I am pleased to announce the new arrangements for Departmental Secretaries of the Commonwealth Public Service.
To reduce unnecessary disruption to my government's program of work, most Secretaries will remain in their existing portfolios. 
In the newly established departments, Mr Mark Paterson will move to head up the Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research; Dr Peter Boxall will be Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism and Ms Patricia Scott will head the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy.
Ms Lisa Paul will be Secretary of the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.  Given its immediate responsibilities, an Associate Secretary for Employment and Workplace Relations will be appointed to this portfolio.
Dr Martin Parkinson will be Secretary of the new Department of Climate Change within my portfolio. Dr Parkinson is a Deputy Secretary in the Commonwealth Treasury and recently headed the Secretariat of the Task Group on Emissions Trading.
In line with our pre-election commitments, all Departmental Secretary appointments will be for five years.
As I have already announced Dr Peter Shergold, the Secretary of my Department, indicated to the former Prime Minister earlier this year that he intended to leave at the conclusions of his five year term in February 2008.
I am still considering who will replace Dr Shergold as the Secretary of my Department.  I will make an announcement on this matter prior to Dr Shergold's retirement.
Canberra
Press Office (02) 6277 7744


Today I have signed the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
This is the first official act of the new Australian Government, demonstrating my Government's commitment to tackling climate change.
Ratification of the Kyoto Protocol was considered and approved by the first Executive Council meeting of the Government this morning.
The Governor-General has granted his approval for Australia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol at my request.
Under United Nations guidelines, ratification of the Kyoto Protocol enters into force 90 days after the Instrument of Ratification is received by the United Nations.
Australia will become a full member of the Kyoto Protocol before the end of March 2008.
The Kyoto Protocol is considered to be the most far-reaching agreement on environment and sustainable development ever adopted.
Australia's official declaration today that we will become a member of the Kyoto Protocol is a significant step forward in our country's efforts to fight climate change domestically  -  and with the international community.
My Government will do everything in its power to help Australia meet its Kyoto Protocol obligations. This will include:
     * Setting a target to reduce emissions by 60 per cent on 2000 levels by 2050.
     * Establishing a national emissions trading scheme by 2010.
     * Setting a 20 per cent target for renewable energy by 2020 to dramatically expand the use of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind.
I will also lead the Australian delegation at the opening of the High Level Segment of the United Nations conference on climate change in Bali next week.
The conference  -  which starts today  -  will set out the “Bali Roadmap” to begin negotiations for the next round of international action against climate change when the first round of targets under the Kyoto Protocol expire in 2012.
Canberra
Press Office (02) 6277 7744


Today's release of a new Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy represents a new era of independence and transparency for the Reserve Bank.
The Statement outlines a mutual understanding on the conduct of monetary policy between the new Government, represented by the Treasurer, and the Governor as Chairman of the RBA Board.
The Statement delivers on the Rudd Government's election commitment to strengthen the independence of the Reserve Bank and will enhance the transparency of the conduct of monetary policy in Australia.
Strengthening the independence of the Reserve Bank is a critical element of the Government's commitment to putting downward pressure on inflation. 
The new Statement does this through a number of reforms agreed between the Treasurer and the Governor. 
To enhance the independence of the Reserve Bank, the positions of Governor and Deputy Governor will be raised to the same level of statutory independence as the Commissioner of Taxation and the Australian Statistician. 
The appointments of Governor and Deputy Governor will be made by the Governor-General in Council and their terminations will require parliamentary approval. Currently the Governor and the Deputy Governor are appointed by the Treasurer and their appointment can be terminated by the Treasurer. 
The Rudd Government is committed to improving the transparency of future Reserve Bank Board appointments and to remove political considerations. 
Accordingly, the Secretary to the Treasury and the Governor of the Reserve Bank will maintain a register of eminent candidates of the highest integrity from which the Treasurer will make appointments to the Reserve Bank Board.
The new Statement also incorporates the transparency measures announced by the Governor yesterday including the publication of Board minutes, and a statement of reasons for the decision following each monthly meeting irrespective of whether there is an adjustment in the cash rate.
Today's announcement is an important step towards ensuring the appointment processes, debates and decision making of the RBA are as independent and transparent as possible.


PM: Well we said we'd get down to work and roll up the sleeves and get on with the job of Government and that's what we've been doing today here in our first Cabinet meeting here in Brisbane.
On Monday we dealt with a range of matters concerning climate change, including our decision to honour our pre-election commitment to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. That's a core challenge, of course, for the economy and for the environment.
What we have been deliberating on today here in Brisbane are matters of equal importance and they relate of course to the economy and to education. The key challenge for the future is to make sure that we have a proper set of policy settings in place to deal with Australia's long term economic policy challenges. A core part of that is to ensure that we have proper monetary policy settings and proper monetary policy arrangements with the Reserve Bank. And what Wayne Swan and I are announcing today are a new set of arrangements to further underline the independence of the Reserve Bank.
What the Treasurer has outlined in correspondence with the Governor of the Reserve bank is our proposal, first of all, to underline the independence of the Reserve Bank by ensuring that both the positions of Governor of the Reserve Bank and Deputy Governor become independent statutory appointments. This would ensure that the Governor and the Deputy Governor enjoy status equivalent to other statutory office holders. At present, the Governor and the Deputy Governor exist effectively at the Treasurer's whim. We believe that we need to enhance further the statutory independence of those roles.
The second measure to enhance the independence of the Reserve Bank is as follows to ensure that when it comes to future appointments of the Board of the Reserve Bank that the appointees are taken from an agreed register or panel of possible board appointments put together conjointly by the Secretary of the Treasury and the Governor of the Reserve Bank.
We are keen, very keen, to avoid any future politicisation of the Reserve Bank Board. We're aware of controversies which have arisen in the past. We believe that by approaching it in this way in the future we will underline and enhance the independence of the Bank. An effective monetary policy is crucial for Australia's economic future and we believe that these measures to enhance Reserve Bank's independence are the right way to go.
On broader economic policy settings of course, we've been warned recently by the Governor of the Reserve Bank about continued inflationary pressures in the economy. There are three ways in which we can address this challenge. One is to ensure we have an effective independent monetary policy anchored still in the independence of the Reserve Bank plus the continuation of the Bank's inflation targeting regime.
The second is to ensure a disciplined approach to fiscal policy and we believe that a hardline approach to fiscal policy will be necessary into the future. That's why we've commissioned, for example, work already on the operation of a razor gang within the Government to deal with problems of any administrative excess and cost cuttings where they can be implemented in the administrative functions of Government departments. We are committed to budget surpluses, we're committed to robust budget surpluses and part and parcel of that is to ensure that we are properly implementing a regime of razor gang type disciplines against unnecessary outlays.
The third element of effective policy in confronting the inflationary challenge in the economy is to ensure that we maximise our investment in skills and infrastructure. And today, again consistent with our pre-election commitment of this first meeting of the Labour Cabinet, we have considered and decided upon a submission put forward by Julia Gillard, the Deputy Prime Minister, on the implementation of Labor's pre-election commitments for the digitisation or the introduction of the digital revolution for Australian schools. This is an important program to ensure that our young people in the future have all the skills that they need to compete in the current Australian economy and in the global digital economy of tomorrow. This is core Labor business. It's part of building up the skills profile of the economy. We've already seen recent reports how against international scholastic benchmarking, our achievements are already under international challenge.
The other measure I would announce today before asking Wayne and Julia to comment further on what I've just touched on is consistent with what I have said in recent days I would also be releasing today the Code of Ministerial Conduct. I'll draw that to your attention, particularly in terms of some changes which have been made.
First of all, lobbyists will be required to register their details publicly on a register of lobbyists to be established by the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet before seeking access to ministers or their offices.
Secondly, ministers will be required to undertake that when they leave office, they will not seek to have business dealings with members of the Government, the public service of the Defence Force on any matters they have dealt with in an official capacity in the preceding 18 months, one and a half years.
Thirdly, electoral fundraising at the official residences of the Lodge and Kirribilli House will be prohibited.
And fourthly, ministers will be required to divest themselves of all shareholdings other than through investment vehicles such as broadly diversified superannuation funds or publicly listed managed or trust arrangements.
The code of conduct is there for your perusal. If I could get Wayne to add to my comments on the independence of the Reserve Bank and Julia to add to my remarks on the roll out of Labor's Education Revolution. Wayne.
TREASURER: Thank you very much, Kevin. I'll be very brief. Can I just say I'm delighted to be announcing these measures which have been agreed with the Reserve Bank Governor to strengthen the independence of the Reserve Bank.
The Reserve Bank is absolutely critical in the fight against inflation, absolutely critical to having a modern economy where we can create wealth without inflationary pressures. So its inflation targeting regime is absolutely critical to a healthy economy, along with strict budget discipline and of course spending which invests in the productive side of the economy.
So, this is a very good announcement, recognising the fact that the Reserve Bank is a world class institution (inaudible). These measures today have been agreed with the Government. I'm delighted to be making this statement today on the conduct of monetary policy because it puts us where we need to be in the fight against inflation.
DEPUTY PM: I think it's very important that the first Cabinet submission that is considered by a Rudd Labor Government is about the implementation of such an important part of our Education Revolution.
Immediately after the election, Kevin instructed our Labor colleagues to go to schools in their electorate and to report on what was happening with computers in schools. Unfortunately they found too many Australian schools don't have adequate internet access. Some don't have internet access at all. Too many schools don't have enough computers for senior secondary students, those in years 9-12, to have access to a computer. And too many are crying out for the sort of technology aid that can make a difference in classrooms like interactive white boards and digital projectors. Today Cabinet has agreed that we will implement our $1 billion fund to bring computers to year 9 to 12 student in each Australian secondary school. We will immediately audit what is out there so we have a full picture of the starting point and we will immediately commence discussions with our state and territory colleagues and with the independent and catholic school sectors so that we will be ready to roll out to commence during the course of the financial year. In the course of this financial year, there will be expenditure of $100 million on grants for schools to assist them with getting computers into classrooms, internet access and other information technology aids. This is the first part of our $1 billion fund which of course will be delivered over the coming four years.
PM: Thanks Julia, thanks Wayne and over to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Answer the second question first. We'll be taking the Cabinet out of Canberra a lot and we've already got plans to visit various other parts of the country over the coming months. I think it's very good for Cabinet colleagues to be exposed to the entire country and I think it's also very good for our senior public servants have the same experience.
In terms of Queensland, in case any of you have missed it, it's my home town and it's Wayne's and it's good to be back and this is an important part of Australia's future and we want to recognise that by holding our first Cabinet meeting here. Can I say when you look more broadly across the country and the dynamic contribution by the West and by South Australian and the other states, its' important that the Cabinet go out to meet the people rather than being always locked behind closed doors in Canberra.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well Mr Nelson the other day I thought was supporting our decision to finally ratify Kyoto after a curious period of opposition to Kyoto ratification. Now he seems to be adding to his comments of the other day.
We have said consistently that our approach to interim carbon targets will be based entirely on the submissions and the recommendations of the Garnaut committee of inquiry into the national emissions trading regime that we've proposed to establish. That's due to report in the first half of next year. A lot of the secretariat work for that now is being underpinned by the Commonwealth Treasury. And that is the basis upon which we will establish an appropriate set of interim carbon targets. I think speculation of individual numbers prior to that is not productive and I would suggest that it would be better for all concerned if we waited for the outcome of that properly deliberated document.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, in your conversation with the Chinese Premier last night, (inaudible).
PM: Well my discussion (inaudible) focussed on strategic dialogue between Australia and the People's Republic of China. It focussed on the continuation of free trade agreement and negotiations between the two countries (inaudible) and focussed on climate change. The Chinese Premier specifically congratulated Australia on its decision to ratify Kyoto and noted that we'd be attending the Bali conference.
I think it's really important that Australia act not just nationally but internationally on climate change and I will say and say again that our job in the future is to do whatever we can to try and bridge the gap which is currently enormous between developed and developing countries. This is an enormous task. In fact in some areas there are reports that the gap is widening but this is an area where we will work and work hard, together with our nominated minister for climate change, Penny Wong, and those supporting Penny.
Bali is in large measure about agreeing on a negotiating pathway for the future. And that's a critical outcome for Bali  -  to make sure that it sets in train a process over the next couple of years with the endpoint of bringing about agreement on comments for the future commitment period.
What role can we play? We'll be as active as we can, we'll be as constructive as we can, positive as we can because climate change is a challenge not just for Australia but for the region and the world.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The target that you referred to, 25-40, is in fact contained in what is described generally as the Vienna Declaration. It's a document from August of 2007 negotiated by officials. Many states have publicly recognised the work of the IPCC in putting together that report but in so doing, states have also indicated that they do not necessarily accept those targets, nor do they accept those targets as binding targets for themselves. That has been a reality since the Vienna Declaration was issued in August of this year. That is also the position of the Australian Government. Therefore we will be determining, based on the merits, based on the advice that we get from the Garnaut commission of inquiry, the interim targets which are appropriate for Australia. And the reason for doing it in the methodical way in which we've outlined is to ensure that those targets are meaningful environmentally and responsible economically. And that's the way ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: There will be a publicly declared list of lobbyists and it will be updated as I'm advised on a six monthly basis and therefore it will be clear cut from that list which lobbyists are working with the Federal Government and on behalf of which companies. And therefore, if lobbyists, for example, change their clients, there'll be a six monthly obligation at a minimum for that to be updated.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The proposal we have contained here is for a declaration of the lobbyists themselves (inaudible) an advance on where we are at the moment and who they represent which is another further advance of where they are at the moment as well. That's where we propose to take it at this stage. We think that is a good step forward in terms of transparency and accountability and also of regular updates (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The question of legislation of the type that you speak, it's always been our view as the Labor Party that that lies properly within the (inaudible) of the states. And that remains (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, Queensland has been a big contributor to the nation's economic prosperity and I think what I would like to do, and I'm sure Julia and Wayne would be on this bus as well, is to make sure that when it comes to international political meetings, when it comes to major international economic conferences that are not just concentrated in the triangle but are actually spread around the country  -  whether it's Brisbane, whether it's Perth, whether it's Adelaide or Tassie. Because every part of the nation in contributing to the nation's prosperity. In Queensland here, we see this part of the national economy as growing strongly but we would like to see of course more and more international focus delivered to those parts of the country beyond the triangle.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Professor Garnaut's going to Bali with you next week and do you see a broader role for Professor Garnaut working in the region on climate change (inaudible)?
PM: I have enormous respect for Ross Garnaut. Ross was my ambassador in China years ago back in the mid-80s. I've known him since then and prior to that he was a key economic advisor to the Hawke-Keating Government and I think they would accept that he was a key architect of so many of the measures which resulted in the internationalisation of the Australian economy at the time.
Now, as for Ross' current role which relates to the emissions trading regime, and Wayne can add to this, that commission of inquiry is now being supported by the secretary (inaudible) across the Commonwealth Treasury, supplemented by continued contribution by state officials.
In terms of Bali, based on my current advice, he's not attending Bali but I'm open to that and I'm sure I've got further discussions with people to concur on that. In terms of the wider role for Ross into the future, he's a very talented guy and he's a bloke who knows his economics, is passionate about acting on climate change and I'm sure subsequent to the conclusion of this report there'll be further work for Ross Garnaut to do for Australia.
JOURNALIST: Stolen generation (inaudible).
PM: In the Cabinet discussion today, no, but we have further Cabinet meetings planned and work is underway as far as all those matters are concerned. And we'll be speaking to appropriate representatives groups from Indigenous Australia, Aboriginal Australian, Torres Strait Islander Australians, but we'll also be seeking advice from those people good will across the country and across the political divide. You know something? This all works if the country gets behind it. And I'm determined it's going to work and work well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: (inaudible) there was a regrettable problem a couple of years ago with the appointment of a Reserve Bank Board member and the perceived conflict of interest and we said at that stage that it was very important to strengthen the independence of the board. We've talked for some time about the need for greater transparency. We've talked about strengthening the independence and we think this is a very good time to do it because traditionally when governments change, they do enter into such an agreement with the Reserve Bank. We've done that. The discussion with the Board has been very useful. They've been very friendly and I'm delighted we were able to reach an agreement with the Governor yesterday, published a whole lot of transparency measures which will mean that the Board's practices are first class and world class and we think that the measures that we've announced today further strengthen their independence. The last thing anybody wants to see is the Reserve Bank politicised and these measures today will further strengthen their independence.
PM: You see, the Reserve Bank is a first class economic institution by global standards. It doesn't matter who you speak to around the world in the (inaudible), our Reserve Bank of Australia is a well regarded institution, well regarded. And therefore we have a responsibility to the nation to continue to strengthen and to underpin and to underline its independence. These are practical measures which the Treasurer has discussed and agreed upon with the Governor of the Bank which we believe sends a powerful signal out to the country that we have not only confidence in the Reserve Bank but we believe it is integral and fundamental to Australia's future economic well being to ensure that we have independent monetary policy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well on the first point I've said prior to the election and subsequent to the election that there'll be a razor gang. The last time I looked at the way in which razors operate they can be (inaudible) painful. Let's not hide from that. I understand that. But you know? It's part and parcel of the price to pay when it comes to maintaining a strong fiscal position, maintaining and advancing budget surpluses particularly when we face economic challenges in the period ahead. So we make no apology for that. Independent monetary policy, strong fiscal policy, committed to budget surpluses, as well as enhancing the national economy productive capacity through investment in skills and infrastructure. As for the proposal for the staff cuts in terms of ministerial staff. (inaudible) The answer to your question is yes, we have done that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Could I just add to that? You know, ministerial staff have sort of grown like (inaudible). You've got to lead by example here. You just rein it back a bit. You've heard us all say from time to time how obscene government advertising was in the previous government. Well it was obscene, absolutely obscene. It's unhealthy for the democracy and a waste of taxpayer's money and having you know something equivalent to a battalion strength detachment of ministerial staff and advisors, frankly I think it is getting over the top. So there will be 30 per cent cut and that's what we've implemented.
TREASURER: Sorry, if there's waste out there, we're going to find it (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We have been deliberating on that internally since the election. In fact we had some much earlier consideration of it by Lindsay Tanner and the Expenditure Review Committee of Shadow Cabinet prior to the election. This is something we are determined to do. We think it's the right way to go. We hope it sets the appropriate example for government at large because we believe it's far better to spend scarce taxpayers' dollars on building an education revolution not in providing us with 27 press secretaries.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, roundabout is what I would say (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: (inaudible) could I say 30 per cent is a big slice and we're determined to prosecute that and you will see us adhering to that ball park.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the Haneef matter, our pre-election commitments remains and that's that we believe there should be an independent judicial inquiry. We're obtaining advice within the government about how best to proceed on that front and we will. The reason for it is not simply to rake over the coals for the sake of raking over the coals. We've got to make sure that with these tough anti-terrorism laws that we've got in Australia that we've got the proper institutional arrangements necessary for their enforcement and the proper checks and balances are in the system as well. So what we're on about is actually establishing the facts for all of that. On the timetable for it, I cannot advise you today, but we are seeking advice on it.
On the second point, I'd rather not comment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I believe, that correct me if I'm wrong colleagues here, but our consistent position for a long period of time has been on these matters that states and territories are answerable to their own jurisdictions and I'm unaware of any such commitment (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On our approach to these questions, state and territory governments are elected to govern and are accountable to their constituencies. The ACT Government's indicated it wishes to head in a particular direction and the ACT Government is therefore in a position to be accountable to its citizenry for that. We've got to run. Thanks very much.
ends
Attachment
Standards of Ministerial Ethics - available on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website


PM:It's good to be out here with Tony Burke, our Agriculture Minister. And I'd like to thank Matt Ahern and his wife, Anna. And where's Anna's mum? She's off somewhere. Anna's mum, Jill Onley. AgForce, with Peter Kenny and Charles Burke and Brett O'Hare, for making it possible for us to come out here, and also to be out at this great beef stud, Buala, and just to see the great work which has been done here. A creative, innovative business involving an exotic Italian breed of bull, the Romagnola, and it's good to see enterprise at work and it's good to see some rain in what's been a very difficult season for so many people in this part of Queensland.
So, it's also good to meet the Romagnola personally, and also to be introduced to my next relative, my newest relative, Kevin. He's over there in ‘yond paddock over there. I'll be studying Kevin's career with a keen interest in the future to make sure that he remains productive.
I said when I became Prime Minister of Australia that I intended to be Prime Minister for all of Australia, and that included being the Prime Minister for rural Australia. I resolved in my mind that night that in the first week of being sworn in as Australia's next Prime Minister, that I would be visiting rural Australia in the first week. Sworn in on Monday, on Friday we're here in the Roma district and we're here at this beef stud at Buala, not far from Roma itself. And the reason I've come here is to underline in week one of the administration, of this Government, that we take the interests of rural and regional Australia seriously and that they will remain central to the concern of the Government that I lead.
There are two reasons for that. One is rural industries are a core part of Australia's economic future. And having grown up on a farm myself, I understand the contribution it makes. It needs to be an industry which continues to make that contribution in the future and we expect, therefore, our Government to be always extending a helping hand to rural industry with the challenges which lie ahead.
And the second reason as well, one known to us all, is rural Australia is part and parcel of the Australian identity. And those people who live out here  -  I've lived on a small farm growing up  -  is part and parcel of the Australian soul. So, any Australian Government, whatever its political persuasion, must take, by definition, take the interests of rural Australia to heart and make those concerns central to the preoccupations of government.
When we read our papers this morning, we read this ABARE report on the impact of climate change on Australian commodity production and exports in the future. This report makes disturbing reading for the nation's future, disturbing reading for rural Australia's future, disturbing reading for the economy's future. This report underlines the economic cost of not acting on climate change. We, therefore, need to embrace the challenge of climate change in order to ensure that we can properly underpin the long-term development of rural industry in this country.
Some of the statistics in this report make for disturbing reading. It says that by 2030 we face the possibility of a 10 per cent decline in agricultural production. By 2050 there's a possibility of a 20 per cent decline in agricultural production against (inaudible).
Then if you look at the impact on the export sector, up to a 63 per cent decline in Australian rural exports by 2030, up to a 79 per cent decline by 2050. Again, measured against a no-climate change scenario.
If you look at the impact on individual sectors themselves, whether it's beef, whether it's wheat, whether it's sugar, the statistics in each of those industry areas is stark and startling and command the policy attention of government.
Finally, the figure which concerns all Australians is this, that according to the ABARE report, we run the risk of a five per cent lower GDP by 2050 as a consequence of the impact of climate change. Climate change is core business for Australian national economic management. It's core business for Australian rural industry and Australian rural communities. And that's why it's the core business of a Government that I lead.
That's why in the pre-election period we announced policies totalling $125 million which contained within them programs to assist farmers with adjustment and other aspects of climate change, and Tony will speak of those in a minute.
The other part of our concern as an incoming Government of Australia and helping rural Australia is this. It goes to the core challenges of the adequacy of the supply of rural doctors and nurses. I know enough about rural Australia to know that there is a real problem here. No matter which rural community I visit in New South Wales, Victoria, in the West or here in Queensland, there is a problem of supply of rural doctors and nurses. That's why, this morning, I discussed this with the Shadow, not the Shadow Health Minister. This morning I discussed this with the Health and Ageing Minister, Nicola Roxon. And what we propose to do is this: we will conduct now an immediate audit of the shortage of doctors and nurses and other health professionals in rural Australia, number one.
Number two: we will examine the reasons for these shortages.
And three: we'll be asking the Department of Health and Ageing to provide us with a range of options for attracting and retaining health professionals in rural Australia.
You see, you can't expect people to come out and farm these parts of Australia unless you've got basic health services. The Commonwealth is uniquely responsible for the adequate training of doctors and nurses but the Commonwealth is responsible for allocating enough university places were that to be the case. Therefore, I want to get to grips with this within the first week of us forming this Government by commissioning that work through the Federal Department of Health and Ageing. And the Federal Minister, Nicola Roxon, we'll be announcing our intention to do this at a meeting of State and Territory Health Ministers, which is being held today in Hobart.
I'm also mindful of the other challenges in rural Australia when it comes to education. I laid out our plan for an Education Revolution and a broadband revolution. That includes rural and regional Australia as well, not just in the cities.
You look at some of the statistics for the rural areas of Queensland, we have a year 12 retention rate considerably lower than for other parts of Queensland. We need to make sure that our teachers are properly resourced, properly equipped, trades training, other advanced curriculum services as well and we'll be seeking to do that as we unfold our education policies into the future.
(inaudible) on transport when it comes to this part of Queensland as well. I don't know how long people have been waiting for an upgrade to occur on this stretch of the Warrego Highway, between Roma and Mitchell. I'm not quite sure why we had to wait until the election of the Federal Labor Government to make a commitment for this to occur but we are confirming our commitment to invest $55 million for the upgrade of the Roma to Mitchell Highway to ensure that (inaudible) capable of taking type two road trains comfortably. That is the undertaking we made before the election, that's the undertaking we'll stick to after the election and I'm pleased to be able to confirm that here today.
Before I turn to Tony briefly, I'll just conclude where I started. We intend to be a government of all Australia. We intend to be a government for rural Australia. I intend to be a Prime Minister for rural Australia. We can't fix all of rural Australia's problems. Some of them are very longstanding, some of them are very deep-seated, but I'll give you this commitment: I intend to work with rural Australia, including peak bodies like Agforce here in Queensland, to come to grips with these challenges and to map out practical strategies for dealing with them. There's no silver bullets here but I'm determined that we'll put our shoulder to the wheel on practical questions like the long term strategy for delivering adequate supply of nurses and doctors to these areas to make sure that we make a difference long term. Over to you, Tony.
BURKE: Thank you very much, Kevin. And I join in thanking Matt and Anna for their hospitality today.
The report today from ABARE really is an alarm bell ringing. Those export figures are extraordinary. (inaudible) we are talking about just short of an 80 per cent cut in agricultural exports against the (inaudible) they've used. And that's not only because Australia has been doing so little to date. It's also because the rest of the world has been active. The rest of the world actually has been looking at adapting on climate change and making sure that we've got a viable and vibrant agricultural sector in to the future.
So this is why the document was launched during the course of the campaign of Australia's farming future. It gives key signals, key signals as to how Labor intends to actually move forward with a strategy to make climate change part of the core business in terms of making sure that we've got the adaptability happening in our agricultural sector to deal with it.
Those changes go through an adaptation partnerships program, an adjustment program and also through to R&amp;D, where you've got $15 million over four year trial (inaudible) allocated there, for research and development brings specifically through a climate change and productivity focus.
The message all comes back to that one simple (inaudible) of truth that ABARE have put out there for everyone today. The cost of acting, the cost of acting is not nearly as expensive as the cost of not acting. And if we want to make sure, as Labor does, that agriculture has that vibrant and viable future for Australia, for the people who work the land now and the generations to come and for the export market that comes from Australia, then the only way to do it is to look forward into Australia's farming future and make sure that climate change becomes part of that future.
PM: Thanks, Tony. And just before I take questions, we've appointed one our brightest and our best as Minister for Agriculture. Tony comes from the rural heartland of inner Sydney  -  that's a joke by the way  -  and our best Primary Industries Minister for the nation in the past I think was Simon Crean who came from inner Melbourne. This bloke will be working in close partnership with organisations like AgForce and their counterparts obviously in the other states. We're determined to get it right when it comes to the future direction of policy on agriculture and more broadly to get it right when it comes to the future of rural communities and their critical needs when it comes to an adequate supply long term of doctors and nurses. That's why I've appointed one of our brightest and best rising stars to this job. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) shows that the rural sector is actually decreasing carbon emissions whereas the rest of Australia seems to be going up. Is regional Australia actually going to be (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I think rural Australia, regional Australia, farmers in particular and the farm sector in particular have made an enormous contribution to Australia's net emissions reductions by what they've done in terms of land clearance. I understand that, I've had many discussions with AgForce and other farmers across the country both here and in New South Wales about the impact on that vis-à-vis the carbon target which we have. I am mindful of that, I respect it. Which is why if we move forward to develop a national emissions trading regime, we will be working in close consultation and partnership with farm industry organisations and we will do so in a substantive way so that we make sure that their views are squarely on the table when it comes to us framing the future of the emissions trading regime.
JOURNALIST: We've talked about national emissions, next we hear Bali (inaudible) particularly this 25-40 per cent reductions over (inaudible). Is Australia going to lead the way on climate change?
PM: As I said yesterday in Brisbane, the challenge for us is to wait for the outcome of the Garnaut commission of inquiry on the emissions trading regime and the impact of interim targets. That won't be ready until the first half of next year and as I've said repeatedly before the election and since the election, we will not be making any determinations on interim targets for Australia until we've received that report.
Secondly, that report will also incorporate within it the best Treasury advice as well and that's where the secretariat services for the Garnaut commission of inquiry report are now being anchored.
And finally, on the nature of the document we referred to, the so-called Vienna Declaration, that is a work of technical experts which has been has been acknowledged by a range of countries and many countries at the same time have not as a consequence accepted those numbers as constituting target for those countries in a binding way at this stage.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know something, what is the purpose of Bali? The Bali Conference is to outline a pathway, a process of negotiations over the next two year period. It will be a negotiation and negotiations involve horse-trading. People here know a bit about what horse-trading means. It means that you sit down with other Governments and work out what's necessary for the planet, what's necessary for everyone to contribute, including Australia. And therefore, frankly, it would be irresponsible from that point of view to go out there and put a number on the table straight away.
Furthermore, it will be equally irresponsible to do so prior to receiving expert advice of the type that we commissioned. The fact that we had the foresight to commission the Garnaut Report six months ago when we were still in Opposition mindful of the possibility that we'd form government, shows that we've been proceeding in a very methodical way when it comes to this.
Australian leadership in the future is underpinned by two points. One, unlike the Government we've replaced, on the first day of being sworn in as a new Government of Australia, we signed the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. That put us around the negotiating table. That's important.
Second, in my discussions with the Chinese Prime Minister in the last few days and with others, I've indicated that we'll be doing whatever we can to try and bridge the gap between developed and developing countries. Australia having a place at the table to do that is a precondition. On the target itself, it will be framed in the due process of the negotiation and mindful of the advice that we get from the Garnaut Report.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The purpose of the Bali meeting is to outline a negotiating process over a two year period. The key thing is to make sure that we have outcomes by the conclusion of that negotiating process and frankly there is a key concern that some countries may seek to, you know, dilate the negotiating process beyond that. I don't want to see that happen.
We must proceed cautiously, methodically but also vigorously to make sure that we get a good outcome not just at Bali but at a series of subsequent meetings which will occur which we'll negotiate the final agreed carbon target. And I believe that is the proper way to go and that is the way we'll be applying ourselves as the Government of Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We will be taking exhibition on this in due course and I know there are multiple views out there in the community on these questions but I believe it's proper to consult carefully with farm organisations on this and to be frank I haven't done so, so far and we'll do so in the period ahead. Do you want to add to that Tony?
BURKE: There's no doubt that there's some science out there which says some of the climate change issues we're dealing with GM will provide part of (inaudible). It's still the case, particularly in Western Australia and Tasmania there's some particular concerns from farmers there that they want to preserve a competitive market advantage that they seek by not endorsing GM and that's why it's confrontational, that we're going through is real.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BURKE: There's been people who've been critical of not having a personal background in farming. There are. I don't. About eighty years since my family left the land and I'm a little bit younger than that. So, the judgment that will be made on me won't be on what I've done before, it'll be on how I do this job and my, my style of working, people will work out pretty quickly I think. But I've taken the opportunity already to be consulting in meetings with the different, with both AgForce and the different state farming bodies. I'll be continuing that conversation. I won't be at home a whole lot over the Summer but my view, as public policy, in this sector in particular, you're taking advice and you listen carefully and you make sure the Department is doing the work and you spend as much time as you can at the grass roots level, hearing face to face the stories and experience of the people who are working the land right now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, we're a Government who are very happy to be judged by what we do, not some sort of judgment about where you might have come from and communities, the last time I looked, it's been a while since we've held the seat of Maranoa and, and it could be quite a long time indeed, as I said I find it interesting that this is the incoming Government of Australia which is funding this upgrade for the Warrigal Highway from Roma to Mitchell and that is because, because it's in the national interest that that occur, because for all industries it's so important.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: (inaudible) I'll have the Transport Minister come back to you on the details of that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, every company speaks for itself. Our business for high speed broadband is clear cut and of course now we'll enter into proper negotiations with various telecommunications providers including Telstra. It's entirely proper, responsible and respectable for Telstra to speak to its own book. I expect every company to do the same. We're the Government of Australia. We come in with a commitment and a mandate to roll out this system. We've allocated funds to do it and that's what we intend to get on doing.
JOURNALIST: amalgamations (inaudible)
PM: Well, my position on all of that is well established, in fact I predated the previous Prime Minister by a factor of three to four months. On the question of compulsory amalgamations and my position hasn't changed. Go and have a cup of tea folks.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask why you chose Roma (inaudible)?
PM: It's a beautiful part of the world. (inaudible) some of our friends from AgForce and said, and we discussed with them and listened to their advice carefully about what's going on in this part of the world. Roma is critical when it comes to the beef industry. We've been looking at obviously stud cattle, the Roma saleyards, I'm advised are the largest saleyards for the country. This is a major transport intersection for the entire national beef industry and beef is a huge export out of Australia and it will be into the future and therefore making sure that this farm community, together with others has got a fair say when it comes to input into what this Government does, we think's critical. This is a vibrant part of Australia. Beef industry's a vibrant industry. It's gone through some tough times. But we're looking forward to working with it well into the future. Thanks
ends


MIKEGood morning.
PM:Good morning, Mike.
MIKE:And congratulations.
PM:Thanks very much.
MIKEI said you'd never do it.
PM:You did say it to me over dinner, sort of, how many years ago?
MIKEI don't know, five or six or seven or something.
FITZ:Prime Minister, does it still seem odd to you to be addressed as Prime Minister and to hear Prime Minister Rudd? Does it still ring odd?
PM:Well, I keep looking over my shoulder and saying who's the other bloke (inaudible). No, it's a great honour but I just see myself still as Kevin Rudd. I've just got a new job to do.
MIKEKevin from Queensland.
PM:That's true. I've just got a new job to do. It's an important job and it requires a lot of hard work  -  up early, to bed late making sure you're across what needs to be done on the day following. So it's a great responsibility and I'm just looking forward so much to how we can begin to roll out or agenda for the country's future.
MIKESo far the transition seems to have been seamless. There have been no heads rolling in the public service and so on. Do you intend to keep it much that way?
PM:I said before the election that we wanted to restore Westminster. Part of restoring Westminster means underlining the independence of the public service and the best way to make sure they provide you with frank and fearless advice is to ensure that they don't have to curry political favour (inaudible) election approaching and people may fear that their jobs are on the line. So we've decided with very, very few administrative changes in terms of secretaries in individual departments, that the previous heads of department in the Commonwealth Public Service, many of whom have served the Howard Government loyally for a long, long time, they should continue and all of us will be judged of course on our performance in the months and years ahead.
FITZ:Prime Minister, before the election you promised to release a Ministerial Code of Conduct and you said in fact that that would be released before the election. We're well over a week later and it still hasn't been released. What is the hold-up, may I ask?
PM:It's just a complex document, and you're right  -  I did say that before the election and I don't hide from the fact that it's taken a little bit longer than I thought. We will be releasing that after our first Cabinet meeting on Thursday and it's just a complex document. We just want to make sure it's got right because this is so much an important part of again restoring Westminster, to make sure the principles for the conduct of ministers are out there and clear for all to see.
It wasn't so much the problem with Mr Howard's Code of Conduct document in terms of its content, it was how it was applied.
MIKEWell Mr Howard applied it very firmly in his first year or so in office and ministerial heads rolled like nine pins and finally he decided it didn't work.
PM:Well the experience of the Howard Government is now for the historian to judge but we believe in high standards of ministerial accountability. We will entrench those principles in the Code of Conduct. That'll be out on Thursday. And then it really depends on the implementation of that Code over time. What I'm determined is that we will have good, sound principles of public administration. The first meeting of the full ministry within hours of sworn in - we went through some of these basic principles. But that'll all be formalised once we release the code on Thursday.
FITZ:Just before we leave Mr Howard, he gave you the concession, well he conceded to you that Saturday night and you had the time at the Lodge together. Was there any moment where he took you aside and wished you well (inaudible) from one Prime Minister to another, any of that kind of thing?
PM: Look, he did and I've been upfront in admitting that he's been entirely gracious and proper in the arrangements for the transition to Government of an incoming administration. And certainly his personal remarks to Therese and myself, and Mrs Howard as well, were kind and warm and I think very much this says a lot about the health of the Australian democracy, that we can fight often a very bloody election campaign but once the people decide, we've got a fairly civilised way of conducting the transition to a new administration.
MIKEOn that Ministerial Code of Conduct, the Howard Government over years (inaudible) abandoned the concept of ministerial responsibility. If things went wrong, ministers weren't told or it was the fault of their department and so on and so on. Will you expect your ministers to be responsible for the conduct of their department?
PM:Ministerial accountability means exactly that  -  that they should be responsible to the Parliament for their actions, to be responsible for the operation of their department as well. Of course there becomes a difficult and grey area - there might be a minor matter of administration within a department over which the minister has no direct oversight or no direct responsibility. But ministerial accountability means that the executive is accountable to the Parliament for the administration of the department of state. And that is a core principle of Westminster and a core principle, I believe, of restoring Westminster.
FITZ:So if a minister has failed in the administration of his department, would you expect him or her to resign or be sacked?
PM:Well my judgement on that, Mike, is that we would have to wait for the circumstances to unfold, you know the facts will be different in each case. The principle of accountability is clear. It's not a notional concept, it's a real concept and ministers must be responsible to the Parliament because the Parliament is the people's house - that's where the Executive of the Government answers to the people through the Parliament. Of course this places an onus of responsibility on ministers. It also places an onus of responsibility on the secretaries of departments. But I can't hypothetically speculate on what may unfold in months or years ahead.
MIKEWould you expect your standards to be higher than those of the Howard Government?
PM:Absolutely because I still for the life of me can not understand through the $300 million wheat for weapons scandal, whereby Australia became the largest source of illicit foreign funding to Saddam Hussein's regime, that no minister, no minister, was held accountable or responsible for that gross failure of public administration.
FITZ:Will you use the power of your office now to continue investigations into AWB and finally get to the bottom of it?
PM:I said prior to the election and just after that once we form government  -  that was only on Monday of this week  -  we'd take advice on that and that's being prepared. But that will take some time to prepare and to deliberate on. I've regarded that as a, and I regard it still, as a matter of gross failure of public administration and I still for the life of me can't understand how no minister, no minister - the foreign minister or the trade minister - was held responsible for this great corruption scandal whereby Australia became the largest source of foreign illegal funding to Saddam Hussein's regime.
MIKEHow deep is that investigation going? (inaudible) documents, are you asking, you know, departmental briefs and all that sort of thing?
PM:I'll be seeking, obviously, advice from the Prime Minister's department in terms of what matters remain to be properly instigated including, more broadly, how these things could be taken further. But I reserve judgment on all of that until we've received advice.
FITZ:All right, Prime Minister, your first step, your first move after being installed as Prime Minster was to begin the process of embracing the Kyoto Protocol. You were interviewed yesterday by Cynthia Banham of the Herald and said that basically you want to now take the lead, for Australia to take the lead, in climate change. You were reported as saying that you wanted to bridge the gap between developed and developing countries on emissions control. Huge step for Australia to go from being laggard on Kyoto to being leader.
PM:Well I believe the best traditions of Australian creative middle power diplomacy is just to do that  -  think in times past. (inaudible) could for example become the peace broker for Cambodia which had been rendered asunder by civil war the death of so many of its people over a long period of time. Australian diplomats are very good at this and Australia, in its best tradition, is capable of acting creatively and imaginatively on the international stage.
But you're right, Fitz, we've had bad record on climate change when it comes to the Kyoto ratification process. We've now put that behind us and I believe we now need  -  and we've got a responsibility to Australians, not just the international community  -  to do whatever we can to bridge the gap between the developed and the developing world because right now that gap is huge. I can't guarantee any success in this enterprise. It's tough but the tasking we'll be giving to our diplomats and to our negotiators headed by Penny Wong is to make sure that everything possible is done to secure an agreement.
MIKEWill you try and encourage China then, and India to move towards binding targets on their emissions? Very tough.
PM: Look, if we're going to succeed in this enterprise for the planet, it is absolutely fundamental that we obtain commitments from the major developing country emitters like China and India and that we also have clear cut commitments from the developed world as well and that includes the United States. Everyone has a stake in the future of the planet and if we fail in this task, the people who will pay the price will be not our grandkids, but our kids. And in fact we're starting to see the evidence of it now with impact on rainfall patterns across the country.
FITZ:Given the importance of this issue, it seems extraordinary to have your Environment Minister Peter Garrett effectively gagged in the lower house in terms of answering questions on climate change and then have your Treasurer, Wayne Swan, be the one to answer them.
PM:Climate change is a huge economic challenge. The question that will be on most of our minds this year domestically will be: how do we frame a national emissions trading regime? Responsibility for that will lie in large part with the modelling work done in the Department of the Treasury. In fact, some of that work has already been commenced by us in opposition through the Garnaut review. And because that modelling work will obviously involve an analysis of the impact of interim carbon targets for Australia, the large slice of that work will be done by the Treasury. So it's entirely appropriate that the Treasurer be the minister accountable in the House of Representatives.
MIKEIt certainly though seems a downgrading for Mr Garrett, who is after all the Environment Minister and you'd think would be representing, would be taking questions that could be addressed to Penny Wong in the Senate. Why the Treasurer?
PM:Well, because if you go to the core questions on the national agenda this year on climate change, the core one, and business will back this view if you put it to them, as will the rest of the country seriously engaged in this question, we must establish an effective national emissions trading regime which involves the determination of interim carbon targets. We know what our target is by 2050 which is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent by 2050 against 2000 levels. But an emissions trading regime means we need interim targets. The modelling for that work has been done in the Treasury. This is the lion's share of the climate change agenda within Australia this year, this coming year, and the year beyond, and therefore there is no more appropriate Minister in the House of Representatives to be answerable on climate change than the Treasurer because so much of the work will be done there in conjunction with the Department of Climate Change, headed by, whose Minister will be Penny Wong, but who is in the Senate.
FITZ:Prime Minister, there's been much comment on the fact that Julia Gillard, your Deputy, has two major portfolios in education and workplace relations. Can I ask you simply, did the drive for her to have those two portfolios, did it come from her (inaudible) or was it your decision that she should have them?
PM:Well, I determined the composition of the Ministry. I did that on the basis of merit and I determined the allocation of portfolios. But with Julia, with whom I've worked very closely in the last 12 months, and we were both elected to the leadership and deputy leadership of the Party only 12 months ago yesterday, we have got to know each other really well. This is very much a meeting of minds when it comes to her being responsible for education, responsible for employment and also responsible for workplace relations. And the rationale is this: that this is the core of Labor's productivity agenda for the future  -  how we educate and train people for the workplace; how we maximise workforce participation, particularly given the ageing of the population; and on top of that, what laws are appropriate for balance of fairness and flexibility within workplaces once people commence work. This we regard as a seamless (inaudible) and I think many people out there in the business community agree with the way in which we put that together.
MIKEAll right, Prime Minister, your first big diplomatic trip is going to be to Asia and Bali obviously (inaudible). When do you think you might focus on the United States and a trip to Washington and the White House?
PM:Well, I spoke to President Bush the day after the election and he very kindly telephoned me to extend his congratulations. We talked then about the possibility of my travelling to the United States next year. We haven't turned our mind yet to precise times but it will be, I imagine, in the first half of next year but we have a very substantial domestic agenda to roll out. For example, we've been talking now about climate change and that's huge and the other part of it goes to Peter Garrett's responsibilities in rolling out these climate change mitigation measures for households like solar programs, like water efficiency programs. This is a massive area of responsibility where we've made a whole lot of commitments for the future as well. And Peter is going to have his hands full doing that, together with the rest of the Environment, Heritage and the Arts portfolio. By the way, these are really important for households.
MIKEOK, but you're going have to rebalance if you like the relationship with the United States, away from the Howard Government subservience and brownnosing to a more mature relationship. How and when are you going to start that or are you going to leave it to Stephen Smith, your Foreign Minister?
PM:Well the relationship with the United States is something I regard as core business for the Prime Minister and always has been in previous governments and I imagine it will be in the future. I've always said and believe that an alliance with the United States does not mandate automatic compliance with the United States in every element of foreign policy. I believe America's an overwhelming force for good in the world and if you look around the world today at the enormous good being done by America and various leaders, you've got to admire this country and its peoples' determination to still be players, positive players in global affairs. We will have our disagreements with the Americans and our disagreements with the Unites States over the Iraq War is well documented but that will not stand in the road of us cooperating with the US Administration and I look forward very much to meeting President Bush when I get to Washington.
FITZ:Will you urge him to ratify the Kyoto Protocol?
PM:Well our position vis-à-vis Kyoto is clear cut and that is that all the developed and developing countries need to be part of the global solution. And when it comes to developed countries and significant emitters like the United States, we need to see our friends in America part and parcel of that process as well.
FITZ:So you will urge him?
PM:And therefore, and therefore, we do need to see the United States, as I've said before, as a full ratification state when it comes to Kyoto.
MIKEPrime Minister, when do you expect Parliament will sit again?
PM:We have not finally determined that but I would imagine, Mike that that would be a normal season which is the first part of February. That's when Parliament traditionally resumes.
MIKEAnd there you would face a hostile Senate which may get in the way, particularly, of your workplace reforms - abandoning AWAs.
PM:Well we'll cross this bridge as we come it but we have, we believe, a very clear cut proposal to the Australian people for fairness and flexibility in the workplace. That's been put to the people. The people have said yes to it and we therefore will be preparing that legislation to go before the Parliament early next year and we believe that reason should prevail on the part of Senators when they deliberate about legislation when it goes to the Chamber.
MIKEAll right, last question, what do you want for Christmas? You've got everything you ever wanted.
PM:Let me see. What I'd really like is to spend a week or two with Therese and the kids, the cat and the dog, and be able to switch off for a week or two. That'll be great.
MIKEAnd will you do that? Will you have that week?
PM:Previous Prime Ministers normally take a week or two off over the break and that's what I would certainly like to do as well because everyone needs to recharge their batteries and I'm sure you blokes do as well.
MIKEYour responsibilities are rather larger than ours. It's good to talk to you again.
PM:You're rendering too modestly the impact of your program.
MIKEYou're very kind.
PM:All the best.
FITZ:Thank you very much.
MIKEThank you kindly. Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd.


PM CLARK: (tape starts) ... It is just a chance to touch base on all the plans that we a common interest in. I have just had the opportunity to go around to a lot of the summits (inaudible), whether we are starting with the Pacific Island Forum in Tonga, APEC here in September, the East Asia Summit in Singapore, CHOGM in Uganda, and just to talk about some of the issues that have been arising there, just a bit of a heads up on some of the things we need to talk about when we meet more formally with officials just to ensure that any issues are on Kevin's radar screen. So, I'm really pleased we've been able to find time to come across early and do this.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, we do not know very much about you. What is your relationship like with our country?
PM RUDD: Well, I regard myself as a friend of Helen's, going back quite a number of years. When we first met she kindly took me to dinner at the Beehive. And I've known Helen and Phil Goff for a long, long time. So, it's just renewing friendships I've had going back over the years.
As for New Zealand, we have so many things in common. From Australia's point of view, this is our sixth largest trading relationship. We have common security policy interests. New Zealand's role in the South Pacific has been outstanding under Helen's leadership. And I look forward to not just continuing this relationship but broadening it.
JOURNALIST: How would you say Australia has done in the South Pacific over the last 11 years?
PM RUDD: Well, today's not the day for partisan comments about anything. It's a day for looking forward. I've always been impressed by what the Kiwis have done on the ground in the South Pacific. They've always been very attentive to emerging problems and what needs to be done. None of us ever get it perfectly right because it's a complex region. But I look forward to working very closely with the New Zealand Government and with Helen's Government on the challenges we face there.
Just as you came in, we were, of course, talking about climate change and Bali, and briefings from our respective delegations up there. I'm heading there on Tuesday. And we'll be in close contact as governments on the challenges we face with climate change, the challenges we face with Bali, plus the negotiating agenda over the next couple of years, it's going to be a tough, hard negotiation. But when you've friends with common interests then we can work these things through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM CLARK: I think there's two issues here. One, the Bali Conference is endeavouring to get a global, comprehensive, negotiation going. And from New Zealand's point of view, we would like to see out of that negotiation a long-term emissions goal agreed on which is comprehensive and everybody needs to be in on that. But there's a second track going on, and that's going on between the Annex I countries to the Kyoto Protocol, and that's where this indicative range of the 20-40 per cent is being talked about. Now, up until now, Australia hasn't been part of that discussion because it hadn't ratified the Protocol and Australia will now come into that discussion. So, let's separate the two things out. I think that one of the critical negotiations for all of us in Annexe 1 is going to be when it's finally agreed, what the Annex I countries emissions reduction goal should be, how that is then distributed across Australia, New Zealand, EU, Japan, Russia, Canada, etc, and that is a discussion that is yet to be had.
PM RUDD: I think the key challenge for us all, and we've got to go and have some lunch, is as Helen was saying, members of Bali wish to set up a framework and a timeline critically to resolve these questions. The move we've taken as Australia is to be part of the process for the first time, comprehensively. And we want this next two year period to be intensive, comprehensive, because we've got obligations to the region and the planet. We take those very seriously. This is going to be tough, full of hard negotiations, of course, but I'd rather be around the negotiating table than absent from the field.
Having said that, I wish you a very good afternoon.
ends


I have asked the Premiers, Chief Ministers and the Australian Local Government Association to attend a Council of Australian Governments meeting in Melbourne on 20 December 2007. 
The Government has a plan to move Australia forward by boosting long-term productivity growth for the future.
The Government has a plan to tackle Australia's future challenges and I want to begin implementing that plan as soon as possible.
I want to use this COAG meeting to set a new framework for co-operative Commonwealth-State relations and take practical steps to end the blame game.
The time for buck-passing must come to an end. The time for real work to deal with real problems facing the nation must begin.
Discussions at the Melbourne COAG will include:
1. The future of Health and Hospitals in Australia, including:
     * Tackling elective surgery waiting lists
     * Investing in aged care, especially in transition care
     * Investing in public dental programs
     * Preventative healthcare
2. Education, Skills and Training  -  The Productivity Agenda, including:
     * Lifting the Year 12 retention target
     * Investing in Early Childhood
     * Promoting the study of Asian languages in our schools
     * Establishing Trades Training Centres in Secondary Schools
     * Implementing the Government's National Secondary School Computer Fund
     * Developing a National Curriculum
3. Climate Change and Water, including:
     * Establishing a National Emissions Trading system
     * Establishing a single national renewable energy target 
4. Infrastructure:
     * Establishment of Infrastructure Australia to audit Australia's infrastructure bottlenecks.
5. Business deregulation, including:
     * Cutting red tape for Australian business
6. Housing, including:
     * More streamlined development approval processes and measures to reduce infrastructure charges and developer costs
     * Addressing rental affordability
     * Homelessness
7. Other National Reform Initiatives
The purpose of the 20 December meeting is to agree on a comprehensive program of work for COAG for 2008 with agreed objectives and reporting timelines.
In a departure from past meetings, I have invited Treasurers to also attend this meeting in Melbourne.
I do not under-estimate the degree of difficulty involved in this ambitious agenda.  
But the time has come now to roll our sleeves up and get to work.
Brisbane
Press Office (02) 6277 7744


PM: It's a great honour for me to spend the last short period of time with His Excellency the President of the Indonesian Republic.  I've been to Indonesia many, many times, and I like this country very much.  I always enjoy coming back here.  And it's been a particular honour for me to have this time with His Excellency, the President, discussing the entire range of our bilateral relationship.  It is a broad and deep relationship with I look forward to continuing with him into the future. 
We touched, of course, on the importance of security cooperation, our work on counter-terrorism, our work on border security questions, and this is excellent cooperation which has come such a long way and I look forward very much to that cooperation continuing into the future and broadening and deepening.
When it comes to the economic relationship between our two countries, the trade relationship goes from strength to strength.  I look forward very much to that sustaining into the future. 
I also look forward to the conclusion of the feasibility study of the proposed bilateral free trade agreement between Australia and Indonesia.
When it comes to our military assistance cooperation relationship, many good things have been done.  I've acknowledged to His Excellency the President the good work and good contribution by my predecessor, Mr Howard, in this context, the work in particular since the tsunami.  The work which is underway with assisting our friends in Indonesia with the construction of thousands of secondary schools across the Indonesian Republic.  This is good work and I'd like to see this expand and continue again.
On Climate Change, His Excellency and I had a good discussion about our two countries working together and forging, over the next couple of years, a growing global consensus on the needs to act, and act effectively, on climate change.  Indonesia is a significant country, a leader in the developing world.  Indonesia, therefore, is exercising that leadership right now by hosting this important conference here in Bali.
Australia, as you know, has most recently ratified the Kyoto Protocol, and as a consequence of that, I proposed to the President that Australia and Indonesia work in partnership globally and regionally and bilaterally to advance a decisive and effective outcome on climate change over this period ahead, these next two critical years.
Here in Indonesia, His Excellency also emphasised the importance of the program and the reforestation programs and there has been good cooperation between our countries in this are and I look forward to that continuing and expanding into the future.
To conclude, this is for Australia one of our most important relationships.  Within one hour of winning the election a week or so ago, His Excellency extended me the great honour by telephoning me direct.  In fact the election was two weeks ago.  I have lost track of time.  But within an hour of the result being determined, His Excellency was on the phone and reaffirming the importance of this relationship between us.  I look forward very much to working with His Excellency on this most important relationship into the future.
Great things have been done in the past between Australia and Indonesia, right back to the independent spirit of the 40s and I look forward to that continuing into the future, broadening and deepening what, for Australia, is a critically important relationship.  Thank you, your Excellency.
JOURNALIST: (translation) Is Australia a priority for Indonesia and with the election of Prime Minister Kevin Rudd will there be any things (inaudible) foreign policy for Australia?
SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO: (translation) Australia is very important for Indonesia.  Australia is Indonesia's partner in (inaudible) partnership (inaudible)
During our discussions today, we discussed many areas where we can expand our (inaudible) cooperation.  As I have said earlier, these include areas in trade and investment, security, development cooperation (inaudible) and climate change cooperation.
I'll be working closely with the Prime Minister to develop our strategic relations and to develop these relations for the long term.  Of course from time to time there will be problems, bilateral problems between us and this is very normal as neighbours but with great spirit and with neighbourliness, our two countries will handle whatever problem that stands in the way.
JOURNALIST: Will Australia and Indonesia be supportive of the draft declaration at this climate change conference which gives a general guideline of 25 to 40 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2020?
PM: Having arrived here about two hours ago and having just sat down with my own delegation, I understand a number of these are still being negotiated.  The first starting point of course, as His Excellency and I just discussed on the question of greenhouse gas targets for the future, is that we request and accept the work of the scientists in identifying the future reductions which have been identified in order to avoid dangerous climate change and that's the scope that you referred to before. 
The second question of course is what binding commitments that individual nation-states enter into.  My commitment to the Australian people just prior to the election is that we would proceed on the question of binding commitments in a methodical fashion.  We commissioned our own national report, entitled the Garnaut Report.  We commissioned that six months ago while we were still in Opposition.  It's due to report by the middle of next year, about June.  Based on that report and the analysis it does in terms of interim targets through to 2020 and beyond and then we would be in a position then to frame our own interim targets. 
I emphasize that our long term target is an ambitious target  -  to reduce our own greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent by 2050 against 2000 levels (inaudible).  But we've established a proper and methodological basis by which to determine interim targets and that's the way in which we are going to proceed.
ends.


Today I have met with the UN Secretary General Mr Ban Ki Moon.
On behalf of the Australian people I expressed my deep condolences to hear of the tragic bombing that occurred in Algiers overnight.
My thoughts and prayers go to the families and friends of those who lost their lives, including the staff from the United Nations offices.
Australia takes a hardline on terrorism and is committed to the global fight against terrorism.
Bali
Press Office (02) 6277 7744


His Excellency, the President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, His Excellency, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, fellow national Leaders, Ministers, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, and all people of goodwill committed to the future of our planet.
I join with the Secretary-General and with the President of the Indonesian Republic in expressing our combined condemnation of this obscene terrorist attack in Algiers. An attack on innocent civilians, an attack on the agents of peace, those working for the United Nations, and therefore, an attack on us all.  And I join with them in extending our thoughts and our prayers to those directly affected by this obscene attack.
A little over a week ago I had the honour of being elected as Australia's 26th Prime Minister.
In my first act as Prime Minister, I signed the formal instrument for Australia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
And just a few moments ago I handed, personally, that instrument of ratification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
I did so, and my Government has done so, because we believe that climate change represents one of the greatest moral, economic and environmental challenges of our age.
Australia now stands ready to assume its responsibility in responding to this challenge  -  both at home and in the complex negotiations which lie ahead across the community of nations.
For Australians, climate change is no longer a distant threat. It is no longer a scientific theory.  It is an emerging reality.
In fact, what we see today is a portent of things to come:
     * In Australia, our inland rivers are dying. 
     * Bushfires are becoming more ferocious, and more frequent.
     * Our unique natural wonders  -  the Great Barrier Reef, Kakadu, our rainforests  -  are now at risk.
 This will sound familiar to many of our Pacific neighbours who are experiencing the impacts of rising sea levels, more frequent severe weather events and diminishing access to freshwater.
And regrettably it is now an increasingly familiar story across the globe, as reflected in the critical conclusions of the Fourth IPCC Report released last month.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our generation.
Our choice will impact all future generations.
This is, therefore, a problem which requires a global solution.
It requires a multilateral solution.
Unilateral action is not enough.
We must all share the burden.
Australia has a long tradition of multilateral engagement:
     * Australia was a founding state of the United Nations at San Francisco in 1945.
     * The Cambodian Peace Settlement.
     * The Chemical Weapons Convention.
     * The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
     * Australia was, in fact, among the first to sign the Framework Convention on Climate Change in 1992. 
 In the past we have been willing to put our shoulder to the wheel.
And what I say to this conference today is that under the Government I lead, we are doing so again.
For too long sceptics have warned of the costs of taking action on climate change. 
But the costs of action are far less than the costs of inaction.  
We must lift our national and international gaze beyond the immediate horizon - to comprehend the magnitude of the economic and environmental challenge that is unfolding before us.
Action to tackle climate change will not be easy. It will require tough choices.
And some of these will come at a political price.
But unless we act, the long-term costs will threaten the security and the stability of us all.
The truth is that we  -  the community of nations  -  are in this together.
The truth is that this challenge of climate change transcends the old ideological, political and developmental divide.
As our host, President Yudhoyono, said to me when we met yesterday, there can be no North or South, given the dimensions of this challenge.
Together we are custodians of the planet.
Together we are custodians of the planet's future.
That's why these deliberations here are so important.
That is why climate change is a top priority of the new Australian Government.
We have embraced a comprehensive plan of action.
The Government has committed to reducing Australia's greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent on 2000 levels by 2050.
Last year  -  when my party was not in government  -  we commissioned a major study to help us to set shorter term targets along the way.
This study, the Garnaut Review, will report in mid 2008.
Together with modelling underway in the Australian Treasury, and also critically, informed by the science, this Review will drive our decisions on short and medium term targets.
These will be real targets. These will be robust targets.
And they will be targets fully cognisant of the science.
And they will set Australia firmly on the path to achieving our commitment of a 60 per cent reduction in emissions by 2050.
But it is not enough just to have targets.
We have to be prepared to back them with sustained action  -  because targets must be, must be translated into reality.
Australia will implement a comprehensive emissions trading scheme by 2010 to deliver these targets.
We will increase the proportion of renewable energy to 20 per cent of our national electricity supply by 2020.
We will invest in research and development to deliver transforming technologies.
But whatever one country does alone, it will not be enough.
This conference must agree to work together on a shared global emissions goal.
A goal that, on the best advice available, recognises the core reality that we must avoid dangerous climate change.
We must now move forward as a truly ‘United Nations' with developed and developing countries working in parallel.
We expect all developed countries to embrace a further set of binding emissions targets  -  and we need this meeting at Bali to map out the process and timeline in which this will happen.
And we need developing countries to play their part  -  with specific commitments to action.
And we need all developed nations, all developed nations  -  those within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol, and those outside the framework  -  to embrace comparable efforts in order to bring about the global outcomes the people of the world now expect of us.
The approach we take must be comprehensive and must incorporate critical challenges, including deforestation.
Australia believes that action on climate change and action on development must proceed in tandem.
We understand that development is a top priority.
We strongly support the Millennium Development Goals, reinforced by our policy as a new Government of Australia, to increase our level of ODA from current levels to 0.5 of GNI by 2015.
We must all respect the aspiration of developing nations to secure their economic development and deliver rising living standards for their people.
But failure to act on climate change will make the development goal even harder to achieve.
Australia recognises the particular responsibility of the developed countries to assist developing nations in this process of transition. 
In the form of technology transfer.
In the form of financial incentives.
And in the form of support for adaptation.
Around the world, great steps forward are being taken by individuals, by households, businesses, communities, organisations, scientists and governments.
But the effectiveness of all those efforts rests on the negotiations that begin here.
As we work towards achieving a new global compact in 2009, Australia is committed to working hard to build bridges between nations with differing circumstances and differing outlooks.
The world expects us to deliver binding targets.
The world expects us to deliver specific commitments.
It expects us all to pull together and for us all to do our fair share.
The Government I lead is only 10 days old.
It is a Government that is realistic about the difficult challenges ahead, particularly in the two years leading up to the Copenhagen conference.
It is a Government now prepared to take on the challenge, to do the hard work now and to deliver a sustainable future.
The community of nations must reach agreement.
There is no Plan B.
There is no other planet that we can escape to.
We only have this one.
And none of us can do it alone.
So let's get it right.
The generations of the future will judge us harshly if we fail.
But I am optimistic that with clarity of purpose, clear-sightedness, courage and commitment we can prevail in this great task of working together to save our common planet.
I thank you.


PM: Last night and this morning I spoke with the Premiers and Chief Ministers and have indicated to them that I'd like to convene a meeting of the Council of Australian Governments on Thursday 20th December.
This morning I discussed with Premier John Brumby of Victoria the possibility of holding that first meeting of COAG under my Prime Ministership in Melbourne, and Premier Brumby has kindly agreed.
The reason I have done this just before Christmas is so that we can get cracking, start work, sleeves rolled up on a very big agenda for the Commonwealth and States and Territories for 2008. What I'm signalling firmly, strongly today is it's time for the buck-passing to end and it's time for the real work, with sleeves rolled up, to begin.
The agenda of work that we've set for ourselves will be significant and will touch families right across our country, as well as the economy.
First item for us on the agenda is health and hospitals and how we go about reaching agreements between the Commonwealth and the States on the implementation of our pre-election commitments concerning elective surgery waiting lists, concerning the establishment, or re-establishment, of the public dental program, as well as the proper provision of aged care beds. Also, we must deal with the question of primary health care, preventative health care.
These are huge challenges for the nation. They affect budgets, they affect families. They affect out wellbeing as a nation and this is a very substantial agenda of work.
There deep systemic questions concerning long-term funding and concerning the long-term delivery of health and hospital services in Australia and this, therefore, must constitute agenda item one for the Commonwealth and the States and Territories when we meet next Thursday.
Agenda item two goes to education and it goes to the proposed implementation of the programs that we put to the Australian people prior to the election. Computers in schools, Trades Training Centres, Asian language education, the development of a national curriculum in four key subject areas through a properly constituted National Curriculum Board, together with other deep needs, systemic needs, across the education and training system.
Item number three: Climate Change and Water. Two immediate challenges on the climate change front are as follows: the harmonisation of the Federal and State systems when it comes to the mandatory renewable energy target that we have set and States and Territories have differently set in the last 12 months or so.
Secondly, on Climate Change, the fact that the States and Territories have already agreed upon their own emissions trading regime must now be harmonised with the work which has been done by Professor Garnaut in the development of a national and integrated emissions trading regime as well.
Item number four, and I indicated this long and hard during the election campaign, is the need for a full frontal assault on business deregulation. I've long been of the view that business in this country has become over-regulated.  The business deregulation agenda has long been on the national reform agenda of COAG but has essentially been stillborn. There has been very little progress achieved. I'm signalling that this must be a core area of work for us because the business community is now excessively burdened by the quantum of regulation which is undermining creativity and enterprise out there in the private economy, as well as the non-complementary nature of regulatory frameworks between the Commonwealth and the States, creating additional unnecessary costs for business. This, again, will be a key item on our agenda.
Infrastructure as well. Prior to the election we foreshadowed the establishment of Infrastructure Australia. We will work closely with the States and Territories upfront on an initial audit of the overall national economic infrastructure stock before identifying priorities for future investment.
Then housing. There is an acute problem when it comes to housing, housing affordability, but also in areas of public housing, community housing, and the homelessness problem afflicting so many across our country today. Labor put forward specific proposals on this prior to the election. Most of those proposals involve key work with the Commonwealth and the States and that's why it must be on this agenda as well.
So, health and hospitals, education, climate change and water, business deregulation, infrastructure and housing are key agenda items which we'll put forward at this critical meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Melbourne on Thursday week.
We see this very much as a strategic discussion between the Prime Minister, the Premiers and the Chief Ministers. And a departure from previous practice, we'll also be inviting the Treasurers of the States and Territories, as well as of course, the Commonwealth, to attend as well. It's my strong view, if we are to drive a program of national reform through calendar year 2008, we need the central agencies of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Department of the Treasury working hand in hand. Similarly across the States and Territories, the State Premier's Departments and State Treasuries working hand in hand so that the central agencies of government drive this reform agenda together.
There will be a strategic discussion with the States and Territories. The States and Territories may well, in the course of the next week, suggest additional items for discussion as well.
The outcome that I want from the meeting in Melbourne next Thursday is this: to agree upon a concrete, practical program of work for calendar year 2008 in these critical areas of national priority. That, I think, is the right step forward. It's important we agree upon that program of work prior to the Christmas break so the preparatory work can get underway during the course of January and February so that we hit the beginning of next year with as much preparatory work being done by our officials as possible.
In the development of this important Commonwealth-State agenda during 2008, I also look forward to extensive discussions with the business community and other groups and peak bodies across the Australian community for critical input to these important decisions for the nation.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST:This huge agenda, is it just one day (inaudible)?
PM:This is a day's agenda, a strategic discussion. But the objective is not to produce a policy agreement in each of these areas on day one. The objective is to outline a program of work for 2008. This will necessarily involve convening a series of high-level task forces under the chairpersonship of the Prime Minister, Treasurer, Premiers and Treasurers in order to produce the outcomes which the nation expects of us.
As I said at the beginning, it's time for the buck-passing to end. It's time for the real work to begin. I don't for the life of me expect that this is going to be an easy job at all. There are so many entrenched difficulties, entrenched prejudices in Commonwealth-State relations going back more decades than any of us can count. But the time has come to turn the page on that and to open a new page in the serious substantive reforms of the Federation. I'm determined to do that and determined to elaborate a concrete program of work. So, if I've got one outcome in mind for Thursday week in Melbourne, it's this: to agree on a program of work and a timetable of work for calendar year 2008.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, are you expecting much resistance from the States?  Will there be goodwill there or are you going to sort of use this meeting as an example to exert your authority over the States?
PM:I'm a strong believer in cooperative Federalism. Remember, my own background in public administration is from the States, and this State of Queensland.  I worked as this State's senior representative on a COAG steering committee of officials for nearly five years.
So, if we're to reform the Federation, if we are to engage in substantive micro-economic reform, if we're to reform key areas of service delivery which affect working families right across the country, particularly in the health, education and housing spaces, then we've got to do it cooperatively. That's the way in which you deliver a real outcome.
As I say, the time for buck-passing has come and gone.  The time for real work has come and must begin now.  I think the Australian people are tired, just sick and tired of all the excuses which their politicians have served up for so long as to why progress can't be realised in these critical areas of public policy need.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, on Chris Bowen's comments on jail terms for petrol company directors who collude on prices, do you think a five-year maximum sentence is a strong enough message to send, considering a court would, obviously in most cases, impose a lesser term?
PM:Well, our policy, long-term, has been for the criminalisation of cartel-related offences.  On the detail of that, I'll let others comment on what may constitute an appropriate range of criminal offences and a range of appropriate criminal sentencing which might occur within that framework.  The key departure from the past is criminalisation.  It's a serious business, it affects the whole economy, it affects so many people's lives, and therefore, we must, as a nation, take a hardline when it comes to cartel-type behaviour.
JOURNALIST:Will you leave open the option of longer sentences, though?
PM:I'd defer judgement to the officials and the line Ministers responsible in this area.  As I said, the line in the sand for us is this becoming a criminal offence in the future.
JOURNALIST: In relation to your Bali visit, will you agree to the climate change target?
PM:Well, the purpose of the Bali meeting is to agree on a Bali roadmap for the next couple of years, within which countries then embark upon long-term commitments.  The challenge for Bali is to make sure that everyone enters onto the same page for negotiations over the next two years. And that is the critical challenge which lies ahead of us.  I don't underestimate the difficulty that this will involve.  But as I said before, I'd much rather be a leader from Australia around the negotiating table, being part of the global solution on climate change, not just part of the global problem.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:Well, understand this, that there are a range of processes still to go through.  First and foremost within Australia, we have the Garnaut report which is not due to report until the middle of next year.  That's an important and sober way to consider appropriate interim targets for Australia and we will wait, as is appropriate, for the conclusion of that report before we start making any determinations along those lines.
Secondly, the figures that you talk about are those which have been arrived at on the basis of the deliberations of technical officers. They reflect where the science stands. National governments have not accepted those across the board as targets for themselves at this stage, nor targets for themselves collectively at this stage so there's a way to go with all of this.
Key thing is this: what's the objective of Bali?  The objective of Bali is to start the process of negotiations for the next couple of years to bring about a real outcome to deal with excessively dangerous climate change.   Australia has taken its head out of the sand and it now wants to be part of the solution, not just part of the problem.
JOURNALIST:So, if Australia wants to be a leader on climate change, why don't you actually agree to an interim target?  And won't Bali be seen as a failure because countries such as Australia won't actually sign up to targets, interim targets, at this stage?
PM:Step number one from the Government of Australia has been to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. We hadn't done that before. Step number two is to be fully around the negotiating tables in Bali, to be part of the negotiating process. Step number three is to agree on a negotiating timetable. We believe that we can make constructive steps forward in each of those areas.
I would not have taken the decision to proceed with the ratification of Kyoto unless, as Prime Minister of Australia, I was determined that Australia show leadership in this area. I intend to show leadership in this area and it will be done on the basis of sober, careful decision-making on the way through.
And as I said prior to the election, when it comes to the determination of our targets, they will be driven by the outcomes of the Garnaut report which Labor had the foresight to commission six months before this election.
JOURNALIST:Will you now be tempted to ask Professor Garnaut to fast-track that report?
PM:This is a very complex area of work. Had the previous Government actually commissioned similar work in the past, then we wouldn't be starting from behind the 8-ball. The fact that we, as an Opposition, in June of 2007, had to commission Professor Garnaut, cadged together the resources of the States and Territories and their Treasuries to working behind Professor Garnaut to begin this work says, I think, something about our foresight. This is a very complex piece of work, it will take him through until the middle of next year, but I'd say that this dovetails entirely with the timetable of negotiations which has been foreshadowed for Bali which occurs over the next couple of years.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) coal is so vital to our economy, you've got some pretty tough decisions to make.
PM:Well, look carefully at what, for example, Professor Garnaut had to say himself today abut the future of the coal industry. Carbon sequestration has a rich future. One of the impediments that we face right now when it comes to properly developing carbon sequestration is the absence of a carbon price. Why don't we have a carbon price?  Because the previous Government fiddled while Rome burned and didn't establish a national emissions trading regime with a carbon target in order to determine a carbon price. It's practical steps like that which make it possible to accelerate the commercial application of carbon sequestration technologies.
I am an optimist, a real optimist when it comes to the future of that industry, an optimism driven by my many discussions with the resource majors about the current state of sequestration technologies. The key missing ingredient is a carbon price.
And the second is how do you actually further encourage the development of the technologies which currently underpin the sequestration process.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll be having bilateral meetings with a range of people, including the President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. I'm looking forward very much to that to review, in overall terms, the Australia-Indonesia relationship. I place the highest priority on Australia's relationship with Indonesia. We are not just neighbours. We are partners in so many common challenges, not least of which is the common challenge of dealing with regional terrorism. I'm also a great optimist in terms of the future of the Indonesian economy and the opportunity to expand our business cooperation between the two countries, and I look forward very much to that meeting.
In addition to that, I'll be meeting with the President of the World Bank, Bob Zoellick, who is an old friend of mine, previously Deputy Secretary of State in the Untied States, and prior to that, US Special Trade Representative, and we'll be discussing how our future commitment on increasing Australia's level of official development assistance, overseas development assistance, will dovetail with the World Bank's program into the future.
On top of that, I'll be meeting with my old friend, Al Gore, and we promised to have a celebratory drink together.
JOURNALIST:When will you be returning?
PM:When will I be returning?  I will be returning at the end of the week. I think that's the safest thing to say at this stage.
JOURNALIST:Opposition Leader, Brendan Nelson, said he's written to you to try and get Greg Hunt, the Coalition's spokesman on Climate Change, Environment and Urban Water, to actually go on this delegation, saying that when Anthony Albanese was invited on a Coalition delegation 12 months ago. What's your response?  Will he be able to go?
PM: That's the first time I'm aware of that so I'll just have a look at it.
JOURNALIST:Regarding the gang rape of a 10 year-old girl (inaudible)?
PM: I'm disgusted and appalled by the reports that I've seen in today's newspapers on this case. I've noted carefully the statements by the Attorney-General of Queensland on this matter. As I understand the Attorney-General's position, he is examining the case further and I await carefully his determination on that.
My attitude to violence towards women and children, including sexual violence towards women and children, is one of zero tolerance. It always has been, it always will be. And I await the further deliberations of the Queensland Attorney-General.
JOURNALIST: It's been suggested that the judge said the nine year-old consented (inaudible).
PM:I'm horrified by the case as reported in today's paper. I'm horrified by cases like this involving violence, including sexual violence, towards women and children. My attitude is one of zero tolerance. And I await the further deliberations of the Queensland Attorney-General.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:I think the appropriate thing to do is to await the further deliberations of the Queensland Attorney-General. This involves complex matters of law and I await his further deliberations.
JOURNALIST:Four Australian men are facing murder charges in relation to the Tongan (inaudible)?
PM:On the details of that case, I'll defer to the Foreign Minister and ask him to comment further. Of course, we as the Australian Government, consistent with past practice, provide consular assistance to any Australians incarcerated abroad. But on the details of these cases in Tonga, I'll defer to the Foreign Minister. Thanks very much.
ends


PM:Just now the Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, and I have laid a wreath at this important memorial here at the Australian Consulate-General in Bali. Many, many, many Australian families have been directly and personally affected by the tragic events in Bali in recent years. The two bombings which have occurred here have led to the loss of much Australian life and much life from people from around the world and much life here locally too from this Balinese community. And it's been appropriate for us, on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people, to lay a wreath to commemorate that loss and the impact that's it's had on so many Australian lives.
Mindful of that loss, in my discussions in the last couple of days with the President of Indonesia, I have reiterated the absolute and fundamental importance of Australia and Indonesia continuing and expanding our cooperation in the entire sphere of counter terrorism. There is already good cooperation between the Australian Federal Police and their Indonesian counterparts. Again, I discussed that specifically with President Yudhoyono. Looking to the future, I would see it important to not only continue that cooperation but to expand it further.
The threat of terrorism is real, as we've seen by recent tragic events in Algiers. Therefore we must remain forever vigilant in this area. National security and the security of Australians abroad are of fundamental importance to the responsibilities of any Australian Government. They are fundamental to the responsibilities of this Australian Government which I lead and therefore it is critical that we continue and expand the fabric of our security policy cooperation in general and specifically on counterterrorism with the Government of Indonesia.
This morning I've also met, together with Stephen, with the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Papua New Guinea. It was good to catch up with the Chief. I last saw him in Moresby after I'd walked the Kokoda Track and I had a good and long conversation with Sir Michael about the future of our bilateral relationship.
I said to Sir Michael and he agreed that it's time to turn a new page in Australia's relationship with Papua New Guinea. This relationship has been through a very difficult period in recent times. There has in effect been a freeze on ministerial contact between the two governments. I do not believe that's an appropriate way forward for the future. We have to get on with the business of reviewing the totality of our relationship and taking that relationship forward.
To give practical expression to that, what Sir Michael and I agreed to today was that the Australian Papua New Guinea Ministerial Forum, which will be on our side headed by Stephen as Foreign Minister, will meet in Papua New Guinea in the first quarter of next year. That will bring together a range of Australian Government ministers, senior ministers who are integral to the bilateral relationship. The purpose of that forum, that ministerial forum, will be from our point of view to review the breadth of the relationship and the dimensions of future cooperation with PNG.
This is a critical relationship for Australia. We've got to get this relationship right as indeed we've got to get our relations right, right across the south west Pacific.
One of the specific areas that Sir Michael and I discussed was climate change and deforestation. This is an important area to PNG, an important area for Australia and an important area for the region and the world. There is a high density of rainforest in Papua New Guinea and we now have dispatched a team of officials which will be visiting Moresby in January to discuss how we take our cooperation on (inaudible) PNG. This potentially is a significant new area of expanded cooperation between the two governments.
We've also agreed that climate change and forestry matters will be a specific item on the agenda for the bilateral ministerial forum to be held in the first quarter of next year and Penny Wong as Climate Change Minister, together with advisers from her department and Ross Garnaut, will be attending that forum.
On climate change itself, we are here in Bali in order to negotiate a roadmap, a Bali roadmap for the future negotiation of a climate change compact involving both developed and developing countries for the future. These are complex and difficult negotiations and my instruction to our negotiating team has been to burn the midnight oil, roll the sleeves up and to spare no efforts in making sure we negotiate an effective mandate for the future.
When it comes to the definition of that effective mandate, we need to ensure that there is a clear cut commitment to a negotiating timeline. It's critical that our destination point for the conclusion of this new compact on climate change is the end of 2009, the Copenhagen Meeting. We believe that that must become the focus for the conclusion of our negotiations during this current period because we cannot delay any longer.
Secondly, it's critical that what is called the two tracks of this process - that concerning the Kyoto Protocol parties and those broader parties to the convention itself - proceed in tandem and are properly synchronised.
The end point we want to be is binding commitments, binding targets for developed countries and specific commitments for developing countries. We need to be working together so that all developed countries - and as I said yesterday, all developed countries - undertake binding targets for the future and that we have specific commitments from the major developing countries and the developing countries in general. Developing countries of course now represent major emitters themselves.
It's also critical that in the work which unfolds through the Climate Change Convention process and the Kyoto Protocol process, that we place avoided (inaudible) at the centre. This is critical in our future bilateral cooperation with the Republic of Indonesia and with Papua New Guinea and I've already referred to expanded cooperation between the two governments in PNG on this question and I've already discussed with President Yudhoyono doing the same with Indonesia. These are two critical areas where we can act early and effectively, bilaterally, regionally and in concert with the evolving architecture under the climate change framework convention, together with the Kyoto Protocol, to bring about significant effective results when it comes to mitigation efforts.
And having made those remarks, I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST:Mr Rudd (inaudible) this morning for indigenous affairs to be placed on the agenda at the COAG meeting. What do you think of that and would you agree with the proposition that if you're an Aboriginal person in Queensland you're not going to fear that you'll not get treated equally before the law (inaudible) and finally are you aware of the case of the 10 year old girl in Queensland who's creating international headlines and embarrassing Australia (inaudible) overseas?
PM: I take an absolutely hard line when it comes to the protection of children, be they indigenous children or non-indigenous children. I said the other day in Australia when the details of this matter were first reported that I was horrified by the reports that I read and nothing has changed in my view of that in terms of the subsequent reports that I have read.
Secondly in terms of the way in which this matter should be handled at COAG, our officials, Commonwealth and State, are currently working on the determination of that agenda. Therefore on the question of indigenous matters there is room for its inclusion, depending on the views of other governments. The question is what productive strategies can be embraced for the future but I have an open mind on that so long as we have a productive and constructive way forward.
Finally, on the specifics of this case, I understand that the Queensland Premier and the Queensland Government currently have it under immediate investigation. I await the outcome of that investigation on the details of the case. If there are further actions necessary for the Commonwealth then we will embrace those actions and implement them.
JOURNALIST: Is there a case for the Northern Territory intervention to be extended to Queensland and indeed right across the country?
PM: The first responsibility we have in the case of this appalling, horrific case at Arukun is to establish all the facts and that's why this investigation is underway and I await with keen interest the outcome of that investigation.
Secondly, on the question of the Northern Territory intervention, we foreshadowed prior to the election, and nothing has changed since then, that we will review the effectiveness of that intervention against the objectives set for it at the 12 month point. That will occur in about September-October of 2008.
That's an appropriate way forward. Remember, the objectives we set for the intervention, the previous Government set as well, and how it should therefore be measured, was against the Little Children are Sacred report, specifically the effect of that intervention in bringing down the incidence of child assault, child sexual assault and violence against children. I await with interest the outcome of that review. And that will determine our future course of action both in the Territory and beyond.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Americans got your message yesterday?
PM: I believe all of us in the world have an obligation to act on climate change. As you know, I'm a great friend and supporter of our Alliance and relationship with the United States. I've always said that America's an overwhelming force for good in the world. I've also always said that an Alliance with the United States does not mandate automatic compliance with every aspect of US foreign policy. And there are established differences between ourselves. One is well known to us all on Iraq, and the second relates to climate change. I've made no bones about it in the past that I believe the United States needs to accept its share of the global burden on climate change and on greenhouse gas reduction. That remains my position today. And the remarks I made yesterday about the United States and all countries needing to shoulder their share of the global burden remains.
JOURNALIST:Mr Rudd, you've repeatedly said that you recognise it's time for the (inaudible) climate change. Given that it's time, are you saying that (inaudible) countries is needed by 2020. Would you, because of your recognition of this science, (inaudible) some recognition of that science in a draft text?
PM: Well, on the question of the recognition of the science, I've already made a number of statements to that effect, both in Australia and since arriving here. On the negotiations underway between the parties at present, the challenge is this: how do you make sure that all parties remain party to the negotiation over the next two years, and therefore, when you have a range of views out to one end of the equation involving various developed countries and a range of views at the other end of the equation, the key challenge for our negotiators is to make sure that we have a clear and unqualified focus and compact, negotiating compact, moving forward. I'd be very concerned if negotiations meant that we had any states indicating that they would walk away from the process. Therefore, what I've instructed our negotiators to do is to spare no effort in trying to bridge the gap between developed countries and between developed and developing countries to make sure we have a robust mandate going forward.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the declaration, it's important the declaration (inaudible) a declaration proves a declaration a reference (inaudible) already guided by the times?
PM: Well, remember the IPCC Report which refers to the numbers that you've just made mention of, is an established document within the climate change convention process. It is there as part of the documentary record of the proceedings of the climate change, scientific negotiation and scientific analysis so far. It automatically, therefore, forms a backdrop to what negotiators would then do at the level of policy. My overarching concern is this: the science calling for action on climate change is clear. That has been concluded by the International Panel. The challenge for policy makers and for negotiators, therefore, is to make sure between now and the end of 2009, there's a robust mandate which is inclusive of all states, major emitters, both developing and developed world, to ensure that we get a real outcome by Copenhagen. The means to getting to that point will be many and varied and the negotiators currently face a very complex task, as negotiators often do in these sorts of negotiations, with still two days to go.
JOURNALIST: What message do you take to President Ramos Horta and the troops in East Timor?
PM: Well, I know Jose Ramos Horta very well during his period as Foreign Minister and, of course, Xanana Gusmao I know very well. There is plainly a continued challenge for us all to guarantee the maximisation of security into the long-term for East Timor. East Timor has a very complex development challenge. But underpinning that development challenge is security. I was critical, as you know, in the past, of Australia having withdrawn too early from East Timor. I believe that was not helpful at the time. And therefore, we will take an exceptionally conservative approach to how best to maintain East Timor's security long-term, doing so in close partnership with the Government of Timor-Leste.
And for the troops themselves, what I'll be saying to them is their work for Australia is much valued and much appreciated. The troops which Australia has abroad at the moment are operating in a whole range of difficult and dangerous environments and I'll be there in part to pass our message to them that the nation appreciates their service.
JOURNALIST:Are you concerned that including (inaudible) in the document (inaudible) reference that could force some countries out of the negotiations and walk even away?
PM: Well, negotiations are currently in a state of flux. My experience of negotiations like this in the past have been in the global trade round when I was Shadow Minister for Trade. And can I say that what I've seen in the past is that when negotiations get to a point of flux at this stage with a couple of days to go, it's important that we have appropriate flexibility for our negotiators to make sure that all parties remain. I'd be deeply concerned if any party was to walk away from these negotiations. Therefore, I've charged our negotiators with doing everything humanly possible to bridge the gap (inaudible) our responsibilities as a newly ratifying state of the Kyoto Protocol seriously.
JOURNALIST: Two questions, if I could, very quickly?
JOURNALIST:The new relations with PNG - does that mean that Australia is no longer pursuing an explanation from the Somare Government as to how Julian Moti escaped or was able to evade those extradition attempts earlier? And on a totally unrelated matter, the Japanese whaling fleet is almost in Australian waters. Are we deploying military vessels to keep tabs on it?
PM: Firstly on the question of the Moti matter, the position of the Australian Government is absolutely clear cut. This individual is the subject of criminal charges and because of the application of Australian domestic law; we have activated our extradition arrangements with the Government of the Solomon Islands. Nothing has changed on that score. We therefore intend to prosecute that to the full. The reason being is that the normal operation of the criminal law of the Commonwealth of Australia, and through its properly constituted agencies, including the Australian Federal Police, and international extradition arrangements should proceed unimpeded and that will remain our position.
Secondly, on the question of whaling, we will have further to say about the whaling matter during the course of next week.
But let me say this. We take seriously Australia's international obligations on the proper protection of whales. We have said in the past that we would look at measures which would fortify any future case to be brought before international legal tribunals on the implementation of Japan's whaling policies, in particular Japan's assertion that these are for research purposes and not for commercial purposes and we are therefore actively considering the appropriate measures for the collection of data which would assist in any future legal case which the Government may embark upon in the future. And on those matters we'll have further to say during the week ahead.
JOURNALIST: Could you please answer the question, that is, is the Australian Navy preparing to be used...
PM: You mean right now?
JOURNALIST: Yes.
PM: As I said, we'll have further to say...
JOURNALIST: In Australian waters.
PM: As I said before, we'll have further to say on that next week and I reiterate our previous policy as stated clearly that we would not rule out the use of Australian assets to collect appropriate data including photographic evidence concerning whaling activities if we were to then advance a case to the appropriate international legal tribunals. But we'll have further to say about that.
ends


PM: If I could begin by expressing my deep sadness at the loss of Clem Jones. Clem Jones, the former Lord Mayor of Brisbane and the Administrator placed in charge of the rebuilding of Darwin after cyclone Tracey, has passed away. Clem was a long standing personal friend of mine. A great source of support and encouragement and friendship and on behalf of all Australians, Territorians, Queenslanders, representatives of the city of Brisbane, he is a legend and we are going to be sadly, sadly depleted by his loss to us all.
In my community in Brisbane, Clem Jones established the Clem Jones Youth Centre, which provides sporting opportunities for young people, including young people who have been in trouble with the law. And his view always was if you provide sporting opportunities for kids, particularly young blokes who have had a run in with the police it's the best way to get them back on the straight and narrow. So he said: how do I do that? So he then began fundraising to establish the Clem Jones Centre for doing that, which now supports literally sporting programs for hundreds and hundreds of young people.
Clem's sense of social justice also extended to the most disadvantaged as well. The Clem Jones Aged Care Centre which, Jenny and I in earlier lives have visited, it's in my own community in Brisbane, out there providing practical support for people in need and when Clem started that off, he was literally out there in the kitchen making sure it was all working. This person, this man, Clem Jones he was the embodiment of extending a helping hand to people in need, a very practical Administrator here in the Northern Territory, the (inaudible) of the city of Brisbane, the modernisation of Brisbane, proper facilities for youth and for our aged and Australia will be saddened by his loss.
Jenny Macklin and I have been, today, here in Darwin, meeting with Indigenous leaders from across the Northern Territory. We've just had a very good two hour long meeting with some twenty five leaders from right across the Territory and it's been a good and constructive discussion about the challenges which are facing Indigenous communities today.
I've decided that this group of twenty five and they have kindly responded positively to my suggestion that they form a reference group for the matters that we have to discuss together during the course of 2008. Now, I will be returning to the Territory on a quarterly basis to discuss our agenda with this reference group of Aboriginal leaders and their agenda with us. We want to ensure that our overall objective of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life expectancy, Indigenous and non-Indigenous education (inaudible) is done on a cooperative and consultative basis so that we achieve progress together.
I also indicated to these Aboriginal leaders today that I'll be bringing the Cabinet to the Northern Territory by the middle of next year and we'll be meeting the Cabinet in an Aboriginal community outside the cities. So we'll be deciding where that occurs in the weeks and months ahead. I think it's very important in response to representations by Indigenous leaders that Cabinet Ministers and the Senior bureaucrats who support them experience first hand some of the challenges which are faced in some of the more remote communities here in the Territory. And so I look forward to resolving that venue and that meeting with them soon.
Finally, the spirit of cooperation which characterised our discussion this morning was really strong. I'm not hiding the fact that there are controversial matters, many controversial matters. I accept that. There is going to be disagreement from time to time and agreement from time to time. But what I'm determined to do is to make sure that our challenge for the future, that is to adhere to a practical program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities is achieved on a cooperative basis. I reaffirm this morning that the intervention will continue and will be subject to a review, as I've already indicated many times before, and as has done Jenny, in the second half of the year and we'll work through that review ourselves but also in partnership with the reference group of Aboriginal leaders with whom we met this morning. I might ask Jenny to add to what I've just said and then we'll happily take your questions.
MACKLIN: Thanks very much Kevin. The people who were represented at the consultation meeting this morning came from a wide cross section of groups. People from educational groups, health groups, people representing the land councils, people from different communities right across the Territory and it was a very productive meeting covering a wide range of issues, some very practically orientated to the implementation of the intervention but others really going to the main agenda items that they see are necessary if we are to close the gap. There was a strong desire that the Federal Government work cooperatively with the Northern Territory Government and both the Prime Minister and I have met with the new Chief Minister and I've met with his Deputy as well in the last day and I do think it is very significant that we were able to come here to Darwin to meet with a wide cross section of people so soon after the election to demonstrate our willingness to go forward to really address the serious levels of disadvantage in a cooperative way, with Aboriginal people.
PM: Just before throwing it open to questions, if I could touch quickly on the events in Bali and climate change. Our advice this morning is that, negotiators were meeting through until very early, in fact very late this morning and this is still a very tough negotiation. It's still in a state of flux. Penny Wong, our chief negotiator and Minister for Climate Change has been playing a key role in those negotiations. She was appointed as one of the co-chairs of the final high level negotiating session and so Penny is in there with sleeves rolled up, probably completely sleep deprived by this stage, trying to bring out a decent outcome. This is a very difficult negotiation, but it is one on which all peoples of the world are placing their hopes and their faith in the governments of the world to come together to produce a decent outcome for the planet.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let me take those in sequence. On the first question of the apology. Yes. And I certainly asked for the input of these experienced Aboriginal leaders (inaudible) Jenny, in terms of how that is best done. This is an important part of building a bridge of respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia and we've got to get that right. The other thing we've got to get right is closing the gap. Both these things are important and we had a good discussion about both this morning.
On your second point Michelle, your second question, I will decide that very early in the week in terms of the inclusion of these matters. On the question of Indigenous affairs onto the COAG agenda, I haven't yet had an opportunity, having just come in from Bali to hear the inputs from any Premiers and Chief Ministers and I reiterate what I said in Bali or Dili, I can't remember which it was, that I'm more than relaxed about having such a discussion, so long as it's capable of producing a solid and productive outcome and I'll wait for reports in from Premiers and Chief Ministers on that and we'll make that clear very early in the week.
And your third question was?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh yes, Aboriginal leaders were very blunt about some of their concerns, about the way in which aspects of the intervention were proceeding. Some had some good things to say about aspects of the intervention. There were many critical remarks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: And that's your fourth question. Deftly done. It went to the range of comments, of implementation arrangements, lack of consultation and the effectiveness of various programs on the ground and also concerns about the operation of the permit system. And look, I believe you've just got to have a very frank, open, consultative relationship with Aboriginal leadership so that we know what the concerns are, they can be reflected back to the public servants who've been charged with the responsibility of implementing the intervention and also assist us in the review process which will occur in the second half of next year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, I just believe in letting everyone have a say. You had twenty five leaders and none of them were backwards in coming forwards. That was the good thing about it. So, I've had to ask the Royal Australian Air Force to delay take off for a little while to talk to Aboriginal leaders and then to talk to you the good ladies and gentlemen of the press.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, on the intervention, I'll let Jenny answer that. I think what we've indicated is that, what was budgeted for it will be allocated because we've got to give this a fair run in order to make a properly informed assessment of its effectiveness. That's one thing. Secondly on the broader question of our approach to Indigenous policy. Prior to the election we indicated a further package of $261 million and that was aimed specifically at what we do with maternal and child welfare, what we do in terms of targeted literacy programs for Indigenous children, and a range of other practical measures. On the health front for example, on rheumatic fever, a $10 million program aimed at targeting that specific problem. As someone as a kid who  had rheumatic fever himself, it is almost endemic in certain Indigenous communities and we really have to act on that one and it's important that it is in progress. So that $261 million program remains on foot.
The last thing I'd say before asking Jenny to add is we've also made specific commitments for the provision of two hundred additional teachers for Indigenous education in the Northern Territory. When I was up here in the election campaign, rolling around shopping centres, the number of teachers from Indigenous communities who would come up to me and talk to me about their lack of resources and numbers in various of these communities. I think this is a very practical and important initiative which has already been put forward by us prior to the election with a funding commitment attached to it and we are determined to implement it. Do you want to add to what I've said, Jenny?
MACKLIN: Thanks very much. As the Prime Minister's indicated, money that was previously allocated before the intervention, both generally and specifically for housing will continue. On top of that there's the closing the gap commitments that he's outlined and the teachers, we also made specific commitments for primary health care infrastructure in remote parts of the Northern Territory, specific commitments for sexual assault services and then a number of specific areas for economic development. Money to enable the employment of three hundred rangers, that's in remote parts of Australia, not just the Northern Territory. Money for carbon trading, to work with Indigenous communities, to really foster a carbon trading, emerging carbon trading market and a number of other specific economic development initiatives. They too were very much the focus of the discussion this morning. A number of contributors wanted to make sure that we worked collaboratively with Indigenous leaders and also the private sector to make sure we really take advantage of the economic opportunities up here in the north.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MACKLIN: One of the issues that we talked about in some detail, were the health checks, the desire for of course the health checks to be effective in guaranteeing that children get access to medical services. One of the contributors today wanted to guarantee that of course that fits in with the primary health care system that exists here in the Northern Territory, that children get access to secondary and tertiary services and ongoing support after the first child health checks. So that's one area where people are glad it's happening but have some suggestions about how we go forward.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MACKLIN: We have indicated for some time, as far back as when this issue was debated in the Parliament, that we thought that the permits should stay. That was raised today as well and certainly people feel that it would be better if they do stay. We have also indicated, however, and this was part of an amendment we moved in the Parliament, that access to Indigenous communities should be extended to journalists and to government employees or contractors who are working for Governments delivering, for example, a full range of services. So, they're the sorts of amendments we would make to the permit regime.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MACKLIN: Well as you'd be aware, we have been discussing these very important issues with the Premier of Queensland Anna Bligh. As the Prime Minister has indicated, he will be discussing these issues and the broader questions of Indigenous affairs with the other Premiers and Chief Ministers as to whether that will be on the COAG agenda. These are serious issues in the Northern Territory, very serious issues in Queensland, but of course they are matters that we need to consider carefully and I intend to do that in a cooperative fashion with the Premier of Queensland.
PM: Just as I conclude the other thing to add to what Jenny's just said there is that, and I was asked this question (inaudible) review, the effectiveness of the program here and that occurs in the second half of the year. These are serious matters, really serious matters. The reason we backed this report, this approach I should say, is because we read ‘Little Children are Sacred' and we were horrified by what we read and therefore we were prepared to back this intervention and we'll then review it's effectiveness and that I think is the appropriate way forward before looking at any other measures downstream in terms of other jurisdictions, and as Jenny said we intend to do this on a cooperative basis.
To conclude also, if I could say to the people of the Northern Territory, to thank them one and all for their support for Damian Hale, in his election as the new member for Solomon. He is a great bloke. I really enjoy talking to him about his views on what can be done here in the Territory, what can be done for this community and the pre-election commitments we made here in terms of GP Superclinics, in terms of our aimed course of action with Tiger Brennan and in other areas, they'll be subject to a detailed implementation strategy. What we undertook to the Northern Territory we'll be delivering to the Territory. And Damian Hale is critical to that. The other thing I said about Damian's role in the future is I will make sure that he has an advisory role with our new Minister for Youth and Sport, Kate Ellis, particularly on the question of advancing Indigenous sporting opportunities into the future. He is well qualified for that and in fact I gather he's playing in the forward pocket this afternoon. At the age of thirty eight, he needs his head read. And he will emerge bruised and sorry for the experience but his commitment and passion for sport and Indigenous sporting opportunities is beyond dispute and I look forward to him playing a role there and we've got to run to the airport. Thanks
ends


PM: Well last night in Bali the world community decided to take a bold step into the future. But it's only one step and we've got a long, long way to go. This is an important step forward because it opens up a roadmap to the future but that roadmap means two further years of hard, tough negotiations between developed and developing countries and among developed countries as well. Australia into the future will be going into those negotiations with sleeves rolled up and prepared to put in the hard yards over this time ahead because we're going to need every bit of negotiating grunt in the international community to bring this to a positive outcome. Of course what's at stake here is the future of our economy. What's at stake here is the future of the global economy. What's at stake is of course the future of the planet itself. And this therefore represents a core priority for this Australian Government over the next two years.
I would also commend the significant role played by Australia in these negotiations. I would commend the role of our lead negotiator, Senator Penny Wong, the Minister for Climate Change. Penny being ably supported by our Environment Minister, Peter Garrett and other members of the Australian delegation, led by our Ambassador for the environment Jan Adams as well as Howard Bamsey. There are many, many Australian negotiators who have been out there burning the midnight oil and in some cases, not sleeping at all for days on end to try and do their bit on Australia's behalf to bring this negotiation to an effective conclusion. So I, on behalf of the Government, thank them for their efforts. Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:Well, if you look carefully at the text of the convention document which has emerged, we now have a commitment on the question of developing countries for them to engage in measurable, reportable and verifiable nationally appropriate mitigation actions. This is a step forward. Is it as much as the international community would have liked? It's not quite there. But does it commit however, developing countries to producing measurable, reportable and verifiable actions? It does that and that therefore does represent a step forward.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:On the part of China or the document itself?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:Well, the reason we have got this document, which commits to actions on the part of the developing world and other actions and commitments on the part of the developed world is that the world can move forward together to address the common global challenge of climate change. Australia, as I've said in previous statements and has Senator Wong, repeatedly in Bali as well, recognises the science here. The challenge for us now is to frame our own national targets, which are cognisant of the science. The Garnaut Review, as I've said on many occasions will report by the middle of 2008 and we will frame our interim targets based on that. The Garnaut Review will also canvas and examine extensively the economic impact of acting and not acting on climate change for Australia. That's why that report is so important for us all.
JOURNALIST:What do you see as Australia's role in further negotiations? Is it going to be focussed on the United States, in pushing them?
PM:I believe the world community has taken a positive step forward here, developed countries and developing countries and there has been movement on the part of our friends in the United States as well, which needs to be recognised. Going forward, the obligation will be on us all to make further efforts. In the developing world we of course need to continue to work with our friends in China and India, on the significant task ahead for them as major emitting developing countries. In my own dealings with the Chinese in the year ahead, I hope to spend as much time as possible with the Chinese leadership acting on that and with the objective of achieving a greater agreement and greater consensus with our friends in China on future courses of action for them. Similarly with India.
On the developed countries side our friends in the United States and other developed countries, I look forward to further discussions with them as well and certainly they'll be forming a part of my discussions with the US Administration.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) when are we going to see some targets set?
PM:Well, this was always desired at Bali as outlining a Bali roadmap and I would commend the efforts of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia for his efforts in intervening in this Conference, to making sure that that roadmap, that Bali roadmap was laid out. But it was always envisaged as a roadmap and what that means is, it's destination point is Copenhagen in two years time. So, the Copenhagen destination point is there. It's clear cut. It's at the end of 2009. We therefore have two years as a world community to roll up our sleeves and do the hard work. The end point of that will decide whether or not as a world community we're serious about the future of the planet.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)?
PM:Our position on that has always been that what we need is a nationally consistent relationships register, both for same sex couples, for de facto heterosexual couples, if they wish to use it, or for carer relationships. That has been our position all along. That remains our position. The other aspect of that is that we want to ensure that we have nationally uniform legislation removing remaining forms of discrimination in terms of inheritance law, taxation law and social security law for same sex couples. Anything else?
JOURNALIST:Church groups might oppose that though (inaudible)?
PM:Well on the question of a nationally consistent relationships register we have been, in the course of 2007, in discussion with various church bodies. There's a range of opinion there. But we believe that's an appropriate way to go. Our position has always been, that marriage is between a man and a women and therefore that always will form the cornerstone of our view on these matters. A relationships register, nationally consistent of the type we had in Tasmania since 2004 and of the type which the Victorian Government has recently proposed, we believe is a positive and productive way forward, particularly if you add to it appropriate nationally uniform legislation to reform and to remove any impediments to same sex couples in relation to inheritance law, taxation law and social security law.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:We'll be consulting with the affected groups on that and the States and Territories, because it affects everybody during the course of the next twelve months. It's complex, you've got to get it right.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) you've talked about the cooperative arrangement with Anna Bligh but you surely must believe that more Federal intervention needs to be done in Queensland and Western Australia?
PM:Well, I've just had a half day talking to the Aboriginal leadership of the Northern Territory, yesterday. We had a good two hour long discussion and prior to that I had a long discussion also with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory. These are complex matters. What I want to do with the States and Territories is move forward on a cooperative basis. Secondly, in the case of the Northern Territory I reiterate, I support the intervention. I've said that before the election. That remains my position after the election. As I said also before the election, we'll review it at the twelve month point and make an assessment of its effectiveness. Therefore, in response to any suggestion that it be applied somewhere, that is a wrong approach, until such time as we've actually concluded our assessment of its effectiveness. My approach therefore, with States and Territories, long term and in the immediate term is to work cooperatively. The other thing I said in Darwin yesterday, and I think in Dili the day before was that during the course of this week I'll be determining through discussions with States and Territories the placement of Indigenous affairs on the COAG agenda for this Thursday in Melbourne and I'll be having those discussions later today and tomorrow with State and Territory colleagues.
ends


PM: In the lead-up to the last election we indicated that we would be taking measures early in the term of this Government to secure fairness and flexibility in Australian workplaces. It's our belief that Mr Howard's industrial relations laws were the most extreme that this country had ever seen in the history of our Federation. And today in Cabinet, we've taken our first step towards the removal of those laws.
Cabinet today has agreed on key amendments to the Workplace Relations Act 1996, and we will introduce these amendments as soon as Parliament returns. We believe that this is an important step forward because so many working families have been adversely affected by the existing range of laws.
Today Cabinet formally approved a range of specific measures which will, first of all, prevent the creation of new AWAs once these laws are passed.
Secondly, it abolishes the previous Government's so-called fairness test, and that will, of course, become applicable as soon as the legislation is through the Parliament.
And thirdly, we'll be introducing a genuine no-disadvantage test. And again, that will become applicable once the laws are through the Parliament.
The other thing that we have begun is the process by which we'd determine the new national employment standards. And what we have done today is to agree to develop an exposure draft for those 10 national employment standards, and these will be released when the Transition Bill enters the Parliament. That way, we'll have a full consultative arrangement with industry on it.
For us, this is a key part of our commitment to the Australian people, a key commitment which we are honouring today by this early decision of the Labor Cabinet, and I'll be asking Julia to comment further on that in a minute.
This Thursday, the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, and I will be attending the first meeting of COAG in Melbourne, the first meeting of COAG occurring during the period of this Government. For us, this is step one in what will be a long-term process, a long-term process with one objective, and that's to end the buck-passing between Canberra and States. It's time, instead, we rolled up our sleeves to agree on a cooperative framework for dealing with the key challenges facing the Federation, facing the business community, and facing individual working families.
The program that we will be discussing on Thursday has been released to you in large measure. It deals, of course, with the health agenda, it deals with the education agenda, it deals with the infrastructure agenda, it deals with the business deregulation agenda and it deals with a number of other items as well, including housing, climate change and water. We've also decided today that we'll be including indigenous affairs in that agenda as well.
Our purpose this Thursday is to engage the Premiers and Chief Ministers in a strategic discussion about our common objectives in this area. We'll be approaching that meeting of COAG in order to provide a framework for the cooperative implementation of the program we put forward at the last election. We believe these are critical areas of great interest and relevance to Australian families.
We are looking particularly at achieving early results on the question of elective surgery waiting lists. And the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, is advancing discussions with her State and Territory colleagues further between now and then with a view to any outcome which might be deliverable, come COAG on Thursday. If not deliverable on Thursday, then into the New Year.
Also, when it comes to these other areas that I listed before, our principle objective with the Premiers and Chief Ministers is to elaborate a timetable, elaborate the structure of working groups, and terms of reference for working groups, so that the work in each of these areas of Commonwealth-State cooperation can get underway.
I repeat what I've said so many times during the election campaign and my commitment to the Australian people, and that is to act early with our sleeves rolled up and a comprehensive agenda of national reform using COAG, not as a whipping boy, but COAG as a means by which to transform the nation.
If I could now turn to Julia to add on industrial relations, then I'll be happy to take your questions.
GILLARD: Thank you very much. As Kevin said, the Work Choices laws are extreme laws. The laws of the Liberal Party allowed working people to have the safety net torn away from them. Too many Australians lost penalty rates, overtime or redundancy, basic conditions. Many more Australians feared their loss.
Our Transition Bill will end the ability of anyone to make new Australian Workplace Agreements. That will be fairer to Australian families. But the Transition Bill will also kick off a new era of industrial relations with a streamlined and modern award system. The Transition Bill will task the Industrial Relations Commission with modernising Australia's awards over almost a two-year period, ending on the 31st December 2009. This is not only better for employees who rely on the safety net, it's better for employers who want to have a simple, modern safety net, something that they can check easily and know what their obligations are.
In addition, we will be lifting the red tape burden on employers. This Bill will end the obligation of employers to hand out the Howard Government's Workplace Relations fact sheet. This is, of course, the first piece of legislation to move forward with fairness. The substantive Bill will be brought to Parliament later next year after a consultative period that will involve industrial relations stakeholders, and most particularly, our Business Advisory Group.
PM: Good. Thank you, Julia. I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, could you clarify if you intend to use the Navy to monitor Japanese whaling (inaudible)?
PM: As I said the other day either in Dili or Bali, we haven't ruled out the use of Australian assets for the purposes of collecting photographic evidence in support of a possible future international legal case against the Japanese on whaling. I also indicated when I was overseas that we would be making our position clear on these matters during the course of this week. And we have some further internal deliberations to undergo in that matter. We'll be making a statement later in the week.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, when you say Australian assets, does that mean military?
PM: Australian assets means Australian assets. It means the property of the Australian Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think I have a clear idea as to what the previous Australian Government did  -  which was nothing  -  when it came to the proper action to protect whales. I understand the full complexity and difficulty of this challenge. I'm fully aware of the depth and strength of our bilateral diplomatic relationship with Japan. I'm equally aware of the fact that no-one seriously believes that this is whaling for scientific purposes. Therefore, we need to embrace a proper, considered, reasonable, balanced course of action. And as I said, I will be making a full statement on that later in the week.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you've listed indigenous affairs on the list now, how do you plan to progress those talks?  Would you be encouraging the States and Territories, or the States in this case, I suppose, particularly Queensland, to be adopting Northern Territory-style intervention?  Are there particular measures you would be putting to them and asking them to adopt?
PM: Well, when it comes to Indigenous affairs, you'll be familiar with the fact that on Saturday I met with the Indigenous leadership of the Northern Territory. We had a good discussion over several hours over the effects of the intervention and the reviews of that intervention. Many negatives, some positive. And I've reiterated to the Indigenous leadership in the Northern Territory that we'd be undertaking our review, which we said prior to the election we would in the second half of this year.
On the question of other States, and particularly recent developments in Queensland, I've been in discussion for some time with the Queensland Government about the, proposals which have been put forward by Noel Pearson, for a Family Responsibilities Commission in far North Queensland, involving, from recollection four communities on Cape York. Last time I was up there, well the time before in fact, maybe it was the time before that, I had some discussions with Mr Pearson about that and certainly with the Queenslanders we'll be seeing if we can get an agreed outcome on that, so that that new arrangement for the Cape can get underway.
More broadly with the Premiers and Chief Ministers, these are people of good will who want to do the right thing by Indigenous communities and let's face it, there are huge challenges out there. I'm looking forward to a very broad ranging conversation with the Premiers and Chief Ministers on what further actions can profitably and productively and cooperatively be undertaken. Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Will the Murray-Darling be included in these discussions (inaudible)?
PM: What we're proposing to do Dennis, and I discussed this at length with the acting Premier of South Australia and the Premier of Victoria, prior to travelling to Bali and that is that we will transact outstanding disagreements, particularly involving the Government of Victoria on the Murray Darling arrangement bilaterally. That is, I'll be dealing separately with the Government of Victoria and as a appropriate with the Government's of New South Wales and South Australia to resolve outstanding concerns there. Those concerns of the Government of Victoria have been well documents. They're on the public record but I believe these are best and most productively advanced by separate one on one discussions by those relevant Premiers and those Premiers are in agreement with that approach.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)?
PM: What I'll be proposing to the Premiers and Chief Ministers is to meet COAG regularly this year. I intend, as I said, not to use COAG as a whipping boy. I have no interest in allowing COAG to become sort of a dead horse. Going to mix all our analogies here soon. But I want it to be a work horse not a dead horse. I don't want to whip it. I just want to stroke it gently. (inaudible)
GILLARD: As it canters towards the finishing line.
PM: Just lately the poetry's lacking. But my intention is to meet it regularly and actually turn it into a real work horse of the Federation. Let's face it, all those list of things I just went through before, they are massively complex. As a former practitioner at a bureaucrat level myself in this area, albeit a decade or so ago, I actually know how much these things get bogged in the weeds if they're just left with officials all the time. Therefore, my intention'll be to meet COAG regularly, possibly quarterly during the course of 2008, so that we are regularly bringing up performance updates on how each of these working groups is going. And progress will be easier in some rather than others but in answer to your question, that's what I've got in mind.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) I think you were meant to have AWAs phased out by 2012, 31st of December. Isn't that now blowing out in that people can still sign AWAs perhaps in January and February next year?
GILLARD: Our policy on this was always very clear. It was in our policy implementation plan in August and that was that there would be no retrospective element at all to what we did in workplace relations. We said in August we would have a transition bill and from the date of the implementation of that transition bill you would no longer be able to make new Australian workplace agreements but to give employers and employees certainty AWAs that were on foot at that time would continue for the balance of their term, bearing in mind they can last for up to five years. I've been advised by the Workplace Authority and you may have seen the Head of the Workplace Authority made some statements when the most recent statistics on the number of agreements being processed were released that there's no evidence in the current statistics of a spike in the number of Australian Workplace Agreements. Now to change the law we have to have Parliament sit. We have to have a bill go through the Parliament. We are going to make sure, through today's Cabinet decision that we are doing that as quickly as possible. This bill will be brought to the Parliament as soon as the Parliament resumes in February.
JOURNALIST: Of those current backlog of AWAs which were waiting approval with the Fairness test, the hundred thousand or so. What happens to those which are still unresolved?
GILLARD: They are dealt with under current law. The operative date for the making of those agreements is the date that they were made, not the date that ultimately they get assessed because they're in a long queue. That obviously is not the fault of the people who made the agreement.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)?
GILLARD: AWAs made under current law inclusive of the Howard Government's changes to WorkChoices in 2007, the so called ‘Fairness Test' will be assessed under that law, not under the new law.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)?
GILLARD: You can't make new law until you have the Parliament sit and have the Parliament consider it. Up until new law is made, Work Choices, the Howard Government's law continues to be the law. Agreements made under Work Choices can last for up to five years. That is correct. But the only way of changing the law is to have this Parliament sit and change it. We are obviously going about that task as quickly as possible. We will present our bill which is to transition to Forward with Fairness, our workplace relations regime as soon as this Parliament sits in the New Year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)? 
And also just while I've got the floor, if I could ask the Prime Minister, as a former practitioner of COAG from the States' perspective, could you tell us whether you think it's frustrating your agenda that not being considered at COAG on Thursday and it's all being determined by the Commonwealth?
GILLARD: The Australian Fair Pay Commission will continue to deal with minimum wages for the two-year transitional period. When our workplace relations system is in full operation from 1st January 2010, then the setting of minimum wages will be undertaken by Fair Work Australia, our new industrial umpire.
PM: And in answer to the other question from Laura, we want to advance this pretty ambitious national agenda cooperatively and, therefore, everyone's got to get a fair shake of the sauce bottle. That means the States and Territories as well. That's why this agenda has been discussed by me on the phone with the Premiers, and I did so before going to Bali and before putting out any statement. And that's why, furthermore, there is an opportunity on that agenda, in terms of other national form initiatives, for Premiers and Chief Ministers to bring forward other matters as well, and that may occur between now and Thursday. And it's within that group that we've included, obviously, indigenous affairs. Michelle, Michelle first.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It is a very difficult operating environment. I think both the Defence Minister and myself have a similar view about how challenging this is going to be in the period ahead. What the Defence Minister was doing in Edinburgh was underlining the fact that we're there for the long haul, and we made that very plain to our American ally and to our NATO partners. And the Defence Minister was also underlining a point which is necessary to make publicly, and that's we would encourage our NATO partners to do more when it comes to Afghanistan. This is quite critical, particularly given the further resurgence of the opium crop, the illicit economy, the amount of narco-finance which is rolling out of that part of the world. Unless we stabilise Afghanistan we've got problems beyond those that we experience at the moment.
JOURNALIST: After Bali, do you have a sense about where the United States is heading and what we can expect to see from them over the next year or so on climate change?
PM: Well, I would commend the flexibility we saw from the Government of the United States in allowing this consensus draft to go forward at Bali. There was a real danger during that last day of negotiations that it would all fall in a heap, and again, I commend the role of the Australian negotiating team, led by Senator Wong, in pulling that out of the fire, also, with the cooperation of other States, of course. Also, some sign of flexibility from some developing countries, viz-a-viz measurable, verifiable, reportable actions. Now, this is not perfect in either department but it does represent a step forward.
Informally, I had discussions with the American delegation myself in Bali and I do not know, is the honest answer, what the US negotiating position will be during the course of this year. But what I know for a fact is this: this will be a hard, difficult negotiation. We seem to be having quarterly meetings a lot but there will be quarterly meetings, I'm advised by Senator Wong this morning, during the course of this year. I think the next one's in Bonn in March and this is going to be tough and again, tough, in order to take the road map into implementation-land.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask the Treasurer, you've expressed concerns about continuing inflation over the next 18 months or so, and the effect on interest rates. Will you be taking the opportunity at COAG to address the inflationary pressures that the States have created?
SWAN: Well, in many ways, Dennis, the reforms that we require to put downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates do go to the COAG agenda, and I spoke about that at some length on Friday. So, the COAG agenda is central to building the productive capacity of the economy. I mean, as you know, the inflationary pressure has been building for a long period of time, it will take some time to deal with, but we must begin immediately. And I think the most important thing we can do is have a new era of fiscal discipline, and the Commonwealth ought to start with itself. I made that very clear on Friday. We do need additional savings but also we do need to work with the States to expand the productive capacity of the economy. We need to work with them in a range of areas to progress the national reform agenda, and we will commence that process on Friday.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)?
SWAN: Well, I'm not going to buy into the outcome of the COAG process. The COAG process is very important and I'll leave that to the Prime Minister to deal with in the first instance.
PM: Just to conclude on that, because Cabinet is still going and we should actually be there, it would be a good idea, and I'd just like to conclude and I'm very concerned about the little girl out here in the sun without a hat. COAG is about reform nationally which benefits working families through access to better services and more efficient delivery of services. It's critical for the business community, through the business deregulation agenda, but it is absolutely critical in terms of the pressures we face nationally on the national economy and inflation, by addressing critically infrastructure bottlenecks and skills shortages. That's why this agenda is so important, as well as lifting the participation rate. These are critical agendas when it comes to doing what government can nationally to maximise downward pressure on inflation to ensure that we're doing the best thing by way of macro-economic management, we'd better get back to Cabinet. Thank you very much.
ends


PM: (inaudible) thank His Excellency, the Governor of Victoria for hosting what has been for us a very good placed COAG, since the election of our Government in Canberra.We thank the Victorian Government for making facilities available, and it's been a really good opportunity to have this, our first meeting, engaged in the process of cooperative federalism outside of the nation's capital (audio failure)...
... training needs, whether it's also the proper provision of services to Indigenous Australians.Right across the spectrum, we have a responsibility at all levels of government to (inaudible) get best yield for the taxpayer's dollar, but to make sure we're providing the best level of services possible as well.And that's what we've done in the program of work we've agreed today.
We see this as important for the year ahead, 2008, which represents a unique year to (inaudible).
(inaudible) recognises that we, the Commonwealth, have a central role in critical areas affecting working families across the country, across the spectrum of education and health care, infrastructure and the rest.I look forward to a period ahead where, together with the Chief Ministers and Premiers, we'll have our sleeves rolled up and stuck into an ambitious program of work.
Today, after extensive discussion and debate, we agreed on seven working groups.We will have a working group on Health and Ageing, which will be chaired by Nicola Roxon, the Federal Minister for Health.New South Wales will be the co-chair.
On our productivity agenda in Education, Skills, Training, Early Childhood, Julia Gillard, the Deputy Prime Minister, will chair that working group.Victoria will be the deputy chair.
On Climate Change and Water, the Federal Minister, Penny Wong, will be the chair of that working group, and South Australia its deputy chair.
On Infrastructure, Anthony Albanese, the Federal Minister, will be the chair, Queensland the deputy chair.
Business, Deregulation and Competition, Lindsay Tanner the chair, WA the Deputy chair.
On Housing, Tanya Plibersek, the Federal Housing Minister, will be the chair and Tasmania the deputy chair.
On Indigenous Reform Jenny Macklin will be the chair and the Territories combined  -  the Northern Territory and the ACT  -  will combine the deputy chairpersonship.
This is a new model for the way in which we do business. Usually these are devolved entirely to Commonwealth bureaucrats.At the Commonwealth end, we're actually engaging our Ministers, who have been recently sworn in and I believe are doing a great job.And they'll have a very important piece of work to deliver, cooperatively with States and Territories during the course of 2008, and we look forward to that constructive work together.
What we're releasing today as an attachment to the communiqué are the detailed terms of reference for each of those working groups, and you'll have those to peruse.
What we've also agreed to today is COAG in calendar year 2008 will meet on a quarterly basis.We intend to turn COAG into the workhorse of the nation.If you come to future COAG meetings, don't expect your spectacular, brilliant announcements every time we get together.We see this as part of the working machinery of the Australian nation.If you're serious about delivering national outcomes it means making sure that the States and Territories and the Commonwealth are in harness together, and that's what we propose.
So, we will have those meetings during the course of the year and, of course, and we hope to be again meeting this time next year as well to bring as much of this work as possible to conclusion.
The core part of the reform program will be the reform of Special Purpose Payments.Now, Special Purpose Payments are part of the deep structure, folklore and mysticism of Commonwealth-State relations.If you've worked in these areas before, as I have, they are the source of frustration at multiple levels, given the multiplicity of them and the way in which they've been designed.  Now, we intend to take a different view.We want to see our SPPs rationalised in the future.We want to see that SPPs  -  Special Purpose Payments  -  increasingly reflect a combination of outcomes and outputs so that people can measure whether the money which is being invested is actually delivering real and improved services out for the Australian community.
And secondly, where the Commonwealth's role comes into play in this is that consistent with that new measurement approach, then we, the Commonwealth, are prepared to embrace incentive payments to the States.And that is a departure from the past.
You heard me speak in the election campaign about the importance of many areas of cooperation between Canberra and the States.One of those relates to elective surgery and elective surgery waiting times.You will be familiar with the commitment that we made during the election period  -  during 2008 to bring down elective surgery waiting times by some 25,000 persons.
Today what we've done is to provide a commitment to the States and Territories combined of additional Commonwealth funding at $150 million for calendar '08, to secure that objective.And the Treasurers and Health Ministers will be meeting in January to finalise the detailed implementation arrangements for that to occur  -  and the distributional arrangements as well.
Another important area requiring work has been in the area of Indigenous affairs.When it comes to Indigenous affairs, in my recent visit to the Northern Territory and discussion with other Premiers and Chief Ministers, it's quite clear that in dealing with some of the challenges of alcoholism and drug dependency, that we need a greater and immediate injection of funds when it comes to alcohol and drug rehabilitation programs.This was brought home to me by many Indigenous leaders in Darwin when I visited there only a few days ago.
Therefore, the Commonwealth upfront will be providing the States and Territories with an additional $50 million commitment as a matter of priority need now to supplement the existing programs in the delivery of alcohol and drug rehabilitation programs, most acutely in remote areas. This is a pressing need now, particularly where interventions have occurred in relation to alcohol and the provision thereof.
In the year ahead, and I conclude on this before turning to Premier Brumby and Premier Iemma to speak from a State's perspective  -  Premier Brumby of course is our host today  -  and before we all then take questions, I'd just say this: this is going to be a very exciting year, 2008.We've got a lot of work to.It's going to be difficult, it's going to be hard, it's going to involve compromise between various levels of government, and we're all going to be squeezed by it.But the great sense of optimism I have in speaking to my colleagues today is a combined resolve to do something decent for the nation.The blame game, buck-passing, it might make for interesting retail politics but, frankly, it's no way to deal with the nation's long- term problems, and we've embarked upon a solid year of cooperation.The challenge now lies with us to deliver in each of these areas.It'll be a long process, a hard process, but we're determined to make as much substantial progress as possible during 2008.Premier Brumby.
BRUMBY: Thank you, Prime Minister.And can I just repeat, I think, some of the comments I have made already about this meeting and that is just how historic this meeting is, the first ever meeting of the Council of Australian Governments held outside Canberra. I think that is a very emphatic and powerful statement by the Prime Minister.It's a statement about the importance of cooperative federalism, about the importance of a genuine partnership, about the importance of working together with the States to do what is in the best interests of the people of Australia.
And today I think what we've achieved through this meeting of COAG is really a new start and a new agenda.We have achieved a genuine partnership.We've had a genuine dialogue, and as the Prime Minister has said, we've agreed a number of initiatives today which are really about taking the nation forward, not just in 2008, but in the years ahead.
Today we discussed matters which have never previously ever made it to the agenda of COAG.Morris Iemma will say a few words about that in a moment, about the difference between today's COAG and COAGs that have been held in the past.
Today we had an excellent discussion about infrastructure, about nation building, about what we need to do to tackle some of the supply side constraints.We had an excellent discussion about climate change.The former Government would never discuss climate change at COAG, or indeed in other gatherings.And today we talked about what is one of the most pressing issues for our State and the nation.
We talked, too, today about practical measures which affect the lives of working families.And so as the Prime Minister has said, additional funding made available today to tackle hospital waiting lists.We've all got challenges in the health system, right across Australia.This extra $150 million means that we can tackle hospital waiting lists right across Australia.And I must say in my own State of Victoria, this will mean reducing those longer-term hospital waiting lists by between five and 10,000 separations.
All of these are things that we never discussed previously at COAG because they would never get past the Prime Minister and never get on the agenda. But all of them, as the Prime Minister said today, are absolutely critical to Australia's future.
We certainly welcome, all of the States, welcome the additional funding on hospital waiting lists.The election commitment, the additional funding that was made available today, this will make a big, big impression in the delays which people experience in hospital systems around Australia.
Importantly today as well, we committed to some of the longer-term reform issues.Again, as the PM has said, Australia needs to be more competitive, we need to drive the productivity agenda.And the national reform agenda, investing in education, investing in skills, investing in early childhood development, investing in health and preventative health programs, these are all things which will drive productivity improvements going forward, help us compete as a nation, build a stronger economy, and take some of the pressure off inflation.
The working groups that have been set up; these are working groups with clear objectives, clear timeframes and measurable outcomes.Again, as the Prime Minister has said, today was about ending the blame game, it was about ending the buck-passing, it was about a road map for Australia's future.
And if you look at the working groups that have been set up, they address each of those seven key areas, and they will, I believe, produce tangible results for each of the States and for Australia as a whole.
Finally, can I just say that the issue of incentive payments has always been one that Victoria has had a strong view about, encouraging the States to do more, encouraging competition and regulation reforms, and a commitment again at COAG today, and the Prime Minister to an ongoing role for the reform council and for an acceptance of the importance of incentive payments, I think again, is a very, very positive step forward in terms of driving productivity growth.
I might just turn to Morris Iemma who has been to previous COAGs, and I think can tell you about some of the difference in today's to previous events.
IEMMA: Thank you, John.Well, today really is a new era.We adopted an approach of working with each other to tackle the nation's problems, not tackling each other. That's one of the key differences from previous gatherings.
Just picking up on some of the things that Premier Brumby said.  On the issue of elective surgery waiting lists; this is the first time that a COAG has made it a national priority, that it's made it on to the agenda, recognising that we aren't talking about lists and numbers, we're talking about better health services.Incorporating into the work that we will do, incentive payments for lifting performance and sustaining performance.  Another key difference.  It's one thing to reduce the lists to cut waiting times, it's another to sustain it.  
And the working groups that have been established, the health working groups, has as one of its fundamental roles, to sustain, improved access to health services, and sustain an improvement in health services, another key difference in some of the debates that have taken place at previous COAG meetings.
Another key difference: infrastructure.  To have the Commonwealth recognise that it has a fundamental role in infrastructure.  A stronger national economy, removing bottlenecks, improving productivity and efficiency, infrastructure is a key.
And one area we couldn't get progress in the past was to have the Commonwealth recognise that it has a role.  Now, we have a Commonwealth Minister, which was a key point of Mr Rudd's election campaign and one of the key issues in his victory.
Now, we have a Commonwealth Minister chairing one of the working groups; the establishment of Infrastructure Australia, a national infrastructure audit, and then determining priorities for the nation, to expand the nation's economic capacity and to secure our future prosperity, recognising that infrastructure is a key to doing that.  Two fundamental differences to previous COAGs.
The third one I'll mention, climate change.I don't need to go over all the detail on how the States had to get together and threaten to go it alone on a national emissions trading scheme to tackle climate change.  Here we have a national commitment to tackling climate change through cooperation and working together.
Three key areas where our commitment is to work together to tackle the nation's problems, not to attack each other.
PM: Thank you very much.And it's over to you to ask any questions you'd like.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Actually, where I disagree with you, Dennis, is that we've actually set, I think, realistic goals. Are we going to get there necessarily in all of these?  Maybe not.  But in the history of the Federation and in the history of COAG, as some of the Premiers have just said, it's the first time we've collectively put our shoulder to the wheel to try and make these things happen.  What I sense across my colleagues is a genuine, personal commitment and determination to dedicate every resource possible to getting a decent outcome for the nation, for the economy and for working families.  I'd much rather try and fall short, than not try at all. And I think that's the resolve of my colleagues as well
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That $150 million represents a $50 million increase on the $100 million which we committed prior to the election.  That follows a meeting with the Commonwealth and State Health Ministers, I think last Friday, and reports to me via Minister Roxon.But the details of all this will be finalised when the Health Ministers and the Treasurers, Commonwealth and State, get together in January.  Wayne Swan and Nicola Roxon will be convening that meeting.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Based on the advice from the Health Ministers, we did need to inject some more money.  We believe its' far better to err on the side of caution here rather than not, because, as the Premiers have just said, these are not numbers, these are people.
We've got to do everything humanly possible.  If you're out there waiting for a hip replacement at the moment, the last thing you'd want is a bit of quibbling between one level of government and the other in terms of what can be done, in practical terms, to bring that forward.
This does not represent a silver bullet on everything, on every item of elective surgery.But when it comes to those which have exceeded the clinically acceptable times, I believe governments at both levels have a responsibility to act. We've done so in the best way we know.
JOURNALIST:inaudible
PM: We've had a solid, rounded discussion on the challenges in Indigenous Australia. In particular, as a consequence of the intervention in the Northern Territory, and based on my discussions with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and meetings with Aboriginal leaders in Darwin the other day, we've formed a view at the Commonwealth level that we needed a quick injection of additional resources to deal with this alcohol and drug rehabilitation need, particularly in remote areas.
This is a big problem on the ground.And if you speak to the Aboriginal leaders in the Territory, they'll give you a lot of detail on this.
More broadly, the reason why we have commissioned a specific working group in this area, to be chaired by Jenny Macklin, is that we recognise that there are common challenges, shared by the Commonwealth and the States and Territories, in the area of providing proper services to Indigenous Australians.
We've also recognised, I recall in the terms of reference, that we need to look carefully at roles and responsibilities between the Commonwealth and the States for the future delivery of services to Aboriginal people.That's reflected in the terms of reference.
I believe we are looking at a productive and cooperative year ahead.  This is an area of massive need.  And let's just face facts, a lot of things that have been tried in the past haven't worked well, and I put the Commonwealth as much in that space as I do some of the programs embraced by States and Territories.  But let's also recognise this: this is a very difficult area as well, to bring about real outcomes.
On the Queensland point, I'll defer to the Queensland Premier.
BLIGH: Queensland is very pleased to see some additional federal money on the table for drug and alcohol rehabilitation services.  We've gone down the path of alcohol management restrictions in every community in the Cape.  And as I have demonstrated with data I have made public this week, after three years of those restrictions, we're not seeing change at the pace we need to see it, and that means putting further restrictions on, including possible prohibition, and the Queensland Government will be putting resources into that.But to have that commitment from the State Government matched by real dollars from the Federal Government is a great and welcome new addition to this area of public policy.
But we also agree that we need to open our minds to doing things very differently.  A lot of good people have done a lot of work that has not benefited Aboriginal people and we need to be honest about that and we need to be very frank with ourselves and with these communities. So, from our perspective, having Indigenous issues on the agenda was very important.  I thank the Prime Minister and my colleagues for putting it on the agenda for the first time, and not only putting it on the agenda but delivering a real outcome.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: When it comes to the allocation of funding in the hospitals area, this is the one fifty you are referring to, we had foreshadowed a total package there in the vicinity of about $600 million, spread over the forward estimates period.  This represents a partial bring forward of that and we'll have to look, therefore, at downstream needs as a consequence of that.
In terms of the additional funding for drug and alcohol rehabilitation services in Aboriginal communities in remote Australia, that comes from consolidated revenue.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:We looked very carefully at, let's call it the whole range of supply side constraints in the Australian economy at present, but there has been a failure in relation to this body in the past. It's not been, and on the part of the Commonwealth Government, it's not been to embrace the absolutely critical nature of skills shortage and infrastructure challenges in dealing with the nation's inflation challenges.  That's why so many of the programs we put forward prior to the election, and which we will implement in Government, deal with skills agenda, it's training places, education and universities, together with what we will do on the infrastructure side and the work of Infrastructure Australia has already been referred to.
Obviously, we are very mindful of labour supply, and not just the supply of adequate skills within the existing labour supply.  We're also mindful of how do you boost the participation rate.And part of participation rate increase which is necessary is reflected in our approach to childcare and things of that nature.  So, all of these supply side questions were touched on in our discussions today, and I'll turn to Premier Carpenter to add.
CARPENTER: Yes, Andrew. This is an issue which is specifically difficult for us in Western Australia, facing great challenges with labour supply, and we had the discussion.  I raised the issue of migration.  It's another which the Federal Government is aware of, particularly in Western Australia.  There are some great sensitivities about this issue, obviously.  It has to be dealt with properly, thoughtfully and in a way which isn't going to be counter-productive.  And as a result of our discussion, I think that we can do that. The specific needs of Western Australia need to be met, in my view, for the benefit of the entire national economy, but we need to do it properly.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll turn to Premier Brumby to answer that, as well as Premier Iemma, if they so choose, and if any other Premier wants to chip in.
The key thing here, in our analysis of this in the pre-election period is that you're looking at a mix of problems. One, it can often be, for example, the availability of a sufficient quantity of day surgery facilities. That's one.
The second is the extent to which this funding can be used to purchase elective surgery services from the private hospital system and from private practitioners. There are a mix of possibilities.  We've looked at these over some period of time.
But the reason I'm delegating, and the Premiers and Chief Ministers are delegating to our Health Ministers and Treasurers until January the detailed implementation arrangements, is that we want to get it as absolutely right as possible.
But I also want to put our bona fides on the table. This is a matter of real concern to people right across the country.  A lot of people out there, right now, heading into Chrisy who are waiting for elective surgery.  We actually need to do something about it.  Over to the Premiers.
BRUMBY:Well, each of the States have different circumstances. Some have capital constraints, some have operating constraints.  In our case in Victoria, we have good capital. We have the Alfred.  We have the capacity for the throughput.  So, it's largely been a money problem in the environment in which we've been paying 60 cents out of every dollar under the AHCA agreement and the Commonwealth, 40.  So, the additional funding will enable us to address those gaps.  It will enable us to treat more patients.  It will enable us to shorten the hospital waiting lists.  And as the PM said, in January there'll be further discussions about the detail of that, including whether, of course, the State itself contributes also to that extra effort, and the outcomes that we can achieve from this. But I don't think there's any doubt this is a substantial new injection of funding.  It is welcomed by Victoria and by the States, and it will substantially reduce the elective waiting times, not just in our State but across Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I might just flick to Premier Iemma on that.
IEMMA: Well, the funding will essentially address capacity.And as Premier Brumby has said, some States the capacity is infrastructure, for others, it's workforce, for others, the model of care.  So, it's the first time that we've seen the Commonwealth recognise, in the area of elective surgery, of book surgery, a role outside of the normal AHCA agreement, and even then, recognise incentives to continue to drive improvement.  Now, in NSW, we've done all of those measures, as far as purchasing off the private sector.  So, where it will address capacity, we (inaudible) on to the private sector, the private sector to undertake some of the book surgery.
Premier Brumby mentioned day surgery.  In NSW, we've implemented an initiative that is similar, (inaudible) 23 and a half hour wards.  It's also addressing workforce.  For example, operating theatres having enrolled nurses assisting the scrubbing, non-registered nurses, and that addresses a capacity issue, a workforce issue.  In other hospitals, it's having operating theatres running concurrently, as opposed to having one going.  
Again, it's looking at the capacity and trying to remove the constraints to capacity  -  to, one, do more surgery; two, improve the access to surgery and; three, reduce the waiting time and get away from this arid debate about numbers on a list.  We will always have elective surgery lists.  They are a mechanism to allocate resources.  But having the surgery done in clinically appropriate time, that's what people want and that's what we're addressing.
FOLEY: Can I just add, Prime Minister? Sorry, can I just add ...
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, the Acting Premier.
FOLEY: Can I just add something very quickly?As a State Treasurer and an Acting Premier, I've attended, as John Brumby and Anna Bligh have done, many Treasurers' conferences where we've had a fairly sterile debate, a pretty singular debate with Peter Costello.  What is incredibly encouraging with what the Prime Minister has laid out today is that he's actually actively got State Treasurers, State Treasuries, Federal Treasury working with Prime Minister's Departments, Premier's Departments and Health Departments by actually knocking down the barriers of the Howard-Costello Government had in place, between getting Government agencies working together. The fact that I'll be flying, along with the State Treasurers, to Canberra in the second or third week of January with Health Ministers to have a meeting convened by Wayne Swan, would have been unheard of over the last 10 or 11 years.  That's how practical engagement between the Commonwealth and the State, for the first time, I'm encouraged that we're actually going to do something serious about addressing the long term health needs of the nation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
IEMMA:The detail will be with the meeting in January. There certainly was a discussion, and there was a very good discussion.  Because the distribution of something that will be addressed, the detail of which will be addressed in January.There was a recognition on the part of the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth that we do have legitimate issues. So, recognition of prior effort and recognition of current effort was discussed, and I'm very pleased.And my Minister will be coming back in January with a very good submission.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
IEMMA: Well, we've already embarked on, for example, lifting the bed base at Royal North Shore.  My Minister announced a $50 million bed package about a month ago.  In relation to nursing, we've recruited 8000 over the last five years, and we'll continue to recruit to fill those 100 vacancies.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
IEMMA: Well look, those two in particular, which are the ones that have received all the attention, one, over the last three years we've opened 1800 beds.  Do we have a bed program currently funded through this year's budget?  Yes, we have.  We supplemented that in the last month, and we'll continue to open beds.  But here's the point, given that we are talking about health reform: if that's all you do, then you're not going to address the fundamental health needs. Because...
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We're in the cooperative phase.And I'm of the view that we can spend this year productively outlining two things, through the reform program which is outlined in the terms of reference under both the Health and Aging Working Group, and associated with it, I draw your attention to the terms of reference of the new proposed National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, an important document.
I believe we have a great opportunity in 2008 to reach cooperative agreement on future benchmarking, outputs/outcomes measurement and incentive payments.  For those of you, reflected in the renegotiation, or should I say the negotiation, the upcoming Australia Health Care Agreement. It is a huge area of work for this year.  So, in 2008, and I said this in the election campaign, my first instinct is to achieve this outcome cooperatively.And I believe given the evidence of goodwill that I've seen around the table today, that that can be achieved.  But from the Commonwealth's point of view, we have to achieve that outcome because the Australian people expect that of us, and we've all got to zip. Thanks
ends


Therese and I and our family would like to wish all Australians a wonderful Christmas this year. Christmas is a time for reflection, it is a time for celebration, it is a time for giving, it is a time for our kids and for our grandkids. It is also a time when we get together as families and some of us travel a long, long way so that families spread across this vast country of ours can come together at last.
Christmas can also be a time when people experience a great sense of loss and loneliness. A spare chair, a vacant chair at the Christmas table, reminding those present of either a loved one who has passed away, or a loved one who cannot be with us at this time.
I'd say therefore to all Australians that at this time of year it is important to reach out to our friends, to our neighbours and to those that we don't know at all, to make sure that no one is alone this Christmas.
I thank all of our church and community and charitable organisations for the marvellous work they do in making sure that those who are in need are catered for, not just now at Christmas, but right through the year as well.
I have just returned from visiting our troops in Afghanistan and Iraq and earlier in East Timor. We have more than three and a half thousand of our men and women in uniform currently serving overseas. They are in great spirits. But at this time of year they are going to be separated from their family and from their loved ones. So I would ask all Australians to bear them in their thoughts and in their prayers as well as they confront the difficult and dangerous challenges of the year ahead.
On behalf of the Australian nation I passed on our thanks to them for their service and their sacrifice, including the sacrifice of some who have paid the ultimate sacrifice, and given their lives for their country.
I also pass on my thanks to their families who I know will be sensing their own experience of loss while their loved ones are serving our nation abroad.
This time of year, many of us travel long, long distances, driving to see our families for Christmas and for the New Year. As someone who lost their Dad nearly 40 years ago in a car accident could I say to everyone please, please drive carefully. Take a break, have a rest, make sure you are not driving too tired.
To our emergency services personnel and to our police who attend to those who are injured at this time of year, I also pass on the thanks of the nation. They are working hard while the rest of us are celebrating with our families and our loved ones.
To our farmers and those who live in remote and rural Australia, can I say the rest of the nation feels with you at this time as well. Despite the fact that there have been rains recently in some parts of Australia, this has been a terrible drought. And in the year ahead I look forward to working with you in dealing with the challenges which face us all and face the farming community in particular.
Christmas is a time of great spiritual significance for those of the Christian faith. Christmas is also a time of equally great significance for those not of the Christian faith, when they get together still as families to celebrate this time together in this wonderfully, diverse nation of ours Australia.
On behalf of Therese and myself, Jessica, Albert, Nicholas and Marcus I'd like to extend to all of you a very happy Christmas, a very peaceful Christmas  -  and a very happy New Year and  a very prosperous New Year as well.
The Lodge, Canberra
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


I strongly condemn the murder of Benazir Bhutto and of all those killed in this terrible act. 
The thoughts of all Australians are with those affected by this terrible attack. 
I offer my condolences and best wishes to the people of Pakistan, all of whom will be deeply affected by this attack. 
Benazir Bhutto was an historic figure of great influence in modern Pakistan. She had been campaigning resolutely for democracy in that country. 
Despite a previous attempt to assassinate her on her return to Pakistan in October and the shocking loss of over a hundred lives in that attempt, Benazir Bhutto refused to bow to intimidation and the continuing threat to her life. 
Throughout her life, Benazir Bhutto showed great courage and defiance in her resistance to extremism. 
The extremists behind this attack cannot be allowed to succeed. I urge all parties in Pakistan to act with restraint and to work for a return to a peaceful democratic process. 
It is my hope that a democratic Pakistan will be Benazir Bhutto's legacy.
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


JULIA GILLARD: The Bureau of Meteorology today has released its annual statement on the Australian climate. Now this statement confirms what many Australians would know from their ordinary lives, which is: it's hot and it's dry. The Bureau's statement shows that the nation has just experienced the sixth hottest year on record. And in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and the Murray Darling Basin, it's been the hottest year on record.
It also shows that for the South-East of the country in the last 11 years, we've missed out on a whole year's worth of rainfall. Now what the Bureau's statement today confirms is the urgent need to act on climate change. We know of course we've see 11 years of inaction from the Howard Government. The Rudd Labor Government has already started acting on climate change. We've ratified Kyoto. We've provided leadership at the Bali summit. And this year we will work on our national emissions trading scheme and increasing the uptake of renewable energy.
We'll also be working in partnership with households, to help households save water, and to save energy, and to make better use of solar energy. These are important initiatives to deal with climate change and today's statement reconfirms just how urgent it is to act.
On another matter, there's been some press speculation today, comments in the media about wage claims in the building industry. Can I say in relation to those press reports of wage claims in the building industry, that the Rudd Labor Government is committed to doing all things necessary to put downwards pressure on inflation and interest rates. We're also committed to increasing productivity. We know that the productivity performance of this nation has been a woeful one. We want to lift productivity because today's productivity gains are tomorrow's prosperity.
Consequently, our workplace relations policy is all about productivity at the enterprise level. People need to be bargaining at the enterprise level. If productivity is rising, then there are gains to be shared.
I want to make it crystal clear it is illegal under Labor's policy for there to be industry wide strikes. I also want to make it clear, that under Labor's laws the courts will come down like a ton of bricks on anyone engaged in illegal industrial activity. We want people abiding by the rule of law. We want people working together in their enterprises. We want people driving up productivity so that there are gains to be shared, which will not put pressure on inflation or interest rates.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the union's got a valid argument, though, that they have missed out on wages and conditions in the last couple of years?
JULIA GILLARD: The valid argument of course is that Work Choices is extreme. The laws introduced by the Howard Government were extreme laws. They allowed workers to have ripped away from them basic conditions under the safety net like penalty rates and overtime. We want to have a fair and balanced system. But a fair and balanced system is going to be one where all parties abide by the rule of law. And it's a system where people are going to be focussed on driving up productivity in their enterprises. That's a fair system. That's Labor's system. It's also a system that's good for the economy because it's good for productivity.
JOURNALIST: Is it a message for employers too? Or are they being urged to not be defeatist and to go hard on signing up non-union collective agreements?
JULIA GILLARD: Bargaining genuinely means bargaining. When agreements expire and people are bargaining at an enterprise level, of course there will be a conversation. There will be a conversation about how to make the business work better. We want it to make it a conversation about how to make the business more productive. We want it to be a conversation about how the business can be more productive and more profitable so that there are gains to be shared. We want people to get around bargaining tables and have those conversations. But those conversations need to be had at an enterprise level. Everyone needs to be abiding by the industrial relations laws of the country.
JOURNALIST: Brendan Nelson said earlier today that under Labor interest rates, inflation and strikes always increase. Have you got a response to that?
JULIA GILLARD: This is more of the same from the Liberal Party. It's a scare campaign. Of course, in the run up to the election that's all the Liberal Party talked about. It ran a scare campaign about Labor in government. It ran a scare campaign about the economy. It ran a scare campaign because it had no ideas and no vision for this nation's future. The Leader of the Opposition is obviously continuing that scare campaign. Clearly the Australian community rejected that scare campaign when they voted and the Leader of the Opposition might want to note that fact.
JOURNALIST: Are you annoyed at the comments from the CFMEU today about possible strike action? Were they extreme comments?
JULIA GILLARD: The important thing is for everyone to understand what the laws are going to provide under Labor. Our policy on this is crystal clear. It was there for everybody to see in the run-up to the election. And our policy said we wanted to see fairness in workplaces and we do. The Liberal Party's laws were extreme laws which allowed too many Australian working families to be harmed. We want to see fair laws, but we also want to see increased productivity. So my message to everyone is a very simple one: we want to make sure that the laws are fair, the laws are flexible, that people are focussed on productivity and that everybody is abiding by the law.
JOURNALIST: Just what can you do to stop industry-wide strikes if that's what the union has in mind?
JULIA GILLARD: Well it will be unlawful for there to be an industry wide strike and under Labor's laws the courts will be fully empowered to come down like a ton of bricks on anyone who breaches one word of those laws. Industry wide strikes are unlawful. Breaches of the law will be punished. The courts will be fully empowered to ensure that that punishment is used.
JOURNALIST: Just on another matter there was an Australian customs vessel that was going to monitor Japanese whaling ships, but it's still in dock in Fremantle. What's happening with that?
JULIA GILLARD: My colleague Stephen Smith has obviously been dealing with the whaling issue and we made it clear that it's our intention to engage in monitoring. The precise movements of the craft involved are movements that are being kept, as I understand it, confidential. I can defer that matter to Stephen Smith and get you a more specific answer, but for obvious reasons we decided that it was important for the security of the vessels for their movements to be confidential.
JOURNALIST: There hasn't been a great deal of movement from the government for the last few weeks. What is actually happening?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, what of course is happening is people have had Christmas, as you would expect. People took the opportunity to have Christmas Day and Boxing Day with their families. What is happening now of course is that people are engaged, as I am engaged today, in paperwork and in meetings and in other processes that we have to go through to deliver our policies during the course of 2008.
We've got a big agenda. Immediately after the election we made a start on it. Some very important things happened. We ratified Kyoto to take one example. We started the set up for the delivery of our computers in schools policy. We started the set up for the delivery of our trades in schools policy. We had a very comprehensive COAG meeting. We announced that we would ensure our transition bill for industrial relations was in the Parliament during the Parliament's very first sitting week. These are all important initiatives and they are being delivered by the Rudd Labor Government. The delivery of our policies will continue throughout this month and through 2008.
JOURNALIST: Church leaders have called for the Bali bombers to be spared execution. Is it appropriate for Australia to campaign against the death penalty?
JULIA GILLARD: Kevin Rudd's made perfectly clear that we are opposed to the death penalty. Both the Labor Party in this country and the Liberal Party have historically engaged in global opposition to the death penalty. However, we intervene on behalf our citizens when they are abroad and caught up in death penalty cases.
JOURNALIST: David Hicks has been on the front page of the news again today. Do you think its time the media left him alone to get on with his life?
JULIA GILLARD: Ah, well, I suspect that's more a question for people standing around me than it is a question for me. Obviously Mr Hicks is the subject of a control order. He has got the legal obligation to abide by the control order. That's the interests of the Australian Government that he does abide by the control order that he's subject to. Beyond that, what Mr Hicks does with his life is a matter for Mr Hicks. He does have to abide by that control order, but beyond that he can make his own decisions. I presume Australian media outlets will make their own decisions as well. At some point, I presume, people will get to a stage where Mr Hicks is no longer the subject of the kind of media attention he has been in the last few days. That will be a question for media editors.
JOURNALIST: Just back on IR, are you concerned that employers are trying to or seeking to circumvent AWAs by negotiating non-union collective agreements and being encouraged to do so?
JULIA GILLARD: We have said that we will change the laws with our transition bill. Of course, the soonest we can have our transition bill in Parliament is the first week that Parliament meets. And it will be there that very first week. From the time that the transition bill is passed, then of course it will not be possible for anyone in this country to make an Australian Workplace Agreement. These are extreme agreements under Work Choices that have allowed the safety net to be stripped away from Australians. We thing that's wrong.
We don't currently understand the position of the Opposition on the question. Some days the Leader of the Opposition appears to agree with Labor. On other days, his Industrial Relations spokeswoman appears not to. But that's a matter for them. We will present the transition bill to Parliament and seek to get through as quickly as possible. We will obviously allow it to be the subject of all proper Parliamentary processes and scrutiny. But we want it to be dealt with as quickly as it can be. And it will end the ability of anyone to make Australian Workplace Agreements.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect the wages to be higher under the new transitional agreements than under the AWAs?
JULIA GILLARD: Under Labor, we will ensure that wage outcomes are about enterprise bargaining. Consequently, the wage outcomes that happen in each enterprise will be a function of the productivity gains in those enterprises. We want a focus on productivity. We do not want to see any wages inflation that would put upwards pressure on interest rates. The way to do that is to ensure that the focus is on productivity. What we found of course with Work Choices is that there were workers who were subject to Australian Workplace Agreements  -  particularly people at the low wage end of the Labor market  -  who had basic conditions like penalty rates stripped away.
What we also found is that the productivity outcomes were woeful. We want to see a high productivity result. A high productivity result means that there are gains to be shared and those gains are not inflationary.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that oil has his $100 a barrel overnight?
JULIA GILLARD: Look, I'm obviously always concerned about the possibility of increased petrol prices and the impact that they put on Australian working families. What we've done is put in place our policies and plans to ensure that there is better monitoring of petrol prices. We want to see strong competition in the petrol market. We know of course that there was 11 years of complete inaction on this question by the former government. We have committed to increased powers for the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission and we've committed to a Petrol Price Commissioner and the search for the person to fill that role is already on.
JOURNALIST: Just to the death penalty. Just to clarify  -  do you oppose, does the government oppose the death penalty all across the world?
JULIA GILLARD: Our position is perfectly clear. We support global moves against the death penalty. The government only intervenes in respect of Australian citizens who are at risk of the death penalty. The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has made that perfectly clear. That is Labor's position. I note that being opposed globally to the death penalty is both the position of the Labor Party and the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: Does that opposition mean anything though if you're not going to, sort of, campaign against the death penalty in other countries? Only if it involves Australians?
JULIA GILLARD:We only intervene, we only use our diplomatic resources on behalf of Australian nationals who are at risk of the death penalty overseas. I think that that's entirely appropriate. Obviously our obligations are on behalf of our citizens and nationals. We intervene on their behalf.
OK, in the words of Kevin Rudd: I've got to zip.
ends


JOURNALIST: Just to start Minister, starting with the flooding in South-Eastern Queensland and also Northern New South Wales. What is the Federal government doing in relation to that?
JULIA GILLARD: Well obviously these are difficult times for many people in New South Wales, in Queensland and in the Northern Territory. Families are caught up in these events and our thoughts are with those families. And certainly I'd want to give my congratulations to all of the volunteers who are out there on the ground in difficult circumstances, helping people get through.
The Federal government is staying in very close contact with our State and Territory colleagues. We are monitoring the situation continuously and we're doing that so that if Federal government assistance is required, it can be delivered in a timely fashion.
JOURNALIST: What sort of assistance could the Commonwealth provide?
JULIA GILLARD: There are very clear guidelines and protocols under our arrangements for dealing with natural disasters. All of these have been agreed between the Federal government and the States and Territories. So we are working with our State and Territory colleagues. If it becomes appropriate under those guidelines for the Federal government to provide assistance, then we will.
JOURNALIST: There are - I think I remember from having grown up in that area - that in previous years in Queensland that the military was called in and various things like that. Is that the sort of thing you'd be looking at this time?
JULIA GILLARD: We are working with our State and Territory colleagues. Obviously we are talking to them about what is needed. They are managing the circumstances on the ground. Under the guidelines we of course are ready to assist if that assistance is required.
JOURNALIST: In Northern New South Wales several disaster zones have been declared. Is the Federal government looking to come to the table with any sort of funding, any sort of financial assistance, for the people that have been affected and their property destroyed, or something?
JULIA GILLARD: This is all a product of the guidelines which enable the government to assist in the circumstances of natural disaster. In the first instance of course, the New South Wales government is managing the emergency response and is very ably assisted by so many volunteers on the ground. We're staying in close contact with the New South Wales government, the Queensland government and the Northern Territory government. And should they require the Federal government's assistance, then we will be able to provide that assistance in a timely manner.
JOURNALIST: It's quite a time of year, I mean, you're right - you've got the cyclones forming in Darwin, you've got the storms in Queensland and New South Wales. It's quite a turbulent time weather-wise in Northern Australia now, isn't it?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly, these weather events have been extreme and so many families are caught up in them. I think like all Australians, I've been watching the TV, watching the footage, watching some of the coverage, particularly from New South Wales and Queensland, the Northern Territory. So we are there, ready to assist, should that become appropriate under the guidelines for dealing with natural disasters. And I'm sure all Australians are sending their best wishes to those who are caught up in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Now, moving on to another issue. The front page of today's Herald-Sun talks about compensation for members of the stolen generation, with a figure of $1 billion being bandied about. Is Kevin Rudd, or when Kevin Rudd does apologise to members of the stolen generation, will there be compensation offered?
JULIA GILLARD: The Rudd Government's made it very clear we will not be having a national compensation fund. We will be apologising to the stolen generation. We believe that will build a bridge of respect and enable Australians to move forward. But our focus is on providing assistance to close the 17 year life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Our focus is therefore on health and education services and economic independence. There will be no national compensation fund.
JOURNALIST: Do you think closing that 17 year gap, health, education  -  do you think that's more meaningful than cash payouts?
JULIA GILLARD: I think all Australians would say they want a circumstance where any child born in this country - whether it's as an Indigenous child or a non-Indigenous child  -  can look forward to a long and happy life. And at the moment we know that if an Indigenous child is born today, on average that child will live 17 years less than a non-Indigenous baby born on the same day.
We don't want to see that in this country. We want to see the life expectancy gap closed. That's about health services, it's about education services and it's also about building economic independence and an economic future for Indigenous Australian families.
JOURNALIST: The head of the Tasmanian Aboriginal Legal Service - Michael Mansell, I think - has said that an apology without compensation is largely symbolic and an empty gesture. What do you make of that comment?
JULIA GILLARD: The Rudd Labor Government has made its views very clear. There will be no national compensation fund. There will be a focus on limiting, indeed ending, the life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. There will be an apology as a way of building a bridge of respect for the future.
JOURNALIST: You would say I suppose that that's a richer legacy than compensation per se?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly our focus will be on the life expectancy gap. We want to make sure that all Australians, no matter where they're born  -  whether to Indigenous parents or to non-Indigenous parents  -  know that their child's got the best possible chance of a long and happy and healthy life.
JOURNALIST: OK. Now something else that's been recorded today is that your government is having public servants go through the books and basically seeing what the Coalition, which of the previous, prior government's promises, can be abandoned to keep the budget in the black. Is that correct?
JULIA GILLARD: Obviously our focus is on making sure that we are prudent with taxpayers' money. We want to keep maximum downwards pressure on interest rates and inflation by delivering a prudent budget. We of course will be delivering our election commitments. We are working through the rest of the Commonwealth public sector. We have always said we would. We believe there are savings there to be had. And if there are savings there, if there is waste, then of course we will cut it out.
And to give just one example: we know the former government wasted tens of millions of dollars on government advertising, party political propaganda which was all about the election. We made it very clear we're cutting that out. We want to be spending precious taxpayers' dollars where it matters, on things like computers for secondary school students in my own portfolio, on our health initiatives and on our vital promises across the board.
JOURNALIST: Will you be fulfilling all of the previous government's election promises?
JULIA GILLARD: We made it very clear in the run-up to the election campaign where we differed from the former government. We've made our own election promises. We will be delivering Labor's election promises.
JOURNALIST: Are you under any sort of obligation, do you think, to actually provide for the promises - for what the Howard Government said?
JULIA GILLARD: Our obligation is to do exactly what we promised  -  and we will.
ends


KEIRAN GILBERT: Ms Gillard, thanks for your time this morning. Can I start by getting your reaction to the death of New Zealand icon, Sir Edmund Hillary?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly Sir Edmund's name is synonymous with adventure, with achievement, with dreaming and then making those dreams come true. I am sure there will be many Australians today who reflect on his death. It was obviously a long life well lived. People always looked at him as a man of achievement and I think people today will mark his passing with regret. But for generations to come people will study what Sir Edmund achieved by being of course, the first to get to the top of the world, and to successfully conquer Everest.
KIERAN GILBERT:And as part of the New Zealand national identity I suppose one of their proudest and greatest heroes.
JULIA GILLARD:  I think the statement today from Prime Minister Helen Clark captures that well. Obviously Helen Clark, as the leader of New Zealand is reflecting the views of the New Zealand people. Sir Edmund Hillary was one of New Zealand's giants, of course a name known around the world and someone of whom they were so rightly proud.
KIERAN GILBERT:Of course we will spend most of the day looking back at the life of Sir Edmund Hillary. But for the moment can we return to the issue of domestic politics, Julia Gillard and this report today that the Federal government is going to spend $20 million on security for at risk schools, particularly Jewish and Islamic schools. How significant is the risk for these particular religious based schools around Australia?
JULIA GILLARD:  I certainly don't want to over put it and I don't want to generate concern. But we are aware from consulting with school communities that there are security issues that some schools face. And I think all Australians would say, every Australian child has the right to go to school and to be safe when they are at school; safe when they are learning and safe when they are at play. So this $20 million is to work with schools who have particular needs and who are at particular risk to make sure that children are kept safe.
KIERAN GILBERT:I note that you refer to particular needs. Will this initiative be means tested before public funds are spent?
JULIA GILLARD:  This initiative is about an applications process; all schools will be able to apply. Obviously we have available to the Federal government, considerable expertise in assessing security risk in the form of the Australian Federal Police and other security agencies. So we would be working with them to assess the real level of risk and provide assistance to schools who may have some particular risk needs, to make sure security for those schools is adequate.
KIERAN GILBERT:This week we have seen some of the major banks lift rates independent of the RBA movements. Can I get your reaction to Peter Costello's suggestion that the banks have taken advantage of the relative inexperience of Wayne Swan and that, Mr Costello himself says, and I think a correct statement, that he was able to keep a lid on those movements both sides of the RBA rises in official rates?
JULIA GILLARD:I thought it was quite an extraordinary statement from Peter Costello. Peter Costello's track record in government of course was to see interest rate rise after interest rate rise despite in the 2004 election pledging to the Australian community that he and the then Prime Minister, John Howard would keep interest rates at record lows. So I think Australians when they listen to Peter Costello will remember that track record. I am also a bit surprised given that Peter Costello appears to be a man on his way out of Australian public life that he would be making such statements. Wayne Swan of course has been doing everything he can to deal with the high inflation environment that the former government and Peter Costello himself as Treasurer has left the incoming Rudd Labor Government. We understand that we need to keep downwards pressure on interest rates in this high inflation environment which we've inherited and we will do that by being very prudent with government funds. Both Wayne Swan and Lindsay Tanner as Finance Minister have made absolutely clear how rigorous our approach will be on expenditure matters. And of course we will be investing in the things that will make a long term difference for prosperity; dealing with skills shortages and the infrastructure bottlenecks which also put pressure on our economy.
KIERAN GILBERT: Can I turn to international matters now and there has been another devastating suicide attack in Pakistan. Are the hopes for democracy there, they don't look good do they?
JULIA GILLARD: My colleague Stephen Smith has made some statements about this matter this morning in his capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Obviously our concern as a nation is to see democracy come in full form to Pakistan. As Stephen has made clear, we want to see the elections which are scheduled, obviously they have been deferred because of the problems in Pakistan, but we want to see the elections as scheduled actually deliver a democratically elected government to Pakistan. We want to work with that government in securing the region. Obviously there are considerable issues in Pakistan and in the boarder region with Afghanistan, on terrorism; we are of course still deployed in Afghanistan fighting Al Qaeda. We want to work with the incoming Pakistani Government on defeating terrorism in the region as well as seeing Pakistan mature as a democracy.
KIERAN GILBERT: But given the fragility of the situation there don't you suspect that it might be better if the General Pervez Musharraf does maintain power and does maintain control over what is clearly a volatile situation there, rather than take the step towards democracy if it's going to be so fragile?
JULIA GILLARD: As Stephen Smith has made clear, obviously we've got an aspiration to see democracy in Pakistan. We have got an aspiration to see democracy there because obviously be believe democracy is the best system of government. Clearly that's part of our national belief but also we believe that through democracy stability can come. It is a difficult situation, it's a fragile situation, it's a fragile situation. Stephen Smith as Foreign Affairs Minister is being well briefed on the situation. We will continue to monitor what is happening in Pakistan but we obviously want to see the nation get to a stage where there is a democratic government and there is security within Pakistan and the government there is making a contribution to security in the region generally.
KIERAN GILBERT: Acting Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, just one final question now ahead of the return of Parliament next month. How are things progressing and specifically, in relation to the big legislative item ahead of the return of Parliament, that being the IR transitional bill?
JULIA GILLARD: We've been working hard on the industrial relations legislation we will bring to Parliament in its very first week. That transition bill will end the ability of anybody to make an Australian Workplace Agreement. Of course these agreements which the Liberal Party brought to this country as part of its industrial relations extremism, allows people to be ripped off, very basic conditions were lost; penalty rates, overtime and the like. The first week of Parliament will see us bring the transition bill to Parliament. We are clearly working on the drafting of it now and we are doing that in a very consultative way with all the industrial relations stakeholders.
KIERAN GILBERT: Julia Gillard, thank you for your time today.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you very much.
ends


It is with great sadness that I pass on my condolences to the family and friends of Sir Edmund Hillary.
The thoughts of many Australians are today with this great hero of our times.
The very name, Edmund Hillary, has become synonymous with daring and achievement. He was a man with a big dream and he made that dream come true.
He was one of New Zealand's giants and someone of whom they were so rightly proud.
He devoted much of his life to helping the Sherpa people of Nepal through the Himalayan trust, which he founded.
He was also a man that experienced great tragedy in his own life when his wife Louise Mary Rose and his daughter Belinda were killed in a plane crash in 1975.   
Sir Edmund Hillary led an extraordinary and historic life. Today as a nation we honour the contributions that this great man made in the modern world.
January 11, 2008 
Melbourne
Acting Prime Minister


TIM WEBSTER:  I'm joined on the line by Acting Prime Minister and of course Education Minister as well, Julia Gillard.  Good morning Acting PM.
JULIA GILLARD:  Good morning Tim.
TIM WEBSTER:   And Minister.
JULIA GILLARD:  (laugh) Thank you.
TIM WEBSTER:  Listen; let's get this story straight first.  Are we really talking about ASIO and AFP guarding these schools?
JULIA GILLARD:  We're talking about $20 million of resources to keep kids safe at school.
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah.
JULIA GILLARD:  And I'm sure every Australian would say every kid in Australian schools should be able to learn and play safely.  They shouldn't be at any risk. 
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah.
JULIA GILLARD:  What we're talking about is, of course, us working with our security people including the AFP, to get the program design right to work out who is at risk.  And then the $20 million can go to things that help mitigate that risk; those security measures at the school.
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah, the first thing that occurs to me though is that ASIO and the AFP aren't brought into public schools, though, are they?
JULIA GILLARD:  Well we want to make sure kids are safe no matter what school they're in.  Obviously in terms of the funding streams, we've got State Government's funding State schools.  The Federal Government makes some contribution to State schools.  And Federal Government makes contributions to non government schools.   We want to make sure wherever you are, you are safe. We would be working with our State and Territory colleagues on circumstances in state schools. We have obviously got this program for circumstances in schools generally. So, we're not drawing any distinctions.  We're saying if there is an Australian child at school, then they should be safe when they're learning and safe when they're playing.
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah, no argument about that.  But most of these schools receive government funding though  -  that's the point.  Shouldn't they pay for their security themselves?
JULIA GILLARD:  Well we don't want education dollars being diverted into security measures.  We think security measures should be funded as security measures.  Keeping kids safe is a national responsibility, it's a State responsibility too, it's an Australian responsibility.  We all want to keep children safe.  And that's why we've got a specific source of funds to assist with that.  Then when they are safe, we want to make sure they get a quality education...
TIM WEBSTER:  Exactly, yeah.
JULIA GILLARD: ...And that's why we've got some very big programs and plans to improve the quality of Australian education.
TIM WEBSTER:  Yes, the PM's back on Monday  -  I'll talk to you about that in a tick.  But are you concerned  -  and I'm reflecting here the thoughts of my listeners, I really am, Minister  -  about the number of Muslim schools around the country?  Some 25 of them, about a dozen in New South Wales and more on the way.  Is it too many?
JULIA GILLARD:  We have a system in this country where we allow people to choose what style of schooling they want their children to go to.  Some people choose for their kids to go to State schools, some want to go to independent schools.  I live in Melbourne's west  -  a lot of people send their kids to Christian schools.  Obviously we've had the Catholic system for a long period of time.  We all grew up with Catholic kids who went to Catholic schools.  In the modern age, obviously we have some Muslim schools as well. 
My concern is that parents get to make a choice.  But every Australian child, no matter what school they are learning in, gets a high class education.  And that's what we are absolutely focussed on delivering. 
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah sure.  But there have been instances of the curriculum not being followed properly.  One in particular in Western Australia.  But religious instruction overshadowing regular study  -  I mean, we can't have that.
JULIA GILLARD:  No, we've got to make sure that wherever kids are learning, they are learning a curriculum that is going to equip them for living and working in a modern Australian nation.  We of course have our proposal for a National Curriculum Board.  That's about driving quality of education, but it's also about the very practical measure that lots of people move interstate.  And we don't want children who move from one State to another State to be bewildered in their new school because everything is different...
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah. 
JULIA GILLARD: ...And a national curriculum will help smooth those transitions.  It's always going to be pretty tough for a young person to move school; you lose your mates and you lose the familiarity of your old school.  But we don't want to make it even tougher by you sitting there going, “I haven't learned any of this stuff” or “I did all this stuff two years ago and now I'm bored”. 
TIM WEBSTER:  OK.  Now I'm sure you've heard of all the dramas with the Islamic school being planned for Camden.  And lots of local residents have rung me, who object to the new Muslim schools in their area.  Are they just misguided?  I mean, I know a lot of it is race-based.  But a lot of people say, well, you know, you're bringing more people into the area.  This is a big school, this one.  1,200 kids.  So what's your thoughts on that?  I know you've only been in the portfolio a short period of time.
JULIA GILLARD:  Well as I understand it, there's a debate about the sort of planning approvals and whether or not that's a sort of appropriate location.  That's not a matter for me, obviously.  Planning is done at a local community level.  And obviously the local community in Camden would be working its way through that.  From the point of view of the Federal government generally, we say that parents deserve to have choices about where their kids go to school.  That's inherent in the Australian system.  And we want to make sure wherever they go, they have a high class, indeed, world class education. 
The thing that distressed Kevin; that worried Labor; that caused us to embark on the education revolution, is we saw too many statistics that were saying our education system was falling behind the standards of the rest of the world.
TIM WEBSTER:  Absolutely.
JULIA GILLARD:  We don't want Australian children to be in the back of the class when it comes to world standards.  We want them to be at the front of the class. 
TIM WEBSTER:  Just quickly on this issue of the funding  -  I know its State based, most of this, not Federal.  But are you concerned  -  and this is the front page of the Telegraph this morning  -  that some private schools are getting State money, millions of dollars of it; building cinemas and gyms, while a lot of the public schools struggle with the most basic needs.  Now, Glebe public school has been pointed out this morning, about flea-ridden carpets and no air-conditioning.  Is it out of kilter?
JULIA GILLARD:  I've seen the story in the Telegraph.  As I understand it  -  of course this is a New South Wales government program  -  but as I understand it, it is a program that is being phased out and has particularly been on its way to being phased out since 2004 for more resourced schools, if I can use that terminology. I think because it was subsidised loan arrangements, obviously they take some period of time to work their way through the system.  But it has been on its way out from 2004. I also note that the New South Wales Government says that the money that was provided was always provided for the things that really are necessary for learning like classrooms rather than some of the ancillaries that have been referred to in the story...
TIM WEBSTER:  As I say (laugh)...
JULIA GILLARD:  So I'm sure all of that will be clarified by the New South Wales government. 
TIM WEBSTER:  Yes.
JULIA GILLARD:  What do I want to see?  Well I want to make sure children right around the nation are learning in good facilities.  The thing that we're doing to make a real difference there is firstly making sure that secondary school students, years nine to 12, can have access to what really is the learning tool of the 21st century: a computer. And we're going to make sure that every secondary school in the country can give people a trades training experience...
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah.
JULIA GILLARD: ...particularly with the focus on the traditional trades where we are so short on people in our labour market...
TIM WEBSTER:  Couldn't agree more with that one.
JULIA GILLARD:  Yeah, and where there's, you know, a good life to be made.  For kids in secondary school, trades training is a real pathway forward...
TIM WEBSTER:  Sure is.
JULIA GILLARD: ...and we want to make sure that there's in their school a way of experiencing all of that.
TIM WEBSTER:  OK now, general politics  -  because you are the Acting PM until Monday.  You would have been, I'm sure, quite amused by Peter Costello saying if he was still Treasurer then the banks wouldn't have raised their interest rates.
JULIA GILLARD: Well, Wayne Swan's certainly made some very clear comments about that. I mean, Mr Costello might like to reflect on his record in government.  Of course we don't want to recite the past, but Peter Costello has raised it. And Peter Costello, members of the former government, gave reassurances about interest rates in the 2004 election that simply didn't come true for people.  We saw interest rates rise  -  indeed, we saw interest rates rise late last year and that was under the former government.
TIM WEBSTER:  Yeah.
JULIA GILLARD:  As Treasurer, Wayne Swan has indicated we have inherited a worryingly high inflation environment...
TIM WEBSTER:  Yes, it's still there.  Yeah.
JULIA GILLARD:  We want to make sure we put downwards pressure on inflation.  One way of doing that is to make sure we are very prudent with government funds and we will be very prudent in the budget.  Another way of doing that is to expand the productive capacity of our economy.  And our education revolution is all about valuing Australian children.  But it's also an economic plan.  Tomorrow's prosperity for this nation depends on people getting a world class education.  Whether that's in pre-schools, schools, technical or further education, or universities  -  we've got to get it all right, if this nation is to be able to hold its head up in the world and compete.
TIM WEBSTER:  Yes absolutely.  And the Prime Minister gets back on Monday.  Is that priority number one for the new government - education?  Because I believe it should be.
JULIA GILLARD:  Kevin made it clear all last year that the education revolution  -  his education revolution  -  is the single biggest priority of the government.  And in terms of the things that we've got on with very early  -  we've already been to Cabinet to get approval for the computers in schools; and we're out talking to the State systems and the Catholic and independent school systems about the delivery of that policy. 
Cabinet has already approved the trade training centres so we can get up on to the job of talking to everybody to make sure that that gets done.  We had one of our COAG working parties just before Christmas.  The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, sat down with his State and Territory counterparts to enter a new age of getting things done together, rather than playing the blame game.  And one of the big parts of that agenda is the productivity agenda, the education agenda.  Making sure we're not at the back of the class anymore in the world.
TIM WEBSTER:  Absolutely.  Yeah, alright.  Well, good luck.  Because if it works for you, it works for us (laugh).
JULIA GILLARD:  Thanks very much, Tim.
TIM WEBSTER:  Thanks Julia. Julia Gillard, of course today and over the weekend, the Acting PM.
ends


JULIA GILLARD: I'll start first by making some remarks about the death of Sir Edmund Hillary. Of course he was a great New Zealander. This is a loss that will be keenly felt by the New Zealand nation. Sir Hillary's achievements were of great (inaudible) and I think many Australians today will be reflecting on his long life and his legacy.
Sir Edmund's name is synonymous with daring and with achievement. He is a man who dreams of doing something that hadn't been done before and then achieved it. He became of course, the person who went to the summit of Everest first and stood as he did term it, ‘on the roof of the world'.
Having conquered Everest, his connection with that part of the world remained for the rest of his long life. He is now known of course as the person who ran the trust in a local area that provided so much of (inaudible) services to the people who live there.
This is the passing of an icon, someone who will always be remembered for his great achievements, for his sense of daring, for his adventures and for his capacity to dream about the things that hadn't been done before. Surely it would be a matter that Australian's and New Zealanders and people around the world reflect on today and in coming days.
Secondly can I go to Labor's promises about security in schools. It is the Government's intention to provide 20 million dollars to assist schools that are at particular risk.
We want to make sure that every Australian child starting at school can do that in a safe environment. Clearly for some schools there are special risks and Labor wants to assist those schools with meeting their security needs.
We intend to work with our colleagues in the Department of Home Affairs and also advised by the Australian Federal Police to develop a way of identifying the schools that face special risks. We will then use this funding to work with those schools to meet their security needs. Most simply put, we want to make sure that every child at school is there in a safe environment and that parents don't have to concern themselves about security matters because they know that they are being dealt with by the school.
Any questions?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: The money could be spent on additional security measures that would be appropriate to that school. Obviously there are all sorts of security technologies, surveillance technologies, technologies that consist of dealing with security matters.
We won't be prescribing that the money needs to be used for a particular form of technology or a particular form of security. This is a process that would work through schools (inaudible) against guidelines that are being worked on now. Obviously we want to be able to assess risk and we want to be able to asses the best measures of addressing that risk.
JOURNALIST: Aren't the AFP and ASIO already assessing risks at schools?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly, our security agencies generally are always working on questions of risk assessment. We are working directly with the Australian Federal Police on working through risk assessments for schools as part of developing the guidelines for delivering the policy. So of course there is always the general role, what is being asked for here is a more specific role to assist us with developing the guidelines for the policy so the money can be used for the best purpose.
JOURNALIST: What evidence do you have that they are under threat?
JULIA GILLARD: We know through consulting with school communities that schools have faced various forms of threat and they have had various concerns. Anybody who meets with school communities and talks to the education sector will end up talking to schools that do feel that they are at particular risk and have had security concerns in the past. Obviously we want to be working with those schools in the process of delivering these funds and improving security to make sure that any risks that have been identified are addressed.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: Whilst the policy is there for all schools, so we aren't pre judging  -  the policy is there for all schools and all schools are able to apply  -  clearly there have been issues that have been raised publicly from time to time about security arrangements in particular sorts of schools. It would be of no surprise to people for example that many Jewish schools have had cause for concern about security arrangements. The program is there to assist schools who feel themselves to be at risk and who are at risk. We aren't drawing a line in terms of school sector. It will be possible for all schools to apply.
JOURNALIST: How many schools already (inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: We are working with development on the guidelines of the policy. What we're doing with that is obviously drawing on the AFP's expertise about what constitutes risk and who may be at risk.  That process is still in train.
JOURNALIST: Is there any particular cap or limit on what one school will get?
JULIA GILLARD: We're intending to devote 20 million dollars of resources to this. We want to work with school communities. It will be an applications based process with guidelines. We obviously want to make sure that every dollar is a dollar well spent - spent on a school that does have particular needs and spent in a way that does have security concerns.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: I think that is a question, the answer to which is almost unknowable. Obviously there are schools that in contemporary times feel themselves to be at particular risk and we want to make sure that we are addressing those concerns.
JOURNALIST: Shouldn't this be a State Government responsibility?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think it is a responsibility for the National Government to make sure that Australian children, no matter what sort of school they are learning in, feel safe when they are at school. Obviously we work with our State colleagues in the education area. Our State colleagues are the predominant funders of the State school system. We also work with them on providing resources to state schools and we directly fund non government schools around the country. I think most Australians would say to themselves that they would be keen to see the National Government playing a role in making sure that Australian students are safe when they're at school.
JOURNALIST: There was a report today that the Federal government will provide incentives to the States to achieve national reform. How would those incentives be determined?
JULIA GILLARD: We are working through, as a Government a major process of reform with our State colleagues. This obviously flows out of the COAG meeting that Kevin Rudd convened with his State and Territory colleagues before Christmas. Out of that we have a series of working parties. I am in fact chairing one on productivity, but there are working parties in a number of areas. Out of those working parties, we will get action plans for reform. So we're not at the stage where we are going to be specifying what's in those action plans, obviously, but COAG working party process is being gone through. It is a very thick process. We will be working intensively. We will be working through February and March on the COAG working party process.
JOURNALIST: Can you say whether they'd be determined by an independent body?
JULIA GILLARD: Well there are all sorts of different areas that are on the COAG agenda and there will be all sorts of different approaches in different areas. So we are talking to our state colleagues about education, we're talking to them about housing; we are talking to them about Indigenous affairs and so on. There's a lot of work to do in those COAG working parties. It's going to be done intensively. What is the aim? The aim is for the National Government to work with our State and Territory colleagues to improve the way that services are delivered and end the blame game. I think Australians are rightly sick of watching Federal Members of Parliament blame State Members of Parliament when something goes wrong. They want to see solutions and that's what the COAG process is about, finding those solutions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: This particular form of funds, this 20 million dollars is to address security issues. Obviously, when you talk about the broad suite of Labor's policies, there are many other ways in which we are benefiting schools. The one billion dollars which has been dedicated to computers for students in years nine to 12. We are already well advanced talking to our State colleagues, talking to the independent non government school sectors about that policy and the first delivery of that policy was 100 million dollars for that policy this financial year. We have our 2.5 billion dollar plans to deliver trades training centres to every secondary school. We're working of course with out State and Territory colleagues more broadly on education: working on universal pre-schools; working on schools; working on technical and further education and of course we've got commitments too to the higher education sector. So there's a very broad sweep of policies, many of which are about benefiting the schools. This 20 million is a very specific program about security risks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: The 20 million dollars is a four year program. We are working on the set up of the program now. So we would be looking at delivery in the next school calendar year.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible  -  re: political party funding)
JULIA GILLARD: We certainly made commitments during the election campaign to electoral reform. We were concerned of course when the Howard Government changed the electoral rules in a way which could disenfranchise young voters and people who rent. These were the changes about when the roles closed for Federal elections. We have got a policy commitment to address that and to make sure that there is time during Federal election campaigns for people to get on the roles. We've also said of course, we believe in proper disclosure laws. We opposed the Howard Government's changes to disclosure laws when we were in opposition and it is our intention to have a more transparent disclosure regime. On any other suggestions or policies or plans, others might have, I can't specifically comment, but we do have those commitments.
ends


The Rudd Government today took the first steps towards fulfilling its commitment to bring 7,750 extra nurses into Australia's hospitals within five years.
This ambitious recruitment plan includes a target of bringing 1,000 nurses back into the hospital workforce by the end of this year.
The Rudd Government will today write to state and territory governments and private hospital sector representatives to outline administrative arrangements for this plan.
The Rudd Government will provide financial incentives to nurses who are out of the workforce to return to work.
These incentives are part of an $87 million plan to boost the number of nurses in our health and aged care system by more than 10,000 over the next 5 years.
There are approximately 30,000 qualified nurses in Australia who are currently outside the nursing workforce. The Rudd Government's plan is to bring many of these nurses back into Australian hospitals.
Under the Rudd Government's plan:  
     * cash bonuses of $6,000 will be available to nurses who have been out of the health workforce for more than a year to return to our hospitals;
     * these nurses will be paid $3,000 after six months back on the hospital ward and a further $3,000 after 18 months; and 
     * hospitals will receive a contribution of $1,000 per re-entry nurse to assist with the costs of re-training and re-skilling.
The Rudd Government's plan will complement nursing re-entry and refresher programs offered by many state and territory governments.
The Rudd Government's nursing policy is designed to benefit public hospitals straight away. It will provide almost 8,000 extra nurses for Australia's hospitals over the next five years.
The Government is committed to a similar scheme for encouraging nurses to return to work in residential aged care facilities.
The Commonwealth Government also announced $150 million for improving elective surgery performance at Australia's public hospitals this week.
The Rudd Government is committed to working with State and Territory Governments to find solutions to the problems facing Australia's hospitals.
Sydney 
Media contact: 02 6277 7744


PM: This morning at 12:30 am Australian Eastern time there was an attack in the Serena Hotel in Kabul. The Serena Hotel is the location of the Australian embassy. It is also the place where our Australians (inaudible) stay.
I've just spoken, about half an hour ago to the acting Australian Ambassador Angela Tierney and she confirmed the position of Australian embassy staff and personnel.
I have been advised by the acting ambassador that all staff are uninjured and that at present the embassy is also finally confirming, the whereabouts of other Australians citizens registered (inaudible) in Kabul.
The Australian Government condemns this attack on the Serena Hotel, which we are advised has resulted in the loss of life. I have instructed the Department of Foreign Affairs immediately to conduct an assessment of the continuing security needs of our mission in Kabul and any adjustment which is necessary to underpin their security will be made immediately.
I have commended the Australian Embassy staff on their courage and professionalism and the way in which they have conducted themselves (inaudible) the last several hours and we will maintain direct contact with them.
I have also spoken about these matters about a quarter of an hour ago with the Foreign Minister Stephen Smith who will be in continuing contact with the embassy in Kabul during the course of the day.
This is a sober reminder of the difficult, dangerous operating environment in Afghanistan. Faced not just by our troops in the field who I had the privilege of visiting just before Christmas, but also by our diplomatic and other staff located in Kabul itself. We should always (inaudible) keep them in mind and have their security needs at the forefront of our attention.
Today here at RPA, I am pleased to be with Nicola Roxon and Reba Meagher, the Federal and State Health Ministers. We are committed to doing everything practical and positive to make health services better for working families across Australia.
We spoke a lot about that last year. We've got an opportunity now as the Government of Australia to put practical steps in place.  That process began yesterday in Brisbane when Nicola chaired a meeting of the State Health Ministers and Wayne Swan did the same with the State and Territory Treasurers on an allocation of $150 million dollars to deal with the immediate challenge of elective surgery waiting lists. That commitment, which is to provide funding for the provision of an additional 25 000 elective surgery procedures of the calendar year 2008, is a step in the right direction.
Another step in the right direction is how do we deal with the current government challenges faced right across Australia in dealing with the undersupply of nurses into the hospital system.
In 2004 the previous government was presented with a (inaudible) planning document that said that Australia was on course to have an undersupply of nurses in the system by 19, 000 by the year 2010. That is a 19, 000 nurse undersupply, or shortfall by 2010 of registered nurses and enrolled nurses.
We need to do something about that rather than just sit back and wait for the problem to unfold. The plan we have put forward is to deal with this challenge at two levels. First, to increase the number of federally funded nurse education places at Australian universities and that will commence this year, with an addition 500 places and next year that will be increased to 1000 places.
Secondly - on the second stream of attack  -  is how do we deal with providing the incentives necessary to bring existing qualified nurses back into the nursing workforce. Right now, I am advised that there are some 25, 000 to 30, 000 qualified nurses out there, who are currently not working as nurses. So what do we do, in practical terms, to make it possible to bring them back into the workforce, or as many of those as possible.
What we are providing today  -  the Government today is writing to State and Territory governments, making available a funding supply of $87 million to provide financial incentives to get qualified nurses back into the system.
That will take the form of $6000 cash incentives for nurses who are qualified, who are currently not in the workforce, and who have been out of the nursing workforce a period of 12 months.
As incentives will be delivered in two (inaudible). Firstly, a three thousand dollar payment at the six month point, followed by a further three thousand dollars payment at the 18 month point, after the nurses re-enter the workforce.
If you put these two measures together, that is for the increased number of university places for nurses and the cash payment system which we are proposing for qualified nurses outside the system, we believe that we can add an addition 9, 250 nurses by 2010.
That gets us half way towards dealing with the projected shortfall in nurse supply. This will not be the end of our announcements on this matter. Though it is a solid start in dealing what is an impending shortfall in the overall supply of nurses.
I conclude by saying this: working families across Australia deserve the best from all their governments. The National Government and State and Territory Governments in producing a high quality and accessible health care system. Part of that means dealing with the elective surgery waiting list challenge nation wide. Part of that lies with making sure there are enough nurses in the system. In the last two days, we have announced practical measurers, aimed at addressing these challenges.
This will take a while to deal with effectively and comprehensively nation wide, but these are two positive steps in the right direction, but I commend my federal colleague Nicola Roxon and State colleagues including Reba, for the work which has been done cooperatively so far on these two challenges.
We'll just take questions on the matters I have raised and any other matters that you'd wish to raise.
JOURNALIST: PM on the Kabul attack, will there be an increase of the Australian troop deployment to Afghanistan by the end of this year?
PM: In my discussions with President Hamid Karzai and with the Australian and American force commanders in Kabul just before Christmas, I indicated that we are satisfied with our current levels of troop deployment. We will maintain a continuing dialogue with our partners both in NATO and elsewhere on what is required on the ground.
We have nothing (inaudible) which will cause us to conclude that we need to increase our current troop deployment to that country. We need to be concerned and vigilant about the security challenges faced by all Australian personnel, diplomatic and military in Afghanistan. This is a very difficult operating environment. It is dangerous. I have met many of these good folk personally in my recent travel to Kabul and to the south of (inaudible) and we should always be bearing their security needs foremost in mind.
JOURNALIST: Is there anywhere more secure for our embassy staff to be based?
PM: Well I have directed, as a matter of urgency, an immediate assessment of their security needs. Any further security needs which need to be met, any further security assistance which is necessary to underpin their security in Kabul will be met by the Government.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you have announced a cut to DFAT funding and some diplomats will come back to Australia. Wouldn't that affect Australia's ability to have influence overseas?
PM: We have a challenge when it comes to dealing with the inflation problem left to us by the previous Australian Government. That means, having a very tight, conservative fiscal policy to take pressure of public spending - as well as dealing with some of the supply side constraints in the Australian economy. The skills shortage - and we were talking about that today when it comes to nurses - but also infrastructure bottlenecks as well.
Part of producing a conservative, focussed, fiscal strategy for the year ahead means that the whole of the national Government is to tighten its fiscal belt. That means the Department of Foreign Affairs as well.  In terms of the specifics, this will mean a trimming in the level of representation of a number of our missions abroad. None of those missions will be closed. But we believe we can do better and continue to discharge our international obligations simply by pulling the belt a bit tighter. Stephen Smith, the Foreign Minister, will elaborate on this further today (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, on the  -  I'll turn to Nicola for the detailed answer to that  -  but, as I said at the conclusion of my remarks just before, there is no magic solution here. But let me tell you, you can either just pretend that the problem doesn't exist, or do something about it. We've decided to do something about it, with the elective surgery waiting list at the front, hence the good discussions we've had with the State and Territory colleagues yesterday, and on the overall supply of nurses front. Providing cash incentives will help, we believe, to get qualified nurses back into the system. It's not going to deliver a perfect 100 percent outcome, but you know something, it's a hell of a lot better than sitting on your hands and whistling dixie and hoping that it all fixes itself up in the morning. Over to you, Nicola.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you. Well we certainly consulted with a number of nursing organisations and had a good look at the sorts of programs (inaudible) in different states. What we saw was necessary was that we needed to add cash incentives to some of the training programs that many States and Territories have provided. This is $6,000 for nurses who are trained and have been out of the workforce for more than a year. Plus there will also be a $1,000 payment to the hospitals who will be recruiting these nurses to help cover some of the training costs that they will incur to provide that refresher work for the nurses. We are very confident that this will have an impact.
We are very confident that a number of those 25,000  -  30,000 trained nurses who are not working in nursing for a range of reasons will be attracted to come back to our hospitals when there are so many things happening in our hospitals and when there is such an opportunity for change in this good new cooperative arrangement between the Commonwealth and the States.
This is just part of that whole package and we are very confident that it will be a good thing, to get those qualified nurses  -  who often love nursing and have left for reasons other than just financial  -  be attracted back (inaudible) when people are making decisions about the years to come, that many will think again about coming back to hospitals to provide vital services that working families need.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) those that were announced during the campaign?
MINISTER ROXON: This is the implementation of our campaign commitment. We announced during the campaign that we would provide these incentives. We want to work with the States and Territories and with private health providers to ensure that we have a mechanism which means so they can recruit nursing staff to their hospitals and we can make those incentives available.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?
MINISTER ROXON: Look, I don't think that's likely to happen. The many thousands of nurses that already work in our system are very proud of what they do. We are pleased that they do the work that they do. But there are many thousand who have taken different jobs choices. Maybe have left to have a child and haven't come back, have found the job stressful and wanted a break.
This is an opportunity for those skilled nurses to come back into the system and we are calling on all of them to consider in their plans for the year to come whether they would like to be part of a new injection of nurses into our hospitals, with a cash incentive for them to do so.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Well look, I mean obviously that is an issue. If Reba wanted to she might make a comment. I think this is a complex problem. A lot of skilled nurses are paid very well. I'm sure there are arguments from many people that they would like to have that many paid more. But we do have a good attractive system for nurses. What we want to do is make sure that their working conditions  -  including having enough other colleagues on board in hospital wards with them  -  will be assisted by this incentive.
We, of course, are about to go into negotiations over the healthcare agreement where will be dealing with funding that's provided that fund all those sorts of issues. And no doubt those matters will be dealt with during those negotiations. But this is about attracting trained nurses back into our hospitals where they are desperately needed and we hope that this incentive will provide an opportunity for them to re-think about their career in the coming year.
PM: Back to Nicola's point just then. Today what we are announcing is the Federal Government corresponding with the State and Territory Governments to make sure that this $87 million is made available from the end of this month. We want the money to start flowing now.
As Nicola said, quite rightly and quite correctly, this is a time of year where many people are making their year's choices and decisions about where they want to work.
To make sure that this funding is available, so that it can be accessed by State and Territory health systems quick smart, that's why we're announcing today the correspondence will be proceeding from Nicola to the State and Territory Governments along those lines.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, as I said in my remarks before, we understand how big the challenge is here. Remember in times past what we had was the pointless blame game between Canberra and the States. Working families are sick and tired of that. They want actually a cooperative start, a new start to this. I said there is no silver bullet, no magic pudding here. We believe we can do much better than we have done in the past.
Here are two very practical steps announced effectively within the first month or so of this Government's existence. There'll be much more to be announced in due course. Nicola has already made reference to the upcoming negotiations on the Australian Healthcare Agreement. That is a very sizeable agreement. And we are confident that in partnership with the States and Territories we'll get the balance right there in both terms of the quantum of funding and also the direction of funding long term as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) would you be happy for Therese to go onto a hospital waiting list (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I've always made no bones about the fact that we're privately insured  -  always have been ever since we were married 26 years ago. And, as I said in the statement yesterday, when Therese experienced her difficulties on Sunday, we sent her to the Mater Private Emergency Department in Brisbane. And, that's where she will be having her procedure later in the week.
What we're concerned about is to make sure that right across the health system, that every Australian  -  whether they've got private health insurance or not  -  has access to a first class health system. What we've inherited nationwide is a system which has currently waiting lists for elective surgery at somewhere between 25,000 and somewhat more than that nationwide.
What we're doing is saying ‘how can we reduce this and do it effectively for all families?'. Not just those, like myself, who are in the fortunate position to have private insurance.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, Nicola has already referred to the fact that we have an upcoming healthcare agreement negotiation with the states. The scope of that has not been settled between Commonwealth and State Governments. And I'm sure we're going to have many more things to say about the totality of the healthcare system  -  including the role of Ministers currently within that system  -  as the year progresses. But, I've said that we need to get cracking on this practical set of measures very early in the Government's term.
These are two practical measures which need to be got going. Both on the elective surgery front and on the supply of nurses front. I believe it is a good start, but there is still a lot of work to do. Thank you very much. I'll take one more, then that's it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) also your thoughts on the big major banks increasing their interest rates (inaudible)?
PM: Well, I think that working families would be looking very carefully at the decisions taken by the commercial banks on these most recent set of rises. I endorse the remarks made recently by the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, on this and I think that people will be looking very carefully indeed at the decisions made by the commercial banks outside the framework of the official interest rates structure laid down by the Reserve Bank. That's the first point.
Secondly, if you ask why I'm going off to the Reserve Bank, I'll be meeting late today with senior representatives of the Bank to discuss the inflation challenge. On the economic policy front, front and centre this year is Australia dealing effectively with the national inflation problem that we have been left by the Howard/Costello Government. It's real, it exists, and you've seen the consequences of that already in terms of adjustments of official interest rates in recent times.
In answer to an earlier question on fiscal policy, I said this is front and centre of the challenge that we face on the economic policy front this year. So the purpose of my meeting today with Reserve Bank officials is to discuss that inflation challenge. Those discussions will shape my own thinking, together with the Treasurer and the Finance Minister's thinking, on how we shape this year's fiscal strategy and I've got to go. Thank you very much.
ends


The Rudd Government has decided to fast-track the establishment of Skills Australia in order to help lift the productive capacity of the Australian economy and fight inflation.
Addressing Australia's long-term skills shortages is vital to tackling the inflationary pressures left behind by the Howard-Costello Government.
Skills Australia will oversee the Rudd Government's commitment to providing an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years and 820,000 over the coming decade.
To get down to work on increasing the skills base of the Australian workforce, the first 20,000 of the Rudd Government's additional training places will be available by April.
New legislation to establish Skills Australia will be fast-tracked and brought before Parliament as a priority.
The total skills package is $1.17 billion over four years.
The Deputy Prime Minister will consult with relevant State and Territory Government Ministers and Industry Skills Councils seeking their urgent cooperation in prioritising the first tranche of training places in areas that are experiencing acute shortages. 
These new training places will see new skilled workers entering the workforce as early as June this year and will be directed to industries experiencing acute skills shortages, to help keep a lid on inflationary pressures.
Key industries likely to receive the new training places will include mining, construction, health &amp; community services, and personal &amp; other service industries.
The mining industry is currently experiencing the highest vacancy to employment ratio, with around 3.7 vacancies for every 100 people employed in the industry.  Wages growth is also strongest in the mining industry, at 5.4 per cent through the year to the September quarter 2007.
Wages growth is also strong in the construction industry, at 4.8 per cent through the year to September 2007.  The construction industry has the highest proportion of employees with a certificate as their highest qualification, at 45.7 per cent.
Skill shortages have been identified by the Reserve Bank as being a factor contributing to higher inflation and interest rates.
Investment in education, skills and training of our people is critical to expanding the productive side of the economy.
Brisbane
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


PM: It's good to be here with Rod Welford today from the Queensland Government here at this construction training centre here at Salisbury in Brisbane. What we've seen today and what I've certainly seen is practical examples of government and industry and unions working together to produce a first class skills set for the nation.
This is critical when you look at the challenges which Australia faces in the period ahead. Right now the core economic challenge which we face as the new government of Australia is fighting the fight against inflation. We have at present a big challenge on our hands and that is the inflation problem left to us by the Howard/Costello Government. Remember, twenty interest rate warning, twenty warnings in a row by the Reserve Bank on the problems of skills and infrastructure bottlenecks. Ten interest rate rises in a row, and the core problem of emerging inflation which confronts the economy now.
What do you do about this? Well our challenge, which we must grasp with both hands, is one  -  to maintain tight fiscal discipline, so that we ensure that the budget does what it can to restrain demand on the economy and the second - is to boost capacity in skills and in infrastructure. These two areas which resulted in considerable inflationary pressures on the economy in recent times.
Today I am here to talk about specifically what we can do on the skills front. This is core business for the new Australian Labor Government. We want to do this in partnership with our state Government friends as well as industry and unions. Today what I am announcing is the first tranche, the first set of additional training places which will be funded by the Commonwealth to assist in the skills challenge facing the nation.
In the pre-election period I committed to the Government, establishing over a ten year period an additional 820, 000 training places. Over the four years of the budget cycle, that would translate into 450, 000 additional training places. But because we face a skills challenge now, what I am announcing is the funding necessary to support an additional, immediate 20, 000 training places across the nation which will come on stream by April.
The reason this is necessary now is because there are huge demands for skills right across the economy now. With a tight labour market and with the inflation challenge we confront, this is a core piece of our overall armoury in fighting the fight against inflation. If you look at some of the numbers on the skills shortages which confront the Australian economy, they are significant. If you look at those which are in the manufacturing sector, the health and community services sector, construction, mining  -  these are significant numbers. Not just for the last year, but on average over the last three years. If I look at manufacturing for example, 15 000, average number of vacancies. In Construction 7000 to 8000. Mining, 4000 to 5000. That's just on average over the last three years, and a problem which has become more acute. So you can either just avoid this and hope that something sorts itself out, or you can have a National Government; in partnership with industry, in partnership with unions and in partnership with State and Territory Governments, rolling up our sleeves to do something practical about it.
So, upfront, now, funding for 20 000 additional Commonwealth funded training places across the nation, focussing on those industry sectors of real and immediate need across the economy. Our commitment remains for an additional 450 000 training places across the budget period of four years, and we remain committed to that long term commitment of an additional 820 000 training places across the decade. That is the first thing I would like to announce.
The second is this. In relation to how we bring about better national coordination of our skills and training effort across Australia. We've committed ourselves to the establishment of Skills Australia, a statutory advisory body. It will therefore be established under national statute within the earliest weeks of the parliament resuming in Canberra.
The reason is we need to take this national skills challenge seriously. We need to have a properly coordinated national approach to it, identifying long term skills needs across the economy, providing national funding in partnership with the states to ensure that we are getting the best high quality training positions available in the areas of industry and geographical concentration where they are needed. And to make sure therefore, we are helping industry effectively on the way through.
To conclude, we are engaged in a national war against inflation. That means a tight approach to budget management. It means a constructive approach when it comes to adding to investment in critical skills needs in the economy.
When I look at the work, for example, which is being undertaken at this construction training centre here in Brisbane, this is the sort of activity which we as a National Government - in partnership with State Governments - wish to get behind. And these additional training places which I have referred to today will be available of course, to the registered training organisations which currently operate within this centre here in Brisbane. But this is a national package.
I will turn to Rod for some further comments, then I am happy to take your questions.
ROD WELFORD: The announcement of the Prime Minister today is a breath of fresh air for skills in Queensland and for Australia. For the last half a dozen years, the Australian economy has been crying out for two yawning gaps in national responsibility to be fulfilled.
The first is in skills and the second is in infrastructure. The announcement today of an immediate 20 000 additional skills training places will help support the initiatives of our government in Queensland and State Governments around Australia to develop the workforce that we need, to meet the demands of our economy's future.
In Queensland we are under enormous pressure in terms of the delivery of infrastructure across a whole range of industries. Manufacturing, construction, civil construction, mining and the health sector.
These are all areas where there are critical skills shortages and the initiative of the Federal Government today will be a breath of fresh air for our initiatives in these fields.
I welcome the opportunity to be in partnership at last with a federal government, instead of the blame game we now have the opportunity to join together and address the critical skills shortages that are limiting the capacity of the Queensland economy to provide the services and the infrastructure that people need.
So as I say, this is a welcome announcement. I don't say that gratuitously. It is a very, very exciting opportunity for us to rebuild the national partnership that is fundamentally necessary between State and Federal Governments to attack this vital economic issue.
PM: Over to you folk for some questions.
JOURNALIST: How much is the 20,000 extra places costing?
PM: Well the immediate 20,000  -  the allocation of funds will depend entirely upon the spread of certificate training places which are offered. And the funding for each of those will differ depending on the length of the course and the intensity of the course. What we have focussed on are those which are immediate certificate level based training places which can immediately plug skills gaps now. The funding quantum will depend entirely upon the spread of places which is taken up. But, each of those 20,000 places will be met.
JOURNALIST: How will they be spread around the country?
PM: Well look, the big growth states of Queensland and WA are facing huge skills shortages. But this is not just confined to those two great states. Everywhere I go in the country one form or another of skills shortage is being confronted. It is a sad thing that this has been ignored for so long at the National Government level. We're turning the corner on this, but the reason we are establishing ‘Skills Australia' is that we have an independent national advisory body to audit national skills needs across industry and across regions and to provide us advice about where future funding priorities should lie, when it comes to the allocation of skills training places. But, this 20,000 now will be available for bids, from registered training organisations across the country, but focussing on those industry sectors which are now most in need. Construction is up there, mining is up there, as well as health and community services as well.
If I could add on community services. Two days ago in Sydney I announced a package of $87 million to fund individual incentive payments to attract trained nurses back into the workforce. Those who have left the workforce already qualified as nurses trying to meet what is currently a projected shortage of nurses nationwide of some 19,000 by the year 2010. Today's announcement is part of a broader attack on the skills deficit of the economy, and I'm confident that we can make a big impression with this upfront payment. But more importantly, with what follows over the three to four years ahead.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned earlier that you've been left with a hangover from the former Government. Peter Costello today is saying that ‘don't fiddle with it, don't tinker with it  -  we left it in a pretty good shape' -
PM: The Howard/Costello Government has left Australia with a big inflation problem. Remember, 20 warnings in a row from the Reserve Bank about skills shortages and infrastructure bottlenecks creating inflationary pressures. Each of those 20 warnings from the Reserve Bank was ignored by the Howard/Costello Government. The result  -  10 interest rate rises in a row. We face an inflation challenge right now in Australia which has been left to us by the Howard/Costello Government. We can either ignore that, or act. Two ways in which we propose to act. A tight approach to fiscal policy. And we intent to do that in our preparations for the upcoming Budget. And secondly, adding to the capacity needs of the Australian economy in skills and infrastructure.
Here are our twin strategies for responding to the inflation challenge left to us by the Howard/Costello Government.
JOURNALIST: But the Howard/Costello Government also left you with a $3 billion windfall (inaudible) spending. How does that help your razor gang?
PM: Well, part of the reason we have an inflation problem left to us by the Howard/Costello Government is that they have been profligate in spending. Therefore, I announced before the election  -  and I've established it since the election  -  a razor gang. That is, it will go through each Commonwealth Government department to remove unnecessary profligate spending. That task is underway and we intend to deliver on that so that we can produce a robust Budget surplus in the upcoming Federal Budget because that is absolutely critical to fighting an effective war against inflation. Let me just go back, just one other thing on inflation then I'll go to you for your follow up question. Inflation  -  and why we must fight a war against it  -  is the enemy of every working family in this country. Inflation is also the enemy of business in this country. It is core economic business to fight the fight against inflation and not to turn a blind eye to it as has happened in recent years. That's why we are absolutely hard line when it comes to fiscal policy. And that's why we are absolutely determined to invest productively in areas such as skills formation and infrastructure bottlenecks. You had a follow up.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The challenge we have in terms of a respectable upcoming Budget surplus is considerably beyond that. But we are going through each Government department like a dose of salts at the moment, to make sure that any unnecessary expenditure is eliminated. And furthermore, the objective is to produce a tight fiscal policy outcome for the year in order to underpin the fight against inflation which is core business for us.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the Government has announced that they want to make $10 billion in savings. You've recently announced that you've found $3 billion that the previous Government didn't spend. So are you now chasing $7 billion, or back to the 10?
PM: Can I just say, I've sat on the initial meetings of the strategic Budget committee of the Cabinet. Can I say, the work has barely begun. And we're out to harvest as much money as possible. And the targets are substantial. But, this is not seeking cutbacks for the sake of cutbacks. The task is core business when it comes to inflation. I cannot overstate the importance of this Australian Government tackling with both hands the inflation challenge. We must do that. And that means a robust approach to expenditure, and it means also an intelligent approach to investing in capacity constraints in the economy.
JOURNALIST: In regards to the whaling issue, do you think it's time the Australian Government brought in the Navy (inaudible) threatening that they're going to move in themselves?
PM:  Let's put this into context. Our approach from beginning has been, what do we need to do in terms of creating evidence for the construction of a possible legal case against Japan to bring a halt to commercial whaling. Japan has argued for some time that this is scientific whaling. I've said repeatedly in times past, I've said it since the election as well, this is commercial whaling. Therefore the practical challenge is how do we bring a stop to this long term? And what we foreshadowed is the possibility of an appropriate international legal case to do that. And the measures we've taken have been with the intention of accumulating sufficient evidence to underpin any such case. That's the core business. When it comes to the most recent events in the area where the Japanese whaling fleet is currently operating, as the Foreign Minister has said I think again in a press statement today, that it is important for all parties to exercise restraint when it comes to the possible danger to human life. We have urged restraint and cooperation between the Government of Japan on the one hand and through it, the Japanese whaling vessel. And on the other hand, through the Dutch registered vessel which is currently part of the Sea Shepherd operations. The objective being to see the safe and early return of the two individuals concerned. That remains our intention, that remains the focus of the Foreign Minister's efforts, and those efforts will continue.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:&amp; The Foreign Minister, Mr Smith, has been dealing with the Japanese Government extensively on this matter, and that will continue into the future until we have an immediate resolution of this matter concerning the two individuals.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: You know what the key challenge is, how do we bring about the end of commercial whaling, period, into the future. That's what I'm concerned about. And the reason I have foreshadowed for some time now the absolute importance of accumulating an evidence base which underpins a possible legal action has that as its single objective. This is not scientific whaling. This is commercial whaling. And we have a responsibility globally to act. And I note, very carefully, that when it came to the preparation of any such legal action in the past, the Government which preceded us did not do so. We must, therefore, be concerned obviously about what is happening in this whaling season, but my objective is to do what is necessary in terms of international diplomacy and appropriate international legal action, to bring a halt to commercial whaling, period.
JOURNALIST: Do you have concerns about the safety of the Australian on board?
RUDD: I have concerns about the safety of all people associated with this operation.  There are particular laws which apply under international maritime law concerning responsibility of masters of vessels at sea, be they Japanese registered vessels or vessels registered in the kingdom of the Netherlands, as is the case with this Sea Shepherd operation.  And those responsibilities go to the maximum preservation of human life and taking all necessary and responsible actions to that end.  Therefore, I would again urge restraint on the parties and full cooperation on the part of those involved to ensure the safe return of those two individuals.
We had a question there, I think.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, story in Sydney today about Pat Farmer, decided to leave his Campbelltown electorate and live in Mosman (inaudible).  Do you think that's important that) elected members need to be in touch with their local constituents?
RUDD: I think every individual Member of Parliament will make their own individual decisions on this and individual circumstances will differ.  I actually know very little about Mr Farmer's circumstances.  I've seen those reports in the Sydney newspapers.  I'm sure he'll answer in his own away to his constituents at the next opportunity, that is, the next election.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
RUDD: The US President has a proposed meeting for Honolulu which is upcoming for the so-called major emitting economies.  Australia will be represented at that meeting by the Minister for Climate Change, Senator Wong and we believe that all forms of global cooperation in dealing with the great challenge with climate change are necessary.  That's why the first action of this national government was to ratify Kyoto and following that, our attendance at the Climate Change Conference of the parties in Bali which I also attended. And Senator Wong herself played an active role in those negotiations to bring about the declaration which was concluded at that conference.  That is core business for us.  Other forms of climate change cooperation, including the states who are still not party to the Kyoto Protocol like the United States, is also important.  But would I reiterate what I have said elsewhere: I believe it's time for the Untied States to ratify Kyoto as well.  We need America as part of the global climate change negotiation.  America has been an overwhelming force for good in the world in so many areas.  We need their voice at the table on climate change as well.
JOURNALIST: Excuse me sir, I think it would be great if we could have greater recognition of apprentices. Do you think we should have a National Apprentice Day?
RUDD: National Apprentice day.  Well you know something?  The more I travelled around Australia in the last six to 12 months, the more apprentices I met, the more I became absolutely convinced that a decent national apprenticeship and national traineeships scheme is what the nation desperately needs, and appropriate recognition for it.  We've already had various awards operating across the states and territories to recognise apprentices of the year.  Your proposal for national apprenticeship day, let me take it on board and we'll come back to you.
But can I say what you are doing as apprentices and trainees here, you're part of the fabric of building the nation and we, the national government, in partnership with the great efforts undertaken by Rod Welford and others at the state level, is so critical to getting the building blocks of the skills needs of this future economy in order.  So on national apprenticeship day, let's come back to you on that.  Thank you for the suggestion.
JOURNALIST: How is Ms Rein?
RUDD: I was with Therese last night.  She has had her surgical procedure.  She's doing fine.  She's a bit sore and sorry but so are most people after they've had a procedure like that and I'm looking forward to having her home very soon.  And as I indicated in a statement yesterday, that we pass our thanks very much to the nursing and medical staff at the Mater Private where she's had that procedure.
JOURNALIST: Will you use the word ‘sorry' for an indigenous apology?
RUDD: I've already said that, yes.  Absolutely. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, where are your sideburns?
RUDD: Well, mate what have you done with yours?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible).
RUDD: You know something?  The good thing about that Christmas / New Year period is that you can also actually avoid going to the hairdresser as well but I'm sure it's an early sign of Therese's recovery when she suggested I head off to the hairdresser yesterday which is what happened.  See you guys.
ends


Federal Cabinet today formally approved the establishment of Infrastructure Australia, a key driver in the Rudd Government's plan to fight inflation.
Infrastructure Australia will help fight inflation by boosting the economy's productive capacity, unlocking infrastructure bottlenecks like clogged ports and congested roads.
Infrastructure Australia represents a dramatic shift in national economic policy, bringing national leadership to infrastructure development for the first time since Federation.
Legislation establishing Infrastructure Australia will be introduced during the first session of the new Parliament.
The Rudd Government will develop a strategic blueprint for Australia's infrastructure needs and ensure future projects are determined by economic, social, and environmental needs  -  not short-term political interests.
Infrastructure Australia will be a statutory advisory council with twelve members drawn from industry, government and local government. This will include five from the private sector, one of whom will be the chair. Infrastructure Australia will:
     * Conduct audits to determine the adequacy, capacity and condition of nationally significant infrastructure, including transport, water, communications and energy.
     * Develop an Infrastructure Priority List to guide billions of dollars of public and private investment.
     * Provide advice to governments, investors and owners of infrastructure on regulatory reforms that can improve the utilisation of our infrastructure networks.
Infrastructure Australia's immediate task will be to audit the nation's infrastructure shortfalls and produce an Infrastructure Priority List to guide billions of dollars of public and private investment.
The first Infrastructure Priority List will be completed within 12 months. In developing the List, Infrastructure Australia will assess projects in terms of specific goals, such as:
     * Meeting water and energy needs;
     * Saving time for commuters battling traffic congestion in our major cities
     * Efficiently moving freight from regional areas to our ports.
     * Meeting the challenge of climate change
Infrastructure Australia will also review the extent to which governments can better facilitate infrastructure investment, including through public-private partnerships as well as better planning and approval processes.
The task ahead for Infrastructure Australia is considerable.
The OECD ranks Australia 20th out 25 countries when it comes to investment in public infrastructure as a proportion of national income.
For 11 years the Howard-Costello Government failed to act on Australia's infrastructure needs.
The Rudd Government is committed to investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
Perth
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


PM: The biggest challenge facing the Australian government today, the biggest economic challenge facing the Australian government today is inflation. That's why the government has declared war on inflation. We must take this challenge seriously. It is core business for the government and the reason is that inflation is the enemy of the economy, it's the enemy of business, it's the enemy of working families.
The challenge we face is that we have been left an inflation legacy by our predecessors. And we must act on it and act on it decisively. We've seen already what has happened when inflation is not acted on decisively. We've seen that those pressures have caused the Reserve Bank to act in the past by increasing interest rates.
Therefore, on the part of the Australian Government, we will deploy every tool of Government policy to ensure that we fight an effective fight against the inflation challenge.
Today in a speech to the business community here in Perth I outlined a clear cut commitment from us to set as a target for this years' budget surplus of 1.5 per cent of GDP. That is a substantial target. We are doing that to enforce disciplines within our own ranks and within the bureaucracy, in terms of the cost cutting exercise in which we are currently engaged.
We believe that is necessary in order to restrain public demand at a time when we need to ensure that we make monetary policy on behalf of the Reserve Bank as easy a job as possible, and not compound the difficulty of a task which the RBA currently has.
Therefore, we have outlined a broad five point plan in dealing with the inflation problem. Number one, I have already indicated which is our target - subject to unfolding economic conditions  -  of 1.5 per cent of GDP as our target surplus for the upcoming financial year. Two, the government is also examining a range of policy options concerning, how do we boost national savings and how do we encourage a broader national savings culture in Australia.
Three, to act decisively and effectively on the skills crisis. The crisis which has been left unattended for far too long.
Four, to deal effectively with a challenge of public infrastructure and infrastructure bottlenecks which exist across the economy and are creating capacity constraints.
Five - to act also with a clear pathway to the future on how do we boost, effectively, workforce participation.
This is our roadmap to the future in dealing with the inflation challenge. It underlines our attitude to government, which is responsible economic management - taking the tough decisions while still investing in the future drivers of economic growth.
Consistent with today's  -  this announcement  -  and the remarks I made in the address this morning to the business community  -  cabinet today has also decided to establish Infrastructure Australia.
Infrastructure Australia will be a core statutory advisory council created for the following three reasons.
One, to audit the current state of Australia's infrastructure stock. Two, to ensure that subject to that audit we establish national infrastructure priority list, in order to best target the public dollar. Three, then to work with State Governments, Territory Governments, other layers of Government as well as the private sector in ensuring that these priority infrastructure projects are delivered. And looking therefore through that, employing a range of funding mechanisms.
This is an important pre-election commitment by ourselves. We spoke long and hard about the need for Infrastructure Australia during the course of 2007 and in this, our first Cabinet meeting in 2008, here in WA, where the infrastructure needs of this state economy are huge, it's important that we took this opportunity to decide to establish Infrastructure Australia.
I'll be asking the Minister Anthony Albanese to speak on that further in a minute. Finally, just prior to coming in here now and part of the reason for being delayed is that I have been speaking with the Queensland Premier Anna Bligh on the state of the floods in that state. I received from the Queensland Premier an update on the flood situation in Emerald (inaudible). We now have reports of more than 100 isolated properties which have been cut off by flood waters. Also reports of considerable, large scale stock losses. In Emerald itself, we have the dam currently running at 126 per cent capacity. Water is, I'm advised, about two meters about the dam wall. The river level currently running at 14.5 meters with a projection to go higher than that. We're watching very carefully the future needs for further evacuations in Emerald itself. I said to the Queensland Premier that we stand ready to assist the State Government in any practical way which is necessary in the days ahead in dealing with that particular challenge.
Already the Australian Defence Force has been deployed to assist with the construction of levies at Charleville. Already also we have envoked through the national disaster relief and recovery arrangements two other forms of assistance to those flood affected areas. Namely those under personal hardship and distress, and also to assist with State Government expenditure on public infrastructure that has been damaged by flood conditions.
We'll continue to maintain close contact with the Queensland Government as the flood situation unfolds, and, as I said before, stand ready to act and assist the Queensland Government as appropriate. Before taking your questions, if I might ask Anthony Albanese to speak further about Infrastructure Australia.
ALBANESE: Thanks Prime Minister. I'm very pleased that the Cabinet today signed off on Infrastructure Australia. It is the second step in the commitments that we made throughout 2007 during the lead up to the election of the Rudd Labor Government.
The first was the creation of an Infrastructure Minister, and of course that was done. The second is the creation of Infrastructure Australia. It will be a statutory advisory council to advise a bureaucratic assistance body, the office of infrastructure coordination will be allocated in Sydney within my Federal Department of Infrastructure.
It will consist of 12 people, five from the private sector, one of whom will be the chair. Three from the Commonwealth, three from the States and Territories nominated by the States and Territories, and one chosen from Local Government.
The Prime Minister outlined the three major functions of Infrastructure Australia which go to the core of addressing what the Reserve Bank has warned on 20 occasions, which is that infrastructure bottlenecks are causing capacity constraints in our economy, causing inflationary pressures and therefore causing pressure on interest rates.
It will consist of trying to address the challenge which is there to address our infrastructure deficit which the Business Council of Australia has indicated is more than $100 billion. We know that CEDA has said that 0.08 per cent of GDP could be added if we addressed the infrastructure deficit. And we know that this occurs at a time where there is significant capital available from the private sector. Not the least of which is the $1.1 trillion which exists in superannuation funds which people in the superannuation industry are saying is available for investment in infrastructure here in Australia, rather than being directed towards overseas.
This is a body that will be able to make policy recommendations to the Government and to the States and Territories through the COAG working group, which will be meeting for the first time in Sydney on Wednesday, that was established at the COAG meeting held in Melbourne in December.
It will address issues such as how we get planning consistency across the States and Territories. How we develop consistent guidelines for investment in terms of Public Private Partnerships. How we address the infrastructure short falls, whether it be the short falls of water infrastructure in our capital cities, whether it be addressing traffic congestion in our cities. Or whether it be dealing with the issue of getting out exports from our regions to our ports.
These priorities are a priority for the Government. We will be introducing legislation in the first session of parliament, and making announcements as to the composition of the Infrastructure Australia council at that time. Thanks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, How confident are you this road map, this five point plan to combat inflation will keep pressure off interest rates?
PM: Well, ultimately interest rates are set in this country by the Reserve Bank, and we've said from day one that we respect the independence of the Reserve Bank. In fact, we've instituted a number of measures to enhance the banks independence. But, when it comes to ensuring that the job of the bank is made as easy as possible, there is a role for fiscal policy.
We've seen the level of growth in outlays that has occurred in recent times by the Federal Government. Frankly, that's not made the job of the bank easier, and it's time we took some of that pressure off.
Therefore, we're adopting a hard line approach of fiscal discipline to produce a substantial budget surplus for the upcoming financial year. We think that's the right way to go. We think that it makes the job of the bank easier. There are a lot of other factors out there as well, but this is one important critical step in the right direction.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull said it's overwhelmingly probable that you will get that surplus  -  in fact, exceeding 1.5 of GDP because you have so much money (inaudible).
PM: Well, it's interesting that when the projection was made for the state of the budget by the previous Government of which Mr Turnbull was part that they projected a surplus for the year in question of either 1.1 or 1.2 depending on whether you're looking at the estimates that put forward at Budget time or at MYEFO and PEFO time.
We've gone much higher than that, much more substantial than that. And the reason we believe we need to do that is because we have been left an inflation problem by the Howard-Costello Government. We need to act on it in order to make the job of the bank easier when it comes to interest rates.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned extra savings measures, these are going beyond what you were promising in the election (inaudible)  -  can you give us a little more detail on that and (inaudible).
PM: We are working hard on extra savings, and to answer your question, the first part of your question Michelle, yes they are in addition to those which we nominated pre-election. Secondly, the reason we nominated a razor gang prior to the election was to go through Government outlays department by department, program by program, line by line to find further savings. That process is underway. But I'm not in a position today to nominate individual areas of further saving, that job is being undertaken now by the razor gang. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh, sorry, I thought you meant savings in public outlays. No, on the question of private savings, which is where your question goes, as I said in the speech this morning and reiterated in my remarks today, we take the challenge seriously to examine all range of options which may encourage a savings culture  -  a better savings culture  -  in Australia. And to boost, therefore, overall national savings.
Those options are being developed within Government. It will take time to work our way through but we believe there is room for further work in this area and for further directions in Government policy. But those announcements will be made in the months ahead.
JOURNALIST: In the Budget?
PM: In the months ahead. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well the Government has noted carefully, recent statements by the Reserve Bank Governor, most recently in his speech in London about the inflation projection for the period ahead. We're also very much aware of the fact that we've seen these inflationary pressures emerge now over the last couple of years. Pressures which have not been acted on by the Government so far.
We see our job as doing what we can at the level of fiscal policy but also investment in skills and infrastructure, to bring down the pressures on inflation, in order to bring down, therefore, upward pressure on interest rates. This is a tough task. We've got to attack this at multiple levels. Hence, the speech that I have delivered today. And hence, one of the key elements of that  -  to act also decisively on the question on infrastructure. These two decisions relate. That is, what we've done, by way of our policy target on the upcoming budget surplus vis-à-vis public demand. And on the question of infrastructure provision, the decision to establish Infrastructure Australia. We have got cracking on both these fronts and there's more work to do
JOURNALIST:Would you agree (inaudible) worse in the short term before it is likely to improve in the long term.
PM: I'll turn to Wayne in a minute on this but our judgement is, and looking very carefully at what the Reserve Bank Governor had to say, is that we've got a challenge, a serious challenge lying ahead. These pressures have been building for a couple of years and you can't turn these things around overnight. What we've decided to do within the first month or so of this Government's existence is to outline a course of action, a plan of action, and have made a significant statement today about what we'll do in terms of a target for the next budget surplus. Wayne?
TREASURER: Well certainly Treasury has forecast that inflation will be elevated for the next 18 months, at or above the Reserve Bank's target band. Underlying inflation is high. That's what drives the decisions of the Reserve Bank. Their decisions are independent. So we don't speculate about Reserve Bank decisions. They take their decisions based on the case, as they see it at the time. What the Reserve Bank Governor said over the weekend was that he was concerned about inflation. We're very concerned about the inflation problem as well, which is why we have begun work immediately on coming to Government to put in place short term and long term approaches to bringing down inflation.
JOURNALIST:Mr Rudd what message then does today's (inaudible)
PM: Well we're not in the business of sending messages coded or otherwise, public declarations or private declarations, to the bank. They make their own judgements. We're responsible for fiscal policy. We're responsible for budget policy. There's a large slab of money out there and how you deploy it and how wisely you deploy it is a critical decision. What we're saying in the earliest months of this Government's existence is that we intend to be very tough minded when it comes to the use of public finance.
We have got to do everything we can to fight this fight against inflation and that means an attack across multiple levels of policy and I think the plan we put forward today does that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well here in the West, and I should say again what I have said earlier today  -  it is good to be back in West Australia. Prior to the election we committed to having our first Community Cabinet in Western Australia, we did that yesterday. And the fact that our Cabinet in terms of its formal national agenda meets here in WA for the first time in 2008 says something about the seriousness which the Government attaches to the WA economy and this economy's needs and for the future.
Infrastructure Australia is a key decision which obviously is relevant to WA's infrastructure needs. On the question of inflationary pressures in WA, the fact that you have such an acute skills shortage, that you have infrastructure bottlenecks here which have built up over a period of time, in large part though the absence of national leadership  -  means that inflationary pressures exist here. We need to act on these nationally and effectively and across the various levels of policy which I have been talking about. In terms of your specific question about what areas, all I can say is, there is a skills shortage, there's an infrastructure shortage  -  both of these things have been identified by the Reserve Bank nationally over a long period of time. Twenty warnings in the case of the last three years, no action ensued. We are taking action.
JOURNALIST:How long will it take to have impact?
PM:Well, as I said, these pressures have been building for the last several years. And that's not our say so, that's there in the data. Therefore, it's going to take a fair while for us to start to turn these things around. But we've put forward a concrete plan of action for doing that. The other thing I've said is that I'm not in the business of criticising the previous Government on its performance on inflation unless we can put forward an alternative plan. And what I'm doing today is saying the previous Government  -  the Howard-Costello Government  -  dropped the ball on inflation. We intend to put our best foot forward in ensuring that we fight the fight as effectively as any Government can.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:I'll turn to Albo in terms of Infrastructure Australia's operation. But on the question of the nation's infrastructure needs they are many and diverse. In the resource states  -  WA and Queensland  -  obviously there are particular and acute needs. But if you go to the urban transport needs in Sydney and Melbourne and elsewhere, and look at the cost to the national economy of lost time in commuting  -  for example  -  because you have overstretched road networks, then, plainly there are infrastructure needs nationwide. Albo, you might want to add.
ALBANESE: In terms of Infrastructure Australia, we have said that it will develop and infrastructure priority list within twelve months. So we will expect Infrastructure Australia to do that by early 2009. That will provide an impetus for investment in that infrastructure priority list to address it. It's no accident that we've made this decision here at the Perth cabinet. I have sat down on a number of occasions here in Perth and also in regional Western Australia to discuss the issues of the infrastructure shortfalls with the business community. What the business community have said to us here more acutely perhaps than most places in the nation is that they need coordination. They've been calling out for it in Budget submissions year after year. We're actually providing a vehicle for that to be delivered. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:Well, Government spending is all about priorities. It is also about the quality of the spend. One of our criticisms of the past has been the fact that so much by way of this surge in revenue in recent years has not been invested in the productive areas of the economy. In particular, skills formation and infrastructure formation development. We believe we can roll out a substantial infrastructure program for the nation based on the advice of this body, this statutory advisory council, Infrastructure Australia, and through the Minister's department.
You know something, it won't all be public provision. One of the tasks which the Minister just referred to was how do we, for example, set about harmonising effectively PPP regulations right across the country? If you're out there as a private investor in infrastructure one of the impediments you face at the moment is these multiple conflicting, or in some cases, non existing, regulatory frameworks for effective investment in infrastructure projects. One of the tasks we've got to do is to fix that up. It stuns me that it hasn't been done before. But if you do that, then you've not just got the public dollar at work, you've got the private dollar as well. And that's how we want to see the future. But to conclude, on Albo's last point, the business community  -  particularly in Western Australia  -  has been calling out for national leadership on this question for years and years and years. They've called for it, we've promised we would act on it, now that we've formed the next Government of Australia we're delivering on it. Thanks for your time.
JOURNALIST: Are all your election commitments quarantined from your spending cuts?
PM:Yes they are. We are committed to delivering everything that we committed to prior to the last election and in advancing the budget surplus target of 1.5 per cent of GDP which we announced today we have factored in the costs of implementing our pre-election commitments. Remember, we were modest about those commitments. We produced a more modest set of commitments and certainly a more robust set of savings than did the then Government. But that's why we are in a position to act responsibly in implementing those undertakings to the Australian community and at the same time providing a clear cut national direction when it comes to a hard line approach to fiscal policy given the inflation challenge and problem left for us by our predecessors. Thanks very much. 
ends


The platform I put forward to the Australian people was for a Government that anticipates the challenges of the future  -  and a government that has a plan to tackle these challenges head on.
The future of the national economy is core business for the new Government of Australia.
A Government committed to responsible economic management.
A Government equally committed to investing in Australia's long term economic future.
And a Government prepared to take hard decisions on the way.
And the purpose: to improve the lives and livelihoods of Australian working families.
I am an unapologetic optimist about our long term future
But the truth is the challenges we face are formidable.
There is absolutely nothing guaranteed about our economic future.
We can't rely on luck.
In this country we must make our own luck.
And to do that we must plan hard for it and work hard for it.
Over the last six months, the global economy has entered into uncertain times.
On the domestic front, we face the underlying challenge of how long we can expect Australia to enjoy the best terms of trade this country has had since the early 1950s.
Nonetheless, despite more than five years of unprecedented global economic growth, and a record terms of trade, we have experienced three years of net exports detracting or making no contribution to our growth.
We have also faced declining productivity which of itself impairs our international competitiveness.
And for the last couple of years, slowly but steadily inflation has once again let loose in the Australian economy  -  resulting in inflation numbers for Australia that are significantly above most OECD economies.
And overarching all these challenges are the mega changes represented by the rise of China, the rise of India and the unfolding economic and environmental reality of climate change.
Therefore the national government faces a very full economic policy agenda indeed.
Reinforcing the need for responsible economic management combined with a clear cut strategy for investing in Australia's long term economic future:
     * Where the macroeconomic fundamentals are strong;
     * Where we build world class education, innovation and infrastructure to drive long term productivity growth;
     * Where we intelligently invest in the industries of the future.
 And driving all of these concerns are the underlying needs of Australian working families, both now and into the future.
Today, I would like to talk about the global economic environment, the nature and causes of the inflation challenge that we face, and to outline the Government's five point plan to fight inflation.
It goes without saying that Australia's economic performance is directly shaped by the state of the global economy.
In economic policy there are factors within our control.
Just as there are factors beyond our control  -  factors to which we must remain alert and vigilant in terms of our own economic policy settings.
We are experiencing uncertain times in the global economy.
The US economy is weakening as a result of a severe downturn in its housing market and associated troubles in financial markets.
The Chairman of the US Federal Reserve recently noted that:
“the baseline outlook for real activity in 2008 has worsened and that the downside risks to growth have become more pronounced”
Just two days ago, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens delivered a speech noting:
“the US now faces a period of below-average performance as the problems in the housing market are digested”.
There's no doubt that developments in the US housing market pose risks to the global economy, as well as our own.
Already higher financing costs in global financial markets are having real impacts on Australian families through increased mortgage rates imposed by Australia's commercial banks.
Families and businesses who have endured ten official interest rate rises in the last five years certainly won't welcome these rate rises, and neither do I.
The government and the economy's regulatory authorities will continue to monitor these developments carefully.
Consensus forecasts have stated that, in part due to developments in the US economy, economic growth is expected to slow in Japan and Europe.
These developments pose significant challenges for the global growth outlook and for the Australian economy.
But they come at a time where strong economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region is continuing to drive global demand for our mineral and energy resources.
In 2007, emerging economies including China, India, Russia and Brazil, drove two-thirds of the growth in the global economy.
The G3 economies of the US, Japan and the Euro area contributed less than a quarter of global growth.
The World Bank in its Global Economic Prospects publications noted that:
“Resilience in developing economies is cushioning the current slowdown in the United States”.
China is expected to continue to grow at double-digit rates over the next two years.
And China's growth momentum is being increasingly sustained by domestic forces.
Over coming years, developments in China will increasingly shape both global and Australian economic conditions.
The Indian economy has become one of our fastest growing export markets and is expected to continue to post impressive rates of economic growth.
Combined, China and India accounted for around 40 per cent of Australia's export value growth in 2006-07.
Emerging economies such as Russia and Brazil are also expected to continue to contribute to global growth.
The economic expansion within our region has only heightened the need for careful management of our domestic economy.
And the most pressing economic challenge domestically is inflation.
Australia therefore faces conflicting economic currents:
     * A global economy (led by the United States) which appears to be slowing.
     * An ongoing terms of trade boom driven by Asia Pacific economies.
     * And significant domestic inflationary pressures at home.
The inflation problem we currently face has not emerged overnight.
The truth is it has been building for some time.
It cannot be solved overnight.
But we can start immediately.
And we have.
For one and a half years, measures of underlying inflation have been running at towards the upper end of the Reserve Bank's 2 to 3 per cent inflation target band.
This has made the task of monetary policy much, much harder.
Official interest rates have increased ten times since May 2002, of which six of these increases occurred in the last three years.
The minutes of the most recent Reserve Bank Board meeting show that the Board remains concerned about the outlook for inflation, despite recent monetary tightening.
Just this past Friday, in London, Governor Stevens reiterated his concern about inflationary pressures, noting that inflation “is likely to be uncomfortably high in the near term”.
The inflation challenge we face today is a direct consequence of policy neglect in the past, compounded by the terms of trade boom.
Strong global demand for our commodity exports has seen our terms of trade rise to 50 year highs.
This has provided a significant stimulus to our economy  -  boosting employment, company profits and incomes.
The Reserve Bank has estimated that it has boosted real national income by around 8 per cent  -  or the equivalent of around $80 billion in the last year alone.
But at the same time it has brought our economy close to its limits of capacity.
With a highly employed economy, demand created by strong growth in income has generated inflationary pressures.
Put simply, demand growth has outstripped increases in the supply capacity of the economy.
This situation was not helped by lax fiscal policy.
Past fiscal policy settings applied insufficient restraint on unproductive spending.
Since 2004-05 Commonwealth spending has grown on average at over 4 per cent per year in real terms.
This is the fastest growth rate for any four year period in the past decade and a half.
We have the right institutional framework to deal with pressures on monetary policy  -  an independent central bank with an inflation target.
Shortly after taking office, the Governor and the Government announced a number of measures to enhance the independence and transparency of the Reserve Bank, through a new Joint Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy.
The new Statement re-affirmed the Government's commitment to the Reserve Bank's 2 to 3 per cent inflation target.
It strengthened the Reserve Bank by enhancing the statutory independence of the Governor and Deputy Governor.
It also incorporated new transparency measures in the Board appointments process, the publication of Board minutes, and a statement following each monthly meeting, irrespective of whether the cash rate was changed.
We recognise the importance of monetary policy for managing demand, but fiscal policy also has a role to play.
It should not be making the job of the Reserve Bank harder.
At a time when the economy is pushing up against the limits of its capacity, we need to be more alert to the impacts of fiscal policy on demand.
Capacity constraints are holding back our economy.
The labour market is the tightest it has been in a generation with unemployment at around 33-year lows.
And while overall participation is at record highs, Australia ranks in the bottom half of OECD economies for prime aged men and women.
Coupled with acute skills shortages in many industries, labour shortages are pushing up the cost of labour.
A lack of investment in skills has also seen weak productivity growth in recent years. Strong growth in wages, without offsetting improvements in labour productivity, adds to price pressures.
A lack of past infrastructure investment has also constrained our ability to boost supply.
With record levels of capacity utilisation businesses have been unable to maximise the opportunities and respond fully to strong demand.
A range of specific factors have also been pushing inflation higher.
Oil prices are being pushed to record highs by ongoing geopolitical tensions, strong demand and supply concerns.
And here at home, the ongoing effects of our devastating drought are leading to higher food prices.
These, of course, are factors over which we have little control.
But with China and India likely to continue to grow strongly, demand side pressures are likely to continue to influence the Australian economy, despite a weakening in the US economy.
This emphasises the need to direct all arms of economic policy towards the things we can influence  -  to take the pressure off demand, reduce costs in the economy through regulatory reform, and further boost the supply side capacity of the Australian economy to alleviate inflationary pressures.
That's why our Government in its earliest days has declared war on inflation.
This will be a tough fight, but unless we engage this fight, the consequences for businesses, employees and families will be very negative indeed.
We recognise that with an economy operating at close to full capacity the only way we will be able to achieve sustained improvements in incomes is to direct our policy efforts towards expanding the productive capacity of the economy.
While they presided over unprecedented boom times off the back of record terms of trade, the Howard/Costello Government failed to make critical investments in skills and infrastructure.
Over the last three years the Reserve Bank of Australia warned on more than 20 separate occasions that skill shortages and capacity constraints were threatening growth and contributing to inflation.
The Howard/Costello Government's failure to heed these warnings allowed inflationary pressures to build.
Today, measures of underlying inflation have been running at around 3 per cent  -  the top of the Reserve Bank's 2 to 3 per cent inflation target band.
The Howard/Costello Government failed to act on their inflation problem.
Instead, they ignored it.
Not only did they ignore it, through their inaction they compounded the problem.
Thereby creating risks to our long term economic competitiveness.
Following the release of the of June quarter inflation figures in July 2007, the former Treasurer declared that:
“...inflation is right where we want it”
This came at a time when measures of underlying inflation were running at 2.8 per cent  -  at the upper end of the Reserve Bank's 2-3 per cent target band.
But one month later the Reserve Bank was forced to tighten monetary policy because of a heightened inflationary environment.
The inflation challenge we face today is very much the Liberals parting gift to the Australian economy.
A decade of neglect of the twin investment deficits in infrastructure and skills  -  has meant our economy has been ill prepared to deal with the demand surge flowing from the terms of trade boom.
For over a decade, the past Government did not put forward a strategic vision for the tax system.
For over a decade, Government spending was not directed to the challenges on the horizon or to boosting the productive capacity of our economy.
A surge in revenues year after year, and handouts before every election.
This has left us with an extended period of elevated inflation.
Businesses that I speak to right across the country  -  small, medium and large  -  consider finding suitably qualified employees to be one of their biggest difficulties.
The former Department of Employment and Workplace Relations identified persistent skills shortages in trades and the professions over much of the past ten years.
Our economy has also been held back as bulk commodity ships queue off our ports, urban congestion clogs up our major cities and both rural and urban areas experience chronic water shortages.
CEDA estimates that Australia's infrastructure backlog is costing us around 0.8 per cent of GDP a year in lost production  -  that is the equivalent of $8 billion a year.
There are few other states that have felt the impact of these deficits more than Western Australia.
Unemployment in Western Australia is the lowest of any state  -  at 3.1 per cent.
The growth in job vacancies in Western Australia is far higher than in any other State, with vacancies growing by 36.3 per cent over the last year, reflecting the difficulties that employers have in filling jobs.
Iron ore miners in Western Australia report that rail and port infrastructure facilities are stretched to their limits.
The consequence of this failure to address the skills crisis, to lift workforce participation and plan for the demands on critical infrastructure, has created a set of deep underlying drivers of Australia's current inflation problem.
Yet these pressures were aggravated even further by an increasingly indisciplined approach to fiscal policy on the part of our predecessors.
A Five Point Plan to Fight Inflation
The government is not in the business attributing all of Australia's inflationary pressures to the policy failures of our predecessors.
As I have already noted, a number of these pressures have been created by external factors.
But equally, responsibility must be accepted for domestic policy complacency and failure where it has occurred.
Policy failure on skills, workforce participation, infrastructure and fiscal policy are clear cut cases of neglect.
There is however absolutely no point in decrying our predecessors culpability on this unless we at the same are pointing the way forward.
That's why today, I would like to chart the way forward, and set out a broad five point plan to fight the fight against inflation.
A plan that addresses both demand side and supply side pressures on inflation.
A plan that uses all the tools available to us  -  both macroeconomic and microeconomic levers.
First, we will ensure the Government takes the pressure off demand by running a strong budget surplus.
This will help make the task of the Reserve Bank easier.
Second, in the period ahead we will examine all options to provide real incentive to encourage private savings.
Third, we will be unfolding our plan for tackling chronic skills shortages in the economy.
Fourth, we will provide national leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
And fifth, we will provide practical ways of helping people re-enter the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard, to lift workforce participation.
By exercising restraint  -  our plan aims to do everything it can to ease the pressure on inflation and interest rates.
And for the longer term, we have a plan to deal with the chronic investment deficits in the capacity side of the economy  -  in skills and infrastructure.
1. Fiscal Restraint
The first part of our plan is a hardline attitude to fiscal restraint.
Prior to the election, we ran as fiscal conservatives.
With the election behind us, we now intend to govern as fiscal conservatives.
The sensible thing for government to do is not contribute to demand through excessive government spending.
For an economy that is now enjoying its 17th year of economic growth, it is prudent for the Government to be running a sizeable budget surplus.
Fiscal policy should not complicate the task of monetary policy.
It should make the job of the Reserve Bank easier, not harder.
That is why the Government is committed to strengthening the budget position as well as improving the quality of public spending.
At the time of the 2007-08 Budget, the budget surplus for 2008-09 was 1.1 per cent of GDP.
At the time of the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook and the Pre-Election Fiscal and Economic Outlook, the budget surplus for 2008-09 was revised to 1.2 per cent of GDP.
We need to do better than that, and so long as economic conditions hold up we will do better than that.
Today I announce a fiscal target that will guide our budgetary process and decision making.
The Government aims to deliver a budget surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, provided growth prospects remain as currently anticipated.
This will require a determined, disciplined approach to spending and a hardline approach to savings.
Our ‘razor gang' is currently working to cut wasteful spending, and find additional savings over and above the $10 billion across the forward estimates that we have already identified.
This is a comprehensive review of spending.
Department by department, program by program, line by line.
It is essential that we spend public money wisely.
We understand that it is not just the overall budget position that matters.
The quality of government spending is equally important.
Added to this is adopting the discipline of allowing automatic stabilisers that are built into the budget to do their job.
In the current environment, this means banking upward revisions to revenue, should they occur.
It is appropriate the budget position is allowed to vary with economic conditions.
Allowing automatic stabilisers that are built into the budget to do their job will help alleviate inflationary pressures.
But getting our fiscal house in order is only a first step.
2. Private demand and saving for the future
The second component of our five point plan is Government action to foster a culture of savings.
Providing attractive incentives to save can help take the pressure off inflation, help people save for their future, and help lift national savings.
This is particularly important at a time when we face elevated inflationary pressures.
We have already proposed First Home Saver Accounts, to help young homebuyers save for the future.
The Government believes there is more to be done in the area of building a national savings culture  -  and we will have more to say about this in the months ahead.
3. Tackling chronic skills shortages
To support these measures  -  we need to deal with the critical supply side constraints of today.
The third point of our plan is to start addressing the economy's skills deficit.
Targeted investments in training will help provide labour resources to sectors experiencing chronic shortages.
At the election we put forward our Skilling Australia for the Future policy, to help fund the delivery of 450,000 training places over the next 4 years, including 65,000 extra apprenticeships.
And we have already gotten to work.
Last week, I announced that the first 20,000 of the additional training places will be available by April this year.
I have also asked the Deputy Prime Minister to consult with relevant state and territory organisations and Industry Skills Councils to seek their urgent cooperation in allocating the first tranche of training places to industries experiencing the most acute shortages.
The mining and construction sectors  -  so pivotal to West Australian economy - are likely to be prime candidates.
The mining industry is currently experiencing the highest vacancy to employment ratio, with around 3.7 vacancies for every 100 people employed in the industry.
Wages growth is strongest in the mining industry, at 5.4 per cent through the year to the September quarter 2007.
The construction industry is also experiencing labour constraints.
Wages growth in construction is at 4.8 per cent through the year to September 2007. The industry also has the highest proportion of employees with a certificate as their highest qualification, at 45.7 per cent.
Meaning that it will benefit greatly from additional training places at certificate level.
The government also announced before the election that it will establish Skills Australia as an independent statutory body to advise the government on skills shortage issues.
Given the urgency of the challenge, new legislation to establish Skills Australia will be fast-tracked and brought before Parliament as a priority.
The government will also shortly consider draft guidelines for the Trades Training Centre in Schools program, with schools able to apply for funding from March 2008.
The Program will give all students the best chance of finishing school and moving into the workforce.
The nation also needs to deal with real economic challenges represented by current skills shortages through the relevant skills categories of the Australian migration program.
We will also deliver further measures in higher education to address skills shortages in maths, science, nursing and early childhood education.
4. National leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks
The fourth point of our plan is to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
Infrastructure is the other major area where our economy is facing a deficit that has not been addressed.
Bottlenecks in our supply chains and urban congestion slow our economy down  -  and are in large part the product of poor leadership, planning and coordination of critical national infrastructure.
Almost immediately, the Government will move to establish Infrastructure Australia.
Infrastructure Australia will undertake an audit of national infrastructure in the areas of transport, energy, communications and water.
It will develop national infrastructure priorities.
And it will provide advice on policy and regulatory reforms to improve the efficient use of infrastructure networks.
In keeping with this, the Government will also work closely with its state and territory counterparts to develop appropriate national frameworks for infrastructure delivery.
An Infrastructure Working Group has been established by COAG with the dual objectives of better coordination of infrastructure planning and investment across the nation; and identifying and removing blockages to productive investment in infrastructure.
Well targeted, integrated, efficient infrastructure will help boost our productivity  -  ensuring that goods and services get to market as quickly as possible, and people get to and from work with minimal delay.
5. Lifting workforce participation
The fifth element of our plan to fight inflation is to put in place practical measures to help people re-enter the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard.
The Government recognises the importance of participation in lifting the productive capacity of the economy  -  this means knocking down the barriers which prevent people who would like to, from entering the workforce.
Ensuring that parents have access to affordable, high quality child care is one vital way my Government will support the workforce participation of parents with children.
From 1 July 2008 the Government will increase the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent of out of pocket child care costs, covering up to $7,500 per child per annum.
This is in addition to providing support to families through the Child Care Benefit.
The Child Care Tax Rebate will also be paid quarterly rather than annually so that families can receive this assistance closer to the time they pay their child care fees.
The Government will also improve access to child care, including for working families, through the establishment of up to 260 new long day care centres on school, TAFE, university and community sites.
Almost 100,000 Australian parents indicate that they are out of the workforce due to problems with formal child care.
The Government's child care policies will help thousands of this group get straight back into work, helping to lift the productive output of the economy.
The Government's skills and training policies will also lift workforce participation.
The 20,000 skills training places which will become available in April will all be directed towards people marginally attached to the labour force.
By ensuring more young Australians stay in school for longer, Trades Training Centres in schools will also increase the likelihood that thousands of school levers are able to move straight into work.
Ensuring that hard working individuals are rewarded for the effort is also critical to enhancing workforce participation.
The Government's tax relief for working families is specifically designed to encourage people into the work force, boosting participation and productivity, and ultimately helping to fight inflation.
We recognise that people have worked hard to make the economy strong, and they need to be rewarded.
The Government believes that the best way to encourage more people into work is to provide better incentives that reward their effort.
Lifting the Low Income Tax Offset, increasing the threshold of the 30 cent rate, reducing effective marginal tax rates and genuine tax reforms (as we articulated during the election campaign) will encourage more people into the workforce in the medium-term.
Initiatives that provide better incentives to bring people into the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard are critical if we are to address the capacity constraints hampering our economy and take the heat out of inflation.
Fighting inflation is the central challenge facing our economy today.
It is the central challenge facing the Government I lead.
The truth is we have inherited a significant inflation problem from our predecessors.
We recognise that inflationary pressures have taken a long time to build and they will take a long time to turn around.
But we have begun work immediately.
Today I've announced a comprehensive five point strategy to fight inflation by:
     * Embarking on a hardline approach to fiscal discipline - delivering a budget surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, provided growth prospects remain as currently anticipated.
     * Examining all options to provide real incentive to encourage private savings.
     * Tackling chronic skill shortages in the economy.
     * Providing national leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
     * Providing practical ways of helping people re-enter the workforce and removing disincentives to working hard - to lift workforce participation.
Fighting the fight against inflation is a core part of the Government's economic strategy.
Building world class education, innovation and infrastructure to meet the needs of the 21st century and to deliver long term productivity growth represents a further pillar of our strategy.
Together with investing in the new industries of the future.
Our government looks forward to meeting many of these challenges in year ahead.


PM: It's good to be here in Karratha and to have been up to the North West Shelf today with Martin Ferguson, the Minister for Resources and with Gary Gray, our Parliamentary Secretary for Northern Australia and Regional Development. The reason we're here today is to talk about infrastructure, and the critical role which we believe infrastructure plays in the nation's long term economic development. 
Infrastructure is fundamental to ensuring that projects like this one behind me here, get going and keep going. Obviously our major corporations do most of the work - but there is a role for national government coordination when it comes to the provision of key infrastructure around the country. What we're seeking to do is to ensure there is a partnership on that basis, long term between the Australian Government, the State and Territory Government's and with the private sector.
That's why yesterday, in Perth, at our first Cabinet meeting for 2008 Cabinet we decided to establish Infrastructure Australia. A statutory advisory council, established to audit the nation's infrastructure stock, determine an infrastructure priority list by year's end and thirdly, to work with State and Territory Government's and with the private sector on how those projects can be implemented and how they should be funded. This is something which business has called out for, for a long time. We've listened to those calls, we've listened also to the calls from State and Territory Government's and we've acted by establishing this body.
When I look at the enormous economic significance of regions such as this, not just to West Australia but to the nation at large, it reinforces the absolute importance of infrastructure for the country's future.
Here in the North West Shelf, this is a massive investment by Woodside and the North West Shelf Venture. Out there, where we've been to the platforms today, we've seen Rankin, we've seen Goodwyn and we've seen Kossack. And the overall exports from this facility - if you put it all together - are something like 12 billion dollars a year. It's a huge percentage in itself of what this Nation sells to the rest of the world.
Keeping the economy strong, partnering with our major resource companies and ensuring the economic infrastructure of the country is properly laid out. This is core business for the new Australian Government. And what we'll be doing throughout 2008 is ensuring that the infrastructure of this country is properly planned in the future to make sure the Australian economy is strong.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, the stock market has dropped another five per cent today, cause for alarm/concern? 
PM: Well we've seen the impact of the US sub prime challenge now flowing through to stock markets across the world, with big movements today in the United Kingdom, in France, in Germany, in Japan, in Hong Kong and of course in Australia as well. It causes us of course to emphasise again the absolute strength of the fundamentals of the Australian economy. Secondly, the fact that economic management, responsible economic management is core business for the Australian Government and that's why the economy was the absolute central focus of the first Cabinet meeting of the Government, yesterday in Perth, when we established Infrastructure Australia. 
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) The initial impact will be felt with Super funds and mum and dad investors, what are your thoughts about what could be done or how people could react to that? 
PM: Well the US sub prime crisis is working its way through stock markets around the world, we see movements in all of the major global stock exchanges in the last period of time and major movements within the last 12 to 24 hours. 
It's important, though at times like this that we emphasise again the strength of the fundamentals of the Australian economy. Economic management, responsible economic management is core business for this Australian Government, that's why yesterday we said that it's time for the National Government to exercise restraint to ensure that those fundamentals of the Australian economy are in good shape in the future as well.
JOURNALIST:  PM, what about skills, the staff here mentioned foreign workers as an idea, what do you think about that? 
PM: Well, we believe that if we're going to lay out a strong foundation for the future growth of the Australian economy, foundation number one is to make sure that we maintain robust budget surpluses. We've announced our intention on that yesterday. The second is to make sure that we have proper skills planning in Australia. To be blunt, this hasn't been done well in recent years. We need to fix that up. Working with business and working with State and Territory Government's to plan long term for the skills needs of the country. That's why, parallel to Infrastructure Australia we've undertaken to establish Skills Australia  -  to take a long range road map of what the skills needs of Australia will be long term. 
How do you respond to that? Greater investment in skills and training and of course calibrating the migration program as appropriate, to the skills needs of this economy and the national economy. The third pillar of our approach to the foundations of this economy long term, is to ensure that infrastructure is right as well.
Skills Australia, Infrastructure Australia, budget surpluses  -  core business for us.
JOURNALIST: PM, what infrastructure promises can you make to the people of the Pilbara in exchange for the contribution the region is making to the Australian economy. 
PM: What we've already said is that when these large projects start coming on stream, by which I mean, Pluto and  -  depending on the private sector proponents  -  Gorgon in time, we've already indicated that a slice of the revenue which comes to Canberra from those projects, will be sent directly into a WA infrastructure fund. Now that's going to accumulate over time and provide a further specific resource for investment and key infrastructure in West Australia. 
Beyond that however, with the work of Infrastructure Australia, let me tell you, here in the West where you contribute one third of this Nation's exports, here you invest so much in terms of this Nation's overall economic wellbeing, our belief as the Australian Government is that WA needs to get it's fair share.
That's why I'll be working closely with Resources Minister, Martin Ferguson and my Parliamentary Secretary here, Gary Gray and with Anthony Albanese, the Infrastructure Minister  -  to make sure WA is analysed thoroughly in the preparation of our first priority list. And that list will be concluded by year's end.
JOURNALIST:  Having said that, housing is at a crisis level in the Pilbara. It's a State issue, but how can your Government help the region's housing crisis? 
PM: Well, can I say that we have made one huge step forward as the new Australian Government. We've established a Department of Housing and a Minister of Housing. In the past, there was no Department of Housing and there was no Minister for Housing. So that's step number one. Step number two is, we already have four specific programs to assist with investment in housing, which we committed to prior to the election, concerning first home saver accounts, concerning affordable rental accommodation, concerning bringing down the infrastructure costs which local authorities often impose on new developments, and on top of that, the appropriate release of available Commonwealth land. These strategies have been put out by us prior to the election. We'll implement each and every one of them and people in this region, I believe, will be able to benefit from them as well. 
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd, Gordon Brown has suggested it is time to return to the honours system (inaudible) Knighthoods  -  in particular to acknowledge people like cricket stars (inaudible) what do you think about that sort of idea? 
PM: I actually haven't seen that report at all. You're talking about the UK or ... 
JOURNALIST:  I think it could apply here if you were backing it, would you like to see someone like (inaudible) 
PM: Sir Gary, Sir Martin? I don't think so, I don't think so. I don't think it's our way. 
(Inaudible)
We've got to head to the plane  -  this gentleman hasn't asked one yet.
JOURNALIST:  At a local level are Pilbara workers better off under a Rudd Government and a different Industrial Relations System? 
PM: Well, you know, all through last year and particularly working closely with people like Gary, we were working to develop an alternative industrial relations system for Australia which would ensure that working families got a fair deal. And to ensure that these large companies which employ workers also get a balanced outcome in the workplace. You know what? Our industrial relations policy, Forward with Fairness gets that balance right  -  we consulted very closely with the major resource companies here in the West. As well as a range of other large companies as well. 
We believe we got the balance right. Julia Gillard will be introducing that legislation early in the Parliament and we will of course be working very closely with industry and with the representatives of working families, to make sure that the implementation of that goes well.
I can say this, we believe that the balance is right  -  keeping the economy strong but making sure that working families get a fair shake as well.
ends


I will be holding a private meeting and working lunch with the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, the Hon Dr Derek Sikua MP in Canberra tomorrow (23 January, 2008).
Prime Minister Sikua arrived in Canberra this afternoon.
I welcome the opportunity for Australia and Solomon Islands to re-establish a close and cooperative relationship.
Canberra
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


It was with great sadness that I have learned of the passing of Heath Ledger.
It is tragic that we have lost one of our nation's finest actors in the prime of his life.
Heath Ledger's diverse and challenging roles will be remembered as some of the great performances by an Australian actor.
Our thoughts are with Heath's family and close friends, especially his two-year old daughter Matilda.
Canberra
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


Today I met with the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, the Hon Dr Derek Sikua MP in Canberra.
Prime Minister Sikua's visit is a welcome opportunity for Australia and Solomon Islands to re-establish a close and cooperative relationship.
Dr Sikua last week announced an ambitious agenda of domestic reform for the Solomon Islands.
Today we discussed how Australia's development assistance could best reinforce these reforms especially in health, other public services and vocational education. There will be more detailed discussions between our two governments on this.
Dr Sikua invited me to visit the Solomon Islands later this year, which I accepted.
I look to forward strengthening the relationship between our two countries and building a prosperous and secure future for the people of Solomon Islands.  
Australia remains committed to supporting Solomon Islands in its efforts to achieve economic growth and stability. 
I welcomed Dr Sikua's statements about the value of the bilateral relationship and the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
RAMSI is helping Solomon Islands achieve stability and security, good governance and economic reform and growth.
Australia has contributed some $1.3 billion to RAMSI since 2003. This also involves a substantial deployment of around 170 Australian Federal Police and State and Territory police supported by over 130 Australian Defence Force personnel.
Around 120 Australian civilian advisers are also working in and with the Solomon Islands public service. 
Canberra
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


The Australian Government has decided to provide additional assistance to those seriously affected by the floods.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) will be made available to those people adversely affected by the storms and associated flooding that commenced in the Mackay and Whitsunday region on 13 January and continued on to affect many areas of Queensland. 
Those eligible will be able to receive a one off payment of $1000 for adults and $400 for each child to help relieve their hardship.
The Australian Government will continue working with the Queensland Government and local community organisations to support people affected by the recent storms and floods.
The workers and many volunteers in and around the affected areas must be commended for their efforts to date.
There will be much work to do over the coming weeks and months for these communities to fully recover.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will provide financial assistance to people whose principal place of residence has been destroyed or significantly damaged, as well as those who have been seriously injured and hospitalised for more than 48 hours as a direct result of the floods.
This assistance is over and above the support being provided by the Australian Government under the long standing Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Through these arrangements with the states, the Australian  Government  assists with the costs and resourcing of response and recovery operations in large scale disasters.
The Australian Government today also approved further financial assistance to help small businesses and farmers through the enhanced component of the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) after a request from the Queensland Premier Anna Bligh.
 This additional assistance will provide registered small and home-based businesses, including farmers, who have experienced severe damage from floods, a grant of up to $10,000 or up to $25,000 in exceptional circumstances, depending on the extent or cost of losses.
 For further information on assistance available for personal hardship, contact the Queensland Department of Community Services on 1800 440 074.
For information on the AGDRP call the Australian Government Flood Assistance Hotline on 180 2333 or visit your local Centrelink office.
More information on Australian Government assistance is available at www.disasterassist.gov.au
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh today announced further financial assistance to help families hit by the impact of severe flooding in regional Queensland.
Mr Rudd said he had signed off on a special level of assistance under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) after a recommendation from Ms Bligh.
“I saw the impact of the floods first hand when I visited Charleville and have been in regular contact with Anna Bligh everyday to be briefed on the latest developments,” Mr Rudd said.
“Although areas such as Rockhampton are yet to experience the worst of the flooding, waters are beginning to subside in many other areas of the State and the full extent of damage is being revealed.
“Although the standard Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements already apply we believe special arrangements are warranted to assist small businesses and primary producers to fix the damage and get back on their feet
“That is why we have agreed to grants for registered small and home-based businesses, including farmers, of up to $10,000 or up to $25,000 depending on the extent or cost of losses.
“This money will help local businesses that have experienced severe damage from the floods with activities such as restocking, replanting and cleanup.”
Ms Bligh said eligibility criteria would be determined with the Commonwealth Government and further information would be available from the Department of Communities hotline on 1800 440 074.
She said the last time this funding assistance was activated was to aid in the recovery from Cyclone Larry.
She said the grants would be jointly funded by the Commonwealth and State and Governments on a 50/50 basis.
“NDRRA assistance had been activated for a further five local government areas today - Duaringa and Woorbinda in central Queensland and Booringa, Bungil and Roma Town local government areas in the State's south west.
“With these activations, there are now 51 local government areas where NDRRA assistance measures have been activated as a result of the monsoonal low.
“It also means that this month NDRRA has been activated in a total of 61 local government areas covering more than 72% or almost ¾ of the State's land area.”
 Ms Bligh said while floodwaters were receding in Emerald and work was continuing with the recovery and clean-up across the region, Emergency Management Queensland was closely monitoring projected flood levels for the Fitzroy River at Rockhampton.
Personal hardship assistance, aid to restore public assets, payments for counter disaster operations and assistance for primary producers and small businesses have already been activated under the joint State-Commonwealth NDRRA.
Under the personal hardship provisions, people affected by flooding in these local government areas can apply for grants of up to $160 per person and $740 per family for essentials such as food, dry clothes and accommodation.
Assistance for affected producers and small business is in the form of concessional loans of up to $150,000 as well as the new grants announced today.
Eligible producers can also apply for up to 50 per cent of their total freight costs.
Items for transport may include emergency fodder, building and fencing materials associated with primary production, machinery and equipment, water, and animals purchased for restocking. The maximum combined freight subsidy payment per property is $5000.
Prime Minister's Office  (02) 6277 7744 
QLD Premiers Office    (07) 3224 4500


STEFANOVIC: The Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, I'll just do a great Australian fly swat. Here we go (swats fly) I'm fine.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, good, good, good. Well there is some deep concern  -  before we get onto Australia Day  -  there is some deep concern about another interest rate rise here. Now, before the election you promised to do everything possible to ease some of those inflammatory economic pressures. What are you doing?
PM: Well Karl, you're right. We've got an inflation problem which has been emerging since the early parts of 2006. And, it's got bigger and we need to take action against it now that we've formed Government over the last six weeks.
Three things. Firstly, we're got to restrain what's called public demand. That means producing a very substantial Budget surplus which is why I gave a speech on Monday saying that come the Budget, our target  -  subject to global economic conditions  -  is to produce a Budget surplus of 1.5 per cent of Gross Domestic Product. That's to try and take some of the pressure off the Reserve Bank.
Two other things. Firstly, to outline our strategy for dealing with the skills crisis because that also helps. The Reserve Bank has been issuing warnings on this for years and years and years  -  twenty (warnings), in fact. And they've been ignored in the past. We need to act on that, and that's why we're, for example, moving to establish Skills Australia and to bring on new apprenticeships quickly.
Thirdly, on infrastructure bottlenecks. That also makes the job of the Reserve Bank harder and that's why in Perth again on Monday we established Infrastructure Australia, to nationally co-ordinate the delivery of major infrastructure projects across the country. That's part of our war against inflation. We've got to fight to fight to make the job of the Bank easier, but it's going to be a tough, tough challenge.
STEFANOVIC: Alright. Considering all of that, is it responsible to go ahead with the tax cuts when inflation is rising so sharply, those tax cuts that you promised?
PM: Well Karl, we take seriously our pre-election commitments to the Australian people. We said we're going to deliver those tax cuts and it would be quite wrong of us to walk away from those undertakings. But I tell you what, when we made those commitments, we also made sure that our other non-tax commitments to the Australian people leading up to the election were very modest, costing much less money than that which was put forward by the Government of the time  -  the Liberals. As a result of that, we are in a position - because of a hard line approach to savings, a modest set of pre-election commitments and now this determination to produce a very significant Budget surplus - we are in a capacity to deliver those tax cuts responsibly, and that's what we'll be doing.
STEFANOVIC: Now, despite the inflation levels at the moment, will you press ahead with those tax cuts and also the Family Tax Benefits?
PM: Well, all of our pre-election commitments remain in place and we don't walk away from any of them and will not walk away from any of them. I take seriously what you put to the people and therefore what has to be delivered to the people. But as I said, the other areas available to us to take pressure away from the Reserve Bank, and from monetary policy and therefore interest rates, is what do you do with your overall Budget surplus, what do you do in terms of savings and that's why Lindsay Tanner, the Finance Minister, is currently engaged in a razor gang exercise against all unnecessary expenditure in the Government. And on top of that, as I said before, acting as part of our five point plan  -  our five point plan of action  -  against inflation, working also on infrastructure and skills.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, some of these things are going to take a considerable amount of time, obviously, to have a flow on effect in the economy. Realistically, do you think Australians should be preparing for at least one interest rate rise?
PM: Well, Karl, I said repeatedly throughout 2007 that I was never going to put myself in the position  -  like my predecessors  -  of delivering public lectures to the Reserve Bank. You either accept the Reserve Bank's independence or you don't. What I can do is through Budget policy  -  the thing which I control  -  is take as much pressure off the Reserve Bank as possible. That is why we've committed to this very substantial  -  approximately $18 billion surplus  -  as a target for the upcoming Budget. And on top of that, act in these other areas. If you get all these things right then you can reduce the pressure. But I go back to the underlying point. These inflationary pressures have been coming up in the economy since early 2006. That's two years ago. We've been the Government now for six weeks. First speech I gave this year was outlining our five point plan of action against inflation. We're implementing it, and we're going to do everything that we can to take that pressure off. But at the end of the day, you can't turn the Queen Mary around overnight, it takes a while.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, well also, something that might take a while, are these industrial relations changes. You're looking at uniform national industrial relations reforms now. But that change is going to be some while off. And have you decided on them yet?
PM: Yes, we've been in close consultation with states and territories through the Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. And our view, Karl, is pretty simple. We have a national economy. If you're a business operating in Queensland or South Australia or Tassie, then it follows these days that you don't have to be all that big of a business to have  -  another great Australian salute, excuse me  -  it stands to reason that it's now probable that you're going to be operating in more than one state. And as I talk to small businesses right across Australia - medium sized business as well  -  one of the problems they face is these different regulatory environments from one state to another. And this actually represents an enormous compliance cost for business. It makes it harder for business to go out and earn a quid. One of those areas in industrial relations where you've got different state jurisdictions. That's why we in partnership with the states and territories will be moving towards a uniform national system, and Julia Gillard is doing excellent work in drawing all those threads together.
STEFANOVIC: Alright. And some other news that is dominating the headlines at the moment and we just want to draw you on if we may, Heath Ledger has dominated the news this week. Were you as shocked as the rest of us when you heard the news?
PM: Absolutely stunned. I was sitting with my family at the time and just thought, how could this happen? This is a bloke who just had his life and career ahead of him. Enormously talented, I'd seen some of his movies, and was a bit of a fan of his acting skills. This is just a tragedy, a tragedy that doesn't compare with that of his own family. So, look, I think this has just taken the nation's breath away. It took my breath away.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, thank you for that. And also in Emerald this morning we're hearing news of looting. Now, as a Queenslander and as an Australian, I guess like the rest of us you're absolutely appalled at that sort of behaviour considering the crisis they have been facing in the last few days?
PM: Yeah, well last Sunday I flew up to Charleville to work with Anna Bligh on just checking to make sure we'd done everything possible in terms of the preparations for the Warrego River there. At that stage, Emerald was just emerging as a challenge and I've been in virtually daily contact with Anna, the Queensland Premier, to make sure we can do what's physically possible to help all those families who have been dislocated by the floods. And, everyone in Emerald, we're watching carefully in terms of what their future needs will be.
But when I get this report this morning about looting in a town which has had the worst flood in its history, you've got more than a thousand people evacuated from their homes  -  it revolts me. It just absolutely revolts me that people could do this sort of thing. I'm confident that the Queensland Police will crack down on this like a tonne of bricks, and so they should.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, well said PM. I think everyone is thinking the same thing. Well the first Australia Day for you as Prime Minister  -  to change topics absolutely completely  -  what have you got planned for us?
PM: For Australia Day?
STEFANOVIC: No, I mean for us - Lisa and I (laughter).
PM: My plan for you guys?
STEFANOVIC: Your five point plan for us, that's all we're after. What have you got planned for the day?
PM: For today and for Oz Day itself?
STEFANOVIC: Yeah.
PM: Well, it's a big day today in Canberra. As you know, I'm sitting here on, I think it's your stage, the stage which will involve the concert for Australia Day tonight.
This morning, Therese and I and the family will be welcoming the finalists for the Australian of the Year to a morning tea over at the Lodge. Looking forward to that. This is one of the great things about Australia Day, it's the Australian of the Year award, because it really does encourage excellence right across the country. You don't have to agree with every point of view, every finalist or every person who has won the award, what's great is you celebrate the excellence of Australian achievements.
Tonight, the concert here, where the Australian of the Year is announced, looking forward to that. We've got the Veronicas playing I think, so we'll be singing along (inaudible)
STEFANOVIC: Now, now PM. We have to pull you up there. Do you know one of their songs?
PM: Um, I was talking to my daughter about this last night, Jess. Hang on. The one that they actually got going with is 4ever. So there you go.
STEFANOVIC: Oh! Nice. (Laughter).
WILKINSON: Well done. Excellent.
PM: Got you Karl, got you Karl.
STEFANOVIC: Yeah, yeah. You've got me a few times. They also said they were very keen on meeting the, quote, ‘K-Rudd', after the awards tonight. You are in with the Veronicas?
PM: Well, they're pals, I understand it  -  I'm looking forward to meeting the Veronicas, it'll be good fun  -  they're pals with Erin Swan, also from Brissie, who is Wayne's daughter and Erin sings with another group, Norma May. Gee, I hope I got the name of her group right. Something like that. Sorry Erin if I got it wrong! The Veronicas put music in my home town of Brissie right on the map. They're a great group I'm told by people in the age group, so I'm looking forward to meeting them.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, we look forward to seeing you and Therese dance away tonight and also we look forward to seeing you at the awards ceremony that Lisa and I will be hosting.
PM: Tomorrow, by the way, one final thing. Tomorrow morning, as in Australia Day itself, we have a flag raising in the national capital. And importantly, what will go on right across the country which is welcoming a whole bunch of people into the Australian family as they take up Australian citizenship and I think that is one of the great things about our national day. Looking forward to that enormously.
STEFANOVIC: It is. Thank you Prime Minister, appreciate your time.
PM: Thanks guys.


Australia Day is a time to celebrate our nation's past achievements.
And it's a time to embrace our nation's future.
This is a great country, rich in heritage and unlimited in its possibilities.
We should be deeply proud of our country.
Proud of Aboriginal culture, which represents the oldest continuing culture in human history.
Our explorers and our pioneers - brave men and women who settled this vast continent.
Our men and women in uniform who have given their lives and their service to defend Australia.
Our farmers, factory workers, business leaders; those who have fought for the rights of working families; our artists, our sporting heroes.
Our immigrants who have contributed so much to the diversity and vitality of Australia.
And then there is the family - the core and continuing unit of our society, which has underpinned so much of our national life together.
I am proud of this nation's past achievements.
And as Prime Minister, I am optimistic, supremely optimistic, about what our nation can achieve in the future.
As we look to the future our task is together is this, to build a modern Australia - an Australia capable of meeting the challenges that are being thrown at us for the future.
Because the challenges we face are great:
     * an uncertain economic outlook, globally
     * an increasingly competitive world, where we now face highly educated, highly trained, highly skilled workers right around the world;
     * new threats to our security;
     * unprecedented pressures on our health system,
     * our ageing population;
     * the great challenge of climate change;
     * and how to achieve effective reconciliation, so that we can all move forward together - Aboriginal and non Aboriginal Australia.
These challenges are great.
But as a country we have faced great challenges in the past.
And as a people, we have always prevailed.
We have prevailed because of the enduring set of values that have shaped us as a country.
Values of independence, values of freedom, of resilience, enterprise and hard work.
At the same time, values of looking out for one another, of mateship and compassion.
And the value of a fair go for all  -  that great Australian value.
These values remain the bedrock of our nation  -  they have forged our past and they will fortify our future.
As we go forward into the future we must draw on these values to build a modern Australia.
A modern Australia capable of meeting head on the challenges of the future.
A modern Australia secure, competitive, compassionate and creative - that becomes even more the envy of the entire world.
And why? Because in one country we are capable of combining two ideas: that working for ourselves and our families is not incompatible with working for our community and our country.
This is the great ethos that is Australia.
But the truth is we can only build a modern Australia by doing it together.
We must draw together the nation's talents, the nation's ideas, the nation's energies to imagine what the nation can still become.
Government is not the fountain of all knowledge.
If we are to build a modern Australia to face the challenges of the future we need to harness our best brains, our best ideas, all for the national good.
And that is what we must now do.
I am an optimist about Australia's future.
Let's together seize the opportunities that lie before us.
To realise Australia's potential as a nation  -  and the individual potential of every member of the Australian family.
Therese and I and our family would like to wish everyone a very happy and a very safe Australia Day 2008.


Your Excellency, Mrs Jeffery, distinguished guests, members of the great Australian family, including the respected family of Aboriginal Australia, within our nation.
Australia Day. There is I think, a great, unrestrained, almost unbridled optimism, almost joy - in fact, unbridled joy - about the way in which we celebrate this day, Australia day. I think that says something about the people we are. It says something about  -  we are a nation of youth, a nation of energy and a nation of ideas and of optimism.
A nation which believes its best days lie ahead of us. And its not just here in the nation's Capital  -  but its wonderful to see so many thousands turn out here in this great community of Canberra today.
Its from Cape York to Cape Lewin, its from the vast expanses of the inland through to the foreshores of Sydney Harbour. Our cities, our towns, the bush. It's the backyard barbeques and its learned academic symposia. All celebrating this one thing. This nation, this country this idea that we call Australia.
Within that we have so much to celebrate and be proud of in terms of this nations achievements. For this day, Australia Day is about celebrating our heritage, its about pausing for a moment to reflect on how we best chart our future.
When we reflect on this heritage we are proud, intensely proud of this nation's Aboriginal heritage. We stand in awe at the dreaming. We stand in awe at the fact that among us, is the world's oldest continuing culture. We stand in awe as we hear the songs and the sounds and the stories and the music which have come down to us from antiquity. We stand in awe at the rock art in the Kimberley's and beyond. Rock art older, more ancient that anything we find in the ancient caves of France and of Spain. There is much to celebrate. In terms of Aboriginal Australia, giving us so much of our continuing identity as Australians.  And we celebrate the fact that this great people have endured, have endured the shock of European settlement and we are honoured to share this great south land with Indigenous Australia.
We celebrate also the great pioneers and settlers who have opened up this great vast land, we celebrate those who have crafted this great Australian democracy, those who have brought to us the great heritage of the independence of the law.
We celebrate those who have gone out and defended this democracy. Our men and our women in uniform, in countless conflicts through the decades of this nation's federated history and still today in fields as far flung as Iraq and Afghanistan and Timor and the Solomons and the Sudan.
We celebrate the achievements of our farmers who have been doing it tough, our business leaders, those who fight for the interests of working families. Those who are out there are as creators and artists and scientists and innovators, our great sporting men and women. We have so much to celebrate.
In celebrating this, we turn our gaze to the future. A young country with so many pages yet to be written in our national story.
The challenges are great, you hear us speak of them so often. Challenges of climate change, challenges of global economic uncertainty, challenges of an ageing population. Challenges far and wide and deep.
But we are fortified in meeting these challenges of the future by this: that we are a people energised by the values which have been written large across the fabric of our history. Which form the continuing thread across that fabric. Values which speak to our independence, our robust sense of freedom. Values which speak of our reward of hard work, achievement and success. But values equally which go to our ability to show care and compassion for those who need a helping hand.
And the great idea and the great concept, the great reality that is Australia is that we as a people and as a nation bring these values together and say in one sentence, we can work hard for ourselves and our families and not see that as a contradiction, in looking after our fellow human beings  -  working hard for our community and for our country.
We, in this great south land bring these great stories together in one people.
Of course, when you go to the challenges of the future and see how rich and deep and sometimes, daunting they appear, we must have about us this idea to build a modern Australia, drawing on these great values which have informed our past and ensuring that this nation is equipped to deal with all the challenges which lie ahead of us.
As Prime Minister of this country I am confident that we can do that. But we can do that by this and this alone, reaching out and calling forth the talents of the nation.
As I stand here and look at this crowd of assembled achievers and those of you in worker day lives across this community in Canberra and across the nation, everyone has something to offer this nation of ours Australia.
And we can only build a modern Australia capable of facing the challenges of the future if we as the nation call forth the ideas, the intelligence and the energies and the enthusiasm of the nation. I said last night that I do not believe that Government has a monopoly on wisdom, and those in the crowd quickly called back  -  in fact government has no monopoly on any wisdom. And there may be some truth in that.
But it goes to a deep Australian truth is so much wisdom lies beyond the doors of Government and my invitation on this our national day is to come forth from the nation with the ideas and the talents and the energies which you wish to contribute to the nation's building.
Which brings me to our new citizens today. Today across Australia some 14 000 people are becoming new members of our national family. On behalf of the Government of the nation, I have one word to say. Welcome.
You are welcome to join this great Australian family. Each and every one of  you. Because in charting our future history we need to draw on your talents, your enthusiasm, your energy and your ability. Each and every one of you.
Those 14 000 people who become members of the Australian family are joined by one in Emerald in flood stricken Queensland, where there is an Australia Day ceremony today. Put your hands together for the people of Emerald.
We welcomed and honoured the excellence of the Australian of the Year and the Australians of the Year last night and those who reached the finals in the great national competition. But their achievement and their success is made real for us because they have about them, a culture of service. They wish to serve the community they wish to serve the nation.
And as I look to those who are becoming members of the Australian community today, we welcome you, but there is a condition.
We want you to serve as well. Bring forth your talents, your energy, your enthusiasm to the great task of building our nation into the future. And that's all we ask.
As we look ahead to the future, let us have about us this idea, build this modern Australia drawing on the values which have fortified our past and which will fortify our future. And do so in a way which carves out a nation in the future which remains more than ever the envy of the world, and always with this idea. To remain as Australia, an overwhelming force for good in the world.
Let's together, advance Australia and let's together advance Australia fair.
I thank you.


On behalf of the Government and people of Australia I extend to the President and people of the Republic of Indonesia our condolences on the passing of former Indonesian President Soeharto. 
Former President Soeharto was one of the longest-serving heads of government of the last century and an influential figure in Australia's region and beyond. 
He presided over the government of what is the world's fourth most populous country and its largest Islamic nation. 
Until the catastrophic Asian financial crisis of 1997, he oversaw a period of significant economic growth and modernisation at a time when Indonesia faced fundamental political, social and economic challenges. 
He was influential in the successful development of the Association of South-east Asian Nations (ASEAN) and of APEC.  
The former president was also a controversial figure in respect of human rights and East Timor and many have disagreed with his approach. Now the world's third largest democracy, Indonesia is a close friend and neighbour with which Australia shares vital political and security interests.
Indonesia's success as a modern democracy is a major interest not just to Australia, but to our region and the world.
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


The Rudd Government will develop a comprehensive, long-term plan to tackle homelessness as a matter of national priority.
The Government will build on its $150 million election commitment to construct new homes for Australians in crisis accommodation by developing a White Paper on how Australia can systematically reduce homelessness over the next decade.
Given the urgency the Rudd Government attaches to reducing homelessness, the Prime Minister has directed that the White Paper be completed by August.
The Prime Minister has appointed Tony Nicholson, Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence, to lead a Steering Committee of experts to oversee the process. 
Additional members of the Steering Group will be appointed in the coming weeks.
The Prime Minister, who will tonight speak at the launch of a public appeal for St Vincent de Paul, said it was clear the Australian Government must do more to prevent homelessness.
“As I have been visiting homelessness shelters across the country, I have become convinced of the need for a new approach to homelessness.
“After 16 years of economic growth, it is unacceptable that on any one night 100,000 Australians are homeless.
“10,000 of those Australians are children under the age of 12.
“The United Kingdom and some parts of the United States have achieved major reductions in homelessness. Some Australian States and Territories have already begun to run services that build on this work.
“We need a new approach that prevents homelessness, improves crisis services, helps people to get long term secure housing and stops the cycle of homelessness.'
“One of our first priorities must be to dramatically reduce the number of Australians sleeping rough each night.
“It is estimated that around 14,000 Australians are in this terrible situation.
“We must also work to better connect homeless shelters with mainstream services  -  housing, health and most importantly, the world of work.
”This means Government, business, community and charitable groups  -  a whole of community effort.”
The Government has already committed $150M to build 600 new homes for people in crisis accommodation and $2.8M to run social and community programs such as the renowned ‘Choir of Hard Knocks'.
The Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek, will have responsibility for the Green Paper, the consultation process and completing a White Paper that will provide a plan of action for the next decade.
Media contact: 02 6277 7744 


PM: Well, Tanya and I are here today to talk about one thing, and that's homelessness. We've just heard from the Choir of Hard Knocks and they are part and parcel of how the nation, through its community sector is responding to homelessness. 
Today we see the human face of homelessness and disadvantage. Tanya and I have been to a number of centres around the country in recent months and we've seen the real challenges on the ground. And it's something that you can either push to one side and sweep under the carpet or you can say, actually, this is just dead wrong. We need to do something about it.
Tanya and I are quite passionate about doing something about it. We don't believe it's something which a country as wealthy as ours in the 21st Century can just ignore.
It's dead wrong that in a country as wealthy as ours, we have 100,000 people who are classified as homeless. It's dead wrong that a country such as ours and as wealthy as ours, 10,000 of those homeless people are children. It's dead wrong that in a country as wealthy as ours that on any given night some 14,000 people are sleeping rough. It's just dead wrong.
We shouldn't be allowing this to happen. A lot of people say, well, you know, you can't fix it, you can't do anything about it, its just part and parcel of things. Well, I don't buy that. I don't think you can fix the whole thing, but let me tell you we can do a hell of a lot better than we're doing right now.
Before the election we talked a lot about housing and housing policy and part of that was how we deal with the challenge of crisis accommodation. In our engagement with the homelessness sector then, the big demand put to us as a matter of urgency was to provide funding to build more crisis accommodation. We've allocated 150 million dollars to do that and that will be unfolded and implemented. But you know the problem is much bigger than that and that's why you will see in this document we put together today, Homelessness: A New Approach, our approach to dealing with this challenge comprehensively in the year ahead.
You see, if you're looking at the dimensions of this, 100,000 people, 14,000 people sleeping rough, it's not something you just throw bits and pieces at. You've actually got to come up with an integrated solution to the overall challenge of homelessness. Mental health, mental illness is a big factor at work in this overall challenge. Family break up, relationship break up is a big factor in the overall homelessness challenge. Domestic violence is a big factor in the homelessness challenge. The absence of proper employment opportunities and training opportunities is a big factor in the homelessness challenge.
It's not just a question of saying, here's a building, put all the homeless people in it. It doesn't work that way. It's saying, here are a group of our fellow Australians who need actually, a hand up. We can do that effectively by  making sure we get the overall policy analysis right and then go forward with an integrated solution for the future.
So the first white paper to be commissioned by this new government of Australia will be a white paper on homelessness. And we are commissioning, Tanya and I, Tony Nicholson, the executive director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence to chair the group which will put together much of this white paper for us. The reason we've decided to do this is because we want a complete analysis and a complete policy response across all levels of government, because we want this to work in the future.
I've said to many of you before, in the election campaign and since, I'm not interested in being the Prime Minister of Australia for the sake of being here. Frankly, I'm just not. I want to be here in order to make a difference and this is one area where we as a nation can make a difference, if we get it right.
So rather than go off half-cocked and throw something at it next week or the week after, we're going to be engaged now in a six month process or slightly longer, with this white paper being finalised in August of this year, which will involve extensive, extensive consultation across the entire homelessness sector, all those factors which are influencing homelessness and what we must do about it.
And I conclude on this before throwing to Tanya for further comment. Those figures that I gave you before, 100,000, 14,000 sleeping rough, 10,000 children: they all come from the old Census data. It's already five or six years old. The earliest evidence from the new Census data is that it's getting worse.
So here we have a situation where as the country gets wealthier, homelessness gets worse. Something needs to be done. I do not want to live in a country where we simply discard people. I don't want to live in a country where we accept people begging on the streets is somehow acceptable in the Australian way of life. I don't want to live in a country where, like many I visit around the world, it's acceptable for people to be sleeping rough every night. We're not like that. This is the Australia Day weekend, Australia is not like that and we intend to make a difference.
TANYA PLIBERSEK: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Some of you probably wouldn't know that during the election as, probably the busiest time of Kevin Rudd's life, he was taking time out, more than once, very quietly in the evenings to visit homelessness shelters around the country. I visited a couple with him, I went to one in my own electorate of Surry Hills where late on a Sunday night after a very busy week, what he did was sit there for an hour and three quarters, listening to the stories of the people who were living in the Mission Australia home in Surry Hills. Not because there were cameras there, not because it would make a good story, but because from day one, this Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has had a serious commitment to substantially reducing homelessness in this country.
It's not as simple as putting roofs over the heads of those people that appear on the homelessness data. It is a more complex problem than that. What we need to do is vastly improve our homelessness prevention services. If we can stop people becoming homeless in the first place, everyone benefits. Secondly, we need to expand and improve our crisis services.
Crisis services need to be more than a roof over a person's head for a night. Those services need to provide wrap around support for people. Whether it's education, employment, mental health services, dental services, health services, pathways back into society so that people don't return to homelessness.
The third thing we need to do is provide exit points from those crisis services. We actually have people staying in some crisis services much longer than they need to because there is simply no where for them to go.
Private rental accommodation is scarce and expensive. The previous government watched for ten years while rental vacancy rates dropped and dropped and the frank truth is, there are many people who cannot find a place to go when they leave crisis services and many of them return to homelessness.
The fourth thing we need to do is prevent the cycle of homelessness. We have an intergenerational cycle of homelessness, where homeless children are more at risk of becoming homeless teenagers and then homeless adults. We can stop that with appropriate support when kids are still young  -  making sure that they stay engaged at school so that they don't grow up not knowing how to read and write properly.
We also need to stop the cycle of homeless that sees people repeatedly using services. We know at the moment that only about ten per cent of people who leave homelessness services leave with a job. I think we can improve that rate quite dramatically but there aren't simple solutions. If the solutions were simple, someone would have fixed this already.
That's why we're getting one of the most skilled and dedicated workers on homelessness, Tony Nicholson to chair the steering committee that will deliver a white paper on homelessness.
This is historic. This will set the direction for homelessness policy for decades to come and it's aimed at seriously reducing, ending homelessness for many homeless Australians.
We know that in the United States and in the United Kingdom, they've made serious inroads into reducing the number of rough sleepers by taking an approach that gives all of those supports, that moves people on from homelessness back into society. I believe we can do that here, with this methodical, planned approach and with the commitment that this Prime Minister has shown.
As well as this white paper, we have committed today to an extra $2.8 million to RecLink the organisation behind this fantastic, Choir of Hard Knocks. We've committed in the past to a nation Rental Affordability Scheme to begin to make a dent on this problem of unaffordable rentals. That's 50,000 new rental properties for low to middle income earners.
And as I have said, we've got the white paper, and our crisis accommodation program - 600 new crisis homes in a place to call home. I am very excited by the potential we have here to make a dent, a serious dent on homelessness in Australia.
JOURNALIST: How much of this would normally have been the province of state governments?
PM: Well look, you know I said a lot last year about ending the blame game. This is about doing that in the case of homelessness. State and Territory Government's have responsibilities through public housing programs and their funding assistance to various community housing projects, but the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement is that, it's a partnership between the Commonwealth and the States. 
But you know, we have actually got to stand back from this and say, it's in part the physicality of having enough accommodation, but it's everything related to that as well, so that you don't have this recurring cycle of homelessness.
If we get both those things right, enough stock - rental and community housing - for homelessness and for people who are challenged in terms of housing affordability, and at the same time are dealing with the things which enable people to get back on their own feet, with marvellous programs like we see here, I think we may be able to achieve some steps forward.
JOURNALIST:   This will take a lot of resources, a lot more than 150 000 million dollars I imagine. What sort of resources are you prepared to put into solving this issue?
PM: Well, I am rather, ‘get the policy right first'. I actually like to get to the guts of it first. I have been criticised in the past for believing in evidence based policy, but I actually think it's not a bad way to go. With this big problem - I think no one would disagree that it is a problem  -  there is a very large sector out there, a lot of good people involved. I am into the business as you have heard me say in speeches in recent days, of actually harvesting the nation's talents and ideas and energy and out there in the community sector, and those in the private financial sector, who have a commitment to making a difference with homelessness, I think we can actually harness the best brains in the country  -  get the analysis right, get the policy right  -  and this government will then get in there, putting it should to the wheel, when it comes to the public finance necessary to make it work.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Will your apology also include any form of compensation?
PM: What we've said before, and haven't changed our position at all  -  the key thing is to build a bridge with Indigenous Australia through an apology, through saying sorry, because that bridge is a pathway to respect, restoring respect. And then, once we cross that bridge, what we want to do then is to make sure through our policy of closing the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australia that we the government, get in behind education programs, health programs and  whole range of other programs to make sure that that gap is closed.
Having said that, I have always said that for us, we can do that in the absence of any compensation arrangement. Of course, we believe that the key thing when it comes to life expectancy and infant mortality rates in indigenous people, that is a huge and immediate challenge. I would rather get all that right than sort of start hairing off in other directions.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to those of the stolen generation who would like you to, as part of your apology, implement the full recommendations of the Bringing Them Home report?
PM: I think the key thing is to build a bridge of respect between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australia. Rather than sweep that to one side - get it right. But having got that far and recognised the enormous contribution of indigenous Australia to our identity, then to address head on the huge gaps which exist in health and in education and in life expectancy outcomes. And you can do that effectively, nationwide through a combined effort, right across governments. That's where my efforts lie. That's what I am committed to and as I said before, I have said this many times before the election and I have certainly said it since, that's where our emphasis lies. And there's nothing different in what I am saying now on the question of compensation to what I have said on multiple occasions prior to that.
JOURNALIST: How much of a priority is it for you to say sorry compared to an issue say, of homelessness?
PM: Well listen, I think lets not sort of start constructing totem polls of who is further up and who is not. There are a whole bunch of social needs in Australia. Getting effective reconciliation right is one. Dealing with this huge challenge of homelessness is another. I want to achieve real, measurable changes in Australia. And these are two areas where I believe we can do it. 
And on homelessness, can I say this. Every one of you, out there in journalism land, looking at me right now, every one of you has an equal risk of becoming homeless yourselves. As I have gone around with Tanya and spoken to individuals in homeless shelters around the country, I am stunned by the life stories of people, in terms of what they were doing when they hit the brick wall - through factors way beyond their control, often  -  and having to pick themselves up again. So that's why I am dead set serious about getting this one right. And guess what, it can happen to each and every one of us.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible - Adam Gilchrist retiring
PM:   Gilly's decision to retire is a huge loss to cricket and to Australia. I rang Gilly just before coming here to talk to you guys and as his Prime Minister, said, Gilly, you need to reconsider, he told me wasn't'.
But he is a fantastic player on the field. Anyone who can register an average of nearly 50 and have the world record when it comes to catches as a keeper. This is an outstanding piece of talent. But the Gilly story doesn't stop there. Fantastic cricketer, fantastic human being. His work in the charitable sector is right out there.
And so I said to him on the phone before, that apart from what he is focussing on right now, which is the game, that we'd like to engage him further in the future given his outstanding work so far in reaching out to people who need help. He is a first class human being, a great loss to Australian cricket.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:   As has been the case ever since that report came down and prior to it, any individual can of course initiate their own actions through the courts of the land. That's open to any Australian citizen, including those (inaudible) former subjects of the Bringing Them Home report. I am not standing in the road of that, people can pursue their own legitimate legal remedy.
What I am saying as the new government of Australia is, here are two big priorities for the nation.
One is, lets achieve some effective reconciliation. Let's say sorry, let's get that right, let's build some respect. Then, let's do something real about closing the gap.
And every one of the indigenous communities I travel to around the country over the years - let me tell you  -  we have actually got to act. It's a disgrace. We need to fix this. We need to deal with it. And that's where my priority lies, in closing the gap. That means new approaches to fixing the problems in indigenous health, indigenous education, protection of children, some of which are on trial currently in the Northern Territory intervention. Thanks very much  -  ah very last one, then I have got to zip, because I will get into strife, I'm due at home, ten minutes ago.
JOURNALIST:   (Inaudible) once and for all have a national system that really drives productivity across all sectors
PM: Well the key request I have got from the business community, all throughout 2007 is, they want a national system for the private economy. And pardon me for being old fashioned but my commitment to them in the election period was to do that. And I said consistently in the period last year that when it came to the public sector, that could be handled elsewhere. We actually take seriously what we said and we mean what we said and we intend to do that.
ends


MEL: The Prime Minister joins us now from Canberra. Good morning to you, Mr Rudd.
PM:   Good morning Kochie, good morning Mel. Happy New Year and to your viewers. 
MEL: To you too
PM: Did you have a good break?
MEL:Yeah we had a lovely break, it was really good, came back refreshed. As have you I am sure. Tell us about the apology. Will you be making it when Parliament resumes on February 12? 
PM: What we're trying to do is do it as early as possible in the parliamentary term. We haven't finally set dates yet. We are in the process of talking to as many indigenous groups across the country as possible. We want to get this right. 
The objective is to just build this bridge of respect between indigenous and non-indigenous Australia so that we can get on with the business of closing the gap in terms of life expectancy, education levels and health levels between indigenous and non-indigenous communities.
MEL: Kevin it's such an emotional issue for a lot of people, not only for indigenous Australians but for a lot of white Australians as well. What do you say to people out there saying "Mate, we have got nothing to apologise for, it happened a long time ago, why do we need to say it?" 
PM: Well look this apology will be delivered on behalf of the Government, ok and therefore we will be making it clear that we will be speaking in the Government's name. 
The views of individual Australians, of course they are entitled to hold because we have got a wonderful democracy.
Why have we been long term committed to this  -  and I was very up front about this prior to the election, there are no surprises here, I have said this beforehand was what we'd be doing, is because as I travel around the country this is unfinished business.
It's very hard to get to the point of then engaging with every indigenous community on the practical future challenges of closing, for example, the infant mortality gap - aboriginal kids, three times more likely to die under the age of 5 than a non-indigenous kid. And the same on literacy, numeracy, all those basic tests.
So the judgment I have made and we as the Government made is, let's get this symbolic act of apology right and then let's move on together. If I have got a vision for the country, is that aboriginal Australia, non-aboriginal Australia moving forward to fix the practical challenges on the ground in those communities.
KOCHIE:  So what you're saying is, you're finding out in Aboriginal communities, when you want to help on literacy, help on health, they've - it's the wrong description - but they sort of have got a bit of a bee in their bonnet about the apology thing. So, we need to need to get that out of the way before all sides start working through these bigger issues which I think we all think we all agree, that we have got to resolve? 
PM: Yeah. Both symbols and substance are important. That's just the truth of it. Not every indigenous community raises this with me, but a lot of them do. And what I am trying to do  -  and it's very tough because so many indigenous groups across the country have different views - but we will try and get this language right, we'll try and do it as early as possible so that we can all cross that bridge of respect, mutual respect and get on with these massive practical challenges in communities. 
MEL: Kevin, one last one on this issue because I want to cover a few things with you. The other word is compensation. So many emails are coming in from our viewers saying they fear that this is going to open up a floodgate of compensation claims. Is that a misguided fear?
PM: We will not be establishing any compensation fund. I said that before the election, I say it again. And since the Stolen Generation report came out years and years ago, it has been open for any individual, Aboriginal person affected by that to engage their own legal actions through the courts of their State or Territory. That's fine. But at the level of national Government, we will not be establishing any compensation fund.
This is about getting the symbolic covenant, if you like, between indigenous and non-indigenous Australia right and then moving on. When it comes to future funding commitments from the Government that I lead, it will be about fixing health, fixing schools and fixing communities in a very practical way on the ground, in partnership with local aboriginal leadership.
KOCHIE: Ok, terrific. Let's turn to another issue another issue that you are passionate about, and we are glad you are passionate about it - is this issue of homelessness. One hundred thousand people homeless every night in this country is just staggering. You promised a 10-year plan to tackle the problem. What are you going to do to make this happen? We talked to the bloke you put in charge, Tony from the Brotherhood of St Laurence yesterday - terrific bloke. What do you expect from it?
PM: Well, you're right in terms of the problem being there. I spoke about this quite often last year and we know how complex it is. I just take a basic view, you can't fix all these problems straight away and you can't fix them totally. But I think we can do as a nation much better on this.
When we speak with people who are dealing with homeless communities right now like St Vincent de Paul  -  and I was attending their fundraising launch here in Canberra the other night - the Salvation Army and others in front line services, what we find is, there is an immediate lack of crisis accommodation, that's one thing.
The turn away rate right now across Australia in many of the crisis centres in Sydney and Melbourne and elsewhere, is huge. So people present with nowhere to go. The majority of them are still being turned away. That's a real problem. That's one thing we have got to fix straight up.
The other thing is this. The big problem is repeat homelessness. You find someone crisis accommodation and then before you know it, after they have been there for a bit, they go out and they come back.
That's because we haven't dealt with problems of mental health, problems of mental health, dental health - a lot of the folk that I have run into have real dental health challenges which is why we are re-establishing the Commonwealth dental health scheme  -  and on top of that basic skills training to try and get people back into work.
So we're trying to look at this at both levels, producing a Government white paper by August, September this year and that's when we will announce our long-term strategy for dealing with it.
MEL: We'll look forward to when that comes out. Next issue Kevin, citizenship. The new citizenship test starts today. There is talk you are going to remove the question about Sir Donald Bradman. Any other bits that you might take out? What are you unhappy with in the test?
KOCHIE:  Why don't you give them a handbook to explain who Sir Don is before they do the test? You can't drop him.
PM: Look, I am unaware of any plans on our part to give the Don the axe. I'm not lining up in that camp. What Chris Evans the Migration Minister has quite rightly said - and remember we backed this in opposition - that having a test with appropriate questions was the right way to go. We think it is right to test people's knowledge and their sense of commitment to the country, in a basic way. The Americans do it, the British do it, I think the Canadians do it. 
We want to try and make sure after having been through it the first time and 90% of people having passed, we want to make sure we've just got it all right. So, three months time or so, we will come back in terms of any future changes to the test. But the concept and direction is right and we supported that in the past. We just want to make sure all the detail are right for the future. I think the Don is safe.
MEL: Fantastic. I've got to ask you before we let you go, how is the new house going? Is all your furniture fit and everything works OK, the Lodge?
PM: Yeah, we've restrained Abby the wonder dog from digging up the garden, which was a big challenge for the last two weeks. She is a golden retriever who seems to be retrieving a lot of things from the yard at the moment. 
MEL: You'll never know what she'll find. Do you get to move most of your own furniture in or is it sort of, pretty much full?
PM: Well when Mr and Mrs Howard showed us around the Lodge, it's quite plain, there is a lot of stuff which just stays there from one Prime Minister to the next, and that's good. But you want to actually make it feel like home so we have brought some stuff from Brissie as well. And things that remind you of where you have come from. We are all settling in pretty well. The little bloke Marcus starts school next week. So that will be the next big challenge and supervising his homework. 
MEL: Good luck with that.
PM: We have all been there. 
KOCHIE:  Exactly right, exactly. Alright Kevin. Thanks for joining us.
PM: Thank you for having us on the program.
ends


The Prime Minister and Minister for Education, today announced the appointment of Professor Barry McGaw as Chair of the government's new National Curriculum Board.
The Board will be established by 1 January 2009, and will oversee the development of a world-class curriculum for all Australian students from kindergarten to Year 12, starting with the key learning areas of English, mathematics, the sciences and history.
There has been a longstanding need for a single, high quality national curriculum in Australia. The Rudd Government is today acting on this need.
Australia currently has 34 separate organisations contributing to the development of curricula and more than 18 different senior History and English courses.
This has created significant disparities in educational attainment between states and territories.
Student achievement in maths and science and literacy and numeracy benchmarks varies widely between each state and territory. For example:
     * New South Wales is the only state to better the average of Year 8 students reaching the advanced international benchmark in maths and science.
     * There is a 26% difference between states and territories in the proportion of Year three students who meet national reading benchmarks.
School retention rates also vary between jurisdictions with less than seven out of every ten students completing year 12 in some states compared to more than eight out of ten in others.
The National Curriculum Board will draw together the best programs from each state and territory into a single curriculum to ensure every child has access to the highest quality learning programs to lift achievement and drive up school retention rates.
It will also reduce disruption for the 80,000 students who commence school each year in a new state or territory, particularly our Defence families.
We need to ensure children get the basics right, but we also need to focus on the achievement of excellence.
We want to develop a rigorous national curriculum that helps Australian students and Australian schools compete internationally.
This requires that we lift standards not reduce them.
The new National Curriculum Board will comprise representatives from each of the states and territories, and three representatives from the Catholic and Independent sectors.
Professor McGaw is a renowned educational expert with considerable experience at both a national and international level. 
The government is delighted that Professor McGaw has agreed to contribute this considerable expertise and lead the new National Curriculum Board in its development of a world-class national curriculum.
Professor McGaw is currently the Director of the University of Melbourne's new Melbourne Educational Research Institute, and formerly Director of Education in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development based in Paris.
Professor McGaw has expressed his enthusiasm at the opportunity to work collaboratively with the education community to ensure all young Australians are equipped with the essential skills, knowledge and capabilities to thrive and compete in a globalised world.
Canberra
Contact: 02 6277 7744 


PM:   Prior to the last election, we committed to an education revolution. And the reason we did so was because we need to build a modern Australia, capable of taking on the challenges of the 21st century. And that means, having as an objective for Australia, creating a world class education system. 
That's core business for this new government.
Part of that vision was that we would establish a national curriculum board, with the objective of developing a new national curriculum for Australia.
Why are we doing that?
The reason we are doing that is because right around the country this week, we've got some 80,000 kids who are starting schools in a different state or territory.
If you are a mum or dad or carer for those kids, there are a whole lot of problems in moving from one state or territory to another because, frankly, the curriculums don't speak to each other. There's a problem.
There's another problem as well and it goes to the whole question of curriculum rigour. Now you've heard Julia and I speak about this on many occasions over the last 12 months. And it's near and dear to our hearts.
If we're going to have a world class education system, it means that we've got to have a highly rigorous curriculum. You look at some of the international benchmarking; only in New South Wales at the year 8 advance international benchmark in maths and science, is better than the international average. The other states and territories are not.
If you go to national reading benchmarks, there's something like a 26 per cent difference between our best achieving states and territories and our least achieving states and territories. There's a problem.
We need to be world class and for that we need a world class curriculum and we need a national curriculum.
There's a further element as to why we are doing this as well. That goes to the overall challenge we face when it comes to school retention levels. These in Australia have stagnated at 75 per cent. You look around the country, in some states and territories, it's something less than 70 per cent. In some it's better than 80 per cent. Our target is 85 per cent and to ultimately build it to 90.
Why is that?
There is clear, indisputable international evidence that the more we have kids retained through to year 12 or year 12 equivalent, then the better the outcome for them personally and the better the overall contribution to the economy.
And there's a wealth of data out there to support that. So three core reasons: mums and dads, and moving from state to state and as our workforce becomes more mobile, this is going to become more and more of a challenge for working families; second we need a rigorous curriculum which is internationally competitive to lift the standards; and thirdly, we've also got to lift our achievement when it comes to year 12 or equivalent retention, because that's one of the best predictors of long term economic capacity.
So what are we going to do?
We're going to  -  as we promised pre election  -  appoint a national curriculum board. And I am pleased today to announce that professor Barry McGaw from the Melbourne Education Research Institute, will be Chairman of this Board.
Prior to that appointment, Barry has also served as the Director of Education at the OECD in Paris. He is one of Australia's foremost educators and we believe he is highly qualified to undertake what will be a significant piece of work for the nation.
He will be supported by a 12 person, or he'd be a member, of a 12 person board which will be drawn from the states and territories as well as from the Catholic and Independent sectors.
And we have done this, and will be doing this, on a consultative basis.
In terms of the task ahead, it's formidable. This is an area of work which historically has been paved with good intentions, but very little outcome.
Our intention is to make a difference, but it is going to be very hard and we recognise that. But the objective we've set is for a national curriculum in the four key subject areas of English, History, Maths, Science  -  to be delivered, as we are starting now in early ‘08  -  by early '11.
Three year task, it'll be tough, and very intensive work. Of course we have a second tranche of work as well, subsequent to that and that goes to subject areas such as Geography and Languages.
This is important work for the nation. And I thank very much, Professor McGaw for agreeing to take on this task on behalf of the Government.
I'd also thank the states and territories for willing to work with us collaboratively and cooperatively on this. And I end with this before asking Professor McGaw to make some remarks.
The overwhelming challenge we face is to build a modern Australia, capable of meeting the challenges of the new century. And within that, to create a world class education system. We promised we would establish a national curriculum. Today, we honour that promise by establishing this board. Over to you Professor McGaw.
MCGAW: Thanks very much Prime Minister. If I could just make a couple of brief comments. One, on the Prime Minister's comments about international competition, and it's a reality in economic terms, but it's a reality increasingly in educational terms among OECD countries.
Since we began the program for the assessment of 15 year olds, countries are paying a great deal of attention. And with the release of the third set of data, last year, we can see that while Australia's maths levels are holding at the same level, we've slipped relatively because other countries have moved ahead of us. Other countries that were equal with us have moved ahead. So it's not a stable competition out there. Every country is seeking to do better and to learn from those that are doing better than themselves already.
In reading, the story was that we've actually declined in performance amongst our fifteen year olds, but the interesting thing is that the decline is at the top end. It's not that kids can't decode words on a page - text on a page - and read in that sense. It's that they are not, at the top end, understanding, comprehending, highly complex text, in the way that we expect fifteen year olds to do, if they are going to build seriously in their further study upon their reading capacity.
So there are jobs to be done.
And the interesting question then is, to what extent we can do it nationally as opposed to in our states. Australia's not the only federal system in the OECD, apart from Switzerland, we're the smallest, the others are much bigger, Germany, the United States, Canada  -  is one and a half times bigger than us.
So you could argue that we are small enough to do things as a whole. Those that would have said that it's better to have the states operate, would normally base their argument on these grounds  -  that the natural experimentation that occurs through state differences gives us the capacity to learn from one another.
The evidence frankly is, that we've never much learned from one another in that respect. The states haven't exposed themselves to critical comparison and haven't systematically learned in the past.
But in the last year I think things have aligned in interesting ways. I served on a committee set up by the Council of the Australian Federation, where the states were talking - in the absence of the Commonwealth - about achieving nationally consistent curricula.
So I think, Prime Minister, the stars are aligned in a way that might give more opportunity to achieve things than were, for example, achieved after the so called Hobart declaration in the late 80s or the Adelaide declaration in the late 90s. This time around, there is a real chance, I think, to do things nationally and effectively.
But the purpose has to be not achieving consistency for consistency's sake, but raising the performance levels.
PM:   Thank you very much. And to conclude before taking your questions, is that this is one pillar of our education revolution  -  national curriculum - and many other pillars as well which the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Education is working on as well, together with the Parliamentary Secretary for Early Childhood Education, Maxine McKew. And that goes to early childhood education, trades training in schools, computers in schools. There is a huge amount of work to be done. 
But this is an important part of it and we're glad to get the ball rolling as Australia's kids across the country go back to school. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what sort of time frame are you talking about here in terms of the work that Mr McGaw is going to do and will you have rigour  -  you talked about rigour  -  will you have rigorous performance indicators to determine how successful it is?
PM: Firstly on the time frame, prior to the election, we committed to three years and we're kicking this off at the beginning of the school year in 2008. It will be completed by the beginning of 2011. 
On the rigour question, Professor McGaw, in conversations with the Deputy Prime Minister, is plainly aware of the Government's interest for there to be a rigorous national curriculum. Because, as he has rightly pointed out, we might be holding our own in terms of internal national standards, we're not holding our when it comes to international standards. And that is the overall rigorous benchmark which we must all apply ourselves to.
JOURNALIST: Does this curriculum go through the whole school system from the bottom to the top?
PM:   K to 12. Yeah. So from Kindy through to Year 12.
JOURNALIST: And it just seems - 
PM:   So the kids we met outside there, the little ones, Grade Four and Five  -  through to those who are, the last couple of years as well.
JOURNALIST: Even though it's a tough task, three years seems a long time, can't it be more quickly?
PM: You know, one of my experiences as a bureaucrat in years past is, I said before, advisedly, that this is a pathway sewn with good intentions and non achievement. I actually know how tough this is. Six territory, sorry six state, two territory curriculum bodies and then if you go out beyond that to the Catholic and Independent sectors  -  I think one of the advices I had here was that we got thirty four separate organisations contributing to the development of curricula across the country at the moment. 
This is a big task. The nation hasn't done this before. So I am being entirely upfront with you about how complex I think this is going to be, but entirely consistent with the time frame we put to people prior to the last election.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, will it depend therefore on cooperation from the state's to make this work? And how are you going to knock heads together?
PM:   Yes it will require cooperation. And I said at the Melbourne COAG, we face, I think an excellent year of opportunity and our challenge is to make the most of it. 
I know enough about Federal-State relations to know that that of itself is going to be an arduous task right across the reform agenda we outlined at the Melbourne meeting of the Council of Australian Governments. This is one area and I am sure Professor McGaw will be drawing upon the full breadth of his charm and diplomacy with colleagues from across the states and territories and the catholic and independent sectors to make this work. But it's not going to be easy.
JOURNALIST: The ACT doesn't have external public exams, will this be compulsory as part of the national curriculum?
PM:   Now we're getting down into individual state jurisdictions  -  I will flip to the Minister.
GILLARD: Thank you for that. Of course the task we are engaged in here is the curriculum development task. The task of assessing, we obviously want to make sure that we know what's going on out there, that's why we have the benchmark test internationally and nationally. Barry spoke about some of the results from the international tests, we also have the national tests to measure achievement and they feed in as information about where states are, who is high achieving, who is not so high achieving, what that says about the curriculum, and what that says about other things that need to be done in the education system. So this is about relying on that data rather than imposing specific testing regimes on jurisdictions. We certainly want national data, and we've got an ability to get that through the benchmark tests that have been rolled out.
JOURNALIST: Just while you've got the microphone, just in relation to the transition bill, Sharon Burrow has said she wants it passed by Easter. Is that realistic?
GILLARD: Well can I make very clear some things about the transition bill. The transition bill is to end the making of Australian Workplace Agreements. The Australian people voted for that at the last election. The transition bill will be in the parliament in the first sitting week and we expect it to be dealt with by the parliament as quickly as possible.
Now that is not to deny the need for scrutiny, of course legislation needs scrutiny. But I think there are two things that the Liberal Party is refusing to get, about this piece of legislation.
One, we've got a mandate for it. We took it to the Australian people. I'm not surprised they are confused about that because they've got no experience in the question.
Two, we worked it up through a consultative process involving the National Workplace Relations Consultative Council, and the Committee on Industrial Legislation. These are expert bodies, representatives of employer groups, representatives of unions. They've been working with the draft legislation, making suggestions to improve it. Once again, a process the Liberal Party has got no experience in because it never used it.
So when that deal comes to parliament it'll come with a mandate, it will come with the benefit of expert advice from all industrial relations stakeholders. Certainly the parliament should have a look at it, but there is no reason why even with an inquiry, it can't be passed during the February and March sitting.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) prices are rising, why shouldn't wages rise (inaudible) to keep pace with them?
DPM:  What I've said on inflation and what the Prime Minister has said and the Treasurer has said is, inflation is bad for working families. It's bad for working families because obviously prices go up. It's bad for working families because it puts upward pressure on interest rates. And that means that obviously, the cost of servicing the mortgage goes up on the family home. Consequently, it's a shared task to fight inflation.
JOURNALIST: Are you attracted to the concept of a social wage  -  sort of a new version of the accord?
GILLARD:  We live in a very different era. We live in a decentralised wage fixing system. And our policy, of course, is to have a decentralised wage fixing system. What I've said, and I'm happy to say it to everybody who is involved in industrial relations, is the way to get wage increases which are not inflationary is to be driving productivity increases. That's why the focus of our wage setting system is on the enterprise. If you work cooperatively in your enterprise and you come up with ways of working smarter, then there are gains to be shared because productivity will have gone up.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is it not reasonable to have a wage increase when prices are rising, without having to have a productivity (inaudible) Is it not reasonable to have a wage increase?
GILLARD:  Well, what I have just said is the policy of the government where we've got a decentralised system. Our policy for a decentralised system. A decentralised system is about setting wages in enterprises. It is about rewarding productivity growth. Fighting inflation is a shared task. The Prime Minister and the Treasurer have said the government is going to play it's part in terms of the way in which we do the budget in May. Obviously we are asking everybody to play their part because inflation is bad for working families.
JOURNALIST: On a related topic, Prime Minister, are you concerned about the IMF slashing its projected growth for the world and the ramifications for  -  what are the ramifications for Australian economy? And secondly  -  I appreciate...
PM:The old double barrel, double pronger, from the west  -  
JOURNALIST: Secondly, unrelated, but, I appreciate that you are not going to attach compensation to saying sorry to Stolen Generation Aboriginal people, but, there is a call from Andrew Murray, as you might be aware, for you to co-ordinate a national reparations scheme that would go to all people who have been affected by state care. That would include all states and charities and churches. Are you interested or effected by that prospect?
PM:On the economy, I've read a summary of the IMF's global economic outlook. Consistent with what the Government has said in Perth, actually, not long ago, we believe that we are facing a dual set of significant economic challenges. One is global  -  the global economy, downward revisions of growth coming off the back of the US sub prime, ramifications of that across Europe, some slacking of demand in Japan. And you see the outcome of that in terms of the IMF numbers for global growth being trimmed, including for the United States and off Europe as well. We are very mindful of that and that's fully reflected in the speech I delivered in Perth not long ago. 
The other challenge we face is the fact that we have been left with a significant inflation legacy by our predecessors, the Liberals parting gift to the Australian economy. Twenty warnings from the Reserve Bank, ten interest rate rises on the row, but the problem is, in those last couple of years of the preceding Government, inflationary pressures mounted and mounted and nothing was embraced as a strategy for dealing with it.
Now, these are two significant sets of challenges. We have a very clear weather eye on the unfolding developments in the global economy, and including in East Asia - notwithstanding what the IMF has said about Chinese growth projections for the year - which according to the IMF remain unchanged.
Also, we're very keenly aware of where we stand with the inflation challenge particularly given the most recent CPI data. Hence the five point strategy we articulated in my speech in Perth. Hence our commitment to producing a robust Budget surplus. Our commitment to investigate measures to further boost national savings including private savings, as well as our commitments to skills, to infrastructure and improving workforce participation.
These two challenges remain right ahead of us as we embark upon 2008. I don't for the life of me underestimate the seriousness of both of these challenges. We are acutely aware of them. We have outlined our framework for dealing with the inflationary challenge and are very mindful and have a weather eye on what is happening globally.
Second point, I haven't seen Andrew Murray's proposal, I'd really like to read what he has had to say.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) fighting inflation. By definition it's going to slow things up.
PM: Well, ultimately, these are the dual set of the challenges that we face. It's a complex piece of economic terrain we face, let's just be blunt about it. On the inflation front, and inflation, as the Deputy Prime Minister was just saying, is the enemy of working families. The enemy of business. It's the enemy of small business. 
As a responsible national Government we must deploy every measure to fight the fight against inflation. And that's why in the first speech I delivered this year we outlined our plan for so doing. And obviously, as the Deputy Prime Minister said as well, that involves a shared responsibility and we are reflecting ours in terms of the impact of public demand on CPI pressures.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on the issue of saying sorry, you said that you will say sorry and you will say sorry and you will do it in the first session. Have you given any thought to adding another component to that sorry which is some kind of tangible thing that you offer indigenous people who have been stolen in the form of either reparations or free health care or something that they can actually have that's not just a symbolic sorry, but actually gives them something?
PM: Well Patricia, this is really important for me to get it right, it's really important for the Government. We've been spending a lot of time on this. Firstly, our commitment to saying sorry is clear cut. I said so before the election. I said if we're elected we'd do it, and we're going to do it. 
And, I've said repeatedly, the reason for so doing is that there is unfinished business here on the part of the nation. We need to get this right because the symbolism of an apology is important.
But, it is beyond that as well. As I said, it's building a bridge of respect which I think has been in some state of disrepair in recent decades.
But having crossed that bridge, the other part of it is all about practical business. The practical business for me is the programme which Jenny Macklin and I have been talking about since the 40th anniversary of the 1967 referendum. And I'll draw your attention to the speech I gave back then which is on closing the gap.
Closing the gap in terms of life expectancy, infant mortality, skills attainments and health outcomes for indigenous people, is the core business. You will see therefore, over time, us unfold a significant programme in that area, very mindful of the experiences we are learning through the intervention  -  the controversial intervention  -  in the Northern Territory.
And, on those questions and how we handle them in the future in terms of the administrative arrangements concerning the apology and welcome to country, Jenny Macklin will have further to say about that very soon as she is concluding her first round of consultations.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the national curriculum, states like New South Wales who pride themselves on their curriculum through the HSC, ultimately would you like to see a nationally consistent HSC or leaving certificate? 
PM: I've been around long enough to know not to prejudge the outcomes by those who are qualified to provide us with advice on this. Can I just say, I am acutely conscious of how much New South Wales Government is attached to the HSC and you'll note the figure I used before in terms of the Year 8 attainments against international benchmarks in advanced maths and science where New South Wales is ahead of the national pack. It's just the truth of it. It's what the data says. 
But in terms of the way in which these things are handled in terms of the report that Professor McGaw's going to produce, we'll wait and see where those deliberations will come to. It's a big challenge.
JOURNALIST: Do you personally find it a little absurd that every state and territory has its own system?
PM: I think the 80,000 kids starting school today at whatever level in a different state or territory are finding it if not absurd, unnecessarily hard. And we actually need to move to a better place for them and for the national economy we need to move to a much better place than we are now.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you have a view on school holidays  -  
PM: I used to enjoy them a lot as a kid. What about you?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I was voted for school holidays myself.  Did you not like them, or what?
JOURNALIST: My question was, my child is going back next Tuesday. There are issues about mobility of the family, some grandparents might live in New South Wales, cant mind the kiddies because they're might be working or something. Is there an aim  -  is there a belief  -  that there should be co-ordinated school holidays as well as a co-ordinated national curriculum?
PM: Let's just bite off one challenge at a time. The content of national curriculum is a huge challenge. Synchronisation of school years across the nation is quite something else and you know there are multiple factors and demands impacting on that question. And when I spoke to my bloke, by the way, about the length of school holidays  -  he goes back to school himself next week  -  he thinks they're not nearly long enough.
JOURNALIST:   Just quickly on inflation. Given the need, the objective to curb Government spending, is there realistically any chance of a paid public maternity leave system over the next few years?
PM: Well, as you know, consistent with our commitment prior to the election, we have commissioned the Productivity Commission to look at a range of possibilities for the future to boost workforce participation. Do you want to add to that?
DPM:  Currently the Treasurer, Jenny Macklin and I are working on terms of reference for the Productivity Commission consistent with what we have said before the election. We are obviously looking at commissioning the Productivity Commission to give advice on a paid maternity leave system. 
We do not want to put additional imposts on small businesses. We are obviously looking at what is out there now. Some big businesses do offer paid maternity leave. Obviously the Government offers maternity payments as well. We are looking at a Government payment system that may assist, and that work will be done by the Productivity Commission.
JOURNALIST: Does the Government support the Workers Union proposal for portable long service leave?
DPM:  Look, what we support and what we were elected on is making sure that there was a safety net in this country, and that no one could strip the industrial safety net away. In terms of the safety net that Labor will ensure is there for all workers, it will include current long service leave standards. 
It is not our intention to build on those standards. We're talking about the current standards being part of the safety net. The significance of the transition bill we were talking about before, is that of course, Australian Workplace Agreements that enabled the safety net to be stripped away.
That's why it is urgent that the parliament deal with the transition bill to end the ability of anybody to make an Australian Workplace Agreement and to end the risk for any worker that they would have that they would have an aspect of the safety net stripped away.
And that is what the Australian people voted for. And we're not asking Doctor Nelson or Ms Bishop to like the results of the last election, I suspect they don't. But we are asking them to respect the result of the last election.
PM: And, last question.
JOURNALIST: New South Wales is considering lifting the leaving age to 16 (inaudible) 
PM: Well, I saw that report from Premier Morris Iemma today or yesterday and I think it is a step in the right direction. That's my own view. I haven't consulted with Julia on this. But I just think it's a smart thing to do. 
See, part of the problem is here is, you know, me off the top of my own head and I hope I don't do violence to educators on this question, is if kids move out of the socialisation of school and education and training too early, well frankly, it is very hard to get them involved in vocational education and training outside of the school. It gets harder.
Therefore, I think what Morris has done is a step in the right direction. And I hope having said that, I haven't done violence to any well established principle of education of which I am completely unaware. And I've got to zip.
ends


MITCHELL: Prime Minister, Mr Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: G'day, how are you?
MITCHELL: I'm well, thank you. Just down to business. Should David Hicks be able to sell his story?
PM: Well, there's a thing in Australia called the Proceeds of Crime Act. And it specifically prohibits the sort of activity which is being envisaged by Mr Hicks. Therefore, if he was to proceed in that direction, it would be a matter for what the police did and what then the DPP did independently under the powers vested in that Act, and that Act goes back to 2002.
MITCHELL: Yeah, the lawyers are arguing though because he didn't commit a crime within Australia  -  against Australian law  -  that he is not covered by this?
PM: Well that will be then for the lawyers to debate. All I'm saying is there is a piece of law in Australia called the Proceeds of Crime Act, that's what it deals with, which is the capacity of people who have fallen the wrong side of the law to sell their story for profit. It's there. But it's not a question for a Prime Minister or a politician to say how a particular piece of legislation applies to the individual circumstances of a case. That's why we have got an independent DPP and independent coppers.
MITCHELL: Yeah, fair enough. But it's reasonable that the Prime Minister has an attitude towards it. Do you believe in the Hicks case, which is a special case, he should be able to tell his story?
PM: I think what I believe in is the independence of the law and the independence of our courts and judicial processes. There is a law there for a specific purpose. You are right to point out the fact that there are peculiarities related to this individual case Neil, everyone knows that. But I'm not going to make a judgment as to how the details of his case apply to the Proceeds of Crime Act, that's up for others.
MITCHELL: Do you, what do you believe media organisations should be bidding for it?
PM: Well, I think all organisations should be mindful of what the law says. They'll make their own judgment based on their own legal advice as to whether they've potentially fallen fowl of the Proceeds of Crime Act. I'm not going to tell them what to do either.
My overall instincts in terms of the media, and this goes to recent comments by the AFP Commissioner on public reporting of terrorism cases for example, is that I err strongly in the direction of maximal media scrutiny. And the reason being that if you look at the history of the Haneef case, media scrutiny I think was basically on the money.
But, here we've got something quite specific, which is whether a person who has fallen fowl to the law, and I know there are complexities associated with that, should be able to sell their story for profit. And I'll leave that determination to the independent judicial and legal authorities.
MITCHELL: Okay, on to something else. The economy. Now you've inherited a tough one obviously. Interest rates likely to go up, inflation issue, stock market wobbly. Is it an important time for unions to show wage restraint?
PM: It's an important time for everyone to show restraint. And that means both public and private. You know, inflation is fuelled by a few factors. One is the extent to which you've got enough capacity in the economy, and that's why skills and infrastructure are really important.
The second is what the Government does in terms of what is called public demand. That's the extent of the Budget surplus. And you've already seen what we have had to say on that. And that is that we are setting ourselves a target of about an $18 billion surplus for the upcoming Budget because we have to do our bit to tighten the nation's belt so that we don't fuel the fires of inflation.
The third bit goes down to private demand. And that means - that goes to the whole question of restraint across the economy. And of course, the people in the trade union movement should be mindful of that as well.
But you only begin to have an effect on inflation when you have a full frontal assault on that. And remember, the previous Government got 20 sets of warnings about inflationary pressures. Ten interest rate rises on the hop. And when we took over, we had inflation running at 3.6 per cent per annum. That is, as reflected in that most recent CPI data, which goes to the December quarter last year, the highest inflation rate in 16 years.
MITCHELL: You have obviously a closer relationship with the ACTU than the previous Government. Will you ask the ACTU for restraint? Because they are not making good noises at the moment about wage restraint.
PM: Well I spoke to a meeting of, or a gathering of, trade union leaders in Canberra last night and I was just talking generally about the election but I was actually pretty blunt about the fact that we've all got to fight the fight against inflation. It's going to mean some very tough decisions for us all this year. And we will have to sort all those things through. They legitimately will argue on behalf of their members, but my responsibility is to act in the national interest on behalf of the Government and it's quite clear that restraint is necessary.
But there is a supply side question here too. Sorry to use economic jargon, Neil. And that is, the overall supply of skilled labour. Now, why do we face the pressure of wage based inflation? The reason is that there is an undersupply of skilled labour and in part that is because our predecessors were asleep at the wheel on skills training for a long, long time. And that's created the problem we've got and we've got some measures in mind to try to deal with that in the short term, on the supply side, and that goes, for example, to a decision I announced in Brisbane recently to fund immediately an additional 20,000 training places straight away. These are short termers to actually bring people onto the labour market.
MITCHELL: Do you have a figure in mind that you think would be a reasonable wage increase over the next year?
PM: No, none at all from my point of view, Neil, because we live in a market economy. And these things will be determined in individual negotiations. And that's as it should be. We abandoned the principle of centralised wage fixation a long, long time ago. And that's why we've got a flexible modern economy.
But I think everyone  -  employers, employees, as well as all those out there supporting those various arguments in the economy  -  need to be very, very mindful that public economic enemy number one right now is inflation. We've all got a combined responsibility to fight it. And part of the reason lies, it is absolutely bad for small business, for business in general, and for working families.
MITCHELL: Would you agree that one of the biggest dangers with public enemy number one though is a wage breakout?
PM: It is one of the contributing factors if there is a problem on that score. But, inflation is a multi-headed beast. As I said to you before, part of the contributing factor to inflation has been an excessively loose Budget policy by our predecessors. That's why we set a more ambitious Budget surplus target for the upcoming Budget. The other lies in quickly acting on some key skills shortages and infrastructure bottlenecks to try and relieve pressure. That's that five point plan to fight inflation that I announced in a speech I gave in Perth a week or so ago.
MITCHELL: So if there is an interest rate rise next week, as most commentators seem to think is likely, is that on the head of the previous Government?
PM: Well, I don't think it's profitable for anybody if we're fighting the fight against inflation to just engage in some sort of political blame game. The truth is this Neil, we've inherited an inflation problem from our predecessors. I don't think anyone out there in the economic -
MITCHELL: You've not been there long enough to change it, actually  - 
PM: Well that's true. They were there for 11 or 12 years, it's just a fact. I mean, look at the incoming Government brief, there's a problem. Look at the fact that there were 20 successive inflation warnings from the Reserve Bank which were successively ignored on skills and infrastructure pressures. Look at the looseness of Budget policy on the part of our predecessors going into the election and the fact that frankly, we, within a month of taking over Government, have had to turn this around and say, here is a five point plan of action. Budget surplus, point one. Point two, how do we deal with increasing national savings and private savings. Three, on skills. Four, on infrastructure. And five, how do you actually help also people who are wanting to get back into the workforce to get back in the workforce through increased workforce participation, and that goes down to childcare questions as well.
MITCHELL: Well you put all that together, it sounds like we should brace ourselves for interest rate rises.
PM: Well, I think you've probably interviewed me on this a dozen times last year, Neil, which was do I believe in the independence of the Reserve Bank. Yes, I do. And, if you believe in the independence of the Reserve Bank, they are the ones who set interest rates and that should be their independent preserve.
My job as the Prime Minister is to make sure that we are doing everything through Budget policy to make the job of the Reserve Bank as easy as possible. That's why I took the decision in my first speech of the year to make it clear to all concerned that we will be shouldering a large part of the Budget policy burden by making clear our commitment to an $18 billion surplus in this coming Budget, and of course, one thing we've got to keep a weather eye on though Neil, is what happens in the global economy.
MITCHELL: Okay. Well, you talk about the surplus. Lindsay Tanner's saying yesterday $4 billion in cuts coming out in the May Budget. Any areas untouchable when you cut?
PM: One we've been quite plain about is defence. In fact, I spent a long time yesterday speaking with the defence chiefs - both civilian and military - and to make plain to them what I was clear about prior to the election. That because national security is the first responsibility of Government, that the defence Budget will be preserved. In other words, consistent with the pre-election commitment, there will be a 3 per cent real increase in the defence Budget right through until 2015. That's on an annual basis. And that's because if you are making long term defence planning decisions including buying new kit and equipment you've got to have some Budget certainty.
MITCHELL: And the tax cuts are untouchable?
PM: The tax cuts as we promised are untouchable. We, the Government, we just take seriously what we said to people before the election. I know there has been some controversy about the tax cuts, but we believe that  -  particularly with particular pressures being faced by working families  -  that those cuts will be helpful and the challenges which lie ahead. But we believe that through a rigorous programme of savings, and Lindsay Tanner's razor gang, and a general tight approach to Budget policy, that we can do our bit by producing a much better Budget outcome than was being projected by our opponents only two or three months ago.
MITCHELL: Is their argument that the tax cuts could in fact compensate if there is wage restraint?
PM: Well, it's a complex argument. And, there is no ultimate piece of mathematics on this. Particularly given we are dealing with a market economy where individual wage setting for, you know, firms, sectors, industries will differ and vary depending on supply and demand factors.
MITCHELL: Well that's true. But you're asking both the employer and the employees to show  -  to react to it - which means the employers get tough and you're asking the employees to be a bit understanding.
PM: What I'm saying is that we're clear cut about our commitment to those working families, and therefore, employees, about what we said before the election. Which is that those tax cuts are proceeding. They will help. There maybe some other things that we can do on the way through as I indicated in my speech in Perth, about how we also assist the general future direction of savings policy as well.
MITCHELL: Where are you guys going to get the $4 billion then?
PM: Well, Lindsay Tanner and I and my colleagues, were here until about midnight the night before last going through, line by line, programme by programme, department by department, areas of interest  -  if I can put it that way  -  in order to get to a big number. If you're a new Government, you do have an advantage of looking at things from (inaudible), going back to some basics. I'm sure there is going to be pain and difficulty emerging from some of these cutback decisions. But we haven't reached them in finality but we're pretty clear about the sort of targets we need to get to.
MITCHELL: Will everybody hurt in some way?
PM: I think there'll be a fair bit of general, you know, difficulty arising from these cuts. But, let's be frank. The overall problem which working families are going to face is if inflation is let loose and starts to rip into people. And we have an overriding national economic responsibility not actually just to declare it as public economic enemy number one, but to launch a coherent fight against it. Can I just say, that if our predecessors had started this years ago, we'd be in a much better position.
MITCHELL: Is welfare untouchable?
PM: Well, when it comes to the existing set of welfare payments, we believe that people who are needing welfare assistance  -  there are multiple categories of welfare  -  are going to face the same sort of challenges this year as they did last year and maybe more acutely. And therefore we're going to be very, very mindful of the impact of those, particularly at the bottom end of the income spectrum, who are going to need all the help they can get to negotiate the struggles of the year ahead.
MITCHELL: So does that mean welfare is untouchable at the lower level?
PM: Well, it means that we believe that when it comes to social security payments, that you've got a whole bunch of people out there who are doing it really tough. And therefore, taking the meat axe to those sort of payments I think is not desirable.
But, can I say, when you look at the administrative expenses of Government departments, in this $200 billion plus Budget that we run nationally, there are many, many areas that we can look to, which frankly, are not core business for the nation which we can take the axe to. There'll be screams and squeals here and there. And there will be cries of saying, well why was that cut and this not. I accept responsibility for that. Tough decisions have to be taken. We're doing it.
[Commercial break]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is in Canberra, he'll take a quick call. Jack, go ahead, please.
CALLER: Good morning, gentleman. I've just got a quick question for Mr Rudd.
PM: G'day Jack.
CALLER: Recently the Australian banks justified an interest rate increase to their customers based on inability to secure low cost loans from the US. We've now seen a one and a quarter interest rate cut out of the US. What's the Government going to do to pressure the banks?
PM: Well, Treasurer Wayne Swan has been pretty blunt about this, and particularly in relation to a couple of the banks, saying quite plainly that the magnitude of their rise did not reflect the extent of the challenge delivered to the banks by...
MITCHELL: But they should be coming down now, they've come down in the US, shouldn't they?
PM: ...by the sub-prime crisis in the United States. Complex arguments there Neil, in terms of cost of credit between banks. But certainly the scope of the rise, by a couple of those banks, was not frankly justified, and Wayne Swan was very blunt in saying that. I support his comments.
MITCHELL: But do you think that they should be bringing them down now the US rates have gone down?
PM: Well, when it comes to what official interest rates should be, as you know, we respect the independence of the Reserve Bank, they determine interest rates  -  official interest rates  -  we don't.
On the commercial decisions made outside of the official interest rates framework, which applied in the case of these recent moves by the various Australian private banks, I've got to say there has to be a process of making it very clear in the public commentary from the Government when people go beyond the pale. A number of those banks did go beyond the pale. We said it, and I think Wayne Swan was very blunt about that on behalf of the Government and I support his position completely.
MITCHELL: Do you have full confidence in Mick Keelty, head of the Federal Police?
PM: I absolutely have full confidence in Mick Keelty. On the recent stuff, concerning his comments on the role of the media in reporting terrorism trials, he is speaking obviously in terms of his own capacity as head of the Federal Police, the Government has its own view and the Government's view is that the media should simply abide by the laws of the land and I err, as I said to you earlier in this program, on the side of the media giving full and frank coverage. I think the media's role in the Haneef case was in the national interest.
MITCHELL: He seems to have a different view of how democracy works?
PM: Well, he's entitled, like any head of a service agency, for example, as you know the State Police services will express a view about things should be handled, that's fine. I mean, we're not going to put a clamper on anybody. He should be able to express his view. On behalf of the Government, however, I support fully the views put by the Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, yesterday which is that we're not going to be in the business of imposing some sort of media black out on the reporting of terrorism cases.
MITCHELL: Are you close to getting a form of words on the apology?
PM: Getting there. This is really tough, Neil, actually. I had a session with Jenny Macklin, the Minister on this, this week. We, through her, have gone through a big round of consultations. And we've also been doing it through various communities in the Northern Territory. Jenny has also met with two representative groups of the stolen generation. So, that's happened as a first round.
Next week we'll go through a further round and we'll be closer to the content of that apology as we get closer to parliament itself.
MITCHELL: Certainly a number of groups I've spoken to, (inaudible) raising the expectation of some form of compensation. Will you unequivocally tell these groups no compensation?
PM: We will not, under any circumstances, be establishing any compensation arrangements or any compensation fund. Absolutely blunt on that. Tell you what the reason is  - 
MITCHELL: But if they seek it, I mean, if they seek it, if they pursue it through the courts, what will the Government do?
PM: Well, if people seek it through the courts, guess what, ever since the stolen generation report came down, any individual has been free to seek compensation through the courts.
MITCHELL: Well yes, but they are arguing that with an official apology, they will have a stronger argument in the courts. Will the Government be represented in any such court cases?
PM: Well, let's cross all those bridges when we come to it. We're absolutely robust in the view that we've been put to us through our legal advice, and on this question, as I've said, there'll be no compensation fund, no compensation arrangements. But since year dot, any individual in Australia is capable of taking any legal action against any Government to seek compensation or redress for any matter. They can do that.
What I'm saying, very bluntly, is that this Government  -  the Government which I lead  -  will not, consequent to the apology, be establishing any compensation fund or arrangements for those affected. The reason for it is this: we've got to get this right, it's unfinished business for the nation. Aboriginal people were dealt a very raw deal through this. We need to make amends for it. I will do that through an apology. It's then time to move on and to move on to working together to close the gap in health, education outcomes for aboriginal and non-aboriginal Australia, and for example, practical areas like infant mortality differences between non-aboriginal kids and aboriginal kids.
MITCHELL: So, will the Government fight any attempts for compensation?
PM: Well, I will take advice on any such hypothetical in the future, Neil. But I've got to say, our previous position, our clear position of policy, is that there will be no compensation fund, no compensation arrangements. And if anyone were to advance a legal case on these matters, they are free to do so. But we would, of course, be robust in our legal advice that there is no basis for them to do so on the basis of the apology which we will render in the parliament.
MITCHELL: Do you support  -  I'm sorry  -  have you given any thought yet to a new Governor-General?
PM: Oh, a little bit, but not much is the honest answer. I think the current Governor-General has most of this year to run. And frankly, I've had a few other things on my mind in the previous six weeks or seven weeks I've been Prime Minister. There has been a few other things happening, mate.
MITCHELL: Yeah, but are you happy with him making comments on the cricket the other day?
PM: I think the Governor-General is perfectly entitled to express his point of view. And, on the question of civility in the game, I think all of your listeners would like there to be greater civility in the game generally. Not apportioning any responsibility to any particular team. It's a tough and competitive business, you can conduct it with a bit of civility.
Remember, in politics we are, shall we say, less than civil to one an other so I'm very cautious about preaching from glass houses here. But I think the nation would expect of us in a political sphere to be more civil towards one an other in the future. And I think the history of the game of cricket, I think people would like a bit more civility as well.
MITCHELL: And just very quickly, because we're nearly out of time, do you support the dredging of Port Phillip Bay?
PM: Well, our job on that  -  I think you've probably interviewed Peter Garrett on this some time ago...
MITCHELL: Yes, I did.
PM: ...is narrowly defined through the Environment Protection Biodiversity Act. And the Commonwealth Environment Minister, Peter Garrett, has got to make determinations based on matters of national environmental significance, world heritage properties, national heritage places, etc. He's made a determination on that already, he's got another one coming up. And he's got to make an independent, unfettered decision. I support his handling of it entirely so far.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks, Neil.
[ends]


PM: The Government's decided on the 19th and 20th of April to convene an Australian 2020 Summit. The reason we are doing this is because we believe the nation faces serious long term challenges which go well beyond the normal electoral cycle. 
We also believe that part of the problem in the past has been that previous Governments have been far too short sighted in their approach to these long term challenges which are there staring us in the face.
Another reason is this: we believe, as a Government, that there is much expertise, energies, ideas, enthusiasm, which lie beyond the ranks of Government itself. And we, therefore, want to open the doors of this great parliament building to the nation's best and brightest brains in order to harness those ideas to shape the nation's long term future.
We face big challenges. Big challenges for the economy, big challenges in social policy. And I'll run through some of those in a minute.
But we want to make sure that in rising to those challenges that we bring forth and summon forth the best ideas available across our country.
We want this also to be bipartisan. I'll be extending an invitation to the Leader of the Opposition to attend, as well as to State Premiers and Chief Ministers and State Opposition Leaders and the Opposition Leaders in the Territories as well.
It's time for the nation to come together to bring forward all of our ideas, talents and energies to deal with this nation's long term challenges.
The national 2020 Summit, the Australia 2020 Summit, will involve bringing 1,000 of our brightest and best from across Australia to this building for one weekend. We'll be presenting those who are engaged in the summit with ten specific challenges which we want their ideas on. And by the end of that summit we expect them to have come forth with their best ideas on how we deal with those challenges.
Future directions for the economy including:
The productivity agenda;
Economic infrastructure;
The digital economy as well as how we deal with the future of our cities;
Population sustainability, climate change and water;
Future directions for rural industries and rural communities;
A long term national health strategy which embraces the challenges of an ageing population as well;
Options for the future of indigenous Australia;
Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion;
A creative Australia, the future of the arts, film and design;
The future of Australian governance, renewed democracy, a more open Government;
The structure of the Federation;
And finally, future challenges to Australian security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
I've asked Professor Glyn Davis, the Vice Chancellor of the University of Melbourne, to be the co-Chair of this Australian 2020 Summit with myself. The summit will be co-chaired by myself as Prime Minister and Professor Davis, who has a long standing background, not just in academia but in public administration.
And most recently, I understand, Mr Howard invited him to Chair the Education Summit involved in the APEC Business Leaders Summit, associated with that conference in Sydney at the end of last year.
So what are we trying to achieve from this? We have big challenges in 2008, on the inflation front, and the implementation of the commitments we made to the Australian people. These are going to take a lot of energy and commitment during the course of this year.
But we also need to have our mind out to the future. And that's why we want to bring into the tent those who have got ideas to contribute to these long term challenges.
Professor Davis will be convening a committee of ten drawn from outside the ranks of Government and they will, as a non-Government Steering Committee, select up to 100 of our brightest and best from across the country in each of these ten areas, thereby resulting in an overall summit of a thousand of our best and brightest.
To conclude, I think it's time for a new approach to the nation's long term future - too much short term-ism in the past. Let's get on with it, and look out to the next decade and beyond.
And secondly, in harnessing the ideas and energies of the nation, let's look beyond the ranks of ministers, politicians and public servants as well, and see what the rest of the nation has to say.
Over to you, Professor Davis.
GLYN DAVIS: Prime Minister, thank you. I was honoured to be asked to be part of this summit and I'm delighted to play a small role in what I think will be a significant national event. 
It is all too rare to bring prominent Australians together from a huge range of areas and ask them to think about the future.
What this does is spend a weekend and all the preparatory time before and all the thinking time afterwards writing it up and proposing to Government therefore a series of ideas for consideration. A chance to have a national conversation which will be more than just a summit, but will think about the future.
I think it's an extraordinary opportunity, a very rare opportunity, to say that ideas and research and speculation about where we might go as a nation get a very public airing, get to be thought about, dissected and discussed and then presented as ideas to Government for consideration.
The Government has indicated that it will consider all the ideas put and it will make a statement at the end of the process  -  some months after the summit I suspect  -  giving a considered response to the ideas that came up at the summit and giving a considered response to those it wishes to take up and those it thinks can't work. And that's important. So there will be not only opportunities for participation, but some real feedback afterwards from the Government about how this might have influenced our national strategy. An important event and a great honour to be asked to be part of.
PM: And just before I take your questions, and to reinforce what Glyn has just said, this is not a talk-fest for the sake of a talk-fest. What we want is for this gathering of the nation's brightest and best to put forward options for the nation's future, to produce summary documents, which we will then consider in the second half of the year. 
We will then provide a considered response to those options papers by years end in each of the challenge areas that I've just run through, each of those ten areas.
And, those which we accept will form part of the Government's long term planning for 2009 and beyond. And those which we reject we will make plain our reasons for why that has occurred as well. But we don't think that it is right simply to shut the door on somebody because they might have a view different from the Governments.
There are no right or wrong answers in this. We believe there are national priorities. We will be putting out concrete questions. We want an open debate, an open deliberation on options for the future, and then the Government will respond in the unfolding of its 2009 agenda.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, does this mean that in certain areas that (inaudible) Labor Party policy now (inaudible) policies that you've got, are they sacrosanct in the deliberations of this process, or will it all be on the table?
PM: No, no. Our policy direction is clear cut and we don't walk away from any of our pre-election commitments at all, and won't. 
What you have is looking to 2009 and beyond, we call it Australia 2020 Summit because we actually need to be looking a decade ahead. And for those reasons, you'll have in each of the ten areas that I've just listed, a succinct statement of Government policy, but, equally, a succinct statement of four or five very specific questions which arise from that about how we best get on with the long term.
And that's where there are no right answers. People may agree with us, disagree with us, or, in areas that we haven't even contemplated so far, throw new challenges and new possibilities on the table.
It's time to shake the tree a bit and see what the nation's got to offer. And I'm enthusiastic about seeing what comes out of this. If you attended our housing affordability summit last year in Opposition, look subsequently at the content of the policies on housing affordability we took to the election. About two thirds of those came from that summit.
JOURNALIST: Who will be determining the questions, the Government alone, or -?
PM: No, no, no. The panel which Professor Davis will be putting together will consider the questions which are contained in the draft release which you'll get in a minute. And these will be finalised over the next month or so. And then, they'll be circulated to people at least a month or so prior to the summit, giving them plenty of time to prepare. But, we want to make sure that this is a good gathering for the nation with a productive outcome for the nation's long term interests. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Yep  -  it's true  -  alphabetically or by State or? 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Okay, look, we have an open mind on this. The reason why today I've asked Glyn to come to Canberra to announce this with me is to indicate very clearly that this panel of ten, committee of ten, which Glyn and I will settle together, will have wide ranging discretions to select the 100 brightest and best in each of those areas. Each of those ten areas. And, for those who do not end up as summit participants, there will be a summit website, and everyone across the entire nation, who has a submission to make, can make a written submission. 
The whole summit will be completely open to the media. And guess what, the media will be invited to participate as well through your various media organisations as participants in the summit as well as covering it to your heart's content.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) representatives of business, unions, social welfare organisations, or will they be people which (inaudible)
PM: I state clearly in the statement, which you'll get in a minute, that we expect everyone to be there in their own individual right. 
I think the problem is, if you have national gatherings of this nature where everyone actually has to represent a sectional interest, it actually constrains the discussion and debate. I think it's far better if people are there in their own right. Of course, they'll argue things near and dear to the causes which their associations have put on the table over a long period of time, but we want people to be selected on the basis of individual merit, achievement, and the rest, and if they've got ideas to offer. 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No, but, first of all, it's a big building this one here, and I've had a little walk around it and you could probably fit that many in it at any one time. 
Secondly, we'll have an open plenary session, I'd imagine, in the Great Hall, subject to the views of the presiding officers, and a closing session in the Great Hall.
But, the substantive work over a Saturday and a Sunday will be conducted in these groups of 100 which will be dealing with specific questions and specific areas. And they will be comfortably accommodated across this vast building. It's time the nation used the national parliament building to deliberate on the nation's long term future. And I think it'll be a good weekend.
Oh, by the way, everyone's coming on a voluntary basis. No one's air fare gets paid; no one's accommodation is paid. This is all up to the individuals. If there are individual cases of hardship, then of course, we'll look at those on a one-off basis.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) what advice have you received on this (inaudible)
PM: As I understand it, Government officials have been briefed by the relevant corporate interests involved and once those briefings are concluded, then of course, the normal processes under Australian law would ensue. But those briefings are continuing over the course of the weekend, as I'm advised. We'll have something further to say about that as the week unfolds. 
JOURNALISTS: Can you guarantee that the wording for the apology will be released before it is taken to parliament?
PM: What I can say is that round one of our consultations with indigenous Australians has come to a close. But we still have more to do next week. And Jenny Macklin has been hard at work. I also intend to sit down and go through the wording of the apology with Brendan Nelson during the course of the week to the extent that it's absolutely concluded by then.
But let me very clear: the core content of it will be absolutely clear. You either support an apology or you don't. And the language of it, and how we approach it in overall terms, should be clear as the week progresses.
But our primary emphasis is to get this right in terms of indigenous Australians. And that is a detailed and complex task. I commend Jenny Macklin in the role that she's played. Round one is done, we've got a few more to do next week, and it'll become clear before then.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The pressures on working families arising from mortgage pressure, arising from other cost of living pressures, are acute. I am deeply aware of that. Not just through having spoken to so many thousands of them during the course of the last couple of months of last year. But also, through the many, many communications that I've had from our ministers and backbenchers right across the community. There are real pressures out there, and mortgage stress is among them.
Secondly, therefore, that's why in the first speech that I delivered this year I outlined that our concern  -  front and centre  -  is to fight the fight against inflation, because we must do that in order to do our part to take as much pressure off the Reserve Bank as possible in order to keep interest rates as low as possible.
Our five point plan for fighting inflation was articulated in a speech I gave in Perth, it'll be on the question of public demand through robust Budget surplus, private demand, boosting national savings. But on the supply side, the actions we have planned on skills infrastructure and workforce participation.
JOURNALIST: There has been speculation that Monday's Cabinet might be discussing legislation coming up. How ready is the Rudd Government on things like IR legislation, legislation for Skills Australia and Infrastructure Australia? 
PM: Well, I think most people would agree that we've hit the ground running with a whole lot of things, whether it's on ratification of Kyoto within about half an hour of being sworn in, with our addressing the challenges of inflation, the homelessness white paper, also the decision to establish Infrastructure Australia with the Cabinet meeting in Perth. 
All Ministers are hard at work bringing these to legislative fruition, where that's got to occur, and getting administrative and personnel arrangements in place as well.
In my discussions with Ministers last week, and I'm sure it'll be reinforced again this week, Ministers are incredibly hard at work. This core undertaking, we made concrete commitments to the Australian people last year. We'll be honouring every one of them. And, that implementation task is well in hand. And the Ministers are hard at work.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well my advice is that the reason for the non-release on Friday of the reasons for his decisions, which cover two of I think 14 or 16 modules of approval which are required for the Gunns project to proceed, is Commercial in-confidence. 
But I also understand from the company concerned  -  or my advice is  -  that the company concerned in the days ahead will be releasing all of that information publicly.
JOURNALIST: Back on the economy, Mr Rudd, are you confident that over the next 18 months inflation will continue to be (inaudible)
PM: Well, I said last year, that if you believe in independent monetary policy and the independence of the Reserve Bank, you do not, unlike our predecessors, provide public lectures to the Reserve Bank. 
Our job is on fiscal policy, and to make the job of the Bank as easy as possible. Our job is also, on the skills and infrastructure front, to remove some of those infrastructure bottlenecks and skills bottlenecks.
Remember this, our predecessors were given 20 successive warnings by the Reserve Bank over three years about mounting inflationary pressures around skills and around infrastructure. No action was taken. There have been ten interest rate rises in a row under our predecessors, six of them in the last three years.
I notice that the Opposition was saying that problems concerning inflation are a bit of a fairytale. I mean, for goodness sake, if you look at the December quarter 2007 data producing an annualised rate of 3.6, that's the highest inflation rate  -  according to the ABS  -  in 16 years. That's the ABS speaking, not us. That's not a fairytale, it's a real problem.
Therefore, the responsible course of action for us is to lay out day one, 2008, what our five point strategy is for dealing with it. It's a long term strategy, you can't turn the Queen Mary around overnight. If you've had literally a decade of inertia on skills and infrastructure, and an increasingly profligate fiscal policy on the part of our predecessors, it takes a while to turn around. But we've been hard at work on this. And, we'll have our shoulder to the wheel in the year ahead. But it'll be tough.
JOURNALIST: Professor Davis has been (inaudible) head of your department  -  
PM: By whom, Laura?
JOURNALIST: Everybody who doesn't know anything. Will you rule that out today, and tell us when you will be announcing - 
PM: Professor Davis, is I'm advised, very happy in the University of Melbourne as Vice Chancellor. And will continue in that position. On the question of the Secretary of my own department, that's reached an advanced stage and decisions will be made on that very soon and announcements as well.
JOURNALIST: Paul Keating blames news organisations and not the Indonesian military for the murder of Australian journalists. Do you agree with him?
PM: I haven't seen that report. And, so I won't respond to it. I think  -  you're talking about the events of '75 in Balibo?
JOURNALIST: Yes.
PM: The events of '75' are an absolute disgrace. News organisations are not to blame at all. If Paul said that, I disagree with him, but I haven't seen what he said. Got to run, see you guys, all the best. 
[ends]
Top


The Rudd Government will convene an Australia 2020 Summit at Parliament House on 19 and 20 April to help shape a long term strategy for the nation's future.
The Summit will bring together some of the best and brightest brains from across the country to tackle the long term challenges confronting Australia's future  - challenges which require long-term responses from the nation beyond the usual three year electoral cycle.
To do this, the Government will bring together 1000 leading Australians to the national Parliament to debate and develop long-term options for the nation across 10 critical areas:
     * Future directions for the Australian economy  -  including education, skills, training, science and innovation as part of the nation's productivity agenda
     * Economic infrastructure, the digital economy and the future of our cities
     * Population, sustainability, climate change and water
     * Future directions for rural industries and rural communities
     * A long-term national health strategy  -  including the challenges of preventative health, workforce planning and the ageing population
     * Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion
     * Options for the future of indigenous Australia
     * Towards a creative Australia: the future of the arts, film and design
     * The future of Australian governance: renewed democracy, a more open government (including the role of the media), the structure of the Federation and the rights and responsibilities of citizens
     * Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
Participants will be selected by a 10 member non-government Steering Committee. The Summit will be co-chaired by the Prime Minister and Professor Glyn Davis, Vice Chancellor of the University of Melbourne.
This Steering Committee will select up to 100 participants in each of the Summit areas who will attend in a voluntary capacity. The participants will be drawn from business, academia, community and industrial organisations, the media and include a number of individual eminent Australians. Summit participants will be invited in their own right rather than as institutional representatives from any particular organisation. Each of the 10 Summit areas will be co-chaired by a Federal Government Minister and a member of the Steering Committee.
The Summit will have the following objectives:
     * To harness the best ideas across the nation
     * To apply those ideas to the 10 core challenges that the Government has identified for Australia  -  to secure our long-term future through to 2020
     * To provide a forum for free and open public debate in which there are no predetermined right or wrong answers
     * For each of the Summit's 10 areas to produce following the Summit options for consideration by government
     * For the Government to produce a public response to these options papers by the end of 2008 with a view to shaping the nation's long-term direction from 2009 and beyond.
In providing this response, the Government in providing may accept some options and reject others  -  but will provide its reasons for embracing its course of action for the future.
The Government has no interest in a talkfest. The Government's interest is in harnessing and harvesting ideas from the community that are capable of being shaped into concrete policy actions.
Government, irrespective of its political persuasion, does not have a monopoly on policy wisdom. To thrive and prosper in the future we need to draw on the range of talents, ideas and energy from across the Australian community.
For too long Australian policymaking has been focused on short-term outcomes dictated by the electoral cycle. If Australia is to effectively confront the challenges of the future, we need to develop an agreed national direction that looks at the next ten years and beyond.
For these reasons, the Government will also be inviting the Leader of the Federal Opposition to participate in the Summit, together with State Premiers, Chief Ministers and their Opposition counterparts.
In addition to those participating in the Summit, all Australians will be invited to make submissions on each of the 10 future challenges. These will be submitted to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet which will act as the secretariat for the Summit. An Australia 2020 website will provide a digital forum for this purpose.
The Rudd Government believes Australians, whatever their political views, can come together to build a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
CANBERRA
(02) 6277 7744
Australia 2020 Summit
Future Directions for the Australian Economy - Education, skills, training, innovation and productivity
The Australian Government is committed to building on our $1.2 trillion economy so that we can compete with the leading nations in a world economy that is being transformed by globalisation, new technologies, and the rise of China and India. While we take full advantage of the mining boom, we must also build long term competitive strengths in the global industries of tomorrow - industries that will provide the high-paying jobs of the future.
In implementing the Government's human capital agenda, the objective is to build a world class education system that can transform our workforce into the best educated and most highly trained in the world. This in turn is aimed at boosting long-term workforce participation and productivity. This program has begun with the immediate priorities of expanding training places to tackle the skills crisis, as well as providing universal early childhood education, a rigorous national school curriculum, improved information technology and trades training infrastructure for the 3.3 million young Australians at school.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * After a long period of sustained economic growth and with the added benefits of the global mining boom, how do we best invest the proceeds of this prosperity to lay the foundations for future economic growth
     * How we best prepare for a global economy that will increasingly be based upon advanced skills, advanced technology, low carbon energy sources and integration with global supply chains
     * How we take advantage of Australia's proximity to the fast growing economies in the world
     * How Australia attracts and retains the most talented, creative and highly skilled people, including researchers and scientists, entrepreneurs, and professional and skilled workers
     * How we ensure that our children have the highest quality teachers, whether in early childhood, school, TAFE or university, including dealing with the crisis in maths and science related disciplines across the education system
     * How we foster innovation in the workplace; encouraging the transfer of ideas across businesses and economies.
Economic Infrastructure, the digital economy and the future of our cities
The Australia Government is committed to building world class infrastructure to improve the competitiveness of our businesses and quality of life in Australia's cities and regions. Our priorities for advanced infrastructure include modern, safe and efficient freight and passenger transport networks, a high speed National Broadband Network, and reliable water and energy infrastructure. World class broadband infrastructure alone could add $20 billion to the Australian economy each year according to some estimates. Modern infrastructure is critical to reducing costs for business and building the platforms for future economic growth.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine ways to:
     * Boost public and private investment in economic infrastructure
     * Improve planning and coordination of infrastructure investment across different levels of government and the public and private sectors (including maximising the most efficient future design of our cities)
     * Ensure that digital technologies are harnessed to improve consumer services, business productivity and the delivery of government services.
Population, sustainability, climate change and water
The Australia Government is committed to decisive action on climate change, to transform a current threat into an opportunity. As the driest inhabited continent in the world, Australia is more vulnerable to climate change than almost any other developed nation and we need a comprehensive plan to facilitate population growth. But climate change also gives Australia a unique opportunity: with our abundance of natural resources, sun, wind and ocean tidal flows, we could be a world leader in the global low carbon energy revolution that will transform the global economy in coming decades.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * How Australia develops a long term plan to adapt to the growing impacts of climate change on our environment
     * How does Australia best plan for its long-term water and energy needs
     * How we position Australia to become a global leader within the next decade in the new low carbon technologies and industries
     * How do we plan future population growth at a national and regional level, given the constraints of water shortages and sustainability
Future directions for rural industries and rural communities
Australia's 130,000 farmers generate $30 billion worth of exports each year and are custodians of 60% of our land mass. The Australian Government is committed to working with rural industries, and the communities they support, to grow their contribution to Australia's economic prosperity and our social wellbeing. The Government is also committed to examining how best to deliver services to rural communities in the future.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * What rural industries are best positioned to take advantage of the global consumer markets of the 21st century
     * What options are possible for effective structural adjustment for rural industries and communities suffering the long term impact of climate change
     * What is the most intelligent form of support the Government can provide to ensure the long term sustainability of rural and regional communities, including the fostering of the next generation of Australian farmers.
A long-term national health strategy
The Australian Government is committed to improving the overall health of our nation through improved preventative primary health, increased access to general practitioners and new dental care services. Investing in prevention can reduce the estimated 550,000 chronic or preventable admissions to hospital each year. The Australian Government is also committed to reforms to improve our hospital system and to ensuring Australians are able to access the best possible care when they experience serious illness or disease. The Government is also committed to a greater national medical research effort  -  particularly into the major disease categories impacting millions of Australian families.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * How we invest to help prevent chronic and acute health problems
     * How we plan to ensure all Australians continue to have access to the very best of modern medical technology including pharmaceuticals
     * How we meet the emerging regulatory challenges of modern medical technology
     * The use of electronic infrastructure to facilitate efficient and effective patient care
     * Strategies to preserve Australia's internationally unique blend of public and private health services
     * How Australia best plans for the future demands on our medical workforce.
Proposals identified at the summit will also be provided to the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commissions for consideration.
Strengthening communities and supporting working families
The Australian Government is committed to practical measures aimed at helping families cope with the collision of work and family life. The Government is also committed to examining new possibilities in partnership with the community, church and charitable sector. Through its focus on social inclusion, the Australian Government is also determined to reduce the barriers to full participation in the economy and Australian society, address locational disadvantage, isolation and the economic dislocation experienced by a significant minority of Australians.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * How we provide practical support to families to combine the tasks of work, raising children and caring for ageing parents
     * How we make a long term difference on homelessness
     * How we better harness the goodwill and commitment of the Australian community through voluntary and community organisations and philanthropic endeavour
     * How we build social capital within and between communities, particularly those that are cut off from the economic mainstream.
Options for the future of Indigenous Australia
The Australian Government is committed to closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia. This includes the gap in literacy, numeracy, infant mortality, health outcomes and overall life expectancy.
The Government is also committed to working with Indigenous Australians to ensure they are able fully to participate - both socially and economically in the life of the nation. This includes providing access to high quality education, health services generally and addressing alcohol, violence and homelessness in those communities where these threatens the safety and wellbeing of individuals and families.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * How we forge a new partnership with between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia to overcome disadvantage and provide practical pathways to the future
     * The role of targeted programs and interventions such as the Northern Territory Intervention and the Cape York Welfare Reform Trials in achieving change in remote communities
     * How we might promote economic development in remote Australia to provide Indigenous community members with the opportunity to be economically independent
     * Improving access to mainstream programs by Indigenous Australians
     * Promoting and preserving Indigenous culture, languages and traditions.
Towards a creative Australia: the future of the arts, film and design
The Australian Government is committed to promoting a national culture of creativity, innovation and enterprise. The Government is committed to examining new forms of advancing the arts, film and creative design across Australia, including urban design. The Government is also committed to examining how best we deploy our national and international broadcasting capabilities, both to enhance Australia's creative industries, technologies and expertise  -  as well as promote a new, modern and innovative Australia to the rest of the region and beyond.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * Future directions for Australia's principal arts bodies
     * Future directions for the ABC, SBS, Australia Television and Radio Australia
     * How best to develop a globally innovative and competitive film industry
     * How to encourage participation in emerging global industries such as game design, the internet 2.0, graphics-rich applications and animation
     * How we build on the creative sector's potential as a major Australian export industry.
The future of Australian governance: open government (including the role of the media), the structure of government and the rights and responsibilities of citizens
The Australian Government is committed to greater access to freedom of information, effective parliamentary reform and removing as many dysfunctional dimensions to the Australian Federation as possible. The Government is also examining ways in which Australians can increasingly deliberate in the making of government policy through a range of mechanisms, including community cabinets, as a part of a commitment to contemporary democracy.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * How best to implement an effective an agenda of open government which best balances the legitimate requirements of the media and the confidentiality requirements of cabinet government in the Westminster system
     * How best to engaged the community in government decision making
     * What forms of Federation reform are appropriate for the future to maximise outcomes for the economy and the community
     * How to ensure the future viability of local government operations and infrastructure provision.
Australia's future in the region and the world
The Australian Government is committed to restoring Australia's place as a nation of creative middle power diplomacy  -  both in our region and in broader international forums. Australia has the potential to be a significant force for good in our region and on the world stage, including through our diplomatic efforts, increased contribution to efforts to reduce extreme poverty and fostering stability and peace in our region.
The Australian Government is acutely aware of the new range of security, economic and foreign policy challenges across our international operating environment. The Government is conscious of the need for creative, long term responses to these challenges.
The Australia 2020 Summit will examine:
     * How Australia best protects its national security interests in the face of an increasingly complex threat spectrum, including terrorism, bio-security and other threats to human security  -  as well as the adequacy of existing institutional arrangements for dealing with the threat spectrum into the future
     * How Australia should maximise its cooperation with its long-standing ally the United States
     * How Australia engages with China and India in the coming decades as both play an increasingly important economic and political role
     * How Australia can make the greatest contribution both within and outside the framework of the United Nations in addressing the challenge of extreme poverty
     * The long-term adequacy of Australia's existing foreign language capabilities to meet increasingly complex challenges presented by the globalisation.
The Government may add to or amend the questions in each of these 10 challenge areas following the settlement of conference participants. Full agenda papers will be circulated to conference participants approximately one month prior to the Summit.


KOCHIE: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us now, good morning to you. Now, first up, why do we need a summit? And how do you see it working?
PM:Well, Kochie, our objective is how do you build a modern Australia capable of dealing with the very big challenges of the 21st century? 
And the two problems we've got at the moment are these: one, because of the shortness of the electoral cycle, which is three years federally, and by the time you've got the sound and light show round an election, that comes down to two and a bit - that there is almost a culture of short term-ism in Australia. And I don't blame any particular side of politics for that, that's just been the way it's been for a long time. Whereas these challenges are seriously long term, and some of them require some long term thinking and long term solutions.
So that's why we've put out a target of what do we want Australia to be in a decade's time, hence the summit for 2020.
The second reason is this, I think as I roll around Australia and talk to people, there is a whole bunch of ideas out there amongst our brightest and best, whether it's the economy, whether it's indigenous policy, whether it's how we build a world class education system, dealing with the big challenges of infrastructure in our cities and in rural areas. There's a bunch of expertise outside Government, and we need to call forth the talents and energies of the nation.
So, for those two reasons, we're going to bring together a thousand of our brightest and best in these ten big challenge areas  -  100 a piece  -  in the middle of April, and shake the tree and see what ideas come out of it.
MEL: And how will you pick these people? Because I read that a thousand people are all expected to pay their own way to Canberra. How will you make sure, I mean, are we talking about representatives from businesses and organisations, or are you talking about a bloke down the road from Oliver's who's always got an opinion on everything. So, how are you going to choose them?
PM: Well Mel, it's a really tough one and I accept that upfront that some people will want to come who don't get here. Firstly, on the way in which you choose, I'll be the co-chair of this summit with Glyn Davis, the Vice Chancellor of Melbourne University and he will appoint with me, a panel of ten experts, one in each in those areas, and they'll have the job, arms length from Government, to sift through up to 100 of our brightest and best in each of those fields. That's basically how it's going to work. And then, in terms of getting here, if people that we choose on a merits basis can't get here through their own financial means, then we'll look at those on a case by case basis. But, frankly, what I want is people, if they've got something to contribute, pay their own way here, accommodate themselves, two days of debate, discussion, but then producing concrete options for the future for us to look at. I think that's the way ahead. And for them to be here in their own right, not representing the organisation for artichoke management, or whatever it happens to be.
KOCHIE:  Well, I think a lot of us have been critical of Government because it seems to have lacked the vision over the last couple of decades that we were used to back in the day when the Snowy Mountains scheme was built, and things like that. So it's a terrific idea. But you can't get the answer in two days, can you? It's got to be longer than that to come up with the answers?
PM:Well, my attitude's a bit like this, Kochie: if as a result of a two day summit, in the nation's parliament where we've got in these ten big challenge areas, a statement of the strategic direction we think as a Government is right for the country, questions within that which we need answers on  -  that is, what options should we pursue in heading in that direction or have we got elements of that direction wrong  -  my view is that if we can shake out of the tree a dozen good, big ideas for Australia for the next decade, we'll have done much better than simply sitting in Canberra and listening to the odd public servant and a few people who roll on our doors as lobbyists. 
KOCHIE:  Will you keep those groups going? You've got ten groups of 100, you know, if one group or two or three groups come up with some great ideas, you say, hey, you're in the right direction, why don't you stay together for a year and nut out the detail?
PM:Exactly  -  well, the rubber hits the road with this Kochie in terms of what we do with the options papers that come out. Now, what I said in my statement yesterday announcing this was that when these options papers for the future  -  take building a world class education system is the challenge. What do we do, for example, to rebuild science and maths across the education system, which we all know is in a bit of state of crisis. And we come up with three or four ideas through this group of experts drawn from across the country. Now, there are no right or wrong answers here. By years end, I've committed ourselves as the Government to then responding, in writing,  to which of those policy options the Government is prepared to embrace, which we can't embrace, and we'll reject, and the reasons why. Then, in terms of what we do from 2009 on, I've got an open mind about what then this summit and what then these groups within it do for the nation in the following year and the year after that. But let's do it one step at a time. If it works, and we get some good results, then I'm completely open to how we sustain that in the years ahead.
MEL: Alright, we look forward to hearing how it all goes in April, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.
KOCHIE:  It's going to be fascinating. 
MEL:   Thanks for your time this morning.
PM:Thanks very much for having us on the program. 
[ends]


KERRY O'BRIEN: The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins me now from our Canberra studio.
Kevin Rudd, you're clearly bracing yourself for your first interest rate increase on your watch this week.
How long do you think you will be able to get away politically with blaming the Howard Government for inflation?
PM:   Well, Kerry, the statistical facts speak for themselves. The last couple of years we've had 20 successive warnings by the Reserve Bank, in fact, over the last two years plus, to the previous government about inflationary pressures in the economy arising from infrastructure bottlenecks and skills shortages. None of these were acted upon.
Secondly, we've had ten interest rate rises in a row under the previous government, six during the last term. Now, I think these two things plainly fall together and there's one other piece in the fact jigsaw here, that is that which comes from the ABS itself and that is in the CPI data most recently put out, you've got inflation running at an analysed rate of 3.6 per cent. That's a 16 year high.
Now that's what we've inherited. Our challenge is to deal with the inflation challenge. We've put forward already in the speech I gave a few weeks ago our five point plan for attacking inflation in the year ahead. The Reserve Bank will do what it needs to do.
But from my point of view my job is to run a tight fiscal policy given the inflation legacy left to us by our predecessors.
KERRY O'BRIEN: OK you talk about a five point plan for the year ahead, at what point will the inflation buck stop with the Rudd Government and I am sure that you would agree that regardless of what arguments you might want to put up, those people out there who are going to feel serious mortgage stress increasingly with each interest rate increase that comes are not going to be, and those interest rates that are now getting uncomfortably close to double figures, are not going to be too interested in who did it, they're looking at your Government?
PM: Yeah, but exactly Kerry. I think people in the Australian community are sick and tired of politicians just playing the blame game or buck-passing. That's why I just cited you three set of facts which are beyond dispute about where we got to.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Sounds like you're blaming the previous government, isn't that the blame game?
PM:   Is the ABS blaming the previous Government, is the Reserve Bank blaming the previous government? It is their data I am quoting, not my opinion. These are just facts but going forward, our challenge is to make the job of the Reserve Bank as easy as possible and the five point plan I've outlined seeks to do that.
Firstly in terms of what we can do through public demand, the budget surplus, outlining a clear cut goal of 1.5 per cent of GDP budget surplus for the upcoming budget.
Secondly, to do what we can to boost private savings. All that on the demand side of the equation, and on the supply side, our strategies for acting on skills infrastructure and workforce participation. That's a strategy. We haven't seen one like that for many, many years.
KERRY O'BRIEN: The economy is at full capacity now, at full stretch now but potentially the full impact and the full pressure of the resources boom is yet to come, isn't it? It's yet to be really felt. I mean, business has been borrowing to pay for its expansion to meet the demands of China in the resources field, but the full hit of exports is yet to flow. I mean, there's a lot of this is in the pipeline ahead, is there not?
PM: Well, in Australia right now we're faced with a unique set of economic circumstances.
We've got on the one hand inflationary pressures at home which have been building the last couple of years and secondly we've got uncertainty in the global economy coming out of subprime and other factors in the United States, causing some predictions, particularly from the IMF most recently in their global economic outlook for a revision downwards of growth projections in North America, in Europe, to some extent in Japan. But absent at this stage, China.
So, this is a very complex picture for us, but we believe that the priority now lies in fighting inflation on the home front through the measures that I've outlined. We'll keep a very close weather eye on what's happening internationally in case we need to adjust. That is what a responsible economic strategy consists of and that's the conservative approach we'll be taking.
KERRY O'BRIEN: You're intent on stressing time and again in the brief period you've been in Government, as does Wayne Swan, the independence of the Reserve Bank, that it's the Reserve Bank Board that takes decisions on interest rates. But you have a representative on that bank board in Treasury, Secretary Ken Henry. What are you as a government asking Ken Henry to tell the Reserve Bank tomorrow, in terms of what you believe should happen on interest rates?
PM:Kerry, if you accept the independence of the Reserve Bank, which we have done as a matter of policy for a long, long time and Wayne Swan in his policy announcements as Treasurer since the change of government has reinforced the independence of the Reserve Bank, you don't go round trying to provide either public lectures or trying to convey some sort of an internal message. They will make a judgment as a Reserve Bank based on a number of factors, a number of pieces of data, one of which will be the fiscal policy settings of the incoming Government.
We've tried to be up front and frank about that. That is, our predecessors were projecting a budget surplus for 08/09 of about 1, 1.1 per cent of GDP. We said we can do a lot better than that. We're projecting or aiming for 1.5.
That's the concrete action you can take to say, "We understand the pressures of public demand," that's what you should do, rather than trying to chip away at the independence of
KERRY O'BRIEN: But I'm not talking about chipping away at the independence of the bank, Mr Rudd. I'm talking about the fact that you have a Government representative sitting at that Reserve Bank Board. You also express sympathy for struggling homeowners who are going to face more mortgage stress if rates go up. Presumably there's a strong prospect that Ken Henry is going to sit there as your representative on the bank board tomorrow arguing for an interest rate increase?
PM: The Secretary to the Treasury's responsibility in part, will be to reflect the fiscal policy reality of the Commonwealth. That's what he would do. We don't seek to direct his course of action. You've actually got to believe in the independent monetary policy, because inflation is the ultimate enemy of working families and businesses.
That's why we believe in the independence of the Reserve Bank. Therefore, we've always said that if we deal front and centre with the fight against inflation we're acting most responsibly in dealing with the economic challenges not just for the economy at large, not just for businesses but for working families, as well. Hardline on monetary policy, our job and our Government's side is to act on fiscal policy and our predecessors let the reins far too loose on that one.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Are you saying that Ken Henry's on his own when he goes into that Reserve Bank Board, he doesn't take advice from the Treasurer, he doesn't take advice from the government on a government position on interest rates?
PM:   Ken Henry as Secretary to the Treasury will reflect the view and the situation in real terms of the Commonwealth vis a vis the fiscal situation that we have, and the fiscal projections that we have. That's what he's to do.
What's my job as the Prime Minister is to make his tidings as happy as possible vis a vie where we'll take the budget balance. And I say again, we are projecting a budget surplus as our aim for this year, considerably in excess of what our predecessors were projecting only three months ago because we've unleashed Lindsay Tanner to take the scalpel through the razor gang to government expenditures and our predecessors never did that.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Just so I understand this clearly Mr Rudd, are you saying that Ken Henry will not have a position on whether interest rates should go up, he'll simply reflect Government policy?
PM: Ken Henry's responsibility is to articulate clearly to the Reserve Bank Board the fiscal reality of the Commonwealth. That is, where we stand, where we're going and, therefore, that becomes one ingredient in the overall mix of presumably of the independent decision of the bank.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But at no point does he say, "I think interest rates should go up or shouldn't go up" on behalf of the Government?
PM: I believe the responsible course of action for the secretary of the Treasury is to make sure that the bank is completely familiar of where we are going in terms of the Government's Budget policy data. They then will make an overall policy setting.
KERRY O'BRIEN: OK.
PM: Beyond that, the deliberations of the board and what may or may not be said within the board, logically are the province of the board.
None of us out there want to see working families punished by interest rate decisions, none of us want any mortgage rate pressure in addition to the half million people already under mortgage pressure prior to there being a change of government. My job, though, is to make sure that our Budget policy direction is sober, consistent and conservative.
KERRY O'BRIEN: You've blamed the previous government for profligate spending also feeding inflation but the Reserve Bank said in its minutes when it put rates up last November that even after all the spending of the Costello budget in May last year and further spending by the Government or spending promises by the Government through the year including their election promises, that that fiscal policy was roughly neutral in its overall effect on growth.
In other words, that the Reserve itself seems to argue that the Howard government spending was not profligate in contributing to inflation?
PM:   Well, our view is that if you put together the aggregation of what happened on the supply side of the economy, which no attention to the skills shortage, no attention to the infrastructure bottlenecks in the economy by the national government.
At the same time you're running a very slack policy when it comes to the public demand impact on the overall inflationary stimulus in the economy.
Put that cocktail together, it was not a happy cocktail.
If you look at the consistent set of warnings from the Reserve Bank, they were consistently critical of the Howard government's performance on the supply side.
That is, through their warnings if you like on skills shortages and infrastructure bottlenecks over many years, 20 successive warnings, each of them ignored, the result being a succession of interest rate rises. Our job is to turn the corner. Turning the Queen Mary around will take time but we take this responsibility very seriously.
KERRY O'BRIEN: On your plan to give an apology to the Stolen Generations of Indigenous Australians as your first action in the new Parliament, how close are you to a form of words and in the interests of bipartisanship, when will you make those words available to the Opposition?
PM:   Well, Kerry, we made it very plain that this is an important piece of unfinished business for the nation. It's been unfinished for far too long. We need to do this and move on. Aboriginal Australians and non-Aboriginal Australians together.
Jenny Macklin the Minister has been out there with Aboriginal leaders for several weeks now. Completed one round of consultations, we've got some more to do this week.
I was on the phone the other night to Brendan Nelson and said I'll be happy to have a discussion with him this week in Canberra. We'll do that over the next couple of days and I'll be giving him a pretty clear indication of where we're going.
Can I just say this, it's clear cut. You either apologise to the Stolen Generations or you don't. We said before the election we were apologising. I'm not quite sure what Brendan's position is as of today, Monday night. But, you know, you can play around with text here and there and we've got to get that right in terms of the Indigenous people and make sure that the apology is effective. But can I say let's not just play word games with the Opposition. You either support it or you don't and I see Shane Stone has a particular view on that this evening.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Your ideas summit, 1,000 people engaged in 10 simultaneous mini-summits over a weekend in a couple of months' time. Can you really expect that a weekend spread so broadly to lead to a whole new burst of policy vision, a 20 year vision or a 10 year vision?
PM:   Are you suggesting to me, Kerry, that it's not worth rolling the arm over and having a go? What I've discovered you know, in the last six weeks or so that we've been in government is that right across the country and certainly within the bureaucracy, there's been a bit of a lid on things.
A whole lot of people have got some real ideas about the future direction of the country. The bureaucracy in my experience seems to have suffered from a culture whereby they feared there was a right answer and a wrong answer and if they gave the wrong answer they had get into strife. I think it's time to turn the page on that.
Secondly we've been, I think, plagued as a nation by too much short-termism, short electoral cycles. It's time to look out to a 10 year vision to the country.
Secondly, harness the energies, enthusiasm and ideas of the nation, and guess what? Everything that gets put forward in this summit is not going to be flash. It's not going to be completely useable the next day. But if you get a dozen good ideas out of 1,000 people gathering together in Canberra at their own expense over a weekend, frankly it's an effort worth going to. Guess what? We're going to debate the future of the ABC as well.
KERRY O'BRIEN: I look forward to that Kevin Rudd.
PM: Do you want to come along?
KERRY O'BRIEN: We'll see. In one form or another
PM:   You can participate it and cover it, whatever you like.
KERRY O'BRIEN: We're out of time for tonight, thanks for talking to us.
PM: Thank you very much.
KERRY O'BRIEN:  Might be a little bit of conflict of interest - covering and contributing.
[ends]


PM:   The tough job of balancing the family Budget just got a whole lot tougher today with the decision to increase interest rates.
The reality of modern life in Australia is that there is no such thing as a small interest rate rise. And after ten interest rate rises in a row, this one will really hurt. Reflecting on how we got into this set of circumstances, the base line is this. That when it comes to higher inflation rates, they result in higher interest rates.
We've had, now, for a long period of time, inflationary pressures building in the Australian economy. And the truth is, inflation in the last quarter of last year was running at the highest rate in 16 years.
These pressures have been building particularly over the last couple of years.
Turning to the future, it means that we have a really tough job ahead.
What are we going to do about it? As I indicated in our first statement on the economy this year, that the core priority of this Government is the fight against inflation. If you look carefully at what the Reserve Bank Governor has said in his statement today, this has been a long time building, and it's going to be with us for a long time as well.
Turning this around is going to take a lot of effort on the part of Government, in order to make sure that we put the position of the Bank such that downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on rates becomes the reality in the longer term.
Therefore, we announced at the beginning of this year our five point plan of attack against inflation. We stated clearly that we will be embracing a conservative Budget target, a Budget surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP.
The razor gang has been hard at work here in Canberra to ensure that we bring about that outcome. That means doing our bit to restrain public demands.
And secondly, as part of our plan of attack against inflation, to do what is necessary to boost private savings.
And thirdly, on the supply side of the economy, to tackle those things which have been left un-tackled for so long now when it comes to the skills shortages in the economy, the infrastructure bottlenecks, and what needs to be done on workplace participation.
These inflation pressures have been building for a long time. It's going to take a long time to turn them around. We have a course of action for the Government. We'll be implementing that course of action rigorously in the year ahead. If I can ask the Treasurer to add to my remarks.
TREASURER: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. This 11th interest rate rise in a row will be tough for a lot of families out there and tough for a lot of businesses. And, the Reserve Bank statement points to the significant problem. High inflation produces higher interest rates. 
And of course, for that December quarter, in October, November and December, Australia recorded the highest underlying inflation in 16 years.
So the RBA statement points directly to that. And it also points to a revision upwards in terms of future inflation. And it also points to capacity constraints in the economy, I quote:
“... Reports of high capacity usage and shortages of suitable skilled labour persists”
The Reserve Bank warned the previous government on twenty occasions about capacity constraints in the economy and those warnings were ignored. The government was complacent.
The government now, takes these matters very seriously and from day one we have worked hard to put in place a series of policy settings to deal with inflationary pressures in the Australian economy.
The Prime Minister's five point plan announced a few weeks ago shows our determination to deal these inflationary pressures. And today's decision just hardens our resolve to deal with these inflationary pressures.
I can understand why families would be angry. I can particularly understand that families will be very angry with the previous Government for failing to heed these warnings. The Rudd Government will not ignore these warnings.
We began work on day one and are continuing to work very hard, using ever lever at our disposal to deal with these inflationary pressures. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
PM: Firstly, your reading of the government statement is correct. That is, that the Governor, consistent with his statutory obligations, is putting the fight against inflation first, hence the monetary policy, tightening that we see today.
Our judgement as a government is that inflation is not just the enemy of the entire economy, it's the enemy of businesses and it's the enemy of working families. And as a government we therefore believe that the fight against inflation must come first as well.
In terms of the long term implications for growth in the global economy which of course lies beyond the remit of the Reserve Bank, but growth in the domestic economy, which is shaped by the decisions of the Reserve Bank. We are confident at this stage that our revenue projections are in order. As I said in my statement in Perth the other day, we will however, as we go forward this year be very mindful of unfolding circumstances in the global economy. Our five point plan of attack against inflation is made against the information that we have at hand today.
There is nothing further we have at hand today which suggest that there should be any deviation from it or our current belief as to what revenue projections for the year ahead will be.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you said that the family budget will get tougher, is it time for you to get tougher with the national budget. Some economists don't think a 1.5 per cent surplus is enough, it won't make an impact on inflationary pressures. Do you accept that argument? Do you think you have got to revisit that target?
PM: Well, I said that we were setting a target of 1.5 and I'd note for the record that that's about 0.5 of a per cent of GDP higher than that was projected by the previous government only about three months ago. We therefore set an ambitious target. Of course, if the Treasurer and I and the Finance Minister succeed in doing better than that, we will.
We will do whatever it takes when it comes to budget policy to put downward pressure on interest rates. That's our responsibility as the national government. We intend to execute that responsibility.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd should the Reserve Bank have acted earlier and harder on these interest rate rises  -  I mean, given that the government was ignoring the warnings that you have indicated  -  should they have gone harder earlier? Are we suddenly inflation genie out of the bottle now?
PM: I am not in the business of public hectoring of the bank in terms of historical, present or any future decisions. If you accept the independence of the Bank, you should let the Bank get on with what it is doing.
When it comes to fiscal policy settings, I think we've been pretty clear about this ourselves. We believe that fiscal policy settings in this country by the previous government were too loose. We've said that for a long, long time.
Quite apart from inaction on the rest of the Government's agenda, namely on the skills front and infrastructure front. Remember as the Treasurer said before, the warnings on inflation have been around now for the better part of two to even three years. Twenty warnings in a row. Read those warnings. They are very stark. But they were warnings from the Bank, to the government, which the government  -  the previous government  -  ignored.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, you say there were warnings from the Reserve Bank but (inaudible)
SWAN: Underlying inflation Laurie, has been on the rise for a long period of time. You can look at the headline rate but you also have to look at the underlying rate. And the Reserve Bank and the Treasury have been warning about the underlying rate for some period of time.
And in the incoming government brief that we received there was another warning about underlying inflation. The alarm bells on inflation have been going off. The previous government was not listening. They were not listening.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
SWAN: The Treasury did not necessarily get it wrong. They have been warning about underlying inflation for a long period of time. Headline inflation moves up and down. Underlying inflation  - 
JOURNALIST: You say that inflation will be two per cent this year and next year?
SWAN: No not at all. And that's not the Treasury projection. No, they didn't get it wrong and it's not the Treasury projection, Laurie. The Reserve Bank has been warning about underlying inflation. The Treasury has been warning about underlying inflation. Headline inflation goes up and down. You might recall the famous banana effect of last year.
What the Treasury takes notice of, what the Reserve Bank takes notice of is underlying inflation. And the advice that we receive from both the Treasury  -  and you have received today from the Reserve Bank and the government has received from all of the forecasting authorities that work with us  -  is that inflation has been on the rise for a long period of time.
Indeed it has been on the march for at least the last two years. And both authorities are extremely concerned about it. They ought to be, because underlying inflation is a cancer which eats away at living standards and that is why it has to be dealt with and we are dealing with the consequences of that today.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you, is the advice that Treasury gave you in the Red Book the same as it gave publicly in the pre election economic and fiscal outlook?
SWAN: I'd have to go back and read both documents and line them up, Laurie and I am happy to do that afterwards.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
SWAN: I certainly will.
PM: But the responsibility Laurie, lies with the Treasurer of the day, I mean, let's stand back a bit. If you are the Treasurer of the Commonwealth, as Mr Costello was for a long, long time. You have got rolling in the door, twenty successive warnings from the Reserve Bank of Australia. A responsible Treasurer would have acted. Particularly on the supply side constraints.
Mr Costello chose not to do so. In answer to part two of your question, by the way, is no.
JOURNALIST: You said the government is confident your fiscal projections are in order (Inaudible)
SWAN: Well I don't conceive that they have got them wrong. So we'll line those documents up later, and we'll have a look.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) should abolish your tax cuts. Will you stand by them?
PM: Yes, our intention is to implement the tax cuts. I have said that on a number of occasions in the past. And nothing has caused me to change that course of action.
JOURNALIST:   You have said that families are struggling under the interest rate pressures and inflation is building, how long will it take for your five point plan to have an effect, how long will it be before families get some relief from inflation through your plan?
PM: Well, inflationary pressures have taken a long time to build, and they are going to take a long time to put back under control. There are three measures available to us to help. One  -  the budget's impact on demand and what that therefore does to push inflation up over time. We have put our credentials on the line on that in terms of our target for 1.5 for this year's budget.
On the supply side of the economy, we have embraced some very vigorous courses of action, to deal with skills and infrastructure and workforce participation. But I am just being blunt with you. A problem which has a long time to build, a long time to turn around and, if you read the Governor's statement carefully, inflationary pressures are still on the build.
I don't intend to guild the lily on that. They are on the build. Therefore it takes radical action. We have outlined our course of action and we did so some weeks ago before any of this data was available.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you said you'll stick with your tax cuts, but can you explain how putting an additional $7 billion into consumer pockets through tax cuts over the next twelve months is consistent with the Reserve Bank's call for a significant (inaudible) in demand?
PM: Well, as you know there are two contributing factors to demand. One is public and the other is private. If you look carefully at the statement I delivered in Perth the other day, it sought to address both. One aspect of that, was of course public demand, and we've indicated our approach on budget policy on that score. The other is private demand, and if you look carefully at that statement, ways in which we can continue to encourage to boost private savings. Can I indicate one measure which we have sought to do so, announced by the Treasurer yesterday - it was our First Home Saver Accounts.
That is not inflationary, that actually encourages savings in the long term over a number of years, before you can access that to assist first home buyers to get into the housing market. That encourages people to save, thereby removing pressures, from private demand now. Unless you wanted to add to that -
TREASURER: Well, I do actually, because we will make additional savings elsewhere in the Budget.  We've made that very, very clear and we intend to do that and that will be revealed on Budget night. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you met with your full Ministry earlier this afternoon.  Did you outline to them the sort of savings that you expect them to put up in this Budget round?
PM: I've been meeting with each Minister and their Secretary individually now for a long time and I still have a number to go.  It's been a very interesting set of intensive discussions. 
On top of that, the Budget Committee has been meeting in long session, line by line, program by program, item by item.  This is a very tough business.  I understand the Finance Minister may have more to say about this tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Mike Rann's indicated that if Mitsubishi is closing today its Adelaide operations, as we expect later on, that the company should pay back the substantial taxpayer support it's been offered in recent years.  Is that your position as well, given the support to Mitsubishi [inaudible]?  Do you think that the company has an obligation to repay taxpayers, given that it gave assurances that its operations would continue until 2010?
PM: Mitsubishi has a responsibility to act properly given the government support it's received.  The actions of the South Australian Government are a matter for Mike Rann.
More broadly, on the question of what's happening with Mitsubishi, the Industry Minister, Kim Carr, was speaking with representatives of Mitsubishi last night and I understand again this morning both in Tokyo and in Australia. 
The Industry Minister federally, as has the State Government of South Australia, has spoken to Mitsubishi in terms of confirming whether there are any measures, further measures, which the Australian or State Government should consider which would be relevant to the deliberations of the Mitsubishi board.  I think we need to wait to see what Mitsubishi itself formally determines.  And on this matter, I spoke at length also with the Premier of South Australia this morning.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, considering many Liberal MPs said that they'll only support the Sorry motion based on the words [inaudible] not too extreme.  When will you make that language available to them so that they can look through it so they can get ...?
PM: Sure, sure.  As I said yesterday, the objective here is to get, if we can do it, a unanimous resolution of the Parliament.  I think that's a really good outcome for the nation if we can do it when it comes to this important step in the process of reconciliation. 
On the specifics of the apology itself, what I have indicated already is that I'll be sitting down with Brendan Nelson very soon to go through the principle content of the motion for the Parliament.  I hope to do that within the next 24 hours, and I look forward to that discussion with Dr Nelson.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll be conveying the clear content of what's there and I'm sure he'll have something to take away with him.
JOURNALIST: Will he have anything to take with him into the party room meeting tomorrow morning or is he going to have to wait?
PM: Well, it depends on when Brendan wants to have his party room meeting.  But we'll check that out.  We're not sort of, you know, trying to be cute and clever here.  I've said yesterday or the day before, Jenny Macklin's been engaged in one round of consultations with Aboriginal leaders, there's still more going on this week and there's still a few things to do on that front. 
But given where we are at the moment, I intend to accommodate Dr Nelson as much as is possible, given he's got his MPs in town and needs to have some discussions.  I understand that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) ...stake in Rio Tinto, what's the government's position on that, and more generally, on China's buying up of stakes in Australian resources stocks?
PM: Well, I'll ask the Treasurer to comment on this because FIRB matters lie within his province.  But by way of a couple of general principles, one, the reason we have Foreign Investment Review Board guidelines and a Foreign Takeovers Act is to ensure that the Australian national interest is always met and deliberations on any significant foreign equity in an Australian firm, whether it's from the United States, whether it's from Japan, China or Balukistan, wherever it comes from.  The second point is there is no country called Balukistan, it's part of another country. That's a comment on the future of Pakistan.
Therefore, those national interest guidelines are there, they'll be applied by the Treasury in its deliberations on the proposal from Chinalco.  These matters were discussed also between myself and the Chinese Foreign Minister this morning and I understand Minister Ferguson has also had discussions with Chinalco as well.  That is the facts concerning the current investment by Chinalco in Rio. But the deliberation on national interest considerations is within the Treasurer's purchase, consistent with the regulations which exist under the Foreign Takeovers Act.
TREASURER: Thank you, Prime Minister.  But as I said yesterday, I don't intend to make any comment on this issue.  I will apply the law under the Foreign Investment Review Board.  Under the Foreign Investment Review Board I will apply the act of the national interest and I don't propose to comment on individual proposals.
JOURNALIST: Putting aside individual proposals, are there any particular concerns that an Australian government should have about state-owned investment vehicles, whether they're companies or sovereign wealth funds or other investment vehicles out of China investing in Australia?
PM: I think if you look at the regulatory environment at present, it covers a range of possibilities, including direct investments by foreign governments and their agencies, irrespective of size.  That's there at present.  That's as relevant to the national interest considerations as anything else and the Treasurer's entirely right in saying that this, together with any other such proposal, should be assessed on its merits against the national interest criteria.
JOURNALIST: So regardless of whether it's a private company investing in an Australian company or whether it's a foreign government investing in an Australian company, be judged on the same merit, national interest and merit base?
PM: Well, the fact that the existing guidelines countenance these entities separately, I think partly answers your question, and that is there is a separate reference to direct investments by foreign governments and their agencies irrespective of their size.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just to confirm that, do you consider the Chinalco investment to be one by a foreign government agency?
PM: I presume this will be the subject of deliberations between the staff of the Foreign Investment Review Board and those seeking clarification of the facts from the Chinese investor.  That's part of the normal processes which apply with officials in these circumstances, and also I think you will find that previous investments, I think, by the Singapore Government investment agency and various entities in Australia have occurred before.  But the Treasurer's entirely right, these should be considered on its merits against the national interests and that's what will occur.
JOURNALIST: You've spoken about the apology as a resolution, what's made you have a resolution rather than a declaration?  And if the vote is split, do you think that taking it over the long-term, that will diminish the value of the apology by the Parliament?
PM: Our belief is that a resolution of Parliament is an appropriate way of expressing formally the resolve of either the Government or the Parliament, depending on the way in which the Opposition votes on this, on such a fundamental matter as this, which is an apology for what has occurred.  That's the advice we've received, that's what we propose to do.  I think it's the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: The advice from whom?
PM:   The advice that we've received from the various agencies of Government. And of course, we own that decision, it's ours, but we believe a resolution of the Parliament is the right, substantive and most appropriate symbolic act that we can take to put this behind us as a nation. We've got a big opportunity here.  Grab this with both hands, get on with it so that Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australia can move forward together on the critical, practical, substantive challenge of closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd, will that motion go to both Houses and if not, why not?
PM:   My understanding, Laurie, and I'll take advice on this and I don't want to mislead you, is that that has not been determined yet but I'll come back to you.  I don't want to mislead you by getting the question of the Senate wrong.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd, during your discussion with Mr Rann this morning did the issue of the tariff freeze come up [inaudible]?
:  We were speaking quite specifically about Mitsubishi's current circumstances and the discussions his government has had with Mitsubishi, the discussions our Government has had with Mitsubishi and both governments be absolutely clear in their communications with the Mitsubishi board in Tokyo as to whether there is anything further from either government, State or national, that could be done that would be material to Mitsubishi's decision.
It was very important for us to establish that and clarify that.  We did that yesterday at the national level.  I'm not quite sure when the State Government of South Australia did it and the answer was there was nothing.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM:   Because I think it's a responsible course of action on the part of any government to assure itself that there is nothing which could be done that has not been done
Remember, at this plant you've got nearly 1000 direct jobs at stake.  These are folk living in the suburbs of Adelaide who have been, as I understand it, on average, working at this plant for 15 to 20 years. 
A lot of people spent their lives there and so I think it's responsible of anyone trying to do the right thing just to check whether there's something that hasn't been done that could be done.  It's just the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Swan, the Reserve Bank Governor referred today to further rises in the Australian terms of trade.  To what extent do you think Australia's inflationary problem has been caused by the minerals boom?
TREASURER:Well certainly it adds to demand in the economy which makes it all the more important that we deal with supply constraints n the economy, and that's why the Reserve Bank has been issuing repeated warnings over a long period of time to the previous government to deal with the supply capacity of the economy.
We took those warnings very seriously when we were in Opposition and we constructed our program to deal with the skills crisis, a program to deal with infrastructure bottlenecks precisely because that takes into account our new environment.
We have to prepare the country for a different world and in the world we live where there is a higher terms of trade, we need to work very hard at expanding our supply capacity and that's what we're doing.
PM:   This Government believes in planning for the long term.  The Government we replaced was a government of short-term-ism, as demonstrated by no action on skills, no action on infrastructure.
They seem to think that these were interesting exercises in social policy or what happened out in the regions.  Our predecessors didn't quite grasp the fact, it seems, these are core elements in the overall fight against inflation.  If they did, well there's not much to show for it. 
I can only assume that that core reality passed them by and we are now paying the price for that.  There's not just an idle piece of social policy about whether you should do something on the skills front or you know, being sweet to a state government about an infrastructure project here, infrastructure there.  It's a systemic question about what you do on the supply side of the economy.
The Reserve Bank is not made up of a bunch of pussy cats who sit there and make the odd sort of fleeting observation about a few skills here and a bit of infrastructure there.
If, in 20 warnings over a three year period, they are saying to government, will you please pay attention to this because it's building inflationary pressure in the economy, you would have thought someone would have done something. 
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd, you've said that you'll do whatever you can to do whatever is necessary to fight inflation.  Does that include revisiting any of your election promises?
PM:   There's nothing in our pre-election commitments that we have any basis for walking away from.  I have no such intention to do so.  We were serious about our commitments to the people before the election.  We intend to implement those commitments.  It's part of our relationship of trust with the Australian community. Of course, Wayne's already answered the question in relation to tax cuts put up the back there.
We're entirely familiar with the dilemmas which are created as a result of that. We are going to honour our commitments but that's why we are taking a really hard line on Budget and that's why we are taking an innovative look at what we can do on the private savings fund as well as demonstrated...
JOURNALIST:   Do you regret that in retrospect, embracing that whole package [inaudible]?
PM:   Working families right across the country, you heard me say this months ago, and the reality is even truer today, are under financial pressure.  It's not just mortgages, they are big, and as I said in my opening remarks, hurting families big time.  It's petrol prices, it's grocery prices, it's childcare costs, all taken together and that's what shaped our decision to embrace the more modest package of tax cuts that were put forward relative to the government.  And remember, ours are some $3 billion to $4 billion less in magnitude than those advanced by the government. And one more question there and we'll zip it.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd, you've asked workers to show restraint in their pay claims the ACTU has called on politicians to show similar restraint.  Would you back an approach where MPs decided to have a pay rise on a lower level than that suggested by the Remuneration Tribunal?
TREASURER: You know something?  We've got the Remuneration Tribunal, and everyone here is familiar with the way that operates.  I've got a really open mind on that.  It depends how this year starts to unfold.  But restraint is restraint and we'll have something further to say about that.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


The Australian and South Australian Governments have today announced a $50 million package to support workers and the region affected by Mitsubishi Motors Corporation's decision today to close the Tonsley Park vehicle assembly plant at the end of March 2008.  The package includes:
     * up to $10 million for intensive assistance to workers; and
     * a $40 million South Australian Innovation and Investment Fund to strengthen South Australia's manufacturing base, creating new jobs and boosting new investment in innovation.
Mitsubishi Motor Corporation's decision will result in approximately 930 direct job losses, comprising 600 plant positions and 330 administrative and professional jobs.
Both the Australian and South Australian Governments spoke with the Mitsubishi President Osamu Masuko and the company's Australian CEO Robert McEniry yesterday and were assured that there was nothing the Government could do to affect Mitsubishi Motors Corporation's decision.
Our top priority now is the workers and their families, and both governments are working with Mitsubishi Motors Australia and Mitsubishi Motors Corporation in Japan to ensure that the affected workers are treated fairly and have the assistance they need at this difficult time.
Mitsubishi Motors Corporation has assured us that it will ensure that the affected employees receive their full entitlements, and that redundancy packages will be available in line with those provided to workers made redundant at its Lonsdale engine plant in 2004.
The Australian and South Australian Governments and Mitsubishi Motors Australia will jointly fund a package of initiatives to assist affected workers, create jobs in southern Adelaide and boost investment in South Australian manufacturing.
Up to $10 million will be made available to provide intensive assistance to workers made redundant as a result of this closure, with the Australian Government contributing up to $7.5 million and the South Australian Government $2.5 million.
The package will include immediate job search support assistance, including a detailed assessment of the worker's capabilities and potential opportunities in the local labour market.
Workers will also be eligible for significant re-training opportunities, to meet skills in demand in growing sectors of the economy.
A new South Australian Innovation and Investment Fund will also be established. The $40 million fund will run over three years from 2008-09 to 2010-11.  This Fund will:
     * Support projects that create sustainable, full-time jobs.
     * Be directed at projects that diversify and strengthen the capacity of South Australia's manufacturing and industry sector.
     * Encourage projects supporting the introduction of new innovations or technology, including investment in emerging and growth sectors such as defence and ICT.
     * Adelaide, and the possible use of the Tonsley Park site and facilities (subject to decisions by Mitsubishi Motors Australia on disposal of the site).
     * Provide up to $10 million for strategic infrastructure that improves the competitiveness of the region.
The Australian and South Australian Governments believe that it is critical to invest in the future of the southern Adelaide region.
There are many commercial opportunities in Adelaide, including in sectors such as advanced engineering, renewable energy, resource, defence and information and communications technology.
The Fund will operate over three years from 2008-09 to 2010-11 and be supported by an investment of $27.5 million from the Commonwealth Government and $7.5 million from the South Australian Government.  Mitsubishi Motors Australia has indicated its willingness to invest $5 million in the Fund, subject to final internal approval.
We appreciate Mitsubishi Motors Australia's assurances that affected workers will receive the best possible support, and its ongoing desire to work closely with governments and unions on this and other issues.
Similarly, both governments applaud the loyalty that workers and unions have shown to Mitsubishi, as the Corporation has worked hard to respond to global pressures.
The Australian and South Australian Governments remain committed to the Australian automotive industry.
The Australian Government's Automotive Competitiveness and Investment Scheme will provide a total of over $7 billion from 2001 to 2015 to assist the industry to become more internationally competitive.
Since the scheme commenced in 2001, Mitsubishi Australia has received around $180 million in ACIS credits.
The Australian Government has also committed to a $500 million Green Car Innovation Fund from 2011 to encourage the Australian automotive industry to develop and manufacture low emission vehicles. 
The Australian Government is currently finalising the terms of reference for a review of the automotive industry to ensure the appropriate policy settings are in place for the ongoing competitiveness of the industry.  Details of this review will be announced shortly.
Contact:
Prime Minister's office 02 6277 7744 
Minister Carr's office  -  Catriona Jackson (0417 142 238)
Premier Rann's office  -  Lachlan Parker (0417 810 890)


Fast broadband technology using ADSL2+ is to be rolled out by Telstra to an additional 900 local exchanges serving 2.4 million households, the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Stephen Conroy, announced today.
The Australian Government congratulates Telstra on its decision to provide higher broadband speeds to its customers. Fast broadband with download speeds of up to 20 megabits per second (Mbps) will now be available in more cities and towns throughout Australia.
Ensuring Australian homes and businesses have access to high-speed broadband services is a high priority of the Australian Government.
Telstra's decision to enable new exchanges with ADSL2+ broadband services follows an assurance that it had an appropriate level of regulatory certainty. This advice was provided to the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).
“The Chairman of the ACCC, Mr Graeme Samuel, advised me that the ACCC has made a number of consistent public statements relating to the regulation of wholesale access to ADSL services,” Senator Conroy said.
“As a result of this advice, I concluded that there is a high degree of regulatory certainty in relation to the ACCC's approach to wholesale ADSL2+ services. I have written to Telstra expressing my position, acknowledging that I agree with the ACCC's stance.
“I am delighted that I could provide this assurance to Telstra and that, as a result, a large number of Australian homes and businesses will have access to improved broadband services.”
The rollout of ADSL2+ to Telstra exchanges is a major step forward in making high-speed broadband accessible to a significant part of the Australian population.
However, technical issues, such as the distance people live from a telephone exchange will affect broadband connection speeds.
That is why the Australian Government is committed to the National Broadband Network that will deliver fibre to the node technology to 98 per cent of Australian homes and businesses, enabling access to broadband services with minimum connection speeds of 12 megabits per second.
“I look forward to working with the telecommunications industry to achieve this outcome” said Senator Conroy.
Contact: 
Kate Cornick 0401 794 710


I am pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Terry Moran AO as the new Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Mr Moran will begin his appointment on 3 March 2008.
Mr Moran is currently Secretary of the Victorian Department of Premier and Cabinet and has led four public sector organisations as CEO over the last 20 years. Throughout his career Mr Moran has gained substantial experience in both central and service delivery agencies.
Mr Moran has a demonstrated ability to develop and implement sustainable administrative outcomes for addressing complex policy challenges.
Mr Moran will be well placed to administratively assist the Rudd Government's objective to build a modern Australia capable of meeting our future challenges.
I would like to formally acknowledge the contribution of Dr Peter Shergold to Australian public life during his tenure as Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Dr Shergold's professionalism and leadership earned him great and deserved respect both within the Australian Public Service and beyond.
I wish Dr Shergold well in his new role at the University of New South Wales. Ms. Jenny Goddard will continue as Acting Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet from 9 February until Mr Moran commences.
CANBERRA


The Australian Government today approved further financial assistance to help small businesses and farmers through the enhanced component of the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) after a request from the New South Wales Premier, Morris Iemma.
The Australian Government will provide additional assistance to those residents seriously affected by the recent floods in the Northern and Central West areas of NSW in December 2007 and January 2008.
Through the NDRRA program with the states, the Australian Government assists with the costs and resourcing of response and recovery operations in large scale disasters.
This additional assistance will provide farmers and registered small business owners, who have experienced severe damage from floods, with a grant of up to $5,000.
An additional tourism recovery package has also been announced, which includes $300,000 each from the Commonwealth and NSW Governments to assist the North Coast region.
The Australian Government will continue working with the NSW Government and local community organisations to support people affected by the recent storms and floods.
While on the North Coast of NSW today, the Prime Minister  commended the workers and many volunteers for their efforts in helping the community recovery effort.“After meeting with local business owners and farmers this morning, it is plain that the impact of the floods on the Northern Rivers District has been very significant.
“There is still much work to do over the coming months, however we hope this assistance today will provide a helping hand for these communities to fully recover.”
NSW Premier Morris Iemma thanked the Commonwealth for recognising the impact of the flood events.
“This is a great example of how the State and Commonwealth can work together.”
“This package is a measured response both to the immediate needs of primary producers and affected small businesses throughout the rural communities in NSW.”
Farmers should contact the NSW Rural Assistance Authority for details on 1800 678 593.
More information on Australian Government assistance is available at www.disasterassist.gov.au
PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS OFFICE: 02 6277 7744
NSW PREMIER'S PRESS OFFICE Office: 02 9228 429


PM:Well I am here today in Kyogle with Tony Burke the Agriculture Minister and Janelle Saffin our Federal Member and we are here to talk to local people, local farmers, local business operators and local government about the impact of the recent floods in the Northern Rivers.
There's been a huge amount of damage from the floods in this Northern Rivers district and I have been talking just now to the Sneath family about the impact on their property here.
Their calculation is that they have probably got $90,000 plus worth of cost incurred through the cost of fodder for dairy cattle and some beef. On top of that, lost production  -  if you don't mild for a day and a half, well there is no milk being produced. And then of course there's extra losses through the loss of dairy cattle through mastitis, some of which have had to be put down.
All this adds up. I have also been talking to a local soy bean farmer and he's had a terrible time. As a share farmer having had a big impact on his property through the loss of top soil. And someone who has worked hard on the land to build that up into a decent farming business enterprise and now has a big challenge on his hands because of what's happened with these floods.
Earlier today we spoke with business operators as well about the impact which they have had and of course the capacity of different businesses to deal with these challenges varies, depending on the circumstances.
Janelle has also been telling me about the impact on local families themselves. She has told me about the flats at Kyogle and the impact on those low lying houses.
So plainly the impact on the floods in the Northern Rivers district has been significant in this district, but beyond this district as well. The reason I have come today is because Janelle has been on the blower to me about what needs to be done by way of extra assistance and there are standard assistance measures, which relate to the natural disaster arrangements which Tony Burke, the Minister, and I were discussing yesterday in Canberra - when he briefed me also on the circumstances here in the Northern Rivers district. I decided that it was good for us to come up this morning and have a look first hand at the impact and take up Janelle's suggestion that we do so as well.
From here, I am travelling to Sydney and I will be having a bite with Premier Morris Iemma about the particular needs here. But what I am strongly minded to do is to agree a further assistance package to assist with the particular needs which are being experienced in this area.
Assistance which also has at front and centre, the needs of local farmers. Of course, these assistance packages from natural disasters from government do not solve all of the problems. They never will. And mother-nature can be pretty cruel. But you can offer a bit more of a helping hand and that is what we intend to do.
And having said that, I think I will flip to Tony, and then ask Janelle to say on or two things as well.
TONY BURKE: The thing that's certainly clear today is the full extent of damage following floods like these isn't always evident when you are at the high watermark. And it's the ongoing problems that could be faced with soil, the ongoing problems with disease and in this case, in particular here, with mastitis, where those impacts continue to be felt.
No government programme fixes everything, but the look today is about being able to provide an extra extend of a helping hand.
It's important with any announcements that follow from this, that we don't  -  that nobody actually feels that they should be self assessing their damage. What's important is for people to be visiting the web page that I would recommend for people to make contact with, which is disasterassist.gov.au  -  and also the Australian Government Flood Assistance Hotline of 180 2 333  -  in terms of making contact as the response from today follows, following the Prime Minister's meeting with the NSW Premier.
JANELLE SAFFIN: I am really pleased to have Kevin and Tony here. Throughout the floods and after the floods I have stayed in contact directly with Tony and more recently with Kevin and I said it is time to come for visit. We have got our submissions in order. I have met with all the different associations, with Norco, with the oil seed growers, cane growers, fishers. Got all that together, met with individual families. That's gone off to the state and it's time that we were given some extra assistance, that's what I have been asking for.
And we're a pretty sort of stoic lot here. We've had three natural disasters in the last few months and the floods was just the last straw. But it took us a few weeks to get all our, you know, information in order. We are now ready to go with that and Kevin has responded positively before he goes off to see the Premier today so I am delighted.
It's good that this is a flood visit. And it is a visit in Page but it's also Richmond that was affected and other areas in NSW. The farmers have really done it a bit tough - and local families. So thank you.
PM:So just before turning to your questions, I think that's put it all in a bit of context too. Here this is the biggest flood this district has seen since 1954. This is not just a bit of wet weather. This is a serious flood which has been through here. And local people haven't seen it as high, unless you were around in the ‘50s. And many lives were lost here in those floods in the ‘50s.
Its been a very big flood. The right thing to do has been to take a bit of time to make sure the assessments are done, they have been submitted properly to State Government, and then trigger mechanisms apply with what additional assistance we can provide at the national level as well.
As Janelle has rightly said, it is not just here. We've received representations also from Justine Elliot, the Federal Member for Richmond, about the impact in that part of the world. And there have been other parts of New South Wales as well.
But, government can't solve all these problems as Tony has just said, but we can lend a helping hand. That's what we propose to do. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister you have arrived here today, and Queensland you announced funding very quickly after the floods, New South Wales, down here, it has been a month since we have had a flood, Western New South Wales, a bit longer and you come here, yet, empty handed.
PM:Well I think the important thing to do is to first of all make sure all the assessments are in. That is important. And my understanding from the New South Wales Government is that that process has just been concluded. Secondly, the reason I am here is to say that we are here to respond positively to a second level of extra assistance.
So the premise of your question actually is wrong.
JOURNALIST:What sort of role will the meeting with the Premier play today in what you can offer?
PM:Well, we've got to go to the detail of the categories of extra assistance. If you look at the structure of natural disaster recovery and relief assistance in the RRA, it falls into two levels: what's called standard assistance and then, additional assistance.
Under those additional assistance measures there are usually three categories of assistance which are possible, those which relate to farms, farmers such as those we've been meeting today. Those which relate to small businesses and those which relate to community organisations.
For example, one of the things that we probably will need to look at over time is, you had a really wet summer, and that's effected the tourism industry as well. What can we do to put a bit more backing behind tourism promotion for this part of Australia so that people know the region is back in business.
All these factors add up to the local economy. The farm economy is important small business operators are important as is the tourism sector. So we are going to look at all of those categories of possible assistance and I'll be seeking to finalise those with Morris when I catch up later today.
But pardon me for being a bit conservative about these things, I always like to come and have a look first. Having grown up on a beef and dairy farm just like this myself, I like to see what the impact has been.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister you say you govern for all Australians yet the Queenslanders have got federal assistance before the New South Wales people. Why is it that they have received assistance so far before us?
PM:Well there are trigger mechanisms involving - for the Federal Government to assist - which involve assessments to the State Government reaching their own decision. Part of the reason for heading of to Sydney today for a meeting with Morris is to complete that process. That's what we go through, that's what we've gone through elsewhere as well. I think it's the right way to go.
Also can I just add to what Tony said, the easy thing is to rock around some place when a disaster has hit. What Tony said is absolutely right. Responsible leadership lies in coming and looking at the impact when it's no longer actually the front page of the news. Because that is when the flow through of people's costs actually occurs. That's when people are working out how they are going to have to budget for it. That's actually the responsible way to handle these things. And I keep saying, we can't solve all these financial problems, but we can lend a helping hand in the right, proper and methodical way, and these processes are about to reach their conclusion.
JOURNALIST:Can I ask Prime Minister, is there any thought of extending federal assistance to people in Western Sydney, around Blacktown, who have been without roofs for up to three months after a storm?
PM:What I'd say about the people in Blacktown, who have been through a really tough time, a really hard time, is, I think it is time for the
Interruption 
JOURNALIST:Any chance of extending federal assistance to people in Western Sydney, for instance, Blacktown, who have been without roofs for up to three months after the storm?
PM:What I discovered here in discussions with Janelle is that - and what I have heard from some of our Federal representatives from Western Sydney - is that challenge number one lies with getting a proper response from the insurance companies.
Now, obviously insurance companies send out their assessors, that's the right thing to do. What I would be saying to the insurance industry across Australia  -  those who are insuring farmers and small business operators and others here in the Northern Rivers, together with those who are insuring those in Western Sydney  -  it's time to get on with it and get on with it very soon.
If you're out there in Western Sydney and you have had a tarp over your roof for quite some time now, I know it takes a while to put an assessment in, but it's time to get on with it and so I'd be appealing to the insurance industry to do the right thing by the people of Western Sydney as quickly as possible.
JOURNALIST:In Lismore, we've got houses that have had tarps on the roof for four months now from the hail storm back in October. We've got complaints coming in to our paper almost daily and I know the local MPs are getting it as well from people complaining about insurers either being tardy or spuriously rejecting claims where, for example, you will have a house that is the only house in the street where the insurer says no we are not going to replace the roof. What can be done to help those people?
PM:Well, I am always attracted to a bit of naming and shaming so when we start to get to that point, I am very keen to engage in a public debate about whether the insurance companies concerned are doing the right thing.
Let's be very blunt about this. Insurance companies operate on the basis of their own calculation of risk. That's why, overall, it has been a very profitable industry, for insurance firms for a long, long time.
But when disasters hit - whether it's in Lismore, Western Sydney or this one up here, can I say  -  can I say, they actually need to come to the party.
I understand the processes, just get your assessments done. And if what you say is right, people are kicking around for four months with tarps on their roofs in Lismore, I don't think that should be the right way to go.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible) ... one waiting for three months just to get the tarp
PM:Okay. But if they have been waiting for three to four months to get assistance from an insurance company, that strikes me as unusual. I am sure the Federal Member will be looking into that for me.
JOURNALIST:Can I just quickly say the front page for the Oz today indicates this latest round of tax cuts might be the last for quite some time and a bit of a change in your policy.
PM:No. Prior to the election we committed to tax cuts flowing from the upcoming financial year. I have said repeatedly we honour the commitments we made prior to the election and we are serious about that. If you go to the people and say you are going to do something and you get elected, you have got to do it.
JOURNALIST:But I am talking beyond  - 
PM:Well, beyond that and including the period ahead, our number one responsibility is to fight the fight against inflation. If inflation -those pressures which have been let loose by the previous government over the last two years  -  if we don't act where they failed to act, then inflation becomes a real, real problem for farmers, small business operators and working families.
Our number one responsibility is to fight the fight against inflation because if you fail to dot hat effectively, the impact on people's lives, their livelihood, their mortgage interest payments as well as the costs of doing business just goes through the roof.
Therefore, the economically conservative and responsible thing to do is to place the war against inflation number one. That's the speech I delivered at the very beginning of this year on our five point plan of attack on inflation. We intend to proceed with that. It's the right course of action for the nation.
JOURNALIST:Anything to say about bank behaviour this week?
PM:Oh, I think Wayne Swan got it absolutely right in his response to what the Commonwealth Bank did the other day. I don't think it was the right thing to do at all.
JOURNALIST:The people of the Central West and Riverina have over one hundred million dollars worth of damage there, any time soon will you be visiting them and then offering them some kind of help?
PM:I think someone from the Government will be there before long. I am acutely conscious of the reports I have received for what's happened elsewhere in the country. But we are a Government for all Australians. I don't care which way people vote. If natural disasters hit, our responsibility is to do the right and decent thing wherever they come from. And it will be assessed against the normal criteria of the effect on people's lives, livelihoods and the rest and then we will act.
Tony Burke has been active through his state counterparts and farm organisations across the country, keeping a close eye on this. And we intend, as I said, to be extending a helping hand.
It won't solve all problems. We can't fix natural disasters but you can, at the level of Government, offer that helping hand of assistance when it is needed.
I think I have got to go now. Thank you.


LAURIE OAKES: Prime Minister, welcome to Sunday.
PM: Pleasure to be on the program Laurie.
LAURIE OAKES: How long did it take you to settle in to the job, I mean, have you got used to being called Prime Minister yet? 
PM: Not entirely, it is the honest answer to it. People say that I usually look around my left shoulder and wonder where the other bloke is, and but we've spent the last couple of months knuckling down to the job, there is a lot to do.
We've got a large number of pre election commitments to the Australian people which we take seriously, and so we've all been focused together with the cabinet colleagues on translating that into reality and that has been a pretty demanding job the first few months.
LAURIE OAKES: And how's the bureaucracy going? Has there been any Yes Minister moments or do they jump to and do what you want? 
PM: Well I said to them the other day, we had a good meeting of the chief executives of all the public service agencies and it was a good meeting. We were just talking about the proper responsibilities of ministers on the one hand and of public service mandarins on the other, but I did remind them that I'm probably the first bloke for quite a while who has been at one stage in his life both Humphrey, Bernard and now the Minister, and in this case the Prime Minister, so there is very little I haven't see before. 
LAURIE OAKES: Yes, Prime Minister. Now the first week of parliament we will see a huge piece of symbolism, you saying sorry to the stolen generations. Why are you doing that first up? 
PM: It is unfinished business for the nation. I think it is time we got on with it. I think as I travel around the country, it doesn't matter where people come from there is an overwhelming desire on the part of Australians to deal with this. 
It is never going to be a unity ticket, a whole of lot of people out there who have raised objections and concerns but I think this is a blight on the nation's soul, I think we need to act on it and I think the sooner we can move on and cross this bridge of hopefully renewed mutual respect between indigenous and non indigenous Australians then get on to the big challenges.
Also of how do you close the gap between indigenous and non indigenous life expectancy, education outcomes, health outcomes, the practical work which we need to do in partnership with indigenous communities across the country.
LAURIE OAKES: Now I understand you spent part of yesterday with a survivor of the first generation of these policies. Tell us about that. 
PM: Well I wanted to have a conversation, in fact to listen, just to sit and listen as I did for about an hour and a half. Pretty difficult for politicians to sit down and just listen for about an hour and a half without expounding on the world. 
But I wanted to do that before sitting down and framing my own speech to the parliament this week, and so I wanted to speak directly to someone who had been through those experiences, in her case, in the early 30s, when as a young child she was taken, stolen, from her family and her community and in her case, taken away at the age of 3 or 4, never saw her mother again because by the time she was allowed to go out and find a job at the age of 16 her mum had died.
Those stories are writ large across the country and they are the source of enormous pain. I think the challenge for us who are non indigenous Australians is to ask one very simple question, what if that was me? How would I feel? And that is why we have got unfinished business to attend to and we intend to get on with it this Wednesday.
LAURIE OAKES: Can you tell us who this woman is? 
PM: No she wants to remain private and I understand that, it is very difficult and emotional. Legitimately emotional but I wanted to spend some time. If she chooses at some later stage to go public on all of that, then that's a matter for her but she is a lady now in her 80s and I want to respect her privacy. 
Jenny Macklin has been doing the same with the stolen generation representatives and there are two groups around the country who are trying to draw together the threads from the various stories, and Jenny has been doing a great job doing that as have out members in the Northern Territory in particular, Warren Snowden, Trish Crossen, Damien Hale, out there talking to local communities.
LAURIE OAKES: And how many members of the stolen generation will be coming to Canberra for this and is the government paying for it? 
PM: We've decided in discussions with the state and territory governments that we and with the representatives of stolen generation people themselves, that we want to bring a representative group of 100 to Canberra for the official apology on Wednesday. And that will be important. We the Commonwealth and the states and territories will be paying for that, we think that is the respectful thing to do. 
And I would like to thank the organisations who have helped us work through the very sensitive question as to who should be in that group but I look forward to receiving them in parliament house in Canberra on Wednesday.
LAURIE OAKES: Will a representative of the stolen generations be there to accept the apology, is that who it will work? 
PM: The exact processes on the floor of the parliament we are still working our way through but that will all become clear over the next several days. 
LAURIE OAKES: But John Howard has decided to snub the event, certainly not attend any way, does that disappoint you? 
PM: Well look, at this stage Mr Howard will make his own decisions and I've seen the reports that we won't come but I can't guarantee that every former Labor prime minister will be there. Malcolm Fraser will be there, and I know that we will have lots of representation from across the show but if Mr Howard could make it that would be a great thing but I do note that we may not have all the former Labor prime ministers there. 
LAURIE OAKES: It is three days off and we still haven't seen the terms of the apology, why not, is there argument going on within the government, is there a split? 
PM: No, disagreement among us but let's be very clear about this. This is a proposed apology on behalf of the government and if the opposition supports us, the parliament, to the stolen generations. The key thing, the absolute key thing, here is to get it right, in terms of the stolen generations themselves. To make sure the language is right, that's my first responsibility otherwise next Wednesday is a wasted event. 
LAURIE OAKES: So it is still being negotiated. 
PM: Yes we are still working our way through the finality of the language. I had breakfast with Mr Nelson the other morning and gave him a piece of paper which outlined what would be the core content of the motion before the parliament and I gave that to him prior to him having his party room meetings so we are operating in good faith on this, and we are hopeful, hopeful, that the nation might be able to conclude this unfinished business on a bipartisan basis. 
LAURIE OAKES: Now this is based on the ‘bringing them home' report, and in fact I think you've invited some of the commissioners who prepared that report to be there on Wednesday, so why have you rejected the ‘bringing them home' commission report, the recommendation on compensation. 
PM: What we said is that we will not be establishing a compensation fund. As in the past since that report came down and let's bear in mind that report was commissioned by the previous Labor government. It has been a long time coming, that was commissioned back in '95, is that since that report came done which was I think was 1997 it has been an open avenue for any individual to take action in the courts if they so chose. 
And that course of action has always been there for such people, as it has been there for people since various state parliaments around the country have done this. That is, brought about there own motions of apology, but for me what is the core challenge. As I've travelled around communities with Jenny Macklin and met many indigenous leaders in the territory and else where the challenge is how do we bridge the gap, how do we close the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians.
The fact that we have the obscenity of indigenous kids under the age of 5, with 3 or 4 times the likelihood of infant mortality under the age of 5, than non indigenous kids. That's obscene, just shouldn't be, so you ask me where is our national investment effort going to go, it is in these practical challenge areas.
LAURIE OAKES: So the ‘bring them home' commissioners didn't know what they were talking about when they said that it should include measures of rehabilitation, restitution and monetary compensation. 
PM: We believe that the best form of dealing with this unfinished business is for the entire community of aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders to close the gap, and you know something Laurie, it hasn't worked very well up until now. 
Let's just be truthful about it. And I include my Labor colleagues in the states and territories, some things have worked but most haven't and therefore what I am looking for this year, and Jenny Macklin, the Minister, and I have had long discussions about this, is how do we actually bring about a new compact for the future at a practical level, and you know something, it is going to cost a lot of money.
But I'm not going to embrace it until we have concluded this unfinished business, I'm not going to do it until we've negotiated a new and effective way of handling, closing the gap in the future, and it must be on the basis of reciprocal obligation between indigenous and non indigenous Australia, if we are going to invest substantially to close the gap that now exists between us.
LAURIE OAKES: Now will parliament be different, this is the first week of parliament under your government, is it still going to be a bear pit or will you change it? 
PM: Well I think what I would want to make clear Laurie is that I can't promise the undeliverable when it comes to the conduct of the parliament. 
Our intention is to ensure that we use the parliament as properly as we can to convey for example the messages, key messages which the government wishes to delivery to the people. Let me give you one example, I will be encouraging my ministers to pay much greater use of the parliament in making ministerial statements about future directions in policy. In the past I think a bad tradition has crept in whereby rarely was the parliament used as the forum of the people of which new policy directions to be announced.
I will be encouraging ministers to use the parliament much more in that respect, and it is a consequence to treat the parliament with much greater respect.
LAURIE OAKES: Less bagging in question time and more politeness perhaps? 
PM: Well whatever I say in response to that question Laurie, I can see you repeating it time and time again when there is some breach by somebody who flips out one particular day. Look my job is to try and restore some respect to the place, I'm realistic about how far you can get, but I've flagged one area where we as a government intend to treat the parliament with greater respect which to use it as much more of a forum for the nation in announcing key directions for the future. We won't do that exclusively, sure events will arise which preclude that but I want to encourage ministers to do the same. 
LAURIE OAKES: Prime Minister we will take a break, be back in a moment. 
**
LAURIE OAKES: Welcome back, we are speaking to the Prime Minister Mr Rudd. Prime Minister, you've said inflation is your biggest challenge... 
PM: Hmmm. 
LAURIE OAKES: But why have we only heard about short-term remedies? What happened to the plans to boost infrastructure and skills training? We've heard nothing about higher education virtually since you became Prime Minister? 
PM: Laurie, we take seriously our pre-election commitments, commitments to the Australian people. All those are being implemented. If you go to skills, for example, we said that we would inject investment into computer training in schools. 
That program is being finalised now by Julia Gillard, and it's a very complex implementation task, but it is happening. Elsewhere on the skills front, we have said that we would establish a national curriculum board to establish a national curriculum for the first time in the country's history.
We announced that board and its chairman only a couple of weeks ago. On the infrastructure front, the first Cabinet meeting of the year in Perth established infrastructure Australia. Anthony Albanese is finalising the board membership for that. And finally on skills and the immediate challenge ahead as well, we promised prior to the election that we would establish over time 450 thousand new training places.
I think about 3 or 4 weeks in the government's life we announced an early release of 20,000 of those places up front, given the skills shortage in the economy.
LAURIE OAKES: But again no mention of universities in what you've just said. 
PM: Well I've run through those three categories, on university; we have a lot more to say, and a lot more to say fairly soon, but you can't build Rome in a day, but our Education Revolution agenda is in place. Every element of what we committed to prior to the election in that Education Revolution will be implemented and the reason is skills are critical to building a world-class education system and making this economy world competitive into the future. 
LAURIE OAKES: You say you can't build Rome in a day, but obviously you have to start pretty quickly if inflation is as urgent a problem as you claim. In terms of infrastructure, where will the money come from given the razor-gang frenzy that we're seeing at the moment? 
PM: Well we've got to get the planning right, one of the things with infrastructure for example, which holds back private investment infrastructure is we don't have across the nation right now. Nationally integrated PPP, public private partnership regulations. Therefore, if you are a significant investor in large projects and you need some critical mass in the projects you're investing in, and maybe as an investment house, you need a nationally consistent set of regs. They don't exist. 
One of the challenges which Lindsay Tanner has right now and Craig Emerson, wearing their deregulation hat, is to get that right. On the public investment side, we also will be for the first time at the level of national government, putting our shoulder to the wheel as well. And we're currently working with State and Territory governments on identifying early projects. So on that given that we've been in for, what, 8 weeks or so, I don't know now, it's ... Anthony Albanese on the infrastructure front, Julia Gillard on the skills front, they've been head-down, tail--up.
LAURIE OAKES: Well you've been criticised for not being prepared to dump the tax cuts amid all this spending-cut talk. Have you considered paying them into super on an opt-out basis, why wouldn't that work? 
PM: On the question of the tax cuts, you're right. We will be proceeding with them. We've seen all the commentary as to why we shouldn't but once again...
LAURIE OAKES: As a promise, so you have to stick to it. 
PM: As a government, well not just stick to it, I take seriously what you say to people. It's not all that magical. You say you are going to do something, you should do it. 
LAURIE OAKES: But don't you concede though that if people saved the tax cuts, rather than spending them, that would counter inflation? 
PM: When I delivered my first speech on the economy this year in Perth and announced before the inflation data came out this year and before the decision by the Reserve Bank on rates most recently, I said that public priority No. 1 for us is the war against inflation and announced our 5-point plan. One of which was, of course, a Budget surplus of 1.5% target of GDP, considerably in excess of that was projected by our predecessors. But the second point was this, what do we do intelligently to boost private savings. Wayne Swan and I are working through a range of options now. 
LAURIE OAKES: Is one of those options paying the tax cuts as superannuation except where people prefer to opt out? 
PM: We will deliver the tax cuts. They will come automatically. 
LAURIE OAKES: Why won't you consider that plan? 
PM: Well, we will work through a whole range of options and possibilities, Laurie, but can I say there will be absolutely no change to people having tax cuts to take as additional income at the point at which they were implemented, because working families are under pressure. But on point 2 of our 5-point plan which both deal with the demand side of the economy, obviously public savings through the Budget, private savings through a range of mechanisms, we've put up there in lights that we think this is an area which we think requires further work. 
LAURIE OAKES: OK, a few quick issues. There is publicity today about poker machines. Senator-elect Nick Xenophon wants to meet you and wants some concrete action from the Federal Government to try to reduce gambling. Are you going to accommodate him? 
PM: Well I don't back away from anything I've said in the past on poker machines. I've said it before and I will say again, I don't really like them. Nothing has changed, I don't intend to change my spots on that. And for those and other reasons I look forward to catching up with Senator Xenophon, as well as, or Senator-elect Xenophon, that is a mouthful, but also other people I've been having private conversations with him on this, including Tim Costello. 
If you look at the numbers on this, it is a bit of a challenge area. I looked at some ABS data on this in recent days and this is a few years old, but when you're looking at some $9 billion in net takings from gaming machines across the country, tax revenue to the states and territories running at somewhere between $5-6 billion, when you've got something like 200,000 machines out there, 77,000 people who are employed in this industry and the unwritten script about the exact social and economic impact on working families, so I look forward to talking to these folk about getting our analysis right about what's happening. I do not want to promise the world here, but I know we have a problem and I know that in partnership with states and territories, we can work through an agreed analysis about social impact and what to do about it. So I look forward to sitting down with Nick Xenophon soon.
LAURIE OAKES: What about the easy step of banning automatic teller machines in gambling areas? 
PM: All those sort of practical things will be on the table in terms of a discussion. Frankly, I think it's wrong that they are there, that's my personal view, but what I've also learnt in public administration is don't just translate your personal prejudices immediately into public policy. You need to test it against some analysis. I think you know where my instincts are on this, but I want to make sure we've got it right on an agreed analytical basis, on the human impact, social tragedy, impact on families, the employment consequences for those 77,000 people out there who are employed in this industry, and on the other hand, the overall impact on the revenues of the states and territories. It is big, complex, but we're going to have a go and having a look at this and it will be an interesting year. 
LAURIE OAKES: Now whaling - the Japanese Government is now threatening diplomatic action over the Australian Government taking pictures and releasing the photographs and film of them killing whales. Are you concerned about this affecting relations between Australia and Japan? 
PM: We have a first-class diplomatic relationship with Japan which goes back over governments, both Liberal and Labor, back to the '50s when we normalised relations after the war. We have a strong economic relationship, strong diplomatic and security related relationship if you look at the trilateral dialogue established by our predecessors in government. These are important to us. But you know something? Calling commercial whaling scientific whaling is not right, it's not accurate, and again I'm being consistent with what I said to the Australian people before the election, which is that we would despatch Australian assets to the Southern Ocean in order to collect evidence, and they've been doing that. 
LAURIE OAKES: Threats of diplomatic action won't dissuade you? 
PM: No, we think it's the right course of action to collect that evidence, and the second part of the process is then to accumulate that evidence with a view to forming a decision about whether it's winnable to proceed with a legal case before either the international court of justice or the relevant tribunal of the law of the sea. I know this will be a bit rocky, I understand that, but we have a responsibility here as well. 
Remember, the previous government established this thing called the Australian whale sanctuary down there. Doesn't seem to be much sanctuary happening at the moment, so I think we've got a responsibility to do what we can, not promising the world, but we are honouring what we said, and we will seek to manage this challenging area of our relationship as well as we can in the period ahead, but there is an overwhelming series of bonds and ties between ourselves and Tokyo, and the fact that Japan, for example, is such a generous donor in developing countries around the world. I mean, Japan is doing some wonderful things around the world. We just have a disagreement on this.
LAURIE OAKES: Prime Minister, we're out of time but we thank you. 
PM: Thanks very much, Laurie.
[ends]


More than 100 members of the Stolen Generations have been invited to travel to Canberra as special guests of the Government when Parliament meets next week to offer a national apology.
First generation survivors are among those who have been invited.
The Government has asked the leaders of the Stolen Generations Alliance and the National Sorry Day Committee to nominate Indigenous people who would best represent their fellow survivors.
Based on this advice and with support from the State and Territory governments, we have offered to fund the travelling costs of these representatives of the Stolen Generations travelling to Canberra for this historic day.
An additional number are attending with the support of businesses and individual donations through Reconciliation Australia.
In some cases, the family representatives of those of the Stolen Generations who have since died have been asked to attend in memory of their relatives.
Others among the invited guests include the widow of Sir Ronald Wilson, Lady Wilson, and Mick Dodson. Mr Dodson and Sir Ronald co chaired the inquiry into the removal of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families which resulted in the Bringing Them Home Report.
Eight commissioners from the inquiry, including Ms Marcia Langton, are also attending along with Evonne Goolagong-Cawley, Professor Fiona Stanley and Mark Liebler.
Ms Pat Anderson co-author of the Little Children are Sacred report will also attend.
Ms Faith Bandler and Ms Evelyn Scott who campaigned for voting rights for Indigenous Australians in the 1967 referendum have also been invited along with Indigenous members of State and Territory parliaments; representatives of the Stolen Generations Alliance, the National Sorry Day Committee and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission.
Leading Rugby League and AFL players Matt Bowen, Greg Inglis, David Peachey, Dean Widders and Michael Long are expected to attend.
Business Leaders are also attending including John Hartigan, Geoff Dixon and Danny Gilbert.
The Australian Government wants to encourage as many people as possible to participate in the spirit of the day. It's an important day for all Australians   Indigenous and non-Indigenous   and the Government wants everyone to have the chance to be part of it.
Big screens will be placed on the lawns in front of Parliament House where hundreds of people are expected to gather to watch the apology and then join in a celebration including Indigenous performers and a community barbecue.
CANBERRA


PM: I'm deeply shocked by developments this morning in East Timor affecting the President of East Timor and the Prime Minister.
What we've had, apparently, are coordinated attacks aimed at assassinating the democratically elected leadership of East Timor, a close friend and partner of Australia.
We can confirm that this morning, Dili time, East Timorese President Jose Ramos-Horta was shot and wounded at his home on Beach Road in Dili.
The President was taken by ambulance to the Aspen Medical facility of the Australian lead international stabilisation force where he's receiving all necessary medical care.
Australia has already indicated we'll do whatever is necessary to provide further medical assistance including offering medical evacuation to Darwin.
That offer has been extended and I'm advised, in the last quarter of an hour or so, has been activated.
We understand that the condition of Jose Ramos-Horta is very serious, but stable.
Also this morning, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao's convoy was attacked. I've spoken to Xanana Gasmao twice this morning, and spoken to his wife Kirsty on two separate occasions as well.
I can confirm that both the President and his wife and family are safe.
He's indicated to me that both with Government security officials and his parliamentary colleagues that they are making efforts to ensure that stability in East Timor is secured at this time.
Australia will stand resolutely behind East Timor at this time of crisis in their democracy.
Australia is a long standing partner and friend of East Timor, in the past. We will remain that way in the future, including at this time of national need.
In response to a request from the Government of East Timor, the National Security Committee of the Cabinet has met today, and authorised a substantial and immediate reinforcement of Australian Defence Force personnel, as well as an additional contingent of AFP personnel.
The international security force, the stabilisation force, including ADF, have already secured key buildings, and deployed more broadly throughout Dili and increased their presence in East Timor's districts.
The security situation on the ground is currently assessed as stable, but this could change quickly as events unfold.
We have, at this stage, not publicly confirmed, but reasonably confirmed reports of the death of the rebel leader Reinado.
Prime Minister Xanano Gusmao has also asked if I could visit East Timor later in the week, and I intend to take up his invitation to do so.
My reason for doing that is to reinforce, in person, Australia's resolve, Australia's determination, to stand with East Timor at this time of deep challenge to its democratic processes.
I conclude with this: that, for there to be a co-ordinated attempt to assassinate the democratically elected leadership of a close neighbour and friend of Australia's is a deep and disturbing development.
This Government  -  the Australian Government  -  will stand resolutely with the democratically elected Government of East Timor at this time of crisis, hence our decisions in response to their request to dispatch additional ADF personnel and additional police forces as well, at this time.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, How many of the troops and AFP are you sending? (Inaudible)
PM: On the question of the ADF deployment, the request from East Timor is for a substantial and significant enhancement. We would look to do that at company strength.
On the question of police personnel, we will be looking to deploy an additional 50 to 70 police personnel, again in response to a request from our friends in Dili.
JOURNALIST: Were there any Australian troops or AFP personnel involved in the incidents this morning?
PM: Not according to my advice. You'll understand, however, that this is a fluid situation. Piecing together precisely how events have unfolded this morning will take some time and I stand to be corrected in what I've just said. But, I have relayed to you the information which we are reasonably confident of being confirmed and accurate at this stage.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is he actually on the plane yet? You said activate, what does that mean?
PM: Well, again we extended the invitation to the East Timorese to have Jose to Darwin as quickly as possible. His condition, as I said before, we understand to be very serious but stable.
I understand a medical decision has been taken to airlift him to the airport about now. I would stand to be corrected the absolute detail of that because it is a fluid situation. We are ready to receive him in Darwin.
I understand that operation is under way.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, does it  -  the extra forces, is that an indication that despite the apparent death of Renaido that the rebel forces are still active and are still a threat.
PM: Our Government, the Australian Government, believes that if we get a request from the East Timorese Government, we need to respond quickly and substantially to that request.
I believe that when you have got something as fundamentally destabilising as the attempted assassination of the entire senior democratically elected leadership of one of our neighbours, it is obviously a destabilising time with rogue elements at play.
Therefore, an appropriate show of force is necessary. That is the judgement of the East Timorese, hence the request that they have made, hence why we have responded to that request.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) bring our total troop numbers to East Timor and is it just an increase in troops or is there going to be some military  -  additional military equipment taken in by them?
PM: My advice, and I will turn to Angus Houston to add to this if there is any inaccuracy in what I say, is that we'll be flying these forces in with ‘Hercs' very soon.
They will come as they are already prepared, as they are defence force professionals, with whatever equipment they need.
In answer to the first part of your question, that'll bring our total troop deployments in East Timor to about a thousand.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) coincide with a parliamentary sitting week (inaudible)
PM: Well Dennis, events are rapidly unfolding and I've received that invitation from the Prime Minister of East Timor. We've agreed that I'll travel later in the week. It's more likely to be later in the week than earlier. I would hope towards the end of the week. But we're watching things very carefully.
Apart from responding positively to his invitation, I also want to make sure in my own mind that we have sufficient deployment of assets to assist the democratically elected Government of East Timor.
I want to make absolutely sure of that personally, and that's what I hope to be doing in a few days time.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We have no information available to us at this stage which would suggest that.
We seem to have the efforts of rogue elements at work. But, this is a rapidly unfolding situation in terms of the information flow. Let's see what unfolds. But in direct answer to your question, we have no such information available to the Government at this stage.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:Well, given that these events only happened a number of hours ago, the request made elsewhere I'm unfamiliar with. But I've spent a fair bit of time this morning talking with Xanana Gusmao, and with members of his family, and it's their considered position that they could do with these assets now.
Remember, historically we've had a relationship with East Timor whereby we have a particular set of responsibilities relating to their security.
When one of our friends in need puts their hands up for a bit of help, a bit of extra help, particularly under these extreme circumstances when someone has tried to take out the democratically elected leadership of the country, I think the right thing to do is to respond and to respond quickly.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I understand through the Department of Foreign Affairs there is contact with Jakarta, unless the Foreign Minister wants to add to what I'm saying.
As we have been in contact with the United Nations as well given their responsibilities for security arrangements there, and our friends, allies and partners in Wellington.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you know how many rebels were involved and indeed how many were captured?
PM: On both those questions, it's fluid. There are conflicting reports, and I'd rather not mislead you on the content of it. As soon as that becomes clear, statements will come from us or from the Government in Dili.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sorry, I missed the first bit  - 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I think everyone in the Government is deeply disturbed by what's happened this morning. Of course, a number of these problems have been brewing for some time, going back to the events of a year or so ago.
But, precisely what has caused this event, let's wait for all the facts to unfold.
I've been around long enough in international relations to know that you wait for all the facts to be in before you reach definitive conclusions.
What we know for a fact is that someone out there tried to assassinate the political leadership of our friend, partner and neighbour. They've asked for some help, and we're about to provide it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) SAS, commandos or elite forces (inaudible)
PM: I don't want to go into the detail of the content of forces, I'll leave our defence force professionals to make those decisions on the precise composition thereof.
But I can say that, certainly, the ADF, a professional bunch of men and women, are always prepared for these contingencies. We have a ready reaction capability at company strength. That's what's being deployed.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) say about how long Australian troops might need to stay in East Timor and indeed what do they say about Australia's capability perhaps we can contribute to other efforts abroad other than East Timor in the future?
PM: Well, both the Defence Minister and Foreign Minister and I have been talking about this today. Because it reinforces an argument we've advanced in the Australian debate for a long, long time. And that is, we have large security policy challenges here in our own region, our own neighbourhood, our own back yard. And, we need to make sure we've got adequate deployable assets to respond to contingencies in the neighbourhood.
Of course, you're aware of the Government's position in relation to the future of our combat force in Iraq. And one of the reasons we've advanced for its return is that we need those assets to be deployable elsewhere.
Therefore, looking ahead, we will be vigilant about future security policy needs in the neighbourhood. But, we need to make sure that we have sufficient assets at home against a range of contingencies in the neighbourhood, not just this one.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The advice that I have from officials is that in relation to yours truly there is not a problem. And frankly, the key challenge is to respond positively, definitively, and publicly to an invitation from my East Timorese counterpart.
If the Prime Minister in East Timor says: ‘what I need is some defence assets and police assets and it would be great if the Prime Minister of this country could come', my response to that is, yes, yes and yes.
If that assists in stabilising a polity, political arrangements in East Timor at a time when they've suffered enormous external shock.
Let's put this into context.
When you look at what has happened in East Timor, this is a very significant regional security policy development. When you have an armed attack against the political leadership of a neighbouring state, particularly one for whom we have such unique responsibilities as East Timor.
Therefore, when our friends ring us up, and contact us, and we're in contact with them, and requests are forthcoming, we should respond and we have done so.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
ANGUS HOUSTON: In answer to the first question, no, we had nobody involved in any of the incidents this morning.
In terms of the deployment, it will be a substantial force that will put us just under a thousand, and will have the capacity to respond in any way that the Government needs us to respond.
We'll have a good manoeuvre capability and we'll be focussed on dealing with anybody who is up to any mischief against the East Timorese Government.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just on another issue. While you were in opposition you promised greater accountability and transparency of parliament. According to Joe Hockey (inaudible) too fewer Question Times under your first year as there were under the Howard Government (inaudible)
PM: I think when it comes to the way in which this parliament will operate, there will be a number of things which we will do differently. As I said yesterday in an interview with Laurie Oakes, I don't think it's responsible to go out there in the promise that everything is going to change overnight.
Specifically on the number of sitting days, for example, you've seen the reform proposed by Anthony Albanese for an extra sitting day for backbenchers, I think that's a very good move. And all these other things which the opposition has raised, I'm sure we can work through those with what will be I'm sure will be a good positive and productive relationship between Mr Hockey and Mr Albanese.
JOURNALIST: When will the wording of the apology be made public (inaudible)
PM: It will be tomorrow. As Anthony Albanese indicated earlier today, we will give notice of motion tomorrow and therefore, prior to that, the opposition will be informed.
I was speaking about this only about an hour or so ago, a bit less actually, with the Leader of the Opposition. And, we'll make sure that all those processes are put in place for that to occur.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, will it be early in the day or will we have to wait (inaudible)
PM: Well, remember who our audience is here, which is indigenous people to have an apology registered with them through the parliament.
And in Jenny Macklin's discussions with indigenous leaders, that's actually important. That it be transacted through the parliament.
So, we seeking to deal with a couple of different objectives here. One is to be open and transparent about what we're on about. Two, deal with legitimate expectations of representatives of the stolen generations to make sure that they're happy with procedures and content. And three, to get up and out there as early as possible.
But, it will be available at the time when the motion is moved in the parliament, obviously, and prior to that we hope to have a further round of discussion with the opposition on language.
JOURNALIST: What's your reaction to the Reserve Bank's warning today that inflation is likely to remain above 3 per cent until mid 2010 and that further tightening of monetary policy (inaudible)
PM: It's a disturbing warning from the Reserve Bank about the extent of the inflation problem that we in Australia now face.
We've said before, and we'll say it again: when we were handed Government we were handed Government with inflation running at its highest level in 16 years. We now know the dimensions of the challenge we face in the years ahead.
That's why together with Wayne Swan, myself and Lindsay Tanner, we've been hard at work on this. That's why the first speech I delivered this year prior to new data coming out on the CPI and prior to new data coming out from the Reserve Bank on the level of interest rates, I indicated that our number one priority would be the war against inflation. Hence our five point plan to deal with the inflation challenge.
It's the enemy of working families, it's enemy of business, the enemy of the economy. For us it's public enemy number one. And we've got a huge challenge on our hands. And the RBA data today says that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, I understand that you spoke with the New South Wales Premier Morris Iemma last night. Do you join -
PM: You're well informed.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Mr Iemma's plan to privatise (inaudible)
PM: On the reform plan in New South Wales, with the electricity industry, Premier Iemma has my complete support.
This is a necessary reform for the nation. I understand how politically problematic it is. But, we need to make sure that we get proper generating capacity for the State for the future. I support Premier Iemma's direction.
JOURNALIST: Your Defence Minister spoke this morning about the need for Australia to have a seat a the table in talks on Afghanistan. You can tell us what that means (inaudible). What are you asking NATO for, what role are you asking NATO forces to give Australia? (Inaudible) How much extra pressure does that put on our commitments and does that (inaudible) NATO forces that they (inaudible)
PM: Well, the Defence Minister has been entirely right in his comments both in the special meeting of NATO Defence Ministers in Edinburgh at the end of last year which he attended with the CDF and most recently in Vilnius.
And why he is right is, we currently have a thousand or so troops deployed in a very difficult and dangerous operating environment, and we want to be confident  -  absolutely confident  -  that this is part and parcel of a coherent global strategy for winning the war in Afghanistan.
And what the Defence Minister rightly said this morning was he was concerned about decisions taken earlier by our predecessors seem to have been taken in isolation from what NATO was doing.
Remember NATO supplies a large number of the forces in Afghanistan, and NATO countries are therefore individually and collectively responsible for shaping a lot of the strategy  -  military and civilian  -  for Afghanistan as a whole.
So what he's asking for, and I support him fully in this, is if we're going to have forces on the ground in Afghanistan, we want to be part of the decision making process, and therefore, as a consequence, have confidence that strategy is capable of success. So I support him in his efforts and his forthright comments on it.
And I think we'd better go. Thank you.
[ends]


KARL:Joining me from Canberra is Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Prime Minister, good morning to you. First of all, how is Jose Ramos Horta this morning?
PM:Best of my advice this morning, he remains in a very serious and stable condition. The Australian Government, as you know, made available both access to medical facilities within our control in Dili and then subsequently flew Jose to Darwin and he has received the best possible attention over night.
But he remains in a very serious, but stable condition.
KARL: Any word on the streets of Dili, what the situation is like there?
PM: This morning's report is that the situation on the streets is calm. But my knowledge of East Timor over the years is that we really have to watch how events unfold. It can be quite volatile. And remember Karl, this is an extraordinary assault on East Timor's democracy.
This attempted assassination of, effectively, the entire political leadership of our neighbouring new democracy and therefore we have got to watch very carefully how events unfold. That's why the Government has acted quickly to respond to requests from President Gusmao for assistance yesterday.
KARL:Ok so as we understand it at this point, you are sending in an extra 120 troops who will arrive later today. Is that enough troops and is our SAS already there on the ground?
PM:  Karl I won't go into the actual operation content of the deployment, that is a matter for the Chief of Defence Force staff and he makes operational decisions. But when I spoke to the East Timorese President yesterday, several times on the telephone, the request came for some additional troops. We responded to that by deploying our ready reaction capability from Lavarack Barracks in Townsville and they will be deployed today as you have just said.
On top of that, on the policing front, I spoke with commissioner Mick Keelty after a further request from the East Timorese, and we will have 50, as many as 70 additional AFP personnel on the ground as well.
Also, HMAS Perth will be mooring off Dili harbour within a matter of a couple of hours and we believe that it is necessary to support the additional defence effort on the ground.
KARL:Prime Minister has the time come to act against the 600 rebels because I know negotiation and conciliation just doesn't seem to have worked up until this point and now potentially those rebels have a martyr don't they?
PM: Well the precise nature of the events of yesterday, we have yet to fully establish and there are still conflicting accounts. Remember, this is the Government of East Timor we are dealing with and the country of East Timor who have requested us to provide assets. We will deploy those assets within East Timor based on the direction of the democratically elected government.
And I am sure that the Australian Defence Force remains ready, willing and able to assist in any operation. On the actual size of the rogue or rebel force that you referred to before, that is a matter for debate.
My advice is that this force or this group, remains in operation but on the precise size of it, it may not be as large as you have just suggested,
KARL:But particularly dangerous still? And potentially more so?
PM:  Well lets see what the analysis is that comes out of East Timor today. I don't want to invent any analysis. Let's just be very careful and cautious about it. Proper policy lies Karl, in making sure you have got all the defence assets you need on the ground to act against a range of contingencies and that's what we have done in direct response to the East Timorese Prime Minister's request yesterday.
KARL: Alright given that Australia has closely followed Reinado, he has been known to us for some time. We have spoken to him many times during the last couple of years and given the increased threat he posed during the course of the past couple of weeks, do you think that it is embarrassing to the UN that they allowed this to happen?
PM:  I think we really do need to establish the facts, the tragic facts of yesterday morning. Both in relation to the attack on Jose Ramos Horta at his residence. I mean, I have stayed with Jose as that residence in the past myself, I know where it is and I would be very interested to find out how the security, close personal protection for him actually worked that day. But also the attack some time later, but not very much later, on the Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao.
These are murky facts still about what surrounded those events. Let's get it absolutely clear cut before we reach conclusions and rush to judgements.
KARL:Alright, but you don't think at this point that we should take over from the UN again?
PM:Well we have a substantial force there with this additional 120 or so troops, that will bring our total force deployment to about 1000 in East Timor. Remember Karl we have always said as Government, as a new Australian Government, that we are going to need to have defence capabilities available within Australia for quick deployment for problems in our own region, our own neighbourhood, our own backyard.
Putting those assets on the ground is important, but we want to do so in close cooperation with the UN, because the UN is doing other things in East Timor which are important for that country's long term development.
KARL:Ok. Either way it does, as you know only too well, remain an uneasy peace. Our time there is open ended isn't it?
PM:Well we keep that under continuing review but I was, when I was in opposition, I was critical of the decision by our predecessors to pull our troops out too early and that, together with other factors I think did not help when it came to the outbreak of violence in East Timor a year or more ago.
I think we have got to be very cautious about when you move substantial troops out of a country to make sure that everything is right in terms of the local police and armed forces controlled by the government of East Timor and their ability to do the job. And that is part of our mission in East Timor today, to bring that country to self reliance for it's security long term.
KARL: Prime Minister, when will you be going to East Timor?
PM: The Prime Minister of East Timor Xanana Gusmao requested that I visit and visit soon so I am planning on doing it, Karl, later in the week.
Part of the reason for doing it later in the week is to form my own judgement about what additional assets are necessary on the ground, both civilian and or military. Whether these assets we have deployed are necessary longer term or shorter term. And you only get a sense of that, frankly once you have met with your defence chiefs on the ground and spent some time talking with your East Timorese counterparts.
I also want to send a very clear message in going, Karl, that we in Australia, stand resolutely with the democratically elected government of East Timor against this rogue attack - this attempt to decapitate effectively  -  the democratically elected leadership of our near neighbour.
KARL: Prime Minister, we do appreciate your time today, thank you very much. We know you have a busy day. You have your first day of Parliament. Is it nice to be sitting on the right side of the speaker, perhaps?
PM: I don't know Karl, it hasn't happened yet. I have been head down, tail up, working on other things, including the matters that we have been just talking about. So, today will look after itself.
KARL:Alright, we wish you well and thank you very much for your time today.
PM: Thanks Karl.
[ends]


HOST: The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, spoke this morning to Peta Donald in Canberra.
PM:  The advice the Government has received this morning is the situation on the streets in Dili remains calm. That the Government of East Timor is in firm control. And also, our own defence assets begin arriving today.
DONALD:What will they be doing when they get there? Do you think it is essential that they get out and round up supporters of the rebel leader Alfredo Reinado?
PM: My job is to respond to the request from our friend and partner, the Prime Minister of East Timor.
I spoke with Xanana Gusmao a couple of times yesterday on the phone just after the attempted assassination both on himself, and separately, on Jose Ramos-Horta.
His request was for these additional assets, therefore, my decision has been, together with the National Security Committee of Cabinet, to deploy them.
An extra company from the ready reaction force in Townsville, the extra Australian Federal Police and HMAS Perth will be berthing off Dili Harbour within a couple of hours.
The actual deployment and use of those forces once they're on the ground, that's a decision properly taken by our force commander on the ground, in close consultation with his East Timorese counterparts.
DONALD: Do you know if any of Alfredo Reinado's supporters have been rounded up overnight?
PM:On the operational details of that, I don't want to comment. I think it's important that our forces on the ground are given maximum latitude to do what is necessary at the direction of the democratically elected Government of East Timor.
But, operations I'm sure will continue to that direction. Our challenge is to work in partnership with our East Timorese friends to ensure that (inaudible) in that country.
But we know from past history that this is often a day to day affair, we're going to have to be vigilant, hence why it is important to have extra assets on the ground quickly.
DONALD:Do you think in hindsight that more should have been done to capture Alfredo Reinado before he was killed in that gun fire? Especially given that there were renewed threats against East Timor's leaders only last week. Do you think that more should have been done to capture him?
PM: What I intend to do first is to establish all the facts about what happened surrounding the actual assassination attempt yesterday morning. There is still a lot of uncertainty about what actually transpired. I want to establish all those facts before rushing to judgment. That'll take some time.
But I don't think it's aided by engaging now in a commentary of what could have been,  should have been, I want to establish the facts first and then we'll reach rapid judgments once that's established about how things can be done more effectively on the ground.
DONALD: It is embarrassing though for the Australian forces in Timor and the UN that Reinado was able to get to the leaders in this way?
PM:  As I'm advised, the close personal protection for the East Timorese leadership, both the Prime Minister and the President, has a long time ago gone from the Australian ADF to others in East Timor. That is, the Australian Defence Force is not responsible for his close personal protection that has been allocated by the East Timorese Government to others.
I want to establish all the facts surrounding that and also the adequacy of protection of these important leaders into the future as well.
DONALD: On the issue of the apology to the stolen generations, there are a lot of very frustrated and angry members of the Coalition who say they haven't seen the wording and they won't see the wording until this evening. And also, they're frustrated that they won't have an opportunity to speak in the parliament.
PM: Well, the question of the apology to Aboriginal people, our primary concern is to get that right with Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander people themselves. I mean, they are those to whom we are apologising. They are the most important people here, not politicians to be quite honest.
DONALD: But if you wanted their support and for this to be a bipartisan apology, wouldn't it have been better to treat them with more respect?
PM:   I've sat down to breakfast with the Leader of the Opposition last week and handed him a piece of paper about the core points for inclusion in this apology. That is virtually unprecedented in terms of how Governments historically treat Oppositions in this country.
And the reason I've done that is your very point. We're dealing with a matter here which goes to how we as a nation heal and how it is best done if we as a parliament can act in unanimity on this question.
But the core part of making sure this apology is effective is to make sure it is done right and proper with the Aboriginal people. They are the most important people in this equation today, not politicians, be it Government or Opposition.
[ends]


I begin by honouring the traditional owners of the land on which this parliament now sits.
I begin also by honouring the traditional owners of all the lands across this continent, Australia.
And I thank the traditional owners here for their welcome to country, the warmth of that welcome, the beautiful traditional message stick, with which I have been presented.
Exactly 100 years ago the land on which we stand was chosen as the site as the nation's first capital. Eighty years ago, we build an old Parliament House and 20 years ago, we built this new great house of the Australian democracy.
Yet the human history of this land stretches back thousands of years through the dreamtime.
The histories of the Ngunnawal and Walgalu  -  and to the west, the Wiradjuri; to the east, on the coast, the Yuin; to the north, the Gundungurra; and to the south, the Ngarigo - a thousand generations or more.
And we who have come to this land more recently, perhaps for five, maybe six, even seven.
Despite this antiquity among us, and despite the fact that parliaments have been meeting here for the better part of a century, today is the first time in our history that as we open the parliament of the nation, that we are officially welcomed to country by the first Australians of this nation.
And Matilda, I thank you for the welcome.
For that welcome, we are all here, Senators and Members, truly honoured.
In 1927, when we opened the old parliament, no Aboriginal or Torres Straight Islander people were invited.  There was no welcome to country, they were not welcome at all. No place at the national table as we began the national parliament in this place for the first time.
But one man, Jimmy Clements, came, and stood alone, referred to by the Canberra Times in 1927 as, and I quote, “a lone representative of a fast vanishing race”, unquote.
I celebrate the fact that indigenous Australia is alive, well, and with us for the future.
Today we begin with one small step, to set right the wrongs of the past. And in this ceremonial way, it is a significant and symbolic step.
And let us resolve here, as Members and Senators and Members of this great Parliament of the Commonwealth, that whoever forms future Governments of the nation, let this become a permanent part of our ceremonial celebration of the Australian democracy.
Incorporating the ceremonial of the dreaming from antiquity into the ceremonial of this great democracy.
It's taken 41 parliaments to get here. We can be a bit slow sometimes. But we got here. And, when it comes to the parliaments of the future, this will become part and parcel of the fabric of our celebration of Australia in all of its unity and all of its diversity.
Our challenge this week, then is to write a new page in the country's history, and this is one small step. But for that page to be truly written, it must be written between ourselves and indigenous Australia, and within this parliament between those who are Government and those who are Opposition. And it is in that spirit that I invite the Leader of the Opposition to support my remarks.


  - I move:
That today we honour the Indigenous peoples of this land, the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We reflect on their past mistreatment.
We reflect in particular on the mistreatment of those who were Stolen Generations - this blemished chapter in our nation's history.
The time has now come for the nation to turn a new page in Australia's history by righting the wrongs of the past and so moving forward with confidence to the future.
We apologise for the laws and policies of successive Parliaments and governments that have inflicted profound grief, suffering and loss on these our fellow Australians.
We apologise especially for the removal of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families, their communities and their country.
For the pain, suffering and hurt of these Stolen Generations, their descendants and for their families left behind, we say sorry.
To the mothers and the fathers, the brothers and the sisters, for the breaking up of families and communities, we say sorry.
And for the indignity and degradation thus inflicted on a proud people and a proud culture, we say sorry.
We the Parliament of Australia respectfully request that this apology be received in the spirit in which it is offered as part of the healing of the nation.
For the future we take heart; resolving that this new page in the history of our great continent can now be written.
We today take this first step by acknowledging the past and laying claim to a future that embraces all Australians.
A future where this Parliament resolves that the injustices of the past must never, never happen again.
A future where we harness the determination of all Australians, Indigenous and non-Indigenous, to close the gap that lies between us in life expectancy, educational achievement and economic opportunity.
A future where we embrace the possibility of new solutions to enduring problems where old approaches have failed.
A future based on mutual respect, mutual resolve and mutual responsibility.
A future where all Australians, whatever their origins, are truly equal partners, with equal opportunities and with an equal stake in shaping the next chapter in the history of this great country, Australia.
 There comes a time in the history of nations when their peoples must become fully reconciled to their past if they are to go forward with confidence to embrace their future. Our nation, Australia, has reached such a time. And that is why the parliament is today here assembled: to deal with this unfinished business of the nation, to remove a great stain from the nation's soul and, in a true spirit of reconciliation, to open a new chapter in the history of this great land, Australia.
Last year I made a commitment to the Australian people that if we formed the next government of the Commonwealth we would in parliament say sorry to the Stolen Generations. Today I honour that commitment. I said we would do so early in the life of the new parliament. Again, today I honour that commitment by doing so at the commencement of this the 42nd parliament of the Commonwealth. Because the time has come, well and truly come, for all peoples of our great country, for all citizens of our great Commonwealth, for all Australians - those who are Indigenous and those who are not - to come together to reconcile and together build a new future for our nation.
Some have asked, ‘Why apologise?' Let me begin to answer by telling the parliament just a little of one person's story - an elegant, eloquent and wonderful woman in her 80s, full of life, full of funny stories, despite what has happened in her life's journey. A woman who has travelled a long way to be with us today, a member of the Stolen Generation who shared some of her story with me when I called around to see her just a few days ago. Nungala Fejo, as she prefers to be called, was born in the late 1920s. She remembers her earliest childhood days living with her family and her community in a bush camp just outside Tennant Creek. She remembers the love and the warmth and the kinship of those days long ago, including traditional dancing around the camp fire at night. She loved the dancing. She remembers once getting into strife when, as a four-year-old girl, she insisted on dancing with the male tribal elders rather than just sitting and watching the men, as the girls were supposed to do.
But then, sometime around 1932, when she was about four, she remembers the coming of the welfare men. Her family had feared that day and had dug holes in the creek bank where the children could run and hide. What they had not expected was that the white welfare men did not come alone. They brought a truck, they brought two white men and an Aboriginal stockman on horseback cracking his stockwhip. The kids were found; they ran for their mothers, screaming, but they could not get away. They were herded and piled onto the back of the truck. Tears flowing, her mum tried clinging to the sides of the truck as her children were taken away to the Bungalow in Alice, all in the name of protection.
A few years later, government policy changed. Now the children would be handed over to the missions to be cared for by the churches. But which church would care for them? The kids were simply told to line up in three lines. Nanna Fejo and her sister stood in the middle line, her older brother and cousin on her left. Those on the left were told that they had become Catholics, those in the middle Methodists and those on the right Church of England. That is how the complex questions of post-reformation theology were resolved in the Australian outback in the 1930s. It was as crude as that. She and her sister were sent to a Methodist mission on Goulburn Island and then Croker Island. Her Catholic brother was sent to work at a cattle station and her cousin to a Catholic mission.
Nanna Fejo's family had been broken up for a second time. She stayed at the mission until after the war, when she was allowed to leave for a prearranged job as a domestic in Darwin. She was 16. Nanna Fejo never saw her mum again. After she left the mission, her brother let her know that her mum had died years before, a broken woman fretting for the children that had literally been ripped away from her.
I asked Nanna Fejo what she would have me say today about her story. She thought for a few moments then said that what I should say today was that all mothers are important. And she added: ‘Families - keeping them together is very important. It's a good thing that you are surrounded by love and that love is passed down the generations. That's what gives you happiness.' As I left, later on, Nanna Fejo took one of my staff aside, wanting to make sure that I was not too hard on the Aboriginal stockman who had hunted those kids down all those years ago. The stockman had found her again decades later, this time himself to say, ‘Sorry.' And remarkably, extraordinarily, she had forgiven him.
Nanna Fejo's is just one story. There are thousands, tens of thousands of them: stories of forced separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their mums and dads over the better part of a century. Some of these stories are graphically told in Bringing Them Home, the report commissioned in 1995 by Prime Minister Keating and received in 1997 by Prime Minister Howard. There is something terribly primal about these firsthand accounts. The pain is searing; it screams from the pages. The hurt, the humiliation, the degradation and the sheer brutality of the act of physically separating a mother from her children is a deep assault on our senses and on our most elemental humanity.
These stories cry out to be heard; they cry out for an apology. Instead, from the nation's parliament there has been a stony and stubborn and deafening silence for more than a decade. A view that somehow we, the parliament, should suspend our most basic instincts of what is right and what is wrong. A view that, instead, we should look for any pretext to push this great wrong to one side, to leave it languishing with the historians, the academics and the cultural warriors, as if the Stolen Generations are little more than an interesting sociological phenomenon. But the Stolen Generations are not intellectual curiosities. They are human beings, human beings who have been damaged deeply by the decisions of parliaments and governments. But, as of today, the time for denial, the time for delay, has at last come to an end.
The nation is demanding of its political leadership to take us forward. Decency, human decency, universal human decency, demands that the nation now steps forward to right a historical wrong. That is what we are doing in this place today. But should there still be doubts as to why we must now act. Let the parliament reflect for a moment on the following facts: that, between 1910 and 1970, between 10 and 30 per cent of Indigenous children were forcibly taken from their mothers and fathers. That, as a result, up to 50,000 children were forcibly taken from their families. That this was the product of the deliberate, calculated policies of the state as reflected in the explicit powers given to them under statute. That this policy was taken to such extremes by some in administrative authority that the forced extractions of children of so-called ‘mixed lineage' were seen as part of a broader policy of dealing with ‘the problem of the Aboriginal population'.
One of the most notorious examples of this approach was from the Northern Territory Protector of Natives, who stated, and I quote:
Generally by the fifth and invariably by the sixth generation, all native characteristics of the Australian aborigine are eradicated. The problem of our half-castes - 
to quote the protector - 
will quickly be eliminated by the complete disappearance of the black race, and the swift submergence of their progeny in the white ...
The Western Australian Protector of Natives expressed not dissimilar views, expounding them at length in Canberra in 1937 at the first national conference on Indigenous affairs that brought together the Commonwealth and state protectors of natives. These are uncomfortable things to be brought out into the light. They are not pleasant. They are profoundly disturbing. But we must acknowledge these facts if we are to deal once and for all with the argument that the policy of generic forced separation was somehow well motivated, justified by its historical context and, as a result, unworthy of any apology today.
Then we come to the argument of intergenerational responsibility, also used by some to argue against giving an apology today. But let us remember the fact that the forced removal of Aboriginal children was happening as late as the early 1970s. The 1970s is not exactly a point in remote antiquity. There are still serving members of this parliament who were first elected to this place in the early 1970s. It is well within the adult memory span of many of us. The uncomfortable truth for us all is that the parliaments of the nation, individually and collectively, enacted statutes and delegated authority under those statutes that made the forced removal of children on racial grounds fully lawful.
There is a further reason for an apology as well: it is that reconciliation is in fact an expression of a core value of our nation - and that value is a fair go for all. There is a deep and abiding belief in the Australian community that, for the Stolen Generations, there was no fair go at all. And there is a pretty basic Aussie belief that says it is time to put right this most outrageous of wrongs. It is for these reasons, quite apart from concerns of fundamental human decency, that the governments and parliaments of this nation must make this apology. Because, put simply, the laws that our parliaments enacted made the Stolen Generations possible. We, the parliaments of the nation, are ultimately responsible, not those who gave effect to our laws, the problem lay with the laws themselves. As has been said of settler societies elsewhere, we are the bearers of many blessings from our ancestors and therefore we must also be the bearer of their burdens as well. Therefore, for our nation, the course of action is clear. Therefore for our people, the course of action is clear. And that is, to deal now with what has become one of the darkest chapters in Australia's history. In doing so, we are doing more than contending with the facts, the evidence and the often rancorous public debate. In doing so, we are also wrestling with our own soul. This is not, as some would argue, a black-armband view of history; it is just the truth: the cold, confronting, uncomfortable truth. Facing with it, dealing with it, moving on from it. And until we fully confront that truth, there will always be a shadow hanging over us and our future as a fully united and fully reconciled people. It is time to reconcile. It is time to recognise the injustices of the past. It is time to say sorry. It is time to move forward together.
To the Stolen Generations, I say the following: as Prime Minister of Australia, I am sorry. On behalf of the Government of Australia, I am sorry. On behalf of the Parliament of Australia, I am sorry. And I offer you this apology without qualification. We apologise for the hurt, the pain and suffering we, the parliament, have caused you by the laws that previous parliaments have enacted. We apologise for the indignity, the degradation and the humiliation these laws embodied. We offer this apology to the mothers, the fathers, the brothers, the sisters, the families and the communities whose lives were ripped apart by the actions of successive governments under successive parliaments. In making this apology, I would also like to speak personally to the members of the Stolen Generation and their families: to those here today, so many of you; to those listening across the nation - from Yuendumu, in the central west of the Northern Territory, to Yabara, in North Queensland, and to Pitjantjatjara in South Australia.
I know that, in offering this apology on behalf of the government and the parliament, there is nothing I can say today that can take away the pain you have suffered personally. Whatever words I speak today, I cannot undo that. Words alone are not that powerful. Grief is a very personal thing. I say to non-Indigenous Australians listening today who may not fully understand why what we are doing is so important, I ask those non-Indigenous Australians to imagine for a moment if this had happened to you. I say to honourable members here present: imagine if this had happened to us. Imagine the crippling effect. Imagine how hard it would be to forgive. But my proposal is this: if the apology we extend today is accepted in the spirit of reconciliation, in which it is offered, we can today resolve together that there be a new beginning for Australia. And it is to such a new beginning that I believe the nation is now calling us.
Australians are a passionate lot. We are also a very practical lot. For us, symbolism is important but, unless the great symbolism of reconciliation is accompanied by an even greater substance, it is little more than a clanging gong. It is not sentiment that makes history; it is our actions that make history. Today's apology, however inadequate, is aimed at righting past wrongs. It is also aimed at building a bridge between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians - a bridge based on a real respect rather than a thinly veiled contempt. Our challenge for the future is now to cross that bridge and, in so doing, embrace a new partnership between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Embracing, as part of that partnership, expanded link-up and other critical services to help the Stolen Generations to trace their families, if at all possible, and to provide dignity to their lives. But the core of this partnership for the future is to closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians on life expectancy, educational achievement and employment opportunities. This new partnership on closing the gap will set concrete targets for the future: within a decade to halve the widening gap in literacy, numeracy and employment outcomes and opportunities for Indigenous children, within a decade to halve the appalling gap in infant mortality rates between Indigenous and non-Indigenous children and, within a generation, to close the equally appalling 17-year life gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous when it comes when it comes to overall life expectancy.
The truth is: a business as usual approach towards Indigenous Australians is not working. Most old approaches are not working. We need a new beginning. A new beginning which contains real measures of policy success or policy failure. A new beginning, a new partnership, on closing the gap with sufficient flexibility not to insist on a one-size-fits-all approach for each of the hundreds of remote and regional Indigenous communities across the country but instead allows flexible, tailored, local approaches to achieve commonly-agreed national objectives that lie at the core of our proposed new partnership. And a new beginning that draws intelligently on the experiences of new policy settings across the nation. However, unless we as a parliament set a destination for the nation, we have no clear point to guide our policy, our programs or our purpose; no centralised organising principle.
So let us resolve today to begin with the little children - a fitting place to start on this day of apology for the Stolen Generations. Let us resolve over the next five years to have every Indigenous four-year-old in a remote Aboriginal community enrolled and attending a proper early childhood education centre or opportunity and engaged in proper preliteracy and prenumeracy programs. Let us resolve to build new educational opportunities for these little ones, year by year, step by step, following the completion of their crucial preschool year. Let us resolve to use this systematic approach to building future educational opportunities for Indigenous children to provide proper primary and preventive health care for the same children, to begin the task of rolling back the obscenity that we find today in infant mortality rates in remote Indigenous communities - up to four times higher than in other communities.
None of this will be easy. Most of it will be hard - very hard. But none of it, none of it, is impossible, and all of it is achievable with clear goals, clear thinking, and by placing an absolute premium on respect, cooperation and mutual responsibility as the guiding principles of this new partnership on closing the gap. The mood of the nation is for reconciliation now, between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. The mood of the nation on Indigenous policy and politics is now very simple. The nation is calling on us, the politicians, to move beyond our infantile bickering, our point-scoring and our mindlessly partisan politics and elevate at least this one core area of national responsibility to a rare position beyond the partisan divide. Surely this is the spirit, the unfulfilled spirit, of the 1967 referendum. Surely, at least from this day forward, we should give it a go.
So let me take this one step further to take what some may see as a piece of political posturing and make a practical proposal to the opposition on this day, the first full sitting day of the new parliament. I said before the election the nation needed a kind of war cabinet on parts of Indigenous policy, because the challenges are too great and the consequences too great to just allow it all to become a political football, as it has been so often in the past. I therefore propose a joint policy commission, to be led by the Leader of the Opposition and myself and, with a mandate to develop and implement - to begin with - an effective housing strategy for remote communities over the next five years. It will be consistent with the government's policy framework, a new partnership for closing the gap. If this commission operates well, I then propose that it work on the further task of constitutional recognition of the first Australians, consistent with the longstanding platform commitments of my party and the pre-election position of the opposition. This would probably be desirable in any event because, unless such a proposition were absolutely bipartisan, it would fail at a referendum. As I have said before, the time has come for new approaches to enduring problems. And working constructively together on such defined projects, I believe, would meet with the support of the nation. It is time for fresh ideas to fashion the nation's future.
Today the parliament has come together to right a great wrong. We have come together to deal with the past so that we might fully embrace the future. And we have had sufficient audacity of faith to advance a pathway to that future, with arms extended rather than with fists still clenched. So let us seize the day. Let it not become a moment of mere sentimental reflection. Let us take it with both hands and allow this day, this day of national reconciliation, to become one of those rare moments in which we might just be able to transform the way in which the nation thinks about itself, whereby the injustice administered to these Stolen Generations in the name of these, our parliaments, causes all of us to reappraise, at the deepest level of our beliefs, the real possibility of reconciliation writ large. Reconciliation across all Indigenous Australia. Reconciliation across the entire history of the often bloody encounter between those who emerged from the Dreamtime a thousand generations ago and those who, like me, came across the seas only yesterday. Reconciliation which opens up whole new possibilities for the future.
For the nation to bring the first two centuries of our settled history to a close, as we begin a new chapter and which we embrace with pride, admiration and awe these great and ancient cultures we are blessed, truly blessed, to have among us. Cultures that provide a unique, uninterrupted human thread linking our Australian continent to the most ancient prehistory of our planet. And growing from this new respect, to see our Indigenous brothers and sisters with fresh eyes, with new eyes, and with our minds wide open as to how we might tackle, together, the great practical challenges that Indigenous Australia faces in the future.
So let us turn this page together: Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians, Government and Opposition, Commonwealth and State, and write this new chapter in our nation's story together. First Australians, First Fleeters, and those who first took the Oath of Allegiance just a few weeks ago. Let's grasp this opportunity to craft a new future for this great land: Australia. I commend the motion to the House.
Video and Audio of the National Apology to the Stolen Generations is  available on the Australia.gov.au website.


I will tomorrow take up Prime Minister Gusmao's invitation to visit East Timor.
In East Timor I will meet Prime Minister Gusmao, Acting President Fernando Lasama de Araujo, the Parliament and the Opposition.
I will also meet Brigadier Baker and others from the Australian-led International Stabilisation Force.  
I will also meet with senior officers from the Australian Federal Police.
This visit will give me an opportunity to hear a first-hand assessment of the security situation and longer-term challenges from Prime Minister Gusmao and others on the ground in Dili.
I will use the visit to reiterate Australia's support for the East Timorese Government and for democracy in East Timor.
The Government and people of Australia were deeply disturbed by the attempted assassination of the President of East Timor, Dr Jose Ramos-Horta, and Prime Minister Gusmao.  
At this difficult time, it is important that Australia sends a clear message that we are absolutely determined to respond effectively to the request from the East Timorese Government for assistance.
We want to play our part in ensuring security and stability, and restate our support for long term economic growth and development in East Timor.
CANBERRA


The Prime Minister today announced that the Australia Government had approved a $6.4 million dollar upgrade for the Naval Fuel Installation at Stokes Hill, Darwin.
The Installation is a key facility for the Australian Navy and our allies, supporting operations from Northern Australia.  
The project is a major upgrade of the Installation to lift its occupational health and safety standards and to guard against environmental damage from accidental spills.
The Installation contains a registered sacred site. From the early design stages of the project, the Department of Defence has worked with the Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority (AAPA) to ensure that the area's traditional owners are comfortable with the project proceeding.  
The Prime Minister congratulated the Member for Solomon, Damian Hale for his efforts in helping to secure the funding for the project. 
Damian has once again showed why he is such a first class representative for the families of Darwin.   
The site also holds national significance because part of it was destroyed by the air attacks on Darwin during World War Two - the first of which occurred 66 years ago on 19 February.  
Defence will ensure that heritage requirements are properly considered during the project.
DARWIN


PM GUSMAO:Ladies and Gentlemen, Firstly, it is with great warmth that I welcome the Prime Minister of Australia, the Honourable Kevin Rudd to Timor-Leste 
Prime Minister, I welcome you on behalf of the Fourth Constitutional Government of Timor-Leste and behalf of the citizens of our humble nation.
By travelling to Timor-Leste, Mr Rudd has extended the hand of solidarity between nations and demonstrated that regional peace is a priority.
The swift and immediate response to Timor-Leste during this time of insecurity is a sign that our neighbours have great faith in our young democracy.
And that the protection of our democracy is central to establishing a climate of peace and stability.
Australia has proven steadfast in supporting the sovereignty of Timor-Leste as willing and committed participants.
The renewed efforts in peacekeeping is an indication that diplomacy amongst neighbours extends beyond borders and is critical to national security.
Our nation is a proud nation. We are ready to progress from volatility to stability and from fear to confidence.
Many people ask, is this achievable in light of this week's events?
Today, I tell you the Prime Minister of Australia and I stand together not only united by the will for peace but united in the values that support peace.
Values which defend social equity and inclusion, uphold transparent and accountable democratic institutions that respect, above all, the Constitution of a nation.
Values that support social welfare as compassionate and necessary for those who suffer deeply from poverty and promote dialogue above violence and debate over political self interest.
Finally, those values which use the power of education to evolve a nation.
But above all else, recognizing that maintaining law and order and the protection of citizens is a natural and God-given right for the people of Timor-Leste and one which I will defend with all that is in my power
So yes...... it is achievable, because a bullet can wound a President, but never, can penetrate the values of democracy.
Mr. Rudd, as we enter into this period of restoration, I give thanks to you, the Australian Parliament, the combined efforts of the Australian Peace keeping mission and the Australian people for their unwavering support to Timor-Leste.
Thank you.
PM RUDD: I would like to thank very much the Prime Minister of Timor Leste for making myself so welcome today here in Dili. 
The Australian people were stunned and shocked earlier this week to learn the news of this brutal and violent assault on the democratically elected leaders of this wonderful country.
The purpose of my visit today is to state in clear and loud terms that Australia will stand shoulder to shoulder with East Timor into the future in the defence of its democratic system of government.
The Australian people and the Australian Government have been long committed to this country both through our brave men and women in uniforms - the Australian Defence Force; though our officers in the AFP; and through our diplomats and aid workers and others who have assisted in the development of this country in recent years.
That assistance will continue into the future. Australia is not just a fair-weather friend of Timor Leste, but is here for the good times, the bad times and difficult times. We are therefore a partner with Timor Leste into the future. The Prime Minister spoke just now of the values which we hold in common as two democracies. In Timor Leste's case - a new democracy, in our case - one of the world's oldest continuing democracies Australia. And that core value is this, it is by the ballot box, not by the barrel of the gun that decisions of our countries will be made.
Therefore the purpose of my visit is to reinforce that core value which unites our two countries and our two people. I state again in a clear-cut terms that we are here to stand shoulder to shoulder with the government and people of Timor Leste in this difficult time in defence of their democracy.
I have also in discussions today with the Prime Minister spoken of areas of further cooperation in the area of police and law enforcement. I have also spoken further today with the Prime Minister in terms of cooperation in the economic sphere as well, including what we can do in the field of agriculture and on top of that in youth employment programs across this country.
We have further measures to announce in this regard into the future, but we aught to make sure that when it comes to Timor Leste's overall development - be in security, be it in the economy, be it in social policy, be it in education, or be it in health that we are in fact comprehensive partners in security and development for this emerging democracy in our own region.
The last thing I would say before I think we take your questions is this - that we are very mindful of the assault in particular on the President's life Jose Ramos-Horta. Jose Ramos-Horta has been a long standing friend of mine. I have stayed at Jose's house before, the house where he was brutally assaulted only on Monday. Our thoughts and our prayers are with him and his family as he recovers in Darwin Hospital. His is a difficult struggle; he has taken very very serious wounds. But I know he is a fighter and I know also that he has been the recipient of the best medical treatment that our country can provide and have willingly and happily provided to our friends in East Timor to assist in his process of recovery.
Also, Mr Prime Minister, the assault on yourself, the threats to your family, we feel equally keenly as your friends in Australia have watched developments very carefully in recent days. So our concerns are of course those between our two countries and our two governments. But there is a personal dimension of this too, the Prime Minister is a long standing friend of our country and many of us in political spheres in Australia, as is the President, and we only wish them well for the future and for the future of Timor Leste's stability and political development.
Thank you very much
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd how long do you think the Australian troops will remain in East Timor? 
PM RUDD: East Timor is an independent democratic state and we will remain in East Timor so long as we are invited to do so by the government of East Timor. Those assessments I am sure will be made on a continuing basis by the Government and because we want to be partners in East Timor's long term security we will always be open to requests from our friends in Dili as to what may be the necessary in the future. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd... this is a question for both Prime Ministers...Is there any doubt in either of your minds that Alfredo Reinado went to the President's house on Monday morning with murderous intent? 
PM RUDD: My response to that is as follows and consistent with that I said in Australia yesterday, the facts of these matters are yet to be fully determined. I believe there are proper investigatory processes underway. We should established all those facts clearly and reach our own conclusion. In terms of the independent investigative authorities of East Timor, I am sure they will reach their own conclusion as well. 
PM GUSMAO: Well, if it was only the incidence of the attacks on the President's residence, then I would conclude like you but it was a number of attacks which would suggest it was a well coordinated plan. 
JOURNALIST: Is East Timor a better a place now that Reinado is dead? I believe the Government and officials were negotiating with him?
PM GUSMAO: Well, with him? He's dead now. For the government and for the state and the security of the people, it is an obligation and we will continue to do this, we will continue to ensure the security and welfare of the people and that is why everything related to insecurity we will address all the issues.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd why aren't you meeting with SRSG Khare and ... (inaudible) the Federal Police?
PM RUDD: On your first question, subject to the UN Special Representative's availability, we will be seeing him later today. Secondly, on the question on the AFP, of course they operate within the overall framework of UNPOL and the ADF of course will operate separately, but the overall mission statement here is clear and that is to work, to enhance the security of East Timor and to do so in response to the request of this democratically-elected government and independent state. Our job is to enhance security here but to do so always in partnership and response to the request of the government 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can you or East Timor set out what further economic assistance the Government is providing to East Timor? 
PM RUDD: One area that we are working on is in the area of the youth employment, given the problems which the Prime Minister and I have discussed on this occasion and that the President and I discussed on my last visit to East Timor in December. That concerns what we can do on the ground through effective infrastructure development and rural development and agriculture development to provide real employment opportunities for young people in this country. 
And we have been working a long time now on this within the ranks of the Australian Government and we are now about to go into the detail of it with our partners here in Dili as well. We have discussed this also with the Finance Minister of East Timor this morning who was a party at our meeting. We will have further things to say about this in due course, but looking at East Timor's overall long term development needs, we are now talking about immediate challenges to the security of this democracy. But we are equally partners with East Timor in the long term challenges of economic development. Ensuring young people across East Timor have a job is core business for this country's long term stability and development.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd will you be visiting President Ramos-Horta in Darwin hospital? 
PM RUDD: When I leave Dili later today, I will be flying to Darwin and I will be visiting the Hospital, firstly to thank the Hospital's staff for the excellent treatment that they have been providing to the President and subject to medical advice from his doctors I will of course seek to say hello to Jose as well, but that will be the subject to the medical advice when I hit Darwin 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd will you be meeting Mari Alkatiri today? 
PM RUDD: I will be meeting Mari Alkatiri from Fretilin and I look forward to those discussions as well. This is a democracy and when heads of government from East Timor visited Australia I have met them both as Opposition Leader and Prime Minister. That is the way in which democracies work around the world and I am sure the health of this democracy accommodates that as well in this country. 
[ends]


Our thoughts are with the families of Mackay, who today are attempting to deal with the impacts of extensive flooding.
Overnight and morning heavy rains have essentially isolated Mackay, with the airport closed and roads to both the north and south blocked and only limited communications available.
Despite this latest blow, I am sure Queenslanders will again rally together, as they did so magnificently last month to help other families in need.
The Federal Member for Dawson, James Bidgood has been in constant contact with my office, local families, small business operators and local government officials since early this morning.
A Disaster Situation has been declared for the Mackay District.
Joint State and Commonwealth-funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements have also been triggered for Mackay and 12 other local government areas.
This will enable local families, small businesses operators, primary producers and councils to access a range of assistance measures.
I would also like to thank those emergency service personnel and volunteers who again have again responded to this latest urgent situation without hesitation.
Finally I urge everyone in flood affected areas to stay safe and follow the directions of the experts like the police and emergency services.


The Prime Minister today announced that the Federal Government would provide additional assistance to Mackay residents seriously affected by the floods.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) will be made available to those people adversely affected by the storms and associated flooding that commenced in the Mackay region on 14 February.
Those eligible will be able to receive a one off payment of $1000 for adults and $400 for each child to help relieve their hardship.
The Federal Government will continue to work with the Queensland Government and local community organisations to support those families through this difficult time.
There will be much work to do over the coming weeks for these communities to fully recover.  The Federal Government will do its bit.  
Queenslanders always respond magnificently in a crisis and I'm sure this will be the case again.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will provide financial assistance to people whose principal place of residence has been destroyed or significantly damaged, as well as those who have been seriously injured and hospitalised for more than 48 hours as a direct result of the floods.
This assistance is over and above the support being provided by the Australian Government under the long standing Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA).
Through these arrangements with the states, the Australian Government assists with the costs and resourcing of response and recovery operations in large scale disasters.
The Federal Member for Dawson, James Bidgood MP, congratulated all the volunteers and emergency service workers on the ground in Mackay, who have been working around the clock to help those local families and small businesses get back on their feet as soon as possible.
We really appreciate the magnificent job all those on the frontline are doing.
For information on the AGDRP call the Australian Government Flood Assistance Hotline on 180 2333 or visit your local Centrelink office.
More information on Australian Government assistance is available at www.disasterassist.gov.au 


UHLMANN:  Prime Minister, good morning.
PM:Good morning Chris.
UHLMANN:  Last year you declined an invitation  -  you said you had declined an invitation  -  to have Brian Burke arrange a dinner with journalists because you were uncomfortable about it, but these emails show you first accepted it.
PM:  Well, that's absolutely right. I did say that I would be prepared to attend such a function and it was only after that, that I became concerned about it and changed my mind. And that is reflected also in what we communicated to Mr Burke.
UHLMANN:   Why wasn't your discomfort immediate?
PM:  Well these things take a little while to sink in. I reflected upon it, I saw, or I was told by my office about what was being proposed, said, ‘oh that sounds fine' and then it just started to sink in, that this was appearing to me to be too much. And that is why I then subsequently said that there are some reasons and in fact I probably used a diplomatic pretext for saying I couldn't be there in order to attend the dinner and we should do it some time in the following year.
UHLMANN:When you discussed this at a very lengthy press conference last year, the impression that you gave was that you ran into Brian Burke at another dinner, that you had been at another couple of occasions where you had seen him by accident. But the impression you gave about this particular arrangement was that it was almost immediate that you had a sense of discomfort.
PM: Well I cant sort of go to (inaudible) day by day sort of unfolding of it but what I do recall is the proposal coming in from him, saying ‘ok that sounds fine' and then as I started to think through the detail of it after that, then changing my mind because for me it started to sound like just too much was being organised. And that's why I indicated that it would not be possible to proceed with it.
I then went on to say give this diplomatic reason for not attending and it was my intention of course, not to proceed with any such dinner the following year.
UHLMANN:Now who wrote the emails because in fact many of them are in the first person?
PM: Normally what I would do under these circumstances - because our life is pretty busy - is someone would come in from the office and say XY and Z has come in and I'd say, ‘ok, why don't you put back a note along the following lines.' So that probably would have been my PA. But it is a note from me.
UHLMANN:Were there other phone calls, were there other conversations with Brian Burke, is this all the emails?
PM:  For the email this is everything. As I said last year there would have been from time to time some telephone contact but not a whole lot. And the three meetings that we, that have extensively been canvassed on the public record about 12 months ago. Chris with the benefit of 20-20 hindsight you just wouldn't have done this but of course, the fact of the matter is that when this contact was had between myself and Mr Burke, and none of the matters which are currently on the record through the triple C inquiry were on the record. I was unaware of them. But I think this was a mistake on my part. Back last year I took it on the chin and that's what I am doing now.
UHLMANN: I guess the essence of the question is that you will be asked now though is not about the invitation or the refusal, it's the question about how you responded to this last year when you were questioned at length about it.
PM:  Well my, the bottom line is, I didn't go to this fourth function and the reason is that I became uncomfortable about it. The reasons I extended to Mr Burke for so doing were diplomatic in tone. But the bottom line is I started to feel uncomfortable. That is just the truth of it, Chris.
I didn't go. And people can draw whatever conclusions they wish to from that but that is just as it unfolded. And I just believe in being clear about the fact that I didn't want to proceed with that and that's the way in which it was transacted.
UHLMANN: Now Prime Minister yesterday the Treasurer released guidelines for reviewing foreign government investment proposals and one of those is the extent to which a prospective foreign investor operates at arms length from the relevant  -  how can a Chinese government-owned investment company divorce itself from the will of its political masters?
PM:  Well therein lies the question, Chris and that is why we have a Foreign Investment Review Board to make independent recommendations based on their analysis of the company in question and I make no remarks at all in relation to current moves on the part of particular companies.
The reason why the treasurer has put forward these foreign investment guidelines concerning the operation of foreign government related investment in Australia, is there has been legitimate interest from the community and the business community in particular for a more precise definition of what the public interest is in shaping the FIRB's recommendations on (inaudible) application.
UHLMANN: But aren't Chinese sovereign wealth funds an extension of Chinese foreign policy?
PM:  Well remember, when it comes to sovereign wealth funds we have had investments in this country before from them. Each of them has to be analysed on its merits and therefore the FIRB will be doing so in the case of the merits of any application it receives. And of course, one has been lodged in relation to the move by Chinalco in relation to Rio Tinto.
This has to be assessed each on its merits. And on the facts pertaining go each one.
It's not a matter of one size fits all in the case of entities from any particular state. For example, in Singapore we had a significant investment from SingTel. SingTel operated an instrument of the Singapore Government. These are matters to be determined on the facts of the matter in each particular investment - when they proceeded with their investment in Optus.
UHLMANN: But you're an expert on China, Prime Minister, what's your assessment? Don't you think that these vehicles would be vehicles of Chinese Government foreign policy? Doesn't that just follow?
PM: My judgment, Chris, is this  -  and it makes no reference at all to the current manoeuvring by Chinese corporations on various stock markets - it's that, China's long term strategic interest is to secure its own resource and energy interests into the very long term future. That has been a stated part of Chinese Government policy for a long, long time.
When I go to China  -  and I'll be going to China, I believe, in the not too far distant future  -  one of the matters I want to discuss with the Chinese leadership is how do we fashion this long term resource and energy relationship between our two countries. 
China does depend on the reliable sources of supply from Australia in a whole range of commodity areas. This will continue into the future. And what I want to talk to the Chinese leadership about is what is their long term strategy and what are this country's long term strategic interests as well.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, just briefly, is an independent Kosovo a good thing?
PM: We believe that it will be. And that's why we've already indicated to our diplomatic representatives around the world that this would be an appropriate course of action. 
The sorry history of Kosovo means we've got to do whatever we can do to ensure that citizens of that part of the world are protected into the future. This would appear to be the right course of action, that's why diplomatically we would extend recognition at the earliest opportunity.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks very much.
[ends]


PM: Julia and I  -  the Deputy Prime Minister and I are here today to talk about Workchoices. In Parliament we have introduced legislation to get rid of Workchoices and to get rid of AWAs.
What we have seen from the Liberal Party is their determination in the Senate to slow down, retard and in fact, get in the way of the elimination of Workchoices and AWAs despite the fact that we have a clear cut pre election mandate to do so.
But it is not just their activity in the Senate, to block our legislation or to delay it, by putting off to a Senate committee, it goes beyond that. Today we have had a spokesman from the Liberal Party, going out there publicly proclaiming still the virtues of AWAs.
The Liberal Party seems to have lost touch completely with the Australian community. If there was one thing upon which the last election was a referendum, it was the future of Workchoices and AWAs.
The Australian people have spoken. It's just that the Liberal Party is not listening. And then the granddaddy of them all, today, we have the former minister for employment and workplace relations, Mr Hockey, going out and saying  -  hold the phone  -  Cabinet Ministers weren't aware of the fact that Workchoices could possibly lead to a reduction in working family's wages and conditions. It was only after he became a minister that these things became clear.
Well, this wholesale rewriting of the Liberal Party's history on Industrial Relations, on Workchoices and on AWAs, is simply laughable.
We know precisely why the Liberal Party took this position on industrial relations and that's because in their history, they have supported the most extreme approach to industrial relations possible.
We saw that in Workchoices. We saw that in the way in which it dispensed with the independent umpire. We saw that also, in the way in which they have handled the overall conditions enjoyed by working families.
In Parliament, we have had the opposition again active on this question. The Liberal Party, in government, did it's best to make sure that the Australian people had to endure Workchoices.
The Liberal Party now in opposition in the Senate is trying to delay the continuation of Workchoices and it's application to working families across the country.
When it comes to what is happening behind us here today, which is the final pulping of this extraordinary remnant of $122 million worth of taxpayer funded advertising, all to promote the virtues of Workchoices.
What we see behind us today, is clear and living evidence of the Liberal Party, and the Liberal Government's sense of priories. $122 million worth of taxpayer funded advertising, this lot behind us worth a couple of million dollars. Several million already pulped starting just prior to the election and this is another half a million copies being pulped now.
That's where the Liberal Party's priorities lie, preserving Workchoices, preserving AWAs, doing it in the Parliament through their spokesman outside the parliament today and through their continued efforts to frustrate our legislation to get rid of this extreme piece of industrial relations legislation. Over to you Julia.
DPM: Thank you very much. Thank you. As the Prime Minister says, today we are here to see the destruction of the remaining Workchoices propaganda.
When the Howard Government decided to implement Workchoices, it knew it was going to be bad for working families. It knew that it could strip wages and conditions away.
The former minister for employment and workplace relations is now trying to get away with some fiction that the Government didn't know working families could be hurt. But their own propaganda talked about how conditions could be stripped away.
With examples like Billy, who had a minimum wage job and lost all of his conditions like penalty rates and overtime but not one cent of compensation. The government knew workchoices was bad for working families so they decided to go on a propaganda campaign to sell it to working families.
The booklets that we are finally destroying today were part of that propaganda campaign, part of the first $55 million of advertising. There were 6 million of these booklets printed, 6 million of these propaganda booklets printed.
The Government, before the election, decided to pulp 3.5 million of them. By then the propaganda campaign was in a new phase. They had spent the $55 million and they were looking to spend $66 million more. But by then they didn't want to say Workchoices so these booklets in September last year, just before the election were marked for destruction and 3.5 million weredestroyed then.
Today we have got the remainder. The remainder that evaded destruction in September. 436,000 booklets, still here - Workchoices propaganda that are going to the recyclers today. Now we can pulp this propaganda and we will. What should be pulped is the Liberal party's determination to play parliamentary games to defend Workchoices.
As the Prime Minister has said, they are defending Workchoices in the death to the parliament. In opposition they are defending it in the Senate, in Government, they defended through this propaganda.
The Howard Government tried to sell Workchoices with this propaganda. Now the Liberal opposition is trying to protect it with it's numbers in the Senate. Well we know what the Australian people voted for last November. They didn't vote for this propaganda, they didn't vote for Workchoices. They didn't vote for Australian Workplace Agreements and the opposition should honour the mandate of the Australian people and pass Labor's legislation.
PM: Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I think the Liberal party are playing with fire here. They should just reflect on this. Just reflect on it, what do the Australian say?
The Australian people said, ‘get rid of Workchoices'. Get rid of AWAs. How loud do you have to be for the Liberals to sit up and take notice. And I think the Liberal Party should reflect on their own future when it comes to this extraordinary act of contempt towards working families and what the Australian people said at the ballot box last year.
JOURNALIST: Why don't you accept the distinction they make between Workchoices AWAs and 1996 AWAs?
PM: It's quite plain that we went to the Australian people, that we stood for the abolition of Workchoices, the abolition of AWAs period. There was no distinction in what we said, AWAs period.
And therefore, that's the mandate that we have from the Australian people. As I said before I think the Liberals are playing with fire if they think that they can just arrogantly brush to one side the voice of the Australian people, stated with absolute clarity at the ballot box last year, and only a few months ago.
JOURNALIST: Are they likely to get burnt?
PM: Well that's a matter for them. I mean, I think the Liberal Party are in grave danger of just losing their way. I mean they are so internally divided on a whole range of policy questions, whether it's Kyoto, whether it's the future of Workchoices, Indigenous policy, that it is very difficult to see what the future course of action is for the Liberal Party at present.
I would simply appeal to the Liberal Party and say, ‘listen to what the Australian people have said, do not treat the voice of the Australian people with contempt, because I think you are playing with fire, real fire'.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Our legislative mandate is absolutely clear, on the prosecution of legislation through the House, I will turn to the minister.
DPM: We introduced the bill last week. Our timetable for dealing with the bill provided for proper scrutiny and a Senate inquiry. All we asked the Liberal party to do was apply their standards to themselves. We asked the Liberal Party to deal with this legislation in the same timeframe that parliament dealt with the last industrial relations legislation from the Howard Government. Now the Liberal Party didn't apply their own standards to themselves and that's because this isn't about an inquiry, this isn't about more information. It certainly isn't about listening to the views of Australians. This is about delaying in Parliament, the end of Workchoices. This is just a process to make sure Workchoices lasts as long as humanly possible.
Because the Liberal Party support Workchoices. Our bill delivers the policy we took to the last election, it delivers on what we said we would be in the Transition Bill, it's got the mandate of the Australian people, and they should pass it.
JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, just a couple of days before the election, you said at the National Press Club that you wanted to take a meat axe to the bloated bureaucracy. Can I ask you whether you are in a position to tell us what percentage of job losses there will be? And, is it fair to say that if you're a public servant you've got something to fear in this next Budget?
PM: Well, first and foremost, we have an inflation problem. We inherited that from our predecessors when we took over Government from our Liberal predecessors, they handed us an inflation rate in this country which is the highest it's been in 16 years.
Secondly, if you look at the Reserve Bank's statement on monetary policy a week or so ago, it projects ahead for the next two years and says that on those policy settings that we inherited, that we are on target to have inflation beyond the three per cent range for two years out. This is a serious inflation challenge.
The question we face as the Government of Australia is what do we do about it.
Part of the five point plan I articulated in Perth to fight inflation, is producing a very solid Budget surplus, and I've indicated what our target for that is.
Part of that means being very disciplined on Government spending. Going to your question about bloating, what I've said to Ministers and our many discussions before the Budget committee of the Cabinet, is that we must look hard and target the administrative expenses of Government departments.
I'm not in the business of cutting programmes willy nilly. But I am in the business of trimming back fundamentally into any bloating of administrative expenses.
JOURNALIST: Cutting jobs?
PM: Cutting administrative expenses.
And so, when we complete the ERC process which will be in the lead up to the Budget and in the Budget itself you'll have a very clear idea about where those cuts will fall.
I believe that we can achieve our Budget outcome by targeting those administrative expenses. I'm not in the business of simply taking the axe to public servants for the sake of doing so.
JOURNALIST: On the Brian Burke issue, you have said you felt, you started to feel a bit uncomfortable about the relationship that became and that you decided against going to the journalist's dinner. Why didn't you just say that to him that it was simply not a good idea rather than delaying it until the next year? And secondly, was part of your discomfort due to your belief that he might be grooming you as some sort of Labor operative?
PM: Look, it's not terribly complicated here. I just felt progressively uncomfortable. When I started to really focus on the proposed event in Perth in December of that year, and looked at it's detail, I progressively became uncomfortable. And once I got the feeling that this was not the right thing to proceed with, then I communicated that in the way in which you've seen described in the emails.
JOURNALIST: You delayed it as opposed to saying (inaudible)
PM: Well, most of us  -  well not all of us, but sometimes  -  we reach decisions over a period of days as opposed to a flash of insight. As I've said before, with the benefit of 20-20 hindsight, I would have handled these matters in the course of 2005 differently. But I don't think anybody at that time had any understanding of the matters which were subsequently to become the focus of public discussion through the CCC Inquiry. I certainly did not.
But with the benefit of 20-20 hindsight, I would have handled it differently.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you talked about China this morning. When are you planning on going and broadly, how do you hope to improve relationships with China (inaudible)
PM: Yeah, I hope to go to China very soon, in the course of the next few months, and I'll be making an announcement to that effect before too much longer. I'm trying to nail down some final details.
But, what's the objective? China, and India, are core parts of Australia's economic future. Look at the trajectory and the growth of our exports to the People's Republic and the growth and trajectory of our exports to India. This is such an important part of the nation's future, but not just in resources. Look at the amount of manufactures we sell into China. Look at the possibilities which exist in agriculture as well. And, what I'm most keen about, is what we can do in the sale of services into the Chinese market as well. Most particularly, financial services where we have enormous expertise.
On the resources sector front, and this is the subject of my comments this morning on ABC radio current affairs, I believe it's a good thing to sit down with our friends in the Chinese leadership and try and think through some strategic horizons for the next 10 to 20 years on China's long term resource and energy needs and what this country has to offer.
Principally, the decision makers in this process, of course, will be our large resource companies. I understand that. And China's corporate sector as well.
But there is a role for Government in mapping out longer term strategic approaches so that we know where the Chinese Government is coming from, and they'll know where the Australian Government is coming from. And I think that's very important in a context of ensuring that our national interests are appropriately advanced.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Chinese Government owned entities are operating from arms length from the Chinese Government?
PM: The problem we face on that is that - I make no reference to the matters that are currently before the FIRB (Foreign Investment Review Board) and the Treasurer because they'll be assessed on their merits  -  the problem we have, whether it's with China or other sovereign wealth funds, for example, whether they come from Singapore, the United Arab Emirates or other state owned enterprises from around the world, is that it's not a case of one size fits all. Each of these entities is different in its structure.
There is a difference, for example, between a Chinese state owned enterprise  -  which may or may not be publicly listed, one that is publicly listed, there is a difference between those in turn and the Chinese sovereign wealth funds such as the China investment corporation. These are all different entities.
Therefore, assessing each proposal requires the application of the criteria which the Treasurer has released and the definition of the national interest, against the particular factual circumstances of that firm. You can't make a broad generalisation. This Government, under the leadership of myself, is determined to send a clear cut message to the rest of the world that we are open to investment. But, consistent with the tradition of the Foreign Investment Review Board process, we will always assess major investment proposals based on the national interest. The purpose of the Treasurer's appropriate release of these guidelines in the last 24 hours is to give definition to the national interest, as some, particularly in the corporate sector, have asked for.
JOURNALIST: For Joe Hockey to be claiming that he didn't know about the core details of WorkChoices (inaudible) in Cabinet, and even though as you say, it's pretty much outlined in that brochure, he's got to be lying, doesn't he?
PM: Well, what Joe had in mind is a matter for Joe. You probably see more of that this evening I gather. But I find it remarkable that you have this re-writing by the Liberal Party of their most recent history on Kyoto and climate change, and on WorkChoices. This is the Liberal Government who stood up, faced the Australian people, and said if you ratify Kyoto the sky will fall in. That if you get rid of WorkChoices and AWAs then, there'll be a general implosion. I mean, for goodness sake.
But going to the core of whether the Liberal Party has been fair dinkum about its recent record, can I say, if you read this through, which relates to that set of WorkChoices which existed prior to the introduction of the so-called Fairness Test, it doesn't take a Rhodes Scholar to work out from that and other associated documents released publicly at that time that you could strip away wages and conditions, so long as they were publicly notified through the AWA process.
Now, for a Cabinet Minister to sit there in the Cabinet Room and say, ‘oh, I wonder what that's all about?' I don't really think it passes muster.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, we're lead to believe that these pamphlets will be recycled into  -  among other things  -  toilet rolls. Is that an appropriate end and (inaudible)
PM: I think it's very important that documentation of this nature is treated with the respect it deserves, but I'll hand over to the Deputy Prime Minister to provide a more tasteful response.
GILLARD: I think I'll just have to endorse those comments.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) diplomatic experience (inaudible)
PM: Well the fact is, I didn't go. That's the reality. To the function which was concerned. And remember, by that stage, I think I'd ended up in Perth that day and that night. I could have gone. But, if you've initially accepted an invitation to go  -  which I had  -  and then you've become uncomfortable about it, then what many folk do  -  I'm not alone on this  -  is you find a diplomatic way to get out of it. But my intention was not to go, my intention was not to go, I didn't go, I wasn't about to go the following year either.
JOURNALIST: Why did you postpone the dinner to the next year? You weren't telling the truth.
PM: I had no intention of attending that dinner, or any reincarnation of it, because I felt uncomfortable about it.
JOURNALIST: It was a white lie?
PM: Well, I felt uncomfortable about having accepted it, then saying, this actually isn't quite right. And then communicating that. And as I've said before, as I've said before, with the benefit of 20-20 hindsight I could have handled this differently, but I didn't, but I've got to be up front about that and say, I got it wrong, and cop it on the chin.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh I think it just felt as if it was getting too much. That's all. Just felt as if it was getting too much.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) You're a senior figure in the Labor Party, he's Brian Burke. Why not just say to him, sorry mate, this is a bad look for me, I am not coming to dinner. Why the need to  - 
PM: Well there's a lot of ‘could have, ‘should have' and as I have said on more than one occasion, this, with the benefit of 20  -  20 hindsight, I could have handled this a lot better.
I didn't, but the key thing here is, I decided not to attend. I didn't attend. I explained it in a way in which you are all familiar with and even though it was physically possible for me to be there  -  I happened to be in Perth on that evening.
JOURNALIST: Do you now regret all of your contact with Mr Burke and (inaudible)
PM: I think, Dennis if you look back to 2005, as I have said before, that I was unaware of the matters which were about to become subject to investigation and then obviously public reporting through the Triple C inquiry. I think most people at the time were unaware of that. I certainly was. And as I said with the benefit of hindsight, I could have handled it better.
But I didn't. That's history and I have accepted responsibility for it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It would have been a few calls and the emails you all have and the meetings as I described in the press conference of March last year in terms of ones that I did have.
JOURNALIST: Just on Workchoices, the previous government justified spending all this money on pamphlets and advertising because it was such a complex system. Can you give an iron clad guarantee now that when your new system comes there wont be public expenditure on similarly explaining to people what their rights are.
PM: I will hand to the Minister on this, but can I just say this. The reason the previous government spent $122 million worth of taxpayers' money  -  ill come back to that in one minute  -  advertising this unfair and extreme set of laws because they were trying to con people into believing it wasn't an unfair and extreme set of laws. It was. They were trying to say that black is white and white is black. That's the problem. And on the $122 million dollars figure, Julia and I have been sitting in on expenditure review committee processes. You know, to think that you have $122 million dollars easy, to pull off the shelf to expend on hospitals, schools, key priorities of public administration, rather than being thrown to the propaganda unit here, is for me obscene.
We believe that we will come up with a simple, manageable set of industrial relations laws. But I will turn to the minister.
DPM: Can I just echo the Prime Minister's comments, this is propaganda. This isn't an information booklet. Let's remind ourselves more of these went to be pulped than ever went into the hands of Australians. We of course will want to inform people about our new system but through proper training.
We understand that employers organisations, unions, employers themselves, employees  -  all want something that explains to them what their rights are but it won't be glossy booklets. It won't be TV advertising. It will be the kinds of communication you genuinely do when you are trying to explain a new system to people. So for example, Fair Worker Australia, our industrial umpire, will take people's calls and explain things to them.
That's what you do when you are tyring to give people information. This is happy snap propaganda. That's all it was ever designed to be.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
DPM: Well, can I say to that, we're concerned on behalf of Australian working families. I have made it perfectly clear that in adopting this strategy the Liberal opposition is not treating the Labor party with contempt, it is treating Australian working families with contempt.
Australian working families voted to end Workchoices. They voted to get rid of Australian Workplace Agreements. That's what they want done and that's what the Liberal party is standing in the way of.
PM: And I conclude on this, we've got to zip to get back to the House  -  is, the Liberal Party, are really playing with fire here. I don't think they get it. If they do, they are not giving any evidence of it. The Australian people were consulted, at length across the entire Commonwealth. Practically every meeting I went to about Workchoices, we consulted extensively with industry groups. We copped a belting and a caning from various industry groups in terms of our position on various aspects of the industrial relations legislation.
You couldn't have had a more complete debate that you had on IR and it's subsets. The people voted for us to get rid of Workchoices and to get rid of AWAs. It's as simple as that.
And the Liberal party are going to continue to play with fire on this. And let them suffer the consequences. I have got to zip.


The Rudd Government will hold its second Community Cabinet meeting in Queensland on Sunday March 2, at Narangba Valley State High School.
Community Cabinet meetings are a terrific opportunity for mums and dads, small business operators, retirees and local leaders to put forward a range of fresh ideas on local and national issues.
Our first Community Cabinet meeting in Perth last month provided my cabinet colleagues with some valuable insights and ideas.
All interested members of the public living in and around the Narangba area are welcome to attend. Please register your attendance in advance. The registration period is from Wednesday 20 February to Tuesday 26 February 2008.
The Community Cabinet meeting program will be:
     * 11.30am to 1.00 pm  -  Registration (refreshments served)
     * 1.00pm to 2.00 pm  -  Public Forum
     * 2.15pm to 3.15 pm  -  Pre-arranged meetings with Cabinet ministers.
     * 3.30 pm  -  Close of Session.
If you wish to attend the Public Forum please advise the Community Cabinet Section of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet by 12 noon, Tuesday, 26 February 2008. You may do this by:
     * filling in the registration form online at www.pmc.gov.au/community_cabinet or
     * phoning PM&amp;C on 1800 088 323 (toll free) or (02) 6271 5563 (Mon to Fri)
Cabinet ministers will be available for one-on-one meetings with a limited number of individuals or organisations. If you would like to discuss a particular issue with a Minister you need to fill in a meeting request form and provide it to PM&amp;C by 12 noon Tuesday, 26 February 2008. You may do this by:
     * filling in the meeting request form online at www.pmc.gov.au/community_cabinet or
     * phoning PM&amp;C on 1800 088 323 (toll free) or (02) 6271 5563 (Mon  -  Fri)
Any enquiries regarding the Community Cabinet meeting should be directed to:
Community Cabinet Section
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
1 National Circuit
BARTON ACT 2600


MIDDLETON: Prime Minister welcome to Newshour.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program Jim
MIDDLETON: First to an issue of the day, Kosovo. Australia rushed to recognise the independence of this Balkan state, now Serbia's retaliating by pulling its ambassador out of Australia, that doesn't all go particularly well for Kosovo in particular, or the Balkans in general, does it?
PM: I wouldn't say that we rushed, we were just quite determined to act early and decisively. The recent history of Kosovo has been a very sad one and we've seen what's happened in terms of the loss of life. We've seen also what's happened in terms of the deprived economic opportunities available to the Kosovo's themselves. So we took a principled decision this was the right way to go. We did so in consultation with our friends and allies around the world. As for the actions and response by the Serbian Government, well nothing that's happened here that's not happening in the United States, in United Kingdom, France and elsewhere, but I am sure we will get through these things. Political transitions like this, they happen, they cause some friction on the way through, but for the people of Kosovo this is an important step forward and we wish those people well in carving out a future for themselves in the community of nations.
MIDDLETON: Mr Rudd, relations with Indonesia are paramount importance for Australia, the Indonesians have been saying that the recently signed Lombok treaty requires Australia to return any Papuans should they turn up on Australian shores, would you comply with that condition?
PM: Well the Lombok Treaty is one which has been signed by our Foreign Minister and by his Indonesian counterpart Hassan Wirajuda and I spoke with the Indonesian Foreign Minister just after that ceremony when he came to Sydney. We will honour fully the terms of that agreement and because we respect Indonesia's sovereignty over West Papua or Irian Jaya as some would call it. When it comes to the handling of individual cases that will be done in full conformity with Australian law, international law and our undertakings under the treaty
MIDDLETON: So you would be prepared to send back Papuans regardless of the domestic outcry which there would undoubtedly be?
PM: What we are prepared to do is to act fully in conformity with Australian domestic law, our international legal obligations under the Convention, and the specific undertakings we've made to our friends in the Indonesian republic. I think the big challenge with West Papua and this is the dialogue I intend to have with my good friend SBY when I next have the opportunity in Indonesia, is to work out together how we can assist as Australians with the long term economic development of West Papua to provide real opportunities for people there. Because if that's going well and if the local administration of West Papua's going well, the push factors for people to leave West Papua then decrease and that's why I want to have a real positive productive dialogue and cooperative relationship with President Yudhoyono on, in the future
MIDDLETON: Still on Indonesia, the Indonesian Ambassador to Canberra has gone out of his way to suggest that Australia's travel advisory's should be scrapped, it is time to consider ditching them?
PM: I know the Ambassador very well, he is a good friend of mine and I've known him some time and his predecessor and his predecessor. They are fine representatives of their country, but my job and the job of the government on behalf of Australians is to take the best considered advice on what are the security circumstances on the ground in various parts of the world and various parts of the Indonesian republic. And I understand that causes friction from time to time. But the core thing here is that we have a consular responsibility for the million Australians who in any one year are offshore and a slice of those are in Indonesia and we have a responsibility to ensure that they know to the best extent that we can provide information about the security circumstances of where they are travelling or living abroad and we will continue to do that
MIDDLETON: So that's a no really isn't it?
PM: Well it's one of those things that you just suck it and see on the way through. The information we have available for government, they change during the course of the year, but the Officials in the government have a solemn responsibility which is to reflect our best information through to the travel advisories, so that the travelling public have access to that with the warnings which are posted. It is not just Indonesia that this applies to, there are many parts in the world, and I understand the difficulties which it can create but first responsibility is the Australian people
MIDDLETON: You're emissions trading expert, Ross Garnaut is about to deliver his interim report I understand, the suggestions are that he will recommend interim targets for Australia but wait and to see what China and India, for example, do before committing any further, is that an approach that takes your fancy?
PM: Well Ross Garnaut was commissioned by us in Opposition in the middle of last year to undertake a study about the economic impact of climate change on Australia, if we were to act on climate change or if we were to fail to act on climate change. The idea come from earlier work done by Sir Nicolas Stern for the government of the United Kingdom when he produced the Stern report on the impact of action and inaction on climate change for the global economy. This is our Australian ‘Stern report' in that respect. On the policy side of what Professor Garnaut's working on, he'll be one of many sources of advice to the government about how we move forward with a new regime on targets, how we design emissions trading and the rest. I look forward to receiving his report, but his is an independent report and we will deliberate on it, we might accept some of it, or reject other bits, but we are very keen to go through it and go through it thoroughly.
MIDDLETON: But there does seem to be some sense doesn't there in Australia having something up its sleeve, if countries like China and India don't act in good faith and don't take sufficient steps toward reducing greenhouse gas emissions?
PM: I've been very plain to our friends in Beijing and New Delhi that we need to see the Peoples Republic of China and India, full partners in the global cooperation which is now necessary to bring greenhouse gas emissions down. If you look at it quantitatively we cannot have an effective long term compact on this unless you have as participants the United States of America, the Peoples Republic of China and India. The maths speaks for itself in terms of emission quantums.
Therefore, the problem we face at present is the United States isn't on the cart. China and India, we need to have more on the cart, in order to produce a real global outcome. For two years ahead, and what President Yudhoyono kick started in Bali  -  the so called Bali Road Map  -  provide us with a negotiating opportunity with Beijing and New Delhi to work through some of these challenges.
I have made plain to my friends in China at least, and I haven't had the opportunity to do so in India, we want China to move to a position over time, accepting for itself, globally binding targets. We think that's important. While recognising China's particular circumstances as a developing country.
MIDDLETON: And to East Timor, a couple of days ago East Timor's foreign minister told me that Jose Ramos-Horta would be out of commission for up to 6 months. That's a bit of worry, creates a bit of a power vacuum possibly doesn't it?
PM: I think the remarkable thing about events in Dili so far and more broadly across Timor Leste  -  is that despite this huge assault on the body politic, with an attempt to assassinate the political leadership of the country, that the institutions of state and government, work remarkably well.
We had the PM Xanana Gusmao effectively take control, using constitutional provisions available to him. We had an acting president appointed, who was president of the national assembly and of course an acting president of the national assembly appointed from the constitutionally provided position there.
So the processes, including the declaration of (inaudible) or what we would call Marshall law, have all been adhered to constitutionally. As for the future, let's watch and pray that Jose has a good recovery. I was up in Darwin the other day. He wasn't conscious. But the doctors, for the first time were starting to  -  sound ok on this question  -  he is a good friend of mine and I look forward to his speediest recovery but I am confident the information I have at hand so far  -  the Government in Dili is performing well, in these very challenging circumstances.
MIDDLETON: Earlier this week you foreshadowed plans to go to China, and fairly soon. Is there any chance that will coincide with this year's Boao forum, which Hu Jintao has indicated that he will attend?
PM: Well I am going to go to China, sooner rather than later. In terms of the precise details of the timing I think we are still trying to bed that down with our friends in Beijing. I look forward to the opportunity of catching up with President Hu Jintao, whether it is in Boao or elsewhere.
We will sort that out in due course. The important thing is, to take our current relationship with China to a new level. I believe that the economic opportunities between us are significant. There is enormous resource in energy relationship between our two countries and we need to have a strategic discussion about that, long term - China's interest, our national interests.
But beyond that, where Australia also has enormous opportunities to pursue, if we can get proper trade access, for example, the financial services market, what we do in the area of biotechnology, what we do more broadly  -  in the sale of Australian education services. This wider services market is what I am keen for Australian businesses to have a greater access to. And in terms of our political relationship with the Chinese government, I look forward to catching up with some old friends and talking about the future.
MIDDLETON: In Mandarin no doubt.
PM: Maybe, maybe. (inaudible)
MIDDLETON: Indeed. China reacted sharply to John Howard's decision last year to ratify a security agreement with Japan. He suggested at the time that it could eventually be upgraded to a treaty. Is that reaction from Beijing the reason that you won't take that additional step?
PM: My attitude about trilateral relationships between Washington, Tokyo and Canberra haven't changed. They have not changed since the year dot. And that is, I welcome the current level of dialogue and cooperation between those three governments. But I believe that's where it most appropriately should stand, into the future.
When it comes to other proposals I have seen which is to somehow quadrilateralise this and involve India, I have also been very plain and blunt about the fact I don't think that's an appropriate direction for us to go at this stage.
MIDDLETON: Why not?
PM: I don't think our friends in New Delhi would particularly welcome that as well.
MIDDLETON: But it's the Chinese who are particularly antagonistic to it, describing it as encirclement and containment.
PM: Well there are a range of views in Beijing on this question. My view is, how do you unfold a future relationship with China which has got great economic opportunities (inaudible) on both sides of the ledger, for us and for the Chinese; develop further, our political dialogue with the Chinese on a whole range of areas; become genuine partners with China in the course of the 21st century. Big challenges, climate change, us working with China. Access to the Chinese services market, huge opportunity for Australian business.
Working with the Chinese on some of our common challenges in the wider Asia Pacific region, including the South Pacific. I think these are big things that we need to work together on. But is that enhanced or helped in any way but some sort of quadrilateral relationship with New Delhi? I don't think so.
But I say at the same time that I am absolutely determined to take our relationship with New Delhi from here to here, through injecting an enormous amount of effort into expanding our relationship with the sub continent. It is a relationship which many governments in the past have tried to accelerate and expand, and I don't make any particular criticism of predecessor governments, but I think we can do much better and I intend to do so.
MIDDLETON: You'd be aware of the talk in Tokyo of you as the Manchurian candidate, or in other words being  - 
PM: No, my Japanese is rotten, and I am aware of that.
MIDDELTON: - Being closer to Beijing than John Howard was. Surely you can see that your decision not to counter (inaudible) upgrading the security agreement to a treaty, also to end the four way dialogue  -  that is not going to ease suspicions in Tokyo is it?
PM: Well I believe that the quadrilateral arrangement, the four way dialogue is not being formally advanced by anybody. It is not a question of cancellation. It wasn't there to cancel. So it is not an active proposal from the Indian government, not an active proposal as I understand from the United States government and not an active proposal from the Japanese government. So it has been kicked around a bit but I am simply indicating quite firmly, I don't think it is a productive way to go given our current strategic circumstances.
As for our friends in Japan, Japan has been a long standing partner with Australia. I am an enormous respecter of what Japan has done in its engagement with the rest of the world. A force for stability in East Asia. The fact that you have got Japanese official development assistance out there assisting developing countries right across the region and beyond.
We partner with Japan in many projects around the world. This is a very good bilateral relationship and I look forward to it expanding into the future as well. You know something, foreign relations in East Asia, it's not a zero sum game. You can have a good relationship with Beijing, and have a very good relationship with our friends in Tokyo and in India and these don't cancel each other out. I think that's kind of like 19th Century von Clausewitz at work. It's not the way in which I think. I don't think it's the way a mature nation's state should think in the 21st century.
MIDDLETON: In July Japan is hosting the G8 summit, the word from Tokyo is that Mr Fukuda has suggested that you might like to attend as well. Is there any chance that you might go along?
PM: I would like very much to visit Japan at the earliest opportunity and we've been in discussion with our friends in Tokyo along those lines. As to the precise arrangements, I will leave that to the officials to sort out. I will look forward very much to catching up with Prime Minister Fukuda . A whole lot of questions we have got on the bilateral front with our friends in Japan  -  that includes the future of free trade agreement and negotiations with them and the sensitivities associated with it. But more broadly, how do we partner with Japan into the future as well, given Japan's enormous generosity in assisting developing countries get across the development divide. I am a great supporter of Japan's international efforts and I would like to be active partners in what they are doing in the developing world.
MIDDLETON: US Defence Secretary Robert Gates will be here shortly in Australia. The United States has F22 Raptors, that says they are for sale to foreigners. There are clearly problems with the last government's plan to buy Super Hornets to fill the gap until the joint strike fighter is up and running, would you consider asking Mr Gates whether Washington would sell the Raptor to Australia?
PM: What I have learnt, through long experience of defence policy questions, is to take the proper and considered advice of the experts. When it comes to the particular capabilities of the Raptor or any other category of American or any other aircraft on the market at present, I would much prefer to take the considered advice of the experts against the capability needs for the Royal Australian Air Force into the 21st Century.
Bob Gates is coming to Canberra, I am looking forward to catching up with him. We were going to put a prawn on the barbie and have him round to the Lodge. I think the Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte is travelling with him for the AUSMIN talks. They will be very welcome guests in Canberra. Very welcome guests at the Lodge and I promised the cat and the dog will be at home.
MIDDLETON: Do you think though that Australia has done enough in terms of support for the United States in the war on terror etcetera, that if we needed the Raptors, if the Super Hornets can't do the job, that the United States would come to the party?
PM: Again, you're question is based on a hypothetical premise about a particular defence acquisition - one not proceeding, or an alternative then proceeding. This is being handled by us in a very considered way. I have got to say, unlike our predecessors, these are serious acquisitions, you are not just dealing with the defence of the nation in the future, you are also dealing with the kit and capability which is available to our men and women in uniform. Whether it is a RAAF acquisition or a Naval acquisition or what is necessary for our Army to be deployed in the future as well. We take these processes seriously. We as a National Security Committee of the cabinet have sat for virtually an entire day on these matters, going through them in great detail. Because the decisions are very expensive in terms of the public dollar, very important in terms of the defence of Australia and very important for our men and women in uniform who have to use this equipment.
So I would much rather take it in a calm, methodical way rather than proceeding on hypothesis based on hypothesis.
MIDDLETON: Before we draw this to a close, the United States is in the midst of its election season. I can vividly recall when I was in Washington with John Howard 8 years ago, him cutting short a news conference, specifically so he could take a call from then candidate George W Bush. He was clearly more comfortable with a republican in the White House. Equally clearly, isn't it the case that you would be happier with a democrat?
PM: This is the Jim Middleton attempted news point of the evening. No Jim, I will accept the democratic decision of the American people.
MIDDELTON: But you do have personal links with quite senior people in the Democratic Party in the hierarchy. The Labor party has links with the democrats. It would be unnatural for you not to hope that Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton won in November.
PM:I have a stack of friends in the United States going back many, many, many years, both Republicans and Democrats. People on the Republican side who have served the current Bush administration and the previous Bush administration of George Bush senior, as well as of course many who have worked in the previous Clinton administration both in Defence and in the State Department and in other agencies of the United States government.
I am pretty relaxed about the seasoned and considered outcome of the American people. The great thing about the alliance is that, let's never forget, it has survived, prospered and expanded after 12 or 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Labor and Liberal, 12 or 13 American Presidents, Republican and Democrat. No side of politics has its paw uniquely on the fabric of this alliance. We have both been contributors to it. And whoever is elected as the next President of the United States, I look forward to working well with them into the future.
MIDDLETON:Will you see either Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton when you do visit the United States later this year?
PM:It depends on the season. If the candidates, Republican and Democrats are out in the field, hustling for votes and in very recent memory I know how intense a business that can be. But I imagine their focus legitimately would be about how they maximise their own positions in the domestic electoral process. But we have good relations with both the major political parties in the United States and many, many people in the Congress and elsewhere.
Recently, Therese and I were pleased to host a couple of visiting US delegations at Kirribilli and these were Republicans and Democrats. People that we have known for a while and people that we had met for the first time. There is a great deal of commonality in the overall interests of our two countries. And a great deal of warmth in the relationship between the political establishment of this country and the political establishment of that country. And I think that is good for the Australian national interest.
MIDDLETON:Prime Minister, thanks for breaking into a very busy schedule to speak to us on Newshour
PM:Pleased to be here.


CAREY: Prime Minister good morning and welcome.
PM: Good morning Greg thanks for having me on the program.
CAREY: It's a great pleasure and it's good to talk to you. Are you enjoying it?
PM: Well it's a year of challenges. Lots going on. On the economy, we have of course been working hard in education and industrial relations and most recently in the week just passed, we've been dealing with the apology to the stolen generations. So it has been a very busy start to the year.
CAREY: Plenty on. Can I just ask you - they are very big ticket items and they are all very complex issues. How do you deal with them in a way that they get done without getting overwhelmed by the entirety of it all?
PM: One, don't sleep too much. Two, have very good staff. And three, read your briefs.
CAREY: In that order?
PM: Yeah, basically. Because, well, there is a lot going on but I have a good staff and there are good public servants and they make sure I have got a steady flow of briefings. But it is very important to remain abreast of the challenges, but more importantly on just what the challenges are, but what is an appropriate response and long term solution to those things that we can act on.
CAREY: I would like to talk about all of those things that you have just identified there. But maybe, my opening concern about this culture of alcohol abuse amongst our young people. Not just amongst our young people but mostly amongst them. Are you concerned about that and I am just wondering what you think about it?
PM: Greg I don't have any hard data in front of me, I am sure many of your listeners would be in possession of it and they could let us know. But look I am just a father with kids and I have observed what's happened over the years with school friends and friends and just the general community.
I am concerned about what I would describe as an epidemic of binge drinking across the country. I think it is not good. It is not good for young people's health and it is certainly not good in terms of coping with addictions in general. But the key question is, what do you do about it? Moaning and groaning about it is one thing, and observing that it is a social problem. How do we act effectively on these?
I have already begun to have some discussions with the Federal Health Minister Nicola Roxon about what we might do on this front. It can only be done in partnership with colleagues in the States and Territories but frankly I think it is starting to get somewhat out of control.
Speaking for example to some of the police around the country. Their concern is that alcoholism - not alcoholism, alcohol abuse - lies at the core of increasing spates of urban violence around the country. Again I don't have the data to hand and I am sure people could perhaps dispute that. But I have got to say I think we are dealing with a growing problem, not a static problem, and therefore I think we have got to sit down and Governments and work out an appropriate response.
CAREY: Ok, so that too on the agenda. Word is that the next interest rate rise could be half a per cent. The first time that would have happened since February 2000 I think. Now I know that the Reserve Bank is independent but would you consider such a rise justified at this time?
PM: We believe firmly and fundamentally in the independence of the Reserve Bank and they set monetary policy settings and that is all about interest rates. Our job as the Government is to make sure that we have got the best policy in place through what is called fiscal policy or Budget policy to make the job of the Reserve Bank as easy as possible and keep as much downward pressure on interest rates as possible.
Big problem we have got is the inflation problem we inherited from our predecessors. As of the March quarter last year when we won the election, inflation was running at 16 year highs and the Reserve Bank, literally in the last few weeks, projecting ahead, has said that inflation is likely to be ahead of the, what is called the Reserve Bank margin, or tolerance margin, of 3 per cent, out to ‘08, ‘09 and into 2010.
Now that's big inflation problem. What does that mean in terms of interest rates? If you have got inflation going up and it puts upward pressure on interest rates. So our job is to do whatever we can through Government policy to lessen the inflationary fires and as well as that, therefore, make the job of the Reserve Bank easier to keep interest rates as low as possible.
CAREY: Related to that then, Bernie Fraser, former head of the Reserve Bank, says that you should be holding off on the $31 billion worth of tax cuts because they will only feed the inflation you are trying to fight. Or if you are not going to do that, at least find a more creative way of using that money. Maybe putting it into to superannuation, money that could be used further down the road. Is he wrong?
PM: Well Greg, working families right across Australia are under financial pressure and whether it is coping with the mortgage, or as it currently stands, quite apart from cost of petrol, cost of groceries, all sorts of costs which families have to bear. These are big costs. Therefore, when we framed before the election our commitment to working families to deliver on tax cuts, we intend to honour that commitment.
But in doing that, there are other ways in which we can help take the pressure of Government spending off the overall level of what is called demand in the economy and that means, spending cuts elsewhere. That's why we have got a razor gang in place to cut hard into unnecessary Government expenditure and some places which will be politically painful.
But we intend to honour our pre-election commitments to working families to deliver them tax cuts. We think that is important. But we also are very open minded on how we further encourage private savings by families as well. And well have more to say on that in due course.
CAREY: Given all of that though and given that equation that we all understand, if it is economically responsible to say to the Australian people ‘look, we promised you $31 billion but we have inherited, in your words, an inflation rate that is much higher than what we though it would be, so in terms of fiscal responsibility, we need to hold back for now.' Wouldn't you trust the Australian people to accept that?
PM: I believe that we need to, first and foremost, show real discipline with Government expenditures elsewhere. In terms of the tax cuts for working families, and I would just add here that these are lesser tax cuts by billions of dollars compared with those which were offered by the previous coalition government, they are a more modest set of tax cuts  - 
CAREY: But they will fuel inflation.
PM: ...they are a modest set of tax cuts but the overall impact on demand in the economy will also be determined by what happens with Government expenditure generally. And that goes back to the other side of the equation. Not just what you do on tax, in putting more money into people's pockets, it's what you also do on the spend side of Government which also injects new money into the economy and therefore if you can pull back on that, it does have, it does have, an effective pulling back on the demand pressures of the economy which then in turn fuel inflation.
CAREY: So Bernie Fraser is wrong?
PM: Well, Bernie is entitled to his point of view. But I've got to say, Greg, I take pretty seriously what I said to the Australian people before the election. Whether it is on this, or whether it is on our commitment to introduce Trades Training Centres into every secondary school in the country, or computers for kids year 9 to 12. Now, we intend to get on with that and do it because that is what we said we'd do and I believe part of the cynicism about our politics lies in people saying something one day and forgetting about it after the election
CAREY: Prime Minister, if inflation continues to rise, I am just wondering how you could argue against a union push for an increase in wages to fight, as you say, the increased supermarket prices, increased petrol prices, prices up all around the board. How could you then say to the union movement, who are going to be wanting more money, that you can't have it? And that again will fuel inflation, surely?
PM: Well, it goes back to your first point about tax cuts. Part of the reason for tax cuts is that working families are under financial pressure. If you took the advice of some, which is to cancel them, then that would further fuel union demands in terms of a general wage call. That's, I think, very important to bear in mind.
The second thing is: we believe that everyone in the economy needs to exercise restraint. And, that means, CEO salaries, it means, of course, wage restraint more generally. And, for our own part, just as members of Parliament - and that's very modest, I simply suggested that we suspend, and it has now been supported by the Parliamentary Party and I think the Opposition - we'll suspend our own salary increases or salary adjustments right through until the middle of next year.
CAREY: We had the apology, moving on to the apology issue, last week. And it seems to have been well received. But, now, as you outlined, the hard work begins. And much of it involves education. There were some harrowing stories in the weekend press that I read, just heartbreaking stuff, and it just underlines the enormity of the task you and all of us confront.
But how can you insist that Aboriginal parents send their children to school? How are you going to be able to do that? And when are we going to have enough teachers and infrastructure for that to be able to take place?
PM: Well, I don't have a magic wand, but I think what's really important is to put all these things together. The reason for the apology was that it was unfinished business for the nation. But it also created a bridge of respect between ourselves and Aboriginal people.
With a clear objective which is to agree upon a set of fixed targets for closing the gap between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australia. Education is one, health outcomes is another. And of course, infant mortality is a third.
When it comes to, for example, educational attainment on the part of Aboriginal young people, we want to set a target of within the next ten years halving the literacy and numeracy gap between Indigenous children and non-Indigenous children. That's a very important target.
In the speech I gave in Parliament last week, I said let's set ourselves a target in five years time of having every four year old little one in remote Aboriginal communities with the proper access to pre-school. Because you're not going to get your literacy and numeracy outcomes unless that starts at a very early age.
On teachers, we've already invested $60 million to provide an extra 200 teachers which would cover 2,000 Aboriginal children across the Northern Territory. $25 million to build three new secondary boarding colleges, providing opportunities for indigenous kids to finish school. These are practical steps in that direction. But it is just the start.
CAREY: How do you make them go though? Coming back to that initial question. You can provide all of that, but unless there's an attitude on behalf of those you want to go to school, to go to school and for their parents to insist that they do. How will you make them?
PM: Well that's where Greg you're right. I'm no bleeding heart on those questions, I'm very practical. There has to be a relationship of reciprocal obligation and mutual responsibility.
We the Government, on behalf of the Australian people are prepared to provide these resources against the fixed targets that I've just spoken about. The fixed targets which we've negotiated with Aboriginal leaders across the country.
But there must be buy-in by each of the 300-400 remote Aboriginal communities across the country. And, I don't believe it's going to be one size fits all. You travel around remote Aboriginal communities a bit, and I've done it a bit, people in the Cape are vastly different in their circumstances to those in the Central Desert to those in Arnhem Land to those in the Kimberleys to those in the Pitjantjatjara lands in South Australia. It's all vastly different.
The communities have some common problems, but I suspect that on your core question, which is, how do you get little ones, for example, to attend school? What we will end up developing is perhaps something like 200-300 different local solutions to making that possible. But, what are the two overarching, or two underlying conditions here, or undertakings?
First is a commonly agreed target. And that's the one I referred to before about literacy and numeracy attainment within a fixed period of time. So that everyone is focussed on the end point.
And then secondly, mutual responsibility between ourselves and local Aboriginal communities to agree on what works in that community to make it happen. It could go down to a combination of housing arrangements. It may come down to secondary boarding school arrangements. It may come down to, it may come down to, a series of health and nutrition related matters. It may come down to how you actually physically get kids out to a school. But it'll be different in each one.
But, I'm not going to impose a one size fits all solution from Canberra. I've discovered since living down here Greg, and having moved out of your part of the world a few months ago that all wisdom does not reside in Canberra. But that each community, and drawing on the expertise of local people and people who know these communities well, will then invariably come up with a different solution. But, it's got to be measured against the hard line measures and timelines that I mentioned before.
CAREY: Across Queensland, our guest is our Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. Prime Minister, a couple of quick issues, I know your time is at hand as well. Poker machines, you've signalled that you're not happy with the number of machines and the dependence of State Governments on the revenue from those machines. What is your current thinking on what to do about them? What would you like to do about them?
PM: Well, point one is I don't have a magic wand and the other point is that I've always been consistent on my views and private views on this  -  I actually don't like them. And the reason I don't like them is that I am just concerned about gambling dependency in the economy, in our society more generally and the impact it has on family financial circumstances and family breakdown.
But what are the elements of this overall challenge? One is getting a clear handle on the social relationship and family finance impact of poker machines and get some science into that so we actually know the facts as opposed to everyone's theories including my own.
Secondly lets also examine carefully the extent to which this industry across the country, the gaming industry, is a major employer. There are about 77,000 Australians who are employed in one form or another in this industry and these are people out there whose own family incomes are dependant on this industry.
And the third thing is, so many clubs around the country, sporting clubs depend in part, some greater than others on poker machines in their clubs to keep their local club operations going.
So what do I want, I want all these things brought together into a comprehensive analysis on the part of the government in cooperation with state and territories, and that is the fourth part of the analysis the extent of current revenue dependencies by states and territories on gaming revenues.
Then, get all the facts on the table. Sort out what we might be able to do. I'm not promising the world here, but what might be the range of possibilities to reign this in a bit in the future.
CAREY: Prime Minister the figures I have seen range from, of problem gamblers 0.55% to 1.75% depending upon who you believe. So the vast majority of people are playing these things for fun, for entertaining, for whatever, without a problem in the world. I wonder if we run the risk of legislating against the vast majority because there's a tiny minority who are having a problem, how do you reconcile that?
PM: Well your right Greg I don't intend engaging in some sort of knee-jerk reaction on all of this. I would like to get a handle, as I said, on the actual measurable dimensions of the social family and economic problems and not just pull a theory out of the air. And I am, you know, I am no wowser on these things.
People should be free to have their own forms of entertainment, that's fine. But for us its always a relative cost benefit analysis. As I travel around the homelessness shelters in Australia I've been doing a bit of that in recent months, the number of people I come across in those shelters who have don't the lot, on the pokies and their families have broken up and they have ended up destitute and in homeless shelters, it's huge.
Now, does that add up to much by way of impact on our society and national economy, put in absolute numbers terms? I don't know yet. That's why we need to get all the facts on the table. So to be very blunt and specific with you, I not promising that which a can't deliver responsibly. What I am promising is that were going to get a handle on the facts and see what if anything can be done.
CAREY: You need to go. Final question we saw you throwing down a few little off breaks yesterday. You need to get that left arm up a little higher may I suggest, respectfully. The wider question is that -
PM: I didn't know I was being filmed I mean that was
CAREY: No it was pretty good there offering big money for that 2020 stuff over in India. You never know,
PM: Which station had that on?
CAREY: I think they all did, you'd be pleased to know.
PM: No I am actually now deeply concerned.
CAREY: Ok, but just before you go the wider question is.
PM: Did I get much turn?
CAREY: Ah not much but I don't think it was a spinning wicket you were playing on concrete. But the wider question is this, you've got a job of enormous responsibility. No body needs to tell you that. You are under extraordinary pressure, what are you doing to stay fit?
PM: I tend to walk a lot and, you know, at different times of each day depending on my schedule. I also swim several times a week and also I gym whenever I can. And so all in all, probably about three of four sessions a week. When I was in Brissy I used to haunt the fitness centre there at Morningside. But now I am down here, it's a bit harder to manage when your bouncing around the countryside
CAREY: I have Warnie be in touch enjoy your day
PM: Thanks very much.


PM: It's good to be here in Walgett today we've visited St Josephs school, we've visited also the local state school, the primary school, we have been to two Aboriginal communities at Namoi and at Gingi. And also a good and long discussion convened by the local council officers here involving many representatives from local indigenous organisations.
Our reason for being here is to get out among indigenous communities on the ground to find out what they have to say about how we can improve things. Remember the government's policy commitment is to close the gap. We've, in the parliament, a week or so ago, dealt with the question of a national apology.
Now we are dealing with the question of closing the gap. The practical question on infant mortality, on other health outcomes, on education outcomes, employment opportunities and housing.
In our discussions today, housing has been an important problem raised both in terms of the availability of housing, but also different forms of home ownership and housing tenure - whether it is community housing or private home ownership, and there are a range of views expressed on that.
On the question of education, obviously challenges raised with us was how to encourage and ensure that we have maximum attendance and enrolment on the part of indigenous children. And on top of that again, to make sure that when indigenous children are through their schooling, that they have an opportunity for further training and work, real jobs and employment.
Health services were also raised and the adequacy of local GP services for this general community out here in Walgett. I think the important thing that we have come here to talk to the local community about it is what practical things can be done, in partnership with local communities to improve housing, health and education outcomes for them.
One of the things which has been raised is the importance of community sport and that is, many indigenous children as we are advised, big interest in rugby league, big interest in netball. I have just been here with the year six's and half of them put their hands up for rugby league, the other half for netball and there was one lone person who put their hand up for rugby union.
No one for AFL, I noticed. But  - 
JENNY MACKLIN: We are a long way from Melbourne.
PM: We are a long way from Melbourne. But the point we are making is that, when it comes to encouraging indigenous children to have full participation in education opportunities, investing more, long term in indigenous sport is a possible pathway to the future as well. Within schools and beyond schools.
And when you are dealing with regional and remote communities, that also raises some practical questions about how you get around in a local competition, if that local competition exists.
Why is that relevant to school outcomes? If there is a good sporting program in schools, and there's a good community competition operating, it can help ensure that young people are making the most of their school study opportunities as well. And that I think is an important step forward.
On the housing front, we obviously have many more consultations to do yet. We'll do that. And this is one of many visits on the part of Jenny and myself to local communities. Did you want to add Jenny? Any questions before we zip?
JOURNALIST: What will you take back to the commission from this - the bipartisan commission?
PM: Well we're still working on the formation of that commission with Mr Nelson. I have had a couple of sessions with him already. As indicated in parliament yesterday, ill try and do another session with him in this coming week. Once we've worked out structure and how it would operate, I would then hope to travel out to communities with him fairly soon, assuming we can get that agreement.
But for us today on this first visit, Jenny and myself, one of the key things that we are picking up is this: there is no such thing as a one size fits all solution for indigenous housing. The idea that there can be a total uniform, national indigenous housing type, actually doesn't fit the circumstances of each community. It may be that in the 300 to 400 remote indigenous communities in Australia, that we will end up with lots of different housing models, from full private ownership through to leasehold through to community ownership. And this whole spectrum of possibilities is what we will be examining. So if there is one take out it is that a one size fits all approach wont work.
JOURNALIST: What is your personal impression of the housing? How would you feel if you found yourself living in some of the accommodation there?
PM: I would just be blunt about it. The standard of indigenous housing in some parts, is not good. Not good at all. That's why we are here. Let's not pretend there is not a problem, there is a problem. That's why we are here, we are trying to do something about it.
But I am not here with a magic wand to say it will be fixed up by next Thursday afternoon at five o'clock. But what I am here to say is, we want to look at the problem, look at options for dealing with the problem, and it wont be one size fits all and then getting on with the business of making sure that these things are dealt with in a reasonable time frame.
JOURNALIST: Home ownership has often been called the great Australian dream, what's your great Australian dream for Aboriginal Australia?
PM: My dream, my vision, my mission in government for indigenous Australia, is to close the gap. When you have, in this country in the year 2008 little children under the age of five who are three or four times more likely to die before their fifth birthday if they are indigenous as opposed to them being non indigenous, that is a disgrace in the year 2008.
So what is my mission? Close the gap. Infant mortality, child mortality, education outcomes, health outcomes and within a fixed time frame.
JOURNALIST: Is it a bit fickle then to be arguing about home ownership and models for housing when such problems exist? Do you think that that argument should be left behind for the time being while  - 
PM: No not at all. The discussion we had this morning at the Walgett Council what with 20 or 30 representatives of indigenous organisations. Housing relates to school, relates to the physical safety of children, relates to nutrition, relates to whether kids are getting enough sleep at night, relates to whether there are decent health facilities and then also what you do when it comes to kids leaving school. Quite apart from the basic problem of overcrowding.
All these things actually relate together. If there is another take-out message it is this: we have multiple levels of government dealing with indigenous policy in Australia and indigenous communities have multiple organisations. Maybe it is time for us to start to look at much more of a whole of local community focus, whereby you have around the one table, not just all the representatives of indigenous organisations and groups but the various levels of government too so there is a complete, from the ground up, community driven response to the challenge which closing the gap represents. One more then I have got to go.
JOURNALIST: Ok, just quickly Fred Chaney said at the indigenous housing conference in October last year that the Commonwealth, no matter who was in power wasn't equipped, public officers weren't trained to deal with Aboriginal communities. Would you agree with that?
PM: I haven't read Fred's comments. You know, I have worked in state government before, I have worked in business before, I am the Prime Minister now, you know there are talents and abilities right across the system and structure of government and beyond government as well. There are first class philanthropists out there who want to invest and provide their expertise in how you develop better forms of indigenous housing. There are first class people who are working with various state housing agencies. Are there failures? Of course there are failures.
What's our job? Summon forth the talents, bring forth the best ideas in the country and get on with fixing these problems. That's one of the reasons why the Australia 2020 Summit to be held in the middle of April has a future for indigenous Australia front and centre. Because we don't believe that government has all the answers.
That is part of the reason why we are out here talking to people in the community today. And I'd like to thank St Joseph's for hosting us as we fly to Mackay.


The Australian Government has agreed to provide additional assistance to help families hit by the impact of severe flooding in Mackay.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh made the announcement in Mackay this afternoon.
The additional assistance will be made available under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) after requests from the Queensland Government and briefings from officers on the impact of the floods on local communities.
The Australian Government will continue to work with the Queensland Government to help families and businesses in Mackay get back on their feet.
Although the standard Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements already apply the government believes special arrangements are warranted to assist small businesses and primary producers to fix the damage and get back on their feet.
Grants will be made available for small businesses and farmers of up to $10,000 or up to $25,000 in exceptional circumstances depending on the extent or cost of losses.
The additional grants will be jointly funded by the Commonwealth and State and Governments on a 50/50 basis.
This money will help local businesses and farmers that have experienced severe damage from the floods with activities such as restocking, replanting and cleanup.
The Mackay region was declared a natural disaster area on 14 February.
The Australian Government has already announced that it would provide additional assistance to Mackay region residents seriously affected by the floods.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) is available to those people adversely affected by the storms and associated flooding that commenced in the Mackay region on 14 February.
Those eligible will be able to receive a one off payment of $1000 for adults and $400 for each child to help relieve their hardship.
Personal hardship assistance, aid to restore public assets, payments for counter disaster operations and assistance for primary producers and small businesses have already been activated under the joint State-Commonwealth NDRRA.
Under the personal hardship provisions, people affected by flooding in these local government areas can apply for grants of up to $160 per person and $740 per family for essentials such as food, dry clothes and accommodation.
Assistance for affected producers and small business is in the form of concessional loans of up to $150,000 as well as the new grants announced today.
Eligible producers can also apply for up to 50 per cent of their total freight costs.


The Australian Government will undertake a comprehensive review of homeland and border security arrangements in Australia.
The Homeland and Border Security Review is part of the Government's commitment to carefully examine the need for change in our homeland and border security arrangements.
The Review will consider the roles, responsibilities and functions of departments and agencies involved in homeland and border security. The Review will also consider possible changes to optimise the coordination and effectiveness of our homeland and border security efforts.
Mr Ric Smith AO PSM will conduct this Review. Mr Smith was the Secretary of the Department of Defence from 2002 to 2006. Prior to this, Mr Smith was Australia's Ambassador to Indonesia and also to the People's Republic of China. Mr Ric Smith is a highly experienced and qualified person to lead this important high level review.
The Review will draw on expertise from across Australian Government agencies with responsibility for homeland and border security. The Review will report by 30 June 2008.


The Australian Government today announced it will formally support a Football Federation of Australia bid to have Australia host the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
The Football Federation of Australia (FFA) will lodge a formal national bid for the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
Winning the right to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup is a Herculean task, but overcoming tough odds is what Australian Football does best.
For an Australian World Cup bid to be successful the FFA will need the full and united support of the Commonwealth and State and Territory Governments.
To achieve this national support the Australian Government will put Australia's 2018 FIFA World Cup bid on the March COAG agenda.
As the host country for the 2018 FIFA World Cup is likely to be announced in 2011, the Government is keen to see Australia's bid kick off as soon as possible.
Representatives of the FFA will meet with senior Australian Government officials in the next week to begin planning the bid.
Australia has a reputation of excellence - on and off the field. The 2000 Sydney Olympic Games, 2003 Rugby World Cup and the 2006 Commonwealth Games has shown the world that Australia is nation that delivers the world's best events.
The FIFA World Cup is the world's largest sporting event. The 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany attracted 3.35 million spectators, including 2 million visitors from overseas.
The event was broadcast to 214 countries and watched by a cumulative TV audience of more than 26 billion people.
Venues such as the MCG and Telstra Dome in Melbourne, ANZ Stadium and Sydney Football Stadium in Sydney, Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane and the recently announced new stadium for Perth could host matches.
Soccer in Australia has 450,000 registered participants and has never been more popular. A bid to host the 2018 World Cup is a natural follow on from the brilliant performance of the Socceroos at the 2006 World Cup and the success of the A League.
FIFA's 2008 member associations each get one vote in determining the successful bid. The cost of the bid would be shared between the Australian Government, State and territory Government's and the FFA.


PM: It's good to be here with Frank Lowy and all our friends from soccer, because what we are announcing today is that we, the Australian Government, are going to be backing an Australia bid for the 2018 World Soccer Cup. This is really important for Australia, really important for the future of this code and if we can pull it off it will be absolutely fantastic for the future of this game in Australia.
We recognise fully, this is a battle between, a David and Goliath encounter. I mean we will be up against some of the biggest soccer countries in the world. We will be up against possibly England, possibly China, possibly the United States, possibly the Netherlands.
But you have got to be in it to win it - and this will be a David and Goliath contest. But our judgement is it is worth getting in there and backing. Our friends in the Football Federation of Australia, we will do everything possible in association with them, and in association with the state and territory governments of Australia to try and pull this major sporting event off for Australia.
Very important for the country, very important for the future of this great code. Very important for all of our young people and young kids who are taking this sport increasingly seriously. And on sport itself can I say, the more young people in Australia who we have engaged in community level sport and competitive sport, in team sport, the better for the nation.
There are some 450,000 people now who are registered with an association, with soccer around the country. This is fantastic. Let's aim higher and part of aiming higher is to aim for the ultimate prize, which is to secure the World Cup for soccer here in Australia into the future. Over to you Frank.
LOWY: Thanks very much Kevin. One thing I would like to say is, how can you lose when you have such support? The Prime Minister, the States, the country. And I think we will do our damndest to get there.
There is a lot of work to do, a lot of people to talk to, a lot of diplomacy, but we are well equipped to do that. And I hope that when the time comes the name Australia will be on the (inaudible) card to host the World Cup 2018.
JOURNALIST: Mr Lowy, do we seriously have the infrastructure to support a bid?
LOWY: Well, do we doubt that Australia can create the infrastructure to support the bid? I mean, we have much already, but what we don't have I am sure we will build.
JOURNALIST: Mr Lowy what kind of support materially do you require from the Federal and State Governments to help your bid?
LOWY: Well, they need to be with us and they are with us. I mean I don't think it's a matter of dollars and cents, not right now anyway. But all this and that will cost most. But eventually you get it back because just imagine, 32 teams coming to Australia. What do they bring with them? How many people and what business and what fame and what fortune you are going to get out of it? So it is an investment, it is not an expense.
PM: Look at the finals in Germany for example. As I am advised, 3.5 million spectators. Two million came from overseas. The combined viewing audience of, I am told, 26 billion, if you put it all together, which is what, four or five times the population of the world, that is a lot of people.
And if that was Australia, the benefit for the nation, both for those who are great and passionate supporters of this code and those who want to see Australia's international reputation lifted even higher, it will be a good thing for the country.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, does your backing come with a commitment for the infrastructure?
PM: What we are going to do first up is work in close partnership with the Football Federation of Australia and the state and territory governments. First in principle step is to say, we want to be in this to win it, recognising that it is a David and Goliath contest. Secondly, at the level of practicality, what we then need to do is to undertake an audit of all of our existing sporting facilities to make sure there is enough for the competitive teams, 32 teams.
You have got to make sure they have got enough training facilities, enough stadium facilities around the country of sufficient standard. So the first step is the audit.
But I have got to say, we haven't taken this decision lightly. We want to be with the Football Federation of Australia in this as partnership and of course in partnership with state and territory governments as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd how much are you investing in this initial stage?
PM: Well pre election in terms of the Football Federation of Australia, we have already indicated that we have expanded support for the code and that is in recognition of what an enormous boost that we have had because of the Socceroos' success in recent years and so many young people taking up this sport at the local level.
So to bring soccer up to the level of some of the other codes, there has to be in this an additional injection of funds. So we doubled the previous allocation of funding over the next four years from 16 million to 32 million.
Now when it comes to this particular event, then we will take this step by step in partnership with the Football Federation of Australia and in close cooperation with state and territory governments. Remember the decision is not taken, we understand until about 2011 so we have got three years of very hard work to go to secure the rights.
We intend to do it in close partnership with our friends in FFA and if we are successful the real work then begins.
JOURNALIST: You must have some financial contribution to be making at this stage to get the bid up and running. How much are you  - 
PM: Well I could say our pre election commitment to double the previous allocation to the code indicates how seriously we take the future of the code and as I said, that 16 million is a substantial allocation.
JOURNALIST: Sir the ultimate prize is winning the bid but what other benefits might come from being involved in the process of trying?
PM: Well let's put it into historical context. This great country Australia has hosted the Olympics twice. We have hosted the Commonwealth Games three or four times. We have hosted the Rugby Union World Cup.
The time has come for Australia, if we have hosted the Olympics, we have hosted the Commonwealth games, we have hosted the Rugby World Cup, it is time for the Soccer world cup to come to Australia as well.
In terms of what benefits flow from that, in preparing the bid and then subsequent to the success of the bid if we get there, you cannot underestimate what impact this has in terms of Australia's global standing.
By putting together a decent bid, and if we then succeed, it helps the overall international reputation of this country. And there is a whole lot of indirect spin offs which come from that for business, for tourism and a whole series of associated events as well.
But secondly, the other big benefit for Australia is, if we are in there pumping hard for this, it does encourage our young people to get out of their computers and get out on to the field and maybe, an hour less with their computer game and an hour more running around the field with a round ball. Including me.
JOURNALIST: Mr Lowy does the FFA have the full blessing of the (inaudible)?
LOWY: Oh yes absolutely. The AFC, the AFC full blessing will depend on whether there is another country that is going to bid for the 2018. If there is another country that is bidding, well I think they will have to take a neutral stand. Otherwise, they are fully behind us.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on another issue (inaudible)
PM: Well we have been discussing this for some time. Last night the Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon was with me and the Foreign Minister Stephen Smith sat down with US Secretary of Defence and the US Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte and we discussed many things including Afghanistan.
Plainly there is a need for better police training in that country, and we have been reviewing the needs for that into the future. Whatever commitment we make will be modest and within our own resources, it won't detract from our capabilities elsewhere, but we are finalising those details. It will be modest.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let's not put any numbers on it, it will be modest, but let's be realistic about Afghanistan. As a Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon has said quite rightly, if we are in Afghanistan we need a strategy to secure long term success. That hinges on a couple of things. One of which is making sure that there is sufficient training occurring of the Afghan National Army, another is ensuring that is enough training (inaudible) occurring for the Afghan National Police.
It is quite plain that there are gaps when it comes to the Afghan National Police, together with other countries, we will be looking to making sure that those training needs are met, but on the basis of everyone pitching in. Our own contribution will be modest.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We take our future defence planning seriously and I am sure that the Defence Minister had an entire day with his US counterpart on these questions yesterday and based on the close and convivial conversation we had last night, I do not foresee a problem. I don't foresee any problem whatsoever.
JOURNALIST: Sir, on a related issue, can we get your reaction to the emergence last week that it appears that the Howard Government would have started pulling its combat troops out of Iraq this year if it had been re elected despite what they said before the election.
PM: I will let the Australian people make their judgement about the integrity of the previous government's stand on the Iraq war from beginning to the end of the Australian deployment. I think those who will reflect on the historical record will reach their own conclusions.
Our commitment has been clear cut. Prior to the election we committed the Australian people that by the middle of this year we would withdraw our combat forces from Iraq. I have been to Baghdad, I have visited our courses, I have spoken with the US military command on the ground, the Iraqi Prime Minister on the ground. We have negotiated, as we said, the withdrawal arrangements for those combat forces and that will be concluded in the middle of the year as we said. And we have got to zip. See you later folks.


PM: Good afternoon everybody. Everyone knows we face long term challenges when it comes to Australia's health and hospital system and prior to the election we said we would establish a National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, and today, I'm implementing and honouring that pre-election commitment. 
We have, of course, a challenge when it comes to all the long term challenges in our system: duplication, overlap, cost shift, blame shift, ageing population, the explosion in chronic diseases, not to mention, long term workforce planning.
This, therefore, creates not just a problem for the next week or the next month, it creates a problem and a challenge for the decade ahead. That why the system, our national health and hospital system, is in need of radical surgery.
Of course, so far, we have at work our COAG Working Group with the States and Territories dealing with the specific implementation of a range of commitments we made on hospital funding and other elements of health funding prior to the election. And that COAG Working Group is also working on the whole question of the Australian Healthcare Agreements.
But it's important that we just are not focussed those challenges, important as they are, it's important we're also dealing with the challenges in the long term. That's why it's critical that we proceed with the implementation of this National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, and I'm pleased today to be able to confirm the appointment of Dr Christine Bennett who will be Chairperson of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission.
Dr Bennett is trained as a paediatrician; she has worked in the past as the CEO of Westmead Hospital in Sydney, Australia's largest teaching hospital. She's been prior to that the General Manager of the Royal Hospital for Women in Sydney. She has also been CEO of Research Australia. She has also worked as a paediatrician in the field, as I indicated before, and is currently the Chief Medical Officer for MBF.
Dr Bennett, therefore, has a wide range of experience right across the field in hospital administration, in the private health industry where she is now, also, of course, as a clinician herself and I'm very grateful Dr Bennett for you having accepted the invitation from the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon to Chair this body.
Dr Bennett will be supported by a Commission made up of the other following individuals:
Rob Knowles who is currently chair of the Mental Health Council of Australia, formerly the Victorian Liberal Health Minister.
Geoff Gallop, former Premier of Western Australia and currently Professor and Director of the Graduate School of Government at the University of Sydney
Mukesh Haikerwal who is a Melbourne GP and the immediate past President of the AMA
Stephen Duckett,a health economist and former Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Health. Well known in the health sector as an expert in health financing. Currently Executive Director of the Reform and Development Division of Queensland Health.
Professor Ron Penny, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, University of New South Wales. Professor Penny is one of Australia's leading immunologists and is a well known expert in chronic disease management and care.
Sabina Knightis a remote area nurse, is currently Senior Lecturer at the Centre for Remote Health and remote area nursing. She's worked extensively in remote health including in Indigenous Communities
Sharon Wilcox is director of consulting firm, Health Policy Solutions. Prior to this Dr Wilcox had 20 years experience in public health policy in Victoria, New South Wales and in the Commonwealth.
Justin Beilbyis Executive Dean of the University of Adelaide's Medical School. He's worked in general practice in both urban and rural settings for 20 years.
And Mary Ann O'Loughlinis currently a Director of the Allen Consulting Group. She was a senior Social Policy Advisor to Prime Minister Keating, and has held a number of Senior executive positions in the Commonwealth Public Service
This, therefore, is a very broad based Commission that we have established and what we've sought to do is bring together the best expertise, the most representative expertise across the country, in order to deal with this nation's long term health policy challenges.
We want to design a health and hospital system capable of dealing with the challenges of the 21 st century. And these are large challenges indeed which affect working families so directly.
Therefore it's no point just tinkering with the system. We've actually got to look at this root and branch, and do it thoroughly, that's why we said before the election we would establish this National Health and Hospital Reform Commission. We've honoured that commitment by the announcement made today, and by the appointments that we've made consistent with that announcement.
If I could ask Dr Bennett if she'd like to add to my remarks, and then, the Health Minister.
DR BENNETT: Thank you Prime Minister. This is a very important opportunity for Australia. We have a very good health system in this country, but we know it's under pressure, and we know we're going to face a lot of challenges into the future. 
This is an opportunity to take people who have a lot of talent and experience in the Health System away from the hurly burly of everyday and to actually stop and think about where we want to see this health system down the track so that we can take steps toward that health system. A health system that actually focuses on the needs of our community and brings together all elements and over 30 years of experience in the health system across all those elements, it's really important we start to connect the whole spectrum of health care for our community.
So I congratulate the Government for this initiative because it is very important, very timely for us to actually stop and have a stocktake of our healthcare system and plan for the future.
PM: Thanks very much. 
ROXON: Thanks very much. Kevin has taken you through the number of people that have agreed along with Dr Bennett to being part of this Commission. These are ten really top quality people. Ten top quality people who are being appointed because of their individual skills and ability. 
They have each been invited to come in their personal capacity, not representing anybody that they might have worked with or for. All of them are very exited about the idea that this is a new chance for us to design some of the changes that are needed so that we have a sustainable health system into the future.
And I'm very exited and pleased to be the Health Minister making these announcements today, because I think the important work of this Commission could well provide a blueprint for us long into the future. And I know that with the quality of the people that have been appointed that we will get strong and detailed advice about a range of initiatives that may need to be implemented earlier.
Many of you would be aware that we've asked the Commission to give us some early advice on our Healthcare agreement negotiations, and of course, the longer term work that they will be doing that Kevin has outlined in his introductory comments.
So this is a really important step for us in developing a health system for the future that will be sustainable and having someone of Dr Bennett's experience, particularly having worked across so many different sectors in the health arena, provides an opportunity for us to look at the health system with fresh eyes, see how we can get the public and private sectors to work better together, see how we can get preventative health care at the front of this debate not at the end, see how we can get our hospitals working better. And it's a big challenge that you've agreed to be part of Christine, we are very pleased that you have, and I think this the first day of a very exiting period in health.
PM: Over to you Folks. 
JOURNALIST: What is the framework, Prime Minister, for the Commission's work (inaudible) so is it going to be commissioned by the Government to look at particular issues? Will it be able to choose its own subjects? And what is the time frame for reporting back to the Government? 
PM: The timeframe for reporting back to Government, we envisage three reporting points. 
Initially, sometime between now and the middle of the year, and that would provide the Government with some interim advice on its response to the deliberations of the COAG Working Group, given that that COAG working group is also looking simultaneously at the unfolding Australian Healthcare Agreement.
Secondly, we envisage an interim report by years end. And finally a final report mid 2009. That's consistent with the reporting timetable we outlined prior to the election as well.
In terms of the program of work, what we've indicated is that it's important that this body cover the field. And that's why the expertise represented on the Commission is so wide ranging.
Specifically, we have asked the Commission to examine the inefficiencies generated by cost shifting, blame shifting and buck passing between the two levels of Government. How we deliver better integrated and coordinated care across all aspects of the health sector, and that includes of course primary health care by GP's through to hospital based care and community care.
Also, critically, the need for a greater focus on prevention. And this is absolutely core business if we're looking at the explosion and the cost across the health system of out of control chronic diseases. Type 2 diabetes is one, cardiovascular another, and unless we deal with these, the impact on our community in terms of well being, in terms of cost to budget, in terms of workforce participation will be huge.
On top of that, how do we better integrate acute services with aged care services, and how do we better develop long term health services for rural areas and the overall deep and abiding problem of proper workforce planning. It is, therefore, comprehensive in its scope. We outlined that comprehensive mandate for the proposed National Health and Hospital Reform Commission prior to the election, and it's that mandate were delivering to this body now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will this clash with your Budget priorities to look for big savings? The Business Council of Australia suggests a three year freeze on spending. Will you exempt health and hospitals from that freeze?
PM: I noticed the BCA, the Business Council of Australia, had something pretty direct to say about how the previous Liberal Government squandered the money which came from the taxpayer in investing in this country's future productive potential. 
And I note also the Business Council of Australia, by virtue of that criticism, is in effect saying that the previous Government didn't deal effectively with the nation's inflationary challenge.
Turning to the future, we believe that this is the year to do the planning. We thought that when we put this proposal together last year. This is a comprehensive piece of work. It needs to be done in the first term of a Government, because you need to get all the experts around the table and look at how the part relates to the whole.
We therefore would not be looking at the recommendations for implementation until we are into calendar year 2009.
JOURNALIST: Cost cutting in the health care - 
PM: Sorry, say that again. 
JOURNALIST: What about cost cutting in the health area? This is a priority now, isn't it? 
PM: Well, when it comes to our Budget disciplines and what the BCA is also talking about, I'd emphasise again that we're dead set serious about our proposed Budget surplus target of 1.5 per cent of GDP. The razor gang's at work and we've been having more discussions about that in Cabinet again today, more work to be done. 
But, dealing responsibly with the Budget, in the current planning period, and, planning long term for the long term needs of our health and hospital system, you need to be doing these things at the same time. And that's what we're doing. That's why we are keen to have these deliberations conducted during the course of '08. We'll be looking forward very much to the recommendations when they come to fruition in '09.
JOURNALIST: Financing, in particular (inaudible) at health insurance and in particular the private health insurance rebate as part of this root and branch review? 
PM: The Private Health Insurance Rebate policy remains unchanged and will remain unchanged. What we're looking at is how the structure internally operates. 
JOURNALIST: After the mid-'09 report, does the Commission stay on in some sort of monitoring role or does it wind up and, it presumably would have recommendations as to whether you would take overthe hospital system, obviously? 
PM: The proposal for this National Health and Hospital Reform Commission is for a finite life through until the middle of next year. It may conclude its work earlier. I'm sure Dr Bennett's very efficient and probably doesn't want to be with us for that long. But, that's the proposal there. It's a concrete piece of work which needs to be done. Then it becomes a matter for Government to deliberate on its recommendations and to decide what policy action we need for the future. 
Working families are depending on us to get this right. And we intend to get it as right as possible.
On the other point you raise, Michelle, which is our pre-election statements about the future ownership of the hospital system, whether it's Commonwealth or State, our position hasn't changed.Mypreference all along has been to do this cooperatively with the States and Territories. We are currently engaged in an extensive set of negotiations with the States and Territories within that framework. This is also consistent, the operation of this Commission is also consistent, with the deliberations of COAG in Melbourne at the end of last year. But we as a Government will make a judgment by the middle of next year whether it's working or not. And that's exactly what I said prior to the election as well.
JOURNALIST: Will it make a recommendation on that? 
PM: No, the Commission's making recommendations to us on the overall design of the system against these terms of reference. That is, how do we best deliver the most cost effective, integrated, health delivery system to Australian working families? 
Given the enormous challenges on the system in terms of ageing the population, cost of pharmaceuticals, the explosion in chronic diseases and the (inaudible) systems management problems we have as well. Together with the undersupply of doctors and nurses.
But the decision, to go back to Michelle's point, the decision on working cooperatively or coercively with the States, as I said last year, will ultimately be a matter for Government. And our determination won't be the subject of a recommendation by the Commission.
JOURNALIST: The Australian Fair Pay Commission had a report out today. Perhaps surprisingly, it talked about lower income workers being better off in the last two years. Your response to that? And also, the Fair Pay Commission brings down a minimum wage decision in July. Given you're going ahead with the tax cuts, would it be right to assume that there is little chance of a pay rise there?
PM: Well, on the question of working families, one of the reasons we are determined to proceed with the implementation ofour tax cuts, despite a lot of public commentary to the contrary, is that we do believe that working families are under financial pressure. And that's why it'simportant they receive those tax cuts. There is a lot of mortgage stress out there, a lot of people are finding it difficult to balance the family budget, and we understand that. 
The other reason for proceeding with those tax cuts, for example, is that it also enhances the overall task of workforce participation. And we therefore think that is a useful contribution to the overall challenges of labour force supply in the overall inflation equation. We've got to be acting on those things.
Remember, the Business Council of Australia today, which is not a branch of the Australian Labor Party, said that these opportunities had been squandered by the previous Government. We don't intend to squander the opportunities which we now have.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, given the events in Parliament last Friday, do you think that the idea of making Parliament sit on Fridays may have been a little ill-conceived? And do you plan to be present yourself next time the Parliament sits on a Friday? And do you have any plan to change or review the idea of sitting on Friday at all?
PM: I think as the Speaker often says, I haven't yet reviewed the tapes. I gather it was a lot of fun for the fair last Friday. I saw a bit of it. But, look, I just think a lot of that behaviour was just childish. I think oneofthe other things I'd draw your attention to is the list of matters which were subject to motions by Labor backbenchers who wanted to have these things raised and debated in the house: electricity privatisation, interest rates and mortgage stress in Western Sydney, health services in Palmerston in the Northern Territory, organ donation, and the Tasmanian Tigers cricket team, among other things.
These are matters of direct relevance to backbenchers. We always intended that this be a forum for backbenchers to put forward their views. And it's a pity that some people decided to take it in a pretty childish way.
JOURNALIST: You said last week that Australia faced an epidemic of binge drinking. I'm wondering how far you are prepared to go to address it. Does it include increased taxes? Or what are some of the options? 
PM: Well, what I said last week, I think it was a radio interview in Brisbane who asked me about this, is that, I don't claim any particular expertise in this area. Others around me have morethan I do. But, as a parent, and someone who has observed what has gone on in the general community over the last decade, frankly, I think it's got out of control. And, Governments at all levels have to start doing something about this. 
For example, binge drinking, alcoholism, substance abuse, substance addiction, all become part of chronic disease conditions which effect the ability for people to lead a productive and happy life, their ability to be employed, and produce huge costs to the overall health system. We'll have something more to say about this very soon.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Mr Knowles and Dr Gallop (inaudible) with the new Prime Ministerial code about (inaudible) reengagement? 
PM: Well I think you've got, DrGallop has been out the system for a while. When was Mr Knowles out of the system? 
ROXON: A long time ago. 
PM: Some time in the Mesolithic period, I think. Sorry, the Kennett Government. Look, you know, no one's sent to coventry permanently, I think what you have got to be concerned about is people walking out the door one day and hopping into a related job the next. 
JOURNALIST: You're reportedly planning to address NATO. What is it additional that you want to tell NATO that your Defence Minister hasn't already? And, would there perhaps be  -  the last Government refused an affiliation request or a closer ties arrangement with NATO. Is that something you might be re-thinking now?
PM: Travel arrangements as far as the NATO summit in Bucharest, have not been finally determined or announced, so I'll leave that to one side for a bit. 
On the question of why would we talk with NATO. Well, NATO is charged, in large part, of the war in Afghanistan. Last time I looked, we were there too. It's pretty basic that if you've got NATO, largely responsible for the operations in certainly the north-western half of the country, and some NATO members in the south-eastern half of the country, in particular Canada, and I spoke with the Canadian Prime Minister about this on the phone just a little while ago and the Dutch Prime Minister on the phone about this on the phone a few days ago, it's important that we talk to each other.
Our Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon is absolutely right. If you're going to have Australian troops, our men and women in uniform, on the ground in a war in such a difficult and hostile operating environment as Afghanistan, then we in Australia, as the Government, have a responsibility to satisfy ourselves that there is a coherent strategy for prevailing in this war. And if NATO have most of the forces on the ground, we need to be talking to them much more comprehensively than was the case in the past. I believe that is the responsible course of action when it comes to Australian national security policy.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) what you are going to do about the tightening of donations (inaudible) and political parties in general? 
PM: Well, consistent with our pre-election commitment, the outrageous decision to ratchet up the disclosure limit for campaign donations to I think ten grand, well, we've already indicated that we'd bring that down to $1,500, to where it was before. I wouldn't be surprised if we went better than that. 
I think that's entirely  -  I think it was just wrong. Absolutely wrong what happened. I mean, the fact that you could have a $10,000 donation limit, just do the maths on that. There are a bunch of people in a room, $10,000 a hit, easy to raise a million dollars in one night. No one knows where it came from. I mean, I just don't think that's at all right.
JOURNALIST: Should Federal Labor, should federal parties, not accept donations from property developers? There is obviously a problem here with the way some of them are operating - 
PM: What I'd like to see, David, is a general review of how we go about campaign finance. I am a big devotee of campaign finance reform. Few things that corrupt the democracy. One of them, is when this stuff goes off the rails. And the other is when you have practices like we saw here, in the last three to six years in particular, where the Government of the day dips their hand into the til and pulls out hundreds of millions of dollars in taxpayer funded advertising. These are two things which corrupt the democracy, and we've got to zip. Thank you very much.
[ends]


Federal Cabinet today formally approved the establishment of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission.
Cabinet today directed the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to develop a long-term health reform plan for a modern Australia.
The Commission has been tasked by Cabinet to provide an interim report on a long-term health reform plan to the Commonwealth Government by the end of 2008, and a final plan in mid 2009.
Following formal appointment by Cabinet, Dr Christine Bennett has today been appointed to Chair the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission.
Dr Bennett will chair a ten member National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. Commission members have been selected to represent the vast range of experiences within the Australian health system.
The Commission will deliver better health outcomes for the community and provide sustainable improvements in the performance of the health system.
The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission will provide a blueprint for tackling future challenges in the Australian health system including:
     * The rapidly increasing burden of chronic disease;
     * The ageing of the population;
     * Rising health costs; and
     * Inefficiencies exacerbated by cost shifting and the blame game.
The Commission will focus on health financing, maximising a productive relationship between public and private sectors, and improving rural health.
The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission Board
Dr Christine Bennett will chair the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. Dr Bennett has worked extensively in health care as a clinician and administrator across both the public and private sectors. She is currently Chief Medical Officer at MBF Australia Ltd.
Dr Bennett will bring a wide range of knowledge and experience to this important position. She is passionate about health care, and committed to delivering long-term improvements to the Australian health system.
Nine other Commissioners will assist Dr Bennett on the Commission:
     * Rob Knowles, former Victorian Liberal Health Minister;
     * Geoff Gallop, former Premier of Western Australia;
     * Mukesh Haikerwal, Melbourne GP and immediate past-President of the AMA;
     * Stephen Duckett, health economist and former Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Health;
     * Ron Penny, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, University of NSW;
     * Sabina Knight, Senior Lecturer, Centre for Remote Health and remote area nurse;
     * Sharon Willcox, Director of consulting firm Health Policy Solutions;
     * Justin Beilby, Executive Dean of the University of Adelaide's Medical School; and
     * Mary Ann O'Loughlin, Director, The Allen Consulting Group.
This experienced team of Commissioners will undertake an intensive work plan, with every member having committed one or two days a week to this important project.
The Commission will report to the Commonwealth Minister for Health and Ageing, and, through her to the Prime Minister, and to the Council of Australian Governments and the Australian Health Ministers' Conference.
The Commission will advise the Government on the key aspects of the framework for the next health care agreements between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories.


On behalf of the Government and people of Australia I congratulate His Excellency Mr Lee Myung-bak on his inauguration today as President of the Republic of Korea. The Government was represented at the inauguration by Mr Harry Jenkins MP, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Australia and the Republic of Korea share many political and strategic interests, and enjoy strong trading ties and people-to-people links that underpin our relationship. 
The Republic of Korea is now Australia's third-largest merchandise export market, worth $13.5 billion in 2007, and our third-largest source of overseas students, with more than 34,000 enrolments of Korean students in 2007. It is estimated that more than 100,000 people of Korean descent now live in Australia and there is a growing Australian presence in the Republic of Korea.
Australia and the Republic of Korea also have a strong record of working together on a broad range of international and regional issues. We have both contributed to international efforts in East Timor and Afghanistan, and we work closely in APEC and other regional organisations.
Australia strongly supports the Republic of Korea in its efforts to ease tensions on the Korean Peninsula, and reach resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue through the Six-Party Talks.
I look forward to working with President Lee and his administration to add even more depth and breadth to our relationship in the years ahead.


PM: Its good to be back in Launceston with Jodie and Nicola, the Health Minister, Jodie the local member and Senator Polley.
Were here to talk about health, were here to talk about hospitals and the future needs also of Launceston Hospital as well, and I will come to that in a minute.
Nationwide today we have released the names of our committee of 10 leading Australians to assist us to put together the summit of 1000 of Australia's best and brightest, to deal with Australia's long term future challenges.
The reason for the 2020 summit is that we want to bring together the best and brightest across Australia to help the government plan for the long term future, not just within the next electoral cycle but challenges which take us out 10 years and beyond.
As people will conclude from the composition of the panel that we've put forward, we intend for this to be bipartisan, we intend for it to be long term, we intend to use this panel to bring together our best and brightest. Therefore what we want is, it doesn't matter what side of politics people come from, whether they are formerly Liberal or formerly Labor, what were concerned about is the best and brightest for the nations future - a bipartisan long term future. These are the things which the country is looking for as we seek to build a modern Australia capable of dealing with challenges of the 21st Century.
Today I'd also like to confirm in addition to our committee of 10 those who will also be co chairing this summit on our part. We have of course a range of individuals from the community, but I think it is useful today to confirm which Ministerial co chairs will be working together with those from beyond government.
For the Australian Economy and the Productivity agenda of course we have Dr David Morgan and his co chair will be the Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard. Julia being responsible for the education, skills and training agenda within government.
The other key challenge for the economy which is economic growth and infrastructure, Warwick Smith a former Liberal Cabinet Minister and originally from Tasmania, his co chair will be the Treasurer Wayne Swan given the critical role of Treasury in these matters.
On population, sustainability, climate change and water, Roger Beale is the co Chair from beyond government and Penny Wong the Minister for Climate Change will be his Ministerial co chair.
For our long term national health strategy, Professor Michael Good from the Queensland Institute of Medical Research will be the non government co chair with together with Nicola Roxon who of course is the Federal Health Minister.
Strengthening communities, we have the Reverend Tim Costello who will be the non government co Chair and he will be partnered by Tanya Plibersek the Federal Minister for Housing.
The future for Indigenous Australia, Dr Kelvin Kong is the non government co chair and Jenny Macklin the Federal Minister for Indigenous Affairs will be the Ministerial co chair there.
Rural industries and rural communities, Tim Fischer former National Party leader, National Party Minister and former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia will be the non government co Chair and Tony Burke the Federal Minister for Agriculture will be the Ministerial co chair with him.
Towards a creative Australia, Cate Blanchett will be heading that up and she'll be partnered by Peter Garrett who's the Ministerial co Chair and Minister for the Arts.
Future Security and Prosperity, Professor Michael Wesley, from the Asia centre of Griffith University in Brisbane and his Ministerial co Chair will be the Foreign Minister Mr Stephen Smith
That's a good list both of Government and Non Government people, I just note for the record that six of our ten from the Ministry happen to be women and I seem to be in the minority here this morning as well. I think that's a good thing to see
This is important for the nation we as the Government of Australia are in the ideas business and we are looking for ideas, innovation from the entire Australian community.
Every Australian will have an opportunity to put their hand up with their ideas for the nations future and if they can do that through any of the following five ways.
They can put their own submission in and the website is australia2020.gov.au.
On top of that they can participate in local community summits and Jodie I understand will be holding one here in the Federal Electorate of Bass.
On top of that again local School's have been invited by the Federal Education Minister, Julia Gillard to hold school summits.
Further there will be a National Youth Summit held in Canberra the weekend before the 2020 summit.
And the 2020 summit itself bringing together 1000 of our best and brightest across the country.
Any Australian citizen who puts in a submission at the Community level, School level, National Youth Summit through the Summit participants themselves or directly online, their submission will considered and evaluated in terms of the deliberations of this committee come the end.
We want every Australian to be in a position to have their say. Our Nations long terms future is too important for anyone to conclude that all the good ideas lie within Government.
I've been around long enough to know that's just not the case. I don't believe the Labor party has a monopoly on wisdom on all these questions. Looking beyond the ranks of our party, beyond the ranks of Government, beyond the bureaucracy and saying to the nation at large in business, in academia and professions and beyond the professions, people from the land and elsewhere. That we want your ideas in these 10 critical challenge areas for the future, the Economy, Health, Education, Climate Change, Water, the Creative Arts in Australia, Indigenous Australia as well as out place in the world together with other challenges.
The other reason to be here today as I indicated in my initial remarks is to talk about health and hospitals in particular. It's not coincidental that the future direction for health and hospitals forms a key working group for the 2020 summit, because we are dealing with long term systemic challenges.
That's why yesterday the Health Minister and I in Canberra announced the appointment of Dr Christine Bennett to Chair the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission and she'll be supported by a commission of eminent Australians with expertise in the health field.
That is important for long term planning for our health system given the enormous challenges we face right from chronic diseases, through to acute care, through to aged care, through to primary care, preventative health care, dental, mental, health as well as what we do with long term workforce planning and the particular challenges of rural and regional health as well.
There's a substantial program of work out there for that particular body and we look forward to receiving their deliberations in due course. Of course where the rubber hits the road is at local hospitals like here at “Lonnie”. Its good to be back here again.
This is my first time in Tasmania since the election, my first visit here as Prime Minister of Australia and because health and hospitals were such a key part of our pre election commitments, that's why I believe it's important to return to this hospital. I came here with both Jodie and with Nicola prior to the election to talk specifically about the needs of this community. One of the core commitments we made was for an integrated care centre to be built in an around this hospital. The detailed planning work for that is underway. There's a meeting of health professionals I understand to get down to the nity gritty of it next week - Commonwealth Health Officials and local hospital staff and I have confirmed today to the management of the hospital that every dollar of the monies we've committed for this integrated care centre will be committed and were determined to see it up and running as soon as possible.
Health and hospitals, critical for Launceston, critical for Northern Tasmania, critical for all of Tassie, critical for the country both at a practical level on the ground and on top of all that how we plan for the future. And finally I just contributed $20 to the local canteen.
Senator Polley have you got the pressie there? Where's the pressie gone, Senator Polley's about to become a grandmother is that right? As a gift from the hospital auxiliary here, well from me by the Hospital auxiliary there's some baby booties
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The first as I understand full meeting of officials will occur next week. We want to see it up and running as soon as possible. The hospital authorities here are looking at the best delivery model for it. They are examining those at the moment, but we are keen to see these funds allocated as quickly as possible and for construction to begin as soon as possible. I don't want to come over the top of local planning arrangements, in case I say something wrong.
But were ready cheques to be signed, (inaudible) waiting for it to happen, so that's our attitude. Beyond the discussion about integrated care centre, it was good again to touch base with the senior management of this hospital, talk about the wider Health needs of this region. In particular what's happening on the chronic diseases front, renal dialysis and as you would have seen before discussing some of those particular challenges faced by patients who are the beneficiaries of dialysis at present.
Those chronic diseases together with the other needs of the hospital acute care as well as aged care, as well as proper workforce planning for the future
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Yes, we honour what we said before. I'll ask Nicola to add to that.
ROXON: Thank you, I have actually yesterday written to the Tasmanian Health Minister just to clarify that we are going to honour the election commitment we made. We have $50 million on the table for Tasmanian health services, but they are contingent upon the Tasmanian Government spending the money that they have saved courtesy of the decision to transfer the Mersey Hospital to Commonwealth ownership. And that means that I want an explanation from the Tasmanian Minister to be satisfied that the money is being spend on providing health services to the community in the north and north west.
Now I know there's been some reports about the sorts of services that can only be provided in Hobart and I am looking forward to Ms Giddings replying to that letter so that we can nut out if there are any problems. We made that commitment. We want that money to used for the benefit of people in the north and north-west and I will be speaking to Ms Giddings about that this week.
JOURNALIST: What can you do to ensure that that happens? (Inaudible)
ROXON: Well I think we have a very good guarantee. We have put on the table $50 million worth of Commonwealth money and that is contingent upon the other money being spent appropriately. Of course, that means if it is not being spent appropriately, we could consider whether we would withhold that money.
No one wants to do that. It is for the benefit of all Tasmanians for the commitments both of the Commonwealth and the Tasmanian Government to service the community well. I am very confident we will be able to resolve this. But it was a clear commitment made by us, advocated for strongly by both Jodie who is here today and Sid Sidebottom and others, and it will be honoured.
JOURNALIST: When do you hope to resolve this?
ROXON: Well I have just written to Ms Giddings yesterday, the reports in the paper really came just in the last couple of days. I am seeing the Tasmanian Health Minister, as long with other Health Ministers on Friday this week. If it isn't resolved by then, we certainly will be having discussions on Friday.
JOURNALIST: If you withheld that $50 million that you promised to Tasmania as a whole, contingent upon the north of the State getting its chunk of the Mersey (inaudible)
ROXON: It is not our intention, it is not our intention, and I think the Prime Minister also wants to make some comments, to do that. I am very confident it can be worked out. But we have made clear that $50 million will flow from the Commonwealth. We have taken on responsibility for the Mersey Hospital. We have requested of the Tasmanian Government, put some conditions on that money. I am absolutely confident it will be able to be resolved. But we need to have those discussions so Minister Giddings can clarify the position of her Government.
PM: And I think on that there is no point in building hypothesis upon hypothesis about what might or what might not happen. The bottom line is, we made a commitment, we are going to honour it. If we have a bit of argy-bargy on the way through. We'll sort it out.
JOURANLIST: Does the condition also remain some talk about this no strings attached funding for hospitals and that money won't flow from the Federal Government unless certain conditions are met by the States. Do you stand by that?
PM: Are you talking about nationally?
JOURNALIST: Yeah Federal funding -
PM: Well, look, what we have done, consistent with our pre-election commitments and in (inaudible) of our pre-election commitments, is have one key area, that's elective surgery waiting lists, beyond clinically acceptable times that we don't intent to stand idly by as the previous National Government did, and say, ‘your problem, we're not having anything to do with it'.
When you look around the country and see how many people are waiting for elective surgery who are going beyond clinically acceptable times, it is an absolute disgrace.
We, therefore, made a commitment about this and we have honoured that. We committed $100 million prior to the election. In discussions since we formed the government, the States and Territories came back to us and said that in terms of bringing that list right down, they needed more money than that. They came to us and asked for $145 million at COAG in Melbourne last December. We signed a cheque to them for $150 million basically saying  -  and the allocation here to Tassie is $8 or $9 million and that is a proportional allocation. And that is designed to deliver a very large number of additional elective surgery procedures. Now that is a classic example of the point that you are raising. We are providing extra funding, but there is a condition attached. It actually has to deliver a real outcome in terms of the number of additional elective surgery procedures. So, we are not in the business of providing States and Territories with blank cheques for anything.
We are in the business of saying, ‘here is the deal: we want to be partners with you in solving a problem for people up the road here who might have been waiting two months longer than is clinically acceptable to get in here for a procedure. Here's is the money for it, but let me tell you, we are going to measure it in terms of whether it's done.'
JOURNALIST: Doctors in this hospital say that even with that money there aren't enough nurses, there aren't enough surgeons and there aren't enough theatres for them to put through extra elective cases. So have you set a time frame (inaudible)
PM: We are looking towards this significant reduction in the elective surgery waiting list through the course of this year.
The points that many medicos make about the undersupply of doctors and nurses is dead right. And we acknowledged this upfront, prior to the election, when we talked about not just the undersupply of doctors nation wide, but again, it is an outstanding disgrace that our predecessors could have received a report from their own planning authorities for the nurses shortage in Australia which said in 2004 that we'd face a national shortage of nearly 20,000 nurses by the end of this decade, that is, by 2010.
And where rubber hits the road, again is here in places like Launceston. And I have been in very frank discussions with the good medical staff here today who are doing their absolute best, given the constraints of resources about attracting additional staff. We've provided the financial resources to do that but they have got a challenge now to actually attract those additional staff in order to support those additional procedures.
It's tough, but can I say, after 88 days or so in Government, it is very difficult to turn around a decade or more of radical underfunding of health and hospitals by the National Government. And remember, the previous Liberal Government, supported by the Liberal member here in the past, ripped a billion dollars out of the nation's hospital system. And where the rubber hits the road is in the operating theatres and in the wards of hospitals like Launceston. We're determined to turn that around, we've made one upfront payment in terms of elective surgery to make that possible. The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission will be looking at the totality of the system.
JOURNALIST: The Tasmanian Premier believes that Northern Tasmanian voters have been let down by Federal Labor because of the decision to axe those Centrelink call centre jobs. Do you agree with the Premier on that one?
PM: Well, each of the existing jobs in that centre, as I'm advised by Senator Ludwig, the responsible Minister for Human Services, is guaranteed. The point of difference lies in the promise made by the previous Prime Minister for which not a single dollar was allocated to the Budget for an expansion of that call centre with an additional 150 jobs.
That's the difference. Let's be very blunt about it. So the existing call centre, I think it's about 118 jobs, Senator Ludwig the Human Services Minister advises me that that's all okay. What we're talking about, or the basis of your question, goes to the expansion proposed by the Prime Minister, Mr Howard, prior to the election.
If they were fair dinkum about that, and if the local then sitting Liberal member was fair dinkum about that, there would have been money allocated for it. Not a zack. Not a cent. Not a brass razoo. How irresponsible can you get?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: You know something, we honour every one of the commitments that we made prior to the election. And we are proud of the commitments that we made here and we will honour each of them to the letter.
We said that we'd be investing; $143 million in Northern Tasmania to support industry and development; $34 million towards investment in the north-east freight roads; $31 million for the main north-south line rail capacity improvements.
In forestry; $9 million for forest industries development fund; $8 million to address major knowledge gaps about the impacts of climate change on forestry and the vulnerability of forest systems.
In health; $15 million for the Integrated Care Centre here in Lonnie; $7.7 million towards the establishment of an addition radiation oncology unit for the north and the north-west; Up to $10 million for improved patient transport in Tasmania; and that particularly effects people in the north. The arrangements for the Mersey Hospital as the Minister was referring to before.
Water; $30 million towards the construction of the Launceston flood levy.
In sporting and community infrastructure I've got about six, seven or eight different individual undertakings there.
Each one of the commitments we made to this community, in north-eastern Tasmania, for the last election will be honoured to the letter. Each one that we made.
As to irresponsible commitments made by the other mob, for whom no money was provided, that's a matter for them.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
ROXON: Well, as the Prime Minister has set out, we are going to honour each and every one of the commitments that we made. We put forward a $50 million health package. It's been strongly supported by the community and we're here today to further those commitments.
We obviously are not going to be meeting the sorts of commitments that the previous Government made without allocating any funding to do so. And, as the Prime Minister's indicated in the other instance, some of these were quite irresponsible, not providing funding, and then expecting them to be somehow met by a future Government.
We will honour the $50 million health commitments that we've made. We're in extensive negotiations with the States and Territories over, of course, the Healthcare Agreement funding into the future, and that will be the way we deliver better health services to the Tasmanian community.
PM: I think that's an important point on health and on hospitals generally. Looking at three different stages through which addition funding support is going to be provided. Right now, up front, the commitment for our pre-election package for Tasmania, the $50 million which Nicola has just referred to. Secondly, Nicola is currently engaged in further discussions with the States and Territories on the upcoming Australian Healthcare Agreement and Tasmania will be a beneficiary of that, in addition to Tasmania's share of the elective surgery funds which we have especially established. What was the third level - the third stage? It's the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission looking at the totality of the national health system's needs into the future.
We have it staged that way.
So let me go back to the core point here. We have an election. We were elected, we are the Government, we honour our commitments. What the previous Government said about their commitments is a matter for them. But we will honour our commitments, and that is the way in which democracies resolve their future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just a quick question on Brendan Nelson's comments about a ‘Super Saturday' idea for the by-elections. Do you think the Liberals should pay for the by-elections if they do have these former Ministers deciding to stand aside?
PM: Oh look, I think that's a matter for the Leader of the Opposition; and, the varying levels of interest and enthusiasm which these members seem to be demonstrating in terms of their commitment to the parliamentary process.


We are gathered here in this place with a single and sacred purpose.
And that is to honour those of our nation's sons and daughters who have served our nation in uniform.
From the killing fields of the Western Front.
The unspeakable brutality of Sandakan.
The impossible war that was Vietnam.
And so to the living dangers of today as the grandsons and great-grandsons of ANZAC once again do their duty  -  this time in theatres spread from the Sudan to the Solomons.
I believe there is no higher calling in the life of the nation than to serve the nation in uniform.
The military life summons forth the most elemental of human virtues: service; sacrifice; self-sacrifice; courage; determination and endurance.
And all given shape by an old fashioned (some might say, unfashionable, but I for one do not) patriotism  -  a deep reverence for this great land Australia and the great values for which we stand.
I say all this as one who has never worn the uniform  -  but as one who over the years has spent many, many days in this great memorial studying the lives of those who have.
For Australians, there is a raw emotion to this place. It is impossible to leave this place and not be moved by it.
A deep sense of loss.
A deep sense of pride.
And yes, a deep sense of hope  -  as we walk silently past the names of the fallen - that their sacrifice should never be in vain and that our duty to them is to remain forever vigilant.
Some nations were forged in war. Ours was not.
Some nations have been rent asunder by war. Ours has not.
Other nations have been of necessity defended in war. And ours has been one. And we, with the support of our great American ally, prevailed.
This national experience has shaped us all.
The first duty of any Australian Government must be for the proper defence of the nation.
Past governments have accepted this duty.
The government I lead accepts this duty.
As will those who come after me.
It is a solemn duty.
It is the core business of the nation.
The security of the nation is the cornerstone on which all else is built.
That is why, while we must cut our cloth in the other departments of state to meet the economic circumstances of our time, we must ensure that those charged with the planning of our future defence can do so with certainty.
And that also is the Australian Government's resolve.
That the nation's defence budget continues to grow with certainty and predictability.
Since its opening in 1941, this great War Memorial has commissioned galleries to honour those who served in the Great War.
Those who served in the Second World War.
And now it is time to honour those who have served abroad in our nation's uniform in the decades since.
To honour the more than 130,000 Australians who have served since 1945.
To honour the 1005 Australians, who served for us and who were not returned to us since 1945.
To honour the service they have rendered in nations as diverse as Korea, Malaysia, Borneo, Vietnam, the first Gulf War; and now the second; Afghanistan; East Timor, Somalia, the Sudan, the Solomons and beyond.
And so our engagement continues.
It says something about the nature of Australia itself.
That we as a people are not only serious about the defence of the liberty of our own nation.
As a people, we are also mindful of the liberty of other nations.
Acting where necessary in partnership with our friends, our allies and the great community of nations in the affairs of the world.
It is not (and never has been) in the nature of Australians to be indifferent to the plight of others.
As a people, we are, by instinct, internationalist.
I congratulate the staff of the War Memorial for the excellence of their work.
I have visited many such memorials around the world.
I believe this memorial to be the best in the world.
And so it should be.
Because our first duty is to honour our men and women in uniform and to honour their contribution to our great nation.


KG: Mr Rudd, thanks for your time this morning. This really is taking bipartisanship to a new level. You have got the former deputy Prime Minister in the Howard Government, former Howard Government minister Warwick Smith and the brother of the long serving treasurer, Mr Tim Costello there.
PM: Well, our attitude is that we want to build a modern Australia designed to deal with the challenges of the future, the challenges of the 21st century and that requires long term thinking. It also requires us looking beyond the typical political divide. These individuals have been selected on the basis of talent, merit and ability. We don't expect to agree with everything that they say, but that is not what this is about. It is about shaking the tree and pulling out the best ideas from the best minds across the nation on our future needs for the long term economy, health, education, our place in the world and other critical areas of challenge as well.
KG:  Was there any difficulty in getting the likes of Tim Fisher to join you on this panel given he was such a close ally, close colleague of the former Prime Minister?
PM: Well Professor Davis from the University of Melbourne has principally done the liaison with the individuals concerned and I am sure he has had good conversations with each of them. I think what I see across this body of ten individuals across these key challenge areas for Australia's long term future is enthusiasm and enterprise and ideas for the future but also an ability to now work with Professor Davis in identifying our “summiteers” - that is, the group of 1000 who we want to come to Canberra on the weekend of 19  -  20 April, to spend that weekend identifying elements of Australia's future agenda.
KG: Is this bipartisan approach though, is it part of your tactic to try and achieve broader support for the initiative?
PM: Well I believe it's important that you select people based on ability and talent and merit not simply to select people on partisan grounds. That's not what it is about. What we want to make sure is that we have a genuine search across the nation for our best and brightest minds and that is where the summit of the 1000 is so critical. And I am sure these individuals, including the former coalition ministers will perform well in helping us identify the bright and the best. This is not about party politics. From the outset I invited the Leader of the Opposition and I believe this also demonstrates that we are not interested in some party fest here. What we are interested are the best ideas for Australia's future. And guess what - the Labor party doesn't necessarily have a monopoly on those.
KG:  You have got some big names on there as well, I suppose the one that jumps out at you is Cate Blanchett the actor. Those sorts of people agreeing to it, is clearly going to help you, or lend weight to the whole process, surely?
PM: Well, Cate Blanchett will be a very good chair of this working group session which will deal with towards a creative Australia. Our creative industries in film, the arts, design, are fantastic. But how do we take that and platform it further? Take for example our current competitive edge in various parts of film, the extraordinary art being produced across indigenous Australia, how do we take what is there and take it to the next stage and unleash the creative and innovative potential of Australia even further.
On the future of governance for example, some would say we have taken the unusual step to invite someone from a news organisation, in the case of John Hartigan. But John Hartigan comes as chairperson of the group called Right to Know and Right to Know has been campaigning in recent years, both in relation to ourselves an the former government, about how we get the balance right between the transparency of government on the one hand and the needs of government confidentiality on the other. So Mr Hartigan's role as chairman of that group Right to Know, representing all Australia's principle news organisations, we thought was the right way to go as well.
KG:  A lot of the names that we have been discussing, and that you have got on this panel are big names, can you tell us, give us a bit of an insight into a couple of the others, for example, Professor Michael Good and Professor Michael Wesley, a couple of names there that a lot of people probably wouldn't recognise, given the other people we are talking about. Give us an insight into what sort of contribution those gentlemen will be making?
PM: Well when it comes to the future direction of health and hospitals, we have massive challenges including the ageing population, the exploding cost of pharmaceuticals, the rampant growth in chronic diseases like type two diabetes and workforce challenges when it comes to enough doctors, nurses and other health professionals into the future. Professor Michael Good, who is Director of the Queensland Institute, past president of the Association of Medical Research Institutes, Director of the Cooperative Research Centre for Vaccine Technology and was appointed in 2006 as chair of the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. This is a person who has an extraordinary background when it comes to medical research, knows the field well. But Professor Good's challenge will again be to work with Professor Davis in bringing together the hundred of our best and brightest minds when it comes to the overall future direction of Australia's health policy.
On Professor Michael Wesley, Professor Wesley comes from the Griffith Asia Institute at Griffith University where he is director. He has been a person who has worked within government in the office of national assessments. He is a first class academic mind with new insights into Australia's place in the world and I believe, part of our challenge with this summit is to bring together a blend of continuity and change, of youth and experience and Professor Wesley brings both to the table. And I think it is important that we have new faces across the country as well. Not just some of the older more anticipated faces in each of these areas.
KG:  Mr Rudd  I know you have got to go to Tasmania but before I let you go can I just ask you one final question, your news release says that every Australian has the opportunity to nominate to attend the summit but given the heavy hitters you have been talking about and that are on this panel, is it really, is it realistic for the average working Australian to nominate and to get a guernsey at this summit or is that just a gimmick that line?
PM: No, we are dead serious about people putting their names forward and about putting their ideas forward. It's true when you have got a national summit of 1000 of our best and brightest minds that some people are going to miss out and some people may miss out unfairly because no process is ultimately going to be fair and totally representative. I understand that. But we therefore are simply putting our best foot forward to get it as right as possible. But for individual members of the community, they should nominate themselves and or, put forward their own submission of ideas for the future as well on the summit website which is www.australia2020.gov.au or our toll free number 1800 703 599.
We want people to bring their ideas forward and submissions for themselves. If they don't get to come as a delegate to the summit, let me tell you submissions containing their ideas will be considered by the panel chaired by Dr Davis and will be taking submissions from the general public as well for consideration for the future, whether or not those people actually attend as delegates or not.
KG:  Prime Minister Rudd, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program.


The Prime Minister and Federal Minister for Health and Ageing today met with local health professionals in Launceston to discuss a range of frontline issues and the Government's planned $15 million Integrated Care Centre.
The $15 million Launceston Integrated Care Centre (ICC) is part of the Australian Government's $50 million investment in Tasmanian Health Services.
The Australian Government is committed to working with the Tasmanian Government to provide first class health care to the families of Launceston.
A vital part of this commitment is our investment in the Launceston ICC.
To gain the best outcome for local families it is essential we engage and have input from the experts - the local doctors, nurses, allied health professionals and related health organisations. That is what today's discussions are all about.
Launceston's ICC will employ an innovative model of patient care that enables health professionals to work in a team environment  -  better linking hospitals, community health services and doctors.
Importantly the services provided by the new Launceston ICC will reflect the specific health care needs of the local community.
The ICC will house a renal dialysis unit from Launceston General Hospital.
Other health services available at Launceston ICC may include:
     * Mental health;
     * Outpatient chemotherapy;
     * Allied health services such as physiotherapy, dieticians, and podiatry; and
     * Possible after-hours GP services.
Other commitments from the Rudd Government for Tasmania include:
     * $15 million to establish GP Super Clinics at: Devonport, Burnie and Bellerive and Sorrell;
     * $10 million for the Tasmanian Patient Transport Initiative;
     * $7.7 million towards an additional radiation oncology unit in the North or North-West;
     * $3.5 million for a PET cancer scanner at the Royal Hobart Hospital  -  the first in Tasmania;
     * North-West Tasmania and Launceston General Hospital are both locations for expanded Medicare-eligible Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services;
     * Tasmanians will also benefit from the Government's $300m investment in improving the transition from hospital to aged care;
     * $8.1 million for Tasmanian hospitals to deliver an additional 895 elective surgery procedures during 2008; and
     * Nurse incentive payments for 146 nurses to re-enter the workforce in Tasmania.


Tomorrow I will meet with the Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Rt Hon Helen Clark in Canberra.
Australia and New Zealand enjoy a strong and robust bilateral relationship founded on a unique shared history and international outlook.  Probably no two societies in the world are as similar as New Zealand and Australia. 
This year marks the 25th Anniversary of the Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement, one of the world's earliest free trade agreements and one of its most successful. 
New Zealand is Australia's sixth largest trading partner and our largest for manufactures.  It is our third largest destination for investment overseas.
I look forward to discussing with Prime Minister Clark ways we can continue to grow trans-Tasman relations.
Our close cooperation on regional and international issues, including climate change and the Pacific, will also be important matters for discussion. 
I welcome this opportunity to meet Prime Minister Clark so soon after our last meeting in December.  A close cooperative relationship between Australia and New Zealand makes each of us stronger.


I am pleased to announce today that 11 leading Australians will form the Independent Steering Committee for the Australia 2020 Summit.
The Independent Steering Committee will be chaired by Professor Glyn Davis. The 10 remaining panel members will perform a critical role by each leading one of the 10 key discussion areas of the Summit.
This first class Steering Committee will also help select up to 100 participants for each of the key discussion areas.
The panel and their discussion areas are as follows:
     * Professor Glyn Davis  -  Chair
     * Dr David Morgan  -  Future directions for the Australian economy
     * Mr Warwick Smith - Economic infrastructure, the digital economy and the future of our cities
     * Mr Roger Beale AO - Population, sustainability, climate change, and water
     * Mr Tim Fischer AC - Future directions for rural industries and rural communities
     * Professor Michael Good - A long-term national health strategy
     * Mr Tim Costello AO - Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion
     * Dr Kelvin Kong - Options for the future of indigenous Australia
     * Ms Cate Blanchett - Towards a creative Australia:
     * Mr John Hartigan - The future of Australian governance:
     * Professor Michael Wesley - Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world
Every Australian has the opportunity to nominate to attend this Summit.
Participants will be drawn from business, academia, community and industrial organisations, the media and include a number of individual eminent Australians.
If you wish to nominate for the 2020 Summit please download a nomination from www.australia2020.gov.au or call toll free on 1800 703 599. Nominations close on 29 February 2008.
The Government will consider the options papers that each of the 10 groups produces at the conclusion of the Summit and then provide a public response to them by end of 2008.
The Rudd Government's interest is in harnessing and harvesting ideas from the community that are capable of being shaped into concrete policy actions.
In addition to those participating in the Summit, all Australians will be invited to make submissions on each of the 10 future challenges. These will be submitted to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet which will act as the Secretariat for the Summit.
Dr David Morgan
David Morgan was Chief Executive Officer of Westpac Banking Corporation from 1999 to 2007, is a non-executive director of BHP Billiton Ltd, and is also chairman of the Australian Bankers' Association.
Prior to joining Westpac, Mr Morgan worked at the International Monetary Fund in Washington in the 1970s and the Federal Treasury in the 1980s, where he contributed to government policy for the financial sector, specifically supporting the floating of the Australian dollar as well as financial deregulation more generally.
Dr Morgan holds a bachelor degree in economics, and also received a Master of Science in Economics and a Doctorate of Philosophy (Economics) from the London School of Economics. He is also a graduate of Harvard Business School
Mr Warwick Smith
Warwick Smith was recently an Executive Director of Macquarie Bank, chairing the Telecommunications, Media, Entertainment and Technology (TMET) Group, and prior to this he was Global Head of the Bank's Corporate Communications Division for eight years.
Mr Smith served as a Federal Government Minister and in a variety of public roles in a Parliamentary career spanning 15 years. Warwick was appointed by industry and consumer groups as Australia's first Telecommunications Ombudsman, presiding over the industry as it entered a deregulated market. He is a former Chair of the Australian Communications Industry Forum (ACIF) Limited and is currently a Board Member of the Sydney Institute.
Warwick has a strong focus on international affairs. He is Immediate Past National President of the Australia China Business Council and an Executive Committee Member of the Asia Society. He is also the Inaugural Australian Member for BOAO Forum for Asia and International Advisory Council, a member of the Australian American Leadership Dialogue and a Councillor on the Australian British Chamber of Commerce.
Mr Roger Beale AO
Roger Beale retired from the Federal Public Service in 2004 after 8 years as Portfolio Secretary of the Department of Environment and Heritage and nearly 20 years in senior positions in the Transport and Prime Minister and Cabinet portfolios.
He has recently Chaired the Expert Panel on Energy Access Pricing for the Commonwealth State Ministerial Council on Energy, advised the Australian states on Greenhouse Gas emissions trading and prepared a major report for the Australian federal Government on policies for Adaptation to Climate Change.
He is currently a Director of Connector Motorways Pty Ltd, member of the Australian
Heritage Council, Chair of the Advisory Board of the National Institute of Governance, member of the Australian Statistics Advisory Council, and of the Greenfleet Advisory Board. Roger is a lead author for the United Nation's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Mr. Beale has a BA majoring in History and Law from the University of Queensland, studied economics at the ANU and completed a Master of Industrial and Labor Relations (Economics) at Cornell University. He was a Harkness Fellow from 1973 to 1975.
Mr Tim Fischer AC
After a 13 year career in State politics, Mr Fischer went into Federal politics in 1984 when he won the federal seat of Farrer for the National Party. He became Leader of the party in 1990. Tim Fischer was Deputy Prime Minister of Australia from 1996 to 1999.
In July 1999 he announced his resignation as National Party Leader, Trade Minister and Deputy Prime Minister. He retired in 2001 to spend more time with his family.
Since leaving Federal Politics he has taken on a wide range of roles and responsibilities. Most recently, in November 2007, he was appointed National Chairman of the Flying Doctor Service.
In 2004 the South Australian government appointed him Special Envoy for the Adelaide to Darwin railway, and he was awarded a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) in 2005. In June 2007 Mr Fischer completed a three-year term as Chairman of Tourism Australia. He is a patron and ambassador for a number of charitable and not for profit organisations.
Professor Michael Good
Professor Michael Good is the Director of the Queensland Institute of Medical Research, the past President of the Association of Australian Medical Research Institutes, and the past Director of the Cooperative Research Centre for Vaccine Technology.
In 2006 he was appointed as Chair of the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. He graduated (MD PhD DSc) from the University of Queensland and the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research in Melbourne.
Mr Tim Costello AO
Tim Costello became the Chief Executive of World Vision Australia in February 2004. Mr Costello studied law and education at Monash University, followed by theology at the International Baptist Seminary Rueschlikon in Switzerland, and a Masters in Theology at the Melbourne College of Divinity.
As a Baptist Minister, he established an active ministry at St Kilda Baptist Church between 1986 and 1994. From 1995 to 2004, Tim was Minister at the Collins Street Baptist Church and Executive Director of Urban Seed, a not-for-profit Christian outreach service for the urban poor. He was also the National President of the Baptist Union of Australia from 1999 to 2002.
In 2004, Mr Costello was awarded Victorian of the Year, in 2005 was Victorian Australian of the Year and also in June 2005, was made an Officer of the Order of Australia. He is currently Chairman of the National Australia Bank Community Advisory Council, a member of the Alcohol Education and Rehabilitation Foundation, and a member of the National Aid Advisory Council. He has been voted as one of Australia's 100 National Living Treasures.
Dr Kelvin Kong
A medical graduate who helped establish UNSW's Indigenous Pre-Medical Program when he was an undergraduate, Kelvin Kong is Australia's first Aboriginal surgeon.
An ear, nose and throat specialist, Dr Kong is based at St Vincent's Hospital. As a board member of the Australian Indigenous Doctors' Association (AIDA) he co-wrote the AIDA Healthy Futures report, which defines best practice in the recruitment and retention of Indigenous medical students.
Ms Cate Blanchett
Cate Blanchett graduated from the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA) in 1992. She won both the Sydney Theatre Critics Circle Best Newcomer Award (Kafka Dances) and the Best Lead Actress Award (Oleanna) in 1993, becoming the first person to win both awards in the same year.
Following the 1997 film Paradise Road, she has subsequently starred in 28 major film roles. Her work has been acknowledged both at home and internationally with AFI, BAFTA, Golden Globe and Academy Awards.
Cate Blanchett is co-artistic director and board member of the Sydney Theatre Company.
Mr John Hartigan
Mr Hartigan began his newspaper career as a cadet at John Fairfax and Sons. He joined News Limited in 1970 as a journalist on the Daily Mirror, rising to News Editor in 1978. After postings to The Sun in London and the New York Post, he returned to Australia as Editor on several metropolitan dailies before becoming Editor-in-Chief of The Daily Telegraph and The Sunday Telegraph in 1989.
In July 1997, Mr Hartigan was elevated to Group Editorial Director, becoming the company's most senior editorial executive. He held that position until his appointment as Chief Executive Officer of News Limited in October 2000. He was appointed Chairman in 2005.
Mr Hartigan is also a director of News Limited, Queensland Press, Advertiser Newspapers, The Herald and Weekly Times Limited and FOXTEL.
Professor Michael Wesley
Professor Michael Wesley is director of the Griffith Asia Institute at Griffith University. Prior to taking this position he was the Assistant Director-General for Transnational Issues at the Office of National Assessments. His research interests include Asia-Pacific politics and security, UN peacekeeping, Australian foreign policy, and regional organizations.
Professor Wesley is the research convenor of the Australian Institute of International Affairs, a member of the Australian Member Committee of the Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific, and a member of the Australian Research Council's College of Experts. Professor Wesley holds a Ph.D. in International Relations from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.


PM RUDD: Good afternoon all, the Australian Government is pleased today to welcome the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Helen Clark to Canberra.
We have just met together as Prime Ministers of our two countries, we've also had an opportunity for a meeting between the Prime Minister and senior members of the Cabinet as well; the Foreign Minister; the Defence Minister as well as the Minister for Climate Change and a number of other ministers as well including the Trade Minister.
I think it's fair to say that this relationship between our two countries is as close as it gets. And I'd like to pay tribute to the previous Australian Government for it's efforts in the past to ensure that this relationship was kept in good working order. And I also would take the opportunity to extend my thanks to the Prime Minister of New Zealand for having done so over the years as well.
This is a great relationship, it's as close as it gets and it has assisted our respective national interests enormously over a long period of time.
Australia and New Zealand have worked well together in dealing with the challenges of today. What we've resolved in our discussions here in Canberra is to ensure that we work now together to deal with the challenges of tomorrow.
What are those challenges? Two of them that have loomed large in our discussions today have been the global challenge and the regional challenge of climate change and also the immediate challenges that we face in the South Pacific.
On climate change, the fact that both Australia and New Zealand now are full ratification states in relation to the Kyoto protocol means that we have an unprecedented opportunity to work closely and seamlessly globally in the international negotiations which will now take place between now and the end of the Bali road map, which concludes at the Copenhagen conference at the end of 2009. These are going to be difficult and complex negotiations for the world, difficult and complex negotiations for developed countries such as Australia and New Zealand.
But I think there is enormous strength to be had by our two countries working seamlessly together in these important negotiations for the future of the planet. We resolved today to work in a new partnership for the future on climate change and you will see that reflected in the combined positions we take across the many meetings which will occur across international community in the two difficult years which lie ahead.
Similarly on the South Pacific. The South Pacific presents Australia and New Zealand with great challenges for the future; challenges to be met in partnership with Pacific Island states themselves. New Zealand prides itself, and legitimately, in having had a good relationship with many, in fact most if not all the Pacific Island states going back a long period of time. Of course there are difficulties along the road.
Again our resolve today is to work together to form a new partnership between Australia and New Zealand on the South Pacific with particular focus on our development assistance cooperation arrangements with the region. Australia each year contributes hundreds of millions of dollars to the region by way of development assistance cooperation. New Zealand makes a significant contribution as well. Between us there's something like a billion dollars invested on an annual basis into the big development challenges which lie in this region.
We both also are mindful of our international obligations which flow from the millennium development goals. And if we look at the millennium development goals and how they have been reflected in the achievements of many of our Pacific Island neighbours, frankly the record hasn't been one of undiluted joy. There are real problems there.
Secondly we have an interest as nation states, quite separate from our global obligations, through the millennium development goals to ensure that we maximise our development assistance dollar for the returns in primary health care, primary education and basic development across our Pacific Island partner countries. So for the future, this government of Australia looks forward to working in close partnership with the New Zealand Government; a new partnership for the future on climate change; a new partnership for the future on the South Pacific.
As I've said before, Australia and New Zealand have worked closely with one another to deal with the challenges of today. Our resolve of this meeting is to work now even more closely in dealing with the challenges of tomorrow. And those challenges are great indeed. Over to you Prime Minister.
PM CLARK: Thank you Kevin. Kevin has summarised the main areas of discussion, which began with an overall discussion about the importance of the relationship. I described it this morning on radio as being like a relationship between cousins, we do so much together and have for so long, it's a very, very deep an enduring relationship and it's important as the Prime Minister said that's it a relationship that's about tomorrow as well as about today.
I've reinforced the importance for New Zealand of the work that's been going on around the economic integration between the two economies and have been assured that that's core business for this new Australian Government as well.
We have discussed in some depth climate change; also the relationship in the Pacific and as well, begun discussions which will continue over lunch to talk about East Asia, Afghanistan and Timor-Leste.
On climate change we are absolutely delighted that Australia has ratified Kyoto. It put's us on the same page in the work we must now do; in the intense international diplomacy around reaching the post 2012 agreement. It makes a huge difference to New Zealand to have Australia in and for us to be able to combine diplomatic effort and muscle in the international negotiations
We have before our Parliament at the present time, legislation for an emissions trading scheme. It is a world first in that it covers all economic sectors and all gasses. That's in contrast with the European Union one which at this time only covers around 30 per cent of greenhouse gasses, so it's a very advanced scheme.
We are part of the international carbon action partnership, which Australia is now also coming into, which will help design the carbon trading markets of the future. And it is important that both of our countries are in there as we can have an influence in how these markets develop.
And at an official level, we are liaising very closely around ideas on emissions trading, because if we could achieve a level of compatibility between the schemes that are playing both sides of the Tasman, that would be a positive thing for the Trans-Tasman relationship.
On the South Pacific, we've talked about how we can co-ordinate closely on development assistance so that together we get the most bangs for the buck for the South Pacific. We're not competitors there, we're partners. We're partners with the Pacific and we're partners with each other and I'd be delighted to see us work even more closely on how we support Pacific development.
Australia is a very generous contributor to the Pacific. It invests a great deal of money and resources and time. And I know that there is some review of the Pacific and the Pacific policy going on in the new Australian Government, and I think it builds on very substantial contributions which have been made for a long time.
On East Asia, I've briefed the Prime Minister on how we see emerging East Asian regionalism, which stretches down as far as New Zealand and Australia, across to India and takes in the East Asian rim. We see it as an exciting development and as a table it's important that we were both as its founding members and should be able to contribute to a sense of community building in.
So it's been a very thorough two and a half hours so far. We've got another hour or so to go over lunch to pick up on issues we haven't yet had time to get to. But I'm pleased to be here. I've come to Canberra for a number of years as Prime Minister and always had a very warm reception. It's been very warm today and I look forward to working with Kevin on the many issues which our countries are jointly engaged.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much, Helen. If I could invite a question from the New Zealand media to start with.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM RUDD: We did discuss a single economic market and these are negotiations which are being progressed through our respective Treasurers and we at the Prime Ministerial level have re-affirmed our absolute political support for the successful completion of that program. It's complex, its detailed. It involves a raft of regulatory impediments which we need to knock out of the way.
The opportunities always need to be put ahead of the obstacles in my view. And having worked a bit on these things myself in the past at the interstate level in Australia, I believe we can do this effectively at an international level. So we did discuss it, Treasurers have our full political support, and we wish to see that program brought to a successful conclusion.
PM CLARK: (Inaudible) I've had assurance that the single economic market work will be core business for this new Australian Government and we very much welcome that.
For New Zealand, to have open access to this market of 20 million plus people has been enormous. We're in the 25th of year of the closer economic relationship. Trans-Tasman trade for both of us has grown at a faster rate than any other area of trade historically. So, it's a win-win for both countries, the solid support in both private sectors for this development, and I hope that at the leadership forum between Australia and New Zealand, which will take place in Wellington in two or three or four months time, that we'll get that continued momentum and backing from our private sectors as well.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the labour drain from New Zealand to Australia?
PM CLARK: The reality is the Australian economy has been fuelled by a minerals extraction boom and that has sucked labour out of states which are not part of that boom to states which are and it has sucked labour out of New Zealand as well.
We do get some welcome flow back the other way, and the skilled flow it is. But New Zealand is satisfied that it's got positive net migration. We have a skilled migration policy which is serving our needs and I know from what I've long read about the profile of Kiwis in Australia, that they are the most highly employed group, the greatest participating group in the labour force, even over and above native born Australians.
JOURNALIST: With an election due in New Zealand later this year do you see any parallels with the Australian situation with Mr Rudd's election? It's been a long term Government losing popularity with a reinvigorated opposition?
PM CLARK: What I saw was the Australian Labor Government elected on policies promoted by our Government, not being part of an occupation of Iraq, coming into the international agreements on climate change and having humane labour market legislation. And I'm thrilled to see a Government elected here embracing those policies we have long stood for.
PM RUDD: I don't comment on domestic politics of other democracies like New Zealand. The people of New Zealand will sort out their own future. That's the great thing about our two countries. But I will say this about our own electoral circumstances in the last few months. It's very much a debate in this country about plans for the future. And a core part of those plans for the future deal with the challenge that we've just been speaking of, which is climate change. It effects radically the global economy. Radically the global environment. And therefore, it effects our national economies and our national environments as well. And the one thing that I've learnt as Leader of the Opposition in the past and prior to that as Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Affairs and Trade, is in my many discussions with Helen over the years in Wellington and elsewhere is that New Zealand has always been forward looking on this climate change challenge under her Prime Ministership. And that's something which I think puts New Zealand into a good space for the future and something I've been mindful of as we've approached our own international and regional obligations on climate change as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on another matter, what we you thinking when you agreed to have only one woman on your steering committee for the 2020 Summit? Was it an oversight or did you purposely want to make women think they weren't being represented?
PM RUDD: The key thing about the 2020 Summit is to shake the national tree to get the best ideas that are flowing from 1,000 delegates and they'll be here on 19 and 20 April, we're looking forward to that. Glyn Davis and myself talked at some length about the steering committee. People popped in and popped out, in terms of availability and non availability.
And can I just say, when I look at how each of those ten working groups, dealing with long term challenges for the nation, are going to be handled, the fact that six of the ten of those are going to be chaired by women who are members of this Ministry and this Cabinet, this Executive of this Government, I think that says all that needs to be said about our view of the contribution of women to Australia's future.
And I look forward very much to the summit. I look forward very much to the contribution of all members of that summit because the idea is to get the best ideas across the country. I am confident we are going to do that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we ask you collectively, Mr Rudd, there are 20 Australians who are apparently caught up in Liechtenstein tax probe. How concerned are you about high level tax evasion in Australia? And Ms Clark, are you aware of any New Zealanders that are caught up in this probe as well?
PM CLARK: I can give a very short answer and that is, no I am not. Not to say one won't pop out of the woodwork but nothing has been drawn to my attention.
PM RUDD: As operational matters concerning what happens in relation to this on Australian nationals in Liechtenstein, that is a matter for the relevant authorities. On the broader question of tax evasion, it's bottom line business for us. Tax laws of the country are there to be adhered to. It doesn't matter where you are, it doesn't matter what your form of occupation is, that's your first obligation. And it's not only important for preserving the public revenue, it's also very important for the country at large to have confidence that everyone is pulling their weight. Can I ask for a question now from one of our New Zealand colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Can I just go back to the immigration labour issue, because a number of Kiwis coming across here was at a 20 year high last year. Why do you think they are finding Australia so attractive at the moment?
PM RUDD: What do I think?
JOURNALIST: Yes
PM RUDD: Well you need to talk to them. I was told by the Prime Minister before that a large concentration of Kiwis coming to the country end up in the good state of Queensland. So on questions such as that, I can scarcely be asked for an independent view other than to say it is a fantastic place and who wouldn't want to go there.
Look, you know the great thing about our two countries, is just the seamlessness of it. People come, people go, and that is the path, that is the pattern as it should be for the future. And we welcome the contribution of New Zealanders to the Australian economy.
We welcome the fact that Australian exporters have such significant access to the New Zealand market. The New Zealand economy, as we were just saying, is of a significant size. It is smaller than Australia's but the fact that it is such a big destination for Australian exports, it is very important to us. So, New Zealand has interests and access to the Australian market and we have interest and access to the New Zealand market. And the way of the future will see people movements, movement of capital and movement of goods and services, moving increasingly seamlessly.
So I think this is a good thing for both our countries.
JOURNALIST: Can you both comment on the deportation yesterday of an Australian publisher from Fiji. And can you also both comment on whether there needs to be a more consultative approach to dealing with pacific nations?
PM RUDD: Well on the question of the South Pacific, building on my comments before, this represented a very large slice of our conversation this morning. There were many other topics covered, but this was a very large slice of our conversation.
Australia and New Zealand recognise that there are big challenges to be dealt with across the region and across basic development challenges. Universal education, primary health care, law and order. These are big challenges indeed.
Our resolve, coming out of today's discussions, is to build a new partnership based on even closer cooperation between our two Governments and between our respective aid agencies on how that billion dollars a year is rolled out.
As the Prime Minister said quite rightly before, both of us, accountable to our tax payers, have to be absolutely confident that we are getting the best bang for our buck possible in terms of the development yield across the region. Specifically on Fiji, the action from the Government of Fiji is to be condemned. It is unacceptable and it is an extremely disappointing development. Prime Minster.
PM CLARK: At the Pacific Island Forum Leaders Meeting last year, Commodore Bainimarama gave a commitment to holding elections by the end of March next year. It is inconceivable that you can hold open, fair and free elections if you have media intimidation and great restraints on the freedom of expression.
That's why what happened this week with the deportation of the editor and publisher of the Fiji Sun is so deplorable. It is a backward step which doesn't give one confidence that the Fiji interim Government is serious about open, free and fair elections before the end of March ‘09.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) apple trade dispute (Inaudible)
PM RUDD: What we have resolved is that we are either going to have apple strudel, apple crumble or apple pie for desert and we are setting up an inter-departmental committee as to the precise composition of the apple mix, the Trans-Tasman apple mix in the ingredients.
Yes we did discuss it and we are allowing our officials to continue with their detailed and protracted negotiations.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about Tim Costello -
PM RUDD: Last one. Yeah -
JOURNALIST: Tim Costello today suggesting that binge drinking and alcohol abuse should be part of your 2020 Summit. What is your view on suggestions that trading hours in Australian pubs and clubs should be reduced and that the number of liquor licenses, in particular, should be reduced?
PM RUDD: My views on this haven't changed since I first was asked to comment on it. And I think we have got a real problem in this country when it comes to binge drinking. You know, I don't have a lot of science to back it up, but let me tell you, as I roll around the country, if Mums and Dads are raising this with me in the supermarkets of the nation, on a regular basis, my ears prick up and say, ‘there's a problem'.
What I see happening around the streets myself is a problem. They still allow me out at night from time to time in this current job. And so, what I see is a bit of a problem too.
Therefore, when Tim says that, I say good on him. Because the whole reason why we have structured this 2020 summit is to look at long term challenges for the nation which often don't get proper and focussed national debate.
Take this one for example. Tim is responsible for co-chairing a session which deals with challenges for the community and social inclusion. I can think of no more core business for that session than how you deal with the problem of substance abuse with young people.
On the second part of your question which is the, what things might be done better in the future, I am all ears for ideas which come forth from the summit on this question.
Governments don't have the monopoly on wisdom on this and I suspect there may be a range of possible responses. Some of them may be tailored to local communities. But I am all ears as to what the community will have to say on this because it is a problem, and as a community and as a Government, we need to act.
But with most social problems, it is not just Government alone. Communities and families have to get in there and they need to work in partnership with us as well. And having said that, we have both got to zip.


The Australian Government has today officially launched the Productivity Places Program to fund 20,000 new skills training places from 1 April 2008.
From today Registered Training Organisations interested in participating in the Productivity Places Program can access expression of interest forms.
These 20,000 new skilled training places kicking off in April will ensure that workers with improved skills will enter the workforce as early as June 2008.
The 20,000 skilled training places will focus on areas of acute skills shortage in the Australian workforce. Areas of focus will include:
     * Mining and construction carpenter, bricklayer, joiner, wall and floor tiler, roof plumber;
     * Health and community services - child care worker, special care worker, personal care and nursing assistant;
     * Motor Mechanic - Automotive electrician, panel beater, vehicle painter, vehicle body maker; and
     * Personal and other service industries cook, hairdresser, sales representative, travel and tourism agent.
The Productivity Places Program is the first step in the Government's election commitment to provide an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years to ensure that Australians develop the skills that industry needs.
By significantly increasing the skills base of the Australian workforce the Government's extra skills training places will ease a capacity constraint in the Australian economy and put downward pressure on inflation.
The Reserve Bank has been warning for several years that skills shortages are driving up inflationary pressures in the Australian economy. Rather then ignore these warnings the Australian Government is taking practical action to begin to address the Reserve Bank's concerns.
The Productivity Places Program will be delivered in a progressively reformed system which will shift the focus from funding training with little regard to employment outcomes or the needs of the economy, to an increasingly responsive system driven by industry demand.
The mining industry is currently experiencing the highest vacancy to employment ratio, with around 3.7 vacancies for every 100 people employed in the industry. Wages growth is also strongest in the mining industry, with the Wage Price Index increasing at 5.1 per cent through the year to the December quarter 2007.
Wages growth is also strong in the construction industry, at 4.6 per cent through the year to September 2007. The construction industry has the highest proportion of employees with a certificate as their highest post-school qualification, at 45.7 per cent.
The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR) is seeking submissions from RTOs wishing to offer approved qualifications under the Productivity Places Program.
Submissions can be made from 7 March 2008. For further information go to: www.dest.gov.au/productivityplaces


PM: It's good to be here in Adelaide again and good to be here at the Motor Trades Association of South Australia Apprenticeship Training Centre, and here with Mark Butler and Tony Zappia, our local Members of Parliament.
We're here today to talk about the absolute importance of skills to the future of the Australian economy. The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern Australia capable of dealing with the challenges of the future and to provide a future for working families.
Part of the challenges of the future consists in what we do in the current fight against inflation, because if we don't fight inflation what we continue to have is upward pressure on interest rates.
We, the new Government, inherited an inflation rate in Australia which was running at 16 year record highs. And we inherited interest rates which were the second highest in the developed world.
This is a real problem. Because if you've got inflation going up, it puts upward pressure on interest rates. So that's why from the beginning of this year within a month of taking office we've indicated that we regard the fight against inflation as core economic business for the new Australian Government. Inflationary pressures are driven by excessive government spending on the one hand and on the other hand by problems on the supply side of the economy as well. Particularly skills and particularly infrastructure.
If you've got inadequate skills, inadequate infrastructure on the one hand, and if you've got out of control government spending on the other, guess what: it pushes inflation up and inflation goes up it puts upwards pressure on interest rates, which hurts working families.
So what we're here to do today within that framework is to announce further what we intend to do to assist in the skills shortage in Australia. 
Here in South Australia there are many shortages in the skills market in many sectors of the economy. So what we are committed to doing is implementing our pre-election commitment of creating across Australia an additional 450,000 training places.
But today, as of today, we put online 20,000 new training places, 20,000 new training places, which registered training organisations such as the MTA here in South Australia can now make application for. These are particularly concentrated at Certificate II and Certificate level III training. Cert II and Cert III are important because the feedback we've had from employers across the country is that they want their workforce to have higher and higher levels of skills. And if there's one overriding request from industry it's we need more skilled workers and we need more highly skilled workers as well. And that's why our program, this productively places program, that we're announcing today, is all designed at making available higher level certificate training places.
We'll be focusing this program, in particular, on the following sectors: mining and construction, it's very big in South Australia where we've got particular demands for carpenters, bricklayers, joiners, wall-floor tilers, roof plumbers and this is really important work . Particularly with the unfolding mining boom here in South Australia.
Secondly, health and community services. Thirdly, motor mechanics of the type that we've been talking to here today, automotive electricians, panel beaters, vehicle platers, vehicle body making. And personal and other services, which include the travel and tourism industry as well.
These are four priority areas for the economy nationwide, priority areas for the economy here in South Australia, and priority areas, therefore, where these 20,000 new training places will be focussed.
To conclude, core business for the economy, fighting the fight against inflation.  To do that you've got to be boosting skills, dealing with infrastructure bottlenecks and reining in unnecessary government spending. What we're here to do in South Australia is to release this 20,000 additional training places so that employers, as early as next week, can lodge their application for these places and as early as four weeks time can start delivering those new training places through access to the funds delivered under this program.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on that point you ‘re connecting inflation to training places. If you create more training places, more jobs, more wealth. How's that putting a lid on inflation?
PM:   If you look at the Reserve Bank's warnings to the previous Government on inflation, they delivered 20 warnings in a row, and those 20 warnings focussed on a shortage of skills and a shortage of infrastructure. That was not the Labor Party saying it at the time, it was the Reserve Bank of Australia. Because if you've got inadequate supply of skilled labour, guess what? It fuels inflation.
If you've got inadequate infrastructure across the country like infrastructure bottlenecks at our ports and our roads system, it creates a constraint in the economy which pushes prices up as well. So the core business of dealing with inflation on the supply side of the economy means boosting skilled labour and dealing with infrastructure bottlenecks.
Twenty successive warnings from the Reserve Bank, that's why this commitment from the new Australian Government for an additional 450,000 training places over time, and 20,000 of those released now, is an important step in the right direction.
JOURNALIST: How long will it take to release the whole 450,000 of those?
PM: Our commitment is to do that over a number of years. From memory, four.  I stand to be corrected on that if I haven't got it precisely right, three or four. But what we have been determined to do is to hit the ground running, but making sure that we have within our first few months in office a release of 20,000 of those priority places now.
The demand from business right across Australia is huge and we've decided to hit the ground running, put these up online now. Registered training organisations such as the Motor Trades Association of South Australia can whack in an application as of a week's time and they can start accessing those funds as of four weeks time. Not bad if you've only been in Government a few months.
JOUNRALIST: On another matter, here in South Australia obviously the River Murray important. You're speaking to the Premier today  - 
PM:  That's right, yeah.
JOURNALIST: ... and I don't doubt it'll be mentioned. When do you, or are you, going to do personally intervene in this and bang Victoria's head with someone else's so we start getting some water down the river?
PM: First of all, as someone said the other day, the problem in terms of the River Murray inadequate water supply for the good states of Victoria and South Australia, these problems have been around for about 100 years. Secondly I note that the previous Government for 12 years actually did nothing to resolve this. Thirdly we've been in office now for somewhere between two and three months.
This is core business, however, for the people of South Australia, and therefore, its core business for us as the National Government. That's why Penny Wong, the Minister for Water, has already met with her Victorian counterparts. To look at the scope of a possible deal which meets the long term interests of the people of South Australia as well.
It's been around for a long time, we've had 12 years of inaction, we've been in office for a couple of months, but for us this is a big priority. Penny Wong has already had one set of negotiations as I understand with the Victorians. It will be part and parcel of my own negotiations with the Victorians soon. We want a deal on this as soon as possible.
On the Murray itself, can I say also this, we have within the first couple of months of being in office already allocated $50 million to begin the buyback of water entitlements (inaudible) the Murray. That wasn't happening before. It's now happening. And so, with that process underway, we're already starting to take action to relieve some of the pressure on the River Murray system.
Also on water policy in general, remember our pre-election commitments here on water are significant. $160 million to support the South Australian Government's proposed desalination plan in the Upper Spencer Gulf. We also have a separate $1 billion urban water program, so that if South Australia goes down the road of a further desalination plant for the city of Adelaide, there is an opportunity to draw on the funds available in that $1 billion dollar program to make such projects possible. And on top of that, there are up to $400 million in practical water savings projects to improve water efficiency and make significant water savings at the Menindee Lakes on the Darling.
These are all practical projects (inaudible). Penny Wong's at work on it, I'm at work on it, and well deliver an outcome as soon as is possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with great respect, South Australians, I think, are sick to death of hearing something's going to be done soon. Because time is clearly running out. We want to know how soon until we see more water coming down the river. I know you can't make it rain, perhaps you can, I don't know, but -
PM: Have you got the formula for how that works?
JOURNALIST:   Not quite. But that's the problem, I mean, South Australia's frustration is hearing people such as yourself say something will happen soon.
PM: What I'm saying to you is this. There is a water challenge, what are the bits that make it up? One is the River Murray. How do you fix that? A deal with Victoria in relation to its irrigators. We've been in office for two months, the previous mob had 12 years to do this they didn't do it, and we're working hard on it.  The other thing with the River Murray is to buy back water entitlements generally. Within two months we've started that with a $50 million allocation of funds I think last week to do it.
What else do you do on water for South Australia? You directly contribute to other urban water projects, and related water projects, in this part of the state.  
That $160 million for the upper Spencer Gulf that's not a piece of loose change, that's real money. A billion dollar program to assist the people of South Australia with a further desalination project if that's what happens here, together with up to $400 million worth of projects with Menindee Lakes on the River Darling. These are all very practical projects. So we believe this is core business. It's going to take a bit of time; we've been at it for two months, give us a bit more time.
JOURNALIST: Are you confident Victoria will come to the party on this? And will you intervene if Senator Wong doesn't appear to be having any success with this?
PM: I think Senator Wong's doing a fantastic job and she has my every support, but the discussions with Victoria will be conducted at her level, and in due course, at my level, once we've narrowed the gap in terms of the negotiating positions. This is difficult stuff. I mean, there's competing demands, competing interests, but were not about to leave the people of South Australia in the lurch. That's why you have from us such a concrete set of water policy commitments prior to the election with money flowing. And this is something which we attach high priority to as well.
JOURNALIST: So you will go to the negotiating table at some point on this issue?
PM: Senator Wong's handling it in a first class fashion with Victorian counterparts as I said. If it's necessary I'll be engaging in that myself.
JOURNALIST: Health Ministers are meeting tomorrow to thrash out the next funding program. You promised to fix all 750 hospitals. Does that start with a fifty-fifty funding commitments between states?
PM: It starts with two things. First of all, right here in South Australia you have as in other states, an elective surgery waiting list which involves a whole lot of people who have been on waiting lists beyond clinically acceptable times. In the past, the National Government has said not my problem it's your problem. What did we do? Consistent with our pre-election commitment, we came up and said here is the money necessary to draw down that elective surgery waiting list to something respectable and sustainable during the course of 2008, as an initial investment.
The first COAG meeting at the end of last year we went to the table with $100 million, the states said they needed $145 million to deliver that outcome and we gave them $150 million. That money has been handed over, step one.
Step two is the rest of the system. This is a big project, and I indicated this many times in the pre-election period. And to do it properly, the total reform of the national health and hospital system to eliminate the cost shift, blame shift and mindless duplication overlap, is we do it through a National Health and Hospital Reform Commission. We said we'd get that up and running within the first 100 days of this Government, we announced the head of that Commission, Dr Christine Bennett, only a few days ago. That's up and running.
Thirdly, once we decide on the future structure of the system, once we decide on who best does what within the overall allocation of health responsibilities within the federation, let me tell you, there will need to be from us, the National Government, a significant additional injection of funds. But the rational thing to do is, deal with the immediate problem which is elective surgery waiting lists, set up a mechanism which provides us with advice on the total reform of the system, and thirdly, fund the reforms which are then implemented. That's the scheme we put forward before the election, we are honouring that commitment and we've done it to the letter.
JOURNALIST: You criticise the previous Government for under-funding (inaudible) 46 per cent over the term of the Howard Government. Shouldn't you bring it up to 50 per cent before you start asking the states to jump through extra hoops in terms of what they have to do?
PM: I take very seriously my commitments to the Australian people before the election. Which is, one, fix the system in terms of system design. And that means the failure to have an effective system when it comes to what GPs do outside of hospitals and what emergency departments do inside of hospitals. Fix the system when it comes to having so many of our acute hospital beds occupied by people who have already been classified to go into nursing homes, but for whom there are no nursing home beds.
Fixing these basic design features as we said we would before the election through a National Health and Hospital Reform Commission. And in addition to that, once those recommendations are through, and endorsed and on the process to implementation, for funding then to flow.
That is what we committed to, in addition to the allocation of funds which came from our pre-election hospital fund of which that $150 million for elective surgery, that's already been committed and delivered.
JOURNALIST: What's your reaction to the Queensland Health Minister's statements today that you may have to take over the public hospital system?
PM: Well look I've always said I'm pretty blunt about all this. We have, and I said this before the election, we will give ourselves until the middle of 2009 to determine whether through the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, and through our negotiations with the States and Territories, we can come up with the best design of the health system possible for the benefit of working families right across the country.
My preference is to do that cooperatively. If we can't get there co operatively, I am dead serious about the alternative option which is to go to the Australian people and to seek a mandate from them for the Commonwealth to take over the system. I said that beforehand, I haven't backed away from it, and I said we would reach that decision by the middle of ‘09.
JOURNALIST: He's indicating that you may need to move before that?
PM:   Well Rome wasn't built in a day, and I did say prior to the election what time frame was rational to do this within. And once again I honour that commitment. We said we would reach that conclusion by mid ‘09. Last time I looked at my watch, it was the end of February ‘08 and I think that gives us a bit more time to work it through.
Let's be serious about it also. Look at the complexity of this, in terms of the number of stakeholders in the health and hospital system. Preventative health care; primary health care through GPs and community health care; what happens with accident emergency departments in hospitals; what happens at the acute end and surgical end of the hospital spectrum; aged care; mental health; dental health; workforce planning; doctors; nurses; long term supply.
It would be great if you went, bang, fixed today. But pre election I said we will work this through over an 18 month period and we have been in office for just over two, heading on towards three months.
JOURNALIST: How do you react to Paul Lennon's claims of blackmail to do with the Mersey Hospital (inaudible)
PM:  Well once again, I take pretty seriously honouring my commitments to the Australian people and the good people of Tasmania made before the election. I said then that those monies would be dedicated to particular health needs in Northern Tasmania. Pardon me for honouring my commitments to do that.
JOURNALIST:  They are marginal seats though.
PM: Well my pre-election commitment was, explicitly, to deliver that funding to those communities spread right across the North of Tasmania, where there are acute health needs, particularly in terms of type two diabetes. I was in Launceston only two days ago and looking at the renal dialysis unit at Launceston General Hospital.
But in terms of the broader health needs of Tasmania, these are subjects of continuing negotiations between ourselves and the Tasmanian Government and I am sure we will sort these things through. But again, I am here to say that two or three months into this Government's life, we take seriously what we committed to before the election, including to the people of Northern Tasmania. All out there on the record.
If I was to do something different now, you would be saying, ‘why have you broken your promise'. I don't intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, before the reception you were campaigning strongly for workers rights. Are you concerned about the South Australian State Government's move to cut workers, injured workers', entitlements under the WorkCover shake-up, I guess?
PM:   I am across a few things at present; I am not quite across that one. I will take that one on notice.
JOURNALIST: On other matters, another issue, reports today that there has been a split in Opposition ranks federally, perhaps backing away from nuclear energy. Have you got a reaction to that?
PM:  Well on the nuclear front, I find it pretty interesting that, here we have a statement from someone senior in the Liberal Party. The Age says today, a spokeswoman for the Leader of the Opposition says, “Coalition policy is to investigate the possibility of nuclear energy.”
Pre-election, they said that this was a part of Australia's future. That is, Australia to have civil nuclear reactors across the country pumping electricity into the electricity grid. That's still their policy. Unless Dr Nelson wants to announce that it is suddenly a changed policy.
Prior to the election, the Liberals said that they were committed to a nuclear energy option, a nuclear energy future for Australia. Prior to the election they committed themselves to a nuclear energy option for Australia. Dr Nelson is still saying that's what they are proceeding with. Unless they're now, about to change policy on that, like they have said - they have now changed policies on Iraq, and Kyoto and maybe WorkChoices, but maybe not all of WorkChoices, and maybe a few more things before lunch time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, ABC Learning. Has the Government got a contingency plan if this massive child care operator goes belly up?
PM: As you know the Government is strongly committed to the proper provision of childcare to working families, and we put forward a range of policies on this prior to the election. And we think this is a core area for working families, particularly when it comes to workforce participation. That is why we committed to increasing the childcare rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. That's why committed to an additional 260 childcare centres across the country. That's why we committed also to providing fee relief those starting to become childcare workers.
In terms of the substance of your question, the Government and relevant authorities continue to monitor closely developments regarding ABC Learning Centres.
It is inappropriate for the Government to comment on the financial aspects of the company. The Government remains committed to working with providers to deliver affordable, accessible and high quality childcare for Australian families. And our concern is always to ensure that working families have access to quality childcare services.
JOURNALIST: But if it does run into trouble are you going to have an immediate short term problem, you can make as many promises as you like on child care, but, you're going to face a decision (inaudible)
PM:  Well I think it is pretty important to say to working families across the country, whatever childcare services that they access, that their child care rebate will go from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. That is a very large addition. That is not simply, quote, ‘a promise',  that is being delivered. If you were to ask Mums and Dads whether that was important or not, I think they would say that it's pretty important, together with the other supply side measures on extra centres and extra staff that we mentioned.
In terms of the commercial matters that you raised, then they fall within the end of the comments that I just made.
JOURNALIST:  Do you fear that the Federal Government will have to get involved, though Prime Minister?
PM:   I think it is very important that we at the level of National Government monitor developments closely, and I go back to my earlier comments on the most recent matters.
Lastly, can I just say, as far as the MTA in South Australia is concerned, I just am very impressed with what goes on at this centre. You have got, based on my advice, 600 young people at any one time, either year one, year two, year three, year four, accessing these first class facilities to train South Australians into this area of acute need in the local economy.
Talking to the young men and women here, they are benefiting greatly by the training services provided. As the new National Government, we want to partner with first class operations like this run by the MTA, because it is part and parcel of producing the most skilled economy in the western world. That is our national vision, good to see it is being applied here locally. Thanks for your time.


BYNER: Prime Minister, welcome and it's good to talk to you, because it's the first time I've spoken to you since you've been PM.
PM: Well thanks very much. It's good to be on the program and good morning to all your listeners here in beautiful Adelaide
BYNER: Tell me what you're doing in South Australia.
PM: Well here today, I'm talking about skills because one of the big challenges we face is to make sure we've got enough skilled workers out there in the economy.
It's one of the big pushes on inflation and because we've inherited an inflation rate running at 16 year highs from the previous government, we've got to do everything we can to try and bring those inflationary pressures down. One of the way in which you'd do that is to expand the number of skilled training places out there in the economy, and if you keep inflationary pressures down it helps also keep downwards pressure on interest rates as well.
So that's what I'm here to do and what I'll be announcing very soon here in Adelaide is that we'll be calling for responses from registered training organisations to take up 20,000 new training places which will go online from us as of 1 April, one month from now.
BYNER: Now Kevin, Prime Minister, the one thing that concerns me about traineeships is that there has not been a very effecting auditing process in the traineeships to deliver actual qualifications at the end of their time and I am sure you have heard the scuttlebutt, and I think it is more than scuttlebutt but I will call it that for the time being. That a lot of people who are employed under traineeship organisations end up sweeping floors or making sandwiches and not getting much skill but providing cheap labour. Are you mindful of this as you announce these extra places?
PM: Entirely, because what we have got by way of feedback from business is that what people want is not just certified training places, that is where people are trained and then obtain a proper certificate-level recognition of the skills that they have obtained, but they are, in particular what business are looking for is for higher level certificate training as well, level two certificate, level three certificates, and the
Because people just don't want more people in their workplaces, they want more skilled people in their workplaces. That's why the emphasis of this program of ours, which is a phase one roll out of what will be 450,000 additional training places over time. This 20,000 and the 450,000 will be focussed at those higher level, certificate level training places.
BYNER: And these are going to be audited to ensure that they don't just become cheap labour?
PM: Our intention, clear cut, is to make sure that we produce people with proper certificates which then become tradeable by them, those people in the workplace, so that they get better paid jobs and the needs of business are met as well. And overall, in economic terms, to do what we can to keep inflationary pressures under control given that inflation as of when we took office was running at a 16 year high.
BYNER: Look, I think the intent Mr Prime Minister is laudable but I made the point that it is going to be up to the state government isn't it, to audit these positions to ensure that they deliver what you want them to?
PM: Well we will be working in partnership with various levels of government and with various levels of government and with registered training organisations to make sure that these are properly delivered. Leon, you have been around for a long time, so have I. Are there are going to be some problems at the edges of all this? Of course, you are going to find some example where I hasn't worked properly. But if out of these 20,000 additional training places which we are putting online, really within three months of taking office, to do something concrete to help employers and employees out there. If we manage to help a large number of employers and employees this way, then we will have been doing a good thing. I can't guarantee that every one of them is going to be perfectly delivered. Life is not like that.
BYNER: No, well I am not asking you to make sure that every one, but I think at the moment there are a lot of jobs out there. I meet so many people on my travels who are on traineeships and I ask them what they are doing, sweeping floors, making sandwiches. I am sure they, see we allegedly have in training between 25,000 and 30,000 people annually. And I wonder if we have actually sufficiently trained them in areas where they are required, we shouldn't have the shortages we have got. So that's why I will make the observations.
PM: Well I think the Federal Government department concerned is very, very determined to ensure that these registered training organisation deliver certificate level training through these extra 20,000 places which we are putting out. We call them, we are calling this the Productivity Places Program because quite apart from the individual employees and their legitimate desire to get better skilled and better paid jobs, quite apart from the legitimate interests of employers, which is to fill the gaps in their businesses, we have got this overriding concern as well which is, what do we do to fight the fight against inflation, in order to keep downward pressure on interest rates.
Because, we inherited some real problems on this score when we took over the government at the end of last year.
BYNER: Alright, quickly, health insurance companies are being asked to please explain. I noticed that Nicola Roxon has said, ‘nup you are not going to get your four per cent'. They are going to go back to the drawing boards. Reason given by the Feds, well it's going to adversely effect struggling families. I mean, that almost goes without saying. What is your observation on the push by health insurance companies to lift their premiums?
PM: Well each of these has got to be justifiable and I entirely support the statements made by the Health Minister Nicola Roxon on this. Working families are under financial pressure. Whether it is the cost of their mortgages, whether it is the cost of rents, whether it is the cost of childcare, whether it is the cost of groceries and whether it is the cost of petrol.
And what we therefore believe is that when it comes to health care costs, what we need to do is to do what we can to help relieve some of those pressure so when the health in insurance companies come and ask for an increase like this, the Minister is doing exactly the right thing in subjecting that to the highest level of scrutiny.
BYNER: Alright
PM: There is no silver bullet with any of these things. But can I say, on petrol for example, after 11 or 12 years of complete inaction on this, within three months we have appointed a petrol commissioner. And the intention there is to ensure that we have got a rolling cop on the beat to make sure that the petrol companies are being competitive and that motorists are not paying one extra dollar more than they need to be paying when it comes to that task of filling up at the bowser each week.
BYNER: Prime Minister, just quickly and I thank you for your time taken out before your commitments here in South Australia. Got to ask about the Murray. When is push going to come to shove where you are going to be a situation where you are going to have to sit down with Mr Brumby and the Victorians and say, come on guys, it will be this, or else.
PM: Well, someone said recently that the problems with the Murray have been brewing for about 100 years in terms of water allocation between the various states. The previous government basically ignored this one for the better part of 12 years. We have been in government now for a couple of months. Climate change and water minister Penny Wong, who is a South Australian, has already had negotiations with the Victorian government. They continue.
We need to get a good outcome here for South Australia.
BYNER: Are you putting a time line on it?
PM: We are going to act as quickly as we can to deliver this outcome. But let me tell you it is high on our list of priorities. Can I say also when it comes to the Murray Darling though, part of the challenge also lies in making sure that we start to buy back some of these water entitlements.
BYNER: Absolutely
PM: And after the previous government sat on their hands on this for 12 years, what have we done? Within a couple of months of taking over, we have begun a process, through a $50 million program to buy back water entitlements.
BYNER: Well we are going to need to spend a lot more than that but that's a start, but I agree with you.
PM: It's a start. But after 12 years, the previous government did nothing. We have started within two months of taking over. The negotiations with Victorians I fully concede, are tough, they are going to be demanding but we are determined to get an outcome which is for the long term benefit of South Australia. I am acutely conscious of the water challenges here. I have had so many briefings form people down here about the state of stress the Murray is in, and therefore, this is going to require action on multiple fronts and buying back water entitlements is part of it. Dealing with the outstanding objections of the Victorian government is another part of it, but we are not going to let this one go. It's core business for us as the new government in Canberra. It's core business for the people of South Australia.
BYNER: Kevin, thanks for joining us and I hope you achieve everything you want in South Australia.
PM: Looking forward to it Leon and it's good to be back.


FAINE: This morning he is in Adelaide and has sparred some minutes to talk to us. Prime Minister good morning.
PM: G'day John how are you.
FAINE: Barry Cassidy and I just a moment ago talking about the Friday sittings of parliament, are you committed to it? Does it provide value for the time of MP's?
PM: Well we've always been inclined to try and provide more opportunities for backbenchers. Why is that? When I was a backbencher myself it was always hard to find an opportunity, basically a timeslot in the parliamentary schedule to raise the concerns of your local community in the parliament. It's just very difficult when you try and squeeze that around the normal legislative program. So that's what we've been on about and that's what we've been trying to provide. I think it's fair to say that the opposition were more determined to turn it into a three ringed circus when we tried this last Friday but there you go
FAINE: If you sincerely want to review the workings of Parliament and get rid of some of the inefficiency you could streamline the whole operation not just Friday couldn't you?
PM: Well I think (inaudible) what you say frankly I mean I've looked at the parliament over the years that I've been there and I've sort of scratched my head sometimes when it comes to the efficient use of time, some of it's a little on the arcane side and you've got a whole lot of people who are just genuine traditionalists who don't want to change things and you've got to respect the institution. But on your general question I think we can make more efficient use of the institution and still maximise the accountability of the executive - that's the government to the parliament and the legislature while still providing opportunities for backbenchers in a representative sense to raise concerns for their local community. Which is what people want to have.
FAINE: Why not announce a review of Parliament, you've announced reviews on just about everything else?
PM: I think you'll find before we took over that last year 05/06 or 06/07 our predecessor government announced in a year or two period of 450-500 different reviews. What we said prior to the election was that having been out of office for 12 years there were critical areas that we going to have a close look at. We are honouring those commitments by doing precisely that.
For example the national health and hospital reform commission: Does anyone expect us having been elected say ok here you go this is what is going to happen tomorrow without bringing all the stakeholders, all the states, all the territories, the private health industry as well as the aged care sector together round the table for a proper consultative review process. That's the normal dispense of government, nothing wrong with that.
FAINE: If you consult people on health in particular they'll all tell you that you have to spend more money. In fact they'll quote Kevin Rudd from the 5th October taking the then health minister Tony Abbott to task saying that the answer to all the problems of the health system, you said this yourself, the answer was to get the commonwealth to pay more of its share.
PM: I don't walk away from those remarks at all. The two things have to proceed in tandem; first getting the actual divisional responsibilities between the commonwealth and the states absolutely right and eliminating the problem that we've got in terms of cost shift, blame shift between lets call it out of hospital care, primary care through GP's and accident and emergency. And at the other end through acute care and aged care beds. You've got to get all that absolutely right. Once you've got it right, which is why we've got a reform process underway to do that, then by definition high levels of funding must flow.
FAINE: So are you prepared to spend more? Are you prepared to live up to your own promises 5th October 2007 just as the election campaign was getting underway. You took Tony Abbott to task and said that you'll fix it when you're in government. Are you going to spend more money?
PM: John I just said that. I said there are two things to do. One is to get the actual division of responsibility right and that's why we said prior to the election that we would have a national health and hospitals reform commission backed up by a COAG - Council of Australian Governments - working group acting on this. And the first two or three months of government we've initiated both of those courses of action
Secondly, when it comes to providing extra funds what we did within the first couple of weeks of taking government was provide the states and territories a additional plan of $150 million this year to do one thing up front and that is to bring down the number of people currently on clinically unacceptable waiting lists for elective surgery. What we've also said is that once we determined the future shape of the system consultatively with the states and territories then it follows that more funding will flow.
I don't back away from any of our pre election commitments one bit on that. What we need is some root and branch reform and it requires additional funding both those things are underway.
FAINE: Four minutes to 10, Kevin Rudd the Prime Minister with me until the 10 o'clock news. The reaction to the announcement chairs for the 11 sessions of the 2020 talkfest, Prime Minister has been I would have thought embarrassing in particular to people in politics like yourself who have talked about promoting the role of women. Do you apologise now for that?
PM: The key thing with the national summit is make sure that we've got a spread of people from across the country both from within government and outside of government. If your question is about inclusiveness the fact that of our 10 major working groups of the 2020 summit six of those on the governments side will be chaired by women; Julia Gillard; Penny Wong; Nicola Roxon; Tanya Plibersek; Jenny Macklin; Maxine McKew. I think says a lot in itself.
Secondly when it comes to non government committees we have also in consistent with our approach to inclusiveness, we have people who come from obviously Indigenous Australia. We have people who are new faces to the whole field of international relations who are not shall I say from the Anglo Saxon mainstream. We have people from the other side of politics. The whole purpose of this exercise is to be inclusive in the general sense
FAINE: And yet you've got middle aged men in suits, white men in suits chairing the session with all but one exception?
PM: Well you're a middle aged man in a suit and so am I. The bottom line is we have something to contribute as well. The point here is not to get hung up on process. The point is actually to bring together 1000 of our best and brightest from across the country and you will find in the 1000 delegates which come, people who want to contribute to the country's long term future beyond the short term electoral cycle; and that means making sure that we've got a big spread of people. I would assume that we've already had something like two or three thousands nominations received from across the country, 50,000 hits on the website and I'm looking forward to this enormously
FAINE: Alright Prime Minister just one minute before the news. ABC learning looking a bit wobbly...
PM: I'd encourage you John to make your contribution as well
FAINE: Thank you. Is the Commonwealth Government prepared to step in if there a crisis in child care?
PM: When it comes to child care this is a deep concern to every working family who have kids looked after by childcare. The government and relevant authorities are continuing to monitor closely developments regarding ABC learning centres. The companies currently under a trading holt and it would be inappropriate for me to comment on financial aspects and its inappropriate for the government to comment on the financial aspects of the company.
The government remains committed to working with providers to deliver affordable, accessible and high quality child care for Australian families. And what's our concern - to ensure that working families have access to quality childcare services. We looking at this closely and our commitment to child care of course goes to the range of other pre election commitments we made to Australian working families.
FAINE: We'll have to leave it there, Kevin Rudd thank you for your time. Prime Minister of Australia Kevin Rudd joining us from Adelaide


I will visit Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands from 6-8 March.  I will be accompanied by the Hon Duncan Kerr SC MP, Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, and the Hon Bob McMullan MP, Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance.
In Papua New Guinea, I will meet the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon Sir Michael Somare, and other senior ministers in Port Moresby.  I will also visit Australian-funded aid projects in Goroka.
On 8 March, I look forward to meeting Solomon Islands Prime Minister the Hon Dr Derek Sikua, and other senior ministers in Honiara. 
Australia has a strong and close relationship with Papua New Guinea.  We want to see a strong, growing and stable neighbour to our north.  We have significant links across trade and investment, defence and development assistance.  Bilateral economic ties are close, with two-way merchandise and services trade valued at around A$4.4 billion in 2006-07.  I look forward to seeing Sir Michael again, following our meeting in Bali in December 2007.
In Solomon Islands, Australia plays a leading role in the reconstruction and nation- building work of the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.  I am also committed to using our bilateral aid program to assist with the country's rural development and infrastructure challenges.  I was pleased to welcome Dr Sikua to Canberra in January this year.  I look forward to continuing discussions on maximising the effectiveness of Australia's contribution to development challenges in Solomon Islands.
I will use the visit to underscore Australia's commitment to work in partnership with our friends and neighbours in the Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands on regional challenges, including economic sustainability, effective development, and climate change.


PM: Thanks for coming this morning.
We have been, as of next week, elected for three months as the new Government of Australia. And, the purpose of this gathering with the representatives of the media today is to speak about the achievements that we have made in those first three months of Government. And those are outlined in this document which we have circulated to you just now.
We were elected on the basis of providing new leadership for the country. We said also that we intended to be upfront with the Australian people. That means, upfront about the commitments we made prior to the election. Upfront about our implementation of those commitments. And up front in our accountability to the Australian people about what progress we made.
That's why we've produced this document.
This document goes through those pre-election commitments which we've implemented so far. There are further pre-election commitments to be implemented during the course of this year including in the Budget context.
But this goes to the heart of what we've achieved in our first three months, and it's part of our accountability back to the Australian people.
We fully recognise as the new Government of Australia that we face huge challenges for the future. We were elected to provide new leadership, we were elected to provide fresh ideas to meet the future challenges. Those future challenges have taken a long time to build, and therefore they're going to take a long time to turn around.
Future challenges on the productivity revolution to be achieved through our investments in education, skills and training.
Future challenges when it comes to the long term reform of our health and hospital system.
Future challenges when it comes to climate change.
Future challenges when it comes to laying out the economic infrastructure which this economy needs for the 21st century, including high speed broadband.
And future challenges when it comes to fixing the decrepit state of our Federation itself.
These challenges have taken a long time to build and they will take a long time to turn around.
But we were elected on a platform of dealing with these future challenges rather than sweeping them under the carpet and avoiding them and hoping that they would simply go away.
Our overall mission statement as a Government is this: we are committed to building a modern Australia to meet the challenges of the future in order to secure the future for working families.
We recognise that in each of these challenge areas, a program of action is necessary.
We believe we have made a solid start, a start indicated in the document we have circulated to you today. But we still have a long way to go and we intend periodically to report back to the community and to the country along these lines.
As for the next three months, well, we're working now in the period between now and the Budget.
We are acutely conscious of the fact that we have a problem on the inflation front. We're acutely conscious of the fact that we have uncertainty with the global economy. We're accurately conscious of the fact at the same time we've got to move forward on the future agenda that I outlined before. And, those will be the key areas of continued work on the part of the Government over the next three months as well.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) page document outlining your achievements over your first 100 days. So you obviously must think that you have achieved quite a bit. How in your first three months in office have you tangibly improved the lives of Australians?
PM: Well the first thing that we have done is taken seriously the implementation of our pre-election commitments.
When the previous Government was elected, they lapsed very quickly into a debate about core and non-core promises. I believe they created a lasting cynicism on the part of the Australian community towards their elected officials. I don't think that's healthy for the democracy, I don't think that's healthy for any Government of the country when you have to take tough decisions into the future on some of those challenges that we face.
So you ask what changes have we made, I've got to say, honouring our pre-election commitments is important in itself. Trust is the key currency of politics, and unless you can be trusted to honour that to which you've committed to do, then, I've got to say, you're not going to obtain the enduring respect of the Australian people.
Let me go to something concrete now beyond that.
Look at today's reports on housing affordability. These upfront core challenges for working families. Prior to the election, and we were attacked by some for doing so, we convened a summit on housing affordability because we identified it back then, way back then, as a challenge for working families.
We outlined a set of policies coming out of that summit on how we would deal with the affordability crisis. None of those is a silver bullet in itself, but let me tell you, when you've got First Home Saver Accounts on the one hand and a range of supply side measures to come on the other, it does help deal with the problem.
On the data itself, if you look at where housing affordability was in terms of the proportion of peoples income being spent on mortgages, in the December quarter compared against the September quarter compared against the previous year, this is getting a tougher, becoming a tougher and tougher challenge for working families. So we've made a start, it's a very practical area, it means something for the bottom line.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd this document is full of reviews and working groups, doesn't that give the Opposition ammunition for its point that there are too many working groups being established? And a related question if I can  - 
PM: I'll come back to your related question. I'm glad you raised that. On the year, I think it was '05-06, our predecessors in one year alone commissioned 495 separate inquiries and reviews.
Can I say that those that you see commissioned in this document proceed from pre-election commitments we made.
Let me give you one key example, and that's the Health and Hospital Reform Commission. If you're looking at something as fundamental and as core business as that, which is how do we deal with the future structure of Australia's health and hospitals system, you must bring together the stakeholders. Private, public, State, Commonwealth, as well as those who are dealing with the preventative health care programs of the country as well.
We said that had to be done through a proper reform and review commission. We said within the 100 days we would establish it and appoint its key staff. We've done so. We said before the election that it'd run for 18 months, that's our intention. And then we'll deliver on the outcome.
It's a responsible course of action for an incoming Government to say, ‘here are areas where you need to review the future direction', I own that, and it's what we said beforehand. And contrast it to the proliferation of review activity which occurred almost at the fag end of the previous Government.
JOURNALIST: It's only three months, but, would someone who left Australia on November 23 and came back on February 29 notice that it was a different country?
PM: That's a question, of course, which you in the press will reach your own conclusions on, I'm not in that sense, to paraphrase someone else in politics, a commentator, I'm actually in the business of doing what I'm elected to do.
But can I just make one point. In one area, which is the absolute importance of honouring your pre-election commitments. What I've sought to do is to say to the Australian people, we are serious about that. We're not just engaged in the classic core and non-core promise business.
I am sure we are going to run into problems in the future about (inaudible) of our pre-election commitments and how are they going to be implemented precisely, that's the business of Government. But I am dead serious about maintaining our trust of the Australian community.
Second point in response to your question Malcolm is this: when we undertook the apology in Parliament, we, I believe, acting in response to our pre-election commitments but also engaging the Australian community and Indigenous Australia on the way through, were doing something, I believe of long term and enduring value to the nation.
I described it as constructing a bridge of respect between indigenous and non-indigenous Australia so that we can cross that bridge and then work on the practical programs of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
I think that's different.
The final thing I think is different is this: when we have this 2020 Summit, what I'm also seeking to say through that is that we're actually in the business of open Government. I'm actually keen to attract the ideas of all Australians out there in their submissions to Government through the Summit on future policy ideas for the nation against the strategic directions we have set. And, I want to encourage a culture of that nationwide. If I want to contrast that with before, I think the past there was a view that there was right and wrong answers, the debate was not entirely encouraged either within the bureaucracy of beyond the bureaucracy. Look at the number of NGOs that had their funding cut after they publicly disagreed with what Government was doing.
We're not in that business. We actually believe in the contestability of ideas and open debate.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you talked about  -  I guess this is a little bit of what Malcolm was talking about  -  you talked about a lasting cynicism that was created by the previous Government. Are you saying that a key objective of your first 100 days is turning that around and creating a culture of (inaudible)
PM: Others will reach their own conclusions as to whether we succeed on this. What I'm saying is that it is a fact that the previous Government said about its pre-election commitments, prior to its coming to office, that they were then to be considered as core and non-core promises. I believe that created a lasting cynicism. As did the reality of the last Federal Election. No mandate to introduce WorkChoices, and they turned around and introduced WorkChoices. They said explicitly they wouldn't increase our troop numbers in Iraq, and then they increased by significant numbers our troop numbers in Iraq. That corrodes the fabric of a democracy.
What I'm saying is, however imperfect we may be, our intention is reflected in this document, to the greatest extend possible, is this is what we committed to do. This is what we've done so far. And we've got more work to do.
JOURNALIST: Without getting to get bogged down in semantics, isn't your achievements something you have completed. Isn't this book about things (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've always like to to be ahead of the pace here. Well, it's three months to the third that the Government was elected, and a few days after before we were actually sworn in.
You're right. In this document you will see, in a number of key pre-election commitments, work has simply begun. And, I'd like to identify for you, in the tradition of transparency, one area that I don't think we've done enough. As I went through this the other night, if you flip over to page 51 which is World Heritage Listing convicts sites in Ningaloo Reef in WA. I asked specifically, well what work have we done to accelerate the processes necessary to nominate the Ningaloo Reef in WA for World Heritage Listing. We've done a bit, but not much. And, that's an area, for example, where I think we've got to crack the pace up more than has occurred so far.
To be fair to the Government, the colleagues in the Cabinet, people have been working very hard. This is as upfront as possible on what we've been able to achieve so far. I say again, there are a number of other pre-election commitments which are yet to be delivered and that will unfold during the course of this year including the Budget context.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask a question on housing affordability and the First Home Saver Accounts. What's your view on the First Home Buyers Grant, is the First Home Savers Account going to replace that? Do you think it's adequate? Should be increased, should be abolished? What's your view on it?
PM: The FHOG or FHOS or whatever it has been called over the years. Years ago, I actually used FHOS when I brought my first home. I think it was, to be frank, I think it was probably a Fraser Government initiative back in the Mesolithic period of Australian politics when I was buying my first home.
I think for first home buyers, those grants can help. We said prior to the election that we would retain that. The first home savers account is in addition to that.
There are two benefits, I believe, which derive from the First Home Savers Account.
One is, it encourages a savings culture on the part of young people in particular.
And secondly, in terms of housing affordability, enables them over time to accumulate a more robust nest egg to enter the market.
If you add that then to what's available through FHOG or FHOS, then, it makes it easier. But can I say, the dream of owning your own home is very important for us as a new Government of the country, and what we see from the data produced and published in some of today's papers in the housing affordability index produced by the Real Estate Institute of Australia, is that affordability is going backwards, not forwards. We've got to do everything we can within the powers of Government to turn that around. And as I've said before, many of the challenges that we face have been building for a long time and it's going to take a long time to turn them around.
JOURNALIST: You're going back to Queensland to celebrate 100 days with a major speech up in Brisbane, I think, after a Cabinet meeting. Why have you chosen to do that?
PM: Well, I'm a Brissie boy, and I like going back home when I can. So, that's one reason.
But, the QUT in Brisbane extended an invitation to deliver a speech. We've accepted that invitation. Queensland has particular challenges, of course. The other reason for going there is that we have an upcoming Community Cabinet as well in South-East Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, we expect another interest rate rise next week. Would you hope that  - 
PM: What intelligence do you have on that, Michelle?
JOURNALIST: If that happens, would you hope that that is the last rise (inaudible)
PM: When we said prior to the election and subsequent to the election that we support the independence of the Reserve Bank, we meant it. And, we continue to mean it. In fact, we enhanced the independence of the Reserve Bank with some of the initial measures outlined by the Treasurer, Mr Swan, just after the election - including the regular publication of RBA Board Minutes.
Our job, in the fight against inflation, which is core business for the period ahead, is to do whatever we can to make the job of the Reserve Bank easier. That's why within the first month or so of forming a new Government, we outlined our five point plan of attack on inflation.
Let me just go to those facts again. When we took over Government, inflation was running at a 16 year high. When we took over Government, we inherited the second highest interest rates in the developed world. When we took over Government, and very soon afterwards, the RBA told us that those inflation rates beyond the three per cent tolerance level were projected to run at those unacceptable levels through '08, through '09 and into the middle of 2010.
That's the economic challenge we've inherited on inflation.
Within a month or so of taking office we indicated clearly our plan of attack on the inflation front.
Two, on the demand side, to do with the fiscal stimulus in the economy, projected budget surplus the other in terms of what we can do to boost private savings. And three on the supply side, vis-à-vis skills infrastructure and workforce participation.
That's our framework for dealing with the inflation challenge.
The core reality is this: if inflationary pressure continue to build, then there will be upward pressure on interest rates. Our challenge is through what is available to us, is to bring about maximum downward pressure on inflation so that there can be therefore downward pressure on interest rates. That is core fundamental economic business for this government. It's the cornerstone upon which all else is constructed.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) quickly enough, do you think to put that downward pressure?
PM: Well can I say having been the Government for just under three months, I've spent more time on this I the last three months than most other things. Because the data is objectively challenging, I ran through the three core stats before. As I said, the first Cabinet meeting of the Government in 2008 in Perth, where I delivered a speech on this subject, outlines our approach to dealing with the inflation challenge.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on the crisis facing ABC learning. Is it your view now after a couple of days of this that the Federal Government needs to take more of a regulatory role in the child care sector? And does it concern you that market volatility is affecting parents (inaudible)
PM: On child care in general, this is really important stuff for working families. We understand that, and you would have seen what we had to say about childcare prior to the election. Both on the supply side, the child care places, the supply of child care workers, and the various fee HECS arrangements for childcare workers that we had proposed.
And on the demand side, to make it easier for parents by increasing the child care rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. These are significant measures.
Secondly, that's reflected in our decision to establish also the Office of Work and Family, which is also monitoring closely the situation, providing updates on developments as they unfold.
The Government and relevant authorities continue to monitor closely developments concerning the ABC Learning Centres.
The company is currently under a trading holt and it's inappropriate for me to comment on the financial aspects. It's inappropriate for the Government to comment on the financial aspects of the company. The Government remains committed to working with providers to deliver affordable, accessible and high quality child care for Australian families.
JOURNALIST: But if ABC Learning closes it's doors, there are a lot of families who will be bereft with their child care. What will the Government do?
PM: Well, we regard it as core business for us to do everything possible in the powers of Government to deliver high quality, affordable child care to working families.
When you're dealing with market sensitive matters, as you are dealing with in the case of ABC Learning, we have to be exceptionally responsible in what public comments we make. And I propose to be responsible.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you describe a lot of things as be core business does that (inaudible) non-core business?
PM: You're suggesting some different vocabulary. As I say, we're not in the business of core promises and non-core promises. But there are some fundamentals which are really important and we all have our different way of emphasising it. But the most fundamental thing on the economy is to fight effectively the fight against inflation. And I cannot overstate to you the difficulty of that task.
When you look at the combination of the global economic environment which we now face and the unfolding inflationary pressure's which have been building now for some years. This creates big challenges for us, and that's why it is core economic business for us to deal with that challenge.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) You've got defence quarantined from cuts, you've got and education revolution on the way which is going costs more, you've got health your going to spend more money on, the tax cuts (inaudible). How do you get to your position where you can say that fighting inflation is the absolute number one priority when you've got these other things? (Inaudible)
PM: Let's look at the (inaudible) elements of the inflation challenge. They are on the demand side and the on the supply side.
Go to the demand side first which is what do you do to boost public savings, you set an ambitious target when it comes to a Budget outcome. Considerably more ambitious than was alive in the previous projections by the previous Government. That's point one. Within that, then you adopt an implement a razor gang in terms of unnecessary outlays. And some of those outlays will be regarded by some as painful, I can understand that. Some of them won't be very politically popular, I understand that. But we're serious about this. Remember prior to the election we nominated billions of dollars worth of savings in contrast for our opponents. And we are in a process since the election of identifying savings of a considerable magnitude as well.
That's on the demand side of the economy. Also in terms of private savings we've already indicated what we're doing in the First Home Savers Account, because that's based on some projections that we had prior to the election capable of generating further private savings of something like $4 billion.
Go to the supply side, this is where you seem to regard these things with a mutual contradiction. You are not dealing effectively with the inflation challenge unless you are boosting the supply of skilled labour, unless your dealing effectively with unleashing some of the infrastructure bottlenecks in the country, and doing what you can to boost workforce participation.
Therefore, the art and the science of this is to get all of those things underway simultaneously. Is it easy? Nope. But let me tell you, that's the course of action we're embarked upon, which is to deal with the inflation challenge, but also, boost the economy's long term productive potential.
JOURNALIST: You have all these working groups. Lots of them. Now, you're talking about a transparent Government. Now, when we called some members of those working groups, they say, oh, sorry, can't comment on that, we've been asked not to talk.
PM: You mean COAG Working Groups?
JOURNALIST: No, not COAG Working Groups, the various business individuals who are members of various advisory -
PM: David I can't be in the business of saying to various people who are just participating in collaborative work with the Government, what they're saying or not saying, I mean it's that's almost an impossible question. Look, you know what the best process for Government decision making is in my view:
One, articulate clearly what you believe the policy direction of the nation should be.
Two, pull together your brightest and best people from within Government or outside Government and seriously shake the tree and see what ideas flow out, and do that as transparently as possible. Some of it will be either market sensitive or might be national security sensitive, so you got to be mindful of that.
Three internally then within Government work out which way you're going to go ahead.
And four, get on with doing it.
If we're going to extend to you and the Financial Review a front row seat at every internal deliberation of the Government, probably not mate. But we'll seek to improve on past performance.
JOURNALIST: Have you been invited as an observer to the G8 summit in Japan this year?
PM: I understand that the Government of Japan has announcements to make on that and I wouldn't wish to pre-empt formal statements by the Government of Japan.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd were you disappointed to learn today that an Australian magazine leaked details of Prince Harry's deployment in Afghanistan?
PM: Actually I was unaware of that, so I wouldn't comment on it. I'm just unaware of the facts
JOURNALIST: Can you confirm that Commonwealth Government departments are already asking for voluntary redundancies? And can you tell us how many there are likely to be?
PM: On the question of the razor gang and the 2 per cent efficiency dividend across Government departments, we fully accept that that's going to cause some pain and dislocation across Government agencies. How that's met within individual agencies, I can't give you a blow by blow account across each of the Commonwealth departments of State. But I'm sure when it comes to voluntary redundancies that will be part of the proposal in some agencies.
But I'd be misleading you if I said that I can give you a blow by blow within each Government department, I can't.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on the Health Ministers meeting today. Does it not underscore the point that the fact that we have Labor Governments in all jurisdictions, will not make governing any easier for you here in Canberra?
PM: I didn't say prior to the election that it would be. I said it presented us with a unique challenge and opportunity to get something as fundamental as health and hospitals right within a window of opportunity which we have in calendar year 2008.
There will always be argy bargy on the way through, that's life, that's politics, that's reality. This isn't sort of the central Soviet presidium whereby everyone's going to have a uniform view on anything at any time, it doesn't work that way.
But, what I encountered with the Premiers is a spirit of cooperation to try to get this thing as right as possible, consistent with our pre election commitments to: one, establish a National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, which we've done within our first three months, under Dr Christine Bennett.
Two, to initiate the COAG working group that is currently being chaired by Nicola Roxon.
And three provide an initial up front performance based payment, namely the $150 million we put on the table to draw down elective surgery waiting lists beyond clinically acceptable times.
So, it will be tough, there will be argy bargy and a bit of scrapping on the way through but life is not a perfect institution, neither's politics.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can I ask, you've been in almost 100 days, has it been what you expected? Have you enjoyed being Prime Minister? And we have a vision for Australia 2020. Do you expect to be Prime Minister in the 2020 Government?
PM: I'd be very, very happy if I make it through the current term. Let's just take this one step at a time, just one step at a time. All I'm saying is, consistent with my remarks at the beginning of this press conference today, we said to the Australian people we're offering new leadership for the future.
New leadership from my point of view means being up front and accountable about what we said we'd do and what we've done while recognising there are some things we can do better and there's still other challenges to deal with.
Secondly, on top of that, to say it's not just new leadership but it's for the future and there are at least five core challenges for the future which our predecessors didn't really touch.
Climate change. We face an enormous challenge in dealing with work left undone. When the rest of the world was moving forward we were spinning our wheels in this country.
The productivity revolution and education revolution. When did you ever see apart from the pre-election budget from the previous Government education figure prominently in Budget statements on Budget night?
Health and hospitals. Our predecessors played the blame game with the States because that was the best political strip available.
Fixing the federation? ‘Well, no, don't want to do that because it upsets the blame game.'
You see these are core areas of work for the future which have been left to languish. If there is one motif for our predecessor's in Government it is a Government with squandered opportunities. Quite apart from the poor economic record reflected in the statistics I ran through before.
With the enormous yield that we had with the public revenue coming out of the resources boom, hundreds of billions of dollars beyond the Budget forecast over many years, it is a crying shame that that was squandered and not invested in future productive potential of the economy and dealing with long term challenges like climate change and water.
So, in answer to your question, these are very big challenges. What I'm determined to do is have a clear cut direction about where we want to take this government in dealing with these challenges for the future. Open the doors of Government as much as possible to get as many ideas from outside about how we deal with them, hence the 2020 Summit, and get on with the business of Government.
We're not going to be a perfect Government, but we intend to have a pretty dammed good go at it against some clearly key set directions for the future. And our organising principle is building a modern Australia to meet the challenge of the future, but always with the object in mind of securing the future for working families.
[ends]


HOST: Welcome everyone; at the outset I'd like to acknowledge the traditional owners and elders of the land in which we gather today.
In particular I'd like to acknowledge the presence of Hon Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia; Hon Anthony Albanese, Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government; Bernie Ripoll Member for Oxley Shayne Neumann, Member for Blair
Local State members Annastacia Palaszczuk, Member for Inala; Jo-Ann Miller, Member for Bundamba; Rachael Nolan, Member for Ipswich; Julie Attwood, Member for Mount Ommaney.
In the Local Government (inaudible) looks like we have councillor Paul Pisalli the Ipswich city council man; Milton Dick candidate for Richlands
Also present today the Director General of the Department of Main Roads, Allan Tesh and all the MR staff, especially Metro district director Eddy Peters.
Our Alliance Partners SAFElink alliance, Leighton contractors, BMD constructions, Mornsal Australia and Arab.
Ladies and Gentlemen welcome to this historic occasion I'd now like to invite the Prime Minister of Australia to address you.
PM: Well this has been a long time coming. A very long time coming for the people of South East Queensland, the people of Ipswich, the people of this great growth region of Australia. Thank you very much for that warm welcome Warren.
What we have here is an example of partnership between the National Government and the State Government on a critical piece of missing infrastructure. You look at this, what you have is 80,000 vehicles a day using this road. You have 80,000 people from working families in this part of Queensland having their days upset, delayed, sidelined, sidetracked, you name it, it's happened because of the problems in having an effective road transport system here in this corridor.
We of course had a debate about this during the election. We said that the way forward was to ensure that we upgrade the Ipswich motorway today were here to honour that commitment.
We've been the Government of Australia for three months. We take seriously the commitments we made to the Australian people and this one of those commitments. We committed to the upgrade of the Ipswich motorway today we honour stage one of that commitment.
This is a significant expenditure of funds; this is $700 million worth of activity. But it's essential activity for two reasons. One if you look at the overall challenge which the nation faces with its economic and transport infrastructure. Investing in economic infrastructure like the Ipswich motorway is fundamental to ensuring that we have a strong economy for the future; that's number one.
Number 2 is working families in this part of the word deserve a fair crack of the whip which means not spending an eternity in their cars on their way to work and therefore we got a responsibility to act, we said we'd act and today we honour that commitment. It's in contrast to the commitment made by the previous government concerning the Goodna bypass. That didn't deal with the challenges that we face here in this part of Australia and that's why we we're very clear cut about what we'd do, what the corridor would be, what we'd do with the corridor in partnership with the Government of Queensland and we are honouring that commitment.
So I thank the Queensland Government, I thank the participating local authorities for their support; I thank the local members in particular for their advocacy. The number of times I've had Bernie Ripoll and Shane Neumann in my ear about this road. I'd like a dollar for everytime it's happened; I'd be a very very wealthy man indeed. Their advocacy has been very important and Anthony Albanese the Minister for Infrastructure has been responsible for ensuring that within the first three months of this Government in office, that we would honour this commitment and we do so today.
Second thing I'd like to touch upon goes to a different challenge for working families and it's this. Working families are under all sorts of financial pressures, one of them is of course finding their way to work and the challenges associated with that. The other one however is basic cost of living challenges like dental care for their families.
Were serious in the commitment we put to the Australian people before the election that wanted to do something to ease the burden for working families under financial pressure with their dental bills. That's why we committed to a teen dental plan in Government and today we honour that commitment.
This will be a commitment which costs up to $360 million and the intention is to provide voucher to the equivalent of $150 per teenager aged 12-17, per year to ensure that they have access to a preventative Dental care treatment each year.
If you look at the data on this it's stunning. We have a huge problem in terms of Dental health in the country. The prospect of dental conditions is getting right out of control during the teenage years, it's huge. If you look at the medical literature on this infections, oral infections, gum disease and the rest goes through the roof at this time in a child's development. That's why you need preventative dental care.
So we're doing our bit to ensure that $150 by way of voucher based subsidy goes to working families under financial pressure to take that little bit off the family budget each year to ensure not only that working families under financial pressure get a bit of help from the Australian Government, but equally critically that our young Australians are given access the best quality dental care as early as possible in life.
So in summary we got challenges for the national economy, building infrastructure is one of them, we got challenges for working families  -  making sure they can get to work on time. Those same working families under financial pressure need just a bit of a helping hand as well when it comes to their family budgets and the basic challenges of dental care as well. So we honour these commitments today.
Pleased to be here in this part of Australia honouring this commitment to this community. It's very important stuff for people who live here. Important for the national economy as well.
Unless I'm wrong I think I now take questions from the ladies and gentlemen of the press, who will now have to shout their questions.
JOURNALIST: Can you make an assurance there will be no tolls on this road and when do we expect work to begin on the Bruce and Pacific Highways (Inaudible)?
PM: Well we've made very clear cut commitments about the Ipswich motorway and its upgrade. That's all laid out before the election and it's absolutely clear cut our intention to upgrade six lanes and along the timeline which we have specified.
In terms of the other commitments under Auslink I'll turn to the Minister to run through those but we take transport infrastructure seriously and that's why were here today within our first three months to do so.
Albanese: With regard to the other commitments we confirmed at the Australian transport council meeting on Friday that we will meet all of the commitments that we made under Auslink 1 and 2. Under Auslink 2 that consists of some $17 billion worth of commitments between 2009 and 2013.
I've had bilateral discussions with Warren Pitt here in Queensland about the Bruce Highway and with Eric Rosendale in NSW about the pacific highway. I've met each of my State and Territory counterparts and what we will endeavour to do is bring forward as much spending as we can to make sure that we address some of the neglect that's been there. But I think this commitment here today were on the 99th day we're fulfilling that commitment this was signed off just on Friday. 
An extra $120 Million over and above what we'd committed to during the election brining it to a total spend for this section of the motorway of $700 million
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (Inaudible) cost cutting slow the economy down?
PM: We believe we can get the balance right when it comes to fighting the fight against inflation which means reducing unnecessary expenditures. But we believe that we can keep the economy on track for solid long term growth by ensuring that we're investing in productive potential like infrastructure, like the Ipswich motorway.
We believe we can get that balance right, it will be tough but we're confident we can do it.
JOURNALIST: Do you run the risk of (inaudible) and driving up unemployment?
PM: Well we face a unique set of economic circumstances which I think people are increasingly aware of. That is we have a global economy which is slowing, drawing back on growth projections both United States, Europe and for Japan. The global growth projections and the most recent IMF report on the global economic outlook basically shaving a significant amount off the global growth projections.
At the same time domestically within Australia we have an inflation problem, the highest inflation rate when we took over office in 16 years and the second highest interest rates in the world. So therefore we have a double challenge and it's a complex challenge. I'm not about to try and say to any of you here that it's easy; it's hard.
But we have a responsibility to fight the fight against inflation and we will do that through all the means that I've outlined so far. Our 5 point plan of attack, at the same time keeping a weather eye on the global economy.
We believe we can get that balance right. It's going to be very tough on the way through given the dual and conflicting economic current's which the government now confronts.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is the Dental Plan you announced today, it that again about honouring your commitments about maintaining that trust with the people who voted for you?
PM: Well I believe there's a whole lot of understandable cynicism in the community about Australian governments getting elected one day and then converting their pre election promises into core and non core promises the next day.
We're not about to embark upon that and our first three months. I'm sure we could have done better in various departments but what we've been absolutely determined to do is to honour what we said we would do to the Australian community. And this piece of infrastructure, this key piece of road infrastructure out here in the Brisbane-Ipswich corridor is a fundamental commitment we made to this community. It's important to honour that commitment to the working families who live here and we've done that.
PM: Mr Rudd you talk about a very tight budget and Lindsay Tanner today talked about (Inaudible). Can you make an assurance here today that working families aren't going to bear the brunt of your budget cutbacks?
PM: I think Lindsay Tanner's doing an excellent job as Finance Minister is the key person involved in our razor gang activities. He's giving haircuts all over the place at the moment. At the end of the day some of them are going to be tough and some of them are going to be unpopular that's true but we believe we need to do this because if you are faced with the highest inflation that the country's seen in 16 years, second highest interest rates in the developed world and the bank saying that we've got courtesy of our predecessors in part the likelihood inflation rates running out beyond the 3% tolerance limits for another two and a half years. This is a big set of challenges.
We therefore have to act, nothing happens in politics for free and there will be pain on the way through I accept that. But we're going to do it as responsibly and as compassionately as possible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister we're you alarmed at all that at the slightly viral youth of your treasurer?
PM: I don't think anyone in this government ever pretended to be some sort of paragon of moral virtues, least of all yours truly. It's a long time ago; Wayne said what needs to be said about that and about the importance of drugs. I'll leave it at that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd there's another poll out today; I think you were named the 7th best dressed Australian. (Inaudible) Are you jealous that Julia Gillard made it to number two (inaudible)?
PM: I did see that poll I think in one of the newspapers today. It has, that poll confirms my general view that no opinion polls should be trusted at all. If it renders me the 7th most stylish person in the country, there's something wrong with the polling data.
So come the next election look with even greater scepticism of
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: There are multiple ingredients to the economic growth formula. One of which is the terms of trade and export derived incomes. Terms of trade are high and projected to go higher, therefore that remains a continuing source of stimulus in the domestic economy and therefore it's important to take that into account with all the other factors which feed the demand side of the economy and we're going that responsibility, hence our 5 point plan of attack on the demand side. What Government spends, what we do by way of encouraging private savings, being mindful of the injection of capital from abroad.
And on the supply side of the economy, the other half of the inflation equation, Investing in infrastructure bottlenecks, investing in the skills needs of the economy; hence the announcement I made last week in Adelaide to bring forward the funding of 20,000 short term training places in critical areas of need in the labour force and also acting to boost workforce participation.
That's the balance integrated approach to the supply side, demand side challenges of economy; which is currently going through unacceptably high levels of inflation.
Thanks very much


The Australian Government will invest up to $360 million over three years in a Teen Dental Plan to make it more affordable for families to keep their kid's teeth in good health.
The Australian Government's Teen Dental Plan will assist one million Australian teenagers between the ages of 12 and 17 with dental costs.
Formally announced today the Government's Teen Dental Plan will become operational on 1 July 2008.
By establishing a Teen Dental Plan to help working families fix their kid's teeth the Australian Government is honouring another major election commitment.
Under the Teen Dental Plan eligible families will be able to claim up to $150 towards the cost of an annual dental preventative check for each of their teenage children.
The cost of a comprehensive dental check-up  -  comprising oral examination, clean, scale, and x-ray  -  is around $290.
While many primary school children receive school dental services, these services are not as widely available to teenagers.  By targeting teenagers, the scheme will not only ease cost pressures, but will also encourage young adults to continue to look after their teeth once they become independent and move out of home.
Under the Rudd Government's Teen Dental Plan, over one million 12 -17 year old teenagers in families eligible for FTB(A) or in receipt of Abstudy or Youth Allowance will be eligible.
A new standalone teen Dental Benefits Schedule (DBS) would be established to administer the new scheme. The DBS would include a single means-tested, age-restricted item for the preventative dental check for teenagers. 
Families would receive a voucher advising them of their eligibility for a Dental rebate of up to $150 per year for a preventative dental check
After seeing the dentist, the $150 would be reimbursed through Medicare Australia. Once real-time eligibility systems are fully established, the dentist may also bulk bill the patient.
As many as one in three Australians report avoiding a visit to the dentist because of the cost involved.
Preventative check-ups help prevent cavities and other dental diseases, and the need for more expensive dental procedures later on.
According to the OECD, the dental health of Australian adults ranks second worst in the OECD, with a rapid deterioration in dental health observed in the teenage years.
According to dental health experts, there is a four-fold increase in dental decay between 12 and 21 years of age, and almost half of all teenagers have some signs of gum disease.
Tooth decay ranks as Australia's most prevalent health problem, while gum disease ranks fifth highest. Untreated dental decay in the Australian adult population stands at 25.5%: a quarter of Australians not getting the dental care they need.
The impact of this neglect is a very real problem for many Australians. A recent study found that one in six Australians  -  17.4% of the Australian population aged 15 and above  -  were unable to eat certain foods because of problems with their teeth during the last 12 months.


The Australian and Queensland Governments today started work on the most important roads project in south-east Queensland  -  the Ipswich Motorway upgrade.
At the sod-turning ceremony in Darra today, the Australian Government announced $700 million for the Stage 1 of the Wacol to Darra project, which will initially upgrade three kilometres of the Motorway, starting with the interchange at Centenary Highway.
The population of south-east Queensland is booming, with an estimated 80,000 cars and trucks using the Ipswich Motorway alone every day.
Without action urban congestion in Australia is set to cost nearly $20 billion in lost productivity by 2020, Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics estimates show.
It is unacceptable that many working parents now spend more time commuting than with their children.
After less than 100 days in office, the Rudd Labor Government is ending 12 years of neglect by delivering a $700 million injection of funds for the Ipswich Motorway.
Once completed, the upgraded motorway from Wacol to Darra is expected to:
     * improve the Ipswich Motorway to six lanes;
     * clear congestion by eliminating the Centenary Highway roundabout and replacing it with a new high-standard interchange, including on-and off-ramps;
     * take around 20 per cent of vehicles off the motorway by building new service roads that can cater for local or cross-suburb trips;
     * provide a safer motorway, with wider lanes and road shoulders, and a straighter, flatter road that meets modern standards; and
     * create bicycle lanes and pedestrian paths along the Motorway to encourage alternative transport.
    Over the next five years, the Australian and Queensland Governments will undertake a staged upgrade of the Ipswich Motorway from Darra to Dinmore as part of our plan to address urban congestion and improve freight access in the south-east.
As part of this plan, work is well advanced on the upgrade of the Logan and Ipswich Motorway interchange and due to be completed in 2009.
We have also stopped work on the former federal government's Goodna Bypass and started modelling and geotechnical investigations on the upgrade of the Ipswich Motorway from Dinmore to Goodna.
The Rudd Labor Government is determined to bring a fresh approach to infrastructure development in south-east Queensland and across Australia.
Australia's freight task is set to double in 20 years and our over-stretched road networks require significant investment and national leadership.
We have established Infrastructure Australia, an independent statutory body which will develop an Infrastructure Priority List to guide billions of dollars of public and private investment into clearing bottlenecks and urban congestion around Australia.
For the first time in more than a decade, the Australia and Queensland Governments will work in partnership to boost Queensland productive economic capacity.


The Government was elected 100 days ago with a mandate to build a modern Australia to meet the challenges of the future  -  to secure the future for the nation and for working families.
The foundation stone of this project is to prosecute a program of responsible economic management while building a modern Australian economy capable of dealing with the diverse challenges of the 21st century.
And always to do so fully mindful of the financial pressures facing Australian working families.
After three months in office, implementation of that program is underway.
We are acting on the immediate challenges.
We are preparing for the longer term.
And we are doing so in the face of economic challenges of a complexity that Australia has not seen in recent economic history.
Right now, we face conflicting economic currents:
     * Internationally, downward revisions of global economic growth from the United States to Europe and to some extent, Japan; and
     * At home, the serious threat of rising inflation.
And these cross-currents of international and domestic factors create significant and long-term challenges for our future economic policy settings.
Economic inheritance
The previous government would have the nation believe their economic policy performance was first class.
But as more and more data rolls in, a different reality emerges.
Consider the following five economic facts.
Fact one: When our government was elected, inflation was running at a 16-year high - and is now projected by the RBA to remain high until 2010.
Fact two: When our government was elected, interest rates had risen ten times in a row and were the second highest in the developed world.
Fact three: Productivity growth (a key factor in sustaining economic growth and keeping inflation low) is running at its lowest level in 15 years  -  having fallen from 3.3 per cent in the mid-1990s to 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
Fact four: Since 2004-05 Commonwealth spending has grown on average at around 4 per cent per year in real terms  -  more rapid growth than in any another four year period in the past decade and a half.
Fact five: At the time of the election, despite the best terms of trade in 50 years, we had generated five and half years of monthly trade deficits  -  the longest sequence in Australia's recorded economic history, contributing to Australia's foreign debt tripling to a record $570 billion.
These facts are not political opinion  -  they are the cold, hard data produced by the ABS and the RBA.
And they are masked by the fact that the economy and the Budget have been awash with the cash produced by record global economic growth and a unique resources boom.
These, therefore, are the objective economic circumstances that the new government now confronts.
Inflation
By December 2007, underlying inflation had risen to 3.6 per cent on the Reserve Bank's preferred measure.
The Reserve Bank stated recently that it now expects inflation to remain above 3 per cent right through to June 2010, on both the underlying and CPI measures.
The previous Government had been warned on 20 separate occasions by the RBA about the increasing threat of inflationary pressures arising from supply constraints.
As the Reserve Bank noted in its monetary policy statement last month, “constraints on productive capacity have persisted for some time”.
Underlying inflation has been running at an average of 3%, the upper limit of the inflation target, for the past year and a half.
It did not arise overnight.
And it now puts into context the complacency of the previous Treasurer who state as late as mid 2007 that “inflation is right where we want it”.
Inflation is the enemy of business.
It is the enemy of working families.
And it is the enemy of the economy  -  because everybody is affected by the upwards pressure it places on interest rates.
Interest rates
We have already seen 11 consecutive increases to the RBA cash rate in the past six years, with three of them occurring since the middle of 2007.
Australians are paying the second highest mortgage interest rates in the developed world.
And all this from a government which promised before the 2004 election that it would keep interest rates at record lows.
Mortgage interest rates have now risen seven times since that promise was made  -  adding $276 every month to the cost of an average new mortgage.
And today we have a housing affordability crisis affecting working families right across Australia.
Productivity growth
Rising inflation has been paralleled by declining productivity growth over the past decade.
Productivity growth averaged 3.3 per cent per annum in the five years to 1998-99.
It fell to 2.1 per cent in the five years to 2003-04.
And it has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent in the first three years of the current cycle up to 2006-07.
That is just one third of the rate of productivity growth that the previous Government inherited in 1996.
The fact is productivity growth delivers inflation-free economic growth.
But the slump in productivity growth in Australia has been a major factor contributing to rising inflationary pressures.
And one of the core reasons for declining productivity growth has been a failure to invest in human capital, technology and infrastructure - at the time when we have had unprecedented budgetary opportunities through the explosion of rising revenue proceeds from the resources boom.
Investment in Productive Capacity
Australia's terms of trade have risen 40 per cent in the past five years.
The Reserve Bank has estimated that this has added 8 per cent to our real national income, equivalent to $80 billion per year.
The Chief Economist of ANZ Bank, Saul Eslake, estimated last year that the mining boom will drive a $398 billion improvement to the Budget bottom line between 2002-03 and 2010-11.
Certainly, spending had been rising rapidly under the previous Government  -  some 4.5 per cent in real terms in the current financial year alone.
But as research produced for the Business Council by Access Economics noted last week, spending simply wasn't being directed to our economy's supply constraints.
The BCA reported that the windfall from the mining boom has, and I quote:
“masked a deterioration in the structural, or underlying, integrity of the federal Budget... 
Of the $87 billion per annum that economic prosperity has delivered as windfall revenue to Canberra since 2002, all but $2 billion has been spent on income tax cuts and new spending. As a result, the Budget is now at risk of a marked and quick deterioration if business conditions turn down."
(BCA Budget Submission 2008 - 09)
External accounts
At the same time, despite enjoying its best terms of trade in more than fifty years, Australia is now experiencing large imbalances on its external accounts, characterised by
     * Export growth over the last decade falling to half the rate experienced during the decade before;
     * A current account deficit reaching record levels and staying above 5 per cent since June 2003  -  its longest period at those levels on record;
     * And foreign debt reaching $570 billion, three times the level when the Howard Government had taken office.
The objective challenges we face on our external accounts have been masked by extraordinarily strong terms of trade.
And the truth is record terms of trade is not the product of good policy, but good fortune.
That's why we should be investing the proceeds of the boom into the future productive capacity of the economy.
Or as one American President has said “the time to fix the roof is while the sun is still shining”.
The 5 point plan to fight inflation
The Government's response to the immediate economic challenges we have inherited is a five point plan to address the inflationary pressures.
In January, I outlined the core elements of that plan:
     * fiscal restraint, with a budget surplus target of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP this year;
     * encouraging private savings;
     * tackling the chronic skills shortages;
     * providing national leadership to address infrastructure bottlenecks; and
     * introducing measures to boost workforce participation.
In our first three months, we have made some initial progress on this agenda.
My purpose today is to outline how the Government plans to advance this agenda in the three months leading up to the Budget in May  -  as well as outline further measures to respond to the housing affordability crisis facing working families.
On fiscal restraint, the Government's razor gang is working intensively ahead of the Budget on 13 May.
The Expenditure Review Committee and the Strategic Budget Committee of Cabinet have been examining spending plans line by line. We identified $10 billion worth of savings before the election. And a further $643 million was announced by Lindsay Tanner last month.
We have set a fiscal target to guide budget policy with a surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, provided growth prospects remain as currently anticipated.
This contrasts with the 1.1 per cent projected by the previous government as late as the Mid Year Economic Forecast released by the previous government in October.
This will include hard decisions which may result in considerable political pain  -  but it is the only responsible course of economic action.
Boosting public savings is important to fighting inflation.
But this must be accompanied by new measures to boost private savings as well.
To help build a culture of savings, the Government has already released proposals for its new low-tax First Home Savers Accounts.
These superannuation-style accounts aim to boost private savings by helping first home buyers save for their first home.
This Wednesday is the closing date for interested parties to make submissions on the implementation design of First Home Saver Accounts.
We will be finalising the implementation details of those accounts after reviewing those submissions.
This is a major innovation for Australia - the first time such measures have been embraced to encourage home savings by any Australian Government.
To fight inflation we must also deal with the skills crisis.
The Parliament will soon pass legislation to establish Skills Australia, the body that will lead an integrated response to the skills crisis.
The Government is committed to delivering an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years.
That will start with the provision of 20,000 new training places in areas of skills shortage from April 2008.
The Government has called for Expressions of Interest for the provision of these places to start next month.
We will be moving ahead with the core elements of the education revolution.
We have already begun an audit of schools' existing computer facilities as part of the implementation of our $1 billion program for computers in secondary schools.
Within the next month, we will be releasing guidelines for schools to apply for the provision of computers.
In coming weeks, secondary schools will also be invited to begin applying for their share of our $2.5 billion fund for the construction of trades training centres.
And during the next three months membership of the National Curriculum Board will be finalised.
The fourth element in our five point plan to tackle inflation is addressing infrastructure constraints by providing national leadership on infrastructure development.
We recently announced the first Chair of Infrastructure Australia.
Within the next three months the full membership of Infrastructure Australia will be finalised, and to our plan is to have enabling legislation to passed through Parliament.
Within the next three months, an Expert Panel will assess private sector proposals for building the National Broadband Network, and we hope to commence construction by the end of the year.
This is the first time in Australia's history that the national government will assume a national leadership role in planning for our long-term infrastructure requirements.
The fifth element of the five point inflation plan is to lift workforce participation.
This requires a range of targeted initiatives including tax reform and improved access to affordable childcare.
We have already introduced into Parliament the Bill for tax cuts that, according to Treasury modelling, will increase workforce participation by an estimated 65,000 over the medium term.
We will be progressing consultations with interested parties on the construction of 260 new long day care centres on school and community sites.
We will also be finalising a Bill to increase the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent of out of pocket costs, covering up to $7,500 in expenses per year, from July 1.
These initiatives will all help, in the immediate term and in the longer term, to address supply constraints and inflationary pressures.
We are nevertheless realistic about time lags and we take note of the Reserve Bank's warning that we face an extended period of elevated inflation.
Housing affordability
The economic challenges for the nation are significant.
But so are the challenges for working families  -  and the challenges they face in balancing the family budget.
Across Australia, there is no greater source of financial stress for working families than housing.
Australia has a real problem with housing affordability.
It is no exaggeration to say that in early 2008, housing affordability is the worst it has been in living memory.
Consider these faces.
In 1996, the average home cost four times the average annual wage.
A decade later, the average home cost seven times the average annual wage.
That means that while living standards were improving, it was actually getting more difficult to buy a house.
Second, in the past decade, the size of the average first home buyer mortgage has more than doubled  -  from $104,000 to $231,000 at the end of last year.
Third, when you look at actual mortgage repayments required to buy a home, the picture is even starker.
In 1996, the mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 17.9 per cent of average household income.
By the end of 2007, mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 32.3 per cent of average household income.
That is an increase from around one in six dollars going on the mortgage to almost one in three dollars.
By this measure, housing affordability has almost halved.
These are not Government or Labor Party statistics.
This is data from the Housing Affordability Report published by the Commonwealth Bank and Housing Industry Association.
Also published in that report is the Housing Affordability Index.
It 1996 that index was over 170.
At the end of last year it had fallen to less than 100.
Again, this suggests that buying is roughly twice as hard as it was a decade ago.
Many factors have contributed to the deterioration in housing affordability  -  but fundamentally there are simply not enough houses being built to meet the demand for housing.
According to ABS and Treasury analysis, whereas in 2004, new housing completions were roughly the same as underlying demand, a significant gap has emerged in recent years.
By 2007, completions had fallen to under 150,000 new houses per year while underlying demand for new houses increased to over 180,000.
That is a gap of over 30,000.
Australia cannot address housing affordability without building more houses.
And as the housing industry has argued, we can't build more houses without more skilled workers to build them.
Under the previous Government skills shortages in many industries  -  but especially residential construction  -  were neglected.
According to the Housing Industry Association, we will need an additional 20,000 skilled tradespeople over the next three years alone if we are going to build the houses that we need.
The Australian Government is acutely mindful of this shortfall  -  hence the decision to bring forward 20,000 training places to next month and focus these places on the construction sector as one of four primary sectors.
The HIA is also calling for a special visa program to increase the number of migrants working in the residential construction sector. The Government will also now consider the HIA's proposal.
The Government recognises a role for skilled migration in addressing skills shortages, having recently expanded the skilled migration program.
The impacts of construction shortfalls stretch beyond the first home buyer market.
As has become clear in recent years, having more people locked out of home ownership means more people stuck in the rental trap.
This means a tighter rental market.
That means fewer places to rent and higher rents.
There is certainly plenty of anecdotal evidence about how Saturday morning rental property inspections are beginning to resemble auctions, with dozens of people competing for every decent property and some offering to pay well above the advertised rate or to pay rent well in advance.
The Real Estate Institute of Australia reports that rental vacancy rates have now slipped below 3 per cent in every capital city.
It is no wonder that average rents for three bedroom homes have now risen by 82 per cent since 1996.
Forecasters are saying that the problem will worsen. BIS Shrapnel has predicted that if the rental market continues on current trends, rents across Australia will increase by an average of 28.5 per cent between now and the end of this decade.
The impact of such large increases in rent is a real problem for working families.
This morning, the Cabinet met and received fresh evidence of the housing affordability problem from the Federal Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek.
It is research commissioned by the Government from the National Centre for Economic and Social Modelling  -  NATSEM and is an analysis of ‘housing stress'.
Households are considered to be in housing stress when they pay more than 30 per cent of their gross  -  that is before tax  -  income on housing costs such as rent and mortgage repayments.
This new research looks at the impact of housing stress on low and middle income earners  -  that is, households whose incomes are in the bottom 40 per cent of households.
This analysis for the first time debunks the notion that housing affordability data is skewed because of the investments of high income earners.
It shows that middle and low income households are experiencing considerable housing stress  -  and the problem is growing over time.
Specifically, it looks at developments since 2004.
The research shows that there are now 1.1 million low to middle income households spending more than 30 per cent of their income on housing.
That has increased by a quarter  -  or 220,000 households since 2004. This is a stunning statistic. And it is a disturbing statistic.
And the data shows it is a problem affecting all generations:
     * The number of low and middle income families and singles in housing stress that are headed by a person under 29 years old has increased to 350,000 - an estimated 55 per cent increase since 2004.
     * The number of families with children in housing stress has more than doubled since 2004. There are now an estimated 575,000 low and middle income families with children in housing stress  -  around 300,000 more than in 2004.
     * The number of older Australians in housing stress has doubled since 2004. There are now an estimated 112,000 low and middle income families and singles headed by a person aged over 70 years old that are in housing stress  -  compared to around 56,000 in 2004.
When you look at this data, it is clear that the housing affordability problem has been one that has emerged over time and is now at a critical point.
It's why we committed to a comprehensive plan of action that will be spearheaded by Tanya Plibersek, the first Commonwealth Housing Minister that Australia has had for twelve years.
We made four key policy commitments on housing affordability last year: First Home Saver Accounts, a Housing Affordability Fund, encouraging greater private sector provision of affordable rental properties and revamping the Commonwealth Properties Disposal Policy.
And last month, we outlined measures to help families get the best deal on their mortgage and to improve competitive pressures in retail banking by making it easier for customers to switch banks.
Today I have already made reference to our First Home Saver Accounts.
I now want to make two announcements on the provision of affordable rental properties and our Housing Affordability Fund.
National Rental Affordability Scheme
The Government has begun the implementation of our election commitment to create more affordable rental properties around Australia by encouraging private investment, especially from institutional investors who play very little role in the provision of rental stock.
The Government's will establish a National Rental Affordability Scheme under which the Commonwealth will provide private investors with tax credits of $6,000 per year for ten years, for building new properties that are rented out at 20 per cent below the prevailing market rate.
The scheme will be implemented in partnership with the State and Territory Governments.
The Government's initiative begins with encouraging the construction of 3,500 affordable rental properties in 2008-09 and add to the stock to reach 50,000 within five years.
Improving housing affordability, however, is a long term challenge for this country.
We do this because improving housing affordability is a long term challenge for this country.
Australia had a national annual housing deficit of 30,000 homes in 2007.
And, despite a forecast increase in residential construction in coming years, we will still leave the backlog of unmet demand from previous years.
Even by 2011, the deficiency will exceed 50,000 houses in NSW alone, according to BIS Shrapnel.
Nationally, it could be three times that figure.
That will mean that we will have to continue to expand the stock of affordable rental properties beyond 2011.
Today I am pleased to further announce that the Government intends for this to be a continuing program  -  beyond the five year time period announced during the election.
Depending on specific details relating to its success rate, and subject to market conditions, the Government envisages that this extension would double the target of new affordable rental properties from 50,000 to 100,000.
On current trends, with demand continuing to exceed supply, we will also need to calibrate the future issuing of tax credits to market demand.
That is exactly what the Government's Rental Scheme will do. The Government's incentive forms a new partnership with the private sector  -  a PPP in concept  -  to deliver on an important economic and social objective.
Since the election, the Government has been hard at work on the implementation of this initiative, including through the Council of Australian Governments.
Through this new partnership with the States and Territories, the States and Territories have indicated an in-principle agreement to participate in the National Rental Affordability Scheme.
The States and Territories will provide $2,000 per home either through cash payments or in kind.
The States and Territories have discussed a range of ways in which they can support this Scheme, including the provision of cut price land or concessions on stamp duty or other charges.
In some cases States may make direct cash contributions.
The National Rental Affordability Scheme will create an entirely new stream to our existing housing market.
The Government believes we can improve rental affordability which still produces good returns for investors.
While there is no short term solution to the housing affordability problem, we believe that over time we can make a real difference  -  to encourage people to save a deposit, to encourage more housing construction, and to encourage investors into the affordable rental market.
Housing Affordability Fund
In addition to the Rental Affordability Scheme, we are establishing a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to help drive housing construction activity.
The Fund will be used to address two components of house costs: infrastructure charges and levies and ‘holding costs' caused by planning delays.
The Property Council of Australia estimates that housing linked infrastructure charges can add up to $68,000 on a new home in some parts of suburban Australia.
Those charges pay for all sorts of important infrastructure like water, sewerage, transport, and parklands.
But when these charges they are passed on to the homebuyer, it can push the dream of owning a new home out of reach.
The Housing Affordability Fund will form a partnership between the Commonwealth and local governments  -  to invest in this infrastructure to reduce the cost of new homes.
Another part of the equation is ‘holding costs'  -  costs associated with planning and approval delays such as interest, land taxes, council rates and staff costs.
These too can add tens of thousands to the cost of a home.
Our partnership with local government will also address the need to streamline planning and approvals processes - to help reduce the cost of homes.
Last year, the Property Council identified this as priority number one for dealing with housing affordability.
Today I am pleased to announce that as part of our Housing Affordability Fund, the Government will invest up to $30 million in a new system to address planning delays.
The use of Electronic Development Applications and an On-Line Tracking Service will allow home buyers to check the status of their approval at any time of the day.
The system will also reduce confusion about the causes of delays  -  such as whether the household has made mistakes in their submissions, or whether the consultant, local government or state government is taking too long.
It will save local councils time and money.
And ultimately it will help reduce development costs and improve housing affordability.
This system is already operational in some councils and the Government investment I announce today will see it rolled out across the country.
We will begin with fast growing regions and roll out the system nationwide by the end of next year.
Today I have focused the economic challenge, the inflation challenge and the challenge of housing affordability on working families.
Of course there are many other elements in our election mandate  -  including the withdrawal of our combat troops from Iraq, ratifying Kyoto and closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
     * Since the Government came to office, I have visited Baghdad and have spoken with the Iraqi Prime Minister and the US military command on the ground. We have negotiated the withdrawal arrangements for those combat forces, and that will be concluded in the middle of the year as we said.
     * We signed the instruments of ratification for the Kyoto Protocol upon coming to office. As a result, Australia was able to play a significant role at the United Nations climate change conference in Bali.
     * On February 13th the national parliament offered an apology to the Stolen Generations. We are now endeavouring to establish a new bipartisanship on the crucial challenge of remote indigenous housing, as part of our commitment to close the gap on infant mortality, educational achievement and life expectancy for indigenous Australians.
The hard work lies ahead  -  framing the Budget; designing an emissions trading regime; implementing major industrial relations changes; further education reforms; reforming the health care system; closing the gap for indigenous Australians; and the entirety of the COAG agenda, including business deregulation.
In the time since the Government came to office, I have learnt that the challenges Australia faces are as deep as we anticipated.
But I have seen also that the determination of the Australian people to confront these challenges is deeper than we could have ever thought  -  looking beyond the short-term to the long-term.
Yes, we have inherited some complex problems that have built up over many years.
But we are committed to dealing with those challenges  -  not avoiding them.
And we will not lose sight of why we've been entrusted with the great responsibility of public office  -  to seize the opportunity (not to squander it) to build a modern Australia to tackle the challenges of the future and to secure the future for working families.


KING: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, good morning and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane. 
PM: Good morning Madonna, thanks for having me on the program. 
KING: Can you fix home loan affordability?
PM: No we can't fix it. What we can do is do whatever we can within the powers of Government to improve it. 
Housing affordability has been a looming crisis for some years in Australia. That's why in opposition last year we convened a Housing Affordability Summit and put forward a whole series of policies that we thought would improve the situation for those trying to enter the housing market in the first place, first home buyers, but also, do what we can to assist people who are struggling to get access to affordable rental accommodation as well. No silver bullets, but we are trying to take measures which recognise that working families are under financial pressure and they need every bit of help that they can get.
KING: Interest rates are expected to go up tomorrow. What will you be telling your Cabinet this morning?
PM: Well, discussions within Cabinet are always confidential. But there is no great secret to the fact that since we took over the Government of Australia we have been facing a very big inflation challenge. It's not a matter of opinion, it's a matter of fact, that when the Government changed Australia was experiencing its highest inflation in 16 years. And on top of that, with 11 interest rate rises now in a row, we inherited a situation in Australia whereby we have the second highest interest rates in the developed world. That's what we face, that's what we inherited, but we now therefore have a challenge to do what we can to tackle the inflation beast. That's why I outlined in January a five point plan to do so.
KING: Would you help your kids to buy their own home or should they do it themselves?
PM: I think every parent, to the extent that they can, would assist their kids to try to get into the housing market. I think that is just a natural human response. 
But the big challenge is, if you look at the impact on housing affordability across the country, the new NATSEM data produced as of December last year, that is, as of when the Government changed, indicates that we've got 1.1 million lower income families in Australia now spending more than 30 per cent of their income on housing costs, they face a real challenge.
What we can do for first home buyers is a policy already put out by Wayne Swan the Treasurer, which assists by creating superannuation style accounts for first home savers. First time in the country's history, First Home Saver Accounts, which enable people to save for the deposit for their first home and get preferential taxation treatment on the way through to boost their savings nest egg so they can get into the housing market earlier.
KING: In talking about super, economists say that the $30 odd billion you've promised in tax cuts will be inflationary. A poll in the paper here on Saturday suggested people would prefer to get that money, the tax money, as super. Is that something you would consider?
PM: Look, we made a very clear cut commitment before the election that tax cuts will be delivered to working families and working families need those tax cuts, partly for the reasons that we've just been talking about. They are under financial pressure and dealing with challenges from the petrol pump through to the grocery prices through to the cost of child care through to paying the mortgage 
KING: So the tax cuts will remain?
PM: Tax cuts, we're serious about our commitments to the Australian people. We said we'll do it, we are going to do it.
But on the savings front, one of the measures that we have introduced to encourage private savings is the one I just talked about before which, when fully implemented, one of the projections we had last year was that our First Home Saver Account program would result in an additional amount of national savings, private national savings, in the vicinity of about $4 billion. That's one step in the right direction.
KING: Have banks gone too far do you think offering 100 per cent loans, offering people, perhaps, enormous amounts of money in the hope that they can pay it back?
PM: Banks will make their own independent commercial decisions, and I think everyone out there seeking to obtain a home mortgage has to go into it with their eyes wide open and looking at the fine print of what banks are offering. 
KING: But is there any argument for the banks not to pass on any interest rate rise we expect tomorrow?
PM: Well, banks make their own decisions on the commercial rates which they set. What the Reserve Bank does, of course, is set the official rate.
KING: Yes, but the Prime Minister's voice carries weight in that debate. 
PM: Well what we've said before, and Wayne Swan the Treasurer said before, is that beyond official rate settings, when we've had adjustments by banks outside that framework as we did earlier this year, there was an entirely appropriate response from the Treasurer Wayne Swan, saying that banks experiencing record profitability should be very, very mindful of their corporate and community standing before leaning on people who borrow from those banks any further. And that applied to, as I said, interest rate settings by the commercial banks beyond the official interest rates policy of the Reserve Bank.
KING: So you would expect banks not to raise interest rates above any increase that the Reserve Bank announces tomorrow ? 
PM: Well the official interest rates regime of the Reserve Bank will be set. They are independent. In fact we have enhanced their independence since we formed government at the end of last year. That is one thing. And that takes into account the overall monetary policy settings for the country. We at the government level of course are responsible for what we can do through the budget, to take as much pressure off the Reserve Bank's inflation challenge as possible. But when it comes to the individual decisions of the commercial banks, they make those and if they move outside of official interest rate settings, then mindful of the general circumstances of financial markets at the time, then I am sure the government will not be restrained from making appropriate comment. 
KING: How worried do you get about this interest rates? Is this something that actually keeps you awake at night?
PM: Well it is a core, core challenge. The first responsibility of Government, beyond national security is to provide for macroeconomic stability. And therefore if you are like us and you have been elected for just three months, the facts say, the data says, the statistics tell us that as of when we assumed government, that we inherited the highest inflation the country has seen in 16 years and the second highest interest rates in the developed world, this is a real challenges. I am not pretending that it is anything other than that. 
That's why in January, barely after six weeks in office, in Perth I announced our five point plan for tackling inflation which goes to setting a responsible budget surplus target for the year 2008  -  2009, at 1.5 per cent of GDP and secondly dealing with the question of private savings and what we do on the supply side of the economy as well, which is skills and infrastructure and workforce participation.
KING: At the beginning of this program I said everyone is only a number of pay packets away from homelessness and we are doing a special report this morning on the state of homeless in Brisbane, prompted largely by your call that your MPs go and visit a homeless shelter, do you know how many of them have done that?
PM: No I don't have a full report back from the caucus yet but we will be discussing this very soon when the caucus reconvenes in Canberra. What we have done in response to that of course is launch the government's first white paper, and that is on homelessness, to get to absolute tin-tax with the causes of the fact that in Australia today we have got more than 100,000 people who are homeless according to the census data, and what we can practically do to bring that number down. 
KING: You are 612 ABC Brisbane listening to the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, today is his first 100 days in office. Prime Minister, talks have been held between your government and Indonesia about a possible transfer treaty for Schapelle Corby and members of the Bali Nine. Can we expect them home by Christmas?
PM: Oh look in terms of those matters, first and foremost a number of them lie before the courts and the judicial process in Indonesia at present and therefore I think it would be completely unwise to comment on the state of those cases prior to them being finally and fully determined by the Indonesian courts. Secondly, I am sure my colleague the Justice Minister or the Minister for Home Affairs I should say and the Attorney General, I am sure are in contact with their Indonesian counterparts about the best settings for the future.
KING: But has this moved forward considerably in the last couple of months as reports suggest this morning? 
PM: Well discussions have been underway for a long time, and I think these go back to the days of the previous government as well. Minister Debus has raised the matter of prisoner transfer treaty with Indonesia, with the Indonesian Attorney General and their Foreign Minister, discussions are continuing. But it is not appropriate to comment until these things have been resolved one way or the other. And as I said, in relation to some of those individual cases that you mentioned, they are still before the courts in Indonesia. 
KING: We are talking about repossessions and the like, I read on the weekend where you have cancelled the project worth $10 million I think to help make rain in the South East. Given the pretty dire circumstances South East Queensland is in, don't we need to try everything?
PM: The key challenge when it comes to effective long term water policy is first of all, acting effectively on climate change where our predecessors did not act. They buried their head in the sand. Secondly when it comes to appropriate water infrastructure for the future for the National Government, also take a leading infrastructure role rather than simply blaming the states. So what have we done about that?
One of our proposals in Government is to establish a $1 billion urban water infrastructure fund and it is there precisely to assist State Governments and water authorities to invest in new projects for example, desalination projects to assist long term water security.
In the past the National Government under Mr Howard did not see itself as having any role in this area. I believe things have got sufficiently serious that you've got to be in this planning, assisting, helping; not just carving from the side.
KING: Some would argue this was a project that was going to do that?
PM: Well I'll defer to the experts on that one. Can I say that we believe that core planning for the future must go to the elements of critical water infrastructure, making proper provisioning for the future for things like desalination plants, where local, state and other water authorities deem those to be appropriate as they have in various states around Australia. 
And secondly, on basic things like lets call it, the effectiveness of water pipes around the country. Many urban water pipe systems have been laid down a century ago leak like hell resulting in certain cities of up to 30 per cent loss and leakage.
That's why we established a $250 million fund to partner with local authorities and State Governments where appropriate to deal with that. In other words, to reduce the wastage of water which currently occurs.
KING: One hundred days in the chair, is this the hardest thing you've ever done?
PM: Well it's certainly the most challenging thing I've done Madonna, but it's very satisfying that you can think and plan and hope that you might be able to make some changes for the nation's long term good. But actually being elected to do something about it, well that's something else. 
The mission statement is pretty plain for us, and that's how do you build a modern Australia to deal with the challenges of the future, to secure a future for not just the nation, but for working families as well. And there big challenges but we're we've got the sleeves rolled up
KING: What's been the toughest day?
PM: To be blunt, when I got the phone call to say that in our near neighbour to the north, East Timor, there had been attempts to decapitate the entire democratically elected leadership of that small democracy. 
That involved some difficult decisions and we turned it around within 24 hours by having troops on the ground and further police on the ground within the day. And I think that was an appropriate response.
KING: People listening now know you, you were part of our inside Canberra segment each Wednesday for years. How's your life changed?
PM: I think there are less hours in the day Madonna. It used to be 24 I'm not sure anymore. 
KING: How many hours of sleep a night do you actually get?
PM: The answer to that question is not enough. 
KING: But roughly 4-5? 7-8?
PM: Well it varies, depends what on. I've got to get up early and think about a interview with Madonna King.
KING: What about last night? How much did you sleep last night?
PM: I'm usually in bed by midnight. But I've been up recently. Look if you talk to all your listeners, I find with most people across the country is that people are working harder and longer to make ends meet. Talk to families about how they manage to hang it together for weekends these days. 
It's not just looking after the kids but doing some part time work on weekends as well.
KING: You talk to those people and they say too that it would be so easy for a politician to be out of touch and they see there politicians as getting out of limousines and going to nice dinners. Can you see that it would be easy to get out of touch being a politician?
PM: Yep I can, very easily. It's one of the reasons why last Saturday not two days ago but nine days ago, I was back in Brisbane doing my mobile office up in Oxford Street, Bulimba talking to constituents who have been waiting to see me for some time. 
And that's one of the reasons why yesterday, up at Narangba Valley State High School, we had a Community Cabinet, the first in Queensland since the election of the new Government. There you had us with six, seven, eight hundred people from the local community, in a community hall, and unlike our predecessors, putting the whole cabinet up front and opening yourselves to questioning about anything from anybody.
Challenging experience but I think it's really important for any Government to remain in touch and that is to throw yourself open to community at every opportunity.
KING: You say you came up Saturday week ago. The last Prime Minister we had lost his seat along with the Prime Ministership. How often do you intend to come up and actually look after that electorate business?
PM: As often as I can. I think people in my local community will understand I've got a few other things on my plate at the moment. But, I'll be back in Brissie as often as I can, and when I get a chance, there talking to people. 
In fact after Community Cabinet last night a few of the colleagues wanted to go out and have a bite to eat, in fact it Anthony Albanese's birthday, so I said the best place to go was my electorate. So off we went and I introduced them to various challenges of my community.
KING: One last question before you go. Anything you wanting to confess this morning, Have you ever inhaled? A previous marriage we don't know about?
PM: I'm sorry on those two, no and no. If you were to impose the moral test further I'd probably fail. 
KING: Kevin Rudd, appreciate your time. Thank you. 
PM: Thanks a lot, Madonna.


The Australian Government today formally established a significantly expanded National Rental Affordability Scheme.
The National Rental Affordability Scheme will fund tax incentives for investors to build up to 100,000 new affordable rental properties.
The new target of 100,000 properties doubles the Government's pre-election policy of 50,000 new affordable rental properties.
This doubling of the number of affordable rental properties to be built under the scheme reflects the severity of the housing affordability problem in Australia.
This measure is one of a range of policies the Australian Government is implementing to assist Australian families under financial pressure.
It was also announced today that the Government will invest up to $30 million to streamline and move online, the approval of Development Applications.
100,000 new affordable rental properties
The National Rental Affordability Scheme is an innovative policy initiative to create a new ‘asset class' of affordable rental properties, because there is currently very little investment from institutional investors in residential property in Australia.
Under the Scheme, the Commonwealth will provide private investors with tax credits of $6,000 a year for ten years for new properties that are rented at 20 per cent below the prevailing market level.
States and Territories have agreed to provide $2,000 per home either through cash payments or in kind, such as via the provision of cut price land or concessions on stamp duty.
The initiative would mean, for example, that rent on a new average three bedroom unit would fall for $350 a week to $280 a week  -  a $70 saving.
It was announced in Brisbane today that if the previous target of 50,000 is reached by 2011-12, the program will expand if market demand by both renters and investors is strong to allow for the construction of 100,000 properties from 2012 onwards.
Industry forecasts suggest that the deficiency of housing stock will not be eliminated by 2011-12.
Streamlined planning approvals
The Government will invest up to $30 million to roll-out nationally electronic development assessments (eDAs) and online tracking services to streamline planning approvals and cut the cost of new homes.
Currently, delays in planning approvals create ‘holding costs' such as interest and land taxes, which the housing industry says push up the price of new homes by tens of thousands of dollars.
Starting with high growth areas and then moving to all councils by the end of next year, the program will fund IT infrastructure, particularly software, so local governments can streamline their planning processes.
The implementation of this program will be discussed at the meeting of the Local Government &amp; Planning Ministers' Council in Brisbane on March 27 this year.
The program will reduce costs and development times, thereby reducing the costs ultimately passed on to homebuyers.  The effect will be to reduce the cost of new developments and individual building projects, thereby improving the affordability of housing.
This initiative will be implemented as part of the Housing Affordability Fund, which will invest $500 million over the next five years to reduce infrastructure charges and streamline planning approvals processes  -  to make it easier for working families to buy new homes.


I begin by honouring the traditional owners of the land on which this conference is held, the Ngunnawal people. And Matilda, thank you for the welcome.
Thank you for the invitation today to discuss the Government's agenda for the future of Australian agriculture.
I believe Australia's agricultural sector will play a critical role in our economic future  -  as a force that generates prosperity, productivity and export growth, and that can help to lead Australia's response to climate change and long term water shortages.
After several difficult years, the prospects for parts of the farm sector are looking up.
But the long term challenges to farming communities are very substantial.
The Government does not take the view that the outlook for agriculture is a continually declining share of the national economy.
The Government sees the agricultural sector as part of the 21 st century economy - not a relic of the 19 th century.
We see agriculture playing an important role in our nation's mainstream economic policies to build a modern Australia, ready for the challenges of the 21 st century.
We don't see it as a sector whose interests should be left to be managed by the National Party as if it were some sort of feudal entitlement.
I am committed to governing for all Australians.
I am committed to ensuring that the Government builds a future for Australians in regional and rural communities.
That's why in our first three months in government, I've spent time talking to farmers in places like Dalby, Walgett and Kyogle as well as talking to representatives of the farming community.
I have a personal and long standing interest in Australian agriculture, having grown up on a farm in rural Queensland.
Rural Australia has been an important part of my life.
I feel at home in rural Australia.
I feel welcome there.
As do my cabinet colleagues.
For these reasons, because the bush is so much a part of Australia's life  -  and because of the sheer economic significance of agriculture to the economic life of the nation  -  the sector you represent commands the respect of government.
Today I want to address the Government's response to three core challenges facing Australian agriculture.
     * First, the immediate challenges in the Australian macroeconomic environment from inflationary pressures;
     * Second, the longer term challenge of lifting our competitiveness in global markets and finding new export markets, and
     * Third, possibly the greatest long term challenge of all, dealing climate change and water shortages.
If we deal with those challenges, the real potential for Australian agriculture can be realised.
Challenges in Australia's macroeconomic outlook
The immediate challenge that we are facing comes from the uncertainty in the current macroeconomic outlook, reflecting a rising inflation threat in Australia against the backdrop of a slowdown in the United States and broader global economic uncertainty.
For Australian agriculture, the latest seasonal developments and commodity price movements have improved the sector's outlook, as the ABARE forecasts for 2008-09 released today show.
But the sector remains exposed to the impact of rising inflationary pressures.
Australia's rising inflation pressures has created an environment in which economic management has become a great deal more difficult.
Inflation is the enemy of agricultural producers as much as it is of Australia's working families.
The higher input costs being experienced by agricultural producers reflect an economy-wide problem in Australia, with the underlying rate of inflation now at a 16-year high of 3.6 per cent.
The deteriorating inflation outlook reflects capacity constraints across the economy that have been emerging for many years.
Those constraints have affected agriculture more than many sectors because of its reliance on infrastructure and its greater shortage of skilled workers.
These rising inflationary pressures have prompted to Reserve Bank to take aggressive action against inflation, with further consequences for the agricultural sector.
We have already seen 11 consecutive increases in the cash rate in the past six years, and the agricultural sector is hit especially hard by rising interest rates.
Combined with the high value of the Australian dollar, which has made exporters less competitive, the macroeconomic environment for many agricultural producers is very challenging.
The Government recognises the threat of high inflation and has begun implementing a five point plan to combat the immediate and longer term inflation threat :
     * Exercising fiscal restraint, with a tough approach to public spending and a budget surplus target of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP this year;
     * Building a culture of private saving with initiatives such as our new superannuation-style, low tax First Home Saver Accounts;
     * Tackling the chronic skills shortages with 450,000 extra training places and a plan for an education revolution;
     * Providing national leadership through Infrastructure Australia to address infrastructure bottlenecks; and
     * Introducing measures to boost workforce participation including expanding the provision of quality affordable childcare and lifting the childcare tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent.
The implementation of the five point plan will be stepped up in the months ahead.
Challenges in global markets
The second major challenge to Australian agriculture is the longer term challenge to lift productivity and competitiveness, and strengthen its performance in global markets.
Global markets present us with challenges such as persistent trade barriers, but they also present us with substantial opportunities.
The strong global economic growth in recent years, particularly in emerging economies, has increased world demand for food, driven up commodity prices and expanded high value markets.
Income growth in emerging economies, and the burgeoning middle class in nations like China and India, are changing global agrifood markets and creating tremendous new market opportunities for Australian agriculture.
Even so, these are intensely competitive markets and we will need to work hard to succeed in them.
The recent improvements in the outlook for Australian agriculture partly reflect the impact that increased global food demand has already had on commodity prices.
Farm commodity export earnings are forecast to reach $31.4 billion in 2008-09 - an 18 per cent increase from the $26.7 billion forecast for 2007-08.
The gross value of farm production is forecast to increase by 18 per cent to around $46.7 billion in 2008-09 after an increase of nearly 14 per cent in 2007-08.
This is good news, but it is important to put it into the broader context of our relatively disappointing performance on global markets in recent years.
In the seven years since September 2000, export volumes have grown at an average annual rate of 1.8 per cent. This compares to average growth of 7.7 per cent over the preceding seven years.
In the period 1983-1996, net exports made a positive contribution to economic growth in 10 of those 13 years.
Since 1996, net exports have made a positive contribution to growth in only two of the subsequent years.
Australia has now recorded 69 consecutive months of goods and services trade deficits.
This is the longest series of trade deficits on record.
Our current account deficit has stayed above 5 per cent of GDP for longer than ever before, and we have inherited a foreign debt of $570 billion, three times the level that the Liberal Government inherited from Labor in 1996.
The long term challenge we face is to return to the strong export growth of the ‘80s and ‘90s and to improve our external balance.
That challenge is even greater when we consider how much the strong terms of trade in recent years has masked our weak export performance.
But with the right investment in knowledge, innovation, modern infrastructure and productivity, Australian agriculture can succeed in global markets and win  -  including in highly value-added agricultural markets.
There are lessons in the previous successes of Australia's primary industries for the whole economy  -  in particular, lessons concerning the importance of productivity growth, innovation and the development and application of research-driven knowledge, as well as achieving export market access.
Improving productivity and success in global markets
The question for the Government that I lead is how we help generate a new wave of productivity growth in the agricultural sector so that we can successfully meet the challenge in global markets.
That requires investment in skills; infrastructure; investment in research, development and innovation; investment to improve water use efficiency; investment in climate change adaptation measures, reducing emissions and a more efficient regulatory and compliance regime at both a state and federal level.
This is the long term economic agenda that we are implementing, and the agricultural sector will be a significant beneficiary of it.
The Government has already begun tackling Australia's infrastructure and skills deficits.
We know that infrastructure bottlenecks are a drag on productivity, especially for the agriculture sector, which relies heavily on transport, water and communications infrastructure.
The government has established Infrastructure Australia to bring national leadership to infrastructure development for the first time since Federation.
In its first 12 months, Infrastructure Australia will audit the nation's infrastructure and produce an Infrastructure Priority List to guide public and private investment.
We recognise that broadband is an immediate infrastructure priority for rural and regional Australia and we will soon be establishing the Expert Panel to advise on the next steps towards building a high-speed National Broadband Network.
A second critical part of our productivity agenda is to tackle the skills crisis and create an education revolution in Australia.
If Australia is to enjoy sustained growth and compete successfully in the global economy, we need to invest in human capital.
Under the Skilling Australia for the Future package, the government is allocating $1.2 billion over the next four years to fund an additional 450,000 training places, including 65,000 apprenticeships.
Legislation currently in Parliament will establish Skills Australia  -  a high level board of experts to advise on current and future demand for skills and training across all sectors including agriculture.
In relation to the agricultural sector, Skills Australia will be provided with industry intelligence by the Agri-Food Industry Skills Council, which will also be working more closely with the vocational education sector to deliver industry training needs.
The Government is also committed to fostering a culture of innovation. Innovation is critical to the competitiveness of agricultural producers in both global and domestic markets.
Our research and development focus needs to emphasise how producers do business beyond the farm gate, as much as innovation in farm production.
In particular we should focus on where innovation is most relevant to global trade and investment markets.
The Government announced a review of Australia's national innovation system in January.
The review is designed to finds ways for industry to better access new ideas and new technologies and the bridge the divide between industry and research.
Its results will be an important input to the development of the Government's policy approach to bolstering the capacity of the agriculture and agrifood sector to compete in the global economy.
Trade policy is of course another important part of the challenges we face in improving our global export performance.
The agricultural sector is perhaps more affected by changing global markets and by trade barriers than any other part of the Australian economy.
It therefore relies on the Government to achieve the best possible outcomes on market access, whether through multilateral, regional or bilateral agreements.
We are committed to using all options to expand opportunities for Australian exporters.
However Australia is above all committed to the liberalisation of world agricultural markets through the Doha round of negotiations in the WTO.
As Chair of the Cairns Group, Australia is doing all it can to reach out to other groups in the WTO to achieve progress.
The WTO Doha round negotiations offer the prospect of the largest gains, across the largest number of sectors and for the greatest number of economies
But in the meantime we will continue to work hard on regional and bilateral initiatives that can deliver genuine progress in improving market access.
In February, the Trade Minister, Simon Crean, also announced a comprehensive review of export policies and programs.
The review will look at how we formulate export policy settings to ensure that our policy settings are effective in building long term international competitiveness.
The challenge of climate change and water shortages
Beyond the immediate challenges created by the current economic environment, the greatest long term challenge facing Australian agriculture is the impact of climate change - with rising temperatures, more frequent extreme weather events and less rainfall.
Climate change will substantially affect the long term productivity and profitability of the Australian agriculture and food sector.
It will change water availability and lead to more frequent droughts, floods and bushfires and alter the distribution of pests and weeds.
In December ABARE published an analysis of the impact of climate change on Australian agriculture. It highlighted serious impacts on agricultural production and exports, reaching the key conclusion and I quote:
“The economic impacts of climate change are projected to be considerable and unevenly distributed around the world, with developing countries suffering the most. Australia is also projected to be one of the most adversely affected developed regions given the importance of agriculture in its economy.” (ABARE, Commodities, December 2007, p672) 
ABARE's analysis estimated that a changing climate could reduce wheat, beef, dairy and sugar production by an estimated 9-10 per cent by 2030 and 13-19 per cent by 2050.
ABARE also found that exports of these key commodities are projected to decline by as much as 63 per cent by 2030 and as much as 79 per cent by 2050.
Climate modelling by the CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology has suggested rainfall in southern Australia could be reduced by up to 10 per cent by 2030 and 20 per cent by 2050.
This is why the Government regards our response to climate change as critical to the long term viability of Australia's agricultural sector.
Our response to climate change globally will require an economic transformation in coming decades.
We need to prepare for climate change, but we also need to be ready to seize new market opportunities that come with tackling climate change.
Because as well as difficult challenges, climate change will create opportunities for agricultural Australia.
Today I want to announce one opportunity that the Government will be investigating: soil carbon.
A few days after the Government was sworn into office last year, I visited Matt and Anna Ahern's cattlestud in Roma with Queensland Agforce President Peter Kenny and with Tony Burke, the Minister for Agriculture.
We discussed soil management practices on farms, and the scope for productivity improvements and reduced emissions from improving cropping practices.
Peter's plea to me was that if the Government wanted to do something about carbon emissions for agricultural Australia, we should focus on the soil.
I am hearing more and more about the possible potential of enhancing the carbon stored in our soils.
That is why today I am asking Tony Burke  -  as part of the our Australia's Farming Future initiative  -  to investigate how better soil management can be part of Australia's response to climate change.
I recognise that this is a complex area and there is a variety of view points.
I am told that there are significant challenges to measuring the emissions from different farming techniques and estimating the carbon stored in our soils.
Those obstacles may make it difficult for soil carbon to play a role in our response to climate change, but we must examine the options.
The truth is that, as in many aspects of climate change, we are only just beginning to look at soil carbon.
‘Low till' or ‘no till' soil management practices were first promoted for their environmental benefits through the previous Labor Government's Landcare program that began in the early 1990s.
More recently in Parliament, the Independent MP for New England Tony Windsor has been a champion of these practices for their water conservation benefits.
We now need to investigate how such practices might provide Australian agriculture with a role in new markets related to reducing carbon emissions.
Climate change also elevates the importance of tackling our long term water shortages.
Securing a sustainable water supply for all Australians is one of the most fundamental challenges facing the agricultural sector as climate change impacts deepen.
We have an immediate problem resulting from the worst drought in 100 years with the situation in the Murray Darling Basin remaining critical.
Despite good rainfall and the floods in the north, inflows into the Murray system are still well below average due to very dry catchments and relatively high temperatures over the last six months.
The two year period to November 2007 recorded the lowest ever inflow to the Murray River. Inflows during this period were 43 per cent lower than the previous record low, which occurred at the end of 1938.
The Commonwealth and the Basin states are working together to manage this situation.
But we also have a longer term challenge of water shortages.
Improving water use efficiency is fundamental to driving on-farm productivity.
The benefits of these measures are real.
Last year I visited in farm around 20 kilometres to the east of Dalby, called Werrina Downs.
This property, owned by Kim and Jan Bremner, is a great example of the returns from investment in water saving infrastructure.
The Bremners had invested in a lateral boom irrigation system. This simple but effective technology has produced water savings in the order of 30 percent when compared with flood irrigation.
Encouraging the uptake of new technologies and infrastructure will be critical to managing our water shortages.
We need to make better use of water in both rural and urban Australia by modernising irrigation infrastructure and supporting households to install water saving devices.
We are committed to providing more confidence to those investing in the water industry through secure water access entitlements, better registry arrangements, monitoring, reporting and accounting of water use, and improved public access to information.
The government will support healthy rivers and groundwater systems by purchasing water to give back to the environment.
We will set a sustainable cap on the amount of ground water and river water we can use in the Murray Darling Basin.
The Commonwealth, States and territories are working through the Council of Australian Governments to identify opportunities for national action to ensure long term sustainable water use across Australia.
The Minister for Climate Change and Water, Penny Wong, chaired the first meeting of the COAG Working Group on Climate Change and Water on 25 January. Another meeting is scheduled for later this week.
In addition to our national response to water shortages, we need to improve drought policy and climate change programs to help farmers prepare for climate change.
In recent years I have travelled widely in regional Australia, including in my role in the trade portfolio and later as leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party.
I have seen first hand the impact of the drought across many parts of the country.
Drought is cruel.
Its effects don't stop when the rains come.
The impact on individuals and communities that have been forced to question their own long term survival is lasting.
It is hard to shake the images of drought-ravaged land from your mind even when you are only in drought territory for a short time.
How much harder it has been for people in farming communities labouring on dry, arid land year after year.
We can only hope that the drought is breaking.
Of course the science of climate change tells us that the medium to longer term seasonal conditions for agriculture will continue to get tougher.
The Exceptional Circumstances drought policy, introduced by the Hawke Labor Government, has served farmers and rural communities well.
This policy is based on a model of a one-in-25 year drought and assumes rainfall will return to past seasonal conditions and does not factor in climate change.
This approach needs updating.
I have asked the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Tony Burke, to work with the farming community and state and territory governments to develop options to improve drought management.
Let me make it clear, though, that the government will not be walking away from farmers in difficulty.
The government wants to ensure, however, that any assistance provided improves the resilience of farmers and farm businesses for the future.
So that every time a farmer connects with the Government, he or she goes away better prepared for climate change.
The government will invest $130 million over four years in the Australia's Farming Future initiative to help primary industries prepare for the impacts of climate change.
The initiative comprises three elements:
     * The $15 million Climate Change and Productivity Research Program will boost research on how farmers can respond to climate change. For example, the program might fund research into on the ground measures such as water use efficiency, or work on using and applying climate modelling and seasonal forecasting.
     * The $60 million Climate Change Adaptation Partnerships Program will include measures such as workshops to improve farmer awareness and understanding of the impact of climate change on agriculture, and on-farm climate change adaptation strategies such as property management plans.
     * The $55 million Climate Change Adjustment Program will help farmers adjust to climate change by funding professional advice, financial management training and re-establishment grants.
Climate change also raises risks associated with threats to biosecurity.
As climate change accelerates, diseases and pests will thrive in new areas.
Australia has been able to keep out many of the exotic pests and diseases that have devastating effects elsewhere in the world.
However, with ever-greater movements of goods and people, the risk of pests, weeds and disease entering Australia is increasing constantly.
We have seen the re-emergence of foot and mouth disease in the United Kingdom and the emergence of Avian Influenza in Asia, Europe and Africa.
More recently, Australia's horse owners and horse-related industries have suffered the devastating consequences of an outbreak of equine influenza.
Our quarantine and biosecurity arrangements must adapt to these evolving risks.
To this end, the government has announced a broad-ranging, independent review of Australia's quarantine and biosecurity arrangements.
This review will deliver on a key election commitment and will be the most wide-ranging and important review of our quarantine and biosecurity arrangements since the Nairn review was commissioned by the previous Labor government in 1995.
Our quarantine system also has a significant impact on the cost of doing business for both importers and exporters.
This review will also consider a range of issues including the effectiveness of import and export inspection and certification; and the scope and adequacy of the current quarantine arrangements as they affect business.
The challenges to the future of Australian agriculture are great, but we must not lose sight of the enormous opportunities for this sector given our natural competitive strengths.
To succeed in addressing those challenges, we need to draw out the best ideas for Australia's future from all parts of the community.
As you may be aware, on April 19 th and 20 th the Government will host the Australia 2020 Summit to help shape a long term strategy for the nation's future.
One of the ten core challenges being examined by the summit is future directions for rural industries and rural communities.
We want to hear new ideas about which rural industries are best positioned to take advantage of the global consumer markets of the 21st century. 
We are asking what options are possible for effective structural adjustment for rural industries and communities suffering the long term impact of climate change? 
And we are seeking view on what is the best way the Government can ensure the long term sustainability of rural and regional communities, including the fostering of the next generation of Australian farmers?
If you have thoughts on these or other issues relating to the future of agricultural Australia and rural communities, I invite you to make a submission through the Australia 2020 website.
In the meantime, I look forward to hearing of the ideas that emerge at this year's Outlook 2008 conference. I wish you the very best for today and tomorrow's proceedings.


I will be making a working visit to the United States of America, Europe, and China from 27 March to 13 April. 
The purpose of the visit is to advance Australia's security, foreign policy and business interests, and to advance Australia's contribution to the global response on climate change.
In the United States (27 March-1 April), I will meet President Bush  -  with whom I discussed the visit on the telephone this morning  -  and other senior members of the Administration.  We are both looking forward to a friendly and constructive meeting covering the range of our common security and economic interests. 
I will also be meeting other senior members of the Administration and the Congress.  As well, I will meet US business leaders and Australians doing business in the United States, and address the US Chamber of Commerce.
Consistent with the importance the Australian Government attaches to multilateral engagement, I will hold discussions at the United Nations in New York.
In Brussels (2-3 April), I will meet the President and senior members of the European Commission.  My objective is to expand our relationship and cooperation with the Commission on global foreign policy challenges, the WTO Doha round of international trade talks, and climate change.
In Bucharest, I will be attending a summit meeting of NATO Heads of Government which will decide on ways of improving the effectiveness of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) strategy and mission in Afghanistan.
In the United Kingdom (4-8 April), I will meet Prime Minister Brown and other senior members of the Cabinet.  I will hold meetings with the financial and broader business sectors and hold talks on climate change issues.  I will be addressing the Confederation of British Industry and Australian Business on future growth sectors of the Australian economy.
I have accepted Prime Minister Brown's invitation also to attend a conference of the Progressive Governance Summit which will bring together around 15 national leaders from different countries.
In the People's Republic of China (9-12 April), I will be meeting senior leaders, including President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao, and the new generation of leadership emerging from the 17th Party Congress.  I will be exploring areas for greater bilateral cooperation, including in climate change and trade in services. 
I will be working closely in that visit with representatives of the Australian business community seeking to expand their trade and investment opportunities in China  -  Australia's largest trading partner.


PM: Today's news is a double blow for the family budget. Two rate rises will really hurt working families. Working families are recovering from the first rate rise which occurred only a short time ago and they've already tightened their belts.
The same families are now looking at a second rate rise which will mean that the family budget will be even harder to balance. Australia's inflation problem has taken a long time to build and it will take a long time to fix. As Prime Minister I take responsibility for the Australian economy, the good news and the bad news, and this is bad news.
As Australian Prime Minister I also take responsibility for doing whatever we can as Government to fight the fight against inflation. That's why we announced in January our five point plan of attack when it comes to dealing with the inflation challenge.
Also as Prime Minister of Australia I take responsibility for implementing those measures which can assist working families who are already under financial pressure and are now under even greater family pressure.
That's why we will proceed with the implementation of our tax cuts. That's why we will proceed with the implementation of the increase in the child care tax rebate. That's why we will proceed with the implementation of those measures we've announced in recent days to improve housing affordability.
This is a difficult day for working families, added to the other cost of living pressures, it makes it very tough indeed. But we the Australian Government will be doing everything we can to fight the fight against inflation and doing everything we can to assist working families with practical measures to relieve some of the financial burdens they are under. There is no silver bullet with any of the measures that we've announced. And it will take a long time to turn around but we're determined to prosecute this course of action.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well when you look at the inflation problem it's quite clear that it's a demand side challenge and a supply side challenge. On the demand side as consistent with our 5 point plan of attack announced in January we've already indicated what we'll do in terms of public demand by producing a budget surplus with a target of at least 1.5% of GDP.
When it comes to private demand we've indicated the measures that we've embraced there so far. And that relates to what we can do to boost private savings by measures such as the first home saver account.
But on the supply side, and that's the other half of the inflation equation, we've already put forward measures to assist with the formation of skills in the economy, the 20,000 additional training places which were announced the other day. Also on infrastructure bottlenecks, also measures to improve workforce participation.
On workforce participation we know from the survey work that's already been done that the introduction of the tax cuts is projected to increase the number of people in the labour force by a considerable number, up to 65,000. Inflation is an aggregation of all these factors, that's why we've got a program of action ahead in each of them.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the opposition has claimed a couple of times that because you have got this two speed economy if you make massive spending cuts in your budget you could end up while dampening activity in the booming states, clobbering the non booming states. Putting aside the fact that we know you think this is the previous government's fault could you just address in economic terms, whether you think that is a fair argument and explain why it isn't.
PM: Well the first point to make about monetary policy settings is that they are independently made by the Reserve Bank. That's the first point, the second is when it comes to dealing with the overall state of the economy; it's important to ensure that we at the level of Government do what we can to rein in public demand, we're doing that. That applies across the national economy and that has its effect over time and to do what we can across the economy to help rein in private demand by the measures that we're talking about there. That is one the ones I referred to before when it comes to the first home saver account.
The critical thing is this: inflation is the core economic problem. Inflation runs up by way of inflationary pressures and numbers. The consequence is that interest rates go up. The core problem and challenge therefore is to deal with the inflation challenge. None of this is easy, but if we were to take our eyes off the inflation ball, frankly the challenges and the impact for working families and businesses across the economy would be even more severe. That's why our eyes are fixed firmly on the inflation challenge.
JOURNALIST: You said you would take responsibility for the economy (Inaudible)
PM: Well, as I said before we take responsibility for the management of the economy, I'm Prime minister of the country; I take responsibility for the good news and the bad news and this is bad news when it comes to the impact which increased interest rates have on working families.
Let's just be blunt about it you can sit around and duck and weave. We are responsible for running the country. We will therefore take responsibility for dealing with the reality as it presents itself and that means fighting hard the fight against inflation through the framework I've already announced. But also implementing a series of measures of the type that I announced yesterday in Brisbane, to assist working families dealing with the housing affordability crisis, but also assisting with other matters which help the family budget as well, like child care.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: When I say responsibility, it's that. We are the Government of Australia, I'm the Prime Minister of Australia. If when it comes to responsibility for the economy, we are responsible for dealing with the good news and the bad. And therefore that means responsible for taking the hard decisions necessary to deal with bad news when it comes. And that means when interest rates go up, it underlines therefore the responsibility we have to fight effectively the fight against inflation. I don't walk away from that, that's what we were elected to do.
JOURNALIST: This morning, you were at the ABARE conference, the bureau is forecasting a 30 per cent increase in the value of Australian exports. (inaudible) Does that mean you will have to revisit your 1.5 surplus target (inaudible) and possibly further because we have got so much extra income coming into the economy?
PM: I'll let Wayne attend to the ABARE numbers.
SWAN: No it doesn't mean that, our target of 1.5% of GDP at least stands and we've said that we are looking for further savings and we will bank additional revenue. We've made that statement very clear.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan is there any justification of banks seeking to push up interest rates beyond the official rate as they did last time and do you fear that once is enough?
SWAN: Well I think bank customers will treat banks harshly in an environment where we have rising interest rates through the official cash rate if they take the opportunity to pass on in an excessive way, other costs that they face. It is true, it is true that the banks are facing an increased cost of borrowing and in some cases that is substantial. But we're not sure how long that will last.
This is one of the reasons why the government put in place, over a month ago now, a bank switching package that would allow customers to vote with their feet. If they were unhappy with what their bank was doing, then they could move more easily.
We put that package in place  -  well they don't necessarily all do the same thing and there are a variety of packages out there. One bank for example abolished exit fees a few weeks ago in a new package. We want to see that there is strong competition out there between the banks, in an environment where interest rates are rising. It is very important that people can vote with their feet.
JOURNALIST: In pure economic terms, would it be helpful (inaudible) if unemployment was to increase?
SWAN: It is not a choice. It is not a choice at all. We can have growth and we can have low inflation. There is no doubt that elevated inflation is a long term threat to growth which is why we have to deal with it. I mean Mr Turnbull and the Liberals just don't understand the inflation problem.
They will not even admit the size of the problem and they don't understand the causes. You have got to deal with the supply side capacity issues in the economy. We are dealing with those. They ignored repeated warnings from the Reserve Bank over three years and the consequence has been elevated inflation. We are dealing with the causes of the inflation problem.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SWAN: Well we're making it very clear. We're saying that fiscal policy has got a role to play. The previous Government didn't think there was a role for fiscal policy so they went on a reckless spending spree and they didn't attend to the capacity constraints in the economy. We are doing all of those things, we want to help the Reserve Bank, we want to assist the Reserve Bank by taking the pressure off monetary policy and having fiscal policy play its legitimate role. A role that it hasn't been playing under the previous government.
PM: To add to Laura's question, you either cop the independence of the Reserve Bank or you don't. We have said that from day one, we said that prior to the election. And that's going to create some very difficult and uncomfortable times. That's just the reality. Let's not pretend it is anything other than that. You either have an independent monetary policy or you don't. What the Treasurer, Wayne has just said is absolutely right.
The problem is, fiscal policy has not been lifting its share of the load for a long time. When you had outlays, public demand running at 4.5 per cent of real growth at the time which the government changed, that is out of control. That's why we are applying a razor gang, and we believe that fiscal policy should play a greater role, hence the disciplines we are engaged in internally within government. But you either have an independent Reserve Bank, or you don't.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We believe that we can get the policy settings as right as possible. Remember we are currently in a full employment economy, our target is to sustain a full employment economy as long as physically possible. That's always going to be subject to international economic factors as well. If you note the current projections on the terms of trade, which are a live factor in this whole debate, the terms of trade are projected to increase further in the year ahead, but this is a difficult predictive game. The Government's core target though is to maintain full employment, that has always been our objective. It will be into the future. Of course, we are subject to international economic circumstances as much as anyone else. Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on the supply side, you have indicated that you would consider letting in more skilled migrants for the residential construction industry. Would you think that it would be wise to boost general skilled migration even though it might (inaudible) effect the demand and or full employment (inaudible)
PM: Well Michelle the economics of migration are complex on this very question because when you bring in skilled workers obviously it assists on the supply side of the economy by aiding for example the residential construction sector or the broader construction sector or other areas of skills demand. At the same time, by virtue of their contribution to consumption, it has an effect there as well. What's the net impact? Well the best advice that we have had within government is that  -  it underpinned a decision recently by the Immigration Minister Senator Evans to increase skilled migration by 6000  -  was that given the current constraints, for example in WA and elsewhere that it is the right thing to do.
On the specific point you have raised about the submission put to us by the housing industry association, we are looking at that. We haven't said yes, no or even maybe. We are looking at it and that's what I indicated in the speech yesterday.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Yes I spoke to President Bush this morning about a visit to the United States. I will be in Washington as of Friday 28 March and I will be meeting with the President at the White House that day. I will be seeing representatives of the Congress early the following week in Washington. Subsequent to that I will be travelling to Brussels for meetings with the European Commission. Then to Bucharest for NATO on the question of Afghanistan. London for bilaterals' with the British Government and to address the British confederation of industry, and then on to China. And I will be meeting with President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao and then back home.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Oh I won't go to the detail of my discussions with the President, you wouldn't expect me to. But we had a good conversation and he said that I was a welcome guest in Washington, as we welcomed recently both the Deputy Secretary of State and Bob Gates the Defence Secretary here in Canberra. He is looking forward to friendly constructive discussions, a range of foreign policy agenda items, also other key challenges here in our immediate region as well, including on the Korean peninsular.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the Commonwealth Grants Commission put out a recommendation today (inaudible) which Victoria and NSW in particular both still (inaudible) GST funds are split up amongst the states?
PM: Before I ask the Treasurer to comment on this, when I first became involved in Commonwealth-State relations which was in 1990 or 1991, the Commonwealth Grants Commission then was described as an impenetrable black box. It still is. I will now hand to the Treasurer.
SWAN: And we support the decision of the independent commission.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well you accept an independent Reserve Bank or you don't. But we are putting every effort into every element of policy at the Government's disposal to put downwards pressure on inflation to put downwards pressure on rates. The exercise in which Wayne and myself and Lindsay Tanner and Julia, the Deputy Prime Minister, are engaged in at the moment, in the Expenditure Review Committee process, is intense. And it is all designed with one thing in mind which is reducing public demand in order to take some of the pressure off inflation, or to take some of the pressure off rates.
SWAN: We're working day and night to tackle the problem.
PM: Mr Swan, are you expecting those cuts to clobber the non-booming states, Mr Swan?
SWAN: No, I don't expect that. What Mr Turnbull is saying is just, frankly, silly. Inflation is elevated and inflation is Australian wide. And we have to deal with it on an Australia wide basis. And one of the problems that we have had in recent years is that national policy has not been directed towards enhancing the productive capacity of the economy. And that has impacted particularly in Queensland and in Western Australia. So we have a program which is balanced which looks after the national interest, and in particular, is directed towards enhancing the supply capacity of the economies, particularly in Queensland and Western Australia.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you have any advice as to how many people could be forced out of their home as a result of this interest rate rise? And, are you both considering at some point some sort of immediate relief to these people rather than long term strategies you have in place?
PM: Working families are under a whole lot of financial pressure and today they have been delivered a whole lot more financial pressure. When we look at some of the numbers involved, they are huge. Remember, we the Government commissioned that work from NATSEM which was released yesterday.
1.1 million families on low to middle incomes who are currently categorised as being in housing stress. That is, spending more than 30 per cent of their gross income on either mortgage payments or on rent. That's something of the vicinity of ten per cent of Australian families. That's a lot of people, that's a lot of people.
The figures I also saw said there have been a 220,000 increase in recent times in people crossing that line. What we can best do is the measures we have outlined on housing. What we can best do is deliver support for working families through tax cuts. What we can best do is for working families suffering child care costs and increasing child care costs is do what we've done by way of increasing the child care tax rebate which flows through from 1 July as well. All these things are designed to provide some help with the family budget in order to do something to assist families under pressure given two interest rate rises on the run in the last couple of months.
JOURNALIST: The Reserve Bank did note today that household demand has slowed substantially with interest rate increases. Just wondering, do you both take some heart in that and what is your reading on the (inaudible)
SWAN: Well I don't think we comment on the particulars of the Reserve Bank statement.
PM: We go back to what is the province in which we can operate which is public demand. And, that's where we've got core responsibility on the supply side measures that we continue to emphasise, and needed to have been emphasised, for a long, long time, up until now.
JOURNALIST: Well on that theme, does that mean that you would look at further means testing on Family Tax Benefit B? You have a cap of $250,000, it's a high amount, would you look at lowering (inaudible)
SWAN: We're not buying into any speculation about Budget matters at all.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible)
SWAN: Either way.
PM: Here we go Patricia, rule in, rule out, start with an (inaudible) -
SWAN: We made that clear in the Parliament.
PM: (Inaudible) that's where that came from (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: The unions are proposing that superannuation be increased to 12 per cent up to 2012. Do you think (inaudible)
PM: We're the party of superannuation. We've always supported ways and means by which you can boost private savings and encourage that. Remember, part of our five point plan for dealing with inflation on the demand side of the economy was to assist and encourage private savings. One of those measures you would see is the First Home Saver Account. And that, when implemented, we're advised could result in additional private savings of something like $4 billion. Our mind is always open to other means by which you could encourage private savings, and we continue to work through those options.
JOURNALIST: Your language of taking responsibility  -  you seem to be looking back less than a while ago in terms of blaming the former Government  - 
PM: There's not much to look back on.
JOURNALIST: Has there been a bit of a line drawn under (inaudible)
SWAN: Michelle, on day one we put up our hand and took responsibility for tackling the inflation problem when we received the briefing in Brisbane from the Treasury and from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. We have been talking about accepting responsibility for tackling the inflation challenge from day one.
PM: I think it is just important to accept up front responsibility for the economy for good news and for bad news and get on with the measures that need to be implemented to deal with the bad news, and that's what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: On political donations, the Opposition has said that was this was for was a stunt. (Inaudible)
PM: Well can I just say on political donations, the Opposition sat there, in silence, while the previous Prime Minister increased the disclosure level from $1,500 to $10,000. Mr Turnbull just sat there while all that happened. I'd just ask people to reflect on that in terms of whether they are serious about campaign finance reform.
I put out three proposals there, and I'm serious about them.
One is, bring down the disclosure limit from $10,000 to $1,000. I think that is responsible, and the right thing to do. You don't want democracy for sale. 
The second thing is to put a ban on foreign donations, be they from individual citizens or from corporations. And, as I said I think last night, both the Labor Party and the Liberal Party have received such donations in the past.
The third is, I'm open to suggestions and discussion about what we might do in terms of capping donations, be they individual or corporate. But I think it is seriously a bit rich for those opposite, having stuck their hands up to increase by, what? $8,500 the declarations.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you have a size of cap in mind?
PM: Oh, I think we need to have, I think, a genuine public discussion and public debate about. But I think you get to a stage in a democracy when it goes to this point, and you've got to say, oops, I think this has actually gone too far. Let's bring it back -
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: ... when it comes to reigning in campaign finance. I think, When you start to look at campaigns in the United States which are costing, how much this one? $1 billion or something? I mean, they're starting to hurtle off into outer space on these things.
JOURNALIST: Will you meet Obama or Hillary Clinton while you are there?
PM: If they are solid and effective campaigners like those I've known in Australia, they're probably out there working hard for votes at the time that I'm there. We'll see what the program permits.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, did today's Newspoll bring you any more faith in the polling process?
PM: Oh, I think, you know, there is only one set of numbers working families are interested in at the moment. And that's the numbers which are coming in on their dinner table tonight as they try and work out their budget for the weeks and months ahead. I don't think anyone else is much concerned about opinion polls, and I think we'd better zip.


It is a great pleasure to be back in Port Moresby again. It is always a pleasure to be among friends.
Thank you Prime Minister for your friendship, your hospitality and your time today.
I understand that this year marks the 40th anniversary of your entry into politics.  You have been an unrivalled figure in the politics of your country since before independence.  I would like to pay tribute to your contribution to your country, to relations between our two countries, and to the region we live in.
Mr Prime Minister, mine is a new government in Australia.
We were only elected a little over 100 days ago in Canberra.  They have been a busy first few months as we establish ourselves and set our policy directions.
We are seeking to chart a course for Australia that prepares us for the challenges of the 21st century   challenges that to a large extent our two nations share, though these challenges take a different shape in our respective nations. 
     * Addressing the complex challenges created by climate change;
     * Ensuring that we use the prosperity created by the mining boom to invest in our future;
     * Giving our children the best start in life through a quality education;
     * Reforming public services like health care. 
The Australian people have given us a mandate to build a modern economy and a modern society, a 21st century society, and our work is already well underway.
A key part of our plan is building a solid foundation of good relations with our neighbours and our other friends around the world.
Building our relationship with Papua New Guinea is an important part of that.  I am pleased that your Foreign Minister, Mr Abal, has already been to Australia for meetings with his counterpart. I was pleased that I, too, had the chance to meet him in Canberra.
The relationship that our two nations enjoy is unique. Australia's ties to Papua New Guinea are very special because of both what we share in the past and because of the shared challenges and opportunities that lie ahead of us.
Of course our historical ties are strong.
But the ties that we enjoy today are even more important to our relationship   ties that exist at the levels of government, education, business, tourism and culture.
Our government officials work together.
Our businesses have strong investment and trade links.
We have academics and students at each other's educational institutions.
We both attract tourists from each other's nation.
And our cultural and sporting links are strong.
Certainly, the enthusiasm for a State of Origin match in Port Moresby matches anything you will find in Brisbane or Sydney.
Players like Marcus Bai in rugby league, and Mal Michael in AFL, have been ambassadors for their nation in Australia.
If I can digress for a moment, I am pleased to have discovered a special local connection to Mal as in his teenage years he played for the Morningside AFL team in my own electorate in Brisbane.
Those people-to-people connections are critically important to our relationship.
Each person   each contact   each journey   helps to build the links between us.  Each one is a strand that joins us together.
Looking ahead, our two nations also share many opportunities and challenges.
We both face significant long-term challenges in ensuring growth and economic development in our own countries and across the region.
Our nations are both blessed with rich mineral resources, and we both face the challenge of working to ensure that the benefits of the global mining boom are used to build long-term prosperity.
Our nations both benefit from being open to foreign investment.
As we look to the future, we have the opportunity now to join together and write a new page in the history of our region   as we work together to foster stability, friendship, growth and prosperity in our region.
But we will only achieve that future if we make the decision to work together.
Mr Prime Minister, I believe that today you and I have made that decision.  We have agreed to work on a new partnership.
Our decision to build a new partnership is based on the idea that we both face many challenges.  How do we educate our people to make the most of the opportunities of the globalised world?  How do we ensure long-term economic development?  How do we meet the great global challenges like climate change?
Our decision is also based on the idea that we can meet these changes more effectively if we work together.
That means our governments working together; our ministers working together; our officials working together.
It also means us being able to pick up the phone and talk to each other directly when there's important business to be done.
Sometimes people want to focus too much on the problems and disagreements that exist in the relationships between countries. We both know that our relationship has complexities.
But the ties between our nations are much greater than those complexities. We have an enduring friendship. And after today, we have the basis for a new partnership.
Our discussions today have been very constructive   both for our bilateral relationship and for the region.  We had a very useful discussion about where we are headed and what we want to achieve.  As long as we agree on that, and we decide to get down to work, we can build a better relationship.
We discussed the idea of new partnership agreements   what I call  Pacific Partnerships for Development .
I was pleased that we could agree on this approach.  The important point is these Pacific Partnerships for Development will be about shared goals for Australia and our Pacific neighbours.  And it will be a symbol of our mutual commitment to each other.
We have already made a start by agreeing today on some important specific areas for cooperation.
I am particularly pleased that we agreed today on a new package of climate change measures.
No global challenge if more important.  No challenge demands more creative and cooperative responses than climate change.
We signed a joint statement today on climate change cooperation.  The statement noted three areas for cooperation: policy dialogue; forest carbon monitoring and measurement; and participation in global carbon markets.
We both have a lot to gain from cooperating in these fields.  We can draw on each other's experience, and we can show the world that countries with very different economic structures can find common ground on climate change.
I am also pleased that we discussed the Kokoda Track.  The Track is a great symbol of cooperation between us and it holds a unique place in our history. It is also a place of deep significance for many Australians who are the children or grandchildren of soldiers who walked the Kokoda Track.
Because of the Kokoda Track, many Australians are now discovering Papua New Guinea for the first time.
Mr Prime Minister I am also pleased to say that during my visit to Papua New Guinea, I will not just be seeing Port Moresby.
Visitors to Papua New Guinea are often urged to go see the country.  To go beyond Port Moresby and to meet the people.  But few do.  I'm pleased to say that on this, my first visit to Papua New Guinea as Prime Minister of Australia, I'll be going to Goroka tomorrow.
I understand that the Highlands Highway passes through Goroka.  I'm told it is the economic backbone of the country and its maintenance is critical for economic development and for access to key services such as health and education.
I'm very much looking forward to seeing that for myself.  And to seeing first hand a very beautiful and vibrant part of this great country.
Regional Affairs
Mr Prime Minister one reason I wanted to come to Port Moresby early in my term was to talk to you and members of your government about our region   the Pacific.
The Pacific countries are a diverse group.  There are the smaller island nations.  There is Australia and New Zealand.  And then there is Papua New Guinea.
Your country is unique.  It is a Pacific power and it sits at an important cross-road.
To your west is the world's largest Islamic democracy.  To your north the rapidly developing countries of East Asia.  And to your South Australia the world's sixth-largest country by landmass.
With these neighbours, your country has a great stake in regional affairs.
And perhaps your most important role is looking to your east, where the smaller Pacific countries lie.
As a leader in the region, Papua New Guinea is uniquely placed to help the island countries of the Pacific meet the challenges ahead.  And I look forward to working with you on those challenges.
Today, for instance, we discussed recent developments in Solomon Islands.  We are both committed to seeing stability in that country.  I appreciate your ongoing support for the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.
We also discussed Fiji.  As prime ministers of two democracies, we understand the importance of protecting our institutions   political, legal and social.  Without our institutions, there is no certainty for the people.  And without certainty there can be no future.
Mr Prime Minister I would like to think of today as the start of a new phase in the relationship between our two countries.
I hope that new phase will be characterised by cooperation, respect and partnership.
I hope, too, that this new phase will build even closer links between our people, our business communities and our governments.
And I hope that, in the future, our relationship will be recognised as a unique example of cooperation.



     * The Government of Australia is committed to beginning a new era of cooperation with the island nations of the Pacific. 
     * Australia respects the independence of the island nations, and the diversity and complexity of development challenges across our shared region. 
     * Economic growth across the Pacific island nations, while improving in some, generally lags behind other developing regions.  Progress towards the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals has been mixed. 
     * The Pacific has significant natural resources  -  minerals, timber and marine resources.  Managing them wisely and sustainably is a challenge for the region.
     * Australia and the Pacific island nations face a common challenge in climate change.  Many of our Pacific neighbours, especially low lying atolls, are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, including devastation from more frequent and severe extreme weather events. 
     * The Government of Australia is committed to working in close cooperation with the Pacific island nations to meet our common challenges and to raise the standard of living for people throughout the region.
     * The Government of Australia proposes to pursue Pacific Partnerships for Development with our Pacific island neighbours.  These Pacific Partnerships for Development will provide a new framework for Australia and the Pacific island nations to commit jointly to achieving shared goals. 
     * Under the Pacific Partnerships for Development, the Government of Australia will be prepared to provide increased development assistance over time in a spirit of mutual responsibility embracing commitments by the Pacific island nations to improve governance, to increase investment in economic infrastructure, and to achieve better outcomes in health and education.
     * The Pacific Partnerships for Development will be a mechanism to provide better development outcomes for the Pacific Island nations.  These Partnerships will embrace: 
         * improving economic infrastructure and enhancing local employment possibilities through infrastructure and broad-based growth;
         * enhancing private sector development, including better access to microfinance;
         * achieving quality, universal basic education;
         * improving health outcomes through better access to basic health services; and
         * enhancing governance, including the role of civil society, and the role of non-government organisations in basic service delivery.
     * Working jointly to help the Pacific island nations meet their Millennium Development Goals will also be a focus of the Partnerships. 
     * Australia will increase its practical cooperation with the Pacific island nations to meet the challenge of climate change and sustainable management of resources. 
     * Australia will make a direct contribution to education and training opportunities for citizens from the Pacific island nations  -  including through the enhancement of regional education institutions and a significant program of scholarships to study at Australian education institutions. 
     * Australia is also committed to linking the economies of the Pacific island nations to Australia and New Zealand and to the world, including through pursuing a region-wide free trade agreement and enhancing other private sector development opportunities.  This will help to secure a sustainable and more prosperous future for the region.
     * As we announced in Canberra on 27 February, the Governments of Australia and New Zealand will work more closely together and with our partners to coordinate our development assistance to the Pacific.  Together, Australia and New Zealand provide around $1 billion of development assistance to the region.  By working together we can improve the impact of our development assistance and provide better results for the people of the Pacific islands.
     * Australia will also work to increase its cooperation with other donor countries and organisations, and international financial institutions such as the World Bank, including through more coordinated delivery of development assistance programs across the region and joint programs where feasible. 
     * Australia is committed to close and strong relationships with our Pacific neighbours and with regional organisations, particularly the Pacific Islands Forum.  We are also committed to fostering stronger linkages between Australian, national and regional institutions. 
     * Australia's relationships in the region already have considerable depth  -  across people-to-people links, economics and trade, and government cooperation.  But Australia wants a new era of cooperation to begin.  The Government of Australia is committed to working with the Pacific island nations on the basis of partnership, mutual respect and mutual responsibility. 
     * Australia proposes that, progressively over the course of the coming years, we negotiate Pacific Partnerships for Development with those of our Pacific neighbours that share this vision.
     * Australia believes that, with long-term commitment and by working towards agreed goals, we will be able to build strong, stable nations in a more prosperous region. 
     * Australia believes that the Millennium Development Goals agreed by the international community at the United Nations Millennium Conference in 2000, provide an appropriate framework for developing nations world-wide, including in our region.  At the mid-point, progress towards the Millennium Development Goals has been mixed.  Australia wants to reach a common resolve with the island nations of the Pacific to strive towards greater success against the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.


As close friends and neighbours, the Government of Papua New Guinea and the Government of Australia have today mutually consented to long term cooperation on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
Rainforests contribute to global climate stability and underpin our global ecosystem. Nearly two thirds of Papua New Guinea's land area is forested, hosting some of the richest flora and fauna in the world and more than seven percent of the planet's biodiversity. This is one of the world's four remaining significant tropical rainforest wildernesses - more than 29 million hectares - providing livelihoods for many Papua New Guinea communities.
This breath-taking natural beauty and cultural diversity creates a unique challenge to achieve economic development and defeat poverty, while being responsible stewards of a unique and irreplaceable part of the global biodiversity and contributing toward protection of the global climate system.
The Papua New Guinea - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership aims to address this challenge by reducing greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, improving livelihoods for forest-dependent communities and promoting biodiversity protection.  International carbon markets will be important in providing the necessary investment to significantly reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and this Partnership will support our participation in these emerging markets.
Our exchange of views and experiences on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation will inform Papua New Guinea's national action plans on climate change and reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, which are currently in preparation. It will complement Papua New Guinea's efforts to promote sustainable forest management and conserve globally significant biodiversity.
Papua New Guinea has played a valuable leadership role in promoting international discussions on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.  Australia and Papua New Guinea supported the December 2007 Bali Climate Change Conference mandate that reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries should be part of a future international climate change framework. 
Australia and Papua New Guinea will support efforts under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol to ensure that a future international agreement on climate change fully incorporates efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.  Our ultimate aim is to ensure that future international carbon markets provide incentives for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and that Papua New Guinea and Australia can fully participate.
Initial Areas for Australia  -  Papua New Guinea Collaboration
1.  Policy Dialogue
Papua New Guinea and Australia will engage in a strategic policy dialogue on climate change, and in particular reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD).  The aim of this dialogue will be to support negotiations on the development of market based incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation under the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol, and to ensure that Papua New Guinea and Australia can participate in these markets. We will also discuss the development of our respective national climate change and REDD policies and programmes.
2. Forest carbon monitoring and measurement
Recognising that a fundamental requirement for participation in global carbon markets will be the ability to measure change in forest carbon stocks over time, Papua New Guinea and Australia will work actively together to increase Papua New Guinea's capacity in forest carbon monitoring and assessment.
Building on Australia's experience in national carbon accounting and measurement, Australia will provide scientific, technical and analytical support to inform Papua New Guinea's development of its own national carbon accounting system.
The outcome will underpin Papua New Guinea's participation in global carbon markets and sustainable management of its forest estate, and will support Australia and Papua New Guinea's efforts to protect the Owen Stanley Ranges and Kokoda Track region.
3.  Participation in global carbon markets
Papua New Guinea is developing a REDD policy and necessary enabling frameworks to generate REDD carbon credits for the international market.  The Government of Australia has committed to developing an Australian Emissions Trading Scheme, and will explore the options of linking to other international systems.  Australia and Papua New Guinea will exchange experience and expertise that will support Papua New Guinea's and Australia's participation in international carbon markets.
Australia will support Papua New Guinea in identifying and implementing incentive-based REDD demonstration activities.  Details of future activities will also be determined during this initial period of collaboration, including addressing technical and methodological issues and the potential involvement of additional partners. Future REDD activities in Papua New Guinea will demonstrate Papua New Guinea's readiness to participate in international carbon markets.
Australia and Papua New Guinea believe that REDD demonstration activities in Papua New Guinea will provide valuable lessons to inform international negotiations on market based incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions from deforestation  and forest degradation under the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol.


SOMARE: Ladies and gentlemen. Australian Prime Minister Hon Kevin Rudd will be making a short statement and of course address the press, local and the overseas press. Thank you
PM: Thank you very much Prime Minister and I would like to thank very much the Grand Chief for making me so welcomed here in Port Moresby today. In this room here we just met the entire membership of his cabinet and discussed the future of our bi-lateral relationship.
We discussed the future for cooperation within the wider Pacific region and the Island States within it. And also the cooperation we can now engage in globally on the great challenge of climate change.
First of all what I would say is thank you Chief for making me feel so welcome. I believe that the time has come for us to turn a new page and write a new chapter in the Australia-Papua New Guinea relationship and that process begins today. On top of that we need to look at what framework we unfold for the future to govern our relationship as two democracies in this Pacific region of ours.
Today I'm releasing the Port Moresby declaration. The Port Moresby declaration goes to our proposal as Australia for the future, for pacific development partnerships between Australia and the states of the Pacific region; the Island states.
The reason for releasing this declaration here in Port Moresby is because of Papua New Guinea's significance as a power within the South Pacific region. It also reflects the leadership role which the Chief himself has displayed in the past and continues to display in the affairs of the Pacific Island forum.
This Port Moresby declaration and the pacific development partnerships described in it go to two simple propositions. The first is for ourselves as Australia and the states of the south pacific region. We need to ensure that our future development relationship is based on mutual respect, mutual partnership and mutual responsibility. That's the first principal.
The second is this; that when we look at the great challenges of development which face developing countries such as Papua New Guinea, we are mindful of the targets and goals which have been set by the millennium development goals on education, on health and on other critical disease categories such as HIV-Aids and tuberculosis and malaria.
That in moving towards those goals we must have common programs between us to achieve those goals. Therefore these Pacific development partnerships are very clear that we are working within the millennium development goals framework laid down in the year 2000 for all developing countries including Papua New Guinea.
Secondly, what we are saying within that framework is that we as the new Government of Australia want to enter into cooperative partnerships with our friends here in Papua New Guinea and elsewhere within the region, based on our own commitment to increase our official development assistance program over time. We made that clear before the election in Australia that we would do so, that is raising our level of ODA from 0.3 to 0.5 by 2015. The other part of it is to have these programs based on reciprocal respect and mutual responsibility to achieve those millennium development goals, which have been laid out for the region.
The last thing I'd say is this, we are carving out a new chapter in the relationship between Australia and Papua New Guinea. We are carving out a new framework for our relationship with the rest of the pacific island countries.
On top of that what the Chief and I have discussed today is how do we work together on the broader international stage in the great challenge of climate change. The document that we have just signed is a Papua New Guinea-Australia forest carbon partnership. It is a practical piece of cooperation between our two countries.
If you look at the overall challenge of climate change, the big source of emissions is coal fired electricity generation around the world. A second big challenge for the overall climate change dynamic is what happens with deforestation and avoided deforestation.
How do we best manage that into the future? And it is this area where countries like Brazil, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea have such a significant role to play. That's why in this Papua New Guinea-Australia forest carbon partnership, we've outlined a new framework to work together on this.
A regular dialogue on how we can advance this agenda within the international forums of the world. Secondly an Australian offer for technical assistance when it comes to the satellite based monitoring of the extent of forestry coverage here in Papua New Guinea, as is applied domestically within Australia for some decades.
And thirdly to work with our friends in Papua New Guinea on then applying what is available within the clean development mechanism of the Kyoto conference framework and a future private carbon market to deliver future revenue streams to Papua New Guinea on the basis of them engaging in programs to reduce deforestation.
This is a practical area of cooperation. So in summary Chief I thank you for your welcome. I thank for the new page we can turn on our relationship as two countries, which have known each other for a long long time. And on top of that a new partnership and framework through this Port Moresby declaration for our future relationships here in Papua New Guinea and more widely across the region. But critically working together on the great global and regional challenge of climate change. I look forward very much to this new partnership with you.
SOMARE: Thank you very much Kevin for taking your wonderful time to come out to our country and as a leader of Government in Papua New Guinea; I just want to say how grateful we are for you to be able to take this time to come and make first state visit to us. And I reported earlier on in that this is the first time a new Australian Prime Minister after 33 years of independence has visited. To make a state visit, there were other visits by Australian Prime Ministers on regional forum meetings, in conferences, opening of Parliaments and so on so fourth. But after independence of 33 years this first time which when we declared independence from Australia to first Labor Government of Hon Gough Whitlam.
And this is the first time a Labor Prime Minister has made a state visit to Papua New Guinea. Other official visits and openings and so on so on, but for a state visit this is very important for us in Papua New Guinea.
This is the beginning of our revised and new relationship that we've had just in the past few years things have not worked out as we've expected. The relationship was more or less deteriorated for a little while because of what transpired at the time. There was no common understanding, mutual understanding between the differences that we have and the differences that previous Australian Governments have.
But it's all water under the bridge, we are talking about a new beginning. New beginnings and new relationships. New relationship for Papua New Guinea and Australia. A very important document that we just signed takes us further on. I think Australia, ourselves, Indonesia are like in triangle on this particular issue of carbon emissions and degradation of forests and forests itself.
I think it's very important today marks a milestone in our history that we will be working very closely in partnership with you. And Australian people are to make sure that we keep the millennium goal that was enshrined in 2000 at the United Nations General Assembly of which part of that was also my being the co chairman of the forest council- international forest council with the countries in which Papua New Guinea's ranked as (inaudible) in the region.
We believe it is very important for us to work together. You have the technology and you have the know how. You've done a lot of preliminary work before us and we will be hoping and cooperating (inaudible). All these things will be finalised when we have a Ministerial conference again in April. Our Ministry conference will be held in Medang.
For all the other matters that we have raised, matter's of bi-lateral relationship, partnership. I think the important thing today was the partnership issue that you have raised. Signing Port Moresby declaration goes to show again the faith and the belief that the Australian people have about a country called Papua New Guinea.
We have 6 million people and we are a bigger part of the pacific-larger and we are very proud of the fact that as soon as you were elected Prime Minister; we thought there's a new beginning of our relationships. And I'm extremely pleased that we are very proud of the fact that you could make your first visit to us in Port Moresby and tomorrow in to Goroka.
Prime Minister there are many issues which we will be discussing and I do not want to take much of your time. My response was to welcome you again formally. To say your most welcome and tomorrow we will give you a new light on what you see from our valley's and mountains and our hills and maybe different climate than Queensland.
Port Moresby is similar to Queensland as you mentioned the climate. So tomorrow will be a bit different for you so we offer yo something different tomorrow. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you very much
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd welcome to Papua New Guinea. My name is (Inaudible) from the Australian Broadcasting corporation. What is Australia's Governments Stance, your Governments stance on the Kokoda track. (Inaudible)
PM: Well I think all Australians have a great emotional and historical attachment to the Kokoda track. So many young Australian men in uniform came here fought and died in defence of our country and our way of life during that great conflict.
When you look at the challenges today they go to conflicting land use needs, they go to how is this area best protected for the future, for our common aspirations, for world heritage protection.
But above all, this is a sovereign state of Papua New Guinea and this sovereign state of Papua New Guinea will be making it's own decisions about the future. What the Prime Minister and I did today was discuss this at length and there will be further discussions between our officials between and now and the ministerial forum for Foreign ministers which occurs in April and will be held in Medang.
We are confident that our officials will arrive at a good outcome on this which deals with the challenges of land use, deals with the needs of local villages and the local community, deals also with the historical significance which this track has for many people in my country and the long term challenge of how you also manage our common aspirations to have this marvellous, marvellous natural asset best preserved for the long term future. So we've agreed on a process to do that over the course of next month or so.
JOURNALIST: Is it a condition of that process that the track not be altered at all?
PM: Well there's a huge debate between historians about where the track is and where it was; and where it is now. I don't propose to enter into that here. There's probably a two day seminar worth of activity in that.
What I think the best thing to do is entrust our officials to resolve this amicably and effectively as I'm sure we will in the period ahead. Which respects fully the interest of local villagers a well as delivering a good outcome for the best protection of this major historical and natural asset which is the Kokoda track.
TIM LESTER: Prime Minister Somare, Tim Lester from the Nine Network, if I could ask if we know our Prime Minister's view on the Kokoda track and whether it should be heritage listed. Could I ask for your personal view on whether you believe the Kokoda track should be heritage listed or the minerals around it should be exploited?
SOMARE: I think I have made my views known to the Prime Minister as we discussed, we will be reaching, we will get our officials to sit down and discuss it. We will have a look at it. And then definitely it will be enlisted in the heritage. But there are areas in which we have to take interest, take into account the interests of our own people, the localities behind the track. We definitely, we will be and in April, and by then we reach some understanding between the two countries.
TIM LESTER: So might a mine and a heritage listing coexist Prime Minister.
SOMARE: This is one of the issues which, for us is not new. We know about it and, but now that the interest is really growing, fast growing interest on enlisting as a heritage for the world, for Papua New Guinea and the world, this is something we are definitely going to reach a agreement on in April.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SOMARE: We have to have a careful look at it. And we are looking at the (inaudible) that has been done. Our water catchment is a big concern here because it (inaudible), city will be greatly effected by water supply. So we are discussing these issues and I am sure that we will reach some understanding in April. So the issue is one the table. It has been discussed, both sides would sit together before April's meeting and sort out this particular problem.
PM: To add to what Sir Michael said then. We had a very amicable and long discussion about this and I think, characteristic of a new partnership between us, I would be very surprised if we don't come out with a decent outcome which deals with everyone's legitimate interests in what is an important matter for PNG and an important matter for Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd would you be willing to offer land owners compensation to make up for lost royalties
PM: What we have said is that the officials will get together and look at all aspects of the problem, that includes the legitimate interests of local land holders. They are as important in this equation as anybody else and therefore, what would be necessary for them for the future. I am pretty confident that through the mechanisms which we have had working with one another in the last few weeks, and they will continue over the next few weeks, that we will have something to say about this by the time we get to our Ministerial forum in Medang.
JOURNALIST: A question on the carbon partnership, are the two countries  -  we have only just got the release now  - 
PM: That's because we just signed it, I am sorry, did you want it before hand?
JOURNALIST: Are the two countries now committing that their future emissions trading systems will be compatible so that carbon credits can be bought and sold between Australia and Papua New Guinea? And can I also ask, is Professor Garnaut, advising you Professor Somare on future options.
PM: I think on the first point, and I will of course let Prime Minister to answer if he sees fit on the Professor Garnaut question. On the first one, what is our aspiration? I mean the three operational dimensions or, parts of this carbon, forest carbon partnership document that we have just signed. The first one commits us to a dialogue process. The second one to measurement, that is how do you measure what is happening in forests. And that is critical, for it to be credible globally, for any future unfolding global set of markets which operate for carbon and thirdly, the third par of the document looks at two possibilities, and that is how any decision by Papua New Guinea in this connection could be enhanced and served by a global carbon market, regional carbon market or national carbon markets, which provide readily, those who would, a supply of those companies or individuals who would want to assist with the decision in Papua New Guinea to retain forests.
That's a smart way to go. Will we be able to get there? That's why we have got a dialogue unfolding. We actually think however, it is a legitimate aspiration for us to have because PNG doing it's bit for the world through avoided deforestation is very important.
There are some 29 million hectares of rainforest in this country, I am advised. That is a lot. But there has to be some return for Papua New Guinea, by way of the clean development mechanism which exists under the United Nations framework and through the operation of private carbon markets as well, if we can get to that point.
This is a frame work which has those as possible end points. It is far better we start heading in that direction together rather than heading in different directions.
SOMARE: There was a question raised on the land owners and the land owner issues, which we have already taken up and my Deputy Prime Minister who is the Minister for Mining has sat down with the land groups, yesterday was the last meeting he had. There is a lot of understanding going on now, for us to reach an amicable understanding between Australia and us on this particular issue. Particularly infrastructure development, or whatever fringe benefits that will come to the land owners from Kokoda, Kokoda down to Port Moresby.
So, there is an understanding there with our land owners so we have not taken it lightly, not taken it simply because of our water catchment issue which we believe some decision will be reached, at the, in April meeting of our respective ministers.
JOURNALIST: Was there any discussion about the use of Australian police in PNG?
PM: We had a discussion about that. Recently the PNG Police Commissioner has asked for some assistance from Australia in relation to various police advisers, we are of course responding positively to that. Those discussions are happening as we speak. I understand there will be some formalisation of it by the time we get to the Ministerial forum in Madang in April.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on a domestic issues, your government today has approved a 4.99 per cent average increase in health insurance premiums, how will this affect working families a day after the Reserve Bank increased interest rates.
PM: Well, when it comes to the cost of living pressures on families right across the country, mortgages, childcare costs, petrol costs, grocery costs, it all adds up. As do private health insurance costs. What the Minister for Health has been seeking to do in her discussions with each of those private health insurance firms is to keep asks for premium increases as low as possible. This has been a difficult and protracted negotiation and the Minister for Health has handled it in the best way possible.
None of this is easy. It all impacts on the bottom line for families. We understand that, which is why on the broader question of handling the challenges of inflation and their impact on mortgages in Australia, ever since the government has been elected, we have been entirely focussed on the fight against inflation to bring downward pressure on inflation and rates over time. Thank you for you time.


I want to thank the organisers for the invitation to speak at this event hosted by the PNG-Australia Business Council and the Business Council of PNG in Association with the PNG Australia Alumni Association.
Since 1980, the PNG-Australia Business Council has helped nurture trade and investment links between PNG and Australia. The Council plays a valuable role in supporting new businesspeople, making its members aware of new business opportunities, and providing advice to both governments on what we can do to make it easier for the business community.
We appreciate the cooperation of the PNG Business Council as the nation's premier business group. Thank you for your support for the relationship between Australia and Papua New Guinea.
I also want to thank the PNG Australia Alumni Association.
One of the strongest stands in the relationship between our countries  -  besides rugby league of course  -  is the people who have spent extended periods of time in both nations, like PNG students or officials in Australia. They return home with a deeper understanding of the culture, values and way things happen in each other's country. Their contribution to the relationship between our countries is invaluable.
On a related point, I do hope that all of you will have a chance to join in the Australia Week celebrations that will be hosted by the High Commission next week.
This might be my first visit to Papua New Guinea as Prime Minister, but it is not the first time I have been here.
I came here in April 2006 and walked the Kokoda Track.
Like many other Australians, walking the Kokoda Track gave me a deeper sense of the bonds between Australia and Papua New Guinea than I could have imagined. For an Australian, there's something spiritual about the place.
Our people formed strong bonds as we fought and struggled together in World War II.
There are bonds formed too as we worked together for the transition to independence in 1975, and through the early days of PNG's independence  -  right through to today.
Many of you know about this history  -  you have lived through, and you have contributed to it and helped to shape it.
Now is the time for us to look forward  -  to consider the future of our relationship and to commit to a new partnership that embraces the new challenges of the 21st century: economic development in a global economy now being transformed by the rise of China and India; climate change; regional stability and regional security.
The PNG Story
The future for Papua New Guinea in this globalised world should be bright.
Like Australia, Papua New Guinea has benefited from strong global demand for commodities in recent years.
GDP growth is projected to be over 6 per cent in 2008. It was over 5 per cent last year.
That means the PNG economy is now worth around USD 6 billion  -  that is an impressive figure in a region where many countries measure their GDP in the $100s of millions or less.
Debt levels have been brought down. The Government has kept the budget is in surplus and the current account is running a surplus.
This country is growing. And it is already the leader in the region  -  accounting for around three-quarters of the region's total population.
I am pleased to say that trade and investment between our two countries continues to grow.
Our merchandise trade was worth almost $4 billion last year and the balance trade balance is in PNG's favour.
And there are growing opportunities for investment particularly in the resources sector, building on the 4000 individual Australian businesses that trade with PNG each year.
But PNG also has some challenges ahead of it. Progress has been mixed against the United Nations Millennium Development Goals that set targets to reduce poverty, improve health and ensure universal primary education.
The New Australian Government
The new Australian Government was elected to office only 106 days ago.
We were elected on 24 November on a platform of taking responsibility for our nation's future.
To help Australia meet the great challenge of climate change  -  both for our environment and our economy.
To build a world class education system.
To improve our hospitals and health services.
To fundamentally reform the Australian Federation, by significantly reducing instances of cost shifting, blame shifting, duplication and waste.
To deliver a strong economy that delivers for working families.
During our first three months in office we have begun the project the Australian people elected us to fulfil.
That is to build a modern Australia capable of meeting our future challenges  -  both for the nation and for working families.
Front and centre on our agenda has been the economy.
Because we believe that disciplined and responsible economic management must be the core business of any government.
At the heart of our economic agenda has been fighting inflation  -  and keeping downward pressure on interest rates.
At the same time, we have also placed high priority on building long-term productivity growth. We see this as a responsible way of building a strong economy and putting downward pressure on inflation.
Investing in the long term drivers of productivity growth is an underlying factor in our desire to build a world class education system.
We've called it an education revolution  -  fundamental reform right across the spectrum of education in Australia  -  from early childhood education, to schools, tech colleges, universities and R &amp; D.
Our Government has begun work on implementing many of our education initiatives - whether it be trades training centres in our secondary schools, computers in schools for all year 9 to 12 students or the bringing forward of 20,000 skills training places - the ball is well and truly now rolling.
We have also placed high priority on developing the infrastructure needs of the country.
We have established Infrastructure Australia to conduct an immediate audit of the capacity constraints which exist nationwide and we are committed to acting on the bottlenecks which create unnecessarily further inflationary pressures and hold back productivity growth.
On climate change our government has now ratified the Kyoto Protocol. This was our first act as a newly sworn in government.
Internationally, we are now a ready and willing participant in the process to negotiate an effective post-2012 agreement.
And on the home front, we are now working towards the establishment of an emissions trading system and a 20 per cent renewable energy target by 2020.
Our government's agenda is big and so is our appetite to see real and tangible outcomes  -  outcomes that help prepare Australia to meet its future challenges.
Pacific Partnerships for Development
One other key part of the new government's agenda is our foreign policy. I am determined for Australia to have good, strong relationships with the countries of the Pacific.
So, yesterday, I released the Port Moresby Declaration. This Declaration symbolises Australia's new approach to the region.
The core of the Declaration is that Australia will begin to negotiate Pacific Partnerships for Development with the nations of the Pacific.
These Partnerships will provide a new framework for Australia and the Pacific island nations to commit jointly to achieving shared goals.
Under the Pacific Partnerships for Development, the Government of Australia will be prepared to provide increased development assistance over time. We will do so in a spirit of mutual respect, mutual responsibility and mutual cooperation.
The Partnerships will embrace:
     * improving economic infrastructure and enhancing local employment possibilities through infrastructure and broad-based growth;
     * enhancing private sector development, including better access to microfinance;
     * achieving quality, universal basic education;
     * improving health outcomes through better access to basic health services; and
     * enhancing governance, including the role of civil society, and the role of non-government organisations in basic service delivery.
The goal of these Pacific Partnerships for Development is to assist the countries of the Pacific make real progress against the Millennium Development Goals.
I understand that these are long-term goals. But the target date for achieving the Millennium Development Goals is 2015, which is not that far away.
I look forward to Australia and Papua New Guinea working towards a Pacific Partnership for Development.
But we are already doing a lot together. Today I will visit Goroka. Because our Government recognises that there is more to Papua New Guinea than Port Moresby alone  -  this is big country with diverse cultures and diverse challenges.
One such challenge that I would like to address today is the spread of HIV/AIDs.
AusAID projections for Papua New Guinea on HIV/AIDS infection rates out to 2025 are alarming:
     * there are currently between 40,000 and 60,000 people with HIV/AIDS;
     * with a business a s usual response, this will result in half a million cases by 2025;
     * with a strengthened response, the result will be 350,000 cases; and
     * with a heightened response through education, prevention and management the result will be 220,000.
That's why today I am announcing that our Government will commit $13 million in programs towards assisting non-government organisations working right across Papua New Guinea with people affected by HIV/AIDS. NGOs working in this field who will receive support include Save the Children, Anglicare and World Vision.
One of the programs is funding for the Burnet Institute who work with Save the Children, Family Health International and World Vision. Their program seeks to reduce the risks of HIV/AIDS for the most vulnerable members of the community.
Because of the movement of our two peoples in and around the Torres Strait, Australia and PNG have a mutual interest in ensuring that this moves to the top of our bilateral cooperation agenda.
I can also announce today that Australia will increase overall aid funding to Papua New Guinea by up to $25 million in 2008-09. This funding will go to education, health and law and justice support and incentive based payments.
These new funds will be targeted at upgrading schools, doing more in the fight against malaria, and doing more to maintain and upgrade key roads.
Incentive based payments will offer the possibility of more funding once jointly agreed performance criteria are met. These funds could then be used by the Government of Papua New Guinea for further work in areas such as infrastructure.
This is one of the ideas at the heart of the Pacific Partnerships for Development I announced yesterday in the Port Moresby Declaration  -  mutual responsibility.
When you look at these announcements, you can see that we are already working towards the Millennium Development Goals  -  health, education and infrastructure are all key elements of our approach.
And, I am very pleased to announce today a series of programs to help develop sports in Papua New Guinea  -  particularly Rugby League.
This $260,000 package is targeted at enhancing facilities at sports grounds and providing equipment such as boots, jumpers and shorts.
We will provide $50,000 to help around 2000 young players meet the registration costs for playing football.
I am also pleased to announce that I have agreed to a request for the Australian Rugby League to use the title “Prime Minister's XIII” for a match against the PNG national team the Kumlus.
I want to give a real boost to sport in PNG. Helping provide young people with access to sporting facilities and organised sporting activities is a good way for us to send messages about fitness and good health among young people.
Carbon Forest Agreement
Yesterday Prime Minister Somare and I also discussed climate change.
In fact, we did more than just talk about it. We signed the Australia-PNG Forest Carbon Partnership.
It is about us taking action together on climate change. It is an example of us working together on the most important global issue we face.
Under the Forest Carbon Partnership, Australia and PNG recognise the importance of reducing emissions from rainforests as one key element in effective global action against climate change  -  emissions from deforestation constitute the second-largest source of global emissions after power stations.
With more than 29 million hectares of rainforest in PNG, it is one of the most important countries for this type of activity.
Under this new partnership we will discuss firstly how we can work together to establish sustainable forest management as an integral part of a future international climate change agreement.
Secondly, Australia will provide technical support to PNG in building a satellite based forest monitoring system and means for measuring carbon in forests. This will be an essential ingredient in positioning PNG to participate in future international carbon trading markets.
Thirdly, we will explore opportunities for practical projects to show how international carbon trading arrangements might work on the ground.
The Private Sector
Our Forest Carbon Partnership have a real connection to the business community.
For instance, our work on forest carbon has the potential to generate substantial investment flows into PNG. International businesses seeking to offset emissions increasingly will be looking for credible and verifiable emissions credits, including from forests.
We look forward to engaging with business as part of our cooperation with PNG on forest carbon.
The Pacific Partnerships for Development are also closely linked to business. Enhancing private sector development, including through better access to microfinance and helping build better infrastructure are key areas under the Partnerships  -  areas that are crucial for broad-based, sustainable economic growth.
The Australian Government is committed to a new partnership with Papua New Guinea. And we hope that the private sector can be a big part of that.
Global and Regional Partners
Just as Australia and Papua New Guinea can work more closely together bilaterally, we can also work together more on regional matters.
The Pacific Islands Forum is the most important of the region's institutions. Its annual leaders meetings set the political direction for the Pacific.
I am committed to enhancing our engagement with the Pacific Islands Forum. In the lead up to this year's leaders meeting in Niue in September I look forward to working with Sir Michael and other leaders in the region.
The region stands to gain a lot from closer integration  - particularly economic integration. We will be pursuing negotiations for a region-wide free trade agreement  -  the so called PACER Plus talks.
As the biggest trading Pacific island nation by far, PNG will be a key partners for us in the negotiations.
I understand the interest in the Pacific in labour mobility as a key part of economic integration. We are looking closely at this complex issue. We are following a New Zealand pilot program very closely and hope to discuss labour mobility at the Pacific Island Forum later this year.
Australia's cooperation with Papua New Guinea goes beyond these traditional areas. At the Bali Climate Change meeting in December, Prime Minister Somare, President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and I discussed climate change.
Cooperation between Australia, Indonesia and PNG has the potential to have a real impact on greenhouse gas emissions, particularly if we look at better forest management.
I believe that Australia and Papua New Guinea have begun a new era of cooperation.
I have no illusions that Australia and PNG will need to work hard  -  harder than we ever have  -  to move our relationship up a gear. But I'm also determined that we do so, and that we show the world how two diverse and different nations in the same region are capable of tackling contemporary challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen ...
Our two great countries are linked together through history, through people and through a desire for a better future.
As leader of the Australian Government I will be doing what I can to strengthen those links.
But I also want to ask for your help  -  the Australians here in Papua New Guinea, the PNG business community, those of you who have studied in Australia, and those of you with links to Australia through links between church and other community groups. I want to ask you to join me in building a stronger relationship between us.
A new partnership that can be a model to the rest of the world.
A new partnership that gets results.
A new partnership that advances the interests of both our nations and our region.
A new partnership that has started today.
Thank you.


The Australian Government today announced a range of new development assistance measures for our nearest neighbour Papua New Guinea.
The measures announced by the Australian Government today will:
     * Assist PNG in its fight against the spread of HIV/AIDs
     * Help PNG work towards meeting its Millennium Development Goals on health and education
     * Build better roads
     * Develop sporting facilities to encourage young people to participate in sport
The fight against HIV/AIDs
The Australian Government will provide increased funding to help fight the spread of HIV/AIDS in Papua New Guinea.
The Australian Government will commit $13 million to NGOs working across Papua New Guinea with people affected by HIV/AIDS.
NGOs working in this field who will receive support will include Save the Children, Anglicare and World Vision.
AusAID projections for Papua New Guinea on HIV/AIDS infection rates out to 2025 are alarming. There are currently between 40,000 and 60,000 people with HIV/AIDS:
     * a “business as usual” response will result in half a million cases by 2025;
     * a strengthened response will result in 350,000 cases by 2025; and
     * a heightened response through education, prevention and management will result in 220,000 cases by 2025.
This funding boost will allow NGOs to continue working on awareness programs, prevention, treatment and counselling for people living and working in areas most affected by HIV/AIDs.
Helping PNG meet its Millennium Development Goals
The Australian Government will increase overall aid funding to PNG by up to $25 million in 2008-09. This funding will go to education, health, law and justice support and incentive based payments.
These new funds will be targeted at upgrading schools, doing more in the fight against malaria, and doing more to maintain and upgrade key roads.
Incentive based payments will offer the possibility of more funding once jointly agreed performance criteria are met. These funds could then be used by the Government of PNG for further work in areas such as infrastructure. This is one of the ideas at the heart of the Pacific Partnerships for Development announced yesterday in the Port Moresby Declaration  -  mutual responsibility.
Building better roads
The Australian Government will release $25 million for the maintenance of the Highlands Highway, a vital link for trade and commerce. This funding is being released following the PNG Government's commitment of $87.8 million through the Key Roads for Growth Maintenance Project.
The joint funding arrangement reflects the shared commitment of the Australian and PNG Governments to this important infrastructure project.
Encouraging sport
The Australian Government today announced a series of programs to help develop sport in Papua New Guinea  -  particularly Rugby League.
A new $260,000 package will be targeted at enhancing facilities at sports grounds and providing equipment such as boots, jumpers and shorts. The Government will provide $50,000 to help around 2000 young players meet the registration costs for playing football.
The Government has also agreed to a request for the Australian Rugby League to use the title “Prime Minister's XIII” for a match against the PNG national team the Kumlus.
The Australian Government wants to give a real boost to sport in PNG. Helping provide young people with access to sporting facilities and organised sporting activities is a good way for us to send messages about fitness and good health among young people.


The Prime Minister today announced that Australia will seek to host the 2009 Pacific Islands Forum.
Mr Rudd said the Australian Government is determined to work with its neighbouring countries in the Pacific on building a stronger region.
“I want Australia to host next year's Pacific Islands Forum to send a clear message to our regional neighbours that Australia is back in business in Pacific affairs,” Mr Rudd said.
“It's been 14 years since Australia last hosted the Pacific Islands Forum. That's far too long.”
“We need to be seriously engaged in our own region  -  on climate change, on regional trade, on development and a raft of other areas.”
“I want a new era of cooperation between Australia and the Pacific Island nations and hosting the Forum will be a big step in that direction.”
“Strengthening Australia's partnerships with our regional neighbours forms the basis of the Port Moresby Declaration that I issued on 6 March.”
“Australia wants to build new relations with its Pacific neighbours on the basis of mutual trust, mutual responsibility and mutual cooperation.”
Mr Rudd said during his three day visit to PNG and the Solomon Islands that he had secured the support of Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare and Prime Minister Sikua for Australia to host the Forum.


PM SIKUA: Thank you, thank you very much ladies and gentlemen of the media. First of all I wish to thank Prime Minister Rudd for taking time from his busy schedule to visit Solomon Islands. This is a manifestation of the new chapter in our bilateral relations. We've had a very successful meeting this morning and I wish to thank Prime Minister Rudd for his indications of additional funding support for rehabilitation and other priorities, priority areas of the (Coalition for National Unity and Rural Advancement) Government that I lead. I welcome the announcement of the $14.5 million additional funding announced by Prime Minister Rudd and I'm also grateful for the granting of the fifth freedom rights to Solomon Airlines.
I also wish to acknowledge and warmly welcome Australia's commitment to work with the region including Solomon Islands under the Pacific partnerships framework. My Government is committed to working closely with Australia and the region on the basis of this framework.
On RAMSI we will continue to consult with a, through contributing countries on matters pertaining to the operation of RAMSI. I hope that RAMSI will continue to assist the Government in fulfilling its rural development priorities and goals. Finally Solomon Islands supports Australia, Australia's bid to host the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders meeting in 2009, thank you ladies and gentlemen.
PM RUDD: Thank you very much Prime Minister for you welcome here in Honiara today and the welcome we also received from members of your Cabinet and I would thank the Solomon Islands Prime Minister for his support and the support from the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea for Australia's bid to host the 2009 Pacific Islands Forum in our country. We think that is a good step forward for Australia in its new partnership of cooperation with the island states of the Pacific. It has been some 14 years since Australia hosted a Pacific Islands Forum and by 2009 it will be 15 years, so it's over due for Australia to host this important gathering of all the island states of our most immediate region and I thank the two Prime Ministers, representing two significant nation states within the Pacific Islands Forum family for their support for Australia hosting this important event.
On top of that, the discussions we have had today have focused on RAMSI, they've focused on our proposal for Pacific development partnerships into the future. On RAMSI, we, as one of the participants in RAMSI, have appreciated the support provided to RAMSI operations by the Government of Solomon Islands. This is a partnership between the Solomons, the Pacific Islands Forum and contributor states including Australia. RAMSI has made progress against the objective set for it, there is still much work to do, but we are confident that it is headed very much in the right direction, and we look forward to working in partnership with the Government of Solomon Islands on how that work can be enhanced into the future
I thanked this morning the various participants of RAMSI. The men and women of the Australian Defense Force, our police, and of course our Government civilian officials and those of other countries as well for the important work they are doing on the ground.
The Prime Minister and I also discussed our framework for Pacific development partnerships for the future. In the case of Solomon Islands, this is not a substitute for RAMSI, it's an addition to RAMSI over time. And we look forward to these Pacific development partnerships as providing a mechanism based on mutual respect, mutual cooperation and mutual responsibility, to obtain the core development goals which we between us have set for the people of this beautiful country. On top of that, I have also indicated to the Prime Minister that Australia would be pleased to support some immediate and specific development projects concerning road infrastructure, recovery from the tsunami as well as other development priorities which the Prime Minister has identified.
Finally, before taking your questions, we also discussed the great question of whaling. This is a matter of concern to the Australian people, concern to peoples across the world. The proper conservation of whales, the proper conservation of these great creatures of the deep and working as an international community towards an end point of ending so called scientific whaling. And I've asked the Government of Solomons to work with us in the future in partnership in support for our efforts in the international whaling commission and in building a broader international coalition against so called scientific whaling. I appreciate the response I have received from the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands on this and I look forward to working with other partner Governments in the South Pacific on this challenge into the future. Australia is serious about this mission we have set for ourselves. We are looking at all ways in which we can advance the cause of protecting these great creatures of the deep into the future and working in partnership with island Pacific countries is an important step forward for us towards that end.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd is Australia's relationships with the Pacific now back on track?
PM RUDD: Well from the Australian Government's perspective we think they're getting back on track. The Port Moresby Declaration was intended for the entire region, the Pacific Development Partnerships are intended for the entire region and it's to herald a new period of mutual respect, mutual cooperation and mutual responsibility. We think we've made a good first start, a good first step in this direction and the response I've received both in Honiara, Port Moresby and even Goroka on this question has been pretty positive.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Sikua this morning Prime Minister Rudd said that the RAMSI forces would stay here for as long as they are welcome and as long as they had a job to do. Can you tell us what job there is left for them to do here and how long you think they should stay?
PM SIKUA: That is a matter in which we are looking at in our review and that will become clearer when the report is produced to Parliament by the mid of this year and we will discuss that in Parliament during the mid year Parliament session.
PM RUDD: What the Prime Minister and I discussed on that was that the Pacific Island Forum conducted a review of RAMSI's performance which was concluded last year and that review was positive. It's now being considered by relevant Parliamentary Committee I believe by the Solomon Islands Parliament and it will reach its conclusions by about the middle of the year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd I'd like to know if you addressed the issue of Fiji with your Papua New Guinea counterparts and the Solomon Islands Prime Minister?
PM RUDD: Certainly we have had discussions on Fiji in Port Moresby. We propose to have discussions on a range of regional questions over lunch fairly soon and that includes of course the desirable objective for us all of seeing an early return to Parliamentary democracy in Fiji.
JOURNALIST: Is there scope for you to work together to achieve that?
PM RUDD: I'll ask the Prime Minister to speak for himself on that, but for myself and Papua New Guinea, again I pay tribute to the work of the Grand Chief Sir Michael Somare and the very constructive role he's played both in the Forum and outside the Forum in encouraging Fiji's early return to Parliamentary and democratic processes. The target's set of course of 2009 and I think we are all marching in that direction together.
PM SIKUA: Yes it's good for us to work together.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you've talked about $14.5 million today for the Solomons and $38 million for PNG when you were there, a total of more than $40 million. What would you say to Australian people who they are facing tough budget, you've talked a lot about a tough budget, why should we be giving money to these Pacific nations when it's so tight back at home?
PM RUDD: It is a question of making sure that if you act now on the development challenges here in the region then you reduce the problems for Australia and other countries later on. If you leave these problems go...let's just assume for example there was no RAMSI, let's just assume there was no intervention, let's just assume that contributor states all walked away. There are real problems that could have emerged including the disintegration of certain regional states. And if that occurred that would of itself be a bad development for the region in terms of its stability. It would also be a bad development for Australia because what would happen is that you would inevitably be large scale outflows of refugees. Now that's why it's important for Australia to act sensibly, intelligently and cooperatively with our partner Governments in the region to build health, to build education, to build infrastructure, to build economic opportunities for the peoples of the Island States, for their own futures. But also it is entirely meshed with the interests of the Australian people as well. Otherwise if this region is not properly attended to, then these problems come crashing across our doors later on.
JOURNALIST: Australian carers and now Australian pensioners are worried by reports in recent days that your Government is about to withdraw payments guaranteed under the previous Howard Government. Can you either give them a reassurance that those payments will remain or at least set their minds at rest and tell them what is being withdrawn and when?
PM RUDD: Right now we are engaged in a Budget process where everything is being debated in preparation for the upcoming Budget. We have been very transparent about that in the period since the last election. What I can say to carers and pensioners right across Australia  -  that there is no way on God's earth that I intend to leave them in the lurch. I will say to carers and pensioners across Australia that as a Labor Government we are there to extend a helping hand to those in need, and not to push them to one side as if they are unimportant. They are not. They are at the forefront of our attention and that will be the case as we frame this Budget and that will be seen on Budget night as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Sikua, could I ask you, your Attorney-General Chambers presented a submission to the Commission of Inquiry basically saying RAMSI was responsible for the damage in the riots and Australia should bare responsibility for compensation. Is that the Government's point of view?
PM SIKUA: I have not received those submissions, and therefore has not come to Cabinet to take a Government position on those submissions.
PM RUDD: Certainly on that matter itself which you have just raised Sean. Our view as Australia, is that RAMSI has acted entirely professionally and properly in discharging its responsibilities. For RAMSI there is absolutely no case to answer. RAMSI itself has made its own submission to this part inquiry which you would be aware. I'm certainly aware of the document to which you have referred as well. These matters will now be deliberated on by the appropriate Inquiry into what happened in those riots. But from the perspective of the Australian Government, there is no case to answer.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on whaling, are you concerned that a Japanese whaling ship has thrown, what they are calling “noise balls” onto the Steve Irwin?
PM RUDD: I'm deeply concerned by any behaviour in the Southern Ocean, from whichever party, which becomes potentially dangerous or incendiary. I make no particular judgment on what may have occurred in the last 24 hours or so. I'm here in the Solomons and have not seen the detail of what has transpired. But I would call on all parties who are active in this matter in the Southern Ocean to exercise restraint. The last thing that any of us want to happen is for there to be a tragedy down there because of any irresponsible behaviour anywhere.
JOURNALIST: Time to send the Oceanic Viking back?
PM RUDD: We have as you know deployed that vessel for one explicit purpose and that's been to collect evidence to form a basis for a possible international legal action and that mission has been successfully executed. We have also said from day one that whoever is down there, has to exercise proper restraint because no one, repeat, no one wants a tragedy to occur. And I would therefore call on all parties not to engage in provocative or incendiary behaviour and for all parties to exercise proper restraint.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Sikua, Prime Minister Rudd said that when he raised the issue enlisting your support for opposition to scientific whaling, he was pleased with your response. Can I ask you, what was your response?
PM SIKUA: Well, as you might know, the International Whaling Commission is meeting in London at the moment. We are not attending because usually Japan pays for our attendance but we refused that assistance and therefore we have not gone because we can't afford it. I'm not sure how much, but it does cost us money and in previous situations and meetings, Japan has been paying for our attendance but we have refused that assistance.
PM RUDD: So I thanked Prime Minister for his indication of working with us positively and cooperatively into the future in building a robust and real coalition against whaling around the world.
JOURNALIST: Did you offer to pay the Prime Minister's attendance?
PM RUDD: Neither his nor yours!


Today I met the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, the Hon Dr Derek Sikua MP, in Honiara to discuss how our governments can work together to address the significant development challenges facing Solomon Islands.
In our meeting, we confirmed our shared commitment to work in partnership, both bilaterally and through the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI), to deliver better outcomes for the people of Solomon Islands.
To do so, Prime Minister Sikua and I agreed that Australia and Solomon Islands will work together to establish a Pacific Partnership for Development: a bilateral agreement emphasising mutual commitments to improve long-term development outcomes.
This Pacific Partnership for Development will link improvements in a number of high priority areas to additional Australian assistance, including for public works to improve infrastructure and create local employment.
I was pleased to advise Prime Minister Sikua that Australia will provide an additional $3 million to Solomon Islands for the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads.
Australia will also provide a further $1.5 million for the construction of shelters in communities affected by the April 2007 earthquake and tsunami. This will be followed by up to $10 million in additional assistance in 2008-09 to support work in priority areas, including in infrastructure development, health, technical education and reforestation.
I welcomed Prime Minister Sikua's support for my proposal that Australia host the Pacific Islands Forum in 2009, as part of my government's efforts to strengthen Australia's engagement with the Pacific.
During my visit, I opened the Solomon Islands National Public Health Laboratory, constructed with Australian support. The laboratory will improve public health services in Solomon Islands and their ability to respond to outbreaks and epidemics by testing for diseases and water and food quality.
Australia is taking a lead role in supporting the Solomon Islands health sector by providing $60 million over five years.
Australia will also be scaling up its response to HIV and other sexually transmitted infections in the Pacific by providing $30 million over the next five years, focused on prevention activities at a community level and expanding testing and treatment in the region.


PM: Well thank you ladies and gentlemen.
The families, parents, local communities and police at the local level have been dealing with the problem of binge drinking for a long, long time. Families, parents, local communities know that binge drinking is a problem right across the country. What we find is that families and local police and communities have been trying to do their bit to turn this problem around, and today the Australian Government is putting up its hand to partner with them to try, to try to turn this problem around.
If you look at some of the figures, we have a big challenge on our hands. There is a 2005 survey by the Australian Secondary Students, of Australian Secondary Students Alcohol and Drug Survey. And it found that in a given week, approximately one in ten, that is 168,000 young people aged 12 to 17, reported binge drinking or drinking at risky levels. For 16 and 17 year olds, one in five drank at risky levels. In an earlier survey, 13 per cent of 18 to 20 year olds drank 13 or more standard drinks each time they visited a club, 83 per cent left the club as the driver of a vehicle and 70 per cent of males and 30 per cent of females believed that drinking was an important tradition at their club.
Ultimately, this, of course, is a question of personal responsibility. But what we propose to do is to, as the Australian Government, to do what we can to partner with parents and local communities and with families and with local police and sporting organisations to try and turn this problem around.
Therefore, we're announcing today a $53 million program, which has three parts to it.
A $14.4 million investment in community level initiatives to confront the culture of binge drinking, particularly in sporting organisations. This funding, in particular, would be dedicated to sporting clubs to assist them in developing local codes of conduct in relation to binge drinking. The Government will also take sporting organisations actions on this question into account in the possible future consideration of grants to such sporting organisations.
Secondly, the question of personal responsibility. $19.1 million to support innovative early intervention and diversion programs for young people under the age of 18. That is where young people are found binge drinking, to provide funding and support to assist to turn those young people around.
The possible initiatives there range anything from requiring young people to participate in educational and/or diversionary activities. Or even to allow the authorities to confiscate alcohol and to provide formal warnings. Our objective under this program is to have a major pilot project up and running in each state capital of Australia during the course of 2008. We need to learn how this can work effectively at a community level.
The third part of this new national binge drinking strategy is this: $20 million over two years in a hard hitting television, radio and internet campaign that confronts young people with the costs and consequences of binge drinking.
I can remember the impact of the HIV/AIDS television campaign in the ‘80s. Also, the impact of more recent television campaigns on smoking, also on the road toll. This ‘in your face' sort of advertising is necessary to confront young people with what happens if you go out binge drinking. It damages your health, increases the risk of damaging your life permanently through a car smash, or losing your life. And, I believe we need a no-holds-barred approach to putting it right in the face of young people as to what happens unless this is turned around.
The last thing I'd say is we don't pretend to have all the answers on this. We've actually spent quite some weeks working this through. But we believe this is a positive step in the right direction. We'll be reviewing this approach in 12 months time against the measures to see what effect has been yielded through this investment. In the meantime, we will be examining other measures through Nicola's department on how we can supplement this campaign with round two of a national binge drinking strategy in 2009.
I conclude where I began. Right across the community mums and dads know this is a real problem. They are trying hard to deal with it at the local community level. The Australian Government now wants to partner with them to see what we can do practically to turn this around. Nicola, do you want to add?
ROXON: Thanks very much. Look, as the Prime Minister has already outlined, this is an issue which is hurting our kids. It's hurting our communities but also, it is hurting our hospitals. I travelled around the country and talk to parents who raise this is as an issue all the time. But just as often I talk to health professionals who discuss the problems they're presented with in emergency departments every night. We know that this culture of drinking is causing great harm to many, many children and we know that it's going to cause even more harm if we don't do something, to do our bit to help stop it.
So the Prime Minister's taken you through the three initiatives that we are announcing today. This is a really important step in the way we tackle the problems of alcohol in our community.
More broadly, these initiatives will then be considered and any further work that the Government might be able to do in our preventative healthcare taskforce, an election commitment that was made, which is going to prioritise the issues of excessive consumption of alcohol. Also the use of tobacco and obesity. Three of the major drivers of health problems across the country.
But today we're focussed very much on what binge drinking does for young people. We know that we have a culture that is developing that is causing serious problems for young people. And we think we need to do our share in helping solve this problem.
If we get it right, this is of course going to make a huge difference to those young people whose lives can be so seriously damaged by not just the drinking, but the accidents and other incidents that often flow from binge drinking. But it will also have an impact on our hospitals on the work of our health professionals across the country, and we know that we have to work with parents and the community to really start to turn this trend around.
PM: Just as we go into this, to conclude. A couple of things we haven't included in this package which will be addressed either with the States and Territories or subject to further internal examination by us. One is alcohol advertising. That of course is subject to some consideration internally at the moment. That will take some time to work through. There is also I believe, a Parliamentary report which is being prepared on aspects of that. Secondly, proper labelling. And thirdly, the adequacy of existing State and Territory laws when it comes to dispensing alcohol to minors, or those suffering from intense intoxication.
So those have not been swept under the carpet. They are still being examined, and they would form part of continuing review by the Health Department during the course of this year, but we thought it was important to start work now in these areas.
JOURNALIST: I was just going to ask whether you are, you mentioned an uncomfortable dilemma with alcohol advertising on television (inaudible) encourages people to think that binge drinking should be part of that culture?
PM: Well, you want a personal view on that, personal view is yes. But we'd like to submit this to some more science and that's why I'm saying it's there, part of the mix for the examination in the year ahead, but I'd much rather get cracking now on these three specific areas.
JOURNALIST: On that front of science there has been various studies that suggested that really graphic advertisements on road toll, for example don't work. Why do you think these will? And, what would you say to people, you know, most people have experiences with binge drinking themselves. You have spoken about your experience overseas. If their parents or the Prime Minister is setting that sort of example, why should anybody else do any different?
PM: Well, I don't stand before you as some sort of saint. Never have, never will do. But what I do know is that when it comes to young people, particularly in that age bracket with the stats I read out before, the age bracket of 12 to 13 to the ages of 17 to 18, the risk of bringing about fundamental damage, brain damage, not to mention other health conditions, is very great indeed. That's why we need to take action here.
So I keep saying in my remarks to you today, there is no total solution to this problem. But we believe this is a step in the right direction. And by the way, on the case of the HIV/AIDS campaign back in I think it was the ‘80s, or maybe it was the early ‘90s, most health experts I've spoken to said that it was highly effective in changing behaviour. I stand to be corrected in terms of some of the other campaigns that you've referred to.
JOURNALIST: In what circumstances do you see sporting organisations having their grants either reduced or withdrawn? What would need to happen for you to do that?
PM: Well this will be worked out Mark, in great detail with sporting organisations. That's why a significant amount of money is dedicated in this program to working out protocols with them. A baseline thing though might be this. Might be, might be. And that is, for a local sporting club to have a clear code of conduct on what constitutes acceptable levels of drinking and not. I mean, I'm no wowser on this sort of stuff. I mean, everyone likes to go out and have a good time. Good on them. But it's where sporting clubs actually draw the line. So having a code of conduct which is developed, with the players or the members of the club, I think that would be a good start.
But if you've got sporting clubs who are out there who just basically take no responsibility at all, maybe that's where we've got to start to have a hard look about whether they should be recipients of long term funding support from the Commonwealth.
JOURNALIST: A lot of sporting clubs are sponsored by (inaudible) I think the Broncos are. (Inaudible). Do you think that will go hand in hand with this?
PM: Well, I think everyone needs a decent code of conduct. I mean, you've got certainly under brewing companies and others who are active sponsors of sporting events and of sporting teams. I mean, I just recognise that up front. It's what you actually do to change behaviour. The whole thrust of what we put forward today is about personal responsibility. Families and communities and local police have been doing a lot on this front. And I think it's time we put up our hand as the national Government as said ‘here is some extra help'. But I do think, frankly, scaring the living daylights out of young people about the health impact of binge drinking in terms of brain damage, I don't think it's going to do any harm and it might just do some good.
JOURNALIST: What do you think is the root cause of young people going out and getting themselves (inaudible) like that? I mean, it's quite an extreme thing to do. You could prevent it, I guess, you could scare them. But what is the root cause?
PM: You know Malcolm, I don't know, is the honest answer. It's a really complex one. And that's why we spent some time grappling with this. When people first asked me about binge drinking, it was quite some time ago, you in the gallery, and we have thought long and hard about this. There is no easy answer. How do you change any person's behaviour which is heading in a personally and socially destructive direction  -  don't know.
What I do know, however, is that what seems to be a missing element in the attitudes of young people is knowing there is a direct relationship between serious binge drinking, 170,000 young people I just referred to, on the one hand, and, for example, brain damage on the other. I don't think they make that connection at present. Therefore, our job, through the advertising campaign and other campaigns, is to draw those threads together. It just hopefully will make young people think.
JOURNALIST: PM, you say you're not a wowser. So what sort of advertisement would be okay? We've seen the VB ads, the (inaudible) ads that have been running since the ‘70s, ‘you can get it driving a truck', that sort of thing. Is that ad okay, or are you worried about the ads that target younger people?
PM: Well, not only do I know that I'm not a wowser; I also know that I'm not a creative designer. So, there is a whole bunch of things which other people do a whole lot better than I do. That's one of them. And at the moment you have some people in politics saying an ad should look like this or look like that. The only suggestion I would have to those designing such an ad campaign, an ad campaign by the way which has to go through the scrutiny mechanisms which we've outlined in other policy, which has been outlined earlier by Senator Faulkner. Is that it's effective in confronting, in the eye balls, young people with the direct health consequences to themselves. Not just TV, radio and also the new media, internet based communication.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) also on grants, you talk about codes of conduct, is that only for players or are you also talking about how sporting organisations (inaudible) Federal Government funding monitor the drinking of people in their clubs?
PM: Let me take those, take the second question first which relates to how we would scrutinise grants to clubs in the future. It's whether they have a code of conduct which applies to those who use their clubs as well as those who are, as it were, active supporting members of their clubs.
And, Laura, your first question was?
JOURNALIST: About whether you'd contemplate a broad ban (inaudible)
PM: No, that's not in range. But, I think  - 
JOURNALIST: Why not?
PM: Well we've got to take this one step at a time. I think, we pushed this whole problem to one side for too long. I'm saying; let's change the direction of the ship from there to here in terms of bringing some appropriate national focus to bare on this. Let's measure it in 12 months time. If it's working, well, we'll know where to put more resources. If it's not, then let's look at other measures. And I ran through some of the other measures before.
JOURNALIST: What's your message to the big football codes? Do you think they've allowed this problem to grow through the actions of some of their players and also sponsorship which they take on?
PM: I'm not in the business of pointing the finger at any particular club or player or anything else. I think it's a problem for all of us. It's a problem for mums and dads right across Australia. I know very few mums and dads with teenage kids who don't worry about this. And, therefore, it's something which whether kids are following this code or that code or not following any code, it's become a growing part of, shall I say, local social culture among young people for whatever reasons - sporty cultures, non sporty cultures. Therefore, I don't think it's helpful to say that ‘A, B and C are to blame'. What I'm in the business of is finding answers. And I think what we've got here is a package of reasonable ways forward.
But, I say, this is not the total solution. In twelve months time we will be back looking at the numbers again. And I may be saying to you, ‘this didn't work properly, let's have another go and do something else'.
JOURNALIST: What about some of those products such as alco-pops and ready to drink type beverages that are favoured by young people when they go out. Are you concerned about those sorts of marketing tools? And is that something you'll have a look at?
PM: Nicola and I have been talking about this today actually. I might ask Nicola to respond.
ROXON: Yes, look, obviously these are some of the products that are getting young people interested in alcohol and making it easier for serious amounts of alcohol to be consumed. Those are the sort of quotes you always here in the research, kids saying ‘oh, I couldn't taste the alcohol'. And, these products do need to be considered closely. The initiatives that we've announced today are a good first step for us to be tackling this problem, but we will be looking closely at the way those products are marketed, make sure that they are complying with all of the regulations that currently exist. And when we're looking at the broader picture, of course, they will be ones that I'm sure many of the health groups in particular, will be wanting to talk to us about.
JOURNALIST: You have previously spoken about how you want to tackle this problem in (inaudible) with the states. What role do you see for the states and territories? And secondly, has the problem really gotten worse in recent years, is it not a right of passage for every young generation to (inaudible)
PM: On the first question of the States and Territories, and I will throw to Nicola on that as well, as she has been talking to our colleagues on this, some of those measures I ran through before like labelling and like the enforcement of regulations and fines regimes against liquor outlets in selling alcohol to minors or to people who are seriously intoxicated. They are state responsibilities. That is why we want to spend further time this year working with them on how that can be improved. So we do accept they have responsibilities. We want to work in partnership with them with these national initiatives that I put forward just now.
And Nicola, you might want to add to that.
ROXON: Yeah, look I do want to just add to that because there has been a number of discussions already between health colleagues at the State and Territory level. Many of you will have followed the announcement we made some time ago about the $50 million investment of the COAG initiative into alcohol treatment and rehabilitation for Indigenous communities. This is a second contribution we are making in this space and certainly our discussions with the States and Territories will continue, because it is an area where we do have a lot of shared responsibilities and we need to work together to find some solutions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you are a father of teenage children, have you spoken to your children about binge drinking and what impact has that had upon policy?
PM: Look, I don't want to, get into detail about conversations I have with my kids. But when I say that I don't know any parents for whom this is not a concern, I include myself as a parent, and therefore, what impact have my chats had with our kids over the years? Some, and they are good. But I mean part of the response we get from parents across the community is, ‘here is a practical challenge for you'. Young people are starting to get towards a drinking age, and their parents are wrestling with this dilemma, when should you begin introducing a young person into responsible drinking?
This is something I actually don't have any particular wisdom on, but these are the sorts of conversations going around the dinner tables of Australia this evening and there is no magical answer to it. But I think those conversations are made easier if the debate is open and in the public and being pushed forward by the means that we have put forward today, including advertising campaigns.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when we last spoke, you spoke strongly on the question of the Government's payments to carers and seniors, but you did not explicitly rule out withdrawing those payments. Shouldn't you do that in light of the fact that this issue has caused so much angst, or if you can't, aren't we to take it that those payments really are in play?
PM: Well when I said, Tim, that our carers and our pensioners shouldn't be left in the lurch that is precisely what I meant. And that is, that when it comes to the bonuses system, carers and pensioners will not be any worse off under the Budget, and beyond that, what we are looking at is ways and means by which we can provide greater financial certainty for carers and pensioners into the long term future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We've said, and we were quite plain, that carers and pensioners would not be worse off under the budget when it comes to that bonus system that you referred to. And for the longer term, the challenge that Jenny Macklin, and others have been wrestling with is how do we put all this on to a more secure, predictable basis for carers and pensioners into the long term future rather than having to deal simply with a series of one offs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Has the ERC come to a general position about what it does with the (inaudible) surge in revenue? The Treasurer has talked about (inaudible) surplus, do you see any role for these one off payments in future?
PM: Well I think when it comes to the general budgetary process including the ERC, I don't think you would expect me to give you a blow by blow account as to how all that unfolds.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I think you are actually. And I am not about to give you a blow by blow rendition. It is an unfolding, internal, deliberative process, we will work our way through. As you know the expenditure demands on Government and the revenue situation is in a constant state of flux. Nothing different from this as in previous years. We will work through it quite methodically. It is important, however, from the debate in the last few days, to make sure that our most vulnerable in the community, have their fears allayed.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that you're talk, constant talk about pain in the Budget, not just yours but your fellow Ministers, has frightened some vulnerable groups?
PM: I can't answer that question, honestly, Michelle. What I can say is that if you have got to make some serious cuts to spending, in the administrative areas of departments, it is going to hurt and that is just the truth of it. You can just continue on regardless as the previous Government did with running outlays at 4.5 per cent real, and just pretend there is not an inflation problem, which seems to be the economic philosophy of those opposite at present. No inflation problem, forget the fact that productivity growth has collapsed in a hole. Can't identify a single spending cut and then convey the impression that there is somehow a recipe for that in responsible economic management. Well we have a different view. Inflation is a real problem. Productivity growth, has ground down to zero and we can't sustain outlay to the level of 4.5 per cent real in the year ahead.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd could your party give a lead (inaudible) donations from brewers and for licensed clubs?
PM: Well on these questions I have always got an open mind, but it is not something we have looked at yet, but we are going to have a go at the national binge drinking strategy that I outlined before for the year ahead. But I have a completely open mind as to how we go in the future. A completely open mind. This is a real challenge for mums and dads. Think of the number of young people in that age bracket of 12 to 17, and according to this fairly recent survey data, 170,000 of them each week are reporting binge drinking levels. That is a lot of young people and we need to do something about it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on the subject of Nauru, are Australian (inaudible) being sent and is there also going to be an increase in police going to PNG (inaudible)
PM: Firstly, on PNG, my discussions with Prime Minister Somare were about a whole range of things on the bilateral cooperation front, including law and order. The PNG Police Commissioner, as I am advised, has already put forward a submission to the Australian counterpart for additional police advisers. I understand we are responding to that positively. How many has not yet been determined, but there would be more.
On Nauru, I'll have to come back to you.
JOURNALST: Mr Rudd on the issue of MPs consulting, have you taken information, taken (inaudible) to make sure that your own MPs are not engaged in any consultancies (inaudible) Mark Vaile engaged in, in recent times? (inaudible)
PM: I think all MPs are required to make sure their register is correct. And with Labor Party members I am sure they will be attentive to their requirements on that. As, I think you or someone else raised a question the other day with us about my own company, Australia China Consultancies, back in the time when I first came into parliament. That company existed right through I think my first term in Parliament and was concluded at that point. And that's reflected as being a source of income to me in my pecuniary interest register at the time. As for others, we need to check they will be attentive to the accuracy  - 
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, you received income from that consultancy after you entered the  - 
PM: As declared in my interest registry at the time.
JOURNALIST: Did you continue with the consultancy work that you were doing prior to (inaudible)
PM: Well I think in my own case when I won the seat of Griffith, there was no particular certainty about winning the seat of Griffith so as my only source of income was the private company I headed. Then you, it was important to  - 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Of course, that was what I just said before. Is that that company ran through the period following the election, there was a revenue stream from it. I think into the next couple of years, it was concluded by the time I got to the following election.
JOURNALIST: Did you travel overseas with that company too?
PM: No, not at all. But as I said that is fully declared in my pecuniary interest register as a source of continuing income through the ACC.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh I can't recall, I don't think so. I don't think so. But as I said, we are required to declare it. It was declared, it has been there since the beginning. And I think, you know I imagine other members have been in a similar circumstance in the past as well. I think what I concluded by the end of that first term was that is was simply not sustainable in terms of workload even as a backbencher to maintain that and to then discharge the full range of responsibilities let alone as you subsequently became a front bencher.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) parliament sitting on Fridays considering (inaudible) back down?
PM: Well I think the thing there Matthew, is that her Majesty's loyal opposition decided to just turn it into a general sort of Barman and Baileys circus rather than treat it as private members business. If the opposition are going to turn parliament into a Barman and Bailey circus then there is no point sustaining a three ring circus, you just get on with the business of parliament and I think Anthony Albanese handled that pretty well the other day. Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister as a matter of principle, should now backbench MPs maintain private consultancies outside of their duty as MPs?
PM: I think, my own experience is that it is not possible to sustain that in terms of your  -  it is perfectly lawful to sustain it  -  it is not practically possible in terms of the demands on your time and as a newly elected member, that was certainly the conclusion I drew during the course of that first term.
JOURNALIST: But it is not just an issue of whether, you know you can get the job done, do you have any concerns that people that could be dealing with you overseas would be confused about who they were talking to, whether it's someone from the government or  - 
PM: I think that is a legitimate principle and certainly one that we will look at further.
JOURNALIST: But you weren't concerned at the time, yourself?
PM: Well as I understood at the time I think there were other, many other precedents for it at the time as well. And as I said the conclusion I drew was that it was not, not practically sustainable. And certainly not at the point, which I was approaching the subsequent election.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Do you believe that this sort of practice should continue?
PM: As I said it is, on the question of, there are two points allied in this. One is how you deal with the practical impost on your time as a member of parliament. And the second is any possible perceived conflict of interest particularly when you either are approaching a position of responsibility in terms of the executive of the party, or whether you have perhaps been in one. So I think it is time to clear this up, to answer your question. And that is one of the things that we will be looking to very soon.
JOURNALIST: So what is your position on Mr Vaile?
PM: Mr Vaile? I think both with himself and with the other Liberal members who haven't been attending fully to their parliamentary responsibilities, I think it is important they make a decision about whether they are going to stay in the parliament or not. But I think in my own case, it is certainly something I became more than convinced of during my first term in this place, which is about ten years ago. That it was simply not doable in terms of the time available as an opposition back bencher.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) as to whether there should be a rule or a guideline for MPs?
PM: I think so. I think that is, having looked at it, even for back benchers. I remember the circumstances of some folk when they arrived here, they had no other source of income, you've actually got a company, and that is it. And then it takes a while to wind it down. The process of winding down that company of mine began at that time. It took some time to get there. It was a practical consideration too in terms of the availability of, in terms of the availability of the sheer amount of time you need to do your job as a member of parliament. As your committee responsibilities increase you get a greater sense of what needs to be done in this place.
JOURNALIST: Wouldn't that become all very sticky though when you have got people (inaudible)
PM: Well that's, yes it is difficult and this was presented to me I remember at the time as I became a member of Parliament which is that (inaudible) sustained if you were a lawyer, a barrister you could take cases. If you have other pre-existing interests, it is very difficult to simply cut that off. So that is why it has been a bit complex. But I think it is time to provide some clarity on this and we will be doing so.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Wilson Tuckey (inaudible) shipping tools, all across Australia for the last five years. There does seem to be a loophole in the pecuniary interest register that allows him to do this. Would you look at tidying up the laws so that MPs can't do this sort of thing?
PM: Well I don't know the full detail of what Wilson has been up to. Wilson is often a voyage of discovery in more ways that one. So I think it's primarily a responsibility for himself and Dr Nelson to clear up. But can I say when it comes to transparency and accountability there are higher expectations of those of us in the political process. And if there is more to be done in the demands of pecuniary interest registration process and what is contained within it, then Senator Faulkner I am sure has that in his in tray.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd do you think the merger of the Liberal and National party will present a formidable political foe to the Labor Party?
PM: I think the problem for the Liberal Party and the National Party is they don't know what they stand for. Ultimately it is a matter for them. But what do they stand for? What does the National Party stand for these days? I am not altogether sure. If they are supposed to stand up for the interests of rural Australian they are certainly a declining force out there because they haven't done so for a long, long time. Where does the Liberal Party stand in terms of protecting working families? Where do they stand on industrial relations? Where do they stand on Kyoto? Where do they stand on Iraq? Where do they stand on anything anymore? I am not sure. The problem that these two parties present at the moment is that it is quite unclear to the Australian people what principles they stand for.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the other day on donations, you mentioned a caps on donations...for organisations, from companies, and individuals. You didn't mention unions. Would you be including them in that category?
PM: I think it is important that if you are fair 'dinkum about this then you have got to look at general caps, which don't benefit one side of politics or the other. But I was very clear the other day about putting numbers forward because I think we need to have a serious and intelligent discussion/debate about it rather than just, you know, pluck a number out of space. I notice, I think it was Mr Turnbull the other day, said that individuals should be excluded from any such cap limit. If you are going to have caps they have got to apply to individuals, they have got to apply to organisations, companies, etcetera.
So therefore, we will take some time working our way through it. But I go back to the other principles we put forward. I think it is time to turn the corner, in the political donations culture. That's why it is important to bring the disclosure limit back to something which is half reasonable. We have done that, I think in our proposal for 1000. But also to cover off some of the other things that I addressed the other day as well.


The Rudd Government today announced a new national strategy to address the binge drinking epidemic among young Australians.
This national strategy will begin with three new practical measures to help reduce alcohol misuse and binge drinking among young Australians:
     * $14.4 million to invest in community level initiatives to confront the culture of binge drinking, particularly in sporting organisations; and
     * $19.1 million to intervene earlier to assist young people and ensure that they assume personal responsibility for their binge drinking;
     * $20 million to fund advertising that confronts young people with the costs and consequences of binge drinking.
Binge drinking among young people is a community wide problem that demands a community wide response, including a new emphasis on young people taking greater personal responsibility for their behaviour.
The three new practical measures announced today will be funded by reprioritising existing government spending.
The binge drinking problem
Binge Drinking imposes a huge toll on our community. The 2005 Australian Secondary Students' Alcohol and Drug (ASSAD) Survey found that in any given week, approximately one in ten  -  that is 168,000  -  12 to 17 year olds reported binge drinking or drinking at risky levels (defined in this report as seven or more drinks for males and five or more for females). For 16 and 17 year olds, one in five drank at risky levels.
A study of community football clubs in 2000 carried out by the Centre for Youth Drug Studies showed that:
     * 13% of 18-20 year olds drank 13 or more standard drinks each time they visited the club;
     * 83% left the club as the driver of a vehicle; and
     * 70% of males (30% of females) believe drinking is an important tradition at their club.
In addition to the objective evidence on the costs of binge drinking, there is the untold impact on families and communities around the country.
The Government is determined to work with communities, parents and young people to implement a National Strategy on Binge Drinking that includes a new focus on personal responsibility.
While the Australian Government has a number of initiatives aimed at targeting alcohol misuse in the wider community, there has to date been no coherent national approach to tackling binge drinking among young people.
Today's announcements are only a first step. The Rudd Government will continue to engage with stakeholders on how the community can effectively confront this social problem.
These measures will dovetail with the Government's wider commitment to establish a National Preventative Health Taskforce, which will examine ways to reduce the health problems caused by excessive alcohol consumption.
The Department of Health and Ageing will also be asked to consolidate relevant data to assist in understanding the scale of this problem, and to assess the effectiveness of these initiatives by mid-2009.
Community partnerships
The Rudd Government will strengthen partnerships with sporting and other non-government organisations to affect the environments that shape the culture of binge drinking among young people.
This will be a $14.4 million grants-based program focused on binge drinking reduction at the sectoral and local level.
This initiative could support projects such as sporting clubs and non-government organisations working together to educate and inform club members about the harms associated with binge drinking, or sporting clubs developing codes of conduct in relation to binge drinking.
The Government will also take sporting organisations' actions on responsible drinking into account in considering other government funding support.
This program could also support local government working with community organisations to address high risk activities, and community organisations working with local police to address underage drinking.
A grants round will commence from mid-2008. Funding is from the existing Community Partnerships Initiative and Rural and Regional Initiative programs.
Earlier intervention to enhance personal responsibility
The Rudd Government will invest $19.1 million to support innovative early intervention and diversion programs to get young people under the age of 18 back on track before more serious alcohol-related problems emerge.
These early intervention initiatives will focus not only on cultures and environments, but also a new emphasis on personal responsibility.
This initiative would target young people under the age of 18 who have been involved in an episode involving alcohol and could include:
     * requiring young people to participate in educational and/or diversionary activities; and
     * allowing police to confiscate alcohol or provide formal warnings.
When young people involved in binge drinking present to hospitals or fall foul of the law, the personal responsibility approach needs to be triggered.
This program will seek to support at least one pilot project in each State capital by the end of 2008. Pilots would require community buy-in from State and local governments, community and health organisations, and local police.
Confronting young people with the consequences of binge drinking
The Rudd Government will invest up to $20 million over two years in a hard-hitting TV, radio and Internet campaign that confronts young people with the costs and consequences of binge drinking.
This campaign will draw on the lessons of previous campaigns that have worked  -  such as those addressing smoking, the road toll and HIV/AIDS.
This initiative will commence in 2008-09 and be funded from existing resources. Consistent with the Government's election commitments, this public information campaign will be evidence-based and non-political.


Women of Australia, one and all. Thank you Tanya and thank you Jenny. And as for the tie by the way, when you make any reference to my tie I always watch to see Therese flinch because it is usually not to do about the colour it is to whether I am wearing one that is stained or not.
It was in this Old Parliament House in 1943 that Australia elected its first women to Federal Parliament. Miss Dorothy Tangey was first elected as Senator and Enid Lyons was elected to the House of Representatives. And it was in this Old Parliament House that a Labor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam made history in 1973 by appointing Elizabeth Reid, adviser on matters relating to women which was the first such position in the world.
And this Old Parliament House was to be the place of another historic milestone a little over a decade later in 1984 when under the next Labor Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, Parliament passed the Sex Discrimination Act.
And I now, in the new Parliament House am proud to lead the first Federal Government to have a Deputy Prime Minister who is a woman.
I am proud to have four women in the Cabinet, seven women in the Ministry, the highest representation of women in any Federal Cabinet or Ministry.
I am proud of the fact that the Government I lead has within its senior ranks, Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries of the calibre of Julia Gillard, of Jenny Macklin, Nicola Roxon, Penny Wong, Tanya Plibersek, Justine Elliot, Kate Ellis, Maxine McKew, Ursula Stevens, Jan McLucas.
I am proud of the fact that one in three Labor members of Parliament are women, the highest representation of women in any of the major parties.
I am proud that nearly half of our Labor Senators are women. I am proud of the Labor Party's recognition of the talents, ability and contribution of women.
In the Federal, State and Territory Parliaments across Australia, 37 per cent of all Labor representatives are women.
I am proud of the fact that our trade union movement today is led by a woman.
I am proud of the fact that in my home state of Queensland, Anna Bligh, an exceptionally capable individual who I have known for many years, is the Premier of that state.
I am proud of the fact that we are a Government of all the talents.
And I am proud of the fact that I am married to a woman who is independent, successful and definitely in her own right.
Our core organising principle as a Government is equality of opportunity. And advancing people and their opportunities in life, we are a Government which prides itself on being blind to gender, blind to economic background, blind to social background, blind to race, blind to sexuality.
We are proud of the fact that equality of opportunity means that all people, all people, all Australians, should have equal access to the opportunities which this great country provides.
We are committed to policies which recognise and advance the interests of Australian women. We are committed to improving the working conditions of women in particular through the abolition of WorkChoices and AWAs, which have unfairly penalised women.
We are committed to giving women more choice, in balancing work and family life. Parents with responsibility for children under school age would have the right to request flexible working arrangements. Employers will only be able to refuse a request on reasonable business grounds.
Each parent will be entitled to twelve months unpaid parental leave in connection with the birth of a child. This will ensure that families can have a parent provide continuous care for a child for up to 24 months after birth. And the Productivity Commission measures, which Jenny referred to before, are now on foot.
We are also committed to improving safety for women, and have introduced a national plan to reduce violence against women and children.
This Government, the Government that I lead, will embrace all necessary measures to reduce, and ultimately eliminate, any acceptable tolerance of violence against women, under any circumstances.
On an international front, we are also active in advancing the welfare of women in developing nations through the UN millennium development goals. These are important goals which go to the lives and livelihoods of women across the world, across the developing world.
We also want to progress the protection of women from sexual slavery and human trafficking.
These are just some of the policy initiatives the Government is implementing. The contribution of women, both to our Parliament and to the broader Australian community, I believe, should be celebrated.
And as I look into the faces of the young women here today, from various schools across Canberra, and like Jenny, I have encountered many across the many schools across the nation, it makes me enormously optimistic about the nation's future, when I see so many talented, ambitious, broad hearted, clear minded young women wishing passionately to make a contribution to this nation's future.
You do our hearts proud every time we engage you across the nation. And we encourage you in taking on the challenges of the nation.
I welcome the leadership of all those women who are here in so many ways and so many places and so many different times, because you have made a contribution to making this country a better place with a greater and more effective participation in the affairs of the nation. I congratulate you for it.
And I thank you very much for this opportunity to be among you today to celebrate the role of women in our life, our national life, today in Australia, and to advance further the opportunities of women in the period ahead.


Dr Kelvin Kong, Indigenous Affairs co-chair of the Australia 2020 Summit, has today withdrawn his participation in the Summit due to family health concerns.
I want to extend my best wishes to Dr Kong and his family and thank him for his valuable contribution up to this point.
I would like to announce that Jackie Huggins AM will be the new co-chair of the Indigenous Affairs panel at the Australia 2020 summit.
Dr Huggins is a first class individual who will bring a wealth of experience to this role.  She is a former co-chair of Reconciliation Australia and a recipient of the Australia Medal (AM) in 2001.
A woman of the Bidjara/Birri-Gubba Juru peoples, Dr Huggins is currently Deputy Director of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Unit at the University of Queensland.
A historian and published author, Dr Huggins is a director of the Telstra Foundation and a member of the Indigenous Reference Group at the Centre of Domestic and Family Violence Research in Central Queensland.
Dr Huggins' rigorous approach to her work and her contribution to policy development in this area will be a valuable addition to the Australia 2020 Summit, and I look forward to working with her in this capacity.


It was with sadness this morning that I learned of the passing of former Federal Member for Hindmarsh, Whitlam Government Minister and leading light of the Australian labour movement, Clyde Cameron.
From his early days in South Australia as a shearer, union organiser and industrial advocate, and throughout his parliamentary career, Clyde Cameron was dedicated to defending the interests of working people.
As a Cabinet Minister in the Whitlam Government, Clyde's appointment of former High Court Justice Mary Gaudron to prosecute the case for equal pay for female workers in the Arbitration Commission made history.
Clyde was a leading advocate for pension increases, the provision of child care to support working women, and greatly improved the pay and conditions of public sector workers during his term as Minister for Labour and Immigration.
Although his career was not without controversy, Clyde Cameron's passion and commitment for working men and women remained paramount.
This was illustrated by his 31 years loyal service to the families of Hindmarsh.
Clyde Cameron retained throughout his life a great sense of pride and history. He will be sorely missed, particularly by those for whom he always stood so strongly.


MITCHELL:  Prime Minister, Good Morning
PM:  G'day Neil, you're out there at the Grand Prix, having fun?
MITCHELL: Working very hard. The Formula One cars have just hit the track..
PM:  Oh, good on you. Big event for Melbourne.
MITCHELL: It is. We might talk about it a bit later if we can. Are you aware the deeming rate has been increased?
PM:  No, I'm not aware of that, so I'll take that one on notice.
MITCHELL: Is that automatic or not?
PM: Deeming normally is, but I'd like to get the detail on it. So, I will come back to your program when I have those details to hand.
MITCHELL: Okay, if you don't mind we might just be able to get some help on it. Shirley, hello Shirley. We've had several calls on it. Shirley have you been told its going up?
SHIRLEY:  I am absolutely devastated. Yesterday I received a letter from the pension people telling me that the deeming rate has gone up, therefore, I was earning more money. So my pension has been taken down, quite a bit, but when I rang up the National Bank who I'm with, they knew nothing about the deeming rate going up and they are not giving me the extra deeming rate price. My pension is going down. This is affecting a huge amount of people over Australia. Something has to be done about it. It's another way that the Government takes off pensioners.
MITCHELL: Thank you Shirley. Prime Minister, I accept of course you wouldn't know all about it, but you have a look at it?
PM: Yeah sure, sure we will come back to your program on it. My normal understanding of these things it that it's an automatic formula which kicks in. But, let's have a look at it. And when it comes to your caller Shirley, if she's obviously dependant on the pension, then people need to make sure they are being treated fairly and properly and I understand how difficult these things can be. So let me come back to you Neil on that.
MITCHELL: What's your stand on deeming? What's your policy? I've always thought it's a little bit immoral actually to deem an interest rate regardless of whether you get it or not.
PM:   Well, deeming was a matter resolved as a policy between both Government and Opposition going back a long, long time. I seem to remember the great deeming debate from memory was about the early to mid 90's. I don't think it's shifted since then.
MITCHELL: So you'd still be supporting the policy obviously?
PM: That's correct, there's been no shift from us, and as I understand it, no shift from the Liberal Party either. It was not a matter of debate in the last election.
MITCHELL: No, that's true. So what about the baby bonus ,is that safe?
PM: The baby bonus is absolutely safe, we committed ourselves to its retention before the election, and we will stick with it.
You've got to look at the data, and I think it has had an impact in terms of nudging up slightly the birth rate in the country. Some may dispute that, but I think it's effective. And most Mums and Dads that I've run into, they certainly welcome that cheque arriving.
MITCHELL: Well, you've got into Government, you've probably found a situation that's worse than you expect, haven't you, in the economic sense?
PM: The global economy is really tough, that's the first thing which has really unfolded in the last three months. You've seen the downward revisions in economic growth in America, Europe and now Japan. That all, of course, washes over the rest of the world and we're not immune from that. That's the first factor.
The second thing has been the depth of the inflation challenge and, as you know, that washed through into two sets of interest rate increases since the election. So it is difficult. We're fighting not just the fight against inflation, because interest rates hurts everybody. But we're also having to deal with the uncertainties in the global economic outlook as well.
MITCHELL: So in that environment, can you guarantee that every promise will be met?
PM:   Yes. We are absolutely determined to honour what we said before the election, and we believe we can do that. Even if it means tightening our belt in other areas and for example, tax cuts which are due to be paid as of 1 July and a lot of people out there have criticised us out there in economic commentary land that the tax cuts should not be paid. My experience of working families under financial pressure is that they need every bit of help that they can at the moment with mortgages going up and everything else. That's, for example, one of the reasons why those undertakings will be honoured from 1 July.
MITCHELL: And that's all undertakings, everything? Nothing, you won't back down on anything?
PM: No, I think it's very important that you just are clear cut with people about what you stand for, what you're committed to prior to the election. You make that explicit, you cost them and we've put forward our costings on these promises prior to the election, and we intend to honour them.
MITCHELL: When will the computers go to the kids in school? Every child in every school gets a computer, access to a computer is the idea isn't it?
PM:  The pre election commitment was that over the next four to five years that we would provide computers to every kid from year 9, 10, 11 and 12. So that's not every kid in every school. It's across that bracket.
As I understand it from my discussions with Julia, the Deputy Prime Minister, and Minister for Education, the initial submissions or applications and submissions, for the first round of those goes out fairly soon. And we will be rolling this program out together with the States and Territories over the course of the next several years. It's a tough program but we intend to honour it.
MITCHELL: Just further on this pension issue, we're getting many callers now saying they have $10 or $20 taken off their pension and Centrelink has told them there was an announcement on the 20th of March that they're not even allowed to talk about it with clients now. But I suspect now it's out there it will be addressed publicly won't it?   
PM: Yeah, well as I said, I'm not briefed on that Neil and I will come back your program on it. I expect it is the automatic application of a pre existing deeming rate. But let me come back to you on that in some detail either through my office or through the Minister responsible.
MITCHELL: Fair enough. Gold $1000 an ounce, share market down, oil prices another record. In this environment, is $26 to much for the wage increase?
PM:  Well, we think on the minimum wage, you've got two realities you've got to deal with here. One is inflationary pressures at home, and secondly, working families under financial pressure. It's tough, it's hard but we want a fair reasonable balanced outcome for working families, particularly those who are dependant on the minimum wage, and that's why we think it's important that those families get some relief through this.
MITCHELL: Is $26 too much?
PM:  Well the unions will always argue an ambit position -
MITCHELL: That's an ambit claim is it, $26?
PM: That would be what the unions would argue for, and -
MITCHELL: But is it an ambit or is it real?
PM:  Well if you're a union in negotiation, Neil, I would suggest that you would describe it as an ambit claim.
MITCHELL: Okay, so what do you want $18, is that right?
PM:   Well I'm not putting a number on it, and nor does our submission put a number on it. In fact, neither of the two previous submissions from the Federal Government to the Australian Fair Pay Commission put a number on it.
MITCHELL: Yeah but arguably this is a slightly different environment isn't it?
PM:   Well, they're an independent body, what we've simply confronted them with is a series of arguments. That is, on the one hand the inflationary challenges in the economy, and the other is that working families under financial pressure. And wisdom lies somewhere up the middle of that, in terms of a decent number.
But we want to make sure that through that, and through a decent industrial relations system which doesn't penalise people like the way AWA's and Workchoices did, together with tax cuts due from 1 July, an increase in the child care tax rebate, we help those families.
MITCHELL: But if you think that $26 is an ambit, which means it is too much, you must have a figure in mind? That's reasonable.
PM:   It's an independent body.
MITCHELL: Yeah I know but the Government will be entitled to put a submission on it. You're entitled to argue for a figure aren't you?
PM:  The Government has pursued the same policy as our predecessor in the two previous rounds which is not to nominate a figure and that's consistent with the Treasury advice that we've received as well.
MITCHELL: The unemployment figures yesterday were good. I saw you and Wayne Swan in Parliament welcoming them. They do put upwards pressure on interest rates though do they not?
PM: Well, the big sleeper in the Australian economy is the skills shortage and it's been around for a long, long time. As you know the Reserve Bank issued about 20 sets of warnings on skills and infrastructure shortages and if you got those shortages, what happens is that it produces inflationary pressures. And if you've got those out of control, it produces interest rate rises. So that's why front and centre to our agenda in Government has been what do you do on the skills front.
Hence why within the first couple of months in Government we've released funding for an additional up front 20,000 training places in areas of critical need right across the country.
MITCHELL: So, is it correct then, or is it no longer the case, that good unemployment figures mean upward pressure on interest rates?
PM:  Well, the zero sum game which some people engage in, which is that you either have a complete trade off between inflation and unemployment, I don't believe that's the way to go. Good policy consists in keeping your target of full employment firmly in mind while keeping your lid on the inflationary bottle. Unfortunately the lid on that bottle has come unstuck in the last year or two.
What's the answer to that is making sure that your boosting two things. The quantity of skilled labour, and that goes back to the skills point I was just making, but also doing what you can to boost the participation rate in the workforce as well. And hence our policies on childcare.
MITCHELL: Ok well we will take a quick break here and come back with more from the Prime Minister who has been meeting with sports officials on alcohol abuse.
[AD Break]
MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, how did you go with the sports authorities on alcohol? Did you get anywhere?
PM:   Yeah, we had a good meeting. Ben Buckley from the Football Federation of Australia  -  soccer; Australia Demetriou, AFL; John O'Neil the Rugby; David Gallop, League; Kate Palmer, Netball; and James Sutherland from Cricket Australia.
Basically what we agreed is this: Firstly that sport is not the cause of binge drinking, but we want sport to be part of the solution to this problem which is effecting so many kids around the country. So three and four specific areas of agreement.
One is, here in Victoria there is a program called the ‘Good Sports' program, which I understand operates at a grass roots level. Currently used a lot by the Netball Association of Australia. It's been effective, as it's been judged by the Government and by the sporting organisations. For the first time the Australian Government is going to kick into that - $5.2 million to expand the application of it to other codes as well. And that just takes it down to grass roots level.
The second one is we want a Club Champions program. There are literally tens of thousands of sporting clubs out there which belong to those six codes - $2 million to assist identifying a senior player and either a senior coach in each club to become the ambassadors for responsible drinking codes in clubs.
And then finally, we have asked the clubs, and the clubs have already indicated to us they're doing this with us, to put together a consistent national responsible drinking code which will apply to all sporting organisations.
The last thing, Neil, is that they very kindly said that for our proposed upcoming television, radio and internet advertising blitz on the damage of binge drinking to young people's health, that they'll come forward with sporting stars to assist us with that advertising campaign.
MITCHELL: Oh, at no fee, I hope!
PM:  I certainly hope at no fee, we didn't get down and dirty on that, but I hope it's at no fee.
MITCHELL: I sometimes wonder if it's a bad look when any elite team wins a Grand Final or something, they tip beer all over each other and go out and get legless drunk for days on end. I know that it's probably the first time for six months they've had a drink, but it's not a good look, is it?
PM: Look, you know, I'm not in the business of belting up on these individual sports men and women. The more you look at the binge drinking problem the more complicated you see it as being. This is I think a very deep underlying change in social attitudes which has been going on for a long, long time
MITCHELL: I notice some people beating up on you. It might have been the Sydney Morning Herald, they said, what right have you got to raise this when you had a famous incident in a strip club in the United States when you couldn't remember what happened?
PM: Well, I think as I said either in the Parliament or elsewhere recently, don't look to me to be a paragon of moral virtue on these questions. But, what I'm really concerned about is 12 to 17 year olds, kids, where the survey data tells us there is a 168,000 of them engaged in binge drinking. And that survey data is two years old. And binge means, consuming within a fixed space of time, seven drinks if you are a young boy, five if you are a young girl. Now, the damage which can be done permanently to your brain and to your body by that is huge. So, I'll take any incoming flack about yours truly, but I've got one target in mind, which is to get that number down.
MITCHELL: How old were you when you had your first drink do you reckon?
PM: Actually, I didn't start drinking till I was in my 20s, to be quite honest. We had a basically, a sort of relatively non-drinking household. Mum didn't drink and Dad had a tot of rum most evenings after he came in from the farm. I think he had more than a tot down at the local, though.
MITCHELL: Hello Ned, go ahead please Ned.
NED:  Yeah, hi Neil, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: G'day Ned, how are you?
NED: Yeah, good thanks. I just want to sort of ask your views on a particular topic. It's regarding the carers allowance.
PM:  Yeah, sure.
NED: My second son was born deaf, and as a result of that we received the carers allowance.
PM:  Yeah.
NED: And, acknowledgment must be made that every bit does help. It's not much, but we are very appreciative of that.
PM: That's right.
NED:However, a couple of months ago my son (inaudible) was also diagnosed, the same son was also diagnosed with autism. And, if anyone who is familiar with living with a deaf child and an autistic child, the autism component is probably five to ten times more costly than the daily ongoing -
MITCHELL: So how does that relate to the carers allowance, Ned?
NED: Well, when we ask for any sort of assistance from Centrelink, we're thinking, well, we've got one problem so we receive one payment. Now we've got another problem, there they just turn their back and say well you are receiving something for one thing, but now we are saying, we've got a problem, a bigger monster that what we had. Yet you're happy to give it for that, but your not prepared to extend it to anything beyond that, because they are two different illnesses, two different problems, two different costs and, I just want to get your view on that.
MITCHELL: Yeah thanks Ned, thank you very much for calling.
PMWell, Ned is obviously wrestling with a real problem there which is how to deal with a kid multiple disabilities. And it is not easy and carers allowance is one way in which assistance is provided and carers payment as well and of course the eligibility for proposed things are different.
On his individual circumstances, Neil, as soon as we finish the program, if I could get his contact details we'll come back to him. That's the first point.
On autism, can I say, this is huge. On average, one kid, I think in 160 is diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. This is an emerging problem. And that is why we support the Helping Australian Children with Autism package which provides $190 million over five years. Now this is not by way of direct payments to families. I grant you that.
That's dealt with through the carers arrangements we spoke about before but we certainly get the point that autism is an emerging, huge, problem for parents across the country.
MITCHELL: Ned, hold on and give us your details if you are comfortable to do that.
Prime Minister you obviously want us to cut back the amount of money lost gambling on poker machines, is that true?
PM:  Well I am concerned about the impact which this has on families doing their entire dough. I don't have all the science on this one Neil. I notice John Brumby in Victoria I think has done the right thing by ripping ATMs out of poker machine premises. I think that is a good step forward.
But I have indicated in my discussions with others, other Premiers, that we want to look at this during the course of the year about what further can be done. I don't pretend to have a complete solution to this.
I want to get some science around it. That is, the extent of gambling addiction, the extent to which this is best dealt with while balancing that against the 77,000 people who work in the gaming industry in the country.
MITCHELL: If you start to cut it back though, I mean, Victoria, it just takes about $1 billion a year from pokies, they might be looking at you to compensate for the lost revenue?
PM:Yep, I understand that Neil. That's why it is a tough decision at multiple levels. You have got, in the industry, 70,000 or 80,000 people who earn their living through the gaming industry. You have got the revenue dependency on the part of States and Territories.
MITCHELL: So would you look at compensating?
PM:  Well, I think on this one, everything is on the table as far as a solid look at; First of all, how big is the problem. Secondly, what works to fix it, in terms of poker machines. And thirdly, what will that cost the taxpayer. And I am just being upfront about the fact, we don't have the answers to this, during the course of this year, including at the upcoming 2020 Summit, we'll be kicking these ideas around.
MITCHELL: Okay, I know you need to get away. A couple of very quick things. Petrol, it's nudging $1.50 in Melbourne. Is there any chance that the Petrol Commissioner is going to have an impact on this? We could be over $1.50 by Easter.
PM: Yeah, I am really worried about what is going to happen at Easter, given what has happened in previous years. Certainly the Petrol Commissioner is going to provide an added level of scrutiny on to the oil companies. I don't want to pre-judge what the Petrol Commissioner does and the sorts of determinations that Pat Walker will make. But certainly, there is firstly a detailed examination, an ongoing monitoring of the buy-sell arrangements as well as a whole series of other things that he has in his kit.
And, I have got to say, we have got to make sure that his office works effectively. It is going to be tough. A lot of these things, as you know, are driven by global prices, but we are deeply concerned about competitive arrangements within the domestic Australian industry.
MITCHELL: So what do we say to motorists, be patient?
PM: Well there is no silver bullet on this. I didn't say there was before the election either. I said what we needed is greater competition scrutiny within the domestic oil industry. And remember our predecessors had, what, 12 years to do something about this, and didn't. We have been in office for three months and we have appointed this bloke, and we hope, we hope, it adds some competitive scrutiny to an industry which hasn't had a lot.
MITCHELL: Are you coming to the Grand Prix on Sunday or not?
PM:Don't know if I am going to get there mate. I'd like to if I could but I don't know if I am.
MITCHELL: Fair enough, do you think it is a good thing, you mentioned earlier, do you think it is a good thing for Australia to have it?
PM: Yeah absolutely.
MITCHELL: Because I think we are about to lose it.
PM:I have seen some of the debate on that, and I am not on the ins and outs of the timing of the race. Are you actually springing around the track yourself at the moment are you?
MITCHELL: There's a Formula One car that just went past.
PM: I thought you were doing the interview in the back of one. But I don't suppose there is a back of a Formula One car. But I think in terms of tourist promotion for Australia and for Melbourne it has been fantastic. On the ins and outs of the debate about, you know when the race should be held and all the rest of it, I'll leave that to the locals.
MITCHELL: I appreciate your time, thanks very much.
PM: Thanks Neil.


The Australian Government and the nations six major sporting bodies have today agreed to work together to help address binge drinking among young people.
This historic partnership will see the Australian Football League, Australian Rugby Union, the National Rugby League, the Football Federation of Australia, Cricket Australia and Netball Australia working together with the Australian Government to support the National Binge Drinking Strategy.
Four new initiatives announced today under the Australian Government's National Binge Drinking Strategy represent the first steps in this partnership:
     * $2 million will be invested in ‘Club Champions'  -  two members from each major club competing in the national competitions across all six sports  -  to help foster leaders in responsible drinking at the elite level.
     * $5.2 million will be invested in a significant expansion of the Good Sports initiative of the Australian Drug Foundation  -  to support local sporting clubs to build a culture of responsible drinking at the grassroots level.
     * The establishment of a nationally consistent code of conduct on alcohol use for peak sporting bodies and community sports organisations, with this to be developed by the sporting codes themselves.
     * Australia's six major sporting bodies have offered their support for high-profile sporting personalities to assist in the Government's $20 million hard hitting advertising campaign warning young people of the dangers of binge drinking.
The goal of the partnership announced today will be to work together to reduce binge drinking among young Australians.
This partnership between the Australian Government and Australia's six largest sporting bodies will build on the hard work and strong campaigns already being carried out by parents and other community groups.
The basis for today's discussion was material provided by the sporting body CEOs on the range of initiatives they already have in place to promote the responsible use of alcohol.
There is a lot of good work already underway and today we have agreed to partner together to take this existing good work further.
It is simply unacceptable that, in any given week, around 170,000 12 to 17 year olds reported binge drinking or drinking at harmful levels.
Australia's key sporting CEOs have today made it clear that they are prepared to play a leadership role in tackling binge drinking among our young people.
This sends a very important and positive message to the community.
Club Champions
Club Champions is a $2 million initiative that will support each club in the leading national competitions to nominate two people  -  one a senior player in the leadership group and the other a sports scientist (eg, dietician, psychologist)  -  to lead the way in promoting responsible alcohol use.
Club Champions will attend an initial symposium at the Australian Institute of Sport in Canberra, where they will receive the very latest information and guidance about how to encourage responsible alcohol practices.
This will be backed up with follow-up support to assist them in sharing and applying this information within their clubs and sports.
Bodies such as the Australian Institute of Sport have world-leading expertise in this area and Club Champions will take advantage of this.
Good Sports
The $5.2 million expansion of the successful Good Sports program, an initiative of the Australian Drug Foundation, supports responsible drinking at the grassroots level.
Local sporting clubs are an important part of the solution to tackling the culture of binge drinking, particularly for our young people.
Good Sports helps local sporting clubs manage alcohol responsibly and reduce alcohol related problems such as binge and underage drinking.
Displaying the Good Sports logo sends an important message to club members and the community. It confirms that the club promotes a responsible attitude towards alcohol and that it provides a safe environment for players, members, families and supporters.
Good Sports is recognised for its extensive research and its reliance on evidence. This announcement will extend its reach to clubs right across the nation.
Nationally consistent code of conduct
The major sporting bodies today agreed to work together to develop a nationally consistent code of conduct for the responsible use of alcohol.
This code will build on the existing codes of conduct being developed by the sporting codes and will produce a harmonised code across sports.
The bodies have also proposed that they play a leadership role in disseminating a national code of conduct to ensure that it reaches the local level.
The Australian Government welcomes that commitment and looks forward to receiving the proposal in coming months.
The Australian Government is committed to tackling binge drinking on a number of fronts.


PM: First of all I'd like to thank the heads of these sporting codes for meeting with myself and Nicola Roxon and the Sports Minister this morning, Kate Ellis. And we've been talking about the whole challenge of binge drinking and I thank them: Ben Buckley, Andrew Demetriou, John O'Neill, David Gallop, Kate Palmer and Jane Sutherland for representing these major sporting codes in Australia.
Let me say at the outset, sport is not the cause of binge drinking but we all believe that sport can be a part of the solution for this problem which affects families right across Australia.
What I've been pleased about this morning is to listen to the presentations of each of the codes about what they are already doing in their own patch. A lot of works going on.
We want to, as the National Government, partner with the codes to fill some gaps and to make sure that the message about responsible drinking reaches right down into local community clubs and organisations.
Between them these codes represent hundreds of thousands of players right across the country. Tens of thousands of clubs. And huge part of the fabric of Australian community life.
For us therefore as the National Government, they form logical partners in dealing with a social problem which affects so many young Australians and their families today.
I think right across the table we had a common view that this is a challenge for all of us. When it comes to the causes of binge drinking, that's right out there deep in society at the moment, a whole lot of factors at work there.
What we need to do, as the National Government and as national sporting organisations, is work together in how we respond to the problem and provide some positive options for young people as well.
It's been my long standing view that young people involved in local community and sporting life are young people who are likely to lead a healthy life, and a good life.
That's why we as a Government also want to partner with these major sporting organisations to ensure that we have more and more young people participating in community support, not any reduction.
The other day in Canberra I announced that we were about to embrace a $53 million campaign, a national prevention strategy, an intervention strategy when it comes to binge drinking among our young people.
$14.4 million to invest in community level initiatives to confront the culture of binge drinking.
$19.1 million to intervene earlier to assist young people who already have a problem.
And $20 million for a national advertising campaign.
What I described the other day is some serious in your face advertising about the impact of binge drinking, particularly on very young people.
And remember the statistic I used the other day, from a 2005 survey, 168,000 young Australian's between the ages of 12 and 17 reported in that survey to be engaged in binge drinking. That is, in the case of a young male, seven drinks within a restricted period of time. A young female five drinks within a restricted period of time. And the impact on their health being huge.
What we discussed and agreed upon today is a four point approach for the future.
The first is this: here in Victoria there is a good sports program, and our friends from netball have already got some good experience about how that works effectively on the ground. At present the Australian Government is not a partner in that program and what we want to do is to ensure that program reaches out across a range of sports and across the country. That's why I am announcing support today to the tune of $5.2 million to roll out that good sports program nationally at a grass roots club level across the country.
The second is, we've agreed that we should have a $2 million program which we will call a club champions program. The idea being, that in grass roots sporting clubs right across Australia we identify a senior player and a senior coach, administrator or physio who together become the local ambassadors for responsible drinking within that local community club. And we think that's a good way ahead.
And the third is, the codes themselves have indicated to me this morning that they will now work together to harmonise their existing work and existing codes of responsible drinking so that we then end up with a uniform code which can be applied across all sporting organisations and clubs across the country.
Many of these codes and clubs have already done a huge amount of work in this area. I was talking to David Gallop about the work that's already been done in the Rugby League, and that goes for most of the other codes as well.
So they the codes have agreed that they will come back with their proposal about how these things are brought together and harmonised into a code which we can then universally ensure is applied across the country.
And finally, the fourth point, we've said before that we want to dedicate a significant amount of money to a direct, in your face advertising campaign pitched at young people using television, radio, FM radio, internet - the way in which young people use and get there information.
And I thank very much the codes for agreeing this morning for their preparedness to nominate significant stars and players from within their codes who would be willing to participate in that national advertising campaign, I thank them very much for that.
On the detailed and creative side for all that, that's not my province. I know what I am good at and I know what I'm bad at. In the creative side of things I'm generally bad at. So that will be left to others. But I thank the codes for being willing and prepared to put forward some of their stars to help with this in getting this message back to young Australians.
I conclude where I began. Sport is not a cause of binge drinking. Sport can be a part of this solution to this problem affecting so many families across Australia today and I thank these leaders of our sporting organisations who have been prepared to pitch in with the National Government to help deal with this national problem.
Now I might just turn to John to comment on behalf of the codes.
JOHN O'NEILL: Thank you Prime Minister and I'd like to acknowledge Kate Ellis, the Minister for Sport, and Nicola Roxon, the Minister for Health. Thanks Prime Minister for inviting us here today. On behalf of the sporting bodies I've been asked to speak and to say how pleased we are to be here. The Prime Minister gave us the opportunity to talk about our programs and what we're doing currently. But importantly the recognition that binge drinking, excessive alcohol consumption, is not just a problem for sport, or sporting bodies, it's a problem for society. And to the extent that we collectively touch a lot of people. Sport touches a very, very large percentage of Australian's in one form or another and we can be part of the solution, we want to be part of the solution. All the initiatives that the Prime Minister has indicated this morning are ones that we will support.
We can work together on this. There's lots of rivalry between us on the park in terms of the battle for hearts and minds, but we are united in wanting to confront the reduction in the consumption of alcohol, bringing it back to responsible levels. And we believe harmonising the approach, a universal code of conduct in this area, is a sensible way to go.
Again thank the Prime Minister and his two Ministers for giving us the opportunity to meet. It was very constructive and I think the way forward under the initiatives announced this morning will improve the situation, not just in sport, but within society in general. Thank you.
PM: Thanks very much John, Happy to take your questions if they deal with this matter, and if you want to go into other matters, I will liberate our colleagues so they can go and do some serious work elsewhere in the country today.
JOURNALIST: Is it time, Mr Rudd, to stop alcohol sponsorship in sport?
PM: When it comes to alcohol sponsorship and alcohol advertising our view is the challenge right now is to encourage a culture of individual responsibility when it comes to responsible drinking.
When it comes to the role played by alcohol in the sponsorship of sport I see no prima facie reason why that should not continue. When it come to advertising, already those matters are going to be considered by the upcoming Senate inquiry which is already got underway in Canberra.
Therefore, on those other matters, let's see what shakes out of the inquiry in due course.
But what I am concerned about is practical action now.
And practical action now means in your face advertising to young people about the impact of drinking on their lives, binge drinking on their lives.
Secondly, using our relationship with these very good sporting organisations to get a message out and intervening with young people already in trouble.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) role the elite sportspeople (inaudible) whether they should be role models (inaudible)
PM: Look when it comes to role models, none of us, repeat none of us, is perfect. I'm not perfect I make mistakes, everyone does. Sports people make mistakes, everyone does.
You see, I'm actually dead serious about the proposition, we are dealing with a grass roots social problem right across the Australian community. And I am dead serious about my argument that sport is not the cause of binge drinking. Sports men and women are not the cause of the binge drinking across Australia. But sport can be part of the solution. And that's where we want to partner with these great sporting codes to help push the tide back in the other direction.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is the cause of binge drinking in your view?
PM: You know something I wish I knew. It's something where I'm sure researchers through the health department, health portfolio, will be doing some work through the course of the year. But one thing is obviously an expanding reach of tolerance and social attitudes.
The number of parents who roll up to me in shopping centres and say, ‘look, my kids were out the other night at a 16th birthday party and the parents allowed alcohol into the party and what should we do about it? When do we start educating our kids when it comes to responsible drinking?'
These are the challenges that Mums and Dads are dealing with.
It's a far deeper level of societal and generational change in Australia which is brought about I think a big change on social attitudes.
What I'm saying is, it's time we actually turned the tide on this. Because it's gone too far. And, again I thank our sporting organisations for being willing to partner with us in forming part of the solution.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Australians who are involved in sport?
PM: Well, part of this outreach program which we've got here for $14.4 million to invest in community level initiatives, as the Health Minister outlined this morning in our conversation with the heads of sporting organisations, about half of that will be in partnership with sporting organisations, half of it with non-sporting community organisations as well.
There are multiple ways in which you reach young people. I've got to say, one of the most effective ways though still, is, I think, some direct, in your face, no holds barred advertising. So that people are confronted with the fact that if you binge drink as a 14 or 15 year old, you could end up with permanent brain damage. I don't believe that message has got through yet. It needs to.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
JOHN O'NEILL: I think as employers of high profile and well paid players, we expect them to adhere to the code of conduct that we have in place now. And, it doesn't do the image of sport and individual games a lot of good for players to get themselves into trouble, being in the wrong place at the wrong time, and (inaudible).
So, we have a reputation risk every time one of our players ends up on the front page of a daily newspaper for behaving badly. I think we all share the intent of the message, you don't put yourself in harms way. And, there are things like curfews, and guidelines, a lot of money is going in from all of our resources into the education of the players and I think this morning we heard loud and clear from all of us that we're spending a lot of money now educating players, about performance enhancing drugs, illicit drugs, recreational drugs and alcohol. So, we're dealing with a less than homogenous group, and we need to just really keep the emphasis on up front education.
PM: And I think, to add to what John's just said, after this meeting today and after we earlier this week launched this national campaign against in binge drinking, guess what: some time this season you're going to find a seniors sportsman or sportswoman out there who would have drunk too much, and guess what, you'll probably find a politician or two who has been up there and has drunk too much as well.
Human nature is like that, there is going to be failures, I understand that.
But, as a nation, it is time to start turning the tide on this, and that's why I'm pleased to be able to partner with these sporting organisations to do so.
JOURNALIST: As a father in your own home, what would you say to your own kids about this?
PM: I try, with all my kids, Therese and I have always encouraged an attitude towards responsible drinking. You know, people will choose whether they want to drink alcohol or not. I accept that and respect that. But if you're going to drink alcohol, then, in our family, and I don't put myself up as any model parent on these sort of questions, but in our family, from an early age, we tried to encourage our kids to understand what responsible drinking is.
That is, in moderation. Nothing wrong with having some fun, nothing wrong with going out and, you know, kicking your heels up and having a party. As long as you draw some lines around it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) harmonised code of conduct (inaudible) this morning about (inaudible)
PM: No, on the second point, no. But I am respectful of the fact that the codes here in their existing work is already substantial.
We will have them come back to us in the course of the next several months in terms of their proposal for a harmonised code. I'm confident, given the good will which is around the table, and the excellent work we have already done, that we can get to that point before too much longer.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, on that question, we have already an approach which is there should be a consistent code. And, the Sports Minister, in fact, raised some of these matters with the codes earlier today.
Work continues in that department, and we're confident we can get to that as an end point.
A lot of work has gone on within the individual codes, as you're fully aware, but we're confident we can get to the point of consistency. It'll take a bit of time yet. But, there is some good will around the table and we're confident we can get to that end point. I might allow our colleagues to go, some of them have to catch aircrafts, and then, I'll be available for general monstering on any other subject.
(Break)
JOURNALIST: On the minimum wage issue (inaudible) do you think the union claim (inaudible) too high?
PM: We believe that what we need for the minimum wage case is a fair, balanced and reasonable outcome for working families under financial pressure.
Working families right now are dealing with mortgage rates going through the roof, 12 interest rates rises in a row.
Working families are dealing with petrol prices going higher and higher. The price as of yesterday was something like $110US per barrel.
The cost of groceries as well as the cost of child care.
Therefore, assisting working families under financial pressure is important. That's why a fair, balanced and reasonable outcome for working families through this minimum wage case is important.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've made out submission the terms which the Deputy Prime Minister has put this morning. I notice some commentary from the Opposition about why a number isn't advanced. According to my information here, in their 2006 submission, no submission on a number. 2007 submission, no submission on a number. Frankly, I mean, the standards being applied by the Opposition on this are completely inconsistent.
And, it's very important that we have a decent outcome for working families. We put our general case, and we want to make sure that working families get a decent outcome from this.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, we believe this is the appropriate way to go. We've had lengthy Cabinet deliberations on this over recent weeks and again last night. We think it is the right way to go. Of course, since the introduction of the Fair Pay Commission, circumstances have changed somewhat. It's an independent body. And, we think this is the appropriate way to go.
We are very mindful of the constraints which exist, which is we are fighting the fight against inflation. At the same time, we've got working families under financial pressure. We think a fair and balanced and reasonable outcome up the middle for working families is the way to go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, it's an independent commissioners job is to do that. As the Deputy Prime Minister said in an extensive interview on this this morning. She's confident that a proper outcome can be delivered by that mechanism. And as I've said here, the way in which this new body as operated the last couple of years, it hasn't attracted a submission with an identified number from the previous Government either in 2007 or 2006, and, frankly, it is an extraordinary double standard on the part of the previous Government to suggest that we should now do something which they did not do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I think what we need is to get a fair and balanced outcome. Unions will obviously argue hard in one direction. I understand that. But, we must do everything we can to ensure there is a fair and balanced outcome which is compatible with us fighting the good fight against inflation, that's really important. Higher inflation pressures result in higher interest rate pressures. And on the other hand, working families now under financial pressure need every bit of assistance they can get.
And let me just conclude with this. Apart from this determination of the minimum wage, we've got to do everything we can to assist working families which is financially and economically responsible.
We are delivering our tax cuts. They come into force on 1 July. They will assist working families.
Despite the fact that many across the country are called upon us to abolish that pre-election commitment, well I won't be doing that. I honour my pre-election commitments to the Australian people. We said we'd being in tax cuts, they're going to come in.
Secondly, we also have an increase in the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent, which comes in at the same time. The reason we're doing both of those things is that working families are under pressure. Working families need help with the tax system. They need help with childcare, and they also need some assistance with the outcome of this national minimum wage case determination. And having said that, I've got to run.


PM: This is a historic day for all Australians and it's a sad day for all Australians as we confirm the discovery of HMAS Sydney. Last night the Deputy Chief of Navy Admiral Crane informed the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel that the HMAS Sydney wreck had been found.
I'm advised that the HMAS Sydney was found some 12 nautical miles from the Kormoran. Some 8 nautical miles from the scene of the principal battle site and at a depth of some 2470 metres. I am advised that the hull of the HMAS Sydney based on initial sonar findings is determined to be largely intact.
The Australian Government hopes that the discovery of HMAS Sydney brings some closure to the families of the 645 Australian Defence Force personnel who lost their lives bravely in this naval action in World War II.
The Australian Defence Force have also informed me that they will be using their own communications systems to make sure that the surviving family members of the crew of HMAS Sydney are informed of this discovery as soon as is practically possible.
This will be a hard day for family members associated with the Sydney. This was over 65 years ago. But pain and family loss even at 65 years removed is still pain and very deep pain. So on behalf of the Government I would say to all those members of the families, of the brave members of the crew of the HMAS Sydney, that the Government extends to them our condolences for the loss of these brave young men.
Further I wish to confirm that under the Historic Shipwrecks Act that the Minister for the Environment has informed me that he is in the process of issuing an interim protection declaration in relation to both vessels, that is the German vessel Kormoran and the HMAS Sydney.
Again I would thank the Finding Sydney Foundation and the crew members of the Geosounder together with the Royal Australian Navy for the support that they have provided to the very detailed and complex task which this has involved.
I conclude by saying this, this is a day which begins a process of closure for many families of the crew of the Sydney. It's also a time for the nation to reflect on the bravery of all of those who gave their lives in defence of their country. In this particularly bloody and brutal naval engagement.
If I could ask Ted Graham now to brief you on the detail of what the Geosounder has found and then turn to the Chief of Navy to add to those remarks before taking any questions.
TED GRAHAM: Thank you very much Prime Minister. In 2001 we established HMAS Sydney Search as a not for profit company run by five volunteer directors to locate HMAS Sydney.
Over the years since then we have raised funds and we have been primarily funded by the Australian, the West Australian and the NSW Governments. We started the search for the Sydney at the end of February. We confirmed we had located the Kormoran last Friday and we confirmed we had located the Sydney as the Prime Minister has just mentioned, yesterday.
So far we are ahead of time and under budget which is a good thing, so we do have some more funds to go ahead and do some photographic work on the hulls.
Their intention now is that the Geosounder will come back into Geraldton on Thursday or Friday this week. We will then mobilise a deep water remotely operated vehicle which has high resolution cameras on it. We will go out and we will go at this stage to both the sites of the Kormoran and the Sydney and the battle site.
I should just mention that we are going to be working in very deep water with high technology and sometimes things don't quite go to plan so it might take us a while to get some proper photography back. That will obviously come from the vessel ashore and be distributed by the normal processes.
Prime Minister thank you very much and thank you to our Navy colleagues and you Minister and to our patrons Tim Fischer and Professor Geoffrey Blainey and Rear Admiral David Holthouse. And I would like to thank my fellow Directors Don Pridmore, Glenys McDonald, Bob Trotter and Keith Rowe for their support and help over the years. And also David Mearns and John Perryman and the team on board the Geosounder.
I would just also like to pass my best wishes to the families of both the Kormoran and the Sydney on this historic day. Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you, Chief of Navy
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: Thank you Prime Minister. As has been said this is a very historic day. For 66 years this nation has wondered where the Sydney was and what occurred to it. We've uncovered the first part of that mystery. We now know where she is or where she finished.
The next part of the mystery of course is what happened and that will take some time. It will be helped of course by the R.O.V. the Remotely Operated Vehicle, activity which we hope will occur next week. But it will take some time to try and ascertain exactly what happened, that day over 66 years ago.
It is an exciting day as well as an historic day for the Royal Australian Navy. HMAS Sydney has always, there has always been an HMAS Sydney in our Navy, and I suspect there always will be.
The current ship, Sydney, is the fourth in the line and the third of the air warfare destroyers will also be named Sydney. It is an historic name and we have added to the history of that name over the weekend. Thank you.
PM: Good, Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, considering there haven't been any photography taken yet of the wreckage, how has it been confirmed that it is the Sydney, considering that it is lying such deep waters?
PM: I'll turn to the Chief of Navy on that. I have got to say, one of our reasons for spending through the Defence, Minister for Defence, Science and Personnel, and with Navy, last night was to ask, and ask again and to ask again, and to seek confirmation and confirmation and confirmation again, before making this morning's statement.
It is very important that these things are got right. But I will turn to Chief of Navy, and if necessary, Ted as well.
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: The Geosounder is fitted with a couple of high resolution imaging sonar's. These are sonar's which are towed in a sled, behind the ship, and obviously at great tow length because of the depth of water.
The initial indication of what we though might be the Sydney was taken from a low resolution sonar or one of the systems which does not have such high resolution. In the course of investigating that contact, we had to, the Geosounder, exchanged the system they had down at that time, to put the high resolution sled down.
And by looking at the images which are transmitted back from the sonar, you can ascertain the length, the height and the width of any contacts that you might have. By comparing those dimensions with the designs and drawings that we had, we were able to confirm firstly that the Kormoran was the Kormoran. The bow section of the Kormoran is quite distinct. And then during the course of yesterday afternoon and last evening, we were able to confirm that the second contact was in fact the Sydney.
David Mearns has indicated that there is no doubt that this contact is the Sydney.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: David Mearns, who is our search leader, and has conducted a number of these high resolution runs indicates that there is no doubt that this is the Sydney.
JOURNALIST: Admiral, are you or Mr Graham able to hypothesise from what you have seen so far, what might have actually happened? Has it told you anything new about the battle of the fate of the Sydney?
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: Not at this stage. It is too early to conduct that sort of hypothesis. What we do know is what we have seen at the site of the battle, with some battle debris. We have the site of the Kormoran and we have the site now of the Sydney. How those three sites interconnect, we will really have to wait until we are able to take some more detailed photographic imagery.
JOURNALIST: Were you surprised that the two ships were so close together?
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: No, in fact the disposition of the wrecks is as it was reported by the survivors of the Kormoran at the time, surprisingly so.
JOURNALIST: So they were right all along?
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: It seems so, yes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: The hull, it is reported as being largely in tact, from the dimensions that we have been able to gain. I am not sure you can draw too many inferences at all from that until we closer to it and are able to have a good look.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Environment Minister's protection orders. Can you tell us what that would mean if Cabinet (inaudible)
PM: The Environment Minister will be issuing a full statement on this a bit later in day. But I am advised that it provides immediate and early protection of the sites against any unauthorised intrusion. But the provisions of the Historic Shipwrecks Act, come into force as a consequence of that interim order.
It is the protection mechanism which we have available to us under Australian law, through that Act of the Parliament which was enacted in 1976.
JOURNALIST: Are there any plans to raise the wreck eventually?
TED GRAHAM: Thanks Prime Minister. No for a start, they are in very deep water and secondly from my point of view and from the foundation's point of view, they contain the remains of many people and our view is firmly that they should be left alone.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Can I say it is important, and I wanted to have those who are conducting the search to respond to that first, it is very important to understand that this is a tomb. And there are 645 Australian soldiers, Australian Sailors, entombed there and they include within their ranks six members of the Royals Australian Air Force. And I think the good thing about Australians is that we treat our war dead with respect and these war dead will be treated with complete respect.
JOURNALIST: How soon are we likely to see imagery, and (inaudible)
TED GRAHAM: We anticipate we will be out on location, probably around Tuesday or Wednesday of next week. The remotely operated vehicle we will be putting down, transmits back to the vessel and then it is a process of transmitting that photography ashore and then, the way our agreement with the Government works, it comes from the vessel to the R.A.N, and then is distributed there through their systems.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: At this stage we believe that the hull is largely in tact, as we've mentioned, and sitting upright on the floor of the ocean. Was there another part to your question?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) because presumably the ships that rescued the German sailors from their lifeboats would have passed through the area (inaudible)
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: No, I don't, but I would say that the only trace of the Sydney, of course, was the life raft which is now in the War Memorial, and a life jacket.
Those two artefacts were found about seven days after the action by one of the search vessels, HMAS Heros. We were searching at that time, seven days after the event, but all that was found from the Sydney was that one carley float, and one life jacket.
JOURNALIST: Does this have any implication for the identity of the body on Christmas Island (inaudible) that body may have floated to the island (inaudible) from this particular vessel site?
CHIEF OF NAVY SHALDERS: Yes, it does. At this stage we are almost certain that the body at Christmas Island, which is not yet identified, is a crew member from HMAS Sydney, and therefore, the raft that he floated to Christmas Island on was also from the Sydney. The raft of course over there is long gone and we're still in the process of trying to identify who that sailor might be.
JOURNALIST: Would the Government consider making this some part of a permanent memorial (inaudible)
PM: During the course of the week we intend to, with our friends in Defence and elsewhere, look at how best the brave crew of the Sydney are further commemorated as a consequence of this discovery. And we will make a subsequent announcement on that. Because it's very important that we also deal with surviving family members and how these things are best done with decency and in a proper way.
The only other thing I'd say, by the way, on your question before is, I'm no naval historian, but some vessels go down with all hands and in quite extraordinary circumstances, and others do not. And, the history of naval engagement is a bit like that.
JOURNALIST: What contact have you had with the Germans over this?
PM: Because the Kormoran, obviously, is a German raider, the Government advised our embassy in Berlin over the course of the weekend to ensure that the German Government would be appropriately informed. And as I understand it, those communications were made furthermore yesterday morning. As an added precaution we advised the German ambassador to Australia of the same.
BONGIORNO: Before you go, the Tibetan protest over the weekend (inaudible)
PM: When it comes to the most recent developments in Tibet and elsewhere in China, our position is that all questions of human rights are important. The Foreign Minister when the Chinese Foreign Minister was in Australia recently raised human rights concerns with his Chinese counterpart.
These most recent developments in Tibet are disturbing and from my point of view, I would call upon the Chinese authorities to exercise restraint.
Australia has always recognised from the beginning Chinese sovereignty over Tibet, but these are significant developments, and therefore have been the subject already of communication diplomatically between our two Governments and I imagine that those communications will continue.
JOURNALIST: And will you raise that directly on your visit to Beijing with the President and Premier?
PM: I think that in most of my discussions with Chinese leaders in the past we have dealt with human rights. I can't see that changing into the future. And, it is a normal part of our relationship with the Chinese which is to say that on human rights questions we have differences with the Government in Beijing. And, when it comes to these most recent developments in Tibet, we have already made our position clearly known. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The normal diplomatic processes apply here, both in Beijing and in Canberra. And, these are serious matters and I take them seriously, and, they will certainly form part of our continued diplomatic communication with the Chinese Government. Thank you.


PM: It's important that we are gathered here today at this place, the War Memorial; because one of the great and profound mystery's for Australia from the events of the Second World War has been the search for the HMAS Sydney. And the reason we are here today is to indicate that we are one step closer as a Nation to potentially finding the Sydney.
Ted Graham, chairman of the Finding Sydney Foundation will speak to you in a minute; But I am here to confirm today that on behalf of the Australian Defence Force and the Finding the Sydney Foundation that the search has now located the wreck of the German raider Kormoran.
This has been a core part of the missing element of the jigsaw in the search for the Sydney for the last 65 years. The Kormoran which we know was the German Destroyer engaged the Sydney in November of 1941. As a consequence of that engagement the Kormoran went down and the Sydney went down.
In the case of the Kormoran there was significant loss of life and in the case of the Sydney all hands were lost, all 645 brave men of the Royal Australian Navy.
It has been a continuing source of unresolved business for the country as to what has happened to this great vessel. The HMAS Sydney earlier in the war was engaged in extraordinary actions in the Mediterranean and was the pride of the Australian Navy at the time. Its action against the superior German cruiser the Bartolomeo Colleoni in the Mediterranean is a matter of record and pride for all those who have followed the history of the Royal Australian Navy.
Therefore for all of us concerned about this great ship and those of us who are concerned about what happened to the 645 brave souls who went down with her have all these years been wondering where she lay and what in the end actually happened.
So finding the Kormoran is one big step forward. Of course that does not mean that the search has yet found the Sydney itself but it does place us one significant step closer. I would commend the work of Ted Graham, chairman of the Finding Sydney Foundation. They have been assiduous and dedicated in the work which they have done and the support in one form or another which had been given to them also by the Royal Australian Navy.
This is an important part of resolving a 65 year old puzzle, national puzzle as to what finally happened to the Sydney and I commend this search operation and the Australian Navy in their support for this activity.
If I could now turn to Ted Graham to give you some details on what has occurred
TED GRAHAM: Prime Minister; Minister Snowdon; Chief of the Defence Force; Chief of the Navy and the families of the 645 Australians lost on HMAS Sydney; Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you Prime Minister and your Government and the previous Howard Government; The Royal Australian Navy; My fellow directors Don Pridmore, Keith Rowe, Glenys McDonald and Bob Trotter; The search team under David Mearns; Our project management team; researchers Gladys McDonald, Kim Curser, David Mearns, Peter Hawthorn and others.
Today's announcement follows years of voluntary work and to commence to close the long standing controversy. Whilst we have a lot of work to do still we have achieved remarkable progress in the last four days.
We found the first signs of Kormoran about 36 hours after we had our sonar system deployed and operating properly. We will be putting a significant amount of information on our website as we speak now. The website is www.findingsydney.com and is also an associated press room site which the press can log onto.
Whilst our confidence level in locating the Kormoran was always high, it received a considerable boost from an excellent recent forecasting work undertaken by the Bureau of Meteorology in Perth for recent weeks. This provided us with further scientific evidence that the estimated location of Kormoran was correct and verified as we located her as I mentioned, in a few hours. It is also very appropriate at this time to remember that some Navy German sailors did not survive the battle.
We have also located what we believe to be the battlefield site and there is an amount of wreckage there but that has yet to be identified. We have not yet located the Sydney.
There are many people which we need to thank and we will do so later via our website and after we find the Sydney. I do however wish to acknowledge the major donations in funds from the Australian; NSW and Western Australian Governments and Corporate and Private donors.
To the future; Our primary task now is to locate the Sydney. I was talking to the ship a few minutes ago, they are looking in a search box which follows where we believe the Sydney should be and obviously we need to continue that work until we find her. Assuming we find the Sydney in the next short while or if we don't find the Sydney the ship is going to come in into Geraldton on Tuesday or Wednesday and take on board a remotely operated vehicle so we can go and closely inspect this site of the Kormoran and battlefield site, hoping that in particular the battlefield site may give us more indication of the direction that the Sydney proceeded in.
The remainder of the equipment to undertake that is currently on its way from Europe. We will be inspecting the Kormoran in water depths of approximately 2560 metres and the site of what we believe is the battlefield in approximately 2740 metres. We will also obviously inspect any other wreckage that we may find in the area.
Really that's all I wanted to say, there will be a lot of material on our finding Sydney website right now and there will be some video imagery posted on there this afternoon that came from the ship last night.
Prime Minister thank you for your kind words, your invitation to be here today and to the Governments past and present and the Royal Australian Navy for their help and advice and close relationships with us.
PM: I might ask the Chief of Navy to speak briefly about the significance of the Sydney itself.
CHIEF OF NAVY RUSS SHALDERS: Thank you Prime Minister. The Navy is jubilant that we've got to this point. As the Prime Minister said this is unresolved business and has been now since the 19th November 1941.
Its unfinished business, what has now been found will allow us to proceed toward finishing something that has been a mystery, Australia's major maritime mystery. This is only a marker, it will be a long, hard and difficult and highly technical search from this point onwards and so we should not hope that this will be resolved quickly. But I say again the Navy is absolutely jubilant that we've got to this point. I congratulate the Finding Sydney Foundation for their resourcefulness, their initiative and their sheer hard work and persistence over many, many years to get to this point.
The Navy looks forward to the day when we can find the Sydney and perhaps more importantly find out why the battle turned out the way it did. Thank you
PM: One final point before taking your questions. Because there's also been a significant loss of German life on this vessel our embassy in Berlin has notified the Government of Germany and that occurred as I am advised during the course of today. And furthermore when it comes to the proper protection of this particular vessel the Kormoran, the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Arts has responsibilities under the Shipwrecks Act, Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 and has the powers vested in him under that act to provide appropriate protection for any such wreck.
This matter of course will now be considered by the Minister as is required under the provisions of that act.
Happy to take your questions or to throw them in whichever direction you would like.
JOURNALIST: Mr Graham perhaps if I could throw one to you. Could you explain to us please how important and why it is important that the discovery of the Kormoran is made in terms of ultimately finding the Sydney? How much does it matter?
TED GRAHAM: Finding the Kormoran was most important to us. The location of the Kormoran matches exactly with the German account of where the Kormoran should be and of the battle location and that gives us a cornerstone if you like to start the search for the Sydney from. So if we hadn't found Kormoran it would have made it much more difficult.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us exactly where it is?
TED GRAHAM: I haven't got the coordinates in my head but they... It's about 150 miles west of Shark Bay. The coordinates are or will be on our website as we speak.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
TED GRAHAM: The bureau, well I didn't know either until I walked in to ask them could they help. The worldwide metrological bureaus have an enormous computer power for weather predictions. They and the American bureau and the European community bureaus combined together to look at all the data they had over the last 40 or 50 years and they provided a lot of information on currents and tides and wind effect off the West Australian coast.
Their work showed us that the life rafts from the Kormoran had to have come from the location where we subsequently found the ship. So that was very important to us.
JOURNALIST: Do you believe it's now simply only possible or probable that you will find the Sydney? How would you describe that?
TED GRAHAM: There can never be a guarantee. We're working in water depths of several thousand metres, our search box was initially 1800 square nautical miles. We're now working in a search box that's approximately 300 nautical miles and that's where currently we're looking for the Sydney.
I was talking to our search ship, they rang me just before I came in here. Their out there today working, we have to remain confident but there can never be a guarantee.
JOURNALIST: likely?
TED GRAHAM: There can never be a guarantee. It's a big ocean out there.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) What was it about the wreck that identified it?
TED GRAHAM: We are putting a lot of imagery on our website, it's imagery which is much better quality than this. But in that imagery which is a bit pointless me showing it to a big room, but the site scan sonar has identified the wreckage of the Kormoran. The bow section of the Kormoran which was blown away from the rest of it and what they now believe is the battle site about 6 kilometres away.
So does that answer what your asking
JOURNALIST: When was it found what date?
TED GRAHAM: On the evening of the 14th. Sorry I should re-clarify that we've had inkling that we had something there on the evening of the 14th. We didn't confirm it properly until yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you spoke about the number of lives lost on the German vessel and you talked about the Minister determining the future of that wreck. How likely is it that you would attempt to recover the remains of the people on that wreck or is that out of the question?
PM: The shipwrecks of this nature have to be completed with complete respect. Complete and absolute respect and hence why the Historic Shipwrecks Act is crafted in the way in which it is.
Whatever side we are on in this appalling conflict, where so many people lost their lives. There are families involved here, families of the 645 brave Australians who lost their lives and families of those of the crew of the Kormoran. That's why these processes will be attended to meticulously by the Minister under the provisions of the act. Do you wish to add to that?
SNOWDON: Because of the battleship is a German battleship it remains the property of Germany. We will do nothing about that vessel until we've negotiated with the German Government but we will be trying to provide interim protection. We will certainly provide protection but ultimately it's a matter for us to discuss with the German Government.
JOURNALIST: Graham can you tell us what you think happened on that particular day after the Kormoran sank? Where do you think the Sydney went? There's talk of it going over the horizon.
TED GRAHAM: All I can do is say exactly what you said to me. There are no survivors from the Sydney so we don't know. All I can do is quote exactly what you said “she was seen going over the horizon” and we honestly don't know.
PM: Any other questions. I just conclude by saying; To commend again the Foundation. I mean this is very difficult technical work, the depth of water here is huge. We are talking about 2600 metres it's very deep.
And secondly decisions by the NSW Government, the West Australian Government and the previous Australian Government to commit funds to this. Funds which have continued to flow of course under us. But the sharp edge of this has been executed by the foundation with the support of our very fine Navy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can we ask some questions one or two other issues briefly if we can?
PM: Sure, if I can allow our friends to not be part of the fray
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister first have you damaged our diplomatic relations with Tokyo by excluding Japan from the Itinerary of your upcoming world trip?
PM: Well the Government of Japan and ourselves have already confirmed my visit to Tokyo in early July and that will be to attend the G8 summit during which time there will be a significant bi-lateral meeting between myself and Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan.
The other thing to say is that apart from that and on top of that the Japanese Government and ourselves have been in discussions for a long, long time since January actually about possible timings for a bi-lateral visit on top of that. Those discussions continue and furthermore to reinforce the importance of the relationship with Japan both the Foreign Minister and the Trade Minister have visited Japan already. Underlying the absolute importance we attach to our relationship with Tokyo.
JOURNALIST: How concerned are you about reports that the TWU in NSW has been harassing businesses and perhaps using stand over tactics to get them to give financial support to the union to elect NSW Labor MP's.
PM: I have an absolutely hard line on this stuff. If anyone has any substantive allegations to make about any illegality on the part of any union or non union organisation it should be drawn immediately to the attention of the relevant regulatory authorities. Either the AEC or the Police that's my view. Simple as that.
JOURNALIST: And what (inaudible) will they be excluded from being appointed to certain Government bodies?
PM: If there is any substantiated allegation whatsoever then no such appointment will proceed. In fact the government has not confirmed any such appointment.
JOURNALIST: Is Australia hypocritical for going ahead with the Kangaroo cull which the Australian Government supports considering Whale (Inaudible)
PM: Well our attitude to Whaling goes to the whole nature of the international whaling commission and relevant International convention which is an agreement between many states. And it goes to whether or not what is occurring is scientific whaling or not.
The reason we have commissioned activity during the course of the year to determine precisely what's going on in the Southern Ocean has been to establish whether or not that claim is true.
So therefore we're dealing with a body of international law, National assertions within that and our contrary assertions within that. That is why this particular action has been embraced by the Australian Government as we indicated in clear cut terms prior to the last election.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) certain middle class so called welfare payments including Family tax benefit B. Obviously you've created a cap of $250,000 would you look at lowering that to make further cuts in the forthcoming budget?
PM: Look I think the important thing is to make sure that we have policies which help all working families and on the detail of the upcoming budget. We're going to adhere to the integrity of the budget process but all working families, all working families will be protected by our Government in the production of that budget and we will honour all of our pre election commitments. Every one of them, every one of them.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We will honour all of our pre election commitments. I mean there is a suggestion here that we shouldn't. Well it's not my view and some have suggested that we shouldn't honour tax cuts because tax cuts benefit people on middle incomes as well.
Not my view we went to the people and said that's what we are going to do and that's what we intend to do. We went to people with a series of commitments in relation to a range of other payments including the baby bonus and that's exactly what we're going to do.
I think if you make a commitment to the people that's what you go ahead and do and I am absolutely confident that all working families will be properly protected by the measures that we embrace in the budget.
Last question, then I got to zip
Sorry is there a last question from someone else. You have just done three and there's someone else waiting up there. Now Patricia there are other people in the room.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Joe Hockey this morning said that the Reserve Bank has gone too far in raising interest rates and put more pressure on the commercial banks who are already paying too much money.
PM: What I would say to Mr Hockey, is that he needs to sort out with Mr Turnbull whether he believes or doesn't believe there is an inflation problem. Mr Turnbull the Shadow Treasurer says there's no inflation problem. The fact is we have the highest inflation rate in 16 years, given to us by that Government.
So once they arrive at a public position about whether there is an inflation problem or not and what should be done about it. Then perhaps then we could engage with a productive debate about these matters in the future.
The second thing is we have this extraordinary set of circumstances concerning Mr Turnbull allegations about the minimum wage case last week. He's just inventing stuff as they go along. This is serious economic debates about a serious set of global economic and national circumstances at present and we have instead the Shadow Treasurer inventing things out of thin air, point 1.
And we have the Shadow Treasurer and Mr Hockey and in fact Dr Nelson not accepting one core point and that is whether we have an inflation problem in this country or not. We say we do and we have put forward a plan for dealing with it. The opposition at this stage are in a state of denial.
Got to zip


PM: I've called this news conference today to announce the new senior leadership team of the Australian Defence Force. I'm pleased to say today that Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston will be reappointed as the Chief of the Defence Force and will continue to command the Australian Defence Force for another 3 years
The Government has great confidence in his leadership and in the performance of our service men and women. His reappointment as Chief of Defence Force will ensure a continuity of leadership for Australia's military during a high operational tempo and reflects on the great work being done by the ADF.
I'm also pleased to announce a number of other senior military appointments. Lieutenant General David Hurley, currently the Chief of Joint Operations, will be appointed as the new Vice Chief of the Defence Force.
Rear Admiral Russell Crane, recently the Deputy Chief of Navy, will be promoted to the rank of Vice Admiral and appointed as the new Chief of Navy.
Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie, the current Vice Chief of the Defence Force, will be appointed as the new Chief of Army.
Air Vice-Marshal Mark Binskin, currently Air Commander Australia, will be promoted to the rank of Air Marshal and appointed as the new Chief of Air Force.
These senior service appointments will take effect from 4 July this year and will be for a period of 3 years. Each of them, that is the Vice Chief of Defence Force, the Chief of Navy, the Chief of Army and the Chief of Air Force have been recommendations made to the Government by Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston the CDF. We've accepted his recommendations.
I would like to thank the outgoing service Chiefs who will be retiring from their respective services. Vice Admiral Russ Shalders has been the Chief of Navy for the last three years and before that he was Vice Chief of the Defence Force. He has served in the Navy for more than 40 years having joined as a cadet midshipmen in 1967. Under his command the Navy has met its many operational commitments and I salute his service.
Lieutenant General Peter Leahy has served two terms, a total of six years as the Chief of Army. He is the longest continuously serving head of the Army since General Sir Harry Chauvel in the 1920's. During the last six years he has commanded the Army during one of it's busiest times of operations. He has also been instrumental in preparing the Army for the future through the hardening and networking Army initiative aimed at modernising our Army and enhancing the land force with two additional battalion groups.
Air Marshal Geoff Shepherd has served as the Chief of Air Force for the past three years. He's had a distinguished career as a fighter pilot and has held a number of senior command appointments. He leaves the Royal Australian Air Force in good shape and recruiting and retention at good levels with no critical categories.
I want to pay tribute to Admiral Shalders, General Leahy and Air Marshal Shepherd for their hard work, their dedication and their commitment to defending Australia. On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I thank them for their many years of dedicated service to the nation.
I also want to congratulate the new leadership team on their appointments. This team has strong credentials and experience in leadership and management and in a joint operational environment. They are well placed to assist the Australian Government to meet our security policy challenges into the future. And the Defence Minister and I look forward to working with them in their respective roles into the future.
National security is fundamental business for the nation. It is fundamental business for the Government of the nation and as I have said before there is no higher calling for the nation than that which we see with our men and women in uniform. I salute their service the men and women of the ADF. I salute their leadership. I salute those who are retiring from leadership positions as I do the service of those who we now appoint to these senior and most responsible missions within the Australian Defence Force.
I might now turn to the CDF for some remarks and then I'll ask the Defence Minister to add.
AIR CHIEF MARSHAL HOUSTON: Thank you Prime Minister, can I start by saying I'm deeply honoured to be appointed for a further three years and I thank the Prime Minister and the Minister for their trust and faith in me.
I should say right at the outset I'm humbled by the fact that I will continue to lead the people of the ADF. It's the people of the ADF who have achieved remarkable outcomes over the last three years, it's incredible what they have done on operations around the world and of course that challenge will continue through the next 3 years.
So my priority will continue to be looking after the people and ensuring that we retain them and their families so that we have an ADF that can meet those challenges now and into the future.
I'd like to congratulate the new leadership team, General Hurley, Admiral Crane, General Gillespie and Air Marshal Binskin. They are a very experienced group of officers and they will form a very cohesive and effective team.
I'd also like to take this opportunity to recognise the great work that the outgoing Chiefs have done. General Leahy, Air Marshal Shepherd and Admiral Shalders. To a large extent the reason we've been so successful in operations is because of the incredible emphasis that the Chiefs have had on the professional standards of their people and also the intense preparation that's gone in to the preparation of our people before they go away on operations. So to all three of those I say a very sincere thank you and I wish them well for the future.
Thank you very much Prime Minister. The ADF is a great Force and I think behind us we have the team to lead us into that future. Thank you.
PM: Defence Minister
FITZGIBBON: Thanks Prime Minister of course I want to join with the Prime Minister in congratulating Angus on his reappointment and congratulating the rest of the new leadership team. We have great challenges before us and I look forward to working with them, I have great confidence in them.
Those challenges are many but I've said on a number of occasions it's my view and I think it's the view of the Government that the single biggest challenge facing the Australian Defence Force in the future is our people and skills shortage and on that basis I've asked the new leadership team to make this a particular focus.
In addition to training and sustaining the respective services, each service Chief will be directly responsible for ensuring that sufficient trained and skilled personnel are available. It is only through the force of strong and professional leadership that this goal will be achieved.
Each service Chief will report to the Chief of the Defence Force, to the Minister for Defence, the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel and through us to the Prime Minister and the National Security Committee of the Cabinet. Every three months or more if required the service chiefs will spell out in detail the progress they have made in meeting the exacting requirements of their respective services for skilled trades and professions.
This will require tireless effort and tight focus on the part of each service Chief. It is a tough challenge in the face of almost full employment and a booming mining industry. However there is no choice but to succeed. The best available military equipment is of little use without sufficient high quality personnel to operate and sustain it. Again I have great confidence in them in progressing this very important issue and I will look forward to working with them.
PM: Thanks very much Defence Minister. Turn to you for questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Houston you took over running the Defence Force 3 years ago at a time when you said one of your main concerns was going to be looking after the people in the Defence Force which you have repeated. It was at a time when the Military justice report was out, very damning report on the state of morale and a whole lot of issues in the Defence Force. How do you feel that, that has improved over the last 3 years?
AIR CHIEF MARSHAL HOUSTON: We've put an awful lot of emphasis on military justice and I think if you have a look at how we have gone in implementing the military justice recommendations, we've completed most of them and I'm pleased to say that I think the way we handle military justice now is enhanced and improved. And certainly we give it an awful lot of attention.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask Defence Minister, you've spelt out that your going to require all the Chiefs to meet very rigorous targets in terms of recruitment and retention. Obviously one of the main ways you attract skilled labour is to pay them more. So is the Government going to do its bit by looking at remuneration for defence personnel?
FITZGIBBON: Remuneration will always be part of the mix of course, but the reality is that we can never hope to compete with other industries, in particular the mining industry, on the remuneration front alone.
That's why we need to find new and innovative ways to encourage personnel to stay rather than to leave. We want to make sure that when the defence family is sitting around the kitchen table thinking about an offer to leave and therefore thinking about whether to stay or to leave. We can put things on the kitchen table which provide them with additional incentives. Which to say, one example of that of course is our efforts to extend free medical and dental services to all Defence families. I think it is innovative projects like this that might just make the difference when defence families are trying to make this difficult decision.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the Iraq war enters its sixth year I think tomorrow. You have called it the greatest foreign policy failure since Vietnam. What are your thoughts as the fifth anniversary approaches and the sixth year goes in.
PM: Well I've been to Iraq on a couple of occasions and visited the Australian Defence Force in the field and my experience of them in the field, both when I visited them in opposition and since I've visited them as Prime Minister is that they themselves a doing a first class job within the operational ambit that they have been given. So there is no criticism of them at all. In fact, nothing but praise.
On the overall wisdom of embarking upon this war in the first place, our position is well known and I go back to what I said some time ago. Which is that if you're going to embark upon a war like that, have it very clearly in mind from day one, what your exit strategy is to be and what you're mission statement is to be. And I think that's been one of the problems which the operation in Iraq has confronted from day one.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you and Mr Fitzgibbon are both going off to the NATO meeting. Do you now believe that with the changes that are being made and the changes that you will push there and that are being discussed there, that the war in Afghanistan is winnable?
PM: I believe that it's only responsible to remain militarily engaged in a conflict where you are putting our men and women in uniform on the line, is if you believe it is winnable. It is I think the first time that an Australian Prime Minister has attended a NATO summit. The reason I am going to Bucharest to attend the Summit is very clear cut. I want to be confident that NATO collectively and the European contributors to it have embarked upon a long term strategy to secure success in Afghanistan and against fixed benchmarks.
That is what has galvanised our thinking and my decision to go and the Defence Ministers decision to go. The Defence Minister has already attended to NATO Ministerial level meetings, one in Edinburgh and the second in Vilnius with the same objective in mind. As I've said to the President of the United States recently on the telephone confirming to him privately what I have said publicly: this Government has committed itself to Afghanistan for the long haul. But for that to be delivered in the long haul, this Government must have confidence that there is an agreed strategy on the part of all the combatant and participating states that there is a strategy to secure success.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) victory in Afghanistan?
PM: Success or victory in Afghanistan, one of the criteria lies in ensuring that you have a sustainable, successful, civilian Government in Kabul with effective control over the bulk of the country. And secondly what therefore flows by way of a military strategy and an economic and aid strategy underpinning that to secure that objective. If there's one criticism which I think all are agreed on. It's been a failure so far effectively to integrate the military arm of the operation with the civilian arm of the operation to ensure that there is a total strategy for Afghanistan country-wide which integrates all elements.
Let me give you one example. You can deploy as our brave troops in Afghanistan, some of whom we have lost tragically, to clear out an area. But unless you have a capacity to ensure that, that area then is sustained under first of all, reasonable security control and secondly, you are in a position to ensure that having done so, that there is as civilian and economic livelihood to sustain the local population. Then you end up being on a merry go round. That's just one example.
So we have some pretty clear cut ideas as we head off to Bucharest. And the reason I am going to Bucharest is, in the middle of my visit to the United States and elsewhere is because I regard this engagement which involves such a large number of Australian troops as being very important. And this Government has got to have some confidence that there is a strategy agreed upon by all which is capable of ensuring or securing success in the long term.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd also on your trip, there's been speculation that the talks in China are going to be very difficult not just on Tibet obviously but on the economic side. What's your thoughts on that discussion?
PM: Well I think the reason I'm visiting China at this stage is because China is our largest trading partner. It makes basic economic sense at a time of global economic uncertainty that we attend to our principle economic relationships and China is there front and centre. Secondly, apart from trade of course there is an investment relationship in both directions. What the Treasurer did recently was make absolutely clear cut what our guidelines would be for the treatment of inbound investments from Government related entities wherever they happen to occur around the world. Whether sovereign wealth funds for example, emanate from the United Arab Emirates. Whether they emanate from the Russian Federation. Whether they emanate from the Peoples republic of China. Whether they emanate from elsewhere.
And certainly in my discussions with Chinese authorities and with the Treasurer's discussions with Chinese authorities, we've received no negative response to us making that non discriminatory position absolutely clear.
JOURNALIST: What is our exit strategy from Afghanistan, is it the same as our mission (inaudible)
PM: The mission statement defines where we wish to be in terms of the objective which I referred to before, against which particular timeframe and thirdly whether all the assets, civilian or military, are in order to achieve that and then against that benchmark, when you should therefore consider withdrawing Australian forces or drawing them down. Now that is all contingent on there being an agreed strategy to begin with and as the Defence Minister has said I think following his return from both Edinburgh and Vilnius - what has staggered him and staggered the Government generally is that when we embarked on a recommitment of forces to Afghanistan some years ago that there was no such common agreed strategy between us and the allies.
FITZGIBBON: Could I just say on that point, I can report that we now have received the relevant draft documents for the Bucharest summit and we have indeed been feeding in our views on that strategy. So we are hoping that in Bucharest we will get a new road map and in addition to that a public declaration which makes clear our objectives in Afghanistan and or course clearly articulates a strategy for Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: Your office confirmed last night that you have had one meeting with the entrepreneur Ian Tang -
PM: If we are going to go into other things can I suggest that our, if your ok with the military side of things, I am happy to stay here for other...
JOURNALIST: Just on Afghanistan, your predecessor began a significant effort in terms of reconstruction there. Is it fair to say that that reconstruction program at best is minimal if not has been stalled completely?
PM: Well progress across the country is mixed. There are a number of provincial reconstruction teams across the various provinces of Afghanistan and the reports from some areas are better than others. It's plain if you look at the map of Afghanistan, the further north and west you go, the easier it is to achieve success because the security environment is more benign, more benign - not absolutely benign, but more benign.
The further south and east you go the harder it gets because the security environment becomes much less benign. Therefore the results from the activities of provincial reconstruction teams is varied. But what is missing in my judgement Malcolm and I turn to the Defence Minister for his views on this, is how that, lets call it PRT, Provincial Reconstruction Team approach to building the civilian economy of Afghanistan - whether that is effectively integrated with a real military strategy across all parts of the country and in the south and the east that is an open question. That's one of the, again one of the reasons that we're heading off to Bucharest (sic).
Because our time is limited I will come back to your question now if that's ok.
JOURNALIST: Your office confirmed last night that you've had one meeting with the entrepreneur Ian Tang since your election to Prime Minister. Can you tell us precisely when that meeting occurred, at whose behest it was, and what you discussed?
PM: I think it was in November, December something like that. In Brissy. 10 or 15 minutes. A cup of coffee. Hello, how are you. I've known this guy for quite some time. It was a personal meeting.
JOURNALIST: Just on the budget, you're continuing to warn of the inflation legacy left to you by your previous Government. You also guaranteed or you said that battlers won't be hit in your budget. You've also said you are not going to carve into what some people call middle class welfare. You've also got a big education program and a big health program. Are you painting your self into a corner? Because if you not making cuts to those big ticket areas. How are you going to find the cuts you need?
PM: Well no one has ever said that crafting a budget is easy. One of the reasons by the way it's not easy is that we decided for national security reasons to quarantine the Australian Defence Force. About which I think they are reasonably happy. About which various other agencies of state may be less happy. But that's been an important discussion. But we believe that national security requires effective long term planning. The kit and equipment used by Navy and Air Force and the Army is expensive stuff. Long term acquisition programs and certainty in my judgement is required. Also on the Defence Force recruitment side.
So no one says that framing a budget is easy when you actually have those core priorities as well as looking after working families, as well as investing in the future. Were fully mindful of that, this will be tough, you know there will be difficult expectations to meet, but you know it's what we're elected to do. To govern, to make hard decisions. The core underlying principle though is this. To make sure that we have a budget outcome which produces downward pressure on demand, downward pressure on inflation, and therefore, downward pressure on interest rates.
If you look at the report released this morning on the impact of the previous Government's discretionary, attitude to discretionary grants. Whereby they are effectively adding billions of dollars to demand over the last triennium, that's a lot of money flowing out there. Therefore we take a disciplined approach to budget management in order to produce a disciplined outcome on public demand and therefore downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates, in contrast to our predecessors. On the expenditure side, there will be tough choices to be made but we intend to get the balance right between responsibility on the demand side and investing in the economy's future and that means sustaining our commitment to an education revolution.
JOURNALIST: How long will Defence be quarantined, is it only this budget or is it future budgets? Is it responsible to permanently quarantine Defence?
PM: We made a very clear cut pre election commitment that we would sustain the allocation of 3% real, through until 2016. I was going to say 15, 16 so there you go. And that's because in our deliberations with our Defence colleges there are very, very long lead times in decisions and this is in many respects a unique portfolio because of that. So with 2008 that's through to 2016 against the normal, should we say, fiscal and funding parameters of Government, this isn't bad certainty for the ADF.
FITZGIBBON: Can I say on that, maintaining 3% real growth and quarantining Defence from cuts doesn't mean that we won't be looking for savings and efficiencies within the Defence portfolio. We've been led to a very difficult budgetary situation. We will need that 3% real and more. We will need to find savings within Defence to be reinvested in Defence if we are going to make up that lost ground.
PM: So savings found within the Defence portfolio we've been speaking to the CDF and secretary of the Department about this. The intention is, and this is what will occur is to reinvest those within defence. The Defence Minister made a speech last night about a $6 billion black hole and we've got to meet that within the framework of 3% real guarantee out to 2016. Plus identifying savings and reinvesting those in portfolio priorities.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I ask, your Petrol Commissioner starts at the end of the month, the ACCC's monitoring petrol prices. What's your message to Australian Motorists as they approach Easter and fears that petrol prices will rise and at some stage is it that the competitions not going to help and your going to have look at the tax regime - especially the 10% GST on fuel?
PM: The key thing that we said prior to the election and we've honoured that commitment is to appoint a petrol commissioner. Remember the previous Government had 12 years to act on this. They failed to do so. The only time that the ACCC began to be given anything like formal monitoring powers was after we announced the decision to proceed with the petrol commissioner in June-July last year. That's after the previous Government had been in for eleven and a half years. Point one.
Point two, is the whole underlying thrust of that appointment and the extra powers given to the ACCC is to ensure that maximum competition policy pressure is brought to bear on the oil company majors. That hasn't occurred up until now. And you've seen recent statements both by commissioner Graham Samuel and others about the upcoming Easter period. We believe that these are the right measures to take at this time to assist struggling motorists. We really get the message that working families are under all sorts of financial pressures at the moment mortgages; petrol prices; grocery prices and other cost of living impacts such as child care. And that's why our response to that is to deliver the tax cuts. We've been criticised for that. We are going to deliver the tax cuts to working families to help them make ends meet.
Secondly we are going to deliver on our commitment to increase the child care tax rebate from 30% to 50% and thirdly to deliver on our commitment to provide working families with an education tax refund. These are designed to help the family budget overall.
And we've got to go. Thank you very much


HOST: The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is on the line and he is speaking with Chief political correspondent Chris Ulhmann.
ULHMANN: Prime Minister Good Morning
PM: Good Morning Chris
ULHMANN: Were you involved in the launch of a Beijing retail development in 2006?
PM: There was a development in Beijing which was I think canvassed in the Australian-China chamber of commerce bulletin of mid 2006. Which I together with I think others from Austrade and the Australian Embassy attended, yes that's correct.
ULHMANN: Did you speak?
PM: I believe so, I speak at many Chinese functions whether I'm in Beijing, Shanghai or elsewhere in the country. It's difficult not to given my 25 year long association with various aspects of the Australia- China commercial relationship.
ULHMANN: But why did you do that was it a favour to Mr Ian Tang of AustChina Investment and Development?
PM: I was invited as I recall to attend this function together with a whole range of other functions. It had as I recall it a proposal to redevelop the Friendship Super store site in Beijing and within that for it to contain some centre for the promotion of Australia-China commercial relations.
I also confirmed that the Australian embassy would be represented at the function and the Australian Trade Commission as well which they were.
ULHMANN: But were you doing it as a favour for Mr Ian Tang, because it did come off the back of some quite extensive travel that you were doing that he was paying for?
PM: Certainly the invitation would have come from that company, but as I said we confirmed also prior to attending, that this would be supported by the Australian embassy and by the Australian Trade Commission.
ULHMANN: Did you feel indebted to him because he was paying for so much travel for you?
PM: Not at all if there was a project which was designed to in part promote the Australia-China commercial relationship and together with requests you receive from the business community at home and abroad you attend those things.
Also having taken the added precaution of confirming the then Australian Governments official representatives through the Embassy and through the Australian Trade Commission would be present as they were.
ULHMANN: When private companies pay for you or any other MP to travel overseas do you think it's reasonable that they surely are expecting something in return?
PM: Which goes to the whole question of the future of political donations on the one hand and on the other hand sponsored travel.
Political donations this company in question has been declared by the Australian Labor Party already on the public register has donated to the Australian Labor Party. It's also donated $150,000 to the National Party at a time when the National Party was in Government. With Ministers presumably meeting from time to time with representatives of this company. I'm not sure of the details.
The second thing on supported travel is that any political Opposition particularly in the positions of Shadow Minister for Trade and the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs are not given an allocated budget from the Parliament and as a consequence, they travel as much as they can on the basis of supported travel.
The key thing in both cases is are political donations declared. In this case absolutely yes on our part. And on the question of supported travel is that all declared at the time, yes it is.
ULHMANN: Do you think that it's a good system that our MP's need to rely on the largess of private companies and doesn't it always open the possibility that, that's influence peddling?
PM: Well I notice the question was put before to the current Shadow Foreign Minister as to whether the current Opposition would walk away from the possibility of supported travel through private sponsorship; he declined to give that undertaking.
That's the circumstance in which we found ourselves in. It's just a reality, if you are trying to do these jobs from Opposition then you are relying upon private sponsorships whether it's by companies with interests in the resources sector, the commercial sector, the financial services community or wherever to make sure that that travel is possible.
The key thing is transparency and declaration.
ULHMANN: The key thing surely Prime Minister is the question to you. Do you think this is a good system? Doesn't it open itself to influence peddling?
PM: Well that's why I've put the whole question of political donations onto the agenda some time ago. On the question of should there be a change to the current disclosure limit, remember the previous Howard Government increased the disclosure limit to $10,000. We brought it down to $1,000, is our proposal.
Secondly we've already proposed to put a ban on foreign donations to Australian political parties. The simple reason is that we've got to not go down the road where we have such large amounts of money with no ultimate ceiling being placed on what's spent on election campaigns. And on the question about sponsored travel I'm all for as I indicated I think in passing yesterday, I'm all for having these things looked at into the future. What we dealt with in Opposition were the cards that we were dealt by the then Government. Which was no support what so ever for us discharging our responsibilities as either the alternative Foreign Minister or alternative Trade Minister of the country.
ULHMANN: Prime Minister would you urge China to allow international observers into Tibet so that the world can see that they are showing restraint which is what you were calling for?
PM: I think it's important and I've said this to Chinese leaders over many, many years that while we respect China's sovereignty over Tibet there are many, many problems when it comes to Human rights abuses.
We have constantly urged restraint as the effectiveness of the mechanism that you propose; I'm not advised as to what currently on the table or whether that would work. I think the important thing for the international community with our friends in Beijing to put clearly on the table the fact that we believe that restraint is to be demonstrated. And also for Human rights standards to be observed.                  
ULHMANN: How can it be demonstrated if you can't see it Prime Minister?
PM: Well my understanding is and I'm not fully up to date on current domestic travel arrangements within China but foreign missions resident in Beijing and elsewhere are entitled to travel to Tibet.
There may be and I stand to be corrected in terms of any recent restrictions, an ability to travel reasonably extensively in Tibet and to make there own reports on that. I think it's important for all Governments to indicate that when it comes to the Tibetan people that appropriate levels of restraint are demonstrated by the Chinese authorities.
That's why I have made the statements I've made during the course of this week.
UHLMANN:    Prime Minister, will your first Budget be aimed at helping the Reserve Bank slow down the Australian economy?
PM: Our intention with our first Budget, Chris, is to produce a responsible budget.  That means, as I indicated in January, setting our target based on the state of the global economy at the time, of delivering a surplus of 1.5 per cent of GDP, that's the target.  And we believe that's important to take pressure of public demand, therefore take pressure off demand, and assist in the overall inflation challenge that the Reserve Bank has to contend with.
UHLMANN:    So, you are trying to slow the economy down?
PM: We believe that it's a question of getting the balance right between the contributors to overall demand, which is private demand, and public demand.  Remember, private demand is going to be assisted by the tax cuts which are coming in to assist working families.  It will be assisted by also the increase in the childcare tax rebate.  On those questions, we believe that given we are proceeding with those pre-election commitments, that on the public demand side we therefore for this and other reasons, need to show restraint.
UHLMANN:    So, you are trying to slow the Australian economy down in concert with the Reserve Bank, is that what you're trying to achieve?
PM: We're trying to achieve a balanced outcome.  As I said, if you look at the total inflation equation, what's it consist of?  Demand side factors and supply side factors.  Two elements to demand  -  public demand and private demand  -  we control public demand, we have some influence on private demand, and therefore we've got to get the balance right.  And therefore, because we're proceeding, as we believe we must with the pre-election commitment we made to provide tax cuts to working families, that on the public demand side we need to show appropriate restraint and not least because the government which preceded us allowed government spending to simply balloon out of control  -  running at 4.5 per cent real as of when the Government took over and interest rates running at the second highest rates in the developed world and inflation at a 16-year high.
UHLMANN:    Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks very much.
ENDS


The Rudd Government today announced two significant new policy initiatives at today's landmark Indigenous Health Equality Summit.
These are important steps in the Government's commitment to closing the life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people within a generation.
The Rudd Government will:
     * invest $14.5 million in tackling high rates of smoking in Indigenous communities  -  a leading cause of chronic diseases such as cancer and heart disease which contribute to Indigenous people's low life expectancy; and
     * invest $19 million in a National Indigenous Health Workforce Training Plan, to get more Indigenous people into the health workforce.
Tackling smoking in Indigenous communities
The Rudd Government will invest $14.5 million over four years to tackle high rates of smoking in the Indigenous population.
Half of Indigenous people aged 18 years and over are current smokers, which is more than double the smoking rate of the non-Indigenous population. According to some reports smoking rates are as high as 80 per cent in some Indigenous communities.
Tobacco smoking is the number one risk factor for chronic conditions and diseases  -  such as cardiovascular disease and cancer  -  in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. In 2003, smoking was responsible for 12 per cent of the total burden of illness, and one-fifth of deaths amongst Indigenous Australians.
Tackling smoking is critical to closing the gap in Indigenous life expectancy.
The Government's initiative will comprise three key elements:
     * supporting research into Indigenous tobacco control. In partnership with research organisations such as the Cooperative Research Centre for Aboriginal Health (CRCAH), this initiative will help build the evidence base around what works in helping Indigenous people to quit smoking;
     * trialling a range of innovative community interventions, including targeted, culturally appropriate communication activities; and
     * offering smoking cessation training to staff working in Indigenous health.
National Indigenous Health Workforce Training Plan 
The Government will invest $19 million over three years in a National Indigenous Health Workforce Training Plan.
Supporting a strong Indigenous health workforce and encouraging more Indigenous people to take up careers as health professionals is critical to improving health services and increasing Indigenous peoples' life expectancy.
This Government's initiative will:
     * support the Australian Indigenous Doctors Association to expand its work of mentoring and networking young Indigenous doctors;
     * support the Congress of  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Indigenous Nurses to expand its network of mentoring Indigenous nurses;
     * support the Aboriginal community controlled health sector to encourage Indigenous people and students  to join the Indigenous health workforce; 
     * provide additional training opportunities for Aboriginal Health Workers, and support for the establishment of a National Aboriginal Health Worker Association; and
     * support the Leaders in Indigenous Medical Education Network to ensure that Indigenous health is expanded into the curriculum in medical, allied health and nursing schools.
Commitment to achieving Indigenous Health Equality 
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon and Indigenous Affairs Minister Jenny Macklin also today signed the Indigenous Health Equality Summit's Statement of Intent, demonstrating the Government's commitment to working in partnership with the Indigenous community and in particular the Indigenous health sector to close the gap in Indigenous life expectancy within a generation.


It is with great pleasure I announce today that 1000 of Australia's best and brightest people have been selected to help shape the nation's future at the Australia 2020 Summit.
The 10 member independent Steering Committee, chaired by Professor Glyn Davis, has had a very tough job selecting the participants from nearly 8,000 very high quality nominations.
The selection process was extremely rigorous and demanding and I commend the Steering Committee for their efforts over the past month.
The 1000 people who have been selected will receive their invitations this coming week.
I would like to personally congratulate those invited to participate in this national debate about Australia's long term future.
This Summit will bring together a diverse and talented range of people who are incredibly positive about gaining the opportunity to put forward their ideas on a national platform.
I would like to encourage every Australian, whether selected as a participant or not, to contribute their ideas and ambitions to the 2020 Summit by making a submission to one of the 10 critical discussion areas which will form the basis of Summit discussions.
In addition to making a submission there are a number of associated events where people can put forward their ideas and participate in discussions.
School Summits will be held by individual primary and secondary schools over a three week period, starting on the 17th of March. The 2020 Youth Summit will involve 100 young Australians and will be held in Canberra on April 12 and 13.
In addition some State and Territory Premiers will be holding their own Summits and there has also been a great deal of interest from Local Members of Parliament to host Summits in their respective electorates to ensure that the ideas of their constituents are considered.
All of the key issues and ideas from the submissions and associated events will form part of the discussions at the 2020 Summit in Canberra on April 19 and 20.
As Prime Minister, I congratulate and thank everyone who nominated. I look forward to hearing your ideas for Australia's future.
20 Participants for 2020 Announced Today
Options for the future of Indigenous Australia
     * Rodney Dillon TAS
     * Leah Armstrong NSW
Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world
     * Waleed Aly VIC
     * Peter Cosgrove NSW
Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion
     * Sara Haghdoosti NSW
     * Freda Briggs SA
Future directions for rural industries and rural communities
     * Joel Clark NSW
     * Terry Underwood NT
     * Claire Penniceard VIC
     * James Fitzpatrick WA
The Productivity agenda  -  education, skills, science and innovation
     * Joshua Gans VIC
Population, Sustainability, Climate Change and Water
     * Erin Cini QLD
The Future of the Australian Economy
     * Lachlan Murdoch NSW
A long-term national health strategy
     * Rosemary Stanton NSW
Future of Australian Governance
     * Tanya Smith SA
     * Michael Tate TAS
Towards a Creative Australia
     * Astrid Wootton TAS
     * Ron Radford ACT
     * Ana Kokkinos VIC
     * Katrina Sedgewick SA
10 Critical Discussion areas at the Summit are:
     * Future directions for the Australian economy  -  including education, skills, training, science and innovation as part of the nation's productivity agenda
     * Economic infrastructure, the digital economy and the future of our cities
     * Population, sustainability, climate change, and water
     * Future directions for rural industries and rural communities
     * A long-term national health strategy  -  including the challenges of preventative health, workforce planning and the ageing population
     * Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion
     * Options for the future of indigenous Australia
     * Towards a creative Australia: the future of the arts, film and design
     * The future of Australian governance: renewed democracy, a more open government (including the role of the media), the structure of the Federation and the rights and responsibilities of citizens
     * Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
See the Australia2020 site for further information.


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) held its 21st meeting today in Adelaide. The Prime Minister, Premiers, Chief Ministers and the President of the Australian Local Government Association, were joined by Commonwealth and State and Territory Treasurers. This meeting followed the successful meeting in Melbourne on 20 December 2007. It was the first COAG meeting ever to be held in Adelaide and was the first of four COAG meetings to be held in 2008.
COAG Reform Agenda: Reforming and Investing for the Future
All Governments today made an historic commitment to a comprehensive new microeconomic reform agenda for Australia, with a particular focus on health, water, regulatory reform and the broader productivity agenda.
On health and hospitals, the Commonwealth agreed to commit an immediate allocation of $1 billion to relieve pressure for 2008-09 on public hospitals. This $1 billion is made up of the indexation of the previous Commonwealth allocation for 2007-08 plus a further $500 million in additional new money. Overall this means an increase in Commonwealth funding for public hospitals for 2008-09 of 10.2 per cent. This decision reverses the national trend of Commonwealth cutbacks to hospital funding over the past five years. 
COAG also agreed that in developing the new health care agreement there would be a review of the indexation formulas for the years ahead. COAG also agreed that the new Australian Health Agreement should move to a proper long-term share of Commonwealth funding for the public hospital system. 
COAG agreed that the new health care agreement would be signed in December 2008 with a commencement date for the new funding arrangements of 1 July 2009.
COAG also agreed for jurisdictions, as appropriate, to move to a more nationally-consistent approach to activity-based funding for services provided in public hospitals  -  but one which also reflects the Community Service Obligations required for the maintenance of small and regional hospital services.
COAG agreed to the introduction of a national registration and accreditation system for health professionals and steps to address health workforce skills shortages.
COAG also made a major breakthrough on water with the agreement to a Memorandum of Understanding on Murray-Darling Basin Reform. This agreement will now enable the necessary action to address over allocation, improve environmental outcomes, and enhance the efficiency of irrigation in a concerted effort to achieve an environmentally-sustainable future for the Basin. See Attachment A.
COAG has agreed a far reaching and accelerated business regulation reform agenda across 27 areas of regulatory reform, to enhance productivity and workforce mobility by cutting the costs of regulation. See Attachment B.
On the broader productivity agenda, COAG has today for the first time ever embraced significant, long-term and ongoing reforms across all aspects of education - early childhood development, schooling and vocational education and training.
Sweeping reforms to the architecture for Commonwealth-State funding arrangements will enable the States to deploy Commonwealth specific purpose payments (SPPs) more effectively and creatively, enhance public accountability and sharpen the incentives for reform through new National Partnerships (NP) agreements.
Other agreements today include:
     * COAG is working to ensure sustainable water supply and has expanded the CSIRO assessments of Sustainable Yields so that for the first time Australia will have a comprehensive scientific assessment of sustainable water yield in all major river systems across the country;
     * COAG has for the first time embraced a new national approach to addressing climate change through a national emissions trading scheme and complementary policies and measures that achieve emission reductions at least cost;
     * COAG has also agreed a nationally-coordinated approach to planning for, and facilitating, Australia's infrastructure needs;
     * COAG is well on track in delivering vital initiatives to assist housing affordability and reduce the number of homeless people; and
     * COAG has set practical goals and agreed more than 23 specific actions across its agenda, aimed at closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
The COAG Reform Agenda will boost productivity, workforce participation and geographic mobility, and support wider objectives of better services for the community, social inclusion, closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage and environmental sustainability.
This new platform for cooperative reforms and investments - to strengthen our economy, empower more Australians to participate in, and contribute to, our economy, and make efficient and sustainable use of our natural resources - will deliver real benefits for Australian families and their communities, not only today but over a generation.
The COAG Reform Agenda is underpinned by a common commitment to clear goals, genuine partnership and the governance and funding arrangements needed to deliver real reform.  A fresh spirit of goodwill has delivered breakthrough agreements in areas unresolved by COAG for too long. It will move on from the blame game to make federalism again work to deliver real outcomes in the national interest.
A New Reform Framework
Critical to the partnership approach is the reform of the architecture of Commonwealth-State financial relations. On the recommendations of Treasurers,COAG agreed on the key elements of a path breaking new Intergovernmental Agreement on Commonwealth-State financial arrangements, which will be finalised by the end of 2008 following extensive work by Treasurers and COAG Working Groups to settle outputs, outcomes, reforms, performance indicators and funding arrangements. 
The new financial framework will result in a significant rationalisation of SPPs, primarily through combining many into a smaller number of new national SPP agreements, without a reduction in total Commonwealth funding for these activities. This reform will see a reduction from the current 92 SPPs to five or six new national agreements for delivery of core government services  -  health, affordable housing, early childhood and schools, vocational education and training, and disability services.
These reforms will clarify roles and responsibilities, reduce duplication and waste and enhance accountability to the community. The objectives and outcomes for each of the new agreements will replace input controls in current agreements.
The new agreements will focus on agreed outputs and outcomes, providing greater flexibility for jurisdictions to allocate resources to areas where they will produce the best outcomes for the community. 
New NP arrangements will provide incentives for reforms, or for funding for specific projects, in areas of joint responsibility, such as transport, regulation, environment, water and early childhood. 
For all new arrangements, a new performance and assessment framework will be developed to support public reporting against performance measures and milestones. Funding for, and the details of, the new agreements will be negotiated during the balance of this year, with the final Intergovernmental Agreement to be considered by COAG in December 2008. 
To enhance accountability and promote reform, COAG agreed a new and expanded role for the COAG Reform Council (CRC). When requested by COAG, the CRC will report to the Prime Minister on the publication of nationally-comparable performance information for all jurisdictions in relation to individual national SPPs and the independent assessment of predetermined milestones and performance benchmarks under the proposed NP arrangements. It will also be responsible for monitoring the aggregate pace of activity in COAG's agreed reform agenda. Attachment C provides further details on the CRC's expanded role.
This new architecture for Commonwealth-State financial arrangements provides the platform for wide ranging policy reforms to improve economic, social and environmental outcomes.
Implementing Commitments and Driving Further Reforms
COAG noted the 26 implementation plans it commissioned of its seven Working Groups, chaired by Commonwealth Ministers, at its meeting at 20 December 2007.  COAG agreed on further reforms in a number of areas. 
COAG acknowledged that the Commonwealth should be responsible for its election commitments. In a number of the reports from Working Groups Commonwealth election commitments have legitimate and additional financial implications for the States and Territories. Consideration of these costs will be included as an addition to the work of Treasurers in the final determination of the new generation SPPs at year's end.
Productivity, Education, Skills and Early Childhood. For the first time all governments have agreed on a common framework for reform of education, a key step in the Education Revolution.  COAG has endorsed a comprehensive set of the aspirations, outcomes, progress measures and future policy directions in the key areas of early childhood, schooling and skills and workforce development that will guide education systems across the nation, building on the initiatives currently underway across States and Territories. COAG has also today agreed to four additional high-level targets that it will use to measure the achievement of reform in Indigenous educational attainment and the vocational education and training sector.
COAG also committed to several key strategies to strengthen early childhood education and care, roll out the computers in schools and the trade training centres programs and provide additional training places under Skilling Australia. As an early priority, COAG has agreed to the development of a national partnership agreement focused on the particular educational needs of low socio-economic status school communities. This partnership will form part of the national education funding agreement to be introduced at the begninnin of 2009.
Business Regulation and Competition. COAG endorsed a far reaching reform agenda for reducing the costs of regulation and enhancing productivity and workforce mobility in areas of shared Commonwealth and State responsibility. This exciting new broad agenda replaces words with actions, and reviews with fundamental micro-economic reforms. The agreed implementation plan is at www.coag.gov.au.
COAG agreed to 27 areas of regulatory reform. This includes a landmark Intergovernmental Agreement by May 2008 to harmonise occupational health and safety laws. COAG agreed that this is a top priority and that governments will closely examine the scope for a reduced implementation timetable at its meeting in July 2008.
COAG also agreed breakthroughs on 12 further regulatory reforms including trade measurement, environmental assessment and approval processes, rail safety regulation, product safety, trade licensing, further payroll tax harmonisation and institutional lending arrangements. COAG also agreed to an ambitious new COAG regulation reform agenda covering nine areas - standard business reporting, food regulation, mine safety, electronic conveyancing, upstream petroleum (oil and gas) regulation, maritime safety, wine labelling, directors' liabilities and financial service delivery.  
COAG welcomed and endorsed the CRC's first report on the importance of, and the progress being made in, the implementation of previously agreed competition and regulation reforms under the National Reform Agenda. COAG agreed, inter alia, to the CRC's recommendation that options be developed to assist those jurisdictions with limited legislative drafting resources to meet their current commitments and obligations.
Health and Ageing. In addition to the decisions on health funding already described, COAG agreed to the implementation of health reform in three stages.
     * The first stage involves immediate action on Health Workforce Registration and transitional arrangements for the current healthcare agreement. These lay the foundation for longer term reform of the health system.
     * The second stage involves COAG consideration at the December 2008 meeting of the new National Healthcare Agreement as part of the broader SPP Financial Framework. There will also be potential NP payments for medium-term health reform from July 2009.
     * In the third stage, when the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission (NHHRC) report of June 2009 is available, COAG will consider additional longer term health reform to be implemented either as updates to the National Healthcare Agreement or as new NP agreements over time. 
COAG also took a major step towards improving Australia's health system by signing an Intergovernmental Agreement on the health workforce.  This agreement will for the first time create a single national registration and accreditation system for nine health professions: medical practitioners; nurses and midwives; pharmacists; physiotherapists; psychologists; osteopaths; chiropractors; optometrists; and dentists (including dental hygienists, dental prosthetists and dental therapists). The new arrangement will help health professionals move around the country more easily, reduce red tape, provide greater safeguards for the public and promote a more flexible, responsive and sustainable health workforce. For example, the new scheme will maintain a public national register for each health profession that will ensure that a professional who has been banned from practising in one place is unable to practise elsewhere in Australia.
In another boost to the health workforce, COAG agreed that Skills Australia would be asked to advise COAG at its July 2008 meeting on the possible allocation of up to 50,000 additional vocational education and training places over three years from 2008-09 for areas of national skills shortage in health occupations (including vocationally-trained nursing, emergency care and allied health occupations).
COAG also agreed key health reform priorities for further work ahead of consideration of proposals by COAG no later than October 2008.
Water.  Australia faces major challenges in ensuring sustainable water supply in the face of a drying climate and rising demand for water. Cooperative partnerships between the Commonwealth and all States and Territories is the key to addressing the water challenge across the country. This was recognised as far back as 1901 where the need for cooperation on the water sharing for the Murray River at the time of the ‘Federation drought' was palpable. The pressures are far stronger today.
COAG has today agreed in principle to a Memorandum of Understanding on Murray-Darling Basin Reform for immediate consultation with stakeholders. This agreement is as significant now as was the agreement of a century ago. We have for the first time in the Basin a cooperative and accountable governance arrangement, which will enable genuine whole of Basin water management to restore the environment and ensure sustainable agriculture in the future. Significantly, COAG also agreed that providing for critical human needs will be included in the Basin plan.
Governments will consult with stakeholders immediately on the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and have committed to sign an Intergovernmental Agreement at the July 2008 COAG meeting. 
In reaching this agreement, the Commonwealth has agreed in principle to fund 90 per cent of the project costs, up to $1 billion of the Stage Two Food Bowl Project in Victoria, subject to a due diligence assessment and delivery of half the gains in additional flows to the Murray River. In considering priority projects in its due diligence assessment, the Commonwealth recognises that in States such as New South Wales and South Australia, infrastructure is privately owned. The Commonwealth will work with irrigators in these regions to ensure equitable consideration of funding proposals. Between now and the next COAG meeting the Commonwealth will agree with the governments of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory on priority water savings projects in the Murray-Darling Basin for priority Commonwealth funding.
The Commonwealth has also agreed to take on the States' liabilities under the National Water Initiative risk sharing arrangements for new knowledge.
COAG agreed to set in train immediately a series of actions to report by July this year to coordinate efforts in purchasing water for the environment, enhance the effectiveness of water markets and assess water supply in remote communities, including Indigenous communities.
As part of a renewed approach to national urban water reform, leveraged through $1.5 billion in new Commonwealth Government urban water security programs, COAG has agreed to release for consultation eight key principles for urban water reforms. 
COAG also commissioned the development of a comprehensive new work program of water reform to address over allocation and improve environmental outcomes, and to address the key challenges in urban water with the final proposal to be put forward for its consideration in October 2008. 
Climate Change. Climate change represents one of the greatest economic and environmental challenges of our age. The projections for Australia of the impacts of climate change are serious: a drying climate in our traditional agricultural area; a greater frequency of floods; droughts and storms; and, the impacts of higher temperatures on community health.
The introduction of an emissions trading scheme to achieve emission reductions will constitute the most significant economic and structural reform undertaken in Australia since the trade liberalisation and financial market reforms of the 1980s. COAG stressed the urgency of the current work to bring together the different approaches on renewable energy targets to combine into one national scheme in order to provide consistency for investors looking to support Australia's renewable energy industry. In addition, COAG agreed to consider options for a harmonised approach to renewable energy ‘feed in tariffs' in October 2008. 
COAG confirmed its commitment to cooperative concerted action to address climate change and agreed to finalise a comprehensive framework for addressing climate change at its October 2008 meeting.
Infrastructure. COAG agreed that a more nationally-coordinated approach to further infrastructure reform is critical to enhance Australia's future economic performance and raise national productivity. As a critical first step, COAG agreed that the immediate priorities for Infrastructure Australia over the next 12 months were the completion of the National Infrastructure Audit by end 2008, the development of an Infrastructure Priority List for COAG consideration in March 2009 and the development of best practice guidelines of Public Private Partnerships for COAG's consideration by October 2008.  
Housing. COAG identified the decline in housing affordability as a pressing issue for Australians and recognised that improving affordability is critical to addressing financial stress and disadvantage, including for Indigenous communities.
COAG agreed to implement five key housing initiatives: to facilitate improved housing supply through identifying surplus government land suitable for housing development; provide incentives to construct affordable rental housing; lower the burden of infrastructure and regulatory costs built into the purchase price of a new home; improve the evidence base for housing policy and program development; and, support the most needy in society through joint Commonwealth-State investment in 600 houses and units for homeless people.
COAG agreed to the distribution of $150 million to deliver new homes for homeless people.  These funds will be distributed with reference to the number of homeless people in each jurisdiction, with a guarantee for smaller jurisdictions that no State or Territory will receive less than $1 million per annum.
COAG welcomed the decision of the Commonwealth to provide $30 million from the Housing Affordability Fund for the roll out of electronic Development Applications in local government with a priority focus on high growth areas.  COAG requested the Local Government and Planning Ministers' Council to make the implementation of this work a priority.
Indigenous Reform. COAG reaffirmed its commitment to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage and agreed to a new national target for its reform agenda -halving the gap in Indigenous employment outcomes within a decade.  COAG agreed on a series of specific actions across health, education, affordable housing and water supply, that will begin to improve the lives of Indigenous Australians, including to provide at least 48,000 dental services to Indigenous people over four years under the new Commonwealth Dental Health Program, targeting the needs of Indigenous Australians through the Transition Care initiative, the elective surgery waiting list reduction plan and the Place to Call Home program for homeless people.
COAG asked the Indigenous Reform Working Group to bring forward a reform proposal on Indigenous Early Childhood Development to the COAG meeting in July 2008. COAG also asked the Working Group to bring forward sustainable reform proposals no later than the COAG meeting in October 2008 on basic protective security from violence for Indigenous parents and children, remote service delivery and workforce planning, and economic participation and active welfare.
Binge Drinking. COAG today agreed on the importance of tackling alcohol misuse and binge drinking among young people. COAG agreed to ask the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy to report to COAG in December 2008 on options to reduce binge drinking including in relation to closing hours, responsible service of alcohol, reckless secondary supply and the alcohol content in ready to drink beverages. COAG also asked the Australia New Zealand Food Regulation Ministerial Council to request Food Standards Australia New Zealand to consider mandatory health warnings on packaged alcohol.
Gambling. COAG agreed to continue to discuss issues related to problem gambling.
Review of Mutual Recognition Arrangements.  COAG has requested that the Productivity Commission undertake a further review of the mutual recognition arrangements and report back to it and the New Zealand Government no later than the end of 2008.
World Cup Bid. All governments have agreed to work cooperatively with Football Federation Australia in support of its bid to host the 2018 Football World Cup in Australia.
Ministerial Councils. COAG also agreed to establish two new ministerial councils  -  one on ageing and the other on international trade. The new Ministerial Conference on Ageing is to facilitate a consistent and coordinated approach to ageing and aged care policy across all levels of government, including reduced duplication of effort and better continuity of service delivery.
Next Meeting. Following a request from the New South Wales Government COAG agreed to hold its next meeting in Sydney on 3 July 2008.
ATTACHMENT A
Murray-Darling Basin Reform
 Memorandum of Understanding
26 March 2008
Agreed in principle for consultation with stakeholders
Preamble
     * In order to implement co-operative, efficient and effective arrangements in the Murray-Darling Basin, the Commonwealth and the Murray-Darling Basin States  -  New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory  -  have agreed that the Murray-Darling Basin Authority and the Murray-Darling Basin Commission be brought together as a single institution, to be known as the Murray-Darling Basin Authority.
     * The new, independent Authority will be responsible for developing, implementing and monitoring the Basin Plan, which will include a sustainable cap on surface and groundwater diversions across the Basin. The Basin Plan will provide for the critical human water needs of communities that use water from the Murray River and its tributaries, a sustainable industry and enhanced environmental outcomes. The Basin Plan will recognise critical human needs as a priority and establish a decision-making process for determining the method for securing this water. The new Authority will also be responsible for the current functions of the Office of the Murray-Darling Basin Commission.
     * With this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), Governments have committed to sign an Intergovernmental Agreement at the July 2008 COAG meeting. Governments will consult with stakeholders immediately on the implementation of this MOU and have asked officials to prepare for the July meeting an Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) and recommendations on any other arrangements required to implement this MOU. 
Heads of Agreement 
Institutional Structure and Governance
     * The Murray-Darling Basin Authority and Murray-Darling Basin Commission (MDBC) would be brought together as a new, single institution, to be known as the Murray-Darling Basin Authority (MDBA).
     * Through the report to the July 2008 COAG meeting, the Basin jurisdictions will determine the functions of the MDBC set out in the existing MDB Agreement and the MDB Acts to be transferred to the MDBA and reflected in the Water Act or the IGA, as appropriate.
     * The Commonwealth will consult with the Basin States on the appointment of the Authority members.
     * All existing staff of the Office of the MDBC will be transferred to the new Authority, noting that their high level of expertise and experience will make a valuable contribution to the work of the new Authority.
     * The new MDBA will have two roles: it will be responsible for developing and implementing the Basin Plan, as provided for in the Water Act; and, will also be responsible for the current functions of the MDBC.
     * The MDBA will provide a Basin Plan in early 2011.
     *  As provided for in the Water Act, the Commonwealth Minister is the decision maker on the Basin Plan. If the Commonwealth Minister decides not to adopt the Basin Plan, then the Commonwealth Minister would give the Basin Plan back to the Authority with suggestions for consideration by the Authority. If the Minister declines to accept the revised Basin Plan, then the Minister must provide to the Parliament reasons for directing the Authority to make modifications to that version of the Basin Plan.
     * A new Ministerial Council will be established, comprising all Basin States and chaired by the Commonwealth.
     * The new Council will provide advice to the Commonwealth Minister on the Basin Plan, including the sustainable cap on surface and groundwater diversions, and monitoring the Plan's performance.
     * If all, or any, Basin State Minister(s) disagree with the cap or other relevant parts of the Basin Plan, these matters would be referred back to the Authority for reappraisal. The Authority would then return the Basin Plan to the Ministerial Council for its advice. The Plan would then be submitted to the Commonwealth Minister for decision.
     * This advisory role of the new Council will be formalised in the Water Act 2007, or as otherwise agreed.
     * In relation to the existing functions of the MDBC (state water shares, River Murray operation, the Living Murray Initiative and natural resource management programs, such as salinity and fish), the Authority would report to the new Ministerial Council.
     * Current state Water Shares, as defined by the MDB Agreement and subsequent MDB Ministerial Council and MDBC decisions, will be preserved unless otherwise agreed by all signatories to this MOU.
     * The Basin Officials' Committee, provided for in the Water Act, will be an officials' decision-making body in relation to the existing functions of the MDBC that will now be performed by the MDBA. Basin Officials will have a role analogous to that of MDB Commissioners, which will be abolished.
     * An external review will be commissioned to examine the most efficient way for the MDBA to perform for the Basin States the current functions of the MDBC. This will address the governance and delivery arrangements for programs and projects. This external review will be an input to the report by officials to the July 2008 COAG meeting.
     * Reflecting the current arrangements for the MDBC, the Basin States will contribute financially to the MDBA for the functions currently performed by the MDBC.
Other Matters
Commonwealth Investments 
     * In determining the allocation of investment funding to projects within a Basin State, the Commonwealth will have regard to progress towards the following key reform outcomes:
     *  competitively neutral and independently regulated water market and trading arrangements across the southern connected Basin;
     * water charging regimes that reflect the full cost of supply to end users including externalities; and
     * publicly accessible and compatible water register arrangements across all Basin jurisdictions (including a national water register information database).
     * The Commonwealth will also have regard, among other things, to the following investment priorities:
     * strategic investment to accelerate development of a best practice and consistent Basin water modelling platform, noting that the MDBA will be developing such a platform in consultation with Basin States;
     * infrastructure investments that capture and return water losses and reduce system evaporation losses; and
     * purchasing water for the environment from willing sellers.
     * The Commonwealth will conduct a due diligence assessment of priority projects nominated by Basin States for funding under the $10 billion plan. The Commonwealth will establish a process for Basin states and other proponents to submit priority projects for their jurisdictions. The Commonwealth recognises that in States such as New South Wales and South Australia, infrastructure is privately owned. The Commonwealth will work with irrigators in these regions to ensure equitable consideration of funding proposals.
     * The Commonwealth Government has agreed in principle to fund 90 percent of the total project costs, up to $1 billion, of the Stage Two Food Bowl Project in Victoria, subject to a joint due diligence assessment and the delivery of half the gain in additional flows (around 100 billion litres) to environmental flows into the Murray River. This project will also deliver a volume of water for farmers equivalent to that available for environmental flows, helping ensure the future for Victorian irrigators. Work would commence in 2009-10 with the project providing significant benefits to the economy and the environment.
     * Jurisdictions will ask the MDBC to accelerate work on a number of feasibility studies to assess the proposed schemes to manage better environmental and irrigation issues, including those in relation to the Barmah Choke.
     * Between now and the next COAG meeting, the Commonwealth will agree with the governments of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory on priority water savings projects in the Murray-Darling Basin for priority Commonwealth funding.
     * If following the due diligence, the Commonwealth agrees to contribute funds to a project, progress payments would be made by the Commonwealth, subject to the Basin State achieving agreed outcomes for water reform.
 Commonwealth-State Water Management Partnerships
     * Within the Basin, access to funds under the Commonwealth's $10 billion plan will be linked to MDB reform outcomes. In this context, the Commonwealth and Basin States will enter into Commonwealth-Basin State Water Management Partnerships to assist States implement water reforms. These partnerships could cover improving water registers, scientific work for new water resource plans, monitoring and enforcement and structural adjustment funding if communities are severely adversely affected. Commonwealth assistance would depend on States achieving agreed outcomes, and would only be for additional or new costs arising from reform, including implementation of the Basin Plan.
     * Overall, the States will not bear additional net costs as a consequence of the reforms set out in this MOU and the implementation of the Water Act.
 Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) 
     * Under the Water Act, the water charge rules can provide for the ACCC to determine water charges in the Basin. The ACCC advises the Commonwealth Minister on water market rules in the Basin.
     * The Parties endorse the importance of the ACCC performing these roles to ensure efficient, transparent markets and charges in the Basin and ask that officials recommend the way in which the role of the ACCC might be strengthened, as part of their report to the July 2008 COAG meeting.
 Critical Human Water Needs 
     * All Basin jurisdictions note that by not providing for critical human needs, there is a gap in the Basin Plan.
     * The Basin Plan process must ensure that situations are avoided where water for critical human needs is not provided. 
     * Jurisdictions agree that the approach to addressing critical human needs should provide as much certainty as possible, while preserving the flexibility required to deal with differences in circumstances.
     * The Working Group on Climate Change and Water will report back to COAG in July 2008 with advice as to how the Basin Plan will address the provision of water for critical human needs.
     * Jurisdictions agree that South Australia will have access to upstream storages for the purposes of South Australia meeting its responsibilities for critical human needs, subject to implementation arrangements being agreed by Basin jurisdictions.
Complementary Management of Environmental Water 
     * All Basin jurisdictions agree to examine the way in which environmental water recovery programs should be managed to ensure they are cost effective and maximise environmental outcomes.
Enforcement of the Basin Plan
     * All Basin jurisdictions support the audit, monitoring and enforcement provisions of the Water Act. They agree to work with the MDBA to develop enforcement arrangements to complement the Act's enforcement provisions to protect States' shares and ensure compliance within catchments.
Risk Assignment Framework 
     * The Commonwealth agrees to bring forward the risk assignment framework in the National Water Initiative, and incorporated in the Water Act 2007, to commence from the date at which existing water resource plans in the Murray-Darling Basin cease to have effect. (The Parties note that South Australia has four plans which cease to have effect between 21 December 2012 and 1 July 2014 for the purposes of the Water Act; New South Wales has 14 plans which cease to have effect on 1 July 2014; Queensland has four plans which cease to have effect on 1 September 2014. The new arrangement would apply to these plans.)
     * The Commonwealth agrees to further amend Division 4 of Part 2 of the Water Act 2007 such that the Commonwealth's share of any reduction in water availability (and therefore responsibility for compensation liability) includes 100 per cent of the new knowledge components of those reductions in long-term sustainable diversion limits that exceed three per cent of the relevant diversion limit.
     * The Commonwealth agrees to honour all existing water resource plans in all jurisdictions, including Victoria's plans that continue until 2019. 
Improved Environmental Outcomes
     * Jurisdictions recognise that the extreme drought has exacerbated the Basin's environmental situation. Continued low flows to Ramsar and other icon sites, including the Lower Lakes, Coorong and Murray Mouth, is resulting in serious environmental degradation.
     * The Basin Plan will provide for improved environmental outcomes across the Basin.
     * Importantly it would seek to improve the status of all Ramsar sites (including the Lower Lakes, Coorong and Murray Mouth) and other key environmental sites in the Basin, with important environmental outcomes such as increasing environmental flows, healthier wetlands, protection of floodplain areas and River Red Gums.
     * The new Ministerial Council would implement actions to assist in addressing these outcomes through its decision-making powers associated with the Living Murray Initiative, natural resource management programs, and River Murray operations.
A New Approach to Murray-Darling Basin Reform 
     * The Parties declare that the agreement set out in this MOU is a new partnership for the management of the Murray-Darling Basin.
     * This MOU implements sound principles of Federal-State relations by assigning the Basin wide planning role to the MDBA and the Commonwealth Minister, while providing for clear participation by Basin States in decision-making and affirming the autonomy of Basin States to manage water within catchments.
     * This MOU removes the conditionality of the IGA proposed by the previous Commonwealth Government. In this context, the Basin States are pleased that, as an expression of good faith, the Commonwealth has already been undertaking consultations with Basin States about the membership of the MDBA.
     * Specifically:
     * a new Ministerial Council will be established, which will provide formal roles for Basin States in the Basin Plan and will decide on natural resource management programs, the Living Murray Initiative, State water shares and River Murray operation;
     * Basin State water authorities will make available water determinations; and
     * State authorities will make river flow directions for the Goulburn and Murrumbidgee Rivers. (These two matters will not be the responsibility of the MDBA, which is what the previous Commonwealth Government had proposed.);
     * there will be a new, cooperative approach to environmental water management by the Parties;
     * unlike the previous Commonwealth Government's proposal, there will be funding available to States under new partnership arrangements for such things as improved water resource plans, monitoring and enforcement, and structural adjustment; and
     * access to funds under the $10 billion plan will be conditional upon achieving agreed water reform objectives rather than the referral of powers sought by the previous Commonwealth Government.
Next Steps 
     * Having agreed this MOU, the Parties further agree:
     * to commence immediate consultation with stakeholders on the implementation of this agreement; and
     * that the Commonwealth convene a group of officials from the Basin States to develop an IGA and recommend any other arrangements required to implement this MOU.
   47.    The IGA for Murray-Darling Basin Reform will be submitted for signature by First Ministers at the next COAG in July 2008.
ATTACHMENT B
BUSINESS REGULATION AND COMPETITION WORKING GROUP
Objectives:
-         to accelerate and broaden the regulation reduction agenda;
-         to accelerate the existing COAG hot spots agenda;
-         to improve processes for regulation making and review; and
-         to deliver significant improvements in Australia's competition, productivity and international competitiveness.
Achieving these objectives would increase productivity in Australia by reducing the regulatory burden on business, particularly where regulation falls across jurisdictional boundaries, and by re-energising the micro-economic reform process. 
Regulatory Reform
COAG agreed a broad and bold regulatory reform agenda, involving 27 regulatory reform areas identified by the Working Group where progress will be achieved in 2008.  These reforms will help deliver significant improvements in Australia's competition, productivity and international competitiveness, making it easier for companies and governments to do business in Australia. The 27 areas agreed by COAG for action, and set out in more detail in the Implementation Plan, are:
     * national harmonisation of occupational health and safety (OH&amp;S) laws. COAG agreed that this is a top priority and that its commitment to harmonisation would be reflected in an Intergovernmental Agreement by May 2008, with model legislation to be developed and submitted to the Workplace Relations Ministers' Council by September 2009 - COAG further agreed that governments should aspire to reduce the five-year implementation timeframe for OH&amp;S and that it would consider the scope for a reduced implementation timetable at its meeting in July 2008;
     * early action and progress in 2008 on a further 12 areas, including existing hotspots and new areas of reform, covering: environmental assessment and approvals bilaterals; payroll tax administration; trade licences; the Health Workforce Intergovernmental Agreement; national trade measurement; rail safety regulation reform; the consumer policy framework; product safety; trustee companies; mortgage credit and advice; margin lending; and, non-deposit taking institutions; 
     * significant progress to be made in accelerating the five remaining COAG hotspots - development assessment; building regulation; chemicals and plastics regulatory reform; Australian Business Number and business names registration; and Personal Property Securities reform;
     * nine new areas to be added to COAG's regulation work program, covering standard business reporting; food regulation; a national mine safety framework; electronic conveyancing; upstream petroleum (oil and gas) regulation; maritime safety; wine labelling; directors' liabilities; and financial service delivery; and
     * in relation to upstream petroleum, COAG agreed that the Productivity Commission undertake a review on the regulation of crude oil and natural gas projects that involve more than one jurisdiction and report back to COAG by April 2009.
COAG also agreed on the importance of ensuring the ongoing flow of new regulation is stemmed through a culture of continuous improvement. COAG asked the Working Group to report to it by the end of 2008 on possible further improvements to both regulation making and review, including examining processes to ensure no net increase in the regulatory burden and common start dates for legislation. 
COAG also asked the Working Group to consider whether further reforms are needed to ensure jurisdictions have best-practice regulation and review processes in place by end 2008:
     * COAG noted that ensuring that the costs of both new and existing regulations are minimised is vital to reducing costs to businesses and consumers and to promoting improvements in Australia's productivity and competitiveness. This can be done by undertaking robust gatekeeping and impact assessment on the flow of new regulations and by also reviewing the stock of existing regulation; and
     * under National Reform Agenda initiatives agreed by COAG in April 2007, jurisdictions are committed to maximising the efficiency of regulation, including through improvements to gatekeeper mechanisms, impact analysis and measuring compliance costs, by undertaking annual reviews to reduce the burden of regulation and by working with the Productivity Commission on its benchmarking study into the compliance cost of regulation. Jurisdictions are also committed to maintaining the impetus given to regulation reform in 2008. 
Competition Reform
COAG further agreed the importance of implementing COAG's existing competition reform agenda as this will deliver significant improvements in Australia's competition performance, productivity and international competitiveness. COAG agreed the specific recommendations of the CRC in relation to the existing competition reform agenda.
COAG also agreed that the Working Group report back to COAG by the end of 2008 on new areas of competition reform including:
     * appropriate models for future regulation of national markets such as for water trading, the energy market, consumer policy and regulation affecting national workforce mobility;
     * unfinished National Competition Policy business; and
     * other new competition reforms.
ATTACHMENT C 
ROLE OF THE COAG REFORM COUNCIL (CRC)
COAG agreed a new and expanded role for the CRC, to help enhance accountability and promote reform as part of the reformed Commonwealth-State financial arrangements. 
COAG agreed a new and expanded role for the CRC, that, when requested by COAG, the CRC will report to the Prime Minister:
     * on a case by case basis on the publication of performance information for all jurisdictions against national SPPs outcomes and progress measures;
     * production of an analytic overview of performance information for each SPP, noting that the CRC would draw on a range of sources, including existing subject experts;
     * the independent assessment of whether predetermined milestones and performance benchmarks have been achieved before an incentive payment to reward nationally-significant reforms under NP payments is made;
     *   through the assessment and reporting process, highlighting examples of good practice and performance, although not extending to a policy-advising role; and
     * monitoring the aggregate pace of activity in progressing COAG's agreed reform agenda.
COAG also agreed that the CRC's role include:
     * continuing to monitor and report on the implementation of those National Reform Agenda reforms referred to it by COAG in April 2007; and
     * other matters referred unanimously by COAG. 
COAG further agreed that:
     * to assist the CRC in its role, the Productivity Commission report to COAG on the economic impacts and benefits of COAG's agreed reform agenda every two to three years (this overtakes the CRC's current role of ex post assessment of the costs and benefits of reforms referred to the CRC in April 2007); and
     * COAG Senior Officials resolve:-
(a)    the precise final details of the CRC's role in relation to the new performance reporting framework, informed by the work of the Ministerial Council for Commonwealth-State Financial Relations on that framework, and report back to COAG at the July 2008 meeting, and
(b)   the implications of the CRC's role for other bodies and processes, including     COAG's Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service Provision.


The Australian Government's mission is to implement a reform agenda to build a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure both the nation's long-term future, and a future for working families.
During its first three months, the Government has focussed primarily on the implementation of its domestic policy agenda. Now, given the uncertainty in global financial markets and the increasing challenges facing the global economy, the Government will use the period ahead to engage critical economic decision makers and business leaders abroad.
To advocate the strength of Australia's economic credentials. As well as continuing to engage our economic partners in the US, Europe and China on the best global response to the current crisis. The Government, through the RBA, the Treasury and APRA has been actively engaged in monitoring the impact of this crisis since the Government's election in November. This is because the Government believes the maintenance of global economic and financial stability is fundamental to Australia's future and therefore should command the full resources of government as a first priority.
Future Challenges for Australia
Beyond the immediate and important challenges facing the global economy, Australia faces a range of additional challenges that are as formidable as they are fluid. These include:
     * inflation at its highest level in 16 years;
     * the second highest interest rates among advanced economies;
     * productivity growth that has been in decline throughout this decade;
     * rising cost of living pressures for working families across the board, including the pressures faced by the poorest Australians;
     * global demographic change, including the ageing of Australia's own population and workforce;
     * economic and environmental pressures arising from global climate change;
     * the continuing threat of global and regional terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction;
     * the security, economic and environmental challenges of our immediate island neighbours in the Pacific, and
     * the adequacy of our existing global and regional economic and security architecture to deal with the challenges of the future.
Not only are the policy challenges the nation now faces formidable, the policy environment in which the nation must now operate is increasingly complex and interconnected. There is no longer a clear distinction between that which was once clinically defined as “foreign” as opposed to “domestic”; “internal” as opposed to “external”; “national” as opposed to “international”; “global” as opposed to “local”.
What we have witnessed in the post-World War II, post-Cold War, post-ideological age of the late 20th century, and now the increasingly digital world of the 21st century, is the progressive globalisation of the security and economic policy domains of the future.
Acting nationally now requires acting internationally
The challenge this presents to Australian policy makers of the future is acute. Australia today lives in an increasingly joined-up world. If Australia fails to engage with the global economic, security and environmental challenges, we will simultaneously fail to deal with their impact on our own country.
That means in order to advance Australia's interests at home, we must increasingly be engaged with other nations in responding to the challenges to those interests abroad. Foreign policy, foreign economic policy and national security policy must increasingly be seen as the natural expression and extension of the nation's domestic policy interests  -  not as some sort of policy exotica removed from the Australian mainstream, but as part and parcel of the interests of main-street Australia. Those who would still believe (or, for the purposes of crass partisan advantage, pretend to believe) in the splendid isolation of the Australian continent live in a fool's paradise.
For example:
     * a failure to engage with the global community on climate change would exclude us from the chance to shape the global response in ways consistent with our national interests;
     * a failure to act effectively on terrorism in our wider region affects our ability to act effectively on terrorism domestically, and
     * a failure to act on the development challenges of the South Pacific Island states will result long term in rolling Australian military interventions, together with the risk of a large-scale influx of refugees from the region.
Australia therefore has no option other than to be fully globally and regionally engaged if we are to effectively prosecute our national interests. The purpose of my remarks tonight, the first on foreign policy since the election of the new Government, is as follows:
     * to outline why the challenges Australia faces will require us to be more internationally active, not less;
     * second, to outline why this will require a new period of active, creative Australian middle-power diplomacy, and
     * third, to outline a range of economic policy considerations that will underpin my upcoming visit to the United States, Europe and China.
Australia acting in global and regional partnership
For Australian policymakers, this increasingly interconnected policy terrain underlines the importance of acting cooperatively with other states.
Australia's national assets are of course not insubstantial.
     * Of the 192 members of the United Nations, Australia has the sixteenth largest economy.
     * Australia has the fifth largest economy in East Asia.
     * Australia is a major supplier of energy and mineral resources to China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
     * And, in purely military terms, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute this year ranked Australia's defence spending as the 11th largest in the world.
Nonetheless, to achieve the sort of global and regional outcomes that are consistent with our interests, we cannot simply rely on our national assets but instead must act in partnership with our allies, friends and the broader international community. Australia has a deep, abiding national interest in the furtherance of a robust, international rules-based order that underpins our long-term security, economic and environmental interests. To maximise those interests, our capacity to act effectively bilaterally, plurilaterally and multilaterally must continue to be enhanced.
Towards a Creative Middle Power Diplomacy
That is why the new Australian Government is committed to the principle of creative middle power diplomacy as the best means of enhancing Australia's national interests. It is also the best means of acting as effective international citizens in enhancing the global and regional order on which we all depend. That means operating in partnership with our long-standing ally the United States  -  as the Government argues that the US continues to be an overwhelming force for good in the world.
It means acting in partnership with our friends in the Asia Pacific region in organisations including APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit. It also means acting in partnership with the United Nations across the range of pan-global challenges from climate change, the Millennium Development Goals and the continuing challenge of nuclear weapons proliferation. In all these domains, Australia intends to prosecute an active, creative middle power diplomacy in partnership with the community of nations.
We believe this is the rational thing to do in pursuit of our own core economic and security interests. We also believe this is the right thing to do because Australia can be a greater force for good in the world. The truth is that Australia's voice has been too quiet for too long across the various councils of the world. That is why during the course of the next three years, the world will see an increasingly activist Australian international policy in areas where we believe we may be able to make a positive difference.
We have begun this process in the Government's first few months in office with our ratification of Kyoto and the active role we played at the Bali Conference on climate change. Also with our immediate response to the security crisis in East Timor.
And more recently with our new response to the acute development challenges facing the Pacific Island states through the Port Moresby Declaration  -  reinforced by our pre-election commitment to increase Australia's overseas development assistance to 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2015. That commitment will assist us in fulfilling our obligations towards the realisation of the Millennium Development Goals in our own immediate region. For the Australian Government, this is the beginning of Australia's renewed international engagement. There is much, much more to be done.
Australia's Global and Regional Economic Interests
The area which right now underlines starkly the absolute interconnectedness of Australia's national, regional and global interests is the impact on the global economy of recent instability in global financial markets. This global economic uncertainty has underlined the decision early in the Government's term to visit the United States, Europe and China  -  all critical to the shape of the global economy for the critical year ahead.
A primary reason for this visit is to communicate to the economic and business leadership of the US, the UK and China the continuing fundamental strength of the Australian economy in the face of international turbulence. I will meet with economic policymakers in Washington, New York, London, Brussels and Beijing. Decisions taken in these capitals will directly shape the global financial environment and impact on Australia's economic future. It is the Government's responsibility to influence international decision-makers as we prepare the Australian economy to the greatest extent possible for the turbulence ahead. That is why I will also be taking the opportunity to argue strongly Australia's economic case, the robustness of the Australian financial system and the strength of our corporate balance sheets in my meetings with international business leaders.
It is important for our interests that overseas observers understand the different economic conditions in Australia compared with other economies.
     * That Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence.
     * That we have a strong regulatory framework for Australia's financial market.
     * That Australia has very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults.
     * That the balance sheets of our principal corporates are strong.
     * That resources demand (from China and India) is holding up strongly and well into the future.
     * That the Government continues to be committed to a conservative approach to budget policy.
     * That the Government has zero net public sector debt.
     * And that the Government is not complacent about the need to push ahead with further, long-term economic reform.
I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term economic future despite the challenges that lie ahead.
The Global Financial Crisis
The current financial crisis represents the unwinding of the extraordinary global credit boom of the last several years. As with previous credit market cycles, the top of the cycle was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low interest rates and rapid increases in asset prices (especially the housing market and share markets). These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap.
Advances in information technology and financial engineering allowed the development of sophisticated new financial instruments. Regulatory frameworks did not always keep up with the rapid pace of change. The risks inherent in these financial innovations were not always well understood by various ratings agencies and regulators.
Investors became overconfident and began to accept higher risks and lower returns  -  as reflected in the decline in corporate investment yields. In 2007 there was a sudden loss of confidence in the value of mortgage-backed securities when banks began to report large losses on mortgage backed assets.
This led banks to hold on to their cash reserves. Interbank spreads rose and interbank lending volumes fell. Banks were less willing to lend to each other because they feared that they would need the cash themselves, and they were worried about the risks in other banks.This has led to the significant tightening of credit markets that we have been witnessing.
Conditions in global financial markets remain difficult. There is continuing uncertainty about the size and distribution of losses from the sub-prime crisis. To date, banks have announced write downs totalling $195 billion. Equity markets have also fallen dramatically with several major bourses, including the ASX, having fallen more than 20 per cent from their peaks last year.
Credit markets remain tight with elevated spreads and securitisation markets are largely closed. There are concerns that the financial crisis and its flow on effects in the US housing market will cause a wider downturn in the US economy. The IMF expects the US economy to slow markedly in 2008 and to grow on average by just 0.8 per cent over the year.
Global growth is also expected to slow in 2008. The IMF expects global growth to slow from 4.9 per cent in 2007 to 4.1 per cent in 2008, with risks largely on the downside. In this uncertain environment, the Government is working with other governments and regulatory agencies on how we coordinate the most effective global response to these new challenges facing the international economy.
Engaging our global and regional economic partners
The economic challenges we face and the need for cooperative action in response highlight the importance of the Australian Government engaging closely with our economic partners around the world. The Australian Government is committed to pursuing our overriding interest in greater openness in global markets  -  rather than retreating towards protectionism in the face of global economic uncertainty.
For me this message is as relevant in Washington as it is in Brussels and Beijing.
The United States is the biggest economy in the world. It is the largest trading nation in the world. The US dollar dominates global financial transactions. For Australia, too, the United States is a crucial economic partner.
Our trade is robust  -  it was worth around AUD$47 billion last year, making the US our third-largest trading partner overall. The US also accounts for nearly 30 per cent of our incoming investment and for nearly 40 per cent of our outwards investment. The United States is more than a close economic partner. In many ways, it plays the most important role in sustaining global growth and sustaining the momentum underpinning open global markets.
US leadership is crucial to getting a good outcome on the Doha Round of trade negotiations. An outcome that delivers immediate market access gains will give a much-needed confidence boost to business with a signal that the governments of the world are committed to ongoing trade liberalisation. Of course the United States cannot achieve a result on its own.
It also requires European cooperation. That is why I will be raising these matters in Brussels as well as Washington. Australia and Europe have well known differences on agricultural policy. We also have very closely aligned interests on pushing to make it easier for services businesses to trade across international boundaries.
As the policy centre of a unified Europe, Brussels speaks for a trading group that is bigger than even the United States. And taken as a whole, the European Union is Australia's biggest trading partner. The United Kingdom is Australia's largest trading partner in the European Union and is second only to the United States as a source and destination of investment for Australia. London is now the world's largest financial centre. And in London I will argue that Australia remains a first class place to invest.
Australia's economic engagement spans the globe. But our trading interests are closest with the Asia-Pacific region. Over 70 per cent of our trade is with the member economies of APEC. Our top three merchandise export markets are Japan, China and the Republic of Korea. India is our fastest growing major export market. Our two-way trade with Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore is worth over $40 billion.
For Australia, it is crucial that the Asia-Pacific region remains open to trade and investment. We need open, inclusive regional institutions. And we need to ensure that bilateral and regional free trade agreements support the rules-based trade system of the WTO. The region's economic importance to the world continues to grow. Japan is the world's second-largest economy with a GDP of around USD$4.5 trillion  -  and Japan remains Australia's largest export market. That's why Australia places great priority on the negotiation of a free trade agreement with Japan.
In Beijing I will be discussing our free trade agreement negotiations with China. Progress to date has been slow. It is a complex process to negotiate comprehensive improvements in market access with a country undergoing such rapid reform and development. I will be urging my Chinese counterparts to join with us in collectively redoubling our efforts on the negotiations to get a high quality outcome.
Australia's trade with China has already been the subject of many economic headlines  -  last year it became our largest merchandise trading partner, and over the last decade the value of our merchandise exports has grown by 20 per cent per year. And China's global importance continues to grow  -  it is already the world's third-largest trading nation and it has foreign exchange holdings in excess of USD$1.6 trillion.
In all the capitals I will visit, advancing Australia's economic interests will be at the top of the Government's agenda. But in an interconnected world, the economic agenda also has to be seen in the context of global politics and global strategic stability. That is why security policy, climate change, development assistance, humanitarian intervention and broader human rights will also feature prominently during this visit. Because on the economy, foreign policy and security policy, Australia is a nation with both regional and global interests which the Government is resolved to prosecute.
Four years ago at the national conference of the Australian Labor Party, I introduced an amendment to the party's foreign policy platform entrenching as the three pillars of our foreign policy: our alliance with the United States, our membership of the United Nations and our policy of comprehensive engagement with Asia.
That trilogy is very much reflected in the structure of this upcoming visit. We will work closely with our ally, the United States  -  the world's pre-eminent power.
We are committed to re-vitalising our engagement with the United Nations  -  and working more closely together in the UN with our partners around the world, including Europe. And we are committed to close engagement with the countries of Asia and the Pacific. It is our neighbourhood. And it is a natural focus for our foreign policy.
That is why the Government awaits with interest the views of this conference on the emerging stresses and strains of our region's existing institutional architecture.
Institutional reform is long overdue. But Australia will be moving cautiously on this score in close consultation with our partners in the region. Our common resolve must be to pursue both a peaceful and prosperous future for the Asia Pacific region.
And it is through this wider process of continuing regional and global engagement that the new Australian Government is now determined to make its contribution to the future development of a robust international rules-based order that enhances the security and economic wellbeing of us all.


The Australian Government is committed to implementing a new reform agenda for the nation to build a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century. For the economy, that means developing policy frameworks to maximise Australia's global economic competitiveness in an increasingly competitive and, now increasingly unpredictable, world. That is why in large part I travel today to the United States, Europe and China  -  respectively the world's largest economy, the world's largest investor in Australia and Australia's largest merchandise trading partner. 
My objective is simple: to argue Australia's economic case in a number of the principal economic capitals of the world and to prepare Australia for the global economic uncertainties that lie ahead.
The Government is acutely conscious of the complex and in part conflicting economic challenges we have inherited:
inflation rates running at 16 year highs at home that have fuelled 12 interest rate increases in a row, and 
at the same time, substantial instability in global financial markets, resulting in downward revisions in global growth and prompting the US Federal Reserve to cut interest rates by 300 basis points in just six months. 
That is why in its first three months in office, there has been considerable and necessary emphasis on macro-economic stability.
In January, following the Government's first Cabinet meeting of the year, the Government released a five point strategy to tackle inflation. Throughout this time, the Government has also maintained close contact with Treasury, the RBA, ASIC and APRA on the fallout from the US sub-prime crisis in global financial markets and its implications for Australia.
What for parts of the Northern Hemisphere has been a winter of economic discontent has also presented considerable challenges for economic policy makers here during the Southern Hemisphere's summer. But beyond this important and immediate challenge of continuing macro-economic management, the purpose of my remarks today is to outline the Government's broader economic reform agenda for the decade ahead (notwithstanding the fact that of course our political fate rests entirely in the hands of the Australian people).
Australia has suffered for too long from short-termism. What the nation needs is a long-term economic reform program around which we can build a broad, long-term political consensus. That in part is why the Government next month is convening the Australia 2020 Summit. The economic stream of the Summit aims to harness new proposals on how to enhance Australia's global competitiveness - and to add these proposals, where appropriate, to the Government's overall policy reform agenda.
My remarks today therefore fall into three parts.
First, the state of global financial markets and their unfolding impact on the global economy as well as outlining the Government's response to these developments.
Second, an overview of the current state of the Australian domestic economy  -  highlighting the fundamental challenge of low productivity growth and rising inflation. 
Third, an outline of the Government's long-term micro-economic reform agenda for the years ahead around the central organising principle of Australia's fundamental need for a comprehensive, long-term productivity agenda. 
Global Financial Markets
Today we face a global financial crisis that poses very significant challenges for the global economy as well as our own. The crisis began in the US housing and mortgage market, but has spread rapidly through broader credit markets, equity markets, and is now impacting the real economy. The whole world has been affected.
In part, the current financial crisis represents a repricing of risk following the extraordinary global credit growth of the last several years. This credit growth was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low interest rates and rapid increases in asset prices (especially the housing and share markets).
These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap by historical standards. Many investors began to accept higher risks and lower returns  -  as reflected in the decline in corporate investment yields.
In the United States the flow of cheap credit helped spur a burgeoning sub-prime mortgage market. At the same time, advances in financial engineering allowed the development of sophisticated new financial instruments, including loans bundled into Collateralised Debt Obligations. It seems that some market participants did not understand the risks associated with many of these new products.
This became apparent when some sub-prime loans began to default. In mid 2007 there was a sudden loss of confidence in the value of mortgage-backed securities. Financial institutions with heavy exposure to the sub prime market such as Bear Stearns in the US, and institutions with large reliance on securitisation such as Northern Rock in the UK, were dramatically affected. 
As liquidity dried up, the credit crunch in the sub prime market evolved into a general tightening of credit across markets and across financial products. Because the extent or distribution of these risks is not fully known, there has been a reduced willingness to lend  -  the previous market complacency with risk has been replaced by excessive risk aversion. It is important to note that Australia's financial conditions are different to many other countries.
The Australian economy has so far proven to be resilient, despite 12 interest rate rises and the fallout from the global financial crisis. Nonetheless, Australia is not immune from events abroad. As spreads increase, they push up the cost of finance, and lead to higher interest rates for home mortgages everywhere including for Australian working families. The crisis in financial markets is also leading to downward revisions in growth projections for the global economy. The US economy is expected to slow markedly this year, which will see global growth slow from the strong rates of growth recorded in recent years.
Slower world growth will inevitably affect Australia, although the economic strength of North Asia has a capacity to shield Australia from the sharper downturn amongst the G3 economies. But we can take nothing for granted. That is why the Government will continue to pursue a policy of responsible economic management aimed at placing the economy on a stable, long-term growth trajectory. 
And that is why I will take every opportunity to argue the distinct features of the Australian economic case during my visit abroad. 
     * That Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence. 
     * That we have a strong regulatory framework for Australia's financial market. 
     * That Australia has very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults. 
     * That the balance sheets of our principal corporates are strong.
     * That resources demand (from China and India) is holding up strongly and well into the future.
     * That the Government continues to be committed to a conservative approach to budget policy. 
     * That the Government has zero net public sector debt. 
     * And that the Government is not complacent about the need to push ahead with further, long-term economic reform.
 And I will do this because I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term economic future despite the challenges that lie ahead. 
Government's response to the global financial crisis
Governments usually face two choices in response to global financial crises.
They can either react to crisis by turning inwards: 
     * by blaming globalisation for exposing them to economic threats that are not of their own making;
     * by trying to erect new barriers to openness; or 
     * by trying to opt out of global financial markets by re-regulating their domestic financial markets.  
Alternatively, governments can choose to hold firm, keep their nerve, and stay the course on policies that will promote stability for the present and continue to reform the economy for the future. It may seem to some that these two goals are in conflict with each other. It may seem to some that we would achieve more domestic economic stability if we were less open to global market volatility.
That is not the view of the Government. Openness and full engagement with the global economy has given Australia much more economic growth than before. Protectionism, by contrast, would limit Australia's opportunities, delivering a sclerotic economy and declining living standards. Australia's engagement with the global economy certainly presents us with challenges, but it also presents us with the responsibility to respond intelligently to those challenges.
By working with our regional and global economic partners we can work towards the restabilisation of the global financial system and address any long-term reforms the system may require. Global economic problems require global solutions.
Australia's response must also involve coordinated action with our economic partners. 
The Government's approach involves several elements including the following:
     * We will continue to monitor liquidity needs internationally and, through the RBA, participate where appropriate in coordinated central bank action.
     * Through the RBA, we will also continue to monitor and maintain appropriate support for liquidity requirements domestically. 
     * We will continue to monitor the Australian financial system in light of the current turbulence to ensure that it remains efficient, flexible and competitive  -  including maintaining competition and choice in the Australian domestic loans market for the benefit of consumers. 
     * We will work with other economies and international financial institutions to improve global standards of transparency and disclosure by financial institutions. 
 As financial markets become more global and assets are traded more quickly between nations, so too must regulation and supervision become more global. The current crisis has highlighted the importance of disclosure and transparency. Loss of confidence in the risk management practices of financial institutions and ratings methodologies as well as weaknesses in disclosure, valuations and financial reporting has been at the core of the crisis. Internationally, we need better rules on the transparency of risk exposures, valuation practices and nature of leverage.
We will work with other economies to improve international risk management systems. This must include: 
     * Options for stronger international financial supervision;
     * Developing improved global standards that will underpin national regimes for transparency, crisis management and stability;
     * Strengthening the co-ordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets; and
     * Ensuring that national authorities respond effectively when specific risks are identified.
This will require efforts by us and others to work closely with the key international co-ordinating agencies, the IMF, the Basel Committee and others, to identify key risks and vulnerabilities and programs of reform. The Treasury, the RBA and the regulators have been discussing these matters with their global counterparts. Pursuing these matters will be a core priority in my engagements abroad over the coming weeks. 
Finally, we will redouble efforts to bring the Doha Round of trade negotiations to a conclusion.
The successful conclusion of the Doha Trade Round would give the global economy a much needed psychological boost at a time when there is a heightened risk of protectionism.
Particularly at a time when the psychology of protectionism may become acute.
It would also demonstrate to developing nations that the advanced economies are serious about honouring undertakings concerning trade liberalisation that were made back in 2001.
The Government's intention is to engage actively with our global economic partners on these important matters in the period ahead. There is no point simply describing the unfolding global economic reality. The Government instead believes we must become an active part of the global economic solution as well: arguing both our own economic case to global investors; as well as arguing the case for appropriate global financial market reform.
Australia's long term productivity challenge
Beyond the uncertainties of the global economy, the Government has inherited a domestic economy from its predecessors that is replete with its own challenges.
In the year leading up to the election, we argued that Australia has in recent years been through a period of extraordinary opportunities as a result of the mining boom. 
We highlighted the fact that the Government had squandered many of those opportunities that could have led to faster growth, by failing to make long term investments in Australia's future productive capacity. I believe history will see the 12 years of the Howard Government as an era of opportunities lost.
The Government had breathtakingly favourable fiscal and economic conditions, like no other Australian government has had. Yet it failed to seize those opportunities. Or even, it seems, to grasp them. The result of inadequate and poorly targeted investment in skills formation, in innovative capacity, in infrastructure, and in budget management now manifests itself in the skills shortages, infrastructure bottlenecks, and inflation challenge that Australian workers and businesses now well understand.
Productivity is, in the long term, the key to building a more internationally competitive economy  -  one that can produce more output from its existing resource base; one that can grow faster without fuelling inflation and consequently, driving up interest rates. 
The need for action on the productivity agenda is clearly underscored by the long downward slide in productivity growth since the late 1990s: 
     * Labour productivity growth in the market sector averaged 3.3 per cent per annum in the five years to 1998-99. 
     * It fell to 2.1 per cent in the five years to 2003-04. 
     * It has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent in the first three years of the current cycle up to 2006-07. 
     * Productivity growth in the market sector fell to zero in the year to December 2007. 
The same trend is evident when we measure Australia's performance against other economies. Australia was ranked behind 14 other OECD nations in the OECD comparison of whole economy productivity levels in 2006. Benchmarked against the United States, the global productivity leader, Australian productivity rose from 77 per cent in 1990 to 85 per cent in 1999, but by 2006 it had fallen back to 79 per cent. 
In comparative terms, Australia has now almost completely lost the relative productivity gains of 1990s. Low productivity growth has contributed to the rising inflationary pressures inherited by the Government last year, with underlying inflation at 3.6 per cent, its highest level in 16 years. Low productivity growth has also made Australian exporters less competitive, contributing to export volumes growing at an average annual rate of just 1.9 per cent in the seven years since 2000, in contrast to the average 6.9 per cent growth over the preceding seven years.
Australia's rising inflation, rising interest rates and the particular challenges on the external account point to significant long term problems that have not been systematically addressed. 
We cannot sustain strong economic growth unless we lift our productive growth. We cannot sustain improvements in living standards unless our productivity growth improves. We cannot meet the challenges of international economic competititiveness if we do not lift our productivity growth; if we do not have a highly skilled workforce; if our workforce is not sufficiently innovative to solve business problems; or if our infrastructure is not modernised to serve our businesses as platforms for growth. 
And so Australia must now begin to implement a policy of long-term reform to boost productivity growth through a productivity revolution.
A new agenda of microeconomic reform  -  towards a productivity revolution
The Government's economic reform agenda is based on the 3 Ps that drive long term economic growth: productivity, workforce participation and population growth.
Investing in a reform program focussed on higher productivity, and higher levels of workforce participation and which deal with the population policy challenges of the future will lift the economy's supply capacity, delivering stronger, non-inflationary growth over the long term. Australia's productivity challenge has been highlighted on at least two significant occasions by the Commonwealth Treasury in its Intergenerational Reports in 2002 and 2007.
Last year's report warned that if nothing changes, average living standards of Australian households over the next four decades will grow at a rate well below previous decades. Treasury has also warned that because our population is ageing, living standards in the next forty years are projected to increase by an average of only 1.6 per cent per year  -  compared to an average of 2.1 per cent over the past four decades. 
The difference may sound small, but a 25 per cent reduction in growth in average living standards means a lot to ordinary households. The conclusion is that productivity growth is going to be more important than ever before if we are to sustain higher living standards with an ageing population. 
Let me be absolutely statistically stark in highlighting the difference between the high and low productivity road to Australia's future. Productivity growth across the whole of our economy has averaged just 1.5 per cent per year so far this decade. 
In comparison, productivity growth was more than one third higher during the 1990s.
The second Intergenerational Report makes the challenge of reversing this trend clear: if future generations are to realise the same growth in average living standards as we have been able to achieve in the past, our productivity growth will have to rise to around 2¼ per cent and be maintained for the next 40 years. 
That's a major task for the nation. That's a major task for the national government.
Australia has not experienced these kinds of productivity gains since the mid to late 1990s, when productivity growth surged off the back off the hard fought reforms of the 1980s and early 1990s. And of course our task is made that much tougher when you consider our starting point. Three years into the current productivity cycle as measures of the ABS, whole economy productivity growth has averaged just 0.8 per cent a year.
I believe we must now embrace a new national objective of getting our productivity growth rate back on track. That is why the Government intends to adopt a number of ambitious targets for the future  -  targets aimed at achieving faster rates of productivity growth for the nation.
Since the beginning of the decade, Australia's annual productivity growth has averaged 1.5 per cent, behind the US (2.0 per cent), the UK (2.3 per cent) and Japan (1.9 per cent). In a decade's time, Australia should aim at realising productivity growth rates that not only keep pace with, but exceed, those of our principal competitors in the OECD. This means implementing a national program of action on productivity growth. 
That is why the Government will be directing the central agencies  -  Prime Minister and Cabinet, Treasury and the Department of Finance and Deregulation - to begin developing specific targets in each of the areas of government policy which directly contribute to increasing productivity growth. 
These productivity targets will be progressively released in the months ahead in each of the key drivers of long-term productivity growth. These productivity-building targets will include, but not be limited to, key indicators for skills, education, innovation, infrastructure, as well as rolling back the regulatory overhang on business.
The Government will begin deploying specific indicators to focus our public investment and over time to track our performance. For example, we already have a target to lift school retention from 74 to 90 per cent.
Furthermore, in vocational education the Commonwealth and States have reached agreement on the need for targeting a halving of the proportion of Australians aged 20 to 64 without qualifications at Certificate III and above, and a doubling of the number of higher qualification completions (diploma and advanced diploma).
But we will be going further. We will set these targets because we are committed to ensuring that government does its part to address the productivity challenge this nation faces. Of course, the Government's productivity agenda starts with an education revolution.
Australia needs a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment, and the quality of our outcomes across the education, skills and training system. The links between productivity growth and investment in human capital, through education, skills and training, are well established.
That is why we have unveiled substantial initiatives including: 
     * the provision of up to 15 hours per week of early childhood education for all 4 year olds.
     * providing high speed broadband to schools, computers at school for all students from years 9 to 12, and funding of up to $1.5 million for trades training centres at every Australian secondary school; 
     * a strategic focus on vocational training through the Skills Australia expert group and an investment in an additional 450,000 training places over the next five years. 
     * HECS incentives for students who study maths and science as well as those teaching those subjects, and a comprehensive examination of the future of higher education.
     * 1,000 new mid-career research scholarships to help retain and attract the most talented researchers. 
     * A new national curriculum in maths, science, English and history.  
We are also reviewing Australia's whole national innovation system, with the goal of making the changes necessary to foster greater investment in research and development and build a stronger culture of innovation in businesses.
The Government will also be implementing a new workplace relations system from the beginning of 2010  -  for the first time in the nation's history a uniform set of industrial relations laws for the entire private economy of the nation. 
The new system will encourage flexible enterprise agreements and create new flexibilities for common law agreements and modernised awards  -  all designed to support productivity growth. Economic analysis highlights the positive correlation between enterprise bargaining and productivity growth, as research last year from the National Institute of Labour Studies most recently observed.
Second, in addition to the changes in human capital investment that will drive productivity growth, the Government is committed to building advanced infrastructure for the economy of the 21st century.
Our national infrastructure is, quite simply, the physical platform for business growth.
Infrastructure Australia will advise on ways in which barriers or disincentives to investing in nationally significant infrastructure can be removed. Infrastructure Australia has been tasked with developing a nationally consistent regulatory environment for PPPs to encourage large-scale, long-term private investment in public infrastructure. 
In the coming decades our ability to engage in the global digital economy of the twenty first century will be a key driver of our productivity growth. Building a high-speed National Broadband Network will give Australia a platform of modern infrastructure that will allow business, education institutions and families to reap the full benefits of participation in the global digital economy. 
Broadband is a fundamentally transforming technology of the future. Third, reform of the federation, including a wide agenda of business deregulation, represents another important engine of productivity growth.
The reform of Commonwealth/State funding arrangements and the use of outcomes-based payments will create powerful incentives for States and Territories to implement reforms and improve their effectiveness. Later today the Treasurer will be speaking to you about the progress that we achieved yesterday at COAG in Adelaide.
COAG has identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy. COAG has agreed that this deregulatory task must begin with the onerous task of creating a single national OH&amp;S system. 
Workforce participation
The flip side of the productivity agenda is lifting workforce participation. As the post-war ‘baby boom' generation moves into retirement, workforce participation will come increasingly into focus as a key driver of long-term economic growth. 
An increase in the number of people participating in the workforce adds to the economy's potential output and raises living standards. The Commonwealth Treasury's Intergenerational Report in 2007 estimated that over the next 40 years the proportion of Australia's population over the age of 65 will double to around 25 per cent.
Over the same period, the proportion of the population participating in the workforce will decline from 65 per cent to an estimated 57 per cent in 2046. With an ageing population, Australia must work to increase the proportion of working age people in the workforce. Australia currently ranks 10th in the OECD on workforce participation. 
While our participation rate is above the OECD average, in specific important cohorts Australia's participation rates are below other developed economies: 
     * for males aged 25 to 54 years, Australia ranked 25th among 30 OECD countries; 
     * for females aged 25 to 44 years, Australia ranked 23rd; and 
     * for older men and women aged 55 to 64 years, Australia ranked 13th within the OECD. 
The 2007-08 Budget noted that Australia would have another 600,000 people in the workforce if we achieved participation rates as high as the top ranking comparable OECD country. 
The Government's strategy to increase workforce participation includes: 
     * First, tax reform targeted at increasing the incentive to work  -  including, but not in the long term limited to, the tax cuts that were announced at the last election and that will begin to be delivered from July.
     * Second, skills reform meaning that new workers are more highly skilled, and that school leavers make a smooth transition from school to work.
     * Third, increasing access to affordable quality child care, by raising the child care tax rebate from 30% to 50% among other measures.
     * Fourth, reforming the interaction of welfare and family payments with our tax system to remove unintended barriers to workforce participation for those currently on the margins of the labour force. Family and child care payments along with social security benefits provide important financial assistance to low and middle income working families. We need to ensure they not only provide an enhanced standard of living but also support workforce participation. 
     * Fifth, a retirement incomes policy that provides a number of options to meet the financial needs of older Australians, particularly for those who choose to continue to work or re-enter the workforce. 
The Government is engaged in long term work in each of these areas because having people unnecessarily outside the workforce represents a waste of economic capacity. And as our demographic challenges become more acute, that is a waste we can ill afford.
The third of the three Ps is population growth. Australia's forecast population trends over coming decades underscore the importance of the productivity and participation agendas. The Treasury's Intergenerational Report has forecast our annual population growth to slow down from an average of 1.4 per cent over the past 40 years to 0.8 per cent over the next 40 years. 
This means that population growth is likely to add just 0.1 percentage point to Australia's average annual growth in living standards (measured by real GDP per capita). This compares with a 0.4 percentage point contribution to annual growth over the past 40 years. 
With the birth rate expected to remain below the replacement rate, we must take further steps to make life easier for parents with young children. This means making workplace laws more family-friendly, improving access to quality, affordable child care and conducting a proper examination of paid maternity leave. 
We must also maintain a significant skilled migration program, one can respond to specific needs such as current and future skills shortages.
At the same time, we must do a better job in planning for the physical and social infrastructure needs of a growing population. 
We need the national imagination to build a big Australia  -  by encouraging natural population growth; by maintaining support for a continued expansion of the migration program consistent with the long term needs of the economy; and by investing to ensure that the long-term infrastructure needs of a growing population are met.
Immigration helps keep a nation young  -  a challenge which Australia must embrace if it is to avoid the decline already evident in a number of competitor economies. 
I am determined to lead a reformist government for the future that develops innovative, long-term solutions to Australia's long-term economic challenges.
That means tackling immediate threats like rising inflation and global financial turbulence. It also means moving forward on the long term agenda to raise productivity growth, workforce participation and population growth.
And the central organising principle underpinning this national agenda of economic reform is boosting Australia's long-term global competitiveness. 
Nobody owes Australia its future. Our responsibility is to build Australia's future. 
And that is the new Government's policy resolve.


PM: Well it's great to be here in Washington to undertake this official visit to the United States. The United States is Australia's oldest strategic ally, our closest strategic ally, our strongest strategic ally. And of course the United States is the centre, or the engine room of the global economy.
Very much this visit is not just a reflection on the past of our relationship with the United States, as strong and strategic as that has been, but also to reflect on the strength of the future of that relationship as well. A large part of my reason for being here is to discuss with the US Administration the current state of the global economy, and also to engage with US policy makers on a coordinated global response to the current difficulties being experienced across global financial markets rolling through to the real economy. The United States, and the state of its economy effects the global economy and Australia is part of a global economy and our working families in Australia are directly affected by what happens here in the US.
On top of that of course, with the President tomorrow, I look forward to a wide ranging discussion on a range of other foreign policy and national security policy questions as well.
I conclude by saying, it is a great honour for Therese and myself to be extended such personal hospitality by the President to be able to stay here at Blair House. We thank him very much for that. And for the warmth and cordiality with which we have been received by representatives of the US Administration on our arrival here at Andrews, only a short time ago.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was President Bush wrong when he says, now is not the time to withdraw troops from Iraq because by so doing, we would risk losing all we have gained in the surge?
PM:Well, as in my discussions with the Vice President prior to the election and the President of the United States prior to the election, and with the President on the phone since the election, our position on that has been made abundantly clear.
The challenge for the future, is how do we partner with America and our other friends and allies in providing other forms of assistance to the Government of Iraq. And that certainly was the nature of my conversation with Ambassador Crocker in Baghdad, General Petraeus in Baghdad and also with Prime Minister Maliki, of the Iraqi Republic when I was in Baghdad as well. We are confident of our policy settings, and I am confident we will do so in close coordination, consultation and harmony with strategic direction in the United States.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you have outlined your goals for your overseas visit but there is criticism that it will take you out of the country for 17 days. Is it justified, the length of you visit?
PM:Well right now the global economy is going through a period of considerable pressure and global financial markets are going through a period of considerable crisis. The options are, when you are looking at the future of the global economy which affects Australian working families, to sit at home and watch the global financial crisis unfold on CNN or to get out here and do something about it.
My response is that, when the global economy, global financial markets have a roll through effect on working families at home, my responsibility is two fold. One to work with other international leaders on the best and most effective global response to that crisis, and second to argue strongly, the case of the underlying strengths of the Australian economy, with the business leaders around the world. And I think that is the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: Glen Stevens says that movements outside the RBA, banks lifting rates, that it's just life. Brendan Nelson says it's bordering on the insensitive. How do you see the comments?
PM:I haven't seen the text of the comments and I will look to detail of the speech. Of course our position has long been that when it comes to moves in interest rates above the official rates, that banks should be very, very cautious about what they do there. We have made it possible through measures already announced by the Treasurer for consumers to quickly and expeditiously move their accounts from one bank to the other so that consumers can walk with their feet. My view is strongly that Australian working families are under mortgage pressure and mortgage stress at present and that has been reflected I think in the unfolding data in recent times. Dennis you had a question before.
JOURNALIST: On Iraq and Afghanistan, what sort of extra help would you be looking at providing Iraq and would that include military training. And on Afghanistan, you are pressuring NATO to put in more troops, is it likely that we will (inaudible) more resources into Afghanistan as well?
PM:On the question of Iraq, what I discussed with President Maliki in Baghdad and it has been our position since then, is that for additional assistance from Australia we would see that primarily falling into the categories of economic and humanitarian assistance. If we were to provide assistance by way of additional training for the Iraqi military or police we would do so out of country. Now on the question of Afghanistan, we have a strong solid commitment (inaudible), about 1000 troops on the ground, and we believe that is adequate under current circumstances. While I would say this about our friends and partners in Europe and part of the reason I am heading off to Bucharest is to deal effectively with the position of various of our friends and partners in Europe. I think it is important that we all get together and shoulder the burden behind a common strategy which has this as its objective, entrenching a long term successful government in Afghanistan capable of stabilising the country.      
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd is the global financial crisis gotten so bad that regulators like APRA need greater powers to take over banks that are in strife?
PM:Right now, the Government through the Treasury is in rolling and continuing close consultation with the RBA, with ASIC and APRA on the best regulatory response at home. And can I say this, against the standard of regulatory arrangements elsewhere in the world, our arrangements are among the best, the absolute best in the world. That's point one. And secondly, when we are looking at the sub-prime crisis as it has unfolded across the world, our sub-prime exposure is quite marginal against those of other developed economies.
The key challenge for us and again a core reason, a core economic reason for my visit abroad is to speak with the US Administration, and tomorrow I am seeing the Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, together with of course, the President himself and the Vice President. And similarly in the United Kingdom, and the various European leaders, and with the Chinese later, is how do we best develop an effective global response to what is an emerging global problem.
And if you go back to Alison's question before, you can either sit at home and watch this unfold on the tele, or get out there and do something about it.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) criticism of the Australian led international force for not pursuing his attackers more quickly, what is your reply to that?
PM:I have not seen the text of what Jose has said, I spoke to him on the telephone the other day while he was still in hospital. Of course, apart from having visited him in hospital, but I don't think he has got an active recollection of that, given the state he was in at the time. I think our Australian forces handled this very effectively on the ground, I defend their absolute professionalism in how that was dealt with in very trying circumstances. The fact that Jose was able to be got to the international medical facility at the Australian base in Dili so quickly, frankly is a large part of the reason why we were able to help Jose pull through.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:No there was no such criticism in any conversation I have had with him.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd what message would you like the Reserve Bank to remind the banking sector of it's responsibilities in setting mortgage rates?
PM:The key question that all banks, all our commercial banks should bear in mind is that working families are under financial pressure. We have had 12 interest rate rises in a row. The impact which this has on an average mortgage which now, $230,000 - $240,000 means $2000 worth of monthly repayments, that's a huge slug on the family pay packet. Now, therefore, any commercial banks in responding to the needs of working families, needs to  understand that these family budgets are under real pressure and some are in genuine mortgage stress.
Again I go back to how that connects with the period that I will be abroad. The global economy is impacting on global financial markets and through that, of course, we see the roll on effect in Europe and in parts of Asia and in particular in Japan. We need to be in the forefront of the global response to this challenge because if we are not we are simply being passive against a force which has the capacity to further effect working families at home. And I am not in the business of sitting at home on my hands, hoping it will all get better in the morning. My attitude is different, you get out there and you participate in the global solution. And the other part of it is, argue the Australian economy's case as a strong and robust environment in which international and global investors continue to place their money.
JOURNALIST: This seems a marathon trip, with a handful of time zones, a handful of climates.
PM:What are you tired out already?
JOURNALIST: I am interested, I mean it is a big challenge for you, how did you prepare for it?
PM:Look, this goes back to Alison's question before, let's go to I think the short term political point scoring being engaged in by Dr Nelson at home. This visit, 17 days, Mr Howard in his first term undertook a visit of exactly the same length and secondly, during that 17 day period, visited two countries alone. The United States and the United Kingdom. In a 17 day period I am visiting the United States, I am visiting the United Kingdom, the European Union and NATO and China. At a time of great global economic challenge and genuine crisis in financial markets, it is the right and responsible thing to do at this time. I think people just need to take a deep breath when we see such, basically you know, short term party politics being played when the nation has some long term strategic interests to deal with.
JOURNALIST: The Americans will be keenly interested in how you balance the relationship, the alliance here, with the growing relationship with China.  What would you say to them?
PM:Well I have always been rock solid on our strategic alliance with the United States, anyone who has known me for the last twenty years will know that my position has not budged one inch on that. It will not budge one inch on that. You can prosecute a strong, close, strategic alliance with the United States, with a robust and expanding economic relationship with China. That is precisely what the United States itself is doing.
And you are getting cold, and I am getting cold, and I am going to go and have a kip. Goodnight.


NEIL MITCHELL: While Kevin Rudd is touring the world, in the studio is the acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning Neil
NEIL MITCHELL: If you'd like to speak to the acting Prime Minister 9690 0693 or outside Melbourne 13 13 32. Is there any hope that this Government turning the banks into good Australians and getting them to stop this habit of increasing interest rates ahead of the Reserve Bank?
JULIA GILLARD: Well my colleague Wayne Swan is working hard on making sure that there is competitive pressures on the banks, we know that there's a problem and people get locked into their mortgage and then they face these increases. We want them to be able to shop around, we want them to be able to change banks, we want them to be able to say to their current bank: “unless I am being treated properly, I am off to another bank”.
Now we've got an interim arrangement with the banks to facilitate swapping. Wayne Swan is making sure that that's going to be a permanent, ongoing arrangement that will be available from November.  But the interim arrangement is there now.  And my message to Australians who hold mortgages  -  I am certainly an Australian with a mortgage - if you think you are getting a dud deal from your bank then shop around.
NEIL MITCHELL: Well Wayne Swan hasn't frightened them so far.  The NAB has increased their rate ahead of it and others are looking at doing the same in the past few days.
JULIA GILLARD: Well the thing that really puts pressure on whether - its banks or any other big business in our society - is the threat of competitive pressure. Banks need customers.  They need people who bank with them; they need people who borrow from them.  And it's the borrowers who can send a message that they‘re not prepared to be treated in this fashion and they're going to shop around if they think they are getting a bad deal.
NEIL MITCHELL: So punish them?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think we're all consumers in that sense and if we've got a mortgage and we that we're not being treated in that mortgage the way we should be then there's the ability to put pressure back on your bank.
NEIL MITCHELL: Well do you disagree a little with Governor of the Reserve Bank; he said that it's being unrealistic to expect the banks to do otherwise.
JULIA GILLARD: Well look, I've seen the comments of the Governor of the Reserve Bank and obviously the Governor of the Reserve Bank's independent - that's a good thing - and he can make comments as the independent Governor of the Reserve Bank.
What we're saying as a Government is we understand the pressures that interest rate rises have put on working families.  We understand the pressure that comes when banks they lift their rates independently of the Reserve Bank interest rate movements.  And one of the things we can do to help working families with that is make it easy to swap banks.
What's the long term solution?  Well a long term solution is to get inflation under control and if we can get inflation under control we can put downwards pressure on interest rates.
NEIL MITCHELL: But is the Governor right (inaudible) banks reasonable to put their rates up ahead of his rate, ahead of the Reserve Bank.  Is he right?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think the Governor is making a point as he sees it about our banking system and the global economy. Obviously he is noting that there have been problems in global financial markets arising from the sub prime crisis in the states. He's saying our banking system needs to react to that; he has made a set of statements in that context.
What I'm saying, what Wayne Swan is saying and what the Government is saying is we understand we've got to look at the global economy is doing.  One of the reasons the Prime Minister is overseas is to talk internationally about the global economy. Our economy here of course we've got to be dealing with inflation.  And then at the level of working families faced with these pressures, government has got to deal with inflation to put downwards pressure on official interest rates. What's the way of dealing with other increases?  Well, through competitive pressures.
NEIL MITCHELL: But in simple terms should the NAB have put up their rates ahead of the official rate or not?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're saying to banks that we believe that the pressure on working families when rates go up has to be recognised and factored in when they make their decisions. 
I am not going to lecture individual banks.  I am going to say we understand when interest rates move when the official interest rate is moved.  When it comes to other interest rate movements Wayne Swan's been very clear with the banks that he believes they need to be mindful of the pressure on working families.  And he said to those families if you think you're not getting a good deal, then shop around.
NEIL MITCHELL: The Governor of the Reserve Bank also says there is no real mortgage stress out there.  99.6 percent of people are up to date with their mortgages. Do you accept that this mortgage stress in an invention?
JULIA GILLARD: No, I see families all the time under mortgage stress.  As you know Neil, my electorate is in Melbourne's west.  It's home to a lot of new housing suburbs. People are very highly geared for debt....
NEIL MITCHELL: How could he get that wrong?  How could he get that wrong and say there is no mortgage stress when we keep getting this message that people are really suffering?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think we are probably talking a little about two different things here. The Governor is reflecting the fact that people are overwhelmingly paying their mortgage payments on time - that isn't telling us how difficult it is for them to make sure that those payments get there on time and what else they've had to cut and how the family is absorbing that pressure. I see that every day in Australia.  I see it reflected in my own electorate where people have cut back to the bone on other family expenditure in order to keep the dollars going into the mortgage because they want to keep the house.  It's the great Aussie dream and they want to keep the house.
NEIL MITCHELL: So the indication to you of mortgage stress is not people having to give up mortgages or failing to pay them, but it is people who are suffering to pay them?
JULIA GILLARD: It's both. We know that there have been problems with increasing arrears rates...
NEIL MITCHELL: But he's saying there's not.
JULIA GILLARD: Well when we do the sort of spatial analysis we know that there have been problems in some parts of Australia with increasing arrears rates.  We've had some data come out about that.  So that's one indication of mortgage stress - people who do everything they can to pay the mortgage and ultimately fail. Another indication of mortgage stress is what else gets cut back in people's lives in order to keep those mortgage payments going in.
NEIL MITCHELL: Do you think that mortgage stress is the fault of the banks of the banks too?  Have they lent money - too much of it too easily - to people who couldn't afford it?
JULIA GILLARD: I think there's a whole series of things that have gone into where we are now.  Obviously house prices have gone up unbelievably.  I mean, we survey across Melbourne, we know that house prices have gone up.  Consequently the burden for people getting into the housing market, the actual volume of the debt is much higher than it use to be.  And so the percentage of your income that goes to servicing the mortgage is higher that it use to be.  And there's not much fat there, so interest rates go up and people really experience those pressures.
NEIL MITCHELL: And there is a report today that housing prices could jump 40 per cent in the next five years. Is that accurate do you think?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I am not a predictor of the housing market.  Obviously, we have seen housing prices go up a lot. The Government has recognised there is a big problem with housing affordability.  We are obviously doing what we can to deal with inflation to put downward pressure on interest rates. 
We've got some particular policies too - and you know, they're modest plans, but they're our attempt to make a difference in this area.  Special saving accounts that have special treatment to help people get that all important first home buyers deposit together or to try and get into the housing market because it's just so difficult now. Some new arrangements to try and facilitate the development of affordable housing.  Obviously we've got a focus on homelessness because people for who drop off the edge whether it's out of a mortgage situation or out of a rental situation, there are too many families that are at that brink of homelessness and we want to address that.
NEIL MITCHELL: Would you like to see the states cutting back their stamp duty?
JULIA GILLARD: We've said to the states - and one of the policies we announced during the election was trying to lift the burden of developer charges in new estates.  Obviously in new housing estates - in my area of Melbourne and cross the board - there's a substantial weight that goes on developer charges when you buy a new home.  We've got a policy to try and address that to lift some of that burden.
NEIL MITCHELL: Is there fear within the Government that the predictions are right that Australia could be facing recession at the end of this year?
JULIA GILLARD: Well what we've said about the Australian economy - the Prime Minister was saying it yesterday and he is going to say it overseas as he has these discussions with global leaders - is there as concerning signs in the global economy flowing from sub prime mortgage crisis.  Obviously that means further credential regulation.  The strength of global financial markets is important. 
But against that backdrop Australia has a good story to tell. Our economy generally, whilst we've got to deal with the problem of inflation, our economy generally continues, we've got good employment rates - all of those things are continuing in this country.  It's a great place to invest, the resources boom is continuing. So the Australian story the Prime Minister is taking to the world is one where our economy is continuing, it's continuing to grow.  We've got to deal with inflation pressures, we've got to deal with our infrastructure problems, we've got to deal with our skills problems.
NEIL MITCHELL: As you've said, or the party has said right through the election campaign: much of Australia's economic health is based on the resources boom. Is this over simplifying it?  The United States goes into recession, China cant afford to, well they cant afford to buy stuff from China therefore China doesn't need to buy materials from us to make what they were selling to the United States and we are all in trouble. What's wrong with that theory?
JULIA GILLARD: I think that's a little too simple Neil.
NEIL MITCHELL: That's the danger isn't it?
JULIA GILLARD: Well look Chinese growth rates are very strong.  We know that. The Chinese economy is going ahead in leaps and bounds.  This is a nation that is developing that is moving to super power statues, its economy is strong, it is a voracious consumer of the things that's we've got to sell. I talk to the resources industry regularly....
NEIL MITCHELL: It's more of voracious producer.  I don't know if it's a voracious consumer, it's a voracious producer.
JULIA GILLARD: Its buys our raw materials, its buys our resources....
NEIL MITCHELL: Nobody buys what it produces without raw materials they don't want our raw materials.
JULIA GILLARD: Its own domestic economy is of course growing in leaps and bounds, so Chinese demand is ever growing as its economy grows.  Obviously China sells around the world and its global trade is also strong.  And its demand for our resources is strong and that demand is continuing.
NEIL MITCHELL: So is the Government concerned about the danger of recession later in the year?
JULIA GILLARD: We're concerned to keep our economy strong and we are identifying as the things the government has to deal with.  The challenges, dealing with inflation - that's very important and the Prime Minister and the Treasurer have been consistently been talking about dealing with inflation.
We've got to deal with our skills challenge.  Our labour market is tight, we've underinvested in training.  That means that there are real skills shortages out there now we've got to do something about that. We've got problems with infrastructure and infrastructure creates bottlenecks in the economy and we've got to deal with that.
NEIL MITCHELL: We'll take a break. Calls for the acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard in a moment.  And in a moment is the Rudd razor gang (inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks for that Neil.
NEIL MITCHELL: There is a number of issues I want to get to so we'll be quick as we move along. Peter - go ahead please Peter
CALLER:Yes, good morning Ms Gillard.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning Peter.
CALLER: Hello, how are you?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm good thank you.
CALLER: That's good. With the banks, I've seen this cycle before in the late 80s, where the banks just throw money at people that can't afford to buy a house which is a dream for everybody of course...
NEIL MITCHELL: Question Peter?
CALLER: Yes, my question is why can't we re-regulate the banks?
JULIA GILLARD: Well Peter I can understand your concerns about people getting into trouble with their mortgages but we need a competitive banking system. We need a banking system that's meeting modern needs and when we look at our banking system we don't have big sub prime problem here. The sub prime problem has been in the US and that's what's feed into global financial markets, so...
NEIL MITCHELL: There's no intention to re-regulate banks?
JULIA GILLARD: I mean there is banking regulations in this country; lets not pretend there isn't any.  There is banking regulations in this country.  But beyond banking regulation, I think the thing that is important is people using their power as consumers and shopping around.  And I was just saying to Peter whilst I understand his concern, and some people do get into trouble, there's no evidence of big problems in terms of who is being linked to in there way that there was in the United States which started off the sub prime mortgage problem.
NEIL MITCHELL: There is a report in the papers today that there's a proposal before the Government to quite simply guarantee $20,000 in accounts. Anybody's account guaranteed in case banks go under.  And people hear ‘banks go under' and they just shudder. Is that proposal before government?  Will the government do it?
JULIA GILLARD: This has been around for a long, long time Neil.  As I understand it, it was first floated in 1997 around the time of the Wallace Inquiry and it's been looked at again by a government agency.  So its one of those policy proposals and ideas that's been floating around government for a long period of time.
NEIL MITCHELL: But is mood now that we take it more seriously to guarantee the first $20,000 of a person's bank account?
JULIA GILLARD: Look I certainly want to say our banking system is strong, it is regulated, it's well regulated, it's appropriately regulated. I don't agree with Peter's idea of about full re-regulation.  It is appropriately regulated, it's very stable.  This has been something that has sort of been floating around for a long period of time.
NEIL MITCHELL: So was it under consideration though?
JULIA GILLARD: Well look it's sort of there, it's been developed by a number of agencies - APRA, Treasury and ASIC - but it's something that's been there for a long period of time. There's no immediate plans to deal with that policy proposal.  And as I say it's as old as 1997.
NEIL MITCHELL: And you see no need to deal with it urgently?
JULIA GILLARD: No I see no need to deal with it urgently. Our banking system is well regulated and strong.
NEIL MITCHELL: Now it's reported also today that a significant cut is planned to the CSIRO as part of the razor gang. Is that right?
JULIA GILLARD: I've seen those reports Neil and I actually sit on this razor gang - it's the expenditure review committee. We certainly don't refer to it as Gillard's garrotte or gelatine or any of those terms.
NEIL MITCHELL: Maybe we should.
JULIA GILLARD: (laugh) Well I don't think so.  I'll have to come up with alliteration for Mitchell, but - Murderous Mitchell or something...
(laugh)
JULIA GILLARD: It's getting nasty now. But what does the ERC do?  Well we sit with the government budget papers and we go through them line by line, and we look for waste, and we look for efficiencies - and that's call prudent government.
But when it comes to the CSIRO flagship program, can I make it very clear: innovation is at the heart of this government's policy agenda as recently as yesterday the Prime Minister in Melbourne was talking about the importance of innovation to productivity and this nation's future growth. The CSIRO flagship program is in the national interest.  It's an important program.
And can I say I know that we are going to have budget speculation every day in between now and budget and one day people will wake up and read that we are trying to you know do a fire sale of the MCG to raise a few quick dollars  -  you know, budget speculation will come and go - but the CSIRO flagship program is an important program in the national interest.
NEIL MITCHELL: So is there a proposal to cut $414 million dollars out of it?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think Neil when you've got a program that is in the national interest which is as important as the CSIRO flagship program, it's a program that enjoys Government support.
NEIL MITCHELL: So you are ruling it out?
JULIA GILLARD: That program has the governments support, full stop.  There's no need to put any more in that sentence. It's got our support.
NEIL MITCHELL: OK. Wayne Carey.  Wayne Carey had an interview with Andrew Denton, now this is - Andrew Denton said binge drinking is a big issue in the life of Wayne Carey which strikes me. It's important for the government because it's only two weeks ago Kevin today, Kevin Rudd meet with the AFL and other codes and talked about binge drinking. Are you concerned by the message coming out of the Wayne Carey situation?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I guess I like many Australians have watched what's happened with Wayne Carey and I find it overwhelmingly sad I suppose, is my reaction to it. I mean he is an incredibly talented man.  He was a legendary football player.  In the ordinary course you would expect him to go into the media and you'd see him at events and you'd see him on TV and he would be having a tremendously successful life. 
And it is distressing to see all of these circumstances around Wayne Carey and I think there's a message there for football, there's a message there for the community. Alcohol has obviously played a big part in this. I think that's the theme of the Denton interview as it is reported in today's newspapers and we're obviously, as a government, concerned to be saying to young people: alcohol isn't a solution to life's problems.  Binge drinking isn't a way of dealing with young adulthood.  And as I think Wayne Carey's life story tends to show there is a heavy price that ends up being payed by alcohol misuse.
NEIL MITCHELL: Did you drink too much as a kid? I did.
JULIA GILLARD: Look, yes Neil to be frank you know, we, I drank the way a young Australians drink when I was young. Where there times when I drank too much?  Sure there were times that I drank too much. Did I ever have a problem with alcohol?  I don't think I ever had a problem alcohol.  I had a youthful experimentation.  You have the occasion where you drank too much and wake up the next day feeling dreadful and after a few of those cycles you learn that it's not that smart.
NEIL MITCHELL: Now the deal on the Murray Darling Basin - a billion dollars for Victoria which got Victoria over the line.  Is that new money?  There are claims that is in fact less than was promised by the Howard Government
JULIA GILLARD: Oh no, the billion dollars is a specific commitment to Victoria.  It's a...
NEIL MITCHELL: But is that new?  Wasn't it there before?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we've got the ten billion dollar water package and it's a clear allocation of a billion dollars to Victoria. It's something that the Premier was obviously delighted about because it enables him to do a set of things which will make a difference for Victorian farmers and ultimately for all of us.
NEIL MITCHELL: But I guess my point is, is there really any money there, in that billion dollars, that wasn't going to be there under the Howard plan anyway?
JULIA GILLARD: That money, the money was - the ten billion dollars obviously is part of the Howard Government's water plan. It was a question of where the ten billion dollars was going to be allocated.  There is no point having a figure that says ten billion in the budget papers and it never goes anywhere. Where's it going to go?  Well a billion dollars is going to be allocated to Victoria for the purposes the Premier is been so keen to argue for.
NEIL MITCHELL: Is that more than you were going to get under the Howard plan?  That's my point.  I thought they were going to get that much anyway.
JULIA GILLARD: There was no clear allocation of resources like that prior to COAG this week.
NEIL MITCHELL: What are you doing for Earth Hour?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I guess I'll be looking to turn some lights off, wouldn't I? (laugh)
NEIL MITCHELL: It seems like a very strange idea to me.
JULIA GILLARD: Earth hour?
NEIL MITCHELL: The fashion industry is going to turn off the lights at 8 o'clock on Saturday night. What is the fashion industry doing at 8 o'clock on a Saturday night?  Partying.
JULIA GILLARD: Possibility having a fashion parade Neil or hunched over a sewing machine generating a new garment.  Hopefully they have to stop doing that for an hour if the lights are off.
NEIL MITCHELL: More Tibet protests today.  Monks interrupting in Shanghai at a press conference with Chinese officials.  Are we going to face this right up to the Olympics, do you think?
JULIA GILLARD: That is not a question I can necessarily answer.  But it seems from recent events that Tibet is going to be an issue on peoples' minds and we are going to see protests from time to time. Obviously the Prime Minister is visiting China during the course of this period overseas.  We've made it very clear - and certainly both the Prime Minister and our Foreign Minister Stephen Smith have made it very clear - that there's no tolerance for human rights abuses.
NEIL MITCHELL: You support maternity leave and Myer had the announcement yesterday and several others - but you are also arguing as strongly as the Prime Minister was yesterday for increased productivity.  How does maternity leave, payed maternity leave, increase productivity?
JULIA GILLARD: I can answer that Neil.  It increases productivity because it makes it more likely that skilled women workers are going to be able to balance work and family life, come back to work with the same employer.  They're likely to feel a sort of debt and a bond to that employer.  It's going to make them more likely to return to work with that employer.  And in the current economic circumstances that employer needs their skills and ability.
It is not good for employers if they lose skilled women, who go on maternity leave, who don't come back and they are in a constant cycle of training and retraining new workers.  That's bad for productivity.
NEIL MITCHELL: Thank you for coming in. How was Kirribilli?
JULIA GILLARD: I was only on the lawns outside for the press conference.
NEIL MITCHELL: You didn't get to stay the night?
JULIA GILLARD: No I was, last night I was at home in Altona, Neil
NEIL MITCHELL: OK.  Oh, one other thing, very quickly: there is going to be a Jewish Summit now before the Summit Summit? 
JULIA GILLARD: Well there's going to be a youth summit.  Obviously there have been some issues about the inclusion of Jewish community members in the 2020 Summit because of the date of which it is being held.  And I think obviously we want to make some efforts to make sure those voices can be heard.
NEIL MITCHELL: So that's sort of a pre-summit summit?
JULIA GILLARD: Well look, we are in trying to include as many voices as we can. I am certainly looking forward to attending the Youth Summit. I'm going to get to do that even when I'm nowhere near young.  So that's good.
NEIL MITCHELL: Thank you very much.


Washington, D.C., March 29, 2008 - In a meeting at historic Blair House in Washington, D.C., U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Christopher Cox and Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced that the SEC, the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) and the Australian Treasury Department have begun formal discussions to consider a mutual recognition arrangement for the two nations' securities markets. The discussions are intended to enhance cross-border law enforcement cooperation, facilitate regulatory coordination, and increase investor access to well-regulated capital markets. 
The SEC recently announced that it would explore a limited agreement with one or more foreign regulatory counterparts that could provide the basis for the development of a more general approach to mutual recognition through rule making. Any mutual recognition agreement would be based upon a comparability assessment by the SEC and by the foreign authority of one another's regulatory structures. The discussions between the SEC and the Australian authorities represent the first step toward a possible bilateral arrangement and will cover potential recognition to allow securities exchanges and market participants to operate in each other's markets. 
 “I appreciate the leadership of Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Federal Treasurer Wayne Swan, and ASIC Chairman Tony D'Aloisio in promoting high-quality securities regulation, investor protection, and transparent markets on a global basis,” said SEC Chairman Christopher Cox. “As technology continues to reduce barriers to cross-border investing, securities regulators need to work together to keep our standards high.  By beginning to build a sturdy basis for cooperation among securities regulators who share the same concerns, we can provide investors with more investment choices and greater investor protections. At the same time, we can strengthen the ability of our governments to cooperate in ways that will better help identify emerging international regulatory and supervisory issues.”
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd added: "Australia has a long history of recognising foreign regulation of securities markets and welcomes this opportunity to be included in a pilot mutual recognition arrangement with the SEC. We look forward to more bilateral arrangements with the SEC and other financial market regulators. Identifying and eliminating impediments to cross-border trading will mean easier and less costly access to well-regulated investment and will improve transparency and liquidity in our markets. This is a good economic and regulatory outcome.” 
Over the past two decades, the SEC and ASIC have developed a close partnership on enforcement and regulatory issues, which was formalized in a 1993 Memorandum of Understanding on securities law enforcement. In recent years, SEC and ASIC enforcement staff have regularly worked together on cross-border investigations of violations of U.S. and Australian securities laws.
The SEC and ASIC today agreed to undertake a formal assessment of each other's regulatory systems to determine the extent to which each jurisdiction produces a comparable level of investor protection. The results of the comparability assessment would be published for public comment before being made final. Once the comparability assessment is completed, this would provide the basis for further discussions between the SEC and ASIC regarding a formal mutual recognition arrangement, which would include specific discussion of the extent to which, and under what circumstances, U.S. and Australian securities exchanges and market participants could operate in each other's markets and would articulate the additional cooperation arrangements that would be necessary and appropriate to ensure the integrity of financial markets and the protection of investors.


PRESIDENT BUSH: Mr. Prime Minister, welcome.  So glad you're here.  And Therese, thank you for joining us as well.  Laura and I are thrilled to welcome you here at the White House.  And I appreciate the opportunity to visit with the leader of one of America's closest allies and friends.
And one thing that's for sure:  that friendship will strengthen and endure under the leadership of Kevin Rudd.  I have found him to be a straightforward fellow.  Being from Texas, that's what I like.  He is thoughtful.  He is strategic in thought.  And he is committed to the same values that I'm committed to:  rule of law, human rights, human decency.  And we're so proud you're here.
We spent a great deal of time talking about the economy.  One thing we spent time on was talking about the benefits of trade between our two nations and the benefits of a world that trades freely and fairly.  And the Prime Minister was asking me about, you know, my views on Doha.  I said it's possible to achieve a Doha Round.  He too believes we should work to achieve a Doha Round.  However, I informed him that it's, we're willing to make serious concessions on the agricultural front, but we expect other nations to open up their markets on manufacturing, as well as services.  And to this end, Prime Minister Rudd, Kevin Rudd, decided, said that he would be more than willing to help.  And that's, I'm very grateful.
On a bilateral front, not only is the free trade agreement working, but next Monday we'll be signing an open skies agreement that will further our, further our friendship and further our commercial ties.  And I think that's a great success of your administration, and ours as well.  
We talked about the environment and energy.  There's a interesting moment for all of us to recognize that we can become less dependent, in our case, on foreign oil and at the same time be good stewards of the environment.
We talked about the need to work collaboratively to achieve an international agreement in which the United States is at the table along with developing nations like China and India.  In order for there to be an effective international agreement, China and India must be participants.
We talked about the need to help developing nations improve their environment.  And one way that we can do so is to commit ourselves to tariff-free trade in technologies that promote low-carbon energy. This is something we're spending a lot of money on in the United States.  And we'll continue to do so, because I happen to believe technologies will enable us to be good stewards of the environment and change our energy habits, which we need to do here in the United States.  
So I want to thank you very much for our discussions thus far on our economic interests and our responsibilities.  
But we also talked about freedom and the need to promote an ideology based on hope and decency.  And that's an ideology of liberty.  And I want to thank very much the Australian government and the Australian people for their willingness to help a young democracy such as Afghanistan.
The Prime Minister and I discussed how Bucharest can become a success.  And I can't thank you enough for going.  And I appreciate very much your strong commitment to helping the Karzai government succeed and thrive.  It's in our national interests that we do so. 
I also want to thank you very much for being a good, loyal ally on Iraq.  Obviously, the Prime Minister kept a campaign commitment, which I appreciate.  I always like to be in the presence of somebody who does what he says he's going to do.  You know, often times politicians go out there and they say one thing on the campaign trail and they don't mean it.  Well, this is a guy who meant it.
But he also acted like you'd expect an ally to act.  And that is, he consulted closely with his friends.  His military commanders consulted closely with our military commanders.  But the commitment of Afghanistan is not to leave Iraq alone, it's to change mission.  
And so he told me about an interesting story.  He met with the Prime Minister, Maliki.  Prime Minister Maliki says to Kevin Rudd -- or Kevin Rudd says to Prime Minister Maliki, "What can we do to help you?"  It wasn't, "What can we do to abandon you?"  He said, "How could we help you?"  And he said, "How about training some farmers in dry land farming?" -- something we know something about in West Texas, by the way, Mr. Prime Minister.  
And I want to thank you for that.  I want to thank you for stepping forward to help Iraq develop a civil society and a strong economy that will enable this young democracy to thrive and help yield peace.  People -- I'm sure the press corps is going to say, "Well, aren't you mad at the prime minister for fulfilling his campaign pledge?"  And the answer is no, just so you don't even need to ask the question now.  (Laughter.)
We talked about Iran and our joint commitment to continue to work together to see to it that the Iranians do not develop the capacity to develop a nuclear weapon.  We talked about Burma.  I want to thank you for your commitment to a free Burma.  And finally, we talked about North Korea and the six-party talks and Australia's support for those six-party talks.  
We're going to have a good lunch, too.  And we'll continue our discussions on a variety of subjects.  He's a(n) easy man to talk to. I appreciate his visions.  I particularly appreciate his consultations on China.  He's an expert on China.  It's clear when you talk to him he is an expert on China.  And all in all, we've had a good start to this important trip.
And we want to welcome you again, Kevin, to the White House.  The podium's yours.
PM: Thank you very much, George.  And it's a pleasure to be here in Washington and with my wife Therese.  And it's great to be here at the White House.  And thanks for your hospitality and having us at Blair House.  We really appreciate that.
Our alliance doesn't simply reflect our shared past.  Our alliance defines our common future as two of the world's great democracies.  I was thinking about this this morning, about the number of President's and Prime Ministers who have been party to this alliance, both Republican and Democrat, and both, in our country, Labor and Liberal. This alliance has been supported by 12 American Presidents, Republican and Democrat.  It's been supported by 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Labor and Liberal, and I'm the 14th.  
And I'm confident that this alliance has a strong, robust future. And the reason I'm confident of that is because it's rooted in shared values.  We actually take the ideal of democracy seriously.  It's not a casual thought.  It's not, just not a passing observation. It's something which is part and parcel of who we are as peoples.  So when you have an alliance which is rooted in a common set of values, it tends to mean that alliance is going to last for a bit.  And there's the things we've done together, right from the Second World War to the present, and there's been many of them.  And we've been in the field together, and there are many other areas in wider foreign policy where we cooperate as well.  
Turning to the future, the President indicated we discussed the current challenges facing the global economy, and this is, for us in Australia, a global challenge.  Obviously, the United States, as the world's largest economy, is fundamentally significant to the way in which this thing plays out.  But our response -- and we discussed this at some length -- is looking at how we can get some better transparency out there in financial markets on some of these particular products which are causing problems around the world. There's an upcoming meeting of the International Monetary Fund, and we'll be working on our common positions towards that end.  
As the President's just indicated, we also spoke about the Doha Round.  My own view is that if ever the global economy needs a psychological injection of some confidence in the arm, it's now, and that can be delivered by a positive outcome on Doha.  It takes more than two to tango.  It takes a lot of people to tango when it comes to the Doha Round, a combination of ourselves in the Cairns Group, the United States, the Europeans, Brazil, India, others.  But what we have agreed -- again, as strong, long-term supporters of free trade around the world as one of the best drivers of global economic growth -- is to work very closely together in the months ahead to try and get a good, positive outcome for Doha -- good for our economy, good for the American economy, good for the global economy.  
On foreign policy, the President and I also discussed, of course, Iraq and Afghanistan. I thank him for his remarks in relation to Iraq.  And what he said is absolutely right in terms of my discussions with Prime Minister Maliki in Baghdad early in December.
We have confirmed today to the President, as we'll be confirming to the government of Iraq in Baghdad, an assistance package of some $165 million, a large slice of which will go to how we assist Iraqis, train their people better in agriculture and in the wider economy.  Prime Minister Maliki said this is a big need for us.  We are a dry continent.  We know a fair bit about dry land farming.  So we'll be spending a lot of money training a lot of Iraqi farmers and agricultural scientists in the year ahead.
On Afghanistan, I confirmed to the President that we're in Afghanistan for the long haul.  It's -- it's a tough fight, but we intend to be there with our friends and partners and allies for the long haul.  And I look forward to being with the President at Bucharest soon, so we arrive at a common civil and military strategy with our friends and partners in Europe and elsewhere. 
On the other matters which were raised in our discussions, the President has run through them neatly.  I won't elaborate on them. But I'll just conclude with this.  It was reminding for me when I saw the guest book this morning at Blair House.  And one of the first entries back in 1944 was a page dedicated to the visit by Labor Prime Minister John Curtin to Blair House.  FDR was president of the United States at the time.  It goes back to remind me how much this alliance has been the product of common nurturing by Presidents and Prime Ministers for a long time.
Mr. President, you said that you had a warm regard for me because, from a Texan point of view, you found me to be a reasonably straight shooter.  I therefore designate you as an honorary Queenslander.  (Laughter.)  
In the great state of Australia, I come from the great state of Queensland.  It may surprise you that it's bigger than Texas.  (Laughter.)
PRESIDENT BUSH:Yeah.
PM:But can I say
PRESIDENT BUSH:Yeah.  (Laughter.)
PM: But can I say quickly -- (Laughter)
PRESIDENT BUSH:Can you recover nicely -- (Laughter.)
PM: The recovery point is this:  Queenslanders and Texans have a lot in common (Laughter) and they get on well.  And so from one Queenslander to one Texan, one Australian to one American, I appreciate the relationship that we are forming, part and parcel to the relationship between two great democracies.
PRESIDENT BUSH: Thank you.
A couple of questions a side.  John Yang.
JOUNALIST:Mr. President, thank you very much.  I'd like to ask you about Iraq -- thank you.  Yesterday, in Dayton, in your remarks you said that the Iraqi offensive against criminals in and militants in Basra was a sign of progress.  But it's also triggered clashes with supporters of Muqtada al-Sadr.  And this morning, U.S. forces were again fighting the Mahdi Army in Sadr City.  What does this say about progress in terms of reconciliation in Iraq among the various factions?  And what can the United States do, what can you do, what can your administration do to help Prime Minister Maliki make progress in that area?
And Mr. Prime Minister, if I could ask you, when you're in Bucharest next week at the NATO summit, what's going to be your message to the European allies to try to bring them along to have the same sort of commitment you just stated here and a commitment to have military operations with their forces in Afghanistan?
PRESIDENT BUSH: Yeah.  John, any government that presumes to represent, you know, the majority of people must confront criminal elements or people who think they can live outside the law.  And that's what's taking place in Basra and in other parts of Iraq.  I would say this is a defining moment in the history of a free Iraq. There have been other defining moments up to now, but this is a defining moment as well.  The decision to move troops -- Iraqi troops into Basra talks about Prime Minister Maliki's leadership.  
And one of the early questions I had to the Prime Minister was, would he be willing to confront criminal elements, whether they be Shi'a or Sunni?  Would he, in representing people who want to live in peace, be willing to use force necessary to bring to justice those who, you know, take advantage of a vacuum, or those who murder the innocent?  His answer was, "Yes, sir, I will."  And I said, "We'll (sic) have our support if that's the case, if you believe in even- handed justice."  
And his decision to move into Basra shows even-handed justice, shows he's willing to go after those who believe they're outside the law.
This is a test and a moment for the Iraqi government, which strongly has supported Prime Minister Maliki's actions.  And it is an interesting moment for the people of Iraq because in order for this democracy to survive, they must have confidence in their government's ability to protect them and to be even-handed.
And so -- the other thing that's interesting about this, by the way, this happens to be one of the provinces where the Iraqs are in the lead -- Iraqis are in the lead.  And that's what they are in this instance.  And the United States, of course we'll provide them help if they ask for it and if they need it.  But they are in the lead.  And this is a good test for them.  And of course, routing out these folks who have burrowed in society, who take advantage of, you know, the ability to be criminals or the ability to intimidate citizens, is going to take a while.  But it is a necessary part of the development of a free society.
PM: In answer to your question on Afghanistan, the message I would take to our friends and partners in Europe when we get to  Bucharest is, all of us have got to share the burden, and that it's built on an assumption that all of us share a common strategy. So the first message, I think, for all of our friends and partners there in Bucharest is we need to sign up to a common script, both military and civil, in terms of how we actually prosecute and succeed in this conflict.  And I believe we can.  No point being there unless you believe you can.
And then the second thing is, once you've signed up to a common script, a common strategy, which has both civilian and military dimensions to it in an integrated fashion, to then say to all of our friends and partners let's all step up to the plate to make this work, and across the country of Afghanistan, not just in parts of it.
I'm optimistic that we're going to make some progress in Bucharest.  I know the President has put in a lot of effort with a lot of European leaders up until now.  We've been talking to some ourselves.  And I think we should look forward to a good outcome, because the people of Afghanistan deserve a good outcome.
If I could ask Mark Kenny for his question.
JOURNALIST: Mark Kenny from the Advertiser.  Mr. President, both sides have stressed that the alliance is in perfect working order, in good nick.  But how can that be the case?  How can the alliance remain unchanged, given that Australia has signalled new foreign policy, with quite different positions from yours on things like Iraq, climate change and potentially over China?
PRESIDENT BUSH: I guess it depends if you're a half-glass empty guy or a half-glass full guy.  It sounds like, to me, our foreign policy interests are aligned.  You know, after all, we've committed to an international agreement that will be effective when it comes to greenhouse gases.  The prime minister just defined his desire to help this young democracy in Iraq succeed.  That's -- that's what we're for.  
So I don't see differences when it comes to foreign policy. As a matter of fact, I see common agreement.  And one reason why is -- is because we share the same values.  And those values are more important than the people who actually occupy the office, by the way. Those are the values that allowed 12 U.S. presidents and 14 Australian prime ministers to be -- to be united in common goals.  And so I -- I disagree with the assessment of whatever expert laid that out. 
Stephen Lee?
JOURNALIST: Thank you, Mr. President.  I wonder if you could talk a little bit more about Iraq and how -- you mentioned criminal elements that are being fought against now.  How concerned are you that the violence now reflects in fact a deepening political and civil, even ethnic conflict inside of Iraq?  How much now are American forces being drawn into the fighting in the last few hours, even?  And how is it going to affect your decision looming on the way ahead?  And if I could ask you both, please, to talk a little bit about the crackdown in Tibet and how you see that affecting our relations in China.  Thank you.
PRESIDENT BUSH: Okay.  Any other subjects you want to wedge in there?  (Laughter.)
Okay.  Repeat some of those things.  He had about five different things.  We're getting old, Stephen.  
Wait a minute.  Look, I -- yes, I've talked about criminal elements.  And one of those things that's been well-known is that Basra has been a place where criminality has thrived.  You know, it's a port; a lot of goods and services go through there. And there was a -- from the beginning of liberation, there have been criminal elements that have had a pretty free hand in Basra.  And it was just a matter of time before the government was going to have to deal with it.  
And you know, I haven't spoke to the prime minister since he's made his decision, but I suspect that he would say, "Look, the citizens down there just got sick and tired of this kind of behavior." You know, most people want to have normal lives.  Most people don't like to be shaken down.  You know, most mothers want their children to go to school peacefully, and yet that wasn't the case in Basra.  
And so, you know, I'm not exactly sure what triggered the Prime Minister's response.  I don't know if it was one phone call.  I don't know what, you know, whether or not the -- you know, the local mayor called him and said, "Help!  We're sick and tired of dealing with these folks."  But nevertheless he made the decision to move.  
And we'll help him, but this was his decision.  It was his military planning.  It was his causing the troops to go from point A to point B.  And it's exactly what, you know, a lot of folks here in America were wondering whether or not Iraq would ever be able to do in the first place.  And it's happening.
Now, they're fighting some pretty tough characters, people who kill innocent people to achieve objectives.  And yes, there's going to be violence.  And that's sad.  But this situation needed to be dealt with.  And it's now being dealt with, just like we're dealing with the situation up in Mosul.  
I have said in my remarks there's been substantial progress, and there has been, but it's still a dangerous, fragile situation in Iraq. And therefore, my decision will be based upon the recommendations of Secretary Gates, the Joint Chiefs, as well as General Petraeus and Ambassador Crocker, all aiming to make sure that we have enough of a presence to make sure that we're successful in Iraq.  
And the reason why it's successful -- important to be successful in Iraq, because, one, we want to help establish a democracy in the heart of the Middle East, the most volatile region in the world; two, we want to send a clear message to Iran that they're not going to be able to, you know, have their way with nations in the Middle East; three, that we want to make it clear that we can defeat al Qaeda.  Al Qaeda made a stand in Iraq.  They're the ones who said this is the place where the war will, you know, take place.  And a defeat of al Qaeda will be a major victory in this war against extremists and radicals.
Four, we want to show what's possible to people.  There are reformers all over the Middle East who want to know whether or not the United States and friends will stand with these young democracies.  
And so this is vital for our national interests.  
And I'm -- I'm confident we can succeed, unless we lose our nerve, unless we allow politics to get in the way of -- of making the necessary decisions, which I have vowed to our military and our civilians in Iraq that that's not going to be the case, so long as I am the president.
And I'm -- as I told you, this is a defining moment, and it's a moment of -- you know, where the government is acting.  And it's going to take a while for them to deal with these elements.  But they're after it, and that's what's positive. 
Tibet -- he wants to talk to you about Tibet.  (Laughter.)
PM: I'll say one or two things about Tibet. It's absolutely clear that there are human rights abuses in Tibet.  That's clear-cut.  We need to be up front and absolutely straight about what's going on, shouldn't shilly-shally about it.  We've made our positions clear on the public record -- the Australian government has -- about the need for restraint in the handling of this.  I think it would be appropriate for the Chinese government to engage the Dalai Lama or his representatives in a informal set of discussions about future possibilities when it comes to internal arrangements within Tibet.  We recognize China's sovereignty over Tibet.  But it is difficult, and it's complex, and it certainly will be matters which I'll be raising when I visit China myself at the end of this visit abroad.
PRESIDENT BUSH: Just -- Mr. Prime Minister, excuse me.  Stephen Lee is anxious on my view on Tibet.  And couldn't have said it better, and that's exactly what I told Hu Jintao a couple of days ago:  that it's in his country's interest that he sit down again with representatives of the Dalai Lama, he -- not personally, but to have -- have representatives do so -- and that we urged restraint.  And I appreciate the Prime Minister's view and advice on dealing with this issue.  
PM:Paul Bongiorno.
JOURNALIST: Paul Bongiorno with Ten News. Mr. President, as you noted, Australia will begin withdrawing 500 combat troops from southern Iraq, and I heard that you accept this decision, which did, as you say, play out in our election.  But how does it fit with your view, expressed quite strongly again yesterday, that to withdraw troops at this time would be to retreat? And you've described our former prime minister as a man of steel.  I'm wondering how you'd describe Mr. Rudd.
PRESIDENT BUSH:Hm.  Fine lad, fine lad.  
First of all, I -- I didn't exactly say that.  And by the way, we are withdrawing troops. It's called return on success. And our intention is to pull down five -- five battalions by July. Troops are coming out -- five brigades.  Excuse me.  Troops are coming out, because we're successful.  And so I would view the Australian decision as return on success, returning home on success.  
That's fundamentally different from saying:  Well, it's just too hard.  Pull them all out. That sends a different signal.  This is a signal in which we're working collaboratively with the Iraqi government.  They know our intentions, and they know we're not going to leave them.  In the very same speech, I talk about developing a long-term strategic relationship with Iraq as well.  And for those who didn't listen to the full speech, I'll remind you that it's in our interest that we enter into such an arrangement.  But a long-term strategic arrangement does not commit any future president to any troop level, nor does it talk about permanent bases.  But it does talk about a joint strategic relationship to make sure that the Iraqi people know and the Iraqi government knows that we're not going to leave them in the lurch.  
And so we are taking troops out, just like the Australians are, because we're being successful.  And his question -- Stephen Lee's question was, well, are you going to bring any further out, not are you going to bring any, are you going to bring any further troops out from that which we committed to do earlier.  And the answer is, it depends on what our commanders say and the folks in Washington say, and it compends (sic; depends) upon conditions on the ground.  His real question was, have the conditions changed such that you believe your commander's going to make a different recommendation than he might have two days ago?  And I can't answer that question.  I can only tell you what I'm going to do after -- after we get back from NATO.  
Thank you for coming.  I have enjoyed it.  
[end]


It is a great pleasure to stand here in the city that in so many ways symbolises this great country in the eyes of the world and the ties between our two countries. 
A great city which has experienced great tragedy.
A great city with the strength, determination and courage to recover from that tragedy. 
New York means a lot to Australians  -  as so many of the Australian diaspora have made their careers here making a great contribution to America, and as a result of that a great contribution to Australia. 
In recent years, Australian actors have performed in New York as well has having played famous New Yorkers on the stage and the silver screen. 
Hugh Jackman in The Boy from Oz. 
Russell Crowe as Jim Braddock in Cinderella Man.
Naomi Watts held in King Kong's paw above the Empire State Building.
There are also some historical ties between New York State, the Revolutionary War and Australian geographical landmarks.
As we know, in the critical events of 1775/1776, the Revolutionary War was a near run thing here in New York as General Washington retreated across the Hudson with the remnants of the Continental Army. 
Later in 1777 as the tide of the war turned, at the battle of Saratoga, in upstate New York one Polish-born General named Thaddeus Kosciusko played a crucial role in helping inflict a significant defeat on the British. 
Early Polish explorers in Australia named Australia's highest mountain after the self-same Kosciusko  -  a hero of the Revolutionary War and of course a hero of his native Poland. 
I'd like to thank the American Australian Association for hosting my first address on this visit abroad  -  a visit during which I will be addressing a range of economic and strategic priorities in the United States, Europe and China. 
Since its establishment in New York 60 years ago by Sir Keith Murdoch (and I acknowledge the continued support of the AAA by the Murdoch family since then), I understand that the Association has hosted every Australian Prime Minister. 
I also understand that its first dinner was in honour of the great Australian Foreign Minister, Dr H.V. Evatt when he was President of the UN General Assembly.  A photo of that dinner is on the program booklet for tonight.  
That night, “Doc” Evatt, mindful of the high concentration of Wall Street representatives in his audience remarked: “I wonder whether I can be heard above the rustle of securities”.  I think I might face the same difficulty tonight! 
I am very pleased to follow in “Doc” Evatt's footsteps because, like him, I believe that strong American global leadership and a strong and effective United Nations are critical for global stability. 
In fact I met the United Nations Secretary-General this afternoon and I told him that Australia was determined to re-invigorate its engagement with the UN. 
I also confirmed with the Secretary-General that Australia will in 2012 be seeking a seat on the UN Security Council for the term 2013-2014. 
I am very pleased to have the chance to speak tonight to Australians and friends of Australia. 
I want to talk tonight about the critical importance to Australia of a continued close relationship with the United States. 
I also want to talk tonight about the priorities of the new Australian Government, particularly how we and our economic partners approach the core challenge of economic management in a difficult global economic environment. 
The new Australian Government
The new Australian Labor Government is committed to responsible economic management and is unashamedly pro-market, pro-business and pro-globalisation.
That is our policy orientation because we believe it is in the best interests of the working families who trusted us with the responsibility of government.
We strongly support open trade, open investment and an open economy.
The last Labor Government of the 1980s and the first half of the 90s, under the leadership of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, opened the Australian economy to the world  -  deregulating financial services, aviation, telecommunications and other markets, and removing tariff protection.
 The Government that I lead stands proudly in that tradition.
We are a reformist, outward-focused and future-oriented government.
The Government's mission is to build a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
For the economy, that means building a globally competitive Australia capable of carving out a future in a highly competitive world.
The Government was elected with a strong commitment to a long-term economic reform agenda, with the overall objective of lifting our productivity growth.
We are implementing a comprehensive program of reforms to our education system, ranging from early childhood services through schools and training, right through to universities and research programs.
The aim of our program is to lift productivity.
Developing our broadband infrastructure is also one of the keys to lifting our productivity.  It is a transformational technology.  It can help overcome what one of our greatest historians described as the tyranny of distance  -  both domestically in Australia and in our links with the world.
With the right broadband infrastructure businesses can deliver better services faster to more customers.  It can open up new markets and reduce the barriers to establishing a new business.  It means that people in New York and Perth can do business in real time  -  and with sufficient bandwidth.
Broadband is not the only part of our infrastructure we plan to invest in.  We need world-class infrastructure across the board to ensure we can make the most of economic opportunities  -  encouraging nationally consistent public-private partnership regulatory frameworks.
Another element of our productivity agenda is removing the duplication that exists between Australia's national government and the governments of individual states.
Since coming to office in early December, the Government has revived the Council of Australian Governments.  We have turned this once fractious body into a mechanism through which Federal and State government leaders can meet and work together on common challenges.
Just before I left Australia, the Commonwealth reached an historic agreement with the States to restructure our $70 billion financial support for them by broadbanding 90 separate grants down to five  -  each with performance based grants based on measurable outcomes.
A second key element to our economic strategy is lifting the workforce participation rate by increasing incentive.
To do this we will embark on long-term tax and welfare reform to encourage more people into the workforce.
We have already legislated significant tax cuts for this year's budget.
Our long-term plan (subject to economic circumstances) is to flatten the tax structure over the next six years. 
Our long-term aim is to reduce the number of personal income tax rates from four to three, with a top rate of 40 per cent.
We recognise that reducing taxes provides an incentive for people to enter and remain in the work force.
As the baby boom generation retires, workforce participation will become more important as a driver of long-term economic growth.
The third element of our strategy is population.  With a lower birth rate, we need to do more to help people with young children  -  making workplace laws more family friendly, improving access to childcare and conducting a proper examination of paid maternity leave.
To complement this, we will also maintain a significant skilled migration program that can respond to skills needs in specific areas.
I believe in a big Australia.  That's why immigration tailored to the economic circumstances of the day is important.  It also keeps a country young.
Innovation is also critical to enhance our global competitiveness in the industries of the future.
The development of Australia's financial services sector shows that world-class industries can emerge given the right policy settings  -  and it is worth reflecting for a moment on the global comparative advantages Australia's financial services sector exhibits.
First, the Australian financial sector has one of the soundest regulatory frameworks in the world.
Second, Australia lies in the same time zone as the East Asian hemisphere.  Australia has strong institutional (and, increasingly, linguistic) linkages to financial markets across our region given the increasing number of Australian professionals capable of operating in the principal languages of Asia.
Third, the market capitalisation of the Australian Stock Exchange at more than one trillion US dollars is about three times bigger than Singapore and around half that of the Hang Seng.
Fourth, our funds management industry is the fourth-largest in the world with $1.3 trillion under management courtesy of the superannuation policy reforms of the 1990s by the previous Labor Government.
Fifth, the new Australian Government, consistent with its pre-election commitment, has decided to halve the withholding tax on distributions to non-resident investors in Australian managed funds to 15 per cent, making it much more competitive with comparable tax regimes elsewhere.
Finally, just today, following a meeting with the Chairman of the US Securities and Exchanges Commission, we announced our intention to produce an agreement by year's end for mutual recognition between Australian and US securities regulatory regimes to enhance capital flows between the two economies  -  a global first for both the SEC and its Australian equivalent ASIC.
The future will also see great opportunities emerging in the clean and green energy sector.
As we move to meet the challenge of climate change, innovations that reduce energy consumption and reduce greenhouse gas emissions will be crucial.
Technology like post-combustion capture and storage will be an essential part of the response to climate change.
We can only make the transition to a low carbon economy by developing technological responses to problems.
Other high-tech sectors will be crucial too.  In bio-technology and the life sciences we are fostering innovation.  Australia has a strong record in the medical sciences and our pharmaceutical exports have been growing strongly in recent years  -  averaging 20 per cent per year.  We have a very strong foundation for the bio-technology sector to grow strongly.
These new economy sectors require a highly-skilled workforce.  Supported by new investment by the new Government, Australia's education system is delivering that.  It has also evolved into a crucial export sector for the economy.
Last year over 450,000 international students were studying in Australia.  Education is our largest services export.  It was worth more than 11 billion dollars last year.
My vision for Australia is a modern economy with the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
We will still exploit our comparative advantages in exporting energy, resources and raw materials.
But we also need new industries that can develop on the foundation of a strong skills base, the right infrastructure and the right policy environment.
Our agenda is substantial.  Its implementation will require us to call forth all of the energies and talents of the nation.
There's some pretty good Australian talent living and working in this city and I was suggesting to the President that he might cancel a few of your visas so we can get you back in the trenches at home. There's work to be done!
In mid-April the Government is convening a 2020 Summit in Canberra.  The objective is to call forth the nation's talents, energies and ideas to address Australia's critical long-term challenges  -  from the economy, through the creative arts, to Indigenous policy.
Through a non-government committee we are inviting 1000 of our young brightest and best.  If you are here in New York please lodge your submission to the Summit.
With such challenges ahead, we cannot afford to waste the talent or potential of any Australian. We are committed to an Australia in which nobody is left behind, nobody is taken for granted.  That holds true with special force for our treatment of Indigenous Australians.
On 13 February I presented an apology in parliament to those Indigenous Australians who had been taken from their families in the past.  On behalf of the Government and the parliament I said “sorry”.
I thought it was an important step to take  -  a step towards healing the hurt and a step towards a better future for Indigenous Australians.  The apology was part of a new beginning because old approaches were not working and we needed a first step towards closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
An important part of this new beginning is a commitment to closing the health, life-expectancy and education gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
In a modern and prosperous Australia, there should be no reason for these gaps to exist.
My vision for Australia's future is for a prosperous nation, and a nation where that prosperity extends to all Australians  -  and that, for example, is why I have stated that the Government's first White Paper will be on homelessness.
Our vision is to build a strong, prosperous Australia in which there is still a fair go for all.
Australia and the World
I have spoken about our agenda for the future  -  our economic and our social agenda.
We also have an active international agenda.
Our engagement with the world is about building on our relationships with partners and international institutions around the world.
It means building on our alliance with the United States.
And it means developing a creative middle power diplomacy to work with our close partners in our region and around the world on challenges like climate change, economic development and countering terrorism.
We believe that this is the rational thing to do in pursuit of our own core economic and security interests.
We also believe it is the right thing to do because Australia can be more of a force for good in the world.
US global leadership
Australia and the United States are historic allies.  Our alliance was forged in the days of the Second World War when we acted together to meet the common danger.
Since the Second World War, the United States has provided the strategic ballast to a stable international order.
In the Asia-Pacific region over the past 30 years, the United States has underwritten regional security and allowed the countries of the region to focus on economic development rather than strategic competition.  This stability has been a crucial ingredient in the region's remarkable economic growth.
The United States' global and regional role is as important today as it has ever been.
It remains central and fundamental to global stability.
Australia and the United States
My position on the role of the United States in global affairs is clear.
I see the United States as overwhelmingly a force for good in the world.
I am proud that Australia and the United States are partners.
It is a partnership that has been supported by parties of both sides in Australia and the United States.
It is an enduring alliance  -  as I said at the White House yesterday, our alliance has been supported by 12 US Presidents, both Republican and Democrat; and 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Labor and Liberal.
It is an alliance shaped by our common achievements in the past.
It is also an alliance defined by our common aspirations for the future.
Our partnership is about more than the formal agreements we have signed.  It is about shared values.  Perhaps that is why we are such natural partners.
During the Second World War, when General Douglas MacArthur was Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in the Pacific, he was based in my hometown of Brisbane.
He was also a regular visitor to The Lodge, where I now live.
In my study, MacArthur and Prime Minister Curtin planned the allied strategy to defend Australia and restore peace to the Pacific.
The strong political and military links that were forged in the dark days of the Second World War are as important to us today as they were then.
The Australia-US relationship is also about our strong economic future.
We have the Free Trade Agreement that provides a framework for ongoing development of our trade.
The United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia.
The United States is the largest destination for Australian outwards investment.
And Australia is the eighth-largest investor in the United States.
The United States is Australia's third-largest trading partner (and what is remarkable about our trade is the prominence of the services sector  -  accounting for around 43 per cent of our exports).
It is a good story of a growing services trade, and one I am keen to see develop even more.
Global Financial Markets
Just as the services trade ties us together more and more, it gives us common cause in meeting economic challenges.
I don't need to convince this audience of the gravity of the global economic challenges we now face.
The current financial crisis represents, in part, a repricing of risk following the extraordinary global credit growth of the last several years.
During this difficult time, we have shared in US concerns about the best response to the financial crisis.
It has been one of the main topics for discussion during my meetings in Washington.
Australia's financial conditions are different to those of many other countries.
The Australian economy has so far proven to be resilient, despite markedly higher interest rates and the attenuation of our own market for asset-backed securities.
We are not of course immune from events abroad.
As spreads increase, they push up the cost of finance, and lead to higher interest rates for home mortgages everywhere including for Australian families.
The crisis in financial markets is also leading to downward revisions in growth projections for the global economy.
The US economy is expected to slow markedly this year, which will see global growth slow from the strong rates of growth recorded in recent years.
And slower world growth will inevitably affect Australia.
Nonetheless, the Australian economy is relatively well placed:
     * Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence. 
     * We have a strong regulatory framework for Australia's financial markets. 
     * The Government is committed to a conservative approach to budget policy. 
     * The Government has zero net public sector debt. 
     * We have very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults. 
     * The balance sheets of our principal corporations and banks are strong.
     * Resources demand (from China and India as well as long-term partners like Japan and Korea) is holding up strongly and will into the future.
     * And the Government is not complacent about the need to push ahead with further, long-term economic reform.
For these reasons I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term economic future.
In the face of the challenge of the financial crisis, governments have to choose to hold firm, keep their nerve, and stay the course on policies that will promote stability for the present and continue to reform the economy for the future.
Openness and full engagement with the global economy has given Australia a 17-year period of sustained economic growth.
Australia's engagement with the global economy certainly presents us with challenges, but it also presents us with the responsibility to respond intelligently to those challenges.
The Government's approach involves several elements including the following:
     * We will continue to monitor liquidity needs internationally and, through the Reserve Bank of Australia, participate where appropriate in coordinated central bank action.
     * Through the Reserve Bank of Australia, we will also continue to monitor and maintain appropriate support for liquidity requirements domestically. 
     * We will continue to monitor the Australian financial system in light of the current turbulence to ensure that it remains efficient, flexible and competitive  -  including maintaining competition and choice in the Australian domestic loans market for the benefit of consumers. 
     * Our response to the global financial crisis must also involve coordinated action with our economic partners.   This is a global crisis requiring an integrated global response.
Australia has been a long-standing advocate and driver behind improvements to global standards for the financial sector through the Financial Stability Forum (FSF); the G20 and the IMF.
Through these and other mechanisms, we will work with other economies to improve international risk management systems. This must include:
     * Options for stronger international financial supervision;
     * Developing improved global standards that will underpin national regimes for transparency, crisis management and stability;
     * Strengthening the co-ordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets; and
     * Ensuring that national authorities respond effectively when specific risks are identified.
This will require efforts by us and others to work closely with the key international co-ordinating agencies, the IMF, the Basel Committee and the G20 Group on Global Credit Market Disruptions (which Australia chairs), to identify key risks and vulnerabilities and programs of reform.
These matters formed a core part of my discussions yesterday in Washington, including with the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Dr Dominique Strauss-Kahn.
In my first 24 hours in Washington, I was privileged to meet with the President and the Vice President, the National Security Advisor, the Secretaries of State, Defence and the Treasury, as well as the Chairmen of the Federal Reserve and the SEC.
It was a busy day.  But it was a rewarding day establishing good working relationships with all key members of the Administration.
Finally, we will redouble efforts to bring the Doha Round of trade negotiations to a conclusion. The successful conclusion of the Doha Trade Round would give the global economy a much needed psychological boost at a time when there is a heightened risk of protectionism. Particularly at a time when the psychology of protectionism may become acute. 
I was pleased that President Bush and I saw eye-to-eye on this point.
US leadership will be crucial to getting a result in the Doha Round  -  as will the attitude of other states in the critical months ahead.
Ladies and gentlemen, when Sir Keith Murdoch addressed the AAA in 1951 he lamented the lack of contact across the Pacific.
Today he would be reassured.
Through the efforts of AAA and countless companies, individuals and organisations, as well as governments of all persuasions in Australia and the United States over the years, our relationship is strong.
And I am confident it will become stronger.
As Prime Minister I am committed to building a relationship based not just on our shared history  -  but a relationship built equally on our common future into the 21st century.


PM: Thanks everyone.  That went Okay.  Well, the Permanent Representative, Mr Hill, and myself, have just spent the last hour with the Secretary-General of the United Nations and we have been discussing a range of matters including Australia's involvement in the United Nations overall; the question of the UN Mission in Afghanistan; the question of climate change; and the question of also the UN's operations in Darfur.  If I could just touch on each of those and then I'll happily take your questions.
I informed the Secretary-General of the United Nations today that Australia will be seeking election to the United Nations Security Council for 2013-2014.  That will be a ballot which will be held in 2012.  The reason for indicating our interest in proceeding with a candidature for the UN Security Council is that the pre-balloting processes begin very early and that's why it's important to declare Australia's intention at this stage. 
If Australia is elected to the UN Security Council at that time, it will nearly be 30 years since Australia was last on the Security Council.  We were last there in 1986.  Australia was a member of the Security Council in the 1940s, in the 1950s and then again in 1973, and then again in 1986. 
It's been a long time between drinks, and therefore the time has come to put our best foot forward and we believe that to be a fully effective member of the United Nations you need, on a regular basis, also to be an effective member of the Security Council as well.  This will be a difficult candidature because there are also two states which have put their name forward and I imagine there will also be others. 
There is no guarantee whatsoever of success of this particular bid, but I believe, very simply, if you are serious about wanting to become a non-permanent member of the Security Council you have to declare your intention and run like fury, and that's what we intend to do.
The second reason for putting our name for the UN Security Council was that the Australian Government is a strong supporter of the United Nations system.  Many people criticise the United Nations for its failings.  I believe it's important to see the cup as being half full, rather than half empty, and for people of good will to support the activities of the United Nations around the world. 
We need to enhance the United Nations activities in terms of multilateral security, multilateral economic engagement, and also in the area of social policy and human rights as well.  And on top of that, climate change and the environment.  To be fully effective in that, we have to be fully engaged with the United Nations, and that is what we intend to do.
On the question of Afghanistan, which was a subject of considerable discussions between myself and President Bush, and the Secretary of State, and the Secretary of Defense yesterday in Washington, I also discussed with the Secretary-General of the United Nations the UN Mission in Kabul. 
We want to see the United Nations Mission in Afghanistan become fully effective and fully operational as soon as possible.  There has been a recent appointment of a Norwegian diplomat to head that Mission after the difficulties which arose concerning the appointment of Paddy Ashdown. 
We want to see this Mission become fully effective and fully operational and the reason for that is that for a long-term effective strategy for Afghanistan we need to have the full integration of the civilian effort and the military effort in a coordinated strategy in order to ensure success in that theatre.  And the Secretary-General and I will again be attending the Bucharest Conference very soon, where these matters will be again discussed.
On the question of Darfur, I indicated to the United Nations Secretary-General our concern and frustration, together with that of other states, about the continued obstruction being provided by the Government of Sudan.  The people of Darfur are suffering. We need to give effect to the resolve already achieved by the United Nations to employ a force. 
The Secretary-General asked the Australian Government for some support for that force.  I have indicated that a modest level, that is a commitment of military officers up to a threshold of nine military officers, will be made available to assist with that force in Darfur.  That will be made as part of the UN contingent, which is UNAMID  -  the United Nations Assistance Mission in Darfur.  The Government of Sudan generally has not welcomed any more substantial military commitments than that from western powers.  I regard this as unfortunate but that is the reality.  Our commitment along these lines is consistent with that which has been provided by the Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of Canada, in both cases about nine military officers to assist with the overall preparation of the wider force. 
In addition, I indicated to the UN Secretary-General we would be providing a further $5 million in humanitarian assistance to the people of Darfur.  Darfur is a continuing humanitarian tragedy.  The international community has a responsibility to act.  That action is currently being frustrated still by the Government of Sudan and our Government is of the view that these matters soon need to be brought back to the UN Security Council so that the Government of Sudan can be held properly to account for its continued obstruction.
Finally on the question of climate change, the Secretary-General and I exchanged views on the difficulties which exist between now, along the Bali Road Map, through to the Copenhagen Conference, which is due at the end of next year.  The significance of the Copenhagen Conference at the end of '09 is to develop a long-term post-2012 set of arrangements for the international community on climate change including carbon targets.
The Secretary-General is concerned about delays which are now occurring in the negotiating process.  He himself has decided to convene a number of representatives of the critical host states, mainly Indonesia, Poland and Denmark, to assist in facilitating this process of bringing it to a more rapid conclusion and to achieve more substantive progress on the way through.  He's also considering the appointment of two special envoys to accelerate the climate change negotiating process.
On Australia's part, I committed ourselves to fully supporting the activities of the Secretary-General and the process under the Bali road map.  The global community has a responsibility of climate change.  There must be a global response to climate change, with all states participating, both developed and developing States, and therefore I indicated to the Secretary-General that we would be, as Australia, being fully supportive of the efforts of the United Nations to bring about a successful conclusion.  The planet's interests depend on that.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, given our arrangement with Canada and New Zealand, is it more realistic that our best chance of joining the Security Council would be 2018?
PM: Well, there's always going to be a debate about when it's the best time to run.  My view is pretty simple.  You've got to be in it to win it and have a go.  We're about to have a go, and I think 30 years is a fair enough old wait between drinks and I think it's time we actually got cracking and see what support we can get.  Remember, as I said before, there is absolutely no guarantee of success in this, but what I can say is that we absolutely guarantee to fail if you don't put your hand up.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can you outline what benefit there is to Australia being on the Security Council for two years?
PM: Yes. If you are a member of the United Nations Security Council, you are an active and direct participant in the key decision-making body of the United Nations on all security policy matters.  As you will recall, whether it was the debate over the Iraq war; whether it's the consideration of particular actions against the Government of Iran; whether it's other matters; this is the critical decision-making body of the United Nations.  Therefore, if you wish to be an effective member of the United Nations organisation, it means that you must express a regular interest in being a member of the Security Council.  All security policy matters of multilateral significance are before the Council from time to time.  Australia has an interest, therefore in being there.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, did you talk to the Secretary-General about your express desire for Australia to be more activist as a middle power state and more creative in its diplomacy?
PM: What I said to the Secretary-General was that he would find us active across a range of spheres of policy.  Our conversation ranged across climate change, security policy challenges  -  obviously in Iraq and Afghanistan, together with the humanitarian challenges in Darfur, and other areas as well concerning the actual physical organization of the United Nations.  He would have, I think, concluded from that, Australia's back in business.  We take the UN multilateral system seriously.
Remember, there are three pillars of Australia's foreign policy. Our alliance with the United States, our membership of the United Nations, and our policy of comprehensive engagement in Asia, and we are prosecuting all three.
JOURNALIST: You didn't mention East Timor, but President Ramos Horta has been quoted as being somewhat critical of both the UN Police and separately of the Australian troops, in terms of the attempt on his life.  One, was this with Mr Ban, and two, are Australian troops under UN control there and what's been learned from the events that took place?
PM: Firstly, yes, we did discuss East Timor.  I didn't run through the entire list.  We were scheduled, I think, for a half hour discussion and it ran for about an hour, so there was a lot to talk about.  It's my second meeting with the Secretary-General, in fact my third meeting with the Secretary-General.  On the question of East Timor, the United Nations expressed its appreciation for the early action by Australia in deploying further troops and further police to East Timor within 24 hours of the attempted assassination of Jose Ramos Horta and on Xanana Gusmao.
 On the particular matter which you raise, which was statements attributed to Jose Ramos Horta concerning the attempted assassination on himself, the UN already has underway its own internal investigation into the security arrangements concerning him at the time. 
I have said before, and I have said again, that I have absolute, unqualified, confidence in the absolute professionalism of all Australian military personnel associated with the events of that day, including ensuring that Jose got to hospital in order to have his life saved by a hospital which was located on the Australian military base in Dili.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister, thank you.  Welcome to you on behalf of the United Nations correspondents who are here.
PM: Thank you, good to see you.
JOURNALIST: Three quick questions?
PM: Oh, three!
JOURNALIST: For those of us who don't know or haven't been keeping track of who else has their hat in the ring for the Security Council seat that you are interested in, could you tell us that? 
And in terms of Darfur, which you dwelt a lot on, one of the things that the Secretary-General has been seeking is helicopters and attack helicopters, and I wonder whether he asked you for any and whether you had a positive response for him?
This is your third meeting with the Secretary-General. We were all looking at your comments about what you had to say about President Bush after you met him, calling him a fine lad and a straight-forward fellow, I was wondering how you would characterise your relationship and your thoughts about the Secretary-General?
PM: All right.  Gee, that's an interesting menu!  The first question is, and my understanding is and advice is that those states which have nominated for election to the UN Security Council at the same time are Finland and Luxembourg, but as I understand it, other nominations may be forthcoming. 
On the second question about Darfur, the Secretary-General today was appreciative of our offer of those nine military officers and also that commitment of humanitarian assistance support, and I think it's fair to say that the Secretary-General and his staff are fully appreciative of the constraints being imposed by the effective operational limitations being opposed by the government in Khartoum on any greater commitment by Western military powers.  That's the second point. 
On the third, which is how do I characterize the Secretary-General of the United Nations, he seems to me to be a fine bloke, a decent fellow, and I've met him before when he was Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea, prior to meeting him in his current responsibility.  Being Secretary-General of the United Nations is a very tough job.  You are ultimately at the disposal of the Member States.  Secretary-Generals are often criticized for failing to act on X, Y and Z, A, B and C. 
Actual political will, ultimately, resides in the hands of Nations States themselves and I think that should always be borne in mind for those to choose to unnecessarily attack the principal office bearers of the UN.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you say the Secretary-General is very worried about the delays in implementing the Bali road map.  How about you?  How would you characterize progress on implementing Bali in terms of us doing what we need to do in time for Copenhagen?
PM: Well, Bali, of course, was last December and we have Copenhagen scheduled for the end of next year, so there is a stretch of time ahead of us, but if you look at the absolute complexity of the Bali road map and the matters which require resolution, it's fair to say that progress across the international community is slow. 
Therefore I support the Secretary-General's statement to me of his concern about that.  I support the actions he is taking in seeking to deploy the political engagement of the heads of Government of Indonesia, Poland the Denmark to provide further impetus to getting towards a successful conclusion.  But this is also going to require the active, much more active, engagement of other member states, including the developing countries as well  -  China, India and others.  Progress so far is too slow, but we've still got time to turn the corner, but let me tell you we've got to get cracking and I think the Secretary-General is being realistic in his concerns.
JOURNALIST: How did the meeting with Ben Bernanke go?  Has it changed your outlook for the international economy and has it influenced what you want to do in terms of financial regulation and transparency?
PM: First of all, I would thank the US Administration for the range of meetings I was able to have in my first 24 hours in DC.  Apart from the President, I was pleased to be able to meet with the Vice President, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, the National Security Adviser, and then the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the Fed, and then, this morning, over coffee, with the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the SEC. 
The meeting with the Chairman of the Fed was a good, long and focused discussion.  Obviously, the matters near and dear to my own heart was: one, the extent of the challenge to global liquidity; two the extent of the challenge in terms of the global response to the adequacy of transparency arrangements across the financial institutions given the particular nature of the financial products involved and the use of these particular instruments. 
I would say that I was more than satisfied with the way in which, to date, the US Administration is cooperating with their international counterparts in developing an integrated global response to the global financial crisis.  Work being done within the Financial Stability Forum; work being done among the G7; work being done also in coordination with the IMF; work being done also in coordination with the G20; and there is a working group there that Australia also chairs.  This work will start to come to fruition over the next month or two.  This is a difficult time, but I am pleased by the extent to which the US Administration, through the Fed and through the Treasury, is working closely with its economic partners, including Australia.
JOURNALIST: So, after those discussions, what is your read on how vulnerable Australia's economy is to what's happening globally?
PM: The take-out for the Australian economy is still good.  We have, of course, limited exposure to sub-prime, we have excellent balance sheets in terms of our principal corporations and the banks themselves.  The default rate in Australia is miniscule by OECD standards.  Furthermore, we have of course Governments to committed to continued budget surpluses and top of that, we, in our own East Asian hemisphere, because of the concentration of intra-regional trade involving Japan, China, India and others, and the higher growth rates projected for a number of those economies, we have a better set of economic prospects than a number of other economies.  So, the economic message for Australia is still sound, strong and good.
JOURNALIST: I would like to defer my question to Junko Tanaka of NHK in Japan.
PM: Can you explain this conspiracy to me?
JOURNALIST: I am representing NHK in Japan and I'm based in Sydney.  I have a question about your itinerary.  One of the three pillars of your foreign policy is Asia, but you are spending only four days out of two weeks, all in China, and not a single day in Japan. 
I know that you mentioned that the Japanese Government is not concerned because you have sent already four Cabinet Members to Japan, but I've been speaking to many people both in the Government and public (inaudible) Japan and there are some concerns and uneasiness about the lack of communication between the two leaders because there hasn't been any telephone conversation between you and Prime Minister Fukuda. 
And also the overall message we're getting is you're focused on China and not very interested in Japan.  Do you think the Japanese are wrong to have that impression, or do you think there were some miscalculations on your side about Japan's reaction.
PM: I think let's put all this into a bit of context.  My predecessor, when he was Prime Minister, I think on four or five separate occasions, visited China without visiting Japan.  On four or five occasions my predecessor visiting Japan without visiting China.  It's simply the way in which visits are organised.  Secondly, it is the current intention of both our governments for me to visit Japan twice this year, and I'm looking forward very much to those visits. 
I think the other thing to say about our excellent relationship with Japan is that the Government, both in Opposition and since becoming Government has confirmed the absolute importance of the trilateral strategic dialogue that occurs between our three countries  -  Japan, the United States and Australia.  I look forward very much to our Government's continued participation in that dialogue and further more to our two upcoming visits to Japan, which I am sure will be excellent visits.
JOURNALIST: Should there have been a telephone call with the Japanese Prime Minister?
PM: Well these telephone calls are arranged as needs arise, and I am sure they will arise from time to time.  There are a number of foreign heads of Government with whom I've not had telephone contact and there are a number of telephone contacts scheduled ahead.  This is entirely normal.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on China, you've recently, or in recent days, you've toughened your talk on Tibet, saying it's absolutely clear there are human rights abuses.  What's convinced you in recent days that there are human rights violations by Chinese authorities and won't your comments make for some fairly awkward times when you get to Beijing?
PM: On the first point, I've said from day one there are human rights abuses. Correct me if I'm wrong but I think when this matter was first raised at a press conference in Canberra, I said let's just be, without having the transcript of what I said at the time, let's be clear about it, there are human rights abuses in China.  Anyone here (inaudible) say that, I think that's what I said. 
And secondly, therefore, on that question, I don't either my perception of what's occurring or my description of what's occurring has changed.  The truth is that we've had human rights abuses in China over time.  I have said that in the past.  At present they are particularly manifest when it comes to Tibet. 
I believe the right course of action is for the Government in China to exercise restraint.  I also, as I indicated in my remarks yesterday with the President of the United States, that it's important for the Chinese, through their intermediaries, to engage with the Dalai Lama and his intermediaries.  I think that would be a right and useful way ahead.
JOURNALIST: Have you or anyone in your government had any reaction from the Chinese Government since your comments of yesterday?
PM: I'm unaware of any such reaction, and I think I'd better zip.  That was about it, got to run.
JOURNALIST: From the other side of the world, Kosovo, that you did recognise on the second day, is being blocked in the Security Council.  As a country seeking membership of the Security Council, what would yours do on the Security Council in that regard?  You are aware of the poverty and they are looking to the membership of the international (inaudible)
PM: Well, you're right to say earlier indicated its diplomatic recognition of the Kosovo state.  The reason for that lies in the appalling recent history of the people, the poor people of that country.  I think there is a body of opinion around the world which says this is the right way to go.  I understand there are difficulties with the UN Security Council but I think our first interest would always be in terms of the fundamental rights of the people concerned and those rights have been sorely oppressed and abused in times past.  Thank you very much.
(Ends)


PM:  Listen, just a few words. Firstly, to thank the Ambassador Dennis Richardson for having us here this evening. What we have done with this gathering, and what the Ambassador has done at our request, is pull together 18 or 20 of our great Australian achievers here in the United States. 
We have people who are prominent in the arts, people who are prominent in all fields of science, physicists, we have an astronaut, and we also have people who are very active in all forms of business and finance. 
Why we are doing this is, you know back home that we have got this 2020 Summit coming up and the idea is to pull forth the talents and energies of the nation. We have through that non-government committee put together 1000 of our best and brightest. Well, offshore we have a million Australians at any given time and here in the United States, we have a truckload of talent and here are some of them. 
What is our objective tonight? We are going to spend a couple of hours actually talking about ideas for the country's future. What we need to be doing further in terms of science and innovation, and in the sub areas of that, from cardiology through to physics and mathematics and the rest. We have just been talking about the Square Kilometre Array Telescope, business, finance, carbon trading, and as I look around the arts, and we have university administrators, what do we need to do across these various important challenges areas for the future. 
So the Government is in the ideas business and we are in the United States, we want to tap the best ideas that Australia has here in this great country. And I will just add this as a final footnote, each of these good folk have flown here I think at their own expense and their own time just to spend some time with us tonight so I thank them very much on behalf of the Government for doing so. Dennis do you wish to add?
AMBASSADOR: Thanks very much Prime Minister. I just might say that this really was initiated by the Prime Minister, when I was back in Australia in January. We were having a chat about what he might do on the visit. And he was pretty keen to link in with the Diaspora.
Just by way of background, here in the United States, somewhere between 100,000 and 130,000 Australians live and work.  And they cover the full scope of the activities that the Prime Minister was talking about. Here tonight are a small group of that Diaspora. It would have been possible to bring together another 18 people who are equally involved at the top of their profession. A mix of things brings them to the United States, opportunity, sometimes research funds, sometimes personal interest, sometimes ambition.
But tonight will be about, very much, the Prime Minister being in listening mode. He has spent the last few days, he spent Friday involved with discussing a whole range of things with the Administration. He has been talking non-stop since he has been here, involved in the full range of global matters. He is now in listening mode tonight.
PM:   Are you saying I haven't been listening so far?
AMBASSADOR: No, no, no. You have been. Absolutely. Anyway, this is very much his initiative and you are all very welcome to this lovely house. Thank you.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, there might be some other people you want to listen to you, what are the chances that you will meet with the hopefuls for the presidency  - 
PM:   Well we I think made arrangements to catch up with Senator Clinton tomorrow. As I understand it we are catching up with Senator McCain on Tuesday. And Senator Obama I understand is in Pennsylvania so I think we are making arrangements for a pretty detailed chat on the phone. So that is as I understand it but I am looking forward to that very much.
JOURNALIST:  What messages will you have for them (inaudible)
PM:   Well whoever wins this next election in the United States, Australia stands as a long term partner with America. Whether it is a Republican or a Democrat, we are partners with this country, long term future, whoever forms the next Administration in Washington. And that will be very much what I will be affirming to each of the candidates with whom I speak.
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd your push to join the United Nations Security Council has been fairly well received at home. Alexander Downer got a Cabinet estimate in 2004 that it would cost $35 million to lobby, how much do you think your (inaudible)
PM:   We are now doing that work in Canberra, on the precise strategy and we have decided to do it again from the ground up. What needs to be done step by step, right across all of the voting blocks of the United Nations. And this will be a big challenge for us right across Africa, right across Latin America and all points in between. Not to mention our friends in Europe and elsewhere.
This will be an intensive diplomatic strategy. Alex is right on this point, none of these things are inexpensive. But we believe that if Australia is to make a contribution to the world, you have got to do it in part through being active in the United Nations which means being active in the United Nations Security Council.
We haven't been a Security Council member, it's coming up for thirty years. We have got to change that which means, putting your shoulder to the wheel and having a go. That's what we intend to do.
JOURNALIST:  You got some questions yesterday about the fact that you hadn't spoken yet with the Prime Minister of Japan. Phone calls go two ways, are you a little bit surprised he hasn't phoned you?
PM:   Oh look, as I said yesterday, it is just a question of when things come up, you chat. And I am sure that as needs arise there will be conversations.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, Australia is up against South Africa to get the Square Kilometre Array (inaudible). Very good I suppose for WA and Australia if we got it. Could I get your view on what you have been told today and perhaps get Andrew Thomas to tell us about the value to Australia?
PM:   Well as we were walking out here into this very brisk evening, and hopefully it will be brisk not for you or us not for much longer. We were actually just talking about the Square Kilometre Array Telescope on the way out. This is a big project. The decision is still some time off. There are key competitors, namely ourselves and the South Africans, but this is potentially a $2.6 billion investment, funded by all countries in the world, in a huge piece of technology which would turbo charge the science in Australia. Over to you Andy.
DR ANDREW THOMAS: Yeah it would. It is extremely important actually and I think Australia is a prime contender for it for a number of reasons. It has got the economic wherewithal to do it. It's got the infrastructure you need to run that large kind of project. More than anything else, it has got a high degree of political stability that you need for running a long term project like that. And Australia, by virtue of its geographic remoteness to other regions is a very low noise area, you would call it, to use the technical jargon. So that those kinds of observations can be done with a lot more cleanliness than they might in other environments.
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible)
ANDY:   If you are undertaking a project like the Square Kilometre Array, or any high tech advance project like that, what you bring to the country is a huge investment in high tech systems, in education and higher learning. And that knowledge base that you have, which you lever with all the resources of all the other nations that are participating, now enhances your community and you develop a whole place of intellectual wealth that diffuses out into the community and enriches the community for the next 20 years or so. That's why it is very important.
PM:   Two final points as I go, just on this. One is, I regard this project of sufficient significance to Australia to have raised it yesterday with the Vice President and with the Secretary of State. This is a big project for Australia. And I am dead serious about long term investment in science in Australia. This is a big part of it.
The second thing is this. We have taken it so seriously we are also in discussions with the Government of New Zealand to in fact make sure that what goes forward, could in terms of meeting the scientific criteria, have facilities spread across the North and South Island of New Zealand as well. The way in which this technology is working is the wider geographical span, the better the capture. We are freezing, we are going in and my guests are waiting, off we go. Thank you.


It is a great pleasure to be back at Brookings.
It is always a pleasure to be at one of Washington's oldest and most distinguished think-tanks.
I would like to acknowledge John Thornton, Chairman of Brookings and Strobe Talbot, President of Brookings.
John's thoughtful contribution on China in recent editions of Foreign Affairs magazine, his direct support for the China Centre here at Brookings and his role as Visiting Professor at Qinghua University in Beijing all fall within the best traditions of contributing to American public policy debate.
Strobe Talbot of course is synonymous with scholarship on the Soviet Union of the past and the Russian Federation of the future.
Substantively speaking, these guys cover the ground between them from Petersburg to Peking  -  standing as a colossus astride the great Eurasian landmass in the great tradition of Brookingsonian expansionism!
Brookings has also been kind to me over the years in opening its doors to its rich array of scholars, researchers and public policy professionals for which I thank you.
The Australia-US Alliance
One hundred years ago this year, President Teddy Roosevelt's Great White Fleet arrived in Sydney.
Thousands stood on the harbour foreshores to catch a glimpse of 384,000 tons of white-painted steel gliding through Sydney Heads.
The American Fleet was, of course, given a warm welcome  -  not least because we Australians are always up for a party.
The British, the truth be told, were not entirely happy about this level of interest, on the part of their recently federated colonies in Australia, towards this visit by the blue water navy of their former rebellious colonies in America.
Less than a century before, of course, the British had left their own particular calling card on the city-scape of Washington in the war of 1812.
We Australians always also spot an opportunity when one comes along.
First, the Australian Government set about leveraging the Great White Fleet's visit to sway the Australian parliament to fund the building of our own Australian fleet.
And second, we then rejected London's suggestion that our fleet merely be incorporated as a squadron within the British Imperial Fleet.
And so was born the Royal Australian Navy.
And so I thank Teddy Roosevelt, the hero of San Juan Hill, for his contribution to the birth of our own Australian navy which soon will celebrate its own centenary.
US naval visits to Australia have continued ever since, in peace and in war, and your navy has always been welcome.
Our troops were soon to fight side-by-side for the first time in a World War.
In the Battle of Hamel on 4 July 1918  -  ninety years ago  -  American troops first took to the field in battle in the First World War.
And they did so under an Australian commander, General John Monash.
The foundation of our alliance came into being in 1941/1942.
When Australia faced the real threat of foreign invasion, in the words of our Prime Minister John Curtin, Australia looked “to America, free of any pangs as to our traditional links or kinship with the United Kingdom.”
In the darkest days of World War Two, Australia and the United States stood together, fought together and died together to restore peace to the Pacific.
This was a critical turning point in Australian strategic thinking.
The next step was our formal alliance.
Signed in 1951, the ANZUS Treaty remains the bedrock of Australia's strategic policy.
Since then, our alliance has been supported by 12 US Presidents  -  Republican and Democrat  -  and 13 Australian Prime Ministers  -  Labor and Liberal.
Our alliance is based on our common values.
We are robust democracies.
We are prepared when necessary to fight to defend the values for which we stand.
Our alliance is also based on our common strategic interests.
For Australia and the United States, strategic stability in the Asia-Pacific is of crucial importance  -  both now and for the future.
We are both committed to market economies in an open global economic order.
Our alliance is steeped in history. 
But it is also part of our framework for meeting the challenges of the future.
The purpose of my remarks today is to reflect on the continued importance of US global leadership; to reflect on the new Australian Government's foreign policy framework and to make some observations on how we both might engage China in the future and how we might shape together China's engagement with the global and regional architecture of the future.
US Global Leadership
My view of the United States' role in international affairs in the future is simple  -  I believe the United States is an overwhelming force for good in the world.
The US has used its political, military and economic power to provide the strategic ballast necessary to underpin the post-war global order.
The US vision for a post-World War Two international order began with the Atlantic Charter when Churchill and Roosevelt agreed that a new order should emerge from the ashes of war, based on the dual principles of political freedom and economic cooperation.
There then followed the San Francisco Conference that gave birth to the United Nations.
The Bretton Woods Conference that created the IMF, the World Bank and led to the GATT.
And then the Marshall Plan to save Europe.
We should not forget the importance of these institutions.
We should not forget that these institutions provided the framework under which the world has developed and prospered over the past six decades.
Nor should we forget that US global leadership gave rise to these institutions.
Half a century later, various of these institutions are under strain and are in need of reform  -  reform that once again must be driven by US global leadership.
In the Asia-Pacific region, this ballast has been provided in part through the US alliance system with Japan, the Republic of Korea and Australia.
This strategic stability has allowed the countries of the region to focus on economic development.
Countries have been able to focus on competing for market share rather than competing for local or regional strategic superiority.
This has allowed the Asia Pacific region to lead the world in economic development over the past three decades.
The United States has been less centrally involved in the evolution of East Asian and Asia-Pacific regional architecture.
There is no US-led NATO equivalent in the region.
We have ASEAN  -  a home-grown body that has made a remarkable contribution to establishing stable relations between the countries of South-East Asia.
We have APEC that Australia, Japan and Korea were instrumental in developing.
In the security space, we have the ASEAN Regional Forum  -  still the only body in the region that brings all the major players together to focus specifically on security issues.
More recently we have seen the emergence of other ASEAN-based bodies  -  the 10 plus 3 mechanism that began with an informal summit in 1997 and was institutionalised in 1999.
And, most recently, we have seen the East Asia Summit that crucially brings India, Australia and New Zealand into a dialogue mechanism with the countries of East Asia.
Notably, three of these bodies exclude the United States altogether  -  making it more difficult therefore for the US to engage directly in the reform of these institutions although there are other opportunities for the United State to become more directly regionally engaged.
This presents some complex challenges for the future that need to be addressed.
Australian Foreign Policy
The new Australian Government is committed to building a strong, prosperous and outward-looking Australia.
Our strategic goals are to maximise global and regional stability and ensure the global economy remains open.
Through this, we believe we can enhance our economic prospects  -  not just for Australia, but for all nations.
We approach our task as a nation that is fully committed to global engagement.
We are the 15th-largest economy in the world.
Our stock market is valued at over one trillion US dollars  -  three times the size of Singapore; and around half the size of the Hang Seng (which includes of course many mainland China-based companies); and responsible for more foreign listings each year than any other Asian bourse.
Because of superannuation policy reforms we undertook in the 1990s, we have developed a world-class funds management industry that has the world's fourth-largest pool of funds under management.
We are a major supplier of energy and resources to the major economies of North Asia  -  China, Japan and the ROK.
Our resources exports to India are growing and will continue to grow into the future.
Our military budget is the 11th largest in the world.
We have a sophisticated foreign policy establishment deeply enmeshed with the countries of Asia and the Pacific.
We are a country therefore with both global and regional interests.
In the prosecution of those interests, our foreign policy has three pillars: our alliance with the United States; our membership of the United Nations; and comprehensive engagement with the countries of Asia and the Pacific.
Some might argue that these are mutually exclusive propositions. 
I regard them as naturally reinforcing.
To prosecute them, the Government intends to deploy what I have described as “creative middle power diplomacy”  -  both globally and regionally.
This means for example that you will see Australia being more active in the global efforts to meet the challenges of climate change following our ratification of the Kyoto Protocol within a week of taking office.
This means we will be doing more to work with our partners around the world to get real progress against the Millennium Development Goals  -  particularly among the Pacific island nations.
Last month I visited Papua New Guinea and I announced that Australia would seek to develop what I call “Pacific Partnerships for Development”.
Under these agreements, Australia and our Pacific partners will set mutually agreed development outcomes.
In return, Australia will be prepared to offer more development assistance.
The strategy is to provide better assistance targeted at real progress against measures of health, education and basic economic infrastructure.
More broadly, our foreign policy intention is to prosecute a more activist foreign policy in partnership with our allies, friends and, through the UN, the wider community of nations in areas where we believe we can make a difference.
For too long, our voice has been too quiet in the wider councils of the world.
Our Alliance with the United States
The first pillar of our foreign policy is our alliance with the United States.
I am committed to deepening our strategic engagement with the United States.
Closer engagement with the United States gives us the tools to better meet the security challenges of the future  -  both regional and global.
The threat from terrorism is still alive and well.
The war in Afghanistan is a crucial front in the fight against terrorism because it was from there that the insidious attacks were orchestrated against this country nearly seven years ago.
We cannot allow Afghanistan to again become an unfettered safe haven for terrorists.
This should be a concern for leaders around the world  -  in Europe and in Asia as much as it is here in the United States.
We have a responsibility to help the people of Afghanistan build a stable future for themselves.
Published surveys have recently shown that the people of Afghanistan strongly support the US-led action in their country to rid them of the Taliban.
That is why in Bucharest I will be arguing in close cooperation with the US Administration for a more coordinated military and civilian strategy for Afghanistan.
The Australian Government is committed to Afghanistan for the long haul.
But we must have a common strategy with credible burden-sharing if we are to prevail.
Consistent with my commitment to the Australian people, we are changing the configuration of our involvement in Iraq.
Our ground combat troops will be withdrawn but our air and naval elements are remaining and we are significantly increasing our civilian aid program.
I also want to see greater practical cooperation between our militaries.
Importantly, this means making it easier for trade in defence goods between us.
I hope that the Defence Trade Cooperation Treaty will be able to pass the Senate here in Washington soon.
My vision for a closer relationship between our two countries extends beyond the realm of strategic cooperation.
We also need to expand our economic relationship.
We already have the Free Trade Agreement that provides a framework for further development of the trade relationship  -  especially in services.
I was pleased on Saturday to announce with Christopher Cox, Chairman of the SEC, that Australia and the United States would commit to developing a pilot program for mutual recognition between Australian and US securities regulatory regimes to enhance capital flows between the two economies  -  a global first for both the SEC and its Australian equivalent ASIC.
In the current climate of global financial instability, it also crucial that Australia and the United States (and our other partners around the globe) work closely together to coordinate responses.
That is occurring through both multilateral and plurilateral mechanisms like the Financial Stability Forum (FSF); the G20 and the IMF.
In my meetings on Friday with the President, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve and the Secretary of the Treasury, responding to the financial crisis was a central focus of our discussions.
We agree that the global nature of the problem demands a global response  -  based on greater global transparency.
The great thing about the Australia-US relationship is also the depth of the personal ties.
More Australians visit the United States every year than anywhere else other than New Zealand.
Nearly half a million people make the trip each year.
And about the same number visit Australia from the United States.
Later today I will be witnessing the signature of an “Open Skies” Agreement between Australia and the United States.
It is a new era in the aviation links between us that began in 1928 when Sir Charles Kingsford Smith and Charles Ulm made the first aerial crossing of the Pacific from the United States to Australia. 
Its aim is to make it easier and cheaper for even more people to make the air journey across the Pacific to add more strands to our ties.
Membership of the United Nations
A second pillar of our foreign policy is our membership of the United Nations.
The Government is also committed to increasing our engagement with the United Nations.
The United Nations and the UN Charter are central to a global rules-based order.
Australia is a foundation member of the UN. We are proud of the role we played in its establishment.
Particularly the part we played in the drafting committee for the UN charter.
We are also proud of the part we have played in UN Peacekeeping Operations over the years.
Today we have people serving in UN-led or UN approved peacekeeping operations around the world in Sudan, Sinai, Solomon Islands and East Timor.
We are currently the 12th-largest financial contributor to the UN's peacekeeping operations.
On Saturday in New York I met the UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon.
I told him that Australia was committed to reinvigorating its engagement with the United Nations.
I also told him that Australia would, in 2012, be seeking a seat on the UN Security Council for the 2013-2014 term.
I also discussed with the Secretary-General the situation in Darfur. 
I said that we wanted to see Darfur again raised in the Security Council.
The Government in Khartoum has been less than helpful to the UN and we need to do more to get an effective response underway.
A response that provides real security to the people of Darfur.
I said that Australia was committed to providing further humanitarian assistance and was considering whether we could make a modest military contribution to Darfur to supplement the police and military personnel serving already under the UN Mission in Sudan.
The world cannot simply stand idly by while the people of Darfur continue to suffer.
I also informed the Secretary-General that Australia would be increasing its official development assistance budget to a level of 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2015.
A particular focus will be working to get real progress against the Millennium Development Goals.
We are already at the half-way point on the time line established in 2000 for the MDGs.
Progress has been mixed at best.
We need to make sure that all our efforts are delivering results.
We want to be part of the global solution on poverty.
We do not want to just be intelligent and well-informed descriptors of the problems.
We want to work at a practical level with our global and regional partners to deliver real progress against these goals on which we all solemnly agreed back in 2000.
I said to the Secretary-General that Australia was ready to make a strong contribution to reforming the United Nations to make it more effective.
In this, the role of the United States is also critical.
Just as the United States drove the establishment of key international organisations, reforming those same institutions will require active US engagement.
It is the same for the WTO. 
US leadership will be crucial to getting a breakthrough so that we can get an ambitious outcome to the Doha Round of talks this year.
Other institutions also have to meet new challenges.
The IMF has a real opportunity to play a leading role in the response to the current financial crisis.
The World Bank, like the United Nations, would benefit from reform and I support the reform proposals currently being advanced by Bob Zoellick.
Engaging the Asia-Pacific Region
A third pillar of Australia's foreign policy is our engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
The aim of the new Australian Government is to develop closer bilateral and regional relations with our neighbours.
Australia has an exceptionally close relationship with New Zealand. 
This is based on common security concerns and common action in our immediate region in the South Pacific.
It is also based on the strength of our economic relationship reflected in our Closer Economic Relationship which has now operated for a quarter of a century.
Within the region, Australia has a long-standing and close friend and partner in Japan.
There is a strong economic strand to our relationship  -  Japan has been our largest export market for 40 years and Japanese investment provides many jobs in Australia, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
We also have a close and deepening strategic engagement. Bilaterally, Australia has in recent times strengthened our defence cooperation with Japan.
There is also the important trilateral element to our cooperation. The Trilateral Strategic Dialogue between Australia, Japan and the United States is an important mechanism that allows three close partners in the region to discuss the interests we share, the challenges we face and deliberate on appropriate responses to the same.
Australia also has a close relationship with the Republic of Korea.
Korea's economic rise in the 1970s and 1980s was a remarkable achievement.
This led to a close relationship between our two countries, particularly in the supply of natural resources.
Korea's global giant steel company, POSCO, is one of Australia's largest single customers.
Our relationship also has a strong military component.
Under UN forces, Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen fought in defence of South Korea in the Korean War.
Security on the Korean Peninsula remains important to us today.
I look forward to working with the new Administration of President Lee on our shared economic and strategic interests.
In South East Asia, Australia has a number of vital partners.
Indonesia is our closest ASEAN neighbour  -  and now a fellow democracy.
It is also the world's most populous Muslim nation.
Indonesia has achieved remarkable things in the past 10 years  -  it has made the transition to democracy, embarked on economic reform, and been a solid partner in the fight against terrorism. Indonesians  -  like Australians and Americans  -  know the pain of terrorist attacks on their people.
Indonesia is also a partner with us in the region.
As the biggest country in South East Asia, it plays a natural leadership role.
Bilaterally, our cooperation covers nearly every conceivable field from working against people smugglers to closer security cooperation under the recently signed Lombok Treaty.
We also work with our other friends and partners in South East Asia including Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines both bilaterally and the through the ASEAN mechanisms.
For us, close engagement with region, particularly in building an open inclusive regional architecture that can underwrite stability into the future is crucial.
Elsewhere in our region, we are witnessing the rise of India.
I want to see Australia and India develop closer relations at all levels.
I am committed to developing a broad-based relationship with India  -  political, economic as well as embracing a more substantive security dialogue.
Australia wants to see India included in regional bodies. 
India's inclusion in the East Asia Summit adds a crucial dimension to the EAS.
And we strongly support India's membership of APEC.
This question of the adequacy of our existing regional architecture given the demands of the future is also one that will require our common efforts.
China
The dynamic change-drivers in the Asia-Pacific region are clear to everyone. 
One of the biggest drivers of those changes is the economic emergence of China over the past 15 years.
China started its domestic reform and global opening process 30 years ago this year.
The first steps towards economic reform were measured.
There have been setbacks along the way.
But the results that have been achieved over the longer-term have been unmistakable.
The living standards of the Chinese people have been lifted dramatically.
In the process of developing itself and its people, China has made a critical contribution to global economic growth.
It has become a trading power and is now becoming an investment power. 
China holds nearly 500 billion US dollars worth of US Treasury bonds  -  a second only to Japan's holdings.
The economic transformation of China has seen a big shift in the personal choices available to Chinese people.
Human rights remain a real problem as demonstrated by the recent violence in Tibet  -  problems that require dialogue and restraint.
China's legal system is still developing.
It has come a long way from the turmoil of the 1970s. 
But in a globalised world where intellectual property needs protection, a full functioning, transparent and independent legal system is crucial for investor confidence.
We have to recognise that China's leaders face staggering challenges domestically.
A recent Brookings research, co-authored by my friend Jeffrey Bader, note for the upcoming Presidential election noted the scale of the challenge.
     * Per capita GDP is still only $1600.
     * The population is ageing and there are big inequalities between the coastal and western regions and between urban and rural areas.
     * Air pollution is a major problem.
     * Lack of water is a serious problem in northern China.
     * And China has to cope with moving up to 13 million people a year into urban centres  -  the biggest urbanisation movement in the history of the world.
China's leaders recognise that they cannot make progress against these significant international challenges in a hostile international environment.
So China's focus has been on stability.
In this context, the single most important element of China's foreign relations is, of course, its relationship with the United States.
Since the Nixon visit of 1972, the United States has been actively engaging China.
On Friday, in my discussions with President Bush, I commended the Administration's handling of the China relationship.
The wide range of new senior dialogue mechanisms gives Washington and Beijing channels to deal with emerging challenges before they become problems.
An important development in US policy towards China was in 2005 when then Deputy Secretary of State Bob Zoellick outlined his concept of China as a responsible global stakeholder.
His argument was that China has benefited from the current global international order  -  in both economic and security terms.
And, as a growing power, China should be more than just a passive member of the international order, it should work actively to sustain the system that has enabled its success.
Bob Zoellick's logic is powerful.
It points to the interests that China shares with other members of the international community.
China's own approach is to publicly emphasise its focus on its economic development and the priority it therefore places on a stable global order. 
China has variously articulated its approach as one of “peaceful rise”, “peaceful development” or more recently that of a “harmonious world”.
The idea of “harmony” is not new in the Chinese body politic.
In the early 1900s the Chinese thinker Kang Youwei wrote about “the great unity” or “the great harmony” and proposed a future utopian world free of political boundaries.
It is worthwhile thinking through how we might try and draw these differing concepts of “responsible stakeholder” and a “harmonious world” together.
The idea of a “harmonious world” depends on China being a participant in the world order and, along with others, acting in accordance with the rules of that order.
Otherwise, “harmony” is impossible to achieve.
Therefore, there is on the face of it a natural complementarity between the two philosophical approaches.
And a complementarity that could be developed further in the direction of some form of conceptual synthesis.
In a political and foreign policy system as large and as complex as China's, this provides a potentially useful framework to start bringing together these world-views.
Differences of course will continue  -  but common ground, where found, should be consolidated, developed and if possible built upon.
What we should consider, then, is a course of practical action that may assist in building on the complementarities already inherent in the two approaches.
Specifically:
     * We should welcome any efforts by the United States, China, Japan and others to extend the Six-Party Talks mechanism into a broader security mechanism  -  one that would later be broadened to include other countries. Given Australia's strong economic and strategic interests in North Asia, we would see ourselves as a participant in any such mechanism at the earliest opportunity. But the opportunity should be taken to advance a broader regional security mechanism that may help remove some of the brittleness that might otherwise characterise security policy relationships across what remains a strategically fragile theatre.
     * Second, the ASEAN Regional Forum may provide a mechanism to develop greater regional cooperation on humanitarian responses to natural disasters and to questions of energy security and stability of energy supply, including through open sea lanes of communication. This would provide a further institutional mechanism for engaging China constructively and non-confrontationally in some of the broader security policy challenges of the region.
     * Third, China should be encouraged to play a more active role in bringing the Doha Round of WTO talks to a successful conclusion. China as a global trading power has a vested interest in so doing.
     * Fourth, China could also be encouraged to play a more high profile role in climate change negotiations. As a major economy, China's participation in efforts to find a solution to global action on climate change will be crucial  -  as we negotiate the torturous Bali Road Map to its conclusion in Copenhagen in late 2009.
     * Finally, as China makes the transition from development assistance recipient to donor, it should be encouraged to work with other donors to develop appropriate OECD-consistent norms for development assistance delivery. Having made the transition, China's experience would be invaluable to other developing nations. For Australia, getting development assistance to the Pacific island nations on a stable footing is crucial  -  and we would be happy to partner with China in some pilot projects.
In short, we look to China to make a strong contribution to strengthening the global and regional rules-based order.
There is no simple one line answer to the question of how we should seek to engage China. 
It is a huge country, with complex global, domestic and historical currents that influence its policy decisions.
But one key is to encourage China's active participation in efforts to maintain, develop and become integrally engaged in global and regional institutions, structures and norms.
At the same time, we have to also recognise that China is rapidly increasing its military spending.
China is developing its inter-continental ballistic missile force and other shorter-range rocket forces.
China's maritime capability is also expanding.
We should not at one level be surprised that a more affluent China seeks to spend more on its military.
But China also needs to be aware that its modernisation drive does have an impact on the region. 
It is in part a question of transparency.
It is also in part a question of uncertainties concerning long-term strategic purpose.
We must remain vigilant to changing strategic terrain.
But strategic vigilance must not be allowed of itself to become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
There is nothing pre-determined about US-China conflict in the future.
We decide the future by our actions today. 
And we need to give ourselves the best chance to choose the best future.
We need to have:
     * strong regional and global institutions;
     * a China that is positively engaged in those institutions as a “responsible stakeholder” contributing to a “harmonious” global and regional order;
     * and continued good management of China-US relations by both sides.
For Australia, the single core question of whether ours will be a Pacific century rests on the long-term management of this most critical relationship.
Our predecessors in 1944/45 faced great challenges in building an international order out of the ruins of the last global war.
But out of their actions arose a stable international order built on the United Nations, Bretton Woods institutions and the continued strategic ballast provided by the United States.
That order has delivered remarkable prosperity and stability for more than half a century.
Our mission for the century ahead must be to enhance that stability and prosperity by meeting the challenges that lie now ahead head on. Rather than pretending these challenges might go away.
Australia stands ready to assist in dealing with these great challenges of the future.


When I first began talking about a visit to Washington I said I wanted to have a chance to talk directly with the business community.
I want to thank The Chamber for the opportunity to address you tonight.
Australia and the United States are intimately linked in the global economy. 
Those links go back a long way.
150 years ago, Californian gold prospectors were scurrying on to boats to Australia to be a part of the Gold Rush that opened up much of inland Australia.
In fact, one very prominent American came to Australia in the 1890s following the mining boom in Western Australia. 
President Herbert Hoover spent about a year and a half in Western Australia planning and developing mine sites.
Hoover came back to Australia a number of times on mining projects and was a pioneer in the mining industry in Broken Hill  -  the city from which our great Australian resource company BHP gets its name.
Today, a different generation of business people shuttle between Sydney, Melbourne, Perth or Brisbane and cities like New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Atlanta.
The United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia.
The United States is likewise the biggest investment market for Australian businesses. 
And you maybe surprised to learn that Australia is America's 8th-largest source of foreign direct investment.
Corporations with operations in both countries form part of the global supply chain of everything from movies to motor vehicles, and from website design to wine.
Employees in both nations report to CEOs on the other side of the Pacific.
People, ideas, capital, goods and services flow freely between our countries.
Our economic ties are one part of our relationship.
But the relationship is also about the political and strategic links we share. 
Links that are based on shared values.
And I shared vision for the future.
I want to address a number of these themes this evening concerning our common economic future at a time of growing global economic stress.
First, the strengths of the Australian economy in the face of the current global financial crisis.
Second, the global response to this crisis and especially the role we in Australia are playing in cooperation with our economic partners in promoting a coherent global response.
Third, the emergence of China as a major global economy, and the opportunities and challenges this presents to the U.S. and Australian economies.
Fourth, how increasing our commitment to freer trade through re-invigorating the Doha round is now more than ever necessary to give the global economy a real injection of confidence.
And finally, the economic importance of getting our response to climate change right.
Australia in the global economy
The global economy is facing some considerable uncertainty at present because of the global financial crisis. 
 I will talk more about our response to the crisis later in my remarks.
But I want to first explain a little about the Australian economy.
I am an absolute optimist about Australia's long-term economic prospects.
Australia's economic fundamentals are strong. 
We are now in our 17th year of continuous economic growth.
Our major corporations and our major banks are healthy, highly profitable and with balance sheets in very good order.
We are a first-rate investment destination, an active global trader and enmeshed with economic ties around the globe.
We are continuing to deepen our trading and investment links into crucial markets in Asia such as China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Australia is a major energy, food and resources exporter, but those sectors employ only five per cent of our workforce.
The vast majority of Australians work in services sectors and these sectors are becoming increasingly internationalised.
We have the largest funds management industry in Asia.
In fact it is the fourth-largest in the world.
The Australian stock market is one of the largest in the region  -  worth more than one trillion US dollars.
It is about three times the size of the Singapore market and half the size of Hong Kong's Hang Seng, where many mainland China public listings occur.
The Australian Stock Exchange is also hosting the largest number of foreign listings in Asia. 
And in all this we are supported by a skilled workforce with considerable international exposure and particular experience in the Asia-Pacific region.
Nearly 23 per cent of Australians were born overseas.
Just over 40 per cent of Australians have a parent born overseas.
And Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese) is now the second most spoken language in Australia after English.
The mission of the Government that I lead is, in short, to build a modern Australia  -  one that is ready to tackle the challenges and seize the opportunities of the 21st century.
Our task is to look ahead and to prepare our people, our institutions, our education systems and our infrastructure for the challenges of tomorrow.
The Government that I lead does not believe we can retreat from change.
The new Australian Labor Government is committed to responsible economic management and is unashamedly pro-market, pro-business and pro-globalisation.
We do not believe it's in the interests of our people to pull back from full participation in the global economy.
There will be no retreat into protectionism  - notwithstanding the rise in protectionist sentiment elsewhere in the world.
The long-term economic priority of the Government that I lead is to lift long-term productivity growth.
Higher productivity and higher levels of workforce participation deliver stronger, non-inflationary economic growth and increased employment for working families.
The Government's productivity agenda shapes our priorities for an education revolution from early childhood through to schools, training, universities and research.
The productivity agenda includes working with the private sector to build advanced infrastructure such as a high-speed national broadband network  -  critical for Australia to overcome the tyranny of distance.
It also means improving the operation of government between the Federal and State levels  -  an area where we achieved some historic changes last week when we began overhauling the entire financial relationship between the Federal and State governments in Australia.
The Government is also currently reviewing Australia's national innovation system.
Our goal is to foster greater investment in research and development and build a stronger culture of innovation as a platform for enhancing our global competitiveness.
We are doing this because we realise that in a globalised world it is our human, physical and intellectual capital that forms the basis of our enduring global competitiveness.
The global financial crisis and Australia's response
There are at present powerful cross-currents running through the world economy. 
The current global financial crisis represents a significant risk to the prospects for growth of many economies. 
In contrast, emerging market economies such as China and India are continuing to grow strongly.
In doing so they are dramatically expanding the supply capacity of the global economy while stimulating demand for commodities.
We are acutely aware of these cross-currents in Australia.
Our businesses and households are facing higher interest rates  -  in part, reflecting the higher global costs of borrowing.
This is happening while Australia's mining sector and banking sector continue to enjoy strong profits.
I don't need to convince this audience of the gravity of the global financial crisis which began in the US housing industry and home mortgage market, and has now spread through other security markets, equity markets and onto the real economy.
The current financial crisis largely represents a repricing of risk following the extraordinary global credit growth of the past few years.
This credit growth was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low interest rates and rapid increases in asset prices (especially the housing and share markets).
These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap by historical standards.
Many investors began to accept higher risks and lower returns.
The flow of cheap credit saw lending extended without sufficient attention to risk.
The specific problem in the sub-prime mortgage market spread all the more rapidly because advances in financial engineering were rather more rapid than the increase in the market's ability to understand the risks associated with many new products based on asset-backed paper.
As liquidity dried up, the credit crunch in the sub-prime market evolved into a general tightening of credit across markets and across financial products.
Because the extent or distribution of these risks is not fully known, there has been less willingness to lend  -  the previous market complacency with risk has been replaced by total risk aversion.
During my time here in the US, I have spoken at length about these challenges with President Bush, the Secretary of the US Treasury, the Managing Director of the IMF, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and the Chairman of the SEC.
In these meetings, I have outlined how Australia will contribute to what must be a global response by our national regulators to a global financial crisis.
As financial markets become more global and assets are traded more rapidly between nations, so too must regulation and supervision become more global.
But without crushing the capacity of markets themselves to respond flexibly to new opportunities in the future.
Australia is a long-standing advocate and driver of improvements to global standards for the financial sector. 
To improve international risk management systems, our global response should include: 
     * Options for stronger international financial supervision;
     * The development of improved global standards to underpin national regimes for transparency, crisis management and stability;
     *  Strengthening the co-ordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets; and
     *  Ensuring that national authorities respond effectively when specific risks are identified.
This requires us and others to work closely with the key international co-ordinating agencies, the Financial Stability Forum, the IMF, the Basel Committee, the G-20 and others, to identify key risks and vulnerabilities and programs of reform.
Australia is an active participant in many of these international efforts.
Australia is chairing the G20 Study Group on Global Credit Market Disruptions examining the causes of the recent credit market transactions and international transmission mechanisms.
The Reserve Bank of Australia is contributing to the work of the Financial Stability Forum.
This important forum comprised of 12 countries with significant financial markets and key international financial institutions, met in Rome just two days ago.
The FSF will soon report to G7 Finance Ministers on a range of regulatory and private-sector actions to strengthen the resilience of the global financial system.
Their report will identify the key weaknesses underlying the turmoil and recommend responses to enhance market and institutional resilience.
The report will also set out policy recommendations in the areas of: prudential oversight of capital; liquidity and risk management; transparency; disclosure and valuation practices; credit ratings; and authorities' responsiveness to stresses in the financial system.
The Chair of the FSF will present key conclusions to the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) on 12 April 2008. 
The Australian Treasurer, Wayne Swan, will be attending this IMF meeting to reinforce our message about the importance of developing an effective global response to the financial crisis.
Today, the US Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, released recommendations for a stronger regulatory system for the US financial sector.
He outlined the US Treasury's objectives-based approach to address particular market failures by focusing on three goals: market stability; prudential financial regulation; and business conduct regulation.
I welcome the Treasury Secretary's review as an important part of the US response to the global financial crisis.
We will be examining these recommendations closely as we progress our approach to the global crisis.
The Australian Government believes we must be an active participant in a coherent global economic response.
China in the Global Economy
I mentioned earlier that the cross-currents in the global economy are keenly felt in Australia.
And one of the biggest currents that we feel is from the economic rise of China.
There is little doubt that what we are witnessing in the rise of China is a major historical change.
China's impact on the global economy has been significant in recent years. 
Never before has such a large economy grown so quickly, with the possible exception of late 19th century, early 20th century America. 
In a globalised world, the impact of China's growth is felt everywhere.
This growth has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in China. 
It has helped to provide stability in China as it seeks to manage internal challenges like the rapid pace of urbanisation, widening income gaps between its urban and rural populations together with a raft of growing environmental challenges.
In the process of growing its own economy, China has also helped to drive global growth. 
Last year, in purchasing power parity terms, it contributed over one-quarter of global growth according to IMF calculations.
China's low-cost manufacturing capacity has provided the world with cheaper consumer goods and cheaper inputs into business. 
This has helped to keep inflation down in the United States, Australia and other economies.
It has also raised the living standards of people in advanced economies like our own.
In Australia, we have felt the force of China's growth. 
China needs fuel and raw materials to drive its growth and Australia has helped to supply them. 
The value of our minerals exports alone to China has grown five fold in five years.
But it is not just about the headline figures for resources trade. 
China is now our top market for education exports  -  over 100,000 Chinese students enrolled in Australia last year.
4,200 Australian businesses export to China.
More than 3,000 businesses are active within China.
In the face of financial instability, the economic benefits of a growing China have to be recognised.
The United States too is benefiting from economic growth in China.
China is the US' third largest goods export market and its fastest growing export market.
US investors are also benefiting from their engagement with China.
While I understand the political sensitivities in the United States about the downside impact of China's economic rise, it's also important to be reminded of the upside as well.
WTO
In the face of global difficulties, it is important that the world accelerates the momentum for the drivers of global economic activity.
A crucial element of that is keeping up the momentum for freer world trade.
We salute the leadership role that the United States has played over the years in establishing the global rules-based trading system.
The raft of agreements which are now together overseen by members of the World Trade Organisation have unblocked barriers to trade, provided new certainty for businesses and investors, and have been an important driver of economic globalisation. 
As a result of this system, countries around the globe, both developed and developing, have been able to sell their goods to others, and we have all been able to access cheaper goods.
Both producers and consumers around the globe have benefited and poverty levels have reduced.
In days of economic difficulty, we need to remind ourselves that it is all the more important to collaborate effectively to ensure that trade can flow freely  -   unencumbered by artificial barriers constructed by government which ultimately damage working families through higher consumer prices.
Tonight I would like particularly to emphasise the importance of pushing together for an ambitious conclusion to the Doha Round.
The negotiations are at a critical stage.
Over the past six weeks, there has been some encouraging progress in the Doha Round in the core areas of agriculture, industrial products and services.
We need to lock in the shape of the deal as soon as possible. 
This needs to happen soon, in the next four to five weeks, for the Round to conclude by the end of the year. 
We believe that not only is this do-able, but it is really our best chance at giving the global economy a psychological shot in the arm.
Political dynamics in the US, the EU and other countries means that failure to conclude a deal this year may see the Round going into cold storage for several years.
This would be to no one's benefit and would seriously undermine the global trading system.  The moment is now! 
I have discussed the WTO in my meetings here. 
I am very encouraged by the strength of President Bush's commitment to concluding the Doha Round. 
It is important that the Congress back the President's commitment.
US leadership is critical.
But so too is leadership and preparedness to move on the part of the other principals to the Round.
We also agreed that the deal needs to be an ambitious one, not a nominal one  -  one that can make a real difference to trade flows. 
What this means of course, is that every WTO member must step forward with an offer that makes the Doha Round outcome worthwhile. 
The time of gamesmanship is over  -  the stakes are too high.
Climate Change
When discussing the future economic terrain, you cannot ignore one other critical matter  -  climate change.
Climate change is the great moral and economic challenge of our time. 
And it requires a combination of effective domestic and global action.
Domestically, Australia has committed to introducing an emissions trading scheme by 2010.
We have also committed to a long-term target of reducing our carbon emissions by 60 per cent over 2000 levels by 2050. 
Globally, the change that we must achieve over coming decades in response to the climate threat is as great in scale as the Industrial Revolution.
We must move to a low carbon economy.
That will mean a profound shift in the Australian economy and in the global economy. 
We will have to make that shift in a way that maintains our competitiveness.  That is why we need a global approach to climate change.
Australia is the world's largest exporter of coal.  For us, developing clean coal technology is a crucial part of our response to climate change.
That's why we're investing in accelerating the development and deployment of these technologies  -  the Government working with the private sector to find commercially viable solutions to climate change.
The low carbon revolution will also open up new opportunities in new sectors.
Already Australian businesses are building wind farms in China, licensing solar power technologies around the world and leading research in geothermal and wave energy.
Global arrangements need to support and encourage the trade in clean and green technology.
The other crucial element to meeting the challenges of climate change is establishing an effective international framework. 
The first act of the new Australian Government was to sign the papers to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. 
We did this because we believe that Australia  -  like all nations  -  has to play its part to find the global solution.  And the best way to do that is by being part of the process.
The road map to a new climate change agreement that we agreed to in Bali in December will need to be closely followed.
In my discussions with the US Administration over the past few days I have stressed that Australia is committed to working closely with the United States to find a way forward on climate change.
Once again, the world needs US leadership.
Over 50 years ago and in the midst of the Second World War, under the leadership of Labor Prime Minister John Curtin, Australia's relationship with the rest of the world began to shift.
Australia became more outwardly focused and took the first steps in reinventing itself as modern economy.
This is a great legacy.
It drives us to seek global responses to global challenges.
My visit here has come at a turbulent time for the global economy. 
How we can best respond to the situation has been a focus of my discussions with business and government figures here.
As have the challenges of climate change and world trade.
There is no doubt these are big challenges.
However, I am an absolute optimist about our ability to meet these challenges just as I am an absolute optimist about Australia's long-term future.
More than that, I am an absolute optimist about our ability to seize the opportunities of the future.
But we must work together to seek coherent global solutions.
To do that, Australia will engage directly and actively with our partners around the world.
One of the most important partners for us is the United States. 
I am committed to keeping that partnership strong.
Together we can seize the opportunities and confront the challenges that will face our economies in the future, just as we have in the past.


JULIA GILLARD: Ok, can I thank everybody for attending today and can I say we're here to take a step forward in solving what has been a 66 year mystery. Of course, the greatest mystery in Australian maritime history is what happened to the HMAS Sydney. I think all Australians watched with a sense of intrigue when the wreck of the Sydney was found. And for many Australians, the families and loved ones of the brave service personnel who lost their lives when the Sydney was lost, it was a time for reflection and for sadness. Finding the wreck and solving the mystery go together, but solving the mystery requires more. It requires us to now enquire into the circumstances of the loss of the Sydney and to try for all time to solve this mystery, to solve this riddle, to give the Australian nation an answer as to what happened to the Sydney. And, importantly, give the loved ones of those whose lives were lost an answer as to what happened when their loved ones were lost on that fateful day.
So today I'm here with the Chief of the Defence Force (Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston) and with the Chief of Navy (Vice Admiral Russ Shalders) to announce that there will be a commission of inquiry into the loss of the Sydney. The Prime Minister foreshadowed this and today we announce that commission of inquiry. It will be headed by His Honour, Mr Terence Cole. Mr Cole has been selected because he's an expert in maritime law; he has also served as the Deputy Judge Advocate General of the Australian Defence Force. He will sit as the inquiry by himself. He will sit alone. The inquiry will be conducted in Sydney and ultimately he will report to the Chief of the Defence Force on his findings.
This is going to be an extensive and complicated inquiry. There are documents that travel across 23 kilometres of shelf space that must be worked through in the course of this inquiry, because they all pertain to the Sydney, and may include information that is relevant to the inquiry. So it will take some time. But it's a task that is worth doing because we do want answers to this very longstanding mystery.
Can I take opportunity to offer my words of praise to the Chief of the Defence Force for organising this commission of inquiry; I think it is an important step to getting the answers that the nation has sought and has wanted to hear for 66 long years.
I'm happy, of course, to take questions on this matter, but questions about the details of the inquiry should be directed towards the Chief of the Defence Force, and if there are questions about the Sydney itself, then they should be directed to the Chief of Navy. So are there questions? Yes?
JOURNALIST: Isn't this going to cover much the same ground that the parliamentary inquiry considered over two years in 1971 to nine, only with the benefit of pictures?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I'll allow the Chief of the Defence Force to answer that question, but can I answer it in part by saying we are clearly in new circumstances, now we are able to pinpoint and see, through the use of photography, the actual wreck of the Sydney. We know the exact geographic location now, where it is located; we can obviously gain information from the wreck itself. That, of course, has never been available to anybody enquiring into this matter in the past.
But I'll allow the Chief of the Defence Force to also deal with that question.
ANGUS HOUSTON: I think that answers the question satisfactorily 
JOURNALIST: Can you explain though, Defence has taken up the practice recently of putting an arms length person, a civilian judge or someone in charge of its inquiries, what is it about the circumstances surrounding the loss of the Sydney that decided you not to put a - to put someone other than a retired or a senior naval officer or naval architect, or someone like that, in charge of the inquiry?
ANGUS HOUSTON: Well, as you know, with the military justice initiatives one of those was to create a capacity to do CDF commissions of inquiry. One of the characteristics of the way we would do business is to always have somebody with credibility, somebody who has extensive legal background, preferably someone with judicial background.
And, of course, His Honour Terence Cole has extensive judicial background and is absolutely the right person to do an enquiry of this nature.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard said that this inquiry will be ... and will take time, have you any idea of the timeframe ...? 
ANGUS HOUSTON: Well, I sat down last week with His Honour Terence Cole and we spent a lot of time going through that. The first step will be to gather all of the information and scope out just what is involved in doing this very complex and comprehensive and complete inquiry.
I think it's absolutely fundamental that we must leave absolutely no doubt as to what happened. We have to establish the facts and we will use everything that is available to His Honour to enable to determine with reasonable certainty what happened to Sydney.
I think this is very, very important from the families' point of view; it's also important from our point of view because, strange as it may seem, no board of inquiry was conducted during World War II after the loss of Sydney. So this is very much unfinished business and we think that this is the best way to go.
JOURNALIST: Will the inquiry look at aspects like whether a search was launched in time or whether ...? 
ANGUS HOUSTON: The detailed terms of reference - at the moment there is just one term of reference and that is to inquire into the circumstances that led to the loss of HMAS Sydney and all of her crew.
Now, as we scope out what needs to be done, we'll get into what's within the scope of the inquiry and so forth. And the terms of reference will obviously be expanded to include items such as that.
JOURNALIST:  [Inaudible] 
JULIA GILLARD: Well of course His Honour Terence Cole has been selected for this inquiry because of his expertise in maritime law, because of his work with the Australian Defence Force.
Can I say in relation to past royal commissions over which His Honour has presided, our argument hasn't been with the work of His Honour in presiding over those inquiries; our argument in relation to the inquiry in relation to the building industry was about the motivations of the former government in creating that inquiry, and also about its terms of reference.
Clearly His Honour Mr Terence Cole is very well qualified for this appointment, he does have expertise in the area, and that will be brought to bear on what is going to be a complicated inquiry, a long running inquiry, and an inquiry of significance to the nation, to our history, to our understanding of ourselves, and also of contemporary significance to Australians who are alive today but remember that fateful day very clearly. They remember the loss of their loved ones and they're still looking for personal answers.
JOURNALIST: Will this inquiry actually talk to any of the German survivors? 
ANGUS HOUSTON: I spoke again to His Honour about this last week, and yes, we would intend to try and find as many of them as we can. Of course, the reality is all of them are ageing and many of them have passed on. But clearly that is a very important thing that we need to do.
JOURNALIST:  Have there been any further surveys of the wreck since you found it and how soon can you see...? 
RUSS SHALDERS: There's been no further surveys, the Geosounder, as you would know, returned to Geraldton to exchange the sonar equipment with which it used to find the wrecks for a remotely operated vehicle. They had some technical difficulties in getting that equipment on board last week. The vessel sailed from Geraldton on Saturday, and as of about 90 minutes ago, they were close to the site but they're weather affected at the moment, there's a cyclone just been through that area, and they've not yet been able to deploy the remotely operated vehicle.
Once the weather abates to a point where they can put the vehicle into the water, their plan is to search - well to use the vehicle to search the Sydney initially, and then the Kormoran and then the battle site. They believe that they can achieve that between now and about 11 April, and as we get the imagery it will be transmitted back to Australia where it will be freely available on the Sydney search website.
JOURNALIST: Would you be having input - in particular questions that you feel as a sailor of experience, coming from a maritime position, you would like to see answered? Do you think are likely to be answered by this enquiry?
RUSS SHALDERS: As the Acting Prime Minister said, the mystery continues. It came in two parts, where was the Sydney, where was the Kormoran? We've now resolved the first part of the mystery; the second part of the mystery is what happened and why?
It would be speculation to try and attempt to answer that why question at this stage, but that's the pressing question, certainly in the Navy's mind, and I think in the mind of most Australians that are aware of this situation. Why was it, how could it be that the Sydney sank almost without trace?
I think the current investigations and certainly Terence Cole's inquiry will hopefully go towards answering that why question; how could it happen? That's the question that I would like to understand and I'm sure the rest of the Navy would as well.
JOURNALIST: Terence Cole will obviously have as long as it takes to try and solve these riddles ... what time frame would we be looking at, are you thinking of next year, 2010, I mean, has he indicated ...?
ANGUS HOUSTON: As the Acting Prime Minister said, it's going to take a long time. I mean 23 kilometres of shelf space with documentation, that gives you some idea of how much material has to be looked at. But it's important that we get this right, it's important that it be a very complete inquiry. 
I would say that we're probably looking well into next year before we get anywhere near the end of it. Certainly it's very important that the work that the Geosounder's doing continues, and it may be necessary to, later in the year, perhaps in the next weather window, to do further research, take further imagery to assist our understanding of what happened out there on 19 November.
JOURNALIST: Are you aware of any - talking about the 23 kilometres of shelf space, is this archived material ... is there any Navy material or official material that you're aware of from the wartime or since, that has not been made public?
ANGUS HOUSTON: I understand a lot of this material has not been looked at ever before. So this gives you some idea of the challenge His Honour faces. It will be very important to find every piece of material and have a close look at it. 
JOURNALIST: Some families have expressed a hope that maybe some personal effects could be retrieved from the vessel. Is that possible and are there plans to retrieve anything from the ship?
ANGUS HOUSTON: I think first of all you've got to understand that where Sydney is, it's - is a war grave and we don't want to - we don't want to interfere with the site. We respect everybody that was lost at that site. 
Of course the other very realistic limitation on us is the depth of the water. To actually recover anything at 2,700 metres is extremely challenging. 
So at this stage we haven't planned to do that. We'll certainly have a look at it, but I think in terms of how we approach it we have to realise that is a war grave and that comes first.
JOURNALIST: What level of support is the ADF providing to this search of the battle site or is this strictly a civilian...?       
ANGUS HOUSTON: The Government has funded the current search to the tune of $4.2 million at this stage. That funding is sufficient to cover the next phase of the search which is the gathering of imagery underway at present. Depending on where we get to and where we might need to go further, further applications may need to be made to government for additional funding. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, just on a different matter, should the - is the Government considering enlisting the [inaudible] that will allow it to use guest workers from the Pacific, both as a means to address our labour shortage but also as a means to help Pacific nations requiring these funds, people sending money back home?
JULIA GILLARD: Can I say of course we have the 457 skilled visa system. And the Government is certainly maintaining the ability of skilled people to come to this country and to contribute their skills. There have been integrity problems with the use of that visa. They have been small in number given how large the number of people who come in on the 457 visa is. But they've still been concerning. And the Government has consequently sought to act in that area. And my colleague Chris Evans is dealing with that matter through a review of the 457 visa and integrity arrangements. 
On the question of guest workers, there has been continuing interest by our Pacific Island neighbours on such a scheme. Obviously from their point of view it would enable money to be remitted back to their home country to families and friends. It's a matter that continues to be on the foreign policy agenda but there have been no conclusions of those discussions. 
JOURNALIST: What's changed since January when Kevin Rudd ruled it out? 
JULIA GILLARD: Well the - of course our Pacific neighbours have indicated a continuing interest in this area and of course the discussion continues. There has been no decision taken and I'm sure the Prime Minister, earlier in the year, referred to this, there's been no decision taken to create a guest worker visa.  But Pacific nations do raise this issue with us and consequently it is on the foreign policy agenda for discussions. But, as I say, there has been no decision taken and people shouldn't expect to see any quick moves in that area. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, on COAG, the states insistence in the communiqué, putting a line in that said, the Commonwealth should pay for its own policies how will that affect the rollout of your computer program, your trade centre program now that the states believe there's a greater onus on you paying more of the costs of those particular programs?
JULIA GILLARD: Well around the COAG table and around the table of the working party which it's been my great pleasure and privilege to chair, the productivity working group that has dealt with the implementation of these promises, there's been a clear understanding that the Commonwealth was making available a billion dollars of resource for computers in schools. 
Of course states and territories have been making their own efforts in this area. They want children to come out of school ready for the world of work in the modern age, ready for life in the modern age. And of course that requires people to be able to use computers. 
So they were investing; they're delighted to see a federal government that's prepared to work in partnership with them and invest an extra billion dollars that would not have been available to them had it not been for the Rudd Labor government's promise.  We have indicated to them, we understand that to make sure computers are available in circumstances where they can be used, to make sure that maintenance occurs, to make sure that professional development occurs for teachers so the computers are fully integrated into the learning environment, that that takes a strategic co-investment. And we are talking to them about the nature of that strategic partnership. 
The hundred million dollars which we have promised to roll out this financial year will be rolled out. It will be rolled out by 30 June and our state and territory colleagues are working with us in partnership to facilitate that roll out. 
JOURNALIST: Why should they be funding your election promises? They've got their own programs for which they are accountable to their voters and you've got yours. It certainly seems, please tell me if I'm wrong, that the states are saying, well no, these are your policies, you fund them. 
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I think that analysis is a bit of a simplistic one, with respect. What the states and territories are obviously saying is, they are responsible for their schools and in running those schools they know that there is a lot to do to make sure that there's appropriate access to computer technology. And they want the children who go to those schools to have that access. And then of course they see the election of the federal government that says, we not only want to work in partnership with you, we want to put a billion dollars on the table to get this shared objective done. And when you have those sorts of discussions, then clearly you want to work together in a strategic partnership and you want to deal with the co-investment issues. That's what we're going to do. 
We're going to make sure that the hundred million that has been promised for this financial year is rolled out. That's an early promise, it's an important promise and it will be delivered and it will be delivered to those schools who are in most need. That is that they have a ratio of computers to children that is worse than 1 to 8, counting computers that are four years old or less. 
JOURNALIST: There was no talk of sharing though during the election campaign when you went to all of those schools and you and Kevin Rudd were photographed with kids with computers promising this. There was no talk of sharing then. 
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think when you see our election promises rolling out you would have seen much commentary from our state and territory colleagues. And that commentary, whether it was in education or whether it was in health or whether it was in water, was all about how they would love to be in a position to end the blame game, and to work with a federal government that was prepared to work with them on things that should be shared objectives and are shared objectives. 
Our state Labor governments and territory Labor governments want to see Australian kids get a world class education. They want to work in partnership with a federal government that is committed to ensuring every Australian student gets a world class education. 
JOURNALIST: Have the existing state programs failed? Is that why you have such a large number of schools with such poor ratios of less than 1 in 4. Have the states not spent the money wisely?
JULIA GILLARD: This is a huge capital task. It's a huge task to move from a situation where our schools didn't have access to computers to a situation where computer technology for upper secondary students is embedded into the curriculum in everything they do. It's an enormous task.  And when you are going to undertake an enormous task like that, from the perspective of the state or territory government, there's obviously concern about the time it is going to take to make sure that every child in those upper secondary years gets the access to computers that we would like to see them have. 
So the states and territories were working in this area. What they lacked was a federal government prepared to work in partnership with them. What they have now is a federal government prepared to work in partnership with a billion dollars to be allocated to this area, and a billion dollars is a lot of money. And it means that there can be a real difference to access to computer technology for Australian students. I'll take one more and then we'll go. 
JOURNALIST: Given that the Government's campaign against binge drinking, are you disappointed to hear that some members of the Australian swim team got into a bit of pub brawl over the weekend. And should Nick D'Arcy lose his place at the Olympics because of that?
JULIA GILLARD: Look, I'm not going to make specific comments about individual athletes; that's a matter that should be dealt with by sporting officials and authorities. 
Obviously the Government is very concerned about binge drinking by Australian young people, particularly by teenagers, many of them below the legal drinking age. We're concerned about the role models in sport and, you know, many of our athletes are great role models for Australian children as they're growing up. They give them something that they want to aspire to. 
 We obviously want to work with the sporting authorities, with our great sporting codes, whether it be AFL or NRL or whether it be the netball. We want to work with all of them to create those role models and make sure that they're there for Australian young people to look at as we combat binge drinking.
And the Government will continue in that endeavour working with those sporting codes. And those sporting codes are very happy to be working with the Government in this area. They understand that binge drinking is an issue in the Australian community. Yes, it does surface from time to time in the world of sport and it's a matter about which they're concerned. Thank you.


Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Treasurer Wayne Swan and Employment Participation Minister Brendan O'Connor today released a road map for the reform of vocational education and training.
The Skilling Australia discussion paper launched today sets out the delivery of the Rudd Labor Government's additional 450,000 training places.
It highlights a new industry demand driven approach to training delivery rather than the old supply driven approaches of the Howard Government.
Close consultation with business is a key component of our efforts to build a world class training system and a modern economy that delivers for Australian families.
The new demand driven approach will better match up training to the needs of industry  -  finally providing businesses with a solution to on-going problems with skill shortages.
It will work with businesses to identify their needs and tailor training to address skill gaps in the workforce.
The independent Skills Australia advisory body and strengthened Industry Skills Councils will be central to the new demand driven reforms.
Combined with new targets to halve the proportion of Australians aged 24 to 64 years without qualifications at Certificate Level III and above and double the number of higher qualification completions (diploma and advanced diploma) by 2020, the reforms will also lead to better jobs for working Australians.
The roll-out of the first 20,000 training places also begins today with the initial batch of contracts to be delivered to registered training organisations who will provide the training.
Unemployed people will benefit from this first batch of training places and could be in the workforce as early as June.
Registered Training Organisations have shown strong support for the scheme which will provide much needed skills to those looking to work in occupations currently in severe shortage.
Industries such as childcare, building and construction and the mining industry are currently facing a chronic shortage of skilled workers.
This next roll- out of training places will give Australians currently in the workforce the opportunity to gain formal training and accreditation, helping to address skill shortages and boost Australia's productivity levels.
Submissions commenting on the discussion paper close 30 April 2008.
For more information visit www.productivityplaces.deewr.gov.au.


PM: Good morning. You're all looking chipper. Today in Washington we have another full set of appointments. I am looking forward to catching up with the Republican nominee for the Presidential election, Senator John McCain.
I have met Senator McCain once before, I am looking forward to renewing that relationship. I have said during the course of this visit that this relationship, this alliance with the United States has been supported by 12 U.S Presidents, Republican and Democrat and 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Labor and Liberal, and I am the 14th.
Whoever becomes the 13th President of the United States, since we began our alliance, what we know is that this alliance will have support whether it is from the Republican side or the Democratic side.
Our alliance with the United States should be and should always remain above party politics. Part of my purpose here in Washington is to make sure that I have made contact with the Democratic party side. And as you know I spoke to both their remaining candidates yesterday. On the Republican side I am speaking to Senator John McCain today.
I am certainly of the view that it is irresponsible for any Australian Government ever to be in the business of taking sides in U.S domestic politics on the outcomes of Presidential elections. That's not the right way to conduct such an important strategic and economic relationship for Australia.
My view is whoever wins this next Presidential election, Republican or Democrat, they will know that in Australia they have a good and reliable friend. And I am certainly not in the business of picking sides.
Also today I am looking forward to catching up with the US Senior Trade Representative Susan Schwab. I am also catching up with the US Energy Secretary. I am about to have breakfast also with the Deputy Secretary of Treasury and the Deputy Secretary of State. And also today with the head of the World Bank, Bob Zoellick. And the Republican House leadership at the Congress.
Putting these various meetings together, whether it is with the members of the Cabinet, that I saw last Friday, the Senate leadership who I saw yesterday, the House leadership who I see today, on top of the candidates both Republican and Democrat, I am very pleased to have been able to establish good working relationships with those currently running the administration here in Washington. And those, depending on the outcome of the Presidentials at the end of this year, who will run this Administration into the future.
The key thrust of my engagements with the representatives of the Administration and others today, again goes back to the economy. The absolute importance of ensuring that the global economy gets a shot of confidence in the arm through getting a decent outcome in the unresolved Doha Round.
The challenges and stresses currently being faced by the global economy as a result of the global financial crisis requires that world leaders combine together to ensure that confidence is enhanced by a good outcome on world trade. There could be no better injection of confidence than get that outcome on world trade.
And that will certainly be the thrust of my meetings today, in particular with the US Senior Trade Representative. I spent some time discussing this also last night at the dinner hosted by, very kindly, by the United States Chamber of Commerce.
I sat at dinner with the US Senior Trade Representative and with the US Agriculture Secretary, both of them are critical for the posture the United States takes in the remaining WTO negotiations.
The international community needs to get serious about an outcome on trade, and we need to make sure that that outcome on trade supports what is at present, some flagging confidence around the global economy because of the rolling crisis in financial markets.
I can take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you confirm that you are going to Japan on June 20?
PM: Well we have been planning on going to Japan as I said on two occasions this year. As I understand it we have confirmed dates in June. Precisely when I am not sure.
JOURNALIST: Is that earlier than you were originally anticipating for a bilateral visit?
PM: No, we have been talking for quite some time with the Japanese about, as I said a visit surrounding the G8 and that has in fact been under discussion since January this year and a separate visit as well. In June I think is where it's now about to  - 
JOURNALIST: So have you spoken to the Japanese Prime Minister in the last couple of days?
PM: These things are always normally transacted, can I say, in multiple iterations, with multiple officials, as everyone gets basically a Rubix cube together to work out who is where, when.
JOURNALIST: So it has got nothing to do with the criticism that Japan was left off this particular trip?
PM: I think we have been talking to our friends in Tokyo about visits there since January of this year. As we have been talking to various other governments around the world as well. The calibration of these things is always a complex matter.
JOURNALIST: Can we fast forward to Brussels, what do you hope to achieve there and what is your program?
PM: The core thing here in the United States has all been about, what do we do as a global economic community to provide a global response to this global crisis in financial markets. There were important outcomes yesterday in terms of the initial statement by the Financial Stability Forum and also there was an important statement yesterday by the US Treasury Secretary on responses to the crisis in global markets.
This is not just some minor marginal thing. What's happening in the global economy and through global financial markets is actually a core concern to decision makers around the world. So whether I am Brussels or whether I am in London, the economy, and the state of the economy and what to do about boosting confidence in the global economy is number one concern.
Therefore in Brussels as in here in Washington, the core message I will be taking is, what do we do in terms of the remaining things to be done in the Doha Round to ensure that that comes to a successful conclusion.
We need American leadership, we need leadership from the European Union, we need leadership also from other key negotiating groups including the Cairns Group which Australia heads, going into the final weeks and months of the Doha round negotiations.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) in Washington, you have seen a lot of people. How much difference do you think it has made meeting these people face to face and what do you think you have achieved in the last few days?
PM: Well I have had three objectives. The first objective has been to engage the US leadership on the state of the global economy and how to respond to the current global financial crisis. As I said this is serious business. And we are working with our friends the United States on the best responses through various forums.
Second, to reaffirm the central importance of our alliance with the United States.
And third, across all of those key deeds of Australia into the future, on the economy and on the alliance, we have established a wide ranging set of working relationships.
I think if you put it together, the Vice President, the President, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defence, the National Security Adviser. And then on the economy, the Security of the Treasury, the Chairman of the Fed, the Chairman of the SEC and today, if you row through the other agencies, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Energy and also the US Trade Representative.
Then on top of that we have had the House Leadership and the Senate Leadership, and the “new leadership”, whoever wins the next election, we have been pretty busy.
But you know something, if you are going to be in DC, it is very important to make sure that the fabric of those personal working relationships is in good order and I believe we have done that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) access to American markets for Australian sugar?
PM: We have a meeting today with the USTR and we will be covering not just the Doha Round but our bilateral access as well, under the existing FTA. Of course that will go to the question of Australia's, Queensland's critical sugar industry.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd if you are not in the business of picking sides in the Presidential race, do you now regret nominating a preference for Hillary Clinton over Barack Obama during last year's election campaign.
PM: When you are doing a, I think it was a John (sic) Denton interview, what was it?
JOURNALIST: Rove.
PM:     Rove, Rove. It was all a blur.
JOURNALIST: But you did nominate Clinton.
PM: Yeah, but as I recall, that was all a bit of fun but all about who was, in my view, likely to win at that stage. You don't punt. As I recall it the question was, was it Hillary or Obama? On a quick off the head response at that stage, I thought the question was about who you thought was going to win.
JOURNALIST: So Hillary or Obama?
PM: I think even when you are doing Rove, you don't even attempt to predict. And I am certainly not in the business of doing that now.
Critically, Democrat or Republican, you know this alliance is going to be in good hands here in the United States. It is very important that we don't get in the business of picking one political party over another. As it seemed to be that my predecessor may have done at a certain time. Ok, thanks.


JULIA GILLARD: I am here today with Treasurer, Wayne Swan and with my parliamentary colleague the Minister for Employment Participation, Brendan O'Connor. And we are here today to make two important announcements which are about Australia's prosperity today and for the future. In order to be a prosperous nation we need to be a productive nation and we need to have the maximum number of people possible in the work force. That's important in the short term because skills shortages are one of the factors putting upwards pressure on inflation and interest rates. And of course we know the Reserve Bank of Australia warned many times that skills shortages, indeed the current skills crisis was part of what was putting in upwards pressure on inflation and interest rates.
For tomorrow we need to make sure that Australian workers have the skills that they need, that we've maximised the number of people in the workforce and they've got relevant and appropriate skills. At the moment employers are short of labour, short of skilled labour to do jobs like the one we've just looked at because this nation under the former government dropped the ball on education and training.
We didn't invest in education and training its given us the skills crisis of today. We want to take the pressure off as quickly as possible and we want to ensure for the future this is a nation with a world class education and training system. The government is committed in delivering 450,000 training places to make sure Australian workers have the skills Australian employers are crying out for. 275,000 of those places will be for existing workers. 175,000 will be for people who are outside the labour force now and who need training to get back into the labour force. Of these 450,000 places some 65,000 will be apprenticeships. Today, with my colleagues I'm announcing the delivering of our first 20,000 places of this 450,000.
In March we asked Registered Training Organisations to come forward, to be the organisations that delivered these 20,000 new training places. We've had more than 300 Registered Training Organisations contact us and say that they're interested in delivering the places and more organisations are coming forward all the time. The 300 registered training organisations that have already come forward are able to offer up to 1200 different sorts of qualifications.
Today contracts are being sent to a number of those Registered Training Organisations to commence the delivery of the new 20,000 places. And for Australians out there who are out of the workforce and desperate to get into the workforce, they can go into their employment services agent today and start the process of being one the Australians who has the benefit of one of these 20,000 training places. We are deliberately pitching these training places to help resolve skills shortages in those parts of the economy where we are most short. So these places are dedicated to mining and construction, to health and community services, to the motor mechanic area where we are desperately short and to a number of personal and other service occupations.
On the question of mining and construction, we know we are short all round and that's why the places we are offering today are across the suite that mining and construction need. There are more than 22 mining, well there are 22 mining specific qualifications that these 20,000 places apply to and there are of course a wide number of construction trades that these places are relevant for. So whether it's building a roof, whether it's doing the concreting, whether it's doing the tiling, these places are there to help people get the skills that they need to get into the workforce, to get into the workforce where employers are crying out for labour.
Secondly and for the future, today I am launching this discussion paper which we will be circulating to businesses and industry. This is about a road to reform for the future. It's about business and industry working with us to ensure that in the delivery of 450,000 training places that we are meeting industry's need. We want a skills system that's focused on delivering for industry we want a skills system that works with the people that participate in it. Having industry and business in partnership with us is an important part of that process and this discussion paper is to get their ideas about the delivery of these places.
Both announcements today, the commencement of the 20,000 places and this discussion paper are an important part of our agenda to make sure we fix the skills crisis, we give Australians access to education and training and we give Australian businesses access to the skilled workers we need. That is about prosperity today and it's about building prosperity for tomorrow.
Are there questions? I suspect there will be.
JOURNALIST: You say that there is lot there for mining the mining industry has expressed its disappointment already, 22 courses are mentioned but most of them are variations on drilling. Why isn't there more for mining and the mining sector?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I can I say when you look at full list I think you can see a number for the mining sector. The mining sector needs workers who can engage in construction. Obviously a lot of construction happens in mining, its call building the mine and building all of the things that associated with the mine. Just looking down the list carpenter, joiner, bricklayer, general plumber, gas fitter, drainer, roof plumber, stone maison and the list goes on, vitally needed skills in the mining sector for the associated construction. Then directly for the mining sector there are a number of occupations. You point to some in drilling and they are certainly there. There are occupations that are associated with being a geologist, with being an engineer, all of those skills mining industry needs. So the full list is about delivering to shortages in mining and construction as well as the industry segments that I referred to earlier. We know employers are looking for people with these qualifications because these qualifications were selected from a survey of employers who are advertising and have job vacancies.
So we've gone to the horses mouth we've said to employers who are looking workers, who are you looking for and this is the list of qualifications and skills that they need that they have sent back to us.
JOURNALIST: What makes you think that you are going to have people who actually want to participate in the program if there is already a skills shortage how are you going to (inaudible) be part of the program?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think that there would be Australians outside the labour force today looking at these 20,000 places and saying, I want to build a future for myself and I want to build a future for my family. And the best way of doing that is to make sure they get access to training that gives them the skills employers are crying out for. That's a pathway to a good job, it's a pathway to a secure job and its one way of making sure that they've got their place in Australia's future and its future prosperity.
JOURNALIST: The miners are also saying that they'd like to see themselves kept exempt from the employment safety net. Do you have any response to that?
JULIA GILLARD: The National Employment Standards that the Government is developing are employment standards we're committed to and we want to get all the details right. And because we want to get the details right we've engaged in an exposure draft process to give everyone including the mining industry the maximum ability to comment and to express their views and we will work through their views. The day I launched the exposure draft of the National Employment Standards I specifically said here it is for your comment; this is a genuine consultation process; we want to hear what you've got to say and this is your opportunity to tell us about it and we will weigh all of that feedback. And this is a stark contrast if I can remind people, a stark contrast to the system engaged in by the former government which not only gave us the skills crisis we are dealing with today but when it published its Australian Fair Pay and Conditions Standard, created a myriad of technical problems for people because it hadn't adequately consulted on it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) 
JULIA GILLARD: The system, the National Employment Standards will be for everyone so it will be for all Australian employees. We are engaged in the process of getting the drafting of them right. We are doing that in a consultative and collaborative way. We have deliberately said to everyone, including the mining industry, this is your opportunity to be at the table for a genuine consultation process and I am very interested in gathering up and then responding to their views.
JOURNALIST: There have also been other concerns from the mining industry expressed today about your IR reforms and how they might affect fly-in-fly-out employees particularly in the Pilbara and Kimberley. Can you give a guarantee that your IR reforms won't curtail that usage of fly-in-fly-out workers?
JULIA GILLARD: Absolutely. Fly-in-fly-out is vital for the mining industry. People work on historically accepted roster patterns; that's part of the mining industry. Workers work those patterns, they are use to working those patterns; many of them enjoy working those patterns and those patterns of work will be available to the mining industry under our workplace relations reforms.
JOURNALIST: You are only sending out the contracts today, that's going to take time so people going into RTOs to apply. When are you going to have 20,000 people in training because clearly it is going to take a little while yet?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we've got the Registered Training Organisations, 300 of them that have come forward. Contracts are going to a number today. What we need is we need Australians to walk into their employment services agent and say I'm interested in that and then the system will put that person together with the right training opportunity through a Registered Training Organisation that as indicated an interest in delivering these places.
JOURNALIST: Won't there be any benefit from today's announcement for the Canberra economy will be overshadowed by public sector job cuts in the budget in 6 weeks?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're working on a budget, of course we're working on a budget and we're working on it very hard and we've been very clear that in this budget we will be delivering the Government's election commitments beyond that it's going to be a tough budget. 
We've inherited a high inflation environment from the former Liberal government. As the Treasurer routinely says the highest inflation environment we've faced for 16 years. Inflation puts pressure on working families, drives up the cost of their mortgage through putting pressure on interest rates, it means every time they go down the shops they're confronted by increasing prices. We want to deal with inflation. Having a fiscally disciplined budget is part of our plan to deal with inflation. We have said on the question of public service job cuts, our aim is to deliver our election policies. We will be doing that. We will be regearing as necessary to deliver our election policies.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer just on the budget no doubt you, the process is going ahead and you said you'd try and find administrative efficiencies. Just wondering whether you have found a lot of fat in the administration, whether you were surprised by that amount if you did and can you give us some examples?
WAYNE SWAN: Well we've been meeting around the clock in fact we have come straight from an ERC meeting and we met all day Sunday, most of Sunday night and we will continue to do that and we have been doing that for many months Matthew. So as the Acting PM said it is going to be a tough budget but it's going to be a budget which will be fair and it will deliver for working families but there will be tough decisions. I am not going to outline those decisions today because we are still going through our budget process but on budget night the answers will be there for everybody to see.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, the Reserve Bank Board is meeting today and most economists are tipping that rates will stay on hold but does that really make a difference given that the major banks seem to be lifting rates independent from the Reserve?
WAYNE SWAN: I don't comment on Reserve Bank decisions, I never do. But I would make this point that dealing with the inflationary challenge is our central responsibility; to get the pressure of the Reserve Bank. What has been happening is all the weight has been put on monetary policy from the previous government. Our objective in this budget is to take the weight on monetary policy, to bring down a disciplined budget, finding savings in the budget, we've already announced $10 billion worth of savings, we're looking for further savings. And most importantly putting in place the investments for the future through programs such as the one we are announcing today to make sure we lift our productivity and therefore take pressure off inflation and take pressure off interest rates.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, are you concerned about any wider market implications of the Opes Prime collapse? 
WAYNE SWAN: Look it's a very serious issue, it's being investigated by ASIC at the moment. I don't intend to comment any further but I'm assured by the regulators that it will not necessarily have wider market implications. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, have you got the Tax Office cracking down on wealthy individuals? 
WAYNE SWAN: Yes I certainly do. There are about 1200 wealthy individuals that have been targeted in this program from the Tax Office. All Australians who have worked hard to make our economy strong and pay their tax want to see everyone in the community, including wealthy Australians, pay their fair share which is why we have put additional resources in the budget for compliance, particularly for wealthy individuals.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) that maybe tax advisers need to be a bit more closely regulated if there is this grey area were they're taking advantage?
WAYNE SWAN: Well I think the program from the Tax Office suggests that it will not be an excuse for those that are so affected to blame the advice that they have received. Look people go into these things with their eyes wide open. What the Tax Office is doing at the moment is providing substantial information to all of those people that may have been participating in schemes which may not necessarily be lawful. It's putting that out there for everybody to see for both the advisers and those participating in the schemes. 
JOURNALIST: And just on Opes you've given a lot of reassurances before, as has the regulators about the fact we are pretty protected from the global crunch. Doesn't the collapse of Opes put a bit of a question mark over those reassurances?
WAYNE SWAN: Well we are not sure what's happened with Opes Prime so I wouldn't want to pre-empt the findings of the investigation. But we're not immune from the fall out of US sub-prime crisis; everybody knows that and its also impacting on domestic interest rates for all borrowers and certainly for business as well. So we're certainly not immune from the fall out of the US system but be assured of this, we do not have the same problems that they are experiencing in the United States. And while there may be some examples of low doc loans being given to people here who should not have received them, there may be examples of practices from mortgage brokers that are less than ideal. But we don't have the same volume of problem that they have in the United States. And it's very important that we learn the lessons of what has occurred in the United States, just as it is important that we learn the lessons from programs and examples that were on television last night. And I make this point, last week at COAG we transferred responsibility, we transferred responsibility from the States to the Commonwealth called mortgage lending and some forms of consumer advice and also consumer credit. 
That's very important because we saw examples last night were there does need to be better regulation and certainly much better business practice from some people involved in lending.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, any last minute push to get Mr Rudd to Japan on his current overseas trip? 
JULIA GILLARD: Mr Rudd has made his itinerary very clear. He's also made it very clear that he is there discussing the global economy with world leaders. He had made his travel program and meets with Japanese leaders also very clear.
JOURNALIST: Julia, what do you think that Brendan Nelson will be hearing on his listening tour based on your movements around the country? What do you hear when you listen?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think Dr Nelson's tour is going to be dismissed by the Australian people as a gimmick unless he's out there apologising to the Australians he meets for being an Cabinet Minister in a government that delivered to working Australians the high inflation environment that we are grappling with now and its consequences for interest rates.
I also think Dr Nelson's tour will be dismissed as a gimmick if he doesn't come clean on his future plans for workplace relations. Everyday Dr Nelson is interviewed he says something different. He is prone to say that Work Choices is dead and then in the next brief he says they believe in the thing that gave Work Choices its heart, its blood and its life and that is Australian Workplace Agreements. Now those two positions are complete contradictions and working Australians are entitled to know what does he really stands for.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson said this morning on radio that he handed the Labor Party a great economy. 
WAYNE SWAN: He is just completely out of touch, isn't he? I mean Brendan Nelson doesn't think there is a problem with inflation, he simply doesn't get it. And if he is out there sitting around the kitchen table with Australian families he'll find out that inflation is a very big problem when it comes to the family budget.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, have you talked to St George, NAB and Westpac about their decision to lift rates over and above the Reserve and do you think their moves have been justified?
WAYNE SWAN: No I haven't spoken to St George but I've spoken to most of the banks on numerous occasions and pointed out to them their responsibility to be mindful of the impact of their decisions on families who have eight official cash rate rises, to be mindful of that on the one hand and of course on the other hand they've got the interest of their shareholders. I think it's very important that the banks behave as responsibility as they possibly can in this environment. 
JOURNALIST: One area of skills you haven't mentioned today is the motor trade industry. I was just wondering how important the car industry is as an incubator of trades in Australia and would that be a reason for keeping the car industry here when it might not be viable on other basis?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I always prefer not to contradict the Financial Review but I believe I did say that one of the areas that the packages are dedicated to is the area of motor mechanics because we are critically short in that area. So for Australians all around the country who care about keeping their car on the road in a safe condition, being able to access a motor mechanic is very important...
JOURNALIST: I am talking about the industry... 
JULIA GILLARD: Yes I just didn't want you to walk away Laura thinking there wasn't anything in this package for things associated with cars. There most certainly is. On the long term future of the car industry, we obviously have Mr Steve Bracks inquiry into that for the government at the moment. That is a matter that has been reported on including in your newspaper as I read it. You would be aware Mr Bracks will deliver his final report to government in the middle of the year and we will respond to it at that point. 
JOURNALIST: Just on the inquiry into grocery prices what difference is it really going to make to families that are trying to manage the household budget and how long will it be before the start to notice a difference at the checkout?
WAYNE SWAN: Well the grocery inquiry is very important because it goes to the core of price pressures that are affecting families around the kitchen table. And there have been a lot of concerns in parts of the supply chain in particular about what's been going on. So we'll get to the bottom of that and when we get that report we will react accordingly, we don't have that report yet.


Australia and the EU share common values and close historical, political, economic and cultural ties. We face many common challenges in foreign and security, and trade and economic policy areas. In meeting these challenges we recognise the value of regular and frank dialogue and close cooperation. We discussed today how we can strengthen and develop our work together on a range of issues such as international trade, climate change, the Pacific region, and international security threats. We believe our cooperation will exemplify how the international community must work together to achieve lasting solutions to our most difficult challenges. 
We have agreed 
     * To promote a new era of creative engagement between Australia and the EU
     * To reaffirm our resolve to bring the Doha trade negotiations to a successful conclusion this year and emphasise the shared interest we have in achieving an ambitious, balanced and comprehensive outcome that creates new trade opportunities in agriculture, industrial goods and services among and between developed and developing countries.
     * To work closely together in implementing the Kyoto Protocol and forging a comprehensive post 2012 global agreement on climate change that will deliver the deep cuts in emissions the world requires. There is no greater threat to the global environment than climate change. 
     * To coordinate regularly on our work on development and security issues in East Asia and the Pacific region, especially on issues such as climate change and deforestation.
     * To cooperate in the fight against terrorism, including tackling terrorist financing effectively and promoting inter-cultural dialogue and understanding.
     * To intensify our work to upgrade EU-Australia relations through a new Partnership Framework, including priorities for cooperation on international security, trade, development issues, the Asia-Pacific region, climate change and energy, science and education, aviation and movement of people, including visas.
In this respect, we note negotiations already underway on a Passenger Name Record agreement, as well as our joint objective of achieving progress towards a comprehensive aviation agreement.
Brussels


HOST: I will now open the floor for questions, the rule of the house is that we normally collect two or three questions (Inaudible) who would like to start
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible). I'd also like to thank the Prime Minster for the time that he actually took when I met him when I worked with (inaudible) in Australia. I'm and Australian and a proud one.
I'm very interested and hope to see continuing steps towards the (inaudible) of Australia's moral and foreign policy (inaudible) if you like with our new administration. There are actually three aspects that were not covered, I know you cant cover everything but I would like to hear comments from you on and what is the current direction that Australia in driving these two aspects which are looking at gender in the 1990's Australia (inaudible) and now we see a lot of work on gender and security, particularly with Afghanistan as you mentioned.
What steps is Australia taking to work with partners including Europe on this (Inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Thank you Prime Minister welcome to Brussels, the only thing that disappointed me a little bit in your speech was the fact that (inaudible). China (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister (Inaudible). Before coming here I was reading the transcript of your presentation to our colleagues in terms of (inaudible) and you spoke extensively and eloquently about another subject that you didn't stress here, that I think is important. About a new Asian security dimension and (inaudible). You rightly pointed out there is no Asian NATO, there is no Asian (Inaudible).
I wish you would perhaps spend a little time sharing with our audience here some of your thoughts on that, because if they do touch on China very specifically and very strongly.
I also wonder what role you might see in this new Asian securities system for what you call medium power in Europe. Thank you
PM: I'll reverse engineer and start at the third and move back to the first. On the question of security in the Asia Pacific region, I think it's quite clear that if you look at the post 45 history of east Asia that you seen an absence of multilateral security mechanisms. What you saw even prior to the end of the cold war here of course was the evolution a series of confidence and security building measures coming of the back of CSCE, OSCE and the Helsinki accords. This in my judgement helped to take some of the sharper edges off some of the harder security policy relationships which existed in this continent at that time.
In our hemisphere East Asia that has not been the case. The strategic stability of East Asia has been underpinned by US core (inaudible), US strategic presence and military alliances with Japan, the Republic of Korea and ourselves.
What I have argued for some time is the need to supplement that by a range of softer security policy cooperation mechanisms. One began some time ago by one of my distinguished pre-decessors Gareth Evans who was then Australian Foreign Minister now resident of this fair town of Brussels. His very important work in international crisis. Foreign Minister Evans innovation in partnership with various regional colleagues led to the formation of the ASEAN regional forum, which provided for the first time a trans-regional mechanism to have a security dialogue.
That has continued but it hasn't yet assumed any institutional status in terms of the actual management of challenges as opposed to the discussion of those challenges. The discussions in Washington and I spoke about this in part at Brookings is that whatever final landing point the six party talks on North Korea may have and let us hope it's a good landing point and Pyongyang has not been helpful at present, it provides a basis for taking that into a broader security cooperation mechanism around confidence and security building measures across North East Asia and perhaps across wider East Asia. We indicated to our friends in the United States that we would support that in which ourselves become party to such arrangements should they unfold. I think that's a good way to soften again some of the sharper edges of these security policy arrangements which currently exist in our part of the world.
And finally on that point I think in going back to the ASEAN regional forum I've argued recently also that, that should provide a mechanism for the various security agencies concerned with counter disaster operations in East Asia to work together effectively, operationally and institutionally. A quick example if you have a major typhoon or cyclone hit in a remote island state with tens of thousands of people living on it. At present you don't have effective and regional cooperation to quickly identify where the problem is and to deploy assets in order to deal with that crisis. And this became acutely real to all of us at the time of the tsunami but also in other events as well.
That again provides I think an opportunity for security policy cooperation at the softer end. If you bring together Chinese, American, Japanese, ourselves and the Koreans, Indonesians, A common institutional structure to deal with counter disaster management in the region.
And my friend from Stockholm I'm glad to hear the restaurants have improved on the Chinese food front, they were always good on the other front.
On the question of China and this upcoming visit of the Swedish Prime Minister as I understand it and my own and this is a part of the discussion I had with the President of the Commission (inaudible) in fact an extensive discussion on these questions. Our overall approach to China has long been and I believe it's an approach shared with the Europeans and others is one of constructive engagement of China with the object of encouraging our friends in Beijing to become full participants and stakeholders in a global (inaudible) based order. Whether that applies to liberations on the future of the global trading system through the WTO or whether it comes to the discussions we also have to go here in Brussels on climate change.
There can be no climate change outcome absent effective inclusion of China. Or in other political and security questions which often come before the United Nations Security Council most recently debates concerning Darfur, debates concerning Burma and elsewhere.
That is the overall approach that we take. On the specific human rights concerns on Tibet which have been so much part of the recent debate. I made comments on that subject with the President of the United States recently in Washington about our concerns on that matter.
I missed the first question (Inaudible)
Non proliferation treaty, for us the fraction of the shall we say the robustness of the NPT arrangements worldwide is a real problem. We are committed as a new Government of Australia to engage in a new diplomacy what I've described as creative middle power diplomacy to assist in rebuilding the global consensus and internal robustness of the Non Proliferation Treaty. That is a bold ambition given the stressors and fractures which have occurred in terms the Nuclear Non proliferation over a long period of time now, that I fear what will happen in the absence of concertive diplomatic action to do so.
On the responsibility to protect, RTP, are to key and the excellent work done by the Canadian Commission some time ago on that. In my discussions with the UN secretary general in New York last Saturday we spoke about Australian financial assistance to the United Nations to advance work in that area, At the analytical level and practical work also in the peace building area and conflict prevention area.
And on the role of gender and foreign policy and what we can do by way of specific economic assistance programs. I've visited some of our own projects and those funded by multiple agencies which we fund in Pakistan and Afghanistan, particularly concerning the education of girls in these societies and elsewhere in the Islamic world. This will be a priority in terms of Australian development assistance cooperation to a range of such countries as we have in the past. But to be expanded in the future through an increase in our ODA.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) ABC, Prime Minister you rightly said that Climate Change is the biggest moral and economic challenge for the community. Two specific points one targets for developed countries, do you know that the European Union has said (inaudible) commit ourselves to reduce emission by at least 20% by 2020. And we have said also that we are prepared to go to minus 30% provided other countries like Australia, Canada and the US will go along. Could you ensure Mr Barosso today that Australia will be one of the countries that would at least be willing to make a 30% reduction considering the fact that you average per capita emissions are twice as high as Europe and that tiny Australia emits as much as bigger France and therefore in considering also that your one of the most sensible and most effected or you will be one of the most effected countries in the globe through climate change. (Inaudible). So where do you stand and my second question
PM: The first one is pretty big
JOURNALIST: The second point. What makes you sure that 16 months or 18 months in Copenhagen the world community will come to an effective outcome and not just another Kyoto as such?
HOST: two more questions on this side and then if we could go back to the Prime Minister
JOURNALIST: Clean Coal (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: I just happen to be a former Labor MP from the United Kingdom (inaudible)
Do you or your Government have any plans to open up the issue of Australia becoming a republic?
PM: I think I'll take those now in the first order. On the important questions raised over here about (inaudible) and the likely nature of the Copenhagen outcomes substantive or not. I was in Bali in fact we ratified, I signed the instrument of ratification within the first hour of being sworn in as the 26th Prime Minister of Australia. I thought that was an important thing to do and to do it first up and in unusual move the secretary general said he had never had this done to him before, presented him personally with an instrument of ratification outside of New York.
I don't know what great convention that contravened but apparently it did and so we got on with the business within about 10 days of taking over. I was there also for the debate about Europe's position on targets 20 by 20 and the option of going to 30. Our position as you know is a long term target of a reduction of 60% by 2050 against 2000 levels. We've always said that we would in the period ahead develop our interim targets but were doing so because in Australia we've not done under the previous Government any parallel domestic work for that which Stearn has done for the United Kingdom and more broadly for the global economy.
And even when we were Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition anticipation your other question. Last year we commissioned the Stern equivalent report in Australia by Professor Garnaut which has still some ways to run. But, once that is with us, together with other inputs of advice including from our own Treasury, we'll be making determinations on interim targets.
We understand that in order to have a fully effective and operating emissions trading scheme you've got to have interim targets. That's clear. We have to dovetail that work domestically with what we're going to do diplomatically vis-à-vis the Bali road map ready for Copenhagen.
The second point on Copenhagen itself. It's a bit like Doha really, it's a statement of the self evident, but in way it is not. All things depend on political will. And I think as we get closer to Copenhagen, it will get tougher and tougher as many Governments around the world confront harder and harder decisions. Not just in the developed world, but in the developing world as well.
And I know for a fact that it will be very difficult to obtain support for example from the United States unless we have commitments for concrete action also from China-having just spent the last four or five days in Washington, including on Capitol Hill.
But this will hinge, at the end of the day, on political will. And hence, the importance of the overarching acceptance on the part of political leaders of the world that this is truly the great moral and economic challenge of our age. Moral, economic and environmental challenge of our age.
In terms of our friends from WWF, I think, is that right? I think there is a great danger when people look at action on climate change to assume, as far as the economy is concerned, that this spells all downside. There's some great work been done recently by (inaudible) and others in the general media, writing for the New York Times, about the need to get the international community's head around the concept that action on global climate change, which is necessary for the survival of the planet long term and the living species within it.
That its presents a whole raft of new economic opportunities as well in terms of births and rebirths of the renewable energy sector and clean green energy. There are already funds out there investing, not just by way of venture capital, but in all sorts of other investments as well in terms of where this renewable energy revolution will take us.
And, it's transformational capacity in terms of the future global economy is of itself significant. So we need to be conscious of that.
You asked specifically about coal, I'm acutely conscious of Australia's status as a coal exporter. I'm acutely conscious of the fact that China's status as the world's largest coal producer and I think importer.
Therefore, the practical question which you then go to is ‘what can we do practically to assist the Chinese in particular on this question?'. We have already committed ourselves to in the first instance to a half billion dollar fund on CCS, Carbon Capture and Storage. In fact, I'm advised that we had a project to begin deploying this technology in Australia today.
We need to accelerate our research cooperation with the Chinese at a pace of knots on this. This was subject of intense conversation between myself and the US Energy Secretary in Washington on this yesterday about their own research effort. And that formed part of my discussion also with the Commission today.
That's around CCS. CCS is not the total answer. At least two other areas need to be worked on as well. And that is, how do we boost the deployment of energy renewable's both in China and elsewhere. And what can be done further by way of technological breakthroughs in terms of greater and more efficient and commercially deliverable use of solar. And finally, on demand side management, frankly, knowing a little bit about the Chinese electricity generation system from an earlier life, I used to live and work there, it is basic things like fixing up the transmission system in China which could do something by way in improving overall efficiency of energy transmission consumption. And, on demand side efficiency measures generally, globally, we calculate that we can make a significant impact within Australia by a much more rigorous nationally driven approach on demand side management.
So the answer to your question is at multiple levels, but we certainly get it in terms of its centrality of the coal equation.
The other question, (inaudible) about the Republic. I've said before in Australia that this is not a first order priority for the incoming Labor Government. We have other challenges on our plate at the moment, including current state of global financial markets, climate change, the future Doha round. But it remains part of our platform as a political party and it's certainly something that we don't walk away from. But we do not regard it, at this stage, as a matter of first priority.
JOURNALIST: Thank you Prime Minister (inaudible) International Trade Union Federation. Firstly, I'd like to assure you of the commitment of the global trade union movement on carbon reduction targets. We're working very actively with (inaudible) on that issue. My question relates to (inaudible) the state of global financial markets. And, I'd like to hear your views on the, we think, evident need of far more effective regulation of financial markets and much greater international cooperation on that question. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible). You mentioned China, you've mentioned foreign investment. There's much discussion about investment in the Australian iron ore industry at the moment. There's much discussion about the, for example the current mergers going on. Investment in the Chinese steel industry. What role do you see for the Australian Government in these assessments. I'm not talking about the anti trust regulators, nor about stock exchange regulators about the Australian Government. What role does the Australian Government have in the assessment of these deals (inaudible). And, what message if any will you be taking to China regarding concerns about access to the stock market for Australian iron ore businesses?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister (inaudible). Traditionally Australian foreign policy has been suited to rest on three pillars. Relationship with the Untied States, commitment to multi lateral way of doing business in the world and a relationship with the rest of Asia. On the very positive speech this afternoon my question is when can we look forward to a statement of Australian foreign policy where there is a fourth pillar namely increasing cooperation with the European Union?
PM: Let me take those questions in order. Firstly, I think the contribution from the International Trade Union Federation. What I find really interesting and encouraging in Australia, and that dovetails with the earlier question on coal is the coalminers union in Australia led Mr Tony Maher is an active and strong supporter of the Government's posture and policy on climate change, Kyoto ratification, Cap and trade system.
We are working actively with all participants in the industry including the union on achieving a good outcome here. So, I thank you for that observation on global financial markets.
This represented probably about a third of my time in Washington with a range of Cabinet Secretaries through to the President on what we do about what is a serious challenge to the global economy.
Without rehearsing what's happened, let's go to possible lines of response.
At minima, we, the Australian Government, both through the G20 and through the financial stability forum where we are also active, in G20 we chair a specific working group on market stabilisation. We believe at minima we need to move for a greater position of transparency, particularly in relation to these new financial instruments. That has been lacking. That needs to happen. It needs to happen into the future.
Secondly, and related to that, you have to look carefully at the whole question and evaluation of assets. How that is done, and how transparently that is done of itself, given so much of the confidence of the system depends on the accuracy of those assessments, which leads to a third point. And that goes to the future of the ratings agencies themselves which should be subject, I believe, to further international scrutiny.
These at minima I think are three lines of reform. I spoke at some length on parts of this in a speech I gave to the United States Chamber of Commerce in Washington two nights ago. And, there is, I believe, a statement also out yesterday or the day before from the financial stability forum, looking at the content of its final report due very soon, mid-April I believe, to the G7.
Someone asked the question about inbound investment in the Australian iron ore industry. We in Australia, of course we're a vast country, we've got 20 million people, the continent of Europe with the population of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, it presents a few challenges in terms of how you roll out the infrastructure for a continent like that and at the same time, someone mentioned before, we have somewhat differential circumstances when it comes to the intensity and density of the physicality of transportation which creates further challenges for us in terms of the climate change challenge.
To get around Australia, you've actually got to get around, and it's a big country.
All inbound investments into Australia, because we are a vast country, historically dependent on capital inflows, and part of an open global capital market, we're are, therefore, open to private investment and have been throughout our economic history.
Secondly, any foreign investment proposal beyond a given order of magnitude, around about $800 million a project, is automatically subjected to review by the various review agencies of the Government, including centrally, in the case of the Foreign Investment Review Board, before the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia makes a determination in the national interest about the acceptability or otherwise of that inbound investment.
Recently, to add clarity to national interest criteria, as it relates to foreign Government related entities, be they sovereign wealth funds or be they (inaudible) enterprises, the Government also released a further definition of the national interest criteria about a month ago.
You mentioned also stock markets and the rest. There's a place where Governments have a proper place. And that's in what I described in the regulation of private markets, including capital markets. But when it comes to commercial transactions between firms, including the use and non-use of stock markets, that's where Adam Smith takes over and the invisible hand. So, I don't propose to provide gratuitous advice to buyers and sellers in terms of how they use or not use them.
On climate change, Our German colleague asked the question about concrete actions. The two concrete actions right now are to develop in very rapid time frame for a country which has not done work on this up until now, effectively, effectively a little bit of work has been done before, is to get our cap and trade system running in Australia. That is an intense period of work for this year and next to identify the interim targets which have been referred to design the system with all the complexities associated with that, With the object of having it operational by 2010.
Secondly to implement, for the first time in Australia, a mandatory renewable energy target of 20 per cent. That is a very significant move for us, and that in turn we believe, through the operation of market mechanisms will boost the deploy ability of solar, wind and we hope, on a research and technology front, bring on the earliest possible consideration of geo-thermal projects where we have considerable resources.
You mentioned also uranium. Our policy is to, Australia has 40 per cent of the world's uranium resources. We export uranium to the rest of the world. The conditionality attached is that the receiving state is NPT compliant. And secondly , that we have a separate and additional bilateral nuclear safeguard agreement with that state. For example with the Kingdom of Sweden we've had one for about 25 years. Similarly with Finland and 19 other states around the world.
You mentioned the three pillars. You said it was traditionally a part of Australian foreign policy  -  it was not. I wrote it myself about three or four years ago. That is why it is used in those terms and incorporated it into the platform of the Australian Labor Party then in Opposition. They are our alliance with the United States, our membership of the United Nations and cooperation in the multilateral order and thirdly our policy of comprehensive engagement in Asia.
In that second one we see the UN and the EU as partners in multilateral engagement and that's in large part why I've been here significantly in Brussels today. To underline again what I said in my remarks before, we want to have a new stage, a new page in Australia's relationship with Europe through the European Union, through the European Commission because we think there are so many areas where we can cooperate more effectively together. Development, the global economy, climate change and the political and security matters as well. And I look forward to that relationship unfolding, so long as the other side chooses to tango. Thank you very much.


PM: Thank you very much Jose, the President of the European Commission and thank you for receiving me today in Brussels.
My central purpose in being Brussels today is to symbolise the importance of establishing a new broad based relationship with the European Commission and the European Union.
Europe, across the world and across the global agenda, has much to offer. And we in Australia wish to partner with our friends in Europe in so many areas of common endeavour: whether it is in global trade liberalisation, the great challenges of development for the impoverished nations of the world through implementing the millennium development goals, or beyond that, the great global challenge of climate change.
Today as the President has indicated, we spent a lot of time talking about the Doha Round. Our view in Australia is this, and I share the view expressed by the President, that this Doha Round is do-able.
There is an urgent need, in my view, to conclude this Round and to conclude it urgently, as a shot in the arm for the global economy. Which as we know has been going through a period of considerable stress through the unfolding crisis in global financial markets.
Negotiators right around the world and in Australia's case the Cairns Group, are hard at work. Time is short, urgency is great, and our requirement to achieve an outcome is significant for all those people around the world who depend on the forces of free trade to prevail, rather than be marginalised.
We also spoke at length about our cooperation on climate change and since the Australian Government's decision to ratify the Kyoto Protocol, we have been in close consultation with our friends in Europe and also partners around the world on the Bali Road Map. And time again, is ticking away.
We have Copenhagen at the end of next year. This will be very difficult to achieve. But following my discussions in the United States and these discussions today here in Brussels and others that I will have soon in China, it will be very important for us all to cooperate closely to achieve outcomes in the benefit of the planet.
This is the overarching moral and economic challenge of our generation and we must act together, in partnership to meet it.
On security questions, we also discussed earlier, the challenges that we face, including in Afghanistan. This formed a part of my discussions also with Mr Solana. We have Australian troops on the ground in Afghanistan. We have troops who are in harms way and we owe them everything in our upcoming meetings in Bucharest and all those other troops on the ground in Afghanistan to ensure that they have an effective strategy, both military and civilian, to ensure that we can prevail. And assist the government in Kabul to establish proper control in over the country.
Finally on the question of our development assistance cooperation, we have spoken at length about the need to work more closely together in the South Pacific. The European Union, I would thank them for this, the Commission are significant supporters of development assistance programs in the South Pacific.
When I was recently in the Solomon Islands, I opened an aid project concerning health services to people suffering from various categories of diseases in the Solomons. And that was co-funded between the Commission and ourselves as the Australian Government. And I would thank those in Brussels who were responsible for that project.
But it indicates where we can go to further, in the future in harmonising more effectively, our significant development assistance efforts with the Pacific Island countries.
To conclude, I look forward to a close relationship with Jose and a new broad based relationship with our friends and partners in Europe. We will always have things that we disagree on. There will be difficult negotiations over trade, and as there always have been in the past on questions of agriculture and defending the interests of Australian farmers.
But we have a broad based relationship and we intend to prosecute that broad based relationship through this new key partnership framework which our two parties will negotiate, we hope by mid year. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on Afghanistan, you have said that you don't intend sending more troops. Is that a permanent commitment or are there circumstances in which that could change and secondly, you want the elimination of that Afghan opium crop, how would you do that and what would you say to those who argue that that could remove the livelihood of some are turn them towards the Taliban?
PM:When I go to Bucharest, first and foremost in mind I have the wellbeing of 1000 troops on the ground in harms' way in Oruzgan province in Afghanistan. Our responsibility is to make sure that there is an effective civilian military strategy across the country, to ensure that their mission prevails.
On the question of opium and the opium crop, again I discussed this with Mr Solana today. There are differing views across the international community about how to deal with this challenge. When I visited Afghanistan for the first time in 2004, this was a challenge staring us in the face then. It hasn't got better since then.
One of our aspirations for Bucharest is to begin to achieve a resolution of how this is to be done. My own view, and you asked for it directly, is this. Crops should be eliminated. Crop substitution should occur and where necessary, financial subsidies to the farmers concerned, so that there is a continued economic incentive to remain in viable agriculture or other forms of viable economic activity. And if we don't act in this department, what happens is, through the illicit sale of opium, not only is it bad worldwide in terms of narcotics, it is bad in providing illicit sources of finance for terrorist organisations.
JOURNALIST: Question to the Prime Minister on the WTO  -  you are saying it was urgent to get a deal, what is required exactly, concessions. And more specifically, there were discussions about agreeing on this scheme to allow countries to shield politically sensitive agricultural products with the full force of the tariff cuts. Has there been any new agreement on this, will there be an agreement?
PM: Negotiators have been hard at work in Geneva on recent days and we have been both briefed on the outcome of those negotiations. There is a lot of work to do yet. In terms of the, including the areas you just spoke of in your question. The urgency of the timetable is this, let's be realistic, we are now in April. There are Presidential elections due at the end of this year. Time is short and if you know anything about the trade negotiations, achieving agreement on what is called modalities, has to be achieved well before what is called the final undertaking.
That means I think we are really looking at a few months at best and the few weeks ahead, are critical to getting an outcome in those few months. World trade, world free trade, is a critical priority of the Australian Government. It is a critical priority in terms of our partners here in Europe as well. We may have different approached from time to time.
We are determined to work creatively and constructively together to get a good outcome for the world economy.
JOURNALIST: Question for President Barroso. Mr President as you know the Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern has announced his resignation today. He will be stepping down one month before the Lisbon treaty referendum, can we have your reaction to that please?
PRESIDENT BARROSOO: First of all his (inaudible) But let me tell personally, that I am very sorry that Bertie Ahern has to leave and decided to leave. He is a good friend. He has been a great partner. We have been working very closely together. Let me praise everything he has been doing for Europe in Ireland, also for Northern Ireland. I was in Belfast some time ago. It was one of the great moments of my experience as President of the Commission, was to see those parties working together in the real spirit of reconciliation that would not have been possible without the commitment of people like Bertie Ahern. So I really want to express my friendship to him and my gratitude for everything he has been doing also to the European Union. It was during his presidency that we made a lot of progress. I remember many, many hours of negotiation and I think he is a politician that has given and is giving a lot to the European project.
PM: Bertie Ahern, his contribution together with Tony Blair's to Northern Island in recent times has been extraordinary. Were it not for their respective contributions, then I agree entirely with what the President has said, what we have seen most recently in Belfast, would not have been possible.
So his contribution in terms of the settlement of a dispute which goes back centuries, many centuries, as an Australian of partial Irish extraction, I know something of it, this has been a great contribution to the world.
JOURNALIST: If I could firstly press Mr Rudd to just respond to the earlier part of the question with regard to what are the circumstances in which you might consider sending extra Afghanistan troops. But my question is to both leaders, you've spoken on the need for a more substantial relationship. That implies there has been something missing in recent times. Can I ask Mr Rudd, what has impeded Australia's relations with Europe in recent times and to Mr Barroso, do you believe that Australia has been too much of a critic and not enough of a partner with Europe?
PM: Look the key challenge here is to look to the future and not to reflect too much on the past. Let's look at Europe, you put the economies together, this is a massive economy and on top of that if you look for example at the impact for this economy, and for the global economy if we got a decent outcome on trade.
If we get a decent outcome on trade, a recent analyst suggests that global incomes would be boosted by $120 billion per annum. For Australia that would be $2.5 billion per annum. So for economies of size, and Europe's collective economy is one of size, getting good outcomes on trade is very important.
Directly to answer your question, I think in the past we have not pursued a sufficiently broad based relationship. We need to emphasise what we can achieve together on trade. Recognise and prosecute our differences in order to achieve a good outcome for all of our constituencies. But also recognise the common ground which we can forge in climate change, the common ground which we can now forge in development assistance cooperation. And the fact that we are now partnering so many European countries together in Afghanistan, for example, common security endeavour is important. Which comes back to your first question.
Our commitment in terms of the 1000 troops is rock solid. As I have said to President Bush in Washington, it is for the long haul. We believe that that commitment is sufficient. We believe that what is appropriate for the future is an effective military and civilian strategy for all participating and proper burden sharing across all participating states.
PRESIDENT BARROSOO: It will be a very important global challenge. It is obvious that all working together we can have global answers to those global challenges, such as climate change.
But also democracy and respect for human rights. But also the Millennium Development Goals. And I could go on and on. And so it is quite obvious that if Australia and the European Union work together, since we basically share the same values, regarding open economies, open societies, the rule of law, human rights. I think we can achieve a lot. I think we can give a contribution not only for the well being of the Australian people and the European Union citizens but also a contribution to make the world a more decent place.
And this was I think the most important conclusion of our meeting today. We made a real, a real commitment on both sides to give more density, to give more substance.
Dual relations, that is good. Relations between the European Union and Australia is good. But of course we can do more. An example where we can do more is precisely climate change. That was why I really congratulated, very sincerely, the Prime Minister Rudd and the Australians. So it is for this courageous move. This is a very important move, because of specific Australian reasons, in terms of their own sources of energy, in terms of their location. It is a very important move.
It is an argument we are losing, honestly, with other very important partners. So, why do we need to make progress. This is a concrete example. So now we are preparing this partnership, this key partnership agreement, framework agreement.
And I hope that our officials will prepare a very good document that will translate now in very concrete terms this determination to go forward. It is not that we will agree on all issues, as Prime Minister Rudd just said. Of course we have some times of difference consistencies, we have to.
But I believe that more than ever, in this unpredictable and sometimes very dangerous world, it is important that partners that are like minded like Australian and the European Union and the European Union member states, work hand in hand to give a positive contribution to this globally, in the 21st century.


About 100 kilometres south west of here is the French town of Noreuil.
On this day  -  the 2nd of April  -  in 1917, a soldier with the Australian 50th Battalion, Private J.C. Jensen won the Victoria Cross  -  the Australian military's highest award for bravery. 
He captured a machine gun post and took forty prisoners.
But I mention Private Jensen for more than his bravery. 
He says a lot about the links between Australia and Europe. 
He was an Australian fighting on the side of European allies in a terrible and bloody war.
Private Jensen was one of nearly half a million Australians who fought with European allies in that war to end all wars  -  fifty thousand of whom still lie in the ancient fields of this continent.
And they were soon to be followed by thousands of sailors and airmen who fought once again with their European allies (this time against Fascism).
Private Jensen himself had come from Europe. 
Private Jensen had been born in Loegstoer, Denmark, about 700 kilometres north east of here.
He was one of the multitude of Europeans who, in the course of the past 200 or so years, has made the journey to Australia to start a new life.
Today I would like to talk about a new life for the relationship between Australia and Europe.
One where we cooperate more closely on security, trade, development, and the great moral and economic challenge of climate change.
New beginning
The historical connections between Europe and Australia are profound.
Europe has nurtured Western civilisation.
Australia has inherited, embraced and adapted that great civilisational tradition. 
The modern state of Australia is heir to European philosophical and political thought.
We owe Europe a debt of gratitude for our stable system of government that has served us well over the 107 years of our federated history.
And our system of government has endured largely unchanged for more than a century already.
One reason these institutions are so enduring is that they sit on a solid foundation of centuries of European political philosophy and institutional pedigree.
At its core, this foundation is about the rights of the individual and the need for government to be accountable to the citizens they serve.
It is a noble heritage that we are proud to be part of.
But we cannot afford simply to look nostalgically back at history when we talk about Australia's relationship with Europe. 
There is too much change in the world today to only hark back to our common foundations.
Globalisation is creating a new generation of deeper, broader political, economic and personal ties right across the globe.
It is changing the way individuals and nations deal with each other.
The new technologies of globalisation are now drawing people together across continents  -  increasingly in defiance of classical geographical definitions of “region”.
If we want to look at the changes taking place in the world, one need look no farther than Brussels.
Brussels, this city, is the heart of a new experiment in sovereignty. 
Just as the treaty of Westphalia in 1648 set the ground rules for national sovereignty for centuries to come, Europe is now at the forefront of developing new notions of sovereignty.
The senseless loss of life of two world wars taught Europe bitter lessons.
The countries of Europe have made an historic decision to seek a new level of shared sovereignty between nations that transcends the normal notions of international relations. 
They are seeking to develop a strong set of rules, norms and institutions to ensure cooperation between the nations of Europe.
And in 2009 this experiment will reach a new stage. 
Once EU member states ratify the Lisbon Treaty, Europe will have a dedicated High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
The question for this new EU High Representative will be what will he or she stand for? 
What sort of Europe will this office represent?
What will be the foreign policy of Europe?
What will be the security policy of Europe?
And how will these policies differ from the national policies of the member states?
I do not know the answer to this question, but I know that as the answer emerges in the years ahead, it is likely to have a profound impact on the international society of states.
Europe is already a force for stability in the world. 
Not just in the absence of major wars from its own soil
Europe has assumed a leading role in helping Kosovo make the transition to an independent state.
Europe has also played a key role in advancing development, security and governance in Africa.
Of course the evolution of politics in Europe is not the only change we see.
With the end of the Cold War more than 15 years behind us now we are seeing a new and much more flexible global order. 
No longer do we see a competition of bloc against bloc as the foundation of international relations. 
We see nations cooperating with each across traditional groupings on the complex challenges all nations face.
As the world changes, and as Australia and Europe change with the world, out two peoples will share ever more convergent interests in an ever more shrinking world.
Europe's global reach
Europeans have settled all over the globe.
The contribution of Europeans to Australia has been so strong that it almost seems redundant to mention it. 
The European migrants that came to Australia after the Second World War and changed forever the way Australians lived, talked, ate and played.
In the process, many of these migrants, quite literally, built Australia.
They participated, for example, in the building of large scale national engineering projects like the Snowy Mountains scheme.
They came in their thousands and built a massive hydro scheme in the middle of nowhere which today displaces 4,500,000 tonnes of carbon emissions each year.
Australia offered a new start to millions of people seeking a new life away from war ravaged Europe. 
Today, some two million Australians were born in Europe and nearly 90 per cent of Australians claim some European ancestry.
But some time in the past, at a political level, Australia and Europe began to focus more on what divided us than what pulled us together. 
At the government level, we began to focus on our differences over trade policy, rather than remembering the trade and investment between our two economies is of intrinsic importance.
We have to be honest and frank about our differences. 
But should also work together where we have shared interests.
This principle extends beyond just Australia and the European Union. 
From time to time we will have policy differences with close friends and traditional partners like the United States.
Governments must make their own policy choices based on their assessment of the national interests. 
But we should not be hamstrung from future action by past problems. 
Europe in the world and Australia and Europe
Australia and Europe should take a broad view of our relationship.
Europe's GDP is more than $16 trillion  -  making it even larger than the United States.
Europe's financial markets are among the world's oldest.
They draw upon a deep pool of specialist knowledge in asset management, banking, finance and insurance. 
And today Europe's financial services firms rank amongst some of the world's largest.
The introduction of the Euro has helped reduce transaction costs and the bolstered development of a larger and more liquid debt and stock market.
The Euro serves more than the 320 million people within its member countries.
It has become a central currency in global financial markets.
It is the second most heavily traded currency in global foreign exchange markets, after the US dollar, with some 37 per cent of daily foreign exchange turnover involving the Euro on one side of the transaction.
Australia, like Europe, is closely linked to the global economy. 
We are the 15th-largest economy in the world.
Our stock exchange is among the largest in Asia  -  and has the largest number of foreign listings.
Our financial services sector has the world's fourth-largest pool of funds under management.
As two global economies, Australia and Europe are closely connected through trade and investment.
We also have strong ties in education and research.  
The EU is Australia's largest scientific partner. 
We have the Forum for European-Australian Science and Technology cooperation  -  called FEAST. 
FEAST, which is hosted by the Australian National University in Canberra, works to boost connections between Australian and European researchers.
Australia and Europe are both focused on building economic futures based on education and innovation. 
You might have heard of the Square Kilometre Array project. 
The goal is to build the world's biggest virtual radio telescope by linking together hundreds of smaller telescopes connected together through a super computer. Australia is bidding to host this project. 
I hope we can count on European support. 
It would open up even more avenues for scientific cooperation and collaboration between us.
Common challenges
Australia and Europe have a shared interest in working together to shape the changing world in ways that serve our needs.
And there are many ways we can work together.
Four weeks ago I was in Honiara, the capital of Solomon Islands. 
Solomon Islands is a country of 500,000 people that lies to Australia's north. 
It is one of our Pacific island neighbours. 
The Solomon Islands has had a difficult time in recent years  -  internal political strife and a stalled economy.
Australia has taken a leading role in helping Solomon Islands overcome its problems.
And I am pleased to say that the European Union has been an important partner in our efforts.
While I was in Honiara I opened a new National Public Health Laboratory. 
This laboratory will help Solomon Islands diagnose diseases, monitor outbreaks and improve food safety. 
It will make a real difference to the health of the people of Solomon Islands.
And our partner in this project, along with the Solomon Islands Government, was the European Union.
I hope that, in the future, we can do a lot more of this sort of cooperation, recognising as I do that the European Union is the world's largest provider of international development assistance.
If we work together, we will be able to help developing countries make better progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.
The international community agreed to the MDGs in 2007 and we are now at the half way point in the time line we set for ourselves.
Progress against the MDGs has been mixed at best, so we should look at better cooperation and coordination to deliver more effective development assistance.
Australia is keen to work more closely with the European Union and other major donors including the World Bank.
For Australia, the focus of our development assistance program is on the Pacific island nations.
The Australian Government is looking to negotiate new agreements  -  what I call Pacific Partnerships for Development  -  with the Pacific island nations to offer them greater development assistance in return for progress against mutually agreed goals.
I also want to recognise the close cooperation we have with Europe in the security field. 
Tomorrow I am going to Bucharest for the NATO meeting on Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is an example of why we need to work hard on security problems.
Afghanistan under the Taliban became a haven for terrorists.
These are the terrorists that planned and executed the attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001  -  which was in every respect an attack on the collective civilisation of the West.
Australia is an ally of the United States.
Much of Europe is an ally of the United States.
Those attacks saw the cold blooded murder of over 3000 people from all over the world. 
We have to make sure we prevent the threat of similar attacks in the future.
One important part of that strategy is helping Afghanistan become a stable country  -  no longer a safe haven for terrorists and drug lords.
It will be a long-term commitment.
It will involve putting our troops in harms way to provide security for the people of Afghanistan.
It will mean agreeing an integrated effective and collective military and civilian strategy.
It will mean all countries needing to pull their weight.
And it will mean agreeing on an effective strategy for eliminating Afghanistan's opium crop which goes to fund so much of the terrorist activity that we are fighting.
The time has come to end the disagreement on so fundamental an element of our overall Afghanistan strategy.
World Trade Organisation
Just as we need to help meet the specific security needs of individual states, we also have to make sure that there are economic opportunities to spur development around the world.
With the world's financial markets facing turbulence, we need to maintain the momentum for trade.
And to achieve that, an ambitious outcome to the Doha Round of WTO negotiations is crucial.
I believe, after the discussions I've had in the United States and here in Brussels today, that a successful conclusion to the Doha Round is within our reach this year. 
The global economy now desperately needs a shot of confidence in the arm.
Over the past five years, world trade has grown twice as fast as world output.
The message from this is clear: an important means of ensuring sustainable economic growth is to continue expanding trade opportunities.
Expanded trade opportunities  -  when combined with efforts to assist developing countries better integrate into the global economy  -  can make a real and substantial difference to development. 
What we need now is to see Ministerial engagement in the Doha negotiations as soon as possible after the release of the revised negotiating texts on agriculture and industrial products. 
These revised negotiating texts are expected in the next few weeks.
There are substantial economic gains on offer from the Round for all states  -  not just for some.
First, a successful Doha Round will bind in legal terms the significant unilateral trade liberalisation that has occurred since the Uruguay Round, thereby providing greater certainty to business.
Second, it will deliver meaningful new market access opportunities in all sectors: agriculture, industrials and services.
Third, it will lock in the elimination of export subsidies in agriculture once and for all and see a substantial reduction in domestic agricultural subsidies.
Fourth, it will see improvements in a range of other areas such as trade facilitation, which will reduce the red-tape and other costs of international trade for business.
Finally, it will reinforce the primacy of the World Trade Organisation as the body which sets the rules under which global trade is conducted.
There is still a lot of work to be done, but a deal is within our reach.
Let us imagine what a final deal on Doha might look like.
     * On agriculture it could deliver cuts of up to two-thirds or even more to trade distorting domestic support and tariffs in developed countries;
     * On industrial products it could deliver significant tariff cuts in developed countries and major developing countries  -  bringing most of these tariffs down to the teens and in many cases single digits;
     * On services it could legally bind unilateral liberalisation that has been made since the Uruguay Round and deliver new commercial opportunities in a wide range of sectors  -  transport, telecommunications and professional services. 
If we can achieve such a deal (and such a deal is, I believe, now within our reach), it will be a real boost to global trade.
All countries have an interest in a strong multilateral trading system based on agreed rules.
Given its leadership role, the European Union has an important part to play in ensuring that the Doha negotiations are brought to a successful conclusion.
It is normal past practice for Australian Prime Ministers and Ministers to travel to Brussels , bash up the Commission, issue a press release, then go home.
And it has not been unusual for the Commission to do the same.   
In a departure from normal practice and protocol, I do not intend to do this.
Certainly we have significant differences on trade policy  -  and I will certainly be defending Australia's economic interests  -  in particular those of our farmers.
But rather than shout at each other, I have proposed a new radical approach of talking with one another instead  -  and working intensively together in the weeks ahead to produce real outcomes for us all.
Australia is committed to working closely with the EU towards this end, a point which President Barroso and I have affirmed during my visit to Brussels.
I will continue to make Doha a priority in my engagement with other Leaders in the weeks and months ahead, including when I attend the G8 Summit outreach session in Japan in July. 
Leadership will need to come from all of us  -  the United States, Europe, China, India, Brazil, Indonesia  -  and the Cairns Group which Australia heads.
Leadership will require intelligent flexibility.But without it, the cost of failure is just too great  -  as the world would once again yield to the forces of protectionism.
And protectionism is the enemy of all our economies  -  and the enemy of the standards of all our working families who will pay the price if protectionism prevails.
Climate change
The biggest challenge the world faces in the decades ahead is climate change.  
It is the great moral and economic challenge of our time.
It will require concerted global action to overcome. 
We need the right domestic policies  -  such as cap and trade carbon markets and policies to promote energy efficiency. 
And we need the right international policies too.
Australia's ratification of the Kyoto Protocol underlines the fact that we are ready for the serious action required to address climate change.
I was pleased that Australia and the European Union could work effectively together (and with others) in Bali to help launch negotiations on a new, international post-2012 framework that will see all countries contribute.
We want to see “top-down” emission reduction targets for advanced economies and specific commitments to action by developing countries.
But we need to do more than that. 
We also have to support large-scale cooperative efforts to develop new low-emission technologies and to reduce deforestation.
A key element of this will be developing effective mechanisms for funding and supporting adaptation, particularly in the least developed countries and vulnerable small island states.
Australia is keen to promote a more pragmatic approach to negotiations that moves beyond the rhetoric of the past. 
To support the UN negotiations, we are also working through the Major Economies Meetings process, the climate change forums under the G8, and engaging in strategic bilateral dialogue with key countries  -  including China.
Emissions trading is at the heart of Australia's and the EU's drive to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
 Australia and Europe have a lot to gain from more frequent dialogue, information sharing and exchange of expertise on carbon markets.
And again I would propose that we become effective partners on climate change along the road to Copenhagen.
Australia and Europe should remember what we have in common. 
Not just the history  -  but also the goals we share for the future.
Europe wants to build on its stable political foundation and the freedoms its people enjoy to enlarge the democratic project.
That is what Australia wants too.
We both recognise, I believe, that we need to work more closely with each other and with other partners around the world.
Today I want to leave you with one clear message: the new Australian Government is committed to building a new, positive partnership with Europe  -  a new economic partnership, a new security partnership, a new development partnership and a partnership on climate change.
But it takes two to Tango.
Let's go forward together - and work constructively together on the great challenges which now face the international order in the new century.


It is important that the British Prime Minister has convened this conference.
It is important that you as women and men of good mind and good heart have come to this conference.
It is important because billions of working people around the world  -  including among them the least powerful in the world  -  actively depend on the success of the political project for which we stand.
The project for which we stand is a good project.
The values for which we stand are good values.
Because we are so bold as to believe that the betterment of humankind is not the stuff of ideal dreams  -  but instead is the stuff of concrete political action.
We should have absolute confidence in the central organising principle of our project: that the advancement of open economies and the advancement of human decency are not irreconcilable propositions.
These are in fact mutually reinforcing propositions as  -  complementary pathways to positive human freedom.
Ours is always a more difficult political task than the conservatives:
     * Because at base their proposition is that the beginning and end of government is the maintenance of free markets;
     * that human dignity can only be obtained through the agency of those markets;
     * and that any concern for those who have no dignity should be through the agency of private philanthropy rather than concerted public policy.
We by contrast stand for open markets  -  while having a clear-cut recognition of when markets fail.
A clear-cut definition of public goods  -  a definition that includes:
     * the security of our peoples;
     * the proper and impartial regulation of our markets;
     * the provision of universal education, of universal health;
     * the provision of a humane safety net; and
     * the proper protection of the planet as the self-evident commons of our collective humanity.
And also a clear-cut definition of our responsibility to ensure all are included in the opportunities our polities, economies and societies provide: in other words that we are in the continuing business of challenging the limitations placed on people's potential by the circumstances they inherit.
Or as David Miliband has said: progressive governments should always see themselves as insurgents  -  never as incumbents.
In other words, that an essential part of the DNA of progressive politics is our rolling assault against endemic social and economic exclusion at home and abroad.
That, of course, is the other element of our political project: we are at heart internationalists.
The values for which we stand do not mysteriously stop at our national borders or in Australia's case, the continental shelf.
We hold these values of security, freedom, fairness and the preservation of the planet to be both self-evident and universal.
That is why I am an enormous admirer of the leadership Gordon Brown has provided the world on two of the great projects of our time:
     * The war on global poverty;
     * And acting with urgency on the great moral and economic challenge that is climate change.
The Prime Minister's contribution on these two great questions over much of the last decade has been global progressive politics at its best.
Just as your collective presence here today at this conference is also global progressive politics at its best.
Because, at our absolute best, we are a movement of hard heads and soft hearts.
The Contestability of Ideas  -  a battle cry for progressive politics
Not only should we be absolutely confident of the values for which we stand.
We should be equally confident in the ideas we advance.
And in the politics we prosecute.
We must always join the intellectual debate against our ideological opponents  -  and we must prevail.
We must engage in the academy.
We must engage in the community.
We must engage in public policy.
We must engage in the brutal business of party politics.
We must engage in the media.
That, once again, is why I would like to acknowledge the Prime Minister's leadership in revitalising the Progressive Policy Network through this conference.
We are, by instinct and by intellectual inclination, a movement that is passionate about the debate of ideas.
I want to say to you today that the new Australian Government which I lead is well and truly open for business when it comes to the ideas debate.
No-one has a monopoly of wisdom in this domain.
That's why in mid-April I will convene an Australia 2020 Summit.
The Summit brings to the national capital our best and brightest minds in search of the best ideas for the country in ten key areas:
     * The Productivity Agenda - education, skills, training, science and innovation;
     * The future of national infrastructure;
     * The challenges of population, sustainability, climate change and water;
     * Future directions for rural industries and rural communities;
     * A long-term national health strategy  -  including the challenges of preventative health, workforce planning and the ageing population;
     * Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion;
     * The future of Indigenous Australia;
     * The future of the arts, film and creative design;
     * The future of Australian governance, including renewed democracy, a more open government, the structure of our Federation and the rights and responsibilities of citizens; and
     * Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
I have appointed a non-government panel of ten leading Australians to in turn select a thousand of our brightest and best  -  100 per challenge area  -  to spend a weekend speaking to government rather than government speaking at them.
So in this spirit, if any of you at this conference have policy ideas, proposals or submissions you would like us to consider, then the invitation is real: send them to my office.
We will respond in time to all of them.
I say again, when it comes to ideas and innovation, Australia is now very much open for business.
The New Australian Government
The new Australian Government is pro-market, pro-business and pro-globalisation.
The new Australian Government is also implementing a fairness agenda aimed at maximising equality of opportunity for every individual to pursue their life opportunities to the fullest  -  as well as providing a proper safety net for all without undermining individual incentive.
At the same time we are also re-engaging the international order with a view to making our own contribution to the great challenges that confront our region and the world.
We have been in office for only four months today  -  but we've been busy:
     * On our first day in office, the Government ratified the Kyoto Protocol and we are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change;
     * On the first sitting day of our parliament, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians, and have begun a policy program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia;
     * The Government also has commissioned its first White Paper on homelessness and is looking at how to invest in compassionate, pro-market solutions which deal with this gaping social challenge;
     * The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the state and territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over use and climate change;
     * The Government has also embraced a comprehensive productivity agenda based on a radical re-investment in education, skills, training, research, innovation and infrastructure  -  not just to provide the best platform for growth for the 21st century but also the best platform for opportunity: our objective is clear  -  to build in Australia the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world;
     * And the Government has also just enacted legislation to put in place a fair and flexible workplace relations system  -  one that balances flexibility for employers with protection of workers' rights and entitlements.
     * Furthermore, on the question of Indigenous policy, I have decided that each year in Australia's Federal Parliament the first working day will be marked by a Prime Ministerial statement reporting on progress in closing the life expectancy gap, progress in closing the gap on infant mortality and mortality of children up to five, and progress on closing the literacy and numeracy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
    Each year we must know as a Government, as a people, and as a country if we have made progress closing this gap.
    We should not underestimate the size of this challenge. 
    Many Governments with the best of intentions have failed in their attempts in the past. 
    But the time has come for the debate to move on from intentions and focus on outcomes, because in this endeavour outcomes are what really matters.
    This annual statement will greatly increase pressure on my Government to make progress towards closing the gap.  That is exactly why I am announcing it.
    There is no reason that in Australia today, a successful developed nation with a modern and prosperous economy, there should exist a 17 year life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians.
Internationally the Government has been active in re-engaging the United Nations (we have just announced our candidature for the UN Security Council after a 25 year absence); re-engaging Europe by developing a new Partnership Framework with Brussels across the breadth of the global agenda; and re-engaging our own region including through new forest agendas with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea and a determination to tackle the development deficit that now exists across the Pacific island states through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
Globally we will partner with the United Kingdom on the Millennium Development Goals given Australia's new commitment to increase official development assistance from 0.3 per cent of GNI to 0.5 per cent.
Just as globally we will now be working with the UK on climate change.
Australia's voice has been too quiet for too long in the councils of the world.
Instead Australia will now pursue an activist foreign policy in partnership with our allies, our region and the multilateral forums of the United Nations.
Future Agenda
The global, national and local agendas confronting progressive governments around the world are replete with challenges.
As a movement, we can turn in on ourselves  -  but protectionism in all its forms is the enemy of working peoples.
Or we can embrace the challenges of globalisation:
     * argue the case for openness;
     * celebrate the opportunities it provides for working peoples;
     * deal decisively with market failure where it occurs;
     * act compassionately, effectively and with dignity with those damaged by globalisation (and let us recognise there will always be some) so that they can participate afresh;
     * foster a dynamic culture of innovation across our societies and economies as the platforms for economic transformation for the future;
     * continue to reform our system of government and government service, so that our citizens lie at the centre rather than the inflexible behemoths of official bureaucracy;
     * and work in partnership with others to reform our institutions of global governance  -  particularly given the new challenges facing the UN, the Bretton Woods machinery and global financial markets.
Progressive politics must always embrace the future, not retreat to the insularity of the past, to forge a new politics of the centre that embraces both the empowerment of peoples through open economies and the opportunities created for people through the agency of a compassionate state.
The challenges we face are great.
But the narrative we have to offer is good  -  tempered by the experience of government, but always tested by the innovation of those beyond government.
And over the year ahead, I look forward to working with you in writing the next chapter of progressive politics and policy.


More than one million Australians were born in the United Kingdom.
Six million Australians have British ancestry.
And if you add together those with Irish ancestry you account for 8 million Australians.
I am one of them.
My father's forebears came from the United Kingdom.
Two of them were lucky enough have their passage to Australia paid for by His Majesty's Government  -  they were transported to Australia on the Second Fleet that arrived in Botany Bay in 1790.
In fact, one of them liked Australia so much that having completed his first tour of the colony and returned to London, he proceeded to re-offend and received seven further years transportation again.
It is a rare, if not unique, distinction to have been transported to New South Wales twice before deciding to go straight!
But the relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom goes beyond our ancestral interests, however colourful.
We have an evolving relationship based on shared values that continues to strengthen over time.
Over the years, Australians and Britons have fought side by side to protect and defend those shared values.
Earlier today, just before coming to this function I visited the Australian War memorial at Hyde Park Corner and laid a wreath.
The memorial commemorates the theatres in which Australians and Britons have fought together.
It is a powerful reminder of who and what we are.
So it is a great pleasure to be here today to talk to British industry and to members of the Australian business community here in London.
The commercial partnerships between our two nations are a crucial component of our modern relationship and important to our future prosperity.
I know that the Confederation of British Industry  -  representing as it does 200,000 businesses  -  calls itself the "voice of business".
Today, however, I would ask you, first, to lend me your ears.
I would like to outline for you the new Australian Government's vision for the future  -  the future of Australia and the future of our relationship with Great Britain.
My central point is simple  -  in a globalised world there are great economic synergies between Australia and Britain.
Great economic synergies that we can exploit to make our countries more prosperous and deliver a better standard of living for our citizens.
A Vision for Modern Australia
The new Australian Government is committed to building an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
That means having a modern, competitive economy.
It also means a modern Australia where everybody gets a fair go.
And that includes Indigenous Australians.
On 13 February I presented an apology in parliament to those Indigenous Australians who had been taken from their families in the past.
On behalf of the Government and the parliament I said "sorry".
The apology was part of a new beginning.
I believe that old approaches are not working and we need to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
I thought the apology was an important step to take  -  a step towards healing the hurt and a step towards a better future for Indigenous Australians. 
In a modern and prosperous Australia, there should be no reason for these gaps to exist.
In a prosperous Australia all people should have the opportunity to build a better life for themselves.
The Government's first White Paper will be on homelessness, because we believe it is unacceptable that people in modern Australia cannot put a roof over their heads.
A Vision for Australia's Economy
We also want to build a modern Australian economy capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
The Australian Government is unapologetically pro-business and pro-market.
To build a modern economy, we need to lift productivity. 
Building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century will require us developing policy frameworks to maximise Australia's global economic competitiveness in an increasingly competitive - and now, increasingly unpredictable world.
We will still exploit our comparative advantages in exporting energy, resources and raw materials.
But we also need new industries that can develop on the foundation of a strong skills base, the right infrastructure and the right policy environment.
We see a role for government as an enabler of business, not as a director.
The economic program of the new Government involves three building blocks.
Stability and Responsible Economic Management
The first is stability in macroeconomic management. This is achieved through a prudent fiscal policy and a central bank with independent carriage of monetary policy.
That is why we have increased the independence of the Reserve Bank of Australia.
That it is why we will deliver a sound budget surplus in May.
That is why we are deploying all the tools of economic policy to keep downwards pressure on inflation.
Providing Critical Inputs: Education and Infrastructure
Second, beyond stability, the Government's role is to ensure the provision of critical inputs for a modern economy.
The government must ensure the provision of high quality education, training, and infrastructure.
That is why we have a plan to build the productive capacity of the Australian economy.
This plan starts with education.
People are the greatest economic resource of our nation.
Australia needs nothing less than a revolution in education  -  a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment, and the quality of our education.
Education has also evolved into a crucial export sector for the economy.
Last year over 450,000 international students were studying in Australia. 
Education is our largest services export.  It was worth more than 11 billion dollars last year.
Alongside education, the Government's other key priority for expanding Australia's productive capacity is infrastructure.
Inadequate infrastructure is a handbrake on growth.
That is why the new Government has already appointed a Minister for Infrastructure and created an advisory body, Infrastructure Australia, led by former airline chief and infrastructure specialist, Sir Rod Eddington.
They will look at Australia's current infrastructure bottlenecks, as well as our needs for the future and develop an infrastructure priority list for the nation.
We will work together with Australian state governments to build on world's best practice instruments, including public-private partnerships, to enable private companies to finance, design, construct, operate and maintain innovative infrastructure to deliver public goods.
Creating a Favourable Business Climate: Deregulation, Competition, Federalism
The third building block for a modern economy is a favourable business climate.
We must assist enterprise through a regulatory system that encourages competition and innovation.
We must reward work and success.
That is why the government has an agenda for reform of the federation, including a plan for business deregulation.
In partnership with state governments we have identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy.
The new Australian Government is embarking on an ambitious reform agenda because we are determined to build a secure future for Australia.
We need to prepare Australia for the challenges and opportunities of the 21st Century.
The greatest moral and economic challenge we will face in the 21st century is climate change.
Australia's ratification of the Kyoto Protocol underlines the fact that we are ready to take the actions required to address climate change globally.
We also need the right domestic policies -  such as emissions trading schemes and policies to promote energy efficiency. 
Implementing an emissions trading scheme is at the heart of our domestic policy agenda.
Australia and the United Kingdom have a lot to gain from more frequent dialogue, information sharing and exchange of expertise on carbon markets.
And the business sector is an important part of this.
Properly functioning carbon markets will require companies that develop expertise in trading carbon.
It will be a new business opportunity, as the growth of the carbon market here in London has shown.
It makes the point that our responses to climate change can also generate commercial opportunities.
A Vision for Australia's Place in the World
The Australian Government is committed to engaging with the world because many of the challenges we will face this century will require global responses  -  like climate change.
There are three pillars to Australia's foreign policy:
     * our alliance with the United States  -  the bedrock of our strategic policy;
     * our membership of the United Nations  -  where we cooperate with partners around the world to meet common challenges; and
     * our policy of comprehensive engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
We will pursue our interests and make a contribution to the community of nations through what I call "creative middle power diplomacy".
For too long, Australia's voice has been too quiet in the councils of the world.
It is time for that to change.
Australia in the 21st Century Global Economy
The Australian Government is proud of the achievements of Australian businesses abroad.
The great American politician and jurist, Earl Warren, said that when he opened the newspaper he preferred to read the sports page first, because those pages record people's achievements.
Whereas the front pages record nothing but people's failures.
Earl Warren did not make mention of the business pages  -  but if you open an international newspaper today, you are as likely to find a successful Australian corporation on the world's business pages, as you are an Australian swimming champion on the sports pages.
Australian businesses have found themselves well positioned to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by the economy of the 21st Century.
The internationalisation of our economy in the 1980s and early 1990s opened Australia up to global markets, just as the economies in the Asia Pacific region began to grow rapidly.
In the last decade, the rise of China and India combined with the continuing strength of Japan and Korea has brought the broader Asian regional economy more sharply into focus.
Australia is well placed to benefit from the success of this region.
The liberalisation and internationalisation of the Chinese and Indian economies is in the process of adding two billion new people to the global market economy.
That is also two billion consumers who, as their incomes grow, demand increasing quantities of protein rich foods, energy, telecommunications, entertainment, and other services.
That is also two billion savers whose high saving rates have contributed to the growth in global savings and, at least until recently, widely available credit.
And hundreds of millions of new workers who can supply  -  at remarkably low cost  -  a significant proportion of the world's demand for textiles, electronics and other manufactured goods.
The extraordinary growth of the emerging economies in the Asia Pacific region underpins the new Government's commitment to comprehensive engagement with our region as a key element of Australia's foreign and economic policy.
For Australia, closer engagement with Asia does not mean less engagement with Europe or less attention to our European relationships.
It actually means a modern and different relationship with Europe.
This is born out by the statistics on trade and investment.
Japan has been Australia's largest export market for 40 years.
China is now our largest trading partner.
But at the same time Europe, taken as a whole, remains by far the largest investor in Australia, contributing more than 30 per cent of our stock of foreign investment.
As Australia forges ever more successfully into Asian markets, so European companies become more interested in investing in Australia as a platform for their operations in the Asian region.
Rather than having to make some arbitrary and unnecessary choice between economic relationships with Europe or Asia; we are finding that these relationships are inherently important and mutually reinforcing.
Australia has a unique opportunity to capitalise on our position as an advanced industrial economy located amid the rapidly developing economies of Asia.
To maximise that opportunity for Australia, we must work hard to enhance our natural comparative advantages.
Our goal in this regard is simple: it is to make Australia the best place to do business in the East Asian hemisphere.
We want to ensure that we have the right policy-settings in place so that Australian businesses thrive.
So that we can export more.
And continue to attract investment from abroad.
That is why, for example, we made an election commitment to cut in half the 30 per cent withholding tax on distributions from Australian managed funds to non-resident investors. 
This was a pledge I first made back in 2006.
And it is a commitment we will be honouring.
Reducing the withholding tax to 15 per cent helps Australian fund managers can compete on the world stage in managing the global pool of funds by more closely aligning Australia's withholding tax rate with those in other countries. 
And, once we implement this reform, I want to signal today that we want to remain more than competitive with the rest of the world.
These reforms build on the existing strengths of the industry in Australia.
Australia's financial sector has one of the soundest regulatory frameworks in the world.
It also has the advantage of lying in the same time zone as the East Asian hemisphere. 
Australia has strong institutional (and, increasingly, linguistic) linkages to financial markets across our region.
More and more Australian professionals are capable of operating in the principal languages of Asia.
Our industry is substantial.
It is the fourth-largest in the world with $1.3 trillion under management  -  a result of the superannuation policy reforms of the 1990s by the previous Labor Government.
And it is one we are determined to grow into a major export industry for Australia.
Australian Financial Markets
Reforming the withholding tax regime is a key part of the Australian Government's plan to ensure that our finance sector continues to grow and flourish.
A globally competitive tax regime turbo-charges investors' interest.
This objective has become even more important in the context of recent turmoil on global financial markets.
In the news in recent months we have seen, over and over again, the pain being felt by financial institutions.
What we don't see as much is the impact that this has on families. For example, let me tell you a little about Australia.
Australians have a higher proportion of direct share ownership than other industrialised countries.
Approximately 7.3 million people or 46 per cent of the Australian adult population owns shares either directly or indirectly via a managed fund or self managed superannuation fund. 
Of this, approximately 6 million or 38 per cent of the Australian adult population hold direct investments.
And nearly all working families have exposure to the share market through their superannuation. 
The high level of participation in Australia is underpinned by a high level of public confidence in Australia's financial authorities. 
This confidence also underpins the high level of foreign participation in Australia's equity markets.
As a capital importing nation, Australia's future economic prosperity depends upon our ability to attract stable, long term investment from abroad into domestic equity markets.
I am determined to ensure that the Australian regulatory framework remains at the cutting edge of financial developments to ensure an efficient, competitive and informed market.
We need to be constantly vigilant to ensure that our regulation keeps pace with the most recent financial market developments.
One of the recent developments in financial markets relates to the recent growth of financial instruments  -  including equity derivatives such as Contracts for Difference and Swaps.
I note that in the UK, the Contract for Difference market has grown significantly in recent years and that estimates by the Financial Services Authority suggest that 30 per cent of equity trades are in some way driven by Contract for Difference transactions.
Similarly in Australia we have witnessed substantial growth in equity derivative products.
Because the owners of these instruments only have indirect economic ownership over the underlying securities, these equity derivatives have enabled market participants, including speculators and hedge funds, to avoid the disclosure requirements associated with direct stakes.
As the UK Financial Services Authority has recently noted, the growing use of these instruments has raised concerns in the business community in the UK, and these concerns are mirrored in the investment community in Australia.
In particular, the lack of an appropriate disclosure framework covering equity derivatives has:
     * reduced transparency of ownership changes and takeover moves;
     *  reduced the ability of companies to know who their effective owners are;
     *  enabled hedge funds to outflank traditional institutional investors by using economic interests to influence companies. 
Today I can announce that Australia intends to take a lead in increasing the transparency of its financial markets in this important area. 
We want to ensure that Australia's regulatory regime does not impose an undue burden on market participants or inappropriate barriers to foreign equity investment in the Australian market. 
Consequently, I have asked the Australian Treasury to review appropriate disclosure requirements for equity derivatives.
I know that the Financial Services Authority here in the UK has recently been working on this area. 
We have been following their work with interest and we are keen to ensure that the lines of communication between our agencies are open.
Second, the government has been working to improve the disclosure regulations covering short selling.
The recent volatility in stock markets has been exacerbated by the lack of transparency surrounding the increasingly prevalent practice of short selling.
It is in the interests of all investors to have greater transparency around these issues.
That is why the Government has also announced it will pursue legislative change to address the ambiguity around covered short selling and disclosure. 
In addition the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) is conducting a review of settlement risks in relation to short selling and stock lending. 
The third area of reform I want to discuss tonight involves Australia's participation in multilateral efforts to improve financial market stability.
The British Government has highlighted the need for:
     * strengthened cooperation and coordination of the Financial Stability Forum and the International Monetary Fund  -  the key bodies for monitoring international financial and economic stability issues;
     *  The right structures to be in place for identifying weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the global financial system; and
     *  National authorities to take action when warnings are given.
As financial markets become more global and assets are traded more quickly between nations, so too must regulation and supervision become more global.
The Australian Treasurer will be taking the Australian Government's program for addressing the global financial turbulence to the IMF Spring Meetings in Washington next week.
We will work with other economies to improve international risk management systems by examining initiatives to:
     * Strengthen the coordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets, including more systematic cross border supervisory cooperation in the oversight of large global financial institutions;
     * Improve coordination of the international work being undertaken by the key bodies responsible for global financial stability issues  -  including the IMF and the FSF; and
     * Strengthen global standards on transparency, disclosure and valuation practices.
Our purpose in pursuing these domestic and international initiatives is to ensure that Australia continues to have one of the most advanced financial services regulatory frameworks in the world.
We intend to work closely with our friends in Britain's regulatory authorities to cooperate where appropriate and learn from each others experiences.
And we intend to work internationally on these areas through: 
     * the IMF;
     * the G20 Study Group on Global Credit Market Disruptions, which Australia chairs; and
     * the Financial Stability Forum, which met last week in Rome and said it would soon make recommendations to the G7 on a range of concrete policy responses relating to: prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management; transparency, disclosure and valuation practices; the role and uses of credit ratings; authorities' responsiveness to risks, and arrangements to deal with stress in the financial system.
We have a big task ahead of us  -  we want to build an Australian economy that will be increasingly globally competitive in the highly globalised 21st century.
We will do that by making sure that we create the right environment for business by building a highly-skilled work force, developing world-leading infrastructure and pushing ahead with deregulation.
If we want to be able to make the most of economic opportunities, we have to be outward looking.
The opening line of Rudyard Kipling's poem, the Ballad of East and West reads "Oh East is east, and West is west, and never the twain shall meet."
Well, in the world today, the old divisions of East and West are becoming blurred.
...
[Message clipped]


PM: First of all if I could congratulate and thank the British Prime Minister Gordon Brown for convening this conference. This series began back in 1999 through President Bill Clinton and has continued since then.
It is important in bringing together heads of government from across the world as well as heads of important international and regional organisations. And today the fact that you have had the British Prime Minister, the Italian Prime Minister, heads of South Africa, Chile and other countries like that and New Zealand, is important in coming to grips with key challenges in the global agenda. And on top of that, to also have the heads of the International Monetary Fund and also the head of the World Trade Organisation and other key UN representatives such as the UNDP. Not to mention the High Commissioner for External Relations for the European Union.
It is a useful gathering of people, an important gathering of people. Secondly the agenda itself is substantive. The big challenges which the world economy, the world society, is now facing is the global financial markets and the future of the Doha Round as part of the global economy. Development challenges against the Millennium Development Goals for the poorest countries in the world and thirdly, climate change.
This was a useful agenda, not just globally, but a useful agenda for us as Australians, participating in each of these deliberations as we do across the world. What I have found in discussions with so many of these leaders yesterday afternoon, and last night over dinner at Chequers, and again today. There is a useful opportunity to nudge some of these agendas forward. Let me talk specifically about Doha. Long discussions, informally over dinner last night, but again today on how to advance the Doha round.
The Doha Development Round, critical for Australia's economic interests, critical for the world economy. Critical also for the interests of developing economies needing to get a boost from greater access to global agricultural markets.
We received a good briefing from the Head of the World Trade Organisation Pascal Lamy and also a lot of exchanges about how we can urge, directly, some greater flexibility on key participating states to get a good outcome.
This thing is not in the bag by any stretch of the imagination. But we are closer than we were a week ago. And I think it has been important for Australia, but also more broadly than that, to have spent so much time on this subject recently in Washington as well, this is a critical piece of work for the international community now and for the global economy and I believe that a good outcome on Doha is a good outcome for the global economy when it needs a confidence boost. And that is a good outcome for Australia.
Secondly, I have just come now from 45 minutes or so with Tabo Mbeke, talking of course about Zimbabwe and Australia's bilateral relationship with South Africa.
It was the first opportunity I have had to meet with Tabo Mbeke so it was a good discussion and he congratulated the government on its election. We talked about a range of matters that we can pursue together over time as well. Including some of the development needs of the African continent.
Beyond that, on Zimbabwe itself, I indicated to Tabo Mbeke that Australia wanted to see, as does the international community, an early declaration by the Zimbabwe election commission, of the outcome of the Presidential elections. Tabo Mbeke has indicated that his understanding was that that declaration would occur soon. He indicated that he was surprised it had not happened just now but his understanding was that it was going to happen soon.
Secondly, we then discussed the possibility of there being a run off election, noting the position of the Movement for Democratic Change, that they would be willing to participate in such a run off election.
The position I put to Tabo Mbeke was that if that occurred, that is, if there was a run off election, which was warranted as a result of the outcome formally of the election which has just been held, and then we in Australia and the rest of the international community, would want that election to be held rapidly. Zimbabwean law provides for that to occur, as I am advised within a three week period, we would be very concerned if that was extended beyond that. Tabo Mbeke's response was that he was supportive of the view which I put, and that is that such an election, such a run off election, should occur within that narrow time frame.
Furthermore, he indicated that that was the view that he was expressing and will be expressing to both sides of Zimbabwean politics.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, is it too early to speak about the possibility of sanctions or further steps against Zimbabwe if such a run off election (inaudible) was not conducted in that (inaudible) period?
PM: Dennis, I think wisdom suggests at this stage that we ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that the Zimbabwe election commission does its job, by providing maximum external encouragement for that to occur and direct encouragement also through countries with such a close relationship with Zimbabwe and the current government as the Republic of South Africa.
I would rather not speculate on actions beyond that because what we are trying to get to at this stage is a free and fair outcome for the Zimbabwean people. And without any side of Zimbabwean politics being able to point, however wrongly, to accusations of external interference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that Britain and other nations would be prepared to substantially lift their aid to Zimbabwe, post Mugabe. Is that the Australian position?
PM: Our view is that if the Zimbabwean election results in a Government which properly and fairly represents the rule of the Zimbabwean people, then Australia of course in partnership with others in the international community would through the World Bank and by other means, participate in a reconstruction effort for Zimbabwe. And that is the conditionality.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you are going to China soon, do you intend to attend the Olympics? Secondly what more pressure other than rhetoric can Australia put on China to (inaudible) improvements in Tibet and what briefing have you got (inaudible) ?
PM: Firstly on the question of the Olympics and Olympic boycotts, I have said before and I will say it again, I don't believe that Olympic boycotts are productive. Secondly, on the question of Tibet  - 
JOURNALIST: Are you going to go?
PM: I will come to each of your questions in sequence. Secondly, the situation in Tibet, we would urge restraint on the part of all parties. Violence has occurred. It is plain that it has occurred. Restraint is necessary and I repeat what I said most recently in Washington, it is time for dialogue between representatives of the Chinese Government and representatives of the Dalai Lama.
On the question of the Olympics, as you all know the President of China Hu Jin Tao has extended an invitation to myself and to my family and what we have said to the Chinese consistently since then is that we are not in a position to confirm whether we would go. It would depend entirely on time constraints as we get closer to the event and that remains our position. Sorry, and there was one other part to your question?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the, I would rather come back to you on that, because I saw an early report of the diplomat's report and I would rather brief you further once I have had an opportunity to read it more closely.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible  -  re Olympic boycotts)
PM: My reflection is just about boycotts in general. I mean you look at the history of 1980, I mean, let's be, there is nothing new in my position there. It was just a long standing view that they don't add up to too much. They key thing is to ensure that we have an effective diplomacy which produces a better outcome for the Tibetan people. That is why I have been pretty up front and blunt about this from day one.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well obviously, obviously consistent with the remarks I made at the time when the Chinese President extended an invitation to me, not as a matter of principle. And as I have said consistently since then, it really does depend on logistics and timing and other commitments at the time.
JOURNALIST: On the financial crisis, and the future of the Doha Round, are you more optimistic now after discussing this with international institutions?
PM: With the global financial crisis, I believe that the IMF, when it meets soon in Washington, has significant challenges ahead of it. We are by no means, as a global economic community, out of the woods yet. This is, as reflected in the comments I think you would have heard today by the Director of the IMF in his remarks to this conference. Furthermore, when it comes to the core challenges of liquidity, transparency and evaluation of assets, papers prepared for that conference by the Financial Stability Forum, which Australia participates in, will be quite crucial.
That is on the global financial markets front. On the question of global trade negotiations, it is fair to say, not based just on what Pascal Lamy has had to say here publicly from the WTO but also in discussions I have had in recent days on this in Brussels and with some bilaterals in Bucharest, and also earlier in Washington, and certainly through our own reporting from Geneva that, this deal on trade lies within our grasp if there is political will. Everyone is going to have to give a bit. Everyone is going to have to give a bit
But the dividend to the global, and Australian economies, for a decent outcome on agriculture, on industrial products and on services, would be significant and substantial, therefore leadership is going to be required.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd this morning when you chaired the session on climate change you mentioned some numbers which you believe that represented a consensus from the meeting of reductions in carbon emissions I think by 2020, but I am not sure. Could you be specific for us, what do you believe was the consensus of the meeting, in terms of the size of carbon emissions that should be adopted (inaudible) and the date by which they should be achieved?
PM: Well firstly I think what I said this morning in my summation of the session which I chaired, was that the targets we set for ourselves should be significant and substantial. I do not believe I referred to any particular number or by any particular date. What I also said was, in terms of achieving whatever target, we as a global community set, should be driven by both the science and available technology.
I think the interesting thing about this discussion today was, both from Bill Clinton and from others, was that the absolute importance of acting on the technology front to reduce overall electricity consumption through better demand size management and what we do in renewables, and CCS technologies on the supply side front. So there was no explicit discussion of a consensus number and a consensus timetable, but lets face it, when it comes to making a carbon market work, when it comes to making an emissions trading scheme work, you must have a long term target, you must a have a medium term target, hence why we are going through the Garnaut process and it must be anchored into a system which is a capping trade system, which is globally compatible, and able to be rolled out as a global carbon market.
I thought it was a very good discussion.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just to clarify your position on the Olympics. You said that you don't know whether it suits your diary for time. But will matters of principle regarding Tibet (inaudible)
PM: By the way I have said that consistently to the Chinese since that time. There is nothing new in that.
JOURNALIST: But, will matters of principle over Tibet or other issues (inaudible) your thinking or your thought process over whether you decide to go?
PM: Not at this stage, but as I said, that is a question of practicality and timing. But I think the important thing for us all, discussions I have had with the Prime Minister of the UK and others is to pursue an integrated and effective diplomacy with the Chinese to try and make the situation in Tibet better. Let's not delude ourselves, this is very, very difficult. It is really very difficult. Helen Clarke, the Prime Minister of New Zealand heads from here to Beijing. The Prime Minister of Chile with whom I have just been speaking is heading off to China.
The Prime Minister of Sweden who I met in Bucharest the other day, is heading off to China. And everyone in the international community is confronting similar challenges at present. The core thing is to have an integrated diplomacy which has the best prospects of yielding a better result for the people of Tibet.
JOURNALIST: On Zimbabwe, the British government (inaudible) was considering a package around a billion pounds (inaudible)
PM: All of our officials across the international community are at work at the moment. I have spent some time in Zimbabwe in years past as an election monitor on behalf of the Commonwealth. I was in a town called (inaudible) in the Mashonaland East for more than a week and I have seen some of the ugliness on the ground, ok. Therefore, if through this election process, we can have a government of Zimbabwe emerge which properly and fairly represents the will of the Zimbabwean people, then I am confident the international community will rally round in terms of an appropriate reconstruction package.
On numbers, no we are not at that stage.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd after your discussions with the Europeans, are you convinced that they are committed to the concessions on Agriculture like you?
PM: I think what we are seeing all around, and it is quite important at this stage not to drill down in to the detail, sub-detail and subtext of where negotiating positions lie in Geneva, because they change all the time. That is just the nature of a negotiation.
But I think what it is fair to say is, for those in Washington, or in Brussels, or elsewhere, around the world, there is evidence of some political will to move in this direction. If I have had a core mission in coming abroad at this time, to argue Australia's economic interests at a time of global economic uncertainty, to work with our global partners on how we respond to the challenge of global financial market crisis and instability and associated with that, what we can do to boost confidence through a successful outcome of the Doha Round.
This has been a continuing theme of these discussions and I think just through jaw boning, a bit, don't overstate it, just through jaw boning a bit, with the Europeans and others, we may have helped nudge this process along. Just may have helped this process.
JOURNALIST: So there is not a major sticking point on the Doha Round?
PM: I would say Michelle, there are dozens of sticking points on the Doha round right now. Let's just be blunt about it. But where it was before, which was in a pre-glacial position, we are now moving rapidly down the glacier. Ok. Except, unlike moving most glaciers, we have five weeks to arrive at the end point. You know, it is going to take a bit more to gelignite this thing into gear. But given where things were frozen up until last time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Everyone is working towards a constructive outcome. Again, I won't comment on our negotiating posture, in its detail and sub-detail in Geneva.
But remember, and the reason why we have strong views on this, apart from, the global economy, giving a shot of confidence to the arm. The national economy, in terms of the long standing interests, of not just our farmers, but also those who are exporting manufactures and those who are exporting services, is that it has been absolutely essential to put our shoulder to the wheel to get a decent outcome. Everyone is engaged in that process at the moment. There are still some nation states which are sticking points, but each of us in our own ways are working on those various states around the world. It is not productive to name them.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the issue of the salute Mr Rudd, Brendan Nelson said (inaudible)
PM: Look, I think, perhaps people don't, not everyone fully understands my slightly quirky sense of humour, but I don't think that is likely to change in the future. I am not about to behave like some sort of robotical (inaudible) in dealing with people, whether they are heads of government, or heads of state or anyone else. And I think the other thing I would say is this. When it comes to our relationship with the United States, perhaps I could sum it up in these terms. We the new Australian Government, have successfully negotiated withdrawal of Australian troops in Iraq while preserving the vitality of our alliance with the United States. I seem to recall that the Liberal Party was in favour of keeping our troops in Iraq without an exit strategy and therefore consigning them there potentially indefinitely.
I think in the substance of these matters, that speaks for itself. Thank you.


Closing the life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians is a core priority of the Government I lead.
That is why on the first working day of every parliamentary year that I am Prime Minister, I will report to the Parliament on the progress my Government has made closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
This annual Prime Ministerial statement on closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians will report on;
     * Progress in closing the life expectancy gap;
     * Progress in closing the gap on infant mortality and mortality of children up to five years of age; and
     * Progress on closing the literacy and numeracy gap.
There is no reason that the Australia of today, a successful developed nation with a modern and prosperous economy, should accept a 17 year life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
There is no reason that Indigenous children in Australia should have less opportunity for education or health care then the opportunities provided to non-Indigenous kids.
This gap has no place in a modern Australia.
Each year we must know as a Government, as a people, and as a country if we had made progress closing this gap.
Every leader knows that accountability brings with it the risk of criticism of failure, as the Prime Minister of Australia I accept that risk.


DEBORAH KNIGHT:Julia Gillard is again wearing her acting Prime Ministerial hat and is our guest this morning. Welcome back to the program.
JULIA GILLARD: Hello.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: And welcome too to our panel, Malcolm Farr from the 'Daily Telegraph' and Brad Norington from ‘The Australian'. Budget night is fast approaching, now just over a month away on May 13. And while the Prime Minister has been overseas, the Opposition Leader has been sounding the alarm about the budget.
BRENDAN NELSON (Thursday): I notice that Mr Rudd has had time to meet celebrities and he had time to meet Senator McCain about the price of coffee in Canberra. I ask myself why he hasn't got the time to talk to everyday Australians suffering with petrol, with groceries and rising interest rates at the same time that the most important budget in Australia's recent history is being put together.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: Julia Gillard, the Treasurer says it will be a tough budget. How hard will it be on Australian families?
JULIA GILLARD: We've been very clear that this budget is going to be about delivering our election promises. We have huge promises to deliver. We said to the Australian people we'd deliver an Education Revolution, we'd be ending the blame game in health, and people will see those promises delivered in this budget. But beyond our election promises, we are on a campaign to get rid of waste, to drive for efficiency, to make sure that the budget is very lean. We have inherited a high-inflation environment that's put upwards pressure on interest rates, that's the legacy of the last government to the country. And we have to fight inflation - and having a fiscally disciplined budget is one way of doing that.
MALCOLM FARR: So, Minister, can you guarantee that Australian working families will not be worse off after this budget?
JULIA GILLARD: Of course I can guarantee that they will see our promises delivered, and those promises...
MALCOLM FARR: Will they be worse off?
JULIA GILLARD: Those promises are about making working families better off. We want to lift the pressure on working families; everything that this government does recognises that working families are doing it very tough. They have seen interest rates go up; they are in a high inflation environment, that's the legacy of the last Liberal government to the country. On the one hand the mortgage goes up, on the other you go down the shops and things cost more. So our aim is to leave working families better off by delivering our promises and by fighting inflation so we take the upwards pressure off interest rates.
MALCOLM FARR: Let's go to something specific. Do you favour the retention of the LPG conversion subsidy?
JULIA GILLARD: I am not going to get into a game of rule in, rule out on budget matters. Of course the budget processes are occurring now, and the budget will be delivered on budget night. What we always see in the lead-up to every budget - and this isn't about the Rudd Labor Government, this is about time immemorial and the way journalists work - in the lead-up there's speculation on a variety of questions. I won't play the rule-in, rule-out game. The budget is prepared, we are clear, we'll be delivering our promises in the budget, and that will be unveiled on budget night.
BRAD NORINGTON: Is it not possible to give your view given your colleague Resources Minister Martin Ferguson says he supports the retention of the LPG subsidy.
JULIA GILLARD: I just made it clear Brad the rule in rule out is a game I am not going to play. I anticipate that every day between now and budget night I'll open up my newspapers and in one there'll be a budget speculation story, and I think it will probably get to fever pitch it will be about whether or not we are selling the Sydney Opera House or the MCG as a fund-raiser. I am not going to get into that business. Budget preparations are confidential, and the budget will be revealed on budget night. But people should expect to see the delivery of our promises. That's what we said to the Australian people we would do on Election Day, and that's what we will do.
BRAD NORINGTON: The Reserve Bank governor Glen Stevens has been sending out mixed signals on interest rates. He said that the economy appears to be slowing down, but he still is concerned about rising inflation. Are you worried about a further increase in interest rates and the pain that might inflict on families?
JULIA GILLARD: I've been worried about every increase in interest rates we've seen, of course...
BRAD NORINGTON: But are you worried about another one?
JULIA GILLARD: Can I just say I've been worried about every interest rate increase we've seen. We saw a large number under the former government. We then, of course, inherited a high-inflation environment, putting further upwards pressure on interest rates. What are we doing in response? We are fighting inflation, because if we can deal with inflation, then we will not risk interest rate rises that you would continue to see if inflation was higher. So we have to get inflation under control.
MALCOLM FARR: Can we go to a core issue here? Who is right - you or the Reserve Bank. Glen Stevens says the talk of mortgage stress is exaggerated. He says that inflation is not out of control. Now, these aren't messages that are pleasant (a) to punters and (b) to you. Who is right?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, what the government has said is we've got a high-inflation environment. What the Reserve Bank has said is inflation has concerned it. I think that they are, if you like, compatible messages, everyone is worried about inflation.
MALCOLM FARR: No, they are not compatible, Minister!
JULIA GILLARD: Everyone is worried about the impact that has on interest rates. When it comes to mortgage stress, there are, you know, a lot of different statistical measures of a mortgage stress. But the measure I use is I talk to people in the streets as I move around, I talk to people in my local community. And people report it's tougher and tougher to pay the mortgage, house prices have gone up, interest rates have gone up, we are in a high-inflation environment, people worry about the cost of things when they go to the shops. That means working families are under stress.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: Julia Gillard, school principals are warning that your pledge to role out a million computers to schools is facing descending into a shambles. Will you take their concerns on board and change the way you roll out the policy?
JULIA GILLARD: The policy is rolling out, and every stage of it is working. We had applications close for the first $100 million actually on Friday evening. That first $100 million has been targeted at schools that have the greatest need. That is, they have a ratio of computers to students of 1 to 8 or worse. Now, some of those schools don't have any computers, if we are counting computers less than four years old, so no computers less than four years old available for students. Now, of the schools that are in that situation and were invited to apply for the first $100 million, 90 per cent have applied. Now, when you get a 90 per cent application figure, I think you can see this is a program that is being met with enthusiasm in schools because they want their children, their kids, their students to have the ability to learn in the modern environment, and that requires access to computer technology.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: Time for a break. But when we return - should political parties pay for costly by-elections. And it was a week when the Opposition Leader's listening tour of Australia turned into a musical.
(SONG) # You and Brendan Nelson And the can-do team #
DEBORAH KNIGHT: Welcome back. You are on 'Meet The Press', with our guest this morning, Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Well, Kevin Rudd is now halfway through his 17-day world tour, with an exhausting schedule of appointments and meetings. The PM has shrugged it off, but he's starting to look and sound tired. Julia Gillard, has he taken on too much, especially with crucial budget decisions awaiting his return and the 2020 Summit?
JULIA GILLARD: I know Kevin Rudd very well, and he's always highly focused on the job and able to do an amazing amount of work. I think, as people know, when you travel around the world, you are in different time zones and the like. But Kevin is always on top of the game and everything that's happening. This has been a very important trip for the country, a trip focused on getting information and having discussions about the global economic environment and, of course, some very important discussions at NATO.
BRAD NORINGTON: Nonetheless, Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Rudd has been criticised for a number of gaffes, the odd verbal stumble, and also a half salute he gave to the US President, which was picked up by cameras around the world. Is that the right sort of discipline for a seasoned diplomat like Mr Rudd?
JULIA GILLARD: I think people expect their leaders to be human beings, and human beings have the occasional joke, and Kevin was caught in a light-hearted moment and, of course, like every human being on the planet, journalists included, Kevin has the occasional joke, and he was joking with the half salute to President Bush. There was no more significance in it than that.
BRAD NORINGTON: Also related to Mr Rudd's world tour, he, of course, visited the candidates, some of the candidates for the presidential election. As Australia's first woman Deputy Prime Minister, would you like to see a woman in the White House, and do you think a woman in the White House could bring a certain perspective that men may not to world politics?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm convinced that whoever wins the American election, we'll have an American President who will be a great friend of this country, and that's good news for Australia. Our alliance with America endures no matter who is in the White House or the Prime Ministership. It's stronger than that. On the question of Hillary Clinton or Barack Obama, whoever comes through as the Democratic nomination is going to make history, whether it's the first woman, or the first African-American, it's going to be a very special moment in the political history of the planet. I'm watching it with interest.
MALCOLM FARR: Minister, back to the school computers. Do these principals of these disadvantaged schools know that they are going to have to find a lot of money to plug in - you can go down to Officeworks and buy a laptop for $500, but you also have to have powerpoints to plug them into, wifi, central computer, routers, airconditioning for a central computer, you have to be able to pay an extra power bill for all these things. Do principals know you are not going to cough up with that money, and they'll have to convince State Governments to come up with what could be an extra $100,000 a school?
JULIA GILLARD: What principals know is we are working in partnership on the delivery of this program...
MALCOLM FARR: Have they been given guarantees they'll get the money from the State?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I can answer that question. We always said this will be a partnership. We are working with our State and Territory colleagues, and the discussion we are having with them is about us putting an extra $1 billion into the vital task of getting computers in school, and in the delivery of that $1 billion, working with the States and Territories on related questions like electricity supply, like, of course, professional development for teachers, like making sure that curriculum is there that embeds the computer technology into learning. That partnership will make sure that computers are in schools in circumstances where they can be used. That partnership is working well, we are getting the $100 million...
MALCOLM FARR: By when will the first Federal Government provided laptop be up and humming with all the support systems intact?
JULIA GILLARD: By June 30 this year...
MALCOLM FARR: No, that's when the money goes out. Are you - can you guarantee that all those backup things, such as the extra power bills, airconditioning, the software will be available by then?
JULIA GILLARD: We need to have the sequence here, and let me explain the sequence, we have the first $100 million for the neediest schools, the States and Territories are working with us in the delivery of that $100 million, the money will be delivered by June 30, the money will be spent on computer technology and the partnership with the States and Territories will make sure that those computers are in settings where they can be used. Then the balance, $800 million on computers and $100 million on fibre to schools, so people can get rapid broadband access, on the further $800 million, we are working on the ongoing strategic partnership so the computers can be in schools, being used, because we are working together with our State and Territory colleagues, and that process is going well. The first $100 million will be delivered, there's an enthusiasm for it.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: OK...
JULIA GILLARD: 90 per cent of the schools asked to apply putting in applications.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: We have seen this week Peter McGauran announce his retirement from politics. We are yet to hear from other seasoned Coalition backbenchers, such as Alexander Downer and Peter Costello. Should it be up to the parties to pay for the by-elections? Should you, parties, Labor and Liberal and Nationals, be footing the bill?
JULIA GILLARD: I think elections are always going be paid for by the Australian Electoral Commission, paid for by the public purse.
DEBORAH KNIGHT: But coming so close to a general election?
JULIA GILLARD: Look, we are always going to have by-elections for legitimate reasons. Politicians are human beings, they get unwell, family circumstances change, and despite their best expectations that they were going to serve a full parliamentary term, sometimes people have to retire, ill health and other matters. But what is going on here with the Liberal Party is of course quite different to that. We have people that presented at the last election now saying they want to go. We are saying to Brendan Nelson as leader of the Liberal Party, be true to your word. When first confronted with this, Brendan Nelson said he would try and work with his colleagues, and organise a super Saturday, we'd have all the by-elections at once, making them cheaper to do. Now he's apparently saying that it's nothing to do with him. We are saying to Dr Nelson, ‘Be a leader of your party, leadership requires talking to your colleagues, if they are going to jump ship, get them all to do it so we can have all the by-elections on the same time day and at least contain the costs for tax-payers.'
DEBORAH KNIGHT: We'll await eagerly as to who the Labor candidates are for these by-elections as well. Julia Gillard, we are out of time, thank you for joining us.
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks very much.


Australia and the United Kingdom today announced an enhanced partnership to tackle the causes and impact of climate change.
The new climate change partnership is aimed at building a global low carbon economy and bolstering effective adaptation measures to the combat increasing greenhouse gas emissions.
Features of the new climate change partnership include:
     * Australia joining the UK as a member of the International Carbon Action Partnership - an association of governments working together on emissions trading.
     * The governments of Australia and the UK working collaboratively on technological solutions to climate change in particular energy efficiency and carbon capture and storage.
     * Heightened cooperation between UK and Australian climate scientists.
Building a global low carbon economy will provide new jobs, new industries and new growth for the future.
This will require an ambitious long term global target, supported by carbon markets that help drive investment in clean technologies.
For Australia, finding a technological solution to carbon emissions from coal-fired power stations is critical.
That's why Australia will work with the UK, the US, China and countries like Norway on translating this technology into an effective commercial reality.
In the lead-up to Copenhagen, the UK and Australia will become active partners in working towards a global consensus on climate change.


London, 7 April 2008. Prime Ministers Gordon Brown and Kevin Rudd met in London today at an important time in UK-Australia relations. The two Prime Ministers agreed to strengthen and transform the relationship between the two countries into a dynamic contemporary partnership.  The relationship already reflects common values, a shared history and a closely aligned strategic outlook.  Trade and investment between the two countries are strong and people-to-people links extensive.  But more can be done together.  The Prime Ministers noted that both countries faced comparable challenges. They agreed that both continue to have much to learn from each other and much on which to cooperate bilaterally and in international forums.
They emphasised their common commitment to sustainable global development.  They agreed to work together to forge an effective international system able to develop global answers to 21st century global problems.  They agreed to focus on a number of key inter-related areas to achieve this:
     * climate change
     * international development
     * trade
     * reform of international institutions;
The Prime Ministers noted that climate change represented the greatest moral and economic challenge globally for the future and stressed that it was imperative that early action be taken by all countries to respond to this challenge.
They agreed that tackling climate change should be a central element of the enhanced partnership between the two countries, using their complementary regional and global relationships.
The Prime Ministers recognised that climate change impacts will aggravate existing strains and create new tensions within and between countries as natural resources become increasingly scarce and unpredictable. The Prime Ministers noted the UK's recently published National Security Strategy and the recent report to the Spring European Council by High Representative Solana. They agreed to continue a dialogue on this issue, and for the two governments to undertake a joint analysis of the security impacts of climate change.
The Prime Ministers also recognised the economic opportunities available from taking early action to tackle climate change.  Building a global low carbon economy will provide new jobs and industries and become a major driver for economic growth and development. 
Recognising the urgency of building an effective global response, the Prime Ministers agreed that the UK and Australia will work closely together to secure an ambitious, equitable and effective post-2012 international climate change agreement based on the Bali Road Map.
The two countries will also collaborate in specific areas aimed at building a global low carbon economy and effective adaptation to climate change: 
     * Recognising that emissions trading provides a price signal that will drive investment in low emission solutions, the Prime Ministers agreed to share information and expertise on emissions trading systems. Prime Minister Rudd also announced that Australia had agreed to join the International Carbon Action Partnership, joining 24 other Governments, including the UK, to share experiences and knowledge on emissions trading 
     * The Prime Ministers agreed to foster collaboration on clean energy technology research through their respective research institutions. They will also identify areas to share experience on energy efficiency, including product standards and achieving behavioural change to reduce energy use. This will complement the collaboration with other countries under way through the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership (REEEP).
     * Deployment of renewable energy and carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies will assist both the UK and Australia to move to a secure and low-carbon energy future. The two countries will prioritise collaboration on CCS technologies (including accounting legal and regulatory frameworks; capacity building; mechanisms for financing CCS; and the development of monitoring and verification systems) and will cooperate on CCS capacity building activities in countries that are significant users of fossil fuels.  
     * Climate change scientists from the UK's Met Office Hadley Centre will work with their Australian counterparts from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO to develop a version of the Met Office Unified Model suited to modelling regional climate change impacts in the southern hemisphere. This will provide the basis for analysis of a range of scenarios for the expected Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment.
     * The Prime Ministers recognised the need for rapidly deployed funds and scaling up of finance mechanisms to assist developing countries to build low carbon and climate resilient economies.  The UK and Australia agreed to work together to strengthen the Clean Energy Investment Frameworks of the multilateral development banks, in support of the UNFCCC process and in the establishment of new funds to be administered by the World Bank - with an initial priority given to the Strategic Climate Fund and those that focus on climate resilience and reducing emissions from deforestation. The two countries look forward to further dialogue on the governance and arrangements for the new funds with other donors and recipients. These funds will be an important step in better integration of environment protection and climate change in the World Bank's development strategy and programmes. 
Both Prime Ministers stated that the international community needed to do much more to help reduce global poverty.  They recognised that efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) agreed by the international community in 2000 risk being undermined by other challenges and recommitted both their governments to work together to help achieve the MDGs by 2015.  The development agencies of both countries will cooperate closely together to achieve this, including through greater involvement with partners drawn from outside government.
Both Prime Ministers indicated they would attend the Millennium Development Goals Summit to review progress with the MDG strategy at the United Nations in September this year.  Prime Minister Rudd congratulated Prime Minister Brown for his leadership on pressing for renewed efforts by the international community to achieve the MDGs.  Prime Minister Brown noted the commitment by Australia through the Port Moresby Declaration of March 2008 and its new Pacific Partnerships for Development program to assist the development needs of the states of the South Pacific.  He committed the UK to work with Australia in coordinating the UK's own development assistance in the South Pacific with these Partnerships.  Many of these states have fallen badly behind in their efforts to achieve progress with their MDGs.
As part of this commitment, Prime Minister Rudd announced that Australia has joined the MDG Call to Action.  The Call to Action aims to galvanise widespread support, momentum and concrete action for the MDGs in what UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon has described as “the year of the bottom billion”.
Prime Minister Rudd commended the UK-French initiative announced on 27 March to support 8 million children in school in Africa by the time of 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. Australia will strengthen its development assistance activities to focus on enabling children not in school in East Asia and the Pacific to access a primary education. 
Prime Minister Rudd announced that Australia had joined the International Health Partnership, to help build sustainable health systems in developing countries and accelerate progress to meet the health MDGs.
Australia and the UK also agreed to work to deliver a step change in reducing maternal deaths. Every minute a woman dies in pregnancy or childbirth. As signatories to the International Health Partnership, the UK and Australia have today committed to ensure that their work to strengthen health systems will focus on achieving demonstrable reductions in maternal mortality. Halfway to 2015, the world still lacks the 4 million health workers it needs to provide effective health services to mothers and children.  
The UK and Australia will help tackle this crisis through exploring how innovative mechanisms can help finance health systems. And since mothers and children are also the most vulnerable to malaria, the two Prime Ministers today committed to work with the international donor community to provide mosquito bed nets to every mother and child in malaria-affected areas by 2010.  In furthering work on maternal health, the two Governments will promote links between UK and Australian health institutions.
The Prime Ministers emphasised the essentiality of open global trade.  They called for a pro-development outcome to the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) trade round.  They stressed that a successful Doha outcome would be a strong boost for a troubled world economy.  Both agreed that the Doha round must achieve a breakthrough over the next two months if it is to be completed this year. 
Both Prime Ministers agreed to press for an early WTO ministerial meeting to agree the shape of the deal in agriculture, NAMA and services. They called on all World Trade Organisation members to engage constructively in the process and to show flexibility to reach a deal in 2008. Notwithstanding the difficulties, both Prime Ministers indicated their confidence that the gap between negotiating positions was not so great that it cannot be bridged if WTO members show the political will needed to reach a deal.
The Prime Ministers discussed recent global financial market turbulence and agreed on the importance of enhanced disclosure and transparency in global financial markets. More broadly they agreed on the need for the IMF and Financial Stability Forum (FSF) to work together more closely to act as an early warning system for the global economy.
Both Prime Ministers agreed that international institutions must reflect the historic shift of economic power globally to the Asia Pacific and the need to accommodate the emergence of new big players in the global economy through reform of bodies like the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the regional development banks.  This also includes reform to the United Nations Security Council, which remains the international community's peak decision-making body on international peace and security.  They agreed to work closely together in developing reform agendas in these bodies. 
Prime Minister Brown expressed his support for Australia's candidature for election to the United Nations Security Council in 2012 for the term 2013-14.
Prime Minister Brown and Prime Minister Rudd also discussed an extensive range of other international issues which included the following:
The Prime Ministers noted that Zimbabwe may be at an historic moment of change. They emphasised that the democratic choice of the people of Zimbabwe expressed through the recent elections must be respected.  Both indicated that it was critical that any second round in the presidential election  -  if one is to be held  -  be conducted in a free and fair manner without intimidation and vote rigging and within the timeframe of three weeks prescribed under Zimbabwean law.  They emphasised that it was vital that the international community, including Zimbabwe's neighbours, continue to do everything possible to ensure that the democratic will of the Zimbabwean people is respected. 
The Prime Ministers expressed their continuing concern over the situation in Tibet and other affected areas.  Both expressed their opposition to violence by any party and called for restraint on all sides, noting that it would be tragedy for all parties if the situation were to deteriorate further.  Both Prime Ministers encouraged China to re-open dialogue with the Dalai Lama or his representatives at an early date.
The Prime Ministers underlined their shared commitment to work for political change and respect for human rights in Burma. They agreed that the regime's draft constitution and referendum process were deeply flawed.  In the continued absence of progress the UK and Australia would seek to further increase pressure on the regime.
The Prime Ministers discussed achievements and the ongoing challenges in Afghanistan with other leaders at last week's NATO Summit in Bucharest. They welcomed the strong commitment expressed at the Summit to build a stable, secure and democratic state in Afghanistan free from the threat of terrorism.  They stressed that it was critical that the new military and political strategy agreed at the Summit be effectively implemented across the whole of the country and that progress in achieving its objectives be assessed at regular intervals.
The Prime Ministers emphasised that terrorism remains a direct threat to the international community. They reaffirmed the priority they give to cooperation between the UK and Australia in countering terrorism globally.  The UK reconfirmed its support for the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement (JCLEC) and agreed to explore further avenues of practical CT co-operation, including in sharing expertise and experience in the field of counter-radicalisation.
Both Prime Ministers indicated their intention to work together on finding more effective ways to strengthen the capacity of international institutions to contribute to stabilising conflict situations and to rebuilding societies affected by conflict.  Both countries have experience of civilian/military deployments in conflict zones and agreed to share the lessons learned and best practice to improve future deployments.  Prime Minister Rudd noted that Australia is establishing a Centre for Civil Military Cooperation to build expertise in this difficult task. 
Both Prime Ministers also undertook to increase their support for conflict prevention activities, in particular through the United Nations.  Prime Minister Rudd discussed this with the UN Secretary-General in New York on 29 March and announced Australian funding to assist the UN in its conflict prevention and mediation efforts.
The UK and Australia share the same strategic objectives in combating proliferation and agreed to continue to work together to combat the threat of weapons proliferation including through the IAEA and other international organisations, treaties and export-control regimes.
Both Prime Ministers expressed their serious concerns about the proliferation threat from Iran. They emphasised the need for North Korea to meet its commitments on denuclearisation agreed through the Six Party process.
The two Prime Ministers recommitted both countries to continue to work very closely on responding to these and a range of other significant challenges facing the international community.


PM BROWN: Well thank you all very much. I am delighted to welcome Kevin Rudd to the United Kingdom. I am delighted that he and his wife Therese have been with us over the last few days.
Britain and Australia have interwoven histories. Kevin and I today agreed on an enhanced relationship to build a shared future. We share a vision about how we can work together to build better international institutions for the 21st century challenges.
We will engage our complementary networks of international partners and regional and multilateral organisations in this process. Specifically, our governments will collaborate in far greater detail in three key areas, beyond the enhanced security cooperation we have also agreed. On climate change where we will work together, on development and trade, where we believe that major advances can be made by working together in the next few weeks as well as years on the reform of international institutions and particularly on managing many of the changes that are necessary in the international economic system
So we are both committed to the reform of the international institutions to make that possible, and we agreed a number of measures that are set out in our Communique. First of all we agreed on the urgency of tackling climate change. We have a shared analysis of the threats that are posed by environmental neglect. We agree on the immense economic benefits in new jobs and industries which a global low carbon economy can bring. We have agreed to work together in close partnership to achieve a post 2012 international agreement on climate change by the end of next year and we will now collaborate on a range of areas where both of us working together can make a huge difference.
I am pleased that Prime Minister Rudd has agreed, and announced that Australia will join the international carbon action partnership. We will work together on clean energy technologies, particularly carbon capture and storage, where our research institutes will work in partnership on climate sciences. Scientists from the Hadley Centre of the United Kingdom, that office will collaborate with Australian counterparts on climate modelling. And we both support the establishment of a strategic climate fund at the World Bank.
On development we have agreed that we will work together in the International Health Partnership on education for all so that millions more of the world's young children can go to school for the first time. And we have discussed how we can deal with some of the great challenges that determine mortality and malaria and many of the diseases where we have the science to eradicate the diseases but have not yet shown that we have the political will to do so.
We agreed that a world trade deal is urgently necessary. And we will work together to achieve that deal hopefully within the next few weeks.
We discussed Afghanistan where we have common ground, because both of us are engaged in civil and military deployments in these areas, so that we can show that the front line against the Taliban is being properly supported. And we agreed that we will continue to cooperate on many of the great security issues of the time.
Kevin, it has been a privilege to welcome you and your wife here to London. We thank you for coming within such a short time of assuming government in Australia. We congratulate you on the major announcements you have already made as Prime Minister, on the environment and on the economy as well as on international development and we look forward to a fruitful and constructive partnership and will welcome you back any time to London, that you are able to come and join us.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much Gordon and thank you for the hospitality with which you have received us here in London. And it is great to be back in London. I have been here many times over the years and I look forward to being back here in the future as well.
The Australia Britain relationship is in first class working order. We have a great history of cooperation with one another, going back over a long, long time.
The focus of our discussions has not been to reflect on the history, but to plan our common future. The bilateral relationship is in strong working order. It is a close relationship, it is an intimate relationship and it will continue that way to the advancement of our respective national interests.
But what we have discussed today is how to broaden that relationship beyond the bilateral. To broaden it into a new period of cooperation between Britain and Australia in shaping the global order. And that is why we have spent so much time these last several days, discussing what we can do together in response to challenges on global financial markets, challenges to the global economy in terms of the current trade round and opportunities, challenges on global poverty in terms of where we go with the Millennium Development Goals, challenges globally, on the question of climate change and also where we go to more broadly in our cooperation across the global agenda.
If you look at Britain and Australia, we are countries of enormous complementary strengths. We are both allies of the United States, we know our friends in Washington very well. At the same time, Britain is strongly engaged in Europe and strongly engaged in high councils in Brussels.
We Australia, are strongly engaged in East Asia and have been as a consequence of our own regional circumstances. Therefore we bring these strengths to the table because most global outcomes hang at the end of the day on what happens from the Americans, what happens in Europe, what happens in the Asia Pacific region.
There is much for us to bring together to the table. So what we have agreed is that in terms of the coordination of our positions, on these key global challenge areas of development on climate change and on the international economy and elsewhere, we will now look at machinery to bring us closer together in coordinating those positions because I believe we are forces for good in the world.
On the specifics of the agenda, as Gordon has just indicated, our troops are in the field together in Afghanistan and currently in Iraq. We respect enormously the contribution of our fellow British combatants in Afghanistan and we have had extensive discussions on how to take that forward in Bucharest. On climate change, we have confirmed today that Australia will be joining the International Carbon Action Partnership.
We have also agreed that we will work together more intensively on the question of CCS, carbon capture and storage. Critical here, critical for Australia, critical for our friends in Norway, with whom we have been having discussions on this in recent days, critical in the United States, and in terms of climate change for China in the future, critical, in particular there.
Also we have the time ticking away on Copenhagen. Copenhagen, when you look at it, it lies barely 18 months away. It was hard enough to get this current round of negotiations started in Bali. The conclusion of these discussions on a post 2012 arrangements for climate change will be very difficult indeed and we intend to work closely together on it.
On international development, Gordon's leadership in this area goes back a long, long time, through the period that he was Chancellor. One of the things that we would like to sign up to which Britain has been so strong in global leadership on is the International Health Partnership.
And one of the applications of that which we have discussed at length this morning is what it will do in the area of avoidable maternal deaths. There is something like half a million deaths each year, I am advised, from women in childbirth and this is simply an obscene number which we the community of nations should do something about.
Within this international health partnership we propose to partner with the UK in making sure that this becomes a key achievable area of progress against the Millennium Development Goals.
The other initiative which Britain has been particularly in support of is education for all. Particular emphasis in Britain's case on Africa, we intend to do something parallel in the case of the Asia Pacific region and the Pacific Island countries in particular.
International financial markets and trade has been the subject of extensive discussions between us over the last several days. We believe that on the global financial crisis and the upcoming meeting of the IMF in Washington, that it's critical that we achieve global outcomes, particularly in the areas of valuation, particularly in the areas of transparency and the other challenges associated with the global economy right now.
And trade, I would suggest that both Gordon and I will be very active on the telephone in the weeks ahead as we try together, with our friends and partners across the world, to forge what I believe is a critical outcome necessary for the global economy. If we can pull off a global free trade deal now, in the midst of so much global economic uncertainty, this will be a great shot in the arm for the global economy. And our combined diplomacies in Geneva and in capitals, will be headed in this direction in the period ahead. Thank you Gordon for your hospitality. I look forward to this new page, this new stage in the Australia-UK relationship.
PM BROWN: Thank you very much this is definitely a new chapter that we are entering into today with regular and clear procedures for cooperation over the next period of time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM BROWN: Well let me first of all pay tribute to the police who managed a difficult situation well yesterday. This is a democratic country, people in this country are free to express their opinions within the law. I think it is important to recognise that there are strong feelings about Tibet and about what is happening there.
I have raised the concerns I have about the human rights situation in China every time I have talked to Chinese leaders and I was in China a few months ago to do that. We will continue to do so.
As far as Tibet is concerned, we would call for restraint and an end to violence. We believe that the human rights dialogue has got to continue and be stepped up and we would welcome discussions between the Dalai Lama and his supporters and the Chinese authorities to bring reconciliation in this area.
JOURNALIST: Alison Carrabine, Fairfax Radio. Prime Minister Rudd you have voiced your support for an Australian Republic but you won't be pinned down on the timing of a referendum, are you not defying the majority of Australian public opinion in pushing the referendum off into the never never, can you commit to framing a question in this term of government and Prime Minister Brown, to you sir, does it not surprise the British people that a country as politically mature as Australia is still not willing to stand on its own two feet?
PM RUDD: What a great pair of questions. I am sure Gordon will answer that in his own time. Look on the question of the republic. I am a life long republican. First point. Second is, it is absolutely clear in the Australian Labor Party platform, that is where we intend to go. Thirdly, I also honour the commitments I made before the last election when asked this, I said, for us it was not a top order question.
We were elected, we are now the Government. From our point of view, given the other priorities in the global economy, the domestic economy, the challenges in education and health and climate change and water. In Australia, these are occupying the full attentions of Government right now.
I expect that in the course of the year ahead, you will have an accelerating public debate about the republic and I welcome that, we should do that, we are a democracy and we will be looking carefully at the way in which that debate unfolds. But we have other fish to fry right now in terms of the priorities back home.
But let me tell you, once a republican, always a republican, these questions are a matter of time and due process.
PM BROWN: This is a matter for the Australian people. We welcome the strength of the relationship between our two countries, we believe that that relationship is stronger. For them, decisions about the future are a matter for the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) calling for more help from the US, the UK and South Africa, how does your meeting (inaudible)
PM BROWN: Well first of all on Zimbabwe, I had a meeting with President Mbeke yesterday and we discussed all the issues effecting Zimbabwe. I have also to talked to the President of Uganda, Museveni. I have been in touch with Mr Kikwete who is the President now of the African Union. I have kept in contact with Kofi Annan who is the mediator who worked very hard in Kenya to bring an end to the violence that happened after the elections there. I think two things are very important now.
First of all the results have got to be published, there cannot be further delays in the publication of results. I think the international community is, the eyes of the world are on Zimbabwe and results that are being, the results that will be the outcome of elections should be published.
The second thing I think is clear is, there has got to be a report about the monitoring of the elections from the (inaudible) Group and if there is to be a second round of elections, it is very important that there is proper international monitoring of what is happening.
And I believe that these are the two things that the international community can ask for and it is right for us to do so. I will continue my talks with the African leaders that I have mentioned and I believe that there is a united will of the international community that elections have got to seen to be fair, elections results have go to be published. Elections have got to be properly monitored.
You asked also about the announcement in the next few minutes about nurses pay. We are breaking (inaudible) conditions in the current global financial turbulence that we are facing. Where there is stability in Britain and where we have low inflation and low interest rates. And as a result of the decisions that we made which were controversial on public sector pay last year, we have lower inflation than our major competitors and interests rates have managed to come down twice.
I think it's important looking forward that we also create the conditions for low inflation and to relieve pressure on interest rates. That's why I think three year deals on public sector pay are an important element of what we can do to contribute to a low inflation economy that is stable and able to withstand the global financial turbulence. That's why I am pleased that the teachers have a three-year deal, public sector civil servants have a three year pay deal, the Department of Work and Pensions and the Job Centre staff have a three year deal and I look forward to the announcement that the nurses will have a three year pay deal as well.
Now these are the first times in the memory of our country that we've had these three-year pay deals. These are important to stability. I think they will be seen as a landmark in allowing us to move forward in the battle against inflation. I think it will give a certainty to our economy at a time when there is uncertainty around the world. And it shows that we can deal with the challenges ahead and deal with them in a long-term way that is to the benefit of the nurses who deserve proper settlements and proper pay for the work that they do and the interests of the whole economy which needs the stability that such a deal will give.
JOURNALIST: David Crowe from the Australian Financial Review. I have a question to both Prime Ministers about China. You both play down the idea of boycotting the Opening Ceremony and Mr Rudd, you said that won't work. But wouldn't you acknowledge, both acknowledge, that (inaudible) against South Africa in the 1970 boycotts did work. What's different here, are you too scared to use a lever that has worked in world affairs in the past and a related issue, yesterday amid the protests, Mr Brown didn't take hold of the Olympic flame. I wonder Mr Rudd will do so when you, when the flame gets to Australia? And in Australia, will the flame be guarded by a dozen Chinese bodyguards?
PM BROWN: One of the differences between now and previous times is that the Dalai Lama who is a the centre of some of this controversy has said very clearly that he does not want the boycott of the Olympics and I think there is a general view that a boycott of the Olympics would not assist this current situation, that most important thing that there is dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama and his supporters.
And remember the basis of this is that the Dalai Lama has made it clear that he does not wish there to be an independent Tibet, he is prepared to accept this part of China and that he renounces violence as well as of course, that he doesn't want a boycott of the Olympics.
So there is a basis for dialogue around these very difficult issues where we again call will for restraint and call for reconciliation. As far as the torch is concerned it was always agreed as part of the exercise of coming around the different countries that the torch is passed between athletes as it was at Downing St, and that's what happened yesterday but I was pleased to be part of the ceremony where it happened.
PM RUDD: On the question of boycotts, I agree with the position that Gordon has just put. The first thing to bear in mind is what the Dalai himself has said and our position, and the British Government and others is that there needs to be a renewed process of dialogue between the Dalai's representatives and the representatives of the Chinese Government.
Secondly on the historical question of Olympic boycotts, is anyone suggesting that the Soviet Union withdrew from Afghanistan eventually because of what happened the 1980 Olympics in Moscow? I don't think so.
It's my general view that these things at the level of the Olympics don't work. On the second question about the Olympic torch going to Canberra I think it's arriving in Canberra on the 24th of April as I understand it. That day we have in Sydney the memorial service for HMAS Sydney. That has been announced quite some time ago if you're aware. The Sports Minister as I'm advised will be receiving the flame in Canberra, or the torch, in Canberra when it comes through.
Britain's circumstances are obviously somewhat different. They are hosting the next Olympics and I think that places their situation in a somewhat different context to perhaps a number of other participating states.
Your third part of your question is about security forces. As the Attorney General said in Australia some weeks ago, we will not be having Chinese security forces or the Chinese security services providing security for the torch when it is in Australia. We, Australia will be providing that security. What Olympic officials the Chinese bring to Canberra is a matter for them but on the security front we will be providing that security.


It is an honour for an Australian Prime Minister to come to speak at the London School of Economics, an institution with such a remarkable history.
When the LSE was founded in 1895 by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Graham Wallas and George Bernard Shaw, its goal was the bettering of society through research into poverty and inequality.
The Social-Democratic response to these great social challenges has rightly changed over time  -  but the relevance of these challenges in themselves has not.
It has surely exceeded even their lofty vision.
Through its doors have passed fifteen Nobel Prize winners, forty-two heads of government and heads of state (including John F. Kennedy, Clement Attlee and Romano Prodi) as well as many leaders in business, academia and law.
One of the most famous Australian LSE graduates was Herbert Cole Coombs (affectionately known back home as “Nugget”) who took his PhD from the LSE in 1933.
Nugget Coombs is remembered as one of the greatest public servants in Australian history, serving as the first Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, helping to establish the Australian National University (my own university) and championing the interests of Australia's indigenous people.
Many of Australia's most talented students continue to come to LSE and this institution continues to strengthen the bonds between Australia and the United Kingdom into a new century.
Another part of the deep bonds between our nations is of course our shared roles in the conflicts of the 20th century.
On Friday when I arrived in London, the first official event on my program was to visit the Australian War Memorial at Hyde Park corner and lay a wreath.
That memorial commemorates the Australian servicemen and women who fought alongside Britons in two World Wars.
The memorial says a lot about who we are and where we have come from.
Australia and the United Kingdom have always been the closest of allies.
In two World Wars, Australians and Britons, fought side by side in theatres of battle right around the globe.
In Europe and the Atlantic.
In Asia and the Pacific.
And we did so in the name of the values that we still hold dear: values of freedom; values of fairness; values which cause us instinctively to seek wherever we can to defend the weak from the strong.
Our histories have been intertwined since the 18th century.
Australia's modern political and legal system is built on the foundation of British philosophical and institutional traditions that we have inherited.
And these are good traditions.
But today I do not want to talk about our shared history.
I want to talk instead about our shared future.
I want to talk about how Australia and the United Kingdom can work creatively together to shape the future global order.
On security.
On global economic management.
On economic development for the poorest nation states.
And on climate change.
Australia in a changing world
The time has passed when countries  -  including those with close ties like ours  -  can talk about their bilateral relationships as though they take place in some sort of vacuum.
In today's world, we are all deeply connected to each other within an increasingly inter-connected global order.
This complexity is compounded by the fact that in this age of the globalisation of security, the economy and the environment, we are also witnessing the collapse of what the international relations scholars have described as “the great divide”  -  between what was once clinically described as the “foreign” and the “domestic”; the “internal” and the “external”; the “national” and the “international”.
All governments are increasingly operating in a seamless policy space where better coordination and cooperation within and between states has become more important than ever.
The new Australian Government's mission is to build a modern Australia that is capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st Century.
That means we have to be strong at home and fully engaged abroad.
We are committed to strong macro-economic management  -  critical in an increasingly fragile global economy.
We are committed to investing strongly in productivity  -  we need nothing less than an education revolution to make sure that our people have the skills and training to compete in the fiercely competitive global economy of tomorrow.
We are committed to building 21st century infrastructure  -  both transport infrastructure and the infrastructure of the future like high-speed broadband.
And we are committed to building an inclusive Australia  -  where the benefits of prosperity are open to the many, not the few.
Australia is already deeply integrated with the global economy.
It is now a quarter of a century since the election of the Hawke Labor Government that pioneered extensive economic reforms that internationalised the Australian economy.
Australia's economy is worth around USD$1 trillion and we are a member of the G20 group of large economies.
Our international trade in goods and services is equal to around 40 per cent of GDP.
Our major export markets are in Asia.
Our major foreign investors are the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan.
Our major investment destinations are those same three countries and New Zealand.
In short, Australia is a full participant in globalisation and we recognise that as a beneficiary of globalisation, we also have to maintain, support and enhance the global economic order  -  and the political and security order that underpins it.
To do so, the new Australian Government will prosecute what I call “creative middle power diplomacy”.
That means we will use our assets, strengths and networks and work with our partners to find solutions to global and regional challenges.
We will approach our task based on the three pillars of the foreign policy of the new Australian Government:
     * our alliance with the United States;
     * our membership of the United Nations  -  where we work with partners from around the world, including our partners in Europe; and
     * our comprehensive engagement with Asia and the Pacific.
What sort of international order do we want for the 21st century?
Today I want to argue that, in a rapidly changing world, Australia and the United Kingdom have a lot to gain from working with each other to shape the emerging global order  -  particularly given Britain's strength in Europe and Australia's standing in Asia.
Both of us are long-standing allies of the United States.
And we are both deeply engaged in the other two major regions of the current global order  -  Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.
And in Australia's case we pride ourselves on being the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
For the UK and Australia, this is not a bad set of strengths to bring to the table as countries seeking to contribute to the shaping of the global order.
Furthermore, we actually get on with each other (at least outside the legitimate and visceral hostilities of cricket where, very simply, we are good, and you are not so good, and the loss of The Ashes is as unjust as the loss of the Elgin Marbles).
The open global architecture pioneered by the United States and its allies in the aftermath of World War II has led to remarkable economic growth.
But there are challenges aplenty ahead.
     * Enhancing the global security order by acting decisively and pro-actively on terrorism;
     * Reforming UN multilateralism;
     * Restoring stability to global financial markets;
     * Making progress on trade liberalisation;
     * Delivering on the global undertaking to make poverty history by making sure that the benefits of globalisation are spread more evenly around the world.
     * Enhancing human rights and not ignoring them  -  even when it is politically difficult, as is currently the case with China over Tibet.
     * And, in addition to all these great challenges to the global order, we must build a co-ordinated response to climate change  -  the great moral, economic and environmental challenge of our age.
Australia and the United Kingdom shaping the world order
Australia and the United Kingdom can do a great deal to advance a shared vision for the future.
Counter-terrorism
For instance on security.
We both have a stake in global security.
That gives us reason to work together on terrorism  -  not just closely, but with absolute intimacy.
Terrorism remains a threat to Australia, just as it does to the United Kingdom.
Part of our response must be domestic  -  police and intelligence agencies need the powers and resources to identify terrorist threats.
They must do so in a way that is consistent with our laws and values.
But terrorism is not local.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon that exploits the openness of the international system to build its organisations and to plan its attacks.
Cooperation across borders between our government agencies is a crucial element of our response.
We can achieve a lot by sharing expertise on counter-terrorism across borders.
For Australia, working closely with our colleagues and partners in South-East Asia is critical.
Institutions like the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation build practical expertise  -  and Australia and the UK both support its work.
We also work together in Afghanistan.
We are both committed to supporting Afghanistan in the long-term.
Last week I attended the Bucharest Summit of NATO leaders to discuss Afghanistan.
Australia is the largest non-NATO contributor to troops in that country.
More than 1,000 Australian service men and women are there, largely in the dangerous south of the country, as is the United Kingdom.
They are putting their lives on the line.
We worked together in the run-up to the Bucharest conference to deliver a workable plan for Afghanistan's future.
A plan that integrates the civil and the military components of our strategy.
A plan capable of delivering a better future for the people of Afghanistan  -  and a better strategy to frustrate Al Qaeda's efforts to make Afghanistan a renewed base for terrorist activity that threatens us all.
And beyond these classical counter-terrorism measures, to work together on reducing the grounds that foment terrorism in the first place  -  investing in education in the Islamic world as well as acting together on a comprehensive Middle East peace process.
Climate Change
When I met with Gordon Brown this morning, we discussed the security implications of climate change.
Climate change will aggravate existing strains and create new tensions within and between states as the supply of natural resources, including food and water, becomes increasingly unpredictable.
Climate change is not just an environmental, economic and moral challenge.
It is also a security challenge.
Australia wants to be part of the global solution, not just the problem.
The first act of the new Australian Government was signing the papers to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We will continue to work constructively in the international arena.
And we see the United Kingdom as a key partner in this.
That is why I was pleased to announce with Prime Minister Brown today a new enhanced partnership between our countries - with climate change at its heart.
We share a vision for an ambitious, equitable, environmentally effective, economically responsible post-2012 global agreement on climate change and will work together to this end  -  drawing on our complementary regional and global relationships.
We will also collaborate in specific areas aimed at building a global low carbon economy together with effective adaptation to climate change:
     * Collaborating on clean energy technology research and the deployment of energy efficiency, renewable energy and carbon capture and storage technologies.
     * Developing climate models that bring together the work of UK and Australian climate scientists.
     * Sharing information and expertise on emissions trading  -  which is why I also announced today that Australia will join the International Climate Action Partnership.
If we are going to reach an effective global response we will need an ambitious long term global target, supported by carbon markets that help drive investment in clean technologies.
Technology must be a big part of the solution.
Australia is the world's largest exporter of coal. For us, finding a technological solution to carbon emissions from coal-fired power stations is crucially important.
Work on these technologies is moving ahead. Last week in Australia we opened our first carbon sequestration pilot plant.
Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States, China and other countries like Norway must work more closely together on translating this technology into an effective commercial reality.
Technology is crucial to achieving cuts in emissions.
So too is action on energy efficiency.
As is action on deforestation, re-afforestation and avoided deforestation in countries with major rainforest cover  -  as Britain is doing in partnership in the Congo and as Australia is now doing with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea.
The transition to a global low carbon economy will provide new jobs, new industries and new growth for the future  -  although structural adjustment will be necessary for all countries.
Consistent with our international approach, we are also committed to tackling climate change in Australia.
We have committed to a target of a 60 per cent reduction of emissions based on 2000 levels by 2050. And we will develop interim targets in the year or so ahead.
We are working to establish a mandatory cap and trade emissions trading scheme by 2010.
And by 2020, 20 per cent of Australia's power generation will be sourced from renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power.
Again, in the lead-up to Copenhagen, the United Kingdom and Australia will be working together towards a global consensus on climate change.
Development
Australia and the United Kingdom can also work more closely together on the global development challenge.
Today I announced that Australia would be signing on to Prime Minister Brown's Millennium Development Goals (MDG) Call to Action.
We support its aim of working for accelerated progress towards the MDGs.
We want to work together on important issues like reducing maternal deaths.
It is deeply disturbing that still in 2008, every minute a woman dies in pregnancy or childbirth.
We are committed to cooperating to achieve demonstrable reductions in maternal mortality.
The Millennium Development Goals must be achieved by 2015.
Already, at the half-way mark, progress in some countries is mixed at best, and in some cases downright disappointing.
When I visited Papua New Guinea recently, I announced that Australia would place the Millennium Development Goals at the centre of its development assistance to the Pacific Island nations through our proposed Pacific Partnerships for Development.
Australia will also work closely with the United Kingdom in the lead up to the UN special conference on the Millennium Development Goals in September.
These two challenges  -  climate change and development  -  are closely linked.
Climate change is already making it more difficult to achieve the goals of poverty eradication and sustainable development.
The World Bank estimates that 20-40 per cent of all overseas development assistance is at risk from global warming.
Therefore the development challenge will require effective integration with the climate change challenge, both in reducing emissions and adapting to the impacts of climate change.
It will also require greater effort - which is why Australia has now embarked on a program to lift its official development assistance (ODA) from 0.3 to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income (GNI) by 2015.
Australia, Britain and the European Union should also work on better coordinating our development efforts among the Pacific Island countries.
Likewise, Australia intends to examine how we might modestly partner with Britain (and the Commonwealth) in defined development challenges in Africa.
Our efforts must be effective, long-term and global if we are serious about making poverty history.
International Financial Institutions
I am a firm believer in the role of international institutions.
Australia played a significant role in the founding of the United Nation some 60 years ago through our then Foreign Minister Bert Evatt.
Evatt sometimes riled his colleagues from the great powers, but he was recognised as a champion for the rights of smaller countries, a critical factor in building effective institutions.
International institutions help to build rules and norms of international behaviour.
The United Nations  -  and other global institutions  -  need to evolve and reform if they are to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
The structure of international institutions must reflect the realities of the modern world.
The Security Council needs to better reflect the world of the 21st century.
Australia supports Japan's and India's bids to become permanent members of the Security Council.
As a demonstration of our commitment to the United Nations, I announced in New York last week that Australia will seek a non-permanent seat on the Security Council in 2013-2014.
I am committed to boosting cooperation between Australia and the United Kingdom in the UN, including on questions of reform.
Australia and the UK can also work together to push for a successful outcome to the Doha Round of World Trade Organisation negotiations.
We are at a critical stage in the negotiations.
Negotiating texts will be out soon and Australia supports the idea of calling for early ministerial attention to the texts to concentrate peoples' minds and get an outcome on Doha.
Freeing up trade is too important to the world's economic future to let this chance pass.
We can also work together on reform of the international financial institutions  -  the IFIs.
The IMF should adopt at the end of this month a package of measures aimed at better aligning its members' quotas (or shareholdings) with their weight in the global economy.
Quotas are the main determinant of voting power in the IMF.
Emerging market economies will be the main beneficiaries.
Korea will see its quota double.
China's quota will increase by 50 per cent, and India's and Brazil's each by 40 per cent.
The reform package will provide for further adjustments for emerging markets in future years.
Prior to the reforms, China's IMF voting share was less than the combined shares of Belgium and Switzerland!
The package also contains important measures to increase the voice of low-income IMF members.
Australia can take some credit for these outcomes.
Some years ago we were among a handful of countries urging the need for quota reform to enhance the IMF's legitimacy and relevance, particularly among emerging market economies in our region.
In 2006, under Australia's chairmanship, the Group of 20 (G20) played an important role in the development of the first stage of the current reform package.
Australia has recognised that this is not a zero-sum game  -  that all IMF members will benefit from a Fund that has greater legitimacy and relevance, and is therefore more effective in fulfilling its vital mandate for international financial stability.
Global Financial Markets
Reforming the IMF is important for the long term.
Dealing effectively with the current global financial crisis is of immediate importance.
The current crisis is significant in the overall context of the economic globalisation process we have all experienced over the last two decades.
Economic globalisation has been driven by three principal forces:
     * the liberalisation of global capital flows;
     * the liberalisation of global trade flows; and
     * the explosion of the new information communication technologies that have underpinned both.
These are the arteries of the globalisation process.
I've already spoken at length about the current challenges to the further liberalisation of global trade flows.
Progress is critical if we are to combat the forces of protectionism, and resolve trade disputes effectively.
The current global financial crisis goes to the imperative of sustaining the strong capital flows that have underpinned the global economy's strong growth in recent years.
We need to maintain a global regime that fosters open capital markets that allocates the world's saving to its most profitable uses, within frameworks of supervision and regulation that maintain confidence in the system.
Of course there are different views on the current financial crisis, and whether it represents a significant market failure or simply a market-based re-pricing of risk.
Either way, the crisis has highlighted the challenge of ensuring that regulatory frameworks keep up with the innovations in financial instruments.
In Australia we have found during the credit turmoil that our regulatory framework is doing its job.
I was pleased to see Sir Howard Davies in a recent Financial Times opinion piece rightly drew the connection between the Australian “twin peaks” regulatory model, and the proposed reform of the regulatory arrangements in the United States.
I don't know whether I would go so far as to agree with Sir Howard's view that the “US Treasury has come to rest near Sydney Harbour”, but I can say that our regulatory arrangements are working well.
This is not to say that our regulatory system can't be improved.
The current turbulence has exposed a number of gaps gaps, which we have announced we will fill.
It has of course also exposed gaps in the international network of surveillance and regulation, which we want to see remedied.
There is a parallel between the oversight of global financial markets and global trade  -  in that effective globalisation in both cases requires effective regulatory regimes that can sustain and, in the event of crisis, restore confidence.
As I said at the Progressive Governance Conference here in London last Friday, modern social democrats believe in open markets; but they also believe in the effective regulation of those markets  -  we are very much the party of intelligent regulation.
The challenge we all face now (Australia and the UK included) is to ensure we get the balance right between market freedom and market regulation.
We should not over-react to recent events, but equally we need to address the problems that have been exposed.
Further, we must coordinate our response to the financial crisis.
Australia and the UK are both members of the Financial Stability Forum and we are contributing significantly to the development of new regulatory approaches to global financial markets through the FSF.
And will continue to do so at the upcoming meetings of the IMF this week in Washington.
Once again the UK and Australia will need to collaborate closely on this work, focussing on matters of valuation, transparency and liquidity.
A key lesson from all of the market trauma of the last six months is that when it comes to something as fundamental as the integrity of financial markets, good rules are essential.
In fact, it is government's responsibility to make the rules which will ensure that open economies and open markets are able to continue to support economic globalisation.
Governments have a role in protecting the integrity, trust and functionality of markets.
We make no apology for now insisting that the rules be reviewed to increase the disclosure and transparency so that a sensible assessment of financial risks is possible.
I entitled my remarks tonight “Australia and the UK, global partners in shaping the future global order”.
The challenges to that order are as broad as they are deep.
Security, global financial markets, global trade, the Millennium Development Goals and climate change.
But what is remarkable about all these challenge areas, Australia and the UK exhibit an extraordinary similarity (if not universality) of interests.
Modern Australia and modern Britain both see ourselves as committed global citizens.
We are both strongly committed to contributing to the future global order.
And above all, both Australia and Britain are forces for good in the world  -  a world in which the number of national actors willing to play a significant global role remains limited.
I look forward very much therefore to building a new partnership with Britain in this, the third century of our bilateral relationship  -  one not just based on the strength of our bilateral relationship, but one based also on our common commitment to building a global order that meets the challenges of the 21st century  -  and one that helps all nations and all peoples, not just the few, to achieve their potential in the dynamic century that lies ahead.


A giant of modern Australian politics has sadly passed away overnight.
He was a master parliamentarian, policy maker and politician.
John Button was a policy reformer in the truest sense.
John committed his life to Labor politics, improving the lives of those who needed it most and the progression of Australia.
For a man who was often described as diminutive, he was a towering figure in Victorian Labor politics.
From his time as a student at the University of Melbourne and prominent young lawyer, John was a leader and one of the great thinkers of his generation.
As Minister for Industry for a decade during the Hawke and Keating Governments, John played a determined hand in modernising the Australia economy, equipping it for the 21st century.
It buoys me at this very sad time that John's last year allowed him to witness two great personal events: seeing the Labor Party return to Government, and seeing his beloved Geelong Football Club win its first Premiership in 44 years.
John's sharp wit, powerful mind and kind nature will be missed by all who had the privilege of knowing and working with him.
My condolences go to John's family and all of his many loved ones.
The Australian Government will be offering John's family a State Funeral.


JULIA GILLARD: Can I open by making some remarks about John Button who has passed away overnight. I knew John Button of course being a member of the Labor Party in Victoria and I always admired him. John Button went into politics with the reputation of being an honest man who spoke his mind and he came out of politics with the reputation of being an honest man who spoke his mind. He was short in stature but he was a legend of the Labor movement and he is particularly responsible for driving the economic debate in this country during the era of the Hawke Government. When this country had to make difficult decisions about opening its economy to the world, John Button was always a voice for reform. And when we look at today's economy and we look at our national prosperity we need to reflect on John Button's contribution to building it over ten years as a minister in the Hawke Government where he was a leader of the economic debate. He is going to be sorely missed of course by his family my condolences go to his partner Joan and to his children. He is going to be missed by the Labor movement and the Labor Party and I think he's going to be mourned by many who remember his contribution during that time and recognise what he did for this nation's prosperity. And I would note coming from Melbourne's west as I do, when I go and visit local car plants like the Toyota factory both the managers and the workers still talk about the Button car plan and there is still acknowledgement by them that the industry would've be unlikely to still be here today if it hadn't been for the visionary work of John Button. So there would be people all around the nation who are stopping today to reflect for a moment on John Button passing and my condolences go to his family and friends.
On the topic of International education I'm here today for a major international education forum. International education is vital to this country's prosperity, education is our third largest export industry and around this country today there is some 450,000 students from overseas who are studying here. Its good for our economy, its good for our cross cultural exchange, its good for our understanding of our place in the world, its good for developing friendships and links that then go on to feed economic exchanges between nations as well as personal exchanges between nations but increasingly we're not just seeing international students come to this country to study in our secondary schools, our vocational education and training providers and our universities, increasingly we are seeing Australian education institutions develop campuses overseas either on their own or in partnership with local providers. We want to make sure that those off shore campuses also offer students a quality education experience, we have a reputation internationally for high quality, we want to maintain that reputation for education provided here and for education provided in Australian institutions overseas.
That's why today I have launched our new AusLIST program it is a web based resource to enable students in other countries and employers in other countries to search and to look at Australian education providers overseas. The education providers who are part of AusLIST have given us assurances of the quality of their education and obviously that will be monitored. This is part of a quality assurance program so when students overseas are making a decision about whether or not to study at the Australian institution in their country or in their region, they can read about that institution, they can view its quality performance and they can be ensured its quality is being monitored by Australia. This is another important development in making sure our international education system continues to provide quality education to students from right around the world. So it's an exciting development and it's been my pleasure to launch it today at this international education forum.
I am happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Do you think your speech today was understandable in light of the flack that Kevin Rudd has received for his speeches overseas so far?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I suppose really to assess someone's speech you need to take a survey of audience members obviously this is a specialist audience of international education providers and they are very keen to make sure the sector continues its reputation for high standards. They are very keen to get an insight into government thinking about the future of international education and importantly we're very keen to hear from them in the context of our major review of higher education and making sure that we have a world class system for the next 10, 15, 20 years.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned at all about the Olympic Torch coming to Australia?
JULIA GILLARD: The security for the Olympic torch in Australia will be provided by Australian security personnel. We obviously have great security personnel in this country they will make the appropriate arrangements so that the torch can proceed on its passage around this country. It may be that people choose to demonstrate; obviously we would say to people who choose to demonstrate in any circumstance that it's important that those demonstrations are kept peaceful.
JOURNALIST: Will you be there to greet the torch?
JULIA GILLARD: No I won't be. I understand the torch lands in the country on the 24th of April and I am in commitments in my electorate in Melbourne that day.
JOURNALIST: Do you support the Olympics being held in Beijing given what's happening at the moment over human rights over there?
JULIA GILLARD: Well the Prime Minister has made very clear our deep concerns about human rights abuses and our deep concerns about human rights abuses in Tibet. We've also made it very clear that we do not support a boycott of the Olympic Games. The Dalai Lama himself has not called for a boycott of the Olympic Games. In our exchanges with China we always raise human rights questions we will continue engagement with China on these issues we'll continue that dialogue because of our concern about human rights issues.
JOURNALIST: Will anyone from the Government welcome the Olympic Torch?
JULIA GILLARD: It's my understanding that the Minister for Sport, my colleague Kate Ellis will be in Canberra to welcome the Olympic Torch when it arrives.
JOURNALIST: Will the Prime Minister or the Governor General go to Beijing for the opening ceremony if invited?
JULIA GILLARD: Well the Prime Minister has been invited to attend the Beijing Olympics and as he's made it clear he is weighing that up obviously the Prime Minister's diary is a very crowded one, the Prime Minister is a very busy man and he is weighing it up in the context of other diary priorities.
JOURNALIST: In the news polls Labor is doing very well but the opposition says you are still in your honeymoon period.
JULIA GILLARD: I've obviously seen the news poll into today's papers can I say I think working families are probably more interested in a different set of numbers than the numbers in news poll. I think they're interested in numbers like how much is their mortgage is costing them, how much its costs them to put petrol in the tank of their car, how much it costs them to go to the supermarket and to get the shopping in for the weekly grocery round and on each of those pressures on working families the government understands its concerned about that pressure and is doing what it can to ease that pressure.
We're fighting inflation to try and take the pressure off interest rates, we're dealing with petrol prices through our new petrol price commissioner, we're of course dealing with grocery prices through an inquiry and we've got a commitment to a monitoring system. We want to ease the pressure on working families. When it comes to the opposition I find it difficult to understand what it is that the Opposition Leader Brendan Nelson stands for. When it comes to the economy on one day he supports the independence of the Reserve Bank Governor on another day he doesn't. On one day he says Work Choices is dead on another day he supports the thing that was at the heart of Work Choices, Australian Workplace Agreements and indeed his spokesperson on Workplace Relations supports going further so I think the opposition needs to define for the Australian people what it stands for because it seems every 24 or 48 hours it changes.
JOURNALIST: There has been more talk about a merger again with the National Party. What do you think about that?
JULIA GILLARD: Well these organisational matters are matters for the Liberal Party and the National Party to discuss and they can do that without the benefit of my views but at the end of the day the Australian people aren't interested in political party structures what their interested in is whether or not people understand what is happening in their lives. And they want to know what politicians stand for. They want to know what their vision for the nation is. And when the Opposition Leader is unable to declare a vision on comparatively simple questions like the independence of the Reserve Bank Governor, like whether or not they still believe in Work Choices, obviously it becomes hard for Australian working families to work out what the Liberal Party stands for. And I think the conclusion they draw is that the Liberal Party has just lost its way.
JOURNALIST: Given your electorate is in the west do you support an east-west tunnel?
JULIA GILLARD: Look I have noted the Eddington report with interest, it's the subject of great discussion in my local community. We had a 2020 summit in my local community last Friday afternoon. It was the topic of discussion there and I believe that dialogue will continue. There are a range of possible options but I think everyone is recognising that something needs to be done to deal with traffic congestion from the west of Melbourne into the city. This is a huge growth area full of new housing estates full of new families -- transport options need to be increased. Obviously we're interested in increasing public transport options as well as private transport options. The Brumby Labor Government is reviewing the Eddington material having received it from Sir Rod Eddington and I anticipate that local communities, including my own, will continue to be part of the process of discussion and decision making with the state government.
JOURNALIST: What's the government's response to the youth homeless report today? Will there be funding for that?
JULIA GILLARD: I was deeply concerned and distressed to see these statistics in today's newspaper. When you've got reports telling you that thousands, indeed some 36,000 young people are experiencing homelessness I think that would concern everyone. I'm sure every Australian would like to say that they live in a nation that ensures our young people are looked after and if people find themselves in difficult circumstances whether due to family breakdown or whatever has put pressure on them, that there is a helping hand rather than just sleeping rough as the solution. The Government's already invested $150 million in combating homelessness. We know that there is more to do. That's why we have asked Tony Nicholson from the Brotherhood of St Lawrence to work with the government to help us to find what else needs to be done but we simply don't want to see anyone let alone young at risk Australians sleeping rough.
JOURNALIST: As Education Minister and Workplace Relations Minister what's your view with linking teachers pay rises to productivity increases?
JULIA GILLARD: On the question of teachers pay we've said it's very important that our society is sending a message that teaching in valuable that the best and brightest should aspire to teach. We want the leaders out of the classes of today to become the teachers of tomorrow and of course that means that we need to reward excellence and merit in teaching. On direct wage negotiations they are obviously matters for state governments but we have said to our state and territory colleagues that we want to work with them on lifting the pressure on disadvantaged and low performing schools. We want to enter into a new arrangement with them to try and combat educational disadvantage where we find it. Inevitably as we have that discussion with our state and territory colleagues who are very enthusiastic about the prospects of doing more to combat educational disadvantage that will lead us to discuss questions of teacher quality.
JOURNALIST: Invasion of the Merrylands school yesterday are there concerns that, should parents be concerned that our schools are coming American type schools with gang problems?
JULIA GILLARD: Look I certainly don't want to spread alarm but what happened in that incident has absolutely no place in this country. Absolutely no place in this country, I know the police are now investigating it, that investigation has to proceed and the people responsible have to be held to account. But that sort of conduct by anyone has got no place in an Australian school.
JOURNALIST: So you don't have security concerns about our schools?
JULIA GILLARD: We indicated at the last election that we would provide some security support for schools that are at particular risk that program is being run by my colleague Bob Debus. They are for schools that have particular security concerns for example we've had Jewish schools in this country that have faced particular security concerns but my overall message would be that that kind of gang culture and gang violence has got no place in this country.
JOURNALIST: Is the Rudd Government considering banning ATM's at poker venues?
JULIA GILLARD: The Rudd Government through my colleague Jenny Macklin has called a meeting with our state and territory colleagues that meeting will be proceeding in June. The Prime Minister's made it very clear that he is concerned about gambling culture and problem gambling that is a concern that is shared by the community. In parts of this city where I live where there are many poker machines, many venues, much concern about how much of family income is being consumed by gambling. It's a concern shared by the community, so we're going to work on that with our state and territory colleagues and Jenny Macklin my colleague and the Minister for Families is leading that initiative and leading the discussion with our state and territory colleagues.
Ok last question.
JOURNALIST: Has the Brumby Government approached the Rudd Government for funding for any of the projects on the Eddington Report?
JULIA GILLARD: The Brumby Government is obviously considering the Eddington Report, working through it. You would have seen the statements that Premier Brumby made when it was received. We have said to our colleagues in the states and territories generally that we are keen to deal with the infrastructure needs of this nation, that's why we've set up Infrastructure Australia which will be guiding government to identify the projects that most need to get off the ground for this nation's future prosperity.
JOURNALIST: Has there been a specific request from the Eddington Report?
JULIA GILLARD: We've got Infrastructure Australia working on the job and as Premier Brumby has indicated he is considering the Eddington Report .


PM: Thanks everybody. Welcome to China. It's important to be here in China with such a significant economic partner for Australia as the People's Republic. This relationship is now more than 35 years old.
The Australian Labor Government more than 35 years ago dug the foundations of this relationship and the purpose of my visit today is of course to build on those foundations.
The days ahead that I have in China are important. All of us are currently engaged with the debate concerning the impact of global financial markets and how that will wash over the United States economy, Europe and what impact it might have here in the East Asian hemisphere.
On top of that, I am looking forward to good bilateral discussions with the Chinese Leadership, both with the Prime Minister and the President. One of the areas for expanding the economic relationship, deal with what we do in the financial services sector. And the gathering from which I have just come and the one to which I will just be returning in a minute, involves senior representatives of China's financial institutions.
I have said back home in Australia that one of the things I want to do is to make sure it is possible, for Australia's banks and Australia's funds managers to have greater access to this market. And that is one of the purposes of this gathering today with senior representatives of the Australian banks and the funds management industry and many of their Chinese counterparts.
Beyond that of course, in China we will be discussing other foreign policy matters which we have a common interest on including the six party talks, including our common interest in the wider Asia Pacific region. And of course in the context of those discussions, we will be having a straightforward exchange on questions concerning human rights in Tibet as well.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd have you met Rio Tinto and BHP in recent days and (inaudible) any concerns that you have about Chinese Foreign investment. What would your concerns be? What would you be saying to Chinese leaders on foreign investment?
PM: Look, it is quite normal for Australian firms, particularly the resource majors, to seek appointments with the Australian Government. We have done so with BHP not long ago in Australia. We will do so with Rio, because of their London operations, that is where they requested a meeting with us and we were happy to oblige. Obviously, one of the things that all the resource majors are concerned about is their long term resource contracts with China, as I say to the Chinese I say to the Australian resource majors, these ultimately are commercial matters, my job is to ensure that there is an overall framework of stability of supply from Australia to this country's and other market's long-term development needs.
I think my job as the Australian Prime Minister is to defend the Australian national interest and the Australian national economic interest and I will make no apology for that, while I am here or elsewhere in the world.
JOURNALIST: On Chinese investment, you also asked about Chinese investment, what view will you take to the Chinese Government?
PM: That's what I have said many times in back home in Australia. Australia is an open market when it comes to foreign investment. And if you look at Australia, we have had a history of relying upon internationally sourced capital to fund the countries long term development. In the great State of Western Australia, it's like that. I mean, you have a relatively small population, a huge land mass and therefore foreign investment has been necessary. Secondly, though, with every foreign investment proposal going back to whenever, we have always had the proper regulatory processes to examine and to advise on investment projects of consequence.
That is normal and natural. This country, for example China, has significant restrictions when it comes to inbound investment into its market. Now, that is the normal thing for nation states to do. We will assess, as we should, deploying the Australian national interest each significant investment project on its way through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd the Chinese Government has officially protested your comments in Washington in regard to Tibet, how damaging do you judge those comments to have been to our relationship with China?
PM: Well look, as I have said before, I think I may have said this in a public lecture I gave in London (inaudible) relationship with China is always going to be complex. It is always going to be challenging. I accept that. I have been in and out of this country for the better part of a quarter of a century.
I make, I have made those comments in Washington, I stand by them. I think this relationship is broad enough to tolerate disagreement. And on these questions, I will be putting my views forthrightly, as I was direct about them in my remarks earlier today at the university.
JOURNALIST: I've just come from the Chinese Government briefing on Tibet at which (inaudible) was asked about your comment and the answer was from the Government on Tibet was that people, you know, countries like Australia and other countries should have a look at the history of Tibet and China and they should have a better appreciation and understanding that people in Tibet are now enjoying democracy and wonderful human rights protection and your comments were totally unfounded. Given this type of uncompromising statements coming out of Beijing, how are you going to have a progressive dialogue on this issue?
PM: Well it is important to, as I said in my speech earlier today, you have a relationship which is capable of handling disagreement and putting views in a straight forward fashion. That is what I said I would be doing in my remarks earlier today and that is what I will be doing. And I stand by the comments I have made earlier on his matter.
JOURNALIST: You have spoken Mandarin this morning and got a good response. Do you think your -
PM: They were being polite.
JOURNALIST: Do you think your views on Tibet and other issues of conflict the Chinese might see as controversial has extra weight (inaudible) because you are a Mandarin speaker and other leaders aren't?
PM: Oh look I think there is a body of opinion around the World on this question. It has been expressed by many World Leaders in recent days. My job is to reflect, I believe, the views of the Australian people and the views of the Australian Government, I have a responsibility to do that, and I have a responsibility to do that also in the context of the breadth of our relationship.
This is an important political relationship for Australia. It is an important economic relationship for the reasons we have just been talking about. Climate change, we have a whole lot of stuff to do with China, if we don't fix carbon capture and storage for example, if we don't deal with Climate Change with our friends in China, well, we have got a real problem globally.
This is a broad-based relationship. This is an area of difference and disagreement. I have always said, let's work on the things that we have in common, that we agree on, and let's be frank and straight forward about some of the things that we don't.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) how would you feel about a Chinese State-owned company with a controlling stake in a company like BHP?
PM: I would think that any significant foreign investment application should be considered by the FIRB and taken on its merits. And secondly I would say that there is a whole bunch of SOEs and SWFs, sovereign wealth funds, state owned enterprises. Sorry someone was using SOEs before. Sovereign Wealth Funds, State-owned enterprises, from all around the world.
In the Middle East, the Gulf, Abu Dhabi, they are huge. And I have received some briefings on their global operations when I was in London, similarly over the Russian Federation. I mean this is, if you go around the world, right now, a whole bunch of Governments around the World are assessing how you deal with capital flows from such entities. Our approach is still one of being open to foreign investment flows, each project should be considered on its merits and consistent with the guidelines we have enunciated.
JOURNALIST: You have said that you don't want to see any interruption to the Olympics and the ceremonies and so forth. The Torch is, the torch leg is going ahead in Australia and will there be the flame attendants in Canberra?
PM: My understanding from Canberra first of all is that we have said from day one that we will be providing all the security, and I mean, all the security. That means that which physically surrounds the Torch when it's in Canberra, and my advice from Canberra is that that will be the case on the ground.
One more then I better zip this  -  I've just left a lunch that's all.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd there have been calls for Australians to turn their backs on the Torch bearers when the Torch goes through Canberra. Would you be disappointed if that happens?
PM: You know, one thing about Australia is that it is a robust democracy, people can express their view in whichever way they want and that's what's good, and I am sure people will make their own call on that. I think it's important that we provide the physical security which Dennis was asking me about before. We're going to do that and treat these matters respectfully, but we live in a free country, people can express their point of view in any manner that they choose, and I have really got to go and attend to this lunch, I'm sorry.


I begin by congratulating Peking University which this year celebrates its 110th anniversary  -  making this university three years older than the Commonwealth of Australia.
Peking University is the most famous in China.
And it has played an important part in modern Chinese history.
In the early 20th century, when China was going through a period of rapid transformation, it was Peking University that led movements for a new era in Chinese educational, cultural and political life.
Peking University was at the centre of the May 4th Movement.
The May 4th era  -  for I realise that it was a transformative decade from 1917 to 1927  -  was one of crucial and lasting importance in the emergence of a modern China.
Many famous figures in this period were active at your university.
One thinks, for example, of Cai Yuanpei, Chen Duxiu, Hu Shi, Li Dazhao and Lu Xun.
This year, 2008, is the 90th anniversary of some key events of the May Fourth era:
 -  through his essays for the major magazine New Youth the writer and educator Hu Shi successfully advocated the use of modern vernacular Chinese in education and the media.
This helped bring about a major change in the way that the young people of China expressed themselves to their compatriots.
Also the writer Lu Xun published the first, and justifiably famous, story in modern Chinese, Diary of a Madman.
I would also note that Lu Xun's design for the school crest of Peking University is still in use.
Indeed, you, the students of Peking University today, are heirs to a great tradition of intellectual engagement with your country.
Studying China
This is not the first time I have visited Peking University.
But it is the first time I have given a speech here.
It is a great honour for me.
And it is a great honour for me to address the students of this university because you are an important part of China's future.
I first started studying China and the Chinese language in 1976.
It was a different China back then.
Zhou Enlai had just died.
Mao Zedong was still alive.
And the Cultural Revolution had not concluded  -  indeed our Chinese language textbooks were still full of class struggle.
Some have asked me why I decided to study Chinese.
I had grown up on a farm in rural Queensland where China seemed very remote.
I remember as a teenager following closely the visit of Australia's Prime Minister Gough Whitlam to China on television in 1973 after the Australia Labor Government recognised China in 1972.
I remember watching the footage of him meeting Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping escorting his party on a tour to the Great Wall.
That visit inspired my interest in this extraordinary country.
When I went to university I knew that I wanted to study China.
I went to the Australian National University in Canberra.
And for the next four years I studied Chinese language, Chinese history and Chinese literature together with Japanese and Korean history as well.
I even studied Chinese calligraphy, but my calligraphy was ugly then  -  and it is even uglier now.
Later I became a diplomat.
Because I was a graduate in Chinese, the then Australian Government decided to send me to Sweden  -  where in those days I could barely find a decent Chinese restaurant.
I eventually made it to China in 1984 when I started work at the Australian Embassy.
But I did not remain a diplomat.
I wanted to enter politics.
I was elected to Australia's Parliament in 1998 and after serving in parliament for nine years in opposition, my party won the general election last year and I had the honour of becoming 26th Prime Minister of Australia.
Australia and China
Some people think that Australia and China are new friends.
But in fact our history is already long.
Chinese settlers came to Australia first in the nineteenth century.
When gold was discovered in Victoria and Queensland in the 1850s, the first major group of Chinese migrants came to our shores.
We now have over 600,000 people who claim Chinese ancestry.
After English, Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese) is the most widely spoken language in Australia.
The Chinese community has deep roots in Australia and is an important part of modern Australian society.
It includes people like Dr John Yu, one of Australia's leading surgeons and Australian of the Year in 1996.
And the young mathematician, Terrence Tao, who I met recently.
The flow of people has not all been in one direction.
Some Australians  -  though a smaller number  -  have made China their home.
George Morrison is one such person.
Morrison first came to China in 1894.
He lived here for 20 years.
In Australia, he was known as “Chinese Morrison”.
And here in Beijing, during the Republic of China, Wangfujing, home to George Morrison, was known as “Morrison Street”.
It is easy to see why people become fascinated with China.
China has thousands of years of continuous recorded history, but it is a country of constant change.
When I look at the China of 2008, I see a very different country to the one I studied in the late 1970s and the one I lived in during the mid 1980s.
China and the World
The changes in China since the 1970s have been remarkable.
And the change in China has led to a profound evolution in the relationship between our two countries.
China's policy change 30 years ago this year to “reform and open up” was the start of your country's re-connection with the world.
China's companies began trading with others.
China's people began to travel.
China's students began going overseas to study in greater numbers.
The world began to see China, and the people of China began to see the world, in new ways.
This institution, Peking University, through its teaching, research and search for knowledge has also had a profound influence on China's changes.
Its graduates have made a big contribution to your country's engagement with the world.
To many people in China, these changes bring a better and richer life.
People are able to make decisions about where they work, how they live and set their own goals.
They can build their own businesses.
At the same time, there are still many problems in China  -  problems of poverty, problems of uneven development, problems of pollution, problems of broader human rights.
It is also important to recognise that China's change is having a great impact not just on China, but also on the world.
The scale and pace of China's economic development and social transformation is unprecedented in human history.
Never before have so many people been brought into the global economy in such a short period of time.
Just look at some of the figures.
China is now the world's third-largest trading nation.
Its exports are growing at over 30 per cent per year.
GDP per capita has nearly doubled in the past five years.
People in Australia and around the world recognise that China's economic development is having a profound global impact.
They understand that China's demand for resources is driving global growth.
But China's growth can also cause anxiety.
Some people are concerned about their jobs moving to China.
When people overseas are faced with big changes and uncertainties like these they get nervous.
We all need to appreciate these anxieties and their origins.
Today I would like to make a suggestion.
I think that you  -  the young people of China, the generation that will see China's full integration into global society, the global economy and the overall global order  -  have an important role to play in the life of the world.
The global community looks forward to China fully participating in all the institutions of the global rules-based order, including in security, in the economy, in human rights, in the environment.
And we look forward to China making active contributions to the enhancement of that order in the future.
It is a necessary task of responsible global citizenship.
It is a big responsibility you have.
You are the product of China today.
And you are the representatives of China's tomorrow.
You will be the ones who define how the world sees China.
“Harmony” was the dream and hope of that great Chinese thinker and activist Kang Youwei.
The Hundred Days reform movement, like Peking University, also marks its 110th anniversary this year.
Kang proposed a utopian world free of political boundaries.
China has variously articulated its approach to development as one of “peaceful rise”, “peaceful development” or more recently that of a “harmonious world”.
In 2005 the then US Deputy Secretary of State Bob Zoellick spoke for his part of his concept that China would and could become a responsible global stakeholder.
As I said last week in a speech to the Brookings Institution in Washington, it is worthwhile thinking about how to encourage a synthesis of these concepts of a “harmonious world” and the “responsible stakeholder”.
The idea of a “harmonious world” depends on China being a participant in the world order and, along with others, acting in accordance with the rules of that order.
Failing this, “harmony” is impossible to achieve.
“Responsible stakeholder” contains the same idea at its core  -  China working to maintain and develop the global and regional rules-based order.
This year, as China hosts the Olympics, the eyes of the world will be on you and the city of Beijing.
It will be a chance for China to engage directly with the world, both on the sports field and on the streets of Beijing.
Some have called for a boycott of the Beijing Olympics because of recent problems in Tibet.
As I said in London on Sunday, I do not agree.
I believe the Olympics are important for China's continuing engagement with the world.
Australia like most other countries recognises China's sovereignty over Tibet.
But we also believe it is necessary to recognise there are significant human rights problem in Tibet.
The current situation in Tibet is of concern to Australians.
We recognise the need for all parties to avoid violence and find a solution through dialogue.
As a long-standing friend of China I intend to have a straightforward discussion with China's leaders on this.
We wish to see the year 2008 as one of harmony, and celebration  -  not one of conflict and contention.
Harmony in the Natural Environment
Our shared future is not only one about harmony between nations and peoples.
It is also about harmony with nature  -  the “Unity of Man and Nature”  -  a concept with ancient roots in Chinese thought.
We all share responsibility for the future.
One of the big future challenges for Australia and China is climate change.
Australia is committed to strong action domestically and internationally on climate change.
Because we know that climate change is the great moral, economic and environmental challenge of our time  -  one that all nations have to work together to overcome.
That's why climate change will be an important part of my discussions with the Chinese leadership this week.
It is important that China play an increasingly prominent role on climate change.
An effective global response to climate change will require the active participation of all major emitters.
I also believe it is important for China's own future.
Unless we are successful, China will face increasing pressure on its water supplies, changing rainfall patterns and rising sea levels.
A strong relationship, and a true friendship, are built on the ability to engage in direct, frank and ongoing dialogue about our fundamental interests and future vision.
In the modern, globalised world, we are all connected; connected not only by politics and economics, but also in the air we breathe.
A true friend is one who can be a “zhengyou”, that is a partner who sees beyond immediate benefit to the broader and firm basis for continuing, profound and sincere friendship.
In other words, a true friendship which “offers unflinching advice and counsels restraint” to engage in principled dialogue about matters of contention.
It is the kind of friendship that I know is treasured in China's political tradition.
It is the kind of friendship that I also offer China today.
A Conversation with China's Youth on the Future  - Mandarin Translation RTF 215KB | DOC 89KB | PDF 348KB


Australia and China stressed the great importance they attached to the issue of climate change and their willingness to strengthen cooperation to jointly meet the challenge of climate change.
The two sides reaffirmed their commitment to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. Both sides reiterated, in accordance with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and consistent with the Bali Roadmap, the need for developed countries to continue to take the lead in reducing GHG emissions beyond 2012 and the necessity to assist developing countries in enhancing their capability to address climate change.
Australia and China recognised the need for intensified negotiations to meet the timeframes set out in the Bali Roadmap and resolved to work closely together in relevant upcoming bilateral and multilateral forums in support of the UNFCCC negotiations.
Australia and China have a lot in common in relation to climate change. The partnership and cooperation between two sides will focus on the relative strengths and common interests for making contribution to global efforts to address the challenge of climate change.
The two sides agreed to promote closer cooperation in responding to climate change by strengthening policy dialogue at Ministerial level and strengthening practically focused cooperation by developing and implementing concrete projects in areas of mutual benefit that will assist both countries in addressing climate change.
As the two countries foster a spirit of closer cooperation on climate change, both sides reiterated their support for the work of the Australia-China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.
Both countries believe that actions to reduce emissions from deforestation should be one of the aspects of future action on addressing climate change and reaffirmed their support for the China-initiated Asia Pacific Network on Sustainable Forest Management and Rehabilitation, established during APEC in Sydney in September 2007.
Identified Initial Areas for Closer Australia-China Cooperation
1. Closer Policy Dialogue
Australia and China worked together with other parties in COP13 of the UNFCCC to finalize the Bali Roadmap on an international framework for addressing climate change into the future. Both sides will continue to work together to promote the negotiations and relevant international cooperation on climate change, under the guidance of the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol.
For this purpose, the two sides agreed to meet at Ministerial level on an annual basis and to strengthen their regular policy dialogue, cooperation and coordination on climate change, based on existing mechanisms on climate change. The first Ministerial level meeting will be hosted by Australia in the latter half of 2008.
2. Expanding the Australia-China Climate Change Partnership
Australia and China share a successful bilateral partnership that draws together the resources and expertise of Australian and Chinese industry, science, and government sectors concerned
The two sides reaffirmed their commitment to the agreed joint projects and agreed to further expand practically focused project activity particularly in the areas of capacity building; renewable energy technologies; energy efficiency; capture and use of methane; climate change and agriculture; land use, land use change and forestry; adaptation to climate change; and climate change science.
3. Developing Clean Energy
Australia and China will cooperate to develop low emission technologies that will assist both countries in economic development in the way of minimising greenhouse gas emissions and underscoring both countries growing need for cleaner forms of power generation.
Both countries welcomed current Australia-China cooperation in these areas occurring through the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate, the Australia-China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology, and our bilateral climate change partnership.
China welcomed Australia's reaffirmation of the commitment to invest AU$20 million in the Australia  - China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.


PM:I just had an excellent 2.5 hours with Premier Wen Jiabao both in our formal discussions and in further discussions over the official luncheon which he kindly hosted for me. I would like to extend my appreciation and thanks for his hospitality and for the hospitality of the Chinese Government during the course of this visit.
We covered a range of subjects and three I would like to emphasise right now in terms of the economic relationship. One is the fact that we have decided to elevate our cooperation in the area of climate change to a ministerial level partnership. There is a joint statement from both Governments on this matter and we look forward to working very closely with the Chinese on climate change going forward.
The fact that our Minister for Climate Change Penny Wong has been here in Beijing these last couple of days has been important of itself and the discussions which she has already commenced with the Deputy Director of the NDRC, the National Development and Reform Commission of China which has the lead agency responsibility for climate change policy.
Furthermore, we intend to make this into a regular semi-annual policy dialogue between us. The focus will be in two areas. One will be bilateral and technical cooperation. We will be funding an Australian $20 million Australia China Joint Coordinating Group on clean coal technology.
As I said in a forum on climate change yesterday here in Beijing, the fact that Australia is the world's largest coal exporting country and that China is the world's largest coal consuming country, presents both of us with a fundamental responsibility to act in this area of critical technology.
Therefore what I am looking for through this new bilateral, ministerial level partnership with China is to elevate considerably, the intensity of our technical and scientific and commercial cooperation in the area of clean coal technology.
This also formed part of my informal discussions with some of China's leading energy companies yesterday, including Shenhua as well as CNOOC in the climate change round table which I attended with Senator Wong.
Also the second part of the proposed bilateral, ministerial policy dialogue on climate change would include our, a forum for us to continue to work on our combined policy on the conclusion of the UNFCCC, UN Framework Convention on Climate Change negotiations, which will have their conclusion at Copenhagen at the end of next year. This will be important for China, important for Australia, important for the world and we look forward to advancing our cooperation in that area as well.
Thirdly and significantly, we have agreed to further our future actions to reduce deforestation around the world, and that I think is an important area for us both to work in. That is on the climate change front.
Secondly, one of the other reasons that I have been in Beijing is to support the expansion of the Australian bilateral economic relationship in the area of the trade in services, in particular the area of the trade in financial services.
I spent yesterday at lunch with the Australian Ambassador and the representatives of Australia's leading banks and financial institutions and their Chinese counterparts. One of the core propositions that I am putting to the Chinese Government for consideration is to expand a number of Australian funds managers who are able to operate here in the Chinese market.
This is a significant growing market in terms of the size and diversity of China's pensions and superannuation industry, pensions and superannuation funds. Australia has among the biggest funds managers in the world. (inaudible) funds managers has effectively a license to operate here. We need to expand that further. What I have agreed with the Chinese today is that we will be establishing a ministerial services round table and its first priority will be the trade in financial services and that will get under way very soon.
This is an important step forward for us, because we want to rapidly grow the services trade between our two countries, particularly in the area of financial services, particularly in what we have to offer in the funds management industry.
Third point, on the economic front, is that we have today agreed to unfreeze what has been the frozen bilateral negotiations for a free trade agreement between Australia and China. And this is important for both of us. We are both committed to ensuring that this is a broadly based, comprehensive and substantive free trade agreement.
Therefore, the Australian Trade Minister Simon Crean will be here within the month, and the object of that meeting will be to identify clearly with his Chinese counterparts, a list of remaining obstacles to be cleared in this bilateral free trade negotiation.
And we have today reaffirmed our commitment to bringing those negotiations to a successful conclusion as soon as possible as it would benefit both countries. Beyond the bilateral economic relationship and beyond our discussion of climate change, of course the question of the Olympics, Tibet and human rights was also discussed. I reiterated to the Chinese Government, the position of the Australian Government which I articulated yesterday in my address at Beijing University, and there was some considerable discussion about the current situation in Tibet and of course on the broad question of the Olympics itself.
That was a significant part of our discussion, which ran I think some half hour, half an hour overtime, largely to accommodate that part of our discussion. Also in wider discussions with the Chinese Premier, we discussed the continuation of the Six Party Talks on North Korea.
Those talks have been continuing in recent days and it is important that we see progress from them. Particularly on the North Korean side on the question of the declaration of their, final declaration of their nuclear status. I spoke at length with the Chinese Premier about the desirability of this Six Party Talks mechanism being expanded into a broader security dialogue across East Asia and I believe that there is a supportive attitude emerging on the part of the Chinese Government for that, as I anticipated, as I encountered also during my discussions in Washington on this.
I reflected to the Chinese, as I reflected to the Americans, that from the point of view of the Australian Government, the desirability of us being able to participate as Australians in this unfolding dialogue as it is (inaudible) extends being the immediate concerns on the Korean peninsular and North Korea's nuclear program in particular.
To conclude, this was a good, solid, discussion between the Chinese Premier and the Australian Prime Minister. We covered core elements of our bilateral relationship. Core elements of our bilateral economic relationship, as well as sensitive questions concerning human rights, Tibet and the Olympics, as well as key areas in the future for foreign policy and security policy cooperation.
This is an important relationship for Australia and Australia is an important relationship for China. As I may have said yesterday, and in earlier days, it is important to embrace this relationship for all the strengths it contains, recognise that we can expand it further into the future and recognise as well that we need to deal in a frank and straightforward way with disagreements when they arise, as I have done today. Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: What was your message on Tibet and what was the response from Premier Wen?
PM:On the question of Tibet, I stated, as I stated yesterday at Beijing University that first of all, Australia, together with the rest of the international community recognise Chinese Sovereignty over Tibet.
Secondly that when it comes to the particular events of recent times, that the position of the Australian government is that there are significant human rights problems in Tibet which require resolution through two mechanisms. One, non violent approaches and two, through dialogue. And that furthermore, we would want and hope and expect to see progress on these measures in the period ahead. I don't wish to characterise the views of the Chinese Government but I think it is fair to say that those reflected to me in our private discussions were consistent with the public position you have seen from the Chinese government in recent times on the question of Tibet.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) I wondered if you could talk about what you mean by that and how Premier Wen interpreted it.
PM:I spoke in English today and so certainly in terms of our formal discussions, as I may have indicated to some of your prior to coming here. What I meant by that term yesterday in the address to Peking University was that there was a form of friendship which you can have with China which is broad and open and capable of incorporating within it, different points of view and providing a point of view to our partners, in this case, the Chinese, which seeks to encourage them in a particular direction and providing counsel where we can on sensitive matters.
Whether that counsel, or whether that advice is received, then that's a separate matter. But that is the tradition of friendship which I was referring to in yesterday's discussion and it is consistent with what I just said before, namely that you want a broad based relationship with China, capable of advancing all the things we have in common and how we wish to develop this relationship while recognising in an up front, frank and straightforward manner, where there may be disagreements.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd did you get the impressions today that Premier Wen did not accept your counsel on the issue of Tibet?
PM:I think it is quite fair to say that the Chinese government in its discussions with me in our extensive bilateral this morning, their position has been today, was consistent with the public positions that China has adopted in recent times,
JOURNALIST: Was there any discussion of sovereign investment funds, investment in Australia generally, foreign investment review?
PM:I emphasised to Premier Wen, as I said, these discussions went from a very extensive formal session, to a less formal session over the official luncheon, we just attended. And on the question of Australia's welcoming of foreign investment to Australia, the point that I made to the Chinese Premier was that, we welcome foreign investment, always have done, always will do.
Secondly, our approach to that is non discriminatory, in terms of country of origin. Thirdly, the application of particular guidelines concerning foreign government related entities applies as much to China as to anyone else in the world, whether it is Singapore, the Persian Gulf or wherever.
And finally I said that, consistent with Australia's historical approach to significant inbound investment projects, that each of those will be considered on its merits, based on the advice of the Foreign Investment Review Board. And we had a good discussion around that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you, from what you have said, do you believe there is no chance of China taking any notice of foreign representations about Tibet.
PM:(inaudible) that's a matter for them to describe themselves. My responsibility as the Prime Minister of Australia, as the Prime Minister of a friend of China, as a Prime Minister of a robust democracy is to report our view about these matters and I have done so.
I have done so publicly yesterday and privately today in a manner consistent with the points that I have made elsewhere. On the response of China, that of course isn't (inaudible) and I understand we have a very challenging period ahead of us on these questions but we will continue to be engaging with our Chinese friends here  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:My public lecture at Peking University was not discussed in itself today. The points of discussion in relation to Tibet human rights and the Olympics were discussed afresh.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:The dialogue was of course raised and the position I have put privately to the Chinese is entirely consistent with what I put publicly (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:On the first point, no. That was not explicitly raised with me, on the question of energy security. Obviously it is connected with the broader question of trade in energy and resources and our investment relationship in energy and resources. And that's why I expressed the views which I began answering in Dennis's question before.
On the second part of your question (inaudible). Calling a spade a spade, let me just say this. (inaudible) they have been the same and in fact the conclusion I have reached is that they are virtually stalemated and frozen. So while there didn't seem to be allowed (inaudible) into the never, never. The attitude that I took was that we should kick start the negotiations and get it going (inaudible). What has come out of this, is a desire to apply fresh political momentum to getting these negotiations going again, therefore mapping a road map forward in these negotiations will be the principle task for the Trade Ministers when they sit down and (BREAK IN TAPE).
Ends.


JULIA GILLARD: I am happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Unemployment figures out, figures slightly up in March. Are you worried about that?
JULIA GILLARD: The employment market is incredibly strong; it's near 33 year highs. We know employment is strong across the country. We know that skills are short and what we've got to do is make sure we are investing in skills and training. So the Government's agenda is to keep employment strong; we want Australians who want to work to have the opportunity to work. To increase people's work readiness we want to invest in skills and training that we know employers need and are crying out for. That's why we are investing in 450,000 new training places. But these are pleasing employment figures.
JOURNALIST: But if they are slightly up is there, do have any particular reason why that would happen, or any idea on why that would happen?
JULIA GILLARD: Clearly we've seen an interest rate increase; we inherited a high inflation environment from the previous government. A further interest rate increase has occurred; we know that that interest rate increase has obviously impacted on Australians. We know that the environment for many working families is very, very tight indeed. But we inherited a high inflation environment; the Government's economic policies are about fighting inflation. We want to put downwards pressure on inflation so we can put downwards pressure on interest rates. Amongst the important things to do to put downwards pressure on inflation and interest rates is invest in the skills of our community and we are doing that through the 450,000 training places. But the employment numbers today show that employment is still very, very strong.
JOURNALIST: Of those areas of social inclusion you've highlighted, which of those do you see as being priorities to look at first?
JULIA GILLARD: One of the things with this agenda, about social inclusion, is we need to recognise the interconnections. As I said in my speech, we need to look at issues like homelessness but we need to understand that homelessness is connected to lack of employment opportunities, to lack of family stability, perhaps for some drug and alcohol problems. So we need to be working on a whole range of fronts. That's why we are bringing together as a government the key portfolios that can make a practical difference to people's lives; health, housing, education, social welfare policies, employment policies, all of these work together to make a difference. We are bringing them together so our responses are coordinated and we are not just offering disadvantaged individuals' one disconnected program but offering them a real solution.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
JULIA GILLARD: Well the Government has signalled an intention to invest in those areas where I think all Australians would be concerned. If you look at the area of homelessness; I do genuinely believe Australians would be disturbed to know that 22,000 teenagers' experiencing homelessness and I think Australians having heard that would want us to put a priority on it, and we have with an investment of $150 million. So we are prepared to make better choices with the Federal Budget about investing in areas of need and we want to see every dollar invested working as hard as it can. And that's about reviewing for effectiveness and performance in every program and redesigning programs as necessary to get the best possible results.
JOURNALIST: The IMF report came out saying that Australia should escape being dragged into the recession with America. How much credence does the Government put into that?
JULIA GILLARD: I think my colleague, the Treasurer, Wayne Swan has made the Government's response to the IMF report very clear. Clearly, there is uncertainty in global financial markets. One of the key reasons for the Prime Minister's trip has been to talk to world leaders about uncertainty in global financial markets. We live in a globalised economy, a globalised world and so uncertainty in financial markets globally does impact upon this country. But as the Treasurer has also made clear Australia is positioned to deal with these challenges and we are dealing with these challenges and particularly with the challenge of inflation.
JOURNALIST: One more. Ten has been approached by members of the Sydney discovery group and some families [inaudible] to your office about the Cole report and wondering whether the report will be able to access all articles, including secret articles being held by ASIO. Can you give that kind of guarantee?
JULIA GILLARD: For the inquiry that is being conducted by His Honour, Terrance Cole, this is the inquiry into the circumstances of the sinking of the HMAS Sydney. Terrance Cole is involved a scoping study to work out the powers and resources that will be needed to get this job done. So this is an area were we are awaiting Terrance Cole's advice. That scoping study is in progress now.
JOURNALIST: Well I suppose the concern is, it always happens with these things when you have got families involved, there's always talk of a cover up. I suppose people are wondering if the government will give a guarantee of sorts, there won't be a cover up 66 years down the line?
JULIA GILLARD: The fact that the Government has announced that Terrance Cole will lead a commission of inquiry into the circumstances of the sinking of the HMAS Sydney shows that this is a government that wants the full history, the full truth to be told. We want it to be discovered, we have got a man who is expert that discovery for us and we will take his advice on what powers and resources he needs to get the job done.
JOURNALIST: The Olympic Torch Relay has turned into a bit of a farce in San Francisco today. Do you think it should come here?
JULIA GILLARD: The Olympic Torch is due to come here; it will be met by the Minister for Sport, my colleague Kate Ellis. We of course will attend to security arrangements for the torch domestically.


PM: Good morning. It's good to be here with Penny Wong, the Minister for Climate Change. Out here at this particular plant run by (inaudible) energy. They are one of China's most significant power generation companies.
Overnight we have seen produced on the question of climate change, a new report by the international panel on climate change. It specifically goes to the impact on the world's water resources as a result of climate change. There is a chapter in it dealing with Australia.
Two or three points to emerge from that climate change report on Australia are as follows.
It says that for Australia ongoing water security problems are very likely to increase by 2030 in Southern and Eastern Australia. Furthermore there are likely to be alterations in the geographic range in seasonality, with some mosquito borne infectious diseases, e.g Ross River disease, dengue and malaria. And furthermore, large shifts of the geographical distribution of agriculture and its services are very likely.
That in summary is what the International Panel on Climate Change report has had to say overnight. And that report, I understand, is on their website.
Which brings into sharp focus that which we are seeking to do here, in China through our bilateral cooperation with the Chinese Government on the overall challenge of climate change. Climate change is a challenge for the world. It is a challenge for China. It is a challenge for Australia.
And as Australia is the world's largest coal exporting country, China is the world's largest coal consuming country, we have a particular responsibility to ensure that we advance the overall technical and commercial challenge of clean coal. That is why in particular, we are here. And I would like to pay tribute in particular to the cooperation which has occurred between the CSIRO in Australia, the Huaneng Group and the Thermal Power Research Institute.
The Huaneng, as a Chinese power company, represents about 10 per cent of China's total electricity generation, I am advised. Here today we are visiting a plant in Beijing which generates 800 mega watts. Altogether, Huaneng itself nationwide, I am advised generates something like 72,000 mega watts. And that in turn, represents some ten per cent of China's total electricity production, from all sources. Huaneng being one of five companies.
Within the Huaneng group, what we have looked at today in terms of this CSIRO project is the one and only project when it comes to post carbon capture technology. And I would congratulate the participants for so doing.
It is important. But we need to put it into context. It is a small start, because what we have here is a piece of technology which is producing PCC (Post Carbon Capture) for some 3000 tonnes Co2 equivalent each year. That represents something in the vicinity of one to two percent in the total production of one plant.
I am putting all this into context for you because this is a very small start, but it is an important start. In Australia, of course, CSIRO is engaging in other such projects. Three are on the drawing board. One in the Hunter, one in La Trobe Valley, one in Central Queensland. And this one in China of course, represents a fourth. It is important work for the future.
In addition to this project, what I would like to do today is also to announce three new projects, that are to be funded by the Australian Government.
Firstly, a feasibility study into the development of the largest solar city in the world, at Weihai in the North East of China.
Secondly, a pilot project applying Australian national carbon accounting systems at the provincial level in Australia, sorry, in China. That's Australian technology being applied at the provincial level here in China.
And thirdly, a trial of the Australian river health monitoring systems in the Yellow River, the Pearl River Basin and the Darling River.
This represents a fresh investment of some $20 million dollars in our bilateral cooperation arrangements with China. They are all pointing in the one direction which is how do we cooperate more effectively at the technical level with China on the overall challenge of Climate Change.
On the detail of these projects I will turn to the Minister for Climate Change in a minute to add to my remarks. I would conclude just by saying this, we in Australia must collaborate absolutely closely with China on the Climate change challenge. That is why it forms such a significant feature of my discussions with Premier Wen Jiabao yesterday, that is why we issued a joint statement on climate change. That is why we have now agreed for the first time to have ministerial level dialogue on climate change. For Australia, from a national interest point of view, it is also important because what we want to do is work with China to produce a better outcome globally on climate change. Critical for the planet. Critical long term in terms of the impact of climate change in our country as well, going back to the International Panel on Climate Change report on water just before.
And finally, also critical for Australian business. We have to do this work in order to underpin Australia's long term carbon sales in the future, our coal exports to the rest of the world. But also, open up fresh business opportunities for those businesses and threshold businesses, venture capital businesses, on the threshold of some of these new technologies, renewable energy technologies, clean coal technologies, energy efficiency technologies, to improve our overall national effort in the climate change space. Good for Australian business, good for our work on climate change, good therefore for the planet.
If I could turn to Penny to add to what I have said.
PENNY WONG: Thank you very much Prime Minister and it is good to be here at Gaobeidian, where the Australian Government is funding approximately $4 million towards the post combustion carbon capture and storage technology which is being piloted here.
And one of the things we do know, very clearly and anyone who was in Bali and anyone who was following the international negotiations subsequently will know this, we know that there is no comprehensive global agreement to tackle climate change unless China is closely engaged with the climate change issue.
We also know Australia, is a country that is vulnerable to climate change and we have a significant economic stake in ensuring that there is an effective global response. So engagement with China is key, it is critical and we are very pleased that the Chinese Government has agreed to the statement the Prime Minister has outlined including the ministerial dialogue.
We know that the dimension of the challenge is enormous. We know that China's energy capacity is growing at very high levels every year and a great deal of that is being powered through coal fired power stations. We know also that Australia as the world's largest exporter in coal, has an enormous economic stake in ensuring that there is a clean coal future, a lower carbon future for the coal industry.
That is critical for us and that is critical for China so it is logical that we would work together on these issues.
The three new projects that the Prime Minister has announced today really build on Australia - China climate change cooperation. Really build on the partnership that exists and that we are seeking to deepen and strengthen. The three projects are first, a feasibility study into the development of a solar city in Weihai. There is a feasibility study funding from the Australian Government to look at making Weihai a solar city.
I want to talk particularly about the project involving Australia's national carbon accounting system. This is not just a technical scientific issue. If you want to manage something, you have to measure it. That is something business understands. And we in Australia actually have one of the most advanced and significant technical capacities to measure carbon emissions in the world. That is a critical issue for China because as China seeks to take a sustainable development path, it obviously needs to know where its emissions are coming from as the first step in managing them.
So we are very pleased that the pilot project, in relation to the national carbon accounting system will be applied in individual areas of China. This is a large country, but as I said, if you are going to manage something you have to measure it. We are very pleased to cooperate with the Chinese Government in relation to this technology.
PM: Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I have seen those reports. I have not seen a full Australian report on them yet. The first responsibility which we the Australian Government have is to take whatever practical steps are necessary to ensure the safety and security of our athletes. On this most recent report concerning this terrorist group (inaudible), our security authorities are now in close contact with the Chinese security authorities.
Subsequent to that we will be in close contact also with the Australian Olympic Committee. Our bottom line is this, every practical measure must be taken to ensure the safety of Australian athletes. That is why we will be taking these matters very seriously.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the challenge for all of us globally is to tackle greenhouse gas emissions whether we are developed or developing countries. And what I have been saying in Washington and Brussels and London and here is that we share a combined global responsibility for doing that and at multiple levels. 
On the demand side, and improving the efficiency of various demand side management systems across the world. But also, when you are dealing with the supply side, renewable energies, investment in solar, this in part deals with that. Investment in other renewable energies and also what we do when it comes to coal. And that is why there is a concentration in our efforts on improving clean coal technologies. But everyone in the world has a responsibility to act to bring down greenhouse gas emissions over time.
Unless we do that, can I just go back to this alarming report, produced by the International Panel on Climate Change overnight, concerning the impact in Australia on water.
We are already the world's driest continent. The impact of climate change therefore for us, and for agriculture, is significant. We have a national self interest, as well as a global responsibility to act in this space and that is why Penny is active globally. That is why it has formed a large part of my activities since I have been abroad for the last period of time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: AP 6 is an important forum for continued technical cooperation. It is part of the overall response, credible response to climate change. I keep saying, we need a global arrangement on the overall target in terms of greenhouse gas emissions.
And secondly, we need to be cooperating on the technology platforms, capable of delivering that outcome. And then thirdly, having a carbon market which sets the price in order to make it possible for various of those technologies to be applied. I might turn to Penny on the particular AP 6 question.
PENNY WONG: Can I say, I think the focus on technology is very important for the relationship with China. The ways in which that might be done, we obviously, there are still issues the Government will need to consider through in the months to come. We obviously have now a clear Government to Government agreement that the Prime Minister and Premier Wen Jiabao signed off and announced yesterday. We do recognise as a Government that a particular interest of the developing nations, particularly China, is technological cooperation. And that is the logic behind the three projects today which are adding to the climate change partnership relationship with China. So technology is a key issue. It goes back to the question Paul Bongiorno, I think asked about the future for China. 
But the challenge for the world and for China is to find a low emission development path. Technology such as what we are trialling here, obviously plays a very significant part in that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Together with other members of the international community, I do have concerns about the level of cooperation on the part of the Government of Pakistan in the overall effort against terrorism in Afghanistan, both in relation to the Taliban and in relation to Al Qaeda. And it is for that reason that I am meeting with President Musharruf. I want to explore with him further practical ways in which Pakistan can assist and contribute to the campaign in the war against terrorism in Afghanistan.
We have more than 1000 troops, Australian troops on the ground in Afghanistan. In Bucharest, the discussion in part dealt with our development as participating states, within ISAF of an integrated civilian and military strategy to deal with the Taliban and Al Qaeda within the country. But, that strategy is incomplete unless we have the full cooperation of surrounding states including Pakistan. And that in part is why I am seeing President Musharruf today.
Hang on, can you put your hand out please rather than just shout out. There, there and there, just so I can get, people have been putting their hands up over here.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd this is on another issue, there is...
PM: Oh, sorry I will come back to you. I thought this was all on Pakistan, your on Pakistan?
JOURNALIST: Yes.
PM: Sorry (inaudible). I will come back to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, since becoming Prime Minister, this is the first opportunity I have had to engage with Mr Musharruf. I am looking forward to the opportunity of doing so. We have a range of bilateral interests also in Pakistan, the Government of Islamabad. But on specifically, on the cooperation on terrorism as it relates to the Taliban and Al Qaeda, I will be seeking to engage President Musharruf on what Pakistan can do more to underpin the efforts of the United States and its allies in Afghanistan, in what is a difficult and protracted war.
I understand fully the complexities which currently exist within Pakistan's domestic policies. I understand the difficulties and complexities which that presents. Nonetheless, I believe I have got a responsibility to engage directly on these questions, in that direction.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: First of all, I won't go into the absolute detail of the discussion. But broadly can I say this, Pakistan at many levels, since September 11 has cooperated and has cooperated significantly with what has become the ISAF countries' operation in Afghanistan. However, that cooperation, particularly on the question of the cross border flow of Taliban and Al Qaeda operatives could be significantly enhanced and I am concerned at the extent to which in recent times, in recent months that, that cooperation has become less than it could otherwise be.
So let's just, this is not a black or white situation. There has been significant contribution by our friends in Pakistan over time, but we believe that in recent times it could have been more. We want that to be better, that is why I together with other heads of Government, are engaging with the Pakistanis on this question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look I am confident the pandas will be safely and effectively delivered to Australia. We will be in contact with our friends in China to make sure that the necessary funding arrangements are put in place.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I am confident that pandas, anyone know the names of the pandas, was it Biongwan and Buehain is it?
JOURNALIST: No, I made that up.
PM: The two pandas, whose names escape me, will enjoy a happy sojourn in Australia and the practical arrangements to be put in place on that, we will sort out with the Chinese. Anything else? Good one, thanks. 


The Australian Government will invest $20 million in an Australia  - China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.
These funds will mean the Australian Government is now investing $94.6 million in China specific climate change and water programs out to 2015.
The Australia  -  China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology will be funded as part of the Government's $500 million Clean Coal Fund.
The Prime Minister and Minister for Climate Change and Water today announced funding for three new climate change and water projects in China.
The three new projects funded by the Australian Government today are:
     * A feasibility study into the development of the largest solar city in the world at Weihai in the northeast of China.
     * A pilot project applying Australia's National Carbon Accounting System at a provincial level in China.
     * A trial of the Australian river health monitoring systems in the Yellow river, The Pearl River Basin and the Da Ling River.
These projects will be funded under the Australia  -  China Climate Change Partnership and the Australia China Environment Development Program; and will form part of the new strengthened efforts to work with China to address climate change. (See Attachment A)
These efforts also include a new Ministerial level dialogue that will provide high level oversight to future collaboration and drive enhanced cooperation in clean energy technologies; climate change science, adaptation, and building the capacity of China to respond to climate change.
Australia and China are building a strong partnership which includes working together in very practical ways to respond to this global challenge.
These practical climate change and water projects are making a small but significant contribution to the Chinese Government's efforts to be part of the global solution to climate change. If successful, each of these small projects has the potential to be rolled out nationally across China.
By relying on Australian technology these practical projects are also helping Australian climate change and water businesses get a start in the massive Chinese market.
The Prime Minister and Minister for Climate Change and Water made the announcement at the Gaobeidian power station in Beijing. This coal powered plant is the site of a pilot post combustion carbon capture project.
This joint initiative of the CSIRO Energy Transformed National Research Flagship, the China Huaneng Group and China's Thermal Power Research Institute is funded with a $4 million Australian Government grant.
The plant is expected to be running by August this year and if successful will capture around 3000 tonnes of carbon dioxide each year  -  beginning the process of adapting the technology for Chinese conditions. Importantly for the people of Beijing, the technology also has the potential to strip other substances that contribute to air pollution, including nitrous oxides, particulates and heavy metals.
Better river health monitoring systems
China's rapid economic development has placed great pressure on its water resources  -  it is estimated that 60 percent of China's monitored rivers are too polluted to be used for public water supplies.
Australia has worked with China to develop a new water entitlement and trading framework in two provinces to help rationalise the allocation of water between different users.
Under the new AU$2 million project announced today, river health monitoring systems will be trialled in the Yellow river, The Pearl River Basin and the Da Ling River. If successful these systems could be considered for wider application in China. The project will be funded under the Australia-China Environment Development Program.
The project will draw on international and Chinese specialists in river health and environmental flows and will aim to build capacity of technicians in China to independently conduct and further develop river health and environmental flow assessments.
The world's largest solar city
The Australian Government will invest AUD$212,000 under the Australia-China Climate Change Partnership in a feasibility study into the development of the largest solar city in the world at Weihai - a coastal city in the northeast of China. The total project will be led by BP Solar working with the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Weihai City Council, State Grid and BP SunOasis with a total cost of $574,000.
The Weihai Green Energy City feasibility study will investigate financing models for installing up to 100MW of solar PV, along with additional solar thermal, and energy efficiency applications in a consolidated urban environment.
If successful, the photovoltaic installation is expected to generate enough electricity to power more than 50,000 Chinese homes based on current energy use.
It will create a global ‘showcase' of solar technologies and energy efficiency options and is part of Australian efforts to help China develop its economy while effectively addressing climate change.
Building China's carbon accounting capacity
The Australian Government will also invest $525,000 to help China apply Australia's world class / internationally leading National Carbon Accounting System at a provincial level in China as a pilot project that explores how the system can be adapted to Chinese conditions.
It will help develop China's greenhouse accounting capacity to enable more accurate reporting in keeping with IPCC guidelines and to prepare it for possible participation in future global carbon markets.
The project will be jointly conducted by the CSIRO, the Chinese Academy of Forestry, the Australian National University, and the Australian Government Department of Climate Change. The project will be funded under the Australia China Climate Change Partnership.
Attachment A
            Program
            Description
            Funding for Australia  -  China activity
            National Clean Coal Fund
            $500 million to 2015 to generate at least $1.5 billion in new investment.
            $20,000,000 2008-2015
            Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP)
            Australia , Canada, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea and United States of America in partnership to address the challenges of climate change, energy security and air pollution.
            $43,929,492 2006 - 2011
            Bilateral Climate Change Partnership Program
            $7.1 million to support the development and implementation of bilateral climate change partnerships and projects with developing countries.
            $5,653,485 2004-2009
            Australia  -  China Environment Development Program (ACEDP)
            $25 million to support and improve environmental and natural resource management policy development in China.
            $25,000,000 2007-2012


JULIA GILLARD: It's a great pleasure to be here today to launch this report, capturing the voices of Australian school children participating in the 2020 Summit process. We called on Australian schools to participate in 2020. we wanted to make sure that when the Youth Summit meets in Canberra and when the final 2020 Summit meets in Canberra, that they've heard the voices of Australian young people. And the students who are in school today are going to be the adults of 2020 so we wanted to capture their ideas. This report contains feedback from School Summits in more than 500 schools. It contains the voices of thousands of school students, thinking about what sort of world they want to live in, in 2020. And I don't think its surprising the single most popular stream to talk about was climate change because young people know that we've got to grapple with the challenge of climate change and that's so important for their future. But they also talked about the economy, education and health, the future for Indigenous Australians. We've got the voices of young Australians recorded on all of these things.
This report is going to go to tomorrow's Youth Summit, where 100 young people from around the country will meet in Canberra in their own 2020 Summit. And then the voice from the Youth Summit will go to the full 2020 Summit on the following weekend. It has been an exciting time in the schools that have participated. It is going to be an exciting weekend in the Youth Summit. And I am very pleased that when 1000 of Australia's best and brightest meet in Canberra for the 2020 Summit, they will hear the powerful voices of Australian young people from this report and from the Youth Summit to meet this weekend. Are there questions?
JOURNALIST: From what you've read from the feedback from students, can you paint us a picture of what they imagine 2020 will look like?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, they imagine, they I think are very well aware of the sorts of discussions that people are having today and they think about what that could mean for the future. A lot of the ideas are about the environment, they're about climate change, about water, about better transport systems, better ways of getting around without creating greenhouse gas emissions. Many of the ideas are about a fairer future for Indigenous Australians. Many young people saw the Apology to the Stolen Generations and they are now reflecting a mood I think of reconciliation in the country. And many are about better assistance in education and in health and many also worry about the price of housing, probably reflecting some of the discussions they hear at home. So we have got ideas right across the board from young people around the country.
JOURNALIST: Did the children say their teachers need a pay rise at all?
[Laugh]
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I did note that one of the ideas was to replace teachers with robots. That's not something that we are considering. I suppose we wouldn't have to pay the robots but we would have to have the maintenance. But I think there is probably a concern from young people about the education system and about how they fit into it.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the safety of Australian athletes in China in the wake of the revelations overnight?
JULIA GILLARD: Of course I've watched the news and we are always concerned bout these questions. Can I say on the question of the security at the Olympics, obviously securing the Olympics is predominantly a matter for Chinese authorities. Our local security people are working with the Chinese authorities on the question of security. These are world events, these are exciting events, many of our athletes have trained all of their lives, they have dreamed from kindergarten onwards about getting to go to the Olympics and realising their dreams of perhaps winning a medal. So this is a time of excitement but it is also a time of prudent preparation on the security front and those matters are being attended to with our local security experts working with the Chinese government.
JOURNALIST: Will the Australian team have their own security as well as what China provides? 
JULIA GILLARD: I won't comment on operational matters. What I will say though is we are assisted in this country by the Australian Federal Police and from other security agencies with the best possible assistance and advice.
JOURNALIST: Do you have confidence in the Chinese government's preparation and the security to protect our athletes?
JULIA GILLARD: I am not going to comment on what are operational matters. What I certainly will say is that our local security people, who are very expert, will be working with the Chinese government. The Chinese government of course is predominately responsible for security at the Games but our local security people will be collaborating with them.
JOURNALIST: The Victorian Government's changes to poker machines. Would you like to see the reduction in the number of poker machines?
JULIA GILLARD: The Prime Minister has shown a key concern about the impact of poker machines and gaming more generally on families around the country. I think many Australians would know from their own circle of family and friends someone who has struggled with gaming addiction and the dreadful consequences it can have for them and their families. Because of that concern the Prime Minister has asked our Minister for Families, Jenny Macklin to meet with her State and Territory counterparts to talk about gaming and what can be done to reduce the harm and she will be doing that in June.
JOURNALIST: Will that affect the number of machines though?
JULIA GILLARD: Those discussions are yet to be had; they'll be had in June, they'll be had between the Federal government and State and Territory governments. Like many issues that affect the nation, we can only come up with the best solutions when the Federal government works with State and Territory governments. That's why the Rudd Labor Government is so focused on ending years and years of blame game where the former government thought that the best thing to do was to blame State governments but not fix problems. We believe in fixing problems, we believe in fixing them through discussion with our State and Territory colleagues and that will be occurring.
JOURNALIST: On the Olympics, Brendan Nelson this morning said he expects that the IOC will can the Torch Relay a little earlier than expected and he is supportive of it. What's your view?
JULIA GILLARD: This is a matter, at the end of the day, for the IOC. Can I say I think that there would be many Australians disappointed if the Torch didn't come to this country. It is the symbol of the Olympics; the Olympics are an exciting event. Many people look forward to going out and seeing the Torch, particularly people who couldn't dream really of going to the Olympics themselves, its one way of them visibly being engaged in the Olympic spirit. So I think people would be disappointed. This is a decision for the IOC at the end of the day and they will make it.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's appropriate that a 14 year old girl be the face of Fashion Week?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm always concerned about young people and their images and stereotypes, about body image. We know of course in this country that we struggle with an epidemic of obesity on the one hand and then too many young people who fall victim to anorexia and other eating disorders on the other hand. I think it's important that magazines and the popular media show realistic images of what it is to be young and to be healthy. On the question of the individual girl involved, obviously this is a decision that her family will make paying appropriate regard to her welfare and making sure that school and other things happen. So I am not going to give advice to that individual family but overall I think it is very important that our mainstream media is reflecting back to the community realistic, everyday images of what its like to be young, to be fit, to be healthy, to be energetic, rather than some of the images we see particularly in magazines for girls which are images of unrealistically thin people, often those images altered in a way that's not apparent to the person flicking through the magazines. We want people to know what it is to be healthy.
JOURNALIST: Some questions raised today in The Australian newspaper regarding Therese Rein's companies, had all of those matters been properly declared by the Prime Minister?
JULIA GILLARD: I am advised this is a company that has been inactive for a considerable period of time, from 2006. It is a company that is being wound up; it will be wound up by the 30th of June this year. It is an inactive company. The Prime Minister has certainly complied with the declaration arrangements for Parliamentarians. This is a company that's on its way to going out of existence.
JOURNALIST: Would you sit at home and watch Glenn Wheatley on reality TV show?
[Laugh]
JULIA GILLARD: I don't get that many opportunities to sit at home watching anything unfortunately and if I did have an idle hour at home to watch something on TV I don't think that would be my first selection.
Thank you very much.


NEIL MITCHELL: And straight to it today, standing in for Kevin Rudd in his regular spot, the Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning Neil.
NEIL MITCHELL: Will Australia send security personnel with our team to the Olympics given the latest news of terror threats to the Games?
JULIA GILLARD: Well of course Chinese authorities are predominately responsible for securing the Olympics. But we'll be making the necessary arrangements to ensure our athletes are safe.
NEIL MITCHELL: So does that mean we send our own security personnel?
JULIA GILLARD: Well look Neil I'd prefer not to talk about the specifics of security arrangements. But obviously we have terrific security people in this country and they'll do what's necessary to look after security.
NEIL MITCHELL: Have decisions been made on that yet?
JULIA GILLARD: Look Neil I really don't want to talk about security arrangements but people should rest assure that our domestic security authorities are obviously well on notice, that there are going to be the Olympic Games and there are going to be our athletes there.
NEIL MITCHELL: Have you yet been briefed on this threat that emerged overnight on the Olympics?
JULIA GILLARD: I haven't been specifically briefed on that threat Neil no, but I am broadly aware of the arrangements that are being made for the Olympic Games.
NEIL MITCHELL: Ok, is China cooperating then with what we want to do in protecting our own athletes?
JULIA GILLARD: Neil as I understand it the arrangements are proceeding as these things do proceed. We have very expert security people in this country you'd be aware of that, they do a good job but in this area the less said often the better.
NEIL MITCHELL: Ok what from the point of, that's the team we are talking about, what about tourists? Now if Australian tourists go to the Games are they on their own or are they just relying on the Chinese or do they have any outside help?
JULIA GILLARD: Well Australian nationals are never on their own when they travel. We obviously do what we can throughout the world to assist Australians who are travelling. We have our diplomatic resources there. We provide people with travel advisories so that they are aware what our assessment is of risk in any place around the world. So all of those normal arrangements are obviously in place and they step up, if you like, for major events like the Olympic Games.
NEIL MITCHELL: Are you concerned by these reports about the plots to kidnap athletes and there's talk about poison gas, poison meat are you concerned by it?
JULIA GILLARD: Obviously we're concerned, I'm concerned. I'm sure Australians generally understand that around the world from time to time we face problems. But I think Australians understand too that we've got some very sophisticated resources here to help us deal with these issues. So obviously I'm concerned, but in the security area we are very well assisted in this country by some great experts and professionals.
NEIL MITCHELL: There are a number of athletes who have already expressed their nervousness, Australian athletes, their nervousness about going and obviously their families will be concerned. What would you say to them?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we will keep in touch the Olympic Committee on all of these matters. Ultimately people will work their own way through these issues. The role of the Australian Government is to make sure that people have got good advice when their making decisions about travelling and our role of course is to make sure that we can do what we can to keep people safe.
NEIL MITCHELL: Would you agree the Olympic Games should not allow itself to be intimidated by terrorist threats?
JULIA GILLARD: Well look Neil I think we've got to react appropriately to this sort of news. The Olympics are an event enjoyed by people around the world. They've been a great celebration of sporting prowess, a great celebration of bring the world together. We all remember fondly obviously the Sydney Games. These are things that are there to be enjoyed, indeed delighted in. Many of our athletes have obviously spent all of their lives training and focusing on these Games and they want to go there and they want to want to win medals.  And I don't want to say anything that detracts from their pleasure in that, that's what they have devoted their lives to. So I think we've got to react appropriately but let's not think this is all on one side. The Olympics is a great event and there are people who from the time that they are kindergarten kids dream of getting to go to the Olympics and participating and some of our great athletes are going to have opportunity this year.
NEIL MITCHELL: Are you likely to go yourself?
JULIA GILLARD: No I won't be, I will be here in Australia. Obviously I have got a big year in front of me delivering the fair and balanced workplace relations system and delivering the Education Revolution, so that's my primary focus.
NEIL MITCHELL: Would you feel comfortable going, given the situation in Tibet?
JULIA GILLARD: I agree with what the Prime Minister has said, indeed not even the Dalai Lama has called for a boycott of the Olympic Games. I think the Games should go ahead. I am not personally in a position to attend because of my responsibilities here.
NEIL MITCHELL: When did you last speak with Mr Rudd?
JULIA GILLARD: We talk from time to time when he's away and obviously we communicate either directly or staff communicate, so I'm kept in the loop and he's kept in the loop about what's happening here.
NEIL MITCHELL: So when did you last speak with him?
JULIA GILLARD: Oh look Neil, I'm not going to go through blow by blow conversations with the Prime Minister...
NEIL MITCHELL: No no I don't want that...
JULIA GILLARD: I think there are some things that happen between Deputy and Prime Minister that happen between Deputy and Prime Minister...
NEIL MITCHELL: Well yes but I don't want the detail of the conversation but roughly when did you last speak?
JULIA GILLARD: Neil we keep in touch as necessary and obviously he is kept in the loop about everything that's happening here.
NEIL MITCHELL: So you don't want to tell us when you last spoke to him?
JULIA GILLARD: Oh look I just think we're Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister obviously we talk all the time. We talk all the time when Kevin's here, we talk as necessary when he's overseas and I think he and I need to be able to do that in our own time and in our own way.
NEIL MITCHELL: The only reason I ask is he looks tired, is he?
JULIA GILLARD: He is a man with enormous stamina, an enormous work capacity. When you are moving round the world and you would know this Neil personally, moving through time zones obviously that can bring its own stresses and strains. But Kevin because of his former work as a diplomat and then of course as the Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister is well use to being on the international circuit and dealing with the kind of time zone changes and the things that it can do to your sleep patters, so he's in good form.
NEIL MITCHELL: Ok why did he raise the Tibet issue publicly before he met the Chinese leadership, surely that was risky?
JULIA GILLARD: The Tibet issue is one that obviously required response. We've made it very clear all along that we are concerned about human rights abuses in Tibet, Kevin has been very forthright about that...
NEIL MITCHELL: But why raise it before the meeting with the leadership in China?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think you've got to recall Neil; these matters were first raised when he met with President Bush so...
NEIL MITCHELL: True but it's a bit different from when he is on Chinese soil. I just thought the protocol would be to meet them, make the point privately, then make it publicly.
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think the protocol is to make the point anytime that you can make the point. And he made the point when he met with President Bush. He's made the point publicly in China. He's been very forthright about these things and that shows our degree of concern.
NEIL MITCHELL: Ok, do you think the Torch Relay given its disruption should go ahead in Canberra or not?
JULIA GILLARD: I think it would be disappointing for people if the Torch Relay didn't go ahead. It's one of the things that has historically built excitement for the Olympic Games. And there have been people who have gone out to see the Torch who wouldn't have the financial capacity to go to the Games themselves, but they feel like they are in touch with the Olympic movement because they see the Torch go by. So I think it would be disappointing if it didn't come round.
NEIL MITCHELL: Are you aware of reports that Mr Rudd failed to declare one of his wife's companies, Invisage Australia, which has got $160,000 in government funding over the past four years and he hasn't declared it?
JULIA GILLARD: I have seen the reports Neil, yes I have and I'm advised that the company in question is an inactive company and has been inactive for a considerable period of time and is in the process of being wound up.
NEIL MITCHELL: But it's still registered and he didn't declare it, isn't that a failing?
JULIA GILLARD: When you look at the technicality of what needs to be declared, this didn't need to be declared and in any event it is an inactive company in the process of being wound up.
NEIL MITCHELL: Why didn't it need to be declared if it was getting government money and it's still registered?
JULIA GILLARD: It's not a company that Kevin has a direct interest in...
NEIL MITCHELL: His wife does.
JULIA GILLARD: She has, that's true. And now the company is in the process of being put out of existence.
NEIL MITCHELL: Well I know that's happening now but it was still registered, its wasn't declared and it was getting government money. It was still registered, it was still getting government money and it wasn't declared, shouldn't it have been declared?
Julia Gillard: Well it's been inactive for a period of time and is in the process of being wound up. Look as I'm advised it's been inactive since 2006 and its going to be formally deregistered at the end of this financial year.
NEIL MITCHELL: But according to the reports it was getting government funding as late as May last year.
JULIA GILLARD: I am not in a position to give you specific advice about those claims. But what I'm advised is that it's been inactive for a considerable period, since 2006 and it's in the process of being wound up.
NEIL MITCHELL: Petrol's about to reach $1.60 next week we're told. When are we going to get your Petrol Commissioner in there ‘kicking butts'?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we've obviously got the Petrol Commissioner, he's been appointed, Mr Pat Walker. We've had the ACCC out and about, I'm sure you would have seen Grahame Samuel appearing from time to time in the media. We do want them, to use your terminology ‘kicking butt'. What we want them to do of course is to satisfy themselves that there's no profiteering or price gouging going on.
NEIL MITCHELL: I know you need to get away. Kevin Rudd's had a successful trip by all appearances and one of the things that's amazed me is the attention devoted to the way his wife dresses. Does that irritate you?
JULIA GILLARD: I see all of this come and go generally in politics so I suppose I raise an eyebrow more than I get irritated Neil. I think it all gets a little bit silly doesn't it? Whether it's Therese or whether it's other women in public life, I'd like to think that people get valued for their accomplishments and their character more than the colour of what their wearing that day.
NEIL MITCHELL: But you've had a bit of a makeover yourself haven't you. Do you have to do this as a woman in politics? I noticed it's a new hairstyle didn't I?
JULIA GILLARD: I get my hair cut from time to time Neil, I don't know if that's equals a makeover. On that basis you must have a makeover every six weeks.
NEIL MITCHELL: Oh come on, it's a bit different the hairstyle. I don't knock it, it looks fine but I mean is this necessary?
JULIA GILLARD: I get my haircut the way I like to get it cut, no one tells me about how to get it cut, except I take a bit of advice off my partner Tim. So all of this just gets a little bit on the silly side. I would hope that we are big enough to look at people and to make an assessment about their contribution and their character rather than whether or not we like the blouse they're wearing that day. I think that that is a hundredth order question compared to the contributions that people make and Therese Rein is someone who's made a considerable contribution in her own right. She is a successful businesswoman. She is someone who takes very seriously social issues. She has had a particular focus on homelessness. A particular focus because of her life circumstances on equal opportunities for people with disabilities and that's all a terrific achievement and she should be noted for that.
NEIL MITCHELL: Thank you for your time. When do you hand back the country?
JULIA GILLARD: Kevin returns on Sunday.
NEIL MITCHELL: And does he get it back Sunday or do give it back to him Monday?
JULIA GILLARD: Oh no, no. As soon as the Prime Minister lands then the Prime Minister is back.
NEIL MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks Neil. Bye, bye.
NEIL MITCHELL: Bye, bye. Acting Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.


PM: I just had a very good meeting with the President of China Hu Jintao, which ran for nearly an hour. It was the second time that we have met, of course, we have met previously at the time of APEC last year. And it was good to renew my personal acquaintance with him and to build what I hope, will become a good strong working personal relationship with the Chinese President for the years ahead.
I also thanked him for the courtesy which the Chinese Government has extended to myself and my delegation during the period that we have been in China. I used this meeting to emphasise that from Australia's point of view, we are committed to building a stronger, deeper, broader, Australia-China relationship into the future.
President Hu committed China to building and constructing a new chapter in the Australia-China relationship as well. We both agreed that this would be good and important for both our country's interests as well as the interests of our peoples into the future as we share a common grid and as we share a common world. Specifically, the President emphasised and reemphasised the importance attached to the recommencement of the bilateral free trade negotiations which I discussed with Premier Wen Jiabao in Beijing.
He also reemphasised the importance which China attached to the New Services Round Table at a ministerial level which was also subject to the decision which we reached in Beijing in the bilateral discussions with the Chinese Premier.
A large part of the conversation with President Hu focussed on climate change. He drew attention to the joint statement which we had released in Beijing and specifically pointed to its content and the prospects which it contains for further cooperation between us. President Hu emphasised Australia's strength and experience in relevant technologies associated with climate change and indicated that China was to draw on those strengths and technologies into the future.
I emphasised from the Australian Government's point of view that within that framework we wanted to partner with China in developing further clean coal technology and setting ambitious goals for us both as countries which have significant roles to play when it comes to coal in getting this technology right and getting it right as soon as possible. Beyond those specific areas, of bilateral economic cooperation, we also discussed Tibet and the Olympics and also we discussed foreign policy in terms of the future of the six party talks and where that might go to in the near and long term.
Both the President and myself underlined the importance of a successful and early conclusion to the Six Party Talks on the Korean nuclear question. The President rightly emphasised that this was the urgent and critical need. We also discussed where the Six Party Talks mechanism might evolve to in the future, in terms of a wider security dialogue across East Asia, similar to discussions I had at the beginning of this visit abroad with the US administration in Washington.
The Chinese President indicated he would continue to be in close contact with the Australian Government on the evolution of this. And he welcomed Australia's continued positive and active role on the question of political security and wider security in East Asia.
I concluded this visit to China and this visit abroad where the visit began some time ago and that is emphasising the absolute importance for Australia of engaging with the global economy. Of engaging with the challenges represented by the instability in global financial markets and by doing whatever I could to enhance Australia's interests in terms of the current negotiations on free trade, globally through the Doha Round, bilaterally through this FTA.
For Australia, this is important, critical work because being members of a global economic order which is now under some stress, and secondly, with us with critical economic interests to pursue with the country which is now our major trading partner, I believe this visit has been worthwhile against those measures.
Happy to take you questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: There was nothing in the position which I put or which the Chinese President put which differed from the public positions that you have seen so far.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I am better informed Paul, about what thinking underpins President Musharruf's attitude to the engagement of his own security forces both within the north west frontier provinces and also his diplomatic engagement in Afghanistan itself. We want to sustain a high level dialogue with President Musharruf and we propose to do that through our representatives in Islamabad. Because for me this is as important as is the domestic military and civilian strategy we pursue in Afghanistan itself and particularly given that we have got more than 1000 Australian troops whose lives are on the line.
JOURNALIST: The Chinese seriously (inaudible) when you say to significant human rights problems, what specifically are you talking about that you believe are those problems and secondly, the opposition back home is saying that you could play a role as an intermediary between the Dalia Lama and the Chinese leadership. What do you think about that?
PM: Well the first thing I would say is that I will play whatever role it is practicable for me to do. I think it is very important not to overstate these things. Where I can assist at the margins of complex international negotiations in general and foreign policy and specifically on sensitive questions like this which obviously have an impact in relation to the upcoming Olympics - if I can assist at the margins I will do so, but I think it is very important not to overstate the potential which we have to play.
JOURNALIST: Are you inclined to take up the offer of President Musharruf's invitation to visit Pakistan? 
PM: I cannot do that this year. I don't think that is possible. At least I can't according to current timetabling but I will certainly be engaging other Ministers on this question because I regard this as very important.
We have more than 1000 troops on the ground in Afghanistan. It is a very difficult security environment. Half of the challenge lies in what is happening domestically within Afghanistan itself and the other half lies in whether in fact the Taliban and Al Qaeda are attaining any form of safe haven across the border and what is being done about that. This is important, therefore you will have both ministerial engagement on this with Government of Pakistan, but other high level engagement in Islamabad itself.
JOURNALIST: Did you discuss with President Hu Jintao the issue of talks (inaudible) iron ore, coal, etc?
PM: No. What we talked about was the importance of Australia being a long term, secure, reliable supplier for China's long term energy needs. And that to be in the framework of a broader, deeper economic relationship between Australia and China. Consistent with the remarks I have made in Beijing with other Chinese leaders, we believe that on the one hand, within a long term economic relationship with China we can say clearly and unequivocally that we are a reliable, long term supplier. And two, on the operational mechanics of that relationship, it will be conducted on commercial grounds. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well my position has never changed and that is that boycotts of the Olympic Games don't work. That has never been my view, it is not my view and it won't be my view in the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what about the significant human rights problems in the west (inaudible)
PM: Well I have been a student of human rights in China over many, many years. And if you looked at the evolution of human rights practices in Tibet, whether it is in the 1950's or 60's or 70's there is an accumulation of problems which have underpinned certain recent events. It is quite plain that that has occurred. If you were to look carefully at the impact of practices in Tibet during the period of the cultural revolution, each of these have had a long term legacy effect in Tibet. And therefore recent events have occurred very much within that context.
Secondly, as we have said consistently, it is important for all parties, in terms of recent events in (inaudible) to exercise restraint and again for all parties to pursue the avenue of peaceful dialogue.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, when you were assessed (inaudible)
PM: Well we have a new government in Pakistan. What was interesting in our meetings with the President of Pakistan was the attendance of the Foreign Minister and the Defence Minister who were from different political parties. Therefore this is a new government in the making. I was keen also to establish contact with those ministers as they represent a party which has not been in government for a long, long time.
It is too early to tell how that particular government will settle in, in terms of its internal arrangements. Given President Musharruf's historical connection with the defence forces and the security forces, I still believe it is entirely appropriate to engage him directly on these defence and security questions because it is those agencies which have the most direct impact on what is going on in the North West Frontier, in the tribal areas, but also through their diplomacy, what is occurring in Afghanistan itself. But because it is a newly formed government, we intend to intensify our diplomatic and political engagement with Islamabad because I take this very seriously as a key part of the overall Afghanistan equation. And we need to know exactly what is happening and satisfy our own minds on that score.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Ah no, cricket was not discussed in the bilaterals that I can recall. But I think I said to Pakistan media as I walked out the door, we look forward to a long term cricketing relationship with Pakistan. 
JOURNLAIST: Prime Minister it has been a long haul, how are you feeling?
PM: I am feeling very chipper, I notice there is a few coughs and splutters around here. So a medicine cabinet will be dispensed by Lachlan Harris afterwards. He has a combination of Berocca, aspirin and various other antibiotics should any of you need them.
JOURNALIST: What do you feel like? 
PM: I am feeling fine actually. I think, look, I mean, the course of this visit, staff mentioned to me before, we have probably caught up in formal bilateral meetings with 13 or 14 heads of government. Informally, with probably more than that. And remember, what we set ourselves as objectives here was to advance Australia's global economic interests, including financial markets and in trade. I believe we have been consistently doing that through the time that I have been away.
Also on climate change, and I believe the agreement to work with both the Europeans and now the Chinese in a much more focussed way on the climate change challenge is a significant advance for us. We also set ourselves an objective of doing what we could on the security and counterterrorism front, particularly with reference to our troops in Afghanistan and that has been a constant focus of talks back in Washington and in London and in Bucharest and also with President Musharruf here.
And then, frankly, it is also having a set of working level personal relationships with heads of government around the world which can now be drawn upon by me as Prime Minister of Australia given the uncertainties which the year inevitably will contain.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd did you talk to President Hu about the (inaudible) 
PM: What I found significant on the financial services front was that President Hu chose explicitly to reemphasise on several occasions during our discussion just now, the importance of a decision to establish a ministerial round table on services. In my representations to President Hu, (inaudible) ran through the obvious strengths of the economy in terms of energy, resources, raw materials. I said, again that we believe that this relationship, when it comes to the economy, needs to be advanced on three pillars. One is in the resources and energy and raw materials sector. The second is our respective markets for manufactured goods. And thirdly, critically for us, to broaden the economic relationship in the direction of financial services. 
I spent a lot of time briefing the President on the strength of the Australian financial services sector and why access to the Chinese market for us was a critical play idea for the future. We need a broad based economic relationship and when I spoke therefore about us wanting a broader deeper and stronger relationship with China, in the economic dimensions of that, that is precisely what I mean.


JULIA GILLARD: I am just going to make a very brief statement but I am really going to hand very quickly over to the stars of the show, our co-summit chairs of the Youth Summit, Kate and Hugh who are with me. But it has obviously been a great pleasure for me this morning as Acting Prime Minister to be here to open the 2020 Youth Summit. This is part of a community festival of ideas, of trying to collect ideas from right around the nation to feed into the 2020 Summit next weekend. We've had more than 500 schools bring young people together to talk about this nation's future and where we want it to be in 2020. Those ideas have fed into today's Youth Summit which brings together 100 young Australians from right around the country who are going to spend a weekend talking about the kind of nation they want to live in in 2020. As I said in my speech, we've brought together representatives of the 1001st generation to live in this country. It's a special generation with its contribution to the nation's future. And when we are talking about 2020, the people in this room today will be the adults of 2020. Whatever long term ideas come out of the 2020 Summit, it's the generation represented at this Youth Summit who will implement them and guide them into the future. So it is a very special opportunity to hear the voices of young Australians. The Summit is being lead by Kate and by Hugh and I will turn to them now to see if they would like to make some statements about what a great, exciting possibility for a weekend full of ideas from some of the best and brightest young people around the nation. So I will call first on my Ministerial colleague Kate Ellis. 
KATE ELLIS: Well thank you very much Julia. It's fantastic for my co-chair Hugh Evans and I to be here in Canberra to welcome one hundred remarkable young Australians to join with us in talking about the challenges which lie before our country and how we can reach our full potential. The one hundred young Australians from right around the country come here with fresh ideas, with different experiences, with unique perspectives. And we think it's really important that when we are talking about Australia in 2020, we are involving in that conversation, the people that will be the parents, the business leaders, the community leaders, indeed possibility the politicians of that time to be amongst the conversations and start working now to put those plans into action. These one hundred people range in age from 15 to 24. They're from right around the country and they've already achieved some remarkable results. Amongst this group in Canberra we have people that have set up their own development agencies, they've gone into business, they've made remarkable academic achievements. They're already out there making a difference in the community and what this government is very keen to do is recognise that young people are already doing very important things. Too often they're stereotyped as being the lout, the party animals and we don't recognise that there are some remarkable young Australians. It's the end of National Youth Week and we think this is a really significant way to put them on the agenda. And I might if I can, just welcome Hugh Evans to say a few words about some of the young Australians amongst this group and some of the things they have already achieved. 
HUGH EVANS: Thank you Minister Ellis. I'd like to add, what a great privilege it is to be here for the 2020 Youth Summit. Some people say that our generation only cares about ourselves, that we don't commit to anything, that we just don't care but really that is a lie. All across Australia young people are shaping the future of our great nation. They are here this weekend because they believe that change is possible and that we can be a generation that really tackles some of the greatest moral and social challenges of our time. And so we have amongst us some very dynamic young people. A young guy, who is our youngest delegate, is a guy by the name of Nicholas Rokkas; he is 15 years old and has already won a sustainable living award for doing incredible stuff in and around his community. He submitted a range of ideas that are practical ideas for Australia's future. We have young people like Tom O'Connor who is the Young Victorian of the Year this year. He's one of the leaders of the Oak Tree Foundation and has also played a significant role with the United Nations Youth Association as well. Him and many others like him are out there to really make a substantial difference for Australia's future. So I am very proud to be here. I am very proud to be able to co-chair this summit together with Minister Ellis. Thank you Minister Gillard for being able to share with us today, we really appreciate you being here. But I guess what we'd like to say it that there are some critical challenges ahead of us. The challenge of climate change is real. The challenge of global poverty is real. We see that probably the most substantial challenge is the challenge of Australia becoming a true knowledge nation. And the reason why this is important is if Australia can be a true knowledge nation it actually gives us the opportunity to tackle broader social policy issues head on because we will have initiative ideas for Australia's future. Thank you.
JULIA GILLARD: Alright, can I ask if there are questions on the Youth Summit first, if people would ask those and then we will turn to more general questions. So are there any questions directly on the Youth Summit and feel free to direct them to Kate or Hugh. 
JOURNALIST: Kate, you mentioned in your speech there the ‘Corey factor' but the reality is that a lot of young Australians are like Corey. Where's their representation here for them?
KATE ELLIS: What we're asking for here is a balance. That when you pick up the newspapers, when you look at the media, people could be mistaken for thinking that there is a whole generation of kids out there that just want to party. They don't care about anything and don't add anything to our community. That's not true. What we're trying to say is there are remarkable young Australians out there. There are people that care about making Australia a better place. That care about improving their local community, about getting involved. And we think that they deserve a fairer go then they've been getting. That's why we've brought these people here this weekend in Canberra. That's why we want to put them under the spot light and let them show Australia their great ideas. Because I think there are a lot of people out there that think they're a bunch of partying Corey's, that are going to be very surprised at just how amazing some of these young Australians are. 
JOURNALIST: So is this partly then about besides getting those ideas worked out, also a process of rebuilding the image following some of that publicity surrounding the Corey's and what have you?
KATE ELLIS: I think that is important. I think that is important that all Australians get a fair go. And I think that some people can legitimately argue that remarkable young Australians aren't featuring as prominently in public debate and in public discussion as they should have been. I know that I'm certainly of the view that young people have not been involved in political discussions, have not had a seat at the table in Australia for far too long. We don't want to silence these people. We think they have great contributions and we want to give them a forum so that they can come forward and be involved in the debate going forward.
JOURNALIST: As Minister who will be receiving the torch in Canberra you relieved that the IOC has announced that it will go ahead today, the Relay? 
KATE ELLIS: I think that the Olympic Torch Relay is a really important part of the Olympic movement. In the past we have seen it is a great opportunity to build excitement about the games to start focusing on our athletes; the training they have been doing, their hopes and expectations. And I hope that when the Olympic Torch Relay comes to Australia, that some of the focus remains on those remarkable athletes. I think it's very important. 
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you. Any other questions? 
JOURNALIST: In the Olympic year do you think that Brendan Nelson's almost finished running his marathon? 
JULIA GILLARD: Look, that's a matter for the Liberal Party. 
JOURNALIST: As someone who's witnessed leadership challenges. Do you have any advice for Brendan Nelson?
JULIA GILLARD: Oh look I don't. These are all matters for the Liberal Party to deal with. 
JOURNALIST:Is he the Government's best asset while he remains leader?
JULIA GILLARD: These are all matters for the Liberal Party to deal with and I'm not going to provide any advice or commentary. The Liberal Party can deal with these issues itself. 
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about more reports today about the connection between developers making donations to the New South Wales state Labor government?
JULIA GILLARD: Well clearly Federal Labor has signalled that we want to make sure that there are better disclosure laws in this country. We were very critical of the Howard Government when it increased the amount, before you had to make a disclosure, to $10,000. My colleague Senator Faulkner is ensuring that disclosure has to happen for donations of $1000 or more and it has to happen more quickly that it's happened with the past with a six monthly disclosure cycle. And then we will of course be questing for ideas for about better disclosure arrangements generally and better transparency in political funding. My colleague Senator Faulkner is going to go through a process, to have a discussion about further ideas. I certainly think the Australian community wants to be reassured on these questions and we are taking urgent steps to do so, making sure we've got proper disclosure arrangements back in the Federal arena with amounts of a thousand or more disclosure. Thank you very much.


UHLMANN: Prime Minister welcome to AM.
PM: Good to be here.
UHLMANN: Can you tell us what you said to President Musharruf?
PM: Well we had a long discussion - obviously about bilateral relations as well and the economic relationship, the political relationship. But the bulk of the conversation was about Afghanistan and about the problems that we, as contributors to the war in Afghanistan, have concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and whether there are further things which Pakistan can be doing to assist us in removing that pressure. Not just for ourselves, but for other contributing states. 
UHLMANN: What more can we do, because of course, this frontier hasn't been able to be controlled by anyone through history?
PM: It is a difficult frontier and I recognise that. I have also looked at the history. He in recent times, has put in a renewed political effort in the, what's called the North West frontier provinces, up there (inaudible) 
But the point that I have made to him is that still our advice is that there is significant leakage across the border. It doesn't help those responsible for security within Afghanistan.
The second concern I raised with him was whether or not Pakistan was being as helpful as it could be in terms of internal affairs within Afghanistan itself. His position was that Pakistan is doing what it can assist to separate out local people from their Taliban leaders in order to ensure that loyalty restructures are returned to traditional tribal chiefs, in the case of the North West frontier provinces. And to other Pashtun leaders, in terms of those parts of Afghanistan where Pashtuns are Government,
UHLMANN: Is there any concern that members of the military or security services in Pakistan are actually assisting Al Qaeda or the Taliban?
PM: Well there have been extensive Western media reports to that effect and obviously I raised those concerns with President Musharruf. He was at pains to point out to me that those reports were without foundation. But his view, the policy he was pursuing was constructive in trying to separate out the Taliban leadership from a support base either in Pashtun areas or in the tribal areas. I said that we would want to continue a high level dialogue with him on this through our diplomatic representatives in Islamabad. As we regard that as important part of the ultimate strategy for prevailing in Afghanistan.
UHLMANN: Is it possible to prevail in Afghanistan, is it winnable?
PM: Well I wouldn't have Australian troops in Afghanistan now if I didn't believe there was a strategy which enabled us to prevail. That's why I travelled all the way to Bucharest. Because one of the things missing up until now has been an integrated civilian and military strategy. I think one of the good outcomes from Bucharest was that we now have heads of government agreed to that. Hopefully, we will have heads of government agree to the monitoring of that in 12 months time in terms of success or failure.
That's one reason why I think we should have some confidence that we have got a strategy for the future. Secondly, absent a diplomatic strategy with Pakistan, given the importance of the border havens, and I fear that our strategy will come under renewed pressure. It's better than we had before. Nothing is guaranteed of success but we are capable of proceeding on this basis.
UHLMANN: Did you get all that you wanted out of Bucharest. You were talking about the opium poppy crop and you said you wanted benchmarks. You didn't get those did you. And you said you would had more to say if you didn't get them. So what more did you have to say? 
PM: Well, when I get back to Canberra I want to get a final read out from the NATO Secretary General on the outcome, on the measurement, of poppy cultivation in 12 months time. That is the agreed strategy contained in the integrated military and civilian strategy in Bucharest. 
Measure it in 12 months time in terms of size of poppy crop. I want to confirm with the NATO Secretary General as to whether there is an agreed measurement strategy in timetable. Then I will be saying further if there is (inaudible).
UHLMANN: Do you think that China is listening to anybody on Tibet?
PM: Well China has got a very tough line on Tibet. I have spent a lot of time this evening on the question of Tibet. I have spent a lot of time in recent days on the question of Tibet in private discussions and you have seen my public remarks as well. My job is to argue strongly the case for a negotiation and for the non-use of violence. But no one is pretending this is easy. I am not. But I continue to argue the case.
UHLMANN: Is there a possibility that China might dig its heels in on Tibet, if there is too much pressure from the international community that it is interfering in China's affairs? 
PM: Well China will always say that. But that shouldn't prevent us from raising a strong view when we have one. And I think the Western community of nations has a strong view on this and they have been raising it. 
How China will react and what happens internally over time, between now and the Olympics and beyond the Olympics, frankly no one can predict that. All I can do at this juncture, being in China now, is put forward I think a rational and reasoned case as to why negotiation and why the avoidance of violence is an appropriate way through what is a difficult situation.
UHLMANN: Throughout the course of this 17 day journey, much had been made of your capacity to speak mandarin and the world is obviously fascinated and a little bit alarmed by the rise of China. Do you believe that you might be a conduit to the West for China?
PM: I think Australian politicians are always in danger of inflating their status on these things. I don't intend to sort of, overstate what I can do or we can do. I believe in being helpful at the margins where we can. I have described before the need for a creative middle power diplomacy.
That means nudging international agendas forward, helping when you can, whether it is on climate change, whether it is on the global free trade negotiations, or the current difficult situation with China in relation to Tibet. It doesn't guarantee you of success but I am all for having a go.
UHLMANN: But as you said, language is the beginning of understanding and you are the first western leader who can speak mandarin that does not count for nothing, does it?
PM: It helps to be able to communicate and I have been having long discussions tonight with various officials on a whole range of sensitive questions. And it's useful to be able to communicate. But an ability to communicate doesn't solve the problem. It may get you a little way towards ensuring that the positions are well understood.
And sometimes when you have got huge language and culture divides, that helps getting you towards the end point which is a better agreement or a better outcome. But I am under no illusion about how hard this whole question of Tibet is and will be in the future. All I can do is argue this and other matters as effectively as I can.
UHLMANN: If China continues to get flogged around the world on this Olympic Torch Relay is there a possibility that could be hugely damaging. Could China retreat from the world as a result of the Olympics?
PM: Well the Chinese Government and I am sure the Chinese Communist Party, are robust, hardened individuals and organisations. And they were always robust in dealing with the world and the world needs to be robust and still friendly in dealing with China.
But there is always consideration to have in mind here, which is public opinion in all of our countries and how all these things wash out in the eyes of the Chinese population. People who watch TV and form their opinions over time. And similarly people in the west. That is why I think this is a very important challenge for us all. It is almost a classic East meets West divide, and frankly it is sometimes very hard to straddle that. But you have got to make sure that it doesn't wash through into wider public opinion.
UHLMANN: You are concerned though that this sort of action does wash through into wider public opinion, but aren't you, you are concerned that the Chinese people will take this personally and that the communist party abuses that nationalistic spirit?
PM: Well I think we have always got to be mindful of a couple of things in international relations. One is, the relationship between governments. Two is, how you use those relationships to advance the important global agendas, whether it is climate change, whether it is free trade. Or, whether it is respecting human rights.
Thirdly, all countries have to be mindful of the role of their communities and their populations. Foreign policy is not detached either here or in Australia or in any other country from what people actually think.
And this of course is not a democracy, that's China  -  Australia is. But the actual feelings of the people count for something long term as well in a country like China. And we have to be mindful of that and mindful of the effectiveness of communicating our positions. Which is one reason why I was pleased to have an opportunity to speak directly to so many Chinese people in the last few days.
UHLMANN: Do you think that China will engage in the way that you would like to see China engage in developing a rules based order for the world. Obviously we are seeing trouble with the rules based order that came after the second world war. You have mentioned that a number of times, that there is a remaking of that, with the World Bank and the IMF, you see different roles for them. Do you think China will engage in that?
PM: Well the rules based order we have now for the world, has served the world not too badly. If you look at the world before 1944- 45, frankly there were a few problems there. Not just one world war, but a couple, a depression and everything else in between. The post ‘45' world order has been significant because it has been rules based, on economy questions, on security questions, on political questions and human rights questions as well. It hasn't been perfect, just better than what preceded it.
The challenge now is that those rules are coming under a lot of stress and pressure. There is Darfur in Africa, where the adequacy of these rules for dealing with the climate change agenda, free trade, but also the ultimate potency of the Security Council and the United Nations. What I have been trying to do in my time in China has been to, and in the United States, is explain and to argue a theory of responsible stake holder, a responsible stake holder approach on the part of China to the global order. And at the same time, mesh that with some of China's own local thinking, on how do you build a harmonious global order.
Does that succeed overnight? No, but I have tried to engage some of the leading thinkers in this country to try and bring these strands together because we want China to be a participant in a constructive, positive rules based order into the future.
UHLMANN: Ok before we run out of time, are you concerned though that some of those things that set up the order of the world, for example the United Nations, that they are not functioning the way that they should, in fact that there should be a remaking of all of these systems now, that they are either running their course, or that they are not functioning in the way that they should?
PM: I believe that each of these organisations can be reformed. The World Bank can be reformed particularly in the direction of the challenge of developing countries on climate change. It having investment and loans in order to acquire the technology necessary to effectively participate in climate change. 
The IMF, we have important meetings of the IMF coming up. The big challenge is for us, how to respond effectively to the new challenges to the global economic and financial market stability presented by the sub prime crisis.
On security, the Security Council, to date hasn't worked effectively on Darfur. These organisations are in need of reform, not a total demolition job, with the idea of constructing something else, that was very much the attitude of, I have got to say, of the previous Australian Government which pushed the UN to one side, altogether.
Our Government, the Government that I lead, is committed to the reform of these institutions and we will be out there arguing a strong reform case, because a rules based order suits Australia.
We are a middle power and we need a rules based order, not just for now but for the next fifty years when who knows who will be the dominant powers in the world.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.


Her Majesty's announcement of the resignation as Governor-General of His Excellency Major General Michael Jeffery AC CVO MC (Rtd) marks the end of a very distinguished term of service in this high office.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I record our deep appreciation of Major General Jeffery's services to his country and our great respect for the outstanding way he has carried out his duties as Governor-General.
Major General Jeffery has a long and admirable record of service to the community. Not only has he served as Governor-General of Australia, but he was also the Governor of Western Australia from 1993 to 2003. A Vietnam Veteran, Major General Jeffery held a number of very senior posts in the Australian Army, including as the first commanding officer of the SAS regiment.
Major General Jeffery will be relinquishing his appointment after just over five years in office. I hope that he and his wife Marlena will continue to enjoy good health and happiness in the years ahead.
I wish Major General Jeffery and Mrs Jeffery the very best for their future.


I am pleased to announce that The Queen, on my recommendation as Prime Minister of Australia, has approved the appointment of Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce AC as the next Governor-General of Australia.
Ms Bryce will succeed His Excellency Major General Michael Jeffery AC CVO MC (Rtd) on 5 September 2008 and be Australia's 25th Governor-General.
Her Excellency Ms Bryce was appointed in July 2003 as the 24th Governor of Queensland. She has been an inspiring Governor and has served the people of Queensland with great distinction.
Ms Bryce has an outstanding record of service to the entire Australian community. She is highly qualified for the role of Governor-General. Ms Bryce has enjoyed a rich and dynamic career as a lawyer, academic and senior public office holder.
Her former roles include Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner, inaugural Director of the Queensland Women's Information Service and founding chair and Chief Executive Officer of the National Childcare Accreditation Council.
Ms Bryce will be Australia's first female Governor-General.
Although the appointment is at The Queen's pleasure, a five-year term is considered usual.
Ms Bryce and her husband, Adjunct Professor Michael Bryce AM AE, were married in 1964. They have two daughters, three sons and five grandchildren.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I extend very sincere congratulations to Ms Bryce.


PM: I'm pleased to announce that Her Majesty the Queen has, on my recommendation as Prime Minister of Australia, accepted and approved the appointment of Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce as the next Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia.
This transition will occur on the 5th of September this year and today we see the passing of the baton from one first class Governor-General of Australia to another first class Governor-General of Australia.
It is, therefore, a great day for Australia and says everything about the smoothness of the constitutional arrangements.
Ms Bryce has a rich and dynamic career as a lawyer, as an academic, and as a senior public office holder. Her Excellency has demonstrated a strong commitment to the bush, she grew up in Ilfracombe, somewhere on the road between Barcaldine and Longreach, I think closer to Longreach than Barcaldine. She has demonstrated a strong commitment to the rights of women, particularly through her former role as Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner, and a strong commitment to Indigenous Australia as well.
Her Excellency, therefore, through her career, has demonstrated a strong commitment to the bush, to Indigenous Australia, and to the rights of women.
I'd also like to use this opportunity to pay particular tribute to the role of the retiring Governor-General, Major General Michael Jeffery. The retiring Government-General has performed his office with great distinction. He has travelled extensively across Australia. He has spent much time with communities in remote and regional Australia, including with many, many Indigenous communities as well. And I would like to acknowledge on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia our thanks to Major General Jeffery and to his wife Marlena for the great contribution they have made to this important office in the Commonwealth of Australia.
I'd like also, in my concluding remarks, to congratulate Ms Bryce on this appointment. We look forward very much to her occupying this high office in our nation.
I'll take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I think it's important that we have, as Governor-General of Australia, someone who has strong commitments to the nation, the community, the fact that Ms Bryce has such a strong commitment to rural and regional Australia, a strong commitment to the rights of women, a strong commitment to Indigenous Australia, and brings with her great experience both as a lawyer, a legal academic and as the current Governor of Queensland. She brings great experience to this.
On the question you raise, I think, it's taken us 107 years. It has been a while. It's good that it's happened.
JOURNALIST: Did you have (inaudible) with The Queen (inaudible)
PM: Michelle, you've been around longer than I have, we don't go to the business of what occurs between conversations between Prime Ministers and Her Majesty The Queen.
Such conversations would normally have occurred between Prime Ministers and the Monarch on questions concerning Australia's Governor-General.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how long do you think it'll be until there is a female Prime Minister?
PM: Well, that's to unfold in the years ahead. As I said, it's taken 107 years to get to this point, obviously it's going to take a little longer in the case of the other one -
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I think our arrangements at present are great. And we've got a great Deputy Prime Minister. And I've been chatting to Julia about this appointment just gone.
JOURNALIST: Queensland has gone from having very little representation in the federal sphere to having a Prime Minister who is from Queensland, a Treasurer who is from Queensland, now a Governor-General from Queensland. Is there some sort of pineapple coup?
PM: Her Excellency, Ms Bryce, has spent some of her career in Sydney. I think she was the head of Women's College at the University of Sydney for some time. She's known across Australia for her work, particularly as federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner. And, I'm sure Her Excellency intends to be a Governor-General for all Australians. She has a rich national experience, and her deep sense of commitment to the bush applies right across this great country of ours, as does her commitment to the rights of women and her commitment to the challenges faced by Indigenous Australians.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what do you see as the role of the Governor-General (inaudible)
PM: First of all, the Governor-General's role is stipulated in the constitution. It's not for me to elaborate on that it's something agreed to by our founding fathers back in the 1890s and then voted upon by us all.
In terms of the personal stamp which any Governor-General may choose to place on that role, I'm sure Her Excellency will do so, reflecting on her strong commitment to the bush and to the rights of women and to Indigenous Australia.
I think she will be a first-class appointment as Governor-General of Australia.
JOURNALIST: Do you know her personally over the years?
PM: Off and on, but the honest answer is not well. Off and on.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Republican debate (inaudible)
PM: As I said prior to the last election, a move to a Republic is not a top order question for the Government. There are many other priorities around. The Government's commitment to a Republic remains clear cut, particularly when you look at the provisions of the party's platform, and I'm sure during the course of this year, as I said recently in London, that the debate on our future constitutional arrangements will continue as it should.
JOURNALIST: Would you welcome any (inaudible) more outspoken about social policy issues (inaudible)
PM: Her Excellency will be fully mindful of her constitutional position. Fully mindful of her role which can be played within that constitutional position, as has been played with distinction by her various predecessors.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) has had a distinguished career in the law and in community service. But in selecting her, how important was gender in your opinion?
PM: I think it's obvious that we needed to have a Governor-General for Australia who captures the spirit of modern Australia. And the spirit of modern Australia is many things. Giving proper voice to people from the bush and the regions. Giving proper voice to the rights of women. Giving proper voice to the proper place of women in modern Australia. And proper place to someone committed to the lives, improving the lives, of Indigenous Australians. These are all considerations in shaping my recommendation to Her Majesty The Queen.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) have a kip and make the announcement tomorrow?
PM: I did go home. I did have a kip. And I'm now with you.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The conventions, as I understand it, and as I am briefed by the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, is that it is normal that the Prime Minister of the day would make a statement about the appointment and that Her Excellency maintain the position of her predecessors in making, from time to time, public statements and speeches on matters of concern to the office of the Governor General as she should. But on this particular day, I'm seeking to conform with the conventions laid down over quite a long period of time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on a separate matter, how did you interpret Hu Jintao's speech (inaudible)
PM: In my discussions with the Chinese leadership over several days and including discussions, private discussions, with a number of Chinese officials, the position which we put to the Chinese is well known to you. I think the private positions put to me by the Chinese, they are broadly consistent with what you have seen publicly from the Chinese in recent days. We would continue to encourage our friends in Beijing to go down the path of dialogue in terms of producing a long term solution to the challenges in Tibet.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Budget (inaudible)
PM: Well, actually, it has been foremost in my mind for the last two and a half weeks as well as I've been in various capitals because the impact on the global financial crisis on the real global economy and the flow through effect in terms of the Budgetary circumstances of various Governments is, frankly, confronting Governments around the world.
The IMF meeting in Washington, which the Treasurer is attending, is very important. It's important because we are currently considering a range of options on how to best deal with the global financial crisis. Some of those have been canvassed already publicly and they go, of course, to the questions of proper evaluation, proper transparency when it comes to the assets held by various financial institutions as well as ensuring that we have liquidity arrangements for the entire financial system.
These are very important matters, and this upcoming meeting of the IMF is a very important meeting.
In terms of Budget, well, we, like other Governments, will face the usual challenges in terms of demands for necessary services against the overall challenges of making sure we keep a proper lid on public outlays given the parallel challenge we face with inflation. Thank you very much for your time.


FAINE: Kevin Rudd good morning to you.
PM: Good Morning and thanks for having me on your program.
FAINE: What do these talkfests achieve?
PM: Well there are two things I'd say. The first is that since becoming Prime Minister of the country I've formed a conclusion that neither the Government nor the Public Service has any monopoly on wisdom and you need a way therefore of harnessing the ideas out there in the community. 
Many people roll up to me either from businesses or non government organisations or from academia or from people I run into in the street saying what the country needs to do is X and I'd say well that's a good proposal have you thought it through. What's the underpinning research. And that led to an idea on my part to actually put together some forums like the one which were having in Canberra this coming weekend. The one which we just had with the youth summit the weekend just passed.
And the second thing is this. If we're going to move forward as a country. We need to fashion a long term vision for which the nation has a genuine buy in. That is the direction which we as a nation want to go and I think a summit like this helps to achieve that end point as well. Because unless you have a strategic vision for the nation and unless the community understands that vision and is behind it. Then frankly you can just tread water.
FAINE: Conservatives are complaining that you've shut them out of the dialogue and you stacked the participants in order to in a way affect the outcome? To influence the outcome, have they got a point?
PM: I think that's a nonsense proposition, one of the first things that we did was establish a non government committee chaired by the Vice Chancellor of the University of Melbourne Glyn Davis. But that committee includes the likes of Tim Fischer former National Party Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, Warwick Smith former Liberal party cabinet Minister. Participants include Greg Lindsay who is the head of the Centre for Independent Studies which is generally regarded as a centre right think-tank in Australia, Gerard Henderson from the Sydney Institute and others including George Brandis. The leader of the opposition is invited as are the leaders of the State oppositions. 
So I think frankly that doesn't add up to anything. I think its important to approach this not from a party political view and I wish people would just sort of put those clubs down for a minute and say this is to be a national gathering of the best ideas that we can put forward for the country's future.
Let's just look beyond the trenches of current political warfare, let's put our minds eye right on the year 2020. Where do we wish to be as a nation on the economy, fairness in the community, our security, the environment and climate change. Where do we want to be in terms of a nation and then how do we get there. That's why this has been convened.
FAINE: Did any of the national leaders you met with during your tour that finished yesterday around the world, did they say anything to you that changed your mind about your vision for the future of our country? 
PM: Quite a lot of things actually. One of the things that I discussed with various world leaders was something touched on by in fact today at the meeting of the World Bank in Washington. In the last 24 hours in the meeting of the World Bank in Washington. Which is, we have an unfolding food crisis across the world. Which is a combination of climate change factors at work together with various people moving off the land in various parts of the country, urban encroachment and then there's a real problem in terms of adequate food supplies. We had 10 major sets of food riots around the world. 
So if you want something which should be close to our global agenda therefore our national agenda how do we contribute to better food security around the world.
FAINE: Kevin Rudd looking at the appointment of Quentin Bryce as our next Governor General is this about the politics of gesture?
PM: Absolutely not, if you look at Quentin Bryce's CV and what she has done with her life, not only is she a person who has grown up in a tiny town of Rural Australia, But she's a person who succeeded in the law, a person who's lectured in law as one of the first female lecturers in law at a university level in Australia. A person who then became Federal sex discrimination commissioner. A person who headed the University College at the University of Sydney. A person who has achieved pre eminence in her field. 
Obviously she will bring her whole perspectives to bear in her occupancy of this new office but I think it's a great reflection on the fact that modern Australia is about the proper role of women in our society unconstrained as well as, and if you look at Ms Bryce career her continuing advocacy of interests of Indigenous Australia and her deep passion for rural and regional Australia.
FAINE: And we can't help but notice, she's a Queenslander?
PM: Well she spent a fair bit of her career in Sydney but then again in Melbourne that's another crime against humanity is it? [Laughter] She's a person who's achieved a national career and you know something Jon we've all got to come from somewhere. So there you go. 
FAINE: Yes and we are Australians first and foremost, I think an end to parochialism would be a very great advance. 
PM: Tends to be my view and I did marry someone from outside our fair state so there you go. And you actually live for a while in Victoria in Melbourne, Beaumaris is that a crime against humanity? 
FAINE: Quite to the contrary. With China do we get punished by the Chinese for your insistence on raising and then re-raising human rights in Tibet? It's a delicate balance that your trying to strike isn't it?
PM: I can't speak for the Chinese Government, nor about what they will do or not do in the future but I think what we all need is a material relationship with China where we can embrace all the things we've got in common with the Chinese and be very frank about the things that we disagree on. That's what I was trying to do in China and I think the best way forward for our relationship for the economy which will become the largest economy in the world in the 21st century . And if we're looking forward to 2020, how do we engage China, how do we engage the rise of India, how do we do that with our eyes firmly fixed on the future? And at the same time upholding all those things which we regard to be fundamental to our sense of Australian identity including our passionate belief in the rights of the individual. 
FAINE: 14 minutes to 9, Jon Faine with you on 774 ABC Melbourne. Kevin Rudd just finally implementing any recommendations or consensus that comes up at your 2020 summit. Is there are task force or is there going to be some process of procedure for gathering, collecting and then watching the implementation of the ideas that emerge?
PM: Absolutely Jon, I don't regard this as simply a jolly nice weekend where we get together and have a jolly nice chat and talk these things through and that's the end of that. What I'm proposing is that whatever consensus emerges from the 2020 Summit has in fact as just occurred with the Youth Summit held in Canberra this weekend. That those ideas then come through Government, we will then sift them through the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. 
And my commitment already is that by years end each of those proposals to emerge from the summit will receive a formal response from the Government and either reasons why we will accept those proposals and then how we will go about implementing them, or why we cannot accept them and the reasons why.
As I said from the very beginning of this exercise, there aren't any right or wrong answers here. If you start saying that from the very beginning you discourage people from participating. I don't care frankly if people put up there hands and say things which are in complete disagreement with aspect of Government policy. They can do so, what I want is to make sure that everyone feels free to contribute as much as they can in as free an environment as possible so we get the best ideas possible.
Then it's the job of the elected Government to decide what we can advance with and what we can't.
FAINE: And are we going to have a republic?
PM: Well I'm a committed republican, our party's platform is clear on the Republic. We have said prior to the election it's not a top order priority for the Government but
FAINE: Is that what you told the Queen when you saw her recently?
PM: Now Jon, you know as well as I do that any Prime Minister of Australia least of all on your program, doesn't go to the detail of their conversations with Her Majesty the Queen and I don't intend to start now? But on the republic our position in support of a republic is clear and I would fully look forward to there being a spirited animated debate during the course of this year and beyond on our future Constitutional arrangements and that includes the republic. And I'm not only more than relaxed about this, that is the sort of debate that should happen from the community up. 
FAINE: Well we will see whether or not it's raised as a priority at your summit coming up. I'm grateful to you for your time this morning. 
PM: Thanks very much and all the best to your summit participants there in Melbourne
FAINE: Thank you, Kevin Rudd Australia's Prime Minister joining us from Canberra.


Thanks very much, Robert, for those very kind and welcoming remarks and welcome to all of you here today for this important part of our 2020 Summit process.
We do have Ministers here from the Government and I thank them for participating. We have Peter Garrett, we also have Chris Bowen, do I see Jenny Macklin back there? I do see Jenny Macklin. I think I have Parliamentary Secretaries in the form of Maxine McKew and I've got Tanya Plibersek there as a Minister, I've got Nicola Roxon here, and I've also got other Parliamentary Secretaries, I've got Mark Dreyfus here. Anyone else I've missed on the Ministerial side? I can't see that someone is pointing to before I go to non-politics  -  non active politics, I should say.
And then, we have so many people from beyond the political sphere who are assisting us in pulling this 2020 Summit together. We have, of course, Glyn Davis from the University of Melbourne. I'd just like to thank him in particular for his sterling effort in trying to harmonise this exercise. The Chinese talk about the doctrine of the great harmony, this has been a challenge to the doctrine of the great harmony to ensure that both in the events leading up to, and in the Summit next weekend, where we have a gathering of a thousand of some of our brightest and best from across the country, that that proceeds smoothly.
Also we have Tim Fischer, former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, welcome Tim and thank you for your positive and constructive role in bringing together people to assist in this Summit and in your particular role in chairing the Summit working group which deals with the future of rural and regional Australia.
Also, I think we've got Warwick Smith here, who is assisting us on the infrastructure front, where have you gone Warwick? He's here. There he is. Buried behind the television camera. Usually in front of the television camera, Warwick.
And then, John Hartigan for assisting us in terms of the working group on governance and John's capacity as Chairman of the group across the media organisations seeking to promote greater freedom of speech in Australia and getting the balance right between the requirements for press access on the one hand and the construction of our freedom of information and associated laws on the other.
So, we have what can best be described in the classics as a very eclectic gathering of folk. And that's a really good thing. Because, you know something about this country of ours, it's a pretty eclectic country. And, I think that's one of its great strengths, its great dynamisms and its great energies.
When I look to the 2020 Summit, which will be held next weekend, I think that this is a great step forward for the country and it's for this simple reason: it's my long standing conclusion from a life which has been involved in the foreign service, the Queensland State public service, as a Member of Parliament and now as Prime Minister of Australia, that those of us involved directly in the political process don't have any monopoly on wisdom. In fact, as I travel around the business community, as I travel around professional organisations, non-Government organisations and our universities, our research institutes, our think tanks, I am always impressed by the sheer vitality of the ideas environment in this country.
And so the challenge of this Summit, and what we will also do today here in this gathering, is to make sure we've got a capacity of harnessing the creativity and the ideas of the Australian community at large into that which we do in Government. I don't think that's beyond our national wit and wisdom. I actually think it's a smart way to do business. I think it's a smart way in which you can run the country.
Ultimately, we were elected to make, as the Government, elected to make the decisions. But if we don't have available to us a mechanism to summon forth the energy, the ideas, the enthusiasm and the talents of the nation, then I don't think we're really trying hard enough. And that's what this whole process is about.
Obviously, what will come out the end of it will be a whole bunch of ideas, some of which will be brilliant, some of which may be a little less than brilliant. But I'm not in the business of saying prior to the event that there is something which is right and something that's wrong. There is something which is politically correct and something which is politically incorrect. We're in the business of encouraging genuine debate, genuine and thorough debate. And, can I say that is what is first and foremost of importance. And secondly, to ensure that from that we extract the best ideas for the nation's future.
I'm strongly of a view, as I think it's been written in books of wisdom and literature of which many in this room will be deeply familiar, that without a vision the people perish. And that therefore, we look forward to this nation's future in 10 or 20 years time and beyond that through the course of this extraordinarily dynamic century in this extraordinarily dynamic hemisphere in which we live and have our being, a hemisphere, East Asia, which will shape very much the future of the world in the 21st century, that we as a nation need to craft a vision with which we are at one - which we are prepared to then develop a concrete strategy to bring that vision about.
I don't want to be Prime Minister of a country where we simply drift. I'm not into the business of politics of national leadership for the sake of being there and observing the nation and its affairs simply drift from one event to another.
I think it was Harold McMillan who once famously said in the United Kingdom: what is politics about? To which Harold once famously said, ‘events dear boy, events'. Can I say, that's a very passive view of what you actually do. It's like you're waiting for something to come rolling down the in-tray of national political office before you then decide what to do. That's not the way in which I want to conduct the affairs of this nation. Nor is that the way in which the Government wishes to conduct the affairs of the nation.
You need to have a forward looking pro-active agenda. We need to take the future in our hands and shape it, shape it to the greatest extent we can in the direction of the sort of Australia we want for the future. An Australia which is built on these great principles: A strong Australia. A secure Australia. An Australia where we have a robust and competitive economy by the best global standards.
An Australia where we never extinguish the flame of a fair go, but in fact encourage it, across all things that we do - so that every Australian indigenous, non indigenous, Australians who have come from across the seas in recent times, and those who have been here for many generations, such as myself, and those who have been here since antiquity, our indigenous brothers and sisters, all have a decent start in this country. And beyond that, that we have a common project among us all to deal with the challenge which transcends all national boundaries, and that is the challenge of climate change.
And that through that we are not simply concerned with our project for domestic Australia, as if some how our talents and enthusiasm should stop at the continental shelf. But in fact, that we have a vision for how we would wish to shape the world as well. And that's what I describe as Australia's future in the area of creative middle power diplomacy.
So that's the broad architecture of a vision and the values for which this Government stands. But can I say, in terms of the policies which would give such a vision effect, what do we do in terms enhancing the productivity of our economy? What do we do in terms of building our nations infrastructure? How do we enhance fairness for indigenous Australians? What do we do to turbo charge research and the education revolution in Australia?
And beyond that again, how do we deal with the great challenge of preventative health care strategies so that we're not simply burdened with a medical structure and a health bureaucracy which is in permanent reactive mode to the problems which come rolling in the door, but we think 20 and 30 years ahead about how do we prevent diseases. How do we cure diseases and how do we prevent diseases? And how do we inject preventative health care into the mainstream of what we do as a nation?
So in all these critical challenge areas, we've posed questions to the nation. And that's why, through the structure of the 2020 Summit, we've been as specific as possible.
Next weekend in Canberra we have ten specific challenge areas which have been identified across the economy, social policy and of course our place in the world. And within that we've framed specific questions where we've asked participants at the Summit next weekend to come forward with their best ideas, their best policy ideas, about how we deal with each of those challenges.
Which brings us to our deliberations today. I thank you very much for taking the time to be with us. Particularly those who have come from afar. And the purpose of today's event is to provide an opportunity for members of the Jewish community to contribute ahead of the Passover.
Events such as this are for all Australians. Religious, non religious. Christian, Jewish, Muslim, doesn't matter what particular religious tradition we come from or non religious tradition we come from. Our common passion here is how do we shape a better and stronger Australia for the future, and an Australia which can be an even greater force for good in the world. So I thank you all for your participation.
The last thing I'd say before handing over to others for the organisational arrangements of today is this. This is not a gathering for the sake of having a gathering. Next weekend is not national gathering for the sake of getting together and having a lovely time, talking about a few idle ideas and ruminating on what might be and what could have been. It's quite different to that. What I want to do is to harness the ideas here today as I want to harness the ideas which emerge next weekend. As we will be harnessing the ideas which came out of the National Youth Summit in Canberra which concluded yesterday.
And the resolve of the Government is that by years end the ideas which emerge by consensus through these gatherings, the best and brightest of these ideas which these working groups put forward to the Government, our intention by years end is to respond to each and every one of them.
I will say in advance there will be some that we'll embrace with passion and enthusiasm, there some that we may embrace with less passion and enthusiasm and some that we may not be able to embrace at all. But our clear commitment to the nation is we will be responding and indicating clearly the reasons for advancing particular ideas and reasons why we may not be able to embrace others.
But I'm not in the business of cutting off the creativity first and saying that there are only certain proposals which will be embraced. That's not the way in which I think open Government does business and certainly not the way in which this open Government intends to do business.
So we look forward to your contribution today and I'll be moving across each of the tables here at our gathering. But I say this quite sincerely. That our intention is to not just ferment intellectual activity, ferment a competition of ideas. But our resolve is to harness ideas, to deploy them for the nations good and for the nations good for the long term future.
Thanks for your participation, thanks for your goodwill, and thank you in advance for the great ideas you'll advance for the national good.


The Prime Minister today congratulated Ms Cate Blanchett on yesterday's birth of her third son and announced that Dr Julianne Schultz will be added as an additional co-chair on the Creative Australia panel at the Australia 2020 Summit.
I want to extend my best wishes to Ms Blanchett and her family and thank her for her contribution to the Australia 2020 Summit thus far.
Ms Blanchett has indicated that she will continue to participate in the 2020 Summit in her role as a co-chair of the Creative Australia panel and has asked that Dr Schultz also be added as an additional co-chair on this panel.
Dr Schultz is an accomplished author and academic and is well-placed to contribute to the dialogue on Australia's cultural endeavours.
A former journalist, Dr Schultz is a Professor at the Centre for Public Culture and Ideas at Griffith University and the author/editor of more than 20 books. Dr Schultz is also the founding editor of Griffith REVIEW, an award-winning topical literary and public affairs quarterly.
Dr Schultz was General Manager, Corporate Strategy and Communications at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 1998-2000, and prior to this, was the Perspectives Editor and columnist at The Courier Mail. Before returning to full-time journalism, Dr Schultz was the Associate Professor of Journalism and the founding director of the Australian Centre for Independent Journalism at the University of Technology Sydney.


PM: It's good to be out here in Penrith in Western Sydney and one of the things we've been talking about in Cabinet today in Western Sydney with Chris Bowen the Assistant Treasurer is the cost of living pressures on working families, not just here but right across Australia. Working families are under financial pressure right now, whether it's through mortgages, whether it's through rents, petrol prices, grocery prices, child care costs. And the practical question for Government is what can we do about it.
One of the things that's driving up cost of living pressures for working families is of course the price of fuel. And that's why Cabinet today has agreed to embrace a National Fuelwatch scheme which aims to bring maximum competition policy pressure onto petrol retailers across Australia, to get the best deal possible for working families.
What we want to do is to ensure that motorists are not paying one cent more than they have to at the bowser. What we want to do is to ensure that motorists are able to buy the cheapest petrol at the cheapest prices at the cheapest petrol stations and at the cheapest times.
How will the scheme work. I'll turn to Chris for the detail of this in a minute but broadly it's got these three elements. The ACCC will be notified each day at around 2pm by retailers across the country as to their proposed price for the following 24 hour period, that is for the next day.
Secondly, petrol retailers will be required to adhere to that price for that period of time and thirdly the ACCC will then place that information in a manner which is available to the public, to the consumer's right across the country. By email, by toll free telephone number and or by other mechanisms as well.
What's the objective here, to maximise transparency across the system to make sure that working families when they take the car to the bowser to fill up are getting the best possible deal available. Now this isn't foolproof this will be difficult to implement. We're proposing to have this scheme up and running by years end and we will be reviewing it 12 months later to see what the flow through impact is for working families.
Of course this scheme has been trialled extensively elsewhere in Australia. It's been operating in Western Australia for some years. And we have been drawing extensively on the experience on that scheme which was introduced by Premier Richard Court back in the year 2000.
We think this is a step forward to help working families under financial pressure, by helping them get the best possible prices for petrol when they go to fill up. We can't promise the world, we can't promise the impossible but we think this extends a helping hand to working families trying to balance the family budget.
I'll turn to Chris now to outline more details of the scheme and then take your questions.
BOWEN: Thank you Prime Minister. Today represents the Governments next step in our efforts to put downward pressure on petrol prices and introduce more competition and transparency into the petrol market.
Today's announcement means that the days of driving past a petrol station in the morning and noticing a price and driving past that same petrol station in the evening and noticing a price 10 to 15 cents higher will soon be gone. This is a pro market, pro-competitive reform, it's a reform to make the petrol market work better for consumers. To give consumers more information, to give consumers certainty, to give consumers and motorists the right to know where they can find the cheapest possible petrol. Where they can get that petrol and where they can get it at best value.
As the Prime Minister said the ACCC will be launching a website, which will have the price of petrol which is locked in for 24 hours. That price will be available to consumers by text message, by an email service and consumers will be able to log onto the website and download there route home and their route to work everyday and get the price of petrol at every service station along that route for the next 24 hours.
This is a very important reform in ensuring that consumers have as much information as possible in order to make their decisions. There is some evidence that by making service stations put their best possible price in the night before there is downward pressure on prices. The ACCC estimates that at about 2 cents a litre, but it is more important than that. There are reasons to do this to give consumers the best possible information to find the cheapest possible petrol wherever they may be.
As the Prime Minister said each service station will be obliged at 2 o'clock to notify the ACCC of their price for the next 24 hours from 6 am the next day. From about 3 o'clock that information will then be available on the ACCC's website and available through all those mechanisms that the Prime Minister and I have outlined.
This is a measure which gives consumers the information they need and puts consumers on a level playing field with retailers. It rebalances the equation between consumers and retailers and makes the market work better for consumers.
Also the stations in metropolitan and large rural areas will automatically be covered. For those smaller and more isolated areas there will be a process in which the ACCC can negotiate with the local council authority as to whether that area wishes to be included in the scheme or not. And those details will be worked through in coming months.
This scheme will be up and running by the 15th December. We want to get this right. We want to make sure we do it properly. We want to ensure that all the I's have been dotted and the T's have been crossed before this system is implemented because this is very important for Australia's consumers.
This is a bold step today it is not a step without controversy, it is not a step which won't be criticised. But on balance after much consideration we believe it is an important step to give consumers and motorists the information they need to make the decisions, the purchasing decisions, they need to make to get the best value for their motoring dollar.
PM: Over to you for questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) you talked about the ACCC getting up to 2 cents a litre off. Is that what the Government believes, there could be a discount of 2 cents a litre? And if that doesn't happen after 12 months will the scheme be axed?
BOWEN: No as I said the ACCC's econometric analysis of the Perth situation found a 2 cent a litre discount. But the much more important reason for doing this is to give consumers more information. The difference between the cheapest petrol station and the most expensive petrol in every capital city across the country is very significant. If you can give consumers the best information to find that cheapest petrol, that's the reason to do this.
The ACCC have certainly found there was no basis for any conclusion that this will put upward pressure on petrol prices. They think there is some basis for reaching the conclusion it puts downward pressure on petrol prices. But the bigger impact is the pro-competitive pro-information reform that consumers receive.
JOURNALIST: Is a lot of this scheme taking advantage of or a reaction to Oil companies taking advantage of consumers? Oil companies are likely to feel as thought they've been pulled into line over this.
BOWEN: Well certainly there's a lot of frustration in the community about petrol prices there's no doubt about that. But this has been based on evidence, this has been based on the research and the experience in Western Australia and that's the only reason for doing it. Because all the evidence is that this can work.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) how do you expect retailers to react (inaudible) how have they reacted so far?
BOWEN: Well as I say this will be a controversial scheme and retailers may feel that this is not appropriate for them. But the Government has to weigh up the equation between retailers and consumers, and the Government has to determine what the best mechanism is to make this market work for everybody, for consumers primarily.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
BOWEN: It's true that this is controversial, it's true that differing motoring groups have different views, for example the RACWA, the West Australian group, initially was very sceptical when it was introduced in Western Australia. They are now strong supporters and have called for it to be rolled out. The NRMA the biggest motoring group in the country is a strong supporter. So yes there will be scepticism, this will be controversial but we wouldn't have taken this step if we wanted to go down the easy road.
But we've gone down this road because on balance after much consideration we think it will work.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: No what we will do first of all, our implementation date is proposed to be 15 December this year. That gives us extensive time for set up, this is really complicated. It currently exists in Western Australia but as you roll out across the other states it takes time. And to get the details right and particularly in terms of the possible opt in for rural local government authorities around the country.
Secondly the 12 month review point occurs 12 months after that and that is to assess the totality of the scheme, its impact on consumers and that of course will include price considerations, its impact on retailers as well and we'll have a wholesale review of its effectiveness then.
We've looked carefully at the WA experience, it seems to be a positive experience, but we will be very mindful of the overall flow through.
You can either sit around and do nothing about this and just say wow is me petrol prices are going up globally there you go. Or you can do something and based in the WA experience this seems to be a step in the right direction but it's no silver bullet to global prices on oil, that's compounded by global supply and demand pressures particularly the increased global demand for oil coming out of China and India.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on household costs the Reserve Bank Governor Glenn Stevens in his speech today acknowledged that there had been a big rise in household debt. He said for the most part the bulk of households appear to be managing to carry that, that is the debt, pretty well. Does this contradict what you have been saying about suffering families?
PM: No, I haven't read fully the Governor's statement today, I've got a summary of it. I believe that all people observing the pressures on working families whether it's through the increased cost borrowing, either for houses or for such shall we say consumer credit card debt, Plus the cost of rent, plus the costs of petrol, costs of groceries as well as the costs of child care are all heading north not south.
That means the family budget is hurting. Therefore what we can do at the level of Government is not to solve all those problems, we can do certain things in terms of tax cuts, we can do certain things in terms of implementing our additional pre election commitments on education tax rebates and increasing the child care benefits which come from the Government as well.
But when it comes to prices like petrol this helps. Overall our strong view is that working families are under real financial pressure. Let me tell you based on discussions with our local member out here in Lindsay in western Sydney, it's absolutely clear cut, you talk to people but they are doing it tough. Let's not pretend otherwise. We don't that's why we are doing what we are doing today.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can I ask about this idea of competition. You've chosen the petrol industry, I presume it could go out to Diesel but why not bread, milk and eggs? Why shouldn't the price of those be locked for 24 hours?
PM: Well firstly on the scope of this scheme itself it applies to unleaded petrol, premium unleaded petrol, LPG, Diesel, 98 Ron and bio Diesel blends. So let's be clear about the scope.
We believe that we've got to get this right because let's face it the cost of petrol underpins most things that families do. This is one area where we think we can apply further competition policy and pressure. We think this is a step in the right direction. Obviously as Chris can elaborate in his further response to your question we've already got underway a National Grocery price inquiry.
BOWEN: We do have a National Grocery price inquiry underway. The important point to make in relation to petrol is that petrol is the only commodity where there's such volatility. You don't see that volatility in groceries, you don't find a weekly price cycle at the supermarket. You find prices going up and down and people not being sure whether they if they go shopping that evening whether the price of margarine will be the same as it was that morning.
You do find that in petrol, that's why this is an important step in petrol. It's a specific targeted industry response to the particular issues in the petrol industry. And whatever issues come out of the Grocery Price inquiry the Government will examine very closely.
PM: We don't pretend on either of these questions that either petrol or groceries to have any silver bullet. But can I say we're always concerned to be responsible in what we undertake to do.
And I contrast that with a statement today by Peter Dutton. Who says, and I quote “I think Brendan Nelson would have a greater capacity to deliver lower petrol prices for families and lower grocery prices” quote unquote.
I'd like to hear a concrete list of the policy measures from the alternative Government on how they would bring that about. Remember this party when it was in Government said that when it came to interest rates that interest rates would be kept at record lows. Apparently we know have the same commitment when it comes to petrol prices and grocery prices.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on alcohol, there's a group calling itself the Alcohol Alliance, will contribute to the 2020 meetings today there were some quite emotional (inaudible) by parents of young people who been caught up in alcohol related violence, wanting you to go further than you have so far on this issue. Is there room to do that?
PM: I saw some of the reporting today on that including some of the real life stories and tragedies involving people who have not just been physically injured but lost their lives through alcohol related violence.
That's why the Government has decided first of all to place this on the National political agenda and on the National policy agenda. To take action already in terms of the $53 million worth of programs we've committed on this and place it on the proposed 2020 Summit agenda for this coming weekend.
At this stage we don't rule anything out, this is a major national contagion and we need to act as decisively as we can. Again with this there's no silver bullet but I think it's time as a Nation and as a community we decided to turn the corner on this. Because I think in many parts of the country most parents would agree it's getting out of hand
JOURNALIST: If I could ask you specifically Prime Minister on the alliance proposing a change on the tax system to encourage manufacturers to create more low alcohol products and there also asking for a review of competition policy to lessen outlets. What's your reaction to each of those?
PM: Well I won't go through an individual shopping list of possibilities now. And I haven't read their detailed submission, I saw the reporting of it today. The reason we're having this matter discussed at the 2020 Summit is that in terms of basic family wellbeing, community wellbeing, safety, this is a big question. You know, it's out there, it's across the breakfast tables, it's across the dinner table, in homes in Penrith and right the way around the country at the moment. Our responsibility it to debate properly all options which conceivably will work in turning this around.
I'm not interested in symbolic gestures of any description, I want to embrace measures which work. That's why we to have a seasoned debate through the 2020 Summit involving some experts in this field. Then we will distil the wisdom which comes from that and come out with a further range of policy responses. But we've got $53 million in programs already.
JOURNALIST: PM you couldn't make the John Button Funeral, was that because of the Cabinet meeting. Wasn't there some way you could have gotten out of it?
PM: I had the Deputy Prime Minster represented me at that funeral as did many of the other colleagues from Cabinet. I had some other things to attend to here in Sydney today. I've got to say John Button's contribution to national political life was remarkable. Particularly the people close to the future of Australian manufacturing, particularly those associated with industry policy and particularly those who are concerned about the future of the Australian automobile industry.
A great Australian, a great contribution and our Government was well represented. I spoke to the Deputy Prime Minister just after she joined us in Cabinet then and she said that the eloquence of the testimonials to John Button's contribution to Australian national life were remarkable and her observation to me almost without parallel.
This is a well loved man, with a great contribution to Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just about the Olympic Torch, you said before that the Chinese officials, track suited officials who have been monitoring the torches movements wont be in Australia and wont have a roll there. Kevin Gospers come out to say today that they will be here. Monitoring the torches movement from inside a van nearby. Which ones right?
PM: Just coming in here today I was handed a statement from ACT policing on the comments which you have just referred to. It says the Chinese Torch attendants have a practical responsibility in relation to servicing the flame but they have no responsibility in terms of security. This has been made clear to the Chinese authorities under no circumstances no matter what occurs will they be called upon to perform security functions.
Thus says the ACT Police and we've got to get back to Cabinet
Thanks very much


Federal Cabinet today approved the establishment of a National FuelWatch Scheme to promote competition and transparency in the petrol market.
The establishment of Australia's first National FuelWatch Scheme will help ensure motorists are not paying a cent more than they have to at the bowser.
The National FuelWatch Scheme will help motorists buy the cheapest petrol, at the cheapest petrol stations, at the cheapest times.
Under the National FuelWatch Scheme, petrol stations in metropolitan and major regional centres will be required to:
     * Notify the ACCC of their next day's prices by 2pm the day before;
     * Maintain this advised price for a 24 hour period; and
     * Apply the scheme to unleaded petrol, premium unleaded petrol, LPG, diesel, 98 RON and biodiesel blends.
The petrol price information collected from these petrol stations will be made available to consumers through:
     * An email and SMS alert service informing subscribed consumers details of the cheapest fuel in their area;
     * A national toll free number where motorists can locate the cheapest petrol in the area they are looking to purchase fuel: and
     * A National FuelWatch website with station by station, day by day and suburb by suburb petrol price information.
By giving motorists highly detailed and up to date information about local petrol prices, FuelWatch will help motorists avoid being ripped off.
No longer will a motorist drive past a petrol station in the morning only to return in the afternoon to find a 10 cent per litre jump in the price of petrol.
Importantly, FuelWatch will also see an end to Mums and Dads driving around on a Tuesday or Wednesday searching for the cheapest petrol.
Rather than guessing the best time and the best place to buy petrol consumers will know where and when to buy the cheapest petrol in town.
The restrictions included in the FuelWatch Scheme mean there is less flexibility for temporary upward and downward movements in prices. However according to the ACCC the effect of the scheme is that it forces retailers to post their most competitive price all day, everyday.
Petrol prices will always be linked to fluctuations in international oil markets. If the global price of crude oil goes up Australian retail prices will be affected.
The National FuelWatch Scheme is not a silver bullet that breaks this nexus; no government policy can guarantee that petrol prices will always go down.
But FuelWatch will ensure that drivers don't pay one cent more than they have to when filling up at the bowser.
FuelWatch was introduced with bipartisan support in Western Australia in 2001 and has been a welcome tool for WA motorists looking to save money.
Econometric analysis undertaken by the ACCC last year concluded that under the WA FuelWatch scheme the “relevant weekly average price margin was around 1.9 cpl [cents per litre] less on average”.
The National FuelWatch Scheme is a key part of the Rudd Government's response to the ACCC report into the price of unleaded petrol. The Scheme will cost $20.9 million over four years and commence on 15 December 2008.
The extension of this scheme outside of metropolitan areas and major regional centres will be subject to negotiation between the ACCC and local Government authorities in rural areas. Rural local authorities will be able to opt in to the National FuelWatch Scheme  -  as they can under the WA FuelWatch model.
The Government will review the effectiveness of the national FuelWatch Scheme twelve months after it operations commences.
The ACCC will now begin working with petrol retailers to ensure a smooth transition to FuelWatch, and construct the supporting IT and communications infrastructure.
The National Fuel Watch Scheme will build on the Government's previous moves to give the ACCC formal monitoring powers and to appoint the nation's first Petrol Commissioner.


Thank you for the invitation to address the annual dinner of the Sydney Institute.
Since 1989, the Institute has been a platform for public policy debate on Australia's future.
The nation should always embrace such debate  -  with genuine intellectual passion and with genuine intellectual rigour.
Great challenges lie ahead of us.
Now more than ever, we need a real debate that transcends the old battlelines of the left and right of Australian politics.
The global context in which this debate now occurs has moved a long way over the last twenty years.
Market-based economic solutions have now been embraced across much of the current and former communist worlds.
At the same time, we have seen a parallel recognition in the capitalist west that Adam Smith's invisible hand does not represent the solution to every economic problem.
In recent times this has been demonstrated by the current debate on the proper regulation of global capital markets.
The real terrain for productive public policy debate resides in a clear recognition of:
     * how markets should be regulated to ensure equitable competition;
     * how to identify where markets fail; and
     * what represents the proper scope for the provision of public goods such as education, health, a humane safety net and global environmental sustainability; and
     * how we build the nation's competitive strengths in an increasingly competitive global economy.
Each of these invite a rich political and policy debate in itself.
These are the core debates at the progressive, reforming centre of contemporary Australian politics.
And these are very much the debates that the Government intends to advance.
The purpose of my remarks tonight is to provide a broad outline of the Government's vision for the nation's future; the start that we have made in advancing that vision; and the role we hope the upcoming national summit can play in taking that vision forward into the longer term future.
Values, Vision and a Strategy for the Nation's Future
The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future as well as a future for working families.
Our agenda for achieving this is shaped by the core values for which we stand.
Values of security.
Of liberty.
Of opportunity.
Of creativity.
Values also of equity.
Of family.
Of community.
Of solidarity.
Of sustainability.
And an underlying fundamental value of an irreducible human dignity.
These values very much shape the Government's vision for Australia's future.
We are committed to a secure Australia  -  strong at home and fully engaged abroad through what I have described elsewhere as a creative middle power diplomacy.
We are committed to building a robust economy  -  through a combination of responsible economic management and a program to enhance Australia's global economic competitiveness.
We are committed to opportunity for all Australians, not just for some  -  through a vision for Australia to develop the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
We are committed to a creative Australia where imagination and creativity drive our efforts in the arts, sciences and the development of a pervasive national culture of innovation and enterprise.
We are committed to the advancement of a fair go for all Australians through education, health and the rules that govern workplaces. We believe that as a Labor government it is our responsibility to challenge the limitations placed on people's potential (including the potential of indigenous Australians) by the circumstances they inherit.
We are committed to the protection of the family by advancing family friendly workplaces and better work-life balance.
We are committed to the concept of community  -  not as a collection of disconnected individuals but as a place where people are bound by common core values and a common sense of responsibility to one another.
We are committed to a principle of social solidarity that extends beyond private philanthropy to a public responsibility to protect the most vulnerable through a humane safety net for all Australians.
We are also committed to the greatest public good of our age  -  the protection of the global commons that is the planet itself - both for all who share the planet today and for those who come after us.
Finally we are committed to fundamental human dignity, through a judicial system that provides for the proper protection of the basic human rights of all.
Part of our vision is to give every opportunity to individuals to provide for their own future by rewarding hard work, enterprise and success.
While part of our vision also goes to a contrasting (but at the same time reinforcing) sense of social responsibility.
In fact our vision incorporates quite consciously a combination of private markets and public goods.
Or what I have already called tonight a new tradition of the reforming centre of Australian politics.
This is where I believe the modern Australia of the 21st century wants to go.
For many years it has been unfashionable to talk of a vision for the nation's future.
In fact, some have argued that framing such a vision is ideologically unsustainable because nations simply evolve as a consequence of the market forces that shape them.
I disagree because I believe a small country occupying a vast continent in a region as wildly disparate as our own has no option other than to plan for its future.
As it is written elsewhere, “without a vision, the people perish”.
I believe that as a nation we need to come together around clear, long-term goals for the Australia of 2020 and beyond.
These objectives should be ambitious.
Excessive caution and a fear of failure should not hold us back.
In fact it has been the absence of such agreed national goals over the last decade that has seen us waste the great dividend that has flowed to Australia through our record terms of trade.
How different it would be now, if we had invested the estimated $398 billion boost to the Budget bottom line in the decade from 2002, into funding a total education revolution?
But instead of investing in the future, against concrete, realisable goals, the revenue was consigned to consumption  -  both public and private.
Opportunities squandered. Rather than opportunities seized.
In the century ahead, it's not unreasonable for Australia to aspire to be the best place on earth to live, to gain an education, to work and to raise a family:
     * a nation with first-rate business and employment opportunities, powered by the world's most educated, most skilled and best trained workforce in the world;
     * a nation where we strive for the highest public health standards in the world;
     * a nation where we care for the vulnerable and where we include the marginalised;
     * a dynamic, vibrant culture incorporating the best of our many immigrant cultures within the best traditions of European civilisation that we have inherited  -  turbo-charged with the best understanding across the collective West of the languages and cultures of the high civilisations of Asia, and
     * a nation with a liveable climate, a clean environment and extraordinary, well protected natural beauty.
We can also be a nation with a sense of wider purpose  -  not a nation turned in on itself and occupied only with its own future, but:
     * a nation that is a great force for good in the world;
     * a nation that contributes to peace and prosperity in our region and beyond;
     * a nation whose belief in the ‘fair go' extends beyond the continental shelf;
     * a multicultural, multilingual nation standing on the doorstep of the world's fastest growth region, and
     * a nation that fully comprehends the meeting place between East and West as the Asia-Pacific century begins to unfold.
But the kind of nation we are in 2020 will be only what we plan for, and what we build together.
And that, in large part, is why in a few days' time we are convening the national 2020 Summit:
     * to unleash the national imagination from beyond the ranks of politics and the public service, and
     * to help fashion a national consensus around a common vision for the nation, with common goals to aim for within that vision.
We can either drift into the future or we can take hold of the future with our own hands  -  to shape the future, to seize the day.
Progress to date
We have been in office for a little over four months  -  and we've been making progress towards our vision for a modern Australia:
     * Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to the Kyoto Protocol and we are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
     * On the first sitting day of our Parliament, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians, and we have begun a policy program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia.
     * The Government has also embraced a comprehensive productivity agenda based on a new program of microeconomic reform beginning with an education revolution and reform of the nation's infrastructure.
     * The Government has commenced a new era in Commonwealth/State relations through the COAG reform process - to reform the Federation, to remove the regulatory burden on business, and to rebuild our nation's health system.
     * The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the state and territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over use and climate change.
     * The Government also has commissioned its first White Paper on homelessness and is looking at how to invest in compassionate, market-based solutions which deal with this important social policy challenge.
     * Internationally the Government has been active in establishing the three pillars of our relationship with the world: a strong alliance with the US, engagement with the United Nations (including our candidacy for the UN Security Council after a 25 year absence) and a strong commitment to our own immediate region, including a determination to tackle under-development across the Pacific Island states through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
     * And most recently, the Government has also advanced the cause of greater gender equality by appointing the first female Governor General in 107 years.
Through these actions we have made progress in our first four months.
It is a start.
But it is only a start.
And, as we move towards a bolder, more ambitious reform program for the future we are also conscious of the challenges we face in implementing that program  -  including the storm clouds that continue to gather across the global economy.
Global Economic Challenges
The global economic context has clearly become more complicated since we took office.
The global economic outlook has sharply deteriorated  -  with a double warning of lower growth and higher inflation.
Last week the International Monetary Fund estimated a 25 per cent probability of global growth slowing to three per cent or less in 2008-09, equivalent to a global recession.
The Fund has now lowered its global growth forecast to 3.7 per cent this year from a 4.1 per cent prediction in January.
It anticipates a “mild recession” in the U.S and slower growth in Europe and Japan.
It also noted that growth would slow in the emerging Asian economies from 7.4 per cent in 2007 to 6.2 per cent this year as a result of further global financial market turbulence and reduced demand for Asian exports.
Recent developments in financial markets also affect the financial security of Australia's working families, because of its impact on the real economy and the availability of credit for lending.
As financial markets become more global, so too must proper regulation, supervision and transparency become more global - but without crushing the capacity of markets themselves to respond flexibly to new opportunities in the future.
Recently, I have spoken at length about these challenges with policy leaders, financial decision makers and regulators in the US, UK, the wider EU and China  -  including the head of the IMF.
I emphasised Australia's willingness to contribute to what must be a global response by our respective national regulators to what is truly a global financial crisis.
The Reserve Bank of Australia is actively contributing to the work of the Financial Stability Forum.
We are also taking action at home. The Government's approach involves several elements including monitoring liquidity needs internationally and, through the RBA, participating where appropriate in coordinated central bank action.
We will continue to monitor the Australian financial system in light of the current turbulence to ensure that it remains efficient, flexible and competitive.
Beyond these immediate measures concerning financial market stability, it is now more critical than ever at a time of declining global economic confidence to bring the Doha Round of free trade discussions to a successful conclusion.
That is why the Government is redoubling its efforts in Geneva and why Doha was a prominent feature of my discussions in Washington, Brussels and London.
In summary, the global economic context in which the new Government is framing its long term reform strategy, as well as the upcoming budget, is the most challenging Australia has faced since the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and arguably since the global recession of the early 1990s.
The cornerstone of the Government's economic strategy therefore is responsible economic management, maintaining our anti-inflation strategy based on producing a significant budget surplus while at the same time advancing a comprehensive agenda of microeconomic reform aimed at boosting long term productivity growth.
Global conditions in 2020
Looking forward to the decade ahead, Australia must be mindful of both the immediate challenges to the global economy  -  as well as the unfolding mega-challenges that are radically transforming the world in which Australia must carve out its future.
We know that on current trends, the demography of our planet will change significantly over the next twelve years.
By 2020 the world's population will have grown by another billion to 7.6 billion people.
By 2020 a representative group of 100 global citizens would include:
     * 56 Asians, including nineteen Chinese and seventeen Indians;
     * 16 Africans;
     * four from the United States;
     * five Western Europeans, and
     * not even one Australian.
In 2020 the world's five largest cities by population will be Seoul, São Paulo, Bombay, Jakarta, and Karachi  -  all cities in emerging economies.
We also know that, on current projections, the global balance of economic power will shift significantly over the next 12 years.
By 2020 the world economy is expected to be about 80 percent larger than it is today.
The average per capita income will be roughly 50 per cent higher.
By 2020 Asia will have grown to 43 per cent of world GDP and Asia's economy will be larger than the US and Europe combined.
Alongside the shift in economic power, there are likely to be parallel shifts in the global strategic balance of power.
China's defence spending is forecast to rise to $150 billion per year, according to the US National Intelligence Council  -  making it second only to the United States.
By 2020, the demands on the world's energy resources will have increased dramatically by nearly 50 per cent.
China alone will seek to increase its energy consumption by about 150 per cent by 2020 to maintain a steady rate of growth.
Even though the world's fossil fuel reserves are being depleted at a rapid rate, absent policy change, alternative energy will still account for only a small fraction of overall energy consumption in 2020.
As our use of fossil fuels increases, so will its observable effects on the natural environment that sustains us all.
Sea levels will rise, temperatures will increase and there will be more extreme weather events.
Climate change means variable water availability; more frequent droughts, floods and bushfires; altered distribution of pests and weeds and the move of tropical diseases into what are currently categorised as temperate zones.
Australia in 2020
Australia too will have changed significantly by 2020.
Our annual output, on current Treasury projections, will have risen by $400 billion to $1.4 trillion dollars.
GDP per capita will have risen by around $11,000 to over $60,000.
Australia's population in 2020 is expected to grow to over 25 million people, while the median age of our population will increase from 36 to 40 years.
Our population of Australians over 85 will have doubled from 300,000 now to 600,000 by 2020, with profound implications for national health care expenditures.
The number of households in Australia will grow by an additional 3 million in the next 15 years but the average size of those households will likely continue to decline. By 2020 the average Australian household will contain just 2.2 people.
If current trends continue, by 2020, diabetes will be the leading cause of disease for men and the second leading cause for women.
Dementia, anxiety and depression, will feature in the leading four health challenges for both men and women.
On a three decade projection, the fastest escalation in costs in health expenditure will be incurred by diabetes, at 400%, followed by neurological disorders, at 280%.
Those statistics give us just a snapshot of the challenges we confront in the years ahead.
2020 Summit
This gives some indication of the depth and breadth of the global and national challenges Australia faces in planning for the decade ahead.
In planning ahead for this decade, the most powerful force in our nation is not the Federal Government's capacity to make laws or implement programs from on high.
The Government cannot, on its own, legislate productivity, competitiveness, business innovation, or healthier lifestyles.
Our most powerful force is the ideas, talent and energy of the Australian people themselves.
Our greatest potential lies in forging a new partnership between communities, businesses, the various levels of government and other non-government organisations  -  to work together to tackle the big challenges that lie ahead.
If as a nation we are genuinely practical and empirical in our approach to finding new approaches to tackle old problems then we can move forward.
And many of these new discoveries will dissolve old debates between left and right based on outmoded versions of reality.
Witness for example the collapse of the age-old debate between welfare entitlement and individual responsibility  -  largely because community engagement has taught us that mutual responsibility is the best way forward both for the individual and for the public purse.
If we therefore genuinely engage society, and not merely the state  -  in other words, Australian people and not just Australian governments - then we will begin to also identify a new way of doing business for the nation.
The Australia 2020 Summit is an important part of this process  -  recognising that government does not have all the wisdom, and recognising that our political opponents also have a contribution to make . This is why we welcome contributions to the Summit from across the political spectrum.
This is why we have included distinguished Australians like former National Party leader Tim Fischer and former Liberal minister Warwick Smith as co-chairs of different streams in the Summit.
I also welcome the participation of the Leader of the Opposition.
The 2020 Summit is an opportunity for us all to rise above partisan politics, and we should create more such opportunities in national life.
The Summit will address the long term challenges confronting Australia's future across 10 critical areas:
     * Future directions for the Australian economy  -  and how we build a competitive economy in a world being transformed by the rise of China and India.
     * The productivity agenda - including education, skills, training, science and innovation.
     * Population, sustainability, climate change and water.
     * Future directions for rural industries and rural communities.
     * A long-term national health strategy  -  including the challenges of preventative health, workforce planning and the ageing population.
     * Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion.
     * Options for the future of Indigenous Australia.
     * Towards a creative Australia: the future of the arts, film and design.
     * The future of Australian governance: renewed democracy, a more open government (including the role of the media), the structure of the Federation and the rights and responsibilities of citizens.
     * Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
In the lead-up to this weekend we have already conducted Local 2020 Summits, School 2020 Summits, a national Youth 2020 Summit and one on Monday with the Jewish community given that next weekend coincides with the Passover.
The Local 2020 Summits have attracted thousands of attendees.
The School summits have been held in more than 500 schools.
Some students offered very practical ideas, like tackling the rural skill shortage with a ‘farm bonus' that would operate like the baby bonus, giving an incentive for students to return to their local communities after vocational training.
Some responses highlighted serious social problems. Many students have commented on their parents' long work hours, and some have sobering words:
“Give advice to parents  -  teach people how to be a mum and dad... We should help people so they don't have to work so much... Parents need to play with their kids more... Parents need to pay more attention to their children.... There is no time for kids, kids need more time.”
On a similar theme, a group of students mid-way through high school recommended some positive steps:
“Increase interaction between parents and children through working from home, reducing work hours, a ‘Take Your Children to Work Day' every so often. The employer could also give out promotions which will help to build up family activities, eg tickets to theme parks and sport games.” 
A Victorian student linked modern work demands to future health problems:
“Exercise? No time in future because we work longer hours.”
Today's students love new technology, but many show a sophisticated understanding of how technology is contributing to social isolation  -  like the primary school student in Queensland who remarked:
“People won't have to leave their houses because everything will be able to be completed online and delivered to the door and this will be very sad.”
School teachers have done a particularly first rate job in getting their students to think about how we make Australia an even better place.
After the completion of these School Summits, last weekend Parliament House hosted a national Youth 2020 Summit.
One hundred young Australian leaders came together to put forward thoughtful and substantive proposals on matters including education, preventative health, mental health, climate change and Australia's place in the world.
The Youth Summit came up with ten key proposals and 30 additional ideas, and my Department is now reviewing them in more detail.
Participants in all these events would confirm that we have no predetermined agenda and no predetermined outcomes.
To help focus the discussions this weekend, I will be asking each of the working group co-chairs to nominate at least one ‘big idea' in their area for the future.
Second, I will also ask them to submit at least three concrete policy ideas, at least one of which must involve no cost or negligible costs.
And third, I will be asking them to identify at least three specific goals for which we should aim by 2020.
The Government will sift through the submissions and recommendations from the Summit and provide a response to its outcomes by the end of this year.
I will also be taking a proposal along to the Summit for discussion.
My proposal for Australia in the year 2020 is to create universal, high quality, affordable Parent and Child Centres for all 0-5 year old Australian children.
I believe such centres could offer real, practical assistance to working families under financial pressures struggling with the practical challenges of raising very young children.
These Parent and Child Centres will bring together maternal and child health, long day care and preschool into one stop shops for parents with young kids.
The goal of this ambitious proposal would be to offer all parents with 0-5 year olds access to a one stop early childhood centre that provides:
     * maternal and child health services such as baby health checks, baby weighing, feeding advice and vaccinations;
     * long day care including play-based activities for children whose parents are at work or studying;
     * preschool and early learning including age-appropriate play-based learning provided by a four year qualified teacher; and
     * playgroups and parental support and advice to ensure parents have a place to meet their peers and get access to advice while their children play.
This model would require partnerships between Federal State and local governments as well as existing private and community service providers.
The aim would be to provide most of these services at low cost to parents - however some services on offer (such as long day care services) would continue to be fee-based but with the cost still subsidised by the Government.
Access to these Parent and Child Centres would be universal, but not compulsory, and the quality of service provided would be underpinned by strengthened national quality standards.
Some or all of the services offered in these centres could be supplied by the private sector and would be subject to competition between providers, helping to drive quality up and prices down.
A single service centre model for all 0-5 year olds would offer great benefits to kids, great benefits to parents, and great benefits to the whole community.
It would improve the quality of health and education and care services for 0-5s, with:
     * Better quality care that is underpinned by strengthened national quality standards;
     * The introduction of more four year trained early childhood education professionals for all young children regardless of age; and
     * Provision of education, health and other supports for children to make sure they are developing both physically and intellectually.
These Centres could improve the level of support for parents:
     * Providing convenient health, education and care services for working parents;
     * Providing age-appropriate services for parents with several kids under 5; and
     * Providing opportunities for non-working parents to meet, to develop peer supports and to access advice while their children play.
These Centres could also improve outcomes for the whole community:
     * Making better use of early childhood resources, reducing duplication, which means more money for frontline services;
     * Freeing up capacity to strengthen national quality standards; and
     * Providing additional support to disadvantaged families to improve the life chances of their children.
A little over a century ago, few would have dreamt that today we would have universal and affordable schooling for our children.
We have already set ourselves the goal of introducing universal preschool services for all four year olds by 2013.
We should aim to take the next step and create universal Parent and Child Centres for all children aged 0-5 by 2020.
Early childhood reform lies at the intersection of our aspirations for this nation:
     * lifting long term productivity and participation through greater investment in education, particularly the early years;
     * a commitment to reducing the cost of living pressures on working families; and
     * a serious effort to reducing the opportunity gap that holds back children from disadvantaged families and communities across the nation.
This proposal builds on the extensive research which has already been done on the critical impact of a child's early nurturing, care and engagement with learning, on every aspect of their later life.
The proposal has been put forward to be debated on its merits.
And I look forward to the inputs of my fellow Summit participants on this and other proposals this coming weekend.
Conclusion
Twelve years from now, another group of Australians will gather to celebrate the Sydney Institute's 2020 Annual Dinner, marking what will be the Institute's 31st year.
Who knows what they will take as their subject  -  maybe the low carbon energy revolution in response to climate change; the rise and rise of India; new security challenges from a new generation of contagious diseases; new transformational technologies, or perhaps the new challenges of inter-faith dialogue among the 80 per cent of the world's population who are religious believers.
I hope they can look back on the Australia of twelve years ago and say, 2008 was something of a turning point.
A time when Australia saw its potential, recognised its strengths and seized the future.
A time when we took stock, looked beyond the trenches for a bit and imagined what we as a people might become.
A time when we said that we were done with short-term thinking and began substantial planning for the long term.
A time when we injected not just new ideas but also a new approach to policy making.
A time when we brought into the policy making process people whose skills and ideas had never been fully embraced before.
And I hope the results will be evident in the modern Australia of 2020.
A nation whose education revolution has transformed future opportunities for a rising generation of young Australians.
A nation with a key role in expanding global markets  -  perhaps clean energy technologies; the biosciences; agricultural innovation and across our service industries.
A nation that leads in its response to climate change.
A nation that has become a great force for good in its region and the world.


Thanks very much. Sir Nicholas Shehadie, Tanya Plibersek the Minister for Housing, Keith Garner, Superintendent of the Wesley Mission, Nick Farr-Jones of the organising committee of Touch Life 2008, residents, and staff here at Edward Eagar Lodge, ladies and gentlemen.
I am still struggling with the challenge of donning the rugby shorts, and to the potential challenge of being someone fast, on the wing, in the presence of Sir Nicolas Shehadie and of Nick Farr-Jones, respectfully, on behalf of Keith Garner and myself, and without consulting with Keith Garner, we decline.
There are certain things from which the Australian public should be protected. And me in rugby shorts is one of them.
I did have two very successful seasons in the second row for the Under 14 “Es” at my college in Brisbane. And after those two seasons, Brother Alexis suggested my career could be better spent as a linesman.
It is the only place you could go after the 14 “Es” actually. There weren't any “Fs”. So thank you for the invitation, but no thanks.
You know this is a wonderful place to be this morning. The work that is going on here is a very good work. To all people who support this work, through the Uniting Church, through the Wesley Mission, through those who work here, as part of their commitment to the community, supported by companies such as Tony Crawford's DLA Phillips Fox, and people who just roll in the door and offer their help, it is a really good thing that you're doing.
It says everything about your sense of humanity and your sense of compassion. And I say this to Keith here, because the tradition he comes from, I think this place and what it has been used for today would make John Wesley be proud, the father of English Methodism.
The fact that this was once a Wesleyan chapel, a Methodist place of worship, and now is being used as a part of the church's mission to help the homeless, that's what Wesley was on about. Wesley shocked people in the middle of the 18th Century religious awakening in the United Kingdom, the great English revival, by saying that one of the first things they wanted to do was establish an infirmary for the poor in downtown London. The shocking and heretical proposition that the poor should be given free “physic” to use that great 18th Century term, and then schools for the poor, housing for the poor.
So I think Wesley would be very proud of you mate, well done.
Homelessness. Nick is right, it is a deep passion of mine and of Tanya's and of the Government. And in part, it is because of a very simple belief, that the beginning of human dignity is to be able to call some place home. That is the beginning of human dignity, wherever that place might be, to be able to call some place home.
And that is our starting point. And secondly, the fact that according to the cold hard statistics, we have more than 100,000 Australians who today have no place to call home.
Statistics we have more than 100,000 Australians who today have no place to call home. As Keith said before after 17 years of economic growth I think, as a country and a community, we can do better than that. We can't fix it all, but we can do a lot better than that.
It is not just 100,000 who, statisticians tell us are homeless. 14,000 of them are children. 14,000. Think of that next time you go to a football match. Just look at the crowd. When they announce that it is 20,000 in the crowd, take off a few, that's how many kids are homeless.
10,000 sleeping rough. It's a lot of people sleeping rough. And like Nick, I've faced this crisis of conscience as I've walked past those sleeping rough, and said, ‘what do I do? How can I help? What should I be doing?' And we are all often rendered speechless at those moments, and I certainly have been.
There's another reason for causing this to be a matter of core business for this Government, and that is that homelessness can happen to anybody. Homelessness can happen to anyone who's here. If you have a catastrophic accident, if your partner develops a gambling addiction, if for whatever reason, you run into one of life's great brick walls which are unable to be anticipated, and bang, all of those great assumptions about your future and how robust and how secure it is come falling down like a house of cards. It can happen to anybody.
And as I have travelled around homeless centres around the country and spoken to folk, the stories are extraordinary. I remember sitting down with Tanya some months ago now just spending an hour and a half just chatting to blokes in that particular place, about how they'd all got there. The life journeys are just extraordinary and from the most extraordinary origins as well. So it can happen to anybody and regrettably today, it is happening to everybody, that is, people from all walks of life.
As Keith again mentioned the challenges of housing affordability and the flow on effect of people wrestling with the mortgage, wresting with rents, to temporary accommodation, to staying with friends or as a young do and say “couch surfing”, and then you end up not knowing where. And if we don't think that is a problem, then I think our eyes are closed.
I am deeply concerned about the emergence of two Australias, deeply concerned about it. Last night with Tanya and others I was in Western Sydney. And we were talking to the community out there about the challenges in Western Sydney and those of housing affordability. And in private conversations afterwards about what social workers there dealing with their sleeves rolled up in putting band aids across people who cannot afford the mortgage and had to go elsewhere. It is all unfolding before us.
I think we can be better as a nation by saying that we don't want two Australias. I think we can be better as a nation saying there's something about us which says someone in need deserves a hand outstretched of human compassion and a hand up. Rather than a finger of condemnation, or even worse, the cold glance of indifference.
I think we can do that, I think it's within our wit and wisdom to do it. We're a pretty bright bunch of people. And it is reflected by the bunch of corporates here with us today. There are people with a heart as well. I think that speaks so well of who we are.
Our job as a Government is to provide leadership. We've said homelessness is a priority for the nation. We've said that by years end we'll produce this Government's first white paper on homelessness, we intend to do that, the works is now underway. We've said we're not interested in piecemeal solutions. We've said we understand and get it when all factors contributing to homelessness whether it's substance abuse or whether it's employment, or whether it's disability or mental illness, need to be embraced in a total strategy to deal with this endemic problem. That work is underway.
Our job is to provide that leadership. But secondly, the job of leadership is to say that we don't have all the answers. That's why Keith and others will be with us this coming weekend at the 2020 Summit where we're looking at housing and homelessness bringing together people from the philanthropic community, people from the public housing community, people from the private investment community and people from right across the show to say lets just shake the tree and see what good ideas come out of it. Innovative new programs, affordable rental accommodation - how do we do it better? How do we do it in a sustainable way? How do we do it so it's not just a piece of press release sort of waiting in the breeze which we forget about three weeks later?
I'm interested in being in Government in order to change things sustainably. I'm not interested in being in Government for the sake of being here and I'm not interested in being in Government for the sake of saying nice things. I think we can make a difference, but in making a difference, we need to be able to take in the best ideas available in the community beyond Government as well. And then, as Keith rightly said in his concluding remarks, partner with people in the private sector to make it work.
The good thing about Australia is we are a very practical mob. That is, we're interested in what delivers the outcome, what works. And if we end up partnering with investment houses and private firms and other forms of creative delivery of services for homeless, we bring to this table no sense of ideology whatsoever. Other than this  -  a sense of deep commitment that we want to change this problem and make it something of which this nation can be proud and a world leader in how to deal with the great challenge of homelessness.
Which brings us to the launch of Touch Life 2008. It's a good practical program. We need money to make these sorts of services work, and for those of you who are corporates here, and who have dug deep either in money or time, or in allowing your staff to contribute money or time, on behalf of the Government, and the people of Australia, I thank you. And we're going to ask you for a lot more.
This is a great program. It's good and practical, it's very Australian. How do you take something that we like doing, and some of us can do well  -  others less well, a reference to Keith not me, remember I had two successful seasons. How do we then harness all those things we like doing into raising money for a great cause?
So I thank all of those associated with Touch Life. It's a good practical initiative. I recognise the contribution of various of my parliamentary colleagues in making sure that this has got of the ground as well.
And therefore it is with great pleasure that I officially launch Touch Life 2008, and I wish this program every success as part of our national mission to deal with the challenge of national homelessness.


PM: Can I say how happy I am here this morning to be at SDN here at Erskineville. Because SDN is an organisation which has been going since 1905 and it has always had a particular commitment to the needs of kids and littlies in inner city Sydney.
What we have here at this centre at Erskineville is a effort to bring together two streams of services for our little children. Long day care on the one hand and preschool education on the other and to integrate them within the one location.
And as I have been advised by those who run this centre here, it is working very well. The proposal that I have put up for discussion at the summit this weekend would seek to build on such a model and try to bring together three streams of services and perhaps some additional services for children aged 0-5.
Firstly, maternal and child health and welfare. The basic health checks which the little ones need. And how to assist parents with the provision of basic health care to very little children. The second of course is the long day care requirements of working families and that is a necessary part of contemporary Australian life.
And the third is the really important emerging science and reality of early childhood education, called preschool, called different things in different states.
But basically, how do you assist little ones with pre-literacy and pre-numeracy and play based learning from the earliest stages of their cognitive development.
We think that if you take as your starting point the needs of working families struggling with making ends meet, struggling with the practicalities of little kids under five, often more than one, how do you best suit their needs long term and suit the nation's requirements long term as well.
And the proposal I have put for the Summit is that we set for ourselves a goal by 2020 of universal access to such services in single locations for working families.
Now when it comes to the Summit itself, I am sure there is going to be a lot of debate, a lot of debate about a whole range of proposals for education, for skills, for training. But can I say, early childhood education is really important.
When I became leader of the opposition a year or so ago, the first policy I released at the university of Melbourne in January of 2007 was on early childhood education.
This is really important stuff for the future. It firstly helps working families, secondly, helps in particular the families suffering from the challenges of disadvantage if you get it right and thirdly, it is the best long term investment in the workforce needs of the economy. Because what happens with the early learning experiences of very young children shapes so much of their later development in life including their emotional development, their social development and their skills formation as well.
And there is a persuasive literature around the world today, that if you invest decisively early on, the yield later on for families, for the economy and for kids themselves is much greater.
And the last thing I would say before asking Maxine to comment as the relevant Parliamentary Secretary is this, that when we came to Government, this country, Australia was running stone-motherless-last across the OECD in national investment in early childhood education.
If we are serious about debating our future, if we are serious about setting goals for our future, if we are serious about helping working families reach those goals for the nation, this area that's early childhood education, must be an absolute priority.
If I could turn to Maxine to add and then we will take some questions.
MAXINE: Thanks Prime Minister. I suppose I would like to say that this is a big idea that the Prime Minister has put on the table and my sense of the reaction this morning is that parents across the country have been saying, “you beauty”.
I think it is because this really is a response to what we pick up, both Tanya and myself in our own electorates and indeed the Prime Minister does.
Most certainly as you campaigned across the country last year. Parents are stressed these days. Parents are living busy complex lives and that stress flows on to the children so I think the task for smart Governments is to look at the way we can roll out innovative models that bring together a range of services that effect the future cognitive and social development of children and in turn take a bit of stress off parents.
And bringing together help, bringing together education, bringing together I would say as well special needs assistance for many children. That is a smart way to go. There are huge challenges which is why the Prime Minister, you know, COAG is the workforce. We know we will not achieve this unless we get agencies working together. Health and Education particularly, have to come together.
I know for instance say there are centres that are very keen to bring an infant health nurse into the centres where you have got long day care, Pre School, special help for children on the autism spectrum, but they are having real interagency fights over getting the health nurse in. Well as I say, I mean, I think this is part of the challenge that we have as a new Government to get all those agencies working together. So Prime Minister I welcome this initiative, I think it is a beauty.
PM: And finally on that, it is also about joined up Government. You shouldn't have bureaucratic turf fights between, you know, agencies about how services are best delivered for children and for their families in the centre.
Otherwise you have got services being dictated by agency squabbles in Canberra or in Philip St or Macquarie St or wherever. That shouldn't be the case. The starting point should be to whom is the service being delivered. The little children in the first instance and their mums and dads in the other, their families. And then the dividend is also for the economy long term.
Over to you for some questions.
JOURNALIST: How do you plan to involve the private sector, I mean you have got, the private sector, not for profit sector, the not for profit sector is saying (inaudible) they are the best placed to deliver all of these services, do you plan to involve the private sector as well?
PM: Absolutely. First of all, put the status of my proposal into context, this is a proposal for discussion at the Summit. I challenge the nation to think ahead, more than a decade's time for 2020, I felt as if I had some responsibility to put something on the table myself, this is an idea and let's see what the response is.
Secondly, if there is support for this and if there is, and there may be additions and subtractions from the idea, we have no ideological approach whatsoever in terms of the form of ultimate delivery. Not for profits like this one here who do a fantastic job. But as Maxine was saying outside, there are certain for profits around the country who are doing good things as well.
The key thing is to get policy setting right. Do we want to have, for the nation, this service delivered in a single location for working families across the country. Universal access. No one will be mandated to use such service. What you do with children zero to give ultimately involves high levels of parental discretion.
But, the key thing is, getting that policy direction settled, agreed and then you look at different forms of delivery.
JOURNALIST: But how are you going to guarantee low cost child care if you are turning it over to the private sector?
PM: Well can I say, right now, we have childcare delivered by multiple forms right across the country. For profits and others. And you know, they do a generally pretty good job and some do fantastic jobs from within both sectors.
I don't think we should get obsessed with the actual form of delivery, that is the actual mechanism of delivery. What we've got to settle is the actual end point which is that a working family in Western Sydney, under financial pressure, has access within reasonable reach to a centre which brings together maternal and child health, brings together long day care, brings together early childhood education, play based learning, and, where necessary, additional outreach services for particular families who may need further help with their kids early learning development or with their basic health care.
MCKEW: Could I just add to that, just very briefly. Affordability is an issue, but you know, it's very interesting. I could take you to some of the top quality centres in the country and they set some of the most competitive rates.
The issue that comes up as well as affordability is the most important one of quality. Where you see high demand for particular services, it's where there is a premium put on quality. So that's the message we're getting.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there's some criticism of you of the timeframe for this plan. 12 years you are looking at. And the fact that the 260 childcare centres promised during the election (inaudible) haven't been built?
PM: Well, for the 260 childcare centres which form part of our pre election commitment, we, as I understand it, have identified already I think some 38 priority sites. They will be funded with the upcoming Budget and then the roll out of bricks and mortar through the planning process for each of those sites proceeds accordingly.
It's very difficult from Canberra to say that a piece of brick will be laid down on a particular date at a particular location 38 sites across the country. I don't intend to do that. And the rest of the 260 will be laid through a methodical process based on needs analysis and locations.
But you talk about 2020, my challenge to the nation is this: let's lift the sights above short term planning, let's engage in some long term thinking for Australia's future. Where do we want littlies such as these to be in a generation's time. And my view is, let's have the debate. That what this Summit is about. On how do you best provide for the future for little ones like this, their families, as well as for the nation. And the literature I read over the summer before last by Heckman, and others, about the absolute importance of investment in young children's lives in the zero to five bracket, is compelling.
As is compelling, the fact that we are the world's worst national investors in early childhood education. That's unsustainable long term. When I was recently in Britain I was advised by various people working with the British Government that the intensity of their research now lies in the earlier sort of neurological examination of the formation of a young child's brain, and therefore, how can we best provide the most effective learning environments and nurturing environments for those children.
You know, I think this is a really important area for the future and why politicians often walk away from it is that, let's just say were talking about investing in these things long term, well, you don't see the yield for 10, 15, 20 years time. Usually outside the normal political cycle. That's why we are having the Summit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister under this plan -
PM: Proposal. Proposal that's what the Summit is about it is for proposal to be discussed. And as I said, it may not attract a whole lot of support, we'll see. Sorry, go on.
JOURNALIST: Where do the traditional baby health care centres, normally attached, say, the local council and the like with the one or two nurses that may be there offering free services. But where do they sit once you shift everything to bigger child care centres?
PM: Well, baby health care clinics, and I've seen them in various forms around the country, and often attached to local authorities on local Government premises, and sometimes in my own state of Queensland delivered slightly separately. They do a fantastic job. It's just that we would, under this proposal, like to see that made easier by way of access for parents by locating in a single centre your core needs for the delicate and difficult task of raising very small children.
JOURNALIST: Are they to be replaced under this proposal?
PM: No, no. Can I just say, under this proposal, a future model, all those baby clinics just remain right where they are. And if we design a future model, into the future, into the 2020 plus bracket, then you would want to bring these services into a single location so that those services continue to be delivered, continue to be delivered as they have been delivered well by those care providers now.
GINNIE UDY - SDN: Could I just make a comment there, because we've been piloting and shown that this model already works. And while the ideal situation would be a stand alone centre, there is so much that you can do already on the basis of what we already have, and a lot of it is not about even actual physical co-location, but the kind of across system links that Maxine was saying at the moment can be so difficult.
We have proven that through just local connections you can build up a much greater integrated service, even if it is not physically co-located. The relationships that our centres have built up with their local baby health clinics, where we've had those staff choosing to come and run some clinic days from our centres or we've run a playgroup in their building.
So it's a lot about the relationships that you create and being more flexible and open minded and thinking laterally. Not just about the bricks and mortar. So it can start earlier, and we have already been doing it. And shown it's worked.
JOURNALIST: While you've stepped forward there, there's been a bit if debate this morning on radio, which effectively rolls around the idea and this was mentioned earlier that the private sector might in some way consume community (inaudible) process. Do you see a risk in that?
GINIE UDY - SDN: The not for profit sector is a third, still, of the sector and there's 3,000 childcare centres across the country. Ideally, it may not mean that absolutely every single one of those centres has to be augmented in this way we've talked about a concept of lighthouse centres, and you don't need a lighthouse on every cliff. You just need a focus of attention, you need that spilling out of networks and connections and a place where people can go. It doesn't need to be on every corner.
JOURNALIST: But you obviously believe that the not for profit sector is better placed to supply these services than the private sector. You said that to the Prime Minister outside.
GINIE UDY - SDN: The value base of the not for profit sector, we believe, is most consistent with this model.
PM: You know, you can construct some conflict up the middle of this if you like, and I know that's where you're going. But can I just say the debate we're having about this proposal is, what's the best end point? And frankly, there are great contributions to be had.
I've got stacks of not for profits in my own electorate in Brisbane. I've got stacks of for-profits. I see good things everywhere. And it's entirely legitimate for not for profit sector to say, ‘hey, we do it best, this is what we do'. I'd expect that, that's normal.
Let's sort of get passed the stage where you're going to have a debate about the future delivery points for effective early childhood services to people that, you know, here is right, here is wrong, here is black, here is white, this is good, this is bad. You know, we need to get beyond the, you know, win/lose on to some real focus and agreement about where we want to land long term. And if that is agreed that that is the destination point. Which is to provide integrated services for children aged zero to five, then, the models for delivery can be appropriately discussed. We haven't got to stage one yet, which to a degree, that's the end point.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) because the private sector has a profit margin. And if you allow that sector to take over this idea there are real concerns around affordability.
PM: Well can I say as Maxine said before, two objectives we have, the nation, which is high quality, and high levels of affordability for people right across the country. And our starting premise is always what's possible and best for working families.
But if you're talking about healthcare, you're talking about aged care, you're talking about a whole range of service deliveries across the country including school education. Let me tell you, we have diverse delivery models in every form right across the nation. We don't have a one size fits all approach.
The key thing in this debate is, do we as a nation agree, and that's part of the reason we're having this proposal discussed at the Summit, do we agree that where we want to land in a decade or so time, is to have these services integrated, not through silos which don't talk to each other, for little children aged zero to five, universally available.
That is the debate to be had. And if we agree on that, it'll be expensive. This has not been costed. It will be expensive. Then you go down to, as I said explicitly last night in my speech, it hasn't been costed, because we should test these ideas on their merits. Then we go down to the best models for delivery.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you able to just in some way define what you mean by universally available on the two key fronts, which are waiting times, or waiting lists, and cost?
PM: When I say universal access, it was outlined in the speech last night. This is to be the subject of debate at the Summit, and I welcome all contributions to it. By the end of the Summit you might have ten additions to what I've put forward and five subtractions.
But universal access means that you've got universal access to high quality, affordable, care for children and early childhood education and health opportunities for children.
That means that if you live in a particular location across the country, you have physical access to such services and it is within your financial reach.
At present that is not the case on either score right across the nation. That's why this is an important debate.
Doing this right for zero to fives is as important as doing it right for kids at university. That's why this debate is necessary.
Cast your mind back a hundred years, not many of us here were. SDN was. One hundred years ago the debate was about, should there be such a thing as universal primary education. And the debates at the time was, ‘good grief, we can't have that, because it is so expensive' and, you know -
MCKEW: Where will we get the teachers.
PM: where will we get the teachers. If the churches want to do that, that's fine. They can be private providers of it. But, you know, let's not have, ‘where will we get the teachers from, it'll cost the taxpayer', etcetera.
We went through that debate.
Come the Second World War, the debate around the country was ‘could we possibly be so bold as to think that we should have universal secondary education?'.
And most of the secondary schools you'll see built around the country, start being built in the post-war period. That's where you started to have secondary education at scale. And everyone said, ‘gee, is that the right way to go? Surely everyone should just go out and do X, Y and Z without going to secondary school, and it's not affordable'.
Then, come to the final quarter of the century we had a debate about universal access to post-secondary education. Be it through vocation education and training or to universities. And we went through the whole debate about affordability then, and we continue to have that debate
All I'm saying is, there is a fourth piece in this. And we skipped over it at the beginning. And that's what happens to zero to fives.
Getting this right is important for the nation, important for families and important for the little kidsters as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) support would you expect at the 2020 Summit this weekend given that it's your own idea that you're taking to your Summit?
PM: Oh, given the attitude which I imagine in an Australian democracy is often displayed towards political leaders, people will be robust in support and opposition. And, I frankly don't care. That's a matter for, you know, you've got to be pretty relaxed about these things.
Here is an idea, whack it out there, and I don't think, if we are involved constantly in this win-lose, right-wrong, you know, you're a dope for putting it up, you're really brilliant for not putting it up kind of idea, you know, we get no where.
When I said when I launched this Summit idea, the whole purpose of this enterprise is to shake the tree. To have fall out of the tree good ideas for the nation's future which come from beyond the ranks of Government.
I actually was dead serious. Because there is a whole lot of brilliance and innovation, I didn't even know about SDN until this morning, a whole lot of brilliance and innovation out there in the community which we need as a Government to tap into.
Another part of my address last night at the Sydney Institute said precisely that. Is that the Summit itself is about harvesting good ideas for the future from outside of Government. It's also about a new form of Government, whereby, we reach out from the narrow circles of politicians like us, bureaucrats, and I've been one of those as well, and actually to people at the coal face, who may not agree with 100 per cent of what we are (inaudible), I don't care. It's just that they are doing really good stuff, and how do you translate the innovation on the ground into good things for the nation.
That's the new form of governance that I want for Australia, and I'm absolutely passionately committed to it. Thanks, got to go.


MITCHELL: The Prime Minister, Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil. Thanks for having me on the program.
MITCHELL: Well thank you for your time. This idea that is going to the Summit of one stop childcare. It's not original, is it? It's pinched from the Blair Government?
PM: Oh, I don't think that any of these ideas are necessarily completely original. I mean, the world of ideas is kicking around out there. Who owns parentage of all of this?
MITCHELL: Is that where it came from, the Blair Government?
PM: No. I mean, there is a whole lot of people who have been talking and debating this. My interest and engagement in this started over the summer of 06-07. I read parts of a book by a guy called Heckman about the impact of early childhood development in various child care centres around the world. If you invest early in a young child's development, then the yield long term in terms of the productivity of that person's life is huge. That's where my interest started. It was the first policy we put out in Opposition in January last year.
MITCHELL: So were you aware of the ‘Sure Start Scheme' in the United Kingdom?
PM:    Personally, no.
MITCHELL: You've got a former Blair adviser working for the Government, Tom Bentley. Has he had an involvement in it?
PM: I couldn't actually tell you on that. There is no great mystery in this. There is a thing called the internet. I mean, you're constantly looking for ideas from around the world. But, my commitment to early childhood education and how you do it better, as I've said, was triggered by discussions with people in the field way back at the beginning of last year. And there was a long policy document. The first one I released after I became Leader of the Opposition, in Melbourne in fact, in January last year, which goes through this. The key thing here is  - 
MITCHELL: So it went through this very idea?
PM: It went through part of this idea. Which is, how do you basically, it said, why is Australia coming stone motherless last in the investment of early childhood education across the OECD economies around the world? Secondly, here is what the scientific literature says, if you invest more early in a child's education the dividend later - great. And thirdly, what we've been debating since then is how to do this better.
MITCHELL: But does it go to this idea of the one-stop shop? 
PM: Oh look, on that specific element, probably not.
MITCHELL: So are we looking here at an idea or a policy?
PM: A proposal. An idea and a proposal. The whole purpose of this Summit, Neil, is so that people can put forward ideas for the country's future.
When an idea can be debated on its merits, that is, is it something which adds to our overall national vision of building a stronger and more competitive economy in the future, enhancing our national security, making Australia fairer, a decent  chance for Aboriginal Australians that is debated on its own terms. Then, against the merits if we decide to take it to the next stage, then you look at the detailed costing of proposals of ideas and then you look at how you might deliver it.
MITCHELL: But isn't a little different for a Prime Minister to be floating an idea. People look at that as policy and say, well, what's it going to cost? When's it going to work? How's it going to operate?
PM: No, I mean, you've got to look at how we're approaching this Summit itself. What I've said is that we need new ideas and new directions for the country. And the Summit itself promises to be in part, a new way in which we do Government in the country. I don't have the view that people who sit in Canberra as politicians, or the public servants who advise them, have a monopoly on wisdom. You've got to be able to have a way of sucking in ideas from the whole Australian community.
There's no perfect way of doing it. But my intention is to throw the doors of Government open, that's why it is going to be held here in Parliament House in Canberra, shake the tree, see what falls out.
And if we get a dozen or so good ideas for the future out of this, it'll be a weekend well spent.
MITCHELL: So do you think you'll have more Summits? Is that the plan? You say this is going to change the way Government is done. Will we have regular Summits?
PM: We'll see how this one goes. I mean, I think we should be open minded about all of this. If it works well, and produces good outcomes, then let's look at ways in which we can do this better into the future as well.
I think there's a great danger of simply closing the doors of the way in which Government works so that it becomes sort of a dialogue internally within itself.
MITCHELL: Isn't parliament supposed to do that?  Isn't that the forum for the people, where our representatives do exactly this?
PM: Well, parliament is elected in the case of the Commonwealth Parliament, every three years. Most of the State Governments every four years. But you have one dip into the community, and that's it.
MITCHELL: But, I would have hoped that your Members of Parliament would be dipping into the community just about every day. And reflecting what we put to them into the parliament, and into the party room?
PM:   And therefore you're saying that's an either/or. You either have MPs who are elected who do that, and that's it, or you have another way in which our Government can engage the community. But let's look at this through, across the Government, you can have at any given time, whether it's industry policy, social policy, health policy  -  there are a range of official or semi-official consultative mechanisms which exist. But, the problem is, you don't have, at present, a forum which says, ‘okay, here is the country, let's look to 2020, 10 or 12 years out, what sort of Australia do we want to be? How do you think we can get there? What are the best ideas for doing it?'
It's basically trying to get the nation to look beyond the trenches of the next three, six, nine months. We're constantly criticised, and I think legitimately, in politics, about being too short term. Here is a forum that's actually looking to the long term.
There's no guarantee of success with this. I actually think it is worth having a go.
MITCHELL: And if it works, you'd look at doing it again? 
PM: Yep.
MITCHELL: Is there a 2020 label that has even been used by Blair's people?
PM:   Oh, I'm sure it has. Who knows. I mean, 2020 is not the unique property of either the Australian Government or the Australian Labor Party. It's a year which happens in the future.
MITCHELL: What do you think of the idea from Julian Burnside, from Civil Liberties Victoria, he thinks politicians should be legally accountable, punished for not telling the truth.
PM:    I haven't seen that one from Julian. But you know something, it doesn't surprise me.
MITCHELL: What do you think of it?
PM:  Oh, I think all of us have an obligation in public life to be up front with people about what we can do and what we can't. And, I take seriously the whole question of  the commitments you make to the Australian people. That's why we constantly get whacked by a number of people who are economic commentators about a determination to proceed with implementing tax cuts. I think you've got to maintain faith with the people. But I think holding us legally accountable in courts, well, that kind of takes it to an interesting new level.
MITCHELL: Just before we leave the child care thing, people like you and I, our children have had access to this sort thing. Even though it might not have been one stop, because that's the way we brought up our children. I was at an organisation last night called the Child Protection Society. They deal with kids at risk. And we were talking about this, Jenny Macklin was there. We were talking about it at some length. And they said, well, it's a good idea, but the real kids at risk are not part of it because they are not going to be taken there and we should be focussing on children at risk.
PM: Well, you know, you're right, there's a problem, and that is, real kids at risk, are their parents going to volunteer bringing them forward to centres such as this, which look at the whole spectrum of kids needs from identification of physical health problems, and of course, that would include the possibility of abuse, though to how you handle other childhood diseases, through to the basic skills of play based learning through to more formal, you know, pre schooling. That is the spectrum of services we want here. But you know something Neil, we cant. There is no silver bullet for every solution. Child protection services are really important nation wide and I think it is fair to say that as a nation we need to be doing better on that score as well.
MITCHELL: Will there be a communiqué at the end of the Summit?
PM: I haven't spoken at length with the co-chair of it on that particular point, that is Professor Davis, we are meeting later today. I think we would want to tell the nation where we think we have got to.
More importantly, and I have said this on the record before, and let me say it again, a talkfest is of no use in itself.
My commitment is, that for these ten national working groups which try and cover the big questions for Australia's future, that each of those will come forth with their major policy proposals.
Our undertaking as the Government of the nation, the elected Government of the nation, is by year's end to respond formally. What we can embrace, what we will therefore proceed to implement and the reasons why, and what we can't and the reasons why.
MITCHELL: Are there no go zones?
PM: Not really.
MITCHELL: What about the US alliance, is that up for debate?
PM: If people want to put their views forth on that, that is fine. I mean I am pretty relaxed about all that.
MITCHELL: Oh really, I had heard that the US alliance was not, was a no go zone, that's not right?
PM:   Well I think if you start getting, well you know where my views are on that. I am rock solid on those questions. But if you start censoring these sort of gatherings in advance by saying you can't discuss this, you can't discuss that, I don't think that is terribly healthy.
You see, if you are going bring together a whole bunch of people from across the nation, I emphasise, who have been selected through the agency of a non-Government committee, then, if you want to get the best ideas possible out of a gathering such as this, and through the working groups which form part of this Summit, you have got to encourage people to speak their mind.
And some of the stuff which will be put forward, which we won't be able to support at all. Some of it will probably be right out there, way beyond that which the general community could tolerate.
But that's okay. But you are not going to get to a point of shaking the tree with the really good ideas which the community (inaudible) come with unless you start, if you start censoring stuff from the first minute.
MITCHELL: So will there be debate or will there be people putting their ideas, sit down, and somebody else puts their ideas?
PM: That'll be up to how each individual co-chair handles their ten working groups. I am not going to be in the business of saying, do it like this, do it like that.
I would assume that each of our co-chairs, which ranges from, Tim Fischer, Warwick Smith and David Morgan, they will conduct it as they see fit.
The idea is to encourage open debate. And some of them are going to have a fair bit of time. You got Saturday morning, Saturday afternoon, you have got Sunday morning and then we will draw all the threads together Sunday afternoon. So, fair bit of time.
MITCHELL: If there is to be a Communiqué, will you and Professor Davis write it between you I assume.
PM: I haven't got to that stage yet Neil, is the honest answer to that. I would much rather see what gets shaken out of the tree first before we start talking about final outcomes.
But on my commitment to respond to that, which emerges from the Summit, it is very clear cut. You will know by year's end what we can embrace and what we can't.
MITCHELL: What did the Jewish Summit come up with?
PM: Well they came up with some pretty good ideas and the reason for those, if you're listeners who aren't familiar why we did it separately, because this weekend is the Passover and many of our friends, therefore in the Jewish community are not able to participate in the Summit.
There were about seven sets of tables there. They came up with a range of proposals. There were some concerning what we do, for example, on the future of innovation, that is on innovation itself. Is it smart to see innovation in the future as somehow separate from, creativity applied to the arts? Innovation is seen historically as something which goes with sciences and technology. Are we dealing with, in fact, the same aspect of people's creativity and imagination and therefore do we need to do this better as a community. Practical proposal.
In the summer, they came up with this idea: should we be offering summer innovation school, say mid summer break for a week or so for kids to come to from across the country or in their localities, whereby innovation is taught.
Not a mainstream school curriculum, so it is best done in the summer so that whether you are into the creative arts, or whether you like sort of playing in a chemistry laboratory or whether you like designing new graphic games, you get them together and basically take kids to the next level.
MITCHELL: We need to take a break, I don't suppose you do the supermarket shopping any more do you?
PM: The honest answer is. No.
MITCHELL: When you did, did you have a green bag?
PM: Yeah and I am just trying to think where I would have got a green bag. Probably at the supermarkets that we  - 
MITCHELL: The plastic bag issue in a moment.
AD BREAK
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, the First Home Saver Accounts are under attack as being unfair, too complex, may not be available on time. A number of submissions to Treasury reported in the Sydney Morning Herald today. What is your response to that?
PM:  Well we went to the election committed to implementing this. We were upfront about making sure that First Home Saver Accounts would be available to the public and we intent to proceed.
I mean, a lot of people are just finding it really hard to, save enough for their first home mortgage. It is complex to design, I agree with that. But, at present, there is no such scheme around.
MITCHELL: The argument has also being put into the submissions, according to the Sydney Morning Herald, that it in fact favours the wealthy.
PM:   Well there will be some people who would argue that, but the reason we have called for submissions is to get the public input to this. I mean, it is part of being more open in the way in which you govern. We don't pretend to get everything right first chop and we are going to see what the public has got to say through these submissions and we will finalise the design.
MITCHELL: So you will still go ahead with it, one way or another?
PM: Yep, yep. We committed to doing it before the election. I believe in honouring your pre-election commitments.
MITCHELL: Plastic bags. Why is it I can drive an eight cylinder four wheel drive to the supermarket, drinking gas like a drunken sailor, and then I get penalised for using a plastic bag?
PM: Well, when you say penalised -
MITCHELL: 25 cents possibly.
PM: Well, as a Government, the Federal Government's position is that we are not imposing levies on the use of plastic bags -
MITCHELL: So you don't approve of the Victorian decision?
PM: That is a matter for what the State Governments around the country do. The State Governments around the country are doing things differently. The South Australian Government said they are pushing ahead with a ban as far as I understand it. The Queensland Government are heading in a similar direction, but some of the other states are doing it quite differently. 
There are voluntary codes out there amongst the major retailers at present, and some of those voluntary codes have worked overall. There is a retailers code of practice, I understand, which I think between 2002 - 2005, according to them at least, has reduced the use of plastic bags by 50 per cent, but that still we have got a big problem on our hands.
MITCHELL: Paula, yes, go ahead Paula. Yes Paula
PAULA:  Ah yes good morning, just a very simple question, I have noticed for quite a long time, the availability of biodegradable plastic bags that are given to me when I have done the shopping in some butchers, some greengrocers. Now I'm just wondering why on earth isn't that explored, we all want to
MITCHELL: Why aren't we using them. In fact we did an experiment of sticking them on the washing line and seeing how they degraded. Prime Minister?
PM: What happened to the washing line experiment?
MITCHELL: They degraded
PM: Ok.
MITCHELL: Ahead of the normal ones.
PM: Well we had a debate about this in fact in Cabinet the other day in Sydney and one of the things that we sent the Minister for Innovation away with, that's Kim Carr from Victoria, was to get further work done by the CSIRO in bringing the biodegradable technology to a point of conclusion. There's good progress so far but we still need to do more, but Biodegradable bags and use of green bags is obviously a big part of the future.
MITCHELL: The torch relay, more trouble in India overnight and I'm not clear here will the Chinese guards run with the torch or sit in the bus?
PM: My understanding is and here on relying upon advice from the Police is that the Chinese torch attendants will be play Zero role, Zero role in the provision of any security and my advice is that they will be in the bus unless they have to attend to the physical lighting or re-lighting of the flame.
MITCHELL: Will they be armed?
PM: So far as I am advised absolutely not. We're providing the security here. This is our country, we provide the security. End of story.
MITCHELL: Will we send our own security people to Beijing for the Olympics?
PM: On the security needs which apply to the Olympic Games themselves, I'd rather just take advice from our own Government authorities on that as well as the Australian Olympic Committee. Normally you depend on the security provided by the host Government.
MITCHELL: I'm sorry, so what does that mean, it's up to them?
PM: Well I think the practice would be if you went to the Sydney Olympics that we provided security for everybody who came to the Sydney Olympics. And I stand ready to be corrected on this, I don't have a brief with me at the moment but can I say that, that's normal process as I understand it for Olympic Games from way back when. We're having Olympics in Beijing which we've all signed up to then presumably the Chinese provide the security there, that would be normal.
MITCHELL: Budget looking tough still?
PM: Oh big challenge, I've spent time in the last few weeks talking to leaders in various parts of the world and we've got two big conflicting trends at the moment.
One is the roll out effect of the sub prime crisis on global financial markets which is in turn having an effect on the real economy around the world, which is causing economies in United States, Europe and in Asia to revise down their growth. That's happening on the one hand. And on the other hand you got emerging inflationary pressures. Not just here in Australia but elsewhere in the world as well.
Dealing with both those at the same time presents you with a unique set of problems. So yes, it's tough.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister last December you announced a new approach on organ donation, a new committee to be set up. We all know the importance of organ donation. Do you know whether that committee has met yet?
PM: Can't give you an answer to that Neil, but can I come back to your program on it? For me it's a big priority cause I'm actually, I am a beneficiary so....
MITCHELL: Yeah well of course. But I think we've got a problem, Australians Donate which was the former body has been shut down. They have got an empty office, phones are ringing, nobody is answering. I'm told the committee hasn't met yet.
PM:Well let me come back to you on that. I'd rather give you accurate information. But for me this is a big priority and getting it right. There's a lot of, shall I say, indication of voluntary effort from Australians on the one hand in terms of willingness to donate organs. On the other hand our actual retrieval rate is very, very low.
MITCHELL: Is that your advice, petrol could be $1.60 next week?
PM: No, I don't have such advice about the price of petrol next week but all I know is it's very high right around the country and this is having a huge effect on working families trying the balance the family budget. Which is why we've decided to have a go with the national Fuelwatch scheme.
MITCHELL: Now there was a lot of attention while you were away for the way your wife was dressed. Did that irritate you?
PM:  Look you know if I'm the Prime Minister of the country, I'm elected to run the place. People can have whatever go they want at me, I'm open season, as you know. And you take the good with the bad and you grit your teeth on the way through.
You do start to wonder about when those nearest and dearest to you who haven't put up their hand for elected office become part of the debate and I might just leave it at that.
MITCHELL: Did it concern her?
PM: Oh I'm not going to go into how my wife feels about these things. But look, you know, this is the 21st Century, it's a modern Australia. Everyone is out there doing their own thing and Therese my wife we've been married for 25 years, she's run her own business, we've raised three kids, she's her own person.
The last time I looked she didn't put her hand up for elected office.
MITCHELL: Fair point. Some colleagues are saying you're working too hard. Are you getting a bit weary?
PM: Nah, I'm fine.
MITCHELL: That trip must have been hard work. You must have been very tired after that?
PM: No we all get tired. Do you get tired?
MITCHELL: Yeah but I don't think I work anywhere like the hours you do.
PM: Yeah but, you know if you take your job seriously, you know your going to work. I mean you don't get to become Prime Minister of the country every second day.
You know, it is something you have got to take seriously and I do. And I believe that our job is to work our guts out. We won't always get it right but my view is, if for example I'm out of the country representing Australia and I have got an opportunity to meet with heads of Government in the countries which really affect our future and I'll be seeing some of those, some other such countries later in the year.
But if I'm dealing with China, the Europeans, the European Union, the United Kingdom, the United States, and in the midst of the global financial crisis, well frankly, I think I've got to put the effort in and establish those working relationships and work with those heads of Governments about how we coordinate better.
MITCHELL: So if I can just quickly be rude, your mandarin was obviously very effective and very good but at times we had trouble with your English.
PM: Sorry about that. I'll seek to improve. Maybe I was tired.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time
PM:   Thanks Neil.


CANNANE:    The Prime Minister joins us from our Canberra studio, Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Steve.
CANNANE:    What will determine whether this 2020 Summit is a success or not?
PM: Well in putting this Summit together, the idea was pretty simple, which is, we are a new Government, we have set out some strategic directions for the nation, how to boost productivity, the need to lift our national infrastructure, prepare for climate change and the problems for Australian water, what should be Australia's future role in the region and the world. There are others as well.
But we can set a strategic direction. We also need to get the Australian nation, businesses, non government organisations, the community at large, our academics and others, around the table and say ‘in this direction, what are some good ideas to take the nation there'. And what I have learnt in four months or so in the job, is that Government and political parties, and the bureaucracy, don't have a monopoly of wisdom.
So it is a pretty basic as that. So to shake some new ideas loose from the tree in the way in which the nation can go in the future.
CANNANE:    If there is no final policy outcomes out of this Summit and I don't mean by Monday morning, I mean, you
PM: I think if we had no outcome from the Summit, within the time frame that you are saying then that would be a real problem.
What I have said is that, we have got 10 major working groups dealing with the future of the economy, population sustainability, long term national health care, strengthening communities, the future of Indigenous Australia and others as well.
If in each of those areas, we don't get new ideas for the future I would be disappointed. But what we have committed to as a government is by years' end, to respond to each of the ideas put forward by each of those working groups for Government to consider and  I have said that by years' end we will say what we can embrace and why. And what we can't and why.
But I am not about to say beforehand that there are right and wrong answers because that just discourages peoples preparedness or willingness to stick their hand up and have a go.
CANNANE: What kind of response will that be, whether you like it or not, whether it will happen or not?
PM: You mean by year's end.
CANNANE:Yeah. That's right.
PM: It will be formal written response. Which is to say, we think that in terms of the nation's future strategic direction, which is: How do you build a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st Century. And they are huge challenges, that, within that framework, we would then make decisions about, does the policy proposal work against the objectives set? Can it be funded and responsibly implemented, and can we sustain its implementation long term?
They are the sort of criteria we will bring to bear.
But in fairness to people who are spending a weekend of their own time with us, these proposals, when they come through the working groups and those put to us at the end of the day by these 10 working groups, chaired by Government and non government co chairs, we owe them the respect to come back and say what we were prepared to take on board and what we weren't. But we need some time to do that.
CANNANE:How will the Summit work, what will be the structure, how do you manage 1000 people and 1000 ideas on one weekend.
PM: Well it is challenging but I think we can do it. You see, what we did originally was, I asked the Vice Chancellor of Melbourne University, Professor Glyn Davis to help us put together a Steering Committee of 10 out there from the community, including, David Morgan and Roger Beale, Michael Good, Tim Costello, Jackie Huggins, John Hartigan, Warwick Smith, Tim Fischer, Cate Blanchett and Michael Wesley.
And those in turn, together with Professor Davis have worked up one hundred people for each of those working groups. So those working groups will be working together during the course of Saturday and Sunday morning on questions we have put to them specifically and how they would respond to those questions.
For example, if we are building a long term sustainable national health strategy, how do we get preventative health care right? How can you do it differently? What should you be investing in it? And how can you measure its success?
Now we imagine that during the course of Saturday morning, Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning, that they will sit through their proposal through debate, of their group of 100 and they will be brought forth then to the plenary session by the end of the entire Summit.
CANNANE: One of the proposals put forward this morning in the papers is an idea of reconstituting a kind of ATSIC, a peak body group for Indigenous people. Do you have an open mind when it comes to a proposal on that one?
PM:      Well as I said before, we don't put forward, you know, right and wrong answers. I mean the Government's stated position in terms of ATSIC's future is pretty clear. But if people want to debate future representative bodies for Indigenous people, given that we have established a full working group on future directions for Indigenous Australia, then they should be free to express their point of view. I am not in the business of censorship.
CANNANE: Warren Mundine says we don't need it. Are you ruling it out or not ruling it out?
PM:      Well as I said, the whole point of a Summit is not to say before hand, there are right and wrong answers. We have an open mind on these questions generally.
Jenny Macklin has already indicated our overall direction on Indigenous policy and we are working through the question of future representative bodies. But it completely contrary to the spirit of the Summit, which brings together 1000 from among the countries brightest and best, to say, sorry here are some no-go areas before you even begin.
I am not in that business.
CANNANE:Ok, let's talk about your idea that you have raised. The idea of the one stop childcare system, with also health services there for zero to fives. It is being likened to a Blair Government initiative, back in 1999, is that where you got the idea from?
PM: Oh look my interest in early childhood education came out of reading sections of a book by Heckman on early childhood development which I read over the summer of 06-07. And that you may or may not recall, lead to myself as Leader of the Opposition in early 07, putting forward some policies on early childhood education. In fact as the first policy announcement of the newly constituted Federal Opposition.
I have had a deep interest in it since then. Why? Because the conclusion of Heckman and others, in the field, and those who study, sort of, the formation of a young child's brain is that the more you invest in early childhood education, that zero to five bracket, the better the long term developmental prospects for the kid through school, primary school, high school and post school education and training, and then their future employment.
It is better for the person, better for the family, better for community, better for the economy. And I think the evidence is pretty overwhelming. So that is the basis of putting forward already, a set of policies in early childhood education.
The idea I put forward the other day takes it a step or two further.
CANNANE: Prime Minister, critics of your proposal have said that there should be no role for private enterprise when it comes to educating children of the age zero to five. But this is such a crucial stage, we don't have private enterprise when it comes to infants primary and high school, why should we have it for zero to five.
PM: Well you know, I think there is a danger of putting the cart before the horse here. I have put a proposal forward to be developed, to be debated, to be added to, subtracted from, canned or panned or supported by those who will be participating in the relevant working group in the Summit.
What I would like to see from the Summit is people debate this among other proposals, purely on the merits.
Does this sort of proposal produce the results long term that we would hope in terms of a boost to productivity, a boost to young people, pursuing fulfilled and productive lives?
The second question which then arises is that if people believe this is a good way to go on the merits, then you look at different questions like as, how do we then cost this and what are the different modes which are possible for delivery.
And that then opens up the whole debate of private, public, mixed etcetera.
But I just think there is a danger of getting ahead of ourselves before we actually debate the merits of the intrinsic proposals.
CANNANE:Yesterday your Environment, Peter Garret failed to get a simple outcome on what many see as a simple issue, getting rid of plastic bags. If we can't resolve something like this, the issue of plastic bags, how are we going to get resolution to these bigger issues.
PM: Well I am sure the Environment Ministers will continue to (inaudible) that one through and it may take a bit of time.
I am not fully across the detail of the various proposals which were put on the table by the Environment Minister's when they met yesterday. One of the critical things we need to do is to develop a national litter management strategy and that is what we at the Commonwealth would like to work with the states on.
Plastic bags are a challenge, they are a problem. We will work our way through these. But you can't produce a solution to every problem over night. I am not in the business of holding out some mirage that you can wave a magic wand and say, problem fixed, move on.
It is harder than that. Overall what we are trying to do through this Summit is encourage and develop new ideas for the nation's future, take the country in a new direction. And evolve hopefully through this a new way of governing which actually involves the whole community rather than just politicians among themselves.
I think that is necessary. What I said in the Sydney Institute speech the other night, about a new tradition of the reforming centre of Australian politics, so many of the classical ideas of the classical left and the classical right no longer really apply to the challenges of the future.
And when you are looking at climate change and water, the rise of China and India, global economic turbulence, some of the old formulas are not working and we need to open our minds to new approaches for the future.
Because if we want a strong Australia for the 21st Century, a competitive Australia and Australia still where everyone has a fair go, I think have got to take a new approach to the way in which we govern the country as well.
CANNANE:Prime Minister thanks for dropping in this morning on breakfast.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


WILKINSON:  Good morning to you, Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time this morning.  
PM: Good morning. Thanks for having us on the program. 
WILKINSON: Well, if we can start with those record petrol prices. $1.58.9 a litre in Sydney yesterday. You would have to say that working families are doing it tougher than ever before. Is your election promise of cheaper petrol prices, in hindsight, one that you never should have made?
PM: I think if you looked carefully at the record, and we were very careful about what we said, we said that we would do whatever was possible through the ACCC  -  the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission  -  to make sure that motorists did not pay one cent a litre more than they needed to when they went to fill up at the bowser. And since then, we've done three sets of things. We've given the ACCC more powers. Secondly, we've appointed a petrol price commissioner. And thirdly, only a few days ago in Sydney, we announced that we are going to establish a National FuelWatch Scheme.
And the FuelWatch Scheme, which has been trialled in Western Australia now for quite some years, is designed about bringing more pressure and scrutiny to bare on those who retail petrol.
There is no silver bullet here. But these are three things done which were not done under the previous Government. And petrol prices are going up across the world.  
My challenge to the Leader of the Opposition, by the way, is, we can't get our National FuelWatch Scheme through the Parliament unless the Liberal Party support it in the Senate. It's as simple as that. So he can't sit on the fence. Does he support it, or does he oppose it? But people are under pressure through rising mortgages, rising fuel prices and rising child care and rents. And that's why this measure, together with what we are doing on tax cuts, is so important.  
WILKINSON:  But motoring bodies, Prime Minister, would disagree with you. Because, with FuelWatch, what seems to be happening is the top end and the bottom end of those fuel prices are getting knocked off, it flattens out the price, and it means that those two cheap days, the Monday and the Tuesday, and if we took Queenslanders as an example, south-western Queensland gets two thirds of its petrol on those cheap days. So really, the people who can afford least, more expensive petrol they are giving a cheaper price at the bowser, so that tells me they are paying more. Sorry, more expensive prices at the bowser.  
PM:The ACCC looked itself at the impact of this scheme in Western Australia. And what it found was that, on average, people were getting about 1.92 cents a litre cheaper than what otherwise would have been the case. Now, that's not a huge saving of itself. But at least it is something. And it's based on that advice that we've gone forward.  
Secondly, as I said before, I don't believe this is a silver bullet. But, the reason we always want to review the implementation of the scheme 12 months after we bring it in, is to make sure that it is delivering benefits for working families. 
You can either sit back and do nothing, or, you can act. And in WA they have done this for six or seven years. My advice is the WA motoring organisation, for example, was quite sceptical about this when it was first introduced. Now it supports it and has the support of both sides of politics in Western Australia, and was introduced originally by the Liberal State Government.  
WILKINSON: Keeping with working families, News Limited papers are reporting this morning that workers on $40,000 a year will receive a $20 a week tax cut in next month's Budget. Is that correct?
PM:That's our current schedule for implementation, yes. See, we've come under a lot of pressure for proceeding and honouring our pre-election commitment to implement the tax cuts we promised before the election. We've come under a lot of attack from economic commentators and others. We believe, based on the example you gave just before about the cost pressures on working families, we've got to give them every bit of support we can. That's why we're determined to go ahead with these tax cuts, and that means, in the case of the family you are just talking about, $40,000 a year, that yes, you will get a tax cut of that order of magnitude.  
It's quite important to do what we can through this, bringing in the tax cuts. Secondly, increasing the child care tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. Thirdly, introducing our plan to have an education tax refund. And fourthly, increasing competition policy pressure on petrol prices so that we can do our bit to try and take some of the pressure off family budgets.  
WILKINSON: Well, leading into the 2020 Summit tomorrow, the one stop shop for child care, pre-school and infant health idea that you've raised, it has actually been very well received. You must have some idea, though, of how much that proposal would cost and exactly where the money would come from? 
PM: Well, the truth is Lisa, we haven't costed it. Because the whole purpose of this weekend, this 2020 Summit, is to put ideas or proposals on the table to be debated on their merits. You see, there is a whole lot of professional research done on this question. If you work really well with children in that early age group, zero to five, on pre-literacy, pre-numeracy, play based learning, and, attend to all of their baby and child health needs, that shapes fundamentally for life how that young person is going to go at school and post school education and training and then later in the workforce.  
This is what is happening in many parts of the world. 
I think this should be debated on its merits, and if people think this a good idea for the future, then let's get down to looking at the tin-tacks of how much it would cost to implement over time, and how you would go about implementing it across the nation. I just want a debate on its merits, because it is a big change for the country. Remember, 100 years ago we were debating the merits of having universal primary school education available to everybody, and everyone thought that would be too expensive. I think it's time we took the debate on to what happens with kids zero to five and, if we think it's a good idea, get on with that. And of course, if we brought in such a scheme, it would be optional in terms of whether parents wanted to use it or not.  
WILKINSON: One other debate over the weekend which is sure to be a passionate one is the one of the Republic. Are you confident that Australia will become a Republic while you're Prime Minister? 
PM: Well, that will depend, ultimately, on what the Australian people will decide and how long they choose to have me around. That's the great thing about our democracy, is that, you're always on notice from the Australian people, and so we should be -  
WILKINSON: Would you like it to happen, Prime Minister?
PM:Well, I'm a Republican, a committed Republican, and my party is committed to making Australia into a Republic. But for that to happen, you have to build a consensus around it. Remember, it was nearly ten years ago that we had a vote on this and the people gave it the thumbs down. Well, we've got to learn from that, and see what works next time around.  
The whole purpose of this Summit is to canvass new ideas for Australia's future, take the country in a new direction, and bring about, what I would describe as, a new form of governing. And by that I mean involving the people much more directly in the big decisions of Government.  
We're in a rapidly changing world.  By 2020, you know 43 per cent of the worlds economy will come out of Asia. More than Europe and the United States combined. The population of the world will go up by yet another billion. Australia's population will be up by 4 or 5 million. We'll have a much more complex set of households to deliver. These are big changes for the future. The rise of China, the rise of India, climate change, water. We've got to get past short term thinking, into some long term thinking, and how we govern ourselves is one of those things as well.  
I'd encourage a debate on the Republic, but I want to hear what people have got to say on it. Because if we're going to move forward, we'll need a consensus.  
WILKINSON:   On a slightly lighter note, Prime Minister, you dropped in on one of the main players at the 2020 Summit this weekend, Cate Blanchett. But she was in hospital, it was just two days after she'd given birth. Can I check that you called first, because a lot of us mums were worried about how Cate might have felt with the PM walking through the door. I've got to tell you, it's my idea of hell! And I hope you don't take that personally.  
PM: Well, how else could I not take it personally, Lisa?  
WILKINSON: We feel very vulnerable when we've just given birth. Was she surprised to see you? 
PM: Hey, look, I'm the father of three kids, I've been around a fair bit for this as well. Been there for the birth of all of them, and I know how challenging things can be afterwards.  
My mum brought me up and it came with some basic manners, yes of course we spoke with Cate and her family beforehand and the information we got was that she not only welcomed a visit, but would really appreciate it. And, I just dropped in for ten minutes and left a present for the bub. And, also, just to check for myself that she was dead serious about her determination to come along this weekend. Because she is chairing one of these working groups. And I said to her, ‘you've just had a bub, you know, take it easy, you don't need to be at this thing'. But, at least as of then, Tuesday of this week, she was absolutely determined to come. So I wanted to make sure of that as well. But yes, checked beforehand, and called in for ten minutes.  
WILKINSON:  We did see that you came bearing gifts. Can I ask what was inside the box? 
PM: Yeah, it was just a little bubby suit. You know, for a newborn. Blue.  
WILKINSON: Okay. And just finally, you've been in the top job for five months now. Do you find the constant scrutiny that you're under tough, especially with your wife Therese Rein? Some of it gets very personal and it certainly did during your world tour.  
PM: Oh, look, I open myself up to whatever the media want to write, that's just part of being in this business. Sometimes you like it, sometimes you may not. But, if I've learned anything over the years, you take the good with the bad and hopefully it all evens out. And, with Therese, we've been married a long time and it gets tougher when the people closest to you, your wife and your kids, become part of the scrutiny, really tough for them, and you feel for them, because they didn't put their hand up, I did. But that's life, that's life in politics.  
WILKINSON:  Looks like it goes with the job, Prime Minister. Thank you very much for your time this morning. We hope it goes well over the weekend.  
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


Australians one, Australians all.
I too begin by acknowledging the first peoples of our nation.
Just as I welcome all of you to this, the nation's capital, to this, the nation's Parliament.
To this, the great meeting place of our common democracy, Australia.
The place from which we your elected representatives seek to navigate our nation's future.
Today we are trying to do something new.
Today we are throwing open the windows of our democracy, to let a little bit of fresh air in.
Rather than pretending that we the politicians of Australia have all the answers, and the truth is, we don't, we are turning now to you, the people of Australia.
And you have travelled a long, long way to be with us. From the tip of Cape York, all the way to the tip of Cape Leeuwin, from Tasmania to the top end.
1000, Glyn told me this morning 1002, will identify those two very soon. You in the back.
1000 Australians, Indigenous and non Indigenous, early settlers families and those most recently arrived.
City and country, industry and labour, academics and non academics, women and men, our youth, and lets face it, our not so youthful.
But what unites us all is a great optimism for this nation Australia's future.
What we are looking for from this Summit are new ideas for our nation's future.
What we are looking for from this Summit are new directions for our nation's future.
And if we succeed, what we are looking for is also new insights into how we can govern Australia, a new way of governing our nation.
Because the old way of governing has long been creaking and groaning.
Often a triumph of the short term over the long term.
Often a triumph of the trivial over the substantial.
Often a triumph of the partisan over the positive.
And the truth is all sides of politics, Brendan's and mine, we are both guilty of this. It is time we started to try and turn a page.
There is another reason for holding this Summit and that is because the challenges the nation now faces are unprecedented in complexity and intensity.
The sheer dynamics of climate change. The Governor General's example of the changes represented by the column of ice from Antarctica. The drying of what is already the world's driest continent.
The rise of China. The rise of India. The great economic and geopolitical transformation of the 121st Century which those two rises represent.
Quite apart from the rolling structural vulnerabilities of an increasingly inter-dependant global economic order.
A further reason we are here is the breathtaking pace of change.
As we look ahead, the year 2020 is not that far away. It is just 12 years from now.
Yet we know that the world of 2020 will be vastly different world from the world of today.
And how do we know that?
We simply need to look back 12 years and see where we have come from.
There were three million fewer Australians in 1996 than there are today.
Only one in three Australian households had a mobile phone.
We were barely using email or the internet - just 300,000 Australian home computer users were connected to the internet at home.
We had never heard of Facebook, we had never heard of Myspace, or even Google.
Most Australian households did not even have a computer at all, and in a 1996 survey, a majority of Australians said their main reason for not having a computer was either that they had ‘no use for one' or ‘no one in household [was] interested in [a] computer' (Australian Bureau of Statistics survey, 1996)
That was 12 years ago. ABS data, It must be true.
Times change and with a frightening pace of change.
Today, more than five million of Australia's eight million households are connected to the internet.
Everyday we use the internet to work, to get our news, to get our sport updates, to plan our holidays, and to stay in touch with family and friends.
The world in 1996, and today
Change comes quickly to the world as well in addition to the changes we see unfolding in our daily lives.
Globally, 12 years ago nations were still coming to terms with the end of the Cold War.
To a large extent, terrorism was something that happened in Israel Palestine, Northern Ireland or Northern Spain. A handful of trouble spots.
How that has changed.
The value of China's exports represented just one eighth of what it is today, 12 years ago.
Debate on climate change was only just beginning to stir.
The report of the second International Panel on Climate Change had only just been released, concluding for the first time that the world was getting warmer, and human activity was partly to blame.
The point is, we've seen extraordinary transformations in Australia and extraordinary transformations across the world these last 12 years.
And we need therefore, now more than ever, to anticipate change ahead, or else we will be swamped by it.
That is why the Government is committed to building a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st Century.
That is why the Government has posed this Summit some specific questions. And we want your ideas on how to meet these challenges.
The ten core challenges for the future
     * How we can build a strong foundation for future prosperity, in a global economy that will be transformed by the rise of China and India and other developing economies; and how we ensure our prosperity does not rest only on the ups and downs of commodity markets but also on what we can craft out of our human capital.
     * How we can have the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world  -  a workforce whose innovation and ingenuity drives productivity growth forward.
     * How we respond to the enormous challenge of climate change and become a leader in tomorrow's lower carbon energy revolution.
     * How we ensure a strong future for rural industries and rural communities at a time when the world, once again is debating the possibility of global food shortages.
     * How we develop a long-term national health strategy  -  and don't simply surrender to the trend of rising chronic disease rates. But instead say, ‘there is a different way of doing this'
     * How we build stronger communities, stronger families and a society that works hard, not to leave any single Australian behind.
     * How we close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage and ensure life opportunities for Indigenous Australians, comparable to those enjoyed by all Australians. That should be our goal.
     * How we build a creative arts industry that reflect Australia's unique story that carries our unique culture to the rest of the world.
     * How we reform our system of governance for the needs of the 21st Century rather than perpetuating some of the structures from the 19th Century.
     * How we ensure Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
That's an easy set of questions. They are just some of the challenges we face, but they are the big ones.
And this Summit, we argue, is just the beginning of the process of responding to those challenges.
Already there are those who are predicting that the Summit will fail.
In fact some have predicted that it has already failed. Some have said it is too big. Some have said it is too small. Some have said that it is not representative enough.
I challenge anyone to find a group which could ever claim to be fully representative of any nation, it is very hard.
Some say that consensus on anything is impossible because it produces the democratic divide.
Whereas I say on certain fundamentals, the challenge is in fact, to build a consensus around those things that really count for the long term.
I say to everyone here, we should just be relaxed about any such criticism.
It is great. It is a reflection of a democracy in which we live. Roll with the punches. That is what it is all about.
I say it is worth having a go through this Summit, even if we fail.
After all, what is there to be lost from trying?
And as I have said before, what is our simple objective here: to shake the tree and to see if from the great talents, energies and enthusiasms and ideas of this nation, we can through this process of the next two days bring forth, say a dozen new ideas about how we can shape our nation's future, together.
We do that, we will have done some really good work here.
A few words about how this weekend will unfold.
To help focus the discussions, I have made three requests of the working group co-chairs:
First, to nominate at least one ‘big idea' in their area for the future.
Second, I am asking them to submit at least three, and I am sure there will be more, concrete policy ideas, at least one of which is to involve no cost or negligible cost.
No cost, or negligible cost. No cost or negligible cost. I have lost my place...
Third, I am asking them to identify at least three specific goals for which we should aim by 2020.
The Government is committed to respond to each of the recommendations which are put forward by the 10 working groups by years' end.
That is our commitment to you.
Some of these ideas, we will be able to embrace.
Others, we will not.
And some we will take in part and change.
But you know something? It is far better we ask the question, and have the answers come forward so that the whole process of national creativity in the ideas debate for our future occurs, rather than throttling it before it starts.
There are no right and wrong answers when it comes to a discussion among people of good heart, good mind and good will.
Finally, I want to thank-you, to the thousands of Australians who have already taken part in Summit across the country.
We've had local 2020 Summits that have attracted tens of thousands of Australians in communities right across the nation.
School summits that have been held in more than 500 schools.
A national youth 2020 Summit which we have just seen part of on the video screen before you.
And in the past week we've also seen a Summit for the Jewish community, because of the clash with the Passover, and other local community Summit's as well.
3,000 ideas submissions on the Australia 2020 website. And thank you to every one for their participation in this debate on the nation's future.
More than 8,000 people applied to be here this weekend, and I want to thank those each and every one of them for expressing their interest in being here among us.
Congratulations to those who have been selected to be here, through the process of the 10 person committee chaired by Glyn Davis.
And can I say as Prime Minister of the country, in this, the Parliament of the country, you are all very, very welcome.
To conclude, the job of Government is to set a strategic vision for the nation.
I have a simple view which is that without a vision the people do perish.
A nation needs a vision.
Government must then invite the nation to respond to that vision and to give that vision flesh and bones and to advance ideas to translate a vision into reality.
As a nation I think we face two overall choices. We can either drift into the future or we can plan for the future.
I say it is time, well and truly time to seize the future with both hands, to build a new Australia.
To build a better Australia, a better Australia for all of our people, as well as turning this great nation of ours Australia, to an even greater force for good in the world.
And now ladies and gentlemen, summiteers, it is over to you.


UHLMANN: Well Prime Minister, hasn't this Summit just endorsed an agenda that you already have?
PM: No, there are ideas here which are not part of our existing agenda. For example, take a proposal to create a seamless national market. That is the creation of a single national regulatory framework across all markets. Whether you're talking about labour markets, product markets, or carbon markets. We haven't been as comprehensive as that in what we've put forward. The economics working group did, that's what they want to see happen.
UHLMANN: But Lindsay Tanner, he's already working on regulation. It's not out of step with what you're doing.
PM: No, we're working at present on 27 sets of regulation. But the overarching goal is let's create a seamless national market, whether it's in electricity, energy, whether it's working in the labour market, whether it's working in carbon markets and water markets. This is an ambition we haven't been presented with before. And that's certainly worth having a look at. It's a big agenda.
UHLMANN: Well, you talk about some of the big ideas that came out of this, and particularly when it comes to governance and it came over the economic stream as well, and also through the rural stream. Are you talking about a complete refashioning of the way that Australia is governed?
PM: Well, one of the core problems at the moment is the way the federation works. It's duplication, overlap, cost shift, blame shift. We talked about that in the pre-election period. We've got seven working groups underway at the moment through the Council of Australian Governments to try and improve that. But the overwhelming chorus of complaint from this Summit was, the federation is not working to help people. Whether it's on the business side, or the delivery of social services. It underlines the Government's resolve to get this right.
UHLMANN: And as you said, you said on the first day that you became leader, you focussed on the federation. So one assumes that you are looking at a complete refashioning of the way that Australia does business. Is that the case?
PM: Well, when it comes to the federation, yes. Of course, the recommendations of this Summit went wider than that as well. It went in the direction of open Government, rolling back existing FOI laws to be more open in what is made available to the community. Ideas such as, you know, Cabinet portals or Cabinet level engagement with the wider community, well, Government wide engagement with the community so that there is maximum access to the information which Government holds.
There is a whole raft of proposals there. We'll go through them each in detail. But, I think it was a well developed group, the governance group, and they've given us a lot to think about.
UHLMANN: Will the power of the states be erased over time? You're looking at health already yourself.
PM: Well, it follows that if you are going to establish a single national regulatory market, if, brackets, if, we go down that direction, it does mean chopping down a lot of pre-existing, state regulatory barriers. Now, we're already seeking to do that with emissions trading by establishing a national market. We're seeking to do it with mandatory renewable energy by establishing a national system, not just state systems. But there are other areas that we've still got to work. Tim Fisher today but up a very practical example, of B-triples and B-doubles. These trucks which roll across our major highway systems from one state over to the other where you physically have to adjust the road train as you cross the state line. These are very practical challenges which we now need to step up to the mark on.
UHLMANN: Will there be a rapid move towards a Republic do you think now?
PM: I think what the Summit was saying, loud and clear, is that there is a big groundswell of support for a Republic in Australia. In order to bring a Republic about, and I'm a longstanding Republican, and we're committed as a party to bringing about a Republic, you do need widespread community support. We lost the last referendum we had ten years ago. We don't want to lose the next one. So we'll be building this one up very carefully.
UHLMANN: Parent and Child Centres, this is an idea that you brought to this Summit, and idea that has came back out of this Summit, I assume it is now a good idea (inaudible)
PM: Well, I  - 
UHLMANN: I assume you thought it was a good idea to start with?
PM: Well, I've had a big passion for Early Childhood Education for a long time, going back to some reading I did a couple of years ago, a year and a half ago. I think what's happened at the Summit is that they've broadened this out into the idea of effectively community hubs. Not just for zero to fives, and that proposal still stands, but how do you better do, what's called, joined up Government, for people in the suburbs and towns of Australia so there is much more an emphasis on one stop shops for families and communities needing to consume Government services. So there were variants of that proposal discussed today. And again, we'll be looking at each of those, and if we support them, they're going to cost. And that will take a lot of work.
UHLMANN: Isn't the very hard part in all of this turning plans into policy? And then you've got to put dollars on them?
PM: Yep, that's right. That's where the rubber hits the road. But that's the sequence. One, develop a plan. Two, flesh it out with ideas. Three, build policy out of that. And four, cost it. And five, implement it and measure it. That's the process. We're at the front end of that process. There is a long way to go. But we're slowly turning things around.
UHLMANN: But finally, at one level it might look like this whole Summit is beyond politics, but at another, it could be seen as deeply political in the sense that everyone sits inside of the fence. Where does that leave the Opposition to go? Is this a political exercise?
PM: Well, Mr Nelson, as you know, was invited to come to the Summit, as were the State Opposition leaders. And we had a former National Party leader as a Chairman of a working group, and he did a great job, Tim Fisher. Warwick Smith, former Liberal Party Minister, chaired the productivity working group.
Look, I'm just interested in decent ideas. I don't particularly care where they come from. What Australians want is for us to plan for the long term. They're sick of short-termism. This is one modest step in that direction.
UHLMANN: So everyone is in the same tent now?
PM: Well, that's a matter for others to conclude, I can't speak for them. But what I'm saying is on key fundamentals like boosting national productivity, establishing a single national market, or a seamless national economy. Moving towards practical ideas as why don't we have a community youth core, so that people can off-set some of their HECS debt. These are practical ideas that I think all sides of politics could, and should, get behind. But there'll never be complete agreement.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Pleasure.


PM: You know what actually hit me between the eyes, was this single undiluted call from the business community and those in our economic working group saying, ‘what we want most of all is a single, seamless national economy'. That is, a single national market. Whether it's in labour, product, carbon, electricity, water. Because the costs of doing business nationally in what is still a relatively small economy by global standards are too great.
MIDDLETON: We saw some big picture ideas too and not surprising that we are hearing calls for the Republic. There was a vote yesterday suggesting that should happen within two years. And those calls actually came from within your own Government. What's your response to a two year time frame given that this has come from the floor of this Summit?
PM: Everyone at this Summit has been free to put their own views whether they are from the within the Government, or outside. I'm pretty relaxed about all that. I'm a Republican. Australia will become a Republic. The question is when. The mood of this Summit was obviously strong in support of a Republic. We just need to get the process right.
Remember, we lost the referendum on the Republic less than a decade ago. I don't believe it helps if we lose another one. We've got to get it right.
MIDDLETON: Will you drive this forward now after having this brought to you from the Summit?
PM: Well, the relevant Ministers and I will spend some time looking at the details of the new proposal. They put forward a new, as I see it, two stage proposal. Let's work our way through that and see what it contains.
MIDDLETON: A couple of other big picture ideas. A bill of rights, and a treaty  -  although that word wasn't specifically used, but that's what that indigenous group was talking about. Your response to those two suggestions?
PM: Well, on the question of a charter of rights, there is already, I believe, an investigation called for by the Labor Party through its last platform on that. And that's the best way forward because there are conflicting views as to what a charter of rights, a legislative charter of rights, does and what it doesn't do, and what its impacts might be. So, open mind on that. And there is already some investigatory work underway.
On the question of a proper legal recognition of indigenous Australia, we of course as a Labor Party are committed to constitutional recognition. And, that is something that we need to get the timing right on as well so that it passes with bipartisan support which will mean getting the language right.
MIDDLETON: There was some frustration within the indigenous group that they were being pressured against proposing a treaty, and certainly using that word. And some other groups expressed frustration today that they felt like they have were being a little bit steamrolled by the Government. How do you respond to suggestions that you were steering the agenda across the board?
PM: There were a thousand delegates here you know. I got around to each group, but it's pretty hard to do that. Look, there's always going to be a bit of argy bargy in all of these things. That's just natural, normal, given our different views. But, I am perfectly relaxed about people putting forward their ideas. Whether we can deliver them or not.
MIDDLETON: Will you only look at the final list of ideas? I mean, there were a lot of groups who came up with dozens of ideas that didn't make the final cut. How many of those will you look at as well?
PM: Well, the purpose of the Summit process was to distil the discussions in all these groups through the co-ordinators and co-chairs of each of these working groups. And ultimately, you have to respond to the final product of that. But if people have further ideas they want to communicate with the Government on, they're more than welcome. I did indicate today that we would be opening the website for 2020 so that the whole community, not just those who were Summit participants, get to put further submissions to Government as well. The curtains haven't come down.
MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


BONGIORNO: Good afternoon, Prime Minister.
PM: Good to be with you.
BONGIORNO: There's no doubt the participants think it's been a successful summit. Did you get one new idea you were after?
PM: Oh, I think we got more than one - we got a whole bunch of new ideas. We set ourselves a task, which was how do we think long-term, not short-term, shake the tree of the nation to get some new ideas for the future and let's explore a new way of governing with greater exchange between the community and government. I think we have made progress against all three.
BONGIORNO: What was one new idea that caught your fancy?
PM: I think the idea of, for example, this community core - that is, where young people would go out and provide voluntary service in the community in exchange for reducing their HECS debt. I think that's a very practical trade. We need more volunteering in the community and students are emerging from university with a whole lot of debt. That is one we want to consider. Hadn't really thought of that one before.
BONGIORNO: Federation figured fairly prominently. You, of course, put this on the agenda yourself in the run-up to the election campaign. What are we looking at here to fix Federation?
PM: Well, I think the first thing we've got to do is go to the absolute core of what is going wrong here and that's in the health area. Health and hospitals - too much duplication, too much overlap. We've got a COAG working group on this all year - Council of Australian Governments - we will know by year's end whether we have cracked that one or not, but the summit was clearly saying that this is a huge area which needs fixing.
BONGIORNO: What do you say to your critics that the time has come for the Government to be doing something, rather than just listening to people, asking other people for ideas, it's time for the Government to get busy?
PM: We have been in office now for four months plus. If you're going to consult the community through a community summit, I'd have thought it's far better done at the beginning of your electoral term rather than at the end of it. That is my view. Secondly, in terms of what we have done, we've ratified Kyoto, we have cracked the impasse of the last year on the Murray-Darling. We've engineered the withdrawal of our combat forces from Iraq. We haven't actually been sitting around, Paul.
BONGIORNO: Well, your Minister Bob Debus thinks that we should have a Republic by 2010. A realistic goal?
PM: Well, Bob's very keen on this one and I'm sure everyone's got their view. I think there was a clear resolve from the Summit that they support a Republic, I'm a Republican, and they've put forward some fresh approaches as to how a Republic might be brought into being.
The Government will work our way through all that during the rest of the course of this year.
BONGIORNO: Well, you say you'll give a considered response to what's come out of the Summit by years end. But aren't some of the issues in there, health, Aborigines, much more important than that in terms of they can't really wait that long to be addressed?
PM: Well, I did say by years end. If we can crack the whip a bit and come out earlier, I will. But, I believe in not creating false expectations.
Some of these proposals are very complex. So I'd much rather we did it thoroughly and give people the courtesy of giving a full answer as to what we can say yes to, what we can't say yes to and the reasons why. But I think we've had a whole lot of good ideas. A whole lot of energy and enthusiasm from the community at large. And it's all about planning for Australia for long term. Not just short term fixes from one election to the next.
BONGIORNO: Thank you very much.
PM: Thanks, Paul


OAKES: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Good to be with you Laurie.
OAKES: Which ideas impressed you most? Which ones are you likely to adopt?
PM: Well, we will spend the next several months formally responding. But the call for a seamless national market, which is knocking out as much interstate regulation as possible, I think is very good.
Secondly, this proposal put forward by the education and productivity group for a community youth core. That is, we need more volunteers in the community, how do you encourage that, and you do that perhaps by having people's HECS debt reduced as they volunteer for community service.
I think those are two which have struck my attention so far.
OAKES: There weren't many new ideas coming out of this though were there?
PM: There were some new ideas, some fresh approaches. I think the goal, for example, of working towards a bionic eye by 2020 is out there. We have done a bionic ear through Cochlear.
We have got great science and technology here. Let's set our sights on that and see whether we can reach that. Blindness is a huge problem here, and abroad. And we have got the science base to do it.
OAKES: But, a recommendation for a review of the taxation system, a review of the roles of each layer of government, new commissions, no solutions, just more inquiries?
PM: I think setting a goal for something like a bionic eye is very clear. A recommendation to do a community youth core, that is a clear recommendation.
OAKES: You keep coming back to the same two, there can't be many?
PM: You want me to go through a larger number, I will.
OAKES: The republic is hardly a big new idea, incorporating the legal rights of Aborigines in the constitution John Howard came up with on his own, without a Summit. Why couldn't the Government have come up with these ideas on its own?
PM: Well the republic has always been a question of when the country and the community would come with us. Remember we lost the last referendum. That was about a decade ago. I view it this way, you need to have consensus behind you. The fact that this summit was saying, thumbs up to a republic, is a big step forward.
The fact they came up with a fresh approach to how to get there, this two stage process, interesting, we will have a look at that. But I think on the constitutional recognition of Aboriginal people, yes I acknowledge the fact that Mr Howard put that forward. But it wasn't done after 11.5 years in office, was it?
OAKES: Prime Minister we will have to leave it there.


KOCHIE: Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd joins us this morning from Canberra. Must be feeling a bit tired after the 2020 Summit, Prime Minister?
PM: It's been a big weekend, Kochie and Mel, good morning.
KOCHIE: Good morning to you. Now, of all the new ideas that you heard over the weekend, is there one that is your favourite that you were sitting there thinking, ‘that's a ripper, I reckon we can introduce that pretty quickly'?
PM: Actually Kochie, there's a whole lot of ideas. I don't want to just go picking and choosing. But from, if you like, the whole question of the economy, a very clear cut call for a single national seamless economy, a national market, breaking down state regulation effecting business at that end.
A community corps of youth volunteers. And if you participate, a proposal to bring down your HECS debt by virtue of your participation as a volunteer.
Through to some of the ones you just talked about just now. Look, there's some really good stuff there.
And to go to your other question, we've said and said beforehand we'll now spend between now and the end of the year sifting through each of them and by then produce a clear cut statement of what we will accept, and why, and how we'll go about implementing it. And what we can't accept and the reasons why as well.
MEL: A lot of them were, sort of, I guess, ideas that we had heard in one form or another but maybe slightly differently. The Australian is saying, ‘something familiar' about these big ideas this morning. Was there anything that you hadn't heard at all before?
PM: Well take for example, the one about the development in Australia of a bionic eye. Our technologists in recent years have come up with the bionic ear that is basically a way of overcoming huge problems of deafness in the community  -  obviously not all problems are resolved. What are we doing on the question of sight?
And there was discussion about, if we've got the technology platform to head in that direction of dealing with the huge problem of blindness, let's set ourselves a target by 2020 of investing what's necessary to develop a bionic eye. Or more modestly, let's set ourselves a realistic target of eliminating trachoma from indigenous communities by 2020.
So, those two, frankly, hadn't been put to me before. I'd never really heard of them before.
KOCH: You had a lot of things put to you over the weekend. Commentator Dennis Shanahan says you're now stuck with a political agenda that's crammed with all these big ideas. Some of them you may not agree with or don't see as a priority. Now, how are you going to sort that out? Are you disappointed that there are so many? And how do you prioritise? And will you disappoint people when you say, ‘oh, well, the Republic, for example, not high on the agenda, we'll have to put it back and back'?
PM: Well look, that's just the task of political leadership and that's what we're elected to do, to lead. But you shouldn't assume that political leadership for Australia, for the long term, and that's what we're on about here - how do we craft a vision for Australia beyond the three year electoral cycle out to the long term. You shouldn't be frightened in doing that to say to the country from time to time, ‘hey look, what's your contribution, what are your ideas on the economy, on health, on education, on climate change and water' and throw the doors open. If you do that, of course you take a risk, that people are going to come in the door and ask for things that either can't be delivered or can't be acted on quickly. I accept that. But I'd much rather do that and hear what people have to say than say, ‘nup, we in politics have got all the ideas, go and jump in the lake'. I just think it's a better way of doing it.
DOYLE: Alright. Look, I want to ask you so much, as you can imagine. But we want to run through a few specific ideas, some of the ones. We mentioned the Healthbook. Kind of a bit like a facebook website. Secure designed for doctors to access your medical records. What do you think of that idea?
PM: Well, it all goes to a discussion about basically the patients or the individuals control of their own medical records. And, I gather this was a subject of some pretty intense discussion in the hundred or so people who attended the health working group. I was in that group for a while yesterday listening to some of their other ideas.
The whole idea is to make sure that you the patient are in control of your records, and also, I presume, if you're moving around the country, you can quickly by secure means, access all those records online so that if you're holidaying in, you know, Perth, and you're from Brissie, you can quickly go ‘bing, here they are, and here is the record' without saying, you know, without relying upon a doctor being pulled out of bed in Brisbane at 4 o'clock in the morning.
It's a very practical idea.
KOCH: But you've got privacy issues and things like that you've got to get over and, I suppose, initially  - 
PM: It's not easy. But, if the technology can be done so it's completely fool proof, that is, secure, then this is obviously something to consider.
KOCH: Ok. Another idea from the health topic, a preventative health agency paid for by the things which cause bad health. Let's take a quick look at some of the comments.
[grab from the 2020 Summit] “This would be funded from taxes on alcohol, cigarettes, and junk food.“
KOCH: Ok. Do we need a user pay approach like that for the health system do you reckon?
PM: Oh maybe, I mean that's one of the things that we'll sort out in the months ahead. But, the underlying principle is we need a better approach to preventative healthcare. Right now we're spending about 1.7 per cent of the nation's budget on preventative healthcare. Whereas, if you look at the explosion in type two diabetes, cardiovascular, and other categories of chronic diseases, they're pushing our health costs through the roof. So, we need a better balance there. And this idea for an agency responsible for that and it's funding proposal, look we'll be putting a lot of effort into working our way through that one as well.
DOYLE: Alright. Another one is to make all new buildings carbon neutral by 2020. I think most people probably would think that's a great idea. But is it possible?
PM: Oh, tough. But we've got to be serious about climate change. If you look around the discussion yesterday, climate change and water and its impact on sustainability, effected the discussions on the economy, ran into the discussions on health because of the movement, for example, in what are currently tropical diseases like Dengue and Malaria into less tropical parts of the country. Then on top of that you've got the impact on security, on immigration, on foreign policy. Therefore, we've got to act on climate change.
This is a practical proposal about the built environment, and let's face it, energy efficiency measures effecting our buildings is one huge way in which we can start to bring about a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions now. So again, that is worth considering.
Hey, can I ad footnote on health by the way. The campaign which you guys on Sunrise have run for so long on organ donation. I think that has really had an effect on the way in which this conference, this Summit, has looked at that question. And you will see some quite radical proposals from the Summit about bringing this forward and trying to fix it. I mean, so thank you to all your Sunrise people on that -
KOCHIE: Yeah the opt our system isn't the answer though. Which was put up at the Summit. Because the issue is not about the number of donors registered, it is that bit in the middle isn't it, we don't need any more registered donors, we just need to sort out the system.
PM: No, exactly right. And there was a meeting, I think, chaired by the Chief Medical Officer of the Commonwealth tomorrow on this. My point was not the particular proposal put forward by the Summit, but, the fact that this is now clearly moving towards the top of the national agenda in health, and I think the fact that you guys have banged on about it for so long, is having a real effect.
KOCHIE: That's good to hear.
MEL: Alright, well we'll keep on it. Another one, the creative Australia topic argued that being creative is quite central to who we are and it should be compulsory at school. Just a little clip, have a look at this.
CLIP: “We can see the creative visual and performing arts, mandated as part of the national curriculum so that the centrality of that was both there in the national curriculum and it was something that was measured along with the other areas which are measured in the national curriculum proposals.”
MEL: So what do you think? Should arts be part of school for all kids?
PM: Well, you know the big discussion yesterday in that creative Australia working group, and the day before, and I spent a bit of time with them, was how do you break down the barrier between what is called creativity over here, usually associated with the arts, and innovation over here, normally associated with science and technology and the new economy.
In fact, you are often talking about the same part of the human brain. So how do you actually bring that together and make it central into the curriculum of the future, because we are talking about planning for the future economy in the long term.
So, this actually goes to curriculum design and can we do it better. One of the practical proposals there were for these creativity slash innovation summer schools, that is, kids who want to participate and their parents want to support them participating.
How do we do that? Midsummer for a couple of weeks, so that you can go off and do all these sorts of new things that encourage a new culture of imagination which is necessary for the future digital economy in the 21st century.
KOCHIE: We have been doing a couple of segments on Sunrise about this global food crisis, the food shortage that is appearing at the moment.
Any solutions come out of the Summit on how to keep food prices down and grocery prices stable?
PM: On the impact at home and abroad of the, let's call it, the food shortage, food crisis, this actually was discussed in the future of rural Australia and the future directions for rural industries, headed by Tim Fisher. And they did a great job.
On the food crisis globally, I mean, I think in the last 12 months when I was overseas recently, I was told there had been ten sets of major food riots around the world over acute food shortage. We have got a global problem, and nationally, as you can see our food prices are going up.
So, on a practical level, one of the things that has come forward is in terms of the better use and cultivation of north and north western Australia. Obviously there is less of problem with rainfall and water supply, but we don't have adequate, up to date surveys of soil quality and hydrology to work out where we could cultivate more extensively into the future. That work would now be considered actively by the CSIRO, but again we will work our way through that in the period ahead. But you have got to get the soil right and the water right and make sure the land is available.
KOCHIE: Oh that's good.
MEL: It's on the table up for discussion. Hey 2020 is going to be a big year, isn't it? Now to ask you one last question before you go Kevin. The Olympic torch is coming through Canberra on Thursday, there has been quite a lot of talk about the role of these Chinese security personnel. You have said that they are going to stay in the bus behind the flame, but the relay organisers are saying that three attendants are actually running with the flame. Can you clear this up for us?
PM: Yeah look, all security for this Olympic torch relay will be provided by the Australian security officers, that is the Australian Federal Police. Let's be very blunt about that.
One of the problems and the controversies which has arisen elsewhere around the world is a confusion of these roles. So let's be very clear about that. The security is provided by the Australian Federal Police.
The role of the flame attendants from the Chinese Olympic Committee is, where necessary, to assist in physically lighting and relighting the flame.
There is a difference between those two functions, so lets be very clear for the benefit of your viewers - all security provided by the Australian Federal Police. Lighting and relighting a flame, obviously, people from the Chinese Olympic Committee will be doing that.
MEL: So are they on the bus unless required to hop off and light or relight, otherwise they are back on the bus?
PM: Look on the practical logistics of on-off the bus for lighting and relighting the flame, pardon me if I don't actually have all of the answers of that.
MEL: Okay, fair enough.
PM: But can I just say, you know, obviously if you are lighting and relighting the flame you have got to be sort of somewhere in proximity to where the flame is and the fact that the flame is obviously being, or the torch is being handed and relit as I understand it, every 100 metres or so . So, there is a logistical problem there for the actual representatives of the Chinese Olympic Committee who do the lighting and relighting of flame. That is right and in previous Olympics that is what, you know, various representatives of international Olympic Committee countries have done.
But the clear separation is between the lighting and relighting of flame on the one hand, and the physical provision of security around the torch bearer. That task will be done by Australian officials only.
KOCHIE: Okay. That's pretty clear. Kevin Rudd, thanks for joining us this morning. Appreciate it.
PM: Thanks very much and thanks for all the input of your Sunrise viewers to ideas for the Summit as well, much appreciated.


O'BRIEN: Prime Minister we might start with the Olympic torch in Canberra on Thursday and the protest over Tibet, that's pro-Tibet probably and pro-China.
Are you comfortable that all security aspects of the Australian leg are covered? That protest can and is likely to be expressed, but contained.
PM: Well, practical measures have been put in place by the AFP Commissioner Keelty. What can be done at a practical level is being done. Of course, we don't know how this is going to unfold in terms of numbers of protestors on either side of the equation but what I can say loud and clear, that if any protestor, irrespective of their political point of view engages in unruly disruptive, violent, unlawful behaviour, then the police will come down on them like a tonne of bricks.
Peaceful protest, yes. Violent protest, under no circumstances.
O'BRIEN: If there is a breach of security, and one has to ask whether you can confidently guarantee that no Chinese officials will engage in direct contact with any protester, in other words, they will remain aloof from any scuffle, unlike London or Paris.
PM: Well the advice that I have got from the Australian Federal Police is that the physical security of the Olympic Torch will be provided by Australian security officials only.
That is the Australian Federal Police. That is why I have said that to the Australian public.
And it is the role of representatives of the Beijing Olympic committee will be simply to attend physically to the lighting and relighting of the flame itself. This torch, so that your viewers understand, is not just a single torch carried throughout, it is a series of different torches, every, you know period of 100  -  200 metres or so, there is a new torch.
So there is a lighting and relighting process to be undergone, but all security, and I say this again, all security is to be provided by Australian officials and Australian officials only.
O'BRIEN: Well you have no doubt seen these Chinese officials in the blue tracksuits described as paramilitaries, recruited from specialist squads in the Chinese People's armed police. That does clearly suggest they are there to do more than simply relight the torch if it's extinguished.
PM: The Australian Federal Police have a responsibility here which is to provide the security and, I am therefore confident, to intervene if anyone else seeks to provide security. That's why the clear understanding, as I am advised between the Australian Federal Police and Chinese Authorities. Is that representatives of the Beijing Olympic Committee are there to assist with the simple physical lighting and relighting of the torch or the flame. That's a complex mechanical procedure.
But around the physical security of the torch bearer and the physical security of the event in toto  -  that is the exclusive responsibility of Australia security officials.
O'BRIEN: And just so we are absolutely clear about this, if any Chinese were to step beyond that bound, Australian security officials would act in a restraining fashion.
PM: That would be my absolute expectation and that is simply asserting the laws of the Commonwealth of Australia. In this country, we provide physical security. And in this case because it is the ACT, through the vehicle of the Australian Federal Police. And all practical measures, for the greatest extent possible have been, laid in, put in place by the Australian Federal Police.
But I go back to what I said before about protesters, any violent activity, any unlawful activity, whether it is, whatever side of the argument people are on, whatever their political motivation, any violent or unlawful activity, the police will come down on like a tonne of bricks.
O'BRIEN: On the Summit Mr Rudd, you have, you are going to formally respond to the participants by the end of the year. But are you confident that there are at least 10 or 12 good, practical ideas on the table, that will translate into effective policy?
PM: I am not going to pre-judge our final process here, Kerry.
O'BRIEN: But you have been a policy wonk for a long time, what are your instincts about what you have seen?
PM: Oh some good stuff there, of course there is. I mean take for example what people said about the economy. A very simple, but I have got to say, commanding objective, and that is to create a seamless national economy.
Where the rubber hits the road on that, it would be a commitment to dismantle interstate boundaries, boundaries or resistances to trade. That is a single regulatory market. And whether we are talking about a market for water, a market for carbon, a market for energy or electricity, these are big reforms, including for surface transport.
If we are to go down that path, and I think there is a lot of economic logic behind doing it, it will have a big effect on how we conduct the future meetings of the Council of Australian Governments.
O'BRIEN: In other words, one big commission charged with that sweep of responsibilities?
PM: That is if we went down that way, the Council of Australian Government's may rise to the occasion itself in doing that. But you see we are an economy which is partly fragmented into six separate state and two territories economies, by virtue of the regulation which has accumulated over many decades, and in the case of the states, centuries.
Therefore, if you are a business seeking to operate nationally, we at least should be providing our people, our business operators with the same opportunities as national economies currently have in Europe, which is an ability to rock around the place across the market of half a billion people.
We still have resistances when it comes to a market of 21 million.
O'BRIEN: How attractive to you is the idea of a sweeping two year review of the entire taxation system and I might add, in fairness to the opposition that Malcolm Turnbull as Shadow Treasurer has already commissioned precisely that for the opposition.
PM: Sure, sure, sure. Oppositions should do that sort of thing. The, for the Government, and remember for the 11 years, or 12 years that the Howard Government was in office, the opportunity for a top down review of the entire taxation system was there.
Instead, they went for, partial activity on consumption tax, and a partial activity on business tax and business regulation.
O'BRIEN: I think you would have to acknowledge, and I don't want to get bogged down in this, I would like to move on, but I think you would have to acknowledge that embracing a consumption tax was one of the biggest single tax reforms in this country's history?
PM: Well I would disagree with that. I think it is a different form of taxation, but when you come to the overall impact of income tax, of company tax, personal income tax, company tax, indirect taxes, the transaction taxes of the states, and the overall effect of the combined taxation system, measured against global tax competitiveness, the previous Government didn't do anything of the sort. They had 12 years to do it. The last time this was looked at top down was a long time ago as we were told on the weekend I think by David Morgan, some 23 years ago.
So to answer your question directly, I actually think we are getting to that time where we need to have a top down look. I wont committ to the next two years to take the other part of your question, but I think it is time we actually looked at a root and branch reform of the Australian taxation system.
But we will come back formally on that later in the year.
O'BRIEN: I notice one of the Summit participants, the media commentator and author David Marr got one idea just listening at the Summit opening to the national anthem, get rid of it, was his idea, find a better one.
Do you actually like Advance Australia Fair, do you think it does this nation justice as an anthem?
PM: Look the question of the Australian national anthem was settled quite a long time ago.
O'BRIEN: You just don't want to go there?
PM: It's fine. I mean, I even know both the
O'BRIEN: Does it stir you, does it stir you when you have to stand as you do all the time listening to Advance Australia Fair and the words of Advance Australia Fair. Does it stir you?
PM: It does and the reason it does is when you've got verses like, for those who come across the seas we've boundless plains to share. That that should be the resolve of any Australian Government, unlike the one that we replaced which seemed to pull up the shutters when it came to our proper international obligations particularly to refugees who found themselves in real strife.
For reasons such as that I think the anthem says what we aspire to as a nation. It think Australians sing it and sing it with passion and when it comes constructing Australia in the 21st century, I think there are bigger challenges ahead of us like fashioning the Australian Republic, in this area that your now talking about than rewriting with a team of musicologists a new national anthem.
O'BRIEN: Well the Republic is hardly a new big idea. It's already labor policy. But purely pragmatically, do you really think that the majority of Australians and the majority of people in Australian States, are likely or will embrace a republic before the Queens reign come to an end?
PM: Hard to say is the answer to that one Kerry. Remember the republic referendum bit the dust less than a decade ago. Partly because the republican side itself of the argument was split down the middle  -  direct elects as opposed to the parliament appointing an Australian head of state. That's why you've got to get this absolutely right.
What I found impressive about the sentiment at the Australia 2020 Summit was peoples desire overwhelmingly I thought for us to move to a republic and to become a republic. There was a sense of inevitability about that. But...
O'BRIEN: But I don't know how many of your selected thousand guests were actually monarchists, obviously not many of them.
PM: Well I'm not so sure
O'BRIEN: And whether that was truly representative of the Australian people.
PM: Well I'm not so sure a whole bunch of monarchists applied, I mean they would have been entirely welcome to and I'm sure they will have their say, but the key thing is this. The Australia of the 21st century will be a republic.
The question I think to arise is the process by which we get there, what stages should be gone through to get there. Because the truth is were unlikely to achieve a positive outcome on this unless there is a wide spread national consensus. I'm glad there was a debate on the republic, there doesn't seem to be a whole lot of demurring on it, but we've got to get the actual proposal right.
O'BRIEN: On next months budget and come at us looming closer and closer and coming back to tax. It's been reported that this budget may not include in it's longer term projections, your second term tax reform goal expressed during the election campaign of reducing the income tax rates from 4 down to 3. Down to 15, 30 and 40%. Is there a concern developing within the Government that, that goal in that timeframe is not affordable, is not going to be affordable given where this economy and the global economy is headed?
PM: Well that second part of Labors tax policy going into the last election was always stated in terms of the conditionality being a national and global economic circumstances. We were up front about that at the time
What now we are about to implement is much needed tax reform and tax changes for low to middle income earners. There's $31 Billion worth of those tax cuts coming up through this budget.
In terms of second stage, second wave of course that lies further down the track and we would not dare expect to lodge that up front in these budget papers. But I'm not going to go into the detail of what may or may not be more broadly in the budget papers on the overall question of tax or on the overall question or our expenditure priorities. But I would simply go back to what we did say at the time that second stage of collapsing the rates from four to three will be subject to global economic circumstances.
We want to get what were doing right now, right first then we will address ourselves to what happens in a second tranche.
O'BRIEN: Very briefly as this close to the budget, are you confident that you can meet your expressed target of bringing in a surplus of at least 1.5% of GDP?
PM: Well I said very clearly in January this year that was our target, that's our aim and that's the one we have been working to internally and it's been frankly hard work. Because of the impact which that has on expenditure. But what's our undertaking here, a responsible exercise in economic management because we face a time of global economic uncertainty. Secondly to honour our pre election commitments, that's absolutely fundamental. So many of them go to the financial pressure which working families are under and thirdly to honour our commitments to invest in Australia's future, in Broadband, Education, Health care and the rest. These are all expensive.
Getting it right within an envelope and still deliver a 1.5% of GDP surplus is tough going but we've got to do that because the inflation pressures which Australia is still suffering from.
O'BRIEN: So are you confident you're going to get there?
PM: Well, were still labouring in the field, Cabinet was working on this again today, and we have still got a little while to go. But that's the target and remember we inherited an inflation rate the highest this country as seen in 16 years courtesy of the previous Liberal Government.
O'BRIEN: Close to time Mr Rudd, very quickly your work ethic and the effort your demanding of those around you is already become the stuff of legend. Did you take on board Kim Beazley's observation recently drawing on his thirteen years experience as a Minister and years further as opposition leader that something has to give. That you cant hope to sustain your current pace over time or presumably expect others to do the same.
PM: Well Kim was a very effective Defence Minister and worked his way through a number of Government Ministries and did a first class job for Australia. Each of us is different.
I have a simple view that your given a mandate from the Australian people to implement some important changes for Australia's long term future. As I've said to you on many occasions before I have no interest in being Prime Minister of this country for the sake of being here. I always believe in seizing the day, do what you can today, plan for tomorrow, work ahead, measure what you do and so
O'BRIEN: But you've got a whole string of people around you that you have to rely on not just Ministers and not just your bureaucrats but all the other bureaucrats of every other department, as I say the pace of work so far has become the stuff of legend. Something does, I mean at some points your going to have to pace yourself if your there for the long term?
PM: Ok, were taking a careful measured approach to the future, you'd expect that of us. But you know your not here just to fiddle your thumbs and I always believe in 100 percent effort. Sometimes we're going to get it wrong and I will get it wrong from time to time and you will probably be the first one to pounce on me when I do, and that's the way it should be.
O'BRIEN: One of the first, and to those who see you as a control freak, keeping Ministers and staff on a tight rein, what do you say?
PM: No, look all of us are measured and evaluated by the Australian people and therefore you could just go out there and drift along into the future or you can plan the future and if you plan the future, you've got to measure what you do and that's why for example in the operation of the Council of Australian Governments, we've set ourselves 4 meeting dates for the year, I've said where we want to get to with each of those dates. I don't know whether we are going to arrive at the end point in each of those areas of work that we've got underway but what I know for certain is, If you don't set yourself some targets, your never going to get there. Take for example the Murray Darling, that's been kicking around for 12 months, 14 months. We finally got there at the last meeting and now we have a single authority to manage the Murray Darling river system, Australia's largest inland river system.
I think by being focussed about things you can get there.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, we're out of time. Thanks for talking with us.
PM: Thanks very much Kerry


From a highly competitive field of candidates, the Prime Minister, the Hon. Kevin Rudd, and the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, Senator Kim Carr, will tonight announce the award of Australian Research Council (ARC) Federation Fellowships worth more than $23 million over five years to 14 outstanding researchers.
The winning researchers are:
     * Dr Christopher Carilli
     * Professor Dr Peter Teunissen
     * Professor Frances Baum
     * Professor Michael Bird
     * Associate Professor Trevor Lithgow
     * Dr James Whisstock
     * Professor John Dryzek
     * Professor Michael Eastwood
     * Professor Tanya Monro
     * Professor Brett Neilan
     * Professor Michelle Simmons
     * Professor Aibing Yu
     * Professor Gaoqing (Max) Lu
     * Professor Peter Robinson
For more information visit www.arc.gov.au
Speaking at the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council dinner the Prime Minster said:
"We want to give our best and brightest researchers opportunities to build careers in Australia.”
"We want to give those at the top of their fields to have access to an elite funding scheme with a strong international focus.”
"The Federation Fellowships will support ambitious research that will have a significant impact on all our lives." 
Solar and other renewable energies, social inclusion and the future of the world's large radio telescope are just some of the subjects being investigated by the nation's leading researchers.
Two foreign nationals working in Australia and one expatriate have been awarded fellowships.
Senator Kim Carr said:
“The ARC has done an excellent job of attracting to Australia's shores, and retaining, so many world class researchers. It is with great enthusiasm that I congratulate these exceptional individuals, who make a critically important contribution to our innovation system."
“I am particularly delighted that, in this group, strong expertise is held in the physical sciences and mathematics. These are fields in which Australia has experienced fewer university enrolments in recent years and in which we must develop greater capacity to be globally competitive.”
In this round, three Federation Fellowships will be awarded to researchers to undertake their work at The University of New South Wales, with two each going to Monash University and The Australian National University.
One each will go to the CSIRO - Australia Telescope National Facility; Curtin University of Technology; Flinders University; James Cook University; The University of Adelaide; The University of Queensland; and The University of Sydney.
The Minister approved all of the projects recommended by the ARC for funding.


This morning the Prime Minister affirmed the Government's commitment to science and innovation by chairing the first meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC) of the Rudd Government.
The Prime Minster said:
"Today I heard from the Innovation Minister Senator Kim Carr and Dr Terry Cutler about the progress of the National Innovation System review and the core role this will play in formulating the Government's productivity and social agenda."
"Innovation, science and research are central to advancing our agenda for a globally competitive Australia  -  they are not a marginal interest but a key force in driving our economy.
"I presented council members with a number of challenges and asked for their best advice on:
     * Getting young Australians excited by science and maths;
     * Creating new careers for aspiring mathematicians and scientists, in the academy and industry;
     * Building a new science and innovation system that can deal with the rise of giants in our region like India and China; and
     * Commercial application of Australians discoveries.
"PMSEIC is a critical part of the Government's agenda to bring together the best and brightest from across Australian society, to formulate evidence-based solutions to key problems and drive economic and social change."
Senator Kim Carr, Minister for Innovation, Industry Science and Research said:
"PMSEIC is the Government's principal source of independent advice on science, engineering and innovation. It brings together Australia's top scientific and business minds."
"Two working groups consisting of leading experts reported to Council on key scientific challenges that the Government is meeting head on:
     * Improving the health of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders mothers, their unborn babies and infants  -  closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
     * Ensuring that science and technology led innovation in services underpins Australian Industries.
"Two young scientists made a valuable contribution with an account of their research in both areas.
"Reports from these PMSEIC expert working groups are making a valuable contribution to scientific knowledge in areas of vital importance to Australia's future.
"The National Innovation System review reports in July, and will be a major item for discussion at the next PMSEIC meeting."
Further information on the Council and the expert working group reports can be found at: http://www.innovation.gov.au/pmseic


I warmly welcome the signing in Madang today of an historic arrangement between Australia and Papua New Guinea to secure the future protection of the Kokoda Track and Owen Stanley Ranges.
I discussed collaboration to protect the Track with Prime Minister Somare during my visit to Papua New Guinea in early March.
We asked officials to produce a program of collaboration that dealt with the challenges of land use and the needs of local villages and communities in the area, while recognising and protecting the deep historical and emotional significance the Track has for so many Australians.
The arrangement signed today achieves those objectives.
Trekking Kokoda has become a rite of passage for many Australians. I was lucky enough to have the opportunity to walk the Track with my son in 2006.
Today's announcement means the integrity of the Track and the experience of trekking it will now be preserved for future generations of Australians.
The Kokoda Track is part and parcel of the Australian soul and on the eve of Anzac Day this is a great outcome for Australia.


Today Australians paused to remember HMAS SYDNEY II and her crew at a national memorial service held at St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney.
As guests arrived at the service, the cathedral bell tolled 645 times, to mark the lives lost when the pride of the Royal Australian Navy's fleet went down with all hands on 19 November, 1941.
On the eve of Anzac Day, the Prime Minister asked all Australians to remember the sacrifice of HMAS SYDNEY II's crew.
“Today we commemorate HMAS SYDNEY II in a manner befitting her significance to the Australian nation.
“The Australian Government hopes that today's service brings some comfort to you, the families and relatives of those who lost their lives. You should all be tremendously proud of them.”
The Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, Warren Snowdon, said to have found the Sydney, to have had this chance to say goodbye, give thanks and remember has been truly moving.
“Every one of the lost men of HMAS Sydney II left behind family; children they never saw grow older, mothers who outlived their sons, and we will never forget their service to Australia.”
Over 770 relatives of HMAS SYDNEY II's crew came from all over Australia to attend the service.
With the church at full capacity, a large screen in Sydney Square allowed members of the public to view the service. The service concluded with a flyover by three Royal Australian Air Force Hawk 127 aircraft.
Following the conclusion of the service, the Prime Minister met with many of the relatives in attendance. A number of the relatives were then taken on a tour of the current HMAS SYDNEY.


We stand here today in this avenue of heroes. 
This avenue called ANZAC.
This avenue with its monuments of steel and stone.
Silent, still, but speaking to us softly with the voices of a hundred thousand souls.
Each one of them with their name etched with care on the walls of this great memorial which stands behind us.
Each one of them the name of a precious life cut short through service to the nation.
For they were the best of us.
And not just these one hundred thousand who spilt their young lives.
But the million and more who have worn the nation's uniform in war and whose lives were forever changed.
And the lives of their families  -  where lives shattered and lives lost also left their wrenching human mark.
I met some such families yesterday  -  the families of HMAS Sydney.
I met widows married barely a year before Sydney was lost.
I met sons and daughters who never knew their fathers because Sydney went down before they were born.
I met others who lined the streets to hail Sydney's returning heroes from her exploits in the Mediterranean  -  daughters who as little ones had cheered their dads as they marched down George street but who six months later with the weeping mothers crammed into the cathedral trying to fathom their fathers' loss  -  the same cathedral where yesterday we once again as a nation met to remember them.
And then there were their mates  -  still scratching their heads, wondering why fate had intervened, and why they were not among their ship's crew at Fremantle for its final voyage.
St Andrew's Cathedral yesterday was like this great open-air cathedral today  -  awash with raw emotion; awash with the bewilderment of loss; but galvanised still with a steely pride.
So what would this brave company of men and women  -  these hundred thousand voices  -  a have to say to us today?
What would the 645 brave men who these last 66 years have lain entombed in Sydney's iron grave beneath the deep  -  what would they say to us today?
What is it about their stories that wrenches us still  -  fully 90 years after the Armistice that ended the war to end all wars.
I think it is this.
That whatever the comforts of our modern age; whatever its distractions and whatever its disillusionments  -  that there is something unique about this land Australia and the ideals for which we Australians stand.
That this is a place of unparalleled beauty.
That we are a good people who want for the good of others.
That we stand for a deep sense of liberty for which our forebears fought and which should never be surrendered  -  whatever the cost.
That we are a people who by instinct cannot stand idly by and be indifferent to the suffering of others.
A people with a sense of a fair go for all carved deep into our national soul.
A people also alert to the needs of our friends and allies.
These are the values which summoned forth the sons and daughters of ANZAC over the last 100 years from our smallest towns, our greatest cities and our most remote outback.
It is this, I believe, that touches us afresh each ANZAC morning  -  the fresh voices of those who have indeed not grown old because their voices still whisper to us amid the quiet reflections of this sombre day.
So what of the future?
Will these great ANZAC values fade as human memories fade?
I think not.
In fact I know not.
I have an absolute confidence that these values run deep in the veins of young Australians  -  such as those young Australians who as we speak here today gather silently and reverently around Anzac Cove on Galipolli's shores.
And not just there - but across the hundreds of theatres in which our one hundred thousand heroes fought and died.
At Villers-Bretonneux where 90 years ago today we lost one and a half thousand winning liberty for a single village of France.
Beyond the killing fields of the Western Front, Australians will also gather today in North Africa and the Middle East.
At Hell Fire Pass and on Kokoda.
In Korea, Malaysia and Vietnam.
And at the cenotaphs spread richly across this vast continent honouring each ANZAC name and the homes from which they sprung.
And for all of us, wherever we gather this morning, their voice, the voice of those one hundred thousand heroes, is clarion clear: hold fast to these values for the future; give of ourselves not just for ourselves but for our nation; and remain forever vigilant in the defence of our liberty.
For the price of this nation's continuing liberty is our eternal vigilance.
Always striving for peace.
Always ready should peace fail.
This at least we owe them.
To our men and women in uniform today, I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.
To those on duty today in Iraq, Afghanistan, East Timor, Solomon Islands, Sudan, the Sinai and Lebanon  -  I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.
I say again what I have said before; there is no higher calling in Australia then to wear this nation's uniform.
To our veterans here assembled; to those on parade across the country and to those whose limbs no longer allow them; I again say thankyou on behalf of a grateful nation.
To their families  -  those who have born the scars of war for a lifetime in a way which no one else can begin to understand; I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.
There are many grand avenues in the great cities of the world - most of them much older than this one.
But there is something haunting, almost holy, about this avenue of heroes here in our nation's capital.
At one end, this memorial to Australia's war dead.
Looking down to the other end to the great monumental symbols of Australia's hard-won freedom.
Causing us to remember afresh this day that one is always guaranteed by the other.
For freedom is always purchased by sacrifice.
Lest we forget.


Australia will withdraw the additional 200 troops deployed to Timor Leste following the attacks on 11 February on President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmao.
This means a rifle company group from the Third Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment will not be replaced when it completes its tour of duty on 27 April.
This drawdown in Australian forces reflects the improved security situation in Timor Leste.
The return home of President Ramos-Horta and the lifting from 23 April of the state of emergency across most of the country have been important developments in Timor Leste's recovery following the attacks. The security situation is now assessed by both ourselves and the Government of Timor Leste as stable.
The immediate deployment of additional defence and police personnel after the 11 February attacks was at the request of the Timorese Government and was necessary to augment the security efforts of the Timorese Security Forces, the United Nations Police (UNPOL), and the International Stabilisation Force (ISF) of Australian and and New Zealand forces. It has successfully achieved its job of helping stabilize security in Timor Leste.
Prime Minister Gusmao has written to me supporting this decision. He has thanked Australia for its assistance following the 11 February attacks and for our continuing support.
We have advised the United Nations and our ISF partner, New Zealand of this decision.
After the drawdown, the Australian commitment to the ISF will return to the pre-February level of approximately 750 personnel out of a 900-strong force.
Australia remains strongly committed to supporting the Government of Timor Leste and the ISF will continue to provide security assistance
We will also continue to work closely with the authorities in Timor Leste and with the United Nations to help develop Timor Leste's own capacities to handle security and other challenges.


PM: On behalf of the Government, I wish to pass my condolences to the family of Lance Corporal Jason Marks, who was sadly killed during engagement with the Taliban last night.
Lance Corporal Marks was a highly trained and professional soldier. He was an inspiration to others. Lance Corporal Marks is married, and is the father of two children. My deepest sympathies and those of my family, and those of the nation, go to Lance Corporal Mark's family and friends and his colleagues.
The Australian Government and the Australian Defence Force will continue to provide his family with the support and assistance they need during this most difficult time.
Our thoughts and our prayers are also with the four injured soldiers and their families. And we hope that they have a full and fast recovery. I am advised that the families of all concerned have been notified by the Australian Defence Force.
This is a sad day for the nation. It is a sad day for the Australian Defence Force. It is a tragic day for the family of Lance Corporal Jason Marks. The security situation in Afghanistan remains grim. This is a difficult, and remains a difficult and dangerous operating environment for the Australian Defence Force, most particularly in Oruzgan Province.
It is likely to become more difficult in the period ahead. We are facing a change of season as the winter snows melt and the Spring full begins, which usually indicates a heightening in military activity on the part of the Taliban and Al-Qaeda.
We've also seen parallel activity on the part of the Taliban forces in terms of the action that we saw attempted against President Hamid Karzai in Kabul in the last 24 hours. Therefore, 2008 will be difficult and dangerous and bloody and the Australian nation needs to prepare itself for further losses in the year ahead.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you concerned that a growing death toll will sap public support for our Afghanistan commitment?
PM: This marks the loss of the fifth Australian in combat operations in Afghanistan. We've had, prior to today's events, as I understand it, some 31 soldiers injured or wounded. This toll will become worse. And I think let's accept that reality and prepare ourselves for it.
The purpose of our recent meetings in Bucharest were to agree, for the first time, with our NATO partners in Afghanistan, a new integrated civilian and military strategy for dealing with the challenge in that country. That has now been agreed. Furthermore, officials today, I'm advised, are meeting in Ottawa to deal specifically with the new arrangements which flow from those discussions between our partners for the strategy which will apply now in the south of the country.
We therefore have a new way forward. Having said that, it will still be very difficult. And it will still be, in my judgment, very bloody. And as I also indicated in Bucharest, it will be important for ourselves, together with our NATO partners, to review the success of this strategy at least on an annual basis.
JOURNALIST: Was that agreed to in the end when you left Bucharest, I think it was still in flux whether that report-back regime was going to be (inaudible)?
PM: There is no formal agreement on that. That will be our approach and that will be discussed further with the NATO Secretary General between now and next year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at the moment are we winning or losing this war?
PM: This is a very difficult engagement. It's been going a long, long time. I think there have been problems with the way in which this strategy has been put together in the past. I think all NATO partners are agreed with that and principally, in the absence of an effective strategy linking the civilian and the military dimensions of operations in Afghanistan, therefore it is important to turn the page and embrace this new strategy.
But nothing is a blank cheque here. We therefore, as I indicated in Bucharest, will be reviewing the effectiveness of this strategy on an annual basis and will be doing so nationally even if there is a reluctance to do so corporately, though I have not encountered that reluctance so far.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you name a local, state or imperial power that has ever managed to control the area where you now (inaudible) Australian troops fighting?
PM: The history of Afghanistan is one which is not only bloody but one which has consistently resisted foreign troop activity. Across what is now called Afghanistan, and certainly the part of the country that you referred to, as I am advised. Therefore the history is against us, but remember, why are we there? We are there because a failed state was giving open succour and support to a global terrorist organisation Al Qaeda, which then attacked our ally the United States on September the 11th 2001 and in the process, murdered 3000 people.
We, as a consequence of our alliance with the United States, embarked upon a combined military action with them. Nothing has changed since then. What we have embarked upon now is a revision to the strategy which we believe to be most applicable in the field and that means, in its essence, getting the integration of our military efforts and our civilian efforts better done than have been in the past.
As I have said before, I would not have Australian troops committed there and nor would I have had Australian them committed there as the alternative Prime Minister of Australia last year had I not believed there was a strategy which could ultimately prevail. Nonetheless, this is not a blank cheque and it will be subject to rolling annual review.
Andrew, you had a question?
JOURNALIST: One of the things that you (inaudible) wanted to get out of the NATO conference was to get more combat troops in more hostile areas including Oruzgan. I think there was talk for example of the Germans coming from the north down to Oruzgan, I think they are stuck in barracks a lot of the time. When is Australia and its troops there going to see more help in these very hostile areas?
PM: Well, part of the discussion occurring in Ottawa today among officials will be to resolve overall troop deployments across the south. Once those discussions are concluded I am sure the Government will have something further to say on that. I think it would be unrealistic to expect there to be dramatic changes in immediate troop deployments, of course, some of our recent diplomacy has been focussed on ensuring that the Dutch could remain in force and the Canadians could remain deployed in the wider south and that has been the subject of quite intensive negotiations between governments and some discussions between myself and my Dutch and Canadian counterparts.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, this 15 day gap to the Budget, how is that process going? And can you guarantee that low and middle income earners won't be worse off when we're hearing of billions of dollars cut from Government spending?
PM: Well the first part of your question is, ‘how's the budget process going?', answer to that, tough as all hell. The second part of your question is that this is a Government that believes in standing up for the interests of working families. And that's why, despite quite considerable pressure in the first several months of this year to drop our commitment to introduce tax cuts for working families, we'll be proceeding with the implementation of those tax cuts. And proceeding with changes to the child care tax rebate as well.
We believe that working families are under financial pressure, not least from recent increases in mortgage payments, but also what's happened with petrol prices and what's happening with grocery prices. And therefore, our commitment is to do everything we can through the Budget to assist. There's no silver bullet here, but we believe in doing whatever we can to assist.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said of the case for Afghanistan, you've said that the risk in there is that the likely toll for Australia is likely to be high. What happens if we lose the war?
PM: Well, that's the great hypothetical question of this morning's press conference. I said before that I think the nation needs to steel itself for higher casualties than we have had so far. And, that's a reflection on heightened Taliban activity, the fact that the Taliban continue to be assisted by I think ineffective strategies to deal with the opium crop, and the flow of revenue which occurs between the opium crop and Taliban and through them Al-Qaeda forces.
That's why an integrated strategy dealing with military and civilian affairs is critical if we are to have a prospect of success. The ingredients of the document agreed to, both its public form and its internal form in Bucharest, provide us with the basis of so doing. Therefore, I've said, and committed this Australian Government, to being there for the long haul. But it's not a blank cheque. We'll continue to review this as necessary.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider dispatching more troops?
PM: We have no such plans as I indicated most recently to the President of the United States and to our colleagues in the other participating States in Bucharest, when we met for some time discussing explicitly our forward commitments - that we believed our commitment was significant.
Remember it's is the largest contribution of a non-NATO power to the operation in Afghanistan, and we believe it's sufficient for our current purposes. The key thing is to make sure that other parties engage in effective burden sharing, and furthermore, that there is an effective civilian correlation to the military effort.
Thanks very much.


Acknowledgements
     * Senator John Faulkner, Cabinet Minister and Special Minister of State
     * Public Service Commissioner Lynelle Briggs
     * Secretary Terry Moran and heads of public service agencies
     * Members of the Senior Executive Service
I begin this morning by honouring the traditional owners of this land on which the Parliament now sits.
Thank you for the efforts that each of you have made to attend this morning.
I know that your workload has been unusually heavy in recent months.
Alongside an exhaustive spending review process for the Budget, the transition to a new government means managing new priorities and new policies, and adjusting to new ministers and their offices.
The leadership roles that each of you exercise require you to balance the day to day needs of government with longer term policy and planning; in short, the reactive versus the strategic.
In the early days of a new government you face both enormous day to day demands while also needing to start implementing new policy platforms.
The transition to a new government is made even harder when it is so many years since the last change of government. Almost two thirds of today's workforce was not even working in the APS when the government last changed in 1996, and has therefore never gone through this process before.
But a transition like this is a learning experience for everyone.
Just imagine what it was like for those of us in Queensland when the Goss Government won office in 1989.
The last change of government had occurred in 1957  -  some 32 years before!
It's a credit to the APS that the transition to the new Government has been so seamless.
So let me say on behalf of the whole ministry, we do appreciate the enormous amount of work that has been done to date.
You are public policy professionals.
You have chosen your career because you believe public policy counts.
You have chosen a good career path because it is about the public good.
It is about something bigger than yourselves.
Furthermore, the work that you do is essential for the nation.
In public service, you  -  like us in the Parliament  -  have a great privilege.
Together, we help to shape our nation's future  -  our national security, our economic future and the fabric of our future society.
We help expand opportunities for working Australians.
And we help Australian families who need a helping hand on the way through.
Today, I've been asked to outline to the SES the Government's policy priorities for the future.
And in doing so, I'll seek to outline the importance the Government attaches to the public service in implementing these policy priorities into the future.
The Government's reform agenda
The new Government was elected with a comprehensive and challenging long-term policy agenda.
We are committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future as well as a future for working families.
We are committed to building a strong foundation for future prosperity  -  through responsible economic management and by enhancing Australia's international competitiveness and productivity.
The Government's productivity agenda begins with a comprehensive long-term program of reforms to our education system, ranging from early childhood services through to schools and training, and right through to universities and research programs.
Developing our broadband infrastructure is also one of the keys to lifting our productivity. Broadband is a transformational technology that offers large long term productivity gains across every sector of the economy  -  private sector, public sector and the third sector.
Another element of our productivity agenda is using the COAG reform process to remove the duplication that exists between Commonwealth and State regulation and service delivery. As many of you will know, the COAG process is already achieving results, although the hardest work lies ahead.
As the leaders of the Commonwealth public service, there is a challenge for you in progressing this COAG reform agenda. That challenge is to appreciate that we are in a new era of Commonwealth/State cooperation.
While always protecting the Commonwealth's interests, I have a greater expectation that you will work constructively with State and Territory counterparts to achieve lasting reform.
If we get that right, we can deliver a fair deal for the Commonwealth, a fair deal for the States and above all, a great deal for the community.
In addition to lifting productivity growth, the Government is committed to maximising workforce participation, targeting the range of factors that influence workforce participation at different stages of life.
The tax cuts that will come into effect in July are a first step to longer-term tax and welfare reforms to encourage more people into the workforce.
To address the hurdles to participation for women with young children, we are making quality childcare more affordable and more accessible: increasing the child care tax rebate; providing play-based early learning for all 4 year olds, and starting to build child care centres at schools.
Another priority for the Government is to do what we can to address the cost of living pressures on working families.
We have already introduced our transitional amendments to the Workplace Relations Act; we have announced new policy directions on housing affordability; and later this year we will establish a national Fuelwatch scheme as well as receiving the ACCC report on grocery prices.
The Government believes in giving a fair go to all Australians and this is reflected in our policies relating to social inclusion, health care, education, workplace relations and our commitment to close the gap in indigenous life opportunities.
The Government is committed to decisive action on the long-term challenge of climate change, establishing an emissions trading scheme, raising the renewable energy target and ratifying the Kyoto Protocol.
The Government is also committed to a secure Australia  -  strong at home and fully engaged abroad, through what I have described elsewhere as a creative middle power diplomacy.
Finally we are committed to new ways of governing  -  strengthening our independent public institutions (including the APS) and how we can make government more open, accountable and responsive to the needs of the Australian community.
The importance of the APS
The Government therefore has an ambitious policy agenda, with a strong focus on long-term policies rather than simply short-term measures.
The Government is determined to deliver for the working families who have given us this opportunity to build a modern Australia.
The process of policy and program implementation is therefore critically important.
Good policy is one thing.
But good policy without effective program implementation is a dead letter.
The work of the APS is therefore crucially important to the Government.
I understand the vast difference made by good policy design, implementation and service delivery having worked myself at both the Commonwealth and State levels.
Some people like to talk down the public service, and perhaps some graduates are less attracted to the APS because it can't match some of the monetary rewards in parts of the private sector.
You may be surprised to know that at the recently concluded 2020 Summit, a constant theme across the 1,000 delegates was the absolute importance of building an independent, robust and properly remunerated Australian public service.
Just look at the policy challenges that Australia faces over the next decade and beyond.
It's the Australian public service that will lead the nation's response to these great challenges.
The challenge of setting up an emissions trading scheme, and beginning the transformation to becoming a low carbon economy.
The challenge of implementing an education revolution extending from early childhood to schools, apprenticeships, universities and postgraduate research  -  to prepare a new generation with skills and competencies that employers will be looking for decades from now.
The challenge of reshaping Australia's sprawling health care system to meet the demands of an ageing population with changing health problems.
I could mention any number of other challenges, from tackling the nation's water shortages to closing the gap on indigenous life opportunities.
Think even of the opportunities of taking the skills you've developed in the APS and using them to transform lives and futures in struggling nations in the Pacific Rim  -  as 270 APS staff are doing right now, a remarkably important part of Australia's overseas aid program.
Also, our diplomats, together with the ADF, who continue to work in harm's way in places like Baghdad and Kabul.
I would contend that the Australian public service offers the most stimulating and challenging job opportunities that you could imagine. And that's the career environment I would like to create for you  -  our public policy professionals of the future.
A public service that is characterised by excellence  -  by policy innovation, by policy creativity, by policy contestability, by long-term policy planning and by a parallel commitment to excellence and innovation in how we best deliver services to the Australian community.
Australia's long term competitiveness will be shaped by the success of our policies in restoring strong productivity growth, implementing the education revolution, fixing the Federation and responding to climate change.
So let me say very clearly that the Government recognises that we cannot deliver our vision for a modern Australia without an APS that is committed to excellence in policy design, policy implementation and service delivery.
The Government's agenda for the APS
Today I want to discuss seven elements of the Government's vision for the future Australian public service:
     * Reinvigorating the Westminster tradition of an independent public service with merit-based selection processes and continuity of employment when governments change;
     * Building a professionalised public service committed to excellence;
     * Developing evidence-based policy making processes as part of a robust culture of policy contestability;
     * Enhancing the strategic policy capability of the public service;
     * Strengthening the integrity and accountability of government;
     * Broadening participation in government through inclusive policy processes, and
     * A contemporary view of government service delivery that emphasises both efficiency and effectiveness in outcomes.
Reinvigorating the Westminster traditions of independence and continuity
We cannot afford a public service culture where all you do is tell the Government what you think the Government wants to hear.
We cannot afford second-best policy responses to the challenges of climate change, the competitive challenge from the rise of India and China or the need for reform of the Federation.
The Government must receive the best advice, based on the best available information and evidence.
Public servants will not give frank and fearless advice if they think their career prospects or the continuity of their employment rest on them simply echoing a Government's own prejudices.
As you know, the last change of government in 1996 saw many public servants removed from senior positions.
Some people argued that on coming into office, the new Government should take a leaf out of the same book and remove agency heads who were seen as being politically aligned to the previous Government's agenda.
We took a very different view. We made a commitment last year that there'd be no ‘night of the long knives' when we came to office. We said we'd treat the public service differently to the previous government, and we have honoured that commitment.
To build a first class, independent public service, promotion must be based on merit, not on politics.
That is why the Government has strengthened merit-based selection standards for appointments to many senior government appointments such as statutory office holders.
These standards will apply to more than 130 senior positions, including 65 agency heads.
Under these new arrangements there is a formal requirement that all relevant positions must be advertised. The process of assessing applicants must be based on merit, and each process must be overseen by the relevant departmental secretary and the Public Service Commissioner.
Ministers will receive a considered report based on a process that applied merit and openness, and will then have final responsibility for the decision. That is appropriate in a Westminster system, where final accountability rests with the Minister.
Appointments will normally be for five years, so that office holders are not under the constant threat that their contract may not be renewed.
Westminster, by and large, has served our system of government well  -  and the time has come to rebuild the Westminster tradition in Australia.
A professionalised public service
A second element of our reform agenda is to build a highly professional public service.
We need public servants who are talented, hard working and innovative to address the immensely complex public policy challenges ahead.
The Government recognises the long term need to strengthen the capacity of the public service.
We cannot do that overnight.
But we know that the Government cannot deliver on its long-term agenda without a high-quality, professional Australian public service.
And as the Audit Office's report on public sector recruitment this week has highlighted, the APS is facing a challenging environment both for recruitment and retention.
We must build long-term capability and capacity by investing in the APS's leadership, workforce development and organisational development.
I am committed to an Australian public sector that fosters career development and rewards high achievement.
I also want to see more flexible pathways between the public sector and the private sector, research institutions and the community sector. We should also improve mobility between agencies within the APS and between the APS and state public sector agencies.
For years the private sector has poached and plundered talent from the public sector. The APS should equally seek out talent from the private sector.
The public sector leaders of the future could be drawn from the public, private and community sectors.
The leadership groups within the public service should reflect a wide diversity of past work experience. This diversity better enables us to understand the different needs of the Australian community and to develop and deliver better public policy.
That means we need people in the public service with hands-on experience of business, finance, logistics, strategic planning and so on  -  just as we also want people with experience in the third sector of voluntary and community organisations.
We need to accept that talent is more mobile now than in the past. But we don't need to think that just because a talented public servant takes up an opportunity in the private sector - or the community sector - that they won't return to the public service further down the track.
Indeed we should encourage APS staff to spend time working in the private sector, the community sector and in overseas public sector roles, as opportunities to build a broader skill base that can be put to use in the APS in the future.
Evidence-based policy
A third element of the Government's agenda for the public service is to ensure a robust, evidence-based policy making process.
Policy design and policy evaluation should be driven by analysis of all the available options, and not by ideology.
When preparing policy advice for the Government, I expect departments to review relevant developments among State and Territory governments and comparable nations overseas.
The Government will not adopt overseas models uncritically.
We're interested in facts, not fads.
But whether it's aged care, vocational education or disability services, Australian policy development should be informed by the best of overseas experience and analysis.
In fostering a culture of policy innovation, we should trial new approaches and policy options through small-scale pilot studies.
It may be appropriate to collaborate with a State government, a business organisation, a research centre or a community organisation.
It may even be appropriate to cooperate on policy innovation with a government agency overseas, such as we are now doing on climate change with the United Kingdom.
Policy innovation and evidence-based policy making is at the heart of being a reformist government.
Innovation can help us deliver better policy and better outcomes for the whole community.
This means that we want the culture of the APS to foster new ideas and new directions - and not to let the narrow interests of particular branches or agencies stand in the way of innovation.
Enhancing strategic policy capabilities
One important feature of the priorities that I've discussed this morning is the long-term nature of many of Australia's key policy challenges.
For the APS to deliver on the Government's long term reform agenda, we will need to invest in a greater strategic policy capability.
By this I mean a greater capacity to see emerging challenges and opportunities  -  and to see them not just from the perspective of government, but also from the perspective of all parts of the community.
Strategic policy development is especially important at the level of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, which should play a whole-of-government, forward-looking role in policy development, as well as carefully thinking through implementation issues, and taking corrective action when policies are not working.
PM&amp;C's role is to support the development and delivery of policy across all of government. In doing so, I expect it to work collaboratively with the entire APS so that we genuinely deliver ‘joined up' government.
As Prime Minister most of my interactions with the APS occur through my Department. My expectations of PM&amp;C are:
     * timely, well-argued, robust and forward looking policy advice;
     * a coordination role, particularly through the Cabinet process, and
     * supporting the implementation of key government programs.
I know this has been a matter of debate in recent years, but I hold the firm view that your job is not just to advise on the day to day issues as they arise. You should also be providing long-term strategic advice to assist the Government in developing its policy direction.
The public service must have the systems in place to tackle the hard issues that present challenges across portfolios, across departments, across governments and across generations.
Of course, the Government is ultimately responsible for decision making. Once a decision is taken, the task of the public service changes to ensuring effective implementation and service delivery.
And this is as important as the decision itself.
Inclusive and innovative government
A fifth element of the Government's agenda for the APS is to encourage wider participation in the processes of government from all parts of the community.
By engaging the community more broadly we can understand better how government policies impact families, individuals, communities and businesses.
This can help us with the challenge of making the different parts of government join up, and ensure that services are not just delivered efficiently from the Government's perspective, but effectively from the citizen's perspective.
One of our challenges is to find ways to harness the best ideas from Australians of all backgrounds and all ages.
The Australia 2020 Summit showed that many Australians are keen to participate in the policy process.
A more inclusive policy process means engaging average Australians as well as experts, think tanks and business and community groups in policy development and delivery. Many parts of the APS already have good processes of community engagement on which we can build.
This more inclusive approach extends to policy implementation and service delivery.
Australians increasingly expect a more personalised service when they deal with large organisations, whether businesses or government agencies. Government agencies must meet those expectations.
This also means cultivating a genuine spirit of public service on the front line of service delivery.
Much of the best innovation will be driven from the front line of service delivery, and we need ways to capture feedback from the front line where public servants interact with people.
The responsibility of capturing this information and feeding it back into the policy process will largely rest with you.
Integrity and accountability
The sixth element of the Government's agenda for the APS is rebuilding a culture of accountability across all levels of government.
The Government has begun that with the Standards of Ministerial Ethics, the Register of Lobbyists, and the Lobbying Code of Conduct.
I have also foreshadowed my intention to introduce new codes of conduct relating to ministerial staff.
Just as these high standards apply to ministers and their offices, I similarly expect the public service to comply with the APS Values and Code of Conduct and the Public Service Act.
The Government will also be enhancing the culture of transparency in government through reforms to Freedom of Information laws, including the abolition of conclusive certificates and the creation of a Freedom of Information Commissioner.
A contemporary view of government service delivery
The final aspect of the Government's agenda for the public service is that we have a contemporary view of the role of the state in service delivery.
I do not have an ideological preference for the public sector, nor for the private sector. The question of how services are best delivered has not been resolved conclusively in favour of either the market or the state.
In some instances, the public sector may provide services that are of better quality, are more accessible, or that come at a lower cost.
In other instances, private or community sector provision may reflect a better use of limited public resources.
Service delivery should be contestable, and decisions about the mix of the public and private sectors should be based on the available evidence on how to deliver services efficiently and effectively.
This means that we will sometimes support services being delivered by those outside of the public sector, but with the proviso that we examine all of the costs and benefits of service delivery options.
As many private sector businesses have concluded, outsourcing can sometimes be a false economy because it can hollow out an organisation's important technical skills and know-how, to its long term detriment.
Corporate memory is important, especially in government, and we should ensure that it is not diminished by short-term assessments of the costs and benefits of how we implement decisions and deliver services.
Conclusion
Australia has been profoundly shaped by the great public servants of the past.
Just think of the extraordinary contribution made to successive governments  -  and more importantly, to Australia - by H.C. Coombs, or ‘Nugget' Coombs as he was universally known.
For five decades from the late 1930s, Nugget served as an economist; as the first Governor of the Reserve Bank; as an architect of a new approach to indigenous affairs, and as a source of advice for successive Prime Ministers of all political persuasions.
He worked directly with Prime Ministers Curtin, Chifley, Menzies, Holt, Gorton, McMahon and Whitlam.
One reflection of his extraordinary contribution is the effusive letters of thanks that were written to him by Prime Ministers Menzies and Whitlam.
After his retirement as Governor of the Reserve Bank, Sir Robert Menzies wrote to thank him for being:
“a man of the most conspicuous ability and of the most shining integrity... [I] have benefited so much from your great services to our country.”
Some years later, Gough Whitlam also wrote to thank Nugget for his contribution to the Whitlam Government's achievements relating to indigenous affairs, the arts, the public service and the public sector:
“[T]he fact that these achievements will endure and make a permanent impression on Australian society is due primarily to your dedication and skill and lofty sense of duty. I thank you for all you have done.” 
Nugget Coombs' career shows that independence, excellence and absolute integrity can all go together.
Nugget's concluding thoughts in his autobiography are perhaps more sharp and relevant today than even when he wrote them almost thirty years ago:
“Perhaps the young and idealistic recruits to Australian Government bureaucracies who sometimes must despair of finding scope for either their abilities or their idealism may find some comfort in the evidence the letters and other aspects of this story provide, that mutually rewarding relationships between Ministers and their official and unofficial advisers exist more often than one would be led to believe by media comment or some aspects of recent political history.”
I hope we can see a new generation of public servants with the spirit of Nugget Coombs.
I look forward to a strong, constructive partnership between the APS and the Government that I lead.
It will sometimes be demanding, sometimes frustrating, and sometimes exhilarating.
But I hope, it will always be rewarding in the role that you play in shaping Australia's future.
I hope that you will each be able to take great pride in your work and the work of your agencies in the months and years ahead.
And I look forward to what we can do together  -  to equip Australia to deal with the challenges of the 21st century.


PM:Like many Australian's, I've woken up this morning to this appalling news about what happened in Sydney overnight. This is every parents' nightmare, I just am stunned by this. It's just terrible news and for parents, this is, for the parents of those who have lost their lives, this is just a terrible, terrible day, just terrible.
CARLTON:They all appear to be very young too, in their 20's and 30's. We don't know how they are on the harbour, but a harbour tragedy always affects us here in Sydney.
PM:Well, I can understand, because when I'm in Sydney, and I am in Sydney a lot and so much of Sydney's life and activity happens in and around the harbour, or the harbour foreshores or on the harbour itself.
And so many young people go out on the harbour on cruises and the like. And people go out to celebrate and have a good time and for this to be the end of it, it's just breathtaking really. I had to be told twice this morning, this is what had happened, because I thought I had misheard.
MIKE:(inaudible) Prime Minister, thanks for those words there.
The business of the day, business of the nation, and I guess the economy first. You've got a budget coming up. Are you confident you can keep the lid on inflation and in fact get it back down below three per cent with Government policy?
PM:Inflation is caused by a range of different factors, one of which is influenced by the resources boom abroad. Another is influenced by capacity constraints in the economy like infrastructure bottlenecks, our ports, another thing is caused, another cause, of course, is labour shortages. But another one is what we do in terms of the amount of activity we pump out into the economy through the Government sector itself (inaudible) the Budget.
So, on that front, we intend to deliver a responsible Budget. I have said before, in January of this year, we had a five point strategy to deal with inflation. One of those involves coming up with a responsible Budget surplus. We're on track to do that. That's one part of an overall strategy.
CARLTON:Can you tell us what the surplus is going to be? (inaudible)
PM:That's a good try, I know it's early in the morning but, no.
CARLTON:Oh right, okay.
ALOISI:Prime Minister, there are suggestions this morning that it will be a Robin Hood Budget, where basically, the high earners are going to be hit hardest and you're going to make some serious cuts in government spending. So, can you give us an idea of which way you're going to go?
PM:Well, Sandy, the challenge we've got is responsible economic management, that's number one, because we've inherited a Government, with inflation running at record highs over 16 years.
CARLTON:It's not record highs is it?
PM:Well it's the highest inflation rate this country has had in 16 years.
CARLTON:Oh, right.
PM:In sixteen years. And secondly, we face a period of global economic turbulence coming off the back of the financial crisis coming out the US. So these are a very difficult set of circumstances in which to frame a Budget.
But if we can responsibly produce a budget, which we intend to, with a substantial Government surplus to make sure that we don't fuel the flames of inflation, our responsibility then is to support working families under financial pressure and that remains core to our concerns.
We intend to honour our pre-elections commitments. And those pre-election commitments included making sure we're going to deliver tax cuts to working families, and, another practical measure, which is to increase the child care tax rebate.
If you're a working family on $50,000 a year, it means, or a worker on $50,000 a year, you'll be about $20 a week better off. And, in terms of the child care tax rebate, if you're a working family with an income of $50,000 with one child in long day care for 40 hours a week, that means that you'll get about $1000 in additional assistance each year.
These are practical measures to help working families who are finding it really difficult to balance the weekly budget right now.
MIKE:Alright. The top end of town did pretty well under the Howard Government.  These humungous executive pay packets and huge tax breaks, for example, on these share options. The Herald is reporting this morning that you are going to get rid of some of that, particularly that loophole where share options are used by the executives to minimise your tax?
PM:Well if we're going to honour our pre-election promises to families under financial pressure through these tax changes that I referred to before, and through increase the child care tax rebate, we've got to make sure that we end up with a responsible budget overall.
Therefore when you look at the sort of tax measures which have benefited many of the super wealthy, share options for example, and their taxation treatment, then of course you would expect the Treasurer to seek to crack down on those sorts of measures and the one you just referred to is important. It delivers back to revenue, we understand, something in the order of $70 million dollars. That's one step in the right direction, producing a balanced overall budget outcome.
CARLTON:So you're going to take a bit of a stick to the top end?
PM:Well, we think it is important to make sure that those who need, really need, the support of Government through the tax system and through the family payments system and through the childcare system, get all the support we can responsibly provide. While, not pretending that any of them add up to a silver bullet to deal with family budget problems, but all practical helps.
But at the end of the day you have then got to produce responsible savings. One of which is to ensure that when it comes to measures which we think artificially advantage those who are at the highest end of the income spectrum, share options for corporate executives, that is one area in which you can move.
But of course we will be tackling other savings measures as well and I will comfortably predict that there will be a fair number of complaints come budget night about some of these measures.
CARLTON:Good, we need that. It's going to be a Labor budget then is it?
PM:We are of the view that if you, we had a Community Cabinet out in Penrith only a few weeks ago and listened very carefully to what people were saying to us out there.
And I remember a gentleman standing up and describing his circumstances and the sort of pressure he's under, given the number of interest rate rise we have had in a row, and just juggling the family budget to be able to afford you know, nappies each week for their smallest child. I mean this is real stuff, and our job as a Labor Government and as a responsible national Government is to make sure that those who need that practical level of assistance get it.
CARLTON:The ‘Nappy Budget'.
PM:Well people are just trying to balance their budget.
CARLTON:No it's fair enough, I am not being sarcastic.
PM:If you have got mortgage price, mortgage rates which have gone up now 12 times in a row. You have got petrol prices going through the roof. You have got grocery prices going up. And childcare costs, always a big part of the family budget. We have got to act in areas where we can help. That is why we are doing what we are doing on tax and what we are doing on childcare.
ALOISI:Prime Minister can I just take another subject and put it in front of you, Afghanistan. With another soldier killed just this week, many Australians will want to know why we are there and exactly what we are trying to achieve and I have to say, if I were a family member of one of the thousand soldiers we have in Afghanistan, your words this week about it becoming much more dangerous would send a chill through me.
PM:Well my responsibility as Prime Minister is just to be upfront and direct with the Australian people, and not to mince words about how difficult and dangerous and bloody it is.
I went there and visited the troops just after being sworn in as Prime Minister, just before Christmas last year and was briefed by the field commanders there about the nature of the operations, it is difficult, it is dangerous and it is bloody, I mean we are up against the Taliban and these people are experienced fighters and they are fuelled with mad messianic zeal.
So it would be wrong for me to say that things are going to get better in terms of the security environment just now. I think it is important just to be practical about it. I spoke on the phone with the field commander, just the night before last, and he reported back to me that the morale of the troops is high.
They are a highly committed group, particularly the commando group who come from Sydney and the attitude that they have got to the job that they have been given is highly professional, I have got to say. It makes you proud to just hear of their professionalism.
The Defence Minister has been up there with them and he reports exactly the same.
CARLTON: Now one last topic if we can, I know you have got to leave us. Down home, back here in NSW, electricity privatisation here. Morris Iemma wants to do it, the unions are dead against it.
It looks like a giant split coming up at the ALP conference this weekend, whose side are you one?
PM:Well I have been absolutely clear cut in my support for Premier Iemma and I do not back away from that one bit. But this is a very difficult negotiation and what I have encouraged all sides of this argument to do is to try and find a reasonable compromise through this.
CARLTON:But you either sell it off, or you don't. Is there a compromise?
PM:Well I will leave that to negotiators, because this is a very complex matter concerning the detailed inner workings of the NSW electricity industry.
But what I have said to all sides, to this deeply felt dispute is that they need to try and find a way through this. Whether they do or not, I don't know. It is very difficult, the positions are very entrenched and as you know in the NSW, the politics are usually very colourful.
CARLTON:Oh yes. Yes, mate.
ALOISI: Prime Minister, just to recap, the Premier has your full support, does he?
PM:Absolutely. I have said that before and I will say it again. And this is a very difficult set of decisions, that he and the Government confront in terms of the future of electricity generation in NSW. These are very tough decisions, they are very hard decisions. But at the same time I would be encouraging everyone to take a deep breath and try and find a way up the middle of this.
ALOISI: Alright Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning
PM:Appreciate it Sandy, thanks very much.


It is a great pleasure to be here today to open officially the new Medical School at Deakin University.
Before I begin my remarks this morning I want to acknowledge the grief and suffering of those affected by the tragic boat collision on Sydney harbour early this morning.
The harbour is the centre of so much of Sydney life.
It is terrible to think of it today as a place of suffering and death.
News like this is just every parent's worst nightmare.
We are thinking of the parents, families and friends of the five young people who lost their lives, and the nine who were injured.
Awful events like this are also a reminder of how much we rely on the training and special skills of the men and women of our emergency services and medical professions  -  the reason why we're here today at Deakin University.
Deakin University has a proud record as Victoria's first major regional university.
It has grown remarkably since it was established in the 1970s to a student population of 34,000 now, including around 7,000 international students studying here in Australia or throughout the world.
And this campus shows that remarkable growth.
Waurn Ponds was once the outskirts of Geelong  -  now it is the centre of a growth area.
Deakin University has made a contribution beyond education to Geelong, its surrounding districts and throughout Western Victoria.
I am sure that Alfred Deakin  -  one of the architects of the Australian Federation  -  would be proud to be associated with your great institution.
I would like to congratulate all of the staff and students of Deakin University on what you have already achieved, even as you are about to take the next step with the official opening of the Medical School.
I can claim a close personal link to the health professions.
My mother trained as a nurse.
So did my sister and one of my brothers.
In fact, I am the one who let the family tradition down  -  the one that did not make it into the health care profession, beyond a short stint as a wardsman in Canterbury Hospital in the ‘70s.
But coming from a family of nurses I have always had lots of views put to me about the importance of healthcare.
[And particularly I've been told many times how it's the nurses who hold the whole system together.]
Health Care
Australia's health care system is under pressures from many sources.
The health needs of our population are changing, as people live longer lives.
Chronic disease rates are rising dramatically.
The costs of new technologies and treatments are very substantial.
And the provision of health care is becoming more complex, especially with the long term management of illnesses becoming increasingly central to the health system.
Australia's health care system is not ready for the challenges ahead, and that is why the Government is committed to health reform.
We have committed more funds, but that is only part of the answer.
We have also begun to work with the state and territory governments to end the blame game about who is responsible for shortcomings in the health system.
We want to work with the state governments to make the system work.
I want to congratulate the Victorian Government for its support for the Deakin University Medical School.
We also want to get the best ideas into the health system and that means being open to new ideas.
That is why we made a long-term plan for health care one of the ten streams we focused on at the 2020 Summit.
We heard of ideas like the proposal for a “Healthbook” that might look a bit like a FaceBook website.
It could be a place for Australians to take control of their own medical records.
They could grant access to those records to their medical professionals  -  doctors, physiotherapists, other health professionals.
At its best, it could give people control over their own medical records.
It is part of the idea discussed at the 2020 Summit of putting the patient at the centre of the health system.
New ideas like this take time to progress, as there are many aspects to be considered.
But I am confident that this sort of thinking can make our health system even better  -  more responsive  -  in the future.
In the meantime, we are moving ahead with the major immediate challenges in improving our health care system.
Health Policy
The Government believes that every Australian has the right to live their life in good health and access the best possible health care when they need it.
That means we have a new focus on prevention  -  on giving people the tools and knowledge to make good health decisions.
It also means defending and strengthening our public hospital system, as the foundation of our dual system.
And it means constantly improving the skills of the health workforce  -  a challenge for the long-term.
I want to see a quality health system that provides access to all Australians, regardless of what they earn or where they live.
That is why we are investing over half-a-billion dollars in targeted rural health programs this year.
Having grown up in rural Queensland I understand the importance of access to health care for all people.
A key part of the improving access to health care in rural and regional communities is improving the health of Indigenous Australians.
The health gap between the Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities in Australia is unacceptable.
Higher infant mortality rates and shorter life expectancy for Indigenous Australians is inexcusable.
But we need to do more to bridge this gap.
The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has committed to a partnership among all levels of government to work with Indigenous communities to address Indigenous disadvantage.
We have committed to closing the life expectancy gap within a generation and halving the mortality gap for children under five within a decade.
I also announced recently that every year when Parliament begins I will present a report on progress in closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia  -  particularly the health gap.
It is a way to make sure that we stay focused on improving the health situation for Indigenous communities.
The Health Workforce
One key element for achieving our vision of a better health system is having the right health workforce.
That means more doctors.
I know that in training more doctors we face the challenge of providing quality clinical training  -  something I know you have been working collaboratively on with the other Victorian Medical Deans.
Having the right health workforce  -  one with an appreciation of the importance of regional, rural and Indigenous health problems  -  will be an important part of improving access to health care for rural Australians.
I am pleased to offer my support for Deakin University Medical School and its strong commitment to these areas.
Your course will help develop a new generation of doctors with a strong understanding of the needs of rural communities, of the needs of our indigenous communities and of the challenging role played by health care professionals in regional communities  -  either as general practitioners or as specialists.
It will develop a new generation of doctors with a focus on health promotion and prevention.
A new generation of doctors that will play an important part in meeting the health needs of our nation.
To offer further support to Deakin University I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government will provide one million dollars to support key rural academic appointments at Deakin's new Medical School.
This funding is part of our response to a newly released audit report which has confirmed that the supply of health professionals in many rural and regional centres is low to very poor.
We want to support Deakin University Medical School's innovative rural training program which will place medical students at training sites in south-western Victoria, including hubs at Ballarat and Warrnambool.
The funding will allow the University to make a number of crucial rural appointments to help with preparations for clinical training for the University's first cohort of medical students.
Conclusion
The Australian Government is committed to health care reform and meeting the changing health needs of an ageing population into the future.
We are committed to bringing new ideas into the health policy debate.
We are committed to working with state governments, with health professionals and the wider community to delivering the best health outcomes possible.
And we are committed to supporting the training of new health care professionals.
I am pleased to say the Deakin University and its new Medical School are important partners for us.
I want to congratulate the University on its new school.
I want to congratulate all those who have supported the establishment of the school  -  federal, state and local politicians, local community leaders and the private sector.
I want to congratulate the staff and faculty and wish you all the best for your first year.
And I want to congratulate the students of 2008 for being the trailblazers for this new course.
It is my great pleasure to open formally Deakin University's Medical School.


KAFCALOUDES: Prime Minister, of course, the news today is very sad news, we've heard about that boat accident that happened on Sydney Harbour. What is your immediate reaction to this?
PM: This is terrible news. It's just stunning news. In fact, I had to be told twice about it this morning to make sure I had it right that we'd lost five people overnight on the harbour, and young people. It's one of those appalling tragedies that is every parent's nightmare to wake up and find that one of your kids, who has gone out for a bit of fun the night before, comes home dead. It's just appalling. My heart goes out to the parents of those concerned. It's just horrible.
KAFCALOUDES: Have you got any more information that you can tell us? What have you been told about the incident?
PM: No, I haven't as yet. I'm relying effectively on the public reports that we have seen, and plus, as I understand it, a statement by the New South Wales Police. These matters are under investigation, but this is just appalling. In Sydney, as I'm sure your listeners know, so much of that city's life and activity and celebration, recreation, occurs on or around the harbour. And so, when these sort of things happen, it's not just the immediate tragedy which affects the families of those concerned and those who are still in hospital, but, I think all Sydneysiders feel this because the harbour is the centre of their life.
KAFCALOUDES: Yeah, obviously there will be continuing investigations that will find out what exactly happened there between that pleasure craft and the fishing trawler, what the cause was, and we'll follow that up.
It has been a tough week actually, for you, hasn't it, Prime Minister? You've had to announce, go public, with the death of that soldier in Afghanistan, Jason Marks, and of then course, another soldier injured just a couple of days ago as well. It has been a tough week, hasn't it?
PM: It's tough for our troops in Afghanistan, they are on the front line, I'm not. And, they are an extraordinary, professional, bunch of Australian soldiers. I was there just before Christmas. I visited them at Tarin Kowt. I was briefed then by the Field Commander on how difficult these field operations were against the Taliban.
The Taliban are violent. They are dedicated fighters fuelled with some mad messianic zeal. And, it's a very tough operating environment. And, when we lose one of our own, it's an absolute tragedy for the family of Lance Corporal Jason Marks. It's felt deeply by the soldiers of the Australian Defence Force.
And there is just this sense of palpable loss across the nation as well, as another one of our young men gives up his life for the country. It's tough. As I said to the Australian people the other day, we need to brace ourselves for what is going to be a very tough year ahead. And, it is difficult, dangerous and bloody.
KAFCALOUDES: Well, on, I suppose, brighter news at least, you are in Victoria. You're heading down to Geelong. You've got some good news to announce?
PM: Well, yes, I'm in Victoria today. And, I'm heading down to Geelong. I'm also visiting Deakin University. And, at Deakin, we've got some things to say about new facilities there at the University. And we believe in an education revolution, and part of that means investing in our universities. And that means universities across the nation as well.
KAFCALOUDES: And there have been, well there is obviously a shortage of doctors, it's been a story that has been around for a quite a while. This is a new medical school?
PM: Well, that's right. We're going to be investing in medical facilities at the university to make sure that we've got, you know, the best capacity available. We think this is all part of an education revolution, investing in our early childhood education, investing in our schools, investing in our universities, and investing in our TAFE colleges as well. As well as higher end research.
It's all critical to make sure that we've got practical steps moving towards what is for our goal for the nation, which is to create an Australia over time, the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world. It's absolutely fundamental.
KAFCALOUDES: We'll be covering that issue a little bit further on in the program as well. But there was some news that came out of America overnight that growth, I mean, Australia's growth is sparking compared to America's, 0.6 per cent growth, which was actually better than expected. But, certainly this should have implications for the rest of the world?
PM: Well, as we move forward to framing this year's Budget, we are facing very tough global economic circumstances. We face, in Australia domestically, the highest inflation rate this country has seen in 16 years. And that's what we inherited from the previous Government. That's on the one hand.
On the other hand, what we face is downward revisions of economic growth globally, coming out of the US Sub-Prime crisis, and what has flowed out through global financial markets to Europe and, to our own part of the world in East Asia.
Now, framing a Budget in those circumstances is very difficult. But our job is to produce a Budget which reinforces responsible economic management by producing a substantial surplus.
Secondly, to honour our pre-election commitments to working families under financial pressure, on tax and child care rebates.
And also, to begin investing in Australia's long term future needs.
We're confident we can do that, but the sort of growth numbers you referred to coming out of North America and elsewhere, and their impact on the global economy, and therefore, long term economic growth in Australia, this makes the task of framing these Budgets very difficult.
KAFCALOUDES: Yeah. Obviously we've been hearing about how there has to be cut backs in the Budget coming up in May. Not the sort of thing you expected?
PM: Well, it's difficult to frame a Budget in these difficult economic circumstances. But, we believe we can produce a responsible Budget characterised by a deep sense of the challenge that we've got when it comes to domestic inflation. We don't want to fuel the flames of inflation. But, at the same time, we intend to honour our pre-election commitments to working families. Working families right across Australia, and here in Melbourne as well, are under financial pressure, real financial pressure, in terms of mortgage increases which have gone up 12 times in a row, grocery prices, petrol prices, cost of child care.
So, we intend to honour our pre-election promises on tax cuts for those families. And, to also increase the childcare tax rebate and other practical measures as well.
But, to do that, it means we've got to produce real savings in the Budget as well. And that's where I'm sure we're going to come into some criticism for a range of people for the sort of savings we make.
KAFCALOUDES: Just before we go, Origin, there is speculation this morning that Origin Energy could be taken over by an overseas (inaudible). Would that concern you?
PM: Well, with any significant investment, foreign investment, into Australia, that would fall subject to the Foreign Acquisition and Takeovers Act, and what happens under those circumstances, the Government then evaluates any such application under the national interest criteria.
On the details of this particular proposal, I haven't been briefed. I'm sure the Treasurer will be because he's the responsible Minister.
The Government welcomes foreign investment in Australia. It's good for the economy and good for jobs. But any significant foreign investment, including this one, has to satisfy the Government's overall national interest test, and they will be applied by the Treasurer in his evaluation of this proposal.
KAFCALOUDES: Prime Minister, thanks for coming on 774 ABC Melbourne.
PM: Thanks very much, and good morning to all your listeners.


Thank you for the invitation to address the Housing Industry Association.
The HIA's annual D.R. Dossetor Address pays tribute to one of the fathers of the Australian housing industry.
Few Australians did more to pursue the dream of universal home ownership than Randal Dossetor.
He was a key figure in the Builders and Allied Trades Association (BATA) and instrumental in the formation of the HIA.
Randal Dossetor's generation was the first generation of Australians to embrace mass home ownership.
For those that had grown up in the depression, home ownership was a rock of security  -  a roof over their heads that could not be taken away.
For those that had returned from war, home ownership was the tangible realisation of the freedom for which they had fought for.
For those post war immigrants that had travelled across the world to make a new life for themselves, home ownership was a stake in Australia  -  proof that they had established a foothold in their new homeland.
In the post-war period home ownership became an important part of the Great Australian Dream. The suburban quarter acre block with a hills hoist, a BBQ and a shed became an iconic Australian image.
The objective of our Government is to continue and strengthen the great Australian dream of home ownership. It is to move Australia closer towards a home-owning democracy.
Our Government's goal is to expand the number of homes and to expand the number of home owners.
Before explaining our housing policy in great detail, let me outline the economic policy framework within which we operate.
The Economic Context
The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
We are committed to developing policies beyond the next electoral cycle; policies which face up to our long term problems, and secure our long term future.
And we are committed to policies which build a strong economy that delivers for working families.
Building a strong economy means:
     * Responsible economic management at a time of global economic uncertainty.
     * Investing in long-term productivity growth by dealing with the long-term neglect of our predecessors in skills, infrastructure and business deregulation.
     * Waging a war against inflation by reining in government spending to put downward pressure on interest rates.
But the Government is equally committed to an economy that delivers for working families under financial pressure.
Responsible economic management must do both: build the overall strength of the economy while doing whatever we can to assist families under financial pressure.
Working Families Under Financial Pressure
The cost of living is rising more rapidly than it has in more than a decade.
Last week inflation hit 4.2 per cent on a year-end basis.
This comes on the back of the Government inheriting from our predecessors the highest inflation rate in 16 years.
Now we in Government spend a lot of time pouring over the figures.
But let me tell you in practical terms what high inflation of this nature means for household budgets.
Over the past year, food costs have risen 5.7 per cent, mainly due to increases in a broad range of household groceries.
For example, a litre of milk has gone up 11.6 per cent over the past year.
A loaf of bread is now 9 per cent more expensive than it was 12 months ago.
The cost of filling up the family car now costs 18.9 per cent more than it did a year ago. That's nearly 20 cents in the dollar.
Health costs have risen 4.6 per cent over the past year, mainly due to an increase in net hospital and medical services rising 5.5 per cent.
Over the past 12 months education costs have increased by 4.3 per cent.
And where the rubber really hits the road for many families is the fact that they have now had to deal with 12 interest rate rises in a row.
And it is the role of government to do everything within its power to provide relief from this pressure.
The job of our government in this Budget is to place maximum downward pressure on inflation and, therefore, interest rates.
The RBA is seeking to counter inflation by raising interest rates and thereby reducing overall spending in the economy.
The Government must cut spending too  -  because if Government spending continues to increase at the same rate as under our predecessors, it will put further pressure on inflation and interest rates.
That's why a budget surplus based on real cuts in government spending is necessary to reduce some of the pressure on working families from high interest rates.
I have said before there is no silver bullet we can use to relieve financial pressure on families.
But where we can act, we must act.
We, as a government, must tighten our belt.
We must engage in responsible spending.
We must reprioritise current government spending.
And that is what we will be doing in the upcoming Budget.
The Budget begins a new era of responsible economic management
Prior to the election, I committed to conservative economic management through producing budget surpluses across the economic cycle.
In this Budget we will honour that commitment  -  although that will mean making cuts to a number of existing government programs.
We have set a target of delivering a surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP to help fight inflation and place downward pressure on interest rates.
Our predecessors set a target considerably less than that for the upcoming financial year.
This Budget will also be a down payment on Australia's long term future.
We will take up the challenge to provide new long term economic leadership for Australia, in key areas like education and health.
We will develop new solutions to Australia's big future challenges like climate change, the ageing population and the rise of India and China.
These were areas of policy neglect by our predecessors.
We intend to deal with this neglect by acting in the nation's long-term interests.
Finally this budget will also support working families under financial pressure.
We promised to support working families and we'll do that in this Budget
Some economic commentators say we shouldn't be delivering tax cuts to working families, but we understand the pressure they are under.
Our message is clear and simple: there are tax cuts in the Government's Budget for one simple reason  -  family budgets are under real financial pressure.
Therefore, as we frame this Budget, we must do three things:
     * Wage a continuing war against inflation;
     * Invest in the nation's future; and
     * Provide support to working families under financial pressure in the here and now.
And all along, ensuring that we keep a weather eye on unfolding global economic circumstances and maintaining a fiscal position that provides flexibility to deal any unforeseen challenges that may arise.
The Housing Affordability Challenge
We are committed to expanding affordable housing as part of our larger goal of restoring economic opportunity and a sense of security to working families who are trying to build secure lives for themselves.
Accessible, high quality housing is central to our vision for Australia's future.
Our ambition is for Australia to be a home-owning society, to extend the opportunity of home ownership to as many people as possible, and to provide high quality, safe, secure homes for those who aren't yet in a position to own their own home.
A place to call home is fundamental to Australian values.
The home is the physical foundation of the family. It is a base from which we raise our children, be part of a community, and build a career.
Home ownership is not just about ensuring that people have a place to live. Homes are also financial assets. For many Australians their home is their largest asset, accounting for on average 55 per cent of wealth.
Owning a home gives us the certainty of a roof over our heads when we retire, making it a little easier to live on the pension.
A few months ago I received a letter from a woman from the town of Woodford  -  about 70km north-west of Brisbane.
She was evidently a hard working single mother with two children still at home. She wrote that she currently does ten hour shifts at a laundry and could “never think of sitting at home and not working.”
But because of the costs of her two sons' education, their bus tickets, and the rising price of fuel, she was slipping further and further away from her dream of saving for a home deposit.
She wrote “I wanted to send you this letter to ask you for some help with the housing problem, not only for me but all the other families who struggle week to week in our tiny town.”
I remember what it is like to feel the sense of security that comes with home ownership.
My mother first bought our family home in Nambour shortly after my thirteenth birthday.
For our family, that home was a source of pride; a weight off our minds; and sense of security.
For the same reasons, owning a home is of deep personal importance to many Australians.
It is our commitment to working families that makes us so determined to act where we can on Australia's housing crisis.
One of the most significant pressures on working families is the rising cost of housing.
Consider the facts:
     * In the last twelve years the median house price in Australia has risen by 200 per cent, compared with an increase of a little over 35 per cent in the CPI.
     * In 1996, the average home cost four times the average annual wage. A decade later the average home cost seven times the average annual wage.
     * In the past decade, the size of the average first home buyer mortgage has more than doubled  -  from $107,000 to $228,000 at the start of this year.
     * To buy an average priced home you now need a six figure salary to service the loan.
     * In 1996, the mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 17.9 per cent of average household income. By the end of 2007, mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 32.3 per cent of average household income. That is an increase from around one in six dollars going on the mortgage to almost one in three dollars.
     * Among low and middle income families alone, there are some 1.1 million families in housing stress  -  that is who are in the bottom 40 per cent of income earners spending more than 30 per cent of disposable incomes on housing. This is 220,000 more families than in 2004  -  an increase of a quarter in just three years.
Home ownership for many these days is as much stress as it is security.
Each 25 basis point costs a household with an average mortgage an extra $58 per month. Thus is it likely that households now face an extra $5,000 a year as a direct result of the interest rate rises on an average property over the last two years.
The consequence of housing stress is working families under pressure.
It also means fewer home owners  -  and more people stuck in the rental trap.
This means a tighter rental market.
That means fewer places to rent and higher rents.
The Real Estate Institute of Australia reports that rental vacancy rates have now slipped below 3 per cent in every capital city.
Rents are rising quickly. In the past year newly negotiated rents rose by about 13 per cent.
Causes of Declining Affordability
At the core, the main reason for the growing housing affordability problem is that there have simply not been enough houses being built to meet the demand for housing.
Just this week, the Housing Industry Association released its March Quarter National Outlook.
It makes for sober reading.
According to economists at the HIA, the forecast number of new dwellings, ‘housing starts', for 2007-08 is just 154,000.
This is only marginally higher than that recorded for the previous two years.
And is still well below the 170,000 housing starts recorded in 2002-03 and 2003-04.
In 2007-08, according to the HIA, the ‘underlying requirement' for new dwellings based on population growth was at least 170,000.
That means we have had a shortage of 15,000 homes for this financial year alone.
According to the HIA, in 2008-09, as a result of interest rate increases, we're expecting to build an extra 154,000 new homes.
It is not until 2009-10, that low affordability and announced new housing policies are expected to see a noticeable increase in housing starts.
The Government's Housing Policy Initiatives
The new Government has an ambitious housing policy agenda.
After more than a decade of neglect, this country needs one.
We now have a Housing Minister, Tanya Plibersek backed up by Departmental capacity in the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs.
The previous Government didn't have a Housing Department.
The previous Government did not even have a Housing Minister.
We've also got clear goals to drive policy making:
     * We want more Australians to own their own home.
     * We want enough housing supply to meet demand.
     * We want first home buyers to have bigger deposits when they buy a home.
     * We want a more affordable rental market that attracts private sector investment.
     * We want to reform the system of public and community housing.
     * And we want to halve the rate of homelessness.
While we are, of course, taking a very disciplined approach to public spending in this budget  -  to put downward pressure on inflation and interest rates  -  we are introducing more new housing policies than any budget in living memory.
The 2008 Budget will include a significant package to tackle the housing crisis.
It includes measures to make saving easier, to cut housing costs, to increase the number of affordable rental properties, and to build homes for homeless people.
This new assault on the housing crisis is in addition to existing measures, such as Rent Assistance and First Home Owner's Grant.
As we move into the second half of the year, we will also be re-writing the book on social housing policy in this country.
The Council of Australian Governments, where the Federal and State Governments negotiate responsibilities and funding arrangements, is knuckling down to deal with the public housing challenge.
The old Commonwealth State Housing Agreement will be replaced with a more comprehensive and streamlined National Affordable Housing Agreement.
The new Agreement will bring together all housing assistance programs including Commonwealth Rent Assistance, the First Home Owners Grant and homelessness programs to create more affordable housing for those who need it.
National Housing Supply Council
The first housing policy commitment we made last year was to establish a National Housing Supply Council.
This Council will be the chief adviser to the Federal Government about housing demand and supply in this country.
We are establishing this body in recognition of the simple fact that Australia cannot address housing affordability without building more houses.
In the last three years alone, we've added almost a million people to Australia's population.
These people have to live somewhere.
And as the figures I cited earlier demonstrate, we simply haven't built enough houses in recent years.
That's why our policy measures are so focused on the supply-side of the housing affordability equation.
The truth is that no-one has been asking the question of how many houses we need, of what kind, and in which locations, for over a decade.
The Council will publish an annual State of Supply report to analyse the adequacy of construction and land supply for the next 20 years.
The Council will bring together information:
     * On the demand side: demographic data about population growth, immigration and settlement; and information about household formation and changing housing preferences for an ageing population and to meet the challenges of climate change
     * on the supply side: land release and availability, planning frameworks and the impact of infrastructure projects.
Industry has information and direct experience in key areas such as skills availability and access to materials.
Currently no-one pulls all of this together to provide clear advice and forecasts so that we can get housing supply right.
The Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek, last week announced Dr Owen Donald as Chair of the National Housing Supply Council.
Dr Donald is a former Executive Director of Housing in Victoria and the first Executive Director of the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute  -  AHURI.
Today, I am pleased to announce that Dr Donald will be supported by a first class team of housing advisers, with expertise in construction, skills, planning and urban development.
The members will include three property industry experts who are here with us today:
     * Former Manager Director of Australand, Brendan Crotty
     * Managing Director of Wilson Homes and HIA Board member, Stuart Wilson; and
     * The HIA's Policy Chief Executive, Chris Lamont.
Welcome aboard.
Other expert members of the council will include:
     * ANZ Chief Economist, Saul Eslake
     * Former Director General of Planning NSW, Sue Holliday
     * SGS Economics Director, Marcus Spiller
     * WA Urban Development Coordinator, Marion Thompson; and
     * University of Sydney, Associate Professor Judy Yates
I am looking forward to the first State of Supply report in January next year.
It will greatly assist in making sure housing supply catches up with demand over time.
If the HIA analysis is right, we already have a housing deficit in the tens of thousands, and it will get worse in coming years as the annual underlying requirement for housing is going to rise above 175,000 a year.
Based on these numbers from the HIA, over the next six years or so, this country is going to have to build an additional one million new homes.
That won't solve housing affordability  -  but it will make a difference.
Building an extra million homes will require a huge effort and considerable resources.
Aside from what Governments do, it will require a huge construction project.
We'll need more land.
That's why the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments are conducting a land audit to facilitate improved housing supply by identifying surplus land for possible release for housing development.
Skilled Workers
We'll also need more workers.
As the housing industry has argued, we can't build more houses without more skilled workers to build them.
Under the previous Government skill shortages in many industries  -  but especially residential construction  -  were neglected.
According to the Housing Industry Association, we will need an additional 20,000 skilled tradespeople over the next three years alone if we are going to build the houses that we need.
The new Government is acting urgently to address the skill shortages by training Australians.
The Government is going to deliver an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years.
We have already fast tracked 20,000 new training places in areas of skills shortages.
We've also established Skills Australia, which will advise the government on skill shortages across the economy.
Today I am pleased to announce that at its first meeting later this month, Skills Australia will consider as a matter of priority the specific needs of the residential construction sector and work towards quantifying what proportion of the 450,000 places this sector needs for the long term.
The HIA has also argued that migration is part of the answer.
The Government acted earlier this year to increase the permanent skilled migration target for 2007-08 by 6000 places, as an immediate response to the skills crisis.
Alongside the permanent skilled migration program, the temporary (457) visa program has also continued to grow strongly and is likely to reach 105,000 in 2007-08.
This is a start because we've listened to the needs of industry and business for who labour shortages are a real concern.
To date the numbers of people coming in through migration programs to work in the residential construction sector have been relatively low and we need to do more to attract skills into the sector.
Housing Affordability Fund
The 2008 Budget will include a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to drive housing construction activity.
The Fund will be used to address two components of house costs: infrastructure charges and levies and ‘holding costs' caused by planning delays.
It has been estimated that housing linked infrastructure charges can add up to $68,000 on a new home in some parts of suburban Australia.
Those charges pay for all sorts of important infrastructure like water, sewerage, transport, and parklands.
But when these charges they are passed on to the homebuyer, it can push the dream of owning a new home out of reach.
The Housing Affordability Fund will form a partnership between the Commonwealth and local governments  -  to invest in this infrastructure to reduce the cost of new homes.
Another part of the equation is ‘holding costs'  -  costs associated with planning and approval delays such as interest, land taxes, council rates and staff costs.
These too can add tens of thousands to the cost of a home.
Our partnership with local government will also address the need to streamline planning and approvals processes to reduce the cost of homes.
First Home Saver Accounts
Our biggest new housing investment in the upcoming Budget is the establishment of First Home Saver Accounts.
Over the next four years, the Commonwealth will invest around $1 billion in these special accounts to help people save a deposit for a house.
If a person sets aside a proportion of their income to the account it receives a government co-contribution.
And when it is growing with interest inside the account, it is taxed at the low superannuation rate.
Our analysis shows that a couple on average wages putting aside 10 per cent of their incomes for their first home, could be able to save a deposit of up to $80,000, depending on returns. This is considerably more than if they held the money in a normal bank account.
The Accounts also support national savings. We estimate that the Accounts will contribute around $4 billion to national savings within four years.
In recent months, the Treasurer has been consulting closely with the financial services sector to make sure we get the details right and have the necessary legislation in place by the end of the financial year.
National Rental Affordability Scheme
Another ambitious commitment is our National Rental Affordability Scheme.
This Scheme aims to create a new asset class for institutional investors in affordable residential housing.
The Scheme will provide an annual incentive to institutional investors to build new homes and rent them to low and moderate income earners at 20 per cent below market rates.
The Australian Government will provide institutional investors with an annual $6,000 refundable tax credit for new buildings.
State and Territory Governments have agreed to contribute at least $2,000 per annum in cash or in kind for each home.
Each property will attract this subsidy for 10 years, at which time the property may be rented at market rates or sold.
In the first five years the Government aims to bring 50,000 properties on line.
If there continues to be demand, the Government will expand the Scheme to 100,000 properties over the following five years  -  a major new investment in Australia's affordable housing stock.
I expect new partnerships to emerge between institutional investors, property developers and community housing agencies.
Today I am pleased to announced the release of a Rental Affordability Scheme Technical Paper for investors, developers and broader housing industry.
The Technical Paper sets out the key features and operating conditions of the Scheme.
We propose delivering the Scheme in two phases: an Establishment Phase  -  allocating 11,000 incentives for dwellings built over next two years. And an Expansion Phase  -  allocating 39,000 incentives for dwellings built from 2010 to 2012.
In early June we will release National Eligibility Criteria for projects under the Scheme.
At the end of June we will put out our first call for Expressions of Interest under the Scheme.
By the end of this year we expect to put out two further calls for Expressions of Interest for projects which will attract the incentive.
With rents rising and working families under pressure, we have no time to waste.
Conclusion
Let me finish where I began.
In the 1950s the precursor to the HIA, the Builders and Allied Trades Association (BATA) was established to promote housing industry and build a new generation of homes for a new generation of Australians.
In the post-war years, Australia benefited from a significant commodities boom. But at the same time the nation faced high inflation and an acute housing shortage.
The paradox of the 1950s economic boom was that the persistent housing shortage meant that even though the country was getting richer, the dream of home ownership was receding out of the reach of many Australians.
There are obvious parallels to today.
The objective of our government is to tackle inflation, take some of the pressure off working families, and to do what is possible to make home ownership affordable.
So that young people can realistically aspire to own their own home.
So that young families can once again see their home as a source of security rather than a source of financial stress.
There is no silver bullet to Australia's housing shortage, but it is the role of government to do everything within its power to provide relief from this pressure.
After all, it's working families that have made Australia the country that it is today.
I don't have to tell this audience that a big part of the realisation of these ambitions lies in our ability to build more homes.
That's where you come in.
This government wants to continue to support you in your vocation, your business, your profession. We want you to be building Australian homes.
We want the HIA, in the spirit of Randal Dossetor, to continue its work to make the Great Australian Dream a reality for more and more Australian families into the 21st century.
It is part of building a stronger, fairer Australia for the future.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, what is rich?
PM: Very interesting question. I think when you look across the country today, people are struggling each day to balance the family budget, we know they form the overwhelming majority of Australians. People way, way, way beyond that, I suppose fall within the category you're talking about.
Our concern at Budget time is to make sure that those who are struggling to balance the family budgets get some support.
MITCHELL: I see the Budget being described as a Robin Hood Budget, take from the rich and give to the poor. That's why I ask what is rich? I mean, what do you consider is the target area?
PM: Well, I think was headline news by a newspaper rather than a statement made by the Government.
MITCHELL: It certainly was, yeah.
PM: That's why I am responding in the way I am responding.
MITCHELL: But it does apply doesn't it? I mean, what is the area where you think people are sort of sufficiently comfortable that you can take from them?
PM: Well, I just go back to the question of balancing a family budget. If you're on median income, $50-60,000 a year, you're looking at putting your kids into childcare and dealing with their child care costs, dealing with the education costs, having to go to the doctor, particularly in winter, a couple of times a month, and paying the pharmaceuticals, and struggle with your mortgage. I mean they are the people who make up the vast majority of our country who we need to look after. People way beyond that -
MITCHELL: So what's that $100,000, $150,000?
PM: I don't put a number on it Neil. It's just that I think once you get right up there, there's the whole question about whether you need support from Government. People struggling with the budget, and I presume that the vast majority of your listeners today, they are the people who we need to try and help and they are the people we intend to provide support to through the Budget.
MITCHELL: So that is your Budget to hit fat cats?
PM: Well, we haven't used that term and I'm not intending to use that term, but I say people at the upper end of the income spectrum, don't actually need direct support from Government much.
MITCHELL: So will they lose things?
PM: Well, let's wait and see what the Budget outlines. But in terms of our commitments before coming to office, and certainly since then, we've said consistently that working families are under financial pressure.
Our first priority is to honour the promises we made to them before the election, to make sure that we provide some support to them, given the challenges that they are under.
MITCHELL: You have made it known that you're going to reverse share option deals for executives. Is that right?
PM: Yeah, that's one measure, that's in the public domain already and that deals with the taxation treatment of share options. Largely for corporate executives. And that's revenue measure worth something to the Government. If you make a saving there, you can use that to provide support for working families in other areas, that's important.
MITCHELL: Not a big saving though is it, $80 million over the course of the Budget, it's not much?
PM: Well if you've been through the process that I've been through with the Treasurer in the last several weeks and months, let me tell you, every million bucks counts. So, you go through it line by line, in fact we're down to the $100,000 lines of Government expenditure, to make sure that you've got enough overall to deal with the challenge that you face in providing support to working families.
MITCHELL: You really get down to that level, you have a look at the expenditure of $100,000 on something?
PM: Well, usually not much below because you're dealing with a heftily sized budget. Not usually much below the million point. But we have been down to smaller line items than that.
MITCHELL: Is it right that funding to nursing homes will be cut?
PM: When it comes to the Budget, let's wait for everything to be put on the table. We can go through a list of in and outs and we won't get very far.
MITCHELL: You're releasing some of it, you're saying the share options will be hit for example. You're talking about spending on migrant education. You're releasing some of it. It's a reasonable point to ask. Because it's out in the public domain that spending on nursing homes will be cut $150 million?
PM: Well, we take our responsibilities when it comes to people who need aged care services very seriously. This has been the subject of much, much discussion within the Government and we are confident that we are going to provide the levels of support necessary to give people proper care in those areas.
It's quite understandable that at this stage of the Budget process, Neil, you are going to have people from one industry group or another out there whacking out their press statements or ringing up media outlets and saying x, y and z - a, b and c are under threat, put some pressure on the Government and see what happens. That's standard and it's natural and it's normal. I understand that.
But our job is to produce a responsible budget for the overall economy and that means fighting the fight against inflation. We are waging a war against inflation at present and the reason for that is, if you don't, and you don't deal with reckless Government spending, some of which we inherited from the past, then you're going to place further upward pressure on interest rates and that's very bad for people.
So, priority number one is to produce a responsible Budget as part of responsible economic management. Honour our election commitments to working families and invest in those areas of neglect where the previous Government didn't act in health and education.
MITCHELL: Okay. So that obviously means cuts in some areas doesn't it?
PM: Well we've never hidden from that, and all will be revealed on Budget night. But if your going to honour your election commitments to working families on tax cuts - $31 billion worth for low to middle income earners, then things have got to give elsewhere, if your going to produce a Budget which is responsible in overall economic terms.
MITCHELL:Okay. Is it correct, as reported, that the surplus will be between $20-$21 billion dollars?
PM: Well, again we have to wait until budget night for that. We set in January the target of producing a surplus of 1.5 per cent of Gross Domestic Product. The reason we set that target was because we believe it's is necessary to produce savings overall, into the economy so that you don't fuel the fires of inflation through government spending. And that is the target we've been working to. The absolute final landing point will be revealed on budget night as well.
MITCHELL: Fair enough. It would it be fair to say, everybody in the country will be touched by this budget?
PM: Well because the budget represent such a huge slice of national economic activity, it will affect everybody. Through the tax scheme, through the proposed approach that we take in health and education and across the board. I think if you are serious about a national budget, setting national policy priorities for the long term future, then yes people will be affected, either immediately or over time.
But our big commitment, our big commitment, given the increases in mortgages and groceries and petrol and the rest, is to make sure that we do whatever we can to support families under pressure.
MITCHELL: So if it's not a Robin Hood budget, what is it? You write the headline?
PM: I think that will be written subsequent to it. But can I say, number one: responsible economic budget. That means, fighting a war against inflation, to make sure that we don't provide further inflationary pressures which provide further upward pressure on interest rates. That is number one.
The number two is: working families are under financial pressure - what can we do to support them to balance the weekly family budget? And that is really hard. That is why there is $31 billion already in announced tax cuts for them. But also critically, increase the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent.
If you are on $50,000 a year, and if you have got a child in childcare, my advice is that you will be about $1000 a year better off. That is a significant addition to people trying to put together the family budget.
MITCHELL:Can I also suggest this is the first big test for you isn't it? I mean, there have been a lot of other things, and some of them symbolic, some of them not, but this is really nuts and bolts government, you have got to get it right.
PM: Oh look, no one hides from that Neil. Budgets are tough, we have spent days, weeks months sitting in that room. And going through it, as I said, line by line. And you know something, it won't be perfect, there will be people who complain, we believe the overall thrust will be right. Responsible economic management, helping families under pressure, and critically investing in those areas of neglect for our long term future, like health and education, you have got to get things right.
MITCHELL:Sorry, 96900693 or 13 13 32, speak to the Prime Minister direct, give us a call now. 96900693 or 13 13 32. Are you planning to focus on motor bike riders?
PM:Well Anthony Albanese, the Minister for Transport has put out some pretty stunning statistics on this and I was unaware of these myself. Motorcyclists now account for almost 15 per cent of all road deaths.
That's huge, last year 240 motorcycle riders were killed and 5000 hospitalised, these are huge numbers, so.
MITCHELL:What do you do about it?
PM:Well we are now working on a national road safety strategy through the Australian Transport Commission. We are going to look at a whole series of practical measures from the community about how we can bring this appalling fatality and injury rate down.
MITCHELL:Just can I ask you quickly too, gay marriage, would you ever allow it?
PM:Oh look, we have said right from the beginning that marriage is between a man and a woman. And I made that commitment before the last election. We will honour that commitment. We support the removal of discrimination from same sex couples and from de-facto heterosexual couples when it comes to basic, basic arrangements in terms of tax, superannuation and the rest, and also a nationally consistent relationships register. But when it comes to civil unions, as it is described, civil unions mean the effective amendment of the marriage act, and that is something we don't support.
MITCHELL: If the ACT attempts to go ahead with it, will you block it?
PM:Oh we are still in discussions with the ACT Government in terms of their proposal. No such other proposal is being advanced by any other state government that I am aware of. And the ACT has some views. We will discuss that through. But we have got a responsibility to honour what we said to the Australian people before the election. And that is, remove all practical levels of discrimination, as they impact on same sex couples. A move towards a nationally consistent registration, register, as they have in Tasmania. I understand now in Victoria, there is one proposed as well.
But on the question of marriage, for us that is sacrosanct, between a man and woman, under the Marriage Act, our position hasn't changed.
MITCHELL:Similar area in terms of a territory being involved, but I know the senate is reviewing the decision to overturn the Northern Territories euthanasia law. Do you support euthanasia?
PM:No, it is a conscience vote. But my view has always been clear cut on this. And I say that as someone who has, like many of your listeners, I am sure, has been in family circumstances where you have seen people very near and dear to you, in the case of myself, my mother, who died of cancer. And it is not pretty to watch.
But my own personal view, and these are matters for conscience vote and people can, if it becomes a matter for vote in the federal parliament, people exercise their conscience differently, but you asked me directly what my view is, that's it.
MITCHELL:Would you oppose a vote, would you oppose the concept of it being voted on in the parliament?
PM:Well on the question of the euthanasia, it depends entirely on what proposals are put forward across the country and how they impact on the federal parliament. All these life matters, including euthanasia, have historically been the subject of a conscience vote on the part of our government's members and I think I can say the same in relation to the coalition. And if one came forward from whatever quarter, then that would be my approach.
The reason for it, it is not some sort of abstract sort of ideological point of view, it is just, my own personal view is that if you change the laws in this area, I do become concerned about the way in which these things can drift over time. Particularly in the attitude taken by older people themselves, or people with terminal illnesses, who then conclude that they are being an increasing burden to their families and then conclude, that it is in other people's interests not their own best interests to seek euthanasia.
MITCHELL:That's true, but do you agree it is happening already? It's fairly, it's commonly practiced in Australia already. It's just not legal.
PM:I don't have data on that, Neil. I couldn't comment. I know that palliative care practices are difficult and complex areas of medicine. And, again I just go back to my own personal experience with my own Mum, who was provided with palliative care at home. And people providing that palliative care were terrific.
Complex area, really hard, and people going through this trauma right now listening to your program, I don't apply any judgment to anybody whatsoever. But, you ask me a direct question what my view is, that's it.
MITCHELL:Thank you, we'll take a break and come back with calls and more questions for the Prime Minister.
[AD BREAK]
CALLER:Good morning Neil, and Mr Rudd.
PM:G'day David, how are you?
CALLER:Very good thanks. Now, I live in Gippsland, in Victoria. You've brought these taxes in for the mixed drinks to try and alleviate the problem that we have with the binge drinking with the young children.
PM:Yep.
CALLER:But, these prices are also affecting the prices that adults, that have paid taxes like myself for 30 years, we're just an average family, and mixed drinks like Johnny Walker and cola or Jim Beam and cola have all gone up.
PM:Well, we've got a real problem when it comes to teenage binge drinking. Talk to any police commissioner across the country and they'll tell you that. Difficult to deal with this. Some of the data we've got from the National Household Drugs Survey says we've now got 30-40,000 teenage girls aged 14-19 and 23,000 boys the same age, consuming alcohol at a level that puts them at high risk of long term harm. And if you look at what they're drinking, take girls for example, in the year 2000, 14 per cent of female drinkers aged 15-17 were reported drinking these ready to drink drinks  - 
MITCHELL:But is it fair that David pay the price for that?
PM:I'll just finish this one other point  -  and by 2004, that had increased by 60 per cent. So there is a big linkage between binge drinking on the one hand and these forms of drinks.
David, sorry it's hurting you. It's a blunt instrument. I understand that. But, we've got a responsibility to act when it comes to young people, and police commissioners across the country are crying out for action.
And on the linkage, if I could just add this, there is a report which I draw your attention to, came out about two or three years ago, it's called ‘The Prevention of Substance Abuse, Risk and Harm in Australia', a review of the evidence, this is by the National Drug Research Institute, and Centre for Adolescent Health. It says, it is established beyond serious doubt, that all other things being equal, increases in the price of alcohol usually leads to an overall reduction in consumption.
It's a blunt instrument, I'm sorry it's affecting you, but I'm really, really worried about what's happening with our young people.
MITCHELL:Hello Lyn, go ahead please, Lyn.
CALLER: Thank you, Neil. Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: G'day Lyn, how are you?
CALLER: I'm well, thank you. I'm just wondering why it is that you and your Government always refer to the working families as the only ones under financial hardship.
There are many single people, there are many elderly people, who are not in a family situation, who are also under financial hardship.
PM: Well, families we use, in just a very broad sense. I mean, if you're a single person who is a pensioner or a self-funded retiree, or someone who is being provided cared by a carer, everyone is part of a broader family. So, when we say working families, we're not talking about some nuclear family of Mum, Dad and two kids, it's people who are out there in a set of family relationships either under one roof or beyond one roof, who are under financial pressure. And that means our senior Australians as well.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, you've explained the increasing dangers in Afghanistan and we've had an injury and a death this week. Yet, only two weeks ago when the 70 troops came back from Afghanistan, you had no representative there to meet them. Why?
PM: Defence, have a practice, the Department of Defence, have a practice in the past, as I'm advised, which is when you have smaller groups of soldiers arrive home from either Iraq or Afghanistan, they don't normally advise either the Minister or the Government.
What happens is, when they bring home smaller groups, like that 70, that at a later stage when all the troops from that particular deployment are back home, often on many different flights, they then are brought together for a general welcoming home parade.
We've had three of those in the last six months. But you know, in the last six months there have been 82 separate flights carrying people to and from Iraq and Afghanistan alone? But in the future, I actually think we need to do it differently. And that's why we've told Defence that when we have any group of troops returning home, of any size, what we'll do is make sure that we've got a Minister there to meet them as well. But that's a change in practice from the past.
MITCHELL: Why have you decided to suppress documents on the inflationary effects of workplace reform? Isn't it reasonable that we know that?
PM: I'm unaware of the details of that. I saw a report on it this morning. FOI decisions are made by our FOI decision markers within individual departments. But I'm really uncertain of the details in that particular case. I wish I could help you, but I can't.
MITCHELL: John Brumby has suggested that he might, the State Government might buy you a house in Melbourne. Now, I know you said that if it was privately funded then it would be okay. Would you take one from the State Government?
PM: Oh, look, Neil you're on a hiding to nothing in Melbourne however you answer this question, aren't you?
MITCHELL: Oh, I think it's a bit silly  -  I don't think you need it, do you?
PM: Can I just say, my overall view is, if the private sector down there want to provide something like that, and there is absolutely no cost to the taxpayer, then it's something we'd look at.
I was in Melbourne the other day, stayed at a hotel. That was fine. Got around, spoke to people, went down to Geelong, and went to the local shopping centre, talked to a lot of people. That wasn't affected one way or another in terms of where I stayed the previous night.
MITCHELL: Do you know how much the Summit cost you? I see $250,000 to Melbourne University, $60,000 to a PR company, which is owned by one of the Government staffers. How much did it cost all up?
PM: All of those facts will be fully documented once we get to the Senate Estimates process, and they'll all be fully disclosed. I think on the precise details of the individual amounts, I don't have that in front of me. But, we'll be completely transparent about that. The other thing to say, though, is, remember, we had all of these people, senior executives from around the country, coming free of charge and dedicating their time free of charge. If you're running a Summit for a 1,000 people from across the country, doing it as inexpensively as we have done it, I think is a very important achievement of itself.
As for the company you referred to, as I understand it, you're referring to CMAX Communications. It's a Canberra based firm, listed as the preferred media partner for Federal Government business under the previous Howard Government, and been awarded numerous contracts by them in the past over the last four years.
MITCHELL: Yeah, but it's owned by one of your staffers.
PM: As I understand it  - 
MITCHELL: And there was no tender.
PM: As I understand it, the tendering arrangements were consistent with Government tendering guidelines. The Prime Minister's Department deemed that within the time frame necessary, they would go for what is called direct source provisions. As I said, all of those things will be fully disclosed at the appropriate time through Government Estimates when all the numbers are in. And it will be completely transparent on that point.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time. I read today, that according to Time Magazine you are one of the most 100 influential men in the country, and according to someone else, you're groovy.
PM: Well, I can say absolutely no to the second point. And, if you ask any of my family to give their view on that, and they'd probably agree. Grooviness is not one of my virtues.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time. I appreciate it. The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I acknowledge the women and men of the great Australian labour movement.
And I acknowledge this great branch of the Australian Labor Party  -  this branch so crucial in forming this Australian Labor Government.
I acknowledge the contribution of our rank and file members and supporters in every division right across this State in adding 10 new members to the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party.
Jason Clare in Blaxland.
Greg Combet in Charlton.
Mike Kelly in Eden-Monaro.
Craig Thompson in Dobell.
Belinda Neal in Robertson.
Bob Debus in Macquarie.
David Bradbury in Lindsay.
Janelle Saffin in Page.
Maxine McKew in Bennelong.
And in the Senate, a bloke who goes by the name of Mark Arbib  -  who is now in the process of reading and memorising that classic thriller called Standing Orders of the Senate.
I congratulate all those candidates and their supporters who came close but who in the end didn't get over the line.
This happened to me in my first election and my exhortation to all our people on the ground is simple: stay the course, ours is a course worth fighting for.
I want to congratulate Karl Bitar on his elevation to General Secretary.
I hear it's been a quiet start for Karl at this conference.
I thank Premier Morris Iemma and his government for their cooperative approach with the Federal Government in our combined efforts to begin the long process of reforming the Federation.
And I thank the members of our industrial movement, under the leadership of Unions NSW, who dedicated this blood, sweat and tears to the campaign of 2007 in defence of Australia's working families.
And it is with pride that I now address you as the 26th Prime Minister of Australia.
Sixty years ago, the 16th Prime Minister of Australia also addressed this NSW conference.
At the 1948 NSW State conference Ben Chifley, the son of Bathurst, son of NSW, and son of Australia, said to the delegates of that conference:
 “The problem that we have set out to right is in seeing that all the community are in a position to have a decent standard of living. That is the ultimate goal of the Labour movement whatever the reversals in that long, long road. That is the task, after all, that we have set ourselves. 
The Labour movement can only be great... by the united efforts of all those who believe in it, of individuals who are not in it to get out of it something personal, but in it because it is a great political party designed to bring all the community a fair share of the things the world is capable of giving them...
 These things are really worth fighting for.”
 Ben Chifley, the railwayman, reminded us then as he reminds us now, that this party and this movement have a great responsibility to this nation.
And what is that responsibility: 
     * to plan for the future;
     * to reform for the future;
     * to build for the future;
     * always applying our continuing commitment to the great Australian value of a fair go for all;
     * always striving to provide a decent life for all Australians (not just for some), and
     * beyond that, striving also to make this nation Australia an even greater force for good in the world.
     * To embody therefore in our work Ben Chifley's great vision of a ‘light on the hill'
Ben Chifley was a planner, a reformer and a builder:
     * From 1942 he planned post-war reconstruction;
     * He established comprehensive soldier re-settlement schemes;
     * He gave all returning soldiers an entitlement to vocational education;
     * He launched Australia's post-war immigration program;
     * He established the Commonwealth/State housing agreement;
     * He introduced free hospital treatment and (against trenchant opposition) a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme;
     * He supported the establishment of the Australian motor vehicle industry;
     * He launched the Snowy Mountains hydroelectric scheme;
     * He established the Australian National University.
But Chif' wasn't just active on the home front.
Chif also recognised Australia's responsibilities abroad.
     * He steered Australia through the last tumultuous years of the War that threatened our very survival as a nation;
     * He prevailed in the party's internal debate on ratifying the Bretton Woods Agreement establishing the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund because we had to be part of the global economic system, not removed from it;
     * Together with Evatt, he framed Australia's role at the San Francisco conference in the formation of the United Nations;
     * He despatched Evatt to chair the United Nations Special Commission on Palestine, and
     * He helped broker the independence of the Indonesian republic from the Dutch.
Chif was no slouch.
All this was done in five years.
Chif believed that we had to seize the day.
Not simply drifting into the future, but actively shaping the future.
Exerting our every effort to direct the future rather than standing idly by while the future is simply allowed to direct us.
The Mission of the new Australian Government
That's why the mission of the new Australian Government is to build a modern Australia, capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future, as well as securing the future for the nation's families.
For the economy, that means building a globally competitive Australia based on a productivity revolution, so that we don't fall behind the rest of the world.
That in turn means an education revolution as part of a single galvanising vision to create the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
That means the national government taking the lead on national infrastructure  -  rather than just bleating about the States.
That means reforming the Federation  -  rather than simply perpetuating the blame game  -  because the Australian people have had an absolute gutful of the blame game and Australian businesses want us to lead the nation towards a long term goal of a seamless national economy.
That means reforming our nation's health and hospitals system.
That means working together to close the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australia.
That means rather than just hoping that climate change will go away, stepping up to the plate and acting on climate change both at home and abroad.
And it means, once again, Australia resuming our proper place in the councils of the region and the world where our voice very simply has been too silent for too long.
Our responsibilities to the nation are therefore great.
Just as the nation's expectations of us are great.
And that is why we must dedicate our heart and soul and strength to the task that is now at hand.
Our achievements so far
We have been in office barely five months.
And we've not exactly been sitting on our dig.
     * Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol and we are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
     * On the first day of Parliamentary business, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians, and we have begun a policy program of closing the obscene gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia.
     * In the first legislation placed before the new Parliament the Government abolished AWAs. We've introduced the Transition Act; we've released our draft National Employment Standards, and we've begun the process of modernising industrial awards.
     * The Government has also embraced a comprehensive productivity agenda based on a new program of microeconomic reform. It begins with early childhood education, continuing with computers and trades training centres in every secondary school, 450,000 new training places and thousands of new university scholarships, along with the introduction of Skills Australia to spearhead our response to skills shortages.
     * The Government has also enacted legislation to establish Infrastructure Australia, and has begun the implementation of our national broadband network to bring Australia fully into the digital economy of the 21st century.
     * The Government has commenced a new era in Commonwealth/State relations through the COAG reform process - to reform the Federation, to remove the unnecessary regulatory burdens on business and to begin building a seamless national economy.
     * The Government has taken action to improve health outcomes by immediately investing $650 million in our public hospitals to reverse the trend decline in the Commonwealth funding share and start an immediate blitz on elective surgery waiting lists, while also establishing the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to develop a long term national health reform plan.
     * The Government has appointed the Commonwealth's first Housing Minister in twelve years and has announced its intention to implement a new National First Home Savers Account; a new National Rental Affordability Scheme, together with a new Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce infrastructure costs for new houses and new developments  -  all to help preserve the great Australian dream for Australian working families to own their own home in the future.
     * The Government has also commissioned its first White Paper on homelessness and is looking at how to invest in new solutions in partnership with community and business groups to deal with this blight on us all.
     * The Government has identified over one hundred items of legislation in areas such as tax, superannuation and social security, that need amending to remove discrimination against same sex couples, and has decided to act through Parliament to remove this discrimination once and for all.
     * The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the state and territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over use and climate change.
     * Internationally, the Government has been active in establishing the three pillars of our relationship with the world: a strong alliance with the US, engagement with the United Nations (including our candidacy for the UN Security Council after a 25 year absence) and a strong commitment to our own immediate region, including a determination to tackle under-development across the Pacific Island states through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
     * And most recently, the Government has advanced the cause of gender equality by appointing the first woman Governor General in 107 years  -  it's been a long time coming.
As you can see, we've been busy.
But this is only a start. 
There is much, much more to be done in the period ahead  -  beginning with the Budget.
Our approach to the Budget
The Government's approach to the Budget is based on four fundamental principles.
     * We are committed to building a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  and an economy that also delivers for working families.
     * Second, we will honour our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
     * Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future  -  acting on areas of long-term neglect of the previous government in education, health and in infrastructure, climate change and water.
     * And fourth, we will also be planning and providing for our nation's long-term national security needs in supporting this most fundamental function of the state.
In building a strong economy that delivers for working families:
We must wage a war on inflation  -  because inflation causes higher interest rates, and because inflation hurts working families.
We inherited the highest inflation rates in 16 years, and ten interest rate rises in a row, from a government that said they'd keep interest rates at record lows.
High government spending pushes up inflation and puts upward pressure on interest rates.
That's why in the budget we are reducing government spending  -  to place downward pressure on inflation and interest rates.
We are committed to delivering a new era of responsible economic management that reprioritises government spending to where it's needed most.
We are also committed to keeping a weather eye on unfolding global economic circumstances and maintaining a strong budget surplus that provides flexibility to deal with any unforeseen challenges that may arise.
Second, we intend to deliver on our commitment to help Australian families under financial pressure.
We understand that families are under financial pressure because of rising costs of living such as mortgages, rents, groceries, petrol and childcare  -  unlike our predecessors who told us working families have never been better off and still tell us today that the impact of rising prices and inflation are a fairy tale.
Some economic commentators say we shouldn't be delivering tax cuts to working families.
But we promised to implement tax cuts.
And we promised to increase childcare assistance in the Budget.
And we intend to deliver on these promises.
We can't ease all the financial pain working families are under but we are doing what we can to help  -  fighting against the emergence of two Australias.
Third, we intend to deliver on our commitment to the Australian people to prepare the nation for the long-term challenges of the future  -  to secure a long-term future for working families.
New leadership for Australia's future in areas of national priority such as schools, universities, TAFE colleges, hospital and economic infrastructure  -  areas which have been neglected by our predecessors.
New leadership to prepare Australia for major new challenges including the rise of India and China, climate change and water and our ageing population, where our predecessors once again neglected to plan.
Finally, there is the security of the nation itself.
There have been billions of dollars in defence waste  -  in one major project after another. This has got to stop.
That's why we are delivering a major defence White Paper later in the year, to properly prepare for Australia's 21st century needs in a significantly changing threat environment.
To do this, we will need to provide sufficient long-term funding to meet our future defence needs.
Prior to the election we committed to 3 per cent real increases in defence expenditure out to 2016, and in the Budget we'll be honouring that commitment over the forward estimates and beyond.
The Budget will contain difficult challenges. I don't hide from that. Some decisions will be unpopular. But our responsibility is to get the priorities right for the long term, and we intend to do that.
Budget commitments for older carers
A couple of weeks ago, we held a Community Cabinet at Jamieson High School at Mulgoa, in western Sydney.
We had many remarks and questions from families under financial pressure.
One of those contributions was from a woman responsible for the care of her adult son who has a profound disability.
She spoke about the fear that so many older carers have across our country  -  a concern for what happens to their disabled children once they are no longer able to provide the support that they have offered during their lifetime.
We do not pretend to have a total solution to this problem.
But it is time that we began to turn the corner.
The Government is making a commitment of $1 billion to fund disability services to address unmet needs and increase support for carers.
In this Budget we are investing $900 million in the new Commonwealth, State and Territory Disability Agreement (CSTDA) for the planning and management of disability services including respite, supported accommodation, community support and community access.
The previous Government was planning to deliver this $900 million in funding independently of the States and Territories, duplicating administrative costs and missing the opportunity to attract matching funding.
By allocating this money through the CSTDA, we can begin leveraging double the funding for disability services through negotiation with the States.
Today I announce that in addition to this $900 million investment, we will commit a further $100 million in the Budget in immediate new capital funding for supported accommodation for people with a disability.
These funds will complement recent State and Territory initiatives, such as the NSW Government's Stronger Together Plan.
This package is particularly focused on providing a response to the concerns that older carers often have about the future accommodation and support the needs of their children.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has estimated that the total unmet demand for accommodation support and respite services by people with disabilities is around 23,800.
So this is a small first step - there is a long way to go. It only provides help for hundreds rather than thousands.
But this $100 million together with our announced $900 million investment is designed to provide additional funds to state and territory governments to begin to reduce this unmet demand.
This new capital funding will be provided immediately to State and Territory Governments, with no matching requirements, to enable them to increase the supply of supported accommodation as a matter of priority.
Importantly, this initiative will begin to help older carers of children with a disability to plan for the transition of their children to appropriate supported accommodation in the future.
It will help provide some peace of mind to older carers.
It is time to start turning the corner and start providing a fairer go for these most vulnerable Australians.
Our challenges beyond the Budget
The Budget represents but one part of our long-term plan for dealing with the nation's future challenges.
Our frame of reference for the future cannot simply be the next 12 months.
In fact, if we are serious about the future, consistent with the spirit of the recently concluded 2020 Summit, we need to be serious about the next 12 years.
The nation now expects us all to lift our sights beyond the electoral cycle for the simple reason that so many of the challenges that now confront us transcend the electoral cycle.
For example:
     * For the rest of this term we will need to confront the long term, interrelated challenges of our tax, welfare and retirement income systems  -  to make sure that we have the right balance between global competitiveness, individual incentive, a social safety net and a capacity for people to live with dignity in their retirement years;
     * A second challenge for the remainder of this term is to deal with the recommendations of Infrastructure Australia and move ahead the national audit of our infrastructure needs and a plan to act on that audit;
     * A third priority for the remainder of this term must be reform of the Federation. The 2020 Summit identified this as being a major structural drag on our national economic performance overall, as well as a source of fundamental frustration on the part of the nation's longsuffering consumers of government services.
     * A further challenge for our remaining term will be to get our domestic and international responses to climate change right, so that we are part of the global solution rather than just part of the global problem. At the same time ensuring that we are not placed at any competitive disadvantage in the context of new global arrangements.
     * We must also begin reforming the way in which we govern.
     * Should Labor be re-elected at the next election, the agenda of work that we will confront would continue to be substantial, not least within our own immediate region where we must see a long-term turnaround in the development trajectory of the Pacific Island states of the south-west Pacific.
The development trends in these small states have been heading in the wrong direction for decades  -  to their long term detriment and to ours.
The reality is that it will take the better part of the decade to start turning these states around  -  and given our leadership role within our region, and our own national interests, we have no alternative but to implement this long-term course of action.
The role of the Party
If we are to achieve any of these objectives for the Party and for the nation, we must remain in government.
It may come as a surprise to some people, but we did not win the last Federal election by a large margin.
Just as it may come as a surprise to some that we would lose the next election with just a small swing against us.
And the truth is, we now face a period of global economic uncertainty.
The challenges we face therefore are formidable.
You as the members of our party are its heart and soul.
You are also its hands and its feet.
If we are to prevail, it is paramount that we remain focused - absolutely focused - on the task at hand.
Remember as Chifley said to us sixty years ago: “the Labour movement can only be great by the united efforts of all those who believe in it”.
Chifley also once described our party as a “great family spreading its political philosophy across the whole continent”.
Like any family, from time to time there are disagreements.
And I'm reliably informed, there's been the odd disagreement or two here over the last few days.
The time has come to dust yourselves off.
The time has come to move forward once again.
The time has come to get on with the business of building a modern Australian nation capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
In his last address to this conference on the 10th of June 1951 (just three days before his sudden death) Chifley issued this appeal to the members of the Party, an appeal that rings down the generations:
“The Labour movement was created by the pioneers... to make decisions for the best for all the people...... we are after all, the only political party in this country which stands for the masses [of people]...”  
“I hope the spirit which animated the people who began the Labour movement goes on today... I can only hope that the sincerity which you have shown over the years in victory and defeat won't be lost; that you will be inspired by the same things which inspired the pioneers of this movement....”
The challenge of Labor in government is to plan, to reform and to build  -  consistent with the values of those who pioneered our party; always applying those values to the new challenges of the future, challenges of which those pioneers could scarcely dream.
Carving out the nation's future.
And all along, seeking to advance and protect the lives and livelihoods of those families that need us.
On this our nation depends.
I thank the conference.


In the upcoming budget the Rudd Government will commit one billion dollars to fund disability services and increase support for carers. 
This one billion dollar commitment includes an extra $100 million in capital funding, to build more supported accommodation for people with a disability.
The extra $100 million in funding for the Rudd Government will provide for up to 35 new facilities accommodating up to six people each.
These new supported accommodation places will be available to people with a disability who may not currently have appropriate accommodation.
They will also be available for people with a disability whose parents are ageing and can no longer care for them at home.
These additional facilities to assist with the transition of people with a disability from home to other accommodation arrangements will allow older carers to better plan the future of their children.
These additional places will give older carers greater peace of mind and the reassurance of knowing that alternative arrangements are more available when they are no longer able to provide full-time care.
Caring for someone around the clock is both physically and emotionally demanding. Carers make enormous personal sacrifices and through their selflessness also make an invaluable contribution to the nation.
This new $100 million in capital funding will be provided immediately to State and Territory Governments. This capital funding will be allocated on a per capita basis and State and Territory Governments will not be required to provide matching funding.
The new accommodation facilities will be supported on an ongoing basis by the transfer of $900 million into the Commonwealth, State and Territory Disability Agreement (CSTDA) currently being renegotiated.
These funds have been offered on a matched funding basis delivering up to $1.8 billion for disability services including more respite services and ongoing funding for the new facilities.
The previous Government was planning to deliver this $900 million in funding independently of the States and Territories, duplicating administrative costs and missing the opportunity to attract matching funding.
The new investment of $100 million in capital funds for supported accommodation is a small but important step to addressing unmet demand and supporting carers to plan for the future care and provide dignity for family members with disability.
This package is particularly focused on providing a response to the concerns that older carers often have about the future accommodation and support needs of their children.
The Australian Government has also committed to the establishment of a National Disability Strategy to help improve long term support for people with disability and those who care for them.
The Rudd Labor Government's first budget is one step in the Government's long term commitment to improving the lives of people with disability, and their families.


A meeting between Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Premier Anna Bligh at Kirribilli has delivered a $100 million health cash injection, which the Queensland Government will use to train doctors in Queensland.
The Premier flew to Sydney to seal the landmark deal with the Prime Minister.
The money will be used to reimburse the state for the cost of training 235 medical students at Griffith University on the Gold Coast at a cost of approximately $60M up to 2010.
The Commonwealth has also agreed to pick up the cost of these medical places from the 2010 intake onwards.
On top of that the Queensland Government will use the Commonwealth Government funding to make a $40 million contribution to help relocate Griffith University Medical School on to the site of the new Gold Coast Hospital.
Medical training was traditionally an area of Commonwealth funding but Queensland was forced to use State funds to start the medical training scheme in 2005 when the Howard government refused to fund the vital places.
As a result the Queensland Government became the only state government in Australia to fund medical training places.
Yesterday the two leaders shook hands on the $100 million health injection, which Premier Bligh said was in stark contrast to years of under funding in health by the Howard government.
“I first started negotiating this deal with the Prime Minister at the COAG meeting in March but we have been working out the finer details of the funding over the last number of weeks,” Ms Bligh said.
“The Howard government starved our health service of funds for years. This is money we need and are entitled to and I am please to see that the new era of co-operation between Queensland and Canberra is starting to deliver.”
The Prime Minister said he was pleased to have had a very good meeting with the Queensland Premier in Sydney.
“After a lot of discussions with Anna, the Commonwealth Government has agreed to inject $100 million immediately into the Queensland health system to help the Queensland Government continue its reforms,” the Prime Minister said.
“Since day one I have made it clear that the Federal Government is committed to ending the blame game on health.
“Australia's health system needs more doctors, and the Premier has told me that she will use this money in Queensland to help fund the excellent medical training program at Griffith University.
“The Premier said the reason for her decision was to make up for the fact that the Queensland Government some years ago took on Commonwealth funding responsibility by itself  -  paying for 235 medical training places.
“Today continues a new era of cooperation between the Federal Government and the Queensland Government on our health and hospitals system.”
The Premier approached Prime Minister Kevin Rudd at the COAG meeting in March to argue that his government should right this wrong.
Weeks of negotiations followed over the quantum of funding, with the Premier and the Prime Minister closing the deal yesterday.
“This deal will free up $100 million of state money that we can reinvest in our health system,'' said Premier Anna Bligh.
“We will direct every dollar saved towards Emergency Departments in our major hospitals.
“This where our hospital system is really feeling the pressure.”
“We are half way through a $10 billion health action plan and every dollar counts. This money will be invested to areas of need right across our health system.”


PM: First of all, it is good to be back here with Sharryn Jackson, Member for Hasluck out here in the city of Gosnells, back in Perth, back in WA. The reason for being here is to talk about our preparations for the upcoming budget, our first budget at the new Australian Government and what it means for WA, what it means for the nation.
Four principles underpinning our budget. The first is responsible economic management, which means ensuring that we have an economy which also delivers for working families. Second, delivering on our commitments prior to the election, to those working families, those families who are already under financial pressure.
The third is, honouring our commitments to invest in the nation's future which means infrastructure, health, education, some other areas as well. And finally, making sure that we are providing for our long terms needs for defence and security.
A few words on each and then happy to take your questions.
The responsible economic management means that we are fighting the fight against inflation. This is absolutely essential. Inflation is the enemy of working families, it is the enemy of the economy and it's the enemy of businesses.
That's why it has got to be front and centre in our focus in this upcoming budget. That's why we will be making cuts to government expenditure to make sure that we produce a responsible overall outcome.
I notice, that the Liberals say that you don't need to worry about that. That there is no economic case for budget cuts. We completely disagree.
When you have got inflation at 16 year highs, as we inherited from the previous government, if you continue to grow government expenditure at the same rate as our predecessors, you add to inflation and you put further upward pressure on interest rates and further upward pressure on prices in the economy. And those prices affect working families.
Our response therefore is responsible economic management, doing the right thing, making cuts in government expenditure, reprioritising what government does, so that we produce a responsible economic outcome.
Fighting the fight against inflation to make sure that we are keeping the overall health of our economy strong into the long term. That's number one.
Number two, I said we have to deliver on our commitments to working families. Out here in this part of Perth, working families are also under financial pressure.
Mortgage prices, house prices, rents, cost of petrol, cost of groceries, childcare costs, all going up.
We have got to do what we can to relieve some of that pressure. That is why we will be honouring our pre election commitments to bring in tax cuts for low to middle income earners and secondly, to increase the childcare tax rebate.
If we do that, and we honour our commitments to those working families which we made prior to the election, we help to deliver some, some support to those families who are already under financial pressure.
Despite the fact many economists have said we shouldn't honour our pre-election commitments to bring about tax cuts, we think it is the right thing to do.
The third principle is this: and that is to invest in the nation's future. And one of the things I have been discussing today with Sharryn and with the mayor out here in Gosnells is the nations and this part of the nation's future infrastructure needs.
We have got to invest in the future of infrastructure, invest in the future of education, invest in the future of health.
The previous government said, ‘all these things, let's just blame the states, make sure it is someone else's problem'.
Our view is to say, ‘no, we the national Government must become partners in investing in the nation's future'.
And for WA, the critical challenge lies in partnering with the Government, and others here in this state, to make sure that WA get, gets what it needs for the future when it comes to national support for this state's infrastructure needs. And that comes right down to the local area as well, whether we are talking about roads, whether we are talking about rail, whether we are talking ports, whether we are talking about broadband. All critically important.
And finally, on the question of providing for our effective long term national defence, here in WA defence is important as it is right across the nation.
You have a strong defence community here in Perth. And therefore we as the new National Government take our responsibilities on national security and defence with the utmost seriousness.
That's why were bringing in a defence white paper at the end of this year. That's why that will provide us with a platform for long term planning and we intend to deliver long term strong growth in defence outlays into the future to plan for our effective national security.
Therefore if you are framing a responsible budget for the nation, responsible economic management, ensuring you are delivering for working families and supporting those families under financial pressure, investing in the future and providing for our long term security.
If I could conclude with this. Dealing with the challenge of inflation means dealing with it by cutting unnecessary Government expenditure and boosting our investment in skills and infrastructure.
The Liberals today have said that their response is to simply bring back Workchoices, the enemy of working families. The Liberals have said let's bring back Workchoices.
We say the path to the future lies in responsible economic management, helping working families under financial pressure and making sure that we have all those responses right for the future.
Mrs Bishop for example, the Deputy Leader of the Liberal party says today “Labor should drop their roll back of workplace relations reforms and build on the reforms of the Howard Government'.
Mrs Bishop from Western Australia has said today that the Liberals plan for the future is simply this: to bring back Workchoices and not to learn from their mistakes of the past. That's their approach for the future.
Ours is completely different.
A balanced industrial relations system, cutting unnecessary Government expenditure and helping working families under financial pressure.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: You talk about families under pressure out here but Treasury analysis said that your policies will bring up prices and inflation (inaudible)
PM: The report you refer to today was from a piece of Treasury advice which, first of all, pre dated the Labor party's release of its industrial relations plan. It pre dated the release of the details of the Governments plan for the implementation of its industrial relations policy.
And also pre dated I note, the Liberals subsequently radically changing their own industrial relations laws at the time, when they brought in the so called ‘Fairness Test', which became an absolute nightmare for business.
The key thing to emerge from today is this: the Liberals have said in releasing this early advice, which they had from early last year, the Liberals are saying today that their plan for the future is to bring back Workchoices. That's the clear cut message.
Under no circumstances will we be brining back Workchoices. We will be cutting Government expenditure and providing necessary support for working families on the way through.
JOURNALIST: Are you preparing Australians basically for a (inaudible) not necessarily a popular one?
PM: We think that a number of the decisions we take will not be popular. But we believe our overall responsibility is to ensure that we have a responsible exercise in economic management and that means making sure that we are fighting the fight against inflation, delivering a substantial Government surplus, cutting back on unnecessary Government expenditure.
I mean, where have we got to in the 21st century when the Liberal Party is now attacking the Labor Party when it comes to inflation from the left and the Liberal Party to us is now saying nationally that there is no economic case to cut Government expenditure.
I don't understand that at all. Is Mr Turnbull and Dr Nelson saying we should increase instead Government expenditure on the excessive rates of increase in Government expenditure which they had in the past?
I think that's grossly irresponsible. So responsible economic management, fighting the fight against inflation and ensuring that we cut unnecessary Government expenditure, that's the way ahead and delivering to working families, some support on the way through.
JOURNALIST:Just regarding these treasury documents, have you had any other advice that your IR plans may have this same answer?
PM:All the advice that we have from government on the question of fighting the fight against inflation has dealt with government expenditure out of control, it's dealt with capacity constraints in the economy like infrastructure, which pushes up prices if you don't have enough infrastructure, which also deals with skills shortages like you have acutely in Western Australia. And none of our advice has touched on the question of Labor's current industrial relations laws.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well that half a billion that I mentioned this morning from the housing affordability fund goes to bringing down the costs of new developments in new areas like this.
So it doesn't matter whether you are a younger person or an older person buying into a development like this. If we, for example, partner with Gosnells in bringing about a local application of our National Housing Affordability Fund, that would be available to people buying houses in this development, whether they are older buyers, middle aged buyers or new buyers.
That is one thing. We have a separate policy called the First Home Savers Account policy which helps first home buyers out there buying their first house.
There's another policy as well, and that is our National Housing Affordability Fund, and that is for people who aren't yet into the home ownership market but who need access to affordable rental accommodation.
All together, about $2 billion worth of initiatives on housing, in contrast to our predecessors, who didn't believe this was their responsibility.
JOURNALIST:Tax cuts (inaudible)
PM: The key thing here is to make sure you have got it in balance. We made a solemn commitment to working families before the election, that we would provide tax cuts. And we are serious about what we said. We intend to do that. In doing so, we also cut out Mr Howard's tax cuts for the wealthiest Australians - billions of dollars worth of those tax cuts for the wealthiest Australians because we believe that people on the lower to middle income brackets is where the help is needed.
At the same time, to be bringing down a budget which is economically responsible, you have got to draw down, government outlay in other areas. And that is why we have been out there through the budget review committee, through the razor gang, cutting into our other lesser priority government programs. That is what we have been doing.
The objective, helping working families, in a practical way, trying to balance their weekly budget, at the same time producing an overall balanced, and overall responsible budget document which keeps the economy strong into the future, but still delivers for working families. You had a follow up?
JOURNALIST: Baby bonus (inaudible)
PM: Well, let's wait for, let's wait for our budget night on all the detail. I am not going to go into each individual line item. But you know something, the critical thing for us is to make sure we are delivering for working families, and I don't understand why you have got the Liberals out there saying that there is no economic case for cutting any Government spending, and at the same time defending welfare payments for the wealthiest Australians, I don't really understand that.
JOURNALIST: Burma (inaudible)
PM: Well I have seen that report from ASPI which is the think tank which operates in Canberra. And one of the reasons we are currently working with the states and territory governments and in fact, I understand the Ministers from those governments met in March on this question, was to pull together what each state and territory government's contingency plans are for dealing with a major natural disaster.
We believe this is of critical importance for future planning, not just the traditional reasons. If you look at climate change, the intensity of natural disasters is increasing.
If you look at the pattern of cyclonic activity in and around the world, as well as the huge human impact of that as well. We therefore, must be ready and fully prepared, I believe the ASPI report is timely and a reminder that we need to review all of our preparation efforts. The Government has been working with state and territory governments as late as March on this, and we will have further to say on this in the future.
And on the question of natural disasters, can I just add this, in relation to the terrible loss of human life, through the cyclone in Burma. This is an appalling tragedy, an appalling tragedy, when you look at such a huge loss of life. And I would call directly on the regime in Burma to provide complete and unfettered access to all international aid agencies trying to deliver assistance on the ground in Burma now. Forget politics, forget the military dictatorship, let's just get aid and assistance through to people who are suffering and dying as we speak through a lack of support on the ground.
That's a direct appeal to the government in Burma.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's simply an initial response, we're in an assessment phase right now in terms of what is needed. As you know the death toll rises by the moment. One of the principle problems we face at the moment is to ensure proper coordination and proper access on the part of the emergency humanitarian relief agencies. And we ourselves, together with other foreign governments are working with the government in Burma to try and maximise unfettered access for these agencies. Whether it's World Vision, whether it's the UN agencies or others. It's quite critical for the future.


AUDIENCE:Well, thank you very much Mr Prime Minister. My name is Michael (inaudible), I'm state manager with (inaudible) here in Western Australia. Let me add my very warm welcome to you. I was happy to hear your comments in relation to housing. You might have deduced from my accent that I'm not originally from here. I hail from Canada. And -
PM:I thought you were Irish, actually.
AUDIENCE:I hear that a lot.
PM: It was a joke, actually.
AUDIENCE:It seems to me looking at some of the initiatives that your Government is magnanimously and diligently unrolling that a lot of the emphasis seems to be on the demand side. Back in Canada and other nations around the world that were predicate on the dream of owning one's own home, we see the introduction of urban growth boundaries having a significant impost on the price of housing. There used to be historically in this nation, from what I understand, a three-to-one multiplier whereby the median income would entitle one or enable one to purchase a home for roughly three times the price. So, given the current median income or around $60,000 one would ideally hope to be able to purchase a new home for around $180,000. We still can see this occurring in some cities around the world, such as in Canada and United States. But of course, sadly, that's not necessarily the case here anymore and I was just wondering what sort of initiatives we can anticipate on the supply side, such as the removal of upfront development contributions for infrastructure costs as well as some of the imposts associated with master planning. Perhaps the privatisation of DA applications? Because of course at the moment here in Perth we see the median income approximately a nine to one multiplier for the cost of a home, down in (inaudible), I believe, it's around 11 times. So it's clearly unaffordable and I was just wondering if we could perhaps entertain the prospect of removing some of the urban growth boundaries so that we can get back to the original Australian dream of around a three-to-one multiplier? Thank you
PM:Thanks for the question. Certainly when I was here in January, we conducted our first Community Cabinet here in Perth, and we threw the doors of the Cabinet open to several hundred people in the community hall and the discussions afterwards with families in the area, it was quite plain to me that housing affordability is a huge challenge here, huge. And it doesn't matter what part of this state you travel in, it's the same response.
The first thing we have done is to recognise this as an area not just of state responsibility but of national responsibility. It maybe of surprise to you in this room to know that prior to the election of this Government there was no Federal Minister for Housing. Now there is one, her name is Tanya Plibersek, and she has this as her portfolio responsibility.
Secondly, we acutely understand the difference between demand side measures and supply side measures in dealing with the overall housing equation.
On the demand side measure, part of the challenge is to ensure that people can actually save enough to cross the deposit threshold, and having consulted extensively with the industry, including the Housing Industry Association and others, what we've put forward how we are now consulting the industry is a First Home Savers Account, which basically provides preferential superannuation style taxation treatment for first home savers. And the objective is to make it more possible for people to get an effective deposit nest egg set aside over a five year period.
But that's one part of the equation
On the supply side of the equation, we actually have more resources dedicated. Let me just go to 2 programs in particular.
One is a half billion dollar Housing Affordability Fund which is designed specifically to deal with one of the problems you mentioned. We acutely understand what occurs in terms of the pass on of infrastructure costs from local authorities, engaged in a local development approval processes, onto the actual purchases of new homes in new housing developments.
This half billion dollar fund is specifically designed for the Federal Government to partner directly with local authorities across the country. Those who wish to participate with the objective of bringing down infrastructure pass on costs by up to 20 per cent to people buying houses in those areas.
A related measure is what we are currently seeking to advance through COAG and other forums to accelerate the development approval process across the country. Because, if there's one consistent playback from the housing industry nationwide, it's that the time lost through the development approval process is costing big in terms of the final pass on price to the buyer.
The second major program I would point to is another half billion dollar fund that we've promoted on the rental side. Part of the challenge, and I'm sure here in Perth as well, based on previous conversations here, is just the ballooning cost of rental accommodation.
We believe that we need to create a new class of investable assets for people, called affordable rental accommodation. Therefore, the purpose of this half billion dollar National Rental Affordability Fund is to provide a resources through which we can partner with large scale private developers to ensure that a proportion of a new rental housing development is provided at an overall market cost of about 20 per cent of what it would otherwise be.
That is there for a cost ultimately to the tax payer, we accept that. But we've provided funding, and again, based on advice to us from the Housing Industry Association and others, to construct 50,000 such units of affordable rental accommodation in the period ahead. And if that works, we'll extend that by another 50,000.
Both those measures, a billion dollars worth of activity on our part in supply side measures. For us, this is just the beginning. Housing policy we regard as critical. We don't intend just to wave it by and say ‘that is a problem for punters who can't make it on the way through.' We actually have a real concern in this area not to mention, not to ignore, the challenge of homelessness.
PM:You've got a very quiet audience here in Perth. I've just been at the New South Wales State Conference, it's quiet different to this. Crowd was as big, but not nearly as well behaved.
AUDIENCE:Prime Minister, (inaudible) if I can I add my welcome and also thanks for your address this morning.
You spoke in much of your talk about the need for long term planning for infrastructure and the importance of taking a long term view. I just wonder what your comments are in relation to the three year election cycle we have at the federal level, and whether that got an airing at the 2020 Summit, and just generally some discussion around that issue which does conflict politicians when it comes to making long term planning on some occasions? Thank you.
PM:I think there are both funding challenges here and regulatory challenges. If I could just back up on infrastructure a bit, because it is a big, big challenge here in the west. And I get the logic, I'm from Queensland, I understand these things. We generate a lot by way of the nation's overall export revenue, and because of the nature of the mining activity in my state and yours, then, frankly, the infrastructure needs are huge and right across the spectrum you don't have a argument with me on that.
I actually understand the conceptual underpinnings of what we're dealing with. So the question then is how do you advance it rather than just talk about it? And it flows, I think, in two categories. One is getting the regulatory settings right. And two is making sure that you've got a National Government which is prepared not to absent itself from the field here, to become active, funding, participants.
On the regulatory side, part of the problem when it comes to private participation in infrastructure investment is that nationwide we have inconsistent PPP regulations. We are now working through COAG this year, with the target date of the end of this year, producing nationally consistent PPP regulatory frameworks for large scale private investors wishing to engage in investment activity in Australia so that they don't have to chop and change from one state regime to the next when it comes to the regulatory underpinnings of those investments.
There are parallel debates about access regimes, and if you're concerned about infrastructure, can we move more effectively in the direction of a nationally consistent approach to access regimes when it come to infrastructure as well. That is a more vexed area, I'm acutely conscious of the complexity of that debate, but these are two areas where we need to see real progress if we are to provide comfort to large scale investment from the private sector.
The second challenge is what is the public sector doing.
The State Government of WA, and I know it's producing its Budget tomorrow, strong economy, strong robust performance on the part of the State Government when it comes to economic management. But the resources here, at the end of the day, are limited.
In the past, the National Government attitude to national infrastructure provision was basically absent Auslink, that is absent roads. The National Government was not interested. This is a fundamental departure. We are saying for the first time as a National Government we are interested. Roads, rail, ports, broadband. And that's why we have created firstly a Minister with responsibility for infrastructure, that's Anthony Albanese. Secondly, to be advised by infrastructure Australia, which is to be headed by Sir Rod Eddington. And thirdly, for support for this to come from what we announced prior to the election period, as the Building Australia fund.
This is a major departure in National Government policy.
There's a further add on for the west and prior to the election I came here and spoke about the need to use a vehicle called a WA Infrastructure Fund, given the particular acute needs of infrastructure in this part of Australia. I referred to that in my formal remarks today. We intend to make use of such a fund in the future, particularly to deal with your challenges here, because your state in vast, the population is small and therefore there is an added responsibility for the National Government to make sure WA gets its fair slice of the action.


Can I thank the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry for the invitation to speak to you today.
It is a pleasure to be here in Perth with so many leaders of WA business - you and your companies have made a major contribution to the success of your state and for the country itself. 
In fact, as you come back to Perth each time, there is a palpable sense of excitement, of enterprise and enthusiasm about this part of Australia. You feel it, you sense it.
Just walking bridge to bridge last night after I flew in from Canberra. Once again you run into people who are always up beat, talking about what  they are going to be doing next, it's a great sense of the ‘possible' that you have here in WA and I congratulate you for it.
It is very difficult to capture the spirit of a place but insofar as I experience WA, there is something of Queensland about this place.
And I mean that in every positive, Bronco related, Brisbane Lions related way, which is that, we wont talk a lot about that, and that is that you have about you a culture of enterprise and the possible, which you should cherish and nurture.
It is a good thing, and to be encouraged further by whoever occupies the Treasury benches in Government, be it in Canberra, or here in Perth.
A lot has been said and written about the remarkable economic conditions here in the West.
Western Australia has undoubtedly benefited from the extraordinary mining boom of the last 5 years.
But to that I would add, the challenge lies in how do we ensure that this extraordinary boom, and the dividend from it is invested into the state's and nation's long term global competitiveness. And that is very much the mission statement of the Government which I lead.
When I come here I find dynamic entrepreneurs leading innovative businesses  -  like the CO2 capture technology firm CoolEnergy; a home grown West Australian company that is delivering cutting-edge clean technology solutions to the global energy sector.
In this state I find innovation, creativity and enterprise.
I find workers whose creativity and enterprise have made so much of what happens here, an emblematic example of success in the age of globalisation.
On my first visit here three months ago, after becoming Prime Minister, I made my first major speech as Prime Minister about the future of the Australian economy.
I spoke of our commitment to tackle Australia's inflation challenge through responsible economic management  -  because inflation is the enemy of the economy and the enemy of working families.
I also spoke of the Government's commitment to build Australia's long term productive capacity through new investments in human capital, in physical capital and a new era of microeconomic reform.
We can't rest on our laurels, we have got to push ahead. We have got to move forward.
Today I'd like to report on some of our preparations for the Government's first Budget  -  a Budget that will deliver on our commitments and begin to lay the foundations for Australia's long term economic future.
Economic context
I should begin by saying that when we assumed office, we knew that this year's Budget would not be easy.
When we won Government on November 24 last year, we knew there was a lot of hard work to do.
We knew we were inheriting an economy which had sustained high inflation  -  the highest this country has seen in 16 years. 
We knew these mounting inflation pressures had contributed to 10 interest rate rises in a row.
And we knew that we had to put an end to an era of fiscal irresponsibility with public expenditure growing at 6.85 per cent in the four years to 2007/08  -  the highest growth rate in more than a decade.
Back in November, we knew that these conditions would present difficulties for the Government's fiscal strategy.
But since then, a series of international and domestic events have made economic management tasks, somewhat more challenging.
The global financial crisis has deepened more swiftly than expected.
The world economy has slowed so rapidly that the IMF was forced to revise down its global growth forecasts - not once but twice - in the early months of this year.
The Australian stock market has lost more than 25 per cent of its value  -  with the ASX All Ordinaries Index falling from its high of 6,873 points in November to a low of 5,130 points in March. And, even though some value has been recovered, this has heavily impacted already, for example capital gains tax revenue.
Crude oil prices have surged  -  up more than 34 per cent from $86 a barrel in November to a peak of $119 a barrel in April. These are big changes and they do represent significant changes in the operating environment in which government's now find themselves.
The annual rate of headline inflation has reached 4.2 per cent in the March quarter of 2008. Excluding the impact of the GST, this is the highest recorded inflation rate since inflation targeting was formally introduced in Australia in 1996.
These events  -  unforseen by most commentators six months ago  -  have reshaped the global economic landscape.  And reshaped so much of the national economic landscape which we must now navigate as the elected governments of Australia.
These events leave no doubt that what Australia needs now is a responsible Budget  -  based on the fundamental conservative principles of economic management.
Budget principles
In the context of these domestic and international economic challenges, the Budget process has been long, tough and demanding and you would expect that.
We have had to make some difficult decisions on the way through and they won't all be popular.
But within the confines of our fiscal position and the broader domestic and international economic constraints, we have stuck to our principles.
For too long budgets have been an annual political set-piece in which the government of the day delivers a swathe of handouts and quick fixes.
That is no longer good enough, given the challenges we face long term.
If Australia is to compete and succeed in a rapidly changing world we need a long-term approach to fiscal policy.
We need leadership that looks beyond the three-year electoral cycle.
That is why I am determined that this budget won't be another “one year wonder”.
It will be a Budget that sets a platform for long term growth.
It will begin to prepare Australia for the future  -  for the next 5, 10 and 20 years.
And in this year's Budget, we will build on this platform.
We'll do the same in next year's budget and the one following.
Three isolated budget packages over the electoral cycle actually don't add up to much.
What we want to be able to do is look back over this three year term and know that we delivered the first tranche of a coherent long-term fiscal and economic strategy for the nation, to prepare the nation for the economic challenges of the 21st Century.
And if we are elected again, I can tell you that we will continue to deliver budgets which build on the strong foundation that we will lay down this year.
That foundation is based on four baisc principles.
Our first priority is to build a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  a strong economy that also delivers for working families.
Second, we are committed to honouring our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future  -  acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water.
Fourth, we will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs in a rapidly changing threat environment.
These are the principles and priorities which have guided us in this Budget process, and they will be reflected in the outcomes on Budget night.
1. Building a strong economy that delivers for working families
Just yesterday, the Reserve Bank noted that there is “considerable uncertainty” about Australia's economic outlook.
In these uncertain economic times our objective is to put the Australian economy on its surest possible economic footing for the long term.
The first priority of building a strong economy is to tackle Australia's inflation problem.
Inflation is not just an abstract figure.
It's just not a number on a page.
It is not just a bureaucratic statistic.
It is a cancer which eats away at the living standards of all Australians.
Inflation hurts the working families struggling to put food on the table for the family.
A litre of milk now costs 11.6 per cent more than it did a year ago.
A loaf of bread is now 9 per cent more expensive than it was last year.
Vegetables cost nearly 10 per cent more than they did last year.
Health costs have risen 4.6 per cent over the past year.
Recently I received a letter from a young mother from Burpengary, a suburb of about 15,000 people 40 kilometres north of Brisbane.
She wrote that she had a job as a sales assistant in a butcher's shop in Brisbane earning $17 an hour.
She had to give up the job because the cost of child care for her three kids and the petrol for her drive to work was so high that she was only $50 a week better off after a whole day's work in the shop.
She wrote: “how is anybody supposed to get ahead when the cost of living is so high. If you buy three litres of milk and a loaf of bread  -  you have just spent $8.00.”
I get letters every week from every corner of the country telling me about the financial pressures faced by many working families.
I have said before there is no silver bullet to provide instant financial relief to those families currently facing these sort of financial pressures.
But where we can act, it is the Government's responsibility to do so.
That is why I believe we must do everything within our power to fight inflation because inflation is pushing up mortgage rates and pushing up the cost of living.
It is why I believe that inflation must be a key priority of this budget.
Unfortunately not everyone is of this opinion.
Mr Turnbull, for example has suggested that inflation is a “fairy-tale”.
He said last month that inflation is “under control”.
He said that it was at “manageable levels”.
Dr Nelson said yesterday that the inflation challenge is a “charade”.
Well, I am here today to say that's not my view. It is not the Government's view.
Nor is it the view of the International Monetary Fund which reported its World Economic Outlook last month that Australia's “main short-term policy challenge is to keep inflation pressures in check.”
Nor is it the view of working families who face higher prices and higher interest rates.
There may only be three people in Australia who don't believe that inflation is hurting working families through rising prices and rising mortgages.
Dr Nelson
Mr Turnbull, and the Tooth Fairy.
And all three are out of touch on this question.
If we do nothing  -  if we sit on our hands like the alternative Government is suggesting  -  then the responsibility for reducing inflation will fall to the Reserve Bank's blunt monetary policy instrument; and that means further hikes in interest rates. 
That's not good for anybody.
We now face the scenario of the Liberal Party of today attacking the Federal Labor Government from the left on fiscal policy.
At a time of high inflation the Liberal Party is urging us not to cut government spending, and presumably therefore, to increase government spending.
I regard this as gross economic irresponsibility in our current circumstances.
And I believe it reflects short-term populism.
The Government is committed to reducing inflationary pressures on the economy through this Budget.
That's why we've got to cut government spending. 
The Budget will cut irresponsible spending because profligate spending has been one of the main reasons we are in this inflation predicament.
We need responsible fiscal policy to start heading in the right direction.
That's why a budget surplus based on cuts in government spending is necessary to reduce some of the pressure on working families from high interest rates.
In opposition, I committed to conservative economic management through achieving budget surpluses, on average, over the economic cycle.
In government, we will honour that commitment.
We will do so in large part by reducing government spending.
The surplus I set as a target for the Government in Perth, when I was here last, in January of 1.5 per cent of GDP was considerably higher than our predecessors were planning for the upcoming financial year.
We will have to make significant cuts to a number of existing government programs, to achieve that higher surplus and to reprioritise spending to reflect the nation's greatest needs.
I can announce today that this Budget will achieve a one-off 2 per cent efficiency dividend across government.  
This efficiency dividend of itself, will yield a further $1.3 billion over the next four years - over and above what the previous government had planned.
Does Mr Turnbull, for example, believe  -  having said that there is no economic case for budget cuts, that the Government should not impose this $1.3 billion saving?
What does the Liberal Party of today stand for if they have abandoned a commitment to fiscal conservatism?
What does the Liberal Party of today stand for stand for if they no longer believe we should cut government spending?
Or that we should eliminate government waste?
I notice also that the Liberals today have been returning to the question of inflation and the inflation challenge and it's interrelationship with industrial relations.
They released a piece of Treasury advice from the early part of last year on the impact of industrial relations on inflation.
This Treasury advice dealt with the impact of industrial relations settings on the overall inflation rate, together with a range of other factors.
Of course the Treasury advice in question was released before Labor released it's industrial relations policy, before it released it's industrial relations policy implementation plan and before I should add, the Liberals themselves introduced their own Fairness Test as part of the subsequent revision to industrial relations laws.
That Fairness Test, as businesses in this room will perhaps attest themselves, adding considerably to the administrative impost on the business.
I would say overall that when it comes to placing these things into proper context, it is important to put them into their chronological context. It is important also to clearly deduce from this engagement by the Liberal Party in this debate, in this fashion, that they are seeking to argue that the only effective tool for dealing with the inflation challenge, is industrial relations and Workchoices.
Our view is that when it comes to dealing with the challenge of inflation, what we need is a five part strategy, the core of which lies in producing a significant budget surplus, around the target that we announced when we were last here in Perth, and achieving that target through effective savings through an attack on unnecessary Government spending.
2. Delivering on our commitment to help working families under financial pressure
The second commitment of this Budget is to help working families under financial pressure.
Our opponents have told us that working families have “never been better off”.
They say the effect of inflation on family budgets is exaggerated.
We had a Community Cabinet out in Western Sydney only a few weeks ago and we listened very carefully to what people were saying to us out there.
Working families face a daily battle to cope with financial pressure because of the rising costs of living  -  every day costs such as mortgages, rents, groceries, petrol and childcare.
It is our job as a responsible national government to help where we can.
That is why we are delivering $31 billion of tax relief over the next four years, directed at low to middle income families.
Some economic commentators say we shouldn't be delivering tax cuts to these families. But we promised to do so, and we promised also to increase childcare assistance in the Budget, and we intend to deliver on that.
We will be increasing the childcare tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent and paying it quarterly - at a cost of $1.6 billion.
These measures won't take away all the financial pressures facing working families.
But they are practical and responsible policies that provide assistance where it is most needed.
Let me tell you what this means in practical terms.
For an Australian family with one parent working full time and one parent working part time (that's three days a week) and a combined gross income of $75,000, this budget will deliver tax cuts worth $27.88 per week or $1,450 each year.
And if that family has one child in long day care for 30 hours a week, the Government's additional Child Care Tax Rebate will deliver an additional benefit of $19.05 per week or $990 per year from 1 July 2008. 
In addition to these measures, the Government will also tackle the housing affordability crisis with a $1.4 billion package of practical policies.
In the 2008 Budget we will include a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to drive housing construction activity.
It will also establish First Home Saver Accounts to help young people get onto the ladder of home ownership. Over the next four years, the Commonwealth will invest around $1 billion in these special accounts to help people save a deposit for a house.
In addition, the 2008 Budget will look after those people in our community who are doing it toughest.
In the upcoming budget the Government will commit $1 billion to fund disability services and increase support for carers.
This $1 billion commitment includes an extra $100 million in capital funding, to build more supported accommodation for people with a disability so that more older carers can have assurance that there are good facilities to look after their loved ones when they're no longer able to do so.
It is our job as a Labor Government and as a responsible national Government to make sure that those who need that practical level of assistance, get it.
3. Delivering on our long-term policy challenges
Our third objective in this Budget is to prepare the nation for the long-term challenges of the future  -  to secure a long-term future for the nation and for working families.
We are committed to providing long term economic leadership for Australia, in key areas like education, health and infrastructure.
We will face up to Australia's big future challenges like climate change, the ageing population and the rise of India and China.
These were areas of gross policy neglect in the past. But they cannot be neglected any more.
We need to begin implementing long term solutions to address these long term challenges.
The longer we neglect our long term challenges, the harder it will be to deal with them.
This neglect was nowhere more evident than in infrastructure.
Consider the facts because they are particularly apposite for the infrastructure challenges here in the West:
     * CEDA reports that as a result of underinvestment, the backlog in infrastructure investment for water, energy and land transport alone is around $25 billion dollars - and that this is costing us around 0.8 per cent of GDP a year in lost production. That's $8 billion a year;
     * According to a CEDA report, if we were to address this backlog, it would increased exports by 1.8 per cent, increase business investment by 1.2 per cent, and lower the consumer price index by 3.2 per cent.
     * Further, it is estimated that a 1 per cent increase in investment in infrastructure results in a permanent increase in economic output of 0.17 and 0.39 per cent;
     * Australia ranks 20th out of 25 OECD countries for our investment in public infrastructure as a proportion of GDP;
     * The Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics estimate that urban congestion  -  caused by inadequate infrastructure - will cost families and businesses nearly $20 billion by 2020;
     * Australia's broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch, with average download speeds lagging at 27th among all developed economies;
     * ALGA estimates that inferior broadband infrastructure could cost regions up to $2.6 billion dollars and 30,000 jobs;
The economic consequences of this underinvestment in physical capital are significant.
Consequences for economic growth.
Consequences for productivity growth.
Consequences for jobs.
And consequences for rising inflation and therefore higher interest rates.
The Government is committed to investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
We know it is not possible to turn around overnight the long term infrastructure neglect that the nation finds itself with today.
But we are certainly going to try.
We are certainly going to make a start.
It's time to set our eyes on addressing the nation's long term needs in road, rail, ports and other infrastructure.
The funds that we allocate to the nation's infrastructure challenges in next week's Budget will be properly and responsibly allocated through the benefit of the Government's new statutory advisory council, entitled, Infrastructure Australia.
Infrastructure Australia will ensure that Australia's infrastructure needs are comprehensively audited and prioritised.
Australia will produce its first Infrastructure Priority List  -  which will guide of dollars in private and public sector investment in coming years.
This will help create the pipeline of projects needed to make investment in infrastructure easier.
This advice will be independent  -  at arms length of government  -  to make sure that the infrastructure investments are made according to the national interest, not political interests.
This infrastructure funding will be in addition to the Western Australian Infrastructure Fund the Federal Government committed to during the election.
Nowhere is the case for infrastructure investment more clear than here in Western Australia.
More than any other state, WA's economic activity in recent years  -  primarily through the mining boom  -  has been the foundation of the nation's economic strength.
The WA Infrastructure Fund will be set up to invest in State infrastructure projects over the next 20 years.
Less than 12 months ago, the nation's peak infrastructure organisation  -  Infrastructure Partnerships Australia  -  released its list of infrastructure priorities.
For Western Australia, The IPA's priorities are:
     * The Fiona Stanley hospital in Murdoch
     * A multi-user sporting arena for big football matches
     * Transport links between the Perth CBD and Northbridge
     * Dredging the inner harbour at Fremantle's port
     * Development of a new port facility at Oakajee in the Geraldton region
     * The Goldfields Water project
This is their list. What it indicates is the fact that many here, and many round the nation, are taking an active interest in underlying the importance of Government's coordinating effectively to ensure that in partnership with the private sector, the nation's and the state's long term infrastructure needs are met.
Infrastructure Australia will work in conjunction with the Private Sector and with State Government's to ensure that we get the priorities right and we get the priorities right for WA's long term infrastructure needs.
The WA Infrastructure Fund recognises the contribution Western Australia makes to the national economy. That fund, will ensure that WA gets the infrastructure it will need for the future, ensure that it is playing it's part to ensure that we have got the right infrastructure framework for this state for the future, to secure Australia's long term prosperity.
4. National Security
The fourth major objective this Budget is to strengthen Australia's national security.
Our Government is ever mindful of the national security challenges we face.
The threat from terrorism is real.
Australian citizens have been the victims of terrorist attacks.
Our embassies overseas have been targeted.
Terrorist groups continue to look for ways to attack.
Groups such as Al Qaeda continue to mutate, regroup and present new threats.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban is trying to re-establish its regime.
We have had a terrible reminder in recent days that the Taliban are only too prepared to kill to further their aim.
States like North Korea and Iran continue to pose a threat to stability in the region and around the world by seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
To meet these traditional security threats in a changing world, we need to work even more closely with our key security partners.
In a connected world, we also face a new range of threats to our national security.
Threats like pandemics that spread across national borders quickly; a threat that requires us to build a robust regional capacity to respond.
Threats like natural disasters that also need region-wide cooperation to respond to effectively.
To meet this array of threats we need a comprehensive national security strategy.
We need to back this up with clear statements of our defence strategy, our foreign policy and our approach to domestic security threats.
For too long Australia's approach to national security has been piecemeal.
Defence spending has been wasteful in the past  -  let's never forget this $1.1 billion Seasprite helicopter fiasco.
We will be improving defence acquisition systems to ensure that resources are used wisely. We will be committing the necessary funds to defence.
We will determine our defence priorities for the long term future through this year's Defence White Paper. This will provide us with the planning platform for the future.
Prior to the election we committed to three per cent real increases in defence expenditure out to 2016, and in the Budget we'll be honouring that commitment over the forward estimates and beyond.
Our aim with the budget is to build the long term national security defences of the nation for the future.
The Government's broader economic strategy
In each of these four big areas, this Budget is about the nation's long-term future.
The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
If we are to build a modern Australia for the 21st century, we will need to take a long-term approach to the physical and human capital needs that drive productivity growth.
This Budget will establish the platform for building long term productivity growth. We will invest in an education revolution.
We need to invest to make our future infrastructure needs in areas such as roads, rail, ports and broadband to make sure that we are dealing with those challenges long term.
We also need to invest in greater workforce participation by reforming our tax and welfare system.  Beyond the Budget, the Government is taking a long-term approach to policymaking.
Australia needs a long term, comprehensive economic strategy to enhance our global competitiveness by arresting the recent slide in our productivity performance.
To do this we must restart the economic reform process that has stalled in recent years.
That is why the Government will match our commitment to new investment in this Budget with a renewed commitment to microeconomic reform through the COAG process.
That's why the Government has advanced a large program of work beyond this Budget for the remainder of this term.
We need to move towards a seamless national economy by cutting the wasteful duplication and red tape facing business.  
We need to end the blame game and make the Federation work effectively, in critical areas like infrastructure, education, training and health.
We need to implement our agenda for reform of the Federation, including a plan for business deregulation.
In partnership with state governments we have identified already 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy.
We need to modernise our tax, welfare and superannuation systems to recognise rather than penalise hard work, and to enable Australian families to get by and to get ahead.
We need to act decisively and responsibly on climate change.
And should we be re-elected we face a long term agenda of work responding to the mega-challenges represented by the rise of China, the rise of India as well as promoting stability and development in the South West Pacific, where developments have not been headed in the right direction.  
To conclude: I am optimistic about Australia's economic future.
And I am optimistic about WA's future.
Spending a day in the stunning city of Perth reminds me everything that there is to be positive about this great country of ours, Australia.
Australia can and should strive to be the best place in the world to live, work, and raise a family.
If there was one, overwhelming message from the recently conducted 2020 Summit in Canberra it was this: you won't achieve long term success if we don't plan for the long term.
You can't change this country if you're only interested in the short term.
You can't repair the physical infrastructure of this nation if there is a one-year horizon.
You can't build Australia's human capital and skills needs if you're only planning out to the next election.
You can't transform the federal system if you're only interested in the next opinion poll.
That is why we have made a commitment to do things differently starting in this Budget.
We will build a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  a strong economy that delivers for working families.
We will honour our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
We will begin to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future.
We will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs.
In this budget and beyond, the Government is committed to making the right decisions now to underpin our long term security and our prosperity.
I thank you for your attention.


PM: It's good to be back at Mansfield High. This school used to be in my electorate some time ago. It's now, of course, in Kerry Rea's electorate, the Federal electorate of Bonner. It's good to be here with Phil Reid, the State Member for Mansfield.
And I thank (?)and the staff and students here at Mansfield High for making me feel welcome here today.
We are in the business of preparing for next week's Budget. Next week's Budget presents the nation and the Government with three sets of challenges.
First of all, how do we fight the war against inflation. Second, how do we effectively help working families under financial pressure. And thirdly, how do we invest in the future, including the future of education, skills and training, including, into the future, of the training our young people in vocational education, the skills shortage which the nation now confronts.
I'll say one or two things about each.
First challenge we face is fighting the fight against inflation. We must dedicate every arm of Government policy to prosecuting a war against inflation. And inflation is the enemy of the economy, the enemy of businesses, the enemy of working families. And families know this through the increase in prices which they now face through groceries, through other consumables, which are making it harder and harder for them to make ends meet.
Secondly, if we don't fight the fight against inflation what happens is it goes through to higher mortgage prices for working families. Therefore, we must fight the fight effectively. That means, cutting Government spending. That's what we intend to do in the upcoming Budget.
I contrast that with those on the other side of politics who are saying there is no case to decrease Government spending, that there is not an inflation problem. We disagree and disagree completely. Responsible economic management means fighting the fight against inflation and that means cutting Government spending.
The alternative is simply to light a fire under inflation which damages everybody.
Second challenge is to help working families under financial pressure and that's why we are determined to honour our pre-election commitment on tax cuts as well as providing additional childcare tax rebate assistance to working families.
And the third area, is how do we invest in the future. And that means, what are we going to do for the future requirements of the nation in education, skills and training. In health and hospitals. And also, in critical economic infrastructure.
In education, skills and training, over in Western Australia just two days ago, and here in Queensland again today. The skills shortage is still alive and well. People can't find skilled labour, particularly in the trades. It's not just the mining boom in WA and Queensland. It's right across the national economy.
You have a large skills deficit which has been building for many, many years. And not enough has been done about it.
Part of the response lies in adding the 450,000 plus additional training places that we're putting into operating in the coming year. But part of it also lies in what we do in making greater opportunities available to our young people in vocational education and training and trades training in schools.
In this Budget, we will be providing funding for the Government's overall investment plan for trades training centres in Australia's secondary schools.
This is an important $2.5 billion plan for the future, and it means that for secondary schools in Queensland, all 493 of them , that we will be allocating something in the order of half a billion dollars over time to make sure that we've got proper funding provided to ensure that these trades training centres are what the young people need for the workforce demands of the 21st century.
At a practical level, it means that schools like Mansfield will be eligible for grants of between half a million dollars and $1.5 million, to make sure that you've got the training equipment necessary for these young people to have the skills they need for the 21st century.
Metal and wood workshops, commercial kitchens, hairdressing facilities, automotive workshops, plumbing workshops, graphic design labs. These are the practical areas where we're prepared to invest.
And we begin that investment program with this upcoming budget. And I repeat unless we are investing in the future, unless we are looking at the skills needs of the future. By providing practical training in the trades, then we're not properly preparing the nation for the challenges of the 21st century.
If we do this well, we are then able to compete with the world and anything the world throws at us. If we fail to do this well then frankly our future is much less assured. One last thing I will touch one before taking your questions is this.
The international community is horrified at developments in Burma. The fact that the Burmese regime continues to obstruct the efforts of the international community to provide assistance to the Burmese people who have suffered this terrible natural calamity in recent days is I believe obscene. The obstruction by the Burmese regime to these efforts is objectionable. Therefore the international community must work together as a matter of urgency to push back this resistance from the Burmese authorities.
On my way here this morning to Mansfield I was speaking to our ambassador in Rangoon and the ambassador reported to me that the there is still high level resistance from the Burmese to allow international aid agencies into the country to do their work.
Our ambassador was speaking yesterday with Tim Costello from Australian World Vision who's in the country and frustrations are still being experienced by the agencies at an on the ground practical level to roll out assistance to those Burmese who, as we speak, are dying through the absence of effective medical and other forms of physical assistance.
We therefore as a community of nations, need to work with the UN that's why in the coming days I'll be speaking with the Secretary General of the United Nations to accelerate global pressure on the regime in Rangoon. Secondly we'll be working with the senior Korean's given their leadership role within ASEAN and thirdly we'll also be working with the Chinese given their particular relationship with the Government in Rangoon. Through these efforts and through what we'll being doing through our own mission in Rangoon. We will be making sure that every effort is applied to trying to push down these barriers of resistance.
We've already allocated $3 million in immediate humanitarian assistance to the international agencies.
The United Nations is currently framing what we believe will be a new UN flash appeal for the Burmese people. Australia will make an appropriate contribution to that once that appeal is launched formally and we will not be in any way minimal in our response to this call for assistance.
But the immediate practical need now is to bash the doors down in Burma so that people in critical need can get that assistance now. And we need to bash those doors down diplomatically and that's where the pressure must come as of today.
Over to you folks
JOURNALIST: Will you be sending additional aid to Burma? (Inaudible)
PM: Yes, this $3 million payment together with comparable payments made by most other developed countries at this stage is purely a first instalment. When the UN flash appeal is formally launched, by the combined UN agencies in New York, we will be making another significant contribution. But one thing at a time. Access is critical, we must get access to Burma and therefore all of our diplomatic efforts must be directed towards getting that access now.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: Well let's cross that bridge when we come to it, but I've got to say everyone in the international community now needs to be leveraging all of their relationships with those who have closer relationships with the Burmese regime than we do. And that includes working with our friends in China, our friends in ASEAN and our friends elsewhere.
This is not a question of politics, this is a question of helping people who are in dire humanitarian need.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: These matters have been raised already and we'll be continuing to raise it with them, and out other friends in South East Asia as well. Multiple points of diplomatic pressure are necessary, because there are so many people, tens of thousands of people who are depending on our success.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: there are have been discussions at multiple levels and they will continue into the days ahead with, as I have said, the Chinese and South East Asians and the United Nations. I note, for example of the Americans, as I understand it through the Secretary of State, have already been dealing directly with the Chinese Foreign Minister, our Foreign Minister is in the process of doing the same.
JOURNALIST: Chief of staff is vetting all FOI requests (inaudible)
PM: We said prior to the election that we would be implementing to the letter, the commitments we gave in response to the Right to Know Coalition, and that includes FOI reform.
Those commitments I reiterated yesterday in a speech I made in Sydney and we stand by every one of those commitments and we will be introducing appropriate legislation for example for the reform of the particular objection which news organisation have which is the previous government's use of conclusive certificates. On the question of individual FOI decisions within Departments, as it has been in the past and it will be in the future, that lies with individual FOI decision makers within the bureaucracy within each Department.
JOURNALIST: Has the Government softened it's stance on the Japanese whaling plan?
PM: Our attitude is that we should use every diplomatic, mechanism available to us to end the commercial whaling, because that is what in effect it is, in the Southern oceans. We are working on that diplomatically with our friends in Tokyo and we continue to examine the legal options which are available to us as well.
We will take this systematically, but out end point is as we have always said, to do everything humanly and diplomatically and legally possible to bring about an end to commercial whaling in the Southern ocean.
JOURNALIST: On the (inaudible) you mentioned mortgages and interest rates and inflation. The NAB made a profit of 2.7 billion dollars for a year and they have increased their interest rates outside of the Reserve Bank, what are your thoughts on that.
PM: That's one of the reasons why we have brought in bank switching arrangements so that if you have money in one bank and you discover that the bank in which your deposit lies is making too much by way of profits and not providing enough by way of services to you, then it's easier to transfer your (inaudible) from one bank to another. In the past that has been very, very difficult.
We have put now a set of measures to the commercial banks to make that possible. We intend to move decisively in that direction so that consumers can vote with their feet if they are not getting proper services from their banks or they are finding that the profit levels of those banks are excessive against the services and the loan arrangements which they provide.
JOURNALIST: In the budget (inaudible) means testing the baby bonus.
PM: Well look, can I say, our challenge is first of all to produce a budget of responsible economic management to fight the fight against inflation. That means cutting government expenditure in contrast to our opponents who say there is no inflation problem and they we should increase government expenditure.
Secondly, if you are going to cut government expenditure, it means also that you have got to look very carefully at welfare arrangements for the wealthiest. We have always said that and we stick by that principle and I am surprised that anyone would actually actively argue against it. Why baby bonuses are necessary for millionaires, frankly, defies my imagination.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we could go through the Budget item by item, line by line. I know that would be of interest to many of you. But I don't intend to do that today. There is a budget document to be released next Tuesday night.
What I have been speaking about today is general principles.
One, responsible economic management, fighting the fight against inflation.
Two, helping working families under financial pressure through bringing around tax cuts and an increase to the childcare tax rebate so that the take home money for families struggling to balance the family budget can be made better in achieving each week's and month's and years, funding budgeting process.
And the third is investing in the future in places like where we are this morning. And having said that, and the bell having gone, I better zip.


CARY: I am delighted to welcome our Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. It's good to see you. How are you doing?
PM: Thanks for having me on the program, Greg. It's good to be back in Brissie.
CARY: It's a great pleasure.
PM: It's good to be back in my electorate.
CARY:This is your electorate?
PM:Yeah, yeah.
CARY: And right in the middle of it on a beautiful Friday morning. So much on the agenda at the moment. Burma, obviously occupying your attention and the world's attention. It's not only a tragic situation, Prime Minister, but a bizarre one, isn't it. The world wants to get in, but they won't let us in. What do we do?
PM: The Burmese regime is behaviour appallingly. In fact, just before coming on the program I was speaking to our Ambassador in Rangoon on the phone. And no progress overnight in terms of what the Burmese are prepared to do - and not just frustrating our own aid agencies, but frustrating those of the international community.
In fact, also overnight, I understand, and I haven't had this confirmed, that at finally that there were four UN workers who arrived for needs assessment, and it seems that two of those were asked to leave at more or less the same time. This was an extraordinary reaction.
What can we do about it? I'm hoping over today or over the course of the weekend to speak with the Secretary General of the United Nations to see what we can do globally to leverage the Burmese into a better course of action.
Secondly, through our partners in the region, Singapore, which currently has a particular role in relation to ASEAN to ask our friends in Singapore to apply more leverage.
And thirdly, I know that the Burmese have a close relationship with the Chinese, and so both the Americans and ourselves will be working on the Chinese to put as much pressure on as possible.
CARY: What is their reluctance? Obviously it's a very closed community like North Korea, they've been running their own race. But what is their particular problem with people coming in to help at a time like this?
PM: Well, the military regime is effectively an authoritarian regime which doesn't welcome any substantive or significant recognition of its problems. In the international recognition, I presume it concludes, it de-legitimises the regime internally.
The obscenity of this is that, the people who pay the price are the poor Burmese people.
So you have got the international community lined up ready to help. Australia, at the government level, ready to help. NGO's around the world, including Tim Costello, with whom our Ambassador was speaking in Rangoon just yesterday. All ready to help, all being frustrated by the actual regime itself.
So we don't intend just to regard this as too hard and too difficult to handle. We will deal with all of our global and regional partners to maximise the leverage on the Burmese because the people of Burma don't deserve this.
CARY: (inaudible) then we'll talk about domestic issues, with a very important Budget coming out next Tuesday. Afghanistan, recent tragedy there involving Australians, and it is ongoing, as you said it is likely to get worse. Are you happy and you have had conversations with NATO and you are keen for us to have a stronger say in what is happening there. Do you remain confident that we are on target to achieve what you (inaudible), what NATO would want to achieve there?
PM: Well I wouldn't have Australian forces in Afghanistan deployed if I did not believe that we had a credible strategy for success. Of course, the reason why we had a NATO Summit on this recently in Bucharest, and it's the first one Australia has actually participated in, is to try and bring together a more coordinated military and civilian effort.
Militarily, our men and women in uniform on the ground are performing a first class job. Making sure that the civilian reconstruction effort parallels that, not just in our part of the world, but across the country. That's necessary as well in order to produce the goal, which is a government of Afghanistan capable of standing on its own feet, and brining about a reasonable degree of effective control across the country.
But I said in Bucharest, and I have said since, for Australia and this government, this is not a blank cheque. We will be subjecting the success or otherwise of the strategy which we are all commonly embarked upon now, every 12 months and we will do so again next year.
CARY: Budget big picture, then I will ask you a small, a few items related to it. Tuesday very important for all kinds of reasons. What will be the premise, what will be the philosophical underpinning of this one?
PM: Number one, responsible economic management and fighting the fight against inflation. If we fail to do that, mortgages will go up. If we fail to do that, you will have further pressure in terms of those cost of living price factors which are so much hurting working families right now. So number one is responsible economic management, fighting the fight against inflation and doing that by bringing about effective cuts in government spending.
And that is the contrast part with our political opponents, who remarkably are saying that there is no inflation problem. They are saying that there is no need for budget cuts and they are saying that there is no need to do anything about welfare for Australia's wealthiest. I find this remarkable. In fact it is not responsible economic management.
CARY: What is driving that do you think?
PM: Well I don't know what is going on internally within the Liberal party but as the Prime Minister of a newly elected Labor Government, to now find myself being attacked from the left by the Liberal Party, on saying there is not an inflation problem, you should not cut Government spending but spend more, and you should preserve welfare payments to the wealthiest. I find that remarkable, and I think it is probably, simply populist politics rather than responsible economic management.
CARY: I imagine in part they would be denying that inflation is the problem (inaudible), arguing you are talking it up on the basis that you are saying you inherited that, implicitly from them. How bad an inflation problem have you inherited?
PM: Well it is an objective number, it is not our say so. It is the economic data. It is running at 16 year highs, it is now in excess of four per cent. And there are not just important warnings from the Reserve Bank of Australia, but also important warnings from the International Monetary Fund to act on this. That is at that level. Because if fail to fight, inflation, who pays the price? Working families, by the flow through effect in terms of higher mortgage rates.
And secondly, if we fail the fight on inflation, then we are basically hauling up the white flag when it comes to all those other cost of living pressures which families are struggling with right now.
CARY: (inaudible) Grocery prices up, fuel prices up left right and centre, by what extent can we actually control all of that. Or is some of that outside of your control (inaudible)?
PM: Well what you can do with working families is provide financial assistance as you can through the tax system and through childcare tax rebates. You see, you asked me before, what is the budget on about. Number one, responsible economic management, fight the fight against inflation, because if you don't do that, then it effects everybody, businesses, households and the whole economy. And you do that by cutting government spending. Number two is to make sure that those working families right now under financial pressure get every level of assistance we can provide. It is not a silver bullet, but we are going to be delivering $31 billion worth of tax cuts in the period ahead, starting this financial year, for low to middle income earners.
We are going to deliver changes to the childcare tax rebate, lifting it from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. So if you are at home and you are juggling the real challenge of extra petrol prices, extra food prices, higher rents, higher mortgages and higher childcare costs. On the other side of the ledger, we hope to provide some assistance, is it going to mean enough? Probably not. But is it going to be a helping hand? We believe so.
CARY: How then do you balance that with the cuts that you and Lindsay Tanner and Wayne Swan have been talking about. The (inaudible) concerned about the baby bonus being messed with, are you going to do that?
PM: Well we believe that working families need every bit of support with things like tax cuts, things like the childcare tax rebate and things like the baby bonus. But on welfare payments, the question is, do the wealthiest Australians need them, when people who are struggling to balance the family income. Do millionaires need the baby bonus? Well, you know, I have a different view of that. And so when it comes to focussing the effort of the Budget on tax and childcare assistance, we think the overwhelming emphasis has to be on those who are struggling to balance the family budget now.
They are front and centre our priority for this upcoming Budget. Fighting the fight against inflation so they're not damaged, or their businesses damaged, in the long term. And secondly, practical financial assistance now, through tax and childcare assistance.
CARY: So, the baby bonus will be means tested?
PM: We'll wait for Budget night I think is the best way to respond to that.
CARY: Jason wants to know how bad does Queensland health have to get, it's pretty crook right now, before there is federal intervention?
PM: You know, health and hospitals is a huge area of necessary national reform. We went to the election saying this was an absolute priority for us and we believe this is an absolute priority for the future.
We've done two things up front. One is $150 million payment to that states, as soon as we took over, to do one thing: which is to bring down those elective surgery waiting lists to something more respectable.
And secondly a further payment of a half billion dollars into the hospital system at the most recently concluded Council of Australian Governments. Of course, my predecessor, Mr Howard, was taking money out of the federal payments to the states on hospitals, not putting it in.
Budget Night, you will see a further way forward on this. Very big, very important. I don't know anyone who is not concerned about the future wellbeing of their health and hospitals.
CARY: You need to be in Mansfield in about half an hour which means you need to get out of here in about 2 or 3 minutes.
PM: (inaudible)
CARY: (inaudible) Front page story of The Australian today. A national welfare card that will allow the Government to control all payments to negligent parents across the country will be unveiled in the Budget. True?
PM: Yes, we think this is the right way to go and we're, of course, starting with Indigenous communities in the Northern Territory and in the Kimberleys in Western Australia. I think it's the right way to go. The overwhelming focus here is to ensure, through these welfare debit cards, that we quarantine payments within them, that you can make sure that food and basic groceries and necessities are being purchased for the kids in each family. The overwhelming thrust of welfare policy must always be the proper protection and preservation of the wellbeing of the child. That's what these are designed to do.
CARY: I notice Ted Mulligan, who conducted this inquiry in South Australia, said the condition of many Aboriginal communities (inaudible) is a national disgrace. Is it a national disgrace? Or is it a disgrace confined to those communities?
PM: I think what is a national disgrace, and I've said so in the speech I made in Parliament on the apology to the Stolen Generation in February, was that we have allowed this gap to emerge right across health and education and life expectancy between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
We're committed to the policy of closing the gap. Is that going to be easy? Nope. Will it require probably 300 to 400 different solutions across the country tailored to each community circumstances in the Cape, in the Territory, in the Central Desert, in the Kimberleys and elsewhere? Yes, they're all different, all these communities are different. But we've got to be held to account and held to a set of standards, which is that when we've got infant mortality rates at three times the rate in those communities compared with non-Indigenous communities, that's just off. We've got to fix that. So I'm for, ‘here are the standards we've got to meet', the fact that there is a 17 year life expectancy gap right now is unacceptable. But the way in which we do it, will have to be tailored very much to each individual community's circumstances.
CARY: So the balance of responsibilities about help from the outside or help from within?
PM: Yep. We've said quite clearly again in the national apology speech that this must be based on a principal of mutual responsibility. Our responsibility, as the National Government in partnership with other governments and the wider community, is to ensure that standards are being met and the resources to get there are being delivered.
Responsibility of local Indigenous leadership is to partner with us effectively on the ground in each community, in practical, effective real measures, not rhetorical measures, real measures, which get us forward. For example, when it comes to increasing literacy performance in Indigenous communities, what are the practical measures to make sure your school attendance from 20 per cent to 60 per cent? That's a practical measure. That's what I am interested in. Doing what's necessary to get that outcome in the Cape will be different to what's necessary in the Pitjantjatjara lands in South Australia and what might work up in the Kimberleys.
CARY: (Inaudible) asking if aged pensioners might be helped more in the Budget? In a word?
PM: Aged pensioners will be helped and we have a range of measures to assist people on retirement incomes into the future. We have already indicated a number of those things so far. But I've got to say, long term, this is also a priority for us.
CARY: I have a question. We've been advocating very strongly for increasing organ donor numbers here in Australia. I know it's an issue you're keen on, you're an organ donor. You were kind enough to invite our program -
PM: I haven't donated any yet
CARY: Well, it may be a little while yet. But, you were kind enough to give us an invitation. We sent down Janelle Colquohoun you were kind enough to take care of. She is awaiting a kidney, pancreas transplant.
We're in favour of the op out system; you said you would look at it. Where are you up to with that?
PM: Well, and thank you very much for sending Janelle down. In fact, I just signed off a note to her yesterday or the day before. She was one of our 1,000 national summiteers at the 2020 Summit.
I pulled together the head of the Health Department and the Chief Medical Officer and myself just the other day. Probably four or five days ago to audit where everything is up to both in terms of the opt-out system and other complementary or alternative proposals.
We've now set ourselves a real timeline for delivering this. We are aiming to come up with a solution which will hopefully be acceptable to all the parties by mid year. Mid year is not far away. But, unless you start setting deadlines for this, guess what, it drifts on forever and people now in the queue for organs which they need to live and live effectively, can't wait. So, I've said to the bureaucracy, let's stop stuffing around let's get on with it.
CARY: Lots more to talk about (inaudible) next time you're here, it's good to see you.
PM: Thanks, Greg.


Introduction
Thank you for the invitation to address the 2008 Future Summit. 
I am especially pleased to be with you tonight because the Future Summit combines two things that I am particularly passionate about:
     * A long term view of Australia's economic, social and security challenges.
     * And an open, inclusive and consultative approach to addressing those challenges.
I believe that long-term thinking about Australia's future shouldn't be something we do every three years at election time.
It should be an integral, normal and routine part of our democracy.
Australia won't tackle the challenges that face us, nor will we fully seize the great opportunities that lie ahead, if we allow ourselves to drift without an overarching vision for the nation  -  and a strategy for realising that vision.
I believe Australians want to part of creating that vision and that strategy. They don't want to sit back and wait for government to come up with all the answers. They want to be involved in shaping their nation's future and their own future.
The long term vision for the nation needs to be a shared vision; one that evolves through time; and is continually debated in every corner of the country at schools and dinner tables and backyard BBQs.
The Government held an ideas Summit of its own in Canberra last month  -  and I'd like to thank Michael [Roux] for his advice in shaping the format of the Australia 2020 Summit.
The Summit was an experiment for the new Australian Government. When we launched the idea of a Summit earlier in the year we didn't know how Australia would respond to this kind of open-democracy. We were just hopeful that we'd get a good turnout and pick up a few good ideas.
But we had no idea that we would be overwhelmed by an avalanche of enthusiasm from every part of the country.
More than 8,000 people applied to attend the Summit.
Participants travelled  -  at their own expense  -  from faraway corners of the nation and (in some cases) other parts of the world to be part of the debate.
The Australia 2020 website received more than 3,000 submissions.
And more than 500 schools held summits of their own.
The Summit generated a large number of ideas. But for me, one of the most important things to come out of the Summit was the idea that there aren't enough opportunities like this for open public debate in Australia.
There aren't enough forums in which Australians from government, business and the community can come together to discuss the nation's long term challenges.
And that is why I am pleased to be part of this Future Summit tonight.
Achieving Long Term Change
In my view, governments should be judged not just by their longevity, but more by their record of positive and permanent change to the direction of the nation.
That is why I am proud to look back on many of the lasting achievements of the last Labor Government.
Through their wide ranging economic reforms, the Hawke and Keating Governments of the 1980s and 1990s transformed the Australian economy.
They had big ideas and a big vision.
They floated the currency.
They cut tariffs.
They modernised labour markets, by introducing enterprise bargaining.
They introduced competition policy.
They cracked open the hidden protection which had shielded the airlines, the banks, and many other industries.
These reforms helped open the Australian economy to the world.
For that reason, the Hawke and Keating Labor Governments are rightly credited with laying the foundation for much of the prosperity that Australia has enjoyed for the last decade.
The result was higher productivity. Between 1993 and 1998 productivity growth was 3.3 per cent. Between 1999 and 2004 productivity growth fell to 2.0 per cent. And between 2004 and the present productivity growth fell to 1.1 per cent.
By comparison, the period since 1996 has been relatively uneventful in terms of economic reforms.
And more importantly, many gathering economic challenges went unaddressed.
The remarkable period of prosperity in the last decade  -  principally delivered by the extraordinary mining boom  -  concealed a multitude of latent economic weaknesses.
Prosperity delivered by the mining boom concealed the fact that our productivity growth is on a steady decline.
It concealed the fact that our infrastructure is inadequate.
It concealed the fact that our skills shortages have become chronic.
It concealed the fact that Australia's microeconomic reform agenda has stalled.
The longer we fail to face up to Australia's economic challenges, the harder it will be to deal with them.
If we do not start acting now, Australia will wake up one morning with the mother of all economic hangovers.
Australian businesses have long been aware of Australia's economic challenges. They have repeatedly called for these weaknesses to be addressed.
The Chairman of the Australian Institute of Company Directors, John Story, said recently:
“We should have been addressing infrastructure issues and skills shortages five years ago. I mean, we talked about it. These issues were discussed around board tables like this for the past 10 years, and the chickens are coming home to roost and there is no short-term fix.”
I could not agree more.
The Government's Long Term Economic Agenda
The new Australian Government is committed to renewing the Australian economic reform project.
The last Labor Government had a vision to internationalise the Australian economy.
It delivered on that vision and opened Australia up to the global economy.
Our Government has a new vision for the nation's economic future.
Our vision is to transform Australia's competitiveness in the global economy.
Boosting Australia's global economic competitiveness is the touchstone of that vision.
And to boost our global economic competitiveness we must boost productivity growth.
That is the Australian Government's central narrative on the economy.
The Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
You don't achieve global competitiveness with rhetoric.
You don't achieve it with a few controversial reforms.
You achieve it with a comprehensive policy reform agenda which cuts across the entire economy.
The comprehensive long term economic agenda of the new Australian Government has several parts.
We are committed to disciplined macroeconomic management to ensure that the economy has a stable foundation.
We are committed to an active microeconomic reform agenda to boost Australia's lagging productivity performance by making long overdue investments in human and physical capital.
We are committed to creating incentives that encourage work and enterprise  -  and we are determined to reform the tax system, boost workforce participation and tackle welfare to work barriers.
Finally, we are committed to getting the policy architecture right; and reforming the Federation is key to the success of our broader agenda.
Budget Principles
The Government's first budget, to be delivered on Tuesday, is one step in our program to transform the future competitiveness of the Australian economy.
For too long budgets have been an annual political give-away in which the government of the day serves up an array of handouts and quick fixes.
That is no longer good enough.
If Australia is to compete and succeed in a rapidly changing world we need a long-term approach to fiscal policy.
That is why I have said that this Budget won't be another “one year wonder”.
It will be a budget that sets a platform for long term growth. It will begin to prepare Australia for the future.
It will build a strong foundation of economic stability that will benefit Australia for years to come.
That foundation is based on four principles.
Our first priority is to build a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  a strong economy that also delivers for working families.
Second, we are committed to honouring our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future  -  acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water, and the rise of India and China.
Fourth, we will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs in a rapidly changing environment.
These are the principles and priorities which have guided us in this Budget process, and they will be reflected in the outcomes on Budget night.
The Budget is a first step in the Government's broader long term economic strategy.
It is an opportunity for us to make a start on our long term vision for the nation.
Disciplined Macroeconomic Strategy
The Budget will reflect the commitment to fiscal conservatism that I made during last year's election campaign.
I committed to bringing back the fundamental principles of disciplined macroeconomic management.
In the last four years Australia has lost sight of some of these principles.
When we took office in November last year government spending was growing at 6.85 per cent in the four years to 2007/08  -  the highest growth rate in more than a decade.
Since then, global economic events -  unforseen by most commentators six months ago  -  have reshaped the global economic landscape.
These events only underline the importance of a return to fiscal responsibility.
The IMF's recent World Economic Outlook report specifically singled out the need for responsible budget policy to help the Australian economy deal with the global financial crisis.
The report stated that prudent fiscal policies and flexible exchange rates provide Australia with “important buffers against any substantial weakening in the external environment”.
That's a call we hear loud and clear.
And that is why we have found responsible savings in this Budget.
The second principle of disciplined macroeconomic management is low inflation.
Our Government is committed to doing everything in our power to put downward pressure on inflation because inflation is the enemy of the economy and the enemy of working families.
Inflation eats away at the living standards of all Australians.
Inflation hurts the working families struggling to make ends meet.
It took the best part of a decade or more of hard economic reforms to tame inflation and boost productivity.
The Government can't fix these sorts of financial pressures overnight, but there are practical things we can do.
And that starts with fighting inflation because inflation is pushing up mortgage rates and pushing up the cost of living.
That's why in January I set out a five point plan to wage a war against inflation.
Our plan addressed both demand side and supply side pressures on inflation.
We committed to use all the tools available to us to fight inflation.
First, we said we would ensure the Government takes the pressure off demand by running a strong surplus in this year's budget. This will help make the task of the Reserve Bank easier.
Second, we have committed to examine all options to provide real incentive to encourage private savings.
Third, we will be unfolding our plan for tackling chronic skills shortages in the economy.
Fourth, we will provide national leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
And fifth, we will provide practical ways of helping people re-enter the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard, to lift workforce participation.
The Budget will be a core part of this plan.
By exercising restraint, our plan is to do everything we can to ease the pressure on inflation and interest rates.
And for the longer term, the budget will also begin to outline our approach to the chronic investment deficits in the capacity side of the economy.
Not everyone agrees with our focus on responsible fiscal policy and our fight against inflation.
An Active Microeconomic Reform Agenda
The second pillar of our long term economic strategy is a comprehensive microeconomic agenda.
Whereas we are committed to economic discipline in our macroeconomic policies, we are committed to necessary policy activism in microeconomic reform.
Medium term macroeconomic policies are essential for stability.
Budget surpluses are essential for economic stability.
But real fundamental change to the underlying structure of the economy requires deep and pervasive microeconomic reform.
Productivity growth is not something you achieve with a single broad sweeping policy.
It is the aggregation of efficiency gains industry by industry, market by market, sector by sector.
Australia needs to revive its microeconomic reform agenda if we are to arrest the recent slide in our productivity performance.
Benchmarked against the United States, the global productivity leader, Australian productivity increased from 77 per cent in 1990 to 85 per cent in 1999.
But by 2006 it had fallen back to 79 per cent.
This means that in comparative terms, Australia has now almost completely lost the relative productivity gains of 1990s.
That is why our Government will couple our commitment to new investment in this Budget with a renewed commitment to microeconomic reform after a decade of neglect.
Our microeconomic reform agenda involves several elements.
First, if Australia is to maximise its future competitiveness in the global economy, we need the best possible regulatory environment.
We need to “get the rules right” so that Australian businesses have wasteful regulation taken off their backs and face appropriate rewards for hard work and enterprise.
This means we need to restart the competition policy agenda.
We need to press ahead with deregulation.
And we need to create an environment that supports risk taking and innovation.
In this arena, our goal must be to move towards seamless and competitive national product and labour markets.
Today we are a long way from that goal.
That is why the Government has an agenda for reform of the Federation, including a plan for business deregulation.
In partnership with state governments we have identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy.
We also need to modernise our tax, welfare and retirement income systems to recognise rather than penalise hard work, and to enable Australian families to get by and get ahead.
That is why today the Government has announced a comprehensive review of Australia's tax system.
The review panel will be chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury, Dr Ken Henry and will also comprise Mr Greg Smith; Dr Jeff Harmer, Heather Ridout, and John Piggott.
The review will examine and make recommendations to create a tax structure that will position Australia to deal with the demographic, social, economic and environmental challenges of the 21st century.
The review will consider whether Australia's tax system contains appropriate incentives for:
     * workforce participation and skill formation;
     * individuals to save and provide for their future, including access to affordable housing;
     * investment and the promotion of efficient resource allocation to enhance productivity and international competitiveness; and
     * reducing tax system complexity and compliance costs.
This review will release an initial discussion paper by Treasury by the end of July 2008. The review panel will provide a final report to the Treasurer by the end of 2009.
The second element of our microeconomic agenda is core investment in basic human and physical capital.
Australian business cannot be competitive if it is hamstrung by poor infrastructure or if it cannot access the skills it requires in its workforce.
For too long the basic human and physical capital needs of the nation have been ignored.
Consider the state of Australia's infrastructure.
Australia ranks 20th out of 25 OECD countries for our investment in public infrastructure as a proportion of GDP.
The Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics estimate that urban congestion  -  caused by inadequate infrastructure - will cost families and businesses nearly $20 billion by 2020.
Australia's broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch, with average download speeds lagging at 27th among all developed economies.
The economic consequences of this underinvestment in physical capital are significant.
CEDA reports that as a result of underinvestment, the backlog in infrastructure investment for water, energy and land transport alone is around $25 billion - and that this is costing us around 0.8 per cent of GDP a year in lost production. That's $8 billion a year.
The Government is committed to investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
We know it is not possible to turn around overnight the long term infrastructure neglect that the nation finds itself with today.
But we are certainly going to make a start.
Infrastructure Australia will work towards ensuring that Australia's infrastructure needs are comprehensively audited and prioritised.
Infrastructure isn't the only area where underinvestment is hurting business.
For a long time Australia has faced chronic shortages of skilled labour.
A business survey released by Grant Thornton earlier this year showed that 58 per cent of businesses identified skills shortages as the biggest constraint to their growth.
That is why we must begin to make the appropriate investments in skills and education for the long term human capital needs of the economy.
That is why we have unveiled substantial initiatives including:
     * the provision of up to 15 hours per week for 40 weeks per year of early childhood education for all 4 year olds provided by a qualified early childhood teacher.
     * $2.5 billion over 10 years to enable all secondary schools to apply for funding of between $500,000 and $1.5 million for Trade Training Centres.
     * providing high speed broadband to schools, computers at school for all students from years 9 to 12
     * a strategic focus on vocational training through the Skills Australia expert group and an investment in an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years.
     * HECS incentives for students who study maths and science as well as those teaching those subjects, and a comprehensive examination of the future of higher education.
     * 1,000 new mid-career research fellowships to help retain and attract the most talented researchers.
     * a new national curriculum in Maths, the Sciences , English and History.
     * a National Asian Languages and Studies in Schools Program to provide additional Asian language classes in high schools.
Australia must make these investments to lift our competitiveness.
The new Australian Government is committed to beginning the process of investing in the nation's human and physical capital.
But we also have a longer term agenda.
We don't want to stop at improving Australia's stock of capital.
We want to take these basic investments to the next level.
This is a long term agenda to go from better skills to a truly innovative workforce.
To go from improved education to a national culture of creativity, innovation and enterprise.
To go from stronger training and skills accreditation to genuine domestic labour mobility.
To go from better infrastructure to dynamic and sophisticated markets for water and transport including pricing and governance reform.
To take our microeconomic reforms and build them into a truly seamless economy by harmonising regulation across the country.
If we are to achieve this we need to fix the governance of Australia's economy and to put in place evidence-based policymaking.
Fixing the Governance Architecture
That is why we are acting to reform the relationships between all levels of Australian government  -  federal, state and local.
We have breathed life into the once fractious COAG process and governments are now working together to drive reform and achieve real outcomes for Australia.
A key part of the COAG agenda, and the Government's approach more broadly, is to strengthen the link between evidence and policy.
This requires us to be more transparent in articulating our goals, monitoring whether we're achieving them and reporting on progress.
For many of our great policy challenges, there is not one ‘right answer', and even where there seems to be, policy challenges are rarely stagnant.
To move forward, we need to be extending those ideas that work and disbanding those that don't.
This requires a new culture among policy makers too  -  supporting experimentation, innovation and learning.
Conclusion
Australia faces many challenges beyond the economic challenges I have discussed tonight. Challenges of climate change, challenges associated with water and energy, and challenges associated with the rise of India and China and the broader shift in geopolitical power.
In all these areas, Australia is looking for a long term strategy.
I say this because I hear it from people right around the country.
From business.
From governments at all levels.
From communities.
And from working families.
And I say it because I believe that we won't achieve long term success unless we have a long term vision and a plan.
I want to look back on our period in Government knowing that we didn't shirk the challenging questions.
That we didn't play it safe with the politics of short-term advantage.
We didn't promote quick-fixes over long term investments.
I know that many will say that this is a political gamble for the Government.
Because the benefits of our broader agenda won't be fully realised for many years.
But we believe that our objective of boosting Australia's global competitiveness cannot be achieved unless we have a long term vision and a long term reform program.
You can't change the structure of an economy by giving it a quick coat of paint.
Productivity improvement is a painstaking process involving hundreds of careful, creative and tailored micro-economic reforms.
I want to look back on our time in government and know that we began that process and that we began to change the nation for the better.
Thank you for your attention.


Acknowledgements
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs, the Hon Alan Griffin MP
The Leader of the Opposition
General Sir Phillip Bennett and Lady Bennett
Major General Peter Phillips and Mrs Phillips
Lt General Peter Leahy, Chief of Army, and Mrs Leahy
Veterans of the battle of Coral and Balmoral
Families of those who gave their lives
Members of the diplomatic corps
Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
We gather here in the nation's parliament to mark the 40th anniversary of a great example of the courage, conviction and dedication of Australia's servicemen in Vietnam.
We gather to honour you, the veterans of the Battles of Coral and Balmoral.
These battles saw some of the heaviest fighting and some of the most prolonged engagements of Australian forces in that theatre.
Between 12 May and 6 June 1968, the Australian forces were engaged almost daily with North Vietnamese Army regular forces.
The fighting was fierce because the North Vietnamese forces needed to clear the path to Saigon.
They had to eliminate Coral and Balmoral and the Australian Task Force so that they could secure their routes to and from Saigon following on from the Tet Offensive.
So the North Vietnamese forces launched attack after attack on Coral and Balmoral.
The first attacks began in the early hours the day after our forces arrived.
And that first encounter was a sign of things to come  -  fierce fighting, bloody fighting and at close quarters.
It could have been a disaster on that first night.
One soldier wrote of that first night at Coral: “Ammo was low, no grenades, the VC were all around us. Out of the 7 men around the M60, I had lost one dead and one wounded  -  there was nothing I could do.”
But, thanks to you, thanks to your determination, your professionalism and your courage, that first night was not a disaster.
In fact, far from it.
The enemy got a little more than they were bargaining for on that first night.
One officer said of his men: they “fought like thrashing machines”.
But of course our troops  -  you, our guests of honour tonight  -  did not just defend, you took the fight up to the enemy.
You spent days patrolling, searching for the enemy and on many occasions came into contact with a determined foe.
I understand that initially the infantry  -  like the infantry in every war, were a bit suspicious of working with tanks.
But after the first day's operation alongside elements of the 1st Armoured Regiment against enemy bunkers, perhaps more than a few minds had been changed.
And, just like 50 years earlier in the First World War when General Monash showed at the Battle of Le Hamel that tanks and infantry could work together, you showed that armour and infantry could form an effective fighting team.
The team at Coral and Balmoral went beyond the infantry and the tanks.
It included the APCs; it included the artillery; it included air crews and, of course, the medics.
What is remarkable about the battle is that despite all the chaos of the battlefield, and the chaos of trying to establish new positions, and coordinate all the elements of a complex and changing battle plan, everyone played their part  -  and everyone played their part with distinction.
In spite of the individual danger you all faced, in spite of the risks you all faced, you got on with it. You did your jobs.
When that happens, the people around you know that they can have confidence in you.
It lets them get on with their job too.
It is an important part of the great Australian tradition of looking after your mates.
It's part of the tradition of not letting your mates down.
It's part of the Australian tradition of the profession of arms
And that is the tradition that you lived up to 40 years ago.
It is that tradition that you added to by your actions 40 years ago.
Tonight, as Prime Minister of Australia, I want to pay tribute to your service to Australia in this great battle of the Vietnam War.
For your service, I say thank you.
For family members here tonight of those who lost their lives, I offer my sympathies.
For those whose service to the nation through this terrible war has not been properly honoured by government, I express regret.
We can never repay the price you have paid.
But tonight I say that we will properly honour the memory of those who fell in the actions around Coral and Balmoral.
Veterans of Australia  -  tonight it is my great pleasure to host this reception in your honour.
The political debate around the Vietnam War was great.
But there can be no debate about the valour of those who fought in that war  -  wearing proudly the uniform of Australia.
On this the 40th anniversary of the Battles of Coral and Balmoral, the nation salutes you.


Your Excellencies the Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia, Major General Michael Jeffery and Mrs Marlena Jeffery
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs, the Hon Alan Griffin MP
The Hon Bronwyn Bishop MP, representing the Leader of the Opposition
The High Commissioner of New Zealand, our co-combatants in this action
Members of the Diplomatic Corps
Veterans of the Battle of Coral and Balmoral
Families of those who gave their lives
Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
Welcome to this beautiful Canberra morning.
On this, our avenue of heroes.
In this country the Vietnam War is sometimes remembered not for what happened in Vietnam, but for what happened in Australia.
Today, I want to say that the Australian Government remembers what happened in Vietnam with our men and women in uniform.
The Government remembers the sacrifice of those who fought.
The Government remembers the ultimate sacrifice of those who fell.
And we remember with pride the qualities displayed by our men and women who served in Vietnam.
Australia's defence forces served with great distinction through the Vietnam War.
As did their father's before them, and as did their father's before them, in previous conflicts, all wearing, proudly, the uniform of Australia.
You  -  the veterans here today  -  upheld all the great traditions that are ANZAC.
60,000 Australians served in Vietnam.
520 gave their lives in Vietnam.
And many others still their lives scarred by that conflict.
The battles of Fire Support Bases Coral and Balmoral were the largest and longest series of actions of the war for Australian forces.
Today the nation pauses to mark the 40th anniversary of those battles.
Coral and Balmoral has become a part  -  an important part  -  of Australian military history.
It was a large action, it was a long action, it was a bloody action.
It was strategically significant.
And it was an action costly in the lives of the brave young Australians  -  Regulars and Nashos  -  who gave, literally, their all.
A couple of months ago I went to the Australian War Memorial to open the new gallery for conflicts from 1945 to the present.
One of the battles that is commemorated in that gallery is Coral and Balmoral.
I saw the Howitzer from Fire Support Base Coral there in the gallery.
It is the No.6 Howitzer from the gun pit at Coral that was overrun on that first night of fighting.
The gun pit that was, in true Australian fashion, retaken soon after and the gun reclaimed.
It says a lot about the way you fought, it says a lot about the way in which you died. Always looking to go on the offensive, never turning back.
This was but one action in a long and tough battle. A battle “like looking death in the eyes” according to one veteran from the engagement.
When you look through the combat diaries from 1 RAR and 3 RAR for May, you get a feel for the level of the engagement  -  day and night, week in, week out heavy enemy action.
Patrols and contacts.
Sniper fire and mortar attacks.
Mass attacks against both fire support bases.
At one stage the order was issued to fix bayonets to advance on the enemy. And through it all, you, the troops, displayed all that is great and good about Australia's defence force.
Not everyone returns from war and the battle of Coral and Balmoral it was the same. 26 brave young Australians lost their lives, men in the prime of their lives  -  11 Regulars and 15 Nashos.
Today we honour the memory of the fallen. Today they are our silent partners in this great national reflection.
Though their families are with us still I would say this to them. We honour your loss and we thank you for their sacrifice. We also honour the veterans here with us today, from that great battle.
We have not always been good at thanking our Vietnam veterans.
In fact at, times we've been very bad at it.
The time has well and truly come to turn the page and to turn the corner.
To thank you all on behalf of a grateful nation for doing your duty to the nation.
After the first engagements then Lieutenant Colonel Philip Bennett, Commanding Officer of 1RAR sent around a message to all units involved saying: “We will all remember this day with pride in our achievements”.
Lieutenant Colonel, now General Bennett was absolutely right. You should be proud of your achievements.
We are proud of your achievements, we are proud of your achievements in the profession of arms.
So, on this, the 40th anniversary of the Battle of Fire support Bases Coral and Balmoral, let us never forget our men and women in uniform.
Those who have worn the uniform and those who still in conflicts abroad wear the uniform today.
Because there is no higher calling in this great nation of Australia, than to wear our nation's uniform.


UHLMANN: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM:Good morning Chris.
UHLMANN:Can you think of another government in Australia's history that's inherited a better fiscal position?
PM: I don't think this is the time to sort of recount economic history Chris. The key question is you play with the cards that you're dealt and the cards were dealt -
UHLMANN: Your cards are good cards.
PM: Cards were dealt with from the global economy are very challenging with downwards revisions of growth globally in North America and also in Europe and washing across the East Asian hemisphere as well.
And we've got inflation at home. So when you talk about cards, inheriting government when you've got record high inflation over the last 16 years running north of four per cent, that's a challenge.
And they're set of circumstances we faced. Contractionary pressures in the global economy coming off the back of the financial crisis, and then at home inflationary pressures.
And in those circumstances, a difficult Budget to craft, but we believe we've got the balance right.
UHLMANN: Certainly, but Budgets are about Government finances and we can talk about the global economy in a moment but the “do nothing” position on this budgets was a $14-billion surplus, surely that's the best inherited position of any oncoming Australian Government?
PM: Well remember our predecessors indicated that they would land a budget surplus, something not much better than one per cent of GDP, we said in  January of this year that we believed that given the inflation challenge, we needed to aim higher than that at 1.5 per cent of GDP and on Budget night we landed at 1.8 per cent of GDP. 
And on top of that, what then comes to the surplus, we haven't just said let's just put all that to one side, we've said instead, let's invest that surplus, both for this financial year and the one coming, into these investment funds for the future. 
That is, for the future of infrastructure $20-billion. $10-billion for the future of health and hospital reform. And $11-billion for an education investment fund. We think this is the right way forward for the future as well.
UHLMANN: Now you made much of your cuts in the lead up to this election campaign, but the rate of Government spending will continue to grow next year, won't it? Haven't you left all the heavy lifting on interest rates to the Reserve Bank?
PM: Not at all, remember what we've inherited over the last four years is a government which had expenditure growth running something north of four per cent. We've brought that down to about one per cent and in terms of all our new spending commitments, they've been met by savings.
$7-billion plus worth of savings in this financial year and across the forward estimate, something north of $30-billion.
I pose you the question; where was there a last significant savings measure proposed by the previous Government? There was none, including the time when inflationary pressures were building.
We've actually turned the corner on this, we've said this is a responsible way forward, and at the same time, we've rejected the advice provided by some in the economic commentariat to jump tax cuts for low and middle income earners because we believe they're under financial pressure and they need every dollar they can to help balance the family budget.
UHLMANN:So your Budget will slow the growth in the economy?
PM:Well you've seen what's happened in terms of both the Bank's and the Government's projection in the Budget papers in terms of upcoming growth.
Obviously that's in fact affected by global factors, and obviously that's been the consequence also of recent interest rate tightenings, remember we've had now 12 in a row.
But, our responsibility is to get the balance right. Firstly, not to fuel the flames of inflation, hence why we've honoured our commitment to meet new spending promises by offsetting savings, and at the same time, ensuring that we keep a rein on overall expenditure growth into the future. We think we've got the balance right.
UHLMANN: And as a consequence, unemployment will rise?
PM: Well if there is going to be, you've seen what the Budget papers have to say on that question. There will be a modest increase on that score as projected through the Budget papers, but we believe that our responsibility for overall balance in the economy is to make sure that you're doing what you can through Budget policy to put downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on rates.
And at the same time, providing what you can through the tax system, through the child care tax rebate system and other payment systems to working families under financial pressure, to help them balance the family budget now.
UHLMANN:So rising unemployment is a good outcome?
PM:Well look, in a global economy where you've got contractions in growth in the United States and in Europe and including a revised growth projections also for East Asia, obviously there's going to be some knock-on effect.
Therefore I'd say also to those who believe that the smart thing to do is simply to axe things like the tax cuts, frankly, I think they need to have a more balanced view of where things will unfold into the future as well.
We believe we've got the balance right given we've got these conflicting economic trends that we're dealing with at the moment, contractionary forces operating globally off the back of the financial crisis and inflationary pressures at home.
UHLMANN: This is just one Budget, Prime Minister, we haven't seen the full effect of your election promises in this Budget have we?
We haven't seen anywhere near enough money to fix the hospital system or to reform federal-state relations. So the big bills for you Government are on the never, never? 
PM: Well I suppose that's where I'd disagree with you Chris because I think what we have done is lay out very plainly where our future investment priorities lie.
This is a huge departure point from the previous Government. Firstly on infrastructure, a $20-billion Building Australia Fund to deal with road, rail, ports and broadband.
Secondly, an $11-billion Education Investment Fund to deal with TAFEs and universities. 
And thirdly health and hospital reform, the one you just touched on; $10-billion. 
Now, these funds exists over and above the normal operations of the Commonwealth Budget. 
These are specifically designed to enter into individual national performance, or partnership payments, with the states to improve outcomes in these critical areas. 
So what we're saying is rather than play the blame game in the past of saying hospitals? State problem. TAFEs? State problem. Roads? State problem. We're saying we want a partner with the states and the private sector in getting these things right and putting $40-billion down for the future on this, I would say is a decisive step in the right direction.
UHLMANN: Well, Prime Minister, just on the true cost of your promises, can you guarantee that no parent or State Government will have to pay an extra cent to support your promise to put computers in every school?
PM: What we've said with the computers in schools program Chris, is that there's a $900-million commitment.
$100-million is to be outlaid very soon, and I was talking to the Deputy Prime Minister about this yesterday. And we've also said in most recent meetings with the states through COAG, that if there are any other roll on and anticipated costs associated with this program from the states and territories that we'd work together about how we can best meet those.
But you know, advancing Australia into the digital revolution is expensive. Our predecessors said, ‘not our problem, let someone else fix it', we say we've got to have our kids in the right place.
UHLMANN: But Prime Minister you said, you said you would pay for computers in every school. Can you guarantee that you will pay for every cent of the cost of putting those computers in schools that there will be no lamington drives, that no State Government will have to kick in to support your election promise?
PM: Chris, we will honour as we have done in this Budget our commitments to the Australia people prior to the election. And that commitment was for computers to be made available to Year Nine, 10, 11, and 12 students over a fixed period of time.
Now, what State Governments do assist and partner with us in that program, given that many of them had begun in part programs of a similar nature, is of course being resolved at a matter of detail in each state through the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education.
Now what individual schools do for fundraising, well Chris, that's a matter for them, but can I say, our commitment is rock solid and its a billion dollars worth of additional investment in making digital classrooms of the future more of a reality that had ever occurred under our predecessors.
UHLMANN: But just quickly, you are clearly expecting it to cost more than you've promised?
PM: Well you know something, when you're rolling out a digital revolution which involves first of all whether you've got the broadband connections right, you've got the broadband capacity right and that you've got the right platforms for each individual school in each classroom, it's going to be complex, hard and difficult.
But the Government's resolve to get this done remains unaltered. I'm determined to make sure that every kid in the future in this country has access to the tools of the information economy of the future. Otherwise they get left behind, otherwise Australia get's left behind.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks Chris.


SPEERS:Kevin Rudd, good morning and thanks for your time.  You said this Budget had to be as tough as hell. You said you'd take a meat axe to the public service. The headlines this morning say the budget is, quote, ‘light on inflation'. That it's a ‘nip and tuck budget', ‘softly, softly'.  Have you squibbed it?
PM:The challenge we set ourselves in January was to deliver a surplus of 1.5 per cent of GDP. We've delivered a surplus of 1.8 per cent of GDP. And we have done that by ensuring that all of our new spending commitments have been met by savings.
And if you were to speak, for example, to the Commonwealth Public Sector Union this morning about the impact on public servants, I don't think they would agree with the point that you've just made.
SPEERS: Well you said there that you have met your extra spending with saving cuts. But you actually said there would be deep spending cuts. So how does that equate to putting downward pressure on inflation?
PM:Well if we've delivered in this budget, which we have, $7 billion in cuts and on top of that across the forward estimates, something north of $30 billion. That's $30 billion more than our predecessors were ever prepared to do.
It's very difficult to find any savings measure in most recent budgets, so we've turned the corner into this new era of public finance responsibility, it's necessary. That's on the spending side, but also on the tax side.
Tax as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product goes down as well. So we are producing a responsible document, we're getting the balance right between fighting inflation, honouring our pre election commitments to working families and investing in the future.
SPEERS:Why then does this budget say that spending is still going to increase next year?
PM: Well the spending will increase by around about 1 percent. When we took over Government it was increasing by 4.5 per cent real each year, and something north of 6 per cent nominal. This is, had to be turned around, but I have got to say, when you have got to ensure that you honour your pre-election commitments to provide tax cuts to low and middle income earners, it costs money and therefore you have got to ensure that the overall balance is right.
Working families out there are under financial pressure. They need tax cuts. They need assistance with the Childcare Tax Rebate. They need assistance with the Education Tax Refund, they need assistance on the housing affordability front.  We have made announcements of policy decisions in each of those areas. It's not a silver bullet. But you know it all costs and we've tried to offset that with cuts in other Government programs, $7 billion worth. $7 billion more than our opponents were ever prepared to do.
And I notice when Mr Turnbull was asked what he would cut further, he said couldn't possibly comment. Pretty interesting.
SPEERS:Well one area where you have cut, the baby bonus. You said just two months ago that, quote,  “the baby bonus is absolutely safe”. Did you mislead those earning more than $150,000 a year?
PM:We have always said that we would keep the baby bonus. But we believe that it's appropriate for the baby bonuses structure for the future, together with other welfare payments, that there is appropriate means testing.
The principle of the baby bonus remains and therefore the vast majority of Australians remain obviously entitled to it. But you know, at the end of the day, you have got to arrive at a point where government can afford to deliver welfare payments. And broadly speaking when you start to get to the $150,000 point, we start to form a judgement that north of that, it's probably an area where government can no longer afford to go.
SPEERS:Well if the rich no longer deserve the baby bonus or family tax benefits. Should they also lose the child care rebate and the private health insurance rebate?
PM:Well the Childcare Tax Rebate is a workforce participation measure. You know as well as I do that, speak to business out there they are all screaming for skilled staff. A lot of those of skilled staff are women, younger women, who have left the workforce in order to have kids. They want to come back part time. How do you assist that and accommodate that. That's why we've got a childcare tax rebate system. So it's designed very much as a workforce participation measure.
SPEERS:So they are not to be touched in the years ahead?
PM:Well we think the balance is about right. We can't see a basis for changing that at this stage. But I think when you've got pretty modest levels of workforce participation in this country against other developed economies. You've got to look at creative measures around childcare, and the child care tax rebate is one of them, to make it easier, somewhat easier for women to re-enter the workforce. And going from 30 per cent to 50 per cent is actually a big jump and this is a big measure contained within this budget and we believe it will help women and working families more generally.
SPEERS: On the new baby bonus cut off at $150,000 a year income, we're getting a lot of queries. Does that income test apply in the year before the child is born or the year after the child is born?
PM:My advice is it's the 6 months following the birth of the child and therefore you would make a calculation as to whether you had income in that period of time, of $75,000 which is the $150,000 annually (inaudible)
SPEERS:Combined incomes?
PM: It's a family income.
SPEERS: Ok. What about pensioners? Clearly these are the real battlers. What do they get in this budget?
PM: Well, there are three measures that we'll put forward for pensioners who are finding it really tough with the increases in the cost of petrol, and in the cost of groceries.
One of the three measures we have is of course the pensioners bonus  -  a one off $500 payment. Secondly, we also have a measure to increase the utilities allowance. This is a very significant measure. Currently the utilities allowance is, I think from memory, about $117. That goes up to $500 in one hit and that is a continuing annual payment for pensioners. Thirdly there is a telephone allowance also for pensioners. Currently I think it is $80. Now it goes up to north of $100 and it's specifically designed to assist with internet connection for pensioners who are now using internet more, through email and the rest, to maintain contact with their families around the world.
SPEERS:The one off bonus payments, though, you said you would put them on a more sustainable footing. Is that work yet to come? I mean they are still listed as one off payments in the budget.
PM:That's, that's true. And one of the reasons why we have put together tax, welfare and retirement income policy, within the overall rubric of the large Ken Henry reform commission on tax, that the Treasurer announced the other day, is to try and get those policy settings right for the long term. This is very complex and very expensive public policy. But you can't fiddle with one bit of it without knowing how it impacts on the rest. So we would like to do that as part of that overall review.
SPEERS:Just one on childcare as well. You promised in the election campaign, 260 new childcare centres. This budget provides funding only for about 38 over the next four years. So how long is it going to take to build 260?
PM: Well there are detailed questions in terms of land use planning for these, they take some time to work their way through. On the detail of each centre and where it goes, I am sure that will be tailored to local, specific needs. But more broadly on childcare - centres is one thing, other supply side measures in terms of helping with the training of childcare workers and early childhood education teachers, there are a lot of measures in this Budget, quite apart from the very massive increase in the Childcare Tax Rebate that we spoke about before.
SPEERS:But what I am getting at is these policies are going to take some years to implement.
PM: When you are dealing with infrastructure questions, if often takes some time to roll out. Because there are detailed physical planning processes to go through. I understand that. I accept that. And we take responsibility for that. We would like it to be quicker, like it to be faster, let's see how we go in the forthcoming Budget in terms of whether any acceleration roll out of those centres can occur.
SPEERS:Just before I let you go, there is a report this morning that you are planning to take the Iranian President Ahmedinejad to the International Court of Justice for inciting genocide and denying the holocaust. Is that right?
PM:The Iranian President's repeated extraordinary statements, which are anti-Semitic, and expressing a determination to eliminate the modern state of Israel from the map are appalling by any standards of current international relations. They are an incitement to international violence.
Now what we have said in the past is that we will take legal advice which the Attorney General is currently doing, in terms of whether there is a (inaudible) way forward here through the appropriate international legal mechanisms and we will study that advice carefully.
SPEERS: No decision made on that then?
PM:No I think the important thing is for the world community right now, to be absolutely united in their condemnation of the regime in Tehran for these sorts of remarks. It is not just, you know, hyperbole, from the bully pulpit of Tehran. It is the roll on effect across the Islamic world to those who listen to Iran for their guidance. I think this is dangerous stuff. The world community should unite against it, and as I said, on the matter you specifically raise, we will take careful and considered advice in terms of whether it is possible on an international legal front.
SPEERS:Ok. Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM:  Good to be with you.


KOCH:Prime Minister, welcome.
PM:Good Morning, Kochie. Good to see you have got a coat on.
KOCH:I am not as tough as you.
PM:I am not prepared for this.  
KOCH:Now, the Budget last night. The papers called it a light Budget but then economists are saying the cuts were a lot deeper than they expected and gave it a bit of a tick. You would have to be happy with that?
PM:Yeah I think, look there is always be mixed reviews, on the day following a budget, because, free country, people express their point of view. But the bottom line is, in January we committed to bringing in a robust big surplus of about $18.5 billion.
And when we crunched the numbers we thought we could actually land a Budget, produce an outcome which was better than that in terms of a surplus. And that actually brings us into about $22 billion. So we have worked hard to do that, primarily through cutting Government programs. And we think that is the right thing to do to put downward pressure on inflation.
Of course, others would want us not to have implemented tax cuts at all for working families. But when we look at people right across the country, they are doing tough. They are under financial pressure. They deserve their tax cuts.
KOCH:Ok, you talked about inflation then. You forecast the inflation to come down. This Budget and your forecast is it enough to bring interest rates down? Do you think this is going to please the Reserve Bank?
PM: Well, fiscal policy or budget policy has to play it's role. Part of the problem in the past, is you've had too much of a galloping increase in government spending. As of when we took over office it was running 4.5 per cent per year, real increase. That is a very big increase.
We have brought this down to 1.1 per cent increase. About a quarter of what it was. We think that it is a step in the right direction. Ultimately, as you know, rates are determined by the Reserve Bank itself, but Budget policy has got to play it's role.
KOCH:Ok, do you reckon you have done your bit to bring rates down?
PM:We have, through budget policy, done as much as we can now to help the bank do its thing. But beyond that, you know the other thing you got to do with inflationary pressures over time is also invest in skills and in infrastructure. And that is the other part of the future message of this Budget.
KOCH:Yep, and those big funds that you have set up. Let's put some questions from our viewers to you that have come in on the soapbox. A thirty year old woman has written about the baby bonus, the means testing of the baby bonus, she says is divisive, a slap in the face to all young women who try to better themselves. Steve in New South Wales said he always thought it was an incentive payment, not a welfare payment. What do you say to that?
PM:Well payments of this nature I think would always be categorised as payments from Government to families and therefore falling within a broader category of social security support of one form or another. I mean it's right, there is a particular added element to this which is to encourage families to have kids.
But at the end of the day, we have to make a tough judgment here. And do people earning more than $150,000 a year actually need this as much as other people who are on much more modest levels of income. We have taken a hard decision and said this is probably where the line lies. I know that is going to upset some people, on baby bonus, on Family Tax Benefit B and in other areas, but we think this is a reasonable line for the future and of course it will be indexed.
KOCH:Ok, now Kylie from New South Wales was confused about how the means test will work. Will you assess her income before the baby arrives, when she and her husband are earning more than $150,00 or after she has the baby and goes on maternity leave?
PM:Well this, this arrangement kicks in as of 1 January next year and therefore what we will - people who are obviously pregnant now we don't wish to upset the apple cart there but we think that is a reasonable compromise.
And of course, you know, we understand that people juggling for the arrival of a bub are going to find it pretty tough but we think this is a fair and reasonable way forward. It is not magic. We know there are some people who are going to be disappointed by this but let's face it, again I go back to lower income earners needing all the support that they get.
KOCH:Ok, Australia's pensioners and seniors will receive an increased allowance of $500 but we are getting a lot of emails from pensioners saying, ‘where are we in this?'
PM: Well I understand pensioners concerns because they are finding it really tough in terms of balancing their budgets. But what we got in this Budget package are three particular measures, one is, a one-off bonus for pensioners which is $500.
PM:Secondly
KOCH:Only one-off?
PM:Sure. Secondly, you have got though, this is a big change, an increase in utilities allowance from something not much more than $100 to $500 a year and that continues into the future. And that is important for all of Australia's two million plus pensioners.
And thirdly, there is a thing called the telephone allowance, so we are increasing by several tens of dollars and the reason for that is to assist people, particularly at home, who are pensioners, getting on with their internet connection. Because internet now, is often a way in which older Australians are keeping in contact with their far flung families. Three measures, all together those come to some billions dollars.
KOCH:Ok. Terrific to see the 19,000 carers of disabled children being brought into the net which is a great move forward. But the carers payment instituted again this year still dubbed as a one-off. It is not going to be ongoing?
PM:We are looking very carefully at where carers payments goes into the future. Everywhere we go in Australia we meet carers and the situation in which they find themselves in is very, very hard and they do a fantastic job.
One of the things, as you have just mentioned, we have changed is to increase some of the definitions or expand them to make more people eligible. On the other hand we are also making sure that we get the system right for the future.
Can I say, one of the things we have been confronted with as we run around the country is not enough accommodation, supported accommodation for older carers with older disabled children, which is why there is another $100 million investment for people in those categories.
We need to work more for carers in the future. And let me tell you that when we look more broadly at the reform of tax and welfare through this mega review that we have now announced for the next year plus, that will form part of the review as well.
KOCH:Ok, before we let you go, two quick things, reaction to the St George/Westpac merger?
PM:Well let's see how all that unfolds. You know these things are, a complex business when it comes to the marketplace. I don't wish to make any statements which would be seen to be inappropriate. The key thing for us is to make sure that we have got enough competition in the Australian banking industry.
Everyone wants to make sure that when it comes to the delivery of banking services, they are competitive, what people are charged, that banks are held accountable to one another - because we made it easier for people to switch their accounts.
So we will watch this one carefully but I don't want to issue any edict about what market should do at this stage.
KOCH:And just finally, the earthquake in China. The numbers are just horrendous and keep rising. What sort of assistance will you be offering for China?
PM: I wrote to the Chinese Prime Minister yesterday in the midst of our Budget preparations and sent it to him straight away by cable, basically saying if there is anything we can do by way of Emergency Management Australia, that is the emergency response team, to go in and quickly identify people in rubble and in buildings, then we are happy to provide.
Those discussions are being advanced with the Chinese Embassy here again today. And of course, our people are ready to move should they be required. This is an appalling loss of life in Sichuan Province.
I have been up to Chengdu myself a couple of times. It is a huge city. Of course, the centre is outside that part of that provincial capital but the province has a population of but the province has a population of about 90 or 100 million people. It's huge.
Let's just see, let's just hope that this is not as bad in terms of overall loss of life as it looks right now but we will be watching it very carefully.
KOCH:Terrific. Prime Minister, thank you for joining us this morning.
PM:Thank you. I am glad you are warm.


WOOLEY: Prime Minister, I notice The Australian leads with a story that ‘we won't raid the nest egg' and it is attributed to you, Kevin Rudd. That you deny there is a $41 billion pool of funds which will be a pork barrel at the next election. 
PM: Well Charles, there is a big choice for Australia's future, and that is whether we are going to have a national government which is committed to the business of nation building, using the taxpayers money to do that. Because it is the people's money, it is not our money. Or alternatively, whether you do as the previous Liberal governments have done which is frankly waste this money on consumption.
What we have decided to do is create three major investment funds for the future. One is, a Building Australia Fund worth $20 billion to invest both with state governments and with the private sector in major projects in road, in infrastructure, in ports, in rail, as well as in broadband.
Second is a $11 billion fund called the Education Investment Fund, designed to improve TAFE's and universities around the country.
And the third is a $10 billion health and hospital fund to also invest in the future needs of our public health system. I think this is the right way for the future. And we believe that the country at large wants these big infrastructure challenges dealt with, and not just ignored.
WOOLEY: The Howard Government's policy of putting of this money in the bank and in future funds was the so called ‘locked box' model, where you couldn't get at it, but a lot of us voted for you Prime Minister because we knew there was a crisis on the Murray, there was a crisis in health, especially in regional Australia, a crisis in Indigenous health, I mean people are actually dying. A crisis in the environment with the highest species extinction rate on earth, in this first world democratic country. But there was feeling amongst some people, if we were waiting for a rainy day, isn't this it? Hasn't the future arrived now? 
PM:  Well it's true that is why we have created these funds, and we have said quite explicitly that they will be drawn on from next year. That is why also in this year's Budget we have committed $75 million in feasibility studies on major infrastructure projects right across the country. For example: in Sydney in metro rail; in Melbourne in some of their inner transport needs; and Adelaide, a traffic congestion study; a traffic management study for in and around Perth Airport; also, similar studies for the future needs of the Bruce Highway, as well as the Gateway Arterial Road system in and around Brisbane itself, to name just a few.
You can either, as the Australian Government say ‘not my problem', and handball it to the states or somebody else. Or you can say, let's roll our sleeves up and do something about it. And on the question of economic responsibility, it is possible to do that, that is, be a nation building government, and at the same time, make proper provisioning for the long term future as well.
The Future Fund that you spoke about before, which is to provide long term financial support for the retirement income requirements of Australia's public servants and superannuation needs - that continues, and further investment has been made in it. So that there is responsible provisioning for the future as well. But we believe it is far better to invest in these critical areas which have been neglected by the previous government for so long, rather than just believe that the people's money is our money.
WOOLEY: Can I put the flesh on the Murray story. I was down in the Coorong recently, at Lake Albert and Lake Alexandrina. Lake Alexandrina, I think 900 square kilometres of fresh water, or it was, our biggest fresh water natural lake. Lake Albert has all but disappeared. Huge toll in the wildlife but also the other endangered species, the Coorong dairy farmers. In one area I visited, 70 who had already gone and the ones who were struggling on were buying water at a few thousand bucks a week. They couldn't last until  -  I mean I know you can't do miracles  -  but they can't last until 2015, 2017, 2019. 
PM: On the question of the Murray Darling, remember, we have been in office for five months. Our predecessors were there for 12 long years. What we have done within four months is for the first time, established a single national authority to manage the entire river system. And that was achieved at the last meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Adelaide. And we now have the single authority running the Murray Darling Basin. We think this is the first step forward.
On the immediate challenges of the river mouth and in the Lower Murray Lakes, I am acutely conscious of the needs there. These have been raised with me in recent times by the Premier of South Australia among others.
WOOLEY: And your Water Minister of course is from South Australia. 
PM: And Senator Penny Wong from South Australia. We are acutely conscious of these immediate challenges and are doing now what we can between the Federal Government and the state government, to see what can be done in terms of the dire condition in which those lakes now find themselves. I am aware of this. But you see our challenge Charles is this, dealing with the immediate problems as best we can. But also having a plan to deal with the nation's long term infrastructure needs. And water infrastructure is one of the infrastructure needs we need to be planning for as well.
WOOLEY: I understand Prime Minister that at times like this everyone wants a piece of you. In fact I was a budget winner because you gave me, or you gave my Tasmanian Devils $10 million. Thank you very much. If you don't ask, you won't get. 
PM: Well you did raise this with me on behalf of the good people of Tasmania just before the last election and I said yes, we will do that. And that money, as you know, has been committed in the Budget. The Tasmanian Devil, as you know, has since February 2006 been listed as vulnerable to extinction under the State Threatened Species Protection Act. And more recently they have been included under the Commonwealth Environment Protection Biodiversity Conversation Act.
It is not just a Tasmanian icon, it is an Australian icon. We need to act. And we have got funding there to assist this important research project which I seem to recall is at the University of Tasmania.
WOOLEY:  It is, it is indeed. And as I said, we do have the highest species extinction rate in the world, it would be nice if we could draw the line at the Tassie Devil. Prime Minister, can I talk about working mums and baby bonuses. This was all a very hard thing to work out I would think, for you and your Treasurer when you sat down. Hard to do this kind of stuff without offending someone? 
PM: I think that is true and no one is suggesting that it has been easy to work these things out when it comes to the baby bonus and the impact on working mothers. But we have to draw a line somewhere. And that is, when it comes to these sorts of income support payments, where do you draw the line? The line that we have drawn when it comes to means testing here, is $150,000. We believe that it is not responsible for the Federal Government simply to provide open ended income support for people who are in much higher income brackets.
I know this hurts and offends a number of people, I accept that. But we have got to make sure that we are looking after people who are in real financial need and that is why we have done this measure. We have also got to produce a proper, balanced Budget as well. And that means making some hard decisions as well.
WOOLEY: The other people who mightn't have come out so well were those mothers who decided - and lots of early childhood development experts say this is the way to go - decided to stay home for the first couple of years of the life of their child. Are they now worse off under the Rudd Government? 
PM: We fully respect the importance of the role played by stay at home mums. And therefore, when you look at some of the challenges faced there, for example under Family Tax Benefit Part B, the fact is 97 per cent of the 1.4 million families with stay at home mothers who currently receive Family Tax Benefit Part B will not be affected by the Budget changes at all.
And on the broader question of means testing can I just say this Charles as well. We've had something of a debate on this in the parliament. On the one hand we've had the Leader of the Opposition saying that he'll have to look at the fine print about whether he supports $150,000 as a means test or not.
Then we have the person who wants the Leader of the Opposition's job, Mr Turnbull saying, I think yesterday or the day before on Melbourne radio, when asked is $150,000 the right point at which to abolish eligibility, “I think a means test it's probably in today's age, it's probably about the right point if you're going to have a means test.” So I've got to say, there is a lack of clarity in terms of the alternative government on this.
It is a hard decision, but I emphasis again both on this and in relation to Family Tax Benefit B. We stand by the decision, we're sorry for those who it affects. But our job is to produce a responsible budget with a strong surplus on the one hand because that necessary to put downward pressure on inflation. And secondly to make sure that in helping working families and I've got to say tipping the scale in the direction of working families, that it's necessary to provide every bit of support to families who are on much lower incomes.
WOOLEY: PM, can I just ask one final question, a foreign policy question. The appalling death toll in China, it takes Burma off the front page. Does it distract the attention of the world from a much worse situation in Burma and what can we do about it? 
PM: Well I think both these represent massive humanitarian tragedies. In Burma of course, when you look at the numbers involved and the appalling response of the regime, it makes all of our blood boil. The poor long suffering Burmese people don't deserve the regime that they have got. What we've got to do as an international community is work with the cards that we're dealt with. And that means, and we've had to take some hard decisions on this ourselves, authorising the Royal Australian Air Force to fly in, provide emergency medical and other emergency assistance, on the airport in Rangoon, hand it over to the Burmese authorities, and, because we're not allowed to have our personnel in. The Americans made the same decision.
WOOLEY: The problem is, the Burmese Generals are stymied, they cannot now stand down or mend their ways because should that happen, they would be tried as, for international crimes against humanity, wouldn't they? 
PM: Well I'm the first to admit on this question Charles, we face an absolute dilemma in dealing with the Burmese. If I had a magic wand I'd make it different. But I don't. What I got to do is work within the constraints of what we've got. But there's another point too and that is to work throughout the international community and that's why I've been on the phone to the Secretary General of the United Nations, the President of Indonesia, the President of Singapore in recent days on this very question, about how do we leverage the Burmese more generally into accepting effective humanitarian assistance from the around the world. There is an impact of pressure over time. But frankly time has now run out or is running out for the poor people affected by this extraordinary tragedy in Burma.
WOOLEY: Ok Prime Minister, I do appreciate your time and once again thank you for the $10 million for the Devils. I'm sure that future generations will bless your name. 
PM:  Well let's hope that the research project produces the outcome and I'll be down in Tasmania and I'll be visiting those guys when I'm next there.
WOOLEY: I won't ask you for more until we run out of the $10 million. 
PM: Well done Charles, thank you bye.


The Rudd Labor Government will immediately provide $10 million to kick start urgent planning on the Gateway Motorway's two missing links.
The construction of the missing links will mean that Queensland motorists will have a first class arterial road linking the Pacific Motorway to the Bruce Highway.
The Rudd Government made this commitment in the Federal Budget to reduce the traffic congestion on this busy highway once and for all.
For 12 long years the Liberal Government refused to commit to building the two missing links  -  leaving Queenslanders with a road that was half built.
The $10 million investment  -  to be matched by $10 million from the Bligh Government  -  will allow planning work to start on:
     * the 12.5km section from Nudgee Road to the Bruce Highway; and
     * the 4.5km from Mount Gravatt-Capalaba Road to the Pacific Motorway.
The investment will fund critical pre-construction activities, such as community consultation, geotechnical surveys, design, environmental assessments and land acquisition.
From 2009-10, an additional $195 million will be invested in pre-construction funding for these links under the AusLink 2 Investment Program.
Kick starting this critical planning work means that the construction of the missing links could be ready to begin as soon as 2011  -  instead of being on the never-never list of the former Liberal government.
The Queensland Government is currently investing $1.9 billion to upgrade the Gateway  -  the only north-south bypass of Brisbane  -  to six and eight lanes.
But if the missing links remain only four-lanes, motorists will be stuck in traffic jams when connecting to the Bruce Highway and the Pacific Motorway.
Already up to 70,000 motorists use these sections of road every day and if we do nothing, by 2012 over 94,000 commuters will be sitting in daily traffic jams.
Without an upgraded link to the Bruce Highway and Pacific Motorway, truckies from the port and airport  -  the fastest growing industry and trade precinct in Australia  -  will struggle to meet their schedules, pushing up costs for consumers.
Roads and rail lines are the arteries of the economy, and infrastructure bottlenecks push up the costs of doing business and add to inflationary pressures.
Under a ‘do-nothing' scenario, urban congestion will cost families and businesses in Brisbane $3 billion a year by 2020, with many working parents spending more time in their cars and less time at home with their kids.
That's why we're planning for the future with commitments such as the one we've made to the Gateway Missing Links, and taken the decision to establish the $20 billion Building Australia Fund to upgrade the nation's ageing infrastructure.


BLIGH: Well I welcome the Prime Minister and the Treasurer here today to see the largest bridge project being built in the country. This is the sort of infrastructure that Queensland needs, this is the sort of project that we need the Federal Government to be a part of if we are going to truly build this State and truly build this country.
I'm very pleased to see them here so soon after the budget, they've got funds that they are looking for a home for and we've got ideas for them. So I'm very pleased to see that they have a sense of urgency about getting projects like this built as quickly as possible.
This project will 20 mins off the average trip time for people travelling to the airport, it will make a massive difference to congestion in and around our airport. This is a congestion busting project, that state governments spending close to $2 billion to make it a reality.
This is the sort of project that would happen much quicker and make a bigger difference sooner if we have a Federal Government like we do now, that want's to build things in this country. So welcome to the Prime Minister and the Treasurer, we look forward to working with them to make more of these projects a reality here in Queensland.
PM: Thank you Premier and it's good to be here with the Premier of Queensland and with the Treasurer Wayne Swan, with Kerry Rea, Federal Member for Bonner and with Warren the Minister. And it's good to be back in Brissie for both of us.
We are proud of the fact that we've introduced a nation building budget and the engine room of the budget is infrastructure and we have committed for the time for the Australian National Government a $20 billion Building Australia Fund.
The purpose of that fund is to provide the National Government with the financial horsepower to partner with States and Territories and the private sector in building economic infrastructure of national importance. Our roads, our ports, our rail, our broadband infrastructure and beyond those funds we've also brought into being an $11 billion fund for the future investment in our Tafe's and in our Universities and a $10 billion fund for the future investment in our health and hospital system.
Today we're here at this important project, at the gateway arterial to look at how we can assist with this project going forward. The State Government has done the work so far, this is nearly a $2 billion project including the doubling of the gateway bridge. But as we look at this project if we are going to actually do something about urban congestion, we've got to make sure that this particular roadway has all the missing links dealt with.
Now right now there's a missing link to the north which goes for about 12 kilometres where we are still going to end up with a bottleneck and to the south as well for about 4 kilometres down in the vicinity of (inaudible).
These are the sort of projects which need to be worked on conjointly between the National and the State Governments. As a first step on these two missing links what we've done in the budget is bring forward $10 million to assist in planning work on those two missing links.
Secondly through AUSLINK the national road funding program. As of the 09-10 period we'll be bringing in $195 million to participate in pre construction work on those two missing links. And thirdly on the key element on the overall construction cost of constructing those missing links, that's precisely the sort of project which will be put before infrastructure Australia for analysis in terms of whether it fits the cost benefit analysis and the rigorous criteria that we'll be setting nationally for co funding from the Building Australia fund.
We believe passionately in nation building. I think the people of Australia and the people of Queensland are sick and tired of one level of Government blaming the other for urban congestion and problems with infrastructure. They are sick and tired of excuses. They'd start to like to see some answers. The Building Australia fund is about delivering those answers and we can do so in partnership and cooperation with State Governments, rather than perpetuating the politics of the blame game. Wayne
SWAN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. A modern economy requires modern infrastructure. And as a local what happens on this road everyday saps growth in the economy, it's a drag on productivity. Our Building Australia Fund will be the key to the modernisation of the Australian economy for the long term. Investment that's been denied, vital infrastructure such as this here is now going to flow from the Building Australia fund. This is indeed a nation building project and we need many more. And that's why this weeks budget was so important.
PM: Ok, over to you folks?
JOURNALIST: Premier how much money do you need from the Federal Government for these missing links?
BLIGH: The total costs of these missing links is between $2 and $3 billion so they are very big projects. We need to finish this project and what I'm very pleased about today is that the $10 million in this weeks budget from the Federal Government starts to accelerate the process of getting those missing links to become a reality.
So this planning, you cant build a road like this and fix these missing links without the first step - that's the planning money. The decision this week by the Federal Government to bring forward that planning money is the first step to these missing links. They're very big and expensive projects but that's why this Building Australia Fund is something that I as Premier am determined to get Queensland's fair share of.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how much?
BLIGH: We'll be looking for as much as we can. Obviously the Prime Minister and Treasurer have established a fund that all states will be putting forward projects to. The States will have to indicate their priorities and they will also have to indicate where they will co-fund projects.
This is a process that we'll be part of but I am very pleased today to see that this planning money accelerates the prospect of these missing links becoming a reality.
PM: If I could add to what the Premier has said. This is a Building Australia for all Australia. Secondly we've said that in future budget surpluses we would draw on those surpluses to add to this fund. If you look at some of the data provided by for example the committee for economic development of Australia, a private body.
In terms of the infrastructure backlog in this country, it extends to tens and tens and tens of billions of dollars. It's time to turn the corner. But we'll be looking at projects to how you enhance the response to urban congestions in Sydney and Melbourne, dealing with traffic problems in Adelaide and in Perth. But also in regional Australia as well, where there are challenges.
The criteria that we've set up for handling these projects is one: State, Territories, the private sector may come forward with proposals. Two: we'll consider them of course at the level of the Commonwealth Government. Three: they will also then be considered by infrastructure Australia the body that's been set up by Sir Rod Eddington and four: it will then be examined by the loans council and five back to the Commonwealth Government for process.
This is a rigorous way of assessing the cost benefit analysis of each project. Look at projects like this, it's vital to the nations transport artery, but it's still got to go through the hoops.
JOURNALIST: So the Gold Coast will be able to share in this urban congestion money as well?
PM: Well we have said quite clearly in the Budget process that we'll invite submissions from across the country on infrastructure projects of national economic significance. That's the criteria and it's got to meet costs benefit analysis, that is what State Governments would be doing normally. What lies beyond the powers of State Governments to do. What's local Governments would be doing normally, what lies beyond their powers to do.
What normally could be funded exclusively or partially by the private sector. But taking all those factors into account what then is a productive funding role for the Federal Government. We need to have rigorous criteria to assess each project against. That's the process we've established. But it all would add up to nothing unless we are putting money on the table - $20 billion is a lot of money to put on the table, that's what we have begun.
No previous Australian Government has done so, in fact those opposing us in the National Parliament at the moment have ridiculed the idea.
JOURNALIST: Speaking of those opposing you, what do you make of Dr Nelson's idea last night (inaudible) Fuel excise?
PM: Can I say what Dr Nelson and Mr Turnbull have done is conduct a $22 billion raid on the surplus. Which means upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates. There one other thing as well, today stunningly in a radio interview Dr Nelson has said that he put together the Budget reply last night without subjecting it to costings. In other words that what he put forward last night had not been costed.
This is an essential requirement of National political leadership. When you are putting forward an alternative budget, you've got to cost it. You cant just hope one day that it might all add up. This is economic irresponsibility 101 to put forward an alternative budget for the nation and then within 12 hours admit to the nation that you haven't costed it. I am stunned by what he said today.
JOURNALIST: But what about the idea of a reduction of 5 cents a litre. That would help motorists would it not?
PM: If you look at the overall impact on working families from what we have done on the tax changes which have been brought in. The total impact of those tax changes, some $46 billion.
Secondly the education tax refund. Thirdly the increase in the child care tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent together with other measures which have been introduced for pensioners and carers.
These are all significant additions to the family budget. Therefore we believe that's the responsible way to go. What Dr Nelson has done instead is say I'm about to on behalf of the Liberal party trash the Liberal parties economic credibility by raiding the surplus to the tune of $22 billion - all in the cause of economic populism.
JOURNALIST: So your ruling it out?
PM: We think that the measures that we have introduced in this budget are right for providing support for working families and If you put together what's contained in the tax cuts, what's contained in the increase in child care tax rebate, what's contained in the education tax refund and other measures including our specific proposals on housing affordability, these represent significant additional dollars each for working families.
JOURNALIST: Can you see how (inaudible) be popular in the community, something like this?
PM: Well, can I say, what is the challenge in the community is first and foremost, to put downward pressure on inflation so you put downward pressure on interest rates. And delivering a $22 billion raid on the surplus, let me tell you, that puts upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates.
JOURNALIST: We're not far from the Pine River here. Apparently Mark Latham says you were fond of telling people you could hear the banjo music playing north of there?
PM: I don't even know the reference to what he's talking about.
JOURNALIST: You've never said that to anybody?
PM: I don't even know the reference that you are referring to.
JOURNALIST: Have you ever said that there is banjo music playing north of the Pine River?
PM: I don't even understand the reference.
JOURNALIST: Just further on the Budget, then there is nothing really in there though for single pensioners, is there. Which a parliamentary committee found (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, I lost you in the traffic noise. Say again?
JOURNALIST: In terms of single pensioners, there is not much in the Budget for them. The Parliamentary committee found that they can't afford to buy meat and go to bed early because they can't afford the electricity. I mean, that  - 
PM: On the payments to pensioners, of course we have a pensioners bonus. We have a new utilities allowance which increases from $117 a year to $500 a year in one hit. We've also sought to increase the telephone allowance for pensioners as well. That goes up to $117 a year, (inaudible) to assist pensioners with internet connections.
These are important measures. Also in the aged pension itself, we've adjusted the calculation basis to make sure that it's calculated in the future against the most beneficial of the three indicators which exist for calculating the pension from.
I understand that this will not be regarded as enough by many. I understand that fully. And that's also why the questions of retirement income will be considered also by the Henry Commission of Inquiry into tax, income support and retirement income, which now works.
I also note, in passing, in reference to the Budget reply last night, that on the question of income support in these categories, that Dr Nelson said that he'd be seeking to use our commission of inquiry to deliver an outcome for carers. I find it interesting that on the one hand, Dr Nelson would criticise us over having a comprehensive, a most comprehensive, look at the tax and income support system in decades, and on the other hand, say that he'll rely on precisely that review mechanism to reach a conclusion as to what further support should be delivered to carers in the future.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to pensioners who (inaudible) can't put food on the table now (inaudible)
PM: Cost of living pressures are really tough, they're really difficult, and that's one of the reasons why this Budget, for the first time, increases the annual utilities allowance to pensioners from a hundred and I think seventeen dollars a week up to $500 a week, that is a significant increase, sorry a year. Therefore, we understand that pensioners are under financial pressure.
The key challenge is this. Against that which was committed by the previous Government five months ago for pensioners and carers, and against that which we have delivered in this Budget, I think you'll find that what we've delivered within this Budget at least equals what those opposite were offering. And I'm quite convinced that in terms of where we will go with the Henry Commission of Inquiry, that we will have a thorough all round examination of what we do for the future form of retirement incomes policy in Australia, including the pension.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is a group of pensioners in Flinders Street in Melbourne taking off their shirts in protest of the Budget (inaudible). Do you think that might get you to speed up further relief for them?
PM: The key question is, five months ago when the Liberals were in office, what did they offer pensioners? Secondly, if you look at the measures that we introduced through this Budget for the same, that is the same group of pensioners, you have the measures that I ran through before.
I understand full well that people on the aged pension are finding it very difficult. That's why we need to have a complete, all round, look at this through the Henry Commission of Inquiry.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think it's very important to make sure that we have a thorough, long term, response to the long term challenges of retirement income policy, and that means for pensioners, it means for carers, and it means for others. And remember, I listened to Dr Nelson on the question of pensioners and carers. For 12 years, 12 years in office, where was the action forthcoming? I don't seem to have seen it. Yet, in five months, this Government has been in office, we are responsible for the accumulation of cost of living pressures on those pensioners and carers which have built up over that period of time. The responsible course of action is this: deliver the measures we promised and committed to prior to the election. And we've done that to the letter. In the case of carers, we provide, one or two additional matters as well.
Secondly, look at the overall, long term needs of pensioners and carers in the context of a comprehensive review of retirement incomes policy. That's why the Secretary of the Treasury has been commissioned to do this. It's what we intend to do.
I go back to what I said before. If you are serious about producing an alternative Budget for the country, how can the alternative Prime Minister and the alternative Treasurer, on the day the day after their alternative Budget is brought down, say to the nation at large, ‘this has not been costed'. You cannot do that. It's not responsible.
SWAN: And what that proves is that they can't be trusted to run the economy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think you'll see funding forthcoming from the Budget when it comes to the Ipswich Motorway. That's what we committed to prior to the election, that's what we've committed to subsequent to the election, and those funds have begun to flow. That's the first point. Our commitment is to stand by what we said we'd do beforehand. And we are doing precisely that.
Furthermore, on the wider needs of the Bruce Highway, one of the other areas where we have brought forward funding for planning analysis is areas of upgrade needed across the Bruce Highway up the Queensland coast in at least four different locations. That work is underway as well.
And I contrast this again with the fact that we have not only Auslink, the previous Government had that as well, but we now have a Building Australia Fund. Now, this Building Australia Fund is new. And, it's designed to support major national infrastructure and road projects.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on Dr Nelson opposing the alcopops and the Medicare threshold as well. Will that legislation have to (inaudible) pass through the Senate after July?
PM: Look, if Dr Nelson and Mr Turnbull want to go down that road, they gotta answer this question: this $22 billion raid on the surplus that they are conducting, how do they propose to fill that $22 billion elsewhere? Because if you don't make that $22 billion up, the maths is simple: it puts upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates.
So Dr Nelson and Mr Turnbull need to think this through very carefully in terms of the impact on working families and mortgage interest rates and remember under them they had two messages for working Australians. One, working families have never been better off. And two, at the last election, the 2004 election, that interest rates would be kept at record lows. If you want two fundamental breaches of working families, there they are. And if you add to all that, by this $22 billion raid on the surplus, which is what they are proposing, then the consequences and the flow through consequences on inflation and interest rates, are there for all to see.
SWAN: Well it's a huge raid on the surplus. And if you raid the surplus, you put pressure on inflation and interest rates. Dr Nelson and Mr Turnbull ought to explain what their alternative is.
JOURNALIST: So you don't think they're going to try and block it in the Senate?
SWAN: We don't know what they're doing. I think they've lost their way. It's pretty hard to tell what they're really up to at the moment. But, if they were to carry through on those threats, it would be a $22 billion raid on the surplus. That is utterly irresponsible given the high inflation that this Government inherited from Mr Turnbull and Mr Costello.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: It's not unusual for office space to be leased for a period of time. It could be that we would see this office continue to exist for anything up to three to five years depending on the final alignment and the pace of acquisitions. This has still got a long way to go before the alignment is finalised.
I think the parliament did the responsible thing moving Mr Bombolas out of an office that was inaccessible by pram, by wheelchairs, it was up, I think, three flights of stairs. It is important that Members of Parliament can be accessed by anybody. And that's what they sought to do. That was the most cost effective office space available. I understand they've got a lease that goes for three years, with an option. Offices from time to time get moved.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: When you're looking for office space, the Queensland Parliament is no different to anyone else. And that is, you find whatever is available within the costs that you have available to you, and you do the best that you can. And obviously the parliament is constrained by finding office space within the boundaries of an electorate.


Tonight I want to speak to you about the Government's approach to sustainability and in particular, climate change.
I want to discuss the need for leadership from the international community in responding to the long-term sustainability and security challenges of energy, food and water resources.
Second, I want to discuss the importance of business leadership in Australia's response to the challenges of climate change and sustainability.
Third, I want to outline the leadership that the Government is taking on sustainability and a long-term strategy to address climate change, including how we plan to advance the climate change and sustainability policy agenda.
Global leadership to tackle sustainability challenges and global security threats: Energy, food, water and climate change
Since the Government came to office almost six months ago, we have set out a long term vision of building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
It is a vision cast within the context of a rapidly changing global economy and a fast-evolving global security environment.
Not too long ago, the argument that the next major threats to global security might come from shortages of food and water, competition for energy resources and the impacts of climate change, would probably have been considered well outside of the mainstream.
That has now changed.
The pace of growth in the developing world has created a resources crunch. Energy prices have soared as demand has outstripped supply.
The age of cheap oil and gas is over, and energy security is now recognised as a key factor in geopolitics and a major driver of long-term national security strategies.
At the same time we have witnessed food shortages and extraordinary inflation in food prices, resulting from rising costs of fertilisers, irrigation and transport, combined with poor harvests in many countries.
Experts are warning of the risk of future conflict in many regions over access to fresh water, with 500 million people living in countries facing chronic water shortages.
And as each year and even each month passes, we're presented with more sobering analyses of the scale of the climate crisis.
Last week we saw reports of a major scientific research project, conducted by eleven institutions around the world including the University of Melbourne and published in the current edition of the journal Nature.
This project has for the first time formally linked global warming caused by human activity to many recorded changes occurring in habitats and wildlife around the world.
After reviewing forty years of scientific research, the study concluded that climate change is already having a major impact on biological and natural systems - and at least 90 per cent of environmental damage and disruption can be attributed to global warming caused by human activity.
These impacts are being recorded after a rise in temperature of only 0.6 degrees.
Climate modelling clearly suggests we are facing a much greater temperature rise in the future.
In the years ahead, the trends that are driving these challenges  -  finite resources, economic development and climate change  -  will become more pronounced, and will have a greater impact on global security.
It is critically important therefore that the international community addresses the challenges of climate change, energy security, food security and water security with urgency.
These are humanitarian challenges; they are environmental challenges, and they are security challenges.
The security threat is highlighted in the food riots reported in recent weeks in more than a dozen countries including Bangladesh, Haiti, Indonesia and several African nations.
Climate change also presents a long term threat to global security.
The international community must also develop practical strategies for climate change adaptation.
There are hundreds of millions of people in the heavily populated mega delta regions in South, East and Southeast Asia who will be at great risk as climate change accelerates, and the international community must work to address these dangers.
Without making a specific connection between climate change and Cyclone Nargis, the current human calamity in Burma demonstrates the vulnerability of developing nations to the impact of increasingly frequent extreme weather events.
If I may digress for one moment on the matter of Burma: I know there are widespread concerns about whether aid contributions are in fact getting through to those who need it, but I am assured that donations are making it through.
I want to pass on the message from Tim Costello and other leaders of Australian aid efforts that our donations have succeeded in providing essential food and water to over 300,000 victims, saving many thousands of lives. No Australian should hold back from donating, because those donations are making a great difference on the ground.
Australia is seeking to play a constructive role internationally in addressing the long-term sustainability and security challenges.
We have already at Bali played a significant role in the negotiations on the new global climate change deal. In addition, we are one of the first donor countries to integrate climate change adaptation into our international development assistance programs.
Australia is active too across the range of global sustainability challenges.
We have recently taken practical steps to help address the food crisis, with a total contribution of $90 million to the World Food Program.
In addition to a contribution of over $60 million provided earlier in the financial year, we recently announced a donation of $30 million to the World Food Program's emergency appeal - to help address critical gaps in its food aid operations as a result of rising food and fuel prices.
Australia has also stepped up its calls for international trade policy reform. The Doha Round of trade talks provides a critical opportunity for achieving trade liberalisation in international agricultural markets, to the benefit of developing nations.
Australian Government agencies are also working on long-term food security and water supply initiatives in developing nations.
Australia will participate in the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation high-level conference on World Food Security in early June, to help coordinate international responses to the food security crisis.
Australia will strongly support such international efforts to provide leadership in addressing the sustainability and security challenges of food security, water shortages, energy security, climate change and resources sustainability in general. These constitute a new and critical agenda for global action.
The role of business leadership in addressing sustainability challenges
Leadership from the business community is critically important to our ability to meet the nation's future challenges  -  particularly the challenge of climate change.
The National Business Leadership Forum on Sustainability has been encouraging corporate social responsibility and sustainability reporting for over a decade.
It has helped move sustainability and corporate responsibility from the margins to the mainstream of corporate Australia.
In advance of the Corporate Responsibility Index awards announcements in a few minutes, I would like to congratulate all of tonight's winners and nominees.
I would also like to announce a new initiative relating to the Government's own support for business leadership.
Tonight I am pleased to announce that the Government has committed $2 million for the St James Ethics Centre to work with Australian businesses to develop their capacity to identify and adopt more responsible business practices.
This new project is about working cooperatively with businesses to promote corporate social responsibility  -  not because they are forced to do so, but because they choose to.
Many of the businesses represented here tonight have led the way.
This new funding will allow the St James Ethics Centre to engage many more Australian businesses in identifying and adopting more responsible business practices  -  particularly small and medium sized companies, whose resources are often more limited.
Business leadership on climate change
Turning specifically to Australia's strategy to address climate change, I want to make it clear that the Government regards the leadership of businesses as critical in determining the effectiveness of that strategy.
Climate change is the great economic, environmental and moral challenge of our time.
Yet Australian government policies have for too long been stuck in a bygone era, neglecting and downplaying the gravity of the climate crisis.
That is now changing.
I applaud the way that during those years, leaders in the business community, research centres and community organisations stepped into the policy vacuum and worked hard to inform public debate and help develop practical solutions to climate change.
The new Australian Government recognises climate change as an urgent yet long-term priority.
But this does not mean the need for business leadership is any less than in recent years.
In fact now that the Government has a comprehensive plan of action, the need for business leadership on sustainability challenges is greater than ever.
Governments must create the right frameworks and incentives, but business leadership is needed in adopting efficiency measures, mobilising capital, creating new markets, developing new technologies, driving innovation, deepening our skills base and developing partnerships across the whole community.
Government, the business community, scientific experts and community organisations must work together if we are to tackle the challenges of climate change and seize the long-term opportunities opening up for Australia in low carbon energy technologies and environmental services.
That's why, from Opposition last year, we convened a Climate Change Summit.
The Summit did not just help inform the Government's policy approach  -  it also helped in developing common ground between different sides of the policy debate who had not been talking to each other.
Last month's 2020 Summit showed the debate is well and truly alive  -  and the Summit presented many constructive ideas that we are now reviewing.
Government leadership on the challenges of sustainability and climate change
The Government accepts its own responsibility to provide practical leadership in our response to climate change  -  with practical measures to reduce our own environmental footprint and measures to harness savings from more efficient use of energy and water.
In March this year, I established an internal Government Taskforce to examine a range of options to improve the sustainability of government operations  -  reducing energy and water use and increasing the recycling of waste.
I have received a draft report from the Taskforce in recent days. It shows that government agencies have a long way to go in implementing sustainability practices.
The report notes National Audit Office data stating that only 21 per cent of government offices had energy efficient lighting installed.
The Audit Office has also estimated that the Government could save $10 million annually if agencies were more proactive in energy and water efficiency measures.
The draft report highlights the fact that government agencies face many of the same barriers that business organisations face  -  competing priorities, capacity constraints, institutional resistance, a lack of access to capital and conflicting incentives.
My hope is that in meeting these challenges within Government, we can also help other businesses overcome these barriers.
We need to look at new and innovative ways of financing sustainable practices, and ensuring the right incentives are in place to reduce our environmental footprint across government.
The Taskforce will be undertaking additional analysis before it presents its final report to me mid year - with an implementation plan to roll out across Government.
This will include action to:
     * improve the energy efficiency of our buildings  -  both those we own and those we lease
     * use water more wisely in the face of the current water crisis
     * use government purchasing power for more efficient office equipment
     * reduce emissions from the government car fleet and look at alternatives to travel like greater use of video conferencing.
I will be taking an active interest in ensuring that we roll out an ambitious sustainability agenda across Government.
This practical action on our own sustainability challenges complements the Government's broader and long-term strategy to tackle climate change.
There are three pillars of the Government's long-term response to climate change.
The first is to help shape an effective global solution
We began this within minutes of being sworn into Government, when at Government House I signed the instruments for the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
That step sent an important message to the global community that Australia now wants to be part of the global solution.
We made an important contribution at the Bali conference a few days later, with Penny Wong co-chairing one of the final sessions that helped to forge the Bali Roadmap  -  even though she had been in the job for just a few days.
Ahead of Copenhagen, we are continuing to work towards a global agreement.
We must reach a global agreement on substantial cuts in the emission of dangerous greenhouse gases.
This is why it's especially critical that the United States, India and China approach these negotiations with a determination to reach a deal.
Achieving substantial reductions will take time even after we've begun to take action. So we can't afford to have these negotiations drag out year after year. We certainly can't afford to repeat the saga of the Doha trade round, where government officials have been dragging their feet to negotiations for almost seven years.
The second pillar of our climate change strategy is to reduce Australia's emissions along the lowest cost path.
Emissions trading is particularly important to achieving this goal, because it will generate market incentives, mobilise investor capital and accelerate innovations that will help drive emissions down.
Accelerating the takeup of renewable energy is also critical to reducing our emissions. The Government is introducing an expanded national renewable energy target to source 20 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2020.
Australia has abundant renewable energy resources  -  from solar and wind, to wave energy and geothermal “hot rocks”  -  and this will help to drive innovation and investment in these technologies.
The third pillar of our strategy is adaptation - the changes we make to adapt to the impacts we cannot avoid.
As the interim Garnaut Report noted, Australia is the driest inhabited continent on earth and is more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change than any other industrialised nation.
For different reasons, that exposure is shared by many developing nations in the Pacific region, and our adaptation strategies must take into account regional neighbours who will need assistance in coping with a changing climate.
2008-09 Budget Initiatives
Last week's Budget delivered on the Government's initial climate change commitments.
The Budget contained measures totalling $2.3 billion over five years to help reduce Australia's greenhouse emissions, adapt to climate change, and ensure we show global leadership in the transition to a low emissions economy.
We now have a Department of Climate Change that is leading the Government's efforts to tackle climate change, including the implementation of emissions trading.
We are investing in clean energy technology  -  clean coal, renewables and new R&amp;D initiatives.
We are investing in $500 million to a National Clean Coal Initiative, $500 million dollars in a Renewable Energy Fund, and $150 million in an Energy Innovation Fund to accelerate clean energy research and development.
We are investing $240 million in Clean Business Australia including measures for green building, manufacturers and the development of environmentally-friendly products.
We are investing $500 million in a Green Car Innovation Fund to encourage the Australian car industry to develop and manufacture low emission cars.
We are also investing in household and community based measures to respond to climate change  -  including $300 million in Green Loans through which 200,000 Australian households invest in clean energy technologies, and $150 million in solar power rebates of up to $8,000 for up to 6,000 homes in 2008-09.
To ensure that rebates get to the lower and middle income households that need them most, the Government will introduce a means test for this plan. The total investment in this program will be $150 million over three years  -  as we promised at the election.
We are also investing $481 million in supporting more than 9,000 schools to go solar.
Australia is also investing in adaptation to climate change in our region. We are providing $150 million over three years to meet high-priority climate change adaptation needs, particularly in East Timor and the island states of the Pacific who are at greatest risk from the impacts of climate change.
The next stage of the Government's Climate Change Response: Emissions Trading
Domestically, our next major challenge now is to complete the design of Australia's emissions trading scheme.
Emissions trading is a central element in creating the market incentives to drive the low carbon energy revolution.
As Sir Nicholas Stern has said, climate change is the greatest market failure the world has ever seen.
Emissions trading aims to address that market failure. It is a major economic reform.
A carbon cap and trade system will mobilise capital and channel research efforts into the most important economic challenge for our generation  -  the low carbon energy revolution.
In the long run, clean energy worldwide will generate jobs, trade and business successes on an even greater scale than the global information technology revolution of recent decades.
But what's needed is a market mechanism to start to level the playing field for clean energy technologies.
As the President of the United States' Environmental Defense Fund, Fred Krupps, has documented in a book released in the US in recent weeks, there is an astonishing array of technologies emerging from research in the clean energy sector:
“Securing our planet against calamity will require a second industrial revolution... We will need to harness energy from the sun, the waves, living organisms and the heat embedded in the planet. We will need to reinvent automobiles, clean up emissions from the immense and rapidly growing coal infrastructure, use the energy we have far more efficiently and put an end to tropical deforestation... No single technology will stop global warming but there is a silver bullet: A cap on carbon that will launch all these solutions into the mainstream.” 
(Earth: The Sequel, chapter 1)
It is critically important that Australia is an early starter in the global clean energy revolution.
Having an emissions trading scheme is crucial because it will allow investors to price carbon and make rational investment decisions that will drive research, innovation and energy efficiency measures that will allow us start turning the corner on carbon emissions and climate change.
It will have substantial long term consequences on the effectiveness of Australia's response to climate change.
That is why the Government is committed to introducing emissions trading in 2010.
The consultation processes that we are now undertaking are very important.
We recognise the long-term implications of the design of emissions trading for our economy and for many industries.
Emissions trading is important to securing Australia's future economic prosperity and we will continue to work with affected industries, in particular those in trade exposed sectors and strongly affected domestic sectors.
The emission trading scheme will have maximal coverage of greenhouse gases and sectors to the extent that it is practical. The broader the scheme's coverage, the lower the cost of reducing carbon emissions. This spreads the burden of reducing emissions across the community more fairly.
We recognise this will involve some hard decisions, but if we're serious about preparing Australia for the long-term climate change challenge we must make difficult decisions now.
Energy efficiency and equity measures
Beyond establishing the emissions trading scheme to put a price on carbon, energy efficiency is will be a major priority in our efforts to tackle climate change.
Energy efficiency delivers a double dividend - reducing emissions immediately, bringing down the overall cost of meeting targets and increasing energy productivity across the economy.
Australia's past record in improving energy efficiency in most sectors is poor when compared to our OECD partners. For example, research by the Australian Bureau of Statistics has estimated that around 40 per cent of Australian homes have no insulation, making them more expensive to heat and more expensive to cool.
The National Framework for Energy Efficiency identified potential energy savings of between 20 and 35 percent based on an average 4-year payback period.
Improving energy efficiency will require greater information provision, greater investment in research and development, and ensuring that there are adequate incentives to embrace efficiency measures. Business leadership is especially important in this area.
The third item on the Government's list of next priorities is to address the equity and distributional consequences of acting on climate change.
We can't hide from the fact that there is a cost associated with acting on climate change.
We know that energy costs will rise. As the former Prime Minister said last year:
"I think everybody should accept that, over time, things like electricity will become more expensive, as, over time, water will become more expensive, and there's not much point anybody saying otherwise..."
(Lateline 5 February 2007)
While acting on climate change will increase some prices, the costs of acting responsibly now are far less than the costs of continued neglect.
We will therefore ensure there are measures to help families adjust to rising costs.
That is why we have already begun investing in programs that help families take practical action at home to reduce their energy bills.
Australia's response to climate change requires the participation of the whole community. Our capacity to respond effectively will be diminished unless we respond as a nation.
Public sector, private and community sectors.
Households and industry.
State and Territory and Federal governments.
All governments, all sectors of the economy.
And across the political divide as well.
When we held the Climate Change Summit just over a year ago here in Parliament House, I quoted Californian Governor Schwarzenegger's description of climate change as the first great ‘post-partisan political issue'.
As Senator John McCain confirmed in a major speech in the past week, all three presidential candidates in the United States have ambitious targets for reducing emissions. Similarly, both sides of the political debate in the United Kingdom strongly support tough action on climate change.
Just as I said this to the Liberal Party in government, I now say the same to the Liberal Party in opposition: Climate change should not be another political football.
We must avoid the temptations of short-term politics and the usual scare campaigns.
Climate change requires serious debate  -  and a serious resolve to act before the cost to those who follow us becomes too great.
We should make every effort to work in a spirit of bipartisanship to forge a long-term consensus on Australia's response to climate change so that the investor community can make long-term investments in low carbon energy infrastructure with confidence.
Of course there will be differing, competing and sometimes conflicting views on some aspects of policy, but the policy debate should be conducted within a joint commitment to Australia's long-term national interests, and framed within the economic cost of action versus inaction.
The Australian community is much more interested in those of us who serve in this Parliament working together to find solutions.
They also expect businesses to provide leadership on climate change  -  in their own power consumption, their investment policies and across all of their business activities.
I appreciate the work that the Forum is doing to promote that kind of long-term thinking.
The Government shares the belief that rising to the challenge of climate change is among our greatest obligations to future generations.
I wish you the very best as the Forum continues tomorrow, and I look forward to working together on the challenges ahead.


KERRY O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, in all the Budget fall out, probably the most wide spread voice of disaffection has come from pensioners and other seniors, many of whom are surviving on basic pension of about $270 per week. This is what you had to say about pensioners in March, ‘there is no way on God's earth that I intend to leave them in the lurch'. But that is exactly what many of them now feel you have done.
PM: Well I think there is a couple of things to say about that, Kerry. The first is, our overall challenge is to bring down a responsible, cautious, conservative budget, in terms of the overall size of the surplus. And that doesn't mean you can do everything in one hit. And it is very important that we are fighting the fight against inflation to put downward pressure on interest rates, because that affects everybody.
Specifically though on pensioners and carers, pensioners and carers in the case of pensioners, they will as a consequence of this budget receive an extra $900 a year. That is made up of a one off bonus, plus, an increase in the utilities allowance. And that represents some $400 more than Mr Howard delivered them in the previous Budget. When you go to carers, depending on whether they receive one or two of the one off bonuses we have offered, they will receive up to $2100 per year more and that is something like $500 a year more than Mr Howard delivered in the last budget.
Now I fully concede that this is still very difficult. And the reason we have ensured that those on income support from part of the overall Ken Henry commission into looking at the future of the tax system, income support and retirement income, is that we try and get these settings right for the long term future.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Well just on that review, to quote Mr Swan from Sydney radio today. Quote, ‘I understand how tough they are doing it and that is why we also announced on Budget night a review of pensions and retirement incomes.' But that is not what it sounded like on the night is it, because going through Wayne Swan's Budget speech, there was no reference whatever to pensioners when he announced the tax review. I have looked carefully through the terms of reference for the tax review, released by Mr Swan that night and once again, the word pensions or pensioners doesn't appear once. Retirement incomes, in the context of tax, gets a passing reference. Were you forced to increase the focus on pensions in the tax review as a result of the post budget backlash?
PM: Not at all Kerry, we have been thinking about this for a long, long time. You see, part of the challenge here, as I have said in previous interviews, is do you simply sustain a system, whereby, there are these one off annual bonuses. And I notice on that score, by the way, the Liberals have committed to nothing by way of more permanent arrangements than that. Or do you try and look more systemically at how you can deal with this in the long term. And so what we decided, quite some weeks ago, was that this, retirement incomes policy, needed to be wrapped into the overall review of tax. And that is the way to go. Because it's a very complex area. It is not just pensioners, it is self funded retirees, and how that overall impacts the total taxation system.
We want to get it right. It will take us a while, but I go back to the core point, that pensioners are receiving $400 a year more than they received as a consequence of Mr Howard's last Budget. In the case of carers, depending on the cocktail of bonuses they receive $500 a year more. But we have still got to make an improvement for the long term.  
KERRY O'BRIEN: $400 a year, I think is less than $10 a week. It wasn't until  - 
PM: (inaudible) against a benchmark which was established by the previous government. I mean, let's put this into comparative context. There seems to be a view that in five months, we can redress problems of  pensioners and carers payments, which have been building for the last decade. I can't do that. But what I have committed to is a system whereby we try and get this right for the long term.
KERRY O'BRIEN: But pensioners no doubt are seeing this in the context of those $31 billion of tax cuts for other Australians that you have talked about a lot. Can I just come back to the issue of this tax review and when the serious emphasis went on a review of pensions as a part of it. Because it wasn't until late Thursday in the Parliament that Families and Community Services Minister Jenny Macklin announced a review within the tax review in which her department head Dr Jeff Harmer, quote ‘will complete an investigation into measures that might be adopted to strengthen the financial security of carers and seniors'. Now, Dr Harmer is now to report to the Treasurer and Ms Macklin by the end of February next year. None of that was mentioned on the night. Which does sound suspiciously like pensioner damage control. Like actions that have followed a pensioner reaction.
PM: Kerry, I was in party to the discussions with the Treasurer and others way before the Budget about the need to have a mechanism which looked at this systematically. That is why the Henry commission was established. Ken Henry, the Secretary of the Treasury. Harmer, who you have just mentioned is one of the Commissioners. And at the time when the Treasurer, I recall, announced this Commission, which made explicit reference to retirement incomes policy, he also indicated that there would be staged reporting back. I presume the only thing that the Families Minister was doing was, ‘well, here is a stage and here are some sub-terms of reference and this will be reported back in due season'. But retirement incomes policy, as you know, includes pensions, includes self funded retirees, and these things can't be addressed in isolation from one another. We were explicit about this from the beginning.
KERRY O'BRIEN: If you look at the reference to retirement incomes, and ok, let's say pensions are within retirement, if you look at the reference to retirement incomes, it is two or three words in the context of a 15 point, a very detailed, 15 point review of taxation. I would suggest to you that that reference bears no comparison to what has followed since and in responding to that, can I ask you whether you will undertake to act on these recommendations within the next budget given that that review will report in February.
PM: Well we will act on those as soon as we are able to. But first of all, we have got to know what the landing point is and the responsible way to do that is to look at retirement incomes policy, which is, there is nothing cute about this, it includes pensions and it includes self-funded retirees, that's what happens when you retire, you either get a pension from the Government or you are self funded. And that is what it means and the term is there. We will act on it as soon as we are able.
By the way, the terms of reference that you have just referred to probably only have one reference to global tax competitiveness for business tax. Do you think therefore that is irrelevant to our considerations - no it is not. You have got to get it all right mate.
KERRY O'BRIEN:Ok, retirement incomes comes at point fifteen and it is a passing reference.
PM: Well I don't have the terms of reference in front of me.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Ok.
PM: But the key thing is, I know from the discussions that we had, it had to form part of the overall commission of inquiry. It also had to deal with business taxation, it had to deal with personal income taxation, it also had to do with income support, including retirement income.
KERRY O'BRIEN: One other bone of contention is the screening from the solar industry and from environmentalists who say after your budget means test on the previous Government's solar panel subsidy, at I think, $8000, that you can't be serious about climate change. Because people were responding too enthusiastically it seems, to the rallying call on climate change and taking up the subsidy, and installing solar energy in their homes. You seem to have cut it back with a means test because it has been too successful?
PM: I think what we have got to deal with here, Kerry, is where do you start to broadly draw the line in terms of payments from Government. And you know, this is a difficult thing.  I mean we have been through this debate with the baby bonus, we've been through this debate in terms of Family Tax Benefit B. Obviously there is a parallel debate when it comes to solar panel rebates etcetera. I understand this is not popular. I said before the budget, that there would be a lot of people who were going to be complaining about it and guess what, there are. Understand that. But on this one, you have actually got to start to draw the line somewhere. I mean, at the end of the day, you know do we want millionaires getting the baby bonus, millionaires getting the solar panel rebate.
KERRY O'BRIEN: This isn't millionaires Mr Rudd, this is people on incomes of more than $100,000. Let me put the question in reverse, why would you put the brakes on a scheme which is designed to make more homes solar efficient, more climate change friendly after all the noise and the profile that you cut and the headway that you made politically, around all these climate change issues coming into the last election?
PM: Well I think it is important to put the climate change debate in its wider context. How do you actually achieve, you know, big impact on the overall question of emissions reductions on the one hand, as well as adaptation measures on climate change as well. An emissions trading regime, we're powering on, on that question after 12 years of dithering by our predecessors. Mandatory renewable energy target, we are moving strongly in that direction as well. Energy efficiency policies, moving in that direction as well. I take the criticism that people don't like it when you means test some of these measures, but you do have to draw the line somewhere.
This is a huge new area of policy activity for the Government. We have got a way to go yet before it is introduced, that's emissions trading, 2010.  But we have got to get all these things right. And I am sure these policy settings will change on the way through.
KERRY O'BRIEN: On immigration, the Budget reveals an extra 31,000 skilled migrants coming into Australia in the next year. 190,000 migrants all together. That's permanent. And another 100,000 a year on temporary work visas. Nearly 300,000 people to process and to settle within a year. Your Immigration Minister Chris Evans has flagged, ‘a great national debate' on immigration over the next few years, he says the system is creaking at the moment, needs an urgent, serious overhaul, because it is based on a model that is out of date. Does Senator Evans reflect your thinking on this issue?
PM: Well Senator Evans' conclusion, including the increase in the skilled migration component by some 30,000 plus, comes obviously out of the Cabinet deliberation. We have had this matter through cabinet on many occasions. And what are we are responding to, the fact that our predecessors didn't have a skills policy. We arrived in Government with the highest inflation rate in 16 years, a skills shortage and infrastructure bottlenecks. What do you do about it?
Well, you produce a responsible budget for the long term to deal with the inflation challenge. Secondly, on skills policy, you invest in education, skills and training. But that doesn't deal with the immediate challenge, so you up your skilled migration. And thirdly, as we have done today with the announcement on Infrastructure Australia, you begin to act on infrastructure bottlenecks. We have a systematic response to the problems that we have been given.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Yeah. But the issue I am talking about, isn't so much the 31,000. I am talking about his comments that the system is creaking at the moment, needs an urgent, this is the whole immigration system, needs an urgent serious overhaul because it is based on a model that is out of date. Does he reflect your thinking on that?
PM: Well, when we are trying to deal with, this is where I am sure Chris is coming from, when we are trying to deal with the overall skills demands of the economy, I think what he is saying and certainly what we are saying as a Government is, it has been a long, long time since a Government nationally has projected ahead and said, in a years time, two years time, three years time, ten years time, what will be the aggregate skills demands for the economy, and broadly and what sectors.  And, how do we actually mesh our education, skills and training system with that on the one hand, with our migration program on the other. It has not been done in a sufficiently long term, structured, planned way up until now. And we think it is time it was highly done that way. Is the immigration department up to that task at present? That's where he is probably saying it is creaking and groaning at the seams because a lot is being asked of it, including answering questions which haven't been put to it for quite some time.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Well just on that point, the department, as we will all remember, that will be overseeing nearly 300,000 migrants coming through just next year. It is not so long ago that the department was shredded by the Palmer report as dysfunctional after all those refugee scandals. Are you confident that the department is up to managing those sorts of numbers?
PM: Well, it takes a while to turn around the Queen Mary. As I said in five months you can't fix the problems of more than a decade, but we know that the economy needs this sort of support. Therefore, we'll do the best we can with the machinery of state that we have been handed. It is going to be tough. But I have looked at the response from the industry groups across the country. In WA, right across the Master Builders Association and the Australian Industry Group and others, they have applauded the measure that we have introduced.
I notice also, immigration numbers have increased quite significantly under the previous government. That has occurred of course, with our bipartisan support, as I assume this expansion would occur with their bipartisan support as well.
KERRY O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Thanks Kerry. 


PM: It's great to be here at North Sydney Oval and to spend some time, just now with the Socceroos and Matildas, and also the Maltilda's opponents this afternoon, the Canadian team.
The Socceroos are off on a huge number of games over the coming four or five weeks. They carry with them the best wishes of the nation. The Matilda's also are heading off very soon to Vietnam to begin a series of games in terms of the Asian Women's Cup.
Both teams carry the nation's best wishes. Both teams are going to bring about a general insomnia on the part of the country as we all have to get up at ungodly hours and find out what has gone on, how the game is going, and whether we are through.
But it is all to a good purpose and that is, that this game, this game of football, is the world game and to do well in the world game means doing well for Australia.
But both of these teams, the Socceroos and Matilda's are ambassadors for Australia. They are our diplomats. More people observe what they do around the world, than ever observe any speech that I deliver anywhere.
And therefore, the hopes of the country ride with them.
Of course the other reason for being here today, is to underline again, the Australian Government's support for Frank's efforts to secure the 2018 World Cup for Australia.
This will be a marathon of all marathons. It is going to be tough as hell. But our approach, together with Frank's is, you have got to be in it win it. And if we want the best for this game for the future, then bringing that World Cup to Australia in 2018 is the way to go.
So, all of our best wishes continue to be with you. And it is going to be a very, very challenging period of diplomacy, both at our level and at yours in the period ahead. Starting when all those FIFA guys come to Australia fairly soon.
JOURNALIST: Next week.
PM: Next week, that's right. Do you want to add to these words Frank?
LOWY: Not much to add except to say thank you to you Kevin for all the support that you have given, your government, and you bring the nation with you for the game and I really appreciate that. All of us appreciate that you speak from here and everybody who loves this game. Thanks very much
PM: More importantly I discovered that about four or five of the Matilda's live in my electorate in Brisbane, so I am keenly following their progress on the fields. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister, your Government's committed $32 million over the next four years to football. Some other codes aren't too happy about that. Some other sports aren't too happy about that. Why football?
PM: Well we have got a huge challenge ahead which is to get behind soccer for the 2018 World Cup. Also, we know that there are particular development needs which are associated with this game.
But when it comes to the other football codes, let me tell you we have other things planned as well.
A lot of those codes are well established and have been around the country for 100 years or so. Less so with soccer, but we believe the country is big enough to support all football codes. We want to be behind all football codes and we will be behind it in different ways at different times.
JOURNALIST:Could this game's involvement in Asia give it some special appeal to the Government, no?
PM: Well when you look at soccer, it is a game for the world and it is a game played right across Asia and of course we are now active in both those, theatres of engagement when it comes to football. But can I say, I have been to see and enjoy so many games of rugby over the years, so many games of league over the years, the only one that cant claim to be fully international is AFL, but I enjoy that as well.
Each of these are fantastic codes, but each needs different level of support at different stages of development. If we were to take this code and take it to the next level in Australia and to secure for Australia, the 2018 World Cup, it means putting our shoulder well and truly to the wheel.
JOURNALIST:The lack of a right sized stadium seems to be the main block, what is the Government going to do about that?
PM: Well I have said to the Premiers, because if we secure the 2018 World Cup, it does have implication in terms of our Soccer Infrastructure across the country. But I am confident that we can work cooperatively with each of the states and the Premiers, to make sure the facilities will be in the right working order.
We in Australia, don't put our hand up for a bid unless we are confident we can deliver the infrastructure to support the bid and that will be the case here as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister that might help placate the other codes as well. If the stadiums are upgraded, I hear that some of them, Parramatta Stadium, Wollongong
PM:Shall we start the list? Alphabetical by state.
JOURNALIST:So a lot of other codes will benefit from those stadium upgrades anyway, wont they?
PM:Look, the Government supports sport in Australia for a whole range of reasons. One is, it is a part of who we are as Australia. It's fantastic. It is part of community life. And the more we have our kids engaged, the better it is for community life. The third is, basic physical fitness and the big challenges of course, we still have with obesity.
For all those reasons we are going to get behind each sport in our own way. As I said, others, other codes, whether it is football or other sports, beyond football, have different needs at different times. But we are quite passionate about being supportive of what our sporting codes do because we think it is the overall physical health of the nation. And in the case of (inaudible) it basically does Australia a power of good on the world stage, beyond anything any politician could ever do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You mean, by saying in Chinese, ‘please don't'. It might take a bit more than that. Frank and I have been talking about this. This will be difficult. The Chinese can be very formidable competitors, but remember we were up against China for an earlier bid for the Olympics too and we managed to prevail.
But this will be tough, and I mean what I said before, tough as all hell, to pull this one off, but the Chinese are in the race, it will be really, that much harder. But that shouldn't deter us. We will certainly have our own quiet discussions with the Chinese in due season. I think it is important to pick the time and moment for such discussions to occur.
JOURNALIST: Will you be meeting with the president of FIFA next week when he is here to discuss the World Cup bid?
PM: We certainly have got FIFA in town and I know I'm meeting FIFA. I know I'm speaking with FIFA, at this point for fear I say anything wrong I'll turn to Frank.
LOWY: You will be meeting them, thank you
PM: I know I've got the gang in town so I'm looking forward to it
JOURNALIST: Do you think the fact that they are coming to town (Inaudible)
PM: I think what is really good and I congratulate Frank's effort in this respect is to bring this significant world body to Australia because apart from anything else they actually get to physically (inaudible) and see. When you see what a stupendous country this is, what a great city Sydney is, how good the facilities are and I hope through their engagement with the Government to understand that we're serious about this.
We as a culture, as a people and as a Government. This is not a political comment, it goes back over time. When we say we're going to put on a major world sporting event. We get on with the business of putting it on. We don't leave anything to risk. That will be our attitude to this as well and that's what I will convey to the FIFA team when they are here.
JOURNALIST: Do you think with your level of support at the moment (inaudible) the number one football code in Australia?
PM: So you'd like me to make a punt as to which of the four codes is going to be the number one?
JOURNALIST: We're trying to get you to show us your direction?
PM: It's called AFL is great, I really enjoy rugby league, rugby I played a bit when I was at school and I really enjoy the round ball as well.
In this country can I say that it's big enough and broad enough to embrace all four codes and globally of course each of these codes has got their own challenges. But you know I don't think it's a question of who comes first, who comes second. What's great about this country, we have many American visitors that come to Australia. They admire the fact that in a country of 20 million people we can support such a diversity of football. And I think it says everything about the rich diversity and geographical differences of Australia that we can do that.
And the fact now that who would have thought 20 years ago where I come from in Bris Vegas, that we would have won three AFL premierships through the Lions. Who would have thought that Melbourne would be putting up a major national rugby league team. Who would have thought these things. I think it's fantastic it says everything about the diversity and strength of the country. So the answer to your question is, no I'm not going to comment.
JOURNALIST:Have you been filled in on the politics of FIFA, pretty animalistic?
PM:FIFA makes the ALP look simple, don't you reckon?
LOWY:Well FIFA is complicated, it's like a United Nations. These things are complicated because they are so (inaudible). A lot of interests are there, but I think we will get heard very well.
PM:I think it is complex and national passions run high and that's where I think diplomacy is going to be very important. But you know pulling off the Olympics for Australia twice in half a century says a lot about Australia, and if we can do that we can give this a good shake and we intend to.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister (inaudible) Macquarie bank (inaudible) once again we see these enormous salaries earned by executive Allan Moss (inaudible) do you like other political leaders in the past. Are you dismayed when you see these numbers (inaudible)
PM: I've said before and I'll say it again, I think at a time when a lot of Australians are pulling tight on their belt that it's important for our corporate leaders to do the same and to show salary restraint. I would urge our corporate leaders to do that, it's disappointing that we don't see it. As much as we should but at a time when a whole lot of people are under real financial pressure, I'm not about to discourage any incentive in Australia, but I think it's important that we show signs of restraint as well.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister how concerned are you that you may be alienating the ageing Australians in the latest budget? The polls seem to be showing that you've alienated a lot of that sector of Australians.
PM: Look I said before the budget that it would be tough and we've had of course a lot of people who have been upset with parts of it since it was brought down. Our first challenge is to deliver a responsible budget. A conservative, cautious responsible budget at a time of great global financial uncertainty. That's why we needed to bring about a healthy surplus.
Secondly when it comes to seniors and carers, can I just emphasise that on senior themselves, we are delivering significant additional payments over what they were delivered at the last budget by Mr Howard and the same goes for carers. In the case of seniors, the payments that we are delivering for them is annually $400 more than Mr Howard delivered at the previous budget. And in the case of carers some $500 more than were delivered to them. I understand fully that this is still a real, real challenge and that's why the Henry commission of inquiry looking at tax, income support and retirement income will be looking at all these matters in the year ahead.
JOURNALIST:Today's poll Prime Minister. Record result for you but I imagine you'll stay well above will you with the antics of the other side. Emails and so fourth (inaudible) that's all beneath you?
PM:What I know is on the question of, like the budget question you have just raised, we have to deliver a responsible budget for the long term, rather than get up and get concerned about, or enthused about opinion polls which are about short term political results.
The Government I lead is about the long term interests of the nation and opinion polls will come and they will go, and some will be up and some will be down, and frankly, you shouldn't pay too much attention to them.
Thanks for your time.


Acknowledgments
Thank you Ann Sanders for that kind introduction.
Mr Robin Crawford, Chairman of the Sydney Cancer Centre
Professor Chris O'Brien, Board Director, the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation
Professor Michael Boyer, Director, the Sydney Cancer Centre
It is an honour to be here today to offer my support for such a worthy cause.
Introduction
Australia is fortunate in many ways.
We have world-class health practitioners.
We have world-class health researchers.
And we have a proud record of achievement in medical science.
However, we also have much more to do.
There remains so much that we can do better and so much that we still don't know.
The gap between our aspirations and our achievements remains large  -  perhaps more so in cancer than in other areas, as cancer remains a large-scale killer.
Health policy challenges
The challenge is to not only close this gap, but to do so in the face of new pressures transforming health policy.
We face rising expectations and demands, alongside an ageing population, an explosion in chronic disease and rapid growth in the costs of medical technology.
These changes bring with them challenges for our entire health system  -  and not least for oncology.
The turmoil, and too often the tragedy, of cancer is something that has touched the lives of millions of Australian families.
Nearly half a million Australians are diagnosed with cancer each year.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare estimates that one in three men and one in four women will be directly affected by cancer before the age of 75.
Nearly 40,000 Australians each year die from cancer  -  accounting for nearly a third of all male deaths and a quarter of all female deaths.
Around three-quarters of cancers are less threatening types of skin cancer (non-melanocytic skin cancer).
Many forms of cancer are preventable  -  and are driven by similar risk factors to other major chronic diseases.
Smoking, alcohol abuse, poor diet and a lack of exercise are the main culprits  -  and we will need a transformation within health policy to tackle them.
This is a transformation that must change behaviours and shift cultures  -  among Australians of all ages.
And while prevention is better than cure, we often have neither option.
Ongoing commitment is needed to achieve the new breakthroughs that will save lives  -  and this must be supported by governments.
And until those breakthroughs come, we must rely on earlier detection and more effective treatment.
On early detection, we are making some progress on this front and in the recent Budget we extended bowel cancer screening to all those turning 50, 55 and 65.
And on treatment, our survival rates are also improving. Five-year survival rates for the most common cancers affecting men (prostate) and women (breast) are now more than 80 per cent. 
The patient perspective
Notwithstanding the heroic efforts of many in the health system, there is one perspective that needs a greater focus in health policy, and particularly in the fight against cancer.
That is the patient perspective.
An honest appraisal of how well we, collectively, meet the needs of patients provides the most compelling argument of all for health reform.
Living with cancer can be one of the most difficult experiences imaginable for patients, and for their families and friends.
It can bring the toughest of us back to earth with a thud, as it reminds us of what is truly important in life.
For many Australians, this most difficult time is made all the harder by the complex maze of services  -  Commonwealth and State, public and private  -  that must be navigated.
Having cancer is stressful enough.
But the task of accessing the right testing, treatment and monitoring services should not make it harder still.
We simply must do better on this front, and this desire to do better for patients is at the heart of our Government's commitment to fundamental health reform.
Translating research into patient care
The quality of treatment patients receive is also critical.
This is underpinned by the quality of our research base, our ability to translate research into practice, and the infrastructure, workforce and systems that support this.
In Washington recently I had dinner with a group of Australians working in the United States.
One of them was Dr Richard Pestell, Director of the Kimmel Cancer Centre.
Like many of the people here at the Sydney Cancer Centre, he has dedicated his life to the fight against cancer.
And like many others I have talked to in this field, Dr Pestell stressed to me the importance of cooperation and knowledge-sharing in the fight against cancer.
If we are to close the gap between aspiration and achievement in health, we need to bridge the divide between research and clinical practice.
I want to see Australians receive the best care available, and for this to occur we must be able to translate the best research into practice.
This requires cooperation not only among researchers, but also between researchers and clinicians to give our knowledge and our breakthroughs the widest possible reach.
Through the recent Budget, the Government is investing a record level of support for cancer research centres and projects.
In 2006-07, the previous government allocated $58 million to cancer specific programs. In 2008-09, the Government is allocating $214 million to cancer specific programs.
The Government's increased funding is particularly focused on supporting cancer research.
The Government's commitment includes (though is not limited to):
     * An extra $87 million over three years to expand National Bowel Cancer Screening.
     * $15 million over three years to support young people with cancer for the first time, through CanTeen.
     * $15 million over three years for independent clinical trials of drugs and research into cancer treatment and care.
     * $15 million over five years to set up two dedicated prostate cancer research centres.
     * $15 million over two years to help build a Children's Cancer Centre at the Women's and Children's Hospital in Adelaide.
     * $15 million over two years towards the establishment of the Olivia Newton-John Cancer Centre at the Austin Hospital in Melbourne.
     * $5.1 million over three years for the operation of the National Centre for Gynaecological Cancers, under the auspices of Cancer Australia.
Sydney Cancer Centre
The Government is also a proud supporter of the Sydney Cancer Centre.
I'm pleased to announce that the Government's 2008-09 Budget provides an initial contribution of $50 million towards the Sydney Cancer Centre.
I can also announce today that the Government will continue its engagement with the Centre and, subject to a business case, be favourably disposed towards additional financial support.
The success of the Sydney Cancer Centre  -  and its potential going forward  -  in no small part rests on its capacity to integrate research and practice.
The Sydney Cancer Centre has an enviable record as a centre of research.
But it is the holistic approach to cancer care where I see the real innovation and potential.
By translating research into practical strategies for patients  -  to treat the disease, to deal with causes and help with recovery  -  we can deliver better care and improve quality of life.
Through co-location, the two-way interaction of research and practice can sometimes transform both research and practice for the better.
Let me acknowledge your support for the Sydney Cancer Centre in helping to close the gap between aspiration and achievement.
Fundraising is a crucial part of this equation  -  and success would not be possible without it.
The Centre's success also depends on the hard work of many dedicated staff  -  who I would like to acknowledge.
This is a bold project with the potential to save the lives of many, and improve quality of life for many more.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be with you on this occasion.
In congratulating the Centre for all it has achieved, and in wishing it every success going forward, I would like to pay special tribute to a great Australian.
Professor Chris O'Brien.
Chris has been a tireless campaigner in the interests of not only better cancer treatment and research, but also in  promoting awareness of cancer and its impacts on people and families.
The fight against cancer is a long-term one that may test us for decades to come. 
It is a fight that will test our determination and resolve, but one that we must front up to if we are to close the gap between our aspirations and our achievements as a nation.
Chris, you should know that you have made a difference in this fight, that your efforts have borne fruit, and that the fight will go on.
Thank you.


PM: It's good to be at the City of Hume today here in Melbourne with the Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and the Minister for Social Inclusion, for this first meeting of the National Social Inclusion Board.
The objective of the Government is to ensure that the great Australian tradition of the fair go for all has practical application for those Australians who are not getting a fair go. Whether we're talking about those suffering from disability. Whether we're talking about those suffering from disadvantage in other forms. Whether we're talking about indigenous Australians. Whether we're talking about those who are struggling to make ends meet from retirement incomes.
We need to be a Government for all Australians. We need to make sure that we bring all Australians with us. And that all Australians have access and opportunity when it comes to the nation's prosperity. Of course, Canberra does not have all the answers on this, never has had, never will have. That's why it's important to engage fully those in the Australian community who have a life long passion and commitment in this area. That's why we're pleased to have this first meeting of our social inclusion board today. And I welcome the participation of each member of it, because they are giving of themselves to assist us in this task.
People like Eddie McGuire; Dr John Falzon, who's with St Vincent De Paul; Ahmed Fahour, who is with the National Australia Bank. Also we have Dr Chris Sarra, an Indigenous leader from Bundaberg in Queensland; and Professor Fiona Stanley, given her work in Indigenous and child health, from Western Australia - to name just four or five.
This is an impressive board, and they have an impressive job of work ahead of them. One of the challenges that the board will be addressing is a national mental health and disability employment strategy. The relevant Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries have released already a discussion paper in this area. But the National Social Inclusion Board will be themselves providing input into the Government's final policy conclusion in this critical area.
Mental Health, those suffering from mental illness, and its impact in terms of the quality of people's lives, their access to proper health care, and their access to proper employment opportunities is a critical challenge of social policy for modern Australia. The Government's mission overall - to build a modern Australia capable of dealing with the challenges of the 21st Century; to secure the nations future, but critically within that, to ensure that we secure a future for all Australians and not just some Australians. And that means those Australians suffering from disadvantage. The Government has been active in a number of areas already, whether it's homelessness or whether it's aspects of disability policy, whether it's aspects of Indigenous policy in closing the gap. But much, much more work is to be done.
The National Social Inclusion Board is one part of our armoury to deal with these challenges into the future and I look forward to their contribution to the nations efforts.
I might ask the Deputy Prime Minister to add to my remarks and then take your questions.
GILLARD: Thank you.
This is an exciting day to have our Social Inclusion Board meet for the first time. As the Prime Minister says, it will be working with us to make sure that the promise of a fair go is realised for all Australians. Here we are in the City of Hume. This is an area that has historically battled disadvantage and there are areas like this right around the nation. We want to make a difference for these sorts of communities. We want to make a difference for those who battle disability, mental illness, for those Indigenous Australians, for those who come from migrant and refugee backgrounds.
The board is going to be providing advice to Government across the full range. There is a lot of work to do and I'm very keen to see the board get on with the job. This will be the first meeting. It will be an intensive process. But it's about joining Government services up to make a difference for Australians who do face disadvantage and who we want to be included in the mainstream of Australian life.
PM: Thanks Julia. Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, during your address to the Social Inclusion Board you alluded to corporate executive salaries. Nicholas
Moore is going to be taking home $26.8 million for his year's work next year. That's 80 times your salary and 453 times the average salary. Is there something to be done? Do these need to be reined in?
PM: Well, we're not in the business of regulating. But I would say to all corporate executives today, it's time that corporate executives showed restraint. All Australians are finding it tough. Working Australians, working families are finding it tough to make ends meet. And they do look to our corporate leaders for an example. So I'd ask them to show restraint, more restraint than we've been seeing.
JOURNALIST: Another kick for battlers, we understand the Reserve Bank could be leaning towards another interest rate rise. What would your advice be in that area?
PM: Well, the Government's policy has always been to accept the independence of the Bank and not to comment on specific interest rate movements. However, the job of the Budget, and the job of the Government, has been responsible economic management, to put downward pressure on inflation or to put downward pressure on interest rates. That's what we have sought to do through this Budget which has yielded a $22 billion surplus. To bring about downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates. That's responsible economic management.
Irresponsible economic management of the type prescribed by the Liberals, seeks to conduct a $22 billion raid on the surplus, thereby putting upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates. The contrast is clear. A responsible economic strategy, which seeks to put downward pressure on inflation and interest rates. In contrast to an irresponsible strategy embraced by the Liberals which does exactly the reverse.
The challenge for Mr Turnbull today is if he's going to conduct a $22 billion raid on the surplus and put upward pressure on inflation and interest rates, he must therefore detail his savings which will make up for that $22 billion raid.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Mr Turnbull will be being dishonest if he comes out and backs the proposal which has been made to cut the excise?
PM: Well, what we've seen in the last period of time is the Liberal party not knowing whether they are Arthur or Martha on economic policy, and certainly not knowing what the ingredients of responsible economic strategy should be for the nation. Remember, Mr Turnbull has said inflation is a fairy tale. Mr Turnbull has said that there is no economic case to reduce Government spending. And Mr Turnbull is party to a $22 billion raid on the surplus, thereby putting upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates.
The challenge for Mr Turnbull today is either to embrace his $22 billion raid on the surplus and nominate the savings, which he has to make in order to make up that amount of money, or to abandon the $22 billion raid which they have articulated since the Government brought its Budget down.
JOURNALIST: Access Economics have predicted private health premiums could rise 10 per cent, five per cent on top of a five per cent rise. Is that (inaudible) send thousands of people back to an already groaning public health system?
PM: In the Budget the measures we announced in relation to the Medicare levy surcharge were this, in a nutshell: In 1996-97 the previous Liberal Government introduced a tax on income earners earning more than $50,000 whom they described as high income earners, and as a consequence of that, that tax has remained with us ever since. They failed to index it. They failed to take any measure to adjust it for inflation. And so 11 years later, they are still describing those earning $50,000 as high income earners.
Well, our Government does not believe that people earning $50,000 are high income earners, even though the Liberals seem to regard that as the case.
What's the effect in terms of individuals or couples? Basically it adds up to a tax of between $20 and $30 a week. Now that's what the Liberals are saying. They want to impose that on these working families and working Australians. We say, that's not fair because this amount has not been adjusted for 11 years for inflation.
And on top of that, I'd also draw your attention to a comment from one of the heads of one of the private health insurance funds, the CEO of Westfund, Mr Graham Danaher. Who, in describing some of the products provided to people in this particular income bracket, described them as, quote, ‘they are a tax dodge product, these products do not take any pressure off the public hospital system'. I'd simply draw your attention to his comments, referring to the particular services being offered by, I presume, various private health insurance funds, to those who are seeking to avoid paying that particular surcharge.
The key thing is this, remember, when it comes to health policy and the public hospital system, the Liberals pulled a billion dollars out of the system and basically said public hospitals are purely a responsibility for the states into the future. Our response is, no, we are putting a billion dollars back in now, as well as $600 million to deal with elective surgery waiting lists. That's where real action lies on public hospitals and public health policy in Australia. Rather than what Mr Turnbull and the Liberals are trying to say, which is that this tax on people earning $50,000 a year should be retained forever into the future. That is their position.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I haven't seen those remarks. The Government, from January of this year, has made absolutely clear that we regard the fight against inflation as one of the first responsibilities of responsible economic management. And the reason is simple. If you fail to fight inflation effectively, it puts upward pressure on interest rates which affects businesses, which affects working families, which affects working Australians everywhere.
Therefore, fiscal policy, budget policy has got a role to play, as well as of course, other elements of policy including what you can do to add to skills and infrastructure across the country to remove those supply side constraints in the economy. What I am disappointed about, in the debate on inflation is that the Liberals, in irresponsible economic management mode, have said that inflation is a fairytale, who have said that there is no economic case to reduce government spending and have instead conducted a $22 billion raid on the surplus as if that is irrelevant. Well, it's not irrelevant. It is time Mr Turnbull woke up to himself.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I think on the question of retirement income policy, it is important to place into absolute context, that which we have done. First of all, on the question of pensioners and carers, what we have done is provide further measures in the budget itself. For seniors we are providing an additional $5.2 billion over the next five years.
Secondly, in the case of seniors, they have been provided with $900 per year more than they were in the previous budget of Mr Howard and that represented in fact, some $400 per year more than Mr Howard himself offered in that budget. That's for seniors.
When it comes to carers, if those carers are in receipt of the carer payment, and the carer allowance, they would be $2100 per year better off than the previous budget under Mr Howard. Or in fact some $500 better off than Mr Howard himself offered in that particular budget. Now these are important figures to bear in mind. But for the future, we have got to make sure that we've got a properly considered system for retirement incomes. That's why, prior to the Budget, we indicated that retirement incomes policy would form part of the Henry Commission of Inquiry for the future. It's got to be done thoroughly and systematically.
But to overcome, in five months, the problems of retirement income policy which have been building over the last ten years or more, is a very difficult ask. We have got the job ahead of us. We have a commission of investigation underway. We've made positive moves in the Budget, as I've just described. But beyond that, we have this Henry Commission to report in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Brendan Nelson's campaigning (inaudible) by-election (inaudible)
PM: Well, we will be campaigning in Gippsland, of course. We want to make sure that we run as strong a campaign as possible. Gippsland will be an almost impossible seat for us to win. But, we intend to put our best foot forward and try as hard as we can.
Of course, the question which the good people of Gippsland will need to ask themselves is whether they've received effective representation for their local interests from the National Party over all these years. I'm sure the good people of the area will have their own answer to deliver on that score.
But, as I've said before, it's going to be a difficult task for us, and we need to make sure that we provide an option for the local people, but recognising that this is one hell of a task for Labor to win. This is a very, very difficult seat for us.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about the suggestion from Bruce Chapman in regards to maybe a HECS funding system, payback system, for athletes at the AIS or (inaudible)
PM: I've seen the report of that today but I haven't actually seen the full text of Chapman's recommendation for our athletes. I'd rather examine that in further detail to see what precisely has been recommended.


Acknowledgements
George Megalogenis; John Cain  -  President of the Board of State Library of Victoria; Anne-Marie Schwirtlitch - CEO, State Library of Victoria; Henry Rosenbloom  -  CEO; Scribe Publications; Staff of Scribe Publications and Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Introduction
Thanks Henry  -  I'd like to say I'm glad to be here this morning. But then again as I reflected on whether I was or not, I'm not so sure. It seems to me that I've seen this book somewhere before George.
Actually, if I remember rightly, it's already been launched  -  indeed not by just one Prime Minister before me, but by two Prime Ministers before me. Mr Howard, back in 2006, on May 31st, and then two days later by Mr Keating, on June 2nd.
And now, George has tacked on a couple of chapters at the end, refreshed the cover and fixed up some of his typos, and hey presto - he's got a third Prime Minister to launch the book today. To paraphrase the great Oscar Wilde to be launched by one Prime Minister is unusual, to be launched by two Prime Ministers is exotic and to be launched by three Prime Minsters, George boarders on the extreme. I'll let you explain that later.
Now George is just the sort of detail-oriented journalist who'd have a crack at a politician for going around the country doing the same thing, re-launching old policies and pretending those old policies are in fact new policies.
Clearly, George has been observing politicians for so long that he's now behaving like one. In fact it gets worse, because this isn't the only launch he's doing for this latest re-run. He's already re-launched this edition, in Canberra last week. I'm told he was out at Avid Reader in Brisbane last night, re-launching it again. And I'm informed that he's re-launching it again with Barrie Cassidy and David Marr at Gleebooks in Sydney in a week's time. And yet again in June, with Barrie Cassidy and with Annabel Crabb at Readings Hawthorn. Politicians might get accused of going round the country launching the same policy in each city under a different badge, but relaunching the same product twice in the same city takes a particular style. This book has had more introductions than Dame Nellie Melba had farewells, but I like it and that's why I'm here.
In fact when I became leader of the Parliamentary Labor party at the end of 2006, this book together with a long tome on early childhood education by a gentlemen called Heckman made up my summer reading in 2006-2007. So for the unfolding strategy George for the year which followed you are partly to blame.
Today I won't repeat Paul Keating's characteristically self-effacing remark when he launched the book just two years ago, Paul put it in these terms:
“Would I write a better book? Well, of course I would. I write better than George and I know more than George. But George is not me and he is not John Howard and his third party view is worth something. Is it worth the world? No. But is it worth something? Indeed, it is.” (Paul Keating, 2 June 2006)
Core argument
Let me turn to the book itself. As I said before I like this book and I've read it. I read it at an important time in the political evolution of the Labor party as we moved from Opposition into what became the world longest election campaign in 2007. Culminating in the events of late last year.
Like all of George's writing, it's clear; it's crisp; it's well-informed and it has an argument even if you can chose to disagree with the argument.
So let me now to contest the argument that George advances:
     * Firstly, Mr Keating and Mr Howard share similar views about an internationally open, market-based economy.
     * And secondly, while they have fundamentally similar economic policies what distinguishes them is different perspectives on national identity and what's broadly described as the culture wars.
In short, George's argument about Mr Keating and Mr Howard is economic similarities versus cultural differences and I'll let him contest the gross implication of his thesis when he responds.
I know George delivers the analysis with nuance and with caveats and many more than I've just articulated. But still, I think he sometimes blurs some very fundamental differences between the two. Mr Keating and Mr Hawke were very different leaders from Mr Howard.
I'd make just three points, two relating to Mr Keating and Mr Howard and one further remark much more general in pointing toward the future.
First, the Hawke and Keating Governments delivered a massive program of economic reform, and they didn't shy away from taking on their own political base when they knew it was in the national interest.
Think tariffs.
Think cuts to the marginal tax rate.
Think enterprise bargaining.
Think how unpopular all of those were with the trade union movement of Australia.
Mr Howard, on the other hand, never took on his own political base in the prosecution of any significant economic reform. His reform agenda never moved out of the ideological straightjacket of the 1970s and 1980s.
Think industrial relations.
Think consumption tax.
And think also of the explosion in untargeted welfare.
Second, Mr Keating was a policy-driven leader who is responsive to changing national needs, which Mr Howard was not. Mr Howard was responsive to politics, but not policy.
When the economic circumstances change, and the demands of a competitive economy change, Mr Howard never adjusted and never took the lead when it came to new ideas.
Look at climate change.
Look infrastructure policy.
Look at education policy.
Look at early childhood education.
There's a mountain of economic evidence about the importance of those policy domains to Australia's future. Mr Howard in eleven years never sustained an interest in any of those policies.
All you have is the occasional reluctant capitulation when the political heat reaches boiling point  -  like the reluctant acceptance of emissions trading last year. Mr Keating by contrast learns on the job, embracing new policies during the 1990s like CAP competition policy, Working Nation in terms of new approaches to labour market policies, and universal superannuation.
George to be fair to him, doesn't entirely miss this point  -  he concedes it in part and I turn particularly to page 363:
“Ironically, [Mr Howard] left office with the economy stronger than he found it, but with a reform legacy less substantial than Hawke and Keating, because he went too far with the labour market, and because he seemed more interested in offering bribes over policy substance.”
What do these conflicting narratives of economic reform for the last decade have to say about the decade that now lies ahead?
Less than six months into the new Government, we have outlined the core elements of our policy strategy for the future:
     * First, a policy of responsible economic management, based on strong surpluses, fighting the fight against inflation and putting downward pressure on interest rates
     * Second, a vigorous program of microeconomic reform, based on productivity, participation and population:
         * On productivity, we have begun an ambitious program of reinvestment in human capital formation, in physical capital formation (infrastructure) and in business deregulation through the COAG reform process
         * On participation, we have embraced a program of tax reform, reform of child care payments, as well as a new approach to preventative health care  -  all designed to enhance workforce participation in the long term, given the particular challenges emerging from an ageing Australia
         * On population, the Government has already announced an ambitious expansion to the migration program in order to deal with long and short-term skill needs; the long-term neglect of skills policy over the past decade; and once again the impact of the ageing of our population
     * Third, the Government recognises rather than rejects the strategic economic challenge represented by global climate change and associated challenges to energy security, water security and food security  -  and the need for a program of national and global action to respond to each.
     * Fourth, the Government's policy strategy also unapologetically embraces social inclusion, and I've just come from the first meeting of the Government's new National Social Inclusion Board with the Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard. And through Social Inclusion which we unapologetically embrace, we believe that there is a need through Government to intervene and in partnership with corporate Australia and community associations as well to assist those suffering from structural disadvantage and to enable them to have greater economic and social opportunities in the future. Failure to act in this area in fact creates a long-term and entrenched social problem that comes at a significant economic cost in its own terms unless dealt with.
     * Fifth, an activist foreign policy which seeks to enhance global, regional and national security and economic opportunities for Australia and to enhance an international rules-based order given the challenges that now present themselves through the rise of China, the rise of India, the continued challenges of terrorism, the need to combat the re-emergence of global protectionism and the need to spread the tent on the global reach of economic development.
For us this constitutes an ambitious policy framework for reform for the future. By contrast, we continue to identify a combination of policy irresponsibility and policy inertia on the part of our political opponents:
     * The Liberals today fail to embrace the key disciplines of economic responsibility by refusing to recognise the inflation challenge; by describing the inflation challenge as a ‘fairy tale'; by maintaining that there is no economic case to cut government spending; by raiding the surplus to the tune of $22 billion without offering any savings  -  thereby putting upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates.
     * The Liberals continue their disinterest in microeconomic reform from the decade that has just gone by. They refuse to recognise that there is a problem with declining productivity growth, let alone advancing new problems to reverse that decline; nor is there any evidence of responsible policy to improve workforce participation.
     * Further the Liberals continue in a state of denial on climate change  -  resorting to political populism rather than engaging in the substantive debate on the future of emissions trading, the future of renewable energy and the future of energy efficiency.
Therefore, if we're interested in the future, the contrast I would submit George is clear:
     * The Government advances a program of policy reform for the future  -  Which will not be without it's controversy.
     * The Liberal Opposition retreats into its political shell  -  and continues to play the same game of populist politics that dictated the policies of much of the last decade.
The nation, of course, has suffered from a wasted decade  -  a decade of squandered opportunity and a decade when instead of investing the proceeds of the mining boom, these proceeds were instead squandered on consumption.
Therefore, we would with absolute confidence argue that there are two clear and competing narratives for the nation's future  -  one based on considered policy activism; the Liberal alternative at this stage based on a cocktail of political populism and their strong historical suit  -  policy inertia.
So having added that to my warm words of welcome and response to George's narrative and the contribution which George has made to political debate. It is with great pleasure that today, for the 27th time, I launch, relaunch and launch again, George Megalogenis' book, The Longest Decade.
I leave to one side George's analysis as to whether I should be described as ‘manic', ‘disciplined', ‘shameless' or, much more distressingly, ‘Geoffrey Boycott'.
In fact, I'll let all those go through to the keeper.
Which perhaps was the greatest hallmark of Boycott's career.
I commend the book to you all.


Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister will today attend the first meeting of the new Australian Social Inclusion Board.
Every Australian should have an opportunity to be a full participant in the life of the nation. Unfortunately, too many Australians remain locked out of the benefits of work, education, community engagement and access to basic services.
This social exclusion is a significant barrier to sustained prosperity and restricts Australia's future economic growth.
Promoting social inclusion requires a new way of governing. Australia must rethink how policy and programs across portfolios and levels of government can work together to combat economic and social disadvantage.
The Australian Social Inclusion Board which brings together leaders from around the country, will be instrumental in meeting this challenge.
Tackling disadvantage involves generating effective, practical solutions at the level of government, local communities, of service providers, employers and of families and individuals themselves.
The Australian Social Inclusion Board will consult widely and provide views and advice to the Government.
The Board will be asked to focus on the most disadvantaged geographic areas and communities in the nation.
In doing so the Board will be asked to make recommendations on policy that could change the lifetime circumstances of jobless families and children at risk.
The Rudd Government has already begun work on a number of priorities which are important to the social inclusion agenda, including work on homelessness, a disability and mental health employment strategy, closing the gap for Indigenous Australians and universal access to pre-school.
Australian Social Inclusion Board Members
Ms Patricia Faulkner (Chair)
Patricia Faulkner leads KPMG's Global Healthcare practice and is also the National Partner-in-Charge for Health, advising both State and Federal Government departments and agencies. From 2000 to 2007, Patricia was the Secretary of the Department of Human Services in Victoria. She has held various board appointments over the years and is currently a board member of the Jesuit Social Services and the Melbourne International Arts Festival. Patricia held senior and chief executive roles in the Victorian Government during the 1980s and early 1990s, including Director of Consumer Affairs, Director of Occupational Health and Safety, and Director of Employment. In 1995-96, she chaired the Economic Planning Advisory Commission inquiry into the Future of Childcare in Australia.
Monsignor David Cappo (Vice Chair)
Monsignor David Cappo is a Catholic Priest and is currently the Vicar General of the Archdiocese of Adelaide, making him the deputy to the Archbishop of Adelaide. In May 2006, Premier Mike Rann appointed him to the position of Commissioner for Social Inclusion, in order to strengthen his ability to influence the development and implementation of social policy. Monsignor Cappo continues as Chair of the Social Inclusion Board  -  a role he has held since March 2002  -  and is a member of the Economic Development Board of South Australia. Monsignor Cappo is a qualified social worker and a former National Director of the Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission. He has made major contributions to national debates in social policy development and has been directly involved in national strategic planning and implementation of social programs.
Ms Elleni Bereded-Samuel
Ms Elleni Bereded-Samuel was born in Ethiopia. She has focused her life's work on strengthening education, training and employment for culturally and linguistically diverse communities in Australia. Elleni is now the Community Engagement Coordinator at Victoria University. Her dynamic leadership has resulted in new solutions for community to access and participate in society. She has brokered partnerships with international and local community organisations, as well as local, State and Federal government departments. Elleni is the first African Commissioner for the Victorian Multicultural Commission. She is on the Board of Directors of the Royal Women's Hospital and chairs the Community and SBS Community Advisory Committees.
Dr Ngiare Brown
Dr Ngiare Brown is an Aboriginal woman from the south coast of NSW and one of the first half-dozen identified Aboriginal medical graduates in Australia. She has a clinical background in acute care and primary health, as well as experience in medical education, policy and research. Her past positions include Indigenous Health Advisor to the Federal AMA and Foundation CEO of the Australian Indigenous Doctors' Association. Ngiare is currently undertaking doctoral studies in human rights, human rights law and public health and holds joint placements in the Child Health Division at the Menzies School of Health Research and the Telethon Institute for Child Health Research.
Dr Ron Edwards
Dr Ron Edwards is a founding board member of the Graham (Polly) Farmer Foundation supporting Indigenous youth. He was awarded a Doctorate in Education (UWA 2006) which investigated the factors that can promote social inclusion within society, particularly in an educational context. Ron has been actively involved in programs that seek to enhance social inclusion amongst Indigenous, homeless and disabled people, as well as in the establishment of low fee Anglican schools. He was a Member of the House of Representatives from 1983-1993 and now works as a project consultant in the private sector.
Mr Eddie McGuire
Mr Eddie McGuire is host of some of Australia's most popular television shows. Eddie became President of the Collingwood football club in October 1998. He also established  -  and is Chairman of the Trevor Barker Foundation and works for many other charitable organisations, including the Brainstorm Appeal, the Alfred Hospital Foundation, the Leukaemia Research Fund, the Burnet Research Institute, and the Alannah and Madeline Foundation.
Dr John Falzon
Dr John Falzon, a sociologist working in the area of social justice and social change, is Chief Executive Officer of the St Vincent de Paul Society National Council. He has written and spoken widely on the structural causes of marginalisation and inequality in Australia and has long been involved in advocacy campaigns for a fairer and more inclusive Australia, especially in regard to welfare legislation, housing justice, homelessness and poverty. John has worked in academia, in research and advocacy with civil society organisations, and in community development in large public housing estates.
Mr Ahmed Fahour
Mr Ahmed Fahour joined the National Australia Bank in September 2004 as an Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer Australia. Ahmed is responsible for managing the Australian and Asian region which includes retail, business and corporate banking. He also oversees MLC, which includes retail investments, insurance and wholesale superannuation. Ahmed holds a Bachelor of Economics from La Trobe University and a MBA from the University of Melbourne. He won a number of prizes during both degrees. He is a Senior Fellow of the Financial Services Institute of Australasia and was appointed by the Premier of Victoria as Business Ambassador in Melbourne's North in Victoria. Ahmed is Melbourne-based and is married with four children. He has an active interest in sports and working on developing social cohesion in Australia.
Professor Tony Vinson
Emeritus Professor (UNSW) and Honorary Professor (University of Sydney) Tony Vinson has worked with disadvantaged communities to strengthen the problem solving capacities of individuals and groups. Since the mid-1960s, he has researched the priority needs of communities and has taught social workers and trainee doctors how to work effectively with them. Tony has extensive experience researching social disadvantage, which culminated in his book Dropping Off the Edge (2007), on the distribution of social disadvantage in Australia. He has direct involvement in community development projects, was Chair of the Independent Inquiry into NSW Public Education in 2002, a Foundation Director of the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics in the 1970s, and one-time Head of the NSW Department of Corrective Services.
Ms Linda White
Ms Linda White is the Assistant National Secretary of the Australian Services Union, the largest union working in the social and community services sector. Linda is also a Vice President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. She has been at the forefront of the union's work nationally and is involved in the enhancement of skills in the sector through her role as chairman of the review of the Community Services Training package for the Community Services and Health Industry Skills Council. She is a solicitor of over 20 years' standing and has worked with clients and trade unions for over ten years at Maurice Blackburn &amp; Co.
Ms Kerry Graham
Ms Kerry Graham has committed herself to addressing the disadvantage and exclusion experienced by parts of our community. She has worked with Indigenous Australians, children and young people, as well as homeless, mentally unwell and dually diagnosed people. Her experience includes working as a solicitor with Aboriginal Legal Services and she was the founding lawyer of the NSW Youth Drug and Alcohol Court for which she received the National Children's and Youth Law Centre award. Kerry is the CEO of the Inspire Foundation, a national non-profit organisation which creates opportunities for young people.
Mr Tony Nicholson
Mr Tony Nicholson has dedicated almost 28 years to improving conditions for those living on or close to the edges of society. A feature of his work has been his ability to collaborate with colleague social justice organisations, governments and business to achieve reform in public policy and service delivery to the benefit of disadvantaged Australians. Tony spent 14 years as Chief Executive Officer of Hanover Welfare Services, a Melbourne-based organisation in the field of homelessness. Tony is currently Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence in Melbourne, an agency at the forefront of knowledge development and practice of a genuinely Australian approach to social inclusion.
Dr Chris Sarra
Dr Chris Sarra hails from Bundaberg in Queensland. The youngest of 10 children, Chris experienced first-hand many of the issues faced by Indigenous students throughout their schooling. Chris has had an extensive and noted career in education, with a focus on the pursuit of improved outcomes for Indigenous children. In the late 1990s, Chris took on the challenges of Indigenous education as the principal of Cherbourg State School in Queensland. Under Chris' leadership, the school became nationally acclaimed for its pursuit of the Strong and Smart philosophy. Chris is now the Executive Director of the Indigenous Education Leadership Institute.
Professor Fiona Stanley
Professor Fiona Stanley is the Founding Director of the Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Chair of the Australian Research Alliance for Children and Youth, and Professor, School of Paediatrics and Child Health, at the University of Western Australia. Fiona has spent her career researching the causes of major childhood illnesses and strategies to enhance health and well-being in populations. She sits on the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council, as well as the Australian Statistics Advisory Council. For her research on behalf of Australia's children, she was named Australian of the Year in 2003 and in 2006 she was made a UNICEF Australia Ambassador for Early Childhood Development.


The Rudd Government will immediately provide $12 million towards a joint Commonwealth and Victorian Government $30 million study of projects that improve East West connections across Melbourne.
The study will assess the projects identified in the recent report, Investing in Transport: East West Link Needs Assessment, that proceed to the feasibility stage following the current consultation process.
These projects have the potential to keep Melbourne's mantle as one of the world's most liveable cities.
Rapid population growth and increasing travel in the city outstrip current and planned infrastructure capacity  -  increasing congestion and undermining Melbourne's liveability edge.
Patronage on Melbourne's trains increased by 23% over the past two years.
Without action, urban congestion is projected to cost families and businesses in Melbourne $6.1 billion a year by 2020, with many working parents spending more time in their cars and less time at home with their kids.
The Rudd Government will therefore examine these major nation-building projects that have the potential to transform the way Melbournians get around, tackle traffic congestion and reinforce Melbourne's world-renowned liveability.
Two innovative rail proposals include:
     * A new 17 kilometre Melbourne Metro rail tunnel linking Melbourne's booming western and south-eastern suburbs and providing a major increase in the capacity of the rail network
     * A new rail connection from Werribee to Sunshine (the Tarneit link) to significantly improve the frequency and reliability of services from Werribee, Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo
These projects are estimated to cost between $7.5 billion and $8.5 billion.
A decision on which projects proceed to feasibility stage will be made by the Victorian Government following community consultation by the end of the year.
The Commonwealth Government will invest in feasible projects that meet strict criteria through the new $20 billion Building Australia Fund, outlined in last week's Budget.
The Building Australia Fund is designed to invest from next year in nation building projects that address infrastructure bottlenecks and ease traffic congestion in our cities and towns.
The Government believes it is time to invest in long-term nation-building, with a horizon that takes us beyond the incremental changes thrown up by political cycles.
The Investing in Transport: East West Link Needs Assessment study was prepared for the Victorian Government by Sir Rod Eddington, who is also Chair of the Commonwealth Government's Infrastructure Australia advisory council.
This study takes a 30-year perspective and concludes that doing nothing on urban congestion is not an option.
The Commonwealth Government's commitment to examine new nation building projects is on top of its substantial existing investment in Victorian transport infrastructure.
In 2008-09, the Commonwealth Government is investing almost $500 million in road and rail projects in Victoria, including:
     * $53 million for the Deer Park bypass and Leakes Road Interchange;
     * $24 million for the Geelong Ring Road; and
     * $26 million for the Dynon Port Rail Link.
The Government is also investing $51 million in 2008-09 to make an early start on delivering its election commitments, including:
     * $25 million to start the Westgate Bridge rehabilitation;
     * $6.5 million to start the 4A section of the Geelong Ring Road; and
     * $5 million to start the Western Highway duplication planning.


Introduction
I'd like to thank Homelessness Australia for the invitation to speak at the 5th National Homelessness Conference.
Let me also say that it is a pleasure to be in Adelaide. This city has long been a centre of innovation and creativity, not just in the arts, but also in business and in public policy.
That is why it is fitting that we gather here to work towards finding creative solutions to tackle one of Australia's most complex and pressing social challenges.
Today, I'd like to begin by acknowledging the many people in this room who work tirelessly to provide support for people who are homeless.
I'd like to thank you, I commend your hard work.
But today I'd like to enlist your support for a great new enterprise: how we as a nation can begin to turn the homelessness crisis around for the long term rather than just apply band-aids in the short term.
As a Government, we have committed to begin the process of finding a new approach to prevention where possible, and where prevention fails, then breaking the cycle of homelessness.
And we know that some of the best experience, information and advice will be found outside of Government.
That's where you come in.
As a government and as a community, we need to learn from your experiences.
That is what the Green Paper I am releasing today is all about.
This is the first national Green Paper on homelessness ever.
And the policy that will follow will be the first national White Paper on homelessness ever.
The Green Paper, and the broader consultation process of which it is part, aims to promote discussion, draw out bold new ideas and to identify evidence-based approaches to reduce homelessness.
This process began at the 2020 summit when Tanya Plibersek and Tim Costello led the discussion on the future of housing and homelessness as part of the future of sustainable local communities.
This Green Paper takes that process of consultation forward.
I would like to thank the Steering Group appointed to oversee the Green Paper: Tony Nicholson, Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence; company director and philanthropist, Anna Buduls; and Heather Nancarrow, Director of the Queensland Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research.
Together with the Department of Families and Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs the Steering Group have done a remarkable job and I appreciate their efforts over the past few months.
With the release of this Green Paper I encourage all of you to play a role in developing an improved long term national response to homelessness by giving us your views on the challenges raised in the paper.
Over the past year, I have visited several homelessness services around Australia and witnessed the reality of Australian homelessness that many of you deal with every day of your professional lives.
I've spoken to people experiencing homelessness in its various forms.
I've shared a joke with them. I've had a cup of tea with them, and I've learned something of their experiences and how they came to be homeless.
In the Mission Australia Centre in Surry Hills in Sydney I met a man who just six months before seemed to have his life on track.
He had a good job, a relationship and a solid income.
He found himself homeless after being knocked off his feet by financial and personal events beyond his control. His experience, like many others, demonstrated how easy it is to have the rug pulled from underneath you.
At the Hanover homeless shelter in Southbank in Melbourne I spoke to some of the 50 men and women staying there for the night.
They were mainstream Australians who had been knocked sideways by unexpected circumstances.
What I learned from these people is that there is no one path into homelessness.
Every person has a different story and a different set of circumstances which brought them to homelessness.
The immediate reasons for homelessness lie in family breakdown, job loss, sickness, drug addiction, gambling addiction and domestic violence.
Homelessness is also a window into the wider debate on Australian disadvantage  -  the rising costs of housing, the rising cost of living, and the particular challenges facing many young people and senior Australians on the fringes of our society.
Yesterday, with the Deputy Prime Minister, I launched the Australian Social Inclusion Board which is tasked with dealing with the overall challenge of tackling disadvantage in Australia.
The board met for the first time yesterday and agreed to devote attention to homelessness but also to responding to joblessness in families and to the needs of disadvantaged children.
Importantly their focus will be on devising ways to intervene early to prevent homelessness.
The facts of homelessness are well known to most in this room:
     * Each night, around 100,000 Australians are homeless.
     * 46,000 of these are young people under 24 years old.
     * 10,000 are children under the age of 12.
     * 17,000 are indigenous.
     * 6,000 are senior Australians over the age of 65.
The cost of homelessness to individuals and their families is large.
It's not just an economic cost.
It's also an acute social cost.
For children, homelessness affects school routines and friendships, education and employment.
Worse still, experiencing homelessness as a child makes adult homelessness more likely.
That's why we need to turn the corner.
The Rudd Government's Approach to Homelessness
The new Australian Government is committed to working towards long term solutions to address homelessness.
But we do want to build a strong economy that delivers for working families, working Australians, and those that are doing it tough  -  In other words, an economy that extends opportunity to all Australians.
As a Labor government we are committed to a principle of social solidarity that includes private philanthropy, community action, and public responsibility to protect the most vulnerable.
But let me also say this: we don't have an old-fashioned approach to these challenges.
This means adapting a philosophy of mutual partnership and mutual responsibility.
We want to support people who have decided to make a change in their life to continue on that path. But we don't want to create a culture of dependency.
That means finding creative solutions to complex problems.
It means investing in solutions which deal with the causes of homelessness.
The new Australian Government has already made a start. We have begun to address several parts of the complex challenge of homelessness.
One of our first commitments in this area was to provide $150 million over five years to build 600 homes across Australia for families and individuals who are homeless.
We have also committed $100 million for long term supported accommodation for people with disabilities.
These are modest but important steps in the right direction.
Other important wheels of change have started to turn.
In March 2008, COAG agreed to reform the Special Purpose Payments, including those that relate to housing and homelessness.
St Vincent de Paul reported recently that nearly 50 per cent of people coming into homelessness services across Australia are private renters in difficulty.
The Government will establish a new Agreement between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories  -  the National Affordable Housing Agreement which will include homelessness as a key area of focus.
It will incorporate both the Supported Accommodation Assistance Program and the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement.
The National Affordable Housing Agreement will provide greater flexibility for states and territories to allocate housing and homelessness resources to produce the best outcomes for homeless people.
In addition to our commitment to build new housing, in last week's budget we provided $2.3 million to RecLink to roll out their sporting and cultural programs like the Choir of Hard Knocks in every State and Territory.
Beyond homelessness directly, the Government has also initiated action across a number of fronts to tackle disadvantage in its first five months in office:
     * As part of the Government's additional $5.9 billion over five years to kick start the Education Revolution election commitments, the Government has committed $534 million to provide universal access to 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year of play-places learning for all four year olds by 2013;
     * The Government has committed $1.2 billion over five years for Closing the Gap Initiatives including $56.4 million over four years for literacy and numeracy programs and $122.7 million over four years for child and maternal health programs.
     * We are delivering 275,000 additional training places for unemployed Australians and reforming employment services to better assist those facing barriers to work.
     * We have delivered seniors $400 more than they received in the last Coalition Government Budget and Carers $500 more.
     * We have tasked the Henry commission of inquiry to report on long term reforms to payments to retired people by February next year.
     * The Government is investing $290m over the next four years to re-establish the Commonwealth Dental Health program to support up to one million additional consultations and start to tackle public dental waiting lists
     * The Government is also investing $0.5 billion to provide a Teen Dental Plan to help families meet the costs of dental check-ups for teenagers.
Each of these measures will help us in our task of delivering opportunities to those Australians currently at risk of being cast to the margins
Which Way Home - The Green Paper of Homelessness
Through these initiatives the Government has begun work on the challenges of disadvantage, but we fully acknowledge that there is a lot more work to do  -  especially in the area of homelessness.
If we take a hard honest look back over the last decade or more - as a nation we have not done enough to address homelessness.
That is why I asked MPs in the Government to spend time visiting shelters and refuges in their local electorates.
Many of them came back to me and told me that our efforts to reduce homelessness were failing.
They told me that homelessness services weren't able to meet the level of need.
Perhaps more distressing than the number of homeless people in Australia is the fact that on any given night seven out of 10 homeless people are turned away from shelters because there's simply no room at the inn.
We lack the scale or strategic focus to address the multiple causes and effects of homelessness.
We can't guarantee that every homeless person who comes to a homeless shelter will get the best possible outcomes  -  be it in education or employment.
Put simply, our homelessness policies aren't sufficient to deal with the scale of the problem.
That is why in January, the Government announced that we would seek to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a new approach to homelessness.
I am pleased to be here today to release what is the first step in developing this new approach.
Which Way Home  -  the Green Paper on homelessness - is the Government's first Green Paper.
And its release marks the beginning of a period of widespread public consultation.
We will be holding public consultation sessions in 12 locations across Australia.
These sessions will start next week in Perth.
We are consulting widely because we believe that the best information is held by the people who see it everyday - those who provide support and assistance to homeless people.
Responses and any other ideas will feed into the Government's White Paper.
The White Paper will include a comprehensive national action plan to reduce homelessness by 2020.
Principles for Reform
The new approach to homelessness begins with renewed national leadership  -  to bring a strategic focus and drive a coordinated effort.
We need better access over the long term to stable and affordable housing.
The 2008 Budget has made an important start on tackling the housing affordability crisis with a $1.4 billion package of practical policies.
The Budget includes a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to drive housing construction activity.
It also established First Home Saver Accounts to help young people get onto the ladder of home ownership. Over the next four years, the Commonwealth will invest around $1 billion in these special accounts to help people save a deposit for a house.
The Government will also provide $622.6 million over four years for the provision of 50,000 affordable rental properties across Australia for low and middle income earners.
But we need to look beyond just providing housing.
We need to increase opportunities for homeless people  -  to participate in the economy and the community.
To have the opportunity to learn and gain new skills and to get back into work.
We also need to strengthen the homelessness service system.
Contact with the homelessness service system should provide a gateway into safe and appropriate accommodation, and then a pathway to social and economic participation.
We need a partnership - at a national level - between mainstream services and homelessness-specific services.
This is a big part of the solution  -  it means many of us cooperating and working better together.
It means all levels of governments working better with organisations who work on the front line  -  like hospitals, mental health crisis services, Centrelink, employment services, courts and police working more closely with women's shelters, youth refuges, hostels and soup vans.
In our efforts to improve outcomes in this area we are guided by the principles of evidence-based policymaking.
Put simply, that means we want to build on what works.
In Australia we have seen several successful initiatives at the state and territory level.
Here in South Australia the Government has brought together the efforts of government with the non-government and business sectors to make a substantial difference.
South Australia set a target to halve rough sleeping by 2010.
The Plan is monitored by Commissioner for Social Inclusion  -  David Cappo  -  who has joined our national Social inclusion Board.
Preliminary data from the ABS show that the plan has led to a reduction in the number of homeless people in South Australia.
This along with many other ideas are worth considering if we want to stop people cycling in and out of homelessness.
We have also seen significant and successful programs outside the immediate sphere of government.
Last year in Sydney, Tanya Plibersek and I visited a homeless shelter run by Mission Australia.
Recently Mission Australia made a deliberate shift to use their funds to provide high quality crisis accommodation to 40 people not 100.
Under the new model clients received a range of services  -  in fact 32 different professional services and training and educational services delivered to these 40 people on site at this homeless service based on their individual needs and strengths.
Services like medical, dentistry, optometry and chiropractic services, TAFE training, life skills  -  and the list goes on.
The objective is simple  -  to equip people with the skills and support necessary to reach their potential.
In conclusion, the new Australian Government recognises that homelessness is an area where we as a community simply must do better.
I said before that homelessness is a window onto Australian disadvantage.
And similarly, the way we as a nation respond to homelessness is a window onto the heart of our community.
The launch of today's Green Paper is a first step on a long journey that I hope will involve input at some level from everyone in this room.
Together, we have a unique opportunity to make a difference to homelessness in Australia.
We owe it to those 100,000 homeless Australians to get this right.


ALBANESE: The Prime Minister has asked that I open up with a few comments about the COAG infrastructure working group process which is a part of the Rudd Government's commitment to building the nation through infrastructure. 
Today in Adelaide we're having the third meeting of the COAG infrastructure working group. Infrastructure requires investment, but it also requires reform. The important work of this COAG working group is looking at ways in which we can streamline regulation between the states and territories to make sure that we operate in a much more uniform way.
This will be aimed at improving productivity, improving efficiency and therefore an important component of why infrastructure is one of the Rudd Government's 5 point plan to combat inflation. The infrastructure working group is working through a series of issues relating to regulation and is working in partnership with the Infrastructure Australia agenda. Sir Rod Eddington has come along today as the Chair of Infrastructure Australia as people would be aware, we appointed the full board this week at the Cabinet meeting and Infrastructure Australia in conjunction with the COAG working group is the way forward.
This means I think we've made a signal of intent in the budget of how seriously we take the infrastructure challenge facing the nation by investing $20 billion in the building Australia fund. This is a critical area of economic reform. I'm very proud to be part of a Government that's finally taking action after 12 years of neglect on national infrastructure issues and the quality of the people who make up the Infrastructure Australia board show I think the commitment that they have to making a contribution to the nation and Sir Rod Eddington is an outstanding appointment as the chair of that board.
PM: Sir Rod
EDDINGTON: Thanks very much Prime Minister, thanks Minister. I'm delighted to be chairing the advisory council and reporting to the Government. I think it's a real opportunity for the business and the public sector to work together and contribute to the all important policy debate. We'll be very clear about the rigour through which we will pass any proposals that come to us. It's a substantial opportunity to spend, but we have to spend wisely on infrastructure that's going to make a real difference both to our long term community and our long term economy.
I'm here today to listen to what the COAG working group team have got to say and then in early June we'll be holding the first meeting of the infrastructure advisory council in Canberra to kick off our work. There's plenty to be getting on with and I look forward to doing what I can to support the initiative. It's a terrific initiative and it is something that I'm sure will make a difference to the nation.
PM: Thanks very much Sir Rod and thanks very much Minister Albanese. It's good to be back in Adelaide today to talk about infrastructure. In January of this year I announced Labor's 5 point plan for fighting inflation. One element of that plan was to ensure that we delivered a sizable, substantial budget surplus, we've done that.
The second part of that plan was to act on the skills crisis, we're in the process of doing that and you've seen measures on this announced in the budget and there will be more to come.
Third part of that plan was to deal with the challenge of infrastructure bottlenecks. Infrastructure bottlenecks when they exist across the country actually add to supply side constraints in the economy which in turn fuels inflation. That's why it's been necessary to act on this as well. We said prior to the election that we would establish Infrastructure Australia. Within the first 5 months of this Government we've done exactly that, through legislation. 
Secondly we've now staffed Infrastructure Australia and I pay tribute to Sir Rod Eddington and his preparedness to take on this significant responsibility on behalf of the Government and on behalf of the nation.
Thirdly we said that we would establish a building Australia fund, we've done that. We have made our intention absolutely clear through the budget and for the allocation of $20 billion in the first instance to that fund. And furthermore we've said that in the future we leave open the option of drawing upon any future budget surpluses to add to that building Australia fund.
Why is infrastructure so particularly important across the nation and here in South Australia? We have a huge infrastructure deficit. Doesn't matter where you turn, we see problems in our roads, in our rail, in our ports. We see problems of urban congestion, we see problems with the infrastructure of the 21st Century. That is a high speed broadband network for the nation.
So there are two options here, one as the National Government you can just wash your hands of it and say not my problem, someone else's problem. Or two, you can say this requires national leadership. That's our response and we've put in place within our first five months in Government the machinery for doing that.
Here in South Australia it's important as well, we've through the budget funded some $3 million to assist in a feasibility study for a sustainable traffic strategy, transport strategy, here for Adelaide and I'm sure we will be working in close partnership with the South Australian Government in the period ahead to ensure that we also are partners in significant infrastructure projects in this state and most particularly those of national significance for Australia.
To conclude on this, Sir Rod has also said quite rightly as has the Minister. The evaluation criteria for projects will be rigorous. These will be subjected to a rigorous cost benefit analysis. We will make sure that the criteria associated with economic (inaudible), the proper deployment of public finance and proper delivery of net benefit to the nation past muster. Before we commit ourselves as the National Government to be partners in any such project and that's why we intend to take sobered and considered advice on the way through.
If I could just add one of two other things. I've also in South Australia here today addressed the National Conference on Homelessness. This has been very important and at that conference I've had the opportunity to release the Governments Green paper on Homelessness ‘Which Way Home?' and that will now form the subject of input from the community sector, from the business community and from other Governments on what will be the first national White paper on Homelessness, I'm advised, in Australia's history. We intend to deliver that White paper by years end, this Green paper is the first step in that direction.
Homelessness is a national obscenity, the fact that we have 100,000 Australians in a country as prosperous as this who are still homeless. So many tens of thousands of whom are young. We have thousands of whom are senior Australians  - people over the age 65, together with a large number of indigenous Australian's. We can do better, we must do better on this. This Green paper released at this important conference here in South Australia today, takes us one step down that path and of course the next step will be the completion of the White paper by years end.
Finally, also on the question of housing and homelessness and on the question of indigenous housing in particular. I'm also announcing today the establishment of a National Policy Commission on indigenous housing. This is important in order to deal with the acute problems facing housing in Australia's indigenous communities.
This is designed very much as a national policy commission which will not be staffed by politicians. Instead it will be staffed by people who have expertise in the field. People who have either been out there in the housing industry or working closely with the housing industry as it impacts on indigenous communities as well as associated expertise. We'll be approaching a number of senior individuals across the community in order to get their participation in this national policy commission. We think it's important and critical work and it's an important priority for us in closing the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians.
Some time ago I had an aspiration of establishing instead a joint policy commission with the Opposition. Regrettably the Opposition has insisted still on politicians being a member of this body. That's not the way in which the Government wishes to proceed, we want experts. Experts rather than politicians and that's why we've decided that the National Policy Commission is the best way to go and this of course has been the subject of some continued discussions between Dr Nelson and myself.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you promised South Australia's (inaudible)
PM: Let's wait for the conclusion of the White paper. The Green paper clearly states we've got to establish some targets and the reason we put that Green paper as a proposal to this conference of a thousand experts in homelessness at this Adelaide convention centre over the next two days is to get their input as to what would be rational and reasonable targets for reducing homelessness over time.
My simple proposition is this, you can either take a business as usual approach as a nation and say, ‘ok that is just part of the problem', or you can say, ‘can't we turn the corner and can't we bring that number down'. I am in the second camp. By the time we get to the White Paper, you will have our definition of those targets, but we want to be consulted about how we get there in the meantime.
JOURNALIST: What about the target of (inaudible) within five years (inaudible)
PM: Well if you, if you look at the speech that I have just delivered, I have described these as modest first steps within our first five months in office. You cannot turn around the problem of national homelessness, which has been building and building for years and decades, in a matter of five months. You can't do that. What you can say however, is that we are serious about this. And we have done three things. First, Green paper, first White paper commissioned by this Government is on homelessness. It will produce the first White paper ever on homelessness nationally for Australia.
Secondly, committing upfront this amount of money to build those additions to housing stock which we announced earlier on. And then most recently, a further announcement of a further $100 million to assist with the construction of emergency accommodation for those with disabilities who have older carers and their carers are running into a real problem in terms of continuing to provide care for their disabled children long term.
I have described this in the speech as very much first steps, but I would rather have taken those first steps than have replicated what I think is a sad history of policy inertia on the part of the previous government on this, who after all, didn't even have a Minister for Housing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you plan to respond to the United Nations invitation for Australia to be part of (inaudible) negotiations in Cyprus and is Mr Downer the appropriate person to be part of that?
PM: The United Nations Deputy Secretary General has approached Senator Hill, or former Senator Hill, I should say, our permanent representative Hill in New York, and proposed the possible appointment of Mr Downer to this role. And furthermore, the United Nations has asked for the Government's response to that. What the Government has said quite clearly to the United Nations, is that should they extend that invitation to Mr Downer, we would support it. We would support it on a bipartisan basis because it would be an important appointment for an Australian as a special envoy.
How Mr Downer responds to that is a matter for Mr Downer. Mr Downer and I have not been in personal contact on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Did you think Mr Downer is a good selection by the UN (inaudible)
PM: Well the UN obviously make up their own mind on these questions and I am not sure whether Mr Downer is their final choice, or one of a number of possible choices. I will leave that to them and I will leave it to Mr Downer. But as you know, Mr Downer and I have had a difficult relationship over the years but if the UN says they want Mr Downer to do a job on Cyprus, I am not going to stand in the road of that and he would have my complete support.
Sorry, I interrupted your question.
JOURNALIST: I was going to say the rising cost of petrol is causing angst within this community and of course transport and everything else is going up in the meantime. Is there anything at all that the Government can do in the next months or weeks to bring down the price of petrol (inaudible)
PM: Well there is no silver bullet on petrol. And we have always said there is no silver bullet. And I have looked at what has happened with these price adjustments in Singapore in the last 24 hours, and the flow through impact on the budget for working families, for working Australians and Australians doing it tough, is really big. We as a Government have initiated a number of measures which help at the margin on this, help at the margin. One of which is the decision to establish National Fuel Watch. Now that will come into operation at the end of year, which will seek to apply nationally, what has been instituted in Western Australia I think for the last five to seven years.
The West Australians tell us that on average it has resulted in something like a reduction in the overall price at the bowser of something like 2 cents per litre. That is not a lot but that is one useful step.
The second thing of course, we have done is to establish for the first time, in Australia's history, a petrol commissioner to provide rolling competition policy scrutiny on the behaviour of the oil majors. These are the two things that we have done, but I fully recognise that there is no silver bullet in this area.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well let's go to what the Budget does. What does the Budget do on tax cuts? The Budget delivers some $55 billion by way of a support package for working families, including $46 billion in tax cuts.
Secondly, what we do through the Budget is provide an increase in the childcare tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent. Thirdly, what the budget does is establish for the first time in Australia's history, an education tax refund for working families, whereby you can claim up to 50 per cent of your education expenses on various items, for primary school kids, up to $750 per year and for secondary school kids, up to $1500 per year.
On top of that, we have taken a measure to remove the previous Government's imposition of this charge on people on very moderate incomes of $50,000 per year, called the Medicare surcharge, Medicare Levy Surcharge, adding up to some $20 to $30 extra per week depending on whether you are a single or a couple. And on top of that, we have a range of housing affordability initiatives which end in the vicinity of something like about $2 billion.
If you put all those measures together, depending on the family, depending on the number of kids, depending on where they fit in the overall scheme of things, we have done as much as we physically can to provide additional help to the family budget. Recognising that the cost of everything is still going through the roof.
The cost of food, the cost of petrol, cost of rents, costs of childcare. So what we have tried to do is say, here is a helping hand with what we can do through the tax system and the childcare rebate system, etc, while recognising that prices are still going up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I just want to ask you also on petrol, can you indicate whether, as we mentioned (inaudible) emissions trading, whether retail petrol is possible it may be exempt given the inflationary pressures (inaudible)
PM: As former Prime Minister Howard said, if you move on the whole question of climate change, as he anticipated the previous Government would as well, then it will have an effect on energy costs. That's inevitable. He said that, I say that.
The key question is how we ensure that the most vulnerable Australians, those who are on lower incomes, are appropriately supported through cost adjustment processes across the board. And one of the terms of reference, of course that we have for our current investigation into emissions trading, is how you deal with those cost adjustments for working families on the way through. That work is underway. It will not be complete for quite some time yet but we are very mindful, as are charitable organisations, like the Brotherhood of St Lawrence, on the impact of movements on emissions trading, pricing the cost of carbon, etc, on families. We are very mindful of that. Very complex work. But that work is underway.
JOURNALIST: But in principle, you wouldn't (inaudible) exclude petrol from any sort of emissions trading would you?
PM: Well the whole question is, when you are designing an emissions trading regime to make it as comprehensive across the economy as possible. At the same time ensuring that working families are appropriately supported at the lower income end in terms of any costs which flow from it. So as I said, Mr Howard like myself, has always accepted the reality that you act in this area, it has an impact on energy prices. The key thing is to make sure, for those who can afford any price adjustment for (inaudible) that you have got some support mechanisms on the way through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I have seen those reports today and as I understand it these matters are under investigation within the defence department and I will leave it for that investigation to reach its own conclusions.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree it is a breach of privacy?
PM: I think the best thing to do is to leave that investigation to reach its own conclusions and I am sure that is what the defence department has under way.
JOURNALIST: Just (inaudible) Mr Dodson has raised concerns this morning about possible changes to Native Title, saying it is not the way to address the 17 year life expectancy gap. That that should be Government policy. How would you respond to that?
PM: Well, closing the gap is, I have got to say, a massive undertaking. At the time which we became the Government of Australia, there is a 17 year life expectancy gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians. You go down to the infant mortality rates. They are something like three times as large in indigenous communities as they are in non indigenous communities. So once again, you can either just say, ‘not our problem, too hard', over there, or say, ‘actually, let's intervene'. But intervene at multiple levels of policy.
Government must take the lead. But there is a role for everyone here. What has impressed me is, and Rod would know of this because of experience corporately, is the number of senior Australians corporates which are now taking their responsibilities in indigenous communities around the country, to try and close the gap as well. Particularly in terms of employment opportunities in some of our mining communities.
I believe a national partnership approach is necessary, but we have got to be absolutely united as a country on setting a goal to close this gap. It is going to be hard as hell and it is going to be really tough, but unless we focus on that, we will just drift and it will just get worse.


The Australian Government will establish a National Policy Commission to develop innovative proposals to improve the provision of housing in remote Indigenous communities.
In my National Apology speech I committed the Government to the creation of a forum to develop solutions to the problem of overcrowding, health problems, violence and abuse that flow from inadequate housing in remote Indigenous communities.
The establishment of a National Policy Commission aims to meet that commitment.
The Commission will report to me as Prime Minister and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, and will meet at least four times a year with the first meeting to occur before the end of June 2008 if possible.
Jenny Macklin will oversee a secretariat comprising officers from my department and hers, to support the work of the Commission.
I will shortly write to all those I have previously nominated to invite them to take up positions on the Commission. These include: Mr Danny Gilbert AM;
Mr Paul Pholeros; Ms Leah Armstrong; Mr Joe Ross; Ms Tania Major; Mr Warren Mundine and Mr Dale Alcock.
I have confidence this group will provide sound advice to the Government on new approaches to addressing remote Indigenous Housing.
My great hope that this Commission might be bipartisan and include the Leader of the Opposition has not been realised.
The Government was unable to reach agreement with the Leader of the Opposition on the membership of the Commission, although two of his nominees, Mr Warren Mundine and Mr Dale Alcock will be invited to participate.
I have decided that this matter is too urgent to delay for the sake of an agreement that might never be reached.


CARLTON: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us on the line from Canberra, good morning.
PM: Good morning Mike, good morning Sandy, and I am in Sydney.
CARLTON: Oh are you? Even better.
PM: That's right.
CARLTON: I am surprised that a Queensland politician, would dare show his face here after (inaudible) State of Origin.
PM: Don't rub it in. Don't rub it in.
ALOISI: Good morning Prime Minister, look I just wanted to say that petrol seems to be on everyone's mind at the moment, certainly with our listeners who have called in this morning. One of them, a man called Pablo, is a truck driver and he called in to say that his fuel bill has climbed to an extra $200 a week. He does deliveries. And he says he is in the terrible position of not being able to pass this to his customers.
What can you say to him?
PM: Well it's really tough, whether you are in small business or whether you are motorist struggling to find their way to work this morning. It's has gone through the roof as we all know.
Firstly, these prices as you know are driven by global oil prices and there is a limit to what national governments can do. What we have done domestically is the things we said before the election, we would do. Establish a petrol price commissioner to make sure there is enough competition within the industry domestically in Australia.
Secondly, ensure that they have got a formal monitoring powers under the Trade Practices Act, which they didn't have before.
And thirdly, from November - December this year, introduce a national Fuel Watch scheme like they have had in WA, going back several years now, so that motorists the night before know what prices will be offered where for the next 24 hours and those prices cant shift.
CARLTON: Pablo the truckie, wants to know why that is going to help him though?
PM: Oh sure, sure. I was about to say to you Mike, these things at best help at the margin. I am not pretending they literally have a more fundamental effect than that. That would be simply misleading. They help at the margins. It is what we said we would do before. And it is what we are doing.
Beyond that, in terms of family budgets, you have seen what we have tried to do through the Budget process, which is acting on tax, acting on childcare tax rebate, acting on the education tax refund, to try and put more dollars into the family budget while they are being eaten up at the same time. I fully understand the rising petrol prices, food prices, rents and mortgages.
ALOISI: (Inaudible) what Brendan Nelson has pledged to do, and that is cut fuel excise by 5 cents a litre?
PM: Well, it is very difficult to know what the Liberal policy is at the moment. Mr Nelson says that's their policy and Mr Turnbull says it is not. And the person designing the Liberals tax policy for the future Mr Ergas, says that the excise level is perfectly fine where it is.
ALOISI: But is it feasible?
CARLTON: Why can't you? Why can't you take the tax off petrol to make life easier for truckies (inaudible)?
PM: Well the proposal for example put forward by the Liberals of five cents, a litre, if you look at the movements in the last several days, which has been something in the order of ten to fifteen cents a litre. There is many people, including the automobile associations across the country by and large have said this would not have a substantial impact.
But we remain always vigilant as a Government in terms of how you can look at, into the future, other measures to assist with the balancing of the overall family budget. Whether that has been effected by rising fuel prices, rising food prices, rates, or mortgage, at the end of the day, it's the dollars that we have in Australian families pockets that counts. We need to try our best for future measures as well to ensure that we can deliver as much support to those families as possible.
ALOISI: Prime Minister, what about the cost of diesel, that is currently climbing up to $1.80 or more a litre. And there was some suggestion yesterday perhaps service stations are putting up the price of diesel to compensate for the amount of money they don't make on unleaded petrol. Do you think there is any (Inaudible) to that?
PM: Well, it will be interesting to see what the petrol commissioner that we have appointed has to report on that, remember, we have not had a petrol commissioner before. This person has just been appointed as of March this year. One of the powers that we've given them is what is called (inaudible) monitoring powers under the Trade Practices Act to look at the LPG and Diesel.
We will be very interested to see whether there has been any untoward movement in those prices which could be explained by normal competition practices in the economy or what is happening with the global price of oil.
CARLTON: Alright. Can we switch to another topic, there is a bit of a storm here in Sydney this morning. An exhibition of photography was to be shown at a gallery in Paddington last night. Images of kids as young as 12 and 13, apparently naked. Do you have a view on that?
PM: Well I have just done the Channel 9 Today Program and for the first time I saw these images. I will say on your program what I said when I saw these images only half an hour ago.
I think they are revolting. That's the first point and the second is, I don't understand why we cant allow kids just to have their childhood and to be able to enjoy their childhood. I really have a problem with this.
But I notice that these matters are currently with the NSW Police, so I'm sure the police will make their own determination through the law about what should happen next.
CARLTON: (Inaudible) about police officers marching into art gallery's and shutting things down?
PM: They are required to act within the definitions of the law. I presume what their policing here in NSW will be the equivalent of the obscenity provisions of the code. Because that's what would apply in these circumstances. That's why I'm reluctant to comment on the police process. They are independent and they are required to enforce the law (inaudible).
For the first time I saw the images on television, as I said, about half an hour ago. Frankly I think they are revolting and I just don't understand why we can't allow kids to enjoy something of the innocence of childhood.
ALOISI: Prime Minister can I go to another topic and this is Homelessness. Around I think 100,000 Australians are still sleeping rough every night of the week. What can you do to help them?
PM: Well what I was in Adelaide doing yesterday was together with Tanya Plibersek the Housing Minister, was launch the first national green paper on homelessness entitled Which Way Home. What we're trying to do is deal with these very uncomfortable facts which you've just referred to Sandy - 100,000 plus quoted by the census data as homeless now.
Some 40,000 plus as I understand, who are young people, you have some 6,000 people over the age of 65 who are homeless and I think from memory some 16,000 plus who are Indigenous Australians.
These figures are unacceptable, we have to start bringing them down. By years end this green paper will result in a white paper where we will bring about a national political response, a national policy response to acting in this area. In the conference yesterday we talked about how you best intervene early when families first enter into financial stress and how you act then so they don't go from one level of crisis accommodation to the next. But the Government can intervene with better forms of early intervention so that people don't end up with even worse problems.
But we're up for consultation with the community now and we will have a response through Australia's first ever white paper on Homelessness by the end of the year.
CARLTON: I notice your old friend of nemesis if you like Lord Downer is about to bring peace to the Middle East or something with the UN. But seriously are you in favour of that, him taking a UN job in Cyprus actually?
PM: Well as you know, I think Mike, having observed these things over the years Mr Downer and I have occasionally had a different point of view...
CARLTON: (Inaudible)
PM: Well yes three or four hundred, but look the facts are these. The Deputy Secretary of the United Nations approached us a few days ago to ask the Governments views about whether (inaudible) Mr Downer as a special envoy, on the Cyprus question and Cyprus as you know has been a place where we have had Australian Federal police in going back from memory to probably 60's  -  I stand to be corrected on the exact date.
They've asked what the Governments view to such appointment of Mr Downer. We said that because we support the UN framework and that's the view of the United Nations Deputy Secretary General, then we would not stand in the way of it. We would fully support it.
ALOISI: On another topic (inaudible) Prime Minister, this row that's developed over the Defence department and Tanya Zaetta over her alleged behaviour in Afghanistan. Has the Defence Department gone too far here?
PM: Well Defence as I understand it have apologised for their handling over this document which seems to have done the rounds within Defence concerning this matter in Afghanistan and I say this matter not what actually this matter is.
And then getting to the substance of it, the Defence Department also has an investigation underway about the events in Afghanistan themselves plus the actual handling of this document. So I'd much rather wait until Defence conclude their internal investigation before you know proclaiming guilt or innocence in relation to anybody.
CARLTON: Just one more thing, Ricky Ponting has just hit up 150 in the first test in Jamaica. Would you like to be the first to congratulate him?
PM: Fantastic, can I just say you know it just makes your heart beat proud. It's truly good. It's fantastic. Good on him and truly fantastic watching as it unfolds over there. I've got to say it's always a challenge watching the series in the West Indies (inaudible) the time of day.
CARLTON: Your predecessor's is actually over there in the stand believe it or not.
PM: Is that right. Good on him and half his luck.
CARLTON: (inaudible) good to talk to you.
PM: Thanks very much.


I  will visit Japan and Indonesia from June 8 to 14.
The purpose of this visit is to advance Australia's economic and security interests with two of Australia's most important bilateral partners.
I will also discuss with the governments of Japan and Indonesia how to best advance our mutual interests in the region on matters including financial cooperation, the development of regional architecture, climate change and disaster relief coordination.
I will visit Japan from 8 to 12 June. Australia's relationship with Japan is long-standing, close and broad-based.
In Japan, I will be received in audience by Their Majesties the Emperor and Empress of Japan and will meet with Prime Minister Fukuda, other senior Japanese ministers and Diet members. I will also meet with senior Japanese and Australian business representatives.
I will visit Indonesia from 12-14 June. Our relationship with Indonesia remains one of our closest and most valued.
In Indonesia, I will meet with President Yudhoyono, representatives of the National Parliament, and senior business representatives.


STEFANOVIC: Good morning to you Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Karl
STEFANOVIC: Thank you for your time and we'll get to that in just a second but if you don't mind starting with fuel. Some disturbing predictions this morning that it will go to $2 a litre. That is going to be incredibly tough placing a lot of pressure on motorists and a lot of pressure on working families budgets?
PM: Well it will be a huge impact on family budgets, on working Australians, people doing it tough out there. It's just been going up and up and up now for a long, long time. There's no silver bullet on petrol prices. If there was I'm sure we'd have done something about it earlier on. What we can do and what we said we'd do prior to the election is make sure that we have firstly a cop on the beat, a petrol price commissioner to make sure there is no exploitation of motorists at the bowser. Secondly, to ensure that the petrol price commissioner has full monitoring powers for the petroleum industry, and thirdly from December of this year, we'll apply nationally what we've had in Western Australia now for some time a national FuelWatch scheme.
STEFANOVIC: Do you think realistically that those methods are going to work though here when you consider that the price of oil and crude oil is going up so dramatically? Is it going have any impact?
PM: Karl I've always said this will help at the margins. I can't control the global price of oil that's been fuelled by a whole range of factors, the rise of China, the rise of India, the fact that the Iraq war has impeded for some time the global supply of oil. These are factors way beyond the control of a National Government such as ours. What I'm doing is honouring what we said we'd do prior to the election in each of those three measures, but I concede at best they help at the margin.
What you can also do through the Budget process is provide some assistance to working Australians, working families on the question of tax, on the question of your child-care tax rebate, education tax refund, to try and put more dollars back into the family Budget but I fully concede this is a very pressured and difficult time for families trying to make ends meet.
STEFANOVIC: Cutting the Fuel tax would help at the margins?
PM: Well let's put all that into context. If you've got tax cuts which bring in $20 plus per week, depending on the size of family  -  number of kids etc; if the education tax refund which will cost Government about $4 or $5 billion puts more dollars on the table; and thirdly if we could increase as we've done in this budget the child-care tax rebate from 30% to 50%, these are extra dollars on the table. I fully concede they get eaten up by petrol prices and rents and mortgages and food but rather than taking a one-off measure here and a one off measure there, in relation to those costs which are going up, because they are so much controlled by global factors. The things we can control are the direct tax impost or tax returns to individuals. That's where we sought to act and honour our pre-election commitments
STEFANOVIC: So you're not going to support a cut to the fuel tax?
PM: I'm not sure the Liberal does either - because Mr Nelson does and Mr Turnbull doesn't. Well I mean you try and make sense of it, I can't. But the bottom line is you take this movement in the last week or two of 15 cents.
I mean, Mr Turnbull has spoken about five cents on excise. Well that's been consumed it would seem in a couple of weeks of movements in the global price. The key thing is, what can you do to make sure that people aren't being ripped off? On the national FuelWatch scheme, in WA they tell us that over several years they've basically helped with a couple of cents per litre, so that motorists can choose on a given day where to go to buy their fuel because in a given day as you know that petrol price at the bowser can vary between 10 and 20 cents across a metro area, sometimes larger. So if the night before you know what the price is going to the next day and where, which is how the system works in WA, that gives greater power to the consumer.
STEFANOVIC: As you mentioned before, only helping with the margins. So it's going to be more pain certainly in the hip pocket for Australian families. Lets move on now, I want to show you some photos this is an art exhibition in Sydney that is causing quite a stir. These are images from Bill Henson, now one critic says that he is an artist of ferocious integrity who depicts androgenous girls and boys adrift in the nocturnal turmoil of adolescence? What we say is, is that, that is crossing the line. What do you say?
PM: That's the first time I've seen them. I think they're revolting.
STEFANOVIC: Should the Government step in here with some sort of or some level of control here?
PM: Well, the NSW authorities through the police are already examining this matter which is why I'm not going to comment on a legal process.
STEFANOVIC: As a Dad how do they make you feel, those photos?
PM: I've just said, it's the first time I've seen them, I find them absolutely revolting. Kids deserve to have the innocence of their childhood protected. I have a very deep view of this. For god sake, let's just allow kids to be kids. Whatever the artistic view or the merits of that sort of stuff, frankly I don't think there are any. Just allow kids to be kids you know.
STEFANOVIC: Agree with you on that one. The Defence department has apologised to Tania Zaetta as you know over the sex scandal leak. She looks like she's going to sue. You worried about that at all?
PM: She's of course entitled to her legal rights and she should prosecute those based on the advice that she receives. I won't comment on that. Defence as you said has apologised in terms of their handling of this particular document. But there's a full defence investigation under way in relation to two matters, what transpired there, and secondly, on the question of the actual handling of this document. There's an investigation under way, I've been in this business for a long time, let's wait till all the facts are on the table.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, some good news to report this morning hopefully, we'll hear from you in a second, but we've been running a campaign on the Today show as you at home know only too well. We've been asking you to support our campaign to have Villers-Bretonneux Anzac Day services continue. We have had 11,000 signatures for this. They think it is incredibly important, will you support the campaign?
PM: Well Alan Griffin the Minister for Veterans Affairs  -  I think you have been talking to Alan about this, has been in my ear about this now for some time. And his recommendation to me is that we proceed and that is that there will be an annual dawn service at Villers-Bretonneux from next year on.
That's a response to what you guys have been doing, but I've got to say it's also a recognition, the fact that on the western front, nearly 300,000 Australians, nearly 50,000 of whom lost their lives, in an exceptionally bloody campaign and I think this provides an additional opportunity for Australians to honour our war dead. Gallipoli, important for the reasons we're familiar with, but the carnage of the western front and the fact that you said you had 11,000 signatures in - there are about 10 or 11,000 Australians who currently occupy unmarked graves. That's just a stunning figure in itself, so well done to your viewers for their reaction and their response. And the Government through Alan Griffin, the Veterans Affairs Minister will be organising this in consultation with the City Government, or the town administration of Villers-Bretonneux to make sure that it all works for them as well, it is their town.
STEFANOVIC: This is incredibly important and historic and I congratulate you and your Government on this, Alan Griffin's done a terrific job. I hope to see you next year at Villers-Bretonneux. Can you commit to that this far out?
PM: Well I want to go to Villers-Bretonneux. I was sort of shaping it a bit to go this time, because I've read a fair bit of the history of the campaign. And the question of whether you will go next year or not will depend on whether you're mad enough to jump in the ring with Wendell Sailor again. That is just seriously insane. Why did you do that for?
STEFANOVIC: Well, well for a good cause PM. Breast Cancer......
PM: So the reason you got to win that, was cause you actually received the greatest number of punches. What sort of rules are they?
STEFANOVIC: See this is what I do for a living, I get up and I get chastised by the Prime Minister of this country. It's good to see you PM.
PM: Stay out of the Ring
STEFANOVIC: I will, I'll take that advice.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Six months ago today, the Australian people decided to change the nation's course.
To elect a government for Australia's future.
A government committed to nation-building.
A government that will tackle the long-term challenges of the future: climate change; water; the rise of India and China; and preparing our kids for the future jobs of the 21st century.
A government that will look after the working men and women of our nation.
A government for all Australians.
In the past six months, we've begun laying strong foundations for Australia's future.
Digging the trenches, and pouring the concrete.
We've brought down a responsible Budget.
And we've set up long term plans to invest in the future.
And today I will discuss some plans for how we'll move ahead, building on those foundations.
But first, I come to say thank you.
Thank you to the rank and file members of the Victorian branch who worked tirelessly to see the election of an Australian Labor Government.
Your work helped deliver a two party preferred vote of 54.3 per cent in Victoria.
...The highest primary and the highest two party preferred vote of any State on the mainland.
Your work helped us to win a total of 21 out of Victoria's 37 seats.
As a result we can today give a special welcome to the two Labor candidates who won seats from the Liberal Party:
     * Darren Cheeseman in Corangamite, and
     * Mike Symon in Deakin.
We also welcome Bill Shorten, Richard Marles and Mark Dreyfus into the House of Representatives.
And we also say thank you to all of our Labor candidates who fought hard in seats across the whole state.
In particular, we acknowledge the efforts of two candidates in extremely close contests:
     * Rob Mitchell in McEwen, who  -  subject to the courts' final decision  -  on the most recent count won 49.99 per cent of the vote with a swing of over 6 per cent.
     * And Rodney Cocks in La Trobe, who achieved a vote of 49.49 per cent.
Victoria also elected two new Senators, Jacinta Collins and David Feeney. And re-elected Gavin Marshall.
As we welcome them, we farewell another.
We salute Robert Ray for an extraordinary 27 years of service to the Party.
Robert played a key role in the Hawke and Keating Governments, and he served 12 years of hard labour in opposition. 
We wish him the very best in his retirement. We will miss him.
We will also miss the great John Button, whom we lost recently after his battle with cancer.
John Button was one of the most significant figures in our party in the second half of the twentieth century.
He led the overhaul of the Australian manufacturing industry from days of sclerotic protection to an era of global competitiveness.
Years after his retirement from active political life, he never lost his passion to serve the Labor Party.
We're proud that his illness did not prevent him seeing in the return of an Australian Labor Government.
And we extend our sympathies to his partner Joan and his sons Jamie and Nick, and to his close family.
This morning I also want to thank Premier John Brumby for the policy leadership he has given as Treasurer and Premier.
There's no doubt Victoria has been at the centre of policy leadership and innovation in recent years under Steve Bracks and John Brumby.
Victoria put the national reform agenda on the table three years ago.
Victorian Labor put the spotlight on the need for a long-term strategy to lift productivity and workforce participation.
Victorian Labor led with the emphasis on human capital and especially early childhood development, taking the major step of shifting early childhood education into the Education Department.
Victorian Labor led on health care reform, with the emphasis on prevention through the ‘Go For Your Life' campaign.
And Victorian Labor has led on regulatory reform.
And I particularly want to thank Premier Brumby for Victoria's strong and positive engagement with the Australian Government's COAG reform agenda, which is so critical to building a modern, competitive economy.
Our values and priorities
It is a great honour to lead the first Australian Labor Government of the 21st century.
Ours is a modern Labor Government, committed to building a modern Australia, capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future, as well as securing the future for the nation's families.
In meeting those challenges of the future, we draw inspiration from more than a century's history of reformist Labor Governments.
We stand in the proud tradition of previous Labor Governments, at the reforming centre of Australian politics.
We are a party of responsible economic management.
We are a party of long-term economic reform.
We are a party unapologetically committed to nation-building.
We are a party committed to investing in our people  -  with one long-term ambition: building the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
We are a party committed to helping working Australian and working families under financial pressure.
We are a party committed to helping the most vulnerable.
We are the party committed to managing change, in a world facing massive change where our continuing responsibility is to help people through the process of change.
We are therefore committed to building a strong Australian economy  -  but an economy that delivers for Australians, working families and those doing it tough.
We are committed to a secure Australia  -  strong at home and fully engaged abroad, through what I have described elsewhere as creative middle power diplomacy.
And we are committed to the greatest public good of our age  -  protecting the environment, the global commons that is the planet itself  -  for now and for future generations.
Our achievements so far
These values and priorities have guided our first six months in office.
And since we came to office, we've been delivering on the substantial reform program that we laid out before last year's election.
The first legislation the new Federal Labor Government introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament was to abolish AWAs.
We've introduced the Transition Act; we released our draft National Employment Standards, and we've begun the process of modernising industrial awards.
When we came to office, we inherited an economy facing serious long-term challenges, despite years of favourable external conditions:
     * rising inflation;
     * weak productivity growth;
     * severe supply constraints in skills and infrastructure;
     * unprepared for long-term challenges like climate change, and
     * unprepared for the rise of China and India.
Since coming to office, we have begun taking action to build a modern, competitive Australia through a sustained focus on driving strong productivity growth.
Higher productivity growth is the key to sustaining low inflation, achieving greater prosperity and securing the well-paid jobs of the future for the next generation.
That's why we've begun the education revolution, funding major new initiatives in early childhood education, computers and trades training centres in every secondary school, 630,000 new training places, thousands of new university scholarships and an upfront half billion dollar investment in our universities.
It's why we've begun taking national leadership on infrastructure  -  this week appointing the board of Infrastructure Australia, which will help guide nation-building infrastructure priorities.
It's why we're working towards establishing a National Broadband Network, to bring Australia fully into the digital economy of the 21st century.
It's why we've begun to reform the Federation  -  with a new era of Commonwealth/State relations.
...Working towards the goal of a seamless national economy, and a modern Federal system of government that delivers better services to all Australians.
The Government is now acting on climate change, after more than a decade of denial and neglect.
Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change, and we're hard at work in designing the emissions trading scheme  -  which will be one of the most important economic reforms of the next decade.
On the first day of Parliamentary business, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians.
We have begun a policy program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia.
The Government has begun work on preserving the great Australian dream of home ownership for a new generation.
Last week's Budget delivered our new First Home Savers Account; a new National Rental Affordability Scheme, together with a new Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce infrastructure costs for new houses and new developments.
From the time I came to office I said it is unacceptable that in a nation as prosperous as Australia 100,000 people are homeless  -  including an estimated 46,000 young Australians under the age of 24.
I am determined that we tackle this problem.
This week I released the Government's first Green Paper on homelessness. We are now looking at how to invest in new solutions in partnership with community and business groups to deal with this blight on us all.
The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the State and Territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over allocation and climate change.
The Government has advanced the cause of gender equality by appointing the first woman Governor General in 107 years.
Abroad, the Government has been strengthening the three pillars of our relationship with the world: our alliance with the US, our engagement with the United Nations and our commitment to engagement with our own region.
We have begun work on restoring Australia's engagement with the international community, including announcing our candidacy for the UN Security Council for 2013-14 after a 25 year absence.
And in our region, in my first visit to Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands I affirmed our determination to tackle under-development across the Pacific Island states, through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
The 2008 Budget
Two weeks ago we brought down the Budget - a responsible Budget, that will help fight inflation and deliver for working families.
The Budget was framed amidst difficult economic conditions.
The Australian economy is facing powerful countervailing forces.
We have the highest domestic inflation in 16 years.
At the same time, turbulence in the global economy is slowing world growth.
The global economy is going through what the International Monetary Fund has described as the greatest financial shock since the Great Depression.
At the same time, oil prices have soared to record global levels off the back of ballooning demand from China and the developing world.
These were indeed difficult conditions in which to frame a Budget.
But we have delivered a responsible Budget, with a strong surplus; a Budget that honours our commitments before the election to support working Australians and working families under financial pressure; and at the same time commencing our long-term project of investing in the nation's future.
At the centre of the Budget was a $55 billion Working Families Support Package  -  and we make no apology for tipping the scales back in favour of working Australians and working families.
The Working Families Support Package helps families meet the increasing costs of living by providing tax cuts, and help with child care fees and the costs of education and housing.
We understand that families are under financial pressure because of rising costs of living such as mortgages, rents, petrol, groceries and childcare  -  unlike our predecessors who told us working families have never been better off and still tell us today that the impact of rising prices and inflation are a fairy tale and a charade.
We can't ease all the financial pressures on working families.
But we can make a difference  -  by focusing help on those who need it the most.
That's what we've done with the Budget's tax cuts.
That's what we've done with the Education Tax Refund to help families with the cost of textbooks, computers, internet connections and other school expenses.
That's what we've done with the Child Care Tax Rebate, increasing it from 30 per cent to 50 per cent.
Seniors are struggling to make ends meet with escalating prices for food, petrol and rents  -  and we've begun the process of providing a better outcome for seniors after more than a decade of neglect.
We are committed to righting the wrongful neglect of our seniors over more than a decade of Coalition rule.
That is why we invested an additional $5.2 billion for Australia's 2.2 million seniors in this Budget compared with $1.5 billion in Mr Howard's last Budget. 
That's why pensioners this year under our Budget will
receive $900 in additional benefits compared with $500 in additional benefits under Mr Howard's last Budget.
That is why we invested an additional $1.1 billion for Australia's 430,000 carers in this Budget compared with a $361 million in Mr Howard's last Budget. 
That is why we've provided recipients of both the carer's payments and the carer's allowance with an additional payment this year of $2,100  -  compared with the $1,600 provided in Mr Howard's last Budget.
And that's why for Australia's 721,000 disability support pensioners we have provided for the first time an additional $500 utilities allowance this year  -  at a cost of $1.16 billion over five years. That compares to them receiving nothing additional under Mr Howard's last Budget.
I know this doesn't solve the cost of living pressures facing seniors, carers and those on disability support pensions.
But this is a first step in the right direction.
The Budget also delivered on our long-term commitments.
     * $5.9 billion towards the Education Revolution.
     * $2.3 billion to address climate change.
     * And $3.2 billion to end the blame game over our hospitals.
The Budget is also unapologetically about nation building. That's why the Budget has established the following:
     * The $20 billion Building Australia Fund will pay for ongoing improvements in our roads, ports, railways and broadband.
     * The $11 billion Education Investment Fund will pay for ongoing improvements in our TAFEs and universities as part of the Education Revolution.
     * The $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund will pay for better hospitals, better healthcare facilities generally, and important medical research.
These funds will help the nation prepare for the long-term challenges of the future.
We were able to deliver on our priorities because we were tough on spending.
We cut out waste and pared back the excesses of the previous Liberal Government.
Every single dollar of new spending in this Budget was more than matched by savings elsewhere.
As a share of GDP, we have reduced government spending to its lowest level since 1989. And tax as a proportion of GDP has also been reduced.
Delegates, what the Budget demonstrated  -  and what the economic debate this year has demonstrated  -  is that the Australian Labor Party is now unmistakeably the party of responsible economic management.
...The party of responsible economic management, and the party of the reforming centre of Australian politics.
Two days after Wayne Swan brought down the Budget, Dr Nelson and Mr Turnbull came out with a $22 billion raid on the Budget surplus.
Malcolm Turnbull says Brendan Nelson's budget plans are bad policy, but good politics  -  and he supports those plans, now, but he won't say if the Liberals will actually take those policies to the next election.
Malcolm Turnbull says millionaires should get government welfare.
Brendan Nelson first says millionaires shouldn't get welfare.
Then he says that they should.
Then he says he doesn't support means testing.
But despite the fact he doesn't support means testing, he's still going to vote for means testing.
And more than a week after announcing his plans to blow a hole of something like $22 billion in the Budget, the Coalition has not released even one single costing to allow the public to see their policy plans and judge their merit.
This is the modern Liberal Party:
The party of reckless spending and endless confusion.
The party of short-term politics and long-term neglect.
The party whose legacy was the highest inflation rates in 16 years.
The party that gave us ten interest rate rises in a row.
The party that four years ago told us they'd keep interest rates at record lows.
The party that said that working families have never been better off.
The party that spent a decade in denial about climate change, the greatest economic challenge of our time.
The party that let our nation's investment in tertiary education slide, while our competitors invested more and more, knowing that skills and education are critical to a strong economy in the 21st century.
And the party of Work Choices  -  the party that attacked the rights of working people and created Australian Workplace Agreements that cut their wages and conditions.
This is the party  -  the Liberal Party  -  which has trashed whatever credentials it had on responsible economic management and the party that has completely lost touch with the needs of working Australians.
Our challenges beyond the Budget
The Budget has built a long-term foundation for dealing with the nation's future challenges.
We will now build on that foundation.
Not with a focus on just the next 12 months, but in the spirit of the 2020 Summit  -  a focus on the next 12 years and beyond.
We are moving ahead on many fronts.
Infrastructure Australia is moving ahead with the national audit of our infrastructure needs.
COAG is moving ahead with a comprehensive reform agenda covering all key aspects of Commonwealth/State relations.
Treasury Secretary Ken Henry is preparing a report on how we confront the long term, interrelated challenges of our tax, welfare and retirement income systems  -  which will include a review of aged pensions, due in February 2009.
Julia Gillard is consulting widely on the details of the modern, fair and flexible industrial relations system that will commence from 1 January 2010.
Julia has also begun the long term reform of Australian higher education.
And Penny Wong is working hard on the design of the emissions trading scheme, a critically important long term economic reform.
Slashing elective surgery waiting lists: Stage Two
Since we came to office, Nicola Roxon has been working hard on our long terms plans for reform of the health and hospitals system.
We have established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to develop a long term national health reform plan.
And we have started taking action.
I have already mentioned the new $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund to ensure long term funding for hospitals, medical technology and research facilities and projects.
The Budget delivered a new investment of $3.2 billion in the National Health and Hospitals Reform Plan  -  to revitalise the public health system.
We have delivered an additional $1 billion to public hospitals over the next year  -  to begin rebuilding the health system after eleven years of neglect.
This growth is the largest single year increase in public hospital funding in almost a decade.
We have invested $275 million in GP Super Clinics, to improve access to health care and enhance chronic disease management.
We have also invested $249 million in a National Cancer Plan.
Another central part of our reforms is the Government's $600 million plan to slash elective surgery waiting lists.
In 2005-06, more than 25,000 patients waited more than one year for elective surgery.
We find this unacceptable and we have begun the job of fixing it.
Today I announce that the Federal Government will commit a further $150 million to slash elective surgery waiting lists.
This funding builds upon the Government's initial investment of $150 million for an immediate blitz on elective surgery waiting lists, announced earlier this year.
This new funding will deliver structural reform in the delivery of elective surgery, to help bring about lasting change in our hospitals.
This funding could be used to buy new, state-of-the-art surgical equipment and construct dedicated elective surgery units.
The allocation of this funding, and what it will be invested in, has now been agreed between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories:
For Victoria, this will mean $36.8 million to redevelop facilities at Royal Melbourne, Monash, Sunshine, Geelong and Frankston hospitals.
It will help in purchasing new equipment, including computer assisted surgical interventions.
It will also provide funding for three innovation projects to help improve elective surgery management.
This is modern Labor  -  reforming and investing.
Conclusion
Delegates, if we are to achieve the goals we've discussed today for the Party and for the nation, we must remain in government.
And that comes back to you, and your efforts on behalf of the great Labor cause.
Today, and over the coming weeks, we're all supporting Darren McCubbin in the Herculean task of winning Gippsland, a seat never once won by Labor in 107 years.
And beyond the by-election in Gippsland, we should all remember that we did not win the last Federal election by a large margin.
So too we would lose the next election with just a small swing against us.
And we are in uncertain economic times.
Nobody should therefore underestimate the challenges that face a reforming Labor Government.
We must deliver responsible economic management.
We must continue to provide support to working Australians, working families and those doing it tough.
We must also be a government of the future  -  a government that plans for the future, a government that invests in the future and a government that delivers the future.
And beyond all these requirements, we must govern with an iron discipline, an iron resolve and an iron focus.
With this in our arsenal, we will be a government that prevails in the tasks that have been set for us by the people who have elected us.
And that is our solemn responsibility.


The Rudd Government today announced a further $150 million to slash elective surgery waiting lists.
This funding builds upon the Government's initial investment of $150 million for an immediate blitz on elective surgery waiting lists, announced earlier this year.
This new funding will deliver structural reform in the delivery of elective surgery, to ensure that there is lasting change in our hospitals. For example, this funding could be used to buy new, state-of-the-art surgical equipment and construct dedicated elective surgery units.
The allocation of this funding, and what it will be invested in, has now been agreed to between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories:
     * NSW: $50.6 million for new equipment and surgical instruments to each Area Health Service and the Children's Hospital Westmead, and improved elective surgery management.
     * Vic: $36.8 million to redevelop facilities at Royal Melbourne, Monash, Sunshine, Geelong and Frankston hospitals; purchase equipment; and provide innovation funding to improve elective surgery management.
     * Qld: $29.4 million to expand elective surgery capacity and commission additional operating theatres.
     * WA: $13.3 million for capital improvements to Albany and Osborne Park hospitals.
     * SA: $8.1 million to develop operating theatres at a number of hospitals, and purchase equipment at a wide range of others.
     * Tas: $3.1 million for equipment for Royal Hobart, Launceston and NW Regional hospitals.
     * ACT: $6.6 million for capital works at Canberra and Calvary hospitals.
     * NT: $2.1 million for capital works at Royal Darwin and Alice Springs hospitals.
In 2008, the Commonwealth is allocating a total of $300 million to slash waiting lists for elective surgery, including: $93.9m (NSW), $71m (Vic), $57m (Qld), $28.7m (WA), $21.7m (SA), $11.2m (Tas), $9.1m (ACT), $7.4m (NT).
This comes on top of the additional $1 billion the Rudd Government is delivering to public hospitals over the next year  -  to begin to rebuild the health system after eleven years of neglect.
This growth is the largest single-year increase in public hospital funding in almost a decade.
In 2005-06, more than 25,000 patients waited more than one year for elective surgery, like hip replacements and eye surgery. This is unacceptable.
The length of elective surgery waiting lists in our hospitals is a direct result of the previous Government's refusal to work cooperatively with States and Territories to tackle problems in our health system.
The Rudd Government understands that elective surgery queues are not about lists and numbers  -  they are about people. The Government's plan will give working families the health care they deserve.
The plan comes in three stages:
     * Stage One (January 2008-December 2008) provides $150 million to conduct an immediate blitz on elective surgery waiting lists and reduce the backlog of people waiting longer than clinically recommended for elective surgery, such as hip replacements.
     * Stage Two provides $150 million for equipment and capital upgrades as outlined above.
     * Stage Three (2009-10 to 2010-11) will provide up to $300 million in dividend payments to reward improved performance by those states and territories that meet elective surgery waiting list reduction targets.


Introduction
Thank you Jenny and thank you Tony for being here as well. Tom Calma, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commissioner; National Sorry Day Committee Chairs, Helen Moran and Sally Fitzpatrick; Stolen Generation Alliance Chairs, Christine King and Phil Elsegood; Gemma Black; Barbara Livesey and ladies and gentlemen. And I join Jenny in honoring the Ngunnawal people on whose land we meet.
Firstly this in an important day, because it goes back to where our process of reconciliation in many respects began. And that's the Bringing them Home report. It's very difficult to read that report and not be moved by it. The stories contained within it are terrible stories, just terrible stories. The good part of the bringing them home report was, it would enable us as a nation to begin to reflect on what had happened, to begin to reflect on how we as a nation could make amends for past wrongs. And how we as a nation then could move forward to deal with the challenges of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australia for the future.
The national apology delivered here in February was one part of what I'd see as a continuing process. It's important, it's important for the nation, the Parliament, the Government and supported by the Opposition to have advanced that motion of Apology. It is important because of the recognition, what had transpired in the past and important in terms of a simple statement of Sorry on the part of the Parliament. But important on top of that because it began our process of closing the gap between Aboriginal and Non Aboriginal Australia. And that's where the hard part begins, that's where the really hard part begins.
Some people say that the problem with the National apology is that it's all about symbols. You know something, there is something very potent about an apology if through the process of giving it we then clear a path of action ahead of us. Someone explained it to me once that it's very difficult to establish a normal relationship with somebody where there have been past wrongs. We simply don't go up and acknowledge that those wrongs have been committed. And it's only once that occurs that you can truly and effectively move forward.
So for us that was very much the first step. Of course the steps which come after that are absolutely critical, are absolutely critical. Since that time Jenny in particular has been very busy. $100 million for Indigenous maternal and child health services; $56 million over four years to improve literacy and numeracy for every Indigenous child; $100 million to employ 200 new teachers in the Northern Territory; $90 million to create 300 jobs for indigenous rangers. And we recently announced $647 million in Housing funding in partnership with the Northern Territory Government, which will deliver around 750 new houses and over 2500 upgrades over the next 5 years and beyond. All part of a $1.6 billion Indigenous housing program.
So symbols without substance, are as I said on the apology day itself, nothing more than a clanging gong. Symbols when added with substance begin to add up to something and that's the course of action upon which this Government is now embarked.
As a reminder of the Apology, we have before us of course this magnificent calligraphic manuscript on velum or calfskin. The calligraphy has been done by Gemma Black, a local Canberra woman, whose work adorns other parts of Parliament House - in particular she regularly works on the Presiding Officer and the Speaker of the House Visitor Books. While she has more than twenty years experience with commissions from both public and private sectors throughout the country, working on this project, she's described as an honour for her both personally and professionally.
This artwork has been donated to the Parliament and therefore on permanent display as part of the Parliament House collection, I thank her for that. It will reside beside the Coolamon, presented to the Government by the Stolen Generations in thanks for the apology, in a place that reflects its importance to our country. The artwork will stand as a constant reminder of where we have just come from and of the journey of healing among us all and where we intend to go to in bringing that journey towards a proper conclusion - which is closing the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians.
Prior to the apology the Government engaged with representatives of the two national Stolen Generations organisations to ensure that the apology reflected their aspirations. The Government has continued this engagement. I would like to applaud the growing partnership between the National Sorry Day Committee and the Stolen Generations Alliance.
The practical measures highlighted in the Bringing Them Home Report, included:
     * commemoration activities,
     * training for health professionals,
     * family reunion services,
     * language, culture and history projects,
     * parenting services,
     * prisoner and juvenile justice services,
     * ensuring national standards for care and protection of Indigenous children and
     * minimum access to family records.
A number of these measures merge with our national priorities for a modern Australia, including the national child protection framework, and giving children the best start in life through early childhood and parenting programs. The Government is committed to working with Stolen Generations to make sure their voices are heard in the design of these policies and programs, and to bring forward some concrete outcomes by this time next year.
Today the Australian Government continues its commitment to the ongoing healing of our Stolen Generations. It is so important that we build on the goodwill and opportunities that were opened up by the apology. One of the main concerns that has arisen through our engagement with the stolen generations has been the critical need for healing services to help individuals and families with their own healing.
This is important work. At the end of June, Stolen Generations members, professionals in men's health, trauma, child safety, mental health, suicide prevention, family reunion services and Government departments will come together to meet to map out the way forward, together. They will consider the evidence. This might include information about experience in other jurisdictions and other parts of Australia. And research led most recently by Doctor Fiona Stanley, the head of the Telethon Institute for Child Health Research and some of the ideas presented at the 2020 summit.
As a first step, the Department of Health and Ageing, with advice from the Stolen Generations working group, will develop a training program for mainstream health services to improve their ability to care for the Stolen Generations, their families and others who were affected. As part of improving access to services, we will develop information materials to promote options for care available to members of the Stolen Generation.
Ladies and Gentlemen, fellow Australians, this is a good day.
And it is the beginning of what I hope will be many good days into the future. Many of us have felt almost a sense of learned helplessness, about how to deal with the challenges of indigenous Australia in the past. It is as if so many things have been trialled and that so many things have not worked. I think it is equally important to look forward with optimism about the things that do work and the things that are going well.
We must be realistic about where we need to improve and lift our game. And we intend to be realistic. I said at the time of the national apology statement that we wish to embark upon a new compact with indigenous Australia which is anchored in the principle of mutual responsibility and mutual respect. And that will be very much our governing principle for the future. The challenges are huge. We need to honour the successes where they appear. And treasure them, and be positive about them. We need to be blunt and realistic about where the problems exist and work our way through them.
Always, always, measuring how we go along the way. Always, always seeking to ensure that where we end up is better, better than the place that we left from.
So I thank you one and all for being long term partners with Government's of all political persuasions in this very long journey towards reconciliation in Australia.
The National Apology is one step in that process. National Sorry Day is another part of that process. Closing the gap is the framework within which we need to work for the future.
Today on this 10th Anniversary of the first Sorry Day, it is therefore with great pleasure that I present this work to the Parliament of Australia to commemorate and celebrate this continuing journey of healing for us all.


On behalf of the Australian Government, I congratulate Paul Lennon on his productive four years as Premier of Tasmania.
Entering state parliament in 1990, Premier Lennon has had a long and distinguished career serving the people of Tasmania for over 30 years in public life as a unionist and politician.
Mr Lennon served in the office of Deputy Premier with distinction on the election of the Bacon Government in 1998. As well as Deputy Premier Mr Lennon took carriage of a series of senior portfolios in the Bacon Government. During that time he was often described as the engine-room of the State Government.
In the most tragic of circumstances, Premier Lennon stepped up to the Premiership of Tasmania in February 2004 with the resignation of the late Jim Bacon.
As Premier, Mr Lennon was a proud and fierce advocate for the interests of his beloved state.
Premier Lennon was dedicated to the cause of developing modern economic infrastructure in Tasmania and was determined to bridge the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians in Tasmania.
I wish Mr Lennon, his wife Margaret and their family the very best of luck and every success in their future endeavours.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd will open the doors of Kirribilli House in Sydney so that registered Australian Charities can use it for fundraising events.
Charities with a national focus, such as St Vincent de Paul and The Salvation Army, will be invited to provide proposals to the Government to use the official residence for a fundraising event.
Up to ten charities will secure the right to hold a fundraiser at Kirribilli House each year.
The Prime Minister believes charity organisations may wish to use Kirribilli House for open days, receptions, dinners or garden tours to raise funds for the important work they undertake for disadvantaged Australians.
“We must provide a strong support network for the Australian charities that provide such critical services through their national community work.”
“Kirribilli House sits on one of Australia's most beautiful icons  -  Sydney Harbour and could greatly assist national charities with their fundraising.”
“Therese and I really hope that Australian charities can use this official residence to raise funds to support their critical work.”
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet will initially undertake an expression of interest project to gauge the interest levels of Australian National Charities that wish to use Kirribilli.
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet will then examine the strength of proposals for specific events and work with charities to coordinate their events. Charities will not pay a fee to use Kirribilli for their event, however they will pay for the cost of holding the event  -  i.e. catering and staff.


A calligraphy version of the Apology Motion was unveiled today by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd at Parliament House to mark the 10th anniversary of National Sorry Day.
The manuscript of the historic ‘Motion of Apology to Australia's Indigenous Peoples'  was produced by Canberra artist Gemma Black on calfskin.
The artwork is intended to provide a permanent acknowledgement of the past, and a reminder that we must harness the determination of all Australians to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.  
Sorry Day has been commemorated on 26 May since 1998 after it was included in the recommendations of the Bringing Them Home report.
This year, the Australian Government has provided funding to 26 organisations to support activities across the country.
The Australian Government is committed to working with Stolen Generations to make sure their voices are heard in the development of targeted programs to help heal the pain.
In June 2008, the Government will meet with Stolen Generations members, professionals in women's and men's health, trauma, child protection and mental health specialists and family reunion services to map a way forward together. 
The Department of Health will consult with Stolen Generations on the development of a training program and materials for mainstream health services providers on Stolen Generations issues.
Since the election, the Government has committed more than $1.2 billion over five years to closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians including undertaking major programs of work in early childhood development, education, health, community safety, employment, economic participation, welfare reform and governance and leadership.
The Rudd Government commends the selfless work of the Stolen Generations organisations in the lead up to the apology and looks forward to continuing the partnership into the future.


On behalf of the Australian Government, I would like to congratulate Mr David Bartlett on his appointment to the Office of Premier of Tasmania.
Mr Bartlett will become Tasmania's 53rd Premier, and I am confident that he will carry out the duties of this office with the passion and dedication of Premiers Lennon and Bacon before him.
Mr Bartlett is a young, bright and creative person dedicated to innovation, business development and information technology.
I have every confidence David Bartlett will make an outstanding Premier for the state of Tasmania.
Mr Bartlett has a young family and represents a new generation of leadership for Tasmania, with a fresh vision to drive the state forward for many years to come.
I wish David, his wife Larissa and their family, all the very best at this exciting time, serving the people of Tasmania in this most important position.
I look forward to working closely with Premier Bartlett into the future.


PM: When it comes to responsible economic management, you have got to make sure you have got a properly managed surplus into the future. You have got to make sure that you are providing support for working Australians under financial pressure and that you are also investing in the future.
Investing in the future means investing in the future of our infrastructure, investing in the future of our hospitals and investing in the future of our skills. And that is what we are here today to talk about, investing in the future of our skills.
We have come to this childcare centre today here in Campbell because if you look across Australia right now, there is a national shortage of childcare workers. And it doesn't matter where you go, we seem to encounter this story all over the place. And therefore, at the very beginning of a child's educational opportunities, with early childhood education with childcare, this is where the actions of Government must deal with the problem.
Across Australia at the moment, we are advised that by 2013 we are predicting 7000 workers, as an estimated shortfall in the early childhood education and care sector.
We have 700,000 parents in Australia who rely on childcare each year, and we have got this impending significant shortage of childcare workers apart from the shortage we have got right now.
So the question is: what do we do about it? And we are going to go from this childcare centre back to Parliament House for the first meeting of Skills Australia and I thank those who are with us today who are now part of Skills Australia and will assist the Government in providing advice on the allocation of the training places and vocational education training places which we have allocated - some 630,000 such places. It is important that we get all of this right.
The allocation of these places is already begun with 20,000 places which were released in April. And in the childcare sector alone, Julia has advised me that we have already got 764 job seekers enrolled in Certificate III childcare, children's services.
Now that is a very important start, but it is part of a long term plan to deal with the skills crisis, not just in this critical sector which is childcare, which effects hundreds of thousands of parents right across Australia in childcare centres just like this one. But more broadly across the total economy, how do you use properly informed advice to plan for Australia's long term skills needs.
Returning to the overall challenges of the economy. If we are going to have responsible economic management, which this Government is committed to, that lies in making sure that you are producing not just a significant and substantial government surplus, but also as you are dealing with other downward pressures on inflation - that means investing in skills and investing in infrastructure.
And investing in skills is so much part and parcel of what this government has undertaken in terms of what we believe to be the needs for Australia to have an education revolution.
I turn to Julia to comment more on the policy and then we will take your questions.
GILLARD: Thank you very much. This centre that we are visiting today really is an example of the skills crisis right around the country. They are looking for and would employ three new childcare workers if they could get them.
That is an example in childcare of what is happening right across our economy. A lack of skills, a skills crisis, is a capacity constraint on growth. Our economy could grow more, we could put downward pressure on inflation if we could solve the skills crisis.
It has been 11 long years in the making with underinvestment by the Liberal party. We have started to fix that underinvestment with the first 20,000 training places. And as the Prime Minister has said, many of them have been taken up by people who want to work in childcare.
The meeting today with Skills Australia will be part of setting up the long term future for delivery of our 630,000 training places in total, and a reform agenda for vocational education and training.
I am looking forward to the meeting and I thank the members of Skills Australia for sharing their early learning abilities with the children here in the centre today.
Apart from skills and the skills crisis, we know another problem for our economy is people not being able to get into the workforce when they want to because they cant access childcare. Either there isn't enough, and that goes to the skills crisis, or they have found it to be unaffordable.
An important part of the Government's Budget is lifting the Childcare Tax Rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. Now this is real dollars in the hands of working families. To take one example, for a working family where the mum works three days a week, it is $47 in reduction of out of pocket costs - $47 extra above what childcare provision is already giving that working family.
For a working mum who works full time, it is $95 in the pocket. This is a very significant difference for working families, a very significant difference to the affordability of childcare.
We want to deliver on affordability, we want to deliver on quantity of childcare, our skills package is part of that. Of course our 260 new childcare centres are part of that. We will move from talking about the skills crisis here in childcare to the skills crisis right across the economy with the members of Skills Australia today.
PM:Good. Thanks very much, over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: PM, the Australian dollar is approaching parity with it's US counterpart do you have any memory of when it was last (inaudible) how significant will it be for Australia?
PM: Well there has been a significant move in the value of the Australia dollar on currency markets and driven in part by of course, the resources boom, and demand for Australian commodities.
On the first part of your question, I seem to remember as a kid growing up, when the Australian dollar was worth more than the US dollar. But it has been a long, long time. Critical challenge for us when you look at the factors fuelling the crisis valuation of the dollar, is that with the resources boom and the inflow of revenue coming from the resources boom, it is one of those other elements in the overall inflation equation, is what people need to bear in mind.
You have got Government spending over here, you have got incoming revenue from the resources boom, and then on the supply side of the economy, you also have the constraints we have just been talking about when it come skills and infrastructure.
This Government, as a Government of responsible economic management, believes that we have to fight the fight against inflation.
If inflation is allowed to get out of control then what happens is that it pushes further upward pressure on interest rates and that is bad news for everyone in this country. Working Australians, working families, those doing it tough, people in business. That's why it's such a core part of the Government's approach to responsible economic management.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can guarantee that Fuel Watch will lower petrol prices?
PM: The last Prime Minister made irresponsible promises about prices, for example. With Mr Howard, when he said, that interest rates would be kept at record lows. That was an undeliverable promise and I don't believe that the Australian people want politicians running out there and making irresponsible promises.
What we have said consistently about FuelWatch, and about our overall approach to competitive policy pressures in petrol and elsewhere, is to enhance competition powers within the economy in order to do what we can to assist with the overall continued pressure on prices. But making any promise on individual prices? We never said that prior to the election and we're not saying it since the election.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) over the last three months petrol has been higher in Perth where FuelWatch operates. What's your response to that?
PM: Well, there are two responses to that. I think one is on a given day things are obviously going to vary across the country, and the key thing is to look at these trends in the long term. But if you look at the ACCC report, which was commissioned by the previous Government, it measured overall price over a period from 2001-2007. That's a long series of data from which to make evaluation. And from that particular enquiry in ‘04, ‘05, '06, and looking to have a similar result in '07, the WA Government's submission to the petrol price inquiry said that petrol was cheaper in Perth than the eastern capitals. So, there is a long series there as well.
I think it's very important, therefore, to look at price development in the long term. As we've always said about FuelWatch, we've never seen this as a silver bullet. We've said it will help with competition at the margins giving information to motorists so they know where the cheapest petrol lies in their city on a given day. And, looking at the data over time, in the West Australian experience, it's delivering something like two cents, on average, less a litre. Two cents per litre less over time.
The other thing is that it's really important to put in context in this debate on FuelWatch what's happened today with the three ringed circus that is the Opposition. Because in this period this morning we've had another several new positions put forward by the Liberal Party on FuelWatch.
Mr Nelson this morning on radio refused to take a position, it seems, on whether of not the Liberal Party would be supporting or opposing this legislation in the Senate.
Mr Turnbull said that the Liberal Party was both for and against this particular measure, for parts of it but against other elements of it.
But then we have Senator McGauran in the Senate who says that the Liberal Party will oppose the legislation in toto  -  ‘it's a dead duck' I think was the language that he's used.
Then we have a WA Liberal Senator this morning who said that FuelWatch is working just fine in Western Australia.
So, we have the Liberal Party saying FuelWatch is working fine in Western Australia. Liberal Party in the Senate saying they are going to block in toto. Mr Turnbull, the alternative Treasurer, saying they are going to accept part of it and reject the rest of it. And Mr Nelson not taking a position. Where does the Liberal Party stand on FuelWatch?
JOURNALIST:Can you clear something up about FuelWatch, will retailers be fined if they drop the price of petrol?
PM:The legislation will be introduced into the house in the next couple of weeks and all those elements will be fully developed in it  - 
JOURNALIST:You must know  - 
PM:In the WA experience, (inaudible) those sanctions have been applied. And, if you're going to have a system which say that petrol companies are required to nominate their prices at 2pm on the day previous, and adhere to those prices on the day following, then you have to have an enforcement mechanism. And the details of the enforcement mechanism will be unfolded in the legislation in the week ahead.
JOURNALIST:Can't you enforce it if it only goes up, if they put the price up (inaudible)
PM:The WA experience is that the sanctions have to work across the board, and that's been the approach that we've considered and debated at length internally within Government. But the full details of the regime you'll see contained and made explicit in the legislation.
JOURNALIST: Would you like petrol to be included in an emissions trading scheme? And do you think your Government could weather the ensuring backlash when petrol hits or increases by 10 to 17 cents a litre?
PM:The first thing to say is that the Liberal Party last year in Government, through Malcolm Turnbull, said that petrol should be included, lets just be very clear about that.
Secondly, what we've said about an emissions trading scheme is that it should be as broad in its compass as possible, but the final architecture of the scheme is still being developed.
And the third thing is this, that through this emissions trading scheme, when it's fully developed, our core responsibility is to ensure that working Australians on low to middle incomes who face price disadvantages flowing from that receive proper support from Government. And we're working on the detail of that as well. That's the responsible course of action.
JOURNALIST:There seems to be a view, Prime Minister, in the international investment community (inaudible). Do you think we've seen the end of reasonably prices petrol? (Inaudible)
PM:I think, the truth of it is, you've got so many factors, globally, impacting on the price of petrol here in Australia. If you look right around the world today, every Government today, around the world, is in the middle of a debate on petrol prices. In fact, I saw this morning there were riots in Indonesia over increased petrol prices, there are debates raging in the United Kingdom about how petrol prices and fuel prices more generally should be handled.
Most countries right around the world are dealing with this phenomenal spike, phenomenal spike, in global oil prices. Of the type that we've not seen since the oil price shocks of the 1970's.
So, on the demand side, what has really changed here? The massive emergence of China and India, as huge new consumers of global oil, and when you've got 1.3 million new cars emerging on the roads of India each year pushing things up and up.
On the supply side, we still have problems in getting Iraq to full production capacity and problems also in Nigeria.
Then, there is a third problem. And the third problem globally is all around the whole question of fuel efficiency and fuel efficient cars. And that's one of the reasons why we in this country are doing whatever we can with this half billion dollar green car initiative to assist with the manufacture of Australian hybrid and fuel efficient cars.
You see, if you're dealing with the challenges of the cost of fuel, it's a global reality we're dealing with. Here in Australia we can deal with part of the problem, and we also need to be very mindful of helping families on the way through with other supports to family budget - whether it is in child care, whether it's in early education tax refunds or through the tax measures we bring in as of 1 July.
JOURNALIST:PM, Cate Blanchett says you should retract your criticism of Bill Henson's artwork. Will you be reassessing that harsh initial reaction that you had to it?
PM:When I was asked the other day for my reaction, my personal reaction as a parent, to the photographs which were shown on television that morning, I gave my reaction. I don't apologise for that reaction. I stand by that view. And I will not be changed on it.
In terms of the other matters concerning the legal processes, that's always been properly the independent province of the law. Quite apart from any personal view of any politician  -  me or anyone else.
JOURNALIST:Do you agree with the Prime Minister on Bill Henson's exhibition and do you think it's a good look to have the vice squad raiding art galleries in Australia?
GILLARD:I'm now concerned that you don't read my radio transcripts, because if you did, you'd be aware that I was asked this question earlier in the week and certainly endorsed the Prime Minister's view.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible)
PM:Well, Mark, there are two questions here. One is our personal view. And I was asked the other day for my personal view as a parent about the photographs which were whacked up on the television screen. And I gave my reaction. I stand by that reaction. And don't apologise for it, and won't be changing it.
There's a second point here, which is the process, the independent processes of the law. As I said on the day, that's a matter for the legal processes to unfold. It's not a question of a politician having a particular view at a personal level which dictates the course of action of the law. The law is an independent beast and the laws governing these matters have pre-existed us by a long, long time. And that will sort itself through.
JOURNALIST:Malcolm Turnbull said this morning, he's got a couple on his walls at home. Should he take them down?
PM:I'm unaware of those remarks. My remarks were entirely based on the couple of photographs which I was shown on television. And as I said, were remarks based on my personal view as a parent. That is the question I was asked, I think, by Karl Stefanovic.
JOURNALIST: What about as Prime Minister?
PM:Well, I'm a parent, I'm a person and my views on the photographs I was shown haven't changed. I am passionate about children having innocence in their childhood. And therefore, when I'm presented with those sorts of photographs, and asked for my personal view as a parent, I gave them.
Now, on the question of the law and how that applies, that's properly in the hands of independent processes completely removed from any politicians personal view. I stand by my personal view, stated before, and I don't intend to change from it.
JOURNALIST:Ms Gillard, will the Federal Government support the creation of Islamic schools in Australia?
GILLARD:Well, we currently have such schools in Australia. We support parental choice, we support parents being able to choose the kind of school that they want their children to go to. That's the policy of the Government and obviously it is reflected in the way in which we fund and interact with schools. The Government works with schools from all sectors from the Government sector, from the independent sector and from the Catholic sector.
JOURNALIST:Do you have any concerns with the Camden Council rejecting the proposed Islamic school in Western Sydney?
GILLARD:This was obviously dealt with as a planning matter by the local council. It's the subject of New South Wales planning laws and should be dealt with in that way through the planning process.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, apparently found what could be the remains of an Australian digger at Fromelles. Do you have any comment on that?
PM:Look, let's wait to see how all this is dealt with. However long ago an Australian veteran has passed away, or been killed in action, and the remains are found, it's very important to handle this very sensitively.
Everyone has family. So let's get it all right first, in terms of the science. But, look at the history for Fromelles and the Western Front, it's just carnage cubed. Just carnage, carnage, carnage.
And every time any of us read anything to do with the history of battles on the Western Front and look at those hundreds and thousands of Australians who lost their lives, it just gives us all pause for thought.
These are Australian heroes. Every one of them is an Australian hero. We were a country of five million people at the time that dispatched something like half a million of our own to fight in these wars, primarily in Europe. And 50,000 of them lie dead. So, we honour our veterans, however long ago they may have died. Thanks very much.


Acknowledgements
Sepp Blatter [FIFA President] 
Frank Lowy [Chairman, Football Federation Australia] 
Distinguished delegates distinguished observers 
Citizens of the world 
Lovers of football
Welcome to Australia. Welcome to Sydney.
And welcome to this great building, the symbol of Sydney to the world.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I acknowledge the people of Burma and the people of China who have in recent times experienced great tragedies
I am honoured to open the 58th Congress of FIFA this afternoon.
You are all welcome guests in our country.
With 208 member associations, an event like this Congress is a reminder that football is the most truly global support of all.
Look around this hall and you are reminded of just how football brings together people from every corner of the world.
And as I look around this hall, I am reminded of the modern face of Australia.
A nation of extraordinary ethnic and cultural diversity.
Apart from the first Australians, we are a nation of migrants.
21 million people. 1 in 4 were born overseas. In fact, our people came from virtually all of the nations represented at this forum.
From Asia, from Africa, from the Americas, from Europe and from the Middle East.
In our earliest years, people came to Australia from Britain and Ireland  -  often not of their own free choice.
But in the years since the Second World War, Australia has become one of the most multicultural nations on earth.
We also seek to be an inclusive nation including indigenous Australians to whom I delivered an apology in Parliament for the great wrongs of past as part of our healing for the future.
Migrants to Australia have brought a belief in freedom; an enthusiasm to build a new life; a determination to work hard.
And often, they have brought one other thing as well: A passion for football. 
It's something Australians are reminded of every week at the hundreds of football matches held in cities, suburbs and towns around Australia.
You need only look at our ‘A League' teams to see the diversity of modern Australia.
With a population of such richly diverse backgrounds, we could almost stage our own World Cup here at home.
One of Australia's proudest sporting moments was when we made the FIFA World Cup Finals in Germany in 2006  -  the first time in 32 years.
Moments like John Aloisi's penalty goal that took us to the World Cup become a shared national memory.
It is extraordinary to consider how much of the world's population shares such memories of football.
But football is indeed the universal language.
It is more than a game  -  it is a powerful force that can bring nations together and help shape young lives through the discipline of playing in a team.
I know that FIFA understands this, with the valuable work that is done in developing nations through the GOAL project led by the President of the Asian Football Confederation, Mohamed Bin Hammam.
I am delighted that Football Federation Australia also announced yesterday a social responsibility partnership with UNICEF Australia, focused on supporting development activity for children in the Asia Pacific region.
Such programs highlight the role that football can play in developing economies.
And as a proud member of the Asian Football Confederation, I also want to wish China, Iraq and Qatar the best for the qualifying matches coming up in the weeks ahead.
Football is a passion that is shared between the nations and people of the world.
That is one of the reasons why the Australian Government strongly supports Australia's bid to host the FIFA World Cup in 2018.
Our goal is for Australia to be a good international citizen, engaged with our region and contributing to peace and development throughout the world.
We are a people committed to the principle of good international citizenship.
We are also a nation of sports lovers, and would like to see sports play a greater role in the relations between nations and peoples. A positive force.
That's why it was a great privilege for us to host the Olympic Games in 2000.
That was an extraordinary event that created a great sense of community among Australians. And a great sense of Australia as an open, international society.
Visitors and locals mingled in front of enormous screens in public squares across the city and the nation.
Some 46,000 Australians took part as unpaid volunteers - as guides and assistants, giving the typically warm and friendly Australian welcome to visitors from all around the world.
For those 46,000 Australians, it was an experience to remember.
I'm sure they'll be telling their children and grandchildren about it for years to come.
Australians loved the opportunity to be a part of such a global celebration of sport and community.
I hope that you have a taste of the same relaxed, friendly hospitality in your time here.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by saying, I wish you the very best for this, the 58th FIFA Congress.
I hope that you are able to get away from work enough to soak up all that Sydney has to offer...
The Harbour, the Bridge, a beautiful and truly global city.
And thanks to our Italian, Greek and Turkish heritage, you can even get some decent coffee here.
We can also offer you some of the best cuisine in the world.
Australians have taken their heritage from Greece, China, Lebanon, Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia, India and elsewhere and - combined with the freshest local ingredients  -  we've made up something new  -  modern Australian cuisine, or Australians simply call it, “mod Oz”.
I hope too that you can visit some of the other highlights of Australia  -  including my home State of Queensland.
Sydney is a wonderful city, but Australia doesn't end here.
I wish you a successful Congress, and an enjoyable time in Australia.
You are truly welcome visitors to our country, for this, the 58th FIFA Congress.


PM: In a few hours time the Government will be introducing the National Fuelwatch Bill into the House of Representatives. The debate is a very basic debate. It's about whether motorists should have the same access to petrol price information as big oil companies. And furthermore whether motorists should have access to that information with confidence for a 24 hour period.
The Government says that motorists should have that consumer power. The Liberal party are saying that they should not and that's the basic difference. As Graham Samuel himself said today and I quote him in an interview.
“The fundamental purpose of Fuelwatch is to swing the balance of power in petrol purchasing away from the sellers to have a sophisticated pricing sharing information. That they share information as to the price between themselves and move that power over to consumers and let consumers know when and were they can buy petrol at the lowest possible price. And importantly to have many hours warning of a petrol price hike where they can potentially suffer a loss of 10 to 15 or maybe even 20 cents a litre.”
So says today the chairman of Australia's competition watchdog.
The core arguments in this debate are essentially threefold. The first relates to price, our position is clear on this. Our position is based on three facts. One is the econometric analysis contained within the ACCC report. That's also been referred to on multiple occasions in the parliament, the 1.9 cent per litre difference. The second is in the further econometric analysis undertaken by the ACCC. That is being released today as well and I would draw your attention to its conclusion.
Its conclusion is quite stark on this matter and having gone through modelling questions and why they went back for further analysis to deal with different consumer buying patterns in a given week. And dealing also with other extraneous factors which might need to be removed from the sampling model. They reach this conclusion overall and I quote them in this document which has come out today.
“the purpose of this econometric analysis has been to satisfy the ACCC that the introduction of Fuelwatch scheme nationally would not, based on the experience in Western Australia lead to consumers paying higher prices for petrol . From the econometric analysis on a conservative basis the ACCC can say that there is no evidence that Fuelwatch led to any increase in prices and it appears to have resulted in a small price decrease overall.”
That's their statement today and their conclusion. The other fact on which we have based of course our view on the impact of Fuelwatch on pricing is of course the definitive statements by the chairman of the ACCC himself and on that question I would simply again turn to his statement which is again today.
“Fuelwatch will not in our view lead to an increase in prices. It will based on our analysis of the Perth situation lead to a statistically significant reduction in prices but there is a far more important element to Fuelwatch. It's about giving consumers the power to determine when to buy petrol and where to buy it at the lowest possible price.”
That's the first element of this debate, that's about price. The second of course goes to the regulatory impact on business. On the question of regulatory impact on business as I said in the Parliament yesterday the business community in particular petrol retailers currently suffer a price impost as a consequence of those service stations already participating in various forms of price information in association with the oil companies usually through price information collection companies, that's already a price which they pay. Now on top of that what the Government did in it's consideration of this matter before Cabinet was to make a clear cut decision that the net establishment cost to participating retailers in the Fuelwatch system would be zero.
That's the decision that Cabinet took and we we're entirely mindful therefore of making sure that small business would not cop any additional costs as a consequence of the introduction of this scheme. So that's the second element of this debate, on the question of the impact on the business community. The third is on the number of independents. And on the number of independents its quite clear where the analysis again from Western Australia comes from and again I go to the documents. The Western Australian experience has been along these lines, essentially that retailers there in the independent sector have benefited enormously from the free publicity which is associated with Fuelwatch.
That is papers and others in the media put the information up and out there about where the best and cheapest petrol is and as a consequence those petrol stations who are not part of major retail chains have access to that free publicity. Then you go page 8 of the WA Governments submission to the ACCC petrol price enquiry indicates that most petrol pump sites closures since 2001 have been company controlled or price supported sites. And furthermore the WA Department of Consumer Employment protection has said that the proportion of sites owned by independent operators and supermarkets has in fact increased. That's the third core argument in this debate.
The first on price and our response to that, the second in terms of the impact or the regulatory cost on business and the third goes to of course the question of the number of independents in the field. I just conclude by saying this, the debate on petrol and oil is a global debate. Every Government in the world is wrestling this debate today as we speak  -  either in Europe, throughout Asia, right across the world. And these are very difficult questions. You can have a real debate or you can have a bogus debate. The real debate is what you do about global demand factors, global supply factors, what you do in terms of alternative fuel strategy, what you do in terms of public transport, what you do in terms of Fuel efficient vehicles, what you do in terms of the ultimate assistance which can be delivered in the here and now to assist the family budget with delivering with this additional and huge impost which families are now facing.
As the Government said at the time when we introduced the scheme, this will be and has been a contentious debate. We recognised it then, we said it then and we've acknowledged it since. In the parliament earlier this week I made it absolutely clear that there were different and conflicting views within the Government and of course we fully embrace that. That's a normal way in which Governments go about making properly informed decisions. We're not in the business of simply suppressing information because it may not be of a uniform type. We believe in having the debate, resolving it and getting on with the business and I've explained the basis for the decisions on which Cabinets choice was made.
So to conclude and I'll conclude on this. There is therefore a clear choice in this bill going into the parliament, the clear choice is along these lines. Either you vote for consumers or you vote for a cosy deal with big oil companies. That's the choice. Why do you think all the big oil companies are opposed to what we are proposing? Over to you Chris and then we'll take your questions.
BOWEN: Thanks Prime Minister. This is an important day for Australian motorists. Australian motorists and consumers often say to me that the balance it tipped against them  -  that they don't feel they have a fair go, that oil companies and petrol stations have all the information and they don't have any and their right. And the ACCC thinks their right, this Government thinks their right. Today we are moving to remedy that situation.
The ACCC's advice to the Government was unanimous from the ACCC commission. It was that we should introduce a national Fuelwatch scheme. I took that advice to Cabinet and argued the case on it's merits and the Cabinet accepted those recommendations. They accepted them because there in the best interests of Australian motorists. The Opposition seems to be arguing that oil companies are against Fuelwatch but it benefits them. I'll leave you to draw your own conclusions as to who is in the motorists corner  -  Oil companies or the ACCC. Australian motorists know the answer to the question and I think it's about time the Opposition woke up to the answer to that question.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying that your own four key economic departments are in the pocket of fuel companies and isn't the problem with the ACCC advice that the only people that, economists at your disposal to give you advice who agree with it are the ACCC and that it's only you and the ACCC that buy this argument?
PM: Well go back to what the gentlemen who commissioned the ACCC report said at the time, that's Peter Costello - this was the most authoritive body within Government to provide advice on this - that was his view as the former treasurer. Secondly if you look at that body within Government which is responsible for providing us with information and advice on competition policy, it's the ACCC. That's the bottom line. I mean they are there for that function. Of course they have an enforcement arm as well and that's why they provided us with the advice. And furthermore on the debate which has been raised by the Opposition about further analysis. We've gone through that today, the further econometric analysis the conclusions are clear cut.
If you were the Government in possession of this clear cut information, one about empowering motorists to give them the same information that big oil companies have and two, do so on the basis of the evidence from Western Australia that there is up to a 2 cent differential in the price between there and the east coast states, then you would proceed on that basis.
JOURNALIST: What was your reaction when you first heard about this latest leak?
PM: Well it's always a challenging day in politics so you sort of rock and roll with the punches, so it's interesting.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd are you confident that it was none of your Cabinet colleagues?
PM: Oh absolutely. I'm absolutely confident, not just the direction in which the Government is proceeding on this but the solidarity within the Government on delivering the best possible outcome for motorists.
On that matter, the secretary of my own department I think has issued a statement in terms of the investigations which will ensue in terms of public service processes.
JOURNALIST: Do you now regret not purging the public service?
PM: Well, the Government took a view before the election that there would be no ‘night of the long knives'. We accept the consequences of that decision. And, we think that it was the right thing to do in order to restore something which resembles the Westminster system in Australia.
Remember this, and this is where it's entirely, I think, interesting to observe the arguments from those opposite. This is the Government who gave us the abuse of public servants through children overboard. This is the Government which failed to even send to the Treasury, for any information or advice, a $10 billion National Water Plan. This is the Government whose use of the public service has been well reflected in the regional rorts program to the cost of hundreds of millions of dollars to the taxpayer. And a Government, when they received contrary advice, in the case of Mick Keelty on the question of Al Qaeda's association with attacks in Spain, simply attacked him publicly by saying that his views represented those of Al Qaeda. That's not our way of doing business. We have a robust debate with the public service.
I understand that there has been some criticism around the edges that some public servants are finding the hours a bit much. Well, I suppose I've simply got news for the public service  -  there'll be more. This Government was elected with a clear cut mandate. We intend to proceed with that. The work ethic of this Government will not decrease, it will increase.
JOURNALIST: Which came first, the (inaudible) advice from the ACCC or the advice from the four departments? And secondly, under your legislation, will retailers be fined for reducing their prices in a 24 hour period?
PM: I'll turn to Chris on both those questions.
BOWEN: Sure. The advice from the central agencies was in response to my initial Cabinet submission. In response to those co-ordinating comments, which were provided to me as the submitting minister at the Expenditure Review Committee, I was accompanied by the Chairman of the ACCC, by Professor Dr Stephen King, and by the Petrol Commissioner Pat Walker. And all those elements were addressed. And, the updated econometric modelling (inaudible) was updated, was briefed on the updated econometric modelling at that point. That is the point in which the econometric modelling was further explained to ERC members.
In relation to the second question, Australian motorists deserve certainty. They deserve to know that when they go past a service station in the morning, and they see a price, that will be the same price when they drive past in the afternoon. The days of driving past a service station in the morning and then coming back at night and seeing the price 15 centre a litre higher should go. They will be able to log onto a website and check the price and then, know when they get there it will be the same price.
Now that requires some certainty. Now, that requires service stations locking in their price. That requires no movements, up or down. And that requires a regime to ensure that's the case. Now there are penalties in the legislation, in the legislation, that will be introduced to the house this afternoon. There are a range of penalties available. And, the ACCC has the capacity to take into account the circumstances involved.
In Western Australia the experience is that there are very, very few instances of petrol stations trying to reduce their price and being fined for it. But there is the capacity for it under the legislation to provide that certainty for motorists.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask, why wasn't FuelWatch part of your election commitments, especially when FuelWatch has been around since, I think, since 2001?
PM: Well, going into the election, we looked at a whole range of questions at how to assist working Australians and working families under financial pressure. We, of course, needed to work our way through all of those proposals on tax, on childcare tax rebate, as well as the education tax refund. But on this one in particular, the discussions we had back then was that it would be very important to reflect properly on the conclusions of the ACCC report. And we've done that. Because it is, as the former Treasurer said, the best agency within Government to provide this sort of advice.
JOURNALIST: You can hardly be filled with confidence, though, when you've got four key departments, including your own department, that not only opposed FuelWatch, but warned it could increase prices?
PM: Yeah, but Daniel, there has never been a time in the history of Government when every Minister in every Cabinet has put forward a position to the Cabinet which is entirely consistent with what their department is saying. And there never will be such a time. The nature of Westminster Government is not like that. And I've said consistently, we will take advice from within Government, and beyond Government. And I've got to say, the ACCC falls within the Treasurer's portfolio. It is a significant agency of state. And, therefore, to assume that what the head of Australia's competition watchdog says is not relevant on price, to assume that a full economic modelling exercise by Australia's competition watchdog is not relevant in this debate, I think we'd be accused of having not acted in receipt of that information and not proceeded in the course of action that we have undertaken.
JOURNALIST: How can you have confidence in your department's advice on other issues if its advice on this matter from the four departments got it so wrong?
PM: Well, can I say, it's a question of making sure you've got a contestable policy debate. I mean, I used to work in the public service myself. The best debates you have with your ministers are those where you have a whole range of views put forward. People in government don't go around and assume that public servants are acting from ignorance or malice. They're using their best information, their best advice, to put a point of view forward. We'll engage with that. And as I said, I think, in my address to the public servants SES offices some time ago, some time ago.....(interruption) .... Is that the SAS or what?
As I said some time ago, we are a party with a political culture, which enjoys the business of policy debate. And that means, you're not going to have a system whereby Ministers are just going to walk in and say, ‘oh well, here is the departmental advice, this is what I'm going to do'  -  we believe in a debate. And we'll make multiple sources of advice, and proceed along those lines.
JOURNALIST: Is Graeme Samuel's reappointment being considered at the moment?
PM: I'm not quite sure of the timeline of that to be quite honest. Chris.
JOURNALIST: Is Graeme Samuel's reappointment being considered at the moment?
BOWEN: The Government is in the position of considering the appointment which is up on the 31st of July.
JOURNALIST: Do you blame the public service for this leak? Are you satisfied that none of your colleagues did it?
PM: All I'd say is that the Secretary of Prime Minister and Cabinet today has issued a statement concerned about the confidentiality of Cabinet documents as I think would occur in the normal circumstances. And I'll leave it to the Secretary of Prime Minister and Cabinet to take whatever action is appropriate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, to take the advice of the ACCC, albeit with a caveat which says that other factors could be at play here, and to ignore the economic advice from your four senior economic portfolios, surely that's a vote of no confidence from you, or from the Cabinet, in the economists working in the bureaucracy for the Government?
PM: Well, if Peter Costello, the former Treasurer, said the ACCC is the best agency in Government to deliver advice on these matters, and Peter Costello was still the Treasurer today having received the advice from that agency, and that agency said - One, this empowers consumers; two, it gives them the same information as big oil companies; and three, on top of that, in the case of West Australia, on average, an up to two cent a litre price variation in the beneficial direction of consumers, it would be irresponsible not to act. So I go back to what the previous Government said at the time it commissioned this agency for this explicit purpose.
JOURNALIST: Do you have confidence in the quality of the economic advice you're receiving from the department -
PM: In response to your question before. When you're in the business of Government you take advice from all Government agencies. You consider that. But we, as a Cabinet, are elected to govern. Public servants are there to advise. And the way in which Westminster works, is that we take the best advice, we have a debate, and we reach a decision.
ACCC advice, as Australia's competition watchdog, and the only agency to have commissioned such extensive econometric analysis of this  -  not just in the first instance, but in the second  -  was the appropriate place to go. And I go to the contrary argument. Were we not to act on this, were we not to act on the information provided, what accusations would then flow in terms of our failure to stand up for the interests of motorists.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'd just say this, that the choice at the end of the day, in this whole debate, is about whether you're going to stand up for motorists or stand up for a cosy deal with big oil companies.
The Labor Government is standing up for motorists and consumer choice. The Liberal Opposition is standing up for a cosy deal, a continuing cosy deal, with big oil companies. Thanks very much.


MITCHELL:Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil.
MITCHELL:Is it correct that under your FuelWatch legislation that, in fact, companies that bring down the price of petrol could be fined for doing it?
PM:   Well, as in Western Australia, there is am enforcement regime which means if the information provided to the FuelWatch scheme is wrong, or if the prices vary during the day, then, of course, that's when the enforcement regime applies. 
MITCHELL:So you'd be fined for bringing the price down? 
PM:And the reason for that is if you have gaming of the system, which means, for example, the possibility of an individual petrol station or a petrol company artificially shifting the price up overnight so that they can be seen to be bringing it down the next day. It actually undermines the whole system.
MITCHELL:So you don't differentiate  -  any reduction in price in that time and you're fined. How much?
PM:Well, the fines regime contains legislation put into the parliament yesterday for individuals go through this. First of all, there are infringement notices, lesser penalties of about $550, up to $2,250 for corporations. And the ACCC then has discretion as to how to handle infringement notices. And beyond that, if there are more systematic abuses, then the ACCC then looks at a more substantial fines regime up to $22,000 for individuals. And that's basically, I think, being modelled on what's been done in WA. And the key thing is, to give motorists choice. To enable them to choose where the cheapest petrol is. So, you've got to therefore have some discipline in the system.
MITCHELL:Can you guarantee prices will be lower under FuelWatch?
PM:I couldn't provide any guarantee on the future of petrol prices, Neil. I said this before the election, I'll say it since the election. That's irresponsible. Because you've got a whole lot of factors impacting the overall cost of petrol.
What we've always said  -  this just gives motorists more choice. Because if you're in metro Melbourne, for example, you can have, on any given day, the prices varying between 15 and 20 cents across stations. And we think that individual motorists should have that information and be able to make their choice about where to go and get the cheapest petrol.
MITCHELL:Well, yeah, but it's possible to look at the world price, to look at the refining margin and everything else, and say that ‘this is what petrol should be'. And you can't escape that. It should be a certain level. The point is, that there is profiteering that goes on, isn't there?
PM:Well, if you look at what the ACCC said, the competition watchdog, they've been pretty clear cut on this.
If I looked at what Mr Samuel from the ACCC has had to say about this, he describes the oil industry in Australia as representing, quote, ‘a comfortable oligopoly', and, then he goes on elsewhere, I think only yesterday, to say that that's its close to collusion, its close to tacit coordination as you could ever get. So what we are trying to do is try and give more power to the consumers and motorists.
MITCHELL:Okay. My point is, you can assess what the price should be with all those factors - the refining margin, the international price, and everything. And, you can say, on that basis, whether FuelWatch is working. Would you not reassess this in that way as it runs?
PM:Well, what we said when we put out the FuelWatch policy itself, as a decision of the Cabinet in the middle of April, at the 12 month point it would be reviewed. We've always said that. Remember, the data which is put together on which this scheme was based in Western Australia was examined over a seven year period and that's the collection of data which enabled the competition watchdog to conclude that, overall, in WA, it represented something like a price difference between Perth and the eastern states of up to 1.9 cents a litre.
As I've always said, this is simply to help at the margins because the overall impact from global oil prices is so huge.
MITCHELL:So is that the best case scenario, perhaps 1.9 cents a litre?
PM:  We've always said that, Neil. This is competition policy at the margins. But on top of that, to give consumers choice. As I said, one of the things that we've been taken by, and I think Graeme Samuel from the ACCC has said the same, is, motorists get really angry when they see such huge price variations across the city and within the one day. What we want to make sure is that when they go home at night, they can go to FuelWatch, find out where the best petrol price is for the next day, and go and get it, if that's what they want to do.
MITCHELL:But Prime Minister, your own regulation impact statement says that this could increase prices in the bush, it could confuse consumers, and could cut competition. Do you agree with that?
PM:On the question of impact in the bush, that's why we've put out the statement on the policy back on the 15th of April. The Assistant Treasurer and myself, were very clear cut. In rural and regional Australia, where you have less petrol outlets, they have an opportunity to opt into the FuelWatch scheme if they want to through their own local authorities. Or, remain outside the scheme.
FuelWatch works best when you've got lots of petrol outlets. That's what we said from the very first day. And we stick by that.
MITCHELL:So, will it increase prices in the country?
PM:Well, I've said before, Neil, that I won't provide any future guarantees on the price of oil. We've got  - 
MITCHELL:No, no, no, outside of the price of oil. Assuming the price of oil stayed static, would this increase prices in the country?
PM:  Well, what I'm saying to you Neil is what I said prior to the election. I won't provide any future guarantees on the price of petrol, the price of oil. This is competition policy which helps at the margins. We got whacked for not providing such a guarantee before the election.
MITCHELL:But I'm not asking for a guarantee. I'm asking for an assessment. Could this increase prices in the bush?
PM:No, on the question of prices in the bush, as I said, on FuelWatch, it is a matter entirely for local government authorities in the bush to opt into the system if they want to, because we recognise that they don't have as many petrol outlets. Therefore, the opportunity for greater competition out there is less. That's why we're not imposing it on them.
MITCHELL:Will it cut competition as your regulation impact statement says?
PM:When it comes to competition, what the interesting thing is about WA, and this is the only experience we've got to go on, is what happens when the Liberal Government in Western Australia introduced this, I think, in 2000-2001, through until 2007, and when the competition watchdog, the ACCC, looked at that over time and took submissions from the WA Government, they found that the proportion of independent petrol stations in the overall number of petrol stations in Perth represented some increase.
You know one of the reasons for that? If you've got FuelWatch operating, local newspapers, for example, hop into it, get the data, and they put the information out there which often advantages some of the small players through free publicity about where you get a good price.
MITCHELL:But it's reported today that the number of independents in Western Australia has dropped from 200 to 17  - 
PM: I think  -  
MITCHELL:If FuelWatch came in in 2001, the number of independent retailers has dropped from 200 to 17.
PM:Well, the submission that I have on the actual number of independent operators in WA, is along these lines. In the submission to the ACCC via the WA Government, they said that the overall proportion  -  well, the absolute number of independent, branded independent and independent chains decreased. The proportion of sites operated overall by independent operators increased slightly.
Secondly  - 
MITCHELL:When was that from?
PM:This is since 2001, and it's a submission to the ACCC inquiry that was obviously held in the last six months of last year. And on top of that, here is a statement from the Western Australian Department of Consumer Employment and Protection, which says, that the proportion of sites owned by independent operators and supermarkets has increased. Now, I'm just simply basing it on them.
And then you go to Michael Delaney, the Chief Executive of the Motor Trades Association, who has said that, ‘we took the view that it would assist motorists and our member's capacity to sell fuel'.
MITCHELL:Why is it that you accept the ACCC's argument. Why do you accept them ahead of the four major departments who have been critical of it? Why does the ACCC outweigh them? 
PM:Well, the first thing to say is that when this report was first commissioned by the previous Treasurer, Mr Costello, he was very clear about why this agency was selected, that's the competition watchdog, and I'll quote him from last year.
MITCHELL: You're going to use Peter Costello as your reference?
PM:Well  - 
MITCHELL:You've been telling us for years he's a dill and now you're using him as a supporting argument.
PM:Neil, there's no news here, I said this exactly in the parliament here to Mr Nelson. Because they are saying why would you bother to rely upon the ACCC. Well, here is what Mr Costello said when he launched this inquiry. He said, quote, the ACCC is an independent regulator that has more expertise in the area of access and pricing than any other federal government instrumentality or agency and that is why it is very important that it is engaged in all these pricing issues, unquote. He said that in Melbourne, by the way. 
MITCHELL:And the ACCC outweighs your four such major departments?
PM:Let me give you the reason why it is the central piece of advice on this  -  because they alone have done the econometric modelling. Not just at one stage, but, they went back and re-examined their assumptions as well. They actually crunched the numbers on this. They came up with the conclusion that, overall, based on the WA experience, that you could yield an outcome for motorists which was in the vicinity of up to two cents a litre better than would otherwise be the case.
That's their analysis. We, therefore, have taken that as the basis as why we will proceed with the FuelWatch legislation. And Mr Nelson's got a very clear choice. He can either kill it, in the vote in the Australian Parliament next week, and side with the big oil companies, all of which are opposed to FuelWatch. Or, he can back the Labor Government's attitude, which is that we should stick up for motorists and consumer choice.
MITCHELL:Or, perhaps Mr Nelson, Dr Nelson, could also be siding with four major departments of yours?
PM:Well, I go back to the question of, first of all, which agency within the Government has the expertise on the question of pricing. The former Liberal Treasurer, Mr Costello, said repeatedly that this was the right place to go to get this advice done. Secondly, they crunched the numbers. That is, they went to detailed econometric modelling. And you know something Neil, if we found ourselves today, let's just imagine we were having this interview and we decided not to proceed having got this report from the ACCC on FuelWatch. There'd be a hullabaloo out there in the community about why we were ignoring FuelWatch given the fact that a 300 page report was produced at great expense based on detailed economic modelling saying it would give motorists two cents a litre better then otherwise would be the case.
MITCHELL:But you must see that it's a little unusual, having spent so long telling us Peter Costello was inept, that you're now using  him as the very argument of what you're doing. 
PM:On the question of the use of Government agency advice, that is, which agency actually has one, the greatest expertise on pricing questions and two, the fact that they are more competent than other sources of information on this, because they do the economic modelling  -  that's just an objective statement. And you know something, Neil, I said it in parliament yesterday, I said it the day before, and I said it the day before. Dr Nelson can't have it both ways. Remember, he was a member of Mr Costello's Cabinet when Mr Costello made these statements  -  
MITCHELL:Ah, well we know there is disagreement in Cabinet, Mr Rudd, don't we. Like your own. 
PM:Well, when it comes to our Cabinet, as I said before, this debate last week really got going in ernest. I've always said this is a controversial decision. And I said earlier this week that there were conflicting views both within the Government and beyond the Government. Because it's controversial. And you know something, Neil, the best thing to do is to have an argument, have a debate, have a discussion  -  
MITCHELL:Yeah, I agree. 
PM:And sort it all through. The idea that you simply elect members of a Government, Prime Minister and Ministers to simply be yes men for any individual government department, I think is ridiculous. 
MITCHELL:So are you happy to have any contrary views from your Cabinet Ministers expressed publicly? Or do you want Cabinet solidarity? 
PM:Well Cabinet solidarity is what the Westminster system is based on. 
MITCHELL:Well I thought you wanted debate, I mean Martin Ferguson clearly disagrees with you and he has been pulled into line, who else disagrees with, who else in Cabinet thinks FuelWatch is a bad idea? 
PM:You know something Neil, when you have board running a private company, presumably - 
MITCHELL:But you are encouraging debate Mr Rudd, you said it is a good thing. How many people in Cabinet disagree with FuelWatch? 
PM:Neil, you know something, when you have a debate, you have it at multiple levels. One is a big public debate like we are having at the present, about what is good, what is bad, what evidence is available. Then secondly, you have one within the, basically the Government equivalent of a board of a major public company, called the Cabinet. 
And that like the board of the company which 3AW is part, is held in confidence. And you have that and then you reach a decision. And you know something  - 
MITCHELL:3AW is not running the country, much as we would like to at times. 
PM:Well you are probably a public company mate. 
MITCHELL:Fairfax, it's called. It is a public company. 
PM:And when the board meets, I imagine they have a sense that the confidentiality of board papers is a reasonable way in which to go. 
MITCHELL:Well that has been breached well and truly. Well will you tell me, in general terms, is Cabinet unanimous in it's support of FuelWatch? 
PM:Yes they are  -  
MITCHELL:Even Martin Ferguson? 
PM:We had the debate, we the discussion, we reached the conclusion. Martin has confirmed that. You see, what happens in a Cabinet discussion is not just on this. We have had a whole range of debates in the last six months whereby Ministers put different views. And we sit down and we sort it through. But the contrast is this, remember a few years ago when Mick Keelty the Police Commissioner put his hand up and said he though Al Qaeda might have had something to do with the bombing of that train in Madrid. What did the previous Government do? 
MITCHELL:They pounced on him. 
PM:They publicly slammed him and said he was reflecting the views of Al Qaeda. That is not our approach. We have just a completely different view. 
MITCHELL: Robert, go ahead please Robert. 
ROBERT: Oh, Mr Prime Minister.
PM:Hi Robert, how are you? 
ROBERT: Good morning. I am very interested in listening to your program because I am, actually own and operate six retail service stations as an independent in the Geelong region and  - 
PM:Where abouts mate, I didn't hear. 
MITCHELL:Geelong. 
ROBERT: In the Geelong region and I firmly believe that your plan with this price watch is actually price fixing, because you are not enabling us to compete. Because I cant bring my price down freely. And I have got to notify 24 hours if I am going up and I have got to notify 24 hours if I am going down.
Now I think that is commercial nonsense. And that is price fixing. And it is against competition policy for you to legislate such things. You may as well fix the price of petrol at a certain level and let it float up and down with the international price.
I mean do you want competition or do you want price fixing? And I think you are into price fixing Mr Rudd.
MITCHELL:Prime Minister.
PM:The second is, we have had a long discussion with the competition watchdog on this and they believe that this actually is the best overall for the consumer and that is why we have gone in this direction.
And on the question of the fluctuation in price. I think what many motorists would say is, we understand that prices are going to go up and down across the normal cycle but why should they vary so wildly within a given day and what is wrong with saying to motorists the night before, hey, tomorrow this is what we are going to have as our price at our petrol station and 24 hours later it may change.
But why should it go up a dozen times in the one day. That's what motorists are saying to us.
MITCHELL:Were you quoting the Motor Trades Association in Western Australia?
PM:No, no, no. Michael Delaney, Chief Executive of the Motor Trades Association.
MITCHELL: Yeah well there is another one there that doesn't agree with that. (inaudible) Motor Trades Association Western Australia says that it has in fact kept prices up. 
PM: Well as I said before Neil and at the time when we launched this policy in the middle of April, it is controversial. People have different views. And you know something - we are talking about something which at best helps at the margins here. 
MITCHELL: That's the worry. I mean all this energy is going into it - it's really not going to help much is it? 
PM: Well remember, I have said in parliament yesterday and through the week. This is, first of all, it is a global problem. Secondly, it requires a long term solution which deals with supply, demand, deals with alternative fuels, public transport, fuel efficient cars, and what you can do to help the family budget, given that petrol prices and grocery prices are going up. 
And then finally, how you actually assist with competition policy as well. And we have always said, right from when we launched this, this is a modest measure, aimed to put more power in the hands of motorists. And I go back to my point, Dr Nelson has exactly the same view here as most of the major oil companies who are opposed to the scheme.
MITCHELL:Prime Minister you say it is a modest measure. The petrol commissioner was the keeper of your policy before the election. I can do something about petrol prices, will appoint a petrol commissioner. This is what he is going to do and it is modest. Surely you have failed in what you said you could deliver? 
PM:Well prior to the election, let me be very clear about the undertakings that we gave. We got attacked on many occasions for refusing to give a guarantee about the impact of the measures we were proposing on petrol prices. 
MITCHELL:That's true, but you said the Petrol Commissioner was the answer. And the Petrol Commissioner now is going to deliver this which you said is just the margins. 
PM:Well we got asked questions like, can you guarantee if you win Government petrol prices will fall. Answer, no we can't provide that guarantee at all. Mr Costello slammed us for saying that last year. 
MITCHELL:Oh he is a dill again is he? 
PM:No, I am just saying we got slammed for it, we got slammed for it last year. And I have just been very blunt about what we said last year. What we always said last year is that what we are going to try and do in this area, that is, improving competition policy within the petrol industry, was to put more power in the hands on consumers. 
And again I reckon it is really important to say, just to paraphrase what Graeme Samuels from the competition watchdog said yesterday, he said that fuel companies have it all over us. They have a very sophisticated price sharing system run by a company called ‘Informed Sources' where they know the price that every one of their competitors is charging at every service station in the metropolitan areas of Australia at any point in time through the day. And that is as close to collusion as you get. What he is trying to do is to give more power into the hands of consumers and that is what we are trying to do.
MITCHELL:We'll take a break, quick break, more from the Prime Minister. 
....
MITCHELL:I'll try to be quick, you haven't got long left. The Prime Minister is on the line. Mr Rudd, do you still trust the public service? 
PM: We have a great relationship with the public service. 
MITCHELL:But can you trust them after the leak? 
PM:Well the Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department who has responsibility for this has commenced the usual review processes as would occur in these circumstances to see what that throws up. 
MITCHELL:But do you trust them? 
PM:We have a great relationship with the public service.  In all the public servants that I am dealing with personally, we have complete trust in the advice which they provide, that is that it is provided in the best spirit on the best basis that they have available to them. Whether we accept that advise is entirely a separate matter. 
MITCHELL:Of course, but do you trust them not to leak? 
PM:Well we trust all those public servants that we are dealing with. And we don't know the  -  
MITCHELL:Somebody has leaked. 
PM:I think that is probably indisputable. 
MITCHELL:Well Laurie Oakes said it wasn't a minister which must have relieved you something. You, how can you trust, if the highest levels of public service have leaked?
PM:Well as I said the other day, when I gave a briefing to (inaudible) new cabinet, when we are talking about cabinet documents guys, we don't mean those documents you leave on the counter. 
MITCHELL:How can you trust them? 
PM: Well obviously there is a problem in the system somewhere. The Prime Minister's Department has got a responsibility for looking at that. But when I talk to my Ministerial colleagues about their relationship with their departments, they say that they are in really good working order and in my own case, the chief executives I deal with are a fantastic team of public servants to deal with. And I support their professionalism. But you know, you are dealing with tens of thousands of public servants here. 
MITCHELL:Are you telling me tens of thousands of public servants saw these documents? 
PM:No of course not. 
MITCHELL:How many saw them? 
PM:Neil, that's why the  -  
MITCHELL:You must have an idea, was it 100, was it 20, what was it  -  
PM:Neil, I actually don't run the public service. That is the Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department. And in terms of the distribution of these documents or associated documents, that is a matter for him, that is something I don't get in engaged in. 
MITCHELL:Do you want to see criminal charges out of this. 
PM:What we would like to establish is what has transpired here. Again it would go to the analogy I used before. I mean, if there is a Fairfax board meeting and suddenly all the board documents go tipping out. I imagine that Fairfax would want to know what happened there.  And ours is much the same, because if there are problems in the security of the system then we have simply got to fix that. Because if it has occurred on this, does it occur on a national security matter in the future - you have got to just make sure your system is as water tight as it can be. 
MITCHELL: We'll take a very quick call, Shirley, go ahead. 
SHIRLEY:Thank you. Good morning Mr Rudd.
PM: Good day Shirley how are you? 
SHIRLEY: Oh I am very tired Mr Rudd. People have been bombarding me with phone calls etcetera, in response to my emails  - 
MITCHELL: Sorry this is Shirley Grant who led the protest on the steps of the Flinders Street Station for pensioners. 
PM:G'day Shirley. 
MITCHELL:Shirley what was your question? 
SHIRLEY: I would just like Mr Rudd to, if he could, to arrange a meeting with myself and Senator Steve Fielding who in turn sent a letter to Mr Rudd last Wednesday requesting a meeting on my behalf. Now something has got to be done.
MITCHELL:On the matter of pensioners. Mr Rudd. 
PM:Good Shirley. Thanks for that. Unaware of the letter yet. I see Steve from time to time. Can I just sort something out with him. I am unaware of the letter. On the question of pensioners and carers. We have heard your message loud and clear. We need to continue to work our way through this. I know that it is very difficult, but in terms of the letter from Steve, I will now go and have a look for it and we will get back you. 
MITCHELL:Thanks Shirley, Prime Minister do you support Qantas in their handling of their industrial dispute? 
PM:Not across the details is the honest answer to that Steve, sorry, Neil. I have been focussing on other things during the course of the week. I have seen some initial reports on it but I would rather get across the detail before saying who is right and who is wrong. 
MITCHELL:Would you suggest this has been your worst week as Prime Minister? 
PM:Oh it has been tough Neil but you know in politics, you take a whacking one week, it gets a bit better the next. You take a whacking the following week, it has been that way since I have been leader of the Labor Party. It is just normal. 
MITCHELL: Are you a bit rattled? 
PM: No. The key thing is just to get on with the job. 
MITCHELL: What did you say when they told you that four, that the advice from four departments had leaked to Laurie Oakes? 
PM: These things happen. You just shrug your shoulders and say, ‘well that is an interesting day in politics'. 
MITCHELL:These things happen. Not one little profanity? 
PM:No it is just one of those things. You know, you get elected to do a job, and our job is to do what you can to help families with their budgets and a few practical things like that. 
MITCHELL:Prime Minister, in Sydney. 


PM: Well, it's good to be back in Queensland and good to be back home here in Brissie for a couple of days in my case, and Wayne I think you're here for the weekend. So, it's also good to be here to receive the honour which we have of being made patron and vice patron of the Former Origin Greats.
This is a great community organisation which goes out there and does community and charitable work, and also supports junior rugby league development across the state as well. This is a good contribution which they've been making for some time. And Wayne and I, as good patriotic Queenslanders, are more than happy, more than happy to take on these new roles.
The other thing I'd like to talk about today is an important agreement reached today in Melbourne between the Federal Families Minister, Jenny Macklin, and her State and Territory counterparts. This goes to an important agreement in the area of disability funding. And, as a result of this agreement, the Commonwealth is confirming today that the Commonwealth allocation of funding to the Commonwealth, State and Territory Disability Agreement will increase from $2.86 billion to $3.86 billion. This represents a 35 per cent increase in the Australian Government's funding for disabilities. This extends, of course over the next four years.
When you put together the Australian Government's contribution with that of the States and Territories, we're looking at a much larger figure overall. That is, that the total funding between the Commonwealth and the States in this area will increase from $10.2 billion to $12.1 billion. This represents an 18 per cent increase on the total Government investment since the last agreement between the Commonwealth and the States. Putting all those dollars into numbers of places, let's put it in these terms. What we've reached cooperatively between the Commonwealth and the States today is an arrangement which provides funding for an additional 24,500 places. That's respite places, that's in home support and supported accommodation places for people with disabilities.
This is an important agreement which has been reached between Canberra and the States, between the Australian Government and the Government's of the States and Territories. This agreement builds on the $100 million allocation which I announced prior to the Budget. That was for supported accommodation and respite facilities, very expensive to provide - but important, particularly for young people who have disabilities, who are cared for by older carers. And as older carers become increasingly concerned about their ability to physically provide care, and where, therefore, their children as they become older themselves with disabilities, where they'll be looked after, it's these sort of places which we provided that funding for.
That was prior to the Budget. What you've got now agreed between Canberra and the States is a new agreement over the next four years which provides the amount of money that I described before. 24,500 places, additional places, for respite, in home support, and support for accommodation places.
This is an important contribution to an area of great need. And that is, those suffering from disabilities and those caring for those with disabilities.
The other thing I'd say to the above is we've reached this agreement cooperatively between Canberra and the States. In the past, the Australian Government was heading off in one direction, and its disabilities programs, and the States and Territories in a completely different direction. These were not coordinated in terms of the funding effort. What we now have is a coordinated effort which we believe will also reduce duplication and overlap between the Australian Government and that of the States and Territories which means more dollars spent on the actual support given to people with disabilities.
And the final thing to say is that the final Commonwealth State and Territory Disabilities Agreement will be negotiated at years end. And therefore, we still hold open the possibility that we will do more in this area as well. But today's agreement has been important because it releases funding now to provide for these additional 24,500 places. Very important for those suffering with disabilities. Very important for those caring for those with disabilities.
JOURNALIST: Where are these places?
PM:These will be distributed nationally and, as I said in those three categories, respite care, supported accommodation, as well as in home support. And the distribution will occur by the normal means across the States and Territories.
JOURNALIST: So will that mean whole new centres being built?
PM: Well, in the case of some of the supportive accommodation, typically what happens, particularly with children whose parents are no longer able to care for them, is that you have supported accommodation often involving six or eight people with a residential carer within that facility, providing a secure, safe environment for those people to be cared for into the future.
This is a real psychological burden, carried by older carers as they look at their children whom they have given their lives to, often over many decades, but no longer feel that they can physically provide for that care themselves. Or, who worry, legitimately about who will care for those people, those younger people, once the carers themselves pass on.
JOURNALIST: On petrol, do you stand by the ACCC analysis (inaudible)
PM:   Well, the competition watchdog has done the economic modelling on this. And the economic modelling has produced the findings that in Western Australia over a seven year period it resulted in a price per litre of up to 1.9 cents less. Therefore, if you're in receipt of that information as the Government, and if you're in receipt of the information from Australia's competition watchdog which says it also gives motorists choice and consumer power by knowing in a given 24 hour period where the cheapest petrol can be bought in your metro area, so that you can go there and buy that petrol, these are the reasons why we've moved in the direction of FuelWatch.
Because, right now, it's not a level playing field. You've got big oil companies over here with all the pricing information available to them but no such information being made available to motorists and consumers. We are unapologetically tipping the scales in the direction of motorists and consumers because we think they should be able to take advantage of that price information. If in the metro area you've got, for example, variations of 10, 15, 20 cents per litre, not only within the given day but across petrol stations themselves, surely consumers should have that information, not just the big oil companies.
We stand up for consumers, the Liberal Party is standing up for the big oil companies. And it is no surprise that most of the major oil companies, like the Liberal Party, are opposed to FuelWatch.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: So, Australia's competition watchdog - which the former Treasurer Mr Costello, said was the best institution in the Government to examine pricing matters - produces economic modelling, examines the data over a seven year period in Western Australia and comes up with that conclusion that, on average petrol there, being up to 1.9 cents a litre cheaper than in the eastern states. What this outfit is saying is that's all wrong.
Can I say, you've got two clear options here. Major oil companies, and those who support them like the Liberal Party, saying that all the pricing information should be in the hands of the major oil companies. We say, all that information should be in the hands of consumers. And the way you do that is through FuelWatch.  
Dr Nelson has a simple choice here. He can either back a cosy arrangement between the major oil companies, or, back the interests of motorists and consumers who are struggling to balance the family budget. The Labor Government stands behind motorists and consumers, the Liberal Opposition is standing behind the major oil companies.
Dr Nelson has a clear choice next week in parliament. He can kill FuelWatch, he can kill it stone dead if he votes against it. That's his option. He can kill it stone dead. That's his option.
I would appeal to him by saying that you have a clear choice here between motorists on the one hand and a cosy arrangement between the major oil companies on the other. And can I quote Graham Samuel the head of the competition watchdog, who said that this arrangement among the major oil companies is about as close to collusion as you can get, and described these arrangements as a cosy comfortable oligopoly.
That's the arrangement which Dr Nelson and the Liberal party is supporting. That's the arrangement which the Labor Government is opposing because we are prepared to stand up for Australian motorist and consumers. Because they are suffering from high petrol prices and we want to give them every bit of help, even if it's at the margins so that they can make those choices everyday.
JOURNALIST: You said before it is half time - you've probably lost first half with the last week that you've had? It has not been easy.
PM:  Well it's as you know, you take a whacking from time to time. I imagine also that we'll take a whacking in next weeks opinion polls but you know something, politics is like that. Sometimes you get whacked, sometimes you don't. They key thing is get on with the job and to get on with the job of implementing our undertakings to the Australian people. Responsible economic management, helping families and individuals under financial pressure as we've done through the budget which Wayne's just brought down and investing in the future in hospitals, in education and in infrastructure, including roads.
JOURNALIST: So you have taken a bit of a bruising?
PM: We've taken a bit of a whacking, but that's what politics is like. It's never smooth sailing. The key thing is to stick to your guns and to say this is what we're elected to do. Get on with the business of responsible economic management, get on with the business of helping families under financial pressure and get on with the business of investing in the future and on helping families under financial pressure  -  let me just add this. Take an average family where you've got a full time worker $60,000 a year, a part time worker $25-$27,000 a year. You've got a couple of kids, one at preschool, one at primary school. If you put together what we've done on tax, on the childcare tax rebate increase from 30 per cent to 50 per cent and the education tax refund. Our calculation is that that family will be receiving an additional $52 a week, that's one thing.
Compare that to what's been put on the table as the alternative, which is a proposal from Dr Nelson and the Liberal party. Which says that you've got 5 cents excise, lets just say you're consuming 50 litres of fuel a week - $2.50 a week. We're offering through the tax cuts, the childcare tax rebate and the education tax refund which Wayne has put forward through the budget, $52 a week. Mr Nelson is putting forward $2.50 a week. I'll let people make up their own mind about what helps at the end of the day to meet some of these huge additional pressures on the family budget.
JOURNALIST: You are talking about getting on with the job. Does that also relate to the public servants and have you (inaudible).  
PM:Look we have a lot of respect for the Australian public service. We work with them everyday. They are good partners in the business of Government, we respect their professionalism and we respect the traditions that they bring to bear. We respect also their work ethic and we've formed a strong working relationship with the heads of our agencies and with our own departments.
But you know something when it comes to this Government's commitment to hard work and a strong work ethic, when it comes to the future it's going to get more intense, not less intense. So let's just understand that we've got a first class public service, they are very professional. But it will become more intense, not less intense, when we look at the future challenges which Government has to implement what the Australian people voted for us to do, and to meet the big challenges of the future. All of which require us to be burning the midnight oil.
JOURNALIST: Does this mean (inaudible)
PM:  Well we are going to be talking about that soon. We'll sit down and have a bit of a yak about what's possible. The Charitable sector and community sector in this country does a fantastic job. One of the things we are currently doing through the Government, through Parliamentary Secretary Ursula Stephens is looking at how effectively Government can partner with the community and charitable sector into the future because so many of these organisations do a fantastic job on the ground. But without adequate or sufficient support from Government. We are working our way through that  -  FOGS obviously is a candidate.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look I used to be a public servant myself. People make career choices the whole time. I repeat what I said before, we have a first class Australian public service. They are dedicated, professional, they work really hard  -  but we're a Government that's elected to Govern. We are a Government that's elected to work hard and work hard for the people who put us there. And therefore we'll be continuing to burn the midnight oil and I don't think there will be any slackening on that front.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:  Well there's nothing particularly unusual about that, I mean I think we've been copping some incomings on that since the day we were elected.
SWAN: We have
PM: But you are either committed to implementing the program we took to the Australian people. Honouring your commitments to the Australian community and getting on with it and that means particularly in the early stages of a new Government that you are going to have a lot of work to do. Take in the case of Wayne  -  bedding down a budget in the matter of three months. Normally Governments start the budget preparation process you know sometime around October, November the previous year. We were elected in November, sworn in, in December then sitting down to begin the budget process late January  -  early February. Very difficult, very demanding but the first class contribution by our public servants, from Treasury, from PM&amp;C, from Finance and the line agencies all to be supported, great public servants. But you know something the work ethic of this Government will be increasing not decreasing.
SWAN: And you know why it's so intense, because we're doing what we said we'd do. And we are implementing the commitments we took to the Australian people and that has involved a lot of work in a short period of time. And we've been able to do that because of the dedication of the public service, as well as the dedication of the Government.
PM: The Government has a big policy agenda. On responsible economic management, producing a budget surplus of $22 billion, implementing the tax changes, implementing education tax refund, implementing the childcare tax rebate, introducing for the first time big new housing affordability measures. At the same time as working on climate change and water, bringing about the first national agreement between the Commonwealth and the States for a single body to manage the Murray Darling. On top of that many other challenges as well in the international agenda.
We have hit the ground running, working very hard. Obviously there is going to be some complaint about that I understand, but we will not be slackening our work ethic, it will heading in the other direction.
JOURNALIST: Is it fair to expect more from the public service (inaudible)
PM: Well I say the first demand on Government lies with those of us who are Ministers and we must lead in this area. We must put our own shoulder to the wheel. Of course you make sure that your departmental arrangements are as flexible as possible so that people can live reasonable lives. But the first responsibility we have as Government is for those millions of Australians right outside the public service. Million of Australians doing it tough right across the country, millions of Australians trying to make ends meet each week for the family budget and our responsibility as the Government is to work night and day to try and make things better for them.
For the future, education, health, hospitals and infrastructure and in the here and now for the sorts of family and individual support packages that we've introduced through this budget and we're already very late for what we've now got to go and do. See you folks                 


CURTIS: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Morning Lyndall.
CURTIS: In response to the leak, you warned the public service yesterday that the work load will only increase. But public servants are saying they are not afraid of hard work, what they are frustrated with is that they are being called in at all hours to give advice which is then ignored and that your office is chaotic. Is there a case to work smarter, not harder?
PM: Well the first thing I would say about the public service is that we have been exceptionally well serviced in the six months that we have been in government through the advice that we have been receiving across a whole range of policy areas.
That is the right way to go. We believe in policy contestability, which means having a debate. That's the right way to do it. Secondly in terms of the pace of activity, it follows as night follows day, that if a government is elected with a mandate to govern with a new program, it is going to be very intense, very intense once that Government takes office. And it has been.
In terms of the specific criticism that you have just made, they have not been made to me. And so I would simply say that our processes of working directly with public service agencies has been good. Whether it is on climate change, whether it is on health and hospitals, whether it is on the future of the education system or the overall task of responsible economic management through the budget process.
In fact, what public servants have said to us is that the preparation of the Budget for example has been much more deliberative, consolidated, and inclusive of agencies and the relevant senior ministers than what they have experience in recent years, under our predecessors.
CURTIS: In a speech you gave to the Sydney Institute last July you talked about the importance of work life balance. Doesn't your message to the public service though, that the work load will only increase, conflict with that message of how important work life balance is?
PM: Well as I have said before, public servants are very much an important part of the overall fabric of public administration, but we are in a uniquely privileged position. We are elected to govern as a government and the public service are there to support the Government.
There are literally millions of Australians out there, working families, working Australians and those doing it tough, who are depending on the Government to work hard, work very hard to implement the program.
If we are going to have a government committed to responsible economic management, a government which honours it's pre-election commitments, in terms of tax, childcare reform and the rest, as well as a Government committed to investing in the long term future, through our funds for infrastructure, education and health and hospitals, then frankly the pace is going to be very tough.
I understand that. It's is tough, it's is hard. But I believe that the Australian community at large expect all of us to work really hard. And the public service, I have got to say, have been responding very well to that.
CURTIS: On FuelWatch, you have said giving a guarantee petrol prices wouldn't rise as a result of FuelWatch would be irresponsible, but after the advice you received from the ACCC, can you say with confidence or reasonable confidence that FuelWatch wont lead to higher prices?
PM: What I am very conscious of is the fact that my predecessor, Mr Howard went out there and made irresponsible promises to the Australian community when he said that interest rates would be kept at record lows. When you are looking at the future of petrol prices, let's just recognise one fact: this is a global phenomenon.
Every government around the world including most politicians from around the world that I have spoken to in recent times, is going through the same set of challenges that we are.
Therefore, what they are embracing is we are seeking to embrace here, is a series of long term responses which deal with supply factors, demand factors, alternative fuels, fuel efficient cars, public transport, and also specific ways to help the family budget.
None of these represents a single solution in itself, but that is the way in which we intend to proceed and competition power for motorists, is just one part, one part, of this overall equation.
CURTIS: But surely you are confident that the scheme will provide a net benefit to motorists?
PM: Well we are very mindful of the advice which was contained in the ACCC report. The ACCC report, including most significant, the further part of the econometric modelling which was produced by the competition watchdog yesterday, says and I quote, “the purpose of this econometric analysis has been to satisfy the ACCC that the introduction of FuelWatch scheme nationally would not, based on the experience of WA, lead to consumers paying higher prices for petrol. From the econometric analysis on a conservative basis, the ACCC can say that there is no evidence that FuelWatch led to any increase in prices and it appears to have resulted in a small price decrease overall.”
That's what the competition watchdog has said. It has been the agency charged with the previous treasurer, Peter Costello, to do this work. It has spent many, six months doing it, at great expense. It did economic modelling to produce that conclusion. That was the advice upon which the Government acted. But as of itself, this competition policy measure doesn't add up to the, you know, the total response to the challenges of fuel.
But I have got to say, our position is clear. We as a government will side with consumers and motorists and consumer power. The Liberals are siding with a cosy relationship with big oil.
And it is not irrelevant that all the big oil companies or most of the major oil companies are lined up in support to the Liberal party's opposition to this.
CURTIS: There has been a lot of argument and a lot of work on a scheme that will save people between 50 cents and $3 on a tank of petrol. These savings will be obliterated if petrol is included in an emissions trading scheme wont they and prices rise by up to 17 cents a litre?
PM: Well the first point to make about that is the Liberal Party, through Mr Turnbull, committed themselves to including this transport sector into their emissions trading scheme last year, in his statement in the middle of last year.
The second is, we are currently working our way through what will be included and excluded from our own emissions trading regime and we will have something further to say on that later in the year once the Garnaut report, in it's various stages is released.
But you know, overall, let's just be realistic about it. If you are looking at the global price of oil, this has gone up some 400 per cent, I am advised, since the Iraq war. Then you look at the huge push factors which are coming out of demand from China and India.
You are looking at the big challenges of alternative fuels and fuel efficient cars and public transport. We have to achieve advances in each of these areas as well as helping families and individuals under financial pressure right now, through for example, the tax changes and other family budget changes which have been introduced as part of the Budget a couple of weeks ago.
CURTIS: You have talked there about the global pressures on oil and also about easing pressure on the family budget. Have you overplayed expectations, did you do that through the election campaign, offering relief for people in areas like groceries and fuel which you largely cant deliver because the factors are outside your control?
PM: Well let me very clear about this. We were challenged, myself and the Treasurer last year, prior to the election explicitly. In fact I think on this program, about whether we could guarantee any reduction in the price of petrol. And we said quite explicitly, no.
Chris Uhlmann on your program last year, August last year, said this to me, “could you guarantee that will lower the cost of any grocery item or any supermarket shelf anywhere by $1?”
And my response to that was: “I couldn't guarantee that for the reason being, that what I have said is that we need to have a robust competition policy watchdog on the beat. We have said that both in case of petrol and groceries, these two huge drivers of difficulty within the household budget.”
Then I went on to say: “I believe in promising what is deliverable.”
Mr Swan was asked by Laurie Oakes, ‘can you guarantee if you win government, petrol prices will fall'?
Mr Swan said; “No I can't guarantee that”. Then Mr Costello attacked us last year for failing to make any such undertaking. Sc the Liberal Party are now seeking to say that we made promises we didn't make. What we have always said is that what we are trying to do through FuelWatch, establishing a petrol price commissioner and other enhancements to the competition watchdog, that we would try and put more power into the hands of consumers.
And I could just say this, that when it comes to consumers. We will always side with motorists and consumers against a cosy relationship with big oil companies. And I make the point again. Why is it the major oil companies are all siding with the Liberal party in their opposition to FuelWatch?
CURTIS: Prime Minister are you surprised at how quickly the wheels came off for the Government this week and is your honeymoon at an end?
PM: You know something in politics you are always going to take a whacking in one week or another. And frankly in the period that I have been leader of the Labor Party which goes back some 18 months now, you have times when you are going to get whacked. And they will come and they will go.
The key thing is simply to continue to prosecute the agenda which we were elected to do. And what's that? That is making sure that we deliver responsible economic management, $22 billion surplus at a time when we don't want to put further pressure on inflation and put further pressure on interest rates. Make sure that we honour our pre-election commitments to bring in tax cuts, childcare tax rebate increases and an education tax refund and invest in the future - infrastructure, health and hospitals and education.
That's what we were elected to do, we will get on to do that, but obviously in any given week, in the political cycle, we are going to take a huge whacking, and guess what, it will happen again as well.
CURTIS: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


MEL: The PM joins us in the studio, good morning.
PM: Good to be here. Good to be back.
MEL: You've got public servants who are paid to advise you. And you're kind of concerned, albeit, they're saying that it won't work, that we'll be paying more. Why are you going against their advice?
PM: Well, there is an organisation called the ACCC which is Australia's competition watchdog. It's also there, paid for by the Government, to provide advice. It's the only Government agency which has done the economic modelling on that. And, they gave us a 300 page report with econometric modelling in it, which said that in Perth, after a seven year examination, it lead to an up to two cent a litre reduction.
And secondly, what the econometric modelling concluded through the advice also given to us by the head of the ACCC is that this arrangement applied nationally will not produce any upward pressure on fuel prices.
There are a whole lot of other factors out there affecting the global fuel price  -  we know about those. But, your question is, what advice do we take? We took the advice of the competition watchdog, a report commissioned by Peter Costello back in the middle of 2007. He said at the time that it was the most responsible agency to advise on price questions. They are the only ones who did the econometric modelling. They came out with a conclusion. And frankly, what would happen in this debate today if all that evidence then went out into the public domain, we'd be attacked for not proceeding with FuelWatch.
So, that's why we did it. But, in Government, obviously, different departments have different views. But this is the only one that actually did the hard number crunching on it.
KOCHIE: A lot of the independents are saying, ‘hey, if we've got to signal our price the day before, it takes away a lot of the flexibility for us to whip in a price drop during the day, we're sort of locked in for that 24 hours'?
PM: Yeah, but we take the side of consumers. If you're a consumer and you're looking for the best price possible, what they say to us in Perth is, what they want to be able to do, is go to the FuelWatch website, find out from FuelWatch, often through free publicity in the newspapers, where the best prices are that day and know that it's going to be that way that day. So that you have the information and on a given day, you know that right across the metro area there can be up to a 15 or 20 cent variation per litre at different petrol stations.
Now, if you're a consumer, my question is this: why shouldn't the consumers of Australia have access to that information, know that it's going to be that way for the 24 hours ahead? Because at present, all that information is only had by the major oil companies. So, in this debate, and this has been my challenge to Dr Nelson all week, either you side with consumer power and the choice of motorists, and this will always only help at the margins, it's only a few cents a litre we're talking about, or you take the side of the big oil companies. And I say this, why is it that all the big oil companies, virtually, are lining up in opposition to our proposal? I mean, I think that says something of itself.
MEL: With the flexibility, and obviously that's what you want, you want to have prices locked in from breakfast till dinner sort of thing, the 24 hour period, Mark in Victoria has got an idea. ‘What about, an easy solution, allowing the states to actually reduce prices at any time, not increase them?' So, they'll lock it in, but if they want to make it cheaper during the day they can actually drop it, but they can't increase it?
PM: The problem with that is what they call, ‘gaming the system'. That is, on the day before you could say that you're going to have a price much higher than you would otherwise be the case, this is if you're a retailer. And then, game it, by bringing it down the next day so that you actually artificially pump the price up through that arrangement. All the experts in WA, and the ACCC people, have actually gone through all these arguments. Because these are the questions that we put in our Cabinet discussion on this.
So, look, this is not a simple solution, and it's not a single solution, because, as you know, Kochie, the price of petrol is a problem right across the world. The global oil price is up 400 per cent since the Iraq War. Every Government leader I have spoken to in the last several weeks says, ‘what's happening with your petrol price debate in Australia' because it is going off all around the world.
KOCHIE: Do you think you've been a bit conned to actually put all your eggs in this one in this one basket, rather than through a whole series of measures? Like, the price of diesel is way above what it is in the rest of the world. Now, that's more efficient than unleaded petrol. Things like dropping charges on hybrid cars, for example. Or, increasing the rebate on converting your LPG to gas in cars. You know, should that be part of the mix as well? Have you concentrated too much on one thing?
PM: Well, this is the point. Not only is the problem of petrol a global problem, every Government is going through it, but you also need what I'd describe as an integrated long term solution, which is what you're talking about. And the sound and lights show which was parliament yesterday, and the last several days, which has been a free and fierce debate, as it should be - what I've said repeatedly is, ‘let's look at all this'. Supply side factors around the world, what can you do on that front in terms of additional prospectively in certain countries around the world, including our own, offshore. Demand side factors  -  efficiency. Because, there is no real attempt at systematic efficiency in those huge countries pushing up the global price.
But, you talk about fuel efficient cars, that's why we have a half billion dollar fund to make sure that we can try and get the car industry here to build an Australian hybrid. And then, alternative fuel strategies. And, why not use the huge funds we've got from the resources boom to invest in major public transport projects like  -  cities like Sydney where we are today, or in Melbourne  -  why is it in the 21st century we don't have an urban-metro system? Why is it? Big cities around the world do. People are in their cars, burning fuel, costing their Budgets a lot money  - 
KOCHIE: So you'll look at diesel, gas conversation, all that sort of stuff?
PM: ... So what the Government is doing internally, is a long term plan to address each of these points. This is just one small part of the overall debate  - 
MEL: Diesel in particular, we get a lot of questions about  - 
PM: You're right on that. And that's why, for example, the petrol price commissioner now has, and this is a small measure as well, but informal price monitoring powers under our arrangements through the ACCC. So, we're aware of all these, working out way through.
MEL: Quick question on the leaks and all the information that has been coming out. You said you're pretty confident it wasn't a Cabinet colleague. Have you gone around and asked each of the Ministers? And if you find out who it was, whether it's come from the public service or elsewhere, what will you do?
PM: Look the process you go through here is that I'm absolutely confident of how the team works. I mean, I know them all, we've debated this matter and overall, cost of living pressures and how to deal with petrol, intensively as a Cabinet. And you know the folk that you're working with. And you know how you got to a particular decision. And in doing that, there's always disagreements internally. But that's normal. That's how the board of Channel Seven would work, I'd imagine. And that's just normal.
KOCH: And marriages!
PM: Speak for yourself. I just do what I'm told. But, what I've done, is the Secretary of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Department, he's simply responsible for the overall integrity of the Cabinet document process. And so what he's doing is conducting his own normal investigation according to the normal processes that are in the public service.
KOCHIE: Alright. Speaking of marriages, a lot of newspaper editorials are saying that the honeymoon is over, the training wheels are off. The Financial Review says you've had six months in power, so the time for excuses is finished. Dennis Shanahan, in The Australian, reckons you're losing your first blush. It's very romantic. Is the honeymoon over?
PM: Oh, look, people will make their judgments about us over time. I mean, I've been leader of the Labor Party now since the end of 2006. And, look, the business of being a national political leader is there are some weeks that go well, there are some that go badly. People make a judgment about you over time.
One of the criticisms we've got is that, which I find remarkable, is that we're working too hard. This is the debate within the public service. You know, if you're elected to form a Government, and you've got a big program of change, trying to make a difference on the big things like urban transport long term, big things like how do you fix the school system, the university system. Big things like health and hospitals. Well, frankly, I do believe in burning the midnight oil. And, we'll continue to do that. Make no apology for it. But how we are treated by the public and the media, look, that's just a judgment for others to make. I've just got to get on and do a good job which I've been elected to do.
KOCHIE: Yep. Okay.
MEL: Busy weekend?
PM: I wish I knew what I was doing. I'm here in Sydney, it's Friday. I'm heading to Brisbane from here. And, in fact, we've got some good things to do in Brisbane later today, at the Mater Hospital.
KOCHIE: Because you still get out on the street, don't you? In your local electorate. You take your, sort of, card table out onto the sidewalk and just chat with people?
PM: Well, in my electorate now, I've been the member now for nine going on ten years. So, I counted it up, I've done 206 mobile offices. But, since I've become Prime Minister, I think I've done two or three. And let me tell you, the queue is now longer. We've now got to solve world peace, we've now got to solve  - 
KOCHIE: The whole lot.
PM: Yeah, the whole lot.
KOCHIE: Thanks for joining us. Good to see you.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program.


I am pleased to launch today the Final Report of the Australia 2020 Summit, a document which captures the debates, deliberations and ideas of those who took part in the summit process.
Around 1,000 Australians attended the Australia 2020 Summit at Parliament House last month, in addition to those who took part - more than 500 School Summits, 2020 Youth Summit, Jewish Symposium and in a range of local and regional events took place.
We wanted to shake the tree in free and open forums and see what good ideas fell out, ideas that will make Australia an even better place in the future.
Some of the good practical ideas to be put forward for national consideration at the 2020 Summit included:
     * A comprehensive inquiry into Australia's taxation system;
     * Community Corps, whereby young Australians undertake community service in return for HECS debt relief;
     * A Learning for Life Account that extends Australia's superannuation system into new areas like lifelong learning.
     * A new National Preventative Health Agency to ensure a new prevention effort is sustained, coordinated and evidence-based.
     * A national clean energy portfolio of several flagship projects  -  in ‘natural advantage' categories such as agriculture, clean coal and renewable energy.
     * An Australian Sustainability Challenge (from the Youth Summit) whereby local communities compete to deliver the largest shift towards sustainable living.
     * Initiatives to improve the understanding of rural Australia among those living in urban Australia, particularly among school children.
The Government has already implemented the first of these ideas by setting up the Henry Commission to review Australia's taxation system.
This report provides many ideas for Australia's path to the future.
Throughout the many different and diverse discussions reflected in this document, some central themes also emerge.
This document tells a story of a modern approach to nation-building, in which Government does not have all the answers, but where we as a nation aspire to be the best place in the world to live, work and do business
This is the result of a series of conversations with thousands of interested Australians, from which this raft of ideas has emerged.
I want to thank all those people who took up the opportunity to be a part of this discussion about our future as a nation.
I thank the volunteer scribes, co-chairs and facilitators, and staff within my department for their efforts in producing this Final Report.
The task of Government now is to consider all of the summit recommendations in the Final Report, and to deliver on our commitment to respond to these by the end of the year.
The Government has maintained throughout this process our support for concrete ideas that set out a practical approach to nation-building, and this will be reflected in our response.
The release of the Final Report does not signal the end of discussions and debate.
I encourage every Australian to continue to contribute their ideas and be part of the conversation by making a submission online.
The Final Report can be viewed at, and downloaded from, the Australia 2020 website www.australia2020.gov.au.


PM: Firstly it's really good to be back here in Brisbane today at the Crackerjack Carnival. This is great testament to Clem Jones the former Lord Mayor of Brisbane. Clem Jones began this carnival back in 1974, he began the Camp Hill Carina Welfare Association back in 1957 and it's a huge community event with one purpose. To raise money to keep local community support going. Local community support for 17 sporting clubs across this part of Brisbane.
It's a fantastic charity, but the people who benefit are from the literally tens and hundreds of thousands of young people across Brisbane who have benefited from these facilities over 50 years. Each year there's 100,000 local people who use these facilities  -  Rugby League, Tennis, Basketball, Netball, the whole works, as well as Swimming. It's a fantastic initiative and I'm pleased to be here today to support it.
Second thing I'd like to talk about today is the 2020 Summit. The 2020 Summit was held not all that long ago and we said at the time of the 2020 Summit that we'd also bring foreword the recommendations or the conclusions or the summary of the matters raised by the 2020 Summit.
The 2020 Summit was put together nationally so that Government could shake the tree to see what ideas we're out there in the Australian community about our country, not for the next 12 months, not for the next two years but out to the next decade and beyond. Australia needs long term planning. That's why we convened a 2020 Summit so we could have long term planning and thinking not just short term thinking. And secondly on top that, that we could engage the whole Australian community. Both the business community, the community sector as well as those engaged right across all the fabric of our national life.
We had 1000 participants in Canberra, we had 500 school summits, we had many, many other community summits held right across our nation as well. We said at the time of the Summit that by the end of May we would produce through the Prime Ministers Department, the summary document of the various ideas put forward at the Summit.
So what we are releasing today is a document of some hundreds of pages. It will be on the website of www.australia2020.gov.au and that document is being released today consistent with our undertakings before.
The other thing I'd say about the Summit is this. It contains a whole range of practical ideas and they include a recommendation for a community core whereby young Australians undertake community service in return for HECS debt relief. A learning for life account that extends Australia's superannuation system to areas like life long learning. A new national preventative health care agency. A national clear energy portfolio for several flagship projects. An Australian sustainability challenge from the youth summit an initiative to improve the understand of rural Australia among those who live in our cities and a comprehensive enquiry into Australia's taxation system.
These are some example of the ideas put forward at the summit and our undertaking is this and I said it at the time. We'll embrace some of these ideas, others we will not be able to embrace and others again we'll modify. That's what we said at the time, that's what we say today. But we also said once the summary document was ready we put it out to the entire community.
That is our return back to those who took a weekend of their time to come to Canberra and to contribute to this important national initiative in a new way of governing. That is opening the doors to allow the community to come in and speak to Government, which is what we did.
Finally the Government has also said on the 2020 Summit that by years end we will provide our full response to all of these matters. Those we can accept, those that we cannot accept and the reasons why as well as those that we'll modify. The 2020 Summit  -  an important way of throwing the doors open of the Government to the community to allow the community to come in and have their say and then on top of that the Government within a reasonable period of time to respond to what the community has said.
I thank those who participated in the Summit for their efforts. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a short list of favourites then that you will be pushing for?
PM: Well I go to say one of the big areas of debate from the business sector was of course the need for a comprehensive overhaul of the nations taxation system. That's why we've initiated the Henry Commission of inquiry into tax, into income support and into retirement incomes policy. That is a massive exercise, it's not really been done that way in more than a quarter of a century and some would argue since the war. That's one thing we've embraced.
Another is the call by the business community for a seamless national economy. That's why through the COAG process involving the States we are now going through item by item 27 pieces of legislation to try and bring about a system whereby if you are a business operating in Queensland, you can easily register your business name or go through the business regulatory procedures in the other states without it costing you a bombshell to do so. That's another one
But one I think is really worth following here in the community sector is also this idea of a community core whereby young Australians undertake community service in exchange for some HECS debt relief. I think that's a good one to think about as well. But I say that on top of the fact that there are literally dozens and dozens of ideas put forward here and we'll work our way through these methodically. But as part of being open with the community about what was said at the Summit, this document puts it all together, puts it out there and if there are any errors in it I'm sure those who participated in the Summit will let us know. But I think the Prime Ministers Department has done it's best job to make sure it's as good as possible.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well you know Clem Jones I remember Clem from 1974 flood in Brisbane. I remember him from previous crackerjack carnivals which have been virtually a complete washout and today again when the weather gods have decided that Brisbane and South East Queensland needed some rain.
Clem Jones rain, hail or shine would be here to support  -  community support and community charities and I'm pleased to be here in the spirit of Clem Jones supporting this fantastic event for Brisbane.
JOURNALIST: On another topic will petrol be excluded from emissions trading scheme?
PM: What we've said consistently about emissions trading is that we have the Garnaut inquiry interim report which comes out in the middle of the year and it will provide it's recommendations on the way forward. A final report from Professor Garnaut will come out some time in September, October and it is in response to those reports that the Government will begin to formulate its direct response, including the coverage of the regime.
What I'd say very clearly though is that last year when the Liberal party was in Government they said through Mr Turnbull that land transport and petrol would be included within the emissions trading regime. Now they seem to be saying something slightly different. We'll make our position clear once we have the Garnaut report in hand.
JOURNALIST: You must have concerns though that if it is included the price of petrol could soar?
PM: The key thing with helping motorist under financial pressure is to make sure that low and middle income earners are not financially disadvantaged by any changes which arise from the emission trading regime. And that they receive a reasonable helping hand from Government on the way through.
One of the reasons we're working hard on this is because we don't want to see low and middle income earners hurt and that's why we're taking our time on this - both in relation to petrol and more widely on energy prices.
One of the problems by the way in Government is we've been in Government for 6 months. We had 12 years of inactivity by the Liberal Party on emissions trading and in 6 months we've had to go from basically a zero start to where we are now, given that we've got to deal with an international negotiating agenda, proceeding at the same time which requires Australia to put its hand up for its position under Kyoto by the end of next year.
JOURNALIST: Now latest research suggest that the National obesity  -  anti obesity campaign may be misdirected?
PM: Well on the question of childhood obesity I think its very important that we understand fully where the challenge lies. We believe that obesity represents one of those chronic disease challenges for the nation and we must act to make sure it doesn't result in a epidemic of diseases like type 2 diabetes. That's the challenge.
Also obesity has enormous compounding effect on cardiovascular disease and some categories of cancer. Therefore we do need a national campaign on obesity but lets go to some of the survey results.
It said that the overall growth rate grows slightly from 6 to 6.8 per cent between 2000-2006. It said that for boys in the lower income bracket it rose from 5.4 to 9.3 (per cent). For children from wealthier families from 4.9 to 6.8 (per cent). For boys from such families 3.7 to 4.9 (per cent). Girls in lower income families 3.9 to 6.8 (per cent) and also some other data as well.
What I'm saying is most of the data here is heading up not down. So you've got two alternatives you can either say this is not our problem, we're not going to do anything about this or you can act. And what the Government has decided to do rather than just brush it away is launch its $62 million national preventative health strategy to fight obesity. This is one step in the right direction.
It's a bit like action petrol, obesity and things like grocery prices. You can have a go at dealing with the problem or you can simply say it's too hard. I'm in the category of having a go and seeing what you can do.
JOURNALIST: Should it be more heavily aimed though at low income families?
PM: What we've got to say is that we've got a national challenge of obesity. It affects different communities in different ways and certainly affects for example indigenous communities if different ways and an effective national strategy has to be tailored to the different demands in different localities but the overall effect would have to be this.
You can either let the figures go up and up and up which produce an epidemic of chronic disease or you can act now to bring it down (inaudible) is a good step in the right direction.
JOURNALIST: Sorry Prime Minister a young boy 11 year old Daniel Clarke. He wrote to the then Prime Minister Howard regarding the funding for an Orang-utan project that he was given. Apparently this little boy has now received a letter from Minister Garrett suggesting there's no more funding there. Isn't that disappointing to you this little boy worked hard and now is feeling crushed?
PM: Well I think this is, I can really understand the little boy concern for Orang-utans. I really value his efforts in this area. I think when former Prime Ministers go around and make these sort of promises, they need to actually make sure that they are funded.
What we have done is made sure that there is a $500,000 commitment for a 4 year partnership with the Nature Conservancy and this compliments our $30 million support for the Kalimantan Forest and Climate Partnership, which will helps tackle the causes of deforestation and the protection of their habitats. Now we take seriously our responsibilities when it comes to nature conservation here and around the world. We're trying to do it offshore with our partners in Indonesia and comprehensive ways in Kalimantan and I fully understand the little boys passion and commitment.
I value that but there is also a different way of handling it as well
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We will continue on the challenge of Orang-utans.


The Government's mission is to build a strong and fair Australia capable of meeting the new challenges of the 21st century.
That means planning for our long-term future.
Planning to meet our long-term domestic challenges.
It also means planning to meet our long-term international challenges.
Australia must above all enhance our regional and global economic competitiveness if we are to secure our future.
Domestically we need to lift our productivity growth.
We need to have the best-trained, best-skilled work force in the world.
We will need world-class infrastructure, including high-speed broadband.
We are committed to policies that will lift work force participation rates  -  a critical need with an ageing population.
And we are committed to continuing population growth, underpinned by a continuing migration program.
We are committed to taxation reform and business deregulation.
And underpinning all must be a commitment to responsible economic management  -  injecting every effort to maintain macro-economic stability.
But Australia faces additional regional and global challenges also crucial to our nation's future  -  climate change, questions of energy and food security, the rise of China and the rise of India.
And we need a strong system of global and regional relationships and institutions to underpin stability.
We also have to make sure that the open, rules-based system of global trade is maintained and expanded.
It is the system that has underwritten our prosperity, just as it has underwritten the prosperity of the region.
When Australia looks intrinsically to the Asia-Pacific region, we can see significant future challenges.
In the South West Pacific the challenges are great.
Many of the smaller states in the region will need to work hard  -  and we will work with them  -  on establishing the foundation for a secure and sustainable future.
Terrorism in South-East Asia will remain a continuing challenge.
And across wider Continental Asia, the rise of India and China represent great economic, environmental, energy policy and security reverberations for the future.
A core challenge for Australia is  -  how do we best prepare ourselves for the Asia Pacific century  -  to maximise the opportunities, to minimise the threats and to make our own active contribution to making this Asia-Pacific Century peaceful, prosperous and sustainable for us all.
Tonight I would like to respond to that question by talking to you about the third pillar of the Government's foreign policy  -  our policy of comprehensive engagement in the Asia-Pacific region.
Our alliance with the United States is the first pillar of our foreign policy and the strategic bedrock of our foreign and security policy.
Since forming Government, we have reaffirmed our support for the alliance, including in March in Washington when I met President Bush.
The alliance  -  the relationship between Australia and the United States  -  transcends political parties and Administrations on both sides of the Pacific.
I have also spoken about the United Nations  -  the second pillar of our foreign policy.
The Government's policy is that a strong rules-based international system is in Australia's national interest.
In March in New York I met with the UN Secretary-General
I announced after that meeting that Australia would seek a seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-2014.
If Australia wants an effective United Nations, we have to be comprehensively, not marginally, engaged.
And that means engaging with key multilateral partners around the globe that share our goals, in particular our partners in Europe  -  a principle of multilateral cooperation with our European partners I re-affirmed in meetings with the European Commission in Brussels in April.
Tonight I want to talk about the third pillar of our foreign policy, comprehensive engagement with Asia.
It is a pillar of our foreign policy because this Government is committed to strong, close, cooperative relations with the countries of Asia.
We have interests that we want to pursue in the region.
And we believe that we can also make a strong positive contribution to the region  -  to its long-term stability, prosperity and sustainability.
We want to build on our history of political, strategic, economic and development contributions to the region in the years ahead.
Tonight I'd like to talk about the future of two of our critical bilateral relations in the region  -  Japan and Indonesia.
And I'd also like to talk about the future of the regional architecture of the wider region.
The changes now taking place in the global economic and strategic terrain are of historic proportions.
Put simply, global economic and strategic weight is shifting to Asia.
For the first time in the settled history of this continent, we find ourselves in the region that will be at the centre of global affairs.
This is a process that began half a century ago  -  and it has at least that long left to run.
Japan led the way with its remarkable post-war recovery and rapid economic growth.
Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore followed.
The countries of South East Asia  -  in spite of the 1997 financial crisis  -  have continued to show strong growth.
Then, in the 1990s China and India began to grow rapidly.
By 2020, according to one study last year, Asia will account for around 45 per cent of global GDP.
By 2020 it will account for around one-third of global trade.
By 2020, Asia's share of global military spending will have grown to nearly one quarter.
Militaries throughout Asia have sought to modernise and continued economic growth will encourage the acquisition of higher technology military systems.
And the region contains continuing potential flashpoints  -  Kashmir, the Taiwan Strait, the Korean Peninsula.
But there is more to the story of a changing Asia than the economic and strategic picture.
Demographics are changing.
The countries that developed first have ageing populations.
China's population continues to grow, but it too is ageing.
China expects its population to peak at around 1.5 billion in the 2030s.
India's population will remain young and will continue to grow in the decades ahead.
It will become the most populous nation in the world by the middle of the century.
The overall population of the region is continuing to grow  -  by 2020 it is projected to be 4.6 billion (out of a total global population of 7.7 billion).
A growing population and higher standards of living are putting increasing pressure on resources.
To drive these growing economies and to provide the standard of living these populations require, demand for energy is growing dramatically.
APEC estimates that among its member economies demand for energy will grow by around 40 per cent by 2020.
Overall, Asia's energy consumption could grow by around two-thirds by 2020.
Or, to put it another way, more than half of the increase in global energy consumption to 2020 will come from Asia.
Wealthier populations are also demanding more and better food.
We have already seen the rising cost of food, globally not just in Asia.
The rising population needs more water too.
We will see more people in water stress because much of the population growth in the years ahead will come in developing countries that already face fresh water supply pressures.
The changes and challenges for Asia will be great.
So, for Australia, engagement with Asia is not just a matter of historical recognition of the requirements of geographical proximity.
Our engagement with Asia for the future will be about engaging with a region of global significance in its own right.
It is the coincidence of several imperatives  -  geographic, economic and strategic.
It is engagement with a region that will be of crucial importance for the future of our planet.
How, then, do we best prepare for the Asia-Pacific century?
First, we have to get our national house in order to maximise our global competitiveness.
Then we need to have good economic and security relations with the countries in our region.
But there is a brittleness in a foreign policy based only on bilateral relations.
To remove some of that brittleness, we need strong and effective regional institutions.
Strong institutions that will underpin an open, peaceful, stable, prosperous and sustainable region.
We need them because regional institutions are important in addressing collective challenges that no one country can address alone  -  and they help us develop a common idea of what those challenges are.
Challenges like:
     * Enhancing a sense of security community (we have something to learn from Europe where centuries of animosity have been transformed into an unparalleled degree of transnational cooperation);
     * Developing a capacity to deal with terrorism, natural disasters and disease  -  problems that definitionally transcend national boundaries;
     * Enhancing non-discriminatory and open trading regimes across the region in support of global institutions; and
     * Providing long-term energy, resource and food security.
I believe it is time that we started to think about where we want to be with our regional architecture in 2020.
It is nearly 20 years since the first APEC meeting in Canberra.
When APEC started, we spoke about the gradual evolution of regional architecture.
And that architecture has evolved in the intervening 20 years.
We have APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN Plus Three and, most recently, the East Asia Summit.
Each has its own positive role to play.
But the core question is what should the long-term vision for our region's architecture be?
We believe that we need to anticipate the historic changes in our region and seek to shape them; rather than simply reacting to them.
We need to have a vision for an Asia Pacific Community, a vision that embraces:
     * A regional institution which spans the entire Asia-Pacific region  -  including the United States, Japan, China India, Indonesia and the other states of the region.
     * A regional institution which is able to engage in the full spectrum of dialogue, cooperation and action on economic and political matters and future challenges related to security.
The purpose is to encourage the development of a genuine and comprehensive sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation.
The danger in not acting is that we run the risk of succumbing to the perception that future conflict within our region may somehow be inevitable.
At present none of our existing regional mechanisms as currently configured are capable of achieving these purposes.
That is why the new Australian Government argues that we should now begin the regional debate about where we want to be in 2020.
Such a debate does not of itself mean the diminution of any of the existing regional bodies.
APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum, the East Asia Summit, ASEAN Plus Three and ASEAN itself will continue to play important roles, and longer-term may continue in their own right or embody the building blocks of an Asia Pacific Community.
There will be wide ranging views about this across the region  -  some more supportive than others.
New bodies and new ideas will continue to emerge.
Australia would welcome the evolution of the Six Party Talks into a wider regional body to discuss confidence and security building measures in North East Asia and beyond  -  and we support the United States in this.
I would also argue that an Asia Pacific Community by 2020 is consistent with President Bush's call for the development of a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific  -  an ambition we have consistently supported as a long-term goal.
The European Union of course does not represent an identikit model of what we would seek to develop in the Asia Pacific.
But what we can learn from Europe is this  -  it is necessary to take the first step.
In the 1950s, sceptics saw European integration as unrealistic.
But most people would now agree that the goal of the visionaries in Europe who sat down in the 1950s and resolved to build prosperity and a common sense of a security community has been achieved.
It is that spirit we need to capture in our hemisphere.
Our special challenge is that we face a region with greater diversity in political systems and economic structures, levels of development, religious beliefs, languages and cultures, than did our counterparts in Europe.
But that should not stop us from thinking big.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an example of the benefits of long-term vision.
In a diverse region, ASEAN has brought together a varied group and forged a common outlook on many questions.
ASEAN has built habits of cooperation and dialogue.
And ASEAN has played a critical role in building and maintaining peace in the region through its work.
To take forward the vision for an Asia Pacific Community during the next six months, the Australian Government will dispatch a high-level envoy to the capitals of the wider region to discuss this proposal.
Subject to that further dialogue we would envisage the possibility of a further high-level conference of government and non-government representatives to advance this proposal.
I fully recognise that this will not be an easy process  -  just as the establishment of APEC was not easy 20 years ago.
But the speed and the scope of changes in our region means we need to act now.
That is why I am announcing tonight the appointment of Dick Woolcott as Australia's envoy on this important matter of unfinished regional business  -  to continue and hopefully complete the work he began on Prime Minister Hawke's behalf 20 years ago.
I said before that this is the Asia Pacific Century.
Ours must be an open region  -  we need to link into the world, not shut ourselves off from it.
And Australia has to be at the forefront of that challenge, helping to provide the ideas and drive to build new regional architecture  -  something we have not done for over a decade.
We also need to invest in our relationships with our partners around the region.
In North East Asia we will need to continue to build our relationships with the economic powerhouses to which we are so closely linked  -  China, Japan and Korea.
In South East Asia we have to add even more depth to our relationships with our key partners  -  Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and others.
In South Asia, we need to re-energise our relationship with the other rising giant, India.
But, ahead of my visit to Japan and Indonesia next week I want to explain how our Government sees its relations with these two crucial partners.
In many ways, our relationship with Japan is one of the foundations of our regional engagement.
The relationship between Australia and Japan is a comprehensive strategic, security and economic partnership  -  and beyond that we have an enduring friendship.
And I am committed to adding even more depth and breadth to that partnership.
Over the past 50 years, developments in our relationship with Japan have often led the way in our engagement with the region.
From our trade treaty in 1957, through to working together to establish APEC in the 1980s under Bob Hawke's leadership, and to our security cooperation, developments in our relationship with Japan have been at the forefront of our regional engagement.
Japan is an ancient culture.
Japan is a global economic power  -  the world's second-biggest economy.
Its economic presence has made a critical contribution to many economies around the world  -  including Australia.
It is a major provider of development assistance around the globe.
Japan is also one of the United Nation's strongest supporters.
It is a clear voice on the world stage for non-proliferation of nuclear and other weapons  -  bringing to the debate its unique and terrible history as the only country to have suffered the effects of a nuclear weapon.
Japan also represents a significant security presence in our East Asian hemisphere.
So, for Australia, engaging with Japan is a core priority.
We have an enduring economic relationship.
But we can still do more to secure a strong future economic relationship.
I will be talking with Prime Minister Fukuda about how we can accelerate our negotiations for a free trade agreement (FTA).
We are also strategic partners.
When I meet with Prime Minister Fukuda next week I hope to be able to take forward concrete proposals for strengthening our security engagement  -  both bilaterally and trilaterally with the United States.
Prime Minister Fukuda and I will also look at how Australia and Japan can cooperate more both regionally and globally.
Regionally, we can look also work more closely together on our development assistance efforts in the Pacific.
Globally, we can also work together on climate change.
Prime Minister Fukuda has invited me to attend the G8 outreach meeting in Japan in July.
Climate change will be a major focus of the outreach session and I will be talking to Prime Minister Fukuda about how we can work together on the science and the policy of climate change.
Underlying the economic relationship, the political relationship and the strategic relationship are the people to people links.
It includes students travelling in both directions  -  including those who spend time on home stay programs, learning the language and culture of the other country.
Japanese is the most studied foreign language in Australia  -  more than 220,000 Australians are studying Japanese at public high schools.
I have to acknowledge here the problem of whaling.
We have had, and continue to have, a frank dialogue with Japan on this.
But I am hopeful that we will be able to find a diplomatic solution to what is an important disagreement among friends.
Next week will be my second visit to Indonesia since becoming Prime Minister  -  my first having been to the Bali climate change meeting in December.
I am looking forward to sitting down again with President Yudhoyono and talking through the future of our relationship.
We already have a great history to build on.
Australia  -  under the ALP  -  took the initiative to represent Indonesia's interests at the United Nations in 1947.
We were a strong supporter of Indonesian independence in 1949.
And, since that time, our histories have been inseparable.
Our relationship has now matured and we have a true partnership.
I have watched Indonesia's remarkable development in recent years.
And it is worth revisiting some of the fundamentals about Indonesia.
Indonesia is the largest democracy in Asia after India.
It is the world's most populous Muslim nation.
Since the financial crisis in 1997 Indonesia has made a strong recovery.
Its economy is growing at over six per cent annually.
Its transition to democracy and its economic recovery in the past decade have been remarkable.
In Australia we should have a better understanding of these changes because our relationship with Indonesia is so important.
It is important to us because of the joint challenges we face and the need we have to develop common responses to these challenges.
For instance on climate change.
I have already had a discussion about increasing our climate change cooperation with President Yudhoyono when we met in Bali  -  and I want to acknowledge the President's leadership on this.
Exploring ways to further this cooperation will be a top priority for my visit to Indonesia next week.
I hope to be able to outline a way forward for Australia-Indonesia climate change cooperation during my visit.
In particular, I believe there is real scope for us to cooperate on the problem of deforestation.
We also have a strong base of people-to-people links.
Nearly 400,000 people travel back and forth between Australia and Indonesia each year.
And around 15,000 Indonesian students study in Australia.
I am keen to make sure that more people in Australia learn about Indonesia.
Indonesian is one of the target languages of our Government's investment of $62 million dollars over the next three years to boost Asian language study in Australian high schools  -  building on the 170,000 Australians who already study Indonesian at public high schools.
And I am keen to see Indonesians learn more about Australia too.
An important part of this mutual learning process is inter-faith dialogue.
There have been a number of rounds of this dialogue so far.
It is a good initiative and one that I hope can be broadened over time.
Our shared global interests and the good people-to-people links that we share give us a good base to further develop our bilateral relationship.
We need to have a vision of where we want to take the bilateral relationship and we need to work towards that vision.
For me, it is a vision of a partnership built on mutual respect and mutual benefit.
Developing our economic relationship is an important part of that.
We need to keep working on our free trade agreement study.
Our goal is simple  -  to make it easier for our business communities to interact with each other.
We also have to build our defence and security relationship.
We have a good basis for cooperation in the Lombok Treaty, but we need to do more.
In particular, we need to further our cooperation in the security field given our common challenge in terrorism.
Beyond our bilateral relationship Australia and Indonesia can yield better results for the region and for the world when we work together in a diplomatic partnership that goes beyond the traditional bilateral preoccupations.
For Australia, cooperation with Indonesia on regional matters  -  including the East Asia Summit  -  is of central importance.
Natural disasters in Burma and China in recent weeks  -  both with terrible death tolls  -  have reminded us of the need to for regional cooperation to have practical results, by improving coordination of disaster response efforts for instance.
Here APEC has an important role to play.
Australia and Indonesia are co-chairs of an APEC task force on emergency preparedness and response.
It was established after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004.
And it has already done some good work.
When I visit Indonesia next week, I will be discussing with President Yudhoyono how we can lift the tempo of the task force's work.
I have some specific proposals to take to the President about how we can do more to bring together disaster relief experts from around the region  -  because when a crisis hits, our people need to have ready made networks so we can respond in a timely fashion.
In doing so, we will need to build on important initiatives already advanced elsewhere in the region  -  most recently by Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan.
As we look to build a new regional architecture for 2020 and beyond, Indonesia will be one of our critical partners.
For Australia, Indonesia is a partner in nearly every field of endeavour.
We are committed to building a closer relationship between our people, our parliaments and our institutions.
We are partners in tackling climate change.
We are partners in building the region.
Next week in Indonesia, I look forward to talking with President Yudhoyono about how we take this partnership forward.
About 30 years ago I first set foot in the wider region.
That experience  -  and my study of Asian history, language and cultures at university  -  opened my eyes to the importance of the region for Australia.
And it has left me firmly of the view that Australia has to make itself the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
Asia is a diverse continent and we have to put great effort into building and maintaining our engagement into the future.
Our businesses, our academic institutions and our government agencies need to understand Asia.
This Government will be investing more in this direction.
Because we in this nation have a unique requirement to fully comprehend and engage with the great new global dynamics of the Asia-Pacific century.
Australia must play its part in shaping the region's future.
And that is what the new Australian Government intends to do.


First of all, thank you all for agreeing to participate. I really appreciate that. This is a priority for the Government. Our mission as a Government is building a strong Australia, a fair Australia and one capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
One of those challenges is not just a 21st century challenge, it is a 20th century challenge. In fact, it has been around for a long, long time. And it is violence against women and violence against children.
And the reason we are here today is to make a difference. And the Government is determined to do that.
Prior to the election we made a commitment to establish this National Council. Today we honour that commitment. This Council begins its work. And I thank each and every one of you for willing to stick your hand up in what is a very difficult area of public policy and a very difficult area of community work - but one where we are absolutely determined to make a difference, absolutely determined to make a difference.
Many of you have already made exceptional contributions in helping survivors of violence and I am especially proud the Council includes Rachel Kayrooz from my own electorate in Brisbane. Rachel and her young daughter Faith have overcome a harrowing ordeal of violence and Rachel is an inspiration in starting the organisation of ‘Shout! Speak Out', to raise awareness of domestic violence in healthy relationships.
So, thank you Rachel. I really appreciate it.
The nation, in my view, the nation and the community, must adopt a zero tolerance attitude to violence against women and violence against children. No ifs, no buts, no maybes. That's where we have to be as a nation, that's where we have to be as a community.
If you look at the statistics on domestic violence, it still presents us with some horrific reading.
The Bureau of Stats research from '05 indicates that six per cent of women, that is one in eighteen women, have been survivors of violence in the previous 12 months.
Six per cent of women, one in 18, survivors of violence in the previous 12 months.
The nation cannot continue to tolerate that. The nation has to make a difference. We have to get that number down. And, what we are talking about through this Council, the practical measures through which that can have a real and lasting effect.
Governments alone can't solve the problem. At the policy level, we wish to engage this Council on what is our overriding benchmark for policy decision making. What works. What makes a difference. We are not interested in that which sounds good. We are not interested in that which looks good. We are interested in that which actually works and gets these figures down. That's what we're interested in.
And that is why it is really important that you have come together as a Council - as survivors, those who have supported survivors, those who represent the interests of survivors, those who can change community attitudes in our schools and our sporting clubs, in local communities and through the national media, and policy makers and advocates.
The Government's approach to tackling violence against women is also part of a broader framework of social inclusion. And very simply it is this. If you have a social inclusion agenda to build healthy communities, if it works effectively, and you have maximal participation in the nation's social and economic opportunities, it usually generates a healthier web of relationships, it usually generates a healthier web of relationships
That's why the Government is committed to building social inclusion across its policies in Government, in education, in income support, in healthcare and in community services.
Violence is not just limited to disadvantaged groups, it occurs across all income groups and cultural groups. And that is why in opposition I committed ourselves to a National Plan to reduce violence against women and children. And your work in this Council is going to be very important in putting that together.
Four specific things that we are working on already.
One, the Respectful Relationships campaign across our schools, across our secondary schools. An education campaign particularly targeted at boys. Important to build that in the minds of young boys as they become adults.
Second, White Ribbon Day. Providing $1 million to boost White Ribbon Day education activities in rural and regional communities.
Third, working with perpetrators, conducting research into international best practice models for working with perpetrators of violence.
Fourth, reviewing the actual legislation itself with States and Territories to ensure tougher and more nationally consistent laws, and best practice, in relation to reducing violence against women and kids.
And fifth, homicide monitoring. Providing half a million dollars to boost the Australian Institute of Criminology's National Homicide Monitoring Program to investigate domestic violence related homicides to inform future interventions.
These are important practical areas of work, but this is where our work simply begins.
The function of this Council is to add to that work and to add to it in areas of evidence based policy, which take us in the direction of bringing those appalling figures down. That's what we want to do.
Of course, the other element which is relevant to violence against women, violence against children, is this - homelessness. Tanya and I share a great passion in this area, what do we do about homelessness.
Recently there was a national conference of those involved in this sector in Adelaide, and Heather Nancarrow was present there and thank you for your work Heather in helping the Government put together its Green Paper on homelessness. That will move towards a White Paper by years' end. But plainly, domestic and family violence is the single greatest reason why people seek help from our homelessness services.
So these things are related. It's not just changing the attitudinal behaviour on the part of men. That is core business, and that is where so much of these activities are directed. It is also about dealing with the immediate emergency services which assist women in these circumstances, and children, and one of those core areas of services is in fact services for the homeless.
That's why for us this is doubly important, getting homelessness right.
The fact that today, in 2008, we can have 100,000 Australians as classified in the census data as homeless, is in my view, obscene. That should not be the case in a country as wealthy as ours.
So these areas of policy are interconnected.
We've got to work on prevention, and that's where so much of the action lies.
We've got to work on response, and that is helping women and children in these circumstances, including in the critical area of homelessness.
But I conclude where I began.
It is only possible if you've got effective buy in from the community represented by persons such as yourselves.
Not only do you bring extra expertise to the table, because in Government our expertise is always limited, you also bring to the table acknowledge and familiarity about what happens on the ground. What works at the point of where the rubber hits the road, where it actually is being implemented out there in the homeless shelter, in the domestic violence shelter or at the point of delivery of critical health and care services for women and children in these circumstances.
So, thank you for coming, thank you for being here. We can guarantee you, consistent with the tradition of this Government, to work very hard.
But you know something, it's actually for a good purpose. The purpose is really good public policy. It rests in some very decent Australian values. Values of fairness. And if we can't provide fairness to women and children who are under the threat of violence, then, frankly we need to be trying a lot harder.
So thanks for being on board.


BEAUMONT: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd morning.
PM: Good Morning Simon, thanks for having me on the program.
BEAUMONT: Thank you for your time. Prime Minister, to pensioners first, why did your government not increase the basic fortnightly pension rate for aged and disabled pensioners in the last budget.
PM: Well, what we have done in the budget is provide an additional $5.2 billion for seniors. And let me just go to two elements of that. One is a one off seniors bonus and the second is to increase significantly what will be an annual increase in the utilities allowance from $107 a year to $500 a year.
Secondly, on the overall question of the long term handling of the pension, which is a major matter for seniors right across the country including in Perth, we have the Henry commission of inquiry examining this thoroughly, to report to us by February next year. We think this is the right way to go because what I understand from all the discussions that we have had from pensioners and seniors groups from right across the country, is how tough it is for people to balance their budget currently, given the constraints on their income.
BEAUMONT: So the Henry commission hand down will be early next year?
PM: That's correct.
BEAUMONT: Why, or do you concede that this actually means that you, you now understand that the increase in the utilities allowances, those quarterly payments or those one off payments weren't sufficient. Do you now concede that the ongoing fortnightly payment that goes into pensioners bank accounts needs to be increased?
PM: Simon the Henry Commission was established on the day of the Budget itself. We knew full well that we would have to look at three things for the future. One was, how we manage the overall taxation system, the second is, how do you manage the retirement income system, which is both pensioners and the taxation treatment of those receiving other forms of retirement income. And thirdly, other forms of income support. And these things always have to be considered together. But let's put it in context.
In the budget itself there is $5.2 billion additional for seniors compared with the previous budget. For carers, $1.1 billion additional compared with the previous budget. And for disability support pensioners, and these are a very important group of some several hundred thousand Australians, $1.3 billion over the previous budget. Now these do not of themselves solve the problem, I understand that. But in six months which this government has been in, to deal with what has been an accumulating set of very significant cost of living pressures for pensioners and carers over the last 12 years, it takes a bit longer than that to sort it through.
BEAUMONT: Why is it on the revenue side of things when the Government wants to increase a tax take like the alcopops tax take for example, that can become enacted almost immediately? Why is it when there is an outgoing, in other words, increasing the pensioner rate that it has to be done at budget time?
PM: But at the end of the day Simon, what I am saying is that in terms of these payments to pensioners, there is a significant increased allocation in terms of what the budget does overall. It is $5.2 billion additional in allocation to pensioners, compared with, for seniors, compared with what was there in the previous Budget.
BEAUMONT: But why do the outgoings always wait to budget time, but if you, it seems if the Government wants to bolster coffers, like with the alcopops tax, that can be enacted immediately. Why do the outgoings have to be (inaudible) at Budget time?
PM: I suppose where I disagree with you Simon is this, what I have said is, apart from that $5.2 billion for seniors, lets go to the other measures contained. There is something like a $54 billion package dealing with, also, families who are dealing with the childcare tax rebate, also the education tax refund and also significant changes in the tax treatment of low and middle income earners from the 1st of July.
If you put all those things together, and these are measures which directly affect the family budget, these are coming in as of 1 July. The measures I mentioned before for pensioners and carers and those on the disability support pension come in from 1 July. We have never said that any of these measures in themselves mean some full solution to the challenges which families currently face and pensioners and carers face with the rising cost of food and the rising cost of petrol. They are designed to help, but the overall point I am making is that there are a large number of measures contained in the budget which go towards helping directly - families, individuals and pensioners and carers under financial pressure.
But there is more work to be done.
BEAUMONT: What is your direct personal message to West Australian pensioners today, coming to you, well coming directly from you this morning?
PM: I think the first thing I would say to pensioners and carers is that we have a huge amount of work to do with them and their peak bodies over the course of the next six months or so while the Henry Commission goes through this with a fine tooth comb. To work out the basis on which we can deal with this effectively for the long term future.
My second point is this, it is very difficult for a new Government framing its first Budget within three or four months of taking office to deal in one hit with the accumulated cost of living pressures which have occurred for people on pensions which has built up over the previous 12 years. In six months, you can't fix what's happened within 12 years. But what you can do is say, ‘we need some more time', we've established a body to do it, and we're determined to get on it with.
BEAUMONT: Mr Rudd, given what happened in the US yesterday, do you now regret backing Hillary Clinton publicly like you did on Rove McManus' television show?
PM: Well you know something, have you ever done a Rove interview yourself?
BEAUMONT: No, I haven't.
PM: Okay, well it's all a bit tongue in cheek. You get ten rapid fire questions. And, I think one was, Hillary or Obama. I mean, my response was Hillary because the way in which I saw the question was, you know, who is going to win? Hillary or Obama. I think they're both fine individuals and I'm perfectly relaxed about whoever was to become the Democratic candidate for the President. And, for that matter, whoever becomes the President of the United States. I contrast that with Mr Howard, remember, who said that if Senator Obama, or any Democratic candidate was to become President of the United States, that would represent a victory for Al Qaeda.
So, a light hearted remark in the midst of a Rove McManus interview, which concluded with ‘who would you turn gay for?' is one thing. A considered statement on a Laurie Oakes interview, by the former Prime Minister, who said that if the Democratic Party was to form the next Presidency of the United States, it would represent a victory for Al Qaeda. That's something else.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, it has been reported this morning that you don't think Obama can beat John McCain. Is that right?
PM: I don't know where that report is from. I've not seen that report anywhere. The great thing about the American political process is that it's fierce, competitive, and above all, democratic. And, whether it is Senator Obama who becomes the next President of the United States, or John McCain, I'm confident that in either of those individuals, we have a strong partner for Australia, a strong partner, in terms of underpinning the future of the Australia-United States alliance.
Remember, this alliance is neither the property of the Republicans or the Democrats or the Labor Party or the Liberal Party. All of us have been the custodians of this alliance since Labor formed it in 1941 when John Curtin, a great man from Western Australia, shaped this alliance with President Roosevelt in the depths of the last war.
BEAUMONT: Analysts have said that Barack Obama has already flagged protecting US trade interests. What impact do you think an Obama administration will have on our trade agreements with the United States?
PM: Well, I think it's very important that we don't get ahead of ourselves. First and foremost, I don't think Senator Obama has been confirmed as the Democratic candidate yet. Second is, in terms of the future shape of his trade policy, his foreign policy, his security policy, that'll all take some time to work through. In my conversation with Barack Obama when I was in the United States recently, we had a great conversation about the strength of the relationship, and, how we can take the relationship to new levels.
There'll always be argy bargy on trade policy. Guess what, there has been between Mr Howard and the Bush Administration on aspects of trade policy, including various US farms bills. There will be in the future as well. But the good thing about our alliance and our friendship is that we can deal with those things on the way through.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, you are honouring your election promises to bring Australian troops home from Iraq. Why did John Howard send an Australian contingent into Iraq?
PM: That's a question which of course should best be put to him. Or, those who served him in the Cabinet at the time including Mr Costello, Mr Downer and others. We have simply said that there is no graver decision for Australia to take  - 
BEAUMONT: You also described it as an abuse of intelligence.
PM: ... no graver decision for Australia to take than to send its troops to war. And when you are making that decision, the first responsibility is to make sure you properly consider all of the evidence before you. And what we know from the two Commissions of Inquiry established by Mr Howard himself and his Government  -  one, by Mr Flood of the bureaucracy and intelligence failure over Iraq and secondly, through the Parliament through what became known as the Joel committee - that there were significant areas of intelligence, where the Government was not transparent with the Australian people, about the qualified nature of that intelligence. What I'm saying is if you're going to take a country to war and put our men and women in uniform and in the front line and in harms way - that any Government has an obligation to be up front and level with the Australian people.
BEAUMONT: So was that intelligence at hand at the time. Was that abused?
PM: Well if you look at what was available. Let me give you one specific example, just prior to the war British intelligence provided the then Australian Government with a view that if you went ahead and attacked Iraq that it would not decrease the terrorist threat, but increase the terrorist threat.
That was provided from memory by the joint intelligence committee of the United Kingdom. Advice which came through to the Australian Government, through the intelligence liaison network. And this has been subsequently canvassed in one or other of those two reports I mentioned before. Remember the public position by the Government was at the time, was that we needed to go and invade Iraq in order to reduce the terrorist threat. What I'm saying is, that objectively in itself is an abuse of the intelligence information that they had.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister just finally looking forward now. The alliance, our place in the Asian Pacific region and this notion of an Asian alliance, an economic alliance as much as anything. Why is that necessary?
PM: Well we're not talking about an alliance as such, what we're talking about is a possibility of setting an ambition for our region to have an Asia Pacific community by 2020. The reason is this, right now we have one body which is called APEC which deals with economic matters. And we have a range of other smaller bodies which deal with various bits and pieces concerning lets call it the political and security agenda. I think what our region needs for the 21st Century is a region wide body which we call an Asia Pacific community. Which brings together political, security and economic matters within a single framework so that we foster over time a common sense of regional community. Between countries as diverse as the United States, China, Japan, Indonesia and India as well as ourselves. And secondly that we don't succumb to any view on the part of some that there is something inevitable about conflict within our region.
I think we need to learn in part from the European example here. Remember France and Germany had been at each others throats for a couple of hundred years prior to 1945 and they managed to have sorted that through. We need to draw from some of that experience in shaping an Asia Pacific community.
It's a big idea, it will be controversial. Some people will not necessarily support it, but what I'm trying to do is to move the agenda forward so that we reduce the risk of conflict in the future and enhance the possibility of acting together on prosperity and environmental sustainability together.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister would you like to see a common currency in the region?
PM: I don't think that's even faintly on the agenda at this stage. The key thing is to enhance security and political cooperation which at present is fragmented. Remember that the region is currently host to a whole range of unresolved territorial conflicts. The Taiwan straits, the Korean peninsula, Cashmere. Involving a whole range of nuclear weapon states. You can either just stand back and just allow things to drift, or you can say actually there should be a better way of handling this. And that's what we are putting forward as a ambitious proposal for the future.
As I said an Asia Pacific community by 2020. You have got to have something to aim for in this business, otherwise the alternative is simply to drift and part of the Governments overall approach is this. Not just responsible economic management on the home front, not just assisting working Australians, working families and those doing it tough, those under financial pressure at the moment. But also planning for the future - infrastructure, education and health, but planning for our future also in a region which will become the centre of economic gravity for the world in the 21st Century.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, thanks for your time today, thanks for talking to us.
PM: Thanks Simon, thanks for having me on the program.


CARY: And we're joined by our Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. Mr Rudd Good morning.
PM: Good morning Greg thanks for having me on the program.
CARY: It's a great pleasure we're out and about today. We're at Rothwell at Harvey Norman's here. State of Origin, the team will be here a little later. Will you be at Game 2?
PM: I won't be because I've got to be in Japan and Indonesia but I've slotted Game 3 and that's on the robust assumption that we're going to do well in Game 2 and, even if we don't, I'm going to be at Game 3.
CARY: An optimistic and hopefully realistic assumption at that. You've been talking a lot about our relationship with Asia. What will this trip be all about?
PM:  Two things, essentially Greg. One is, we have a very important relationship with Japan. They are a huge economic partner. We also want to work with them on climate change, after all its home to the Kyoto Protocol. And thirdly, we want to enhance also our security co-operation with Japan as well. Very good partners for us for the future.
Second, with Indonesia, because it's the largest Muslim country in the world, it's our closest large-country neighbour and we have an abiding interest in making sure that relationship is in first class working order.
And with President Yudhoyono, who I caught up with at the Bali Conference on Climate Change just after the new Government was sworn in, we've agreed also to work together on climate change, particularly on rainforests, where Indonesia is host to one of the few large remaining rainforests in the world which are so critical for dealing with the overall challenge of climate change.
CARY: Okay. Just on climate change and the Kyoto Protocol and the whole environmental platform. We've been bogged down for a couple of weeks on the issue of fuel prices and both sides of politics arguing how we can keep that price lower. Isn't it true thought at some time when we get the carbon emissions and a holistic view of what we need to do about our environment, that at some point, prices will need to go up?
PM:  Well, Prime Minister Howard said that if you act on climate change, then inevitably, it's going to impact on energy prices, and therefore, fuel prices.
The key question is, how do you manage this in a long term way which also helps families as much as possible in the shorter term as well.
No one can promise a single solution on oil prices because they are globally driven and, they've gone up 400 per cent, I'm advised, since the Iraq War. That's the reality. The question is, what do we do about it. Our response is this. We need more by the way of energy efficiency in the developing world.
The reason there is, it's China and India's demand for global oil which is pushing the price through the roof, that's one of the factors. Second is, on the supply side, we need to do more to encourage prospectively in various parts of the world including Australia. But the third is this, fuel efficient cars, how do we encourage that longer term? And on top of that, what do we do in terms of alternative fuel strategy as well? And the last one, I think, is what do you do in addition to make sure we've got a decent, credible, public transport system for Australia, and that's where we have a real problem.
Those long term solutions. And then when you're dealing with more immediate challenges, then of course, there are the specific measures that we've put forward in the Budget to try and help families under financial pressure.
CARY: Okay. So obviously you've got a lot of things to deal with, so that means working very hard. The worry is, from those close to you and those in the public service and others, that you're working way too hard. Do you accept that argument? Do you need to be working as hard and having others work as hard to keep up with you?
PM: Well Greg, we're elected to govern. And governing Australia is a tough business. And I would think that the people who have supported me in my own community and electorate in Brisbane have known me for the last ten years, and always known that my attitude is, you go out there and you give your all. And similarly, given that I'm now Prime Minister, you give your all in terms of try to do your best for the country, it's a big task.
Responsible economic management at a time of global financial pressure. Trying to assist working Australians, working families, and those doing it tough with meeting their budget needs around the table. And also, investing in the future in some of the things we just talked about. Infrastructure, hospitals and schools. And then, more broadly, investing and planning for the future of Australia and its dynamic region that we find ourselves part of as well. That's a big day, that's a big day.
CARY: Well it is a big day, I am sorry to rush, we have only got a few minutes before the news and I want to cover a couple of other subjects.
PM:Yeah sure
CARY: But when does hard, when does hard become too hard? I understand that overnight we learned that three public servants from Treasury working 35 hours straight last week, to prepare a new policy. That can't be smart.
PM:I haven't seen that particular report but what I do know is that when you prepare for example Budgets under Governments going back from time in memoriam, I am sure the Secretary of Treasury would have the same view that often public servants do work in very intense stretches in order to get key things done. And that is not peculiar to this government that has happened in the past as well.
But more broadly, we were elected to govern. Governing is hard, you have got to work hard, work very hard and work, most importantly against a long term plan. If you don't have a long term plan, then you drift.
But I think my own work ethic is not about to change.
CARY:Prime Minister, only a couple of minutes, when our previous Prime Minister, Mr Howard was asked about Barack Obama possibly becoming president, he said Al Qaeda would celebrate that, they'd mark it in their diaries.
It now seems certain, it's a fact that he will lead the Democratic party against John McCain. He is favourite to become the next president. You have met the man, what do you make of the man and what is your perspective at this moment in history, really?
PM:Well I had, when I was in the United States, I had a long conversation with him on the telephone, because he was in a different part of America. I had met Senator Clinton face to face and Senator McCain face to face. Both Senator Obama and Senator Clinton are first class human beings. They understand our part of the world acutely and Senator Obama, because part of his upbringing was in this part of the world and he used to come in and out of Sydney at the time when his family was living in Indonesia, has many fond and positive memories of Australia.
Senator McCain has the same actually because of his long service with the United States Military. And I think his father was based in this part of the world during the war.
Whoever wins, Republican or Democrat, I think our interests are going to be well served. And as I said this is a good relationship, I'm a bit disappointed that my predecessor Mr Howard could have described the great Democratic Party as somehow representing the interests of Al Qaeda, that is just wrong.
CARY:What would you expect from Senator Obama. How much experience do you need (inaudible)
PM:Well Senator Obama has been in political life for quite some time, as has Senator Clinton. Senator McCain also.
Look, I think he has an enormous insight in terms of the domestic challenges of this nation. He understands our part of the world. The key thing is -
TRANSMISSION INTERRUPTION  


WILKINSON: Mr Rudd good morning to you past week the price of oil has been falling but all of a sudden we get to a long weekend and bingo we're looking at a $1.70 a litre. Can I remind you of what you said on the show two weeks ago. Take a look.
PM: I can't control the global price of oil. That's been fuelled by a whole range of factors, the rise of China, the rise of India, the fact that the Iraq war has impeded for sometime the global supply of oil. These are factors way beyond the control of a national Government such as ours.
WILKINSON: Prime Minister, do you stand by those comments because it would appear that there's still a lot of profiteering going on?
PM: On the question of what the oil companies do, that's why you need a petrol price commissioner. We didn't have one under the previous government, we've got one now, to put maximum competition policy pressure on to the big oil companies. And that's what in part this debate about FuelWatch has been and the Liberal Party have voted against it.
We've simply said, ‘why shouldn't motorists, for example in Sydney, know today that there is something like, or yesterday that there was about a 16 cent per litre difference between what one petrol station was offering in one part of Sydney, to what another petrol station was offering at the other'.
That's consumer choice, that's consumer power. We've sought to act in support of the consumer in a very difficult environment where world oil prices are going up.
Our opponents have said, ‘no, we don't like that, we've voted against it'. That's what happened in the parliament this week.
WILKINSON: Well, this price is not just affecting motorists either. Qantas is cutting back on flights and Virgin Blue could go bust because they're refusing to increase prices. In the past 24 hours we've learned - sorry could I just get your comment on that?
PM: Well it's very difficult. I was speaking with representatives of the aviation industry this week. If you step back from all of this, what we are facing is a genuine global challenge.
Every government in the world is struggling with this at the moment, for motorists who are under real pressure because of prices going through roof, but also key elements of industry as well, particularly those most sensitive it to like aviation.
We're keeping in close contact with the aviation industry, given their challenges. But can I say, it's a very, very difficult period we're going through. We haven't had this sort of pressure on global oil prices since the 1970's  -  400 per cent they've gone up since the Iraq war.
And what we need therefore is a long term strategy for dealing with this apart from helping families and individuals in their and pensioners and carers with their financial needs through the Budget now.
WILKINSON: Particularly if that price does hit $2 a litre which they're saying will happen by the end of the year.
PM: That's just horrific. That's why we are seeking to do what we can through Budget support and that's why the measures were brought in through the Budget, but also longer term.
And can I say, one of the things I was talking about in parliament yesterday is what can we do now to make sure that we work with the automobile industry to manufacture hybrid fuel efficient cars in Australia so that we can produce more savings for motorists and more fuel efficient transport.
And secondly, hasn't the time come for some decent, decent public transport systems invested in by the national Government across our major cities so people don't burn their petrol prices each day on the way to work.
WILKINSON: Ok, moving on now. We've learnt that the AFP has smashed an international child porn ring. They've arrested more than 90 Australians and 1,500 are under investigation. Are you surprised at this extent of this problem?
PM: I think everyone who sees these sorts of actions by a law enforcement agency, not just in Australia but around the world, are saying this is very important work by our agencies because everyone, everyone, has a view that we should protect always the interests of children.
This is enough to make your stomach turn when you look at the number of people who by these reports have been involved. But because it is an investigation, because it is subject to legal processes, I'm reluctant to comment further.
WILKINSON: Well your stomach did turn two weeks ago on the show when you described the photos that Bill Henson took as revolting. Now the classification board has given them the all clear and it seems unlikely that charges will be laid.
Are our censors and police, aren't they supposed to reflect community standards, it sounds like they're not reflecting your standards?
PM: Well I think on your program, I think it was Karl who asked me the question, what my attitude was as a parent to those photographs and my reaction was very clear cut.
I've been asked many times since then have I changed my view and let me say on your program today I have not changed my view one bit. I also said on your program that when it comes to the independent processes of the law, they are completely separate from what any individual politician may think, feel or respond to by way of their own individual judgments.
And independent processes of the law are on foot, dealing with this and other matters and we should not interfere with that one bit whatsoever.
WILKINSON: But do you think the classification board got it wrong?
PM: You know something, organisations like that are at arm's length from politicians, it's a matter for those bodies independently including the legal authorities, to evaluate these matters and reach their own determination. We as individuals may have our own private views; the virtue of our democracy is that we can have that.
I said on this program what my views were as a parent. I don't budge from that. But I'm not able to go around and start dictating to the legal authorities what they should or shouldn't do. That's quite a separate matter.
They've always been independent. In fact that's what I said on your program from day one.
WILKINSON: Ok, another subject this morning - Paul Keating and Bob Hawke, former Labor Prime Ministers have criticised your plan for a European style union in Asia. They've called it unachievable and inappropriate. Do you pay much attention to former Labor Prime Ministers these days?
PM: Well the great thing about this country is, always going to have an open debate. I think, look it's very important to do two things here.
Try and not just get caught up the day to day of international politics and look longer term about where we need to be in a decade's time. What I'm concerned about in our region here in the Asia Pacific region, is that we want to avoid two things: one, any drift towards long term conflict; and two what we want to do is to encourage greater economic and integration.
That's what we should be aiming for. My proposal which I put forward is, at present, we don't have a single body in our region which does both those things, and I've set an ambition for 2020, that we as a region should start moving in that direction.
I also said explicitly by the way that we should not be looking at the European Union as some sort of identikit model, our region is vastly different.
But we do need, we do need to work towards a body in our region long-term which at least has the states of the region talking together, discussing together, cooperating together, on political, security and economic and trade matters.
That I think is a reasonable aspiration for the future. There'll with a lot of debate about it, some will think it's too far. But I'd say to Hawkey by the way, when he kicked this thing off back in 88, 89 with the establishment of APEC and his work there and Paul's very important work on the top of that when Hawkey started this process they all thought it was unachievable as well - where he got. I'm simply trying to take it one step further.
WILKINSON: Ok well I am sure he will take that advice on board Prime Minister. Now finally, have you worked out what was behind your sickness, the other day? Was it a dagwood dog, a party pie, pork roll, or was it actually what a lot of people think, a bit of a porky pie?
PM: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, I don't know the last time you had - let's call it politely on national television an upset stomach, but when you have an upset stomach let me tell you, the evidence is graphic.
All I know is, when I was at the football the night before, I don't pay a whole lot of attention to what I eat. Someone hands me something and I stick it in my mouth. So, a problem with that.
Whether it was a dagwood or a party pie or someone told me this morning it could have been a chicken Kransky? What is a chicken Kransky for goodness sake.
WILKINSON: Chicken Kransky, I don't know. You have got to watch more closely what you're putting in your mouth Prime Minister?
PM: Well if you are watching the game you don't.
WILKINSON: Well Karl said that he saw you at the footy last Friday night and you were drinking heavily, but apparently it was tea?
PM: Yeah, yeah. I was about to say. You go and plead the fifth Karl Stefanovic! Hey, it was a great game though, wasn't it?
CARL: It was a good game, good result.
PM: Broncos came in just five seconds after the hooter. You know, all I know is it was a graphic and unpleasant morning that morning but I think a lot of your other viewers would have had a stomach bug of one description or another, what caused it, who knows? But it was not fun.
WILKINSON: Ok well you are off to Japan so make sure you take a bit of notice PM, it might help?
PM: Ok, thanks very much.


FAINE: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, good morning to you
PM: Good morning Jon, thanks for having us on the program.
FAINE: Yesterday you announced an ambitious proposal for an Asia Pacific Community. A push that will involve retired diplomat Richard Woolcott. What's your vision, what does it look like when this is up and running?
PM: Here is the current challenge. Right now we don't have any single regional organisation in the Asia Pacific which deals with economic cooperation, political cooperation and security cooperation.
My concern long term is drift. That is, we don't want to have a drift towards conflict within our region where we still have so many unresolved territorial conflicts.
So what do you do about it? You set an ambition for the future which is about having a regional organisation which we call an Asia Pacific community. Not modelled on the European Union, but which within one body has the capacity for all the states of the region - China, the United States, India, Indonesia, ourselves and others - to work together and cooperate together on how do we effectively bring about a common sense of community, that is -
FAINE: Do you want a unified currency in the end?
PM: Absolutely not. That's not the objective at all. The objective is to have us with a common sense of security. That is, a common sense of how do we work together on common security projects, common political projects and common economic projects.
FAINE: Paul Keating, amongst others, says it won't work and it's not a good idea.
PM: Well that's the great thing about Australia is that it's a free country. People have their say. When Hawkey, Prime Minister Bob Hawke I should say, got this idea for APEC, started back in the late 80s people said it wouldn't add up to anything either.
APEC is about economic cooperation. What I am talking about is extending that to political and security cooperation and basically having a forum whereby you can bring together the various states of the region who represent different languages, different cultures, different religions, different political systems, different economic systems - which is why it's so vastly different to Europe - but get them to cooperate together on common security projects. For example, how do we work more effectively together on common natural disaster challenges across our region. It's that sort of practical stuff we have in mind.
FAINE: How does that improve the lives of ordinary Australians, the people who you dedicated yourself to helping in the election?
PM: Well, let me give you one specific example. One of the things which needs to be advanced across our region at the moment, and President Bush has in fact suggested something like this, is a free trade agreement which cover the Asia Pacific region. If you free up trade within our region completely you open up huge new opportunities for Australian exporters and that means Australian jobs. And not just in the resources sector but in other key sectors like the financial services sector and for our hard working farmers who are currently held out of so many markets.
That could be advanced more effectively if we had an organisation which embraced political security and economic cooperation. But as I said it's an ambitious plan for the future but I believe in planning long term, having an aspiration and an ambition for Australia rather than just allowing things to drift.
FAINE: Is it part of your obsession with China?
PM: I think its part of my concern with having a set of arrangements in our region whereby we don't turn around in a decade's time and say ‘how could we have avoided that, how could we have avoided that particular conflict?' What I'm trying to encourage is a culture of cooperation on security matters, because at present, there is no regional body linking the United States, China, India, ourselves, Japan on the common security questions and that is I think a reasonable ambition.
We're not talking about a European Union. In fact in my speech the other night I said that it's not right to see Europe as some sort of identikit model. But we can do better than we are at the present, and to do that you've got to set an ambition and a timeline.
FAINE: Tying this, eventually I will, to your trip to Japan. The Productivity Commission in a submission yesterday, your appointed inquiry into the Australian car industry, said that $300,000 of taxpayer's money is spent for every job in the Australian car industry and we should lose one car manufacturer. Are they right?
PM: Well, I haven't read to full text of the Productivity Commission report yet. What I would say is that I said explicitly prior to the last election that I didn't want to be Prime Minister of a country where we didn't make things anymore. A core part of that is to ensure that we've got a viable automobile industry.
FAINE: But how many manufacturers do we need?
PM: Well, that ultimately is determined by market factors. But what I am saying is Government also has a role.
The speech I gave in Parliament yesterday is how do we actually engender in this country a new green car industry, a new green car culture, whereby fuel efficiency becomes the new driver for innovation, reform and change across our auto industry. That's why we stand by our half billion dollar green car innovation fund -
FAINE: Even though they say it's a waste of the money, the Productivity Commission?
PM: Well, the Productivity Commission often has a very dry view of these things. What I would say to the Productivity Commission, and to others, is that: when it comes to the future of the Australian automobile industry, let's again have a vision and aspiration for the future that we can manufacture cars in Australia, and secondly, use the challenge and the opportunity represented by climate change and rising fuel prices to get in this country built more fuel efficient cars, including Australian hybrid cars -
FAINE: Even if it's a lot cheaper if we continue to import them rather than making them here. You still want to make them here?
PM: I think there are a couple of challenges here, and probably three.
One is, ensuring that we have a continuing viable manufacturing industry in Australia.
Two, helping motorists with an increasing variety of fuel efficient cars so that consumers can choose.
And three, on the way through, also doing our bit for the environment.
That's what we're talking about yesterday and that's why on World Environment Day, in the Parliament yesterday, I made a statement about our vision for a new car plan for Australia, building on the Button car plan of the 80's and 90's, but where the new driving force, if you'll pardon the appalling pun, the new driving force is both the environmental challenge and the challenge for fuel efficiency to help the family budget.
FAINE: Unless Governments, for instance, take the charge, take the lead: charge: electric car, bad pun again Prime Minister, but unless -
PM: We both need a different job you realise that. In the humour stakes
FAINE: ... unless you commit the Government to acquiring large numbers of hybrid or battery powered cars then there's no hope of the industry getting a toehold. So, when will the Federal Government do what you told us some months ago you personally had done, which was trade in your Four Wheel Drive Ford gas guzzler for a hybrid car. When will the Government do that on a larger scale?
PM: In the speech I gave to Parliament yesterday I said we should have as a goal for ourselves over the next decade to have something like 4,000 Hybrids in the Commonwealth vehicle fleet. That's what I said explicitly, that's where the direction we should head in.
But with the individual auto producers, car manufacturers in Australia right now, the Industry Minister Kim Carr is in deep discussion, deep negotiation. We are determined to develop a new car plan for Australia and the objective again is to help motorists by giving them a greater consumer choice with a greater range of fuel efficient cars. But on the way through, having as many of those as possible made in Australia and not just for sale in Australia but export in Australia too.
The other thing people need to know is that we are currently, through the last car plan, the Button car plan, transformed a domestically protected industry into a major export business for Australia with some $5 billion worth of sales. I think that's a remarkable achievement, lets take it to the next stage.
FAINE: Your about to go to Japan Prime Minister are you going to negotiate with Toyota are you going to meet them while your there?
PM: Well, we've been talking with the motor vehicle companies across the board: Toyota, Ford and General Motors Holden. That's been done through the Industry Minister, we continue to do so.
FAINE: Are you meeting car companies while you're in Japan?
PM: I'm sure I will be. Because that's been part of the, part of the discussions so far.
FAINE: And will you be attempting to negotiate the next step in this hybrid car manufacturing while you're there?
PM: You know, one good thing about having industry ministers is that they do those negotiations for you. But, the Industry Minister Kim Carr, I know has been in active discussion with all the car manufacturers since we came up with this proposal in opposition for a green car innovation fund of half a billion dollars.
And it's given us a great platform to walk in the door of a car manufacturer and say, ‘how can we as a country and as a community work with you, the motor vehicle industry, which employs some 66,000 Australians, highly skilled workers, how can we take you from where you are to the next stage'.
And that next stage is a better export business, but also a better business for Australian consumers by giving them more fuel efficient cars manufactured locally to choose from.
FAINE: There's some inevitability over the course of the last two or three weeks while there has been arguments about fuel prices, FuelWatch, excise, GST, and all the rest of it, Prime Minister, but the inevitable thing is, the absolutely inescapable conclusion you have to draw is, that fuel prices are going to keep going up, are they not? And that's never going to be any different for Australian families?
PM: Well Jon, global fuel prices have been on the march for a long time. They are up, I think, about 400 per cent since the Iraq War. Every Government around the world is under the same pressure that this Australian Government is under at present when it comes to the impact of rising global oil prices on petrol prices and on the family budget.
The important thing is to be realistic about the proposals you put forward for the future. We put forward in the Budget measures to assist the budgets of working families, working Australians and those doing it tough.
But beyond that, to have a plan for the future to deal with more fuel efficient cars, to rise to the challenge of alternative fuels and, in big cities like Melbourne, also, to begin to work with our State Government friends on major infrastructure projects which do something to relieve urban congestion because so much fuel is burnt each week with people sitting in traffic queues.
FAINE: When we talk about fuel for cars, we also should look at fuel for houses, Prime Minister. Do you yet concede that the solar panels policy announced in the Budget to means test solar panels was a mistake and should be reversed?
PM: Well, means testing is a difficult challenge because it means that some people will miss out. We've been through a large part of a means testing debate right across the post-Budget discussion in the nation.
What we have done with means testing of solar panels for roofs, is to bring it in line with what Mr Turnbull, then Environment Minister did in July last year when he brought in a means test of $100,000 for solar hot water systems.
FAINE: But you've killed an industry.
PM: Well, there is can I say, the allocation in this upcoming Budget for this financial year for the solar panels rebate scheme is significantly increased. But the other thing to say is this, there are additional programs of some hundreds of millions of dollars to put solar panels onto all of Australia's secondary schools.
We also have for the first time a green loans fund for individual families to provide low cost, low interest, loans for people seeking to install energy efficiency measures  - 
FAINE: But low income people can't afford it. The people who could afford it have just basically pulled their orders. You're not listening to the industry if you don't acknowledge that you have killed off their future prospects?
PM: Jon, when you bring in a tough Budget in tough national and global economic circumstances where inflation is on the loose, which is pushing up interest rates and interest rates in turn have a huge effect on small businesses and have a huge effect on families and the ability to pay the mortgage, our first responsibility to the country is to take some tough and unpopular decisions.
FAINE: And that makes sense. But what extra inflationary pressure would there be from solar panel installations, Prime Minister? As one part of it all, it would be absolutely immeasurably small.
PM: Well, again, if you go to, let me answer that in two levels.
On the overall discipline of the Budget, a $22 billion surplus is made up of individual measures, each of which is tough. Many of which are unpopular. I accept that.
FAINE: But this one is economically foolish for the future as well, because it kills off sustainable energy?
PM: If you look at what we are doing more broadly on sustainable energy with a half billion dollar renewable energy innovation fund, on top of that the introduction of a mandatory renewable energy target of 20 per cent by 2020, add to that $400 million plus for the schools solar panels installation fund, together with the additional budget that we allocated for the provision of these low interest loans to families  -  all these things add up.
This is difficult, I accept. I accept also what you're saying Jon in terms of being unpopular. But tough decisions are made. But if you look overall at what we are doing on clean, green, renewable energy, across the field, including solar, this is light years ahead of where the previous Government was -
FAINE: It may well be, but it was looking even better, and it made commonsense and good economic sense and good environmental policy, and you've killed it.
PM: Well, can I say, if you've got green loans, $300 million over five years, up to 2012 to 2013, up to $10,000 subsidised interest for up to 200,000 existing households, who may not be able to afford the upfront capital cost of even buying a solar panel with an existing rebate  -  that helps.
When you look at solar schools, $481 million  - 
FAINE: So the bottom line is, you're not going to review this policy?
PM: I said before Jon that as we approach the finalisation of the emissions trading scheme, which is also part of our core response, our core response to dealing with the challenge of climate change, we will continue to refine and fine tune all of our policy settings at renewable energy, but also the necessary supports also for low and middle income earners.
FAINE: So you're hinting that you might review this particular one measure in the Budget, to means test solar panels?
PM: Jon I am simply re-stating what I've always said, is that as we move towards an emissions trading scheme in response to the Garnaut Report, dealing with the totality of the climate change challenge, then of course we're going to be looking right across all of our measures in support of renewable energies, but also other measures which support the family budget at time of transition.
FAINE: Alright. Well that would be, I'm sure, greeted with some delight within the industry if you were to so announce. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is my guest, you're on 774 ABC Melbourne, Jon Faine with you through ‘til 12 o'clock.
On other things, Prime Minister, are you a bad boss?
PM: I beg your pardon? Define and quantify.
FAINE: A boss who makes life unsustainable, to use the same language, for your staff?
PM: I would think that I am currently supported by a first class staff here in the Prime Minister's office in Canberra. Many of whom have been with me for a long, long time. Are you talking about the public service more broadly?
FAINE: As well as your own staff, reports from people who, obviously, for self evident reasons, don't want to put their names to anything, say that it's unsustainable. That word comes through, not just in environmental policy, but within your own office?
PM: Again, if you're talking about the work ethic of the Government, or the work ethic of the Prime Minister's staff, or the staff of the Prime Minister's office, Jon, we were elected to govern. We were elected with an ambitious program of responsible economic management, investing in the future, and implementing our pre-election commitments
FAINE: But it doesn't have to be erratic or unfocussed.
PM: That requires a huge amount of effort, a huge amount of work. And it requires a huge amount of dedication. We receive that, all those qualities through the staff who work in the Prime Minister's office and through the Australian Public Service.
FAINE: What sort of decisions though do you and other people make when you have put in unsustainable hours. If you have put in an 18 hour day. What are you like in the 18th hour?
PM: Jon, if you speak to public servants about when, for example the budget is put together. The budget each year is an enormously intense exercise where public servants work very, very long hours. It is a huge policy and public finance document.
And in times past, including the previous government, public servants burn the midnight oil in order to bring that about. Nothing has changed in that respect in terms of this Government. More broadly we have got an ambitious agenda for the 20,900,000 Australians who are not commonwealth public servants who are depending on us to deliver responsible economic management. Get on with the business of Honouring our pre-election commitments and get on with the business of ensuring that we are investing in the long term needs of the nation in infrastructure, health and in schools.
Now that is all tough, and it requires a lot of hard work and that hard work will continue.
FAINE: That sounds tough, it sounds inspirational I am sure to some people and it may even impress people in the business community but for others it is a little chilling, it is a little frightening because there is a certain hypocrisy is there not in saying I believe in work life balance for everybody else and introducing policies that force bosses to look after workers everywhere else but I am going to crack the whip close to home.
PM: I think my engagement with senior public servants is that, and I addressed the entire senior executive of the Canberra based public service probably about a month ago now, is that as reflected to me by the senior managers of the public service, they are enjoying engaging with a Government which is interested in the long term reform of the nation.
For them, this is a professionally rewarding and challenging experience because we are engaged in a policy debate and dialogue with the public service.
If you are trained as a public servant, and years ago in an earlier more gentle life, I was, what most professional public servants want is to be able to engage with the political arm of government on the future policy direction of the country. It is intense; it is sharp, but professionally rewarding.
But you know sometimes you have got to burn the midnight oil. You don't do it all the time, but you know we have big ambitions for the nation. We are going to continue marching in that direction.
FAINE: You are on your way to Gippsland, I will ask you about the by-election in a moment, but Barack Obama is now the democrat candidate in the United States race for the white House.
Did you back the wrong candidate when you were visiting over there and saw Hillary Clinton but not Barrack Obama.
PM: Jon, when I was in the United States, I said to the embassy, I would like to catch up with Senator McCain, Senator Clinton and Barrack Obama, where will they be, when I am in Washington DC?
Senator McCain was in Washington DC, I went and saw him up on Capital Hill. Senator Clinton was in downtown Washington, I saw her I think at Brookings. And Senator Obama was out campaigning somewhere in the Midwest so I had a long conversation with him on the phone. That's just kind of normal.
And they were all terrific conversations, all great friends of Australia.
FAINE: And Barack Obama as the Democrat nominee, how much does he know about this nation, what is his engagement with for instance, ideas like the one you floated, for a Asian Region powerhouse?
PM: Well because of where Senator Obama has grown up, he has I think from what I have read and from our discussions, a considerable understanding of our part of the world (inaudible) part of his time growing up in Indonesia.
On his way back to the United States from time to time he would drop off in Sydney. He has many strong and positive memories of our part of the world and therefore because of where he has grown up, I think a pretty acute understanding of some of the challenges here in the Asia pacific region.
But the Republican candidate, Senator McCain, with whom I had a good conversation, he too has an intimate understanding of our part of the world.
Australia's interests would be well served by whether we have a Republican or Democrat. I contrast that by the way with my predecessor Mr Howard, who said if Senator Obama or the Democrats won the next presidential election, it would be a victory for Al Qaeda. I found that remarkable then, I find it remarkable today that even Dr Nelson's liberals haven't said that that was a ridiculous thing to say.
It was then, it is now.
FAINE: Sounding more like election mode, for the by-election which I will come to after a quick question, Kevin Rudd.
PM: No just a bit of foreign policy accountability for those opposite.
FAINE: Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia, my guest. Jon Faine with you on 774 ABC Melbourne.
Bill Henson's photographs now will not result in a prosecution according to the New South Wales DPP in news that has been announced this morning. It seems that nobody, now not even within the legal establishment, let alone in the arts, censorship or media world agrees with your judgemental stance, if I can call it that, Prime Minister, that those photos were disgusting.
PM: Jon, if I am on national television, I am shown for the first time a couple of those photographs, and I am asked what my view, what my personal view is as a parent, I am as entitled as any other Australian to put my point of view.
And I did. I don't apologise for it. Haven't changed it since. I also said in the same interview, that any legal processes associated with the treatment of these photographs and this material is completely independent of politicians. I have said that consistently since then. As it should be.
FAINE: The resultant lack of any police follow up or court prosecution suggests that this was an inglorious episode in the cultural discussions that this nation occasionally engages in Prime Minister.
PM: Jon  - 
FAINE: And you added some fuel to that fire.
PM: Well Jon if you are on national television, asked for your view as a parent in response to a particular piece of material, you can express a view or simply waive it through. I expressed a view, don't apologise for it. But if we got to the stage where people can't be asked their views on particular objects.
FAINE: That would be censorship, I am not a fan of that.
PM: What I am about to say is we are all entitled to express our point of view, even Prime Ministers and secondly, to say quite rightly that independent legal processes associated with the treatment of material such as this are completely independent of the individual views of politicians. And I have said that since then too. These two ideas, you know, can coexist.
FAINE: Alright and just finally Prime Minister, what are the Labor party's chances in a by-election that is well, a massive margin in Peter McGauran's old seat down in Gippsland?
PM: (inaudible) really tough. I think this seat is, since the National Party came into being in 1921 or 22 it has been theirs. So it will be really, really difficult for us to prevail but the  - 
FAINE: A popularity test for Kevin Rudd?
PM: The challenge in Gippsland is to get people a local choice. You can either just walk away from very difficult seats like this and say, ‘it is too hard for Labor because we have never held this seat since the National Party had it from 1922'. Or you can put forward your candidate Darren McCubbin and say ‘he is a local bloke, local mayor and please consider him when you are putting forward your democratic choice'.
But in answer to your first question, tough as hell.
FAINE: It is though, a popularity contest for you.
PM: I think the challenge for the nation Jon is simply to go out there with the business of governing. Every day, every week, every month, there is going to be opinion polls up and down. Including elections, by-elections, state, federal. The key thing is to get on with the business of honouring your commitments to the Australian people on things like Kyoto, honouring your commitments to the Australian people on withdrawing our combat forces from Iraq, honouring your commitment to the Australian people to invest in education and health, in an education revolution.
Get on with the business of doing that, and people will make their judgement in you know, two or three years time, whether that has been sufficient or not. In the mean time, it is just head down, tail up, get on with the job.
FAINE: Thank you for time this morning.
PM: Thanks Jon.


Australia will join an international force under the United Nations Assistance Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) to help implement a plan to restore peace and stability to the strife torn region of Sudan.
Working under the code name Operation HEDGEROW, nine ADF Officers would be employed within the UNAMID Headquarters in logistics, movement and operational areas.
ADF participation in UNAMID is subject to final agreement by the Government of Sudan.
These appointments will provide ADF officers with an opportunity to serve within the UNAMID Headquarters and demonstrate the high level of confidence that the UN places in the ADF.
Darfur has been a continuing tragedy and the Australian Government has a responsibility to act and this contribution demonstrates our commitment to the UN and restoring peace and stability in Darfur.
An estimated 200,000 people have died from the combined effects of war, famine and diseases since 2003 and an estimated two million people have been displaced.
When fully deployed, UNAMID will become the UN's largest peacekeeping operation with an estimated 20,000 troops and 6,000 police and civilian personnel.
The Australia Government has also pledged five million dollars in humanitarian assistance to the people of Darfur. Preliminary planning has commenced for the ADF deployment to UNAMID.


PAUL BONGIORNO: Good morning, Prime Minister, and welcome back to the program.
PM: Good morning, Paul, good to be here.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Let's just go to Hillary Clinton for a moment. You met her in Washington a month and a half ago. Are you sad to see her defeat?
PM: Well, she's an extraordinary human being. She shows in America what modern women in politics can do. This is a very tough game, politics in the United States, and for her to have run so close and run so well and so strongly for so long, I think she's right when she says it proves now what women in American politics can do.
Having said that, Senator Obama is a first-class human being and a first-class presidential candidate. So let's see what happens in the great American democracy.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Do you think the pressure is on him now to have as a running mate a woman, whether it's Hillary or another? I mean, you have a Deputy Prime Minister who does a good job.
PM: The last thing I'm about to do at the distance of some 10,000 miles across the Pacific is provide gratuitous political advice to the Democratic Party about who should be number one and who should be number two. Their own electoral process has determined who is number one.
I tell you what, though, Paul - it was only last year that Mr Howard as Prime Minister said that, ‘If any Democratic candidate wins the US Presidential election, including Senator Obama, that would-be a victory for Al-Qaeda'.
Mr Nelson was Defence Minister at the time. He didn't disagree with Mr Howard's statement then. I'll challenge Mr Nelson today to publicly distance himself from Mr Howard's remarks now that he is leader and alternative Prime Minister.
PAUL BONGIORNO: We do want to talk about your Japan trip but you have an announcement to make on humanitarian aid?
PM: One of the things that we've been working on with the United Nations with is the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Darfur. When I was in New York only a few months ago, I met with not just the UN Secretary-General, but basically all of his senior team.
They are greatly concerned about that rolling crisis. We've had about 2 million refugees created, possibly up to 200,000 deaths in this silent rolling tragedy. So they've asked us for help and what I've said was we'll provide what we can through the Australian Defence Force.
It's a modest contribution. We're sending a team of 10 military logisticians to form part of the United Nations command in the United Nations mission in Darfur. The Sudanese Government has reservations about any significantly large contributions from Western countries.
In other words, we've operated within the constraints of the host government. But we've got to act and help in a practical way and I believe, given that Australians always want to lend a helping hand when you have such continuing humanitarian atrocities as we've got in Darfur, a place I visited myself not long ago, I think it's the right way to go.
PAUL BONGIORNO: So that's, that's, nine ADF personnel and also $5 million in humanitarian aid?
PM: There's humanitarian assistance as well to assist with the ongoing challenges of the humanitarian agencies. But there's a massive effort being put together by the African Union and the United Nations. When finally formed, this, I am advised, will be one of the largest UN peacekeeping operations ever - some 20,000 altogether - but the frontline forces will be very much from developing countries acceptable to the Sudanese Government.
But for any frontline force to work, it's got to have a command structure. It's got to have logisticians - and that's the specific ask of Australia from the United Nations and, as a country which always prided itself in putting its hand up to help and to be a force for good in the world, my response has been 'yes'. It's a modest contribution but at least it's in the right direction.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, going to Japan - you're leaving shortly for Japan - is this a trip you should have made three months ago?
PM: Look, the relationship with Japan is in first-class working order. Japan is a relationship which Australia has which is based on strategic security and an economic partnership and based on enduring friendship. I've been to Japan quite a number of times before in various capacities.
PAUL BONGIORNO: But are you guilty of giving the impression that China is more important to you and to Australia than Japan?
PM: Japan is a partnership which is anchored in our comprehensive engagement on strategic matters, security matters and economic matters. It goes back a long time. The Asia Pacific region involves many important states. Japan is critical. Also, we've got other partners within the region as well. China and Japan between them are our largest trading partners.
They are huge, and so it's important to attend to all of these relationships. But I've got to say, with Japan the key challenge is making sure that we take this existing strategic security and economic partnership to the next stage, which is why, when I visit the Japanese, I'll be talking with Prime Minister Fukuda about how we increase our security cooperation as well.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Will it be all that receptive to you? After all, the Japanese were particularly incensed at the very hard line we took on whaling, especially of the release of the pictures of the whale and its calf. We seem to have backed off. We haven't named our whaling envoy and we seem to be sending signals we're not going to take them to the World Court?
PM: Well, what we're doing now, Paul, is what we always indicated which is that we'll seek to resolve this matter diplomatically, and I'll be having discussions with my Japanese counterpart on that. But we have clear principles when it comes to the proper protection of whales in the Southern Ocean. Japan has a different view.
We'll seek to resolve that diplomatically and let's see how the diplomacy runs. But this is a disagreement among friends. It's an important disagreement among friends, but I would draw everyone's attention to the fact that our position on the question of protection of whales hasn't changed one bit.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Will we be naming an envoy soon?
PM: I understand those processes are well in hand with the Environment Minister.
PAUL BONGIORNO: What about the legal challenge?
PM: Well, the key thing is diplomacy first. Let's see how we go. That's why I'm looking forward to the discussions with Prime Minister Fukuda. But our position on the importance of protecting whales has not changed but let's give diplomacy a go for the period ahead. There are several opportunities for that to be advanced, including through the upcoming meeting of the International Whaling Commission as well.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Prime Minister, we'll take a short break.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, Prime Minister, is the work/life balance you talked about in the run-up to the election - does that apply to the 60,000 Federal public servants?
PM: Of course it does. What I find remarkable about the Liberal Party on this one Paul, is that this is the party of WorkChoices, this is the party of AWAs, this is the party of stripping away penalty rates, overtime and all those basic conditions which working families and working Australians have fought so hard to get for decades.
Now we have crocodile tears from the Liberal party. Well, come on, give us a break. We were elected with a strong mandate to govern, a strong mandate of responsible economic management helping families under pressure and helping carers and pensioners and planning for the future - and that involves a solid, solid work ethic from the Cabinet and of course from the public service.
PAUL BONGIORNO: But surely that doesn't include people working 36 hours straight?
PM: I would draw your attention, Paul, to what the Secretary of the Treasury, Ken Henry, who has worked for the other mob for 12 years and prior to that, worked for us, and guess what - in and around Budget time and the wash-up from it, it's not unusual for some of your most senior public servants to work very intensive bursts. This is not something which has never happened before in the public service. I mean for goodness sake - I used to be a public servant myself.
I've worked through the night before, because part of the public service, when I was a public servant, is making sure you get the job done for the timeline which has been set, particularly if it involves legislation. So it's not common, but it's not unique.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Your original comments came after the leak of Cabinet documents which gives the impression that you're at war with your own public service or they're at war with you. PM: The Australian public service are a first-class operation. Their work ethic is great. Their professionalism is of high standards and this Government, the one that I lead, is committed to the restoration of Westminster, whereby we engage with the public service on their ideas. We will not always agree with their ideas, but we don't mind an argument, a discussion, a debate.
That's the way it should be. It's a spirit I sought to reflect also in the 2020 summit. We're actually open to ideas and it means that if a piece of paper is served up by a public servant's department providing their advice, that's important, that will be part of the debate, but it won't necessarily be the conclusion that the Government through Cabinet reaches.
That, I think is a sign of health in a democracy rather than the John Howard approach which says there is one answer, one answer alone, it's the John Howard answer alone and no-one put any piece of paper anything different or we'll blow your head off.
PAUL BONGIORNO: The other issue that is worrying families, working or not, is of course, the rising price of petrol, $1.70 with forecasts of $2 a litre by the end of the year. It's making the impression that you gave in the run-up to the election looking very tatty now, isn't it - that would you keep downward pressure on petrol prices?
PM: As you know, Paul, having covered the election carefully, each time Mr Swan or myself was asked directly could we guarantee that petrol prices or grocery prices would go down, we said no. And secondly we were attacked by Mr Costello, the Treasurer, for refusing to provide that guarantee prior to the election. Why?
Because it would have been irresponsible, absolutely irresponsible, as was Mr Howard's promise to keep interest rates at so-called record lows. Then they went up another 10 times. The bottom line is this - we've got a huge problem worldwide when it comes to oil prices and petrol prices.
When I go to the Japan I'm speaking to Prime Minister Fukuda. Next month he'll be hosting the G8 summit. One of the matters I'll be raising with him and writing to other G8 heads of government on is the global challenge of global oil supply right now, because what is happening in Australia is happening worldwide.
Every head of government across the world is dealing with this challenge now and it goes to global oil supply in large part, the role of OPEC. OPEC need to open the production lines to a greater extent, increase global oil supply. They've done it a bit in response to representations from President Bush. The G8 provides an opportunity to apply the blowtorch to the OPEC organisation - and it's time that happened.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, you, of course, have been battling the Opposition with FuelWatch. As the legislation came into the Parliament earlier in the week, this is what the Shadow Finance Minister had to say:
SHADOW FINANCE MINISTER PETER DUTTON: Now the Australian public would be horrified to know that a key element of FuelWatch is that petrol stations throughout that 24-hour period - or some say throughout a 48-hour period - will not be able to drop the price of petrol. How can that be competitive? How can that be to the advantage of consumers?
PAUL BONGIORNO: Isn't it interfering with the market?
PM: Well, the key thing here is competition policy. What we said prior to the election was, one: we couldn't guarantee lower oil prices or petrol prices - or for groceries. Secondly, what we would do would be to act to increase the competition power available to consumers, motorists and people going to shop.
We have done that by creating a petrol price commissioner, giving that commissioner for the first time powers to conduct formal monitoring of what's going on in the petroleum industry and beyond that other powers as it relates to diesel and LPG.
FuelWatch provides motorists with information in a given day. For example, in the last few days, if there's been a variation, as I understand there has been in Sydney, of 10 or 12 cents a litre from one petrol station to another in the metro area, we stand for allowing consumers to know that information.
Dr Nelson stands for only allowing that information to in the hands of the big oil companies. That's the difference.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Prime Minister, isn't the elephant in the room here climate change? The fact of the matter is that these fossil fuels are dangerous to our planet and they're going to have to be more expensive, especially once carbon trading comes in?
PM: Well, the challenge that we've got in dealing with climate change is to act responsibly, nationally and internationally, so that we don't extinguish the planet for future generations. That's basically the challenge. And secondly to do it in an economically responsible way. Remember the economic cost of inaction is far greater over time than the economic cost of action.
Our challenge is this. Mr Turnbull, the shadow treasurer, has already said that the Liberal Party in government was committed to including petrol in the Emissions Trading Scheme.
Our position is we will wait for Garnaut to come down. We'll examine the scope of the scheme. But what we've also said is that when it comes to those families who are under financial pressure, that we'll also be providing other forms of support to cope with any impact that flows to their overall cost of living as a consequence of any such change.
Dr Nelson is involved right now in the mother of all fear campaigns about this, but last year they said they, the Liberal Party, were committed to emissions trading. Last year they said they'd include petrol. Last year Mr Howard said that, if you act in this way, it will increase the cost of oil and the cost of energy. That was last year.
Dr Nelson, being a politician of great principle, seems to have forgotten what the Liberal Party stood for last year.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, Prime Minister, you've been a frequent visitor to the United States over the years. Do you think America's ready to elect a black president?
PM: Once again, fools rush in where angels fear to tread. It's a matter for the American people. What I know about both of these candidates, Senator McCain and Senator Obama, with whom I had discussions when I was last in the United States, is that these are both first-class human beings.
They both have a great instinct for the world. They have a great instinct for our region. And I think whoever wins this, Republican or Democrat, the Australia-United States relationship will be in first -class working order.
PAUL BONGIORNO: It seems at this point in time, the greatest divide between the two candidates is Iraq. Senator Obama is for a fairly speedy withdrawal. Senator McCain is not. It's one thing, I guess, for Australia to withdraw its troops. It's another thing for the United States. If Obama did win and withdrew troops quickly, would that weaken the battle against terrorism worldwide?
PM: Look, first of all, who wins the United States election, we don't know. Secondly, what would then flow in terms of declared policies on Iraq and implementation in the field remains to be seen. What we know from both sides of American politics is that, over time, they wish to bring down the US troop presence.
I think that's clear-cut. What we did prior to the last election is say, ‘If you vote for an Australian Labor Government, by mid-year we'll withdraw our combat force'.
We've honoured that commitment and Mr Howard said the other day had they won the election, they would have sustained that combat commitment - a very clear distinction between us and the Liberal Party at home.
But I've got to say from my discussions with the US Administration, I believe they'll handle these things soberly, sensibly and also, bearing in mind our continuing common engagement, at a large scale in Afghanistan, and that's going to go for a long, long time.
PAUL BONGIORNO: There is one issue here at home that seems to be dividing all the political parties, as it does, and that is the question for aid for abortion advice. Now, we do know there was a ban introduced 10 years ago by the Howard government on this. Foreign Minister Smith is looking at it again. What role will you play or will the caucus play in this?
PM: I'll sure there'll be a caucus discussion. Put all this into context - there was an all-party report last year chaired by the Liberal Party under Dr Mal Washer, as I understand it, which recommended that these guidelines agreed in the past by the Liberal government be changed. That, of course, has triggered further discussion both within the Liberal Party now, and in our own party. The caucus I'm sure will debate this at the appropriate time.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Do you have a strong view?
PM: I've got to be presented with all the facts yet, but I would imagine this will be one of those things we will have a full and frank caucus discussion on.
The exact nature or the quantum of our funding commitment to these programs to assist population control mechanisms in developing countries and how they are administered, I'd really like to get my head around all of the detail of that before getting into the substance of the debate.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Many of the churches are already arcing up. Will this play any role?
PM: Look, it's a democracy. Everyone's got a pretty fair chance to have their say in this country. Good on them. And I say good on anyone who's got a different point of view. I go back to what I said earlier on. We actually don't push a debate to one side. Let's have a debate. Let's have a discussion and as soon as I'm across all the detail I'll be in it as well. It's one of the things which is part of how you govern the country - being open to challenge rather than saying any challenge to us represents some sort of threat to our political authority. Not our approach.
PAUL BONGIORNO: Prime Minister, thank you very much for being with us and safe trip.
PM: Thanks very much, Paul.


PM: It's impossible to visit Hiroshima and not be moved by what you see.
It is a graphic human story of the horrendous impact of nuclear weapons.
And as I said in my speech before, what happened with that bombing, 140,000 dead out of this city of 340,000, occurred with a single 15 kilo tonne bomb.
Across the world today we have some 10,000 nuclear warheads currently in operation, and some 20,000 in storage.
Many  -  in fact probably most  -  of greater capacity of that bomb which took out Hiroshima all those years ago.
So, the question is, what do you do about it. The question is, can the international community act, and what do you do about it. The question is, can the international community act in a more effective way than we have in the past when it comes to the big challenge of nuclear proliferation.
We know where the debates lie on North Korea. We know where the debates lie in Iran. Both subject to individual action at present.
What we need, however, to begin preparing for is the next review conference for the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
People are often critical of the NPT, but I think they need to reflect on its history.
When the NPT came into being in the 1960s, the emerging fashion was for one state after another to join the nuclear weapons club. And effectively, what the NPT has done, despite its flaws, is reign that in. And many states, many states, have chosen as a consequence of the existence of the treaty not to go down the nuclear weapons road.
The challenge we face today is that the treaty once again is under great threat and great challenge. And so the proposal that I have put today is to establish an international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament to be co-chaired by former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans.
We'll be discussing with the Government of Japan, as I've indicated in my speech, their form of participation in this commission. And also more broadly with the international community.
What's the objective?
The objective is to take the work already done by both the Canberra Commission, Tokyo Forum and elsewhere, including by the eminent group of Americans to whom I referred also in my address, and, to seek to shape a global consensus in the lead up to the MTP review process in 2010.
When we got to the last MTP review conference, frankly, a lot of the pre-work wasn't done. It's no one's fault in particular, it just wasn't done. As a consequence, it wasn't a terribly productive conference.
We can't afford for that to allow again and for the NPT, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, simply to die the death of a thousand cuts. We've got to work on it.
So, what we're proposing is in effect, a three stage process. One, Australia establishing this international commission, and we'll be working with like minded countries like Japan on their form of participation in it.
Two, the recommendations of this commission will then be taken to an international conference of experts to be convened, we plan, by the end of next year.
Three, to use that conference as a spring board by way of policy and political momentum into the actual NPT conference itself.
Why Australia? We've always been strong historically on the question of nuclear disarmament. We established the Australia group, we were key actors in the development of the comprehensive test ban treaty. And more broadly, at the time in question, were very active in the development of the chemical weapons convention.
It's time for us also as Australians to reconstitute our global disarmament and arms control credentials. The challenge is real.
I just conclude with this.
If you look at the writings of Kissinger, Shultz, Perry and Nunn, none of these are a bunch of peaceniks. None of them. Kissinger isn't. None of the others are either. These are hard realists in the tradition of US strategic policy. But they reached a conclusion after extensive and eminent careers that we need to reconstitute a global objective of the world about nuclear weapons and that the proper execution of an effective nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is a part of that process.
So, I think the challenge is there. We're going to have a go. And as I said in the speech as well, no guarantees of success. But you've got to give it a huge shove. And we intend to do that.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd are you saying that the NPT is pretty much in danger of collapse? (inaudible)
PM: I think it's becoming fragmented over time. And, what I'm concerned about with the NPT is incremental drift. And that is, when it begins to lose its cogency in the eyes of states. And, what's the machinery of that an effectively operating International Atomic Energy Agency which is its machinery of force in the field.
These two things have to be done and done well. And it means action also on the part of those states which already have nuclear weapons. Not just threshold states.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We'll be discussing that with our friends in Tokyo on Thursday. And we'll be discussing it in other capitals as well. And we'll take our time to refine the proposal. I know our friends in Japan have a strong, strong track record themselves on the question of nuclear disarmament given their own experience of nuclear weapons in this country. And we would welcome Japan's participation. And they've already agreed with us that we will have between us a high level dialogue on the NPT and non-proliferation more generally as part of this framework.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, given your strong restatement of the importance of the NPT today, are their any circumstances under which a Rudd Labor Government would see uranium exported to India while it remains a non-signatory of the NPT.
PM: Well, our policy platform on that is clear. And we've made it clear in the past. And secondly, we've also indicated that we believe it's important to maintain the integrity of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
I understand full well the arguments put by the Government of India. I've also, and I've had presentations on this matter from the Government of the United States about the importance of India's particular circumstances.
We've very mindful of that. However I would remind you of where our policy stands and it comes off the back of the platform of the Australian Labor Party.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) become a member of (inaudible)
PM: Well, the commission that I'm proposing is a non-Government body. It'll be created by Governments, but it's out there, and the model that I would have in mind is what the Government of Canada did some years ago with its international commission on the responsibility to protect. The Government of Canada provided the machinery for doing it. It convened a panel of global experts with a couple of co-Chairs, and it did the work.
And if you reflect back on the work which has been achieved since then, you can see how it has worked its way into the fabric of international law, and worked its way into the fabric of the UN system. And that work is not complete, it's ongoing. That's the model I've got in mind, But, it's going to be very, very tough.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, it's the technical aspects of that debate I'd prefer to refer to others. I've heard many presentations on this subject. And, I think it's a matter upon which politicians at this stage should be careful to comment. And I would defer comment until we have further internal discussion on this within Government.
Our own significant uranium reserve, as I said in my speech, is one of the largest known reserves in the world, I also believe underpins our credentials in addressing properly and in a principled way the global debate about nuclear non-proliferation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I think the facts speak for themselves. This relationship with Japan, I think, we've had seven Australian Government ministers visit here in six months. I can't think of any other country where we've had that concentration of ministerial visits. And, we take this relationship enormously seriously. And the other thing that I'd say is that as I reflect back on when Mr Howard became Prime Minister, I think he got here, to Tokyo, about the six month point. I'm here at about the six month point.
But, you know, the substance of this relationship is a fantastic relationship. And there is so much that we can work on. I described it before as a comprehensive strategic security and economic partnership. And if you go to each of those categories of work, there is much that we are doing with Japan and we'll do more. Including our common interest to expand further our security cooperation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) domestic issue (inaudible)
PM: Oh, I'm surprised by that.
JOURNALIST: Belinda Neal (inaudible) -
PM: Which nation-state is she representing?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible). Have you spoken to her, what would you say about what is going on and (inaudible) disciplinary action?
PM: First of all, no I haven't. Secondly, I understand my office has been in contact. And thirdly, I understand that she has issued a statement and I draw your attention to that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) petrol prices (inaudible)
PM: Australian motorists, like motorists right around the world, are copping it in the neck at the moment because of global supply and the problems, in part, associated with OPEC.
There's a huge challenge we've got as a global community. OPEC supplies something like 40 per cent of global oil. Secondly, they're not meeting again until September to adjust any future production quota for themselves.
On top of that, what I have said, and I'll be communicating this with my discussions with Prime Minister Fukuda on Thursday, is that when the G8 meet here in July. This must be the top of the agenda. Why? We need a clear statement from the world's major economies to the OPEC producers to lift their production quota now. Because currently we're having a distorted market. We have a distortion of supply and demand and OPEC has done very little by way of any interim adjustment in its output.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) supply side  -  what about demand?
PM: On the demand side, the other part of my remarks today was this  -  there must be a parallel emphasis at the G8 on energy efficiency and fuel efficiency technologies in the developing world.
China and India are projected to represent about one half of the prospective global increase in oil demand. Therefore, energy efficiency within those countries is of direct consequence to us. Not simply in terms of climate change reasons, but in terms of overall demand for oil.
We have a supply problem, that's OPEC, and they've been refusing to act. That's where our action must happen.
On energy efficiency in the developing world, in particular those consuming so much of the world's oil at present, this is now acutely important in order to deal with an unsustainable global set of increases to the price, unsustainable in terms of its long term impact on the global economy.
Long term solutions are necessary here. Long term solutions are necessary here. As well as assisting, where we can, to help with family individual budgets on the way through.
JOURNALIST: The other day in your ministerial statement on World Environment Day, (inaudible) funding for a hybrid car (inaudible) green car in Australia (inaudible) 2010-11, I think  -  when would you like to see an environmentally friendly green car of some description to be produced in Australia?
PM: Well, on the green car fund, the half billion dollar fund, my understanding also is that that fund can also in part be brought forward, is also designed to be accessible to motor vehicle manufacturers across the board and not to support any particular technology or any particular brand.
I want to see an Australian hybrid car, manufactured hybrid car, as soon as possible. For two reasons. One is, for those Australian motorists that like buying Australian manufactured cars, to give them that option.
Second, in terms of the impact on fuel prices, I think it's really important for people to have that as an option at home as well in terms of dealing with this horrible impact of rising oil prices that effects family motorists.
I'd just add one other point.
Whether it's our call to act on OPEC, or our call to use a green car fund to promote an Australian hybrid, or our call to act to give consumers basic information on the price of petrol, I notice the Liberal Party is opposed to each of these measures. Long term, short term. And it raises the question in my books as to what they actually stand for on this question.
We at least have these courses of action which we're pursuing . They seem to be saying no, no, and no.
I think people are getting tired of negative politics. They'd like to see positive solutions for the future.
JOURNALIST: Two questions, if I may. (inaudible) world is actually producing more oil (inaudible)
PM: On the question of speculators which is where you go to and that is in fact what we're seeing is stockpiling and speculators and some time speculative stockpiles. We're currently examining all the data that's available to the Government on that. And we'll have something further to say about it in the period ahead. I don't wish to pre-empt what we'll say there. We're acutely conscious of what a number of states have said about that around the world. We are now, ourselves, establishing the data and we'll have something further to say on it.
That, however, doesn't remove the impetus from OPEC to do something significant about its overall production quota which it has not adjusted despite an exponential increase in demand off the back of what's occurred in the developing world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I ask, about your speech (inaudible) nuclear waste (inaudible) Martin Ferguson (inaudible). Do you agree with him on that?
PM: Well, I haven't seen the text of what Martin has had to say. But, quite plainly, we're going to have to work this through our Government decision making processes over time. We'll do it methodically, we'll sift through the options available to us. These are difficult decisions, but we'll do it over time. We'll do it methodically. And we'll do it consultatively. That, I think, is the key response to that.
And I think the broader point being made by Sam Nunn and the rest on the global front is how do we cope with this challenge globally, given the abuse which can occur within the nuclear fuel cycle in terms of the diversion of material, nuclear material, for possible weapons application. That is, I think, their core concern.
JOURNALIST: Have you made a decision yet (inaudible) Beijing Olympic Games (inaudible)
PM: Fairly soon, I think. I think we're sorting a few things out at the moment on that. So, fairly soon I'd imagine.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) haven't made a decision? (inaudible)
PM: We've got a few things still to sort through. But it won't be too much longer.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know, Phil, what I'd love to do right now is get an independent international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. I'd like to get a few co-chairs. I'd like to get an agenda rolling. Then I'd like to have a conference in Australia. I'd then like to go to the NPT conference, and then sit down with the community of nations and say, ‘what are we then going to do?'But, you know, that's at least three stages away. And I think that the proposal you just put forward does not have a good foundation at all.


I arrived in Japan last night, and I have already been able to visit two great cities.
Both steeped in historical memory.
Both sharp in their message for the future.
First Hiroshima where I visited the memorial.
It is a very moving memorial.
A memorial that reminds all humanity that each generation must commit itself afresh to the cause of peace because the cost of war is beyond any new generation's imagining.
And now Kyoto, a city that embodies much of the rich history of this great culture that is Japan.
There is a famous poem about the beauty of Kyoto.
The great poet Basho wrote:
Even in Kyoto
hearing the cuckoo's cry
I long for Kyoto
And the beauty of this great city is in part about the change of seasons  -  the snows of winter, the cherry blossoms of spring, the heat of summer, and the colours of the autumn leaves.
And the change of seasons brings our minds to another great challenge for the future  -  the great challenge of climate change.
And it is with this great cause that Kyoto is indelibly associated in the minds of the world.
Today I too want to look to the future.
The new century and the new millennium have well and truly begun.
In fact the first decade of the new century is nearly over.
It is time for us to begin thinking about what will become the Asia-Pacific century.
Will it be a truly pacific century and therefore a peaceful century?
Will we continue to build prosperity for all our peoples?
Will we continue to enlarge the democratic project?
Will ours be a sustainable region  -  contributing to or detracting from a sustainable world?
We need to be thinking planning and shaping a region that embraces these aspirations.
Rather than simply allowing other dynamics to instead shape us.
As we think about our common future in the region and the world, Australia looks to Japan as a true friend and partner.
Our relationship is strong and our friendship is enduring.
It is based on a solid foundation of economic cooperation, reaching back to our commerce treaty of 1957.
We share common values.
We are both great democracies.
We are both strong allies of the United States and have benefited from the strategic stability that the United States has brought to this hemisphere over the past half century.
We both also benefit from an open global trading system as we both are great trading nations  -  with each other, and with the world.
Australia and Japan are also deeply engaged with global developments.
We support the United Nations, including its peacekeeping operations.
We provide development assistance around the world  -  and we work together when disasters hit.
We are recognised, I believe, as good global citizens.
And both Australia and Japan are committed to the development of regional architecture, institutions and practices in our own Asia-Pacific region aimed at promoting peace, security, prosperity, development and sustainability.
Australia therefore sees our relationship with Japan as a comprehensive strategic, security and economic partnership.
A partnership energised by common interests but also by common values and an enduring friendship.
Today I would like to talk about the challenges that we face for the future and how Australia and Japan can work together to meet them.
Challenges like nuclear weapons, climate change, food and energy security and the future institutional architecture of our region.
In the past decade, the world has not paid adequate attention to nuclear weapons.
There have been nuclear developments that we have had to confront  -  like North Korea's nuclear program and the danger it poses to the region; as well as Iran's continued nuclear ambitions.
And there has been some thinking about new ways to counter the threat of weapons proliferation.
Australia and Japan were both founding partners in the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).
And Australia and Japan cooperate closely on export controls in the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).
These help to support the cornerstone of the global effort to eliminate nuclear weapons  -  in particular the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
But there has not been the same focus on the danger of nuclear weapons that we saw at the height of the Cold War.
In some ways that is understandable  -  nuclear weapon stockpiles have come down a long way since their peaks in the 1980s.
The two main nuclear powers, our shared ally the United States and Russia, have negotiated a series of treaties that have cut the number of nuclear weapons.
And South Africa and Ukraine have shown that it is possible for countries that have nuclear weapons to eliminate them.
We no longer live with the daily fear of nuclear war between two superpowers.
But nuclear weapons remain.
New states continue to seek to acquire them.
Some states including in our own region are expanding their existing capacity.
Hiroshima reminds us of the terrible power of these weapons.
Hiroshima should remind us that we must be vigilant afresh to stop their continued proliferation.
And we must be committed to the ultimate objective of a nuclear weapons free world.
The cornerstone of the global nuclear disarmament efforts remains the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
It is a treaty that is grounded in the reality of the existence of nuclear weapons, but with a firm goal of their eventual elimination.
It is a treaty that, by any historical measure, has helped arrest the spread of nuclear weapons  -  particularly given the proliferation pressures that existed across states in the 1960s when the treaty was negotiated.
But 40 years later the treaty is under great pressure.
Some states have developed nuclear weapons outside the treaty's framework.
Some, like North Korea, have defied the international community and have stated that they have left the treaty altogether.
Others like Iran defy the content of the treaty by continuing to defy the IAEA  -  the agency assigned to give the treaty force.
There are two courses of action available to the community of nations: to allow the NPT to continue to fragment; or to exert every global effort to restore and defend the treaty.
Australia stands unambiguously for the treaty.
I accept fully that we have a difficult task ahead of us.
But I believe Japan and Australia working together can make a difference in the global debate on proliferation.
We are uniquely qualified.
Japan remains the only state to have experienced the consequences of nuclear weapons.
Japan today has a large nuclear power industry.
Australia has the largest known uranium reserves in the world.
We can, therefore, understand the concerns that countries bring to this debate.
And we share a view of the importance of the NPT.
Australia and Japan are also both recognised as being committed to non-proliferation, including through our strong support for the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Each year, for more than a decade, Japan has put forward a UN resolution on nuclear disarmament.
Each year, Australia is proud to be a co-sponsor of that resolution.
We do more than just vote for it.
Alongside Japan we present it to the international community and jointly seek their support.
Australia itself for the last quarter century has developed strong global credentials in arms control and disarmament  -  through our establishment of the Australia Group; our work in the United Nations on the Chemical Weapons Convention and as one of its original signatories; and our work on the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Australia and Japan have also both been at the forefront of global thinking on the long-term challenge of nuclear weapons.
In the 1990s, Australia convened the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons.
Japan in the late 1990s established the Tokyo Forum for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
These two bodies produced reports that have become benchmarks in the international community's efforts to deal with nuclear weapons.
I think it is time we looked anew at the questions they addressed and revisited some of the conclusions they reached.
The NPT Review Conference will be held in 2010.
It is the five yearly meeting of parties to the treaty to assess progress against the treaty's aims and look at how we can strengthen its provisions.
As former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said in 2007, nuclear non-proliferation is the most important issue facing the world today.
So, before we get to the Review Conference, we need to do some serious thinking about how we support the treaty and how we move forward on our goals.
I announce today that Australia proposes to establish an International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, to be co-chaired by former Australian foreign minister Gareth Evans.
The Commission will re-examine the Canberra Commission and the Tokyo Forum reports to see how far we have come, how much work remains, and develop a possible plan of action for the future.
The Commission will report to a major international conference of experts in late 2009 that will be sponsored by Australia.
I look forward to discussing with Japan their participation in the work of this commission.
Australia and Japan have also agreed to establish a high-level dialogue on non-proliferation and disarmament to advance this critical international debate.
It is intended that the Commission and the subsequent conference will help pave the way for the NPT Review Conference in 2010.
We cannot simply stand idly by and allow another Review Conference to achieve no progress  -  or worse to begin to disintegrate.
The treaty is too important.
The goal of nuclear non-proliferation is too important.
Even with these additional efforts, there is no guarantee of success.
But that should not deter us from exerting every diplomatic effort.
This is a view shared by people with unique experience in strategic policy.
In the United States, former Secretaries of State George Shultz and Henry Kissinger, former Defence Secretary William Perry, and former Chairman of the US Senate Armed Services Committee Sam Nunn said in an important article the Wall Street Journal in January:
“The accelerating spread of nuclear weapons, nuclear know-how and nuclear material has brought us to a nuclear tipping point. ... The steps we are taking now to address these threats are not adequate to the danger.”
Relevant to our deliberations here, this eminent group of Americans has suggested steps for the future.
They have said we should:
     * strengthen the means of monitoring compliance with the NPT  -  which could be achieved through requiring all NPT signatories to adopt monitoring provisions designed by the IAEA;
     * develop an international system to manage the nuclear fuel cycle  -  given the growing interest in nuclear energy; and
     * adopt a process to bring the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty into force.
It is time for a new approach  -  of which the revitalisation of the NPT and the IAEA is a critical part.
Another major challenge the international community faces is climate change.
When the international community met here in Kyoto a decade ago in December 1997, a consensus was forged on the need for the world to act on climate change.
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted.
And the first act of my Government was to sign the documents to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate change is the greatest moral, economic and social challenge of our time.
We have developed and grown over the past century in a high-carbon environment.
We now have to shift gear.
We have to move to a lower carbon economy.
And we have to do so at the lowest cost.
Australia and Japan can help lead the way in this project.
And I am pleased that I will be able to visit Japan again in four weeks time at Prime Minister Fukuda's kind invitation to attend the G8 Outreach Summit on climate change and the Major Economies Meeting Leaders Summit.
I would also like to place on record my praise for Japan's and Prime Minister Fukuda's global leadership on climate change in the lead up to the G8 meeting.
What we need is effective national and international action to meet the challenge of climate change.
Australia's climate change policy rests on the following principles:
     * acting on mitigation
     * acting on adaptation; and
     * acting globally through international negotiations.
And we take the view that our policy approaches must be informed by a clear understanding of the science of climate change.
While the science is clear on human-induced global warming, we must continue to deepen our understanding.
We have an increasingly sophisticated understanding of highly complex climate systems  -  the relationships between oceanic and atmospheric systems  -  and how the increase in our carbon emissions is affecting them.
Australia and Japan have a long history of working together on climate change.
In fact, it is the focus of our Antarctic research cooperation.
Because the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean play a major role in the global climate system.
Later this week in Tokyo, our Antarctic scientists will get together to further strengthen our cooperation in Antarctic climate science.
This work is a critical part of the puzzle to help us understand the pace, shape and trajectory of climate change.
Their work provides the evidence in support of the call for more action on climate change, not less  -  and I look forward to taking forward our cooperation with Japan on Antarctic research when I meet Prime Minister Fukuda later in the week.
In part because of this science, it is now clear that we have to act sooner rather than later if we want to avoid the most serious impacts of climate change and lower the costs to the global economy.
The economic cost of inaction on climate change is far greater than the economic cost of action.
The first pillar of Australia's response to climate change is that we need policies to reduce carbon emissions  -  the mitigation challenge.
We need to tackle this problem on a range of fronts  -  clean coal technologies, alternative fuels, renewable energy, and energy efficiency as well as combating deforestation.
Once again, Australia and Japan can cooperate closely here.
Japan relies on coal for over a quarter of its energy generation needs.
And Australia is the main source of this coal.
So we have a shared interest in solving the problem of greenhouse gas emissions from coal.
We have a shared interest in clean coal technology.
Australia and Japan are both investing in many new clean coal technologies.
We both support the Callide A project, the world's first demonstration of oxy-fuel combustion with carbon dioxide storage.
Australia is also investing in China in a pilot project to assess post-combustion carbon capture technology.
As the biggest single global source of carbon emissions, we need to invest in these new clean coal technologies.
To deal with climate change effectively, we must deal with clean coal.
It is core business for Australia, for Japan and for the world.
And again, I look forward to discussing this with Prime Minister Fukuda.
Nonetheless, driving clean coal technology alone will not solve the challenge of reducing carbon emissions.
A further area of Australia-Japan cooperation on climate change is deforestation.
Each year, the world loses about 13 million hectares of forest.
This accounts for approximately 20 percent of global human-induced greenhouse gas emissions.
Australia has outlined its commitment to reducing emissions from deforestation through our International Forest Carbon Initiative.
One of the key aims of this Initiative is to develop market-based approaches to reducing emissions from deforestation.
The ability to measure the amount of carbon stored in rainforests is the first key step in enabling countries to earn credits in the market for preventing deforestation.
Through this Initiative we are working with our neighbours, particularly Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, and these two countries represent two of the world's great remaining rainforest areas.
In March of this year I visited Papua New Guinea and signed a forest carbon partnership.
I will be discussing a similar initiative with President Yudhoyono later this week.
Through our work with Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, we can support these countries move towards participating in global forest carbon markets and gain economic benefit for the emissions that are avoided.
There is scope for Australia and Japan to work together here too.
We both have the high-technology systems to measure and monitor the carbon stored in forests  -  it requires a combination of satellite monitoring and on-the-ground observations.
Australia's National Carbon Accounting System (NCAS) is widely recognised as one of the most sophisticated systems developed so far.
I hope to agree in my talks in Tokyo that Australia and Japan will be able to offer our expertise to countries in our region to monitor their forests to support market-based initiatives to reduce deforestation; to promote sustainable livelihoods while making a significant contribution to protecting biodiversity.
A second pillar to Australia's policy is working on adaptation to the effects of climate change.
Australia is supporting countries to develop their capacity to respond to changed climatic conditions.
We have allocated $150 million to help the Pacific island states meet the challenge of adaptation.
And in March, Australia released the Port Moresby Declaration, which outlined our vision for a stronger closer relationship with the countries of the Pacific.
Sitting on top of all of these efforts is the need for an effective international climate change regime  -  a third pillar of our action program on climate change.
The international community has to act together.
We have to deliver on the roadmap agreed to at the Bali Conference.
There are irreversible consequences if we fail.
We must be ambitious.
Japan was ambitious in delivering the Kyoto Protocol.
We all need to be ambitious for the post-2012 climate regime.
We need to aim for a global regime that will deliver real action on climate change  -  based on credible actions by developed and developing countries.
Japan has been playing a critical role in the lead up to the G8 and Major Economies Meeting Leaders' Summit.
I will work with Prime Minister Fukuda to support an outcome that adds real momentum to the global climate debate.
I believe that we need a globally-agreed long-term global emissions reduction goal as a key step for framing the international response.
I welcome Japan's contribution to that debate.
We also need developing countries to take action to slow the growth of their emissions, at the same time as they continue their economic and social development, thereby placing a huge premium on energy efficiency.
We want to see an effective future global framework that reflects actions by all key countries, in binding international commitments which are consistent with our global agreement to common but differentiated responsibilities.
We fully expect that the nature and scale of commitments will differ but all nations of the world need to play their part, and make nationally-appropriate binding commitments to do this.
I look forward to working in close partnership with Japan in the 18 months that lie ahead of us culminating in the Copenhagen Conference  -  the next chapter in the mission that began here in Kyoto.
Climate change is also relevant to another of the great global challenges of the future  -  energy and food security.
Japan has been a global leader of these debates.
Energy security is particularly important given the global repricing of energy resources that is taking place.
We are currently experiencing the biggest increase in the price of crude oil since the oil shocks of the 1970s.
Global oil is at its highest price in history.
Global oil has increased in price by 400 per cent in the five years since the Iraq War.
This has profound consequences for global inflation  -  both for energy and for food.
There is an imbalance between supply and demand that is putting upwards pressure on oil prices.
So we need to deal with both sides of the equation.
Acting on their own, few governments can affect world energy prices.
But acting together there is much that can be achieved.
That is why our response to the rising costs of energy must include participation in a co-ordinated global response.
The international community must address the global imbalance between supply and demand.
OPEC needs to be pressured to increase supply in order to achieve proper market outcomes.
And disappointing supply growth from non-OPEC countries should also be addressed.
We also need greater openness to investment in the energy sector around the globe because many oil producing technologies are old, inefficient and inflexible.
Greater investment and newer technologies will help expand exploration and get oil out of the ground more efficiently.
At the same time, we need to take action to reduce global demand.
The remarkable and welcome economic development in China and India has, of course, contributed to greater energy demand.
Economic development leads to greater demand for energy.
For instance, the number of vehicles in use around the world is forecast to grow from 500 million to over one billion by 2020.
What this means is that in order to reduce demand, we need to address energy efficiency and greater transport fuel efficiency.
In the case of oil, the economic and the environmental imperatives are pointing in the same direction  -  demand reduction, in part through increased energy efficiency.
When the G8 meets in Japan next month, Australia argues that energy security, OPEC production and global energy efficiency be at the top of the agenda.
Escalating energy prices in turn have an impact on food production.
Australia's Foreign Minister attended the Food and Agriculture High-level Conference in Rome last week.
He reiterated our support for the decision by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to establish a Task Force on the Global Food Crisis.
In Australia, we are developing a comprehensive long-term action plan for food security which will draw on our expertise in semi-arid agriculture research, production and adaptation.
Australia has committed nearly $100 million to the United Nations World Food Programme for 2007-08.
I want to acknowledge that the Government of Japan, too, has been very generous in of its financial support for international emergency food aid.
Acting on the causes and effects of the global energy and food crisis will be critical challenges for the decades ahead.
How Japan and Australia meet these global challenges will depend in part on the future of our own region which is home to many of the world's major emerging economies.
Australia and Japan both live in the fastest growing and fastest changing region in the world.
By 2020 Asia will account for 45 per cent of global GDP, one-third of global trade and more than half of the increase in global energy consumption.
As global economic and strategic weight shifts to Asia we need to anticipate the consequences and shape the region's future.
We need to think about how to take the region's architecture to the next level.
Strong institutions are needed to underpin an open, stable and sustainable region.
We currently have a number of institutions  -  APEC, the ten-member ASEAN group, ASEAN plus three, the ASEAN Regional Forum, and the East Asia Summit.
Each has its own positive role to play.
But none of these mechanisms as currently configured is capable of providing the comprehensive framework for what the region needs to effectively shape the future.
The region needs an organisation which enables regional political, economic and security dialogue and cooperation and, where agreed, common action.
That is why I have proposed that we begin to discuss an Asia Pacific Community.
Not an identical model to Europe.
Not an economic union, monetary union, exclusive customs union  -  even less a common security pact.
Our circumstances are vastly different to Europe.
But the purpose is to encourage the development of a genuine and comprehensive sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation  -  and so actively work against any latent assumptions that future conflict in our region might one day be inevitable.
It will take a lot of work to build an Asia Pacific Community  -  but we should remember 20 years ago Australia and Japan helped fashion APEC from nothing.
Twenty years later the challenge is to take APEC to the next stage in its evolution and fashion for the first time a comprehensive Asia Pacific Community.
In this context I noted carefully Prime Minister Fukuda's important speech last month about a future Asia that “acts together”.
To ensure a peaceful Asia Pacific Century, we will all need to act together.
None of us know precisely what our region or the world will look like in 2020 or in 2050.
But I know that decisions we make now will shape that world.
That is why the Australian Government is committed to working with close friends and partners like Japan on the challenges we face.
In particular on critical challenges like nuclear weapons, climate change, energy and food security, and the future shape of our region itself.
Over 50 years ago Australia and Japan took the first formal steps to establish an enduring friendship and relationship.
We are now true partners.
I want our two nations to capitalise on that foundation.
To broaden and deepen our bilateral political, security and economic relationship.
And to broaden and deepen our multilateral cooperation in tackling the great challenges of our region and our world in the century of the Asia Pacific that lies ahead.
Let us  -  Japan and Australia  -  shape that future together.


AMBASSADOR: Good morning ladies and gentleman. I'm Murray McLean Australia's Ambassador to Japan. Welcome to today's media opportunity.
It gives me great pleasure to introduce the honourable Kevin Rudd MP, Prime Minister of Australia.
Katsuaki Watanabe, President of Toyota Motor Corporation.
Senator the Honourable Kim Carr, Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research.
And, Mr Tokuichi Uranishi, Executive Vice President, Toyota Motor Corporation.
I'd first like to welcome Minister Carr to the lectern.
CARR: Your Excellency, thank you very much for that introduction.
Can I just say that Australia is proud, in fact very proud, of its car industry.
We are proud to be one of only 14 countries around the world with the know-how to design, engineer and manufacture a car from scratch.
I firmly believe our economy benefits from the investment, from the jobs, from the skills, from the research and development, from the innovation and exports generated by the automotive manufacturing industry.
There are many landmark dates in the history of the Australian car industry.
1894 was when Australia first produced a motor vehicle.
1963 when the Tiara was assembled at Port Melbourne, and became one of the first Toyotas ever built outside Japan.
And in 1984 when the late John Button unveiled his visionary plan to build an Australian car industry based on innovation and exports.
And in 2006 when Toyota fulfilled that vision by exporting its 500,000th Australian-made vehicle.
Working with the industry to meet new challenges and secure new investment is a high priority for me, and for the Australian Government.
Indeed, with the Government sworn in on the 3rd of December last year, I think I first met with Toyota executives, in my new role as a Minister, on the 12th of December last year.
And in February, I was here in Nagoya and toured Toyota's remarkable plant  -  or at least part of it.
It is a great pleasure for me to be back here today with the Prime Minister, the Honourable Kevin Rudd MP, to mark another important milestone in the story of the Australian automotive industry.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd.
PM: Twelve months ago I asked the question, why Australia did not have an Australian manufactured hybrid car. Twelve months later, we are now much closer to turning that vision into a reality.
Because today what we are announcing with our friends from Toyota is that from 2010, Toyota will produce 10,000 Toyota Camry hybrid vehicles at its Altona plant in Victoria.
We are pleased by this announcement, and we thank Toyota Motor Corporation for its cooperative involvement with the Australian Government in this important project.
This hybrid will use one third less petrol than a standard car. One third therefore less by way of emissions. And, therefore, for an average family driving some 20,000 kilometres a year, saving up to $1,000 a year.
Therefore, for a project like this, this is an important step forward for Australian motorists and fuel efficiency. An important step forward for the Australian motor vehicle industry. And an important step forward also for the environment.
This occurs at a time when as Australia, of course, must do whatever we can to assist motorists who are faced with the challenge of rising fuel prices and also assist in our overall efforts to bring down greenhouse gas emissions.
The Industry Minister advised me just before that we have something like a million cars sold each year in Australia. And only 5,000 of those at present are hybrids. Australia, we believe, needs to do better and more on the question of fuel efficient vehicles.
Of course, this arrangement has come as a consequence of negotiations between Toyota and the Australian Government. And as part of the Government's new car plan, we've decided therefore to commit a grant from the new green car innovation fund of some $35 million.
The Victorian Government is also making an investment.
We decided to make this green car innovation fund available, of course, to all motor vehicle manufacturers and for all those engaged in various forms of fuel efficiency technology because our overall objective is to drive home a better bargain for Australian motorists, in terms of their fuel costs. But also, to drive home a better bargain also when it comes to greenhouse gas emissions.
I repeat  -  12 months ago, we put out a vision which is, ‘how about Australia having its own Australian manufactured hybrid car'. 12 months later, we have, therefore, this important announcement with our partners here in Japan for that vision to begin to be turned into reality.
Thank you very much to our friends from Toyota, and I look forward very much also to welcoming President Watanabe to Australia very soon, in the next month or so, where we intend to discuss, again, the long term future of the cooperation between Australia and Toyota, the long term future of hybrid manufacture in Australia, the long term future of fuel efficient cars in Australia. And I look forward very much to welcoming President Watanabe when he visits. Thank you very much.
WATANABE: [Remarks in Japanese]
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you're giving $35 million assistance from the Green Car Innovation Fund. Can you tell us, or maybe President Watanabe could tell us, what it will be used for?
PM: Well, I'll make a general comment and then I'll turn to Minister Carr and then to President Watanabe.
This Green Car Innovation Fund is all about how you assist with the start up of new technologies in Australia. It is not a production subsidy, it's about starting up a new business. And, that's what we set as an ambition last year. We are proud of the fact that we are now able to realise that ambition. We think this has been a good partnership between the Government of Australia and Toyota.
As I said, good for motorists, good for fuel efficiency, good for the car industry in Australia, good for the environment.
CARR: This fund will be used to, obviously, the car industry development of new production facilities within the existing Camry line in Altona. And it will add capacity to the Australian manufacturing industry. It will enhance the capacity of Toyota's research and development centre in Melbourne. And will provide a platform for future developmental work for future Camry productions at Altona.
WATANABE: [Response in Japanese]
JOURNALIST: President Watanabe, Tim Lester from the Nine Network in Australia. Would you first tell us what price you expect the hybrid Camrys to retail for in Australia compared to their traditional counterpart  -  how much more will Australian motorists be paying? And can you also give us a picture of how you think this will change the plant at Altona in terms of numbers of employees and its long term operations?
WATANABE: [Response in Japanese]
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, yesterday you were talking about the clothing industry, the whitegoods industry, how countries should play to their strengths in manufacturing. And that is unfair for Australian families to be subsidising uneconomical industries. How does that fit with the car industry in Australia and how do you justify supporting that industry when other countries obviously make cars cheaper and better than we can?
PM: Because I've long said that we believe in innovation. We believe in innovation policy, we believe in industry policy.
It was very clear last year when campaigning for the last election that I didn't want to be Prime Minister of an Australia where did didn't manufacture things anymore. I was very upfront about that. Very upfront about the fact that we believe in industry policy and we believe in innovation policy.
And therefore, when you look at the important innovations which are occurring with hybrid technology and other fuel efficient technologies, and given the overarching environmental imperative here, and, the new imperative when it comes to the cost to family motorists with the cost of fuel, we believe this is the right way to go.
Innovation policy across the board when you're talking about support for R&amp;D efforts, of course means that you are injecting public investment into R&amp;D operations which may occur within private companies  -  we understand that. But we have long done that. We have long done that in the past. And we'll continue to do so in the future.
And what is the additional public policy benefit for Australia? Providing Australian motorists with more options when it comes to Australian manufactured hybrid cars and fuel efficient cars. Helping the family petrol budget and on top of that, helping reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We think it's the right policy decision.
And, this framework for the green car innovation fund is open to other fuel efficient innovation and technologies and of course, to other motor vehicle manufacturers.
But, our friends in Toyota have been engaged in this negotiation, as the Minister said, from the earliest days of the Government. And we're proud of the decision. And we're proud of our cooperation with Toyota who have been long term friends and partners of Australia. And as I said to the President before, we have a long and strong history of cooperation. We also believe we're going to have a long and strong future.
JOURNALIST: Question to Minister Carr, you're going to Detroit, as I understand it, to meet with the Ford Motor Corporation. Do you think this decision by Toyota will assist? Will you try to convince them to compete?
CARR: Yes I do, and it's not just with Ford, it's with General Motors as well.
The Australian automotive industry is extremely important for the rest of manufacturing in Australia. It is a highly internationalised industry so it's important to talk to decision makers. It's important to talk to people who can make the call on new investments and that's what we're doing.
We want to see a rapid transformation of the Australian automotive industry because it is so important. Not just to ensure that people have the freedom of movement, its a great liberator, but also because the effects it has on so many other things. Whether it be steel, whether it be plastics, whether it be the electronics industry. I mean, building a skills base for automotive also means we have the skills capacity to build a fighter aircraft.
You know, it's very important for the aerospace industry.
So it's vital that we get these connections right.
This is an industry that's been under a bit of pressure. The Government wants to work with the industry in meeting the challenges of the future, and that means reducing the impact on people's wallets and reducing the impact on the environment.
QUESTION: Mr Watanabe, my name's Matthew Franklin, I work for The Australian newspaper.
I've got a question for both of you.
Mr Rudd, really this is just a subsidy is it not? Why should taxpayers be funding the production of a new car? And isn't this further proof that large car manufacturers really require Government assistance to stay in Australia?
And, Mr Watanabe, would you have been producing this car in Australia without access to the $35 million grant?
PM: I think the first thing to say is that you have here a combined partnership between the Australian Government and the Victorian Government. So, there is an investment from the Victorians as well.
On the question that you posed specifically to me, it's a bit like saying that all innovation policy which involves the injection of a public investment into private R&amp;D operations, is wrong. I don't have that view. I never have had that view. I never will have that view.
R&amp;D, particularly those related to clean, green technologies, constitute a public good. And whether those public goods are executed through formally public research, or in private research associations and institutions, or, associated with private companies, is immaterial.
What we have here is an important underpinning technology which we will now have manufactured in Australia.
And as the Minister has just said, in his upcoming discussions elsewhere, what we need to do as a nation is in fact to have smart investments in new innovations and new technologies right across the entire generation of fuel efficiency and energy efficiency.
Why? Motorists and consumers need lower prices in an age where we now have a global oil shock. And secondly, on top of that, we have now a new global environmental imperative called climate change.
WATANABE: [Response in Japanese]
JOURNALIST: My name's Karen Middleton, from SBS television Australia.
Question to you, Prime Minister Rudd, can I ask you, what if any conditions are you placing on this company, is there a timeframe involved in production of any employment or any other conditions will be placed on this funding?
And secondly, to President Watanabe, can you tell us what bench marks you will set for the success of this program? Is there a time frame in mind (inaudible) review the success (inaudible)
PM: I'll ask Minister Carr to supplement my answer.
But the bottom line is this. We said last year, very clearly, let's have an ambition for Australia to have an Australian manufactured hybrid car.
12 months later, we are now in the process of realising that vision.
That's not bad progress for a Government that's been in office for six months.
And there's a core reason for it. That is, if you speak to motorists, a lot of them like to actually support cars which have been made in Australia. Because they like to support Australian manufacturing jobs. There is 66,000 Australians that are employed in the motor vehicle manufacturing industry. Therefore, if you can bring these things together, which is the natural desire of many consumers to buy a car which is made in Australia, and a car which helps the family budget over time because of the use of hybrid technologies and helps the environment  -  that's the core benchmark which I established.
Minister, do you wish to add?
CARR: Yes, thank you Prime Minister.
The negotiations have been going on with Toyota Australia for a six month period. Yes, we have set quite definite milestones. These are of course are matters are discussions between the Government and the company and we're not at liberty to discuss the commercial in confidence nature of those conversations.
But the primary objective here is to ensure that we have high skills, high wage jobs for Australian workers, producing advanced technological means of ensuring the industry is able to cope with the challenges of the future.
And I'm absolutely confident that all of those conditions will be met.
WATANABE: [Response in Japanese]


The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Toyota President Katsuaki Watanabe announced this morning in Nagoya, Japan that Toyota Australia will produce 10,000 hybrid Camrys a year, at Altona, from 2010.
Victorian Premier John Brumby said the announcement was a significant coup for Australia, and a project the Federal and Victorian Governments had been working hard on for some time.
Mr Rudd said: "We are delighted Toyota has decided to invest in the Australian car industry and build the hybrid Camry at Altona."
"The Federal Government is talking to all the car and component makers about ways to build cleaner greener cars, to reduce carbon emissions and improve fuel efficiency, as part of building a sound future for the Australian vehicle industry.
"We are very pleased that Toyota has taken the lead. The hybrid Camry will be the first green vehicle of its kind to be manufactured in Australia," he said.
Mr Brumby said: "Fuel efficient cars are the future of the automotive industry."
"I have been personally advocating for a hybrid car to be built in Victoria. During my recent trip to Japan, I met with the President of Toyota Katsuaki Watanabe to discuss the prospect of Victoria becoming home to a locally built hybrid car and I am pleased Toyota has now made this decision.”
"The production of the hybrid Camry will create additional local automotive jobs and shows that automotive industry is capable of adapting and meeting the global challenges of climate change."
Mr Rudd said: "As part of its $500 million Green Car Innovation Fund, the Federal Government will provide $35 million in assistance to Toyota Australia to help secure a new era and a new direction for green automotive production in Australia.”
The Victorian Government will also make a financial contribution to the project.
The hybrid Camry will be the greenest car manufactured in Australia with lower emissions than any other Australian-produced model.


ALAN JONES: Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard has joined me. Julia, good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning, Alan.
ALAN JONES: Nice to talk to you. I'm sorry, but I must ask you about Belinda Neal. You're running the country now while Kevin Rudd's out of town. Have you spoken to Belinda Neal?
JULIA GILLARD: I haven't spoken to her directly, Alan. Obviously the Prime Minister's office, which is assisting me with my work this week, has been in contact with Belinda.
ALAN JONES: What do you make of these sorts of allegations?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I made it clear yesterday, I'm not happy about any of this. As Members of Parliament, whenever you're out in public, and it doesn't matter whether you think you're there for a public event or a private event, the reality is you're representing the Parliament. All of us have to remember that and I think this is now a hotly disputed matter where the facts are very unclear. We've got statutory declarations on all sides with all different versions but I think it does stand as a reminder to all of us that there's a standard that the Australian public expects us to live up to whenever we're out in public.
ALAN JONES: There's another issue here, I mean two other issues, I think. I mean firstly the victims, and it appears there were victims here - those who've argued that this behaviour did occur - are vulnerable people on limited income. They've got very few defences, they desperately need their job. The business needs desperately to stay in business. If they are afraid that politicians will exercise quote unquote “power” then they are in a very vulnerable position, aren't they?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I don't want anybody to be concerned about that. I mean this is a business where people go and buy meals and it's served to them by staff who are obviously trying to get about their jobs. None of this I think should be affecting the business. People should still be going there and enjoying themselves.
ALAN JONES: But if they felt threatened when they were performing their tasks then they'd be worried as to what it might mean in the end result.
JULIA GILLARD: I think that gets to be (inaudible) of all the facts that are contested here. I mean I know there are varying versions on all sides so I don't want to be assuming what did or didn't happen here when there is such a dispute over the facts.
But Alan I'm more than happy to say that as a general statement about politicians anywhere, anytime we should be treating the people who are dealing with us, whether they're there in restaurants, whether we're meeting them walking down the street, whether we're meeting them at community functions, we should be treating them with respect.
ALAN JONES: They are your paymasters after all, aren't they?
JULIA GILLARD: Well it's a democracy and everybody's got one vote and that's the great, great strength.
ALAN JONES: You're the Minister for Education, I mean bullying, according to research, 70 per cent of kids at school go through bullying at one stage. The abuse of power does represent verbal bullying. That's one of the concerns that seems to be at the heart of all of this.
JULIA GILLARD: Bullying is unacceptable. It's unacceptable in our schools and we've certainly talked to teachers and school principals.
ALAN JONES: It's illegal in the workplace.
JULIA GILLARD: As it should be, as it should be. And no one should be trying to exercise that degree of power over another person in an inappropriate manner.
But Alan, obviously in relation to this incident, we don't know what the facts are in the sense that there are now so many versions out there. Obviously, Ms Neal has made a statement about the matter. But for me, the thing that comes out of it is a reminder to all of us that there's a standard when we're out in public and we've all got to strive to meet that standard.
ALAN JONES: As the boss, though, just for one final question on this until we get to other things on policy but, you're running the country, you're in charge of the country, do you see it as your responsibility to call in the member of your team  -  there's one member of your team, the other person is a member of Morris Iemma's team - to call this person in to see whether their behaviour is consistent with what you expect of your team.
JULIA GILLARD: Well Ms Neal has made public statements about what she says happened on that night. She obviously rejects the allegations that have been made about her conduct on that night. What I would say to Belinda, what I would say to any member of the team is that people have to make sure that they're acquitting a good statement when they're in the public domain.
ALAN JONES: There is no reason it would appear for those people who were just serving plates and setting up tables to go into the detail of a statutory declaration that they have. Something must haven provoked that response, mustn't it?
JULIA GILLARD: Well what we do know is Belinda has made a statement in the public domain. People who were with her have now made statements. There have been statements from some of the staff involved. That's all out there. What my message is, very clearly, is whether it's to Belinda or any Member of Parliament, there's a standard. It's a standard I expect to see acquitted whenever in public.
ALAN JONES: And if they don't meet it?
JULIA GILLARD: Well it's a standard I think the community expects, and Alan you've pointed out, ultimately, the community is our paymaster.
ALAN JONES: On childcare, you're promising $1.5 billion of taxpayer's money to lift the childcare subsidies from 30 per cent of the cost of childcare to 50 per cent. Why wouldn't a childcare operator cash in on this and just put up their prices?
JULIA GILLARD: Well because they know that the Government attitude is, very clearly, that we will be watching to see if there's any unfair pricing practices.
ALAN JONES: There's nothing you can do.
JULIA GILLARD: Well there are things that we can do to expand childcare supply. And people in the childcare market know that that's a powerful tool...
ALAN JONES: (inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: Well it's not. We've got more than 1,000 childcare workers coming on stream. They're in training now. We're committed to delivering 260 new childcare centres. We're going to pay the TAFE fees for people who want to be childcare workers, got another 1500 early childhood educators...
ALAN JONES: So you're saying build government childcare centres near existing centres to provide some competition. Is that all you can do?
JULIA GILLARD: Well supply side measures do make a difference to competition. 260 new centres is a big supply side measure. Expanding workforce is also important. Childcare centres right around the country that would do more if they could get more workforce into them. We're saying we want to see a broader childcare market here and I think that would be something on the minds of childcare providers.
ALAN JONES: But from July 1, as you know, childcare fees are going to go up by six per cent or $4.20 a day. Now if the whole of the workforce asked for six per cent from July 1 we'd be up in arms.
JULIA GILLARD: I think we've got to remind ourselves of the starting points here Alan, which is we are changing the arrangements for childcare so that the rebate we give people goes from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. People are going to end up better off as a result of this move, that is, they will pay less of their childcare and the Government will give them more to pay their childcare fees ...
ALAN JONES: You would hope, it goes up, just for the benefit of my listeners, the rebate goes up from $4,354 a year to $7,500 a year on July 1. Why wouldn't an operator say “well I can have a slice of that now”?
JULIA GILLARD: Because we are saying to operators we will be monitoring prices. We understand that the genuine costs of providing childcare change from time to time, the costs of doing business in childcare go up, but we will be alert for any unfair pricing practices. The Government is delivering a range of supply side measures which are going to change the childcare market. That's something I think would weigh on the mind of operators, particularly when we've said in terms of the selection of providers for our new 260 centres that a track record of providing affordable care will matter for that selection and we've said we're prepared to canvass other options at the Government's disposal if we see evidence of unfair pricing practices.
ALAN JONES: I should point out for the benefit of our listeners, the Acting Prime Minister is sitting here without any notes at all and has no notice whatever of the nature of the questions that are being asked.
Can I ask you a question about university. Brett has written to me and I've had a stack of emails of this kind.
You need not look any further than the health sciences - medicine, pharmacy and dentistry. Apparently my daughter's UAI of 99.85 is not enough to secure a position in these courses yet we read daily headlines of skills shortages in these areas. For someone who's worked in health for over 30 years, I'd like her to look elsewhere for her career but she's determined to reapply. Who is responsible for limited opportunities to gain a position in these courses -the universities, the medical colleges or the Government? Or do we just continue to import people into these professions.
What's your response to Brett? I mean it's just ridiculous, isn't it?
JULIA GILLARD: My response to Brett is it is ridiculous and my response is everybody's got some responsibility. Government provides some of the funding for universities in the modern age, not all of the funding to universities. Certainly Government can send signals about new niches to have positions in skills shortages areas. When I was the Shadow Minister for Health, which Alan you will recall I was for a period in Opposition, I set a national goal that this country needs is that we are training enough medical workforce to meet out needs. There has been an expansion in the number of undergraduate places for doctors. We are going to expand further the number of places for nurses. We are obviously critically short of both.
The aim here should be not that we are always going to put ourselves in a position where we have to import people from overseas to staff our hospitals. We should be training enough to meet our own needs. Doesn't mean no one would ever migrate because people go overseas and they fall in love and all of that natural kind of stuff, but we wouldn't be desperately scouring the world to get people to come here.
ALAN JONES: Can I just make this point to you. The previous Government, the Howard Government, and now the Rudd Government, have talked a lot about the shortage of skills to the extent that they have I think inculcated into the minds of the electorate that we're talking about electricians and plumbers and people working in the mining industries. All the research suggests that we're short of professionally trained academically qualified people and yet we don't seem to be opening up university places to fill that void.
JULIA GILLARD: The shortages in the vocational education and training area are profound. We are short of all of those traditional tradespeople  -  electricians and plumbers, we're short of people to work in construction, we're short of people that work in mining. We are also short, and you are right, of some very important university educated professionals and we're making new investments to take some pressure off there...
ALAN JONES: Can I just make the point that, sorry to interrupt you there, for the decade 1996-2006, which I read last year by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, demonstrates that most job growth in Australia for that period occurred within industries that required - their words  -  “trained professionals with university qualifications.” Now we've got to do something.
That brings me to the next question. I have been inundated with emails asking why people can't be allowed into university if their parents pay. I mean why (inaudible) other parents are allowed to buy a second car or a holiday home, but the responsible parent says “well, listen, you didn't make it because you did cadets and all sorts of things at school. We're prepared to invest in you, we don't expect any dilution of university standards and we're going to pay for you go to go university, to be full fee paying.” Why when we've got this shortage don't we allow parents to do that?
JULIA GILLARD: Because that hasn't been a measure that's expanded the size of the system. I think we've got to remember what's happened with universities in this country. Way back when, they were small very elite places. They turned into being big educators of Australians, mass education institutions under the Hawke and Keating Governments - people would remember the Dawkins reforms. Yes, we are...
ALAN JONES: Dreadful.
JULIA GILLARD: Well, it's certainly...
ALAN JONES: (inaudible)
JULIA GILLARD: Well it certainly gave a lot...
ALAN JONES: Dumbed down the standard (inaudible).
JULIA GILLARD: Well, Alan I'm not going to agree with that but it certainly gave many more Australians an opportunity to go to university.
Yes we are short of some university trained professionals, we've been short of doctors, short of nurses, short of engineers and short of people who have studied maths and science. The Government has taken steps to address some of that. We've got incentives to study maths and science, undergraduate medical palaces are already...
ALAN JONES: But why couldn't someone at university, an overseas student, Julia, pay to go to an Australian university, and a parent can't pay for their own child to go?
JULIA GILLARD: Well can I reverse the question which is why is it fair for someone who doesn't have money but who gets a better score to miss out because someone else's parents can afford to pay? Now I'd like to see access to university done on the basis of merit and I'd like to see access to university open enough so that we are meeting the skills needs that we have for this country...
ALAN JONES: But the skill needs are for professional university qualifications. Not everybody you know develops at the same time. And if your son or daughter was a late developer and you had confidence that they would pass the university requirements, you'd say well we don't want any help from the taxpayer, we're quite prepared to pay for our child to go to university, just like a European person can pay to come to Australia or an Asian person can pay to come to Australia.
JULIA GILLARD: If your son or daughter was a late developer then they could of course do a mature age entry, but the history of full fee paying places in this country has been that it's about putting people with dollars in front of people with talent. Now I'm not suggesting that everybody who's gone into a full fee paying place didn't meet the academic standards to get there - universities maintain their academic standards. But there has been evidence that people have paid for a place and got in when someone with a higher score who couldn't pay missed out. I reckon that's unfair, that's not the Australia way,
ALAN JONES: So we knock them both off?
JULIA GILLARD: No, the Government is phasing out full fee paying places and increasing the number of ordinary university places. So we're not shrinking the system - there will be new HECS funded places as they're referred to in the trade, people who can go to university under the normal arrangements, but we are going to phase full fee paying places out of the system.
Alan, I think what you're pointing to is that over the last ten years or so we have seen our universities neglected. They are very much under pressure. If you talk to a university vice-chancellor they'll tell you that. That's why we've got the Bradley Review of Higher Education to say what do we need to do to have our universities as a world class system for 10, 20, 30 years into the future. Whilst we're making new investments - and we're making a new investment of $500 million this year - that is before the 30th of June, this financial year - universities will be $500 million better off than they were before.
ALAN JONES: All right, there's several things I want to cover with the Acting Prime Minister. We'll just keep going on this. Could I just refer you to the statements by Kevin Rudd before the federal election when he said a Rudd Labor Government will publish the annual results of individual primary and secondary schools on national reading, writing and numeracy assessments for students in grades three, five, seven and nine. Publication of school performance information will form an integral part of Federal Labor's plan to improve literacy and numeracy. Now you seem to be saying that those results will not be published generally, will only be available to parents who have a child attending that particular school.
JULIA GILLARD: No, we're very determined to deliver the pre-election policy. In order to do that we've got to make a set of arrangements with our State and Territory colleagues. We've made the first bit of those arrangements. So it's just the first step and the first step is for the Federal Government to get the school by school testing results. We will also of course want to make sure parents get them - parents are the ones who are desperate for this information. But we have made that first step, the Federal Government didn't even get that information. Now that's not the whole of what we're going to do, it's not the whole of what we're aiming to do...
ALAN JONES: According to New South Wales...
JULIA GILLARD: But it's the first step along the way.
ALAN JONES: Queensland and New South Wales, I understand, will only provide you with these results on the condition that they're not published.
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're going to keep working with our state and territory colleagues. We need to work with them. We want to deliver our election...
ALAN JONES: But you mightn't be able to.
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're determined to deliver our election promise and I've made it very, very clear when I've met with the education ministers right round the country, we come together periodically as a ministerial council, I've made it very clear to them that the Federal Government will be delivering its election promise. Yes we understand that requires agreement with the States and Territories, but they wouldn't want to underestimate our determination to get this job done.
But I am pleased that even before negotiating the new schools agreements and some big things that we've got in the pipeline for schools, we've been able to take a first step and that first step is to say that the school by school information will be at least provided to the Federal Government. That's something that's never happened in the past.
ALAN JONES: Just one final question on that, do you say that Queensland and New South Wales will provide you with these results? I'm under the view that you won't get them from Queensland or New South Wales unless you say they won't be published as league tables.
JULIA GILLARD: No I'm not interested in the business of league tables.
ALAN JONES: Well basically letting everyone know the results of individual schools...
JULIA GILLARD: What I'm in the business of is getting performance information out there which tells you the whole story about a school, not just one little bit of the story.
ALAN JONES: You're saying you wouldn't be publishing it (inaudible) publish the annual results of individual primary and secondary schools on national reading, writing and numeracy assessments.
JULIA GILLARD: As part of comprehensive performance information, so that's going to be one bit. There are other things that we want people to know about how our schools are performing. We want to make an agreement with our States and Territories so the whole lot is there for people to see. We understand...
ALAN JONES: Just interrupting, it's eight o'clock but we will stay with the Acting Prime Minister. Sorry, just finish this one.
JULIA GILLARD: We understand that it's not just testing results that people want, they want the whole story, we want the whole story to be out there too, school by school and we're working with our State and Territory colleagues to deliver that. But we've taken the first step and I think that needs to be acknowledged.
ALAN JONES: Industrial relations - you also said it was a big play in the election. Forward with Fairness - again you can't get the states to fall in line with that.
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're delivering Forward with Fairness, we've delivered the first bit of it by getting rid of the ability of employers to make Australian Workplace Agreements which had cost a lot of families with ripped off pay and conditions. We're going to deliver the rest of Forward with Fairness in our substantive industrial relations bill later this year. We're talking to the States and Territories about making sure that there is a uniform system for the private sector. They've got coverage, the States, of people who work...
ALAN JONES: And New South Wales want to hang onto their coverage.
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're having that conversation but we are determined to deliver Forward with Fairness and when I met with my ministerial colleagues who do industrial relations including the New South Wales Minister, they all endorsed Forward with Fairness.
ALAN JONES: But my understanding is that State and Federal Industrial Relations Ministers have agreed to a set of principles for a national IR system that that model of yours is dead and the States, mainly New South Wales, haven't agreed to implement it. They want, the States want to continue to operate their own state based systems, all of them.
JULIA GILLARD: The document you're referring to is the third page of the communiqué from when the Ministers last met and page one says they re-endorsed Forward with Fairness. That's Labor's plan, it's what we promised the Australian people, it's what we're going to deliver and the State Ministers have endorsed it.
ALAN JONES: Just back to schools, quickly on this computer thing, I get a stack of correspondence, principals writing to me to say, because your promise was that you'd put a million computers or more than a million into schools and that every student nine to 12 would gain access to their own computer. Now principals are writing to me saying it's turned into a shambles. The hidden costs are going to have to be born by us, that is the schools or the families or the State. And they're saying to me well the promise was just provide the computer. All the other stuff  -  the infrastructure, the refiguring of the schools and maintenance is going to have to be provided by the States. Is that right?
JULIA GILLARD: We're working in partnership with the States but we've made available enough money per unit cost which means for States like New South Wales which have good purchasing arrangements a proportion, indeed a substantial proportion - around 40 per cent of the funds we're making available - can be used for the deployment costs of computers. But we are assisting with that. We want to work in partnership with States.
ALAN JONES: The maintenance, the adequate and safe power points and security, a traditional classroom's got to be redesigned. Who's going to fund all that?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, Alan I think let's just take one little step back. We are going to invest now it is $1.2 billion in the Digital Education Revolution. Before we made that promise and came to government ready to deliver it, States and Territories and schools round the country were doing what they could to introduce computers into classrooms. Now there's an additional $1.2 billion to help them with that task of bringing the Digital Education Revolution...
ALAN JONES: (inaudible) teach us everything about computers. Are you going to pay for the professional development of teachers, are you going to pay for the software that's needed to run them, for the curriculum support that's needed for them, are you going to pay for that?
JULIA GILLARD: We're going to invest the $1.2 billion, that's what we promised. In relation to the first round of funding which we've made available, the first $100 million in a state like New South Wales, a substantial proportion of that funding can be used for deployment costs, the sorts of costs that you're talking about. We are going to keep working with the States and Territories as to the best possible partnership for the rest of the fund.
ALAN JONES: Are families going to be up for money here?
JULIA GILLARD: No, this is about putting an additional $1.2 billion into the...
ALAN JONES: Maintenance, installation costs, will you pay for those? Technical support, will you pay for that? The hardware, the supporting hardware, the networking, the professional development. Will the Federal Government stump up the money for that?
JULIA GILLARD: We'll work with States and Territories in delivering the lot. We are going to have computers in settings where they can be used. States and Territories were spending money on computers before the election of the Rudd Labor Government. We don't expect them to down tools from that task. We expect them to work in partnership with us on the delivery of this Digital Education Revolution.
Schools wanted computers. Before the election of the Rudd Labor Government they were struggling with that. We are now standing by with $1.2 billion, the first $100 million of it going out by the 30th of June this year to help them realise their vision for making sure that kids have access to computers for learning.
So we're working on it, it's a new resource and the money that we're making available in the first round in New South Wales, for example, a proportion of that money can certainly be used for all of the associated costs which you're pointing to.
ALAN JONES: Just one final thing, and I don't want you sort of disappear through the roof here, but there's talk that the Foreign Affairs Minister Stephen Smith has signalled that India's refusal to sign the nuclear non-proliferation treaty could be overlooked and that we could be selling uranium to a non-signatory country. Indeed the Times of India claimed only a matter of days ago that Australian officials had softened their stand on the issue of last month's meeting of the nuclear supplier's group in Berlin. Your election promise was to ban exports to India as long as it refused to sign the treaty. Do you envisage any circumstances under which that ban would be lifted?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I know Stephen Smith is obviously dealing with this matter principally as Foreign Affairs Minister. I think the Government has made very clear its attitude here and we've made very clear our attitude about nuclear disarmament matters generally. Indeed one of the things that Kevin Rudd has been doing in Japan, visiting Hiroshima, dealing with the issue of nuclear disarmament. We're very clear on our policy settings here. Stephen is working on it. We're obviously working with a substantial democracy in our region with India and those talks will continue.
ALAN JONES: But is there, in the long run, will the Rudd Government find a way of seeling uranium to India?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I'm content to let Stephen Smith continue to work on the issue as Foreign Affairs Minister. He obviously is very aware what the policy is - the policy we announced before the election. He's stepping through the diplomacy and I think we should let him do that.
ALAN JONES: Thank you for coming in. It's always very beneficial for listeners to hear the kind of detail that you always seem to be on top of, I commend you for that and we'll talk again soon. Thanks for your time.
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks, Alan.
ALAN JONES: Thank you for your time. The Acting Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Education, Industrial Relations and I don't' know what else  -  what else?
JULIA GILLARD: Social Inclusion.
ALAN JONES: I don't know what that means. Julia Gillard.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.
ALAN JONES: She's going back to hot water. There you are, there's a little lesson. What's the hot water about, she's drinking hot water, she's turned all Bob Carr on us.
JULIA GILLARD: I'm trying to drink less coffee. I'm not sure that the hot water is the most satisfactory substitute but I'm sure it's doing me some good, Alan.
ALAN JONES: I would hope so. Good to talk to you.


Thank you for that kind introduction.
I want to thank the Japan-Australian business Cooperation Committee for hosting this dinner tonight.
I also want to thank the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Nippon Keidanren and the Japan Foreign Trade Council for extending their support to tonight's function.
It is an honour to have the chance to speak to the representatives of the major businesses that help tie together our two countries.
And can I also say a special thanks to Chairman Imai.
It was over forty years ago that you made your first visit to Australia on a fact finding mission with what was then the Fuji Steel Corporation.
Two years later, in 1963, Fuji Steel signed a contract with Western Mining for the supply of iron ore.
Those first shipments of iron ore were small by today's standard but that was the beginning of a relationship between Nippon Steel and the Australian resources sector that has served both Australia's economy and Japanese industry so well.
It is no exaggeration to call you a pioneer.
Your strong leadership of Nippon Steel has ensured that it today remains Japan's largest buyer of Australian steel-making materials.
And you have contributed to the Australia-Japan relationship more broadly through your role as Chair of the Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committee since 1997.
In this role, your advocacy of an Australia-Japan FTA has been critical in building the necessary will in Japan to proceed with these negotiations.
I wish to thank you most sincerely for your contribution to the relationship, both through your leadership of Nippon Steel and the JABCC.
I am pleased that Australia was able to honour this contribution by making you an (Honorary) Companion of the Order of Australia in 2003.
Australia has many good friends in Japan  -  but you are one of our closest friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be back in Tokyo.
I arrived in Japan on Monday and I have been working my way here  -  riding the shinkansen and seeing some of Japan's stunning sights on the way.
Because this is my first visit to Japan as Prime Minister, I want to spend a few minutes introducing the new Australian Government and outlining our domestic agenda before I move on the main topic for today, the friendship and partnership between Australia and Japan.
The new Australian Government is committed to renewing the Australian economic reform project.
Our vision is to make sure that Australia remains competitive in the global economy.
We are already expecting the economy to grow 2.75 per cent over the next year  -  it will be our 17th consecutive year of growth.
But we are committed to strengthening our economic base.
We are committed to building a modern, Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century - to secure the nation's future.
The comprehensive long-term economic agenda of the new Government has two critical elements.
We are committed to disciplined macroeconomic management to ensure that the economy has a stable foundation.
And we are committed to activist microeconomic policies to boost Australia's lagging productivity performance by investing in human and physical capital.
We are committed to creating incentives that encourage work and enterprise.
We are determined to reform the tax system, boost workforce participation and tackle welfare to work barriers.
The Government's first budget delivered last month was the first step in our program to transform the competitiveness of the Australian economy.
Our overarching priority was responsible macroeconomic management.
And for the longer term, the budget set down plans to deal with the chronic investment deficits in the capacity side of the economy  -  in skills and infrastructure.
Budget surpluses are essential for economic stability.
But you don't change the structure of the economy with budget surpluses per se.
Real fundamental change to the underlying structure of the economy requires deep and pervasive microeconomic reform.
Productivity growth is not something you achieve with a single broad sweeping policy.
It is the aggregation of efficiency gains industry by industry, market by market, sector by sector.
We put in place a microeconomic reform agenda to lift Australia's productivity performance.
This means:
     * having the best possible regulatory environment;
     * developing an environment that supports risk taking and innovation;
     * investing in human and physical capital; and
     * investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
We know this is a big task but we are committed to it.
For instance, we have unveiled substantial initiatives in education, including:
     * providing high-speed broadband to schools; and
     * developing a new national curriculum in maths, science, English and history.
Australia must make these investments to lift our competitiveness.
Another key part of our economic strategy is engaging with global economy.
We recognise that we can get the best for the people of Australia if we participate actively in the global economy.
And we need to engage politically and strategically with our friends and partners around the region and the world.
The new Australian Government has three pillars to our international engagement:
     * our alliance with the United States;
     * our membership of the United Nations; and
     * comprehensive engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
For Australia, Japan is a partner in these three pillars.
Ours is a relationship that really began in earnest in 1957 with the Commerce Treaty.
In fact, 1957 was the year I was born so I identify very personally with that treaty.
Throughout the next decades, our relationship developed and broadened very quickly.
Through the Nara Treaty in 1976 and to the formalisation of our security ties in the Joint Declaration last year.
The relationship between Australia and Japan is one of comprehensive strategic, security and economic partners.
It is a relationship of enduring friendship.
We are true friends and true partners.
And it is a relationship that the Australian Government is committed to developing.
That is why in the past six months, six of my ministers have visited Japan (for a total of eight visits).
The portfolios they represent demonstrate the depth of our relationship  -  foreign affairs; trade; industry and innovation; resources, energy and tourism; climate change; and agriculture.
The ministers have visited to make sure that the momentum in all areas of our relationship is maintained.
Because even with a solid base, relationships have to be worked on  -  and our relationship does have a very solid base.
We are both democracies.
We are both US allies.
And we have an economic relationship that it is of vital importance to both our countries.
Japan continues to be Australia's largest export market  -  a position it has occupied for over 40 years.
And Japan is a major investor and employer in Australia.
We both gain a lot from this economic relationship.
We are both supporters and drivers of globalisation.
Because of these shared characteristics, we have many shared interests  -  interests that are regional and global.
Australia and Japan both want to see a stable, prosperous and open region.
We have the history of working together to establish APEC  -  and I hope to work closely with Japan as we move towards the next stage of our region's architecture.
We are also partners in the big global questions that we face  -  questions like climate change and nuclear disarmament.
The places I have visited so far in Japan show the breadth and depth of our relationship.
I have visited Hiroshima and Kyoto and had the chance to give a lecture at Kyoto University on the two great global challenges symbolised by those two cities  -  nuclear disarmament and climate change.
I visited Nagoya on Tuesday and met with the President of Toyota.
Yesterday I also visited a Jusco supermarket where President Okada of AEON Stores announced a major new campaign to promote produce from Australia.
I also had the honour of an audience with the Emperor and Empress this morning.
And I am looking forward to talking with Prime Minister Fukuda tomorrow about how we can further develop the friendship and partnership between our two countries.
I am looking forward to working with the Prime Minister on taking our relationship to a new level.
When you look at the ties between our countries, you have to acknowledge the importance of the economic relationship.
And one of the foundations of our economic relationship is, of course, the resources trade.
Last year, not long after he became Prime Minister  -  and before I became Prime Minister in Australia  -  Mr Fukuda gave a speech at a joint meeting of the Australia-Japan and Japan-Australia business cooperation committees.
He noted then the importance of the resources trade saying that Japan depends on Australia for over half of its imports of coal and iron-ore.
It is a fact that symbolises the depth of our relationship  -  a trading relationship that started decades ago because of pioneers like Mr Imai and has brought great benefits to both sides.
By sourcing materials from Australia, Japanese companies helped drive the development of the resources sector in Australia.
By being a reliable supplier for Japanese companies, Australia helped underwrite the development of key industry sectors in Japan.
And in the 21st century, that resources relationship is as strong as ever.
We both continue to gain a lot from the relationship  -  Australia has a long-term market, Japan has a stable supply source.
Australia understands the importance to Japan of the question of security of supply.
The Australian Government is committed to supporting the development of long-term commercial relationships between our two countries.
I think it is important that we also continue to look to the future in the resources trade.
Japanese investors continue to play an important role in providing capital and long-term purchasing contracts to help the development of Australia resource projects.
I want to say that the Australian Government is committed to encouraging foreign investment in Australia.
Foreign investment has always played an important role in development in Australia  -  we recognise that and expect it to continue.
We welcome foreign investment.
We particularly welcome investment in new sectors, including the renewable energy sector.
Like the 30 billion yen that Mitsui is putting into a wind farm in Victoria  -  helping us address the challenges of climate change.
You can find Japanese investment in many areas in Australia  -  not just resources.
Yesterday I had the pleasure of visiting Nagoya and meeting the President of Toyota Motor Corporation, Mr Watanabe.
Toyota is a major investor in Australia.
It employs around 4000 people and last year exported over 80,000 vehicles from Australia.
And yesterday we announced that Toyota will begin producing hybrid cars in Australia from 2010.
Toyota is a great example of the economic relationship between Australia and Japan  -  we already have deep connections, but we have to be looking for ways to take it forward.
Toyota's investment in Victoria is a vote of confidence in the Australian economy  -  and it is a symbol of the type of investment we want to attract and the sort of sectors we want to see develop  -  new, high-tech investment.
Japan's manufacturing investments in Australia go far beyond the automotive sector, as important as that is.
Japanese companies have major investments in the processed foods sector in Australia.
Snowbrand produces high quality cheese and infant formula for export to Japan and other countries,
Japan's Kirin now owns Australian National Foods, Australia's largest dairy producer.
Kirin also produces malt for brewing beer at a large facility in Perth  -  most of this comes back to Japan as a key ingredient in what I understand is a rather popular amber coloured beverage in Japan.
And then there is Hakubaku Australia, which produces dried noodles in a factory in Ballarat in country Victoria.
Why am I highlighting Japanese investment?
Because these investments highlight the growing sophistication of our bilateral economic relationship.
And it is these complex interactions that we need to bear in mind as we negotiate our bilateral FTA.
The FTA will benefit Japanese companies whether as importers of raw ingredients, or as processors of food in Australia which is ultimately for consumption in Japan.
There are many opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation.
Yesterday, the first thing I did when I came to Tokyo was visit the AEON supermarket in Shinagawa.
President Okada showed me around and announced that his Jusco range of stores would be undertaking an Australia Fair in July.
The Fair will highlight the range of Australian produce available in the Jusco stores  -  from fruit and vegetables to great quality Australian beef.
It is an example of the depth of our economic relationship.
It shows the investment and trade links and the benefits that flow in the end to Japanese consumers.
That is why, for Australia, it is important that we deal with agriculture in our free trade agreement.
For us, it is a key exporting sector.
And we believe that Australia, with its record as a stable supplier and a friend of Japan, is well-placed to expand its role as a supplier of food to Japan.
Australia is pleased to play a role in supplying Japan's food needs through exports.
Our products make up some 10 per cent of Japan's agriculture imports.
Like in manufactures and processed food, investment plays a key role in our agricultural relationship.
I was very interested to see that AEON operates a large feedlot and cattle finishing centre in Tasmania, and that the “Aussie Beef” brand is so popular with Japanese consumers.
And production from Japanese and Australian-owned facilities produces key inputs for Japanese agriculture  -  such as stockfeed, agricultural chemicals and fertilisers.
These investment and trade links have provided enormous benefits to Japanese consumers.
And addressing current restrictions on this trade through an FTA would provide still further benefits to consumers.
An FTA could also make a significant contribution to Japan's food security.
It could help secure for Japan supplies of high-quality, safe foods at a time when global prices are rising and predicted to keep rising, and for the first time in many years, Japanese consumers have seen certain food products in short supply.
An FTA could help strengthen Australian food supplies to Japan, and encourage Japan's own agriculture sector to become more competitive.
Australia has a strong record as a stable and safe supplier and a friend of Japan, and is well-placed to continue playing this role into the future.
So far I have spoken about what are really the traditional areas of our economic relationship  -  resources, agriculture and cars.
These are all important elements of the relationship, and make up the bulk of the trade.
But I think we should also look at the future of other sectors.
Sectors like clean green technology, bio-technology, food technology, education exports and financial services.
Australia has real skills in these areas and they provide a base for greater cooperation between us.
Tourism has long been an important part of our relationship.
My home state of Queensland was at the forefront of helping to develop the Australia-Japan tourism relationship.
In the past ten years nearly six million Japanese have visited Australia.
But even with tourism taken into account, our services trade accounts for only around eight per cent of our exports to Japan, despite the fact that more than three-quarters of our total GDP comes from services.
There is enormous scope for growth here.
I recognise that for some service Australian service providers Japan may be a challenging market.
But I also believe that Australia has some natural strengths we should draw on to further develop this trade.
Take the financial services sector as an example.
In the 1980s, Australia completely overhauled our retirement funding system system.
We made it compulsory for all Australians to save for their retirement.
That has led in the past 20 years to the amassing of a large amount of funds in Australia.
And those funds of around 1 trillion dollars form the basis of our funds management industry.
Our industry is now the fourth-largest in the world.
It is dynamic and innovative.
And it is well-regulated.
Japan, too, has huge amounts of funds in its pension funds  -  estimated to be around 2 trillion US dollars.
I think we could both gain a lot from building bridges between our two sectors  -  particularly because they have a combined net worth of around 3 trillion US dollars.
Our financial sectors have both amassed a lot of experience.
Our professionals have skills that they can use in both markets.
We should look at how we can create more opportunities for our financial sector professionals and institutions to access each other's markets.
Australia's financial services sector is globally competitive and it brings with it some natural attributes that should allow it to make the most of opportunities in Japan.
We are in the same time zone as Japan.
We have a highly skilled workforce.
And we have an increasing number of professionals who know their way around Asia, and specifically who know their way around Japan.
I had lunch today with financial service sector representatives from Australia and Japan and it showed me just how much potential there is in the sector  -  and how much enthusiasm there is in the business community.
I look forward to discussing with Prime Minister Fukuda tomorrow how we can further develop this relationship by expanding the dialogue between our regulators and companies.
And, of course, by creating service sector opportunities through our free trade agreement negotiations.
If we are to secure the benefits from our economic relationship into the future, we need to think about how we move forward.
There are specific sectors  -  such as the five sectors I mentioned earlier: green technology, bio-technology, food technology, education exports and financial services  -  where we can develop our contacts.
And cooperation in these new sectors can be building blocks to a new relationship.
We should be ambitious.
The Australian Government is committed to concluding a comprehensive, high-quality FTA with Japan.
It is not just about increasing the trade in goods.
We should be looking at our FTA to remove barriers to investment, to spur growth in the services trade, and to develop other new areas of economic cooperation.
I recognise that Japan has sensitivities in some sectors.
But at this stage of the negotiations we should be aiming for the best, most comprehensive agreement we can develop.
One reason we need to aim for an ambitious agreement is that we need to develop agreements that support the global trade system  -  the World Trade Organisation.
Australia and Japan have been key beneficiaries of the rules-based open trading system.
Japan has had access to global markets for its products.
Australia has been able to trade freely around the world.
So we have to ensure that our trading relationships help support, maintain and build that system rather than undermine it.
We also need to think about how we can support businesses not just bilaterally but also in the Asia Pacific region.
APEC has done a lot of great work in the past 20 years.
It has built a strong consensus behind the idea that open markets and economic reform are the best way to drive economic development.
I am a strong supporter of APEC  -  not just because it is a symbol of Australia-Japan cooperation in the region  -  but because it makes a difference.
But I also think that we need to begin discussing where we want our regional organisations to be in the year 2020.
The APEC goal is for free and open trade and investment in the Asia Pacific no later than the year 2020.
It is a goal we should continue to pursue.
With Japan hosting APEC in 2010, the next few years presents an excellent opportunity for us to continue working together on the big challenges facing our region.
And Australia and Japan work closely together in all other existing regional organisations, such as the East Asia Summit.
We were pleased to support Japan's initiative for a second-track study on an ASEAN plus 6 FTA.
We are also working together to advance regional financial cooperation through this initiative.
I hope that we can work closely together, too, as we look to the next phase of regional architecture and move towards developing an Asia Pacific Community for 2020 and beyond.
In a speech last week I announced that Australia would be appointing a high-level envoy to travel around the region and hold discussions on how we bring our region even closer together  -  how we develop an Asia Pacific Community.
The envoy is going to be Dick Woolcott, the distinguished former Australian diplomat who played such an important role in developing APEC.
He will be coming to Japan as part of his travels and I would be keen for you  -  the Japanese business community to meet with him and share your ideas about what an Asia Pacific Community should be.
I realise it is going to take some time to develop these ideas.
But we have to start now and move towards our goal over time.
And the goal is simple  -  a regional body that can deal with all of the important challenges we face  -  political, economic and security-related.
Part of our goal with the Asia-Pacific Community is to build our ties with the region.
To do that Australia needs a pool of people that know about Asia.
We need a pool of people that understand the languages and the cultures of the region.
We need a pool of people as comfortable doing business in Tokyo as they are doing business in Tasmania.
That is why the Australian Government is committed to making Australia the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
We already have a strong base to build on.
There are between two and three hundred thousand kids at Australian schools studying the Japanese language.
It is the most studied foreign language in Australia.
And in the recent Budget, we committed $62 million to building on this base.
That money will go to boosting our teaching of Japanese, Chinese, Korean and Indonesian.
Our hope is that we will be able to double the number of students studying one of these four target languages in the final years of high school by 2020.
I am also pleased that we have many community programs that help boost this understanding  -  particularly exchange student programs run by individual schools and community organisations.
Beyond our high schools, we have a strong base of university level education and research about the region, and Japan.
Australia has invested with some success over the years in becoming an Asia-literate country.
Japanese studies has led the field.
This is a national priority for Australia.
The strength and richness of Japanese studies in Australia is reflected in the fact that 33 of Australia's 40 universities and its leading technical colleges include Japanese studies in their curricula.
There were over 15,000 student enrolments in Japanese language or Japan-related courses at Australian universities at the time of the last Japan Foundation sponsored survey of Japanese studies in 2003.
That number has risen slightly over the last 5 years.
The Australian National University, my old university, is recognised as having one of world's leading research programs on many facets of Japan's society, history, culture, economy, politics and law.
And it has some really interesting programs.
For instance, ANU hooks up its law students with students in Tokyo for legal negotiating practice sessions in real-time.
The ANU students in some groups conduct their entire negotiations in Japanese.
It is a great example of innovative teaching and training that builds our skills base  -  and it does it in the professional services sector that is one of our strengths.
Just over 50 years ago the Australia-Japan economic relationship began its remarkable growth.
That growth has continued through to today and it has provided the basis for the comprehensive relationship we have today  -  a relationship that covers security cooperation, working together in the region, and a commitment to trade and development.
This Australian Government is committed to making that relationship even stronger.
The first 50 years was about industrial development and leveraging off complementarities, to build Japan's world class manufacturing and consumer product industries and to build Australia's world class agricultural and resources industries.
The next 50 years has to be about combining these complementarities with our well educated workforces and our innovative natural entrepreneurs to create a continuing economic partnership based upon services and value adding as well as our traditional strengths in the energy and resource fields.
I want to acknowledge the crucial role in our relationship that has been played by our business communities.
And I want to assure you that we see the business sector as partners with government in building this relationship and taking it forward.


The Commonwealth Government is working closely with Western Australian authorities to help minimise the impact of the significant disruption to WA's natural gas supplies as a result of the explosion at the Apache Corporation facility at Varanus Island last week.
The Commonwealth very much welcomes the efforts by Apache Corp to rectify the damage to its pipelines as quickly as possible and the response of major energy users to prioritise their energy consumption.
The Commonwealth is also determined to ensure that any impact on the Western Australian community and the economy is minimised as a result of this incident.
The Commonwealth is prepared to make available assistance to those businesses and employees that are genuinely disadvantaged as a result of this incident.
Centrelink and the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations will be working with relevant WA Government agencies to devise the most effective way of delivering the assistance.


JULIA GILLARD: Today I'm here with the Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek, to launch a technical paper about our Housing Affordability Fund. It's a paper for quick consultation.
The Housing Affordability Fund is all about assisting Australians with more affordable housing. We know that it's the great Australian dream to own your own home, and we know for many working Australians that dream seems a very long way away.
And we also know from the statistics that in terms of the generation of new homes for Australians, we are going to be running behind demand. That is going to make the dream of owning your own home a more difficult dream to realise.
One of the things that we promised Australians before the last election is that the government would act on housing affordability; we would have our actions led by a dedicated Minister for Housing, and Tanya is doing that work for the government; and we would also create a Housing Affordability Fund - a $512 million fund, the purpose of which would be to try and take the pressure off.
What this fund is for is to assist with developments. What we want to do is we want to make sure that planning happens more quickly, so holding costs can be reduced. We also want to make sure that there is potential from some assistance with infrastructure.
If through the Housing Affordability Fund we can address these issues, that means that developments can happen more quickly, and in a more affordable way, for working Australians. This is a partnership that is going to involve local governments. It's a partnership that I'll get Tanya to more fully describe.
The paper that we're releasing today is for short consultation. This fund is going to be open for business from mid-July, with a first $50 million allocation to try and make a difference on housing affordability. I'll hand over to Tanya at this point.
TANYA PLIBERSEK: Thank you. We're here today talking about our Housing Affordability Fund technical paper. The Housing Affordability Fund is one of the measures that were funded in the last federal budget. It's a $512 million fund over five years.
The money is to reduce the cost of new homes for purchase, either by speeding up development processes so that we reduce holding costs on these new homes, or by paying for small amounts of linking infrastructure.
If there's a little project that's holding up a much larger development, local government, State Government will be able to apply to this fund for a little bit of money to help with that.
The money will be distributed on a competitive basis, and this technical paper lays out exactly what it is that we're expecting of people; exactly what it is that we require of local governments, local government associations; State Governments, and others who will be applying for this funding.
It sets out how we will expect them to make their application, and how we'll expect them to respond to the government and report to the government on savings that have been passed on to home buyers at the end of the day. The critical thing to remember here is that we will determine applications on the basis of value for money, savings for new home buyers.
This technical paper, as I say, lays out how bodies will be able to; the information they need to make a successful application to the fund.
It tells how we will measure success. It asks a few questions of local governments and State Governments for their feedback. But it is very clear that at the end of the day what we're looking for is a reduced cost for new homes to purchase.
We have Chris Lamont with us today from the Housing Industry Association, and Chris is going to make a few comments from the housing industry's perspective.
CHRIS LAMONT: Thank you Minister. The HIA is delighted to support the Housing Affordability Fund. 
This is a targeted and appropriate measure. As the Minister and the Acting Prime Minister stated, this is about reducing those costs that relate to holding costs; that red tape which is delaying construction, to make a practical difference to reduce the price, or the sticker price as HIA refers, of a new home.
This is a measure that is not without strings. It is an outcome-based policy, an outcome-based fund that designs to reduce the cost of a new home.
Housing affordability is now at a record low. The situation won't get any better unless we have funds like this, and measures such as these, to improve the situation. HIA is delighted to see that the Federal Government's re-entered the housing affordability space. This is the first measure of this kind for 11 and a half years.
Our urban centres have been the victims of an under-investment by the Federal Government, and previous Federal Governments, and this measure is specifically targeted to improve housing affordability on the ground to those that matter.
Thank you.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you. 
Can I ask people at this stage if they've got questions on housing affordability and the Housing Affordability Fund to ask them now; and then I'll take the opportunity to make a statement about two other matters, and we'll move to general questioning, but, with Chris and Tanya, if people have questions about housing affordability then obviously we're all standing by ready to take them.
No - housing affordability questions? Okay. Alright. Well if I can move on to dealing with two other matters.
Firstly I'd like to make some comments about the matter involving the disruption of gas supplies in Western Australia.
People may be aware that there is a major disruption to gas supplies in Western Australia. As a result of an explosion, 30 per cent of gas supplies are no longer available.
That's got implications obviously for people who live in the west for household use. It's winter, and people want to be able to have ready access to gas.
It's also got an implication for businesses and for the people who work within them. Obviously many businesses are dependent on gas, either directly or through its energy generation capacity; and for those businesses they are now facing a tough time, which has implications for the people employed in them and whether or not there will be stand-downs.
This is obviously a major matter affecting Western Australia, and the West Australian economy.
It is not a matter that is going to be remedied overnight, in terms of the return of full supplies. This is a major disruption, and will take time to fix.
I yesterday spoke in my capacity as Acting Prime Minister to the Premier of Western Australia, Alan Carpenter, and we will continue to be talking to the Premier on ways in which the Federal Government can assist Western Australia to deal with this major disruption.
Alan Carpenter of course has taken a series of actions locally in Western Australia to try and ameliorate this problem, but it is a significant problem that is going to have ongoing economic and social consequences.
We are going to be working with the Western Australian Government on addressing those consequences. And I will be having further discussions with the Western Australian Premier on the matter.
On a further matter; the matter involving the Federal Member for Robertson, Ms Belinda Neal, can I say in relation to that, obviously this matter has achieved a great deal of media attention in recent days. I indicated yesterday, when asked by the media, that I was not happy with the situation that emerged over the weekend, and the matters associated with Ms Neal's visit to a restaurant in her local area.
This morning of course there are further revelations in the newspapers. I am also concerned about those revelations.
With both matters now having come to my attention, and particularly the new matter this morning contained in newspaper reports, I am concerned that this is indicative of a pattern of behaviour which obviously is not acceptable.
I have spoken this morning to the Prime Minister, who is as we all know, in Japan. The Prime Minister and I have discussed the matter. We will be making some further statements during the course of the day in relation to the matter.
The Prime Minister is very fully committed in Japan. He is, as we speak now, meeting with the Japanese Emperor, but we have discussed the matter, and a further statement about it will be available later on during the course of today.
QUESTION: Does that mean you're going to ask the Member to stand down?
JULIA GILLARD: That means we'll be making a further statement during the course of the day.
QUESTION: Does that mean that's one possibility, that you'll be discussing?
JULIA GILLARD: That means we'll be making a further statement during the course of the day.
QUESTION: Does it sound as though a position has become untenable?
JULIA GILLARD: The factors here are as follows; obviously I was concerned about the original matter, a second matter has come to public attention today. I believe that this is indicative of a pattern of behaviour. I've discussed the matter with the Prime Minister and we will be making a further statement later today.
QUESTION: What's the hold-up? Why a further statement later today, what are you waiting for?
JULIA GILLARD: The Prime Minister is in Japan. He has a fully committed program. He is currently meeting with the Japanese Emperor. Obviously our bi-lateral relationship with Japan is of critical importance to this country. The Prime Minister's focus is therefore on acquitting the program in Japan and meeting with the Japanese Emperor. Obviously we will be dealing with this matter during the course of the day.
QUESTION: The Dalai Lama's in Sydney today and I understand Chris Evans is meeting with him. Will you be meeting with the Dalai Lama and if not is that because you're trying to avoid him?
JULIA GILLARD: The Acting Prime Minister will meet with the Dalai Lama later this week. Chris Evans will be Acting Prime Minister later this week. That is because the Prime Minister will be in Japan. I will be in New Zealand, leading a high-level ministerial delegation to a forum with our New Zealand counterparts. Obviously there is no closer bilateral relationship, I suspect, on the planet, than the relationship between Australia and New Zealand. That is a forum that I will be attending with a number of my ministerial colleagues and which the government has made a commitment to attending. Chris Evans will be here as Acting Prime Minister and he will meet the Dalai Lama on behalf of the Australian Government.
QUESTION: Is Chris Evans up to the job of Acting Prime Minister, he's never done that before, has he?
JULIA GILLARD: Of course he is and he will be Acting Prime Minister for a period of about, I think, it's 26, 27 hours while I am in New Zealand.
QUESTION: There's reports today that Toyota was already going to be making its environmentally friendly car, I just wanted to know whether you think that's true and if it is, if it's a fair use of taxpayer's money to prop Toyota up?
JULIA GILLARD: Can I say, you're raising a matter very dear to my heart and about which I can speak at length. I live in Altona, I live within walking distance of the Toyota factory . Car manufacturing is important to this nation, it's important to jobs in this nation, it's important to innovation in this nation and making sure we've got an Australian made hybrid car is important to Australian consumers.
About a million cars will be bought by Australians this year, but only 5000 of them will be hybrids. Now that's not because Australians don't want to have cleaner, greener, vehicles, people do. But they want to see an Australian made cleaner, greener, vehicle.
The government believes that it was appropriate to work with Toyota through our green car fund to ensure that there would be an Australian made hybrid and to ensure that it was available for Australian consumers as quickly as possible. I am delighted by yesterday's announcement. I am delighted that Australians will be able to make the choice to buy an Australian made hybrid vehicle. And I'll be more than happy, should anybody want to come to Victoria and tour through Toyota with me, to show it to you.
QUESTION: Just on ABC Learning, as well, I understand that they've increased their fees 10 per cent, do you think they're taking advantage of the childcare rebate?
JULIA GILLARD: There are press reports today about the intention of ABC Learning in relation to its fees. Those reports aren't directly confirmed by ABC Learning. On the question of childcare fees, I have made it absolutely clear that the government will be assessing whether there is any evidence of unfair pricing practices. The government is determined to lessen the pressure on working families by childcare fees. That's why we've increased the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. It's all about taking the pressure off and getting extra assistance into the purses and wallets of working Australians who need childcare and need it to go to work.
What we're also doing, and this is very important for our childcare industry and the shape of the childcare market, is that the government is committed to a number of supply-side measures. We've already got more than 1000 new childcare workers in training.
We have plans to increase the childcare workforce beyond that by making sure we pay the TAFE fees for people who want to study childcare and by having 1500 new early childhood educator places at Australian universities we're also committed to delivering 260 new childcare centres and I have certainly said that when selecting the providers in those centres, a track record of affordability in terms of the provision of care will be one thing that the Government will be looking to.
QUESTION: [Inaudible question]
JULIA GILLARD: Well, your question is premised on an assumption. So that's your assumption not mine. We'll deal with these matters in a statement later today. Obviously Ms Neal is a member of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party caucus and consequently it is a matter that Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister and I as Deputy Prime Minister currently Acting Prime Minister we will deal with on behalf of Federal Labor.
QUESTION: On the issue of alcohol, The Public Health Association has called for an increase in excise for alcoholic drinks, not just alcopops is that something you'd consider?
JULIA GILLARD: The government was motivated here by a concern about binge drinking amongst Australian young people and I think that there is plenty of evidence that we should be concerned. Binge drinking, by young people is a health issue, it's something that would concern us in terms of creating a pattern of alcohol use and abuse that will stay with people for the rest of their lives. It's also an issue of profound concern in relation to street violence. I mean, no-one wants to see a young Australian go out for a night out, for a good time and come back injured and tragically.
We know there have been some young Australians who have died as a result of street violence associated with alcohol - ingesting alcohol and binge drinking. So in those circumstances the government was committed to doing what we thought would make a difference for binge drinking for young Australians. We therefore dealt with a tax measure in relation to alcopops. These alcopops were taxed less than drinks that are mixed themselves that people mix themselves, we obviously wanted to make sure that the tax treatment was equal, and we've done so.
Now I suspect there will be people who bring a variety of perspectives to this debate and we'll see that variety of perspectives on display. We've seen it already, we'll see it again in the next few weeks but the government believes this is a measure that could make a difference in relation to binge drinking we are motivated to do that, we want to do that, we want to make sure that we do something on binge drinking and something to protect young Australians.
QUESTION: Just quickly, on an idea that was voted on the 2020 summit about sending Australians to -overseas to study Asian languages, in particular, has there been any progress on that idea?
JULIA GILLARD: On Asian languages, certainly there was the idea at the 2020 Summit and like all ideas from the 2020 Summit we will be responding to those ideas by the end of the year as we have committed. We went to the last election, promising a new investment into the provision of Asian languages in schools.
The Prime Minister is someone who is very personally passionate about people being able to speak one of the languages of our region as he does, obviously, being a fluent Mandarin speaker. We are making sure that that six - more than $60 million investment is there to encourage the learning of Asian languages in school, that is being worked through between the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments, the independent and Catholic schools sector with the first delivery in relation to Asian languages in the next school year.
QUESTION: You may already have been asked this, but in Mr Rudd's absence who do you think he would like you to support tonight out of New South Wales and Queensland in the State of Origin?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, look. There isn't too many times where I seek to say something different from the Prime Minister but I've considered the matter. Obviously I was a little bit torn because I am a Melbourne Storm supporter and of course we've got a Melbourne Storm player in the Queensland team but I've wrestled with it and wrestled with it and I think the fairest possible thing is if the Prime Minister supports Queensland and I support New South Wales. Thank you very much.
QUESTION: [Indistinct], one more question on the Dalai Lama - sorry to ask it...
JULIA GILLARD: Okay, last one and we're going.
QUESTION: ...I believe [indistinct] still here on Sunday, are there any plans for Mr Rudd to see him there and if not why not?
JULIA GILLARD: The arrangements have been made for the Acting Prime Minister Chris Evans to meet with the Dalai Lama on Friday. Thanks very much.


PM: Therese and I have been overwhelmed by the positive response which we've received personally in our visit in Japan. And also the positive response which we've received in the name of Australia here in Japan. 
Whether it's in Hiroshima, whether it's in Kyoto, whether it's in Nagoya, whether it's in Yokohama or whether it's here in Tokyo.
One of the things that we've discussed in the last 24 hours with several groups of Japanese leaders is the absolute importance of expanding the knowledge of Japanese language in Australia.
I've indicated to our Japanese hosts that we have some 377,000 students of Japanese in Australian schools.
Across western countries, I'm advised, this is the single largest number of students of Japanese anywhere in any other country in the world.
And it's part of our vision to create Australia in the future as the most Asia-literate country across the west, across the collective west. And, within that, to have also the greatest numbers of Japanese speakers.
Last night, at the Ambassador's residence, we had dinner with leaders of Japan's new economy. Companies from the services sector, internet based in large part, but beyond our traditional economic engagement in manufacturing and in commodities and in tourism.
And, we spoke at length about the importance in the services sector of expanding that trade because the absolute importance of languages within that.
Right now, the Japanese economy is 75 per cent a services economy, similar with Australia, both developed economies, with a high concentration across the services industries. But, the concerning statistic is that only 8 per cent of our bilateral trade is in the services sector. That's why we had this meeting with new economy leaders last night who represented large new emerging Japanese corporations whose names are not familiar in Australia, but whose companies are engaged in an active services sector, internet based companies here in this country.
So the challenge I left with them, and this morning over breakfast with a meeting of young Japanese political leaders, rising leaders from the LDP, the Democratic Party and from Komeito, people that I've met in the past in various previous visits here at various conferences, and some that I had not met before, was how do we build this future services trade between our two countries?
And that brought us again back to the fact of languages. If you are dealing on the internet and you dealing with internet based companies and you are operating in the same time zone the absolute importance of having high level language skills in both directions cannot be overemphasised.
This morning also I visited the elementary school not far from the Ambassador's residence. And there we saw Australian technology at work. I'm advised that one of the technologies being used in that school is software developed by a Japanese Australian which he is now selling to Japanese schools and selling in the business of selling to Australian schools, so far primarily in Victoria but also prospectively in South Australia.
And how does that software work? Basically it's interactive whereby the study of the language you've got kids today who are exchanging emails from that school with kids in rural Victoria. And, a software system that enables them to select what language they are going to send their email in, to work on the vocabulary, to work on the grammar, and to have a response back from the other end. It's a very interesting and innovative piece of software. And, the innovator is looking for how we take that piece of Australian software and turn it into a means by which we can expand more generally the teaching of Asian languages across Australian schools.
What's our vision? As I said before, making Australia into the most Asia-literate country in the collective west.
Our vision is also underpinned by a $62 million expansion to the national Asian languages study program in Australian schools and the objective over time is to double the number of Australian students studying Asian languages. Japanese, Indonesian, Chinese and Korean. These are priority languages for the future, essential not just for mutual understanding between the countries of the region and ourselves, but absolutely critical in the services trades which will dominate the trade of the 21st century. An important initiative, and one that we'll be discussing further.
If I could add one other thing before taking your questions.
It was a great honour also for Therese and myself to spend time this morning meeting with the Emperor and Empress of Japan. It was a good meeting. And we reflected on the long and positive history in our bilateral relationship. Their Majesties reflected also on the hospitality they received from the Whitlam Government when they last visited Australia in 1973 when the Emperor was Prince Akihito.
I extended to the Emperor and the Empress a formal invitation on behalf of the Government of Australia to visit Australia again. I extended also an invitation to the Crown Prince and Crown Princess to visit Australia. And we look forward to the response from the Japanese Government in due season.
A good visit so far. And I'm looking forward very much to my discussions with Prime Minister Fukuda and other Japanese minister in the period ahead.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Japanese are looking for assurances on energy supply security and food supply security, to put it that way, isn't this really an issue for the market? Aren't we going to sell to whoever pays us the most (inaudible).
PM: What I've said to our Japanese friends when they've raised this in both public and private discussions is Australia has been a long term reliable supplier of food, energy and raw materials for more than half a century. We have no intention as a nation to change that for the next half century. We see ourselves as long term secure suppliers, always within the discipline of the market, and as we know, sometimes the market has been kinder to us and sometimes kinder to Japan over that last half century, the same will be the case for the future.
One of the concerns raised by the Japanese side in relation to food security is the debate in this country about the Free Trade Agreement, about agriculture, and also about the degree of Japanese food self-sufficiently. The figures quoted is that level of food self-sufficiency is now at 39 per cent.
This is a live matter in the debate in this country on the future of greater access to this market by Australian agricultural exporters.
A parallel concern has been raised about the impact of climate change on drought in Australia and whether Australia could reliably be a long term effective supplier of agricultural product if this country is going to draw down its domestic levels of food security.
What I've been at pains to point out is that the emergence of droughted circumstances in Australia has occurred over time. And what has happened with our farmers, our food technologists, and our agricultural scientists and those who have expertise in irrigation technologies is that we are great adaptors, we've been adapting over a long period of time, and that we'll continue to do so. And still see ourselves as a long term reliable supplier of food to the rest of the world, including Japan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Robert Gates has said in the last 24 hours or so that the United States nuclear arsenal might be more important than (inaudible) because if they built up within Russia (inaudible) conventional weapons, nuclear weapons. How does this tally with your vision for a nuclear weapon-free 21st century?
PM: Well, remember the question of a nuclear free world was first between the superpowers discussed between President Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev in the Reykjavik Summit back in 1985. And the aspiration towards moving to a nuclear-free world has been discussed by many American political leaders since then. And, you recall in my statement the day before yesterday about the combined position of former Secretaries of State Kissinger and Schultz and on the Democratic side, Sam Nunn and Bill Cohen.
I believe there is an emerging consensus, including in parts of the United States, to move again towards this long term goal. I note carefully what Sectary Gates has said. I haven't seen the full text of his remarks. But our resolve is very clear. Our immediate task is to bring back a sense of global commitment and strengthening to the nuclear non-proliferation regime under the NPT, that's the immediate task we set ourselves for 2010, and the build up processes leading to then. But beyond that, we have also restated the historic position of Australian Governments, but with greater urgency, that we must move towards a non-nuclear weapons world. And that, I believe, is important in the global debate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you hope to achieve on the issue of whaling in your discussions with the Prime Minister and other ministers?
PM: Well, as I've said back in Australia, and as I've said to a number of folk since arriving here in Japan, we hope to explore every possibility of resolving the whaling disagreement between our two countries diplomatically. And that means looking carefully at the provisions of the IWC  -  the International Whaling Convention  -  and, of course, at the content of the upcoming meeting of the IWC, which occurs very soon. And further, at the specific reform proposals for the future of the IWC which Australia has already tabled at a previous meeting.
There is a lot to go through on this. As you know, our position on this has not changed. But we have an important international conference coming up on this which involves all the participating states. Our position will be, ‘let us look at the reform of this body for the future, see if we can resolve this problem diplomatically', and that still has some time to go.
Our underlying position has not changed in terms of the objectives.
JOURNALIST: How sensitive do you have to be, Prime Minster (inaudible)
PM: Well, the basis of our policy, and our policy objective, has not changed one bit  -  hasn't changed one bit. But, in terms of using every avenue of diplomacy available, we'll do that. As I've said in many meetings with Japanese so far, this is a disagreement. It's a strong disagreement. But it is a disagreement among friends. And when you've dealing with friends, you use diplomacy as much as is possible, as that's what I'll be seeking to do with Prime Minister Fukuda tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Toyota Australia (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think what I'd do is two things. Draw your attention to what President Watanabe said yesterday and, so  -  “I'm saying that we're very grateful receiving subsidies and funds in response to the costs we pay, the money we pay, and investments we make. And they make it possible to advance our research and development, and our production facilities.”
But in clarification further, I draw your attention to a statement put out by Toyota today where it says, in part, “the Government's critical support and strong desire to introduce new environmentally friendly technology, and promote increased innovation in the Australian automotive industry, enabled Toyota Australia to develop a case for a locally built hybrid Camry.”
And furthermore, they go on to say: “Toyota's decision to build a hybrid Camry in Australia was based on various business considerations. However, the Government's support was a critical factor in securing local production”  -  that's their statement today.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you won't be in Australia to greet the Dalai Lama, so you won't be seeing him I understand. One, are you disappointed that you will not be greeting him? And two, would you have greeted him had you not been on this trip?
PM: Oh, absolutely. I mean, I've met the Dalai many times before. And there's nothing remarkable in this. The invitation to meet him came to my office, and therefore, the Acting Prime Minister and as I understand it, the Foreign Minister will be catching up with the Dalai. And he'll be treated with appropriate respect as a major religious leader in the world.
And that, I think, is the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you have any reason to fear that your scheduled meeting with Prime Minister Fukuda could be interrupted by the difficulties that he's having in the Diet today and tomorrow?
PM: Look, what I know about international politics is that it always is prosecuted simultaneously with domestic politics. And, I have every sense of optimism in terms of not just meeting with Prime Minister Fukuda, but the content of that meeting as well. Our officials have been working hard on this for quite some time. And I think we're going to have a very good conversation.
Every international political leader faces domestic political challenges. They don't just get turned off when someone arrives. And nor is that the case in Japan. You know the great thing about Japan  -  robust democracy. They take their democracy with both hands and they go for it. And, you know, good luck Australia.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to the whale issue, you have been stressing pursuing every diplomatic measure that you can. Isn't it the case that in fact, as the New Zealand Government has told you, you don't have a legal leg to stand on in pursuing this in any legal sense, and can you say that you still hold out the prospect of going to the International Court of Justice?
PM: Well, these things always have to be dealt with in sequence. And, I don't intend to engage in a debate with our friends from across the Tasman about our own advice and advices on these matters  - 
JOURNALIST: Well what is that advice?
PM: ... I don't intend to engage in a public debate about our advices, other than to say that our position hasn't changed. And, we were clear in our position on this quite some time ago. But I'll go on to say this. That, pursuing a diplomatic strategy is not inconsistent or incompatible with preparing for other such strategies, other strategies which may assist in achieving the policy objective that we've got. And our policy objective hasn't changed. It has been clearly stated by us in the past, and it will not change.
You know, we're dealing with a long standing friend and partner with Japan. We'll be deploying every element of our diplomacy. But, as for any commentary from across the Tasman on these matters, I'll leave that to those across the Tasman.
JOURNALIST: Should Belinda Neal be disciplined?
PM: I spoke to Belinda Neal today and I've said to her that there is, and there appears to be, a pattern of unacceptable behaviour here. Furthermore, what I've said to Ms Neal is that in reflecting on that, that it's important that this be dealt with by her appropriately into the future. She's indicated that, as a result of our conversation, that she'll actually be seeking counselling to assist in her own management of her relationships with other people. I've also reminded Ms Neal that none of us, none of us, are guaranteed of a future in politics. None of us are guaranteed of a future in politics.
JOURNALIST: So was she lying, Mr Rudd, when she said that nothing happened and she wasn't abusive?
PM: You've got conflicting versions of events. And so, the view that I've taken, the strong view that I've taken, is that if you look at a series of events that there is, or appears to be, a pattern of unacceptable behaviour. She's indicated that she will be seeking counselling to assist in her management of her relationship with others. And I've reminded her very clearly that none of us are guaranteed of a future in politics.
JOURNALIST: So is that a final warning, is it?
PM: It's a clear cut conversation between me, as the leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, and as Prime Minister, and with her, as a Member of Parliament. And it was appropriate that that conversation occurred.
JOURNALIST: Just the International Court of Justice advice. Phillip Ruddock actually received advice a couple of times as the former Attorney General and it was clear that it would pretty much be quite useless. Now, talking about the ICJ, you were  - 
PM: Do you have a different legal form of words to express that?
JOURNALIST: Okay  -  (inaudible)
PM: Not entirely guaranteed of success, or something?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible). Talking about the ICJ, you did threaten last year, you said that you were going to take Iran to the ICJ. Is that still your intention? (Inaudible)
PM: There is analysis underway within the Department of Foreign Affairs on that matter. That involves, as you would be aware, a whole series of other international legal instruments. And, we're not yet in receipt of the totality of that advice. It'll take some time.
On the question of Iran's international behaviour, the position of my Government hasn't changed. And that is that states which threaten existentially the existence of other states, as Iran has done in the case of Israel, represent a real problem in terms of the international order. I've been very clear about that, very clear about that.
When the President of Iran says that he intends to ‘wipe Israel off the map'  -  I would take that as a belligerent statement. And, anyone who thinks that it's not, I think has an interesting interpretation of the English language.
But on the specific question, we're still seeking a full brief from the international lawyers on that matter, and that will take some time.
JOURNALIST: Was it Ms Neal's suggestion that she should undertake counselling or was it yours, and did you raise the prospect of her endorsement as a Labor Party member?
PM: The question of counselling arose in our conversation in terms of how to deal with this matter. And, as I said, she indicated that would be the best way to proceed.
On the question of a future in politics, obviously that goes down to the question of the future of any candidate for the Labor Party's pre-selection as well. So as I said, none of us are guaranteed of a future in politics. But, it's important, its important that she reflects fully on the events of recent times, and acts on the basis  - 
JOURNALIST: But did you suggest that she seek counselling?
PM: As I said, it arose in the conversation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Things arise in conversations, and I think it's an appropriate course of action. She's indicated that what she is minded to do. And I would encourage her in that direction. As I said, no one, repeat, no one, is guaranteed of a future in politics. And, that goes for all of our Members of Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Does she owe the parliament an explanation as her husband has been required to do in New South Wales?
PM: I think the important thing here is to deal with the immediacy of what I've described before as what appears to be an unacceptable pattern of behaviour. And then, secondly, look at how that is best dealt with in terms of her personal circumstances. Hence, the question of counselling, and beyond that, to reflect pretty soberly on the implications for all of this.
As I said, no one, no one, is guaranteed of a future in politics. And I think all MPs, and all of our MPs, need to reflect on that fact.


The Deputy Prime Minister, the Hon Julia Gillard MP, will lead a strong delegation of Australians to the 2008 Australia New Zealand Leadership Forum being held in Wellington, New Zealand on 13 and 14 June.
The Forum promotes the strength and potential of the Australia New Zealand bilateral relationship. It also considers a range of broader domestic and international strategic issues.
Australia is sending its strongest contingent yet including six Federal Government Ministers and 40 senior business leaders.
Agenda items for this year's Forum include:
     * discussion on the progress of the Single Economic Market;
     * key economic trends and priorities for the new Australian Government;
     * the impact of climate change;
     * Australasian demographic trends and their consumer and cultural impacts; and 
    strategic issues facing Australia and New Zealand in the Asia-Pacific.
The Deputy Prime Minister, the Hon Julia Gillard MP will speak about priorities for the new Australian Government.
Ms Gillard will then lead a discussion panel involving key Australian Ministers with a direct portfolio interest in the countries' bilateral relations.
The Australian delegation includes business and industry leaders drawn from companies with interests and markets in New Zealand.
It includes the CEOs of the Commonwealth Bank, National Australia Bank, and Fairfax Media, and Chairmen of Telstra, Lion Nathan and Pricewaterhouse Coopers.
Mr Rod McGeoch, Chairman of Sky City Entertainment Group Limited and Mr John Allen, Chief Executive of New Zealand Post will co-chair the 2008 Forum.
The forum provides an opportunity for participants to discuss the importance of the bilateral relationship between the two countries.
The Deputy Prime Minister will also meet with New Zealand's Prime Minister, Helen Clark.


The Rudd Government today unveiled the next step in its commitment to tackle housing affordability with the release of the technical paper for the Housing Affordability Fund.
The $512 million Housing Affordability Fund aims to lower the cost of building new homes by tackling the critical supply side issues of the length of time taken to bring new houses to sale and the impact of infrastructure charges.
Through the HAF, the Government wants to create an incentive for projects that will make housing more affordable.
The Fund aims to make housing more affordable by addressing two significant supply-side barriers to housing development:
     * Holding costs incurred by developers as a result of long planning and approval waiting times; and
     * Infrastructure costs, such as water, sewerage, transport, and open space.
Investment will be targeted to areas that with high demand for new housing and can be used for both green-field and in-fill developments.
The fund will be distributed by direct grants, primarily to local governments, local government associations and State or Territory Governments, through a competitive selection process.
Proposals will be assessed against transparent, needs-based selection criteria and will have to demonstrate that cost savings are passed on to new home buyers.
Many Australians are having trouble finding affordable housing and they are using a growing proportion of their income to keep it.
One of the major reasons for the decline in housing affordability is the lack of supply, with an insufficient number of houses being built in recent years to satisfy demand.
The expected number of new dwellings, or housing starts, for 2007-08 is just 154,000. This is well below the 170,000 housing starts recorded in both 2002-03 and 2003-04.
It is also well below industry estimates that we need to build at least 170,000 new dwellings in 2007-08 alone just to keep up with the housing needs of a growing population.
The Government invites submissions from State, Territory and local governments, industry and other stakeholders to ensure that we get this policy right.
Copies of the technical paper can be obtained from the website, www.fahcsia.gov.au and submissions can be sent to haf@fahcsia.gocv.au
The HAF is a part of the Australian Government's comprehensive approach to tackling housing affordability, which also includes the National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS), National Housing Supply Council, and an audit of surplus Commonwealth land that can be made available for new housing.
Up to $30 million from the HAF is being used to develop IT infrastructure and software to roll out nationally, electronic development assessment systems and online tracking services to reduce red tape and streamline planning approvals.



     * On 12 June 2008, Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda of Japan and Prime Minister Kevin Rudd of Australia met in Tokyo to reaffirm the particular importance of the relationship between Japan and Australia, and confirmed their commitment to strengthen further the comprehensive strategic, security and economic partnership between Japan and Australia.
     * The two Prime Ministers shared the view that the relationship was based on a long history of cooperation, trade and investment links of enduring significance to both countries, a growing strategic relationship reflecting shared strategic interests and democratic values, and close people-to-people links. They expressed their determination to strengthen these important pillars of the relationship and explore new areas of cooperation.
     * In this context, the two Prime Ministers called on the next Japan-Australia Conference to present forward-looking recommendations for future Japan-Australia relations.
Security Cooperation
     * The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to promote bilateral security cooperation through the implementation of the Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation and its Action Plan, including updating the Memorandum on Defence Exchange and holding the Customs Cooperation Meeting. This also covers continuing enhancement of defence exchanges including unit-to-unit exchanges through aircraft visits such as P-3Cs and ship visits. The two Prime Ministers also reaffirmed their commitment to work together to contribute to peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond.
     * In this context, the two Prime Ministers welcomed steady implementation of the Action Plan, and reaffirmed the importance of reviewing the status of bilateral security cooperation and examining further ways to enhance cooperation with a view to reviewing the Action Plan.
     * The Japanese side welcomed Australia's proposal to host the next Japan-Australia Joint Foreign and Defence Ministerial Consultations (“two-plus-two”) in Canberra in early November. The two Prime Ministers confirmed their commitment to hold the talks this year and to coordinate further to realise the proposal.
     * Noting that Japan and Australia both maintained alliance relationships with the United States, the two Prime Ministers emphasised the strategic value of promoting bilateral security and defence cooperation between Japan and Australia.
     * Underlining the importance of continuing presence and engagement of the United States in the region, the two Prime Ministers shared the view that strengthened bilateral cooperation would contribute to the enhancement of trilateral cooperation among Japan, Australia and the United States, such as through security and defence cooperation in the trilateral senior officials' meeting.
     * The two Prime Ministers confirmed their commitment to enhance dialogue and cooperation on a trilateral basis with the United States. The two Prime Ministers shared the view that the third ministerial meeting of the Trilateral Strategic Dialogue (TSD) to be held in late June would give greater momentum to furthering trilateral engagement in a practical manner including through disaster relief cooperation. In this context, the Japanese side welcomed Australia's offer to host a first meeting of TSD disaster relief experts.
     * The two Prime Ministers renewed their commitment to tackle the proliferation of the weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. The two Prime Ministers welcomed the fifth anniversary of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) and expressed their determination to continue cooperation in the effective implementation of the PSI and its outreach activities.
     * The two Prime Ministers stressed the need to enhance regional capacities to provide disaster relief, including through the APEC Task Force for Emergency Preparedness (TFEP), and welcomed the World Food Program's plan to establish a regional disaster simulation facility. In this context, the Australian side noted Japan's intention to consider creating a network among disaster relief organisations already existing in Asia which would complement the work of other regional mechanisms. The Japanese side took note of Australia's intention to conduct a feasibility study on improving regional disaster relief mechanisms and to consult Japan closely on this.
Economic Relations
     * Reaffirming the importance and the high degree of complementarity of the economic relationship, the two Prime Ministers expressed their determination to further strengthen the economic relationship between the two leading economies. The Australian side noted the significant role Japanese investment had played in the development of the Australian economy.
     * The two Prime Ministers shared the view that the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) / Free Trade Agreement (FTA) would provide a good opportunity to strengthen and deepen the economic relationship. The two Prime Ministers affirmed their commitment to working towards a comprehensive and mutually beneficial agreement. The two Prime Ministers stressed the importance of a flexible and constructive approach in negotiations to achieve such outcomes, bearing in mind the sensitivities of both sides.
     * The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed the importance of stable supply of food and energy and mineral resources from Australia to Japan, noting that both countries benefit from such reliable supply. They confirmed their commitment to examine this issue in the context of the EPA/FTA.
     * Recognising that services trade was a relatively underdeveloped part of the bilateral trade relationship which needed to be enhanced, the two Prime Ministers shared the view that efforts to link the two services sectors should be strengthened.
     * The Australian side welcomed Japan's “Invitation Programme for Future Business Counterparts from Australia,” under the Japan-East Asia Network of Exchange for Students and Youth (JENESYS) programme that aims to build stronger business links between the two countries.
     * The two Prime Ministers decided to encourage the financial regulatory authorities in both countries to broaden the scope of their cooperation, including a regular dialogue between them to share experiences in financial services, with regulatory authorities involving business and other sectors as and when necessary.
Climate Change
     * The two Prime Ministers affirmed their commitment to cooperate on climate change and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, acknowledging the close bilateral engagement occurring between the two countries through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), particularly in the ‘Umbrella Group', the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP), APEC and the East Asia Summit.
     * The Japanese Prime Minister welcomed the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by Australia. The Australian Prime Minister welcomed the close co-operation with Japan in advancing the climate change agenda, stressing the importance of Japan's leadership as the G8 Chair of this year.
     * The two Prime Ministers expressed their resolve to work to establish, by the end of 2009, an effective international climate change framework in which all major economies participate in a responsible manner through the negotiations under the UNFCCC process.
     * The two Prime Ministers emphasised that while developed countries should continue to take the lead, all major economies should make meaningful contributions in accordance with their responsibilities and capabilities.
     * The two Prime Ministers underlined the need to reach a positive outcome at the G8 Hokkaido Toyako Summit in July to accelerate negotiations in the framework of the United Nations. The two Prime Ministers confirmed their commitment to working with others in the Major Economies process on a shared vision for a long term global emissions reduction goal and other important elements.
     * The Australian side highly appreciated the contribution of Japan's “Cool Earth Promotion Programme” as an important input to address the challenge of global climate change. The two Prime Ministers saw that the sectoral approach is useful for encouraging global sector specific actions. They also saw the bottom-up sectoral approach, which can complement economy-wide targets, as a useful tool for identifying technically possible mitigation potentials. The two Prime Ministers looked forward to continuing to work cooperatively on this and many other issues.
     * The two Prime Ministers reiterated their support for cooperative private-public sector work to share best practices and improve energy efficiency in the APP. They shared the view that such cooperation between developed and developing countries needs to be further enhanced.
     * The two Prime Ministers welcomed the launch of the Callide A project, the world's first demonstration of oxy-fuel combustion with CO2 storage and shared the view that the project would make a significant contribution to the development of technology that captures greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired power stations. As a flagship APP project it is a good example of how Japanese and Australian industry and researchers are working together to develop practical solutions to address climate change.
     * The two Prime Ministers stressed the need to develop innovative technologies and to shift to a low carbon society in order to achieve long-term emissions reduction. The two Prime Ministers concurred on the importance of sharing technology roadmaps in partnership with the International Energy Agency (IEA), and of establishing a framework for international cooperation. They also expressed their support for the outcome of the G8 Environment Ministers Meeting regarding an international research network of institutions involved in research on low-carbon societies.
     * The two Prime Ministers recognised that Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) is critical. Therefore, the two Prime Ministers welcomed that relevant agencies of both sides would continue to cooperate in developing integrated forest and carbon monitoring systems towards a Global Carbon Monitoring System (GCMS) to underpin REDD policies. Cooperation will include a collaborative research alliance of Australia's CSIRO, the Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information, Japan's National Institute of Environmental Studies and Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency.
     * Noting that forests play a key role in conserving biodiversity and mitigating climate change, the two Prime Ministers decided to continue to work together to achieve sustainable forest management and combating illegal logging in the Asia-Pacific region.
     * The two Prime Ministers expressed their commitment to cooperate in assisting developing countries including Pacific Island countries in their effort toward adaptation to climate change. In this context, the two Prime Ministers expressed support for the co-benefits approach which addresses both development and climate change issues at the same time.
     * The two Prime Ministers welcomed progress towards the establishment of the new Climate Investment Funds at the World Bank.
Science and Technology
     * Recognising the two countries' strengths as world-class centres of research, the two Prime Ministers directed relevant ministries and agencies to take a fresh look at existing science and technology cooperation with a view to identifying new areas of mutual interests. They also encouraged closer collaboration between Japanese and Australian researchers, especially among young researchers. They welcomed the twentieth anniversary of Questacon.
     * The two Prime Ministers underlined the importance of generating the interest of the younger generation in science and technology and expressed their intent to build cooperation in this area including through student exchanges.
     * The Japanese side welcomed Australia's interest in participating in the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP).
     * The two Prime Ministers recognised the important role of continued cooperation in scientific research in the Antarctic to support the understanding of the global impacts of climate change and confirmed their commitment to further enhanced cooperation in this area.
Pacific Islands
     * The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment towards the Pacific Island countries in supporting their efforts to promote peace and prosperity. The Australian side welcomed Japan's intention to strengthen its efforts as “Peace Fostering Nation” in the region. The Japanese side welcomed the 6 March Port Moresby Declaration outlining Australia's approach to cooperation with the Pacific Island countries.
     * The two Prime Ministers expressed their intention to enhance dialogue and cooperation not only bilaterally but also with other major players in the region such as the United States and New Zealand. The two Prime Ministers affirmed that they would closely cooperate toward the Fifth Japan-Pacific Islands Forum Summit Meeting (PALM 5).
Energy and Mineral Resources Security
     * Recognising the strategic importance and highly complementary nature of the trade and investment relationship in energy and minerals resources such as iron ore, coal, liquefied natural gas (LNG) and uranium, the two Prime Ministers underlined the importance of stable and secure supply of energy and minerals resources. They noted the efforts of Australian Federal and State Governments to enhance infrastructure in support of energy and minerals exports.
     * The two Prime Ministers noted with great concern the escalation in oil prices. They also noted the importance of increased investment in energy and resources projects for sustaining global economic growth and combating high oil prices. They confirmed the need to address these issues in a cooperative manner in relevant international forums such as the IEA.
World Food Security
     * The two Prime Ministers stressed the importance of world food security. They noted with strong concerns the trend of high prices of food, particularly in light of its acute impact on developing countries' efforts to overcome poverty and to reach the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). They confirmed the need to tackle this issue in a cooperative manner in line with the outcomes of relevant international fora including the FAO High-Level Conference on World Food Security in Rome.
East Asia Summit (EAS)
     * In order to realise long-term stability and prosperity in East Asia, the two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to the development of the East Asia Summit (EAS) by promoting specific cooperation in such areas as energy security, finance, the environment, disaster management, climate change, education and youth exchange, based upon the principle of openness and universally shared values.
Regional Economic Integration
     * The two Prime Ministers also welcomed initiatives for regional economic integration including the Track Two study on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA), the establishment of the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA), initiatives on regional financial cooperation and the APEC initiatives for strengthening regional economic integration including the examination of the options and prospects for a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) as a long-term prospect.
APEC
     * Noting that Japan and Australia had been formative in the development of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the two Prime Ministers affirmed their shared commitment to strengthening APEC as one of the primary regional institutions and noted the contribution APEC could make to regional economic integration.
Future of Asia Pacific Region
     * The two Prime Ministers underlined the importance of continuing regional discussions on the future of the Asia Pacific region to explore ways to better respond to common challenges in the region, referring to Prime Minister Fukuda's Initiative for the future of the Asia Pacific as well as Prime Minister Rudd's proposal to exchange views on a future vision of the region including regional architecture.
WTO
     * Recognising the benefits of cooperating on economic issues in multilateral fora, the two Prime Ministers affirmed their strong intent to seek a conclusion to the WTO negotiations within this year and stressed the importance of achieving an ambitious, balanced and comprehensive outcome. They stressed that a successful outcome would be vital to the global economy, the international trading system, and the needs of developing countries.
Intellectual Property Rights
     * Emphasising the importance of intellectual property rights in this knowledge-based world economy, the two Prime Ministers affirmed their cooperation in intellectual property related issues, including on international efforts to harmonise substantive patent law. Recognising the need to combat counterfeiting and piracy, the two Prime Ministers also confirmed their commitment to work together towards early conclusion of negotiations for an Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA), with a view to establishing a new standard of intellectual property protection.
Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
     * The two Prime Ministers renewed their determination to strengthen the international disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime. The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed that they would continue to closely cooperate with each other with a view to achieving a successful outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference including through launching a bilateral initiative for high-level expert dialogue on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In this context, the Japanese side welcomed the idea of establishing an international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament proposed by Prime Minister Rudd on 9 June in Kyoto.
     * The two Prime Ministers stressed the importance of cooperating in the field of denuclearization of the Russian Federation, including the dismantlement of decommissioned nuclear submarines in the Russian Far East.


PM: I've just concluded a very good discussion with the Prime Minister of Japan, Prime Minister Fukuda.
And, subsequent to that, we had lunch together. And, it was a good wide ranging discussion.
We talked about how we enhance this Australia-Japan relationship into the future.
You would have seen our statement in terms of enhancing our bilateral and trilateral security cooperation. That's important for the future.
And we are in the process also at the bilateral level of developing a defence cooperation memorandum. And that will be concluded in the months ahead.
We will also be expanding our exercises in relation to maritime surveillance and we also have further plans in relation to defence logistics with each other.
Trilaterally, with the United States, we are also planning with our friends in the United States and in Japan for an exercise soon on response to a regional natural disaster. And that is a good practical way of taking our trilateral security cooperation forward.
Also, I appreciate very much the positive response from the Japanese Government to my proposal for an International Commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. And we continue to work with the Japanese on their participation in that.
On the economic front, the discussion about the FTA was deep and long and broad covering matters of sensitivity on both sides of the equation. I appreciate in particular the emphasis on the services sector which is contained in our joint declaration today.
To the Prime Minster I made the point which I've made publicly that our two economies are 75 per cent services economies. Modern, advanced economies. Yet the services trade is only 8 per cent of our bilateral trade. We need to do more on that. And opening that trade up further through a comprehensive FTA is a good way ahead for the future.
On the global cooperation front, the Prime Minister and I have agreed to work closely together in the lead up to the G8 outreach meeting on climate change. We've also agreed to expand our bilateral work on the whole challenge of global energy prices, global oil prices in particular. Given the impact which it is having on inflation around the world, and the impact it is having on economic activity around the world.
On the question of the Asia Pacific Community, we had a long discussion about that over our lunch in particular. And how that might be developed in the future.
In his speech of 22 May, Prime Minister Fukuda outlined his own vision for how this region can work together in the future and we have agreed to do work together on our respective concepts about future regional cooperation. I look forward to that work advancing.
My comments on whaling in the statement I made with the Prime Minister I think explain fully where we are going with that and there will be an intense period of diplomacy in the period ahead. I look forward very much to the Prime Minister taking up our invitation to visit Japan and as I said throw some Aussie beef on the barbeque.
That was the first half of the conversation, the second half of the conversation was about the State of Origin win by Queensland against New South Wales which having explained that fully to the Japanese Prime Minister he thought it was a good outcome as well. 30 nil in the cause of righteousness.
By the way in the speech I gave last night in case any of you hear something about this we were tracking the result halfway through and I was told mistakenly by a source  -  a Queensland source, at the table that we were ahead 14-10. To be told afterwards that we had won 30 nil was surprising. But I think it was a great outcome for Queensland. Great outcome for the game and I look forward very much to going to the third State of Origin.
Finally on tourism, tourism has been affected significantly by recent decisions by Qantas in terms of routes between Japan and Australia, including to Queensland, including to Far North Queensland and Cairns in particular. That's underpinned a statement by the Tourism Minister Martin Ferguson yesterday to match a Queensland Government injection of $4 million to support further tourism promotion for Queensland in particular.
That will also form part of a broader and new international advertising campaign designed to further promote Australia as a tourism market given these recent challenges arising from decisions in the aviation industry.
Also regional tourism organisations will now have access to the export market development grants scheme and we hope to have further to say about our overall tourism strategy for the future. This is very significant for Queensland, for Far North Queensland, and other parts of Australia affected by these decisions. I've just been speaking to Jim Turnour on the phone, the Federal Member, and it's quite clear that this has had a strong impact in his community and we have been very sensitive to his representations to the Government about the need to act on the question of the effective promotion of Queensland and those affected centres in the international tourism market which is a very competitive and difficult place to be.
Over to you for your questions.
JOURNALIST: Can the relationship between Australia and Japan is now reaffirmed (Inaudible)
PM: I believe the Australia  -  Japan relationship is so strong, so broad and so deep it's embedded in the political cultures in both of our countries. Labor and Liberal in Australia and LDP and I believe Democratic Party here in Japan as well. I've met many Opposition politicians since I have been here and certainly many from the LDP and from the LDP coalition partners.
The great thing about the Australia  -  Japan relationship is I believe it actually transcends political divides. It is so strong, it is so positive, its so important economically, politically and of course strategically. And it's a relationship which can endure differences as in fact our relationship with the United States endures differences.
JOURNALIST: Jeddah Summit (inaudible), will you be going?
PM: The Government of Australia has been invited and that has just been conveyed to me in the last hour or so. And they will be considering that overnight and we'll be considering also the actual content of the agenda for the proposed Jeddah conference which would be I think the weekend after next. So we'll have more to say about that tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: So its likely that that there will be an Australian (inaudible)
PM: That's a gross piece of verballing on your part Andrew in terms what I just said. I said an hour ago we received an invitation from the Saudis. It was conveyed as I understand it on behalf of the Saudi King and I understand the invitation has gone to other heads of Government that is correct. And I also will be looking very carefully at the proposed agenda for that meeting overnight and we'll have further to say about it tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can we assume from your comments and Prime Minister Fukuda's that when you raised the issue of whaling the Japanese Prime Minister basically was not interested. It sounds like he gave you short shrift. Please tell me if I am not right?
PM: Could I please tell you if your wrong as well?
JOURNALIST: You can.
PM: No we had a good discussion about that both in the meeting before lunch and as well as over lunch as well. We'll work on the diplomacy of this as I have said before in the months ahead. This is a matter which is held deeply both in Australia and Japan for different reasons but we intend to use every diplomatic effort in the period ahead.
There was a good discussion on it and I think we will  -  both he and myself - that's Prime Minister Fukuda and myself will be putting our shoulder to the wheel. I think the other important thing to say is the Prime Minister and I agreed that this disagreement among friends should not in any way undermine the strength, depth and breadth of the Australia  -  Japan bilateral relationship.
JOURNALIST: What does it mean to tackle this diplomatically? They want to continue whaling, you want them to stop. Where is the room to move, what actually are you (inaudible)
PM: Well if you look at the diplomacy that's being advanced through the IWC  -  the International Whaling Commission - there are reforms there in terms of how you approach the future of scientific whaling, for example. There are proposal which Australia has already put on the table in the lead up to the IWC meeting. This will be the subject of discussion when the IWC meets in Santiago, Chile fairly soon and we'll see what comes of that. That's what I mean by diplomacy. So its not something airy fairy. Its out there, there are proposals to talk about. But for diplomacy to work you have got to give it a go. And that means some of its private and some of its semi public and some of its public.
JOURNALIST: Did the Prime Minister give you any indication that he was prepared to give ground. What sort of hope do you have that this will achieve some change of position?
PM: I think its fair to say in our discussion that both of us hold to the positions of our respective Governments. I wouldn't wish to give any impression to the contrary. But we also hold equally to the position that this is something that we need to give a strong diplomatic push to in the months ahead. And the next stage of that will be when the respective Ministers and others meet in Santiago. But I go back to what Prime Minister Fukuda said I think in the press statement before as well as conversations privately that we do not see this as having the capacity to undermine the strength of our bilateral relationship. And we're both committed to exercising diplomacy in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: If diplomacy is the way ahead now at least for some period, doesn't that tell us that your releasing of the pictures, sending of the surveillance vessel, causing the diplomatic damage that was quite clearly caused as a result of doing those things, was in fact an over response early on and diplomacy should have been given the run all along.
PM: Our position has not changed on the question of whaling and nor has that of the Government of Japan. But we have committed to a period of diplomatic negotiation on the way through. These positions as I said before are deeply held in Australia, they are deeply held by the Australian Government. You've heard me speak on this in Australia before. But they are also deeply held in Japan, we can respectfully disagree but we will try diplomacy for the period ahead to see what we can achieve.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: Well on the question of whaling our objective all along quite apart from our broader objectives for the IWC is to make sure that there is appropriate protection for whales in what is proscribed by us as the Australian whale sanctuary in the southern ocean. That's where the objective has been.
We have of course broader whaling policy considerations alive within the IWC. And as you know we've had broader and distinct and continuing reservations about scientific whaling as currently (inaudible). For example one of the proposals which is being considered in the IWC is non lethal scientific whaling. That is if research into whaling is deemed to be necessary then there are ways in which that can be advanced by non lethal means and therefore that one of the proposals being considered.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Julia Irwin says Belinda Neal is being singled out because she is a woman. What's going on with your backbench at the moment?
PM: I've seen those comments from the member for Fowler and I believe they are wrong.
JOURNALIST: Will she be disciplined?
PM: No they are just wrong.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think everyone can get out there and have their say about things, that's fine but I think on this one Ms Irwin is wrong.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM:I think its fair to say that given Japan's particular experience of nuclear weapons in the events of 1945 there is a strong level of interest and support in Japan for this Australian proposal, this proposed international commission. The Japanese Prime Minister went to this topic spontaneously in his conversation with me prior to the press statement and we returned to it I seem to recall in the discussion we had over lunch as well.
So I think its something which they are supportive of. Secondly on the question of Japanese participation. That will take some time ahead for them to resolve internally. We are pretty relaxed about that. We welcome whatever form of participation Japan chooses to advance.
This is really important, its 18 months effectively from now until were in the year when the non proliferation treaty review conference is held. The last one did not get very far. We can't afford to have the NPT fragment into the future. It's time, it's well and truly time, that we got together, started to shape a political consensus and a policy consensus and that's what this proposed commission and subsequent international conference would seek to do.
JOURNALIST: Are we likely to see Japanese troops training on Australian soil as a result of the expanded Defence cooperation (inaudible)
PM: That's not currently the subject of discussion as I understand it between our respective militaries. As I have said before, we're currently developing a defence memorandum of cooperation between us. That will make it easier for existing forms of maritime cooperation to occur as I understand it. We will be increasing our joint exercising when it comes to maritime surveillance. These are important steps forward into the future.
Japan and Australia under the new Australian Government and under Prime Minister Fukuda's administration wish to take our bilateral defence and security cooperation further. I think the Prime Minister believes this is good for the overall security and stability of our region.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Oh look Ms Neal and I had an extensive conversation yesterday as I indicated in my statements to you. And it was my conclusion that based on that conversation with her that this was the appropriate way ahead. As I said there seemed to me to be an apparent pattern of unacceptable behaviour and the proposal to engage in counselling was one that I fully supported. As I said again it's important that all members of parliament, all members of parliament reflect on the fact that nobody is guaranteed of a future in politics.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Agriculture has been shall I say canvassed in its normal firm frank and friendly way between the Japanese and the Australian sides. But it was actually a very good and detailed conversation about AG. Very detailed conversation about agriculture, very detailed conversation about the services industries. And what I've said not just in the meetings with Prime Minister Fukuda but also with other Japanese Ministers who I've met today including the Minister for METI, the Minister for the economy and international trade and industry. As well as other Japanese members of the diet is that we want a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement as soon as possible, dealing with agriculture, dealing also with the services industries and we'll need their support and the Japanese political process to get there.
This will be very tough, really tough but together with our combined efforts right now between the Japanese Minister and Simon Crean most recently at the Paris OECD meeting on a final push and shove on the DOHA round to try and push that towards a global outcome. I've got to say the two sides are working very well together on trade policy right now. It's still going to be a hard negotiation.


JON FAINE: Kevin Rudd is busy representing the nation with one of our most important foreign partners, Japan. There he is negotiating over nuclear non-proliferation treaties, he is dealing with the prospect of a new economic free trade zone throughout Asia, he is talking about solving the problems of the world and then  -  he gets a phone call. About a backbencher who has gone on a bit of a, well, a bit of a rampage, if not much more. Causing substantial embarrassment within some sensitive parts of the Labor Party. 
The Prime Minister takes time out from his important international mission to tell Belinda Neal to get anger management. Women on the Labor backbench and the caucus screamed double-standards. Coming as it does at a time when we have a Deputy Prime Minister who is a woman. Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning John.
JON FAINE: Are there double standards being displayed here, as some of your colleagues are saying?
JULIA GILLARD: No, certainly not. I spoke to the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, about this matter yesterday. I was obviously disturbed that there was a pattern of behaviour here. I thought we needed to discuss the matter and there needed to be some action taken. I had a conversation with the Prime Minister and then the Prime Minister talked to Belinda Neal directly. I would have done exactly the same thing, exactly the same thing had it been a male Member of Parliament.
JON FAINE: What's the pattern of behaviour you refer to?
JULIA GILLARD: Well obviously there was the incident in the restaurant which has received so much publicity. The matter involving the soccer match and the suspension. There was a pattern emerging there and I thought the matter needed to be discussed with the Prime Minister and needed to be addressed, and it has been.
JON FAINE: So, what, one little tiff of the soccer field  -  many of us who engage in competitive sports find that, you know, a bit of white-line fever can set in. And then Belinda Neal denies that she swore, denies that she threatened  -  her denials are obviously dismissed. And that's enough to get you on the front page of the nation's newspapers and the attention of the Prime Minister while he is in Japan?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I don't write the newspapers, Jon, so obviously it's been on the front page of a lot of newspapers for a number of days. Most particularly in New South Wales  -  so that's an editorial judgement that you'd have to take up with the people who edit those newspapers...
JON FAINE: And you're reacting to that. Is that what this is all about?
JULIA GILLARD: No, no we're reacting to a circumstance where we thought it was appropriate for the Prime Minister to have a conversation with Belinda. He has had that conversation. Obviously what has come out of that conversation is that Belinda is going to seek some professional assistance here. I believe that is the appropriate course.
JON FAINE: (inaudible) the Prime Minister personally counsels a backbencher who has an argument in a pub?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, what happened here Jon, is obviously there was in my view a pattern of behaviour. There needed to be some action taken in relation to the matter. I've spoken to Kevin about that...
JON FAINE: But have there other things that we haven't yet heard about that have established that pattern of behaviour?
JULIA GILLARD: No, I'm referring to the events that are publicly known, Jon...
JON FAINE: Nothing more?
JULIA GILLARD: No, I'm referring to the events that are publicly known. That is what motivated me to make the phone call to the Prime Minister yesterday. The events that as you say, have been the subject of a great deal of media attention. And the matter has now  -  action is going to be taken, in terms of Belinda undertaking some professional counselling in relation to this...
JON FAINE: Does she have a drinking problem?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, Jon, that's a pretty silly question I think. What...
JON FAINE: Well, I think it's the one that most people listening to you, and who are not part of this New South Wales obsession with Belinda Neal, are wondering about. What is going on here?
JULIA GILLARD: What is going on here is exactly what I've just said Jon. There is no second agenda, no third agenda, no deep dark mystery. It is all exactly as I've said, absolutely transparent. There was an incident in a restaurant, obviously was reported in the newspapers. You've read those newspaper reports; other people have read those newspaper reports. There was a further matter reported on yesterday  -  obviously I wasn't aware of the matter until I saw it in the newspaper, but it relates to an incident playing soccer. Putting those two things together, I was obviously concerned about them. People would also be aware that there was a matter involving an exchange in Parliament, which has been the subject of public attention...
JON FAINE: With Sophie Panopoulos-Mirabella?
JULIA GILLARD: That's right. And on the basis of those things, I've discussed the matter with the Prime Minister yesterday  -  we agreed that he would speak to Belinda Neal and the rest of it is very much now in the public domain and recorded. And Belinda Neal will be seeking some professional guidance in relation to these matters. And I think that that's the appropriate course.
JON FAINE: It's raised many other issues. Labor backbencher, your colleague Julia Irwin, had this to say:
Julia Irwin: Oh yes, I'm definitely disappointed, and always have been that it's the women of the Parliament who are singled out.
JON FAINE: And she in fact went on to refer to the fact that Mark Latham was never told to go off to anger management counselling. And she's leading the charge, saying in fact you're over-reacting and it's not fair.
JULIA GILLARD: Well I just disagree with Julia Irwin on this matter. I think she's got it wrong. As I say, Jon, obviously I was literally involved with these events yesterday and everything I did yesterday, I would have done exactly the same had it been a male Member of Parliament.
JON FAINE: Is this a slight changing of the guard within Labor politics too? Does this mean the New South Wales right, of which Ms Neal is a member and her husband is a leading light as well, as Minister in the New South Wales government? With a Queenslander as Prime Minister and a Victorian from the left as Deputy Prime Minister, they don't have the same clout as they used to?
JULIA GILLARD: (laugh) Jon I can see you're desperate to weave a conspiracy theory around all of this. But there isn't one to be woven. It is exactly as I have described to you, no less, no more, no more complicated than that. I would have taken the same action had it been a male Member of Parliament. I would have taken the same action had it been a Member of Parliament from another state. I would have taken the same action had it have been a Member of Parliament from another faction. There is no conspiracy theory to be woven here. It's straight up and down, plain and simple as I have just explained it to you.
JON FAINE: Moving to similar issues but in the state forum if I possibly can, Julia Gillard. The Labor Party in Victoria is having its problems too over finding someone to replace Andre Haermeyer for the by-election in Kororoit. Is the preselection of Marlene Karuse guaranteed or is it off to the ALP's National Executive?
JULIA GILLARD: I understand that the preselection processes were finalised last night, from the point of view of the Victorian ALP. Obviously I'm not directly involved in those preselection processes. I wasn't in attendance at any of those meetings last night, but I understand that they've all happened and obviously the candidate is now there and in the field and campaigning to replace Andre Haermeyer in the Parliament.
JON FAINE: It's not been done by the book though, this preselection, has it?
JULIA GILLARD: Look, as I understand it there was a local vote of Party members and then the central preselection committee met...
JON FAINE: Local and (inaudible) of Party members which was then sought to be over-turned by a larger meeting.
JULIA GILLARD: Well Jon, I am not an expert in the details of what has happened in this preselection. As I understand it, local Party members got to vote. Then the central preselection panel which usually deals with these matters got to vote. And a candidate is now in the field and campaigning.
JON FAINE: So do you expect this to go on appeal? Are you aware of any moves to take this to an appeal?
JULIA GILLARD: I think I'm very clearly indicating to you John this is a State preselection. It's been undertaken by the ALP. It's not a matter for me. I'm not directly involved in the matter. And the only important thing is to make sure that an electorate out in Melbourne's west, Melbourne's north and west, gets good representation in the State Parliament.
JON FAINE: Later this morning we'll talk to Les Twentyman, the high-profile youth worker who has announced his candidacy as an independent. The Labor Party is vulnerable when you are caught up in your in-fighting are you not?
JULIA GILLARD: I think the thing here is people will make a determination ultimately on the issues. And when you look at the future of this state and what has been achieved by the Brumby Government and obviously the Bracks Government beforehand, I think people will look at that and say that they want to see that built on. And that's what will motivate people to vote.
I'm obviously aware, as someone who lives in Victoria, that we've seen substantial new investments into our schools, into our hospitals, into our infrastructure that's been brought by the Brumby and Bracks Government and I think they're the kind of things that motivate people when they vote.
JON FAINE: Julia Gillard, a couple of other quick things. You're making an announcement about computers in schools, the rollout of an election promise I understand. Where will you be?
JULIA GILLARD: I'll be at the Essendon East Keilor District College and I will be linked by web technology with a school in the ACT and a school in Western Australia. So we'll be showing the power of the technology. And what I will be announcing is that the first round of the computers in schools is being announced today. There are 896 secondary schools that are going to benefit. They're going to benefit with more than 116 000 new computers. It's the first round of our $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution. And I think importantly, we focus this first round, which is an expenditure of $116 million  -  we focussed it on the schools most in need of the technology. So we ordered it through and identified those schools that had a ratio of computers to students where there were eight or more students looking at the one computer or looking to use the one computer. And we've said, let's invest to bring that ratio to one to two.
JON FAINE: Can you guarantee that this program will be on budget and we won't see the sort of blowouts in your rollout of computers in schools that we are seeing  -  for instance, the Auditor-General yesterday, the Victorian Justice Department - a $14 million computer rollout from eight years ago still not finished and now costing more than $40 million.
JULIA GILLARD: We are determined to deliver this program on time and within budget. We've got a budget of $1.2 billion  -  that's a lot of money. Obviously we have delivered this first round as promised. We went to the Australian people and said that there would be a round one, that round one would be delivered before the 30th of June. Obviously when you have an election in late November and a government sworn in early December, to do that we've had to get an absolute canter on. But we've done that.
I'm going to give great credit to all of the schools that have worked with us, the school systems, to make sure that we could rollout such an ambitious program in its first stage so quickly. And this is just the start. But I am pleased and very happy to see that this start has been focussed on those schools that need assistance the most. That's what we wanted to do  -  help those most in need first.
JON FAINE: Alright, just finally Acting Prime Minister and I know your time is precious. Have the proposal for Victoria to introduce a HECS-style loan system to fund the TAFE sector is coming under fire as submissions to the State government on this from TAFEs themselves are being leaked to the media and various large TAFEs, particularly RMIT in this instance, according to a report in today's Australian newspaper - in their own submission to the state government say that this would be a disaster. Do you want Victoria to introduce a HECS-style scheme?
JULIA GILLARD: I think we just need to take a step back here and remind ourselves that the relevant Minister, Jacinta Allen, deliberately put out a paper for consultation and discussion and that's obviously what's happening. And I think that that is a good process. For those people, this is what the government is looking at, what do you think  -  that is exactly a good process. Obviously we are going to be working with our state and territory colleagues right around the country...
JON FAINE: But you haven't answered my question about whether you think a HECS-style system is good for TAFE.
JULIA GILLARD: Well, this is a debate that's happening in Victoria. And obviously the Brumby Labor Government is working its way through it. What I am working on, and we are working on new investments in this area, is the delivery of our 630 000 new training places...
JON FAINE: Aren't you going to answer my question? You don't want to tell me whether you think it's a good idea or not?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, look, the discussion is happening in Victoria. Obviously there are discussions between governments  -  that is between the Commonwealth Government and every state and territory  -  on the best way forward for vocational education and training. Everybody realises we need to form a new investment. Everybody realises that there is a skills crisis and we've got to address it. Those discussions between us and the states and territories are continuing under the umbrella of COAG. So I'm not going to make any pre-emptive announcements about those discussions.
JON FAINE: Well thank you for explaining to us the context for it all. I'm grateful to you for your time.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you very much Jon.
JON FAINE: Julia Gillard, who is Deputy and Acting Prime Minister at the moment.


KARL STEFANOVIC: Joining us now, Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Julia, good morning to you.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning, Karl.
KARL STEFANOVIC: Good to talk to you this morning. Now, Kevin Rudd calls it counselling, Belinda Neal calls it conflict resolution. She appears to think it's all a bit of a joke, don't you think? Is that disappointing?
JULIA GILLARD: What we've taken here is decisive action. The Prime Minister spoke to Belinda Neal yesterday. We were obviously concerned about a pattern of behaviour here. We've said to Ms Neal that she needs to get some assistance with that and she certainly agreed to get professional counselling assistance. And Kevin made it clear yesterday and certainly I've been making it clear during the course of the week that there is a standard of behaviour that people expect from Members of Parliament and of course from the Labor Party's point of view, no one's preselection is guaranteed. That is all about MPs doing their job and doing it properly.
KARL STEFANOVIC: Julia, she has a pattern of bad behaviour as you say. She says she didn't do anything wrong though at the nightclub, she denies the Sophie Mirabella incident and yesterday, strangely, she said it was the referee's not so good decision. I don't think she's sorry at all.
JULIA GILLARD: Ms Neal yesterday certainly said she thought she needed assistance in deescalating situations, in taking the conflict out of situations. She acknowledged that yesterday. She will be seeking the professional counselling that we have asked her to undertake so I think we really need to let that process continue, Karl. And obviously this sort of incident has been one that I said I'm not happy about and it stands as a reminder to all MPs that whenever we're out and about, even if you're out and about on a private occasion like a private dinner, there is a standard of behaviour that the community expects and certainly my expectation and Kevin's expectation is that every member of the Labor team meets that standard of behaviour that the community would expect.
KARL STEFANOVIC: The problem here that I see is that it's all well and good for you to say that but that person has got to want to change and for me watching that press conference yesterday - I'd like to hear your thoughts on it  -  she just didn't come across as being sorry, legitimately sorry.
JULIA GILLARD: Well Karl she's agreed to the course of action. She's agreed to undergo the professional counselling. I think we've got to acknowledge that and that process will now happen.
KARL STEFANOVIC: All right. There are reports this morning I'm sure you're aware of as well she keeps photos of her enemies in the freezer. Have you heard that before?
JULIA GILLARD: No I haven't, Karl.
KARL STEFANOVIC: Are you afraid you're in there?
JULIA GILLARD: No I'm not.
KARL STEFANOVIC: All right. Let's say in all seriousness, though, talk about the effect that this has on her electorate, in particular the good people of the Central Coast. They're not being represented in a great way here. Is it time that you start looking ahead to finding a new candidate for the Central Coast?
JULIA GILLARD: Well Kevin made clear yesterday that for all of the Labor team, no one's preselection is guaranteed. We expect people to be representing their constituencies and doing it well. In relation to Ms Neal, obviously these matters have now been dealt with. Ms Neal has agreed that she is going to undergo professional counselling and I think that that's appropriate.
KARL STEFANOVIC: All right, so it's a little bit too early to say whether or not you'll be looking for a new candidate.
JULIA GILLARD: Well Ms Neal's agreed to a course of action and I think we've just got to let that course of action take place.
KARL STEFANOVIC: All right, you are being very diplomatic this morning. Let's move on. New figures show consumer confidence has hit a 16 year low this morning. I just wonder when will these measures that you've put in place in the last Budget start to take effect. When will the burden on working families be reduced?
JULIA GILLARD: Well our Budget had a $55 billion package for working families. It includes tax cuts which of course start from the 1st of July for the new financial year. Those tax cuts are about lifting the pressure, particularly for low and middle income earners.
KARL STEFANOVIC: Because people are doing it so tough, Julia, as you know.
JULIA GILLARD: Look, people are doing it tough and that's a legacy that we've inherited, we've inherited high inflation environment. Obviously we've seen interest rate rises. Whether you buy your own home or you're renting, interest rate rises are bad news. We've got to take inflationary pressure down.
The Budget was designed to do that but it was also designed to bring assistance to working families, tax cuts are direct dollars in Rebate to try and take the pressure off for families that have got kids in care. We've introduced the Education Tax Rebate so you can get that bit of assistance when you're spending money on all the things that families do spend money on for education today which will include, you know, broadband access and textbooks and all of the aids that kids need to get through school so all of those measures are timed to start on the 1st of July. $55 billion is a big package of assistance and we wanted to deliver it because we understand it is tough.
KARL STEFANOVIC: All right, you're also rolling out your computer program I know today. Just finally, I know that you're kicking your coffee habit and I know that can be a very difficult time but I have rung my doctor and he says that kicking a coffee habit and deliberately drinking hot water can lead to irritable and withdrawal symptoms, muscle pain, trembling, insomnia and palpitations. You know I have your health in my interests. It's all bad though, isn't it, when you try to give up something you love.
JULIA GILLARD: I'm fine thanks, Karl, and I'm just trying to drink a little bit less coffee and a little bit more water. I'm sure that's going to do me some good and I'm feeling fine. And I'm looking forward to going to a school in Victoria today to launch our computers in schools program to announce which schools are going to get computers out of the first round. There's 896 of them so that's good news for 896 schools who will be receiving 116,000 computers and I might even celebrate that a bit with one cup of coffee.
KARL STEFANOVIC: Easier than dealing with Belinda Neal at the moment, that's for sure. Thanks Julia, good to talk to you.
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks, Karl.


Thank you very much Prime Minister Fukuda, both to yourself and to the Government and people of Japan for making myself and my wife Therese feel so welcome in this beautiful country. 
We've enjoyed our stay, our visit in Hiroshima, in Kyoto, in Nagoya, Yokohama and now here in Tokyo.
Australia has a strong friend and partner in Japan and Australia has a strong friend and partner in Prime Minister Fukuda.
Australia and Japan have a comprehensive strategic security and economic partnership. Our partnership is not just based on common interest, it is also based on common values and an enduring friendship.
We are both democracies. We are both open economies. We are both strong allies of the United States. We have so much in common that we can actually deliver great good to the world acting in partnership together.
The Prime Minister and I have agreed to expand our bilateral security cooperation and our trilateral security cooperation with our common ally the United States. We believe this enhances the stability of the Asia Pacific region.
I thank Prime Minister Fukuda for Japan's positive response to Australia's proposal for an international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
I visited Hiroshima on my first day here in Japan as Prime Minister. It was the first time an Australia Prime Minister has visited Hiroshima. And I understand it was one of the first times that any serving western head of government has visited Hiroshima. We should learn from Hiroshima and act together globally on the question of nuclear non-proliferation and the future of a nuclear weapons free world.
We've agreed as Prime Minsters to continue to expand our economic relationship, inject further efforts into the FTA negotiations and I particularly appreciate our inclusion in our joint declaration today on the importance of the services trade also between our two countries and its future.
I acknowledge and appreciate the strong global leadership displayed by Prime Minister Fukuda on the challenge which we all face on climate change. I appreciate also his strong statement of support for Australia's decision to ratify Kyoto. We will work together in the lead up to the G8 outreach meeting, and the major economies meeting, and Australia looks forward to working closely with Prime Minister Fukuda's Government in making those meetings a success.
We also discussed global oil prices, this great global oil shock which all of our economies are experiencing at present. And the impact on petrol prices. And we've agreed to work closely together on international action on this question. And I understand it will be a matter for discussion also at the G8 Summit.
Prime Minister Fukuda on regional cooperation and institutions made an important speech on the 22nd May about Japan's future engagement with our own region.
I strongly support the thrust of his speech and I thank Japan for their positive response to the proposal and the discussions associated with the proposal that I put forward for an Asia Pacific community. We look forward to working with each other on advancing these proposals for the future of our region together.
On whaling, Prime Minister Fukuda and I agreed that you can have disagreements between friends. It's one of the good products of us both being strong democracies. We've also agree that this disagreement should not undermine in any way the strength and positive nature of our overall bilateral relationship and that we'll be working in the period ahead diplomatically in search of a solution on this question.
And finally, I've extended an invitation to Prime Minister Fukuda to visit Australia next year as my guest. In Japan here the other day, at one of the AEON supermarkets, I had a chance to eat some Aussie Beef here in Tokyo. If the Prime Minister could come to Australia I look forward to having a barbeque at the Prime Minister's Lodge in Canberra and throwing some Aussie Beef on the barbeque for you.
And thank you very much.


PRESIDENT YUDHOYONO: [Statement in Indonesian]
PRIME MINISTER RUDD:   It's good to be back in Jakarta. I always feel as if I am a welcome guest in this country, and it is my first visit to the capital of the Indonesian Republic as Prime Minister of Australia.
It is an important relationship for both countries. Australia and Indonesia are neighbours through geographical circumstance. But we are friends through active national choice. And this is a very good friendship. A very strong friendship. Not just between each other, but also, the new phase of cooperation now between Indonesia and Australia in the counsels of the world.
Today, the President and myself discussed our proposals to continue to expand our security cooperation within the framework of the Lombok Treaty.
One practical area of cooperation we discussed was our proposal to take a joint proposal to the next meeting of APEC on cooperation on counter disaster organisation and management, here in the Asia-Pacific region.
Indonesia has experienced a tsunami. The people of Burma the terrible impact of the cyclone. The people of western China, the earthquake, most recently. We don't know where a natural disaster will hit next. But, between us, we believe we can take a good and strong proposal, consistent with the mandate we've received from APEC to do so, when APEC next meetings in Lima at the end of the year. Good for the people of the region, good for the countries of the region, and good also for Australia and Indonesia to be working together on such a practical project.
Second, on the area of our economic cooperation, there is a strong relationship between us and getting stronger. And again, His Excellency the President and myself agreed that our officials would work with every effort to bring about a successful conclusion to the current free trade negotiations between Australia and New Zealand and ASEAN, and I thank Indonesia for their active participation in that process.
The President and I also discussed bilateral and regional cooperation, and global cooperation, on climate change. The great economic, environmental, and moral challenge of our generation. We have, as you would have just seen, signed together the Australia-Indonesia Carbon Forest Partnership. This is important for the future. It's important because if you look at the impact of rainforests on global warming, (inaudible) we have seen so that this contributes some 20 per cent to the global challenge on carbon emissions.
What we've agreed today is a practical program between two countries to make this better. Firstly, at the policy level, here in Jakarta, through our cooperative efforts together. Secondly, through the important work of technical measurement and management through the National Carbon Accounting Scheme  -  or NCAS  -  which we in Australia have developed and are working with Papua New Guinea on at present. And thirdly, through demonstration projects in Indonesia, involving carbon credits.
This is a practical project, it is one that we discussed together in Bali six months, it was one we have signed together today here in Jakarta, and one we hope to build on in the proposals we put together when we attend the G8 outreach meeting on climate change in Hokkaido, Japan in only a few weeks time.
We also discussed our regional cooperation more broadly. And I thank Indonesia for its thought for Australia's inclusion some years ago into the East Asian Summit. We also discussed how Australia and Indonesia could work together in the development of our regions future architecture. And our officials look forward to working with each other on this project, including a discussion of our proposal for an Asia Pacific Community by 2020.
Within ASEAN itself there is already a great culture of cooperation. On security matters, on political matters, on economic matters, and on social matters. And in many respects, that culture of cooperation needs to be taken more broadly across the breadth of the Asia Pacific region.
I thank the President for his support for our proposal for an international commission to discuss nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. This is a challenge for all countries of the world. And we welcome any form of Indonesian participation in that Commission which will be co-chaired by the former Australian Foreign Minister, Mr Evans.
Bi-laterally, we also talked about education. And the numbers are stark. There are some 16,000 Indonesian students currently studying in Australia. There are some 50 Australian students currently studying in Indonesia. That is not good enough. We need to do better. And we intend to do better. We currently have many, many young Australians studying the Indonesian language in our schools. 177,000 of them. We intend to increase that number. But the challenge lies in regenerating the study of Indonesian language and studies more broadly through our university system. And we will be working the universities in Australia on that. And I thank very much the President's decision concerning the extension of higher degree scholarships to Indonesian students who further study in Australia.
Finally, we also discussed the great challenge that we face with democracy and the future of interfaith dialogue. I thank very much the President for his kind invitation to co-chair the Bali Conference on Democracy. It is an honour for him to have extended that invitation to me. And I accept it gladly. Beyond that, we discussed at some length where we take our existing interfaith dialogue between our two countries, and expand that more broadly across the world.
You see, there is a thesis in the world at the moment, sometimes called in the academic literature, the Huntington thesis about the clash of civilisations. (Inaudible) and myself don't agree with the Huntington thesis. (Inaudible) and myself have a different view. And we intend to work together on that different view. That there is nothing inevitable about the clash of civilisations. That, in fact, there are huge commonalities between us which we need to build on. And interfaith dialogue between our countries and more broadly across the globe, is an area where our two countries will have further to say in the months ahead.
President, thank you very much for your kindness and hospitality in receiving myself and my wife Therese here in Jakarta today. For the ceremonial welcome that we received and for the time that we were able to spend in the Indonesian Republic. Indonesia is such an extraordinary international success story. A robust democracy, only ten years after (inaudible). An economy generating strong economic growth. A great culture of domestic tolerance within its society. An Indonesia now increasingly a voice of leadership through the world and through the counsels of this region on climate change and beyond.
It's an honour to be here, Mr President. I look forward to your visit in Australia when you are able to make the time available to do so. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: [Question in Indonesian]
PRIME MINISTER RUDD:  Well, firstly, I'm not familiar with the circumstances of this particular matter. More broadly, can I say, that here in Indonesia, we have not just a robust democracy, but I think, a great tradition of respecting the citizens of Indonesia's human rights.
Of course, both of our countries are governed by international law and international humanitarian and, by international refugee law. And we will always be mindful of our obligations under our treaties on that question.
And, on difficult and sensitive matters in the past, Indonesia and Australia have worked well together. I'm sure we'll work together well on any such challenges into the future as well.
JOURNALIST (BONGIORNO):  President Yudhoyono, the Australia travel warning speaks of very high threat of terrorist attack in Bali, and the imminent threat of terrorism in other parts of Indonesia. Do you accept that this accurately describes the situation? And would you like to see Australia follow the example of the United States and lift its travel warning?
And to Prime Minister Rudd, do you accept that the advice contained in our travel warnings is accurate as of today? And do you believe that Australia maybe should follow the United States?
PRESIDENT YUDHOYONO: [Response in Indonesian]
PRIME MINISTER RUDD:  Thank you very much, Mr President, in response to the question that has just been posed.
Firstly, I think we need to understand the history which, of course, His Excellency the President has just outlined. Terrorist attacks in 2002, 2005 as well as that on the Australian Embassy here in Jakarta. These have had a significant impact on a large number of Australian families. We, in Australia, will always be sensitive to their experience.
Second point is that in Australia we have an independent body called the National Threat Assessment Centre. The National Threat Assessment Centre reaches its own conclusions on these matters. And, having reached those conclusions, they are then reflected on the content of our advisory. And that is our process, as it has been in the past, and will be into the future.
The other thing that I would like to say is to reinforce what the President has said. The current level of cooperation between the Indonesian security forces and the Australian security forces in dealing with the terrorism challenge is extraordinarily close. Both from the Australian Federal Police, and other agencies, including Immigration - it is very, very good. And I would thank the President for the extent to which that cooperation is able to continue into the future because that is so important to us as well. Obviously these matters involve sensitivities. I understand that. I think we all understand that. These are difficult challenges. And we have, of course, some disagreement among friends on this. But, from the Australian point of view, we are required within our system to respond to the advice provided by NTAC, the National Threat Assessment Centre.
Indonesia and our future security cooperation I'm sure will go from strength to strength as we continue in our common resolve to deal with our common enemy, which is terrorism.


The Australian Government has today confirmed a strengthened five year development partnership with Indonesia to help tackle poverty and promote regional peace, stability and prosperity.
The first program to be funded under this strengthened development partnership is a $49 million maternal and neonatal health program.
This four year program will make pregnancy and childbirth safer for women in Indonesia's poorest areas by funding programs such as:
     * Increased access to trained midwives during pregnancy and childbirth;
     * Improved management of maternal and neonatal health services; and
     * Increased funding for community level support structures for new and expecting mothers.
The program will be targeted to help mothers in Indonesia's poorest areas such as Nusa Tenggara Timur and other eastern Indonesian provinces.
The aim of this program is to significantly reduce the number of women who die needlessly during pregnancy and childbirth by ensuring that in target areas 75 per cent of women and newborns with complications receive appropriate care.
The Australian Government will also today sign new partnership agreements with Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama.
Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama are Indonesia's two largest faith based Muslim community organisations focused on providing practical assistance such as basic health, education, and disaster response services.
These community based services play a practical and important role in the continuing development of Indonesia.
The Australian Government is today announcing additional funding of $900,000 for Nahdlatul Ulama and $1.5 million for Muhammadiyah to progress their important work in disaster preparedness.
Under the strengthened five year development partnership with Indonesia announced today Australia will provide up to an expected $2.5 billion in development assistance to Indonesia between 2009 and 2013.
This funding commitment to assist with the development of Indonesia follows the $1 billion Australia Indonesia Partnership for Reconstruction and Development forged after the 2004 tsunami.
This increased commitment to the development of Indonesia is consistent with my Government's commitment to a significant overall increase in international development assistance.
This is Australia's largest development assistance program and will be implemented in line with Indonesia's Medium Term Development Plan and Australia's budgetary process.
Australia and Indonesia are determined to work in partnership to create a better life for around 100 million people who live in poverty on less than US$2 a day.
Together, we have identified the long-term priorities for development assistance to Indonesia and our Governments will jointly manage implementation.
Australia works at the national, provincial and district levels to help improve service delivery and systems. We will target assistance to the poorest provinces across Indonesia, including Aceh and Papua.
Australia will help Indonesia to make faster progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, particularly to improve the health of mothers and children and increase access to clean water and sanitation.
Australia will work more closely with multilateral organisations, like the World Bank and the United Nations, to tackle major development issues. For example, we will support a World Bank program to improve access to safe water supply and sanitation services for up to 10 million people in 5,000 villages over the next three years.
Climate change is one of the greatest global development challenges of our time and Australia and Indonesia will progress our partnership to address this issue.
Australia will also continue to support Indonesia's efforts to strengthen governance, democracy, human rights and disaster preparedness through Indonesian institutions and civil society and further enhance our people-to-people links.
This commitment to Indonesia is another step forward in a partnership that is important to us both and to peace and prosperity in our region.


Introductory Remarks 
Thank you very much for giving us Australians such a warm and friendly New Zealand welcome.
This fifth meeting of the Australia-New Zealand Leadership Forum brings together an impressive group of government, business and academic leaders who have come together to advance our shared interests and goals. The Forum thus provides an invaluable opportunity to deepen the already close and fond relationship that exists between our two countries.
As our Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said to Prime Minister Helen Clark when she visited Australia in February, the relationship between Australia and New Zealand is ‘as close as it gets'. We enjoy strong and multi-faceted ties, founded on a unique shared history and a wide range of common interests. Where we have occasional differences, we never lose sight of the overall health of the relationship. The close cooperative partnership between Australia and New Zealand has over the years shown its robustness and resilience. It also makes each of us stronger.
It's a relationship so close that  -  as you know too well  -  we Australians sometimes conveniently forget to mention that some of our most talented people are in fact Kiwis. I'm talking of course about people like Crowded House and Russell Crowe, whom we've ‘borrowed' from time to time. In fact we've created a new term ‘New Zealand Australian' to try to take credit for our good fortune in having such talented neighbours. These people-to-people contacts are extensive in both directions. Despite growing international competition, New Zealand retains its place as one of Australia's favourite holiday destinations. In this chill winter season, Australian skiers head for New Zealand's snowfields.
Of course while we may sometimes neglect to mention the New Zealand heritage of some of our most talented residents, there's one thing we never neglect to mention  -  that's the word ANZAC. We were reminded of this connection when Prime Minister Clark visited Sydney in late April to unveil a new statue of a New Zealand digger at one end of the ANZAC Bridge, standing as a silent sentinel opposite his Australian comrade in arms. I can't think of another two sovereign countries prepared to incorporate another nation's name into that of their own armed forces and to share one of the truly formative moments in their national histories. That really says it all.
Let me also make clear that the new Government in Australia is looking to inject renewed vigour into our trans-Tasman relationship. The presence of such a strong team of my Ministerial colleagues at this Forum attests to this commitment.
Today I want to give an overview of some the foreign and domestic priorities of the Rudd Government. I see it as particularly important that decision makers and opinion leaders in New Zealand are aware of these policies because of their trans-Tasman implications. I should add that, on many issues Australia and New Zealand share common cause. We are thus keen to secure New Zealand's input, support and engagement on issues where we can work effectively together, both in domestic and international contexts.
As you will notice, our federal constitution has focused our national reform efforts around a new era of inter-state cooperation through the Council of Australian Governments known as COAG. While our system obviously differs with New Zealand's more unitary state, I know that New Zealand participates actively in many COAG forums where we embrace similar challenges and goals.
     * Global challenges like climate change, energy security and migration.
     * Regional challenges like maintaining democracy and stability in the Pacific, and building a wider Asia-Pacific Community which brings in all the key players, including the United States, Japan, China, India and Indonesia.
     * And domestic challenges like investing in the education and health of our people to ensure we prosper in the world-wide human capital revolution. Our two countries are renowned for knowledge and creativity. There are also significant numbers of expatriate Australians and New Zealanders spread across the world, including in key leadership positions in major economic centres. We thus have a joint interest in working out how to benefit from our educational and cultural investments.
Since taking office, the Rudd Government has made significant steps to implement an ambitious agenda spanning economic and social reform and changes to Australia's international role as a middle power.
The priorities in these areas are largely set by our election commitments.
They add up to a set of priorities covering every sector of Australia's economy, society and polity.
The Regional Reform Agenda 
I want to start with our shared regional agendas where Australia and New Zealand have a solid track record of achievement over many years.
The Rudd Government is committed to a new era of revitalised engagement and cooperation with Pacific island countries based on principles of mutual respect and responsibility. A key element of this strategy is close collaboration with New Zealand.
The Prime Minister's Port Moresby Declaration of 6 March this year affirms Australia's commitment to the Pacific. A key element is Pacific Partnerships for Development, through which Australia will provide increased development assistance over time in return for commitments from individual governments to improve governance, increase investment in economic infrastructure and achieve better outcomes in health and education. Working closely with New Zealand, we are also promoting closer economic integration of Pacific Island countries with Australia and New Zealand where our Closer Economic Relations agreement serves as a model. We see such integration as crucial to the region's development and long-term sustainability. We are also looking at creative options such as establishing an Australian seasonal labour mobility scheme for Pacific Island countries. In this regard, we have found New Zealand's experience instructive. We have very much appreciated the willingness of the New Zealand Government and other stakeholders to discuss with us the NZ Regional Seasonal Employment scheme.
Looking to the wider region, we have to prepare ourselves for the coming of the Asia Pacific Century.
As Prime Minister Rudd said last week, global economic and strategic weight is shifting rapidly to our part of the world. And it's in our interests to try to shape the outcome.
This means we need strong global and regional partnerships and institutions to underpin stability.
It was with that in mind that last week that the Prime Minister signalled his intention to engage neighbouring countries in a dialogue about establishing a potential Asia Pacific Community as a structure for discussing security, economic and environmental issues of joint concern.
It's a long and involved process that will require much dialogue. And it's our full intention to engage closely with our friends across the Tasman as we start to explore the possibility further.
The Domestic Reform Agenda
Of course, prospering in this age of immense change also requires far-reaching domestic reform. Given our CER partnership and resulting interdependence, changes at the Australian end naturally have implications for New Zealand.
At the heart of our domestic priorities lies our commitment to responsible economic management.
Clearly, international economic and business cycles are producing a very different environment from the one Australia has enjoyed for the past decade.
Our response to those pressures, and managing the risks of major international price shocks, requires ongoing reform to lay the foundations for sustained growth.
So our first order of priority for nations like ours is the development of long-term strategies and investments to lift productivity and enhance our international competitiveness.
In Australia this means things like:
     * The review and reform of federal - state relations and reducing the dysfunctional federalism that's acting as a brake on economic growth;
     * Reducing the burden, and increasing the efficiency, of tax and regulatory systems to support the potential for business to contribute to the economy;
     * Improving and increasing infrastructure, especially in the supply of water, in transport, in energy and in broadband;
     * Increasing workforce participation to support both individual opportunity and economic growth;
     * Implementing an effective, market-based response to climate change;
     * Pursuing more international trading opportunities for our businesses; and
     * Creating systems of excellence in early childhood, school, vocational and higher education.
Within each of those priority areas for reform, we have or are in the process of implementing major commitments.
In our view this is the modern agenda for nation building that we believe will become a model for similar countries around the world.
We have set in train processes to further expand the depth and breadth of that reform agenda.
We've been criticised for setting up a large number of major reviews of existing policies and programs. This is something we are totally unapologetic about, because those reviews are providing the government with the sort of detailed, expert, evidence-based understanding of its policy options we need to carry off long-lasting reform in areas of great complexity and uncertainty: climate change, national security, defence capability, national innovation systems, sectoral economic reforms and so on. A new direction for any nation can't rest on ideology or half-baked solutions; it must be based on evidence.
Those reviews are also an important opportunity to broaden the sources of policy advice to the government by seeking out expertise from the private sector, the non-government sector, academia and other levels of government.
Two innovations may be of particular interest  -  a new role for the Council of Australian Governments and our recent 2020 Summit.
From a once-yearly consultative mechanism, the extensive COAG process, in which New Zealand participates through the Ministerial Councils, is becoming a dynamic part of our nation's system of government. This recognises that improving national efficiency and productivity relies on the states and local government as well as the Commonwealth.
COAG will now meet more regularly, including four times in 2008.
And its aim will be to get all public services working with joint purpose across the whole reform agenda to raise national productivity and improve social equity, including: health and ageing; education, skills, training and early childhood; climate change and water; infrastructure; business regulation and competition; housing and Indigenous reform.
Seven Working Groups  -  comprising federal ministers and senior state and federal officials  -  have been established to drive ongoing change and to develop and implement the COAG reform agenda in these areas.
And the decisions of COAG will be joined by a more effective framework for federal financial relations, which will link federal payments to the states to the advancement of reform, including new National Partnership funds to promote innovative service improvements.
You may have followed in the press the recent 2020 Summit  -  which brought a thousand of our nation's brightest minds from across the whole of society together to set an agenda for the future.
It was a highly successful event which captured ideas for building a modern nation ready for the challenges of the 21st century.
The Government is moving quickly to develop a comprehensive response to the ideas raised at the Summit.
Lead Ministers have been allocated to each main idea, and a reference group of senior government officials has been established to ensure that this work is properly coordinated and progressed within the timeframes.
Ideas from the Summit will be used in different ways  -  some will inform the development of policy, others may lead to specific programs or ways of doing things. We believe they will produce important new directions for the country.
It is already clear that a large percentage of ideas have links to existing policy and program initiatives. Almost one third of the group of about 140 top ideas generated from the Summit have been supported, in various ways, in this year's Budget. Fifty of the key ideas are directly related to the work of COAG.
The initial report of the Summit's outcomes has been published and is available on the 2020 website. In addition, the 2020 website will continue to receive public submissions and comments.
The Prime Minister has asked for a comprehensive response to the ideas of the 2020 Summit to be provided to him at the end of the year.
This is a clear indication of the government's intension to further expand its reform efforts during its first term of office.
Governance Forum
Finally, a distinct set of priorities applies to the business of government itself. Good government is about developing a long-term strategic view, putting in place the right machinery, policies and programs, and striving for highly effective implementation and delivery of services which produce national benefits.
To achieve this:
     * A more rigorous and open appointments system for major public bodies has been instituted;
     * The Prime Minister has released the Government's Standards of Ministerial Ethics which contain important initiatives to restore and improve ministerial accountability;
     * We have established a Register of Lobbyists;
     * We are promoting a culture of pro-disclosure of information including the establishment of an Freedom of Information Commissioner; and
     * We are holding regular Community Cabinet meetings across Australia which allow Australians from all walks of life to directly engage with Cabinet ministers and senior public servants in person.
This also requires a public service focused on policy development and implementation and one that has the necessary capabilities  -  the skills, resources and systems in place to support effective implementation. As the Prime Minister said in his recent speech to the Senior Executive of the Australian Public Service ‘Good policy is one thing. But good policy without effective program implementation is a dead letter'. So another of our reform goals is the creation of a leading-edge public service.
Concluding Remarks
These are just some of the key elements of the reform agenda the new Australian Government is committed to introducing and which my colleagues will be expanding upon in our discussions during this Forum.
After such a lengthy period out of office, and during a time of rapid economic, social and environmental change, we're determined to be a government of reform.
In the past, Australia has been a world leader in economic and social reform. We want her to be so again  -  and to be an innovator in tackling the new challenges of climate change, Asia- Pacific growth and regional integration.
New Zealand  -  which also has an enviable track record on innovation and reform, and which shares many important interests with Australia  -  is a natural partner in these endeavours. We are thus looking forward to working alongside New Zealand on these challenging and exciting agendas. We have much to learn from each other and can amplify our regional and global influence by close collaborative effort.
Thank you.


ASEAN and Australia commit to advance cooperation in economic integration with the launch of the second phase of ASEAN-Australia Development Cooperation Programme (AADCP-II) today. Under the program, Australia will provide A$57 million to ASEAN over the next seven years to support greater economic integration in the region.
Prime Minister of Australia Mr Kevin Rudd said the new program underscored Australia's commitment to engaging with ASEAN.
“Australia is committed to supporting ASEAN's efforts to establish an economic community by 2015 and economic integration is an important step in that process,” Mr Rudd said during the launch of the program at the ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta.
“Australia is in a unique position to provide this support,” Mr Rudd said. “We have had the longest partnership with ASEAN, dating back to the 1970s, and we will be the first partner to work within ASEAN Secretariat systems to implement this type of program.”
Under AADCP-II, Australia will provide high-level policy advice, research and implementation support to assist ASEAN to harmonise standards, eliminate tariffs and reduce non-tariff barriers to trade. Australia will also work with the new Member States to assist them to harness the benefits of broad-based economic growth.
Mr Rudd is the first Head of Government of a Dialogue Partner country of ASEAN to visit the ASEAN Secretariat. “The ASEAN Secretariat is honoured by the visit of Prime Minister Rudd and welcomes the assistance from Australia in enhancing our economic integration, which will serve as the catalyst for community building efforts in ASEAN as well as ASEAN's role in fostering a wider community in East Asia,” Secretary-General of ASEAN, Dr. Surin Pitsuwan said.
“The innovative approach of Australia to work within ASEAN Secretariat systems, making ASEAN and the ASEAN Secretariat as key stakeholders of the cooperation, will help ASEAN drive the assistance to the most pressing areas with a view to addressing the gaps in integration, especially in the areas of trade liberalisation and facilitation, and narrowing of development gaps. This will certainly support the goal of market integration in ASEAN,” he said.
The Second Phase of AADCP will be executed in close partnership between the ASEAN Secretariat and Australia. It will target 12 priority sectors which account for more than 50 per cent of ASEAN's trade in goods and services, including tourism, textiles and apparel, and fisheries.


This is my second visit to Indonesia since I became Prime Minister last year.
My first visit was to Bali to the UN Climate Change Conference, where I also had a chance to meet with President Yudhoyono and talk about the relationship between our two countries.
It was a great pleasure to meet him again this morning and have a formal discussion about our vision for where we take this unique relationship between Australia and Indonesia.
In our discussion this morning I was reminded once again of the incredible changes that have taken place here in Indonesia.
It has been a remarkable decade for Indonesia.
Few countries have been through so much in such a short period of time  -  the Asian Financial Crisis, the transition to democracy, terrorist attacks and the terrible tsunami of December 2004.
What is remarkable is that Indonesia has not just come through these changes, it has triumphed.
The variety of voices in the public debate in Indonesia and the vibrancy of the media are testament to the depth of the democratic roots that have been laid.
Indonesia's economy is growing at around six per cent.
And Indonesia has been at the forefront of the international fight against terrorism.
Not only that, Indonesia has also strengthened its regional and global leadership role at the same time  -  particularly under the leadership of President Yudhoyono and particularly with Indonesia hosting last year's critical meeting of the UN Climate Change conference.
So, before I begin, I want to acknowledge and put on record that the Australian Government admires what the Indonesian Government has achieved in the past decade.
Australia
In Australia we have had a change of government.
We have come to Government committed to strong economic management, building a fairer Australia and investing in the future so that Australia is prepared to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
Domestically, that means investing in our people.
It means investing in our infrastructure.
It means deregulation and creating a seamless national economy.
All aimed at boosting long-term productivity growth and boost Australia's long-term global competitiveness.
At the same time, we are committed to building a fairer Australia  -  including for Indigenous Australians.
The new Australian Government is also international in its outlook.
We are committed to building strong relationships with our key partners  -  key partners like Indonesia.
But we also believe that foreign relations cannot be based solely on bilateral relations.
To help underpin security, stability and prosperity we need strong regional institutions and we need to support the maintenance and the development of the global rules-based order.
Australia and Indonesia
That is the fundamental approach the Australian Government brings to its relationship with Indonesia.
We want to work towards a better future for the people of Australia and a better future for the people of Indonesia.
The best way for us to do that, is in partnership.
Australia and Indonesia are inseparable partners.
Ours is a relationship that has evolved a lot in the last 60 years  -  from the time when Australia first supported Indonesian independence to the strong, close and increasingly comprehensive partnership we have today.
Today I would like to speak about the partnership we have between Australia and Indonesia and how we should take this partnership forward.
Shared Challenges  -  economic growth and development
The Australian and Indonesian Governments share a common goal of economic development for our countries.
We have different circumstance and different attributes, but we are both after sustainable development for our people.
Today I discussed with President Yudhoyono the new country strategy that the Australian Government has developed with its Indonesian partners.
The program will run for five years and is an indication of our long-term commitment to our relationship with Indonesia.
Tomorrow in Aceh I will formally launch the Aceh component of the strategy.
I also look forward to seeing some of the development projects we have been working on together there.
But economic development is mainly about the private sector.
I want to congratulate the business people that are here today.
You are at the forefront of our economic relationship  -  you are the ones finding and developing commercial opportunities.
It is not always easy doing business across international boundaries.
I recognise the hard work and commitment that goes into building and maintaining business relationships.
Our job in government is to make it as easy as possible to do business.
That means helping to bring down barriers to trade.
We can also work regionally  -  through the FTA we are negotiating between Australia, New Zealand and the member countries of ASEAN.
I would like to see us moving quickly through these complex negotiations to get an outcome as soon as we can.
If we can link both of our economies to the wider region through this agreement, it will provide some real opportunities for growth.
We can also do more bilaterally  -  I hope that the feasibility study into a free trade agreement between Australia and Indonesia will show that there are great gains to be made if we open up our economies more to each other.
We can work more broadly too  -  particularly in APEC where business and investment facilitation is a key focus.
And we can work globally.
The World Trade Organisation talks are at a critical stage and we need governments around the world  -  supported by the voice of business  -  to make a push to conclude an ambitious deal before time gets away from us.
Because it is the WTO that has set the stage for the remarkable growth in trade and the global economy over the past six decades.
Indonesia plays an important role in these global trade talks as the Chair of the Group of 33  -  the major group of developing countries at the negotiations.
These are tough negotiations  -  I accept that.
But I think we should all keep in mind what we stand to gain from an ambitious outcome to the round  -  and what we stand to lose if the round fails.
Shared challenges  -  working together globally
Continued economic development is crucial to both our countries.
But we also need to build a sustainable future for our countries and our region.
And there is no greater challenge in building a sustainable future than climate change.
We have to act to tackle climate change.
The economic cost of inaction will be much greater than the economic cost of action.
Australia and Indonesia share the goal of reducing global greenhouse gas emissions.
For Indonesia, one of the biggest challenges is reducing deforestation.
I was very pleased today that President Yudhoyono and I signed a Forest Carbon Partnership that commits our two countries to work together more closely in this area.
Around 20 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions comes from deforestation.
So it is a critical element in the fight against climate change.
But land clearing is a path to a better economic future for people in many cases.
So how do we recognise the value of keeping rainforests and at the same time provide opportunities for economic development?
One answer to this question is to tie rainforest protection to emerging global carbon markets.
We need to set a value  -  a real dollar value  -  on the carbon stored in rainforests.
But before we can do that, we have to know how much carbon there is.
That is where Australia can help.
Using a combination of satellite technology and on the ground monitoring, we have developed a system to measure the amount of carbon stored in forests that is widely regarded as world's best practice.
Over time, as the forest is monitored, changes in the amount of carbon can be measured and quantified.
Then, in the long run, this information can feed into carbon markets.
The carbon credits from avoided deforestation  -  in other words the preservation of rainforests  -  could be an alternative source of revenue for Indonesia.
This is not a straightforward process.
Carbon markets are still developing.
But President Yudhoyono and I agreed today to develop a roadmap for linking forest carbon and global carbon markets.
There is real potential for Australia and Indonesia to lead the world here.
We share a goal of having avoided deforestation recognised in future climate change agreements.
We will be working closely together in the lead up to the G8 meeting in Japan next month  -  where President Yudhoyono and I will both attend the outreach session with its focus on climate change.
Australia and Indonesia have already shown that we can lead the world in other areas.
The regional inter-faith dialogue process that began in 2004 is a great example of this.
The dialogue brings together people from Australia, Indonesia and from around the region to share their ideas and discuss their faiths.
It gives people a chance to focus on what brings us together, what joins us, rather than what might separate us.
I am a strong supporter of the inter-faith dialogue and I want to see it continue and expand in the years ahead.
I am pleased to announce today that Australia will host the next round of this dialogue.
I think that this regional dialogue has been such a success that we should look at how we can share our experience with the wider international community.
I think we should look at how we can take the dialogue to the world.
We will be exploring with our co-chairs and co-sponsors of the dialogue how we can invite others to participate in the dialogue.
Climate change and interfaith dialogue are both examples of Australia and Indonesia working together on global challenges.
Our cooperation sets a great example about what we can achieve  -  particularly when countries that belong to different international groups decide to act as a bridge between their groups.
Shared Security
Beyond cooperation on the big question of climate change and our work on interfaith dialogue, our shared geography makes us partners in a wide range of matters.
For instance in fighting against terrorism.
Australians and Indonesians have both suffered from the scourge of terrorism.
We have seen innocent people murdered.
And we have responded by strong, practical cooperation in preventing terrorism and tracking down the perpetrators.
I want to pay tribute to the close cooperation we have in this area  -  particularly between our law enforcement agencies.
I am committed to maintaining and strengthening that cooperation.
But our security cooperation is broader than counter-terrorism.
We have the Lombok Treaty that sets the tone for this wider security cooperation.
And it provides a framework for increased cooperation in defence, law enforcement, and other critical areas including aviation and maritime security.
President Yudhoyono and I discussed the Treaty today and we agreed to develop a detailed plan for increased defence cooperation  -  one of the key aims of the treaty.
People-to-people Relations
Of course our relationship extends far beyond the important area of security cooperation.
We realise that bringing together a wide range of people from our countries pays real dividends.
I am keen to see our people-to-people ties spread more widely.
I have said before that I want to make Australia the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
This is not a purely academic exercise  -  although education is a critical part of the puzzle.
It is about increasing the chances for people from Australia to get together with people from countries around the region, to sit down and talk and learn about each other.
We already have over 170,000 students studying Indonesian in Australia.
I want to see that number rise.
The Australian Government announced in the Budget that we are going to allocate $62 million over three years to boost the study of Asian languages in Australia.
Indonesian is one of the target languages, and part of the funding will go to helping language teachers in Australia spending some time in the country of the languages they teach.
It will give them a better understanding of Indonesia and some deeper personal ties.
It will give them more knowledge to help teach the next generation of Australians.
And this is a two-way street.
We want the people of Indonesia to have more opportunities to learn about Australia.
So I was delighted today that we agreed to get officials to work on establishing a work and holiday visa program.
A shared region
Another important element of our relationship is our regional cooperation.
Australia's future  -  like that of Indonesia  -  will depend on developments in our immediate neighbourhood.
We both want to see a stable, open and prosperous region develop.
Indonesia has long played a regional leadership role.
Particularly in ASEAN whose headquarters I will visit later today.
As the earliest of the regional organisations, ASEAN has been a model for the region.
It has shown how cooperation and dialogue can be built in and has set an example of what can be achieved.
Australia is a strong supporter of ASEAN  -  particularly having been its first dialogue partner since 1974.
We recognised early that Australia and ASEAN needed to build a partnership because we were after the same thing  -  stability in our region.
Australia has a particularly close relationship with Indonesia in regional organisations.
Look at APEC for example.
APEC has led the way in building cooperation across our broader region.
For instance, APEC is now playing an important role in building cooperation in response to natural disasters across the region.
And recent tragic disasters in Burma and China remind us how important this work is  -  disasters in our region continue to lead to a dramatic loss of life.
Australia and Indonesia are the leaders of a task force within APEC that is looking at how to bring our experts across the region together.
This morning President Yudhoyono and I agreed to lift the tempo of this task force's work.
We will be working with Indonesia to host a workshop on damage assessment techniques.
This is critical to building our capacity to respond to disasters  -  the more accurately we can assess damage the better we can tailor our responses.
Furthermore President Yudhoyono and I agreed that we would take to the APEC Leaders' Meeting in Lima, Peru this year a joint proposal on how to better coordinate regional disaster response work.
Australia is driving a feasibility study on a regional centre for disaster relief coordination.
This study will feed into the proposal we take to APEC.
We have a good history of cooperation to build on  -  we worked together to set up the Indian Ocean tsunami warning system in 2005.
There is also another aspect to regional cooperation that I would like to talk about.
The working-level cooperation we have on matters like disaster relief has the capacity to make a real difference.
But we also need to think about the bigger strategic question of what sort of regional institutions we want to see evolve throughout this century.
Our region is going through historic changes.
The rise of India and China is driving the region's economic growth  -  and that of the wider world.
And the region's share of the global economy is growing.
By 2020 Asia is expected to make up 45 per cent of global GDP.
It will account for one-third of global trade.
By 2020 Asia's share of global military spending will be nearly one-quarter.
In other words, global economic and strategic weight is shifting to Asia.
So we need to anticipate the consequences of these changes and work to shape the region's future.
One critical element of this is thinking about how to develop the next stage of our regional architecture.
Because strong institutions are needed to underpin an open, stable and sustainable region.
Our existing regional institutions all have positive roles to play.
APEC brings together a wide range of economies, including at the leaders level, every year.
ASEAN has led the way in developing a sense of community in South-East Asia and it has formed the basis for a range of other important groupings - ASEAN plus three (ASEAN and the North-East Asian countries China, Japan and the Republic of Korea), and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ASEAN plus 11 others).
And the most recent addition is the East Asia Summit (bringing together ASEAN, the North East Asian countries and, Australia, New Zealand and India).
But we need to think about the next stage of evolution of our regional organisations.
None of the existing mechanisms as currently configured is capable of achieving what the region needs to effectively shape the future.
Because what the region needs is an organisation capable of handling political, economic and security dialogue.
An organisation that brings together all of the major countries  -  the United States, Indonesia, India, Japan, China and Australia.
An organisation also capable of marshalling cooperation and, where agreed, common action in these areas.
We need to encourage in our region the development of a genuine and comprehensive sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation.
We need to start thinking about how we develop our organisations  -  how we get to the next level.
We need to start the debate now if we are to effectively shape the region's future.
That is why I announced last week that Australia will initiate consultations over the next six months in the region's capitals.
We have appointed a high-level envoy, Dick Woolcott (a former Australian Ambassador to Indonesia of course) to carry out these consultations.
Next year, subject to those consultations, we would envisage the possibility of convening a conference of government and non-government representatives to advance the proposal.
The proposal is an extension of APEC's original vision of an Asia-Pacific Community.
This proposal is not about economic or monetary union, or even a customs union.
It is not about a political union.
It is not about a security pact.
It does not envisage any diminution in national sovereignty.
Nor does it necessarily envisage any diminution of any of the existing regional bodies or existing security alliances or other similar arrangements.
The proposal embraces an Asia-Pacific Free Trade Agreement and other steps that we are already looking at towards greater economic integration in the region.
But it must be about more than just economic cooperation.
It should include confidence-building measures designed to promote greater openness, transparency and cooperation around the region.
We need to start this conversation, this debate.
Because if we do not we run the risk that we will drift towards the idea that in our rapidly changing region conflict at some stage is, somehow, inevitable.
In the early 1990s, Australia's Prime Minister Paul Keating and Indonesia's President Suharto worked together to establish the APEC Leaders Meeting.
That meeting took APEC's work to the next level  -  it made APEC the only forum that brings together the leaders of our region every year.
It is now time that we think about how to realise the original APEC vision of establishing an Asia Pacific Community.
It is time to begin thinking about how our region should look in 2020.
Moving ahead
Australia and Indonesia have a big work agenda ahead of us.
And our work will be taken forward on the strong base of our existing ties across.
But we need to bring together people from all sectors  -  government, business, and the academic and wider community sectors  -  to generate new ideas to develop our relationship.
I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government intends to host in 2009 a major conference on the future of Australia-Indonesia relations.
Our goal is to bring together people who have had a long involvement with relations between our two countries and people who are experts and leaders in their fields but have perhaps not had the chance to get involved.
We will bring them all together and get some ideas about how to move ahead.
We will be talking with our friends in Indonesia over the next few months about organising this conference and thinking about where we take this partnership.
We need to start imaging together where we want this relationship to be by 2020.
Australia's and Indonesia come to each other with vastly different histories.
One of us represents the Group of 77  -  the developing countries.
One of us is of the West.
One predominantly Christian.
The other the world's most populous Muslim nation.
But we also come together with much in common.
We are democracies that are committed to making a contribution to our region and to our world.
We are committed to working with each other to build our relationship.
Today, in my talks with President Yudhoyono, we agreed to take our partnership to a new level.
A new level that will build on our strong bilateral economic, political and security links.
But equally importantly, we made a new commitment to work in partnership in the world.
We have much work to do to meet the challenges of our time  -  from climate change and terrorism to sustainable development and response to natural disasters.
By combining our strengths, I believe that our partnership can be a model to the world of cooperation.
I am committed to that goal.
Thank you.


As close neighbours and partners in this global effort, we - the President of the Republic of Indonesia and the Prime Minister of Australia - reaffirm our resolve to respond to the serious challenge that climate change poses to our countries and to all countries of the world.
We welcome with enthusiasm the significant progress made at the Bali Climate Change Conference, including the call for a shared vision for long term cooperative actions, including a long-term global goal for greenhouse gas emissions reductions. We believe the leaders of all countries  - developing and developed - must support and build on the achievements in Bali to ensure that an agreement is reached through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) on an effective future international response to climate change at the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference in 2009.
Climate change is the greatest sustainable development challenge of our time. Effectively tackling the global challenge of climate change must be one of the highest responsibilities of leaders of all nations and will require their determined, coordinated and concerted focus, taking into account the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and their respective capabilities
It is imperative that we move swiftly and together: delaying action only increases the costs of inaction. We pledge to work cooperatively with other committed leaders to drive forward action on climate change and to consult closely with other countries to ensure success at the Copenhagen Climate Conference.
An important element for an effective international response is acceptance of a collective goal that will provide a framework for our future efforts. To add momentum to the progress made during the Bali Climate Change Conference, we urge all leaders to agree on a long-term global goal for emissions reductions as stipulated in the Bali Action Plan.
Further, we recognise that cooperation between developed and developing countries on concrete and decisive action on climate change can provide confidence that all countries will benefit from an effective global response.
Today we have agreed to develop a Roadmap for Access to International Carbon Markets, which will model how a developed country like Australia and a developing country partner like Indonesia can work together towards participation in international forest carbon markets. We have asked our relevant Ministers to work together to develop the Roadmap in time for the Australia-Indonesia Ministerial Forum, which will be held later this year in Canberra.
This will be supported by a new Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership. The Partnership will assist Indonesia in reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, building on the collaboration that Indonesia and Australia have already developed in this area. It will also support negotiations to give effect to the Roadmap, by including incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in a future international climate change agreement under the UNFCCC.
Indonesia and Australia will continue practical cooperation in other areas to address climate change and its impacts, including in the exploration of opportunities to reduce emissions through better urban waste management and through support for the modelling of climate change impacts to assist in adaptation planning.
Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership
Recognising the depth and closeness of our relationship, the Government of the Republic of Indonesia and the Government of Australia have today agreed to establish a framework for long-term cooperation on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
Tropical forest land in Indonesia covers more than 120 million hectares  -  with tens of millions of Indonesians residing in and depending on these forests for their livelihoods. Indonesia's tropical forests are some of the most biologically diverse and extensive in the world, and host around 10 per cent of the world's plant and mammal species.
Indonesia is playing a leadership role among rainforest countries in its policies on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, promoting sustainable forest management and conserving its rich biodiversity  -  and welcomes strong and reliable support from its international partners to achieve substantial and rapid impacts in these areas. The Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership will give this support by providing programmes and activities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, to improve livelihoods for forest-dependent communities and to promote biodiversity conservation.
International carbon markets will be important in providing the necessary investment to significantly reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation over the long term. Cooperation in the framework of this new Partnership will help both Indonesia and Australia engage in emerging international markets for forest carbon emission reductions.
The Partnership will build upon, and provide clearer goals for, existing cooperation between Indonesia and Australia in three key areas:
     * policy development and capacity building to support participation in international negotiations and future carbon markets;
     * technical support for Indonesia to develop its national forest carbon accounting and monitoring system; and
     * the further development of demonstration activities, and the provision of related enabling assistance, to trial approaches to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
The Partnership will incorporate existing cooperation through Australia's International Forest Carbon Initiative, which is one source of external support for the Government of Indonesia's own Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Indonesia (REDDI) initiative.
Indonesia's commitment to international leadership in addressing the challenges of climate change is firm, as reflected by its role as host and Chair of the 13th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Bali in December 2007. Indonesia and Australia both strongly advocated for the decision made at the Bali Conference that reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries should be part of a future international climate change framework. Our Governments' ultimate aim is to ensure that future international carbon markets provide incentives for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and that both Indonesia and Australia have in place the policies and technical capacities needed to participate fully in these markets.
Areas of Indonesia - Australia Collaboration
1. Policy development and capacity building
Indonesia and Australia will cooperate on developing climate change policy, in particular on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. Recognising our different national circumstances, Indonesia and Australia will cooperate on international negotiations under the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol and on the development of our national policies on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
Indonesia and Australia will continue to support efforts under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol to ensure that a future international climate change agreement incorporates efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. Both countries agree that future international carbon markets provide a sound mechanism for mobilising investment on the scale necessary to support and provide incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
The Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership will incorporate and build on Australia's initial A$10 million package of support for Indonesia's REDDI initiative. This includes support for the development of a national policy framework and strategies for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and may include activities to support sustainable peatland management. Australia will continue to work closely with other donor countries within coordination structures established by the Government of Indonesia.
Indonesia is moving forward with the development of policies and enabling frameworks to establish demonstration activities and ultimately participate in international carbon markets. The Australian Government has committed to developing an Australian Emissions Trading Scheme. Indonesia and Australia will both benefit from an exchange of experience and expertise that will support their participation in future international carbon markets.
2. Technical support for forest carbon monitoring and measurement
Establishing an effective and comprehensive national forest carbon accounting and monitoring system is an essential pre-requisite of participation in international carbon markets. Indonesia is developing a national Forest Resource Information System (FRIS) that will underpin Indonesia's participation in international carbon markets and the sustainable management of its forest estate. Australia has a National Carbon Accounting System (NCAS) to account for greenhouse gas emissions from land-based sectors.
Under the Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership, Indonesia and Australia have establish a structured, multi-year program with the aim of further building Indonesia's capacity in forest carbon accounting and monitoring. This will include technical, scientific and analytical support to underpin the development of the FRIS, the provision of remote sensing data, and the sharing of experiences from the development and implementation of the NCAS.
Australia's efforts to support a globally coherent approach to carbon accounting and monitoring, including through historical data acquisition, storage and processing, will also provide direct benefits to Indonesia as it seeks to establish baselines with reference to past rates of deforestation and forest degradation.
3. Development of demonstration activities
Indonesia is developing the appropriate national-level policies and programmes to support the implementation of demonstration activities to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, as called for in the Bali Action Plan. This includes the development of a national carbon accounting and monitoring system. Successful demonstration activities will facilitate international agreement on market-based approaches to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in post-2012 climate change framework and also signal Indonesia's readiness to participate in international carbon markets.
The Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership will encompass the Kalimantan Forests and Climate Partnership agreed between the Governments of Indonesia and Australia in September 2007. Both countries recognise the importance of the Kalimantan Forests and Climate Partnership as the first, large-scale demonstration activity of its kind in the world, and its role in informing international negotiations under the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol. Australia has committed A$30 million to the Kalimantan Forests and Climate Partnership which will trial an innovative market-based approach to financing and implementing measures to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in Central Kalimantan.
The Indonesia  -  Australia Forest Carbon Partnership will support Indonesia in identifying and implementing additional incentive-based demonstration activities. Details of future activities will also be determined during this initial period of collaboration, including addressing technical and methodological issues and the potential involvement of additional partners.
For the Republic of Indonesia 
H.E. Dr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono 
President 
For Australia 
The Hon Kevin Rudd 
Prime Minister 
On this day, 13 June 2008.


As part of Australia's new five-year development partnership with Indonesia, the Australian Government will provide up to $50 million to assist Aceh to build a prosperous and peaceful future after the dual impact of the tsunami and 30 years of civil conflict left it as one of Indonesia's poorest provinces.
These funds will be used to:
     * improve the quality of education for Acehnese children;
     * assist governments to deliver better services;
     * help community members, including women, to participate in decision-making and democratic processes; and
     * rebuild livelihoods and foster economic development.
This marks the transition from Australia's highly successful rehabilitation work in Aceh to an ongoing commitment to the province's longer-term development.
Since the tsunami we have rebuilt health and education facilities and village halls at the heart of communities, supported housing reconstruction through land mapping, and strengthened democratic processes and government service delivery.
Today I inaugurated the Ulee Lheue Primary School, one of more than 2000 being built across Indonesia to improve opportunities for children, including more girls, and provide a better quality education.
Education is fundamental for economic development and we will build on our successful program with funding for Aceh of $8.5 million over three years.
We will continue to help local governments in Aceh to deliver better services and help citizens participate in decision-making and democratic processes.
To support peace efforts and long-term stability, we will focus on getting people into paid employment, including women who have traditionally been excluded from the workforce.
Today the Governor of Aceh and I opened Aceh's peak aquaculture prawn and fish hatchery and training centre, a centrepiece of efforts to increase economic opportunities and livelihoods for Acehnese people.
Australia's substantial longer-term commitment to Aceh is an integral part of our development partnership with Indonesia, which focuses on the 100 million people across Indonesia who live in poverty on less than US$2 a day.
We will build on the close bonds between Australians and Acehnese forged since the tsunami and assist Aceh to achieve a sustainable and prosperous economic future, peace and stability.


I first visited here only a few weeks after the tsunami. And, it is difficult not to remember the terrible scenes of that time.
I remember seeing so many people's lives tragically affected. So much destruction, so much devastation, so much sadness. So when I come back here, I feel very much as if we are on sacred ground.
Sacred ground because more than 150,000 innocent men, women and children lost their lives by this terrible act of nature. Sacred ground also because those of us who came from Australia to help also saw the loss of some of our own lives.
So, for us, this is sacred ground too because nine of our own  -  members of the Australian Defence Force, working here to help our friends in Indonesia  -  lost their own lives. We honour their service and their sacrifice.
What is extraordinary in the intervening three years and more is how this great community in Aceh, and this great country Indonesia, have responded to this devastation.
Not just in the extraordinary act of rebuilding this community, but also, in seeking the opportunity created by the devastation of the tsunami to heal the wounds of the past in the civil conflict which had racked this place, Aceh, for so many years.
Physical wounds being healed. Political wounds being healed. It is a great testament to the people of Aceh and Indonesia that you have done this with such great success.
We in Australia have tried to play our part in the rebuilding of this beautiful part of Indonesia. And today I would publicly honour the role played by former Prime Minister John Howard in his right decision to contribute $1 billion for a reconstruction package for Indonesia, and for his decision to allocate a quarter of a billion dollars to this province of Aceh. And to dedicate so much of that money to the building of schools like this one.
Prime Minister Howard's decision to support the rebuilding of this community was the right decision. The right decision for Australia. The right decision for Indonesia. And the right decision for Aceh. And I thank him for it publicly.
Which brings us to this beautiful school at Ulee Lheue. This school says so much in its own way about the impact of the tsunami.
Of its 312 students, 297 were killed. Of its teachers, most were killed. I think 17. This is unimaginable in any local community for that to have happened. But now, you have rebuilt. And I salute the courage of this community for having rebuilt this school.
And across Aceh, more than one in ten teachers lost their lives and across Aceh 38,000 school students lost their lives. For us, unimaginable. And I salute the people of Aceh for having rebuilt their communities and their schools across this land here.
Australia has contributed some quarter of a billion dollars to the reconstruction of Aceh. $51 million for the restoration of education here in Aceh. And we're visiting one such school today. And we are very pleased to be here. 
What we have through our friends in Indonesia have been able to fund is the reconstruction of 18 education facilities in tsunami affected areas. 43 primary schools in conflict affected areas. And trained more than 4,100 education officials, teachers, and school community members.
This is our small contribution to try and help rebuild this community.
And so, when I visited the classroom before with Therese and with the Governor and the other officials from the administration here in Banda Aceh, and to see the smiles on the young students faces, and to know that they are at a school which we have helped to rebuild, and helped to support, it makes every Australian heart glad.
For the future Australia also intends to be long term partners with the people of Aceh and its community here in Banda Aceh for the long term economic development of this part of Indonesia.
It's very much a practical example which I think speaks to the world at large about what a country like Australia, a western country, predominantly Christian, can do in partnership with our friends here in Indonesia, the largest Muslim country in the world. A product of the respect that we have for each other.
So, could I thank all of our friends here in Banda Aceh. Those from the Government, those from the education sector, those from this school. All those who have been part of the building process.
Also, the Australian Government officials. In particular, those from the Australian Embassy in Jakarta, and the AusAid officials who have been here working from the beginning to help ensure that this project succeeded.
And so it is with great pleasure that I am able to be here today on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia to participate in this official inauguration of the Ulee Lheue State Islamic Primary School. And we wish all the children here who study, a wonderful future, as we wish a wonderful future to the people of Aceh and the people of Indonesia.


PM: It's good to be back in Darwin and I'm here with Paul Henderson the Chief Minister and of course Damian Hale our local Member of Parliament. Can I say it's always good to be here because you sense the strength of this local economy. The regional economy in the Northern Territory is the fastest growing in Australia. More than 6% growth per annum and this is the product of good strong economic management on the part of the Territory Government.
It's also the product of a strong partnership between the Government which I lead in Canberra and the Government here in the Territory. And we have seen the practical manifestation of that in projects such as the upgrade of Tiger Brennan Drive. We have $74 million invested from the National Government in that, in partnership with the Territory Government and the works underway. Our Government has only been in for 6 months but this practical work is important for the people of the Territory and to make sure that people up here are getting a fair shake of the sauce bottle when it comes to what's happening nationally on roads infrastructure. And I thank the Chief Minister for his cooperation on that as I do Damian for his strong representations on this important project.
In the future, one of the things we will also be working on together is developing an integrated economic strategy for the Northern Territory. That is between the Territory Government and the Australian Government. Because this is so much a key part of Australia's economic development in the 21st century. We have a concentration of economic resources here, we have a people here who are blessed with a spirit of enterprise and the preparedness to have a go.
We also have a strong partnership between the Territory Government and the Government in Canberra. And as a result of that the Territory Government through the Chief Minister and myself will in the period ahead be working on the elements of an integrated economic development strategy for the Northern Territory and I look forward  to that work unfolding.
Finally or should I say second last. I'd like to talk briefly about Zimbabwe. In Zimbabwe our concern and the concern of most countries around the world is that Mr Mugabe will steal this election. Therefore it's important that the international community of nations including the African Union, and including the South African development council speak with one voice about the importance of democracy and the will of the people prevailing in Zimbabwe.
The concern of all people is that Mugabe will seek to steal this election. And to deny the free exercise of will on the part of the people of Zimbabwe. I've spent several weeks in Zimbabwe myself in the past. I've seen how Robert Mugabe can manipulate elections. The international community does not want to see that happen again and it's important that the world community speak out with one voice on this important matter.
Also on the question of the challenges which many people around Australia are experiencing at present with the impact of high mortgage prices. One of the concerns that we have had and the Assistant Treasurer has spoken on this today, concerns the activity of unscrupulous buy sell techniques for those families who are under pressure concerning their mortgages and the need to sell their homes. And that's why the Assistant Treasurer has announced today that the ACCC will be posting a dedicated website on this matter to ensure that consumers have proper information on their rights when it comes to any pressure on them by those who provide their mortgage finance to sell their homes.
We don't want to see Australian consumers and Australian home holders ripped off. That's why the Australian competition watchdog has stepped in with this website and I'd remind all of those engaged in this business, those engaged in anything which borders on unscrupulous buy sell techniques, to be very mindful of the powers of the Australian Competition Watchdog when it comes to unscrupulous activity. And what the competition laws of Australia define as unconscionable conduct.
The competition watchdog is watching that is why this particular website has been launched by the ACCC today and I draw your attention to the statements by the Assistant Treasurer on this.
Happy to take your questions
JOURNALIST:   What is going to happen to the intervention now the AMA is refusing to recruit doctors?
PM: Well the intervention of course is now about 12 months in. And in terms of what has occurred under the intervention I would just draw your attention to some statistics and then I will come to the direct nature of your question.
There are nearly 10 000 community health checks which have completed. 51 government business  managers have been placed into 72 communities. Income management is in place in 52 communities out of 73. 12 600 people are currently subject to income management. The community clean up program has (inaudible) commenced in 66 remote communities. There are now more than 50 additional police on the beat in remote NT communities.
Of course what the AMA does for itself in the future is a matter for it. And of course we as the Government will be placing for tender the new arrangements when it comes to the recruitment and deployment of medical personnel in these communities. As I have said also before when we reach the 12 month point we will be subjecting the entire intervention to review.
We have indicated that in the past, and that review will be conducted consistent with our earlier statements on it.
As I have said with the Chief Minister also, it is important we take the politics out of this and we get on with the business of assisting people in communities on the ground in practical ways. Which is why the National Government has invested literally hundreds of millions of dollars into making sure that these services are being delivered on the ground. It is difficult work, it is hard work, I commend those in their fields doing this work, but we will continue consistent with our commitments on this in the past.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Topic: Belinda Neal.
PM: Well the statement that I made the other day in relation to Ms Neal speaks for itself.
JOURNALIST: Six months ago you set up an indigenous working group and you promised it would meet every 3 months (inaudible).
PM: We've met that group in fact, at the end of last year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:     No, I met with them at the end of last year. The next meeting of the group occurred I think around March / April, where the Minister represented me at that meeting. And we will be back very soon, sometime I think in the July / August period for a further meeting. We take our consultations with indigenous leaders here seriously. We've framed our consultative arrangements strongly around the indigenous leadership of the Northern Territory and they will be integral to the consultative arrangements that we said we would put in place when it comes to the review of the Intervention.
We said that at the 12 month point that that review would be undertaken and we are acting consistent with that commitment.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible)
PM:     On the details of the operation of the review I would refer you to the Minister Jenny Macklin. At the 12 month point the review would be underway and I am sure that her department has that well in hand. And we'll do so consultatively with the Territory Government and with indigenous leaders.
The objective here is very clear. Remember what I said nationally at the time of delivering the apology to indigenous people. Our objective now for the future is how do we close the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. And so much of that practical work lies on the ground here in the Territory of course, and the rest of Australia as well.  And it is against closing the gap that the evaluation of the impact of the intervention will be measured, and we are determined to proceed in that direction.
JOURNALIST:  Are you happy with how things are going so far?
PM:     Well let's wait for the review. I think the facts and figures I read out before indicate a measure of success, but let's be realistic about it and get the data in across the community and form a seasoned judgement about how this is proceeding  -  where improvements need to occur we will make improvements.
JOURNALIST:   Do you think the AMA has got its priorities mixed up?
PM:   The AMA will make its own decisions on this. That's a matter for them. Our objective is to deliver the services that are needed in Indigenous communities and we will work with whomever is available to do that. Our objective as I said is to close the gap and I'm dead serious about having an effect here, a result. I'm sort of sick and tired of the politics of this stuff. Let's get on with the business of closing the gap in a real way for indigenous people so that they are not just the political meat in the sandwich on this. The key thing is how do we close the gap on health, how do we close the gap on education, how do we close the gap in terms of physical security within communities, how do we close the gap on housing.
These are the criteria against which the intervention is measured. My Government is determined to make a difference. It's hard, it's tough, it's difficult, it's been swept aside for far too long. Let's get on with the business of trying to make it work.
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) Topic: John Della Bosca.
PM:  Well I stand by the statement I made the other day
JOURNALIST: Can you (inaudible) without the AMA though (inaudible)
PM: Well there's a tendering process underway at the moment and because of the tendering process. I'm not at liberty to comment as to how that might be proceeding and who else might be throwing their hat in the ring. I don't know the answer to that question so let's wait for the tendering process to conclude. But we will work with whomever is able to deliver the services to indigenous people on the ground. That's the important thing.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) ......
PM: Sorry can't hear you mate
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) Topic: Nuclear waste dump.
PM:  Well there is an independent scientific process underway. I mean we will respond to the science on these questions. I think it's important again to take the politics out of this and to make sure that any advice to Government is based on science and what's the key to the science. One element of that is simply the most geologically stable site.  But we will wait for the independent process to have its way through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister a report came out today about binge drinking. Saying that three to four drinks in a session is binge drinking. Do you think three to four drinks in one session is binge drinking?
PM:  Well I think the important thing here is to put the facts into context. The NHMRC the National Health and Medical Research Council initiated this work when Mr Abbott was Health Minister of Australia. Let's put all this into context, the work began by the National Health and Medical Research Council when Tony Abbott was Health Minister. I notice Mr Abbott is now saying interesting things at variance to that today in terms of his views about the problem being no worse than it was in the past.
Let's see where the science unfolds on this. As I understand it the NHMRC report still has to be subjected to appropriate peer review by other specialist bodies. But what we said all along on the question of binge drinking is either you can stand up with the Liberal party and stand by tax loopholes which they deliberately created back in the year 2000 or you can act on binge drinking which is a problem in inner cities right across Australia.
Ask mums and dads across Australia what they fear most on a Friday and Saturday night at the moment. It is their young people going out and what might happen to them, are they gonna get bashed, are they going to end up in hospital, are they going to end up with brain damage. These are the concerns which fuel not just mums and dads across the country. It also fuels the concerns of every Police Commissioner I have spoken to and I've got that advice. We also have the advice of many of the peak health bodies concerned about binge drinking amongst young people. And what we've sought to do is to act in response to that.
We'll have further to say on the overall strategy to deal with binge drinking nationally. But this is a national challenge. Mums and dads are concerned about it. Police Commissioners are concerned about it. The health authorities are concerned about it. The only people with their head in the sand on this is the Liberal party.


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd and Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations Julia Gillard, today released the new National Employment Standards (NES).
The NES are a key element of the Rudd Government's new modern workplace relations system and will come into effect on 1 January 2010.
The NES will ensure that all employees are protected by a strong safety net of fair minimum conditions that can't be stripped away.
The NES will apply to all employees in the Federal system regardless of industry, occupation or income.
The NES were developed following extensive consultation and consideration of submissions to the exposure draft which was released on 14 February 2008.
129 submissions were received from a wide range of stakeholders, including: employee and employer groups; businesses; community organisations and individuals.
The Rudd Government's consultative approach is in stark contrast to that of the previous Liberal government.
The NES will be simpler for Australian employers.
The Work Choices standard runs to 149 pages of complexity, provides only five minimum conditions and many of the protections provided are sub-standard. 
The NES, in contrast provides10 vital protections in just 50 pages.
The NES provide employers with the flexibility and simplicity they need while also ensuring employees' key entitlements are protected. 
The NES are:
     * Maximum weekly hours of work
     * Request for flexible working arrangements
     * Parental leave and related entitlements
     * Annual leave
     * Personal/Carer's leave and compassionate leave
     * Community service leave
     * Long service leave
     * Public holidays
     * Notice of termination and redundancy pay
     * Fair Work Information Statement 
The Government will shortly issue a revised Award Modernisation Request to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission (AIRC) attaching the NES to assist in its task of modernising awards.
The NES and award modernisation are integral components of the Government's commitment to deliver a modern workplace relations system to benefit all Australians.
Legislation will be introduced into Parliament later this year to give effect to the Government's commitment. The legislation will include other aspects of workplace relations relating to the NES including compliance, interaction with agreement making and future reviews.
The National Employment Standards in more detail can be found at www.workplace.gov.au


PM:     Before the election we undertook to abolish AWAs and introduce a fair and flexible industrial relations system for Australians. Since the election we have introduced the new industrial relations act which has abolished AWAs for the future and we have begun to build a new industrial relations system for the country.
A cornerstone of that system of course is a fair and simple and strong safety net which will be made up of new, national employment standards and made up also of a modern award system.
Today the Deputy Prime Minister and I are releasing the national employment standards for Australia. This is an important part of an industrial relations reform for the country.
It is important for working Australians, it is important for Australian employers.
These new national employment standards are a real safety net for working Australians which cannot be stripped away. Fairer for workers, simpler for employers.
Also by releasing these 10 new national employment standards, we are advancing the work which has already been commenced on the modernisation of the award system across the nation.
That is an important part of our overall industrial relations reform. These new national employment standards go to maximum weekly hours, requests for flexible working arrangements, parental leave and related entitlements, annual leave, personal carers leave and compassionate leave, community service leave, long service leave, public holidays, notice of termination and redundancy pay, as well as a fair work information sheet for all employees.
Of course this is important for the future because it provides the bedrock of the new industrial relations system for Australia. A core part of what we took to the election, a core part of what we are delivering having formed the Government of Australia.
The question that will be asked by some, ‘what's different here?'. It is essentially this, one, these national employment standards cannot be stripped away. The second is, they are simpler. This document here, National Employment Standards runs to some 50 pages to explain these 10 new national employment standards.
If you go to the Workchoices legislation, it takes I think 150 pages to explain the previous arrangements for so called standards which underpinned Mr Howard's system.
But also key differences when it comes to content as well. The right to request flexible working arrangements, very important for working families today.
The right for improved parental leave and to request further parental leave. And on top of that, ensuring that when it comes to redundancy, we now have that elevated to a statutory entitlement, redundancy payments.
Of course, when employees arrive at work, it is important that they also have access to basic information which is why all employees will be guaranteed of a fair work information statement.
This is a core building block for the future. A core building block for the future of a fair and flexible industrial relations system for all Australians, in the federal system.
That represents about 85 per cent of all employees. This is an important advance in the industrial relations reform agenda and we are proud of our achievements in delivering on our undertakings to Australians prior to the election on building a fairer and flexible system for the country, Julia.
DPM:   I would just like to emphasise that these standards have been put together in a consultative way. We released an exposure draft of the 10 national employment standards on the 14th of February. We received 129 submissions about their content. These final national employment standards have been improved because we took a sensible and measured approach to generating them.
This stands in stark contrast to the Workchoices legislation and the so called Australian Fair Pay and Conditions Standard which was mired in complexity and had all sorts of unintended consequences because there wasn't sufficient consultation with employers or employees.
These National Employment standards have been proved through consultation and I want to thank everybody who has been part of that process. 
These ten national employment standards are there for every Australian employee. Whether you work part time in a restaurant, or whether you work as a surgeon at a hospital, these 10 national employment standards are a safety net for you.
For employees who earn $100,000 or less, they will also have the benefit of modern, simple awards, providing a comprehensive safety net.
This is a way of guaranteeing working families fairness at work. We have also delivered a simpler system, these national employment standards guarantee 10 protections at work and yet they are a third of the size of the former Australian Fair Pay and Conditions Standard which purported to guarantee five standards, but many of the provisions were substandard and didn't guarantee anything at all.
The national employment standards will now go to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission so when it is creating modern simple awards, it knows what the national employment standards are.
The National  Employment Standards and the modern simple awards will come into operation on the first of January 2010. The National Employment Standards will be in legislation to be brought to the Parliament later this year to complete the introduction of Labor's fair and balanced workplace relations system.
JOURNALIST:  One of the major criticisms that Labor had of Workchoices was that employees could be forced to work on public holidays, and without penalty rates, under your system, can any employee be forced to work on a public holiday?
DPM: The National Employment Standards guarantee the eight national public holidays. They also guarantee public holidays which have been gazetted for a particular area of the country, for example Melbourne Cup Day or indeed Geelong Cup Day which only apply in a particular region.
The National Employment Standards provide that employers can only request an employee to work on a national, on a public holiday, if it is reasonable to do so. Obviously there are some workers in our community, who we all accept need to work through public holiday periods. People who work in the health care sector for example, we need them at work and that has been a long standing feature of their employment, but the National Employment Standards do protect the common public holidays that Australian workers enjoy.
JOURNALIST: On extending unpaid parental leave by 12 months, you say here that business grounds may be a reason to stop that leave, what does that include, what sort of business grounds may that include?
DPM:  In some businesses obviously it is not possible to have people work from home, or it is not possible to have people work part time. If one were attending for example to an emergency response situation, it may not be possible for those employees to have the benefit of flexible work arrangements.
We understand Australian workplaces come in all shapes and sizes, but what we want to achieve through this new flexible set of working conditions for parents, is that they are able to go to their employer and canvass the prospect of additional unpaid leave so that they can have a parent at home for the first two years of a child's life, or canvass different ways of working. And in many occupations today, with new technology, different ways of working are possible, if people work through the issues.
JOURNALIST:Deputy Prime Minister, a lot of this goes to penalty rates, what are, what is a fair penalty rate for working on a Sunday or public holiday and is that set out in these standards?
DPM:The question of penalty rates would be dealt with in the modern simple awards, obviously penalty rate regimes vary from industry to industry. But we understand that it is important for working families that their entitlements, if they work on public holidays, or if they work overtime are protected and understood, that is part of the task that the Australian Industrial Relations Commission is doing in the creation of simple modern awards.
Under Workchoices, under the Liberal Party, it was possible for penalty rates and overtime to be stripped away without compensation. That was a feature of Australian Workplace Agreements. And obviously with the transition act which passed the parliament earlier this year, that is no longer possible. No one in this country can make an employment agreement that strips away those basic conditions.
JOURNALIST:Australians work some of the longest full time hours in the OECD. Do you think that is a problem and will the regulation of working hours here address that?
PM:These national Employment Standards apply to the total economy or at least that which falls within the Federal System. It is about 85 per cent of employees. And when we talk about a 38 hour week that is clearly one of the national employment standards.
Ultimately, you are going to have different circumstances in different workplaces as the Deputy Prime Minister was indicating before, there are different provisions here for example on the question of averaging, than existed under the previous regime with Mr Howard.
We think it is very important that these basic protections exist across the entire industrial relations system and for the entire workforce which falls within the Federal Jurisdiction.
Individuals are constantly going to make their own choices. We understand that but our important obligation for the nation is to make sure that you have got basic standards, a proper safety net which can't be stripped away. And that is what this is all about. And upon that, you then build a modern award system and upon that, other industrial instruments in turn flow.
This is the basic building block of the system and it is really important work and it is important that the award modernisation process can now be advanced as a result.
JOURNALIST:Can I just ask a question on the issue of whaling. Now that the Japanese have failed to buckle to your demands, or you're lobbying, and you have said that the diplomacy now moves to the International Whaling Commission, can you just be a little more explicit on exactly what you are hoping to achieve through that. Are you wanting scientific whaling declared a farce and some other method  - 
PM:Well one of the options which has been canvassed in the reform of the International Whaling Commission's approach to these matters is, if scientific whaling for example is the objective, then how can scientific whaling be advanced by non lethal means. Let's examine for example with our friends in Japan and elsewhere as to what the body of research that is needed is, and how can that be obtained by non lethal means. That is a considered proposal which has been advanced through the IWC by our Minister and one which he will be arguing when he arrives in Santiago, Chile in about a week's time.
That is one of the things that we will be discussing with the Japanese, and others.
This will be difficult as a negotiation, we fully accept that, but that together with other measures we are seeking to negotiate through with our friends across the world including in Japan.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what message will you be taking to the Saudis should you or one of your ministers be dispatched to Jeddah this weekend? And secondly, drinking four beers, is that binge drinking?
PM: The connection between the two questions?
JOURNALIST:Ethanol.
PM:   On Saudi, I will be discussing with the Ministers today our representation at that conference, Australia will be represented. Because the reality is, with oil prices affecting economies right across the world and this global oil shock being the greatest that we have seen in 30 years, it affects all oil consuming countries.
That is why it is important to attend this forum, and there are a range of other forums which we will be attending as well. On the precise form of representation, we will come back to you.
On the drinking stuff, I will come to the drinking stuff  -  hang on, I will just answer this one and then I will come back.
Your question was about four, is this the NHMRC point? Yeah. Well you have got the National Health and Medical Research Council which is a professional body which began this work, as I understand it, back when Mr Abbott was Health Minister.
And they are a body of independent professionals. I am sure their findings are going to be subject to peer review. But our general approach is that we should take expert advice. But let's see what the peer review
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think you had four I might have had two. And I can remember how many I had mate. But you know on these questions there's a serious debate here between us and the Liberals, it's a serious debate. We take the side of Australian Police Commissioners who point to this problem as being a massive one for them across the country.
We take the side of the health professionals who say that binge drinking among young people and among young girls in particular is a massive problem across the country. Mums and dads are anxious when their kids go out of a Friday and Saturday night, as to what's going to happen to them - street violence, people being taken to accident and emergency in greater and greater numbers. Now we recognise that as a problem and we as a Government are responding to that.
The Liberals are in a state of complete denial, and when you have the likes of Mr Abbott, the former Health Minister saying this is all about moral panic. I mean for goodness sake this is a real problem, a real problem. The Police Commissioner of NSW as described this as a major national problem. He said the problem is getting worse.
If you look at what other Police Commissioners have said. If you look at what the health professionals are saying, this is a massive problem. So either you do something about this, as we indicated much earlier this year with a series of other announcements on how we are going to deal with binge drinking, in addition to what we have done with this particular taxation measure, or you run around and think its all a big joke, which is what the Liberals are doing.
The Liberals are saying its all a bit of moral panic. We don't have that view, this is serious stuff. Ask mums and dads in any supermarket today whether they are concerned about their kids on a Friday and Saturday night. You know frankly the response I get right across Australia is they are and they are looking to Government to do something about it.
There's no magic solution here, we've got to start turning these numbers around. This is one part of a response.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you say to the 67 per cent of Australians today who want you to cut petrol excise?
PM:Well we have been talking to and listening to Australians right across the country for some time. I mean I have been talking to working Australians for weeks and months about the impact of petrol prices on them and hearing their message loud and clear. Which is why as a result of this budget for a typical family we're bringing in measures to improve the family budget by some $52 a week - that's a typical young family.
That's an important measure. Acting in order to make it easier for Australians to buy fuel efficient cars, that's a measure. Acting in terms of the development of for the first time of a long term energy and fuel strategy for Australia, that's also part of our responsibility.
But in my discussions and talks with working Australians in recent weeks and months, we've certainly got their message loud and clear. Our response has been to act through the budget to provide support for working Australians and working families and pensioner and carers. To act on the question of Fuel efficient cars and to act in the development of a long term response to what is a global problem.
I've just come from Indonesia as you know. There has been riots in Indonesia, riots in France, I think riots in Spain. Lorry drivers being killed in various parts of world, riots in the United Kingdom.
This is a global problem, we have the greatest global oil shock in 30 years which has reverberating across every economy in the world. But we have a plan going forward and is as I have just described.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard today you have acted to ask child care centres to provide the fees their charging so you can publish them on a website. Does that mean that you are concerned that maybe price gouging ahead of the subsidy increase on July 1 and if its only voluntary will it achieve its objective.
DPM: I have made it clear over time that we are very concerned to make sure that the changes in the child care tax rebate that the Governments introduced through the recent budget, get into the hands of working families. We want to take the pressure off when it comes to child care fees.
We've sent a very clear message to industry that whilst we understand that from time to time for reasonable reasons costs in child care go up that we do not want to see any unfair pricing practices. I have certainly said through my letter to child care providers that we want them to disclose their fees.
The letter indicates that this is a first step and the letter also indicates that we are looking for cooperation from the industry, but if further down the track we need to have arrangements that make disclosure of fees mandatory then we will certainly look at those arrangements. But in the first instance we're asking for cooperation, we're asking for disclosure.
JOURNALIST: On Iguanagate are you worried that the law might have been broken at some point?
PM:Look there's a police investigation underway and lets see what it turns up.
JOURNALIST:Would you object to Belinda Neal making a detailed statement to Parliament of her version of events two Friday nights ago?
PM:Look I think the right course of action is to allow the law to have its way, have its course. As you know I acted on this matter last week. There is a police investigation underway. It's a serious investigation. I believe its better that, that investigation be allowed to proceed unimpeded.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on fuel, the Neilsen survey showed that people are not at all convinced by Fuelwatch. Do you think that this does, do you concede it has some flaws or do you think people don't understand it and why have you therefore failed to get that message across?
PM:Michelle I think we have always seen Fuelwatch as, and we'd depicted at the time, as a modest measure to deal with greater consumer power for consumers. In a very difficult environment, a difficult environment which is produced by a global oil shock.
Its one modest measure and we have never sought to describe it as much more than that. Remember the savings that we indicated which were possible under that were something like 1.9 cents per litre based on the WA experience.
What we're talking about worldwide are massive fluctuations in price, tens and tens of cents a litre brought about by the global oil shock and that's why it reverberates in every capital and every city in the world at the moment.
JOURNALIST:Your roving ambassador Mr Woolcott has suggested that DFAT maybe facing staff cuts which are too deep and may affect its job. Are you concerned particularly with all the agenda's you have put out that DFAT is facing too much staff cuts?
PM:Well first of all lets put it in context. When Mr Howard became Prime Minister I think the first budget result for DFAT including I think the aid budget was a whack of $300 million plus. I think ours is probably more in the vicinity of about $20 million and this has been a difficult budget to frame. We've imposed an efficiency dividend across the public service and that's had its effect and none of that's nice I understand that.
Secondly again having spent some time with DFAT officers in the last few days. They are an extraordinary professional bunch of people. They arise to a professional challenge, they have worked under extremely challenging environments in the past under much more straitened resources than actually exist now. I'm talking about the impact of the cuts in first many years actually of the Howard Government.
We will always be mindful of the need for resources to support particular initiative in the future. But my discussion with departmental officials is that they are excited and enthusiastic about getting into the business of how do we advance the proposal for an Asia Pacific community. How do we advance the proposal for an independent commission on nuclear non proliferation and nuclear disarmament and various other measures which we will be advancing as well.
But we're always mindful of particular resource requirements which flow from particular initiatives and we will be in continued discussion with the department on that.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible) haven't gone far enough with getting rid of workchoices. How much have you gauged that their on board with these employment standards?
DPM: Well we've consulted all parties. As I have said we had 129 submissions. Our aim has always been to deliver a fair and balanced system. And we understand that industrial relations stakeholders including the trade unions will say from time to time that they would have liked to have seen a little bit more. I think we will see the unions say that on one side, I think we will see employers say that on the other side.
What that means for us is we're delivering what we promised which is a fair and balanced system.
JOURNALIST: Have you met with Ms Neal since returning from overseas? And if so what was the nature of those discussions?
PM: No and therefore no.
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd what type of international travel ambassador do you think Paul Keating would make? And do you have any suggestions for maybe a slogan given that he's well known floury use of the language.
PM: Yeah, I reckon what I've seen today falls into the category of idle speculation. Its about as probable I reckon as having John Howard and Paul Keating team up for a dual number in the Eurovision song contest, and probably about as likely of taking the prize.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) the police investigation of letting it run its course. Have you or your office instructed Ms Neal not to make a statement to the parliament?
PM:  Not that I'm aware. If your asking in response to the question I was asked before, what I think is the appropriate course of action. There's a police investigation underway, that should proceed unimpeded and I think that's the appropriate way for it to proceed rather than to allow sort of politics to get in the middle of it.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM:  There's a police investigation underway. I don't know whether the police have spoken with Ms Neal directly yet but I think it's appropriate that, that occur and...
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) the public has a right to know here.
PM:   I'm sure the public will know the consequences of the police investigation in due season. I just think you've got to be quite driven by appropriate processes here, which is that police are investigating. You allow the police investigation to proceed. I think that is the right course of action.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) employers were forced to hand out propaganda to employees. Aren't you doing the same kind of thing with your information sheet?
PM: Don't think so, I think this is basically a basic fact sheet  -  here are your ten national employment standards and this is what they mean and this is where you go. Over to you Julia I think its pretty basic stuff actually.
DPM:This is an information sheet..
PM:They don't get a free mouse pad
DPM:Well we've got a number of mouse pads still available if people want them. This is an information sheet, the contents of which is to be generated by our industrial umpire  -  Fair Work Australia.
One of the problems in industrial relations, one of the reasons we're creating a one stop shop is that it can be hard for employers and employees to work out where to go when they need advice and assistance. That basic information will be provided through the fair work information statement.
JOURNALIST:Mr Rudd I take it from your answer to Mark Riley earlier that the Government is not at all interested in considering reducing the fuel excise?
PM:  Our response Dennis is as I described before. One that in my talks with working Australians and working families right across the country in recent weeks and months - we get the message loud and clear that motorists are hurting a lot. Which is why in this budget there is a $55 billion support package for working families. Which is why we have embarked on a course of action in relation to fuel efficient cars. And which is why we are developing as I have indicated before a longer term policy paper on the question of fuel and energy policy for Australia.
I've also made previous references to the work of the Henry commission.
JOURNALIST:On Friday your infrastructure Minister Anthony Albanese said words about the Ipswich Motorway saying there would be a full upgrade right to Rocklea. Can you confirm that and where will the money come from for that last 6 kilometres. Is it going to come from the Building Australia Fund?
PM:On the Ipswich Motorway, we committed ourselves to its upgrade prior to the election. Since the election I have been there to launch the upgrade work. For the remaining 6 kilometres as you describe it through to Rocklea, we will either have that submitted for consideration by Infrastructure Australia to be funded out of the Building Australia Fund or alternatively from the next round of AUSLINK funding.
Either way we will be honouring that commitment. Because its basis for us for the people in that corridor who have suffered from very poor treatment in terms of their major road connections through the city of Brisbane for far too long. And far too many people frankly have found themselves in real difficulty on that road in terms of traffic accidents as well.
JOURNALIST: Should the New South Wales Government press ahead with it's plans to privatise electricity?
PM:Matter for the New South Wales government Dennis, by my position on this has always been clear in terms of the right course of action. But their internal decision making processes are a matter for them. I have never changed from my original view on that. I have never changed from my original position on that. (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST:Dick “tosser” Turner (inaudible)
PM:Yeah, I actually just heard about that before I came out here. Wayne Swan and I attended a function with many of the state of origin players, the greats from the past in Brissie not long ago. And he wasn't able to attend, and he was in hospital and doing it tough in his fight against cancer then. Wayne and I went and saw him and he was in remarkable spirits. I understand he actually rallied to go to the most recent state of origin game.
It would have been a good one for him to watch. This bloke is a legend in Queensland. An absolutely legend. And I speak for Wayne Swan and myself as Queenslanders, we are deeply saddened by his passing, he is a great loss to the game.


O'BRIEN: The Prime Minister joins me now from our Canberra studio. Kevin Rudd, if we can start with oil. You and Brendan Nelson are both arguing over very small savings at the bowser, although his small savings are bigger than your small savings, that's if you have savings in the end.
But isn't it time to look Australians in the eye and tell them the news is only going to get worse on oil?
It may get better in the short term, there may be moments where the price drops a little, but in the long and the medium to long term, it's going to get worse and that there's nothing significant that you can do about it. Now isn't that the case?
PM: Kerry, on global oil prices, no one that I can speak to, either within the Government, that is the Treasury who are looking at the long range forecasting here, or abroad, can give you any confidence about where global oil prices will be in three, six, nine, 12 months time.
It is a very murky future that we face. What we do know for a fact is that right now we have the greatest global oil shock in 30 years. We know for a fact that prices are up 400 per cent since the Iraq war, 100 per cent in the last 12 months alone. It's led to protests and riots in the UK, Spain, France, as well as Indonesia and our own region and South Korea.
So this is a massive shock to the global economy. It's happening across all economies at present. What we need to do is frame an intelligent, long term response to this, and Australia as of when we took over Government did not have a long term energy strategy, a fuel strategy.
We're working on that, six months into office, and we hope to have something to produce later in the year on that score. Dealing with the long term challenge, as well as being mindful of the impact on people's hip pocket now.
O'BRIEN: Well, you talk about it being murky and that you don't really know where it's going to be, but there is a growing and very credible body of advice that with the odd slot going down slightly, that it's simply in the long term going to be going up and up and up. 
Richard Heinberg is a highly respected world expert on the oil crisis and when the world reaches the point where known oil reserves reach their peak and then irreversibly decline, he says, over the long term, nowhere for oil prices to go but up.
Now, in that context, isn't it just faintly ludicrous to be arguing over whether you can save a cent a litre here or cent a litre there?
PM: But Kerry, that's why my responses to many of these questions in parliaments in recent weeks have been framed in terms of one, global oil supply, what can be done to boost investment in those countries which are the principal oil exporters? There's a problem there. Two, on the demand side. Global initiatives on energy efficiency and the huge great push countries of China and India? Three, what do you do in terms of energy efficiency in economies like our own? That goes to the whole regime of fuel efficient cars, in particular. Four, what do you do in terms of an alternative fuel strategy? And five, what do you do in terms of public transport, in order to make it accessible, particularly in our metro areas?
This is a long term strategy as well as dealing with the immediate hip pocket impact on motorists who are feeling it right now.
O'BRIEN: But what is your brief description of the underpinning philosophy that says the Rudd Government will not reduce the excise on fuel as a means of alleviating the pain at the bowser for Australians? 
PM: Well, our view is that we're faced with, as a government of responsible economic management, we're faced with a long term challenge here. It is about global energy supply, it is about global oil supply and what you do in terms of adjustment at home. That's why the framework we adopt is the five points I've just run through a minute ago.
O'BRIEN: But why can't part of that framework be - I'm just trying to hear a clear statement of philosophy here - why can't part of that framework be short, medium and long term, cutting the excise on petrol, because your revenue is going to continue to grow anyway as the price goes up. Why not try to alleviate that pain for motorists by cutting the excise? 
PM: What I said just before, Kerry, I think on a couple of occasions is, this is a long term strategy. The sort of global factors you just pointed to before and you quoted some international experts. As I said, "As well as assisting motorists now". How do you assist motorists now?
A couple of things you can do practically is, what we've sought to do, mindful of what's happening, through global oil prices through the budget. The family budget at the end of the day is aided by tax measures, childcare tax rebate measures and the rest.
A typical young family as a consequence of the Budget we've introduced of a couple of kids, $52 a week better off. Mr Nelson's measure that he's announced in terms of excise, $2.50 a week better off.
O'BRIEN: But before you go any further Mr Rudd, that's not a fair comparison because, in fact, that tax cut that you're implementing is very similar to the tax cut that the Coalition would have implemented if they were going to be in government now anyway. So to line up your 50 bucks against Brendan Nelson's $2.50 is simply a false premise and secondly... 
PM: Not at all Kerry actually, no. Can I answer your question first? The Liberals made no promise whatsoever on child care tax rebate, no promise whatsoever on the education tax refund, and furthermore, are opposing right now our measure when it comes to the Medicare levy surcharge. All of those are unique to Labor.
Finally on the tax point, there are $4 billion worth of tax in the original Liberals' proposal which went to the Top End which, in fact, we've taken away from the Top End to give people back in those other forms of income support including the education tax refund.
O'BRIEN: But when you promised those things Mr Rudd in the election, you didn't promise them in the context of helping people with the pain at the bowser from petrol; it was in the context of other specific things you were going to provide those cuts for? 
PM: Yeah but, Kerry, standing back from all of that, cost of living pressures affecting families right now fall into what baskets? They fall into the cost of petrol, the cost of groceries, also rents, mortgages, as well as the cost of child care.
What we're trying to do through our family support package and the assistance we've provided pensioners and carers in the Budget is to provide some support in those areas and I'm making a clear contrast point between Dr Nelson's proposal, which is not even supported by Mr Turnbull, the alternative leader.
O'BRIEN: It is now. 
PM: Well, who knows where the Liberal Party are, because they are leaderless at present, and divided. And so it's $2.50 on 50 litres fill up a week as against the $52.50 proposal that we have when you aggregate all the measures.
Also, looking at the question of specific taxation treatment, we've said before that tax treatment in terms of the GST treatment of fuel is also part of the Henry Commission of Inquiry and that unfolds.
O'BRIEN: But when you say that the Liberals are leaderless at the moment, the fact is that Dr Nelson is making some headway in the polls and judging by today's poll in the Fairfax Media, he's winning the political debate on oil. At least the political debate. 
Do you accept that you have to do better in explaining why it's not a good idea to cut the excise and why people would do better to work out how to consume less petrol?
PM: Kerry, in all the conversations I've had with working Australians around the place in recent weeks, recent months, I know full well that motorists are suffering a lot of pain at present. I've heard that message loud and clear.
What I'm seeking to say in response to that is in helping the family budget you can do that also through the tax system, the child care system and a range of other ways. As I said, that typical family I've spoken of, that's a $52 effect.
Also, can I just say this; the Liberals have had 12 years in office. We had a 33% increase in oil prices last year when they were in. Where do we hear any measure on their part? And it seems in the last six months what we've had is suddenly, this is uniquely the responsibility of, uniquely the fault of the Labor Government. Can I just say, let's put all this into a bit of historical context.
I accept responsibility for the Government. I accept the criticism which is forthcoming. I understand that motorists are under pressure. This is a global challenge. We are trying to work through it both with a long term strategy, which did not exist as of when we took over, as well as the specific Budget measures aimed at helping with the family budget on the way through.
O'BRIEN: Okay, on industrial relations Mr Rudd, you've left it vague with the 10 basic principles of safety net in terms of working conditions that you've confirmed today. You've left it vague on how long workers might reasonably be asked to work beyond a normal 38 hour week under the new safety net. 
But at the same time, it seems it'll be left to the individual worker to argue with his or her employer over what's reasonable. Now that's in the eye of the beholder isn't it, what's reasonable? What constitutes reasonable hours?
PM: Well, Kerry you say it's vague-up. We've been very plain about the fact that the industrial relations system we're building is intended to be a fair and flexible one, having abolished AWAs (Australian Workplace Agreements) for the future, honouring our pre-election commitment. And the groundwork for this, the building block, is these National Employment Standards, ten of them.
We announced these prior to the election in broad outline. We spent the last three months negotiating their detail, as Julia Gillard has done an excellent job with representatives of industry and the unions in so doing, and now they are out. They are necessary to go to the second building block which is to provide advice to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission on the modernisation of the awards. And many of the detailed questions that you've just referred to are dealt with in that second phase of the process.
We are rebuilding an industrial relations system which the other mob after 12 years took a meat axe to, throwing people's penalty rates out that window, their overtime out that window, and then having the hide to talk to the Australian people today about cost of living pressures, when they were quite prepared to blow apart the basic conditions which people had previously in the workplace.
O'BRIEN: And how credible do you think you are on family friendly working standard after that rather unfortunate statement the other day, as the biggest employer in the country, you recently told public servants who are unhappy with working hours you're demanding of them, "Get used to it, more to come, that it was going to increase rather than decrease". It is a serious question, isn't it? 
PM: Well, you know Kerry, there are 20... We take our responsibilities as employers, the public service, seriously. They are first class people doing a first class job and their professionalism is right up there.
O'BRIEN: But you didn't say that the other day when you essentially eyeballed them. Look, it might not have been intended as such, but it certainly sounded nasty and that was the way a lot of people took it? 
PM: Oh well, things may be perceived in one way, what I know is that on multiple occasions since taking Government and prior to that, I've said consistently my admiration for the professionalism of the public service.
But let me just go to one other point. There are 21 million people in Australia, 100,000 or so of them are public servants, and there are 21,900 million people on us as the Government to work really hard to deliver our program. It's a tough business being in Government. I make no apology for that. We will work hard. We will continue to work hard, and, of course, we will abide by the Industrial Relations laws of the Government in so doing.
But, you know, when I encounter senior Public Servants, they are challenged by our desire to have a real professional policy debate with them. Sometimes the odd barney and good on 'em because that's the way it should be in a normally functioning government. We don't do what Mr Howard did to Mick Keelty which was when he dared offer a different view on terrorism, he had the Foreign Minister go out and accusing Mick Keelty, the Commissioner of the AFP (Australian Federal Police) of doing the biddings of al Qaeda, virtually that's what he said.
O'BRIEN: Okay, with the time that's left, the brief time left, Belinda Neal's nightclub experience. If there happens to be an adverse police finding with regard to the integrity of her actions after that incident, what range of actions is open to you and does that include expelling Belinda Neal from the Labor Party? 
PM: Kerry, first things first, it's called due process. There is a police investigation under way and everyone should await its outcome. I think that's very important. And apart from the histrionics of the Opposition in Parliament today, the key thing is that this investigation is on and it should be allowed to proceed unmolested.
I noticed when one was on last year, the Liberals unleashed one of their own to rip into the police for daring to conduct such an investigation.
The second point is this, I have said very clearly both to Ms Neal and in my subsequent public remarks that nobody, repeat nobody, is guaranteed of a future in politics. We are expected to do our job properly. I've said before in the case of Ms Neal there appeared to be a pattern of unacceptable behaviour. We've agreed that she has a course of counselling to undergo. Let's wait to see what happens with the police investigation. But I repeat; none of us has a guaranteed future in politics.
O'BRIEN: Very quickly Mr Rudd, the question from Christopher Pyne of a potential Commonwealth law, criminal law being broken, is there any reason why you would not refer that to the Federal Police? 
PM: Kerry, my understanding of police investigations, if it's been undertaken by the NSW police, is that if they in the process of their investigations discover any other matter, automatically this flows to other police jurisdictions. Once again, we have a political Opposition posturing on these questions and I just go back to this point. Mr Howard said last year when the current Member for Bowman was under investigation himself through the AFP, that he Mr Howard, was ensuring that his colleagues made no statements in the Parliament on these matters while an investigation was under way. That was the rule then for the Liberals. It seems to be a different rule now.
O'BRIEN: Mr Rudd, we're out of time, thanks for talking with us. 
PM: Thanks very much, Kerry


I've lived in Beijing a bit myself over the years and you're going to have a great time. 
The closest I got to competitive sport in Beijing was playing for Australia in the Australian team in Beijing in cricket. There were only 12 Australians in China at the time and I was selected as 12th man. As our captain said I never troubled the scorekeepers much. But I tell you what no one ever read of any score of mine but they are going to be watching how you guys go. All of us are going to follow it with a huge amount of personal interest and pride. 
Australians love sport. Australians love the Olympics and Australians love Australian sportsmen and women representing their country at the Olympics. Your part of a very proud history which goes back now more than 100 years. 
This is all an essential part of who we are as Australians. From the big cities to the outback Australians are now itching for the action to begin. We will all be glued to the TV sets watching every step along the way. Every success, every not success, every striving, every competitive sprit that we will see on the competitive field of sport when you are up there. 
Australians will be there right behind you, everyone of us, because you do us proud. The opportunity to compete in the Olympics and the Paralympics is, in itself, an incredible achievement for each of you. It means you have earned the right  -  through hard work and training  -  to represent your country at the highest level. 
And I'd just like to say to each and every one of you before you go be proud of your achievement. Absolutely proud of your achievement. To have reached this height, to be part of this great Australian team. Its something which so many Australians aspire to and so few achieve. 
So each of you prior to any calculation of who gets medals or who doesn't, just be proud of the fact that you have made it to Team Australia, representing Australia at these games and I salute you. 
You've now got of course the further summit to climb. Taking to the track, the field, the pool, the range or the water, you will be up against now the best in the world. 
You will be among athletes who have also dedicated themselves to excellence in your chosen field. The competition will be intense. You will all be after the same thing. You will be intense competitors, you will be rivals, you will be striving for the prize. 
But I say again the prize that you have already achieved is to be part of this great team. 
It does make you part of an exclusive club, and it creates a unique bond among athletes. Even individual sports, its important that everyone, everyone plays their part. And the people who have played their part over the years have been your mums and dads, your coaches, all those dedicated folk picking you up at 4:30 in the morning. Taking you off to a swimming pool at 5 (am). Week in, week out  -  year in, year out. 
There's just a hope and a dream in your mum and dads eye, your coaches eye that maybe you'd crack the team and the same for the athletes. And I think it's a time to reflect on the thanks that we all owe the dedicated mums and dads and coaches of Australia, in order to get you to the stage that you have reached. 
The sacrifices made by your families are many, and I suspect they will be more nervous, more excited and more proud than each one of you. A sporting career only comes to rely on so many people the coaches, trainers, nutritionists and others and more and more so as you approach the peak of your sport. 
In Beijing, you will be supported by some of the best coaches, sports scientists and support staff in the world. They are just as dedicated and I'm sure they're also pretty excited too. 
To each of you who are coaches and trainers, nutritionists and other staff supporting our athletes here today, can I also say to you thank you on behalf of the nation. Your dedication and support of these proud athletes is also so important to the country and I thank you for your professionalism.
 The Australian Institute of Sport, the AIS is a famous brand in world sport. It is little wonder that other countries have tried to pinch our techniques and tap into our expertise, because the AIS has done so well. Despite their best efforts, I'm sure that the AIS will again ensure Australian athletes are the best prepared they can be in going forward to these Olympics. 
I am also pretty sure that you will be watched like hawks over the next 50 days  -  your training, your diet, whether you sleep, make sure you get plenty of sleep. Because all of that's important in helping, the athletes to prepare for the final events in Beijing. 
I was in Beijing just a few months ago. I can tell you that the games really are transforming the city. The anticipation is huge, and I am sure the Chinese will be absolutely magnificent hosts to each and every one of you. 
Like in all big cities, there will be a few challenges in Beijing, there always are at Olympics time. But I am sure that it you will overcome any hurdles that you are presented with, just as you have done many past Olympics and those who have preceded you have done at every Olympics back to 1986.
 I am looking forward to being their with you myself and I am confirming today that I'll be in Beijing at the invitation of the Chinese Government for the opening of the games and to be there cheering you on for the few events. 
I like so many Australians will be there with pride watching you, cheering you on and urging you to do you absolute best for Australia as I know you will. 
Today, I want to wish all of you the very best  -  athletes, coaches, sports scientists and other support staff. And with your big day looming, I just leave you with one simple message. 
As you embark on this journey, know this and know this as you go through each and every difficult minute and hour and day of the competitive weeks that lie ahead of you. And that is this: your country Australia is so very proud of you, so very proud of you. Good luck.  


The Governor-General and the Prime Minister will attend the Beijing Olympics Games at the personal invitation of the President of China.  
The Prime Minister will attend the Opening Ceremony and the Governor General the Closing Ceremony. 
The Prime Minister will be attending the Beijing Olympics to support the Australian Olympic Team which will be our largest ever at an overseas Olympics. 
The Prime Minister will be in Beijing between 7 and 10 August and will participate in the Australian Olympic Team's Flag Raising Ceremony and address the Australian Olympic Team at an Official Team Reception at the invitation of the Australian Olympic Committee. 
The Prime Minister will also attend a number of engagements in the Games program in support of Australia's athletes including Shooting, Women's Basketball, Cycling and Diving events.


PM:Kate and I are here today to express the best wishes of Australia for our Olympics team, headed off very soon to Beijing to represent all of us.
We have had a very simple message today to all of our Olympians and Paralympians, and that is, the whole Australian nation is behind them.
And on top of that, the whole Australian nation is proud of them.
For these Olympians and Paralympians to have reached where they have got, which is to be members of the Australian team, is an extraordinary personal achievement for them, their mums, their dads, their coaches and those who have supported them.
As I said in my remarks before, the whole nation is going to be cheering them on, right across Australia, country and city.
This is when the nation legitimately grinds to a halt as we sit in front of the TV screens and watch those final events.
I am looking forward very much, and at the invitation of the Chinese Government, to be there at the Opening Ceremony in the first few days myself, to help cheer the team on.
I have got to say, having spoken to many of the team this morning, they are right and ready to go. They are looking forward to it. They are excited, as they should be. They have reached the peak of their profession, the peak of their sport, and they are doing a fantastic job for Australia already.
A quick word from Kate and then I will take your questions.
ELLIS:Well with 50 days to go until the Olympics, it is an incredibly proud occasion to get to officially farewell our AIS athletes who are Beijing bound.
It is also a really important time for us to stop and celebrate the remarkable achievements of the Australian Institute of Sport. We have seen today that almost half of the team have trained here - 200 out of the Olympic team of 440. And well over half of the Paralympic team. And the Government is tremendously proud of the AIS.
And we are also lifting our eyes beyond Beijing to make sure that we can continue to have the greatest facilities, the greatest support and the best programs in place for Australian athletes.
PM:Over to you folks
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister any early predictions on the number of medals (inaudible)
PM:What sort of question is that?
We are there backing every Australian athlete, every Australian Olympian and Paralympian. And you know something, these young people are going to do their absolute best for Australia. And win lose or draw, they are going to have the support of every Australia.
They are a very professional mob. And the great thing about Australians is, and I have seen them in so many sporting environments over the years, is there is always a ‘never say die' approach. Out there, fighting hard, win, lose or draw.
So win lose or draw, every Australian is going to be out there pitching in for Australia supporting them.
JOURNALIST:Mr Rudd, just on the decision to go Beijing for the opening, did you ever consider not going?
PM: Oh look, what I had to work out, as I said, I think at the time, is a few scheduling things back here. But we have made it work and I'll be going to the Opening Ceremony and I'll be there for a few days after that and come back. I think all together about three days.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that that delay has upset Beijing? And what do you say to the reports of the diplomatic (inaudible)
PM: I'm unaware of any of that. So I'm pretty relaxed about going. The Chinese Government have extended the invitation. The Australian Olympics Committee have been supportive of the decision to go. I think it's the right thing to do. And more importantly, just to cheer for the Australian team and respond positively to the invitation which has been extended to me personally by the Chinese President.
JOURNALIST: A number of weeks ago Olympic officials expressed concern about the number of medals Australia will win (inaudible)
PM: I'll hand over to Kate.
ELLIS: Certainly we're in ongoing conversations with the whole sporting community about continuing to advance Australian sport. And as I said, that means beyond Beijing, which is why we've already put out a direction paper about where we need to go to make sure that we've got the long term plans in place to make sure that Australian sport continues to, perhaps overachieve on the international stage.
Now, in all of our conversations people have made clear that this isn't just about funding. It's about making sure that we get the best bang for every buck that we put into sport.
Which is why I was so happy that we met with each of the state Sports Ministers just a couple of weeks ago and have agreed to sit down and work together: remove duplication from the system and make sure that we've got a sporting system which continues to do all Australians proud.
It's well and truly on the agenda and we're working beyond Beijing and looking for how we can continue to deliver in London and beyond that as well.
JOURNALIST:Mr Rudd, just on petrol, there has been a call this morning for a ten cent a litre cut in the excise (inaudible)
PM:Australian motorists are doing it tough because of rising price of petrol because of the global oil shock, the biggest global oil shock that the world has seen in 30 years.
I think what we've had, I think, from the Liberals today is probably their third position. One is what Dr Nelson has said and then there has been Mr Turnbull saying that he wouldn't necessarily implement what Dr Nelson has said. Now we have another proposal on top of that. So I don't think, frankly, the Liberals have a consistent position on this at all.
I think the other thing that I'd say about petrol is, just take a practical example of prices in Sydney the last 24 hours or so. If you were to look at the price variation within metro Sydney, we've had price variations in Sydney yesterday, I'm advised, of up to 20 cents a litre. Take in Eastwood, and in Carlingford, you have a nine cent a litre variation. In Mosman, you have a 16 cent a litre variation between different petrol stations in virtually the same area.
Simple question I've got for the Liberals is, why shouldn't motorists have access to that information? That's what we're trying to provide motorists, access to that information, so that motorists can make their choice about where they're going to go and buy their fuel. What's wrong with that?
That's what we're saying. And as I said in Sydney itself, the variations have been huge. As I said, they are the two examples that lie in those two particular areas. We've got a pretty clear approach to that.
The Liberals have opposed it, and their alternative is, first of all, Dr Nelson's position. Then there's Mr Turnbull's position which is not to implement Dr Nelson's position. And then we have another position again from a Liberal Party representative today.
JOURNALIST: Don't you think that drivers in most of your electorates would prefer to be paying 10 cents a litre less?
PM: I think a thing, and we've never overstated the significance of FuelWatch, we've always described it as a modest measure, is that motorists deserve to have effective consumer choice. We've always said this is about boosting the power of the motorist over the big oil companies.
What we have done is back motorist's consumer choice and consumer power. And what our opponents seem to be doing is constantly taking the side of the big oil companies.
I go back to this: why is it that every big oil company, virtually in the country, doesn't want FuelWatch? Anyone sort of work that out? And, why is it that a significant number of the motoring organisations support FuelWatch? Not all of them. But a significant number.
We think it's pretty basic. Motorists should have this information available to them, be made available to them. The petrol companies do through their own internal information system. Why shouldn't motorists have that information publicly available to them?
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible)
PM:I think long term we have said that in dealing with the challenge of petrol, we have responsibility to assist with working families, working Australians under financial pressure. Which is why through the Budget, as a result of this Budget, your typical young family will be $52 a week better off. That's against the $2.50 which Dr Nelson offers, if Mr Turnbull supports Dr Nelson, with his excise proposal. So, $2.50 which the Liberal Party is offering - $52.50 which is what we're providing though the Budget. That's a clear alternative, here and now.
Then we have an approach to help motorists with consumer choice  -  that's called FuelWatch.
And then, longer term, the Energy Minister is working on a long term energy strategy for Australia. There hasn't been one before. And part of that lies with long term incentives for exploration as well.
But it covers the raft of challenges.
The pressures on global oil, in terms of supply. The pressures in terms of demand and what you do in terms of energy efficiency in major developing countries like China and India who are sucking in so much oil at present. What you can do in terms of alternative fuels. What you can do in terms of fuel efficiency and fuel efficient cars. Hence our decision recently on hybrid cars. And on top of that, what you're investing in public transport.
And, longer term, incentives and support for the industry, vis-à-vis exploration.
So, that is an integrated strategy for dealing with these challenges long term. It comes in addition to the measures which are obviously of more immediate application. Including the Budget measures which I mentioned before.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:Well, firstly, I think, as most people realise, this was a Howard Government measure from the Howard Government's 2006 Budget, I seem to recall  -  six or seven. And it's flow through effect is to commence operation as of 1 July 2008.
When our Government's Ministers became aware of this, they began immediately their consultations with the sector, the community and charitable sector, to make sure that we could bring about changes to again do everything possible to eliminate unintended consequences for those working in the church, charitable and community sectors.
Those consultations are underway. Ministers are working hard on this at the moment together with their advisers. We have an objective of reaching a policy decision on this very, very soon. But as the Minister said yesterday in her statement to the Parliament, it will take a little while to then turn the administrative machinery around. But we are working on this as quickly as we can given that we inherited a set of arrangements which had long been put in place by our predecessors.
And I've got to get back to Parliament. Good to see you.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I'm proud to speak to you today  -  as the first Prime Minister from Queensland to address this Queensland State conference in almost a century.
I'm proud to come here with my Queenslander colleague and friend, Wayne Swan  -  the first Federal Treasurer from Queensland in a third of a century.
I'm proud also to share a stage with a great Premier, who has broken new ground for women in Queensland, Anna Bligh.
And beyond that I'd like to say thank you to this Queensland branch, and to all Queenslanders, for the large number of Queenslanders we returned to the Australian Parliament  -  the equal largest number of Queensland Federal Labor MPs ever in the nation's history.
And beyond politics, I'm looking forward to seeing Quentin Bryce in a few weeks' time and saying, G'day, Governor-General.
This isn't a ‘pineapple coup', as some have said - it's a timely recognition of this great state's role in Australia's future.
Queensland's contribution to the nation
Queensland is in the driving seat of the national economy.
     * Queensland grew 6.8 per cent in the last financial year, the 11th consecutive year in which Queensland exceeded Australia's economic growth rate.
     * For the seventh year in a row, Queensland will outstrip the growth of every other State except Western Australia.
     * Queensland now contributes $187 billion to national income and $35 billion to the nation's exports  -  53 per cent more than just five years ago.
     * In the past five years Queensland has created more than 367,000 new jobs, while the population has grown by close to half a million people in that period.
And this is not the first time that Queensland has led the nation.
Queensland saw the world's first Labor government in the world in 1899.
A Queenslander also led the first majority government in Australian history  -  Andrew Fisher's Labor Government.
And it is now one hundred years since Andrew Fisher first became Prime Minister in 1908.
But today, I come to speak to you about a 21st century Labor government with a vision for a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, a more secure Australia, and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
But first I come to say thank you. Our success last year was the result of many people working enormously hard, and nowhere more so than in this State.
Thank you to the rank and file members of the Queensland branch who worked tirelessly to see the election of an Australian Labor Government.
Thank you to all members of the labour movement in Queensland, whose efforts through the ‘Your Rights at Work' campaign made such a difference on the ground.
Thank you also to our past State Secretary Milton Dick, and to our new State Secretary Anthony Chisholm, for your relentless hard work.
All those efforts helped deliver the largest swing we recorded anywhere in the nation  -  a swing of 7.5 per cent to Labor.
We achieved our best ever two-party preferred vote against the Coalition.
We won 9 seats in Queensland, the best performance in any state.
As a result we have:
     * Shayne Neumann in Blair;
     * Kerry Rea in Bonner;
     * James Bidgood in Dawson;
     * Chris Trevor in Flynn;
     * Brett Raguse in Forde;
     * Jim Turnour in Leichhardt;
     * Jon Sullivan in Longman;
     * Graham Perrett in Moreton, and
     * Yvette D'Ath in Petrie.
Queensland also elected a new Senator, Mark Furner.
And we also say thank you to all of our Labor candidates who fought hard in seats across the whole state.
In particular, we acknowledge the efforts of three candidates who were beaten by thin margins of less than one percent:
     * Jason Young in Bowman;
     * Fiona McNamara in Dickson, and
     * George Colbran in Herbert.
As we welcome the new members of our movement, we also note with sadness the passing last year of those who fought the fight and kept the faith.
Clem Jones made an immeasurable lifelong contribution to Queensland and the Labor Party, and especially to building the modern city of Brisbane.
And Tom Burns was the heart and soul of our movement for half a century.
Today I also want to thank Premier Anna Bligh for her leadership of this great State.
Anna is a leader who looks over the horizon to the long-term challenges facing the State.
She's a genuine partner in building a new, modern Australian Federation that will deliver a better deal for Queensland.
     * A better deal through improved health services.
     * A better deal through cutting regulation for business.
     * And a better deal through a genuine national partnership in building the infrastructure Queensland needs for now and for the future.
Governing for the future: Labor's great tradition
The great task of Labor governments  -  whether at a Federal or State level  -  is to govern for the future.
We are the party tasked with navigating the nation's future.
Opposing us is a party lost in the past.
That is why our Labor Governments are committed to reform.
To build a stronger Australia.
To build a fairer Australia.
To build a forward-looking Australia, ready for the challenges of the future.
Think of the great legacy of Andrew Fisher, Queensland's first Prime Minister.
He built a stronger Australia through a program of nation-building:
building the fundamentals of national defence policy including establishing the Royal Australian Navy in 1910;
     * establishing the seat of national government in the Australian Capital Territory, and
     * establishing the Commonwealth Bank.
Under Andrew Fisher, Labor also built a fairer Australia:
     * extending old age and invalid pensions;
     * building a fairer industrial relations system, extending the arbitration system and introducing workers' compensation for Commonwealth employees, and
     * introducing a baby bonus for mothers and helping reduce infant mortality.
These measures helped provide financial security for generations of Australians.
One hundred years later, new challenges fall to us.
Our challenge is to build a modern Australia that's capable of tackling the challenges of the new century that is now unfolding.
We've come to government amidst what the International Monetary Fund described as the greatest global financial shock since the Great Depression.
We have come to government at a time when the nation has been hit by the greatest global oil shock in more than thirty years.
And we've come to government with the highest inflation rate in 16 years, with ten interest rate rises in a row after the Australian people had been told that interest rates would be kept at record lows.
And in a longer term sense, the global economic map is now being re-drawn by the rise of China.
The rise of India.
And the great global and environmental challenge that is climate change.
In this time of great change, our task is to make Australia stronger and fairer, and to equip Australia with the long term strength to tackle the challenges of the 21st century.
A stronger Australia
The Government inherited an economy that had been weakened by years of long-term neglect.
The previous Government had fed the demand side of the economy with its lavish spending, but ignored the supply side  -  the nation's skill base, its infrastructure and regulation reform.
The result was the fastest-rising inflation in 16 years, and an increasingly uncompetitive economy.
These were unusually difficult economic conditions in which to frame a Budget.
But we delivered a responsible Budget, that addressed both the immediate and longer term challenges facing the economy.
We achieved a strong surplus of $22 billion and made tough spending decisions, reducing spending by over $7 billion.
This means that fiscal policy is targeted at fighting inflation and ease pressure on interest rates.
Looking forward, we must retain this fiscal discipline.
Because we must ensure that government spending does not fuel inflation, and we must focus spending on our long-term priority to lift productivity growth by investing in the future.
That is why the Government has begun an education revolution  -  with the long term objective of building the best educated, best trained and best skilled workforce in the world.
The Budget included major new initiatives in early childhood education, computers and trades training centres in every secondary school, 630,000 new training places over the next five years and thousands of new university scholarships.
But beyond this year's Budget, we've also established the $11 billion Education Investment Fund for the future  -  to invest in the 21st century needs of our universities and TAFE colleges.
Advanced infrastructure is also critical to building a stronger economy.
The Government has now established a $20 billion Building Australia Fund to fund future infrastructure needs.
We've also established Infrastructure Australia, the lead agency that will bring together Commonwealth and State expertise on infrastructure planning.
Its infrastructure audit will be completed early next year, providing us with a national Infrastructure Priority List by March 2009.
Our current competitive assessment process will determine the private sector partner for the new, high-speed, National Broadband Network, which will bring Australia fully into the digital economy of the 21st century.
The Government has also begun a new era of Commonwealth/State relations, to end the blame game, build a modern Federation and move towards a seamless national economy.
This is a big agenda. Andrew Fisher began working on matters like uniform railway gauges a century ago  -  and yet in 2008 we still don't have a national system of business name registration.
But the good news is, we are making progress. We are working through 27 priority laws for regulation reform.
And I salute the work being done by Craig Emerson in this important task for the Federation.
And I look forward to further progress when COAG meets early next month.
Perhaps our greatest long term challenge of all is climate change.
As the interim Garnaut Report highlighted, Australia is more exposed to the impact of climate change than probably any industrialised nation.
From the day we took office, we began taking action after more than a decade of denial and neglect.
Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
And we're hard at work in designing the emissions trading scheme  -  one of the most important economic reforms of the next decade.
Delegates, we recognise that we've taken on a challenging workload.
But there's a long way to catch up to our competitors.
The pace of change in the world around us is matched only by the neglect and complacency of the Government that preceded us.
A fairer Australia
If we build a stronger economy for the long term, we can build a fairer Australia.
Like the Fisher Government of a century ago, we're committed to a fair go today for all Australians.
We believe that as a Labor government it is our responsibility to challenge the limitations placed on people's potential by the circumstances they inherit.
...Whether they're born into a remote Indigenous community, a family that's just made its home in Australia, or a fast-growing regional area.
A fairer Australia starts with fairness in the workplace.
Last year we committed to abolishing Australian Workplace Agreements for the future.
This year we honoured that commitment.
The Government is also delivering on our commitment to build a modern, fair and flexible industrial relations system.
We're now building a decent safety net for the future  -  and this week, we announced the National Employment Standards that will be the foundation of the new safety net.
We're consulting widely now, and later this year we will introduce the legislation for our new national workplace relations system.
The Government believes the purpose of a strong economy is that it delivers greater prosperity and a better life for all Australians.
That's why the Budget made no apology for tipping the scales back in favour of working families.
At its centre was a $55 billion Working Families Support Package.
That package helps families meet the increasing costs of living by providing tax cuts, and help with rising child care fees and the costs of education and housing.
Not everyone understands the reality of those pressures.
Last year the Liberals were telling us that working families have never been better off.
And this year, they've told us that rising inflation is a fairy tale.
The Government understands that families are under financial pressure because of rising costs of living such as mortgages, rents, petrol, groceries and childcare.
We know that we can't ease all the financial pressures on working families.
But we can make a difference  -  by focusing help on those who need it the most.
That's why we also made additional provision in the Budget for the most needy in our community:
     * An additional $5.2 billion for Australia's 2.2 million seniors, compared with $1.5 billion in Mr Howard's last Budget  -  giving pensioners $900 in additional benefits compared with $500 in additional benefits under the previous Government's last Budget.
     * An additional $1.1 billion for Australia's 430,000 carers in this Budget - giving recipients of both the carer's payments and the carer's allowance an additional payment this year of $2,100  -  compared with the $1,600 provided in the previous Government's last Budget.
     * For the first time, an additional $500 utilities allowance for disability support pensioners  -  at a cost of $1.16 billion over five years. That compares to them receiving nothing additional under the previous Government's last Budget.
No national government can turn around trends in global oil markets.
But governments can assist by helping the overall family Budget.
The Government has delivered $52 for the typical working family, while Mr Nelson promises relief worth just $2.50.
Governments can also help by boosting consumer power. That is why we are establishing FuelWatch  -  to help motorists get the best deal at the bowser.
Governments can also assist by applying pressure to OPEC in partnership with other governments, which is why Martin Ferguson is going to the meeting in Jedda this weekend.
Governments can also assist by planning for the future, such as with fuel efficient cars.
That's why through the Green Car Innovation Fund the Government is working with the three car manufacturers to ensure we are building the next generation of hybrid cars here in Australia. We are delighted with Toyota's commitment to build a hybrid Camry from 2010.
The Liberals oppose each of these measures because they have decided just to play politics with petrol  -  to do anything and say anything to get a headline.
We're also acting on housing affordability.
In the months ahead, we will also launch the First Home Saver Accounts, we will call for the first Expression of Interest for the construction of new affordable rental properties, and we'll use the Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce infrastructure charges and development delays that add to the cost of new homes.
Building a fairer Australia also means delivering universal, high quality health services to all Australians.
The Government announced a $3.2 billion National Health and Hospitals Reform Plan in the Budget.
This is just a start. We recognise that the health care system needs major long-term reform.
That's why we established a $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund, and a National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. We look forward to its interim report at the end of the year.
Anniversary of the Northern Territory Emergency Response
In building a fairer Australia, there can be no greater priority than closing the appalling gap in life opportunities for Indigenous Australians.
On 15 June last year the Little Children are Sacred report revealed shocking levels of child sexual abuse in 45 Indigenous communities in the Northern Territory.
Six days later the Northern Territory Emergency Response was launched  -  recognising that this was an issue demanding immediate national action to urgently protect children in these remote communities.
Today is its first anniversary, and this morning, the Minister for Families, Communities and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, released a report on progress after the first year.
One year on, the Australian Government remains committed to the emergency response and determined to maintain its momentum.
Its effectiveness is critical to the change that's essential if Indigenous children are to be safe and healthy, growing up in families and communities which nurture and protect them.
We have learnt a lot from the first year.
We've learnt that much can be achieved working in partnership with Indigenous communities.
And that achieving real change involves new approaches and strong, forward-thinking leadership.
Important progress is being made, with more police on the ground, people feeling safer, 11,000 health checks for children with follow-up treatment, a major investment in housing and infrastructure, and 200 additional teachers being recruited over the next five years to teach the 2000 children previously not enrolled.
Income management has now been extended to more than 13,000 people in 52 communities, with licensed community stores reporting increased purchases of fresh food and more money spent on children.
The NT Emergency Response Task Force has now presented its final report to the Government.
It outlines the achievements of the NTER over the past 12 months and puts forward a range of recommendations across the areas of child protection, education, health, education housing, stores and community safety.
We will be closely considering their advice.
We have also begun a review of the NTER, headed by three experienced and highly regarded figures in Indigenous affairs.
We expect this report in October this year, and will then be mapping out the way forward both in the Northern Territory and beyond.
In the meantime, the implementation of the Emergency Response continues.
Progress has been made in the last 12 months, but much remains to be done to meet our targets to close the gap on Indigenous life opportunities.
Planning for the future
Long term policy is necessary for infrastructure, education, health and for tackling Indigenous disadvantage.
But perhaps our greatest long term challenge for the future is climate change.
As the interim Garnaut Report highlighted, Australia is more exposed to the impact of climate change than probably any industrialised nation.
From the day we took office, we began taking action after more than a decade of denial and neglect.
Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
And we're hard at work in designing the emissions trading scheme  -  one of the most important economic reforms of the next decade.
Delegates, we recognise that we've taken on a challenging workload.
But there's a long way to catch up to our competitors.
But the Government is determined to act.
Delivering for Queensland
Today I've outlined a wide-ranging program for a stronger and fairer Australia, and an Australia that plans for the long term future.
It is a demanding program.
But it is also a necessary program.
But it means delivering outcomes on the ground, where it counts.
So let me mention some of the ways we're delivering on Queensland's critical infrastructure needs.
With 1,700 people crossing the border into Queensland every week, infrastructure in south-east Queensland is under great stress.
It's estimated that by 2020 urban congestion will cost families and businesses in Brisbane more than $3 billion.
That's the economic cost  -  but there's a social cost too, with many commuters spending more time in their cars than they do with their kids.
That's why the Government is taking decisive action to combat congestion and get our cities moving again.
In 2008-09, we will invest $826 million in nation-building road projects in Queensland.
This includes $63 million to make an early start on our election commitments  -  getting work going 12 months ahead of schedule on projects like the Townsville Port Access Road and the Pacific Motorway.
We're also committed to the full upgrade of South East Queensland's worst road  -  the Ipswich Motorway.
We've allocated $2 billion to upgrade the priority sections between Dinmore to Darra to six lanes, and further work will be assessed by either Infrastructure Australia and built by either the Building Australia Fund or under the next Auslink.
We've also entered into a $20 million partnership with the Bligh Government to plan the next stage of the Gateway Motorway upgrade.
It's Brisbane's only north-south bypass, it's part of the national network and yet the Coalition wouldn't put a cent into fixing it.
But the Government also understands that Queensland is Australia's most decentralised mainland state.
40% of those who come to Queensland every week move to regional areas, especially to booming cities like Gladstone, Mackay and Cairns.
And the artery that runs through the heart of these communities is the Bruce Highway.
That's why, after years of neglect, the Government has a $2.2 billion plan to upgrade the Bruce.
Over $150 million will be spent in 2008-09 on widening in Caboolture and Gympie and safety and flood works in north Queensland.
Delegates, to build a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia, and an Australia that plans for the future, not that simply allows the future to plan for us - we must remain in government.
And that comes back to you, and your efforts on behalf of the great Labor cause.
We're proud of the extraordinary results we gained in November.
But we would lose the next election with just a small swing against us.
We are in times of exceptional global financial volatility.
We realise that makes it more challenging to deliver on our long term plans.
But it also makes them more important.
We know as well that because Labor Governments are committed to reform, we always face higher expectations.
In delivering our plan for the future, we must govern with discipline, with focus and with absolute unity of purpose.
We must be willing to make difficult decisions in the nation's long term interest.
We are the party of the future.
The party that can best lead change.
We've governed this nation through many difficult times in the century past.
We face greater challenges ahead.
But together, we can and will deliver for the people of Australia


UHLMANN: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Chris.
UHLMANN: Were working families better off this time last year?
PM: Well, we've had a huge increases in petrol. We've had significant increases in the cost of groceries and, of course, the wash through effect still of what's been 12 interest rate rises in a row over many years and that means therefore that there are huge new pressures on working families.
What we've tried to do with the Budget is to provide some help on the way through. Each family's circumstances are going to be different. But we've said we would try to help, and that's why we have brought in the tax measures and the other measures.
UHLMANN: Well, when you introduce an emissions trading system will the costs of living rise higher still?
PM: What we've said, as Mr Howard said last year, is that if you act on climate change and the emissions trading system then obviously there's a flow through consequence for the cost of petrol and the cost of energy. We understand that.
What we will be doing is also providing support for working families, working Australians, pensioners and carers to deal with any additional cost to them.
And also, through the system, we'll also be providing support for business to adjust.
UHLMANN: Can you compensate everyone for the costs, the rising costs, of living?
PM: We believe we're going to approach this in a clear and responsible way, which is why we're putting out a green paper on this matter later in July.
On the question of the costs to be incurred by families on the way through, we will be providing compensation for those worst affected.
We will also be providing support for families in general by one means or another.
But we'll be working this through in detail during the course of the second half of this year, because it is a detailed and complex process. We're going to be measured about it, responsible, clear, consultative and it's going to take some time to work it through.
UHLMANN: Do you think that people are aware of the fact that the price of electricity will rise?
PM: Well, Mr Howard of course, when he was Prime Minister last year said that once they indicated themselves that they were going to introduce an emissions trading scheme, and on top of that, include petrol within that scheme, he also indicated that there would be increases in the price of energy and the price of petrol.
UHLMANN: So how much will the price of electricity rise?
PM: Well, that will be determined once the system and its design characteristics have been finally determined. And that is what we have said right from the very beginning, there's nothing new in that. That all goes down to the target that we have set for ourselves for environmental and economic purposes, which is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent by 2050.
Then, just to explain the logic of it, it depends then on the trajectory that you have between now and then in terms of the emissions you bring down each year. That in turn determines the carbon ceiling, for the economy, and that in turn determines what will be the framework within which a carbon market would operate. And these are the matters which have yet to be determined. So when you ask what will the carbon price be in the flow through, we are some way off having all that determined. And that's why we're going through a green paper and white paper process in close consultation with business.
UHLMANN: It also matters what will be in and what will be out. Will fuel be included in an emissions trading system? Because, of course, you're demanding that the opposition tell us that now.
PM: Well, let me go to ourselves first and then to the Liberal Party second. We've said from the beginning that we believe that the scope of the emissions trading scheme should be as broad as possible. We've said that the fuel and the transport sector have to be part of the overall climate change strategy for the Government.
But the precise definition of the scope of the scheme, that will become clear during the green paper, white paper process.
We're taking our time on this, we believe it's responsible to do that. It takes time to work through the consultation process with business and other affected groups and we have said that from the very beginning.
UHLMANN: You're criticising the Opposition for not telling us what they think about fuel today?
PM: Well, Chris, the contrast which I am about to go onto with the Liberal Party is that one, at 5 minutes to midnight after being in office for eleven and a half years they brought in their policy decision through their own policy paper to introduce an emissions trading scheme.
Secondly, the then Environment Minister said at that time they would include petrol and transport.
And third, since the election they have said that now that's all up for grabs.
The environment spokesman for the Opposition, Mr Hunt, said the other day that they hadn't made up their mind now about whether they would include it or not.
What we have said is we're proceeding on this policy development process calmly, coolly, methodically, responsibly. And that's why we have been out there for the last six months consulting industry. Next stage is a green paper process, following that a white paper. And each of these matters will be dealt with clearly and responsibly through that process.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, do you think Australians, ordinary Australians understand the size of the task that you're undertaking? This is larger than the deregulation of the economy, this is larger than the GST. Now, your timeframe has it coming in, in 2010, are you committed to that timeframe? Do you think this is something perhaps you should take to the people once they know the detail?
PM: Well, Chris, we believe that we've got to lay out a long term plan for dealing with the climate change challenge. You're right to say that this is a far reaching economic reform. It's a far reaching economic reform. And we're not Robinson Crusoe on this. Governments and economies around the world are struggling with the same challenge. But we all know what happens if you don't address it. And that is, that the climate change challenge isn't addressed, we continue to have global warming, and the possibility that it reaches unsustainable levels with grave consequences for the global economy, the environment and the survivability of the planet.
On our own timetable, we are working very hard on this, as I said before. Step one is to produce our green paper on the future of the emissions trading scheme. We then consult further. We will then produce in time a white paper. Our implementation ambition is 2010. And that's the framework within which we are operating.
It's difficult, it's hard, it's complex and you're right to say there's a huge task of engaging the entire Australian nation on this. Because it does affect everybody.
UHLMANN: And to tell them what the costs will be. For example, there's a by-election in Gippsland this weekend. Can you tell the people who work in the brown coal industry what is going to happen to their jobs, what will happen to that industry, what will happen to the assets in the La Trobe Valley when you introduce a price on carbon, and make brown coal which is the cheapest most abundant source of power we have, the most expensive source of power we have  -  what happens to that industry?
PM: What I say about the coal industry generally, and I come from the state of Queensland which is a significant coal exporting state, is that coal has to be part of the long term solution as well. That's why the Government, unlike its predecessor, has a half billion dollar clean coal fund.
The future for the coal industry lies in large part in the development and perfection and commercial application of the clean coal technologies.
There are 4 extant technologies. We are working our way through those methodically. And in the case of the La Trobe Valley, which you referred to specifically, my recent advice was that through our clean coal fund, that half billion dollar fund, we're already investing I believe in one or two projects in the La Trobe Valley to look at the application of this technology to them.
That's got to be part of the global and the national solution and the industry solution for coal as well.
UHLMANN: Isn't it likely that that industry will have to be shut down?
PM: I am a complete optimist when it comes to the future of the coal industry. What the nations needs to set for itself, and the world, is a goal to bring about the commercial application at scale of clean coal technologies.
There is a lot of work, often of a disparate nature, occurring around the planet at the moment on this. But we in Australia are probably among the top three or four research countries in this area. What we've done with our half billion dollar platform, through the clean coal development fund, is to provide a huge turbo charge to the work which is going on in this area. But the ambition must be to deploy these technologies within a reasonable timeframe -
UHLMANN: Will you rule out considering nuclear energy as we move towards the change in our economy?
PM: Just to finish the last point then I'll answer the question you just raised.
And that's got to be a clear cut ambition. If you look at China and India on the coal question, you can't wish away their use of these carbon intensive fuels. Therefore, the problem that we face as a planet, quite apart from the interests of our industry, is to get clean coal technology right, not just in the laboratory, but commercially applied in plants.
On the question of nuclear, we believe that we have a full range of energy options available to Australia beyond nuclear with which and through which we can respond to the climate change challenge, and we're confident we can do that.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks Chris


PM: How are you?
MITCHELL: Ok. Would you allow him to spend five weeks with wombats at this time?
PM: How people choose to spend their leave is a matter for them privately. I imagine when you go off on leave Neil, you did the same.
MITCHELL: I tell you what, if there is a crisis Prime Minister, I would come back and we have got a crisis.
PM: Neil I don't know the individual circumstances concerning the secretary of the treasury's leave arrangements. What I do know is that the economy has been under significant international pressure and challenge since the day the Government was elected.
We had the global financial crisis, which continues. And we have had of course the global oil shock which has occurred over the last several months. And over that period of time, since we formed the Government, the Secretary of the Treasury has not been on any leave that I am aware of.
MITCHELL: Precisely Prime Minister, because it is important. I mean this is, we are in economic crisis and your main adviser is out of contact for five weeks. I mean sure, a week or so, fine. But you wouldn't go on holiday at a time like this, how can you let him do it?
PM: Neil, his individual leave arrangements are a matter for him....
MITCHELL: You are his boss, surely.
PM: Well actually, he works for the Treasurer.
MICTHELL: Ok, well the Treasurer works for you, where does the buck stop?
PM: Neil what I was about to say is, the Treasury is made up of a team made up of the Secretary of the Treasury, a number of deputy secretaries and a management team. When I work with the Treasury, I am dealing with the team of people around the table, each of whom has responsibility in key areas of the economy.
The Deputy Secretary shoulders as much responsibility in that respect, as does the Secretary himself. Therefore, when we are dealing with difficult economic policy decisions, working our way through, as we are at the moment, the emissions trading scheme debate, we are dealing with a range of senior officers from the Treasury and they are highly competent individuals.
And as we framed the Budget, we were as much dealing with the Secretary of the Treasury as Deputy Secretary of his department, of Finance and of the Prime Minister's Department, all of whom are senior and competent economists who have served Government's of both political persuasions.
MITCHELL: So you are quite comfortable with the head of Treasury, the chief economic adviser of the Government taking five weeks off at a time?
PM: What I can say to you Neil is that his individual leave arrangements are a matter for him to -
MITCHELL: There not Prime Minister, you are ultimately his boss. Now, If I am on leave and (inaudible) falls down, I come back and if I don't the boss wants to know why. If you are on leave and a major crisis erupts, you come back.
PM: Neil, I would appreciate the opportunity just to answer the question you asked me before, which is that any individual is entitled to have leave each year. And what we know in terms of the pattern of economic challenge over the course of the last seven months, there hasn't been any opportunity for this individual to take any significant leave whatsoever. Any individual to remain effective throughout the course of the year needs to take a break. On the individual details concerning his leave arrangements that is a matter for him to resolve with the Treasurer, I am not across that at all.
But what I have got to say is, any individual is entitled to ensure that they have appropriate balance in their own personal family life as well. Remember the Government was attacked most recently for working public servants to the bone.
MICTHELL: I understand all that, I just think it looks extreme to me and it is not, in my view, it is not a good sign of leadership in the middle of the crisis that your leader goes away. He's the leader of the treasurers department, you pay him a hell of a lot of money to do that job and he wont be there at a time like this.
Did you see the Wall St figures overnight? 358 points. What is going to happen to our stock markets today? Did you see the world oil price, a new record. What does all that mean? It means crisis Prime Minister.
PM: Neil, throughout the course of this year, the Treasurer and I have been through a whole range of reports from the global economy, including what was occurring in March this year, when the world economy was on the verge of a significant meltdown on the back of the financial crisis.
On the question of global oil prices, they have been going through the roof for some months now. If I was to project out for the rest of the year, there will be a series of adverse global economic events as well. That's the first point.
The second is, the underlying assumption in your question Neil, is that the Secretary of the Treasury is unique among the Government's economic advisers  - 
MITCHELL: That is not it all. Prime Minister, my point is that the economics as you well know, is about perceptions, about confidence, about appearance, about leadership.
One of our leaders is going missing.
PM: Neil the substance of economic leadership means getting decisions right. And if you are going to get decisions right it means having available to you, the range of economic advice across government.
That lies in the Treasury department, the Finance Department, the Prime Ministers Department and of course our continued dialogue with the Reserve Bank.
That is the way in which we frame, through a team of advisers, our position on a whole range of complex policy challenges from the beginning of the year on.
And that will be the case in the future. And I go back to the original point. There is never a perfect time for anyone to take leave. I understand that. I mean, I have found myself in the same circumstance as well and I am sure you do as well.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister do you accept that the average family is $30 a week worse off from when you became Prime Minster?
PM: I have said consistently in the parliament and elsewhere Neil that what we have done through the budget is try and provide support for working families and working Australians, pensioners and carers under pressure. And they have copped a slug in terms of additional prices through petrol, through rents, through mortgages, through groceries and through childcare costs, not just over the course of this year, but last year as well.
We have tried through the Budget, to make that burden lighter but we understand full well, that in the case of many families, it is very, very tough.
MITCHELL: Does that mean your tax cuts which come in next week have already gone?
PM: Every individuals circumstances will be different, but what we do know is that in the first half of the year, we got all this advice from senior economic commentators, not to honour our pre-election commitment to introduce tax cuts. We honoured our pre-election commitments, we have done that.
They flow from the first of July. A typical young family with a couple of kids, one in preschool, one in school, they stand to be, through the measures introduced through the Budget, about $52 a week better off.
MITCHELL: And they have lost what about 30?
PM: They will be facing a whole lot of additional costs, I have never pretended that was not the case Neil.
It is a very difficult environment for families. And what I do know on top of that is one of the big additional slugs in the family budget bill each week, is the rolling cost of interest rates. Remember as of the time the Government took office, we had had 10 interest rate rises in a row, since then we have had two.
My concern, overall through the budget strategy is to do what we can through responsible economic management, not to add any fuel to the fires of inflation because if that occurs, interest rates continue to go up and if that occurs, the hole in the family budget gets much bigger.
MITCHELL: Is it inevitable that your carbon trading scheme, the emissions trading scheme will effect the price of oil, petrol?
PM: Well as with Mr Howard last year, my position is the same as his, that if you act on climate change and you act on the price of carbon through an emissions trading scheme, it does effect the price of energy and the price of oil.
That is the position which he has had, I have had, and Dr Nelson has.
The key question is, on the way through, how do you best support and compensate working families, working Australians, pensioners, cares, to deal with any price adjustment. The principle we have adopted is that we will be providing support, as we will be providing support to affected businesses and we will be working that through our Green Paper and White Paper process during the course of the second half of the year.
MITCHELL: Is it correct that you are looking at a cut in excise?
PM: A cut in excise, you mean of the type that Dr Nelson has been talking about?
MITCHELL: Well a cut in excise to compensate for an increase in petrol price because of the emissions trading scheme.
PM: Our approach to emissions trading Neil is that we will provide support, support to working families. On the form of support, on the form of support, the whole series of options which the government is working through at present.
MITCHELL: Does that include an excise cut?
PM: Well the form of support has to be worked through by Government. And I have got to say, it is a complex process. In terms of the petrol price, that is one aspect of it. The other is the general energy price and beyond that, for example, you know the costs of heating for people who are pensioners.
How do you deal with that? How do you deal with the roll on consequences of higher energy costs to other cost of living burdens for people at the lower end of the income spectrum? All of these things have to be dealt with.
So in terms of how you respond to that, how you deal with it, the means by which you do it, it is a very complex debate.
But the underlying principle is this: we are of the view that if there is an adjustment to the carbon price is to be brought into the economy, and the reason for it is to act on climate change, because the economic cost of inaction, longer term, is far greater than the economic cost of action  -  that on the way through, on the adjustment, which would occur, our principle is that we would be providing support to families, to pensioners and to carers as well as to businesses dealing with adjustment challenges as well.
MICTHELL: Yes but in that environment, is an excise cut on the table, is it one of the things you are examining?
PM: The Green paper process, White paper process will sort all that through Neil, that is just the proper and considered way of doing it  - 
MICTHELL: That means it is on the table  - 
PM: The Green paper and White paper process will sort all that through  - 
MITCHELL: I'm sorry Prime Minister, I don't understand what that means.
PM: It means that we have a whole range of matters to consider on this front.
MICTHELL: Including the excise, the possibility of an excise cut?
PM: There is a whole range of matters to consider on this front. And Neil if you get into the business of ticking things in or out  - 
MICTHELL: I am not asking your approval, I am asking whether it will be considered.
PM: If you tick things in or out, in terms of the various options on the table, both for compensation for families and for support for business, and frankly you are dealing with a huge problem long term of not having clarity delivered through this, through the white paper process at the end.
So I don't think its productive at all to speculate about inclusion of one aspect or another on the compensation machinery. The key question is this: will compensation be provided. The means of it, the means of it, is a separate matter.
MITCHELL: Well, no, the key question is how much compensation will be provided. Will you provide compensation that compensates entirely for the imposition of the emissions trading?
PM: Well, what I've said Neil, is that we will provide compensation to support working families  - 
MITCHELL: But aren't we going to be out of pocket in the end? Are we going to be out of pocket? Or will your compensation, be it an excise cut or anything else, will your compensation compensate us 100 per cent?
PM: The reason we've embarked upon a green paper, white paper process, Neil, is to get...
MITCHELL: Prime Minister people don't understand green papers and white papers. They understand putting petrol in their car and the proposition that it could go up 30 cents a litre because of this. And then they say, ‘will we be compensated for that'?
PM: Well, I notice there Neil you simply take as a given the scare campaign taken by the Liberals of 30 cents a litre  -  what's the basis of that, Neil?
MITCHELL: This is what people are concerned about. Now it might be a scare campaign but -
PM: (Inaudible)
MITCHELL: Well you tell me, how much will it go up?
PM: Well, what we've said is that we've got a lengthy process to work through to adjust this economy to the reality that we have to better cost the price of carbon. And if we don't do that effectively, Neil, over the long term, look at your kids, look at your grand kids, look at the consequences for the planet and to the economy, it's all very bad. So what you can do -
MITCHELL: How much will it mean to me?
PM: Well, if I was going to irresponsibly provide a series of numbers here and now on this question, it would not add to the debate. The responsible course of action is as I've described. It may not meet the tabloid needs of the moment  - 
MITCHELL: Oh, come on. This is reality, Prime Minister. This isn't politics. This is people paying for petrol.
PM: No, politics, Neil, is when you take at first blush a figure given to you by the Liberal Party of 30 cents a litre...
MITCHELL: Well you give me an option  -  and you won't. What I'm asking is 30 cents, 20 cents, 10 cents  -  will you compensate us 100 per cent?
PM: And then inject that into the reality as if it's a given. That's not proven.
All we're saying is that the responsible course of action, Neil, is to do that on the basis that I just outlined.
MITCHELL: Jack, go ahead please Jack.
CALLER: G'day Neil.
My question is to the Prime Minister.
You keep shoving this working families down our throats as though it's some mantra from heaven. My challenge is to you to find one employer that wouldn't let any working person take four weeks of annual leave all in one hit.
Thanks.
PM: On the question of leave, I mean, everyone is entitled to leave, Jack, and it's a question of sorting it out with their individual employer, when it's the best time of year or not the best time of year to do it.
On the question of Ken Henry, which of course is what you're referring to, he's a first class public servant, works extremely hard. Rarely takes a break. And has always been there to assist the Government.
I think the key challenge is to ensure that all of our people are trying to get their own lives as best balanced as they can. It's difficult, it's hard, I understand that. But I've got to say, we need to have our public servants functioning at an effective level.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break and come back with more from our Prime Minister in a moment.
[Break]
MITCHELL: Mr Rudd we we're talking about tough times, and they are tough times. Is it reasonable in these tough times for you to use a VIP jet to fly yourself and your kids to the cricket?
PM: When it comes to the Boxing Day test, my understanding, Neil, is that the normal convention is that Cricket Australia invite the Prime Minister of the day to go down. And so I think I have followed the convention of previous Prime Ministers in so doing, and secondly -
MITCHELL: What's wrong with a domestic flight? Why VIP?
PM: The convention is, as I understand it, to use the normal air services provided for the Prime Minister. I understand there are security arrangements associated with that. I'll get you some further advice on all that. I simply acted on the basis of what the normal precedents were.
And the second point, is in terms of accompanying family, if there is a dependant child, then that child travels with me. There's a non dependant child, then of course we pay for them at normal commercial rates.
MITCHELL: Michelle, go ahead please Michelle.
CALLER: Hi Mr Prime Minister. I don't meant to be disrespectful to you at all but I'm an educated person and I have absolutely no idea what your talking about ‘Green Paper, White Paper'. It doesn't sound like English?
PM: Okay, Michelle, I understand your confusion about this because the emissions trading scheme is really, really complicated.
And, of course, what we are trying to do is this. Firstly, deal with the climate change challenge. What does that mean in practice? Bringing down total greenhouse gas emissions for Australia and the rest of the world.
How do we do that? One of the ways in which we do that is what's called an emissions trading scheme. What does that mean? It means increasing what is called the cost of carbon so that people make better choices across Australia about the use of carbon -
MITCHELL: I'm sorry Prime Minister, I think she's asking about Green Papers and White Papers, not about greenhouse gasses.
PM: No, no I understand that Neil. I'm trying to explain what they are about.
So, the challenge is dealing with climate change.
Therefore, what a Green Paper is, is the Government puts out some options for the community to debate and think about, about how we best respond to the challenge of climate change  -  that's the Green Paper.
The White Paper then follows after we finish the consultation process, which is, the Government puts out its own policy decision at the end of it.
The reason we do it that way is that we have an opportunity to consult business and the community first, in an informed way, and then, having got all those inputs, then come back to a final decision at the end and that's called a White Paper.
MITCHELL: Okay, Michelle.
CALLER: How does that affect the petrol going into my car though?
PM: Well, on the question of petrol going into the car, there are two factors at work here. One is the global price of oil, that's huge, it affects everybody  -  that's massive.
What we're talking about here is something separate to that, and that is, how to deal with total greenhouse gas emissions and climate change and global warming.
Now, the global price of oil is hugely affected, that's because of supply and demand factors coming out of the Middle East, that's hugely affected the price of oil and petrol for you. And for all motorists in Australia. And that's really tough, and its really hard and that's why it's important that we try and provide as much support as possible through the Budget to help you in your circumstances.
On the emissions trading scheme, which is how we deal with greenhouse gas emissions, that is a longer term project going out half a century, and its all about how do we make sure that your kids and your grandkids have a planet that we can inhabit.
MITCHELL: Thank you Michelle.
Prime Minister, alcopops, I mean there's the threat now that it could be blocked in the Senate, you're alcopop tax. If it is blocked, where are you going to get the money? $3.5 billion?
PM: Well, this goes to the question of the economic responsibility of Liberal Party. Because you either have a responsible Budget in difficult economic circumstances, and we've budgeted for a $22 billion surplus to put downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates. Or, you go the populist route, which is what the Liberal Party have done, said yes to any pressure group that comes around, block things in the Senate, and that blows a $22 billion hole in the surplus. So the responsibility lies with them.
MITCHELL: So where will you get the money? If it's blocked? $3.5 billion.
PM: Well, we will continue to apply pressure to the Liberals and we will see what they do at the end.
MITCHELL: Did you Australian Hotels Association, the new head of it, saying that we're becoming to puritanical. We're lecturing people about drinking. Frank Devine in The Australian today, a very funny article about his life as a drinker. Are we becoming a bit wowserish here?
PM: Well I've always said Neil, I don't regard myself as a wowser at all -
MITCHELL: Well, she did say you were an exception because of previous history?
PM: Well I haven't read the article. Who she -
MITCHELL: The new head of the Australian Hotels Association. She said you're not a wowser.
PM: Well, I certainly am not, and I've made that point in multiple interviews over the years.
The question here is one of balance. You know this as well as I do, Neil. You're concerned about your kids and what happens in the middle of Melbourne on a Friday and Saturday night, and the discussions I've had with Christine Nixon, her equivalent in New South Wales, Mr Scipione the New South Wales Police Commissioner. You either say, ‘okay, that's all just normal' or, we try and do something about it.
There's no magic solution here. There's no single solution. But one of the ways which you handle it is in this category of drinks, which we know from the health reports, are particularly attractive to younger women and have led to a huge spike in the take up rate of alcohol by younger women. And because the Howard Government created a massive tax advantage for this category of drinks alcopops back in the year 2000 we closed it.
Are people reacting badly against it? Yep. Do they like it? No. We think it's the responsible course of action? You betchya.
MITCHELL: The Qantas dispute, Prime Minister, do you support Qantas taking maintenance offshore?
PM: Well these are difficult corporate decisions for every company. I can't again say the individual corporate decisions of any major company across the country. We would hope that every Australian company would do their absolute best to source their requirements on-shore because its better for Australian jobs. But we're not in the position, nor were our predecessors, to dictate what individual companies do.
MITCHELL: Were you given any warning that the tyre factory was going to close in Melbourne in the state of the tyre industry in the country?
PM: I was unaware of that personally. What the industry Minister may have been aware of, I don't know.
Of course, that loss of that particular plant is bad news for Australian manufacturing. One of the reasons why the industry Minister and myself were in Japan recently was to negotiate an arrangement with Toyota to have hybrids manufactured in Melbourne, and in Australia, for the first time.
MITCHELL: Several cases with neglected children in Adelaide and Canberra over the past few days which are just horrendous. I saw the parliament debating it yesterday with Jenny Macklin talking. Do you agree with Barnaby Joyce that neighbours have got a bit of responsibility here? If you see this going on, dob them in?
PM: I think the whole community's got a responsibility. And to act sensitively and responsibly. I mean, I think the basic principle here is the protection of the most vulnerable. Little children together with our most aged and infirm Australians, are the two groups who are the most vulnerable. And I think, frankly, that's just a higher call. It sort of goes across everything else so that if you have a reasonable suspicion, or reasonable concern, that a young child is the subject of abuse, I think you've got a moral responsibility to act.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time
PM: Appreciate it


I am pleased to announce that the National Policy Commission on Indigenous Housing met for the first time today in Canberra.
The Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, and I attended this meeting.
I announced last month the National Policy Commission would provide advice to the Government on innovative proposals to improve the provision of housing in remote Indigenous communities.
The Commission has started work on a number of priority activities.
These initial tasks include assessing remote Indigenous housing data to identify gaps, assessing the capacity of existing government programs to address remote Indigenous housing needs, and identifying tangible policy objectives for government in both remote and urban and regional contexts.
The challenge we face in addressing Indigenous housing shortfalls cannot be overstated.
2006 Census data and 2006 Community Housing and Infrastructure Need Survey data indicates that of the 22,000 Indigenous households in remote or very remote Australia:
     * around 7,000 or over 30% of these households are overcrowded.
     * almost a third of the 15,000 houses managed by Indigenous Housing Organisations require repairs or replacement; and
     * almost 3,000 Indigenous people are homeless.
Today Commission members heard of recent Government policy work, including through COAG, aimed at addressing these deficits.
They have been asked to join this broader effort by providing practical ideas and proposals for improving housing for Indigenous Australians across the nation.
The Commission will advise the Government on regional strategies for housing delivery in remote areas that promote the health and economic participation of Indigenous people.
Identifying barriers to the provision of remote Indigenous housing and opportunities for facilitating private sector investment will be a key aspect of the Commission's work.
I congratulate the Commission members  -  Mr Danny Glibert, Ms Leah Armstrong, Mr Paul Pholeros, Mr Joe Ross and Mr Warren Mundine on their commitment and enthusiasm in agreeing to accept this challenge and I look forward to their considered advice over the course of the next year.


Today the Australian nation says thank you to you the men and women of the Australian Defence Force.
Today the Australian nation says thank you to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force for your service in Iraq.
And I can say right now, also, my thanks to the city of Brisbane for making you so welcome today in this welcome home parade. Thank you, Brisbane.
And to be in this great city, in this great city hall, my Mum told me during the war that when she was a nurse at the Mater Hospital, this was the best place to come and meet a man in uniform at a dance.
And she was right. It's the place to be.
There is no higher calling than to wear the uniform of Australia.
You are the proud inheritors of the Anzac tradition. And, that tradition now reaches back a hundred years.
You, like them, are responding to the nation's call.
You, like them, have learned the profession or arms.
And you, like them, are men and women of courage.
And in your lives and in your service, you exhibit these great values of the Australian Defence Force, and the nation honours you.
As the nation thanks you today, for your service in Iraq, the nation also thanks those continuing to serve in Iraq, in Afghanistan, across the Middle East, and elsewhere in the world.
You have served, and they continue to serve, in dangerous theatres.
They serve in difficult theatres.
They serve in bloody theatres.
And the nation must never forget that you, the men and women of the defence force, here today, and those serving abroad today, continue to put yourself in harms way.
That requires courage, and it's that courage we salute today as well.
Today we therefore thank those who have served in Iraq.
Today we thank those who continue to serve in Iraq, and other theatres abroad.
But today the nation also thanks those who make that service possible  -  you the families of the Australian Defence Force.
The Mums and the Dads. The brothers, the sisters, the wives, the husbands, boyfriends, girlfriends, partners. Grannies. And the flock of kids that I see in front of me.
You make it possible for our men and women in uniform to serve because you are their lifeline to Australia.
I honour you the families of the Australian defence community.
The Australian nation must remain vigilant about its national security. The threats from our security remain real, and the Australian Defence Force is the frontline our nation has in meeting those threats. Which is why the defence of our country must remain strong.
Freedom is not for free. Freedom comes at a price. And you are our frontline in the defence of our freedom. And for that, I thank you.
As I have been (inaudible) in Iraq, on one and two occasions, and seen how you have worked in the field, can I also say this, you are not just soldiers, proudly bearing the tradition of the profession of arms in this country, you are more than soldiers. You are ambassadors of Australia.
And I have seen you take the great name of Australia to that theatre, to that troubled land, and advance the great name of Australia even further.
So yours has been a mission not just in uniform. Yours has been a mission beyond the uniform as well. Advancing our great name as a country prepared to lend a helping hand to those in need. And for that, we thank you.
Soldiers of Australia, and ambassadors of Australia, I extend therefore to you on behalf of the Government of the nation, and on behalf of the people of the nation, the thanks of the nation.


PM: I congratulate the National Party on their retaining the seat of Gippsland, a seat which they've held for the last 86 years.
The people of Gippsland have said loud and clear their concerns about impacts on household budgets. From the global oil crisis, and from rising interest rates, both of which hit the family budget hard.
The Government has taken tough decisions, including cutting Government expenditure. But that's been necessary to put downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates because interest rates hit family budgets, household budgets, hard.
The Government remains determined to take tough decisions for the future because that's necessary to deal with Australia's future challenges  -  not avoid them. Because if we avoid them, that puts further upward pressure on interest rates into the future. And that hits all household budgets hard.
It's our resolve, as the Government, to take these tough decisions for our long term future. It's in the national interest that we do so. It's also in the interests of household budgets in the long term that we do so as well.
It means that on the way through that there will be political set backs  -  I understand that. But our resolve to take tough decisions in the national interest and in the interests of families for the long term remains continuing.
JOURNALIST: Does a swing of over 7 per cent surprise you? It's a lot bigger than expected, isn't it?
PM: Well, when you take tough decisions for Australia's long term future and the future of working Australians, it means that there will be political set backs. That's simply the truth of it.
JOURNALIST: Is it a sign, as, Warren Truss says, that rural Australia feels you have broken your promises to them?
PM: All Australians in rural and regional Australia have an interest in making sure that there is downward pressure on interest rates, downward pressure on inflation. Because that affects all household budgets.
We need to take tough decisions for Australia's long term future because you avoid those decisions, it means that there is further upward pressure on interest rates and that hurts the budgets of all Australians, country and city.
JOURNALIST: Do you very much feel like the honeymoon is over for your Government?
PM: The Government's elected to take tough decisions for the future, and that means that there will be political set backs along the way.
JOURNALIST: So this is a set back?
PM: The Government was elected to take tough decisions for the long term future, tough decisions to keep downward pressure on inflation, downward pressure on interest rates, and that means that there will be political set backs on the way through.
But our resolve remains to act and to govern in the national interest, and to act and govern in the long term interests of all Australian families. If you avoid those challenges, the problem gets worse longer on.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's about time we had a by-election in Mayo now?
PM: What Mr Downer does is a matter for Mr Downer and the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Liberal Party (inaudible) to distract from the Gippsland results?
PM: Well, that's a matter for the Liberal Party.
I'm elected to govern for all Australians, and tough decisions are necessary for the long term.
Family budgets are under real pressure. Household budgets are under real pressure. Which is why we have got to continue to make tough decisions to put downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates - because interest rates are the enemy of all families.
JOURNALIST: Speaking of tough decisions, does New South Wales Labor have some tough decisions to make about its leader? Would you support John Watkins as Premier?
PM: Oh, this is a matter entirely for the New South Wales branch of the Labor Party.
I've always expressed my support for the Premier, and that continues to be the case.
JOURNALIST: But would you support John Watkins if he became Premier?
PM: I've always supported Premier Morris Iemma, that remains the case.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we've seen a spate of child neglect cases around the country. I'm just wondering if there's any plan for like a federal oversight in the same way that you've talked about for health for child protection bodies within the state?
PM: You know, I think, as a nation, we must do better and can do better for the protection of our little ones. I think that would be the feeling of all Australians, particularly on a day like today.
A national framework for child protection is necessary. We can do better, and must do better, for the protection of our little children because what's happening is absolutely revolting.
JOURNALIST: Just on Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe's due to be sworn in. Do you have any plans to make any representations about what is happening over there on the international stage?
PM: Mr Mugabe has no political legitimacy at all. What we've seen is the destruction of democracy in Zimbabwe. And Mr Mugabe's legitimacy should be challenged by the entire international community, and not just by Australia.
In Zimbabwe, the people who suffer are the poor people of that country. I've been there for a few weeks myself some years ago. People should not be suffering from a lack of food in a country so rich in resources. In Zimbabwe they are because Robert Mugabe's destroyed the country's economy, destroyed their democracy. He deserves the universal condemnation of the international community.
Australia for its part will now examine a tougher range of sanctions against members of the Zimbabwean regime.


STEVENS: Good morning Prime Minister Rudd. Welcome to Mackay.
PM: It's good to be back in Mackay. It's terrific. I've got to say I was up here in February in the floods and it's good to see that so much progress has occurred now in recovering from the flood. Although I still understand there's a lot of work to be done.
STEVENS: And where are you this morning?
PM: At the Mackay Marina, and I've got to say, it's stunning. Having flown out of Canberra and Sydney in recent days, this is a beautiful part of the world. People living up here you all know you're in paradise, but those of us who visit know you are.
STEVENS: We need you to visit more often.
PM: Well, twice since I been Prime Minister and I've only been Prime Minister for six months and I think I was here a couple of times last year as well. But this time I brought the entire Cabinet.
STEVENS: So tell me why is it important to bring the Community Cabinet to Mackay?
PM: Well, it's like this - it's a new way of governing in Australia whereby we bring the Cabinet to the people. The National Government has never done this before, and we think it's the right way to go. This is the fourth one we have done in six months. We've been so far on the outskirts of Brisbane, we've been in Perth in Western Australia and we've been in Western Sydney.
We're here in Mackay, yesterday, and we have a further regular Cabinet meeting here in Mackay at the city council chambers today. And this is part and parcel of providing the local community with an in your face opportunity to put to members of the Cabinet any question they've got. And if you're a community organisation to then have an opportunity for an hour or so to sit down with individual appointments with Ministers about your particular concerns.
So, we think it's the right way to go and we got a whole lot of interesting proposals from people here yesterday.
STEVENS: So what did you take out of some of the questions you were addressed with yesterday?
PM: A lot of concerns were raised about the affordability of housing here in this region. Obviously off the back of the mining boom, and other needs. The Housing Minister who's with us Tanya Plibersek has been talking with local community organisations and the council about that. We have a national housing rental affordability fund which we may seek to deploy in this region, but the details of that will be sorted out with her.
We also, of course, received many representations about the needs of local roads including the Peak Downs Highway. And on top of that of course basic concerns about costs of living. Particularly people's concerns about the concentration of supermarket power.
STEVENS: Obviously we're going to talk about housing affordability. It's not something that we're proud off that we're the sixth least affordable in the country. What solutions can we expect?
PM: We've been in Government for six months and it's a bit hard to turn things around having had our predecessors in office for 12 years. When we took over in Canberra, their previous Government did not even have a Housing Minister. We now have one and that's Tanya.
And since then we've announced three new plans coming to more than $1.5 billion.
One is to provide assistance for first home buyers through first home saver accounts. Whereby, if they save money on their first deposit, we provide them with preferential tax treatment so that they can accumulate a deposit earlier than would otherwise be the case. That's for first home buyers.
Secondly, there's a new fund which we've established which deals with local government infrastructure charging on new developments. Often when people go out to buy a house in a new housing development there is a real problem in terms of the amount that's loaded on to the house price from new infrastructure development. That is, not just curbing and channelling but also often additional community infrastructure as well - adding 50, 100 and sometimes $150,000 to the cost of a house.
What we've done is said we will partner with various local authorities around the country to bring down those infrastructure charges on new developments by as much as 20 per cent. Now, again the Housing Minister will decide in partnership with various local authorities around the country which ones we can work with, and on what projects, but we intend to have a go at this.
And the third one is rental affordability. And people in rental accommodation, particularly who may not be here for a long time, it's a real problem in terms of getting access to affordable rents, and that's why we have got a half billion fund for this as well. To co-invest, effectively, with private developers in new affordable rental accommodation whereby a proportion of the new apartments would be at, say, 20 per cent less than the normal market rent.
These are three new programs we brought in. They don't solve the problem, but they represent a step forward.
STEVENS: Prime Minister, you did mention people who aren't going to be here for a long time. That remains one of our biggest issues, because of the affordability, its hard to attract doctors, teachers and police for the region and then keep them here because they come, they realise how unaffordable it is and then tend to move on. Could specialists be offered tax relief to live in the region?
PM: The Health Minister is in discussions with her state counterparts at present, that's Nicola Roxon, who was here yesterday and today as well about the particular needs of rural and regional Australia. I'm sure she'll take that matter up further with the local authorities here as well.
Part of the underlying problem we've got is this: we had a period back there in the 90s where we just weren't training enough people through the universities, particularly doctors and particularly medical specialists, and the flow through effect of that decade later is terrible.
The previous Government really dropped the ball on this big time and now we're paying the price for it.
We're trying to turn things around, it will take time and it's very difficult in six months, which is how long we've been in office, to turn around problems which have been accumulating for the last decade.
But you're right, this is a problem. Last night at the civic reception I attended down at the surf club, local representatives of a couple of the local hospitals, the Mackay Base and the private hospital, told me about the particular problems which now exist in terms of orthopods. That's a real problem. But the Health Minister will do what she can, in partnership with her state colleagues, to try and turn this around. But it's not easy.
STEVENS: The other people it really does affect is pensioners, they voiced their opinions on their situation yesterday. Luckily you were spared the same sort of protests we saw in Melbourne. They are particularly suffering in this area, what can be done?
PM: Well, pensioners and carers are doing it tough and that is why in the Budget, we have introduced a substantial $5.1 billion increase in what is called the carers and pensioners utilities allowance. In the past that was $107 a year and now that has been increased to $500 a year. That costs us $5.1 billion, that is one step.
We will also be examining the long term redesign of the retirement income system through what is called the Henry Commission of Inquiry. That is under way through the Secretary of the Commonwealth Treasury at present.
But that $5.1 billion investment is not only new in the utilities allowance, it is also continuing. So that is one measure designed to assist pensioners and carers right now.
STEVENS: When do you expect we will see the results of that inquiry?
PM: It is not due to report until the end of next year because it is totally related to the tax system, the income support system and the retirement income system. We have not had a root and branch review of the total system until, for about the last quarter of a century.
But on the particular question of pensions themselves, of course we expect an earlier report in the first quarter of next year. The Henry Commission will deal with the totality of tax, income support, retirement income, and it has got this spread of review activity which goes out from now until the end of next year but because retirement income is so important, then we expect a report in the first quarter of next year.
STEVENS: I spoke to the mayor of the Mackay Regional Council Col Meng earlier this morning, he suggested that you were going to make an announcement that could effect the future of Mackay. Can you give me more details of that?
PM: Well that's nice of Col to say so.
STEVENS: Well I guess we are hoping.
PM: I had a good chat with Col yesterday about local needs, and it is quite plain that you have got big challenges here in the area. But if I could just make one point about the flow through effect of what happens with the big changes to the tax system, the childcare tax rebate which flow from tomorrow the 1st of July. I mean if you are a young family, a typical young family with a child at preschool and one at school, then because of the changes to income tax, the education tax refund and the childcare tax rebate, then on average we would expect some, a family such as that to be $52 a week better off.
The education tax refund - right here in Mackay in this region, there are some 15,000 students in Mackay in the region who would be eligible to claim this refund. And that will provide a total benefit across this region of up to $7.5 million a year.
The childcare tax rebate, about 7000 children in the Mackay region would be eligible for that in terms of their being within the age bracket for which the childcare tax rebate applies and that goes up from 30 per cent to 50 per cent for out of pocket childcare costs up to $7500 a year.
Now all those start flowing from tomorrow and other things like the teen dental program as well, which will provide a $150 voucher for an annual dental check and about 5000 young people in the Mackay region who would benefit from that.
All these measures are national measures but they apply to very large groups of people here in this region as well.
STEVENS: What about the suggestion that childcare centres are raising their prices since this rebate came in effect?
PM: Well we have seen some evidence of that around the country and no one wants to see childcare costs jacked up artificially.
And the Deputy Prime Minister has already indicated her concern about any excessive increases. But there have of course increases in previous years. Our response to that has been to make sure that this has been a substantial increase in the childcare tax rebate and therefore provide a substantial additional benefit to working families under financial pressure.
We cant guarantee the cost or price outcomes in any individual childcare centre but we at least want to be doing our bit to make sure that we are making it easier to cope with financial pressure.
Also under the previous government the average fee for a child in full time long day care increased by almost 80 per cent. So price increases are not new. But this is a very big increase in the childcare tax rebate.
STEVENS: The mayor, while we are talking about mayors, the mayor of the Whitsunday Regional Council has addressed the issue of infrastructure for Abbot Point. Is there the chance that the Government may be able to help out? Obviously in turn securing the investment of Chalco in the region.
PM: Well the Mayor had a good conversation with me yesterday about the particular needs at Abbott Point and certainly the people from the region should be congratulated for their success so far with their negotiations with Chalco.
What I agreed with the mayor yesterday, is that in the coming months that Minister for Infrastructure Anthony Albanese would sit down with him to work out what we could do in partnership with the local area. I don't want to pre-empt any of that because this is a very large scale investment. You have got to be very clear cut about where responsibilities stop and start between the Federal Government and the State Government and the private developer.
But as I said in my earlier remarks, we want to be partners with local authorities and we will work with them to the greatest extent that we can.
But they should be congratulated for the great success they've had so far in terms of achieving the status they have with Chalco in what, I'm advised, stands to be a $3 billion plus investment.
STEVENS: We've mentioned the fact that you've already, you've spoken to two of our regional Mayors, Whitsunday Regional Mayor Mike Brunker and Mackay Regional Council Mayor Col Meng. Has the recent amalgamations across this state made it easier for you to have contact with local council representatives?
PM: Oh look, whenever I've travelled before, either Leader of the Opposition or now as Prime Minister, I always make a point of linking up with the local authorities wherever I am. And I don't think it's easier or harder, that's a matter for local people to sort out. And I know that's been a controversial process with the State Government.
Also, you mentioned local Mayors. Apart from the Mayors of Whitsunday and Mackay Region, I also caught up briefly last night at the function with the Mayor for Burdekin. So we had a good general discussion about the range of local authority needs in this area, focussing not just for example, on the Abbott Point proposal, but broadly the infrastructure needs of the wider region.
STEVENS: Also, how much can you tell me about the emissions trading scheme which is supposedly releasing more details on today?
PM: Well, we aren't releasing further details on that today. We have a long term process of developing our policy in this very complex area.
Essentially it's this  -  climate change is real. International scientists through the United Nations panel have agreed that it is real and it is happening. And the economic costs of inaction are far greater than the economic costs of action.
What the scientists tell us, that if temperatures continue to increase we're going to face large scale bleaching of the Barrier Reef, the loss of up to 80 per cent of the wetlands in Kakadu, extensive droughts across south-eastern and south-western Australia, a large impact on agriculture, large impact on tourism. All these are economic costs.
So, the argument we put as the new Government of Australia is you either stick your head in the sand and hope that it all goes away, which is what the Howard Government did, or you can act, and act in partnership with Governments around the world.
And in acting, it requires us working at multiple levels. Global negotiations, that's why we've ratified Kyoto, so that we can be around the negotiating table with other Governments.
Secondly, on top of that also acting in particular areas like boosting the mandatory renewable energy target so that solar has a bigger role the play in the future. As well as introducing an emissions trading scheme. And on the emissions trading scheme, we will in due course be releasing a Green Paper which outlines some of the Government's thinking on how this should be unfolded. It will be a tough area of policy, but it's a necessary area of policy to bring about longer term, an economy in Australia capable of dealing with a lower carbon world.
STEVENS: Obviously we're aware of the importance of the coal industry throughout this region. Do you have to tread carefully not to step on the toes of that industry?
PM: Well I'm a Queenslander, I'm a big believer in coal. And, this is Australia's largest coal producing state and Australia is the world's largest coal exporter.
That's why the Government, for the first time in the nation's history, has established a half billion dollar national clean coal fund. And from that fund already we are participating in projects aimed at bringing on stream large scale clean coal power generation plants over time.
We've got to take this new technology of clean coal from the laboratory, commercially apply it, in power stations at scale so that the world can see that this technology is capable of being commercially applied.
And we have hit the ground running with this. A half billion dollar fund. I think it's really important. We need to be part of the global solution when it comes to the future of coal, not just part of the problem. And that's why we have got our shoulder behind the wheel with this large investment.
So I'm an optimist about the future of the coal industry. And it's part and parcel of the long term solution of dealing with the climate change challenge.
STEVENS: Prime Minister, I must say, you sound very relaxed the morning. Obviously the Mackay Marina works for you?
PM: It's a fantastic part of the world. It is just stunning  -  it's stunningly beautiful up here. Flying in on the plane and just looking at the cane fields and what has happened in terms of local development and out to the Whitsunday's, this is an extraordinary part of the world. And people who live here, I think you know you're in paradise. Those of us who visit it certainly know you are.
STEVENS: We do, we love the area, and we're glad to have you here. Just before you go, one quick question  -  State of Origin Wednesday night. Score?
PM: Not predicting the score, but I am predicting who is going to win, and it starts with ‘Q' and ends with ‘D'.
STEVENS: Fantastic. Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Good on you, thanks very much.


PM: Well it's great to be back in Mackay and it is great to be back here with the Cabinet, the Cabinet of the Australian Government. It's taken 108 years for the Australian Government to bring the Cabinet to Mackay and we made it. And I'm pleased that we've done so in the first 6 months of this new Australian Government.
We've committed to our Community Cabinets every couple of months or so around the country. We think it's a good way for the Government to engage the community. And whether its here or whether its in Western Sydney, the outer suburbs of Brisbane or the southern suburbs of Perth where we've been so far, it's for us a very important way of hearing what the community is saying to Government about their needs.
Also its great to be here at St Francis Xavier School in Mackay and to look first hand at the great work they do in their after school care program but as it is today their vacation care program as well.
It's also good to be here today on the Treasurers birthday. Happy birthday Treasurer.
TREASURER: Thank you.
PM: He's an end of financial year Treasurer, is that right? I'll talk about a few things. One is the importance of what starts up on the 1st July. What starts up on the 1st of July for helping with the education costs faced by Australian parents, and also what starts up on the 1st July in terms of the tax cuts for so many Australians and the Treasurer will talk about that in a minute.
First of all: Education Tax Refund. The message to Australian parents is that from the 1st July please start keeping your receipts. Because the education tax refund starts to kick in as of this coming financial year.
That means you should be keeping receipts for what you spend on Laptops, home computers and associated costs, home internet connections, printers, education software. Also trade tools for use at school, textbooks, stationary.
And remember Education Tax Refund is to help parents meet the costs which they face in educating their children, particularly in the age of the digital revolution. And there's always a demand for new software, always a new demand for a new printer, always a demand for something which is necessary by way of the computer upgrade.
So what does this provide? For up to $1500 a year for secondary school students  -  keep your receipts. Submit them and there will be a tax refund of 50% on that. And for primary school students $750 a year and for again a 50% refund on that.
So for the Education Tax Refund the message is keep your receipts from the 1st July, because this is really important for the future. From the 1st July we'll be helping parents meet these additional costs for educating their secondary school and primary school kids and it will be important for all parents to keep their receipts.
Second thing I'd talk about also from the 1st July is the increase to the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30% to 50%. This centre here at St Francis Xavier I've just been told is a fully accredited centre and therefore parents here have access to the Child Care Tax Rebate.
From the 1st July the Child Care Tax Rebate goes up from 30% to 50%. From the 1st July it goes to a ceiling of $7,500 and that means that you have that additional help in meeting the child care costs and wider therefore education support costs of your children. And certainly those whom we've spoken to here this morning appreciate the fact that this additional assistance will be provided.
The third thing I'd talk about is of course our computers in schools program. This is an important way of preparing the next generation of Australians for the digital revolution. We don't want to see Australia with a digital divide between those who have access to computers and those who don't.
We want kids in our secondary schools across the country from year 9 above to have access to computers in their classrooms. That's why we have committed to a national program to bring in access for kids for computers from year 9 and above, year 9, year 10, year 11, year 12.
Let me give you a practical example here in Mackay. In round one of the funding alone we have provided an allocation of some $116 million nationwide. What does that mean as far as Mackay is concerned. Three secondary schools already funded here including St Patrick's College Mackay with 187 computers and Eamon is here as the Principal of that school.
Burdekin Catholic High Schools, 67 computers, Mackay State High, 269 computers. Total computers in this first round for this region alone 523, total cost $523,000.
This is the first step. But it's an important step and I ran into Eamon last night from St Pats just talking about what that means in his school. And it means in his school which is a year 11 and 12 school only, that they will be able to improve their provision of computers, their ratio of provision through this first round from where it is at present to a ratio one is to two and then over time when we go through further rounds of this process to get it up to the target that we have already spoken about. Which is one is to one.
And when it comes to a school like St Pats, if you got $187,000 it gives you an ability to invest in computers in the classroom and in the library in places like that, this is a sizable step forward.
Of course the implementation of the program is going to involve challenges and complexity, that's just life. That's what happens in each individual school community. But the key thing is for the Australian Government to be assisting school communities across Australia prepare their children and our children for the challenges of the information revolution of the 21st century.
Nationwide if I could add this, that $116 million will be provided to 896 schools, supporting 290,000 students across the nation.
I notice today that, I'm advised anyway that Dr Nelson and the Liberal Party of have described computers in schools as a fraud. Well my challenge to Dr Nelson is this: is he going to if he becomes Prime Minister disconnect these computers? Is he going to stop the funding for this computer program? We regard this as a practical support for school communities across the country and my challenge to him is, be positive don't be negative. Don't call this sort of assistance as he has done.
What we need to do instead is get behind our school communities for the future. This is a good program, a practical program. I think those school principals who are receipt of the funding to buy these computers appreciate it and we just regard it as the first step in assisting these schools into the long term.
Now Wayne on the other aspects of 1 July.
TREASURER: Thank you very much Prime Minister.
The really important thing about the tax cuts which will commence on July 1 is that for the first time in a long time they will tip the scales back in favour of working families. Because for a long time in this country under the previous Government tax cuts were skewed predominantly to higher income earners.
The very important thing about these tax cuts which commence from 1st July is that they tilt the balance back to working families. I think it's important just to think about what this will mean for a typical working family.
A typical young family will be $51.54 per week better off as a result of these budget measures which will commence on the 1st July. Let's just take a look at that family.
A couple with one child in primary school, another in child care earning a combined income of something like $87,000 a year will have an increase of $2680 over the course of 08-09.
That's made up of tax cuts of around $20 and of course the rest is made up in the additional benefits that the Prime Minister was talking about before. Additional relief when it comes to out of pocket childcare expenses, and of course, the education tax refund. And it is very important that everybody keeps their receipts so they can apply for the education tax refund because these measures are very important.
Given what has occurred with the increases in the cost of living, the tax cuts are absolutely essential to provide some relief to working families who are doing it tough.
And it is the case that earlier this year when we were preparing the Budget, there was a lot of advice to the Government, ‘don't proceed with the tax cuts.' Well, we have proceeded with the tax cuts because they had been earned by the Australian people. People who have worked hard deserve some relief, they deserve some incentive. And that is why they are being delivered.
We did bring down a tough Budget, we did cut back on spending, but we made room to deliver the education tax rebate. We made room to deliver addition support for parents with out of pocket childcare expenses, so important to the success of centres such as this that we are visiting today.
This relief enables those parents who are having their children looked after here, to go to work and to contribute to the economy and we need all parents out there participating in the workforce. But they can only do that if they have got the peace of mind and the financial capacity to ensure that their children are being properly cared for at an excellent centre such as this.
Now over and above, over and above the tax cuts which will commence, the Government also in the budget made provision for additional assistance to some people who are on the lowest incomes in our community and really doing it tough.
For example, we increased the utilities allowance for pensioners, for aged pensioners, disability support pensioners and carers. That is now $500 a year and the second payment for the utilities allowance is now coming through in the next week or so.
That is something like $5 billion has been allocated to the utilities allowance over the next few years and over the forward estimates.
That is once again concrete recognition that many people on low and fixed incomes out there are doing it really tough. So these are also essential measures which are in the system, and providing relief to those out there that are doing it tough, given the cost of living pressures.
PM: Okay folks, over to you.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, do you have any advice on how much cost of living pressures increases - housing, petrol, groceries - are eroding family budgets?
TREASURER: There is no doubt that there has been a significant increase in the cost of living in recent times. It would be a bit early to be making any accurate predictions of what's occurred through the increases say in the price of petrol in recent of times.
But just consider this fact. This global oil shock has resulted in, on average, an increase of about 30 cents per litre of petrol since the beginning of this year. So that certainly has an impact on all of those people who are driving cars, doing long commutes, living in regional areas such as this.
You talk to people in this region as we have been doing over the last 24 hours. I mean, people are reliant upon their vehicle to get to work. They do long commutes to work. So providing additional tax relief is all the more important in an environment such as that. But it will have an impact on the overall inflation rate. But of course, our situation is complex. The Government inherited, the highest inflation in 16 years. That was the legacy of the Liberal Party. And in our recent Budget, we put in place the policy settings to reign in spending, but also to make provision for the future, to lift the productivity of the economy.
That is important, to maintain that discipline through the years. And that fiscal discipline will be very important in putting downward pressure on the domestic inflationary pressures.
On top of that we now have these global inflationary pressures coming in as well. And that makes the environment very difficult for a lot of people.
We as a Government remain determined to tackle the inflationary pressures in the economy because nothing erodes living standards more than a high inflation economy. So we will continue to provide the fiscal discipline that is necessary to tackle those pressures and provide relief where we can.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will these measures, kicking in from tomorrow, help reverse that slide in Labor's fortunes that we saw in Gippsland?
PM: Look, I think opinion polls come and go. I mean, and by-elections will come and go. The key challenge is this, to govern for the future. And that means, from 1 July, brining in these practical measures to assist working Australians, working families, pensioners and carers, who are under financial pressure.
On these education costs alone we have got the Education Tax Refund, the first time in the nation's history. You have a computers in schools program to assist schools with this expensive technology. You have this very large increase from the childcare tax rebate.
And then the income tax measures which the Treasurer just spoke of. These are practical measures to support families under financial pressure, pressure which arises from a series of interest rate rises and on top of that, the global oil shock.
It doesn't solve all problems but these are practical measures aimed to support Australians under financial pressure.
JOURNALIST: Is the computers in schools program in jeopardy, at the moment, considering what we are reading about, the NSW Government demanding more money, placing demands on the Commonwealth?
PM: We will, of course, continue to negotiate with New South Wales and other states on the details and the implementation of the program. But the program itself will be implemented because it is a first class program to assist schools with practical needs for the future.
This Government is proud of this program. It is a very good program. We intend to implement this program. If I go to those numbers again, already, within six months of forming Government, we have been able to, through round one, approve funding for 896 schools across Australia, supporting 290,000 students. And in a local area like this, three secondary schools already with grants approved. And the principle over here I have spoken to, Eamon, already working out how that $187,000 at St Pats is going to be used.
This is a first class program to help our kids be educated, with computers for the future, and instead we have Dr Nelson and the Liberal Party saying, ‘all this is a fraud.'
Is he going to say that to the principles of all the 896 schools around the country?
This is a first class program; and it's time the Liberals stop being so negative.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: At our previous COAG meeting the cooperation with the States and Territories on this has an agreed basis. That continues over the course of the next several months in terms of what long term co-investment with the states may still be necessary for the implementation of associated costs on the ground within schools. We understand that, we accept that, that is something we agreed back in March in Adelaide. Those negotiations continue, including with the good state of New South Wales.
JOURNALIST: What is the full cost of your program (inaudible)
PM: Schools program, we have allocated funding for between $1.1, $1.2 billion dollars. And the objective is clear. To make sure that we have got kids in year nine to year 12 that have access to computers at school.
And, for example, again going to the example of St Pats, I was just talking to the principle before, that may mean ensuring that you have got replacement of out of date computers currently in their Library  -  have I got that right, Eamon  -  together with what they actually can physically provide in the class room as well.
His objective, through this grant, is to bring the ratio up to one is to two, and then, through further rounds of the program, our objective is to bring one is to one.
JOURNALIST: It doesn't look good, does it, these documents talk about (inaudible) side deal and other states wouldn't be aware. What does it say about your Government?
PM: You know something, with the implementation of any program involving the States and Territories there is always something which is called argy-bargy. And this is just normal argy-bargy associated with a negotiation with States and Territories to get good things done.
Can I say, this is a first class program, and I am disappointed that the leader of the Liberal Party would be so negative about what 896 schools across the country, and their principals, have already had grants of funding for.
You can either do nothing about the computer needs of our next generation of Australian kids, or you can say, ‘how do you help schools, how do you help principals, how do you make sure that you've got the learning platforms of the 21st Century, how do you prepare them to use the information superhighway?'. Well, we've got a plan for that. It's a good one. But there'll always be argy-bargy on the way through.
JOURNALIST: Have you had similar requests from other states?
PM: Argy-bargy is a national phenomenon. It is not a state specific phenomenon -
TREASURER: It happens everywhere.
JOURNALIST: How are talks going, proceeding in terms of emissions trading (inaudible)
PM: Well, we have been working on our response to climate change since the beginning of the year and since we formed Government. In fact, since we ratified Kyoto as the first act of the Government in December last year.
Tough work, hard work, and it will continue.
We have a Green Paper process to come to next. But that is the beginning of the policy development process. It's going to take a while. Governments around the world are dealing with this complex challenge, it's not easy. But we've got to put our sights also on what are you doing to prepare the planet for the challenges out to 2020 and 2050.
And if you look at these little kids here today, you can either say, ‘well, it's all too hard, I'm not going to act', or you can say, about your kids and your grandkids that in fact we're going to take the right measures to do something to save the planet.
So, the policy development process is underway. A good process. Still got a long way to go.
JOURNALIST: How much pain will there be to energy intensive industries or to users of petrol, and what can you do about it?
PM: Well, we will develop our policy through the Green Paper process, the White Paper process, in full consultation with industry and full consultation with the community sector as well, because there are adjustments across the spectrum.
But we've always said that we'd be providing support to households. We've also always said that we'd be providing support to industries on the way through.
But there is a long, long way to go. The purpose of a Green Paper is to provide a platform for further focussed consultation with industry. This is the right way to go. To have a rolling policy focussed dialogue with industry, and the community sector, to make sure that we do the right thing by the planet, the right thing by industry, and the right thing by households. And it is very, very complex, it's tough, but the Government's determined to proceed.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, given the complexity, can you meet the deadline of 2010?
PM: Oh look, our commitment is clear cut from our pre-election statements on this, absolutely clear cut. And, we will be putting that through the Green Paper process, to industry, and to the household sector.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that you'll be able to educate the public about emissions trading and allay the fears that they might have about how it will affect their lives and the economy?
PM: You know, what I would hope for is that Her Majesty's loyal Opposition would actually regard this as a bipartisan challenge for the nation. I would have thought trying to do something to save the planet, trying to do something to prevent the bleaching of the Great Barrier Reef here off Mackay, trying to do something to prevent 80 per cent of the Wetlands at Kakadu from drying up, trying to do something to avoiding a further intensification of drought in south-eastern and south-western Australia, is the right course of action.
Of course, you can choose to go the cheap populist road and run a fear campaign. And our political opponents began that in the last week of parliament. But you know, we intend to act in the long term in the right interests of the planet and the environment and to do so in a responsible manner which is mindful of the nation's economic interests and mindful of the financial needs of Australian households.
I think we can get the balance right, Dennis, in answer to your question. It's going to be a tough debate. A really tough debate  -  I understand that. But, this Government doesn't resile from tough, tough choices.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how was Gough Whitlam when you went to see him?
PM: In good spirits, yeah. Gough's in his 90s, and we had a good yak, and Gough was full of advice as he normally is on each occasion that I meet him. But, he's been there for a little while, so I'm sure we all hope that he's on the way to recovery.
JOURNALIST: What's wrong with him?
PM: I'd rather not comment on his specific medical condition.
JOURNALIST: Was there any particular advice that he gave you?
PM: None that I'm going to tell you. (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Just quickly, stepping back to Community Cabinet. Why are we in Mackay?
PM: Look, pre-election we said this Government, if it was elected, would engage the community through Community Cabinet.
The Australian Government has never done that before. And the reason for doing it is that it is a great way to put Cabinet Ministers directly in contact with local communities, particularly in regional Australia, because the needs here are often quite different to those which are presented to us by our public service advisers in Canberra.
Why Mackay? Well, this bloke here, James Bidgood the new Member for Dawson, was in my ear as of about 24 hours of the election saying  - 
TREASURER: It wasn't that long.
PM: Okay. Twelve hours. Saying, ‘when are we going to have the first Community Cabinet here?' So, we're here. And it's good to be here.
I was here just after the floods in February. Wayne came up some time ago as well. So you've had a couple of Prime Ministerial visits, you had a Treasurers visit. It's an important part of Australia and the challenges in Mackay and the wider region on housing, on infrastructure, on roads are important for this region. But we've got to get them right for the long term because this part of Australia is important for the nation.
You look at those huge potential developments which have been spoken about in the resource sector, and the needs which flow from that in terms of infrastructure, and the needs which flow from that in terms of housing, you've got to get it right now just for local people here, but getting it right here means getting it right for the nation as well.
TREASURER: Could I just add to that, because I came here last year, I was shocked to find out that my predecessor had not been here. Or if he had been here, it was, sort of, a very long time ago.
This is a central part of our national economy. Vitally important to some of the key industries upon which our prosperity is build. We understand that. And what's why we are moving right around the country, particularly through regional Australia, to get an on the ground appreciation of what the challenges are.
Whether it's Gladstone, whether it's Mackay, or if it's right around the coast, the great sunbelt communities that are building and growing along our coastlines are a critical part of the economic future of this country. And, this Government, this Cabinet, is absolutely determined to be in touch with those communities.
PM: Thanks folks.


Key elements of the Rudd Government's $55 billion working families support package funded in this year's budget will take effect from tomorrow.
These practical measures will help take the pressure off the household budget by ensuring a typical young family with two kids will be $52 a week better off.
The major elements of the Government's working families support package that take effect from tomorrow include:
     * $46.7 billion worth of personal income tax cuts for working Australians;
     * $4.4 billion to fund a new Education Tax Refund, to help parents with the cost of educating their kids;
     * $1.6 billion to increase the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent and pay it quarterly;
     * $490.7 million to fund a Teen Dental Program that will allow eligible families to claim $150 per teenager per year for a dental check up.
These measures complement the Government's $5.1 billion investment to lift the Utilities Allowance to seniors and carers from $107 to $500 annually, and pay seniors and carers their lump sum bonuses in full.
Personal Income Tax Cuts
Starting tomorrow families will benefit from the introduction of $46.7 billion worth of personal income tax cuts.
These tax cuts will mean every Australian taxpayer will have a little more money in the pay packet every week to help meet rising costs of living.
The Rudd Government's tax cuts will provide an additional $20.19 per week for a taxpayer with an income of $40,000 for an annual benefit of $1,050.
A taxpayer with an income of $80,000 will be $21.15 per week better off and will pay $1,100 less in tax over the year.
Mackay families with a typical taxpayer will be around $20 a week better off as a result of the income tax changes.
Education Tax Refund
The $4.4 billion Education Tax Refund will help the parents of 2.7 million primary and secondary students meet the rising cost of educating their kids.
Eligible families will receive a 50 per cent refund every year for key eligible education expenses up to:
     * $375 per primary school child, per year
     * $750 per secondary school child, per year
Eligible expenses for the Education Tax Refund include laptops, home computers and associated costs and trade tools for use at school and text books.
The families of more than 15,000 students in Mackay will be eligible to claim the refund, potentially providing a total benefit of up to $7.5 million per year.
The Child Care Tax Rebate
From 1 July the Child Care Tax Rebate will increase from 30 per cent to 50 per cent of out of pocket child care costs up to $7,500 per child in approved care.
This $1.6 billion investment will benefit around 600,000 families nationally and more than 7,000 children in Mackay.
In addition, for the first time the Government will pay the Child Care Tax Rebate quarterly rather than annually.
Other Programs
From 1 July, the $490.7 million Teen Dental Program will provide a $150 voucher for an annual dental check up for more than one million teenagers nationally and more than 5,000 young people in the Mackay region.
Across Australia 3.3 million seniors, carers and disability pensioners are currently receiving the second quarterly instalment of increased Utilities Allowance, including 31,000 residents of Mackay.
In the last week seniors have been paid a $500 bonus and carers, bonuses of $600 and $1,000 depending on the payments they receive. Eligible seniors and carers will also benefit from an increase in the telephone allowance from $88 to $132 annually to help meet the cost of an internet connection.
An estimated 11,000 Mackay seniors and 500 carers are receiving bonuses.


PM: It's great to be out here at Altona with the Premier of Victoria and also with the Industry Minister Kim Carr. The three of us believe passionately in the future of Australian manufacturing.
We also believe passionately in the future of the Australian automobile industry and that's why we're here today with our friends from Toyota.
Because, what we've agreed recently with the management of Toyota in Japan is that from 2010 we'll have manufactured, here in Melbourne, the Toyota Camry hybrid.
This will be a great step forward for the manufacturing industry in Australia. A great step forward for the future of the automobile industry in Australia. And a great step forward in our response to climate change.
Let's be very clear about the facts.
This hybrid will consume one third less petrol and therefore produce one third less emissions. Good for the family budget, good for the environment. And that's why the Australian Government and Victorian Government are backing this project.
Can I say that this has been made possible at the Commonwealth end as a result of the Green Car Innovation Fund. That's something that the Industry Minister Kim Carr has been behind from the beginning. And this Green Car Innovation Fund forms the backbone, a half billion dollar backbone, to our new car plan for Australia.
Our new car plan for Australia has as its core what we do to make greater number and range of fuel efficient vehicles in this country in the future. That's what the Green Car Innovation Fund is all about. That's what our new car plan for Australia is all about. And it begins with this decision to bring in an Australian manufactured hybrid here at Toyota from 2010.
Over to you Premier.
BRUMBY: Thank you very much Prime Minister and if I could just echo the Prime Ministers remarks today. This I think is an extraordinarily exciting decision by Toyota, an extraordinarily positive decision for the motor vehicle industry in Australia.
It brings together the very best in manufacturing with the combined efforts we've got across all of the Governments of Australia to tackle climate change. And as the Prime Minister has just said that the best way of doing that is through hybrid vehicles.
This is a great decision for the economy because it's going to mean more investment and more jobs.
It's a great decision for the environment because its going to mean around one third lower carbon emissions.
And it's a great decision to for families because if your fuel consumption is reduced by a third or your fuel consumption is improved by a third, then of course, your household budget is improved immeasurably as well.
So, good for the economy, good for the environment and good for families.
This is also a great partnership, I think, between Toyota, the State Government and the Federal Government. This investment, this decision wouldn't have occurred without that partnership occurring. And this is probably the biggest single breakthrough I think we've seen in the motor vehicle industry in decades.
If we want to tackle climate change, the best way to do that is through hybrid vehicles. If we want to reduce emissions in the transport sector, the best way to do that is through hybrids vehicles. And of course the next generation of hybrid vehicles, the plug in vehicles, you'll be able to buy your hybrid car, take it home at night, and if you're a subscriber to green power, plug into the power point and your car will be completely carbon neutral. And in terms of these big challenges we've got in Australia at the moment, how we sustain our manufacturing industry, how we tackle climate change, there is no better way of doing this than through the production of hybrid vehicles.
Can I also just say today, as you know the President of Toyota Mr Watanabe is in Melbourne and of course the Prime Minister met him on his visit. I met the President earlier this year in Nagoya in February. I met with the President this morning and today at lunchtime, the Prime Minister, Senator Carr and I will be meeting again with President Watanabe to have further discussions about Toyota and about their possible investments in the future. And we welcome his visit here to Melbourne and we welcome his strong endorsement of the Government support which has been provided for this great project.
PM: Thanks Premier.
Just before we take your questions if I could just add one or two points in conclusion.
As Premier John Brumby has said, this is all about partnership. About partnership in dealing with the future of manufacturing, partnership about dealing with the future of climate change.
The best thing for the country is to have State and Federal Governments working together on this in partnership with industry. There's an alternative, which is just to have a permanent rolling brawl and everyone blames everyone else for nothing happening.
We don't actually have that view.
We think there's a smarter way ahead. We think there's a smarter way ahead for the Australian people, the economy and the environment - and that's to work together.
One other thing on another subject. I noticed the statement today by Mr Alexander Downer on his future. I would simply wish Mr Downer well in his career post politics. The Secretary General of the United Nations and I spoke last night about his appointment as a UN special envoy on Cyprus. This has been the subject of previous discussions between the Australian Government and the United Nations.
I've indicated before to the Secretary General that the Australian Government fully supports Mr Downer's appointment. We believe that this is an important role for the United Nations and we are completely behind Mr Downer's appointment, something I confirmed again last night in my discussions with the Secretary General Ban Ki-moon who currently is in Japan. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, this hasn't been formally formalised yet by Mr Downer. I don't know if his letter has yet gone into the Speaker of the House of Representatives. So let's take all this one step at a time.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well you know something, as I said, in the 18 months I have been leader of the Labor Party, polls will go up and down on climate change, on political parties. But the key thing is to govern for Australia's long term future.
This requires tough decisions, tough decisions for Australia's long term future. That's what we were elected to do. That's what we intend to do.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm actually not even familiar with the detail of that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: That's a matter for the independent investigation by the New South Wales police. And politically, I propose not to make comment on the content of that investigation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I've got a bit of a noise problem back here.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well look, I think the cost of petrol is hurting all Australians and hurting Australian family budgets, which is one of the reasons why for Australian motorists, we're getting behind hybrid vehicle manufacture in Australia.
What's the core reason for getting behind hybrid vehicles? For the future of the environment, for the future of handling the pressures on the family budget, one third less petrol consumption, one third less greenhouse gas emissions. Good outcomes for the environment, good outcomes for the family budget.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sorry, say that again.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, we had a very good discussion, Kim and myself, with Mr Watanabe and his executives in Nagoya less than a month ago. And I know he already has developed a strong working relationship with the Premier through the Premier's earlier visit to Nagoya this year.
We will obviously discuss more of the details concerning the 2010 project. But we're also concerned about the long term. What we want is to see long term commitment and investment in Australian automobile manufacturing. Toyota is part of that. I also notice that Senator Carr, would note, that Senator Carr has also been in Detroit and has had discussions also with Ford and GM.
For us, the three of us, we are passionate believers in the future of this industry. And that means working in partnership with the big car companies. We make no apology for that. And we will talk, we will jawbone, we will negotiate, we will get the best deal  -  hopefully  -  for the Australian consumer, and hopefully for Australian manufacturing and hopefully for Australian manufacturing jobs.
In the case of hybrids and fuel efficient vehicles generally, the best deal possible for the environment as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, we've always said that when it comes to climate change, the economic cost of inaction on climate change is far greater than the economic costs of acting on climate change. That's our starting point principle.
Secondly, we've also said that through an emissions trading scheme we'd be providing support for families, pensioners, carers in adjustment costs. Also providing support to Australian industry for adjustment costs as well.
We have a long term policy development process underway. It will take us through a Green Paper and a White Paper. But do you know something, tough decisions have to be made.
You can either look at your kids and grandkids and say, ‘not my problem, it's all your problem', or we in this generation can act. And my view is, we've got a responsibility to act. But we are going to do it in an economically responsible fashion, and do it in a way which supports working families, working Australians, pensioners and carers on the way through.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We've said consistently that through our Green Paper process and White Paper process, the scope of the emissions trading scheme would be made clear. Furthermore, what we have said is that we believe the scheme should be as broadly based as possible, and there are clear cut economic and environmental reasons for doing so. And at the same time, we've indicated from the beginning that we will be providing support to families, to individuals, to pensioners, to carers, to assist with cost adjustment. And also, providing support for Australian business.
We've got to do the right thing by the environment, the right thing by climate change, the right thing by the economy and the right thing by the household budget. All of these will require tough decisions. This Government will not be walking away from tough decisions.
Twelve years, the previous Government walked away from this. Refused to ratify Kyoto, said it was someone else's problem, and now, who knows where their position is on emissions trading. Last year they said that petrol should be in, said the Environment Minister on behalf of the Government, this year they say it shouldn't be. Or having, listened to their environment spokesman, it might be. Who knows.
We have a clear cut policy development process on this. And we have been explicit about how it will unfold and that is the process that we will use to unfold the scheme associated with emissions trading.
JOUNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well it is important that we invest within this scheme as described by the Treasurer. But when it comes to renewable energy, can I say, ‘what is our clear cut vision for the future? We want to increase the mandatory renewable energy target to 20 per cent by 2020'. That is what we committed to do. That is what we intend to do.
You see, if you are serious about the climate change challenge, and acting responsibly on the way through, it requires action at multiple levels.
One, a commitment to emissions trading. That is economically and environmentally responsible, a market based solution to dealing with the challenge of greenhouse emissions.
Two, boosting the role of renewable energy through increasing the mandatory renewable energy target. And that is what we are doing and we already have a half billion dollar clean energy fund. That is already existing. And that is in addition to the half billion dollar green car innovation fund. I mean we are active in this space.
Thirdly, there is a big challenge when it comes to energy efficiency writ large. We will have more to say on that in the period ahead.
Fourthly, alternative fuel strategies. Fifthly, public transport. And I am sure we will be engaged in further discussions with the Victorian and other state governments about the big challenge of urban traffic congestion.
Ask yourself this question, how much do people waste each week sitting in unnecessary traffic queues and how much of additional do they put into the environment in terms of greenhouse gas emissions because we have yet to evolve a large long term investment into urban public transport systems with the national government playing its role as well. I think it is time to act.
Those are domestic strategies for dealing with this challenge. Then there is the global strategy and that is why we ratified Kyoto. Very simple reason for that. You can either be at the negotiating table for the future of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions or walk away from it.
Out predecessors walked away from Kyoto, did nothing on emissions trading until five minutes to midnight and now have walked away from it again. Nothing on renewable energy. I think the contrast is clear.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: (inaudible) Look the Government has a clear cut policy agenda. Much of our legislation has been blocked in the Senate by the Liberal Party.
We are a Government of responsible economic management. When you have inherited the highest inflation rate this country has seen in 16 years, as we did. When you had 10 interest rate rises in row, as we did at the time at which we formed office, the responsible course of action is to bring in a significant budget surplus to put downward pressure on demand, downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates.
That's why we have got a $22 billion surplus budgeted for. Our Liberal opponents who once described themselves I think as economic conservatives are now seeking to blow a $22 billion hole in that surplus.
Again the contrast is clear. They have done that in the Senate up until 30 June. With the new Senate we will be negotiating hard to ensure that our legislative and Budget package gets through.
JOURNLIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I think the computers in schools program speaks for itself. I was in Mackay yesterday in North Queensland and I noticed a lot of the incoming criticisms from Dr Nelson on this.
In Mackay, that region, there are three secondary schools who are as of round one of the funding application, have received grants to the tune of something like half a million dollars to bring in 500 computers. And two Catholic schools, one Government school. When I spoke to the principal of one of the Catholic secondary schools there, St Pats in Mackay, he was delighted.
So when the Liberal Party come to us and say, that this is a fraud, I would ask Dr Nelson to go to each one of the principals of the 896 secondary schools across Australia who have been allocated grants in round one of this program, and say to each of them that this is a fraud.
But let me tell you, they don't think it is. They think it is practical help to assist schools with bringing our kids into the digital revolution of the 21st Century.
On the negotiations with the states as Premier Brumby and I know, there is a period that lies ahead of us over the next three to six months to work out our respective roles in terms of additional investment responsibilities on the part of the Commonwealth.
We said that in the Adelaide COAG meeting. The process continues and we are confident we will get a good outcome on it. Good for the kids, good for the Federation.


The Rudd Government today proposed a major new national reform package to establish Australia as a world leader in organ donation for transplantation.
Despite more than 90% of Australians supporting the idea of organ donation, Australia has a longstanding shortage of organs for transplantation.
To address this, the Government proposes a total Commonwealth funding package of $151.1 million, including new funding of $136.4 million over four years to boost the number of life-saving organ transplants for Australians.
This is an important development for the 1,800 Australians on transplant waiting lists.
The key features of the reform package include:
     * $67 million to fund dedicated organ donation specialist doctors and other staff in public and private hospitals;
     * $46 million to establish a new independent national authority to coordinate national organ donation initiatives.
     * $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
     * $13.4 million to continue national public awareness and education;
     * $1.9 million for counselling for potential donor families; and
     * Other significant measures including enhanced professional education programs, consistent clinical protocols, ‘clinical trigger' checklists and data collection for organ transplants in hospitals.
A new national organ donation and transplantation authority would be set up by 1 January 2009 to drive and oversee a comprehensive set of reforms outlined in the attached fact sheets.
The reform package will be proposed to the States and Territories at tomorrows Council of Australian Governments' meeting.
The Rudd Government is confident that in the spirit of cooperation all states and territories will sign up to the new National Plan to Boost Organ Donation.
Transplantation is a highly successful treatment that transforms the lives of individuals and the families who care for them.
Australian families deserve the best organ donation and transplantation system in the world, but our current system falls short.
As a consequence of long waiting lists, Australians spend years with more costly treatments such as dialysis. This costs our hospitals $83,000 per person per year, compared to the cost of a kidney transplant - $65,000 per recipient for the first year and $11,000 a year thereafter.
As Australia's population ages and more Australians are affected by lifestyle diseases such as obesity and diabetes, the demand for transplants will continue to grow.
The package developed has drawn together the best international evidence and practice, as well as the expertise of stakeholders such as the Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand, the Cognate Committee on Organ and Tissue Donation, and ShareLife.
The package does not change the framework of legal consent for donation. The families of all potential donors will be supported to make the choice of whether to donate at what is a very difficult time.
The package continues the Rudd Government's commitment to making our hospital system work for Australian families.
The Government will undertake detailed consultation on implementation of the package with relevant groups including the states and territories.


COAG has agreed to the establishment of a national platform to settle all property transactions electronically.
A single national electronic conveyancing system is a significant step towards creating a seamless national economy in Australia.
Australia's first national electronic conveyancing system - to be operational by March 2010 - will provide an efficient online national platform to:
     * Settle property transactions electronically;
     * Lodge instruments electronically with land registries; and
     * Meet associated duty and tax obligations electronically
The agreement to establish a national electronic conveyancing system is only possible because all states and territories have agreed to cooperate together.
A national electronic conveyancing system will mean consumers across the country will use the same electronic system to settle all property transactions.
Under the current system every state and territory has their own unique property conveyancing system with different processes and procedures, based on an antiquated system of paper-shuffling.
Industry groups estimate a national electronic conveyancing system could reduce the costs of buying and selling property by $250 million a year.
Consumers will save money by spending less on expensive legal and conveyancing fees and transaction costs such as bank cheques.
This national system will mean that whether they buy a house in Darwin or Dubbo, Bundaberg or Ballarat, consumers will use the same online system to lodge and exchange all the documents, certificates and contracts needed to buy their new house.
COAG has agreed to the following timeline for the implementation of a new 
e-conveyancing system.
     * July 2008  -  Agree to form of legal entity for a new e-conveyancing system
     * October 2008  -  Settle and sign governance agreement for a new e-conveyancing entity
     * October 2008  -  Agree on funding for a new e-conveyancing entity
     * December 2008  -  Establish a new e-conveyancing entity and appoint board
     * March 2009  -  Agree on a nationally uniform business processes
     * December 2009  -  Implement any necessary legislative changes in jurisdictions
     * March 2010  -  Commencement of a new e-conveyancing system
This national electronic conveyancing system will require the establishment of an e-conveyancing entity which will be owned by all relevant jurisdictions.
The new e-conveyancing entity board will be skills-based and include directors with banking, conveyancing, information technology and other relevant commercial skills, as well as directors with knowledge of State and Territory processes concerning land registries, duties and taxes.
Victoria is the only jurisdiction that currently has an electronic conveyancing system that allows you to complete property transactions online.
The entity is to assess the Victorian electronic conveyancing system ECV and, to the extent it is suitable, use it as the basis for the underlying software for the new national e-conveyancing system.
The Council of Australian Governments has agreed that the COAG Business Regulation and Competition Working Group will oversee the implementation of a new e-conveyancing system.


PM: Today I want to announce a new $136 million national plan to boost organ donation and save lives.
This $134 million plan is new money from the Commonwealth Government. And therefore, it's important that we make sure this is in place in our cooperative arrangements with the states to make it work in hospitals like this which do such a fine job in this area of organ transplantation.
Our approach is this: rather than blame the states, let's work with the states to help hospitals boost organ donation and save lives. That's the simple principle here and it's an important one.
Why are we doing this?
Around the country today, there are something in the order of 2,000 people on the transplant waiting list, and many more waiting to get on to transplant waiting lists.
It's very important that we act on this.
What will this money be spent on?
This $136 million will be divided in the following way:
$67 million to fund dedicated organ donation specialist doctors and other staff in public and private hospitals.
$46 million to establish a new independent national authority to coordinate national organ donation initiatives.
Thirdly, a $17 million contribution in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs explicitly associated with organ donation.
Furthermore, $13.4 million to continue a national public awareness campaign and public education.
And finally, $1.9 million for counselling for potential donor families.
This is an important national initiative. My view is, there has been too much stuffing around on this question for too long. One level of Government blaming someone else - just hasn't worked. It's time we actually got on with it to try and make it work.
It's proposed that this new national authority to coordinate organ donation initiatives be in place by 1 January 2009.
In formulating this new national plan, I'd like to acknowledge the contribution of the following associations. We've taken advice from the Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand, the Cognate Committee on Organ and Tissue Donation and Share Life.
I'd like to acknowledge also the contribution from the Chief Medical Officer, John Horvath, as well as Jane Halton, the Secretary of the Department of Health. As well as the Minister for Health and the Parliamentary Secretary Jan McLucas.
This has been very much a team effort in pulling together a national response to a national problem. And we need it.
Recently, I convened in Canberra a summit, a 2020 Summit, and there has been, out of that Summit we had calls for the establishment of a seamless national economy, calls for a fundamental review of the nation's taxation system. We've acted on both of those. We have programmes of work now underway across the nation.
One of the other initiatives called for from the 2020 Summit was to fix this problem that we have in this country in terms of an undersupply of organs given the huge demand which exists.
What we have done since the Summit is accelerate our work within the Commonwealth Government, and our consultation with professional and clinical bodies to bring forth this new national plan.
And could I say this in conclusion, the challenge for us is to make sure this works on the ground. This new national plan, this new $136 million national plan for organ donation is aimed, very simply at saving lives.
We will be working with the states and territories to make sure this is incorporated within the hospital system of the country. We want to help hospitals do their job, we want to help the clinicians do their job.
And if I could finally say this to anyone who is concerned about this critical need out there in Australia today, if you're not now on the organ donor list around Australia, please think about it and get your name onto it. You can do it through your local Medicare office.
The second thing is, please talk to your families, please talk to your families. Because they make critical choices at the end of the day when that time comes.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: You're right to say that one the challenges that we faced is that all of our public hospitals are out there doing a fantastic job, doing what they normally do. And often this literally falls off the edge because everyone's busy, they're doing other things. Therefore, you need a dedicated capacity within hospitals with specifically allocated medical staff and nursing staff with appropriate counselling support to make sure this happens.
And so rather than just buck-pass this between the two levels of Government, we just said, ‘enough is enough', here is the calculation of what is needed, and we've done this in close consultation with professional bodies. Here is the funding for the staff that is necessary over this period of time. And we intend to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: Is the biggest problem, Mr Rudd, encouraging the public to consent to donating organs?
PM: My understanding is this, we have a high level of public support for organ donation. The problem occurs at the point at which people arrive in hospital. Often there are problems in terms of appropriate arrangements for family consent at that point. Often there are real problems of the type we have just addressed of having dedicated medical, nursing and other counselling staff to make it happen.
There are other countries around the world which have got this better done than we have. And so we have got to learn from the international experience and that is why I believe and I might ask the CMO to comment on this, what we have come up with is what we believe to be worlds best practice in this new national plan to boost organ donation, and to therefore save more lives.
CMO would you wish to add?
HORVATH: Thank you Prime Minister. As the PM said, we looked at international best practice and saw where countries were doing it better than were, and how we can adopt their practices to fit the practices in the Australian healthcare system.
And as the PM said, we talked to all the relevant people who have the skills and knowledge in this area and built up a package which will reflect that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) What would you be hoping to see those rates increase to with this package (inaudible) announced today.
ROXON: What we know is, what we know is there are nearly 2,000 people currently on the list waiting for transplants and where know there is a larger number of people who are not on the list, that are going to be in need of these transplants.
We of course want this to have a huge impact, make a dent in that list. But we are not going to try to set a figure on it when we are actually now setting up a new system which I think will really be able to fundamentally change the way that we work in this country.
Brad asked a question about public support. There is huge public support for this. What this package though will do is turn that public support into reality by providing some really dedicated staffers in hospitals.
We know that it is difficult for hospital staff to talk to families about organ donation when their primary job is to try to save lives. We need dedicated separate professional staff who can approach the families in a sensitive way with proper training, and this package will allow for all of those things to happen.
So we would like to see the rates improve dramatically. If we had anywhere near the same response in terms of the actual donation rates being in any proportion to sort of public support, in terms of putting yourself on the register, we would be doing ten or twenty times better than we are already.
PM: If I could just add to this and then take the next question. I wish I could say that as a result of this package, that everyone of those 2,000 people currently on the list could be helped straight away. It won't be like that.
But we are determined to turn this around. And having the funding right, having a national strategy right and the proposal for a new national authority for national independent leadership on this, we think is what is necessary.
Because I am concerned that in a years time, two years time, three years time, it won't be any better unless we take action now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
ROXON: Look it is a really good question because it goes to the core of the sort specialist staff you need to have in our hospitals. We need to have people properly trained in being able to provide that support to families.
It is a very, it is always a very difficult situation for families and I think that the staff that are currently in hospitals doing a great job, will be relieved and assisted to know that there are more resources to have some dedicated staff who can provide that counselling support, will be properly trained.
For many families it is a source of some relief in a difficult time, that the organs of their loved ones might be able to save someone else's life. That's the discussion we want people to have with their families, it is a very difficult one. But putting these resources in and having a national strategy to drive it, can make a difference to those very difficult circumstances that people find themselves in.
PM: I think that is really important. I think if you are to try and understand how the, this flow works, it is one boosting public awareness, public information, that is part of the strategy. Secondly, providing counselling services at the critical and sensitive times that you have just described. Thirdly making sure you have got appropriate clinical and nursing staff to deal with the practical situation which then confronts them.
And unless you are dealing with all those things at the same time, then you are not serious. That is why we have said, let's stop stuffing around on this. Let's have a go. And that is what it is all about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well my expectation is that the Member for Robertson would honour her commitment to the Australian Parliament to cooperate fully with this police investigation. I have said already that there are serious consequences which flow from anyone who has broken the law. And furthermore, I've said already that no-one is guaranteed of a future in politics.
I also have noted that a statement from the police yesterday, that they will soon hand a brief to both the Commonwealth and to the State DPPs.
JOURNALIST: Will you be telephoning Ms Neal as (inaudible) or Mr Della Bosca her husband, to direct her to co-operate fully with police?
PM: The statement I have made clearly about my expectation about co-operation is clear cut and absolute.
Which is in the process of being communicated or has been communicated through the Party Whip.
JOURNALIST: If she doesn't cooperate with police with you be expelling her from caucus?
PM: I think on that question, it's important to say this. At the conclusion of these legal processes I'll be making a determination as to what course of action is warranted in terms of the undertakings which the Member for Robertson gave to the Parliament about full co-operation with this police investigation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well actually to correct your point there, there was a statement by the police I think late yesterday on this matter. Within about an hour or so I issued a statement which indicated quite clearly, that was my expectation. And my expectation is directly consistent, directly consistent, with the undertaking which the Member for Roberson gave to the Parliament some two weeks ago.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: That is a matter being handled between the Member for Robertson and the Chief Government Whip as would be appropriate in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Are you aware that she has started such counselling?
PM: That is a matter being handled between the Chief Government Whip and the individual Member.
JOURNALIST: It must be annoying for you though, Prime Minister Rudd, (inaudible) concerned with matters like this (inaudible) you're trying to do important things like organ donation (inaudible) questions about Belinda Neal?
PM: That's kind of life isn't it. You know if you get on with the serious stuff and you hop into it. But other things come up, it's important to deal with things.
Look if you're going out there to the Australian community today and asking them this question, what they want in terms of the future of national organ donation to save lives. I got to say, I add something personal to this, I'm the beneficiary in terms of tissue donation.
I have an aortic valve transplant, I had one years ago. So I'm a beneficiary. I can't sit around and just say, ‘well, you know, don't care about the rest of you'. My response particularly when this matter was raised in this 2020 Summit is let's get on with it. And having visited some of these kidney transplant patients today, and having spoken with the doctors, the good doctors and nurses who work here about those who are in the queue, I mean, we have a huge problem on our hands.
In New South Wales alone the doctors advised me before that in terms of kidney transplants, about 120 a year, is that right, in the wider Sydney area, is that right? And on the waiting list side something like 500 to 600. Let's try and turn this around. I think that's a really important step forward, I actually got to zip.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) what do you put that down to and what can you do about it?
PM: Well on the question of consumer confidence for example, if you were to look around the world today because of the global financial crisis and also because of global oil prices, we have significant impacts around the world in terms of various measures of consumer confidence.
Across all OECD countries at the moment consumer confidence is at the lowest level in nearly a decade. In the United States it is the lowest in more than 16 years.
By another measure in the United States it's the lowest in 28 years. In the United Kingdom it's the lowest it's been in 13 years. In New Zealand the lowest its been in 17 years. We have a global phenomenon here and it's about the global financial crisis which has been unfolding since August of last year.
We have this year the greatest global oil shock in 30 years, and in Australia's case, you also have the cumulative effect of 12 interest rates rises in a row, ten before we assumed office. All this washes through.
The response is an absolute determination to pursue responsible economic management which is why we brought down a $22 billion surplus. Because on the inflation front and the interest rate front the irresponsible course of action is to add fuel to the fire. The responsible course of action through strong economic leadership is to say we will ensure that the Budget surplus contributes to dealing with the inflation problem and the interest rate problem, rather than making those problems worse.
Fighting that fight against inflation is core to dealing with Australia's overall economic circumstances. But on top of that, from 1 July assisting working families, working Australians, pensioners and carers with a combination of tax cuts, child care tax rebates as well as education tax refund, teen dental plan as well as other initiatives flowing through from the Budget to assist people on the way through.
These are tough circumstances. The Government remains committed to a course of strong, responsible economic management but doing as we have done through the Budget, delivering assistance to working Australians on the way through.
I've really got to go. See you folks.


KOCH: To a breakthrough on something we have been talking about for months. Australia's organ donation rate is woefully low. Even though we have one of the highest donor registration rates in the world, following through is terrible. Just 198 people actually donated their organs last year. That was down from 202 the year before.
But now the Federal Government will spend close to $150 million setting up a national organ donation program. It's a hobby horse of the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, he joins this morning to take us through it.
Good Morning to you.
PM: Good Morning Kochie
KOCH: Now, how will the money be spent?
PM: Well, $150 million, basically it splits down like this. About $67 million for the additional medical staff and nursing staff in hospitals who have this as their exclusive job. Because at present we don't have that dedicated personnel who are responsible for this, which it often just gets pushed to the side.
Secondly, we have about $47 million as well to set up for the first time a national authority to co-ordinate all national efforts for organ donation. Because at present it's split up all over the place.
KOCH: Ok you have all these community groups, mainly focussing on registration. so this authority will keep everyone on the same track, talking to each other.
PM: Well, the Chief Medical Officer, who we've had working on this, and the secretary of the Department of Health, Jane Halton, John Horvath have done a terrific job with all their counterparts around the country, and their advice is if you want this to work, you actually have to have this single authority.
Plus, not just an authority, but plus the money to have the specialist doctors and nurses who's job it is to do this. Because we all know these are very delicate circumstances which arise in hospitals.
But then on top of that $17 million for further infrastructure support within hospitals to make sure that you've got the physical facilities to do this properly. And in addition to that, money to help with counselling as well. Because there are very tricky situations with families.
KOCH: That's right. And as it stands at the moment intensive care doctors are in a conflict of interest, aren't they? Their looking after the patient and then having to go to the families and say ‘hey, can we have your loved ones organs', and the families think, ‘mate, you're meant to be saving my loved one, not asking me for their organs'.
PM: Exactly. And that's why it is so sensitive, it's so delicate. But when you're looking around Australia today and you've got nearly 2,000 people who are waiting now on the list for transplants  - 
KOCH: and thousands of others who don't even make the list.
PM: Thousands of others that don't even make the list.
This little girl on the front page of the Tele' the other day, Cordelia Whatman, I think her name was  -  2 years old. So, I mean, there's she, she's one of those 2,000 on the list, and if we can just make a bit of a difference and hopefully a much bigger difference by throwing this investment into it, and the prospects of littlies like that, hopefully in the future they have a chance.
KOCH: This will improve us to world's best practice, and, theoretically we should be then doing close to 1,000 transplants a year. If it's implemented well. That's the big question. It's got to be implemented  - 
PM: Understand that, fingers crossed. This new national authority will come into being as of 1 January. It will take a while to set it up and to get all the dedicated staff within the hospitals, etcetera. But, a year following that, we will evaluate to see what has actually happened in terms of the turn around rate.
But when you have 90 per cent of Australians supporting this, that is, organ donation, but such a low rate of actual donation, then frankly it is the responsibility of the National Government to say, ‘can we improve this?'. It's not going to fix problems for everybody, but we can do as a nation a lot better.
So thanks to you Sunrise and the viewers for getting behind this program. But also, ShareLife and the other organisations out there, the Transplant Society and the Cognate Committee on organ and tissue donation. These have all worked together. And with our health professionals. And supported by the Health Minister and the Parliamentary Secretary.
KOCH: Well, I've got say, it's the most rewarding thing I've ever been involved in, so terrific on the follow through. Now, that doesn't mean  -  today is all about organ donation  -  doesn't mean we aren't going to not hound you on the solar power, we'll do that another day.
PM: Kochie, why does that not surprise me at all?
KOCH: Ok, let me tell you.
PM: But I tell you what, I'll finish on organ donation. As I keep saying, this doesn't solve everything. But all the groups say this is the best way forward. And we'll evaluate at the 12 month point as to whether we need to do further stuff as well.
KOCH: To make sure it's implemented well.
Thanks for joining us.
PM: Good to be here.


PM: The new Australian Government was elected at the end of last year. We were elected on a platform of ending the blame game between Canberra and the States and Territories. And in the six or seven months since then, in the three meetings of the Council of Australian Governments that have been held since then, we have sort through practical actions to give effect to that.
Prior to our election we undertook to end the blame game. Through the work of COAG, we've sort to implement that commitment for the country.
And the reason for it is simple. The overall challenges facing the nation's economy, the overall challenges facing the nation's households demand that we as Governments work together.
The Australian people, rightly, are fed up to the back teeth with politicians at different levels blaming each other for problems which actually have practical solutions available to them.
And that's what we have sought to do through this gathering.
Today we have made practical decisions for the future, when it comes to the economy, when it comes to water, when it comes to health, when it comes to indigenous affairs and when it comes, also, to child protection.
These are challenges which require practical responses, and we've sought to do that through this meeting today.
Firstly on the economy.
Out of the 2020 Summit, we have a strong call from the nation's business community to establish in Australia a seamless national economy, a seamless national market. And there's much work been underway since then through the relevant COAG working group, chaired by my colleague the Minister for Small Business, Craig Emerson. And I would thank him and the various State and Territory officials who have worked with him on putting together a report for us today.
What we've agreed today, as Governments, is to achieve uniform nation systems in 14 areas, including uniform laws in occupational health and safety, a national system of trade licensing, and a new national approach to the registering of business names. These are practical measures. Practical measures which mean a lot to those operating in the business community today.
We've had a long, long time  -  more than a decade  -  where these things were talked about from time to time but nothing happened. What we now have is an agreement to establish uniform systems in each of these areas.
Occupational health and safety, a huge challenge for business operating in different jurisdictions, similarly for trades licensing, and similarly for the simple process of registering a business name. In my discussions with business, frankly, the very practical question which is often put to us as an upfront compliance cost for operating a business across state boundaries in Australia is why do I have to pay and go through the hassle of multiple registration of business names across state boundaries.
This, and the other two that I've mentioned, represent three practical measures of 14 sets of measures which have been agreed on by Heads of Government today. And I thank them for their cooperation.
Secondly, we've also made progress in the area of water. Today we've signed an intergovernmental agreement on Murray-Darling Basin reform. This takes the historic agreement which we reached in Adelaide at the last COAG meeting to the next stage. And this agreement is what myself and the other Heads of Government have just signed in front of you just now.
This intergovernmental agree creates the vehicle for the long term reform of the much challenged Murray-Darling Basin system.
It represents a lot of work between our Governments given the different demands placed on this system by the peoples of our different states. And I would thank the Premiers of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia for their strong collaborative approach in bringing together what has been a difficult agreement.
Secondly, at the immediate and practical level, the Government, the Federal Government, has committed to projects worth $3.7 billion across the Murray-Darling system. These represent significant water projects for the nation. At a time when so many parts of Australia are water challenged and water scarce, this represents a very practical way forward. It builds on the agreements that we reached in part with the Government of Victoria in Adelaide. And we now have similar commitments made to the other states. And the Premiers will speak separately on those and the Chief Ministers, as they choose.
Therefore, what you have on the water front is an intergovernmental agreement which many people said we'd never reach  -  we've done that.
And secondly, what we now have also is practical action on $3.7 billion worth of water projects. I've got to say, that's also where people want to see practical projects happening on the ground.
Third area is in health. Today, on behalf of the Commonwealth, I reported to the states the progress that we've made in the critical area of organ and tissue donation and transplants. This effects thousands of Australians. Right now, we have nearly 2,000 Australians that are formally on transplant waiting lists across Australia. And many more besides who can't make it to the waiting list.
So as both States and Territories and the Commonwealth we have been working through the Chief Medical Officer, and the Secretary of the Department of Health in recent times to make sure that we could achieve a breakthrough on this question.
Again, the 2020 Summit said to the nation, very simply, will you stop stuffing around on this and do something. We've done that. And it's been, I've got to say, a lot of work between our jurisdictions to get it done.
The $136 million worth of new funding commitments from the Commonwealth goes to the provision of $67 million worth of support for additional doctors, medical staff and nursing staff, exclusively tasked with this complex, challenging and sensitive task in our hospitals in order to achieve organ donation.
Another large tranche of money within that towards the establishment for the first time of a national organ transplant authority. And on top of that again, funding for other infrastructure support within hospitals and a public education campaign to ensure that those who currently need organ and tissue donation in order to survive are better served by our national system than is currently the case.
It is a good, practical measure designed to help people currently facing real challenges in this area.
Fourth area, Indigenous early childhood education. Today we agreed to sustained engagement with one another in the critical task of achieving the mission we set for ourselves in closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
In particular, we've looked at Indigenous early childhood development. And it is in this area that we've now agreed a national partnership between us involving some joint funding of $547 million over six years to address the needs of Indigenous children in their early years.
This includes evidence based child and maternal health services to assist with ante-natal care. And new child and family centres to provide early learning, parenting education, health and family support.
If we are serious about closing the gap on mortality, life expectancy between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians, for children under the age of five as well as lifting literacy, numeracy and wider educational outcomes and wider health outcomes for indigenous Australians, it must begin with little children.
That's why this program has now been agreed among us, involving significant contributions from the states in order to achieve real progress in this area.
Presenting a national apology to indigenous Australians is one thing. Taking practical steps aimed over time at closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians is what is now required. And we've now made progress on that.
Finally, in the important area of child protection, the Council of Australian Government's has agreed to a new national child protection framework to be completed by December, primarily to improve information sharing between Governments, to better protect children moving between jurisdictions, and to better coordinate prevention and early intervention for families and children most at risk.
Given recent developments, this is particularly important. It has long been important. And I thank States and Territories for working with us on how we can improve inter jurisdictional cooperation in this critical area concerning the protection of the most vulnerable among us.
To conclude, I would thank again the States, the Territories and the Australian Local Government Association for being constructive, positive participants in what I believe to be a new way of governing. Rather than just taking pot shots at each other for the political fun of it, to get on with the hard business of hopping into these big challenges, and very practical challenges, and achieving real progress.
Real progress on economic reform in the microeconomic reform agenda, business deregulation. Real reform when it comes to water, the intergovernmental agreement, as well as the $3.7 billion of water projects I referred to before. Real progress when it comes to practical areas like health, organ donation and transplants. Similarly with Indigenous early childhood development, as well as the critical area for the future child protection.
If I could turn to Morris, who is our host, and then to John, who is the Chairman of the Council of the Australian Federation, to add to my remarks, invite any other colleagues if they wish to, and then throw it open to you. Morris.
IEMMA: Thank you Prime Minister, and I endorse those comments. Constructive and successful meeting. And another meeting in which we've made big progress on the big issues that confront the nation.
We've reached an agreement on Murray-Darling, the Murray-Darling Basin, an intergovernmental agreement. And that will involve, as the Prime Minister has mentioned, a $3.7 billion investment in infrastructure, in better metering in water savings measures for a sustainable future, for the families in the Murray-Darling Basin.
New South Wales has received its fair share of the funding of the infrastructure that will be flowing as a result of today's agreement. And, we will now have an independent authority that will determine a Basin wide cap.
The other key issue that New South Wales has wanted addressed has been the transfer of risk, and the management of risk, when it comes to liabilities, and any future change in liabilities as a result of a nation wide cap, and the determination of those levels.
So, the two issues that have been outstanding from New South Wales' perspective have been addressed, I'm very pleased to say, successfully addressed, at today's meeting and we're in a position to sign the agreement. An historic agreement for the families in the Murray-Darling Basin for a sustainable and secure future.
In the area of health, more progress in health reform. I'll come to the issue of indigenous health in a second, but one area in health that we reached agreement and we made progress on today which hasn't received attention is that the first instalment of the Commonwealth's 50,000 vocational health training places roll out. And they start rolling out as at the end of this month. And the first instalment is 4,500 places across the nation.
What we will be doing after today is working with the Commonwealth on the distribution of those. But they are in crucial areas of health. In aged care, for example, for trainee enrolled nurses. Nurses to assist the elderly in our hospitals as well as in nursing homes. Also vocational training places in therapy, occupational therapy. And these are key areas of health professionals there is a shortage of. And more training places in the first tranche of those training places funded by the Commonwealth and rolling out immediately will provide real relief to our hospitals, provide better care in our nursing homes.
And obviously also, provide job opportunities for young Australians. So, this is a particularly pleasing part of today's meeting and the agreement that we have reached.
The six year, $550 million indigenous program of early childhood development. I will just stress one part of this program. It was one that was established in New South Wales just over three years ago. And it is the Aboriginal maternal and infant health strategy.
And this has been a program to target Aboriginal mums who are pregnant, provide them with pre-birth and post-birth support. It has proved very successful in reducing the death rate for Aboriginal babies. And as part of this historic agreement, that kind of program gets rolled out nationally. And in our Budget brought down just over a month ago, we extended it across New South Wales. And the most pleasing part of this early childhood development program is a program nationally targeted towards Aboriginal infant and maternal health.
It saves lives. It's proved successful in New South Wales in dropping the death rate, in saving babies, and this is a key area of reducing indigenous disadvantage and reducing death rates in Aboriginal communities among young children.
It is a fundamental reform and it is pleasing that the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth have shown leadership in this area and that we have been able to, as part of this key reform, coming from this meeting, now a national six year program, of $550 million.
In the area of business regulation, the Prime Minister has outlined three key areas, but there are ten areas that we have agreed on. There are approximately another nine that will be subject to further work. But the first ten - occupational health and safety, uniform laws on trade registration and for the registration of business names.
This will save business, particularly their national scheme of registration, tens of millions of dollars. I want to stress in the area of occupational health and safety, it is explicit in the agreement, that there is no reduction of safety in the workplace for workers.
PM: Thanks very much Morris and if I can ask John as chairman of CAF.
BRUMBY: Thank you Prime Minister. Well I thought today was again an extraordinarily positive COAG meeting in terms of the outcomes that we were able to achieve by working together. And as we'll recall, we had the first historic COAG meeting in Melbourne last December.
We set in place then a number of arrangements that would cement this relationship of governments working together and I believe there is further powerful evidence of that today.
And all of this is about building a stronger, fairer and more sustainable Australia. I want to particularly comment if I can on the issue of business regulation reform, a seamless national economy. I think we are all aware that if you look around the world, the world economy has some challenges at the moment, it is a more difficult economic environment over the next six months than we have seen in previous years.
And for many businesses it will be a more difficult environment. And so the more that we can do as governments to remove unnecessary regulation to make it a seamless national approach is going to help business and it is going to help them compete in both the national and international economy.
And you know the Prime Minister a few moments ago indicated that it is decades since we have seen this sort of reform and it is decades since we have seen this sort of sweeping reform to business regulation.
It is something that has been very strongly supported by our state. We believe very passionately that if we want to have competitive global businesses, you have got to remove some of the red tape that holds them back. And so today really is an historic agreement in that regard.
Water, we all remember I think the historic agreement that we reached in Adelaide, an historic memorandum of understanding on the Murray Darling Basin and the challenge of course has been to convert that into the intergovernmental agreement.
And we did that today, we have done that with every party on board and I think what we have achieved is a very positive and very sensible outcome. It is an outcome which I think will be good for our state of Victoria, good for irrigators, good for the Murray Darling Basin community. But in the longer term it will also be a very good outcome in terms of the big environmental issues and challenges that we face.
For our part, I am delighted that we have achieved a significant additional funding again, $103 million for irrigation projects in the Sunraysia area. Overall as the PM mentioned, $3.7 billion worth of projects and all of this is about new investment in water saving infrastructure.
And what you can guarantee from these investments is there will be water saving. Those savings are available to irrigator communities, they are also available for the environment and so this today was really and agreement which is good for irrigators, good for rural communities but also in the longer term, a very good outcome I believe for the environment.
And finally can I say on the issue of health and governments working together. Again, I really reiterate what the PM has said about ending the blame game and just a bit of evidence about how successfully our governments are working together.
The first COAG meeting we had in Melbourne, the Prime Minister announced additional funding to tackle elective surgery waiting lists around Australia. I am pleased to report and reported to the COAG meeting today that in our state of Victoria, we have been able to treat this year, already close to an additional 3,500 elective surgery patients.
It is the biggest backlog, if you like, that we have tackled in elective surgery since we have been in government and we have been able to do it because of the partnership approach that we have got with the Federal Government.
And I think it is a great example of Governments working together to make a practical difference to the lives of Australians. So I though today built on that, I thought it was again a very, very positive and historic COAG and the test of it of course is that it will build a stronger, a fairer and more sustainable Australia.
PM: Before turning to questions, do any of the other colleagues wish to speak? Everyone ok, over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well one of the things that you can't do as Prime Minister is make it rain. That is the first thing. And let's just be realistic about the challenges we face. This is a massively stressed system. A massively stressed inland river system in Australia which has been under challenge now for, you know, more than a decade.
What we have tried to do through this agreement is have a mechanism through the Murray Darling Basin Authority which is capable of independently developing a Basin plan. That's the first thing. And that Basin plan is critical to long term use of the water resources within the system.
Secondly, what you can also do to assist with one of the demand pressures on the system, is to have a consistent set of rules across all state jurisdictions about trading in water.
And that's what this does as well. Thirdly, in terms of specific projects to assist with water efficiency, quite apart from the ones that we referred to last time around in Adelaide, which related to Victoria, these other projects are designed - the $3.7 billion worth of projects - are in part designed towards enhancing the existing level of water efficiency.
These are all practical steps aimed at taking it further. Helping on the demand side through greater efficiency. And that is where so much of this investment goes. Helping also in the critical area of water trading, water rights by having interstate regulatory arrangements rather than conflicting arrangements.
But critically overall, for the first time in the nation's history, now, through a Murray Darling Basin authority, a capacity to develop a whole of Basin plan. And that is absolutely essential.
None of the represents a single solution to the problem, but let me tell you, we are in a far better position than we were before.
RANN: Can I just make a comment on the River Murray on relation to, there was a question about South Australia. For generations, people have said we need to run this as one river. And for generations, leaders have failed that test. If ever there was a test of federation, if ever there was a test of federalism, if ever there was a test of Australian leadership, it is about the River Murray. And that decision has been made today.
People have been talking to us about making decisions for the long term health of the river Murray and that meant an independent commission running the River Murray as well as of course in my state, more than $600 million being committed by the Prime Minister for the complete reengineering of the lower lakes for massive extra funding to reinvigorate the land.
And also of course to save Currency Creek and Langhorne Creek. So if ever there was a test of cooperative federalism that test was today on the River Murray. About running the River Murray as one river, rather than pretending that somehow it was divvied up, divided up along state lines.
And I think that is a critical outcome. For years people have talked about a long term solution to the river Murray and why no one has had the guts to make those decisions, those decisions have been made today and have now been signed.
IEMMA: Just to add to that George: Piping, diverters, metering and a Basin wide plan.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's absolutely new, $3.7 billion worth of projects. And for the first time, machinery to develop the Basin plan. Last time we had a memorandum of understanding which is based on principles. We now have an intergovernmental agreement which we have just signed in front of you.
Through the agency of that, creates the mechanism through which the Basin plan is developed. And mate, there is a limit to what you can do in six months in this show and I think we have cracked the whip as fast as we can. The other mob had a decade plus and got virtually nowhere.
JOURNALIST: When will the new Basin plan be operating (inaudible)
PM: Hands across the borders on the River. Both of these - are you speaking as a South Australian  -  both of these are high priorities for us. To get the authority up and running to get the Basin plan done. But I don't want to pretend it is going to be rapid-fire and quick in terms of the latter. It has got to be thorough, it has got to be integrated, it has got to be comprehensive and done, most critically, independently.
People ask where else lies the reform, as Premier Rann just said before, for 100 years or the entire settled history of this continent, this has been effectively Balkanised.
It can't be any longer, this system is too stressed. So, you have an independent authority to do it, we have now agreed that through an intergovernmental agreement which is binding, people to develop the Basin plan. I can't give you a completion date as to when it will be done by but it is a high priority. I don't want to speculate on that because I just don't want to mislead people.
It is tough. This is an area which covers one seventh of the continent and supports three million Australians, represents some nine billion worth of rural exports and it's something you don't just sort of fool around with. It is complex work.
But we now have the machinery to do it. And I think in terms of an achievement within our first six months here, that is real. But secondly, to go also to the specificity of Matthew's question, this $3.7 billion worth of projects is real as well, when added to the $1 billion we announced earlier on in Victoria.
You have nearly $5 billion worth of investment in these water projects, highly significant to the system. Yes, Daniel. Daniel and then David.
JOURNLAIST: (inaudible)
PM: What we have agreed to as governments is that we have stated our ambition to increase that cap from four till six by the end of 2009. Further increases to the cap will be subject to consultation among stakeholders.
So we have been mindful of the expert advice that we have received, we think this is the right reform direction to go. Consultation will be necessary on the way through. And as I said before in answer to your earlier question, trading in water rights is one part of the equation. Ensuring the efficiency with which the water is used is a very important part of the equation. Underpinning that, you don't have rhetoric, you have, as I said, $4 billion plus worth of investment.
This is a big reform. Sorry, David, and then over here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh there's the Fin Review, always impatient. Now how many were there under the last Government David?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: And what happened with those ten hot spots David?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: What we have today as I said before, is, in the previous COAG, we agreed on four, today we have an agreement of fourteen. I listed three in the headline, I can give you the others: occupational health and safety, national trades licensing, national regulation of trustee companies, national regulation of mortgage broking, national regulation of margin lending, national regulation of non deposit taking lending institutions, a national system for remaining areas of consumer credit, business name registrations, standard business reporting, electronic conveyancing, personal property securities, product safety, environmental assessments and approvals, and most critically, chemicals and plastics.
RANN: Excellent
PM: Which various jurisdictions have been concerned about, lead by South Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: No I was about to say, geez you are a tough task master mate. Then on top of that, there are nine areas where accelerated progress has been agreed at July COAG which add up to the rest of them. Fourteen agreed today, four before plus nine to come. The nine to come are, consumer policy framework, national construction code, development assessment, directors liabilities, food regulation, national mine safety framework, oil and gas regulation, maritime safety regulation, wine labelling.
That forms the program of work for the second half of the year. Achieving an agreement that we shall have a national uniform system in those fourteen areas, building on the four we have done before, ain't bad.
It actually is the most significant regulatory reform that we have achieved as a nation in more than a decade and some would argue, since the beginning of the federation. That is, brining national uniformity in these critical areas. For many people out there in, writing commentary on this, they may not seem to be, terribly sort of headline grabbing.
If you are a business, let me tell you, on business registration stuff that I referred to before, Oc. Health and Safety. These cause people to pull their hair out and scream blue murder. And so, on these fourteen, we have agreed that we will have a system, we now have timelines attached to each of them in terms of their delivery points. And there is still a lot of hard work to be done, with each of them.
But can I say, getting to the point where we said we are going to have national systems in these areas, is I think, a major, major advance. Now over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, recent scientific reports that the lower lakes are dying and that they face a critical state right now (inaudible)
PM: Well, firstly, the lower lakes are highly stressed as you have said before. And that stands for all to see. Second is, and in answer to the earlier question, what we have done is create, as it were, the framework for action through the intergovernmental agreement and the authority and which includes within it of course the possibility for a greater trade in water rights. And thirdly, the water efficiency measures across the system which actually effect the totality therefore of the waterflow of the system.
And that's why an investment of $3.7 billion today, add $1 billion from three months ago, something approaching $5 billion worth of investment, is not a bad way forward. But on the specifics of the lower lakes and what happens, I cannot solve that overnight. I accept that. But you can act in an integrated system wide fashion in a responsible way such as we have done in our first six months of office.
I might ask the Premier of South Australia to add to that.
RANN: Just on, if you look at the detail, that huge commitment to the reengineering of the lower lakes, and in places (inaudible) down on the peninsular, Langhorne Creek, Currency Creek. And there is going to be, you know, obviously there is a huge amount of engineering works.
What we are saying is basically, that those communities, those irrigators, those farmers, will no longer need to take water out of those deteriorating lakes. It is about basically building a pipeline from Callem Bend to get them much higher quality water. And this is a complete reengineering of the lower lakes. Plus a major commitment to reinvigorating the Riverland and providing funding there as well. So we are very pleased with this outcome.
PM: For example, $120 million of this $220 is for an integrated network of pipelines to service townships, communities and irrigators currently reliant on the lower lakes for their water supplies. So this is very practical and very detailed. John, sorry I interrupted.
STANHOPE: I just wanted to make the point, in relation to the agreements today around the Murray Darling Basin, (inaudible)
The ACT is entirely within the Basin, the only jurisdiction is exclusively within the Basin, Canberra is of course the largest city. But in addition to the issues around governance and efficiency and the purchasing of water that has been mentioned by you Prime Minister and the Premiers, there is also significant recognition of the need to improve the quality of the water within the basin.
And to that extent, today I am particularly pleased that the Commonwealth has agreed to provide $85 million to Australian Capital Territory for the purpose of improving water quality. In other words, through the removal of salt from out water treatment or our sewage facility.
We as a significant city within the basin, produce through our sewage works, somewhere in the order of 40 tonnes of salt a day., which is (inaudible) leached straight into the system and the Commonwealth today has recognised that issues around quality are as important as the significant issues related to the, getting the government structures right.
And I acknowledge the approach that the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth have taken in an integrated broad ranging approach to deal, not just with the need for us to work together, but to recognise all the separate and distinct parts of improving and seeking to restore the Murray Darling Basin.
So I acknowledge today $85 million of direct assistance to remove salt, in the upper reaches of the Murray Darling Basin and through that to enhance the quality of the system as well.
JOURNALIST: States can be sensitive about the operation of their child protection units. Does the commonwealth have a role other than improving interagency communications?
PM: What we have a particular role in, and that's reflected in the communiqué, is this: so many problems in child protection occur across state boundaries. The question which we face at an operational level is, is there a rapid and effective information transfer between jurisdictions, which makes it possible for the child protection authorities in other states to do their job.
Secondly, at the level of the Commonwealth, are we properly integrating for example, the information which may be available through our own commonwealth, own systems like the Centrelink system, and is that being properly integrated with the information base available to the state child protection agencies and other related law enforcement agencies.
Our advice is that we can do better on this. And that actually is designed to assist child protection workers in the field. This therefore will be an accelerated program of work for us over the next six months and the intention is to come to an agreement on how this will be done better in the future, come the December COAG.
If I could say this as well: I have said this in relation to recent tragic events. Australia can do better, must do better, and one practical way we can do better, and must do better in this area is to make sure there are no impediments between jurisdictions, between States and Territories.
And in terms of the Commonwealth's own information systems, to give all information necessary to child protection officers to do their job.
JOURNALIST: What about the area of national standards for child protections and perhaps a national uniformity (inaudible)
PM: What I know is that when this working group reports back to us in December, they will have a remit and I would not rule out any range of recommendations coming forward in terms of how we make this system better.
An additional area, apart from information flow, across jurisdictional boundaries, is how can we better coordinate early intervention and protection. It's a really complex legal domain. But I think this group will have its work cut out for it in coming forward with practical recommendations in that area as well.
The one that I've identified up front is one which smacks us in the eyes as being a real problem, which is, I want to make sure that there is no problem with the data getting through so that action can be taken immediately, that it is warranted. But, let's see what the working group reports on.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: My advice is that, and having been dealing with 14 of these today including chemicals and plastics, but on Oc. Health and Safety, that our proposed landing date for that is 2011. I'm looking for Craig Emerson who is with us at the moment somewhere. And, therefore, we have a time frame to work this through.
This will be complex, difficult and hard. Because the states, frankly, have different systems. And there are different concerns expressed by a number of them. But what I'm pleased about in terms of all my State and Territory colleagues is a common national resolve to say, let's not just push this to one side. Let's have a common resolve to achieve a uniform system.
But, there's still a lot of hard work to be gone through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it was recently reported that the Government is considering a revamp of the Foreign Investment Review Board process. Could you comment on any activity in that area? (Inaudible)
PM: Well, on the question of foreign investment, our regime is fairly clear. You would have noticed that earlier this year, in particularly, we enunciated new principles for foreign investment, particularly from state related entities.
These have been a further effort on our part to make completely transparent those criteria which will assist Governments in framing responses to the national interest test which is the core part of the foreign investment regime.
On the second question you raise in terms of the trade performance, I haven't seen the numbers, I've been in this conference all day. But can I just say this, we've had a real problem in the past with not boosting our volumes. And I haven't seen the volume numbers today. And we've been relying in the past in our trade performance in terms of price. Part of the challenge for us long term lies in not just depending on movements in price, but movements in volume, which is why this Government, through the Building Australia Fund, is absolutely committed to acting on infrastructure constraints which have stared us in the face for so long in terms of getting greater volume out to export.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) ALP admin committee meeting (inaudible)
PM: I always avoid them if I can.
IEMMA: The invitation came, and actually, Friday is regional visit for me. So, I'm making alternative arrangements.
PM: It wasn't a politically correct answer. I always go to them whenever I can.
IEMMA: The wording on occupational health and safety is that ‘COAG recognises the legitimate concerns about workplace safety and reaffirms its requitement that there be no reduction in workplace safety.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) World Youth Day rail strike (inaudible)
IEMMA: Well, the rail unions have been offered four per cent over two years and I understand there are discussions going tomorrow. But there is no grounds for them to disrupt World Youth Day. There are no grounds for them to disrupt commuters, whether they're daily commuters or interstate and international visitors. None what so ever.
There have been negotiations, there is an independent umpire. An offer has been made which is above the two and a half per cent funded wages policy. And I'll make the point to the rail unions that there's now 14 wage settlements that have been approved and they're above the two and a half per cent.
JOURNALIST: At the time the gentleman on your left assume the leadership of the Parliamentary Labor Party, you had the broad support of ALP head office in New South Wales and the unions here, John Robertson. It now appears you don't have that support for your leadership. Mr Robertson said today when asked if he supported you in the job, he said, ‘that's a matter for his parliamentary colleagues'. How does that feel?
IEMMA: Well he's right. He doesn't get a vote. My colleagues do. Just like he didn't get a vote when Bob Carr retired.
PM: And on that happy and fortuitous point, I thank the colleagues, Premiers and Chief Ministers for what I think has been a very practical and positive outcome for households, for business and for the federation.


WOOLEY: Kevin Rudd good morning to you Sir.
PM: Charles thanks for having me on the program.
WOOLEY: Can you as a supporter of the Maroons tell us how it is pronounced.
PM: MA-RONES
WOOLEY: How can it be Prime Minister?
PM: Because it is orthodox Queensland pronunciation and therefore it is true and you should know that, Charles.
WOOLEY: Yes, so ill forget what the Collins Australian dictionary tells me (inaudible) I have lost this argument several times.
PM: Was that, was that dictionary published down south?
WOOLEY: Yes undoubtedly.
PM: Therefore, what's your point?
WOOLEY: Prime Minister we all know how to pronounce Garnaut.
PM: “GAR-NOTE”
WOOLEY: Yes, “GAR-NOTE”, 600 pages, in which, as far as I now understand it, that despite all the prognostications from electricity generators about the ruin that it will cause to their industry and the down valuing of their assets. Mr Garnaut suggests that they shouldn't be given any compensation.
That's a suggestion are you likely to go along with it?
PM: Well let's see what Professor Garnaut has to say in the totality of his report. All I would say, Charles is that we have got a climate change challenge on our hands. Carbon pollution creates a problem, not just for Australia but for the planet.
It is an economic problem and environmental problem. As someone passionate about outback Australia, you would understand what's happening to the Murray Darling. So if we fail to act on climate change, we fail to act on the intensification of drought.
WOOLEY: I am not a sceptic on this. I think that we should always be informed by the best science. And the best science I read and the best scientists I talk to tell me this is happening.
PM: And that is the starting point for the Government's response as well. There is no dispute about the science, that it is happening. The practical question becomes one of, first of all, what are the economic costs of not acting as opposed to the economic costs of acting.
And then thirdly if we are going to act, therefore, what is the best course of action. Now our judgement in terms of the economic cost of action is that it is the right and responsible way to go. Otherwise the flow through costs for drought, water, river systems, irrigation, agriculture, food, tourism, through the loss of fresh water in the Kakadu, through the bleaching of the Great Barrier Reef, through what happens to the snow fields of Victoria, is huge.
And the employment consequences are huge. Emissions trading which is partly what Professor Garnaut will deal with is one part of the solution. Another part of the solution is what we do to boost the mandatory renewable energy target for Australia.
And thirdly what we do to boost energy efficiency. And this is very much our approach.
WOOLEY: How much to we need bipartisanship? Now it looked to me after the Howard Government was lost, largely, I think significantly on this issue they were sitting on their hands on climate change and all polling shows Australians care. But if Brendan Nelson is going to, well, not thrive but benefit by a few ratings points from sniping on your Government over rising petrol prices, then aren't we lost everywhere. Is it possible that fuel prices need to rise in order to encourage us to use other means of energy generation?
PM: Well you see this will involve Charles, tough decisions. But the Government is determined to make tough decisions for the long term future, the economic future as well as the future of our environment. And if you look at your kids and your grandkids and ask yourself this question: when they turn around and ask in 30, 40, 50 years time, why did the previous generation not act when the science was clear. I find it very difficult just to sit on my hands and say, ‘ah well, it was all just too hard'.
The problem I think with the Liberal Party campaign on this, this fear campaign that they have launched, is that first of all, it is a double standard because last year in July last year through the Environment Minister Malcolm Turnbull they committed to first of all an emissions trading system.
Secondly including petrol. And thirdly that it should be the most comprehensive system anywhere in the world. That's what they said before the election.
WOOLEY: I think Malcolm Turnbull still believes that.
PM: Well, he has said something different since then. And Dr Nelson has certainly repudiated him. So there is a double standard involved in the Liberal Party's new position. Last year under Mr Howard they didn't really believe in it. Then suddenly they did believe in it on the eve of the election, put out a very long policy document to the effect that I just described before.
Six months after the election they are back to not believing in it because they think there is some political points to be scored on the way through. But the key thing is this, leave aside the Liberal Party's double standards underpinning their new fear campaign. Frankly, this is such a huge debate for all Australians, we have just got to get it right.
It needs to be a rational debate, a clear debate about what we can do in Australia and what we can do in partnership with the rest of the world.
WOOLEY: And just briefly as I understand it, rather than the actually madness of trying to reduce the price of petrol better to compensate people in other ways, who are suffering from the rising costs of fuel, the inevitable rising cost of fuel when we run a carbon tax across it.
PM: Well when you introduce emissions trading as Mr Howard himself said last year and Dr Nelson has said the same, and you act on climate change, that it follows that there will be an increase in energy prices and petrol prices - that follows. The question is, how do you then provide support to households on the way through to adjust. How do you provide support to businesses on the way through and help them adjust.
We intend to be very responsible, measured and consultative with the community sector and with industry on the way through. But we are absolutely determined to get the policy right for the long term. If we fail to do that, we fail the next generation and frankly given how intense the climate change effect is already being felt across Australia, we fail our own generation as well.
WOOLEY: Just finally, we are setting a very good international example here. The Howard line was of course, what's the point of doing that if the huge emitters like China and India, who might emit more in a week than we do in a couple of years if they don't go along with it.
PM: Well one of the key problems in the past is that the United States used to say that they would not act. And one of the comforts the United States as then the world's largest emitter took was that the Australian Government was apart from Kazakhstan, the only three Governments in the world to have initially signed Kyoto but then refused to ratify it.
What has happened since is that when we ratified Kyoto, is that the political debate has also changed elsewhere in the world and for reasons also alive in US domestic politics, both sides of American politics, the Republicans and Democrats have now committed themselves to significant new targets on carbon reduction and dealing with carbon pollution.
So what we got to do, we ratified Kyoto till we could be part of the global negotiation. The previous Australian government was not. We are going to work with all the major economies in the world including the United States.
And then when it comes to the new developing economies including China and India, to use those negotiations to get them to commit to courses of action in the future as well.
But you know something? The sure-fire way of getting them to do nothing is for the rest of us to sit on our hands and say, ‘you first mate'.
WOOLEY: Prime Minister just before you go I would also like to again thank you for the $10 million for the Tasmanian Devils. I have been shooting a 60 Minutes story which will be forthcoming in a few weeks and I can say the field workers, the scientists and medical specialists, the oncologists and other people from a whole lot of disciplines who have been able to come together are very appreciate of this.
PM: Of thanks for that  - 
WOOLEY: It didn't make huge headlines but it should have.
PM: I mean as a kid in primary school in Queensland, that place where we say Maroon, or was it “MA-RONE”?
WOOLEY: You say “MA-RONE”, I say “maroon”, let's call the whole thing off.
PM: We'll just proclaim a truce. But in primary school I used to always be taught about the Tassie Devil and when I heard in recent years that we have this huge problem, I think it is the right thing to do to get in there and help.
But I really appreciate being kept up to date with how the Tasmanian Devil conversation breeding specialist group is going at the University of Tasmania because we want them to succeed.
WOOLEY: Yes we do indeed because sadly, over this century, we in Australia have the highest species extinction rate of any place on earth.
PM: Which brings us in part back to climate change.
WOOLEY: Yes it does, it does.
PM: One of the other consequences of climate change apart from the economic and environmental consequences we discussed before was, a further reduction in biodiversity. And at the level of public health, the scientific reports indicate a move southwards in terms of the spread of tropical diseases as well.
WOOLEY: Yes it is big at the micro and the macro level isn't it. I mean you think, you mentioned retreating snow levels in the snowys', and we think about the future of the little Corroborree frog. And we should all be patriotic about our (inaudible) shouldn't we.
PM: Well in this part of the world we are blessed with enormous natural biodiversity relative to what is the case in many other countries. And therefore I believe that imposes upon us a, you know, a duty to nature as well as our duty to our fellow human beings to get the adjustment to a lower carbon economy right.
It will take tough decisions but I think, you know, I think the Australian people want us to have a responsible debate about this and I don't think they just want the usual fear driven politics.
WOOLEY: I think the polling shows that you are heading in the right direction. Prime Minister thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thank you Charles.


PM: It's good to be here with Mike Rann, Premier of South Australia and Penny Wong, South Australian Senator and Minister for Water and for Climate Change.
This is where we see climate change and the real challenges facing water and the river Murray come together. Climate change according to international scientists is causing long term, deep drought across southern Australia. And as a result of that what we have is stress, greater stress to our river systems and of course our greatest river system  -  the river Murray.
And if you want to see an example of stress from climate change and where it could go over time, look at what's behind us here in terms of the Murray Darling system.
Therefore the challenge for us not to bury our heads in the sand and pretend this problem will just go away. It's to act on it and to act on it both for the immediate term, the medium term and the long term.
In the immediate term for communities like this where you've got so many good farmers and local communities who are affected by this is to take practical action. That's what I've done in partnership with the Premier of South Australia in recent times (who is about to die!!!!) You ok (Coughing in background)
PREMIER RANN: I'm ok
PM: Ok. What I've done with the Premier of South Australia in recent times in agree with the Water Minister on a package of some $610 million worth of water projects. $120 million goes to a pipeline network around Lake Alexandrina and the other side going over towards Lake Albert.
And the whole challenge here is to assist these local agricultural communities and communities themselves deal with the immediate challenge. When you've got local farmers who invested so much in these pumping stations to deal with the challenges of keeping their winery's going, to keep their other agricultural projects going, our responsibility is to provide a helpful hand. And that's we've done in the immediate term. That's $120 million of a $600 million package.
Medium terms it's the management of this entire system. This massive Murray Darling System, from Queensland where I come from, through NSW, across Victoria and to here. And unless we manage this river system better in the long term, then what we do in terms of shorter term measures will not help.
Therefore we need to have a medium term strategy as well, which is why a couple of days ago we've agreed to establish by 1 January a single national authority, independent, the Murray Darling Basin authority. To set a basin wide plan, to set a basin wide cap and that is a responsible medium term course of action.
Then longer term action, and that's dealing with climate change. I can't make it rain, the Premier of South Australia cant make it rain. Therefore we've got to deal responsibly as a national community and as an international community to act on climate change. Otherwise your burying your head in the sand and we don't intend to do that.
And that is why the stark warnings contained in Professor Garnaut's report about the cost of inaction should focus our entire national debate on what we do on climate change.
The bottom line is this, if we fail to act on climate change we are condemning great river systems like the Murray Darling to an entirely perilous future and the resolve of our Government is to act.
It will be tough, it will be difficult, it will be expensive. But we intend to take on this challenge and to do our absolute best in responding to what I think is the great challenge of our generation.
Mike did you want to add?
PREMIER RANN: Just wanted to say how much, I came down here to the Lower Lakes with Dean Brown, Karlene Maywald and others and we met with local people. And they came up with a plan; it's a plan that really came from local people about the re-engineering of the Lower Lakes and the desperate need for a pipeline for totable water, for critical human needs. For fresh water rather than saline water for the Nehrung peninsula.
Also of course the pipeline that would come down near Tailem Bend bringing fresh water to basically save and secure the future of two critical wine districts and agricultural districts for our state Currency creek and Langhorne creek. So the plan that we're supporting with the re-engineering of the lower lakes came from the local people and I want to congratulate Dean Brown for his leadership and his advocacy on behalf of the people that he represented for many, many years.
So this is really about a partnership. The Prime Minister responded, Penny Wong and I have been working on this now for months. It's a terrific outcome from the COAG meeting and also of course about $190 million is being spent on the river land as well. But a reinvigoration of the area in terms of structural adjustment.
But no-one pretends there is a quick fix. There is no-one who believes that there is a quick fix. This is about basically making sure that we re-engineer the Lower Lakes, it also means about making long term decisions for the future. Basically making sure that the river is run as one river rather than what we've had for over 100 years which is a river that's been mismanaged by states that have taken their own interests against the interests of the river.
PM: And to just conclude on that, if anyone doubts that Australia must act on climate change. Have a long, long look at the future of the Murray Darling.
Over to you folks
JOURNALIST: Has it surprised you what you've seen today or is it worse than you expected?
PM: What has stunned me is the extent to which this shoreline has moved from there to there in the space of a year. And what we see from the data is that inflow into the Murray Darling system has been at historically record lows. That's is since the data began to be collected, in the last two years the lowest inflow across the system.
And secondly therefore we've got to act and that's why we have a practical course of action now for these communities. Medium term in terms of the better management of the system and longer term by acting on climate change.
JOURNALIST: What are you doing to get fresh water down to these Lakes in the short term and that seems to be a big agenda for many of the locals both here and particularly on Lake Albert where if walked as far as you had today you'd be up to your armpits in mud?
PM: The challenge right now is of course to assist with this pipeline in order to provide water from higher up in the Murray to these communities. And speaking to the local winegrowers, local grape growers they are positive about what our two Governments have done together, that's the first.
The second is what the Minister has been doing for the first time in the nation's history. In the 6 months or so that we've been in Government is to buy back water entitlements around the system. The Commonwealth Government for the first time in history is using money to buyback water entitlements and we've already spent $50 million on that and that has already brought back a number of licences. We will prosecute a vigorous campaign of buyback.
The other thing is why in the Council of Australian Governments the other day we allocated $3.7 billion worth of water projects to improve the efficiency of the irrigation system right along the Murray Darling system in all States to take further stress off the system upstream.
None of these represent the magic solution itself, we must be acting on all these fronts. In 6 months we've made more progress on this than our predecessors did in 12 years.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister any of that water that you're buying, will some of that find its way here for lower lakes to top it up.
PM: Well the buyback is really critical because it take overall stress off the system to some extent. But lets be realistic this is a massively stressed river system. I'm not going to pretend that its not.
I think it's far better for the nation's political leadership to say this is a massive national problem, it's been building for years and years and years. And action is necessary, cooperative action is necessary in order to make a difference.
So I've said before at those three levels, you can't say to the good farmers here don't worry until we fix climate change. Because frankly that's just not going to work for them.
That's why we're investing in a practical project now, an expensive project $120 million just for these communities to get water through. Medium term the basin plan and basin cap and a more aggressive approach to the purchasing of licences. Longer term acting responsibly nationally and globally on climate change.
That's our three phased strategy, it's the right way for the nation, it will be a tough debate, it will be an ugly debate. But its one in which we intend to engage because I think the nation expects it of us.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: The Coorong is severely stressed and this problem has been building for years and years and years. And we'll be working with our partners in the South Australian Government to do whatever we can on this front. I'm acutely conscious of its significance in intrinsic environmental terms. I understand that, but this problem has been building for years and I don't intend to lie to people to say that I can fix it by next week, next month, next year. But can I say we are now taking a series of actions which we believe will be significant on the longer term.
The alternative is to bury your head in the sand and we don't intend to do that.
JOURNALIST: People here are calling for natural disaster status or funding. Is that ever going to be considered on the table?
PM: Well there are standard national criteria which apply to that in terms of droughted areas across the country. And that very much lies with the professional authorities to make evaluations on each local government area effectively.
PREMIER RANN: We're talking to Tony Burke about a whole range of other issues. I mean there are different issues that apply, we're talking to the Federal Agriculture Minister. I went to Canberra to draw in a few of them the other day to meet with him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Senator Nick Xenophon is planning to introduce a private members bill to force the NSW Government to release water that is stockpiled in Menindee lakes. Do you see any need for action to release at least some of that water to fix the environmental problems down here?
PM: As Prime Minister of the country I'm prepared to engage with each of the State Governments of the country to do what is in the overall interests for the river system. Not just push it to one side but to work with them to take action for the overall benefit of the system.
There are farmers right across this system, there are farmers in NSW, there are farmers in Queensland and in Victoria and farmers here. Each have legitimate interests, our job is to try and balance those interests but overall to save this river system. Otherwise we're not doing the right thing by the nation.
So what we have done in our first 6 months as I said before, represents a solid start. But you know something it is just the start, there is a whole lot more to be done.
Can I just say in terms of one other thing. One of the ladies gave this to me. I assume what she said to me is accurate, she says this is a turtle and what you see here is the consequence of the calcification of the turtle's outer case and of course the turtle doesn't survive.
I just been presented this by one of the locals, I assume that the case. If some biologist proves to me to the contrary later on  -  matter for the scientists. But here we see as well as what we saw on the shores edge with the fresh water mussels, also the impact on biodiversity of not acting on climate change.
JOURNALIST: But isn't that why the lakes need fresh water and what was in the COAG agreement that would enable to Federal Government to grab fresh water where it see's it needs it for environmental (inaudible)
PM: As I've just responded short term, medium term, long term and that's the best approach that we've got and in 6 months I would challenge those who preceded us to demonstrate any more robust course of action that they undertook in the previous 12 years.
But there is no single magic solution, we will be acting in partnership with the South Australian Government in their management of these challenges here locally. Supporting them where we can and engaging in all the other Governments.
JOURNALIST: Locals say you should have made the visit much earlier than today?
PM: Well you know something I've as a kid knocked around these. I actually have some sense of this part of the world. I've also had long discussions with the South Australian Premier about the challenges here and of course I have water Minister who last time I looked comes from the fair State of South Australia.
The key thing is practical action. As I said in 6 months what did this community ask for. A pipeline to help them here and to help them over there and what we've delivered in 6 months by that $120 million pipeline out of a total $600 million package for South Australia ain't bad. Just a start  -  ain't bad.
PREMIER RANN: Also as I pointed out the other day. People say well what difference did the COAG meeting make. Well it made $3 billion worth of difference and in this State hundreds of millions of dollars more than $600 million being spent. The re-engineering of the lower lakes which is what people when I came down here with Penny Wong were asking for and also of course a big, big package of support for the riverland.
And of course for years people are saying when are we going to have leaders that make decisions for the long term as well? Because we've had over a 100 years of mismanagement of the river Murray. Now the planning, now the basin cap will be administered by an independent authority not groups of politicians under the influences of vested interests which is what the environmentalists have been asking for, for decades.
PM: Just to conclude on that, one of the farmers just here mentioned to me before there's local vegetable farmer who has laid off 20 workers. That's because of the problems of actually getting accessible fresh water from this system.
If you want a classic local example of the costs to the economy and jobs of not acting long term on climate change, of not acting on the Murray Darling river system  -  that's it. But as that 20 jobs writ large across the nation. So, climate change requires action if we are to save long term great river systems like the Murray Darling.


CASSIDY: Now to Canberra and the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who has had a couple of days to try and absorb Professor Ross Garnauts 600 page draft report on climate change. He joins me now, Prime Minister good morning and welcome.
PM: Good morning Barrie and thanks for having me on the program.
CASSIDY: A diabolical political problem, the toughest any Government has faced in a lifetime, that's enough to overwhelm anybody, do you feel in any sense overwhelmed by this?
PM: No Barrie we took this decision when we were in opposition, we said first of all we were going to ratify Kyoto, the Howard Government refused.
Secondly we said that we would introduce an Emissions Trading Scheme to bring down carbon pollution. The Howard Government having originally opposed that, then supported it and now the Liberal's oppose it. So goodness knows where their position is today.
So the decision we took was last year, we realised then as we realise now this will be a very tough decision. But we need it for the long term, bringing down carbon pollution is necessary if we are going to provide a sustainable long term economic growth path for Australia as well as protecting our environment and the planet. It will be hard, it will be tough, but the Government's up for it.
CASSIDY: And you say it will be tough. What's the toughest decision you have taken so far as Prime Minister?
PM: I think you can't just sort of pick and choose on those sorts of questions. I think the whole raft of challenges we face in Government are complex and difficult, but this one, Barrie, is one which I think challenges us all as a nation, because it goes beyond our generation into the next and into the one after.
The easiest thing to do is stick your head in the sand and say "Not my problem", but I frankly don't think most Australians can do that, if they looked in the faces of their children and grandchildren, they think it is their problem and they expect Government to take responsible, calm, measured approaches to deal with it, that's what we are seeking to do.
We need to do it for the economy, there's an economic cost to Australia and a jobs cost if we fail to act because of the impact on tourism, the impact on agriculture and the impact on the total economy therefore. But we need to do it for the environment, so that people who come after us have some place where they can live, and live as we have lived.
CASSIDY: I think It's understood that you will need to take tough decisions and that's why I asked you to nominate one tough decision you have taken so far?
PM: Well look can I just say the preparation of the Budget, the reason I answered the way I did before is because we are confronted on a daily and weekly basis with a range of difficult choices.
CASSIDY: But in retrospect what was the tough decision in the Budget?
PM: Well can I say if you are elected as an incoming Government with a whole range of expectations to turn around in six months what our predecessors left unaddressed in 12 years, it is very, very difficult. Therefore, taking the knife to a whole series of Government programs in order to produce a $22 billion surplus at a time when there was considerable pressure on inflation, having inherited inflation at 16-year highs, that was tough.
Myself, Lindsay Tanner, Wayne Swan and other Ministers including Julia Gillard sat down, week in week out for months, working our way through programs to cut so that we could honour pre-election commitments, that hasn't been popular, we understand that. If you want to know what's tough, that's tough. What's easy is what the Liberal Party say which is "Let's blow a hole in that surplus by going on a spending spree.” Well that's irresponsible in the fight against inflation.
CASSIDY: I think some would argue means testing certain benefits to people beyond $150,000 is not particularly tough.
PM: There's a whole range of programs in the Budget arrangement Barrie, which all have consequences in terms of the community. We understand that and we receive a lot of complaints from a lot of things that have been done. But to actually bring down tax as a proportion of GDP, to bring down expenditure as a proportion of GDP to the lowest level its been since 1989, all driven by one imperative, which is how do you put downward pressure on inflation to put downward pressure on interest rates. Because if you let interest rates get away, what happens is, it affects the real economy and growth, and that affects jobs.
That's a complex message to sell, but its the right message to sell and cutting in order to bring about a $22 billion surplus, while at the same time honouring your pre-election commitments for tax cuts and the rest, that was a hard process, a difficult process. But we got through it and the Ministers performed fantastically in that process.
CASSIDY: You only need to listen to talkback radio for 5 minutes and you sense the public is desperate to have a better understanding of the climate change issue. So lets try and help, in plain simple terms what is an emissions trading scheme.
PM: Well let me answer it in three ways, one you say what's the public aware of. I think I agree with you the public understands that there is a need to act. And for Australia there is a need to act for a range of economic and environmental reasons, the cost of inaction now is far greater than the cost of action.
On the specifics of a carbon trading reduction scheme or a carbon emissions reductions scheme or an emissions trading scheme it's this: first of all, we as Australia, need to put a cap on the total amount of carbon pollution we put out into the atmosphere. Otherwise, frankly, if everyone around the world keeps does that, just letting it rip, then the planet gets hotter and hotter, and hotter. If we fail to act on that, then we have a real problem.
The second question then is once you have imposed that cap, which we would do through this trading scheme, is how do you then manage the economy within it? What you do then is that you provide each individual business unit with a permit and the green paper will go to the question of how that might occur, but you allocate permits across the economy which together add up to the total carbon cap for the economy. Then rather than the Government coming in and saying, "You can do this, you can do that", you allow a market too operate, a carbon market whereby people who are emitting carbon can trade with each other, but still the overall carbon market or carbon cap is kept in place.
That's the responsible way to ensure you don't go beyond an environmentally unsustainable point in terms of carbon pollution, but secondly providing flexibility for businesses within the economy to trade within that overall cap.
CASSIDY: (inaudible) That essentially applies to industry. What is it that you are asking of ordinary Australians?
PM: Well obviously once you bring in a carbon pollution trading system like this, that it affects through the entire economy most particularly through the cost of carbon-based energy, and, of course, including petrol. That flows through to the entire economy, and therefore flows through to households, so therefore there is a consequence.
One of the matters which will be canvassing in the green paper is how do we provide adjustment support for households during that process, and similarly, how do we provide adjustment support for businesses during the process. These are complex and difficult questions, but these will be outlined at least in the broad once we get to the green paper point.
CASSIDY: Sure, but in simple terms, what are you asking of people out in the suburbs  -  your asking them to pay for more Power and more for petrol?
PM: As I said if your going effectively a cap on carbon, and therefore have a new price for carbon, that flows through to the price of energy for households, that's true. Mr Howard said that, I say that, I think even Dr Nelson has said that.
The key question then is how to support households, particularly lower income households, in their adjustment to that new system and that's where the devil lies in the detail. That's where there'll be a whole lot of debate and that's why we're going to go through this is in a calm measured responsible way once we put out our green paper on this later in July, and work our way through to the public debate through on it through to the end of the year.
CASSIDY: And if its $2 a week or something on the power bill and maybe 4 cents on petrol, given the mood of the country on this issue, they'll accept that wont they?
PM: Well we don't know at this stage what the carbon price would be. Therefore, I think any adjustment at a time when households across Australia are under real financial pressure with rising mortgages, rising rents, the impact on petrol and the impact on food, I think any adjustment cost will be difficult.
That's why we have to be mindful of how we provide adjustment and support for households during that process, particularly those at the lower end of the income spectrum.
CASSIDY: Now, there is another diabolical aspect I suppose to all of this - inflation. Inflation is public enemy No.1, and your responses to climate change surely must, by definition be inflationary?
PM: Well our response to that Barrie from day one of the Government coming into office, has been to outline a hard line fight against inflation. In January my first speech on the economy barely a month after becoming Prime Minister I outlined our five-point strategy against inflation, led by our approach to how we would bring about a responsible Budget and boost public savings. Therefore that's the framework within which we approach economic policy. When it comes to the carbon pollution management system that we are talking about in this debate we are very mindful of that as well.
The Governor of the Reserve Bank was asked about this only a few months ago and he indicated then that he did not see long-term inflationary impact resulting from this scheme. The other thing to say Barrie, is that we need to ensure, we need to ensure that we have proper powers for the competition watchdog, the ACCC so that whenever any system of this nature comes in, that there's no opportunistic price gouging at that time as well.
CASSIDY: And what about jobs, obviously jobs can be created in some areas, but they'll be lost in others?
PM: Well the economy is always in a process of adjustment, reform and readjustment and all these changes in the economy produce new jobs in different areas. The CSIRO produced a report on this quite recently and it indicated that with the of these climate change management systems, that over time, in the next two decades, they projected we would see the addition of between two and three and a half million jobs to the Australian economy. But they won't be the same jobs necessarily but they never have been.
This economy has been in a process of structural reform now, going back to the great reforms of the Hawke and Keating period. Now that process will continue, but will be in the direction of a cleaner lower carbon economy. But let me tell you, when you look at the future of employment and economic opportunities in the renewable energy sector, they are huge.
Therefore, there will be difficultly, and there will be adjustment and there will be pain, when it comes to certain parts of business. We accept that, that's why we embrace the principle of helping business with adjustment support.
But in the longer term, there is also the prospects of new opportunities for employment as well.
CASSIDY: Now the 2010 deadline, are you determined to meet that?
PM: Our ambition remains 2010 and you'll see all that canvassed in the green paper itself. We don't believe there's a case for delay, we will be very mindful of what business says to us in terms of implementation arrangements which flow from the scheme. But our ambition remains that and part of the reason our ambition remains for it Kerry is as Professor Garnaut outlined in his report. I mean time for Australia is running out, we can't just keep putting these things off and off and off and off and remember the previous Government were presented with an Emissions Trading Scheme proposal by Treasury in 2003, and put it into the too hard basket. That's five years wasted.
We believe we believe we have the right timeline outlined, 2010 remains our ambition and of course we'll consult with industry on implementation arrangements.
CASSIDY: Do you accept the logic of what the Opposition is saying on petrol, that skyrocketing prices of late is a big enough price signal for anybody and that you don't need to move again?
PM: I think what I'd say to that one Barrie is that what we're talking about here is how we deal with a realistic price for carbon for the next half century, and when do we bring in a system which accurately prices carbon over that period of time. Because if we don't act by the quarter century point and mid century point, both as a nation and as a globe, then frankly we start to run the risk of getting to the point of environmental no return, at least that's what some of the scientists are warning us.
Therefore pricing carbon for the long term is a challenge. In the shorter of course you going to have massive fluctuations in the price of petrol for example because of the supply and demand factors in the Middle East. We'll always be mindful of that in terms of what can and should be done to assist motorists in terms of their broader income arrangements. But what we are on about with this reform is a long term reform for the environment, and for the economy.
On the environment, one other thing as well - today the Agriculture Minister will be releasing a new report on the impact of climate change on drought. We asked some time ago for the CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology to advise us how do we deal with exceptional circumstances drought arrangements into the future. They've now presented us with a report and the findings are again very disturbing. What they say in two short points is this, and this will come out later today  -  firstly that when it comes to exceptional or extreme drought, exceptionally high temperatures, the historical assumption that this occurred once every 20 years has now been revised down to between every one and two years, that's the first point.
Secondly, with exceptional circumstances drought conditions, under scenarios within it, that that will occur twice as often, and with twice the area of droughted parts of Australia included. Now this is a serious revision of the impact of climate change on drought and the Agricultural Minister will make that clear in the report that he releases later today, again on climate change.
CASSIDY: If that's so then why did you let John Brumby get away with what he got away with at COAG where he refused to allow you to raise the cap on the Murray River from 4% to 6%
PM: Well the actual agreement says that the Council of Australian Governments has the ambition to raise this to 6% by the end of next year.
CASSIDY: But no guarantee's?
PM: But the first thing is we first of all have a Murray Darling Basin Authority for the first time, six months ago there was not one. Secondly it will come on stream as of 1 January next year in terms of its staffing and its powers. Thirdly, for the first time a basin-wide management plan covering one seventh of the area of Australia and on top of that for the first time a basin-wide cap for the entire system.
Now, in the meantime I was talking to Penny Wong about this yesterday when we visited Lake Alexandrina and the lower lakes, which are highly stressed because climate change...
CASIDY: Well stressed because water has been taken out of the Murray, surely not because of climate change?
PM: Well there's an aggregation of factors, stress because of climate change, stress because there's been frankly shocking use practices of the Murray Darling system going back frankly decades and in six months I think we've achieved more than the predecessors did in 12 years on this. But on the specific question of how do you deal with flows into the system, you need a combination of short, medium and long term arrangements.
Long term is what we're discussing, acting sensibly on climate change. Medium term, through getting this authority established, having a cap for the entire system. But reinforced by the Water Minister Penny Wong, having now for the first time, begun a large scale program of purchasing back water entitlements across the system. We've already begun that, our predecessors never did that.
CASSIDY: Its just that it has been presented in Victoria that John Brumby has given to commitment about supporting an increase from 4-6% and he picked up an extra $100 million to boot.
PM: Can I say Barrie, prior to the change in Government Victoria ruled out any Murray Darling Basin authority, we now have one. Prior to the change in Government the Victorian Government refused to engage in any of these intergovernmental arrangements through what we now have, an intergovernmental agreement.
We have made significant progress. But I'm the first to say there's a long way to go. Can I say, in terms of pulling pressure out of the system, you do two things. One is you empower, as you have done, the Water Minister, Penny Wong to buy back water entitlements and we've already bought back some $50 million worth and that program will continue and expand.
The second is this massive investment that we have put in, some $3.7 billion across Australia, across the Murray Darling Basin to improve the irrigation efficiency of the system so there is less pull on the system that way.
Shorter term measures by the way, is what I was in South Australia with Mike Rann talking about in the lower lakes. Which is how do you actually pump water from elsewhere in the Murray to assist with farming and local communities right there at the Murray mouth. What we need is short, medium and long term strategies for dealing with this. In six months we have got the framework right. I'm the first to say however we have a long way to go.
CASSIDY: Ok just a couple of quick ones, we're running out of time. Will Labour contest the Mayo by-election.
PM: Oh look, we'll sort our way through that, I haven't really had a discussion with any of the colleagues about that. Mayo has never been held by the Labor Party as you know and we'll sort our way through that in the weeks ahead.
CASSIDY: But its out at 7%, some polls have you sitting at 57% two-party preferred, if you didn't run it would look like you've been spooked by Gippsland wouldn't it?
PM: Well I've got to say, you always got to be mindful of one or two things here Barrie, which is one which is making sure that local voters have got a choice, and the second is I don't know about the opponents, but the Australian Labor Party is not made of money. Each time you run an election or participate in it, that's another several hundred thousand dollars which gets spent in a campaign, in a seat which you have never held in the history of the federation. So you have got to work these things out, and we'll sort is out in due course.
CASSIDY: Have you got any messages for your colleagues in NSW, should they give Morris Iemma a fair go?
PM: Morris Iemma has taken really tough decisions on the future of the electricity industry there, really tough decisions. That is why I support him. I think he has done a good job on this very, very difficult debate, and I think Premiers such as him are fully deserving of support, and he certainly has mine.
CASSIDY: Just finally on top of the Bill Henson controversy, a taxpayer supported magazine has put a naked 6 year old girl this time on its cover, Art Monthly Australia. The editor said that he did it to restore some dignity to the debate, is that what it does?
PM: If you asking my personal view Barrie, no it doesn't and it does the reverse. My view hasn't changed on this. We are talking about the innocence of little children here. A little child cannot answer for themselves about whether they wish to be depicted in this way. I have very deep, strong personal views on this which is that we should be on about maximising the protection of children. I don't think this is a step in the right direction at all.
CASSIDY: And it does seem to be a deliberately provocative act aimed directly at you?
PM: Who knows what the motivation is, but I've got to say my interest and the interest of many Australians. I think most Australians, is to protect little children and restore innocence to kids childhood. But I go back to the fundamental question: how can anyone assume that a little child of 6 years old, 8, 10, 12, somehow is able to make that decision for themselves? I mean, I don't think they can. That's just my view, and that's why frankly, I can't stand this stuff.
CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Good to be with you.


PM: Well good morning. This is the first major economies meeting at Heads of Government level. And, the first G8 outreach meeting attended by Australia.
This major economies meeting, at Heads of Government level, on climate change, is the first to be held. And, this G8 outreach meeting is the first that Australia will attend.
The agenda for this meeting will cover three major areas. Climate change, it will also cover food security, and it will cover energy security.
On the question of climate change, I will be engaging world leaders on the need for us to all achieve real progress on the post-Kyoto road map. This is critical for the planet, and critical for Australia.
We are the world's hottest and driest continent already. And therefore, we run the risk of being hit earliest and hardest when it comes to climate change.
Looking to this meeting, I doubt that this meeting will achieve major breakthroughs. But it is important to use this meeting to help fashion a consensus on the need for us all to act together on climate change because of all our economic and environment interests are at stake.
On the question of energy security, I will be arguing that we need, as a world community, to address the challenges facing global energy production and supply and refining capability.
Furthermore, on the question of food security, we have a huge challenge on our hands right now. And that is to achieve a major breakthrough at the World Trade Organisation Doha round of negotiations. A ministerial meeting is due later this month. We must achieve a breakthrough there. Not only important for the global economy, important also for long term global food security.
Therefore, on these three big agendas, climate change and acting on global energy security and food security, I look forward to engaging world leaders on these critical subjects, not just for the planets future, but for Australia's future as well.
And I conclude where I began. This is the first major economies meeting at Heads of Government level on climate change, and the first time Australia will be attending a G8 outreach meeting. And myself and the Minister for Climate Change Penny Wong look forward very much to participating and putting Australia's case.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Brendan Nelson wanted you to take a blow torch to the G8. Can you do that?
PM: The G8 outreach meeting will deal with food security and energy security. The argument that I'll be putting is the need for the major economies of the world to engage with the major oil producing countries of the world to deal with the huge challenge of global oil production, oil supply, and the problems in refining capacity.
A practical challenge already pointed to at a meeting held recently in Saudi Arabia was the inadequacy of open investment arrangements with the major oil producing companies. Therefore, we have to deal with these supply questions, these investment deficiencies, and these refining deficiencies if we are to deal with the overall challenge of global oil supply.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson also spoke about yesterday the danger of Australia moving before the rest of the countries in terms of an ETS scheme. If the other countries don't play ball, would that have the potential to knock our plans back?
PM: You know, Australia is the world's hottest and driest continent, and therefore we run the real risk of being hit hardest and earliest if we do not achieve global progress on climate change. That is a real problem for Australia.
Secondly, when it comes to the rest of the world, remember 27 states in Europe are already operating with a carbon reduction trading scheme. More than 10 states of the United States are already operating with a carbon reduction scheme. Japan, where we are going, is currently debating the introduction of a carbon reduction scheme.
The rest of the world is moving. We must move with the rest of the world because our interests are so acute. If we are already the world's hottest and driest continent, we run the real risk of being hit hardest and earliest.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd are you concerned at the cover up allegations levelled at George Pell in regards to a sexual abuse case?
PM: I understand that the Catholic Church has issued a statement on this last night dealing with these matters.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Our ambition remains clear, our intention remains clear, our plan remains clear, consistent with what we said in the lead up to the last election which is to have this new carbon pollution reduction scheme in place in 2010. And as I have said before, we will be very mindful of the implementation responsibilities which flow to business in particular on that. And that's why we are going through a green paper, white paper process.
JOURNALIST: What would be the optimum outcome for Australia from the Summit? (Inaudible)
PM: As a group of nations, as I have said, this major economies meeting is the first to be held at heads of government level on climate change. These major economies represent 80 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions.
There are 16 of us around the table. And these economies represent 80 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions. The challenge for us is to use this meeting to push the global negotiating agenda forward on the post Kyoto road map on climate change.
There are negotiations currently being engaged in at a ministerial level where Senator Wong, the Minister for Climate Change is Australia's representative.
That began in Bali just after this government was elected. It goes to Poland at the end of this year and Copenhagen is intended to be the concluding point at the end of 2009.
Therefore, we have got to work hard as world leaders at this meeting to provide as much momentum as possible for those negotiations. But I repeat what I said before, it is unrealistic to expect a dramatic breakthrough at this meeting.
But the objective is to push the global consensus further in this direction. If we fail, I go back to what I said before. In Australia, we are the world's hottest and driest continent and If we fail to achieve progress nationally and internationally, we run the risk of being hit hardest and earliest.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Art Monthly, says she is offended by your comments. Is she too young to know the real issues here?
PM: As I said the other day. My attitude to this has not changed one bit. And that is, the protection of children and the innocence of children is of fundamental importance. Secondly, if people want to make a political point in opposition to me, I don't think it is right they use under age children to make that point.
They can engage the political debate as much as they want, it is a free country. But when it comes to the protection of children, I say that should be a foremost responsibility for each of us and I add this: How can you credibly expect a six year old girl to have made their own independent decision about this matter in the beginning.
I go back to my point, we have a view about what constitutes, you know, a responsible time for people to take decisions for themselves. Children, I don't think fit within that category. We have got to board a plane. Last one.
JOURNALIST: On world youth day, how embarrassing would it be for Australia if the unions carry through on their threat to disrupt?
PM: Can I say that leaving aside the legalities of industrial action. I think it is very important for Australia, all Australians, including this trade union, to treat the visit of his holiness the Pope with appropriate respect.
He is a welcome guest in Australia, Australia is honoured to have the holy father with us. And all Australians, including those in this particular union, I believe should treat him with respect.


I am pleased to announce that Japan will join Australia as Co-chair of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
At our bilateral meeting tonight Prime Minister Fukuda informed me that Ms Yoriko Kawaguchi has agreed to be co chair of the Commission.
Ms Kawaguchi is highly respected and experienced political leader in Japan and a current member of the upper house of the Japanese Parliament.
As a former Environment Minister and Foreign Minister Ms Kawaguchi has a wealth of political and international experience that will greatly assist the work of the commission.
Ms Kawaguchi will join Gareth Evans as Co-chair of the International Commission which I announced after visiting Hiroshima last month.
The Commission aims to reinvigorate the global effort against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to strengthen the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) by seeking to shape a global consensus in the lead up to the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
These are goals that Australia and Japan both share, as key partners working together with other like-minded countries to advance the goals of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
The NPT is the most significant and successful arms control instrument of the nuclear age. While remaining the cornerstone of global disarmament efforts, the NPT is facing increased pressure and strain by the actions of countries such as North Korea and Iran.
The NPT's review is an opportunity for Australia, Japan and other like-minded countries to ensure the treaty provides a robust framework for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation that will serve us into the future.
In our discussion, Prime Minister Fukuda and I reaffirmed our commitment to working together through this Commission to strengthen the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime and to reinforce the NPT, including working to achieve a successful outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
I look forward to working with Japan, Ms Kawaguchi, Mr Evans, together with other friends and partners, in taking forward this very important initiative.


PM: Today the heads of Government from around the world met as major economies on the great global and environmental and economic challenge of our age, climate change.
These 16 economies represent 80% of global greenhouse gas emissions and my message as the Prime Minister of Australia was very simple. The buck stops with us. It doesn't stop with anyone else it stops with us.
We represent 80% of global greenhouse gas emissions and when it comes to the negotiations which are underway at the present, political momentum, political direction is necessary if we are to negotiate to achieve an outcome for the planet. Both for our long term economic future and our long term environmental future.
I argued in the context of the meeting for the need for developed and developing countries to work towards a grand bargain. A grand consensus, a new consensus on action. Requiring us to commit to targets, requiring us to commit to actions, requiring us to commit to the proper exchange of technology capable of delivering those targets and commitments. We can arrive at the Copenhagen conference at the end of next year no better off than we are now. With positions left unresolved without movement having occurred. Whereas my argument and the belief of the Australian Government is that we need to see all governments, developed and developing countries begin to fashion a grand consensus, a grand bargain on climate change between now and Copenhagen.
The challenge will be great and there has been no huge breakthrough at this particular meeting. It is one step along the road, but I think I can speak in relation to all heads of Government who attended this meeting. There is a clear focus on the need for a substantive outcome at Copenhagen.
We also discussed the global financial situation and the challenge which it represents to the global economy. On this question and our engagement with international monetary funds it's quite clear that the global financial crisis is far from over.
It's a requirement for increased global governance when it comes to global financial markets. A requirement also for within that governance for greater global transparency. By no means is the world out of the woods yet when it comes the financial crisis, which began to unfold in August last year.
Therefore it's important that the efforts through the IMF, the financial stability forum and through other international actions, pointing towards an enhanced global governance regime for global financial markets. The cornerstone of which must be greater transparency.
On the challenges facing global oil and global oil prices it is quite clear that we face challenges in global supply and that's why we need to see greater foreign investment access to global oil supplies. Greater investment also in greater refining capacity.
On the demand side it's quite plain that we need to see action in terms of greater energy efficiency within those new and emerging economies which represent such a large slice of global demand when it comes to oil markets (inaudible).
Also transparency in markets to ensure that there is clear accurate market information concerning the operation of oil markets today and the concerns raised by many of my colleagues and myself about the continued manipulation of markets possibly by speculators. One part of an overall equation.
I also indicated my appreciation for the actions of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Gordon Brown with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in convening a conference recently on these questions and look forward to the Government of the United Kingdom holding a further such conference later this year.
It's important that this agenda on the supply side, the demand side and the market transparency side be taken further and not be allowed to drop.
On global food its quite plain from our discussions with the President of the World Bank, Bob Zoellick today that we have a major emerging problem across many developing countries today.
This has required specific action both by the world food program and by the World Bank to meet contingency requirements for various developing countries suffering from immediate food crisis, leading to social instability and also practical areas of support when it comes to the provision of food technology, seed supplies and fertilisers.
There is an immediate crisis to which we we're alerted by the World Bank which requires further contribution by us Australia and other governments to international efforts by the World Bank now. And I confirm today that Australia will be contributing a further $50 million to the fund operated by the bank to deal with emergency food requirements.
Also in relation to food the argument that I put as did many others was on the question of the current Doha round and the need to secure a positive outcome for world trade.
Long term this is critical in terms of freeing up global food markets and to ensure that agricultural producers across the world receive proper market prices for their food production.
There is a ministerial meeting scheduled for later this month, the 21st July, and my argument and the argument of many heads of Government is that we need to provide every level of political support necessary to ensure that we get a positive outcome from the Doha round.
This will very much be one of the last opportunities to yield a positive outcome and there is the ingredients as we are advised by some today of a possible deal being struck, it will still be hard, it will still be tough, but political momentum is necessary and it is directly relevant for the long term interests of agricultural producers and consumers around the world.
Finally I'd say there was consensus around the room today about the global nature of the challenges we face. The great global challenge that is climate change, the great global challenge which lies in the turbulence we see one year on in global financial markets, global oil prices, global food prices. All challenges to the stability of our own national economies as well.
Where that lead us all is a requirement for greater coherent global action in responding to these challenges and I believe with the common resolve on the part of all heads of Governments attending this conference today, to work in that direction.
I would congratulate the Prime Minister of Japan, Prime Minister Fukuda for convening this conference. It has represented a positive stepping stone towards further acts of co-operation which are necessary across these agenda's over the next 6,12 and 18 months.
I congratulate Prime Minister Fukuda in particular (inaudible) achieved with the G8 in moving the (inaudible) of G8 in the direction of a greenhouse gas reduction target of at least 50% by 2050. Which is reflected in the G8 communiqué.
I'm happy to take your questions
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd to you say that there is a global (inaudible). The five outreach countries yesterday set out a 2020 target for climate change of up to 40%, now is that 40% target something you're willing to respect if that's the bargain that has to be struck?
PM: What I said accurately was that there is a need for a global bargain, there is a need for a global consensus on this question which requires targets on the part of developing economies and commitments which are measurable and verifiable on the part of developing countries.
This occurs within the framework of common but differentiating responsibilities between those two groups of countries. (inaudible) the G5 that articulated the position in terms of interim trajectories or interim targets on the part of the developed world, that is part of the continuing negotiations between us. The argument that I put today is that what is the legitimate interest on the part of developing countries, that is what targets will the developed world put on the table.
What is the legitimate interests of developing economies, what commitments, specific commitments of national action will the developing world undertake. And what I argued today is its necessary for us all to engage in a open and transparent exchange on these questions well in advance of the Copenhagen conference.
If you simply fail to be transparent with one another on that prior to Copenhagen there's a great danger that we reach Copenhagen with no substantial advance being achieved and with many of these fundamental questions left unaddressed. And on the question of interim targets on the way through, that will be part of the negotiations on the way through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I believe G8 in its commitment to a goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2050 represents a step forward. Of course there is a long, long way to go and part of that distance refers to the previous question, which is the gap between developed and developing countries on targets and on national commitments by developing countries and on the technology that is necessary to give effect to those targets and commitments.
These are the three elements which I described in my remarks as forming the ingredients of a long term grand bargain across the developed and developing countries of the world, if we are to achieve an outcome at Copenhagen.
The great danger is that no work occurs on this of substance between now and Copenhagen in which case our negotiators are left with no where to go.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you said there was no great breakthrough on climate change and you've indicated that there could be danger for Copenhagen. Given that there was no great breakthrough either on oil prices and food prices, do you feel that the G8 is the right place to discuss these issues and shouldn't there be somewhere else where such issues can be discussed separately and more precisely?
PM: I think if I could make a comment as a first time participant in these gatherings. You have for the first time a heads of Government meeting of the major economies on the question of climate change. And as a participant in that discussion there was frankness and candour around the table from developed and developing countries about possible ways forward.
What I found remarkable was there was no fundamental dispute about the science. That there was no fundamental dispute about the need for global action, what there is a disagreement about is the level of action required across the developing world and across the developed world. We've known that for some time, the key answer to your question Dennis lies in what happens at head of Government level between now and Copenhagen.
At the end of the meeting today, and Prime Minister Fukuda may have already indicated this in his public remarks, there is a commitment for the major economies meeting to convene again at heads of Government level in order to provide guidance to negotiators between now and Copenhagen.
That is likely to occur off the back of the G8 Summit next year.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd did the issue of the Indian-US nuclear co-operation agreement come up in your bi-lateral with the Indian Prime Minister (inaudible) and what is the Australian Governments attitude with the (inaudible)
PM: I had a very long and good conversation with the Indian Prime Minister, both prior to today's meeting, during today's meeting as we were sitting next to one another and in a subsequent bi-lateral.
I would thank the Indian Prime Minister for extending to me an official invitation to visit India at the end of the year, I look forward to taking that up.
We also discussed the importance on the part of both our Governments in broadening and deepening the Australia-India relationship and we are both committed to doing that. And that occurs across the economy, our political dialogue and also our broader security defence cooperation as well.
The recent decision by the Indian Government in terms of its nuclear arrangements with the United States was raised. This matter is still to be progressed in terms of India's separate negotiations with the IAEA in terms of the safeguards agreement and then that matter proceeds as I would understand it through the normal processes of the nuclear supplies group.
What I've indicated is that we in Australia would of course examine the content of that IAEA safeguards agreement with the Indians once it's concluded.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: I've indicated that Australia will examine that document and of course we would do so given the interest which the United States and India attach to it. We would examine it constructively, but we need to see the document first.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: We had no discussion on that particular question and the position of the Australian Government as they say in the classics is well known.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister it can be difficult for people at home to expect that after all this heavyweight artillery being gathered here, nothing happened on oil. Nothing no matter what you might say incremental as it is happened on climate change. Aren't you going to go back with disappointing news?
PM: I think before I came Malcolm I indicated that I did not expect breakthroughs in this meeting in Hokkaido. I think it is important however to put what occurred here into its context.
Prior to the G8 meeting there was less clear cut resolve on the part of the G8 in terms of a commitment to reduce by at least 50% by 2050 greenhouse gas emissions as a global target. As I said that represents an advance on where the position was before.
Secondly and in response to Dennis's question I indicated that the Japanese Prime Minister has concluded there should be a further MEM meeting on the back of the G8 Summit in order to provide specific guidance to negotiators in the lead up to the Copenhagen conference at the end of next year.
That is an advance by way of the process with which we are engaged. Far too often Ministerial negotiators are left out there, let me use an Australianism “swinging in the breeze” in the absence of sufficient political direction from heads of Government on concrete proposals and I believe that proposal from the Japanese Prime Minister, supported by the Chancellor of Germany and others, and the Italians is a good way forward.
On the question of global oil, the initiative by the United Kingdom through the Jeddah conference to bring together global oil producers and consumers within a single forum to examine three propositions. Constraints to supply, efficiency when it comes to the demand side and transparency in markets does represent an advance and the fact that the British Prime Minister has indicated a further meeting on that I believe is useful.
The truth is what emerged from today's discussion and it is a difficult reality for the peoples of the world who are experiencing great challenges at present from escalating oil prices, escalating food prices as well as instability in global financial markets, is that these problems are all inherently global.
Every head of Government around the world who attended this meeting spoke of their own domestic experience of these three sets of global challenges and as the Prime Minister of the UK indicated and I don't think I would be speaking out of turn reflecting his comments in terms of the meeting. We are the first generation of world leaders to have to deal with each of these matters as genuinely global challenges requiring global responses.
Climate change, oil, food, financial markets. Individual national action does not solve each of those problems.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I please ask your impressions of Hokkaido?
PM: I've got to say having only arrived yesterday I can give you limited impressions but having stayed in the Sapporo last night it's an extraordinary city. I didn't realise it was so large and so cosmopolitan; as I flew out in a helicopter today I could see the dimensions of the city.
Secondly the landscape is extraordinary, it's beautiful and flying across the mountain ranges here today gave us a great insight into the natural beauty of this northern island of Japan. And could I also say this as someone who grew up on a farm in rural Australia, it was good to see large broad acre farms on the drive here today and it reminded us of the extent to which this part of Japan is a key agricultural region as I understand it also having grown up on a dairy farm myself - a key centre for the Japanese dairy industry.
So I thank the local government in Hokkaido for making all of us as heads of Government feel so welcome in this country.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd John Howard said you're more interested in the process of Government than opportunity for leadership. (Inaudible)
PM: Are you quoting particular remarks today from Mr Howard...
JOURNALIST: ...(inaudible)
PM: ..... ok good.
Well can I say that if you are dealing with the global challenge of climate change, you can wish that you can get an outcome from the entire world in a particular meeting, or you can contribute to trying to deliver those outcomes through those meetings over time.
Lets face it, the truth is we are engaged in a global negotiation on climate change. Australia is the hottest and driest continent on earth. We run the risk of therefore being the hardest hit and the earliest hit if climate change remains unabated. Therefore we in Australia have no alternative on climate change alone to be active in the global negotiations and we intend to be. The alternative implemented by the previous government was to absent yourself from the negotiating table effectively all together. I'd much rather be at the negotiating table, shape the long term global solution, maximising Australian interests, but maximising the global interests on the way through.
Regrettably that takes a few meetings on the way through. You could unilaterally hope it was somewhat different to that but reality suggests its not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the position of the United States is (inaudible)
PM: What is interesting and important is that this meeting of major economies is in fact an initiative of President Bush's. Therefore if you look at the three elements in what might underpin a long term grand bargain or grand consensus between developed and developing countries. It lies in effective targets on the part of developed economies, measurable and verifiable actions on the part of developing economies. But thirdly and critically what you do in the area of the technologies, assistance and carbon markets to give effect to those targets and commitments. In or the technologies got to be.
The United States through President Bush has been very strong on the need to support technological innovation. That's why the MEM was commissioned in part and that certainly has been reflected in subsequent US policy.
The only thing I'd say about the United States is this, some people in Australia ask about the commitment to a carbon target while reducing our greenhouse gas emissions in Australia by 60% by 2050. Both the Republicans and the Democrats in the United States in terms of candidates for the US Presidential elections have commitments equal to or more ambitious than that for America at the same time frame.
So I think both in terms of the current administration and whichever administration may replace it. America I believe represents for us a fellow partner for getting good outcome for the globe.
JOURNLAIST:Inaudible
PM: Well the big challenge for Doha lies on 21 July. If I sensed anything around the room today it was a fresh and renewed energy of resolve on the part of global heads of Government to try and make this 21 July Ministerial meeting work.
If we manage to make it work given the softness of the global economy at present. Given the difficulties in global financial markets and given therefore some of the negative projections for the global economies for the year ahead. A real positive shot in the arm would be a positive outcome on Doha as a result of the 21 July ministerial meeting.
The Secretary General of the WTO convened this meeting. Those who I think were involved in the meeting believe the ingredients of a deal are there. It requires political will, this could still fail. But can I say it's worth the push - and that occurs under this administration. What may happen in the future, post the November elections in the United States, and new administration coming in January well let's take all that one step at a time.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: Well remember there are 27 States in Europe who already operate with an emissions trading scheme. There are more than 10 states in the United States who are operating with an emissions trading scheme. The country in which we are at the moment, Japan, is debating an emissions trading scheme - so this has been going on for some time around the world.
Secondly, we intend to prosecute our own debate when it comes to our carbon pollution reduction scheme. Calmly, methodically, in a measured way in the period ahead, our ambition remains.
Our plan remains, our intention remains for 2010 and as I've said consistently we'll be entirely mindful of the response of the Australian business community to our green paper on the implementation arrangements which flow from that.
Anything else?
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: The relationship with Malaysia for Australia is very important. If you look at the trade numbers alone there's a very strong economic relationship and my ambition is to make it stronger. Secondly, both the previous Australian Government under Prime Minister Howard and I believe the Government under my own leadership wants to beef the relationship with Prime Minister Badawi's Government. We think there is great opportunity to do that at the political level and remember our countries have long been linked in a security sense through the five powered defence arrangement.
I believe this is a strong important broad based relationship, remember so many Malaysian leaders have been previously trained in Australia, in Australian higher education institutions under the Colombo plan and other university arrangements since then.
The challenge is to take what is an existing good relationship with Malaysia and if we can across those three critical areas make it even better. So this is one further investment in that and I hope to build on the work of my predecessor in so doing.
Last question then I've got to go.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible (Canadian question)
PM: I had a good conversation just now with Prime Minister Harper about our respective challenges when it comes to greenhouse gas emissions and we've had discussions on this in the past and we'll continue to dialogue on this in the future as well.
Australia somewhat like Canada, but I don't profess to be an expert on the provincial arrangements which exist in Canada, ran a risk in recent times of there being state based regimes for emissions trading (inaudible), which were incomplete.
Therefore that was one of the reasons why we indicated prior to the last Australian national elections that we, if we were elected, would introduce an emissions trading or a carbon pollution reduction scheme. We intend to do that.
When we release our green paper very soon we will then engage in a period of comprehensive consultation with the community sector and the business community on implementation arrangements. That will take some time, but our conclusion in Australia is that a carbon market is a market based solution within that overall carbon target in terms of providing aid, the certainty you need in terms of the overall cap of carbon pollution and secondly, providing flexibility within that through the operation of the carbon market for businesses to make their own decisions.
That's the view that we've taken, each countries national circumstances are different.
Thank you very much.


PM: I've just spoken to the Chief of Defence Force who has advised me that Signaller Sean McCarthy was killed yesterday afternoon on active duty while on service in Afghanistan. On active duty in service of the Australian nation.
He was killed on operations in Oruzgan Province by an improvised explosive device. Two other members of the Australian Defence Force have been wounded. One is being treated in Tarin Kowt and the other in Kandahar. I've been advised by the CDF that their injuries are non life threatening.
Sean McCarthy was 25 years old. He joined the army in Brisbane some seven years ago. He has recently been a member of the Signal Squadron embedded within the SAS in Perth.
Sean McCarthy was a fine Australian soldier, in the best traditions of the Australian Defence Force. He'd been commended for his previous active service on two overseas deployments, one earlier in Afghanistan and one also in East Timor.
Sean McCarthy is a terrible loss to his family, a terrible loss to the Australian Defence Force and a terrible loss to the Australian nation.
The Australian Defence Force is the pride of the Australian nation and the pride of the Australian people.
My thoughts, my prayers go to his family at this terrible time. My thoughts, my prayers and the deepest thoughts and prayers of the Australian nation of people go to his family, his loved ones. They go to the family and loved ones of all members of the Australian Defence Force on deployment abroad engaged in difficult and dangerous operations.
Take your questions
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does this highlight once again the dangers that Australian forces do face in Afghanistan? That it's not an easy mission for them there?
PM: As I've said before, this is a difficult, dangerous and bloody operating environment. We have lost Australian forces before, my fear is that we will lose them again. This is a terrible loss for his family today and we honour his service to his country.
JOURNALIST: Do you know, are there are any issues about protection on vehicles etcetera that this incident raises at all?
PM: The Chief of the Defence Force and I discussed the circumstances surrounding this death. This of course will be investigated fully by the Australian Defence Force.
We are dealing with improvised explosive devices. These are the source of many of the attacks in recent times in Afghanistan. Of course, we are also dealing with a time of year as the weather has warmed where there is an intensity of operations as well on the part of the enemy.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd do you know how close he was to (inaudible) and Tarin Kowt. To the base camp?
PM: I'm advised by the CDF not to speculate publicly on the location of the operation.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd is Afghanistan you will be raising in (inaudible) this afternoon?
PM: In my discussions with various other contributing states including for example the Canadians, and others, this would be a matter of normal discussion. Many countries contribute to Afghanistan. Many have recently increased their troop deployment, including the French.
This is continued concerning for all contributing states. As I said earlier this year in Bucharest, we in Australia would be subjecting our deployment and the overall success of our strategy, that is the combined allied strategy in Afghanistan, to annual review. That is an important and logical way to proceed.
As I've said before, when it comes to our future deployment in Afghanistan, we are there for the long term, we are there for the long haul. But, there is no such thing as a blank cheque.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you're here for the G8 meeting on climate change can I just ask you quickly, what is your view of the agreement that was reached yesterday, that talks about a shared vision and 50 per cent cuts? Does that cut far enough, are you happy with that?
PM: What I'd prefer to do, just because of the news we're just received, is focus just on the Afghanistan matter and this terrible loss just now.
I am speaking to at length this afternoon, I am to happy to  - 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm happy to speak to you on any other matter then.
If there is concern about that. (Inaudible) I'll say something about that then.
When it comes to the globe and the challenges we all face, I will be speaking with world leaders about the content of the conclusions yesterday from the G8. I have said, and Ill say again, that all nations must put their shoulder to the wheel in doing more to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions.
That becomes now more important because of the science. And it is important not just that we achieve progress in our individual talks here, but we don't know how much progress can be achieved.
It is much more important that our negotiators involved in the detailed negotiations between now and the Copenhagen conference at the end of next year, are given sufficient political momentum, and sufficient political support, to bring about an effective agreement.
This will be a tough road, it will be a hard road and we must do everything we can as world leaders to ensure that our negotiators have as effective a negotiating mandate as possible.


BADAWI: I must say that I am happy to welcome Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd to Malaysia and of course this visit is important. It's the first opportunity that I have to discuss with him on matters of bi-lateral relations. Australia and Malaysia have very long years of diplomatic relations and many activities and many areas of common concern.
Many programs that have been doing very well within Malaysia and Australia and I like to therefore touch on a few to highlight some of the points and programs that we have agreed upon.
We agreed at our meeting to establish a formal link at the diplomatic level. That is to insist on regular meetings begin of Foreign Ministers of Malaysia and Australia. This mechanism is to ensure there is regular consultation on matters of common concern to both Australia and Malaysia.
We have also agreed to work and holiday visa program. We should be signing a memorandum of understanding after the discussions have been held between the officials of both Australia and Malaysia.
The focus of this program is to enable the young people particularly University students from both countries to visit Malaysia and Australia for extended holidays and to be allowed to take temporary employment during such visits.
I have also enhasised the importance of, I regard it as important, that Australia also send their students to study in Malaysia. We have Australian students but thousands of student studying in Australia from the Columbo plan days and we have benefited the higher education in Australia. And I think its about time we should receive Australian students coming to Malaysia and we are looking into the possibility of setting up what we call a twin sister universities between Australian and Malaysian universities.
We have also agreed to establish a pilot sister schools program. Which will involve at the start of the project 6 schools in Malaysia and 6 schools in the State of Victoria in Australia. I think it's a very exciting program that will involve young people to get to know one another, to get to know of our respective countries. It is exciting and it is a beginning of the linkage. Talking about linkage we must provide more opportunities for the young people to get to know one another.
Because Australia and Malaysia in the years to come I'm sure will become closer and closer in the many cooperation, because the many cooperation programs that we are engaged in not only at ASEAN level but also at other levels, other forums.
We agreed to pool our resources on a joint Malaysia-Australia program to train teachers from Afghanistan. This I believe is a project that will usher in a new chapter of cooperation within Malaysia and Australia that involves a third party. This institute certainly will be our first experience in helping Afghanistan to provide the teaching of teachers and at the same time the teaching of teachers of teachers. Is that how you put it?
The teaching of teachers and it is a program that certainly will come within the scope of our duties, peacekeeping under the banner of the United Nations.
We discussed other areas of cooperation including agricultural, including cooperation, collaboration in the field of R&amp;D, biotechnology and other fields too.
We discussed the Malaysia-Australia free trade agreement. We have agreed to revisit the subject and to put new emphasis in the negotiations. However we are aware at the moment that is also going on in discussions within ASEAN, Australia-New Zealand FTA.
Malaysia would certainly prefer that we pay more attention, we focus on this negotiation first, after which then we can proceed with what we can do bilaterally.
We discussed a number of international issues but time did not permit, I was very keen to talk to Prime Minister Kevin Rudd on the subject of the G8 Hokkaido Summit. I certainly would like to know some of the decisions that have been made. Especially that concerns the increasing price of oil and of course the world food prices.
It was a good meeting I must say, very good meeting. We have no problem at all about discussing any subject that we want and the result has been in my view very productive and constructive in terms of developing and widening bilateral relations between Malaysia and Australia.
The Prime Minister
PM: Thank you Prime Minister Abdullah. Thank you for your warm hospitality in receiving me as the Prime Minister of Australia here in Malaysia today on this my first official visit.
Whenever Australians visit Malaysia we feel as if we are among friends, because so many Malaysians have studied at Australian universities and the people to people contact between our two countries is vast.
If you look over the spread of time some 300,000 Malaysians have studied at Australian universities. Many have chosen to make Australia their home, many more of course have come back here to make great contributions to this country. But what I find each time I have come to KL in the past is as you walk around and meet people you are among friends. And I have felt that very much here today, as the Prime Minister of Australia visiting here for the first time in that capacity.
If you look at the breadth of the Australia-Malaysia relationship it covers the field. If you look at our long standing defence ties, they go back almost to the beginning and their have been since the Second World War some 35,000 Australian servicemen who have served in either Malaya or Malaysia in the intervening decades. And the fabric of our defence cooperation continues, our armed forces continue to work closely together and the Prime Minister and I have explored ways in which that could be expanded into the future.
On the economic front we are among each others top ten economic partners and therefore this relationship of mutual economic significance and mutual economic benefit. That is why our discussions have focussed also on the future of the Australia-New Zealand ASEAN free trade agreement and the negotiations which are still underway in that agreement and our aspiration to have any outstanding differences resolved as quickly as possible.
The people to people ties I've spoken about. Such large contact between our two countries not just historically but today some 15,000 to 20,000 Malaysian students studying in Australian universities, all making a huge contribution to the fabric of what for us is a very important relationship.
On the specific matters which the Prime Minister has raised. The first I would draw attention to is the common project we've embarked on together to help the people of Afghanistan. The people of Afghanistan have gone through an extraordinarily difficult period in recent time and of course the security of that country is still very much a matter which is being contested.
Australia has been committed there for some time. What we'd like to do with our friends in Malaysia is this, through our universities, work together to train teachers and principles to work in the schools of Afghanistan. Therefore the proposal we have now agreed upon is that we will embark conjointly on a program to train the trainer. That is the training to be done here in Malaysia, assisted and supported by Australian universities. Assisted and supported in turn by Australian Government through our development assistance program.
Security is one part of Afghanistan's future and it is core. But development and education is equally important long term. In our own experience in Oruzgan Province in Afghanistan the security task is enormous. But beyond that, beyond that and the loss of lives that we in Australia have suffered in recent times as a consequence of that action, it is important through provincial reconstruction, getting economic development going and building the education infrastructure of Afghanistan that so much of the hard work is still to be done.
In Malaysia we have an extraordinary exemplar Muslim society and Muslim country in the world. A country which can comfortably partner with the particular needs of the education system in Afghanistan and we look forward therefore to partnering with our friends in Malaysia to together help these people in their path to development.
The second area I would draw attention to is the agreement we have reached as two countries on the conjoint training which we will provide as Australia and Malaysia of forces to be dedicated for peacekeeping purposes around the world. Malaysia has already made an extraordinary contribution to peacekeeping operations under the United Nations going back to the days of the Belgian Congo. And Australia has been engaged in peacekeeping operations since the inception of the United Nations in 1945.
Together we've worked out that we've probably been engaged in some 100 plus peacekeeping operations around the world. And today Australia relies heavily upon Malaysia's contributions still in East Timor and of course Malaysia continues still to make a strong contribution in other theatres including (inaudible) in a highly challenged and difficult operating theatre.
But here's the practical challenge for the future. Many countries wish to put up their hand and say they wish to contribute to peacekeeping operations in the world but may not have the specific training and expertise to do so. What we've agreed today as Prime Ministers is conjointly Australia and Malaysia to provide joint training platforms, programs and expertise between our two armed forces for regional countries wishing to participate in UN peacekeeping operations around the world.
If I can find two characteristics, a common characteristic which comes out of these two projects, that is the one in relation to Afghanistan and teachers and education and the others as it relates to UN peacekeeping operations around the world, I believe this points to a new phase in the relationship between Australia and Malaysia. Not just expanding the cooperation between our two countries but our two countries together working in common operations around the world.
The education sphere when it comes to Afghanistan, the peacekeeping sphere as it applies to the requirements of the United Nations. And this is the sort of cooperation which is possible between existing close friends and partners.
The other matters as the Prime Minister has indicated  -  a sister schools program between Malaysian junior secondary schools and those in Victoria, a principle that we've embraced to embrace the working holiday visa program between our two countries and our commitments to establish a regular Foreign Ministerial forum between our two countries with the ambition it translating into a joint Ministerial commission over time.
Prime Minister Abdullah thank you very much for having me in this country. This is a vibrant democracy and I congratulate you and the people of Malaysia for the way in which you've handled democratic transformation of this country. It is great to be here in this the administrative capital of Malaysia and see these marvellous boulevards, these great buildings all which have been developed really in the matter of the last decade. Its an extraordinary sight to see.
When I look at the evolution of Canberra, our nations capital over 75 years and what has occurred here in the last 10 years. I've got to say from an Australian point of view this is a remarkable achievement.
Prime Minister thank you for your hospitality and we'll take questions from the ladies and gentlemen of the press.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: This is to me, yeah and sorry could you repeat the question.
JOURNALIST: inaudible
PM: Oh the Five Powers Defence Arrangements. I will answer and I'm sure Prime Minister Abdullah will have something to say about that as well.
The great thing about Five Powers Defence Arrangements is it provided a framework for cooperation between our militaries going back decades and as a consequence I can only speak on behalf the Australian defence force. We have benefited from that cooperation enormously.
Australian soldiers speak very highly of their Malaysian counterparts and I believe we have benefited enormously from the joint training exercises in which we have engaged and also the other exchanges of personnel which have been associated with that.
From an Australian point of view the FPDA therefore and the cooperation specifically with Malaysia which that permits, enhances the security of our wider region and certainly from an Australian national interest point of view is an agreement we would wish sustained into the future. Prime Minister
BADAWI: We did discuss on the subject of FPDA and are views are almost the same. So there's no such thing in my mind as the FPDA is irrelevant. It is relevant, it provides excellent opportunities for our forces to meet and to undergo various training and operational exercises and it has benefited Malaysia in many ways. This engagement that leads to cooperation among the defence people.
JOURNALIST: I have a question for both Prime Ministers. Its about the G8 Summit. Mr Badawi first of all the G8 (inaudible)
BADAWI: Well we had a chance discuss very briefly on the subject of the G8 meeting of Hokkaido. I was telling Prime Minister Rudd that we should discuss this at dinner tonight. But however we did touch a little bit on the subject of the climate change. But I have always had the view the developed countries should do more, should be greater contribution. And the failure to do that of course is regrettable but what else can we do they have so much interests, and their interests are so big. But I know that the there are certain difficulties among members. Some on our side China and India have a, very strong position on this. Of course they have very persuasive, very strong arguments but still it does not help us to deal with the subject of climate change and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
PM: Thank you Prime Minister and we will continue our conversations about the G8 both on climate change, global oil and food security over dinner tonight and I look forward to that opportunity.
I think on the question of climate change as I said in Hokkaido. The challenge for the world both developed and developing countries is to fashion a grand consensus, a grand bargain on the future of climate change involving the responsibilities of both developed economies and developing economies.
We understand where the Bali road map has left us, which is a principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. For developed economies that is commitment to targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. For developing economies that is a commitment to ensure that measurable and verifiable actions are undertaken by those economies.
Here's the challenge. For us all, prior to we get to Copenhagen at the end of next year to indicate to each other what action is possible on both parts. The grave danger we face is that if we reach Copenhagen and we do not have a transparency among us that the negotiators at Copenhagen conclude that they don't have a mandate to go forward.
That I think would be a loss for the planet. It would be a loss for the developed world, it would be a loss for the developing world and the planet we all share. And this challenge that we all face, which affects our economies, which affects our environment and affects the next generation of Malaysians and the next generation of Australians is something which is too important for us simply to become bogged down on.
So that challenge we face is for both sides in this argument, both sides in this debate, both sides in these negotiations to honour the principles that we committed to at the Bali roadmap. But to translate those into real negotiating positions by the time we get to Copenhagen.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
PM: I haven't seen those comments which you attribute. I assume from Foreign Minister Mukherjee is that correct? But I did have the great opportunity of spending an hour and a half or so with Foreign Minister Mukherjee in Canberra only a short time ago.
And I was able to build on that conversation yesterday with a number of good conversations with Prime Minister Singh of India. On the question of the ARF which in part Prime Minister Abdullah and I discussed today as well as part of our regions architecture. It is good that ASEANS original concept among itself which is to ensure peace and amity and cooperation among the participating States is a principle to then be extended to the wider region which gave birth of course to the ASEAN regional forum. Which is a basis for dialogue on common security concerns across the region.
Of course the membership of the ARF is wide and it is large. But that proposal of course from the Indians is something which should be considered further. From my point of view I think its important that the region continue to discuss among itself its future arrangements. ASEAN has played such a vital role in stabilising South East Asia and if we we're to look back over the last 30 years or so where ASEAN was and where it has come to, this is a remarkable achievement.
As I said to the Prime Minister before think back in time. We had the challenges of the time of the insurgency, the challenges with (inaudible), we had the Vietnam war, we have the conflict in wider indo-china and in the evolution of ASEAN what we have seen is these internal conflicts effectively dealt with and instead a culture of security cooperation and dialogue among the now expanded member states.
I think there is something for the nations of the Asia Pacific region beyond ASEAN's membership to learn from ASEAN's achievements in this respect. One of the reasons why I've advanced into the international debate myself a long term goal of an Asia Pacific Community is so that APEC in the future may have a capacity to evolve in that direction and of course that's one of the reasons why I've dispatched an envoy Richard Wolcott a former senior Australian diplomat to begin discussions with our friends and partners in the region on the possibility of that concept becoming a reality by 2020.
JOURNALIST: Inaudible
BADAWI: Well we do not impose any limit what type of subject that can be brought up in our discussions. I think I have a very good discussion with Prime Minister Rudd on a wide range of topics. What I have just informed you of was just some of those very (inaudible) points of our discussion.
I look forward to continuing cooperation with Prime Minister Rudd and I think this stage of Malaysia-Australia cooperation I must say that this stage of our cooperation has benefited us more than it has before. And we wish to continue to use this space so that we can expand and deepen cooperation.
Although we have a long history of cooperation in the area of education, but today we are talking about the younger students, the students who are in secondary school. We have the 6 sister school arrangement with their counterpart and at the same time we are also encouraging more Australian students to study in Malaysia and that's important.
It's about time that we see Australians coming here, we have been going to Australia for education since before independence in the 50's when the Colombo plan was introduced. We have benefited a lot but I think now we must think in terms of cultural benefit, cultural exchange and that's important to begin with the young people and their established contacts at an early age. And that will stay with them and I hope that this is a good for the future of Australia and Malaysia.
PM: The Australian Government places high importance on the Australian-Malaysia relationship and it's not just because of the friendship about which I spoke before and it's not just because of the interests we have in common. What we want to do is take this good relationship between Australian and Malaysia to a new level and that is the expanded cooperation about which Prime Minister Abdullah has just spoken. And a new level not just what we do with each other bilaterally but a new level in what we can do together in partnership in the region and the world, and that I think is important.
On the question of the strength of this relationship and the robustness of the Malaysian democracy. What has been great for us all to see in the councils of the world is the strength of Malaysia's democratic processes and the fact that these democratic processes have been tested and applied in recent elections and that democracy is not just alive and well in Malaysia but flourishing. And that I think is a great testament to the political wisdom of the people of this country.
Thank you very much.
BADAWI: Thank you, thank you very much.


MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, very good to see you again.
PM: Good to be on the program.
MIDDLETON: This initiative that you have with Malaysia to educate Afghani, or Afghan teachers, what's the thinking?
PM: Well, Malaysia is a moderate Muslim country and regarded with great respect right across the Islamic world. So, when it comes to designing education programs, teacher training programs for Muslim countries with real challenges like Afghanistan, Malaysia has a lot to offer.
Secondly, what we would like to do is partner with our friends in Malaysia through our universities, with their universities, to assist with the funding, that is, bring Afghan principals, educators, education trainers to Malaysia. Use our funding through our universities to assist in their training, send them back to Afghanistan to in turn train more school administrators, more teachers. That is the simple proposal.
MIDDLETON: So, it is designed also I take it, to give Malaysia a real role in a real way in what is going on in Afghanistan at the moment?
PM: Well very much so, but I think for the Government of Malaysia's educators that has been its ambition for some time.
Part of what we are trying to do with our friends in Kuala Lumpur is this, to provide new avenues whereby Australia and Malaysia can work together in the world. Rather than just focussing our efforts on our bilateral relationship, which is in fine working order, it is a good relationship, it is a great relationship, I am sure we will make it better again.
But it is actually taking those existing strengths and applying them to problems within our region and problems beyond our region. And that combination of Australian expertise, Australian funding, Malaysian expertise, and it's great credibility as a mainstream Muslim country, I think it will help the people of Afghanistan.
Because in Afghanistan, if we can assist with the security as we for example are doing in Oruzgan Province, and we have lost troops again recently, tragically. But in the provincial reconstruction effort, can assist in flowing teachers through and education administrators through, to help build the civil society of that part of Afghanistan, it is the first step forward.
MIDDLETON: Looking at Afghanistan further, in the wake of the latest death of an Australian soldier in combat, your Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon declared pessimism about the course of the struggle there. Do you share that pessimism?
PM: Well, the Defence Minster have been quite right in, since the period that we formed the Government of Australia at the end of last year, to underline the absolute realism we have got to have about what we are up against in Afghanistan.
This is a very tough challenge and that is why the Defence Minister and myself and the Chief of Defence Force went to the Bucharest conference in March-April this year, with the members of NATO, to map out for the first time, an integrated political and military strategy for the future.
And what we said then was that we wanted to review progress against that strategy each year. So, that is the realism we have tried to inject into the Afghanistan campaign and we will be doing that ourselves.
MIDDLETON: Do you think the struggle against the Taliban can be won without the commitment of more troops as American commanders seem to fear that they don't have enough? What are your experts telling you about the level of troops as far as the war is needed?
PM: Our focus, logically, has been on Oruzgan province and that is where we are. We have an operation in Kandahar and then another at Tarin Kowt.
And our focus has been on what is necessary to secure that part of Afghanistan in partnership with our Dutch allies.
We are doing that, but it has got two arms to it. Again a military strategy, and a political and civil reconstruction strategy. We think we have got the access to work that through in our part of Afghanistan. As for the country at large, that's what I would like to have professionally evaluated in 12 months time.
Because, as I said before, Australia is there for the long haul. But we are not providing a blank cheque.
MIDDLETON: I take it you are still adamant are you that Australia will not be committing any further forces to the struggle in Afghanistan?
PM: There is no basis for any such addition. We of course will evaluate the success of this strategy that the have embraced as a group of nations in Bucharest, after a long debate, because we don't simply want things to be allowed to drift without review. You must have a focussed review. That strategy set some bench marks and that's the evaluation we will be undertaking, hopefully in partnership with others, come March/April next year.
MIDDLETON: You have just emerged from meetings with your Malaysian counterpart. You have described Malaysia as a flourishing democracy. I am wondering how that sits with the allegations around the last election of vote rigging and vote buying and the fact of detention without trial?
PM: Well on the actual operation of the parliamentary elections themselves, remember we've had an unprecedented outcome in these March 2008 elections. Why I said that we have a flourishing democracy in Malaysia is that outcome has been handled peacefully, it's been handled democratically and I think it's a great testament to the people of this country and their institutions that that was able to occur.
There are many people who didn't believe that that could be accommodated peacefully.
And that's why I said what I said about the robust state of the Malaysian democracy.
MIDDLETON: Did you contemplate meeting Opposition Leader Anwar Ibrihim while you were here, and why in the end did you not?
PM: Well, in the first instance it's important to note that the practice in this country back to time immemorial has been when there are visiting Heads of Government, that they do not meet Opposition Members of Parliament or Leaders of Oppositions, that has been the case for a long, long time. And certainly a practice adhered to by my predecessors in the Australian Government.
There's nothing different to what I'm doing to what my predecessors have done. That's the first point.
Second is, in terms of Anwar himself, as he's indicated on the record, no such request for any meetings were made either.
In the past, contact as appropriate has been maintained at other levels, including at the Foreign Minister, Foreign Ministry, level, with Opposition figures, that has been the case in the past and will be the case in the future.
MIDDLETON: You had a seat at the top table this week at the G8 and petrol, fuel prices, of course, were pretty high on the agenda. But, the talk of a blowtorch being applied to OPEC, seems like a pretty dim flame in terms of the outcome there, wasn't it?
PM: Well I seem to think that Dr Nelson was the person who was issuing public calls of that type in relation to the G8 meeting.
The important thing about the G8 meeting was that we had three things on the agenda. One, seeking to begin to force some consensus on the critical challenge of climate change. Two, the immediate challenge of global energy supply, energy security and global oil prices. And three, what to do about food security prices around the world as well.
And the meetings I attended with the 16 largest economies in the world, were well focussed around those three challenges. 
On the question of global oil prices, there was a clear discussion about the outcomes of the Jeddah Conference, which was convened by the King of Saudi and by Gordon Brown, and further, I understand the British Prime Minister will be having a similar meeting towards year's end.
On the critical questions of supply, that means greater investment in oil production. Secondly, greater investment in oil refining capacity. And thirdly, greater transparency in oil markets.
These are the three areas where concrete work has to occur. Press releases don't fix that.
MIDDLETON: But it also meant, doesn't it, that relief in the short term for consumers, whether they be in Australia, Malaysia or anywhere else around the world, is quite some way off?
PM: Well let's be blunt about it, the global oil price challenge did not materialise overnight. You've seen global oil prices ratchet up last year significantly, and they have of course gone up steeply again this year.
This has been a problem emerging for some time. And a large part of the global challenge lies in the difficulties in supply. Partly because of OPEC's arrangements. Partly because of possible problems in speculation from lack of market transparency. And partly because you don't have enough in foreign investment flowing into oil production and refining capabilities.
But specifically, where the conference in Jeddah, which brought together oil producers and consumers, established a framework for further work. But it's going to take some time to work through. There is no silver bullet on this. I'm the first one to place that clearly on the record. But at the global level, we still have a programme of work to be done.
MIDDLETON: Finally, climate change, the meeting between the G8 and some of the developing nations ended with pretty much a clear split with the developing nations demanding action via the industrialised world ahead of them and steeper action too.
It does seem, doesn't it, that we haven't really advanced much since the original Rio conference on climate change back in the early 90s. The question is getting more urgent and yet people are simply sticking to their own citadels?
PM: I believe the challenge is becoming more urgent because the science speaks very clearly on this. I don't think anyone is being responsible if they look at the science and say, ‘sorry, not for me buddy'  -  it's just there, it stares you in the face.
And guess what, it's doesn't readily acknowledge national political boundaries. Climate change goes across the lot. And therefore it affects everybody.
Secondly, some progress was achieved, albeit modest on the part of developed countries, in terms of their commitment to a goal of reducing global greenhouse emissions by 50 per cent  -  or at least 50 per cent  -  by 2050.
MIDDLETON: But there's no mechanism for doing it and no agreement on exactly how it should be done?
PM: Sure. And it's the other part of that reference in their communiqué points to where the operational negotiations are happening, which is the Bali road map, the climate change ministers, through until the Copenhagen Conference at the end of next year.
So, at one level, there was from the developed countries a signal that they are prepared to embrace a more ambitious target. That's at one level, and I say, that's modest.
I think where we need, what I describe as a grand bargain or a grand consensus, is for the developing world, who have a clear idea about what developed economies will do. And secondly, then, from the developing world, say to the rest of the international community, here are the actions we can take. And the third part in particular is critical.
What are the technology platforms, what are the market systems, which can give effect to these commitments and targets. They are the elements of a grand bargain or a grand consensus which needs to be struck. We're a long way off it.
But you can either sit back and say, ‘all too hard, sorry, not going to be part of it, say it's all, like Mr Howard used to say, it's a charitable Kyoto plot. Well, it's nothing to do with Kyoto, it's about the science, and whether you're going to act on it.
The Government of Australia under my leadership intend to act. It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, but it's the right thing to do.
And I contrast that with our political opponents. We are adopting a calm, measured, sensible, responsible approach to this great challenge of climate change. They adopt a new position every 24 hours. Who knows where they stand on this great challenge of our age.
MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Good to be with you.


I would like to thank the Malaysia-Australia Business Council and the Australia-Malaysia Business Council for hosting today's lunch.
The Councils do a great job in promoting the economic ties between our two countries and I want to acknowledge their contribution and commitment.
It is a great pleasure to back in Kuala Lumpur.
I have enjoyed visiting this city in the past.
Each time I come back the changes are remarkable.
Malaysia is a country with a remarkable record of national achievement and contribution to the region.
There is real strength to the ties between our two nations.
A strength that comes from the history we share.
But also a strength from the future we can shape together.
What ties us together are the bonds that have grown between our people over more than half a century.
During the Second World War Australians came to defend the Peninsula.
They fought, were captured, suffered and died here and in Singapore
In the Post-War years they came to provide security and stability as the modern nation of Malaysia came into being.
And all of these veterans formed a strong bond with this country and her people.
They still come back.
Each year, the veterans and the families of veterans of the Malaya Emergency and the Second World War come back and visit Malaysia.
Over 35,000 of them have served here from the Second World War on.
But the traffic has not all been one way.
Australia has been happy to welcome hundreds of thousands of Malaysians to study in Australia over the years.
In their teens and twenties, young Malaysians come to Australia to study.
They get to know about us.
They make friends.
They might even learn about rugby or Aussie rules football and other high cultural pursuits.
And they come back to Malaysia and they maintain those connections with Australia.
They maintain their memories of their time in Australia.
It is those personal experiences that tie our two countries together.
We also have the contemporary ties of migration.
The Malaysian-Australian community has made a great contribution to Australia's development  -  including through our Climate Change Minister Penny Wong, who has Malaysian heritage.
Going back, we have many ties between us.
But our relationship is also very contemporary.
And it is also a relationship about how we shape the future together.
We face many of the same challenges domestically, regionally and globally.
And we have great scope to cooperate even more closely in meeting those challenges.
Before I talk about how the new Australian Government hopes to build on our ties, I want to explain a little about the Government itself.
We were sworn in as the new Government just over seven months ago.
And we were elected on a platform of responsible economic management, investing in the nation's future in education and infrastructure, and tackling the big long-term challenges like climate change, water and our future in this Asia-Pacific region at the dawn of this century of the Asia Pacific.
In an uncertain global economy, the Government has brought down a responsible budget based on a 22 billion dollar surplus  -  one of the largest in the nation's history.
The Government has established an 11 billion dollar education fund to invest in the future needs of our universities and our vocational education institutions.
The Government has also established for the first time a 20 billion dollar Building Australia Fund to invest in our future infrastructure needs in roads, rail, ports and high-speed broadband.
And through the Council of Australian Governments, we have begun a process of national regulatory reform with the long-term goal of creating a seamless national market.
We have a big agenda.
But it is one we have to implement if we want to secure Australia's future.
When I was reading about the Malaysian Budget before coming here, I was struck by how similar our approaches are in some ways.
We both realise the importance of investing in our human and physical capital.
Both Governments are focusing on the same areas with the same aims  -  making sure our nations are as competitive as they can be in the highly competitive global economy of the 21st century.
This is not surprising.
Our populations are about the same size.
And both our populations are an example of bringing together people from diverse backgrounds.
Our two economies have a strong emphasis on resources.
But we are also both diverse economies  -  strong in the manufacturing, agricultural and services sectors.
To ensure prosperity for our nations, it is critical that we have the right domestic policy settings.
But we also need to engage the global economy beyond.
Malaysia has a rich history as an international trading centre.
It has been a meeting point of trade routes, cultures, peoples and religions for many centuries.
Most famous is the city of Melaka  -  home of Malaysian hero Hang Tuah  -  which dominated the region's trade routes in the 15th century and was a meeting point and melting pot for many of the diverse influences that gave rise to the modern nation of Malaysia.
As the 21st Century goes on, we are all going to have to follow the example of Melaka and ensure our prosperity and development through openness and engagement.
We will all need to be more connected, more globalised than ever.
If we want to thrive, we will need to be fully engaged with the global economy.
The development in the economic relationship between our two countries is an example of this.
We have both benefited from our economic engagement.
Malaysia is Australia's 11th-largest trading partner.
And Australia is Malaysia's 11th-largest trading partner.
The headline figures in the growth in trade have been impressive  -  trade has grown at over 10 per cent annually in recent years.
But what is more impressive is the range of connections being formed and the remarkable growth in Australian investment in Malaysia in recent years.
ANZ Bank has invested a billion dollars in Malaysia's Ambank.
Media Monitors are here with more than 50 staff here in Kuala Lumpur extending their very successful Australian business model to Malaysia.
Australian and Malaysian companies are working together here, in Australia and around the world in the resources sector.
And I understand that the Convention Centre we are in today is managed by an Australia-Malaysia joint venture.
The list goes on and on.
The members of the two Business Councils are at the forefront of this and I want to thank all of you here today for your efforts.
You are the people who are building these ties.
Whether you are large or small, your contribution to strengthening the economic ties between our two countries is important and appreciated.
Our job in government is to provide not only the domestic environment to help businesses thrive, but to help remove barriers to trade and investment around the world  -  to create more opportunities for you to do business; to make it easier for you to do business.
And there is a lot of work being done on this front.
We are negotiating an FTA between Australia and New Zealand and all of the ASEAN countries.
Australia and New Zealand have had a free trade agreement  -  what we call the Closer Economic Relations agreement (CER)  -  for 25 years.
The idea is to link our bilateral FTA with the ASEAN group.
It is a complex negotiation with 10 in the ASEAN group and two in the ANZ group.
But we are getting close to finalising the negotiations.
I am hopeful that we can overcome the last obstacles in the months ahead.
For many products, that would mean that the ASEAN and the ANZ markets become one  -  a market with a combined GDP of 2.3 trillion US dollars.
Bigger than India at 1.1 trillion US dollars and nearly three-quarters the size of China's 3.3 trillion dollar economy.
Already, four out of ten Australian exporters sell their products to ASEAN countries.
That would be a great outcome for businesses operating between Australia and Malaysia.
An outcome that we hope will spur even more growth in our trade and investment links.
At the same time we are negotiating a bilateral free trade agreement.
Prime Minister Abdullah and I agreed today that as soon as the ASEAN-ANZ negotiations are concluded, Australia and Malaysia will invigorate our bilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching a quick and mutually beneficial conclusion.
In doing so we will continue to consult widely with stakeholders in both our countries  -  including many of you here today  -  to ensure that we know what barriers to trade and investment need to be addressed.
For Australia, getting a good outcome for the services sector is particularly important.
Our funds management sector is now the fourth-largest in the world with around one trillion dollars under management.
It is a sector of the Australian economy that has developed rapidly in recent years and it has world-class skills to offer the world.
I hope that we can find further opportunities for our financial services sector to work closely together in the years ahead.
A good outcome on a trade agreement between our two countries would be another boost to our trade.
Of course, sitting above all of this is the World Trade Organisation negotiations that have been underway since 2001.
I have just come from Japan where I attended the G8 Outreach Summit and we agreed that pushing for an outcome on these negotiations is a global priority.
I met Brazil's President Lula and the trade negotiations were a feature of our discussions  -  Brazil is a critical nation in the negotiations.
It was also a feature of discussions I had with other leaders.
In the negotiations we are getting closer to a deal.
But, for a whole range of reasons, time is also running out.
We have to get agreement this year  -  and as soon as possible this year  -  if we want to see the benefits of the deal flow through to the global economy over the next couple of years.
On 21 July, trade ministers will meet in Geneva to thrash out a deal.
This meeting is likely to be the make or break point of the negotiations.
Australia and Malaysia have long been close allies in the WTO negotiations.
And I want to see us continuing to work closely together in the next critical months.
We are both in the Cairns Group of agricultural exporting nations.
We both want to see freer trade in agricultural products.
But we also want to see freer trade in manufactured goods and, importantly, in services.
For Australia, the services sector is a critical part of the Doha negotiations.
Our economy is nearly three-quarters services, but it makes up less than one-quarter of our exports.
One reason for this discrepancy is barriers to trade in services around the world.
I am pleased that Trade Ministers will meet in Geneva later this month to finalise the package on these core areas of the Round.
If they do, we will have a good framework for a deal before the end of the year.
And at a time of economic uncertainty with rising global energy and food prices, a good Doha outcome will be an important psychological boost for the business world.
Whatever happens with the Doha Round, one thing is clear in terms of the global economy  -  in the 21st Century, the Asia-Pacific region will become even more important to the global economy.
Look at some of the remarkable figures.
Japan, as a 5 trillion US dollar economy, is the second-largest economy in the world.
China has foreign exchange reserves of USD$1.6 trillion and its economy is growing at around 10 per cent a year.
The value of India's exports has grown at an average of nearly 20 per cent a year over the past decade.
The ASEAN countries  -  having sprung back from the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis  -  have had average economic growth of six per cent annually over the past five years.
Also in the Asia-Pacific region is the United States.
By far the world's biggest economy.
And still the leader and innovator in so many economic and technological fields.
The point of these figures is to show that global economic and strategic weight is shifting to the Asia-Pacific region in what will be the Asia Pacific century.
To make the most of that, we need an open and a stable region.
We need a region at peace, and engaged with the rest of the world.
The question, then, is how do we ensure that we get what we need?
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an example of the benefits of long-term vision.
Forty-one years ago, leaders in South-East Asia took the farsighted decision to establish ASEAN.
And, since then, in a diverse region, ASEAN has brought together a varied group and forged a common outlook on many questions.
ASEAN has built habits of cooperation and dialogue.
And ASEAN has played a critical role in building and maintaining peace in the region through its work.
ASEAN will remain central to the region's future architecture.
A month ago in Sydney, I announced that Australia would begin a series of regional consultations about the future of the region, culminating if warranted in an international conference next year.
The aspiration of an Asia-Pacific Community was part of the dynamic which led to the establishment of APEC.
Twenty years after APEC was established, I think we need to start the discussion about where we want to be in 2020 and beyond in terms of our regional architecture.
There will be different views on where we need to go; how we should get there; and about how fast we should move.
My own view is that we need a regional organisation that includes all of the major players  -  from the United States to India, Japan and China and of course Australia, Malaysia and the ASEAN countries among others.
And we need an organisation that can discuss all of the challenges we will face in the century ahead  -  economic, political and security challenges.
Australia and Malaysia have long been at the forefront of the discussion about our region.
Malaysia has been a driving force in ASEAN.
Australia played a key role in establishing APEC nearly 20 years ago.
For Australia, Malaysia is a key partner in this process of thinking about how we want the region to look in 2020.
I was pleased that Prime Minister Abdullah and I could discuss this today.
And I will be asking my envoy for an Asia Pacific Community, Dick Woolcott, to make sure that he comes to Malaysia early in his consultations to hear the view from Kuala Lumpur about the way forward.
I want to emphasise that the Australian proposal is about doing the necessary thinking about where we want to be in 2020.
So we have begun a process of dialogue about an Asia-Pacific Community.
Because we believe that, in a rapidly changing region, we should seek to shape the future of our region, rather than let it be shaped by events.
But ASEAN, as I indicated in my speech in Sydney, will remain at the core of the region.
And the region has much to learn from ASEAN's experience.
One reason we need robust regional institutions is to help us tackle the wider challenges we share  -  economic challenges, security challenges and political challenges.
And, among those shared challenges, none is more difficult than climate change.
Yesterday I was in Japan for a meeting with the leaders of 15 other countries.
It is a group called the Major Economies Meeting on Climate Change and Energy Security.
This group brings together 16 developed and developing countries to discuss climate change.
And yesterday we all agreed  -  it is time to act.
Both developed and developing countries need to act together  -  because the impact of climate change will be felt by all of us.
As we forge a new grand bargain on how to tackle climate change it is important that a wider range of countries are involved in efforts to slow the growth of and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Fast-growing emerging economies like Malaysia can play an important role in this process.
And Australia looks forward to partnering with Malaysia in the lead up to the Copenhagen climate change meeting.
Cooperation on the future of our region is something that Australia and Malaysia should be able to do well, just as we cooperate globally in areas like trade.
We should be able to work closely together because we have such a strong bilateral relationship.
And the Australian Government is committed to building on that relationship.
I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government has decided put the Australia-Malaysia Institute on a permanent footing.
The Institute was established in 2005 for three years and it has made a strong contribution to building new links between our nations.
So we have decided that it should keep filling that important role.
It will help us take the relationship forward.
In fact, Prime Minister Abdullah and I talked a lot today about how to take our relationship forward.
And I was pleased that we were able to discuss some new initiatives.
For instance, the schools twinning program.
If we want to make sure that our two countries not only maintain our existing ties but develop them even further, we have to make sure that younger generations in both countries know each other.
I was delighted to be able to visit a school in Kuala Lumpur before this lunch.
The school is participating in a new twinning program with Australian schools.
Under this scheme, schools in Malaysia and schools in Australia will become partners.
To get us started, six schools from the state of Victoria will partner with six Malaysian schools.
The students in the partner schools will get to know each other.
And in the process, children in both countries will come to understand their counterparts.
I hope they will also come to understand how important this relationship is.
Education links between us are not new.
But they continue to grow.
We have around 20,000 Malaysian students studying in Australia.
And we have around 15,000 Malaysian students studying in more than 500 Australian programs in Malaysia.
These courses are delivered through partnerships between Australian institutions and more than 50 Malaysian institutions.
The ties go beyond teaching too.
Our researchers work together through the thirty active agreements between Australian and Malaysian universities.
The education connections between us are one of the underpinnings of the relationship.
I would like to acknowledge the presence here today of Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr Jeffrey Cheah and Tan Sri Dato' Azman Hashim.
Two men who studied in Australia.
And two men who are the leaders in their fields.
Your personal links and your understanding of Australia are an important strand in our relationship.
It is a strand that I hope will grow.
Later today I will be involved in the launch of a full-time Australia Network channel on the ASTRO television network.
I am proud of the Government's support for Australia Network: an independent but credible voice, it will bring Australia into the homes of many Malaysians, enhancing knowledge and understanding of how we live and view the world.
The Prime Minister and I also announced today that Australia and Malaysia have agreed on a work and holiday visa scheme to be signed by our ministers.
This scheme will let young people in both countries visit the other and spend some time travelling around and doing some work.
It is another avenue for us to build the ties.
I am particularly keen to see more Australians come to Malaysia  -  either to study or to work.
The Australian Government is committed to making Australia more Asia-literate  -  and that means giving our young people more chance to learn the languages of our region.
It also means giving them more chances to spend time in the region.
Because I believe that such experiences  -  along with academic study  -  are critical to really understanding a country.
This morning Prime Minister Abdullah and I agreed on a new element to our education cooperation  -  an element that extends our cooperation to benefit third countries.
Australia and Malaysia are going to combine to provide teacher education for Afghanistan.
I think this is a great symbol of us taking our relationship to the world.
It is not just about Australia and Malaysia cooperating with each other, it is about using the depth of our relationship to make a contribution to the global community.
One area where we already have very strong exchanges is defence cooperation  -  through both the long-standing Five Power Defence Arrangement (now 37 years old) and our bilateral contacts.
In the past year, more than 2200 Australian service personnel visited Malaysia to work side-by-side with their counterparts.
And in the same period nearly 700 Malaysian defence force personnel visited Australia for the same reason.
3000 defence force personnel visiting each other's country in 12 months is a strong indication of the depth of the defence ties we have  -  and we want to expand these even further.
We conduct joint exercises.
And we conduct joint exercises with other partners in the region from time to time as well.
Our militaries work well together because they have a long history of ties and exchanges.
And the programs maintain their momentum because both sides are committed to them.
In the case of the Five Powers Defence Arrangement, the exercises are among the largest in the region.
That means that when we have to work together  -  like we have in East Timor for example  -  our soldiers can work together seamlessly.
It means we can work together on disaster relief operations when it is needed.
Our defence links are an important  -  if sometimes underappreciated  -  part of our relationship.
But like education, it has the potential for us to take our partnership to the world.
Prime Minister Abdullah and I agreed today to work together on peacekeeping training around the region.
This is another great example of our bilateral cooperation now being extended to a regional or global level.
We have many strands to our relationship.
We have to strengthen those strands and encourage new ones to develop.
Today, the Prime Minister and I agreed to a joint ministerial commission, which will involve regular meetings between our foreign ministers.
This reflects one simple fact.
Both governments want to make sure that in the years ahead, we are working together more on a wider range of challenges  -  including climate change and energy security.
The relationship between our two countries has a very strong base.
It has a base of history, of personal ties and experience, and it has a base of mutual interest in regional and global affairs.
We will face some big questions in the decades ahead:
     * How do we ensure prosperity and stability for our people in an age of rising food and oil prices and financial instability?
     * How do we deal with climate change?
     * How do we deal with the shift of global economic and strategic weight to our region?
These questions will take a lot of effort to answer.
But we will be better off if we work on the answers together.
And I believe that Australia and Malaysia should be close partners in this process.
I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I wanted to send a clear message that Australia is committed to developing a broader, deeper relationship with Malaysia.
We want to take our bilateral relations to a new level  -  by building our strong cultural, political, economic, education and security ties.
We also want to work together in the region  -  in particular on the question of how we shape our region for the future.
And we want to work together globally on international trade, on climate change and on other challenges we face.
We are both committed members of the United Nations.
And we both have a strong history of participating in peacekeeping operations.
We can build on this shared commitment and strengthen our global cooperation too.
We are committed to building the ties between our nations, our people and government and private institutions.
We are committed to working together on regional issues.
And, in the century ahead, we are committed to working together on the big global challenges we face.


I am pleased today to announce a significant joint initiative between Australia and Malaysia to improve teacher training and boost literacy in Afghanistan.
This new joint initiative will see around 30 master teacher trainers trained in modern teaching methods.
These master trainers will be trained in Malaysia and then return to Afghanistan and pass on these new skills to other teacher trainers.
Literacy levels in Afghanistan are amongst the lowest in the world and a key priority for the Afghanistan Government is to boost literacy as fast as possible.
This master teacher training will make a significant contribution to helping the Government of Afghanistan achieve this important goal.
This joint initiative is a new chapter of cooperation between Australia and Malaysia working together to achieve a more secure and stable Afghanistan.
The detailed arrangements for this new joint initiative will be finalised following consultations between AusAID and the Governments of Malaysia and Afghanistan over the next two weeks.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate and honour as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I thank Matilda, where have you discreetly disappeared to? I have never known Matilda to discreetly disappear anywhere. Thank you very much for that exceptionally warm welcome to country. It is so important in the fabric in our celebration of what Australia is.
The Australian of the Year awards are an important part of our national life. These awards give all Australians an opportunity to take part in recognising and applauding outstanding achievement and contribution  -  in every field of national life: sports; education; the arts; business; the armed forces; scientific and medical research; charity work; strengthening the life of local communities from the bush to the suburbs, and helping those most in need, both in Australia and abroad.
These awards are also special in the way they acknowledge leadership of younger Australians, older Australians and those making a difference in local communities but those whose work would otherwise go unrecognised on the national stage.
The Australian of the Year award has been made since 1960, that's almost fifty years ago.
During the past half century it has become an increasingly important national celebration of positive achievements and of individuals who have in their lives and in their work, genuinely made a difference for Australia.
We think of names such as Joan Sutherland, ‘Weary' Dunlop, Fred Hollows, Arthur Boyd and Cathy Freeman. That is indeed a roll of honour.
They are not just outstanding Australians who excelled in their endeavours. There is something distinctively Australian about their achievements and how they rose to greatness.
The exuberance of Cathy Freeman, who can ever forget.
Fred Hollows' understated but intense commitment to better the lives of others.
The courage, compassion and heroism of ‘Weary' Dunlop.
And this year, Lee Kernaghan, the voice of country Australia.
Each of these lives tells us something not just about them, but about us as well  -  something about being Australian; something about the values to which we should most aspire.
And what is that essential value? It is I think, an essential Australian trait to believe that we become better human beings by giving to other people.
Some call it mateship, others call it being a decent neighbour, it is called many different things. But if you drill down into it and try to understand it's essence and it's fundamental being, it's essentially that.
In this country, in our own Australian way, to discover the ancient wisdom of St Francis, that it is in giving that you receive.
And that is a really good Australian thing. And it's a remarkable thing. It is about how we regard greatness within our own country, properly deserved and it is how we regard greatness in the contribution to the world beyond.
Australians of the Year are role models to a new generation of Australians. They are Australians who lift our spirits. They inspire us. The are positive role models.
They challenge us to do more than just live our lives. They challenge us to do much, much more than simply to pursue our own self interest.
That includes the distinguished winners of all of the Australian of the Year Awards  -  including:
The Young Australian of the Year award  -  won in 2008 by Casey Stoner, Australia's reigning world champion motorcycle racer, whose career began with his first national title win at the age of six.
The Senior Australian of the Year award  -  won in 2008 by David Bussau, whose work in co-founding Opportunity International has helped, literally millions of people in developing world lifting themselves out of poverty.
And Australia's Local Hero award  -  won in 2008 by the inimitable, irrepressible, incomparable Jonathon Welch, who has contributed his musical talents through the Choir of Hard Knocks, which has brought hope and inspiration to many people suffering from addictions, mental illness and homelessness.
And so we look ahead to Australia Day 2009, it is now time to think of other Australians who deserve similar acclaim.
That is why we are launching this appeal for nominations for the 2009 awards.
This is an opportunity to recognise distinguished achievement and contribution to the life of our nation.
So I would urge all Australians, young and old, country and city, to get engaged, think it through, have a yack. Work out who you think deserves this great recognition on behalf of the people of our nation.
As I travel across the length and breadth of this great land of ours, Australia, I am constantly surprised, constantly amazed at the discovery of local acts of heroism, local acts of contribution, local acts of community service, which would otherwise simply go unremarked and unnoticed beyond that community.
These are the people who we wish to recognise. It is that quality of life that we wish to emulate and to hold up high in the history of our country.
I think also as we embark upon this new year of nominating people for this great award, let's also reflect again on the core values we wish to reflect people who give of themselves to the community, people who give of themselves to the nation. People who give of themselves in Australia's building bridges with the rest of the world. Positive people. People who inspire our spirits, people who reach beyond themselves, and people who see fulfilment in that very act of giving.
It gives me great pleasure to declare nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards 2009 officially open.
I encourage every single Australian to think it through, nominate somebody, somebody who has inspired them, somebody who has lifted their spirits, and made them proud to be an Australian. Thank you.


PM: I am here today with the Minister for Climate Change and Water, Penny Wong, here at the Hume Dam. And on Wednesday the Government is releasing it's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and in part, we are dealing with the long term challenge of rivers like the Murray.
If we are going to deal with the long term challenge of climate change, we need to act and we need to act with a clear cut course of action. Because what we are warned by the scientists, if we fail to act on climate change long term and we fail to act on the causes of climate change long term, then what will happen to river systems like this is they will start to get worse and worse and worse.
Here at the Hume Dam, I have just been advised that the Murray, here in the upper Murray, just the other side of the Dam wall is now running at levels which haven't been seen since this Dam was built in the 1920's.
So the water levels in the upper Murray are lower than they have been since the Hume Dam was built in the 1920's. What we are here today to talk about also is of course, the level of inflow in the Dam itself which is currently at 19 per cent capacity. And of course this is one of the lowest it has been.
The report that the Minister and I have and release today from the CSIRO, Water Availability in the Murray, deals with the impact of use and other factors on water availability in the Murray into the future.
And there is a few stats I will point out to you. One is that inflows into the Murray today are one sixth their long term average. Secondly, between 1997 and 2006 we have been tracking worse than the CSIRO's mid point scenario out to 2030 taking into account climate change factors.
What does that mean? CSIRO, tracking climate change impact on the Murray out to 2030, the medium point of their projections is in fact better than what the Murray is today. In other words, we have a real problem on our hands.
And the third point is this that the CSIRO report says that there could be up to 41 per cent less water available in the Murray Region by 2030.
We have some real problems on our hands.
And this report seeks to put some science around this in terms of defining the problem. And that's why we are here today. But apart from defining the problem, our responsibility is to outline a course of action.
Three courses of action to which the Government is committed. Long term course of action deals with how do we deal with the causes of climate change and that is in part why we are introducing this carbon pollution reduction scheme, the green paper for which will be released this coming Wednesday.
The second is this: We need medium term strategies as well, which deal with over allocation of water entitlements across the entire Murray Darling system, and how do we bring that back under control.
And the Minister already has acted on this for the first time in the Nation's history, the national Government is buying back water rights from farmers who wish to sell them in order to put less stress on the overall system.
And there is a third factor as well. How do deal in the short term with the efficiency of irrigation systems and how do we therefore have less demand right now on the system through more efficient irrigation management systems.
That's why the Minister and I together with the Premiers and Chief Ministers announced recently in Sydney a further $3.7 billion in funding support for irrigation systems modernisation to produce more efficient irrigation systems across the system.
What we need therefore are short term strategies which deal with the problem now, medium term strategies which is taking demand off the system in terms of buying back water rights and entitlements, and we have begun that through the Minister's work. And then long term, taking action on climate change.
Because if we don't, then we are going to see not just the continuation of a problem we have here, but getting much, much worse. So that this beautiful part of the Australia ends up being damaged big time, long term.
This requires long term action, that's why the Government is committed to this. And a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme which we will be announcing the outline of this coming Wednesday, is part of this long term solution. Minister, do you wish to add?
WONG: Thank you. First can I thank all those people who have hosted us today. It has certainly been a very interesting tour and it reminds us yet again that climate change is not just about the future. It is not just about our children and our grand children. It is also about the here and now.
And the report that the Prime Minister referred to shows us just how much we are up against it in the Murray Darling Basin at the moment.
And it shows us what is projected to happen as a result of climate change. So we do need to act. We need to act through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme which I will be announcing on Wednesday and we also need to act in the short and medium term to take pressure off the river to deal with the over allocation that we have seen over too many years.
The Dam behind us is at historic low levels. We know that last June, the June just gone, is the driest June on record. And we know that we have had historic low inflows for the last two years. So this shows us yet again how climate change is a present problem as well as a problem for future generations and that is why we must now act.
JOURNALIST: Minister you have gone to the Coorong earlier this month and now the head of the Murray up here at Hume. What things have you learns about the system overall in terms of feeding back into a plan for it's future?
PM: Well, the big challenge - and I will ask the Minister to comment on this - is to finally just look at the hard data contained in reports like this but to also see first hand the impact in terms of dam storage levels, the level of the river and of course all those irrigators who are currently depending on the system.
What have we done in our first six months in Government, for the first time we have a Murray Darling Basin Authority. An Authority due to come into operation by years' end with it's own chairman chief executive, with it's own powers to determine a Basin plan for the entire system and for the first time in the country's history, a basin wide cap.
We have done that in our first six months. I am the first to admit, we have got a lot more to do. The second thing the Minister has done since we have been in office is commence this very necessary program of buying back water entitlements from farmers who want to sell, to take the stress off the system.
The third thing is, a commitment to this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to deal with this problem in the long term as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you flew into Albury this morning, did you fly over Lake Hume at all?
PM: No, we saw in the distance, we came in that way.
JOURNALIST: Are you surprised by, physically looking at it, how low it is?
PM: Well I remember coming here as a kid and I came here I think from memory, in around about 1967, because we came down here on a holiday. Were you born then?
WONG: '68 I was born.
PM: Ok, you were being thought of at that stage. And I just noticed on the table back there, ‘68 I think was your historical low.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) low and was full within a year.
PM: So I remember coming down here as a kid and seeing it was low, but I have got to say, if you look at that data up there contained in the management centre that we were at just before, we are looking at levels for this Dam which have rarely, rarely been reached in the past.
So the system is under stress. It effects everybody. We need a long term plan for action. Long term measures, medium term measures as well as the investments we have just made, some $3.7 billion across the system to improve irrigation efficiency.
JOURNALIST: Minister, what sort of achievements will you be expecting that new authority to have made within the shorter and the medium term? Do you have particular goals?
WONG: Look, the agreement that the Prime Minister and the Premiers signed off on at the last COAG is historic. And the reason it is historic is that for the first time in the Nation's history, we will be managing this basin as one basin and recognising that rivers flow across state borders. So that is an historic agreement. Obviously what we want from the authority is the development for the first time, of a scientifically based, basin wide plan and cap that will set a sustainable level of extraction from the river.
What we know, and these reports tell us that, is that we have to do more with less. We have to become more efficient and we have to take less water out of the rivers than we have over the last 100 years. So what the Government is doing until that plan is developed is to reduce stress on the river by purchasing entitlement, purchasing water and investing in irrigation infrastructure so farmers can do more with less.
JOURNALIST: The head of the Murray Darling Basin Commission, Dr Wendy Craig has actually said we need rain of biblical proportions to ever fill the lake here again. I mean, what sort of difference will the strategies and the money that you are putting in, make in that sense. Are we going to see, you know in two years or three years, a rise in water levels because of that.
WONG: Well what we have to do is to do more with less and we have to reduce how much we are taking out of the river. So what we can do as a government is to work with the State Government's to manage this river system better and to manage it recognising where we are likely to go.
The report we released today suggests that by 2030 we will see substantially lower inflows into the river than the 100 year average. And that is consistent with so many of the reports that have been released in the Murray Darling Basin, that we are looking at a future where there is likely to be less rain.
So we have to prepare for that and the way in which we prepare for that, first in the short term, is to reduce what we take out of the river, so that's purchasing entitlements so we can get water back into the river. And then we have to do more with less and we have to ensure that our irrigation industries are as efficient as they can be so that we can reduce pressure on the river.
And long term, we do have to prepare for the possibility of a future where there is less rain. And part of that means we have to tackle climate change through measures such as the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Will the water buyback from the infrastructure upgrades help the river system in time before it is beyond repair?
WONG: Look, we recognise that we are up against it in the Murray Darling Basin, we recognise that we also have to deal with an historically low level of rainfall and historically low level of inflow.
What the government is absolutely committed to doing is purchasing water. We have already spent for the first time in the nation's history, $50 million as a down payment on the health of the River Murray,
We have committed $5.8 billion in this year's Budget to investment in infrastructure in irrigation to ensure that we can do more with less. So we have a short and medium term plan and also we know long term, we do have to prepare for the likelihood of a future with less rainfall.
JOURNALIST: Wendy Craik has described the river system as being on life support last week when she has revealed those figures. Do you agree, do you think it is, the situation is that dire?
PM: This river system, as the Minister and I said only a week or so ago at the, down towards the Murray mouth, the Murray Darling is in severe stress.
Let's not pretend it is any better than that, it is severe stress. And this has been a problem building for a decade plus. And in terms of the climate change factors, for longer than that as well.
The key though is what is a credible course of action for the future. There is no point promising what you can't deliver. We can't promise that it is going to rain. But what you can do is have a credible long term strategy on climate change hence a carbon pollution reduction scheme; A credible medium term strategy when it comes to buying back entitlements; and a credible immediate terms strategy which is about upping the efficiency of the way in which we use this precious resource. And to do it in a national way.
I mean that's, Victoria, this is NSW, this is all Australia. And we have got an Australian problem on our hands. And as Australian we have got to fix it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd there has been reports of your most recent water buy back, the money that was spent was actually grossly undervalued. Is the government prepared to meet the market value of water for it's next buyback?
PM: Well I'll have the Minister speak to that in detail but can I make one point  -  this is the first national government in Australia's history to participate in buying back water entitlements. And we have done that within six months of taking office.
Now that's how deeply we feel about the need to act on this system. Secondly, this initial $50 million allocation is simply that, an initial allocation, we have got much bigger plans long term. Minister.
WONG: Well as you know as the Prime Minister has said, this was the first time the National Government has directly entered the water market. We are undertaking an evaluation of the first $50 million down payment. And a range of stake holder, including irrigators are on that evaluation committee.
But can I say, obviously in approaching water buyback, we have to be mindful of a number of things. We have to look at what is the environmental value of the water, making sure that we can actually do something good for the river with the water and we have to ensure that the taxpayer is getting value for money. And those are criteria which are transparently applied to our water purchase program.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) when you are buying back some of this water (inaudible)
WONG: We absolutely understand how tough it is in many regional and rural communities and for many irrigators. We are at a situation where we see the driest June in history, on record. The two years prior to the election of this government were the direst two years in terms of the Murray River in history. And what is even more concerning I think it was 43 per cent lower than the previous low. So this is an historically dry circumstance we all find ourselves in.
The Government is very conscious of that, we do want a strong future for the irrigation industries and the communities that rely on them. That's why we are investing $5.8 billion into that, into infrastructure irrigation investment. We also have said, part of our program is purchasing water, purchasing entitlement. Because all of us, all the communities who rely on the river, all of the industries who rely on the river have an interest in ensuring the river is much better health than it is now.
PM: Remember it is the CSIRO that tells us that the River Murray stands to have 41 per cent less inflow by 2030. And if we are looking at a clear cut example of the need to act on climate change, this is it.
JOURNALIST: There is a concern also Mr Rudd for looking at those forecasts going forward, something as simple as drinking water and the domestic supply, have you sort of heard much (inaudible)
PM: Well the Minister will be engaged in consultation right across the Murray Darling System. Of course residential use and urban use is part of the demands placed on the system. The big demands placed on the system are of course from agricultural users. And that is why the discussion we have just been having about how you deal effectively, fairly with farmers and the purchase of water entitlements. That's where the big debate lies.
You can either shy away from that and say it is all to hard, sorry, too sensitive, or you can act. And we intend to act.
JOURNALIST: Have you set a time frame for agriculture to enter the emissions trading scheme?
PM: Well I think there is a Green Paper coming out on this soon, so. And I think it is going to have something to do with a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. This Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is, will deal obviously with emissions trading and it will deal also with how we support households and businesses in the transition period as well.
So carbon pollution reduction is what we are on about, if you are being serious about dealing with the long term challenge.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Pope Benedict is a welcome guest in Australia. I hope he has a great rest. I think so many Australians, hundreds and thousands are looking forward to seeing him during the course of the next week. And I look forward to participating in some of those events myself.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) John Howard wanted Big Brother taken off the air, now that it is happening, anything to say on that?
PM: Can I just say, television networks make their own decisions and things come and things go, and I'll leave it up to them.


A new CSIRO report released today states there could be up to up to 41 per cent less water available in the Murray Region by 2030.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said today's report was further evidence of the urgent need to act now on climate change.
Prime Minister Rudd and Minister for Climate Change Penny Wong today visited the Hume Dam on the Murray River near Albury, following the CSIRO's release of the Murray River Sustainable Yields Report.
Hume Dam is currently at 17 per cent of capacity, with inflows to the Murray for June this year the lowest ever at just one-sixth of the long term average.
The new report shows that between 1997 and 2006, inflows to the Murray River were lower than the ‘best estimate' (most likely) climate change scenario for 2030 - indicating the impacts of climate change are taking hold faster than anticipated.
Under the worst case scenario set out in the modelling, flows to the Lower Lakes at the mouth of the Murray would fall by 69 per cent by 2030.
“Tackling the problems in the Murray Darling Basin requires serious action on climate change,” Mr Rudd said.
“We're moving to tackle climate change with a new scheme to reduce the carbon pollution that causes climate change.
“The situation in the Murray Darling Basin demonstrates that doing nothing on climate change is not an option.”
The Rudd Government recently committed $3.7 billion to Murray Darling Basin projects as part of the $12.9 billion Water for the Future plan.
Minister for Climate Change and Water Penny Wong said the Rudd Government's $12.9 billion investment in water was helping Australia adjust to the impacts of climate change that cannot be avoided.
The effects of neglect, mismanagement and over-allocation on the Murray River are also highlighted in the report.
CSRIO estimates that water extraction along the Murray has reduced the total end-of-system flow by 61 per cent. Flow at the Murray mouth now ceases 40 per cent of the time, compared to one per cent estimated in the absence of development.
“We've had years of neglect and over-allocation in the Murray Darling Basin,” Senator Wong said.
“Addressing over-allocation by purchasing water entitlements is a key priority.
“We are spending $3.1 billion on water purchase to ensure the river gets a greater share in the future.”
The Australian Government and Basin States signed an historic agreement in Sydney earlier this month to establish a new independent authority to manage the Murray Darling Basin, ending years of neglect, mismanagement and blame shifting.
Today's report forms part of the CSIRO Murray-Darling Basin Sustainable Yields project being undertaken on behalf of the Australian Government and the Murray-Darling Basin states. The project looks at the impacts of climate change and land use change across the Basin's 18 regions.
A final report pulling together the findings of all 18 sub catchment reports will be released by CSIRO in the coming months.
More information about the CSIRO Murray-Darling Basin Sustainable Yields project can be found at www.environment.gov.au/water/mdb/yields.html


PM: I begin by honouring the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose great cultures we celebrate as among the oldest in human history.
Australia welcomes the youth of the world to Sydney. Australia welcomes the youth of the world to this celebration of faith and this celebration of life.
And as Prime Minister of Australia I welcome you from every land, every path, every continent on this, our planet.
Prime Minister welcomes pilgrims to Australia in various languages.
And Australians. And Australians, g'day and have a great time down under.
You are here for this great celebration of life, this great celebration of faith and this great celebration of hope. And for this you are so much the light of the world at a time when the world has so much darkness.
Too often in the history of the world when young people travelled in great numbers to other parts of the world, they do so in the cause of war. But you here today are here as pilgrims of peace.
Some say there is no place for faith in the 21st Century. I say they are wrong. Some say that faith is the enemy of reason, I say, also they are wrong.
Because faith and reason are great partners in our human history and in our human future. Rich in humanity, rich in scientific progress.
Some say only that which they see wrong in Christianity and in the church, I say let us speak also about what is right in Christianity and the church.
It was the church that began first schools for the poor. It was the church that began first hospitals for the poor. It was the church that began first refuges for the poor and these great traditions continue for the future. And I say this, that Christianity has been an overwhelming force for good in the world.
Australia is a land of great freedom, a land of many cultures, a land of many faiths. But also a land deeply shaped by and proud of this nation's Christian heritage and future. And within that great Christian heritage, we honour deeply the great catholic heritage of Australia as well.
Deep in its tradition, rich in its history, vital in its future. You come here as young pilgrims of the world. I say to you as I conclude, as Prime Minister of Australia, you are welcome guests in our land. May each of you be enriched by your time here among us in Australia just as you enrich Australia by your time here with us. Welcome to Australia.


MOORE: Prime Minister, the Government has committed to helping households overcome the cost of an emissions trading scheme. Is that a guarantee, low income households won't be worse off?
PM: What we've said very plainly is when it comes to pensioners and carers and those on forms of social security support in that category, we would provide beyond the normal adjustments to those pension payments additional support to meet any costs arising from the introduction of this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
MOORE: Is that a no worse off?
PM: Similarly for low income households as well and beyond that we've also indicated a preparedness to support households in general to obtain assistance for energy efficiency measures within those households to bring down their energy cost over time. We think these are practical steps forward. I tell you what I can guarantee, is that if you don't act on greenhouse gases now, if you don't act on climate change, the cost for every household will in time go through the roof.
MOORE: But can you guarantee for low income households that they won't be worse off?
PM: As I said, it is explicitly stated in the Green Paper and you've read it I assume yourself today, that we've committed in this Green Paper to meeting through additional payments, through the tax and payments system any additional costs which come to households as a consequence of the introduction of this scheme.
Of course you are always going to have other things which affect the standards of living and the costs for families. But our commitment vis a vis a low income households, pensioners and carers is clear cut and stated in the Green Paper.
MOORE: What's the cut off, what's the income threshold for a low income household in this context?
PM: Well what we've spoken about is where Family Tax Benefit A starts to reach its base rate, which is around the $53,000 to $55,000 a year per household, and of course below that we have people who are on pensions, carers.
MOORE: So that is $53,000 and below?
PM: Yeah, for households. And then beyond that we have also had a further commitment for middle income households to provide some assistance to assist them as well. And more generically for households we will be examining, when we get to the White Paper stage, other ways of assisting households adjust with investment in new ways of improving energy efficiency at home. Because that is not just good for the environment and for the overall economy, it's good for the cost of the householders as well.
MOORE: But when it comes to some assistance for middle income earners, can you give any guide as to what proportion the 1 per cent or 0.9 per cent increase in inflation the Green Paper is forecasting based on a $20 a tonne carbon price. What percentage of that middle income earners will have to bear?
PM: We will work that through during the course the White Paper consultation process. What we need to make sure is that those who are least able and least flexible when it comes to responding to what is a higher cost for carbon. Let's go back to the underlying facts here.
My job as Prime Minister is to face the scientific facts and the economic facts and to get the balance right for Australia for the long term. That does mean a higher cost for carbon. And the question is therefore, how do you provide assistance to those households least able to adapt and adjust in the here and now and businesses least able to adjust in the here and now to transition through that.
MOORE: So when do we get details of the compensation scheme, when do we know when it starts and indeed whether its upfront so you get the compensation before you pay the higher electricity bill?
PM: Well in the Green Paper as you would understand we've outlined our principles. And principles, design principles force the overall Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. It's about emissions trading, it's about support for households and support for businesses. When the White Paper comes through, including exposure draft legislation, it is through that that you will have the full detail in terms of where we will go on these support arrangements both for households and for business.
MOORE: The other area of compensation of course is petrol. Your own climate adviser Professor Garnaut was very clear that compensating people would lead, what he called, ‘a funny signal'. Does it really send the right message?
PM: Well, when you are looking at our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we're covering 75 per cent of the economy. That includes the transport sector, it includes therefore petrol. But we are very mindful of the fact that households right now are under financial pressure.
Therefore, our response to that is to provide this adjustment support and we've indicated we would do so for a three year period cent for cent for any consequential increase in the price of petrol.
We would take off associated petrol taxes and then we would review at the three year point. I think that is a responsible course of action now in order to transition the system to a lower carbon economy, which is what we need for the economy longer term, what households need for the economy longer term as well as looking after our kids.
MOORE: So what the are the benchmarks for that review?
PM: In terms of..
MOORE: Of petrol. Whether or not you continue to cut cent for cent.
PM: Well lets have a look at that point for example at what the overall impact on household budgets are, where will the price of oil stand at that stage? Etcetera. These are the sorts of criteria which will be de deployed at that time.
But we think it's a fair and reasonable thing to help households who are under real financial pressure now to adjust through. Remember the overall integrity of this scheme is achieved by having such breadth of coverage across the economy, 75 per cent of the economy we think this is the right way to go for Australia for the long term.
MOORE: As Brendan Nelson argues you're asking Australians to take you on trust aren't you. They're getting a carbon trading scheme. Whether or not they will continue to be compensated for the higher cost of petrol after three years, don't know.
The actual format of a compensation scheme for households at this stage, don't know. When it will start, don't know. There's a lot there isn't it that you're asking them people to trust you.
PM: Well in the first six months of this Government's life and its now seven months, we have done more than our predecessors in 12 long years. They sat there as climate change sceptics and then on the eve of the election said that they would introduction an emissions trading scheme. And now that we're across the election hump and we are now the Government they say they are now opposed to one.
Well I really don't know where Dr Nelson stands other than he seems to be engaged in irresponsible short-term politics.
For us, it's laying out, as we said more or less after we came to office, through the Climate Change Minister Penny Wong, building block number one is putting out this Green Paper to outline the design features of an emissions trading scheme as part of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and our support payments for households and business.
Building block two will be when we produce the finality of that with legislation at the end of this period. It is a sequential way through and it's one part of our overall strategy to bring down carbon emissions as well as a new strategy for energy efficiency which we will be putting out in due course, a new strategy for, on the supply side dealing with clean coal technology, a further supply side strategy dealing with renewable energies. All part of doing our bit for the planet but also getting a decent outcome for all Australians.
MOORE: The Green Paper also includes limited compensation for the big polluters, the electricity generators so they don't become riskier investment prospects. How limited will that compensation be?
PM: We will get to that as we consult with each of the electricity generators. There is a number of them around the country and a number of them, depending on the age of the generator and the age of the plant, the nature of its technology, each of their particular circumstance are different.
There is no blank cheque being offered to electricity generators. But we are mindful of the fact, mindful of the fact that their environment, their investment environment changes as a consequence of the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
So we believe that adjustment support is are necessary but the quantum will be determined after we've had a very hard-nosed, individual negotiation with each of those generators. And we intend to be very tough.
MOORE: The other side of the argument of course is the one the Greens make, and they say that while the whole point of a trading system is to send price signals, they argue, you rush to compensate and you rush to neutralise?
PM: Well you know something we're going to get attacked from the left and that's what the Greens are doing. We're going to get attacked from the right and that's what Dr Nelson is doing. My job to get the balance right for the future.
And if getting the balance right means having a clear sense of our target, our objective, which is to bring Australian carbon emissions down and to do so in partnership with the global community through our negotiating posture and the Bali roadmap, the Kyoto roadmap or the post Kyoto road map as it now is, to do all that and provide adjustment support on the way through.
That's the responsible and balanced course of action.
The Greens on the left out there, they may not like what we're going to do. And they will say it's not as pure as the (inaudible) snow, well I'll cop that on the chin. And you will have the climate change sceptics over on the right corner saying that we shouldn't be doing anything. My job is to face the facts, the economic facts, the science facts and prosecute a balanced course of action.
MOORE: This is, as we have been saying repeatedly, a Green Paper, you are now opening it up for consultation with the business. How do they consult with you when they have no numbers, no economic parameters, no emission target parameters and yet the time of consultation actually closes before they will get those economic parameters from the modelling that Treasury is due to provide in October?
PM: Between now and the end of the year, as you've said, there will be further modelling produced. Remember, though, when we said this Green Paper would come out, its purpose has always been to provide the design of this system.
How fast the system is then driven in terms of trajectories between now and 2050 with the carbon target we have long term of 60 per cent reduction by 2050 against 2000 levels that is to be determined once we've got modelling.
MOORE: But the modelling comes after the closure period of consultation. That's my question how does business give you the consultation when they don't know the modelling?
PM: Well the first they've got here is the design features and that's critical. Secondly, what we've indicated also in the case of the large category of firms, some 1,000 across the economy but, as you know that is 1,000 over literally millions of firms out there who are affected by these changes, they now have provided to them through this Green Paper the design of a system.
For those which are energy intensive or emissions intensive or trade exposed we've already indicated the thresholds of support that we are likely to provide in terms of the possible free issue of permits, that is there.
But we have to take it one step at a time and can I say there will be detailed individual discussions. It's 1,000 businesses out there. We can have reasonable discussions with a large number of them in the time we've set for ourselves. But we have got to get on with it. We can't keep pushing this off. The last mob did that for 12 years, 12 waisted years.
MOORE: But given the modelling has been in fact delayed, hence we are now it getting it in October, the intention is you say is start in 2010. Is it possible that will slip?
PM: What we've said right along is our ambition remains unchanged. We believe it's technically achievable in terms of the consultation process, the drafting process and the legislative process.
Though it will be very interesting to see where the Liberals stand on this in the Senate. Are they going to play blocking strategy or are they going to be constructive partners in the nation's long-term environmental and economic future?
We believe this is deliverable. As I've said consistently in previous interviews, including on this program, we've been very mindful of the implementation arrangements for these 1000 businesses who will be affected. They are large businesses and they will be treated respectfully but our ambition is as I've stated before for 2010.
MOORE: Prime Minister thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program 


Your Holiness, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
I acknowledge the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
On behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people it is my great honour to welcome His Holiness, Pope Benedict XVI to Sydney, Australia for this World Youth Day.
Your Holiness, you are a very welcome guest in our country. Your Holiness in this country you are truly among friends and we are honoured as Australians, all Australians to have you with us today.
This is an occasion of great significance for the whole of the Australian community.
It is especially significant for Australia's Catholic community who make up more than one quarter of our number. Australia's Catholic community reflects the great diversity of the church worldwide, comprised of descendants from early Irish and English settlers, post-War migrants from Italy, from Malta and from other parts of Europe. And those who are arrived more recently, from diverse parts of the world, including Asia, Latin America and Lebanon and the Pacific Islands.
Australia's Catholic community likewise reflects the great physical diversity of Australia. From those who gather in the restored grandeur of St Mary's Cathedral in this great city of Sydney and to those who gather in the weathered old parish churches in the smallest towns of our outback.
Over 1300 parishes span the length and breadth of this vast Australian continent and, your Holiness, I am sure that in each one of those parishes every one of them would welcome you with open arms.
Your Holiness, you are also welcome in Australia, a welcome guest for the wider Australian Christian community. You are also welcome in Australian on behalf of those Australians of other faiths and indeed for the general Australian community at large.
Your Holiness you are welcome as an apostle of peace in an age where in an increasingly interdependent world peace is a much needed voice among us all.
Your are welcome as a voice for the world's poor. You are also welcome as a voice of hope at a time in our planet's dealings when hope is most needed of all.
It is fitting that his holinesses first visit to Australia is for the occasion of World Youth Day. In part because Australia itself is a young country, although as this young country we inhabit this vast and ancient land.
In part also because the great diversity of the pilgrims who have come to Sydney, mirror the great diversity of modern Australia. We are literally in this country, people who have come from every corner of God's earth.
And also, as we experience the sheer exuberant joy of the young people of the world who have come to this city and who have imparted their joy to us in this land. It has been a wonderful experience for us all.
Your Holiness, Indigenous Australians, our Aboriginal Australians, our Torres Strait Islander Australians have also asked me to extend to you the warmest of welcomes.
Our Indigenous people are so much part of our county's past and so much part of our country's future. It has been from time to time a troubled past. We now work to forge a common future among us all.
You Holiness, you have done us a great honour in coming to this our land Australia. We welcome your presence, we look forward to your continued events among us and we hope and pray on behalf of all Australians that your time here in Australia is a blessing not just for the people of this land, not just for the pilgrims who have come from across the world to be with us, but also for those of you who visit us for the first time as well.
Your Holiness, we welcome you.


SPEERS: Prime Minister Thanks for your time. You've called this a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme but can you tell me when carbon pollution is going to start coming down in Australia, when is it going to stop going up?
PM: Well as you know this scheme is not intended for introduction until 2010, that's consistent with what we said before the election. We'll legislate our plan is by early 2009, implementation arrangements during the course of that year  -  with the object of it coming into operation in 2010.
So we're looking at a long term target of where Australia's carbon pollution levels slide by 2050. You will see it progressively unfold in that period of time.
SPEERS: Do you have in mind a date at which carbon pollution will stop going up and start coming down?
PM: Well this will depend entirely on the trajectory, that is the pace at which we have this scheme operate and that will be determined in the White Paper. And that will decide whether we have a shallower curve or sharper curve between now and 2050.
SPEERS: So you can't sit here and say within 5 years pollution will stop going up in Australia?
PM: You will have a clearer idea of that once we give the mid term targets of this scheme and that will be determined in the course of the White Paper. And the reason we haven't done that now is that we've still got some economic modelling to be done by the Treasury on that.
We're also still in the middle complex global negotiations. What we've said we'd do with this Green Paper is outline the design features of this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and consult the community and industry further on it.
SPEERS: But despite the advice of your hand pick adviser Ross Garnaut, you are compensating motorists for higher petrol prices and you are compensating coal fired power stations for some of the additional costs they face. But the whole point of an emissions trading scheme is to introduce and extra cost so who's going to bear the brunt here?
PM: Well the precise nature of support for the electricity sector of course will be determined during the course of our negotiations. As I said in interviews yesterday there's no blank cheque here. We'll need our coal fired power stations to adjust to a lower carbon economy.
SPEERS: And there will be job losses there do you think?
PM: Well they'll need to adjust to a lower carbon economy, I take considerable instruction from a report from the CSIRO recently which pointed to the net employment advantages for the Australian economy of bringing in a scheme designed to deal with climate change like this.
SPEERS: So there doesn't have to be job losses?
PM: Well you know the economy is constantly in a process of internal change and reform. Remember the great debate of the 80's and 90's about whether we should reform the economy or not. Engage in internationalisation of the economy and as a result of that new jobs are created in new industries which previously had not been considered before. For Australia clean green energy, for example, with a whole new set of industry and employment options and possibilities for Australia not just at home but for export as well.
SPEERS: You recently described working families as those earning up to around $80,000 a year but they are going to be hit by this and not fully compensated aren't they, families on $60,000-$70,000-$80,000 year?
PM: Well my job, David, is to respond to the scientific facts on climate change, the economic facts and what we need to do to adjust this economy over time. And of course there is going to be costs on the way through. I'm not going to look the Australian people in the face and say look this is cost free. It does have a costs lets just be up front and honest about that.
Mr Howard said the same last year and I assume Mr Nelson has an option for dealing with climate change which is cost free, has he? I'm not sure.
So therefore the key is to get the balance right, to make sure that we have a system which bring down our carbon emissions overtime against the target we have set for mid century. If we fail to act the economic costs for Australia are huge, because we are the hottest and the driest continent already.
Secondly when it comes to bearing the transition arrangements or the transition costs, obviously there are costs for industry which we will support on the way through and for households. Obviously the focus also for households are those on the lowest incomes, pensioners, carers and lower income Australians where we have said we will meet the costs which arise from the introduction of this scheme and for others that we will assist and we'll decide on the precise formula for that during the course of the next 6 months.
SPEERS: What I'm saying is there won't be full compensation for those working families on $60,000-$70,000-$80,000 year?
PM: What we've said for pensioners and carers and for lower incomes is we will meet those costs. For other households we have said that we will assist. And on top of that we'll also provide a mechanism to help families, to help household invest in energy efficient technology for the home. That is to draw their costs down over time. The precise formula around that we will settle on over the course of the next 6 months.
SPEERS: The Green Paper indicates that the average household costs I think is around $11 a week which would be more than $500 a year. Are you comfortable with working families paying that amount?
PM: Well remember the Green Paper doesn't define a carbon price, it simply says here the vehicle we're going to use. So therefore we've yet to establish the precise carbon price and that will come once we set mid term targets. So let's take this one step at a time.
SPEERS: But are you as Prime Minister comfortable with a $500 annual cost on an average household?
PM: What I am comfortable with is taking the responsible balanced course of action to deal with the interests of all Australians and all Australian households and our businesses and economy in the long term.
No one is coming up with a credible alternative course of action for the nation. You either stick your head in the sand and say ‘sorry all too hard, too politically difficult  -  not going to do anything about it' and then we wake up in 5 or 10 years time to discover the problem is much, much worse.
SPEERS: But you are clearly reluctant to say that your working families are going to have to pay, and they are?
PM: I've just said earlier in this interview that this thing is not cost free. I've said that for industry and I've said so for households. I've also said that because we want to get the balance right that we'll be providing support on the way through for those on lowest incomes and additional forms of support for other households. Particularly on expensive questions like how do you introduce effective energy efficiency technologies or appliances in your own home and that's another area where we will be doing further work.
But we don't intend to just walk away from families and say look your on your own here. The way in which this has been crafted is to provide as much practical support on the way through, and this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme any cent which is earned from it as a result of selling permits, every dollar, every cent, is spent in support of either households or industry to adjust to a lower carbon economy.
SPEERS: Petrol will be one of the key battle grounds here, now Minister Penny Wong said yesterday and I quote “we're effectively giving Australian motorists 5 years notice, before there a likelihood that the price impact will be felt in petrol” end quote. Is she right?
PM: Well of course the whole idea of giving some predictability to the future is that motorists will be able to say well look, longer term it may be smarter for me to move to more fuel efficient or hybrid vehicles for example.
SPEERS: But your not going to keep that offset forever are you?
PM: Nice piece of verballing there David
SPEERS: Well the question, your not going to keep the off-sets forever are you. It wouldn't make sense?
PM: What we've said is we'll review it after three years and we intend to. Remember...
SPEERS: It would be silly to keep it forever?
PM: We will review after three years and...
SPEERS: The oppositions saying keep it forever.
PM: Well the oppositions saying anything. The Liberal party say what they want everyday, it's a new script everyday. Remember last year they were against emissions trading. On the eve of the election they decided they were for it, we get to this side of the election they are against it again. No one know where the Liberal party stand on this at all.
My course of action, responsible course of action, is to find a balanced way through what is a very hard debate for the economy and for households. But the cost of inaction is huge.
SPEERS: As you know the Coalition is saying you've gone too far, the Greens say you haven't gone far enough, particularly on petrol. How negotiable is your position on that, are your prepared for a battle in the Senate on that, are you going to stick to your guns on the position you've laid out?
PM: Well we will be attacked from both the left and the right. I mean we are already, but what I think the Australian people are looking for is leadership which is balanced, responsible and measured in dealing with the challenge for the entire economy and we don't intend to walk away from that.
On the Senate, I think there's going to be a huge national spotlight trained on the Liberals. Are you going to be responsible partners in this countries long term economic future or are you just going to walk away and play opportunistic short term politics?
SPEERS: Sounds like a double dissolution slogan Prime Minister?
PM: Another nice piece of verballing on your part David that's twice I the one interview.
SPEERS: Is that a possibility or is that completely out of the realms?
PM: We've put out a Green Paper, well put out a White Paper. We'll put exposure draft legislation out for the community and for business to see.
We intend to be completely transparent about what we're on about here. And you know something; we are going to cop criticism. But I think we go back to the starting point. That is I've got a responsibility to act and the Liberal party, because they will control the numbers in the Senate themselves also have a responsibility to guard this nations long term economic future and to be consistent with the principles which people like Malcolm Turnbull articulated less then 12 months ago about their core hardline position in support of emissions trading. Or sorry, that was just their pre-election position.
SPEERS: Just quickly Prime Minister your meeting the Pope today. The apology issue, the victims of sex abuse within the church. How important is an apology from the Pope in your view?
PM: This is a matter for the church and I respect the internal judgements of the church. I don't stand outside the church and provide them with public lectures in terms of how they should behave. I've noted carefully what his Holiness has said in the United States. Obviously that was a source of great comfort and healing in the United States. I'm like all Australians very much looking forward to what the Pope has to say here in Australia as well, as I am to my own conversation with the Pope later this morning.
SPEERS: The church is concerned about Australia possibly providing overseas aid for abortions in other countries. What is your latest thinking on that?
PM: Well there is a debate about the adequacy of support for family planning processes in other countries through the Australian development assistance program. Obviously this is an area of big concern in the developing world about how you provide appropriate assistance. As with all aspects of development assistance policy it's under continuing review.
SPEERS: Have you got a personal view on that?
PM: I'm not quite sure where either the Foreign Minister or the Parliamentary Secretary Bob McMullen is up to on these matters yet. The key thing is to make sure you've got effective policies.
SPEERS: Your view is going to be important though?
PM: Well the key thing is to make sure you've got effective policies which deliver the policy outcome on these questions. And what's that? Being serious about the millennium development goals, being serious about effective population management policies around the world and appropriate family planning. But we haven't drilled into the detail on that and I've got to say one of the reasons for that is we've had a few other things on. One of which has been climate change.
SPEERS: On that note Prime Minister thanks for your time
PM: Thanks for having me on the program


UHLMANN: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Chris.
UHLMANN: Now you have dubbed this the Carbon Pollution Reduction System so by 2015 will it have delivered a cut in greenhouse gas emissions?
PM: We will know the precise impact over time once we set the mid term targets, once we set what is called within this debate, the trajectory. That is, the stages to be reached over time. And that in turn will obviously inform us and the country as to what reduction will occur at particular year points.
And we will know that therefore once we produce those mid terms targets in the white paper at the end of the year.
UHLMANN: So is it possible that green house gas emissions could rise between 2010 and 2015?
PM: Well we will know once we set those mid term targets and as I said they are part of the white paper process. That will occur, we aim for, the end of this year, early next year. And that is the logical way to proceed.
Step by step. The purpose of the green paper as you know Chris, was to outline the design features of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, how it would work. The actual speed at which it operates is phase two and that is what we will do once we have got the Treasury modelling and once we have produced our mid term targets.
UHLMANN: I understand that Prime Minister but I am not asking for specific figures, I am just wondering whether or not emissions will fall between 2010 and 2015. It is called the Carbon Pollution Reduction System so will it live up to the title on the box?
PM: Once you see the mid term targets Chris, it will certainly have that impact over time but I am not going to stand here and pull a number out of space and say it is going to be at that level at this time.
The key thing, and we have done this in a matter of six or seven months of being in Government is achieve the outline of such a scheme. Our predecessors, and I heard one of them on the radio just before, had 12 years to act on this and failed to do so, even though they were provided with a submission to cabinet on this five years ago and didn't have the political courage to act.
In six months we tried to turn this around. Here is the outline of how our scheme would work. The speed at which it operates, we will settle once the Treasury modelling is done.
UHLMANN: If it doesn't cut emissions will it be a failure?
PM: Well the whole point of this system is to reduce emissions. Remember if you step back from this all, what is, what are the three pillars of this Government's approach to global warming and climate change?
Firstly to bring about reductions in global greenhouse emissions. Secondly to ensure that we have got appropriate adaptation strategies for our most exposed industries already and I think particularly of our farmers and agriculture at this point.
And thirdly, to participate fully through our ratification of Kyoto, in negotiating a global arrangement on climate change so that we can do something effectively for this country for the medium to long term.
That is the strategy. That's what we've embarked upon. Nothing is going to be perfect but it certainly beats sticking your head in the sand, which is what the Liberal Party have been doing for 12 years.
UHLMANN: Now you have talked a lot about compensation but this system doesn't inflict some pain, then it wont change behaviour will it?
PM: Well, what we have looked at here through this scheme is to make sure that first of all it has wide coverage. It covers 75 per cent of emissions in the Australian economy. Secondly therefore, when you are talking about a scheme which covers effectively that spread of the economy, we are looking at a very extensive scheme in terms of it's overall impact.
Secondly on the adjustment mechanisms for households and for businesses, what we are concerned about it to ensure that we enable those least able to cope with any adjustment costs, pensioners, carers, low income earners to be helped on the way through.
That is why we have said we would meet any additional cost flowing from the scheme. And secondly for businesses, to provide them with adaptation and transition arrangements as well. All necessary to move Australia gradually over time to a lower carbon economy,
UHLMANN: Where is the incentive to change if you provide too much compensation?
PM: Well that will, that incentive will of course be struck once the carbon reduction, Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme begins operating and you then have a carbon price which is set.
Then what happens is that it becomes much more cost effective for businesses and, over time, households to move to more carbon efficient ways of going about their daily work, their daily life. Or in the case of businesses, how they operate.
For example, over time, we would probably point in the direction of motorists deciding that the best thing to do is to move to more fuel efficient vehicles. I would have thought for the country overall, that's important, coming off the back of the overall resolve to move to a lower carbon economy.
UHLMANN: Easy for the rich to move to more fuel efficient vehicles than the poor though isn't it?
PM: Well that's why the adjustment system that we outline in the Green Paper starts from the first and fundamental principle that those will least financial flexibility, pensioners, carers, those on income support payments, that we would meet adjustment costs for them. Similarly for low income earners.
We would also provide assistance to other households to assist with the investment in energy efficiency technologies and systems and appliances for their homes.
This is a long term gradual change but with one end point in mind and that is to bring down our overall carbon emissions and with that work with the rest of the world in negotiating an effective carbon reduction scheme globally.
UHLMANN: And when you speak of working with the rest of the world the one thing that is clear in all this, isn't it, that if there is no movement by the rest of the world then this system wont make any difference at all to global warming.
PM: Well for Australia, we are already the hottest and driest continent on earth. Therefore, this continent, is likely to be the hardest and earliest hit by climate change.
One simple fact is that the CSIRO and the bureau of meteorology talk about what is going to happen with the future of temperature increases in Australia. The impact also which flows to drought, 20 per cent more droughted areas by 2030.
If there is no change, a 63 per cent reduction in agricultural exports. All that means, loss to the economy, loss to jobs. Therefore we have got to act. But I also know, having just been to the G8 meeting in Hokkaido in Japan, is that in order to have any hope of delivering a decent global outcome that countries like ourselves have to be at the negotiating table and acting.
If you are engaged in this sort of game of, you know, waiting for someone else to always move first, always move first, then guess what, every country adopts that strategy, every country adopts that strategy then actually no progress is made whatsoever.
UHLMANN: Well you are going to move Prime Minister and you have just been to the G8 and you have spoken to some of these leaders. How optimistic are you that there will be an international system that will have meaningful change?
PM: I think it is to be blunt Chris, I think it is just too early to tell. What I do know is this, when I hear people like the Liberal party here talking about the future of climate change and as if we are acting solely ourselves. We already have 27 states in the European Union who have one form of emissions trading or another.
We have a large number of states and provinces in the United States and Canada doing the same. The Japanese are debating the introduction of a scheme themselves. Both Republican and Democrat candidates for the Presidency in the United States have committed to carbon reduction targets either the same as or more ambitious than we have for Australia.
The world is starting to move on this, and the reason is everyone is starting to calculate the economic cost of not moving. And that means standard of living and jobs and it is a difficult challenge for us, but I am not about to bury my head in the sane and just hope it goes away. We will embark upon this course of action.
UHLMANN: Yeah but just briefly on this point Prime Minister, in a world where we cant be sure whether the leaders are murdering their people or building nuclear weapons, how can you have a system where you verify the emissions of millions of companies.
PM: Well it is going to be tough but the alternative Chris is to do nothing.
Remember what we committed to through the Bali road map only six months ago on the part of developing economies was for measurable and verifiable commitments to action by developing countries. That has to be now translated into reality.
But you can either be at the margins of this and say, ‘well it's all to hard, I am just going to go away', or you can pitch in and try and come up with a solution.
If we fail, the economic consequences for this country, Australia, are massive. We will have a real impact on our standard of living, a real impact on jobs, a real impact on how we live our daily lives. I am not prepared to stand by and allow that to happen. We will come up, as we have done with this Green Paper, with a responsible balanced course of action.
UHLMANN: Finally, are you expecting support for this in the Senate from the Liberal Party?
PM: Well the Liberal Party as you know, have changed their position now three times. This time last year, the first half of last year they opposed emissions trading. By the time it got to the election they said they were going to have it.
You had Malcolm Turnbull on air just before, who in July last year said that they would have the most ambitious, well the Liberal Party said, they would have the most ambitious emissions trading scheme in the world and it would include transport fuel.
Now that we have got the election out of the way they are back to their position of the first part of last year, which is they oppose it, it seems.
Who knows what their position is. But I would appeal to the Liberals to either adopt a responsible course of action for the Australian economy and be partners in getting this right for the long term future as opposed to just playing short term irresponsible politics, because frankly, it is not going to get us anywhere.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister thank you.
PM: Thanks very much.


PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Ok, bottom line in this. Who pays, who will be worse off, who carries the cost?
PM: Well what we have outlined is a system which is not cost free. That's the first point. Secondly, pensioners, carers and those on those sorts of social security support payments, we have said that we will meet any costs of adjustment to this new scheme as they come in.
We have also said for low incomes earners, that we would do the same. For households beyond that we have said we would provide some support and also provide help, which we have yet to identify in detail but will do so by years' end, on also helping households introduce energy efficiency measures within their own households to help the planet obviously but to help their own household energy bills.
MITCHELL: So who is it? Who in the end will be paying the cost?
PM: Well as I said there will be an adjustment cost for families and the other part of course an adjustment cost for business. There are about 1000 of Australia's largest businesses which will be involved in this scheme, this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and you will find that many of those businesses and of course the electricity generators, coal fired electricity stations, will have to pay adjustment costs.
We will provide transition payments for a number of them, but this system does not come cost free and I don't intend to misrepresent that.
MITCHELL: I understand that but I cant quite see in the end who pays. Where does the buck stop?
PM: Well if you have got a combination of households and businesses through this, obviously it is a combined effort. This system of Carbon Pollution Reduction covers some 75 per cent of the economy. It comes in from 2010 on, that's our ambition.
And the adjustment cost to the scheme will be born by those thousand businesses. There will be some flow through costs as a result to households and that's why we are providing these adjustment payments on the way through.
MITCHELL: Ok, so every household in a sense is going to have to pay. Even with the compensation, everybody is going to be a little worse off.
PM: No, when we have talked about pensioners and carers and we talked about low income earners, what we have said explicitly in the Green Paper is that we will meet any costs arising from the introduction of this scheme.
But beyond that, we will provide some adjustment support. This will be tough, it will be unpopular, but I believe it is the right and responsible course of action for the long term, which we just cant keep putting off.
MITCHELL: Middle Australia? Well some of the interpretation goes middle Australia will carry the majority of the cost, power bills for example going up $220 immediately.
There wont be full compensation for middle Australia will there?
PM: What we have said for those beyond lowest incomes is that we will provide some support. And secondly what we have said is that we will assist with households investing in energy efficiency appliances and energy assistance within homes.
The precise formula around that Neil, we haven't determined yet and that will be sorted out over the next six months or so.
MITCHELL: What if I am a family over $100,000 or $150,000 will there be help for me?
PM: Well we believe, we are looking now precisely at what form of assistance we provide in terms of, lets say, assistance to help households get the best energy efficiency technologies into their homes.
The precise cut off for that, the precise forms of assistance we will spend the next six months or so working through.
What we want to do is to help families in this adjustment period. A lot of people find it difficult to make the adjustment up front for example by bringing in better appliances on the home front, and we are looking at particular ways of how we help.
But the clarity of that will be in once the White Paper is done end of this year.
MITCHELL: OK but just another element, what about the flow on costs? If you are earning above $100,000 or $150,000 a year, will you get assistance to meet the increased costs?
PM: Well there are two parts of the assistance. One is a measure which helps with the actual adjustment costs themselves and the other part is assistance in bringing in new energy efficiency.
MITCHELL: So I understand that, will the actual adjustment costs, will there be some sort of relief to people above $100,000 or $150,000 on the actual adjustment cost?
PM: Well in terms of middle income earners and those in broader receipt of Family Tax Benefit A, we are of course looking at ways which we can assist them on the actual costs themselves. But on the detail of that and the other forms of assistance in terms of energy saving technology, you'll have that in the White Paper.
That's what we are working through over the next six months and we will be consulting with the community sector and industry on that as well.
MITCHELL: So you are looking for relief for middle income earners but you cant tell us what it is?
PM: Exactly right  - 
MITCHELL: Ok well what about higher income earners?
PM: And that will come through in the course of the White Paper.
MITCHELL: Well what about the higher income earners? There is not a lot of families earning a joint income $150,000, what about them?
PM: Well at the end of the day you have still got to make sure that your assistance measures are targeted on those who can least afford to meet the adjustment.
That's why we start with pensioners and carers, that is why we move on to those on lower incomes and through middle incomes accordingly.
MITCHELL: So that means higher income earners there is no relief for the additional costs, does it?
PM: What it means is, and we haven't determined as I said the precise definition of the assistance for help when it comes to energy efficiency systems within homes  - 
MITCHELL: No I am talking about adjustments for the cost, not the energy assistance, I am talking about the cost.
PM: Where that line comes in. We will draw a line in terms of where the,
MITCHELL: Where?
PM: Well, on that, the precise dividing line we will make clear in the White Paper.
MITCHELL: So above a certain line of income you won't get assistance with the increased costs. Is that the fact?
PM: On costs themselves that is correct. On the question of provision for households, for help with energy efficiency measures, which is another form of if you like cost adjustment, we have yet to determine the characteristics around that but we think that is another way of practically  - 
MITCHELL: Prime Minister I started by saying, who pays, what you are saying here is, the rich pay.
PM: You will find if you look at the overall design of the system, Neil, it is targeted on 1000 businesses around the country, our biggest businesses which is a small proportion of the millions of businesses in Australia.
MITCHELL: But I am talking about households here and you are saying above a certain level of which we do not yet know, will not get assistance for increased costs. So that means people above a certain level which is determined to be rich, will in fact not get any compensation.
PM: What I was saying Neil is, and why I began talking about business is, it is the flow through costs which come from business. A lot of those electricity generators that flow through in terms of energy prices, but also, other possible flow through costs as well.
So, what we are doing at one level is providing assistance and adjustment support for certain businesses who will be involved in this scheme. That of course affects the flow through cost to consumers from the sorts of things they produce.
Secondly, when it comes to the direct impact on households, as I said, our first target is to help those who can least afford the adjustment and then we will move up the income scale accordingly.
MITCHELL: Ok, but you wont, you don't yet know what the cut off level is.
PM: We will make that absolutely clear in the White Paper, that we believe that it is right fair and balanced to start with those who are least able to cope with the adjustment cost.
MITCHELL: Petrol Prime Minister, exactly how will the excise cut work? When will it come in?
PM: Well the mechanism that we have talked about, as you have seen in the Green Paper Neil is cent for cent. That will come in to accompany the introduction of the emissions trading scheme and therefore, as you know, we have also said in the Green Paper that would be reviewed at the three year point.
MITCHELL: So will there be a trigger point where that happens or will you just, day one say, we are taking a certain amount per litre off the excise?
PM: What we have said, the petrol tax we have brought down cent for cent to match any increase to the price of petrol arising from the introduction of the scheme. On the detail of how that works and precise calibration of the date and the mechanism for doing it, all that will be in the White Paper too.
The principle though is clear, and that is, that it is cent for cent as of the introduction of the scheme.
MITCHELL: But I don't, I can't understand even in principle how that can work. Because the market is so volatile. Do you set a level and say, well above that, that is the impact of carbon trading? I mean, when, or do we pay it at the pump and get it back later. I just don't understand  - 
PM: No, no, no. The tax adjustment occurs, then as a consequence, it doesn't flow through to the motorist.
MITCHELL: But where does it occur and when?
PM: As I said as of the introduction of the scheme and the second point is, pointing to any future adjustments in the petrol price, what we said again clearly in the White Paper is that there will be periodic adjustments to that (inaudible) arrangement so that the overall principle of cent for cent is preserved and at the three year point, we would also review the entirety of the scheme.
MITCHELL: But I'm sorry I'm still not clear. The day before your system cuts in, petrol is $1.50. The next day how much is it?
PM: As of the introduction of the scheme, any cent increase arising from introduction of the scheme is offset immediately as a consequence of the cent for cent undertaking.
MITCHELL: So you wait for it to go up?
PM: As of the introduction of the scheme it is applied automatically and the principle outlined in the Green Paper is that it would then be adjusted periodically over the course of the next three years to respond to any other changes which occur to the petrol price as a consequence of the introduction of the scheme.
The idea is to produce a system which is as fair and transparent as possible while not slugging motorists at a time of very high oil prices with the cost of the introduction of this scheme. The detail of date and the precise mechanism, you'll have all that in the White Paper, but the principle is clear in the Green Paper.
MITCHELL: But the principle, I'm still, sorry but I still don't understand. The petrol price is so volatile, how do you know whether it's gone up because of market movements or because of your carbon tax and therefore how do we know we're getting compensation for the price increase?
PM: Well, you'll know the carbon price because the carbon price will be set clearly by the market and therefore the translation of that carbon price through to any additional cent per litre in terms of the cost of petrol will be know clearly and publicly and therefore the petrol tax will be adjusted accordingly.
That's what we've said and we will do so with periodic adjustments, not just the first one off, but subsequent to that through until the three year review point.
MITCHELL: Will it apply to diesel as well?
PM: We've said it applies to all products including diesel.
MITCHELL: Okay. Now it's reported the trucking industry is only guaranteed one year of relief is that correct?
PM: That's correct.
MITCHELL: Well, that's a bit dangerous isn't it? I mean, if the price of fuel goes up for the trucks it flows through to all of us for everything?
PM: What we've said is parallel to what we've said in the case of motorists that there will be a review at the 12 month point.
Because this is a, I fully concede Neil, a complex system, but at the end of the day we've got to move to a lower carbon economy over time.
We ought to make sure that we've got the system working as effectively as possible, and therefore, for long haul vehicles on our open roads we've been in deep consultation with the trucking industry about how this should work. We want to make sure that it's working effectively at the 12 month point then we would review it.
But we've been very mindful in providing that adjustment for the first 12 months of what you point to, which is any impact or flow through impact on the cost of goods for people, particularly in regional Australia.
[Break]
MITCHELL: Prime Minister I understand you can't above a certain level, but for the middle income earners the estimates on the average family are done in Melbourne today, an immediate $220 rise in their power bills. Can they be confident they will be compensated for every dollar of that?
PM: I haven't seen that particular report, but can I say that the precise number that flow through to energy bills and of course what you and I have just been talking about Neil which is petrol prices, will come once the actual carbon price is set. What you've got probably got in the Green Paper are figures which flow through on the assumption of $20 a ton. But we haven't actually got to that point yet.
MITCHELL: Well I guess the principle is, is there a principle here that says no middle income family will be worse off?
PM: Remember in the earlier part of our discussion today, I said that for people on income support payments - that's pensioners and carers and others - we will meet any additional costs. For low income earners we will meet any additional costs and for middle income earners that we will assist. The precise level of assistance in terms of financial assistance in addition to what we also help with by way of helping households adjust with new energy efficiency technologies, that will be made clear in the White Paper.
MITCHELL: What is the impact on the CPI likely to be?
PM: Well according to the Green Paper, somewhere between 0.9 and 1 or 1.1 (per cent). Therefore, this is a significant element in our thinking because working families, households across the country are under financial pressure. And that's why we have been very keen to make sure these adjustment payments are as fair as possible to help those who are going to be most, or least able to cope.
MITCHELL: There is a massive impact there, isn't it, because the CPI obviously flows through in so many costs, charges and taxes. That will be a massive impact on people.
PM: Well 0.9 per cent. So that's, if it's translated into a basket of goods of $100, that's 90 cents out of $100.
MITCHELL: Yeah but every bill I pay, every tax and fine in Victoria and mostly around the country is linked to the CPI?
PM: Well I'm the first to agree with you Neil that this has a cost impact. I've said that from the beginning. This system will never be cost free. But you've got to move to a lower carbon economy in order to deal with longer term the economic cost to Australia and to jobs of not acting on climate change. And these are some of the challenges you face.
What you've got to do is be balanced and reasonable about it, and provide adjustment payments on the way through. Which is what you and I have been talking about for pensioners, carers and lower income earners in particular.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, as I understand it, business has to consult by the end of September, yet they don't get the economic modelling until October. How can industry consult if they don't know what it is?
PM: Well we're going to have a longer process of initial and subsequent consultation with business. Once the exposure draft, for example, goes out and the actual White Paper, there's what we call third round consultation with business as well.
What we've got to do is take this step by step. What we said with the Green Paper is, and we're asking industry's response to this, is the actual design of the system. It's complex, it's hard, it's difficult to explain  -  I accept that. And that's what we're seeking industry response to.
Given that we are talking about the direct impact on 1000 of Australia's largest businesses, and remember we've got about two million businesses out there around the country, these 1000 businesses we'll be working with them pretty directly on the way in which the system we designed. But we will have a further round of consultation with them too.
MITCHELL: But you're also talking about an impact on every Australian here, aren't you, financially?
PM: Well the flow through to the whole economy affects all of us. I mean, I've always said from the beginning Neil that I'm not going to stand up and say to people that this is a cost free change.
It's wrong to say that, it's just simply untrue. But if you're going to make a change for the long term, which is necessary if we find ourselves in this country already as the driest and hottest country, continent in the world, and therefore likely to be hit hardest and earliest by climate change.
We've got a responsibility not just to those who come after us, our kids and grandkids, but also to the here and now of the Australian economy to begin this process of adjustment.
MITCHELL: How much money will you bring in, in the trading scheme, in the permits?
PM: Well, that of course will be determined by the carbon price.
But the principle that we have set is that any cent, any single cent, which is earned from the selling of permits, basically, pollution permits, is then reinvested in the adjustment payments which go to households on the one hand, and also for businesses to help them with adjustment during this period of moving to a lower carbon economy.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, in the current economic environment, you would agree that, I assume, that the world economic environment is very nervous, very volatile, perhaps even depressing?
PM: It's a very difficult time and I know the argument, which says that this therefore the wrong time to be debating this. Of course, our intended ambition for implementation is 2010, which is a couple of years away.
We believe, however, that there are huge costs which continue to grow for Australia if we just push this off and off and off. So also, that's why we tried to bring in a responsible and balanced scheme in terms of adjustment arrangements for the industries who will be part of the scheme.
MITCHELL: But the Untied States is teetering on the edge of recession, isn't it?
PM: The testimony from the head of the US Federal Reserve overnight points certainly to lower levels of growth in the United States. It is a very difficult time in the global economy. Global financial markets have been in a state of flux since August of last year through the sub prime crisis. Also on top of that we've had the problems flowing from Middle East oil.
That's why we've tried to come up with a balanced scheme which does the right thing for Australia for the long term because if we keep putting this off, and we need to have a global scheme with other countries participating, if we keep putting this off, then I think the cost that will come to Australia will be huge.
The one projection, just for your listeners, is that if we don't act on this and get a decent outcome both nationally and internationally, we're looking at 20 per cent more droughted areas in the country by 2030. You're looking at a 63 per cent reduction in our agricultural exports.
All of that means jobs and wealth for Australia down the gurgle unless we do something about it.
MITCHELL: I know we're almost out of time, but what is your priority then? Is it this legislation, is it climate change, or is it economic reform? Is it the state of the economy? Is it reforming the financial markets?
PM: The first responsibility we have is for responsible economic management. That makes it therefore fundamentally important that we are engaged with the global monetary authorities, as we have been since we came into Government last November, on the stability of the financial system.
Secondly, a responsible Budget which is what we brought down in May, with a $22 billion surplus because of the uncertain times which lie ahead.
But thirdly, embarking upon this reform to bring in a lower carbon economy over time, gradually, with adjustment payments. And people from the Greens and the left will also say this is not enough, and people from the right will say it is going too far. We think we've got to get started; this is a responsible way forward.
MITCHELL: Could this cost you Government if you get it wrong?
PM: Oh look, I don't take anything for granted, Neil. These are tough decisions, it's tough times. The easy political thing to do is short term politics, put it in the too hard basket and bury it at the bottom of the garden.
I don't intend to do that, because I think this is the right course of action. We'll have further debate in the next six months: consultation with business and households to try and get the final settings of this right.
But I think for the long term, what's the challenge? As Prime Minister, I've got to face the scientific facts, the economic facts, and adopt a balanced and responsible course of action on the way through. Not just hope and pretend it will all just go away.
MITCHELL: Just finally, Prime Minister, you're meeting the Pope today, later today  -  do you believe that people who raise these cases of sexual abuse are ‘dwelling crankily on old wounds'?
PM: I haven't seen, you're quoting someone's remarks there, are you?
MITCHELL: Yes, I'm quoting the Bishop in charge of World Youth Day, and a case of a family approaching, wanting to get an apology on behalf of one child who has committed suicide after being abused by police and another who is a hopeless alcoholic. Bishop Fisher made the comments, ‘dwelling crankily on old wounds'?
PM: Well, I haven't seen those particular remarks. What I do know from individual cases that I have read about over recent years is that these cases of abuse cause enormous damage to families, enormous damage to the individuals over time. And it's appropriate that Church authorities handle each of these matters individually and sensitively.
As you know, when Pope Benedict was in the United States recently, he issued an apology to all victims of abuse in Catholic schools and institutions and elsewhere. And let's see what the Holy Father has to say when he is in Australia as well.
MITCHELL: You'd hope he'd do the same?
PM: Well, it's a matter for the Church. But I noted carefully what he said in the Untied States. And going back to the family of the circumstances you just described, these are horrendous. They're just awful. They're horrible facts. And what I do note also is that the Church over time has been moving in response to each of these matters as they've come into the public domain, and you would say sometimes better than others, but it is very important for the Church to respond appropriately to each individual case.
Ultimately it is a matter for the Church, and I've noted carefully what Pope Benedict has had to say on this sensitive and difficult matter recently in the United States.
MITCHELL: I appreciate your time. Thank you very much.
PM: Thanks Neil.


MIKE: Good morning.
PM: Good morning Mike, good morning Sandy.
SANDY: Good morning Prime Minister.
MIKE: You're under fire from all sides here, aren't you? The Greens and the environmentalists are saying you haven't done nearly enough. The Opposition, I think, is saying you've gone to far too fast.
What have you done?
PM: I think the challenge here, Mike, is to, as Prime Minister, is to face the scientific facts, face the economic facts, which confront us. Be upfront about this and put forward a responsible, balanced course of action for the Australian economy in the here and now, but also to do something responsible for our kids and our grandkids.
It's all very easy just to push to one side and say ‘too hard'. We'll get attacked from the left for not haven't gone far enough and from the Liberals  -  depending on what day it is and what position that they have on any particular day. But, my job is as Prime Minister is to carve our a responsible course of action to reduce carbon pollution over time and to provide, at the same time, adjustments, payments and support for households who can least afford those adjustments. And secondly, to help businesses in the transition period as well.
SANDY: Prime Minister, although there will be compensation for households, do you think Australian families will be supportive of this when they know they're going to be paying more for electricity, for gas, and at the supermarket as well?
PM: Well, Sandy, the easy thing to do would be to run around and say I can bring in a cost free scheme. And I can't. You know, even Mr Howard last year said when, for a moment or a season, the Liberals were embracing emission trading, he said that it couldn't be taken without higher energy costs, without higher fuel costs  -  he was right. He was right then, he's right now, and that's the position this Government has.
I'd rather be upfront about that than try and sort of guild the lily.
The key thing though is, there is a huge cost to Australia if we fail to act. This is already the world's hottest and driest continent. We are therefore likely to be hit hardest and earliest by climate change. The CSIRO has projected that could have, I should say, the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics has projected that we could have at least a 63 per cent reduction in agricultural exports by the year 2030. That's a huge impact on our standard of living, on jobs. So you can either just allow that all to happen, or you can roll out a plan of action for dealing with it nationally and internationally, and that's what we've done.
MIKE: Alright. And if we head off bravely across the horizon on this and then turn around and find out that China, India and lot of other countries have done nothing at all, that could severely damage our economy, couldn't it?
PM: Well that's why we're taking a responsible, balanced course of action through this.
Firstly, across the developed economies in the world, we've already got 27 economies in Europe who are operating with emissions trading. North America, there are a large number of states in the US and provinces in Canada doing the same. Both candidates  -  Republican and Democrat  -  for the US Presidential elections are committed to carbon pollution reduction targets, either the same as, or more ambitious, than what we've put forward.
Then you go to the developing world, and obviously our job is to do whatever we can through our global negotiations, that's why we ratified Kyoto, to make sure that they commit to concrete courses of action for the future as well.
That's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, but we will go into this with our eyes wide open to make sure that we're looking out for the interests of the Australian economy in the long term.
SANDY: But Mr Rudd, shouldn't this go hand in hand with major investment in public transport, in solar energy, that sort of thing?
PM: Well, absolutely. If we step back from all this, what's the overall strategy for climate change? One, reducing carbon emissions through schemes like the one that we've just put forward. Two, climate adaptation, particularly for agricultural and rural areas where you've already got the real impacts - simply look at the state of the Murray-Darling at present for farmers struggling to deal with the reality of climate change. And three, an active, vigorous global negotiating strategy, which is why we ratified Kyoto, so that we can be part of a global negotiation for a decent outcome everywhere.
If you go also to the question of other ways of carbon pollution reduction, this scheme that we put out is one of them. Another will be a strategy that we will release in due course on energy efficiency for homes and for businesses.
MIKE: So why did you pull out of the solar panel scheme then, the subsidy on that one?
PM: I'll come back to that in one sec.
And then also dealing with a much more effective approach to renewable energy across the board. And, what we do with clean coal technology as well.
This is all part and parcel of an integrated strategy to bring down carbon pollution reduction.
On the solar panels point, what we did was simply reflect the means testing of that what the previous Government had already introduced last year for solar hot water systems. So, that simply brought those two systems into line. But as we said before Mike, all these renewable energy arrangements, particularly those affecting households, are very much in the mix as we now approach the assistance that will help households with bringing in more energy efficient technologies into their homes.
MIKE: Alright. Now, that's fine. And you say you will compensate the battlers, I think up to $150,000 or so. It doesn't compensate small business, does it? If you're a small business using electricity or gas, those costs will be going up big time. And plus the general all round price rise?
PM: Remember, we've got about two million or plus businesses in the economy and those who will be directly part of this scheme are only about 1,000 in number  -  these are the big businesses. And, the debate about adjustment costs for them is outlined in the Green Paper, and the proposed climate change action fund that we are putting forward to assist in the transition for certain businesses. And also the electricity industry supply assistance fund.
MIKE: Yeah, but I'm talking about if you have a factory in western Sydney, a metal working factory which is using a lot of gas, using a lot of electricity, your costs are going to go through the roof.
PM: What we are working our way through is how we assist businesses in dealing with these adjustment costs, and just dealing with households. But as I've said right from the very beginning of this exercise, Mike, the problem is if you've got politicians running around the place saying that there is some magical cost free arrangement, magical cost free arrangement, for introducing a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme for Australia, then they frankly are just not telling you the truth.
There are costs, they are real, I'm not going to pretend otherwise. But, I'm all ears for Dr Nelson or Mr Turnbull, depending on what day of the week it is, to come up with a cost free system of bringing down carbon pollution in Australia.
MIKE: You just want to see Mr Turnbull and Dr Nelson agree on it, don't you?
PM: Well, having a single position from the Liberal Party on any day of the week would be an advance on where we are. We've had about a dozen in the last week. But, you know, where the Liberal Party comes out on this is pretty important because they will affect the vote on this in the Senate.
SANDY: Prime Minister, you also need the Greens to get your plan through the Senate. We spoke to the Greens' Senator Christine Milne this morning and she said the Greens were pretty disappointed with what's come out. There are several things she thinks need to be addressed before they can think about supporting the Government, one of which is they don't see why big coal generators should be given compensation, more money should be going into renewables. Will you be talking to them over the next nine months? I suppose you will be, to try and get them to try and come to where you are and you to where they're at?
PM: Well our challenge is to get our policy right, the Green Paper is the first stage in this process, we'll have a White Paper years end, early next year with exposure legislation. Then, of course, it is a matter for putting that into the parliament. My appeal is directly to the Liberal Party to either be responsible partners in the future economic direction of Australia  -  remember that they committed to all this last year, then we had an election and they said, ‘whoops, now it's in our short term political advantage to oppose it.' So the Liberals have got some serious soul searching to do on this question in terms of acting responsibly for the long term.
But, you know, we're going to get attacked from the left on this, from the right. My job is to take the responsible course of action which is balanced for the long term, and I think this Green Paper has the basis for that course of action going forward.
MIKE: The other suggestion being (inaudible) you've got also got one eye on the next election and you're indulging in politics as the ‘art of the possible'?
PM: Well, we committed prior to the last election, it might be an old fashioned view, but we committed before the last election to doing this. We said that we would introduce this sort of scheme. We said we'd ratify Kyoto, we did that within an hour of taking over Government. We said we'd introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, this is the first instalment of that through this Green Paper. We said we'd introduce a half billion dollar renewable energy fund  -  we've done that through the Budget. We said we'd introduce a half billion dollar clear coal investment fund  -  and we've done that as well.
These are all initial steps. And can I just say, climate change didn't occur overnight. The science of this has become clearer and clearer over the last decade, and we've had really a wasted decade under my predecessor on this, where he and they preferred to stick their head in the sand. In six months we've achieved more progress on this than our predecessors did in 12 years.
SANDY: Prime Minister, can I ask you about the other big story of the day, just getting away from climate change. And that is, you're meeting the Pope again in Sydney this morning  -  it's going pretty well, don't you think?
PM: Well, I was at the inaugural Mass the other evening in Sydney and it was just, I've got to say, enormously inspiring to see 150,000  - 
SANDY: It's a great feeling.
PM: ... 150,000 kids out there, in a wave of optimism and hope. It was a really good thing. So I'm looking forward to my meeting with Pope Benedict later this morning.
MIKE: Have you got anything to say to him?
PM: Not that I'd say to you, Mike.
MIKE: You might want to confess or something, I don't know. Any confessions that you might like to offer?
PM: You mean confess to you?
MIKE: No. Well if you feel like it. I don't like the chances.
PM: Well, probably neither of us would have enough time.
I'm looking forward to the conversation with Pope Benedict. And I had a shorter conversation with him at the airport the other day when he arrived.
I think all Australians, quite rightly, feel honoured to have the Holy Father with us for this week. I think all Catholic Australians regard this as a very important and special time, as they should. But I think for the entire community, Catholic, non-Catholic and those beyond the Christian faith, this is a really good time of celebration for the wider community.
MIKE: The only possible confession I was thinking of comes from the allegation, the book that was out the other day saying that you use the ‘f' word a lot in private. Do you?
PM: The next question?
MIKE: You've squibbed it!
SANDY: Thanks for your time, Prime Minister.
PM: I've never pretended to be Mother Theresa.
MIKE: Thanks Prime Minister.
PM: See you, bye.


PM: Well its good to be here with Penny Wong, back in Brisbane in my case, visiting Brisbane in Penny's case at the Bulimba State School. And I thank the school community here at Bulimba for showing me the work that they are doing in terms of building a sustainable planet, a sustainable community.
Over the work that's gone on in this school community, which I've seen over the years myself as the local member and it was all aimed at causing our young people to know where their own responsibilities lie in building a sustainable community and helping contribute to a sustainable planet.
Whether it's the use of solar panels on the school roof, whether it's the skills which are inculcated in the kids in terms of sustainable uses of our land. This is all very good and I congratulate the Environment Club and those associated with it here at Bulimba State School and their doing a great job. I thank them for their hospitality in showing us around the school this morning.
The clear message we have for Australia is this, we need to act responsibly on climate change to help deal with the challenges to our economy as well doing the right thing by our kids and by our grandkids.
It's about acting now on the economy in an effective, measured, responsible way to adjust to a lower carbon economy and also making sure we're acting for our kids and grandkids as well. And that's very much what has guided the Government in its approach to the release of our Green Paper on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
We have to get it right for the long term and this is a responsible course of action, also for the short to medium term. If you stand back from this challenge what we've sought to do is to act responsibly with the economy in terms of the budget strategy we've adopted, responsibly in support of working households across Australia in dealing with cost of living pressures, and acting responsibly for our long term environmental future and economic future by taking action on climate change.
And I conclude where I began. We must as a nation act in a responsible balanced way for our economy now as well as a responsible way to look after our kids and grandkids for the longer term as well.
Did you want to add anything? Happy to take your questions
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister should Premier Anna Bligh have declared the holiday (inaudible)
PM: Look I know none of the details of that other than to say that I've known Anna Bligh for the last 20 years. She's a person of great integrity and I'm confident that all these matters will be handled appropriately by the Premier.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm confident that Anna Bligh is a person of absolute and great integrity. I've known her for about 20 years and I'm sure she will deal with these matters and questions that you raise in the appropriate way.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I have said before and I'll say again that I have known Anna for a long time, she's a person and a Premier of great, in my experience, absolute integrity and I'm sure these questions will be dealt in an appropriate way.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) being the Prime Minister is easy as I've heard you say, what about....
PM: I beg your pardon
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Can you tell me where that was said -
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: (Inaudible) to which I then said that if you compared yourself with Lincoln in the middle of the American civil war. That being Prime Minister of Australia represents a lesser challenge. Is that called verballing by you, would you like to rephrase your question? Thank you would you like to re-put the question?
JOURNALIST: How tough is it (inaudible)
PM: It's very tough, a really tough job for the Government. But our job is to act responsibly for Australia, for the economy now and for our kids now and grandkids in the longer term.
You can either take that as a responsible course of action even though it's tough and it will involve cost and pain for Australia, I accept that. But I am not going to say to Australians this is going to be a cost free, pain free transition. That's just wrong.
What I am saying is here is a strategy to take us forward and here is adjustment support for both households and for industry on the way through. That's the responsible course of action.
The irresponsible course of action, irresponsible short term politics if you change your position every day on the question of carbon pollution reductions.
And here is my challenge today to the Liberal Party. The Liberal Party has the power to decide whether this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme passes the Senate.
My challenge today to the Liberal Party is come clean. Where do you stand? Is it yesterday's position, today's position, last week's position, last month's position? Frankly they've had more positions than you can count.
Last year the Liberal Party said through Treasurer Costello that they would introduce the most comprehensive emissions trading scheme in the world and that they could introduce it by 2010. That's what they said in the lead up to the election.
My challenge to them, my challenge the Liberal Party today is do they uphold what Treasurer Costello said on behalf of the Liberal Party last year. Because that directly affects whether this will pass the Senate.
JOURNALIST: Could it trigger an election?
PM: This is a serious matter for Australia. It's a very serious matter for Australia because we have to act nationally and internationally on climate change. That's why we have issued this Green Paper where we've outlined a plan for the future to act responsibly on the economy and to make sure that we are also looking after our kids and grandkids.
Therefore, my challenge to the Liberal Party is get serious about this because will you honour your pre-election position on an emissions trading scheme or will you not?
We have a plan out there. It has been out there now for some days, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. They committed themselves to similar such scheme less than 12 months ago. The challenge for them is to get real.
This is a serious matter, a very serious matter. The country takes it seriously, the Government takes it seriously. It's about time the Liberal Party took it seriously because they will directly affect whether this passes the Senate.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I think the challenge for the Liberal Party, which committed themselves to being sensible before the election is to be fair dinkum with the Australian people or just play short term politics. I think that's the challenge they face and the numbers in Senate speak for themselves.
JOURNALIST: Apparently Mr Turnbull today on radio called you a political fraud.
PM: I think the challenge for Australia is to deal with this challenge which faces our nation, our economy and our future and our kids, responsibly without name-calling. Responsibly. The challenge to the Liberal Party is to get fair dinkum about what they stand for on climate change. We have a plan out there. We are out there now consulting households, the community, and industry. And what we have instead from the Liberal Party is short term, irresponsible politics.
JOURNALIST: Is the Carbon Reduction Scheme going to prevent LNG projects going ahead as has been claimed?
PM: What we have said right from the beginning is that we will now be in consultation with industry over the next six month period, getting all branches of industry about the state of their emissions, the state of their emissions intensity and therefore, what adjustment support they could expect from the Government under that.
I note that (inaudible) considered all branches of industry. And there is going to be, a lot of argy bargy on the way through, as there inevitably is. But that's part of a negotiation. I go back to what I said before; this is not a cost free, pain free solution for the future. It involves some hard decisions.
We are either going to be part of solution to this, or we can dig a hole and bury our head in the sand. Which is the current position of the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I haven't seen precise reporting from our post in Jakarta on those matters. I would say by way of general principle the following, that together with the Liberal Party, our policy has been one of stated universal opposition to the death penalty, but in the case of foreign terrorists, we are not in the business of intervening on any of their behalf's.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is a complex and international legal discussion between the Government of the United States and the Government of Australia. I am advised that the Attorney General's Department is in close and continuing contact with American counterparts, aimed at the successful prosecution of this matter.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you have just met the Pope, do you remember how long it has been since your last confession?
PM: Given that you are from Triple M, I don't suppose I could put the question back in your direction. Is it decades or several decades?
We had a really good conversation yesterday. I enjoyed very much the conversation with the Holy Father. It ranged over a whole range of topics, including in part on climate change and as well as other matters, including a global interfaith dialogue.
As I said in Sydney yesterday at the official welcoming to Australia, he is a welcome guest in Australia, not just from the Catholic community, but from the wider Christian community and beyond that, from the entire Australia community.
We are honoured to have him with us and he still has several days with us still. We hope that his time with us is both memorable for himself and the Catholic community, I think it will be memorable and historic event for the Australian nation.
And I have got to go.


MULDOON: I'm joined by the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd.
PM: Good morning, Rhys. How are you?
MULDOON: Very well. How are you?
PM: Not too bad. You're in downtown Canberra, I'm in downtown Sydney.
MULDOON: Oh, you're in downtown Sydney. It's a little bit busy at the moment?
PM: That's true. 150,000 pilgrims and it's a lot of folk in town.
MULDOON: Yeah. Which leads me straight away to my first question. As Prime Minister obviously you've met all sorts of incredible people and had all sorts of incredible experiences.
I'm just wondering, out of these three things, what would you consider your highlight: Signing the Kyoto Protocol, meeting the Pope, or doing the traffic report with me on 666 ABC Canberra?
PM: A, B and C above.
MULDOON: That's a very brilliant answer. Now I do know that  - 
PM: I believe I did the traffic report last time I was on this program.
MULDOON: Yeah, we did. And I'm not sure if you recall, but there wasn't too much to report that day.
PM: No, it's true. I was just told by public servants that they were an hour late for work because they got all the street names wrong, so.
MULDOON: Oh really, well that's very helpful. Now, I believe it was Therese's birthday yesterday.
PM: That's true, yeah, she had a great birthday. It was (inaudible) day that she also met His Holiness the Pope - Pope Benedict.
MULDOON: Yeah, it makes it quite a memorable birthday.
PM: Certainly was. And, I can't claim to have organised it that way, either the timing of her birthday or the timing of the Pope's visit. It certainly worked out that way. So it was really good.
MULDOON: Have you ever given her a birthday present that was just a complete dud?
PM: Ah, any asked male listening to this program would have to say in the span of their married life, or their relationship with their partners, that they have bottomed out on certain major occasions. I'm one of them (inaudible).
I think it's a golden rule  -  don't go for the kitchen appliances. I think that's kind of the way to go.
MULDOON: Yeah, maybe not sending out great signals.
PM: No, no, no. That's basically no. Just don't go there. I found that in the very early years of our married life and, my mother always appreciated (inaudible)
MULDOON: Now, when we first met you were Shadow Foreign Affairs, and obviously you've since became Prime Minister.
Now, in show businesses, I remember that someone once described directing a film was like simultaneously making love and getting root canal.
Is being the PM similar?
PM: I've never had a root canal, so I can't answer that question.
MULDOON: Okay. I just thought it might be an interesting, um...
PM: I'll tell you what it is though, it is a real challenge, a good challenge, but yeah, in a country like Australia your in a set of global circumstances which are rapidly changing. Global financial crisis which has been rolling now for the better part of 12 months. The global oil crisis, running for the last several months, in terms of this extraordinary increase in the price of petrol around the world.
Us having been elected for the first time in 12 years, having to bring down a tough and responsible Budget while at the same time honouring the commitments you gave to the people of Australia before the election.
So, it's been a pretty full six or seven months since we got in.
MULDOON: Yeah, now with the whole climate change challenge coming up, sometimes when you have to sell something politically or give some medicine, you have give it with a little bit of sugar. Would you agree with that?
PM: Oh, no. I think the case of climate change, which people understand the need to act. My job as Prime Minister is to look at these scientific facts, look at the economic facts, and then make a balanced judgment for the country's long term future. And then when you look at the science facts and the economic facts on climate change, the fact that temperatures are going up and we're already the world's hottest and driest continent, and we'll become, therefore, likely candidates to be the hardest and earliest hit by climate change. And the economic facts are simply these that the economic cost of not acting on climate change (inaudible) greater than the economic costs over time of acting on climate change.
Then, you've got to take a decision. We've done that. What I said yesterday, in many interviews, was that I'm not going to look the people in the eye and say that this is not going to come without cost. It will come with cost. Therefore, it is necessary to make adjustment payments, provide adjustments, of course, for households, particularly lower income households and for businesses. And that's essentially what our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is about.
One, getting the long term reduction of greenhouse gas emissions right for Australia.
Two, providing adjustment payments for households affected by those costs on the way through.
And three, support payments also for Australian business so that we minimise the dislocation of the economy.
MULDOON: And, with, sort of, let's just say for argument's sake that it turns out that we were sort of leading the world in the global challenge as far as climate change goes, what do you think the tricky bits are going to be convincing the Chinese to use the coal that they buy from us, using it responsibly?
PM: A big challenge with coal is simply this  -  how do we, in partnership with the rest of the world, get it right when it comes to clean coal technology. Before the election, we committed to a half billion dollar clean coal innovation fund, we have already made investments from that. The challenge from us, in partnership with our friends around the world including those who buy our product, is to apply this technology to coal fired power stations at scale, here I mean large scale, and establish its workability and it's cost. That's what we're working on now. That's the big challenge for all of us.
But, it's not just coal. At the same time we established a half billion dollar renewable energy fund. And the idea there is to mainstream more renewable energies into the Australian electricity grid, and we're working on that through our mandatory renewable energy target, undertaking to increase that to 20 per cent by 2020.
So, if you do that on coal, you do that on renewable energy, and thirdly, also, bring about a national strategy for energy efficiency in households and in businesses to help households and firms reduce their overall demand on electricity in relative terms
[phone breaks up]
MULDOON: Sorry, you just dropped out for a sec.
Did you like the fact that the Pope mentioned the challenge of global warming?
PM: I didn't know in advance what the Pope was going to say, obviously, both on the question of Indigenous Australians or on climate change.
I think His Holiness is responding to the challenges as he identifies them around the world. Climate change is real, an international panel of climate change scientists, 4,000 essentially humourless guys in white shirts and white coats with their heads stuck down test tubes, they've come up with this conclusion over the course of the last decade plus, that climate change is happening, that it is caused by human activity. And furthermore, their projection that in the 21 st century, that world temperatures could go up between one and six degrees commands all of our attention.
And I'm sure His Holiness has received reports to that effect. In his sermon yesterday at Barrangaroo, which I attended, he was drawing particular importance to how do we manage our planet sustainably. And there I think he is echoing the concerns of the world.
MULDOON: And so was there any part of the Pope's message yesterday that touched you personally.
PM: I think, I had a long private conversation with His Holiness which I enjoyed very much. We covered a whole range of subjects.
MULDOON: Was he aware of your interest in Dietrich Bonhoeffer by any chance? The German Philosopher?
PM: We normally don't go to the detail of these conversations but I think it fair to say that Dietrich got a Guernsey.
MULDOON: I would have loved to have heard that conversation. Just particularly, I suppose just I mean, like, just on a funny little level, just the fact that he was a Lutheran too. Just to see, you know, because obviously what has been one of the amazing things about World Youth Day is how it is, it seems to have united more than just Catholic's in a lot of ways. Just seeing that many people taking their faith seriously.
PM: Well what I have said to the Holy Father at his official state reception yesterday at Government House in Sydney was not only is he a genuine and welcome guests and among friends here in Australia with the Catholic community, but also I believe from the wide Christian community. Also from the community of other faiths, and my sense and understanding of it from the general Australian community as well.
I think the good thing about this World Youth Day, and I congratulate those who have organised it in considerable difficulty and adversity, is it is a great and positive celebration of life, of faith and work and I think that transcends denominational divides as well.
MULDOON: And with the Pope obviously he has a message to share with the world and is continually asked for his message and I am wondering, with his message and say with the message concerning climate change, do you ever think there is a danger of message fatigue?
PM: Well I think I can't speak of course for what the Vatican may say from time to time, that's a matter for them. But I think for all of us in various forms of leadership, the challenge is to look at the facts as they present themselves to us, in the case of climate change and dispassionately work your way through what then needs to be done and go out and do it and tell people why you are doing it.
For example on the question of climate change, I see no point going around to the Australian people and saying ‘oh by the way we are going to act on climate change and it is going to cost nothing'. I just think that is wrong.
It is going to cost the economy to adjust but we have hit upon a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme for example which makes what we think is the most effective, gradual and economically responsible adjustment over time. And if you do not adjust now, you will be looking at a much steeper, sharper and costly adjustment later on.
So I think it is .far better with whatever policy challenge you are facing and whatever level of political leadership you are facing, is just to be upfront about the difficultly and complexity. Explain how you are going to have a go in responding to it, and get on with it.
MULDOON: So do you think, I mean finding yourself as Prime Minister, this time, this place, with this, sort of huge global challenge, do you see some difficulty. Do you see in some way that you may have to kind of throw yourself on the grenade of this challenge at some political cost?
PM: That was good for you until that last analogy.
MULDOON: Maybe not grenade. I shouldn't have used.
PM: Look I have got a pretty simple view and I have said this many time before. There is no point being Prime Minister of Australia for the sake of Prime Minister. I have said before the election, climate change is a real challenge for the country.
Those who preceded us had 12 years to act. They failed to act, put their head in sand, refused to ratify Kyoto, refused to take action.
And therefore, in six or seven months I think we have made more progress on this than our predecessors did in 12 years. We are still going to get attacked from the left and the right for either not going far enough or for going to far.
But my job is to get the balance right for the country, both for the economy now, because it effects are being registered within our immediate time frame.
Look what's happening to the Murray Darling. Look at the impact which that has potentially on agriculture over time, on the projections from the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource economics, is that absent any change on climate change, then we are looking at 20 per cent more droughted months in Australia by 2030.
We are looking at a 63 per cent reduction in Australia's agricultural exports.
Now that, translates into real economy, real standards of living and real jobs.
So you have got to address that reality and at the same time, beyond the economic interests of this generation, look at your kids squarely in the eyeballs and say, well you know, I got to do something for kids and grand kids too.
Because if you are looking out across the span of the 21 st century, the effects are being felt now and the curve gets steeper the further we get into this century unless we nationally and internationally act.
This is going to be really tough. Getting a global negotiated agreement done, it is going to be really tough. But I know one thing for sure Reece, it is far better to be around the negotiating table, having ratified Kyoto than sticking yourself to one side, taking out a spade, digging a very big hole and sticking your head in it. Which is what out predecessors did.
MULDOON: Who do you, who are some of the world leaders that you have met since being Prime Minister that have actually impressed you personally?
PM: Oh there is a large number, who I have encountered who I think are dealing with very challenging national circumstances which they find themselves in. I am not in the business of ticking some off and crossing others.
But can I say overwhelmingly encountering women and men of goodwill trying to the best for their countries and more often than not, try to do what is good for the planet as well.
It was a good opportunity recently in Hokkaido at the G8 Summit to spend time with Prime Minister Singh of India, with also other global leaders including Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan. The good thing and I think the privileged thing about being in this position is an opportunity to work with to her global leaders on common global challenges.
Global climate change is one. Global food security crisis is another. How do we deal with the global energy crisis and it's flow through impact on the price of petrol for lower income households world wide.
These are real challenges. Now that I have said that Reece, I am about to fly to Brisbane.
MULDOON: Yeah I know so I am just about to wrap it up. I have just got one very last quick question. Now I know that your son Nick is a huge reader and I recently read Bob Carr's book on all the books that he loves. Is there any chance that you are going to put out a book like that, with all the books that you love?
PM: No I think Bob has covered the field. And I think Bob Carr's book is terrific. I am failing at finding decent time to read at the moment but I am wading my way through a biography of Lincoln at the moment, which is a good read.
So I would recommend it to people. For a good study of, whenever you think life is going a bit tough, in politics, have a look at Lincoln's presidency during the civil war. Now that's what I call tough.
MULDOON: Ok, thank you very much for speaking to us today Prime Minister. Have a great flight.
PM: Thanks Reece, cheers.


Governments have received their eighth report from senior officials on dry inflow contingency planning in the southern Murray-Darling Basin (MDB). First Ministers have agreed to the recommendations made in the report.
The key message of the report is that the 2008-09 water availability outlook for the southern MDB is serious and has deteriorated through March - June. The report indicates that across much of the MDB the water available for irrigators, communities and the environment remains at record low levels. Water available in the Murray System is being shared between New South Wales (NSW), Victoria and South Australia in accordance with the special sharing arrangements agreed to by First Ministers on 5 February 2008. These special sharing arrangements are likely to be required throughout the water year 2008-09 and the need for contingency planning continues.
Rainfall over most of the southern MDB was below average for the 2007-08 water year. Hot and dry conditions in autumn 2008 in the southern Basin have resulted in diminished tributary inflows and increased losses. Little improvement in water availability was seen in the first half of 2008. Even with average rainfall in 2008-09, inflows could likely remain well below average because of dry catchments reducing runoff. Full recovery of the system is likely to take several years of above average rainfall. The Bureau of Meteorology's seasonal outlook for July to September shows increased chances of drier conditions in the southern part of the MDB.
Stream flow records in the southern MDB show that a dry autumn and early winter increases the chances of low inflows to storages over the reminder of the water year.
Compared to the rest of the MDB the south western corner of the Basin, which covers the lower reaches of the River Murray, received relatively little rainfall over summer. This area has also experienced higher than normal temperatures which has increased evaporation and exacerbated water quality concerns, particularly in the Lower Lakes. Lake Alexandrina and Lake Albert are currently experiencing unprecedented adverse environmental impacts as a consequence of the drought. These impacts include increasing salinity and the high risk of acidification and mobilisation of metals as a result of the exposure of acid sulfate soils.
Murray-Darling Basin Governments recognise the severe problems facing water users from the River Murray as a result of the drought. This is placing pressure on all water users, impacting on communities, production and the environment.
Based on the current water availability and assuming inflows at or above historic minimums, there would be sufficient water for critical human needs and water quality maintenance upstream of the Lower Lakes through 2008-09. However, if inflows are less and losses greater than expected, further contingency measures may be required to be implemented to secure critical human needs.
Governments are actively managing the Lower Lakes and Coorong situation and are providing $6 million through the MDB Commission to support the emergency measures to reduce the risk of environmental damage to Lake Albert. A range of medium and long term risk management strategies for the Coorong and Lower Lakes are being developed. Pumping of water from Lake Alexandrina to Lake Albert is underway as an emergency response to maintain current water levels and prevent potentially irreversible ecological consequences.
Governments understand that continuing low water availability over the coming months will particularly impact on irrigation and other water-dependent industries and the environment. Water users will need timely and accurate forecasts of water allocations over coming months, so that they can make key management decisions. To ensure that information is available for this purpose, governments will continue to work closely with industry associations and stakeholder groups. The Murray-Darling Basin Commission will continue to provide regular drought updates.
Work is continuing on contingency planning in order to protect critical human needs for 2009-10 should inflows remain at or below record minimums through winter. Governments would also need to consider how they would set aside water early to protect critical human needs for 2009-10. Governments have agreed to the following principles that will underpin the arrangements to meet critical water supplies in 2008-09. These principles are:
     * The special sharing arrangements agreed to by First Ministers on 5 February 2008 are still required for the 2008-09 water year and contingency planning needs to continue.
     * All Governments will be working co-operatively through the Senior Officials Group and implementing contingency planning for sharing water through this difficult time. The first priority for Governments in this very low water availability situation is to meet critical urban, stock and domestic water supplies for communities relying on water from the southern MDB.
     * In managing the impacts of dry conditions, water trading markets should be used to the maximum extent possible.


The Australian Government will for the first time appoint a resident Ambassador to the Holy See.
The Government intends to recommend to the Governor General that the Hon Tim Fischer AC, former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, be appointed to the position.
The appointment will mark a significant deepening of Australia's relations with the Vatican. It will allow Australia to expand dialogue with the Vatican in areas including human rights, political and religious freedom, food security, arms control, refugees and anti-people trafficking.
It will also provide an avenue for us to learn from each other's perspectives on the Millennium Development Goals and climate change.
The appointment of a resident Ambassador is also underpinned by Australia's commitment to inter-faith dialogue.
The Holy See has expressed support for Australia's efforts, within Australia and in the region, to facilitate greater understanding between people of different faiths.
This will be the first time since 1973, when Prime Minister Gough Whitlam established diplomatic relations with the Vatican, that Australia has appointed a resident Ambassador.
It is intended that Mr Fischer will take up his appointment in early 2009.


Your Holiness, it is only a week since I greeted you on your arrival on your first visit to Australia. Yet in that week Your Holiness it feels very much that you have already become one with us. Indeed that you have become one of us.
I said on your arrival that in Australia you were among friends. Your Holiness after sharing this week with us I believe you now know you are among friends.
And the sun had shone literally on your visit for the duration of your visit and it has been a good thing.
As we think back on this last great week of reflection and celebration, the minds and hearts of our people are filled with the images of affirmation, of possibility and of unity.
We think of the sea of flags from practically all the nations of the earth. We think of the ocean of young people who have come literally from every corner of God's earth. And how this hard bitten Sydney city has taken these young people to their hearts.
We think of your arrival by boat at Barrangaroo.
We think of your warm embrace of our first Australians who have experienced so much hurt and suffering at our hands over the centuries, but with whom the process of reconciliation has now begun.
We think of the ancient symbols of the Stations of the Cross, cast against the modernity of the Sydney skyline.
We think of your message of healing and hope to the victims of abuse.
We think of your message of spiritual purpose in this materialist age.
Your message of care for this planet that has been entrusted to us to be its custodians not just its exploiters.
And Holy Father your continuing message of faith and reason. Not in hostility to each other but in harmony with each other.
Beyond these great messages, Holy Father, we have also been touched by your simple humanity. Of your ignoring of centuries of Papal protocol to don the cap of a NSW Police constable, of giving hope to the dying and indeed to one who has now died.
Your Holiness in Australia we are a relatively informal lot and we like that approach, we like it very much. And you should now see yourself very much as the Honorary Chaplin of the NSW Police Force.
Your Holiness your visit has been of great significance to Australian Catholics, to the wider Australian Christian community and indeed to all Australians. Your visit is also of significance in the relationship between Australia and the Holy See.
For 35 years our two States have enjoyed excellent diplomatic relations since my predecessor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam established that relationship in 1973.
Today I announce that for the first time Australia will have a resident Ambassador to the Holy See in Rome. And today I announce that the Government will be recommending to his Excellency the Governor General the appointment of the former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia the Honourable Tim Fischer as Australia's first resident Ambassador to the Holy See.
In doing so Australia will join the 69 other nations with resident Ambassadors to the Holy See. Your Holiness I am confident that Mr Fischer, Ambassador Fischer as he will be, will discharge this position with dignity and enable Australia and the Holy See to work together on the great challenges we face in the world.
On human rights, including political and religious freedom across the world. On poverty, on food security, on international humanitarian relief, on peace, arms control and disarmament. On the great challenge of climate change and the other great debates affecting the future of our planet.
Your Holiness we thank you for making this very long journey to Australia. Australians are accustomed to the voyage; those who come here for the first time are not. And it is as you said the other day a daunting voyage.
We now entrust you to the flying kangaroo for your safe return to Rome. Please Holy Father bear us in your thoughts and prayers for the future. That we here in Australia may work indeed to shape a better world for the future.
Holy Father we wish you farewell.


Today, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Treasurer Wayne Swan, Minister for Superannuation and Corporate Law Nick Sherry and Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Competition Policy and Consumer Affairs Chris Bowen met with representatives of the Australian banking industry to discuss how to increase domestic competition and expand the financial services industry both here and abroad.
The Prime Minister and Treasurer welcomed the Australian Bankers' Association's support for its commitment to positioning Australia as a financial services hub, and indicated that the Government looks forward to a constructive ongoing dialogue with the industry .
The Rudd Government is committed to strengthening Australia's place as a financial services hub in the Asia-Pacific region, and has already announced a range of initiatives to enhance the financial services industry in Australia.
In the Government's first Budget we announced a significant cut in the level of withholding tax from a non-final rate of 30 per cent to a final rate of 7.5 per cent on certain distributions from Australian managed investment trusts to foreign resident investors  -  giving Australia one of the most competitive tax regimes in the world.
The Government is implementing a national approach to credit regulation. This will reduce red tape for business, whilst ensuring that working Australians are protected from unscrupulous behaviour by some operators.
The Government has also announced a number of bilateral agreements to improve access to key overseas markets for the Australian financial services industry.
The Government is jointly hosting with the NSW Government a Financial Services Hub Summit on 31 July. The Summit will examine the strengths of Australia's financial services sector, opportunities to build the sector and barriers to the sector's growth internationally. We look forward to the banking industry's participation at the summit.
The difficult global financial environment and its impact on Australia were also discussed.
The Treasurer acknowledged the pressures placed on borrowing costs as a result of the global credit crunch, but reminded the banks that hard-pressed families will reward institutions that provide relief when it's possible.
The Treasurer also outlined the importance of a stable and competitive banking sector that provides the best possible services to consumers at the lowest possible cost.
He stressed the importance of the Government's bank switching package to enhancing competition and welcomed the industry's commitment to fully implementing the package by November this year.
The Treasurer also discussed the progress the banking industry is making to ensure that customers can open First Home Saver Accounts on 1 October, when the legislated Scheme comes into effect.


Thanks very much and welcome to this new gathering there. (Inaudible) and Melbourne University Press had recommended that Christine and I arrive by barge, but we thought that would be a bad look so we did not.
I am glad to have read parts at least of Inside Kevin 07, because I am glad that despite Christine's super sleuth efforts, that some of our more remarkable campaign triumphs have in fact failed to make it into print.
Those of you on the campaign trail, may remember our singularly successful day in Devonport, straight out of the campaign advancers manual, at our pre-planned drop in at the Devonport Senior Citz. which resulted in three press conferences going on at once, none of them ours, all of them hostile.
And I though to myself, this is not an entirely auspicious start to this campaign. That would be matched by our day in Townsville for those of you who were there in another teaching module direct from the perfect campaign module. There we were in Townsville with Peter Garrett, launching our new bright spanking new policy on solar power, solar energy, in a classroom in a solar school, which was uniquely powered by solar energy when the lights went out.
Another less than positive augury at that stage of the campaign.
Then there is another ingredient of a happy campaign, which as you all know is a happy media contingent, which is how we managed to somehow find a plane capable of seating 50 journalists on it, packed on board with a broken loo, to fly all the way from Mackay to Perth, requiring literally, a pit stop in Alice Springs, where the only authorised loo fixer was unavailable because he apparently was significantly under the weather.
All of which made for a very happy arrival on the part of the journalistic party when they got to Perth. Again, straight out of the campaign manual.
Not to be outdone by my first candidate launch in the campaign which was in South Australia, early in the campaign. Where in spite of everything ever written in the official campaign manual about little children and animals, a very excited dog was invited to the launch and having been presented to me on stage, proceeded then to leave a very significant calling card on stage as well, reflecting precisely an early canine observation of what he thought of my campaign and my campaign prospects.
Not to be outdone by that day in Brisbane, some of you may have been there, when I did four shopping centres on the trot in a single day, when in the final of those shopping centres, an elderly lady in a wheelchair invited me quietly to come close and then invited me to put my hand on her fulsome bosom. Only to reveal that to be the nesting place of her very favourite pet marsupial.
This is all true. Her pet, a terrified sugar glider that obviously felt as if he had been somehow trapped in a ravine somewhere in the Himalayas. Such are the rigours of the campaign trail.
None of which actually made it into your book Christine, for good reason.
But the real omission of this book Christine is Lachlan Harris, only two mentions in the index, how do I know, Lachlan has told me so. Lachlan now is in deep therapy, nothing more distraught than a spin miester who has been spurned.
But I digress from the 2007 election, our subject for today. Firstly, some thank you's. And that is to the extraordinary team who supported myself and the leadership of the parliamentary Labor party in securing that election victory.
It is said and is often said as a truism that this was an effort on the part of a team. But I as the leader of the parliamentary Labor party know that to be true acutely. A team, made up of a fantastic group of human beings. A team, highly professional. A team also highly committed to the ideals for which our movement stands. And a team absolutely united in our common purpose.
And to each one of them here today from various parts of our operation, I thank them individually and collectively because without them, this simply would never have been possible.
Second, to talk a little bit about the reasons for political change itself. I would argue that there are three basic reasons Australians voted for change last November.
First, the world began changing around them and in ways that were potentially quite threatening to their understanding of their long term interests.
Second, they, that's Australians, were led by a Government that after 12 years, had shown not the slightest interest in preparing them for these great changes happening around them.
And third, they wanted instead a Government that could help navigate the nation's future through these choppy seas that lay ahead. As well as a government that was committed to extending to Australians some helping hand on the way through.
So let's take these in order. What were the changes confronting Australians at the time. First, that Australia way ahead of the rest of the world, had already moves into a high inflation, high interest rate environment that had begun to damage our standard of living. That's jus the facts as they presented themselves by the middle and toward the end of last year.
Second, Australians who were becoming wary that they were simply living off the resources boom rather than lifting their underlying productivity growth.
Third, Australians were becoming conscious that they were being left behind in the rest of the world in the education, research and science and innovation fields and new technologies like broadband.
Fourth, Australians, Australia was ignoring the damage to it's own economy, it's natural environment and it's water resources by the clear cut, absolutely clear cut, evidence of climate change.
And finally, Australians were becoming more concerned that they were now facing a much more complex region and a much more complex world than ever before. With China and India looming to dominate the 21st Century, just as the United States and the United Kingdom had dominated the 20th.
Which leads to the second core reason for political change. That the Liberals in Government exhibited no interest whatsoever to do anything about preparing Australia for these great changes unfolding around it.
And to navigate the choppy seas which therefore lay ahead. There are two pathways possible for any Government. One is to be a reformist government that anticipates the change and wherever possible gets ahead of the curve.
The other is to be a government of the status quo, ignoring emerging challenges until they become immediate crisis, and then adopting the core principle that something might just turn up.
Great for the good times, absolutely rotten, in fact downright dangerous, for the bad times.
And after 12 years in Office, the Liberals have become masters of the status quo and the Australian people saw it for what it was. No strategy on inflation despite repeated warnings from the Bank on capacity constraints. No strategy on productivity growth, in fact they denied there was a problem with productivity growth at all.
No strategy on the drivers of a 21st century knowledge economy despite reams of OECD data showing us plummet down the international league tables.
On climate change, a state of national and international denial rather than a program of practical action, and no plans to prepare for the dawn of the Asia Pacific century, not even an exit strategy from Iraq.
Which brings me to the third basic reason for change and that is the decision to turn to an alternative government ready to prepare Australia for the rocky road ahead through a clearly defined program of reform.
A clear cut anti-inflation strategy articulated in our first month in government and anchored in one of the biggest budget surpluses in our history. Second, a micro economic reform agenda to boost productivity growth on the back of a $11 billion education investment fund, a $20 billion infrastructure investment fund and a deregulation agenda backed by the BCA, the biggest the country has ever seen.
A climate change agenda at home and abroad that has travelled further in six months than our predecessors did in 12 years. And a new strategy of comprehensive engagement in our region with a reform agenda for the region's long term architecture, a reform agenda for nuclear non proliferation, in what has become the most proliferating region in the world, and a strategy to turn around the development slide here in the south pacific.
So in the six months or so since we have been elected, the global storm clouds gathering have become even darker, reinforcing the urgency for long term, responsible reform. And for a long term responsible reform agenda to see Australia through, requiring tough decisions, tough decisions for the long term, tough decisions that the Government I lead is prepared to take.
The global economy is now 12 months into a global financial crisis with real consequences for global and Australian economic growth. Global inflation now on the march off the back of what is now the third great global oil shock and an associated global food crisis.
These global factors now compounding the 16 year record high inflation that the government inherited last November that had already resulted in 10 interest rate rises in a row. And on top of all these factors, the rolling impact of climate change continuing to wreak havoc, with the Murray Darling now in significant crisis.
All of which means, the need for a national economic reform program is now greater than ever. The need for a government with the guts to prosecute such a program is now greater than ever and the need for a government prepared to prosecute a reform program, helping households to cope on the way through is now greater than ever.
In a nutshell, these were the reasons which we are argue that we were elected. Identifying the changes occurring around Australia, prosecuting an argument that the liberal government had failed after 12 years to do anything of substance to prepare Australia to meet these choppy seas brought about by the changes unfolding around us. And thirdly to embark upon a program of national economic and related reform in order to see this nation through.
My argument is simple; there is absolutely no point in being elected to government for the sake of being in government.
For the sake of being there, for the Peter Sellars school of public administration, for the “I like to watch” school of public administration, if you remember the movie Being There. The Liberals' standard operating procedure for more than a decade.
Fine for a global boom, an absolute failure in preparing for after the boom is over. Opportunities squandered rather than opportunities seized. We by contras intend to get on with it.
In our first six months we have laid the foundations, honouring our election commitments by brining down a responsible Budget, by commissioning the relevant policy reviews. This to be followed by two and a half years of intensive reform; tax; welfare; regulation; skills; infrastructure; innovation; health, housing; closing the gap with indigenous Australia; climate change and water.
It was for this reason that we argue that we were elected and it is for this reason that we intend to govern. And with that it gives me enormous pleasure to launch Christine Jackman's book on the 2007 election campaign.
This has been a work, and labour of some intensity over a long period of time. I have known Christine from back in her Brisbane days. This has required a lot of effort, a lot of interviews, a lot of work. And I congratulate her on her professionalism.
I have not read every page of this book, though the index search done by Lachlan basically stopped when he realised that his mentions in the book were of such a limited scope. But I can say that in terms of documenting the events, the tumultuous events of the year 2007 this has been a significant effort on Christine's behalf and it gives me great pleasure to launch this book.
Congratulations Christine.


The Rudd Government today announced the short listed locations for three new boarding facilities in the Northern Territory to provide better school access for remote Indigenous students.
The short list includes the regions of regions of Wadeye, Warlpiri Triangle, East Arnhem and Maningrida. Extensions to existing facilities in locations such as Tennant Creek or Katherine will also be considered, should funding permit.
The announcement was made at the Yirrkala Community Cabinet meeting. It signals the first step in the delivery of the Government's pre election promise to build three new boarding facilities in the Northern Territory.
Northern Territory Education Minister, Marion Scrymgour, MLA, strongly supported the establishment of boarding facilities in communities in a recent statement, Transforming Indigenous Education.
The Rudd Labor Government has committed $28.9 million over four years, together with a $15 million capital contribution from the Indigenous Land Corporation.
This is an important step in meeting the Government's commitment to at least halve the gap for Indigenous students in Year 12 or equivalent attainment rates by 2020.
The new facilities will provide more than 150 beds across a range of accommodation styles. They will support improved access to quality schooling and better education outcomes for Indigenous secondary school students. The first of the facilities is expected to be completed in 2009 with the remaining two built in 2010.
The Australian Government is working closely with the NT Government and Catholic Education Office on the initiative. This collaborative approach will continue into the next stage, with community consultations an important next step. The Government will only build these facilities where there is strong support from communities.
The Australian Government and Northern Territory authorities will engage in close consultation with the communities in the short listed locations. Government officials will visit communities to explain the initiative, listen to community views and answer questions.
Following community consultations, and with the support of relevant communities and key stakeholders, feasibility studies will be commissioned to address issues such as likely student demand, community infrastructure needs, social and cultural expectations of the feeder communities, costs, timeframes and sustainability. Only after the consultation is completed will final decisions be made on locations.


PM: Well it's good to be here in north east Arnhem Land on the Northern Territory and we are here for our fifth community cabinet. We have had community cabinet so far in Perth, in Brisbane, in Western Sydney, Mackay and now we are here in North East Arnhem Land and we are looking forward to meeting with local people.
So far we have had 2200 people attend our community cabinets across Australia. And we have had 300 one on one meetings with individuals or community organisations. And for us it has been a good way of engaging the Australian people on their local needs. It is also a good way for our cabinet to remain in touch with the needs of Australians on the ground.
And that is as important here in this part of Australia, and we are dealing with remote and regional communities and the indigenous communities in this part of the world, as it is anywhere else.
We have been dealing with locals through our community cabinet process on practical questions like roads, healthcare, housing as well as the cost of living and I imagine those will be some of the topics that we will address here as well.
Also, particular challenges in this part of Australia for economic development, for education, for employment opportunities and to ensure that we are delivering good an effective healthcare on the ground.
When it comes to this government's approach to indigenous policy, we sum it up in three words. Closing the gap. That's what we are on about. That's our mission and it is going to take a while to get there. But that's what we intend to do.
We have set ourselves some ambitious targets when it comes to education, early childhood education, year 12 completion rates, literacy and numeracy achievements on the part of indigenous kids as well as health outcomes, in particular closing the gap when it comes to the mortality rate for little kids under five.
These are practical targets we have set ourselves, with real timelines and I can tell you, it will be tough, it will be very tough.
But unless you have got these targets within closing the gap, as the central organising principle to what government is doing on the ground, we simply drift.
I am the first to say the challenges are enormous and these two folk with me here, the Minister and Warren, know full well from their engagement and Senator Trish Crossin here, know full well from there engagement here in this community and other indigenous communities across Australia just how big the challenges are.
But our view is, we are here to make a difference. And we are here to make a difference over time with practical actions on the ground. The last thing I would say is, already since the election we have committed some $666 million in specific practical programs to assist with indigenous communities in this part of Australia.
And to give you some indication of where those investments have already been made, some $98 million already invested in an additional 200 teachers, some 50 teachers each calendar year to 2011, $30 million to build three new indigenous boarding facilities across the Northern Territory. Some $99 million over two years from 08'  -  09' to expand primary healthcare services in the Northern Territory for Indigenous people.
Some $92 million to form the creation of (inaudible) jobs that support the delivery of Australian Government funded services and some $75 million for the further implementation of income management across the Northern Territory.
So to summarise where we were. Three words summarise our approach to indigenous policy, closing the gap. Practical actions to close the gap. And in our first six to seven months in office we have committed these funds, invested in practical areas with one end point in mind, closing the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians.
Hard work, practical work, but we intend to get on with it. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there is a huge infrastructure backlog (inaudible)
PM: Well first of all I have yet to be presented with the document you have referred to so I will be looking at it with interest. I am sure that's going to happen.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I am assuming that you have rendered it accurately. (inaudible) pardon me for sort of being a stickler for process. I would rather be presented with a submission first, before I respond to it's content to you good folk from the media.
But can I say this more broadly. We know full well that there are massive infrastructure problems in rural and remote Australia.
And that includes in indigenous communities. One of the things I referred to before was the prospective investment in primary health care and prospective investment that we have already earmarked for education.
These are practical steps forward. But I am the first to say that we have got much, much more to do.
And after our engagement with the local indigenous community today, we will have further plans for action for the future.
Also, key inputs from our Northern Territory representatives who are here with us today as well.
JOURNALIST: The intervention is also going to come up with Aboriginal leaders (inaudible)
PM: Well I will again wait to have our meeting with indigenous leaders. But I would draw your attention to some facts and figures on this question. As of 16 July, income management was in place in 63 communities and nine town camp regions and over 14,300 people are currently being income managed compared with 1,700 at the end of November 2007.
Secondly, there are now 54 Government Business Managers in place, servicing some 72 communities and town camp regions. And thirdly, we have had something like 11,000 child health checks which have been undertaken in 70 communities.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I will just finish the point. Therefore, these are important registrable achievements but we have to evaluate where we have got to through a proper process of review. Remember our pre election commitment was, at the one year point, we subject this to appropriate review. That board of review has already begun it's operation. Three of it's members I understand are in Darwin more or less as we speak and they are going through each element of the intervention against the key criteria of what is working and what is not.
And we will know through the conclusion of that process, how we take this forward into the future. I believe very firmly in evidence based policy and I am concerned about what is working and what is not, against our objectives, which is closing the gap.
And closing the gap is what this government is on about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a fundamental flaw of the intervention was the fact that the previous Government never properly engaged Aboriginal people in the decision making process. That indigenous people deserve to be involved in the decision making process that affects their lives?
PM: One of the reasons we are here today, is to engage directly with this local and significant indigenous community here in North East Arnhem Land.
I won't rake over the coals in terms of what the previous Government did or did not do in their engagement or non engagement of indigenous communities. What we are doing by virtue of being here, we've brought a large slab of the Cabinet to North East Arnhem land to spend the better part of the day engaging with this significant local indigenous community on their views.
And what I know from my previous discussions with indigenous communities, I'm sure Jenny and Warren and Trish feel the same, is that there's going to be a whole range of different views. There will be different views within communities and let me tell you across the 400 plus remote communities right across Australia there are different views between those communities.
We are committed to a process of engagement with them, but what decisions we take ultimately will never ever have uniform support. We've got to make tough decisions for the future. The end point is how do we close the gap and that's what we're in this business of Government for when it comes to indigenous Australia and that's what we intend to get on and do.
JOURNALIST: On emissions trading are you going to have to negotiate with the Greens do you think?
PM: We have a clear cut strategy for Australia's long term future on our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. And I would strongly urge all people who are interested in the countries long term interests to get on board, rather than playing short term electoral politics which now seems to be caught up in the leadership politics of the Liberal party on this critical question of climate change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there are reports in NSW today that people from the Iemma Government have confirmed that there were phone calls of a party political nature made to the Iguana club in relation to Belinda Neal and John Della Bosca (inaudible)
PM: I haven't seen the reports and I'd rather have a look at the reports first.
JOURNALIST: Would you be concerned if that was the case?
PM: I'd rather look at the reports, it's a bit like talking about a submission that I haven't seen yet. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson says he will not accept an emissions trading scheme that starts before 2011?
PM: On something as critical as climate change which affects our economy, our river system and our future job and our kids. We have a clear cut course of action for the future, the Liberals are playing short term politics and they should get real.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) there's been reports and allegations that the Northern Territory Government has underspent Commonwealth Government grants (inaudible)
PM: You know what we've been on about since we've been in Government on the question of the dispersal of funds across the States and Territories for indigenous programs is for the first time in the country's history the Commonwealth putting together a proper system of transparency across all Governments.
That's why through the Council of Australian Governments we have initiated a process. From my recollection, I ask the Minister to add to my comments here, is that we're due to receive a report back through the Premiers and Chief Ministers at the first COAG of next year on all of that.
These sorts of reporting and accounting mechanisms haven't existed up until now. Am I right on that? And therefore we have actually set that in motion, we have a report back process on it.
We believe very strongly in partnership with the States and Territories on our overall missions statement of closing the gap. We've done so already, with this program that I just referred to before for example for the Northern Territory, will also attract a significant investment from the Northern Territory Government (inaudible) on the question of housing and their own program of closing the gap.
Jenny do you wish to add?
MACKLIN: As the Prime Minister has indicated we are doing exactly this through the Council of Australian Governments, we understand how critical it is for every State and Territory to be able to guarantee that they are spending the money they should be spending on indigenous people because we have such a huge task in front of us to close the life expectancy gap.
We are working cooperatively through the working group on indigenous reform, one of the COAG working groups and we're also engaging the expertise of the productivity commission and their overcoming indigenous disadvantage in this task.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MACKLIN: Well really its all about transparency, that's the task that we have in front of us is to make sure that we have transparent information about where money is going so that all Governments are accountable for the commitments that they make to indigenous people.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister one more question. Another idea that's going to be put to you today is the reinstatement of elements of the Racial Discrimination Act that were taken out during last years intervention. Are you open to that?
PM: Well we are engaged in the proper process of review of the entire intervention and I look in particular to what the review board has to say on the question of the RDA. The RDA is fundamentally important to the Labor Government, it has been in the past, it will be in the future. We'll be particularly attentive to what the review board has to say on that and the other criteria which have been advanced to the review board by the Government to evaluate what's working and what's not in terms of this intervention.
I conclude with this. We are in Government to take tough decisions for the long term future for the country and that includes indigenous Australia and that means being real about Closing The Gap. I'm interested in practical action, I'm interested things that work, that make a difference.
It's not going to be easy, it's not going to be smooth. It's going to be tough in various parts of Australia but we intend to roll our sleeves up and have a go.
Thanks very much


The Rudd Government today announced it will fund two studies to assist the Northern Territory with the expansion of Darwin's East Arm Port.
This announcement follows Chief Minister Paul Henderson's far-sighted announcement today to fund a significant expansion of Darwin port's facilities
The Australian Government will fund two separate studies associated with this long term investment in Northern Territory economic infrastructure.
The ‘All Tide Access' study will assess the needs of Darwin's East Arm Port to ensure ‘all tide' access for LNG, Panamax size and larger vessels.
The ‘Technical and Financial Feasibility' Study will assess the feasibility of increasing the Port of Darwin bulk export capacity from Panamax to larger vessels.
The Federal Government will invest $3.2 million to fund these studies to help ensure that one of Australia's fastest growing regions is able to meet its future infrastructure needs.
The Northern Territory Government has lodged a detailed submission with Infrastructure Australia seeking a Commonwealth contribution to the cost of the port expansion.
Infrastructure Australia will look at the future needs of the Northern Territory, including the further expansion of the Port of Darwin, as it develops a national priority list for infrastructure investment to be completed early next year.
As part of its strategy to invest in Australia's long term economic prosperity, the Rudd Government established Infrastructure Australia, a national body tasked with developing a long term blueprint for fixing and modernising the nation's infrastructure.
The Federal Government had allocated an initial $20 billion to its Building Australia Fund, money which in the years to come will be used to build critical economic infrastructure such as roads, rail, ports and broadband.
The expanding resource and mining sectors in the Northern Territory are placing increasing pressure on the Port of Darwin.
This announcement today demonstrates the Northern Territory Government's commitment to building the economic prosperity of northern Australia.
It is important that we start work now to increase the capacity of the port to enable it to manage the increasing throughput as demand for Territory's mining and energy resources grows.


PM: Well it's good to be here with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Paul Henderson talking about the future of Darwin, the port of Darwin and the long term economic development of Australia.
Darwin in the 21st Century is going to be very much Australia's gateway to Asia. And if you look at how this city and this port have transformed in recent years and what the potential lies ahead, we can only be optimistic about what we can do in partnership with each other.
Therefore, it becomes a practical challenge about how do we build long term the capacity of the Port of Darwin to support future major projects in this part of Australia. And that is why today with the Northern Territory Government, what we are announcing is a funding of $3.2 million for two significant feasibility studies into the long term expansion of this port.
One goes to channel deepening in the port itself and the second goes to, how do we expand the on berth facilities here within the port to support greater activity in the future. These are important underpinnings of the research which will then need to be undertaken by infrastructure Australia, as Infrastructure Australia considers the submission which has been put to it by the Government of the Northern Territory.
This is practical action on our part in support of what the Northern Territory Government is seeking to do. Long term this is critical not just for the Territory, not just for critical for Territorians but also critical for the National economy. You come up here to the Northern Territory, you come to Darwin you sense automatically, a great deal of optimism for the economic future.
And when it comes to the burgeoning economies of East Asia and Darwin's natural point of access to those economies, where the rubber hits the road is what we can do here at the port and where the rubber hits the road again is, practical proposals such as those that have been put forward by Paul and his Government and our consideration and evaluation of whether Infrastructure Australia is able to support those.
A practical step again is, two immediate feasibility studies - one on channel deepening, the other on, on berth port expansion so that we can look at infrastructure Australia's ability to get behind the Territory Government long term. Over to you Chief Minister. 
HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and I do welcome you here to East Arm Port today. It is fantastic to show you the wonderful growth potential that is here.
Today as Chief Minister I am announcing a $100 million investment in expanding infrastructure at the port here in Darwin. This builds on the 08' Budget, I announced $60 million this financial year, in terms of expanding the Port's capacity. There will be a further $40 billion invested over the next two years.
This is a $100 million investment in the Northern Territory's future. The future of the Territory is really wrapped up around the resources sector. And the expansion of the Port of Darwin, the Darwin to Adelaide rail link is really creating the opportunity for resource developments in Central Australia. Driving the economies in regional Australia, providing employments in Central Australia and for Indigenous people.
But those mines and that resource cannot be developed unless we expand the capacity of the Port to give the port the capacity to ship those resources to a resource hungry Asia.
So this is a significant investment today. We have put in a submission to the Infrastructure Australia Fund, seeking a $200 million contribution from the Australian Government and it is great to be here with the Prime Minister today to demonstrate what is happening at the Port of Darwin, the opportunities to further grow the export capacity of the nation through the Port of Darwin and certainly it is an investment that will also return dividends in terms of employment, investment and the resources sector in Central Australia.
PM: And just to conclude, before we take your questions on this and any other subject. So therefore, in a nutshell what you have got from the NT Government is $100 million from it's own resources. Secondly, an application to Infrastructure Australia for a $200 million investment from the Commonwealth Government. And thirdly in terms of practical action now, while Infrastructure Australia works its way through those proposals, is funding for two feasibility studies which underpin this overall project.
One for channel deepening, and one for the actual physical expansion of the berthing facilities here. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
HENDERSON: Oh look I am very confident that we will be able to work through these issues with the Green Paper that the Prime Minister and Penny Wong released last week.
We've had the SEAAOC Oil and Gas Conference here in Darwin last week when the Green Paper was released. I met with all of the major LNG producers (inaudible) last week and obviously there's issues that need to be worked through.
But I believe it is in the nation's interests that we expand the LNG industry in Australia. Certainly as Chief Minister I am 100 per cent committed to seeing the INPEX project delivered here for Darwin. And in terms of globally, LNG being a much cleaner source of base-load energy supplies, it really is an opportunity for Australia to grow an industry that is actually going to contribute to a reduction of greenhouse gasses globally.
I believe we can work through these issues and I am certainly going to be working through a Northern Territory Government's submission to the Green Paper that seeks to maintain the investment in LNG in Australia, particularly here in the Northern Territory.
PM: I will just add to that before taking a further question. That's why the Australian Government is a big believed in the long term of LNG and in the expansion of LNG in the future. And that's why we have already invested a significant amount of money for example in carbon capture and storage, with LNG facilities already from the Australian Government, and we'll be doing more of that.
Secondly as the Chief Minister has just said, through the Green Paper process, we will be consulting the LNG industry extensively across the country. And we are confident that we can find a way forward on this.
Continuing LNG into Australia's economic future, expanding it's role for the reasons the Chief Minister has just outlined, but also working with the industry to draw down its green house gas emissions. You know, you can do all those three things.
That's the challenge. We intend to take that challenge head on for our long term economic interests in Australia and in the Territory, but also doing it in a responsible way, which deals with the challenge of greenhouse gas reduction.
JOURNALIST: Should the LNG industry get free permits (inaudible)
PM: Well what we have said is that, if you look at our Green Paper, we are now in the process of consulting extensively with industry including the LNG parts of that industry.
We believe that there is a way through this in our consultations. If we didn't we would not have already invested upfront significantly in carbon capture and storage technologies.
I am confident there is a way forward through this partnership with the industry. And we are looking for example for submissions from the industry on the specific data requirements we have in terms of carbon intensity, as a proportion of revenue produced from the industry, that is one of the benchmarks that we'll be that we would use in terms of the future use of permits.
But secondly, also the possible application of industry adjustment funds of the type which has been foreshadowed with the climate change adjustment fund.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on inflation, the opposition says the inflation rise yesterday is proof that the Government is not doing it's job but more than that, rather than fighting inflation, decision your government is making is actually contributing.
PM: The previous Government had 12 years to deal with the emerging inflation challenge and instead left this Government with the highest inflation we have seen in this country for 16 years.
That's what we got in the in-tray, day one. Secondly, what we have done since day one is launch our five point plan of attack to deal with the inflation challenge long term. The core of which is a $22 billion budget surplus, which the Liberals say we should simple fritter away.
We have credibility on this question. Our opponents do not. And can I say on the practical impact, for households across the country, practical measures like honouring our commitment for a $45 billion tax package for households. A $5 billion plus package for pensioners and carers, and practical measures such as what we are doing in the housing sector, $2.2 billion worth of measures. And I would draw attention to the fact that we have had the Treasurer and the Housing Minister now release our prospectus for the Housing Rental Affordability Scheme. And that will be a significant investment by us - 50,000 units of affordable rental accommodation nation wide. Large investment from us in partnership with the private sector.
Practical action by us to deal with real concerns on cost of living and a responsible overall economic strategy for dealing with the inflation challenge and problem which our predecessors left in our in-tray, day one.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I am simply referring to the basic statistical reality which is that as of seven months ago which is when we assumed the Government, they having been in Government for 12 years, we received in the in tray, inflation at a 16 year high.
That is a fact. No one disputes that fact. Secondly what we've done is not simply say isn't that a terrible thing. We embraced within one month of assuming office a five part strategy for waging a long term war against inflation, the anchor stone of which is a $22 billion budget surplus, as well as strategies for dealing with capacity constraints like this, dealing with exports and the skills shortage as well.
That's a practical way forward, not simply saying that we've inherited a problem and isn't it terrible.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well it seven months into a challenge which has been emerging over the last decade plus and remember our predecessors received 20 separate warnings from the Reserve Bank of Australia about capacity constraint problems, infrastructure problems and skills problems compounding the inflation challenge. That's the challenge we've inherited, so what have we done in response to that?
One, a budget surplus $22 billion to take pressure off overall demand in the economy. Two, in terms of the skills shortage an $11 billion dollar education and skills investment fund for the future and three we now have a $20 billion Building Australia Fund to be presided over by Infrastructure Australia which is precisely the body to which the Government of Northern Territory has submitted this proposal.
Infrastructure action, skills action and on the overall question of total demand on the economy, action through the budget surplus. Our opponents say whittle down the budget surplus to nothing, don't act on skills cause we the Liberal party didn't act on skills for the previous decade plus and they say basically infrastructure who gives a damn its not our job. Our action plan is quite different.
JOURNALIST: Do think its impacting yet though? Are we seeing an impact of your strategy yet?
PM: Well you know something it takes a while to turn the Queen Mary around. And if its been heading in particular direction for more than a decade, with no action on the fundamental drivers of inflation, then its going to take a while therefore, for us to turn this around.
We have a plan and strategy in place and its going to take a while for it to take effect. On top of that we inherited a domestic inflation problem, the worst in 16 years only seven months ago, and since then a global financial crisis adding to the cost of credit, a global oil crisis adding to the cost of fuel and associated with that a global food crisis which has added to the overall global cost of food, all of which flows into inflation as well.
Global factors out there driving inflation on top of the domestic inflation challenge we inherited from our predecessors and our response is here's a plan of action going forward but its going to be tough and its going to resolution to see it through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) alcopop tax has contributed to inflation. What do you make of that claim by the opposition?
PM: Well the Opposition, the Liberal party can say that they are concerned about binge drinking one day and they don't give a damn about it the next. It's a bit like trying to find out what the Liberal party position is on climate change. Its hot one day, cold the next, disappears completely on the day after. But the same when it comes to how you properly deal with challenges like binge drinking.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on your emissions trading scheme, what do you believe is the future of the coal fired power generation industry. Do you think that industry has a future at all?
PM: I believe when it comes to what we categorise in the Green Paper as strongly affected industries, which goes to the heart of coal fired power generation, of course it has a future. That's why we are engaged very much with the industry on the sort of support they will need for their adjustment processes. That's one and that's what's called the Electricity Supply Adjustment Fund, ESAF in the Green Paper.
Point two is this, the best way you can also assist industry and the coal fired Generation sector is by working with them on the next generation of cleaner, greener technologies. Carbon capture and storage, clean coal technology, we put our best foot forward with a half billion dollar clean coal innovation fund, investment fund.
Our political opponents had no such investment going forward, we have. It's the new technologies particularly in CCS. A half billion dollar action from us, more to come and secondly can I say also working in the physical adjustment process through the adjustment fund which is contained within the Green Paper. And its for those reasons we believe there is a viable future for coal in this country.
JOURNALIST: A range of groups in the Northern Territory have called for an inquiry into how the Territory Government spends Commonwealth revenues. Will the Federal Government support such an inquiry and do you have a problem...
PM: I have absolutely no basis for concluding at all that the NT Government is doing anything other than the right thing when it comes to the use of public funds for investment in indigenous communities.
Secondly the NT Government itself some time ago commissioned its own inquiry with the likes of Saul Eslake, part of that inquiry which concluded that some 50 percent of the Territory's commitment of funding to services was being expended on Indigenous Territorians. Thirdly what I've also said is since we've formed the Government of Australia, nationwide every State and the Territories through the Council of Australian Governments process, we are also collecting data based on a principle of transparency of who is spending how much on what. That will conclude in March of next year and we've had nothing but cooperation from the Government here in Darwin in providing that data.
JOURNALIST: Rents up more than 20 percent in some areas according to a new report (inaudible)
PM: What we've released today, well two things. One is we have a housing policy and strategy anchored at present in $2.2 billion worth of programs to deal with first home savers, to deal with rental affordability programs and thirdly also to deal with how to you draw down the infrastructure costs for new housing developments. These programs did not exist before, we have introduced them or are in the process of introducing them in the matter of our first seven months in office.
Secondly the prospectus today has been released by both the Housing Minister and the Treasurer on the new Affordable Rental Accommodation Strategy or scheme for the country. This is important, 50,000 units of affordable rental housing - 20 per cent below on average the market price in partnership with the private sector modelled already on programs which have existed of a similar nature overseas.
That's practical action to deal with problems of rents which are real and are hurting working household right across the country.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd just in relation to emissions trading the opposition still hasn't decided (inaudible)
PM: My appeal to Dr Nelson, Mr Turnbull and whoever else may be lining up to lead the Liberal party is climate change requires a responsible long term strategy for the future, not just short term opportunistic politics. At present in the Liberal Party, climate change has become an internal political debate over the Liberals party's leadership. Instead it should be about the long term interests for our economy and for our environment and for our kids.
JOURNALIST: INPEX (Inaudible)
PM: What a perfectly phrased question. As Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia made up of the various States and Territories, can I say this will be a great project for Australia.
What I know also is that the NT Government has put its best foot forward with a first class set of proposals to the project proponents of INPEX. Obviously this will be subject to a competitive process but can I say we are here shoulder to shoulder with the Government of Northern Territory supporting what they want to do with the port of Darwin. That's directly relevant of course to the future long term of projects such as this.
Can I say ultimately this is a project for the nation.
JOURNALIST: You flagged the beginning of consultations over constitutional reforms to recognise indigenous people. Does the Government have a plan for what form that will take, would it be in a preamble and what's the timeline for this reform?
PM: First and foremost, there's nothing new about the fact that the national platform of the Australian Labor Party has said for some time that we've committed to the constitutional recognition of the first Australians. That is not new its been around for a long time. That remains our commitment.
Secondly what I've also said loud and clear is that subsequent to the national apology, that our first priority is closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And when you look at those specific tasks that we have set for ourselves on education, on health and life expectancy, let me tell you they are huge. We have 25 percent of indigenous Australians living in remote communities, more than 400 of them across the country and the challenges facing each of those communities is different and in some cases massive.
Then we have the 75 percent of indigenous Australians who live in urban Australia. We have a huge problem on our hands in dealing with this. My immediate priority and that of the Government is to put in place systems of measurement, systems of funding and systems of management able to deliver real progress on closing the gap over time.
That occupies the bulk of the Governments thinking right now. On the question that you raise in terms of Constitutional recognition, that will be a process of consultation very much over time and we haven't set our minds yet as to how that will be advanced or progressed. Number one priority right now is closing the gap and taking the first concrete steps in that direction.


PM: It's good to be here with Penny Wong the Minister for Climate Change and Jim Turnour our Local Member and we're here today to talk about the practical impact on the environment and the economy of climate change.
Its real. Anyone who doubts that climate change has a real impact on the economy and the environment should go and have a look at the Great Barrier Reef. The Great Barrier Reef is a fantastic asset for all Australians, for all Queenslanders and in fact for this great system of biodiversity which it represents.
It is the greatest corral reef in the world, but we have a real problem on our hands and our scientists have been hard at work establishing the linkages between coral bleaching and climate change.
And it's a bit like this: what Penny and Jim and I have just seen is some of the great corals out there at the low isles and what they demonstrate through a process of coral coring is this. That if you go back into the ancient corals some of which are a 1000 years old, what you can establish is that it is only literally in the last 20 to 25 years that we see evidence of coral bleaching.
So you have a clear record from the history of the corals going back a thousand years. A mapping of the recent history of the reef since the 17th century and yet what we see is the first evidence of significant coral bleaching literally occurring in the late 1970's. That's what the scientists tell us.
The second thing the scientists have told us and its demonstrated on the computer presentation we've just seen is the intensity and frequency of coral bleaching across the reef is increasing at a pace of knots.
Now what are the causative factors here. Plainly climate change is at work and it's compounded in this part of Australia also by problems of water quality. So if were serious about the future we need a practical action plan to deal with both these challenges.
Firstly on the question of water quality, what we committed to prior to the last election was a $200 million reef rescue package and we are delivering on that undertaking. And that's to assist our local farmers with how they manage their nutrient run off from their farms into the waters which flow into the Great Barrier Reef. That is one critical causative factor.
The second is this: what do we do on the great challenge of climate change itself? And that is why a centrepiece of our response to this is the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme which the Minister Penny Wong has released in recent times through the Green Paper and which we're now in the business of consulting industry on.
This represents a clear pathway forward for the nation, a clear pathway forward for those concerned about the preservation of this great Australian asset, the Great Barrier Reef.
To conclude, those who are still climate change sceptics need to have a long hard look at the absolute importance of preserving this wonderful asset the Great Barrier Reef. We have a plan for dealing with this in the long term, it's going to be tough, difficult and hard but let me tell you it's a better course of action than burying your head in the sand and pretending its not happening.
That's our approach; we intend to stick with it. Over to you folks
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is about acting on climate change in the long term so we preserve great assets like the Great Barrier Reef.
Secondly when it comes to the electricity industry what we have said is that when it comes to coal fired generators we are already investing a half a billion dollars in our clean coal initiative to assist that industry. Secondly we've already indicated through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper that will also be providing some assistance through the electricity supply adjustment fund and of course we will be in continued consultation with the industry.
I go back to the core point, we need as Australia to act locally and globally on the challenge of climate change because if we fail great assets like the Great Barrier Reef will be fatally in peril.
JOURNALIST: So they don't need to fear that they won't be getting assistance to change to cleaner forms of generation?
PM: We have already provided one form of assistance through a half billion dollar fund to assist with the new technologies to deliver cleaner coal. And the second is our commitment in the Green Paper to assist further with the electricity supply adjustment fund.
JOURNALIST: Apparently Julie Bishop last night said that the coalition's ETS policy is under review. What is your thought on their stance on the issue?
PM: The problem with the Liberal Party is not it's personalities, it goes to the core of it's policies on climate change and Workchoices. The Liberal Party's policies on climate change are rooted in one thing, denial, climate change scepticism and ignoring the peril which currently threatens the Great Barrier Reef.
We have a plan of action. The Liberal's alternative plan of action is to dig a hole and bury their head in the sand.
JOURNALIST: The Head of the Commonwealth Bank yesterday said the bank might raise rates again independent of any movements by the RBA. IS there anything the Government can do to stop that or prevent it or increase competition amongst the banks?
PM: The key challenge facing Australia because of the adverse developments in the global economy, the global financial crisis, which has now been running for about 12 months, the global oil crisis and the third great oil shock that we have seen in recent times, is what do we do in Australia to continue to fight the fight against inflation.
Part of that challenge lies in making sure that you deliver a responsible and reasonable Budget surplus. (Inaudible)
Therefore, given these global challenges in the global economy and also on the question of the global oil shock, the challenge for Australia is as follows.
What do you do to fight the fight against inflation here. We since January have embarked upon a five point strategy to deal with the inflation challenge in the long term. The core of which is a $22 billion budget surplus to take pressure off inflation by taking pressure off overall demand in the economy.
And to invest in skills through our $11 billion education investment fund and invest in skills through our $20 billion infrastructure fund, the Building Australia Fund. This is a concrete plan of action to put downward pressure on inflation over time and downward pressure therefore on interest rates.
That is a clear cut strategy. The alternative strategy again, put forward by our opponents, a bit like climate change, is to bury your head in the sand, pretend there is not a problem.
Remember on the inflation challenge which is directly linked to interest rates, and directly linked to employment, what they have said is that inflation is a fairy tale, that it shouldn't be taken seriously.
We think it has to be taken dead seriously and let me tell you, households across Australia don't regard inflation as a fairy tale like the Liberal Party have said. It really affects cost of living pressures right now and our job is to assist with responsible macro economic management, and to provide assistance to households under financial pressure.
JOURNALIST: Are you getting any amusement out of the latest dramas involved in the conservative merger in Queensland?
PM: The problem for the Liberal Party and the National Party is not one of personalities or structures. It is one of policy . A policy which is wedded to Workchoices. A policy which is wedded to climate change denial. A policy which has no response to the sixteen year high inflation record they left us with at the time of which the Government changed at the end of last year.
Having said that, we need to get to Cairns because we are going to be late for a civic reception. Got to run folks.
JOURNALIST: Beijing terror plot (inaudible)
PM: Well I have seen the reports from Beijing concerning the soccer facilities I believe, in Shanghai. I believe the Chinese authorities will be monitoring these events closely. We have not received our own direct diplomatic reporting on this yet.
But first and foremost responsibility that we all face in partnership with our friends in the Chinese Government is the security of the athletes who represent Australia in other countries, that is my first and foremost concern. And based on the evidence I have so far, the Chinese authorities are taking the security challenges in Beijing and elsewhere in China, most seriously.


It's a great pleasure to be back home in Nambour.
And it's a great pleasure to be here at the QUOTA Memorial Park with the Wall of Remembrance.
We are here to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the Nambour RSL.
It is, I am told, probably the oldest RSL in existence.
A reminder of how even this little corner of Australia 90 years ago was so affected by war.
And how the community then came together and formed an organisation for returned soldiers.
If the war touched Nambour, it shook Australia greatly.
Over 400,000 Australian enlisted.
Over 300,000 served overseas.
Over 60,000 died.
And this was out of a population of only four million.
It was an extraordinary sacrifice for a country so young.
And one that we must surely remember.
So congratulations to all Nambour RSL members for laying the foundation for the RSL tradition and keeping it going for so long.
Today, to celebrate the 90th anniversary we are here to dedicate this Wall of Remembrance.
The RSL has worked hard to with the local community to commemorate all those men and women from Nambour and the surrounding area who have served with our armed forces.
There are already 280 names on the wall.
They are the names of men and women that have been a part of the great traditions established by the ANZACs.
The traditions of dedication to duty and proud service in the name of their country.
There is no higher calling than to wear the uniform of this country.
And on this wall is the name of people that have answered that calling.
I am proud that my father's name is there on the wall.
He served with the 2/15th Australian Field Company of Royal Australian Engineers.
He served in the Middle East, back in Australia and in the South West Pacific.
After the war, he came here  -  to Nambour.
And I am still proud to call myself a Nambour boy.
I want to thank the Nambour RSL, QUOTA International and the local community for coming together on this project.
Honouring those who have served is part of who we are as Australians.
It is right to honour them.
Because they served to protect us.
They have protected Australia and have stood for what we believe in.
The stories that our fathers, brothers, sisters and mothers tell us about their experiences are the story of our nation.
Like the stories of the battles in the South West Pacific in 1941 and 1942 when we fighting for the future of this great country.
Australia, with our ally the United States, was fighting for its survival.
Armies manoeuvred, fleets sailed and air forces roamed the skies.
But these military units were all made up of individuals with stories to tell.
People from Nambour and countless other towns around Australia.
People whose stories we should hold dear.
The Memorial Wall will help make sure that our memories do not fade.
The Next Generation
But we need to do more than that to keep the memories alive.
We have to make sure that the stories are passed on to younger generations.
And we hope and pray that it will not be necessary to add the names of future generations to the list of those who gave their lives in war.
I want to thank all the young people here today who are taking part in this event.
The Suncoast Christian College Choir ...
The ADF cadets ...
And the students from Burnside High School, Nambour Christian College, Nambour High School, St John's College and Suncoast Christian College.
I see the values of ANZAC running deep in the veins of young Australians.
So I am confident that the memory of those who have served and the memory of their deeds will live on.
They will live on and will remain a part of the fabric of who and what we are.
Gallipoli, Tobruk, the Kokoda Track and the modern day theatres of the Middle East are an important part of the story of our nation.
Young men and women continue to serve with distinction with our forces at home and overseas.
They follow in the tradition of ANZAC and they build on its name.
Whether as peacekeepers, combat troops or working in any one of a number of support roles, our troops do us proud.
Today we also recognise the role played by the families of those who served.
When they serve, soldiers need the support of families and friends back home.
And when they return home they also need support.
They need the support of their families and they need the support of the wider community.
The RSL does a great job in this.
It helps people make the transition back to civilian life.
And it helps veterans stay in touch with one another  -  to maintain the ties that were often forged under fire.
So today I would like to congratulate the RSL not only for building the Wall of Remembrance, but for its work over the past 90 years in supporting veterans.
I want to congratulate QUOTA International on the initiative it took more than 10 years ago to establish the Memorial Park.
This event and this memorial are a fitting and dignified tribute to the members of the RSL who have served their nation with distinction.


The Prime Minister and Minister for Sport today officially wished the Australian Paralympic Team good luck for the upcoming games in Beijing.
170 athletes, including 11 guide runners and pilots for the sight impaired, will represent Australia at the 13th Paralympiad in Beijing. They will be supported by 121 officials.
During a ceremony at Parliament House, the Prime Minister said the Government was proud to support the athletes through the Australian Paralympic Committee.
“You are an inspiration to all Australians - we will be right behind you as you chase your dreams in Beijing.”
Minister for Sport Kate Ellis said today she was looking forward to attending the 2008 Paralympic Games and supporting the Australian team.
“Australia has a rich sporting heritage and you can be proud of your place in this team and of the mark you will make in writing the next chapter in Australian sporting history,” Ms Ellis said.
The Australian Government provided more than $26 million to the Australian Paralympic Committee to support Australia's paralympic athletes in Beijing and the Winter Paralympics in Torino, Italy.
The Australian Government has also supported Australian Paralympic Committee programs, such as the Telstra Paralympic Preparation Program, the Toyota Talent Search Program and the Classification Program, in the lead-up to the Beijing Games.


I would like to start by just reflecting on what extraordinary things you have done and those before you have done. The video presentation just now is a graphic visual reminder of the fact that our Paralympic teams past and present have overcome all odds in order to be there representing Australia. You are a celebration of the possible and I congratulate you for your guts, your determination and your professionalism and your commitment to our countries name.
I would like to start by thanking the President of the Australian Paralympic Committee, Greg Hartung, for inviting me to this announcement of the Australian Paralympic Team. But most importantly I'm here to congratulate the athletes selected to be part of the 2008 team, particularly those that have joined us today.
You are extraordinary Australians and you have done extraordinary things and all Australians are proud of you, all Australians are proud of your achievements in getting to where you have got and all Australians are proud of what you will do in our collective name in Beijing - good on you.
Thank you for making Therese and Kate and I honorary members of your team. We promise not to muck up, well at least Therese and I do.
Therese is particularly honoured to be an unofficial member of your team. Let me tell you a little bit of her story. Her Dad was in a wheelchair. He was an RAAF navigator during the war, his plane crashed and progressively during the 50's and 60's he lost the use of his legs and her entire life memory of her Dad is her Dad in a wheelchair, and he past away only about a decade ago in his mid 70's and he was an extraordinary man.
But here's the connection also, after the war in his period of rehabilitation he was sent to Stoke Mandeville, that hospital in the United Kingdom where the Stoke Mandeville games began. The Stoke Mandeville games then gave birth in large part to the Paralympic movement from 1960 on. And Therese's Dad, John Rein, was there at the original Stoke Mandeville games we are advised - she was not there - in the mid 50's we are advised from the family history, carrying the Australian flag at those games and an archer. He later participated in wheelchair basketball and he later also participated in other sports and was a great encouragement to many people who then became participants in the Paralympic movement.
So for Therese it's a particular honour to be here and she has a huge family connection in terms of the inspiration which her Dad represented in her life as someone who always believed in overcoming the odds. So well done, Therese knows in particular how tough that can be.
Australia has participated in the Paralympic Summer Games since they first commenced in Rome in 1960. Our success has grown from winning 8 medals in the first games to a record achievement of 149 medals in the 2000 Sydney Games.
Since 1996, Australia has been ranked in the top five nations at the Paralympic Games and was one of only two countries to win 100 or more medals at the Athens games in 2004. The stories of their success and many of your successes, as many of you were at Athens, are truly inspirational.
In Athens, the leading medal winner, Chantel Wolfenden, won an incredible six medals in the sport of swimming, closely followed by Prue Watt, who won a total of five medals in swimming as well. We also had great successes on the track, with Tim Sullivan winning gold in all four of his sprint events. These are just a few of the success stories among the Australian Paralympians.
At this year's Paralympic Games in Beijing, Australia will take a total team of 170 athletes and 121 staff  -  our biggest team ever to an “away” Games  -  and I am sure at this Games we will continue to be a dominant force - no pressure.
We will be watching you as you strive towards your goals in Beijing. We Australians love our sport. And we take great pride in those who represent our country in the field of sport. We love to see the action and the competition, and we are motivated by the hard work you put in and the character you demonstrate.
The Government is proud to support you through the Australian Paralympic Committee. The Committee's vision  -  to enable Paralympic athletes to “inspire and excite the world”  -  is one which all Australians share.
The Government recognises the importance of encouraging Australians to participate in sport  -  for the personal and social reward that it brings and to bring about also a healthier country, a healthier community.
We are keen to enhance recognition and support for disabled athletes. It is important that we improve pathways into elite sport for athletes with a disability and improve participation more broadly. Your own efforts are particularly important in helping us to achieve this. You are role models, all Australians, all Australians are watching you as role models and it is a great role model that you provide us all.
You are about to represent Australia at these games and this is itself as I said before an extraordinary achievement. Not too many people get to reach this level of excellence and compete against the best in the world their chosen sport.
The example you set goes an enormous way to motivating other Australians to get active, participate in sport and be the absolute best they can. You are role models, not only as sports men and women, but also as extraordinary people. You challenge us to dream big and to keep striving towards our goals despite the obstacles that we may run into in life.
Your efforts inspire our country. Of course there is still more to do  -  when the Games themselves actually begin. And I'm sure our Chinese friends are looking forward to that day which comes very soon and I look forward very much to being there among them at the time when those games lift off.
You will have a lot of support from your coaches and trainers, your family and friends. And don't forget that you have this whole nation of Australia behind you. And yes, we're going to be watching.
The 2008 Paralympic Games will be broadcast into every household in Australia, with over 100 hours of live and highlight coverage shown through the ABC. I thank the ABC for their commitment and for their support.
Also I hope that you thoroughly enjoy your time in Beijing, it's a great city. Therese and I have lived their ourselves for a few years, it's a fantastic place. You'll find many, many really interesting things to do apart from your actual participation in the games themselves. It's an ancient land, an ancient capital and a wonderful people.
And I would like to thank all the coaches, trainers, and other staff who support our athletes. Your dedication and professionalism is appreciated. On behalf of all Australians, I would like to wish all those participating in these the 13th Paralympic Summer Games the greatest of success.
Australia will be watching, Australia will be cheering, and Australia will be proud of you one and all.


PM: The Government is today pleased to announce the appointment of Justice Robert French as the new Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia.
Justice French will be the first West Australian to be Chief Justice of Australia. The first West Australian to occupy this office, therefore, in 107 years.
His appointment is made necessary because the retirement of the Honourable Chief Justice Murray Gleason, which takes effect as of Friday the 29th of August, 2008.
We extend on behalf of the Government our congratulations to Justice French on this important appointment, the most important constitutional office in the land.
We also extend our congratulations to Justice Gleeson on his contributions as Chief Justice of Australia in recent years.
Justice French brings to this new appointment 22 years worth of service on the Federal Court. He is well regarded across the legal profession. He has had a distinguished legal career so far and we congratulate him on this most important appointment.
The Attorney.
MCCLELLAND: Thank you.
Yes, it is with great honour that I confirm that Justice French has been appointed as the next Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia. He has had 22 years of distinguished service as a Judge on the Federal Court of Australia. He is regarded judicially as a leading jurist. He is regarded academically as a lawyer of great expertise.
He has written extensively, not only in judgments, obviously delivered in his role as a Judge of the Federal Court of Australia, but he is widely published on a number of topics. He is regarded as a constitutional law expert. He is regarded highly in respect to his expertise in administrative law, his experience in native title. He has served the broader legal community in a number of categories, including the Legal Aid Commission of New South Wales and he serves currently as a part-time member of the Australian Law Reform Commission.
So, he has constantly maintained a passion for the development of the law. He is regarded universally as a fair minded judge who gives the right of fair hearing to those who appear before him. He is respected for the clarity of his reasons and his ability to express the law in clear and concise terms. We are confident that he will provide outstanding leadership to the High Court of Australia.
PM: Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST:  Attorney, how many names were on your short list for this appointment? And were any of the sitting High Court Judges considered for the Chief Justice role?
MCCLELLAND: Again, it's inappropriate to identify those persons who were considered, but I can say, and it's a matter of interest, that the process of consultation that occurred in respect to the appointment of Justice French is the most extensive that has ever occurred in Australia. Not only were the Premiers of the states consulted and Chief Ministers, Attorneys-General of course, but also law societies, bar associations, the community legal sector, legal aid commissions, and indeed the Deans of leading law schools as well as, of course, the women's legal groups were consulted.
So, out of that process of consultation, to answer your question, quite remarkably there were in the order of 200 letters sent out canvassing views. Quite remarkably, of that 200, I can identify that there were 24 nominations. So, those who were nominated were clearly in the elite of Australia's legal profession.
It is fair to say that any one of those persons would have performed admirably. We are convinced, however, that we have the outstanding candidate at this point in time.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) before the appointment, yourself and the Prime Minister, have you spoken to  - 
MCCLELLAND: No, no interviews were conducted. I, of course, spoke to Justice French before the Cabinet announcement. And he, of course, indicated he was very honoured to accept the appointment and he specifically indicated, as the Prime Minister has, his appreciation for the work of Chief Justice Gleason. And, indeed, I think he will acknowledge that in any statements he makes.
JOURNALIST:  Attorney, do you expect he will be an activist judge or a black letter judge?
MCCLELLAND:  He is a black letter lawyer. He has written a number of articles commenting on the development and the evolution of the law. So he brings to bare an interest in the practical development of the law, but in accordance with legal principles  - 
JOURNALIST:  Another conservative on the High Court?
MCCLELLAND:  He is I think you would describe Justice French as a fair minded jurist who is most certainly a black letter lawyer but who has shown an interest in the evolution of the law.
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd, what's your reaction to the collapse of the Doha talks, and what does it mean to Australian producers, particularly agricultural exporters?
PM: At a time of great global economic difficulty, this is a body blow to the global economy.
The global economy needed a positive shot in the arm right now. And the best way to have delivered that would have been through a positive outcome in Doha.
The tragedy of all this is that it was well within reach. I, last night, or in the early hours in fact until about 2 this morning, on the phone to various people in Geneva. On the phone to Prime Minister Gordon Brown and others about how this could be rescued. It didn't work. And I am deeply, deeply, deeply disappointed about its impact not just on the global economy overall, at these difficult global economic times, but also in terms of the impact for Australian primary producers, but also, our economy in general.
Nonetheless, there is no point crying over spilt milk. What we've got to do now is dust ourselves off and get on with the task of where to next, and I'll be engaged in discussions with various international leaders in the days ahead about how we seek to find a further pathway forward.
I don't wish to hold out unnecessary hope on that question. But I believe, given that this possible agreement was so close and so nearly within reach, that it would be an absolute tragedy simply to kiss it all goodbye.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) bad sign for agreement on climate change if an agreement on trade can't be reached?
PM:   I don't believe you can draw an automatic connection between the two. I think we have had a huge, huge set-back in terms of the political will of the governments of the world to act in concert for what is plainly in the global economic good, which is to expand free trade across the world.
Good for developing countries, good for developed economies, good particularly at a time of great economic challenge.
On the question of global climate change negotiations, they have a way to run through until Copenhagen at the end of next year.  They'll be tough, they'll be hard, they'll be difficult. We understand that, we accept that but we intend to be activists in that process.
Can I also say on Doha, to pass my personal and public congratulations to the work of Simon Crean, the Trade Minister. Simon has been an absolute Trojan in this.  As part of the G7 group of negotiators Simon has tried every avenue known to man to try and pull this off. He has worked tirelessly and I would publicly acknowledge his contribution, as have many other international trade ministers and leaders to me in recent times.
JOURNALIST:   Is now the time to be cutting domestic tariffs given that the multilateral trade negotiations (inaudible) failed? (Inaudible) considering cutting domestic tariffs?
PM:  Well, by instinct, I and this Government is a Government of free traders. Because I believe, as I said of the international economy it's what applies to the domestic economy, free trade grows jobs, it grows the economy. There'll always be problems of adjustment and dislocation on the way through, but that's the history of economic development.
On the question specifically, however, that you point to, which is the current reviews in relation to both automobile tariffs and to TCF tariffs, there are processes in place on that, they'll report in due course.
JOURNALIST:  Now that the Liberals have clarified their position emissions trading,
PM:When did that occur?
JOURNALIST:  Now the focus is on whether you can get it through a 2010. Are you envisaging  - 
PM:   The question is a serious one, I understood this was a the matter of the party room debate today  -  has that concluded, or?
JOURNALIST:  Well, it's clarified anyway.  But, can I ask  -
PM:  Okay  -  I'll put the preface to one side.
JOURNALIST:The focus now on 2010, do you envisage the start being the soft start that business wants so that the system can be tickled into perfection?
PM:Our responsibility as a Government is to take tough decisions for Australia's long term future because it is the responsible thing to do.
Those opposite have been engaged in short term politics which has got more to do with their own internal party debates than the long term interests of Australia.
On the question of the future shape or our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, putting together the Green Paper we put out has been a huge and complex process.  We've had a further discussion on the negotiation process now, consultation process with industry, which will now unfold in the months ahead. That will be comprehensive, it will be systematic, and we'll work through the matters which are raised with us by industry one by one. And we'll bring that to a conclusion with the White Paper.
When we frame our White Paper response, that is when we will make decisions in terms of what is called the trajectory, that is the pathway through to our 2050 target and we'll do so only at that time.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd would you be willing to ease up on the cap for the ETS if there's no agreement at Copenhagen?
PM: We believe that we have a responsibility to get on with it. There has been too much time wasting, there's too much time wasting. The call of the international community and the call of the people of Australia is to get on with it and they want us to take action. They want us to show some leadership, I accept fully this will be tough and there will be pain along the way, I accept that I'm not going to back away from it. But what we need is a clear pathway ahead because we also need to be upfront participants in a global negotiating process which is consistent with what we are doing at home.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible) young man who dance for you in the Territory the other day?
PM:That's just, I've have got to say, an unspeakable tragedy.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: We believe that we've got to act, let's put this into context. Our pre-decessors had 12 years to act, they did nothing until 5 minutes to midnight brought down this thing called the Shergold report. After the election then said we're not really interested in that, then we are, then we're not, then we're half interested. Well I don't really know where they stand. 
Our position is clear prior to the election we said we would introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We said what our target would be to 2050, we said we'd start this process with a Green Paper, we've done so. We said that once we have concluded the consultation process with industry we would then define what the trajectory path would be through to 2050. And that's what we intend to stick to so therefore we will not speculate on possibilities within that pathway or that gateway until we reach the conclusion of the process and the Green Paper speaks for itself on that question.
JOURNALIST: The Green Paper says that you won't actually set the cap until 2010 (inaudible) so that does allow you to wait to see what happens in Copenhagen doesn't it?
PM: Well what we have said is that we will indicate what our pathway will be and that is a decision which we will take in the context of the White Paper. We have said consistently that we will be simultaneously engaged in a global negotiating context and as I have said many times before as other countries have done in terms of a band within a pathway, that can be entirely tailored for international negotiating circumstances. For example the Europeans have put out some time ago a band which is upper and lower to a particular destination point consistent with the pace of international negotiations. I've said before that's a reasonable approach, it was outline in the Green Paper as well.
JOURNALIST: Within the last 24 hours we have seen the publication of an ASIO submission to the Haneef inquiry indicating that ASIO said there was no danger to Australia from Dr Haneef. The Queensland police said something similar, isn't it now time to give this inquiry the powers of a royal commission to get to the bottom of this properly?
PM: Well the Clarke inquiry is still underway, it still has a way to process through all of the matters which are put before it. Matters of fact and the submissions associated with that. I think we should be calm temperate and responsible and wait for the outcome of that inquiry. I think that's the right way to go ahead.
JOURNALIST: The High Court's decision today to uphold exclusive access rights of traditional owners to Northern Territory tidal waters. Do you have concerns for that elsewhere in Australia and would your Government consider moving to provide access to non indigenous fisherman to those areas?
PM:  This matters been a subject of extensive legal deliberation by various courts and most recently by the Full Bench of the High Court of Australia. Secondly the officers of the Attorney's department are now studying the actual detail of the decision which was only handed down today.
Thirdly we are encouraged by the positive and constructive attitude which has been demonstrated thus far by organisations such as the Northern Territory Lands Council in terms of ensuring that there are flexible and sensible arrangements. Negotiated arrangements put in place which can properly balance the rights of interests of fishers both commercial and recreational.
I think the key way through this is common sense, we would urge all parties to show common sense and as this matter has been the subject of legal deliberation for a long, long, long time then its time now for common sense to prevail on the ground now that the High Court has clarified the law.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM:  Well working families, working Australians, Pensioners, Carers are under huge cost of living pressures and the reasons go to the fact that we have a rolling impact of global economic developments, global financial crisis which rolls through to unofficial interest rate rises, goes to global oil shocks  -  the third great oil shock since the 1970's and the roll through costs again in terms of not just petrol but food as you point to it.
We will await the release of that report but can I say our view is we need to continue to examine all practical measures, practical measures to assist working Australians under financial pressure. We've started that process through the tax cuts which came into effect as of 1 July. We started that process in terms of the changes to the child care tax rebate which came into effect as of 1 July, education tax refund begins to flow from the next point, that is 1 July next year, but becomes operational in terms of the collection of receipts during the current financial year and other measures as well including establishment of the teen dental program.
These do not solve all financial pressures for people who are doing it really tough at the moment - and they are. But our overall charge is this, to do whatever we can to continue to strengthen the Australian economy for the long term. That is the most responsible course of action that we can undertake for all those under pressure now.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd as a former Opposition Leader of how do you think Brendan Nelson's leadership looks today?
PM:  That is a matter for the Liberal party. The problem of the Liberal Party is not one of personalities, its policies like WorkChoices and simply being a bunch o climate change sceptics. That's the problem, that's the problem.
JOURNALIST:            Has there been any progress in the appointment of a High Commissioner to London?
PM:  Closer than yesterday.
JOURNALIST: What's taken so long?
JOURNALIST:  Are you waiting for Peter Costello to retire?
PM: All the processes of diplomatic and other appointments go through proper channels and this one as together with others has yet to be concluded. Some take a little longer than others but it will done in due course. Properly considered fashion and we're perfectly relaxed with the process.
JOURNALIST:Can a former politician be ruled out?
PM:Can a former politician be ruled out? We will adhere always former, serving or future, we'll always adhere to the proper process.  As you see in the case of Tim Fischer's appointment I have not ruled out the appointment of former politicians to diplomatic appointments. But this is always on a case by case basis as is appropriate to the post and to the challenges and to the skills of the person involved.
I think Tim's appointment was entirely appropriate.
JOURNALIST:Peter Costello would make a good High Commissioner?
PM:That is a matter on a broader front in terms of his future to be resolved by the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:You should ask Mal Brough. See what Mal's views are on these questions. The key question for the Libs, the Nats in whatever form is not one of personality, not one of structure but one of policy. The Libs and the Nats stand for WorkChoices, they stand for scepticisms on climate change, they had no solution in terms of exiting our troops from Iraq.
Lets just be very clear about this, the problem on the conservative side of politics is not branding, its not names, its not structures. It's the policies they stand for, they are policies we fought hard in the last election and the policies fight hard against come the next election.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:Well as I have said before Michelle in reference I think to Mayo, maybe in a reference to Lyne as well I can't remember. These are seats which have never been held by Labor and in the history of their having been established as seats in the House of Representatives.
Secondly unlike various other political parties, we don't have a million bucks to throw at every by-election that comes along. Which is precisely what the other mob threw at the by-election in Gippsland. But we have yet to reach a final decision on that.
Ok thanks folks


I'm honoured to present the inaugural Tom Burns Memorial Lecture, an event that from today will become a fixed part of the Queensland political calendar.
Tom Burns was a great Queenslander.
Tom Burns was a great Australian.
Tom Burns was a great Australian internationalist.
Tom Burns was in all these things a proud son of the Australian Labor Party and the great Australian labour movement. 
His contribution to the cause of Labor stretches back to the 1950s.
Despite that, he was a man who always grasped the future.
Before his time, he understood the potential of Asia for Australia's economic future.
Before his time, he understood the importance of reform if the Labor Party was to win government.
He understood too that political life is a marathon, not a sprint. And so he worked tirelessly, year after year, holding the party together through some of its darkest hours.
Always pointing the way forward.
Forward to government  -  after 23 years in the wilderness federally, and after 32 years in the wilderness here in Queensland.
Forward to a better future both for working families and for the nation.
When the Don Dunstan Foundation invited me to give an inaugural Tom Burns Memorial Lecture, I was a little surprised.
You could hardly imagine more different personalities.
Don Dunstan was an urbane, cultured South Australian. A man most at home watching the opera in the Adelaide Festival Centre  -  performing his poetry readings; Australia's very own renaissance man.
Tom Burns was an in-your-face, colourful Queensland larrikin from central casting, a man who embodied Australian mateship; most at home in his boat on Moreton Bay, a fishing line in the water, pelicans overhead and wearing a very attractive pair of stubbies.
In terms of sartorial splendour, both displayed a passion for shorts  -  Don, his hot pants; Burnsey, what could be described as Queensland formal attire.
What they have in common is that they were outstanding Labor leaders of their time.
Both were men of vision  -  deeply committed to the Labor cause of fairness and reform. 
They were friends, too  -  indeed just two days after Tom had become party leader in December 1974, when the ALP representation in the Queensland parliament was reduced from 33 to 11  -  the cricket team that is now the stuff of legend - Dunstan got on the phone and told him he was coming up to Brisbane to help him with the enormous challenge he'd just taken on.
That's when the Queensland Party began to professionalise its operations.
Both were also colourful, larger-than-life personalities  -  never afraid of causing offence, and yet well liked by political friends and foes.
They were leaders who have left a deep imprint on political life, long after they had departed the stage.
This memorial lecture is a very appropriate way in which to remember Tom  -  as well as a great way to raise funds for Indigenous literacy and homeless youth.
I knew Burnsey for almost 20 years.
He was always an inspiration - a source of advice and encouragement, and sometimes the source of a good clip behind the ears. 
And he brought colour and life into any room he entered.
Like Don Dunstan, Tom had a great sense of mischief.
On his retirement in May 1996, Tom recounted a remarkable story about the day he ended up in a sauna with the infamous Russ Hinze, the Minister for Roads in the Bjelke-Petersen Government.
Tom was asked who he most loved to hate in his political life and he surprised people by answering that it was not Joh Bjelke-Petersen, but big Russ.
Tom explained that though Russ Hinze was a “bloody old crook”, he liked him.
One day, he saw big Russ and complained to him that National Party politicians in government never went to a Labor electorate to give schools a holiday.
Apparently it was the practice for government MPs to go to schools in their electorate and declare a holiday, a sure route to political popularity - at least for the kids, if not the parents!
But kids in Labor electorates never had such good fortune.
So Russ Hinze replied  -  “Do you want me to come?” and Tom said  -  “Yes”. And Russ responded immediately: “Thursday”.
And Russ did exactly as he said - by 11am that Thursday, Tom Burns and Russ Hinze had gone to seven schools in Tom's electorate and shut them all down, declaring holidays.
The two of them thought they were doing quite a good job, so next they began visiting pubs in the area, trying to declare holidays there as well  -  though with less success.
The late afternoon saw Russ Hinze singing the Red Flag in the Colmslie Hotel at Morningside - in my own electorate - and finally, Russ and Tom had their photo taken under the Gabba scoreboard, before retiring to the sauna at the Gabba.
Only Burnsey could have got away with that.
Tom Burns, ahead of his time in understanding Asia
Much can be said about Tom Burns' achievements in his public life, and there are endless stories about how he relentlessly championed the interests of people in the bush throughout his years in opposition and government.
But I want to focus on an aspect of Tom Burns far less well known.
That was his role as one of the first Australian political leaders to embrace the potential of Asia for Australia's future.
Tom was a trailblazer in building Australia's relationship with China.
As Federal President of the Labor Party, he helped lead the first official delegation to the People's Republic of China in 1971, meeting Premier Zhou En-Lai while Gough met Chairman Mao Zedong.
That visit is now the stuff of political history.
But if you place yourself back in the context of Australian politics in 1971, undertaking that trip took real political courage.
There was a clear risk the visit could backfire.
But Tom Burns as President, alongside Gough Whitlam as parliamentary leader and Mick Young as Federal Secretary, took the risk because they had the foresight to realise the role that China could play in Australia's future.
Unsurprisingly, Prime Minister Billy McMahon attacked Labor for taking this delegation, famously remarking that in the Great Hall of the People, Zhou En-Lai had played Mr Whitlam like a fisherman plays a trout.
McMahon's remarks were a not-so-subtle attempt to revive the spectre of communist influence used against Labor in previous two decades - so often, and so effectively.
But this time the scare campaign didn't work.
Instead, it emerged just a couple of days later that Henry Kissinger had secretly visited Zhou En-Lai in Peking, and it was announced that President Nixon would visit Peking soon after.
Labor had showed it was far more in touch with contemporary international developments than the Liberal Government.
And Beijing still recalls that visit as a sign of Australia's friendship and engagement with China.
Tom Burns worked tirelessly to strengthen Australia-China relations forever after the 1971 visit  -  visiting China more than fifty times, with the rare distinction of meeting the four generations of Chinese leaders.
Most recently, he chaired the Queensland China Council forr the Queensland State Government.
His support of Australia's relationship with China was recognised when he became the first Australian not of Chinese heritage to be awarded the prestigious Gold Magnolia Honorary Award from the Shanghai Government for his contribution to Chinese-Australian relations. 
This achievement is all the more remarkable when you think of Tom Burns' background.
He had no university qualifications; he had never been a student of international relations or Asian studies.
And he had come from a State regarded in that era as the most parochial of all the States.
Yet he grasped the significance of China like few others of his time.
Tom was a walking, talking example of experiential learning.
Tom was ahead of his time on the question of China.
He worked hard to build bridges between Australia and China.
He recognised early that China would be of critical importance to Australia in the future.
When China was still an inward-looking nation with little economic power, Tom engaged with China.
He realised that China would play a bigger role in world affairs as time went on.
And, instinctively, he knew that the best choice for everyone was to involve China in the international system.
I think the world has now caught up with Tom's thinking.
A few years ago the American Deputy Secretary of State, Bob Zoellick wrote an article urging China to become what he called “a responsible international stakeholder”.
Zoellick's point was that, as an emerging economic and political power, China had much to gain from supporting the international order.
The Chinese Government, too, has begun to use its own words to talk about similar concepts.
It is talking about how to build an “harmonious world”.
These two ideas  -  “responsible international stakeholder” and “harmonious world”  -  have some similar ideas at their respective cores.
The idea of a “harmonious world” depends on China being a participant in the world and  -  like other nations  -  acting in accordance with the rules of that order.
Working in cooperation with others is what “harmony” is about.
“Responsible stakeholder” contains the same idea  -  China working along side other nations to maintain and develop the global and regional rules-based order.
China's positive engagement with the world is good for China and it is good for the world.
In recent days, we have seen a major setback in Doha.
China however has been playing a constructive role  -  notwithstanding its reservations about its agricultural sector.
When I visit Beijing next week, I will again explore with China's leadership what might be possible to keep the flame of Doha alive.
Multilateral action on trade liberalisation is a major challenge.
Multilateral action with China on climate change is also a major challenge.
The case for global and national action on climate change is clear.
The economic costs of inaction on climate change will be far greater than the cost of action now.
The environmental cost of inaction is stark.
For Australia, the case is clear: We are already the world's hottest and driest inhabited continent.
We therefore will be hit hardest and earliest by climate change, unless we act.
It is vital to our national interests that we act internationally on climate change.
So either we do as the Liberals did for 12 years past and for the future, and bury our heads in the sand.
Or we act.
We say that we have already wasted too much time.
We say that action through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the responsible way ahead.
It will be tough and it will cost  -  but it is the responsible course of action for the future.
Acting in partnership with China will be important  -  with China as the largest coal consumer in the world, and Australia as the largest coal exporting nation  -  Australia and China have a combined responsibility to act on clean coal.
That is why during my visit to China with Senator Wong in April, we announced that the Australian Government will invest $20 million in an Australia  - China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.
Overall, the Government is now investing $95 million in China specific climate change and water programs out to 2015.
During my visit, our two nations also agreed to establish a new Ministerial level dialogue to drive enhanced cooperation in clean energy technologies; climate change science, adaptation, and building the capacity of China to respond to climate change.
And under the Australia - China Climate Change Partnership and the Australia China Environment Development Program, we announced:
     * A feasibility study into the development of the largest solar city in the world at Weihai in the northeast of China.
     * A pilot project applying Australia's National Carbon Accounting System at a provincial level in China, and
     * A trial of the Australian river health monitoring systems in the Yellow river, The Pearl River Basin and the Da Ling River.
Collaboration with China on climate change, on the Doha Development Round as well as the rest of the global multilateral agenda is part of Australia's goals for the future  -  to shape a common future characterised by peace and prosperity for the Asia Pacific century that lies ahead.
Tom Burns, the party reformer
Tom Burns was both an internationalist and a passionate Australian nationalist.
In the same way, Tom Burns championed reform to the Labor Party itself.
He joined the party at the age of 18 in 1949, and spent much of his spare time working for the party during his six years in the RAAF in Victoria, where he trained as a radio mechanic.
In the half century that followed, he served in an extraordinary range of party positions  -  State organiser; State Secretary; State President; Federal President; State Opposition Leader and Deputy Premier.
It's unlikely that anyone will serve such a wide range of roles again.
But, in today's idiom, Burnsey was no party hack or machine man.
He was a flesh-and-blood true believer.
He believed politics wasn't about power for its own sake.
It was about representing ordinary people who otherwise never had a voice in government.
It was about achieving social progress.
They weren't easy days for the Labor Party in Queensland or indeed federally. The roles he played often brought their share of conflict and tough internal challenges. 
One of the highlights of his period of Federal President was Burns was given the tough job of investigating problems in the NSW branch in 1971.
His report was typically blunt, and recommended a comprehensive program of reform.
Alongside Mick Young's reforms to the Victorian branch in 1971, Tom's efforts helped lay a platform for the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972.
The Labor Party that Tom Burns knew was far from perfect, but he gave unending loyalty and commitment.
When he became Queensland Labor Leader in 1974, he inherited a divided party, a poor organisational structure, and just 11 members in the Queensland Parliament.
But Burnsey didn't complain  -  he just got on with the job of rebuilding.
He knew the art of the possible  -  how to push the envelope, without pushing it too far.
He showed great enterprise as Opposition Leader.
To overcome the astonishing lack of resources for an Opposition Leader  -  he was given only two advisers - he went out and established an informal policy advisory network  -  the ‘Bank on Burns' committee, that comprised up to 80 people including academics, Reserve Bank staff and even a few brave state public servants.
As a result, he was able to take a substantive and ambitious 20-point employment plan into the 1977 election, where against a wily Joh Bjelke-Petersen and a gerrymandered electoral system, he more than doubled representation to 23.
In fact, he came near to tripling the party's representation, falling short by less than 300 votes in a further seven seats.
When he felt his time as leader was up in 1978, he gave up the leadership but he didn't walk away from his party. He continued to serve in the parliament for almost twenty years.
What kept him going was his commitment to the Labor Party and the people it represented. Just a few days after the election of the Goss Government in December 1989, he remarked:
“Of course there were times when I felt like giving up during the 17 years I spent on the Opposition benches. 
But then I would go to some little country town where we had no hope, and an old bloke would tell me he had taken the day off to meet me, and would take me to his home for morning tea or lunch. 
You could see they were putting out food they couldn't afford, and that they couldn't really afford to miss a day's work. 
But they would be filled with enthusiasm and pride in the organisation, and I would think: ‘They're not giving up. How can I?' 
They were the people really kept the faith, who never deserted the Labor Party. And I'm not ashamed to say I cried out of pride for them.” (“Tom's tears flow after 32-year wait”, Courier Mail, 10 December 1989)
His role was significant at a national level as well as in Queensland:
     * his was the vote that prevented Gough Whitlam from being expelled from the Labor Party in 1966;
     * he, along with Mick Young, led the successful 1972 It's Time campaign, and
     * he was instrumental in adopting modern campaign techniques.
Our democratic system relies on political parties to generate candidates and policies that address the needs of their times.
Tom was someone who understood that. He had an extraordinary ability to get warring parties into a room and knock good sense into them  -  and I'm sure many in this room could furnish examples of times when he did just that.
Tom's spirit of party reform must continue to guide us as we confront the great reform challenges ahead, and develop new forms of engagement with the Australian community.
And he was always focused on the real purpose of politics and the Labor Party  -  to stand up for the interests of ordinary working people.
Conclusion
Tom Burns got it right on party reform.
He got it right on China.
And he left an inspiring legacy for a new generation to take forward.
Tom Burns brought good humour, colour and passion to a long public life.
Tom Burns is one of the greats in Australian political life and especially in Queensland political life.
I am honoured to be the first to deliver the Tom Burns Memorial Lecture and I'm grateful that like you I was able to call Tom a friend.


I am delighted to welcome you today to this important summit.
I thank the New South Wales Government for their support in assembling the peak leadership of Australia's financial institutions, regulators and representatives.
Before we discuss the substantive agenda for today, I want to make some specific remarks about current financial market conditions.
As we know, the past 12 months have brought volatility and continuing uncertainty on global capital markets.
Australia is an open economy, and since the 1980s we have actively pursued deeper integration with the global economy.
No sector of our economy is more globally integrated than the financial services sector.
As a result, we cannot be immune from global developments.
Australia is strongly placed to see our way through these difficult global financial challenges.
Firstly, we have a strong, well regulated banking sector.
Secondly, our banks' balance sheets are still strong compared against their relevant global counterparts and our banking sector is taking sensible steps by putting in place provisions to respond to difficulties.
From day one, the Government has encouraged banks to disclose their positions and address any problems  -  this is part of the proper, transparent functioning of the financial system.
Thirdly, in general, our corporate balance sheets are strong.
Fourth, in addition to a well-regulated financial sector, we have built a strong surplus  -  one of the largest surpluses in almost a decade by reducing spending as a per cent of GDP to its lowest level in 20 years  -  as a buffer to help withstand the challenges now unfolding.
Fifth, we have a comprehensive program of long term economic reform  -  to build a seamless national economy, a highly skilled workforce, advanced infrastructure, competitive markets and efficient regulation  -  all of which will underpin the competitiveness of the financial services sector.
Sixth, we have taken steps to strength Australia's financial markets. We have moved to expand the issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities by up to $25 billion, to support an efficient bond market and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
We have also introduced a Financial Claims Scheme, to provide certainty and protection, and we are reviewing the appropriate disclosure requirements for equity derivatives.
Lastly, the Treasurer, the Governor of the Reserve Bank and I have all been working through international forums  -  such as the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF  -  on the crucial issues of liquidity and transparency in the global financial system.
We are working to make sure Australia comes out the other side of these challenges in a strong position compared with other economies.
Before moving back onto the day's agenda I would like to express my disappointment at the recent failure of WTO members to secure a breakthrough in the Doha Round.
At a time of great global economic difficulty, this comes as a body blow to the global economy, and it is a loss of valuable opportunities for Australia.
What we have to do now is get on with the task of where to next  -  and I'll be engaging in discussions with various international leaders in the days ahead about finding a path forward.
     * The Government recognises the enormous export potential of the financial services industry, and is committed to developing policies to establish Australia as a regional financial services hub.
     * Globally, financial services exports are worth more than $150 billion per year. [OECD 2005]
     * Global trade in financial services has been growing faster than in any other services sector, at an average annual rate of 17 per cent this decade [OECD 2007].
     * Australia has a sophisticated financial sector with a track record of innovation and significant recent successes in global markets.
     * Assets under management in Australia exceed $1.1 trillion US dollars, making it the largest funds management industry in Asia and the fourth largest in the world.
Within our neighbouring economies of the Asia-Pacific region, despite the recent volatility, we are seeing the strong underlying trends that will continue to drive growth and provide opportunities for Australia's financial services sector:
     * an increase in the volume and frequency of the movement of capital;
     * a growing middle class, and
     * ageing populations and savings growth, including growth in assets under management.
The Government's overall economic agenda is founded on:
     * responsible economic management;
     * a comprehensive program of economic reform;
     * and intelligently investing in the industries of the future.
And the Government is convinced of the very substantial future potential for Australia's financial services sector  -  both domestically and in regional and global markets.
This is something that I addressed two years ago as Shadow Trade Minister, when I spoke to the Investment and Financial Services Association conference in Brisbane.
And since taking office, we have advanced an agenda across the full spectrum of policies that affect your industry.
     * Tax: we have cut withholding tax rates for established real estate investment trusts to a final rate of 7.5 per cent by 2010-11 (from 30 per cent) - to make it one of the most competitive in the world.
     * Deregulation: We are making progress towards consistent, national regulation of credit products. We are advancing this work through the COAG Business Deregulation and Competition Working Group, as part of our wider reform agenda to build a seamless national economy.
     * Education: We recognise the sector's need for highly skilled and multilingual graduates, and we look forward to continuing discussions with industry on how we build the workforce skills that we need for the future. Already, we have invested $62 million to help give Australian school students the language skills needed to engage with our Asian neighbours.
     * In addition, we are conducting the Bradley Review of Higher Education to examine the responsiveness of the higher education sector in altering the course mix to meet student and employer demands.
Successful expansion into global markets requires a partnership between government and the financial services sector.
One of the most critical ways in which the Government can act is to enable greater access to overseas markets for financial services, which are often subject to significant barriers to entry.
That is why I have hosted financial services industry lunches each of my overseas visits  -  in the United States, in China and in Japan.
I am pleased that we have already achieved some results.
Just over a month ago, Australia secured approval as an investment destination under the Chinese Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor Scheme.
This will open opportunities for Chinese banks to offer investment opportunities in Australia  -  providing access to one of fastest growing markets for funds management in the world.
Chinese funds under management stood at US$451 billion at the end of 2007.
By the end of this year could be as much as US$720 billion.
The Government is also actively pursuing improved access to the Hong Kong market (and indirectly to the mainland Chinese market), by pursuing mutual recognition agreements to help lower barriers for Australian funds managers in the Hong Kong market.
In the US in March earlier this year, I announced with the Chair of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chris Cox that we would work together to develop mutual recognition of securities regulation  -  and we hope to be in a position to make an announcement on this in the near future.
And just last month, we brought into force an agreement for mutual recognition of securities offerings between Australia and New Zealand.
Across this range of key initiatives in tax, deregulation, education, infrastructure and overseas market access  -  we're sending the message that Australia is serious about competing as a global financial services provider.
We recognise that there is more work to do.
This Summit is an important next step to chart the path forward.
This is the time to plan ahead for the future of the industry beyond the current global difficulties.
I know that several further important ideas will emerge from today's discussions.
It's important that these ideas don't simply get lost in the bureaucracy.
That's why the Government will also be establishing a dedicated team within the Treasury to take charge of the financial services agenda for the Government.
This team will coordinate the Government's policy actions in this area and be a single point of contact for the sector.
This team will also build on the ongoing work we have been doing across the Government in with industry organisations such as IFSA, the ABA and the Insurance Council, as well as with individual businesses.
This team's first task will be reporting on the outcomes from today's Summit and establishing priority areas for action before the end of the year.
The Government's Financial Sector Advisory Council will be charged with oversight of this team and advising on the Summit's recommendations. 
On one other matter, the Government understands the importance of taxation for the international competitiveness of the financial services sector  -  as with other parts of the Australian economy.
That is why the Government has initiated a root-and-branch review of Australia's tax and transfer system, led by Ken Henry. The taxation issues raised in today's summit will be referred for consideration as part of the Henry Review.
Finally, I want to raise one further matter for your thought and feedback.
We would appreciate your efforts to identify those barriers to overseas market access that most restrict Australia's capacity to expand our financial services exports.
The Government is committed to working with the sector to help overcome those constraints.
And if it will assist our efforts to expand the sector's global opportunities, I would like to prepare to lead a delegation of senior industry leaders to key Asian economies to showcase the strengths and sophistication of Australia's financial services sector.
We want to work to ensure that the financial services sector is an important part of Australia's global branding.
Thank you again for your attendance at today's Summit.
Today's discussions will be an important input into Government policy making.
I look forward to today's outcomes and to your continued input as we work together in building an industry that has an important role to play in building and sustaining Australia's prosperity.


The Prime Minister today announced a platform for future action by Government and industry to secure Australia's future as a financial services hub. 
The Rudd Government announced the establishment of a dedicated team within the Treasury to assess and implement ideas raised at the summit and to act as a single point of contact for industry to help make Australia a financial hub.
The Treasury team will consult widely with industry and ensure that the diverse range of ideas canvassed at the summit are considered and implemented in a timely fashion.
The Government's Financial Sector Advisory Committee will oversee the work of the Treasury team and provide industry input into recommendations to government.
The Government will report back with an agenda for action by the end of the year.
The Prime Minister further announced that:
     * Taxation issues raised by industry will be considered by the Henry Review and the Board of Taxation's review of tax arrangements applying to managed investment trusts; and
     * The Government will actively promote Australia's financial services sector by leading a ‘roadshow' to key Asian economies.
The summit builds on the range of initiatives the Government is pursuing to boost financial services exports, and brought together for the first time representatives across industry, government and academia.
The summit will discuss new opportunities for the Australian financial services sector and help the Government and industry chart a path forward to ensure that Australia's financial services sector is amongst the most competitive in the world and that Australian financial services businesses can succeed in global markets.


I am pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Roger Wilkins AO as the new Secretary of the Attorney General's Department. 
The current Secretary, Mr Robert Cornall AO, recently informed me that he wished to leave his position as Secretary on 31 August. .Mr Cornall has held that position since 24 January 2000 and has led the Department during demanding times, not least in the area of national security. I express my gratitude to him for his dedicated service. I have asked Mr Cornall to be available to undertake ad hoc tasks for the Commonwealth in the future, and he has agreed. 
Mr Wilkins will bring great experience to the role of Secretary. Mr Wilkins was Director-General of the New South Wales Cabinet Office from 1992 until 2006 and currently heads the Government and Public Sector Group, Australia and New Zealand, at Citi. He has recently completed a Strategic Review of Climate Change Programs for the Government. 
Mr Wilkins holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree with First Class Honours in Philosophy and a Bachelor of Laws Degree from the University of Sydney. He has extensive experience in policy development and governance, and has published on a diverse range of public policy and legal issues. I am confident that Mr Wilkins will provide strong leadership to the Attorney-General's Department. 
Mr Wilkins has been appointed for a period of five years from 1 September 2008.


UHLMANN: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Chris
UHLMANN:    Is this the slow down we had to have?
PM: We're facing very difficult global economic conditions. I think we have just got to acknowledge that fact Chris. The bottom line is we have an impact on the global economy flowing through to Australia from the credit crisis coming out of the US sub prime.
Secondly we've had the further shock to the economy coming off the back of the global oil shock, the biggest that we have seen since the 1970's. All these factors affect the real economy and real growth across the world and that in turn impacts on Australia. The key challenge is that we have a course, a pathway through this and that's got to be built on a strong approach to budget policy and a strong approach to long term economic reform so that we can come through this in better shape.
UHLMANN: But isn't this part of your handy work, your budget cut spending, the Reserve bank is putting up interest rates, your trying to help them in their inflation busting exercise. Isn't this partly your handy work?
PM: Well I just ran through before Chris the global economic conditions which affect not this economy, but every economy across the world at present..
UHLMANN: And interest rates are also affect the economy?
PM: Yeah I'm about to go onto the domestic factors as well. And if you look the registration of businesses and consumer confidence across most western economies at present you can see the wash on effect of these global economic factors.
Here in Australia what's compounded that is that as at the point at which we assumed office seven or eight months ago we were given the highest inflation numbers this country had seen in 16 years. The economy had just been through 10 interest rate rises in a row and as a consequence that flows through to real economic activity and that's partly reflected in what we are seeing in the retail numbers in recent times.
UHLMANN: The Reserve Bank gets to decide where interest rates are set. Did the Reserve Bank get it wrong?
PM: Prior to the election and since the election we've maintained our policy of the independence of the Reserve Bank. And the reason we support that policy is in terms of the long term strengths of the Australian economy the independence of our monetary policy authority, the Reserve Bank, is fundamental. We intend to stand by that.
What Government can do productively is help out the task faced by the Reserve Bank and it had a challenge it faced on the inflation front as the point at which we took over Government. And what we can do at the point of fiscal policy is to assist with the overall task of bringing down inflationary pressures by ensuring that we have done the right thing to bring down a significant budget surplus, which we did through the last budget, thereby contributing through fiscal policy to deal with the inflation challenge which we and the Australian economy inherited.
UHLMANN: Yes you say that you're trying to help the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank is trying to slow the economy, the question is did you help them slow the economy too fast?
PM: We believe that we have done the responsible thing through our $22 billion budget surplus and remember that surplus is there to provide also a buffer for uncertain global economic times ahead.
UHLMANN: Are you concerned the economy is slowing too fast?
PM: We believe that in terms of the budget settings for this Government's approach to fiscal policy, we got those right. And it's far better to have a $22 billion surplus to deal with future contingencies, a buffer for the future, than not to have.
Remember the underlying problem which we confronted and other economies around the world are confronting two challenges. One of inflation and of course the roll on effect in terms of the impact of those global factors I referred to before. Therefore what we've got to make sure we do in this economy is get the balance right. We believe through fiscal policy we have done that. We also believe that in terms of national economic policy management we have a strong course of action to see our way through what is plainly a very large global economic challenge facing all economies.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister is the balance of fiscal and monetary policy right? Is the economy slowing too fast, are you concerned that it might be slowing too fast?
PM: We believe that when it comes to budget policy, we have done the right thing. It is the right course of action and as I said a $22 billion surplus is the best way you can position this economy going forward. It gives you a buffer for the future.
Secondly we also have a long term program of economic reform and in part that surplus assists that through our investment in education, skills and training and the productivity reform we need to see long term.
On the other part of economic policy which is monetary policy, that of course remains the independent preserve of the Reserve Bank. I go back to what I said before, if you start to have Governments preaching to the Reserve Bank about particular levels of monetary policy at particular times it is not a good recipe for the long term future because then you have the monetary authorities subject to day to day political pressure.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister there is now a glut of unsold houses on the market. Last year you worried a lot about the fact that houses were unaffordable, the prices were dropping fast, is that a good thing?
PM: Well housing affordability is a deep concern facing all Australians and it affects people differently in different parts of the country.
UHLMANN: So it's good news that house prices are falling?
PM: I would say that housing affordability is a challenge facing many households across the country and it affects people in different ways in different parts of the country. In certain places we have through our approach to housing policy including our first home saver account, through also the approach that we have taken with affordable rental accommodation, doing what we can to assess where there is housing shortages. In other areas obviously through the roll on impact of 10 interest rates rises in a row under our pre-decessors that's obviously having an effect on activity in the housing sector as well.
We need a strong way through this for the long term, we believe we've got that course of action. Of course there's going to be pain and dislocation on the way through. Let's just face that for what it is and not pretend that its not happening. The key thing is the strength of this economy for the long term.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister finally have you asked treasury for advice on what would happen if you increase business costs by putting a price on carbon at a time when the economy is slowing?
PM: On the question of the advice sought from Treasury that of course remains internal to the Government and it's a question best directed to the Treasurer as well.
UHLMANN: You would ask that question though wouldn't you?
PM: In the context of the Cabinet sub-committee on climate change deliberations on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme we've been exceptionally mindful of getting the balance right in terms of doing the right thing for the environment and the economy long term, while also helping households and affected businesses in the adjustment process.
That will be painful and difficult on the way through as well, but we believe that we have done the right thing. On the question of specific advices from the bureaucracy I'm sure there's a thousand of them, that's the right way to in fact do public policy in Australia, not lock the bureaucracy or anybody else out.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister thank you
PM: Thanks very much   


MITCHELL: On the line the Prime Minister Mr Rudd good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister we hear all the economists talking in the usual jargon here and I know its complex but if we can avoid that sort of jargon, because it touches people in a real way this they need to know where they stand. Do you accept that the economy is now in reverse?
PM: Well you look at the retail figures that you just spoke about Neil, plainly what you see is a slowing in retail spending over the two quarters which have been the first half of this year.
MITCHELL: But is it slowing too quickly?
PM: Well its obviously happening out there and the big challenge is as you know getting the balance right between not having an economy which is plagued by high levels of inflation forcing interest rates up over the long term. While at the same time ensuring that enough activity continues to be generated in the economy and this is a challenge not unique to Australia.
MITCHELL: Is the balance right, is it slowing too quickly?
PM: Every economy in the world is facing these challenges at the moment in what are the most difficult global economic conditions in a quarter of a century. In terms of the balance which is you question, I think in terms of what Government can do in budget policy and that $22 billion surplus we've got, a buffer for the future, I think that's right. As you know we have always prior to the election and since the election accepted the independence of the Reserve Bank.
MITCHELL: Yeah
PM: They make their own decisions and I think that's right because you don't want a politically pressure them one way of the other. I think as far as what we can do in providing a strong way through for the future, we got our settings as right as we can but its going to be tough. I don't want to mislead your listeners.
MITCHELL: So there's nothing more you can do to limit potential damage?
PM: What we can do to assist working Australians, working families, pensioners and carers who are under real cost of living pressures now because of petrol, because of mortgages and rents as well as groceries is the measures that we put through the budget, tax cuts which came through 1 July together with what we've done in terms of increases for pensioners and carers. But you know its still very tough out there and we'll have more to do.
MITCHELL: But how do those things that you have outlined, how do they reduce the likelihood of us going into recession?
PM: Well what we can do is cushion people in terms of the impact on their family budgets. Tax cuts for example, remember in the budget that we have just done we have introduced some $46 billion worth of tax cuts right across the economy. They started flowing as of 1 July about 4 weeks ago.
Secondly the child care tax rebate has gone up from 30% to 50% that affects a lot of households. Also there's a $5.2 billion package for pensioners and carers. None of these solve the problem, they simply assist in cushioning the blow.
MITCHELL: Okay well you say its going to get tougher, how is it going to get tougher? Jobs will go?
PM: Well if you look at where one thing relates to another. First thing remember we've had inflation running at 16 year highs as of when we came into office. That then flows into interest rates and you've had 12 of those on the trot going up. That in turn affects the level of activity in the economy and that in turn affects ultimately employment.
That's why if you go back to the beginning of that sequence, its why its very important to do what we can to keep downward pressure on inflation. That's why we have adopted the policy of bringing in such a significant budget surplus.
MITCHELL: Well we have seen a few job cuts Qantas, Don Smallgoods in Melbourne, Starbucks. Do we have to accept that there are more job losses ahead?
PM: Well if you've got a slowing economy coming off the back of the highest inflation rate in 16 years and 12 interest rate rises in a row then the flow through to growth in the economy and the flow through to employment, one just follows from the other. The key thing is to have a strong strategy to see this economy through for the long term. That's why we have anchored that in a very significant budget surplus. That's why we believe that through a continued process of economic reform there is a way through this while helping and assisting working families, pensioners and carers on the way through.
MITCHELL: As I said does that mean that we have to accept that there are more job losses ahead?
PM: Well what I say on that Neil is that when it comes to the statistics provided by the ABS its not appropriate for politicians or Prime Ministers to speculate on future data (inaudible).
MITCHELL: You've already said its going to get tougher and I'm saying is it going to get tougher by more jobs going?
PM: Well what I'm saying to you is speculating on individual pieces of data is not got any real foundation. But what I can say is if you look at the conditions globally and the factors driving it, the global financial crisis coming off the back of US sub prime affecting every economy in the world, the global oil shock the worst that we have seen in 30 years, this is rolling through. Its therefore realistic to say that this is going to affect the whole economy. When you add to that the high levels of inflation the Government inherited and 12 interest rate rises in a row it all means that we have a difficult way through, a difficult way ahead. But I believe the economic policy setting of the Government are strong and we believe that we are better positioned than most other economies in the world to see our way through these challenges.
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister you've said its going to get tougher. If I'm just a member of the public going to work today or just started work, how is it going to get tougher for me?
PM: Well tough in the sense of the impact on people's family budgets.
MITCHELL: So its going to be harder to pay the bills? Am I likely to lose my job? All those issues are what people worry about.
PM: That's absolutely right which is why I have said many times during this discussion and previous discussions we've had on air that I fully understand the direct impact that this has on the family budget. For example what's the biggest driver at the moment in terms of making ends meet around the family breakfast table. Its paying the mortgage because the mortgage has gone up with 12 interest rates rises in a row because of inflationary pressure being so high.
So the responsible course of action against that big driver being cost of living pressures for working families and working Australians is to put as much downward pressure on inflation as possible so that there's no further cause for interest rate rises.
MITCHELL: Do you accept a recession is a possibility?
PM: I believe that we have a strong policy course of action to see this economy through, we are in the best position, in a better position than most other economies in the western world given our strong budgetary position, the independence of our Reserve Bank and as well as a clear strategy of economic reform. It will be tough, we are not immune from the global economy but I believe we've got strong policy settings for the future.
MITCHELL: Okay so do you accept it's a possibility?
PM: I believe that we have a responsible strategy for the future and I believe that the best way of ensuring that is through a responsible approach to budget policy, we've done that. And if you've got a $22 billion buffer, which is what we now have off the back of the last budget Neil, we have an ability to therefore provide and use that buffer in the future if the global factors get tougher and tougher in the period ahead.
I'm not in the business of making wild promises for the future. Before the election for example we were challenged on multiple times could I guarantee that petrol prices would come down - I said no, could I guarantee that grocery prices would come down  -  I said no. What I can guarantee is that we will have strongest most solid set of economic policy directions into the future anchored in a strong budget.
MITCHELL: I understand the independence of the Reserve bank and as Prime Minister you can't advise them publicly or even privately for that matter to reduce interest rates or anyway to make any decision. However if interest rates do come down, which is the broad speculation across the economist today, how can you guarantee the banks will pass on the interest rate cut?
PM: Well I think the banks will be under huge pressure in the marketplace to act in response to official interest rate changes. I know that with great disappointment a qualified response to that question the other day when it was put to one of the heads of the commercial banks as to what they would do when that happened.
Can I say operating in the market these banks have a responsibility to act despite recent adjustments both by NAB and by ANZ in response to some bad lending decisions made in the past. Look at the overall profitability levels of our banks, they are huge. Therefore I believe they have got a responsibility to pass on. And if for what ever reason they don't fully we have brought in bank switching devices which enable people very simply to change their accounts from one bank to another.
MITCHELL: Is the migration rate relevant at this stage? John Brumby said today we shouldn't increase migration rates any further in this environment, well he's reported as saying that. Do you agree?
PM: I haven't seen the Premiers comments on that. The migration debate is complex, on the one hand there are various parts of our economy which continue to suffer from labour shortages and look particularly at various parts of Western Australia and Queensland but elsewhere as well, and in particular categories. So there's no blunt answer to that.
On the other side of the equation Neil we also know that when migrants come to the country - guess what we've got to actually build more houses as well.  Therefore it actually brings extra economic activity at the same time. It's a complex equation, we believe we've got to get the settings right.
MITCHELL: Are the setting under review then. The migration act?
PM: We review these on an annual basis and we adjust them according to the Governments very close consultation with the industry organisations about what they need where. And the good thing about the migration program is that we can ratchet it up and ratchet it down consistent with where the economy is a particular time.
But it's a very varied economy.
MITCHELL: David, go ahead please David.
DAVID: Good morning Neil, good morning Mr Prime Minister.
PM: G'day David
DAVID: Ever seen the Hollowmen Mr Prime Minister? Probably every morning.
Listen the biggest danger for the Australia people
PM: The answer to your first question by the way is no I haven't but go on.
DAVID: Well you should. The biggest danger to the Australian people is your Government. Its got to pull its head out of its backside, your going to lead the world with carbon trading are we. We're going to lose jobs by the (inaudible).
I am in business and one of the biggest problems we're facing at the moment is interest rates and petrol prices taking all the free money away from people. People aren't spending and their looking down the tube at what your carbon trading. You are going to teach China where a man has crawled overt he top of 2 billion people, 90 million in his own party to get to the leadership of that country. Your going to tell him are you, your going lead by example and show him what Australia can do (inaudible)
MITCHELL: David what's you business, what sort of business?
DAVID: Well I'm in pie manufacturing, all be it very small. But the fact is I'm right at the sharp end of it and I can see it straight away and I'm in a very tough area, Coburg. And I can see it straight away that these decisions that are made and business losing. I've watched companies close down all around me. They are going directly to China, some of them have picked their machinery up and gone to China.
MITCHELL: Okay I think the point Prime Minister is without the vitriol, that people are hurting in a very real sense and they are looking for some hope that their going to get through this in better way. I mean that's the point I was making at the start, this is starting to really bite people.
PM: It is and its biting people right across the world. That's why you need a strong decisive course of action for the future. One is through an approach to budget policy which says we have a strong surplus, a buffer for the future. I'd much rather have $22 billion to draw upon from this budget than not to meet the contingencies which arise.
Secondly we have amongst the best financial regulators in the world in terms of our financial institutions and thirdly we have a clear cut strategy to fight inflation, which will be tough given we inherited it at 16 year highs. But if we don't, go back to the cost to business, the cost to small businesses, one of the biggest drivers in business costs is the cost of capital and therefore we've got a responsibility to do what we can to put downward pressure on interest rates because it affects everybody, households and business.
Where David mentioned before in his tyre business and things going offshore to China.
MITCHELL: Pie I think it was.
PM: Sorry
MITCHELL: Pie I think was
PM: Sorry, I thought he said tyre
MITCHELL: As in eating pies
PM: Oh right okay, sorry,  I misheard him. The reality is this has been a process which has been happening over 20 years and you've seen right across the world with lower labour rates in China, so much of the world's manufacturing having gone there.
The key challenge is through an activist industry policy which is what we're doing through Industry Minister Kim Carr for example on the automobile industry, do what you can particularly through new green car technologies to keep jobs in Australia.
MITCHELL: Okay in this environment his other point. In this environment can we really afford to push ahead with the carbon trading scheme on the same timetable if countries like China and India, as they gave indication during the week, are not going to do anything? Can we really afford to stick to your timetable?
PM: Well, let's go to where the international negotiations now stand. First of all, we all know that there is a clear economic case for acting on climate change. For Australia, we're already the hottest and driest continent. It therefore follows that unless we act globally on climate change that we are going to be hit hardest and earliest. And that affects the economy, it affects agriculture, it affects the Murray-Darling, it affects tourism industries including the bleaching of the Great Barrier Reef, which of itself employs, in tourism, some 60,000 people.
Therefore, we're got an immediate economic interest at stake, with a sharper edge of this in terms of impact -
MITCHELL: But we also have an immediate economic crisis to cope with.
PM: That's true, but the responsibility lies in making sure that you have a clear cut strategy to act on climate change, which is responsible, and make sure we're also around the negotiating table with the rest of the world, which we've achieved through ratifying Kyoto. And that means turning into reality the undertakings given by the world community at the Bali Conference about six months ago which says, for the developed economies, that's us, that we'll have binding targets for the future. For the developing economies, like China and India, that they'll undertake what's called, in the jargon of the conference, verifiable action.
MITCHELL: I understand this. But are you locked into that timetable?
PM: We've said that we're committed to the introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in 2010. Right around the world there is some 27 states in Europe which have these arrangements at present. About 27 states and provinces in the United States and Canada are doing the same. The Japanese are in the process of the same debate as we are at the moment.
We need to act nationally and globally. And you're right, it's got to be a global solution. What the developing countries will  - 
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, if I can interrupt. The environment is changing and has changed. The economy is getting worse. Some people are talking about the danger of recession. Do you remain locked into that policy despite these changes in the economic environment?
PM: Our objective remains, Neil, to introduce the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in 2010. We're in a detailed process of negotiation with industry over the next six months. We had already discussions through Penny Wong and the Ministers on the impact in particular industries and particular sectors. Remember, that the direct impact of this scheme flows to 1,000 of our largest businesses in the country. We still believe it's the right course of action. We also have adjustment schemes for households and for businesses on the way through for the short term and the medium term.
But the long term, unless we act on this, we're burying our heads in the sand in what is a real economic job loser from Australia. And that is, climate change with no response to it.
[BREAK]
MITCHELL: You're going to the Beijing opening, the Olympics. Will you in your talks raise human rights issues with the Chinese officials?
PM: I've done in the past and I will be doing so in the future, Neil.
MITCHELL: What about censorship issues? Because the media is being censored in Beijing.
PM: Yeah, I've seen those reports. I'm quite concerned by them. I saw the reports, and also the comments by Kevan Gosper.
My attitude to our friends in China is very simple  -  they should have nothing to fear from open digital links for the rest of the world during this important international celebration of sport.
MITCHELL: So you will raise that with him?
PM: Yeah, absolutely. And, I think that's the right thing to do.
I'm as surprised as I think Kevan Gosper is by what has gone on here, and apparently, some, according to Kevan at least, some deal between the IOC and the Chinese authorities.
MITCHELL: The new Governor-General has sacked one of her staff which is creating quite some debate. Do you support her decision to do that?
PM: Well, every new Governor-General has the right to decide upon who his or her official secretary should be, that's the first point.
The second is, on the question of the turnover of the position of official secretary, this person who has done the job I think in an exemplary way in the past, he has been in the position for five years. His predecessor was in the position for five years. And also, the individual concerned is an officer, I think, of the Australian Public Service. And therefore, head of the Prime Minister's Department will offer that person reappointment within the Australian Public Service as would be normal.
MITCHELL: I understand we're spending $20 million exhuming the bodies of the World War One diggers at Fromelles to give them individual graves.  Would it perhaps not have been better to have left them undisturbed and erect a monument? I'm thinking of the money, I'm just thinking of the sensitivity around it. Why the individual approach?
PM: Well, this is, as I understand it, been the subject of considerable discussion between the Australian and British Governments and through the relevant ministers. And the decision which has been reaches between the two Governments is that this is the most appropriate way to honour the loss of this extraordinary number of our serviceman in that one day, I think it was nearly 2,000 Australians killed. It's just appalling when you think about it. So, if you go to the western front and the battlefields, and I've seen a little bit of them over the years, where we can our obligation over time has been to honour the individuals where you can do that. And, you know, even though it is nearly 100 years ago, I think these are all young men with families and I think it's the decent thing to do.
MITCHELL: Do you think you're arrogant? Did you see the poll this week?
PM: No, I didn't see the poll.
MITCHELL: Newspoll suggested that you are being seen as increasingly arrogant. Do you think you're arrogant?
PM: Oh, people make their own judgments about me, Neil, and that's a matter for them. My job is just to get on with providing the best policy leadership for the country. And people will make their judgment about me over time. And frankly, that's a matter for the Australian people.
MITCHELL: Who would you rather face in Opposition  -  Peter Costello or Brendan Nelson?
PM: The problem with the Libs is not personality or even structure, it's policy.
MITCHELL: Well are you going to give us a tip on Peter Costello  -  will he come back?
PM: Oh, I wouldn't have a clue. I mean, it has been a while since Pete has called me for some advice. But, you know, at the end of the day, whoever it is, what's the key thing? It's the party of WorkChoices, which was to reduce our  - 
MITCHELL: You won the election, we don't have to go through it all again.
PM: It's the same party  -  WorkChoices, they still stick by that. It's the party of climate change sceptics  - 
MITCHELL: Okay but you need Opposition don't you. You need strong Opposition.
PM: Well that's a constitutional requirement, I'm a strong believer in a strong Opposition. But remember this  - 
MITCHELL: It makes good Government.
PM: Yeah, but I've always said that in the past and that's important. But Mr Costello left us with what we've been talking about in a lot of these discussions, and that was inflation running at 16 year highs, 10 interest rate rises in a row, and he's been a life long supporter of WorkChoices.
MITCHELL: People look back on a pretty good 10 years for the economy, though. As even your own party admitted at the time, things were going well.
PM: But look global factors, you had a global commodities boom which began in 2001 which pulled in a large amount of money into this economy, and now we've got global factors coming out of the US sub-prime crisis, washing in a negative direction.
You know, it's important to put all these things into context, and to have a clear cut economic strategy to see this economy through  -  we've got that.
MITCHELL: Fair enough. One last question. I read you have a criminal history. Did you know your ancestors were crooks?
PM: I certainly did, yes. I didn't realise there were quite that many. The Mormon Church has apparently done a family history for me, they handed it to me yesterday. I knew I had one sizeable criminal back there, in a bloke that came out here first up  - 
MITCHELL: Proud of it?
PM: ... apparently there is half a dozen of them. Mate, we all have a past.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much. The Prime Minister, in Brisbane, Kevin Rudd.


I'm delighted to be here tonight in support of the Oaktree Foundation.
It has been terrific to watch Oaktree grow from just a seedling, five years ago, to its current shape  -  with branches spreading across the country.
I remember my introduction to Oaktree when a young man named Hugh Evans came bounding through the door of my office in Parliament House.
He didn't just want to talk about the weather  -  or show me his new medal as Young Australian of the Year.
Instead, Hugh wanted to talk about poverty.
He wanted to talk about injustice.
And, most impressive of all, Hugh didn't just want to talk about it, he wanted to explain to me how he was going to fix all of this.
It has been wonderful to watch Oaktree grow in the years since then.
Tonight I'd like to focus on the role that Oaktree and other organisations in the third sector can play in our efforts to tackle poverty.
Challenging economic conditions
But first I would like to address the immediate challenge of the difficult global economic conditions now being confronted by Australians and by our region.
Australia like other nations faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is building a stronger Australia through responsible economic management to put downward pressure on inflation and as a result, on interest rates.
And it is why we have a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long term competitiveness and build the industries of the future.
Industrialised nations are facing some of the most uncertain economic conditions in the past two decades, with soaring energy and food prices, combined the uncertainty in global credit markets.
Australia is not immune to the impact of these developments  -  and we have the added complexity of inheriting the highest inflation rate in 16 years.
As a result of slower global growth, tighter credit conditions and higher interest rates, economic growth is expected to moderate to 2.75% in 2008-09.
This is expected to lead to a moderation in employment growth and to gradually reduce inflation.
The Budget forecasts that employment growth is expected to moderate from 2.5 percent in 2007-08 to 1.25 per cent in 2008-09.
The Budget also forecasts that unemployment is expected to rise from 4.2 percent currently to 4.75 per cent by June 2009.
With the global turmoil buffeting all economies, the Government's responsibility is to chart a responsible course ahead.
The Government is acting responsibly to meet the short and long term challenges of rising inflation and a slowing global economy.
In the short term we are monitoring unfolding developments to ensure that we strike the right economic balance for the conditions we face:
     * We struck the right fiscal balance in the Budget.
     * We provided a $55bn support package to Australians doing it tough including $47bn in tax cuts.
     * And we built a responsible Budget surplus of $22bn to give us a buffer for the future.
For the long term, we are prosecuting an economic reform agenda based on:
     * Enhancing long term productivity growth by investing in education, skills and training, led by an $11 billion Education Investment Fund.
     * Investing in our future infrastructure needs, led by a $20 billion Building Australia Fund.
     * Taking practical action to lift workforce participation over time.
     * The most comprehensive review of the tax and retirement incomes systems in the last half century.
A strong economy for the long term is fundamental for Australia's ability to support working Australians at home, as well as to be generous in our international assistance efforts.
The Make Poverty History campaign and Oaktree
The difficult global economic conditions will of course have a particularly acute impact on many of the world's poorest nations  -  who are particularly vulnerable to soaring commodity and food prices.
That makes the work of Oaktree and the Make Poverty History alliance even more important. 
I had the honour of attending one of the first Oaktree Vision Nights at Carey Grammar, not long after meeting Hugh Evans in Parliament House.
The sheer passion of the team was remarkable.
They understood:
     * That a world in which half the human population lives on less than $2 per day, is not fair, and not tolerable.
     * That we cannot put up with 30,000 children every day dying of preventable illnesses.
     * And that quite small amounts of money for people in a wealthy nation like ours, can have big impacts for people in the world's poorest nations.
The extremes of global poverty make for heavy reading  -  but what has always struck me about people in Oaktree is their refusal to engage in a counsel of despair. 
They want to take responsibility.
To act. To lend a hand to those who really need it.
To inspire young Australians to believe that they can make a difference. And to act on that belief.
And with a passion to mobilise young Australians to work together and bring new hope to people in the developing world.
Oaktree has now branched out into every state on the mainland, building links, I understand, to over 200 schools and mobilising more than 15,000 supporters.
It is an outstanding example of the fantastic youth movements that have risen up in Australia in recent years  -  like Oxfam's youth movement, Vision Generation at World Vision, the church-based Micah Challenge  -  all part of the wider Make Poverty History coalition.
Oaktree's achievements in just five years have been substantial  -  from the Schools for Schools program building partnerships between schools in Australia and the developing word, to the creative and eye-catching campaigns to lift awareness of the fight to end extreme poverty.
I was delighted to support Oaktree and the Make Poverty History concert in Melbourne in 2006.
I am told that somewhere there's even footage of me dancing to the Hilltop Hoods that night.
The good news is, that is not up for auction tonight.
I was pleased also to join the concert for the Make Poverty History Zero Seven Road Trip at the Sydney Opera House last year.
That was where I made the announcement that in government, Labor will lift Australia's overseas development assistance to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income by 2015.
Australia's aid commitment
We will honour that commitment  -  and in this year's Budget, we made our first step, raising development assistance by $505 million to a total of $3.7 billion for 2008-09.
As one of the nations that signed on to the Millennium Development Goals in 2000, Australia accepts our responsibility to help make those goals a reality.
Those eight goals are the shared development priorities for the international community.
They include halving extreme poverty by 2015 and achieving universal primary education by 2015.
Australia has a very special responsibility to help nations in our immediate region.
The success of economic development is critical to the long term security of our region.
But progress among the Pacific island countries towards the Millennium Development Goals has been mixed at best.
That is why Pacific island countries are a major focus of our development assistance program.
They are in our neighbourhood, and Australia wants to be a good neighbour.
We know that they face some real challenges.
Some countries have gone backwards against some of the key goals.
It is clear that we need a new approach to assisting these countries build a sustainable future.
That is why, in March when I visited Port Moresby, I issued the Port Moresby Declaration.
That Declaration was a commitment by the Australian Government to building long-term relationships with the countries of the Pacific  -  relationships built on mutual respect, mutual responsibility and mutual cooperation.
Our next step is to work together with Pacific island countries to forge our Pacific Partnerships for Development.
Under these partnerships, we will agree on joint development goals with Pacific island countries.
And we will jointly monitor progress towards the goals.
If the goals are achieved, we will be prepared to offer more assistance.
The partnerships will be tailored to the circumstances of each country, reflecting their particular challenges.
Some of the greatest challenges are faced by the smallest island states  -  many of whose survival is threatened by the impact of climate change.
I intend to advance our plans for the Pacific Partnerships for Development later this month when I visit Niue  -  one of the smallest Pacific island states  -  to attend the annual Pacific Islands Forum Leaders' Meeting.
Already, Australia has announced a $150 million program to assist countries in our region to tackle the impacts of climate change.
In addition, through AusAID we will be funding two new positions for youth ambassadors to help us in the fight against climate change.
AusAID has now begun advertising these two positions.
One will be an Environment and Climate Change Officer with the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation in Beijing.
Their job will be to coordinate the implementation of the UN-China Climate Change Partnership Framework.
The other will be a Climate Change Research Officer with the United National Development Programme Regional Centre in Bangkok.
I would encourage any young people interested in climate change to put their hands up for these positions.
I can also announce tonight that AusAID has just agreed to provide funding for four Australian Development Research Awards to undertake climate change related research in our region.
More than three quarters of a million dollars will be allocated for research into renewable energy and better management of forests.
Deforestation is a critical element in climate change, accounting for around 20 per cent of global carbon emissions.
These awards will fund research on how to combat illegal timber trades, and on economic incentives and governance measures to reduce the contribution of tropical deforestation to climate change.
Australia will also continue to promote the concerns of small island states at risk from climate change.
Last month in my remarks at the G8 Outreach Summit in Japan, I sought to put the spotlight on how climate change threatens their very future.
Australia will also continue to press for the interests of these tiny states at the negotiating table for the global climate change deal that is so important to the interests of the world's poorest people.
The Third Sector
In forging partnerships to tackle the challenges of development and climate change, it is critical that governments work more closely with the non-government sector, or third sector.
But we also recognise that the non-government sector has a critical role to play.
The third sector is often more effective at mobilising support, harnessing the energy of volunteers and developing innovative approaches to entrenched problems at home and overseas.
That is why the Government is committed to strengthening its partnerships with the third sector  -  because there's things you can do, that we can't.
But equally, the third sector must have the support of government.
Governments have a responsibility to exercise compassion and care for people who need help.
And governments alone can provide the big investments needed to address entrenched disadvantage, whether in Australia or overseas.
What we need  -  to tackle huge challenges like extreme global poverty, Indigenous disadvantage and homelessness  -  is to bring together the vitality of the third sector with the resources of government.
In our overseas development assistance, AusAID will continue to build on its relationships with develop assistance organisations.
Oaktree is an outstanding example of the vigour, imagination and leadership in Australia's third sector.
Its efforts add to the enormous contribution that is made by Australia's leading development aid organisations - including World Vision, CARE Australia, Oxfam and Caritas.
Oaktree has also made an important contribution to the Make Poverty History alliance, that has done such an important job in raising the profile of the Millennium Development Goals and the pathway to end extreme poverty.
A new era of philanthropy
Another very positive recent development is World Vision's initiative to establish the Business for Millennium Development organisation.
This highlights the scope for the corporate sector to play a far stronger role in Australia's contribution to development assistance.
This is where most of us here tonight come in.
The Australian people are generous about reaching into their own pockets to help out those in need.
In fact, OECD data indicates that Australians are the world's second most generous private donors to non-government aid organisations.
That is remarkable tribute to the community spirit of Australians, who understand that our responsibility to look after one another does not end at our borders.
But we can still do better.
The third sector cannot achieve its potential without the financial support of the corporate sector and wealthy individuals  -  just think of the global impact of Bill Gates and Warren Buffett and their inspirational generosity.
Research for the Australian Centre for Philanthropy and Non-Profit Studies earlier this year indicated that the giving of Australia's most affluent people has not even kept pace with their rising incomes in the past decade.
Other evidence suggests that Australia's affluent are only giving a little more than average Australians, and are giving at a lower level than their counterparts in comparable countries such as the UK, Canada and the US.
Simply put, our corporate sector and more affluent Australians can do a better job in contributing to the third sector.
That is why the Government is currently considering the scope of a reform agenda for the third sector.
Philanthropic organisations play an important role in combating social exclusion and enhancing the economic, social, cultural and environmental wellbeing of society. 
The role and importance of such groups will be examined by both the comprehensive review of Australia's tax system and the Productivity Commission review of the contribution by the not for profit sector.
The Government can also do better  -  in fact our generosity lags well behind most wealthy nations, with Australia ranked 15th out of 22 nations for our aid commitment.
We have some great examples of prominent Australians who have made enormous contributions to the wider Australian community through supporting charitable activities.
But we can do more.
Conclusion
In the meantime, I would like to congratulate all of the supporters of the Oaktree Foundation from the business sector that are here tonight.
We all know that tackling poverty and disadvantage is a long-term challenge.
If aid strategies are to be effective, they also need to be long term.
That's why Oaktree needs a secure long-term foundation  -  both in terms of its future leadership and its financial base.
Oaktree is already making the transition from its ageing founder, Hugh Evans - who turned 25 in March - to a new young leadership team  -  led by David Toovey, Tom O'Connor, Rachel Hart, Erin Sciola and Brooke Fowles, and supported by the Oaktree volunteers who are at your tables tonight.
It is also important for Oaktree to have a secure financial foundation  -  so that it can make long term funding commitments to its key programs.
And that's why we're all here tonight.
Tonight is a very important opportunity to establish a sound footing for Oaktree's future.
So tonight, it gives me very great pleasure to officially launch the Oaktree Future Fund.


The Australian Government today announced its support for a ground breaking new initiative, the Australian Employment Covenant.
The Australian Employment Covenant is a private sector initiative lead by Mr Andrew Forrest, the CEO of Fortescue Metals Group.
The Australian Employment Covenant will rally employers to commit to providing opportunities for 50,000 Indigenous Australians to step out of welfare and step up to permanent full time paying jobs.
Just as the Government has set targets to close the gap between Indigenous and non indigenous Australians, Andrew Forrest is going to ask Australian businesses to be similarly bold.
Under the Australian Employment Covenant, Indigenous Australians who want to work will be encouraged to opt out of the welfare system.
Indigenous Australians who decide to take this first step can then enrol in a short intensive training course that will get them ready for on-the-job mentoring with a participating employer.
Participating employers agree through the Australian Employment Covenant to employ Indigenous people qualified to the training-ready level.
The Government's part of the bargain is to help bridge the training-ready gap. The Government will match this commitment with appropriate pre employment training.
Andrew Forrest and his steering committee  -  including Noel Pearson, Warren Mundine and Rod Eddington - will be encouraging every Australian employer to join them in tackling Indigenous unemployment in a way that only the private sector can  -  with real jobs. 
The Government welcomes this imaginative and ambitious plan which will build on existing initiatives on the part of individual companies.


I welcome the opportunity to return to Consilium tonight - I'm told for the sixth time.
And I look forward to returning in the future.
Because I welcome all substantive contributions to Australia's policy debates.
I don't think that think tanks should find themselves in or out of favour simply because of a change of government.
Policy ideas should be evaluated on their merits, not by their letterhead.
Australia is facing some complex, long term challenges  -  challenges that go to the heart of Australia's prosperity and security in the changing world of the 21st century.
These challenges don't have easy solutions.
If we're going to tackle them successfully, we must have thoughtful, robust debate and exchange of ideas.
As we saw at the 2020 Summit in April, Australians are genuinely interested in new ideas for our future  -  and I thank Greg Lindsay and others here today for their participation.
Australians today are not much interested in the old battlelines of yesterday's ideological wars.
Watching the traditional Right and Left of politics in today's policy debates sometimes reminds you of seeing your kid trying to put on last year's jumper only to realise it no longer fits.
The old Right and Left thinking is often an ideological straitjacket.
The solutions to today's challenges  -  on productivity growth, on welfare reform, on Indigenous policy, on workforce participation and on climate change  -  won't come out of conventional Right or Left paradigms.
The solutions will come from people willing to challenge the false choices of the old paradigms that said that our only options are heavy-handed regulation or unrestrained market forces.
We simply don't have to choose between Hayek and Brezhnev.
The Australian Government sees itself as being at the reforming centre of Australian politics.
We believe unapologetically in the power of market forces as the most efficient and effective means of generating economic prosperity.
Just as we also believe in the public goods that constitute the pre-conditions for a market economy to perform efficiently and effectively.
We also recognise that markets fail.
As a matter of general principle we believe in using market mechanisms and incentives to design innovative approaches to these long-term challenges.
We also believe in a compassionate society that endeavours to pick up those who have fallen down, and help them back on to their feet. Not through the episodic acts of private philanthropic endeavour, but through the actions of society through the State.
Always, however, with an open mind as to the agency through which a compassionate society should act.
That is why we explicitly reject Hayek's view that society has no obligation to others who are unknown to us  -  and Hayek's preparedness to allow fundamental social institutions like the family to fend entirely for themselves against unrestrained market forces.
That is why for example we have a different approach to industrial relations, because we believe families need certain fundamental protections in the workplace.
This broadly is the philosophical framework we bring to government  -  again what we would describe as the reforming centre of Australian politics  -  recognising the power of markets, but recognising equally the limitations of markets.
Consider for example climate change  -  perhaps the greatest market failure in history.
Yet we believe a market mechanism  -  emissions trading - is the best way to find the lowest cost and most efficient route to cutting carbon emissions.
Consider also how micro-finance has proved so effective in developing nations in our region. Even very small amounts of financial capital have been effective in helping millions of people to start a business and start the climb out of poverty and despair.
The most productive intellectual and policy debates today often lie at the intersection between market failures and market mechanisms.
And the challenges of policy innovation and solving complex problems today often arise from the nuts and bolts questions like how we design markets:
     * that harness the innovative potential of market incentives
     * that operate transparently with informed and empowered consumers, and
     * that are supported by the most appropriate provision of public goods.
...while intervening where necessary when markets fail.
The Government's priorities
Tonight I would like to discuss our long-term priorities for government.
Australia like other nations faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is building a stronger, fairer, and more secure Australia to help meet the needs of families and to see Australia through.
The Government also has a plan to tackle the long term challenges we face for the future.
Our first responsibility is the nation's security.
The Government prioritises the defence and security of our nation, its people and their interests through:
     * building a strong defence force;
     * shaping the regional and global environment in ways consistent with Australia's national security, and
     * planning for long-term energy security.
Second, the Government is committing to building a stronger Australia for the future through:
     * responsible economic management to put downward pressure on inflation and therefore on interest rates, and
     * a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long term competitiveness - the heart of which is how we build long term productivity growth through an education revolution, and an ambitious program of business deregulation and tax reform.
Third, the Government is committed to building a fairer Australia that:
     * delivers a balanced, fair and flexible industrial relations system;
     * helps working families, pensioners and carers with cost of living pressures, and
     * endeavours to bring all Australians into the mainstream of Australian economic and social life  -  including action on closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Fourth, the Government is committed to preparing Australia for the great global and domestic challenges of the 21st century, through:
     * a responsible and comprehensive plan of national action on climate change;
     * securing our long-term water supplies, both the Murray-Darling and our urban water systems;
     * reforming the national health care system so that it can cope with the demands of an ageing population, and
     * working internationally to build a more secure and prosperous world for the 21st century by seizing opportunities for creative middle power diplomacy.
And fifth, the Government believes in practising a new way of governing that is more transparent, more accountable, and more open to contributions from the whole community  -  an approach reflected in:
     * the 2020 Summit;
     * the introduction of regular community cabinets throughout Australia;
     * an increased engagement with the ‘Third Sector' of not-for-profits, community organisations, corporate philanthropy and volunteerism, and
     * reforms to Freedom of Information and processes of making government appointments.  
Australia's economic challenges 
The Government has embarked on this comprehensive reform strategy for the nation at a time when we are facing the worst global economic conditions in almost twenty years.
The global economy is now 12 months into a global financial crisis with real consequences for global and Australian economic growth.
The crisis in global credit markets has been complicated by what is now the third great global oil shock, alongside soaring world commodity and food prices.
This means that inflation is on the march globally, while the impact of the credit crisis continues to unfold around the world.
These are challenging conditions.
Australia's economic outlook is further complicated by the domestic economic circumstances inherited by the Government: inflation at a 16 year high, resulting in 10 interest rate rises in a row; and the second highest real interest rates in the industrialised world.
Those constraints were not simply the product of the mining boom in Australia. 
They also reflect the fact that Australia had not seen adequate levels of investment in education and training in recent years.
Nor had we planned sufficiently for our future infrastructure needs, or sustained the progress on microeconomic reform that was achieved in the 1990s.
Our challenge for the future is to turn around the disappointing productivity performance that we've seen in the current decade, with productivity averaging 1 per cent in the current cycle compared to 3 per cent in the mid-1990s.
Achieving higher productivity growth over the longer term will help us to reduce inflation and therefore reduce nominal interest rates, as well allowing us to achieve faster growth.
The Government's economic reform program
These challenging conditions underscore the urgent need for responsible economic management and a substantive new national economic reform program in Australia.
The Government took a disciplined approach to the Budget.
We brought government spending down to its lowest level as a share of GDP since 1989, and built a strong Budget surplus of $22 billion  -  one of the largest in a decade and an effective buffer for the future.
The Government also established a $40 billion long term investment framework for infrastructure, education and health care reform  -  through a $20 billion Building Australia Fund, an $11 billion Education Investment Fund and $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund.
We did not wait for economic conditions to turn against us before developing our major agenda for economic reform.
In fact, long before the global financial crisis and from the Opposition benches, we began laying out an activist approach to microeconomic reform.
In January last year I released a detailed policy paper outlining the urgent case for an education revolution to lift long-term productivity growth.
The education revolution has now begun  -  with measures including early childhood education for 4 year olds, trades training centres and computers in schools, targeted investment in university maths and sciences, and a sweeping review of higher education.
Further, for the first time, Australia now has the capacity to begin planning for our long term infrastructure needs through Infrastructure Australia.
And with the $20 billion Building Australia Fund, and the forthcoming guidelines for Public Private Partnerships, we have the capacity to begin to deliver on those plans.
The Government is also driving forward its plan to build a seamless national economy, tackling 27 areas of Commonwealth/State regulations through the COAG business deregulation process.
The Government is preparing for the impact of an ageing population by focusing on long term measures to increase workforce participation, including substantial measures to make childcare more affordable and accessible.
We are also committed to assisting Australian businesses in preparing for an increasingly competitive global economy, by building a culture of business innovation. Later this month we will receive the Cutler review of innovation policy.
The Government has begun to embark upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has since the early 1990s. It is a substantial program, because serious microeconomic reform has been so long neglected.
This work is long overdue, and critical to the long term competitiveness and productivity of the Australian economy.
A new agenda for a fairer Australia
A strong economy allows us to deliver opportunities and improved living standards for all Australians.
A strong economy also allows us to builder a fairer Australia.
The fair go is a fundamental Australian value  -  and it is a fundamental part of the Government's vision for Australia's future.
The Government believes in building a fairer Australia by abolishing Work Choices, by helping Australian families, pensioners and carers in practical ways make ends meet as well as offering a helping hand to the most disadvantaged.
That is why the Government has also begun tackling entrenched disadvantage:
     * to close the gap in Indigenous life opportunities;
     * to tackle the long term causes of homelessness, and
     * to build a broader framework for social inclusion of all Australians.
While our commitment to fairness reflects an enduring Labor value, the Government is open minded in how we go about improving opportunities for the neediest people in our community.
We are conscious that in several areas, traditional approaches have not worked  -  and we need to innovate if we are to be successful in creating a fairer Australia.
New Approaches to Indigenous Policy
Nowhere is there a clearer need for new partnerships and policy innovation than in Indigenous policy.
The problems that we are fighting today have been generations in the making. 
A decades-long social decline paralysed by violence, neglect, despair and the breakdown of families and communities. 
It is the legacy of successive governments' failures. 
This didn't happen overnight and it can't be fixed overnight.
But closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians must be a national priority.  It is a major piece of unfinished business facing the nation.
We have set targets across the core areas of health, education and employment to focus our efforts:
     * Over the next decade, halving the gap in infant mortality rates. 
     * In the same time frame, halving the gap in reading, writing and numeracy for children.
     * Over the next generation, closing the 17 year gap in life expectancy. 
     * And halving the gap in Indigenous employment outcomes within a decade.
Meeting these targets will not be easy.
Government cannot do this alone.
Nor can it be done without the Government.
It requires a plan, with responsibilities shared between local Indigenous leadership, governments, business and third sector organisations.
We are now working through how best to translate our closing the gap targets into community level development plans.
There is no national one-size fits all solution.
The Government's core role to provide the basic building blocks in communities  -  investments in education, health and housing infrastructure and advice on governance and service development  -  delivered in partnership with others.
These new local partnerships to close the gap must marshal all the resources and expertise in each community.  We must have a three-way partnership at the local level involving:
     * government leadership and investment in provision of infrastructure and basic services;
     * Indigenous Australians taking individual and community responsibility for their actions and their futures, and
     * the active engagement of the business community to help build a lasting foundation for employment and progress.
One of the great missed opportunities of past Indigenous policies has been that we haven't effectively harnessed the potential contribution of the business community.
Even so, recent years have seen some valuable individual initiatives:
     * The four major banks are partnering with the Aboriginal employment strategy in Sydney to place hundreds of Indigenous high school students in traineeships.
     * The National Australia Bank is also partnering with the Traditional Credit Union to provide access to community credit facilities in the Northern Territory.
     * Mining and resource companies are training and recruiting disadvantaged Indigenous job seekers from the Pilbara to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
     * The Australian Indigenous Education Foundation is using corporate and philanthropic investment to fund boarding scholarships at leading private schools for young Indigenous Australians.
     * The AFL, the NRL, cricket and netball leagues are bringing sport to Indigenous communities and create new education pathways.
     * Macquarie and other corporates are financing the Song Room project, to bring music and the arts to children in disadvantaged communities.
These are all outstanding examples where the business community is improving the opportunities for people in Indigenous communities.
This is a clear repudiation of the statist model that says only the Government can solve our major challenges.
Of course governments have unique roles and responsibilities.
But governments do not have the power to rebuild families and communities that have broken down.
What we must aim for, in our Indigenous community partnerships, is to provide all the necessary support and assistance  -  but ultimately, to empower Indigenous Australians to take responsibility for their futures.
The corporate sector has a very important role to play in these partnerships.
I'm pleased to announce tonight that the Government will support Andrew Forrest in his ground-breaking initiative, the Australian Employment Covenant. 
Andrew plans to rally employers all around Australia and have them commit to providing opportunities for 50,000 Indigenous Australians to step out of welfare and step up to permanent full time paying jobs.
Just as the Government has set bold set of targets to close the gap, Andrew is going to ask Australian businesses to be similarly bold.
Under Andrew's plan, all Indigenous Australians who want to work will be encouraged to opt out of the welfare system.
Those who decide to take this first step can then enrol in a short intensive training course that will get them ready for on-the-job training with a participating employer.
Participating employers agree through the Australian Employment Covenant to employ a certain number of Indigenous people qualified to the training-ready level.
The Government's part of the bargain is to help bridge the training-ready gap.
The Government will match this commitment with appropriate pre employment training.
Andrew Forrest and his steering committee  -  including Noel Pearson, Warren Mundine and Rod Eddington - will be encouraging every Australian employer to join them in tackling Indigenous unemployment in a way that only the private sector can  -  with real jobs. 
I welcome this imaginative and ambitious plan and I look forward to supporting this initiative.
Conclusion
From the day we came to government, we had to make a choice between two paths for Australia's future.
Would we take the easy path of business as usual  -  hoping that the good times of recent years would just roll on? Would we just hope, as yesterday's neglected challenges became today crises, that something else would just turn up and get us off the hook?
Or would we take the harder path and take on the big challenges  -  putting the long term interests of Australia ahead of short-term politics?
We are determined to take the latter path.
We know that will often make things tougher for the Government.
But it's why we're here.
Not power for its own sake, but to prepare Australia for the challenges of a new century  -  a century in which the Anglosphere that dominated the past two hundred years is unlikely to remain in ascendance.
An activist Government like ours is good news for a think tank like the CIS. I think we'll be doing a good deal to keep you in business.
I very much look forward to the CIS's continued contributions to the policy debates that lie ahead.


PM: Today we want to talk about one of the big challenges which Australia faces for the future.
We need a clear cut plan for dealing with those challenges. And the challenge that I'm talking about is how do we close the gap between Indigenous Australia and non-Indigenous Australia.
Following the national apology, I said the Government would be opening up a plan, a long term plan, to close the gap in infant mortality, in education, in health. But also, critically, employment.
And employment is what we're here to talk about today. How do we transition Indigenous Australians from welfare into work - into real jobs.
And the leaders that I have with me today I know are passionate about this enterprise.
Andrew Forrest has put forward a bold proposal on behalf of corporate Australia. And it's this: that corporate Australia in the years ahead with team together to create some 50,000 jobs for Indigenous Australians.
If you look across the numbers, we have a large number of Indigenous Australians who are either not in work, or have never worked. And we believe that the best way forward for those Indigenous Australians is to make them training ready, job ready, and to give them a job for the future.
And that's where corporate Australia comes in. We want a strong and close partnership between corporate Australia, between the Government of Australia, and the Indigenous leadership of Australia. That way, we have a real prospect of making this work.
Government only programmes, I fear, are doomed to failure. That's why we need a strong partnership between Indigenous leadership, our major companies, as well as the Government itself supporting this plan on the way through.
What's the Government's role in this? Well, firstly I'd like to say today that we endorse and support Andrew Forrest's bold initiative, this Australian Employment Covenant. This is an important programme, as it involves a commitment from corporate Australia to build 50,000 real jobs for Indigenous Australia.
The Government's role is to support that by partnering with those corporates who want to sign on to this, by providing enough training programs to make those Indigenous Australians training ready.
And so the process would be like this. Government, participating with training programmes to make Indigenous Australians training ready. Secondly, participating companies then taking on those young Indigenous Australians into work  -  into paid work  -  where they would then be mentored.  And, over time, absorbed into the long term workforce of corporate Australia.
And of course, the key thing there is to make sure that those young Indigenous Australians enter the payroll from the beginning. And that's an important commitment from the corporates who participate in this programme.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I congratulate Andrew Forrest for his initiative, and I would also congratulate the Indigenous leadership of Australia for their preparedness to support this initiative. It will be an initiative which works on the basis on everyone being prepared to sign on, to become part of it. Companies willing to sign on, as well as individual Indigenous communities and leadership groups signing on as well.
If we do that together, we've got a way ahead for dealing with this long term challenge for Australia to build a fairer and more inclusive country.
Andrew, why don't you come here and tell us your part of the story.
FORREST:  Thank you, Prime Minister.
Ladies and Gentleman, as I sit with every employer in Australia, the only thing which stands between the success of what the Prime Minister has outlined is us, it's the employers of Australia.
Two things which have occurred which are completely breakthrough. One is that the Government, through the massive machinery of Government but in a very innovative and flexible and energetic way, are prepared to deliver the training which Aboriginal people need.
This training has to be in short courses. The devil of training is boredom. A three to four month short course, which is crammed with the industry details specific to that Aboriginal's future job, is what has always been required and what the Government is promising to deliver.
From Australia's perspective, every employer in Australia can look at this. If you employ one person already, please make the second one an Aboriginal person.
Bottom line here is that if you mentor an Aboriginal person into the workplace, in all my experience in the 15 years which I've been doing this, which I've been trialling this, that Aboriginal person makes an excellent contribution to your firm.
So my direct appeal is for every employer in Australia, when the Government delivers and when the Aboriginal leaders and the Aboriginals themselves deliver work mentor ready Aboriginal people to you to employ, we ask you to step out to your major role, your major part, in breaking, at last, the Aboriginal social and monetary poverty cycle, and employ those Aboriginals.
There are parts (inaudible) will. To the major players which I've spoken to in the corporate sector and the private sector, in the public sector, the will is there. I now appeal to the goodwill, to the great heart, of all Australians to step up and employ Aboriginal people when they are work mentor ready.
The Government has promised to deliver these training programs, we as the corporate sector, the agricultural sector, the general employment sector, I feel now, at this point in time, have the heart, have the will, and certainly have the ability, to break the Aboriginal social and poverty cycle with real jobs on full time pay, permanent places in our employment society.
So I thank you and I very much welcome to responses from my Aboriginal brothers here.
PEARSON: Good morning, and thank you very much Prime Minister and Andrew for the opportunity to express my great excitement about this initiative.
I've been talking up hill and down dale for many years about the scourge of welfare, and the desperate need for our people to engage in the opportunities of Australia's incredible economy.
And we've made a lot of progress on that. There's a lot of preparedness on the part of our community to get our young people off welfare and participating and taking their share in the country.
The one piece of this jigsaw that I haven't been able to do is provide the work opportunity answer. Whether you're in Aurukun or you're in Hopedale, you're out in the sticks, we can do the welfare reform to push our people into real work. But the bit that I could not ever muscle together was the work opportunity part of the jigsaw.
And so it was with a complete hit to the solar plexus when Andrew proposed not a few thousand real jobs in a timeframe, but 50,000 guaranteed real jobs.
I've hung around corporate Australia for a number of years. I've heard a lot of goodwill from people. But I've never been actually sure about whether those doors are open-able from the outside and whether when you tested the door, Aboriginal people could enter.  And Andrew assures me, and I'm sure he is correct about this, that these doors are there for the opening. And I think that Andrew is taking the leadership to open the door for Aboriginal Australia to enter the staircase of opportunity for our people is a huge fillip.
And I want to say, I want to endorse the Prime Minster's remarks that his goal, which is absolutely the correct goal, of closing the gap. That is absolutely the correct policy goal. And, you get the employment part of the jigsaw together, and you've cut a large part of the challenge out in closing the gap.
You get 50,000 Aboriginal mothers and fathers in the workplace, you've made the most decisive gain in terms of closing the gap.
So I just want to say that I'm really very, very pleased at this announcement of the Australian Employment Covenant.
PM: Thanks very much Noel. Warren, do you want to add?
MUNDINE: What I've got to say is very simple. If we're going to break through Indigenous poverty, if we're going to break down the dependence on welfare, then we're going to need jobs, we're going to need jobs across the Australian economy, because otherwise we're just not going to move forward.
So when I ran into Andrew in Perth earlier this year and he talked about his idea, he talked about how he wanted to do this, it was music to my ears.
This, as Noel said, this was the missing piece in the jigsaw. You can educate people as much as you like, but if they've got no jobs to go into, as a young Aboriginal ten year old kid told me, ‘why do we need to be educated if there is nothing for us and there is no future?'
This is going to fill that gap. It's an ambitious scheme, 50,000 jobs is a big push. Andrew wants to do this in two years. I think he's right; you've got to put the challenge out there, you've got to take it on. Otherwise, we're not going to break through this poverty. We're not going to break through this welfare dependency. And we're not going to make our community sustainable, safe, and build a future for our kids.
I'm very pleased with the Prime Minister for coming on board. Having a conversation yesterday with him, and then today, and hearing his commitment to this program, is actually going to drive it forward and make it achievable. I've got to congratulate the Prime Minister, I've got to congratulate Andrew, and I've got to congratulate Noel and everyone who is coming on board with this. And I've like to thank you for that.
EDDINGTON: Thanks Prime Minister.
I mean, we know that there are a number of Australian companies today that have excellent Indigenous employees in their ranks. We also know that there are many young Indigenous members of our community who are fit and able to work who aren't in work. And, the many companies who genuinely wish to create opportunities for Indigenous Australians, so that we can close the gap that Noel and Warren have spoken so powerfully about.
It's an opportunity for those companies to be part of a practical, workable scheme to bring the young men and women of the Indigenous community into the workforce, and to ensure that future generations aren't blighted in the way in which past Indigenous Australians have been blighted.
It's a real opportunity, it's a practical opportunity, and with the leadership that the Prime Minister, that Andrew, Noel and Warren have shown, we have a chance. It's up to us as the employers of Australia to grasp it.
PM: Thank you.
So, just to wrap up, and take your questions.
This is a bold initiative from corporate Australia. I congratulate Andrew Forrest for putting it out there. We in Government are prepared to support his initiative. This'll be tough, it'll be hard.
And we also thank the leaders of Indigenous Australia for being prepared to be part of this great national effort to move as many Indigenous Australians as possible from welfare into real jobs. It's a real pathway for the future.
To conclude, where Sir Rod left off, many Australian companies are already doing good things out there. Fortescue is one of them, and I've seen other actions by other mining companies and others in the corporate sector including the accounting firms and the banks.
What we're talking about here is taking that level of commitment to a new, higher level. And that's why I would support the call by Andrew Forrest to corporate Australia to get in behind this programme.
We set ourselves a period of the next 100 days to turn this ambition into a detailed plan. (Inaudible).
But we look forward to then being in a position towards the end of the year to unveiling the totality of this plan for the year ahead.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well this is a very tough ambition which Andrew has set for Australian companies. We'll do our bit as Government, which is, as companies sign on to this Australian Employment Covenant, then what we would be prepared to do is to work with those companies to provide the necessary number of training places, tailored to the needs of those firms and those industries. That's what's important here.
What I do know is that unless you set targets, and unless you set goals, and we have one as a Government, it's called closing the gap, you turn around in five, ten, 15 years, and you've made no progress. It's far better to set some ambitious goals, even if from time to time you fall short. I commend Andrew for his ambition.
FORREST: If I could perhaps add to that.
It is an extremely tough ask. But in all the Australian employers that I've met, are they ready for that challenge, do they have the heart for that challenge, do they have the ability to meet this challenge? The answer is absolutely yes. This is simply a forum for them to express that great heart which I believe is in every Australian employer.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
FORREST: I won't give you absolute specifics. But please don't be surprised that I've canvassed corporate Australia, that I've canvassed particularly the leaders, and in many cases the owners of these companies. And what I've found myself pushing against is an open door.
From the highest in the land, to the employers of two or three people only, the questions to me have been ‘how can I help?'. And I'm gratified by that and I believe this is now an idea of Australian employers, not of mine, but of Australian employers, whose time has.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, what sort of flow on effects do you expect to see if this is successful? What are the benefits long term?
PM: Well, Noel Pearson hit the nail right on the head before when Noel said that this is very much the missing piece to the jigsaw. Government working on infrastructure challenges for Indigenous Australia, like in health, like in housing, like in education, making sure we've got proper governance in Indigenous communities.
But unless we are providing jobs, and Government can't provide jobs, that's where corporate Australia steps in, then we're falling short.
This is very much the missing piece to the jigsaw, where corporate Australia, if it steps up to the plate, can make a huge difference.
So my ambition, together with Andrew, is to do what we can to turn this vision into a reality, while recognising that it's a very ambitious goal which he has set for Australian companies.
JOURNALIST: How much money are you willing to (inaudible)
PM: Well, we've said that if corporates step forward with their plan, then we'll get behind those corporates with the necessary number of training places in the necessary locations with the necessary flexibility to make sure it actually works.
You know, we've got to make sure that we've got a system which is flexible enough to reach across the different challenges which companies face, and the different challenges which individuals in Indigenous communities face. This will be a big challenge, of course, for us all. But I commend again Andrew's leadership in putting forward this bold plan forward.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) blank cheque?
PM: What we've said is that if companies come forward, we'll support those companies.
This is very much a partnership. It's a partnership between Indigenous Australia, a partnership with corporate Australia, and a partnership also with the Government of Australia. With corporate Australia in the lead, and that, I believe is absolutely right when you're talking about real jobs and sustainable jobs for the future.
I think we'd better go. Thanks everyone.  


Following my attendance at the Beijing Olympic Games, I will visit the Republic of Korea and Singapore from 10 -12 August.
I will seek to strengthen further the excellent bilateral relations we enjoy with both countries and to build on our cooperation in regional bodies and groupings.
In discussions with both governments, I will cover matters of mutual interest including the response to the breakdown in the World Trade Organisation Doha round of negotiations, global financial uncertainty, regional architecture and climate change.
I will visit the Republic of Korea on 10 and 11 August and will meet President Lee Myung-bak, Prime Minister Han Seung-soo and senior Korean and Australian business representatives.
Our bilateral relations are strong and we enjoy one of the most complementary trade relationships in the world.
On 12 August, I will visit Singapore and meet Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong, Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew and senior business representatives.
Singapore is a valued bilateral and regional partner.


Thank you very much Vice Chancellor Ian Chubb. To the Chancellor elect of the Australian National University Kim Beazley, good to have you here again Kim at my old university. To Mrs Mary Bull it's an honour to have you with us and to members of your family because Hedley for those of us who never knew him personally is just an outstanding name in the disciplines of international relations and strategic studies. 
To the various other representatives of the university, to Bob McMullen my parliamentary colleague and Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance and Michael L'Estrange the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Members of the Defence Force, Members of the Diplomatic core and dare I say it most importantly you the students and scholars of the future because in your hands more than you probably estimate lies the future. How we shape this discussion this debate about international relations, about strategic studies, very much impacts the reality. And those engaged in the academic pursuit of these disciplines never ever underestimate your impact on what the practitioners then take from that and how you shape the reality out there in Australia's engagement with the world.
I have a prepared speech from which I will now depart.
Can I say something about Hedley Bull who I never met. But if there was an Olympic Games in international relations and in strategic studies Hedley Bull would be without doubt a gold medallist, an absolute gold medallist.
This is an extraordinary contribution from the extraordinary scholar. If you travel the world Hedley Bull's name is known across these core disciplines and we should honour him proudly as one of our own, as an Australian born and bred, as a product in large part of this university. But most importantly as Australia's gift to the scholarship of the world in these critical disciplines.
A pre-eminent scholar, a pre-eminent Australian and a pre-eminent contributor to the important discipline of international relations.
If I could address my remarks in just two or three ways.
The first is as I've looked at the description of how you propose to do things here Vice Chancellor, I think it's a very good thing. Namely this is by its very definition an interdisciplinary centre, you are bringing together the disciplines.
And let me step back a bit in terms of why I think that is a good thing. If you look at the emergence of the academic discipline of international relations which goes back to the end of the First World War, E. H. Carr and the rest. And the legitimate emergence of international relations theory and strategic studies as separate academic pursuits. This was a good thing because it brought focus and attention and analysis and data to what is a critical element of scholarship and policy.
In the period since the last War and most particularly in the last decade or two, something different has been emerging. Now what the international relations scholars would describe as the collapse of the great divide namely between that which is exclusively international relations and that which is, let's call it, intrinsically national matters.
The collapse of the divide between the foreign and the domestic, the internal, the external, the international and the national. That's called globalisation and it is happening a pace and complexity which affects not just those of us who are practitioners in public policy but its happening at a pace and level of complexity which also affects how the academy organises itself.
Which brings me back to I think the great achievement which is reflected in this Hedley Bull Centre. And that is your bringing together the great disciplines of international relations, of strategic studies, of defence studies, of diplomatic studies in history. Also of political science and also of social change. Because guess what the reality which we practitioners, I speak here as someone who use to work in the Department of Foreign Affairs when I used to have a real job back then, constantly deal with which is this highly interrelated reality.
There's not just this box of things over there called strategic studies, a box of things over here called diplomacy, a box of things over here called international economics and a box of things over here called domestic politics and social change. We are dealing with a constant interrelated nature of the above.
And where I think this centre has a great potential contribution to make to the scholarship of the world and certainly a contribution to public policy making in Australia is doing it here. Because you have the strategic studies, strategic and defence studies centre, the department of international relations, the department of political and social change and the Asia Pacific school of diplomacy all contributing to the combined efforts of this centre.
That is a very good thing because it actually reflects the reality which those of us who are practitioners, political and diplomatic level, have to deal with.
The second point I'd make flows directly from the first and that is that the critical role which specialists in these fields have to play in providing advice to Government.
If there is an inherent spark of genius in the idea of the Australian National University, and the imaginings of the likes of Chifley and Curtin way back when which gave birth to this university not long after the Second World War. it was in locating an Australian National University here is Canberra which would provide a ready platform for advice and engagement with those of us who are public policy practitioners.
Whether its economics, whether it's in social policy but most critically given the concentration of our international diplomatic efforts in the area of foreign policy and security policy. Therefore it is a doubly good thing that the Hedley Bull centre is here. It is a doubly good thing that it is here at the heart of the Australian National University because from our point of view the challenge for the future in having a fully engaged academic faculty with not just tens but I hope hundreds of scholars engaged right across the breadth of our international engagements is of fundamental importance. And it is a good thing that you now have a place, an integrated place to call home.
The third thing I would say is this, right now we are engaged in great challenges in terms of how we shape and reshape the international order. The Australian Government has launched a debate about the future shape of the Asia Pacific region.
We put forward an idea for an Asia Pacific Community by 2020 and that is a debate which will unfold and ebb and flow over the years ahead. But I am simply of the view that unless we begin to initiate debate about the future shape of our region, the future institutional shape of our region, then the alternative is simply drift into another future. I'd much rather that we in this country were actively engaged in debate about what the future shape of our region should look like and that very much lies at the heart of our proposal for an Asia Pacific Community.
Another proposal we have out forward out there where we would again invite the contributions of this institution is our proposal embodied in the combined establishment of an international commission on non proliferation and disarmament.
This area of work of course was something which lay near and dear to Hedley's heart if I look at the work he undertook in the British Foreign Office in the mid-sixties when he headed the office, I recall, of Arms Control and Disarmament in the FCO 65, 67 or thereabouts. I apologise Mrs Bull if I have got those dates slightly wrong but thereabouts.
And that 40 years later remains completely unfinished business. This is a complex and difficult area of work in strategic studies, arms control and disarmament and international relations.
The reason we have put forward the idea of an international commission is because we need to provide a public vehicle for engendering a genuine international debate among politicians and with specialists on how we actually breathe life back into the non proliferation and disarmament agenda.
If we look around the world today over the last decade this is very much a debate which has drifted into the sand. Yet we look around the world at the same time we continue to see the evidence of nuclear weapons proliferation. This is a challenge for us all.
It is a complex challenge, it is difficult, we fully are ceased of that, but that should not be an excuse for inertia. It should instead be an encouragement to action.
So this international commission which will be co-charred by the effervescent Gareth Evans, always like phosphorus on water our Gareth, will be up and out there engendering new friends and occasional frictions in the international community as we seek to push this agenda forward.
But it is a necessary agenda and I say about this what I just said about the debate on the Asia Pacific Community.
It is a far better thing for Australia and the world that we are intelligently debating these propositions about how to shape the world's future and our regions future and its institutional dimensions then simply sitting back and waiting for events to unfold.
That is not in my nature, it is not in the nature of this Government and is certainly not evidenced in our decision to establish an international commission which will be co-chaired by Gareth Evans. And also importantly supported in my most recent discussions in Tokyo with the Government of Japan.
Therefore to conclude my remarks where I began which is the future role of this Centre.
I can think of no better place from which the ideas that will shape our country's future in our engagement with the world could be developed from than this great Hedley Bull Centre.
You have remarkable opportunities here, the world literally lies at your feet. There is a great tradition of scholarship in this institution and you now have great facilities to support it.
Some years ago I was an undergraduate here, studying just over the road there at the faculty of Asian studies. And occasionally would lurch into the doors of the Coombs Building to speak with eminent scholars and that's how I would run into the likes of Des Ball and I'd run into the likes of Ross Babbage and others. And in fact spent some time studying part time here in the 1980's, in the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre before lurching off into Queensland and steadily working my way into the political sphere.
But this institution from my personal experience of it and these institutions which in part form the Hedley Bull Centre are great institutions. Those of you who are part of them should be proud of them. They have done great things in the past. I am confident that they will do great things in the future.
And with those remarks it gives me enormous pleasure to declare open this Hedley Bull Centre.


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister 8,000 Falun Gong have apparently been detained in the lead up to the Olympics, what will you say to the Chinese leadership on human rights?
PM: As I've said before with our friends in Beijing, we will always raise our human rights concerns with them. I've done that in the past, I've done it privately, I've done it publicly and I'll be doing that again.
JOURNALIST: What about the suggestions that the Russians are cheating in the lead up to the games. Are you worried that Australian athletes are going to be competing against cheats?
PM: The International Olympic Committee has a responsibility to ensure that we have a fair games and that means a proper and rigorous approach to testing so that everyone has a fair chance, everyone has a fair go and that our athletes are on the same level playing field literally as everyone else.
So the IOC's got a big responsibility on its hands to make sure that these games are as drug free as possible.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee grocery prices will come down under your watch?
PM: We have a plan of action to increase competition within the grocery sector. After 12 years in office the Liberal party offers a plan of inaction and doing nothing. That's the difference.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister as a long term observer of Chinese affairs, what credence do you give to the claims that 8,000 Falun Gong have been detained in the lead up to the Olympics and what's your response to it?
PM: Well on the detail of that I have not received reports yet from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs, not from our embassy in Beijing. Obviously we've raised concerns to the Chinese in the past about human rights in general and about Falun Gong in particular. I'll continue to do so.
That's part of a mature, responsible relationship with the Chinese Government. I've done it in the past and I'll continue to do it in the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you promise to do it with the Chinese leadership when you meet them in Beijing?
PM: I've already said in an interview the other day that on human rights concerns in general, that it's been a feature of my discussions with the Chinese leadership in the past and will be in the future, including in this visit.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm sure the Treasurer will have something further to say about our overall framework for tax reform when he speaks to the media later today.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that you're looking at replacing mining royalties with a rental resource tax?
PM: Can I say that we've said early this year in response to the 2020 Summit that we would be having the biggest most comprehensive review of the taxation system at least in the last quarter century and probably longer. And guess what we're delivering on that.
You know why, the business community of Australia are sick and tired of one of the most complex tax systems in the world. That's why we've decided to do this comprehensively and the Treasurer will have further to say about the spectrum of that review later today.


STEFANOVIC: Well Kevin Rudd is preparing to board a plane this morning bound for the Beijing Olympic Games. Our mandarin speaking PM has vowed to raise human rights issues during his visit to the Olympic city and he joins us now from Darwin. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Morning Karl, how are you?
STEFANOVIC: I am very well thank you. Just on that issue, are you really going to raise those human rights issues and perhaps more importantly, do you think Beijing will listen?
PM: Well Karl I've always in my previous meetings with Chinese leaders done that and I don't intend to change on this occasion, I'll continue to do so in the future.
On the second part of your question which is, will that have any effect in terms of overall Chinese human rights policy, I think its useful noting that when the international community, including myself, reacted to some of the decisions taken about a week ago on the censorship of internet sites, that some changes were made to that. Not a perfect response by any means.
But I believe the responsibility of the international community is still to speak with a strong united voice on these questions, while recognising that over time some progress has been made in China. Remember it was not all that long ago they were in the middle of the Cultural Revolution where people were being put up against a wall and basically knocked off.
STEFANOVIC: You don't expect any serious resolution to ongoing commitments in Tibet?
PM: Well, when I was last in Beijing you might recall Karl I gave a speech at Peking University where I raised the Tibet question. Since that time the Chinese have recommenced a form of dialogue with the representatives of the Dalai Lama. I don't wish to pretend that any major breakthroughs have been achieved through that at all. But I think it's still important for us all to encourage a peaceful dialogue to produce a better outcome for the people of Tibet and that's what I'll continue to do.
But let's not overstate it. You're not going to turn the events of centuries around in the matter of a few days but what you can do is continue to apply the appropriate level of scrutiny to these things and I intend to do that while still building on what I think is a very important relationship for China. This also is Australia's largest trading partner.
STEFANOVIC: Okay, now closer to home, your grocery website is copping an absolute pasting as you would know only too well. The prices seem to be out of date, that seems to be a major criticism and just a general guide. It's really not going to do much for working families is it?
PM: Well I think working Australians and pensioners and carers are under real financial pressure at the moment because of rents, because of petrol, because of grocery prices, that's the fact.
What we undertook prior to the election is to do what we could to increase competition power for consumers. And what we've done through this competition watchdog inquiry is come forward with some practical but modest measures to assist that.
One of them is what's called unit pricing and that is that the possible labelling of goods in supermarkets so that you know exactly what quantity your getting for what price, that's one thing.
Another is possible action in relation to what's called creeping acquisition to push competitors out. And the third modest measure is to ensure that consumers over time, through the competition watchdog, have access to a database which says - look over time, a basket of goods at this type of supermarket is going to be better value for you then a basket of goods at that supermarket. And that's the ACCC's first fist at this yesterday and as they have said and as Chris Bowen the Minister has said, all responses to it will be taken into account and I'm sure refinements will be made over time.
STEFANOVIC: Because those refinements need to happen at the moment it's ineffective, completely ineffective for families when you consider that it doesn't take into account daily specials. There's no way that Australians are going to be able to save money looking at this website is there realistically?
PM: One thing though Karl I'd just say is this, that Choice Magazine for example or Choice the consumer group, what they have said, as I understand it, is that the advantage that can be delivered through this sort of website is to indicate what a basket of goods at a particular supermarket in your region may cost at that supermarket relative to another supermarket.
And as I understand it from the first sampling of this yesterday, nationwide you had something like 56 Coles supermarkets across the country coming out better than their competitors on an overall basket. Aldi coming out some 20 percent better as I understand it on a basket of staple goods.
Now that doesn't go down to as you quite rightly said product specific information which can be had today and accessed tomorrow. But the intention from the competition watchdog is to provide consumers with that choice or information over time about one supermarket chain verses another or one supermarket in their area versus another against a basket of goods.
But we will continue to refine this over time
STEFANOVIC: It probably needs a fair bit of refining I would suggest.
PM: I'm sure it does Karl but remember this, if I could just say this, when it comes to providing consumers with any power whatsoever, our predecessors had 12 years to act and did nothing. This is a modest step in the positive direction, there's more to be done.
STEFANOVIC: All right. It was vintage Paul Keating last night as I am sure you are aware, I'm sure you were watching. He said of Peter Costello “he's a slow acting dope”. He accused you of running at the behest of little press secretaries and you don't have a clear message. What would you say to Paul Keating?
PM: Oh Paul's sometimes not an entirely happy chappy and I think you see a bit of evidence of that last night. So look you know you just cop it on the chin and sort of keep wondering through. We take all criticism. We reflect on it.
STEFANOVIC: Alright. Do you agree with him though on his thoughts on Peter Costello?
PM: Look I'm not into the name calling part of politics. I don't actually think that helps at all. What I know is this, after 12 years of inaction on the key challenges facing Australia's future including how do you deal with the problem of 16 year high inflation, interest rate rises  -  10 rises in a row under our predecessors producing the second highest interest rates in the western world - dealing with education long term, dealing with health long term, dealing with climate change long term, we have a clear cut strategy for action and that's what we're doing.
STEFANOVIC: I know that you're not going to name call but what do you think of Peter Costello?
PM: Oh look for the Liberal party, Karl, it's a matter for those guys to turn their current soap opera into something else. But beyond that...
STEFANOVIC: Peter Costello
PM: Beyond that it's not a question of personalities, it's a question of policies. Peter Costello, Brendan Nelson and Turnbull all stand for WorkChoices, they stand for climate change denial and they stand for having left Australia with the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
STEFANOVIC: Come on Prime Minister, I know that you would have personal thoughts on Peter Costello. You ran the gauntlet, you took on Kim Beazley a year out from the last election, you had blood on your hands, you became PM, you think he's soft right?
PM: Well what I would just say Karl on all that is that in the business of politics which is a hard business, I think you know that you've been observing this business for a long time.
Nothing is ever handed to you on a platter, nothing is ever handed to you on a platter. You've got to go out there and work hard for it and be absolutely convinced on your plan for the country's future.
We have that plan, that's what we are embarking on with a clear course of action despite the perfect storm of global economic circumstances which are affecting Australia at the moment with the global financial crisis as well as the global oil shock. We have a clear cut plan of action through that.
I say to the Liberals again, its not a question of personalities it's a question of having a set of policies for the future. Rather than being anchored in climate change denial, staying with WorkChoices and bringing back AWA's, which is their current policy, and no policy to deal with the high interest rates they left us only 6 months ago.
STEFANOVIC: All right, your not going to talk about Peter Costello, what about Paris Hilton...
PM: I did say nothing is ever handed to you on a platter, nothing is ever handed to you on a platter
STEFANOVIC: All right I'll take it because at least we might get some press out of that. Now Paris Hilton, she's running for President in the US as you know only too well...
PM: Is that my job for you Karl is it?
STEFANOVIC: Well I don't mind every now and then, you could just shake it down a little bit, mix it up a bit for people at home. Tell them what you really think deep inside Prime Minister. It think it will stand you in good stead.
PM: I said I didn't think Paul was an entirely happy chappy do there you go.
STEFANOVIC: Now I just want to get your thoughts on Paris Hilton, I seriously do because she is running for President of the United States. I wonder how this will affect the ANZUS alliance or trans-pacific relations in general?
PM: I reckon if Paris put up her hand. Think about this Paris Hilton suddenly with a big engagement on international relations. I think suddenly you would have a surge of enrolments in our universities as students suddenly regarded this as sort of the place to be.
I'm not sure Paris is going to do hugely well though.
STEFANOVIC: All right and her campaign slogan?
PM: Campaign slogan. I don't think there is any slogan which is going to get Paris across the line. I hate to be a pessimist about this but I'd go back to the think tanks.
STEFANOVIC: All right we'll leave Paris, we'll leave Peter Costello. Your heading over to Beijing would you like to wish our athletes all the best?
PM: Absolutely Karl. The reason for going to Beijing is to cheer on the Australian team. Its going to be really tough competition. Really tough, but all Australian's, all Australian's, are out there basically giving of their best in supporting this team doing their best for Australia.
So lets urge them on but understand how much pressure these kids are under as well. It a lot of pressure but I'm proud of the fact that they are wearing the Australian uniform.
STEFANOVIC: All right, well we are too. Thanks for your time today Prime Minister and Ni hao
PM: Thanks very much Karl


The Prime Minister and the Minister for Sport attended a flag raising ceremony at the Olympic Village in Beijing today, officially marking the arrival of the Australian Olympic team.
A total of 433 athletes will represent Australia at the 29th Olympiad, supported by more than 300 Australian coaches, officials and staff.
Speaking with athletes at the ceremony, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd wished the team well for the start of competition on Saturday.
“All Australians are immensely proud of you. Know that their thoughts and best wishes go with as you compete against the world's finest athletes over the coming weeks,” Mr Rudd said.
The Minister for Sport, Kate Ellis said the raising of the Australian flag was a proud and inspirational moment in the lead up to the opening ceremony tomorrow and the start of competition.
“The Australian Olympic team is here in force and ready to give it their all,” Ms Ellis said.
“With the raising of the Australian flag, our athletes have symbolically turned a little piece of Beijing into Australia and signalled our arrival at the Games to the rest of the world.”
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Sport will attend an Australian team reception this evening, which will include the naming of the Australian flag bearer to lead the team into the Olympic stadium for the opening ceremony.
Past Australian Olympic flag bearers include Colin Beashel (Sailing  -  Athens 2004), Andrew Gaze (Basketball  -  Sydney 2000), and Andrew Hoy (Equestrian  -  Atlanta 1996).


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today congratulated Australian businesses involved in preparations for the Olympic Games and pledged continuing Australian Government support to further strengthen trade and economic links with China.
The Prime Minister made the comments as he officially opened Business Club of Australia (BCA) Beijing 2008  -  the government's official business program for the Olympics.
More than 40 Australian companies secured contracts to assist with the Beijing games, including PTW Architects which designed the Beijing National Aquatics Centre - (the ‘Watercube') - and Athletes Village.
Other projects Australian companies have worked on included the design of the National Aquatics Centre; the International Tennis Centre and Athletes Village; transport planning; engineering works; financial and telecommunications services and security.
At the BCA Beijing 2008 event the Prime Minister witnessed the signing ceremonies for two memorandums of understanding (MOUs) between Australian and Chinese companies.
One agreement involves AIMS Financial Group and a commercial arm of Beijing University that will establish a joint venture funds management company to invest in biotechnology.
The other MOU between National Australia Bank (NAB) and the Agricultural Development Bank of China (ADBC) is the first between an Australian bank and a Chinese financial institution in the area of agri-finance.
The Rudd Government is committed to further strengthening Australia's economic relationship with China - already our largest trading partner with two-way trade in 2007 valued at $58 billion and Australian exports valued at $27.7 billion


PM: It's good to be back in China and it's good to be back here in Beijing.
I've just had a good discussion over three quarters of an hour or so with Premier Wen Jiabao, which covered the breadth of our bilateral relationship.
In the days ahead I will also be meeting with President Hu Jintao and various other representatives of the Chinese Government.
It is good to be here in Beijing, primarily, to support the 434 Australian athletes participating in these the Games of the 29th Olympiad.
Our job here is to support the Australian team. They are Australia's ambassadors to the world at this important event. My job is to get behind them, and that's what I intend to do.
In my discussions with the Chinese leadership today and Premier Wen Jiabao, I thanked him for the physical preparations which have been made for these Games.
Yesterday I visited the Olympic village and spoke at length to a number of the athletes and coaches and physios. All were very complementary of the accommodation in the Olympic village and the physical arrangements which have been made for them in the village.
And so, on behalf of them I thank the Chinese organising authorities, as I did to Premier Wen Jiabao this morning.
Now, discussions today on the Australia China relationship, we emphasised the importance of this relationship to our two countries. This is a very strong, long standing, political relationship. A very important economic relationship. An important relationship in what China and Australia can also do together in the world.
We spent a lot of time talking about the current state of world trade negotiations and what happened most recently in Geneva with the suspension of the negotiations under the Doha round. Both Australia and China are committed to working closely together in the months ahead during August and September to see if our two Trade Ministers can work on a possible breakthrough on how we deal with the outstanding unresolved questions of special support measures for agriculture in developing countries.
So much progress was achieved in Geneva on bringing a successful conclusion to the Doha round. It was the view of both the governments of China and Australia that we need to exert every effort to try and bring these negotiations to a successful conclusion.
The Chinese Trade Minister Chen together with Australian Trade Minister Simon Crean, who is here with me in Beijing at present, will be meeting, and will be doing whatever we can at the diplomatic level to breathe life back into these negotiations. And, on the specific question of unresolved differences on the question of support mechanisms for agriculture in developing countries to work through how that gap can be breached in the negotiating postures of the various states.
Secondly, we also spoke about progress which has been achieved so far in the bilateral free trade negotiations between Australia and China. These negotiations have gone on for a long, long time. We need to achieve more progress. Since my visit here in March-April, we have made some progress.
Some progress in the most recent round of the negotiations, and a further round will be held in September.
Preparations are also being made for a business and services roundtable. And both the Premier and myself once again restated our public support for providing the political momentum necessary to try and get these negotiations through to a successful conclusion.
We need a good outcome on this bilateral FTA between China and Australia. China is Australia's largest trading partner. We therefore need to work with China on how we break down any remaining barriers of significance in our two way trade and investment relationship.
On the question of bilateral investment relations, we spoke at length about the importance of the energy and resources sector in the bilateral economic relationship. Important for Australia, important for China.
I emphasised to Premier Wen Jiabao that Australia, on the question of foreign investment in the Australian resources and energy sector, applies a non-discriminatory policy. The same approach we adopt with our friends in China we've adopted historically with our friends in Japan, the United States and elsewhere.
Australia has an open regime when it comes to foreign investment, one of the most open and liberal anywhere in the world. And that applies to our minerals and resources sector. And it's been that way for the better part of half a century. It will continue that way into the future.
Secondly, our policy is non-discriminatory between states, between companies as they come from various parts of the world, so long as those companies are adhering to market principles in their operations within Australia.
Finally, consistent with our practice in the past, we'll submit every foreign investment application to national interest tests. And we will continue to do so in the future. But Premier Wen and myself reiterated the importance of our long term cooperation in energy and resources as part of our overall economic relationship. Very important for both countries and I committed again Australia to being a long term reliable source of supply to China's long term energy and raw material requirements.
We also discussed the great challenge facing our common humanity, which is climate change. This is big for Australia, big for China, big for the world. And, in Beijing now, this is so much a logical, important subject for discussion as we wrestle to the great challenge of climate change.
Australia and China, as a result of our meetings here in Beijing in March-April, have agreed to establish an Australia-China climate change ministerial dialogue. That will have its first meeting in Canberra in November. And we're looking forward to those discussions with our Chinese friends.
In particular, I also discussed with the Chinese today the need to strengthen our bilateral cooperation on clear coal technology. We will be having particular further discussions with our Chinese friends in that ministerial dialogue in Canberra when we meet.
I also discussed with Premier Wen Jiabao the question of human rights. I also raised with him the question of religious freedom. I raised with him the question of Tibet. I raised with him the question of internet freedom. And we agreed that these matters will be pursued further in the continuation of Australia's bilateral human rights dialogue between Canberra and Beijing. And we believe that the next round of that dialogue will be scheduled for later this year.
Finally on the question of the recent suffering of the Chinese people with the earthquake in Sichuan.
I reiterated to Premier Wen Jiabao the extent to which all Australians had been moved by the huge loss of life  -  more than 70,000 people losing their lives in this extraordinary natural calamity which affected to many people in communities throughout Sichuan Province.
Sichuan Province is a province of, from memory, some 90 million people. And the devastation which has been brought across so many rural communities in Sichuan has been of heart rending proportions.
Premier Wen Jiabao reflected to me the appreciation of the Chinese Government and people to the more than $15 million of assistance provided by the Commonwealth Government, the State Governments, various city councils in Australia, including Brisbane and I believe Melbourne, together with the community appeals which were launched more generally by the Red Cross in Australia and by the Chinese community in Australia.
Tragedies like this remind us of our common challenge as human beings. Natural disasters are common challenges for our combined humanity and we need, therefore, as an international community to continue to work to be better prepared to meet such challenges in the future. We never know when natural disasters will strike again across our region.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give us a better idea of exactly what you said on internet freedom, religious freedom, and Tibet?
PM: Well, I said to the Chinese leadership that on the questions of human rights, of religious freedom, of Tibet, and on internet freedom, that these continued to be concerns, that we would continue to prosecute these concerns with the Chinese leadership both through the discussions we have just had and through the bilateral human rights dialogue which lies ahead between Australia and China.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there's been any improvement as promised by China in winning the right to host these Games?
PM: What I know as a student of Chinese history going back a long, long time, if I was to be holding a press conference here when I first arrived in China as a diplomatic 25 years ago, and was to compare the level of civil and political liberties and economic freedoms of the Chinese people then compared with where we are now 25 years later, this has been a very large change.
Has it resulted in a perfect set of civil liberties, of course not. And that's why we continue to have a human rights dialogue, engagement, and points of disagreement with the Chinese. But let's acknowledge where changes have occurred. And let's also be equally frank about where changes still need to occur. And that's very much the tone of my conversations with the Chinese leadership in the past. And will be in the future.
JOURNALIST: Have President Bush's comments helped or hindered your ability to have a dialogue with China (inaudible)
PM: I haven't studied the full text yet of what President Bush was saying most recently in Bangkok, I've seen some press reporting of it. I'd rather read his entire speech.
We in Australia speak for ourselves, and I've said so in the past when I was here in Beijing. I said so when I was in Beijing last time, speaking at a public address at Peking University. Also in my bilateral discussions with the Chinese leadership then, as I have done with the leadership and these discussions with Wen Jiabao this morning.
JOURNALIST: How were those remarks received this morning? Did you sense something?
PM: Well I would prefer always for the Chinese Government to characterise their own position in their own language, and that's a matter for them.
My responsibility as the Prime Minister of Australia is to be frank about where I have seen, in response to the earlier question, changes, positive changes as having occurred. And, where we still believe changes can continue to need to occur. That's part of a mature dialogue with China, and I think that's important.
I also note for the record that when I was here last time speaking on the question of Tibet and the importance of a resumption of dialogue between China and the representatives of the Dalai Lama. Despite all of its imperfections, there has been some resumption of that dialogue.
This will be a slow process. Remember, I've indicated in the past that it's impossible in the space of several conversations over several months to change what have been deeply entrenched developments in Chinese history over many decades and many centuries. But let's acknowledge that in the period since China opened to the outside world from 1978, 30 years ago, there have been very large changes in terms of what is now possible for individuals to pursue in this country, while recognising at the same time that there is still problems on the human rights front which we have to deal with.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you look over your shoulder, what do you think of the pollution levels? Do you have any concerns for our team?
PM: Well, on the question of haze and smog in Beijing, I've noted carefully the comments this morning from the IOC from Mr Rogge. I confess myself not to be a scientist, I'll leave that province to others. What I do know, however, is the IOC has said that they will be taking regular monitoring of air quality. And if the IOC have concerns about the well being of athletes, that they will take appropriate action.
That strikes me as a responsible course of action. It's the right course of action. These things have to be subjected to science. And therefore, the burden lies very much with the IOC to make sure that happens. And as I understand the reporting today, from the IOC, not just every day or two, but every hour or two, they'll be monitoring air quality as the well being and health of our athletes is of first and foremost importance. Not just for Australia, but I'm sure for all the young people participating in these Games from around the world.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed though? I mean, it's the day of the opening ceremony, are you disappointed to see it so bad?
PM: Well, our friends in China are putting a lot of effort in terms of trying to bring down pollution levels. It's tough, it's a big challenge, and of course if you have a combination of pollution factors and haze factors it is always going to be difficult to deal with.
So, let's try and emphasise the positive in terms of what our Chinese friends are seeking to do here, while also emphasising the role of the IOC on the very specific challenge of making sure our athletes have their air quality monitored, regularly, each day of these games so it is not a problem for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I come back to the human rights front. (inaudible)
PM: I've been a student of human rights in China since I was in university more than 30 years ago. And my experience of dealing with our friends in China, it's always going to be an effective combination of private diplomacy as well as periodic public reminders of where the international community stands around critical international covenants such as the international covenant on civil and political rights which all states are party too.
Therefore, my approach is very much a combination of the two.
I believe, certainly in the case of my own dealings with the Chinese, it is effective to engage them bilaterally, effectively, clearly, but also respectfully in terms of where China has come in the last quarter century  -  over the last 30 years since the opening up of the, that started in the period since 1978.
This is complex challenge which doesn't lend itself to be neatly categorised as, you know, one thing or another. You have got to recognise progress where it has occurred, while reminding our Chinese friends where progress still has to occur.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, are you concerned that ordinary Chinese are going to be unable to enjoy these Olympic Games, in the same way that Australians did in Sydney because of, you know, security, intense security, and I guess, access to events.
PM: Well there is 1.3 billion people in this country. I reckon it is a bit of challenge getting them in to see most of the events. You know, let's just face a few facts. There is 20 million of us in Australia, 1.3 billion Chinese. This is a bit of a logistical challenge.
But look, it was always going to be tough, in terms of getting proper access to individual events on the part of the local citizens. Talk to the people of Sydney in the year 2000, could everyone get into the events they wanted back then? I think that was pretty tough as well.
So, look, I can't answer on the details of that. There are so many Olympic events, I don't know how tickets have been allocated, distributed and the rest. That is a matter for the local authorities.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, analysts are saying that the Reserve Bank looks like it will slash interest rates next month. What would your message be to banks about passing on that cut?
PM: I say to the commercial banks in Australia that they have a responsibility to ensure that action by the reserve bank is reflected in the interest rate posture adopted by those commercial banks.
Furthermore, what the government has done since being elected is introduce bank account switching arrangements, so that now, it is much easier for customers, if they are unhappy with an individual commercial bank's response to the official interest rate changes, to switch their account.
In the past, that was really hard. We have made that as easy as possible. And we are seeking to ensure that those arrangements underpin the ability of consumers to literally vote with their feet, change their accounts, if one bank is not properly responding to changes in official rates by the Reserve Bank.
And the reason is that working families, Australian pensioners and carers, are under financial pressure, from rents, from mortgages, from all sorts of cost of living pressures, and therefore, if banks are not going to do the right thing, then we have tried to make it possible for customers to vote with their feet.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well for somebody who has looked at these things for the last 30 years and I think the history of human rights in China has always been two steps forward, one step back. And it is important therefore, to look at things in the long historical view. It is tough, it is hard, it is difficult, but when I look back at the China of '76, when I first started studying Chinese for example, the China of ‘78, in the process of opening to the outside world began, the China of ‘89, in terms of what happened at Tiananmen, and what has happened since then it has been, as I said, a process of two steps forward, one steps back.
But lets' stand back from all that and say, if you are an individual Chinese citizen, in terms of the freedoms available to you, now compared with back then, there has been significant process, while saying in the same breath that there is much, much more progress that still needs to occur.
JOURNALIST: Which athletes did you meet in the village yesterday and what did you have to say to them?
PM: I met stacks and stacks of athletes. I wouldn't wish to name anyone in particular. I met a lot of rowers, who were hot and sweaty, who had just come back from (inaudible). I met our beach volleyballers. I also last night spent a lot of time, with practically every member I think of the Australian shooting team. There seem to be most of the disciplines represented. Judo, members of the Judo team. Members of the wrestling team, where the emphasised they were not Greco Roman wrestlers, they were freestyle. And of course many of our swimmers.
Can I just emphasise what I said before about the overall playback that I got from the athletes, is that they were really happy with the physical facilities at the village. And the level of support that is provided by the Australian Olympic Committee, in terms of the number of doctors, physios and support staff for the team, I didn't hear a word of complaint from our athletes.
Not to say something won't go wrong, but I am pretty impressed with the way the AOC has got the arrangements in place, as I am impressed by what the Beijing Olympic Committee has done in terms of the physical facilities of the village.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It's China, people speak Chinese. It's kind of, it has always been a bit of a problem, it's kind of life. I imagine Chinese athletes found it a bit tough in Australia back in 2000. But no, I have to say the athletes are really upbeat. It was really good to be among our athletes yesterday and last night.
Their attitude is really positive and they are really appreciative of the support they are getting from back home.
They are really appreciative of the fact that so many family members have been able to come to Beijing to support them as well, the Australians corporates who have got in there behind the Australian Olympic Team and the Australian Olympic Committee, and the physical facilities which have been made available to them in terms of what is available in the Olympic Village. So overall, I have got to say that the wrap from our athletes has been pretty good.
And I just say again what I said last night, for James Tomkins to be extended the great honour of being Australia's flag bearer - great honour for him, a 42 year old bloke, out there at the front, good on him. Great honour for him and an important role for Australia in what I think will be an extraordinary event at the opening of these games later this evening.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Trade Simon Crean today witnessed Australia's largest agricultural bank sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Agricultural Development Bank of China (ADBC) in Beijing.
The historic signing today will open the door on a new level of cooperation between Australian and Chinese financial service providers.
Today's official signing by National Australia Bank Group's CEO, Mr John Stewart, and ADBC President, Mr Zheng Hui, is the first major collaboration between agri-banking institutions of China and Australia.
Prime Minister Rudd and Minister Crean welcomed the signing as the starting point from which to build another mutually beneficial connection between the Australian and Chinese economies.
“This agreement has the potential to develop into a strong, bilateral arrangement with the exchange of expertise, skills and personnel in agri-banking, exploring a new sphere of business interaction between our nations,” said Mr Rudd.
The Memorandum is the culmination of 12 months friendly negotiation between the two banks on an agreement which includes the two-way transfer of agricultural and banking skills through staff exchanges and training.
“This builds on a natural fit between two major agri-banking institutions. National Australia Bank looks forward to exploring potential future collaboration in trade finance, agricultural infrastructure finance and product development,” said Mr Stewart.
“ADBC hopes to benefit from exposure to Australia's farming and agricultural business efficiencies with plans for staff training, business study visits and increased understanding of the Australian agri-business market,” said President Zheng.
In February 2008, NAB became the first foreign investor in China's trust sector when its institutional banking division, nabCapital, acquired a 20% stake in Union Trust Investment.


PM: It's great to be here in Beijing with Kate Ellis the Sports Minister and we're both here with one objective, and that's to support the Australian Olympic team. 
They've been doing fantastically well in their first day of competition. I went out and saw the Opals yesterday  -  they did really well. And I was at the swimming pool last night, and I've got to say, we had a fine bunch of Australians emerge through to some finals today. Grant Hackett of course, and we're got Steph Rice and then we have the women's 4 X 100 freestyle relay. So, I think Kate and I are headed out to the swimming pool fairly soon to cheer them on.
I was talking to Laurie Lawrence last night at the swimming pool. Laurie was doing an inevitable Laurie Lawrence actually, which is to encourage the team on and to create a strong, positive atmosphere amongst our athletes.
I've got to say, since seeing the Australians walk onto the field at the stadium the other night, the response I've had from various Chinese with whom I've spoke to including the leadership, was a very strong Australian contingent, a large team, and I think it's fair to say that as they marched onto the arena the other night there was a strong roar of support from the Chinese crowd which was very encouraging for us to hear.
So we would thank our Chinese hosts for their expressions of kindness.
The other thing I'd touch on is which here in Beijing I've also taken the opportunity to catch up with the other various members of the Chinese leadership and various other leaders who are visiting here in Beijing.
Apart from Wen Jiabao, I spent yesterday also in a session of discussions with President Hu Jintao, and also with Zhang Ping the head of the NDRC, which is responsible for China's overall economic policy direction.
I also was able to have breakfast with the President of Vietnam, caught up with the President of the Philippines, caught up last night after the swimming with the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, we talked about our common engagements and concerns in Afghanistan, as well as spending some time yesterday in discussions with Jose Ramos Horta from East Timor.
So, it's been a good opportunity to catch up with various leaders from around the world as well.
The final thing I would say is as that these Games have just begun. This is going to be a very tough, tough competition for Australian athletes. What's happened around the world is that so many people have gone out there and learnt from the Australian example of the last 20 or 30 years, and the competition gets stiffer and stiffer. So, however our athletes do at the end of the day, of course, we in Australia are out there hollering out support for each of them. But, however they do, once these Games are done the challenge will then be to prepare for the London Olympics in 2012. And that's going to mean us working very carefully with the Australian Olympic Committee, and with the Australian Institute of Sport and the other big sporting organisations to make sure that the planning is right, and the investment from our side, which is Government, get it right as well.
As I said the other day, we intend to be long term partners with the AOC in preparation for the next Olympics and the one beyond that as well.
Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) American volleyball coach was stabbed (inaudible) Are you concerned at all that this might be the source of some anti-Western sentiment (inaudible)
PM: The facts of this particular case are obviously tragic. I do not know the full details, I've just seen the reporting.
This is a very large city of 12 million people. And, in my experience of this city of the years, foreigners have always been made to feel very welcome. And foreigners walking around the city have always been made the feel safe. This seems to be a tragic incident, a tragic occurrence obviously for the family, but beyond that I couldn't comment on the details.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what did you witness between Mr Bush and Mr Putin at the Opening Ceremony?
PM: Well, as I said yesterday, it was just an animated conversation which to me seemed quite friendly. They were sitting a couple of seats in front of me and as I said quite clearly yesterday, I didn't hear what they were saying. It was just an animated conversation which I observed to be quite friendly, ass was occurring between President Bush and a number of other world leaders. We had a quick chat as well as conversations between other world leaders.
JOURNALIST: What's your view on the situation in regards to Georgia? Do you think Russia has been over the top in its reaction?
PM: I believe that the position of the international community, supported by Australia, is that Georgia is an independent state, it's territorial sovereignty should be respected, and therefore, all states should exercise restraint, and that includes the Russian Federation.
It's important for the United Nations Security Council to deal with this matter. It's regrettable that in the session which has been held on Georgia that they have been unable to reach an agreed resolution on action. But for our part as Australia, and I think in common voice with the rest of the international community, we are calling on all parties to exercise restraint and for the territorial integrity of the sovereign state of Georgia to be respected.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean a ceasefire?
PM: At a minimum we need to see a ceasefire. As President Bush said the other night, a return to the situation at least it was before on the 6th of August  -  that is the first step. And the important thing here is to recognise the sovereignty of the independent state of Georgia.
We are witnessing a terrible loss of life, a terrible loss of human life and it is important that all countries across the world express their resolute condemnation for these acts of violence.
And it is important that restraint is demonstrated and the sovereignty of Georgia is respected.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I am glad you have given me those two alternatives, can I suggest a third, lest I be verballed by a distinguished representative from an Australian newspaper, and it is this.
What was great is that the ambassador was able to organise at the residence, heads of many Chinese corporations, who for us, are very old friends, friends who have been trading with Australia for 10 years, 20 years, 30 years, going back a long, long time. And their relationship with Australia is very deep and very broad.
It was a good occasion to sit down with them, and the heads of major Australian corporations as well. We had BHP, we had Woodside, we had Rio, we had Fortescue, as well as many of their Chinese counterpart organisations.
Good opportunity for a general discussion on the future direction of the economic relationship. It was a good opportunity for a general discussion on the future of the relationship in resources and energy.
I am very confident that this will be a robust and strong relationship into the future - good for Australia, good for China.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, climate change is one of your biggest political issues back home. Is there anything here in China, in your talks with President Hu and Premier Wen, would lead you to believe that China is prepared to take some serious steps towards a new global agreement?
PM: In my discussions yesterday with President Hu Jintao, I outlined the importance which we attached to the challenge of clean coal technology and I regard this as a very important area for future practical cooperation between Australia and China.
Secondly, I took that conversation one stage further in my meeting with Mr Jung Ki who heads the NDRC, the National Development and Reform Commission of China. This is China's, effectively, central economic planning agency.
I believe that if we are serious about climate change there are two courses of action that are necessary. One is, consistent with out negotiations in the Kyoto framework, for developed countries to undertake long term binding targets, and for developing countries to take concrete, measurable and verifiable actions consistent with the resolution we achieved at Bali, going forward also to the Copenhagen conference at the end of next year.
That is one set of actions. The second is this: that in the case of critical technologies such as clean coal technology, that we take these technologies from the laboratory into the power plants.
And that is very much part and parcel of what Australia and China have been talking about in the period since I have been Prime Minister.
We agreed some time ago to establish an Australia  -  China Ministerial Dialogue on Climate Change. One of its core components is on clean coal technology. We are told that by 2030, 70 per cent of China's energy will still be generated by coal fired power stations.
If we are serious about dealing with greenhouse gasses and global warming in general, we must act on clean coal. And that forms a core part of our discussions with the Chinese, and we will have more to say about that in the months ahead.
JOURNALIST: Labor has done, well pretty badly in the Northern Territory elections. It's the first electoral test since you became Prime Minister. It looks like there is going to be a hung parliament there. Do you have any comment about that?
PM: Well this has been obviously a tough race in the Northern Territory and I would congratulate both sides of politics for having fought a very tough campaign. As I understand it, the chief Minister, Mr Henderson has 12 seats with four yet to be determined and obviously there is a lot of counting to be done.
The Northern Territory election is reminder to all of us in politics that the Australian people will hold us accountable and this is an important lesson for all sides of politics, particularly those of us who are currently in Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said the other day following my discussions with Premier Wen Jiabao, I raised the question of religious freedom on that occasion. And I indicated that going forward, the next step in that process will be the bilateral human rights dialogue.
And religious freedom is an important matter for Australians as are the general freedoms which are part and parcel of our human rights dialogue with the Chinese.
Secondly, in terms of going to church this morning, someone asked me about that. It is typically what we would normally do of a Sunday, whether we are here or whether we are in Washington or whether we are in Canberra.
And it was good to be among Chinese worshippers at the Northern Cathedral. Therese and I, we lived in Beijing in the ‘80's and I remember one very cold winter's night, I think it was Christmas, it was snowing, we went to the recommissioning of that cathedral in about 1985 from memory.
We haven't been back there since. It was good to meet the good folk from the Northern Cathedral who have been pursuing their religious faith these last 25 years.
JOURNALIST: So you weren't there making a political point.
PM: Wherever I am in the world, I think you know me reasonably well, I will try to get along to church, that is just part of our family practice, whether it is Beijing, Brissie, Washington, New York or wherever.
And as I said, the Northern Cathedral has that particular significance for us. We have to go because we have to get somewhere else, so thanks very much folks.


NICOLE DYER: Julia Gillard is today making her way to the Gold Coast. She'll be officially opening Australia's first six star green-designed education building at Bond University.
And a very, very big welcome to the Acting Prime Minister, Ms Gillard. Good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.
NICOLE DYER: Has your busy schedule allowed you to see much of the Olympic coverage?
JULIA GILLARD: Ah, it hasn't really, no. But I do try and catch the snippets on the radio and I'm certainly looking forward to some of the swimming today. It's going to be fantastic.
NICOLE DYER: Well, it certainly is. We've got the 4 X 100 relay for the men's. Sophie Edington, who's from the Coast, will also be taking the pool in the backstroke. Do you have favourite event?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm going to have my eyes, or maybe my ears, on Libby Trickett's performance in the 100m butterfly - I'm looking forward to that.
NICOLE DYER: Mr Rudd is in Seoul now. Last month you were in New York and were very impressed by the transparency of school performances over there. What did you like?
JULIA GILLARD: What I liked was the fact that you could get comprehensive information about what's happening in schools. Now we're not talking about anything as simplistic and silly as league tables, but we are talking about parents and the community understanding what kinds of students are in schools - their socio-economic status, the number of Indigenous students, the number of students with disabilities - because that obviously means the schools have special needs, and also how schools are attaining. And if you can get that information and you can see comparable schools, where one's doing really well and one's not doing well, then of course you can find the answer - ‘What's the difference?' - and spread the best practice.
NICOLE DYER: How does it work over in the US?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, look, there's no one perfect model and you've always got to be careful about transporting a model from overseas, but you can learn by having a look around. And in New York and in other places, information - very comprehensive information - is made available publicly and to parents.
NICOLE DYER:  So exactly what would you like to see introduced here in Australia?
JULIA GILLARD: What I'd like to see here is I'd like to see a system where we could look at schools and know what kind of students are in those schools, and I'd like to know that because I'd like to bring new resources to bear for schools that are facing disadvantage
I don't want to see any Australian child left behind. And I'd also like to see us getting literacy and numeracy and attainment data, school by school, so we could see how everybody's going.
NICOLE DYER:  The critics of such a plan say that you could risk unfairly stigmatising a school. What's your reaction to that?
JULIA GILLARD: I think that really depends a fair bit on the mindset that you bring into (inaudible). This isn't about shaming people or telling people that they've done badly. This is about understanding what's going on so that we can help schools that need extra assistance, and it's only by helping those schools that need extra assistance that we're really going to have an education revolution for all Australian kids in all Australian schools.
NICOLE DYER:  But Ms Gillard, attempts to do this in the past have not worked. So what makes you so sure that talking about this idea again is going to get it off the ground?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I'm an optimist about reform and I'm particularly an optimist when I sit with my state and territory colleagues and with representatives of the Independent and Catholic school sectors, and we're all on the same page in the sense we've all got the same aspirations for Australian kids.
People don't want to see kids left behind, they don't want to see schools left behind. They're now working with a government that isn't saying bad schools and bad teachers, and unfortunately that was their experience under the Howard Government. They're working with a Government that's saying, “What can we do to fix this? What can we do to make it better for the kids in those schools?”
NICOLE DYER:  When Kevin Rudd was elected as Prime Minister, he ... one of this main platforms, of course, was the Digital Education Revolution. Some of our federal members here on the Coast have been very critical of what they say is a broken Rudd promise on school computers. Is it true that not one Gold Coast secondary school was allocated computers in Round One?
JULIA GILLARD: Round One was focused on schools in the greatest need, so that round was for schools that had computer to student ratios of 1:8 or worse. Now across the life of this program - it's a $1.2 billion program - every secondary school is going to benefit, so every school on the Coast is going to benefit.
But we did ask schools would they mind if we focused the first round on the schools in greatest need. So what that means for your schools locally is they weren't in the greatest need, they didn't have ratios of 1:8 or worse, but they will be able to participate in future rounds and every school will benefit from the program.
NICOLE DYER:  So the Gold Coast didn't miss out on computers because it's a Liberal Party heartland at a federal level?
JULIA GILLARD: Oh, certainly not. What we did was we audited what schools had and we invited every school that had a ratio of 1:8 or worse to apply for Round One. It was a strictly mathematical formula. I don't care whether schools and students are being educated in Labor seats, Liberal seats, National seats, Independent seats - whatever other colour or flavour seats come in - that's entirely irrelevant to me. I want every student to have a good education and I want students in secondary schools to benefit from our Digital Education Revolution, and they will.
NICOLE DYER:  Federal Education, Employment Workplace Relations Minister and Acting Prime Minister, Julia Gillard - a woman with a lot on her plate at the moment, joining me on ABC Coast FM at a quarter to nine.
Ms Gillard, you have made yourself available to open Bond University's six star, green-designed education building. Why do see this as being so important?
JULIA GILLARD: Of course, everybody's talking about climate change, and the Government's focused on tackling the challenges of climate change. It's one of the biggest issues for our long-term future. And if we are going to tackle something as big as climate change, then governments have to play their part and that's what we're doing with designing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
But also, institutions, people in their homes, need to be playing their part as well. And so I see this development of a green building, a six star building, which models in its design how to deal with climate change issues and energy issues, and it's also going to be used to teach Australian students about those things. I think that is an important flagship for how we're going about tackling climate change.
NICOLE DYER: Julia Gillard, thank you very much for your time.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.
NICOLE DYER: Enjoy your time on the Coast by the way. So are you in Brisbane at the moment?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm in Brisbane at the moment and I'm very much looking forward to coming down to the Coast, and I know that you consider it cold at the moment.
NICOLE DYER: Well ... [laughs]
JULIA GILLARD: But let me tell you as a person from Melbourne who spends a lot of time in Canberra, this isn't cold by my standards. [laughs] I'll be the one running around in short sleeves and you'll be the people laughing at me.
NICOLE DYER: [laughs] Julia Gillard, thank you. We'll see her at a beach some time soon.


PM: It's good to be at this Asan medical centre here in Seoul in the Republic of Korea.  It's a practical example of Australian technology at work. Cochlear, most but not all Australians are familiar with this remarkable piece of Australian technology to help the hearing impaired or those who have suffered near total hearing loss.
To see these little kids just before and the great progress which has been made in their lives I think is a wonderful thing. It's not just a good thing for families and for kids in giving them a decent future, and in this case 3,000 people have been helped by this Australian technology, it's also great for Australian exports.  It's also great for Australia's international standing.
A lot of my discussions in China and elsewhere have focussed on the resources and energy sector. But what we need equally to emphasis is Australia as a major, major centre of biomedical research, of medical technology and of medical appliance application and we see that here as well.
I would congratulate Cochlear and this great centre as Asan for the work that they are doing. Good for the local people, good for the continued branding of Australia as a high technology country producing such marvellous devices to help the rest of the world.
The second point I'd make is that it's good to be here in the Republic of Korea on my first Prime Ministerial visit to this country. I'm looking forward very much to spending some time with President Lee later in the day. We have much to discuss in what is an important economic relationship for both of us.
This is Australia's fourth largest trading partner, fourth largest export market I should say, and for us therefore it's a major economy which means a lot for Australia in the future. That's why I am here to build bridges with the political leadership of this country and also with the corporate leadership as well. And that I think is important for both of our countries' future.
This is a broad based relationship, strong in the economy. What I am seeking to do through this visit is to enhance the political dimensions of the relationship as well. If there's one thing you could say about the relationship in the past, it's been a very strong and vibrant economic relationship, less developed at the political level. We need to change that for the future.
Our Government is committed to deepening, broadening and strengthening the political relationship between the Commonwealth of Australia and the Republic of Korea as well as enhancing the future possibility for security cooperation as well.
I think I will leave it there and throw it open to you because I know we are time pressed. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd there's a discussion paper out today on the pension saying that the single pension is too low and amongst the lowest in the OECD is that not compelling evidence to give pensioners more?
PM:Well the Senate inquiry which was commissioned last year was actually established by Labor in Opposition and it was that Senate inquiry which recommended that the Government conduct a comprehensive review of the pension and the adequacy of the pension to meet the requirements of our seniors into the future.
That's what we have done in the first six months or so of being in Government and I understand the full discussion paper will be released on that today in Australia.
We've said repeatedly that pensioners are doing it tough in Australia. In Opposition we committed to conducting a formal review of this, we have done that now within the first six months.  The discussion paper is going out today and we will be very attentive to what its recommendations will be.
JOURNALIST: So Mr Rudd how long will pensioners have to wait before they see some benefits of your Government's commitment to this? How long would you forecast the delay will be before they will actually see (inaudible)
PM:What I could say Tim is that there has been a 12 year wait already for pensioners to get a fair deal and we intend to do this thoroughly. We have said that the Harmer report will come down at least by February next year. We're looking forward very much to its report and we will take appropriate action once that report comes down.
The other thing you will find when the Harmer report is brought down is it outlines the numbers involved in this. We're talking about the total payments involved in this sector of the economy; it is huge, absolutely huge. Therefore we have to make sure we are doing it absolutely right. But our Government recognises that pensioners, carers are doing it very tough out there. This is concrete course of action to deal with the challenge facing pensioners.
We can't solve every problem overnight but we have honoured what we said we'd do. We're getting on with the job of doing it and the report, as we said, will come down by February next year.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible) Will the Government reconsider direct cuts to fuel excise in addition to the provisions made in the ETS?
PM:  What we've said as you know through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the clear arrangements in terms of drawing down the fuel tax according to the additional impact which arises as a consequence of the introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
That is our commitment, we have always said we will be attentive to the cost impacts on working families, working Australians, pensioners and carers they're doing it tough. I've noted what's happened in terms of the impact of these events in Georgia. Tragic for the people in Georgia. Very disturbing in terms of global security, also roll on consequences for the global economy.
The bottom line is working families, working Australian's, pensioners and carers are doing it tough and the cost of living pressure are significant. We will take practical actions in the future to help. We've spoken about pensions today, we indicated what we will do with the introductions of the Carbon Pollution Reduction scheme.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible)
PM: First of all let's get our names right, it's an Asia Pacific Community we are talking about and the concept here as outlined in the original speech is not for a political union, it's not for a monetary union, its not for a customs union and its not for an economic union.
It is however a long term goal for 2020 to have a body across the Asia Pacific region which enables all of the countries of the region to cooperate not just on economic matters but on political and security matters as well. That's the long term goal and what we are looking for in the years ahead is a discussion on that proposal.  Nothing more ambitious than that, a discussion on that proposal and that's very much the way in which this matter has been handled in talks that I have had so far with President Yudhoyono, with the Prime Minister of Malaysia as well as with the Chinese leadership as well and I sure today with President Lee of Korea and with others.
This will be a long term process and we've set a long term goal.  But we are in the process of having Dick Woollcott our special envoy go out there and talk to regional Governments, that will take time.  We will continue to refine this proposal in response to regional suggestions.
But I am firmly of the view that you either have a discussion which is focussed about the future shape of our region or you just let it happen. I'd much rather be in the business of setting a goal, setting a broad concept as the objective and focussing the regions discussions, and that of the alternative, that I don't want to see happen, is any long term drift in the reverse direction and that is toward the polarisation of the region. I don't want to see that..
JOURNALIST:Aren't you lowering expectations there by saying (inaudible). When it first came out
PM:Did you read my speech when it first came out
JOURNALIST:You talk about the European Union style (Inaudible)
PM:I think if you look carefully at the speech what it said was this. Let us learn from what Europe was able to do in this respect. France and Germany at each other's throats for 200 years, they established a body which initially was not called the European Union and that through the processes and habits of cooperation over 50 years we now have the result we have across broader Western Europe. That has been a positive development, that was the reference in that speech and if you read it carefully that's exactly what it said.
Therefore what I'd go on to say is this. The habits of cooperation on political, economic and security matters are those which we are seeking to advance through an Asia Pacific Community. This will be a long debate, it will be one where we will take submissions and views and opinions from right across the region. The concept will be amended and evolve over time but we will continue to prosecute this into the future, because what's the end point. Stability and prosperity for this region through the Asia Pacific century rather than allowing it to drift in any reverse directions.
JOURNALIST:Will you pursue a free trade agreement with Korea (Inaudible)?
PM:  There has been some discussion between our officials about what we would describe as the importance of pre-negotiations on a possible FTA between Australia and the Republic of Korea. This work has not yet formally begun, but what I would like to discuss with President Lee today is how we begin let's call it the informal processes surrounding that.
As I said this is a big economic relationship, it's pretty open but we can make it more open. Remember when it comes to the sale of education services, the sale of these technology products and investment in an economy like this. It's very important for Australia; we intend to make let's call it a modest first step in this direction in our discussions with President Lee today.


The Prime Minister today praised the work of leading Australian technology company Cochlear and a Korean surgeon in assisting the hearing impaired.
The Prime Minister made the comments while visiting Asan Medical Centre in Seoul, a leading centre for conducting Cochlear implants.
At the centre, the Prime Minister presented a plaque from the Australian Embassy in the Republic of Korea to Professor Lee Kwang-sun, who has personally undertaken more than 400 Cochlear implant operations.
Almost 3000 people in Korea have received Cochlear implants, around 60 per cent of them children. Cochlear established a direct presence in Korea in April this year (2008). The implants are used by children and adults with a severe to profound hearing loss and who do not benefit from other hearing aids.
The Prime Minister said Cochlear was an example of a leading Australian company successfully taking innovative technology to the world.
Exports of elaborately transformed manufactures and Australian investment are both growth areas in Australia's important trade relationship with Korea. In 2007, Australian merchandise exports to Koreas were worth $13.5 billion  -  the most significant of these resource and energy commodities, but increasingly also finished products.  


It is a great pleasure to be in Korea and to be here among friends.
Our two countries might be separated by separated by geography, but we have a lot in common.
We are both outward looking countries.
We rely for our prosperity on a stable and fair global trading order.
We are both allies of the United States.
And we are both countries committed to middle power diplomacy.
That means we work closely with our partners around the world to shape the international environment.
We have a strong history of working together in particular on regional initiatives.
And we are close economic partners  -  a relationship that brings enormous benefits to both sides.
Tonight I would like to talk about how I view our relationship and how much scope I see there is scope to develop it.
Because  -  as many people recognise  -  the development of the strength and diversity of our political ties has too often failed to keep pace with the development of our economic ties.
I am determined that the Australian Government that I lead will change that trend.
We want to build on the strong economic base of our relationship.
We want to expand our security and political connections.
And we want to work together more closely on the big challenges we all face.
We are committed to building a stronger, broader relationship with Korea  -  a relationship that reflects the extent of our shared interests, our shared values and our shared goals.
Korea
Part of the reason I want to do this is because I think that a closer relationship is in the interest of both countries.
For Australia, becoming more engaged with Korea's remarkable economy can only be a positive move.
The Republic of Korea turns 60 this week.
I know that “Korea” as a distinct nation on this peninsula has been around for thousands of years.
But it was only 60 years ago that the Republic of Korea was born out of the end of the Second World War.
It was not an easy birth.
In less than two years time, the Republic of Korea was fighting for its very survival in the face of an attack from its northern neighbour.
The war was brutal and tragic.
It pitted brother against brother.
When the war ended with the armistice three years later, Korea was in a terrible state.
Years of conflict had destroyed infrastructure and left people in poverty.
It is that starting point that makes Korea's economic transformation over the next decades so remarkable.
From the 1960s, Korea transformed itself into a global economic force.
Korean brands have come to dominate markets around the world.
Korean ingenuity and innovation is widely recognised.
And this was all achieved by the hard work of the Korean people and the economic policy choices of the Korean Government.
There have been setbacks on the way  -  including the Asian financial crisis in 1997.
But Korea has always proved itself to be resilient.
So I would like to pay tribute to the people of Korea, and Korea's business sector, for all that has been achieved in the space of 40 or so years.
The New Australian Government
Like Korea, the new Australian Government is committed to economic growth.
We understand that countries need the right domestic economic policies if they want to remain competitive.
We also understand that the best future for our people lies in engagement with the world.
The new Australian Government's domestic economic reform agenda is broad.
We are investing in education and infrastructure so that we have the best workforce we can and that businesses have the physical infrastructure they need to innovate.
We are also working to deregulate and build a seamless national economy.
Australia is a federation that spans a continent.
It is crucial that businesses in Sydney and Perth do not face different rules as they cross state borders.
The other side of our economic development policies is global engagement.
We welcome foreign investment in Australia.
Our process for considering foreign investment is straightforward and provides certainty to investors.
We work with our economic partners around the globe to keep pushing open the door to economic exchanges.
I was very disappointed two weeks ago when the Doha Round of trade liberalisation talks broke down in Geneva.
Pushing forward on global free trade is a key aim for this government.
And, at a time when the global economy is facing pressures from rising oil prices, rising food prices and a global credit crisis, a good outcome from the trade talks would have been a real boost.
It would have sent a strong signal to the business community that governments are still committed to the idea of freer global trade.
And the talks in Geneva made huge progress  -  we should not lose sight of this fact. 
Nor should we give up hope, because the outstanding issues remain capable of resolution.
We have to think about how we now move forward.
There are three steps we should take.
First, lock in what we've achieved by recording the progress we've made.
Secondly, resolving the remaining areas of difference.
And thirdly, looking to seize next available window of political opportunity.
We have to keep pushing to get an outcome from all the work that has been done, because trade has played such an important part in global economic growth in recent decades,
It is simply too important for us to give up.
Australia-Korea economic relations
Despite the set back in Geneva, I am still confident that the economic relationship between Australia and Korea can continue to grow.
Our economic relationship is very important for Australia.
It is also, I believe, very important for Korea.
Our economic ties have been the bedrock of our relationship for decades now  -  since the first shipment of iron ore arrived here in the late 1960s.
Resources continue to form the foundation of our trade.
Korea is a major export destination for Australian uranium.
The coal and iron ore that Australia exports to Korea is of benefit to both countries  -  it is an export for us and a critical input in the manufacturing chain for Korea.
My Government is keen for that relationship to continue.
We would also like to see it expand.
Australia has a long and proud history as a stable and reliable supplier of LNG.
A relationship between Australian suppliers and Korean consumers of LNG would be another mutually beneficial strand in our relationship.
What is noticeable about recent years, is the expansion of the economic relationship.
We now have a very strong service component to the relationship.
Education is an important part of that.
Around 35,000 Korean students were enrolled in Australian educational institutions last year.
In addition to these students, we have close to 30,000 young Koreans visiting Australia on “Working Holiday” visas. 
More young Koreans come to Australia under this program than from any other country.
And today I witnessed an e-lecture between Yonsei University and the Australian National University (my own university)  -  it is an example of the expanding education links we have.
Our financial sector cooperation is also growing.
Now, the Macquarie Group of companies, Korea, is a major presence in Korea.
The Group has invested around $20 billion in Korean assets as of March 2008.
In doing so, it delivers good returns for Korean, Australian and international investors.
Australian performing arts is a growing new service export sector for Australia in Korea. 
Partnering with Korea's dynamic and influential entertainment sector offers real opportunities for Australia.
Korean audiences welcome foreign performers here in Korea.
Australian groups and individuals are performing almost every week in Korea.
Groups and individuals such as “End of Fashion”, “Tony Emanuel”, “Saritah” are making a big impact on the performing arts scene in Korea.
We have also seen increasing ties between our high-technology sectors.
I visited a clinic today to see the work of Koreans surgeon providing children with cochlear implants  -  better known as the bionic ear, a technology that was first developed in Australia 30 years ago.
The Cochlear success in Korea is not an isolated example of our high technology trade in the health sector with Korea.
Hospira Corporation's Australian operation supplies $1 million of injectable pharmaceuticals to the same hospital I visited this morning.
In manufacturing too there are more and more ties between Australia and Korea.
Just look at the automotive sector.
The global supply chains of General Motors means that GM Holden of Australia is supplying 100,000 automotive engines to power passenger vehicles manufactured in their Korean factory.
Also, the Holden “Caprice” vehicle fully made in Australia will soon be on the road in Korea as a luxury car in the GM Daewoo range.
The economic and trade relationship is strong and it is growing.
But I think we should be looking for ways to push it to an even higher level.
The recent non-government study into the feasibility of a free trade agreement between our two countries showed remarkable potential.
It showed that a free trade agreement could boost Korea's and Australia's GDPs by more than 20 billion US dollars each over the next 12 years.
I am very keen for our governments to look very closely at the question of an FTA.
I think we would have a lot to gain from one.
And today I was pleased that President Lee and I agreed that our two governments would begin pre-negotiation consultations on a free trade agreement.
Regional Cooperation
One important element of our economic ties is that we share many common ideas about how to ensure that our region is one that supports economic development.
For nearly 20 years now, since APEC was launched, our two countries have been strong supporters of developing our regional organisations.
APEC is still the main economic body for the region.
It has done good work in encouraging more open trade and investment between member economies.
It has helped to ensure that our region remains open and inclusive.
As beneficiaries of globalisation, I think that both Australia and Korea are of the same view that cutting ourselves off from the world of seeking to develop exclusive economic blocs is not in anyone's interest.
We agree that lowering barriers to economic activity is the right thing to do.
We agree that we should be trying to increase the links between countries, not erect barriers between them.
Today I was pleased to have the chance to talk with President Lee about the future shape of our region.
The region we live in now is very different to the one at the time when APEC came into being.
Cast your minds back to 1989.
Only one year earlier, Seoul had hosted the Olympic Games.
China's economy was growing, but was still relatively small.
Japan seemed likely to overtake the United States as the world's biggest economy.
The Soviet Union was collapsing.
Korea's evolution to a full democracy was close, but still incomplete.
India was inward looking and not engaged with the global economy.
We now face a very different region  -  the economic landscape has shifted dramatically.
In the past 20 years, the challenges we face as a region have also changed.
At the top of the agenda now are climate change, terrorism and financial instability.
Our existing regional institutions are playing an important and constructive role in promoting stability, cooperation and prosperity in our region.
But I believe that we should start thinking about what we want our region to look like in 2020 and what regional organisations we might need.
I want to start a dialogue around the region about this question.
It is time we began to think about where we want to get to as a region.
If we do not, we leave ourselves that the mercy of events.
For Australia, having other countries like Korea support this dialogue is of crucial importance.
Over the coming months I hope that Korean leaders, officials, academics and business people can join in this discussion about where we want our region to be.
More than economics
An important part of this discussion will need to be about matters other than economics.
In 2020, we will need a regional mechanism that can bring nations together to tackle the challenges we will face.
That means we will need a body that can discuss more than economics.
We will need a body that can also discuss security problems.
Australia and Korea both want a stable region  -  a view that is, of course, shared by many around the region.
The question is, how do we achieve that?
The answer is that we need a body that brings together all of the major powers in a forum that can discuss any challenges that might arise.
In a region with changing power relativities, it is crucial that we have such a mechanism.
So, part of the discussion I want to have around the region is about how we bring security matters into the scope of our regional bodies.
Taking our relationship forward
Regional cooperation is just one area where I believe Australia and Korea can work more closely together.
In fact, I think we can work more closely together on a whole range of areas bilaterally, regionally and globally.
As two middle powers, as two democracies and as two Asia Pacific nations, we should be looking more at what we can do to work together on the big challenges we face.
For instance on climate change I think we can look to do more together.
Korea is a major consumer of Australian resources  -  a trade that brings benefits to both sides.
But questions of energy and climate change are intimately linked.
As major energy partners, we should look to how we can work more closely together on climate change.
On the big security questions, too, we can do more together.
I announced earlier this year that Australia was going to establish an International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
I look forward to Korea playing a role in the work of the Commission.
Because I believe that the threat of nuclear weapons is still real, but that the political momentum to solve that problem has faded in recent years.
It is precisely the sort of work that middle powers can do  -  bringing together countries with a shared goal and building a global consensus on how to tackle a major challenge.
But just as importantly, I think we can do more in our bilateral  relationship.
Strengthening our bilateral cooperation would better reflect the shared interests we have.
For instance, Australia and Korea share a keen interest in the resolution of the North Korean nuclear question.
We do not face the threat of the North Korean army the way South Korea does.
But we have important interests in this region.
Three of Australia's top five export markets are in North Asia (Japan, China and Korea).
Anything that could lead to instability on the Korean Peninsula and in the surrounding region is of great concern to Australia.
It is for this reason that Australia has long supported resolution of the North Korean nuclear problem and we continue to do so.
We also continue to provide humanitarian assistance to North Korea.
The shared interests we have in questions of security are often under appreciated.
The historical military links between us are strong  -  over 17,000 Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen served in the Korean War.
And 339 lost their lives.
We have worked together in peacekeeping operations  -  including in East Timor.
And as allies of the United States, we have much in common.
I was pleased that today President Lee and I agreed that we should look at how to bring the different strands of our security cooperation together under a new mechanism.
I am keen to see our security relationship strengthened and a formal security cooperation arrangement would help to do that.
There is enormous potential for closer cooperation in the education area.
I was very pleased to be able to witness today the signing of a new agreement between Australia and Korea to encourage greater education and research links at all levels in Australia.
I want to encourage more Australian institutions to build links with their Korean counterparts.
Strong education links can help to build the people-to-people ties and boost understanding of each other's countries.
But other sectors also have an important role to play here.
The Australia Korea Foundation was established in Australia to promote the broadening of the relationship.
The Foundation was established in 1992.
Its goal is to promote links between different sectors in Australia and Korea.
It runs a business internship program and a young leaders exchange program.
And it funds research linkages projects.
It works hard to add depth and breadth to the ties between us.
It is my great pleasure to announce tonight that the Australian Government has appointed a new Board for the Foundation, including a new Chairman.
David Palmer is a former Managing Director of the Australian Meat and Livestock Association.
He has had a long involvement with Korea and brings great business experience to the role.
He is joined on the board by other business, academic and artistic figures who are all committed to expanding and deepening Australia's relationship with Korea.
They share the commitment of the Australian Government to doing more with Korea.
My thinking on building education and other people-to-people links is simple  -  I believe that Australia needs to be the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
It is in our interest to do so.
We share a region and a time zone with a diverse region.
To make the most of the opportunities that come our way  -  particularly in the services sector  -  we need people that can span the gap between us.
We need people that can understand and be comfortable with the languages and cultures of the countries of our region.
To do that, we need to give young people the chance to experience life in other countries in our region, and we need more education links to achieve that.
Conclusion 
Today President Lee and I talked about the relationship between our countries.
We talked about the history and about the relationship we have today.
But most importantly, we talked about the potential we see in the relationship.
As two new governments, we have committed ourselves to take some real, concrete steps to realising the potential of the relationship.
I would like to thank the Korean and Australian businesses that have done so much to build our relationship in recent decades.
And I would like to ask for your assistance as we seek to take this relationship to a higher level.
A level that more properly reflect the interests we share and the ties we have between us.
Thank you.


 PM: Many, many challenges and opportunities in our bilateral relationship and our common activities in the region and the world.
On the bilateral front the Australia Korea relationship is in first class working order. The President indicated to me the country's deep appreciation and sacrifice of Australian soldiers here in the Korean War and spoke movingly about those contributions. 
As I reflected upon my visit yesterday to Busan and the United Nations cemetery there I referred particularly to the sacrifice of one young Australian soldier who lost his life at the age of 17 having lied about his age. The President hadn't heard that story before.   We we're advised yesterday that this young Australian solider was in fact the youngest member of the United Nations forces to have been killed in action in the Korean War and they have named a war memorial after him at the cemetery in Busan.
Now we'll continue into the future the further developments of security cooperation between our two countries, the Republic of Korea and Australia have already worked and continue to work with one another in many parts of the world through peace keeping operations and we'll be looking at further opportunities to expand and develop our security relationship as well.
And the Foreign Ministers will be discussing that further over the next two to three months ahead.
On the economic relationship the President and I confirmed our commitment to the principle and objective of a free trade agreement between our two countries.
As a consequence of that preparatory discussions and negotiations will be held, the first round, as I'm advised Ambassador, in Canberra.  Am I right Ambassador? The first round of negotiations will be held in Canberra, I don't wish to mislead the Australian media, in September-October. These are preparatory discussions, preparatory negotiations and the President and I confirmed our in principle support for an Australia Korea free trade agreement.
For both of this is an important economic relationship and therefore the further liberalisation of economic engagement between us is important.
Over lunch the President and I also spoke about the importance of climate change and the importance of further work still on clean coal technology and we are strongly of the view that action on clean coal technology is important if we are to act globally and effectively on climate change.
Here in the Republic of Korea the impact of carbon emissions from the People's Republic of China is significant in multiple ways. And therefore there is a particular Korean interest in participating more closely with Australia in the work that we have underway domestically on clean coal technologies and a whole range carbon capture and storage.
You would have witnessed also the signing by our Governments respective representatives of the Memorandum of Understanding on Education. There is a strong set of education links between our universities, you would have seen this morning the direct link between the university here and the Australian National University and we will be seeking to expand those links further.
The establishment of the Korean Institute at the Australian National University later this week is one step in that direction. But beyond the study of each other's national studies, that is studies of Korea in Australia and studies Australia here in Korea, it is the academic exchanges right across the spectrum particularly in the life sciences, biosciences and in biotechnology which will be important in the future.
Finally we had also a long discussion about the Asia Pacific Community and it was a good discussion. Constructive, positive, the President indicated his interest in how we improve better the regional cooperation between member states of the Asia Pacific region and the President indicated he was looking forward to receiving the Australia Envoy of Richard Woollcott who is visiting other regional capitals over the coming months.
We believe we will have a strong positive and constructive dialogue with the Korean Government on this question in the period ahead.  Because our common objective is to ensure that we have effective multilateral cooperation between the various countries of the region into the future. As I said, I think, in the earlier press conference today, I don't want simply have our countries in this region drift into the future. Instead what I want is for us to collectively and intelligently to shape our future.
I don't want a region which in 20 years times drifts towards any direction of polarisation between China and the United States. I want instead a region which is shaped and unfolds in a way which encourages that habits of cooperation on security matters, political matters and economic matters in the future.
The process of dialogue with our regional partners in the Asia Pacific region, Asia Pacific community, continues and I look forward to continuing those discussions in Singapore tomorrow.
Happy to take your questions. 
 JOURNALIST: Prime Minister did you discuss North Korea?
 PM:Yes we had a long discussion about North Korea and what I indicated quite plainly to President Lee was that we in Australia supported strongly the Republic of Korea's efforts through the six party talks.  We understood fully the frustrations which the ROK experiences in dealing with the regime in Pyongyang and the fact that the Pyongyang regime continues to drag the chain when it comes to fulfilling its obligations under the in principle agreements which have been reached so far.
We are on the side of the ROK in this process, strongly supporting their interests and they are a friend, partner and fellow democracy in this region and we would encourage their continued efforts together with our common ally the United States in getting a satisfactory outcome through those talks.
I think it's fair to say that recent developments in the six party talks have been difficult and that is in large part because of the continued intransigence of the North Korean regime.
 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on a related topic. Did you discuss your proposed nuclear disarmament commission to strengthen the NPT? If so what response did you get and shouldn't the Republic of Korea be one of the most likely supporters of that endeavour?
 PM:We did discuss Australia's proposal for an Independent Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament. The Korean Government through the President indicated their interest in this initiative and in the period ahead Gareth Evans' work will obviously include the Koreans strongly within it.    
You are right to point out that in this part of the world the Republic of Korea has a strong interest in the overall challenge of nuclear non-proliferation in the activities that have occurred north of its border here in Pyongyang and across the various activities of the North Korean regime.
So President Lee and I have agreed to continue to discuss this in the period ahead.  We intend to maintain informed contact with one another using the telephone, on this, on the APC and other common challenges we face in the region.
I also by the way have extended a personal invitation to President Lee to visit Australia and he's indicated he will seek to do so in the first half of next year. That will be subject to the usual diplomatic protocol in the finalisation of timing.
 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd what the timetable for your expectation or your hope for nuclear disarmament on the Korean Peninsula and have things gone backwards give that (inaudible) years ago we saw the two Koreas marching together into the Olympic stadium but on Friday night they couldn't agree to do that.
 PM:Well when you're dealing with Pyongyang the best case outcome is two steps forward, one and half steps backwards, if not two, two and half steps backwards. I mean I've been to North Korea a couple of times and I know the sort of regime we're dealing with there and it's very difficult.  And certainly there have been real difficulties in recent times until some manifestation of that, as you rightly pointed out, at the Olympics Opening Ceremony in terms of the North Koreans refusing to march, as I understand it, in sequence with the South Koreans.
But there are two strategic options when it comes to dealing with the problems of the Korean Peninsula; one is to simply say that nothing works therefore don't try; and the other is have a go and that's what the six party talks were about. I commend the Governments of the United States, Japan and China, Republic of Korea and others for working strongly on this set of arrangements.
But North Korea has to step up to the plate and on so many question still they haven't done so effectively. If you look for example at this terrible tragedy which occurred only a few weeks ago at a beach resort in North Korea involving a South Korean tourist. He was shot dead while walking along the beach by a North Korean security personnel. Frankly when you've got that sort of behaviour going on it's pretty hard to achieve a lot of progress quickly.
 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the Republic of Korea's is very important to Australian beef farmers as a market and we have seen American beef come in here recently they are working hard on an FTA as well. What's your message to Australian farmers worried about the Korean market and competition with American farmers?
 PM:Well I have a view that Aussie beef will always succeed because Aussie beef is better.  And I think its frank in its success for example in markets like Japan and Korea have gone to, go down to the quality of our product. I'm pretty confident we are going to be able to compete and compete effectively on that score.
In the future we will always have to be vigilant about our trade policy interests with Korea as with any other country, but I'm confident in this market that Australian beef producers are going to continue to get a fair go.
There is no evidence of any discriminatory approach and I've detected on the part of the Korean Government through my discussions with President Lee on the question of future access for Australian beef.
 JOURNALIST: On the Free Trade Agreement Prime Minister how soon could it possibly be adopted (Inaudible)
 PM:Well its one step at a time. The advance I believe we have achieved in our discussions today is for us both to agree to the principle of a free trade agreement, that's important. And secondly for preparatory discussions and negotiations to occur in September-October.
This will be a slow process, and my discussions in China as you know, that's been a very slow process. Effective free trade agreements are hard if they are real free trade agreements because they involve substantive negotiations on substantive matters which involve concessions on the part of both parties and for them to be WTO compatible they have to genuinely liberalise trade as oppose to being an exercise in gesture politics.
So this will take a while, so I'm not about to put a timetable around it. What I've been keen to do with President Lee today is to say that this represents a potential new chapter in our relationship. We want to get going, this we think represents a good and practical step forward.
 JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd you've met now the Chinese, the Japanese, the Indonesians, Malaysians and South Koreans I think leadership all face to face since announcing your Asia Pacific Community proposal. Does it worry you or should we take anything from the fact that, as I understand it, none of those leaderships has given an unqualified endorsement of the plan?
 PM:The plan as such is for a process of discussion and the objective is clear which is 2020 we'd like to see an Asia Pacific Community where the various countries in the region are able to discuss common economic challenges, political challenges and security challenges, that's the landing point.
What I commenced in the speech I gave to the Australasian Society in Sydney a month or so ago was a process of discussions and if you reflect on the comments that I've made on multiple occasions since then, we expect that this is going to take a long, long time. It will be a long, long process of dialogue, don't expect any rapid breakthroughs. The evolution of regional institutions usually takes time and this will be no different.
Furthermore what I've also said is it will take carefully into account the views put to us by various regional countries and partners and I am quite confident that our process through the special envoy of Richard Woollcott will be able to embrace that.
I keep going back to my fundamental principle here. I'd much rather set an objective, I'd much rather set a date and much rather set up a process of discussion and negotiation than simply be silent and allow things to drift and that's all I have done.
And in discussions so far, they've all been pretty good. President Yudyhono, including with my Malaysian counterpart, including with President Hu Jin Tao and also with of course Prime Minister Fukuda and here with President Lee. All with lots of questions to ask, all probing as to how this thing could work over time, interested in our views..
 JOURNALIST: all positive?
 PM:As we are interested in their views. I don't wish to characterise the particular positions of any one of them in any particular way. But put it this way no road blocks to date.
 JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
 PM:I've really got to go, I was going to just say something about, I understand Libby Trickett's had a win is that right?
Well Libby fantastic, terrific, all Australians are proud of you and another great outcome for our Australians in the pool. 
I would have liked to be able to stay in Beijing for an extra day to see it, but I think there must have been millions of Australians back watching on their TV screens.  So good on you Libby, well done. Australia's proud of you.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on education between Australia and the Republic of Korea. 
This important signing will promote collaboration between the Australian and Korean governments to further strengthen education ties.
It will provide a framework for closer cooperation between Australia's Department of Education Employment and Workplace relations and Korea's Ministry of Education, Science and Technology to exchange information on education challenges and identify priorities for practical cooperation.
Korea is Australia's third-largest source country for international students, with more than 34,000 Korean students enrolled at Australian institutions in 2007. 
There are also strong links between Australian and Korean universities in areas such as student and staff exchanges and academic research.
The Prime Minister also attended today an e-lecture given by Australian National University (ANU) Vice-chancellor, Professor Ian Chubb, to students at Yonsei University in Seoul. 
The lecture demonstrated the significant potential for the delivery of English-language e-lectures and e-classes by Australian institutions and service providers to students in Korea and more broadly in the region.
The Prime Minister welcomed the establishment of a Korea Institute at the ANU, to be launched formally on 15 August, and plans to establish an Australia Institute at Yonsei University.


FRAN KELLY: Well, up to 20 per cent of Australians aged between 15 and 24, that's about half a million people, are apparently neither in full-time work nor full-time education. 
And in a speech later today to the annual conference of the Australian Council for Educational Research, Education Minister Julia Gillard will promise to do more to help these young Australians who aren't making this transition from school to work.
But with the PM, Kevin Rudd, out of the country, there's also a lot of issues to talk to the Acting Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, about.
Julia Gillard, welcome.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning, Fran.
FRAN KELLY: Now let's talk Olympics first, day three of the Games. What will you be watching?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I'm afraid my program today doesn't mean I'll be watching too much. I'm going to Bond University, Griffith University, delivering the Australian Council for Educational Research speech, and a few other meetings and commitments. But I will be in and out of the car and listening to the radio and hoping to hear that Libby Trickett's won the 100m butterfly - that would be great news. And, of course, later tonight we've got Stephanie Rice back in the pool for the women's 200m individual medley, so plenty of Olympic news to listen to during the day.
FRAN KELLY: Yes, plenty of hopes raised. Now, just on that - the whole hopes of winning gold medals - China's already showing its dominance on the medal tally. If Australia doesn't reach the stated target of more than 15 golds, does that matter? Would you be worried about that?
JULIA GILLARD: I think let's just do our best at the games and do the medal tally at the end. Obviously, our athletes are there and already putting in great performances, so I think the task at the moment is to be cheering them on.
FRAN KELLY: Okay. Well, no gold medal for Labor in the Northern Territory election that's for sure. In fact, many Territorians didn't even bother to vote. Why did Labor poll badly? 
JULIA GILLARD: I think we've got to remind ourselves that this result is actually exactly what Paul Henderson, the Labor Chief Minister, was telling everybody to expect. He consistently said that it was a tough contest for Labor...
FRAN KELLY: I don't think he thought it was this tough! I think the former chief minster was saying last week they would romp it home. 
JULIA GILLARD: Well Paul Henderson said consistently it was going to be a tough fight and it was going to come down to a handful of votes in a handful of seats.
FRAN KELLY: What about one vote, one seat?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, one vote, one seat, maybe. Obviously we're going to wait for the result to be finalised during the course of this week. But I do think perhaps some of the needier expectations were above and beyond what Paul Henderson was saying ... should be expected. He always said it was going to be close and it is being very close indeed.
Now the Northern Territory is obviously an election system where there's a fair bit of volatility built in because they're such small electorates. Nevertheless, when elections come and go, there's always a lesson for politicians in them, and I think the lesson from this election, as Kevin Rudd has said, and it's a lesson for all politicians - is that you've always got to be in touch with the electorate and you can't take anything for granted.
FRAN KELLY: Is there a lesson about going early and if there is ... you know, the Western Australian Premier, Alan Carpenter, is set to do that too, he's going on September 6. I mean, do voters expect their governments to go the full term?
JULIA GILLARD: I think each election contest is fought on its own issues. I don't think that we can construe from the Northern Territory some grand lessons for Western Australia - those elections are going to be fought on different issues, on things that matter to the population of those two places.
Obviously, generally, the public says to politicians that they want them to serve their term and get the job done. But circumstances can bring early elections on and that's what happened in Western Australia.
FRAN KELLY: Okay, can we move to the issue of student unionism? A report from your Department, I think, tells us what we've long suspected, that the introduction of Voluntary Student Unionism by the Howard Government hit the tertiary sector pretty hard - the funding cuts that amount to about $160 million. Now I know you're a former national president of the Australian Union of Students. Is it time to reintroduce compulsory student unionism?
JULIA GILLARD: We committed before the election that we would not reintroduce compulsory student unionism.
FRAN KELLY: Why don't you believe in it?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, we said we'd find a way of working with universities and student organisations to make sure that students could get services and that students could engage in proper advocacy to universities and beyond on issues that affect the student population. I mean the fact that we've got declining student services, including sporting and welfare services, is yet another part of the Howard Government's legacy in higher education.
FRAN KELLY: Well, the question is: What are you going to do about it? ‘Cause the universities are trying to plug those gaps failing and it's costing them. Are you going to give them more help?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, look, this is a dreadful and sorry tale - I agree with that, and we're trying to rebuild our universities all round.
Step number one - we made $500 million available through the Better Universities Renewal Fund and that money can be used to rebuild student amenities.
Step number two - my ministerial colleague, Kate Ellis, is in a process of consultation with universities and student organisations about what to do on student unionism and the paper you refer to is part of that process.
FRAN KELLY: Okay.
JULIA GILLARD: Step three - we've got the Bradley Review of higher education, led by Denise Bradley, which we want to lay down a blueprint for higher education for the next decade and beyond. This is a sector that took a pummelling from the Howard Government and was victim to, most particularly, its extreme Work Choices agenda and a lot needs to be done to rebuild it.
FRAN KELLY: A lot needs to be done across the board in education, I think. According to a speech you're going to give today, you're calling for more transparency in the performance of our high schools. Now your state counterparts have been resisting that very loudly for a very long time. What is it that you want? Do you want just a league table of results? Is that what you're looking for?
JULIA GILLARD: Absolutely not and we've made that clear. What we've committed before the election, and what we want, is rich-performance information about schools. The essence of league tables is you take one little thing and whack it in a list and say that's all you need to know about your local school - we're certainly not in that card.
What we want to know is very comprehensive information about who is in each school, because that would tell you something about educational need. We want comprehensive information about attainment at school because then you could look at schools that were in comparable positions, and if one was doing a lot better than another, you could ask yourself why and you could find a way of spreading the best practice from one school to another. And, of course, we want schools to be able to speak on their own behalf to say how they define their particular mission and what it is that they are focusing on.
Now, why do we want all of this information? Well, one, because I think people, particularly parents have got a right to know. Two, because if we're going to do things like make a real difference for educational disadvantage, then we need to know where that disadvantage lies and we need to know the best methods of addressing it.
FRAN KELLY:   And it seems that we need to know that quite urgently because another thing that we're talking about today is the high school dropout rate, and apparently, Australia ranks 23 out of 35 OECD countries for finishing Year 12 or Certificate III qualifications. We've got half a million young Australians falling between the gap of schooling and the workforce. What can we do about that? What's the answer?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I'd have to agree, Fran, these are pretty startling and worrying statistics, and that half a million is added to each year by another 45 000 to 50 000 young people, who come out of school and lose their way and don't make a successful transition to the next stage of education or into the world of work. We need an education revolution, we promised that.
FRAN KELLY:   Sure did. 
JULIA GILLARD: We certainly did and we're delivering it. And amongst the things we need to do, we need to be lifting retention to Year 12 or equivalent. We need to be doing that by investing in trades training and alternative pathways for young people. We're doing that with our $2.5 billion Trades Training Program. We also need to make sure that the curriculum is meeting students' needs - that's what the national curriculum process is about.
And we need to be helping people with information and support as they make those transitions - that's what our Job Mentoring Scheme is about and our Job Ready Certificate - to help those young people who are going to move from the world of school to the world of work to make that transition successfully.
Now, none of this is going to be easy. We're in intensive discussions with our state and territory colleagues because if we're going to achieve this, it's got to be achieved cooperatively. But if we are to have a long-term productivity and prosperity in this country, the sort of prosperous future that we want, then we need to make sure that young people are staying in education and coming out with skills. We can't afford to have young people just lose their way into some twilight world between school and work and never properly make the transition.
FRAN KELLY: Now, Minister, none of this comes cheap, presumably either no improvements in education. There's a report this morning in The Daily Telegraph that some cash-starved schools are turning to private sponsorship for funding of things like libraries. Is that a good idea? I mean, can you ... do you approve of the day we might see, I don't know, the Microsoft Learning Centre or the Coca-Cola Library?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I certainly approve of business partnerships with schools and I've seen some of them that have worked phenomenally well.
FRAN KELLY: Sure, we're talking about plugging a gap here.
JULIA GILLARD: Yeah, they're not about those programs at their best ... aren't about a simplistic, putting a plaque on a wall of a building. Rather, they're about a really strong relationship, where people from the business come and act as mentors in the schools and there are work experience opportunities in the business and the like, so I'm all for that.
Obviously, we want to make sure that we are investing better in our schools. We've made some big commitments there and we're delivering on them. I've spoken about the $2.5 billion going into trades training. We've already had the first round of that, the first round of schools successfully getting the first $90 million, and we're in the Second Round now. We've got our big investments in computers in schools, the $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution. And we're working now with state and territory colleagues, and with the Independent and Catholic systems, on the new schools funding agreement. 
FRAN KELLY: Okay.
JULIA GILLARD: And also on some better ways of assisting disadvantaged schools and some better ways of improving teacher quality.
FRAN KELLY: Alright, Julia Gillard, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks Fran.
FRAN KELLY: Julia Gillard is Acting Prime Minister, while Kevin Rudd is out of the country in Korea - on his way to Singapore on the way home from the Games.


GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: Here at home, Education Minister Julia Gillard has called for Australian schools to open their doors to public scrutiny so parents can get a clear idea of what's happening in the classroom. 
Ms Gillard says local schools should follow an American model, which allows parents to track the academic achievements of schools and to know the social and economic background of other students.
Julia Gillard, who is currently the Acting Prime Minister as Kevin Rudd continues his tour of Asia, is speaking here to Marius Benson.
MARIUS BENSON: Julia Gillard, you seem to be suggesting that schools around Australia are being a bit too secretive at the moment. Is that fair?
JULIA GILLARD: I don't think it's a question of schools being secretive. I think what we know about our education system if we look right across the board - the State system and the Catholic and Independent systems - is we don't have all the information that should be in the public domain to help us make the best possible decisions about the future of education. So it's time for a change.
I think we should know, school by school, the percentage of students in each school who are likely to face educational difficulties - people from low socio-economic status homes, Indigenous children, children with disabilities, children from non-English speaking backgrounds. And we should be able to attract attainment, school by school, then we could compare comparable schools, and if one was doing much better than another, we could say why and we could learn from that best practice.
MARIUS BENSON: Probably a lot of parents would say we'd like to know more about the attainment of schools. But what you're suggesting in terms of disabilities and individual socio-economic groups that conjures up pictures of parents perhaps ringing up a school and saying, “How many Aboriginal children there? How many poor children there?” Is that the sort of enquiry that is good for parent-school relations?
JULIA GILLARD: I think people know things like that about schools in their own locality. I think people can wander around suburbs and point to schools and have some understanding of who's in that school. What we don't have and what would be very useful for funding and other decisions is to be able to track disadvantage in schools nationally.
We're currently talking to our state and territory colleagues and the Independent and Catholic school systems about making new and additional resources available for those schools that are in disadvantaged communities and which are likely to have special needs. Now if you're going to make additional resources available, then you obviously need to be able to identify where they'll do the most good. 
MARIUS BENSON: You're speaking about another education issue and post-education issue today, which is a concern about a lot of young Australians who are neither in education nor in employment.
JULIA GILLARD: That's right. I'm speaking today at the Conference of the Australian Council for Educational Research. We know by international standards, that too many young Australians don't make a successful transition from school to work or study. Too many young Australians either end up not working or studying at all, or working part-time or perhaps studying part-time, but not really making a strong transition into the next stage if their lives.
We need to be doing what we can in the upper years of secondary schooling to make sure that people have the skills and information they need to make a successful transition to the next stage of their lives.
MARIUS BENSON: Can I just ask you a political question in your capacity as Acting Prime Minister? The Northern Territory election was held at the weekend. The result is still in the balance - Labor might lose, might hang on. Kevin Rudd says there are important lessons for Labor in the Territory result. What are the important lessons in your mind?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I would say looking at the result in the Northern Territory first that the Chief Minister there, Paul Henderson, consistently said that this was going to be a close election where it would come down to a handful of votes and a handful of seats and he's been proved right.
And I think Paul Henderson said those things because he understood that the Northern Territory electorate is a volatile one. We're talking about very small seats because we're talking about a small population in the Northern Territory - that tends to make for volatility.
And I think Kevin Rudd is right that the lesson from this poll - for all politicians - is that you can never be complacent. You've always got to be out there doing the job everyday.
As you said, we don't know yet what the Northern Territory result will be. It's too close to call, but it will obviously become clear during the course of this week as counting continues.
MARIUS BENSON: Julia Gillard, thank you very much.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.
GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: That's the Acting Prime Minister and the Education Minister, Julia Gillard, speaking to Marius Benson


ALI MOORE: Well Kevin Rudd is in Singapore and that means Julia Gillard is the Prime Minister.  Well, she's the Acting Prime Minister. She's sitting in the Prime Minister's chair - if not literately than figuratively.  And she is doing that on a morning when soldiers have been injured in Afghanistan. Russia has pushed further into Georgia and at home the question now being asked is just how many people will loose their jobs as part of this economic slowdown. Julia Gillard, good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning Ali.
ALI MOORE: If we can start with Afghanistan.  We talked to Joel Fitzgibbon at the beginning of the program. Are you worried about the increasing number in injuries and casualties we're experiencing in that country?
JULIA GILLARD: We've always said this was going to be a difficult fight and it is a difficult fight. We've also moved into a period of increased intensity.  It's what they refer to as, somewhat tragically in Afghanistan, as' fighting season'. Because we've moving into the season where the weather facilitates people doing the kind of things we saw happen to our troops yesterday. So it is a tough fight but it's an important fight.
ALI MOORE: Well if we can turn to Georgia- Russia as I have said has pushed well into Georgia. It's gone beyond the disputed areas despite appeals for a ceasefire and Georgia is calling for international help. Where does Australia sit on this conflict?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we have certainly joined the international calls to say that hostilities should cease and we would renew those calls. I think people who have been watching their TV screens and listening to the radio would be very disturbed by some of the images that have come in of civilians who are caught up in these hostilities. So we certainly want to see a ceasefire there.
ALI MOORE: Julia Gillard here's a little of what President George Bush had to say.
{President George Bush grab} 
ALI MOORE: Julia Gillard I think President Bush meant to say “Georgia's duly elected Government” there, not “Russia's duly elected Government”. But my question to you is: do you think the US will physically come to the aid of Georgia?
JULIA GILLARD: Well look I don't think, Ali, that it's appropriate for me in these circumstances to be making predictions about what the US or any other nation would do. Obviously we're monitoring the situation closely.  We're staying in contact with people around the world, including of course our ally the United States.  And the position we're advocating publically and within the councils of the world if that there should be a ceasefire.
ALI MOORE: Would Australia ever get involved in a conflict in that region?
JULIA GILLARD: Well Ali, I'm not going to be drawn on hypothetical's, particularly about something as serious as this. We're in a situation where we are calling for a cease to hostilities and we're obviously monitoring all developments very closely.
ALI MOORE: Well if we look closer to home - the Reserve Bank is forecasting a rise in unemployment which would equate to some 100,000 people out of work. Can you offer any comfort?  Is this just the slowdown we had to have?
JULIA GILLARD: We're in an environment where there are a number of big global factors that are hitting the Australian economy. We haven't been immune from the global credit crunch which started with the sub prime mortgage issue in the United States and has gone on to infect global credit markets and obviously we haven't been immune from the impact of increased oil prices either. We're also seeing a slowing as a consequence of eight interest rate increases in the last three years, so those factors are all in the mix.
What can we do?  Well, what we can do is fight inflation here, which is an enemy of working families, putting prices up, putting upwards pressure on interest rates. We did that by delivering a fiscally responsible budget.  And we are doing it by generating better capacity in the economy through new investments in skills and infrastructure. 
Our recent employment numbers, the numbers that came out most recently, continued to be strong with unemployment at 4.3 per cent. So that's obviously very low.  
ALI MOORE: You also have argued in the past of course, that the other thing you can do is to generate a more gentle industrial relations environment but at the same as we're getting this slowdown, I understand that the abolition of the Coalition's Work Choices is now going to be delayed.  Is that correct?
JULIA GILLARD: I read that in the newspapers this morning with some surprise  -  because no, that's not correct. We've always said that our substantive industrial relations Bill would be in the parliament in the second half of this year.  And it will be.  And we've already substantially taken away the worst aspects of Work Choices.  We...
ALI MOORE: But not unfair dismissal.  And you had held out the prospect that that would have an earlier start.
JULIA GILLARD:   What I've always said is the Substantive Bill, which will deal with unfair dismissal, would be in the parliament in the second half of this year.  And we will look when the bill is through the parliament - and I say “when” because obviously we've got to deal with a Senate with a Coalition which is still in the embrace of Work Choices.  But when the bill is through the parliament we will obviously be bringing on stream the parts that we can as soon as possible. 
But I think we've got to remind ourselves that in terms of the worst Work Choices rip off - the 16 year old kids that had the safety net ripped away in their first job - we've already fixed that with the first Bill in parliament of the Rudd Labor Government. 
No one need fear that they walk into a workplace today to have an Australian Workplace Agreement shoved into their hand which takes away basic pay and conditions... 
ALI MOORE: Julia Gillard we are heading up to the news, but just wanted to clarify: there is no delay?  You are on timetable for those changes?
JULIA GILLARD: We are on track, where we always expected to be.  And AWAs are already gone - the worst aspect of Work Choices. We are delivering exactly as we promised before the election.
ALI MOORE: Julia Gillard, thanks for joining us this morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Thanks Ali.


LEE: We've had a very good discussion on a wide range of issues and reaffirmed our commitment to step up cooperation between our two countries.
While both Singapore and Australia have been blessed with peace in recent decades, our relationship goes back to the Second World War when Australian troops were deployed in Singapore with other Commonwealth forces.
That chapter of our history is preserved at the Kranji War Cemetery which Prime Minister Rudd visited first thing this morning before dawn.
When Singapore gained independence in 1965 Australia was quick to recognise us the very next day. Since then we've built close ties rooted in a deep and strategic relationship. Our geographic circumstances and priorities are not identical. Australia's interests encompass the South Pacific where it has shouldered responsibilities for fostering and periodically restoring peace and stability, while Singapore is a part of ASEAN and tracks more closely developments in South East Asia.
Nevertheless our relationship is underpinned by our broadly similar strategic outlooks and many mutual interests. We both uphold an open globalised system that promotes economic interdependence between countries. We both see the vital importance of the United States to the Asia Pacific. We are both convinced that a peaceful emergence of China and India is positive for the region and for the world. We both want a stable and open region, which embraces Australia and New Zealand as part of the broader Asian family.
Furthermore both societies are direct, pragmatic and informal in spirit and in tone which makes it easy for us to understand each other and get along together.
This convergence of interests and ethos sets the overall tone for our bilateral relationship. Our ties have developed steadily and become institutionalised and during through successive changes of leaders on both sides our cooperation is robust and substantial spanning diverse areas.
One key pillar of our cooperation is in defence. The MOU on defence cooperation which we have just signed underscores our strong and multifaceted defence ties. We have been partners in the five power defence arrangements since 1971 and our armed forces have a well established working relationship honed through many joint exercises and training courses.
The Singapore armed forces trains regularly in facilities like the Shoalwater bay training area and the Oakley aviation centre in Queensland as well as the RAAF base Pearce in Western Australia.
We owe many thanks to the Australian Government and people for these generous arrangements. This year the (inaudible) will be deploying a medical team to support the Australian Defence forces in Oruzgan province in Afghanistan.
I'm confident that the MOU we have just signed will help us to strengthen further our defence interactions and cooperation.
In the economic field our bilateral trade has flourished, particularly since the implementation of the Singapore-Australia free trade agreement in July 2003. Last year Singapore was Australia's fifth largest trading partner. We are both open economies committed to promoting trade, investments and bigger stakes in one another's success.
For example the interior design project for Changi airports new terminal 3 was lead by Australian architectural and design firm Woodhead, working alongside a Singapore partner. We look forward to more such collaborations between our companies as well as deepening and broadening of the free trade agreement in future reviews.
Our people to people ties through tourism, cultural and educational linkages are warm and friendly. More than 10,000 Australians live in Singapore, adding to the vibrancy of our city. The Australian School here is full and expanding, in fact the Prime Minister just opened a new building today.
Similarly tens of thousands of Singaporeans live and work in Australia, while an even larger number have received their tertiary education there. In our early years of development many of our students studied in Australia on Colombo plan scholarships. Today we have four Cabinet Ministers, quite a few members of Parliament and numerous senior civil servants who are alumni of Australian Universities.
Singapore has since graduated from the Colombo plan to our regret, but many Singaporean youths continue to pursue their studies in Australia. On our part we hope to see more Australians come to study in our educational institutions, because such ties form a vital bridge between our countries.
On the political front Singapore and Australia cooperate closely in regional forums such as the ASEAN regional forum, the East Asia Summit and APEC. Singapore has always supported Australia's active engagement within the region. We appreciate Australia's contributions including your quick and generous response to humanitarian relief efforts after the Boxing Day tsunami and cyclone nargis.
These are clear demonstrations of Australia's commitment to the region, as your linkages with East Asia grow we hope you will work closely with us in Singapore and our ASEAN partners to shape the evolving architecture of regional cooperation and in particular we look forward to Australia's appointment of its Ambassador to ASEAN and to the speedy conclusion of the ASEAN- Australia- New Zealand Free Trade Agreement which will strengthen Australia's economic linkages with South East Asia.
Prime Minister Rudd Singapore is glad to have in Australia a close friend and a strategic partner. Over the years we have nurtured diverse and solid ties through regular exchanges between our leaders and officials at all levels. I am happy to work with you and your team to build in this long tradition. Recently Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard visited Singapore and we look forward to welcoming your Ministers for the upcoming Singapore-Australia joint Ministerial committee meeting.
Our meetings are characterised by the candour of our exchanges and the ease of which we relate to each other. Even when we hold different views on issues we always try to work through them together in good faith, bearing in mind our shared longer term interests and perspectives.
Distinguished guests, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen may I now invite you to rise and join me in a toast to the good health and success of Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, the peace and prosperity of Australia and the enduring friendship between our two countries and peoples.
HOST: Ladies and gentlemen the Honourable Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia
PM: Thank you very much Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, distinguished members of the Cabinet of the Government of Singapore and Distinguished representatives of the Government of Singapore, Ladies and Gentlemen.
When Australian Prime Ministers visit Singapore they feel instantaneously that they are among friends and so it is today. If I could, Prime Minister thank you very much for the personal hospitality you have extended to myself and my delegation during our visit here to Singapore today. It is regarded by us as a continuing reflection of the warmth and sentiment which has existed in this relationship for many, many decades and many, many decades to come.
The Prime Minister rightly pointed to the stage in history when this relationship was formed. The days of 1941 and early 1942 were dark days for both our peoples and visiting Kranji as I did this morning before dawn and seeing the graves of thousands of Australians and also to be reminded that there also lies thousands of graves of British servicemen, there lie also even more graves and more memorials in the names of Indian servicemen. This was an extraordinary contribution from across the world in the defence of this island in a very difficult time.
In the hearts and minds of Australians therefore when we think of Singapore, our first thoughts go to those dark and terrible times. So many families in Australia today still bear the scars of those losses. Of course that common endeavour in the field of defence and security has continued in the decades since then. We work closely with each other since Singapore became its own independent republic.
The Prime Minister has also referred to the five power defence agreement, an arrangement which we continue to place confidence, an arrangement which we continue to support. We regard that arrangement as important in terms of the interests of our respective countries. Important in terms of the wider stability, strategically of South East Asia and we will be continuing our support for that arrangement into the future.
But beyond the formal requirements of the five power defence arrangement there is also the fact that our armed forces on a daily basis are engaged in practical forms of cooperation in so many different ways. In Australia at Royal Australian Air Force Base Pearce and Oakley in Queensland and elsewhere.
But also as the Prime Minister also indicated the fact the our friends from the Singaporean armed forces will soon be with us in support of our troops in Afghanistan through the deployment of their medical team. This again is a sign of, not just the friendship between our two countries, but a sign that our armed forces are comfortable in their work with each other in theatres across the world and we look forward to receiving them soon in Tarin Kowt.
Defence is one strong pillar of this relationship but it is not the only pillar. The second pillar lies of course in the strong economic and business ties which have developed now over many, many decades. I met with many representatives of the Australian Business Community this morning over breakfast and none of them Prime Minister told me that they weren't earning a dollar. They always have problems to raise such is the nature of business representation to representatives of their Government.
But in this state of Singapore they have found a comfortable and welcoming business environment in which to operate for which I thank you. It is for many of them a platform to which they conduct their wider business operations across South East Asia and beyond.
Our business relationship has been augmented by the conclusion of the free trade agreement between our two countries. That free trade agreement will continue to be subject to review and refinement over time. But it has provided a strong and solid foundation for the economic and business ties which have developed over the years and will continue to develop into the future. The good thing also about the Singapore-Australia business relationship is that it is not narrowly based, it is broadly based and we intend through our combined bilateral efforts and the efforts of our business communities in both countries to add fabric and depth and breadth to this relationship because it is important for both of our economies.
A third pillar in this relationship lies in the connections which have built up over a long period of time between our educational institutions. I met again with the representative of James Cook University here in Singapore this morning. James Cook will be running a campus soon in Singapore for some 3500 students. But beyond that particular initiative there are as the Prime Minister indicated literally thousands and tens of thousands of Singaporean students whom we have welcome in Australia over many decades to come and live among us, to study among us, to return to Singapore and to form important human bridges of understanding and concrete business relationships between our two countries and two economies.
Prime Minister you said that Singapore had graduated from the Colombo plan and I was speaking about the Colombo plan this morning with your Minister for Transport and Second Minister for Foreign Affairs Raymond Lim who was himself nostalgic about his own education in Australia at the University of Adelaide through being a Colombo plan scholar.
I think in some creative way we need to revisit how we expand our cooperation again through tertiary educational opportunities for young people across South East Asia and beyond. And the Government of Australia will be devoting keen attention to this challenge in the days, weeks and months ahead.
The human bridges and professional bridges which the Colombo plan formed between Australia and Singapore and between Australia and so many other countries in South East Asia in fact rich, profound and one which continues I believe to yield enormous lasting benefits to our two countries and our two communities. I think it's a lesson from which we should continue to learn into the future.
Prime Minister you also mentioned a fourth pillar in our relationship which is our common endeavours in working to build the architecture of this the South East Asian region and wider Asia Pacific region.
As I said to the Prime Minister this morning some around the world have from time to time criticised ASEAN for being insufficiently active or activist. I have never supported that criticism for the simple reason that I regard ASEAN as one of the extraordinary successes in international relations.
The fact that the South East Asia of 40 years ago is so radically different to the South East Asia of 2007-2008 is itself a remarkable achievement. The fact that here in South East Asia we now have a real sense of community, a real sense of security cooperation, a real sense of continuing political dialogue within one another to solve problems through diplomacy rather than by other means, a real sense of emerging economic community. And in that respect ASEAN has been in our view in Australia and on the part of the new Australian Government an extraordinary success.
Part of that success and a key engine room of that success has been the effective diplomacy of Singapore itself and Prime Minister I would pay public tribute to your own contribution in that respect and to that of your predecessors Goh Chok Tong as well as your father Lee Kuan Yew. These achievements in terms of regional cooperation in South East Asia are owed in no small measure to the effective and successful diplomacy of Singapore over a long period of time.
We also have new regional institutions which have emerged including the East Asia Summit in which Australia is also now a participant. The Prime Minister and I will work closely together in how we shape the future agenda of the summit together and in cooperation with other parties to those summit arrangements.
It's important that again across wider East Asia we inculcate the culture of cooperation. The habits of cooperation often do not come naturally. Institutions which encourage cooperation are to therefore of themselves to be supported. That's why we will work closely with Singapore in the future evolution of this important institution, the East Asian Summit.
More broadly again we have next year the opportunity for Singapore to host APEC. When that meeting occurs here in Singapore at the end of next year APEC will have reached its 20th year. It will be important for us all to continue to contribute to APEC's agenda as a forum for wider Asia Pacific Cooperation across the new great powers of this our East Asian Hemisphere and of course the continuing great power that is the United States. Again the habits of cooperation are to be encouraged and are to be supported.
We also look forward to the admission soon across the country to the Asia Pacific region by our special envoy Dick Woolcott the former diplomatic representative in this part of the world. An Australian diplomat of great standing Mr Woolcott will be engaged in wider dialogue with our friends across the Asia Pacific region on the possibility of the long term evolution of an Asia Pacific Community. And we look forward to the contributions of all regional governments including that of Singapore to that proposal
Mr Prime Minister it has been a great honour for me to be invited to this extraordinary residence here in Singapore today and I thank you very much again for the hospitality which you have shown to me and to members of my delegation.
I extended to the Prime Minister early today an invitation to visit Australia again. I said to him, he is always a welcome guest in Australia and we look forward to seeing him in Australia very, very soon. I think sir you will know and know from experience in our country you will always be made to feel welcome because there as here we feel that we are among friends.
In conclusion if I could on behalf of all of those present, now propose a toast to the President and to the people of Singapore.
To the President and the people of Singapore. I thank you very much.


JULIA GILLARD: Can I start by saying it's a great pleasure to be here at Bond University today to open this new and very special building. This is a building with a six star rating. It's a building at the forefront of science and technology when it comes to being energy efficient and water efficient. And within this building we are going to teach the people who are going to make a difference for tackling climate change tomorrow - the designers, the planners, the people who will make a difference to how we live and work right across this nation and right around the world.  
The challenge of climate change is one of the greatest challenges this nation faces and indeed the world faces. It's the biggest economic and social challenge of our time, and to see Bond University working with Mirvac, supported by the Federal Government with a $3 million investment, playing its role in dealing with the challenge of climate change by developing a facility like this is very inspiring. 
It's been a great pleasure to be here today for this opening. This is a building at Bond University that Mirvac, that the designers and certainly the Federal Government can be proud of, and what happens in this building is going to make a difference to how this nation deals with climate change. 
QUESTION: Can you see Parliament House adopting the same sustainable changes?
JULIA GILLARD: We do know that our Parliament House authorities are working on doing what they can to make a difference to the energy and water consumption of Parliament House. Obviously, the building built in 1988 I think it was, and it needs retrofitting. Obviously, the great thing with a new design like this, is from the ground up as the driving principle behind it, you can build in sustainability and you can generate a green star rating like a six star rating.
QUESTION: Minister, no problems getting this amount of money to a private university from the Government's perspective?
JULIA GILLARD: The Australian Government, the Rudd Labor Government, wants every university in this country and indeed every school in this country to be a provider of excellent education. That's why we support all of the universities in this nation and why we support schools, whether they're in the State system, the Catholic system or the Independent system. We want people to have choice but we want every choice to lead to a quality education. That's what our Education Revolution is all about.
QUESTION: Talking about star ratings, you would like to see schools have some sort of a star rating system?
JULIA GILLARD: I would like to see performance information for schools available in the public domain and available most particularly to parents. And the reason we want to do that is to not create simplistic league tables that tell you nothing. We want there to be rich performance information available. We want to understand who is studying in each school, the number of children in each school who may face some form of educational disadvantage and need extra help.
And we want to understand how schools are attaining so we can compare schools in like positions and if one's doing better than the other, find out why and then spread that best practice. It's in everybody's interest, and certainly the interest of every Australian child studying at school today, for the maximum amount of information about our education system and their school to be available publicly and we will be pressing for that.  
QUESTION: The Education Department has released a report into Voluntary Student Union fees saying that it's having a negative impact on universities? Should there be a revision of the system?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly this was one of the cruellest and unkindest cuts of the Howard Government to our university system. The Howard Government abolished compulsory student unionism and as the report released by my Department shows, that means students are missing out on vital services. It means they're missing out on sporting opportunities, on welfare services, counselling services, the kind of things that students rely on and need when they're at university.
Of course, our universities were treated shabbily more broadly than that. Apart from the attack on student unionism, of course, our universities were forced to adopt the extreme Work Choices law. We're working with our universities to rebuild. We've invested already $500 million through our Better Universities Renewal Fund and that money can be used for student services, for the capital development of student services if universities choose. We also have the Bradley Review into higher education to chart a course for higher education for the next decade and beyond. And we're working to rebuild the student services, particularly being oversighted by my ministerial colleague, Kate Ellis. 
QUESTION: So you won't be going back to compulsory union fees?
JULIA GILLARD: The Government prior to the election ruled out a return to compulsory student unionism. But we did say we wanted to work with universities and student organisations to make sure students have the services that they needed and also to make sure that there was a proper role for student advocacy at our universities.
QUESTION: Is there going to be a website, say university watch?
JULIA GILLARD: [laughs] What we're talking about already is $500 million of cold hard cash that's going to our universities to assist with capital development. You've heard, of course, how that's going to be used at Bond University. Universities around the country are using that to take some of the pressure off. Then we've got the Bradley Review. We need to make sure we've got a long-term plan for universities in this country that ensures that our university system is a world class system and we are working on that.
You don't fix a decade of neglect overnight, but we've done the first instalment with the $500 million through the Better Universities Renewal Fund. And we will work with the Bradley Review and our universities and with the student services to chart their course for the future. 
QUESTION: Regarding our single pension, how bad is it and what does the Government intend to do about it?
JULIA GILLARD: We understand that it's tough out there for pensioners. We understand that with rising cost of living pressures that hits people on fixed incomes, and that's particularly true for older Australians. In the Budget, we tried to take some of the pressure off by providing older Australians with a $500 cash bonus and also by providing them with a higher degree of subsidy for their utilities. We know that when the gas bill rolls in or the electricity bill rolls in, that can be a difficult time. So we have a new utilities allowance that's paid quarterly to try and take some of the pressure. Between the $500 cash bonus and the $500 utilities allowance, that's a $1000 there for older Australians.
We know more needs to be done and that's why we've asked the Henry Review to look at this whole area of pension payments and the material being released today by my ministerial colleague, Jenny Macklin, is part of that process. 
Can I say I noted in today's newspapers that former minister, Mal Brough says when he was a member of the Howard Government he argued for an increase in the pension rate and got knocked back by the Howard Cabinet, which of course includes Brendan Nelson, who is leader of the Opposition, Julia Bishop Deputy Leader, Malcolm Turnbull, Shadow Treasurer, and Peter Costello who was then off course Treasurer of the country, knocked back increasing pensions. 
QUESTION: Do you accept that the Northern Territory election result is a kick in the pants for the Rudd Government and that, and should Anna Bligh also be concerned?
JULIA GILLARD: The Northern Territory result is obviously about the Northern Territory and I think it's important to note that Paul Henderson, the Labor Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, always said this would be a tough election for Labor and it would come down to a handful of votes in a handful of seats and how right he was. It has come down to that handful of votes in a handful of seats. We'll obviously get the full results this week. It was always going to be a tough fight for Labor and so it's proved.
What I would say is I would endorse the Prime Minister's comments that for all politicians, whatever political party they are in, whatever parliament there in, in this nation the electorate is always sending us a message that they won't stand for complacency. They want to see people getting the job done, they want to see governments with the long-term plans that will make a difference for the future and that's what the Rudd Labor Government is all about.  
QUESTION: Minister, Rod Welford and Bronwyn Pike have come out and said there shouldn't be league tables and you shouldn't compare schools. It was an election promise that results of the literacy and numeracy tests would be revealed, and there was a bit of a back flip saying they wouldn't come out. What can Australian parents now expect in terms of what their kids are doing at school?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I absolutely agree there shouldn't be league tables and that's not what the Rudd Labor Government is talking about. We're talking about a full set of information about our schools. We're in intensive discussions with our state and territory colleagues about making sure this information is available and what people should expect is they should expect us to deliver on our election promise that that performance information will be available.
QUESTION: Wont a rating system segregate schools and you know, put children at a disadvantage?
JULIA GILLARD: We're not talking about league tables; we're not talking about a simplistic rating system. We're talking about all of the information one would need to understand what's happening in a school. And if I could put the proposition very simply like this: the Government is talking about making new resources available to assist schools that face disadvantage. We know there are schools round this nation doing it tough. Educating students from poor families, educating Indigenous students, educating children with disabilities, educating children from migrant and refugee backgrounds - we want to know where those schools are so we can help them better. That's what getting this kind of information into the public domain is about, knowing where educational disadvantage is so we can fix it. Okay, thank you very much.


CHRIS SMITH: Julia Gillard, I think, should be congratulated. The Federal Education Minister and Acting PM is pushing for parents' rights to know what is going in their kids' schools - and I think that's well and truly fair enough. And let's face it, as a parent you can't glean much of a satisfactory or unsatisfactory notion from a report card. It doesn't tell parents much at all and doesn't tell those who run our schools much either.
But Julia Gillard's looking to change that. She's met with the Chancellor of Schools in New York, where there's a lot more targeted teaching based on information gathered from students' backgrounds and also their performance. Now if the Education Minister is able to introduce something like that here, nationally I presume, it will help nudge along the Education Revolution we heard so much about during the election campaign. 
Now this plan will give parents plenty ... plenty of information about the kid's school. For one thing, it'll reveal how much money the parents of students have, also class sizes, teacher qualification, the number of Indigenous students at the school, kids with disabilities and non-English speakers; some real test results. And I know people are frightened to put people at the end of the scar when it comes to test results. But I would've thought the acknowledgement that kids aren't doing as well as they should is an enticement to improve. 
We've spoken about that on the program and other programs on 2GB before. Maybe you'd like to comment - 13 1873.
Education Minister and Acting PM Julia Gillard joins me to talk about the plan right now. Good morning, Acting Prime Minister. 
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.
CHRIS SMITH: How does that feel, to run the country?
JULIA GILLARD: [laughs] It feels pretty good but obviously the boss will be back. He arrives back late tonight, but in the meantime, I'm obviously here doing what I can, doing what I can do to fill in the gap.
CHRIS SMITH: Give us insight, do you speak to Kevin Rudd like ... now that you're running the country, do you speak with him like five, six times a day?
JULIA GILLARD: The Prime Minister is overseas, he's in intensive meetings. He obviously went to the Olympics first, then in Korea, then in Singapore. So we don't need to speak as frequently as that and obviously I'm well supported by our public service advisors and by our staff. So I keep an eye on domestic matters when he's overseas.
CHRIS SMITH: Okay, to education. Now if this plan for our schools was to be introduced, you'd do it nationally no doubt. You'd be supplying families and education planners with a hell of a lot of information. Now just explain for our listeners - how would that benefit the kids in classes and parents?
JULIA GILLARD: I think it would benefit two ways: number one, if we had real national information about who's in school, we would be able to identify those schools that have large numbers of kids that are going to need that extra little bit of help to succeed in schooling. We know that kids from poor families, Indigenous children, children with disabilities, children from non-English speaking backgrounds, can all end up with great educational results, but they often need a little bit of extra help to get there. So we would be able to focus on those schools that have children in large numbers in those categories within their number and give them extra resources and extra help. So that's number one.
Number two, we would be able to compare like-schools, schools with comparable student populations and if you saw that one was doing a lot better than the other, then you'd be able to work out why. You'd be able to spread the best practice from the high achieving school through to the school that isn't doing so well. 
Now at the moment we've got no way of doing those comparisons, and if you tried to do those comparisons just on test scores, then principals and teachers and parents would be able to say, ‘Well, you know, you're not comparing us with the school that's like us'. So we need all the information about student population so we can do the comparisons of like-schools. 
CHRIS SMITH: I received so many calls from parents saying almost the same kind of thing - ‘I'm not getting enough information. I don't know how my student or my child is doing'. Truly, really, in real terms, to compare like-schools to like-schools, is that why you're saying you need to reveal how much money the parents of students have so you can compare, say, socio-demographic regions and areas?
JULIA GILLARD: It's interesting. At the moment, sitting in the chair as Federal Education Minister, I have a database which gives me the socioeconomic status of private schools. So we know that information about non-government schools, but we don't know it about government schools. So it's not about getting an individual parent's information. I'm not interested in what Mr Smith and Mrs Jones have or don't have, but having enough information so we can look at those schools that come from poorer, less advantaged backgrounds and identify them.
And I want to reassure people we're not just gathering information for information's sake. We're in active discussions with states and territories and the catholic and independent school systems about bringing new resources to (inaudible) in schools that do face disadvantage. So we want to use this information to identify problems with a view to fixing them not blaming people, saying bad schools, bad teachers or anything else.
We want to take a positive mindset and say, ‘Let's work out what's out there. Let's see where disadvantage is and let's make a difference for that disadvantage. Let's compare comparable schools and if one is attaining a lot better - there's better teacher practice, better leadership, better things happening in that school - let's spread it'.  
CHRIS SMITH: Okay. You've got an uphill battle to a certain degree because in recent years the four letter word ‘FAIL' has been taken off the agenda by educators.
And we've heard this time and time again - you cannot classify kids as failing, you can't tell the kids and their parents that they haven't done as well as they should and yet again I get so many calls from parents saying, ‘Hey, that's how they improve. That's what we need to help them improve their marks at school and improve their retention to what's happening in the classroom'. Is that what you're supporting here - a real series of test result that has winners and losers?
JULIA GILLARD: I think we've got to be pretty realistic and we're in a big wide world and it's sometimes a tough world and kids have to come out of school with the skills to live in that world. So they've got to be able to read and write, they've got to be able to get a job, they've got to be able to have the life skills, which mean that they will cope with life's up and life's downs. And there's not point to trying to cover up whether or not kids are getting those skills that they're going to need for life.
Now that doesn't mean that the message to a young child has to be confidence-shattering, ‘You're a bad boy or you're a bad girl'. That's not how the message should be put. But students need to know how they're going, their parents need to know how they're going and then they need a plan for getting better. 
CHRIS SMITH: The New York experience you went through must've impressed you, to turn around and say what you said at the conference yesterday. Tell us about that.
JULIA GILLARD: Yes, I had the opportunity to go the United States and I met there with a man called Joel Klein, who is the all up runner of the schools in New York - they call him the Chancellor of Schools. And New York is obviously, geographically, a very small place compared with Australia but there's 1.1 million kids in New York schools so he's got a pretty big job, Joel Klein.
And he's got a system and obviously there's a lot of statistical methodology and expert advice in this, but what the system does is it enables him to compare like-schools with like-schools - see how people are going. They then give extra resources to try and boost schools that haven't done well. And one of the things that Joel Klein said to me which really impressed me is he said, ‘When the system was first introduced, it was very controversial'. Now when they go through the system, he takes calls from principals that say, ‘Next year I'm going to make sure my school does better'. And that's the kind of attitude you want. Now, I'm not ...
CHRIS SMITH: It almost increases competition, right?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I think it increases focus, absolutely. I'm not suggesting we uplift the New York model and move it to Australia - Australia's a very different place. But I think you can look at things like that and you can learn from aspects of them, and the transparency and the sense of achievement and the drive to get better results.
And I think we'd all know from watching our TV, parts of New York are pretty tough places with a lot of educational disadvantage. To get better results in places like that is really meaningful. And what we want to do when we look across this vast country is make sure that every kid's getting an excellent education. And I think as we look across this country now, we can see too many places where we'd say the kids aren't getting a fair chance.
CHRIS SMITH: How are you going to convince Morris Iemma this is the way to go and maybe a few other Premiers that don't agree?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, we'll keep having the discussion and we're in intensive discussions now with the states and territories. We've got some very important things to do by the end of the year. We've got to agree with the states and territories and the catholic and independent school systems the next school funding agreement. We also want to agree with them a new national partnership for more money for disadvantaged schools. We also want to agree a new national partnership on teacher quality because how good the classroom teaching is so much a determinant of everything else. And we want to agree with them some new ways of boosting literacy and numeracy.
So it's a big agenda. But as part of that agenda we're going to be pursuing these transparency measures and we're going to be putting that pretty assertively.
CHRIS SMITH: Can I ask you one simple question on banks before we let you go?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly.
CHRIS SMITH: I keep hearing, we keep hearing talk about forcing banks to lower interest rates. Treasurer Wayne Swan has said he can't do much about that. Here's a hypothetical for you: what about legislation to keep the market deregulated - don't touch that - but still force the banks to do what they've done for 20 years honestly and stay in line with the  (inaudible) issued by the Reserve Bank.
So forget Glenn Stevens said, that is, ‘Oh, banks go for your life. Lift them as much as you need to lift them'. How about we get the banks back in line with the Reserve Bank and make it essential through legislation. I know it's a tough call and it is a hypothetical, but why couldn't you consider that? 
JULIA GILLARD: I don't think legislation is the way to do it. Banks obviously look at the Reserve Bank ... do more than look obviously. What the official interest rate is vital to them. There are also the costs that they incur in accessing money, so banks borrow as well as lend. And when they borrow, things like the global credit crunch obviously matter to them. So something that started with the sub-prime mortgage problem in the United States is now infected the global credit markets of the world ... 
CHRIS SMITH: Yeah, but that is an excuse now because it is definitely and, without doubt, easing and they keep using that as an excuse.
JULIA GILLARD: But what we've said to the banks and Wayne Swan's been said very clear on this is we expected them - should the Reserve Bank puts interest rates down and obviously the Reserve Bank sets these things independently of Government - but should the Reserve Bank put interest rates down, we expect banks to pass that on. And we're also making it easier for consumers to put pressure on their banks by making it easier for them to switch banks if their bank isn't doing the right thing. There have been all sorts of, you know fees and other arrangements that have locked people into mortgages. We want to make it easy for people to switch if they think their bank isn't giving them a good deal. 
CHRIS SMITH: I just get a feeling that out there the community doesn't think enough is being done to force the banks into line, but anyway that's a question for another day, no doubt. Thank you so much for your time. Enjoy running the country.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you very much.
CHRIS SMITH: Okay, Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard.


When I arrived in Singapore this morning, the first place I visited was the Kranji War Cemetery.
There is no more permanent reminder of the connection between Australia and Singapore than that sacred place.
More than 2,500 Australians are buried at Kranji or are remembered on the Singapore Memorial to the Missing.
These brave Australians do not lie alone.
Together with the Australians are honoured many thousands of others, including at Kranji some 2700 British, 670 Indians and many others who gave their lives also for the defence of this island.
And those that survived the battle of Singapore then had to go on and endure horror and hardship as prisoners of war.
I thank the Government of Singapore for continuing to honour their memory.
And it is for these great reasons that Singapore has always occupied a special place in the hearts of Australians.
For Australians, military ties with Singapore are not just a matter of distant history.
They have been alive through the Emergency, through Konfrontasi, and more recently through the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
And they continue to inform the present as well as shape the future.
Most recently, our defence forces have worked together in East Timor.
And they will soon be working together in Tarin Kowt in Afghanistan.
Time after time, we also find ourselves side by side in military operations, in peacekeeping operations and in humanitarian operations  -  as in the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami.
Security, defence and peacekeeping cooperation has been a fundamental, continuing part of our relationship.
Part of a wider relationship between our two countries which I believe is welcomed by both our governments.
It is, therefore, a great pleasure to be back in Singapore.
And I want to thank the Government of Singapore for extending to me the honour of giving the Singapore Lecture.
My purpose in this lecture is to outline our thinking on the possible shape of our region in the future in a rapidly changing world.
And, furthermore, how we might together respond to the new challenges that these changes will create if we are to maximise our common goals of security, prosperity and sustainability for the wider region.
All the more important at the dawn of what will become the Asia-Pacific century  -  as the centre of geo-strategic and geo-economic gravity progressively shifts to this our own region.
With this shift comes great responsibility.
A responsibility to ensure that this century of Asia and the Pacific remains truly pacific as previous centuries of Europe and the Atlantic have not.
The changes and the challenges we face are therefore great indeed.
The Transnational Scope of the Challenge
Dealing with the challenges of a more integrated world means understanding both the limitations of the state and the limitations of markets  -  and embracing cooperative solutions to global challenges.
Challenges which lie beyond the reach of any single nation state  -  however powerful.
For example, climate change is the consequence of the failure of free markets to adequately account for pollution externalities.
Similarly, the recent international financial turbulence was precipitated by too little effective regulation, not too much.
The gathering challenges of energy, water and food security reveal the need for long-term management of these critical global resources  -  recognising price realities as a product of scarcity while equally recognising macro challenges of energy and water shortages and their impact on adequate food supply.
And one of the major security threats of the 21st century thus far  -  terrorism  -  has revealed itself to be diffuse, elusive and no respecter of national boundaries and largely immune to the polarised geopolitics of the Cold War era.
We can say confidently that none of the major contemporary global challenges can be addressed by a retreat into isolationism or unilateralism.
Today's global challenges therefore derive from a diverse mix of market failures, ineffective regulation, and inadequate international institutional frameworks to deal with what most of us would regard as genuinely global public goods.
The Drivers of Global Change
The world is experiencing rapid change of an order of magnitude rarely experienced in human history.
These changes are complex.
These changes are greatly interconnected  -  defying the capacity of the traditional silos of public sector policy formulation to deal effectively with them.
These changes are also, in the main, global and therefore tend to defy exclusively national responses.
These changes thus demand that every nation review and renew their national objectives, their participation in regional and global institutions, and their place in a dynamic world.
And nowhere is the pace of change greater than in the Asia Pacific region.
Indisputable demographic and economic change dictates that we are entering the Asia Pacific century.
It is estimated that by 2020, Asia will account for around 45 per cent of global GDP, one third of global trade and nearly one quarter of global military spending.
Our region's population is continuing to grow and is projected to reach 4.6 billion by 2020 out of a total global population of 7.7 billion.
Rapid population growth, combined with rapid urbanisation, will place increasing pressure on resources, particularly in relation to energy.
Asia's energy consumption could grow by around 40 per cent by 2020, or to put it another way, more than half of the increase in global energy consumption by 2020 will come from Asia.
The rise of China and India is a significant part of this shifting pattern of global economic and strategic weight toward the Asia-Pacific region.
This rise will be among the key defining developments of the 21st century.
The rise of China in particular represents the great unfolding drama of this new century.
Will China democratise?
How will China respond to climate change?
How will China deal with crises in the global economic and financial systems?
How will China respond domestically to the global information revolution?
And how will Chinese culture adjust to the array of global influences now washing across its shores directly and through the agency of the greater Chinese diaspora?
How China responds to these forces will radically shape the future course of our country.
Which means how countries such as Singapore and Australia seek to influence China's view of its role and responsibility in the merging global and regional order is also of great importance.
Beyond this shift in geopolitical power, a further factor driving global strategic change is the future course of economic globalisation.
The freer movement of goods, services, people and capital across borders has brought many great benefits.
It has generated high rates of global growth.
It has enhanced the prospects, in particular, of developing countries which have opened themselves to the international economy.
The economic globalisation of recent decades has also brought more people around the world out of poverty more quickly than any other time in history.
The challenges of economic globalisation, however, also need to be faced up to and their strategic consequences need to be addressed.
The illegal movement of people, drugs, weapons and capital across borders is accelerating.
There is also growing sense of grievance among some who believe that they have not had full access to the benefits of globalisation, or that they are simply worse off as a result of globalisation.
Even in states which have benefited unambiguously from globalisation, there is often a backlash against it when economic times get tough.
These economic realities have important strategic consequences.
A third major international change is the evolution of the concept of ‘national security'.
Clearly, the traditional concept of the term endures  -  that is, the security of one nation in relation to another.
But the concept has broadened to include the threats to international and national security posed by non-state actors who facilitate the global reach of terrorism.
National security is broadening even further in the outlook of some states to include food security, water security and energy security as well as security from the threat of health pandemics.
Climate change will lead to changed rainfall patterns and, therefore, to changes in agricultural production that will have an impact on food security.
Severe weather events will occur more frequently in some regions, making it more important that nations are ready to respond to natural disasters within and beyond their borders.
Competition for increasingly scarce energy resources will make it more important than ever for nations to manage territorial disputes.
These are all evolving concepts of national security that have significant strategic consequences.
We need to ensure that our international organisations are capable of producing real results in all areas  -  from human rights to trade liberalisation and climate change.
Policy Responses
As governments, the complex challenge we face is to craft policy responses to this rapidly changing region and world.
The new Australian Government is committed to ensuring that we are strong at home.
We are committed to enhancing our national security.
That is why the Government is building a more secure Australia by strengthening our defence for the future, building on the US alliance, and tackling new national security challenges, including long-term energy security.
We are also committed to strengthening the Australian economy.
Australia like other nations faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is building a stronger Australia through responsible economic management to put downward pressure on inflation and implementing a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long-term competitiveness and to invest in the industries of the future.
We are also committed to an activist diplomacy aimed at enhancing regional security and an open global economy enhanced by effective institutional and regulatory arrangements.
To achieve this we must act in concert with other states  -  both regionally and globally.
Singapore's Achievements
Australia  -  like Singapore  -  is naturally an outward-looking country.
We both understand the fundamental truth that our future can only be as nations fully engaged in global and regional affairs.
Singapore has demonstrated a remarkable global reach well beyond the physical size of this island republic.
This is equally remarkable given that Singapore is such a new nation state.
Only 45 years ago, Singapore joined with Malaysia.
And then two years later embarked on its own independent course.
In the 43 years since, Singapore has exhibited a significant record of achievement.
For a state to establish itself following the turmoil of independence is no easy task.
Entire national structures must be built.
The institutions of a national economy have to be developed from the ground up.
And Singapore's international personality had to be established.
In all of these things, and against any comparable global measure, Singapore has been a unique success story.
Singapore has become a major centre of regional and global trade.
Singapore has become a global transport centre.
Singapore has become a global financial centre.
Singapore has also maintained a peaceful multi-ethnic society in a region where ethnic tensions have been, from time to time, acute.
There is therefore great potential for our two countries to work creatively together to respond to the great challenges of our region and our world.
ASEAN
Singapore already has a long track record of positive regional activism through ASEAN.
At the height of the Cold War, 41 years ago, the leaders of five South East Asian nations got together to form ASEAN.
Singapore was one of the nations that helped to chart the future course for ASEAN as a founding member.
The world has changed a lot in the intervening 41 years, but ASEAN has endured.
In fact, ASEAN has done more than just endure, it has grown and it has matured.
During Singapore's Chairmanship of ASEAN over the past 12 months, the ASEAN Charter was signed  -  a new milestone in ASEAN's evolution.
I think that ASEAN's most impressive achievement  -  and one that is often under-appreciated  -  is building a sense of regional identity, a sense of community, and a sense of neighbourhood.
The countries of South East Asia have diverse histories, political systems, religious beliefs, social systems and cultural backgrounds.
But a real sense of community has been forged where there had been historically few substantive ties.
In fact when ASEAN was formed, the member states themselves had been riven by conflict then raging through Indochina.
Forty years later, by absolute contrast, the habits of cooperation have crafted a sense of genuine community.
It is a community that defaults first towards dialogue rather than confrontation.
It is a neighbourhood whose residents seek, first and foremost, to cooperate more closely with each other.
In this sense, ASEAN represents an outstanding essay in institutional success for which member states, including Singapore, should be congratulated.
Some criticise ASEAN for being insufficiently activist.
I argue that this criticism is misplaced because it fails to appreciate that ASEAN's great success has been to avoid conflict among member states and allow economic development to progress unimpeded by intra-regional security concerns.
That is why I argue that ASEAN has been a remarkable success story.
ASEAN in turn has given rise to other elements of the wider regional architecture including the East Asia Summit (EAS), the Asia Europe Meeting (AEM) and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
Australia is therefore proud that it was ASEAN's first Dialogue Partner in 1974.
APEC
Of course, another example of cooperation is the one with the broadest membership in our region  -  and that is APEC.
Once described by Gareth Evans as “four adjectives in search of a noun”, APEC has become a noun in its own right nowadays.
APEC has shown that its model of cooperation and dialogue can deliver practical results across the wider region.
Much of the day-to-day work of APEC on harmonisation of customs regulations and similar topics may not shape the global terrain.
But they do make a practical difference to businesses.
They make it easier to conduct business across international boundaries and that helps to drive economic growth by the lowering of the costs of transactions.
If we can take forward APEC's idea for a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (as recommended by the United States), it would be a significant boost to regional prosperity.
APEC also works in the important area of regional disaster response  -  a field in which the ASEAN Regional Forum also plays a role.
If you look around our region over the past decade, the cost of natural disasters has been staggering.
Last year, according to the Red Cross, 241 disasters across Asia resulted in more than 15,000 deaths.
And this year the cyclone in Burma and the earthquake in China have reminded us of the power of nature  -  more than 150,000 lost their lives and so many hundreds of thousands more have been seriously affected.
And these events have reminded us of the need to be able to react quickly.
What is more, they have reminded us that responding to large-scale natural disasters is often beyond the power of even the largest states.
But, if we pool our resources and if we coordinate our assets, we can do more and we can get better results.
In responding to a crisis, the first 24, 48 or 72 hours are critical.
So, we need regional mechanisms that facilitate a quick response.
Australia and Indonesia are going to take a proposal to the APEC Leaders Meeting in Lima, Peru, this year about regional disaster management coordination.
Next year Singapore will host APEC - and I know that Singapore is already working hard to make sure that next year's agenda will be ambitious.
Australia is committed to working closely with Singapore in the lead-up to APEC next year.
Just as we will work with Japan and the United States over the following two years when they will host the APEC Leaders' Meeting.
APEC has a record of helping shape regional responses to challenges like trade liberalisation, trade facilitation, as well as providing a regular forum for meetings of regional heads of government including those of China and the United States.
The Concept of an Asia Pacific Community
Over the years, our regional architecture has evolved.
It is not static.
It has changed greatly since the first steps were taken to establish ASEAN forty-one years ago.
Our region has benefited greatly from the regional architecture that has emerged.
The founders of ASEAN, of APEC and of the East Asia Summit did us a great favour in establishing these organisations.
These institutions have made, do make and will continue to make a great contribution to our security, stability and prosperity.
Earlier I outlined the key drivers of global change.
In twenty years time, the global terrain may well be unrecognisable as a result of deep forces currently reshaping our world.
As governments, I believe we have a responsibility to think about the future and to plan for it.
The alternative is to sit idly by and let our world and our region to be simply reshaped by events  -  as if we were passive by-standers.
My view is simple, either we shape the future, or the future shapes us.
We need to prepare our countries for the future, and we need to prepare our region for the future.
It is for this reason that two months ago in Sydney I highlighted the advantages for the wider Asia-Pacific region in engaging in a conversation about the future of our regional architecture.
And further that that conversation would be usefully directed at how we could develop a concept of an Asia Pacific Community.
Of course, we want a stable region that is secure, open and prosperous.
Our region should be one that opens channels between countries, not one that erects barriers between them.
But how do we ensure that we get that sort of region?
How do we avoid any accidental slide into complacency, competition or even conflict, rather than engrain the habits of cooperation?
One constructive way would be to have a regional discussion about the sort of regional architecture we want to see in the next 20 years.
Open dialogue and discussion is the first step in planning where we want to be.
Inevitably, there will be differing views on this question.
That is a healthy thing.
But it is important to have a conversation that explores the options.
We need to make sure that all of the major players are engaged in an open conversation about the region's future  -  the United States, China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and others  -  including India.
And we need to be able to conduct continuous dialogue on any and every challenge we might face  -  from climate change to economic liberalisation, to security cooperation to natural disaster management.
Because as I noted at the outset of this Singapore Lecture, the challenges we face no longer fit neatly within the boundaries of politics, economics, environmental or security concerns.
They cross over these boundaries.
And they eventually cross over national boundaries.
Furthermore, let us be clear about what an Asia Pacific Community is not.
It is not an economic union.
It is not a monetary union.
It is not at this stage a customs union.
And it is certainly not a political union.
All of our existing regional mechanisms have a critical role to play both now and into the future  -  including ASEAN, APEC and the EAS.
But, at the same time, we need to begin our conversation about where our wider region goes from here.
And this is where the wider region needs to learn from ASEAN's success  -  how to build the institutions, habits and practices of cooperation across the policy spectrum and across historically uncomfortable national divides.
Australia and Singapore have a long history of cooperating on effective regional architecture.
And so we look forward to engaging with Singapore as an influential participant in that discussion.
Australia remains open to the suggestions of our regional partners as this discussion unfolds.
Because by definition, an APC by 2020 is very much a long-term project for the future.
Global Challenges
Beyond the region, the long-term capacity of our global institutions to deal with the new generation of global challenges we face also demands debate.
The United Nations remains in need of reform given that many of the challenges to the global system today were not envisaged in 1945.
The International Financial Institutions also remain in need of reform  -  including a new role for the IMF to deal with global financial crises of a type not envisaged at the time of Bretton Woods in 1944.
The failure of the WTO to deliver the Doha Round also reminds us that the political will of the membership is crucial to the success of international bodies.
Climate change also looms as a major new challenge to the global system. The strength of the global community on this challenge will be critically tested at Copenhagen.
And then there is the continuing challenge of non-proliferation for which the next global challenge looms at the point of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference in 2010.
The Australian Government has established an International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
It will be co-chaired by former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and former Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi.
The Commission has a big task in front of it.
The Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty has done a good job over the past 40 years in limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.
But some states have sought to challenge the NPT.
North Korea has developed a nuclear program  -  although we welcome the recent progress towards solving the question of this program.
Other states, such as Iran, have defied the International Atomic Energy Agency and, in doing so, have undermined the Treaty.
With the next five-yearly review of the Treaty due in 2010, we need to look at how we can strengthen support for the Treaty.
We need to strengthen support for safeguards so that nuclear material is strictly controlled.
And we need to develop new thinking about how we work towards the goal of the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
It is crucial that we build wide spread support for the Treaty, across regions and between those states with nuclear weapons and those without.
The Commission's task is to help build that support.
Going Forward
For Australia, an important element in all of these challenges is our ongoing cooperation with Singapore, the broader ASEAN membership, and the wider region.
Australia's future will also depend on our ability to engage constructively and effectively with the countries of the Asia Pacific.
That is why I am committed to making Australia the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
By investing in Asian languages and cultural education in Australia's schools, my vision is for the next generation of Australians  -  businessmen and women, economists, accountants, lawyers, architects, artists, film-makers and performers  -  to develop language skills which open their region to them.
This is part of our long-term vision for a fully regionally engaged Australian nation in this Asia-Pacific century that now unfolds before us.
And in Australia, that process has already begun.
Conclusion
I began this lecture by addressing the drivers of global strategic change.
I want to conclude by saying that to deal with the challenges that arise from these changes, we need effective global institutions, we need effective regional institutions and we need close cooperation with reliable partners.
For Australia, one such partner is Singapore.
We will not always agree.
Nor should we.
That is inevitable for tough-minded nation states like ours.
But because of the common history we share, our many common interests, and our common awareness of the challenges we face, the potential for us to do more together in the region, and in the world for the common good is very great indeed. 


PM:   Well can I say it is great to be back in Singapore and good to be here on my first visit as Prime Minister of Australia. Singapore and Australia have a shared past. Singapore and Australia have very much a shared future. And that is what this visit to Singapore today is all about.
This morning I had the opportunity to lay a wreath at Kranji, where we see the tombs of literally thousands of Australians who made the supreme sacrifice. And together with others here in defence of the island republic in 1941 and 1942, this is etched deeply into the souls of all Australians.
Singapore therefore occupies a special place in the hearts of the Australian people. Memories of what occurred back then, many of our veterans still alive, many still coming back, many to visit the graves of their mates.
Later today, building on what has been a strong military relationship between Australia and Singapore, I am also anticipating the opportunity of issuing a new memorandum of understanding with the Government of Singapore on defence cooperation. This in turn will underline the strength and depth and breadth of the existing security policy cooperation between our two armed forces and our two Governments.
We look forward to the continuation of that cooperation into the future. And this memorandum of understanding provides a fresh framework for doing that. 
This is an important economic relationship for Australia as well and that is another reason why I have taken the opportunity of being here to spend breakfast around the table with senior representatives of the Australian business community.
This is a good relationship for Singapore, a good relationship for Australia and through the Free Trade Agreement, and building on that Free Trade Agreement into the future, we are looking for further opportunities to broaden and deepen our economic engagement.
Later today I will also have the opportunity to deliver the Singapore lecture, and I would thank very much the Government of Singapore for extending that invitation to me, that honour to me to deliver what is a most prestigious lecture.
The other thing I have been doing here in Singapore today where I think those of you, ladies and gentlemen of the press have already been as well, and that is here at the Australian International School. This is a fantastic school and it brings I think into sharp focus, the absolute importance of education as a bridge between our two countries, our two cultures and our two economies.
But also, apart from that, seeing all these young Australian kids out here in the earliest days of their educational experience, exposed to another culture, learning another language, in many cases and being very much pioneers in what will be Australia's increasing economic integration with the great economies of the Asia Pacific region.
Education is a core part of the Australian Government's economic policy platform for the future. But education equally is a core part of building bridges of common understanding between Australia and the countries of the region.
As I said before, the challenge that we face for Australia for the future is making Australia into the most Asia literate country across the Western world. I believe we have made a good start on that. We have got much more to do.
Our national Asian language and studies program in Australian schools, literally teaching tens and hundreds of thousands of young Australian kids back home, the principle languages of Asia: Chinese, Japanese, Indonesian as well as Korean - but also importantly giving them an introduction to the principal languages, principal cultures of the region as well.
This is part of our long term mission statement of placing Australia in a position as the ‘go to' country across the Western world, with the best understanding of the economies and cultures of this part of the world, here in the Asia Pacific region. I am happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:   Well, is this to be broadcast in Mandarin is it?
JOURNALIST:  Yeah that is right.
PM: Ok, here we go, this is to your audience here in Singapore is it? Well the Olympic opening was an extraordinary event and I think it says a lot about China's recent achievements and my wife and I had the opportunity to attend the opening ceremony, together with many other Western heads of government. And we were honoured to do so. It was also good to see huge teams of athletes from right across the world, building further bridges of common understanding between different cultures and different countries.
PM SPEAKS IN MANDARIN
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd yesterday you announced a free trade agreement with Korea, at the same time your Government has been saying it wants (inaudible). Was yesterday an admission that ultimately free trade agreements are (inaudible)?
PM: I think it is important to put it in this way and this is exactly the policy direction of the Australian Government. And that is, you can walk and chew gum at the same time when it comes to free trade negotiations. We are absolutely vigorously committed to the successful prosecution of the multilateral trade liberalisation round through Doha, through the World Trade Organisation.
We are a member of the G7, a group of negotiating countries led by Trade Minister Simon Crean. And we haven't given up yet. In fact it has been a feature of my discussions elsewhere in the region, including with the Chinese, about how we can still close the gap between the final negotiating positions reached in Geneva only a week or two ago. Multilateral trade liberalisation is the best for the world because the rules then don't discriminate against any country.
And that is the best way to enhance global economic growth. Secondly, simultaneously, there is evidence by the posture we have taken domestically towards bilateral free trade agreements, right back to the American FTA, we have indicated both as an Opposition party and as a party now in Government, that we will prosecute those agendas vigorously as well.
Hence, the decision in Seoul yesterday, in my discussions with President Li of the Republic of Korea, that we have agreed on the principle of a free trade agreement between the two countries. Secondly, our officials will meet in September, October to engage in pre negotiations. And thirdly, in my discussions with the heads of the four major business conglomerates, or peak industry organisations as we call them in Australia, in Seoul last night, there is strong, across the board support for bringing such a free trade agreement into fruition.
So my answer to your question Patricia is, walk and chew gum at the same time. That is what we intend to do. And with vigour.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:   Well ASEAN remains the absolute core of the region's architecture. ASEAN is a great success story across the Asia Pacific region. If you turned the clock back 40 years to when ASEAN was started in 1967, think about what the world, what the region was like then.
You had a lot of conflict in South East Asia, Indo China war, Vietnam, Cambodia, as well as the recent history of conflict involving Indonesia as well, not to mention the Malaysian insurgency. Put all of those things together 40 years ago, it was not a happy set of security circumstances. 40 years later, ASEAN's great contribution has been to bring about, not just the habit of security policy cooperation, but the reality of a genuinely peaceful, secure environment.
And that has helped provide the platform for economic growth. So, as for an Asia Pacific community, what I have said is, the rest of the wider Asia Pacific region should learn from ASEAN's success. And build on the success which ASEAN has achieved. ASEAN, always remaining at the core, but looking at how we can take that idea, that habit, that culture, that institution of cooperation across politics, across security and across the economy and other areas of cooperation, into a concept for the wider Asia Pacific region, involving the United States, Japan, China, India, etc.
That is very much where I see ASEAN's role. A benchmark of success within South East Asia, a continuing central role in the evolution of the concept of an Asia Pacific community as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you expect that (inaudible)
PM: This matter is before the courts and before the judicial processes in this country. And consistent with my attitude to similar such cases in the past, I would not raise them because they are currently before the judiciary.
JOURNALIST: But Mr Rudd on a general level, Peter Lloyd is (inaudible)
PM: As I said before, this matter is before the courts. It is before the judiciary in this country. And consistent with the policy I have adopted elsewhere, I would not comment on a matter currently before the courts and that applies in this case as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Probably not is the answer to that, but go on.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well my answer to your question relates to my answer to the earlier question about an Asia Pacific community. There are two possible scripts for the future of the wider Asia Pacific Region. One is, a possible script, which heads in the direction through complacency, possibly, heading in the direction of the possibility of non cooperation, even conflict.
That is one possible trajectory. I don't think any of us want to see that because we have seen the enormous prosperity which has come off the back of stability, enabling economic growth to proceed at such a pace, as we have seen over the last quarter of a century. And ASEAN has been critical in that connection as well.
So that is one possible path. The other possible path, building on the ASEAN example, is to in fact consolidate the habits and the institutions and the practice of cooperation, including in the security policy sphere.
And that is one reason why I have advanced the concept of an Asia Pacific community. APEC does a great job within its current framework. Its mandate is restricted to economic policy matters. I think it would be good, long term, and the Asia Pacific Community vision, is long term, it's 2020, would seek to broaden the mandate of a wider regional institution to enable the discussion of, dialogue on and cooperation in, the spheres of political cooperation as well as security policy cooperation as well as the economy as it does presently.
That is, I think the best course of action. And that's why we should learn from the great experience of our friends in ASEAN and how they have built that culture of security cooperation here in Singapore. Here in ASEAN, where Singapore has led so much of the debate about South East Asia's regional architecture.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) two Australian soldiers have been injured in Afghanistan, can I get your reaction to that (inaudible)
PM: On the facts concerning the injuries which have been sustained in Afghanistan I would rather not comment. I would rather allow the Chief of Defence Force staff to make full, a full public statement on those details because I don't wish to be misleading in any way.
On the fact that this attack has occurred and Australians have suffered injuries as a result, then the view of the Australian Government, as stated in the past is that we are always deeply concerned about the security and well being of all of our men and women in uniform, in whatever theatre they are engaged and that includes Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is difficult and dangerous work and therefore our thoughts are always with the troops. But I know Angus Houston, the Chief of Defence Force staff, is also continues to be in the business of ensuring our troops have everything that they need in order to ensure that their security is best obtained on the ground in what is a very difficult environment.
Our thoughts and prayers are of course with the families of those who have been injured and I am confident the defence force family and community are in active contact with those families as we speak.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well first of all I am not quite sure what you are referring to. I understand there is a freedom of information request, is that right, on this matter. I understand it has been handled in the normal matter. But I would defer the comment back home on that because I don't have all of those details before me.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I think one of the things I am looking forward to discussing with the Prime Minister today is taking this memorandum of understanding on defence and security policy cooperation as the new framework. What we now do within that framework by way of an intensification of the cooperation between for example, our armed forces. Singapore Armed Forces are a highly trained and effective organisation. And the Australian Defence Force has worked closely with the Singapore armed forces over a long period of time. There is a high degree of mutual respect between these institutions, as there should be.
The practical questions which the Prime Minister and I will address is how is this then taken further on the ground. What I am signalling, certainly to my Singaporean counterpart is, we at our side, on our side are more than committed to embracing a deeper and broader defence and security relationship with Singapore. It is in good shape now, I would not criticise anything that has happened in the past. I think we can however, make it deeper and broader into the future. That is in our interests and I think it is in Singapore's interests as well.


CARPENTER: If we are re-elected we will extend the Northern train line to Butler, that will be a $147.5 million project. It will be the beginning of further extensions as we go out to Brighton and Yanchep. We expanded our vision, we outlined our vision at the State conference for the expansion of the urban rail network and public transport generally in Western Australia and the metropolitan area.
The first part of the work that we will undertake is the extension of the northern rail line from here to Butler. Remember we expanded the rail line from Joondalup up to Clarkson and look at the incredible development that you have seen around this node here as a result of this transport link and I pay tribute to a Alana for the work she has done in that regard.
We'll also be expanding the parking capacity at the trains stations along the line by a thousand bays to accommodate the increased traffic that we are seeing. We anticipate that the expansion of the line from here to Butler will see an extra 2000 people per day using the train service. That's the equivalent of taking 1800 cars off the road. And for those people who are familiar with the northern freeway traffic in the morning you would understand how important that is to get more traffic off the road.
We are very, very keen to deal with these issues, urban congestion, proper planning for public transport, for the growth of our city, responding to the issues of climate change, of increasing fuel costs, it all comes together. It comes together in policy development like this. And this is why we are so committed to this sort of work here in the metropolitan area. And I am grateful that we have got support from the Federal Government in the direction in which we are travelling in this policy initiative.
Are there any questions?
JOURNALIST: Premier is there Federal infrastructure money in this project?
CARPENTER: No this is State money, this project but I'm bringing Kevin here for a reason and I want to show the Prime Minister what we are doing in public transport provision dealing with the issues of urban congestion, of urban growth and trying to make our city's places where people can live and transport themselves about quickly.
What we are doing here is providing an option which is faster, its cleaner, it's safer. Why wouldn't you, why wouldn't you use this sort of public transport option if it is made available.
I've listened, I've spoken to the Prime Minister about dealing with public transport in our major cities, about dealing with urban congestion. We've got a proven track record, not only the Northern line but of course what we did with the Mandurah line, the extension of the line to Thornlie and I'm trying to demonstrate to the Prime Minister that our expansion of public transport to deal with urban congestion is worthy of Federal support.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
CARPENTER: We are in discussion, put it that way Nardia and I thought it was an opportune time to bring Kevin up to this area and show him what we are doing in public transport and obviously in particular to rail. We are also expanding the feeder bus service and extending the peak time capacity as well.
We want to move people around quickly, cleanly, cheaply, safely and it fits exactly I think with the sort of policy direction that Kevin Rudd has outlined from his Governments point of view.
PM: Why don't I add to what the Premier has just said on that. For the future when you come to growth States like WA you just see the development bursting at the seams. It's a great thing to see because this has been a State which has seen such strong economic growth in recent years. And all that comes with a price, it means that people have to have places to live, suburbs in which to build their homes, raise their families and that leads to one big need  -  infrastructure. And it's good to see the State Government here under Alan's leadership with a forward, visionary plan on how to deal with urban congestion and public transport.
That's one of the basic needs which people have and therefore this practical plan which has been put forward here to expand this particular rail to link to Perth's north out to Butler is one positive step in the right direction.
To go to your question, how does it mesh with where we come from as the Federal Government. For the first time the Federal Government believes that it should partner with State Governments in infrastructure development and that's why we have for the first time established an infrastructure fund, a building Australia fund of $20 billion. And part of our plan there is to partner with State Governments into the future on their particular needs with infrastructure, including their needs in relation to urban congestion and that includes of course within it public transport.
Infrastructure Australia and its advisory committee will be examining all proposals from State Governments in the months ahead, but we have put our money where our mouth is, a $20 billion national fund. The first time such a fund has been created in this country's history.
And part of the reason we did that is when I came over as Leader of the Opposition and since being elected (inaudible) you look at States like WA, you look at their long term infrastructure needs, they are great.
So either as the Federal Government you can say not my problem it's their problem, or you can chose to be partners. We're choosing to be partners and that's why we will look very closely at the proposals put to us by the WA Government for their future infrastructure needs.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well the Premier on this particular project has he has just indicated, this will come from State Government finance. This is an expansion of a rail network out to a new station, out here in this great growth corridor on Perth's north.
On the future, which is the future vision for the wider public transport needs and urban rail needs of Perth and Perth metro and beyond, that's exactly what Infrastructure Australia will be looking at. The Premier has already put forward a proposal concerning public transport to Infrastructure Australia, that will be evaluated on its merits. What I am saying loud and clear is that these sorts of projects are the sort of projects which the Federal Government wants to partner with State Governments on and that means the State Government of WA.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd when will money start to flow?
PM: Well you know something, the last 12 years that the Liberal's have been in power in Canberra there wasn't any money to flow. First budget we've established a fund $20 billion. Secondly the Infrastructure Australia advisory council is going to develop and approve its infrastructure priority list for the nation come next February.
So within about 12 months of us assuming office after 12 years of inertia, you'll have a clear demonstration from us on the direction we are going. What I am signalling to you loud and clear today is that the urban congestion needs, the public transport needs of our major cities including Perth are up there as priority number one.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd with wall to wall Labor Governments across this country, are you worried that Western Australia could be the first State to fall to the Liberals?
PM: What I can say is that in Alan Carpenters Government and in Alan Carpenters leadership, that you have a practical bloke whose got a long term vision for the States future and prepared to take hard decisions for the future.
If I look at stuff like this which is rolling out a rail network in a metro area, guess what this costs money and you have a WA Government that's prepared to roll out a vision and to put its money where its mouth is in terms of the network so far. What we want to do is partner with a Government like this into the future as they unfold further elements of their plan for transport in a city like this.
The other thing I'd say is on that question is the key thing for us is to make sure that the State leaders we are dealing with are practical people like Alan Carpenter prepared to make hard decisions for the future. And when I look at this bloke taking hard decisions in the past, take domestic gas. This is a huge barney with the major oil and gas companies in this state. You know, I believe, as Alan does in getting on with our large energy corporates- that's all part of economic development .
But you have also got to have a political leader who is prepared to stand up and from time to time take these big companies on. He did that on domestic gas, 15 per cent domestic gas, that I think is a symbol of this leader's strength in securing this state's long term future and being prepared to take hard decisions on the way through.
JOURNALIST: He has had to deal with Brian Burke as well, you have obviously been following that.
PM: Oh we all have our problems on the way through.
JOURNALIST: Fuel Watch (inaudible)
PM: Well what I would say to the Liberals federally is why should the motorists of Australia not have access to the same pricing information that the good motorists of Western Australia have had for many years. The Liberals are the ones who control this in the Senate and what the Liberals have done federally is decided to side with big oil companies against consumers.
It is the Liberals who decide what happens in the Senate and they have decided that they will back big oil companies rather than giving more information to consumers like motorists have had in this state for many years.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the ball lines are very much in the Liberals court. The Liberals decide ultimately the passage of these matters through the Senate and the Liberals have decided to back big oil companies against the consumer power which motorists deserve, and have had in this state for some time.
JOURNALIST: So is it dead in the water or is there room to compromise on your part?
PM: We have a clear cut plan on FuelWatch. A plan which has been based on the experience here in WA. And we say to the Liberals, get real, back motorists and stop being in the pocket of the big oil companies.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The ACCC has produced a report which demonstrates that over time, this is seven years worth of data, there is something like a two per cent per litre differential as a result of having FuelWatch in.
But we have said all the way through, this isn't some magic solution to the global problems which come out of global oil prices out of what is happening in the Middle East and elsewhere.
That is a huge global force at work but within that, Fuel Watch in this state, WA has given motorists more consumer power. And I say to the Liberals, why don't the people of Australia deserve to have that same consumer information as well.
JOURNALIST: Did the Premier consult with you before going so early in the election? There has been some criticism, under the cover of the Olympic Games?
PM: The Premier and I talk all the time, primarily about the development needs of this state. The question of election timing is of course, something which the Premier has made independently.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the way the people perceive the performance of the Federal Government, do you believe that that will be a factor in the state election?
PM: Look I know whether, state elections, however they turn out, these are always in my experience fought essentially on state factors, on state grounds. But I say this, the practical decision for the future is very much for us, do we have a State Government which has a strong plan for the future and can we partner with that plan in a very practical way, like on urban transport, urban rail networks and urban congestion.
This state government has such a plan. We the Federal Government have said for a long time, we are now for the first time in the country's history going to partner with State Governments on their infrastructure needs.
That is what I say for the future, whether you can actually work with a state government, and with this Premier, I can work.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I haven't even begun to think about it so I just got in from Singapore at about sort of, midnight last night, and then I was in Seoul, and then I was in Beijing, and then I was in Brissie, so there you go.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd what do you think about the decision to go so early though, given that the Liberals changed leader the day before the Premier called the election?
PM: Oh look, these are local decisions for the Premier himself and I haven't been privy to that.
JOURNALIST: ABC learning (inaudible)
PM: I have only just arrived back in the country and I haven't seen those reports. I would prefer to comment on them once I have studied them in detail.
JOURNALIST: Will you try and ease the concerns of Senators Xenophon and Fielding (inaudible)
PM: Our plan on Fuel Watch is absolutely clear cut and we put that out there and frankly the decision making power lies with the Liberals. They are the ones with the power in the Senate. Either back consumers and motorists choice, or back big oil companies and they decided to back big oil companies.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I say that each state government will operate within its constitutional requirements as this state government has done. And what I have said is what our policy is, and I don't think our position on fixed four year terms has been backed by the Federal Liberals.
I stand to be corrected on that but I don't think they have.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister will you be doing any fundraising for Labor while you in Perth?
PM: I haven't even thought about it. I don't think I have been asked but I stand to be corrected.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Actually I have been discussing this with Foreign Affairs officials this morning, given the negotiations which have occurred overnight between the Government of France and the Government of the Russian Federation and the efforts made by President Sarkozy of France.
Let us hope that this proposed cease fire actually occurs. Let us hope we have now a way forward. I notice that one of the pre conditions that France has imposed, given it's presidency of the European Union, is to ensure humanitarian access.
If that is the case and if we have humanitarian access, Australia as always will be in there through the appropriate international agencies, including the International Council of the Red Cross, to provide practical humanitarian help.
Australians expect our government always to be out there with a helping hand when people are in need, and there is something like 100,000 displaced persons, I am advised in this particular war zone in Georgia.
JOURNALIST: What did you think of the criticism the Chinese are getting in relation to the Olympics? Faking things, replacing little girls with other little girls because they are not pretty enough?
PM: I saw that report this morning. And I don't think I am going to buy into that.
JOURNALIST: Why not?
PM: Because I don't know all the details, that's why.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Commonwealth Bank profit
PM: What I would say to the commercial bank is this: If you are registering in these economic circumstances a 7 per cent increase in profits - and I am all for our companies being profitable, that is part and parcel of a market economy - but if you are a bank generating significant profits, and the commercial banks have been generating significant profits in recent years, I would say that those banks owe it to working families, working Australians who are under financial pressure at the moment, that when official interest rates move that those moves should be passed on to consumers.
I think that is the right and reasonable thing to do.
And I might just conclude on this, because the whole question of interest rates brings us back to the state of the global economy. And I will just say this in relation to events in WA as well.
We are going through some very rough global economic times at present. I have just had meetings in Beijing with various global leaders, the Chinese leadership, I had a brief conversation with the President Bush. I also have been in the Republic of Korea and yesterday in the Republic of Singapore.
Every global leader is faced now with huge challenges in the global economy coming out of US sub - prime, the impact on global financial markets and in turn what is happening with global oil prices.
In these tough global economic times, you need responsible economic management and leadership, strong economic management and leadership.
Tough global economic times requires strong economic leadership of the type we have received here front his state leadership of Alan Carpenter's Government.
Thanks very much.



HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, welcome to Adelaide and welcome to the morning program.
PM: Hi David, good to be on the program.
HOST: Prime Minister have you come to Adelaide offering anything to help solve the state's water crisis?
PM: Cabinet is meeting in Adelaide today and we will be briefed by the Murray Darling Basin Commission on the key question of the overall state of the system which means the amount of water within it.
And secondly the implications for that in terms of the lower lakes and the long term water security of Adelaide. And Cabinet will then, based on that submission, look at what further measures will be possible to reduce the pressure on a system.
The core reason for the pressure on the system being, we are in the middle of an appallingly low level of rainfall into the total catchment of the entire Murray Darling Basin system and I can't make it rain.
HOST: There are some people who seriously question the figures that the Murray Darling Basin Commission had come up with in the last week or so. For instance, somebody that you have got to get to know over the next few months and years, Nick Xenophon independent Senator for South Australia, he believes that there needs to be an independent audit of the water because a lot of the information that is given to the Commission comes via states and states have a lot of self interest in this.
PM: Well what I have got to say David is that we are dependent on the advice provided to us by the expert body and their advice is that in a system which has a total storage capacity of 24,000 gigalitres, that's the Murray Darling system, currently the public storage stands at something like 2,250 gigalitres.
This is a huge shortfall in the entire system. But in terms of alternative expertise to provide umbers, frankly we are required to act on the advice given to us by those who go out there and do the professional measurements.
HOST: Have you given up on the lower lakes?
PM: I believe the lower lakes are an absolute environmental priority for the nation, in which case Governments of all political persuasions need to do whatever is physically possible to make sure that this asset is preserved as best as is possible.
That is one of the reasons why the Government, which has only been in for the last 6 to 8 months, has begun a program of buying back water entitlements. This is the first time that the Commonwealth Government has done that.
We have already purchased back, 35 gigalitres worth of entitlements. The previous government had 12 years to act on this nationally and I can't identify a single occasion that they actually bought back a single entitlement.
We have begun that process; we have dedicated $3.1 billion for the purchase back of further water entitlements into the system, that is what we engaged in.
HOST: But you have baulked at the idea of compulsorily acquiring water. That is real water, not entitlements to water because if, you might have an entitlement to an enormous amount of water and it is not there, you can't use it.
But you have baulked at the prospect of buying, compulsorily acquiring water, real water.
PM: Well go back to the question of how much water actually lies within the public storage system itself.
The figures I ran through before which is a storage capacity across the system of some 24,000 gigalitres, currently our public storage stands at 2,250 gigalitres.
That is the problem in terms of the overall supply of water into the system, which comes off the back of the fact that five of the last six years we have had record low inflows of water into the Murray.
And again I go back to the point, that, and I have heard people like Christopher Pyne and others complain about inaction by the current government on this question for last six months, these problems have been emerging for the last six to 12 years.
We have a record of inaction by our predecessors. What we have done is taken every possible measure available to us in the last six months to try and turn this disaster around.
And it is a real problem.
HOST: Many South Australians think that if the River Murray finished in Victoria or New South Wales, it would never have reached this crisis.
PM: Well the key challenge we face in dealing with the totality of this river system, is one, recognise the supply constraints, that is, it's not raining. But two, on the demand side, people pulling water out of the system, what can we do about that.
Three practical measures. The first is, and for the first time the Commonwealth Government has now an agreement with the states to set up a single authority for the management of the entire Murray Darling Basin area, it is the Murray Darling Basin Authority with the power to set a cap, a total cap, on the water extracted from it. That is the first time that has happened and we have done that in the first six months.
HOST: (inaudible) for instance, you weren't able to broker a deal with the other states to lift the cap on trading water between various irrigating areas. It is still left at four per cent. So that body, that independent body that you set up is extremely limited. Much of the powers remain with the states and will remain there for another 10 years.
PM: The body has been established despite a decade or so which was available to our predecessors to establish it. For the first time in the country's history we have a national authority capable of setting this cap and it will take a while to implement, I agree with that on the ground.
I don't wish to mislead people about how complex this is, but in six months we have cracked a nut which our predecessors failed to do over 12 years.
Second point though is, how do you actually take further pressure off the system on the demand side. And that is this ambitious program of $3.1billion for buying back water entitlements across the system. And in six months, we have already allocated $50 million of that, purchased back 35 gigalitres of entitlements.
And the third practical measure is this, those who currently draw on water from the system, how do we make their use of water, from the system, more efficient. And the Government, and again in partnership with the states including the Government of South Australia, is investing $5.8 billion on a whole range of irrigation and water efficiency measures. Because currently the systems across the Murray Darling can lose up to thirty per cent of the water taken out of the system simply through the inefficiency and antiquated state of the irrigation machinery and technology being used.
HOST: Prime Minister, all of those measures might have worked ten years ago. If you implement them as you have just outlined, the Lakes will be dead. The Lakes will have turned to acid or they will have been covered in sea water, before much of that is implemented. Do you accept that proposition?
PM: Well David, I can deal with the practical situation presented with me having been Prime Minister for the country for six to seven, seven or so months. And these are the measures that we are implementing. In terms of the importance of the Lower Lakes I am in complete agreement with you.
This is a highly stressed area, I visited them recently with Senator Penny Wong, and in terms the challenges faced there, these are great and large indeed. Building over the last decade plus. What we have done in terms of practical measures, about how you take pressure off the system, vis a vis, water being taken out of it, is embrace this set of measures with buying back water entitlements and improving irrigation efficiency and your earlier point is correct. The Murray Darling Basin Authority will take some time to establish a basin wide cap but this is an area which has been the subject of Commonwealth-State bickering for the better part of 100 years. For the first time we have a national authority, but it covers an area one seventh the size of the Australian land mass, one seventh of the Australian population, 40% of the nations agriculture and as a consequence it's difficult to work though.
HOST: Prime Minister you've twice said that there's about 2500 gigalitres in public storage in the Murray. A listener has called to say that the Commission's report last week said there was 5,000 gigalitres in storage?
PM: The report that I have from the Murray Darling Commission, four major storages as at 6 August 2008 has Dartmouth standing at 738 gigalitres, the Hume Dam at 678 gigalitres, Lake Victoria 314 gigalitres and Menindee Lakes 526 gigalitres. A total of 2,256 gigalitres and that refers to the storage which is currently occupied in the four major dams of the system.
There are a number of smaller weirs across the system, but that is the heart of the system that I have just referred to.
HOST: Talking to interstate journalists and commentators I get the feeling that in the eastern states they think this very clearly. There is not enough water, the lakes will turn to acid unless they are flooded with sea water. So stop complaining South Australia, stop worrying about how we got here and accept that, that's what needs to be done. Do you accept that view?
PM: No my attitude is along the lines of how do we actually help two problems here which are immediately faced in South Australia and that is one, what can we do in practical terms to reduce the overall demand on the system which increases the water which flows through to South Australia and therefore the Lower Lakes hence the buyback of water entitlements against a very significant program of purchasing.
And the second is what do we need to do long term to secure Adelaide's water supply itself. Which is why prior to the election I indicated that we would be as an incoming Government committed to the establishment of a significant additional funds, in excess of $1 billion, to assist State Governments with the construction of desalination plants to ensure their long term urban water supply.
These are practical measures that we've embraced, practical measures that we will implement. But to be upfront with you David turning this around in the matter of the last 6 to 8 months, on the back of what has been a decade plus of inertia and inaction on the part of our predessors, is a very difficult task. We are doing what we can but I'm not in the business of saying this is an exclusively South Australian problem at all.
My job as Prime Minister is to govern for all Australians and when it comes to South Australia's needs, and the needs of the Lower Lakes, they are particularly acute.
HOST: Prime Minister we're only a minute away from the 9 o'clock news but Terry has called to say Kevin Rudd has the opportunity to be a legend or a loser over the Murray it's your choice?
PM: Well David I'd just much rather level with people about the dimensions of the problem in terms of overall rainfall supply, what you can do to pull water out of the system by the practical measures I referred to before and as a result have a credible long term strategy dealing with the Lower Lakes and dealing with Adelaide's water supply.
But you can't turn the Queen Mary around to be sailing in a particular direction for the last 12 years in 6 months. It takes time particularly with water, particularly when we are dealing with climate change and the impact it has on the nation's overall rainfall and water supply.
HOST: And you don't think it would be any different if the Murray finished in Victoria or New South Wales?
PM: My job David is to deal with the realities that I am confronted with. A Murray Darling System which has been ravaged, over allocated to hell over the last hundred years and to turn that around, $3.1 worth of money to buy back water entitlements is one practical step in that direction. There is much, much more to be done and we are working hard on this which is why the Murray Darling Basin Commission is with us here with the entire Cabinet in Adelaide to brief us on the state of the system and what further practical measures can be embraced.
HOST: Just quickly, people they might get some good news out of cabinet today?
PM: We'll listen very much to what the experts have got to say. We'll be back and back and back again when it comes to the Murray and South Australia's needs. This is a very dry part of Australia and this is the direst and hottest continent on the planet at a period of unprecedented climate change.
Therefore I'm going to be back and back again in terms of further practical measure that we can do to help but I don't wish to give anybody any suggestion...
HOST: We must go Prime Minister thank you its 9 o'clock.


PM: First of all, good Olympic news. We've got the gold medal to our women's 4 X 200 meters freestyle relay. Congratulations to our women swimmers. Once again they've done Australia proud in the pool. And of course, great efforts also by Eamon Sullivan and Jessicah Schipper.
Australia continues to do well at these Olympics. The competition gets tougher and tougher each time and it continues to be that way. Once these Games are done, as I've said before in Beijing, and as I said earlier in Australia, we'll be sitting down with our friends from the Australian Olympic Committee, the Australian Institute of Sport and working through their long term plans for the future as well as our co-investment with them as we prepare for future Olympic Games  -  next stop London.
It's good to be back in South Australia, it's good to be back in Adelaide with Premier Mike Rann and Penny Wong and of course Amanda Rishworth our local Member for Kingston.
I've just been told that this is my 20th visit to Adelaide since I became leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party about 18 months ago. So it's good to be back again, and I've been back quite a number of times since being elected as Prime Minister.
The reason for being here now is of course we are dealing with the most practical impact of climate change across Australia, and that is our rolling water crisis. And that is nowhere clearer across Australia than in a heavily stressed Murray-Darling river system.
And nowhere is that more evident than here in South Australia.
And that's why I've been back here before with Premier Mike Rann and with the Water Minister Penny Wong, and here again today, to talk about the challenges to the system, and to talk about also practical responses from the Federal Government.
This morning, in Cabinet, which was held at the Adelaide Town Hall, we were briefed by representatives of the Murray-Darling Basin Commission on the current state of the overall river and the challenges which we face ahead.
This is a highly stressed river system. And the practical challenges we face is how do you turn around policy responses to that following more than a decade of inaction on the part of the previous Federal Government.
Decisions which we have embraced today as the Federal Government are along these lines.
Firstly, there has been a debate about the state of the audit of the overall holdings of the system.
As you know, on the 1st of August the Murray-Darling Basin Commission released its interim audit on the total public holdings of the system. The next stage in that will be in September when the Commission releases its full audit, and for the first time, of both public and private holdings across the system.
And thirdly, what we've agreed as a Cabinet is that once that national benchmark is established, of where both public and private holdings lie within the system, we will then make that a regular audit and for all those figures then to be made publicly available on a rolling basis.
Finally, there has been some challenge on this question about the adequacy, or the accuracy, of the Murray-Darling Basin Commissions numbers. And therefore, what Cabinet has agreed to do is to commission one of the independent accounting houses of the world to separately and independently audit the accuracy of the Murray-Darling Basin Commissions numbers. And we will commission that work immediately.
Secondly, practical measures in terms of how do you take stress off the system. How do you reduce the demand on the system. And the most practical thing a Government can do, and what this Government has embraced as a course of action, is to buy back water entitlements. For the first time in the history of the federation, the Commonwealth Government, since this Government has been elected, has begun the purchase back of water entitlements.
We've already spent some $50 million buying back some 35 Gigalitres from the system. Now, as a result of today's decision, we have decided to take that several steps further. Therefore, we have today agreed that we will initiate $80 million worth of water purchasing earmarked for South Australia. We will also conduct now a Queensland water tender. That means a tendering of water purchases from those who hold water entitlements in Queensland, but extend that elsewhere in the northern basin of the Murray-Darling near the Menindee Lakes, and extending the existing commitment of $340 million to $400 million.
That is $400 million allocated now for the purchase back of water entitlements in the northern basin from Queensland and in New South Wales down to the Menindee Lakes.
Thirdly, we will now initiate a new Basin wide water purchase tender for ‘08-09. That's the third practical step.
Four, working with irrigation communities to buy out water entitlements from areas willing to move out of irrigation all together, facilitated by a price premium reflecting the value of water savings from closure of infrastructure such as supply channels. In other words, where you have defined and discrete irrigation communities, that is, the Commonwealth is prepared to step in and to buy back the entitlements from that entire community.
And finally, working with State Governments to co-fund the purchase of appropriately located irrigation properties and their water entitlements to enhance environmental outcomes across the northern Basin.
These are further practical measures we have taken to increase and accelerate the pace of the Commonwealth Government buying back water entitlements from this very stressed river system.
This is a practical course of action, I emphasise again. Prior to the election of this Government, not a single Gigalitre of water was purchased back by the previous Federal Government, despite the fact that we've had now ten years or rolling drought, and the last five years the lowest inflows into this system that we've seen on record.
Furthermore, in terms of Adelaide's long term water needs itself I've been discussing today again with Premier Mike Rann his plans in terms of the desalination plant. As you know, the Commonwealth Government when we were in Opposition committed ourselves to being co-investors with the South Australian Government in that desalination plant which is intended to have a capacity of 50 Gigalitres per year.
What Cabinet has agreed today, is if the South Australian Government decides to expand the capacity of that desalination plant, 80 Gigalitres or to 100 Gigalitres, then we the Commonwealth would be prepared to separately co-invest with South Australia to bring that extra capacity on stream.
To put this into context in terms of overall demand, Adelaide's annual water consumption runs at something of 210 to 230 Gigalitres. If we bring on stream a 100 Gigalitre desalination plant, you're looking at a new capacity which represents something approaching 40 to 50 per cent of Adelaide's total water needs. 
These are three sets of practical measures which the Commonwealth Cabinet has embraced today. One on the audit of the overall needs of the system and the measures associated with that. Two, this $480 million announcement concerning accelerated and intensified buy back of water entitlements across the northern basin. And thirdly, our decision to become co-investors with South Australia in a subsequent expansion of its desalination plant for the long term provision of South Australia's water needs.
And to conclude with this, Mike Rann came to Canberra only a week or so ago to talk to me about the needs faced by the system, including the stressed needs of the Lower Lakes in particular, and what can be done system-wide. In response to Mike's representations, and his earlier representations in terms of the need of this audit, we have responded with the audit measures that I have just announced.
And secondly, we have responded in terms of the particular measures for accelerated, intensified buy-back of water entitlements. And thirdly, with the additional measures to aid Adelaide's overall water supply.
These are practical measures which are part of a long term plan to deal with a highly stressed water system, the Murray-Darling, which has suffered the impacts of climate change and regrettably a decade's worth of inaction on the part of the previous Federal Government.
If I could turn to Mike to add, and then we'll take your questions.
RANN: Thanks very much. We are delighted with this. I mean, the IGA, the Intergovernmental Agreement, dealing with the long term things that Australians have been talking about. Billions of dollars being spent on re-engineering the River Murray, and also, of course, a large amount of money to buy back water entitlements, to release that water into the River.
And of course, out of that we got a $610 million commitment from the Rudd Government for a re-engineering of the system, particularly a big slice of that for the Lower Lakes so that the people like Currency Creek Wineries, the Narrung Peninsula, could be taken off the Lower Lakes. So we're delighted today that having reached the IGA agreement and getting that $610 million, that we're now going to the next step.
And people have been saying to me for some time, ‘we need an audit of the entire River Murray Basin, we need an audit so we know water is there, public water and private water, and we should make that public'. So we're delighted that the Federal Government has announced today that there will be a complete audit of the system, and also that that complete audit will then be independently verified by an international agency.
So that's something, I mean, people keep saying that there's water here, water there, there's water that exists that could be released. Let's test that, let's have a complete audit of the system so that the people of Australia can know exactly what water is out there both in public and private hands so that we can make the best decisions.
But also, of course, we're absolutely delighted to see the Federal Government speeding up its buy back of water. What has caused this crisis in the River Murray? First of all, a one in 1,000 year drought. A one in 1,000 year record low inflow into the River Murray, plus the fact that over a century a massive over allocation. So, we need a combination of more rain, but we also need to buy back entitlements. And we're delighted that the Prime Minister today has announced an accelerated buying back of water licenses so that that water can come down the River.
I have to say that having been involved in this, having had a Press Club lunch, a National Press Club speech back in the beginning of 2003, and calling for a crisis meeting and then being totally ignored for years, that more has been achieved over the past few months than has been achieved in the previous quarter of a century.
So, I'm delighted with the audit. I'm delighted with the accelerated buy back. I'm delighted with the commitment to partner with us for an expanded desalination plant.
On that, you'll remember when we announced the desal plant that we would engineer it for 100 Gigalitres. The outflow pipes, the inflow pipes, the connector pipes, would all be geared for that. But what we want to do, of course, we are committed to the 50 Gigalitre plant that is proceeding at pace in terms of all of the planning, the expressions of interest, the pilot plant, and so on. But, this will give us the financial wherewithal to expand that plant should that be necessary. So, we're delighted that things that we've been working with the Commonwealth with have come about today from a Federal Cabinet meeting here in Adelaide.
PM: And Penny, and then we'll take questions.
WONG: Just very briefly, I'm delighted to be here today with the Prime Minister and the Premier to announce what the Federal Cabinet has determined in relation to purchasing and other matters. 
Can I just make one point. What we are dealing with in the southern part of Australia is a set of circumstances that are extremely difficult. We have a history of over allocation, and South Australians understand how that has come about. We have an historic drought, and we also have to deal with the consequences of climate change.
So the measures that Federal Cabinet has agreed to today, which are about returning water to the River, purchasing water, accelerating our purchase program, and implementing our election commitments. And, of course also, the implementation of the desalination funding commitment, and working with Premier Mike Rann and his Government on that issue.
These are all measures that are about preparing this nation for climate change and it's consequences. Preparing for a future where there is likely to be less rainfall. Thank you.
PM: Okay, over to you folks for some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you now saying that the Lower Lakes can be saved?
PM: What I'm saying is that we need for the whole system including for the Lower Lakes a greater supply of water. The practical question is what can you do about that. One is it rains, the second is you can buy back water entitlements.
There is a third as well which is you increase the efficiency of existing irrigation systems. We are embarked upon the second and third courses of action and what I've said to you today in terms of the needs of the Lower Lakes and the system more broadly is this intensification and acceleration of the buyback of water entitlements. That is a practical course of action. But I don't want to say that there is some magic solution here. It's very difficult in the space of six months or so to turn around a decade's worth of neglect. But we have embarked on this, as far as the buybacks concerned, but also as Mike's just said, the investments which have already been made in irrigation efficiency systems to the tune of $610 million.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is this compulsory acquisition that you're talking about? And what guarantee that one drop of water from Queensland or New South Wales will actually flow into South Australia?
PM: Well as I said before you cannot make it rain. If you look at the total public storage of the system of the Murray-Darling at present, something like 24,000 gigalitres. Look at that which is in public storage and the four major dams at present, it's 2,500 gigalitres. Across all the public storage facilities the entire system, something like 4.8 thousand gigalitres - 24,000 capacity, 4.8 thousand in terms of what's there in the system.
We have a problem it's a deficit, it's a shortfall. What I can do as Prime Minister is partner with State Governments, as well as separately nationally, buyback water entitlements because of this gross over allocation of water entitlements particularly in the other states, particularly in the other states and that's where this money has been directed.
But I'm not going to provide false promises, I'm not going to provide false guarantees about there being some simple solution here. I'm trying to turn around a situation which has evolved over many, many years and we are dealing, as the Minister just said, with the real consequences of climate change.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We're working within the market -
JOURNALIST: How do you feel about paying $55 million to Jim Selim?
PM: You talking about the Pan Pharmaceuticals arrangement? Well this matter is obviously been worked out between the Commonwealth Government's Lawyers and those representing Pan Pharmaceuticals. These are matters which have been resolved in the normal processes of dispute resolution as well as part of the legal processes. I'll leave that to those who have been party to the negotiations. I'm satisfied that we have reached a conclusion to a matter which has now gone on for some five years and so that the TGA can get back to doing its job.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Telstra workforce?
PM: I believe that every Australia worker has the right to engage a union to represent them if they want to. That should be the right of every Australian worker. Or if they so choose not to have a union represent them. That's the right of every Australian worker or employee.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well what I am concerned about overall is to make sure that we have got a fair and flexible industrial relations system, and that means that if you are an employee in a large firm or elsewhere that you have got the opportunity to be represented by a union if you so choose.
In the past because we had AWAs gradually infecting the entire industrial relations system and WorkChoices getting the balance completely wrong between the rights of employees and the rights of employers, unfair arrangements emerging in large parts of the workforce.
We've started to turn the clock back on all that, our first piece of legislation abolished the right to make new AWAs and we've also of course begun the process of award modernisation. We'll get to a fair and balanced system soon, but again, it takes a while to dismantle a structure which our predessors spent a long time putting in place.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the buyback scheme will that include giving any consideration to buying the six stations that the ACF identified in the plan that they put forward to Senator Wong and Mr Rann (inaudible)
PM: What we've said in this decision is that we will work with State Governments to co fund the purchase of appropriately located irrigation properties and their water entitlements. Note we say appropriately located irrigation properties and I would draw that to your attention. What I've talked about more broadly in my remarks today is buying back water entitlements. A part of the decision relates specifically to properties.
JOURNALIST: On desalination before the last election you promised a billion dollar fund (Inaudible). You haven't given a contribution there yet, yet you're already promising for an expansion?
PM: Well one step at a time. The proposal by the South Australian Government for this very important desalination project is for a 50 gigalitre project and what we have said, that in relation to that phase of it, we are prepared to invest up to $100 million consistent with our policy.
If there is a further phase to this as the South Australian Government has indicated it may do to, in fact, double the capacity of this desalination plant, what I am saying to you loud and clear is that we would be prepared to consider a further investment of up $100 million to accommodate that as well. And that's entirely consistent with what we have said in the past.
Again, our challenge is to do what we can in a practical sense to deal with the challenges of the Murray-Darling, at the same time help where we can with the challenges in the Lower Lakes and help with Adelaide's long term water security through this desal plant as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on FuelWatch, what compromises would you be prepared to accept on FuelWatch?
PM: Our policy is clear cut. We believe that we want to make sure that Australian motorists have the same rights available them as their fellow Australians currently do in West Australia where this system has operated for six or seven years.
The WA experience is that after six or seven years of monitoring on average there's a saving of up to two cents a litre. This is not a huge saving but it does give consumer power and consumer choice and does help balance the family budget. It's not a silver bullet, doesn't solve all the problems of global oil prices.
What I can't understand with the Liberals who control the fate of this in the Senate is why the Liberals want to back big oil companies rather than get on the side of consumers and give motorists more choice, more information about where they can get the cheapest fuel on a particular day, and where they can get it.
JOURNALIST: Is it all of nothing for you though?
PM: Our plan is clear. I wait to hear from the Liberal party about whether they are going to back big oil or back motorists and consumers. I'll tell you who we are backing, and that's motorists and consumers.
JOURNALIST: Nick Xenophon is willing to trade on some things though, would this be something (inaudible)
PM: From my point the ball lies in the court of the Liberal Party. I can't understand why a major political party like the Liberals would say we are going to back big oil rather than motorists. A motorist in Perth today can look up on a website where they can get the cheapest fuel and go ahead and buy that and therefore make a saving to the family budget.
The other thing is this, when you look at the price differentials each day within a given fuel market, I looked at some of the data yesterday, you've got price differentials within urban markets of five, ten, 15, 20 cents a litre. Why should motorists have that information available to them?
I don't understand.
For me it's passing strange that the only people volubly against this proposal are the big oil companies and of course the Liberal party which backs them.
JOURNALIST: If the banks don't pass on in full an interest rate cut what will you do about it?
PM: From my point of view it's something that the four commercial banks need to have a long hard look at themselves, a long hard look at themselves on how the Australian public look at them. If you are going to produce profit lines like we saw registered yesterday by the Commonwealth Bank, and then in the same breath say that if official rates come down that we may not pass on all of that cut to those who are making mortgage repayments, I think the banks collectively suffer real damage to their reputation.
Secondly at a practical level, as of November I'm advised that a full range of our account switching devices are in place so that customers will then be able to vote with their feet.
A practical thing if you are a customer is if you've got a whole series of credit and debit arrangements to your bank account. What's one of the things that stands in your way when you say I'm going to shift from Commonwealth to NAB or from ANZ to Westpac or whatever. It's ‘how do I actually rearrange all of my credits and debit arrangements into my bank account'. And frankly it's a pain in the neck, we all know that.
What we are going to do is make sure there's a system in place which makes that as easy as possible, so that if bank X decides that they are not going to pass on cuts in official interest rates, that you can move your account as speedily as is possible and these systems exist elsewhere. I'm surprised that our predecessors didn't give consumers these powers as well.
JOURNALIST: Just on Telstra you seemed reluctant to talk about exactly what the company is doing. Do you have any concerns about what Telstra is doing to its workforce?
PM: Well I don't know the full detail of Telstra's industrial arrangements but I would say this. Whether you work for Telstra of whether you work for any other Australian company, any employee there should have the right to be represented by a trade union if they so wish.
That's what I would say to our friends at Telstra and say to every other Australian company. I'd be very disappointed if that was not the case.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd on Georgia, your Government has announced a million dollars there, can you just expand on that?
PM: Well the humanitarian package that we've embraced there is important, we believe, in terms of the immediate needs faced by the people who are affected by the recent military activities between Russia and the Georgian State.
There is something like 100,000 refugees already, or displaced persons, internally displaced persons, and the call has gone up to international aid agencies for help. Australians always step in, pitch in to help where we can. We are doing that and this will be delivered through the appropriate international aid agencies.
This is a long way from Australia but this is an appalling war because of the affect on innocent civilians and I support fully the actions of President Sarkozy of France in trying to bring about a peaceful resolution to this. Apart from the diplomatic support for the efforts of the Government of France and the European Union, the next practical thing we can do is to provide money to help provide emergency accommodation and food to those 100,000 people who have been displaced.
JOURNALIST: What about John Howard he was given his AC today?
PM: Well congratulations to Mr Howard on his Order of Australia. These sort of awards are beyond party politics and I think we should all acknowledge Mr Howard's long contribution to Australian national political life, and I congratulate him and wish him very well with his award.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd just one more topic on the recognition of the battle of Long Tan, the long overdue recognition there. Can I just quickly get your comment on that?
PM: Well the Government as you know has been examining an independent report on these matters and I know my college Alan Griffin the Minister for Veterans Affairs has been paying particular attention to this.
I believe so many, many years after Long Tan, more than 40 years now, it's right to set these things and to make sure they have been done properly.
These are veterans who are getting on. This was a heroic action by Australian troops against overwhelming odds comprised on North Vietnamese regulars. The fact that we were able to prevail in that encounter and lose so many Australians on the way through, I think most Australians are now familiar with. But it's absolutely right that we provide appropriate recognition to the heroism so displayed and I'm glad that, that has now occurred.
Thank You


The Rudd Government today announced three sets of new water initiatives to help deal with the critical situation in the Murray Darling Basin.
These new initiatives will build on the Governments Water for the Future Plan by improving water management in the Murray Darling Basin.
These initiatives were finalised by Cabinet in Adelaide today where the full Cabinet met to discuss the critical situation in the Murray Darling Basin.
The new Basin-wide initiatives announced today include:
     * The first comprehensive, detailed and externally reviewed audit of both public and private water storages in the Basin.
     * Initiating a new basin-wide tender in 2008-09; and expanding the previously announced Queensland tender to include northern NSW and increasing funding for this program by $50 million to $400 million.
     * A Commonwealth-State initiative to co-fund the purchase of properties holding large water entitlements, particularly in the northern Basin.
The Cabinet today received a briefing on the Lower Lakes from the Murray Darling Basin Commission on the state of the Lower Lakes. The Cabinet confirmed that if the South Australian Government, based on the advice of experts, finds that it has become absolutely necessary to open the Lakes to sea water, the Commonwealth will consider any such proposals.
In addition, Cabinet today decided to become a co-investor with the South Australian Government in any future expansion of its desalination plant at Point Stanvac from its current proposed 50 Gigalitres to a possible expanded capacity of 80-100 Gigalitres.
Cabinet also decided to accelerate the $120 million SA pipeline project to secure water supplies for Lower Lakes communities. This project will involve connecting Lower Lakes communities to water supplies further upstream at Tailem Bend.
The new initiatives announced today are designed to help the nation meet the huge challenges we face in the Murray-Darling Basin.
Whole-of-Basin Initiatives
1. Murray-Darling Basin Water Audit
The Murray Darling Basin Commission will finalise a detailed and comprehensive audit of water availability in both private and public storages across the Basin within the next month.
This is in response to the South Australian Government requesting more information on Basin water storages.
This will be updated every three months with the information made publicly available.
Initial advice on current water availability was released by the Commission last week, and we have requested that this report be completed and released within a month.
We will seek the assistance of an international auditing company to review the methodology used by the Commission in producing the audit.
It is important that we ensure communities across the Basin have a clear understanding of the scale of the problem in the Murray-Darling Basin.
2. Purchasing water entitlements to return to the Basin's rivers and wetlands
In response to concerns expressed by the South Australian Government, the Federal Government will further accelerate water purchasing activities following the success of the first-ever Federal Government water purchase earlier this year.
This will ensure rivers and wetlands across the Basin get a greater share of water when it becomes available in the future.
The Government's new Murray-Darling Basin water purchase plan includes:
     * Initiating the $80 million of water purchasing in South Australia;
     * Conducting the Queensland water tender, including extending it to accept water entitlements from properties elsewhere in the northern basin and near Menindee Lakes and extending the existing commitment of $350 million to $400 million subject to the water being securable against downstream interception;
     * Initiating a new Basin-wide water purchase tender in 2008-09;
     * Working with irrigation communities to buyout water entitlements from areas willing to move out of irrigation, facilitated by a price premium reflecting the value of water savings from closure of infrastructure such as supply channels; and
     * Working with State Governments to co-fund the purchase of appropriately located irrigation properties and their water entitlements to enhance environmental outcomes in the northern basin.
3. Allowing water to go to where it brings most benefit by freeing up water trade in the Basin
The Commonwealth will actively pursue the implementation of water reform initiatives necessary to ensure the lifting of the 4 per cent limit on water and the application of that limit on a consistent basis as soon as possible.
4. Rolling out the Government's $5.8 billion commitment to making irrigation infrastructure more efficient and achieve water savings
This includes accelerating projects such as the New South Wales government's efforts to reduce evaporation and achieve water savings at Menindee Lakes to help secure Broken Hill's water supply and, in the longer term, provide greater flows to the Murray.
5. Establishing the new independent Murray-Darling Basin Authority by the end of the year, which will implement a new Basin Plan in 2011 including a new sustainable cap on water use


From 18-21 August, I will visit New Zealand, and then travel to Niue to attend the annual leaders' meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum.
This year marks the 25th anniversary of the Closer Economic Relations agreement between Australia and New Zealand.
The pact is widely regarded as one of the most successful and forward-looking economic and trade agreements in the world, and remains fundamental to close cross-Tasman ties.
I look forward to discussing economic links with New Zealand Prime Minister, Miss Helen Clark, who I last met in Canberra in February this year.
Miss Clark and I will also speak at a major climate change conference in Auckland, on 19 August.
In Niue, I look forward to meeting with other Pacific leaders to discuss common action to tackle the region's political and economic challenges, including achieving the Millennium Development Goals, addressing the threat of climate change, and restoring democracy in Fiji.
I look forward to discussing with leaders Australia's new engagement with the region, as outlined in my Port Moresby Declaration, released in March.  


PM: Well it's good to be back in Tasmania, the second time I have been since being elected as Prime Minister, I've just been told since being elected as leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party in the last 18 months I have been here on 8 occasions. Always good to be back here is Tassie, good to be back here with our local members, good to be back with the Tasmanian Premier.
This is so much part of the heart and soul of Tasmanian and Australian tourism, that is this great Port Arthur convict site. And I would congratulate those who are associated with this most recent part of the site redevelopment and conservation plan. Really important for Tasmanian tourism, really important for Australian tourism and its good that the Australian Government and the Tasmanian Government together with the authority here led by Barry have been active partners cooperating in ensuring this conservation project is brought to completion.
Historical tourism in Australia is part and parcel of the overall fabric of the industry and in Australian tourism we constantly have to be in the business of reinviting, redefining and reshaping the product we take to the rest of the world and the rest of the nation.
That's why it's good to see that here at Port Arthur we're not just resting on our laurels, not just saying well its always been (inaudible) let's just leave it that way and instead we are going back to this site and saying well how can we take this whole site further and to provide an opportunity for new visitors and old visitors coming back to have a fresh opportunity to experience this country's convict past.
As I just said in the remarks I made inside, so many Australians have a convict background including yours truly and therefore when you come to sites like this it's not just an academic exercise, it's not just wondering around a park. It's actually finding an opportunity to peer back to the emergence of the Australian character, the Australian soul and the Australian nation.
So I congratulate the Port Arthur authority for what they have done here, transforming this extraordinary site into something even more extraordinary and I congratulate the Tasmanian Government for their keen work in partnership with the Commonwealth on this. And it's been my own personal great pleasure to be here today for the official opening of this part of the convict site here at Port Arthur. And it's also providing me an opportunity to have some further discussions with the Tasmanian Premier about matters to do with our two Governments.
If I could turn to the Premier to add to my remarks and then to Peter.
PREMIER BARTLETT: Well thank you . Port Arthur is of course as iconic in Tasmania as the white sands of our east coast beaches and the rugged mountains of our west coast.
It is iconic for all Tasmanians and a site that I believe is iconic for all Australians. Its deeply linked of course to where we come from as Tasmanians and who we are and its so important I believe for us to understand that heritage, to embrace it and to learn from it as a State going forward.
So it's my great pleasure to be here with the Prime Minister today to open what is I believe a world class restoration of the separate prison that adds weight I believe to the prospect of the Port Arthur historic site becoming world heritage listed and we are actively working with the Australian Government on that listing.
It's really important I believe for Tasmania not to rest but to continue to expand on the significant opportunities that we have in heritage tourism and associated economic social and cultural growth that we will see from that.
Quite aside from Port Arthur there are many other sites with huge potential around Tasmania. I recently visited Oatlands and saw first hand the significant convict heritage which is unrestored within that town, but has real potential to continue to create iconic sites for Tasmania. Iconic sites that will bring new and returning visitors to our island and we look forward also to working with the Australian Government and Local Government on realising those opportunities.
So having the opportunity to have the Prime Minister here is very welcome. We have a very cordial relationship that I know in conversations to date that the Prime Minister is very much aware of the challenges but also the opportunities that face Tasmania and I look forward to having some further conversations with him while he is here this afternoon.
Thank you.
GARRETT: This is a good day for Tasmania because Port Arthur means such a lot to the history of this island. And to the nation and the heritage recognition that this site has now and the fantastic restoration that's been taken by the community here and by the authorities means that we will have more Australians and more people internationally visiting this site, understanding how critical the history of Port Arthur is to our Australian history and providing a good strong driver for regional economies.
There is no doubt at all that Australia's heritage is rich, its distinct and its unique. It tells us stories about our past, it fashions us into what we are today and what we have become. Port Arthur is one of those iconic site and we do expect that the Port Arthur site to be a part of a greater world heritage nomination which we have every anticipation should be successful in two years time. So congratulations to all involved its a very good day, this is an important site for Australians, our heritage is critical to understanding who we are to driving our regional economies and also to sharing our Australian experience with visitors from overseas.
PM: Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) river in Queensland, there's evidence that there's new development there in breach of a moratorium in 2001. Is that embarrassing as a Queenslander and also is it a sign that States once again can't be trusted on water?
PM: Well we take any real breach of obligations in relation to the our international obligations for heritage protection seriously. I look forward to a factual report on this. I haven't received one yet and once we received that report then we will take the necessary action.
When it comes to the proper protection of our waterways and our wetlands these are matters of national importance, matters of national responsibility under the relevant international conventions to which Australia is signatory and we will act according to our obligations.
JOURNALIST: And regarding your announcement yesterday of $50 million is a drop in the ocean from the $3 billion you've got over the ten years. Is it enough, is it a big enough announcement yesterday, it doesn't seem to be much of a step up from where we were?
PM: Well $50 million is the amount which has already been spent and that's brought back 35 gigalitres of water for the Murray-Darling system and that's the first time in the history of the Commonwealth that the Commonwealth government has actually brought back water entitlements. We've don't that in our first six months.
The previous Government over 12 years did buy a single gigalitre of water entitlement back from the Murray-Darling system, point one. The second point is this: what was announced yesterday was an enhanced package of some $400 million for the purchase of water entitlements from Queensland and New South Wales. That's important going down as far as the Menindee lakes.
The third thing that was announced yesterday was a further package of $80 million for the purchase of water entitlements within South Australia and fourthly what was announced yesterday was that the Commonwealth would now be in the business of engaging in the negotiation for the purchase of properties, not just water entitlements, but properties themselves which are of significance relevance to the overall demands being placed on the system.
These are significant steps forward in terms of taking stress off the system. As I said yesterday and I say again today, there are no magical solutions for dealing with the Murray-Darling given that this Murray-Darling system in the last 12 or 13 years has had the 12 hottest years in history and in terms of inflows into the system, record low inflows into the system.
And at 6 months its very difficult to undo a pattern of inaction which has gone back more than a decade on the part of the previous Federal Government. These are concrete steps forward. We have taken our first steps in terms of reducing demand on the system. And the second set of measures that we adopted in COAG in Sydney in July was to expend something in the order of $5.2 billion in irrigation enhancement investments nationwide across the Murray-Darling Basin so that the 30% of water which is lost through the inefficiency of the irrigation system is reduced.
The overall objective is to reduce demand on the entire stressed river system. A stressed river system because we have now the impact of cumulative drought and in turn an impact which comes as one of the consequences of climate change.
JOURNALIST: Tasmania's Police Commissioner has stood down pending a criminal inquiry. Does the State need an anti corruption body?
PM: Well this matter as I am advised is now the subject to internal investigation within the Tasmanian Police Service and while that matter is subject to investigation I don't propose to make any comment whatsoever.
JOURNALIST: The Bracks review on the car industry. How urgently does the Federal Government need to act on these recommendations to ensure the continued future of car manufacturing in Australia?
PM: Well the Bracks review has delivered it report as I have said before and I said prior to becoming Prime Minister of Australia. I don't want to be Prime Minister of a country that doesn't make things anymore.
We take the future of our automobile industry seriously, we take the future of manufacturing industry seriously. That's part of how we are as Australians, that part of what we do. Therefore this important study which has just been concluded will now be examined in detail by the Government and in the months ahead we will be delivering our response.
Its been a serious body of work done, its come up with some substantive recommendations. We will now evaluate those, but I say to everyone loud and clear that we are long term believers in industry in Australia. Long term believers in Industry policy in Australia, long term believers in manufacturing in Australia, long term believers in the automobile industry in Australia.
And as evidence of our good intense on this, we've already of course announced and implemented since coming into to Government a half billion dollar Green Car innovation fund, which has already been drawn upon by Toyota in order to have in Australia by 2010 manufactured for the first time in Australia, an Australian manufactured hybrid car.
That's what the Australian people want, a government which just doesn't stand to one side and say sorry not our responsibility, a government instead which says how can we partner intelligently with industry to make this important sector of our economy have a real future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you support all States having anti-corruption bodies?
PM: Well the trigger for your question is this matter relating to the Tasmanian Police Commissioner. Because I am not familiar with the facts of it and I won't be familiar with the facts of it until these matters are concluded I have no further comment to make on it.
JOURNALIST: The Bracks review recommends that fuel goes into an ETS and transport included in an ETS without even mentioning a compensatory cut in fuel excise. Is that fair enough?
PM: Well as I said we will examine this review which is a detailed, complex document in the weeks and months ahead. We will not come up with a kneejerk reaction to it. We take the industry seriously, that's why we have subjected it to such analysis. And remember through Barry's former close colleague John Button, through the Button plan for the future of the car industry  -  that's largely why we have got a car industry today, that's the bottom line.
And therefore in continuation of the spirit of the Button plan for the car industry we take this seriously. We're going to methodical about it, we are going to be careful about it, we are going to consult closely with industry on it. But we won't be rushed into a decision, we'll do it as I said in the months ahead.
JOURNALIST: Jodie Campbell (inaudible)?
PM: She a fantastic member, she is doing a great job and she is constantly in our ear about what the local community needs. And a $4.5 million support package in Scottsdale I think indicates that we are being practically responsive to what has been a terrible impact for the local community in terms of jobs by the decision to close the mill.
So I would applaud the local member for being up there, in our ribs, in our ear, in our face. That what she does, she is very good at it and our response it to come back with practical support packages of the type we have delivered.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in general do you support anti-corruption watchdogs...
PM: It is a matter for individual States to make their own decisions on.
JOURNALIST: The announcements yesterday, only $50 million of it was new money, the rest of it has already been previously announced. Is this enough as an emergency measure?
PM: The $80 million from South Australia will go to particular measures which they will adopt as far as the buyback of water entitlements in South Australia is concerned. The original package as the release indicated yesterday for Queensland was less than the $400 million which was then announced and the reason we have enhanced that amount of money is because we want to extend the ability to buy back water entitlements down the Darling from Queensland as far as the Menindee lakes. That's what is different about this.
And the second thing that's different is this. It is our preparedness to now purchase properties. And a further different which was announced was our ability to now go out and negotiate with entire irrigation sub communities and to purchase those.
We are proceeding as rapidly as we can in the market to buy back water entitlements. Given that as of nine months ago not one dollar was spent by the previous Government for 12 years to buy back a single gigalitre of water when we know that the last decade this river has been under great stress.
I go back to what you can do practically and realistically within a fixed period of time. The other thing I'd draw your attention is the statement yesterday that in 08-09 we'll also engage in a further basin wide tender arrangement to purchase back further entitlements as well.
One step at a time. In six months $50 million, 35 gigalitres. This announcement which comes in the two parts we have just discussed and then a further indication that we will go to a further Basin wide tender.
These are practical steps heading in the right direction, given we have such a stressed system, an absolutely stressed system which needs to have demand taken (inaudible) through a chronic history of over allocation of water entitlements going back decades.
JOURNALIST: Are you planning on visiting the north any time soon?
PM: Well I was up that way not long go and I will be back up that way I imagine before much longer. Its a great State I like being back here.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
In particular, I acknowledge Mrs Pat Green and Mr Frank Horton, representatives of the indigenous community of Tasmania.
I also want to acknowledge the families and friends who lost loved ones here at Port Arthur on April 28 1996, a dark day that remains in our memory.
It is an honour to be present here at this site of such great national significance:
     * a site of outstanding cultural significance;
     * the first convict site to be listed on the National Heritage List in Australia, and
     * the first of the eleven sites on the Australian Convict Sites World Heritage Nomination that will be considered by the World Heritage Committee next year.
After the revelations last month that about the depth of my own convict ancestry  -  perhaps I should feel at home here.
Indeed, not just one, but seven distinct convict lines  -  I am almost a thoroughbred when it comes to my convict past.
One of my forebears from seven generations back was transported to Sydney in 1789, then sent on to Norfolk Island  -  at the time, the only convict settlements in the British Empire more remote than Port Arthur.
A little-known historical footnote is that Port Arthur later became the most remote penal settlement in the Empire, when Norfolk Island ceased as a convict settlement after 1855 and transferred its remaining convicts here.
Port Arthur was also the last penal settlement to receive direct funding from London, with that practice continuing to 1877.
Port Arthur and Australian history
Coming to Port Arthur is a confronting experience for any Australian.
This is the most significant convict heritage site in our nation.
In bricks and mortar, this stark landscape confronts us with the dramatic story of our nation's beginnings  -  a story so familiar that we easily lose sight of just how remarkable and improbable it is.
The story of a faraway land populated by the cast-offs of an empire  -  men and women who remain in the blood lines of so many of us today.
A land out of which arose a nation, that within a century would lead the world in social reform and economic prosperity.
Against a backdrop of such exceptional beauty here at Port Arthur, these foreboding buildings remind us that our nation began with the deprivation of liberty for some 166,000 convicts transported to Australia - 72,000 of whom came to Tasmania, or as it was, Van Dieman's Land.
The scale of convict transportation to Australia was far greater than any other penal colony in the world  -  whether we measure it in terms of the numbers sent, the duration of the journey or the vastness of the areas settled.
This site invites us to come inside  -  inside the story of the Australian nation, and its extraordinary journey. 
Just consider how Port Arthur speaks to us of the achievement and contradictions of our origins.
A nation founded by convicts  -  who on this island comprised a majority of the population until at least the 1850s.
Yet consider the achievement of our nation:
     * Australia became one of the earliest nations to give common people the right to vote, making us now one of the world's oldest and most stable democracies.
     * One of the first nations to introduce women's suffrage.
     * A society that - with the conspicuous exception of its relations with Indigenous Australians  -  found ways to resolve its conflicts peacefully, and without resort to civil war.
     * A nation that became one of the first to embrace the rights of working people: the eight hour working day, the living wage, and crucial social supports like the age pension and workers' compensation.
     * A nation whose people, by the beginning of the twentieth century, enjoyed the best living standards in the world.
And all of this occurred within the lifetimes of men and women who had set foot upon Australian soil as convicts.
Our first Federal Parliament even included a former convict in William Henry Groom  -  a Queenslander, representing the seat of Darling Downs. 
And he was a conservative to boot  -  with his son subsequently also representing Darling Downs in the Parliament, and serving as Attorney General of the Commonwealth some years later.
Indeed, Charles Darwin had remarked of the penal colony as early as 1836, that:
“as a means of making men outwardly honest  -  of converting vagabonds most useless in one hemisphere into active citizens in another, and thus giving birth to a new and splendid country  -  a grand centre of civilisation  -  it had succeeded to a degree perhaps unparalleled in history.”
The Australian story truly is remarkable  -  into a large convict migration, underpinned too by the extraordinary ancient cultures of the Indigenous people whose role in our history we are only now beginning to understand and recognise.
The Separate Prison
Port Arthur reflects many of the contradictions of the early Australian nation.
Though Port Arthur is perhaps the greatest symbol of convict Australia, in fact most convicts did not serve out their sentence behind bars  -  rather, the prison was reserved for secondary offenders.
Despite the exceptionally beautiful landscape, Port Arthur was a harsh, cold and fearful place  -  as depicted in the great 19th century novel by Marcus Clarke, For The Term of His Natural Life.
Yet there is another side to Port Arthur.
It was a place of isolation and punishment  -  yet as the work of the Authority has helped us understand, this was also a place where prisoners enjoyed access to an extensive library of contemporary books, and established a substantial garden.
It was a centre of industry and skilled workmanship  -  from shipbuilding, blacksmithing and shoemaking to carpentry and brick making  -  skills that many of the convicts acquired after coming to the colony as boys.
Indeed, the Separate Prison that we re-open today was intended to achieve a radical reform of penal practices.
It was conceived not as a place of punishment, but a place for prisoners to contemplate their failings and to be reformed.
Floggings were replaced with extended periods of solitary confinement designed to reform the individual through reflection and isolation.
Two new approaches to penal reform influenced the Separate Prison  -  first, the concept of the prison as a penitentiary, or place of repentance, developed by Pennsylvania's Quakers with the Eastern State Penitentiary in 1829.
They had hoped ‘the silent system' and not the lash would transform hardened criminals.
Second, Port Arthur was influenced by the reformist utilitarianism of the philosopher Jeremy Bentham, in which treatment of prisoners was to be measured, predictable and efficient  -  not harsh, arbitrary, unpredictable or capricious.
In turn, both these approaches to penal systems were largely abandoned.
In understanding the significance of Port Arthur, we should understand the context of social disorder, injustice and foment in Europe against which the early colonists sought to create an ordered society in this new land.
Previous decades had seen:
     * the Industrial Revolution;
     * the American War of Independence
     * the explosive growth of urban populations;
     * the political upheaval created by the French Revolution with its overthrow of the monarchy and established church, and then many long years of war until Napoleon's defeat in 1815, and
     * a widespread fear of crime and social breakdown, which underpinned the harsh system of transportation.
Throughout the 19th century, many of those arriving in Australia left behind them extreme poverty or even starvation.
Life in this place was difficult and unfamiliar.
Yet life in Australia also offered the possibility of freedom  -  ultimately for both free settlers and convicts - a new start, with possibilities that simply did not exist back at home.
Those possibilities were to be realised by successive generations who founded the Australian nation.
And it is here we see something of the beginnings of the Australian nation  -  founded in adversity; people forced from foreign lands and others who came in pursuit of opportunity, both availing themselves of the freedom this land offered to them all.
From early on Australians had a special understanding of the reality of the underdog, creating the strong commitment to ensuring a fair go for all.
Fairness is etched deep into the Australian soul.
I congratulate the Port Arthur Historic Site Management Authority and the Conservation and Infrastructure Team for the exceptional work they have done on the restoration of the Separate Prison.
Congratulations to the architects and all of the skilled professionals and tradespeople who have put their heart and soul into such a complex restoration project.
I know it has been a complex, painstaking process to reconstruct this part of the Separate Prison using traditional skills.
But this work will give visitors a far better appreciation and connection to a place of such heritage significance.
It is a great achievement, and I understand that the Authority has plans for significant additional work that will further enhance the experience of visiting Port Arthur. 
The Australian Government believes that it is vital that we continue to identify and protect the places integral to our national story, so that they can help us remember and understand that we are part of a living history.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I also thank the Tasmanian Government for their partnership on this important heritage initiative.
It is vital that we continue to appreciate, recognise and protect our investment in our National and World Heritage sites. 
They are important to our history, our future and to the local economy of many parts of Australia.
Recent studies indicate that Australia's World Heritage properties generate $12 billion annually and support over 120,000 jobs across the nation.
Port Arthur is a great example of how heritage places can contribute to national and local tourism.
Hundreds of thousands of people from across Tasmania, Australia and the world make the journey to Port Arthur every year, ensuring that this site is both protected and appreciated.
We treasure Port Arthur for what it teaches us about our past, for the way it enriches our present, and for its contribution to our future.
Thank you to everyone for your efforts in contributing to its conservation.
I am pleased now to present Barry Jones with a plaque marking the National Heritage Listing of Port Arthur.
And I am delighted to declare the Separate Prison of Port Arthur open again, here at this site of such great national significance.
This will help ensure that this vital heritage site is accessible to future generations  -  so they too can begin to understand the extraordinary story of the founding of the Australian nation.
A nation without history is like a person without memory. And memory helps shape our hopes and vision for the future. Let us therefore celebrate our history as together we craft the future for this great nation, Australia.


I am delighted to join you for the opening up of a new era in the history of AXA, or for those of us who have been around long enough  -  the old National Mutual, whose history reaches back to 1869.
I am especially pleased to open this building  -  because it is not just as the headquarters for AXA's Australian and New Zealand operations, but it's the headquarters for financial services operations extending to Hong Kong, China, India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and Singapore.
I congratulate AXA for the growing strength of your offshore financial services business.
I note particularly the extraordinary growth you are enjoying in India, with 94 branches in 83 cities, and 24,000 AXA agents  -  all achieved in just two years.
AXA's longstanding and fast-growing presence in Asia demonstrates a theme close to the heart of the Government's vision for our economic future:
The Government's vision for Australia's future is to build a stronger, fairer Australia  -  capable of meeting the challenges of the future.
Challenges like building long term productivity, preparing for an ageing population, taking decisive action on climate change, engaging fully with the dynamic economies of the Asia-Pacific region.
Part of engaging with the economies of Asia is expanding our reach into the financial services markets of Asia  -  because financial services is one of the fastest growing sectors of the global economy, and the global economy's strongest growth is being achieved in our own region.
As we know, the  past 12 months have brought volatility and continuing uncertainty to global capital markets.
Because of the state of the global economy, like other nations Australia faces tough times ahead.
Australia has an open economy, deeply integrated with global markets  -  especially through our strong financial linkages.
. 
For the most part, that brings great benefits and great opportunities.
But we are not immune from global developments when global conditions become more hostile.
Nevertheless, Australia is well-placed to see our way through these difficult challenges.
The Government is committed to building a stronger Australia, through responsible economic management that helps to put downward pressure on interest rates.
We have a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long term competitiveness and build a seamless national economy  -  with a highly skilled workforce, advanced infrastructure, competitive markets and more efficient regulation  -  all of which will underpin the competitiveness of the financial services sector.
And we are committed to investing in the industries of the future  -  industries like financial services.
As a financial centre, we are well placed despite the uncertainty in global markets.
First, we have a strong, well regulated banking sector.
Second, our banks' balance sheets are still strong compared against comparable global counterparts.
From day one, the Government has encouraged banks to disclose their positions and address any problems  -  this is part of the proper, transparent functioning of the financial system.
Third, in general, our corporate balance sheets are strong.
Fourth, in addition to a well-regulated financial sector, we have built a strong budget surplus  -  one of the largest surpluses in almost a decade  -  as a buffer to help withstand the challenges now unfolding.
Fifth, we have taken steps to strength Australia's financial markets. We have moved to expand the issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities by up to $25 billion, to support an efficient bond market and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
Sixth, the Treasurer, the Governor of the Reserve Bank and I have all been working through international forums  -  such as the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF  -  on the crucial issues of liquidity and transparency in the global financial system.
All of this should help Australia to come out the other side of these challenges in a strong position compared with other economies.
As AXA has recognised, there are enormous long term opportunities for Australia's financial services sector in our region.
Those future prospects are driven by strong long term economic and demographic trends in our region:
     * the rapidly increasing flows  of capital;
     * the growing middle classes throughout Asia, with their propensity to save, and
     * ageing populations and the growth in assets under management.
At a global level, financial services present us with great opportunities:
     * Worldwide, financial services exports are worth more than $150 billion per year.
     * Global trade in financial services has been growing faster than in any other services sector, at an average annual rate of 17 per cent this decade.
     * The sophistication and innovation in Australia's financial sector provides us with significant opportunities in global markets  -  in particular, with the world's fourth largest funds management industry, with  $1.1 trillion US dollars in funds under management. AXA is of course a very significant player in this market, with more than $95 billion in funds under management, $20 billion on which is outside Australia.
The Government is committed to supporting businesses like AXA Asia Pacific as they move into regional financial markets and build our position as a financial services hub.
That is why we held the Financial Services Hub Summit in Sydney at the end of last month.
The Summit's purpose was to get the best ideas on the table from all the key stakeholders, so that there is nothing holding this sector back from success in the markets of our region.
A range of priorities were identified at the summit  -  including taxation, workforce skills and regulation.
We heard concerns about the overlap of Commonwealth and State taxes, where businesses face some 53 different Commonwealth, state and local taxes.
The Government has already begun examining some of the matters identified by industry, as part of the Board of Taxation's review into the tax arrangements that apply to managed funds. The Government has also consulted with industry on Australia's future tax treaty program.
Of course in the Government's recent Budget, we have announced a phasing down of the withholding tax on distributions from foreign funds under management, from 30 per cent to 7.5 per cent by 2010-11.
More broadly, the Henry Commission is conducting a wide-ranging review of the Australian tax system, and the Government is referring a number of the tax issues raised at the Summit to this Review.
The Summit also focused on niche areas of financial services where Australia has particular opportunities offshore, including superannuation. 
There was constructive discussion on the workforce  training and immigration policies relevant to the sector in Australia.
And there was a push for a permanent Olympic bid style Committee, to help the liaison between Government and industry to drive the push into regional financial services markets.
As I announced at the Summit, a dedicated unit is being established in the Treasury to drive the review and implementation of policy for the financial services sector, under the oversight of the FSAC.
In the meantime, the Government will continue to work with the sector to open up greater access to overseas markets for financial services, which are often subject to significant barriers to entry.
That is why I have hosted financial services industry lunches in my overseas trips to the United States, China and Japan.
I am pleased that we have already achieved some results.
     * Just over a month ago, Australia secured approval as an investment destination under the Chinese Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor Scheme. This will open opportunities for Chinese banks to offer investment opportunities in Australia  -  providing access to one of fastest growing markets for funds management in the world.
     * During my visit to China in April, China's leaders and I agreed to accelerate our FTA negotiations.  We also agreed that increased access to China's financial services sector was a priority for Australia. 
     * In subsequent meetings our officials have made some progress and we are hopeful that the FTA negotiations will lead to better access to China's market for Australian financial service providers.
     * The Government is also actively pursuing improved access to the Hong Kong market (and indirectly to the mainland Chinese market), by pursuing mutual recognition agreements to help lower barriers for Australian funds managers in the Hong Kong market.
     * In the US in March earlier this year, I announced with the Chair of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chris Cox that we would work together to develop mutual recognition of securities regulation.
     * And in June, we brought into force an agreement for mutual recognition of securities offerings between Australia and New Zealand.
We want to work with business like AXA  to identify the barriers to overseas market access that most restrict your capacity to expand our financial services exports.
And as I said at the Summit two weeks ago, if it will assist our efforts to expand the sector's global opportunities, I would be prepared to lead a delegation of senior industry leaders to key Asian economies, to showcase the strengths and sophistication of Australia's financial services sector.
Across this range of key initiatives in tax, deregulation, education, infrastructure and overseas market access  -  the Government is serious about making Australia competitive as a global financial services provider.
So that when a business like AXA enters overseas markets, you know the Australian Government is a partner in your efforts to win new business opportunities that will help create future jobs in buildings like this one, and prosperity for all Australians.
Congratulations to all of the staff of AXA and to Rick Allert and his board for your efforts in creating an Australian footprint in the financial markets of the region.
Financial services are a key element of Australia's economic future  -  and I look forward to this sector becoming part of Australia's global branding.
I hope this outstanding building can itself be a hub for a business that continues to thrive.
And in time, I hope you can outgrow it too.
I am delighted to declare AXA Asia Pacific Holding's new headquarters open for business.


I have noted Commodore Bainimarama's decision not to attend the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders' Meeting in Niue.
His attendance was expected and there is no reason he should not do so.
Commodore Bainimarama promised Leaders at last year's Forum that he would hold elections in Fiji by March 2009. He has since announced that he will not hold elections on this timetable.
Commodore Bainimarama had the opportunity, through his attendance at the Forum, to explain this decision in person to Pacific leaders.
Fiji will still be, despite his absence, a major feature of Leaders' discussions in Niue. There is no reason why Commodore Bainimarama should not attend for those discussions, as he did last year.
Australia's view remains that Commodore Bainimarama should meet his solemn commitment to hold elections by March next year. 


It's good to be back in New Zealand.
Although this is my first official visit as Prime Minister, I have already met Prime Minister Helen Clark many times here in New Zealand and in Australia and we have become good friends.
For an Australian Prime Minister, the relationship with New Zealand is always a core priority.
For both our governments, the relationship between our countries is always a core priority.
And so it should be.
Ours is a unique relationship In part because of the history we share, summed up through the word ANZAC.
In part because of the work we do together in the region and the world.
In part because of the sheer depth of engagement with each other.
More fundamentally, this relationship is unique because it goes far beyond the relationship between governments.
The depth to the relationship comes from the extraordinary ties between our business people, our sports people, our academic communities and because of the approximately one million people that travel in each direction every year.
So governments on both sides of the Tasman have to recognise that in the case of Australia-New Zealand relations, we don't run the show.
We are just one strand of the relationship.
But today, when I met Prime Minister Clark, we discussed how we can do more to strengthen our strand of the relationship.
And there were three main topics we discussed.
First, our economic relationship.
Second, our roles and responsibilities with the Pacific Island countries, as we both head to Niue for the Pacific Islands Forum.
And third, how we can work together on the global challenge of climate change.
Even Closer Economic Relations
First, I would like to talk about the economic relationship.
And I would like to do that against the backdrop of the new Australian Government's economic policy approach.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough economic times ahead.
The global economy is going through some turbulent waters  -  financial market instability; rising oil and food prices; and slowing growth in some major developed economies.
Most recently, we have seen the disappointing breakdown of the Doha Round of world trade talks in Geneva.
At a time of economic uncertainty, an ambitious outcome from the Doha Round would have sent a strong signal that governments around the world remained committed to freer trade.
The challenge for us now is to lock in the progress that was made at the recent Ministerial Meeting and make another push to resolve the remaining differences.
Australia and New Zealand want the same things from the Doha Round.
We both want to secure the reforms on offer, particularly in locking in substantial reform to world agricultural trade.
The Doha Round is too important to let the possible gains slip through our fingers.
In the face of these global economic uncertainties, the Australian Government's response is to make sure we are able to cope with these challenges by:
     * responsible economic management to put downwards pressure on interest rates and inflation;
     * a  major economic reform program, including deregulation to create a seamless national economy; and
     * investing in our human and physical capital  - to keep us competitive in the long term.
We are also firmly of the belief that the best economic prospects for Australia lie in closer economic engagement with the wider world.
And a central element in that is even closer economic engagement with New Zealand.
This year is the 25th anniversary of Closer Economic Relations agreement between Australia and New Zealand  -  CER.
CER is one of the world's oldest trade agreements.
It is also widely and rightly seen as one of the most successful.
It has played a vital role in nurturing the vibrant and integrated economic relationship that our two countries enjoy.
Since CER was signed, New Zealand's exports to Australia have grown at an average of 7.7 per cent a year.
Overall trans-Tasman trade has grown at over 8 per cent a year in the last 25 years.
Last year, two-way trade in goods and services was worth 21.5 billion Australian dollars.
CER has helped to forge a trans-Tasman business community of which each of you are members  -  indeed shareholders.
It is useful to remind ourselves of what the world looked like when the CER was finalised and signed in 1983 by the Hawke Labor Government on the Australian side:
     * trans-Tasman relations were recovering from Australia's 1981 re-discovery of the lost art of underarm bowling
     * agriculture remained firmly locked-out of the multilateral trading system, with the Tokyo GATT Round having failed to include farm trade in any meaningful way;
     * in our region, ASEAN was composed of just five members, serving a primarily political role as a bloc to prevent the spread of communism to south-east Asia; and
     * in the wider region, China's economic explosion had not yet begun.
Against this backdrop, Australia and New Zealand signed a free trade agreement that remains one of the most comprehensive, liberal and forward-looking in the world. 
The question today, is where to now for Australia, New Zealand and CER? 
In global terms, CER has delivered an impressive level of integration, but more remains to be done.
Our Ministers met just last week in Melbourne to discuss the next steps for CER.
The challenge before governments on both sides of the Tasman is to drive forward the creation of the Single Economic Market, building a seamless economy between Australia and New Zealand of more than 25 million people. 
That is why we welcome the strengthened engagement from the Clark Government in working with Australia to finalise an Investment Protocol to CER, which we hope will reduce compliance costs for Australian and New Zealand investors. 
Australia wants to be ambitious here  -  our aim is to reduce the amount of screening that currently occurs in relation to investment flows between the two countries.
In addition to the Investment Protocol, we want to conclude negotiations for a new tax treaty.
Australia's Treasurer, Wayne Swan, recently invited the New Zealand Treasury to make a submission to the Australian Government on the mutual recognition of dividend imputation  -  or franking  -  credits, which I know is of concern to New Zealand business.
Furthermore, we need to develop a regime which facilitates the portability of retirement savings across the Tasman. 
This measure goes to the heart of removing disincentives to the free movement of people across the Tasman by allowing individuals to consolidate their retirement savings.  
The Australian Government looks forward to working with the New Zealand Government to complete this work, and then take on the next reform challenges.
The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) is another area where we can do more. 
Since being elected last November, the Australian Government has put a lot of effort into getting the state and federal governments to work together more cooperatively through COAG.
One focus has been on harmonising regulatory frameworks.
I want Australia-New Zealand relations to plug into this work.
Wherever possible I want to look at how we can extend to New Zealand the work we are doing in the COAG Business Regulation and Competition Working Group on national regulatory arrangements.
It is all about making it easier for businesses to operate across the Tasman.
The Trans Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangement, concluded in 1998, shows how much this type of integration can offer.
The Mutual Recognition Arrangement overcame in one fell swoop a number of regulatory barriers to the movement of goods between our countries and people wishing to pursue their occupations on both sides of the Tasman.
I also want our governments to look at how we can expand CER outwards.
The most important of these is our work in negotiating a new trade agreement between Australia and New Zealand  -  negotiating as CER  -  with ASEAN, representing ten economies. 
The importance of this arrangement is underscored by its economic weight  -  the ASEAN-CER market would have a combined GDP of 2.3 trillion US dollars, which is more than twice as large as India - at 1.1 trillion US dollars - and nearly three-quarters the size of China's 3.3 trillion dollar economy. 
It is a complex negotiation but I hope that the last obstacles can be overcome in the coming weeks when Trade Ministers meet in Singapore.
On an even larger scale, Australia is committed to seeing a comprehensive, region-wide trade and economic agreement spanning both sides of the Pacific, and we welcome APEC's current discussion of an FTA for the Asia Pacific. 
As two founding members of APEC, Australia and New Zealand have a stake in taking forward this ambitious goal. 
Australia also supports the efforts of the East Asia Summit to deepen integration through its study on Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA).
New Zealand has also been an active player in the so-called P4 grouping  -  with Singapore, Chile and Brunei  -  which could provide a building block towards a broader APEC-wide economic agreement. 
With a range of regional economic initiatives being discussed and pushed forward, the Australian Government believes that we need to begin to have a debate about how we want our region to look in the decades ahead.
That is why in June I proposed that the region should begin to discuss the kind of regional architecture we want by 2020, what I've termed an Asia-Pacific Community.
We need to make sure that all of the major players are engaged in an open conversation about the region's future  -  the United States, China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and others  -  including India.
And we need to be able to conduct continuous dialogue on any and every challenge we might face  -  from climate change to economic liberalisation, to security cooperation, to natural disaster management.
As our partner in CER, I am very keen to hear New Zealand's views about this idea.
I have appointed an envoy to visit regional capitals to take soundings about an Asia Pacific Community.
And I have asked him to make New Zealand the first visit in his program to engage the government as well as the business and academic communities.
Our Pacific Neighbourhood
The other important element to our relationship is how we work together with our Pacific colleagues to ensure a stable, sustainable and prosperous region. 
Since coming to office, I have urged closer coordination between Australia and New Zealand on our regional policy settings. 
My reason for wanting this seamless coordination is simple. 
The Australian Government wants a new era of cooperative relations with the Pacific Island countries.
And to achieve that we need to work closely with our partners in New Zealand.
When combined, Australia and New Zealand are by far the single biggest influence on developments in the Pacific. 
But with this influence, comes responsibility. 
Responsibility to do what we can to promote sustainable economic development in a region that is largely performing poorly against key development indicators including the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals, when much of the rest of the developing world has been improving.
Nearly 18,000 children each year in the Pacific region die in the first 18 months of life, many in the first month after birth.
Maternal mortality rates have worsened in some regional countries over the last 15 years. 
About 1,000 women die annually from complications of pregnancy and childbirth.
There is mixed progress towards universal primary education, but the region as a whole is not on track to achieve this.
There are many more examples I could give.
We must work with our Pacific friends and partners to improve these development outcomes.
In March the Australian Government outlined its new approach to the Pacific in the Port Moresby Declaration.
We are committed to a new era of cooperation with the Pacific Island countries, exemplified by the Pacific Partnerships for Development.
The Partnerships will over time cover all aspects of our development relationships with partner countries, including infrastructure, basic health and education, improved public sector management and community based development.
Partnerships are based on a concept of genuine partnership  -  partnership that recognises responsibilities and contributions of both parties and their mutual accountability for better development results.
We will be listening to our Pacific Island partners, not dictating to them.
They have the ultimate responsibility for the policies and programs which will deliver development to their peoples.
We will be working closely with them to achieve these outcomes.
We will be also be working with other donors, especially New Zealand, but also including the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Union, Japan and emerging regional donors.
Another ambition Australia and New Zealand share is to deepen consultation with our Pacific Island neighbours on a region-wide economic integration initiative called PACER-plus. 
Trade Ministers from the Pacific met in late July and agreed to further consultations on the proposal in 2009.
We hope PACER-plus can provide new energy for closer economic integration in the Pacific.
Our approach to PACER-plus is to have an integrated trade and development assistance approach.
So we will be looking at incorporating capacity building into the agreement.
We will be working closely with New Zealand and the Pacific Island countries to take this initiative forward.
Together with you, the business community, we will be seeking new and innovative ways to collaborate in the Pacific to promote new business and private sector activity, activity that will  increase economic and social opportunity for the region's citizens. 
Climate Change: the Next Chapter?
As we look at the Pacific, we have to recognise that climate change will be the biggest challenge we face in the decades ahead.
I have described climate change as one of the greatest moral, economic and environmental challenges of our age, and it is therefore fundamental that Australia and New Zealand build on a common heritage of hard work to tackle this menace.
We cannot sit back and wait for others to tackle the problem on our behalf.
We have to be brave enough to realise the imperative of action.
And I would like to publicly recognise the leading role New Zealand has taken on climate change globally.
If we are to influence the global response to climate change, we must also act locally. 
And we both have decided to act.
There are several areas where close cross-Tasman cooperation is necessary.
First, on adapting to the effects of climate change, Australia and New Zealand have an important role to play in the Pacific to help our neighbours  -  especially low-lying atoll nations  -  deal with the implications of climate change. 
Climate change will be the theme of this week's Pacific Islands Forum, where I will outline to Pacific leaders some of the first funding decisions from Australia's $150 million International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative. 
Climate change mitigation is also an area where Australian and New Zealand technology and expertise will be in high demand.
As you all know, both governments are also working on the development of emissions trading schemes. 
Australia's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper was released on 16 July 2008.
Extensive community consultation is now underway ahead of the release of a White Paper on scheme design and exposure draft legislation before the end of the year.
In developing our ideas, I have been pleased by the close consultation and collaborative work between our respective policy advisers and scientists. 
Such close cooperation has ensured that no barriers exist between our respective schemes that would prevent future linkages, should the Australian and New Zealand Governments decide to make them.
This is no accident.  Our governments have cooperated closely to ensure that the schemes can be linked.
As we look to the future, and the international linkages that will be required to reduce both global emissions and the costs of doing so, continued close Australian-New Zealand collaboration will be needed. 
In the meantime, there are other pressing challenges, demanding our close cooperation.  
Next year, in Copenhagen, the world will seek to conclude a new, landmark multilateral post-2012 outcome.
At Copenhagen, the international community must conclude an ambitious, comprehensive outcome that would see all countries better act on climate change. 
Australia and New Zealand are working closely to pool our ideas, strategies and negotiating weights to influence for the better the outcome of next year's conference.
Conclusion
I want to see Australia and New Zealand working more closely together.
I want to see us working more closely together bilaterally, driving towards the Single Economic Market.
I want to see us working more closely together regionally, in a joined-up approach to the challenges of the South Pacific.
I want to see us working more closely together globally, striving towards an outcome for the Doha Development Round, and on the profound challenges of climate change.
Our two great countries remain unique forces for good in the world.
When Australia and New Zealand work together, we can achieve more than the sum of our parts.
The government I lead will play its full part in ensuring that, together, we cooperate even more closely into the future to realise that potential.


PM CLARK: It's been a great pleasure for me today to host Kevin Rudd in his visit to New Zealand. We've begun the dialogue at the Australian-New Zealand climate change forum and carried on the climate change discussion in our talks this morning.
Clearly climate change will be one of the key issues that the Pacific leaders want to discuss at the forum and with Australia now on board and having ratified the Kyoto Protocol and taking a very full and constructive part in international negotiations I think this is going to improve the atmosphere in which this issue is discussed at the forum this year. So that's the key thing discussed.
We've obviously discussed the other items on the agenda including Fiji. I repeat what I said in the New Zealand media yesterday afternoon that there is no reasonable excuse at all for Fiji not attending the forum.
I personally intervened to ensure that transit visas were available for the Fiji delegation to go through Auckland airport to Niue so that they could be accountable to forum leaders for commitments given last year. I think forum leaders will be very disappointed that the Fijian Government has determined not to be represented for reasons which can only be described as spurious.
Nonetheless forum leaders will address the issue of Fiji, we have a Ministerial Contact Group report and recommendations which (inaudible) discussed and no doubt the forum will be in touch with the interim Government of Fiji afterwards to convey the views of the forum.
Apart from that we've touched on a number of issues that our Governments work on and there is an announcement that I have to make today on behalf of the New Zealand Government and that is that following representations from Australia over a number of months, firstly from Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to me in the discussion of the level of (inaudible) New Zealand has decided that it will formally and publicly support and campaign for Australia's bid to host the world's largest radio telescope project.
We see this as having possibilities and potential for New Zealand and Australia that at this time are probably almost beyond our imagination. There are a number of steps to be gone through here as Australia is campaigning for the support for its bid and we will join that campaign. We have agreed today that our Governments will sit on a joint officials committee which will work on the diplomatic work which must now be done and also the way in which our science, our investment, our ICT infrastructure, our economic modernisation, development transformation can be leveraged off a huge project of such significance as this should Australia be successful in winning the right to host it.
So that would be a very exciting field for our scientists, for our technology people and one that we are very interested in exploring the full potential of with Australia through the joint officials process staring very, very soon.
Prime Minister Rudd, over to you.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much Helen and its good to be back in New Zealand and thank you very much for your hospitality today here in Auckland.
This is a very good relationship between our two countries and our two Governments and I appreciate very much the contribution which the Prime Minister makes to this relationship to make it work on both sides of the Tasman.
One of the key areas of cooperation between the both of us is the critical global challenge of climate change. As I said in today's forum, I would acknowledge publicly the leadership role which the Prime Minister of New Zealand has demonstrated on this over many years.
Leadership has been necessary in order to focus the global debate on the actions we need to take collectively as nation states to deal with this great environmental and economic challenge.
Together we are acting domestically through our respective approaches to emissions trading regimes. We are also acting together internationally through the current set of negotiations for the post Kyoto arrangements post 2012. And Australia has no closer partner in those negotiations than New Zealand. We will continue to work closely on these challenges and through the Poznan and through to Copenhagen at the end of next year.
We are about to go to Niue where in our consultations with our fellow heads of Government from the Pacific Island countries, we are confronted front and centre with the impact of climate change on regional states.
When I recently attended the G8 plus meeting in Hokkaido in Japan, one of the messages I sought to convey to the heads of the major industrial economies in the world was these are not theoretical debates for our friends in the South Pacific. For many of them this is a real and emerging reality which goes to the very survivability of their nation states. And that is something of which both the Prime Minister and myself are acutely conscious when we sit down with forum heads of Government in Niue over the next two days.
Secondly, more broadly across the forums agenda, there is the great and continuing challenge represented by the threat to democracy in Fiji. I think it is absolutely regrettable that the leader of Fiji has decided not to attend this forum. It would have been far better for the leader of Fiji to sit down with the leaders of the Pacific Island countries and answer to the commitments which have been previously given by Fiji to fellow Island states. That is now not going to occur.
The reasons for non-attendance which have been provided are simply not persuasive, particularly given the facts which Prime Minister Clark has just put before you.
We in the South Pacific and Pacific Island countries in particular take democracy seriously. That is why we don't believe we can sit idly by while the principles of democracy are shredded, and therefore, the resolve of Pacific Island counties is to act in concert on this question and we look forward very much to the discussion which will now occur minus Fiji in Niue on how this matter should be handled into the future.
It is regrettable that Fiji will not be represented in its own right, given that Fiji, and to the traducement of democracy, is the core subject for discussion.
And finally on the square kilometre array radio telescope. What Prime Minister Clark has said is absolutely right this is a massive project of global significance and for radio astronomy in our two countries and you have got to be in it to win it. This is a big project with multiple billions of dollars worth of investment. Once constructed this would be the largest radio telescope in the world, 50 times more powerful than any current radio telescope, a huge contribution to global radio astronomy, a huge contribution to the science in our respective countries, to innovation in our respective countries. And to be in not only do we have to put forward a credible scientific case, we also need to put together a coherent diplomatic strategy to secure it.
The decision makers here are a group of 19 countries who form part of an international consortium. And they will be assessing this primarily on the science and the basis of Government support for such a project.
The beauty of us being able to put forward potentially a combined bid is if you look at the geographical spread that we can provide all the way from Perth in the west over here to New Zealand in the east, that's a sizable array of radio telescopes that you can put together. And the proposal here is that you would have several hundred clusters of dishes, some 50 to 100 individual dishes, forming part of each particular cluster.
That represents a major advance on the science, the technological spin off, the innovation spin off and therefore the industry spin off for our respective economies would be huge. And therefore, with large projects like this, it's really good that we have the potential for our two Governments to work together.
Hence the Prime Minister's proposal for a joint officials group to work between Wellington and Canberra on this at the diplomatic level, but also at the science level and the technical level to make sure that we advance this proposal.
Decision time is still some couple of years off. But unless we are up there at it with the proposal before the decision making country in the interim then we will simply not prevail and we intend to be in it to win it.
JOURNALIST: Question for Prime Minister Rudd, talking of energy efficiency this morning I wanted to clarify you mentioned the figure of 30 per cent. Did you mean that we could meet up to 30 per cent of our abatement task right through energy efficiency measures? And also when will we see that package of measures and are they likely to include mandatory measures for industry?
PM RUDD: The Government continues to work on additional energy efficiency measures. Some we committed to prior to the last election concerning what can be done in households in particular. But, we recognise fully that there is a much broader set of measures to be embraced by both households and by businesses in order to make a significant contribution to drawing down overall energy usage, and therefore greenhouse gas emissions.
As for the figure of 30 per cent, there is not a robust science around that number. I think I seem to recall using the term ‘one of the numbers kicked around Government' is 30 per cent. Given, however, the fact that most in the international community talk about significant numbers in this area, I believe we've got to take this seriously, robustly, particularly in a period where we're starting up other mechanisms such as, in our case, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and New Zealand's equivalent scheme in terms of emissions trading, in order to make an overall longer term impact on drawing down carbon emissions.
Energy efficiency, second plank, and we'll be doing more on that in the months ahead as well as what we do on the renewable energy front. These for us are three fronts that we'll be embracing in dealing with the overall challenge of climate change.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) did you discuss in your meeting this morning perhaps new recommendations or perhaps sanctions that you might take to Niue, its a question for both if you could in regards to forcing Bainimarama around the table in the future?
PM CLARK: What we have is the Ministerial Contact Group report, and list of recommendations. And those have not yet been publicly disclosed. So, the issue will be whether in the light of Fiji's interim Government's non-attendance, whether leaders will be of mind to take the matter further than the Ministerial Contact Group envisaged.
That's something I'll be wanting to canvass with other leaders as they start filing into meetings in Niue this evening.
PM RUDD: I think the other thing to be said is Bainimarama's, frankly, contempt for regional leaders such as the Grand Chief of Papua New Guinea, Sir Michael Somare, on this question have to be taken into account. And I think it's going to turn into a very interesting discussion in Niue in terms of this decision not to attend.
JOURNALIST: Wont both of you be disappointed though if there isn't a strong message coming out of this forum demanding that Fiji returns democracy?
PM CLARK: I think there will be a strong message from the forum and the Ministerial Contact Group report and recommendations are strong. I think that Pacific leaders will be concerned at the no-show. Because it is about keeping face, isn't it. If someone is not prepared to come and be accountable for breaking commitments given to leaders a year ago, that itself speaks volumes.
So I expect there will be a robust outcome from the forum.
PM RUDD: And I think regional leaders generally will be disappointed. As the Prime Minister was saying before that the Fijian leader has chosen not to front, and to confront his counterparts in the south Pacific. I would have thought that that would be a normal thing to do.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM CLARK: Well, we're of the view that the Pacific is not at that point. This question has been around, obviously in the media and the commentary for quite a long time. But I think it's important that we don't run up the white flag on the future of small nations ATOL nations in the Pacific and elsewhere at this time.
New Zealand, as you know, has (inaudible) communities here including from Tuvalu and Kiribati. At this point we provide for an ordinary migration through the resident quotas each year and of course for the seasonal work opportunities. And there is a quite a lot of family (inaudible) which goes on as well.
I don't think we're at the point where anyone if you wanted (inaudible) would be thinking of mass relocation of people. We're in the business of trying to stop the world's climate deteriorating to the point where these nations are (inaudible)
I'll probably take one more from each side, because I'm trying to catch a one o'clock.
JOURNALIST: Emissions trading (inaudible)
PM RUDD: Well, we are at the Green Paper stage in Australia. New Zealand is more advanced than that. We have a ways to go through that before we reach a White Paper, and then to legislation.
Again, our officials respectively advise us that there are no barriers to linkage. I think we are seeking to get our own houses in order first. And I think that is the process in which we are in engaged and explicitly stated in our Green Paper is a preparedness to link with compatible international systems.
And frankly, in terms of the long term health of the planet, that is a good direction to head in. But as I said, in terms of our processes, we still have a way to go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the NSG, the Nuclear Supply Group meets in two days. New Zealand has reservations about giving India a waiver, Australia clearly supports it. What the view of the two Prime Ministers on where this issue is going to go, will it survive?
PM CLARK: Well we haven't discussed this today and New Zealand is working with the group of other small like minded countries who are represented on the Nuclear Supply Group. Obviously with the agreement that has been reached raised some minor concerns from New Zealand as a nuclear free country and those concerns have been shared by others, small western democracies.
So we will be meeting, we will be listening to the case and networking with others. It would be no secret that we would like to see more conditionalities around the agreement. We're pursuing this diplomatically.
JOURNALIST: On Pakistan, can I ask you both to comment on the resignation of Pervez Musharraf?
PM CLARK: You can.
I heard it on the morning news this morning so I haven't had time to take further advice. Does this come as a surprise? No, it doesn't. I think Pakistan is going through a process of change. Mr Musharraf visited our country three or four years ago. We had discussions with him then urging a return to a democratic Government.
We were active in the Commonwealth on issues relating to Pakistan. We saw with great sorrow the death of Benazir Bhutto in the midst of an election campaign a few months ago. We can only hope now that Pakistan will make a transition to a popularly elected President who can help bring stability to the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Clark have you been able to confirm to Prime Minister Rudd that have you have the numbers to pass the emissions trading scheme (Inaudible)
PM CLARK: I've said to Kevin Rudd today exactly what I have been saying to Kiwi media that we continue discussion with the parties who maybe able to provide support for that and as soon a there is a majority for proceeding you will be the first to hear about it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Pakistan (Inaudible) Binge drinking (inaudible)
PM RUDD: I'll try and draw those two themes together in a creative and insightful way. Pakistan internal politics and binge drinking.
On the question of Pakistan, which has been raised by two journalists here. Pakistan's domestic politics is a matter for the Pakistanis themselves, and I support what Prime Minister Clark said before about the importance of the democratic process there.
The key consideration equally for all of us as we observe future political developments in Pakistan is the impact this has on the continuing military campaign in Afghanistan where we have problems in terms of Al Qaeda, we have problems in terms of the Taliban, we have problems in terms of the porous nature of the border.
Therefore, a core concern for those of us engaged in Afghanistan is the future shape of the Government in Islamabad and the posture it will adopt in terms of cross-border cooperation with the Government in Kabul, and with those of us who are allies and friends of the United States engaged in military actions on the ground in what is a difficult, dangerous and bloody environment for our troops.
On the other question you raised, which is Australian domestic politics, I just say this to the Liberal Party.
If they are about to block this measure in the Senate, if the Liberal Party are about to put their hands up to maintain a tax exemption or a special tax treatment for this category of alcoholic drinks which is specifically targeted on young girls, then the question I want to know is what do they believe the binge drinking rate will become among young girls in the future once they take this action?
Thanks very much.
PM CLARK: Thank you everyone.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today signed Pacific Partnerships for Development with Prime Minister Somare of Papua New Guinea and Prime Minister Tuilaepa of Samoa at the Pacific Forum Leaders' Meeting in Niue.
These are ground-breaking new initiatives, and a central element of our commitment to a new era of cooperation between Australia and our Pacific neighbours.  They give expression to the practical new regional partnership I outlined in my 6 March 2008 Port Moresby Declaration.
These Partnerships commit Australia and our partners in the Pacific to work together to meet common challenges, in particular to make faster progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and our partners' development goals. 
Economic growth in the Pacific region has picked up. But progress is mixed and lags behind other parts of the world, such as the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa.  Many Pacific island countries are not yet in a position to achieve MDG standards of health or education by 2015. Up to a million children in the region do not attend school.  As many as 18,000 children die each year from preventable causes.  And lack of employment and economic opportunities, together with climate change and extreme weather, are grave concerns for vulnerable island and atoll countries.
We want to work shoulder to shoulder with our Pacific neighbours on these challenges. Our Partnerships for Development will strive to realise better development results by committing Australia to provide new and additional bilateral assistance over time, whilst at the same time embracing commitments from Pacific partners to improve governance, increase investment in economic infrastructure and achieve better outcomes in health and education and other areas.
Australia is committed to the fundamental principles of mutual respect and mutual responsibility underlying the Partnerships.  We will jointly assess progress towards development outcomes and hold each other accountable for the commitments we make to our peoples and each other.  This will reinforce our partner countries' leadership of their own development policy and strengthen our cooperation.
Our Partnership with PNG aims to provide better access to markets and services through improved infrastructure; faster progress towards universal basic education; improved health outcomes; strengthened public administration, including at the provincial and district levels; and to launch a new approach to providing sound development data, including a national census in 2010.
Samoa is on track to meet the MDGs. We have therefore agreed that our Partnership will assist Samoa to move beyond the Goals, by supporting a more robust economy through private sector-led growth and employment, agricultural development and regional economic integration; better quality health and education outcomes; improved governance, including public sector capacity development and strengthened law and justice agencies; and guarding against vulnerability to climate change.
Australia will be pursuing similar agreements with other Pacific partners who share this ambition and vision over the coming months and years.


PM: It's good to be here in Niue at the Pacific Island Forum. This is an important gathering of regional leaders where our objective, of course is to, what we do together as a community of Pacific Island countries to enhance our political stability. How do we enhance our common interests for economic development. And how do we deal with the great challenge affecting us all, and that's climate change. This forum here in Niue will be addressing each of those challenges.
On the question of the political stability of our wider region, of course there has been an assault on that because of the attack on democracy in Fiji. This region, this community of States, prides itself in supporting the principles of democracy and this community therefore will be discussing what measures can be taken in response to the contempt for democracy which has been reflected in the position by Bainimarama.
On the question of economic development today here in Niue I have signed and am signing the first of our Pacific development partnerships with the Governments of Papua New Guinea and of Samoa.
This is a new framework for Australia's aid relationship with the countries of the Pacific. It's based on a principle of mutual responsibility. Australia has already indicated through the Port Moresby Declaration that we're prepared to be long term partners with the countries of the region on their path to development. But at the same time, we need to see measurable progress in education indicators, in health indicators, and also in the provision of infrastructure. We also need good data to support that as well.
And these agreements, which have been already signed by myself and the Grand Chief, Sir Michael Somare, on behalf of Papua New Guinea, and later today with Samoa, embody this principle.
It's important for one core reason. We've all signed up to the millennium development goals, but if you look at the way in which this region is tracking against the millennium development goals, in many countries, most of the indicators are heading in the wrong direction on health, on education outcomes, and on other critical barometers of economic development.
Therefore, we can either simply stand to one side and say that's the way things are, or we can try and do something about it. And certainly our resolve is to try and do something about it. And that underpins the principles I articulated in Port Moresby in February in the Port Moresby Declaration which embraced the principle of a Pacific Development Partnerships, and six months later we are signing the first two of those.
In the course of the year or two ahead we have already embraced a timetable for doing a further six Pacific Island countries, and we will continue to work our way through each of those.
Finally on the question of climate change. As I've been in many international meetings in recent times, climate change is often discussed almost in a theoretical sense, that's it's some future problem facing the planet and not one of immediate pressing present reality.
For many of our Pacific Island neighbours, climate change is a current and unfolding threat to their physical survival. And the Pacific Island countries are saying to the countries of the world, including Australia, including the United States, including the Europeans, including the Chinese and the Indians, the time for action, concrete action on climate change, is now. It is the right thing to do it is the responsible thing to do. And we can't simply push action off indefinitely into the future, hoping that someone else will solve this problem for us.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) your counterparts, what is their reaction to Bainimarama's boycott?
PM: Well, I'm sure you've already spoken to the Chief Minister, and also to the Prime Minister of Tonga about their positions, I'll allow them to speak for themselves, not wishing to characterise their independent national positions.
I think there is an overall sense here that one, Bainimarama made solemn undertakings to their forum twelve months ago. That is, that there would be democratic elections held in Fiji in March of 2009.
Secondly, we now have Bainimarama saying that's not going to happen. And it's quite plain from actions on the ground in Fiji that he has no intention for that to happen.
And thirdly, therefore, I think this is a direct and deliberate slight and snub to the leaders of the Pacific Island countries assembled here in Niue. And we will be discussing today and tomorrow the forum country's reaction to that.
JOURNALIST: But at this very early stage from your discussions with these two leaders, what do you think the measures that you talked about earlier could possibly include?
PM: Well, let's wait to see how that unfolds. There is discussion today and tomorrow. I've only spoken with two of the leaders so far. But I think if there is a mood across the Pacific Island Forum, it's that Bainimarama has gone not just one step too far, but many steps too far. And saying to the leaders of the South Pacific Island countries themselves he doesn't care about them, or coming back to account to them the undertakings he gave to them twelve months ago, I don't think Bainimarama has won any friends for himself in this gathering.
JOURNALIST: Could this be the beginning of the end for the Forum?
PM: I believe the Forum is a robust gathering of local democracies, and therefore the challenge for us in these meetings is to uphold and stand firmly behind that principle of democracy. And therefore, that means holding to account those who violate that principle, and holding them to account on the solemn undertakings they have given to this body. That very much will occupy the focus of the attention of Island Governments and certainly it has been a large part of the conversation I've had with them.
Secondly though, in terms of the forum, the overarching challenge which these island countries face is the challenges of development. And as I've said, if we as the international community's signed up to the millennium goals in the year 2000, in September the leaders of the world will assemble again in New York to review progress against those Millennium Development goals at the half way point through to 2015.
And the report card for the Pacific Island countries is not good. It just ain't good. Therefore, a core challenge for the forum, and for us working with the forum as the provider for about half the development assistance cooperation for this entire region, is how can we start to turn this around.
And I emphasise to you all that the serious nature of the substantive engagement that we've had with island countries on these Pacific development partnerships. The objective is to make the principle of mutual responsibility entrenched. And for achievement against those development goal objectives measureable into the future as a part of Australia's continuing aid commitment to the neighbourhood.
JOURNALIST: Does that principle of mutual responsibility mean that Australia will end up spending more money on aid in the region?
PM: It will depend entirely on performance within the region. You calibrate our development assistance cooperation arrangements on the basis of measureable improvements in performance. If you go to child health barometers, if you go to basic indicators in terms of maternal health, post childbirth. If you go to indicators for kids completing secondary school equivalent, or literacy and numeracy achievements from Primary School. These are very basic markers.
Now, we will be long term partners with the region on the condition that our investment in these areas is met through these partnerships, these development partnerships, and resulting in measurable achievements. There is no blank cheque here. And that's why we in Australia believe this is the right way to go.
As I said, the alternative is to just to say ‘all too hard, all too difficult, the region can't develop'. That's not my attitude. We actually have a national responsibility to do this. And furthermore, it's in Australia's national interest for us to help built long term political and economic stability in this neighbourhood.
If we don't, we create significant long term security problems for ourselves in this neighbourhood. And this has been an area of, shall I say, too significant neglect over the past decade or so on the part of previous Governments.
JOURNALIST: On the case of Bainimarama, you're limited in what you can actually do, aren't you? You've got tough measures already. If you impose further sanctions, do you risk the danger of hurting the Fijian people themselves?
PM: Well there's no magic solutions with all of this. You've just got to be practical, realistic, but at the same time, be absolutely clear about the principle. I'm not about to be part and party to a regional arrangement which says that you can traduce democracy and get away with it. We cannot legitimise that norm here in our region.
You've got to say that if a regional state violates fundamental principles of democracy that, that is not acceptable according to the norms of this region. And the alternative is simply to allow that the drift into a sense of what is normal and acceptable. I'm not about to do that, my predecessors didn't, I'm not about to.
JOURNALIST: So you have got diplomatic sanctions, are you considering economic sanctions?
PM: Well we have discussions to go through both today and tomorrow and let's see what emerges from that. This forum is made up of 16 countries, Australia is one of them and we will be actively participating in those discussions.
But as I said the key thing is to be absolutely clear cut that this form of behaviour, this violation of democratic principles, is unacceptable in this region. It is not on. That is not the way in which this regions conducts is political business, and we cannot legitimise it.
JOURNALIST: On guest workers, Sir Michael Somare welcomed the announcement in Papua New Guinea. Your meeting with other leaders of nations that weren't included in the pilot. Do they have a right to be disappointed in that?
PM: Well, as I said to someone yesterday, I think it was in Wellington, I've been Prime Minister of the country for six or seven months, or seven or eight months now. It takes a while to work these things through.
The key thing with those who will come to help Australian industry, Australia's fruit growing industry, and to prevent fruit from rotting on the vine is to make sure this pilot program works, works smoothly, and works effectively. The second step is to evaluate at the 18 month and three year point how it's gone. And thirdly to build on that experience.
We've been up front with our friends in the region that that's how it is going to proceed. That's what we intend to do.
JOURNALIST: So how did you choose which countries got to be in and which countries got to be out?
PM: Well, I rely keenly on the advice of our diplomatic advisors who are professional people who provide the Government with advice from our missions right across the region.
JOURNALIST: Did they give you reasons for their advice?
PM: I'm sure they gave well fortified reasons for their advice.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well I just don't want aid to be inputs measured. It's got to be outcomes measured. That's a very simple principle, that's what mutual responsibility is about. That is, we'll be co investors with our friends from the rest of the international community together with the sovereign Governments of the region, but this is a two way street. And the two way street means investment here by way of inputs but you have got to make improvements on the measurables.
Measurable outcomes on health, measurable outcomes on education, measurable outcomes on infrastructure. Otherwise it's simply a process without rigour and I'm not up for that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Nice verballing, good try.
What it does mean is as follows. I have said to all of our friends in the region, we see ourselves very much as long term partners in this neighbourhood and we regard ourselves as friends and we treat our neighbours in the region with respect.
We will be co investors with them in their challenges of development, but its co investment with them on the basis of mutual responsibility with publishable data on what improvements are being registered, and that is a very important way forward.
JOURNALIST: In regards to climate change, you've talked about that a bit and said it's going to be the theme of the conference. Have you given thought to environmental refugees going to Australia and preparations for that sort of thing?
PM: Well, the Prime Minister of New Zealand and I were asked about this in Auckland yesterday and our attitude is this, what countries like Tuvalu and Kiribati say to the rest of the world is this: this is a huge warning bell on climate change, a huge warning bell.
And for those with ears to hear, that's what it is saying. And I think the best way to interpret the climate change challenges of the exposed low lying island states is for the countries of the world to act rather than to push it off.
That is a think the message to come out of those countries rather than hauling up the white flag and saying it's all too late.
JOURNALIST: What is the mood towards Australia? A year ago Australia had bad relations with PNG, there was problems with the Solomons, Sogavare has left, what a difference a year makes and it's been a bit of luck with Sogavare leaving. What's the mood towards Australia?
PM: Well, I'm sure you will deduce that over the next day or two. Far be it for me to characterise the views of our neighbours in the Pacific.
Look I think the key thing in our dealings with the sovereign countries of the region is to proceed always on the basis of respect, and we do that.
Each of these countries, each of these communities, each of these societies is quite different in their circumstances, and that's our first principle.
Secondly, it's engaging with these communities and countries and sovereign Governments on a basis of mutual responsibility. Here's our proposal for partnership, this is what we want to do, these are the measures we want to see improve over time, come with us.
Now, that's their choice, whether they wish to or not, but that the framework that we are laying out.
JOURNALIST: Is this the first time you have held bilateral talks in a dive shop Mr Rudd?
PM: This is a classy place, so you just mind your tongue.


PM: The Pacific and the Islands of the South Pacific are core business for Australia's national interest. Those national interests go to our long term security, those national interests go to the economic wellbeing of our neighbours, those interests go to the impact of climate change. And each of these questions has formed a part and in some cases a substantial part of the discussions among pacific Island leaders today.
On climate change the chair of the forum the Premier of Niue will issue soon the Niue declaration which is, as he advises us, the first time the Pacific island countries have issued a joint declaration on climate change. Part of the reason for that is because you have here in the South Pacific the direct impact of climate change in terms of people's ability to survive.
We had presentations of course from the heads of Tuvalu and Kiribati for whom the impact of climate change is immediate, direct and physical. I indicated to the leaders of the region with whom I have been corresponding recently that I had taken up their concerns at the G8 plus meeting in Hokkaido in Japan a short time ago and reflected to the leaders of the industrial world the impact of unconstrained greenhouse gas emissions on the ability of some of these Island communities to survive.
I also indicated to our friends in the Pacific, Australia's endorsement of a $150 million climate change adjustment fund which includes within it an additional allocation of $14.8 million for a range of climate change adjustment programs here for the Island countries themselves.
Put this into context, this is the single largest climate change adjustment program to be provided to the island countries of the South Pacific. And the countries of the Pacific reflected in a series of representations around the room their appreciation for Australia's support.
Of course this is just the beginning, adaptation and adjustment is one thing. Dealing with mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions long term is part of our charge which we'll prosecute, in part on these island countries behalf, through our negotiations in the post Kyoto framework.
We also disused the great challenges of development and there was agreement that there had been mixed results across the region on the regional countries performance against the millennium development goals. Back in 2000 the international community including Australia, New Zealand and the Island states of the pacific agreed to work concretely on 8 specific millennium development goals - going to core measure of health, core measures of education outcomes, core measures also of basic maternal and child welfare.
If you look at the data which is contained in the Ausaid report which was released yesterday, regrettably the outcomes here among the pacific island countries has been mixed and that data reflects that. That's why we have undertaken of course the pacific development partnerships as part of our new framework for engaging the counties of the region in their development challenges.
I've said to individual leaders and I've said to those gathered collectively that Australia embraces a principle of mutual responsibility. We are prepared to invest long term with the development needs of this region on the condition that we receive and measure, measurable improvements against those millennium development goals here over time.
Next month will mark the midterm review conference of the United Nations when heads of Government from around the world will see how has the world community gone between 2000 when the millennium development goals were embraced and 2015 when they are supposed to be realised.
We are not on track now to realise those objectives here in the pacific island countries. We are not even faintly on track. And that's why a radical new approach to development assistance here in this region is necessary. We've said to the region we'll be there in terms of our long term investment through official development assistance. But we will be there on the condition that we through mutual responsibility to one another see measurable progress against the key education, health and other economic indicators.
Finally on the question of democracy within our region and there was a long discussion today about the recent developments in Fiji and what needs to be done in terms of the pacific islands forums posture on that.
For the first time this pacific island forum has condemned directly the actions of Bainimarama, the interim Fiji Prime Minister in failing to honour his undertakings to the pacific island leaders a year or so ago - and that was to hold democratic elections in Fiji by March of 2009.
Secondly for the first time the leaders of the pacific island forum have embraced the possibility of suspension of a member state. This is a development of what's called earlier the Biketawa Declarations here in the South Pacific. It goes to the unacceptability of non democratic practices and that's why forum leaders have for the first time embraced this as a possible special measure to be adopted against Fiji should they continue not to embrace their undertakings for March 2009 elections.
There's a third element as well. Leaders of the pacific island countries have agreed in principle to meet again in Port Moresby at the end of the year to receive the recommendations of the Ministerial contact group with the Fijian interim Government on whether or not any progress is made between now and then toward the objective of holding elections, or whether none is made. And to have such a gathering out of session on the part of pacific island leaders to consider the recommendations of that report.
So in summary - condemnation of the interim Fiji Government for failing to return democracy to Fiji. Secondly, the embrace for the first time of the possibility of suspension of a member state. And thirdly the pacific islands saying we will meet if necessary in Port Moresby at year's end to give effect to this unfinished business.
Over to you
JOURNALIST: Do you think that Frank Bainimarama will actually listen to you though? (inaudible)
PM: Well for the Pacific Island Forum to declare an unequivocal condemnation of Bainimarama, the interim Prime Minister of Fiji, is itself unprecedented.
Secondly, what is unprecedented is for the first time the forum countries giving definition to special measures. That is, the inclusion of suspension.
And thirdly, a timeline. Which is that we're going to receive a report on this by year's end, which will still be three months before the scheduled convening of elections.
For the region to speak with a uniform voice, a united voice, condemning the abuse of democracy on the part of the interim Fiji Government, is itself a significant step forward.
But however, let me put that into context.
We are dealing with very difficult entrenched problems in Fijian politics, and this is a very hard nut to crack. My mission here, in Niue, through this Pacific Island Forum, has been to make as hard as possible this forum's language in dealing with this abuse of democracy in our region, our neighbourhood, our backyard.
JOURNALIST: Having spent some time with the leaders here today, is your feeling that if Bainimarama doesn't engage with the forum between now and when this next Ministerial Contact Group puts out their statement, that their feeling at the moment is that they will suspend Fiji?
PM: Well, I can't predict what each member Government will do. I think the feeling across Pacific Island leaders at present is that they've had it up to here with this guy. They've had it right up to here. I mean, this guy has been given 18 months since coup date to now to honour a commitment to have an election in March next year.
And what we've done is seen him go backwards from that commitment, not forwards towards realising it.
That's why I think the view in the room was decidedly hard-line in sending a clear message to the interim Fijian Government, with a distinction that when it comes to the people of Fiji, that the mood of this family of nations and democracies in the wider Pacific region is that we'd like them back as soon as possible. So therefore, the language is explicitly directed at this interim Government.
JOURNALIST: He's already showed contempt to the forum by not showing up and by not fulfilling his own undertakings. So why will the threat of suspension, how can it be leveraged to push him towards fulfilling that commitment to hold democratic elections?
PM: Well I'm not about to stand here and say that any diplomatic action against the interim Government of Fiji is going to produce immediate result. What I can do is deal with the cards that you're dealt. And that is, the opportunity through this forum to have a clear cut resolute statement that the abuse of democracy in this our region is not tolerated. It is not an implied norm for this region in the future. And furthermore, that when it comes to the message of the Pacific Island leaders to the international community at large, that these leaders are saying this is, for us, unacceptable.
What happens within Fijian domestic politics over the next few months, let's wait and see. The alternative would be to turn around to the good people of Fiji, on the part of all the island leaders in this community, and say ‘we don't care'. Well by virtue of the language which is condoned in today's declaration, which has been the subject of many hours of discussion and debate and deliberation, I think the people of Fiji will now conclude legitimately that the leaders of this region do care about the future of democracy in their country.
JOURNALIST: Mr Bainimarama has made a couple of trips, I think, to Beijing. And he seems to believe that the Chinese might be a way to help out. Would you be talking to the Chinese about this?
PM: Oh, I would find it remarkable if states beyond the region were to in any way interfere in the internal political affairs of states within the region, and particularly in relation to this matter. And I'm unaware of any such reports.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is it true that you actually penned the communiqué?
PM: I made some changes to various drafts on the way through, but it's a combined effort on the part of many people participating in the debate. But I think the clear resolve in the room was for there to be an unequivocal message. I mean, Fiji is a great country. They're a great people. They don't deserve to have their democracy abused in this way.
JOURNALIST: Was it you that tabled the suspension idea?
PM: It was a subject of collective effort.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that such unity would have been possible a year ago given the antagonism between the former Government and some of the pacific nations?
PM: Look, I think what has been helpful in this exercise is for me to have spent some time with many of these leaders beforehand.
You may recall that the first visit to a country, apart from attending the Bali Conference, that I took abroad as Prime Minister was to Papua New Guinea then on to the Solomon's. I was able to spend a couple of days with the PNG Government and we actually spent a lot of time talking about Fiji then.
And then Chief, Sir Michael Somare, has spent a huge amount of time in the last six months trying to find a way through in terms of Bainimarama, honouring the undertakings he gave to the previous forum.
I think that has helped, and also, many of these Heads of Government I've been happy to have received and spent time with in Canberra in the last several months as well.
I think building a set of personal relationships with the Island leaders has been really important. It's certainly important in being able to advance Australia's national interest here today.
One of Australia's core interests is to use whatever means available to us to see the restoration of democracy in Fiji.
JOURNALIST: For a long time in the Pacific the emphasis has been on regional. Yet Australia is signing up to these bilateral partnerships. How do you justify this?
PM: Well, I think the first thing to do is to make sure that all such bilateral arrangements, as they are with New Zealand bilaterally, are compatible with the Pacific plan.
We've just spent the better part of the afternoon debating the future of the Pacific plan, which is very much a development plan for the entire region.
Secondly, all Governments including New Zealand's are party to our international obligations for the millennium development goals. Thirdly, therefore, what our bilateral arrangements should do, as ours now seek to do, is to give effect to those two sets of objectives reflected in those two common regional and international documents.
Our Pacific Development Partnership is to do precisely that. And what we want is measureable progress against the development indicators, as I would think all Governments would across the region.
JOURNALIST: What's the relationship to the trade deal, PACER Plus?
PM: Well the PACER Plus discussions so far between the Trade Ministers in my view have been unacceptably slow.
What we have sought to reflect in the communiqué today is a desire for things to be brought to the point of decision about concrete negotiations when the forum next meets.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible)
PM: Our attitude is that on the question of the impact of climate change on the island states, that what's happening with the island states represents a warning bell to all of us in the developed world. And that's very much the message I actually conveyed to the G8 in Hokkaido. So rather than sort of hauling up the while flag and saying ‘all is ruined, all is lost, and there is no way of turning this back', I think it's far better we focus our efforts now on deploying the arguments alive within the region. The examples of Tuvalu and Kiribati and elsewhere. To actually engineer concrete action on the part of the major emitting states.


The Prime Minister welcomed today the commencement of construction of a new specialist training wing for the East Timor Defence Force (F-FDTL) funded by the Australian Government's Defence Cooperation Program.
The new facility, to be built at a cost of $5.7 million, is being constructed at the F-FDTL's training base in Metinaro, East Timor. 
Speaking during a visit to Australia by the Prime Minister of East Timor, HE Mr Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, the Prime Minister said the new training wing would provide high-quality specialist training in areas such as communications, logistics, engineering and medical skills delivered by Australian Defence Force (ADF) personnel. 
Construction, which began last month, would be completed in December and training would begin in January 2009.
The Australian Government will provide more than $8 million in assistance to East Timor through the Defence Cooperation Program this year, increasing to $13 million in 2009-10.  The program has focused on developing leadership and discipline, strengthening financial management, civil engineering and communications.
The Defence Cooperation Program is in addition to security support provided to East Timor through Australia's leadership of the International Security Force (ISF) and contribution to the United Nations police operation in East Timor.  There are currently around 750 ADF personnel deployed to East Timor as a part of the ISF and around 50 Australian Federal Police officers as a part of the UN police contingent.


PM RUDD: Welcome and it's good to have the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste with us here on this wonderfully warm Canberra morning. It's always a pleasure to have our good friend Xanana Gusmao with us in Canberra.
Australia's national security interests require that we have a good relationship with our near neighbour East Timor, that we have a stable East Timor, that we have prosperous East Timor and that we have an East Timor anchored into a strong path for development for the future.
What we have with the Prime Minister is a strong leader who has acted decisively in response to the terrible event which unfolded in East Timor in February this year.
Most recently of course I have caught up with President Jose Ramos Horta both in Beijing and earlier during the President's visit to the Papal mass in Sydney and it's good to see that the President has recovered from the terrible assault on his life.
Those events in February were a reminder about the great challenges in building this new democracy in our region and what I've said to the Prime Minister this morning is that Australia will be secure, long term reliable partner with Timor-Leste not just in the months ahead, not just in the years ahead but in the decades ahead.
Geography has deemed that we are neighbours and the good thing is we are close neighbours and I believe I can say Prime Minister we are also close friends.
Also today the Prime Minister and I discussed the future of our education training and employment relationship. This is important because of the challenges which East Timor faces in improving its investments in its human capital, both within its public sector and across the general economy and then generating employment in that economy to take newly trained personnel.
We've agreed to launch a joint education training and employment initiative which will come back to us with specific recommendations for action by year's end. In particular what we are looking at is the needs in the Timor-Leste public sector and its public service for an intensified training program, grassroots, middle level and senior level in order to make sure that East Timor is properly equipped to address its challenges for development. And that applies I think particularly given the size of the investment fund which East Timor has already secured for itself to fund part of its economic development future.
As part of that initiative also we are looking at specific assistance with the development of East Timor's national economic infrastructure plan. That is due for unfolding during 2009. There is intense work to be done on it still and one of the initiatives also within the framework of this joint education, training initiative is to ensure that we provide additional high level personnel to assist with the completion of that particular infrastructure plan.
Also we are able to confirm today that we've significantly increased the number of East Timorese student scholarship for Australia and that has been a product of direct negotiations between the two ministries and the two Ministers. As well as an on the ground project within East Timor to advance the establishment of a language training centre for English language capability training in Dili itself.
On the economic front we discussed also the challenges for the development of our common resources and we look forward to making further progress on that when the joint commission meets at the end of October to resolve any outstanding differences between the two countries on the protocols which operate under the treaty and secondly on the appointment of all personnel to that body as well.
In terms of food challenges within Timor-Leste also we have agreed that Australia will be providing a further $2.5 million for the seeds for life program that aims to improve crop fields in East Timor through better seed varieties.
The last thing I would mention is of course of defence and security relationship. This has been part of Australia's engagement with Timor-Leste right back to the earliest days of the independence process and through to the present. And literally thousands of Australian defence personnel have served in Timor and done the good name of Australia proud in the work they have done on the ground there. And also working closely with their Timor-Leste counterparts.
Also I'm announcing today that construction has begun on a $5.7 million specialist training facility for the East Timorese military focussing on logistics, communication and medical services. This together with the continued program of cooperation we have between the Australian federal police and their East Timorese counterparts forms a large part of the continuing security policy relationship between our two countries.
Therefore on the questions of education, training and employment in which framework we also discussed the future application Labor mobility arrangements between us as well. Secondly, on the challenges for our common economic interests in the development of the resources in the Timor Sea. And thirdly the further enhancement to our security policy relationship. This has been a most productive discussion which the Prime Minister and I have had together, combined with a long discussion now between a large number of members of his own Cabinet and the members of our Cabinet as well.
Prime Minister.
PM GUSMAO: Thank you Prime Minister. Prime Minister, Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen. Very good morning, we came and expected snow but I believe we brought the sun from the Timor-Leste to Canberra.
PM RUDD: Thank you.
PM GUSMAO: I would like to say thank you to Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and to the Australian Government and the Australian people for hosting this official visit. Prime Minister Rudd you and your nation have been loyal friends and steadfast partners to the people of Timor-Leste.
You have visited our nation twice since becoming Prime Minister. Once on your first overseas trip and the second to lend your support after the attacks of February 11.
These demonstrated the commitment of your nation to support Timor-Leste on our journey. By being the largest donor of development you as a nation are shaping the Timor experience. Standing side by side in peacekeeping, contributing to our health, education, human capacity and building our institutions. And working with us, not only identify our challenges but to help us deliver solutions and I can tell you the solutions what Prime Minister Kevin Rudd already mentioned to you and it was what we can bring to our country.
Today as we met with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet we we're inspired by the Australian experience, the expertise. Talking about expertise, Prime Minister has promised me to send a team of four or five senior construction experts to help as to make the plan of our infrastructure planning. The (inaudible) commitment to democracy. We are a young nation, we are only six years old and that is why everything that we are doing we do under these principals, under the commitment to self, the people and to go through a democratic way of development.
It is what we as the Government strive to establish and this my friends is what drives us daily in our (inaudible). I'd like to tell you that it was greatly due to your support this year that we as a Government we're able to achieve small, we can say miracles.
When we came to the Government we inherited many social, military and political problems and I can tell you today is better than when we came to the Government one year ago.
Problems of almost 700 petitioners were solved; they finally choose to be (inaudible). The rebels who (inaudible) international security have all surrendered. Over 100,000 (inaudible) who have lived in makeshift camps since 2006 have returned to their homes -  21 camps are closed and almost 50,000 people have begun their lives.
And it is all with the help of security forces, defence forces from Australia and of course the international community.
And I can tell you also that we we're able to pay the first pensions to the elderly, to the disabled, to the infirmed and the heroes of our nation, the veterans. They achieved a new level of national stability, the crime rates are down, the economic growth is up to eight per cent and there is a renewed sprit and vision. And we just ask the Australian Government that the Prime Minister of the nation here, we want to make our state institutions, essentially  in the public service, more capable, more professional, more able to respond to the duties that we are committed to.
We are now seeing the fruits of strong performance, strong governance, supported by very young but very dedicated and talented Cabinet from diverse political backgrounds through a coalition. We lead a coalition of five parties, which is a little bit difficult but we are entering in a good way to respond to our differences and to be more committed to serve the people.
That's why here it is a special day for us after one year in the Government and Prime Minister thank you for all the help and we know that as a closest friend and as sometimes (inaudible) a friend of Timor-Leste  -  Australia and we continue to play a very important role in the building of our State. It is a difficult process of building the State and six year old we believe that with your continued support, we'll make our people more safe not only, but more happy.
And it is what I can say thanks from our heart to thank the Australian Government, the Australian people for the continued support in essentially, this is the first time  they say, for support that our President received during his treatment in Darwin and it is due to your personal friendship.
Thank you very much. 
PM RUDD: Thank you very much Mr Prime Minister and on a personal note as I said before its great to have to Kirsty here with us as well. It's great to be among friends.
Now if I understand we are to have four questions, we begin with a journalist from Timor-Leste.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) I work for the East Timor television. I have two questions. The first is, the main problem facing East Timor now is unemployment. Around 80 per cent of East Timor young people doesn't have a job. So what are the Australian Government policy to help East Timor (inaudible) to solve this problem? The second question is, now Timor-Leste and Australia have a big project in Timor Sea (inaudible)
PM RUDD: I'll take those two and the Prime Minister I am sure will add. On the first one on employment, we discussed that a lot this morning. In the six or eight months that the Government of Australia how now been in office and following my visit to Dili in December and to Dili again in February, one of the things that we have done is this - we have begun a youth employment program. And the challenge is this - if you have got unfolding infrastructure projects coming, how do you generate labour intensive employment opportunities for young people, in particular young males, out in rural areas across Timor-Leste.
It is very young population, a rapidly growing population, need to apply jobs, need to find jobs for them. So we are doing action on the training front, but on the employment front Bob McMullan, the Parliamentary Secretary for Development Assistance cooperation has just launched in East Timor, a program aimed at creating 50,000 jobs across East Timor through this youth employment program which is labour intensive work, usually manual work, coming off the back of infrastructure projects.
As part of the joint education training employment initiative that we have just spoken about, to report back to us by years' end, we will look at how we can take that program further, once the funding for East Timor's national infrastructure plan unfolds next year.
On the second question you raised, which is about the joint project in greater Sunrise.  The whole question of pipelines and on shore processing that is a matter for the commercial partners. Our job as Prime Ministers is to make sure the intergovernmental agreements are in place and that is the deadline we have set for ourselves to resolve any outstanding matters on that front, both in relation to a protocol for operating between us and on the personnel, to form the full membership of the joint commission to be in place by October.
That is our objective. That is the objective we have set for ourselves. Prime Minister?
PM GUSMAO: I will say that while our friends are trying to train our youth, it is our duty, East Timorese government, to create jobs. That is why we are thinking about how to push the development growing in our country. That is why also that Prime Minister offered me a team of four or five experts to help us to establish the infrastructure plan in our country.
We have to move to the public investment to create the basic infrastructure like roads, ports, airports, bridge, electricity. And it will attract investments and they will create jobs. On the other hand we are thinking that we don't have a good scheme of jobs there. We talk about microfinance, we talk about the possibility to help the small and medium enterprise and eventually agribusinesses. That is why this government is committed to continue to continue to push agricultural production that can start giving opportunities to the youth, essentially to women ,to start making small business on the small and medium size. We have to create the conditions to help them. We have to look at the mechanism that they can be confident that when they start a business they will have it is an overall picture of what we have to do in the few years coming.
About Sunrise, as the Prime Minister said, we also have the same point of view. It will be, it will depend on technical and commercial perspective. As Government what we can do is to establish and improve the mechanism to facilitate the (inaudible) real the decision about this.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Guest Workers Scheme (inaudible)
PM GUSMAO: Well we continue to talk about this, to discuss. Of course (inaudible) it will take time. We agreed with the Australian Government, with the Prime Minister that we will discuss how we can participate and how the Australian Government can (inaudible)
PM RUDD: Specifically what we have said is, in the joint education, training and employment initiative, that one of the matters to report back on is this. And that is to be by years' end and possibly earlier in terms of feasibility.
But let's take it from the ground up. There is still some work to be done on this.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on the Olympics, what do you think the legacy of the Beijing Olympics is for China's relationship with the West and do you think there needs to be increased funding for the Australian Olympians for the next Olympics in London?
PM RUDD: So from the future of Western civilisation to the number of medals next time around. Okay, let me try and sort of steer a middle path up the middle of this.
Look, I think our friends in China have hosted a highly successful Olympic Games.
Let's remember that these Games have been free of violence and this is a very uncertain world that we live in.
The Games also of course have generated their controversy. I don't know of a single Olympic Games in recent history which has not generated controversy of one sort or another. But on the broader question of China in the future, as I said recently in a speech, this is the great unfolding drama of the 21st Century. This is the dawn of the century of the Asia Pacific and one of the big driving forces in the century of the Asia Pacific is the future of China, not just it's economy but also it's international political personality.
So this was very much I suppose the public opening act, but it will be a challenge and an opportunity for us all to engage in. To repeat what I have said elsewhere, the big challenge for Australia is not to just to allow this century to unfold as if we are just passive bystanders, but to actually shape the century.
And that means, when you have got large, new emerging economies and foreign policy and security policy players like China, how do we fashion actively, a culture of cooperation and the habits of cooperation between the major countries and economies of the region.
That underpins the logic of our proposal long term for an Asia Pacific Community. And why we think that is important is that we would much rather have everyone's negotiating energies focussed in that direction rather than to allow any for m of the strategic drift in the reverse direction.
On the other part which is the future and funding for elite sport in this country and Olympic sports, as I said prior to the Olympics beginning, this Government will be long term partners in the significant funding of elite sports - both through the Australian Olympics Committee, through the AIS and other elite sporting organisations.
And we will be sitting down with all of those bodies following these Olympics to work out how that is to unfold.
But a second part of what we will be doing on the sports front as well, and that is elite sports are only ever properly supported if you have got a huge base of community sports program across the country as well. And so for us a parallel thrust is how do we invest effectively across the nation, in getting as many kids as possible engaged in sport from as early as possible, for a whole range of physical and social benefits as well.
And part of it is these kids openly feed into our elite sports programs as well. So we will be doing both of those and doing them vigorously into the future.
Other questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd what is the government doing in response to the apparent kidnapping of the photographer Nigel Brennan in Somalia?
PM RUDD: We have been actively engaged on this since the news of this kidnapping occurred. We have deployed additional staff from our mission in Pretoria to our high commission in Nairobi, which is handling this case at a consular level. 
The DFAT consular officials are providing consular assistance to the family in Australia who have asked, I am simply referring to their request, have asked the media to respect their privacy at this difficult time. This is a sensitive and difficult case, but you need to know that we are engaged at every level on this, at every level on this.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you also on Sunrise, I am Gemma Daley from Bloomberg, have you been informed of a decision by Woodside and it's partners to rule out processing Sunrise LNG in East Timor? And if they wanted to process in Darwin or through the floating terminal, would you oppose or block development of that field.
PM GUSMAO: Well our position is that we (inaudible) and commercial viabilities after that we will accept any decision. (inaudible)
PM RUDD: Okay, folks thank you for that. And thank you for being at this summery occasion with us all, out here in the courtyard.


The Prime Minister announced today that Australia would almost double the number of scholarships available for East Timorese students to undertake full-time undergraduate and postgraduate studies in Australia.
The number of places under the Government's overseas aid program would increase from 12 to 20 in 2009, at a total cost of around $3 million per year. 
Since 1999, 158 scholarships for undergraduate and postgraduate studies have been awarded to East Timorese students under the Australian Development Scholarships scheme administered by AusAID.
The Prime Minister made the announcement during a visit to Australia by the Prime Minister of East Timor, HE Mr Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao.  The Prime Minister said education was fundamental to economic development and was particularly important to improving opportunities for young East Timorese. 
Scholarships play a complementary role to Australia's broader support for education in East Timor as part of the Government's overall aid program, worth an estimated $96.3 in 2008-09. 
For the four years from 2008-09, the Australian Government has committed $24 million to support vocational education and help address youth unemployment in East Timor.
Globalisation has made language skills increasingly important in the development of human resources.  Australia is examining the need for English language training, and will invest $200,000 this financial year to undertake a scoping study for a language training centre in East Timor.
The Prime Minister also announced today an additional $3.8 million to improve food security in East Timor.  This will comprise an additional $1.3 million to support the World Food Program's (WFP's) mother and child nutrition program and an additional $2.5 million for the “seeds of life” joint rural development program.  The Government had already this year provided $1 million to the WFP to support its work with mothers and children in East Timor.
The “seeds of life” program is aimed at boosting farm yields through improved crop varieties and associated technologies.  The additional assistance will lift Australia's total contribution to the program to $10.5 million between 2008 and 2010.


The Rudd Government today signed a world-leading arrangement between Australia and the U.S. that will pave the way for easier access by investors and financial markets to each other's financial systems. 
The mutual recognition arrangement between Australia and the United States was signed today by Senator the Hon Nick Sherry, Minister for Superannuation and Corporate Law, Mr Tony D'Aloisio, Chairman of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC), and Mr Christopher Cox, Chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), at a signing ceremony at the SEC's head office in Washington D.C.
One of the most critical ways in which the Government can act to build Australia as a financial services hub is to enable greater access to overseas markets.
Today's event follows an agreement by Prime Minister, the Hon Kevin Rudd and Chairman Cox in March to begin negotiations on a mutual recognition arrangement.
The arrangement will provide greater access to U.S. markets for Australian investors, while maintaining strong investor protection and ensuring market integrity. It will also make Australian markets more attractive and accessible to investment from the United States.
This will mean that retail investors in Australia will be able to access the U.S. market directly through Australian brokers and enjoy Australian regulatory protection.
The arrangement will also help reduce red tape and compliance costs as brokers and markets will primarily only have to comply with one substantive set of regulations  -  namely in their home jurisdiction.
Australia is the first jurisdiction with which the U.S. has sought such an arrangement. Australia was selected by the U.S. on the basis of the quality of our regulation and the effectiveness of both ASIC-SEC and Australian Treasury-U.S. Treasury relations. 
The SEC and ASIC have entered into new, strengthened enforcement and supervision arrangements to enable them to better cooperate and coordinate efforts to secure investor protection and market integrity under the Arrangement.
At the signing ceremony, Minister Sherry thanked Chairman Cox on behalf of the Australian Government for the personal leadership he has shown on this deal. Minster Sherry was joined at the signing by the CEO of the Australian Investment and Financial Services Association (IFSA), Mr Richard Gilbert.
Today's agreement is another example of the Rudd Government's commitment to developing Australia as financial services hub.
This is Australia's third mutual recognition arrangement. The first was with New Zealand and covers securities offer documents.  The second arrangement was with Hong Kong and covers the sale of retail funds to investors in each other's market.
These arrangements build upon the Government's success in gaining approval under the Chinese Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor Scheme and domestic initiatives such as cutting withholding tax rates for established real estate investment trusts to a final rate of 7.5 per cent by 2010-11 from 30 per cent.


The Government has now been in office for a little less than nine months - or just under a quarter of the current Parliamentary term.
In our first nine months our priority has been three-fold:
     * to lay the foundations of a program of responsible economic management in the face of increasing global economic uncertainty;
     * to implement, principally through the Budget process, the commitments we made last year to the Australian people on tax, on income support and childcare to help those under financial pressure; and
     * third, to begin to lay out a policy and financial framework for addressing Australia's long-term challenges in education, in hospitals, infrastructure, climate change and water following 12 years of neglect.
As we begin a new parliamentary sitting, I would like to outline our overall approach to the Government's policy framework for the future.
I would also like to outline more specifically an important part of the Government's commitment to implement an Education Revolution: namely, a policy agenda to significantly improve the quality of Australia's schools.
Around the world today, governments are dealing with the most challenging global economic conditions since the early 1990s.
The US sub-prime crisis has changed the economic outlook for the global economy and consequently for Australia as well.
As the US Federal Reserve Governor Ben Bernanke said on the weekend, the global financial storm “has not yet subsided”.
Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan have already registered negative quarters of economic growth.
Australia, as a result, has confronted a particularly complex set of economic challenges this year.
Contractionary pressures abroad.
Compounded by inflationary pressures, low productivity growth and supply constraints in the domestic economy  -  in large part the legacy of a decade of policy neglect.
This has presented real challenges for economic policy from the earliest days that we have been in office.
The Government has nonetheless moved quickly to respond to these challenges.
We have delivered responsible economic management, with a conservative Budget grounded in a $22 billion of surplus.
That surplus was designed to put maximum downward pressure on inflation  -  made necessary because the Government inherited inflation at 16 year highs, 10 consecutive interest rate rises and the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
This surplus was achieved by arresting expenditure growth, which had been growing in real terms at four per cent in the previous four years, and by reducing tax to its lowest level as a share of GDP in nearly a decade.
The surplus was also designed to provide a buffer for the future  -  the policy flexibility to negotiate any uncertain economic times which might lie ahead  -  which is why the Liberals' current assault on the surplus in the Senate is so grossly irresponsible.
Furthermore, despite widespread calls to drop our commitment to tax relief, we delivered a $55 billion Working Families Support Package  -  together with a $7.5 billion package for seniors, carers and disability pensioners  -  all designed to help Australians under financial pressure.
Finally, the Government through its regulatory agencies has been actively engaged with global financial institutions in responding to the global financial crisis, while maintaining the domestic liquidity needs of Australian financial markets through concrete measures in the public bond market.
While prosecuting a policy of responsible economic management, the Government has also been determined to honour its pre-election commitments to the Australian people.
When we formed government, I said I had no intention of recycling the absolute cynicism of previous governments - making a swag of pre-election commitments then reneging on them as “non-core” promises.
That's why we have delivered:
     * Tax cuts for low and middle income earners.
     * The Education Tax Refund.
     * Raising the child care tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent.
     * A permanent increase in the utilities allowance for pensioners, carers and those on the Disability Support Pension.
     * Re-instatement of the Commonwealth Dental Scheme.
     * First Home Saver Accounts.
     * Rolling out computers in schools and trades training centres across Australia's 2,685 secondary schools.
     * Abolishing AWAs for the future and building a modern, fair and flexible workplace relations system.
     * Taking decisive action on climate change both at home through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and through our negotiations abroad following our ratification of Kyoto; and
     * Bringing the blame game to an end by reinvesting in the nation's public hospital system.
We are honouring our commitments made to the Australian people.
But for us that's not the end game. In fact it marks just the beginning.
The beginning of a period of long-term reform to tackle the nation's long term challenges.
Because for this government that is the central purpose of being in government  -  to make a fundamental difference to the future direction of the nation.
We are determined not to repeat the neglect and wasted opportunities of the Liberals in government.
For years we watched in frustration as the best economic opportunities in a generation passed us by.
Rather than investing the proceeds of the mining boom, the Liberals squandered them on consumption.
It was a decade of opportunities squandered, not of opportunities seized.
Our Government belongs to the reforming centre of Australian politics  -  a tradition that recognises the limitations of both markets and of governments.
We believe policy reform is necessary if Australia is to seize the future.
Our long term reform agenda embraces the full canvas of government, including how we build:
     * a more secure Australia given the new national security challenges we face;
     * a stronger Australia given the long term challenges to our economy;
     * a fairer Australia given the extreme levels of disadvantage that continues to exist among us; and
     * an Australia capable of meeting the sweeping new challenges of the 21st century, including climate change.
The first priority of government is the nation's security.
This challenge is becoming increasingly complex as the balance of global strategic and economic power shifts to the Asia-Pacific region, as terrorism continues as a global and regional threat, and new challenges emerge such as energy security.
That is why we are developing a plan to strengthen our defence forces, to enhance our relations with friends and allies and to tackle non-traditional threats like terrorism, natural disasters, water scarcity, food scarcity and energy security.
The starting point will be a new national security policy, to be outlined in a National Security Statement  -  the first in Australia  -  during this session of the Parliament.
We are also bringing new rigour to our defence planning through a new Defence White Paper that will detail the emerging strategic terrain we face and how our policy and defence procurements will respond.
And, to give our Armed Forces the resources they need, the Government has committed to providing 3 per cent real growth in defence spending for the full decade ahead.
The Government will strengthen the US alliance as well as our security cooperation with regional partners like Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore.
And, to help shape the future of our region, we have begun a regional dialogue about an Asia-Pacific Community to build a culture within our region of security cooperation.
We believe we must try to shape the future of our region rather than let it simply be shaped by events  -  and that means unapologetically prosecuting an activist defence, foreign and security policy for the future.
The Government is committed to using the proceeds of the mining boom to invest in Australia's long term economic future.
The key to building a strong economy is long-term productivity growth.
Over the last 40 years, productivity growth has accounted for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in Australia's living standards. 
But in recent years productivity growth has declined sharply  -  from average annual growth of 3.3 per cent during the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, to just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
The Government is committed to building our long-term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for productivity growth:
     * an education revolution by improving the qualitative and quantitative investment in the skills of the workforce  -  driven in part by our $11 billion Education Investment Fund;
     * second, a nation-building infrastructure plan;
     * third, investing in innovation and the industries of the future;
     * fourth, creating a seamless national economy through business deregulation; and
     * finally, taxation reform.
I will return to education presently as this will go to the core of my remarks today.
On infrastructure, we have begun our reform program by establishing a $20 billion Building Australia Fund to support critical national infrastructure such as road, rail, ports and high speed broadband.
We have reinvigorated the Council of Australian Governments with a major reform agenda, including a list of 27 areas of regulatory reform for building a seamless national economy.
And we have established the Henry Commission as the starting point for long-term reform of tax, welfare and retirement incomes.
Creating a fairer Australia is a crucial part of the Government's reform agenda.
Disadvantage holds the economy back by reducing workforce participation.
It also holds the economy back by increasing demand on public resources.
Disadvantage forces too many Australians to live on the fringes of the nation's economic and social life, struggling for training, work, health care, dental care and access to housing.
In many cases that disadvantage is compounded by a combination of family breakdown and the weakening of community ties.
Our challenge is to bring these Australians back into the mainstream through a reform agenda of social inclusion.
The Government will be pursuing new ways of doing this.
Through tax relief towards the bottom end of the income scale.
Through a review of retirement incomes with a view to placing pensioners on a more secure footing for the future.
Through action on homelessness.
Through a package of housing affordability measures, including First Home Saver Accounts, the National Rental Affordability Scheme and the Housing Affordability Fund.
Through working to close the gap with Indigenous Australian's.
And through getting rid of Work Choices and building a fair and flexible industrial relations system for the future.
Australia must now prepare also for the sweeping set of challenges that we face for the future  -  rather than simply burying our heads in the sand.
That's why the Government is prosecuting a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, a national energy efficiency and renewable energy strategy.
That's why the Government, for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth, has begun the large scale buy-back of water entitlements to reduce the obscene levels of over-allocation in the Murray Darling River System. 
That's why the Government is developing a long term agenda to reform the health and hospital system including increased investment in public hospitals, a national preventative health strategy, the reduction of elective surgery waiting lists and the introduction of GP super clinics  -  all necessary responses to a great challenge for how to deal with the rapidly ageing population of the Australia into the future.
The Commonwealth can't tackle all these challenges on its own. 
It's also going to take a new way of governing  -  particularly increased cooperation between federal, state and local governments, businesses and community organisations.
We want to take Australians with us by engaging with the community, by harnessing the best ideas and by drawing on the best talents of our people.
That's why we convened the 2020 Summit  -  to get the best ideas on Australia's future.
That's why we have also made Community Cabinet meetings part of our regular program of government.
That's also why we will be drawing in the private and community sectors, to partner with the Government in new ways of achieving our reforms.
We will start this through our reforms to Indigenous education and employment programs.
It is based on our view that government is not the repository of all wisdom, that there are limits to what governments can effectively do and that the private and community sectors have much, often very much to offer.
The five policy areas that I have discussed constitute the framework for the long term reform agenda for the nation and for the government.
I said before that within this framework, the core of our economic reform agenda is to build long-term productivity growth  -  in large part by an education revolution in the quantity and quality of our national investments in the education of the next generation of Australians.
Today I want to outline the next chapter in Australia's education revolution - the reform of school education.
In my first major policy speech as leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party last year, I argued why Australia needs an education revolution.
I said the evidence about the link between long term prosperity, productivity growth and investment in human capital could not be clearer.
As the OECD said in 2006:
“evidence of the public and private benefits of education is growing.  Application of knowledge and skills are at the heart of economic growth, with the OECD attributing half of GDP per capita growth from 1994 to 2004 to rising labour productivity.”
That is why we are committed to delivering an education revolution.
In our first Budget we allocated $19.3 billion to education initiatives over the next four years to help deliver our commitments on:
     * a national curriculum in English, maths, the sciences and history;
     * a $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution;
     * a $2.5 billion Trades Training Centre program; and
     * guaranteed funding to both government and non-government schools.
The Liberal Government talked about teacher training, performance standards, literacy and numeracy. But after 12 years, 24 reports and 220 recommendations, there was nothing much to show of it. 
No national teaching standards.
No national curriculum.
Too many kids still leaving school too early.
Too many who are unable to read or write.
And now we are playing a game of catch up football. There is clearly much to be done.
While Australian schools stand up reasonably well in international comparisons, our competitors are quickly catching up.
A 2006 OECD study shows Australia's average performance in reading literacy worsened between 2003 and 2006, primarily because of a decline in the percentage of high-performing students.
It shows that in scientific literacy, 40 percent of Australia's Indigenous students, 27 percent of students in remote schools and 23 percent of students from the lowest socioeconomic quartile performed below the OECD baseline.   
Australia also has relatively low levels of Year 12 completion by OECD standards. 
After doubling in the 1980s and early 1990s, our retention rates have flat-lined at around 75 per cent since 1992. 30 per cent fewer Indigenous young people reach a Year 12 qualification than non-Indigenous.
Why does this matter? Because students with low literacy and numeracy in Year 9 are more likely to get frustrated and leave school early  -  and more likely to end up unemployed or only marginally attached to the workforce.
Conversely, the evidence shows that each additional year of schooling increases individual earnings by around 10 per cent.
Another recent study found that increasing a country's literacy scores by 1 per cent against the international average is associated with an increase in living standards of 1.5 per cent of GDP per capita. 
That is why, through COAG, we are developing reforms aimed at achieving the ambitious national goals of lifting Year 12 or equivalent attainment to 90 per cent by 2020. 
When COAG meets in October and December this year, we will be working towards historic reforms to Commonwealth-State relations.
In the area of schools it's time to move beyond outdated divisions between Commonwealth and State responsibilities and between public and private provision.
Our focus must be on the basics: ensuring that all of our children emerge from school able to read and write, with basic maths and science skills and the ability to enter the workforce, vocational training or university study.
So what is to be done?
Greater accountability to parents and the public is one important area of reform.
Greater transparency for the outcomes achieved by Australian schools is another area of reform.  
All Australian schools  -  public and private  -  need to do more to demonstrate the outcomes they achieve with the resources they receive from the broader community.
This is not about creating an arbitrary public league table. 
It is about ensuring that all schools, all teachers and all students are focused on achieving the results we need as a nation and realising the potential also of each child.
That is why I am today announcing three central pillars of reform in schools that the Commonwealth aims to achieve through Council of Australian Governments later this year:
     * one, improving the quality of teaching;
     * two, making school reporting properly transparent; and
     * three, lifting achievement in disadvantaged school communities.
The States and Territories are important partners in this process.
Our challenge to them is to commit to concrete, tangible reforms.
And our commitment to them is to match ambitious policy reform on the one hand, with new financial support on the other as part of our upcoming National Policy Partnership negotiations on the future of education.
Research shows that nothing at school influences student outcomes more than excellent teaching.
It has measurable impacts on cognitive, affective and behavioural development.
Studies suggest that the quality of teaching accounts for something between 30 and 60 per cent of the outcome across these areas.
A McKinsey report on the world's best performing school systems last year highlighted the importance of recruiting the top university students into teacher training.  
In Korea, those recruited into teaching are in the top 5 per cent of students; in Finland, they are recruited from the top 10 per cent and in Singapore and Hong Kong, the top 30 per cent.
I believe our teachers are our greatest economic asset.
We need to re-establish in Australia that teaching is a great profession and a great calling for the best and brightest of our university graduates.
We must insist on teaching excellence in every school. 
And insist that school leadership is strengthened, particularly in schools where the learning needs of students are most acute. 
Of the school-based influences on outcomes, school leadership is second only to teaching in its importance.
That is why the Government will work through COAG to start a new era in Australian school education, starting with a National Policy Partnership on Quality Teaching.
To establish new national standards to reward both principals and the best performing teachers.
To provide additional funding to encourage school systems to invest in teacher recruitment, development and excellence.
The package will also include measures to recruit the nation's most talented graduates into teaching and place them where they can make the greatest difference.
In recent years the US and the UK have implemented innovative and successful programs of this kind  -  the Teach for America and the Teach First programs  -  where highly talented graduates are given an accelerated pathway into teaching, placed into the most challenging school environments and paid at a higher rate.
They also receive mentoring and support from leading businesses and an option of employment after they complete their initial teaching assignment should they choose to leave. 
These programs have given talented young graduates a taste for teaching  -  and many have made it their life profession as a result.
Under our new reform partnership, beginning from next year, we will work towards establishing a similar scheme in Australia.
Participation will be open to non-government as well as government schools  -  because we know  there are disadvantaged schools across the entire education spectrum. 
Currently, most teachers reach a salary ceiling at around $75,000. If they aspire to earn more, they must leave the classroom.
We need to send a clear message to university students that teaching is a rewarding long term career.
And send a message to experienced teachers within the school system that they should keep striving for excellence.
I want our best and brightest teachers motivated and rewarded to work in our most challenging schools.
I want school principals to have the autonomy to make more staffing and salary decisions at the local level, to tackle local problems like poor literacy and numeracy.
And I want teachers spending their time doing what they do best  -  and that's teaching - not losing their valuable hours in paperwork or on tasks better handled by support staff.
Last year I said that Australian school students deserve a higher level of transparency concerning the overall performance of their schools. 
The Government is committed to investing substantially in our schools to deliver better outcomes.
But we will not be making those investments without demanding greater accountability in return.
As I said in January 2007, we are committed to a greater quantitative effort in the funding of the school system, but beyond that qualitative performance is equally important.
I appreciate there can be debate about the most reliable indicators of school effectiveness.
But I cannot understand why public institutions such as schools should not be accountable to the community that funds their salaries and their running costs.
Right now, we do not have accurate, comprehensive information to allow rigorous analysis of what schools and students are achieving. 
This must change.
Parents have a right to information to inform their family's decision making about school enrolment.
It is important, too, that this information gives parents the full picture.
Simplistic league tables don't really tell us how well a school is performing.
They don't tell us about the student population that the school started with  -  and its level of educational advantage.
Everyone understands why a private school on Sydney's north shore might do better than a comprehensive government high school in the outer suburbs.
But it is not unreasonable to expect that schools with a similar mix of students and similar starting points should do equally well.
What parents most want to know is what difference a school is going to make  -  in other words, the extent to which it is adding value to the results of their students.
Parents overseas can get this information. Australian parents  -  and students  -  deserve the same.
That is why today I announce that we will be making agreement on individual school performance reporting a condition of the new national education agreement to come into effect from 1 January 2009.
Within a year, we want to see increased information available to Australian parents.
And within three years, a report that shows not just how their child is doing, but how their child's school is performing compared to similar schools.
Knowing where there is underperformance will help us to target additional resources.
I know some will resist these changes.
There is little doubt that greater transparency will reveal some schools in Australia may be seriously underperforming and may have been struggling for some time.
Many, but not all, of these schools serve disadvantaged communities.
Many, but by no means all, of these schools are in the government school system.
We should not tolerate underperformance. It damages the students irreversibly. It fails their families. And therefore it must change.
Where it is clear that individual schools are not up to the mark, we need to be prepared to invest money and effort to lift their performance. 
And where despite best efforts, these schools are not lifting their performance, the Commonwealth expects education authorities to take serious action  -  such as replacing the school principal, replacing senior staff, reorganising the school or even merging that school with other more effective schools.
Tough action is necessary if we are to achieve real change. And it's tough action that our reform payments will reward.
A third focus of our school reforms is to tackle underachievement in our most disadvantaged school communities.
In Australia, socioeconomic status is more strongly associated with educational achievement than it should be.
I have already referred to the OECD research which found that students in the lowest socioeconomic quartile lagged those in the highest socioeconomic quartile by 2½ years.
If Australia is to be the land genuinely of the fair go, we must do a better job in ensuring that every young Australian gets a decent education.
That is why today I announce that we will pursue a further National Policy Partnership with the States and Territories to tackle underachievement in our schools.
There is no ‘one size fits all' answer to school underperformance  -  but we can give schools more control over their performance and more support in achieving better outcomes. 
We can provide more funding and greater discretion to principals and local school communities to address their specific local conditions.
That is why, beginning next year, this National Policy Partnership will contain measures to help:
     * attract high performing principals and teachers to underperforming schools;
     * provide funding for intensive learning activities and additional coaching for those students who are falling behind;
     * create robust networks of parents, other schools, local communities and businesses to help students in transitioning successfully to work or further education; and
     * to provide incentives for individual schools to extend their reach through longer opening hours, after-school study support, sports and other activities to help keep students engaged in their studies.
To make a real difference, we anticipate that governments will need to commit to additional investments of around $500,000 per year for an average sized school.
This funding should target areas where intensive learning support can make the greatest difference to student outcomes  -  like early intervention and support for children with developmental challenges. 
I want to see these resources beginning to be deployed in our most disadvantaged schools within the next 12 months.
The measures that I have outlined today will involve a lot of public debate in the period ahead.
But I intend to take these measures to COAG for agreement by year's end.
In the meantime, the Deputy Prime Minister and I will be spending a lot of time talking to parents, a lot of time talking to teachers, a lot of time talking to students, business partners and unions around the country. This is serious business we are talking about here today.
The measures I have announced today are the next step in delivering on our education revolution.
They are designed to reform our school system for the better.
They are designed to bring about better teaching, better school leadership and better results for schools in disadvantaged areas. 
All these changes are likely to cost money and that is where we will have a significant, significant negotiation with the States.
I know it's sometimes difficult to accept change when you're battling against the odds trying to help on the ground society's underachievers.
But I want people to understand that our reforms are essential to Australia's future  -  because quality education is good for our economy, good for our community and good for individuals. It will help create jobs and higher wages, and will create better opportunities for all Australians.
The Government wants the next generation of Australians to be the best educated, best skilled, best trained in the world.
We don't apologise for this ambition.
Today, we take one further practical step towards achieving the education revolution that Australia needs.
One step further to building a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia, and one capable of handling the great challenges of the 21st century that now lie before us.
I thank you.


The Rudd Government today launched the next chapter in its Education Revolution to help build a stronger economy for Australia's future.
Australia needs a world class education system to face the challenges presented by a rapidly changing world.
The Rudd Government's Quality Education plan represents the biggest school reform agenda in recent history.
Boosting the quality of education in Australia's 9581 schools builds on Labor's $19.3 billion commitment to education in the last budget.
By working together with the States and Territories, the Government aims to improve the quality of education delivered in Australian schools in three key areas:
     * Improving the Quality of Teaching
     * Recruiting the highest performing graduates into teaching.
     * Recognising and rewarding top teachers.
     * Measuring School Performance
     * Collecting and making available to parents in a clear and simple format information about the performance of their child, and their child's school.
     * Public reporting by schools of their performance on key measures including national test results.
     * Helping Disadvantaged School Communities
     * Using national data to target funding to underachieving schools.
     * Funding targeted strategies to lift performance by attracting higher performing teachers, funding intensive learning activities, engaging parents, and developing extended learning hours and services.
The Rudd Government will seek agreement on these reforms through the Council of Australian Governments at its meetings in October and December.
Reporting on performance will be a requirement of any new school funding agreement.
The Government is confident these measures will be implemented in Australian schools from the beginning of next year.
Today's new chapter in the Education Revolution builds on the Rudd Government's existing commitments to improving education in Australia. These include:
     * a national curriculum in English, maths, the sciences and history;
     * guaranteed funding to both Government and non-Government schools;
     * a $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution that over time will provide access to a computer for every student in years 9 -12, and
     * a $2.5 billion Trade Training Centre program across Australia to build trade training centres in Australian secondary schools.
Improve the Quality of Teaching
Research shows that nothing at school influences student outcomes more than excellent teaching.
The Government will establish a National Partnership on Quality Teaching to inspire and to reward principals and accomplished expert teachers.
The package will include measures to recruit the nation's most talented graduates into teaching. They will be given an accelerated pathway into teaching, placed into the most challenging school environments, and paid at a higher rate.
Under this new reform partnership school authorities will be encouraged to reward our highest performing classroom teachers and provide incentives for them to teach in our most challenging schools.
We will encourage a wider range of skills and experience in schools, using specialist teaching expertise to the full and doing a better job in meeting every student's needs.
School principals will be given the autonomy to make more staffing and salary decisions to tackle local problems like poor literacy and numeracy.
Our reforms will encourage teachers to spend their time doing what they do best  -  teaching, and not on paperwork better handled by support staff.
Measuring school performance
In return for increased investment in the quality of schools, the Rudd Government will demand greater transparency and greater accountability.
It will insist on a system of individual school performance reporting as part of the new national education agreement to come into effect from 1 January 2009.
These reports will allow parents to compare schools with a similar mix of students and the extent to which they are adding value.
These public reports will reveal a limited number of instances where it is clear that individual schools are simply not achieving the essentials.
The Government is prepared to invest money and effort to lift their performance.
However, where despite best efforts, these schools are not lifting their performance, the Commonwealth expects education authorities to take serious action  -  such as replacing the school principal, replacing senior staff, reorganising the school or even merging it with other more effective schools.
Tough action is necessary to achieve real change. And it's tough action that our reform payments will reward.
Investing in disadvantaged school communities
The Rudd Government will pursue a National Partnership with the States and Territories to address underachieving schools.
These measures will be designed to suit the needs of local schools and could include measures to help:
     * attract high performing principals and teachers to underperforming schools;
     * provide funding for intensive learning activities and additional coaching for those students who are falling behind;
     * create robust networks of parents, other schools, local communities and businesses to help students in transitioning successfully to work or further education, and
     * provide incentives for individual schools to extend their reach through longer opening hours, after-school study support, sports and other activities to help keep students engaged in their studies.
To make a real difference, we anticipate that governments will need to commit to investments of around $500,000 per year for an average sized school.


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Chris Uhlmann from the ABC. Can you tell us the difference between an arbitrary league table and an individual school performance report? And, no matter what you call it, if parents find out that their school is not performing well; won't they do the rational thing: vote with their feet and leave?
PM: Well, on the last point, we would make no apology for that. The whole idea is to make sure that schools are accountable for their performance. And part of accountability means that the parents and the students know how that school is performing against agreed standards.
On your first part of your question which goes to the question of a national league table it's this: when we talk about an arbitrary national league it's basically one which would try and line up a comprehensive government school in the outer suburbs of, you know, Brisbane, Sydney or Melbourne with the likes of Geelong Grammar and the rest.
Far better it is that instead you have a system whereby schools which broadly have common characteristics, common socio-economic profile across the country within government and non-government systems for that data to be readily comparable. That's what we're talking about.
And the second thing as well, put yourself in the position of parents, and a highly labour-mobile country which Australia is today. When people move interstate, one of the things they want best and quickest is readily available comparative information on the schools within that geographical area. And so the other element of comparison that we would look to through the agreements that we seek to make with the states is to make that available as well.
So if you move to a new town, whether it's Canberra, or whether it's the southern suburbs of Brissie where I come from, you can quickly access comparative data. That's what we're talking about, and we think that's a practical way forward.
The argy-bargy on this is going to be significant with the states. We accept that but we intend to prosecute this and we have some way to go yet in the months ahead. But that's where the Commonwealth wants to land.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Andrew Probyn from The West Australian.
Let me take you off the topic of education for a tick. What justification...
PM:     That's very amicable of you Andrew.
JOURNALIST: What justification would Woodside and other North West Shelf partners have in passing on the $2.5 billion in condensate tax to WA consumers.
And, secondly, Martin Ferguson says that if they did it there might be - it could precipitate action from the competition watchdog. How so?
PM:     Well, I think on the first point which is the impact on Dom. Gas in WA, I'd draw people's attention, I think, to a statement made on 20th August by Dr Nelson on behalf of the Liberal Party, saying that based on his advice there would be no inflationary effect. So I'd simply leave that stand in its own terms, in terms of the Liberal Party's position.
As you know, within the debate on condensate, Woodside are not happy; let's just be blunt about it. No-one likes getting a tax when they haven't had one before. That's just the reality.
But we don't intend to shirk from this. Remember the reason why that particular arrangement for condensate was put in the first place was to encourage the development of the industry some decades ago. Now, some decades have now past and I think it's time the broader Australian taxpayer got a return on all of that because that money to be obtained through that tax, which is a unique concession, is to be dedicated to the sorts of reforms for schools that I've just been describing in these remarks.
And on the question of the competition policy watchdog, I'm sure that the ACCC and others will be watching keenly the actions of individual companies in responses to any individual tax measures which have been announced.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you ran through a list of the promises that your Government's delivered on since winning government, can you explain in practical terms how day-to-day people are better now than they were nine months ago?
PM:     Well, let me go to one which is immediate, which is the fact that you have of that $55 billion working family support package through the Budget, tax cuts flowing through to low and middle income earners right across the country and they began to flow from 1 July.
And on top of that the particular changes, some $7.5 billion worth of changes, for pensioners, for carers and those on the disability support pension. And furthermore, as of 1 July, the fact that the childcare tax rebate has gone up from 30 per cent to 50 per cent.
So, in terms of bread and butter concerns, these are very bread and butter responses delivered within our first six months in office. And the reason we've done that is that we haven't accepted the argument by someone else last year that working families have never been better off. We've actually taken a different view, and that is that working families, pensioners and carers are facing real cost of living challenges.
And that's why we, through the first Budget, have sought to do three things. One, adhere to the discipline of responsible economic management, given the uncertainties in the global economy, hence the surplus. Two, deliver on our pre-election commitments to assist working families, pensioners and carers under financial pressure. And three, to lay out the policy and financial architecture for our long-term reform agenda through the three great reforming investment funds that we've established: $20 billion for the Building Australia Fund for infrastructure; $11 billion for the Education Investment Fund to invest in both vocational education and training, and in higher education; and, thirdly, the $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund.
We think these are practical responses now to the challenges that communities are facing and families are facing, as well as opening up our pathways to the future through investments in the country's long-term needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Malcolm Farr from The Daily Telegraph.
You used the euphemism significant negotiation to describe the talks with the states but...
PM: And argy-bargy.
JOURNALIST: Yes...
PM: Which is also a technical term.
JOURNALIST: Well, on the argy-bargy index isn't your toughest opponent going to be the teaching unions? And would you say that the teaching unions have so far had a positive role in giving parents more transparency as to the operation of schools?
PM: I think some of the - it's a very mixed bag, to be honest. Some of the unions have been complete to the - resistant, I think it's fair to say, and we therefore expect a fair bit of argy-bargy on that front as well, but we don't intend to shirk from it. We think this is the right way to go.
I think, at the end of the day, what's going to prevail in this debate is the interests of parents and of students, and that is they deserve to have the information available to them of how schools are performing.
We recognise fully all the challenges which local school communities and teachers face if you're dealing with really entrenched social and economic disadvantage. But at the end of the day parents and students should be able to have the information in front of them.
Also, as I sought to answer the question from Chris Uhlmann before, if some walk with their feet that's exactly what the system is designed to do; that is to make sure that school communities are being responsive to the legitimate high expectations of parents and kids that they get first-class education opportunities at the school level.
Because you know something? Having been on a P and C myself, once you - once kids start going through the primary school and they start lagging behind literacy and numeracy measures, and you don't tackle them at least by the early high school you really start getting to the point where it's too late. So, frankly, having this information up there and putting the pressure back onto school systems, which are run at the end of the day by state governments and by others, to ensure that these schools are performing at their best levels, is what this set of reforms is all about.
JOURNALIST: Mark Riley from the Seven Network, Mr Rudd. You said in your speech that all these changes are likely to cost money, which appears to be an observation of breathtaking understatement. When you're talking about increasing...
PM: I didn't say they'd be for free.
PM: You're talking about increasing teachers' salaries and additional funding of half a million dollars to the average school per year. How...
PM: Half a million.
JOURNALIST: Sorry?
PM: Half a million.
JOURNALIST: Half a million, yeah. Half a million.
PM: I thought you said a B word there for a minute.
JOURNALIST: Half a million. That's an awful lot of money. How much money is it and how much is the Commonwealth prepared to provide?
PM: Well, I noticed today the - talking about unions before, the Australian Education Union is out there giving us a whack about our provision for funding for school education over the forward estimates.
And of course it's an inherently dishonest document, and the reason it's dishonest is this. The union known full well that we are currently in direct negotiation with the states and territories for the funding which flows from 1 January next year. In other words, what we've put in since we've come into government is for this year alone. And everyone knows that. And we're in the middle of a negotiation.
Part of my - purpose of my remarks today is saying, this is where the Commonwealth Government wants to land in terms of quality education, that is that's where we want to have the outcome being on performance reporting for schools, on additional payments for the best performing teachers within the schools, appropriate supports for the best principals in schools, and of course the other part of the package being how do we support those schools who are suffering from most entrenched disadvantage.
So, yes, it does all cost money. But the purpose of a negotiation is that we don't hand over a blank cheque. I presume that's the intention of the AEU in putting out that document that it's done today. It's just nonsense.
We're up for negotiation which will be conditional on these quality education benchmarks being met. That's what we're on about. And so that's why we haven't put forward concrete figures in the speech I've given today.
This is the hard part of the negotiation which Julia and Wayne, the Treasurer, will be into big time, literally in the months ahead. But we need to get to a conclusion because the next school year starts in January, and we intend to drive a hard bargain.
JOURNALIST: David Crowe from the Australian Financial Review. Prime Minister, in an hour or so hostilities will resume in Question Time. The debate will turn again to the Coalition's position on various bills out of the Budget.
Just looking at one, for instance, FuelWatch seems doomed given the way the Coalition and some of the independents might vote. Is that change and other Budget measures you've got worth going to an early election for? Are they that important to the ordinary voter that you would go early given the experience of John Howard in '98 and Bob Hawke in '84?
PM: When have I said before I'm going to an early election? There seems to be an assumption in your question that I am, or have said something to that effect. So let's take away the presupposition underpinning your question because I've never said that, unless some of you can correct me to the contrary.
What I have said, these are all important parts of the Government's policy agenda. We intend to fight hard in the Senate. Our principal concern in the Senate is to prevent the Liberals from delivering a major assault on the Budget disciplines which the Government sweated over in preparing the Budget of May this year.
I mean, if you look at some of those basic disciplines we brought about through the Budget, on spending, when we took over office the spending growth was running at four to five per cent under the previous government.
We brought that down to one per cent in the current Budget. On savings, as you know, our new initiatives were funded by the savings that we had made, some $33 billion worth of savings. And we landed at a point in the Budget whereby we've reduced the tax to GDP ratio to a lower level than the previous year and a lower level in frankly almost a decade, particularly against what was a high taxing government, the one which preceded us.
To get to all those points on reducing spending, on bringing about a very hard set of savings $33 billion worth and to produce an outcome on tax of the type that I've just described, by tax as a proportion of GDP is down in the first year of this Government. It's taken a lot of work but secondly it's been a necessary fiscal discipline given Australia's globally uncertain economic conditions. And the ones that we face.
The - in a time of global economic uncertainty the worst thing the Liberal Party can do is to hold to ransom the fiscal discipline of the Government by some, $3 billion, $4 billion, $5 billion, $6 billion dollars depending on how they feel on a particular day.
This is not the time to do that. As I said before, one of the reasons we have worked hard to produce a budget surplus of this type is not just to put downward pressure on inflation, downward pressure on interest rates, but to provide us with a fiscal buffer to deal with the challenges we may face in this uncertain environment.
And in a time of global economic uncertainty, the worst thing you can have is uncertainty on the home front delivered by an irresponsible party acting for populace reasons in the senate. That's why we're going to prosecute a very hard line, economic debate with the Liberals in the Senate with one objective in mind, to get this budget and its integrity upheld in the Senate because it's necessary in terms of the overall economic wellbeing of the country.
JOURNALIST: Hi, Prime Minister, Matthew Franklin from The Australian.
PM: Hi, Matthew.
JOURNALIST: I am interested in argy-bargy as well. The...
PM: I notice that from what you write, yeah.
JOURNALIST: Thanks. Look, I've seen State Governments, including, I think, the one that you used to work for openly, aggressively act - work against media attempts to provide any kind of scrutiny to the way - to relative performances of schools as Malcolm said we - the education unions hate this stuff. You've said today, you've laid out a series of principles and you've made clear that you have to now negotiate on them.
Can you tell us that the basic principles, putting aside the funding, of what you've outlined today are non-negotiable and that you will not be backing down either by - to demands from the states or the Labor movement?
PM: These are hard principles, Matthew, and Julia and I have spent a lot of time on this and her work in this area in recent weeks and months has been particularly intense. So we haven't pulled this out of thin air, we have thought about it, we have worked on it, we believe this is the correct way ahead for the nation, for the economy, given the productivity arguments that I ran through before.
But also in terms of life opportunities of the tens of thousands of kids affected by this.
So therefore, the principles we put forward are robust, strong, and we intend to adhere to them.
Whether states and territories agree with those, remains to be seen in the final analysis. But what we can do at the end of the day is fashion national policy partnerships, with governments, and if various governments choose not to receive these additional payments, I think the country will say, ‘be it on their heads'. But the reason we have designed this structure of national policy partnerships is precisely with this in mind.
The states, to be fair to them, and the territories, are doing a lot of good work in various of these areas, but they've encountered a lot of resistance as well. And that's why with those states which have a strong reformist inclination we intend to partner with them.
Through these partnerships, partner with them in a real financial way as well, make it more possible for them, but we can't shirk this agenda anymore. We can't just say it's all to hard and put our heads in the sand.
When I said at the beginning of last year that one of the most important things for me if I made it to becoming Prime Minister of this country was engineering an education revolution, we meant it. Not just in terms of the amount of money we invest in this system but the quality of the system as well. Every kid in the country deserves a decent start; it doesn't matter where they come from. Every kid in the country. And to the extent that it is possible with in our powers of the Commonwealth Government to deliver that, we intend to do it. It is a very high priority.
JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan, from The Age. Mr Rudd, in the current economic downturn how high do you expect that unemployment might go? Do you think we could get to a situation where it has a six in front of it? And after your talks with the car industry this week, and given the job problems in that industry, do you think there is a case still for making the fall in tariffs that's been recommended by the Bracks Report?
PM: On the - we've been upfront as is the Treasurer and others about what we see to be a slowing in growth and employment across the economy. And that of course is consistent with what you see in many other developed economies around the world. On the question of the car industry, our approach, and I said this, I think as of the day I became leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party - I am a free trader, always have been, always will be.
And the reason I am is because protection like that ultimately doesn't help consumers particularly working families who are struggling to get the best deal possible with a very large purchase. We all know the history of that, shirts, shoes, over time the ability of families to be able to stretch their budgets further have all been enormously assisted by the deep reforms to tariffs which are engineered during the period of the Hawke and Keating Government.
So our attitude to the future of the car industry is very much one which depends on industry policy which I've never equated with tariff policy. And industry policy for us means investing in innovation. And I've said that from the beginning and I'll continue to say that as well. And that's why we've established a half billion green car innovation fund.
And it's funds like that in the future which will enable us to help industries innovate, secondly, to also innovate in directions which are consistent with the nation's other priorities, other environmental priorities. In the case of fuel efficient cars, reducing not just the carbon footprint but also helping to drive the family budget further as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Karen Middleton from SBS Television. I just wanted to take you to a part of your speech where you talked about non-performing schools and needing to lift their performance and you suggested that in some cases they may need to be reorganised or even merged. It strikes me that that might be unpopular with some parents.
Here in the ACT, the ACT Government announced some year or so ago that it was closing and merging schools and there was uproar. And in the end it had to back down on some of those schools. So I am wondering, what do you say to parents who might be alarmed at the prospect that schools might be closed or be merged, especially in a time where they've got rising household costs primarily transport costs?
PM: First of all the proposed national partnership payments and agreements I referred to before, both on quality teaching and on funding arrangements with the most disadvantaged schools, these would be agreements with State Governments with education systems. And therefore definitions ultimately will lie with them about how they then implement these agreements on the ground.
The Commonwealth doesn't directly run the systems, we don't. They're run either through the independent school system with the Catholic Education System or though the state and territory systems. And that is the simple administer of reality.
So those decisions ultimately would be made local - locally. What we can do however, in partnership agreements, with states and territories and with the systems, is to outline clearly the criteria which may lead in that direction. No-one wants to merge a school with another school if you can possibly avoid it.
But you know if you're a bunch of mums and dads and you see through the transparency measures I referred to before the fact that against comparable schools elsewhere that your local school is performing really badly and has done so for many years and there hasn't been any real turnaround, we've got to look at some practical hard disciplines at the end of the day about what you're going to do about it.
You can either say, ‘well, let's hope like [inaudible] that something ultimately turns up or furthermore that you get new management into the school, or if that doesn't work then you've got to actually, for the sake of the kids, look at a different arrangement. But those decisions ultimately will lie with the systems themselves. What we'd be doing is designing the funding agreements to make that possible.
JOURNALIST: Hi, Mr Rudd, Phil Coorey from The Sydney Morning Herald. You may have just answered this question but similar to Karen's a lot of state or all states have a local system where you can only go to a school in your area.
So if - how - if you were to, quote, vote with your feet and you weren't allowed to, is that the State's responsibility or - and/or the Commonwealth's? And in that - in that theme, who would take accountability if a school needs to merge but the State won't do it for political reasons, is it the Commonwealth's fault or the State's fault?
PM: Well, we at the Commonwealth level have a responsibility to design clear cut policy and funding agreements with the states and territories. So the contents of those agreements, obviously, are the joint responsibility of both levels of government. The execution of the agreement on the ground, obviously, lies with the system which manages the schools. So they will make the decisions on the ground locally.
But if you see evidence, plainly, of a state and territory system which has signed up to a national performance partnership on quality - quality teaching, for example, where all the - and through the transparency reporting arrangements that we spoke about before, and you saw clear evidence that nothing was happening on the ground, despite the evidence being presented, then that provides you with an opportunity at the federal level to act as well in terms of non-compliance with the basis of the agreement.
Now, a lot of this in the argy-bargy of the next few months will be nutted out with the states and territories. And I'm not pretending for one moment this will be easy. It'll be a complex negotiation. But we, the Commonwealth, have determined this is the right way to go and we are not going to take a backward step.
JOURNALIST: Paul Bongiorno, Ten News, Prime Minister. I'm just wondering what benchmarks we're going to use here. I noticed that some of your goals are out to 2020. By the time of the next election, what should have happened? For example, the brightest of the maths and science teachers, and this is a problem that all the school systems have, can leave the system, get three to four times the salary working in the private sector, away from education.
You say there's going to be a lot of argy-bargy and it'll be tough but the Commonwealth is determined. Are you as determined in this area as you are in health, where you've said if the states don't come to the party you'll take them over?
PM: One step at a time, Paul. I always believe in consultation - consultation - just cause you're an old lefty, consultation - talk about revolutions. The consultation first, a hardened negotiation and ultimately, of course, there are other devices available. But we're not canvassing those when it comes to education. I think we can still get there through the negotiating process that we've outlined. It will be tough and we're going to have to put money on the table. But as I've said from the very outset of our debate on the Education Revolution, from day one, January University of Melbourne 2007, I said we're on about lifting the quantitative investment across the range of education. From early childhood education through schools, through vocational education and training, through universities, through innovation, through R and D up to the highest ends of rocket science, we're into upping the quantitative investment.
But parallel to that, are qualitative disciplines, which is to measure the quality of that which is produced. And that applies here to the school system most critically. Because going back to, you know, the core of this debate, if we are serious about this nation having a robust economic future in the economies of the twenty-first century, and you look at what our competitor economies are doing around this region and the world and the radical investment programs they have in human capital, and in within the school systems, there is a grave danger of us being left behind.
I use this point again to go back to the cardinal principle. And that is, for us this is serious business. We intend to prosecute this with full vigour, knowing full well that there's going to be blowback on the way through.
JOURNALIST: James Grubel from Reuters, Prime Minister. You mentioned in your speech the Government's plans for emissions reduction, and we noticed in the past week or so business, particularly big business have come out and said they have great concerns about the Green Paper and the plans for the emissions trading scheme.
Is there a growing - is there a sense that the Government - that there is some sympathy for some of those complaints? Or do you think that big business isn't really doing enough at this stage to prepare for emissions trading from mid-2010.
PM: Well to use the term of the day, argy bargy is not restricted between the Government and the state and territory school systems. We also, we're having a fair bit of that with the business community as well. And that's natural and normal.
Just, you know, I just regard that as part of business. We've put out a Green Paper when it comes to the future of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. The reason it's called a Green Paper is that it's there to form a basis for negotiation, and that's why we're engaged, through various ministers of the Government, led by Penny Wong, but also Martin Ferguson, also Kim Carr and Simon Crean and others, in direct negotiations with individual businesses.
And we intend for this to be a real negotiating process. The reason for having a detailed framework out there through the Green Paper on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, is to focus the debate down to the points of real disagreement, and to work out what is the productive way forward.
And I think reasonable people will be able to achieve that.
What I detect, overall, from the business community is actually something quite good. None of them have said to me, so far, ‘oh, by the way, we don't want to act on climate change.' None of them have said, ‘oh, by the way, all the science is wrong.' None of them have said that. You roll the clock back a few years, that's probably what might have been the starting point.
So I think there is a sense of genuine corporate or collective responsibility here. But we are into a detailed negotiation, and it will be tough and it will be hard. But as I said at the very beginning of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme debate, if you are going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, which we must, and if we are to be credible negotiators in the essential negotiations coming up over the next 12 months or so, to get a global deal, then this is the necessary course of action. It will never happen cost free.
This is not a cost-free business. Anyone who says that is misleading you. And I don't intend to say that. The question is, how do we do it. What is our pathway to the future on this. And what adjustments do we provide for households and for businesses on the way through. And this, again, is a high priority, a high policy reform priority for the Government in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: Emma Macdonald from The Canberra Times. Mr Rudd, how is it an education revolution when you're following Coalition policies to threaten the states' and territories' education funding unless they introduce performance pay, principal autonomy, school comparisons, not to mention the fact that you're following the Coalition policy to dock welfare payments to truanting families?
I mean, it's hardly original, let alone revolutionary. And if they were such great ideas at the time, why did Labor at every level oppose it?
PM: Well what would be revolutionary for someone to actually do this, as opposed to just talk about it. You know, I've mentioned before in passing, how many reports did the previous Government deliver on all this sort of stuff over the last decade plus. I mean, there's enough to weigh down the lower archives of the National Library. But in fact doing something is quite a different challenge, and I just think we as a National Government have got a responsibility to act. I can't guarantee 100 per cent success on this score, but we intend to have a damned good go at it, let me tell you.
And the other question that you implied, or part of the question which you put forward, was how is it an education revolution to impose hard line disciplines on school systems. Well, if the alternative is elevated hand holding with state and territories and systems and to say that's kind of the way through, as opposed to being tough and hard headed about benchmarks for performance in the future, let me tell you the road that we'll take is the second one.
And why do we take it? Because kids out there going to average schools deserve every opportunity that kids at flash schools have. And this is the way through.


CLARK: Mr Rudd, good afternoon.
PM: Philip, thanks for having me on your program.
CLARK: Well, welcome to the program, it is going to be a busy time. Parliament is back and the Senate is already saying we are not going to pass anything, at least the Opposition in the Senate.
I mean how big a problem is this going to be for you, because you really are going to have to negotiate with a whole panoply of players up there. You have got Nick Xenophon from South Australia, you have got Family First, Senator Steve Fielding, you have got the Greens and the Opposition?
PM: Well I think our first focus is always going to be the Liberals, and that is whether they are serious about doing the responsible thing.
One of the reasons we are concerned about the legislation in the Senate at the moment is this: it is all about whether or not we are going to preserve the Government's Budget surplus, which is what we need to do in these uncertain global economic times.
And if you whittle that down, which is what they are proposing to do at the moment, by knocking off  $3 to $6 billion dollars worth of measures, then it reduces the surplus, and what does all that mean? It means you have got, first of all, less of a buffer to deal with any challenges which may lie ahead, because the global economy is under real stress and the moment.
And secondly, it means that if you are going to reduce the surplus, it has the effect of putting more upward pressure on inflation, and therefore, more upward pressure on interest rates. And that is the last thing we want at present.
CLARK: Look, they are difficult economic times, I think you would acknowledge that, people are worse off than they were a year ago, would you agree?
PM: Well, what I have said today in the Parliament when asked about this is that it is just important to level with people. I mean, people are under real cost of living pressures. My predecessor went around the place and said that working families had never been better off. I just think you should level with people.
Everyone's circumstances are different. What we have done in recognition of the fact that there are pressures from rents, from interest rates, from groceries and from petrol prices, is through the Budget, deliver $45 billion worth of tax cuts, a further set of some $10 billion worth of other payments, including the increase to the childcare tax rebate form 30 per cent to 50 per cent. And $7.5 billion worth in additional payments for pensioners, carers and those on the disability support pension.
But, the truth is, these are difficult times for people and I am not about to try and guild the lily and pretend that it is not. But we are trying to do practical things to help on the way through.
CLARK: I have talked to a number of pensioners on this program who do it really hard in Sydney. You can't find affordable rent in Sydney any more. A rental of around $250 dollars a week, which is what we would call affordable rent for many people, is just unattainable in many parts of Sydney, perhaps most now with the current rental crisis. Pensioners in particular are doing it hard. When are we going to see some comprehensive approach to pensioner income?
PM: What we did, first of all through the Budget, is the $7.5 billion worth of additional payments that I just mentioned. One of those things, by the way, includes for the first time, increasing the utilities allowance for pensioners from a hundred and something dollars a year to $500 a year and now that is made as an annual payment.
But we have always known that this is simply step one. Step two is to go back to the fundamentals of how the actual pension is constructed. And so we have commissioned the Secretary of the Treasury, Ken Henry, to look at the future of tax, the pension system, retirement income system in general. He is due to report in February of next year, which is about six months or so from now. And we hope to have a proposal from him about how to provide pensioners, in particular, with better security into the future.
CLARK: So might we see something in next years' Budget?
PM: Well, if we report in February of next year, we'll then make a decision about when to implement. But let me put it to you in these terms, Philip.  What you just said before about pensioners in Sydney and how difficult it is to try and survive, I fully get, I fully understand.
Because each time we go out with the Cabinet and do a Community Cabinet as we did recently in the southern suburbs of Adelaide and prior to that in the western suburbs of Sydney around Penrith, the stories that we hear are very direct, very personal, and really hard. So we want to try and act sooner rather than later.
But the only thing I could say to your listeners as well is the cost of living pressures which are putting such pressure on the pension, haven't just cropped up in the last six months that we've been in office. They've been building for many, many years.
And part of the problem we face is dealing with an area where, frankly, our predecessors didn't undertake any fundamental reform of the pension for 12 years they were in office.
CLARK: You've been accused of a bit of window dressing, too much possibly  -  this Grocery-watch site. I mean, it's a joke, isn't it? You could save yourself millions by canning this thing straight away. I mean, what possible use is it to anybody?
PM: Well, what we said from the beginning Philip is the idea was to make sure that within a given region, shoppers would have an opportunity to work out over time which of the supermarket chains  - 
CLARK: You don't seriously think this website does that, do you?
PM: Hang on. Let me just finish what I'm saying. What you've got is an analysis of I think some 600 plus supermarket sites across the country, spread across 62 separate regions, done against different baskets of goods, so that you can compare over time, for example, in a particular region, maybe the southern suburbs of Brisbane, whether it's Coles or whether it's Woolies, or whether it's one of the others like Aldi, who are providing the best deal and by how much.
It's one small measure to increase consumer power.  And we've never pretended that it's anything more than that. The other thing is that in the short time that it has been operating it has already had about 3 million hits on its site. So, I think people are interested to know which of the chains overall is doing better by shoppers than others in their region.
But, I don't want to overstate it, and we haven't before overstated it. This is not an attempt to go out and say you can bring down grocery prices or anything like that. But it is to give consumers more information than they've got at present.
CLARK: Okay, I know you've got to go because it is Parliament and all that. I know today you've guaranteed the education funding into the future, this is despite the fact that the Education Union says you're going to cut teachers and cut salaries. That's not going to happen?
PM: Absolutely not. That's quite a dishonest statement out by the union, and I think they know it.
What we've done is provided funding for this year, that's 2008, and we're right now in the middle of a huge negotiation with the States and Territories on the future funding for schools for the four to five year period following that. And that will be finalised by the end of the year.
But what I spoke to the National Press Club on today, and in Parliament also Philip, was this: what we invest in terms of more money into the school system and into early childhood education and into vocational education  -  trades training  -  is one thing. But we've got to lift the quality of our school education as well.
What I put out there today was a proposal for new partnership agreements for the states to boost teacher quality. To also boost our funding for the most disadvantaged schools in the country. And also, to make sure that we've got the best school performance data out there into the community so you've got transparency about which schools are doing well, and which schools are not doing well.
These are major education quality reforms which have put out there today, and they are as important as injecting more money into the system overall as well.
CLARK: Okay, I know you've got to go. I appreciate your time. We'll look forward to having you in the studio shortly.
PM: I look forward to it Philip.


PM: It is great to be here today with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education Julia Gillard, Andrew Barr from the ACT Government and ACT Education Minister, and Annette Ellis our local member.
It is good to be here at the Gordon State School here in the ACT and its been great to see what our kids have been doing in new and innovative ways of approaching the big challenges of numeracy and how they are doing their fractions, how they are doing their multiplication, how they are doing their division. Its been good to see these practical programs at work.
The Government was elected on a platform to bring about an education revolution in Australia. Yesterday the Government announced a further chapter of that platform which is quality school education for Australia.
What we are committed to doing is not just increasing the amount which the national Government invests in school education but also to ensure that those funds are also directed towards lifting the quality of school education across Australia as well. And we sought to do so in four specific areas: one is to boost school leadership across the country and to provide greater power for school leaders and school principals.
Secondly to provide greater investment for the support of teacher quality to encourage more and more of our best and brightest university graduates into the teaching profession and for those who become our best and most effective teachers over time to provide them with real incentive to stay in the classroom.
Third, to ensure that we have got a proper reporting and public accountability and transparency of the performances of schools. And that doesn't mean creating arbitrary league tables, what it does mean is ensuring that we've got proper comparisons of what schools facing similar challenges are doing in one part of the country against schools with those sort of challenges in other parts of the country.
And the fourth element of our quality schools education program is this. To provide real additional investment for schools in our most disadvantage areas.
And that's to ensure that those schools are given a decent start not just with the same expectations as other schools who may not face the same range of challenges but are given an additional shot of funding to make sure that they can do the best by way of their kids.
Overall therefore what we stand for is this: we want an education revolution in the amount of money we invest in schools but we also want an education revolution in the quality of schools performance.
The Australian Government is not going to write a blank cheque on these questions, the Australian Government is in the business of negotiating with the States and Territories to make sure we boost the overall investment across the nation in our school but at the same time we are achieving measurable improvements in the quality of our school education as well.
The last thing I'd say is this. The great thing about our education system nationwide is that we have so many fantastic teachers. I would argue that teachers are the greatest economic resource Australia has and our job as the national Government is to get behind teachers and to support them. Support them intelligently, creatively, with more funding and to enable them to lift the performance of their schools.
The last thing I'd say before handing to Julia is about literacy and numeracy. Literacy and numeracy is a very, very practical way in which we can help schools with innovative programs such as those which are being deployed here at Gordon.
Here we looked at numeracy programs this morning and the sort of work being done with these clusters of year 5 and year 6 students on improving their skills in basic mathematical computation.
This is good but what the Education Minister will now talk to you about is how we are rolling out $40 million worth of pilot programs across the country as part of our $500 million plus new Australian national investment to lift literacy and numeracy performance across the country.
Over to you Julia
GILLARD: Thank you Prime Minister and its been great to be here today and to see the children of this school of Gordon Primary School, and we've got the uniforms proudly on display, doing their numeracy work. And I think what you have seen today is kids there learning, but that learning also made fun, very engaged in it because it has been made fun.
Now as the Prime Minister outlined yesterday we want to bring an education revolution to the quality of Australian schooling and as part of the we want to make sure that in schools right around the country we are getting the basics right. Because there is nothing more important than learning to read, learning to write, learning to do maths, these are the foundation skills for everything else in education.
On the 1st of September we start national literacy and numeracy week. It's a great time to celebrate literacy and numeracy and to remind ourselves right across the nation how important it is to make sure every Australian child gets a great education and every Australian child gets the basics right.
Today I'm proud to announce that as a down payment on our more than $500 million dollar plan to get the basics right and improve literacy and numeracy we are funding $40 million of trial programs.
These programs are right around the country, one of them is here in this school. This is money that has been targeted at those schools that face particular challenges, those schools serving communities with a lower socio economic status where we know it is so important to get the basics right.
The money for this school, more than $280,000 is going on the program you just saw in action. This school's been using this program, it is a further investment in creative ways to get numeracy happening at school.
The programs right around the country are there in literacy and numeracy, they are going make a difference for children today, and of course what we learn from them about the best of teaching, is going to make a difference for children ultimately right around the country.
This is a practical step, $40 million going to programs where children can immediately benefit and we can learn more about how to get the basics right for every Australian child in every Australian school.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you say to teachers that, after the message yesterday feel bullied or stigmatised (inaudible)
PM: What I would say is our teachers are the greatest resource Australia has. And I would say that what we are committed to doing is investing more in quality teaching across Australia. Our message is a positive one for the country. It is a positive one for education, it is a positive one for teachers, which is: how can we, as the Australian Government, not just preach as the previous government did, but actually come to the party with funding, real funding long term to assist in improving quality teaching, quality school leadership, quality reporting of school performances. And in addition to that provide real additional amounts of money for those schools in our most disadvantaged areas.
If you were to go to a school for example in a disadvantaged area, with an average school budget and say that we will look towards providing you with an additional half a million dollars a year  -  let me tell you, innovative teachers, innovative school leaders can do a lot with that sort of commitment. 
So what we are saying is, we want a quality revolution in Australian schools, but we are going to be there for the quantity as well, which is the additional funds to be invested.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the opposition leader said this morning that there is already law brought in last year to tie performance to funding, he wants to know will you be (inaudible)
PM: Well as I said yesterday, we intend to adopt a pretty hard line approach on this and we have got a lot of negotiation to undertake with the states and territories in the period ahead and these will be tough negotiations.
But on the question of differences I think it is pretty interesting to note that what is the core difference here is the previous Liberal government which preached about this for 12 years and did very, very little.
And if you look at the bottom line in terms of the extra dollars committed, very, very little indeed. What we have is a quality education agenda for the future, but also a preparedness to fund. That is the difference.
That is the core difference here. And in terms of those negotiations with the states and territories, it will be tough, it will be hard, but we believe, absolutely, I think you can say from the pit of our stomachs that this is the right thing to do and we intend to prosecute this.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: What I would say to our friends in the teachers unions across Australia, and many of them are fantastic people, is that it is time to arrive in the 21st Century. And that is, let's get past the name calling, let's get past all this sort of pointless debate about blaming someone here or blaming someone there.
Let's get on with the business, two core objectives: how do we lift the standards of Australian schools across the nation and how do we provide the funding necessary to do it. Now, presumably what some of our friends in the trade unions would like us to do is just hand over a blank cheque.
Well guess what, I am not going to do that. What we will be doing is providing extra funding but at the same time, making that funding conditional on lifting school performance, while recognising that individual schools across the country often face really hard practical challenges given the immediate environment and social economic circumstances which they face in those communities.
That is why the four pillars of this program are so important: quality teaching, quality school leadership, transparent reporting, but at the same time, extra funding not just for those but for schools in disadvantaged areas as well.
JOURNALIST: Are you to blame for the collapse in business confidence represented by the Sensis survey this morning?
PM: One of the things I noticed from that particular survey was their concern on the part of small and medium enterprises about interest rates. And they are right to be concerned about interest rates. And interest rates were at the second highest in the developed world as of when this government was elected only eight months ago. And that followed 10 interest rate rises in a row and that followed inflation running at 16 year highs.
So when I look at the text of that particular survey and I look at the reasons given by small to medium enterprises, they legitimately go straight for interest rates and they go straight for the fact that we have had 10 interest rate rises in a row, as to the point of which we were elected, and therefore, what is the response?
The response must be a clear headed strategy to put downward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on interest rates. That is why we are committed to a $22 billion surplus through the budget, to do our bit to put downward pressure on inflation and on rates.
And the Liberals approach is to do two things, ignore the fact that they delivered us 10 interest rates rises in a row and the second highest interest rates in the developed world and on top of that, to bury their heads in the sand and say, we are going to make it worse, by pulling billions of dollars off the government's surplus.
And what does that do? It puts further upward pressure on inflation and further upward pressure on rates.


ALOISI: The Prime Minister is on the line. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning. Thanks for having me on the program.
CARLTON: Thank You. Who's your toughest opponent, the entrenched teaching unions or the State Governments that are supported by them?
PM: Well look, I hope good sense prevails with all of this because what's the starting point: How do you provide the best quality education in schools for Australia's kids? That's what got to be the starting point and what we are saying is, as the Australian Government, we are prepared to significantly increase our funding to the States and Territories for quality education, quality teaching and for funding for our most disadvantaged schools. But we are not going to do so as a blank cheque, we are going to do so on the basis of conditions attached.
Now the opposition to this I'm sure will come from multiple quarters and I'm sure some of the unions may be unhappy with this, but it think this is absolutely necessary to invest more in our kids, in our teachers for the future but to make sure that there are conditions attached. And that's about boosting the quality of school education.
CARLTON: The teaching unions though have opposed every educational reform since the invention of chalk and blackboards haven't they? They are going to give you a big fight on this one?
PM: Well there maybe a bit of argy bargy on the way through, I think that's fair to say Mike. But I think its time to do this. I notice the Liberals were saying that they had come up with some of these ideas in the past. Well that's terrific, 12 years in Government, 24 reports on boosting quality education in our schools and quality teaching, not much to show for it in terms of real action.
I think its time to get on with this and we are prepared to have an argument if that's necessary because I think tough decisions are necessary for the long term. You can't simply allow our kids to be in schools which are consistently underperforming. We have got to do something about that.
Our teachers are our greatest asset, and what we are trying to do here is how do you provide greater rewards and incentives for our best teachers to stay into the system? How do you provide more incentives and rewards for our best university graduates to go into teaching? And how do we make sure that our schools are properly reporting to parents and to students and to the wider community about how they are going.
ALOISI: John Hatzistergos who is the acting Education Minister in NSW says he doesn't support funding tied to reporting on schools. So, if states continue to say to you we don't like the idea, will you just overrule them?
PM: Well what I said yesterday at the National Press Club when I released this is that we prepared to boost funding, boost funding significantly, but it won't be a blank cheque. And so its a matter for States and Territories whether they want to take the boosted funding or not. That's what is on the line here.
CARLTON: In other words, toe the line or you don't get the money?
PM: That's getting close to it Mike.
CARLTON: I thought it might be
ALOISI: That might be actually on the money. What about the Teacher's Federation Prime Minister, here in NSW, it also says your just adding school-watch to FuelWatch and grocery-watch and nothing more will come of it?
PM:  Well you know something, I'd say to our good friends in the Teacher's Federation of New South Wales, it's time to get with the 21st century. And on this stuff, these are important reforms. You see, people have talked about this for far too long, which is how do we properly reward our teachers? How do we properly encourage our best university graduates to become teachers? How do we properly empower our school principals and our school leaders to make the decision within schools to boost their performance, particularly the education outcomes for the kids? And how do we do that in a practical way which links extra funding with increasingly transparent reporting on how those go? That's what it's about.
CARLTON: Okay, but don't you run the danger of comparing apples with oranges? I mean let's take Killara High School on Sydney's North Shore. Leafy, affluent they speak one language, English and they speak it very well. They do extraordinarily well. Another school in Sydney's Western suburbs are battling, kids speak 23 different languages, parents hard working but having trouble making ends meet. How do you compare the performance of those two schools?
PM: Well Mike, obviously, and I can fully understand why you chose not to watch my address to the National Press Club.
CARLTON:I was absorbed with every golden word, Prime Minister.
PM: I'm sure you had more entertaining things to do and I can understand that. But I actually addressed this head on.
You can either have what we describe as crude league tables, and I use the example of looking at a elite school on Sydney's north shore versus a school in outer suburban Australia or in regional and rural Australia, which has got a different set of challenges.
So therefore what do you do about that? A couple of things. First of all make sure that each school in itself has a proper reporting benchmark and framework for the performance that its got to make and improve against its local conditions, that's the first thing.
Secondly, we think it's right that schools with similar challenges, if you like a similar social economic profile around the country, are in time compared with each other. For example a school that you referred to in western Sydney which has got 26 languages or 62 languages in the playground, and a whole bunch of families who are out there working hard and some really struggling hard. Well, we understand fully that they are quite different to some schools which are in more fortuitous economic circumstances. We should be able to compare those schools which are in western Sydney with other schools which have a got a similar socio economic profile.
And finally, what parents want is in a particular geographical area, just say within a wider suburban area, they would like to be able to know how one school is going against the other and we think that's a fair thing too.
These are where we want to go to, not crude league tables which compare Geelong Grammar down in Melbourne with Nambour High which is where I went to.
CARLTON: Fine school Prime Minister, fine school. Produced you and the Treasurer, it can't have been all bad.
PM: No, it was a great school, but its got a different set of, shall we say ‘challenges', than Geelong Grammar.
But we are therefore moving towards a system where you can compare more effectively apples with apples. And we take the point you can't compare apples with oranges and that's what crude league tables were all about.
ALOISI: Can I ask a question Prime Minister, not related to this but when I mentioned the Teachers Federation, talking about adding school-watch to FuelWatch and grocery-watch.
Keeping the Teacher's Federation out of it, is there are perception do you think among Australians that your Government was elected to help us get out of some tough economic times and that not a lot has been done other than several reviews?
PM: Well the Government has been in office now for a little less than nine months and what we are dealing with is the overhang of a fair bit of inaction for the previous 12 years.
But let me tell you on the question of the economy, what we have been wrestling with is the fact that when we took over Government we had inflation running at 16 year highs, we had 10 interest rates rises under Mr Costello and Mr Howard in a row, giving us the second highest interest rates in the western world, that's what we took over nine months ago.
Since then, we have brought down one Budget and as our best preparation for the future, we've done two things. A $22 billion budget surplus to give us a buffer in uncertain global economic times, and secondly, delivered on our pre-election tax cuts for working families as well as ensure that we increased the child care tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent, as well as introduce an education tax refund for working families and an initial payment of an extra $7.5 billion for pensioners, carers and those on the disability support pension.
ALOISI: But people are still doing it tough out there?
PM: Absolutely, absolutely - and I understand that full well. Which is why in the case of pensioners for example, for the first time in a decade we are having a root and branch look at how the pension is put together and how payments to pensioners in the future can be put onto a more secure footing.
CARLTON: When are you going to get an answer? I mean there's a proposal this morning for raising the single pension rate, which is real battle, are you gonna do that?
PM: Is it a real battle, and that's one of the things we are specifically looking it in the context of the Henry Commission of Review on the future of tax, income support and retirement incomes including the pension. And, for example -
CARLTON: Yeah, but reform of the entire tax system is a large job. Sticking up the pension is a little easier isn't it? Couldn't you do something about that?
PM:  Well we are talking these things in stages, and that's why the Henry Review itself is not due for a full report back until the end of 2009. But in the case of its report back on pensions we've asked them to come back as of February next year which is about six months away.
ALOISI: And will a decision be made soon after? I have a vested interest. I have a elderly parents both of who have said to me if one of them goes the single persons pension is just too small for them to live on.
PM: Well, we hear that message loud and clear. And can I say, having been in Government for nine months, looking at a system which wants touched fundamentally for 12 years, and costs of living pressure didn't suddenly materialise in the last nine months, this has been ratcheting up for a long, long time and therefore we are determined to act in this area,.
But we are going to do so in a proper and considered way because the total amount of monies which the Commonwealth spends each year on pensions runs to the tens of billions of dollars, and therefore we have got to make sure we get it right.
CARLTON: Are you going to have a real battle getting your programs through this new Senate?
PM: Well, it's matter for the Liberals in the Senate really. We are in uncertain global economic times. Therefore, we believe that the right course of action is to make sure that we have a robust Budget surplus going into the future because we need that buffer for the future.
What the Liberals have done is basically go into the completely irresponsible mode of saying that what they intend to do is to pull billions and billions of dollars out of the surplus.
The worst thing you can do in the globally uncertain times that we face is to take action like that because what it does is, it actually puts upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates and the Libs gave us 10 interest rate rises in a row. We are trying to turn things around and this is absolutely irresponsible for them to do in the pursuit of short term politics.
ALOISI: Okay Prime Minister. Thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program.
CARLTON: Thanks very much indeed.


BYNER: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.
PM: Good to be with you Leon.
BYNER: Your education revolution is based, to a large extent on a New York model that Julia Gillard investigated. Can you explain to the people of this state how it will, work bearing in mind that the education union find any notion of any comparison - and this is their word - “odious”?
PM: Well we think it's time for the union to get into the 21st century. Because what's at stake here is the future quality school education of our kids. And the people who deserve transparency, public reporting on this, are our kids and their parents, that's what this is all about.
You ask what are the elements of this. Basically there are three parts to what we are putting forward. The first goes to teacher quality. We want to make sure is that we have an ability to provide greater support fo paying teachers to stay in the system who are first class teachers.
Secondly, to provide greater support financially to make sure we get the best university graduates into teaching and to do it what we can to keep them there. The other thing we are doing, apart from teacher quality, goes down to school leadership and that is to make sure that our school principals  -  those who are the leaders of our school communities - have as much autonomy as possible to make decision to improve badly performing schools.
And the last thing is this; the only way in which we have to measure all of this in the future is to make sure that we have got a proper school performance reporting. I understand the argument put forward by some in the unions and elsewhere that you can't have simply arbitrary league tables or crude league tables which compare the most elite private school with the most struggling Government schools.
I understand that. But you can compare, however, apples with apples. And that means schools which have similar challenges in similar socio economic environments, which have similar school populations, similar challenges, can be compared with each other. And the purpose of that is to make sure we work out which schools are facing the biggest challenges so we the Government can provide more resources to those schools.
But if in the end schools are not performing well, parents need to know that, kids need to know that and action then would need to be taken.
BYNER: Prime Minister you would know that the Coalition had a very similar policy which was resoundingly rejected and poo-pooed by the States. Are you expecting the same reaction, even though you have made a perfectly logical justification as to what you want to do and why?
PM: Well, the problem with the previous Liberal government in Australia, they had 12 years to do this - 12 years to do this. They brought down report after report, some 24 reports on the quality teaching and quality education. But when you look around and find what actually happened with this, the conclusion you have got to reach is not much, not much at all.
Therefore, what we are proposing to do with the States and Territories and many of them are doing good things in these areas already is to partner with those States and Territories on the basis of a new funding agreement with Canberra.
Therefore on quality teaching we are proposing what we call a new policy partnership with states and territories on quality teaching, a new policy partnership with states and territories on providing additional funding to the most disadvantaged schools, but again on the basis of performance.
And with our new national education agreement, which priovdes billions of dollars to the states and territories over the years ahead, to make sure that one of the conditions of that is appropriate school performance reporting.
These are the negitations that we are going to have with the states and territories in the three to four months ahead. It will be a tough negotiation and i think you are right to anticipate there will be some flak from some of the unions, but not all the unions -
BYNER: Well the bureaucracy in South Australia are wedded to a bygone era of this what they used to call ‘care, share, grow' and there's no such thing as fail, everybody gets a prize almost for turning up.
(inaudible) one of our leading academics, has for some time been calling for a restoration of good standards not a dumbing down in the curriculum and this is something which is also controversial. What are you going to do where you may find states such as South Australia whose education bureaucrats, and indeed, whose minister may not agree with some of the fundamentals that want to put in?
PM: Well look, what we are doing is putting a proposal on the table and it will be a matter for states and territories whether they take the proposal up. We are prepared to put a large amount of new funding into this against the objective of raising the quality of teaching and performance in our schools.
We want to get behind our best teachers. But it's not going to be a blank cheque Leon. It has got to be with conditions attached and those conditions go to school performance reporting, quality teaching and greater powers for school leadership.
We think that's the right way to go But at the end of the day this will be a decision for the states and territories. We believe that this can be very effective partnership for the future, but mate, I'm not going to stand around and just write a blank cheque, I don't intend to.
BYNER: I didn't expect that you would do that. So, in the sense is it fair to say Prime Minister that what you want to do is rest away a central control from an educational bureaucracy and give independence to schools to do what they think is appropriate including hiring and firing?
PM: What I want to see is part of this quality schools reform package Leon is this: In those schools in particular were we have got lots of evidence and lots of data saying that a school is not performing well, that school leadership in those particular schools at least are given more autonomy to make decision about the teachers, about the overall use of resources within the school. But we are not going to simply just wave a stick at them. We want to give them more money to do that as well.
And one of the things which Julia Gillard has been doing some excellent work on as Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister and who was herself educated in Adelaide, has said to me is that what we need to do is those schools who are facing real challenges is provide extra grants to them. But the condition again is that the school leadership, school principals, are given greater autonomy over the use of that money to lift performance.
BYNER: Prime Minister, you would know that a lot of young people who can graduate as teachers, with the same qualifications, can do much better in other parts of the world in terms of salary and industry. So what kind of investment, if you could put a finger on it, what kind of extra money would you be spending on teacher salaries?
PM: Well, what we are going to do with the negotiation with states and territories, Leon, is have a serious negotiation over that and that will come down to the tin tack of dollars and cents. So I'm not about to put our negotiation position on the table in an interview with you.
BYNER: I understand. Okay, but -
PM: But let me tell you what we are on about here. You're absolutely right, one of the challenges that we face is getting our brightest uni graduates into teaching. So one of the things that we are looking at is some of the progress made by the ‘teach first program' in both the US and the UK, it has slightly different names there, whereby often for three and five year periods and often in partnership with some of our best companies we take our best graduates from the universities and have them spend a finite period with a shortened education degree often, but people who have graduated with first class degree in other areas - get them into the schools, even if we can only make use of them for three or five years, and make it worth their while to do so.
It may be then that they choose to leave the school system and go to the companies who maybe partnering with us in this. Or it may be, as evidence from the US and UK suggests, a very large slab of them say this is a fantastic profession i want to stay.
That's what we want to do, as well as for all those fantastic teachers in the system right now, make sure that they have got proper financial rewards to remain in the system, to remain in the classroom and not to also be burdened down by an extraordinary additional task which is thrown in their direction which is to become part time school administrators as well.
BYNER: I don't know whether you are aware of this and you may be because Julia is so connected to Adelaide and South Australia, but right now the Teachers Union is going through quite a brisk negotiation with the State Government. They want a 20 per cent increase and Mike Rann has been very clear in saying that he just does not have that kind of funding on the table. Now that you have spoken about incentives and higher salaries for performance, how do you expect this to interact with those negotiations?
PM: Well I'm not across the detail of where Mike is up to in his negotiations with the local Teachers Union. All i know form my own experience at the State Government level in the past, because I used to work in the Queensland State Government, is these are always really tough and hard negotiations because the ultimate cost to the State Budget for the education portfolio, and for teacher salaries is huge, it is massive.
But rather than the National Government simply saying, as our predecessors did, ‘your problem mate, we're not going to do anything about it except say to you from time to time boost the quality of your teaching', we have a different approach - which is we will help you with additional funding, but here are the conditions attached. That's the difference and we think that is the right compact for the future.
BYNER: Now one, question and this really is the crux of what we are saying today. Your attitude to those who find comparisons ‘odious' and exams almost unreal. I've had discussions with many educationalists in this state and the idea of more rigorous examination or indeed any kind of benchmark accountability, seems an anathema to them.
PM: Look I think we do our kids a disservice for the future, Leon, if we don't have more and more rigour in the school system, because it is a tough and competitive world out there. The great thing that we have seen with so many of our schools in recent decades is programs designed to deal with the wider social challenges which kids face. And they are real and it's a different society to the one which you and I grew up in, we've got to understand that.
At the same time however, we have got to make sure that kids from whatever side of the railway tracks they come from, wherever they grew up, whether their parents are rich of poor or whatever, have the absolute best start in life possible. And that means that their school educational opportunities should be absolutely first class.
Now that means helping and supporting our best and brightest teachers. Helping and supporting schools attract, and the education systems attract, the best graduates from universities. And at the same time, for schools which are facing real challenges because of the disadvantaged nature of the communities in which they operate, for the Federal Government to say to the states, ‘well look based on the data these schools are finding it really tough here is an additional grant of funds for those schools individually' and Julia's spoken about up to $500,000 for individual schools in those circumstances. But again it won't be a blank cheque, we'll expect performance to improve.
So we got to have a quality education improvement, not just improvement in the quantity of what we invest. We believe that the future lies in doing both those things.
The Liberals would preach about quality but do nothing about the quantity of how much has been put in. We intend to do both.
BYNER: Prime Minister thank you for your time.
PM: Thanks Leon.


Today the Prime Minister and the Minister for Education officially launched National Literacy and Numeracy Week 2008 by announcing a $40 million literacy and numeracy initiative.
The Rudd Government will invest $40.2 million in 29 literacy and numeracy pilot projects in schools across Australia.
These pilots will trial or expand initiatives that exemplify strategies to improve literacy and numeracy outcomes for those students most in need of support, in government and non-government schools.
Pilots were selected because they focus on reforms that will deliver sustained improvements in literacy and numeracy for students, particularly for low SES, Indigenous or disadvantaged students.
Government, Independent and Catholic education authorities were invited to submit proposals for pilot programs by the Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs in June 2008.
This funding is available from 2008 and will support pilots for up to two years and negotiations with successful education authorities will be finalised this month.
Getting the basics right at school is fundamental to helping all Australian students reach their full potential.
These pilot programs will guide literacy and numeracy reform by developing and sharing an evidence-base of what works.
National Literacy and Numeracy Week is an Australian Government initiative that runs from 1-7 September which aims to raise community awareness of the importance of developing effective literacy and numeracy skills for all Australians.
For further information about National Literacy and Numeracy Week activities visit: www.literacyandnumeracy.gov.au  
The full list of National Literacy and Numeracy pilot programs is at: www.deewr.gov.au/literacyandnumeracy


MITCHELL: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Neil.
MITCHELL: Believe it or not we were just talking about the AFL drugs policy which has been released after consultation with your Government. Are you happy with it?
PM: They seem to be doing the right thing. I've only just got a full briefing on it. As I understand it it's based on a principle of three strikes and you're out. And we think that this is a positive advance on where things were before.
MITCHELL: Okay. But how is that an advance? It's always been three strikes and you're out?
PM: Well, the key thing is if you go to the content of it, it also deals with a consistent approach to how long a person can continue to defy drug testing standards  -  that's the first thing. Secondly, there is an equal emphasis on what you do on the part of those players in terms of education, player welfare and rehabilitation.
MITCHELL: You're happy for the names to be kept secret then, until three strikes?
PM: Well, on that part of it I've not seen the detail. So, I'll get my Sports Minister so call in to you.
But we've been, through the Sports Minister, working with the AFL. They're making progress on this. And, we would support them in sending a clear message that drugs in sport are unacceptable.
MITCHELL: Seems like the most dramatic thing here is hair testing out of season. They'll pluck a piece of your hair and see if you've taken drugs?
PM: Good that you've got some hair left to pluck, I suppose.
But, on the draconian nature of it, well, the AFL knows its family, its community, its culture. They can make those judgments in terms of how that's best done. But the key thing is to draw some clear lines in the land about drugs in sport. So I commend the AFL and the progress they've made.
MITCHELL: The problem I've got with the hair testing is that if it's a positive test, they don't do anything about it. They counsel you. They don't take any penalty against you.
PM: Well, that's a level of detail I'm not (inaudible)
MITCHELL: Do you accept that these are the worst economic times in 25 years?
PM: I think it's tough, very tough. I don't have benchmark or a year in mind. But you've got a combination of global and national economic factors at work. And I'd much rather be upfront about that with the Australian people, rather than pretending that it's any different.
MITCHELL: Is this a key problem for your Government?
PM: Oh, it's a big challenge. It's been a big challenge, frankly, since day one.
The sub-prime crisis in the United States started rolling from August last year. As of when we took over at the end of last year, the briefings that we began to get from the Treasury, were concerning. And (inaudible) my discussions with my counterparts in the United States, that challenge has got worse and worse.
Half a trillion dollars with of loans have been written down in the United States and other countries, and that has a wash on effect for everybody.
MITCHELL: Well you've got jobs going now on a regular basis in Australia. How long have we got to cop that for? How long before that turns around?
PM: Well, the Budget forecasts which we put out in May indicated that unemployment would rise to 4.75 per cent. We've been mindful of that, as there would be a slowing in economic growth.
Australia is not immune to what is going on around the world. The key thing is what you're doing about it. And, our plan in response to that is to, first of all, make sure we don't put further upward pressure on inflation and interest rates, that's out $22 billion surplus. Secondly, to make sure we're investing in the country's long term productivity growth, and that's what we're talking about with an education revolution and the investments were making there.
Thirdly, the industrial relations system. It's very important with changes to the industrial relations system that we've got fairness. Under WorkChoices, including the final version of WorkChoices, if you lost your job you also lost your automatic entitlement to redundancy pay.
MITCHELL: What's the short term answer? I mean, is there any short term hope you can offer the people? Businesses are very nervous, jobs are going, interest rates are still hurting - 20 per cent increase in household costs for people in the year that you've been there, 20 per cent up.
PM: Well, it's a really difficult time. I think if you go to the core driver of what's occurred in the economy in the last 12 months, it's come off the back of sustained periods of high interest rates. We have had 12 interest rate rises in a row. Ten prior to us taking office. Two in the last six months. And the effect of that on the cost of mortgages, and the flow through effect in terms of cost of finance for business, has been huge.
We've got to turn that around which is why the cornerstone of what we've been working on these last eight to nine months is to create a Budget position which makes it easier for the Reserve Bank to start putting interest rates down.
MITCHELL: So when do you see some relief for the average person?
PM: Well, starting with the Budget as of 1 July, we delivered $44 billion in tax cuts to low and middle income earners. That has flowed as of 1 July. The second thing is an additional $10 billion in a Family Support Package which contains within it an increase in the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. And for pensioners, $7.5 billion in additional payments starting from 1 July as well.
These are the beginning of our response. But I'm not going to mislead your listeners to say this solves all problems  -  it doesn't.
MITCHELL: So when do you see a turn around in the economy? When do you see things picking up?
PM: Well again if you go to the economic forecast, we believe that into the period of 2009, you'll start to see economic growth picking up. If you go to the forecasts which were released by the Reserve Bank in August, you see growth by the June quarter of 2009 improving to 2.25, and then by the end of next year to 2.5.
I would draw your listeners' attention to the fact that six of the seven major industrial economies around the world at present have generated zero or negative growth in the last one to two quarters. So the global impact of the slow down coming off the back of the US financial crisis has hit hard around the world.
MITCHELL: Do you think the Government is offering leadership on this? I mean, a number of people, including the union movement, have said that we need to really have economic leadership now. We need to have a sense  -  people need to have a sense  -  that not only does the Government understand, but it is leading them somewhere. That it is taking them somewhere. That it's in control of this.
PM: Well firstly, we're in a global economy that's faced facts on this, that's one point that everyone needs to understand.
Secondly within that, three core elements of economic strategy for the period ahead. One is the discipline of responsible economic management with the Budget surplus that I referred to. You need a buffer for the future.
Of course, our Liberal opponents want to white ant that away.
The second element in terms of economic strategy for the future is to build productivity growth. And that comes off the back of what we're doing with the investment in education, skills and training.
And the third is this  -  infrastructure. This is the huge gaping hole that we've inherited from our predecessors. A $20 billion Building Australia Fund to build large scale infrastructure projects necessary to deal with the country's economic future.
That's the third part of our economic strategy for the future but its going to be tough, I don't want to mislead people.
MITCHELL: On health does the buck still stop with you?
PM: Absolutely.
MITCHELL: Are you aware of the heart kids at the Royal Children hospital, are number of them are having their heart surgery delayed 7 and 8 times here in Melbourne?
PM: Yes I have seen those reports and I think they are appalling.
MITCHELL: Do you know why its happening?
PM: I understand the Health Minister has been speaking her Victorian counterpart. What we have done in terms of overall funding to the Victorian system is since the Government came in 8 or 9 months ago, we've made an additional billion dollar payment to the States.
MITCHELL: Well its not working is it?
PM: I am just going through what we have done and then we will go down to the specifics. A billion dollar payment to the States because Mr Howard Government had taken a billion out, that's the first thing.
The second is in terms of elective surgery, what we have done through our $600 million accelerated elective surgery fund is make an allocation of $150 million to the States straight up of which the Victorian allocation was some $34 million and that's designed to purchase an additional 6000 procedures as phase one of the plan.
On the detail concerning these poor kids and their heart operations the individual management of that in the hospitals concerned I am not familiar with that, because these are detailed management questions. But if there is anything further practical we can do by way of funding support then we will do so.
MITCHELL: Ok so the buck stops with you but you don't know why this is happening at the moment?
PM: Well Neil if you were to ask me what's happening in any one of Australia's seven, eight, nine hundred public hospitals across Australia today I couldn't tell you. What I can tell you is what I am doing to respond to a system wide crisis, whereby in part our predecessors pulled money out of the system. What we have tries to do in our first nine months in office is put money back into the system.
MITCHELL: But do you know why it is happening?
PM: Look on the individual details concerning these 400 cases I don't and I fully understand that the circumstances in each operating facility will be different. What I can do is provide the funds that we have, but look we have got to turn around the entire public hospital system in the country.
What I said last year is we need to end the blame game and part of that means someone ultimately accepting responsibility for its proper funding. That's what we are proposing to do.
MITCHELL: Alcopops, if this legislation is frustrated there could be $300 million, will you give it back?
PM: Well as I understand it from the legislation, if the Liberals proceed with blocking this in the Senate which they seem to be doing., the that $300 million then gets anchored into the back pocket of the distillers because thats what happens.
MITCHELL: So it would go back to the distillers?
PM: A question best put to the Liberal party Neil.
MITCHELL: No, no, no we know they are blocking it but is that your understanding of the tax law?
PM: My understanding, I stand to be corrected on this, is that once that occurs then basically the distillers obtain for themselves a windfall. Now I've got to say why do you think the distillery companies have been jumping up and down so much about this.
And if you look at what we could use that money on, that revenue. We have just been talking in dollar terms about the amount of money we are putting out to elective surgery $600 million for this year to assist the States to accelerate the number of cases that they are performing.
This $300 million so far that we've collected by way of additional tax on this category of drinks goes straight back into the hands of distillers rather than going to programs like that.
MITCHELL: So the tax was partly as raised money?
PM: Well all taxes raise money Neil.
MITCHELL: Yeah but you have been putting this as a health initiative?
PM: Yeah but Neil I mean your saying its either or. The truth is we had to act in relation to, well your question before to me fair cop was about the revenue implications of it
MITCHELL: Yeah
PM: Now you are talking about the public policy justification for it, based on the reports from the relevant health authorities across the country and what the police commissioners have been saying around the country.
We had to act to close a tax loophole on a particular category of drinks were you saw this explosion in drinking on the part of teenagers in general and teenage girls in particular.
MICTHELL: Are you getting a bit frustrated by the Senate already?
PM: Oh I'm getting a bit frustrated with the Liberal party in the Senate. I mean we've got a bit economic challenge which is the first part of your discussion with me today. And a big economic challenge lies first and foremost in making sure through a strong Budget surplus you are not putting further upwards pressure on interest rates.
The Libs have committed themselves to a raid on that surplus of six to seven billion dollars, that has one consequence. Less money for the Budget to spend on proper purposes and secondly it has the effect of putting further upward pressure on rates.
I thought everyone in the country wanted downward pressure on interest rates.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, we talk a lot about education this week. What do you think of the situation where you have discovered yesterday where a school nurse provides a 14 year old child with a contraceptive pill without approval or the telling of the parents?
PM: Not knowing the individual details of the case Neil but if what you have described to me is accurate it sounds really off.
MITCHELL: Its a policy, it happens regularly.
PM: Well it just sounds off, but I am just saying I am not familiar with the details of the case.
MITCHELL: Fair enough, Peter Costello why is he an assassin. You have called him an assassin?
PM: I don't know if I used that term. I think I said in Parliament, well Parliament is pretty ferocious encounter as you would have observed from time to time yourself Neil.
MITCHELL: I think he's coming back isn't he?
PM: Well thats a matter for him. Get him on your program and I'm sure he will let you know.
In the case of Mr Costello though he does prefer to be handed things on a platter. One thing about Brendan is he took over the job straight after the election loss although thats a matter for the Liberal party. But what I was talking about the other day was the state of the economy and in particular the fact that when we took over office Mr Costello who was Treasurer for the previous 12 years gave us the biggest inflation in 16 years, 10 interest rate rises in a row and the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time. Do you ever shed a tear?
PM: Yeah a lot.
MITCHELL: Do you really?
PM: Yeah.
MITCHELL: I noticed your wife crying in public this week, which I thought was a lovely human moment. What makes you cry?
PM: I think we all just run into cases of just human tragedy and Therese wasn't planning on the other day. She was reading a poem handed to her by an Aboriginal girl about her mother's death and there you go.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for talking to us.


CARY: Mr Rudd, Good morning.
PM: Good morning Greg.
CARY: A bit to talk about. Maybe just on a couple of those things I was just talking about, Barack Obama today accepts his party's nomination for presidency of the United States. We have come a long way in a short time.
PM: I'll say. I had a conversation with Senator Obama last week and talked in part about where he had come from and where he is headed to. This is an extraordinary achievement for him as an individual, as an American politician. And should he win in the Presidential election, I think Australia will have a very good friend in the White House.
If Senator McCain wins, of course, he knows Australia well as well and we would be well served with that outcome.
CARY: How do you find him on a personal level?
PM: He is a very warm person. I have not, both my conversations with him have been on the phone because when I was in the United States he was elsewhere in the country and of course, last week I was here.
But we have covered topics far and wide. About our common interests here in the Asia Pacific region. Also a lot of conversation about climate change. And one of the encouraging things about American politics is that both Republicans and Democrats are now committed to significant programs of action on climate change nationally. 
That is really important because we are in the midst of quite crucial negotiations with all the other countries of the world to bring about a reduction to greenhouse gas emissions.
CARY: On my earlier comments concerning the 14 year old girl, not obviously something that is your responsibility, but something as a father you will no doubt have a thought about. A 14 year old girl, goes to school, gets a prescription for the pill. How would you feel about that if you were the father.
PM: Well leaving aside how I might feel, the facts of the case I am not fully across. I have heard about them in an earlier interview from a Melbourne radio station this morning. But from the facts of the case at least as presented, to me it strikes me as off that a parent would be excluded from this discussion.
CARY: Is there something that should be done legislatively about that. Obviously the school sees that they have got a responsibility in the area but it is a balance of responsibilities and I would have thought it should come down on the side of the parents.
PM: I think this is where common sense in my judgement should prevail. And that is, on these sensitive matters, to deal with members of your family. The family should be brought into the loop. That, again based on the reporting that I have seen, is at a minimum what should have occurred here.
CARY: Ok, let's talk a bit about common sense and education. We should have talked a lot about this. We will get to the politics and the policies of education in a moment. But we have the situation in the north of our state where the school is actually banned the children from doing cartwheels because they might hurt themselves. Are we becoming a nanny state?
PM: I haven't heard that story Greg. I would have been kicked out of school early on, a) for having attempted cartwheels and b) for having failed most of the time. The cartwheels I tried to perform were pretty awful.
I am not across that. I think the key thing is in our education system, is just to get the balance right between kids ability to be creative, to be expressive, and have a bit of fun, and what I have been talking about this week as well, which is to make sure that the quality of their education outcomes from school, equip them best for life.
And we have got a increasingly competitive world out there with our competitive economies across Asia investing hugely in their education, skills and training systems. My great fear for Australia is being left behind. And that is why the Government is committed to what I have described as an education revolution. With the overarching, the overriding goal of transforming this country into the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world.
CARY: And you are prepared, obviously to get pretty tough about making sure that happens. People have talked about doing the kind of thing that you have talked about this week. What becomes the first step in actually making it happen?
PM: You are right there has been a lot of talk about what we describe as this new chapter of the education revolution which is about quality education. Namely, how do we boost teacher quality, how do we boost the resources going to the most disadvantaged schools. How do we strengthen school leadership and on top of that, how do we strengthen school reporting so that parents and the wider community know how a school is actually performing.
Now, take for example one of those practical elements of this quality education revolution that we are talking about. That is, more resources for disadvantaged schools. Our problem is that there are a whole lot of schools out there which are right up against it in terms of school communities where they have got 20, 30, 40 or 50 different language groups, kids arriving in the schools from refugee communities with no knowledge of English whatsoever.
And it is very, very hard for those schools therefore to you know, perform against, let's call them the most elite schools.
So it follows logically that we need a way of assessing what those individual most challenged or disadvantaged schools need. And we hope to see the first progress and those payments to those schools by the second half of next year.
On the rest of the quality education revolution, again progressively during the course of 2009, but we have got a very tough negotiation coming up first with the State Governments and Territory governments of Australia and we won't conclude that until years' end.
CARY: Why will you get that response from them? Why will the unions fight a lot of what you are taking about? One of their arguments of course is how do you identify an excellent teacher?
PM: Well that is true and they raise some fair questions. But you know, they, therefore where they then go to with that argument is therefore that you shouldn't reward excellence, or more particularly this: that when you have an excellent teacher who gets to the top of their profession, that in order to stay in the field, they have either got to become an education bureaucrat if they are going to be further promoted or leave the system all together if they want to earn more money.
Now we have got to make sure that we have got a system in place that provides financial incentives for those teachers to stay on in the classroom where they perform a fantastic job for the country.
So that is the first one, second one of course, some of the unions object to but not all of them, is proper public reporting by schools about how they are performing. You can't have arbitrary league tables which compare, for example the school that I went to on the sunshine coast, Nambour High school, with Geelong Grammar, which is one of the most elite private schools in the country.
I mean, they are just different schools with different circumstances. What you can do is compare the performance of schools like Nambour with comparable schools in comparable parts of Australia, comparable parts of Queensland, if you have got a standardised way of testing that. And parents I think have a right to know how their school is going when measured against comparable schools.
CARY: I would have thought it is a no brainer, you know, nothing more powerful than an idea whose time has come. All the response we are getting, and I imagine it is the same around the country side, is behind the kind of thing you are talking about. Just on that, how much should a great teacher get?
PM: (inaudible)
CARY: How much money should a very good teacher be paid, an excellent teacher?
PM: Oh, there is a really tough question. What I have been told is that in most states and territories of the country, if you are a classroom teacher, your salary at the most senior levels within a school, doesn't get much beyond about $75,000 a year. Now we think that because this is such a critical profession for the country's future, we have got to set up a better set of incentives for that.
The second thing we would say about quality teaching is this: the other part of the problem we run into is how do we attract the best and brightest university graduates into teaching in the first place.
And what we have done there is studied what has been happening in the United States, the United Kingdom where they have a program called, Teach America and in the case of the UK, Teach First.
What does that mean? It means that the best and brightest university graduates, often in partnership with concerned large corporations wanting to do their bit for the community, will help sponsor one of these graduates with a shortened education degree, or education training, following the first degree that they have studied, whether it is in science, whether it is in maths, whether it is in English, to go into the school system, often for a limited period, three to five years. And then, with a guarantee of being able to pursue a career in the company concerned.
But what happens is that a number of those bright graduates are actually choosing to remain as teachers because they love the profession.
So our practical challenge at the beginning stage of all this is to get the brightest and best graduates back into teaching as well, and we have got to be creative about the way we do that.
CARY: It is one of the most important jobs in our community isn't it? Is there a single teacher who you recall who helped lead you down the road, to the seat you sit in now?
PM: Before I name them, which I won't, because that will offend every other high school teacher I had -
CARY: Not necessarily. I think for all of us there is one of two that stand  - 
PM: Yeah I think that is true. I mean there were I couple of teachers I had at Nambour High School who took a particular interest in me, my performance, how I was going, occasionally gave me an intelligent clip under the ears and said, you know, read this if you think you know everything.
And that was good. I mean people really taking an interest in a young kid's educational development.
What I want is right across Australia, for every school kid to have that experience. Where it is not just one or two teachers but most of their teachers, you know, greatly focussed on those kids educational achievement.
Our teachers now are doing a fantastic job, but we have got to make it easier for them, and we have also got to make it easier for parents to have information about how their kids are going at school through publicly understandable reporting. And how the school as a whole is going against comparable schools in the state, in the region, and certainly across the country.
CARY: Prime Minister, just two final questions, one of health, you would be across the problems we have been having here in Queensland this week, it is something you have addressed at previous conferences with our Premiers. Health Minister Robertson says we are not in crisis. I think most people here at the moment would seem to think that we are, you are obviously keeping an eye on it. Your thoughts?
PM: Well the key thing for the Australian Government to do is to make sure that we are effective long term partners with State Governments like the Queensland State Government in providing the funding necessary for them to do their job.
What is the challenge in Queensland? Rapidly growing population and an ageing population across the country and through innovations in medicine, people are living longer and with more complex diseases to manage.
Now, some of those challenges are really good challenges to have, but they are real which means that governments, state and federal, have to be investing a lot more in health.
The problem with the previous Liberal Government is that despite all those pressures on the public health system of Australia, Mr Howard's Government pulled $1 billion worth of funding out of the public hospital system. In one year, we have committed an additional billion, and on elective surgery waiting lists, provided an additional allocation of $600 million to the states in order to bring forward the number of elective surgery procedures.
But we have got a big negotiation again with the states at the end of this year on the future of the Australian Health Care Agreement and we will be wanting to do a lot more there, including for the first time, a national preventative health strategy. 
Because if we don't act there, that is, preventing people from developing chronic diseases which are avoidable, then in the future we will probably end up spending every taxpayers dollar on health. (Inaudible)
CARY: Yeah I think we are spending about, just about five per cent at the moment, isn't it, on preventative? So you would be looking to up that significantly?
PM: Yeah we have got to make a real dent on this in terms of lifestyle choices because look what is happening with diabetes. I mean, there is a real, real challenge here. And if you look at the cost intensity of treating people once they have diabetes as opposed to the cost challenges of preventable courses of action with certain categories of diabetes, then for me it is a no brainer that we have got to be investing more.
But again, despite 12 years in office, we have had 12 years of neglect on the part of the previous Liberal Government on an effective national preventative health care strategy.
CARY: Okay. I am talking to Francis Collins, Dr Francis Collins in a couple of hours from now. You would be aware of him, he is in an eminent scientist, eminent theologian. And he looks at all the arguments against God and counters them. And it is a very interesting book, philosophical, religious, very interesting book. Can I just ask you, whether you think the single biggest argument in favour of God's existence is?
PM: You really know how to conclude and interview don't you? We started with teen pregnancy, now we are moving on to the existence of God.
CARY: The single biggest reason in your mind? The single biggest argument?
PM: Well as you know, I am a believer, I have never pretended not to be, and I respect those who have no religious belief. It is a free country, freedom to believe, freedom not to believe. For me, it is ultimately the order of the cosmos, or what I would describe as the creation. You can't simply have, this is my own judgement, creation as simply being a random event, because it is so inherently ordered. And the fact that the natural environment has been ordered in a way where it can properly coexist over time.
If you were simply reducing that to mathematical probabilities, you've got to say, it probably wouldn't have happened. So I think there is an intelligent mind at work. And so that is not a unique view in my part, that has been the view of theologians for about 2000 years.
CARY: Okay. I will finish on a lighter note then, I know you have  - 
PM: I have got to say Greg, in every interview that I have had, I have not been asked to prove the existence of God. But you on 4BC have a world first.
CARY: Well I might be the first to ask you this as well. We have been having a competition throughout the year for our listeners to pick the winner of a nominated footy game.
I know you are going to the Bulldogs versus the Broncos and that is going to be our nominated game. So our listeners need to pick the winner and pick the score. Broncos versus Bulldogs, who is going to win and what will be the score.
PM: Oh, the ‘Broncs' to win and, I am too smart to pick the score. See you later.
CARY: Prime Minister, enjoy your day.
PM: See you mate, bye.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I'm delighted to join you for the Australian Industry Group's National Dinner tonight and address you for the first time as Prime Minister of Australia.
I'm especially delighted to join you as you celebrate the ten year anniversary of the formation of the Australian Industry Group, through the merger of the ancient factions of the old Metal Trades Industry Association and the Australian Chamber of Manufactures.
The companies represented by Ai Group are strong contributors to Australian economic growth and employment, and we value your role in building the nation's prosperity.
Like its predecessors, the Ai Group has enjoyed a strong relationship with both sides of politics.
I would particularly like to acknowledge the strong and independent contribution to national policy debate made by Ai Group's CEO, Heather Ridout.
We appreciate Heather's constructive input, in particular through Infrastructure Australia, Skills Australia and our Business Advisory Group on workplace relations.
Sometimes Ai Group agrees with the Government.
Sometimes they disagree.
But consistently, we enjoy a genuine constructive engagement.
Tonight I want to discuss how the Australian Government is responding to the challenging set of global economic conditions that we now confront.
It is now a little over nine months since the Government came to office.
The Government's overall plan is to build a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia, to help working families, pensioners and carers facing financial pressures and to prepare Australia for the new challenges of the 21st century.
In the nine months since taking office, we've brought we've down our first Budget, begun our program of national economic reform, and put forward our framework to act on Australia's long-term challenges  -  including climate change.
The Government has come to office at a time when we are facing some of the most challenging global economic conditions in almost a quarter century.
The global financial turmoil of the past 12 months is leading to a deceleration in growth all across the developed world.
Six of the world's seven largest development economies have recorded zero or negative growth in their most recently-reported quarters (Japan, Germany, the UK, Canada, France and Italy).
At the same time, inflation is rising and the global economy has seen the greatest oil price shock in more than thirty years.
Industrialised economies have seen inflation almost double in the past year, from an average of 2¼ per cent to 4 per cent.
Globally, share markets in developed economies have fallen by an average of around 20 per cent. Our own stock market is also down by around 20 per cent since the beginning of the year. 
Around the world, we are witnessing decade lows in consumer confidence  -  with the lowest confidence levels since the early 1990s in the US and the UK.
The Government moved quickly to respond to the challenges posed by the global credit crisis  -  dealing with the immediate challenges, such as liquidity in our national financial markets through our actions in the public bond market, and through the coordination of global regulatory responses to the crisis through the International Monetary Fund, the Financial Stability Forum and the G20.
The uncertain global environment has created tough conditions for many Australian businesses, as the latest Performance Indices from the AiGroup for manufacturing, construction and services have shown.
The high value of the Australian dollar has also put great pressure on many exporters  -  at a time when competition from nations like China and India is increasingly fierce.
Despite all of these economic challenges and the requirement on us all to face up to them, we should never lose sight of the great strengths of the Australian economy.
Australia is better placed than most countries to negotiate the impact of the global economic downturn  -  although let us be realistic, there will be a number of significant bumps along the road.
Last week we learned that Australian businesses are planning to lift capital expenditure to a record $100 billion in 2008-09, with a 5.7 per cent increase recorded in the June quarter.
Here in our own region, developing economies continue to grow, demand for our commodities is strong, and prices for our commodities are at generational highs.
The 50-year highs in the terms of trade are resulting in extra income flowing into the economy and fuelling strong investment.
Indeed, the June quarter balance of payments today recorded the greatest quarterly improvement in the current account deficit since records began in 1959.
Despite difficult global conditions, many Australian businesses are still thriving, and for many their greatest challenge is still to manage growth successfully. 
As we look ahead to 2020 and beyond, there are strong grounds for optimism and confidence in our future.
The Australian Government is committed to steering Australia through tough global economic times to ensure our economy emerges in strong shape.
We have delivered responsible economic management, with a conservative Budget grounded in a $22 billion surplus.
The surplus was designed to put maximum downward pressure on inflation and interest rates.
The Government has also begun to embark upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has seen since the early 1990s.
In recent years productivity growth has declined sharply  -  from average annual growth of 3.3 per cent during the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, to just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
That productivity slowdown reflects the long-term neglect of investing in the drivers of productivity  -  our workforce and our infrastructure.
We must turn that around  -  because in the long term it is productivity growth that will build our future living standards.
Over the last 40 years, productivity growth has accounted for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in Australia's living standards. 
The Government is committed to building our long-term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for future productivity growth  -  education, infrastructure, innovation, business deregulation and taxation reform.
We have laid out an education revolution for Australia's future  -  ranging through early childhood education, school, vocational education, universities and research.
In our first Budget we allocated $19.3 billion to the Education Revolution over the next four years to help deliver:
     * a national curriculum for all students in English, maths, the sciences and history;
     * guaranteed funding to both Government and non-Government schools alike;
     * a $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution that over time will provide access to a computer for every student in years 9 -12;
     * a $2.5 billion Trade Training Centre program across Australia to help provide robust trade skills for students and keep them engaged in schooling, and
     * 630,000 training places over five years through our Productivity Places Program.
On infrastructure, we have begun our reform program by establishing a Infrastructure Australia to help drive investment in critical national infrastructure such as road, rail, ports and high speed broadband.
On innovation, the Government is already rolling out the Enterprise Connect network I first announced at the Ai Group national forum last year  -  a network that links small and medium-sized businesses to ideas, technologies and infrastructure.
Up to the middle of last month, more than 900 firms had received or applied for Enterprise Connect services.
The Government is building a 21st century innovation-driven industry policy - not the old industry policy based on protection and resisting change, but the 21st century innovation policy that embraces change, productivity and global markets.
On deregulation, we have made significant progress in reinvigorating the Council of Australian Governments with a major reform agenda, including a list of 27 areas of regulatory reform for building a seamless national economy.
We have established the Henry Commission as the starting point for long-term reform of tax, welfare and retirement incomes.
We are working to expand access to overseas markets for Australian businesses  -  as a strong supporter of the Doha Round at the WTO, as well as making progress on free trade agreements in our region.
The Trade Minister, Simon Crean, has also concluded negotiations for the region-wide ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
This is the largest FTA that we have ever negotiated  -  covering 16 per cent of our trade in goods and services, worth $71 billion.
ASEAN is an enormous market of 570 million people with a combined GDP of more than 1 trillion US dollars.
The ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand market will have a combined GDP of 2.3 trillion US dollars, which is more than twice as large as India - at 1.1 trillion US dollars - and nearly three-quarters the size of China's 3.3 trillion dollar economy. 
We will also support our exporters.
Tomorrow, Trade Minister Simon Crean will receive a high-level review into Australia's Export Policies and Programs and we look forward to examining its recommendations.
We're also consulting widely on the design of our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, that will help drive our long-term transformation to a low carbon economy.
However tonight, I would like to focus on the role of nation-building infrastructure in building a stronger Australian economy.
This Government is committed to implementing the single largest infrastructure program in the history of the Commonwealth.
This Government believes in nation building.
That's why the Government is investing in a nation building plan of some $76 billion.
We stand in the great tradition of nation-building Labor Governments that laid the foundations for the prosperity enjoyed by successive generations of Australians:
     * The Labor Governments that built post-war infrastructure, training and housing programs for the returning service men and women  -  as well as the massive Snowy Mountains Hydroelectric Scheme. 
     * The Labor Government that help build the urban infrastructure needed for the sprawling suburbs that grew up on the outskirts of our cities in the 1970s.
     * The Labor Government that began a national investment in our railway infrastructure in the 1990s.
Now, as a new century stretches before us, we must build the infrastructure for a new century and the needs of a rapidly changing world.
Our job isn't just to maintain what was built in the past.
We must build new infrastructure for the 21st century:
     * 21st century highways, to help get working parents out of traffic jams and home to their families more quickly.
     * 21st century ports, to get our exports to their markets without delay.
     * 21st century broadband, to drive a digital revolution for our schools, hospitals, small businesses and regional communities.
     * 21st century public transport, giving Australian families more transport options than relying on the car.
     * 21st century power stations, as we transition to a low carbon economy.
     * 21st century water infrastructure, so we no longer waste this precious national asset.
     * 21st century schools, to give kids the world class education for the jobs of the future.
     * 21st century hospitals, to give families the quality health care they deserve.
This is a vision that takes us beyond the necessary arithmetic of the Budget.
Beyond necessary tax reform.
Beyond the necessary regulatory reform to create a seamless national economy.
Beyond the predictable economic terrain.
Beyond all of that, to a new program of nation-building  -  but this time in partnership with the private sector.
We need as a nation to have about us the national imagination to look beyond the horizon.
Not just to hope that infrastructure might materialise.
But to plan for it.
If we look at many of our major cities, they cry out for better long-term infrastructure planning.
Not just for greater convenience.
Not just for greater amenity.
But critically as new generators of 21st century economic activity, where functioning cities are essential to our economic future.
Beyond the cities, our wider national economic infrastructure must function properly as well.
In the long-term, this will underpin productivity, competitiveness, exports and prosperity.
And it will help drive economic growth in times of global uncertainty.
In just nine months of Government, we have committed to a $76 billion infrastructure investment program, allocating funds for transport, utilities, communications, and social infrastructure.
We'll invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
We'll invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport, energy and water priorities.
And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
We have yet to imagine properly the full transformational economic potential of a 21st century cutting edge high speed broadband network  -  the ultimate technological capacity to bring markets closer and to finally overcome the tyranny of distance that has been Australia's lot since the earliest days of European settlement.
We'll also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, trade training centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
We'll invest $11 billion health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we are building the foundations of the nation's future prosperity.
We're already rolling up our sleeves and starting on projects right now:
     * We are turning soil, mixing concrete and upgrading the Ipswich Motorway in Brisbane.
     * We have funded 896 schools to plug in 116,000 computers and get students connected.
     * We have funded 100 schools to start planning and building their new Trades Training Centres.
We've already established Infrastructure Australia to audit the nation's infrastructure needs and development a national priority list.
And we've already begun work to reform infrastructure sectors, through national heavy vehicle regulations, better rail safety laws, and developing national guidelines for public private partnerships.
Infrastructure policy is a national priority for this Government because infrastructure constraints have been holding back our economy for too long.
Infrastructure constraints are a drag on economic growth, they hold back productivity, they add to inflationary pressures, and they part of the reason we saw ten consecutive interest rate rises under the previous Government.
The cost to the economy of inadequate infrastructure will rise if we do not act now.
According to CEDA, if we can remove infrastructure bottlenecks we can lift our economic performance.
We could potentially raise Australia's GDP by 0.8 percent per year.
We could increase exports by 1.8 per cent, increase business investment by 1.2 per cent, and lower the consumer price index by 3.2 per cent.
But achieving those long term dividends will require investment now  -  and not just from the Commonwealth.
State governments, their corporations, and the private sector also have critical roles to play.
State Governments now have serious, long term capital works programs.
In 2008-09 alone, the Queensland will spend $17 billion; NSW Government will spend $14 billion; Western Australia $8 billion and Victoria $4 billion.
According to ABN Amro, investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be $380 billion  -  including $255 on economic infrastructure and $125 billion on social infrastructure.
ABN Amro forecasts that some $80 billion of investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be undertaken through public private partnerships.
This makes the development of national PPP guidelines and rigorous assessment of project contracts absolutely critical.
The National Broadband Network, for which we are currently in a competitive assessment process, could be one of the world's largest ever deals involving the public and private sectors.
Putting Commonwealth, State and private infrastructure activity together, we are looking at a real driver of long term economic growth for Australia.
It is a core part of our vision of Australia's economic future  -  nation-builders, together building a nation.
We do not accept the dogma of the previous Liberal Government that this is not the proper province of the national government.
The Government believes that the tens of billions of dollars of revenue from the mining boom should have been invested in Australia's long-term productivity capacity.
And while those revenues continue to flow, that is what we intend to do.
According the Ai Group's own Construction Outlook, infrastructure and mining-related activity is fuelling engineering and commercial construction work.
Consider that in 2009, private sector construction work is forecast to hit $92 billion  -  double what it was just 5 years ago.
There is big growth in road and rail projects, sewerage and water supply projects, electricity generation projects and mining construction work.
Activity levels are their highest in 16 years.
According to the latest Access Economics Investment Monitor, all up there are currently more than $600 billion worth of projects underway or in planning in Australia.
This is 21st century nation building  -  and a core part of the Government's plan to see Australia through the economic challenges that lie ahead.
The road will not be smooth.
But the road can be navigated by a clear cut plan that sees us to our destination  -  a stronger economy with world class skills and world class infrastructure for the future. 
Building Australia's future prosperity requires strong leadership, responsible economic management and a plan that tackles the nation's long term challenges.
As we move forward, the Government especially values our policy partnership with the AiGroup as a leading voice for Australian business.
Business is a crucial partner if we are to achieve the economic reform that's needed for the nation's future prosperity.
This is a Government that has already demonstrated that it will listen to the business community.
We took on board Ai Group's priorities in framing this year's Budget.
You called for raising investment in education and training  -  and we delivered with our investments in Trades Training Centres and the 630,000 new Productivity Places.
You called for us to deliver on infrastructure  -  and we delivered, with $41 billion allocated to new nation-building investment fund: the new Building Australia Fund, Education Investment Fund and Health and Hospitals Fund.
You called for the implementation of the promised personal income tax cuts  -  and we delivered.
You called for a boost to innovation and export facilitation programs  -  and we've begun that task with the Enterprise Connect network, and we'll be considering further measures following the reviews of the National Innovation System and our Export Policies and Programs.
We have, as one of your own publications noted recently, begun to “join the productivity dots for the Australian economy”.
Many of these challenges have been neglected for a long time by successive governments.
Tackling them successfully will take time.
But one thing is critical  -  that short-term politics doesn't block that long-term plan for the nation.
As a nation we need to look to the long term with ambition, confidence and with determination.
I know that is how the Australian Industry Group approaches the great policy challenges of the future, and I look forward to partnering with you as we carve out a strong economic future for Australia.


Today we gather to commemorate the Battle for Australia.
But before I begin I want to acknowledge our Australian Defence Force personnel who are currently serving in theatres abroad.
We have had news this morning that Australian forces serving in Afghanistan have been engaged again in heavy fighting against the Taliban.
This fighting has seen nine Australian troops injured, some seriously.
Our thoughts and our prayers are with our troops, with their families and their loved ones.
Today as we remember those who gave their all for this nation in the past, let us also remember those who continue to give their all for the nation today.
On this day, the 3rd of September, in 1939, Prime Minister Robert Menzies declared war on behalf of Australia on Germany.
On this day, the 3rd of September, in 1942, with John Curtin as Prime Minister, Australian and American forces were heavily engaged in the Battle of Milne Bay  -  a Battle that was soon to become the first defeat of Japanese forces on land and a turning point in the war in the Pacific.
The third of September therefore has particular significance in our nation's story.
For nearly a century now we have commemorated ANZAC Day as the great commemorative event to honour those who gave their all in war.
For nearly a century we have also celebrated Remembrance Day as the end of that bloodiest of wars.
But in the more than half a century since the end of the war that came to our own shores, we have yet to determine a day to commemorate those who came to the defence of Australia itself.
And today as a nation we settle that question.
For today, as a nation, for the first time we officially commemorate the first Wednesday in September as the day to remember the Battle for Australia following the official proclamation of this day by His Excellency the Governor-General in June this year.
The day when we together with our American ally began to turn the tide of the war in the Pacific.
The day when we honour specially those who gave their all in the defence of Australia itself.
We commemorate a time when our nation itself was under attack.
We commemorate a time when a young nation found its very survival at risk.
We commemorate a time when the Australian mainland and Australian cities were themselves under attack.
When one million Australians served in uniform to protect their country.
When a further six million Australians were mobilised.
When thousands, tens of thousands lost their lives in neighbouring nations, on the seas, in the air, and on Australian soil. 
The bombing of Darwin.
The attack on Broome.
The Battle of the Coral Sea.
On the Kokoda Trail.
At the Battle of Milne Bay.
The Battle of Guadalcanal.
The Battle of the Bismarck Sea.
The Battle of the Beachheads  -  at Buna, and Gona and Sanananda.
The death march at Sandakan.
And this bloody list goes on.
We know that some question whether there was indeed a Battle for Australia.
And yes, there's fertile ground for historical debate on the views of Curtin and Churchill, the plans of the Japanese Imperial Army and the Imperial Navy, and what might have happened had the Japanese advance not been stopped at Milne Bay and Imita Ridge.
But on this there can be no doubt:
Never in our history was our nation so threatened.
Never in our history was our future less certain.
Never in our history was our determination to defend ourselves so fully tested.
From the factories to the Volunteer Defence Corps, the air raid shelters and the barbed wire across the beaches.
We'll never know what success by the enemy might have meant for Australia  -  invasion, occupation or isolation.
But we know that Australian soldiers at Milne Bay brought those forces their first defeat on land in the entire Pacific war.
And we know it was from then that the course of the war began to change.
We struggle today to understand just how serious Australia's situation was in 1942.
The impregnable fortress of Singapore had fallen.
Over 15,000 Australians had become prisoners of war.
Prime Minister Curtin understood the threat.
On the day that Singapore fell, he warned:
 “The fall of Singapore can only be described as Australia's Dunkirk ... [The] fall of Dunkirk initiated the battle for Britain. The fall of Singapore opens the Battle for Australia.”
So said Curtin. And Curtin added:
“What the battle for Britain required, so the battle for Australia requires.  That meant service and struggle and complete devotion for Britons in the defence of Britain.  It means the same thing for Australians for the defence of Australia.” 
This was a battle that would involve all Australians.
A fight for survival itself.
The imminent threat was brought home just days later when Darwin was bombed.
Curtin described it as the first “physical contact of war within Australia”.
He called on Australians to:
“vow that this blow at Darwin and the loss it has involved and the suffering it has occasioned shall gird our loins and nerve our steel”.
But the Japanese imperialist forces kept advancing.
Islands continued to fall.
The Americans withdrew from the Philippines.
The advance reached Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Timor.
As the southward march continued, the myth of the invincibility of the Japanese Imperial Forces grew.
In May 1942 at the Battle of the Coral Sea, American and Australian ships and our air forces fought side-by-side against a Japanese flotilla that was part of the strategy to take Port Moresby and isolate Australia from our allies.
There were losses on both sides, but Port Moresby never fell.
It was a sign of things to come.
When speaking in Parliament of the Battle of the Coral Sea, Prime Minister Curtin called on all Australians to join in the war effort. He said:
 “Men are fighting for Australia today; those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.”
This was for Australia, total war.
As Curtin had said to the Americans in March:
“out of every ten men in Australia, four are wholly engaged in war as members of the fighting forces or making the munition and equipment to fight with... The proportion is now growing every day.”
As our men fought along the Kokoda Track, the men and women at home were hard at work in support.
As our airmen fought in the skies of the Pacific the population at home was devoted to production and the civil defence effort.
As our sailors sought to claw back control of the oceans the population at home continued to sign up for the war.
And then there came a day when the news from the frontline changed.
When the myth of the invincibility was stripped away from the advancing enemy forces  -  at the Battle of Milne Bay.
Both sides in the Pacific War recognised the importance of Milne Bay.
It offered a sheltered harbour on the south-eastern tip of Papua New Guinea.
Whoever controlled Milne Bay would have a strong position to defend Port Moresby and the waters around.
From 1942, the Allies developed airfields there.
But the advancing Japanese forces set their sights on Milne Bay too, as a crucial stepping stone to Port Moresby.
In August of 1942, they attacked at Milne Bay.
Their initial progress was rapid.
But when they reached the edge of the airfield, they were stopped.
Then they were then pushed back, pursued - and eventually they fled.
At Milne Bay, Australian and American soldiers  -  working side by side  -  proved they could stop the Japanese imperial forces.
The impact on morale was enormous.
After seeing Malaya, then Singapore and then a string of islands fall, the Allies had now seen their troops turn back the advancing army on land.
It was in every respect, a turning point.
And that is why we mark Battle for Australia Day on the first Wednesday of September, commemorating this great victory at Milne Bay.
There are many stories of bravery that can be told about Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen during the Battle for Australia.
I want to mention just one today.
In commemorating the Battle for Australia in the years ahead, the nation will have the chance to hear many, many more stories, and so they should.
The Royal Australian Air Force played a critical role in supporting the troops at Milne Bay.
At Milne Bay the RAAF's 76 Squadron was led by Keith ‘Bluey' Truscott.
Truscott was one of Australia's best-known flying aces during the Second World War.
Before the war he had been a well known Aussie Rules player.
He had played in Melbourne's 1939 Premiership team. We all make mistakes.
In fact he was nominated as one of the best on the ground and finished the match with two goals.
But like so many young Australians, then and since, he answered the call to arms.
He enlisted in the RAAF in 1940 and, after training, he joined the war in Britain.
In 1941 and 1942 he flew and fought over the skies of Europe.
And, by the time he returned to Australia in early 1942, he was a decorated hero who had destroyed at least 11 German aircraft over Europe.
Truscott deployed to Milne Bay with Number 76 Squadron in August 1942  -  just before the Japanese landing.
And the Squadron flew out of Milne Bay throughout the conflict.
In terrible weather, on metal landing strips that were slippery and dangerous, the aircrews of 75 and 76 Squadrons flew “beyond the point of exhaustion” in support of the ground forces.
They flew so much and fired so many rounds in support of the ground forces that the barrels of the guns on their aircraft were worn smooth from the number of rounds that were fired.
The aircraft would land, refuel, re-arm and immediately take to the skies again  -  day after day after day.
Bluey Truscott, the other pilots and the ground crews showed the sort of dedication that was required to turn the tide in this great Battle for Australia.
Their commitment to the task was the equal of any unit throughout the war.
And to people like them and thousands more, we as a nation, owe a profound debt of gratitude.
There are many such heroes in the Battle for Australia.
Heroes of battle.
And heroes on the home front as well.
One of those was John Curtin.
Like Churchill and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, he was an outstanding leader of a democracy who rose to the occasion when he needed to serve the nation.
He poured himself out in the defence of our nation.
He drove himself to exhaustion and ultimately, of course, to an early death, just months before the war ended. 
General Douglas Macarthur gave Curtin this remarkable tribute in 1945:
 “He (Curtin) was one of the greatest wartime statesmen, and the preservation of Australia from invasion will be his immemorial monument.”
Today, we commemorate the spirit of Curtin and all of those who served in this nation's defence in the Pacific during our nation's darkest time.
Today, we carve a date in the nation's calendar  -  the first Wednesday of every September  -  to remember this Battle for Australia.
To remember a time when our nation was in peril.
And to remember those who answered the call of their nation and risked their lives to defend the nation.
British children learn their nation's finest hour was when their troops stood alone against Hitler in 1940.
And Americans learn that their Greatest Generation was the men who took Normandy in 1944 and Iwo Jima in 1945.
It's time all Australians knew more about 1942.
Every year we remember the events at Anzac Cove that are etched so deep in our national memory.
It's often said, at Gallipoli our nation was born.
But at the Battle for Australia, our nation stood up and confirmed that we as a nation, would endure.
And that's why we have come here today to remember Battle for Australia Day.
We remember that freedom is always purchased by sacrifice.
And that liberty can only be guaranteed by courage.
On Bluey Truscott's grave in the Perth War Cemetery are the following words:
“In loving memory of our darling Keith, his duty nobly done.”
Today we honour all those who served and sacrificed their lives in the Battle for Australia, their duty was nobly done.


We are here today to bring together two important strands of Australian history  -  the place of Gallipoli in our history and the original vision for our Bush Capital.
The Battle of Lone Pine, like the story of Simpson and his donkey, is a part of our national history.
And the story of how the Lone Pine came to Australia, too, is worth mentioning.
93 years ago the Battle of Lone Pine left around 9,000 soldiers lying dead.
The ridge on which this battle took place had had every tree cut down to cover trenches.
Every tree except one  -  the Lone Pine.
The vision of a lonely tree, silhouetted against the sky as the Australian troops looked up at their objective, evokes much of the hardship of the Gallipoli campaign.
After the battle, at least a couple of Australian soldiers souvenired pine cones as mementoes from the battleground.
And a seed from one of these  -  the one that Lance Corporal Benjamin Smith of the 3rd Battalion whose brother had died in the battle  -  finally made it to the grounds of the War Memorial in 1934.
1934 was a year of great events to commemorate Gallipoli.
It was also the year that Turkey's leader, Kemal Ataturk, offered solace to the parents of those young Australians who lost their lives at Gallipoli saying, “After having lost their lives on this land they have become our sons as well.”
The memory of Gallipoli  -  symbolised for us in the Lone Pine and the many trees that have grown from it  -  is important to all of us; the people from Australia, from New Zealand and from Turkey alike.
While battles raged on the Gallipoli Peninsula, so too they raged in Canberra.
But the battles in Canberra were, of course, of a very different nature.
They were the battles between architects, designers, officials and politicians about the face and soul of our national capital.
These too were hard fought battles.
Walter Burley Griffin was committed to bringing about his vision for Canberra.
A vision that he saw as embodying the spirit of the new nation of Australia and the “bold and radical steps in politics and economics” that the young nation had dared to take.
Part of his original vision was for an International Arboretum at West Lake.
An arboretum that would represent the continents of the earth through its trees.
Today  -  nearly 100 years later  -  we are seeing that vision realised.
It is a vision that has had many setbacks along the way  -  including the terrible fires of 2003.
But today we can celebrate the bringing together of two great stories in our history.
One, the story of sacrifice on the Gallipoli Peninsula and the birth of a nation under the fire of shot and shell.
The other, the birth of the nation's capital and the vision of its designer.
It is a great pleasure to be here today to help plant Lone Pine saplings in the new Canberra International Arboretum and Gardens.
And it is a particularly great pleasure to be able to do so alongside the representatives of New Zealand and Turkey.
Thank you.


Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. On this historic day, I acknowledge the first Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We are here today to celebrate two great continuities.
A continuity that is embodied in the ancient culture of Aboriginal Australia and the continuity that exists also in our modern constitutional arrangements.
Thank you very much for that welcome to country. This is the first time we have had a welcome to country on behalf of the Ngunnawal people as part of the official swearing in ceremonies associated with the installation of a new Governor-General. And this is a good thing.
Of course there is one other historic thing about today's proceedings, the first time in the 107-year history of our Federation we are also swearing in a truly wonderful woman as Australia's Governor-General. It took us 107 years but we got there in the end.
There could be no person more qualified to assume that honour than Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce. Her Excellency is Australia's 25th Governor-General.
She will bring a very special touch to the office of Governor-General just as she has to the office of the Governor of Queensland.
Her Excellency was appointed in July 2003 as the 24th Governor of Queensland. She has been an inspiring Governor and has served the people of Queensland with great distinction.
But of course her service to the community goes back long before her appointment to the office of Governor.
She has an outstanding record of service to the entire Australian community. Ms Bryce has enjoyed a rich and dynamic career as a lawyer, as an academic, as a senior public office holder.
Her roles in the past have included Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner, inaugural Director of the Queensland Women's information service and founding Chair and Chief Executive Officer of the National Child Care Accreditation Council.
Your Excellency, your service in your new role will take you to all corners of our great nation.
From our largest cities to our very smallest towns.
From the coast to the deep red centre of this great and ancient continent.
To meet all the people, all the people that make up this great continent and country of ours Australia.
Your Excellency you will share moments of great triumph with the people of Australia and you will be there also in our most difficult times, as assuredly they will also come. In those tough times, the community will call on you for support and for understanding.
It is not always an easy role but it is one of the greatest honours that the nation can bestow on any one of its citizens.
The Office of Governor-General plays an important role in our system of Government.
Both through the formal Constitutional role and through the highly valued role that the Governor-General plays in providing leadership, support and inspiration to our community, our community organisations, our great army of volunteers for the betterment of our nation.
Today we have witnessed the swearing in of a new Governor-General who I am sure will fill both of these roles with dignity, distinction and commitment and with a distinctive Queensland touch.
Your Excellency, you are a truly distinguished Australian.
You will now occupy the most distinguished office in our Australian Constitutional arrangements and we wish you the very best in the new role of leadership you have in this our great land, Australia. 


Morris Iemma has made a substantial contribution to public life in NSW over two decades.
Morris achieved much for NSW, both as a Senior Minister and Premier of Australia's largest state.
Morris put mental health on the national agenda, brought James Hardie to account and made tough decisions for NSW's future in the areas of desalination and energy reform.
Morris also recently oversaw a highly successful World Youth Day festival.
Morris' ability, work ethic and leadership skills were acknowledged in his elevation to Premier in 2005.
Two years later he delivered Labor a record fourth consecutive four-year term in NSW.
I wish Morris, Santina and their family all the best for the future.


DOYLE: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning on this bright and sunny Canberra morning.
DOYLE: It's a remarkable refreshing start to the day, isn't it, standing here lakeside.
PM: It focuses the mind, Mel.
DOYLE: It certainly does, and gee, we're focussed.  What an historic day, too. I mean, our first female Governor-General. Is she excited?
PM: I spoke to her the other night in my office in Parliament House, Canberra. Yes, she is excited, and she should be. I mean, she's a person who has achieved so much in her life as a lawyer, as an academic, as Sex Discrimination Commissioner. I mean, Quentin Bryce has been out there working hard throughout her career.
And I think she's going to bring great experience, and also great dignity, to the office.
DOYLE: Because you don't want her gender to overshadow what she's accomplished and what she brings to the role as a person. But let's focus on the fact that she is our first woman, for a moment. I mean, that is a pretty historic step isn't it?
PM: I think, as she said on the day of her announcement, she said, I think something like this  -  if a little girl from a country town in Queensland with a couple of hundred kids can become Governor-General of Australia, then girls can do anything.
And I think that's great. I mean, she's going to be terrific when it comes to her passion for girls and the challenges that they face growing up in Australia. But she's also got a passion for littlies. I mean, she had an earlier job in charge of the accreditation agency for childcare, so the rights of children, boys and girls.
She's also got a great passion for the bush. She comes from a little town called Ilfracombe, of a couple of hundred people, and she'll be, as she said to me, travelling widely in rural Australia, and that will be good. And Indigenous Australia, she has a deep passion as well. So I think she'll bring great passions to the job.
DOYLE: And can you tell me a little more her as a person? Do you think she'll bring, I don't know, something a little bit different to the role than we've seen in the past? She's a mum of five, she's a grandmother of five?
PM: Well, my experience of Quentin, as of today I'll call ‘Her Excellency', is that she is a phenomenally warm person and that what you see is what you get. I mean, she just engages with kids and with anybody, including Aboriginal elders, bushies from the deep bush, everyone is the same, and they are just greeted with the same engaging personal warmth. And I think that's a terrific human quality.
Her predecessor, Major-General Michael Jeffery, it's been a great performance in the role by him. But each Governor-General I think brings something different to the job and we're looking forward to this big day for Quentin Bryce.
DOYLE: Now you mentioned your predecessor. I've got to ask you, comments this morning in one of our papers saying that we're paying around $2 billion a year, $2.5 billion, to look after our former Governors  - 
PM: Million.
DOYLE: Oh, million, (inaudible) I don't need to ask you about it. Sorry. Millions. That's much better. Former Governors-General  - 
PM: You had me worried there  - 
DOYLE: Haven't you got that late bill?
PM: That's about 10 per cent of the defence budget.
DOYLE: Is it, I guess, a storm in a tea cup or is that just the way it is? I mean, obviously first class travel, office in the CBD, but is that what the role brings even when they're no longer  - 
PM: It's entirely right that the media subject to scrutiny the payments to office holders and former office holders  -  I have no problem with that at all.
We are a constitutional monarchy. That's how we are at the moment. And we have a Governor-General. And, many of these Governors-General, once they leave office, retain continuing association with all these organisations which they've been formally patron.
Like the departing Governor-General, Major General Michael Jeffery, is patron of 200 organisations in Australia. And a lot of those he would develop a strong personal connection with, so that continues for quite some time and I don't intend to disrupt what's been a by partisan consensus in this country going back a long, long time and that will apply to the future as well, so long as we are a Constitutional Monarchy.
DOYLE: Anything you'd like to tell me this morning.
PM: So long as we are a Constitutional Monarchy
DOYLE: Because that's a lot of talk isn't it that Quentin Bryce may well be our last Governor General.
PM: Well you know what the policy position of the Australian Labor Party is that at an appropriate time we would consult the Australian people, but we have got some other priorities to deal with first for Australia.
DOYLE: Will you give us a heads up though when that may be that we can start pondering it
PM: You mean exclusive on Sunrise
DOYLE: Yeah
PM: Next question
DOYLE: I knew you would, (inaudible) all right I was talking billions before,  $6 billion though am I right is the figure now with the Senate overriding your Luxury car tax so that's a big whopping hole in the Budget?
PM: Well I would say this about the Liberals, this is a real challenge, its a real problem. We've got difficult challenging global economic times coming of the global financial crisis. You've got economies around the world now generating negative economic growth.
Here in Australia, when the Government took over we had inflation running at a 16 year high, we had the second highest interest rates in the world having gone up 10 times in a row. That's what we have inherited.
The challenge for us is what you do about it. The cornerstone of responsible economic management is to have a strong Budget surplus and we brought one down in the Budget -$22 billion-  because we need that as a buffer for the future. But now the Liberals are conducting a $6 billion raid on it and that's a real problem.
The problem is if they get away with this, what it does is it puts upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates. And having just got the first interest rate cut in 7 years this week I think that's just exactly the wrong way for the Liberals to go.
DOYLE: Well after you spent the morning with Her Excellency maybe go and have lunch with Stephen Fielding, have a chat with him and get him on side.
PM: Yeah you could give us some tips on that
DOYLE: Thank you very much for joining us this morning and it is a pretty special day so all the best and give her our best as well.
PM: I'll do that, we'll have a great ceremony in Parliament House later today and the day may warm up, maybe.
DOYLE: I have got my fingers crossed, thanks so much Prime Minister for your time.


SPEERS: Prime Minister good morning, you suffered your first big defeat in the Senate yesterday when the Coalition and Family First's Steve Fielding voted against your increase in the luxury car tax. Their concern is that this tax hike will also affect farmers and tourism operators who need four wheel drives. So will you make any changes to this bill before you put it back to the Senate in a couple of weeks?
PM: We don't plan to and let's go to the core of their opposition to this about four wheel drives. Of the five top selling makes of four wheel drive in the country 80% of the models would not be subject to this luxury car tax.
This is just an argument plucked out of space by the Liberals because at the end of the day they are serving the interests of people other than working families. Remember this is a half billion dollar tax break to people who buy Porsches and the like as opposed to a half billion dollars going into public transport projects across Australia.
SPEERS: Even if there is only say 20% of those Land Cruisers that are affected, is there room for compromise with Steve Fielding on this or are you going to put the bill up as it is?
PM: Our intention is to proceed with our legislation as it is and I think if people now focus on what is lost by way of investment elsewhere in the country on infrastructure in general and on public transport infrastructure in particular, I think there will be some pressure brought to bear on our good friends in the Liberal party.
Cause you put this together with the other measures they are blocking, some $6 billion plus. What's it cost to do a major revamp to urban rail in a city like Adelaide? $2-3 billion? What's it take to engineer some major public transport improvements in inner Brisbane? A couple of billion dollars? I mean these are the alternatives. So you can either take the side of those who are producing and selling luxury cars or take the side of those who are on the side of the private health insurance funds or the big oil companies or the big supermarket chains, or you can use that money for investment for working families, pensioners and carers and public transport's a big area of need.
SPEERS: Are any of these measures you mention there that do as you say add up to $6 billion worth going to a double dissolution election over?
PM: We intend to apply the blow torch to the Liberal Party in the Senate; they have got to answer to the Australian people...
SPEERS: What does that mean, what's the end point, is it a double dissolution?
PM: The end point is this, if the Liberal Party want to stand up and say to the Australian people that they think providing a tax break to Porsche buyers is more important than investing in the needs of urban rail across Australia, I would suggest that in time some pressure may be brought to bear on them.
It's the Liberal Party who have made this happen in the Senate.
SPEERS: But pressure how?
PM: Well of course there's the means of public political pressure. You know, these are choices which the community will become very familiar with. Either you sit in traffic jams and resolve that Government should do something about it by for example investing in urban rail.
What's the Liberals' approach as they sit in the traffic jam? Look next door and see how much the Porsche is going to cost with or without a luxury car tax.
SPEERS: You don't rule out going to an early election, double dissolution election over these measures?
PM: Nice try at verballing David, it's good on your part. We intend to prosecute our agenda in the Senate and if necessary in the Senate again because we believe we have a right strategy here - to invest in the nation's long term infrastructure including its public transport infrastructure. To do that we need money and to do that we need to be able to deploy the $6 billion which they want to give back to people who buy luxury cars, people who in the big distillers don't want to see this tax change when it comes to ready to mix drinks and others.
SPEERS: Moving on, your handpicked advisor Professor Ross Garnaut today hands down an important report. It will tell us the sort of targets short term that he thinks Australia should adopt to tackle climate change.
In Bali last year - this was your first trip as Prime Minister - you agreed that developed countries including Australia should adopt a goal of cutting emissions by between 25-40% by 2020.
What will it say about your credibility, Australia's credibility in negotiating a new global agreement if you don't stick to that sort of goal by 2020?
PM: Well first thing David the premise of your question isn't right. In Bali last year both Penny Wong the Minister and myself came under enormous pressure for not committing at that stage to interim targets and we had lots of screaming and shouting from our friends in the European Union because we weren't prepared to do that.
Now the reason we said that we weren't prepared to do that at that stage is that we want to see our own economic modelling first and work that through systematically, gradually, for Australia's own circumstances, so we intend to do that.
What Professor Garnaut will do today is produce some modelling in support of his own version of the emissions trading regime. What we will do ourselves when Treasury releases its own modelling is produce modelling which underpins or which guides what would unfold with our carbon pollution reduction scheme.
Both of these modelling exercises contribute to the public debate and we will only be framing our interim targets consequent or after we get all that information.
SPEERS:   Yeah apparently Ross Garnaut will say that Australia stands to benefit more if we go for deep cuts rather than shallow cuts or are you more inclined of the view that we do need a soft start until the rest of the world gets on board?
PM: I think we have got to wait and see what Professor Garnaut says and he comes out today. The treasury modelling is still some way off. I think we have got to be calm, measured, careful in the way in which we do this. That is, to make sure the adjustment costs for the Australian economy are manageable, at the same time being absolutely resolved that we together with the rest of the world must act and we must act in a coherent way.
The Government's agenda on this is clear cut as opposed to the Leader of the Liberal Party this week who said that climate change had nothing to do with the state of the Murray-Darling basin. I find that remarkable.
SPEERS: Prime Minister, on the economy, we saw figures this week that show the economy has hit some road bumps. The growth more than halved in the last quarter, in NSW it's going backwards. Where is this headed, I wonder where you think the economy is headed. I mean, is it going to end in recession? Can you give us any guarantees on that?
PM: Well the challenge for us as you know is responsible economic management. Across the European Union as I indicated in the Parliament yesterday there has been data produced which says that in the last quarter that the economies across the Euro region had contracted. And 5 of the 7 leading industrial economies in the world have experienced negative growth in the last quarter, negative or zero growth. So this is tough going out there in the global economy.
But we believe we have a clear strategy to steer Australia through this and that means ensuring that we preserve our budget surplus to provide us with a buffer for the future. That secondly we also have a clear strategy for nation building through the three major investment funds that we have established and we think on the basis of a strong budget surplus, a commitment to productive investment through our nation building strategy that we can steer Australia through. But it's going to be tough and it's going to be bumpy.
SPEERS: But is a recession too alarmist?
PM: What I'm concerned about about those opposite, leading for example with Joe Hockey, is a consistent strategy - that's the Liberal party from the beginning of the year - to talk the Australian economy down. And I think that's just grossly irresponsible. What you are dealing with in the economy now are real and objective factors, that which is flowing in from overseas off the back of the global financial crisis, together with the domestic inflation and interest rate pressures that we inherited at the end of last year from the previous Government.
These are objective and real factors, then over here you've got confidence factors. And what I'd say to the Liberal party - Dr Nelson, Mr Hockey, Mr Turnbull - is, if they persist in their strategy, their political strategy of talking the Australian economy down, I don't think that is responsible.
SPEERS: But Prime Minister, you are the one controlling the leaders here on the economy, and just again, is recession too alarmist to be talking about when we look at...
PM: We believe that we have a clear strategy to see the Australian economy through. We believe we have a clear strategy to steer the Australian economy through and that means prosecuting a budget strategy of responsible economic management and having the capacity, the finance, to invest in long term productive investment.
And we intend to do that. That is a responsible course of action. The irresponsible course of action is to talk wildly about language or using language which talks the economy down. I don't intend to do that.
SPEERS: Just a few quick ones if I can. Belinda Neal, has she undergone enough of the counselling that you ordered to overcome the pattern of behaviour problems that you identified?
PM:   Well Ms Neal, the Member for Robertson, has indicated that she has subjected herself to the counselling which I required of her some months ago.
SPEERS: Are you satisfied with that?
PM:   And as I said before, all of us, all members of parliament, have to conduct ourselves and a type of behaviour which is acceptable to the community.
SPEERS: There is new allegations she was menacing towards Brendan Nelson.
PM:   Well I will let Dr Nelson speak to that.
SPEERS: You're not worried about that?
PM:   Well put it this way, that is a matter for Liberals to advance in whichever way they want to politically. I am sure it will be completely impartial in the way in which it is put into the debate. But as I have said to the member for Robertson and to other members of parliament, we are all required to adhere to high standards of behaviour. That goes for the member for Robertson, that goes for Belinda Neal.
SPEERS: On WA, voters head to the polls tomorrow. It's often easy for Prime Ministers to say after a state election whether federal factors were at play. So let me ask you on the eve of the WA election, do you think there are any implications that voters will be casting a verdict on your government or Brendan Nelson's opposition in WA?
PM:   It is, I think it was about two or three days after the state election was called, I was in Perth and asked the same question by the West Australian media. My answer then is the same as now, as it will be after the WA state election  -  these 
elections are fought on state matters.
What I can say though about the state of the WA economy is that it continues to register strong economic growth.
And I think that is in large part because you see a state Labor Government in Western Australia which has shown strong economic leadership and invested in the infrastructure needs of the WA economy.
SPEERS: So why are they in trouble? Of losing?
PM:   That is a matter for the West Australian voters to resolve among themselves and there is a whole lot of state political factors at play.  What I am saying however is that if you look at the Nationals Accounts data which came out just a few days ago, strong growth numbers from WA, part of the reason for that is because you have had strong investment in the infrastructure underpinning so much of the resource development of WA, by the West Australian Government.
SPEERS: Just finally Prime Minister, I can't let you go without a question on the most famous moose burger eater, Sarah Palin, do you think she has what it takes to be Vice President or indeed leader of the free world should anything happen to John McCain?
PM:   The great thing about the great American democracy is they will make a properly informed choice between candidates both Democrat and Republican. I seem to think it was Mr Howard who said that a victory for the Democrats, let alone a victory for Barack Obama, would be a victory for Al Qaeda.
Mr Howard said that. I haven't heard Mr Nelson by the way repudiate that. Our attitude is whoever wins the US presidential election, Republican or Democrat, Senator McCain or Senator Obama and their respective running mates as Vice President, Australia will have a strong friend in the United States under an administration of either colour.
SPEERS: You look forward to a moose burger at the White House?
PM:   You know something, I haven't tasted moose, and I am not sure I ever will.
SPEERS: Well read into that one what you will. Prime Minister thanks for your time.
PM:   Good to be with you.


UHLMANN: Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Morning Chris
UHLMANN: Is inflation still the biggest economic challenge facing Australia today?
PM: Well we have got to deal with two challenges; one is inflation, as I indicated in my speech on this subject in January this year just after having become Prime Minster. And the second is the contractionary challenges across the global economy.
Those two factors were real in January when we framed the Budget, they are just as real now.
UHLMANN:   But the public enemy number one in January was inflation, you weren't talking about contractionary forces then.
PM: Oh I think if you look at that speech closely Chris it refers to the fact that the Australian economy then, as now, is subject to two sets of forces operating in different directions. And that is the impact of the world financial crisis which is rolling through to negative growth numbers across many OECD economies, that's on the one hand.
And secondly, a domestic inflation challenge, which as you know when we took over office at the end of last year we had inflation running at 16 year highs, 10 interest rate rises in a row and the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
We have had to deal with both of those challenges, we think we have got our policy settings as right as possible in responding to a very difficult economic environment.
UHLMANN:   Well given it is difficult and they are conflicting forces do you spend now, is now the time for the Government to start spending?
PM: Well the key thing and the most responsible thing to do is to have delivered as we did through the Budget in May a sizable Budget surplus, some $22 billion, 1.8 percent of GDP. And that was to provide us with a buffer for the future and that buffer, in part is directed towards our future investment funds for infrastructure, for education and for hospitals.
And we believe that if we roll out a responsible investment program in each of those areas in the period ahead, what we are then doing is investing in long term productive capacity for the economy. We think that's the right thing to do and that's the course of action we will be embarking on.
UHLMANN:   But the dollar's falling that means that we will import some more inflation. You are planning to spend $76 billion, business plans to spend $100 billion, the States billions more, what will that do to inflation?
PM: The key challenge here Chris is how you actually deploy budget surpluses. What our predecessors have done in terms of their use of the public revenue, which has come out of the resources boom, is to effectively use that for consumption.
What we have said instead is that we need to save those surpluses for the purpose of then directing them into long term productive investments. This has been the sustained advice, in multiple warnings by the Reserve Bank of Australia, some 20 warnings over many years about the capacity constraints in the Australian economy but also the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Industry Group, (inaudible) we need to invest in productive capability. Why is that necessary? To boost long term productivity growth which is of itself non inflationary growth. That's what we are on about, that's what we intend to do.
UHLMANN:   All right speaking of consumption, household spending went backwards for the first time in 15 years in the national accounts. Is that a good thing?
PM: Well households are obviously responding to the fact that we have had real challenges through the impact of 10 interest rate rises in a row. That has an effect on consumer confidence. And you see that clearly evidenced in the national accounts figures which came out during the course of this week for the June quarter.
The key challenge for us however is to make sure our long term responsible economic strategy remains in place, which is why dealing with the irresponsible actions by the Liberals in the Senate, to blow a $6 billion hole in the Budget surplus, has to be confronted.
UHLMANN: When you talk about that, you talk about luxury cars against working families, big oil, big supermarkets. Are you saying that business is the natural enemy of households?
PM: Of course we believe that the way to manage the economy is to address the needs to every sector of the economy. That means that households, we need to make sure that they are properly supported by a set of economic policies which put maximum downward pressure on interest rates because that affects the cost of credit whether its on mortgages, or whether its in terms of consumer credit.
Businesses, we have got to make sure that the overall state of the economy remains as strong and as robust as possible. And one of the things that business has asked for us for the long term is to make sure that we are investing in long term productive capacity in the economy: in our ports, in our roads, in our infrastructure, in our high speed broadband.
We believe we can get both those challenges right, its difficult, its hard but we have got a clear strategy for handling it.
UHLMANN:   The little run of rhetoric you have at the moment when your hammering the Liberal Party is to say they are backing big oil, they're backing big supermarkets does that mean that you think that business is the natural enemy of working families?
PM: Let's take one example that was part of your question before which is the luxury car tax and just address that in its essential detail. Its $555 million which the Liberal party has chosen to preserve for the purposes of those buying Porsches, for those buying Rolls Royce's, for those buying luxury cars, as opposed to that half billion dollars going into a infrastructure investment fund for the future which, subject to the views of Infrastructure Australia, could be directed towards public transport.
So it's half a billion dollars for Porsches as opposed to half a billion dollars for public transport. The choice is pretty clear here.
UHLMANN:   Prime Minister just a couple of quick things do you have any more information on the health of the Australian troops that were injured earlier this week?
PM: I spoke last night to the Chief of Defence Force about the soldier that we are most concerned about. The Chief of Defence Force told me that he had arrived in Germany, but beyond that I have not got an update this morning as to his condition.
As the Defence Minister said in Parliament yesterday, he has been seriously wounded and we in the Government and the Australian Defence Force family remain deeply worried about him.
UHLMANN:   And one last thing Prime Minister, do you support the US incursions into Pakistan when you are fighting the Taliban, do you think that, that's something that needs to be done?
PM: Well that's an interesting question from left field. Ok Chris in dealing with the challenges of the Taliban in Afghanistan this is not a simple, neat military operation where problems concerning the Taliban's ability to operate across the border with Pakistan can simply push to one side.
We need to adhere to the principals of international law, but I am confident that our American ally has acted appropriately in its dealings with the Government of Pakistan. It's difficult, it's hard, but my responsibility together with other heads of Government of those participating in the war against the Taliban is to be effective. And to be effective means dealing with the challenge that a number of Taliban continue to find safe haven across the border in Pakistan.
UHLMANN:   Prime Minister we will have to leave it there thank you.
PM: Thank you


I congratulate NSW Premier, Nathan Rees and NSW Deputy Premier, Carmel Tebbutt on their appointments today. 
Nathan and Carmel are highly talented and hard working individuals.
This leadership team has what it takes to confront the challenges facing NSW and move the state forward.
I look forward to working closely with Nathan, Carmel and the NSW Government on our shared challenges in education, health, climate change and water.
These matters require strong leadership from all levels of government and I am confident that is what Nathan and Carmel will provide.


Thanks very much for that very warm Tassie welcome. In fact everywhere I go these days I seem to be being upstaged by Tasmania. A few months ago it was Ricky Ponting, last week it was Princess Mary.
I half expected to come here to today to find out I had been replaced as the keynote speaker by Peter Hudson.
Proud Queenslanders, who can be here among the proud Tasmanians. Our two great states have helped make this very great Australian nation. If you look at just what we have contributed together. You gave us apples, we give you pineapples. You gave us Ricky Ponting, we have given you (inaudible)
You have given us Princess Mary but we have given you King Wally Lewis. I know it is a different form of football.
But it is great indeed to be back here in Tasmania and to be back here also with Tasmania's brand new Premier David Bartlett.
I take this opportunity to congratulate a new Labor Premier in Australia as well, the Premier of NSW Nathan Rees, and Deputy Premier Carmel Tebbutt. I look forward very much to working with Nathan on the big challenges that we face in Australia's future and we will be doing that soon with Council of Australian Government's.
To Jodie Campbell, Member for Bass, Julie Collins, Member for Franklin, Sid Sidebottom, Member for Braddon, good to have you have back in Parliament Sid. Dick Adams, Member for Lyons, we also have Senator Nick Sherry, Senator Katrina Bilk - who I think has just survived her first fortnight in the Senate - good on you, I thank you very much Katrina. Senator Carol Brown, Senator Kerry O'Brien, Senator Helen Polley, John Dowling the State Secretary, and men and women of the Tasmanian branch of the great Australian Labor Party.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge this great branch of the Australian Labor Party. I acknowledge the rank and file members of the Australian Labor Party. I acknowledge the rank and file members of Braddon who delivered Braddon back to the Australian Labor Party.
To rank and file members of Bass who delivered Bass back to the Australian Labor Party and to rank and file members who have also returned to Labor, Denison and Lyons and Franklin.I also want to acknowledge the work of this great state branch as I also acknowledge the work of the men and women of the Australian trade union movement  -  the Your Rights At Work campaign.
Tasmania delivered Federal Labor's highest vote of any State in the nation  -  at 56.2 per cent of the vote, it helped deliver one outcome, and that is to consign the Howard Liberal Government to history.
We, the Labor Party won the national election because we stood for something radically different than the Liberal Party:
They are the party of Work Choices. We are the party to abolish Workchoices.
They are the party which gave us AWAs. We are the party which abolishes AWAs.
They are the party who send our combat troops to Iraq, we are the party in Government who returned our troops from Iraq.
They are the party who refused to ratify Kyoto, we are the party, in our first hour in Government, ratified the Kyoto Protocol
They are the party who denied and who continue to deny the reality of climate change. We are the party who accepts the reality of climate change and agree that we are responsible for acting on climate change.
And remarkably delegates, they are the Party today which still says, when you look at the state of Australia's great inland river system, the Murray Darling System, the Liberal Party says today that climate change has nothing to do with it.
They are in a state of denial now, they have been in a state of denial in the past and they have indicated that they will be in a state of denial in the future on climate change.
Also if you look about the other great differences between what they did in their 12 long years in office and what we have committed to do in our first nine months in office.
They are the party which ripped $1 billion out of the nation's public hospitals. In nine months in office, we have put $1.2 billion back into the public hospitals of Australia.
They are the party who withdrew, literally hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars from the nation's universities. In our first budget we delivered back an additional half billion dollars to the nation's universities. And so the list goes on.
Whether  it is in health, whether it is in education, whether it is across the entire spectrum, what we saw from that Government after 12 long years in office was this: despite the benefit of the resources boom, despite there being 12 years through which so many of those years delivered enormous increase in the revenue of the commonwealth, their response was, not to invest in the nation's infrastructure, not to invest in the nation's education, not to invest in the nation's health and hospital system, and instead to allow that money to be wasted.
I have news for you delegates, in our nine months in office, we have turned a corner decisively, we will be investors in the nation's future.
I'm delighted today to be here this weekend with Premier David Bartlett  -  leading this Government here in Tasmania.
The Premier understands that absolute central importance of education for this state's future and for this nation's future.
He understands that the best investment we can make is in our people, the next generation of Tasmanians, the next generation of Australians.
He understands that the jobs of the future will be different from the jobs of the past.
And he understands that the economy of the 21st century is an economy built on the education, skills and training of the workforce.
That is why he is the first Premier in fifty years in this State to retain the education portfolio  -  because he wants education to be at the heart of the Tasmanian Government's strategy for the future and I congratulate him on that.
This goes to the heart of the Labor message. The Labor message is that, wherever you are, whatever side of the tracks that you are born on, whether you are rich or poor, whatever part of this country that you come from, that our mission as Labor is to reach out a hand and say, ‘here is a future for you'. Here is a future for you, carved through first class schools, first class preschools, first class TAFE's, first class training institutions, first class universities.
That is the Labor mission from the past, that is the Labor mission for the future - and I welcome Tasmania's participation in it.
Tasmania has also been embracing the economy of the 21st Century, embracing the opportunities of the digital economy, renewable energy, (inaudible) and value adding to your additional industries.
And very soon Tasmania will reach a population passed the half million mark.
I know that the Bartlett government will be a partner in building an innovative 21st Century commonly for Tasmanians. And I look forward as Prime Minister of Australia, of working closely together with the Premier of Tasmania and this Tasmanian Government to forge the future together and we will do that with energy, with vigour and with determination.
It is now a just nine months since the Government, the Australian Labor Government took office.
Since coming to office, we have been prosecuting our long-term program to build a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, a more secure Australia, to help working families, pensioners and carers facing financial pressures, and to prepare Australia for the challenges of the 21st century.
But our reform agenda has just begun  -  as we build this more secure Australia, this stronger Australia and, fairer Australia and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the new century, we are also committed to new ways of engaging the community in different ways as well.
And that is why we as party and we as a movement, must constantly explore and (inaudible) new ways of engaging with the community at the grassroots.  Always keeping in touch, always responding to what the people are saying, that is the message of Labor, that is mission of Labor.
The first priority of government, for the National Government is to protect our nation's security. The security challenges that face Australia are increasingly complex.
The balance of global strategic and economic power is shifting to the Asia-Pacific region. Terrorism continues to pose a threat, and new challenges such as energy security continue to emerge.
The Government is responding to this complex emerging environment by preparing Australia to meet these new national security challenges.
We will strengthen our defence forces for the future, and we will enhance our relations with our friends and allies across the region.
We will also tackle non challenges like terrorism, natural disasters, water scarcity, food scarcity, and energy security.
The Government is delivering on our commitment to build this more secure Australia.
The starting point will be a new national security policy outlined in the near future in a new National Security Statement for the nation. It will be the first time Australia has had a National Security Statement.
We are bringing new rigour to our defence planning through the preparation of a new Defence White Paper. The White Paper will detail the emerging strategic terrain we face and how our policy and defence procurements for the future will respond to that great complex terrain.
And to give our Armed Forces the resources they need to do the job, the Government has committed to provide three per cent real growth in defence spending, not for the next year ahead, not for the next three years ahead, for the next ten years ahead, so that our defence forces can claim certainty for the future, because that is our first responsibility as Government.
We also intend to promote security cooperation in our region. And to do this, we are promoting as a Government a regional dialogue about the future of an Asia-Pacific Community.
We believe we have a simple choice  -  we either try to shape the region, shape the future of our region or allow our region simply to be shaped by events.
So we will continue prosecute an active foreign defence and security policy agenda for the future.
The years of disengaging from the international community for Australia are now over. Australia is back in business. The United Nations, the frame work convention on climate change, dealing with the challenges of global poverty. Dealing with the challenges in our own immediate region in the south-west pacific. Australia is back in business under this Government.
We are again engaging with the world again  -  including through our nomination to the UN Security Council, our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals for the world's poorest people, the establishment of the International Commission for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, which is now headed by the former foreign minister Gareth Evans.
And by using Australia's potential for creative middle power diplomacy, we will build and keep building a more secure Australia, and to play our part to do our bit, to deliver a more secure region and a more secure world.
The Government came to office at a time when Australia is facing some of the most challenging global economic conditions in almost a century. We face serious global economic challenges. If you looked at the unfolding of the global financial crisis these last 12 months, it is watched across most economies in the world. Negative growth rates have been generated in Japan, Germany, France and Italy.
Zero growth in the United Kingdom and so the list goes on.
In Australia that economic challenge is compounded by the economic circumstances we inherited and bear these facts in mind. When this government was elected in November last year, we inherited the highest inflation this country has had in sixteen years. We inherited ten interest rate rises in a row. We inherited the second highest interest rates for Australian working families of any developed country in the world.
That was John Howard's and Peter Costello's legacy for Australian working families. When you therefore look at those challenges, those in the global economy and compounded by our local economic circumstances, the Government's course of action has been clear.
One, responsible economic management, anchored in a $22 billion budget surplus. A buffer for the future. Responsible economic management.
Two, a clear economic reform agenda to boost our long term economic productivity growth. And that is through the agency of an education revolution in our schools, in our preschools, in our training places and in our universities. And three, for this nation, under this Government and under this Prime Ministership, to begin the single largest commonwealth government driven nation building program the country has seen, $76 billion.
In the past the attitude of the nation's government under the Liberals and Nationals was this: not our problem, blame somebody else.
If there was a problem with infrastructure don't come up with solutions, just come up with an excuse, that was their attitude. Our attitude is different. If we the national government are the recipient of this great influx of revenue resources from around the world, off the back of the resources boom, you can either do two things with it.
You can waste it on consumption, which is what the Liberals did, or you can invest it in the future, which is what we intend to do. That's the difference. And we are proud of the difference. We are a party and Government of nation building.
When we look at the challenges of broadband, we look at the challenges of our roads, the challenges of our ports, the challenges of our railway system, our attitude is, it is not who do we blame, our attitude is, how do we fix it.
That is the difference. And so our first nine months in office, we have dedicated $76 billion to this great task of nation building, and we intend to get on with the task.$20 billion, Building Australia Fund, $11 billion education investment fund, $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund, $26 billion through the Auslink roads program and other programs as well. This is just the start.
The people of Australia are looking at their national government and not simply for a litany of excuses, they want instead a program of action. And I say to you delegrates, we in our first nine months have embarked on that course of action. 
We intend to build the nation. We are nation builders by instinct, we are nation builders by instinct, by our history and we will be nation builders for the future.
Those opposite, the Liberals enjoy particularly talking the economy down. I would draw the Liberal's attention to one core fact, in the various data which has been produced on the economy in the last period of time, what the Australian business community is saying about their view of the future.
Last week we learned that Australian businesses are planning to lift capital expenditure to $100 billion for 2008-09.
That is the highest investment level ever, after a very strong 11 per cent increase in the financial year that just ended.
It demonstrates strong confidence in our economy's future.
And there's good reason for that confidence.
We are in the fastest growing region in the world  -  and despite the global slowdown, we are still seeing solid growth in our region.
The latest IMF forecasts predicts 8.4 per cent growth for Asia's developing economies for both 2008 and 2009.
Demand for Australia's commodities remains strong, and prices for our commodities are at generational highs.
The 50-year highs in the terms of trade are resulting in extra income flowing into the economy and fuelling strong investment and export revenue.
Indeed, the balance of payments this week recorded the greatest quarterly improvement in the current account deficit since records began in 1959.
Despite therefore, difficult global conditions, Australian businesses are determined to get on with it. Many are still thriving, and many firms are held back more by a shortage of skilled labour than a shortage of business activity ahead.  
The Australian Government is committed to steering Australia through these tough global economic times to ensure our economy emerges stronger in the long term.
Our strategy of responsible economic management, depends in part on our ability to deliver a strong budget surplus, a buffer for the future, a $22 billion buffer for the future. 
At this last week's in Canberra, when our Senators, including our Tasmanian Senators got to, got up close and personal with those opposite, we saw what the Liberals were really like. We saw what the Liberals were like.
What did the Liberals do in their first major legislative act in the Senate? The Liberals decided that their number one priority was to make sure that Luxury cars would remain affordable. In other words, their number one priority in their legislative action in the Senate was to block an increase in the Luxury Car Tax.
That is their number one priority. So much in touch are they with the needs of working families, pensioners and carers, that their number one priority in the Senate, it's the composition of the new Senate has been to act on the Luxury Car Tax in this way.
Let's go to the money involved: $555 million, half a billion dollars. So what the Liberals are saying is that they will put porches ahead of public transport. They will put Rolls Royces ahead of urban rail. Half a billion dollars to make sure that your Porsche or your Maserati or your Lamborghini, remain affordable.
You know something, I don't think that's what working families are looking for.
Working families want some help, and if half a billion dollars is available through what has been a modest tax increase in this category of vehicles, I say as the head of the Labor Government, we want to dedicate that money to the urban transport needs of working families coming into work.
But what we see from the Liberals, this pattern of behaviour, spreads across their other actions in the Senate as well.
Take the Medicare Levy Surcharge. We have a simple measure announced in the Budget, was to make sure that working families are no longer penalised by the surcharge. Back in 1996, they introduced the surcharge for those earning $50,000, which they defined back then as high income earners.
And guess what, as of 2007 when they lost office, they still defined those earning $50,000  a year as high income earners, because they hadn't changed the surcharge.
Our budget measure was this: it is time to change that to provide people with a decent break.
And so that is our measure before the Senate at the moment, to make sure that those who have to pay that surcharge at present in that $50,000 to $100,000 bracket no longer have to pay that into the future.
And for a working family with a couple of incomes, $60,000 from one $60,000 from another,  you are looking at a potential saving of more than $1000 a year. So in the very week that for the first time in seven years, the Reserve Bank delivers an interest rate cut, the equivalent of which is $600 a year for a person on an average mortgage, the Liberals turn around and say, well here is a $1200 tax bill back on top of that for you.
That's what the Liberals are saying, that is what they are doing, and more importantly, they are committed to do it in the future. I say this to the Liberals as they contemplate their future actions in the Senate: It is time for the Liberal Party of Australia just to get real with the challenges which working families are facing.
They want a help up, they don't want another tax thrown on top of their heads like this one that I have just been talking about.  But it is part and parcel of a pattern of behaviour. Whether it is FuelWatch, whether it is Grocery Choice, whether it is what we are doing with the changes to the Medicare Levy Surcharge.
Whether it is what we were proposing also in other areas of tax. In one areas after another. They are not siding with consumers, they are not siding with working families. The same Liberal Party of Workchoices, the same Liberal Party who constantly is siding with the big end of town as opposed to helping those who need a hand  up.
This Liberal Party earns the Nation's condemnation and you have just seen the first edition of it in the debate we had just now in the Senate on the Luxury Car Tax.
Labor's plans are different. We say to take this revenue, the $6 billion which the Liberals now hold to ransom and say, let's invest that instead in the nation's future. Let us invest it in the urban transport needs of our major cities. Let's invest it in the infrastructure needs of this great state of Tasmania.
Let us make sure that we have a decent telecommunications system, in this great state of Tasmania, lets invest to make sure that happens.
Delegates I spoke before about an education revolution, in our first budget we allocated $19.3 billion to the Education Revolution over the next four years.
We are delivering a national curriculum for all students in English, and maths, the sciences and history  -  and already we have established the National Curriculum Board.
We have guaranteed funding to both Government and non-Government schools alike  -  this year, Tasmanian schools will receive funding of $201 million from the Commonwealth.
We have begun to deliver on our $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution - Round One of the computers in school program saw funding for 1,047 new computers in 23 schools across Tasmania. That's practical action.
While the Liberals in parliament complain about computers in schools, I have one question back to them, and that is, which of you as liberal members of parliament want to put your hand up and hand the money back from the schools in your area. 
I am yet to hear one say yes. You know why? The P&amp;C's and the P&amp;F's across this country are saying, any practical help to make sure that our kids have the opportunities of the 21st Century education in the classroom is help that is welcome and that they receive positively.
We have begun allocation funding for our $2.5 trades training centre programs in schools. We are funding 630,000 training places over five years through our $1.9 billion investment in the Productivity Places Program.
I welcome the agreement we have reached with the Tasmanian Government just last week to work together in delivering Productivity Places in Tasmania.
That partnership will deliver training places across many Tasmanian industries including the key skills shortage areas in community services and health, in manufacturing, in construction and electrical trades.
We started this year with 458 new training places in identified skill shortage areas, and we are matching that training closely to industry needs so that businesses have a solution to skill shortages.
Already, 1,030 Tasmanians have commenced training in the Productivity Places Program in occupations such as Community Services Support Work, Security Operations and Asset Maintenance  -  and 300 of these job seekers have completed training. That's practical action. That's practical action for Tasmania, practical action in our first nine months in office.
And I look forward to continuing to work with the Tasmanian Government on strengthening the skills, education and training of the Tasmanian workforce.
This is the practical start, the skeleton, the bones, the flesh the blood of the education revolution, which I am committed to and which your premier is committed to.
And as we seek to build the nation, building together and in this state, 21st century highways, 21st century broadband, 21st century water infrastructure and 21st century hospitals and schools.
In the long term, this is necessary to underpin productivity competitiveness, exports and growth.
I said before delegates that we are committed to a program of nation building. And we see the states as being partners with us in that progress.
But nation building, building for the future, building a stronger economy, building a more secure Australia is an incomplete vision unless we are equally committed to building a fairer Australia, to give every working person a decent go.
And that is why fairness is etched deep into the Labor soul. From our very beginnings, from the earliest days of the 1890's, when this movement of ours was founded and we began operating as a national political party in 1901. If there is one core organising principle of Labor, it is this: to give every person a fair go.
And that is why when the Liberals said that their attitude to a fair go was to impose Workchoices and AWAs. They lost touch totally with the Australian community.
Because in that one act they dropped the fair go and they shredded it, they shredded it. Because at the end of the day, they are not the party of the fair go. They never have been and they never will be. It is not in their DNA. It is in ours and we should be proud of it.
That's why we are building a fair and flexible industrial relations system for the future.
That's why we're delivering tax relief for working families. That's why, in this most recent Budget, we have provided $7.5 billion in additional payments to pensioners and carers and that is why we have young kids going to preschool, increase the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. And that is why if you are educating your kids at school, for the first time in the nation's history, there will now be an education tax refund to help you get a tax rebate for what you invest in your kids' education.
We have also in the (inaudible) fairness, decided to shine a light on the great national obscenity that is homelessness. How is it that this nation of ours in the 21st Century that the (inaudible) can say to us that we have 100,000 Australian out there who cant call the place home.
How could we allow that to happen. I say it is wrong. I say we have got to do something about it. And that is why we have launched the first Green Paper for this Government, in the first month that we were in office, a national paper on homelessness. It will deliver its findings by years' end. And this Government is determined to act.
To act also in partnership with our programs on housing affordability: First Home Saver Accounts, the National Rental Affordability Scheme, the Housing Affordability Fund.
In the past, the Liberals thought so much of housing and housing affordability, they did not even have a Minister for Housing. They did not have a department responsible for housing. They had no housing policies.
In nine months, we have hit the ground running. But we looking forward to the delivery of this White Paper on homelessness, because I believe a mark of a nation's decency, a mark of a people's decency, a mark of our society's decency is looking at a need as acute and as deep as that and saying, ‘we must act'. And act we will.
We have also, as a party and as a Government chosen to shine a light on the great challenge of our age as well which is closing the gap. Closing the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians.
I do not believe that for us as a party and the Government of the people can stand idly by while the life expectancy gap between indigenous and non indigenous and Australians grows wider as opposed to growing narrower.
How is it that young Aboriginal children under the age of five have three times the mortality rate of non indigenous kids. It is just wrong, we have got to do something about it. Closing the gap is one of the hardest commitments this Government has made. We have outlined a timetable for so doing. We are harnessing the resources of Government for so do. We will do so in partnership with the businesses and community organisations across the nation.
But I say to you as delegates of the Australian Labor Conference here in Tasmania, the mark of this Government and this movement must be to deal with this great and enduring challenge to our nation's decency. And we are determined to act.
Delegates, it has been good to be among you today. It has been good to be among you here  in Tasmania. Part of our challenge for Government is not just building a secure Australia, building a stronger Australia, not just to build a fairer Australia, not just to prepare for the great challenges of the future including climate change, it is also to explore together a new way of governing, a new way of engaging in the community. A new way of remaining in touch.
It has been good to see here in Tasmania the new Tasmanian Government beginning to fold out, community cabinets across the Island.
As a national Government we have done this since the beginning of the year. We have had community cabinets now in the Western Suburbs of Sydney, the Southern Suburbs of Perth, we have had them in the centre of Mackay, in North Queensland, we have had them in an Indigenous Community in Yirrkala, in East Arnhem Land.
We have also held them in other parts of the country as well. And what I can say to you today and confirm is that before years' end, we will be bringing the entire cabinet here, to Tasmania as well.
For the first time in ten years, the Australian cabinet is coming to town and it is coming here to Launceston. And next year, the entire cabinet is coming back to town, we are going to the south of the island.
And the year after that we are going to the north west. It is part of the community engaging the cabinet. It is part of the community engaging the Government. There is no better discipline for the soul, for some of the mandarins that work in the commonwealth public service to sit down across a table, with representatives of local community organisations and find out just what it is like.
It is part of a new way of governing. And we intend to do that, and to keep doing it.
Delegates, as Governments we can never afford to lose touch with the community.
None of us in Government can ever taker the community for granted. None of us in Government can ever lose touch with the community. None of us in Government can ever become detached from what the people are saying because the people are very tough task masters and it is right that they are tough task masters. Because in Government they give us their trust to deliver for them. To deliver for them, in what is needed now and to deliver for them, leadership for the great challenges of the future. And that is our challenge.
Friends, It has been an honour to among you today because you are the heart and soul of our movement. Each and every one of you. Today I have met so many of you as I came into the building. I met the missos, I met many missos, more missos than I could poke a stick at. I met members of other unions as well.
And I thank you again for you work with Your Rights at Work. Each and every one of you. I met also, those of you who work in local councils. I met also, a woman who works on council up in Georgetown, who said something really interesting to me. She said that why she was in the business of local government was to respond to what, to use her term, the local people, those who see themselves of little people, need.
I think there is something in that for us. Always to bear in mind what it is like when you are doing it really, really tough.
I also met today representatives of (inaudible), out there doing the hard work of recruiting. Keep at it, each and every one of you.
We constantly must rejuvenate our movement, we must constantly rejuvenate by bringing you people in. The values of which we stand are ancient and continuing and they are good values because we stand for the fair go.
But we must always be rejuvenated by people who come afresh to join our ranks and that is where your task comes in.  
I also met today, the (inaudible) where are they? Hands up. I have never met these folk in my life before, other than to know that they became life members recently. And I heard the story of how Young Labor was formed in Hobart in 1948, 68 years ago.
You know, when I hear stories like that from the local council of Georgetown, from the formation of Young Labor in 1948, to the work on our campuses today, to the work that we see through our great trade unions, it makes me proud to be the leader of this great movement of ours.
Our values are great. Our people are great. Our mission is good. Our determination is strong. Let's go forward to the future, together.


The Australian veteran and ex-service community will have their views represented by the fourteen Australians appointed today to the Prime Ministerial Advisory Council on Ex-service Matters, the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Alan Griffin announced today.
The members of the Council are different to any other current veteran representative group.  Members are drawn from every part of the veteran community, including servicemen, partners of veterans, war widows and veteran advocates.  The Council reflects and brings together the diverse groups in the veteran and ex-service community. 
The Chair of the Council will be Dr Allan Hawke, former Secretary of the Departments of Veterans' Affairs and Defence and the current Chancellor of the Australian National University. 
Dr Hawke will be assisted by Frank Benfield, Dr Robert Black AM RFD, the Hon Graham Edwards, June Healy OAM, Commodore Nick Helyer MBE RANR, Warrant Officer Peter Hind OAM, Ken Kipping AM, Gail MacDonell, Anne Pahl, Philip Pyke, Donna Reggett, Brigadier Keith Rossi AM OBE RFD ED (Rtd) and Brigadier Neil Weekes AM MC (Rtd).
“As a group, these people have personal and professional experience spanning the three services, in advocacy, rehabilitation and parliamentary processes, and have an understanding of the impact of service on families.  I look forward to hearing their input on ex-service issues,” said Mr Rudd.
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs sought the views of the ex-service community about how they wanted their issues communicated to government.  More than 100 submissions to a discussion paper were received, and the Minister met in excess of 800 people at consultation meetings held throughout Australia during the Parliamentary recess.
“As you'd expect, I've heard a variety of views, but veterans themselves were very supportive of the concept of the Council,” said Mr Griffin.
The Council will advise the Government on veteran and ex-service issues, and identify problems and priorities to improve the Government's provision of services.
The Council will meet for the first time in October 2008. At its first meeting it will confirm its terms of reference and advise on a review of current consultation mechanisms between DVA and the ex-service community. The Government will also seek the Council's advice on major issues facing the portfolio in coming months, including the study of suicide in the ex-service community and the reconsideration of the Clarke Review recommendations not accepted by the previous Government. Further information on the Advisory Council is available at minister.dva.gov.au.
The establishment of the Council delivers on another of the Rudd Government's election commitments.
Biographies of the members of the Advisory Council are attached.
Prime Ministerial Advisory Council
Membership
Dr Allan Hawke  -  Chair
ACT
Dr Allan Hawke's extensive career in public administration at senior levels includes past appointments as Secretary of the Departments of Veterans' Affairs, Transport and Regional Services and Defence.  He completed his public service to Australia as High Commissioner to New Zealand.
Dr Hawke was appointed a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Public Administration in 1998 and a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Management in 1999 in recognition of his outstanding contribution to public service.  In 2001 he became a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Company Directors.  The Australian Financial Review's “Boss” Magazine, named him as one of Australia's top 30 true leaders in its inaugural list in 2001. Dr Hawke was appointed as Chancellor of the ANU on 4 February 2006 for a three year term.
Mr Frank Benfield
Queensland
Mr Benfield enlisted in the Australian Regular Army in 1963 and served in Vietnam from November 1970 until November 1971.  Post Vietnam he served overseas in Papua New Guinea and Indonesia.  Following discharge (as a Sergeant) he was employed with the Royal Thai Navy Air Wing in Thailand from 1984 to 1987.
Mr Benfield's involvement in advocacy and welfare needs of veterans dates from the 1970s when he founded an Association to tend to the needs of Army Aviation veterans of the Vietnam conflict.  He maintained an advocacy role for veterans from all conflicts and is a member of the Vietnam Veterans' Association of Australia (VVAA) and the Vietnam Veterans' Federation of Australia (VVFA).  He is currently a part-time Services Member of the Veterans' Review Board (VRB), being first appointed in 1999.
Group Captain Dr Robert Black AM RFD
South Australia
Group Captain Black served in the Royal Australian Air Force Reserve for 46 years including duty in Butterworth, Rwanda, Bougainville and East Timor.
Group Captain Black is a Doctor of Medicine and has a Master of Surgery.  He is a fellow of the Royal Australian College of Surgeons.  He was the Senior Visiting Specialist of the Daw Park Repatriation General Hospital for 23 years and has conducted a self employed private surgical practice.  He was appointed a Services Member of the VRB in 2006.
Hon Graham Edwards
Western Australia
Mr Edwards served as a Private in Vietnam as a member of the Assault Pioneer Platoon of 7th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment.  During his time in Vietnam, Pte Edward's platoon moved into an area where mines had been laid. A M16 mine exploded wounding three men; both Pte Edwards' legs had to be amputated.
When Mr Edwards returned to civilian life, veterans' welfare became an important issue for him and he also moved into public affairs and state politics.  After 14 years in State Parliament, he entered Federal Parliament in 1998, being elected to the House of Representatives for the seat of Cowan, in Western Australia. He retired from politics at the 2007 federal election and continues to maintain a strong and active involvement in defence, disability services, and veterans' issues.  Most recently, Mr Edwards has accepted a position as a member of the National Disability and Carer Council.
Mrs June Healy OAM
ACT
Mrs June Healy (nee Davidson) was a member of the Royal Australian Army Nursing Corp (RAANC) in 1954 before enlisting in the Women's Royal Australian Army Corps (WRAAC) in 1960.  She was posted as Adjutant/Quartermaster at 31 WRAAC Barrack Melbourne and in 1962 to WRAAC School as Adjutant (ARA).
Mrs Healy became a member of the WRAAC Association and has served as National President.  She is a foundation member of the Defence Widows Support Group.  Mrs Healy is a former National Secretary of the RSL and former National President of the War Widows' Guild of Australia.  She has been a board member of the Heart Foundation (ACT) Division and past National President of the Council on the Ageing (Australia).
Commodore Nick Helyer MBE RANR
NSW
Commodore Helyer is an RAN veteran of the Vietnam conflict.  He retired from the RAN in 2000 after thirty five years in uniform, four with the Royal Navy and thirty-one with the RAN.  He has been an active member of the Reserve ever since.
He is the Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Veterans' Children Assistance Trust and a Director of the Mission to Seafarers, Sydney.  Commodore Helyer is also currently the Legacy representative at the NSW Ex-Service Round Table on Aged Care and is the NSW member on the Legacy Co-ordinating Council (National).  Commodore Helyer's previous involvement with the ex-service community includes roles as past President and Director of Sydney Legacy.  He is also Patron of three ex-RAN Ship Associations.
Warrant Officer Peter Hind OAM
Queensland
Mr Hind joined the Australian Army Medical Corps in 1965 and served in Vietnam in 1966 and 1967.  He joined the Australian Air Force in 1970 and served in Malaysia between 1971 and 1979.  In 1996, Mr Hind was the Command Warrant Officer in charge of some 15,000 personnel before taking up an appointment as the military protocol Warrant Officer with two Governors of NSW, HE Admiral Peter Sinclair and HE Mr Gordon Samuels.
Mr Hind retired from the RAAF in 2000 and in January 2000 went to East Timor for eight months, working with Aid Medicale Internationale and Timor Aid to establish a pathology laboratory.  Mr Hind regularly returns to East Timor and the laboratory is still operating today.
In January 2001, Mr Hind rejoined the Air Force to act as pathology technical advisor to the F-111 aircraft Deseal/Reseal Board of Inquiry, studying the effects of solvent exposure on Aircraft workers.  In September 2001 he was appointed as the Chief of Air Force Advocate to support the affected members of the F111 aircraft Deseal/Reseal program.  Currently, Mr Hind is the Deputy Director of the Military Claims Liaison Office, assisting all serving members injured in Defence due to their military service.
Mr Kenneth Kipping AM
ACT
Ken Kipping is a renowned consumer advocate and supporter of the Australian Defence Force who has nearly 40 years experience in the financial services industry.  Mr Kipping is an Accredited Defence Correspondent (with deployments to Rwanda, Middle East, Bougainville and East Timor).
Mr Kipping is a former Chairman of the Army Credit Union and was a consultant to the Department of Veterans' Affairs, Defence Housing Authority, PNG Defence Force and to the Tongan Government during the initial deployment to the Solomon Islands. He was instrumental in structuring Defence Health Term Life and the AIG Services Security Plan, optional insurance programmes designed specifically for ADF members and their families.  He is currently the Chairman of the Australian Defence Force Financial Services Consumer Council. In 2007, Mr Kipping was appointed to the Review of the DSH Insurance Scheme.
Ms Gail MacDonell
NSW
Ms MacDonell is the partner of a Vietnam veteran.  Several years ago Ms MacDonell decided to study psychology to gain insight into problems of families of veterans and has attained a Bachelor of Psychology (Honours).  She is currently studying for her Masters (Hons) at the University of New England in the area of the psychological and social well-being of the partners of veterans.
Ms MacDonell is a well respected member of the Partners of Veterans Association (PVA) and represents the PVA on the National Veterans' Mental Health and Well Being Forum.  Ms MacDonell has been working with veterans and their partners and families on a volunteer basis for just over 10 years
Ms Anne Pahl 
Victoria
Ms Pahl joined the RAN in 1988 and saw warlike service on the HMAS Jervis Bay as part of Operation Solace in Somalia during 1992/93.  In 1999, she transferred to the RAN Active Reserve and currently holds the rank of Chief Petty Officer with the Defence Force School of Signals Maritime Wing at HMAS Cerberus.
Ms Pahl is active in representing the interests of veterans, particularly younger veterans and current ADF serving members.  Ms Pahl has been a Board member of the Victorian RSL State Executive since September 2003.  She is currently the RSL National Representative on the National Younger Veterans' Consultative Forum.  Ms Pahl is also the chair of the Victorian State RSL Young Veterans Forum and chair of the State RSL Veterans' Affairs Aged Care Consultative Committee.  She is also a member of the Victorian Ex-Service Round Table on Aged care.
Mr Philip Pyke
Tasmania
Mr Pyke is currently a member of the Australian Army Reserves with the rank of Major.  He has served in the Middle East and Iraq in 2003 and, more recently, in East Timor.
Mr Pyke has had an extensive role in Defence public affairs across the three Services and, in civilian life, was a member of Tasmania Police until recently when he resigned to take up a media and communications position with the Catholic Archbishop of Hobart.  Mr Pyke takes an active interest in the welfare of veterans and their families, including Reservists.  He is currently a member of RSL Tasmania, the Defence Reserves Association and is the Tasmanian point of contact for the Australian Peace Keepers and Peace Makers Veterans' Association.
Ms Donna Reggett
Queensland
Ms Reggett is the partner of a long serving RAAF veteran who served as a peacekeeper in Somalia and is also a daughter of a RAN veteran who served in Vietnam.  She is the current State Secretary of Australian Peacekeepers and Peacemaker Veterans' Association (APPVA) and a member of the National Treatment Monitoring Committee (NATMOC).
Ms Reggett has undertaken studies in Counselling and Mediation at the Southern Cross University and is trained under the Department's Program as a Level Three Advocate.  She is actively involved in the veteran and ex-service community as a pensions and welfare advocate for a range of ex-service organisations in the Ipswich district.
Brigadier Keith V Rossi (Rtd) AM OBE RFD ED 
Victoria
Brigadier Rossi served in the Australian Army from 1937 to 1976, progressing from the rank of Private to Brigadier.  He served in World War II in the Middle East and Pacific and, later, in Vietnam.  Mr Rossi joined the RSL in 1943 and since that time has been involved at the Sub-branch level on committees, as President and, at Branch level, State Senior Vice President, State Executive member and RSL Historian.
He has been the RSL Representative on Gallipoli, Western Front and Greece pilgrimages and Chief Marshal at Anzac Day ceremonies.  Mr Rossi was also involved in Legacy as a Legatee, on the Pensions Committee, Commemorations Committee and Youth Employment Committee.  Mr Rossi is a member of the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia (VVAA).
Brigadier Neil Weekes (Rtd) AM MC 
Queensland
Brigadier Weekes served with the 1st Battalion, The Royal Australian Regiment, in South Vietnam in 1968 as a Platoon Commander, where he was awarded the Military Cross (MC) for gallantry.  He remained with the Battalion for its tour in Malaysia and Singapore during 1969-1971.  He subsequently served in postings in Papua New Guinea and Malaysia.
He is currently the Patron of the Vietnam Veterans' Association of Australia (Townsville Branch), Patron of the National Servicemen's Association of Australia (Townsville Branch) and Patron of the Townsville Branch of the RSL.  He is also the Chair of the North Australian Military Heritage Association.


Thank you to the Pacific Area Newspaper Publishers' Association for the invitation today to launch your 39th annual conference.
I've spoken to this conference before.
But this is my first time as Prime Minister.
And I want to congratulate PANPA's ongoing efforts in fostering excellence, innovation and professional development within the newspaper industry  -  for one single reason, and that is, the state of newspapers is central to the health of Australia's democracy. It still remains its principal arteries.
Much has been written about the changing media environment in which you operate.
The media landscape, of which you are an important part, is being transformed as communications become more diffuse.
This is having a profound impact on your profession.
Just as it is having a profound impact on my profession and on the whole way in which we collectively conduct our democracy. 
Consumers' habits are changing as people increasingly access news and information on laptops, Blackberrys and iPhones.
Today there are roughly 80 million blogs, and nearly 200 million people connected through the internet on Facebook and MySpace.
And the corollary of this shift online is a change in the way in which news is created and the way in which news is consumed.
You know better than most that this change represents challenges to traditional media, including newspapers.
The closure of the Bulletin magazine after 128 years and, the Sunday Program after 28 years, are evidence enough of the great changes which are now afoot.
But this doesn't mean abandoning quality journalism, or quality ideas or quality debate.
In fact, I believe today that there is even greater demand for quality news and quality debate.
And that's because our communities, both local and global, are tired of the same old political script.
Our communities, both local and global, are instead looking for new solutions to the new challenges they confront  -  from family disintegration to pressures on local communities, to climate change.
That is why each government must work harder to engage the community directly, rather than governments simply going to the polls every three or four years and then returning to some level of political or community engagement three or four years later. It hasn't worked before. It doesn't work now. It won't work into the future.
Earlier this year we convened the 2020 Summit  -  to get the best ideas on Australia's future from Australians from all walks of life.
Hundreds of submissions were received. Thousands of Australians participated through local school summits, local summits and local community forums.
What struck me was that we had 500 secondary schools across Australia participate in this process -  that is nearly one fifth of the nation's secondary schools  -  and they ran their own local school summits.
Australians at all levels are wanting to participate in a continuing discussion about Australia's future.
We have also for the first time begun holding Community Cabinet meetings across Australia to give people direct access to Cabinet Ministers.
Within the first 12 months of government we will have held Community Cabinet meetings in every State of the nation.
We're learning a lot from these meetings about the day to day concerns of Australians.
The challenges of raising adult children with profound disabilities.
The challenges of living on the single age pension.
The challenge of getting to work without proper public transport.
The challenge of climate change to our farmers and the river systems on which they have depended for more than a century and on which they can no longer depend.
Community engagement also requires a practical response.
Both now and most critically, for the long term.
That's why, for example, we will respond to each and every one of the recommendations brought forward at the 2020 Summit as promised, by year's end.
Saying yes to things we can do.
Saying no to those things that we can't do  -  and explaining why.
As well as indicating those things that will need more work.
This I would argue is part of a continuing dialogue between the Government and the community which we represent and therefore our intention is to conduct our relationship with the Australian people in this way.
Today I want to discuss the core objectives of the Government and the policy agenda we have embarked upon to achieve them - including our agenda for a revolution in Australian education.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough times ahead because of the state of the global economy and the challenges of a rapidly changing world. 
That is why the Government has a plan to build a more secure Australia, a stronger Australia and a fairer Australia - to see Australia through the challenging times that lie ahead.
That means tackling long term challenges  -  not just putting them off into the never never.
That also means doing what can practically be done to help working families, pensioners and carers in the here and now.
Australia faces new national security challenges ahead, some of which will require new responses.
That is why the Government has a plan to strengthen our defence force for the future, enhance our relations with our friends and allies and tackle new longer term challenges for our nation, like energy security. 
We are already bringing new rigour to our defence planning through the preparation of a new Defence White Paper.
We have committed to give our Armed Forces the resources they need to do the job, by providing 3 per cent real growth in defence spending for the full decade ahead.
We are combining this commitment of resources with a new strategic foundation for our defence planning.
The starting point will be a new national security policy outlined in the near future in a National Security Statement which will be released to the Parliament in the near future.
It will be the first time Australia has had an integrated National Security Statement.
We are also working to strengthen our alliance with the United States and to build our security cooperation with regional partners including Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore  -  all of whom I have visited during our first six months in office.
We are also re-building our relationship with the Pacific Island countries to begin to turn around decades of strategic drift.
To help shape the future of our wider region, we have also begun a regional dialogue about an Asia-Pacific Community for the future  -  to begin to foster a culture and to fashion an institution to encourage the habits of security cooperation not confrontation.
And we are engaging again with the wider world  -  including through our nomination to the UN Security Council, our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals for the world's poorest nations, and the establishment of the International Commission for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament and our ratification of Kyoto.
We believe we have a simple choice - either we try to shape our regions and our world order or we simply allow our region and our world to be shaped indiscriminately by events. That's the stark choice.
For these reasons, the Government intends to prosecute an activist foreign policy, an activist defence policy and an activist security policy for the future.
We are re-engaging with the international community by deploying Australia's potential for creative middle power diplomacy - to enhance our long term security and that of our wider region.
Our second core priority as a Government is to build a stronger Australian economy.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough economic times because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is committed to responsible economic management anchored in a strong budget surplus.
That is also why the Government has a plan to boost long-term productivity growth through a comprehensive economic reform program.
That reform plan starts with an education revolution with the long-term objective of building in this country the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world.
That must be our ambition as a nation.
Our reform plan also includes a $76 billion nation-building plan to tackle the nation's infrastructure bottlenecks, the single biggest nation-building plan in our country's history.
The Government came to office at a time when Australia was facing some of the most challenging global economic conditions in almost a quarter century.
In the past year:
     * A global financial crisis has been triggered by a wave of defaults in the US housing market, with the most recent manifestation of the crisis being the takeover by federal regulators of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac which together hold about $5.4 trillion of debt, around half of the United States' entire mortgage debt.
     * The global economy has seen the greatest oil price shock in more than thirty years.
     * Industrialised nations have seen inflation almost double.
     * Five out of the seven largest industrialised economies have experienced zero or negative growth in recent months.
     * Global share markets have fallen by an average of 20 per cent.
     * Global consumer confidence levels have fallen to their lowest levels since the early 1990s.
We must face these global economic facts. These are tough global economic times.
And Australia is not immune.
But the Government is committed absolutely to steering Australia through these tough economic times to ensure our economy emerges in strong shape for the future.
We have delivered responsible economic management, with a conservative Budget grounded in a $22 billion surplus.
The surplus was designed to put maximum downward pressure on inflation and interest rates  -  to give the RBA maximum room to make interest rate cuts.
The Government has also embarked upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has seen since the early 1990s.
We are committed to building long term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for future productivity growth:
     * an Education Revolution to which I have referred;
     * a nation-building infrastructure plan including roads, rail, ports and most critically, a national high-speed broadband network;
     * investing also in innovation;
     * creating a seamless national economy through an ambitious program of business deregulation, and
     * long term tax reform.
We have laid out an Education Revolution for Australia's future - ranging through early childhood education, school education, vocational education and training, universities and research.
The Education Revolution isn't a slogan, it is a driving vision for the Government.
It's at the heart of building a 21st century economy.
Australia can't compete against the rest of the world by driving down wages and conditions.
The low-cost economies of our region can always beat us at that game.
And we can't expect our resources sector alone to shoulder the burden of building our future prosperity.
We must invest in knowledge and the knowledge-based industries for the future.
In our first Budget we allocated nearly $20 billion to the Education Revolution over the next four years.
We have begun allocating funding from our $2.5 billion Trades Training Centres program for Australian secondary schools, our $1.2 billion digital education revolution for Australian secondary schools as well.
And we are working for the first time in the country's history on a national school curriculum covering English, maths, the sciences and history.
We are funding 630,000 training places for the Skilling Australia for the Future program.
And investing an additional half a billion dollars from our first Budget to begin rebuilding our university infrastructure.
The Government's commitment to the Education Revolution is matched by our commitment to nation-building infrastructure.
The Government's nation-building program is now in motion.
In just nine months, we have committed $76 billion in these critical areas of infrastructure bottleneck.
These long-term investments will help build the foundations of the nation's future prosperity.
On the deregulation agenda, through the Council of Australian Governments which has come back to life, we are working on 27 areas of regulatory reform with the single objective of building a seamless national economy.
It's time for the Federation to enter the 21st century.
I will work with every State and Territory Government towards that goal and I don't intend to allow politics to get in the way.
Finally, we have established the Henry Commission as the starting point for long-term reform of the tax, welfare and retirement income system - another crucial element in building a stronger Australian economy for the future.
As well as the challenge of building a stronger Australia, the Government is committed to ensuring that all Australians can participate in an inclusive society.
The Government believes passionately in a fair go for all, based on equality of opportunity, a humane safety net and acting on entrenched disadvantage in new ways. 
We're delivering on our commitment to tax relief for working families, with a $46.7 billion tax package, a $4.4 billion Education Tax Refund, the first in the country's history, to help with the kids' education and an increase in the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent.
We've also provided $7.5 billion in additional payments to pensioners and carers in the Budget and begun a detailed review of retirement incomes with a view to placing pensioners on a more secure footing for the future.
The Government has also begun to act on the homelessness agenda with the first White Paper on homelessness in our nation's history.
It is for me, simply obscene that in a country as wealthy as this, we still have according to Census date, 100,000 Australians who can still call no place home. It is time we put a stop to that.
The package of housing affordability measures is also now being implemented, including our First Home Saver Accounts to provide concessional taxation treatment for young Australians saving for their first home.
The Government has also committed to closing the gap with Indigenous Australians, including through our support of the Employment Covenant initiated by Andrew Forrest and other Australian employers, to generate tens of thousands of new opportunities for employment for Indigenous Australians.
As well as meeting the challenges of building a more secure, stronger and fairer Australia today, the Government also recognises that Australia must prepare now for the challenges of the future. 
What will be the shape of China, what will be the shape of India, what will be the shape of the Asia Pacific region. And how does Australia carve intelligently its future in the midst of this ocean of change.
Like other nations, Australia faces long-term challenges, including climate change and water, the ageing of our population and long-term food and water supply.  
That is why the Government has a plan to act on climate change, to tackle the long-term needs of the hospital system as well as a plan of action on the future of the Murray-Darling Basin.
We are acting on these challenges.
After a long period of inaction, we have drawn a line in the sand on climate change.
We recognise it as the greatest economic, environmental and moral challenge of our time.
That's why the Government ratified Kyoto on the day we came to power.
It's why we will be implementing a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to achieve the lowest cost reduction in carbon emissions for Australia.
It's why we are supporting an energy efficiency strategy for the nation.
It's why we will introduce a new national renewable energy strategy for the nation.
And we applaud the leadership being shown by many media organisations and other organisations on reducing carbon emissions and embracing sustainable business practices.
What we do as nations must be matched by what we do as households, what we do as corporations. The planet, at the end, is at stake.
We have begun on a long-term strategy to reform also the health and hospital system and end the blame game between different levels of government.
We have established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission and the National Preventative Health Taskforce, and we have invested in our public hospital system and in the reduction of elective surgery waiting lists. This task has just begun.
And through COAG we are negotiating now a new Australian Health Care Agreement, a major step in our long-term program of health reform, to take effect mid-2009.
The Government has also made new forms of community engagement one of our long-term national objectives. The Government that I lead believes that Canberra doesn't always know best, and that we must work hard to always keep in touch with the community.
To do that, we must be open and accountable to the community as well.
That is why the Government has introduced the Lobbyists' Register and Code of Conduct.
That's why in May this year we introduced amendments to the Commonwealth Electoral Act to ban foreign political donations.
It is why we also legislated to reduce the disclosure limit from the $10,000 brought in by the Liberals to $1,000  -  although the Liberals are now obstructing this in the Senate.
Before the election we also made commitments to reform Freedom of Information legislation.
The Government will deliver on those commitments.
As Senator Faulkner announced in July, the Government's FOI reforms will be implemented in two stages.
We will be introducing legislation to abolish conclusive certificates in the current sittings of Parliament.  Conclusive certificates deny people the right to challenge decisions not to release government documents.
As a result of our reforms, Ministers will no longer have an unchallenged power to rule out the release of documents.
Decisions refusing access to a government document will now be subject to full independent review on the merits.
Secondly, we will be releasing an exposure draft of legislation addressing our other FOI commitments.
The draft legislation proposes to establish a Freedom of Information Commissioner, who will be an independent statutory officer. 
Consistent with our commitments, the exposure draft will also address other recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council in their joint report on Open Government.
The exposure draft is expected to be released for public comment in late 2008 or early 2009.
That will give PANPA and other interested parties the opportunity to scrutinise and comment upon the proposed reforms.
Our strong commitment to these reforms does not mean that we won't from time to time have disagreements with some FOI applicants. That is normal.
Robust and effective internal government processes do require confidentiality.
Just as robust and effective internal corporate processes also require confidentiality.
It is a question of balance. We take the strong view that the previous Government got that balance wrong.
And we're determined to get the balance right  -  while recognising that from time to time there will be argy bargy.
The task of developing model whistleblower protection legislation has been given to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, which is chaired by Mark Dreyfus QC.
They will be reporting back to the Government by February 2009.
In fact I understand that a number of media representatives are participating in a roundtable that the Committee is holding today.
A further item on our agenda is journalist shield laws.
The Government does not believe that journalists should be prosecuted for publishing material that is merely embarrassing to the government of the day.
The Attorney-General is considering options to strengthen protections for journalists and their sources in reporting the news.  These are real, concrete reforms. They will take a while to do, but we are determined to implement them.
And they will help make government more open, more accountable and more responsive to average Australians. 
Before closing, I would like to return to a core element of the Government's long-term reform agenda  -  the Education Revolution.
For me, a first-class education is both a matter of basic fairness as well as being a national economic imperative.
We have committed as a Government to lifting school retention rates from 75% to 90% by 2020. We are doing this so that nine out of every ten children have the choice of a job, learning a trade or completing a university degree.
We know completing schooling to Year 12 level is important not just as a pathway to further education, but because without it Australians are significantly more likely to be unemployed. 
Each additional year of schooling is associated with around a 10 per cent increase in earnings.
Children who receive a better education are less likely to commit crimes in later life. 
Low educational attainment is also associated with inter-generational poverty and social exclusion.  The individual, social and economic benefits of high quality schooling are inseparable from each other. 
Education is critical to people's life chances, to our future economic growth and to our community life. The Government's revolution must be both quantitative and qualitative.
In our first Budget we allocated $19.3 billion to education initiatives over the next four years.
But we are also implementing a set of qualitative reforms:
     * We have invested $20 million and are developing a national curriculum in English, maths, the sciences and history for all school students by the end of 2010.
     * From 1 January 2009 we will be investing $625 million to encourage more students to study maths and science and pursue related careers including teaching. We need to act on the crisis of maths and science teaching in our schools.
     * We are investing also $62.4 million to re-establish a National Asian Languages and Studies Program so that more students have the opportunity to learn the language and civilisations of our closest neighbours. And again a mission of the Government is this: to make Australia over time into the most Asia-literate country across the collective West.
The most China literate country across the collective west, as this region of ours - the Asia Pacific region - becomes the geo-political, geo-strategic and geo-economic centre of the world in the 21st Century.
Two weeks ago at the National Press Club I set out our quality education agenda for Australian schools.
I announced the three central pillars of reform that the Commonwealth will be seeking to achieve in partnership with State and Territory Governments through COAG:
     * Firstly, improving the quality of teaching;
     * Secondly making school reporting more transparent, and
     * Thirdly lifting achievement in the most disadvantaged schools in our communities
There was a great deal of focus on some specific elements of what I had to say a couple weeks ago, particularly the consequences in individual cases of pursuing these reforms. 
Some reacted strongly to the idea that if we set higher standards, we should insist on them applying in every community.
Our view is, that if despite our best efforts over the long haul, we cannot make a difference to student outcomes, strong action should be expected by parents, teachers, governments and taxpayers to make things right. And I stand today by what I said back then.
But those proposals should not be seen in isolation but as part of an overall agenda to reform and to invest.
As I said when I released my outline of the Education Revolution in January of last year, that is, the month after I became leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, this revolution requires a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment, and the quality of our education outcomes.
This is required at every level of education from early childhood to advanced research.
We need to set for ourselves a new national vision  -  for Australia to become the most educated country, the most skilled economy and the best trained workforce in the world.
In our reform agenda and collaboration with the States, we are proposing two distinct pools of reform funding.
To support reforms that advance quality teaching within schools, we will introduce new National Policy Partnerships with the States. These partnerships payments are up-front payments that help drive reform and payments that are made on outcomes achieved.
In the case of disadvantaged schools we have proposed a separate policy partnership with the States to provide more resources to achieve better and measurable outcomes.
Our goal is to see an average sized school in a disadvantaged area receive in the order of an additional $500,000 per year to use flexibly to lift student outcomes.
This might enable a school to employ additional teacher aides, pay high performing teachers who help lift student outcomes to top up on their regular salary - or fund after-school homework or reading classes. 
Over time, reward funding would also be available for the schools that make real progress in these difficult challenges.
We are prepared to support those reforms up front that can make a difference. And we are ready to reward schools that go the extra mile to make sure they continue to improve.
While the priorities and the payments are distinct, their delivery needs to be integrated together so that it has the maximum impact on student learning. 
We will judge each element on the evidence of its effectiveness.  But in reality, none of the reforms we propose - school transparency, teacher quality and lifting attainment in disadvantaged school communities - can be undertaken without the other.
In short, reform is required to identify the weaknesses and then to target additional investment and to measure improvement.
One of the best example of quality schooling lies in Finland. Finland is the highest performing nation in the OECD when it comes to student outcomes.
Finland recruits the top graduates to teaching  -  in fact the top 10 per cent of university graduates become teachers and admission to teaching degrees is tightly controlled.
But they also ensure that every child excels. They employ one specialist education teacher for every seven regular teachers.
This means that children who are at greatest risk of falling behind receive additional one-on-one tuition.
In contrast, in Australia, we find the pool of children failing to meet reading, writing and numeracy benchmarks growing as children move through the primary years  -  3, 5 and 7.
The Preliminary Paper for the 2007 National Report on Schooling in Australia shows that on reading and numeracy, the proportion of our children meeting the benchmarks is declining.
     * Between years 3 and 7 the proportion of students meeting reading benchmarks declines by four percentage points [93.4 to 89.3]
     * Between years 3 and 7 the proportion of students meeting numeracy benchmarks declines by thirteen percentage points [93.2 to 80.2]
The results for children from disadvantaged backgrounds are even more stark.
That is why we need therefore a concrete plan of action.
Like Finland, we want to recruit the best graduates to teach in our schools. That is why we are prepared to offer reform payments to schooling authorities which are prepared to recruit top graduates into teaching, reward our best performing teachers and give them incentives to teach in underperforming schools.
Like Finland we want to ensure that students who need additional support to succeed can get that support.
That is why we are prepared to offer additional assistance to schools which on publicly available data are underperforming compared to similar schools.
This could involve:
     * attracting high performing principals and teachers to underperforming schools;
     * providing funding for intensive learning activities and additional coaching for those students who are falling behind; or
     * providing incentives for individual schools to extend their reach through longer opening hours, after-school study support, sports and other activities to help keep students engaged in their studies.
We want to give school leaders such as the local school principal the tools to confront the challenges they face on the ground. This is a necessary part of an effective national reform program.
In a few weeks' time I will mark the tenth anniversary of my own election to the national Parliament.  In my first speech in Parliament, I called for an education revolution. That was ten years ago.
Within weeks of becoming leader of the Federal leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, I set out a detailed case for the Education Revolution.
Now, in government, I am determined to implement that Education Revolution.
It will require tough choices, tough decisions, tough reforms.
But without significant change and significant new investment we will not achieve the best we can in the future. Therefore, this Education Revolution is necessary in 21st century economy, necessary to give our kids the best possible start in life, and necessary also for overcoming entrenched disadvantage.
The Education Revolution is central to building a stronger, fairer Australia and one that delivers a better future for all Australians.


PM: It's good to be here at Beenleigh State High School and with Brett Raguse the local member. And it's been good talking to the principal and the teachers and some of the students here at Beenleigh State High as well.
What we've been talking about is school retention. And how do you best make sure that our young people are encouraged to stay on to year 12 equivalent. 
Now, around Australia right now we have as an average retention rate through to year 12 something like about 75 per cent.
The Government has committed to raising that to 90 per cent by the year 2020.
And the reason is year 12 equivalent retention at school is the best predictor of a young person's life opportunities. The best predictor of their employment opportunities. The best predictor of how their subsequent educational opportunities and training opportunities unfold as well.
So that's the challenge.
And what we've seen here are very practical examples of what the teachers are doing cooperatively with the kids here to encourage a lift in year 12 retention.
Things like the homework club. Things like active engagement with traineeships and apprenticeships. Things like active engagement with the local PCYC. Things like active engagement with one-on-one work with some of the kids who might be finding basic reading and writing and numeracy tasks a little bit tough.
The thing is every school is different. All the challenges are different. And every young person brings their own unique story to the school.
Our challenge as a Government is not simply to say, ‘here is a target, go off and meet it'. Our challenge as a Government is to partner with schools like this one and say, ‘here is a helping hand'.
A couple of weeks ago at the National Press Club I gave a speech on Labor's education revolution. I also spoke about the need for a quality revolution, in what we do in producing the best education outcomes possible for our young people.
And part of that lies in what do we do to properly resource teachers at schools such as Beenleigh. What do we do also to make sure that schools such as this have proper levels of resourcing. And what do we also do to make sure that we've got proper accountability to the community at large.
So, when it comes to the implementation of Labor's quality education revolution, it is schools facing challenges like those at Beenleigh where we want to be in the field, in the marketplace, providing extra resources.
For example, if you look at these homework classes which are operating effectively here, you've got teachers giving up their voluntary time after school a couple of times a week to make sure that kids who need the help are getting it.
What we'd like to do is provide the principal with more resources to do that into the future.
And that's the model of the quality education agenda which Julia Gillard, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education is now negotiating through with the states.
What's the end point? We are serious about an education revolution. The education revolution is not a slogan for this Government, it's our core driving belief because we want to make sure that we boost what we invest in every young person's opportunities for the future, and at the same time, lift the quality of what our schools can produce. And that means providing our schools with more resources.
It's good to be here at Beenleigh, good to see what the kids are doing, and also, it helps us shape the implementation of the quality education agenda to make sure that schools like this get the resources they need to lift their school retention rate even higher into the future.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We promised prior to the election that we would halve HECS for kids taking maths or science courses at university, and then, halve it again if upon graduation they chose to work in such a field, including in teaching. That programme rolls out next year. It's an expensive program, it's going to cost us $625 million.
It's a lot of money. But if you look around the country, and I haven't spoken to our friends here at Beenleigh on this yet, but there is a real challenge getting enough flow through of high quality maths and science teachers across the school system.
So what do you do about it?
You can either just say ‘woe is me', and that's the end of that. Or, you can provide real incentives for kids to study those courses at university.
I ran into before just a couple of kids who just participated in a science competition at Griffith University where they had to compete against the other schools to assess the particular chemical quality of a particular acid within a particular time. And these kids won, and they're going off to the state finals in October, I seem to remember, and that's great.
One of them was indicating, or suggesting to me, that they wouldn't mind continuing in this area when they get to university. So what can we practically do? If you look at the combined HECS charges which apply to someone doing a maths or science course over four years at university, it is actually quite a large amount of money. So if we can halve that, and then halve it again on the basis that a student can work in that field for a period of five years following graduation, we think that's a practical way to get more of our brightest high school graduates into the field and to keep them.
JOURNALIST: Could you survive on the single pension?
PM: I agree very much with what Wayne has said and what Julia has said that living on the single aged pension is very, very tough, which is why we are committed to its reform.
JOURNALIST: So you couldn't live off it?
PM: I agree with both Wayne and Julia, I think it would be almost impossible to continue to live on the current single aged pension, and that's why for the first time in twelve years we are reforming the basis of the single aged pension in order to provide our seniors with greater security for the future.
JOURNALIST: How far away is an outcome?
PM: Well, remember we've been in Government for nine months, and what I'd say to the Liberals before they jump up and down, as they often do on this, is that the cost of living challenges facing pensioners did not emerge suddenly on the 24th of November 2007. These have been building for a long, long time.
There has been no fundamental attempt at reforming the aged pension system. Which is why prior to the Budget we committed to the Henry Review, and within that the work that is being done by Mr Harmer, and he's due to report in February of next year.
In the meantime, what we've done through the Budget is deliver $7.5 billion worth of additional payments to pensioners, carers and those on the disability support pension, including increasing the utilities allowance for pensioners to $500 a year and to make that permanent. Increasing it from one-hundred-and-something dollars a year to $500 a year and making that permanent.
JOURNALIST: Are you embarrassed by Mr Raguse's comments today that the pension does need to be increased?
PM: He, our position on the pension is that first of all, we have increased the utilities allowance to $500 a year, that didn't happen under the previous government.
Secondly, it is permanent, and that permanent increase hasn't happened under the previous Government and therefore, for the future, whether it's how we approach the base rate of the pension, or how we approach other payments such as the utilities allowance, the Government is examining carefully, how we provide greater financial security for aged pensioners for the long term.
This has been neglected for far too long. Let's have a bit of straight talking about this. Let's just have a bit of straight talking about this. The aged pension has been under stress for many, many years. This Government has been in for nine months and in our first six months we said, this needs to be looked at fundamentally. Here is interim help in terms of the increase in the utilities allowance and this is what we plan to do long term. And that will report in February.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well obviously in terms of the needs that we face for the pension between now and when the report comes out, you are going to have regular payments of the utilities allowance, which are now paid on a regular quarterly basis.
We promise not just to increase the utilities allowance to a single payment of $100 and something dollars a year. It is now four regular quarterly payments of $125 each payment and one of those, and another one of those payments will flow through soon.
Secondly, there has also been the regular adjustment to the age pension, which flows through in September as well.
Put together the one off pensioner bonus of $500 which was delivered before the 30th of June, secondly the increase in the utilities allowance almost by a factor of four, and thirdly making sure that those payments are made on a quarterly basis  -  these are designed to provide a helping hand on the way through until we receive the Harmer report's recommendations for the future.
JOURNALIST: So there's no more until that report comes out?
PM: Well as I said, there are these regular adjustments, there are these regular adjustments for the utilities allowance, regular adjustments to the actual pension based on the CPI and one of then again flows through as of the end of September when the, both the single aged pension and the pension for couples will increase by between $13 and $16 each, plus, as I said, the regular adjustment to the utilities allowance.
The reform program that we have got in place is to make sure that we put our aged pensioners on to a secure footing for the future.
JOURNALIST: Brett, you wanted an additional payment. Do you still stand by that?
REGUSE: Look, what the Prime Minister just said, that what we have done as a Government is provide more through this last budget. In fact I didn't actually say we needed a payment right now.
What I did say, that people are feeling the pinch right now and as soon as we can get out reform process in place to review, the first review in 50 years we have done, essentially on taxation and pensions.
So for us, this is a really, really good opportunity. But my comment was that people are feeling the pinch. Every member in this country knows that they are feeling the pinch and we are doing something about it as a Government.
PM: And the good thing about what Brett is doing now is he is out there talking to his community. What I have said to all of our members of parliament. Go out there, talk to your local communities and bring back to us what local pensioner groups are saying.
And secondly, Mr Harmer who is conducting this inquiry himself, is conducting as I understand it forums across the country. And you know what? It is time we just had some plain speaking about this. The people on the single aged pension are doing it exceptionally tough.
It is time to fix that. In our first six months in office we have established a means of doing that. And it reports next February and in the mean time, you have from us, virtually a doubling of what Mr Howard delivered by way of additional payments in the previous budget for this coming, this current financial year.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, are any of your family on the single aged pension?
PM: My mother, prior to her death was. That is how she survived.
JOURNALIST: And she got by okay on it?
PM: My mother, I have just answered the question as I did.
JOURNALIST: Wouldn't you have saved all this grief if you had done this in the budget, if you had increased the pension in the budget?
PM: Well can I just say first of all, let's put this into context. The pressures on the aged pension have been growing for years and years and years. Secondly there has been no fundamental review of the adequacy of the pension against a new means of calculating it for decades. Thirdly within our first six months in office, we established that.
Fourthly what we then do is to say for the year ahead, rather than simply say that what Mr Howard gave pensioners by way of an additional payment last year was enough, we would go further and in fact virtually double that in our first budget.
So what did Mr Howard do in his last budget? He provided a one-off $500 payment to pensioners. We did that and on top of that we increased the utilities allowance to $500 a year and made it permanent.
That's what we did. That is for the interim. Put those two payments together - $500 as a special one off payment, plus the $500 utilities allowance  -  that's about $1000 for the year that is underway, before we come to the fundamental reform which is being undertaken by Mr Harmer.
That is a rational, reasonable basis to proceed through this debate, given that, and I say this to, again, people from the political opposition, that the price pressures on pensioners did not start in November last year.
They began a long time ago. And no one - repeat, no one - has actually done the fundamental work to put this on a better and more humane and fairer basis for the future and we are determined to do that.
JOURNALIST: Brett, did you ask for on the ABC a one-off, stand alone payment between now and when Harmer reports?
RAGUSE: No in fact if you read the transcript I didn't say that. What I did say was that people want action right now. The action we are taking, as the Prime Minister has announced, this review, in February next year, that is the action that we are taking, yes.
JOURNALIST: Are you back pedalling now?
RAGUSE: Not at all, in fact read the transcript, read the transcript.
PM: That is exactly what Brett said and can I say, he is doing what I have asked which is go out and talk to pensioner groups. You can either sort of you know, play politics with this like the Liberals do, or you can engage with pensioner groups as we have done through practically every community cabinet we have held around the country in our first nine months in office.
And simultaneously, have the most senior officials in the land conduct a root and branch review of the adequacy of the pension system. All that in our first nine months in office. What happened in the previous 12 years in office? That is the question I'd like to ask. What happened for the previous 12 years in office?
I don't hear any answer from those opposite on that.
I did hear one thing though, from Margaret May, who is a shadow minister from this part of the world, who on one day said that the Liberals had committed to increasing the base rate of the pension, before Malcolm Turnbull one hour later cut her down and said the Liberals had no such policy. So let's just clarify that.
JOURNALIST: Speaking of this part of the world, is it just coincidence that you, Julia Gillard, Nicola Roxon and Wayne Swan are all (inaudible).
PM: Queensland is a nice place.
JOURNALIST: It is not that cold in Canberra at the moment?
PM: I come back to Brisbane all the time. I didn't think I needed a visa to come back mate. I was staying at Norman Park last night, is that acceptable for you? It's alright, we put the garbage out as well so it's ok.
Wayne also comes from here as and I think Victorians are able to visit as well, that's Julia, so I think you guys both need to take counselling.
JOURNALIST: On climate change there is a group of scientists saying that the Garnaut report doesn't go far enough and they want to see 40% cuts?
PM: Well there is always going to be argy bargy within the scientific community, and the policy community, and the business community over climate change and what should be done to it. Let me just say absolutely clearly - we are determined to implement a carbon pollution reduction scheme. It's the right thing to do for the planet, it's the right thing to do for the Australian economy. It's the right thing also to do for the long term interests of working families and we are going to do that.
It's going to be tough, it's going to be controversial, some people will say we have done too much, others will say we've not done enough. I'll tell you what though  -  we've pulled our head out of the sand, we've ratified Kyoto as a first act of this Government, we are now fully engaged in the global negotiations on the future of Kyoto and we are going to get on with it.
The alternative is to continue 12 years of denial, we don't intend to do that. Climate change is a challenge for the future and it requires tough decisions now and we are determined to make those decisions.
JOURNALIST: They're scientists though  -  wouldn't they know how much it needs to be cut to make a change?
PM: Well you know something - my experience is that not all scientists agree and you can have who have different views. And I can I say this about Professor Garnaut's report as well. His is an independent report. What he is contributing to is the national debate on both the underpinning science of climate change but also the policy response to it.
The key alternative though is this - either you take the alternative Government's script which is to continue to engage in climate change denial or you have a plan of action. We have a plan of action, it's called a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, it will be followed by a national energy efficiency strategy, it will be followed by a national renewable energy strategy and that's what I call a coherent response for the challenge. But there is always going to be argy bargy on the way through - free country, people are going to agree or disagree.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in you PANPA address you said that you are the only newspaper reader in your family...
PM: Is that a crime, or what?
JOURNALIST: As a newspaper journalist, no. Given the recent redundancies at Fairfax are you concerned about the future of quality journalism in Australia?
PM: Oh I stand by the remarks I made in the address at PANPA which is that newspapers are critical to the lifeblood of democracy., whether they are delivered physically or whether they are delivered online, it's just that quality journalism is important.
Quality journalism as I said whether it's electronic or whether it's with the new media or whether it's through the traditional forms of print remain vital for Australia's future and I see no diminution of that around the country and in fact there's a greater demand for more of it.
You know why? Because as I said in the speech to PANPA just before, Australians want a debate about new solutions to the new problems that we are facing.
Whether it's family disintegration at a very local level or whether it's climate change at a global level, they are actually tired of the ancient sort of political script of someone blames somebody else, they actually want some positive solutions. I think that's what they want to get on with.
Now, having quality journalism provide the means through which that debate can and should occur is important for the future as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I am not about to enter into an internal debate about the virtues of Fairfax's industrial arrangements or News Ltd's industrial arrangements or Channel 9's industrial arrangements or Channel 10's industrial arrangements or Channel 7's industrial arrangements. Did I miss anybody, AAP sorry.
JOURNALIST: Were you informed about the cuts in May when you met with the Fairfax executives?
PM: I can't recall when I last met with Fairfax because I see them all the time. But not that I can recall.
JOURNALIST: PM, RBA warning of 100,000 jobs to be lost, are we on the brink of a recession?
PM: I think on the question of employment as we have said consistently through the budget papers, that we project unemployment to increase to 4.75%. We've been upfront about that, we said it at the time of the Budget and you know something Australia is not immune from the global economic crisis.
If you look at the remarks I delivered this morning, you've got action by the United States regulatory authorities in relation to Fannie May and Freddie Mac and that is a huge action by the US Government. You have five of the seven industrial economies in the world either at zero growth or negative growth over the last quarter. You have the third big oil price shock in the last 30 years and the roll through effect on business confidence across the OECD has been huge.
But you know something - we have a clear cut economic strategy to see Australia through these difficult economic times. We intend to prosecute that and if you look at the condition of other economies around the world I believe that we are well positioned in Australia to see this economy through, we intend to do that, it will require tough decisions on the way, one of which is to retain the viability of the Government's budget surplus.
And the reason we need that is to provide a buffer for the future in uncertain times and again I would call upon the Liberals, get responsible. Unblock the passage of these bills in the Senate so that the Budget surplus can be maintained. 
Let me just come back to one final point. We spoke before about the age pension and acting on that.
So the Liberals are supporting a measure in the Senate which protects the buyers of luxury cars, half a billion dollars worth, while we're in the business of reforming the long term underpinnings of the age pension. I rest my case.
By the way on the global economy I just saw some comments from Mr Costello in the United States. I find those remarkable. There you have Mr Costello and the Liberals who gave us 10 interest rate rises in a row, $400 interest rate hike a month for average mortgage holders, the second highest interest rates in the world and he goes offshore and delivers us a lecture about the state of the Australian economy.
I think Mr Costello should reflect on the conditions he left this Australian economy in as of November last year. Inflation running at 16 year highs, 10 interest rate rises in a row resulting in a $400 a month hike on interest rate payments for average mortgage holders and on top of that the second highest interest rates in the world and Mr Costello goes offshore and bags the Australian economy, well I don't think that's the right way to go.


I am pleased to announce a number of senior appointments.
Mr Finn Pratt PSM, currently Associate Secretary in the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, will be appointed as CEO of Centrelink for a five-year period from a date in the near future to be determined by the Minister for Human Services.
Mr Pratt has a wealth of experience in the delivery of employment services.
I wish Mr Pratt well in his new role.
Mr Pratt replaces Mr Jeff Whalan, who announced his retirement in May after contributing admirably in many senior roles.
I am also pleased to announce the reappointment of three Departmental Secretaries.
Dr Jeffrey Harmer will be reappointed as Secretary of the Department of Families, Housing and Community Services, Ms Jane Halton PSM will be reappointed as Secretary of the Department of Health and Ageing, and Mr Michael Taylor AO will be reappointed as Secretary of the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government.
Each appointment is for a five-year period with effect from 26 October 2008.
I appreciate the continuing contribution of the three Secretaries.


Last year I went to the RSL's National Congress in Melbourne as Leader of the Opposition.
And when I spoke, I outlined our commitments for veterans.
Since then we have begun to honour each and every one of those commitments.
And over the weekend the Minister and I announced the fulfilment of another.
We have established a new forum to give veterans a voice in the highest levels of Government.
It is the Prime Ministerial Advisory Council on Ex-service Matters.
Together with the RSL the Council will provide government with continuing advice on the needs of the veterans community.
This proceeds from a deeply held view on the part of the Government that the first responsibility of government is the security of the nation.
And it follows therefore that government has a particular responsibility towards those who have worn the nation's uniform.
Because there is in my view no higher calling than to wear the uniform of Australia.
I am also pleased to announce tonight the appointment of the new Secretary of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
Mr Ian Campbell the current Australian Electoral Commissioner, will be appointed as Secretary for a five-year term from 22 September 2008.
Mr Campbell brings a lot of experience to the position.
He was deputy president of the Repatriation Commission and a member of the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission between 2000 and 2005.
He has also held Senior Executive Service positions in the employment and health portfolios.
I am sure that Mr Campbell will be working closely with the RSL in the years ahead.
Tonight I would like to speak to you about the long-term defence of Australia.
While I will focus on defence, the Government takes a broad view of what constitutes national security.
We need to respond to our increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, where the lines between traditional notions of external and domestic threats are blurred.
We need a new whole-of-government national security strategy of which our national defence policy is the core component.  
We need a new approach that brings together all the elements of traditional and non-traditional security capabilities that will ensure Australia responds to the full breadth of the threat spectrum that now confront us:
     * Responding to the increased militarisation of our own region;
     * Dealing with the continuing threat of terrorism;
     * Acting on the challenges to sovereignty facing the Pacific Island countries;
     * Preparing for the new challenges of energy security; and
     * Anticipating the impact of climate change on long-term food and water security.
As veterans you understand the breadth of the challenges we face in the defence of this nation.
During this session of Parliament we will have Australia's first ever National Security Statement.
That Statement will set out the way we will approach the full range of our national security challenges  -  from defence to domestic security.
It will outline the institutional framework within which the Government will determine our national security policy settings for the future.
Defence, of course, remains the single most critical component of national security.
And getting long-term defence policy settings right will be done through the Defence White Paper due later this year.
The White Paper will set out in detail the strategic terrain we face.
It will also set out the type of defence capabilities Australia will need.
It will also dictate the type of force structure we will need  -  a structure which will in part need to last us until the middle decades of the century.
The 21st century looms as the century of the Asia Pacific.
By 2030, and possibly even by 2020, the Asia-Pacific region will be home to the largest and most dynamic economies in the world.
And these economies will all be closely tied to each other through trade and investment.
This economic power means that the Asia-Pacific region will also be the source of much, if not most of the world's income, investment, ideas, innovation and technology.
This will bring enormous economic opportunities for Australia.
It will also bring some strategic risks.
And the task of an effective national security policy is to maximise the opportunities and minimise the risks.
Driving much of the change in our region will be the rise of China.
China will be the most dynamic major economy in the first half of this century - followed by India.
According to some estimates, by 2020 China will replace the United States as the world's largest economy.
China's economic growth will change the way it sees its own role in the world.
And it will change the way others see China  -  the Olympics are a great example of that.
Over the long term it is clear that China will have more political influence in our region.
Our other major Asian trading partner, Japan, will remain a major world economy even if it is not recording the growth rates of China.
An ageing population will have a major impact on Japan by 2050, with more than one-third of its population over 65.
But given its stature in the region and its continuing strength, Japan remains a major global and regional power.
The United States is likely to remain the world's only superpower through to the mid-century.
Over the coming decades, the United States may see its position decline relative to other economies, but it will remain a major economic influence and a powerful source of ideas, innovation and technology in the global economy.
You only have to look at the US's unmatched capacity for transforming new ideas into new technology.
The United States accounts for around one-third of all world patents.
By contrast, Australia accounted for 1.6 per cent and China 1.8 per cent in 2004.
The United States has shown time and time again that it can rise to any challenge and constantly evolve.
So nobody should ever underestimate the ability of the US to maintain its global leadership role.
The United States will also remain strategically dominant given the vast array of military capabilities available to future US administrations.
The Asia-Pacific region will become more prosperous and its population will continue to grow.
Militarily, however, as it has already become economically and politically, the Asia-Pacific will become a much more contested region.
The region's total population will exceed four billion by 2020, or 56 per cent of the world's total. 
Australia's population will only experience modest growth, growing to around 35 million by 2050.
But China's population is expected to peak at around 1.5 billion in 2030.
India will near the 1.8 billion mark by mid-century.
Indonesia's population could be as high as 350 million.
The demographic changes in our region will mean that by 2020 when we look to our north, we will see a very different region to the one we see now  -  one where population, food, water and energy resource pressures will be great.
We have to add one more element to this mix when we are looking at the future, and that is the existing military and political fault lines.
We still have North and South Korea technically at war.
We have mainland China and Taiwan still unable to resolve basic questions of sovereignty  -  although recent developments might give rise to some optimism.
We have unresolved border disputes between many countries including between China and India and between China and its maritime neighbours in the South China Sea  -  but it is reassuring to note that these disputes have been managed to this point.
In short, we have a rapidly changing region, but one still characterised by a number of unresolved flash points arising from unsettled territorial disputes.
As nations grow and become more affluent, they also update their military forces.
We see this in our own region.
We see a substantial arms build-up over time.  
We need to be aware of the changes taking place. And we must make sure that we have the right mix of capabilities to deal with any contingencies that might arise in the future.
The growth in Asian and US military expenditures has dominated recent increases in global military spending.
And, as a general observation, the modernisation of Asian military forces is being characterised by significant improvements in air combat capability, and naval forces  -  including greater numbers and more advanced submarines.
We are also witnessing a  gradually increasing ability to use military assets more powerfully through more advanced communications, joint command and intelligence systems.
As we look at our own Australian defence needs for the decades ahead, we need to ensure we are at the forefront of military technology development and acquisition.
Our armed forces must be equipped to deal with the emerging security environment.
For that, we need to further develop key capabilities.
We need a first rate and flexible land force  -  one capable of taking on challenges from contributing to high-end military engagements through to delivering post-conflict reconstruction support.
We need an enhanced naval capability that can protect our sea lanes of communication and support our land forces as they deploy.
And we need an air force that can fill support and combat roles and can deter, defeat and provide assistance to land and maritime forces.
It is not easy to tailor a force to meet every possible contingency, so we need to choose our equipment and our people carefully.
Of course, technology itself does not win wars or ensure a nation's defence.
To make the most out of technology you need the best trained, best commanded forces possible.
Properly trained professional soldiers with the ability to think tactically and strategically are the decisive factor.
And on this score, Australia has been richly blessed as evidenced by our soldier's performance in the field.
But all of this will come at a price.
That is why the Government has already committed to making sure we stay ahead of the game by extending the real growth of the defence budget by 3 per cent per annum to 2017-18.
That is why defence has been quarantined from the Government's efficiency dividend in the last budget.
That is why we will continue to do so in to the future  -  so that any savings realised in the defence portfolio are re-invested back in to the future of the ADF.
We also have to realise that our national security relies on more than a strong defence force.
It relies also on careful management of the foreign relations we have with countries around us with our allies and friends around the world.
The Government's strategic policy involves three components  -  what we call the three pillars of our international policy:
     * a firm commitment to our alliance with the United States;
     * comprehensive engagement with Asia and the Pacific; and
     * comprehensive engagement with the United Nations and the multilateral order.
Our alliance with the United States is and will remain the bedrock of our strategic policy.
It is an alliance with a long history.
And the military cooperation between our two nations goes back even further  -  to the First World War.
This year is the 90th anniversary of the Battle of Hamel when Australian and US troops first fought side-by-side under the command of Sir John Monash.
Under this Government the alliance will be strengthened through greater and closer operational cooperation.
Under this Government, security policy cooperation will also be strengthened with a number of regional partners including Japan, Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Maylaysia and Singapore. 
When I visited Japan in June, the Prime Minister and I agreed to deepen our security cooperation even further.
When I visited Korea at the start of August I agreed with President Lee Myung-bak that Australia and Korea would begin to look at how we could move in the same direction.
We already have a strong history of military cooperation with South Korea  -  I think we need to use that base to build our cooperation for the decades ahead.
Across South East Asia I am also determined to strengthen our security cooperation.
The strength of our ties with Malaysia and Singapore must be maintained and developed.
The Five Powers Defence Arrangement has been an important part of our defence engagement since 1971.
And it remains the only multilateral defence treaty in our region with an operational element, which helps in our shared fight against terrorism.
With Indonesia I was pleased that President Yudhoyono and I agreed in June to strengthen our cooperation under the Lombok Treaty.
The Lombok Treaty provides a framework for increased security cooperation to combat terrorism, and transnational crime and other security threats.
It provides a framework for cooperation between our defence and domestic law enforcement agencies.
We are committed to developing fully this security relationship.
The Government also wishes to expand its security policy cooperation with India.
Together with our security policy dialogue with China.
Our security and political relationships with our smaller neighbours are also critical.
This Government has deliberately sought to put our relations with the Pacific island nations on a new footing.
We recognise that Australia and the Pacific Island nations share a common goal of stability and prosperity in our region and that the best way to achieve that is through closer cooperation  -  including in defence and security.
As the Asia-Pacific region changes, we will need to think about how we want the region to look in 2020.
We need to think about how we can ensure that our region is stable and prosperous in the decades ahead.
To that end, we have started a regional conversation about how to shape the future of our region, rather than simply let it be shaped by events.
We have started the discussion about how we can develop an Asia Pacific Community.
If we do not start to think now about where we want the region to go, we run the risk of competition and tension overriding cooperation.
Australia is well placed to begin this process of discussion.
As a middle power, we can propose ideas that other larger powers might have trouble taking the lead on.
Another example of this is the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
The danger posed by nuclear weapons has not disappeared.
In fact, some argue that the threat is as great as it has ever been because more states now have nuclear weapons and the threat of the technology spreading, including perhaps to terrorist groups, has grown.
So we need to galvanise the international community behind efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and work towards the goal of their eventual elimination.
I have appointed Gareth Evans to co-chair the Commission with former Japanese Foreign Minister Ms Yoriko Kawaguchi.
Their  task is to lead a group of experts to come up with some new thinking  -  based on hard-headed strategic analysis  -  about how we deal with nuclear weapons.
And about how we re-energise the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Australia has the credibility and the drive to lead initiatives like this  -  in part because they are in our interest, but also because they make a positive contribution to the international community.
As a middle power, Australia has much to gain from strong global institutions, particularly the United Nations.
That is why we are seeking a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-14.
Creative middle power diplomacy is once again hard at work in enhancing our enhancing our security policy cooperation across East Asia; in strengthening our alliance with the United States; in reaching the regional and multilateral nuclear non-proliferation agenda; and in building the region's long-term cooperative architecture.
But diplomacy must always be reinforced by a credible national defence strategy .
The changes in our region are, in reality, the major changes facing the world.
I see two main strands to our response to the changing strategic terrain.
First, we have a diplomatic strategy that is aimed at keeping our region peaceful and prosperous.
Second, we need to make sure that we have an Australian Defence Force that can answer the call if it is needed.
The calls we make will be diverse  -  from responding to natural disasters to conducting offensive combat operations  -  and our forces need to be able to respond to a range of contingencies.
And the truth is our defence has been overstretched for a long time.
The tempo of current operations has too often taken precedence over proper planning for personnel and equipment for the future.
Getting this right will require much work.
And that is what we are doing through the White Paper process.
The Government looks forward to a long-term constructive relationship with the RSL as we build Australia's defence force to meet the demands of the 21st century.


PM: National security is the first responsibility of government and defence, within that is the first responsibility of government. And part of planning for the future means planning for our future defence needs.
What the Government is determined to do is to ensure that Australia meets our future defence challenges.
Later this year we will be delivering our first national security statement to the Parliament - the first time Australia has had such a statement to the Parliament.
And that will be followed by a defence White Paper, which will outline Australia's future strategic scenario, Australia's future defence capability needs and our future recommended force structure.
This is an important year because the decisions we take this year will shape very much what Australia's defence forces look like out to the middle decades of this century.
This 21st Century is the century of the Asia Pacific. We see the rise of huge new powers in our own region. Economically strong, but on the back of economic growth comes also greater investment in military expenditure. And as a result of that we have therefore, huge increases in military spending here in our own region, our own neighbourhood, our own backyard.
So Australia's response to that under the Government that I lead is that Australia must be prepared.
And therefore it is important that we are in a position in the future to deal with any future challenges which might arise, both through our defence preparedness but also through our wider national security policy and foreign policy actions also to try and ensure that we have a peaceful and stable environment through this century.
One of the challenges we face is the fact that there is not just this increase in military expenditure across this region, but also that presents therefore challenges in terms of Australia's ability long term to defend its own sea-lines of communication.
When we look at places like this where we have huge exports going to the rest of the world, we must be in a position in the future to defend Australia's own sea-lines of communication.
That means having sufficient naval capability to do it.
If we are going to defend our sea-lines of communication to the rest of the world, we have got to make sure that we have got the naval capability to underpin that. And Australia therefore must have necessary maritime power in the future in order to give that effect.
The challenge that we face is that as of when the Government took over, navy in particular was under severe stress. For example within navy there is something like 24 separate skills categories which are currently suffering considerable personnel shortfalls, 24 separate skills categories. That is the challenge that we inherited.
Now across our naval personnel where we have something like 11,000 plus personnel, we must as a matter of priority start to rebuild those skills deficits in our navy. So the challenge for us in the future is not just to reequip navy with the necessary numbers of personnel, but to make sure that we have got enough naval assets out there to defend our sea-lines of communication.
So to conclude: first line of responsibility for government is defence. And part of defence is to make sure that we can defend our sea-lines of communication to make sure that our exports get to the rest of the world. And to do that Australia needs sufficient naval capability into the future, and we therefore need to close the skills gaps which currently exist within navy, the 24 sets of skills gaps that we inherited from the previous Government.
That's going to take a lot of work, it's going to take a lot of planning, it's going to take a lot of finance. But this is the direction in which the Government's thinking heads as we move towards the completion of the Defence White Paper for later this year, and the national security statement as well. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: So are you proposing a dramatic expansion of the Navy?
PM: Well, Australia is a maritime state. We have significant maritime interests, not just in terms of our own immediate interests in the south-west Pacific, but more broadly in the defence of our own sea-lines of communication.
So as a nation you've got to be serious about defending your sea-lines of communication in the future. And that means having sufficient naval capability to do it, and it means planning ahead to the middle of the century to make sure that those ships, subsurface and surface ships, are planned for, that they are invested in and the personnel necessary to keep them operating are there.
And as I've said, as of when the Government took over, we've inherited a real problem on our hands. Navy at present, absent any expansion, is having difficulty providing personnel in all its critical skill categories. There's a major job of work to be done here.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) on top of the spending that we already know about?
PM: The Defence White Paper will go to the detail of that. The Government has already indicated that for the next decade, we intend to provide three per cent real annual growth in defence outlays. That is to give our defence planners certainty for the future.
The Defence White Paper will begin to outline the sorts of investments that the Government and the nation needs to make.
What I am doing today, and following on from my address to the RSL National Conference here in Townsville last night, is to indicate very clearly that for the Government a major priority is to ensure that we have got enough naval capability in the future, enough naval assets, enough naval personnel, and therefore enough funding put aside to invest in that long term.
We are either serious about Australia as a maritime power into the 21st Century or we're not. This Government is serious.
JOURNALIST: Are we sending the right message to our foreign neighbours? Are we becoming paranoid of them?
PM: Well, we have got to deal with facts and reality. Australia is in a region where there is an explosion in defence expenditure, or arms expenditure, across large parts of the Asia-Pacific region. So, you can either ignore that, or you can take practical steps in response to it at the defence level.
But secondly, it's a question of what you also do through your diplomacy. Remember in the first nine months in this Government what I've advanced is a proposal for an Asia-Pacific community. That is a community involving all the states of the Asia-Pacific region, so that we can foster a common culture of security cooperation, not conflict.
So what I'm saying is you need a strong diplomacy to encourage peace, stability and cooperation - at the same time being vigilant in the preparation of our national defence.
Both of these are part of an integrated national security strategy. Not one, not the other, but both.
JOURNALIST: It has often been said that there is potential at Townsville for a naval base. What do you think about that?
PM: Well, the Defence White Paper will examine the future of where all of our defence assets and defence installation should be.
Townsville is critical to the defence, long term defence assets of Australia. The air force base here is extremely important. The army base is extremely important. These are core elements of Australia's overall defence posture.
Future planning, however, on the detail of installations and the detailed deployment of assets, that's best left to the Defence Chiefs. What I am saying though, as the country's Prime Minister is we need to prepare for the future.
There is an arms build up across the Asia-Pacific region, and Australia therefore, must take appropriate preparations for the long term future itself, at the same time as advancing our diplomacy.
Both these things are part of an integrated, rational approach to national security policy.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) an arms race if we are building up our Navy in the region?
PM: Well can I say that there has been an arms race underway, or an arms build- up let me put is in those terms, across the Asia Pacific region for the better part of the last decade.
What I am saying is when I look at Navy, the Australian Navy, we need to make sure that we have enough capability there to deal with future challenges. And the Navy that we have inherited is one which has 24 major skills categories where we don't have enough personnel. That's right now before we talk about any enhanced naval capability.
There is a huge job to be done here. What I am saying is the Government is up to the task because we believe it's important for the future.
Strong defence, strong foreign policy, encouraging peace, cooperation and stability, at the same time making sure that Australia is always prepared. And in this part of Australia, Northern Australia, North Queensland knows very much what it's about to be prepared.
JOURNALIST: Inevitably mean that we don't have to increase our defence budget quite significantly wont it?
PM: Well what we have allocated already is the only area of Government that we've quarantined from efficiency dividends in Canberra is the Defence budget. That's why we have indicated with absolute clarity three per cent real growth for our defence budget out for the next decade. That is a guarantee not given to any other arm of Government, any other arm of Government.
And the reason is our defence planners need that level of certainty. We will examine carefully what the Defence White Paper says on the detail, both for this decade and beyond. But I am saying quite clearly that if we are to be serious as a maritime power and defending our sea-lines of communication, Australia needs a naval capability which is able to do that.
We need to plan for it, we need to provide the manpower for it and we need to provide the funding for it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Let's see what the Defence White Paper has to say. As I said the Defence White Paper will take us not just to the next decade but the critical thing for all Australians to understand is that we are making defence decisions here which take us out to the middle of the century, the middle decades of this century.
And we are looking at a time in the Asia Pacific region and world history where for the first time in several hundred years we are going to have powers other than Anglo Saxon powers who will be dominant players in the world and therefore Australia must be prepared through its diplomacy, through its foreign policy and through its defence policy.
And that's what I describe as an integrated national security policy and more of this will be developed in the national security statement which is made to the parliament soon.
JOURNALIST: Question on climate change quickly?
JOURNALIST: International panel on Government panel on climate change report recently about meat consumption dropping down to one meat session a week. Any comments on that?
PM: One
JOURNALIST: Eating meat only once a week.
PM: I kind of like meat so I will have a read of that report. Thank you.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Tony Burke today visited Emerald in central Queensland to discuss interim findings from the national review of drought policy.
They met with Peter Kenny, head of the panel appointed by the Rudd Government to examine the social impact of drought, and President of AgForce in Queensland.
The Government commissioned the social panel report in June, along with an economic assessment by the Productivity Commission and a scientific report from the Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO.
The Prime Minister discussed the social panel's initial findings about the impact of drought on individuals, families and rural communities.
The Rudd Government understands that this drought has had a terrible social impact on many communities.
Climate change could place even more strain on hard-working families on the land, so we must act now to better prepare for future challenges.
Mr Burke said that Government was committed to reforming the system in consultation with rural communities and welcomed their extensive input so far.
The panel held 25 public meetings across the country, including in Alice Springs (NT), Inverell, Bourke, Gilgandra, Forbes, Griffith and Goulburn (NSW), Esperance, Morawa, Wongan Hills and Merredin (WA), Shepparton, Birchip, Mildura and Colac (VIC), Bothwell (TAS), Gatton, Dalby, Charleville, Longreach and Emerald (QLD), Keith, Gawler, Orroroo and Wudinna (SA).
More than 1,000 people attended the meeting, and in addition the panel has received more than 236 public submissions.
According to the panel's early findings, the current system of drought support is failing farming communities because it is too heavily focussed on supporting businesses, rather than people.
Key early findings from the panel include:
     * An absence of coordination has emerged over more than a decade, involving a wide range of local, state and federal drought support services;
     * Support services often overlap, leaving gaps in critical areas such as mental health;
     * There is a need to plan better for social wellbeing and encourage personal development training;
     * There is a need to plan for ‘dryness' as a permanent condition in many parts of Australia.
Mr Kenny said the panel's visits to rural communities had allowed many farmers to have a direct say in government policy-making for the first time.
The social panel will meet again this week to continue its work and is expected to provide a final report to the government within a few weeks.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today turned the sod on Townsville's $190 million Port Access Road, up to two years earlier than originally anticipated.
The Australian and Queensland governments are each contributing $95 million to link the Flinders and Bruce Highways to the Port of Townsville  -  a project which could help attract up to $10 billion worth of investment to the region.
“The early start on this vital project was only made possible by the decision to bring forward $20 million as part of our first Budget,” Mr Rudd said.
“We took this decision because we recognise the importance of 21st century transport infrastructure to the region's rapidly growing economy.”
The road is now scheduled to be completed by the end of 2011 or early 2012.
The Port of Townsville handles 10 million tonnes of freight a year  -  a figure that's expected to triple over the next 20 years  -  and supports up to 7,000 direct and indirect jobs.
Minister for Infrastructure Anthony Albanese said improving access would allow major industries, such as livestock, sugar and mining, to move goods to and from the Port more quickly and safely.
Currently, road trains are required to break down into single trailers on the outskirts of Townsville before accessing the port via semi-suburban roads.
The new road will allow them to drive to the port directly without having to remove their trailers, significantly increasing efficiency and reducing costs.
“Residents living near the Port of Townsville have long been calling for better road infrastructure,” Mr Albanese said.
“This project will greatly improve their quality of life by reducing the amount of noise, dust and vibrations caused by heavy vehicle traffic.”
The road will be delivered in two stages  -  the Stuart Bypass (Stage 1) and the Eastern Access Corridor (Stage 2). The contract for Stage 1 was recently awarded to the Abi Group/Seymour Whyte Joint Venture.
“The Port Access Road project demonstrates the Government's commitment to providing North Queensland with high-quality, well-planned roads,” Mr Rudd said.
“Improving the links between existing freight routes and major export points like the Port of Townsville is vital to Australia's future prosperity and national productivity.”
The Rudd Labor Government's plans for North Queensland also include:
     * $55 million to duplicate the 5 kilometre Douglas Arterial from University Drive to Upper Ross River Road to four lanes, with planning already underway;
     * $110 million to duplicate 7 kilometres of the Bruce Highway from Vantassel Street to Flinders Highway to four lanes;
     * $90 million to realign about 4 kilometres of highway on the northern side of the Cardwell Range, including a rail overpass, widening the road and adding overtaking lanes to boost safety;
     * $60 million to build up to 30 new overtaking lanes between Sarina and Cairns, a 60 per cent increase for this stretch of the Bruce Highway; and
     * Flood immunity works around Tully and between Townsville and Cairns.
This financial year the Rudd Labor Government will invest $3.2 billion in nation-building road and rail projects, including more than $500 million to make an early start on 45 election commitments such as the Townsville Port Access Road.
Queensland Minister for Main Roads, Warren Pitt, welcomed the Prime Minister and Minister Albanese to Townsville for the sod turning.
“This is a much needed piece of work for the community of Townsville and is long overdue,” Mr Pitt said.
“This joint project is another sign of the commitments of the Australian and State Governments to building vital infrastructure across Queensland.”
The state contribution is part of the Queensland Government's $16.2 billion commitment to roads over the next five years.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history. 
We gather to pay tribute to Edward Gough Whitlam.
12th Leader of the Australian Labor Party.
21st Prime Minister of this Australian Commonwealth.
Great reformer of this great Australian nation.
To pay tribute in simple terms is to say thank you.
And there are many who would say thank you.
Those young Australians, often the first in their families, given their first opportunity to go to university.
Those Aboriginal Australians whose land rights were finally and formally recognised under the laws of the Commonwealth.
Those migrant families who joined a warm, welcoming and genuinely multicultural Australia which for the first time celebrated diversity rather than demanding uniformity.
The women of Australia who were guaranteed, for the first time under law, genuine equality in the workplace.
The workers in industries who rose to the challenge of a world where tariff protection had become unsustainable and where the Whitlam Government had the courage to recognise that to survive we had to compete in the world, rather than protect ourselves from it.
The sick and the infirm who, for the first time, were afforded universal health insurance where treatment was prioritised according to physical need rather than the ability to pay.
The authors, the artists and the filmmakers who gained their start on a Whitlam fellowship and who gave expression to a new independent, and creative Australian identity.
This is an extraordinary legacy of an extraordinary man.
It is the legacy of a man who realised there was no time to be lost.
A man who realised that opportunities were to be seized  -  rather than allow opportunities to be squandered.
These qualities go to the temperament of his leadership.
But they also point to the content of his policy.
To the utter dismay of his political opponents, so much of his reform program has survived - despite the succession of conservative administrations that followed him.
Each trying to tear him down.
Each failing miserably in their most miserable of tasks.
The question to be asked is why has so much of the Whitlam legacy endured not just the ravages of time  -  but also the systematic assault of the conservative political establishment?
The answer, I believe, is that in his mind's eye, Gough Whitlam could see a future for Australia vastly different from so much of its suffocating past.
The answer, I believe, also lies in the fact that in the great tradition of progressive politics, Whitlam sought to shape that future, rather than simply respond to events.
And that in shaping that future, he brought to bear the great, the good, the continuing values of our movement and of our nation  -  that we could craft an Australia that was strong, secure and competitive while not extinguishing the fires of the Australian soul.
A soul that by instinct, by inclination and hewn by historical experience, was animated by the possibility that this nation should also be a place of cooperation, of compassion, of creativity  -  and above all, a fair go for all.
Labor's mission has been to embrace both these traditions  -  what others have called a nation of ‘hard heads and soft hearts'.
The conservatives' mission has been to deny that any such reconciliation is possible.
We have the audacity to believe that it is.
Politically theirs has always been the easier task  -  to argue that, in the end, the only practical proposition is economic self interest.
Ours has been a more complex task  -  as we argue that self interest, in the absence of a parallel concern for the interests of others, is incomplete.
That the interest of the individual and of the commons are inseparable.
That rather than contradicting each other, in fact they temper each other and reinforce each other.
Furthermore, we are so bold as to hold this truth to be self-evident. 
Nowhere is this truth more self-evident today than in the great debate of our age  -  the short term self-interests of some against the long term sustainabiliy of our planet that ultimately sustains us all.
So whether it is the role of government against the market;
The role of the economy against the needs of the physical environment that sustains the economy;
Or the role of national self-interest against the need for international cooperation to deal with the common challenges of humanity;
The principle is a continuing principle  -  and constitutes the core dividing line between progressive politics and conservative politics; between social democrats and neo-liberals, and, in Australia, between Labor and the Coalition.
That self-interest and the interests of our fellow human beings are inseparable.
Labor therefore sees itself in the tradition of the reforming centre of Australian politics.
Recognising the power of markets and the limitations of markets where markets fail.
Recognising the abiding importance of public goods including education, the environment and security for all.
Recognising the power of targeted government intervention  -  while also recognising the limitations of government in the form of all-providing state that only serves to suffocate the enterprise of individuals.
We have seen this tradition of the reforming centre alive in Whitlam, alive in Hawke, alive in Keating  -  and equally alive in the policy direction of this new Australian Labor Government of today.
Gough Whitlam's visionary government was one of those turning points - in contemporary jargon, ‘tipping points' - in our party's and our nation's history.
The Australian Labor Party was founded in 1891.
Gough Whitlam was born only a quarter of a century later in 1916 -and therefore has lived a life that has spanned most of the history of our party, itself one of the oldest continuing political parties in the world.
1916 was the year that Andrew Fisher resigned as Prime Minister after leading the world's first majority Labor Government - Fisher's government having helped deliver great reforms including the arbitration system, the aged pension and the Commonwealth Bank together with great national institutions such as the Royal Australian Navy.
A quarter of a century later, when John Curtin was Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam served his nation in uniform.
When Curtin died, in 1945, Whitlam joined the Australian Labor Party.
When Chifley died in 1951, Whitlam put himself forward for preselection for Werriwa which he won and held for the following quarter of a century.
He spent 20 years in Parliament before he came to government.
They were 20 years of deep disappointment.
Disappointment but never despair.
He did not buckle.
He did not waver.
He did not just keep the faith.
He fought the fight.
Beginning with the fight to reform what had become a moribund party  -  the first of three great Whitlam reforms which I believe symbolizes so much of his leadership.
When Gough became leader, the party had been out of office for nearly 20 years.
The parliamentary party had balkanised.
The party organisation had atrophied.
The party policy platform had ossified.
Gough Whitlam turned all that on its head.
Against the faceless men, it was crash through or crash.
And Whitlam crashed through.
His core message was that the Labor Party was open to all people of good will who supported the progressive political project  -  not just a narrow protected industrial group.
Whitlam's tradition of party reform continues to speak to us today.
The windows of the party must continue to be held wide open to all comers: from business, from the unions, from the professions, from the trades, from rural Australia, from immigrant Australia, from all corners of Australian life.
Ours must be a genuinely broad church, representing the face of contemporary Australia, united by Labor's continuing values and the urgent demand of translating these values to the challenges of the future - without being hide-bound by archaic formulas from the past.
One of those challenges of the future is our engagement with our neighbours in Asia  -  and here, once again, Whitlam was a reformer ahead of his time.
Once again, he could see in his mind's eye a different future for Australia.
While the conservatives remained blinded by the Cold War, Whitlam saw the beginning of a new strategic and economic relationship between China and the West arising from the Sino-Soviet split.
The conservatives railed against him for embracing China.
The very same conservatives were rendered mute when Kissinger and Nixon did the same.
Whitlam looking to the future.
The conservatives, once again, lost in the past.
Whitlam looked to the future on how to engage China 35 years before it rose to become the world's second largest economy and prospectively the largest. (Remember in Gough's day, China's economy was smaller than that of Australia).
On China and the wider region, Whitlam began the work which his sucessors have continued.
How to engage China on the economy.
How to engage China on climate change.
And how to engage China, Japan, and the United States in a manner which preserves the peace of the Pacific Century  -  rather than allowing the century to drift in the direction of conflict.
These are the challenges of which the new Australian Government is deeply seized  -  driven also by our vision to make Australia the most China-literate and Asia-literate country in the collective West.
But in this setting at Sydney University, we should pay particular tribute to the Whitlam Government for a third great reform which has given so many women and men the opportunity to go to university.
Previously, the cloisters of great universities like this had been reserved as finishing schools for the privileged.
But Gough Whitlam, himself a graduate of our oldest university, flung open its gates to all. Because he believed that access to an education of the highest quality should be determined on one factor alone: merit.
Whitlam recognised that restricting education to the wealthy only entrenches  existing privilege, and prevents our finest minds from reaching their fullest potential.
Whitlam recognised that our nation's economic prosperity is directly linked to the prosperity of our minds.
But the revolution achieved by the Whitlam Government was not limited to the university sector.
It also extended to our schools. For decades, Labor had refused, for ideological reasons, to fund Catholic and independent schools.
But Whitlam changed all that.
Instead he treated government and non-government schools alike and allocated funding according to one simple principle: need.
‘Merit' and ‘need'. Put those propositions together and you begin to build a reform agenda for the future.
But there's one particular Australian who owes a debt of gratitude to Gough Whitlam for the way he transformed Australia.
A high school kid from the Queensland country.
A kid inspired by Gough and Margaret's audacious and historic journeys to China. 
A kid for whom that visit sparked a lifelong interest in Australia's national destiny with its neighbours and with the world.
A kid who lived Gough Whitlam's dream that every child should have a desk with a lamp on it where he or she could study.
A kid whose mum told him after the '72 election that it might just now be possible for the likes of him to go to university.
A kid from the country of no particular means and of no political pedigree who could therefore dream that one day he could make a contribution to our national political life.
That kid was me.
And more than 30 years after the Whitlam revolution, I am proud to stand before you as Prime Minister.
And I owe it to the fact that I am the beneficiary of a Whitlam education.
Some ask why I believe in an education revolution.
The answer is simple: I and many others are the beneficiaries of one.
Education is the engine room of equity.
Education is the engine room of the economy.
Therefore to invest in education is to invest in our future  -  as individuals and as a nation.
The galvanising vision of the government is to become the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
This must be our ambition for the nation.
It must be our ambition for ourselves.
There is no alternative for the 21st Century when knowledge-intensive industries will determine the wealth of nations.
It is not in my view a coincidence that, two centuries ago the author of the original “Wealth of Nations”, Adam Smith, deemed education should always be a public good.
To achieve an education revolution requires a revolution in how much we invest as well as how we invest it.
It requires a revolution in our quantitative investments.
And in our qualitative investment.
An emphasis on the resources we put in to education as well as an emphasis on what comes out in the form of educational outcomes for our young people.
From early childhood education.
Through schools.
Through vocational education and training.
Through universities.
Through research.
Through innovation.
Through investing in the knowledge-based industries of the future.
As a government of the reforming centre, Labor's reform agenda is a broad one.
To build a more secure Australia by widening the compass of our national security engagement, by enhancing our national defence, and by expanding our diplomacy abroad in the great Labor tradition of creative middle-power diplomacy.
To build a stronger Australia through a policy of responsible economic management, a long term program of economic reform to lift our productivity growth, and an ambitious plan of 21st Century nation-building.
To build a fairer Australia through a fair and flexible industrial relations system; tax reform for low and middle income Australians; the reform of income support payments; tackling housing affordability and homelessness and acting on closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
To build an Australia capable of responding to the challenges of the future including climate change, the Murray-Darling, the ageing of the population, the challenges facing our health and hospital system and the reform of the federation.
And through all of this, to explore a new way of governing so that government continues to engage the Australian community on local community needs between elections  -  and not just at election time.
The reform agenda is as wide as it is deep - as it is urgent.
A reform agenda that is now doubly necessary given the squandered opportunities of the decade past.
Reviews of the Whitlam legacy have tended to be of two types: hagiography or demonization.
Gough, like the rest of us, is mortal.
And all mortals are capable of human failure.
And the Whitlam Government had its failures.
But the successes obtained in three short years of the Whitlam government have endured now for a generation and more.
And that is because as a movement we have sought to write the nation's history  -  while our opponents have sought to re-write it rather than write their own.
As a movement we have sought to use our political incumbency to plan for the nation's future  -  rather than use incumbency (as our opponents have) for the sake of incumbency itself.
As a movement we have sought to be nation builders  -  rather than our opponents who have never believed in nation building.
But beyond all these things, we as a movement have always sought to build up the nation's hopes rather than play to the nation's fears  -  as our opponent routinely have done.
As others have said, to play to the good angels in our human nature, rather than the bad.
To build up rather than to tear down.
To Include rather than exclude.
To unite rather than divide.
This has been the mission of Labor.
To craft a secure Australia, a strong Australia, a competitive Australia  -  but also an Australia where the fair go is not just an idle sentiment from the ballads and Paterson and Lawson in our past, but an enlivening and integral part of our future as well.
It is to this great cause that this remarkable Australian has dedicated his life.
And it is for this that a grateful party and a grateful the nation pays tribute to him.


The winners of the inaugural Prime Minister's Literary Awards have been announced tonight at Parliament House in Canberra.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd was joined by Arts Minister Peter Garrett to announce the two winning works, both by first time authors and selected from a competitive field of 14 short-listed Australian fiction and non-fiction books.
The Zookeeper's War, by emerging novelist Steven Conte, has won the $100,000 Fiction award.
Ochre and Rust: Artefacts and Encounters on Australian Frontiers, by South Australian museum curator Philip Jones, has won the $100,000 Non-fiction award.          
The Prime Minister said it had been inspiring and heartening to see the quality and breadth of contemporary Australian literature represented in the winning and short-listed works.
“I look forward to these new awards continuing to celebrate great Australian writing in the years to come,” Mr Rudd said.
“The two winning works have all the qualities these awards celebrate, they are beautifully written and exciting books by two exceptionally talented Australian writers,” Mr Garrett said.
The Fiction winner, Steven Conte's The Zookeeper's War, is set in Berlin during the Second World War, and was described by the Prime Minister's Literary Awards judges as a striking first novel, enriched by formidable research, and a breadth of historical imagination.
The Non-fiction winner, Philip Jones' Ochre and Rust: Artefacts and Encounters on Australian Frontiers, creates a vivid picture of Australia's past and has been described by the Prime Minister's Literary Awards judges as a work of elegance, simplicity and outstanding clarity.
The Rudd Government introduced the Prime Minister's Literary Awards to recognise excellence in Australian literature and celebrate its important role in the nation's cultural and intellectual life.
Visit www.arts.gov.au/pmliteraryawards for more information.
Background Information
2008 Prime Minister's Literary Awards Fiction winner: 
The Zookeeper's War by Steven Conte
The Zookeeper's War is a powerful novel of a marriage, and of a city collapsing. It confronts not only the brutality of war but the possibility of heroism. (Fourth Estate)
Fiction judging panel comments: The Zookeeper's War is a striking first novel, imbued with the melancholy of a collapsing world - Nazi Germany in the last years of the Second World War. Vera, married to the keeper of the Berlin Zoo, struggles each day to survive Allied air raids and betrayal by neighbours. As characters negotiate intricate and destructive moral choices, the narrative drive is sustained to the satisfyingly uncertain ending.
The author: Steven Conte was born in Sydney in 1966 and raised in Guyra in rural New South Wales. He worked for a year as a bank teller in Sydney before hitchhiking around Europe and lived for several months in Berlin, which later provided the initial inspiration for The Zookeeper's War. Conte studied professional writing at the University of Canberra, as well as Australian literature (as a civilian) at the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra. He has supported his writing by working as a barman, life model, taxi driver, public servant and book reviewer. Conte did a PhD in Creative Writing at the University of Melbourne from 2000 - 2005, developing the manuscript that became The Zookeeper's War, and he now works as a student advisor in a university college.
2008 Prime Minister's Literary Awards Non-fiction winner:
Ochre and Rust: Artefacts and Encounters on Australian Frontiers by Philip Jones 
Ochre and Rust takes Aboriginal artefacts from their museum shelves and traces their stories, revealing charged and nuanced moments of encounter in Australia's frontier history. (Wakefield Press)
Non-fiction judging panel comments: Jones' conception of using artefacts such as a cake of red ochre, Aboriginal shields and Daisy Bates' travelling suit to discuss aspects of the Australian frontier is an original one. His work has depth and breadth of analysis; and his prose has simplicity and elegance.
The insights drawn are through a true historian's eye and the work illuminates larger debates about encounters between the first Australians and the European settlers.
The author: Philip Jones is an historian interested in the Australian frontier and in the artistic and cultural activity engendered by it. Before writing his doctorate on the history of ethnographic collecting, he completed a law degree and majored in French history at the University of Adelaide. Appointed curator in the Anthropology Department at the South Australian Museum in 1984, he was a contributor to Peter Sutton's seminal Dreamings: the Art of Aboriginal Australia (1988). Jones has curated a number of ethnographic and historical exhibitions, and designed the concept for the South Australian Museum's Aboriginal Cultures Gallery.
Since 1985 he has undertaken fieldwork with Aboriginal communities in southern and central Australia. He is currently involved in a site-recording project with Aboriginal people of the Birdsville region. The contemplative and reflective strain in Ochre and Rust reflects Philip's strong interest in literature; from Goethe to Cortazar, and Stendhal to Sebald. 
2008 Prime Minister's Literary Awards short list for Fiction
Burning In Mireille Juchau 
El Dorado Dorothy Porter 
Jamaica: A novel Malcolm Knox 
Sorry Gail Jones 
The Complete Stories David Malouf 
The Widow and Her Hero Tom Keneally 
The Zookeeper's War Steven Conte
2008 Prime Minister's Literary Awards short list for Non-fiction
A History of Queensland Raymond Evans 
Cultural Amnesia: Notes in the Margin of My Time Clive James 
My Life as a Traitor Zarah Ghahramani with Robert Hillman 
Napoleon: The Path to Power, 1769 - 1799 Philip Dwyer
Ochre and Rust: Artefacts and Encounters on Australian Frontiers Philip Jones 
Shakespeare's Wife Germaine Greer 
Vietnam: The Australian War Paul Ham
Visit www.arts.gov.au/pmliteraryawards for more information


From today Local, State, and Territory Governments and private companies can apply for grants from the Rudd Government's Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce the cost of building new homes.
Housing Minister Tanya Plibersek joined Mr Rudd today at a new housing development in Franklin, where they released the application guidelines for the Government's new Housing Affordability Fund.
The Housing Affordability Fund is a Rudd Government initiative that invests $512 million over five years to target the planning and infrastructure costs that are incurred when building new housing developments.
Tens of thousands of new home buyers are set to directly benefit from the Fund, with savings coming from grants of up to $10 000 per home, reduced holding costs, and contributions from other levels of government.
Mr Rudd said the fund aimed to encourage the building of much-needed housing developments for Australians.
“We know that Australia is facing a significant housing shortage problem  -  that is why we are taking action,” Mr Rudd said.
“We need to keep up with the housing demands of a growing population and help to reduce the costs of owning a home.
“These grants will be targeted towards areas with high demand for new, entry-level housing.
“Applicants will have to be able to demonstrate that their cost savings are passed on to new home buyers.”
Ms Plibersek said the Fund was an important new initiative that would specifically focus on reducing the holding costs that our planning system imposes on developers.
“These are costs that are in turn built into the price that home buyers pay for their new home,” Ms Plibersek said.
“Governments at all levels owe it to home buyers to have planning processes that do not add unnecessary costs to housing development.
“The Fund will also address some of the other upfront costs faced by developers that are ultimately passed on to home buyers  -  like infrastructure charges for the installation of sewerage, roads, cycle-ways and parks.”
State, Territory and local governments and private companies are all eligible to apply for grants.
The Rudd Government also wants to improve the efficiency of the planning and development paper trail  -  to drag it into the 21st century by making it quicker, more accessible and more user-friendly.
That is why the Government has allocated $30 million from the Housing Affordability Fund to fast track the national roll-out of an electronic development assessment (eDA) system to make use of 21st century technology to replace a 19th century paper-based system.
The Housing Affordability Fund is a critical part of the Australian Government's housing strategy. The 2008-09 Budget included $2.2 billion in new housing affordability investments:
     * A $623 million National Rental Affordability Scheme to encourage the building of up to 50,000 new rental properties.
     * A $150 million Place to Call Home initiative to build hundreds of new homes for the homeless across Australia.
     * A $1.2 billion investment in First Home Saver Accounts to help first home buyers save for a deposit.
For further information on the Housing Affordability Fund and the application guidelines please visit:  www.fahcsia.gov.au/internet/facsinternet.nsf/housing/haf.htm.


PM: Well thank you ladies and gentlemen for being here and to be here with the Chief Minister of the ACT and of course with our friends from the Housing Industry Association and also with Tanya Plibersek, the Housing Minister.
The Government is committed to building an Australia for the future where the great Australian dream of being able to own your own home is kept alive. Part of that is the debate we had a year or so ago as an alternative Government on the whole question of housing affordability.
And back in opposition we convened a housing affordability summit and at that housing affordability summit in which the Housing Industry Association participated, we went through many of the supply side problems in dealing with the housing affordability crisis.
On housing affordability, the basic fact we need to be aware of is this: that back in 1996, your average cost of buying a new home represented some four times the average annual wage.
By the time we reached the election at the end of last year, it was 7.5 times the average annual wage.  That is a huge impact on your ability to turn the great Australian dream into a reality. So we had a discussion with our friends in the industry about what you do about that.
And two of the responses that we have developed on the supply side go to, how do you increase the overall stock of affordable rental accommodation, and the Ministers have been talking about that recently with our new National Rental Affordability Scheme. And on top of that, how do we also deal with the actual costs of new developments like this which are being released? And that goes to our National Housing Affordability Fund.
What we are announcing today is, we are launching the Housing Affordability Fund itself. This is a half billion dollar program to reduce the costs of families buying a new home in a new development. The scheme, this half billion dollar scheme, is now open for business. This half billion dollar scheme means that local authorities and others around the country can put in their submissions to become partners with us in this scheme.
What happens on the ground? The idea is this: as we said last year, to come up with a scheme which enables us to bring down the cost of a new development or a new house in a development such as this, by up to $20,000.
That is, up to $10,000 in terms of the actual direct contribution by the Commonwealth with participating local authorities and others on the infrastructure charges which go into a new development.
And on top of that, part of the deal is to reduce the holding costs on a new house as well so that the local authority will enter into an agreement with the Commonwealth to say that they can speed up the development approval process, bring down the holding costs and therefore bring down the overall costs of the new house as well. Again by a further, up to a further $10,000.
This is a practical set of measures to bring down the costs, the on costs, the infrastructure charges and the holding costs on new houses in new developments like this.
And the challenge is this: to make it work. To make it work for families out there so that the dream of owning your own home becomes more of a reality.
Can you just add to this, Tanya?
PLIBERSEK:  Thank you, Prime Minister.
Look, it's terrific to be here today to launch the Housing Affordability Fund application process.
We've already contributed $30 million of this money to an electronic development assessment process. So the Housing Affordability Fund has already been active in changing an eighteenth century paper based development system to a 21st century electronic development assessment system. But today's launch is the ability for local councils, State Governments, developers and partnerships of those organisations, to make applications to the fund.
In an area like this, a Greenfield site, a local developer might partner with a council and say that we believe if the Housing Affordability Fund can contribute $x million, we can bring down the cost of a new home by $10,000 or $20,000. The local council might say, ‘well that's terrific, instead of taking a year to approve that development, we'll take six months', and that saves you another $5,000.
So by working together with developers and different levels of Government, this Housing Affordability Fund will make a major saving for young Australians, particularly those buying entry level modest homes.
This is only part of the Government's housing affordability agenda. A National Rental Affordability Scheme is designed to help people renting homes for 20 per cent less than the market rent. We've also got our First Home Saver Accounts, which will be operational in October. We've got major banks and a number of financial institutions that are very enthusiastic about offering our First Home Saver Accounts. Our housing supply council and our measures for homelessness are also being developed and announced and released at the moment.
We're here today with the Chief Minister of the ACT, who might want to say a few words as well.
STANHOPE: Thank you Prime Minister. Just to support this fantastic initiative to acknowledge that it is about partnerships. Partnerships working, partnerships between different levels of Government. And for the States, Territories and local councils, there are of course significant embedded costs.
Costs in development, major infrastructure costs in any development such as this  -  the roads, the sewage, but also the community facilities, the infrastructure which every new development drives, new schools or libraries, or other community facilities. And a program, a project, such as this acknowledges and recognises the role which all levels of Government play. It is about a partnership.
The Commonwealth has a capacity to contribute and to be part of the resolution of this overwhelmingly complex issue of housing affordability. As the Prime Minister has said, this remains the great Australian dream and it's a dream that many Australians unfortunately have seen perhaps more difficult to attain and through initiatives such as this, the prospect for partnerships that this project raises that many more Australians, many more Canberrans in my instance who perhaps have felt the enormous frustration of their capacity to enter the housing market, now perhaps will see a greater opportunity through this particular announcement and the other aspects of the Commonwealth's housing affordability package.
So, it's great to be here, I endorse it absolutely, it is about Governments working together to resolve issues that all Australians face and there is nothing more important than this issue of owning one's own home, and that great dream that we have for ourselves and certainly for our children and our grandchildren.
PM: (inaudible)
SILBERBERG: Thank you Prime Minister, Tanya Minister for Housing and Chief Minister of the ACT. HIA is delighted to have been invited to participate a the launch of the Housing Affordability Fund. The Housing Affordability Fund is the third major election commitment by the Government which is aimed at improving housing affordability.
HIA recognises that closing the housing affordability gap is something that will take a period of time. But thankfully both the Prime Minister and the Minister for Housing are determined and passionate about addressing the housing affordability challenge. And on behalf of HIA I would like to acknowledge our appreciation to both the Prime Minister and to the Minister for Housing.
Quite rightly the Housing Affordability Fund aims to improve the supply of new housing and it does so by offering financial incentives primarily to local government to improve planning approval processes and importantly to bring down the costs of social and community infrastructure which currently is embedded in the price of new housing.
The Housing Affordability Fund provides in excess of half a billion dollars for that purpose. The new home purchaser will be the fundamental beneficiary of savings that will be passed through as a consequence of the Housing Affordability Fund.
HIA agrees that the potential savings represent about $20,000 off the cost of a new house and land package. Will the Housing Affordability Fund reduce the value of existing real estate? No it will not. The fund will ensure that local government is provided with funding support for community and social infrastructure that currently is paid for typically out of new residential development charges.
So all local residents will have the benefits that flow from having the community and social infrastructure facilities and services that they will be paid for in part through the Housing Affordability Fund.
HIA is pleased that the Commonwealth has recognised that it has a part to play in contributing towards the funding of social and community infrastructure in new residential developments. And hopefully the Housing Affordability Fund will form part of a bridge to a deeper Commonwealth engagement in supporting the provision of social and economic infrastructure in our major cities and regional centres - infrastructure that is vital to the effective operation of a modern community.
Each of the Federal Governments housing policy initiatives are innovative, they are novel and as with any new programs that break new ground it is possible that there might be some tweaking required to ensure that the programs have cut through and that they are effective. But HIA believes that we have in our Federal Government Ministers and the Prime Minister who are committed to ensuring that these initiatives will be effective.
So HIA is delighted to support this initiative and we look forward to continuing a close working relationship with the Federal Government.
Thank you.
PM:  Thanks very much Ron and just before I turn to your questions to finish where Tanya left off. This is one more than $2 billion worth of initiatives on housing affordability and its really important, because its all about making sure that young Australians in particular get access to their own home. And I simply say in the past we didn't have a Housing Minister, we have got one now. In the past there wasn't a housing policy well we have got one now. We now have $2 billion worth of new programs.
First Home Saver Accounts, National Rental Affordability Scheme, together with this new Housing Affordability Fund and the other measures which Tanya referred to before.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST Prime Minister as you pointed out during the campaign as well it used to cost 4 times the annual income to buy the average home, now 7 times. What do you think would be an appropriate measure given the ratio that you are using and how long will it take for you to achieve the sort of level that you are after?
PM: Well I think where we would like to get to is to bring that down over time. I can't put a number on that, but what I do know is if you just put it at arm's length and say not my problem its just going to get worse. And so therefore the overwhelming presentation to us by industry 12 months or so ago at our summit on housing affordability was you need to match demand side measures with supply side measures.
So on the demand side measure we have First Home Savers accounts to enable people to save enough for a deposit, that helps. But on the demand side measures what do we do to pump out more affordable rental accommodation - 50,000 units of affordable rental accommodation is a large commitment and that's what comes of the $600 million plus fund which Tanya has been talking about recently. And this helps with new housing developments like this.     
None of these represents the total solution. But what I am signalling loud and clear as Prime Minister of Australia is that we want to tackle the housing affordability crisis for Australian families. It has got out of control and we need to start bringing it back under control.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:Well you know something there is a housing market out there and the Government doesn't seek directly to interfere in the housing market.
What can Government do about housing affordability? One, create responsible economic policies which enable the Reserve Bank to take decisions to bring interest rates down, that's one thing. And after ten interest rate rises in a row under the previous Government, it's good at last to have seen some crack of light on that.
The second thing you can do is to intervene on these supply and demand side measures that I've spoken of.  The alternative is simply to say, ‘not my problem, not my responsibility, not my concern, you go out and look after yourselves entirely'. As I've said before, and I think Ron has said as well, this is part of a response. And obviously there is a housing market out there which will be driven by its own, you know, factors as well. But this is part of a response aimed at making housing, in particular for first home buyers, but not exclusively, more affordable than it currently is.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd, Peter Costello says that you're a boring Prime Minister. He says he could have beaten you last year. Do you have any response to that?
PM: Oh look, I think the Liberal Party leadership is a matter for those guys. It's kind of like a rolling three ring circus between Mr Costello, Mr Turnbull and Dr Nelson. I saw there was some flattering things said about me also by Mrs Costello. And, can I just say, I've met Mrs Costello a few times, I think she is a lovely lady, and I understand her sticking up for her man.
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) being a bit mean spirited if you vote down the Opposition's bill to raise the single aged pension?
PM:  I think the challenge here is after 12 years of neglect the Liberals come up with a short term measure which leaves 2.2 million carers, widows and the disabled with nothing. Our approach is long-term proper reform. That's what we're embracing on top of the measures we brought in through the last Budget. And we intend to do that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) helping the worst off first?
PM: The 2.2 million carers, widows and the disabled, those who miss out all together from this particular measure, also need help. And that's why we're being properly considered about this.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the New South Wales Labor Party doing a good job for the people of New South Wales?
PM: The people of New South Wales are saying loud and clear to the State Government of New South Wales that they have a very short time indeed to get their act together. That's my view as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will the Government be looking to make concessions with Family First Senator Steve Fielding?
PM: Senator Fielding as I understand it has requested to see the Treasurer today on the Luxury Car Tax. Remember on the Luxury Car Tax, here you have the Liberals voting for Porsches against public transport, voting for Porsches against pensioners. That's what it is.
Senator Fielding has requested to see the Treasurer today. I am sure they will have a good discussion. But as I say, if we are going to engage in long term reform for the nation on urban congestion in our major cities, on reform to the pension, it is going to cost a lot of money.
And a half a billion for Porsche drivers around the country is something we could put to that purpose.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Western Australia Labor has now lost there. Is it going to make your job of cooperative federalism that much harder with the Liberals (inaudible)
PM:  I had a good conversation last night with the Premier elect of Western Australia, Colin Barnett. I congratulated him as I congratulate him again today on his becoming the next Premier of Western Australia. And as I said to Mr Barnett last night on the phone, I look forward to working with him on the big challenges that we have got to make the Federation work for the good of the country and for the good of the people of Western Australia.
Can I say, fixing the Federation goes well beyond party politics. And therefore I am looking forward to working with the new WA Premier and his Government. Practical things to do, and we intend to get on  with the job.
Also, we confirmed last night on the phone that the next council of Australian Governments meeting will proceed as planned in Perth for early October.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: What I mean by that is that the people of NSW are just fed up with any Government which seems to be more concerned about itself than it is about the future of the state. And that goes for any political party, whether it is the Federal Liberal Party or the State Branch of the Labor Party in NSW.
Very simple question here, which is, are you going to get on with the business of providing Government and services to the people who need it, or are you going to get lost in your own internal goings on?
That is a message equally clear to the State Labor Government in NSW as it is to the Federal Liberal Party of Australia.
JOURNALIST: There were reports that you wouldn't give Morris Iemma the backing that wanted on privatisation (inaudible)
PM: I think what you need to know is that many press conferences I backed in the then Premier of NSW on the question of electricity privatisation. It was my position and remained my position.


PM: Well it's good to be here at the Minto family centre, our friends from Burnside and to meet the kids this morning and the mums and those who are working here at this great centre, and also to be here with Maxine McKew our Parliamentary Secretary for Early Childhood Education and of course Chris our local member.
There is great work going on here and it's part and parcel of what we want to build for the nation through the education revolution. And that is - how do we bring all Australians with us and how do we bring all Australian young people with us as well?
One of the measures that we have announced as part of our education revolution is to produce a better funding package for schools in areas of disadvantage across Australia. That's going to be important because so many of our Government schools across the country and other schools need greater investment to enable them to do their job properly.
Second is to make sure that we are reaching out when it comes to literacy and numeracy into the homes of kids who may be having a bit of a hard start in life. And that is where this sort of program comes into play.
What is being done here is really good, but what Maxine and I are talking about today is taking this model one step further through our national program of Home Interaction Programs. It's designed like this so that through partnering with local community organisations we can then reach out into the homes of little ones aged three to five and help them with their reading and their writing and also their counting.
And we intend to do that by partnering with community organisations who then engage tutors, who then go out into the homes. Too often we have a system whereby we wait for kids who need help and their families to arrive at a centre somewhere. It doesn't always work that way. The best thing you can do actually is reach out and take those services into the home and that's what we intend to do with the Australian Government's program for Home Interaction Programs right across the country.
Today - and I will turn to Maxine in a minute on the detail - is that we are announcing 13 of these across the country and it will be part of 50 being rolled out nationwide, helping literally thousands of families.
The purpose is this. We believe that every Australian deserves a decent start in life, we believe the nation needs an education revolution and part of that means bringing along all of our little ones whatever circumstances they grow up in. Home Interaction Programs are part and parcel of doing that and today we are very pleased to be able to confirm another 13 sites across the country including one here in south western Sydney at Claymore.
Also if I could touch on two other matters before I turn to Maxine to add to my remarks on Home Interactions Program.
In terms of what has just happened in Canberra can I simply say this, I congratulate Mr Turnbull on being elected as the new leader of the Liberal Party of Australia. It's a great honour to be elected as a leader of one of Australia's large political parties and therefore I extend my congratulations to Mr Turnbull and to his family.
I also say to Mr Turnbull, I look forward to working with him on a bipartisan basis on as many national challenges as possible. And this is really important. One of those national challenges for the future for Australia will be our move towards a republic. And therefore given Mr Turnbull's historical track record on the republic, I look forward to working with him on both the timetable and the way in which we advance the cause of the republic in Australia.
Mr Turnbull has long been a supporter of the republic and we know for a fact that you are only going to achieve that sort of change in Australia on a bipartisan basis with both sides of politics agreeing. So the invitation is out there for Mr Turnbull to work with us on that. The invitation's out there for him to work with us on as many matters in the national interest as possible and I congratulate him again.
The last thing I would turn to of course is the question of these trials which have just been resolved in Melbourne. Can I simply say this on the question of terrorism; this Government will continue to take a hard line on terrorism. The outcome of these cases in Victoria demonstrate that we have a continued challenge on our hands. The Government will continue to adopt a resolute approach to dealing with this challenge within Australia. Australia still faces risks when it comes to the terrorist threat and our law enforcement agencies will continue to be vigilant.
But I say this loud and clear that these convictions represent a clear message to those contemplating any act of political violence. We in Australia not only will not tolerate it but the full force of the law will be brought to bear as well.
Before we turn to questions I've got to ask Max to add to what we are talking about here with Home Interaction Programs.
MCKEW: Thanks Kevin. I welcome the roll out today of the Home Interaction Program because I think at its core it's this and it's what we see in the Burnside centre here. It's about building resilience in children and in families.
We know that children have a happy healthy experience in their early primary years in the home where their parents also have a positive attitude to learning. And if I could just relate this to what we saw last week with the roll out of the national testing results in literacy across the country.
The children who would have struggled to get to the appropriate band level would have come from families, if you like, where there's probably not a positive attitude to learning , perhaps where parents didn't much like their own school experiences. But we know we don't want that imparted to their children because they're going to struggle too. So at the core of the Home Interaction Program and I know from conversations with Jane and Linda and other peoples at Burnside, it's about working with families in a very particular targeted way and the HIP program does that.
It identifies home tutors in particular communities; often a parent who will work with a number of families with particular education resources, so that it's a positive experience for both the community worker, for the parent and for the child. And it is all about making sure that child has a happy healthy transition to school.
Thank you
PM: Over to you folks
JOURNALIST:   Prime Minister, is 45-41 a good enough majority for the Liberal party to leave Malcolm Turnbull alone?
PM: Well that's a matter for the Liberal party. I congratulated Mr Turnbull on becoming leader of the Liberal party. It's an honour to lead a political party in Australia, it's a tough road but I look forward to working with him on a bipartisan basis on challenges for the future including the transformation of Australia into a republic.
JOURNALIST:   Is he a better choice for them than Dr Nelson?
PM: It's a matter for the Liberal party and I am sure they will continue to have robust internal debates about their future. But I congratulate Mr Turnbull on his win.
JOURNALIST:   Do you expect them to get a bounce in the polls following this?
PM: Oh look I can say every Government in Australia including the one that I lead has got to be on its mettle and I fully expect that with the change of leadership and all of the attention which that will bring to bear, of course the Liberals will get a surge out there in the opinion polls, that's just a normal thing.
But the responsibility of Government is to deal with the practical challenges of the nation and we're here in Western Sydney today talking about a very big practical challenge and that is how do we build a first class education system for the 21st century which brings all of our kids along with us. And that means, as Maxine has just said, building resilience in our kids who are often finding it a bit tough out there, and starting at the earliest years of life.
JOURNALIST:   Does this settle the issue of Mr Costello's potential leadership?
PM: Matter for the Liberal party and matter for Mr Costello, Mr Nelson, Mr Turnbull - they can sort all of that out for themselves. But I congratulate Mr Turnbull on his win.
JOURNALIST:   On the Medicare levy, on the surcharge is there any room to move to court some of the other members of the Senate?
PM: Our attitude is very clear on this, here we are in Western Sydney, there is a big challenge in terms of cost of living and part of that cost of living is directly affected by how we treat this Medicare levy surcharge.
 Now when the Liberals brought down this rule back in 1996 where they said that anyone earning $50,000 a year was a high income earner, and they haven't changed that in 12 years. And we have sought to change that. And can I say I think that's the right thing to do for people who are suffering cost of living challenges out there.
And I'd appeal to the Liberal party - both on this and on the luxury car tax - do the responsible thing in the Senate. Make sure that the Government's surplus is kept intact because in this time of global economic uncertainty the Government needs a strong financial buffer to deal with the uncertainties which lie ahead.
We've seen overnight developments in the United States on the global economy, on Lehmans, we've seen developments in relation to Merrill Lynch, we've seen developments in relation to AIG. And can I say on the top of what's happened to other institutions in the United States, the mortgage lenders, we are in a period of significant crisis in global financial markets. This has continued for some time, it will continue for some time again. Therefore in Australia the overwhelming challenge is to maintain strong responsible economic management.
This is core business for the nation and part of responsible economic management means maintaining a strong budget surplus, because we need that buffer for the future. That's the Government's policy and I would appeal to the Liberals to support that as well.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd what do you say to people today who are worried about what effect this might have on their super funds?
PM: Well can I say that we are in a period of global financial crisis, this has been running now since August of last year and it's become more intense. In Australia we are in a strong set of circumstances, the Government has a responsible policy of economic management to see Australia through these challenging global economic times. Already those who have superannuation investments have suffered as a consequence of the fall on global stock markets. That has already occurred and continues to occur.
The challenge for Australia is to see this nation through the current challenges which are coming from abroad and part and parcel of that means ensuring that we preserve our budget surplus for the future because we need that buffer for future investment.
The other part of the Government's economic strategy is this, it's a strategy of nation building. We believe that at a time like this - and it applies to Sydney and right across Australia - that the national Government must take the lead in building the nation's long term infrastructure, Our roads, our rail, our ports, our high speed broadband. A strategy of nation building led by a $76 billion nation building fund which we have now through the national government is critical also to see Australia through the challenges of the current time.
Responsible economic management, anchored in a strong budget surplus and a policy of nation building.
But you know long term getting this education revolution absolutely right and necessary because if we don't the young people who will form our workforce in 20 years time won't have the skills necessary to compete.
JOURNALIST: Can I get you to return to Mr Turnbull once more? What do you think about the bloke?
PM: I just congratulate him on his winning the Liberal party leadership and I congratulate him because I have been in politics myself for a while, it is tough and I congratulate him on his win and I look forward to working with him on a bipartisan basis on the big challenges for Australia, and that includes longer term how we deal with the question of the republic.


Special Rudd Government programs offering educational support to very young children from disadvantaged families will be established in every Australian State and Territory from next year.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Parliamentary Secretary for Early Childhood Education and Childcare, Maxine McKew, today announced 13 new locations for the Home Interaction Program (HIP) for parents and children.
As part of the Education Revolution and in partnership with the Brotherhood of Saint Laurence, this program offers home tutoring, books and educational resources to disadvantaged children aged between three and five years.
The Rudd Government has committed to $32.5 million over five years to roll out the program nationally.
Mr Rudd said that parents played a crucial role in their child's education.
“This program helps parents to provide their children with the skills and confidence to start school with a positive attitude to learning,” Mr Rudd said.
The 2007 National Report on Schooling in Australia Preliminary Paper indicates that by Year 3, children from families where neither parent has worked for twelve months or more, do considerably worse against reading, writing and numeracy benchmarks.
By Year 3:
     * 88.5% of children from jobless families are meeting reading benchmarks compared with 93.4% of all students;
     * 87.2% from jobless families are meeting writing benchmarks compared with 93% of all students; and
     * 87.3% from jobless families are meeting numeracy benchmarks compared with 93.2% of all students.
“To close this gap, the Rudd Government is determined to identify and target additional resources to parents, children and schools where there is underachievement and disadvantage,” Ms McKew said.
Home Interaction Programs will be established in 50 communities, supporting 3,000 families. HIP already operates at nine locations, six in Victoria; two in Tasmania; and one in New South Wales.
An additional 13 locations will be rolled out in 2009, including implementing a program in Launceston, Tasmania in partnership with Anglicare, with a further 14 locations in 2010 and 14 in 2011.
The Brotherhood of Saint Laurence in collaboration with the Australian Government Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations is now calling for expressions of interest for partnership organisations to implement the program within one of the identified locations. A full list of locations is attached.
The Prime Minister and Ms McKew encouraged organisations with a focus on family and children who are well connected in their local community to apply.
Those successful will provide managerial support to the program coordinator, an office and meeting space and links to other community, family and children's services, including kindergartens, child care and schools.
Organisations interested in applying can locate the Expression of Interest application form and additional program information from the Home Interaction Program Australia website at www.hippyaustralia.org.au.
The 12 new Home Interaction Program locations where a partner is required:
     * Claymore (Campbelltown) NSW
     * Windale (Newcastle) NSW
     * Inala (Brisbane City) QLD
     * Riverview (Ipswich City) QLD
     * Elizabeth Grove (Adelaide) SA
     * Girrawheen (Perth) WA
     * Rockingham WA
     * Rosebery TAS
     * Sheffield TAS
     * Clarendon Vale (Hobart) TAS
     * Charnwood (Canberra) ACT
     * Alice Springs NT 


Violence against women is difficult to talk about.
But for those who find it difficult, let us be clear  -  however uncomfortable it is to talk about, it is degrading and damaging to experience.
We often prefer silence to the confronting truth that nearly half a million Australian women have experienced violence from their partner or former partner.
Well, we can be silent no longer.
Because for too long, silence has been seen as tolerance.
This is just plain wrong.
And the time has well and truly come to turn this around.
As a nation, the time has well and truly come to have a national conversation  -  a public national conversation, not a private one  -  about how it could still be the case that in 2008 half a million Australian women could have experienced violence from their partner. 
And the objective is to turn this terrible statistic around.
Because each of these statistics is a human face.
And it is my gender  -  it is our gender  -  Australian men  -  
that are responsible. 
And so the question is: what are we going to do about it?
Analysis of Bureau of Statistics figures indicates that[1]:
     * In any year, nearly half a million Australian women experience physical or sexual assault by a current or former partner.[2]
     * One in three Australian women have experienced physical violence.
     * One in five Australian women have experienced sexual violence.[3]
     * Less than one third of all physical and sexual violence is reported to police.
     * Approximately 90 per cent of women who experience sexual assault do not access crisis support, legal help or other support services such as telephone helplines.
Violence against women is the great silent crime of our time.
It is the silence that makes it the most insidious.
Because it prefers the darkness. 
Because if it stays in the darkness, it cannot be discussed, debated  -  let alone dealt with.
To begin with, we need to change the attitudes of Australian men.
From birth, it must be drilled into the conscious and the subconscious of all men that there are no circumstances  -  no circumstances  -  in which violence against women is acceptable.
There are no circumstances in which the threat of violence against women is acceptable. 
There are no circumstances in which the thought of violence against women is acceptable.
That on violence against women, we have simple, clear policy in two words: zero tolerance.
That needs to be heard from every husband, every father, every partner.
From every celebrity. 
From every business leader.
From every football player.
From every brick layer.
From every bus driver.
From every factory worker.
From every office worker.
From every lecturer.
From every teacher.
From every student.
And from every politician of every political persuasion.
And it needs to be heard in every place.
In our parliaments.
In our work places.
At our barbeques.
Violence against women needs to move from the great silence to be part of a continuing national conversation. 
Why?
Because we need to change the way many men think.
We need to change the way some boys think.
And that cannot be done in silence.
Before coming to office, we said we would implement a national strategy against violence and sexual assault.
That strategy includes three things:
     * supporting women who have been the victims of violence;
     * ensuring that the legal system is effective in handling cases of violence against women; and
     * ending the cycle of violence for future generations.
To develop this strategy, the Government has brought together a group of experts and community leaders - the National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women, chaired by Libby Lloyd, one of the driving forces behind the Australian White Ribbon Foundation.
I was pleased to be able to join the Council in June this year at its first meeting.
And I'm pleased to see so many Council members here tonight.
I'm looking forward to seeing and supporting the National Plan that the Council will be presenting to Tanya Plibersek, the Minister for the Status of Women.
I understand that the Council has now received 370 submissions from organisations and individuals contributing ideas to be included in the Plan.
Once finalised, the plan will allow the Government to pursue the most effective, evidence-based approach that can help prevent violence and assist women who are still its victims. 
The truth is, we can't reduce violence against women unless we change the attitudes of future generations.
On their own, all the laws in the world can't stop violence against women unless there is a genuine change in the way that Australian men think.
If we are going to be effective in changing community attitudes we need a better understanding of those attitudes now, and how those attitudes change over time. 
We need to understand how those views are formed, so that we can target our efforts towards the most effective measures that cultivate respect for women.
We know that men who tolerate violence towards women are more likely to perpetrate violence than those who do not.[4] 
For example, some believe that violence can be excused in certain circumstances; that women sometimes "ask for it" or "deserve" violence; or, that violence is a trivial matter.
According to a Victorian study,[5] almost one in four people believe domestic violence can be excused if the perpetrator genuinely regrets what they have done afterward, or if the violence results from a temporary loss of control.
It's those attitudes that lie behind the continuing high incidence of violence against women.
We need to get to the bottom of those attitudes, and find the best way of changing them.
That's why I am announcing tonight that the Australian Government will invest up to $2 million in research and analysis of Australian community attitudes towards violence against women.
This project will be carried out in partnership with VicHealth, the Social Research Centre[6] and the Australian Institute of Criminology.
This research will help us to track changing community attitudes over time to give us the best evidence base for changing the attitudes of men.
This will help shape the practical recommendations of our National Plan for the future. 
To change attitudes, young men need to grow up with positive role models in their communities.
During the election, the Government committed to a comprehensive high school education program to help young men and young women to develop respectful relationships.
I am pleased to announce tonight that at the start of next year, we will be testing several programs to measure their effectiveness in both schools and youth organisations.
One model that the Government is testing is the Victorian Centre Against Sexual Assault's Sexual Assault Prevention Program for Secondary Schools.
This is a program that engages the whole school community and helps all students and teachers to take responsibility for their part in preventing violence against women.
There are a number of very promising educative models operating across Australia that are building positive values and ethical relationships amongst young people.
These programs are a valuable contribution to the development of our National Plan.
The White Ribbon Foundation is also doing great work in providing positive community role models to challenge and change the attitudes of men and boys.
The Government has provided $1 million to extend the reach of White Ribbon Day educational activities into rural and regional communities, particularly in high schools.
One of the unique features of White Ribbon is how it has brought together such a diverse range of male leaders, from judges to football players to academics, media personalities, police and politicians.
Tonight's White Ribbon Ambassador Award is a way of recognising the excellent work of those ambassadors.
There are many people here tonight whom I know have made extraordinary contributions to the White Ribbon campaign.
But there can be only one winner, and he is a very deserving one.
I am pleased tonight to announce that the 2008 Winner of the White Ribbon Ambassador Award is Mark Burgess, CEO Police Federation of Australia.
Mark has been a White Ribbon Ambassador since 2004.
His long career in the NSW Police gave him a deep understanding of the brutal reality of violence.
But it is in his role leading the Police Federation of Australia since 2000 that Mark has provided such strong leadership to promote awareness and understanding of violence against women.
Mark's efforts are making a real difference among the 52,000 police officers who are on the front line in dealing with violence.
Mark has given enormously of his time and energies to this campaign, and he's always willing to help out more.
So I am delighted to be able to present Mark with tonight's Award and to support the excellent efforts of White Ribbon in making a difference to the lives of hundreds of thousands of Australian women.
The White Ribbon Foundation is an outstanding initiative  -  men and women coming together and saying that we cannot tolerate violence any more. 
That we will not tolerate violence any more.
That the time has come as a culture, as a country and as a nation to draw a line in the sand, once and for all.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Footnotes
[1] ABS, Personal Safety Survey 4906.0 2005
[2] Exact figure is 443,300 (or 6 per cent of the female population)
[3] Some women will experience both domestic violence and sexual assault
[4] Flood and Pease (2006). The factors influencing community attitudes in relation to violence against women: a critical review of the literature  -  Paper Three of the Violence Against Women Community Attitudes Project, VicHealth, Melbourne.
[5] Victorian Department of Health (2006). Two steps forward, one step back  -  Community attitudes to violence against women: Progress and challenges in creating safe and healthy environments for Victorian women.
[6] The Social Research Centre is a Victorian based research company that specialises in social and health policies.


I move:
That this bill be now read a second time.
Earlier this year we opened up the doors of Parliament to the people of Australia for the Australia 2020 Summit.
We did so looking for new ideas for our nation's long term future.
Ideas for tackling the nation's future challenges.
Many constructive ideas came forward, and later this year the government will be responding to each of them.
One of the key ideas discussed for the future of Australia's health and hospitals system was to establish a national organ donation scheme.
And that is why today I introduce, with some pride, to the House the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority Bill 2008.
This is to provide the national leadership that Australia needs to lift organ donation rates and make it possible for our expert transplant doctors and health professionals to save many more lives, and return many Australians to good health.
For too long, organ donation rates in Australia have lagged behind many other nations, despite high levels of community support for organ donation.
For too long, Australians have been left desperately waiting, month after month, for a transplant that could mean the difference between a normal, healthy life and debilitating chronic illness.
And in some cases, the difference between life and death.
For too long, people have talked about the need to lift organ donation rates but there has been no national leadership to take action on that goal.
And for too long, we have failed to act despite projections of a rising prevalence of chronic disease, an ageing population and, as a result, increased needs for organ transplants.
Last year, we made it clear that this government intends to end the blame game between the Commonwealth and the states and take responsibility for reforming our health and hospitals system.
That the government I would lead would get on with getting things right.
Today, the government delivers on that commitment.
Today, I stand before the House to move a bill that forms a central part of a national plan to reduce unnecessary suffering for thousands of Australians who are waiting for transplants.
Today, I move a bill that will help to honour our commitment to establishing Australia as a world leader for organ donation and transplantation.
As Australians we are fortunate to live in a nation that has long been a world leader in the clinical outcomes we achieve for transplant patients - a nation where more than 90 per cent of people support organ donation. Yet we are also a nation with a very long, far too long, waiting list for transplant procedures.
At any one time there are 1,800 Australians currently on waiting lists for an organ donation that could save or transform their life. 
Last year, there were just 198 deceased organ donors in Australia.
This resulted in 657 transplants - meeting just one-third of demand.
We should not tolerate so many Australians languishing on waiting lists for want of national leadership to lift organ donor rates.
Despite the high quality of clinical care across our nation, we lag well behind many other developed countries in organ donations.
The International Registry of Organ Donation and Transplantation reports that, in Australia, there were just 9.8 donors for every one million people in 2006.
In contrast:
     * Spain had 33.8 donors for every one million persons - more than three times higher than Australia.
     * The United States had 26.9 donors for every million persons - more than 2½ times the rate in Australia.
While Spain and the United States are world leaders respectively, Australia's ranking for organ donors per million population was behind Belgium, Austria, France, Italy, Ireland, Hungary, Czech republic, Norway, Germany, Sweden, Canada, Poland, the Netherlands, Argentina, Denmark, Switzerland and the UK.
We need to do much, much better.
This is simply not good enough - not for today, and especially not for the future.
In the decades ahead of us we will have an older population, and a population with a much higher incidence of chronic diseases such as obesity and type 2 diabetes.
Several of those chronic diseases can result in the need for a transplant.
Consider kidney disease.
More than three-quarters of people waiting for an organ transplant are in need of a kidney. 
Even now, one in three Australian adults face an elevated risk of developing chronic kidney disease. 
And the incidence of kidney disease is almost certain to rise further, because of its link to other chronic diseases.
Australia also has a high prevalence of hepatitis C infection.
Hepatitis C infection causes increased rates of chronic liver disease, resulting in a greater need for liver transplants.  
There are many other donor organs that are likely to be in greater need in the years ahead.
The long waiting list for transplants also imposes significant costs on our health and hospitals system.
For example, the cost for each person waiting on a kidney transplant is $83,000 per annum if they are receiving hospital based kidney dialysis.
In contrast, the cost of a kidney transplant is just $65,000 per recipient for the first year, and only $11,000 for each year thereafter.
Australians awaiting a transplant require extensive, expensive and time-consuming treatment.
That can make it harder for them to carry on work, to play an active role in their community and to enjoy a reasonable quality of life, all of which are important.
Lifting organ donor rates will help us build a more efficient health system and help sick Australians back to full participation in work and in the community.
But above all the reason why we must lift the number of organ donations is that, by doing this, we can help save and transform the lives of thousands of Australians of all ages.
Let me mention just one example.
A fortnight ago I informed the House that I had privilege of meeting with Cordelia Whatman, her parents, big sister Octavia and grandparents.
Cordelia had just returned home to her family and to Canberra after four months in hospital.
For those of you who are not familiar with Cordelia's story, she was diagnosed with biliary artesia at 10 weeks.
Biliary artesia is a chronic liver problem that affects vital body functions.
Having undertaken an unsuccessful procedure in July 2007, Cordelia had been suffering from severe jaundice, a broken leg, lethargy, debilitation and inability to gain weight.
But just a few weeks ago, that all changed.
And it all changed for one reason - a donor organ became available to her.
The transplant operation was performed at the Children's Hospital at Westmead in Sydney. Cordelia had a 13-doctor medical team, headed by Dr Albert Shun and Dr Michael Stormon. Each member of that team is to be congratulated.
Shortly after, Cordelia was discharged from hospital, the transplant operation a success.
Cordelia had to wait more than a year on a transplant waiting list.
During that long wait, Cordelia was becoming increasingly sick.
Indeed, the doctors had declared an operation urgent, and Cordelia's mother was only days from providing a liver donation herself.
That operation could have placed her mother's life at risk.
But it was made unnecessary when a donor organ finally became available.
Today, Cordelia can look forward to a healthy life - because of the selfless act of a donor and their family. And we thank them.
Cordelia's donor also provided six other organs, potentially saving the lives of others with their decision.
In Australia today there are some 30,000 people who like Cordelia have benefited from an organ or tissue transplantation in this country.
We have some of these people with us here today, as well as some who are among the 1,800 now waiting for a transplant.
I would like particularly to acknowledge some of them who are with us today in the gallery:
Felix Bulmer, aged 17, who benefited from a corneal graft that has dramatically improved his vision; Russell McGowan, who has had a bone marrow transplant; Marjorie Taylor, the mother of Annette Taylor, who expressed her wish to become an organ donor before her death at the age of just 13. Marjorie took it to then Prime Minister Whitlam to ensure that her daughter could go through with her wish - and so she became the first organ donor in the ACT.  That was more than 30 years ago.
These are just three of the 30,000 Australians who can tell a story of how an organ transplant can transform your life.
Transplantation make it possible for people of all ages to enjoy those things that we too often take for granted - the ability to live free of debilitating disease, the ability to live a fit and active life, the ability to continue as a healthy member of their family and community.
The government is determined to make transplants possible for many more Australians.
And that is why - and that is the only reason why - this bill is before the House today.
When we look the nations that have enjoyed most success with organ donor rates, we learn one clear lesson.
National leadership is needed to drive the change necessary to improve rates of organ donation.
The nations that lead the world in organ donation and transplantation rates all have national systems to coordinate and drive this program actively within each individual hospital.
These national frameworks are supported by ongoing community and professional education.
The bill that comes before the House today reflects international best practice.
It forms a core part of the reform package that the government announced on 2 July this year, to lift Australia to world's best practice in organ and tissue donation for transplantation.
The government has committed $151.1 million towards this objective, including $136.4 million in new funds. This is not cheap. To do it well takes money, and we are determined to invest this money.
And this package was endorsed by the Council of Australian Governments when it met on 3 July.
The national plan consists of five key steps:
     * $46 million to introduce a coordinated, consistent approach and systems under the leadership of a new, independent national authority - the Australian Organ Donation and Transplantation Authority - that is established under the bill that is before the House today.
     * $67 million to employ trained medical specialists and other staff dedicated to organ donation who will work closely with emergency department and intensive care unit teams in selected public and private hospitals across Australia.
     * $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
     * $13.4 million towards raising community awareness and building public confidence in Australia's donation for a transplantation system.
     * $1.9 million for counsellors to support donor families.
This is a comprehensive plan, based on international best practice, that aims in the long term to establish Australia as a world leader in organ donation for transplantation.
It will mean that:
     * potential donors are properly identified at hospitals across the country;
     * every family of a potential donor will be asked about organ donation;
     * a dedicated specialist will work with the potential donor and their family to provide support through what is often a very, very difficult process;
     * hospital staff will be able to focus on donor care knowing that the hospital has a separate budget to cover organ and tissue donation;
     * families receive the support they need at the time of organ donation and afterwards; and
     * there is an equitable and safe process for managing transplant waiting lists and allocating organs once they become available.
One of the most important parts of this plan is to tackle the point at which our organ donor system is currently failing.
That is in the emergency wards and intensive care units of our hospitals.
Currently - and this is the core, practical problem - we do not have dedicated staff trained to help families through the difficult circumstances which they confront at that point and under which they may consent.
And with the pressures placed on our hospitals - and they are great - it is often difficult for clinicians to have these sensitive and delicate conversations with the families of potential donors.
This problem is compounded by the lack of dedicated hospital resources to manage the clinical procedures necessary for an organ or tissue transplant.
This explains why, despite an increase of one million in the number of organ donor registrations since 2002 to a total of six million registrations, there has been no increase in the number of lives being saved through transplants.
That is what we are trying to solve and deal with through this legislation.
The majority of resources in the national plan will be dedicated to addressing this particular practical problem.
The Australian Organ Donation and Transplantation Authority will work with states, territories, clinicians, consumers and the community sector to build a world leading system for Australia. 
The Authority will:
     * coordinate clinicians and other hospital staff dedicated to organ and tissue donation in hospitals across the country;
     * train professional staff to do that;
     * oversee a new national network of state and territory organ and tissue donation agencies;
     * introduce and manage a national data and reporting system;
     * lead ongoing community awareness programs about organ and tissue donation and transplantation; and
     * work with clinical and professional organisations in developing clinical practice protocols and standards.
The Authority will enable all families of potential donors to be asked about donation.
It will work with clinicians, hospitals and community organisations to educate people about donation, support families through this decision, and make sure that suitable patients will be considered as potential donors.
It will encourage Australians to discuss their wishes with their family - it is a very difficult conversation to have - and provide every family of a potential donor the information, knowledge and support to choose donation.
And as a matter of reassurance, I note that the bill before the House today will in no way impede or restrict existing regulations for ensuring the safety of organ or tissue transplants.
Since making the announcement earlier this year, the government is getting on with the task of putting this system into practice.
All state and territory governments have signed up to the best practice national plan - and I thank them for it. Each of the states is working under the leadership of the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer to implement this plan.
Work is on track to establish the national authority by 1 January 2009.
The positions of CEO and Medical Director of the new Authority have been advertised.
Recruitment for new medical and nursing jobs in hospitals will commence as soon as possible.
Preparation for a national community awareness campaign for launch in early 2009 is underway.
I would like to conclude my remarks on this bill with a few additional points.
First, I would like to thank those organ donors and the members of families who have lost loved ones and who have assisted at a time of great personal distress and difficulty for them.
Second, I would like to say thank you to the organisations that have played such an important role in promoting awareness of the importance of organ donation and who have helped the development of the government's national plan:
     * The Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand;
     * The Cognate Committee on Organ and Tissue Donation;
     * Transplant Australia;
     * Gift of Life;
     * Zaidee's Foundation; and
     * ShareLife.
I would also like to acknowledge the contribution from the Chief Medical Officer, John Horvath, as well as Jane Halton, the Secretary of the Department of Health and Ageing.
Second, on a personal level as recipient of a tissue transplant some years ago, I want to place on record my own debt of gratitude to the doctors, the health professionals and the community that has promoted organ and tissue transplants for so many years.
Finally, I would like to make an appeal to all Australians.
If you are not now on the organ donor list, please think about it and get your name on to it. Maybe that is a practical challenge for us all here: to make sure in the next few weeks that every member of this House and of the other place has made sure that they have made that decision with their family.
I would also make this appeal to the nation's media: get behind this particular proposal. I thank the media for the work that they have already done. I have noticed that whenever our friends in the media get behind this, and we have good and positive stories of successful transplants, one thing happens: effective donation rates go up. This is a critical piece in the jigsaw. I thank the media for what they have done and I encourage them to continue to do it into the future. It really does help.
I appeal to all Australians to talk to their family about this matter. Your family makes critical choices if ever the day arrives when it might be your organs that can save the lives of others.
It is an extraordinary gift of an individual and their family, made in often very tragic circumstances.
Mr Speaker, lifting the level of organ transplants in Australia requires a cooperative and concentrated effort from the Australian government, from state and territory governments, from health professionals, from community organisations and most of all from the whole Australian community.
This bill is a major step forward in coordinating our nation's efforts to save lives and restore quality of life for thousands of Australians.
I thank the officials for their work in preparing this bill, given that I have been more than usually demanding in making sure that this bill was ready on time. I thank them for it, because they have really worked up against it.
So my challenge to the nation is: let's get on with it.
I commend the bill to the House.


The Rudd Government today introduced legislation in the House of Representatives to set up the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority, which will implement and oversee Australia's new organ donation and transplantation system.
The authority is the centrepiece of a national plan to reduce unnecessary suffering for thousands of Australians who are waiting for organ transplants.
For too long organ donation rates in Australia have lagged behind many other nations, despite high levels of community support for organ donation.
The Rudd Government is determined to make transplants possible for many more Australians and the authority is the key to making that happen.
It will work with states and territories, clinicians, consumers and the community sector to build a world-leading system for Australia.
The Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority is part of a national reform package worth $151.1 million, including new funding of $136.4 million over four years.
The key features of the reform package include:
     * $67 million to fund dedicated organ donation specialist doctors and other staff in public and private hospitals;
     * $46 million to establish the authority, to be set up by 1 January 2009;
     * $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
     * $13.4 million to continue national public awareness and education;
     * $1.9 million for counselling for potential donor families; and
     * Other significant measures including enhanced professional education programs, consistent clinical protocols, ‘clinical trigger' checklists and data collection for organ transplants in hospitals.
Transplantation is a highly successful treatment that transforms the lives of individuals and the families who care for them.
The Rudd Government encourages all Australians to register their consent for organ donation on the Australian Organ Donation Register, which is administered by Medicare Australia.
People who are considering registering as donors are also encouraged to discuss their decision with their family.
People can obtain registration forms at the Medicare Australia web site, www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/organ, by calling Medicare on 1800-777-203, or by visiting their local Medicare office.
The Rudd Government reforms have drawn together the best international evidence and practice, as well as the expertise of stakeholders such as the Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand, the Cognate Committee on Organ and Tissue Donation, Transplant Australia and ShareLife.
The package does not change the framework of legal consent for donation. The families of all potential donors will be supported to make the choice of whether to donate at what is a very difficult time.
The organ donation and transplantation reforms continue the Rudd Government's commitment to making our hospital system work for Australian families.


O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, if there is a recurring phrase on the global financial crisis in the commentary from some of the world's top financial minds, it's ‘uncharted waters'. If there is another, it's that this is the worst situation financially since the Depression. Do you agree that the world financial system is in uncharted waters and facing its biggest challenge since the Depression?
PM: I won't put a time measure on this Kerry but certainly in our discussions with the Treasury and the Reserve Bank and APRA the Australian financial regulator, it's quite clear that we are dealing with something here which we as Australian national economic regulators haven't had to deal with for decades and the core of it of course goes back to bad loans in the United States.
But of course that's been made worse by the fact that those loans have been securitised by a lot of non-transparent financial instruments spread right across the world. And that's now gone on for 12 months and as you have seen it's sort of affected one institution in the United States after another and some in the United Kingdom.
That's why it's going to be tough but our regulators are up to the task and they are performing very well.
O'BRIEN:   Certainly there is a commonality in views that this is uncharted waters and if the global financial system is in uncharted waters, how can anyone even the Governor of the Reserve Bank, say with any certainty what the possible impact or likely impact of the global credit crunch is going to be on Australia?
PM: Because the Reserve Bank Governor in making statements as he has done is very mindful of the state of the balance sheets of Australia's banks. He's very mindful of that in relation to what has been the balance sheet on the relevant US institutions and you know something, his advice and that of APRA is the balance sheets are in sound order. They are in good order and for those reasons we should have confidence in what the regulator has to say.
And therefore at times like this it's important to be clear cut about where problems exist, but equally to be balanced about the underlying strength, not just of the economy overall but of these institutions based on an objective analysis of their balance sheets.
O'BRIEN: But if we needed another reminder of our connect, of Australia's financial connect with the rest of the world, the Macquarie Bank which has been Australia's greatest investment bank by far I would have thought, its shares fell by as much as 24% today before they recovered slightly. Nearly 50% in just over a month. I don't expect you to give value judgments on individual companies or share values but it does suggest that this crisis is very much in play in Australia.
PM: Well we've said from day one, right back at the beginning of the year, that we are facing uncertain global economic times because of the global financial crisis. Now the number of times I have reflected on this at the despatch box in question time over the last nine months is probably, I don't think I could count how many times I have done that. But the key thing here is the health of the system, the health of the Australian banking system, the health of the Australian finance system, the state of its balance sheets is good, the state of the regulators is robust.
Most financial regulatory systems around the world look at Australia and ask themselves this question - why don't they have as robust a regulatory arrangement as we do in this country?
For those reasons, both the Governor, the head of APRA and others have made the statements that they have. And therefore we need to be balanced and sensible about our public statements on this.
O'BRIEN: But in castigating Malcolm Turnbull about his comments on what the Governor said, you seem to be just saying at times like this political leaders should sit mute on the Governor's utterance even if they don't entirely agree?
PM: The key thing is we are facing a global financial crisis and therefore if the Governor and not just the Governor but APRA as well, the Australia Prudential Regulatory Authority, has had a look at the balance sheets and based on that objective analysis has made the statements that there is a vast difference between the state of Australian banking institutions and those in the United States and that there is light years between the two, a vast gap between the two, I believe those statements should be respected.
They are not just plucked out of space, they are based on an analysis of the numbers. And my criticism of Mr Turnbull today, and he should know this having been a merchant banker himself, is that when you have a whole lot of uncertainty arising out of the global financial crisis, it's not the time to start making idle observations about whether the Reserve Bank Governor is right or not and I think that was his error today.
O'BRIEN: Do you have full confidence in the Governor and I ask that particularly in the context of former Treasurer Peter Costello's comments about the Governor in his memoirs when he said in relation to Glenn Stephens putting up interest rates just before the last election that and I quote ‘a more experienced Governor would not have felt the same need to prove himself by putting rates up and thereby demonstrating his independence from Government', in other words implying that the Governor still had things to learn at least in November of last year?
PM: Well there you have Mr Costello writing the epistle of truth I presume. I mean others could regard the Costello memoirs as an essay in arrogance which I think is much closer to the truth. Why, because Mr Costello is trying to defend one core proposition - 10 interest rate rises in a row while he was in charge of the economic reins of the country.
Look you either accept the independence of Australia's monetary authorities or you don't and we as a matter of policy have said throughout our time when we were in Opposition, when I was Opposition Leader and since we have come into government including two interest rates rises after we came into government, we respect the independence of the Governor.
O'BRIEN: But in respecting the independence of the Governor, do you also have full confidence in him and his judgments?
PM: As I have said before we have confidence in the institution, we have confidence in the Governor and full confidence in the Governor. And furthermore, to take some politically partisan shot in saying that the Governor might have got it largely right but not completely right in his statement about the robustness of Australia's financial institutions as Mr Turnbull did today, I think is economic irresponsibility writ large when you have got so much at stake in the economy.
O'BRIEN: But Mr Turnbull's comments were pretty innocuous weren't they, particularly in the context of him also expressing confidence in the Australian economy and the Australian banking system. Are you sure that you are not over-reacting in your zeal to land some blows on the new leader's economic credibility?
PM: Kerry, if Mr Howard was Prime Minister now and if I was the Opposition Leader and I came out and partly disputed the accuracy of what the Reserve Bank Governor said about the health of Australia's financial institutions now relative to the United States, what do you think would have happened?
He would have been over me like a rash. You know something - the reason I have said what I have said today is to cause Mr Turnbull to think and reflect about the importance of language, public language, at times like this. And the reason for that is you have got objective problems out there in the global economy to do with the facts I talked about before. But you know there are subjective ones as well which go to confidence and if you have language like that and more generally what we have seen from other comments from the Opposition starting with Mr Hockey earlier this year when he began talking the possibility of a recession, I think that is plain irresponsible when the health of the economy is at stake and the confidence of our financial institutions is at stake.
O'BRIEN:   Have you made it your business to reassure yourself that the Government's $40 billion Future Fund is safe in the context of the American crisis, that it has no significant exposure to American financial institutions?
PM: Well what we have done obviously in relation to the developments with Lehmans most recently is ask that very question. And the response that we have got on the question of Lehmans is there is no significant exposure at all by the Future Fund in relation to the collapse of that institution. As the situation unfolds in the United States we will continue to pose those questions both in relation to the Future Fund and of course the Australian Office of Financial Management as well.
This is the right and responsible thing to do. I've got to say the Treasurer and myself and other burn the midnight oil on this and we are on the phone a lot.
O'BRIEN:   You and Mr Turnbull are circling each other at the moment like a couple of wary wrestlers if I could put it that way...
PM: I have never seen myself as a wrestler Kerry...
O'BRIEN: I stopped short of saying Sumo wrestler
PM: Well thank you very much I appreciate that..
O'BRIEN: Is it really so wise to be attacking him on the basis of his wealth. If his wealth is an issue, why isn't yours?
PM: Look Kerry I have not said anything in relation to Mr Turnbull's or anyone else's personal wealth and can I say...
O'BRIEN: Yes but those around you have including your deputy leader.
PM: Can I say there is always going to be a general sort of to and fro in the political conversation, there was last year and there has been this year but can I say to you as the Prime Minister...
O”BRIEN:  Sorry before you go any further, Mr Rudd, are you saying that you have no part, no role, no contribution to the strategy discussions behind the scenes about what tactics to address to Mr Turnbull in his first week as leader, that this is some kind of random criticism coming from your associates but not from yourself?
PM: The fact that I have said nothing about this Kerry reflects my absolute view that a person's individual wealth has got nothing to do with their suitability for office. What is relevant here is the content of their policy.
And therefore my critique of Mr Turnbull goes to the essence of his economic leadership and the fact that he has simply given the tick to the irresponsible budget strategy adopted by his predecessor which is to block $6 billion worth of revenue measures for us in the Senate.
O'BRIEN: Then can I assume from that, that you will be asking your subordinate Ministers to cease their attacks on his personal wealth?
PM: As I have said before Kerry, my view and absolute view has been all along that a person's individual wealth has got nothing to do with their fitness for office. What does have relevance to their fitness for office is as I think the Finance Minister said in Parliament yesterday, not where they have come from but what they represent.
What they represent on WorkChoices, what they represent on whether we should be buying back water entitlements from the Murray Darling System, what they represent in terms of the importance of fighting the fight against inflation and what they represent about the seriousness of interest rates changes and the impact of interest rate rises on working families.
Remember Mr Turnbull said not long ago that a 25 basis point rise in interest rates was not really anything to get excited about. Well I think people in western Sydney would have a different view. It's the content of policy which takes my attention, not Mr Turnbull's background at all.
O'BRIEN: The Opposition has now set its sights on your penchant for overseas travel, pointing out that you will have been overseas for 50 days out of 300. Is this next trip really necessary in the context of what is going in Australia?
PM: Well the first thing to be said Kerry is that in March when I was there I had an opportunity to speak with the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board Mr Bernanke, the Secretary of the Treasury, on top of that the Chairman of the SEC Mr Cox as well as the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury as well, as well as the President of the World Bank and the head of the IMF.
And the reason I did that in March was because I had a deep sense then that these relationships were going to be critical as the year unfolded. I have been on the phone and had other meetings with a number of these individuals since then and it's very important that those discussions be renewed and there are concrete practical reasons for it. And that is in terms of the future health of various US domestic financial institutions and their global impact, we in this country need to know what's happening. We need to make preparations when that's necessary.
And the other thing is this: in going to New York the other objective I have got is on climate change. We need a global outcome on climate change and this provides an opportunity with 130 leaders from around the world in the city at one time to work with them on what we can get as a decent outcome for Copenhagen.
They are practical things and by the way on the numbers of days you talk about, Mr Howard in recent years was travelling 60 days, 63 days, 64 days, 65 days. This year I have travelled..
O'BRIEN:Not in his first year..
PM: ..40-43 days. But you know something? It is necessary in an age of complete global interdependence -  whether it's on security, whether it's on climate change, or could I say the state of the global economy - to be in a position where you can pick up the phone and deal with people and/or meet with them because the challenges are really hard.
And relationships in all that as I have discovered in recent days on this global financial crisis has really been very important.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd we are out of time, thanks for talking with us.
PM:   Good to be with you.


All Australian mayors and shire presidents will be invited to attend the first meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government at Parliament House this year.
This unprecedented gathering of the nation's 565 local councils will be held on November 28 and is the Rudd Government's next step in forging a new, nation-building partnership with local communities.
Local government represents the third arm of the Australian Federation  -  and the Rudd Government is committed to a new cooperative engagement with  that level of the government closest to local communities.
Invitations will also be extended to local government peak bodies and the Local Government and Planning Ministers in State Governments.
This initiative will give local communities a real voice in the future of Australia's national infrastructure.
The one-day meeting will address issues of national and local significance including:
     * Building national and local infrastructure to boost our economic capacity and improve the quality of life in our communities;
     * Tackling immediate challenges facing major cities and growth corridors, including urban congestion, urban planning and design; and
     * Steps towards constitutional recognition for local government. 
The ACLG builds on a $2.2 billion investment for local governments this year through financial assistance grants and the Roads to Recovery program. In addition, we are partnering with local government in the $512 million Housing Affordability Fund; and the $176 million Better Regions program.
This first meeting of the Council will also assist in the development of the Government's new regional and local community infrastructure fund, which will commence next year to support local communities.
The Rudd Government recognises the rising cost of infrastructure provision and growing demand for services in local communities.
A 2006 PricewaterhouseCoopers report estimated a $1.1 billion annual under-spend in community infrastructure renewals by local government.
A 2008 Productivity Commission report found that 20 per cent of local councils relied on Commonwealth and State grants for half of their revenue.
The Rudd Government is determined to address the concerns of local councils because of their importance:
     * To national infrastructure, with their responsibility for 657,000 kilometres of roads across Australia;
     * To the national economy, with their activities worth $22.1 billion in 2006-07, and 168,000 jobs; and
     * To local communities, who rely on councils for a range of services from child care and aged care to meals-on-wheels and library facilities. 
Local government is central to the Rudd Government's nation-building agenda.
The Rudd Government is reigniting the spirit of co-operative federalism and reaching directly to the level of government closest to the community.
This new partnership is the most significant step forward for local government since the 1970s when the then Labor Government introduced Financial Assistance Grants to support services at the local government level.
The November 28 meeting will also see the announcement of the ongoing membership and charter of the Australian Council for Local Government.
The Rudd Government will work in partnership with local government and our state and territory counterparts to deliver reform for local communities.


PM: The government was elected on a platform to build the Australia of the future. And part of our program for building the Australia of the future is to reform the Australian federation. And when we reform the Australian federation, part of that of course is a cooperative relationship with states and territories. But there's another part as well, and that is a new cooperative engagement with local lovernment in Australia.
Today, together with the Minister, Anthony Albanese, and with Paul Bell, the President of the Australian Local Government Association, I'm announcing that on the 28th of November, here in Parliament House in Canberra we'll convene the first meeting of the Australian Council of Local Governments.
That means that we'll be extending a direct invitation for the first time in Australia's history to all 565 councils in Australia, their mayors and/or shire presidents, to come here to Parliament House for this first meeting of the Council.
The purpose of the meeting is as follows. We intend to use this as an opportunity to engage with local government direct on their future partnership with the national government on this government's nation  building program for the future. Our infrastructure program for the future. And the reason for that is that local government itself delivers significant infrastructure on the ground. And we wish to be new partners in that with them.
The second, of course, is to tackle the immediate challenges facing our major cities. Our major cities and the local government authorities that administer them have particular challenges in their growth corridors - urban congestion, urban planning, and design.  And we believe that we will have a significant new cooperative relationship with local  government in our major cities in this area as well.
And the third is this. We committed prior to the election to constitutional recognition of local government. And prior to embarking upon the referendum necessary to do that, we wish to consult directly with the local government authorities of Australia to make sure that we get that absolutely right. And we intend to use the 28 November meeting, this inaugural meeting, of the Australian Council of Local Governments to do that.
And finally, could I simply underline to all of you here the importance of local government itself. Local government across Australia employs some 168,000 people. Combined Budget of some $22 billion. And responsible for some 657,000 kilometres of road. It makes sense, therefore, for this government, the national government, to have a new partnership with local government.
We committed ourselves to this course of action prior to the election. We begin the implementation of that commitment now.
The final thing I would say is that we need to make sure that this third arm of the federation, the national government, state governments and local government, are walking together in building the nation's long term infrastructure needs.
And, specifically, the Minister will be seeking input to his new proposed local government and local communities infrastructure fund.
Over to you, Minister, and then we'll turn to Paul Bell for comment as well.
ALBANESE: Thanks, Prime Minister.
This is indeed a very significant day where we're seeing the forging of a new partnership between the Commonwealth and local government.
Local government is the area of government that is closest to local communities. It delivers basic services to local communities in the form of aged care, child care. It looks after local roads. And it's the missing piece, if you like, in the government's nation building agenda.
We have a plan for nationally significant infrastructure through the Building Australia Fund and through Infrastructure Australia. Today, this announcement represents the next step in making sure that we also remember that locally based infrastructure in local communities where people live and work is significant. And we want to move forward in partnership with local government.
We committed to this new partnership during the election campaign. Since then, I've had numerous meetings, not just with the ALGA, but with capital city lord mayors, with local government around the nation, in cities and in regional communities.  And we've worked up what would be the best structure to maximise the input of local government. Hence, we'll have a smaller body of around 25 to 30 in terms of membership to be announced at the inaugural meeting of the Council held on November 28. That will include representatives of the ALGA and also the state based local government associations as well as a number of important industry associations including local government managers as well as the Australian Local Government Women's Association.
That will be the organisation that will have ongoing contact on a day to day basis with the Commonwealth.
But we also thought that it was important that on an annual basis we have a forum in which every single council in the nation, and shire, could participate and have interaction with each and every member of the national Cabinet. This is something that hasn't happened in the past. It has been a missing piece in our federation. And, I believe that the November 28 meeting will be welcomed out there in Shires, in councils and by local communities.
BELL: Thank you Prime Minister and Minister.
Look, today does mark a new era of collaboration within the Australian government with local government. This is a first, and it's part of building a stronger relationship with local government and local communities across Australia.
Prime Minister Rudd has engaged local government in a way which we have never seen before. We've been a part of COAG for many years as an invited guest. I think today is about taking that further, taking it to a strong partnership with the Australian Government. Local government, local communities, having a chance to help reform and build a stronger federation.
This is about the Australian government being at every local community and at every person's place in building certainly stronger communities, safer communities, and including the much needed infrastructure to build a new economy of the future.
The federal system, we believe, without local government does not reflect what is now in place within our system in the federation. A strong local government has been built over many years that services the places that we are at. And the places that we deliver for our communities need to be recognised, need to be understood, and need to be embraced.
Today the Prime Minister and our Minister have said that we want to embrace local communities, local government, and form a relationship that has never been seen before in this federation.
We congratulate the leadership that has been shown by the Rudd Labor government in this regard, and look forward to building on the meeting of the 28th. Look forward to building on the Council of Australian Governments. And look forward to being able to deliver more efficient and effective services to the community and people of Australia.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: That's the weekend, the meeting, just after APEC. Will you be back for the meeting or?
PM:   Yes, we've worked out the timing of this.
There will be the possibility of a little shuffling around depending on the availability of certain key mayors, but we are pretty confident that the 28th, or thereabouts.
JOURNALIST:   Why on earth would you want to give constitutional recognition to local government when state governments have sought to amalgamate councils to save money, reduce duplication and inefficient government?
PM: Because we believe in honouring our pre-election commitments. We said we'd do this before the election, we're getting on with the business of doing it. And we're doing it in a consultative way. The best way to do it consultatively is to invite the mayors and shire presidents of the nation to Canberra, and we'll get their input into what the question should be, and we'll proceed with honouring our pre-election commitment.
JOURNALIST:   Why do you need on the provision of infrastructure the input of the councils given that you have undertaken that Infrastructure Australia will choose these big projects without the involvement of politicians? Aren't you just trying to forge political networks with sitting councillors across the country? 
PM: Such cynicism from the Oz, I'm surprised and shocked.
Can I say this, that the Building Australia Fund, and Infrastructure Australia, is about nation building projects at a large scale. And we've said, quite explicitly, as has the minister, how they'll be deliberated on and decided.
Ports, rail, major road projects, national broadband network - what we are talking about here are some of the local community infrastructure projects that local government needs to engage in. Right now the Australian government expends something like $2.1 billion a year on local government, correct me if I get some of these figures wrong, $1.9 billion I think in financial assistance grants and on top of that we have $300 million plus in terms of various categories of road programs.
What we need to make sure is that the local infrastructure deficit, local community infrastructure deficit is met and this is not just plucked out of space. PricewaterhouseCoopers as I understand it did a report recently in the last 12 to 18 months for the various local government associations of Australia which identified some critical infrastructure deficits. For example, if you go to the PricewaterhouseCoopers report, it says that in that study's mid case scenario - $1.13 billion per annum annual underspend on infrastructure renewal, $14.5 billion backlog in infrastructure renewal work.
We intend to get that right, and one of the reasons that the Minister has put forward his proposal for a new local infrastructure fund is to respond to objective reports like this and to get the structure right so that we can respond flexibly and rationally to local infrastructure needs, rather than just saying all over to them and all their problem.
Did you want to add to that?
ALBANESE: Just that it's an important distinction between the Building Australia Fund and nationally significant infrastructure and what we are talking about here. Indeed what we are saying to local government and local communities is that we won't leave you behind. That local community-based infrastructure is also important to the living standards and lifestyles of people who live in regional Australia and people who live in our cities.
JOURNALIST:   Mr Rudd, the share market has fallen 4% this morning and some Australian bank shares have fallen up to 20%. The result of a fallout in the UK means that BankWest may be subject of takeover speculation. Has Cabinet convened to discuss the growing financial crisis around the world and secondly have you considered any contingency arrangements for expediting bank mergers if they become necessary?
 PM:  Firstly, Cabinet when it met on Monday was extensively briefed on developments as of then by the Treasurer, based on briefings he'd obtained as of that time from the Treasury and from the other financial and economic regulators.
Secondly, since then and I've got to say on a daily basis the Treasurer and myself have been in active conversation with both the Secretary of the Treasury, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, and in the case of yesterday the head of APRA. That close collaboration continues.
Our overall concern has been to ensure not just the liquidity of the Australian financial system, but to make sure that our regulators are in close operational contact with their international counterparts. The advice of the regulators is still that Australia's financial institutions are in sound shape, that the order of their balance sheets is strong and therefore as the Governor himself said today there is a world of difference between the circumstances facing Australia's financial institutions and those which face financial institutions abroad. We are not immune to those difficulties but we are in a strong position to see Australia through.
I wish to add one further point on that. You raise the question of global financial crisis. I notice today comments by the Leader of the Opposition in response to questions about the words of the Governor of the Reserve Bank on this the other day.
The Leader of the Opposition was asked, do you take comfort from the words of the Reserve Bank Governor yesterday that conditions in Australian banks are light years away from what is happening in other banking systems around the world.
Mr Turnbull said, ‘yes I do take comfort from that, I don't know that I would use the word light-years. I would express it differently”. He goes on to say: ‘It's just a question of language. To say that Australia is light years away from the economic crisis in the United States suggests that you know well, light years suggests millions of miles away'.
Can I say this, when we are in the midst of a global financial crisis, when there is significant stress on global financial institutions, and because of the interconnectedness of those institutions with Australian financial institutions, it is of absolute importance that our national political leaders speak responsibly.
I therefore would strongly suggest to Mr Turnbull that in making comments about the position, the considered position taken by the Governor of the Reserve Bank about our position relative to those in other in countries, that he should think twice before making comments which separate him in any way from what the Governor is saying.
This is a very difficult and challenging set of global economic circumstances we face and I would strongly caution him against language along those lines.
JOURNALIST: Given the importance of economic commentary that you underlined, would you welcome the appointment of Julie Bishop as Shadow Treasurer and what do you think that would say about the priority the opposition claims to be putting on economic issues at the moment?
PM: Well the matter of personnel within the Liberal Party is a matter for them. Our engagement with them, particularly through the Senate, is the content of their economic policy. And can I say this: when you have the Leader of the Opposition say, as he has in recent times that inflation is a fairytale, that is an economic policy position we disagree with.
When you have had the Leader of the Opposition say in recent times that a 25 basis point cut in interest rates is nothing, or 25 per cent basis increase in interest rates, as it was a couple of years ago, is nothing too dramatic, that's an economic policy position I disagree with.
When  you go to the content of economic policy, whereby in the second or third day since the change in leadership of the Liberal party, we have simply had tick, tick, tick, to each of the economic policy positions adopted by Mr Nelson, including the $6 billion raid in the Senate on the budget, I would say that on the content of each element of economic policy - inflation, interest rates and the budget surplus - I don't see any evidence of economic policy responsibility. That's what I am concerned about and it is not just an idle remark because it translates into concrete action in the Senate.
JOURNALIST: To go back to Laura's question about Australian companies, we have seen the value of Macquarie Bank, our largest investment bank, drop by about 50 per cent in the last month. Are you as Prime Minister concerned that Australian companies and financial institutions could become subject of takeovers, offshore takeovers, as a result of this global financial rout?
PM: Well the global financial crisis is deep, it has continued now for 12 months and as we have seen by developments in the last several days in the United States, it has become worse.
When you have these moves against the largest American investment banks as we have seen, obviously the implications worldwide are significant. When you have seen the injection of the action by the Federal Reserve, the United States Treasury in relation to AIG, the world's largest insurer, this obviously has global implications.  We are not immune from that.
But I say again, one: the balance sheets of Australia's financial institutions, we are advised, are in sound shape. Furthermore, the regulatory arrangements in this country are the best in the world.
Thirdly, the Government is in active daily contact with each of the regulators and fourthly, those regulators are in active daily, collaborative action with their counterparts around the world.
We operate in an international economy where you have a range of decisions on mergers and acquisitions which occur globally. Each of those would be subject, of course, in their application to the criteria applied by the Foreign Investment Review Board and therefore we would simply adhere to normal procedures should any such future action occur in relation to any Australian company.
And of course you are familiar with our particular policy when it relates to Australia's principal financial institutions, the banks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do your assurances go to the thousands of customers of BankWest given that its parent company is in considerable difficulty?
PM: Obviously the Australian financial regulators are in close contact with their British counterparts, the Bank of England, in terms of the most recent actions in relation to HBOS.  And we are advised that all those procedures are well in hand, that this is being handled in the most regular and orderly fashion and as a consequence, the government is confident that the regulatory arrangements we have in place provide certainty for all Australians who are concerned about the state of their financial institutions.
These are difficult times, I accept that. The government accepts that, the government recognises that. But the government intends to apply all the pre-existing, well established regulatory arrangements to each of these challenges as they arise and that applies to BankWest as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, earlier this year you talked about the need for greater transparency in the markets. We have had months of turmoil since then, do the events suggest that there is probably a need for some heightened regulation of the markets?
PM: Well the Australian government has been active in the Financial Stability Forum since the beginning of this year on the questions which have been unfolding for markets since August of last year and they go to a range of different measures, one of which is transparency measures, particularly in relation to these particular financial instruments.
These are matters that I discussed with US financial regulators when I was in the United States in March. I met the chairman of the Fed, I met the Secretary of the Treasury, I met the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and others on this very question. The need for transparency in relation to various of these instruments is now greater than it was even then.
It is important that all participating governments, coordinated appropriately by the International Monetary Fund, act on this.
There's a further measure as well. It goes to the question of the financial claims scheme which the government has been implementing in the period that we have been in office, and 
that I say is one which was recommended first in Australia, following the HIH Royal Commission back in 2003, five years ago.
We have prosecuted that, our proposal is out there with the financial community. It will be legislated on soon.
And we are doing that in direct response to the calls for the Financial Stability Forum for all its member and participating states to have similar, appropriate financial claim schemes in place for depositors across the economies of the developed world. We have done that, we are getting on with it, but your question about the need for global action on transparency in other areas, which is coordinated, we are doing our part in Australia, we need to see much more of that internationally.
JOURNALIST: Ahead of your attendance at next week's United Nations Millennium Development Goal meeting, the co-chairs of the Make Poverty History Coalition, Tim Costello and Andrew Hewitt have called on you to increase our aid commitment to 0.7 per cent of gross national income up from 0.5, of which there is bipartisan support. Do you heed their call? Will you increase our aid commitment to 0.7 and why?
PM:   Our position is to aim to, by 2015 to reach 0.5 and we have made no commitment beyond that. Secondly, we have many other huge competing priorities for, on the Australian budget. And those will take priority.
We believe that in the actions we have taken so far, particularly in the South Pacific, where we have direct security concerns and long term concerns about economic and other refugees, this is the right course of action, both for Australia's national interest and other interests as well.
Also, to build on an answer I gave before, in New York I will be seeing on this occasion, the Chairman of the New York Federal Reserve. I will be meeting also with the President of the World Bank.  I will be also having meetings with other representatives of the Fed and the Treasury, while I am in the United States. The reason for that is that we are in the midst of a significant global financial crisis. That is the truth. 
Everything is connected to everything else. That's the truth.
We are in daily contact with our friends in the United States and it has been useful to have built on the relationships which I was able to establish in March myself with the heads of those various agencies and elsewhere and I will be sustaining that when I re-engage with a number of them in the United States next week.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) can I just clarify, Prime Minister, the remarks you made about Mr Turnbull's comment. Is your promise to the nation that Australia and its economy and its financial institutions are light years away from the events occurring now in America?
PM:   What I am saying to you Mark is that I stand by, unequivocally, the comments of the Governor of the Reserve Bank and I do so as Prime Minister of Australia, because we are in the midst of a global financial crisis.
His analysis of the situation now is correct and should be endorsed, and I do not believe should be the subject of partisan comment, which it was this morning.  That is not helpful in a current environment where we must all, as responsible national political leaders, have the overall stability of the financial system as our first and foremost concern and responsibility.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how does that match up with what you have just said?
PM:   Well the Governor has said elsewhere, on many occasions that obviously Australia is not immune, that is a statement of fact. But when he makes a clear and unequivocal statement about the distinction between the state of Australia's financial institutions and their balance sheets, and those in the United States, that is a comment which should be let stand, unadorned by the political commentary of alternative Prime Ministers of Australia.
This is a very serious time for the nation. It is a very serious time for our national financial institutions. It is not just a political football.
JOURNALIST: Given that the United States is now propping up an enormous number of institutions, that Wall St may affect Main Street, how likely do you think that a United States administration of any colour will introduce an emissions trading system or some kind of cost, impose some kind of cost on business in the next couple of years?
PM:   Well the first thing I would say Chris, in response to that is, both the Republicans and the Democrats, as you know, in their commitments leading up to the Presidential election have indicated that they will take action on climate change. 
That is the first point.
Secondly in my private discussions with both Senator McCain and Senator Obama, it is quite plain to me that this is not just language from them, that both sides of American politics are serious. The detail of the action that they take and whether that is in full concert with the international community, or separate national action, well that is yet to be seen.
Our job as the Australian government, however, is not just to sit back and kind of wait for things. Our job as the Australian government is to try and influence US and other national behaviours and we are doing that to the best of our ability.
JOURNALIST: Will you be trying, will you be seeking to have further contact with presidential candidates during your trip?
PM:   No not on this occasion. I have spoken literally in the last two or three days, with Senator McCain and I have spoken in the last two or three weeks with Senator Obama. And if I know anything about electoral politics, they have probably got a few other things on their mind just now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)  uranium to Russia, will you now block the sale?
PM:   I haven't studied yet their full report. Obviously the global situation in relation to the Russian Federation is now complex, as a result of what we have seen in Georgia and most particularly in Southern Ossetia. We will be working closely with international governments on the best response to the Russians. This is, again, I have got to say, a very difficult challenge for the global order.
If you look back over the last 20 years or so, what has happened in the last couple of months or so in relation to the West's engagement with the Russian Federation,  I fear that we are at one of these turning points. And I think it is very important, very important indeed that all governments are fully seized of where all this goes long term. And that is why this government in Australia, is going to spend a lot of time working our way through the question that you have just put, together with others, on the West's long term engagement with Russia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Brisbane Broncos, you are the patron of the Brisbane Broncos. There has been some serious allegations made against the players. What is your response and concern about discipline within the team, after they were on a weekend bender?
PM: I would say two things, and the first has no reference to the individual events concerning the team, because they are, to the best of my knowledge, still subject to police investigations. So I make no comment on the individual details of what is currently the subject, I am advised, of a police investigation.
On the general question of violence against women and respect for women, I would draw your attention to a speech I gave last night in Sydney for the White Ribbon ambassadors. I would say this unequivocally: there are no circumstances at all which justify any level of violence against any woman at any time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)  does John Murphy understand the real issues facing working Australians, working families sitting around the kitchen table, I mean does he enjoy your full confidence still?
PM: He has apologised unequivocally for those remarks and so he should.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced a $100 million Global Institute to speed up the development of carbon capture and storage technology.
Through this Institute, the Rudd Government will work cooperatively with other countries to help reduce the amount of C02 released into the atmosphere.
The Government is offering to host the Institute in Australia and would continue to contribute up to $100 million per annum towards its operation.
Developing and commercialising this technology is vital for Australia's future.
The Institute will aim to accelerate carbon projects through facilitating demonstration projects and identifying and supporting necessary research - including regulatory settings and regulatory frameworks.
Carbon capture and storage is a process that captures carbon dioxide (C02) and transports it to a site where it is injected deep underground for long-term safe and secure storage.
Australia has already held informal consultations with industry and foreign governments over a possible model for the Institute. 
The model for the Institute and its operations will now be the subject of further detailed discussions with parties that have an interest in carbon capture and storage, such as foreign governments, industry and various international bodies.
This will pave the way for its commercial deployment across the world by the end of the next decade. 
World energy demand is projected to grow by 55 per cent between 2005 and 2030.
Despite the growth of renewable energy, fossil fuels, especially coal, will remain major sources of the world's energy in the coming decades.
Around 80 percent of Australia's electricity currently comes from coal fired power generation.
Coal is now Australia's largest source of export earnings, earning an estimated $43 billion in 2008-09.
All major models of how the world can achieve lower greenhouse gas emissions expect a significant part of the reduction to be achieved through the use of carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS). 
However, while there have been small scale trials of the technology, no industrial-scale integrated CCS power stations have been built.
Australia already has an active research effort underway.
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and the Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies (CO2CRC) are leading research into CCS.
A number of small-scale CCS demonstration projects have commenced at Australian power stations.
The Government has also established the National Low Emissions Coal Initiative (NLECI), a $500 million program to accelerate the development and deployment of technologies that will reduce emissions from coal use.  It includes funding for research and to support the trial of different technologies. 
The Government has already established a National Low Emissions Coal Council and Carbon Storage Taskforce. These bodies will play a leading role in helping to deliver this new global initiative.
Legislation to establish a regulatory framework for CO2 storage under the seabed in Commonwealth waters is currently before Parliament.  This legislation will allow Australia to offer the first carbon storage blocks for commercial development in early 2009.


I'm delighted to be back this year at the National Student Leadership Forum.
I'd like to make some remarks this morning firstly about leadership, service and character.
I'd also like to speak about how the Government plans to move forward its engagement with young Australians on the future challenges that face our nation. 
Each of you is in a formative stage of life.
A time of enquiry, discovery and learning.
A time when you start building professional skills.
And a time when you form values that will guide future decisions and future directions.
Perhaps the picture of the potter's wheel depicts this better than words.
Character is something like the clay on the potter's wheel, that starts out soft and pliable but slowly takes its shape and solidifies.
Each of you is at a stage in life when your character  -  the way you think and act - is still taking shape.
But as time passes, it becomes harder to change.
That's why it's important that you think consciously about your values now.
To answer three key questions: What do you believe?
Why do you believe it?
And what are you going to do about it?
You shouldn't put those questions off for some time in the future.
It's in this time of your life that you should determine your core beliefs and values.
Because in the years to come, the answers you have to those questions will shape the way you respond to the challenges and opportunities that life will bring.
One of the lessons of life, as of politics, is that you can't predict the future course of events and the opportunities that might come your way.
If we reflect on the lives of some of the greatest leaders of the past century we can see how the path to greatness often doesn't run in a straight line.
(And in passing I'd note that women are sure to be much better represented among the ranks of the great leaders of the new century than the one just gone.)
When John Curtin lost his seat in the election of December 1931 and found himself battling depression and alcoholism, he could have barely imagined that ten years later he'd be called upon to lead Australia through the Second World War, a time when our nation's very survival was at risk.
When Winston Churchill was languishing through his wilderness years in the 1930s, few could have imagined that the great task of leading Britain through it darkest hours would soon fall upon his shoulders.
And when Nelson Mandela was incarcerated in South Africa, for twenty years smashing limestone rocks on Robben Island, he could hardly dare imagine that at the age of 75 he would lead South Africa's peaceful transition to democracy and bury the despicable system of apartheid.  
Life is unpredictable.
None of us know the challenges or opportunities the future might bring.
But what the lives of so many great leaders shows is this:
When opportunity the opportunity comes, you must be prepared.
And the best preparation isn't relentlessly seeking success or self-promotion.
It's not just about building up your social networks or creating a blizzard of publicity.
It is above all, about knowing what you believe, and why you believe it, and what you're going to do about it.
Having a moral compass as you navigate the rocks and shoals of life. 
So often it is adversity that best tests us and prepares us for the future.
Think of Curtin, Churchill and Mandela.
All experienced extraordinary adversity  -  times of devastating discouragement.
The same is true for so many other great women and men.
So often you find that setbacks become the most important turning points in people's lives and careers.
I know this in a small way from my own experience.
When I first stood for Parliament in 1996, I was defeated in an election that saw Labor lose all but two seats in Queensland.
It was not an auspicious start in federal politics.
But it was for me one of life's greatest lessons.
I didn't walk away from public life.
Instead it became a time of learning.
Over the next two and a half years I learned much that I could not have learnt any other way.
About politics, about my local community and about never taking anyone or anything for granted.
So I would say to each of you  -  ambition is a good thing, but in pursuing your ambition you should expect setbacks.
One of my predecessors as Prime Minister once famously remarked that life wasn't meant to be easy.
It's important to expect the hard times, as well as the good times.
But how you handle defeat can matter more than how you handle success.
So be ready to make mistakes; to be let down; to face discouragement and sometimes, to wonder whether you aren't just beating your ahead against a brick wall.
Just like Nelson Mandela, smashing those rocks on Robben Island, day in and day out, for almost twenty years.
That experience formed in him the deep wisdom, the patience and the determination that made him able to help heal the wounds of apartheid and transform his nation's future.
I'd like also to reflect on one other person I regard as one of the greatest Australians in our lifetimes, the asbestos campaigner Bernie Banton, who died on November 27 last year.
An ordinary Australian whose courage, dignity and persistent fight against injustice made him one of the most extraordinary men of our times.
A man who inspired the whole nation - a little Aussie battler, staring down the might of a large corporation.
A man who kept fighting for the fair go for all those victims, despite the debilitating effects of asbestos-related diseases that in effect were slowly closing down his lungs.
Bernie faced more tragedy and hardship than perhaps any of us will ever know.
He'd lost one brother to asbestos, and another was battling disease.
He'd lost friends  -  by last year, less than 10 of his 135 work colleagues from the James Hardie's factory in the 1970s were still alive.
He'd lost his health and he knew asbestos would ultimately cost him his life.
But Bernie never lost hope.
He never lost his determination to fight for what was right.
And he never lost his decency and composure.
He was a man with a deep faith in God and a profound compassion for his fellow man.
But it was Bernie's response to setback after setback that made him such an inspiration and such a leader.
He didn't give up, turn inwards or become bitter, though he'd faced discouragements we could scarcely imagine.
He just fought on so that the James Hardie workers would be supported in the long years of declining health, and so their families weren't left with nothing after they were gone.
There was nothing flash about Bernie  -  not much polish and not too many fine words.
Yet when a generation of politicians will be forgotten, we will still remember Bernie Banton.
Because he inspired us.
Because of his character and his authenticity.
Because he was a true Australian hero. 
Reflecting on Bernie Banton's life, I want to give each of you this challenge.
Don't think that the only pathways to leadership lie in the fields of politics, business, the media and other positions of prominence.
Look also to other pathways where you really can contribute and serve.
Consider, for example, the vocation of teaching.
Few people have as great an impact on a person's life as a great teacher.
It might lack the financial rewards and prestige of finance, law or management, but it is a truly great profession.
The international education research tells us that we need to recruit the best teachers into the classroom.
Because the quality of a school simply can't exceed the quality of its teachers.
Indeed, the quality of teaching is the single greatest influence within schools on student performance.
Each of you is here because you've been spotted as a person of exceptional talent and ability  -  and you should take pride in that.
But what matters most is how you use your talents  -  and specifically, how you use them to make a difference in the lives of those who haven't had the same opportunities as you.
The Government wants to open up more pathways for young Australians to use their talents to make a difference in Australia and abroad.
Last month I announced that the Government plans to create new accelerated pathways to bring talented Australians graduates into teaching roles in disadvantaged schools.
In the United States since 1990, a program along these lines called Teach for America has enjoyed remarkable success.
Highly talented graduates are given an accelerated pathway into teaching, placed into the most challenging school environments and paid at a higher rate.
They also receive mentoring and support from leading businesses and an option of employment after they complete their initial teaching assignment should they choose to leave. 
These programs have given talented young graduates a taste for teaching  -  and many have made it their life profession as a result.
Research has shown just how effective the Teach for America graduates are  -  achieving an impact on student results three times as great as experienced teachers.
The program is so successful that it's now wildly over-subscribed, with 19,000 applicants competing for just 1,500 places each year.
In other words, Teach for America has made teaching “cool” again.
And that's what the Government wants to see happen in Australia.
Teaching might not appeal to you  -  so let me mention some other avenues of service.
The Youth Ambassadors for Development program creates opportunities for young Australians to share their skills and knowledge in developing countries and make a difference in some of the world's poorest nations. 
More than 2,500 young Australians have now participated in that program, contributing to the great global challenge of making poverty history.
This month, 126 new youth ambassadors will leave Australia to take up placements in more than 20 countries.
There's a Climate Change Research Officer based in Bangkok.
A nurse trainer in Fiji.
A Water Supply Coordinator in Indonesia.
A Legal Aid Officer in Laos.
And a Sign Language Trainer in Samoa.
They're not easy jobs, but they make a difference in the lives of people in other nations who have nothing.
In Bac Lieu in Vietnam, one of our Ambassadors has developed a plan to create a safer and more reliable water supply and sanitation system for that city.
As we know, unsafe water supplies so often contribute to disease and infant mortality  -  so a project like that means saving lives.
Another Youth Ambassador in Solomon Islands recently piloted an Associate Diploma in Occupational Therapy at the Solomon Islands College of Higher Education.
That has opened up new career opportunities for young people in the Solomons, as well training people to help those with disabilities who don't currently have access to therapy.
There are many other opportunities for service in the ‘third sector' of community organisations both here and overseas  -  like the internships with Indigenous organisations around Australia offered to hundreds of students by the Aurora Project.
All these projects create opportunities to give something back to the community.
And it is only in giving that we can lead a complete life. 
As St Francis of Assisi said  -  
“for it is in giving that we receive, 
it is in pardoning that we are pardoned, 
and it is in dying that we are born to eternal life.” 
Finally today I would like to make some broader remarks about how the Government intends to move forward with our engagement with young Australians.
The Government I lead believes in a strong engagement with the nation's youth.
That is why we held the Youth 2020 Summit here in Parliament House  -  indeed in this room - earlier this year.
One of the proposals that came out of that Summit was to develop an ongoing dialogue between young Australians and the Government, creating new ways for youth to engage with government to work to tackle common challenges together.
The Government has allocated $8 million in the Budget for this purpose and I'm pleased to announce today that on October 2nd the Australian Youth Forum will be launched by Kate Ellis, the Minister for Youth.
The Forum will provide a framework for engagement across all areas of government policy.
The Government will also be commissioning the new Office for Youth to compile a new report on the State of Australia's Young People  -  a report that will help us to identify future priorities for Government policy, and in particular, where young Australians are needing more support.
Further, the Minister for Youth will be commissioning work on what has been identified in a major national survey as the top concerns of Australian youth (1) -  healthy body image.
We all experience the relentless daily media bombardment of images that distort the expectations that many young women and men have relating to their body image.
We are realistic about the limitations on a government's ability to tackle such a pervasive problem.
But we recognise the negative impact it has on the confidence and esteem of so many young Australians.
And working with young Australians, we want to identify positive steps we can take to address this difficult problem.
Again I'd like to congratulate each one of you for being selected to participate in this year's forum.
It isn't easy to get the time to stand back and reflect upon the big questions of life, but this is one such opportunity.
I hope that some of you can look back on this weekend in twenty years' time and reflect on it as a time that helped you establish your bearings and how to apply them to the benefit of others.
That is what leadership is about  -  it begins with service.
Effective leadership serves people first.
And it is the pathway to a deeply fulfilling life.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Mission Australia's National Survey of Young Australians 2007 covering 29,000 respondents


MITCHELL: On the line is the Prime Minister, Mr Rudd good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Do you now accept that a world recession is a possibility?
PM: I think the global economy is in real trouble and that's because of the global financial crisis. A recession is defined as two quarters of consecutive negative growth and if you look across the top seven industrial economies in the world, five of those seven have already generated either zero growth or negative growth in the last quarter. So it's difficult.
MITCHELL: So it is a possibility?
PM: Well if you look at that last quarter's worth of growth it was not encouraging. The key thing is to make sure that we have a strategy to see this economy through and because we are not an island to do so in concert with the other major economies and banking and financial systems around the world. That's what we have been hard at work on.
MITCHELL: George Bush has cancelled his trip, will you also stay home?
PM: Part of the reason for being in the United States next week Neil is to speak again with the US economic regulators and financial regulators. One of the people I will be meeting is the Chairman of the New York Federal Reserve - one of the three principal decision makers on deciding what future interventions the Americans make in the US financial market. And we have a direct interest in that because Australian financial institutions also have exposure to different US financial institutions and as much foreknowledge as we have got about what the Americans may be doing in their own market is of direct relevance to Australians, to be helpful to Australian financial system.
MITCHELL: But what do you say to Australians listening now who are panicking a bit, worried about their superannuation, worried about their job, worried about the banks, worried about the future. What do you say to them?
PM: The key thing at a very difficult time like this Neil is to recognise what the objective problems are and to implement a clear strategy to see Australia through these challenging global financial circumstances.
MITCHELL: So you are saying you have got a clear strategy?
PM: We have. Let me go to the detail of it. The first thing right now that we have unlike most other major economies in the world is a very large financial buffer delivered through the Budget surplus that we have. If you look at the economies that I ran through before who are currently experiencing negative growth, most of them are running very substantial Budget deficits as well. So their flexibility to operate if things get more and more difficult is very, very limited and ours is not. We are in a strong position on that score and it was one of the reasons we delivered a $22 billion surplus.
MITCHELL: Surplus one, Number two?
PM: Number two means ensuring that through our financial regulators in the Australian banking system headed by the Reserve Bank, also by the Australian Prudential and Regulatory Authority and by ASIC that they are day-by-day examining the balance sheets of all critical Australian financial institutions and are in direct consultation with their international partners to make sure we have forward planning.
Now we have done that and have been doing it assiduously in direct cooperation with the Australian commercial banks, that's part of the strategy number two.
MITCHELL: Yep, part three?
PM: Part three means that in terms of the long-term strength of the Australian economy, part of confidence lies in ensuring we implement a focussed nation building program which in our case is based on a $76 billion infrastructure program.
That deals with long-term capacity constraints in the economy, but it also does this: it also demonstrates that this government will be engaged directly in economic activity across the economy to provide strong leadership into the future. That is also part of our strategy and I have got to say those things take up the largest part of our day.
MITCHELL: Ok so those three things you think should maintain confidence in Australia?
PM: I think the other thing that's necessary Neil is as follows and that is that our public commentary about the state of the Australian economy has to be very careful and measured because there are objective problems out there. For example in the United States you have got real problems when this crisis began 12 months ago about what's called bad loans in the mortgage market, that's part of the problem. You know the other part of the problem is that you have not had enough transparency in financial markets so that institutions know what problems other institutions have got.
That's what I described as the subjective problem, that leads to a confidence crisis within the financial system. So you want to know the other thing that we are doing? Through an international body called the Financial Stability Forum, Australia is one of six or seven countries which has been out there pumping out new transparency measures in the financial markets to try and restore health to the system underpinning the financial markets.
MITCHELL: But Mr Rudd, if I am sitting here about to retire and those four propositions are put to me, that doesn't reassure me at all about seeing my superannuation go out the door.
PM: Well obviously Neil if you look at what's happened with stock markets in response to the global financial crisis and they have gone down and gone down a lot. And that directly affect people's superannuation, you are absolutely right to say that. What I am saying however is that this is a strong credible robust economic strategy to see Australia through. And if you are in the middle of facing a global financial crisis at present we are better placed than most economies around the world to see our way through this. Others are in a far more difficult situation.
MITCHELL: Do you accept that although the problems with the financial markets at the moment, that flows through to the whole economy eventually and that means jobs doesn't it, that means jobs at threat?
PM: Well Neil I just believe in levelling with people. I have been saying for some time we are facing a global financial crisis and Australia is not immune and you are right. Confidence problems which come out of the financial market as well as real problems in terms of the availability of credit have an effect on the real economy and that in turn affects employment.
It's one of the reasons why we have projected ahead that unemployment will increase to four and three quarter percent during the course of the next year. We are not immune, but I am saying given these global circumstances we have a clear cut strong economic strategy based on responsible economic management to see Australia through.
MITCHELL: So in simple terms, to the person who isn't spending every day reading the Financial Times or the Financial Review, what do you say, do you say sit tight, do you say don't panic, what do they do?
PM: Well Neil the worst thing that any political leader can do is provide individual financial advice to any individual Australian. 
MITCHELL: Oh of course, but we are not talking individual here  - 
PM: No, no I am just being very cautious about that. I think the legitimate expectation of the community is that the government has a clear cut responsible economic strategy to see Australia through.
And secondly that it is as active internationally as we are nationally because, and this is where it goes back to the critical nature of us being totally engaged with the US financial institutions. When I was in the US in March this year, sitting down with the head of the IMF, the chairman of the US Federal Reserve, the Secretary of the United States Treasury and the chairman of the US Securities and Exchange Commission has been very necessary because maintaining those personal links with people who are the key decision makers each day, I have got to say in recent days, has been very important for us.
MITCHELL: This is going to be with us for some time isn't it? I mean, even if we are coming out of it now, who knows, but even if we are coming out of it now, this is going to affect this country for several years ahead.
PM: It is a very difficult set of circumstances Neil. I don't wish to mislead your listeners.
MITCHELL: But is that a fair comment, it is going to affect us for years ahead?
PM: I can't put a figure on that Neil. I do know that every time I speak to some of the individuals I have just referred to, they indicate that we have a long way to go yet. I notice however that  - 
MITCHELL: What term?
PM: Well let me just go back to one comment by Dominique Strauss-Kahn who is the head of the International Monetary Fund, he's a bloke I have been in contact with several times during the course of the last year. What he has said is that he expects to see economic growth recover in 2009.
He says that we are in for a difficult period this year and that is the statement now of the bleeding obvious but to give Strauss-Kahn his due, he was saying that much earlier than a lot of other people were this year.
But his projection, and he has been somewhat bearish on this, is that we will see a recovery in global economic growth numbers in the course of 2009. Whether it is middle or later 2009, remains to be seen.
MITCHELL: Okay that said, and you accept that analysis do you?
PM: Well the IMF is the global body that the entire global financial community entrusts with analysing the entire system. That is his projection and I simply put it to your listeners as a reasonable guide to the future and we, at a national level, will be harnessing every bit of Australian economic policy power and financial power to make sure we steer the economy through.
MITCHELL: But Mr Rudd you must have advice from your own bureaucrats and the Reserve Bank and everybody else. What is your view, how long is it with us?
I mean that is the quote of the IMF but how long is this, in the advice you're getting?
PM: We have our own director on the IMF board so it is a body owned by all of us. So it is a credible global institution. In terms of the Australian international institutions, I can just reflect back to you Neil that we are in for a rough time globally, at least through the course of 2008.
2009 is a more open question. But what I have just indicated to you from Strauss-Kahn has not been, from the bloke from the IMF, is not being disputed by our own national economic authorities.
MITCHELL: Hello Deano, go ahead please Deano.
DEANO: Good morning Prime Minister, how are you?
PM: G'day Deano.
DEANO: Look we have just got one question, before I have an accident.
PM: Mate, just make sure you have got both hands on the wheel.
DEANO: Oh definitely, I drive manual, so I have got one, only one. But I am a good driver, never had an accident. I was wanting to ask you, I have got a bank account, like how many other million people. Does the Australian government guarantee the money in that bank account?
PM: The first thing I would say to you Deano is this, and here I quote directly from the head of the main regulator of the Australian banking system and that's called the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority. What he has said is as follows: Australians deposit taking and insurance companies supervised by the APRA, are well capitalised, profitable and well regulated and are weathering the turmoil well.
Australian depositors and insurance policy holders can be confident in the soundness of Australian financial institutions, that is the first point. The second is this, Deano: what we have done since coming into office is put out there what is called a financial claim scheme, and a financial claim scheme, once it is legislated as it will be later this year, provides a basis for individual deposit holders to obtain their deposits back up to $20,000 in a short order of time.
This is part of the international -
MITCHELL: What does that mean Prime Minister?
PM: It means that in the unlikely event that you had a problem with a financial institution, that rather than wait as you have to under the existing laws of Australia, for the liquidation of that institution, by the you know, by the receivers and by the liquidators to get money back, that this actually provides up front access to cash on the part of the depositors. That is why we have acted on this, despite the fact, I have got to say, that the recommendation to do it came five years ago in Australia after the HIH implosion.
MITCHELL: But Deano's question is very direct, does the Australian government guarantee the banks?
PM: Well his question went to depositors and what I have said is that, what APRA has said, the regulator, which is that they have confidence in the (inaudible)
MITCHELL: That is not answering the question, Deano, your question is  - 
DEANO: I am telling you that I was on the RBA website yesterday and I was reading that, and as (inaudible) the RBA, the Australian Reserve Bank does not guarantee a (inaudible) which is approved deposit takers, is that what it is or?
MITCHELL: Okay, the direct question is does the government guarantee the banks?
PM: Under existing law, well he is asking, you are asking a question about the banks themselves  - 
MITCHELL: Ok, does it guarantee the depositors funds in the banks?
PM: Well under the existing law of Australia, what happens is that in the unlikely event that you had difficulty with an individual institution, you have a scheme in Australia which is called Depositors First, that is that if an institutions gets liquidated, then the depositors get first call.
We are trying to improve that, how are we going to improve it? Through this financial claims scheme which means that in a timely fashion, depositors get access to up to $20,000 of their cash before having to wait for liquidation process.
That legislation will be through very soon.
MITCHELL: So does the government guarantee depositors funds?
PM: Well the government, historically has not done so in Australia since, you know the federation of the country to the best of my knowledge. What I am saying is, what I have just referred to you Neil is the actual laws of Australia as they currently exist and how we are about to change it through this new financial claims scheme, for the benefit of people like Deano.
MITCHELL: Thank you Deano, thank you for calling. We will take a break, more from the Prime Minister in a moment.
[Ad break]
MITCHELL: Andrew, go ahead please, Andrew.
CALLER: Prime Minister, I'm an average Australian. I'm just wondering when you are going to start talking English and explain to the Australians where we stand today. None of us can understand the words that you're trying to get across. And I particularly mean the average Australian. Thank you.
PM: Well, can I just say in response to that, the global financial situation is really complex. And we're dealing with financial markets which are really complex, and some of the language in which we've got to deal in is very complex. My job is to make sure that we've got a credible, national economic strategy to respond to the global economic environment. We've got that anchored in a very strong Budget surplus. And I've got to say, my responsibility is to work hard with national financial institutions and international financial institutions to chart a course for Australia through. That's what I'm doing. Some people may not support it. I understand that. It's politics.
MITCHELL: It's an interesting point, Prime Minister. I was talking to Malcolm Turnbull about it this week. I asked him if he thought he was a good communicator. Do you think you're a good communicator?
PM: Oh, that's a matter for other people to judge. Obviously your last caller doesn't have that view. But  - 
MITCHELL: Do you think Malcolm Turnbull comes across as arrogant?
PM: Oh, mate, people will make their own judgments about me and Mr Turnbull. I'm much more concerned about the judgment that they make at the end of the day on the policy.
MITCHELL: I did see a report this week that you'd answered 50 questions in more than five minutes in the Parliament. Did you see that?
PM: No I didn't see that. But, I mean, it depends on the nature of the question. I mean, I think  - 
MITCHELL: Well, the previous government was running at about half of that rate?
PM: Well, can I just say that since I've been in I think the Opposition has probably asked me more than 300 questions in parliament. Some you answer in a short period of time, some take longer. It depends on the nature of the question.
MITCHELL: Wealth is also being discussed as an issue this week. How much are you worth?
PM: Well, my salary is on the public record. It's  - 
MITCHELL: How much is your wealth (inaudible)
PM: $300,000 plus is what the Prime Minister earns.
In terms of my wife, she is a successful businesswoman. I'm proud of what she has done. She gets a salary from her business. And she's built that up herself independent of me for the last 20 years.
MITCHELL: Do you know what the family wealth is?
PM: Well, the question of what Therese's individual investments have been since we've got into government, that's gone obviously into a blind trust. So, our income, that is, my income, is out there on the public record.
Her income is a private matter, always has been. She's built up the company herself. But the key question about debates about wealth, this goes to Mr Turnbull as well, is that his wealth is completely irrelevant to the debate about the future because the debate about the future is the policies we represent. And the policies we put forward, for example on WorkChoices, we oppose it, he supports it  -  those sort of things.
MITCHELL: He said you're the richest Prime Minister in history and you're more wealthy than him. So he's sort of turned it into a political issue. Are you wealthier than him?
PM: I have no idea what Mr Turnbull's personal wealth is  - 
MITCHELL: Do you know what you're worth yourself?
PM: On the question of our own financial arrangements, I know exactly what income I get, I know how much I've got in the bank myself. But can I say, my wife's individual income arrangements are a matter for her, they always have been. As they should be. I mean, she's built up her business off her own back over the last 20 years. That's a matter for her. I'm accountable for what the taxpayer pays me. And frankly, to go back to the overall question about wealth and personal wealth, this is not relevant to the debate about the future of the nation.
MITCHELL: You're quite right. But I must say, I think if my wife had built up a business worth $100 million, I'd know about it. I think I'd be spending it.
PM: Well, you know something Neil, I'm very proud of what she's done -
MITCHELL: Oh, of course.
PM: Hang on, let's just put it on the table. She started with nothing, and put the house on the line 20 years ago to get a sufficient loan from the bank, initially it was a private loan and then she had to put the house on the line later on, in order to build up the business  - 
MITCHELL: Good on her.
PM: So, she started from scratch. Built it up. Good on her. And she's done that, I've got to say, without any help from me, which is probably why she succeeded.
MITCHELL: You just get the feeling that it's a political negative to be wealthy. And that's silly.
PM: Well, I have not said anything about Mr Turnbull's financial circumstances  - 
MITCHELL: Well no, but your party has been after him.
PM: Well, you know, it's a pretty free and fierce exchange in the parliament, mate. And you can't control what either all of they say, all of the other side say about the likes of me, or for that matter, what all of our mob have got to say about some of them.
But from my point of view, I'm the Prime Minister, I'm the leader of the Labor Party, questions of Mr Turnbull's wealth are not relevant to the debate.
MITCHELL: Unions say you've dudded them on WorkChoices. Now, why haven't you? How is it really significantly different from what John Howard was doing?
PM: Well the first thing is that we've abolished the right to make AWAs into the future. And those AWAs have stripped everything effectively away  - 
MITCHELL: What about unfair dismissal laws?
PM: Well, the unfair dismissal laws are quite clear cut. What we've said is  -  and we said this before the election and we've honoured everything that we've said  -  if you're in a small business with less than 15 employees, it follows that for the first 12 months that unfair dismissal laws do not apply. After that, what we're putting out is a very simple six  - 
MITCHELL: Doesn't that mean that in a small company that you can unfairly sacked and there is nothing you can do about it?
PM: Well, we've got to balance this with the rights of small businesses  - 
MITCHELL: Oh, I agree.
PM: And get the balance right. (inaudible) We obviously will apply the full range of the unfair dismissal code. The thing is to get it right. And what we have done is, I believe, given small businesses 12 months flexibility. After that, a fair dismissal code applies, which is very simple and straightforward. If someone gets caught tickling the till, they'll be out the door straight away. Other than that, it's a very simple process to go through.
MITCHELL: The unions should cop it?
PM: Well, I think we've got to get the balance right. And you know something, if you have people whinge about what we do from both sides, you're probably getting the balance about right.
MITCHELL: (inaudible) tell John Howard that about WorkChoices.
Now, can I please  - 
PM: I don't think he got it right from both sides.
MITCHELL: Well he got whinges from both sides.
PM: I don't think there are many people saying from the employees' side ‘go harder John, go harder'.
MITCHELL: If I can just finish on something personal. Are you a shooter?
PM: I have been, yeah. I shoot, well I have shot sporting clays, yes.
MITCHELL: Do you still do it?
PM: I haven't done it for a couple of years now. But yeah, I used to be patron of one of the shooting clubs in my electorate in Brisbane, the Belmont Rifle Range.
MITCHELL: Pretty good at it, too?
PM: Ah, no. Very bad, actually.
MITCHELL: And you're a horse rider?
PM: Yeah. I grew up on a farm, I like horses.
MITCHELL: How often do you rise horses?
PM: Well, last time I was on a horse was probably a month or two ago up on a cousin's sheep property not far from Canberra.
MITCHELL: Clears the head?
PM: I beg your pardon?
MITCHELL: Clears the head, does it, riding a horse?
PM: I like riding.
MITCHELL: No, no  -  I think it does clear the head to get out and do it. But, if anybody ever worries about your nerd image all you need to do is be seen with a horse and a gun.
PM: Mate, you know something, I grew up on a farm where there were guns around. I like shooting, when I get a chance to go out and doing sporting clays, and I like riding a horse. Do you know something, that's not what I'm paid to do.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.


PM: Today, the Minister and I have launched an Australian Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. This Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, to be located in Australia, forms a core part of the Government's climate change strategy and a core part of dealing with Australia's future environmental and economic challenges.
If you go to climate change, coal fired power stations globally represent about 40 per cent of the problem. Therefore, we have got to deal with that, not just for the next year or two but out for the next decade and beyond, out to the middle of the century.
Look at the future plans of China and India, so much of it depends on the future of, their dependency on coal fired power stations. So the practical challenge is what are we going to do about it.
And part of the practical response lies in carbon capture and storage. This technology or technologies, because there is a group of four of them, best known, have been out there in the scientific community and partly in the corporate community for some time.
But the problem is this, as of 2008 worldwide there is not, to the best of our knowledge, a single at-scale integrated carbon capture and storage project in the world. This is a massive problem. The G8, a meeting that I attended in Hokkaido only a few months ago, has committed itself to 20 at-scale projects by 2020, and for those to have been commenced by 2010, which is only a couple of years from now.
As we have examined this over the last three to four months, the Minister and myself and our departments and our advisers working with other governments around the world have not yet identified a dedicated machinery to turn that vision into reality.
That is, to bring these projects into reality.
And that is why this global carbon capture and storage institute of ours comes into being. What is it to do? Four things: Firstly to make sure that we can facilitate those projects in reality by in part assisting with the organisation and finance for them, ideally through private consortia but leaving open the possibility of public participation as well.
And the reason for that is, and we had a discussion on this with industry just before, the start-up costs for movers in this industry are huge. That partly explains why that so few at-scale projects in any of the technologies across the world at present, and non in multi-integrated technologies at present.
So the first function is to facilitate projects. And in part, that will mean the organisation of finance and, if necessary, government participation in it as well.
The second is to ensure that we have a dedicated and integrated research capacity. There is so much going on around the world which is not coordinated, it's time this was brought under a single roof. That is, for Austalia to be the go-to place globally for information about how you do carbon capture and storage projects.
We have a lot of good expertise out there at the moment with the CSIRO and the CO2 coordinated research centre. But we need to make sure that the global pool of knowledge is brought together as well.
Third thing is to make sure that we're also the go-to place on regulatory and legislative questions. The work Martin has done in the last few days in bringing in the legislation to parliament on the off-shore storage legislation is really important. It's world first. And around the world the big debate at the moment (inaudible) what sort of regulation and legislation you need for on-shore and off-shore storage to make these projects work.
And finally, communication. To get all the information on where projects are, how they could be financed, what the technology is, what the science is, and what the regulatory information is and how it can be deployed, making sure that is disseminated across the world.
If I could just conclude with this. Climate change is a threat for the future. It is a threat also for the future of our coal industry in Australia. Therefore, we need to act on it. Not enough has been done globally on this. This proposal from Australia is our effort to close that gap. And therefore, it is the proposal that I'll be taking as the cornerstone of my address to the United Nations General Assembly next week. Because we need to get buy-in from other governments. We also need to get buy-in from global corporations to turn this into reality.
Overnight, we had one letter from the British Government, from the British Prime Minister, indicating his full support for this initiative. That's one government. We've got a lot more to do and our officials have been at work for some months with other governments around the world. There is much more to be done. Over to you Martin.
FERGUSON: Thank you.
Australia is one of the world's energy superpowers. We are rich in coal and rich in gas.
In the fight to reduce CO2 emissions, Carbon Capture and Storage therefore is bread and butter to Australia and bread and butter to the global community.
We are also a nation which has got to lead and invest in technology so as to solve the problems that confront the world from an environmental point of view and also guarantee our economic future because coal is our most valuable export as a nation.
It's the lifeblood of not only our national economy but also key regional communities around Australia. That's why in the context of technology we have to put all shoulders to the wheel and the feedback from industry today with respect to the leadership position adopted by the Prime Minister in initiating this global carbon capture and storage was very, very positive.
The discussions today were not only attended by representatives of our electricity generators - and you shouldn't forget that 80% of Australia's electricity actually comes from coal fired power stations - but also key coal industry companies such as Xstrata, BHP and Rio Tinto.
In addition to their very strong endorsement we also received absolute support from the scientific community, representatives of the environmental non government organisations such as the WWF, the Climate Institute and also key representatives of the labour force working in these activities such as the CFMEU and the AWU.
I simply want to say from our nation's point of view we have to be at the forefront of putting in place both domestically and internationally solutions to carbon capture and storage. Obviously we have been making progress, we have already got the world's biggest carbon capture demonstration plant in the Otway in Victoria. That has the support of the Australian Government, the Victorian Government, industry and the scientific community.
We are also hopefully soon to be the first nation in the world to actually put in place offshore carbon capture and storage legislation. It passed the House of Representatives yesterday afternoon, it will soon move into the Senate and I have come a long way in terms of my engagement with the Opposition and we are very close to reaching agreement hopefully with respect to a couple of outstanding issues which will enable that legislation to pass the Senate.
I simply want to say that as an energy superpower it's our responsibility to lead and our global institute is about pulling together the global community to actually focus in a proper way in putting in place key demonstration plants sooner than later.
PM: Just to conclude before taking your questions. Australia is the world's largest coal exporting country. Therefore this is core business for Australia to provide global leadership on carbon capture and storage, that's what we are doing.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, doesn't this Institute in terms of the international negotiations also take a little bit of the pressure off Australia in terms of the targets it sets and the ETS it establishes in the early stages?
PM: Well our intention with these projects of course is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and therefore in terms of meeting our long-term targets that's part and parcel of the process.
Just talking to some of the industry guys inside - plainly, this is a core pillar of the Government's overall climate change strategy. The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, energy efficiency, renewable energy. But with this sector, which represents such a huge slice of electricity generation in Australia, 80 per cent plus, and such a huge slice globally, this is an important area to achieve real results. And it is, to go to the core of your question, it therefore assists if we get it right in bringing down our carbon emissions much earlier.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how many of these projects do you expect to be in Australia and by when if you are looking at fast tracking it from the G8 date?
PM: Look, our objective is to have the global Carbon Capture Storage Institute up and running from January next year. That's our ambition. And this is quick given the amount of time pulling an organisation together that involves the participation not just of government, but industry, and other associations, and also foreign governments as well. That's what we intend to do.
Secondly in terms of Australian projects, that is what the institute will assist in determining. But can I say, look across Australia. You've got the La Trobe Valley, you've got the Hunter Valley, you've got the Queensland coal fields. Here are important areas where we need to be looking in terms of bringing up at-scale projects.
JOURNALIST: Where will it be based?
PM: Yet to be determined, it'll be in Australia.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) the industry, quite a few (inaudible). Are they spending enough money on advancing these technologies because you're going out of your way to help preserve their profits  -  shouldn't they be doing this?
PM: What I said in our last gathering with industry, and Martin and I sat down with industry representatives initially on this at CEO level last week (inaudible). What I said to them is that this is a threat, an economic threat to the nation, an economic threat to your industry, and that's why we've all got to have skin in this game. And we mean that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
FERGUSON: (Inaudible) I have established a low emissions coal council. That will begin meeting today, which brings together those representatives. The Prime Minister also announced yesterday a task force going to actually doing the necessary work to establish where we can actually sequest the carbon.
In terms of industry, can I say, they understand the need to do more. But they wanted some leadership. They have responded positively in our discussions last Friday and today. Basically they are on board, they needed someone to pull it together because all around the world people were talking about this but no one was pulling it together. We will be working closely with the International Energy Association, we have already indicated to them that we are prepared to take this lead.
But also, which is part of the international activities pulling together more closely with the carbon sequestration leadership forum.
The industry knows this is about investing in their future, and they are very supportive of the Government's initiative.
PM: Matthew, just to finish on that point. The truth is, some are and some are not. I think what they all recognise from our discussions last week is that they all need to do more and they have all said to us that they are crying out for national and global leadership on this. This has been a litany of good intentions around the world. This has been an exercise where there are so many aspirational statements out there that you could pack them in the boot of your car and still have room left over. I mean, they're all there.
But I don't see any machinery to make it work. Because of the gap, the investment gap, involved in first movers at large scale projects. And that's where Government has got a role to play.
JOURNALIST: It's no doubt a worthwhile project. But just making a broader point that in the ten months of your Prime Ministership you've progressed from local committees to national summits to regional forums and now a global institute. All you've got left is an intergalactic symposium. What would you say to pensioners who would say they don't want their Prime Minister in New York next week, but here with the parliament sitting, representing them and doing something for them in these troubled times?
PM: The challenge of climate change is real. It affects everybody. If we don't get this one right, it affects the economy and jobs. We're talking about Australia's largest export here, which generates tens of billions of dollars worth of revenue each year. And let me tell you, we the public revenue, benefit from that hugely.
I'm on about long term protection of the revenue base. That's the first thing.
The second is that while in the United States I will be meeting with the UN's economic regulators about the global financial crisis, and with other global leaders on it. And the reason is, this is by it's very definition, a crisis which whereby the impact in one institution rapidly ricochets across the world. The amount of time the Treasurer and I have spent on the phone in recent days talking to people in other parts of the world has been huge. In my meeting, for example, with the Chairman of the New York Federal Reserve, key questions which I will be talking about is what is the prognosis? Are there any other concerns across the system? If so, where? And what can be done to prepare? And you know something, that's a very bread and butter concern for Australians.
JOURNALIST: Isn't that what the regulators have been doing on a daily basis? (Inaudible)
PM: That sort of information exchange occurs at different levels. But you know something, when the time comes that you also need some action taken somewhere, you've also got to be able to pick up the phone directly, or speak to people directly, about what needs to be done quick smart.
So, information gathering is one thing, getting action in defence of Australia's financial institutions is another. And that's why it's really important. 
Also I'd draw your attention to a comment made just the other day on this particular question where, I think someone else said recently in terms of their presence in the United States:
“There is a very great concern about the situation here in America, and that's really the reason I'm here. The security for mortgages, for homes, for jobs of Australians are dependent in large measure on international developments coming out of the United States. To this credit crisis. Which is why it is important for me as Shadow Treasurer to be there.” That was by Mr Turnbull earlier this year.
The truth is, it's a global financial crisis. We're all engaged. My job as Prime Minister is to act in the national economic interest and those three days in the United States, that's exactly what I'll be doing, both on the global financial crisis, but also on concrete action on climate change.
JOURNALIST: You seemed to suggest on radio this morning that Australia could face a difficult 2008, but things could get better on the economy in '09. I'm not sure if I heard that correctly, but do you think this global shakeout hasn't got a long way to go? And what concrete grounds do you have in suggesting that next year could actually be (inaudible)
PM: What I did this morning was respond to an interviewer's question about how long this crisis would take to wash through. And therefore, what the long term prognosis for the real economy was, was simply cite statements by the Head of the IMF Strauss-Kahn, who pointed to a recovery of sorts in 2009. The head of the IMF I've spoken to a few times before, has historically been pretty dark about how the global economy was going to go when I spoke to him first in Washington earlier this year. Much darker than many other people I have spoken to. I noted therefore carefully what he had to say most recently about the prognosis for 09.
But you know you can't put a time limit on this, you just can't but it's important to be balanced in our statements. There are real problems across the global financial markets now, we all know that. But in Australia we must also focus equally and emphasise equally the underlying strengths of this economy and the elements of that strength as well.
JOURNALIST: Given that you and Malcolm Turnbull are both now quoting Malcolm Turnbull. This morning he said that he wanted a bipartisan approach to the economy; he is willing to sit down with you at anytime. Are you also in lockstep with him on that?
PM: Can I say that if there is to be an act of bipartisanship, it can start very close to here, about 100 metres or so that way and slightly over there it is called the Senate. $6 billion worth of bipartisanship.
I notice that someone said this morning that $6 billion actually wasn't much money. Well can I say it is. If you want for example to fund long-term reform of pensions and of retirement incomes policy in Australia, $6 billion is not a piece of loose change, it's a lot of money. So a good test of bipartisanship is unblock the Budget measures in the Senate, very simple.
JOURNALIST: In Afghanistan, were Australian soldiers involved in the death of a Governor in the Southern Province that you know of?
PM: My advice is that the ISAP, International Security Assistance Force and the Government of Afghanistan are currently involved in an investigation of this incident. The facts are unclear at this stage according to my advice. As soon as they become clear then we will have something further to say.
JOURNALIST: Is help for pensioners which you've promised next year some time in jeopardy if parliament doesn't pass the measures proposed by the government in the Senate?
PM: Can I just say Governments rely upon predictability of their finance. And the measures that we have got blocked in the Senate are reasonable measures and if the Liberal party was being responsible they would enable those measures to be used to fund other reform programs. And I have got to say there are a range of those which we need to do, pensions and retirement income policy is one of them. But there are many other areas as well and I would again appeal to the Liberals in the Senate to cease being economically irresponsible and start being responsible, unblock those measures because the reform programs which the Government has committed to are substantial and they are expensive.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible). Have you received any advice on what that impact might be and are you having to look at any early trimming of Budget spending figures?
PM: I think that question had best be directed to the Treasurer. I think I would say by way of general principle that when you have a softening of global economic growth and a softening of Australian economic growth, that obviously that will have some impact on Government revenues over the course of the financial year.
But I would suggest you put that specific question to the Treasurer.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Mr Ferguson mentioned before that there is already a carbon sequestration leadership forum. Is it not doing a good enough job, why is this necessary and did you have the power generation sector saying to you we really need this institute you are talking about?
PM: I will turn to Martin as well on this but absolutely. If there is a clarity in calls from industry it's let's get this going, they have made public statements to that effect just now. But it's to close the information gap, it's to identify projects and to organise finance. And to turn all these aspirational statements into reality and that's really important.
Secondly in terms of the existing international bodies and I have made reference to them in the remarks I made before in speaking to industry and other representatives - a lot of good work's going on out there, but you know something, it is not very well coordinated.
What we are trying to do is to bring it together not just to make Australia the go-to place for this critical technology for the future, but also to make a real difference in turning a project concept into reality at large scale and do it quick.
FERGUSON: Our global institute is about bringing all sectors together in a coordinated practical way. Obviously there has been some work done to date, but what you really need is to get everyone in the room - Government, the private sector, the scientific communities - to actually turn it into reality.
Hence the need for a global initiative, hence the good support we have received today from industry, the labour force and environmental NGOs, and the positive feedback we have been receiving over weeks and months from our global engagement in terms of the discussions we have had with a range of nations. The Prime Minister has referred to the positive feedback last night from Gordon Brown. I have a departmental officer who is also at this very moment engaged in discussions overseas, for example we had very good discussions in Norway yesterday.
We are pulling it together in one organisation that can actually deliver for a change rather than just talking about it.
PM: Last one.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd there has been a lot of concern or analysis about regulations in relation to the global financial issues. I know that your feeling has been that we have got the regulations more or less right. But are you concerned about whether we have got the balance right between promoting long-term investment and (inaudible) short selling for example and the hedge funds. Have you got any concerns about the activities of Hedge funds and the you think that we might need to look at Australia's regulations in order to clamp down on some of those practices?
PM: On the question of short selling the Government welcomes the measures announced recently by the US regulators on that 48 hours ago. I understand that the FSA has done the same in the United Kingdom. In Australia my advice is that some months ago again based on the earlier recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum in which we participate, the Minister Chris Bowen currently has a proposal out with industry on the future of short selling.
We believe that this together with other areas of the financial markets need to be not just closely examined but acted on. Transparency is one set of measures we have referred to already, but as far as short selling is concerned I draw your attention to what Chris Bowen has been doing already and this was well ahead of the developments of the last week or so.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) this morning that the Families and Communities portfolio is important but not part of the main action or the main game in politics. What do you think pensioners would think about that given that he is responsible for pensioners?
PM: Well I notice that day in day out the Liberals now talk about pensions - they didn't talk about them last year - now talk about pensions yet the Liberal party spokesman responsible for pensions says it's not important.
I think that speaks volumes about the political opportunism alive in this debate. I mean I find it stunning that Mr Abbott could have said that, but out of the mouth of Mr Abbott often proceeds deep truths about what's really going on in the minds of the Opposition.
Thanks very much.


The Rudd Government is offering to buy the water entitlements of small block irrigators in the Murray-Darling Basin who agree to sell all their water entitlement to the Commonwealth.
The Government will offer up to $150,000 as a special exit payment, along with other transitional assistance, to eligible irrigators on 15 hectares or less.
The short-term scheme will be available this financial year. Access to the program will be conditional on irrigators selling their water entitlement to the Commonwealth to be returned to the Basin's rivers and wetlands.
The program is expected to yield up to 48 gigalitres of water for the environment.
This assistance will allow eligible small scale irrigators with permanent water entitlements of at least 10 megalitres who choose to leave irrigated farming to stay on the farm.
The Government has allocated up to $57.1 million for this assistance to bring relief to small-scale irrigators in the Murray-Darling Basin impacted by drought and climate change who wish to exit irrigated farming but are unable to sell their farms.
This program will provide struggling small irrigators  -  many of whom have been carrying on farming enterprises that were established by their families several generations ago  -  with an opportunity to exit the sector while remaining in their family homes.
Many of these irrigators live close to rural and regional centres. Staying on the farm and working nearby are real options for them.
The objective is to help these small block irrigators remain in their communities while getting out of the business of irrigation, at the same time as providing greater environmental flows to the Murray-Darling system.
In addition to the exit grant of up to $150,000, two complementary grants will be included in the package:
     * up to $10,000 for advice and training, including skills development, direction setting plans, succession planning and business advice
     * up to $10,000 for removal of permanent plantings and other production-related infrastructure
The program will be part of the Government's Water for the Future plan, which includes $3.1 billion for buying back water in the Basin and $5.8 billion for infrastructure improvements and to help communities adjust to reduced water availability.
Implementation of this initiative will be linked to water reforms agreed between the Commonwealth and the States. More details for irrigators about how to access the package will be announced within the next month.


BATH: Mr Rudd thank you. Firstly are the savings of Australians safe?
PM: The Australian Prudential and Regulatory Authority is the regulator of all Australian financial institutions, meaning deposit taking institutions, banks as well as the insurance companies as well. Their advice is to the Government that our institutions are well regulated, they are well capitalised and they are profitable.
BATH: But Australians are watching what's going on in the US Prime Minister, and with all due respect they are watching the American Government bailout US banks and I guess they are wondering if the Australian Government would do the same for our banks?
PM: Well can I say the circumstances in the United States are vastly different to those in Australia...
BATH: But we are not immune from what's happening in the US.
PM: The Governor of the Reserve Bank made that absolutely clear in a statement only in the last week or so, of course we are not immune to what's going on in international financial markets. At the same time we should be absolutely clear cut about the different quality of the institutions we have in this country.
BATH: You are going to New York this week, what will that achieve? Shouldn't you be here looking after the shop?
PM: By definition a global financial crisis requires a global response and that means if you have got more than 100 heads of Government in New York for three days which is what will happen, the number one topic for debate among heads of Government will be the content of a further global response to the global financial crisis.
That's a principle reason why I am in New York and I believe it's my responsibility to do so.
BATH: Mr Rudd thanks for your time this evening.
PM: Good to be with you.


PM: Well welcome to welcoming the babies in Wayne Swan's electorate here in Brisbane and it's great to be with Wayne at this community event which he's run here on Brisbane's north side for nearly a decade. It's great to be part and parcel of community life. 
One or two things about the economy, the global economy and also what Wayne will speak to is measures to assist working families.
The core to our plan for the nation's future is responsible economic management. That means ensuring we have a strong budget surplus, it also means that we have a total comprehensive engagement with the global and national financial regulators at this time of global financial crisis.
Of course part and parcel of our response to the global financial crisis is to make sure we have strong economic management at home and that rests in a strong budget surplus and this Government stands by the surplus it delivered through the budget and it's important to deliver that surplus with integrity.
Why, Australia needs that as a buffer for the future. If you look at some of the other economies around the world at present who are affected by the global financial crisis, there are very few who can boast a budget surplus at a time like this. We have, and we have got it for a deliberate purpose and that's for Australia to have a strong buffer for the uncertain times which lie ahead globally.
The other thing I would say is beyond the budget surplus itself, Australia has been actively engaged with our national and international financial institutions in a coordinated response to the global financial crisis. At home that has involved measures that we put in place some time ago concerning Commonwealth Government securities, concerning also our proposals for a financial claims scheme, concerning also other measures that we are engaged with the global financial institutions on in order to provide the best global response possible to what is a global financial crisis. Australia is not immune, Australia must act nationally, Australia must act internationally. It's core business for the future.
The other part of the Government's plan for the future is to bring forward practical plans to assist working families, pensioners and carers under financial pressure and that goes to working families struggling with housing affordability. And today what Wayne is going to talk to is important practical work he has been doing with Australia's banks to introduce First Home Saver Accounts for working families saving for their first home so that we can make that great Australian dream of owning your own home still a reality for the future.
Over to you Wayne.
TREASURER: Thanks Prime Minister. Look there is fantastic news today and the news is that two of our biggest banks have signed up to the First Home Saver Accounts. There have been building societies, there have been credit unions of significance sign up to the account, but we now have two of our established banks sign up to the account .
So from the 1st October, for the first time in our history Australian's saving for a first home will receive a significant Government contribution to help them accumulate a bigger deposit, because we all know there is a real fear out there that our children and that our grandchildren will not be able to get a foothold in the housing market and this First Home Saver Account with the Government assistance is going to assist a lot of people over a significant period of time to accumulate a bigger deposit for their first home.
A very significant initiative and that's why it is such great news that two of the established banks have signed up along with building societies and credit unions. And the other good thing about this account and its design is that parents or grandparents can also assist the first home owner to save.
I am sure if you go over there today and talk to some of the grandparents, some of the parents, they will be pretty keen on helping their children get a toehold in the housing market, or a foothold in the housing market, via this First Home Saver Account.
So there will be a listing of all of those financial institutions that have signed up to the First Home Saver Account and it can be found on the APRA website which is apra.gov.au
I urge everybody to get all of the details of this account. This will be for the first time in our history a significant Government contribution to assist first home buyers accumulate a bigger deposit.
It's one of the measures that both the Prime Minister and I are extremely proud of, it was an election commitment that we gave and its starts on the 1st October.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: No I haven't, this requires new systems to be put in place. You can't just click your fingers and put a new account out there into the market in a short period of time.
I believe all of the financial institutions that are participating are doing so enthusiastically. I believe more financial institutions will sign up as time goes on, but we have a significant number including a couple of the very big banks signing up on the 1st of October. That's great news.
PM: Prior to the last election only 10 months ago we promised to have First Home Saver Accounts, 10 months later that's delivered and they will be out there in the marketplace and with the banks on board it's terrific.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of global financial turmoil, did you consider using any part of the surplus (inaudible)?
PM: The key to Australia's response to the global financial crisis is responsible economic management and that means a strong budget surplus. A $22 billion surplus which the Treasurer and I and other Ministers worked so hard on for the May budget.
Secondly we've indicated that we want to invest as much of that surplus as possible into productive potential for the economy long term. Our roads, our ports, our infrastructure, and our high speed broadband.
On top of that practical measures like we have announced today to assist working families also under financial pressure. Can I say on the status of Australia's financial institutions - through the regulators and the Treasurer was meeting with the regulators as recently as Friday, we have been in close contact with them, closely monitoring the balance sheets of Australia's principal financial institutions and the good news for Australia is that based on the advice that we have receive the balance sheets remain in good order.
There is a difference between the status of Australia's leading financial institutions and the health of their balance sheets against what we see off shore. And we need to speak positively and strongly about that because that's the factual advice that we have received.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the key thing is to at a time of a global financial crisis, what is necessary for a global financial crisis in dealing with it is a global response, and that is dealing with global leaders because we know that Australia is not immune.
A global financial crisis by its definition is global and therefore if you are going to respond to it effectively it means that high levels of coordination with leaders from abroad and that means dealing with the regulators as the Treasurer and I do both at home and abroad on a regular basis. It also means dealing with Heads of Government because a lot of the decisions that need to be taken are in fact very much at the discretion of the political leadership of the countries concerned.
We have a direct interest in what future actions are going to be taken by various Governments around the world. It is therefore our responsibility to engage with them, it is the responsible and right thing to do. In fact it's irresponsible to head in the reverse direction.
TREASURER: Can I just add to that and then we are going to have wind up because we have 160 babies down there waiting. In relation to the comments from the Opposition Leader this morning, $6 billion is a lot of money and that's what the Opposition is opposing in terms of our budget measures in the Senate. If they are serious about responsible economic management they should pass that $6 billion worth of measures.
At the moment $6 billion worth of measures in the Senate and a further $14 billion worth of spending measures is what the Opposition is going to raid the surplus for, if they were in Government. That is not responsible economic management.
At a time of global economic uncertainty we do need a strong surplus as a buffer against that uncertainty. The Government will certainly put in place and keep in place all of those measures which deliver the responsible outcome that provides the buffer for Australia in these uncertain times.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) about the Broncos?
PM: I think all of Queensland is in mourning, at least all of Brissie is and many parts beyond Brissie.
TREASURER: Well I was there last night and I was in the middle of thousands of Bronc's supporters and they were all pretty deflated and you can't say anymore. 
But they put in a big effort you know it was a tough game. It was a great game of rugby league and unfortunately someone has got to lose.
PM: And it just didn't quite break our way. 


UHLMANN: Prime Minister Good Morning.
PM: Good Morning Chris.
UHLMANN: There's an international credit strike, what's wrong with canvassing the idea of how you might relieve some of that pressure in Australia?
PM: Well firstly the Reserve Bank throughout the course of the last 12 months has been monitoring liquidity requirements of the Australian domestic economy and acting appropriately, that's the first point.
The second is to recognise clearly the difference between Australia's domestic financial circumstances and those in the United States.
Let me just make two very clear points, first of all in the United States, the underlying problem goes back to subprime mortgages which represent some 15 per cent of the US mortgage market, in Australia that figure is less than one per cent.
Secondly, arrears on mortgage repayments in Australia, remain at about 0.55 per cent, in the United States it's something more than six times that.
The circumstances in the two markets are different and therefore we believe it's very important that we maintain a clear understanding in our public language about those differences. And I think it's therefore very important that all responsible public commentary on this reinforces those differences rather than tries to say that we have exactly the same sort of circumstances as the Americans.
UHLMANN: Well Prime Minister, you know that Australian institutions, not just banks, borrow extensively overseas to fund their operations, can the Australian financial system and its business system survive a long run credit strike, isn't that what this is about?
PM: On the question of the availability of liquidity and credit in global markets, that's what the Australian regulators have been monitoring closely in the 12 months plus that this crisis has been unfolding.
And the Reserve Bank has been acting appropriately in response to that, and of course, we will continue to take our advice from the regulators about the liquidity needs of the economy.
But I keep going back to this point, the United States yesterday, or over the weekend announced this extraordinary $700-billion bailout of bad debt in the United States, and for people now to be providing commentary in Australia that we should do the same, if I have read these comments correctly over the weekend from some, is frankly not responsible.
UHLMANN: Isn't it responsible though Prime Minister to start considering options? Shouldn't you be thinking in fact as to whether or not our institutions can survive the fact that credit may be extremely scarce now business institutions run on that credit? Haven't you been thinking about that yourself?
PM: But the point I'm making to you Chris, is that, since the Government has been in this last nine months, our regular engagement with the Reserve Bank and others go to the daily, weekly, monthly question of the credit and liquidity requirements of the Australian Financial System and the Reserve Bank has been acting appropriately.
We will continue to maintain our advice from the financial regulators in Australia and act appropriately.
But what I'm saying is that there is a mountain of difference between the need in the United States for a $700-billion bailout of bad debt on the one hand, against the systems which prevail within Australia, which have quite different levels of exposure to subprime, different levels of arrears when it comes to the repayment of mortgages and a different state of the balance sheets of financial institutions.
We will remain vigilant on this as we have been over the nine months that we've been in office.
UHLMANN: There is a huge difference about whether or not we're exposed to those sorts of debts Prime Minister, but isn't the contagion that spreads out from the United States a loss of confidence in the financial system and the fact that the financial system might seize up if there's not enough cash in the system?
Are you saying that you haven't considered or war-gamed the possibility of a lack of cash for Australian business institutions, have you not at least thought about that?
PM: Chris, that's completely implicit in my answers to your previous questions.
UHLMANN: Well that's what Malcolm Turnbull's thinking about, albeit aloud.
PM: What I'm saying is that the circumstances between the two economies are vastly different, secondly on liquidity requirements, the Australian economy, as you would expect the Treasurer and myself have been working through those liquidity needs, with the Reserve Bank and others during the course of this year.
Not in the last week, not in the last two weeks, but all year, and calibrating our response accordingly and that's what we will continue to do.
There is however a vast difference in the circumstances and in terms of international response, one of the other measures which the regulator ASIC (Australian Securities and Investment Commission) announced on Friday, and took further over the course of the weekend, was in relation to the need to bring in appropriate arrangements on short selling for the Australian stock market.
We have done that, we have acted nationally, that's a responsible course of action, it's important to be measured and considered in our response to developments as they occur and that is what the Government is doing.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister do you have full confidence in the Foreign Minister Stephen Smith?
PM: I have absolute confidence in the Foreign Minister.
UHLMANN: Why can't he carry Australia's case to the United Nations this week and do whatever talking needs to be done on Australia's behalf in New York?
PM: When I go to New York for the next three days of this week, there will be some 100 plus heads of government in New York at the United Nations General Assembly, and there will be one topic of conversation and debate and discussion among heads of government and it is this, the most effective global response to the global financial crisis. That is a meeting at heads of government level.
The second point is this: I will also be engaging with the US financial regulators, including the chairman of the New York Federal Reserve, the chairman of the New York Federal Reserve is one of three critical players in the United States on future actions on the US domestic financial market.
These are important meetings, together with meetings with other representatives of the financial community.
Chris, you can either respond to the populist political attack being mounted by populist political opposition, not to go to a meeting of a hundred world leaders at a time of a global financial crisis, or you can act in the national interest and do that. I intend to act in the nation interest.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, though aren't those two reasons you gave post-facto reasons for this trip, in fact the initial reason you we're going was to address the UN General Assembly and to lobby for Australia's position on the Security Council in 2012. Is that really necessary now?
PM: The absolute requirement in the midst of a global financial crisis is to deal with how the world responds to the range of proposals which have already been put forward by the International Monetary Fund, by the Financial Stability Forum and on top of that, by the G20.
The key thing is to muster political support to respond globally. The head of the IMF said recently, the solutions are out there in terms of response to global financial market instability, what is lacking is the political will to do that. Our challenge is to muster that will.
Of course there are other matters on the international agenda as well, including a global response to climate change, but when you have an opportunity, as the leaders of the world gather in New York for just three days to engage on what is the greatest financial crises that we have seen for a long, long time, and to muster the political will to respond coherently to it, it's important that in the national interest, Australia is there rather than simply hoping that someone else sorts it out on our behalf.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister Thank you.
PM: Thanks very much


GILBERT: You're heading off to New York this afternoon. You're going to miss the rest of the week in parliament. Why do you need to go?
PM: Well, this week in New York the annual meeting of the UN General Assembly will have heads of government from 122 countries around the world including the heads of government from 13 of the world's 15 major economies.
There'll be one subject, one core subject on people's mind, and that is the global response to the global financial crisis.
And there are two schools of thought here. Either you can go down the populist road, the opportunistic populist road, which is what various people in politics are championing at the moment and not go, or you can act in the national interest. My judgment is that my responsibility as Prime Minister is to act in the national interest, which means working through with other heads of government the best response to this global financial crisis.
Australia has to have a seat at the table, not just sort of hang out to one side an expect everyone else to kind of solve it. That's not how it works.
GILBERT: But that reason was given later. The primary reason was to address the UN General Assembly. Are you too focussed, too obsessed, with foreign affairs?
PM: Well Kieran, you know, Australia is part of a global order - a global security order, a global economic order and a global order when it comes to climate change. And Australia must have its voice heard. That's my job  -  I'm the Prime Minister of the country. Mr Howard in the past, and I've supported him for doing this, addressed the UN General Assembly to make Australia's case known.
I do the same  -  on our response to the global economy, on our response to the great challenge of climate change as well as the enduring challenges of security. You can either be Australia with its voice at the table and at the UN General Assembly this week, where, as I said, 13 out of 15 heads of government from the 15 largest economies in the world. Or you can ‘that's not our business.
Well you know something, the national interest, I believe, is served by Australia's Prime Minister being there arguing our case, and I intend to do so.
GILBERT: Have you got the balance right? After this trip you would have met Ban Ki-moon three times. You haven't met Nick Xenophon once. Yet you've got problems getting your legislation through the upper house. Is your balance right?
PM: You know something Kieran, I have a very competent team in the Senate who deal with a whole bunch of Senators, independents, from the Greens, from the National Party, and that's their job, to assist in steering our legislation through the Senate.
But you know what the nature of our challenges today are, they are fundamentally dealing with how we build a strong economy in Australia for the long term, and to see Australia through this financial crisis. That means ensuring that we have a strong surplus at home through the Budget. But secondly, it means that our actions as Australia are properly coordinated abroad with the other international financial institutions and other national governments. And that's why my responsibility as the head of government is to be there participating actively on Australia's behalf.
GILBERT: Malcolm Turnbull says he would like to sit down with you to talk to you about what you can do to take the pressure off the banks. Why is that such a bad idea?
PM: Well can I just say, I saw Mr Turnbull the other day talk about bipartisanship. Well, bipartisanship would begin with unblocking the Government's Budget measures in the Senate. If I look across the world today at this time of global financial crisis, and I look at the major economies grappling with this crisis, we in Australia are running a strong Budget surplus, some $22 billion, 1.8 per cent of GDP. And I look across most of the others, they're all in deficit.
Now, the reason we've managed to generate a surplus as a buffer for the future is we've taken strong, and sometimes unpopular, actions in the Budget. For politically opportunistic reasons the Liberals are now trying to block those in the Senate - $6 billion worth, which the Liberal Party have described as a bit of loose change. That's not my approach. So on bipartisanship, it begins at home, it begins in the Senate. I'd like to see some concrete action on behalf the Liberals there. It's in Australia's national economic interests that they do so.
GILBERT: What about the Opposition Leader raising the prospect of providing greater support to our banking institutions? Why not at least discuss that?
PM: Can I say, governments are elected to govern, and what we've been doing since we have been in office is on a regular basis work through with the Australian financial regulatory authorities, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, the Reserve Bank of Australia, as well as the Australian Securities and Investment Commission, on a weekly-monthly basis about the regulatory and liquidity needs of the Australian economy and the financial system. That is part of a core continuing work of government. And we've been doing so from day one.
Secondly, looking to the future, there are, I see a couple of approaches which people seem to be recommending. There is one I have heard in the last few days which says that Australia needs to adopt the US model of providing an Australian equivalent I assume of a $700 billion bailout of bad debt.
Well can I just say the circumstances in Australia's financial system are radically different from those in the Unites States. First and foremost, subprime which lies at the core of the US financial crisis, represents some 15 per cent of total US mortgages and by and large they are bad debt, in Australia less than 1 per cent. In the United States we have high levels of arrears on payments for mortgages, In Australia it is 0.55 per cent.
So we can have one populist school of economic thought which says you can mouth off about these things, you can motor mouth your way through these things and talk about them as if there is no difference between Australia and the United States when objectively there is. Or the alternative approach and that's our approach, a responsible course of economic action, dealing in a practical daily, weekly response to the advice of the regulators to make sure that our institutions remain in good order.
GILBERT: But your Assistant Treasurer introduced legislation in June to broaden the investment mandate of the Office of Financial Management. Why would you do that if you wouldn't at least consider the possibility?
PM: But what I am saying Kieran is that the Government has been active across a range of fronts all year.
GILBERT: So what's Malcolm Turnbull done wrong then in raising this as a prospect?
PM: Can I say to use language which says that Australia needs to adopt American style practices, referring to what has occurred over the weekend, is of itself irresponsible language. Because it suggests that the nature of the problems in mortgage markets in the United States are similar to those in Australia. They are not and for the figures I gave out before.
Therefore the responsible course of action is to work calmly and methodically through these challenges as we have done all year with the regulators in ensuring that liquidity levels are kept up within the Australian financial markets through the actions of the Reserve Bank. Through taking other measures in the debt market which we took months ago, to do other measures like the proposal we have for a financial claims scheme for Australian depositors and policy holders and through a range of other measures as well. We have been doing this from the beginning.
That's the responsible course of action, calmly, methodically. As opposed to sounding off in a press conference.
GILBERT: Just another couple of quick questions to finish up. The polls show an immediate bounce for Malcolm Turnbull and the Coalition. Can you beat this guy?
PM: Well you know something, when there is a change of political leader in Australia there is always a poll bounce. It's been that way since time immemorial and will be into the future as well.
The challenge for us for the future as the Government is to implement our plan for Australia's long-term future. Building an Australia for the future, a strong economy, investing in education, investing in health care and doing the right thing on climate change and water. And we will be judged, Kieran, at the end of the day on whether our plans have been implemented or not.
GILBERT: I noticed you didn't say you could beat him though?
PM: You know something I think people are sick and tired of personality politics and therefore it's going to go down to the content of our policies and whether we implement them or not. And I am very cautious about that, very considered, very methodical, and we will work our way through this agenda. And we will be implementing our plan for the country's future.
And at the end of the day people will make a judgement on the success or otherwise of what we have done and I am quite prepared to have my reputation staked on that rather than personality politics.
GILBERT: Julie Bishop is about to be appointed the first female shadow Treasurer, the first woman to take a treasury portfolio either in Government or Opposition. Do you welcome that, do you congratulate her?
PM: I haven't seen that report, so that's an internal matter for the Liberals.
I would say one thing though to the Liberals, the test for the Liberals is the importance which they now attach to pensions given that their spokesman for pensions Tony Abbott, the shadow Minister for families which is responsible for pensions says, this is not an important portfolio and certainly not important enough for him.
So on the one hand we have all this carry on by the Liberals in their new found doctrine of compassion and then in a moment of political honesty we have Mr Abbott, the shadow Minister for pensions, saying that portfolio is not important enough for him.
The test for Mr Turnbull is what is he going to do about that.
GILBERT: Prime Minister thanks for your time
PM: Good to be with you


PM: Today I have been meeting with a range of people including the President of the World Bank, also with representatives of the finance community here in New York and I also had some conversations with representatives of the Federal Reserve and others. I attended a function with President Bush and President Talabani of Iraq, talking about the future of that country.
In my meetings with the investment community here in New York, it is quite plain that there is a strong view that Australia's banks are in strong working order and their balance sheets are strong as well. That view was reinforced to me in the discussions that I just had with the representatives of the finance community here in New York. Also, the recent report by the International Monetary Fund on the Australian economy points to some core facts, namely that in the IMF's view our banks are strong, our regulators are strong and Australia is well placed to weather the current storm. The IMF's report also points to the strength of Australia's budget position which has been described as enviable.
My discussions just now with Bob Zoellick from the World Bank, who is an old friend of Australia in his many different positions over the years, it's quite plain from when you look at the global financial crisis we of course look at the implications through our own national experience and the implications for Australia, the President of the World Bank has been explaining to me the implications of course for developing economies across the world as well, already confronted with challenges in terms of food security and the roll-through effect of this financial crisis and its impact on developing economies.
That of course affects economic growth and it affects how all economies participating in global markets fair in the future. The key challenge for us all is to have a coherent strategy to respond to this crisis. In Australia that is anchored in our strong budget position, it is anchored of course in the strength of our national regulatory institutions, it is anchored in the strength in the balance sheets of our banks, it is also anchored the extent and density of our cooperation with international financial corporations and international institutions as well.
We have done that, we are doing that and we will continue to do that in the future.
I might turn to the President of the World Bank to make some remarks and then I'll take some questions.
ZOELLICK: Well, first I want to thank the Prime Minister for taking some time to meet with me today, I know he's got a very busy schedule during a brief visit. I found it to be very, very useful because, as the Prime Minister mentioned, over the course of the past seven or eight months there has been a lot of focus on financial turmoil globally.
At the World Bank we have been trying to highlight some of the issues for the developing world and, in particular the double jeopardy of the fuel and food price increases, and what we can try to do to help those that are most vulnerable. I believe that some of the turmoil over the course of the most recent week is likely to also ripple through the developing world in a way that we really haven't seen so far. The developing world has been an alternative (inaudible) of growth but I think we now have to prepare for challenges in that realm as well.
Much of the focus I think at this UN session, led by the Secretary General, is on the Millennium Development Goals and highlighting the fact that while we are now in a period where we are trying to focus on some of the financial recovery, that we also have to pay close attention to what is done on the human recovery side, particularly with some of the challenges that we are going to face in terms of aid and supporting these countries.
In that sense, I want to take this opportunity to thank not only the Prime Minister but the people of Australia. Australia was one of the countries that came in promptly and helped support a rapid food financing facility that we have to try to deal with taking that program to some of the countries that were most under stress.
We also have discussed over time some of the key issues in financing in the climate change area. Whether it's the forestation questions or some of the other issues that we face, Australia really has stepped up and worked closely with us on some of these issues which are going to be important because when you really look at the food and energy and water they are all exacerbated because of the challenges of climate change. So we had some chance to discuss the perspectives globally as obviously Australia is an important economy as part of global growth. As the Prime Minister said, and the most recent IMF report has good things to say about the strength of Australia's financial economy but Australia's part of a global system and so that's one of the reasons why it was very helpful to be able to compare notes. So thank you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) would you like to see the Bill before Congress passed as quickly as possible, the bail-out measures, and secondly, do you think it is time for whoever takes over the US president to implement better transparency in US financial systems similar to measures we have in Australia?
PM: Firstly, America is a robust democracy and the debate in the Congress will be fast, fierce and hard. But can I say that we are facing a global financial crisis and my appeal to our colleagues, Republican and Democrats, both sides of the aisle and the House and the Senate, is that the global economy needs these measures to be dealt with quickly.
Secondly, on the broader question of transparency could I say that through the Financial Stability Forum, where Australia has been active for a long period of time, the transparency recommendations there are very clear.
We in Australia have been in the process of implementing those and it would be good if all economies, large and small across the world, did the same because transparency is a core part of the long term stabilisation of global financial markets.
JOURNALIST: From your talks today, including with the investment bankers, do you think that Australia needs to take any further measures to reinforce itself against this crisis?
PM: The good thing about the IMF report today, apart from its general statements about the strength of the Australian economy, is also its statement that Australia is well-placed to see its way through the current global downturn. And that our banks are well regulated and our banks are strong.
The response from those in the investment community with whom I spoke today is that Australia's main banks are seen to be strong, and are robust also in the market place. And that was encouraging to hear. In terms of further measures on behalf of the Australian Government, we have worked on a daily basis, on a detailed basis, with our own council of economic regulators  -  the Reserve Bank and the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority as well as ASIC. We will respond to their advice systematically and thoroughly each day. We believe we have our current policy settings right but further responses on policy front will be taken as appropriate.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what is the latest advice on what stage we are at in dealing with this crisis? I know that you have been told today by certain people that it is going to get worse. Is that your view?
PM: Well I am not quite sure who you are referring to in particular but let me explain our own position. And that is, a global financial crisis is going to obviously affect global economic growth and that will wash through to the national growth performances of all economies.
And you see in our own figures in Australia, that we are projecting a softer growth performance in the period ahead. This therefore has a time to wash through to the real economy and that is what all policy makers are concerned about.
I can say one thing though about that. The fact that we have in Australia, what the IMF describes as an enviable budget position of a $22 billion budget surplus, as a buffer for the future to act, is very important and puts us in a very good position, relative to other economies.
BOB ZOELLICK: Well I basically agree with the way the Prime Minister stated it. And I will just add from the perspective of the World Bank since we focus on developing countries, that one of the elements that has characterised this financial turmoil very differently, if you think about it, from the ‘90's or the ‘80's, is the strength of some of the developing countries.
That is a good thing, the multiple pool of growth and Australia has benefited from that in East Asia. I think what we now have to watch is to see what the ripple effects are in terms of exports and the trading system and whether then this leads to some questions in terms of domestic investment in some of the developing countries, and some of them may not have strong banking systems.
Now, each country has to be looked at on its own terms and we actually, at the World Bank, are trying to go through each of the developing countries and try to understand what we can do to support.
Fortunately the Bank is a very well capitalised institution, we're considered a quality credits or we are sort of a (inaudible) so we have got a good capital (inaudible) 30 position, we are currently in a good position to help and that is one reason again, it is helpful to talk with the Prime Minister given his experience particularly in the Asia Pacific region, as we try to think about how we can support that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) $700 billion bail-out going to some non US based institutions, are you aware of whether there are any Australian institutions would benefit as currently designed by the Treasury Department and also for Mr Zoellick, do you have a view on this, the idea of banning all types of short selling, as something of a financial expert, what do you think of that as a policy?
PM: Firstly in terms of the content of the $700 billion proposal from the Secretary of the United States Treasury, our own Treasury and our own central bank are currently in discussions with their American counterparts on the full and final detail of this package and how it will be implemented.
I will reserve further comment to that. I have already said that we welcome this package. I think it is a good and strong measure from the US administration at a time when the global financial crisis, global financial markets are under considerable stress.
I have also noted by the way, a debate between moral hazard on the one hand and a financial crisis on the other. Can I say that at a time like this, when you have the global financial system in severe crisis, the important and enduring consideration here is to act decisively to restabilise the system.
That is the first responsibility of Government and I would commend the administration for what they have done.
ZOELLICK: I would just say generally since my focus is on the developing world, that I think what, you know, particularly (US Treasury) Secretary (Henry) Paulson and (Federal Reserve) Chairman (Ben) Bernanke have done are important and good steps.
And I think that this is a problem, certainly beyond the scope that anybody expected, and I think the combination of steps that they've taken and the SEC has taken have been the right steps.
Now as the Prime Minister, you have a debate in the Congress, an equal branch of government in terms of trying to move it forward and I hope and expect they probably will move it forward.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) leaving aside the strength of the Australian banks, how would you characterise Mr (Rupert) Murdoch or the investment bankers at the roundtable's view of where this is heading?
PM: Well I will let individual investment bankers speak for themselves. Can I say in relation to the state of the Australian banks and their balance sheets, the International Monetary Fund is not given to casual views, they have conducted an analysis of the state of the Australian economy and the elements of it and their conclusions are there in black and white. And the IMF has delivered a very strong positive report card for Australia, and on the robustness of our regulators, the strength of our banks, and our ability to see our way through this global economic downturn.
JOURNALIST: On climate change Mr Rudd, you and Mr Zoellick discussed it, is there any question that it may affect the timetable for implementation of an ETS in Australia?
PM: No our ambition is as it has always been, Dennis, and we haven't changed that. What I have been discussing with the President of the World Bank today and with many others here in New York, is the implementation of the initiative I announced in Australia last Friday, for a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
That is important in terms of bringing on coal fired power stations in the future using CCS technology. That is a practical means, not only to bring down greenhouse gas emissions in a timely fashion, but a practical means also to assist strongly affected industries, the electricity generation industry, in a period of transition which would occur once a carbon pollution reduction scheme is introduced.
JOURNALIST: Do you welcome the breakthrough you had on the Luxury Car Tax? And where are you up to with the other measures that are working their way through the Senate?
PM: Well it is quite remarkable that we have to depend on the independents in the Senate to get our measure on Luxury Car Tax in Australia through. I find that remarkable.
Secondly, can I say this, at a time of global financial crisis, it is imperative that Australia remain in a strong Budgetary position. The Government has brought down a strong Budget surplus and I would say it is irresponsible for any political party to block measures which underpin that surplus in the Senate and that remains my position.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Medicare Levy Surcharge (inaudible)
PM: Because we want to deliver a $1200 a year or up to a $1200 a year benefit for working families. And I am surprised that the Liberal Party would stand in the road of that in the Senate as well.
And the reason why we have put forward a compromised position is that we are absolutely determined to deliver that as an outcome for 330,000 Australians. Our original proposal was for 400,000 Australians and the answer to that question is best obtained from the Liberal Party back home.


JULIA GILLARD: I'm here with the Treasurer to welcome the International Monetary Fund (IMF) article four report on Australia, and this report concludes, and I quote, that: ‘The sound macroeconomic framework that we have in this country should permit Australia to weather the global downturn and contain inflationary pressures.' This report comes to three important conclusions: it welcomes the Government's budget surplus; it notes the resilience of the Australian banking system; and it welcomes the Government's ambitious reform agenda through the Council of Australian Governments (COAG). And I want to say in respect of that agenda of reform through COAG, that it is a vital agenda of reform for this country's future; that the work that is happening to end the blame game is work that is all about preparing this nation to meet the challenges of the future. 
Now obviously intergovernmental discussions can be complex. But for Australians this ambitious program of reform is about better schools; it's about better hospitals; it's about a seamless national economy; it's about a national approach to climate change; a national approach to homelessness and housing; it's about a new era of nation building and investment in infrastructure; and importantly, it's about closing the gap for Indigenous Australians.
The endorsement of this program of reform is significant. The Government has worked intensively throughout the year with our state and territory colleagues on this ambitious program of reform. And many of the intergovernmental agreements that will deliver these vital new reforms will be concluded before the end of this year.
With those words, I'll hand over to the Treasurer.
WAYNE SWAN: Thanks very much, Julia. It's very encouraging to get such a strong endorsement, such a strong endorsement for the Government's budget settings - the economic settings of the Budget. And also, I think, for our long-term reform agenda, and also, such a strong endorsement of the quality of the banking and regulatory systems that we have in this country.
I think this report underscores the importance of the budget surplus and the role that fiscal policy does play in supporting monetary policy. And you might recall there was a fair bit of debate back last May about the appropriateness, or otherwise, of the budget settings. I think this report does demonstrate very clearly that we got the balance right. I think the report also strongly supports the decision of the Government to do something long term about the capacity constraints in the Australian economy, through the establishment of our investment funds. And it recognises the important role those investment funds will play in lifting the productive capacity of the Australian economy and putting in place the long-term investments for the future.
I think the IMF is also adding weight to the Government's view that we're not immune from global difficulties, but we are in good shape to handle those difficulties. And I think, like the Government, the IMF is saying that we do expect the slowing of global growth, but we still have a lot to be optimistic about. All of that is pretty encouraging but we understand that there are difficult times ahead. We're not out of the woods yet but it's good to see that the IMF shares our view about the budget settings and the long-term reform agenda for this country.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, the report also says that the the risks are on the upside in the [inaudible] economy, says that if inflation persists at an elevated level, further fiscal restraint may be needed and the authorities and staff agree that monetary policy should be tightened quickly if needed. Leading indicators suggest [inaudible] is expected. This was based on conversations in July.
WAYNE SWAN: That's right.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that assessment has changed very much and if there is a need for further fiscal restraint, what would be the timeframe for that?
WAYNE SWAN: Well, I'm not going to speculate about the future. As we know, the impact of these events in the United States and on global markets is one that has been quite profound. The flow-on impacts of that in terms of world growth are yet to be seen. I think the IMF has just made the rather sensible conclusion that for the period that this report covers that we got our settings right.
The Government will have to be flexible in responding to changes to the international environment. We are acutely aware of the need to tackle inflationary pressures in the economy. But at budget time, we were also acutely aware of the countervailing forces impacting upon this country.
Both the Prime Minister and I, in April, were overseas - we became acutely aware of the potential for the US sub-prime crisis to continue to impact on world growth. That's one of the reasons we chose to place the budget settings as we did in May and we will continue to make appropriate adjustments as time goes on. So there are always risks out there - sometimes they are on the upside and sometimes they are on the downside.
At the moment, if you are looking at  the international environment, you'd have to say that the risks are more on the downside. This report would reflect the assessment of some weeks ago.
I mean last week, for example, was one of the most momentous weeks that we have seen in terms of, in terms of, economies around the world and in terms of the United States. So, the job for policymakers is to be flexible in that environment.
JOURNALIST: What advice are you getting now from Treasury about the impact that the global financial crisis may have on government revenues, pitching forward to the MYEFD in late November.
WAYNE SWAN: Let's not speculate about where we'll end up in MYEFD, but there is no doubt if you just were to look at the impact, say, on stock markets, that there would be a substantial impact there in terms of future government revenues from capital gains tax, for example - that would be one. But it is too early, far too early, to be making that assessment or speculating about what the outcome may be. Because, as you know, on the other side, we've had some pretty healthy increases in commodity prices and so on. But if you're looking at the second-round effects of what has gone on in world financial markets - and most particularly in the United States - they will have implications for future revenue. And to underscore that point, that's why the integrity of our budget surplus is so important, and how irresponsible it is for the Liberal Party to attack that surplus at a time of global economic uncertainty.
It is completely economically irresponsible for the Liberals and the Nationals to be doing in the Senate what they have done in the last 24 hours. I mean, there is more economic responsibility in the hands of the Greens - Mr Xenophon and Mr Fielding - and in their little finger than there is the Liberal and National Parties in the Senate.
Now, fortunately, we've put forward a balanced measure in the Senate, a balanced proposal on the luxury car tax and that has passed. We have put a balanced proposal in terms of the Medicare levy surcharge threshold and we are talking to the minor parties about that, but we can't get any economic responsibility out of the Liberal and National Parties in the Senate.
Surely, this report underscores the absolute importance of a decent surplus and why the Liberal Party should be supporting the Government in the Upper House. But unfortunately, I think they've completed shredded any pretence at having any economic credibility at all.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, you've passed the luxury car tax, but it's kind of a bit unrecognisable from the original form. 
WAYNE SWAN: That's not true.
JOURNALIST:  post renovations in the Senate.
WAYNE SWAN: That's not true. We've made some concessions, but it's still there. The measure is substantially still there, the revenue flow is substantially still there.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] is not there, isn't it?
WAYNE SWAN: Beg your pardon?
JOURNALIST: Rebates and [inaudible] and people have got to go back so they can claim back their rebates.
WAYNE SWAN: Well, that what happens when the Liberal Party behave like economic vandals in the Senate. I mean, we've got a responsibility to the country, we've got a responsibility to the revenue base, we've got a responsibility to the Australian people to preserve the integrity of our Budget - and that's what we're doing. We are taking responsible measures in the Senate; we are negotiating with the minor parties - the Greens, Mr Xenophon, Mr Fielding - we're doing that in a sensible and measured way. We've got a good outcome. I don't accept your characterisation of that outcome at all. This is the consequence of a Senate where the Government doesn't have a majority.
But what has made all of that necessary? The vandalism of the Liberal Party in the Senate. Now Mr Turnbull said on day one of his leadership that he was going to be different and he was going to provide economic leadership. Well it's not economic leadership to vandalise the Budget in the Senate. It certainly isn't economic leadership to do what he did in his first the press conference, which was spend $20 billion in 20 minutes.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, on the COAG reform agenda that you mentioned - have you got agreement off the states from the national industrial relations system? Will your forthcoming legislation include measures on how the (inaudible)?
JULIA GILLARD: The discussions with the states on workplace relations are actually occurring through the relevant Ministerial Council rather than straight through COAG. I've met with the Workplace Relations Ministerial Council on a number of occasions and we are discussing the Government's legislation, and obviously our aspiration to make sure that there is one workplace relations system for all of the private sector.
In that process, of course, the states have very rationally said they want to see the Government's legislation; they want to see all of the details of the shape of the system. When we have the committee on Industrial Legislation Meeting to go through the Government's legislation, which will occur from the 7th of October to the 17th, we will also take the opportunity to have officials from states and territories work through the legislation. And we will then go to a further Workplace Relations Ministerial Council at the appropriate time. 
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
JULIA GILLARD: Well, we're working towards agreement. We're continuing to discuss with the states getting agreement. Obviously, the states want to see our legislation and then if I can echo some of Wayne's words, - the legislation will come into the House of Representatives. The great unknown about the future of that legislation is how it will be treated by the Liberal Party in the Senate. And the last stated position of the Liberal Party on this question, still heavily in the embrace of Work Choices, is that they won't pass the Government's legislation unless we graft the most hated bit of Work Choices - Australian Workplace Agreements - back into the heart of it.
Well, we won't be doing that and we are saying to the Liberal Party that the Government's legislation should be new in light of the fact that the Australian people voted for the policy Forward with Fairness last November. 
JOURNALIST: The IMF said in this report that it identified the risks to Australian banks from global financial turmoil have been rollover risk because they're relying so heavily on wholesale funding. I was just wondering if you could give us update on what your assessment is on how banks have been able to access global markets in the last week, whether they're still being able to access them comfortably.
And also, can you tell us whether it's true that Macquarie Bank, amongst others, lobbied the Government very heavily over the weekend and if this influenced your short selling decisions, or were the short selling decisions taken and announced on Sunday purely based on advice from regulators?
WAYNE SWAN: Well, in terms of the term funding for our major deposit taking institutions - my advice for the Reserve Bank is that they have been accessing that term funding on international markets and that they have done that substantially, I think, for the period ahead. But what goes beyond that will be dependent upon on how these matters play out in international markets. So the Government is acutely aware of that, as indeed are the regulators.
Secondly, in terms of so-called lobbying over the weekend, I, as I've said in the Parliament, had a meeting with our Council of Financial Regulators Friday afternoon. The major regulators the Reserve Bank - APRA, ASIC, the Treasury - and went through a whole range of issues. This is, consultations that have been happening regularly all year. It so happens that we had a meeting on Friday afternoon and discussed some of the issues, including the issue of short selling. But this is an issue taken independently by ASIC - taken independently by the decisions they made on Friday afternoon and independently in the case of the decision they announced on Sunday afternoon.
The Government does support both those decisions. And I think I explained in the Parliament why there was a change over the weekend and that change was entirely appropriate because of the change in the conditions themselves changed between the close of the markets in Australia on Friday night than elsewhere.
In terms of lobbying, over the weekend I spoke to - as I've said, all the regulators - I spoke to a large number of people involved in the financial services sector. Not one of those was in any way dominant in influencing the views that I had about this matter. But, in any case, the final decision was taken by ASIC. I support the final decision they took. Many people in the market  then and now have been lobbying the Government and regulators about these issues. There is absolutely nothing unusual about that. In fact, it's the way you would want it to be. You would want decisions that are taken like this to be decisions which have been discussed at length with industry.
JOURNALIST: So you said, just to be clear, Macquarie was one of those organisations?
WAYNE SWAN: I spoke to a large number of organisations ...
JOURNALIST: Including Macquarie?
WAYNE SWAN: I'm not buying who I spoke to over the weekend. I spoke to a large number of organisations over the weekend. In any one week since this event commenced on the first of January, I would've had regular conversations with CEOs of most of the major financial services corporations in this country and I'll continue to do it. ..
JOURNALIST: You see the point of the question that they're only beneficiary; they're the only big beneficiary of the short selling ...
WAYNE SWAN: I'm sorry, that is a completely absurd ...
JOURNALIST: Are they the big beneficiary of short selling?
WAYNE SWAN: ... a completely absurd characterisation which doesn't reflect well on your good self. The fact is that this was a very substantial decision about the integrity of our market. In an environment where serious regulators around the world were moving to take very substantial decisions, and they were markets in which Macquarie Bank or any of our banks were not big players. So these were decisions being implemented around the world late last week and over the weekend. And the beneficiary of the decision by our regulator was the Australian people. They were beneficiary - the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, do you think that the regulator might've made a mistake in the implementation of the decision given the market's opened late [inaudible]?
WAYNE SWAN: I think it was always going to be the case that when a decision of this size was taken, there would have to be adjustments made as it was implemented. That was recognised by the regulator. It was also recognised by the ASIC.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, just back on COAG, and education in particular, a while back Kevin Rudd made a speech to the Press Club outlining a forward program. How have negotiations gone since that time with the states on these matters and will you be taking this matter to the next COAG meeting next week? Do you expect an outcome?
JULIA GILLARD: The Government's taken some further steps on the reform agenda. In fact, an important step was taken today when I introduced the new Schools Bill into the Parliament. The Bill delivers $28 billion to non-government schools, but it also makes it absolutely clear that we will be requiring of non-government schools the same transparency and reporting framework we will be requiring of Government schools.
We are moving towards a National Education Agreement, which is about lifting the quality of all schools in this country and about transparency for all schools. Those discussions are continuing. They're continuing through the Productivity Agenda Working Group that works for COAG. They've also continue through the relevant Ministerial Council. We've always said that the final arrangements for schools would be made at the final COAG this year - that's the Government's timetable and we'll meet that timetable.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, how much harder will it be to get agreement given (inaudible) in WA and the prospect of another one in the ACT? How much hard will it be for you to get the national reforms?
JULIA GILLARD: We'll make this the last question and then in some famous words, ‘we'll have to zip'. On the question of arrangements with states and territories, we've made it perfectly clear to each state and territory that the Government is determined to ensure that there is a new era of transparency for Australian schooling. We're determined to make sure parents have information. We're determined to make sure that you can compare like-schools with like-schools. We also believe this information is important for Government to show where disadvantage is, to show where we need to make the most difference to lift quality in schooling.
So the Government is determined on its transparency agenda - the Prime Minister outlined it at the National Press Club. We're working towards finalising those agreements with all governments, including newly elected governments.


Today I completed Australia's ratification of the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA), a key UN treaty for sustainable management of tropical timber.
The ITTA is the principal global agreement designed to achieve the sustainable management of tropical forests.
The ratification of this agreement is also vital in our effort to mitigate climate change, with mechanisms to reduce greenhouse emissions by eliminating unsustainable forest practices.
With 47 per cent of the global forest estate in tropical regions, Australia has significant interests in the sustainable management of these forests.
Within International Tropical Timber Organisation member countries only 4.5 per cent of tropical forests are currently being sustainably managed, according to the definition used by the Organisation.
Good forest management is critical to tackling climate change, as deforestation contributes 20 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions.
The completion of the ratification of the ITTA will mean Australia is better positioned to play a leadership role in combating illegal logging activities, and working in partnership with the international community to ensure that forests around the world are properly managed.
The ITTA enables Australia to continue to extend our expertise in forest management to neighbouring countries, through greater collaboration on forest law enforcement and governance.
This year Australia signed forest carbon partnership agreements with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea.
Ratification of this agreement reinforces Australia's other initiatives in forest management, such as Australian objectives to assist Asia-Pacific countries build capacity to sustainably manage their forests.


We gather together at a time of great challenge to the international system.
A challenge that reminds us afresh that we live in a world where our interdependence is now greater than at any time before.
An interdependence that therefore demands our international cooperation now, more than at any time before.
There are many who criticise the United Nations.
And those of us who know this institution well know that it is not immune from criticism.
But those who argue against the United Nations advance no credible argument as to what should replace it.
Whatever its imperfections, the United Nations represents a necessary democracy of states.
States who resolved out of the carnage of the last World War that cooperation should always be preferred to conflict.
That our national interests are invariably best served by the simultaneous prosecution of the international interest.
That the purposes of our common humanity should prevail over the narrow interests of the few.
When the nations of the world met at San Francisco in 1945, the United Nations was conceived as a bold experiment.
One which ran contrary to the grain of the international order that had preceded it, where conflict was the norm and cooperation the exception.
One where the international community, for the first time, began to imagine how through an international institution we could protect not just the sovereignty of states, but equally advance the protection of peoples and the dignity of individuals.
And beyond this, we began to advance the idea that through the other great international institutions  -  the World Bank, the IMF, the GATT and the ILO  -  that we could fashion an international economic order that recognised the unfolding reality of economic interdependence.
These were the ideals we set for ourselves more than half a century ago.
And while the history of our achievements since then has been mixed, the ideas and ideals on which these institutions were constructed nevertheless remain as valid now as they were back then.
The failures that we have seen in recent times do not lie in the institutions alone.
The failure lies more in the poverty of our political will to animate these institutions to discharge the purposes for which they were created.
And that, distinguished delegates, is our collective responsibility.
The global financial crisis of today presents us afresh with a critical opportunity to act comprehensively and collectively for the long term  -  rather than selectively and separately for the short.
In the post-war period, the quantum of financial institutional failure seen these last weeks has been great.
The quantum of government intervention in financial markets has been significant.
And the quantum of the impact of one market on another has been unprecedented.
What we have seen in financial markets should bring home to us all that the central organising principle of this 21st century is interdependence.
For the century just past, interdependence may have been one option among many.
For the century that is to come, there is no longer an alternative.
Interdependence is not the expression of sentimental idealism.
Instead it is a recognition of the new realism of our current time.
This represents the cumulative impact of the globalisation of our engagement with each other over many decades.
Through unprecedented trade flows, unprecedented investment flows and unprecedented financial flows, we now see the globalisation of economy.
The globalisation of security  -  arising from the searing impact of September 11 when the obscenity visited on this great city caused us all to conclude that terrorism was the enemy of all of civilised humanity, not just of some nations.
And the globalisation of the environment  -  as we have come to recognise that carbon emissions from one part of the planet affects all parts of the planet  -  and therefore radically affects the future of the planet itself.
For what all these things tell us is this: that interdependence is the new realism of this 21st century.
And unless as a community of nations we rise to this new challenge our future is bleak indeed.
Mr President, the global financial crisis is a call to the global community to act.
Financial markets are a public good.
The stability of global financial markets is a public good.
If governments fail to protect this public good, then those who suffer are the working people of the world whose jobs, whose homes, and whose standard of living depends on it.
It is governments rather than speculators that have the central responsibility for determining the rules that govern the way markets work.
A decade ago the global economy and global financial markets were buffeted by the Asian financial crisis.
And as a global community we resolved that we would act to reduce the risk of such systemic crises in the future.
The problem is, a decade on, systemic lessons were not learnt.
And now we face a financial crisis of truly global proportions.
We must, therefore, ask ourselves three questions:
     * what went wrong;
     * what needs to be done now to fix the problem of financial market instability for the long term; and most critically
     * how we marshal the political will to do so.
First, what went wrong.
There has been a failure of internal governance within financial institutions.
There has also been a failure of external oversight.
Regulators have not always recognised the systemic risk posed by significant financial institutions.
So what must now be done?
The immediate task is to rebuild confidence in the financial system, by ensuring that central banks provide adequate liquidity, by enabling the recapitalisation of critical financial institutions and by ensuring the continued solvency of these institutions.
Over the longer term, the challenge is to reform financial markets and regulatory systems to reduce the chances of these events repeating themselves in the future.
To this end, together with other states, we would argue that the following reform program be implemented:
First, systemically important financial institutions should be licensed to operate in major economies only under the condition that they make full disclosure and analysis of balance sheet and off-balance sheet exposures.
Systemically important financial institutions are not just commercial banks, but can include investment banks, insurance companies, hedge funds and financial clearing houses.
Which institutions are systemically important will vary by one country and over time. 
The central bank in each country should have responsibility for financial system stability.
This should be embedded in globally agreed best practice standards of financial regulation  -  and assessed by the International Monetary Fund.
Second, we need to ensure that banks and other financial institutions build up capital in good times as a buffer for bad times, using predictable rules.
Supervisory frameworks need to be counter-cyclical, not pro-cyclical.
The Basel rules need to address this. 
Third, financial institutions need to have clear incentives to  promote responsible behaviour rather than unrestrained greed. 
Regulators should set higher capital requirements for financial firms that have executive remuneration packages that reward short term returns or excessive risk taking.
And again the Basel rules also need to address this.
Fourth, supervisory systems must be compatible with accounting principles that reflect reasonable assessments of the value of assets over time. 
We need to make sure accounting rules foster a more medium-term perspective and do not encourage institutions to think that risk is low just because current asset prices are high, or recent asset-price volatility has been low. 
The Basel rules also need to address this. 
And fifth, the IMF should be given a strengthened mandate for prudential analysis.
Conservative and consistent prudential standards should be applied to all financial institutions of systemic significance.
Furthermore, the IMF and the Financial Stability Forum should develop early warning systems of impending institutional vulnerabilities and provide advice on remedial policies.
Collectively, these institutions have led the development of the initiatives which represent the core of the financial market reform agenda, which I have just described.
However, these institutions are by their very nature bureaucratic. And the reform processes they initiate are constrained by a lack of political authority.
So I come to the third question which arises from the current crisis: how are we to go about implementing this reform agenda for the long term?
What is required is political will  -  exercised through ministerial forums working in cooperation with the IMF, the Financial Stability Forum and the G-20.
The G-20 is well placed to provide political authority to have these actions implemented urgently and comprehensively.
In this context,
     * Australia will work intensively with the forthcoming chairs of G-20, in particular the UK in 2009, to ensure that financial stability is at the centre of the work program and to initiate arrangements to strengthen G-20 input into shaping the work of the IMF and the Financial Stability Forum and implementation of agreed outcomes. 
     * At their meeting in November, the G-20 Finance Ministers should review progress in adopting the current Financial Stability Forum recommendations, and reinforce the agreed deadlines for finalising their implementation, and agree with the Financial Stability Forum a clear timetable for the action plan.
     * As the systemically important economies, G-20 members should demonstrate their commitment to best-practice financial regulation and disclosure, by providing better information on the stability of their domestic financial systems and cross-border exposures to the IMF and Financial Stability Forum. 
     * The IMF and the Financial Stability Forum should provide regular scenario analysis to the G-20 to facilitate clear engagement on the risks facing the global financial system.  This analysis should be included in an enhanced version of the IMF's Global Financial Stability Report. 
Distinguished delegates, the purpose of this reform agenda is to provide a real political mandate for our international regulatory institutions to do their job in defending the integrity of the international financial system.
Mr President, one of the greatest challenges we face is climate change and the threat it poses to the environment.
In December last year, after many years delay, the Australia ratified the Kyoto Protocol.
We are determined to be part of the solution to climate change  -  not just a part of the problem.
We have acted to begin the process of developing a comprehensive emissions trading or carbon pollution reduction scheme to bring down CO2 emissions over time.
We will also implement a national energy efficiency strategy, as well as a renewable energy strategy.
Developing and deploying new technologies will also be part of our response to climate change.
The Australian Government has decided to establish a global centre to drive the demonstration and commercialisation of carbon capture and storage technologies.
This project  -  building on existing national and regional initiatives  -  will bring together the best researchers in the world to develop the best technology to apply.
As the world at present is planning to generate 45 per cent of its electricity from coal in 2030, we can no longer afford to delay to act on this technology.
Delegates, Australia invites all governments and corporations of good will to participate in this Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
Mr President, the United Nations, and we its member nations, have a responsibility to protect the nations and the peoples of the world.
We must protect people from terrorism.
And this must include commitment to support those nations in the frontline of the struggle.
Australia is working closely with the Government of Afghanistan and our global partners to bring security and stability to that country.
We can never again allow that nation to become a haven for terrorists.
Australia is also an active contributor to global efforts to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
We continue to urge nations to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty so that it can enter into force.
We remain concerned that states such as Iran and North Korea continue to defy the international community and fail to comply with demands for a full declaration and accounting of their nuclear programs.
Their actions are undermining the global consensus to contain the spread of nuclear weapons.
This year the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty - the NPT- celebrates its 40th anniversary.
As a middle power and as a long-standing member of the NPT, Australia is committed to working with other nations towards the goal of the eventual abolition of nuclear weapons.
Australia  -  with our close friend and partner Japan  -  has established an International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament to create the political and policy consensus necessary to elicit a real result on non-proliferation and disarmament in advance of the 2010 Review Conference.
The United Nations' own security machinery must also be effective.
The Security Council needs reform.
Australia supports the expansion of its permanent membership to reflect changes in the world since 1945.
And our nation, Australia will be a candidate for a non-permanent seat for the 2013-2014 term.
Australia once again wishes to play its part in advancing the international security order.
Mr President, prosperity comes from economic growth.
It comes from nations trading with each other.
That's why it is so important that we conclude the Doha round of world trade talks this year.
That's why we must also implement the Millennium Development Goals consistent with our solemn commitment in this place at the dawn of this millennium.
Progress against the goals has been mixed.
We need to redouble our efforts to reduce poverty, provide education for children and ensure that people in the developing world have access to health care.
Australia is committed to increasing official development assistance to 0.5 per cent of gross national income by 2015.
Australia now resolves to do much more, much, much more to make poverty history.
It is unforgivable that poverty and conflict  -  such as that in Darfur  -  continues to claim the lives of innocents in the face of inaction by governments.
Development is also about protecting human rights.
Sixty years ago this Chamber adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We must commit afresh to the protection of the rights that  that charter identifies.
As nations we should also commit afresh to righting past wrongs.
In Australia we began this recently with the first Australians  -  the oldest continuing culture in human history.
On behalf of the Australian Parliament, this year I offered an apology to Indigenous Australians for the wrongs they had suffered in the past.
This was the right thing for Australia to do.
Mr President, our membership of the United Nations is a key pillar of our foreign policy.
Our priorities are regional, but our interests are global.
We work with partners around the world to meet shared challenges.
Through our membership of the United Nations, we are committed to using creative middle power diplomacy to help overcome the great challenges of our age.
Challenges which lie beyond the power of individual nation states to resolve.
Challenges which can only be solved by unprecedented cooperation between states.
Because in this chamber, and through the organs of the United Nations, the problems we seek to solve touch every one of our peoples.
To advance prosperity and stability at home, we must advance prosperity and stability around the globe.
Australia was one of the founding members of the United Nations.
Our Foreign Minister at the time, Dr Evatt, made a significant contribution at the San Francisco Conference, particularly on the part of small and medium countires.
He ensured that the role of the General Assembly was protected in the structure of the organisation as a whole.
And 60 years ago this week he was elected President of the Third General Assembly.
Evatt was a patriotic Australian.
Evatt was equally a passionate internationalist.
Sixty years later, this institution, together with other international institutions of our current order, have yet to realise the vision of those who founded it.
Yet the need today in this age of unprecedented global interdependence, is greater than ever before.
And so distinguished delegates, it falls to this generation to now summon the political faith  -  and to exercise the political will necessary  -  to act for the common purposes of the planet we all share.
I thank you


Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Clinton Climate Initiative of the William J. Clinton Foundation.
Under the MOU Australia and the Clinton Climate Initiative will work together to help tackle climate change.
The MOU will see Australia and the William J. Clinton Foundation collaborate to;
     * Deploy carbon capture and storage technology to large scale projects.
     * Examine policies to encourage large scale solar power generation in Australia.
     * Design collaborative policies in conjunction with large cities and other organisations on improving energy efficiency.
The William J Clinton Foundation will work with the Australian Government through Australia's Global Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) Initiative announced by Prime Minister Rudd last week.
This collaboration will help accelerate the development of CCS technology and pave the way for its commercial deployment by the end of the next decade. 
The Clinton Climate Initiative will draw on its experience in international collaboration and work with Australia and other nations to help achieve a balanced portfolio of demonstration projects.
The Clinton Climate Initiative is already working with a number of Australian states to develop solar power facilities.  The MOU will enable the Australian Government to explore opportunities to draw on the Clinton Climate Initiative expertise in considering policies to encourage large scale solar power generation in Australia.
The Australian Government is developing a national energy efficiency strategy as one of the keys to successfully addressing climate change. 
The Government will draw on the experience the Clinton Climate Initiative has in working with large cities and other organizations on improving energy efficiency in the drafting of this strategy. 
Australia and the Clinton Climate Initiative will also explore opportunities for collaboration in the energy efficiency area across government, business and the community.


ROSS STEVENSON: Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Good morning, Julia.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.
ROSS STEVENSON: When's Kevin back from overseas and if its not ‘til after Saturday, does that mean that you get a ticket to come and watch the Grand Final?
JULIA GILLARD: [Laughs] No, Kevin will be there at the Grand Final. So you can expect him to be doing all of the formal things that prime ministers do on Grand Final day. I will also be there watching, studying and barracking.
ROSS STEVENSON: Who's going to win?
JULIA GILLARD: I've tipped the Hawks. I've gone for the underdog, it's the only dog left in the competition after my Dogs went out last weekend. [Laughs] So in a desperate search for a remaining dog, I've decided to go for the underdog.
ROSS STEVENSON: Reported this morning and the biggest policy setback for your Government since the election 10 months ago -  a billion dollars worth of budget changes to the Medicare levy surcharge threshold were defeated by the single vote of Senator Steve Fielding. What do you do now?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I think we've got to remember that Steve Fielding's vote is only crucial if the Liberal Party oppose our measures and the Liberal Party have opposed a measure that would've meant a tax cut for some very hardworking Australians. It's a pretty simple proposition here. Originally, this levy was about high-income earners. The cut-in rate for it wasn't indexed, time goes on. It's now catching lots of Australians in the net and we want to put it back where it should be so it is catching people with higher incomes. That is what this debate has been all about. So the Government remains determined to make sure that we give some tax relief for those Australians who have got caught up in this system.
ROSS STEVENSON: Tell us what the ... you know, sort of the argy bargy of politics, presumably you could've got the vote of Senator Steve Fielding in the Senate. What would you have had to have done?
JULIA GILLARD: We had worked through with Senators generally and talking to Senator Xenophon and others, a new arrangement. We had originally said that we would put these threshold at $100 000 for singles and $150 000 for families. We were prepared to move to $75 000 for singles but that proposition didn't even get debated in the Senate because of the way that the Liberal Party and Senator Fielding voted.
We think that that proposition should be debated. It's obviously a proposition of merit. This is about getting balance into the system, making sure that hardworking Australians get a tax cut and also about making sure that our health insurance arrangements are right for the future.
And at the end of the day, this is one of our Budget bills and our Budget altogether, is about delivering a big surplus because in these uncertain financial times you need a big surplus, you need a buffer against the uncertainty. And the last thing, really, the Liberal Party should be engaging in is creating budget uncertainty at home when there's so much financial uncertainty abroad.
JOHN BURNS: Do you disagree with the proposition that's been put that if your bill got through it, it'd put more stress on already stressed hospitals?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I find it a little bit odd that that argument's being put by the Liberal Party that chopped $1 billion out of public hospitals. The truth is this Government is already strongly reinvesting in the public health system. And I also think that that view gets informed by a bit of a simplistic perspective that's not right. Just because people have private health insurance doesn't mean that they never use public hospitals. We've all got a shared investment in the public hospital system. If you had a critical health emergency now and I'm certainly not wishing one on you, but in reality, if you did ...
ROSS STEVENSON: If you saw what he's about to eat, then there's a chance of a minor health crisis coming up. Julia, we must away and I share your sentiments. I will be going for the same underdog and thanks for your time.
JULIA GILLARD: No, problem. Thanks Ross.
ROSS STEVENSON: Julia Gillard, Acting Prime Minister I think became during the week became the first female to be Prime Minister during Parliamentary Question Time


I am pleased to announce with Prime Minister Aso of Japan the Commissioners who will serve on the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament, along with Co-chairs former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and former Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi. 
These eminent and outstanding individuals from around the world  -  including former heads of state and ministers, military strategists and disarmament experts  -  are uniquely placed to bring fresh and imaginative vision to this important undertaking.  A list of the Commissioners is attached.
The first meeting of the Commission, hosted by the Australian Government, will be held in Sydney from 19-21 October.
The Commission's two year mandate is to reinvigorate the global debate on the need to prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons and for nuclear disarmament, and to strengthen the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) by seeking to shape a global consensus in the lead up to the 2010 NPT Review Conference, and beyond.  The NPT is the most significant and successful arms control instrument of the nuclear age.  While remaining the cornerstone of global disarmament efforts, the NPT is facing increased pressure and strain from the actions of countries such as North Korea and Iran. 
The Commission's work will not, however, be limited to the fundamentally important task of reinvigorating the NPT.  It will also be looking at ways in which the non-NPT nuclear armed states can be brought into the global non-proliferation and disarmament system.  The Commission will also address the important issue of ensuring that any expanded use of civil nuclear energy due to climate change and energy security concerns does not result in an associated increase in proliferation risks.
These are goals that Australia and Japan both share, as key partners working together with other like-minded countries to advance the goals of both nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
I look forward to working with Japan, and with Ms Kawaguchi and Mr Evans, together with their fellow Commissioners, in taking forward this very important initiative.
Commissioners
Gareth Evans (Australia) (Co-Chair)
Mr Evans was Australia's Resources and Energy Minister from 1984 to 1987 and Foreign Minister from 1988 to 1996. He has been President of the International Crisis Group since 2000, and chair or member of several global commissions, including the UN Secretary-General's High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change in 2004.
Yoriko Kawaguchi (Japan) (Co-Chair)
Ms Kawaguchi was a MITI Director-General, Managing Director of Suntory Ltd, and then Japan's Environment Minister from 2000 to 2002, and Foreign Minister from 2002 to 2004.  She is currently a member of the House of Councillors and Chair of the Liberal Democratic Party Research Commission on Environment. 
Ali Alatas (Indonesia)
Mr Alatas was Foreign Minister of Indonesia from 1988 to 1999.  He is currently an adviser to and special envoy of the President of the Republic of Indonesia.
Turki Al-Faisal (Saudi Arabia)
HRH Prince Turki was Director General of Intelligence from 1977 to 2001, Ambassador to the United Kingdom and Ireland from 2002 to 2005, and to the United States from 2005 to 2007.  He is currently Chairman of the Board of the King Faisal Center for Research and Islamic studies in Riyadh.
Alexei Arbatov (Russia)
Dr Arbatov was a member of the Russian Duma and Deputy Chairman of the Duma Defence Committee from 1994 to 2003.  He is currently a Scholar-in-residence and Chair of the non-proliferation program at the Carnegie Moscow Center.
Gro Harlem Brundtland (Norway)
Dr Brundtland was Prime Minister of Norway for ten years between 1981 and 1996.  She chaired the World Commission on Environment and Development which published the report âEUR~Our Common Future' in 1987, and Director-General of the World Health Organization from 1998 to 2003.  She is currently the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Envoy on Climate Change.
Frene Noshir Ginwala (South Africa)
Dr Ginwala was Speaker of South Africa's National Assembly from 1994 to 2004.  She is currently Chancellor of the University of KwaZulu-Natal.
François Heisbourg (France)
Mr Heisbourg is Chairman of the International Institute for Strategic Studies and Geneva Centre for Security Policy, and Special Adviser at the Fondation pour la Recherche Stratégique, and was a member of the French government commission producing the 2008 Defence and National Security White Paper.
Jehangir Karamat (Pakistan)
General (Retired) Karamat was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Chief of Army Staff until 1998 and Pakistan's Ambassador to the United States from 2004 to 2006.  He is currently the Director of Spearhead Research.
Brajesh Mishra (India)
Mr Mishra was India's Ambassador in Geneva, Jakarta and New York from 1973 to 1981, and National Security Adviser and Principal Secretary to former Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee from 1998 to 2004. 
Klaus Naumann (Germany)
General (Retired) Naumann was Chairman of NATO Military Committee from 1996 to 1999 and Chief of the Defence Staff in Germany from 1991 to 1996.  He is currently a member of the International Advisory Board of the World Security Network Foundation.
William Perry (United States)
Dr Perry was the U.S. Secretary of Defense from 1994 to 1997.  He is currently a professor at Stanford University in the School of Engineering and Institute of International Studies.
Wang Yingfan (China)
Ambassador Wang was China's Permanent Representative to the United Nations from 2000 to 2003, and Vice-Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Chinese National People's Congress from 2003 to 2008.
Shirley Williams (United Kingdom)
Baroness Williams was Leader of the Liberal Democrat Party in the House of Lords from 2001 to 2004.  She is currently Professor Emeritus of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University and an adviser to Prime Minister Gordon Brown on nuclear proliferation issues.
Ernesto Zedillo (Mexico)
Dr Zedillo was President of Mexico from 1994 to 2000.  He is currently Director of the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization, and Professor in the Field of International Economics and Politics at Yale University.


PM:   The central focus of this visit has been the global financial crisis. I have spoken so far to representatives of the US financial community, I have spoken to the President of the World Bank, I have spoken to the Vice Chairman of the Fed. I have spoken to, I will be speaking later today with the President of the New York Federal Reserve as well.
Last night I also spent a lot of time with Prime Minister Brown, with the President of the European Commission and with others on the overall response to the global financial crisis.
What emerges from all this is as follows. One: for the short term what is necessary is for the world community to get in behind the initiative of the Government of the United States in the proposal that is currently before the United States Congress.
Obviously there is a political debate to be had here in Washington, but in terms of the need for this initiative, to stabilise global financial markets, there can be in fact no doubt.
Therefore, for the immediate term, the responsible course of action for the international community is to support this initiative from the Government of the United States. And that was very much the sentiment which emerged from the discussions last night, those with the British and with the Europeans.
Then the challenge is for the medium and the long term. In the medium and the long term, the reform package which is necessary for the regulatory regime for financial markets is relatively clear. Firstly, on transparency: transparency of balance sheets and off balance sheet transactions and across the range of financial institutions which are systemically significant to both the national and international financial system.
Secondly, consistent global credentialed standards for these financial institutions. Also on top of that, to make sure we have appropriate reforms for corporate governance to ensure that the right arrangements are in place through the (inaudible) to ensure that those who run financial institutions have the right incentives to behave appropriately - appropriately for the long term not just a very short term, an often speculative profit cycle.
Of course, underpinning these long term reform measures is the overriding need for global consistency. It is simply no good for one country to have strong regulatory standards against transparency, against credential requirements and against corporate governance, only for those standards not to exist in other significant economies.
Which brings me to my final point. The reform agenda for the regulation of financial markets is relatively  clear and it has been developed over some months now through the financial stability forum which Australia is one of the limited number of countries who has played a significant role.
The challenge now is how do we translate that reform agenda into action and that goes to what must now happen in the period ahead. The G 20 is an important gathering of economies and together represents some 85 per cent of the world's banking system.
The G 20 therefore must as a matter of urgency in the period ahead, meet to reach agreement on this reform agenda which has already been in outline there from the financial stability forum. Secondly, the G20 must then present its agreed outcomes to the meeting of the International Monetary Fund.
The International Monetary Fund was established in 1944, the overall purpose is the stability of the global financial system. It is time the IMF had its mandate reinforced and enhanced to achieve that long term goal. And part of that lies in global consistency of the standards I referred to before, and continuing global monitoring of the enforcement of those standards.
These two sets of meetings, that is, of the G20 and of the IMF, are about to happen within the next month or so. The way forward is to use these two sets of meetings, that of the G20, and that of the IMF, to arrive at agreement, and a timetable of agreement for the long term reform agenda.
This, and I will just conclude on this, therefore when I speak to the United Nations General Assembly today, I will be emphasising not just the elements of the necessary reform agenda, the stability of financial markets, but also the practical way ahead to achieve that agreement. That formed very much the substance of late and long conversations with the British Prime Minister last night and further discussions today with the President of the European Commission.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that there is the  international will to do this Mr Rudd?
PM:   What I have picked up from the British and from the Europeans and also among significant developing economies, including the President of Brazil, who was participating in our discussions last night, there is a strong resolve to act.
And the reason is, the consequences of the global financial crisis, for the real economy both in developed countries but also in emerging economies, is real.
And therefore the resolve to act, I believe is real. But the test, the real test will lie in these two sets of upcoming meetings, G20 and IMF, that is where the test will lie. And what we are calling for as Australia and with our partners in the UK and in Europe, is for decisions to be taken then.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd have you received any further updates on the impact of the financial crisis and or the US bailout on Australian institutions, particularly the councils, local shires?
PM: As of this time in New York no I haven't received further advice form Australia. A question better put to the Treasurer back in Canberra.
JOURNALIST: When you hear President Bush saying our entire economy is in danger and talking of the risk of a painful recession, do you think you have underplayed the potential ripple on effects from all of this on the Australian economy  -  notwithstanding the fact that the banks are strong?
PM:   If you have been attending the House of Representatives in recent months in Australia, the number of times I have said from the dispatch box that the global financial crisis is real and Australia is not immune from its effect, goes back a long, long time. And that is because through our regulators in Australia we have been monitoring  and measuring the impact of this crisis as it reverberates across the world, including to developing economies, including to those like China, which purchase of course, so much of Australia's exports.
We are alert to this, but I say again, the key difference between Australia and the United States lies in the strength of our regulatory environment and lies also, lies also in the strength of the balance sheets of our commercial banks. And that was underlined again in the IMF report, to which I referred a day or two ago.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd when you were originally coming here it was understood you were going to be using this meeting and presumably your speech to talk about Australia's pushing, the climate change agenda and clean coal and so forth, you are now using this speech tonight (inaudible) you are using  it to push what seems to be this agenda about economic reform and reform to the financial system. Is that a change of plans?
PM:   No, you will find in my speech to the United Nations General Assembly I will emphasise one: the fact that we are now in an age of interdependency across the board. Whether it is on the global financial system, whether it is on the global environment, climate change or whether it is also on other challenges which need to be dealt with globally, including long term, those of nuclear proliferation and disarmament.
And I will be addressing these various challenges that we face. Can I just add on climate change, since I have been here, the global carbon capture and storage institute has been the focus of so many of my engagements here in New York.
I have met also with the Climate Group here in New York, which represents so many of the larger American companies in the energy sector where there is a universally positive response to this initiative , filling a gap which is currently out there in the world.
Similarly, a positive response just now in my discussions with the President of the European Commission. There is a general recognition for example, that across the world, as I said in a briefing in Canberra last Friday, that we don't have enough at-scale projects around the world.
Also, the Memorandum of Understanding I have just reached with the Clinton Foundation, with President Clinton, a very significant non-government organisation which helps marshal corporate interest around the world in investing in projects like this, CCS projects, carbon capture and storage, solar projects and energy efficiency projects.
So can I say, in the range of other engagements I have had, including in the address to the United Nations General Assembly, CCS, carbon capture and storage, part of our climate change agenda has been front and centre.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said (inaudible) may make it harder or exacerbate introducing and ETS (inaudible)?  
PM:   No, as I said I think in response to the question from Dennis, I think the day before yesterday, our plans remain on track. This is going to be hard, it is going to be difficult, and because it is complex, and I have just spoken with the President of the European Commission about complexity there as they move towards the Copenhagen conference on the, the totality of the Climate Change agenda.
But you know something, a lot of people have said the great virtue of our global carbon capture and storage Institute is this: that when it comes to the impact of carbon pollution reduction scheme on strongly effected industries like electricity generators, this potentially represents significant assistance, significant support, significant adjustment for what for us is a critical sector in Australia.
We are 80 per cent coal dependant, this economy is 80 per cent coal dependent, the Chinese are going to be significantly coal dependent for a long time to come. So it actually, this initiative dovetails entirely with our global carbon capture and storage, our global carbon pollution reduction scheme.
JOURNALIST:   Do you concede however that it is going to be very difficult to get this through 2010 without the Opposition support given that relatively minor measures, budget measures for example have stumbled on just one man, Steve Fielding?
PM:   Well I would draw attention to the Liberals.. The Liberals under their new leader have again voted for a tax cut for big oil companies in Australia and voted against a tax cut for working families. I don't understand how they could do that. Senate responsibility I think is something the Liberals should reflect on long and hard.
JOURNALIST: Is the CCS Institute a reassurance for Australia's coal industry?
PM:   It is a, can I say that the response so far from not just the coal sector but the oil and gas sector has been very positive. It wasn't just the gathering of heads last Friday in Canberra where we had the principals from so many Australian resource companies, but the private consultations I have had with many of them before, and our advisers have been working with each of them and their parent companies around the world.
I think part of the reason why they are so positive about our initiative is this: what is happening out there in the investment community at present is a debate about how do you close the gap between the normal commercial price of building a coal fired power station, and the extra price which you have to pay to bulk on CCS systems. And how do you close that gap.
And what they see is a big opportunity for governments around the world to assist in closing that gap and meeting the G8 target of 20 at-scale projects by 2020.
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd what sort of response have you been getting in your meetings to Australia's bid for the UN Security Council seat and for your disarmament commission?
PM:   On the question of our Security Council candidature, it is a competitive race, the vote is not until 2012 and so frankly, every vote counts. It is like one huge global caucus ballot.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:   This afternoon also with the newly elected Prime Minister of Japan, Prime Minister Aso, and I congratulate him very much on his success, the Prime Minister of Japan and myself will be jointly launching the International commission on nuclear non proliferation and disarmament.
This is important work for both of our countries, but important work for the international community leading up to the NPT review conference. In my discussions for example with Dr Kissinger yesterday, he was strongly supportive of this initiative, because the initiative itself in part is built on clear statements from the likes of himself, Sam Nunne, Bille Perrry, William Cohen  -  people who have conservative views on national security generally about the need to deal with the non proliferation disarmament agenda long term.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the MDG has clearly been (inaudible) would you care to comment in particular on the education aspect and the Chinese Prime Ministers comments earlier today that they are giving a very large number of international scholarships.
PM: I have just spoken to the special session on the Millennium Development Goals and outlined Australia's support for the goals. I have also outlined the Government's commitment to 0.5 per cent of (inaudible) being committed, the implementation for these goals and I have spoken at length about the application of this commitment to the development needs of the Pacific Island countries.
I have outlined just now to the community of nations our redesign of our Pacific Partnerships for Development, around the framework for the Millennium Development Goals: Benchmark analysis against the Millennium Development Goals for all 14 of the Pacific Island countries. Frameworks for delivering education, health, infrastructure, employment, against the Millennium Development Goals and then measuring our performance.
That is what I have just been talking about. More broadly on education, you will see from Australia over time a large expansion in the scholarships we provide around the world. It is necessary, not just for the development of human capital in developing countries, but it is also necessary for us to build on the great legacy of the Colombo plan. And you know something, I intend to be doing that in spades.
JOURNALIST:   What is your plan B if you can't get the emissions trading scheme through the Senate?
PM: Oh Michelle, that is very negative of you. Can I just say that  - 
JOURNALIST:   Well you are a long term planner, I am sure there is something there?
PM: Can I say that it is time the Liberals began acting in the national interest in the Senate. On two major challenges: one, responsible handling of the budget surplus in Australia at a time of global financial crisis. 
Look again at the OECD comparisons about the strength of our Budget position relative to so many other developed economies at this time of crisis. We are as the IMF said, ‘in an enviable position'. That is the first point. But secondly, on longer term challenges to our economy which is getting climate change right, my appeal to the Liberals would be to embark upon a new period of responsibility rather than a continued program of irresponsibility like we have seen so far.
JOURNALIST:   When you meet the New York Governor of the Fed Reserve, you have spoken of the need for the international community to support what is going on, is there anything you will offer in terms of RBA assistance or other Australian support? 
PM:   The RBA and our regulators, I have got to say, are in daily contact with their counterparts in the United States and elsewhere in the world. I am kept well briefed of those developments, cooperation is good and where cooperation at a material level has been necessary, it has been forthcoming as well.
But on this initiative of the Americans, as Gordon Brown and I discussed and agreed with President Barroso last night, the most important contribution given the debate here in Washington at the moment is to say that the world wants to see a positive outcome from the debate at the US congress on this important initiative to stabilise global financial markets.
JOURNALIST: From what you have said (inaudible) to deal with this crisis?
PM: I believe that the administration has produced a very significant substantial and solid initiative to stabilise the global financial system. It demands the support of the international community. It certainly has my support. Thanks very much.


NEIL MITCHELL: The Acting Prime Minister, Julia Gillard good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning Neil.
NEIL MITCHELL: Well the head of the ANZ bank, Mike Smith says that if this US package doesn't go through or doesn't work, the prospect of a depression in the United States. Do you agree?
JULIA GILLARD: Well the Prime Minister is over in the United States and he's certainly urging the United States to act. What we know Neil, is that here at home in Australia, we can be reassured we've got a well regulated financial market and we are in a very different circumstance to what has happened in the United States. We don't have the same exposure to sub-prime loans. We don't have the same regulatory issues so whilst obviously we're in troubled times and globally there is so much uncertainty abroad. Here we've got a well regulated financial sector and an economy that's showing some resilience in the face of this trouble.
NEIL MITCHELL: But we are going to feel this aren't we?
JULIA GILLARD: Yes, we are not immune from what happens in the rest of the world; we are going to feel it. The nature of the financial system today is that it is global...
NEIL MITCHELL: So how will we feel it?
JULIA GILLARD: ...we do feel the effects. Well for our banks obviously they are affected by what happens globally, we've got to recognise that and the Treasurer's been making the point very clearly that we're not immune. But we also have to recognise the differences. And in circumstances where people can be quite worried because they get up and look at the newspaper headlines every day and listen to the radio and worry about what's going to happen next, I think it is important to keep reminding that we're in a very different situation when it comes to the strength and resilience of our banking system.
NEIL MITCHELL: But we do have the Reserve Bank, ASIC and the Prudential Regulation Authority preparing a contingency plan in case banks get into trouble.
JULIA GILLARD: Our regulators have been working together and working all year and it goes to show that the regulatory system in this country works well...
NEIL MITCHELL: The quote from the bank yesterday “there may be circumstances where a public sector response is required in order to satisfactorily resolve a financial distress situation”. I mean there they're talking about the possibility of the same sort of bail out we are looking at in the United States.
JULIA GILLARD: What our regulators have been doing is, all year they have been working together. We have a well regulated financial system, the quality of our regulators is good and obviously they work strongly together. They work strongly monitoring the situation, making the adjustments to ensure liquidity. You would expect them obviously, as people who are prudent, to canvas all circumstances and possibilities. The message from the Reserve Bank and from the regulators has consistently been that our banking and financial system is very strong, it is well regulated, we are not in the same circumstances as the United States, we do not have the same exposure to a sub-prime mortgage problem.
NEIL MITCHELL: Yes I agree entirely. They are saying that the banking system's very strong but this is what their plan is though isn't it? They are drawing up contingency plans.
JULIA GILLARD: The essential message Neil and I really do think it's very important obviously confidence and the fact that people worry needs to be upper most in our minds in these uncertain times. I think it's very important for people to recognise that our independent regulators are telling us that our financial system is well regulated and in a different circumstance; indeed it's been described as light years of difference from what is happening in the United States.
NEIL MITCHELL: Well look we got a very blunt and simple question on this last week from somebody who said is my money in the bank safe?
JULIA GILLARD: Well our regulators obviously would say yes, your money in the bank is safe. Our banking system is strong and well regulated.
NEIL MITCHELL: How will it affect us then? Jobs- will jobs go in Australia?
JULIA GILLARD: Well our economy is subject to two countervailing forces at the moment and the Treasurer and the Prime Minister have been making these statements all year. What is happening in the global financial markets really means the truth of those statements is even more evident. On the one hand we've got a domestic inflation problem which we need to deal with. We also have inflation flowing from world events like global oil prices and increasing food prices and obviously with global financial markets in this amount of turmoil the cost of credit is going to increase for people. So there are all those pressures. Those pressures lead to ten interest rate rises, consecutive interest rate rises in a row, there were ten under Peter Costello's watch. We saw an interest rate reduction relatively recently...
NEIL MITCHELL: What do you mean the cost of credit is going to increase?
JULIA GILLARD: The circumstances with banks dealing with each other obviously affected by the global financial circumstances.
NEIL MITCHELL: So how does that affect us- interest rates?
JULIA GILLARD: Well the upwards pressure on interest rates here in Australia has been a result of the inflation issue that we've been dealing with in the last....
NEIL MITCHELL: No, no, no that is not entirely right is it? Because the banks, in fact, stayed ahead of the official rates because of the sub-prime crisis.  So they were trying to get money back because of their bad investments.
JULIA GILLARD: But the last interest rate movement Neil was down and the point I am making is that there are countervailing forces in our economy. There's the dealing with the inflationary pressures, there's the fact we did seek consecutive interest rate movements  -  the last one was down. But obviously that is going to feed through to the economy and we've seen that. On the other hand, the resources boom continues to run strongly for us- we've good terms of trade.
NEIL MITCHELL: So what is the message really to people who are concerned, people who read the headlines, hear the discussions and the word depression being thrown around, let alone recession being thrown around- what is the advice to people? What is your advice to people as Acting Prime Minister?
JULIA GILLARD: My advice to people is basically to understand we are in a different situation from the United States when it comes to our financial institutions, point number one and very important in terms of people being worried about the future. Point number two, this nation does have some challenges to face up to. We've got an inflation challenge to face up to and the Government's been dealing with that through its Budget surplus, though its new investment in skills and our new long-term plans for infrastructure. We've also got to face up to the fact that we need to be driving productivity up and that's really what our new workplace relations settings are about, as well as making sure people get treated fairly.
My advice to people in these times is I think Australians are very sensible people, they get up every day and they go to work and they work hard, they come home and they make decisions about how they are going to spend the money they earned. People want to buy a home, they want to invest, they want to look after their families. So they should keep on doing all of that.
NEIL MITCHELL: What? Stay clam?
JULIA GILLARD:   I certainly don't want anyone to have an impression that they should have some anxiety about our financial institutions. We're making the point very strongly and the independent regulators are making the point, that our financial institutions are very strong. We have at the moment very low unemployment; the most recent unemployment figures were very low. There's people out there working hard doing what people normally do. So yes absolutely keep a weather eye on all of the circumstances, people are going to listen to the radio, they're going to work their way through the newspaper but at the end of the day for people who are looking after their families, their circumstances are going to be about going to work, working hard, earning that money and making provision for their family as they always have.
NEIL MITCHELL: So business as usual?
JULIA GILLARD: Well it's obviously not business as usual but Neil can I say that there is a difference between prudence and caution and planning as opposed to getting too worried about these things. Yes we've got to be focused; we've got to understand the nature of the challenges and in understanding the nature of those challenges, we're not immune from world events but we do have a strong, well regulated banking system. We have an inflation challenge in this country; the Government's policies are calibrated to deal with that inflation challenge. We obviously have other challenges in this nation like facing climate change and drought and a series of others but they're the type of economic fundamentals that we're dealing with.
NEIL MITCHELL: If may just finally notice it was good enough for George Bush to have a bipartisan approach with Barack Obama and John McCain, why not Kevin Rudd do that? Malcolm Turnbull has put the offer on the table, why not?
JULIA GILLARD: Well we're calling for a bipartisan approach too Neil and particularly a bipartisan approach to delivering the Government's Budget. The Budget is about dealing with the inflation challenge; the Budget is about delivering a surplus that we need as a buffer in uncertain times. The worse of all possible things when we've got global uncertainty is to have Budget uncertainty. So we've been calling on the Libs to work with us to deliver the Government's budget and I'd have to say we haven't seen one iota of cooperation.
NEIL MITCHELL: Just quickly- football who's going to win?
JULIA GILLARD: I've tipped the Hawks. I'm obviously a Bulldogs supporter Neil so last Friday night was not a particularly happy time for me. So in the absence of being able to go for the Bulldogs, I've gone for the underdog.
NEIL MITCHELL: And Malcolm Turnbull's been making certain confessions on television- got anything to confess to us?
JULIA GILLARD: What would you like me to confess Neil?
NEIL MITCHELL: I don't know what you've done.
JULIA GILLARD: I've been working hard and extraordinarily well behaved. Does that stack up as a confession or not really?
NEIL MITCHELL: Does it matter that he smoked dope?
JULIA GILLARD: Does it matter? Look I can't imagine that it matters in any way shape or form, no.
NEIL MITCHELL: Did you?
JULIA GILLARD: At university; tried it, didn't like it. I think many Australian adults would be able to make the same statement so I don't think it matters one way or the other.
NEIL MITCHELL: I agree with you. Thank you for speaking with us.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.


The Prime Minister, the Minister for Education and the Minister for Health today announced 1,094 new Commonwealth supported higher education places in the national priority area of nursing.
The new places will give more students the opportunity to qualify as registered nurses and will increase the number of nurses available to work in our hospitals. That will benefit patients in the health system significantly and, ultimately, the community.
As promised prior to the last election, the new places for nursing students will be available from 2009.
These 1,094 new nursing places will help take the pressure off Australia's hospitals. They include 55 extra places for midwives and 130 places for specialist mental health nurses. The Rudd Government is currently conducting a review of maternity services in Australia.
The announcement was made in Newcastle where 50 nursing places have been allocated to the University of Newcastle.
Higher education providers have indicated that around 50 per cent of the courses where new places have been allocated will offer places to enrolled nurses to upgrade their qualifications.
More than 60 per cent of courses will provide clinical placement opportunities in rural and regional areas.
More than 300 places have been allocated to campuses in regional areas to create opportunities for students to study nursing without the need to relocate to a metropolitan campus.
The extra places are part of the Australian Government's 2008-09 Budget Health and Hospitals Reform  -  Health Workforce initiatives.
Places have been allocated to higher education providers delivering courses in the following States and Territories: New South Wales, 310 new places; Victoria, 280 places; Queensland,110 places; Western Australia, 155 places; South Australia,135 places; Northern Territory, 50 places and the Australian Capital Territory, 54 places.
A full list of the new places is available: RTF 368 KB | PDF 77KB.


PM: It's good to be here at John Hunter and it's good to be here with Sharon Grierson. It's good to be here with the team. And we're here today to talk about the future of health and hospitals, the future needs of nursing within it. And I'll also make some remarks about paid maternity leave. As we've seen some new mums and some new bubs this morning.
For the future of our hospital system, we've got to make sure that we are training enough qualified nurses. Each year across Australia, there are literally thousands of young people who want to get into nursing courses across Australia who can't get in.
In 2006 there was about 2500 who were turned away from university courses because there were simply not enough places and at the same time we've got a shortage of nurses nationwide. The practical question, therefore, is what do you do about it?
And what we are doing today is announcing a new national package of 1100 nursing training places across Australian universities. This is very important for the future and of that 1100 we intend for 60% of the nurses doing their training to do placements in rural and regional areas. We expect 300 of those places, about a third, to actually have the training conducted in rural and regional areas. Here in Newcastle, I'm pleased to say that we'll have 50 of those places allocated to the University of Newcastle, specialising and with an emphasis on mental health.
This is an important down payment on the future. It's simply wrong that we've got a nursing shortage - 2500 young people a year turned away from a nursing place. What we're doing today is putting a down payment on fixing that with 1100 new places nationwide and 50 of those here in Newcastle.
If I could add, in terms of some of the services that we've seen here in this great hospital of John Hunter, and I congratulate the staff here of this very significant hospital, which serves such a huge community across NSW and not just here in the Hunter.
Having just visited the midwives and looked at some of the outreach work that they do, it's quite plain that one of the essential services they provide is this combination of pre-natal care and post-natal care. Post natal visits out to new mums, to make sure that mum and bub are doing well.
In fact we met a new bub today, his name is Carson who now shares a birthday with the Deputy Prime Minister, Happy Birthday Julia. Carson is 5 hours old, Julia is just a little bit older than that.
But this brings us to the whole question of part of the challenge for the future which is the future needs of the Australian economy. The Australian economy of the future will have stay at home mums who we'll be supporting with the baby bonus, but also mums in the paid workforce who we will also be supporting with paid maternity leave and it's time Australia bit the bullet on this.
It's going to be a challenge to make sure we get the exact policy settings right because we are in the midst of serious global economic challenges. But we are determined to get that balance right for the future.
We've had 12 years of neglect on this, it's time Australia bit the bullet on paid maternity leave, we intend to get on with the job and we will get the policy setting right once we work our way through the detail of this report. I'm mindful of the challenges we face in the economy.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well for the Australian economy of the future we are going to have stay at home mums who we will be supporting with the baby bonus and also mums who are in the paid workforce who we will be supporting with paid maternity leave.
We believe that's the right balance for the future, because mums will make that choice. We have got to be smart enough and intelligent enough and flexible enough to accommodate both those challenges.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we have just have a draft report coming down later today from the productivity commission, that's good, that honours our pre election commitment which the Treasurer honoured I think in February of this year Wayne, when the Productivity Commission was given that reference. This is their draft report, it will now go out to community for wider consultation and there will be a national debate about the details, the precise form of it, the precise length of it, etc.
So we are still some ways off resolving the final policy detail, but what I am saying to you loud and clear today is that this Australian Government believes the time has come to bite the bullet on this and we intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: For the next budget or the budget after that?
PM: Lets work our way through the detail, nice line of questioning. What I am saying to you today is it's time for Australia to bite the bullet on this. The future economy has to provide this level of choice for stay at home mums, to be supported with the baby bonus, but also for women in the paid workforce to be supported with paid maternity leave. We think as a nation we can get that balance right.
Anything else folks?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the question of climate change, one of the huge challenges of the future is getting our response to climate change right. This Government intends to do that, we have out there at present a proposal for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We are working our way through consultation with industry, we intend to get the balance right, we need to act for the national economic interest and our national interests on climate change and the environment to bring down greenhouse gas emissions. But we intend to do it in an economically responsible fashion.
That's why we have got a proposal out there for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme into the community. Business has been consulted on that, community groups have been consulted, we will get the balance right. We are determined to act and act in a responsible way.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know one of the things I launched both in Canberra a week or so ago and at the UN General Assembly in New York was our plan for a global carbon capture and storage institute.
Now if you look at the huge areas where coal is so important the Hunter is right up there together with the Queensland coal fields, together with the La Trobe Valley in Victoria and what we are determined to do is to become world leaders in CCS technology because you know something that is one of the most practical and effective ways we can help with our coal fired electricity generators to adjust to the climate change reality of the future and we intend to be world leaders in this technology. World leaders in the deployment of this technology, that's why we have taken the lead with our proposal to establish this global carbon capture and storage institute.
JOURNALIST: Is that going to be enough if some of our region's major industries going (inaudible)
PM: You know something, we intend to get the balance right. Our long term economic interests require us to act on climate change and we need to also ensure that our long term environmental interests are served by acting on climate change. So we intend to get that balance right.
After 12 years of neglect and starting from a zero start, this has been a lot of activity in the last nine months. We have gone from being just part of the problem, to being part of the solution. And we intend to get the detail right, and to do it in an economically responsible fashion, including for critical regions like the Hunter.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reports today indicating that the Government might be considering selling bonds to fund infrastructure projects?
PM: We have established, as you know, through the Budget, a Building Australia Fund and Education Investment Fund and also a Health and Hospitals Investment fund for the future. Put those funds together, $40 billion worth of investment funds for the future.
We believe we have sufficient funds available through those investment vehicles for the future to meet the challenge of our future infrastructure needs. And we have got no plans along the lines which your question suggests.
JOURNALIST: You won't have to borrow (inaudible)
PM: We have no plans to do so because we believe that the funds that are available through this $40 billion set of initiatives which the Treasurer outlined in the Budget is the right way ahead.
Remember in the past no national leadership on future infrastructure investment. Now you have national leadership. A Building Australia Fund - $20 billion. $11 billion for the Education Investment Fund. $10 billion for the Hospitals Investment Fund for the future. This is the right course of action, and before you add onto that what we are doing with the next stage of Auslink, all together, a $76 billion nation building fund for the future. We've got the balance right, that's how we intend to do the job, and we believe those funds will be sufficient to the task.
JOURNALIST: Kevin, would it be appropriate for the Government to go into debt (inaudible)
PM: We have no plans what so ever to do so because we believe these funds are sufficient for the task which I've just outlined.
JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied with the US bail out (inaudible)
PM: When I was in New York I sat down with both the British Prime Minister and the President of the European Commission to discuss the impact of this proposed $700 billion fund for the Americans to stabilise their domestic financial markets.
I also sat down with the Chairman of the New York Federal Reserve at the end of last week to discuss its implications.
This is the right measure for the Americans to be introducing right now to stabilise, frankly, the cornerstone of global financial markets, which is the US financial market. 
This is a measure which should be supported. When I was in the United States I called upon both Democrats and Republicans to support it, as did Prime Minister Brown, as did the European Commission President Barosso.
It's the right course of action, and I would support the Administration is doing this. 
Australia is well positioned to handle the challenges of the global financial crisis, but we are not immune, and that's why this action by the Americans should be supported.
JOURNALIST: The current crisis will make it harder for government to strike partnerships with business. Will there be borrowing in the future?
PM: Sorry, could you say that again?
JOURNALIST: Do you think the current crisis will make it harder for the Government to strike partnerships with business in the country? Will you be looking to (inaudible)
PM: We have no plans for such borrowing in the future at all. And the reason is that the funds that we've established through the Budget, $40 billion worth of investment funds for infrastructure, this is significant. And we intend to deploy those funds for nation building projects necessary to overcome infrastructure bottlenecks, including bottlenecks in our ports, bottlenecks in our roads, bottlenecks in our rail including urban congestion. And also, the big challenge of laying out a high speed broadband network so that all of Australia, including rural and regional Australia, including this great region as well, can benefit from the infrastructure of the 21st century economy  -  and that's high speed broadband.
JOURNALIST: Is there enough money (inaudible)
PM: On computers in schools, I was just chatting about this with Sharon, and I looked at round one of computers in schools here in this region of the Hunter, nearly $10 million, providing funding for nearly 10,000 computers across a large number of schools. How many schools in this area? Quite a large number of schools. Therefore, we intend to get on with the job, and I believe it's very much in the interests of the schools and school kids of New South Wales that the New South Wales Government cooperates with us on this important reform, necessary for every kid in every classroom in the country, including here in New South Wales.
Thanks very much.


WILKINSON: Morning Prime Minister, now I know as a parent you must understand the aguish of the Lapthorne family. Exactly what is your Government doing to help them?
PM: Well the anxiety of Mrs Lapthorne is just understandable, this is appalling, it is every parent's worst dream for one of their young ones overseas to go missing.
What have we done - an Australian Federal Police officer has been dispatched from London to Dubrovnik to work with the investigation to work with the authorities to try and find this young one. Based on the report from that Australian Federal Police Officer if we need to send more AFP officers they will be there quick smart.
We are doing what we can with the authorities to try and find her. This is very hard and it's a different country, different culture but we will not rest until we have put every effort into trying to track down this young one. She is an Australian, she deserves every level of consular assistance we can provide.
WILKINSON: Should we be demanding more cooperation or more information from the Croatian police?
PM: We are doing that right now. And through our police liaison and through the Australian Federal Police, but also at the diplomatic level, we are putting maximum pressure on the authorities.
Can I say that on a very practical level though, if we find from our own police liaison officer we need more resources dedicated to this they will be there quick smart. And that is what we need to do in this case or any other case like it where we have got a young Australian who has gone missing abroad. And I just say to the family I fully understand your anxiety, your fears. It's horrible, it's absolutely horrible and we will do everything we physically can.
WILKINSON: Prime Minister, have you or your department spoken to the Lapthornes?
PM: Stephen Smith, the Foreign Minister, has spoken with the family I am advised. And on the question of the police being dispatched from London, the Minister Stephen Smith and the other Australian authorities will keep us in the loop about what extra resources are necessary and we will provide them.
WILKINSON: We will turn now to that crisis, the financial crisis, in the US. As you would know just a few hours ago Congress rejected the $700 billion bailout. The stock market fell five per cent in five minutes. Has anyone got a ‘plan B' on this?
PM: This is a bad development, I have just spoken now with Australia's Ambassador to the United States before coming onto this program. We understand that a proposal will be, in one form or another, should be resubmitted to the Congress this Thursday.
But can I say that we believe and I believe all friends and allies of the United States believe that the passage of a measure like this is necessary to stabilise US financial markets, it's necessary to stabilise therefore global financial markets and we would call, together with other friends and allies of the United States, on all parties in the US Congress to put aside partisan differences.
This is too big for the global economy and global financial markets to simply be captured by party politics.
WILKINSON: Prime Minister, what's your advice to everyday Australians who are watching this? They are worried about their own financial security, their super funds, their retirement?
PM: The International Monetary Fund, which is the body worldwide charged with looking at the health of each nation's financial institutions, as late as last week said that of Australia's four major banks. That they are in good working order with good balance sheets. And those four banks represent something of 85 per cent of banking activity in Australia.
That's a very important conclusion as late as last week. And the point I would like to make is that's just the International Monetary Fund's view, it reflects the facts in Australia. We have the world's strongest regulators, our major banks' balance sheets are in strong and good order, and on top of that we have been working closely with the regulator and with the banks to make sure that everything is done that needs to be done to continue this clear difference between the situation of our banks and those in the United States.
WILKINSON: The Reserve Bank of course meets next Tuesday to look at interest rates. Until this point this morning there was a lot of predictions saying that it was going to fall. What do you think this is going to mean for interest rates here?
PM: Well, as you know the Reserve Bank makes its independent decisions on interest rates and that's the policy we have adopted since coming into Government.
Our job as a Government has been to make the job of the Reserve Bank as easy as possible to put downward pressure on interest rates. So we will see what the Reserve Bank does.
But can I say, because the Government has been pursuing a policy of strong economic management, based on a strong budget surplus and because our regulators are the strongest in the world, our situation in Australia is frankly given these global circumstances among the best that you could have. And therefore we as Australia will continue to pursue this strong approach to economic management in the period ahead.
WILKINSON: Prime Minister, now to that recommendation yesterday to the Productivity Commission. It was for all families to have access to 20 weeks taxpayer funded maternity leave at a cost of $450 million annually. In the shaky market can we really afford this? And are you 100 per cent behind it?
PM: Well, the Productivity Commission report is a draft report and it is out there now for community debate through until year's end. That's what is going to happen.
But I think where we have got to as Australians is this - it is time for us all to bite the bullet on the need for paid maternity leave.
And the reason is this - we believe very much in supporting stay at home mums and that's through the baby bonus. We also need to be supporting in the future those mums who are in the paid workforce who represent some 175,000 parents each year or mums each year, who are finding it financially difficult to manage their budget and juggle that with providing for the costs associated with having a new one as well.
This is one practical measure to help, but on the detail of it can I say we will work that through over the months ahead to make sure that we get it absolutely right.
WILKINSON: Prime Minister, pensioners are finding it financially difficult as well. So why can we afford this but not an increase to the pension, an amount that you and a number of your political colleagues have admitted that you would never be able to live on?
PM: Well can I say we are in the business of reforming the pension and that is why we are hard at work on this and we are working our way through all the options, not just for one group of pensioners but across all categories of pensioners.
Let me just point to the cost implications of this as well, every $10 a week increase in the pension costs an extra $2 billion a year now and forever into the Budget bottom line. If it is $20 a week that's $4billion a year, if it is $30 a week that's $6 billion a year.
Now we have got to make sure we get this right because the question we have got to ask ourselves is, in investing significant money in long term pension reform and let's be frank about this Lisa, it hasn't been reformed for the last 12 years and within our first 12 months we are acting on this reform. We have got to get it absolutely right because the numbers here are huge and furthermore we have got to ask how we fund this.
And if it's that amount of money, and if we are looking at a significant investment, does that mean less investment in key infrastructure in our major cities, how do we find that money? And that's the debate we are also having as well. It is easy to put out a press release on this. It's harder to make it work on the ground and we are acting responsibly to make sure that happens.
WILKINSON: Okay. Prime Minister we will have to leave it there, thanks very much for your time, we do appreciate it
PM: Good to be with you


I congratulate Tim Gartrell on his tremendous service to the Australian Labor Party.
Tim served as National Secretary of the ALP for more than five years, after spending more than three years in the role of Assistant National Secretary.
Tim's leadership qualities during this often difficult period for our party were superb.
As National Campaign Director, Tim was instrumental in the election of a Federal Labor Government.
His ability, hard work, judgment and campaign leadership skills are first class.
Tim was also a great advocate for and helped ensured the promotion of a new generation of quality ALP MPs.
I wish Tim, Kerry and Rose all the best for their future.


PM: The decision by the United States congress not to pass the measure by the US administration for the stabilisation of the US financial markets is disappointing. This is a bad development. I have spoken this morning to Australia's Ambassador to the United States and our understanding is that this measure or a similar measure will be re-presented to the United States Congress later this week.
I have spoken also to the British Prime Minister this morning, Gordon Brown, and the attitude that we will adopt and I believe other friends and allies of the United States will adopt is to urge the United States Congress to pass this or a similar measure when it is re-presented to the congress later this week. This is necessary for the stabilisation of the US financial markets. It's necessary for the stabilisation of global financial markets.
The other point I would make is this, that when it comes to Australian circumstances and that of our financial markets, as recently as last week the International Monetary Fund delivered its conclusions about the status and the standing of Australia's banks. The IMF concluded that when it came to Australia's major banks which represent 85% of the Australian banking system, that these are in good order. 
That they are weathering the financial crisis well. That they are well regulated, and they are well capitalised. That remains the situation.
Australia's four major banks are among the world's 20 double-A rated banks. In part that is because of the strength of our regulatory system. In part that is because of the strength of their balance sheets. In part that is because when it comes to our banks' exposure to subprime, which began this financial crisis more than 12 months ago, our banks exposure to subprime is less than 1% of Australian total mortgages, in the United States it's something like 15%. Therefore the circumstances of the Australian financial system, the Australian banking system are fundamentally different to those which pertain to the United States.
Furthermore, the Government has spoken this morning with the Australian Regulators, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority  -  they have advised that the developments overnight in the United States do not affect the fundamental stability of the Australian banking system.
Developments overnight in the United States will prolong the liquidity problems that we are experiencing in financial markets and that we have been experiencing for some time. The regulators and the RBA will continue to do what is required to provide ongoing liquidity to Australian financial markets as they have been for some time.
The bottom line is this. Strong regulation, the best regulatory system in the world, strong balance sheets on the part of our banks, as well as a strong budget situation on the part of the Australian Government means that the Australia's situation in this period of global financial turbulence is the best that you could have against what is being experienced by other countries and economies around the world.
These are difficult times, these are worrying times. But the strength of our banking system, the robustness of our budget surplus place Australia in a strong position to see the Australian economy and banking and financial system through this global financial crisis.
SWAN: Thanks Prime Minister. I just want to underline the strengths of Australia in this uncertain international environment. We have been in contact with our regulators overnight. Indeed as we have said on many occasions, we have been in constant contact with our regulators all year. And of course as the Prime Minister said, these events don't change the fundamental strength of the Australian banking system. But of course, these developments do prolong the liquidity problems that we have been experiencing for some time. And of course the Reserve Bank has been dealing with that and it will continue to do that. We do have first class regulators and we also have a strong economic position, a strong budget surplus. We also have high commodity prices and we also have a budget and budget settings that suit the times.
As we said back in May, we anticipated that these events in the United States would have some time to run. And unfortunately that has been the case, but we have put in place the best possible settings to cope with the fallout from these international circumstances and in this environment we also have some of the best regulators in the world to deal with it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, last week in New York you with Gordon Brown, Nicholas Sarkozy, a whole bunch of world leaders called on Congress to pass the bill. They didn't listen to you then, why do you think they are going to listen to you now, especially as this now seems to be caught up in the Presidential politics?
PM: Well Phil, you are right. We are in the midst of a US Presidential election campaign and what you have is a whole lot of political passions unleashed in the midst of this serious economic debate, for which there are global consequences. Our understanding from Washington, is that a package, a similar package will be re-presented to the Congress later this week. I believe it is important when that package or a similar package is re-presented, for all American Congressmen to understand the united interests which friends and allies of the Unites States have in the passage of this new package.
I believe that's the attitude of the British Government, that's the attitude of the Australian Government, I believe you will see the same from other European Governments as well.
Ultimately this is subject to the US domestic political processes. We can do what we can do, but we intend to be arguing this case strongly, robustly in the days ahead. This is necessary for the stabilisation not just of the US financial markets but of global financial markets.
JOURNALIST: What would be the consequences of this package not being passed and when you say you will be arguing the case, will Dennis Richardson be making representations at a specific level in the United States?
PM: Representations will be made at multiple levels both by our own Government and by other Governments. You see the thing about this global financial system is it goes beyond the interests of individual national Governments and we will be acting in concert with our friends and allies to make sure that Congressmen, Republic and Democrat, are acutely aware of the interests which are at stake here across the global financial system and when you ask at what level those representations will be made, from the top down.
JOURNALIST: President Bush warned of a long and painful recession if this package didn't get through. Do you share that forecast and what would that mean for Australia?
PM: I strongly support US President Bush's leadership on this question, because the consequences of the failure of this measure are significant for the US financial system and more broadly. In terms of the prognosis for the US domestic economy I leave the US national Government speak on their own behalf.
What I know is the roll on implications for the global economy are significant and that's why every friend and ally of the United States must be in there pitching in, making our case to US Congressmen Republic and Democrat.
JOURNALIST: You're right we don't have a subprime crisis like the United States but we do have the most deeply indebted households in the world. What is your advice on how well placed they are to survive an international recession?
PM: The responsibility which the Government has is to ensure the stability of the economic system of this country and the stability of the financial system of this country, that's the lynchpin.
How do you do that, by making sure that our regulators are doing their job and they have been and the regulators advised us that in terms of the four major banks which make up 85% of the Australian banking system, are in good working order, strong balance sheets, in a good position and as I indicated before among the best in the world.
That represents the core of the system, our job is to make sure that the core of the system is healthy and that means us taking every practical measure to ensure that continues to be the case.
SWAN: I just wanted to add to that because it is true that for some time household have been under financial pressure. We recognised that in the Budget, it's why we delivered the tax cuts, it's why we delivered additional assistance to pensioners and to carers. We fundamentally understand that they need a helping hand in difficult and uncertain times such as this, and of course as you know Chris we were criticised at Budget time for delivering that additional assistance. But we delivered it in an economically responsible way because we made room in the Budget through other savings to provide this additional assistance for households which is arriving precisely at the right time.
PM: The global financial crisis is a challenge to a national economy, it's a challenge to the household economy and that's why some 6 months plus into this crisis unfolding, because it began last August, the Government deliberately embraced a $54 billion family assistance package through the Budget amidst considerable criticism at the time. And that's because household budgets are under pressure, the global financial crisis doesn't help that.
JOURNALIST: The 85% of the Australian banking system that's under the big four. What about the other 15% the smaller banks, particularly when we see fears overseas?
PM: Well the measures announced by the Treasurer last Friday through the AOFM, Australian Office of Financial Management, will be important in supporting all of Australia's financial institutions including the ones to which you refer.
We believe that again based on the advice from the regulator that the financial system is in good working order and we have confirmed that again this morning. The problems we face as the regulator has advised us again this morning is the developments overnight in the United States will prolong the liquidity problems that financial markets have been experiencing for some time. But the regulators as they have been doing in the past and will continue to do so in the future, will continue to provide ongoing liquidity for the Australian financial market in all of its elements as they have been for some time.
SWAN: I just wanted to make the point that our regulators have been very active in terms of all deposit taking institutions.
JOURNALIST: Given the worsening liquidity crisis, will you be more relaxed with or take a softer line on the banks if they fail to pass on all of any interest rate cut given by the Reserve Bank?
SWAN: Well, as you know, Mark, I was most insistent earlier this year that any cut in the cash rate should be passed on because when borrowing costs go down, rates should go down as well.
Now, what we've seen in recent weeks is a very big spike in borrowing costs internationally, and that will certainly have an impact on domestic institutions. There's no doubt about that. I'm not going to speculate about what the Reserve Bank will do next week. But we do know that when borrowing costs go down, rates should follow. But of course, the reverse also happens. When borrowing costs are pushed up, and particularly pushed up sharply, then that has consequences as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's likely that Government revenues are going to be below the projections of the Budget. And you've got a lot of bills stacking up, obligations stacking up. What were your reasons for rejecting borrowing as a source of funds for infrastructure or other programmes?
PM: We believe that through the money that we dedicated to our future investment funds, the Building Australia Fund, the Education Investment Fund as well as the Hospitals Investment Fund, are sufficient to the investment challenges that we face for the period ahead. That's more than $40 billion worth of activity. We believe that we can make a strong start through those funds. That's the right course of action, and we will continue that course of action into the future. That's a lot of money, and that's  - 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The other part of it is that if you add that $40 billion to the overall nation building strategy which the Government has, it comes to a total of some $76 billion once you roll in Auslink funding. We are a Government, and a party, of nation building. We'll be doing that. And, certainly discussions we had yesterday in Newcastle in the Cabinet and with the Infrastructure Minister Anthony Albanese, this is a major and emerging priority for the Government to get cracking on these projects.
SWAN: I just wanted to add to what Malcolm had to say. Malcolm, it is the case that these events will certainly put pressure on the revenue, no doubt about that, that's why it's so important for the Government to get its remaining measures through the Senate.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you think it's (inaudible) now to soften the welfare controls on indigenous people in the Northern Territory?
PM: What I think it's time to do is to review carefully the review that we commissioned some time ago of the intervention. And we'll look at that. We said that we'd get that done about the middle of the year. We haven't received it yet. We'll go through it  - 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) things need to change now?
PM: No, I'm sympathetic to the view that you take it step by step, look at the evidence, what's working, what's not, and act accordingly. And, remember we provided bipartisan support for this intervention in the first place. We said that against the objectives which have been set that we wanted to see the evidence of the first 12 months. Let's look at the evidence, see what's working, see what's half working, see what's not working, and act accordingly. That's our approach. And none of that is ideological.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd (inaudible) difficult and worrying times, what should Australian families do to prepare for the difficult times ahead?
PM: Our responsibility as a Government is to ensure the stability of the economic system and the financial system, that's the absolute core of the wellbeing which flows to Australian families. And the Treasurer and I have been hard at work on that. This is a difficult task given the global financial factors that are involved.
The second thing is to make sure that through the Budget measures which we brought in, and that subsequent measures through subsequent Budgets, are focussed squarely on the needs of working families, pensioners and carers, who are doing it tough out there, and who face additional pressures flowing from this global financial crisis.
We understand that, we get it, and as a result of which, it's not just future direction of the national economy, it's how we provide practical assistance on a continuing basis to the household economy as well.
JOURNALIST: What's you assessment of the global crisis on China, our biggest trading partner?
PM: In discussions that I've had with officials it's quite clear that there will be some downward revision of China's growth prospects itself. But, based on our analysis of China's rolling demand for Australian commodity exports, we are well positioned still into the future. And that is on top of the forward contracts which have already been signed against pre-existing price levels.
Therefore, our economic relationship with China in this period of global economic uncertainty continues to be of great importance and we are continuing to work on how to free that economic relationship up further and further.
You know, this crisis affects us all. And what's important, and I conclude where my remarks began, is that all people of goodwill around the world act in concert with our friends in the United States to see the right measures taken through the US political process to stabilise the global financial system.
All of our interests are at stake here, including those in the US. And we'll not be leaving a stone unturned in making sure that all those who need to know in Washington have our views and the views of our friends and allies. Thanks very much.


SANDY: What's happened in Wall Street, in the United States, what does this mean to Australia and Australians and should we be worried because inevitably people will start thinking ‘oh my God, it'll happen here'?
PM: This is a bad development in the United States financial markets. I've been on the phone this morning to our Ambassador in Washington to identify when a package will be represented to the US Congress.
Our understanding at this stage is that it will be represented some time later this week, and we will be urging all American Congressman, Republican and Democrat, to support a measure which is necessary to stabilise not just US financial markets, but global financial markets.
In Australia, to go to the other part of your question, as late as last week we had the international monetary fund produce a report on the state of Australia's banks. And it concluded that they are in good shape. It said that Australian banks had weathered the global financial turmoil reasonably well. The four large banks, that account for two thirds of bank assets, continue to report strong profits through to 2008, through early 2008, and together with adequate capital.
And the point I'd emphasise to your listeners on this score is that our regulators are first class, Australia has four of the world's 20 AA rated banks. In terms of sub-prime, which is what caused this crisis in the United States  - 
MIKE: Loans to people who can't pay them back, you mean?
PM: That's right, yeah. These loans, they represent some 15 per cent of mortgages in the United States. They represent just about one per cent of the mortgages in Australia.
And when it comes to arrears rates, that is, people who are falling back or behind in their repayments to banks, ours is very low, something like less than one percent, the United States five or six times higher than that. So, there are great differences between the state of the US financial system and the state of the Australian financial system, particularly in relation to the banks that I just referred to.
MIKE: Okay, let's put that around the kitchen table then, if you like. People are worried about their family budgets, their savings, their super, their mortgage repayments, their credit card debts  -  are they safe? Are they going to be okay?
PM: Well what I can say to you Mike, and to your listeners, is that if in the midst of a global financial crisis you wanted to be in any country in the world, you'd want to be in Australia. Because our regulators, as I just indicated, are first class. They've just been through the state of the four large banks and they've reached conclusions about the state of their balance sheets.
So we are in strong order going forward. And this is backed by strong economic management by the National Government.
It is true, we are buffeted by global financial markets and it is true that what happens in the United States does affect the rest of the world. But here in Australia, based on the objective truth of the state of the balance sheets of our major banks, we are in a strong position.
SANDY: But we are Prime Minister, are we not, carrying more debt per household than we ever have before?
PM: Well, personal indebtedness has been at high levels and that has accumulated over a long period of time.
The key thing for the Australian economy, however, is the state of our financial institutions. And, as I said before, as recently as last week, the International Monetary Fund, the global authority charged with looking at the balance sheets, if you like, of each country's financial system, has reached that conclusion about Australia.
It's a difficult time, it's a hard time, but can I say, we together with the Reserve Bank, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority and others, together with our international counterparts, are working through this day by day to make sure that we are in the best position possible in Australia.
MIKE: Alright. The maternity leave package, that came as a bit of a bolt from the blue yesterday. Is that just a plan, a recommendation, a suggestion  -  or are you actually going to implement it?
PM: Well, prior to the  -  let me just put it all into context  -  prior to the election we said we'd get the Productivity Commission, and that's a specialist research unit of the Federal Government, to produce a report on this. What happened yesterday is they produced their draft report, runs to a couple of hundred pages, very detailed, looks at a whole range of reasons why Australia could use, productively, a paid maternity leave system. That's their draft recommendation. For the next few months, it's out there for public debate. And they'll produce their final report at year's end.
What I said yesterday was that it's time for Australia to bite the bullet on having paid maternity leave for this country. On the detail of it, that is, how much, how long, we'll wait and until we get the final report come year's end.
MIKE: What do you say, Mr Rudd, when we've had a bit of this criticism here on the program this morning to people who say that they don't want their taxes paying for women who choose to have children and work. Something I have to say I don't agree with, but what can you say to them because they are Australians as well, after all?
PM: That's true. You've got to get the balance right in this system. Across Australia we obviously have stay at home mums, and we have mums who are in the paid workforce. And we've got to provide support for both. Our approach as a Government will be for stay at home mums to provide that support through the baby bonus. And that will remain, and that will continue. But for mums returning to the workforce, we believe the time has come for paid maternity leave.
Now, the precise shape of that, the content of it, the length of it, we will work our way through in the period ahead.
There's a couple of facts, through, which might help the debate on this. That is, across Australia right now there are something like 285,000 babies born each year. 110,000 mums at the time at which their baby was born were not in the paid workforce. 175,000 of those mums were in the paid workforce.
So what about those 175,000 mums? What we're finding is that about half of them have some form of paid maternity leave provided by their employer. But, what's happening is that lower income mums in particular, and those who are finding it hardest to balance their family budget, are in fact not getting paid maternity leave.
That's where we've got a problem on our hands. We've got to make it easier for them to make a decision to have a bub and not to go back to work too early because that's not really good for the health of the bub, not really good for maternal and child health in general.
Getting the balance right between choice, here, mums who choose to stay at home, and that's a decision I entirely respect and will support through the baby bonus. And, those mums, particularly lower income mums, who need to get back to work, we've just got to get the balance right.
MIKE: One last quick one, you get the last leg of this Garnaut Report on climate change today. Aren't we though with this rock bottom world financial crisis, there's not going to be much money around to fix up climate change in the next few years, is there?
PM: Well, climate change is there with a huge impending economic cost for us all. I mean, the overall logic is the economic cost of inaction is far greater than the economic cost of action.
But you know, what we've said all along is that we'll stage our implementation of Australia's response to climate change in an economically responsible way. But we intend to act on the best advice and the best evidence. But if we fail to act and just push it to one side or throw it under the carpet, it's just going to come and bite us on the behind.
If you want some evidence of what's happening with climate change, look at the state of the Murray-Darling, and look at the impact which that's already having on our national economy.
We've got to act, but let me tell you, we're going to be acting in an economically responsible fashion.
SANDY: Prime Minister, we know that you've got to scoot, so thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks for having us on your program.


MOORE: Prime Minister, you've just been on the phone to the Prime Minister of Japan. This morning, to the British Prime Minister. What's your latest advice? Will the bail out be passed by Congress?
PM: Certainly the determination of America's friends and allies is to speak directly and diplomatically through our ambassadors in Washington to our friends in the United States Congress to try and ensure that this package is passed both by the House and the Senate. Both the attitude of the Government of Japan, the Government of the United Kingdom is that this is actually crucial to the stability of the global financial system, not just the financial system of the United States.
And all of America's friend and allies are of the same mind, and certainly when I spoke with Taro Aso just a short time ago, it was his determination and their message, like ours, will be the same to the Congress.
The administration has put its package forward, it's the Congress that we make this particular argument to.
MOORE: And what is your reading of the current situation with the Congress? Would you bet it will get through?
PM: Look, I'm not a domestic American political analyst, but I would say that there has been a shock to the system in the United States which has come as a result of the failure to pass the President's original package. I would hope, as does my Japanese counterpart and others, that reason will prevail.
But you know, this is not all over red rover. There is a way to go yet, and that's why I believe the responsible course of action is not just to say ‘this is a domestic concern for the Americans', but for America's friends and allies to be in there pitching our argument as well.
It affects here. It affects Tokyo. It affects London.
MOORE: Given how vital it is, what happens if it doesn't get through? Is there a Plan B, or indeed, a Plan C, if it had to be?
PM: Look, I don't think it's productive to speculate on the non-passage of this particular proposal because if that were to arise, we would be back with a further proposal from the administration to the Congress.
There is a fundamental problem that needs to be dealt with and that's the liquidity of the US financial system. That is an immovable object. It's there, it has to be dealt with. In these very difficult circumstances, the Administration has come forward with a responsible package, albeit a controversial one, albeit an expensive one.
So in answer to your question, let us continue our efforts to argue the case with the legislators in the United States who are dealing with US taxpayer dollars, argue the case as effectively as we can. That I believe is the responsible international course of action, quite apart from what we in Australia are doing domestically.
MOORE: Well, liquidity obviously is affecting our own markets severely. You've also just spoken with the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens. Is he still comfortable about how Australia is responding and how we sit?
PM: Well, our overall response as the Government of Australia is to work in close cooperation, and in response to what the regulators say. And the regulators have stated again yesterday through the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority that our major banks are in good order, their balance sheets are strong, and they are well regulated. That continues to be the case. So, in the midst of what is a genuine global financial crisis, it is important for all Australians to realise that our banks are the best regulated in the world, their balance sheets are in strong order, and we intend to work very closely with our regulators to see Australia through this global financial storm.
MOORE: And that begs the obvious question. If our banks are well capitalised, they're sound, they're well regulated, there is not a problem  -  why can't they pass on any interest rate cut officially next week in full to mortgage holders?
PM: Well, the Reserve Bank of Australia only last week indicated through the Financial Stability Review that the cost of bank finance has obviously gone up as a result of the global financial crisis. Our banks are not immune from the impacts of this.
Therefore, obviously, if there is an official interest rate cut, we the Australian Government want to see a maximum pass-through of that to consumers.
But we must make sure also it is done in a manner which is consistent with the stability, continued stability, maintaining the stability, of the Australian financial system.
Consumers have just been through ten interest rate rises in a row under the previous Government, and they deserve the maximum pass-through - the maximum pass-through also consistent with maintaining the stability into the future of our system.
MOORE: But why back off the banks? Because as Malcolm Turnbull points out, they are exceptionally profitable. They have massive market share, again they are well capitalised, they are not under any stress  -  are you running up the white flag, as Malcolm Turnbull would have it?
PM: You know, if there is a choice between following the advice of the Australian regulators on the one hand and playing a game of political populism on the other, what I'm saying to you tonight is that this Government will take the advice of the regulators, and that's  - 
MOORE: But just last month, Prime Minister, just last month Wayne Swan was unequivocal that any cut would have to be passed on. He didn't mind then being absolutely unequivocal. This time, in just a matter of weeks, the Government appears to be backing off?
PM: Can I say, this global financial crisis has deepened in recent times. And I think all those watching your program and observing developments around the world would agree with that.
You know, this crisis has already claimed the scalps of 25 banks around the world. Now, our responsibility, consistent with the advice which is publicly available through the Reserve Bank's report, the Financial Stability Review last week, has to be mindful of the fact that the cost of bank finance has gone up.
What I want to see as the Prime Minister of the country is an absolute maximum pass-through of any reduction in official interest rates through to consumers. They have been hit with ten interest rate rises in a row under the previous Government, I understand that.
But at the same time, my responsibility is to ensure the continued stability of the Australian financial system. That's what the Government -
MOORE: So if there's no pass-through, that's okay? If there's no pass-through because of the stresses that the banks are under with funding, that's okay?
PM: What I am calling on the banks to do is to provide an absolute maximum pass-through. That I believe is the responsible course of action because  - 
MOORE: What does that mean? Does that mean half of an official cut, a quarter of an official cut, no pass-through?
PM: Well, I'm entirely attentive to what the regulator said in the report on the stability of the cost of finance as recently as last week. And I go back again to my point, Ali, if the choice is between political populism in the midst of the most acute stage of this crisis on the one hand, as opposed to responsibly responding to the public advice of the regulators, this Government will follow the advice of the regulators even if it is politically unpopular. That I believe is the responsible course of action for this Government to pursue in the midst of a global financial crisis.
MOORE: Prime Minister, still on banks, and just briefly, there is a widespread perception in this country that Australian bank deposits are Government guaranteed, which of course they're not. We are one of only two countries in the OECD that doesn't have an explicit Government guarantee. You're setting up a claim scheme that will basically cover the first $20,000 of any deposit should a bank fail. Is it time for Australia to have an explicit Government guarantee of deposit funds?
PM: The first thing to say in response to that Ali is that we have the best and most tightly regulated banking system in the world. And we should be confident in that fact, and, as I said as of yesterday, the Prudential Regulatory Authority said that our banks, those which represent 85 per cent of the Australian banking system, have strong balance sheets and are weathering this storm particularly well. That I believe is the cornerstone of our position -
MOORE: So that's a no? Sorry Prime Minister, we're running out of time, does that mean no?
PM: We have currently laws that have been around for a long time called ‘depositor first'. After the HIH fiasco, there was a recommendation that we bring in a financial claim scheme. That was five years ago. The previous Government didn't act. We have now got that legislation out there in the community, and we will legislate on that. We believe that currently this system in Australia is the best regulated in the world. Our major banks are in strong working order. Remember, of the 20 AA rated banks around the world, our four major banks are among that 20. And we should have confidence in that fact.
MOORE: Prime Minister, many thanks for talking to us.
PM: Good to be with you.


New measures to improve information sharing between the Australian Government and State and Territory child protection agencies were agreed to today by the Council of Australian Governments.
The Federal Government is leading the way in providing greater protection for children by helping to remove barriers to sharing information in child protection cases between and within jurisdictions.
The Australian Government will include Centrelink in the national child protection alert system. A new national protocol will be developed for Centrelink to release information to child protection agencies to help locate children at serious risk of abuse and neglect when their whereabouts are unknown.
Often basic information  -  like a current address  -  can be very important in these cases.
The new arrangements will:
     * specify the information that can be requested from Commonwealth agencies;
     * set out a standard process for requesting information, including authorisation, to reflect legal obligations;
     * specify what supporting information, or evidence, is required for a request; and
     * include timeframes for responding to information requests  -  particularly important during investigations.
The incidence of child abuse has reached alarming levels. Every year, there are nearly 60,000 cases of Australian children being harmed, abused or neglected.
These appalling figures demand a determined, concerted response from all levels of government. This is a national problem that requires a national response.
 The new protocol will be developed for information sharing between Centrelink and child protection agencies by the end of 2008 and will be operational in 2009.
 Improved information sharing between and within jurisdictions is a key element of the Australian Government's National Child Protection framework
 The Government is committed to providing national leadership to protect Australia's children. A National Child Protection Framework is key to the Government's child-centred approach to family policy.
Our greatest responsibility is to protect our children, wherever they live.


HOST: The Prime Minister joins me. Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Hey Jeff, how are you?
HOST: Good thank you. Prime Minister, our world's changing isn't it? How important is it, do you think, that the US Senate supports a bailout in the next couple of hours?
PM: It's very important. I have just this morning early Perth time been speaking to the House Majority leader Steny Hoyer, who I have known for some time, about how things stand in Washington. Apart from the House, the process as I understand it that these matters will go to the Senate in the next few hours and they will go to the House some time Friday Australian time.
I think it's still tight but my job has been to argue to the American Congressional leadership that friends and allies of the United States like ourselves, the Japanese and the British have also a big interest in the passage of this measure, because the stabilisation of US financial markets means the stabilisation of global financial markets.
HOST: Do you have an Australian contingency plan? If it turns out that this bailout goes ahead but it proves to be pouring good money after bad, what does the Australian Government need to reassess then?
PM: We have been working very closely on the implications from the global financial crisis for Australian financial institutions all year, a whole range of measures - the Reserve Bank, often without much fanfare, injecting liquidity into Australian capital markets, that's been going on in March, in June and in the months since then; also measures announced by the Treasurer last Friday for the Australian Office of Financial Management to provide additional liquidity to assist with bank lending.
These are measures which we have been taking all throughout the course of the year and we will continue to act responsibly in response to what the Australian financial regulators advise us. That's the approach we will be adopting in the future as well.
HOST: Prime Minister, I spoke to our own Premier Colin Barnett earlier today about the fact that this situation changes the way that Governments, State and Federal, spend. How much do you think this global financial crisis is going to strip from Australia's Budget surplus? What are the numbers?
PM: The international reports, both the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, have indicated that the global financial crisis is going to see a reduction in global economic growth. That's also reflected in Australia's growth numbers and if growth is going to be down, it follows that Budget revenue is going to be affected as well.
I can't give you exact numbers, we are working our way through all of that. But what it does mean, it puts an absolute premium on Federal and State Governments working closely together to do three practical things.
Reduce duplication and waste because there is no money to waste. Secondly also act together to take away unnecessary regulation on businesses because businesses are finding it tougher and we have got to make it easier for them to invest. And thirdly for Governments themselves to maximise what they can do to invest in the nation's and in the case of WA the State's future infrastructure needs. That's what I will be talking to the premiers about today
HOST: Will you be telling them not to expect federal money of the kind that Colin Barnett wants for those infrastructure projects in the north for instance? Will you be telling them they do have to rein in spending?
PM: Well it's going to be necessary for all of us to be very, very prudent about the way in which we spend, because this is a global financial crisis and it affects all of us. I had a good chat with Colin yesterday about his infrastructure priorities in the State and we will continue to work those through with him and my Ministers will be meeting with him in the weeks ahead as well.
HOST: Will they be shaking their heads and saying Colin you know the realities as well as we do - the money is not going to be there at least in the short to middle term?
PM: We intend to be very practical about all of this. There will be stuff that we can do practically with the WA Government, Labor or Liberal. And there will be stuff which will be too hard to do because of the financial affordability factor. But you know we intend to cooperate very practically with them, this is a very important State for the nation's future economy. The percentage of national exports which are generated out of WA is huge and therefore I have always said both in Opposition and since becoming Prime Minister, that the national Government needs to invest more in WA's infrastructures needs, really important for WA, really important for the nation.
HOST: We understand the vote is about to happen any minute, the financial bill will be considered very shortly. Prime Minister, is Australia facing a new austerity?
PM: Well it's going to be tough times. I have said consistently that this global financial crisis, throughout the course of this year I have been saying it, the global financial crisis is real, it affects economies around the world, it affects the budgets of all Governments including in Australia. But most critically it affects household budgets.
One of the reasons why in the Budget earlier this year we were determined despite a whole lot of criticism to pass a $54 billion family support package including tax cuts for low and middle income families, including increasing the child care tax rebate, including bringing in for the first time the education tax refund  -  these are practical measures to help with the family and the household budget because it is going to be tough.
HOST: So Prime Minister, with the family and the ordinary household budget, can you explain to ordinary Australians again why Wayne Swan and yourself are not chasing big banks with a big stick, demanding that they pass on the likely rate cuts offered up by the Reserve next week?
PM: Our first responsibility is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and Australia's banks have strong balance sheets, they are well regulated. And around the world in the midst of this financial crisis, out of the world's top 20 AA rated banks, our four major Australian banks are among those top 20. We need to keep them there and that is very important for the stability for the Australian financial system.
My attitude to interest rates is very simple, we want to see the absolute maximum pass through of any change to official interest rates next week, if there is any change, through to consumers. They have suffered 10 interest rate rises in a row under the previous Liberal Government. The first cut in seven years occurred last month and we have been seeking to support the Reserve Bank in doing that by having a responsible Budget surplus. The times are tough, this is a very difficult financial environment and my first responsibility is to do whatever it takes to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system because it affects households and their interests as well.
It may not be politically popular but it's the responsible course of action and that's what I intend to do.
HOST: Prime Minister, we only have a very small amount of time before we get to the news. COAG was going to be about climate change, it was going to be about health reform, it was going to be about water. Now it is largely going to be about finances. But very briefly on education, the plan for school funding to be tied to teacher and student performance, do you think you are going to get support for that from Western Australia? Colin Barnett says he doesn't like the idea, says it's not practical?
PM: We will work through the detail with the WA Government and that will be part and parcel of the negotiations we have with all the States and Territories on the future of our schools package, both the quantity of what we invest but also the quality you need to attach to it. My own view is very simple. We need to make sure that all schools - government and non government - are providing the highest quality education to kids. And parents should have the right to full transparency about how their kids and their schools are performing.
And we also need to attach incentive packages to ensure that those schools which are underperforming can lift their game.
We have spoken about an education revolution. That's about how much you invest, it's also about the quality of the system as well. But we will work this through with the WA Government.
HOST: Ok, I appreciate you talking to me this morning. Thank you very much.
PM: Good to be on the program.


Prospective businesses will be able to apply and pay for a national business name online through a single application under a new system approved today by the Council of Australian Governments (COAG).
The new process has been estimated by Ernst and Young to save Australian businesses $1 billion over the next 10 years.
It will save businesses time and money, with the single application covering both a business name and an Australian Business Number (ABN).
“To register a business name nationally at present, businesses have to apply separately in eight States and Territories and pay a fee eight times at a total cost of around $900,” Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said.
“COAG agreed it was absurd in the 21st century for businesses to have to go through such duplicated processes.”
The new system will establish a one-stop online shop for businesses to interact with government.
The new system is one of the 27 areas of regulatory reform identified by COAG earlier in the year. It will bring Australia one step closer to a seamless national economy, as called for by the 2020 Summit and the Business Council of Australia.
The simple, national scheme will benefit small businesses as well as national businesses.
“With the internet, more and more small businesses are operating in more than one State or Territory,” Minister for Small Business, Independent Contractors and the Service Economy Craig Emerson said.
“The new system will be much cheaper and quicker, enabling a single registration for a single fee. 
“Those businesses that want to register a name in a single State or Territory (such as a local café, butcher or motel) will still be able to do so within the national system.”
Small Business Ministers gave in-principle support to the initiative at the Small Business Ministerial Conference in Christchurch, New Zealand, in May.
Businesses will benefit from a national system to help them identify government support, as well as regulatory requirements across all levels of government, no matter where they are trading.
The new system will be established by 2011.


JOURNALIST: How are you and Government leaders planning to cushion the effects on all Australians of the global financial crisis. Why doesn't the public have a right to expect the banks do what Malcolm Turnbull said to do and pass on all the next interest rate cuts?
PM: The first that we have as responsibility in Government is to ensure strength of the Australian economy and the strength and stability of the Australian financial system.
This is fundamental. It is fundamental to everything and what has been pleasing and good about the discussion with colleagues today is their collective commitment for everyone to do their part.
Part of the future lies in the confidence which comes also to the nation through an integrated program of nation building, investment in infrastructure, investment in economic infrastructure and I don't know a single Premier or a Chief Minister around this table who couldn't identify for me immediately two of three major infrastructure needs in their respective States or Territories which need investment.
We are a nation committed to infrastructure, we are a Government committed to nation building and I think that is going to be very important part of our economic message to the nation in these globally unsettling times.
And the second part of your questions Geoff, it goes to the stability of the financial system. You have got two alternatives here.
One is you can respond to the advice of the financial regulators and the Reserve Bank has as early as last week was saying that the cost of capital for our lending institutions has been directly affected by the global financial crisis and you can respond to that. That's why we have said that we want to see a maximum pass through of any reduction in official interest rates to consumers. But we also want to make sure that we maintain the stability of the Australian financial system consistent with the advice of the regulators.
So either you can act responsibly in response to the advice of the regulators or you can choose to play short term populist politics.
The Government that I lead will take the hard decisions in the interests of the long term stability of our country's financial system. Now if that's politically unpopular on the way through so be it. It is the right thing to do .
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The challenge is also to look 3, 6, 9, 12 months ahead. We still do not know for example what will happen with the passage of the proposal which is currently before the United States congress. This morning Australian time and very early Perth time, I was speaking to the House Majority Leader in the United States, Steny Hoyer, who is a bloke I have gotten to know in recent times, about how the legislation will progress through the House of Representatives.
We are still up for a debate in the United States. It is tough, it is tough politically. I certainly put to him the view of a friend and ally of United States of the importance of both Houses of Congress to pass an important measure to stabilise an important financial system, there and therefore globally.
What I am saying to you is, we do not know, the final detail of the passage of that proposal of the United States Congress. We do not know its long term impact. And therefore the prudent course of action is to be looking ahead 3, 6, 9, 12 months later and to ensure that we are responding intelligently and appropriately to the advice of the regulators and as I said as late as last week who were advising us about the cost of capital for Australian institutions now and into the future and to make appropriate and sensible preparations for that. My responsibility is to do everything sensible to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and I intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: The Premiers all came here today to say that they would like to see fast tracking of your infrastructure funding. You went to the election with some very clear policies about process involved (inaudible). Can you guarantee that even though you bought forward this schedules that those standards will stay in place?
PM: Absolutely. And the reason is that Infrastructure Australia has been established under national legislation with an advisory broad and for the purposes of exercising complete probity of analysis, cost benefit analysis of every infrastructure proposal put to it.
Why? It is taxpayers' money and it is expensive. It is a lot of money and we only intend to use this money wisely investing and dealing with the infrastructure bottlenecks of the future.
Bringing forward an interim report is an important measure. But you know something it will not lead in any way to any compromise to the processes associated with Infrastructure Australia.
Projects will be considered on their merits and will be subject to the due diligence of Infrastructure Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, laudable as it is, not maybe Matthew.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know something the job of politics is to get it right at both levels. The Premiers and Chief Ministers have been making good and strong points about the nation building challenges which we face and particularly at this time of stresses in the global economy.
The same time you can deal intelligently and flexibly in response while not compromising in the integrity of your assessment process.
This is a lot of taxpayers' money we are talking about $20 billion. It is not going to be thrown up against the wall, let me tell you. It is going to be used wisely, and therefore that is the process we have invested in.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: You would get at least 8 arguments on that.
BRUMBY: There are a lot of engine rooms around the place.
PM: Well some 4 cylinders, some 6, anyway (inaudible). Can I say I have said every time I've come to the West, and I say this as a loyal son of the great state of Queensland, is the figures speak for themselves in the West. In mean in West about a third of the nation's exports come from here. Am I right Colin?
BARNETT: A little more.
PM: Thank you for that.
And therefore the commands respect. I have said when I was Leader of the Opposition, I have said so as Prime Minister, and I have been many, many times in the last 18 months that the national Government needs to invest more in this State's infrastructure needs into the future. Why? It is in the national interest to do so.
So much of the country's wealth comes out of this State. But for the other parts of the country which we will respond to in national interest terms, infrastructure needs are far, wide and broad. The challenge is to get it right. We discussed today the scope of the Building Australia Fund. Our initial investment is $20 billion and subject to future budgets we will be investing in more. We intend to be long term partners with the States and Territories in nation building.
You know it was a term which sort of became unfashionable for a while. We are about to bring it right back into fashion, it is the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) there could be a $10 billion impact on the upcoming budget because of the financial crisis. Those figures, is that true?
PM: That was in the Oz, it was on the front page. I have said before at press conferences in Canberra, is that if you have got a global financial crisis and it has been unfolding for some time it is going to global economic growth to be ratcheted back. That's true, it's both attested to by the IMF and by the World Bank and by others and that has therefore led to revised growth projections for Australia. That means revenues (inaudible) be down as well. That is clear. On the quantum we are working our way through that.
And when the numbers are good and ready, I am sure you will be maybe not the first to know, but I am sure you will know soon after that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Barnett your first COAG, the only Liberal Premier. (Inaudible) infrastructure (inaudible) are things moving fast enough as far as you're concerned?
BARNETT: Well I was happy with yesterday and today's discussions as I said, particularly with the Prime Minister. Western Australian will be putting in a revised submission on what we believe are in this state's and the nations best interest. And we'll endeavour to get that to Canberra within the next two to three weeks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Mr Brumby are you concerned that the impact of the financial crisis (inaudible) will be that impact on PPPs and the ability to secure finance from the private sector, and if that happens, will the Commonwealth money be enough to bridge that gap?
BRUMBY: Well, what I've said about that is the global financial conditions will make it a more difficult environment for PPPs than would otherwise have been the case. Nevertheless, I expect that there will be a significant number of PPPs in Victoria and across Australia that will be fully funded over the next few years.
But what I've said more generally, and what has been echoed today in the discussions we've had and in the communiqué, is that in the current environment, where there will be less available credit around the world for capital projects there is a bigger and more important role for Government.
And that's what we discussed today, and I couldn't have been happier with the discussions we had today. The fact that subject, of course, and fully consistent with proper processes as the PM has said, we're going to see the interim report from Infrastructure Australia. That will mean more money for more capital works can hit the ground sooner than would otherwise have been the case. And that's exactly what we need in terms of stimulating activity and maintaining strong economic conditions going forward.
So I think the steps we've taken, plus the agreement today on national PPP guidelines, is exactly the right thing for governments to be doing, and will create that better investment environment, albeit a more difficult environment than it was three months or three years ago.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you now think our economy needs the shot in the arm that big government infrastructure spending will give it (inaudible)
PM: The nation has for a long time needed infrastructure bottlenecks to be dealt with. The Reserve Bank has been saying that for a long time. As I've said repeatedly in parliament in Canberra, there has been up to 20 warnings about infrastructure bottlenecks across the nation. That is a continuing need.
What I've also said in recent times, and again in the parliament in Canberra, is that what's our response to the global financial crisis? One, maintaining a policy of a strong financial management through a strong Budget surplus to provide us with a buffer for the future. But two, through that also to implement our long term strategy of nation building  -  a $76 billion plan for nation building. I've said that before and I'll say it again.
These two needs are entirely compatible. And, I'm determined to get on with the job. And it's been a good discussion with the Premiers and Chief Ministers today on that.
RANN: Can I just take that question from the other states, to say that infrastructure. I mean let's just remember, and I've been at COAG meetings now for more than six and a half years, the previous Federal Government wasn't in the game of infrastructure. In fact, we've already seen a role out of significant infrastructure in relation to the River Murray's needs and the re-engineering of the river. And I think what we're talking about now is a real commitment. I mean, my state has doubled the infrastructure spend and with PPPs which we've committed to, effectively tripling the infrastructure spend. In the past, we've had state governments that were spending more on infrastructure than the entire Federal Government, so we welcome what is happening with infrastructure now. We welcome the fact that we're going to get a report by the end of this year so we can get cracking.
But it's in stark contrast to what we've had over the last six and a half years, or twelve years, where infrastructure couldn't be discussed at COAG meetings.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, what you'll see in the communiqué today and I'm sorry it is not ready for you, and I went through a summary of what we did today which was not comprehensive it's partial. One of the things that we've done today, and people have actively contributed to this, is the new intergovernmental agreement on early childhood education for indigenous Australians.
That's consistent with a commitment that I gave as Prime Minister at the time of the national apology about closing the gap.
That's led to detailed work with the states and territories over the last several months which has brought together that intergovernmental agreement which I've signed today, or I'm about to sign today, but the communiqué will go through that.
Colin Barnett though in a discussion with me last night and again in comments this morning, triggered some thinking on my part about how do we take that part of closing the gap into, frankly a much broader national agenda. And that is, states, territories and the private and community sector marching to the beat of the same drum on a complete response to the challenge of indigenous Australia. And that will be informed, also, by the report that we'll receive soon on the experience of the NT intervention.
JOURNALIST: Another major problem facing us all is the price of petrol (inaudible).
PM: We'll sort that through really quickly  -  I wouldn't worry too much about that. The key thing is having someone in the saddle. We've got one. In contrast to previous administrations when no such entity existed. This is right, it helps, it helps in terms of maximising consumer power together with other measures. And while we're here in Western Australia, I draw attention to the fact that FuelWatch has operated successfully in this state since the year 2000 I think, Colin, 2001, introduced by the then Liberal Government. We sought to do that nationally, as you know.
These are all measures designed to increase consumer power in what is a very difficult cost burden for families across the country, and that is the price of petrol.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm a big fan of the LNG industry, always have been, always will be. I've seen a lot of their projects, and it's exciting to see what's happened on the North-West Shelf and where it can all go to into the future.
Second point, though, is on the specific impact of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme on LNG, as I've said already, we'll sort through in our consultations with industry, precisely how LNG and other industries will be dealt with - strongly affected industries, emissions intensive trade exposed sectors of the economy. This is a very comprehensive exercise that the Commonwealth is engaged in at the moment. It's not easy, it's hard, it's complicated. But you know something, it's necessary to do in the national interest and we are being thorough about it. And I draw your attention to the most recent report by Ross Garnaut, which again continues to inform the debate.
I think we'd better zip, folks, because I know a few of the colleagues have got to start zipping themselves to other parts of the country.
Thank you, thanks very much.


The Rudd Government will crack down on dodgy mortgage dealers and payday lenders under a $71 million action plan to modernise Australian financial services.
Other predatory lending practices, including unsolicited offers to extend credit card limits, could be targeted in the second phase of the four-year overhaul of consumer credit laws.
The two-stage plan was agreed to by Premiers and Chief Ministers at the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) meeting in Perth today.
With the global financial crisis threatening economic stability in other countries, the Rudd Government has moved to further protect consumers from unscrupulous lenders.
“These are difficult times and strong regulation is the best protection for all Australians,” Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said today.
“Australia's strong banking system and robust budget surplus put us in a strong position to see the economy through this global financial crisis.
“These new measures will protect consumers and cut red tape for business.”
Under the first phase of the plan, the Commonwealth will take responsibility for trustee companies, the existing key credit regulation, and the Uniform Consumer Credit Code (UNCC) by enacting it as federal law.
The UCCC already covers mortgages taken out to buy the family home. It will be extended to cover mortgages on investment properties to help stop borrowers racking up excessive levels of mortgage debt.
So-called payday lenders will also be targeted, bringing them under a national licensing regime for the first time and forcing them to lend responsibly, including assessing borrowers' capacity to repay loans.
Also known as deferred deposit lenders, payday lenders charge extortionate fees and charges on small loans and cash advances to some of the most financially vulnerable people in the community  -  those who would not normally qualify for credit from a bank or other financial institution.
For the first time, all finance brokers, advisers and credit providers will be covered by a national licensing scheme.
Lenders will be licensed by corporate watchdog the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC), which will be given extra powers to police the scheme.
In a further breakthrough, all borrowers will be able to appeal to an external dispute resolution body to which all licensed lenders must belong.
The Corporations Act will be extended to cover margin lending products, which will have to provide product disclosure statements similar to First Home Saver Accounts.
The first phase changes will be dealt with in Commonwealth, State and Territory legislation by the end of June 2009, with a two-year transition period for affected businesses.
The second phase of the action plan will look at possible further rules to stem predatory lending practices, such as a review of credit card limit extension offers, an examination of State approaches to interest rate caps and other fringe lending issues.
The Commonwealth may also look at regulating reverse mortgages to protect older Australians considering using the equity in their homes to gain access to credit.
Any second phase changes would become Commonwealth legislation in the first half of 2010.
The action plan follows the release of the Government's Financial Services and Credit Reform Green Paper in June and agreement at the March and July COAG meetings to transfer consumer credit regulation to the Commonwealth.
“The Rudd Government has consulted widely with industry through the Green Paper, which received more than 150 submissions,” Minister for Superannuation and Corporate Law Nick Sherry said.
“The previous Government sat on report after report, which all said today's actions were necessary, yet they did nothing. In just 10 months we have acted to see that our financial services will be regulated nationally and consumers will be better protected,” Minister Sherry said.


PM RUDD: The Council of Australian Governments meets at a time of global financial crisis. And it's times like this that a crisis affects all Governments, Commonwealth, the States, Territories. And therefore it's time when all Governments must cooperate in Australia's national economic interest. 
I am pleased to report today that the Governments of this Australian Federation have done just that - cooperating in practical areas such as how do we advance our regulatory arrangements in Australia to make it easier for businesses to function. How do we bring about uniform areas of national credit regulation at a time when regulation of credit markets is under particular national and international scrutiny? And also working together on how we build the nation through infrastructure projects for the future?
The Council of Australian Governments today has agreed to implement a plan for the regulation of remaining areas of consumer credit. This follows COAG's decision that the Commonwealth would assume responsibility for the regulation of mortgages, mortgage broking, margin lending and all remaining areas of consumer credit such as payday lending and financial counselling services.
The implementation plan that we have adopted is a timeline for the transfer of these responsibilities to the Commonwealth by June 2009. This is a major reform in an area which has been crying out for reform for a long, long time and necessary at times like this.
Secondly, the Council of Australian Governments has also debated today the need for infrastructure reform and to engage in a program of nation building for the future. On infrastructure reform one of the challenges that we have faced in the past is the absence of nationally consistent private public partnership guidelines for the nation.
COAG agreed today that we will have as a nation such nationally consistent guidelines and we have agreed that those guidelines will be adopted by year's end. Furthermore on the question of our nation's infrastructure needs for the future, we discussed the role of Infrastructure Australia, the role of the Building Australia Fund which were announced in the Commonwealth's most recent Budget.
Earlier the Council of Australian Governments has agreed that by year's end Infrastructure Australia would conclude its audit of Australia's infrastructure needs and that its first COAG meeting of next year, that is March next year, that COAG would then examine in infrastructure priority list for the nation.
What the Commonwealth has decided to do is to have infrastructure Australia provide an early report on both of these matters - that is the infrastructure assessment of the nation, the audit, as well as infrastructure priorities - and for this now to be done by year's end. This program of work has been advanced.
We believe this is important because of the outstanding infrastructure needs of the nation, both in our cities and in our rural and regional areas and we intend to get on with the job. This Government, the Australian Government has for the first time in many, many decades decided to take a leading role, an active role, a partnership role in laying out the nation's future infrastructure and we intend to do so in close collaboration with the States. Also the decision we have taken to have nationally consistent private public partnership guidelines will help the private sector be partners with us into the future as well.
On another matter the Council of Australian Governments has also looked at the importance of bringing in a national energy efficiency strategy and we have agreed to set ourselves the object of having such a national energy efficiency in place by year's end.
This is important, always referred to in the public debate as the low hanging fruit of the climate change agenda, the best way, the most effective way and the earliest way of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions and we intend to do so. Our objective is to have that national energy efficiency strategy agreed by year's end.
We have also agreed as Commonwealth, States and Territories to the establishment of the National Curriculum Board as a statutory authority under Commonwealth legislation, accountable to all Australian Governments. And we have also decided through that legislation to bring together the functions of national curriculum, assessment and data management, analysis and reporting at a national level.
We believe this is an important part of the nation's quality education agenda and I look forward to continuing partnership with the States and Territories in this important area of reform.
We also as a Council of Australian Governments today dealt at length with the requirements that have been put to us in the overall area of child protection.
The Council of Australian Governments has agreed to develop a new protocol for information sharing between Centrelink and child protection agencies and to include Centrelink in the national child protection alert system by the end of 2008.
Leaders also agreed in principle to a framework for an inter-jurisdictional exchange of criminal history information for screening of people working with children and we will continue to implement that agenda.
Finally, we had a discussion about closing the gap and the challenges of Indigenous Australia. And this grew out in part of a conversation I had in part with the newly elected Premier of Western Australia, Colin Barnett, last night.
And that is, how we take this practical area of reform into the future.
And what we've agreed, as Premiers and Chief Ministers, and as the Prime Minister of the country, is to hold a dedicated Council of Australian Governments meeting on the practical challenge of closing the gap. The objective, an integrated national strategy to do this, harnessing the different experiences of the states and territories in practical areas of reform that have worked. Candidly acknowledging those things which haven't worked. And incorporating in this new national strategy the input of the private and community sector as well.
Private schools and boarding schools, sporting clubs, sporting organisations such as we've seen here in Western Australian through the Clontarf Academy. As well as private sector generated employment initiatives such as that which is currently being advanced by Mr Andrew Forrest.
This will be an important meeting, and we intend to be well prepared for it.
Finally, we've agreed to bring forward the next Council of Australian Governments meeting. Originally scheduled for December, we intend to get cracking. It'll be held on the 17th of November, and that meeting will bring together the practical work which the Commonwealth and the States have been working on all year on the future reform agenda for health, hospitals, education and the critical areas of future funding reform in the service areas so important to Australia's working families.
I might turn now to our host, the Premier of Western Australia, and then to the Premier of Victoria.
PREMIER BARNETT: Thank you Prime Minister, and might I first thank you and my fellow Premiers and Chief Ministers for visiting Western Australia for this COAG meeting.
I, as you can understand, was absolutely delighted to be here. I didn't think I would, but here I am.
It was a good meeting. A number of those issues that have been before COAG for some time have obviously progressed further. It provided, for myself, an opportunity to not only meet the Prime Minister, but also the others at the table and to get to know them a little.
It also provided an opportunity for me to speak to the Prime Minister at length about some of the issues for Western Australia, and some of the aspirtations the new State Government has and some of the major projects for the future in this state.
I was particularly pleased that the decision has been made to have a special COAG meeting with respect to closing the gap, and issues to deal with Indigenous people in Australia.
Australia is a very prosperous, successful economy and nation, however not for all people. And addressing that area of social injustice I hope will prove to be the crowning achievement of this particular COAG meeting. A lot of work to be done, a complex and difficult issue, but it's one that rises above the interests of party politics, and it's one that rises above the interests of different governments. And I was excited, Prime Minister, I think there was a genuine desire across all the meeting today that we have to take on that responsibility.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much, Colin.
If I could now turn to John as the Chairman of the Council of the Australian Federation to add his remarks, then invite any other Premiers or Chief Ministers who so wish before taking your questions. Over to you, John.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thank you, Kevin.
I think we had an excellent meeting today from the perspective of the States and Territories. I think it was another great example of Governments working together as the Prime Minister has said before, ending the blame game and getting on with the job of working together to do what is right in the national interest.
We had a long discussion today about the global financial crisis, the world economy, and Australia's response to that.
It is, of course, important to reiterate that the fundamentals in Australia, as they are in each of the states, are particularly good. We are in a much better position than most other governments around the world.
But I was particularly pleased out of today's discussion that the Infrastructure Australia will now be providing their interim report on priority projects in December. This will enable us to have a good look at all of the capital projects that were under consideration, and I guess, if you wanted to summarise this approach, it's really how we fast track what is a very big infrastructure commitment by the Federal Government.
And that commitment will enable the Commonwealth and the States to work together to get cracking to bring major infrastructure projects online earlier than would otherwise would have been the case.
As the Prime Minister has said, we also agreed further significant regulation reforms today, cutting red tape. That was a feature of the last COAG. And again in the context of the global economic conditions, helping businesses reduce red tape, seamless national business regulation, helping them get on with the job, is one of the most important things we can do.
The Prime Minister referred to a national approach to public private partnerships, that's something which certainly we've been seeking in Victoria for some time. We made good progress today and we'll have the final guidelines complete by the November 17 meeting.
In terms of Governments working together, child protection, the exchange of information through Centrelink. Centrelink, in a sense has been the missing link in the information chain in the past and having Centrelink now providing that information will assist in the way in which the states manage child protection.
We also agreed today to a national approach on emergency warning systems. This is something which again the states and particularly Victoria have been pursuing in this era of climate change, one thing we can be sure about is that we're going to see more climatic conditions and circumstances  -  more climatic events  -  which create emergency situations.
So whether it's thunderstorms, whether it's bushfires, whether it's wind events, in so having the best possible emergency warning information system in place across Australia, will be a good thing in terms of protecting citizens across the country. And so we've agreed on a full report back by the end of 2008 on that issue so that we can progress it going further.
We also agreed a national approach of course to hazardous chemicals.
The Prime Minister has mentioned climate change. We agreed on the national approach to energy efficiency. We had a very positive discussion about carbon, capture, storage and the critical role that Australian Governments can play in leading the world in carbon capture storage.
And if you think of countries internationally like China, in 20 years time China's economy will be four times bigger than it is today and they will still be generating something like 60 per cent of all of their electricity from coal.
And so tackling the global carbon issue, carbon capture storage, is a fundamental role for Australia to play. We are a leader and the initiative recently announced by the Prime Minister will help us go a long way towards doing that.
Finally, can I say again, another great example in the climate change area, I think in Governments working together. We've agreed today on more regular reporting in relation to the Murray-Darling Basin. More regular reporting of progress in terms of projects. And this is important. In the last year we've seen very strong levels of water trading, and that's a positive thing which is occurring in the Basin. We've also seen significant works occurring in terms of water saving infrastructure, delivering water for the environment. And what we agreed today was regular reporting back through COAG of the success of those investments in terms of releasing water for the environment and particularly the Murray system.
Finally, in relation to the next meeting, November 17, for the states this is a significant meeting. Getting an agreement on the major SPPs, and on national partnership agreements at that meeting, particularly the healthcare agreement.
I know we said at the first COAG meeting in Melbourne last year in December that we will take a year to get the Australian Healthcare Agreement right, if we can do that by November 17, I think that will be just a stunning example of the Federal Government and the States working together in the interests of those who use our health system across Australia. And so that will be a significant focus of that November 17 meeting.
And of course, as Colin has said too, we discussed today closing the gap. And the focus next year with a specific COAG meeting on closing the gap will also be, I think, a very concrete example of governments working together.


The Rudd Government is close to finalising the first stage of consultations to develop an historic National Compact with the non-profit sector.
The Compact is part of the government's reform program to build an Australia for the 21st century.
“The Compact will represent our commitment to work in partnership with non-profit organisations to build stronger communities and improve the lives of all Australians,” Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said.
Similar compacts or partnerships have worked well overseas to provide a mechanism for discussion and agreement on important issues, including providing better services to local communities, families and individuals.
The non-profit sector includes community groups, sporting associations and peak not for profit bodies which help create strong, active and connected communities.
At the end of June 2007, there were 40,976 ABN registered not-for-profit organisations in Australia, as well as 600,000 organisations that would not fall within the ABN registration requirements.
“We are now finalising the first phase of consultations with the non-profit sector  -  these have taken place in Sydney, Perth, Hobart, Adelaide, Townsville, Brisbane, Darwin and Alice Springs with consultations scheduled for Melbourne and the ACT next week,” Mr Rudd said.
These consultations have been jointly led by Senator Ursula Stephens, Parliamentary Secretary for Social Inclusion and the Voluntary Sector, and the Australian Council of Social Service.
“Many matters have been raised during the consultations including the importance of the Compact as vehicle for change, an opportunity to redefine the non-profit sector's relationship with Government,” Mr Rudd said.
“A National Compact would build on initiatives already commenced to improve the relationship between community organisations and Government and to help them do their important work:
     * We have acted to end the use of ‘confidentiality clauses' in funding contracts which stopped organisations from speaking to the media.
     * We have commenced discussions with State and Territory Governments to reduce the red tape burden on non-profit organisations so they can focus on the needs of the individuals and families they serve.
     * We have also asked the Productivity Commission to construct a new tool to measure the contribution of the non-profit sector to communities and the economy, including the value of volunteers,” Mr Rudd said.


CARY: Good morning
PM: Good morning, Greg and thanks for having me on the program.
CARY: I just talking about the seeming bipartisanship of what came out of yesterday. You might talk with us a little bit about that. What are the key points out of it our listeners should know?
PM: Well, all Premiers and Chief Ministers when we meet in Perth yesterday were completely seized to the fact that we are in the middle of a global financial crisis. Therefore that has implications to the Australian economy. Therefore we need to cooperate, put any petty differences to one side.
What does that mean in practice? What we have decided to do on the infrastructure front is to bring forward a report on priority national infrastructure projects from Infrastructure Australia. That was due to be considered next year, we will now bring that forward to the end of this year. And that's practical projects like roads, rail, port, high speed broadband. That is the first thing.
The second is in the area of regulation of Australia's credit institutions, a number of those are still regulated in an uncoordinated way across the States. We have decided and have agreed as all Governments now to bring that under a single national uniform set of regulations. We think that's important for the long term future, particularly the problems we have seen overseas.
They are two practical things that we have done. But we did a lot of other things as well.
CARY: How confident are you then that we can weather whatever economic storms are about to hit, not only the United States but seemingly the other parts of the world? And we will obviously get some of that over here as well.
PM: Well many people have said to me around the world that Australia is better positioned to weather these storms among practically all of the countries. The reasons are these  -  our banking system is well regulated, they are running strong balance sheets. Thirdly, we have a strong budget surplus which gives us a buffer to act into the future and for those three reasons we believe that we are well positioned to see Australia through.
It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard. But my overall responsibility as Prime Minister is take the decisions, including some hard decisions, to ensure that we maintain the stability of the Australian financial system.
CARY: Prime Minister from Australia's perspective, let alone America's, how important is it that the Congress now passes the bailout package over there? And how confident are you that they will?
PM: It is of fundamental importance. It was bad, very bad that it didn't get through the Congress last time. During the course of this week, I have had Australia's Ambassador in Washington speaking and working with individual Congressman on this. Yesterday morning, I spoke directly to the Leader of the, the House Majority Leader on this as well, putting the view of friends and allies that whether you are in Australia, whether you are in Japan or the United Kingdom, we as friends and allies of the United States need to see this package passed through the Congress as well.
Why? The stabilisation of the US financial markets means the stabilisation of global financial markets. Very important for the economy. I'd rather not think about the consequences if it doesn't pass but I know a lot effort is being put in by our friends in the congress to muster the votes necessary. But it is going to be tight.
CARY: A couple of other issues this morning. One I mentioned on the program yesterday, how sickened I felt and a lot of our listeners felt the same way to wake up and see on our front pages the smiling faces of the Bali bombers as they get closer with their date with the executioner. You said yesterday that they are murdering cowards who deserve to die. You went on to say it is only fair that the Bali bombers are on death row. I don't know if there are too many Australians who would disagree with what you said. It does raise this question however no doubt, and that is you implicitly supporting or explicitly supporting the death penalty there and yet we've got plenty of murdering cowards on death row here. Why not the same for them?
PM: What I said was first of all they describe themselves as holy warriors. I said they are not holy warriors at all, they are cowards and they are murderers and they are mass murderers.
Secondly, I went on to say that they deserve the justice that they will get. By which I mean consistent with the judicial system and how that pans out in the end is a matter for the Indonesians.
Our position as you know has always been one as a matter of general policy of opposition to the death penalty. We also have said that we intervene in the cases of individual Australians who are convicted with capital sentences abroad. And that has been a bipartisan policy since year dot. My comments yesterday were about basically the integrity of the Indonesian judicial system and that is evident in the transcript.
CARY: I accept that, but if we are to support that judicial system and the integrity of it and condone what that judicial system is doing, is it not appropriate that we even contemplate the same kind of punishment for similar kinds of crime in Australia?
PM: Well look, bipartisan basis we've opposed the death penalty in Australia going back to year dot. Well, a long, long time, anyway. And that's the view of Liberals, it's the view of the Australian Labor Party, and that will be the case into the future as well.
And also, when it comes to Australians convicted of sentences abroad, both Mr Howard when he was Prime Minister, and myself since becoming Prime Minister, we regularly intervene with foreign countries arguing the case for clemency for Australians convicted abroad.
When it comes to foreign nations, the situation is as I described before.
CARY: Okay. Just perhaps in a sentence then because there is not a lot of time and only one or two points to make - what is your fundamental, philosophical problem with the death penalty?
PM: Oh, I take the underlying view that when it comes to the death penalty, in this country, I have never accepted the argument that it represents a sufficient deterrent of itself. And secondly, the argument that killing another person doesn't bring back the person to life that they have already killed themselves.
So, if I was persuaded of the deterrent arguments or the other arguments, then I would have a different view. But I have never had a persuasive argument put to me on that score and that has been my consistent position throughout my life.
CARY: Okay, we have two minutes. Let me ask you quickly about maternity leave, one of the big stories of the week. I'm getting a lot of correspondence from small business concerned about the nine per cent superannuation impost. At the same time, they've lost a worker and had to replace that worker. What would you say to them?
PM: Well, I think for all business we are very mindful of the fact that business have real costs here. The first thing about paid maternity leave though is that we are one of two developed countries around the world  -  us and the United States  -  who don't have it. It's just, frankly, we've got to catch up with the 21st century, and I'm surprised that the Liberals have been opposing it, I really am.
Secondly, on the way in which it'll be funded, the proposal put forward by the Productivity Commission is for this payment to be paid by the government. The exception, of course, is that when a woman is on paid maternity leave that their superannuation contribution continues to be paid by the employer.
I've got to say, we'll work through all of that detail over the next few months, but we, the Government, are strongly of the view that paid maternity leave's time has come. We've fiddled and faddled on this for 12 years, it's been 12 years of inaction. It's time Australia bit the bullet on this. This Government will bite the bullet, and we will put forward a detailed response to what has been put out by the Productivity Commission over the course of the next few months.
CARY: Okay, the other concern related to all of that is the disparity, and, I think Tony Abbott highlighted it earlier in the week, between those who choose to be stay at home mums and those who are working mums. The stay at home mums will effectively get less than the working mums during that period?
PM: Can I say this, that all mums at present receive the baby bonus. And I believe, fundamentally, in women's right to choose here. Across Australia, there are nearly 300,000 bubs born each year. About 100,000 of those mums are stay at home mums, about 200,000  -  a bit less than that, heading up towards 200,000  -  are mums who return to the paid workforce.
Now, we've got to deal with both those realities and support women who make those choices.
Stay at home mums will not be a dollar worse off. The baby bonus will continue to be paid.
What we are now debating is paid maternity leave. And as I said, it's just wrong the fact that we're one of only two countries in the world not to support women. Often women in low income levels are finding it almost impossible to juggle having a baby and needing to go back to work in order to balance their budget, their household budget.
CARY: I understand that. But you don't find a problem with that disparity, that the baby bonus won't be as much as the 18 weeks paid maternity leave?
PM: Look, I respect women who make both those choices. But I've got to say, we've got to bite the bullet on paid maternity leave.
The medical advice is that if women are returning to the workforce, and often the case at present if we're talking about lower paid women, women on low to middle incomes whose employers have not been able to provide any form of paid maternity leave, for the health of the bub and the mum, what all the professional advice is is that women need to be at least given the flexibility of being with their bub for four and a half, five, six months. You know, breast feeding and the rest, settling the baby down. It's really important.
So the practical question is how do you provide sufficient income support for women often lower paid women in those circumstances.
I know it's controversial, I know it's tough, but the Government's determined to bite the bullet on this. And I'm surprised, again, that the Liberals would oppose it.
CARY: The big question until last  -  no Brisbane Broncos in the Grand Final. Storm versus Manly, what's your tip? Who do you want to win?
PM: I'll be backing the Storm because half of them are from Brissie.
CARY: Enjoy the day Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks very much, Greg.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Tonight, here in Australia we wait, watch and listen with our heads turned towards Washington and those legislators who will determine the America's national response to this most dire financial crisis.
When events the magnitude of which we have witnessed in the last week take place, we sometimes struggle to find a sense of proportion.
But if we lose that sense of proportion and perspective, we may misjudge and overreact.
That's why it is important to focus on how stability can be restored to the global financial system.
And why it is also important to outline, in clear, calm and objective terms, the great strength of the Australian financial system.
The strength of the Australian economy.
The strength of the Australian budget position.
And how the Government intends to steer Australia through this global economic storm.
Australia is not immune from the problems in the United States.
However we are better placed than most countries to weather the storm.
     * We have first class regulators.
     * Australia has four of the world's 20 AA rated banks.
     * We have about 1% of sub prime loans versus about 15% in the United States.
     * Our arrears rates are more than five times lower than the United States.
     * We have budgeted for a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future that is the envy of the developed world. By contrast, six of the seven largest economies are currently running Budget deficits.
The Australian economy is resilient, flexible and strong, and the Government is confident it will steer Australia through the global economic storm that lies ahead.
And whereas five of the world's largest economies already have recorded zero or negative growth this year, Australia continues to generate positive economic growth.
We should not forget that the Australian stock market suffered a 25 percent drop in one day in 1987.
The market recovered from that fall.
Our market will in time recover from the current volatility.
It's worth remembering that 1987 was also the year the movie “Wall Street” premiered in New York and Gordon Gekko entered our lexicon when he sought to sum up the philosophy, for lack of a better word, of a generation of financiers with that chilling declaration: “Greed is good”.
The “greed-is-good” era brought the stock market crash of 1987, the savings and loans debacle in the United States and the global recession which gripped many countries in the early 1990s. 
It is perhaps time now to admit that we did not learn the full lessons of the greed-is-good ideology.
And today we are still cleaning up the mess of the twenty-first century children of Gordon Gecko.
At a technical level, the current financial crisis is the unwinding of the extraordinary global credit boom of recent years.
It is a rapid shift and dislocation in the credit market cycle.
The top of the cycle was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low cost of capital and rapid increases in asset prices, most notably in housing markets and share markets.
These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap.
In particular there was a rush to purchase real estate.
For a short time, the real estate boom was a self-fulfilling proposition. Low capital costs and high demand for housing caused house prices to keep rising  -  a classic ‘asset bubble' began to develop.
At the same time, advances in information technology and financial engineering saw the emergence of sophisticated new financial instruments and structured assets.
These assets were purchased by investment banks, hedge funds and other financial institutions.
But regulatory frameworks did not always keep up with the rapid pace of change. The risks inherent in these financial innovations were not always well understood.
As the housing bubble burst, it triggered a wave of home foreclosures and asset write downs that, as Americans have been saying, have rocked both Wall Street and Main Street.
That's the technical debate.
But it also points to a broader debate about corporate values and, for that matter, a debate about the general values of our current age.
Beneath the financial jargon and dramatic stock market events, the sub-prime crisis has also reflected a fundamental failure of values.
We've seen the triumph of greed over integrity.
The triumph of speculation over value creation.
The triumph of the short term over long term, sustainable growth.
The fact is that Gordon Gekko wasn't tamed in 1987  -  he was simply ignored.
The fact is that much of the root cause of the sub prime crisis came down to our financial markets rewarding people for taking extravagant risks.
Executives earned massive bonuses.
Their rewards were skewed to short term “success” rather than long term creation of asset value.
Corporate governance structures encouraged short term paper results over long term measurable achievement.
Angelo Mozilo, the CEO of Countrywide Financial, the largest sub-prime lender made more than $270 million between 2004 and 2007 before its collapse.
Stanley O'Neal, the former chief executive of Merrill Lynch, was paid $US100 million in the last two years as a result of the massive profits the bank made during the subprime housing bubble.  When the bubble burst, Merrill Lynch suffered massive losses which obliterated the earlier gains, yet their executives had no obligation to pay any money back.
They literally laughed all the way to the bank.
Perverse financial values were also on display in the American retail mortgage market. 
The ‘originate and distribute' model of mortgage lending encouraged mortgage providers to unscrupulously provide finance to borrowers who often did not have the capacity to repay the loans.
Mortgage salespeople preyed on the aspirations of vulnerable families, soliciting them to take out home loans.
Lenders confused working class people, non-English speaking families and first time borrowers with hidden fees, ratchet interest rates, and confusing repayment terms.
Predatory financers inflated borrower's income and overstated their ability to pay back a loan.
These were the most obvious manifestations of the culture of greed and short-termism which pervaded large parts of the American financial sector.
This culture was never challenged by a political and economic ideology of extreme capitalism.
And this crisis bears the fingerprints of the extreme free market ideologues who influence much of the neo-liberal economic elite.
Free market ideologues who have a naïve belief that unrestrained markets are always self-correcting and that markets left to themselves will always achieve optimum outcomes.
Ideologues who believe that any regulation of private business is fundamentally wrong.
Ideologues who have resisted the regulation of financial markets and the supervision of a wide range of financial institutions.
Ideologues who lectured the developing countries caught up in the Asian Financial Crisis a decade ago about the need for transparency and disclosure, but did little to reform their own financial systems.
Ideologues who believe that government is always the problem, never the solution.
Except of course when there is a crash  -  then, the self-same ideologues argue, having privatised their profits, we should socialise their losses.
And by the way, having demanded lower and lower taxes all the way through.
When we are through the current crisis it will be time therefore to take stock.
Not to overreact - but rather, for the world to calmly take stock of what went wrong, as we pursue the reforms necessary to restore long-term confidence and stability to global financial markets.
Global financial markets require global financial regulation based on the fundamental principles of transparency, conservative prudential standards and, above all, universality.
That is why the Australian Government has put forward at the United Nations and prospectively at the International Monetary Fund, a five part regulatory reform program for consideration and implementation by all governments.
There is an alternative political and policy narrative to the one that has tended to prevail in recent times.
A narrative that recognises the importance of markets, but one that also recognises the limitations of markets and recognises also where markets fail.
A narrative that recognises the role of public goods.
A narrative that recognises that one of those public goods is market regulation. 
A narrative that values transparency, competition and innovation  -  but one that does not encourage speculation nor reward for merely short-term success.
A political and corporate culture that values profitability and productivity achieved through hard work  -  but one that does not endorse the Gordon Gekko ethic of the quick buck, based on little more than a single financial transaction.
We believe that market participants need strong incentives and rewards for success.
But we believe that their success should be measured over a sustainable horizon. 
We believe in strong incentives for individuals, but we also believe that trust and traditional ethical standards are essential elements of the financial system.
We believe strongly in the profit motive.
But we also believe in responsibility to the community where those profits are made - a belief increasingly evident in Australian corporate philanthropic behaviour.
I say again, when we are through this crisis, it will be time to take stock.
And through informed debate in political and corporate Australia as well as the media of the virus, the disease, some would say the epidemic, of short-termism that also threatens Australia's long term future.
Because across the length and breadth of the nation, the cry of the people is clear  -  and that is for a long term, sustainable vision for the nation's future.
One that goes beyond the electoral cycle.
That goes beyond a quarterly corporate reporting cycle.
And one that certainly goes beyond the 24 hour news cycle.
A long term vision that embraces:
     * long term planning on the nation's productivity agenda;
     * long term planning on the nation's workforce participation agenda;
     * long term planning on the nation's infrastructure - our ports, our rail, our high speed broadband;
     * long term planning for the ageing of the population;
     * long term planning for the economic and environmental impact of climate change;
     * long term planning for water and for agriculture in this, the world's driest continent, and
     * long term planning for our engagement with the Asia Pacific century.
The Government I lead is not just committed to responsible economic management for the immediate term.
The Government I lead is determined to be a nation-building government for the long term.
And beyond this overriding emphasis on the long term, after a decade so much squandered on the short term, we must also encourage a much wider community debate on the corporate and political values we hold dear  -  a debate between short-term gratification and long term vision.
A debate that brings to a head how we shape the reward structures of corporate Australia.
A debate about how we assess the long term values of companies, their executives and their assets against their long term performance - as opposed to short-term asset bubbles.
And this is very much a values debate  -  Gordon Gekko, greed and immediate gratification as against a culture that values a fair go, that values hard work and that values thinking about and preparing for tomorrow.
The Australian Government has been proactive throughout the global financial crisis that has been with us since our first day in office.
We have responded to events as they unfold, often anticipating them, and putting in place policies, programs and measures to better prepare Australia for the period ahead.
We have acted to promote stability, transparency and confidence in national financial markets.
The Australian Government has also been actively involved in designing the global regulatory recommendations coming out of the Financial Stability Forum created by the G7.
Australian financial authorities (APRA, ASIC, RBA and the Treasury), are also taking action to address each of the five areas identified by the Forum including:
     * strengthened prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management;
     * enhancing transparency and valuation;
     * changes in the role and uses of credit ratings;
     * strengthening the authorities' responsiveness to risks, and
     * robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system.
And here at home, the Government has been working to strengthen our domestic financial system.
Earlier this year the Australian Government began working on legislation to improve disclosure requirements around short selling. The exposure draft of this legislation has now been released.
And, more recently, ASIC has acted in concert with regulators around the world to put temporary restrictions on short selling.
In May this year, the Government announced that it would increase its issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities as part of the Government's commitment to the effective operation of Australia's financial markets.
We provided legislative authority for an increase in future Commonwealth Government Securities issuance of up to $25 billion to strengthen the robustness of Australia's financial system and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
In September the Government announced that the Australian Office of Financial Management would be authorised to purchase Australian residential mortgage-backed securities  -  a measure made possible by legislation introduced and passed back in June. 
This will strengthen effective competition in Australia's mortgage markets.
The Government has also been active in advancing consumer protection in Australia's credit markets. In April, the Financial Stability Forum recommended that authorities review and, where necessary, strengthen deposit insurance arrangements.
Following this, the Government announced in June the adoption of a Financial Claims Scheme.
The financial claims scheme will ensure depositors and insurance policyholders with Authorised Deposit Taking Institutions (ADIs) have quick access to their money up to a defined threshold.
Also in June, the Government proposed the Commonwealth take responsibility for regulating all consumer credit.
Three months later, COAG agreed to create uniform national credit regulation with a view to closing loopholes and cracking down on unscrupulous lending.
These are concrete measures in many areas to promote competitiveness, transparency and proper consumer protection in our financial markets  -  and above all to maintain confidence and stability.
That is why we have also called on banks to act responsibly and competitively in response to any RBA rate cut next week.
The easiest thing the government could do would be to take the populist approach.
But the global financial crisis is real and it is affecting global financial stability, and financial instability has very serious consequences for Australian families.  
Of course we want to see the Liberals' high interest rates come down.
Ten interest rate rises in a row under the Liberals.
And last month (aided by this Government's fiscal policy settings) we saw the first interest rate cut in seven years.
Of course we will welcome a cut in interest rates.
And we will press for those to be passed on to the absolute maximum extent  -  a maximum that is consistent with maintaining the stability of the financial system.
But if the choice is between the sober advice of the financial regulator and any rank act of political populism, the Government will choose the advice of regulators - even if taking that advice proves to be politically popular.
The first responsibility of any government is maintaining the stability of Australia's financial system at a time of almost unprecedented global financial crisis.
Our major Australian commercial banks are in a strong position.
And that must continue to be the case.
And this is equally important for all the mums and dads, all the working families, all the pensioners and carers  -  who together have a fundamental interest in the stability of the Australian banking system.
Particularly at a time when the world has recently seen more than 25 banks fail or needing to be bailed out.
These policy responses and reforms to domestic and international financial markets are part of the Government's broader economic reform agenda.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is committed to strong, responsible economic management anchored in a strong budget surplus.
That is also why the Government has a plan to boost long-term productivity growth through a comprehensive economic reform program based on an education revolution to make our workforce the best trained in the world, our nation-building infrastructure plan, investing in the technologies of the future and our tax and regulation reform plan.
That means maximising Australia's economic competitiveness in an increasingly competitive - and now, increasingly unpredictable - world.
My vision for Australia is a modern economy with the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
My vision for Australia is also the country with the best 21st century infrastructure in the world.
And my vision for Australia at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century is for Australia to be the most Asia-literate (and China-literate) country in the western world.
Our economic program for the future is built on three building blocks.
Responsible Economic Management
The first step to ensuring stability is through macroeconomic management. This is achieved through a prudent fiscal policy and a central bank with independent carriage of monetary policy.
It is why we delivered a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future.
And that is why we have increased the independence of the Reserve Bank of Australia.
Boosting Productivity: Education, Infrastructure and Deregulation
Second, beyond stability, the Government's role is to ensure the provision of critical inputs for a modern economy to boost long-term productivity growth.
Productivity growth has been faltering in recent years.
We must turn this around because productivity growth is the only effective guarantee of non-inflationary growth in living standards in the future.
The Government must ensure the provision of high quality education, training, and infrastructure.
This plan starts with an education revolution  -  a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment in, and in the quality of our education system.
Alongside education, the Government's other key priority for expanding Australia's productive capacity is infrastructure.
Inadequate infrastructure is a handbrake on growth.
That is why the new Government has embarked upon a program of nation building.
We have appointed a Minister for Infrastructure and created an advisory body, Infrastructure Australia, led by Sir Rod Eddington.
Infrastructure Australia is auditing Australia's current infrastructure bottlenecks, auditing our infrastructure needs for the future and developing the nation's first infrastructure priority list.
We will work together with Australian State governments to build on their world's best practice instruments, including public-private partnerships - to enable private companies to finance, design, construct, operate and maintain innovative infrastructure to deliver public goods.
Yesterday, COAG agreed to bring forward our timetable for determining future infrastructure priorities  -  a core part of the Government's nation-building agenda.
And COAG has agreed on a goal of embracing nationally consistent PPP guidelines by year's end.
In partnership with State governments, we have also identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy  -  in practical areas such as establishing a one-stop shop for registering a business name for all of Australia, as well as establishing a national consumer policy framework.
The overall mission is clear: building long term productivity growth so that Australia's long term economic future is secure, without being totally captive to the ups and downs of the mining boom.
Economic engagement with Asia
A third building block for our economic future is our policy of comprehensive economic engagement with Asia  -  as Asia will drive global economic growth for much of the 21st century.
In August we concluded negotiations for a region-wide ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA). 
In terms of coverage this is the largest FTA Australia has ever negotiated.  It covers 16 per cent of Australia's trade in goods and services, worth $71 billion and targets a big market of 570 million people with a combined GDP of US$1 trillion. 
In addition to good market access, it will provide much greater certainty for Australian investors.
During my visit to China in April I agreed with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao that we would unfreeze our FTA negotiations which had stalled. 
Since then we have had two rounds of constructive negotiations with a third scheduled in December. 
China is Australia's largest trading partner with two-way trade in goods and services of $58 billion in 2007.  Our exports are already growing at around 20 per cent annually. 
The FTA should accelerate this through better market access.  We are particularly focussing on achieving results on services, especially financial services.
We are also stepping up the pace of our FTA negotiations with Japan after my visit in June.  The seventh round will be held this month. 
I agreed with the new Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso in our meeting in New York last Thursday that we would accelerate these negotiations as Japan remains our largest export market. 
Following agreement with President Lee during my visit in August, the first round of preparatory talks for an FTA with the Republic of Korea will take place in two weeks in Seoul. 
The Republic of Korea is our fourth largest export market but out trade has been limited to a few major commodities.  Its potential has been neglected.  We now want to expand and diversify the economic relationship.
We have also accelerated our FTA feasibility study with India, which will now report this year.  India is already our sixth largest merchandise export market and eighth largest services market but the potential is far greater. 
The Government takes economic engagement and integration with Asia seriously.
China's extraordinary economic growth has been a driving force behind the period of very strong global economic growth experienced between 2003 and 2007.
Indeed, China was also a stabilising force during the Asian financial crisis in 1997.
China provided a stable export market for many of the countries that suffered from the economic turmoil.
China also contributed financial resources to the IMF rescue packages for Thailand and other Asian economies.
Despite domestic economic pressures, China also resisted devaluing the Renminbi.  
This helped to maintain the export competitiveness of their Asian neighbours during the crisis and the overall stability of the region.
China also has a strong interest in contributing to the resolution of the current global financial crisis and the restoration of strong global economic growth.
China has in recently days made some important statements on the global financial crisis.
President Hu Jintao has welcomed the US Administration's Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) to buy up distressed financial assets, noting that China hoped these measures can achieve quick results to improve economic and financial conditions in the US.
Addressing the United Nations last week, Premier Wen Jiabao also made a commitment that China would play its part in addressing the global financial crisis, including through enhanced financial coordination. 
And at the World Economic Forum meeting in Tianjin last weekend, the Chairman of the China Banking Reform Commission, Liu Mingkang, called for the establishment of a global regulatory system that is in keeping with the global financial system.
In view of China's important role in restoring stability and ensuring future global expansion, these are important statements.
As I mentioned in my own remarks to the UN General Assembly last week, the G-20 should play a major role in supporting reform of the global financial system.
China, as a member of the G-20, can significantly assist these efforts, including through supporting financial stability being at the centre of the G-20's work program.  We look forward to working closely with China in strengthening the global financial system.
China can also support the broader implementation of the Financial Stability Forum's recommendations through Asia.
In recent years China has also been playing an increasingly role in global financial markets.
It is estimated that at the middle of this year, Chinese institutions were holding around $500 billion US dollars worth of US treasury bonds and $200 billion in US asset-backed securities.
The current instabilities that are concentrated in the US should not be taken as a signal to China to retreat from integration and globalisation. 
We need to address the problems that have given rise to the current crisis, and not withdraw or huddle down into ourselves.
China's friends, including Australia, must continue to encourage China to continue to play the positive role in the global economy and financial system it has in the past.
It is important we make it clear that China's ongoing economic and financial integration is important, and this integration is firmly in the interests of China, the interests of Australia, and the interests of the global economy.
It is important now for western nations to demonstrate our positive support for China as a responsible stakeholder in the global economy and in major financial institutions.
Indeed with many financial institutions in the US and Europe now requiring recapitalisation, this is a time when China  -  alongside other economies such as Japan and Korea - can play an important role in strengthening global financial stability.
Chinese institutions have the liquidity to take stakes in those US and European institutions.
Such investments should not cause alarm in western nations.
They are a natural reflection of the structural changes in the global economy.
The 21st century economic reality is that China is now a major economic and financial powerhouse.
By whatever measure you wish to use, China's economy is on course to becoming the world's largest during the first half of this century.
Strong growth in the Chinese economy is now crucial to the global economy  -  just as strong export-driven growth in China has been dependent on the health of the global economy.
It is in every nation's interest for China to strengthen its links to the global economy and to become an increasingly positive stakeholder in the global economy.
That is why we welcome the recent decision by the People's Bank of China to reduce its lending rate by 0.27 basis points, demonstrating the Government's willingness to stimulate the economy if growth continues to slow.
That is why we also welcome recent statements by the Chinese leadership that China's best contribution to the global financial system is for China to strongly grow its economy.
And it is why we should also welcome further Chinese investment in global financial institutions.
Such investments would have a stabilising influence on global financial markets, diversifying and strengthening the investment base of those financial institutions.
It is also important that China participates in building the future architecture of global trade by helping revive the Doha Round, where China  -  and Australia - have a strong interest in achieving an outcome that can underpin strong future economic growth.
China has played a constructive role in negotiations to date.
China can now be an even more positive force in these negotiations in the future  -  helping to shape a final agreement among the key parties.
A positive outcome on Doha would not just lift global economic growth in the longer term  -  it would also provide a shot in the arm for international confidence in the short term.
On the key challenges facing the international community  -  the global financial crisis, the future of global trade and climate change  -  for China to be engaged and participating as a responsible stakeholder is strongly in the interests of China, Australia and the global community.
Developments in global financial markets in recent times have been of truly seismic proportions.
Both the scope of institutional failure and the scale of government intervention in financial markets have been unprecedented.
As the IMF noted yesterday in its latest World Economic Outlook, “the financial turmoil that began in the summer of 2007 has mutated into a full-blown crisis".
There is a lot of jargon in financial markets.
Terms like short-selling, systemic risk, collatoralised debt obligations might seem to be a world away from the lives of ordinary Australians.
But the fact is that financial stability is a public good which has a very direct effect on all Australians.
If we fail to protect this public good  -  that is the stability of Australian financial markets - then those who suffer are the working people whose jobs, whose savings, whose homes, and whose standard of living depend on it.
That is why the Government is acting responsibly to support the stability of the Australian financial sector.
That is why we are acting with our partners around the world to assist in restoring stability to global financial markets.
And these are responsibilities that this Australian Government is determined to discharge.


PM: It's good to be back here with my own community here in Brisbane at a time which is 10 years on since I was first elected as the local Member of Parliament. It's great to be here with members of these community organisations, with Meals on Wheels, school P&amp;Cs, P&amp;Fs, sporting clubs, refugee advocacy groups and others in the RSL.
It is great to be among them because they actually are the building blocks of this local community which I have proudly represented now for the last 10 years.
And also to have the opportunity here to make some comments about what we intend to do as a national government in building a new compact with the community sector, with the not-for-profit sector.
The not-for-profit sector is part of the building blocks of the Australia of the 21st century. We will need a new compact with them so that we engage their ideas, we take the red tape burden off them and we provide them with greater support to go out there and do the job which they are best capable of doing and most passionate about doing.
One of the things I will touch on before taking your questions is this. Nation building, this Government is passionately committed to the project of nation building for Australia. Because we have major infrastructure challenges for the future, our ports, our roads, our rail, our need for high speed broadband.
So many people, including here in Brisbane, are sick and tired of sitting in congested traffic all the time. What are we going to do about that? Building the infrastructure for our major cities of the future is one of the priorities of this Government. We intend to put our shoulder to the wheel in partnership with other levels of Government and in partnership with the private sector.
Building Australia, nation building. Big priorities for the future. It is part and parcel of who we have been as a country in decades past and now the national Government is back in the game of infrastructure development for the future.
Last thing I will say is this, for this to happen the Building Australia Fund needs to be passed by the Australian Parliament. And here is my challenge to the Liberals. Up until now they have opposed it. They have shouted their opposition to this on the floor of the House of Representatives, said all sorts of negative things about it.
I think they are radically out of step with the mood of the Australian nation and the needs of the Australian economy. So my challenge to them is act responsibly, support this legislation through the Parliament because we want to get on with the business of nation building and do it with a significant fund to back it through. And that is the Building Australia Fund.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) opposition has said this will be used to bail out Labor Governments (inaudible)
PM: Last time I looked the Government of Western Australia was not a Labor Government. Secondly, the Government of Western Australia also wants to partner with us on infrastructure developments across that state. Infrastructure developments in the north of Western Australia. Those major resource communities which need support, which need better port access, which need better general infrastructure support.
Do you know, this is a national challenge as well.
The other thing I would say to the critics and the naysayers is this. The Reserve Bank for years and years and years has warned the previous Australian Government of our infrastructure bottlenecks in Australia as pulling back Australia's future economic growth.
The previous Government ignored all that, 20 warnings they got. That's contributed to inflation. It's also created a problem for long term productivity growth in the Australian economy. Well, we don't intend to stand still on this. We are going to get on with the business. Because we budgeted for a budget surplus we have the money to deliver to the Building Australia Fund, an important buffer for the future at this time of global financial uncertainty, an important platform for investing in our nation's future infrastructure needs.
JOURNALIST: When will that money be made available?
PM: One of the decisions we reached yesterday at the Council of Australian Governments was to bring forward an interim report from Infrastructure Australia. Infrastructure Australia has been doing two things - auditing the stock of the nation's infrastructure and secondly compiling a national infrastructure priority list for the future.
That was scheduled for March next year, we have now brought forward an interim report to be deliberated on by Government by the end of this year. That is the first step.
Second, on the money which is the Building Australia Fund, it depends on when the Liberals get their act together in the Senate, and whether they are going to support it or vote it down. Their present remarks have been negative. My challenge to them is this - at this time of global financial uncertainty, unblock the surplus in the Senate and secondly support this important measure for the nation's future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: In the budget we allocated some $20 billion for this. So the funding has been allocated, its dedication to this particular fund depends on the passage of the relevant legislation through the Parliament.
JOURNALIST: In light of Bill Henson's interview with Fairfax newspapers (inaudible) do you stand by your previous comments (inaudible) and how do you feel about (inaudible)
PM: Oh look, I have nothing to add to what I've already said on this matter. Of course, I stand by my earlier remarks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well can I just say, the Libs should have a long hard look at what happens elsewhere around the world when politicians for short term political reasons get in the road of major national initiatives which need to happen.
There's too much short-termism in Australian. There has been in the past.
We need long term plans for the future, and guess what, they cost money. You've got to do it.
If people had this view in the 19th century, and you know something, there never would have been built railroads around Australia. Because the arguments back then were that they were too expensive and how would governments roll them out.
My argument for the 21st century is let's build a national high speed broadband network, let's make sure that our national infrastructure is up to scratch, and let's not just throw our hands up in desperation at the huge challenges of urban congestion. Let's get on and do something about it. And it costs money.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Are you talking about the American measures?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: On the American measure, I just spoke with  -  I thought you were referring to the attitude of the Liberal Party in the Senate on the question of the Building Australia Fund  - 
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: So that was the answer to that third question.
On the other legislature that we were talking about, which is that in the United States, I spoke to our ambassador in Washington only an hour or so ago about how things are shaping up for the House of Representatives debate and the vote.
This is still very tight, and I think we've got to watch very carefully what happens in the day or so ahead.
I spoke yesterday with the House Majority Leader in the United States, Steny Hoyer of the Democrats, made our views known, and those of other friends and allies in the United States.
This is still going to be a very tight vote.
I note also what the Speaker, Mrs Pelosi, has had to say about her stated intention of not taking the Bill to the Congress for a vote, the House of Representatives for a vote, until she's confident the numbers are there for a passage.
The passage of this measure is really important for stabilisation of US financial markets, which is really important for stabilisation of global financial markets, which is really important for unfreezing credit worldwide.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, we've made our case with the Administration and with the Congress in the United States. I've also been on the phone to friends and allies with the United States, the British Prime Minister on a couple of occasions and the Prime Minister of Japan yesterday before speaking directly with the House leadership.
We have made every argument possible, it's now down to the vote. In Australia itself though, I'll say this. We, throughout the course of this year, the Government, the Treasurer and myself, have been working actively to ensure sufficient liquidity in the Australian economy through the interventions by the Reserve Bank.
Secondly, assisting further on that with the measures the Treasurer announced recently, the Australian Office of Financial Management. And thirdly, increasing the Australian bond market by the measure we announced to increase the available funds by $25 billion into that.
These are practical measures we've implemented during the course of the year, together with the Reserve Bank's continued action on the liquidity front.
Australia is well positioned. A strong balance sheet, strong regulation, a strong Budget surplus.
These are three qualities which we have in Australia which are not evident in many other countries which are currently being buffeted.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, the importance in Australia is for us to be clear sighted about the difference between US financial institutions and those in Australia.
Can I make this point  -  of the 20 AA rated banks around the world, Australia's four major banks are among those 20. And that's really important. It's really important in terms of the future of credit arrangements worldwide because when credit unfreezes  -  and that's why the passage of this package before the United States Congress is so important  -  then lenders will look at credit ratings of major banks around the world. Which is why it is important to ensure that our banks remain in first class reputational order and our major banks which represent 85 per cent of the banking system are so important in that respect. We're different to the United States, obviously we're not immune from what's happening in the United States.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Infrastructure Australia, which has been set up under legislation, will go through the infrastructure audit. It's not just of capital cities, it's for the regions of Australia as well. And secondly, provide recommendations on an infrastructure priority list for the nation.
Obviously, we can't meet every expectation  -  that's just being honest about it. But we are going to, as rationally as possible through the advice we receive through Infrastructure Australia, put together that priority list. And that will mean dealing with regional challenges, not just those of the capital cities.
But can I add this.
National high-speed broadband, the infrastructure of the 21st century, the core part of it, goes everywhere. And those most disadvantaged now through non-investment in the past are those in regional and rural Australia.
JOURNALIST: On footy, the Grand Final's on this weekend. You're going?
PM: Yep, I'll be there.
JOURNALIST: Now, you're obviously a proud Queenslander, you're patron of the Broncos. Who should we hate more  -  Melbourne or Manly?
PM: Let me rephrase the question. Who will I be supporting? Let's put it in a positive frame of mind.
I'll be supporting the Storm. And the reason is the Storm wouldn't exist if it was not for Queensland, in players, that is.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: My answer to your question is ‘I didn't do it'
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I think in terms of dress standards about two. In terms of demeanour and attitude, positive attitude, five and a half. Quality of tea itself, right up there with a seven or eight.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Thanks to B105 for the catering today. It was good. Although I haven't had any yet. It's spectacular. But like most spectacular cakes they're often best looked at rather than consumed.
Okay guys, I better run.


PM: A few comments on what has happened with the passage of the measure through the United States Congress. 
This is a positive step forward in restoring stability to the global banking system. But there is still much, much more work to be done. And the stability of the banking system is important to all working families everywhere.
I spoke this morning to Roy Blunt, the Republican Whip, to thank him for his efforts in putting together numbers on the Republican side. And I had spoken earlier with Steny Hoyer, the Democratic Party Majority Leader to encourage him to put votes together on his side.
And can I say this on behalf of the Australian Government, we express our appreciation to the leadership from the US Administration, the Democrats and the Republicans, in putting aside these differences.
And I say again, this is a positive step forward in restoring stability of the global banking system, but there is much, much more work to be done.
Stability in the banking system is of fundamental importance to all working families everywhere.
Obviously the global financial crisis is having an effect on the global economy and we know that, we can see that in the real economy unfolding, both in growth and employment. And that's why the Australian Government has decided to bring forward its nation building program. Because we take seriously our responsibility to provide leadership at a time, of great global financial and economic crisis.
Can I just conclude by making these remarks. This has been a tough exercise for the United States. But beyond that, we now face a challenge of bringing about globally consistent financial regulations on transparency, on prudential standards, and on corporate governance in the financial sector.
This is very important in restoring stability to the global banking system and financial system long term. Also, important in restoring confidence to the banking system as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: If the report is accurate, I'm disgusted by it. If the report is accurate I'm disgusted by it. I think parents would be revolted and horrified if this were true.
JOURNALIST: Can the Australian Government to more to help the family of Britt Lapthorne?
PM: Look, on this, the Australian Government, through its authorities, has been dealing with the local authorities since they were first notified of this matter.
The Foreign Minister has been in contact with his counterpart, who has promised to provide every assistance.
The President of the Australian Senate met recently with the President, and the Government has indicated that they will provide every support to Australia. Beyond that we've also dispatched representatives of the Australian Federal Police.
I understand how hard this is for any family who has had one of their loved ones go missing. We take every case seriously because it could be our kids any day. I say this also, at any one time there are one million Australians off-shore. One million Australians off-shore. And our job is to do whatever we can to help families who find themselves in these horrible circumstances.
So we will leave no stone unturned, through the Federal Police, through our diplomats, through our consular officials, through our political contact with the Government, to do whatever we can do, to assist in this really, hard and difficult manner.


PM: Today's RBA decision comes at a crucial time in the Australian economy. In the midst of a global financial crisis, which has already seen some 25 banks around the world either fail or be bailed out, and at a time when the global financial crisis is also having a real impact on economic activity around the world.
But here in Australia, we have strong financial institutions, we have a strong Budget surplus when many Governments around the world are in deficit.
And we also continue to generate positive economic growth when most major economies in the world are generating negative economic growth.
Nonetheless, the global financial crisis has an impact on Australia as well. The Government welcomes the decisive action by the Reserve Bank of Australia, just as the Government itself has indicated its preparedness to take decisive action through the bring-forward of its $76 billion nation building agenda.
The Government welcomes the relief that the Reserve Bank of Australia's decision will provide to working families and to Australian small businesses. At a time like this, any responsible Australian political leader will welcome this decisive action by the Reserve Bank of Australia, providing maximum relief to Australian working families and to small business and maintaining the stability of the Australian financial system.
The stability of the Australian financial system remains the cornerstone of this Government's economic policy. This is particularly underlined at this time of global financial crisis. The Government has set a strong economic policy direction for the future to see the Australian economy through the difficult times which lie ahead. This will require tough action, tough decisions and some of those decisions will not be popular. This Government remains determined to take those decisions.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. This decision is welcome. This decisive action will strengthen our economy. It will provide relief to families and to small business. And from that perspective, it underscores the underlying strength of our economy that we have more room to move than just about any country in the world when we are responding to these adverse global events. It's a very welcome decision and it will most certainly strengthen our economy.
PM:Over to you folks.
TREASURER: Was the full one per cent a shock to you Prime Minister?
PM:We welcome this decisive action by the Reserve Bank, and as I've indicated already, the Government itself has already demonstrated its preparedness to take decisive action by bringing forward a $76 billion nation-building agenda. These are unusual times for the global economy, brought about by the extraordinary events in global financial markets.
JOURNALIST: But were you surprised (inaudible) one per cent is huge?
PM:We are dealing with extraordinary economic times, extraordinary circumstances in global financial markets when some 25 banks around the world have either failed or had to have been bailed out. As a consequence, we, in this country are conscious of the need to continue to take decisive economic policy action. The Reserve Bank has done so today in relation to monetary policy. The Government has already demonstrated its preparedness to do so in terms of bringing forward the nation-building agenda. As I said before, tough decisions lie ahead and we intend to take them.
JOURNALIST: What are some of those tough decisions?
PM:Well, as we've already indicated, the cornerstone of the Government's policy is to ensure the continued stability of the Australian financial system and that's caused us to make some unpopular statements in recent times.
We stand by that because what we have been concerned about first and foremost is the continued stability of the Australian financial system. And let me add this: the stability of Australia's banks is a real, continued issue for working families, for small businesses, for everybody and that's why every responsible politician and political leader should welcome this decisive action and should have as the cornerstone of their concerns relief for those who are borrowing money, but the continued stability of the financial system as well.
JOURNALIST: What's your message to the banks (inaudible)?
PM:Our position has not changed, and that is, we believe that given the pressures which borrowers face there should be absolute maximum pass-through to working families and to small businesses. And the reason is, we want to make sure that those who are currently borrowers get relief but at the same time maintaining the stability of the Australian banking system.
I repeat again. Look around the world, look at what's happened in recent times. More than 25 banks which have either failed or had to have been bailed out. The cornerstone of our system is the continued stability of the Australian banking system. We remain determined to underpin that through the actions the Government takes, and all political leaders should exercise responsibility in making statements relevant to that objective.
JOURNALIST: What does maximum mean though? Does that mean the full one per cent?
TREASURER: Could I just add to that. The Government expects that the banks will pass on in full official rate cuts when conditions normalise. That is our bottom line. When conditions normalise, we do expect that the banks will pass on in full official rate cuts.
JOURNALIST: Has the sombre economic outlook put the inflation genie back in the bottle?
TREASURER: Well, I think the Reserve Bank has spoken about its view on the course of inflation over the years ahead, and it's good to see that they do expect it to come down in the years ahead. But the most important thing from the Government's perspective is through fiscal policy to further strengthen our economy. To further ensure that the investment the Prime Minister was talking about before takes place so that we can continue to grow in a low inflationary environment.
JOURNALIST: How concerning is the plunge in the Australian dollar?
PM:Well we are in the midst of a global economy and there are a lot of factors at work at the moment in the global financial markets and as we have said repeatedly all year Australia is not immune. The actions however that we take occur in the context of Australia being in robust economic and public finance and when it comes to the banks private finance, compared with any other country or economy around the world.
Let me just go back to for example our budget circumstances, you look across the major economies of the world at the moment. Practically none of them are currently able to boast a budget surplus. Why is that important? It provides you with a buffer to take necessary actions in the future given the uncertainties that lie ahead. Look at the rest of the major economies in terms of their ability to generate positive economic growth.
Most of the major economies are generating negative economic growth. Australia, particularly when you look at its financial institutions and particularly when you look at the state of their balance sheets and how well they are regulated is in first class operating order given the extraordinary stresses and pressures which are available and presenting themselves across the global economy.
JOURNALIST: What is your message to the banks though? (inaudible) maximum and Treasury says when conditions normalise  -  what are you expecting the banks today to pass on?
PM:Well maximum pass through is the Government's continued position. Secondly, as the Treasurer has just indicated as global financial markets stabilise over time that there will be full pass through, that is the responsible course of action here because the cornerstone is this, maintaining the stability of the Australian financial system at a time when more than 25 banks around the world have either failed or have had to be bailed out and that is a bottom line concern for every working family and every small business in this country. And it is a responsibility which the Treasurer and I take seriously and are not going to subject to casual opportunist, political comment.
Anything else?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Why won't you guarantee all banking deposits?
PM:Because the Australian banking system is in first class working order the arrangements which have prevailed for a long period of time remain adequate. Furthermore based on the recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum which Australia has actively participated in for a long time we are bringing forward a financial claims scheme, that is the right course of action. That will be introduced through the Parliament before the end of the year and that has been already circulated by the Treasurer out to the corporate community. The bottom line is this though our banks are in first class working order.
The major banks represent 85% of the banking system in the country, their balance sheets are in first class working order. We have the best regulatory system in the world. Therefore we believe we have robust financial institutions going forward and it is important to be absolutely clear cut about the difference which exists between our major financial institutions and those which are currently under stress in practically every other economy around the world.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) pass on a full one per cent cut?
PM:The challenge for the future is to ensure that given as you would see from the statement put out by the Reserve Bank today, that interbank lending will be tight for a period to come, that we must not look just at the current slice of time but look ahead as well. 3 month out, 6 months out, 9 months out.
Our responsibility we take seriously which is the underlying stability of the Australian financial system now and into the future. And that is why the prudent course of action is to take the advice of Australia's financial regulators which the Government has done, underpinning the statements it's made so far. We will not engage in populist politics on these sorts of questions. We will do that which is absolutelyright and responsible to underpin the long term stability of the Australian banking system. That is what working families, pensioners, carers, small businesses would expect of any Government of Australia, including this one.
TREASURER: Can I just say it is reckless behaviour to pretend that the funding costs of banks have not gone through the roof in recent times. Absolutely reckless behaviour to pretend that those funding costs have not gone through the roof.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, what are the pre conditions for stability in the credit market?
TREASURER: Well first of all we have got to see conditions stabilise globally. That is why the package in the United States was so important. Here domestically our Reserve Bank has been very active, very active in insuring that there is sufficient liquidity in the system, which has been the subject of increased costs. That is one of the problems that we have had. The Reserve Bank has been attending to it by putting liquidity into the system and is continuing to do so.
PM:If you look into the future, two other factors remain completely relevant to your question. One is the wash through impact of the $700 billion package adopted most recently by the United States Congress. That is factor number one.
Factor number two is the agreement across the major economies of the world of the long term regulatory system across financial systems. The Treasurer soon will be departing to Washington for a meeting with the International Monetary Fund on this very question.
That is what will be the future rules on transparency, the future rules on capital adequacy, the future rules on prudential standards and whether all of the above, including corporate governance and reward structures for executives in financial institutions, and whether all those above will be consistent across the financial institutions of the major economies of the world.
So part of restoring global confidence to the equation is the wash through of the American package, part of it is also making sure we have a consistent, strong, transparent, regulatory system, the financial system for the future. And that is certainly on the Treasurer's agenda when he attends the IMF board of governors meeting in Washington presently.


The Rudd Government today announced the guidelines that Infrastructure Australia will use to select projects for the nation's Infrastructure Priority List.
The guidelines outline the evidence-based approach that will be taken to select the transport, water, energy and communication projects that Australia needs.
All proposals will be assessed against their ability to:
     * lift national productivity
     * strengthen Australia's international competitiveness
     * develop our cities and regions
     * reduce greenhouse gas emissions
     * And improve the quality of life of Australians.
In developing the assessment guidelines, Sir Rod Eddington and his team have drawn on national and international experience.
Today's announcement provides the community with an insight into how Infrastructure Australia is going about its immediate task of developing a list of projects essential to securing the nation's long term prosperity.
An interim report on the Infrastructure Priority List will be completed by the end of 2008 and will aim to guide investments from the private and public sectors, including allocations from the $20 billion Building Australia Fund.
The Rudd Labor Government is reforming the way Australia plans, finances and builds infrastructure.
Through a combination of national leadership, long term planning and genuine community engagement, we will reverse the decades of underinvestment in the nation's critical economic infrastructure.
For more information see http://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/


The events of the last few weeks have had a profound effect on the global economy.
We have seen more than 25 banks fail or need to be bailed out around the world.
We have seen an unprecedented financial sector rescue package in the US of almost $1 trillion.
We have seen reverberations across Europe.
We in Australia are not immune from these global developments of epic proportions.
These developments will affect growth.
They will affect employment.
They will affect government revenues.
But the Australian Government has set a policy course to see Australia through the current crisis.
The cornerstone of this strategy is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system  -  critical for the national economy, and critical for the household economy.
This will require tough decisions.
Some of which will be unpopular.
All of which however are necessary.
Necessary to maintain the stability of our financial system.
Another cornerstone of the Government's economic strategy is nation-building to secure our future.
Today's conference provides a unique opportunity to bring together the nation-building commitment of governments and the nation-building expertise of the private sector.
An opportunity for us to work together to help shape the future of our nation's infrastructure.
This is an historic task.
In our vast nation, infrastructure has always been fundamental to our national development.
From the building of the railways in the 19th century, to vast projects like the Snowy Mountains hydro scheme in the middle of the twentieth century, to the building of the urban infrastructure that made possible the growth of our cities in the 1970s  -  visionary nation-building plans have long been fundamental to Australia's economic growth and development.
The Government I lead is committed to renewing this vision for nation-building in the 21st century  -  and that is why today's summit is important.
In this room we have leaders in infrastructure ranging across planning, construction, finance and project management.
We have policy leadership.
We have business leadership.
We have academic leadership.
And we have the representatives of all levels of government.
The Government I lead is committed to an ambitious nation-building agenda.
That doesn't mean lifting our infrastructure investment by just a few percentage points.
It means delivering a transformational vision for the infrastructure of the 21st century.
Today's conference is about taking the next steps in transforming our national investment in infrastructure.
The conference will deal with the needs of individual sectors:
     * urban transport and design;
     * freight transport;
     * water;
     * energy; and
     * information and communications technology.
The conference will also deal with the functional challenges that cut across all infrastructure sectors:
     * Skills shortages;
     * Finance;
     * Institutional reform; and
     * Demand management policies.
Put simply, as a nation we can no longer afford to waste time  -  we must get our infrastructure decisions right.
Australian economic conditions
The Australian Government is committed to steering Australia through tough global economic times to ensure our economy emerges in strong shape.
While we face tough times, Australia is in a better shape to weather this storm than most other nations:
     * Our major financial institutions are well capitalised and profitable.
     * Our regulatory framework is world class.
     * Sub-prime mortgage loans account for only 1 per cent of the mortgage market compared to around 15 per cent in the US.
     * Our economy continues to grow, although slower than forecast in the Budget) while nearly all G7 economies are now experiencing negative growth.
     * Our budget surplus is strong while once again nearly all other major economies are in significant budget deficit.
     * Australian businesses are planning for a record $100 billion of capital expenditure for 2008-09.
     * Our export revenues are growing strongly. 
The Government's economic strategy embraces:
     * a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future and to be used to meet the challenges of the future;
     * a comprehensive strategy of microeconomic reform to boost long-term productivity growth; and
     * a $76 billion nation-building plan for the future  -  to also help create jobs for the future. 
The Australian Government is committed to responsible economic management, with a strong Budget surplus as a buffer for the future.
We achieved that surplus by reprioritising spending and cutting back on waste, implementing a total of $33 billion of savings over a four year period.
As a share of GDP, we reduced spending to its lowest level since 1989, while revenue as a share of GDP fell to its lowest level in a decade.
Second, the Government has also begun to embark upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has seen since the early 1990s, to lift the nation's productivity growth.
In recent years productivity growth has declined sharply  -  from average annual growth of 3.3 per cent during the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, to just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
The productivity slowdown reflects the long-term neglect of investing in the drivers of productivity  -  in particular the skills of our workforce.
The Government is committed to ending that neglect.
Because we know that in the long term, it is productivity growth more than any other factor that will deliver better living standards for Australians.
Over the last 40 years, productivity growth has accounted for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in the living standards of Australians. 
The Government is committed to building long-term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for future productivity growth  -  education, infrastructure, innovation, business deregulation and taxation reform.
We are progressing strongly on each of those fronts  -  through the education revolution; the 27 items on the COAG business deregulation program; the Henry Review of the taxation and welfare systems; and the recently-completed review of Australia's national innovation system.
The third pillar of the Government's economic strategy is our nation-building plan for the future.
The Government is committed to implementing the single largest infrastructure program in the history of the Commonwealth.
The Government agreed with the States and Territories at the Council of Australian Governments meeting in Perth last week, we are now bringing forward our long-term nation-building agenda.
In our first year in Government, we have committed to a $76 billion infrastructure investment program, allocating funds for road, rail, ports and high speed broadband.
We will invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
We will invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport and communication priorities.
And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
We will also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, trades training centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
We will invest $11 billion health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we are building the foundations of the nation's future prosperity.
However, the Commonwealth will not be able to meet the nation's infrastructure needs alone.
State governments, their corporations, and the private sector also have critical roles to play.
In 2008-09 alone, the Queensland will spend $17 billion; NSW Government will spend $14 billion; Western Australia $8 billion and Victoria $4 billion.
According to ABN Amro, investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be $380 billion  -  including $255 on economic infrastructure and $125 billion on social infrastructure.
In addition to the Commonwealth's financial commitment to infrastructure investment, we have established for the first time in Australian history a comprehensive policy framework for national infrastructure development.
Earlier this year we established Infrastructure Australia, the independent statutory council headed by Sir Rod Eddington that will spearhead our infrastructure reforms, making recommendations to government on both policy and specific projects.
The Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Anthony Albanese has also begun work to reform specific sectors of national infrastructure, including through national heavy vehicle regulations - and improved rail and maritime safety regulations.
Infrastructure policy is a national priority for this Government because infrastructure constraints have been holding back our economy for too long.
Infrastructure constraints are a drag on economic growth, they hold back productivity, they add to inflationary pressures, and they are part of the reason we saw ten consecutive interest rate rises under the previous Government.
Infrastructure bottlenecks will tighten in coming years unless we invest now.
By 2020 our population is expected to grow to 25 million.
By 2020 our economy is expected to grow to $1.4 trillion.
With more people and a larger economy we will face greater pressures on our roads, our rail and our port infrastructure; more pressures on our electricity network and water supplies; and more pressure on our telecommunications networks.
By 2020, the Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport, and Regional Economics estimates that without action, the cost of urban congestion will soar to $20 billion.
That is a national traffic jam of truly national proportions.
The same is true for freight  -  a 90 per cent increase in urban light commercial vehicle traffic in the 15 years to 2020.
The same is true for energy  -  the National Energy Market Management Company estimated in 2007 that we will require 1,185 megawatts in additional generation capacity by 2010-11 alone, and as much as 7,000 megawatts by 2016-17.
According to Infrastructure Partnerships Australia, the need to lower carbon emissions alone is going to require an additional investment in infrastructure in the order of $120 billion across freight, passenger transport and energy infrastructure  -  including carbon capture and storage and renewable energy investments.
The growth in demand for information and communications technology infrastructure is likely to be even more rapid.
Every time new Internet applications develop, such as YouTube, Facebook, or Secondlife, extra gigabits of traffic are added to the nation's broadband network.
Our broadband investment is critical given the state of our broadband infrastructure.
According to Washington-based independent think tank, the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, Australia's broadband infrastructure lags behind 26 other countries including Korea, Finland and Slovak Republic.
The growing demands for infrastructure demand a vision for building 21st century road, rail and public transport networks; 21st century energy and water infrastructure, and 21st century high-speed broadband.
This investment in 21st century infrastructure is critical for our long-term economic future.
In the long-term, this will underpin productivity, competitiveness, exports and prosperity.
And it will help drive economic growth in times of global uncertainty.
The cost to the economy of inadequate infrastructure will rise if we do not act now.
According to CEDA, if we can remove infrastructure bottlenecks we can lift our economic performance.
We could potentially raise Australia's GDP by 0.8 percent per year.
We could increase exports by 1.8 per cent, increase business investment by 1.2 per cent, and lower the consumer price index by 3.2 per cent.
While economic and population growth will add to our infrastructure challenges in the future  -  we are starting from behind after more than a decade of infrastructure policy neglect under the former government:
     * Inadequate infrastructure investment;
     * Poor infrastructure planning;
     * And no infrastructure vision for the future.
But now is not the time to catalogue past mistakes in infrastructure policy.
Now is the time to act  -  to get infrastructure policy right.
It is time for the Commonwealth, States, Territories and infrastructure companies to roll up our sleeves and get on with the job of nation-building.
     * We must undertake institutional reform.
     * We must create a stable ‘national infrastructure pipe' for public and private investment.
     * We must change intergovernmental arrangements to make sure there are nationally consistent PPP guidelines.
     * We must resolve legislative overlays between Federal, State and local Government regulations.
     * We must ensure effective principles for third-party access regimes.
     * We must encourage private sector investment on the back of a major increase in public investment in the national infrastructure investment.
     * We must improve our financing strategy across the infrastructure lifecycle  -  from design and delivery to maintenance and renewal.
We must attract the best skilled labour to support our infrastructure needs.
We must address skill shortages across all stages of infrastructure development  -  design, planning, provision, construction, administration, and maintenance and renewal.
This is especially true for engineers  -  according to Engineers Australia, migrants account for more than half of the growth of new entrants to the Australian engineering profession each year.
It is expected that by 2011, 70,000 engineers will have retired but only 45,000 new graduates will have been trained.
We must also address the challenges facing individual infrastructure sectors.
We must encourage investment in energy generation capacity  -  traditional and renewable  -  in an era of carbon trading.
In water infrastructure, we will have to boost investment and improve the operation of pricing and ownership systems to ensure sustainable water use in our cities and towns.
In communications, we have to build a National Broadband Network and take ICT investment in this country to the next level.
We will need more ICT workers and have to overcome the ‘application gap' in education, health, digital commerce and entertainment  -  because we need investment in the software to match the investment in the hardware.
And, of course, in transport infrastructure policy, we also face big challenges.
One of the biggest challenges will be deciding which projects get funded now, and which ones have to wait.
The tens of billions of investment dollars we need for transport projects will simply not flow overnight.
Infrastructure Partnerships Australia recently collated a list of passenger transport projects that our major cities will need over the next 10 to 20 years.
The cost of just 17 projects was $33 billion.
Priority rail freight projects cost $13 billion.
Road project proposals that have come forward carry a price tag of $43 billion.
Tackling these challenges will require strong partnerships between the Commonwealth, the States and the business community.
I am a strong believer in PPPs because they mean the Government can ensure value for money for the taxpayer through a public interest test, while bringing specialist expertise and innovation from the private sector.
Good PPPs can deliver value for money through optimal risk transfer, management synergies, and integrated whole-of-life asset management.
They can also free up public resources to focus on other core services of government.
ABN Amro forecast recently that some $80 billion of investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be undertaken through public private partnerships.
It is because of the important role that PPPs will play in Australia's infrastructure future that the Council of Australian Governments last week endorsed the Report on the National PPP Guidelines developed by Infrastructure Australia.
This is an example of what cooperative federalism can achieve.
To put this into perspective, for the first time jurisdictions have come to the table willing to work together to change something as fundamental as how they invest their infrastructure dollars for the benefit of the nation. 
The development of nationally consistent PPP guidelines were the first reform priority we set for Infrastructure Australia back in March.
The National PPP Guidelines Report brings together material from different jurisdictions and provides an agreed, unified national framework for the delivery of PPP projects.
It covers the key phases in the delivery of PPPs, how to achieve optimal risk allocation, and how to measure the value for money from a PPP project against traditional public sector procurement.
Infrastructure Australia has delivered on its first task  -  on time; on target.
This reform is also about changing the culture.
Because many government departments and agencies are still using the same procurement models they have had for decades.
It is not sound infrastructure policy to have a framework that leaves out PPPs.
Nor are guidelines of much use if they are not implemented by jurisdictions.
That is why, Infrastructure Australia, with COAG's endorsement, has committed to developing detailed national PPP model for agreement at the November COAG meeting.
The comprehensive PPP package will include a Practitioner's Guide, Risk Allocation and Standard Commercial Principles, Public Sector Comparator Guidance and Discount Rate Methodology Guidance.
In developing this package, Infrastructure Australia has shown the initiative to get the best policy and practical outcomes.
It demonstrates the benefit of having an independent statutory organisation such as Infrastructure Australia and the benefit of having both the public and private sectors at the table.
Infrastructure Australia is also conducting an audit of the nation's existing infrastructure.
This will be concluded by the year's end.
The next task will be to produce an Infrastructure Priority List.
The Commonwealth has also decided to bring forward an interim report on the above in order to accelerate the Government's nation-building agenda.
The National Infrastructure Priority List will be crucial to Australia's prosperity because it will identify our priorities for years into the future.
It will be the basis of determining funding allocations from the Building Australia Fund.
While no one but an elected Government can decide how to invest $20 billion of taxpayer funds, it must receive strong and independent recommendations.
To assist this, today I am pleased to announce today the next step for Infrastructure Australia's role in delivering our nation-building agenda - the National Prioritisation Methodology that will be used to assess relative need.
These guidelines outline the methodology that Infrastructure Australia will be applying to assess the infrastructure proposals it receives.
These guidelines ensure the National Infrastructure Priority List is backed up by a truly transparent process.
I believe that all interested parties  -  infrastructure companies, state and local governments and the wider community  -  should have a clear understanding of how Infrastructure Australia will determine its recommendations to government.
Key assessment criteria will include:
     * How does a project expand Australia's productivity capacity?
     * How does it build Australia's global competitive advantages?
     * How does it develop our cities or our regions?
     * How does it reduce greenhouse gas emissions?
     * How does it improve our quality of life?
Infrastructure Australia will then apply a tough, clear-eyed assessment of the intrinsic value of each project.
In short it will ask: “does it stack up?”
There must be a serious cost-benefit analysis that for the first time will monetise economic, social and environmental costs and benefits.
And in the case where costs and benefits can't be accurately monetised, these factors will be rated for the purpose of fair comparison.
Appraisals will typically have to be assessed over a thirty year timeframe.
Infrastructure Australia will also ask: what are the costs  -  the capital costs, the operating costs and the maintenance costs?
Serious ‘sensitivity tests' of the cost-benefit ratio under different circumstances add to the robustness of this appraisal methodology and will give certainty to the government's decision making:
     * What if materials cost continue to rise?
     * What if there are construction delays?
     * What if demand for the infrastructure doesn't meet expectations?
Proponents will not be able to overstate benefits and understate costs as has sometimes been the case in the past.
It is critically important that our infrastructure decisions are based on objective analysis of projects and needs.
Policy integrity is critical to good decision making.
This is the analytical rigour needed for modern nation-building.
Finally, Infrastructure Australia will use this information to compare many different projects, measures and solutions.
On this basis, it will recommend to Government which projects are the top priorities, and which projects might either belong further down the track or simply might not stack up at all.
There's no doubt that the tasks involved in shaping our nation-building agenda are very substantial.
That is why we have established Infrastructure Australia - to bring transparency, rigour and integrity to the task of infrastructure prioritisation that was sorely missed over the last decade.
It's why we are undertaking such a comprehensive analysis of Australia's infrastructure needs.
And it's why we have brought this conference together today.
The nation-building agenda for Australia's 21st century is about government taking leadership responsibility for addressing Australia's long-term future needs.
It's ultimately about more than just roads, bridges, ports, airports, energy networks, communications networks, training centres and so forth.
It's about a vision for Australia to achieve its full economic potential.
A vision for laying foundations for the prosperity and security of the generation that will come after ours.
A vision to which the Government I lead is resolutely committed.


SANDY: Good morning Mr Rudd. 
PM: Good morning Sandy, thanks for having me on the program.
SANDY: You must be very pleased with that news yesterday?
PM: Well we're in the middle of tough economic times globally, and around the world and in the middle of this global financial crisis we've had more than 25 banks either fail or have to be bailed out. Therefore, we believe it's important to get the balance right between maintaining the stability of the Australian financial system and providing maximum help to working families under financial pressure, and that's what we've been seeking to do through our approach to economic policy at a tough time.
MIKE: Were you pleasantly surprised by the size of the cut. One per cent's big?
PM: This was decisive action by the Reserve Bank, decisive action to help families, but decisive action also, which we believe is consistent with the global economic outlook we face. The Government itself, Mike also remains committed and has indicated its willingness to take decisive action itself by bringing forward our agenda for nation building across Australia through our Building Australia fund and getting on with major projects across Australia. You see...
MIKE: Can we ask you about the infrastructure thing in a minute, I'd very much like to come to that. Just on the interest rate cut there for a bit, Malcolm Turnbull is saying the banks should pass on the full one per cent cut, and you're not pushing for that - why not?
PM: Well my first responsibility as Prime Minister and that of the Treasurer as well is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and that means taking a very clear-sighted look at what's happening around the world with the liquidity of the banking system. As I said before, if you've got 25 banks or more now that have either failed or have had to be bailed out, my first responsibility is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial and banking system. Now that means that has direct impact on families, it has direct impact on small businesses to make sure that our banks are in tip-top working order. That's been our number one responsibility. Also, within that framework, to make sure that we've got maximum support for working families through the high mortgages which they've been paying up until now. It's getting this balance right and taking your responsibility seriously, rather than just engaging in populist politics.
SANDY: Prime Minister, everyone's focussed on the United States and Europe, but Australia is now heavily dependent on the Chinese economic boom. Well what's the outlook there?
PM: Well, I was talking to the Chinese Prime Minister a couple of nights ago about this very question, and that is, what China plans to do in the period ahead. (inaudible) see China's own growth projections down slightly but that's down from something like 11 and 12 per cent, down to nine and 10 per cent. China has a huge impact on the economies of the east Asia region as well as now the global economy. My understanding is that China will continue to drive strong economic growth for its own national purposes, but that's also good for countries like Australia because China is such a major trading partner of ours.
MIKE: So do you reckon our commodity prices, you know, coal and so on, will hold up?
PM: I can't give you a price-by-price response to that Mike, and obviously commodity prices are being affected by what is now the global economic climate, where you've got so many economies in Europe who are already experiencing negative economic growth and lots of commentary around the place at present about the current state of the American economy. China is the third big factor in this, together with Japan in our own region. China, however, continues to generate strong economic growth and part of the long-term strategy of this Government, and the strategy for the period immediately ahead is how to more deeply and broadly engage with the Chinese economy, which is now critical for Australia's continued economic performance.
SANDY: So for Australians waking up this morning and thinking about our economic outlook, what can we expect - a recession, a contraction, a soft landing?
PM: We believe, and our understanding from everything that we've analysed internally is that the Government's current policy course of action will see Australia through these difficult economic times. It's going to be tough, there'll be bumps along the road, and some hard decisions will have to be made. Some of them won't be popular, but we believe the policy course of action we've set for the nation will see the economy through. I've got to say, that if you look at the underlying strengths, which is against what's happening in Europe right now, where you've got most major economies generating negative economic growth, Australia continues to generate positive economic growth. On the question of Budget, Australia has a substantial Budget surplus as a consequence of Wayne Swan's Budget back in May. If you look around Europe they don't have that buffer of flexibility for the future because most of those economies are running significant Budget deficits already.
And also the strength of our future business investment outlook, this causes us to be confident about the Government's current policy economic directions.
HOST: You mentioned the infrastructure projects earlier. I suppose they are designed to keep our economy pumping as well are they?
PM: Well there are two parts of policy here. One you saw from the Reserve Bank in its decisive action yesterday which helps working families and which is also designed to maintain the stability of the financial system, but the Government itself as I was saying before to Mike, is also committed to taking decisive action on its own part, as we have already indicated by bringing forward our nation building agenda. And the nation building agenda through our $20 billion building Australia fund is designed to get in there and support major infrastructure projects for the country.
HOST: Have you got specific projects in mind or are you waiting to see what comes up from the States?
PM: Well what we did at the beginning of the year was we established Infrastructure Australia. That is the first time any such body has been created nation wide, chaired by Sir Rod Eddington. Right now they are finalising the lists of infrastructure requirements put to them both by State and Territory Governments and by others across the country and they will determine based on that an audit for the current state of the nation's infrastructure stock and a priority list for getting on with the job. We are doing it in a systematic, thorough fashion and we have indicated that that body Infrastructure Australia will bring forward an interim report by year's end that we will get on with the business of rolling up our sleeves and funding these projects.
HOST: I think Prime Minister you will have a cue a mile long of Sydney-siders outside your office saying please put some money into our roads and our public transport and our trains. Is that on the cards?
PM: Well nationwide one of the criteria that we are applying to Infrastructure Australia's assessment is what can government credibly do to reduce urban congestion. Certainly when I've looked around the huge cities in Australia  -  Sydney, Melbourne and also in Brissie  -  there is a real problem in terms of urban congestion.
So, the practical challenge is how do we deal with it.
One of the things that stunned me over the years is how is it we got to the beginning of the 21st century without any of our three major east coast cities with a coherent plan, let alone the reality, of an expense urban metro system.
Now, we've got to see what the independent advice is from Infrastructure Australia, they're working on it, but urban congestion is critical. Good for the economy, good for commuters, and I believe also, good for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
MIKE: Well there's a hint.
There have been reports here in the Sydney papers, I'm sure you've seen them, that you're not going to fund, or not keen on funding, the north-west light rail system in Sydney, allegedly because it won't bring you any votes. True or false?
PM: That is, can I say, comprehensively false.
First of all, we have an independent decision making process to decide these things, which is what Dr Rod Eddington's body, Infrastructure Australia, is currently working its way through.
Secondly, it's a matter for State Governments what they put forward to Infrastructure Australia. They can put forward anything they so choose. The decisions will be taken by Infrastructure Australia in terms of the recommendations they bring forward to the Federal Government.
We're up for all well thought through, well documented proposals.
SANDY: Prime Minister, can I ask you, changing tack here, pensioners still hoping that I think you'll have a Christmas present for them. Will you?
PM: Well, we've said before that in the Budget we have brought forward some $5 billion worth of additional payments for pensioners. And that's provided the equivalent of something like $15 to $20 extra per week, if you put all the elements of those additional payments together.
But I've always said, this is simply a down payment on the future. We've got to get the long term reform of the pension system right. Every $10 a week that we would increase the pension by in the future results in an extra $2 billion to the Budget bottom line in one year - $8 billion across the forward estimates. And if you take it up to $20, that's $4 billion a year, you take it out to $30, that's $6 billion a year.
We've got to make sure we get this absolutely right because it goes into the Budget bottom line for the future at a time of great economic challenge for Australia. But I've always said, the Government is committed to reforming the pension system. And we will do it.
MIKE: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time, it's good to talk to you always.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program. 


MOORE: Prime Minister, good morning. 
PM: Good morning, Ali.
MOORE: It is the first time since we were in deep recession that we have got a reduction of that size, a lot of people are now thinking ‘gosh, it must be bad.'
PM: Well the global financial crisis, I think every one of your listeners has been watching and reading what has been going on around the world. The facts speak for themselves: in recent times you have had 25 banks around the world fail or having to be bailed out. It's serious and Australia is not immune from the impact of what's going on in the global economy and the global financial community. But the Australian economy continues to perform, continues to have strong prospects. Growth remains positive.
In most economies in Europe it's gone negative. We have a strong Budget surplus, most of the economies in Europe that are wrestling with this challenge at the present are already in Budget deficit territory by a big order of magnitude. And then on top of that, we have strong business investment growth into the future. I believe therefore, that there are strong rational grounds for Australians to remain optimistic about our future economic prospects.
MOORE: The Reserve Bank has warned, obviously, of a sharper than expected deterioration in conditions, that's what's led to this very large cut, but I wonder if you think it's going to be enough? It gave our market a bit of a boost yesterday but the SPI, the futures, are telling us the market's going to close down 5.7 per cent this morning. We're seeing Wall Street down massively again. Is this one per cent enough to give people the confidence you're saying they should have?
PM: Well, global financial markets are in a continued state of turmoil. We've seen the recent controversy in the United States over the non-passage of that $700 billion program, and then its much later passage by the Congress.
MOORE: And the market's been worse since it was passed, it's down 900 points in two days.
PM: And plainly, there are confidence questions alive across the United States as there are across Europe, but there are fundamental distinctions between the state of our major banks here in Australia and the state of major banks in the United States and in Europe. The balance sheets are strong. We have the best bank regulators in the world and because of that and because we have strong budget policy with a $22 billion surplus as a buffer for the future, we are best positioned of all economies in the world to see Australia through this global economic storm.
MOORE: Is 0.8% of the 1% that most of the big banks have passed on to mortgage holders. Is that equivalent to the maximum pass through that you were calling for?
PM: Ali, we have always said that we have a responsibility to maintain the stability of the financial system. I know others have gone out there and run a politically populist line, but my first responsibility as Prime Minister and Treasurer's responsibility is to maintain the stability of the Australian banking system. Therefore it has been important through this decisive action for the Reserve Bank for there to be maximum assistance to households and we have seen that through the decision by the commercial banks in terms of the 0.8 pass through.
But as the Treasurer said yesterday when financial markets stabilise we expect the banks also to pass through the rest over time. But this measure itself and I am sure your listeners have been listening to what it means, but if you are on an average Australian mortgage of something in the vicinity of $250 000 that means that this results in a monthly repayments reduction of $136. This is significant decisive action but the Government itself remains committed to decisive action for the future through bringing forward our nation building agenda which I spoke about the other day.
MOORE: Kevin Rudd you talked there obviously of being financially responsible, I suppose, in terms of the banks. But at the same times as you have been warning about their potential inability to pass on the full rate cut. Let's just take the Commonwealth Bank, they are expected today possibly to announce they purchased Bank West for $2 billion, and they're cutting deposit rates, which I would have thought goes well against the grain when they needed all the domestic funding they can get. Isn't there sort of a slight contradiction here. The banks have got billions to spend on purchases, (inaudible) cut their deposit rates, but we can't force them to pass on the full rate cut because they can't afford it?
PM: Ali, let's stand back from it all and almost go back to your first question about the intensity of the global financial crisis and how it's affecting banks around the world - 25 banks around the world either failing or having to be bailed out.
One of those, of course, in the United Kingdom has been HBOS, and one of its subsidiaries is BankWest  - 
MOORE: I understand all that, but I'm talking about, HBOS is not currently going out and spending $2 billion on a rival financial institution.
PM: But BankWest is part of the Australian financial system. And therefore, and I'm not going to comment on any market related matter here, but our responsibility as the Government, and more broadly across the Australian financial system, it is this: to maintain the stability of Australian banking system.
Therefore, if you've got a subsidiary, which is BankWest, which operates in Australia, a subsidiary to a British banking group which has found itself in difficulty, it is important to stabilise the system  - 
MOORE: So you're saying that they're not working for their own good? They're actually working to stabilise the system?
PM: Ali, what I'm trying to do is explain a very complex reality which is out there. You've got a global financial crisis which is knocking global banks over left, right and centre. My job, and sometimes it's going to be very unpopular, is to argue in defence of the stability of the Australian banking system. That means making sure we get these decisions right.
MOORE: Thank you very much for joining us this morning.
PM: Thanks, Ali.


O'BRIEN: Mr Rudd, we're seeing quite an incredible set of government interventions in just the past few days. The final stamp of Congress on the US bailout, Australia's big rate cut, the other central banks cutting over night, the massive British bailout. But absolutely nothing has stopped the slide of confidence for more than the blink of an eye. That must really worry you?
PM: Well, we're in the midst of a global financial crisis. And you're right Kerry, we've seen some 25 banks, or more than that now, either fail or have to be bailed out around the world and that's got a real roll-on effect to what's going on in the economy, globally and a wash-on effect here.
Our view is this: what are the essential needs? Liquidity in the global financial system, and that's why we've supported both the US and the UK measures, and they're very substantial measures. I was talking to Prime Minister Gordon Brown about his financial assistance package on the telephone this morning.
There's a second part to this equation, which hasn't been done yet, and that is to summon the global political will to agree on the changes to the regulations in the system. And the reason why that is necessary is it's the other half of the confidence equation. Fixing up liquidity now is one half, fixing up the rules for the future, that's the other half, and I don't believe... (inaudible)
O'BRIEN: Just on that point, with all respect, fixing up for the future is a long way from many people's minds right now. They are deeply concerned about the present and the immediate future. As everyone keeps saying...
PM: Can I just make one point, though, Kerry, is that confidence in the system now hangs off both those factors. It hangs off- is there enough liquidity in the system now...
O'BRIEN: But primarily, primarily about that liquidity. And the judgment of the market, day after day is, you guys, governments, George Bush, Gordon Brown, whoever, we don't really think you know what you're doing or we don't think you're doing enough. That is the market's judgment, right or wrong.
PM: Well, can I go to what the International Monetary Fund said today. It said that on this second half of the equation, getting the rules right, which is a core part of the confidence equation going forward, it's not that there's a great disagreement about what those rules should be, it's a lack of political will between governments to agree on them. That is why one of the significant things to happen in the last 24 hours is US Treasury Secretary Paulson's decision to convene a meeting of G20 finance ministers, including our Treasurer Wayne Swan, this weekend, and part of the mandate must be not just global liquidity requirements, but the fortified key changes which must be made to the rules, including transparency, capital adequacy, prudential standards, corporate governance, and for those to be consistent across major economies.
O'BRIEN: OK, well let's concede the point for the sake of the argument, but that's not going to stop right now Australian house prices going into a slide. If what we heard on this program was right last night, that our own housing prices in this country are at such unsustainable levels that the debt binge of this country's households is also unsustainable and the only way for them to go is down. Does that bother you?
PM: Well, Kerry, I believe in levelling with the Australian people. This is a very difficult time, it's a very difficult set of challenges. There's no point gilding the lily here. But equally it's important to say this: our responsibility as the Government is to provide tough, decisive action to keep the economy strong, relative to what's happening around the rest of the world, and secondly, to underpin and to maintain the stability of our banking and financial system.
These are two great strengths. Is that going to deliver us, problem-free, out of this virtually unprecedented global financial crisis? Well of course it's not. But is it going to deliver us in a stronger state, stronger condition, than would otherwise have been the case? You betcha. That's the decisive action to which we've committed and we're going to do it.
O'BRIEN: What message do you have for people who feel they're at the mercy of the markets? Stay calm? Don't panic? Don't rush to liquidate your assets?
PM: Kerry, I don't provide individual financial advice to individual investors or mortgage holders. That's the responsibility that's provided by financial advisory services to households around the country. My job is this: my job is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system, and you know something? When I see 25 banks collapse around the world, that is a very fundamental, and can I say, focussing challenge when you've had virtually a global credit strike in terms of inter-bank lending. This has taken much of the Government's time.
And the second is this: a set of policies which continue to generate in Australia positive economic growth when the world, the IMF tells us today, much of the world is heading into recession, at least the developed world.
O'BRIEN: You keep saying that Australian banks are the safest in the world, but doesn't the real vulnerability in Australia lie with those massive levels of household debt, with our own debt binge, and isn't that largely beyond the control of Government to protect those households that have extended way beyond their means if the global economy really turns nasty?
PM: My responsibility, in dealing with the challenges faced by households and the economy overall, is to continue to take the action necessary to grow the economy. That is the core challenge at present. That's why our $76 billion nation building agenda is critical as well. To continue to grow the economy is critical, because that way we can sustain continued growth in jobs in the future, and that's going to be very difficult, given what's happening around the world.
Nothing in this is easy Kerry, I'm not misleading anybody. But our job is to maintain that difference which exists between our conditions and those around the rest of the world, and to do what is necessary to achieve that, and that's the Government's resolve.
O'BRIEN: Economist Steven Keen pointed out on this program last night that America's private debt levels are way beyond what they were going into and during the '29 Great Depression, and so are Australia's. That must worry you?
PM: Well, personal consumer credit and personal consumer debt has been growing year-by-year over a decade plus. That is true. The key question however is the overall balance in the Australian economy, and on that question, I can say that we continue to provide, for example, through a strong Budget surplus, strong management of public finances, as well as the other measures the Government is taking, a fundamentally different set of macro-economic circumstances going forward compared with the Americans. The Americans are what? Grossly in debt in terms of their public sector, that is, public sector debt. They are running budget deficits, and on top of that, of course, they are, in terms of their credit regulations and their financial regulatory environment, much worse than we have been.
O'BRIEN: Whether that's so or not, do you agree with Professor Keen's assessment, he's been studying this for a long time now, he's been warning about this for a long time now. Do you agree with him that Australia's housing values, our real estate values, are unsustainable and secondly, that developers by-and-large are not going to invest in new land and housing developments because they know the capital gain is simply not going to be there for the foreseeable future?
PM: Well Kerry, again, I'm not in the business of providing advice on the future shape of the Australian housing market, because it differs...
O'BRIEN: But surely you have to be vitally interest in this because...
PM: I am Kerry...
O'BRIEN: ... the issues of homelessness, the issue of adequate public housing, the issue of adequate housing generally, the issue of young people being able to get into homes, the issue of rental prices, the issue of people who've got very big mortgages watching the value of their home go south?
PM: You're asking two sets of questions there, which is to provide a prediction about where house prices are going to be across the country over a period of time. I'm not in the business of doing that, that's irresponsible.
What is responsible for me to do is this: on housing policy, what have we said in the nine, 10 months we've been in Government? There is a major supply-side problem. If you look at not just homelessness but you look at the lack of availability of affordable housing, and the overall problem we've had with price escalation in the general housing sector, putting home ownership beyond the reach of so many Australians, this is a critical public policy need.
What have we done? In 10 short months in office, $2.2 billion worth of housing policy programs, a first home savers account on the demand side, if you like, and on the supply side, $625 million national rental affordability fund and secondly a half-billion dollar general housing affordability fund.
The rental affordability fund is designed to construct 50,000 units of affordable rental accommodation in the period ahead.
We have an active set of policies and programs here. They're all on the supply side, necessary to do, and necessary to give a more affordable outcome for working families and there is...
O'BRIEN: All of which you were promising you had in train before we knew the extent of this tidal wave, this huge onslaught on the global financial system and you'd have to concede yourself, surely, that you along with everybody else, nobody knows really where this is going to go, nobody knows its limits. We could end up in a global recession that sweeps Australia up in it. Is that not so?
PM: Kerry, based on our analysis within the Government, we have no information available to us which causes us to conclude other than that we will continue to generate positive economic growth in this country.
Now of course it's difficult globally, but let's cause the country at large to have before them the objective facts about the state of the economy. That is, look again at the International Monetary Fund report today. What does it say about the most advanced economies in the world in 2009? Basically, close to recession or in recession. What does it say about Australia? A growth number with a ‘2' in front of it. What's it say about unemployment? In the most advanced economies, the unemployment rate in 2009 of 6.8 per cent or thereabouts, in Australia an unemployment rate with a ‘4' in front of it. Well, can I say that represents a fundamental difference. My job is to do everything possible, everything decisive available to Government to maintain this difference between our circumstances and those of the United States and elsewhere.
O'BRIEN: What is your biggest fear for Australia? Right now, what is your nightmare for Australia?
PM: Kerry, my responsibility to Australia is to speak objectively about the problems we face and equally objectively about the strengths we have. People running around throwing their hands in the air, talking about nightmares is not leadership, that's commentary, and I'm not in the business of commentary. The nation requires plain talking, straight talking about the problems we face and the strengths we've got, and that's what I intend to keep doing.
O'BRIEN: And are you able to say that you are completely levelling with the Australian people about your fundamental confidence in the Australian economy to withstand this, to actually stay in positive growth no matter what comes at us?
PM: Kerry, I am confident that we have the policy settings in Australia here to see Australia through what is an unfolding economic storm, a global financial crisis which has created an economic storm. It will be tough, it'll be rough, and there's going to be lots of rocking of the boat, let me tell you.
But, if you go back to what the settings of the Government's policies are: one, of all the OECD economies now that have been buffeted by this problem, there are very few indeed who can boast a $20, $22 billion Budget surplus as a buffer to act, and let me tell you, this provides us a buffer which comes in very handy in circumstances right now, hence our nation building agenda.
And secondly, all those economies, before the events in the United States in the last couple of weeks, six of the seven of them are either zero growth or negative growth already. We're continuing to generate positive growth. It's going to be tough and hard, but I can tell you that we in the Government will be prosecuting a hard-line economic agenda which has one overriding objective: to continue to generate positive economic growth in Australia, despite the difficulties we face.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking to us.
PM: Good to be with you.


The Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, HE Mr Nguyen Tan Dung, will visit Canberra and Melbourne from 12  -  14 October.
This year marks the 35th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and Vietnam in February 1973.
Australia and Vietnam enjoy a strong relationship and we cooperate on many important regional and international challenges, including anti-people smuggling and human trafficking measures.
Vietnam is one of Australia's most dynamic trading partners in South-east Asia.
Bilateral trade has grown an average of 20 per cent per year over the last five years to reach $6.9 billion in 2007-08.
Australia is Vietnam's 16th largest investor and the Vietnamese economy holds many opportunities for Australian business.
Australia is a leading education destination for Vietnamese students with almost 13,000 Vietnamese enrolments in Australia.
Australia is also very active in delivering education and training in Vietnam, with around 10,000 Vietnamese students studying for an Australian qualification in-country.
I look forward to discussing with Prime Minister Dung ways in which we can further strengthen the cooperation between our countries. 


PM: We've seen so many good people come out today to honour this bloke's life, Chris O'Brien. Extraordinary man, extraordinary life story, but also an extraordinary inspiration to all Australians who have had to deal with a cancer diagnosis. He's an inspiration to us all, I've met him many times now, and we've had many yacks over the years. Good man, great future, big contribution. 
On the policy of it, what Chris talks about in terms of comprehensive cancer centres is really important for Australians to get a hold of, and here I talk about all health systems in the country. How do you best bring together research and clinical trials and treatment of patients in an integrated facility and centre, because each of those disciplines helps to bring breakthroughs to the other. Now that's what he's on about, and you know something? He's right. So, we've put some money behind the one which he proposes here in Sydney, I think it's a model for the future. As I said in my remarks before, we'll be doing more. One other thing, then happy to take a question or two, then I've got to zip.
The global financial crisis is affecting all economies around the world. Part of the challenge we face is to make sure the world summons the political will to bring about a common set of regulations for financial markets for the future. Wayne Swan, the Treasurer is in Washington now for a meeting of the International Monetary Fund and for a meeting which has just been called of the G20 finance ministers. The G20 represents some 85 per cent of the world's banking system.
Confidence needs to be restored across global financial markets. Part of that means ensuring there's liquidity in those markets. That requires unprecedented international cooperation. The other part of the confidence equation is to ensure that we've got commonly agreed, consistent rules for financial markets as well. That's why, the G20 is so important, that's why Australia will be putting forward concrete proposals to the meeting of G20 finance ministers, consistent with the proposals I put to the United Nations General Assembly a week or two ago in New York. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We're in to a negotiation with the states, and it's going to be tough and hard. We want to get good outcomes for schools, good outcomes for education, good outcomes for health and hospitals, and guess what, there'll be a lot of argy bargy on the way through, there normally is.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the Government's committed to long term reform of the pension after 12 years of neglect. To reform the pension long term takes a lot of money and we're determined to deliver that by the time of the next Budget because pensioners are hurting.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Argy bargy doesn't mean the end of cooperation, argy bargy is argy bargy. I presume you have a bit of argy bargy in your news rooms from time to time. Oh, I'm sorry, that never happens. It's just life you know.
JOURNALIST: In light of the financial crisis, what guarantees can you give the Australian public that their bank deposits will be protected? Is the Government going to move (inaudible)?
PM: My answer to this is very simple. First of all, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, APRA, advises the Government that our banks' balance sheets are in good condition. We are different to banks around the world, our banks are in a strong position. First and foremost, everyone needs to understand that point.
The second is this: for a long time, Australia has had a depositors-first scheme, whereby if any bank ever got in to trouble at any time, depositors have first recourse.
And the third element is this, and that is, quite some months ago, before this crisis burst onto the newspaper front pages of the world, the Government prudently put forward a proposal for a new financial claims scheme. That's been the subject of discussion between the finance community and the Treasury, and once that's concluded, very soon we'll be introducing legislation for a new financial claims scheme on top of that. 


UHLMANN: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM:Good morning Chris.
UHLMANN: Now, some of the piecemeal actions by the governments around the world made your job more difficult, and I'm thinking particularly of government guarantees on bank deposits.
PM:Well there has been a series of, at best, uncoordinated actions by various national governments on this, and this has not created an overall image of international government consistency on these questions.
I think, overall, what we face is a broader problem of a lack of a demonstration of global and coordinated political will to deal with some of the deeper regulatory challenges that we now face, and that, I believe is a key part of the confidence equation and that must be addressed as the finance ministers meet in Washington this weekend.
UHLMANN: Well if some governments guarantee bank deposits and you don't, don't you risk capital flight from our banks?
PM:Well the first and fundamental fact in all of this, Chris, is that our banks are in good working order. Our banking system is the best-regulated in the world and the balance sheets of our major banks is in first-class working order. That's the advice of the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority.
The second thing, for a long, long time, unlike many countries, we've have had a depositors-first scheme that if any bank got into any difficulty, then depositors would be looked after first. And to augment that the government has already put on paper its proposals to the financial community many months ago for a further financial claims scheme, and that in fact was in direct response to an international recommendation from the Financial Stability Forum which operates under the G7.
We've been acting on this, acting effectively, and to the greatest extent possible in coordination with recommendations with the international body.
UHLMANN: So do you rule out guaranteeing bank deposits?
PM:Well our financial schemes goes to this very question, providing, in terms of the proposal which has been discussed between the banks and the Treasury, coverage for up to 80, 85 per cent of depositors in Australia. This is a considerable advance on the system which existed before and that is currently being finalised between the Treasury and of course the financial community. And, we've acted, and acted quickly on this.
UHLMANN: As the economy slows, and that's expected now, you expect that the IMF expects that we'll see government revenue fall, so will pensioners get relief in the next Budget?
PM:Well, the Government has always said that we are committed to long term pension reform. And, we believe that it's very important to get the numbers right.
As I've said to you and others in other press conferences on this subject, every $10 a week increase in the pension results in $8 billion across the forward estimates  -  that's a lot of money. That's why we've got to get it right.
But we're confident that we'll get this right by the time of the next Budget.
UHLMANN: So you will be offering relief to pensioners in the next Budget?
PM:Well I'm not going to indicate in a radio interview, Chris, our precise timetable. We've been working through this for many months to make sure that we get the numbers right. It is a huge, huge expenditure. We intend to get the numbers right rather than just pluck a number out of the air as others have done in the political debate on this.
Pensioners, in particular single aged pensioners, have been doing it very tough and for a very long time, going back many, many years. There was no fundamental pension reform under the previous government, during those 12 years. We'vehad to start from scratch on this, and we've been doing it thoroughly, and we are in the process of working through our conclusions on this. And as I said before, it'll be done by the next Budget.
UHLMANN: Looking at other places where people are feeling pain at the moment, there isn't really anything any government can do to protect someone's super, is there?
PM:Well, on superannuation, as I've said in interviews again in recent days, it's just a simple basic and terrible fact that the falls we see on global stockmarkets directly affect what happens with people's superannuation earnings. And that is happening right across the world and it's affecting superannuants here in Australia.
Our job is to ensure that we provide strong, decisive action to maintain the overall strength of the economy and to deliver on those measure that we introduced through the Budget, including our $55 billion family tax support package, including tax cuts, increases in the childcare tax rebate, and other measures.
Of course, when it comes to the specifics of superannuation, stockmarkets have been heading in the wrong direction. What we can do is maintain strong economic direction and provide support to families by other means.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, are we likely to see increases in health insurance premiums as the funds face losses on their investments?
PM:We have no advice to that affect, Chris. I think the overall thing is to ensure that we are providing overall assistance to the family budget when the family budget is under so much stress. I go back to what I was saying before about our $55 billion package to assist families through our Budget, including significant tax cuts that have been delivered since 1 July.
UHLMANN: Alright, looking more broadly, can you afford an extra $23 billion over the next four years for the states on top of the $33 billion they already get?
PM:Well I just noticed a report on that in one of today's papers. That I presume, is some sort of wish list put out by someone from the states. I'm unfamiliar with that number. I would think that the best way to continue that negotiation, between the Commonwealth and the states, is for it to be done through the normal meetings between the Treasurer and the heads of treasuries. That works (inaudible) and it's thorough work and needs to be completed that way.
UHLMANN: It's done though to put pressure on you, isn't it?
PM:Well, the states can jump up and down and put any public pressure they seek to put on me, I won't be responding to that.
My responsibility is to deliver continued strong, economic leadership to the country which means, as you've seen through the Budget, delivering a strong surplus which is a buffer for us to use in the future, and to engage the states and territories in a real reform of the Federation whereby the Commonwealth invests more and the states do more. That's the bottom line here.
We're not simply going to extend to the states any blank cheque and we won't be extending to the states a blank cheque in the order of magnitude I see reported in today's newspapers.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, just finally, we're coming to the end of George Bush's term as President of the United States over the last eight years. How would you assess the job he's done, was it a good one?
PM:Chris, I'm not in the business of providing foreign policy commentary on the performances of other heads of government. The core thing is this: Australia is a strong ally of the United States. I speak with the President of the United States on a regular basis and I believe that in dealing with the challenges ahead in the global economy and security, Australia must deal with any administration, Republican and Democrat, and there's been good cooperation between Australia and this Republican administration in some of the challenges we've had to deal with in recent times, including the treasurers' upcoming meeting in Washington, including with the US Treasury.
This G20 meeting, that's coming up over the weekend, is absolutely critical to deal with the challenges of long term regulatory change to the financial system. That's in turn critical to restoring confidence to markets, and that's where Australia and the United States are working closely together.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM:Thanks Chris.


I would like to thank David Epstein for his hard work and loyalty as my Chief of Staff and Principal Adviser during my time as Opposition Leader and Prime Minister.
David Epstein today resigned as my Chief of Staff in order to take up a new role outside of the Australian Government in the new year.
As Opposition Leader I sought out David Epstein and asked for his assistance to help deliver a victory for Labor at the 2007 Federal Election, and if successful, establish a new Australian Government.
David Epstein agreed to that challenge and his counsel and leadership played a pivotal role in Federal Labor's election victory.
David's professionalism and experience were vital ingredients in establishing a new Australian Government.
David's strong links with the business community, state governments and the labour movement were great assets during his time in my office.
As well as being a central and trusted member of my team, David has served the Labor Party with distinction in key roles for more than 20 years. I wish him and his family well.
On behalf of the Australian Labor Party, I thank David sincerely for his leadership and the first class advice he has provided to three Labor Governments and the party.
Alister Jordan, my Deputy Chief of Staff, will replace Mr Epstein as Chief of Staff. Mr Jordan has served as my Senior Adviser and Deputy Chief of Staff for the last six years.
David Fredericks has been appointed as my new Deputy Chief of Staff. Mr Fredericks was previously Chief of Staff to Minister for Climate Change and Water Penny Wong, and Leader of the Opposition Kim Beazley.


Tonight is a great celebration of enterprise and entrepreneurs.
It's a celebration of great Australian achievement.
Of innovation, investment and a lot of hard work.
There's around 40 finalists represented here.
Each of them could tell a story of years of hard yakka.
And for each of them there are the family, friends and employees who were there too - supporting their dreams, working through nights and weekends to get an urgent job done.
Then there are the investors, the business partners and the suppliers and customers who all play critical roles in getting a business started and making it a success.
Small business is a vital part of the Australian economy  -  vital to creating jobs, exports and national prosperity.
And that's why tonight we're celebrating some of our nation's best small and medium size enterprises.
They comprise 96 per cent of all active businesses, employing nearly 4 million people and contributing around one third of GDP.
I know there's many people who romanticise about running a small business.
What I find is that those people who romanticise about small businesses usually aren't running one.
The truth is, running a small business is tough.
I know it from Therese's career and from my own.
So often there's nobody else to pick up the slack.
No-one else to do the extra paperwork, which often becomes a weekend job.
No-one else to rescue things when there's a crisis.
That's why getting a business off the ground is such a great achievement, and it's why we should publicly recognise our outstanding SMEs as we are doing tonight.
The events of recent weeks have been remarkable.
As the IMF has said this week, this is the deepest shock to the global financial system since the Great Depression.
We all know that we're going through a period of exceptional volatility.
There are tough times ahead.
But it's important that Australian businesses keep perspective.
We are not immune to the global downturn.
But the stability of our financial institutions is in good order.
Our banks remain profitable - in fact yesterday, the World Economic Forum released a report on the soundness of banks and Australia was ranked 4th out of 134 nations, ahead of 130 other nations.
Our economy is still growing.
We have a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future, and to be used to meet the challenges of the future.
And our exports are growing strongly.
If we look to the enormous expanding market of China, the latest forecasts predict growth of 9.4 per cent in 2009.
Further, Chinese leaders have indicated a willingness to lower interest rates to stimulate their domestic economy  -  an important development for the global outlook.
India is expected to grow by 6.9 per cent in 2009.
The ASEAN economies by 5.7 per cent.
Ours is the fastest growing part of the global economy  -  by a long shot.
And that means Australian businesses still have many export opportunities.
There's one other development this week that puts a silver lining on an otherwise dark cloud.
And that's the impact of the Australian dollar's depreciation on the competitiveness of our exporters.
There's no question that while the dollar was in the 90s exporting was very, very tough.
With the dollar in the high 60s this week, the outlook has changed.
Australian exporters have a new competitive edge  -  notwithstanding the weaker growth outlook in the world economy. 
The Government I lead is strongly committed to helping Australian businesses succeed on global markets.
We are implementing a comprehensive productivity agenda to turn around the weak productivity growth of recent years.
That agenda comprises the education revolution, a nation-building infrastructure plan, business deregulation through the COAG agenda, supporting business innovation and reform of the taxation system.
This is a long-term agenda but after just ten months in office it's well underway.
We also have a long term vision to make Australia the most Asia-literate country in the western world.
That means equipping the next generation of working Australians with the language, cultural and business skills to help them seize the opportunities of the 21st century, the Asia-Pacific century.
I believe SMEs will be driving the export growth of the future.
Right now, 90 per cent of Australian exporters are either small or medium sized enterprises (SMEs).
Yet only 15 per cent of Australian SMEs are exporters, according to Austrade/Sensis research  -  suggesting we can do much more.
The Government is committed to helping businesses develop new export markets in Asia and across the world, through our outstanding trade assistance agency, Austrade.
Austrade operates innovative programs across the world and throughout our region.
For example, since the Beijing Olympics where Telstra and Austrade conducted the “Win Business Gold in China” competition, 12 Australian small businesses have successfully built new export contacts.
Tonight I'm pleased to announce a new initiative to build future exports.
Austrade and Telstra will be working together to set up programs for winners and finalists from the Telstra Business Awards and the Telstra Business Womens Awards.
Those programs will help those winners and finalists to develop their export and international business potential.
This is an important initiative.
It ensures that these Awards don't just end with tonight's ceremony or next week's magazine story.
It makes it possible for the Awards to become a stepping stone to global success.
And it makes good sense.
After all, these Awards winners attract the best young businesses in the land.
We should do all we can to help the businesses to expand onto the global stage.
In the tough times that we're facing, I want to reinforce the strength of the Government's commitment to the SME sector.
We are committed to a framework of responsible economic management to help SMEs to thrive and grow.
That is why we delivered a disciplined Budget in May, with a strong surplus as a buffer for the future.
I have mentioned already the importance of our long-term productivity agenda.
In particular, we are pursuing a deregulation agenda to create a seamless national economy.
Over the last decade the deregulation program of the Hawke and Keating Governments that opened up Australia's markets has been reversed by what the Business Council of Australia has described as the "creeping re-regulation of Australian business".
We want to turn that around, and ease the regulatory burden on Australian businesses.
Our reform program includes an unprecedented 27 areas of overlapping and inconsistent regulation across the Commonwealth, States and Territories.
We simply say this:
It's the 21st century.
We've got to stop acting like we're still in the 19th century with nine separate markets and overlapping and inconsistent business laws.
In cooperation with the States and Territories, we are dismantling the barriers to businesses operating seamlessly across State and Territory boundaries.
For example, as a result of the recent COAG meeting, businesses that operate across state boundaries will no longer need to register their business names, and pay separate fees, in each state and territory. They will have to register only once at a central, national registry.
And tradespeople who move from one state to another won't have to apply for and pay for a separate licence in each state.
This will put an end to the economics of the rail-gauge era  -  where businesses in the 21st century have still been facing the same sort of obstacles in operating across state boundaries that our grandparents faced when catching a train from one state to another.
The Government is also supporting small businesses by funding 36 Business Enterprise Centres located in suburban, rural and regional Australia, at a cost of $42 million.
These centres are providing established and start-up businesses with commercial advice, legal advice on retail and commercial tenancies, advice on compliance obligations, GST bookkeeping, finance and cash-flow management as well as advice on promotion and marketing.
We are removing the constraints on small business expansion through investment in education, skills development and by bringing forward our nation-building infrastructure plan.
We are also investing in innovation.
The recently released report of the Review of Australia's National Innovation System represented the first step in harnessing the potential of innovation and putting it work for the benefit of all Australians.
It made a number of important recommendations aimed at improving the innovative capacity of small business that the Government is considering and will respond to in the near future.
These are all practical steps to supporting the important role of SMEs in our economy.
All these measures come down to the simple aim of creating more innovative, competitive and successful Australian businesses.
Tonight, we celebrate some of the best of those businesses.
To all those businesses who have come this far as finalists tonight: Our warmest congratulations  -  and all the very best for tonight's announcements.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd. Good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Describe your emotion- are you nervous about this?
PM: No, my responsibility is to absorb information, work with the key officials from Treasury and from the Reserve Bank, decide on the Government's policy action with my colleagues and the Treasurer and Finance Minister and others, and get on with implementing it. And, as you said in your introduction, internationally, talking positively and objectively about the strengths of the Australian economy.
MITCHELL: If you're not nervous, are you concerned about the situation?
PM: Oh look, any reasonable person is concerned by what we face at the moment Neil. All of your listeners would have been following developments on their television screens and on radio programs like yours. Of course it's concerning. One of the problems we have is pointed out in a report by the International Monetary Fund yesterday, which is the solutions to this long term lie in better regulation of the financial market. Everyone has agreed to that. You know what's lacking is the combined political will of governments across the world to work together as one to come up with a new set of consistent global regulations for financial markets. That's where the action now lies, and that's what the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, is working on this weekend in Washington.
MITCHELL: Another disaster on Wall Street overnight. Any idea what's spooked the market?
PM: No, I'm still getting reports in on what happened with the market overnight in the United States, but I think that question you've just raised links to the previous one. On the confidence equation, it comes from two factors: one is, is there enough money in the system globally, and that's this interbank credit strike that's going on at the moment because confidence has disappeared from so many financial markets around the world. And the second is, a lack of confidence in the regulations underpinning the system globally, and that is the other part which needs to be fixed.
MITCHELL: I know this is a sensitive area, a difficult area, but this question is being asked. The front page headline in The Australian today: ‘PM urged to bolster banks'. There's been some action to do that overseas. Will you, will the Government, guarantee depositors' funds?
PM: On the bolstering of banks, Neil, let me put out to your listeners what the Government, and through the Reserve Bank and by other means, has done throughout the year, and I'll come back to your question on depositors in just one tick. What we've been doing through the Reserve Bank all year, now without headline treatment, in March, in June, in August and September, is through the Reserve Bank continue to inject liquidity into the Australian financial market system. We've done that undramatically, consistently and responsibly.
The second thing we've done, is that we've also through a body called the Australian Office of Financial Management only several weeks ago injected a further $4 billion into the system as well.
And finally, what we've done is free up the system by releasing a further set of Australian Government securities which again has the effect of releasing liquidity into the system. We've been doing that all year and the best thing about these things is often they're done undramatically, below the radar and just to make sure the system's properly functioning.
On the question about depositors, three points: first is, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, who regulates our banks, tells us that our banks are in good working order. That is, that their balance sheets are strong, they remain well-regulated and that the regulatory authority is going through them on a continuing basis.
There was an international survey out yesterday comparing our banks with every other banking system in the world - 134 countries. We came in at number four of 134, and depending on how you read the table, we came in equal second. Now that's pretty good. The second thing is, we've had a system which has been here for a long, long time called depositors first. Not all countries have this. That is, in the unlikely event that any bank in the future, and this has been around for a long, long time, got into trouble, and then depositors have first call.
The last thing is, we're adding to it through a financial claims scheme, which we took from one of the recommendations come up with internationally earlier this year. It's been out there with the financial community the last three months, and we're going to legislate on it soon.
MITCHELL: OK. In Ireland, in Germany, they're guaranteeing banks. In the United States they've been propping up banks, in the United Kingdom they've been doing similar things. Will you take those actions if necessary?
PM: Well, you know, all the economies you've mentioned, each of them have had significant banks fail. We don't have that problem. Our banks are in first-class working order, and what these governments have done is react to bank implosions as they've occurred. I mean, we've had 25 major banks around the world, or major and lesser banks around the world, either fail or having had to been bailed out. Australia is not in that situation, and therefore it's important for all your listeners, and for everyone in the economy to understand the underlying and continuing strength of our financial system and our banks. It's also based on those extra insurances that I referred to before.
MITCHELL: I accept your assurances, and I hope people accept your assurances, but the question is still being asked: if the worst, if the most unlikely happens, what do you do?
PM: Well, the financial claims scheme which we will be introducing into the Parliament very soon is a further insurance in that direction, and it will provide coverage for at least 85 per cent of depositors out there in the Australian community.
MITCHELL: Well, are you saying that 85 per cent of depositors are $20,000 or less?
PM: That's correct, and if you go through the banking data, but on the final detail of this Neil, we're working through it, between the Treasury and the banks as we speak. We've done this in only a matter of a few months, and before this current crisis came to bare, and I've got to say, this recommendation for a financial claims scheme was first made to the previous Government after the HIH collapse five years ago. Nothing was done.
MITCHELL: This is going to flow through to the real economy, isn't it? I see that GM shares were down in the US overnight. I saw reports that 700 car dealers could be closing in the United States. Clearly it'll mean jobs in Detroit, jobs in the car industry. This will flow through to the real economy in Australia, won't it, it must cost jobs?
PM: Well, the International Monetary Fund yesterday, Neil, put out its global economic outlook, and it makes for sobering reading. And you're right, the global financial crisis is affecting the real global economy, and we're not immune from that. But again it's important to underline the difference. If you look at the growth numbers put out for the economy worldwide and for the major economies within it for 2009, it's either zero or into recession. The numbers for Australia have a ‘2', a positive ‘2' in front of them. There is a difference, but you're absolutely right, there is going to be an impact.
MITCHELL: It will cost jobs?
PM: Well, we've always said that the global financial crisis is going to affect growth in the economy, therefore it affects employment, and that is, I don't believe in misleading people or gilding the lily, that's just the truth. My responsibility is to continue to implement a strong course of economic action for the country, and including bringing forward our $76 billion nation building agenda, which helps build the economy long term, build critical infrastructure, and creates jobs.
MITCHELL: I'd like to get to that in a moment, but the sort of indication I'm talking about is Melbourne Airport has announced overnight that they're postponing a $500 million redevelopment they were planning on going ahead with because of the uncertain economic times. I mean, if that keeps happening, that's a lot of jobs.
PM: Well, you're right to point out that firms are being affected around the country and around the world through one of the points you raised before, and that's this virtual freeze which has occurred globally on interbank lending which underpins so much of the project finance for projects, infrastructure projects, around the world.
That's why it's really important for us, a - to have budgeted early for a very significant Budget surplus, $22 billion, to b - bring forward a nation building agenda which we, the Government, fund and do so in partnership with state governments as well. Ports, roads, rail, infrastructure, and we have brought forward our priority list and we intend to get cracking.
MITCHELL: I'd like to get to the specifics of that in a moment, but just first, can we clear up pensions? Will there definitely be some sort of pension increase next year?
PM: Firstly, we've said that we'll have the pension reform, long term pension reform, done by the Budget. Secondly, on the detail of it, as I've said, I think on your program, before Neil, because this is a massive exercise, we want to get all the numbers right.
Every $10 a week is $8 billion across the forward estimates. That's a $10 a week increase is $8 billion across the forward estimates. We've got to get it absolutely right and not just pick and choose one small group of pensioners, but bring about comprehensive reform for everybody.
MITCHELL: Is there a danger that because of these tough times, there will be nothing there next year?
PM: Can I say Neil, we are absolutely determined to deliver pension reform. We said back at Budget time this is a complex exercise, involves millions of Australians, it's very expensive. We will do it and we will do it by the next Budget.
MITCHELL: And you stand by that?
PM: Absolutely.
MITCHELL: Will there be cuts in other areas?
PM: Well Neil, the Budget process is under way and we'll go through the usual exercise which the Finance Minister, Lindsay Tanner, presides, which is the Expenditure Review Committee, and we will work our way through unnecessary expenditures in order to deliver savings, and that helps us fund much needed long term reforms, including pension reform.
MITCHELL: So there will be some pain in those cuts, presumably?
PM: There's never been a Budget without any pain, but let me say this: there's never been a responsible Budget without some pain somewhere, and because at the end of the day the country's got to balance its books and we have taken a very conservative approach to public financial management, and I'm absolutely glad we did so in the last Budget and created ourselves a $22 billion surplus buffer for the future.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break and come back with more from the Prime Minister, including your calls and the nation building - where will it be spend and when?
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with us, obviously financial issues are paramount but there are a number of other issues I want to raise with the Prime Minister, so I'll try to be quick. Sam, go ahead please Sam.
SAM: Good morning. Mr Rudd, has this financial meltdown been caused simply by greed and stupidity? And if so, moving forward, can we legislate worldwide to minimise those two elements?
MITCHELL: Can you legislate against greed and stupidity? That's a big ask. Prime Minister?
PM: You can do a bit about greed, I'm not sure about stupidity. Look, a couple of reasons why all this has happened. One is, that the rules around the world haven't been transparent enough. That is, that when loans are made, that banks around the world and in the United States declare to the financial regulation system how much they've lent, to whom, and how that has been underwritten by other banks, so that when we have a problem with enough money in the system, the central regulator can say, ‘here's where the problem is, here's how much it is, and here's who's got it.' That's the problem now, and that's what largely creates the confidence problem.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, there's a report in The Australian today that the states are demanding $23 billion in extra funding to go along with your plans, is that correct?
PM: I have not seen any such report from the states themselves, I've seen the report in the newspaper. Neil...
MITCHELL: Will they get it?
PM: I reckon this is one of the larger try-ons of the century. We're engaged in a long negotiation with the states over the future of hospital funding, and on schools funding. We're going to sort that out in the middle of November. I'm sure there'll be a lot of argy-bargy in between time, but what was that great line in The Castle? ‘You've got to be dreaming'.
MITCHELL: When will you start spending?
PM: We've said that on the nation building fund, the nation building agenda for Australia, that we will have the list from Infrastructure Australia, the priority lists, their first report on that by December. Now that means that we have done it within our first year, we've got in the submissions basically from all the states now, I think one is still to come in, and once we've gone through that, and Infrastructure Australia provide their recommendations, we can then begin to make announcements.
MITCHELL: Obviously, I don't want to lock you into things, but would you be looking into things like the tunnel that's being talked about from Caulfield to Footscray in Melbourne, that sort of things.
PM: I haven't looked in detail at what the Victorian Government has put forward, but can I say this as a general principle: when I go around Melbourne, I go around Sydney, and I go around Brisbane, you look at urban congestion, and you've got to say, it's time for the national government to help shoulder some of this burden, and whether that's with underground rail, whether that's through roads systems, I'll let the experts provide the advice but we've got to act on the congestion. And can I say, in nation building, it's not just a question of providing extra activity in the economy, jobs and growth, it's building infrastructure that the nation needs anyway.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, it strikes me that unlike some other financial crises we've had when the speculative stocks go down, the blue chips are getting hit hard here, which says something about the nature of the crisis, but it also says superannuation funds are getting hit hard. Is it fair that when we're all suffering, the politicians have guaranteed superannuation that we pay for?
PM: Well the super system, as you know Neil, has been around for yonks, before Members of Parliament, and was changed somewhat I think a few years ago. But you're right, it's a pension system. On the question of the private superannuation market, people are copping it left right and centre at the moment because of stock markets, you're right on that. Over the last 35 years, Australian superannuation has delivered returns of approximately five per cent over and above inflation.
MITCHELL: True, I understand all that, but is it fair that the politicians are immune from all this?
PM: Well, the politicians, or the Parliamentary superannuation scheme has been built around a pension system going back decades and decades, through good times and bad times in the superannuation system, and that's been the case under Mr Howard, it's the case under me, and it's been the case under many previous Prime Ministers.
MITCHELL: A couple of other things if I may. The young Melbourne backpacker missing in Dubrovnik, Britt Lapthorne. The Family's been critical of the way the Government has handled it, are you aware of the case?
PM: I'm totally aware of the case. I've been talking to the Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith about it regularly and to my advisors. This is terrible for the family, and it's really distressing for any mum or dad in Australia losing track of one of their loved ones anywhere around the world. You know we've got around 1 million Australians overseas at any one time, and this is horrible whenever it happens.
MITCHELL: Are you confident the Federal Police are doing all they can?
PM: I've absolute confidence in the Federal Police. The Federal Police Commissioner, Mick Keelty's been on the phone to the chief of the Croatian police, we've got a Federal Police officer on the ground, we have two consular officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs on the ground in Dubrovnik. We've also have had the President of the Australian Senate meet with the Croatian Prime Minister, President, Minister for the Interior, and of course, we are working as effectively as we can in a foreign country to try and help in what is an awful situation.
MITCHELL: It's not hard to relate to is it, I mean you've got a daughter of a similar age yourself.
PM: Exactly, I mean, we've always got to think: there's a million Australians out of the country at any one time, any family that loses track of a loved one, that is a real concern to all Australians and a concern to the Government. Then you're faced with the practical challenges of trying to help track them down in a foreign country.
MITCHELL: It's reported today that American intelligence reports are saying that the situation in Afghanistan is in a downward spiral. Do you get the same reports?
PM: I haven't seen that report, or the US intelligence report, but the security situation in Afghanistan is very hard. Diggers on the ground in Oruzgan province are doing a fantastic job, but it's becoming increasingly violent, and you've seen evidence of that with attacks on our diggers in recent times, but in Oruzgan in our part of the country where we're responsible together with the Dutch, we're doing a good job and I believe that over time we're stabilising that part of Afghanistan. More broadly across the country, it is a huge challenge.
MITCHELL: Because of the economic situation, would you review our immigration policy, you know, our immigration targets? Cut immigration levels?
PM: As with all previous Governments, and mine is the same, whenever we set immigration targets, we will adjust them according to economic circumstances of the day. Those targets that you've referred to before represent an increase on the previous year and that was in response to demands from employers across the country, particularly in Western Australia and Queensland and in the mining and resource intensive states, for more skilled labour. What we'll do in the future is adjust according to economic circumstances.
MITCHELL: So does that mean we'll expect less immigration next year?
PM: We'll wait for the advice on what's needed where and it's not one-size-fits-all across the country, that's the problem we face Neil.
MITCHELL: Hello Jim? Go ahead please Jim.
JIM: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: G'day Jim.
JIM: (inaudible) in regards to the American markets doing so poorly, and the state of our markets doing well (inaudible), why is the value of the Australian dollar so low?
MITCHELL: Okay, I'm going to repeat because the line was bad. Why is the Australian dollar down if we're in the good shape we say we are?
PM: Jim, it's like this. International financial markets mark Australia and the dollar on a number of things. They look at the strength of the financial system, they think it's good and strong, but at the same time they're looking at the future of world economic growth and therefore what the world's going to need in future commodities like coal and iron ore. They see commodity prices coming off and as a result, they take a more pessimistic view of Australia's long term economic prospects. That's what's happening in markets. My job is to work as hard as we can as a Government to make sure that our policy direction remains strong and the economy remains strong.
MITCHELL: Having said that, are you concerned about these reports coming from the mining sector that China is starting to cut back its demand for iron ore?
PM: Look, what I've known about the Chinese demand and global demand for Australian commodities is it really goes up and down, Neil, depending on the cycle.
MITCHELL: But this environment is pretty worrying isn't it?
PM: Yeah, but the more fundamental thing is that China's growth strategy remains on track. They've come off from 12 per cent growth to around nine to 10 per cent growth. They've brought down interest rates by 27 basis points two days ago. We're going to see obviously fluctuations in what they demand in terms of raw materials, but long term we should have confidence that in China we have a huge continuing market, as we do in Japan and the Republic of Korea.
MITCHELL: Something else, the Governor-General's comments on paid maternity leave. That's a partisan issue, should she really be commenting on it?
PM: Neil, I haven't seen what the Governor-General's said on paid maternity leave, and...
MITCHELL: Well she was supporting it earlier in the week, she was supporting paid maternity leave.
PM: Oh, look, I'm pretty relaxed about the Governor-General expressing her views. I think having the Governor-General in some sort of ivory case where they are precluded from making personal observations about priorities, I mean the previous Governor-General had strong positions, for example, on the environment and would often speak on that, and on indigenous policy. I'm sure the current Governor-General will do the same in areas of personal priority to herself.
MITCHELL: Just finally, quickly, Prime Minister, the context of the economic crisis - is this the worst in a generation?
PM: It is Neil.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks.


The Prime Minister's Chief of Staff, David Epstein, today tendered his resignation with the intention of taking up a new role outside the Australian Government in the New Year. 
“I'd like to thank Kevin Rudd for allowing me the opportunity of being Chief of Staff to the Prime Minister of a Federal Labor Government”, Mr Epstein said.
“What began as a temporary assignment to lead Kevin Rudd's office to the last federal election turned out to be as successful as anyone could have hoped for, lasting longer than we first planned when the Prime Minister asked me to stay on to help manage Labor's transition to government”.
“I recently advised the Prime Minister that I intended to move on by the end of the year, and I now need to decide on some options that are before me.”
“I'd particularly like to thank my wife and children for supporting me through thick and thin. I think it might be the last time they willingly let me say I am just going off to Canberra for a short time to work on an election campaign.”
“I'm proud to have contributed to a new Australian Government which can allow Australians to re-engage with each other and the rest of the world. There is much to be done, but I'm leaving knowing the foundations are there to do it.”
“Since early 2007, I've been privileged to work with people dedicated to making Australia a better place. They range from PMO staff, ALP ministerial and electorate staff, federal ALP Caucus members, Tim Gartrell and the ALP National Secretariat, the wider Australian labour movement and, since 24 November 2007, members of the Australian Public Service”, Mr Epstein concluded.
Mr Epstein will leave the Prime Minister's Office formally on 14 November, after handing over responsibilities to Deputy-Chief of Staff, Alister Jordan, who will be appointed Chief of Staff. 
Backgrounder 
David Epstein recently resigned as Chief of Staff and Principal Adviser to the Prime Minister.
Mr Epstein's career includes work in government, as a corporate adviser and in the telecommunications industry.
Mr Epstein began volunteering as an ALP staffer in 1981. His background in federal politics includes staff positions with two Cabinet Ministers and six years as Federal Government media director during the Hawke and Keating Governments.
He was appointed Communications Director for the Australian Labor Party National Secretariat in 1996, later joining the staff of the Leader of Opposition the Hon Kim Beazley to become Chief of Staff to (1997 to 1999).
Mr Epstein left politics in 1999 to become Executive Director of the Australian Electrical and Electronic Manufacturer's Association (AEEMA), and its major operating body the Australian Telecommunications Industry Association (ATIA).
He subsequently worked as a senior telecommunications executive, then became a director and shareholder of corporate advisory firm, Government Relations Australia.
He joined Mr Rudd's staff in July 2007 as Chief of Staff to the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Epstein was educated at The Geelong College and the Australian National University, where he majored in Politics (International Relations) and Economic History. He is married to Sandra Eccles, and has two children.
His recreational interests are reading, travel and outdoor activities, particularly long distance cycling (Audax).


HOST: Prime Minister thanks for talking to us. Just two days ago you said $20,000 was enough protection for bank deposits. Now it's all deposits in all banks in Australia. Is that dramatic change telling us that there are worse things to come?
PM: Not at all. Our banks remain in fine first class working order. The reason that we have gone for the guarantee that we have provided is because governments all around the world are now doing this. And they are doing it in countries which have got banks in a very bad condition.
The problem is, if we in Australia don't do the same, then I am concerned about putting our banks in position also where they are looked at differently as they go to try and raise money overseas.
But there is a second reason as well. And that working families, pensioners, carers, small business operators right around Australia, themselves have become increasingly anxious because of what they have been seeing on their television screens night after night.
And I as Prime Minister of Australia intend to give them certainty. And that is why I have taken this decision, based on advice from our regulators, to guarantee all deposits for the three year period ahead.
HOST: But you keep saying that. You constantly say our banks are not in the dire position as their overseas counterparts. If that is reality, why do they need such a widespread taxpayer funded guarantee?
PM: Well our advice as the Government comes from the regulators. And the bank regulators go through the balance sheet of these banks day in, day out and they have been doing it all year.
They are in the best position to tell the Government the true state of the health of our banks. And what I have said to you tonight and what I have said in recent days is not something we have plucked out of space. It is based on a cold, hard analysis of the numbers.
But secondly, you know, you look around and you see people who have small deposits in banks or other financial institutions, building societies, credit unions, because of what they are seeing on the TVs, getting more anxious and anxious. And I am not prepared to tolerate that continuing.
HOST: You also, Prime Minister, you are also going into the banks. As we understand it you are also guaranteeing for a large extent, the banks' ability to raise money overseas.
PM: Well you know something, the stability of the banks is of fundamental importance to all Australians. Households, small businesses, pensioners who put their bank accounts in their local bank branch.
They have, all of them, a deep sense of the need for our financial institution to be as stable as possible into the future. And that means that looking after the long term stability of our banking system is not just something for those banks themselves, it is a main street concern for working Australians, pensioners, carers, everybody.
And we are equally concerned therefore about the stability of the banking system as we are about looking after the individual interests of depositors themselves and we have done that through the decisions that the Government has announced today.
HOST: And what about the rest of the economy, your Treasurer has already admitted that unemployment is set to rise. How many jobs will be lost?
PM: Well you know this global financial crisis is affecting growth and jobs right across the world and that means affecting growth and jobs here in Australia as well. It is a global crisis with local consequences.
HOST: Yes but how many jobs here Prime Minister?
PM: Well I was about to go to that. On the jobs front, what it means is that we are going to see increased unemployment. I don't want to gild the lily with people watching your program tonight. It is going to be tough. But I am also saying we have a strong course of policy action to see Australia through. The reason we brought down a $22 billion budget surplus earlier this year was to give us the financial buffer to act for the future.
HOST: You inherited a lot of that from the previous government, but let's talk about how many jobs. You've just come out of meetings with your departmental chiefs in Canberra all weekend, you've been crunching the numbers, tell us what they're saying.
PM: Well on the question of the $22 billion budget surplus, that's for the financial year that we're in. It's not inherited from the past at all. That's the first point.
The second is this  -  what our advisers are saying to us is that the money we, this government, has set aside can be invested now to make it possible for Australia to remain in positive economic growth into the future.
Most other economies around the world have gone negative already, most other economies in the world have got unemployment now going through the roof, in Australia we are well positioned to see ourselves through this, but it's going to be tough and hard.
HOST: Are we talking 300,000 jobs? 400,000?
PM: Look, all I can say is given the major shift in the global financial crisis in the last week or two, where it's gone to a new and dangerous stage, I don't want to mislead people, saying that's got no consequence for jobs. But no, we don't have numbers around it, but what I do know is we have a large budget surplus which we can draw on now to assist in seeing the Australian economy through the very difficult and stormy times which lie ahead.
HOST: Are you expecting the price of housing to fall here in Australia?
PM: Well, I don't have detailed information on various parts of the housing market, it's different across various parts of the country, but you know if the economy is being buffeted abroad, then it follows, from forces abroad, it means that it's going to impact all parts of the Australian economy as well. That's just the truth.
HOST: And Prime Minister, Wayne Swan has also conceded that the budget will take a hit. You'll be walking on egg shells trying to balance that. Which part will be cut first?
PM: Well, because we were so conservative in our budgeting, and putting aside such a large surplus, we believe that we can deliver on the commitments we made to the Australian people through the budget and prior to the election. It's going to be tough, but we've got a strong enough buffer there despite the reduction in government revenues to honour our commitments and to keep the economy strong long term. That's our commitment to see Australia through this economic crisis which has seen already 25 banks around the world either fail or be bailed out.
HOST: Prime Minister, your emissions trading scheme. Will that be delayed? Yes or no.
PM: We maintain our ambition to deliver the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as we promised, which is 2010.
HOST: So that's still on the table? Will start as predicted?
PM: Remember, implementation date for that is some two years away. What you've got to use the interim time for is to get all the rules right and make sure that it's properly consulted with business and that you've got the settings right. You can't just put that off forever. You put it off forever, let me tell you there is a big, big long term economic cost which is looming through no action on global warming. We've got to act because there's an economic price tag attached to not acting and it's huge.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks very much for talking with us tonight.
PM: Thanks for having me on your program.


Global financial markets are experiencing some of the most challenging conditions ever witnessed.
In recent days, as global financial conditions have deteriorated markedly, governments around the world have taken unprecedented steps to guarantee the liabilities of their financial systems.
The Australian financial system is demonstrating its resilience to the international financial market turbulence. Australia's banking institutions remain sound, well-capitalised and profitable with high asset quality.
The Australian financial system is however being affected by global events. Recent developments in the international wholesale funding markets have created acute funding pressures that now pose potential risks to the total supply of finance to the Australian economy.
This has the potential to slow further domestic economic activity.
The G-7 met on 10 October and agreed that the current situation calls for urgent and exceptional action to stabilise financial markets and restore the flow of credit, to support global economic growth.
Guarantee on deposits
In response to these developments the Australian Government will guarantee all deposits of Australian banks, building societies and credit unions and Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks.
This guarantee will operate for a period of three years. This is similar to action that has been taken in a number of countries.
The guarantee will be legislated as part of the Financial Claims Scheme (FCS). For the first three years of its operation, there will be no cap.
The guarantee will operate from the date of this announcement. From today there will be no limit on deposits covered by the FCS. In three years time, the Government will review this position.
New measures to enhance the powers of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) will be legislated.
Guarantee of term funding for institutions
The Australian Government will also guarantee wholesale term funding of Australian incorporated banks and other authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs).
The Government will offer the guarantee in return for a fee in respect of eligible non-deposit debt obligations of Australian ADIs and foreign subsidiary banks operating in Australia.
It will enable Australian institutions to raise funds overseas in the current tight conditions and will restore confidence in credit markets. The facility will be withdrawn once market conditions have normalised. Details will be finalised in the next few days.
Purchases of RMBS from non-ADI lenders
Further to the Treasurer's announcement in September, the Government has decided to direct the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) to purchase an additional $4 billion in Residential Mortgage Backed Securities (RMBS).
The Government has been monitoring the market closely and has determined that this additional $4 billion in funding is required for the purchase of RMBS from non-ADI lenders (those being lenders who are not banks, building societies or credit unions) by the AOFM. 
This will benefit Australia's mortgage market by levelling the playing field for non-ADI institutions and ensuring that this sector of the lending market has access to funding for their operations.
My officials have done considerable work on the design of these arrangements and, in developing these measures I have received advice from the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Chairman of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and the Secretary to the Treasury.
Collectively, these measures will reassure Australian depositors that their deposits are safe and that they can have full confidence in the Australian financial system.
In addition, these measures will assist Australia's financial institutions weather the global financial turbulence.
Background
Interim Government Guarentee of Deposits and Funding of Authorised Deposit Taking Institutions.
The Australian banking system continues to demonstrate its resilience to the international financial market turbulence. Australian authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) continue to be assessed as sound and the sector remains well capitalised and very profitable with high asset quality.
The Australian banking system is, however, affected by the global events. In recent days, as global financial conditions have deteriorated markedly, governments around the world have taken unprecedented steps to guarantee the liabilities of their financial systems.
European governments (Ireland, Germany, Denmark and Iceland) have moved to insure 100 per cent of eligible deposits. Other jurisdictions have significantly increased their deposit insurance caps. For example the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the United States has lifted its cap from $100,000 to $250,000 per depositor until 31 December 2009; the UK has raised the value of deposits it insures to £50,000 from £35,000; the EU has increased its minimum deposit insurance limit to €50,000 from €20,000.
Governments are also providing unprecedented support to their financial institutions in order for them to recapitalise and gain access to wholesale borrowing. For example, the UK Government has made available to eligible institutions a Government guarantee on short- and medium term debt issuance. This will assist institutions operating in the UK to refinance their wholesale funding obligations as they fall due.
Having carefully reviewed international developments, the Australian Government, acting on the advice of the regulators, has decided that it must act to provide the same guarantees for our banks and other financial institutions. If we do not do so, Australian financial institutions could, over time, find it more difficult to borrow in international financial markets. They would become uncompetitive in attracting funds in markets that have become increasingly tight and risk-averse as this global financial crisis has deepened. 
What action is the Government taking?
Guarantee on deposits
As part of the Government's Financial Claims Scheme, the Government is guaranteeing all the deposits held in Australian-owned banks, Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks, building societies and credit unions.
The guarantee will apply immediately, and remain in place for three years. This means from today, there will be no limit on the deposits covered by the Financial Claims Scheme. At the end of the three-year period, the Government will review the cap on the guarantee.
Deposits covered
The guarantee applies, from today, to all deposits held in Australian-owned banks, Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks, building societies and credit unions. These institutions are authorised to accept deposits by APRA and are subject to prudential regulation to protect the safety of these deposits.
The guarantee applies to all types of deposits, regardless of the type of account through which the deposit is made. For example, it includes savings accounts, passbook accounts, cheque accounts, pensioner deeming accounts, term deposits, mortgage offset-accounts, farm management accounts, first home savers accounts and retirement savings accounts. Both retail and wholesale deposits are covered by the guarantee.
The guarantee applies to deposits held by all types of legal entities in Australia, including individuals (including joint accounts), partnerships, businesses, trusts and government entities.
The guarantee applies to deposits denominated in any currency.
The guarantee does not apply to deposits held in branches of foreign banks in Australia. These deposits are not subject to the depositor protection provisions of the Banking Act 1959.
Guarantee of term funding for institutions 
The Government is making available to Australian-owned banks, Australian subsidiaries of foreign owned banks, building societies and credit unions a guarantee on eligible wholesale borrowing.
The Government will offer the guarantee in return for a fee in respect of eligible non-deposit debt obligations of eligible institutions. It will enable Australian institutions to raise funds overseas in the current tight conditions and will restore confidence in credit markets. The facility will be withdrawn when market conditions normalise.
To ensure that taxpayers are not disadvantaged by this guarantee, the Australian Government will charge financial institutions for providing the guarantee. This charge will be similar to an insurance premium. Effectively, the Australian Government is insuring the eligible liabilities of Australian financial institutions.
Funding covered
The guarantee on wholesale borrowing will be made available to Australian-owned banks, Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks, building societies, and credit unions. It will be available, on application, for new and existing term debt issuance out to 5 years (60 months). The guarantee will be available for eligible debt instruments issued in all major currencies.
The guarantee will not be available to foreign banks, including those with branches in Australia, or entities that are not APRA-authorised deposit-taking institutions. These latter entities are not subject to Australia's prudential regulation regime.
Lenders that are not APRA-regulated will have access to the Government's complementary initiative to invest an additional $4 billion in residential mortgage-backed securities (see below).
Purchases of RMBS from non-ADI lenders
On 26 September, the Treasurer announced the direction to the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) to purchase residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) from a wide range of Australian lenders in initial tranches totalling $4 billion.
The Government has been monitoring the market closely and has determined that an additional $4 billion in funding is required for the purchase of RMBS from Australian non-ADI lenders (those being lenders who are not banks, building societies or credit unions) by the AOFM. This will benefit Australia's mortgage market and ensure that this sector of the lending market has access to funding for its operations.
This initiative will also provide a level playing field for the non-ADI lenders who will not have the benefit of the guarantee of the term funding facility.


The global financial crisis is affecting markets across the world, including Australia. It's affecting economic confidence across the world, including in Australia, and it's affecting the real economy across the world, including Australia as well.
Australia is better positioned than practically every other country in the world to see its way through this crisis.
As you know our economic regulators are the best in the world, our major banks have the best balance sheets in the world, and our budget surplus is the envy of most other countries across the world.
And the reason for this is that as this global financial crisis has unfolded, we in Australia have sought to anticipate events and to put in place prudent preparations for those events and to act accordingly.
We've done this consistently in the period that we've been in office.
It's also the fact that the Government has been in close contact with governments across the world all year  -  the G20, International Monetary Fund and through the Financial Stability Forum.
I've spoken again this morning with the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, who is on the ground in Washington meeting his counterparts in the IMF and the G20. Coordinated international action is critical to the overall confidence equation in dealing with the global financial crisis. Knowing the changes which need to be made is one thing, summoning the global political will to execute those changes is the other. Both must be done.
In this context, the Government has decided today on three further measures to maintain the continued stability of the Australian financial system.
First, as of today, the Australian Government will guarantee all term wholesale funding by Australian banks operating in international credit markets to make sure that they have the best possible access to global capital in the future.
Over the past year, many banks in other parts of the world, banks that are much less well regulated and they have been in fact, poorly managed, these sorts of banks have got into trouble. And a lot of those banks have in fact failed and some of them no longer exist.
In order to prevent other banking failures, what's happened is that governments around the world, have in recent weeks and in particular in the last week, developed guarantees and various other support mechanisms for their banks' international credit raising arrangements.
Australian banks, despite the fact that their balance sheets are in excellent shape, now have to compete with these foreign banks for funding on global financial markets. Foreign banks which, despite their weaker balance sheets, now have the advantage of government guarantee. That presents Australian banks with a challenge.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I will not stand idly by while Australian banks are disadvantaged in international credit market places because of the actions taken by foreign governments in support of them.
We must act now because other governments with weaker banks have moved to make those institutions more competitive than our stronger banks in the marketplace.
For that reason, I can announce today that anyone who lends money to our banks in the international marketplace has an absolute assurance that their money is safe. With the explicit guarantee now offered by the Australian government, our banking system will be even stronger in the future in its international credit raising operations.
It will remain competitive in securing finance in international markets. This measure will remain in place until global financial markets stabilise.
Having taken the decision to guarantee the borrowings of banking institutions, the Government has also decided as of today to enhance the level of protection provided to depositors under our financial claims scheme.
If we are guaranteeing the national institutions lending to banks then it is only fair that we guarantee working families, pensioners, carers, small businesses and all deposit holders, guaranteeing that they have the same protection.
Accordingly, the Australian Government will guarantee all deposits, whatever their size, in all Australian banking institutions for three years - banks, building societies, credit unions.
As Prime Minister of Australia, again I am not prepared to stand idly by in dealing with the concerns of Australians as they watch global financial developments unfold.
Furthermore, this measure puts our banks on a similar footing to other banking systems around the world. At the end of three years, the Government will review the cap on the guarantee that I have just announced.
The third measure I announce today goes to the availability of funding for non-Australian deposit taking institutions. Further to the Treasurer's announcement in September, the government has decided to direct the Australian Office of Financial Management to repurchase an additional $4 billion in residential mortgage-backed securities. The government has been monitoring the market closely and has determined that an additional $4 billion in funding is required for the purchase of residential - backed mortgage securities from non-ADI lenders.
This will benefit Australia's mortgage market and ensure that this sector of the lending market has access to funding for their future operations.
The measures I've announced today are based on the advice of Australia's economic regulators. The measures I've announced today have been the product of extensive deliberation between myself, the Treasurer and other Ministers who are members of the Strategic Policy and Budget Committee of the Cabinet.
The measures I've announced today are part of also international measures designed to help unclog the arteries of the global financial system. Critical to the international economy, critical for the Australian national economy and critical also for the household economy.
There will be many bumps in the road during the period ahead and the ride will not be smooth. We are in the economic equivalent of a rolling national security crisis and the challenges are great.
But the Government has set a strong course of economic policy action to see Australia through this economic storm and we are determined to do so. I'll take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: First of all, the measures today are three fold. One is to do with the ability of our banks in the future to secure funds for their long term lending operations. And that goes to the availability of commercial finance long term in Australia as well. The significant guarantee decision that we have made today makes it easier for those banks to operate in international credit markets in the future and frankly, that is of fundamental importance to credit flowing in the future to Australian businesses and others needing finance.
Secondly, the measure that we announced in relation to depositors, as you will have noted from my remarks just now, goes to all depositors.
It also goes to deposits without a cap. And that is, whatever the size. And the reason for that is to provide fundamental confidence in the system, given the news, the bad news often, which people are seeing on their television screens each night, coming in from around the world.
And furthermore, as a reason for that too, and that is there being no cap and again in the international financial market's assessment of Australian banking institutions for them to conclude that government guarantees are as comprehensive as possible.
And the third measure that I mentioned, the AOFM and the extension of a further $4 billion into the mortgage market, is critical particularly in terms of non-deposit taking institutions.
JOURNALIST: When you say that it applies to all deposits, that applies to all deposit products - term deposits, deposits with foreign banks in Australia (inaudible)
PM: We are talking about all deposits. Let us be clear about that. Now, for Australian banks, building societies, credit unions and also for the foreign subsidiaries of banks operating in Australia taking deposits.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) with higher costs relative to other banks (inaudible)
PM: Our responsibility is to look ahead - three, six, nine and 12 months. And what we in the government have been particularly concerned about is what various foreign governments have done to guarantee their banks' term funding arrangements into the future, in particular banks which haven't been performing well at all. Banks which have a far inferior credit rating to Australia's.
So what have those foreign governments done is come in over the top and saying ‘Okay, we'll fix that by providing a sovereign guarantee'. And the problem is in international credit markets looking ahead is that that causes international credit institutions to look at those banks more favourably.
I'm not prepared to stand around and allow that to happen and to place our banks, our Australian banks at a disadvantage. That's just wrong. It's not just wrong for them. The flow through consequences for the availability of credit longer term in the Australian economy for businesses and for other operations is of massive importance to the real economy. This is a most significant decision and one which we haven't taken lightly.
JOURNALIST: Given how serious the situation is, have you spoken to Mr Turnbull to try to encourage a bipartisan approach (inaudible)?
PM: On the first question, I've certainly asked the Treasury today to brief the Leader of the Opposition fully on the decisions we've taken and the reasons for so doing. On the second question, let me say this: this global financial crisis has entered a new and dangerous phase with real consequences for growth, for jobs and therefore for the future.
And as a consequence the government of course is examining measures for the future about how best to deploy the surplus that we've had set aside for the future.
JOURNALIST: How quickly will you legislate the package? And what happens if it doesn't work, if it doesn't restore confidence, what else is there for the Government to do?
PM: Well my first responsibility is to take actions in a measured, calm and responsible way and to be ahead of the game.
Our major banks don't face a crisis of raising credit on international credit markets today or tomorrow or in the next week. I am concerned about three, six, nine, 12 months ahead and again anticipating events and putting in place prudent preparations for that.
Secondly, you know, if you are in the midst of a rolling, if you are in the midst of the economic equivalent of a rolling national security crisis, I think everyone needs to understand that there's going to be a lot of bumps along the road.
And it's going to be rough, and it's not going to be even, it's not going to be smooth.
There won't be a magical response in the next 24 hours. But this is a strong clear cut course of action, both for the banks themselves, critical to providing credit to the real economy, but also to depositors who have had their confidence affected because of what they have seen on their television screens about international financial markets.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you saying there is no circumstance under which you would allow an Australian bank to go bust and would you allow any of the big banks to merge and effectively end the Four Pillars policy?
PM: First of all, the advice from the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority is that our banks today, as last week and as for the period ahead, remain in first class working order. The measures I have announced today go to their ability to continue to provide credit long term into the Australian economy, because the banks raise a large slice of their funding for domestic credit reasons offshore
And I am not about to have them in a position where they are placed at a disadvantage by foreign governments' actions which have artificially helped badly performing banks in those foreign countries. We remain committed to the Four Pillars policy.
JOURNALIST: The Treasurer this morning was talking about policies being under review (inaudible). You've given a (inaudible) on pensions by the next budget. Is there anything else that you can assure or is everything that is yet to be implemented now, under review?
PM: No, we remain absolutely committed to implementing our pre election commitments and those commitments which you saw in the Budget. As I said, the core discipline of the Budget was to put aside a substantial surplus to meet the contingencies of the future.
How long have you all heard me say, it is good to have a surplus like that as a buffer for the future? Well the future is here. And the question now is how to most intelligently use our surplus to maintain positive growth in the economy, given what I just said before. The global financial crisis has now reached a new and dangerous phase for the global economy with real implications for economic growth in Australia and jobs in Australia.
So we are examining all measures necessary to maintain positive growth in Australia into the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) mini budget is possible and secondly, on the questions of the emissions trading scheme, can you give a guarantee that you still plan to introduce that at the time that (inaudible)
PM: Michelle, I meant what I said before which is that, and I have been saying this in recent days, is that one, we have a nation building agenda which we are bringing forward $76 billion.
Two, as I have said just now in answer to Lenore, that we are examining other measures but we've got to be realistic and practical in response to the new challenges to growth which the global financial crisis has delivered. And the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, our ambition remains as I have described it before.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what's your estimate of the value of the liability that you have undertaken with your guarantee?
PM: Well across the Australian banking system at any one time, there will probably be deposits in the order of six to seven hundred billion dollars. And that's reasonably constant over time.
The key thing is for everyone to bear this in mind - that Australia's regulators all year have been going through the balance sheets of all of our banks. And we ask them on a regular basis, ‘how is it all going?'
And the balance sheets of our banks are in good working order, first point.
Second is, the measures that I have announced today are simply to make sure that the banks have proper access to global credit into the long term future, that's important. And to make sure that our depositors have a guarantee from Government, given the uncertainty which they are seeing on their television screens each night.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what guarantees are you getting from the banks (inaudible) you are going to guarantee their borrowing costs overseas (inaudible). What guarantees are you going to get from the banks that they won't indulge in risk-taking behaviour now that they have a government-backed guarantee?
PM: The guarantee that we are speaking of will also come at a cost to the banks by way of an insurance premium. And that will be levied at an appropriate rate, determined between the Treasury and themselves, which will go to ensuring that this is not simply a free gift from the Government by way of a guarantee to the banks, but that in providing this guarantee long term, providing this Government gilt edged guarantee long term, out there in the international credit place, that the banks are paying something back to the taxpayer on the way through.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the states obviously are looking for money for both health and education (inaudible)
PM: What has changed?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Will the states need to be ready to take less now as a result of the lower growth projections (inaudible)?
PM: Well we are in difficult economic times and we will have a tough negotiation with the states and territories, but for working families, pensioners and carers, what happens in the future with hospitals and schools is still really important. And we have a good reform agenda.
It will be a tough negotiation, probably a tougher negotiation, let's just be blunt about it. I understand that. But we have got a strong reform agenda to implement. The Government is in a strong budgetary position because of the measures we took earlier this year and we intend to get on with the business of delivering better schools and better hospitals for working families as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) unemployment going over five per cent (inaudible)
PM: Well I would draw your attention to the most recent publication on that which is the IMF's World Economic Outlook, which still projected for Australia an unemployment rate with a four in front of it. The rest of the major industrial economies had an unemployment rate with a six in front of it.
But given the developments in global financial markets in what has been a really turbulent couple of weeks, as night follows day there is a roll-on impact in terms of the real economy and jobs.
So unemployment is likely to be high. That is just levelling with people, it is likely to be higher.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Likely to be higher than has been projected. We don't have numbers on that. I am just telling you.
If you look carefully at what's happened in terms of the impact of global financial markets on confidence, both business and consumer across the world, Australia's major export markets as well and the consequences for confidence within Australia, it is a much tougher set of circumstances.
I go back to this, the Government has a clear cut, strong course of policy action to see Australia through. And I'd much rather be in our position with a strong budget surplus to draw upon, to help maintain positive economic growth in this country given the challenges which are unfolding in the real economy across the world.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) are they very much signalling to the Australian public, don't panic?
PM: Look, our attitude is very simple. Our banks and our financial institutions are in first class working order and on top of that now, the Australian Government guarantees your deposits.
It is really important given the bad news which so many ordinary Australians have been seeing down their television screen each night.
It is the right thing to do. It is also the right thing to do to help our banks in the international credit market, not be disadvantaged by the actions of foreign governments and that is why we have acted on this other important measure as well.
I am equally concerned about the availability of credit for businesses into the future as well, hence the other measure.
JOURNALIST: Isn't there a possibility it might have the reverse effect (inaudible) the banks are so secure, why are you taking such extraordinary measures (inaudible)
PM: What I have been saying, Mark, in previous discussions with the ladies and gentlemen of the press as well, is it is always important to be thinking three, six, nine, 12 months ahead. 
Right now the balance sheets look great. I am concerned about where it is going to be with the wash-on effect of these actions by foreign governments in six months time.
JOURNALIST: So the banks are secure now but they might not be in 12 months time?
PM: No, I am saying something quite different, quite different to that.
And that is the availability of credit in the economy. That's why this measure in providing a guarantee to the term funding arrangements used by the banks in the international credit market is so important. I don't want an Australian bank to be discriminated against, a first class Australian bank discriminated against, because some other foreign bank which has got a bad balance sheet, has been propped up by a guarantee by a foreign government. 
That is the bottom line.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I repeat what I said before. We are determined to implement our pre election commitments and our budget commitments. Remember, we produced a conservative budget document with a strong buffer with a strong surplus for the future.
On your other question, which is what is most effective for the future, or what is best for the future, we are spending our time working our way through that.
This Government is calm, methodical and rational in the way in which it approaches challenges. We spend a lot of time examining what's going on. We spend a lot of time looking at the policy options. Then we decide and we get on with it. We have done this in relation to the measures I have just been talking about today, we are doing so into the future as well.
The Government is determined to take whatever decisive action is necessary to secure the long term interests of this economy and the Australian people. Thank you.


The global financial crisis is affecting financial markets right around the world including Australia.
More than 25 banks around the world have failed or been bailed out. Share markets around the world have suffered large losses.
And the reality is in recent days we have entered a new and damaging stage in the global financial crisis  -  with real impacts on economic growth and jobs around the world and with real impacts on economic growth and jobs here in Australia as well.
Australia is better placed than almost any other country in the world, to deal with this crisis. We have the best bank regulators in the world. Our banks' balance sheets are strong and healthy. And Australia, unlike most other countries, has a strong budget surplus.
Part of the reason we are in a better position than most is that all year we have been anticipating events and taking practical steps to prepare for them.
That's why I have announced new measures today to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system into the future.
This package includes a guarantee for all bank deposits in Australian banks, credit unions and building societies.
The Government has been working for the last several months on the details of its financial claims scheme for depositors - because depositors haven't had one before.
We have decided to bring in this scheme  -  to cover all depositors and all deposits without cap  -  because I don't want to see unnecessary anxiety out there in the Australian community as ordinary Australians watch the bad news unfold on their television screens from overseas each night.
I also want to put our banking arrangements on the same footing as those which now apply in many other countries.
Another measure I have announced today is for the government to guarantee the overseas borrowing arrangements of our banks so that they can secure long term credit to continue to fund business and mortgage lending in Australia into the future.
Other governments have done this with their banks  -  and with banks in many cases which have very poor credit ratings indeed, relative to Australia's banks. And I don't want to put our banks at a disadvantage for the future.
All this is necessary to help unclog the arteries of the global financial system.
The Government is also concerned about the impact of the global financial crisis on growth and jobs for Australia.
The Government is determined to support the economy into the future by bringing forward our $76 billion nation-building agenda  -  where, for the first time, the Commonwealth will fund large scale investment in our ports, in our roads, in our rail and in high speed broadband infrastructure for the future.
The Government also remains determined to take other decisive action as necessary to support continued positive economic growth into the future  -  and to help working families, pensioners and carers deal with the impacts.
This is not just about the national economy; it is just as much about the household economy.
The truth is that what Australia is experiencing is the economic equivalent of a rolling national security crisis.
That means there is going to be a lot of rough weather ahead, and I just want to level with you.
But the Government has set an economic course for the country to see Australia through.
And we remain prepared to take whatever action, whatever action may be necessary to secure this nation's long term economic future. 
Good evening.


PM RUDD: The Prime Minister of Vietnam, Prime Minister Dung, will make some remarks and then as is the custom, we'll invite a couple of questions each from the Australian side and from the Vietnamese side.
Firstly, on behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I would warmly welcome Prime Minister Dung on his visit to Australia and this, his first visit to Australia.
Thirty-five years ago under Prime Minister Whitlam our diplomatic relationship was established between Australia and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. And 35 years later we honour, we thank you Prime Minister for honouring us with this visit in honour of this anniversary. And today the Prime Minister and I have agreed to lay out a road map for the next 35 years. Both Prime Minister Dung and I believe in long-term planning.
Vietnam is an important country in South East Asia. Currently a population of nearly 90 million people, and by the year 2025, 2030, a population of 150 million. And Vietnam is therefore becoming one of the strong and important pillars in South East Asia. It's in both Australia's interest and Vietnam's interest to take our existing strong bilateral relationship therefore, and make it even stronger into the future.
The Prime Minister and I exchanged our views on the impact of the global financial crisis on our respective economies and on the future of the global economy. Now, we agreed that the global economy faces difficult and uncertain times ahead but that underlines the importance of coordinated international action and we intend as two governments to be in close contact on that action including the collaboration between our respective central banks.
I thanked the Prime Minister for Vietnam's strong support for the successful negotiation for the ASEAN Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement. This agreement we hope to have signed by year's end but it brings together Australia and an economic entity which is very large indeed  -  the combined economies of South East Asia. I also thanked the Prime Minister for the government's speedy decision to provide the ANZ Banking Group with a foreign banking licence for its operations in Vietnam. Finally, the bilateral trade between our countries has now reached nearly $7 billion. The prospects are very good and we intend to build this bilateral relationship to take that economic engagement even further.
Prime Minister Dung, you are a welcome guest in our country, you're a welcome guest here in our national capital, Canberra, and I'd invite you to make some remarks.
PM DUNG (Translator): His Excellency Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, distinguished guests, dear friends. I'd like to thank you Prime Minister for your excellent words about our excellent adult (inaudible) friendship and I fully agree with what you have just said.
I'm very pleased to make my very first visit to this beautiful country of Australia on the occasion of our 35th celebration of the diplomatic relations between our two countries. My wife and I, as well as the entire delegation, would like to express our sincere thanks to Mr Prime Minister and all Australian friends for their warm and cultural welcome extended to us right from the very moment we landed in Canberra.
The Prime Minister and I got a very successful meeting based on the spirit of friendship, construction and mutual respect and understanding. The two governments are very (inaudible) since the establishment of our diplomatic relations. Thirty-five years ago we have been able to establish a really good and strong friendship and cooperation in many areas.
We have got good cooperation in such areas as politics, diplomacy, economics, trade, investment, tourism (inaudible), education and training, culture, defence, security and many others. Those cooperations have brought about practical benefits to both sides and contribute greatly to peace, stability, cooperation and development in the region.
And on that spirit the Prime Minister and I agreed to further endeavour to bring our cooperation and friendship to a more comprehensive and more effective stage. We also agreed to further accelerate and promote cooperation in trade and investments because these are the areas that possess great potential.
This will be further facilitated as the two countries have concluded the negotiation, the bilateral negotiations, on the ASEAN Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement and Australia has agreed in principle to recognise Vietnam's market economy and to reconsider its quarantine measures on Vietnamese seafood.
I'm very glad to inform you that during my visit the government of Vietnam has decided to grant the licence for the ANZ Group for 100 percent local incorporation in Vietnam. This is the third foreign bank to receive such a licence.
(inaudible)
The Prime Minister also announced to me that the Government of Australia will fund the designing phase of the Cao Lanh Bridge in Mekong Delta Province of Vietnam, which is a very significant construction for the socioeconomic development of the region. And Australia will consider further assistance to Vietnam in the construction phase of this bridge.
We're also thankful for the very effective assistance from Australia in the development of our education and training. In particular, the Prime Minister has informed me that Australia will increase the number of scholarships for Vietnam from 150 to 175.
We are also very thankful for the Australian Government and people for welcoming Vietnamese students to your country. Today, nearly 10,000 Vietnamese students study in Australia. This is the largest number of Vietnamese students abroad. They will be excellent bridges connecting our two nations.
We do appreciate the presence of RMIT and the University of Melbourne in Vietnam. They have truly contributed to our development.
We have also agreed to further boost our cooperation in other areas such as agriculture, defence, security, culture, science and technology, to name a few.
And I have the honour to invite the Prime Minister and his wife to visit Vietnam in early 2009, and my invitation has been accepted.
And, we would like also to thank the Australian Government and people for giving a happy home to the Vietnamese community in Australia, helping them to integrate and contribute to the prosperity of Australia.
And I commend the contributions of the Vietnamese community here to the furtherance of our friendship and our cooperation.
We have also agreed to work together and Australia will apply necessary and appropriate measures to prevent such acts that might harm our bilateral ties.
And, building upon the excellent friendship between our two countries and on humanitarian grounds, I've informed the Prime Minister, the Vietnamese President has decided to grant clemency to two Vietnamese Australians charged with drug trafficking.
And besides, we also touched on various other areas of cooperation.
I hope that after my visit, and with the efforts made by both sides we will be able to bring our friendship and cooperation to a more comprehensive level that's deeper and more substantial in the benefit of the two peoples and for the sake of peace, stability, cooperation and development in the region.
Thank you very much.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much Prime Minister. If I could invite the first question from the Vietnamese side.
JOURNALIST: (Translator) Could you elaborate a little bit more about the concrete measures and solutions to bring our economic trade and investment ties to a higher level? 
PM RUDD: If I could begin by answering and then I'll turn to Prime Minister Dung. Firstly, the state of the bilateral trade relationship is very good, with as I said $7 billion in bilateral trade, and this is a very good foundation to build on.
The second building block is the agreement for an ASEAN wide Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement which, with the support of the Vietnamese government, should be signed at the end of this year.
Thirdly, the decision announced today in relation to the ANZ over time will lead to an expanded services and financial services trade between our two countries and that will be an important new building block for the future.
Two other concrete areas for expansion are education services where the operations of RMIT, we believe together with other Australian education services, can be significantly expanded in the future. Together with a significant increase in the number of Vietnamese students studying in Australia, which is the sale of Australian education services, plus new building blocks for economic ties in the future.
Currently we have about 200 Australian companies operating in Vietnam with a paid up capital investment of in excess of a billion dollars. We would want to see that expanded in the future as well including in new and expanding areas like mining.
Did you wish to add, Prime Minister?
PM DUNG (Translator): I fully agree with Prime Minister Rudd about the steps and solutions to further bring us our trade, economic and investment ties. You can see that bilateral trade in 2007 reached a figure of 7 billion US dollars and this year this figure might well come to over 8 billion and the potential for further, for bigger trade is there.
For instance, if the agreements by both sides today on the reconsideration of the quotes and measures on seafood import from Vietnam is well observed then we can see a much bigger trade volume between us.
Today Australia is the 17th largest investors in Vietnam with a total capital of one billion US dollars. However, there remains a number of other prospective projects that might receive their licence very soon. This will further boost our investment ties.
Besides, there are two important factors. First, it is our excellent diplomatic and political ties which is progressing by the day. The second factor is the large Vietnamese community in Australia. There are now 250,000 or more of them here. Plus, 10,000 Vietnamese students. They are the practical bridges, not only in terms of connecting our nations and building up our friendship, but also in boosting economic, trade and investment ties between us. Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the financial crisis, how much of the surplus are you prepared to spend down to help see the country through this period? Are you considering some sort of interim payment to pensioners to help them in the short term and to provide some stimulus to the economy?
PM RUDD: When we framed the last budget we did say it took some tough decisions to build a surplus as a buffer for the future. And the surplus was put aside for tough times. And those tough times have now come.
So the Government is resolved, as we have indicated before, to take decisive action as is necessary to support economic growth into the future. The Government is considering practical measures to that effect as we speak and we will make further statements as are necessary.
This action will include of course the Government's nation building agenda for the future and other measures.
And if I could take another question from the Vietnamese side.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible) the Vietnam-Australian relation has kept along strongly in recent times and do you have any comments on the prospect for the relation next time?
PM RUDD: My comments are these - that when it comes to the Australia -Vietnam relationship, we should be very ambitious for the future.
Vietnam is a big country, and it's getting bigger. But the base of expanding the relationship lies in expanding also the political relationship.
The Prime Minister and I have already spoken on the telephone before, but it's good to spend quite a bit of time here today in Canberra. And I look forward to visiting his country later next year.
The great thing about the Prime Minister of Vietnam, Prime Minister Dung, is that he strikes me as a very practical sort of bloke. Which means that in building practical cooperation projects in the future, I think we can really do business with each other. So we'll be spending more time on the phone in the mean time on those projects.
Do you wish to add Prime Minister?
Given that the Prime Minister doesn't appear to add, I think there has been some caucusing over here, and we'll go to the West Australian.
JOURNALIST: What specific measures are you considering? And when it comes to pensions, areyou ruling out acting on pensions before the Harmer Review comes down in February-March?
PM RUDD: I believe that the purpose of having a surplus is to make sure you've got a buffer for the tough times. And the tough times have come. That means making sure that you're taking necessary measures, all necessary measures, to contribute to positive economic growth in the future and to help families on the way through.
On the detail of those measures, the government will make further statements in due course.
Thanks, Prime Minister.


The Rudd Government is providing 2.9 million Australians in regional and rural areas with around $4 billion in extra support to help with cost of living pressures and sustain economic growth.
The initiative is part of the Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy that will strengthen regional economies and households, given the risk of a deep and prolonged global economic slowdown.
Pensioners, carers and families living in rural and regional Australia will benefit from additional financial assistance from 8 December.
Almost one million families in regional and rural Australia who receive Family Tax Benefit A will receive a lump sum payment of $1,000 in respect of each eligible child in their care.
The payment will also be made for each dependent child who attracts Youth Allowance, Abstudy, or a Veteran's Children's Education Scheme payment.
Around 1.9 million pensioners living in regional and rural Australia will get a down payment on longer term reforms because we recognise their need for early support.
Pensioners living in regional and rural communities will receive a one-off payment of $1,400 if they are single or $2,100 if they are a couple.
Recipients of the following payment will be eligible:
     * Age Pension;
     * Carer Payment;
     * Disability Support Pension;
     * Bereavement Allowance, Wife Pension, Widow B Pension, Partner Allowance, Widow Allowance;
     * Special Benefit;
     * Veterans' Affairs Service Pension; and
     * Veterans Income Support Supplement.
As well, those receiving Carer Allowance will receive $1,000 for each eligible person in their care.
The Government's economic package also includes help for self funded retirees in regional and rural areas seriously affected by the decline in the value of their investments.
In all 130,500 Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders living in regional and rural Australia will receive a payment of $1,400 if they are single or $2,100 if they are a couple.
For the first time, lump sum payments are being extended to include 391,000 Disability Support Pensioners under the age of 65 living in non-metropolitan areas.
All payments will be tax exempt and not included for income-testing purposes.
Thousands of Australians in regional Australia will also benefit from the Rudd Government First Home Owners Boost.
     * First home buyers who purchase established homes will have their grant doubled from $7,000 to $14,000;
     * First home buyers who purchase a newly constructed home will receive an extra $14,000 to take their grant to $21,000.
The Rudd Government initiative is designed to stimulate housing activity and give first home buyers a better chance in the housing market.


The Rudd Government today announced a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to strengthen the Australian economy in the face of the worst global financial crisis since the Great Depression.
This $10.4 billion strategy will strengthen the national economy and support Australian households, given the risk of a deep and prolonged global economic slowdown.
The Australian economy is strong, and we remain better placed than most other nations, but Australia is not immune from the global financial crisis.
In the midst of the global financial crisis, the Rudd Government is taking decisive action to strengthen the Australian economy.
The Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy contains five key measures:
     * $4.8 billion for an immediate down payment on long term pension reform.
     * $3.9 billion in support payments for low and middle income families.
     * $1.5 billion investment to help first home buyers purchase a home.
     * $187 million to create 56,000 new training places in 2008-09.
     * Accelerate the implementation of the Government's three nation building funds and bring forward, the commencement of investment in nation building projects to 2009.
The Rudd Government made tough decisions in the May budget to build up a large budget surplus to act as a buffer in tough economic times.
Today those tough economic times have arrived and the Government is now acting decisively to use the surplus to strengthen the Australian economy.
The Rudd Government's Economic Security Strategy is a significant economic response to deal with extraordinary economic times.
This $10.4 billion strategy will be entirely funded from the budget.  Treasury advises that the Budget will be in surplus after these measures.  The Government will publish a full budget update in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook within a month. 
Australian pensioners
The Rudd Government will deliver a $4.8 billion down payment to Australia's four million pensioners, carers and seniors - providing them with immediate financial help in the lead up to comprehensive reform of the pension system.
The $4 billion down payment for pensioners will be made available through a lump sum payment of $1,400 to single pensioners and $2,100 to pensioner couples, which will benefit:    
     * Age Pensioners;
     * Disability Support Pensioners;
     * Carer Payment recipients;
     * Wife and Widow B Pensioners; Partner, Widow and Bereavement Allowees;
     * Veterans' Affairs Service Pensioners;
     * Veterans' Income Support Supplement recipients;
     * Veterans Affairs Gold Card holders eligible for Seniors Concession Allowance;
     * Those of age pension age who receive Parenting Payment, Special Benefit, or Austudy; and  
     * Eligible Self Funded Retirees holding a Commonwealth Senior Health Card (CSHC)
People who are receiving Carer Allowance will also receive $1,000 for each eligible person in their care. 
The Government's Economic Security Strategy includes help for self-funded retirees who are eligible for a Commonwealth Senior Health Care Card.
Those who hold a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card or are Veterans Gold Card holders eligible for Seniors Concession Allowance will receive a payment of $1,400 if they are single or $2,100 to couples. 
These pension payments will be made from 8 December 2008 and are intended to provide additional support in the 9 months between now and when long-term reforms are introduced from the beginning of the next financial year.
Australian families
The Rudd Government will invest $3.9 billion to provide immediate financial support to help around 2 million Australian families.
The support will be delivered to families through a one-off payment of $1,000 for each eligible child in their care.  Those who will receive the support include:
     * Families who receive Family Tax Benefit (A); and
     * Families with dependent children who receive Youth Allowance, Abstudy or a benefit from the Veterans' Children's Education Scheme payment.
In all, around 3.9 million Australian children will receive a $1,000 one-off payment.
These payments will be made from 8 December 2008.
First Home Buyers
First home buyers will be eligible for grants of up to $21,000 under a decisive Rudd Government initiative designed to stimulate housing activity and give first home buyers a better chance in the housing market.
More than 150,000 first home buyers are estimated to benefit from the time-limited scheme.
Under the First Home Owners Boost:
     * First home buyers who purchase established homes will have the grant which they are currently entitled to doubled from $7,000 to $14,000; and
     * First home buyers who purchase a newly-constructed home will receive an extra $14,000 to take their total grant to $21,000.
First home buyers will be eligible for the First Home Owners Boost from today (14 October, 2008).
All contracts entered into by 30 June, 2009 will be eligible for this new additional assistance.
The Rudd Government will invest around $1.5 billion in the housing market over 2008-09 and 2009-10 through this initiative.
Jobs and Training
The Rudd Government will invest $187 million to create an additional 56,000 training places this financial year to help keep the economy strong in these tough times.
This funding injection will:
     * Effectively double the Productivity Places Program from 57,000 to 113,000 in 2008-09; and
     * Take the Government's total investment in training places since April to more than $400 million.
These new places will take the Rudd Government's total commitment to the Productivity Places Program to more than $2 billion with over 700,000 new training places created over five years.
The new places will be available at Certificate II, III and IV levels, with 10,000 places to be allocated as ‘Structural Adjustment Places' to provide retraining opportunities and support to displaced workers.
There has been a huge demand for training since the Productivity Places Program began in April, with more than 50,000 jobseekers enrolled and over 11,000 having already completed their training in areas of skill shortage.
Nation Building
The Rudd Government will fast track its nation-building agenda to help shield Australians from the global financial crisis.
The Government will accelerate the implementation of the Government's three nation building funds.  Government Ministers will bring forward their interim Infrastructure Report so that work can commence in 2009 on projects in the key areas of:
     * Education and Research;
     * Health and Hospitals;
     * Transport and Communications.
To fast-track these projects, the Government will be seeking referral of the legislation for the Nation Building Funds into a Senate Committee this week.
Attachment: Budget Impact of Economic Security Strategy - RTF 86KB | PDF 54KB


The global financial system is experiencing its most significant upheaval since the Great Depression.
More than 25 banks around the world have failed or been bailed out. Global stock markets have suffered significant losses.
The crisis has buffeted confidence around the world and is contributing to a serious slowdown in the global economy.
The International Monetary Fund now expects growth of less than 1 per cent in six of the world's largest developed economies next year.
This will be the slowest growth in the advanced economies for over a quarter of a century.
Australia is not immune from these developments, but we are in a much better position to weather the storm than many other countries.
            Actual
            Forecasts
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            World
            5.1
            5.0
            3.9
            3.0
            Advanced economies
            3.0
            2.6
            1.5
            0.5
               United States
            2.8
            2.0
            1.6
            0.1
               Japan
            2.4
            2.1
            0.7
            0.5
               Euro area
            2.8
            2.6
            1.3
            0.2
               Major advanced economies (G7)
            2.7
            2.2
            1.2
            0.1
            Australia
            2.7
            4.2
            2.5
            2.2
Figure 1 - IMF Global Growth Forecasts
Source: October 2008 IMF World Economic Outlook
In the May Budget, the Government was acutely aware of the risks posed by turbulence in global financial markets.
The Budget forecast that problems abroad would slow the Australian economy and impact on employment. This was against the backdrop of already high domestic interest rates and inflation.
In recent weeks the global financial crisis entered a new and dangerous phase, with inevitable consequences for the Australian economy. 
The Rudd Government is determined to take decisive action to strengthen growth and protect Australians from the fall-out from the global financial crisis.
The Government has moved quickly to alleviate pressures in the Australian financial sector through its guarantee to Australian depositors and wholesale funding to ensure it remains globally competitive.
The Government is working closely with other governments around the world to address the global financial crisis.
The Government is now taking decisive action, delivering a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to strengthen the Australian economy and support Australian households through these difficult times.
The package specifically bolsters recent weaker growth in household consumption and housing, and provides much-needed assistance to Australian pensioners and families.
The Government is also accelerating the implementation of projects to be funded through the three Nation Building Funds announced in the Budget to strengthen our economy.
The Government took the tough decisions in the Budget to build a strong surplus to act as a buffer in an economic slowdown. This is now providing the flexibility to respond to the dramatic deterioration in the global economy.
The Economic Security Strategy will complement the Reserve Bank's recent moves to reduce official interest rates. It also builds on the measures the Rudd Government announced in the 2008-09 Budget.
Treasury advises that the Budget will be in surplus after these measures. The Government will publish a full budget update in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook to be released within a month.
All advice currently available to the Rudd Government is that the Australian economy will continue to experience positive economic growth.


Good evening. 
Today I announced a $10.4 billion economic security strategy to help see Australia through the global financial crisis.
Many Australians have become concerned, anxious and even fearful as to the future.
The truth is that we are going through the worst financial crisis in our lifetime. I've described it as the economic equivalent of a national security crisis.
More than 25 banks around the world have failed, or been bailed out.
But here in Australia, we have among the best regulated banks, with the best balance sheets, in the world.
And they were rated last week as coming equal second out of 134 banking systems worldwide.
Nonetheless, as Prime Minister, I was not prepared to stand idly by while people's fears here were being fed by the stream of bad economic news from abroad.
That's why the Government took decisive action on Sunday to guarantee all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions, for the next three years.
My first responsibility as Prime Minister is to take whatever action is necessary to maintain the stability of Australia's financial system. 
And I will continue to exercise that responsibility.
In the last few weeks, the global financial crisis has moved into a new and dangerous stage.
And that is its effect on the real economy, on growth and jobs, around the world and here in Australia.
Growth will slow, and unemployment will rise. That's why the Government today announced this $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to support continued positive growth in the national economy, and to provide practical help to households as well.
This strategy is designed to help pensioners, carers and families, and first home buyers.
The Government believes in long term planning. That's why we set aside a $22 billion surplus earlier this year in the Budget, as a buffer against tough times.
Those tough times have now arrived.
And that's why we've decided to take decisive action today with this Economic Security Strategy. And we'll build on it soon with the Government's nation building agenda, to build the infrastructure Australia needs for the future.
History tells us that when the economy slows, responsible governments step in to strengthen growth. And that is what we have done by using the surplus.
As Prime Minister, it is my job to level with the Australian people. I don't intend to guild the lily. There will be tough times ahead.
But the Government remains determined to take whatever action is necessary in the future to steer the economy through this global financial crisis.
And I have absolute confidence that as a nation, we will get through these tough times together.
A video of this speech is also available.


The Rudd Government today announced a First Home Owners Boost to ensure first home buyers will be eligible for grants of up to $21,000.
The First Home Owners Boost is a decisive Rudd Government initiative to stimulate housing activity and give first home buyers a better chance in the housing market.
Under the First Home Owners Boost:
     * First home buyers who purchase established homes will have their grant doubled from $7,000 to $14,000; and
     * First home buyers who purchase a newly constructed home will receive an extra $14,000 to take their grant to $21,000.
More than 150,000 first home buyers are estimated to benefit from the scheme.
The Rudd Government's First Home Owners Boost is part of the Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to strengthen the Australian economy during the global financial crisis.
First home buyers will be eligible for the First Home Owners Boost from today (14 October, 2008).
All contracts entered into by 30 June, 2009 will be eligible for this new additional assistance.
The Rudd Government will invest almost $1.5 billion in the housing market through this initiative.
All newly-constructed homes will have to at least meet their relevant State and Territory energy efficiency and sustainability standards.
This initiative will help strengthen the Australian economy during global financial crisis and help protect Australians during the difficult global economic times that lie ahead.
The Rudd Government understands that the economy faces the twin challenges of a subdued housing market and housing affordability levels at record lows.
That is why the Government is committed to action on both fronts.
This measure builds on the Government's $2.2 billion worth of housing initiatives in the 2008-09 Budget, including:
     * A National Rental Affordability Scheme to build 50,000 new affordable rental properties;
     * A Housing Affordability Fund to reduce the cost of bringing new homes to market; and
     * First Home Saver Accounts to encourage young people to save for a new home.
The First Home Owners Boost responds to the housing affordability challenge and will help strengthen residential investment activity in Australia.


The Rudd Government will invest $3.9 billion to provide immediate financial support to help around two million Australian families.
This decisive action is part of the Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to strengthen the Australian economy and support families during the global financial crisis.
The support will be delivered to families through a one-off payment of $1,000 for each eligible child in their care.
Those who will receive the support include:
     *  1.9 million families who receive Family Tax Benefit (A); and
     *  Families of another 220,000 dependent children who receive Youth Allowance, Abstudy or a benefit from the Veterans Children's Education Scheme payment.
In all, around 3.9 million children will benefit from the $1,000 one off payment.
The global financial crisis is placing increasing pressure on family budgets already stretched by the rising cost of living.
The Rudd Government is taking decisive action to strengthen the Australian economy.
Lower and middle income working families are the driving force of the Australian economy.
It is vital that in times of global financial crisis these Australians have our support.
Most families will receive their full payment automatically in the fortnight beginning 8 December 2008 on each family's regular family tax benefit payment day. These payments will be completed by 19 December.
Families who receive their family payments as a lump sum at the end of the financial year will receive their additional payment when they make their claim.
Payments will be tax exempt and not included for income-testing purposes.


Today the government is announcing a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to deal with the challenges of the global financial crisis, to support continued positive growth in the Australian economy, and to provide practical support for households as well.
The global financial crisis, as I've said before, is the economic equivalent of a rolling national security crisis. Inspecting the financial system, we've seen the impacts around the world in terms of large banks collapsing or having to be bailed out.
It's affecting stock markets, we've seen the gyrations on stock markets in recent times.
But it's also affecting the real economy. The real economy: jobs, growth, overseas and here in Australia.
The Government's approach throughout this global financial crisis has been to plan ahead, to examine unfolding events, and to act early and to act decisively. The Government has done so in the course of the last weekend in relation to the measures necessary to underpin the long term stability of the Australian financial system.
But the global financial crisis has entered into a new, dangerous and damaging phase, one which goes to the real economy  -  growth and jobs.
And that's why the Government has decided to act decisively and early on the question of this Economic Security Strategy for the future.
An Economic Security Strategy to help underpin positive economic growth into the future and to provide practical support for households.
Decisive action, responsible action, early action, all in Australia's interest.
Why is this measure necessary? Let me advance three reasons.
Firstly, if you look at the data which has been produced by the IMF in recent times about the global economic outlook and global growth forecasts, you see significant downwards revisions in global economic growth. At least one percentage point off global growth numbers larger than that across the most developed economies. 
The second is, we see evidence also of softening prices for Australian commodities on international markets.
And thirdly, you look at the business and consumer confidence indicators both here and in other countries. These point to difficult times ahead.
So you can either sit back and watch this data unfold, or you can act on it. This Government has decided to act on it.
That's why we have assembled this $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy for the future.
It contains five elements, and I'll go to them now.
Firstly, a $4.8 billion immediate down payment on long term pension reform.
Secondly, a $3.9 billion payment in support for low and middle income families.
Thirdly, a $1.5 billion investment to help first home buyers purchase a home.
Furthermore, $187 million to create a further 56,000 new training places in '08-09, a doubling of training places as they currently exist.
And fifth, accelerating the implementation of the government's nation building agenda, bringing that forward as I've indicated in earlier remarks.
Let me go to each of these measures.
Firstly, on Australian pensions. The Government will deliver a $4.8 billion down payment to Australia's four million pensioners, carers and seniors. This will contain within it a $4 billion down payment for pensioners which will be made available through a lump sum payment of $1,400 to single pensioners, and $2,100 to pensioner couples. 
This will be payable in December.
The decisions necessary to implement that change by December need to be taken this week.
Also, people who are receiving carer allowance will also receive $1,000 for each eligible person they care for.
These payments will be made from 8 December 2008 and are intended to provide additional support in the nine months between now and the middle of next year, when long term reforms will take place as the government has already indicated, consistent with the recommendations of the Harmer Committee of Inquiry
Secondly, family payments. $3.9 billion which will take the form of a $1,000 payment for each eligible child in care for those who currently receive support through Family Tax Benefit A, and families with dependent children who receive youth allowance, Abstudy or a benefit from the veterans' children's education scheme payment.
In all, about 3.8 million Australian children will receive a $1,000 one off payment to their families. These payments will be made from 8 December this year as well.
The third measure, first home buyers. At present, as you're aware, first home buyers are eligible for a $7,000 grant. The government is concerned about softening demand for housing over time. Therefore, the government has decided to act decisively in this area as well in consultation with industry and with others.
As a consequence, for the duration of '08-09, the First Home Owners Grant will be increased from $7,000 to $14,000. On top of that, first home buyers who purchase a newly constructed home will receive an extra $14,000 to take that grant to $21,000. In other words, a doubling of the First Home Owners Grant if you are buying your first home, a tripling of it if you are buying a newly constructed home.
This is designed to support activity in the housing sector. And the housing sector is critical in terms of the overall performance of the economy.
The fourth measure. I indicated before that the government already had in place a number of productivity training places which have been oversubscribed based on the advice provided to us by the Deputy Prime Minister. The Government, therefore, in the period ahead through to the end of the current financial year will effectively double the number of productivity training places from 57,000 to 113,000 in '08-09, costing $187 million.
Finally, in relation to nation building, the government will continue to implement the bring-forward of its nation building agenda. We will make a comprehensive statement on this in December with the bring-forward of the priority lists, both for the Building Australia Fund as well as in education, health and in hospitals.
All together, these measures, as I indicated before, come to a total investment in the economy of $10.4 billion. As I've said before, the government prepared well ahead for this set of circumstances that by ensuring that in the current Budget we provided ourselves with a strong buffer for the future.
The purpose of a surplus in the Budget is to deal with tough times. And tough times are with us. Therefore, the government intends to deploy this surplus in the ways in which I have just described.
Finally, the government remains determined to take whatever action is necessary in the future, firstly, to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system, and secondly, to continue to underpin positive economic growth in the Australian economy going forward.
If I could turn to the treasurer, who has just returned from Washington, to add to my remarks, and then we'll take your questions.
SWAN: Well thanks very much, Prime Minister.
It is the case that we are in the midst of the worst financial crisis ever to confront the modern market economy. And the sooner that governments act to protect their people the better. That is the lesson that I learnt in Washington and New York in recent days. That is the lesson that other world leaders have learnt in their economies. 
The situation is moving very fast, and it does require decisive, decisive action.
And decisive action requires a fiscal stimulus. This is a fiscal stimulus and it will support monetary policy as well.
We've acted on monetary policy, now we are acting on fiscal policy and of course we have acted to strengthen our financial system and to strengthen the stability of our banks.
Now it does remain the case if there was ever, if there was any country in world that you wanted to be in in these circumstances it is Australia. But we are not immune and the situation in the last couple of weeks has changed dramatically. The face of the crisis has changed dramatically.
I was comforted, comforted by the fact that leaders on the weekend recognised the seriousness of the situation, and its threat to the world economy and decided to take decisive and coordinated action.
And as you have seen through the last 24 hours and will continue to see, that coordinated action is happening on a global basis. And part and parcel of that coordinated action is action on fiscal policy. This is an important package, an important strengthening of the Australian economy. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will be left in the surplus for this financial year after this package and do you have an estimate of what this will mean in terms of growth, GDP figures, could add?
PM: On the first question, as the Treasurer just indicated, we are confident that we will still be able to deliver a comfortable surplus going forward. The details of that will be contained in MYEFO which will be released during the course of November.
On the second question about our growth assumptions, they were last forecast in the Budget. The reason we are taking this measure though is to provide us with an extra buffer for the future. What you are looking at is an economic security strategy, the equivalent of one per cent of GDP. And the reason we are doing that is to give this economy that extra buffer for the future. We think it is the right thing to do and it is the right thing to do now.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd did you not have forecasts ahead of MYEFO for unemployment and growth and how they would be affected by this crisis on which you based this package?
PM: Certainly, talking to our advisers in Treasury, we have been very mindful of what would logically follow in terms of the softening of growth and employment projections for Australia going forward, given what has happened.
But here is other thing, it is very important to act early and decisively. If you are to learn anything from economic history it is this: at a time when economies need stimulus support, don't leave it too late.
There are critical messages and lessons to be learned from history here, which is act decisively, act responsibly and act early. And we have done that and we are acting ahead of the curve, looking to where our economic circumstances would be well into next year.
That is the right course of action.
SWAN: I might just add to that because Lenore, it is really important to understand that the world changed. It changed dramatically in the last couple of weeks. That is what policy makers around the world are all dealing with and we are simply not immune from that. I mean that is why you have seen some of the actions in the financial system in recent days, throughout Europe.
That is why you have seen more action in the United States. Something changed fundamentally and of course, what is now required because of the shock to the global economy is a domestic stimulus, a domestic stimulus to give us a buffer against this adverse movement in the global economy.
The IMF is talking about zero growth for advanced economies and a downgrade of growth for emerging economies.
PM: (Dominique) Strauss-Kahn, the managing director of the IMF, said about the developed economies - either in recession or on the cusp of it. That is what we are up against globally. And the key challenge here is what we do to deploy our surplus by planning ahead and to make sure we have an extra buffer for growth and for jobs into the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the payment to pensioners, was this something you were planning to do or has that been changed by events in the last couple of weeks? And is that quantum what pensioners can expect to get and retain beyond the review, the Harmer review?
PM: The two things are separate Mark. We will still be attentive to the recommendations which come forward from Mr Harmer for a long term pension reform. If you take the figures which have been put out today, in terms of the equivalent payment per week which comes from the bonus which has just been described, or the one off payment which has just been described for singles, it is in the vicinity of $35 per week and for each member of a married couple, some $26 per week.
But we will wait until we get the full report from Mr Harmer in terms of long term pension reform. I emphasise this: this applies to all categories of pensioners, carers.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you have any estimate of the effect of this package on inflation and going in the other direction do you have any revision on inflation as a result of the general slowdown?
TREASURER: Thanks Michelle. Well the Reserve Bank itself has made the observation that inflation will begin to turn down, following a peak around September. But around the world there is a substantial easing of monetary policy because of a forecast dramatic slowing of growth.
So the risk on inflation is now abating.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: Well our numbers Michelle will be published in MYEFO which will be out in the next month.
JOURNALIST: Just on the housing package, you said in your opening remarks that they were designed to support activity in the housing sector. Is that talking about the building sector, and is it also essentially designed to help keep housing prices from falling?
PM: Our principal concern here Laura is activity in the economy. This is a macro economic package, through fiscal policy and it is designed to promote activity. Our policy action here, given the significance which private dwelling investment represents in the national accounts, is to ensure that we maintain activity in the sector. That is why these one off measures have been embraced.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this looks like being a great Christmas for pensioners and low income earners. What's your message to people who are missing out? I think with the Family Tax Benefit Part B, I think if you start earning over $42,500 you start missing out, and when you get to $94,000 you lose 30 cents in the dollar. So what's your message to those people who might be seen as earning a bit more and missing out here?
TREASURER: Well Family Tax Benefit A runs right up the scale. So this is a very inclusive package and it is for Family Tax Benefit Part A. It is a very, very strong package and I can't give you the exact percentage of people that are eligible for that but it is a very high percentage of all families and I will get back with the exact number for you.
But make no mistake, this goes to a lot of families out there, a lot of families. And it, as you correctly point out, is a significant boost. Because the other thing is that families have been under very significant pressure because the other shock in the world economy has been of course the oil price shock, which people have been carrying in addition to relatively high inflation early in the year.
So these people actually have had a fair burden on them, which is why we are seeing an easing of monetary policy and why we have the capacity to ease fiscal policy, and that is what we are doing.
PM: These measures affect millions of families, affect millions of pensioners and affect a lot of people out there who are contemplating a decision now about whether or not to go ahead with that critical decision to invest in their first home.
JOURNALIST: Obviously you have said this is designed as a stimulus so will you be  -  and the timing before Christmas  -  are you actually encouraging people to spend this money when they get it? Is there a danger that people will hold onto it and will pay down credit or increase their savings?
PM: Now Dennis, it's important to put this into the context of various other measures. Firstly, you have a 100 basis point decision reduction by the Reserve Bank. Now secondly, you have the measures that we're taking today, as they affect pensioners and they affect families. And thirdly, of course you have the measures taken by the government, the action taken by the government over the weekend concerning the guarantee on deposits in banks, building societies and credit unions.
All these measures affect confidence, and do you know something  -  part of our job in this business is to continue to construct the rational grounds for confidence in the future.
We will not dictate how any individual consumer or person spends their money, it's a matter for them. But what we're on about is making sure the financial system is sound and secure, in which people can have confidence, that the public finances of this country are sound and secure, in which they can have confidence, as well as delivering practical support on the way through.
JOURNALIST: Do these measures leave room for the Reserve Bank to keep easing monetary policy?
PM: The Reserve Bank will make its own call in the future, Paul, and all I can say is that we, being responsible fiscal policy, are doing the right and responsible thing, and furthermore we are in a position so to do because of the cautious and conservative approach we took to the budget when it was constructed in May, to give us this buffer for the future.
TREASURER: Can I just add to that, what has happened here is fiscal policy is now supporting monetary policy because circumstances have changed dramatically around the globe.
PM: Also remember what the Reserve Bank Governor said in his statement the other day. He used a term which reflected very much what the Treasurer was saying before. He referred to recent events as having reflected quote: “A material change” unquote and that is why decisive action across the policy instruments available to government is necessary and that is why the Reserve Bank has equally acted decisively.
JOURNALIST: You won the election declaring yourself to be an economic conservative. Has this calamity, this economic calamity worldwide, transformed you into an economic radical?
PM: The credentials of being an economic conservative is about this  -  planning for the future and putting money away for that. This government has planned for the future, it's put money away for that, and we've decided the time has now come to invest, and to invest in the ways which we've described.
TREASURER: Can I just add to that, if that's your categorisation, just look at those people around the table at the G20.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're spending a lot of money here to really address market failure, and you have to do that because you want to protect people, the real economy. How important is it that there is regulatory reform across the whole global system so that we don't have to sit here in another five years having to bail out failed banks again?
PM: I'll turn to Wayne to give a fuller response to this because he's had a full diet of this around the table of the IMF and the G20. But (inaudible), the bottom line is this, and my discussions recently with President Bush and Prime Minister Brown and others is part of the global confidence equation affects here as well.
It is for the markets of the world to see the governments of the world embrace a unified, uniform, consistent set of measures on liquidity, on capitalisation, as well as regulation for the future.
And in the process, not to go down the road of what we described as, you know, Balkanised regulation. If ever there is a single message the governments of the world, that now this is one planet, it's this one and the challenge we still have ahead of us, and the Treasurer's been doing some excellent work on this in Washington in recent days, is to arrive at that point where on those three core elements of consistent regulation, we the governments of the world get it right.
Transparency on the question of liquidity and capitalisation and also the regulatory framework across the top.
TREASURER: I just wanted to add to that, because (inaudible) but (inaudible).
PM: I was going to speak shortly and briefly, wasn't I? Sorry.
TREASURER: Both the G7, the G20, the IMF  -  they all regard this as a global problem that requires a global solution. From early on this year both the Prime Minister and myself have been very active across a range of forums arguing for the recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum to be implemented globally, and that has not happened across all countries.
But also the Prime Minister has put forward an important new agenda to add to that of the Financial Stability Forum. That's been on the agenda, and he's taken that up with other world leaders, including President Bush.
I believe, as a result of what occurred on the weekend, all nations, particularly the largest developed and developing nations, will now seriously consider that forward agenda, because in all of the meetings I was at, the United States particularly recognised that the source of this crisis was there, and they do feel a responsibility to work globally to solve it.
JOURNALIST: You spoke about confidence. We've seen a massive bounce back on the markets overnight, how much heart do you take from that, and what do you say to people who might see that as a sign that the crisis is over?
PM: Well, I believe in taking things one day at a time and planning well ahead invariably on the worst assumptions. That's part of our job in government, and that's why we're being prudent and rational about our way forward and, you know, there's a lot of work to be done yet, and can I just say here and now, there are going to be huge bumps in the road yet, it's not going to be even sailing.
But, if there's one single lesson for us all from economic history it's this  -  there will be action. Responsible action. Decisive action. And I believe the government has done so.
TREASURER: Sorry, I just want to add to that  -  you might recall, Karen, in late March-early April this year when there was action on the investment bank Bear Stearns, many people concluded that that was the end of the global financial crisis.
When I was in Washington for the IMF meetings at that stage, I met with a number of people in the United States who said to me ‘This is not the end. It's just the beginning'.
Now sadly, that has turned out to be the case. Granted, particularly through May and June, it appeared that the world was going to settle down, but the world has changed, particularly in the last couple of weeks and what we must do is to act early and to do everything that we can to protect our people, but we must also deal with the issues internationally and we're doing that as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, two questions  -  the opposition have been calling for months for a $30 a week increase in the pension, you called it irresponsible, but were they right all along? And secondly, if the world has changed, do you still intend to introduce an emissions trading scheme in 2010?
PM: We've committed to long-term pension reform after those opposite after 12 years did nothing  -  first point. Secondly, in terms of the measures that we've adopted, as we've said consistently, they should apply to all categories of pensioners and carers, not just cherry picking some. I think that answers that point.
On the question of emissions trading, our ambition remains 2010. And do you know, part of the Government's thinking there is the calls from many in business for consistency and predictability for the future. Climate change is not going to go away. The question is getting the rules right, getting the design right, mapping it out early so people understand the rules within which they're operating and can responsibly operate.
The long-term economic cost to the entire economy and to the entire global economy of not acting on climate change remains formidable.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the cost of this package have any impact on your ability to deliver all of your election promises and your COAG agenda, or the pace at which you're able to deliver those?
PM: We are confident, having been prudent financial managers, that we can honour our pre-election commitments, we can honour our Budget commitments, and we are confident that we'll continue to advance our nation-building agenda as well. The second part of your question was?
JOURNALIST: The COAG agenda and...
PM: On the COAG agenda, we're up for a lot of argy-bargy on that fairly soon. I'm looking forward to that. But, you know, long-term reform on health and hospitals and schools, that's still important. It's out there, it's bread and butter stuff for people in the community. We intend to get it right, so yes.
JOURNALIST: $10 billion is a big package but very little of it seems productivity-related. It seems to be pensions and a family assistance package. Have you softened on your attention on productivity?
PM: As we said quite explicitly before, this is a macroeconomic package designed to do two things  -  which is to support positive economic growth into the future, and secondly, to support the household economy as well.
The Government's long-term productivity agenda remains in place. My answer to Dennis' question before about the role of the Education Revolution and the broader productivity agenda in the negotiations with the States and Territories remains on track. Furthermore, the other big driver or productivity is what you do in terms of infrastructure. That remains on track as well.
There's not an either/or business. Sensible long-term planning gets the challenges presented to us from outside the square right, as well as those that we've been working on for some time as well.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, will this package be enough to prevent Australia from falling into recession or will you guys be back here in six months' time outlining more spending to keep the economy ticking over?
TREASURER: I don't ever use those terms about the Australian economy. As I said before, there's one country in the world you would want to be in in these circumstances, it is Australia. We have underlying strengths here that virtually no other country in the world has, but we're not immune from the fallout and that's why we've decided to act  -  for the short-term - to act immediately now.
We have a long-term agenda which strengthen our economy, a long-term investment program. This is not a substitute for that. That continues. And some of these payments are one-off  -  one off for good reasons. What they do is recognise the enormity of the shock to the economy that is flowing from these international circumstances. But our long-term agenda remains on course.
PM: The Government remains determined also, as I indicated, I think, in my remarks before, to take whatever action is necessary in the future to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and to continue to support positive economic growth in the economy. That's the responsible course of action.
JOURNALIST: On infrastructure, realistically, how quickly could you get the first of your projects up and running, given that you've brought it forward by three months and there's going to be quite a time lag before you can get...
PM: The Federal Government in the past has not had a nation-building agenda. So, we've had to start from scratch, point one. Point two: we've been out there with the States and Territories for some time now putting together a priority list for infrastructure and submitting those to rational analysis, and to bring forward, as I've suggested for first reports in December.
When we make a further statement on our Economic Security Strategy for the future we will give you a clear indication as to the rollout pace which is possible under that agenda. We've got to get the policy right because this is serious stuff  -  getting infrastructure right for the future. And that's why we cracked the whip, made sure it's going to be ready in time, but we want to make sure, equally, it's done in a responsible way.
JOURNALIST: A question also for the Treasurer. Is this enough to ensure that economic growth next year stays with a two in front of it, as Lindsay Tanner suggested on Sunday? And secondly, if this is such an unprecedented crisis, if tax revenue falls at the same time you need to stimulate the economy, what's your position on posting a deficit, if necessary?
TREASURER: Our fundamental commitment is to keep the Budget in surplus over the economic cycle. That was the commitment we took to the last election and our commitment now. That's why we describe ourselves as economic conservatives, not radicals.
PM: The other point is, as I've said before, the numbers we have before us all suggest this economy will continue to generate positive growth. What we are doing today, given the extraordinary events which have happened abroad, is to provide this economy with a buffer for the period ahead. That, I think, is a responsible course of action.
JOURNALIST: Is it your view, or the view of those people you met in Washington, that the world has changed forever? Are we going to get back to a situation where we were before? And isn't it the reality that whatever we do in our economy, given the global nature of this, we're still at the mercy of what other countries do?
TREASURER: (inaudible) was we can't continue with business as usual, otherwise we will be condemned to these events in the future. You might recall this has happened before. This event is now bigger. It was called the Asian Financial Crisis and indeed, the G20 was formed as a consequence of that. But despite that, in the 10-year period since then, the fundamental reform that needs to happen to the financial architecture has not happened.
I certainly believe that the scale of these events, their threats to the fundamental stability not only of the economy, but of security, will now galvanise world leaders to put in place some of the fundamental reforms that are absolutely required. And that's what the Prime Minister and I have been arguing for all year and I now believe that commitment is there.
But the world and the globe is going to be tested in the next few months. Hopefully, actions of recent days will place a floor under what's occurring internationally, but whatever occurs, we can't lose sight of the need for fundamental long-term reform.
PM: Just to finish on the G20, you know it's one of the best vehicles around for dealing with this  -  the reason being it includes both developed and developing economies  -  the 20 most advanced economies in the world. It includes China, it includes India. Australia, through the Financial Stability Forum and through the G20, have below the radar, been at the forefront of developing reforms in the system all year.
We'll continue to do so. We'll continue to argue for the effective resolution of these matters at a political level.
It is my strong view and the view I've conveyed to other political leaders around the world, is part of the confidence equation globally lies in this: for the markets of the world to stare in the eyeballs of politicians of the world and conclude that the politicians of the world have reached a uniform agreement on the precise content of the future regulatory package on liquidity, on capitalisation and the rest.
That's the solution. That's what we're working towards globally, as well as taking the necessary decisive action here locally.
Thank you very much.


The Rudd Government will invest $187 million to create an additional 56,000 new training places this financial year to help keep the economy strong during the global financial crisis.
This decisive action is part of the Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to strengthen productivity and protect the Australian economy from the global financial crisis.
This funding injection will:
     *  effectively double the Productivity Places Program from 57,000 to 113,000 in 2008-09; and
     *  take the Government's total investment in training places to more than $400 million since April 2008.
With a slowing global economy, the Rudd Government is committed to supporting and training jobseekers to ensure all those who can benefit from extra help are able to access these places.
Increasing productivity and the skills agenda are central to the Government's economic platform. These new places will help maintain the momentum the program has generated and provide more skilled labour to meet the needs of industry.
The Rudd Government made tough decisions in the budget process to build up a large budget surplus to act as a buffer in tough economic times.
Today those tough economic times have arrived and the Government is now acting decisively to use the surplus to strengthen the Australian economy.
There has been a huge demand for training since the Productivity Places Program began in April, with more than 50,000 jobseekers enrolled and over 11,000 having already completed their training in areas of skill shortage.
Almost 1,000 jobseekers who have been referred for training by employment service providers have already obtained jobs. This is an excellent outcome for such a new program.
The new places will be available at Certificate II, III and IV levels, with 10,000 places to be allocated as ‘Structural Adjustment Places' to provide specific retraining opportunities and targeted support to displaced workers.
These new places will take the Rudd Government's total commitment to the Productivity Places Program to more than $2 billion with more than 700,000 new training places to be created over five years. 


The Rudd Government will deliver a $4.8 billion down payment to Australia's four million pensioners, carers, seniors and veterans - providing them with immediate financial help in the lead up to comprehensive reform of the pension system.
This decisive action is part of the Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to boost the Australian economy and support pensioners and families during the global financial crisis.
The $4.8 billion down payment will be made available through a lump sum payment of $1,400 to singles and $2,100 to couples, which will benefit:    
     * Age Pensioners;
     * Disability Support Pensioners;
     * Carer Payment recipients;
     * Wife and Widow B Pensioners; Partner, Widow and Bereavement Allowees;
     * Veterans Affairs Service Pensioners;
     * Veterans Income Support Supplement recipients;
     * Veterans Affairs Gold Card holders eligible for Seniors Concession Allowance;
     * Those of age pension age who receive Parenting Payment, Special Benefit, or Austudy; and  
     * Eligible Self Funded retirees holding a Commonwealth Senior Health Card (CSHC)
People who are receiving Carer Allowance will also receive $1,000 for each eligible person being cared for. 
All payments will be made automatically through Centrelink and the Department of Veterans Affairs in the fortnight beginning 8 December 2008.
Payments are intended to provide additional support in the nine months between now and when long-term reforms are introduced from the beginning of the next financial year.
The global financial crisis is placing increasing pressure on budgets already stretched by the rising cost of living. 
That is why we are taking decisive action to provide support to pensioners while reforms to the pension system are being finalised.
The Government will not pit pensioner groups against each other and we will not exclude two million carers, people with a disability and married pensioner couples from this payment ahead of longer term reform.
These payments recognise the additional costs single pensioners face relative to couples.
For the first time, lump sum payments are being extended to include Disability Support Pensioners. 
The Government is reforming the pension system to prepare Australia for the challenges of the future and we are committed to getting it right for the long term.
Long term pension reform will be delivered in the 2009-10 Budget context.
The $4.8 billion package builds on the $7.5 billion in support provided in the Government's first budget, bringing new spending on pensioners, seniors and carers to $12.3 billion.
The Government's Economic Security Strategy also includes help for self-funded retirees, who are eligible for a Seniors Concession Allowance or hold a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card.
They will receive a payment of $1,400 if they are single or $2,100 for couples. 
The Government is closely monitoring the global financial crisis and its impact on pensioners.
In the last week financial markets experienced a significant fall in share values, resulting in substantial reductions in the value of pensioner financial assets.
The Government has asked Centrelink to quickly update their system with the current value of any investments, including shares, that pensioners might hold.
This will ensure that pension payments are based on the most up-to-date asset values available.
Payments will be non taxable and not included for income testing purposes.


The Rudd Government will fast track its nation-building agenda to help shield Australians from the global financial crisis.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced that the Government will accelerate the implementation of the Government's three nation building funds.
Ministers will bring forward interim Infrastructure Reports to December 2008 so that work can commence in 2009 on projects in the key areas of:
     *  Education and Research;
     * Health and Hospitals; and
     * Transport and Communications.
The Rudd Government is taking decisive action to sustain growth and protect Australians from the fall-out from the global financial crisis.
That is why the Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy will strengthen the national economy and support Australian households during the global financial crisis.
To fast-track these projects, the Government will be seeking referral of the legislation for the Nation Building Funds to a Senate Committee this week.
The Government calls on the Opposition to make sure that there are no obstacles to the implementation of this commitment.
Further today, the Government committed to:
     * Speed up the implementation of the Government's Nation Building Funds, so that projects can be funded as early as possible.
     * Accelerate the establishment of boards for the Health and Hospitals Fund and the Education Investment Fund.
Today's announcement builds on the Rudd Government's recent decision to ask Infrastructure Australia to produce an interim report on the National Infrastructure Priority List by December 2008.
Fast-tracking the nation-building agenda can secure economic activity in the short term and expand growth potential in the medium to long term.
The Rudd Government has already commenced the first funding round of the Education Investment Fund, receiving some 14 submissions for new research facilities and capital expenditure in Australia's universities.
The Government has already committed more than $26 billion to its three new funds:
     * $12.6 billion towards the Building Australia Fund for transport and communications infrastructure;
     * $8.7 billion towards the Education Investment Fund for education infrastructure; and
     * $5.0 billion towards the Health and Hospitals Fund, for health infrastructure.


Good evening. 
Today I announced a $10.4 billion economic security strategy to help see Australia through the global financial crisis.
Many Australians have become concerned, anxious and even fearful as to the future.
The truth is that we are going through the worst financial crisis in our lifetime. I've described it as the economic equivalent of a national security crisis.
More than 25 banks around the world have failed, or been bailed out.
But here in Australia, we have among the best regulated banks, with the best balance sheets, in the world.
And they were rated last week as coming equal second out of 134 banking systems worldwide.
Nonetheless, as Prime Minister, I was not prepared to stand idly by while people's fears here were being fed by the stream of bad economic news from abroad.
That's why the Government took decisive action on Sunday to guarantee all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions, for the next three years.
My first responsibility as Prime Minister is to take whatever action is necessary to maintain the stability of Australia's financial system. 
And I will continue to exercise that responsibility.
In the last few weeks, the global financial crisis has moved into a new and dangerous stage.
And that is its effect on the real economy, on growth and jobs, around the world and here in Australia.
Growth will slow, and unemployment will rise. That's why the Government today announced this $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to support continued positive growth in the national economy, and to provide practical help to households as well.
This strategy is designed to help pensioners, carers and families, and first home buyers.
The Government believes in long term planning. That's why we set aside a $22 billion surplus earlier this year in the Budget, as a buffer against tough times.
Those tough times have now arrived.
And that's why we've decided to take decisive action today with this Economic Security Strategy. And we'll build on it soon with the Government's nation building agenda, to build the infrastructure Australia needs for the future.
History tells us that when the economy slows, responsible governments step in to strengthen growth. And that is what we have done by using the surplus.
As Prime Minister, it is my job to level with the Australian people. I don't intend to guild the lily. There will be tough times ahead.
But the Government remains determined to take whatever action is necessary in the future to steer the economy through this global financial crisis.
And I have absolute confidence that as a nation, we will get through these tough times together.
A video of this speech is also available.


Last year, in my formal reply to the last Budget of the Howard Government, I referred to a great remark from a great American President, John F. Kennedy.
Speaking at a time of unprecedented American prosperity, President Kennedy said: 
“the time to fix the roof is when the sun is shining”. 
And I said back then the sun was shining on Australia.
Back then, because of an unprecedented global economic boom, the sun had been shining on Australia for the better part of a decade.
But all that began to change, a little more than three months later, with the beginning of what we now have come to call the Global Financial Crisis.
What began as a patch of bad weather in America has now become a cyclone that has threatened to engulf the world.
It has smashed its way across the globe. It has swept aside financial institutions that had survived a combination of World Wars and world depressions across the centuries.
And it has even threatened the finances of nations themselves  -  with one nation-state declaring itself to be officially bankrupt.
These are testing times.
But my message to the nation today is that while these winds of ill-fortune have battered institutions and shattered confidence across the world, the Australian financial system remains strong.
Our economy remains strong.
And the Government has set a national course of action to see Australia through this international crisis.
Ladies and gentlemen.
We are being tested.
Of that there is no doubt.
But our country and our economy will prevail.
In part, because in the time the Government has been in office, we have been planning ahead  -  preparing for the worsening of the storm. 
In the May Budget, we built a strong budget surplus as a buffer against future turbulence abroad.
When we planned for that surplus, we had thought we might be planning for events that might occur well down the track.
In fact, those shocks have arrived just a few months later.
We were nevertheless well prepared for the challenges we now face.
And we have acted decisively, we have acted responsibly and we have acted early.
I know that many Australians are deeply concerned about the future.
Make no mistake - this is the single greatest threat to our economic security in a generation.
And it's the most significant upheaval in the global financial system in our lifetime.
That is why the Government has acted decisively with the $10.4 billion
Economic Security Strategy.
     * To do everything possible to keep our economy growing.
     * To do everything possible to create new Australians jobs.
     * To do everything possible to build new Australian homes.
     * To do everything possible to help those in greatest need.
     * To do everything possible to prepare for the future.
In the last few weeks the global financial crisis has moved into a new and dangerous stage.
But this is a crisis that has been unfolding for over 15 months.
Its origins go back to the beginning of this decade, with the collapse of the dot com boom.
US authorities responded with aggressive cuts in interest rates.
That opened up an era of cheap debt that was accompanied by increasing financial complexity and a greater appetite for risk.
Financial products  -  from basic sub-prime home loans to complex financial derivatives  -  were built on the shallow foundations of a cheap debt economy.
Loans were advanced to millions of people, especially in the United States, with no realistic prospect of them ever being repaid. 
And those loans were financed through complex financial products that were understood by neither investors nor regulators.
The balkanisation of risk, the attenuation of risk sought the impossible dream of the elimination of risk and responsibility  -  so that ultimately nobody believed they carried risk and responsibility.
And through it all, the ratings agencies blessed these products as safe investments  -  ratings agencies that have yet to face their own day of reckoning  -  and the products they sanctioned continued to proliferate.
Credit default swaps also played an important role in the excessive underwriting of high-risk mortgages.
The ability and willingness of providers of credit default swaps to offer cheap insurance against counter-party risk exaggerated the credit worthiness of the assets and the counter-parties that backed them to the final investors.
This mix of cheap credit and cheap insurance ultimately resulted in these sub-prime assets being sold all over the world to investors, from both large scale financial institutions to small scale investors like councils, corporations, charities, churches and even ordinary households.
They had no chance of understanding what they were investing in, until crunch-time came late last year, when the absurdity and the obscenity of the leverage contained in these investments finally began to erupt.
By then, it was clear things had gone badly wrong.
And it was then that the financial crisis erupted.
Because when analysts went looking to find which institutions had exposure to those sub-prime loans, those exposures weren't transparent and couldn't be easily found.
There was no clarity about who held which investments, nor what those investments really contained.
Clouds of suspicion began to gather over one financial institution after another.
As those clouds began to gather, lending began to dry up.
And what had begun as the sub-prime lending crisis slowly morphed into a global crisis of confidence. 
The causes were complex.
     * Failures in transparency.
     * Failures in lending standards.
     * Failures in prudential standards.
     * Failures in risk-management.
     * Failures in corporate governance  -  in fact, obscene failures in corporate governance which rewarded greed without any regard to the integrity of the financial system.
And these failures weren't limited just to businesses on the margins of the financial system.
They happened in our major global financial institutions, the Wall Street investment banks that were pillars of the global financial system.
And that is where we've arrived in recent weeks, as markets have lost confidence even in leading global financial institutions and in the international financial system itself.
Financial markets reduced to panic.
The global financial system pushed to the brink.
We've seen some of the largest one-day movements in stock markets of any time in history.
And these developments are now taking us into recession across most of the industrialised world.
What we have seen is the comprehensive failure of extreme capitalism  -  extreme capitalism which now turns to government to prevent systemic failure.
The institutions of government that extreme capitalism spent decades deriding.
So what is to be done?
The collapse of this house of cards has had devastating consequences both for financial markets and for the real economy.
The IMF has estimated that losses and write-downs on loans and securitised assets will reach 1.4 trillion US dollars.
Over the year to the end of September, global equity markets have fallen by 17.5 trillion US dollars, including losses of 4.1 trillion in US equity markets. 
Australian financial markets have not escaped unscathed.
Our equity markets experienced losses of around half a trillion dollars in the same period.
But Australia is in a stronger position than comparable nations.
We have four of the world's 20 AA rated banks.
They are profitable.
They are well capitalised. 
The lending standards of our financial institutions have not deteriorated. 
The regulation and supervision of Australian financial institutions leads the world.
Our auditing and reporting standards have been ranked 3rd in the world.
Australia has also been ranked equal second out of 134 nations for the soundness of our banks in the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report.
These are important national institutional strengths at a time of global systemic weakness.
But like other financial institutions around the world, Australian banks have found it harder and more expensive to source funds.
This of course has significant consequences for the real economy in Australia.
It is clear that the global economic impacts of this crisis will be profound.
The boom that saw the strongest period of global economic growth in thirty years is over.
The IMF is now forecasting the slowest growth in advanced economies for over a quarter of a century.
In the words of its World Economic Outlook last week:  
The world economy is now entering a major downturn in the face of the most dangerous shock in mature financial markets since the 1930s. ... The major advanced economies [in North America, Europe and Japan] are already in or close to recession. 
The IMF is now forecasting zero growth across advanced economies this year, and growth of less than half a per cent in six of the G-7 economies. 
The impact of the crisis is not limited to the advanced economies.
Emerging markets like China and India will be affected.
Nevertheless, emerging economies remain strong.
China is still expected to grow next year by 9.3 per cent, India by 6.9 per cent, and the ASEAN economies by 5.7 per cent.
Further, Chinese leaders have indicated a willingness to lower interest rates to stimulate their domestic economy  -  an important signal for the global economy.
Remember this is what China did in the Asian Financial Crisis a decade ago.
The stakes are now much higher.
The opportunities for China are also greater.
Right now the world needs China's economic strength at a time when growth is under threat.
Asia is the fastest growing part of the global economy  -  by a long shot.
And this will help Australia to weather the storm that lies ahead.
Our economy will however be affected by the global fallout.
That is why the Government has taken decisive, early action to support our economy and our financial system.
The Government has systematically taken a range of measures over the past 10 months to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system.
They are measures which have been implemented in the closest possible coordination with our financial and economic regulators.
First, we have acted to maintain liquidity in financial markets.
The RBA has acted quickly and appropriately to expand liquidity in financial markets  -  often in coordination with its international counterparts  -  in a series of actions in March, June, August, September and October to inject liquidity in to markets.
In May this year, the Government announced that we would provide legislative authority for an increase in future Commonwealth Government Securities issuance of up to $25 billion to strengthen the robustness of Australia's financial system and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
And in June we introduced legislation that would enable us to boost the range of assets in which the Australian Office of Financial Management could invest.  
All these measures were put in place ahead of time.
Invariably without fanfare.
But with a single purpose of having all the necessary instruments in play  -  prior to any deepening of the crisis.
Second, we have guaranteed bank funding.
Last weekend I announced that the Government would guarantee, by application and in return for a fee, term wholesale funding by banks and other authorised deposit-taking institutions in Australia so that they can continue lending.
Again we took this decisive action in close consultation with the regulators.
And we did so in anticipation of foreign government guarantees in less robust national banking systems  -  foreign guarantees that would have placed our banks at a disadvantage in global credit markets had we not acted.
Third, we have guaranteed bank deposits.
On Sunday we announced a financial package that guarantees all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions for the next three years. 
This is a broad guarantee that covers the deposits of both households and businesses, as well as wholesale deposits.
This guarantee is being implemented as part of the Financial Claims Scheme announced by the Government earlier this year.
Recommendations for a Financial Claims Scheme were first made five years ago after the HIH Royal Commission.
But after five years, no action was taken.
That is why the government in June this year proposed a framework for a Financial Claims Scheme  -  the result of which is properly prepared legislation that will be introduced into parliament today.
Fourth, we have acted to protect financial institutions from speculators and short selling.
On September 19, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) announced a ban on short selling. 
And on 23 September, the Government released draft legislation on disclosure arrangements for covered short sales, which is open for public comment until 21 October.
These measures have been absolutely necessary to act on predatory behaviour by international speculators on Australian markets.
Fifth, we have acted to support competition and liquidity in the mortgage market.
On 3 October the Government announced the initial purchase of $4 billion of residential mortgage backed securities to support wholesale funding of financial institutions and improve competition in the market for housing finance.
The Government has been monitoring the market closely and has determined that an additional $4 billion in funding is required for the purchase of residential mortgage backed securities from Australian lenders who are not banks, building societies or credit unions by the AOFM.
This will benefit Australia's mortgage market and ensure that this sector of the lending market has access to funding for its operations.
It will also provide a level playing field for those lenders who will not have the benefit of the bank funding guarantee.
Sixth, we have acted to reform the regulation of credit in Australia.
On 3 July, the Council of Australian Governments agreed that the 
Commonwealth would take over responsibility for regulating mortgage broking, margin lending and non-deposit lending institutions. 
And on 2 October, COAG endorsed an implementation plan for the regulation of remaining areas of consumer credit. 
This reform will be implemented in a phased approach, beginning with the transfer of responsibility for trustee companies and existing key credit regulation, including the Uniform Consumer Credit Code as phase one in the first half of 2009.
COAG has also agreed to an implementation plan for the regulation of remaining areas of consumer credit, including pay-day lending, credit cards, store credit, investment and small business lending, and personal loans.
The reform package is to be completed in the first half of 2010.
And seven, the Government has been active all year in the Financial Stability Forum, the IMF and the G20 in forging consensus for consistent regulatory responses to the global financial crisis across all major economies.
These measures have been implemented over time to maintain the stability of our financial system at a time when more than 25 banks around the world have either failed or been bailed out.
But it became clear in recent weeks that the global financial crisis has taken a turn for the worse  -  and entered a new and dangerous stage, one affecting the real economy, growth and jobs.
Decisive action was necessary to help maintain positive economic growth for the future.
This is the Government's objective.
And this is going to be tough in the midst of an unfolding global recession.
The Economic Security Strategy the Government announced yesterday was decisive action, responsible action and early action - in extraordinary and dangerous economic times.
This package puts Australia first.
It puts the Australian economy first.
It puts Australian families and seniors first.
The Economic Security Strategy was made possible by the $22 billion surplus we built in the May Budget as a buffer for the future.
That surplus was a prudent and appropriate measure to build up as a precaution for tough times ahead.
Those times have now arrived.
As Prime Minister I will not sit idly by and watch Australian households suffer the worst effects of a global crisis they did not create.
We are delivering this package at the right time to the right people at the right amount of strength.
And the Government remains prepared to take further action as necessary for the future.
The Strategy contains five key measures:
     * $4.8 billion for an immediate down payment on long term pension reform.
     * $3.9 billion in support payments for low and middle income families.
     * A $1.5 billion investment to help first home buyers purchase a home.
     * $187 million to create 56,000 new training places in 2008-09.
     * An acceleration in the implementation of the Government's three nation building funds to bring forward the commencement of investment in nation building projects to 2009.
Last year we instigated an inquiry into the cost of living pressures faced by senior Australians.
In the budget this year we provided $7.5 billion to deliver increased financial security to seniors, carers and disability support pensioners.
And we embarked on a focused examination of the pension system through the Harmer review to make sure that it delivers for these people over the long term.
Yesterday we made an important down payment on long term reform and we did this in a way that is aimed at boosting household consumption.
In total, around 4 million Australians  -  carers, seniors card holders, aged and disability pensioners  -  will receive a payment.
In December we will pay single pensioners and seniors $1,400  -  two thirds of the $2,100 we will pay couples.
This is in recognition of the strong view expressed to Dr Harmer's review that the current single pension rate which has remained at just 60% of the combined couple rate over the last twelve years is not enough.
In the nine months between now and when we intend long term pension reform to take effect, these payments provide the equivalent of an additional $35 for single pensioners and $26 for each member of a couple pensioner household.
We will also provide a one-off payment of $1,000 to the more than 400,000 Australians who receive carer allowance in recognition of the tireless support they provide for children and adults who are ill or who have a disability.
In just twelve months, we have invested an additional $12.3 billion in assistance for pensioners, seniors and carers.
In just twelve months we have delivered an additional $2,300 to single pensioners and $3,500 extra for pensioner couples.
In just twelve months we have established a process to achieve long term pension reform  -  to deliver economic security for older Australians, for carers and for those with a disability.
These are the kind of commitments that should have been made a decade ago.
After pensioners, families with young children, particularly those on lower and middle incomes, are experiencing tough times.
That is why we will pay around three quarters of all Australian families with dependent children a lump sum payment of $1,000 per child in December. 
This measure will benefit the 3.9 million Australian kids living in low and middle income families.
This $3.9 billion measure builds on the substantial initiatives contained in the $55 billion Working Families Support Package in this year's Budget.
The third area targeted by this economic growth package is the Housing and construction sector. 
This sector has recorded little growth in Australia in recent years, despite strong population growth. 
In part, this reflects the impact of the interest rate rises and increasing costs for housing construction. 
To strengthen this important sector of the economy, the Government will introduce a First Home Owners Boost. 
From 14 October 2008 to the end of June 2009, the Government will increase the First Home Owners Grant for established homes by $7,000 (to a new total of $14,000) and by an additional $14,000 for newly constructed houses (to a new total of $21,000). 
This measure will cost around $1.5 billion. 
This initiative is designed to stimulate housing activity and give first home buyers a better chance in the housing market.
More than 150,000 first home buyers are estimated to benefit from the time-limited scheme.
And it is balanced by the various supply side measures already underway in the Government's $2.2 billion housing affordability program.
The Government also recognises the human cost of an economic slow-down. 
The fourth measure I announced yesterday will provide enhanced training support for the workforce. 
This $187 million funding injection will effectively double the Productivity Places Program from 57,000 to 113,000.
Finally the Government will also accelerate our historic commitment to 21st century nation-building.
Nation-building is essential for our long term productivity to build a 21st century economy. 
Nation-building is also in the spirit of the Australian people.
Our nation's existing infrastructure did not spontaneously combust.
Our forebears built it.
Previous governments built it.
And now the baton of responsibility passes to this generation.
For too long, our nation's infrastructure has been left to be run down.
It remains a substantial long term constraint on our nation's productivity growth.
This has been the subject of countless reports during the squandered decade of the Howard government.
That is why the Government will accelerate the implementation of the Government's nation-building investment funds for the future. 
The time has come to roll our sleeves up to build the nation.
I have asked Ministers to bring forward an interim list of proposals for infrastructure spending by early December so that work can start in 2009.
     * On roads.
     * On rail.
     * On ports.
     * On water infrastructure.
     * On hospitals.
     * On educational institutions.
     * On research.
And work will begin next year on building the National Broadband Network. 
To fast-track these projects, the Government will legislate in the next month  -  subject to any politically-driven obstruction in the Senate.
As we contemplate the impact of this financial crisis on real economies, real people and real lives, it must also galvanise us to act in the future that we never allow greed and lax regulation to put us in this position again.
I addressed this matter in my recent speech to the UN General Assembly, which among other things, called for reforms to the Basel capital adequacy requirements.
One of the points in that speech related to executive remuneration.
At that time, I said that financial institutions needed to have clear incentives to promote responsible behaviour rather than unrestrained greed.
I spoke of the need for the Basel II rules on capital adequacy to pick this concept up, specifically that regulators should set higher capital requirements for financial firms with executive remuneration packages that reward short term returns or excessive risk taking.
At the G20 meeting next month, Australia will be arguing that the G20 engage with the Financial Stability Forum to agree a clear timetable for implementing this and other actions needed to protect financial stability in the future.
We will be urging the G20 to commission an action agenda in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund, the Financial Stability Forum and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision on the best means of implementing this initiative, preferably by the end of this calendar year.
Consistent with this, the Australian Government will be working with the relevant Australian regulators to design a template that could be adopted by the international authorities - a template that links capital adequacy requirements to executive remuneration in a way that acts against excessive risk-taking in our financial institutions.
The Australian Government will also now be examining with APRA what domestic policy actions would be appropriate in pursuit of this objective  -  ie to deal with the problem of executive remuneration to financial institutions.
Ladies and gentlemen, there are times in our personal lives which are of such moment that we are forced to re-think all the plans we had for our future happiness and prosperity.
The same can be said of the lives of nations.
The events of recent days have seen the wealth of families, companies and even sovereign states stripped back to a degree and at a rate unprecedented in our lifetime.
Stock exchanges around the globe have responded emotionally rather than rationally to the economic crisis brought on by the collapse of the sub-prime market.
The champions of extreme capitalism have been found to have feet of clay.
For the first time ever, our people are reading about - and my government is participating in - decisions to inject trillions of dollars back into an international financial community which is frozen by fear.
Fear of the unknown.
To put it simply  -  when markets fail, governments must act.
We know that from history.
As a government and as a nation we must respond to the twin evils which are at the root of this malaise  -  greed and fear.
Fear is the first of these demons which we must see off.
Dealing with the greed which has caused the fear will come after that.
Seventy-five years ago the world was in the grip of a much deeper and more immobilising crisis than the one we are confronting today. President Roosevelt personally directed his government's response to that most calamitous of all collapses.
One of his rules in dealing with the challenges of his time was to refrain from what he called “issuing proclamations of overenthusiastic assurance”.  He correctly saw that “we cannot ballyhoo ourselves back to prosperity”.
I believe that we too must level with the Australian public about the size and seriousness of the threat to our national prosperity brought on by the evaporation of capital.
Realistic about the threats.
But equally realistic about the strengths.  Realistic about the uncertainties we face. Anyone who grew up on the land knows that you can't control the weather. Sunshine every day - and rainy nights - that's what you dream of.
But life's not like that.  There are good years, and there are hard years. And you don't choose the order in which they come. But the hard years teach you to never give up. You learn resilience.
You learn courage.  You learn to plough on.   That's what we as Australians must do, in the hard times that lie ahead. This is as much about our spirit as it is about the concrete decisions of policy we take.
We're not a people who panic.  As Australians, we take the good and the bad in our stride.  And we go forward.
And we intend to join with other nations to re-build the architecture of the global economy, so this global financial crisis is not repeated in the future. This will be tough.
But I have absolute confidence that the nation will make it through  -  together.
Question and Answer Session
TINGLE: Laura Tingle from the Financial Review, Prime Minister.
You talked at length in your address today about the relationship between lack of transparency in the financial crisis and confidence. I was wondering if you could outline for us your plan for the government to detail its liabilities to the banking sector as part of the banking guarantees, both the general one and the wholesale funding one. Will you be giving details in MYEFO and in the Budget of contingent liabilities by nature of security? And how much detail will you be able to give?
PM: The Government believes on these questions in absolute maximum transparency. Part of what I just said before was that it's important for the government to level with the people about the nature of the challenge that we face, the actions that we're taking, and the cost of those actions as well.
The Government will therefore be making transparent at an appropriate time in the future any liabilities the government accumulates as a consequence of the actions in recent days.
The form of the publication and release of that we have yet to determine, but it will be made public, and we are completely confident about that. We think it's the right course of action.
DUNLEVY: Prime Minister, the family tax benefit system used to cover 90 per cent of families. Now it covers just 75 per cent of families. Has this problem been a frustration for you in the last few days as you try to get cash help out to families? Would you have liked to have been able to give more families help? And is it fair that millionaires will be able to get the $21,000 first home buyers grant but families where two parents work hard and both earn just average earnings don't get $1,000 for their children?
PM: You know, Sue, there's always a problem in the way in which FTB-A is calculated. And those familiar with the system know the debates as they have raged over the years.
And as we approach the need to provide extra support to the economy and to households in recent weeks and recent days, you're right, once again we had to confront the problem of how FTB-A is constructed.
But the bottom line is this. It's a system that is there, it has been there for a long time, and therefore provided the best and most efficient and effective way of providing assistance now rather than engaging in an attempt at, shall we say, short term institutional redesign.
Our objective is to get assistance out there now to families. Not just to help families with the extra costs that they are incurring, but also importantly, to support growth in the economy. That's why we decided to use the existing mechanisms for FTB-A.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister why is Macquarie Bank included in your bank borrowing guarantee? And what's your advice on what would have happened to the Australian economy if Macquarie Bank had of gone the way of Lehmann Brothers?
PM: Well, I'll answer the first question, and I don't enter into hypotheticals in relation to the second.
The first is this: that Macquarie also takes deposits, and its deposit taking institution is APRA regulated. And therefore, we are non-discriminatory in our application of the guarantee we've provided.
PORTEOUS: Mr Rudd, Clinton Porteous from Courier-Mail newspaper. You talk about levelling with the Australian people  - 
PM: I get worried when people start like that.
PORTEOUS: We have the Budget estimates about there about employment and growth so that next month we'll see some more financial updates.
Just in simple terms, how should people look forward or what impact could it have on job security, on business, as we go forward?
PM: Well, let's look at all the objective facts out there. One, you've got the global economic forecasts covering the major economies in the world all heading south at a pace of knots and the statement I referred to before by the IMF, which says that those major economies are either in recession or on the cusp or recession  -  that's fact one baring down on us.
Fact two is what's happening in China with a two percentage point downwards revision in its growth, but I do note that they're injected stimulatory monetary policy in recent days and may do so in terms of further acts on fiscal policy.
The third factor out there is what you see staring us in the face with very, very negative consumer and business sentiment indexes.
So they are out there as objective facts, looking at us.
Therefore, as I may have said yesterday, you can either look at all that and say, ‘well gee, that's a lot of trouble baring down on the Australian economy' and do nothing about it or you can act and that is why we have acted.
Plainly, as both the Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, and the myself have said in recent days, we expect slower growth, we expect more unemployment than has been projected, and that is a direct consequence of the global financial crisis.
And that underpins precisely the nature of the package that we have put forward yesterday, this economic security strategy for the future, and it is simply the first instalment. The second part of it will be what we do in December when we advance the nation building agenda of which I spoke in my remarks before.
O'MALLEY: Sandra O'Malley from AAP. You spoke of the need to reign in greed, Prime Minister. Can you explain how the Government intends to reign in rampant executive salaries?
PM: Well, what I spoke about today was next steps for the Government  -  namely, how do you deal with this challenge of executive remuneration packages in financial institutions? And how do you parallel that to new corporate governance structures for financial institutions and how do you incorporate that in the new overall rules for the financial system here and internationally?
You've got to act at home and you've got to act abroad on this. And what I'm signalling today is that the government will now be working with APRA on how that is best done as a template for the rest of the world as an addition to what's called the Basel II regulations.
And secondly, what domestic actions on top of that are necessary in Australia.
You see, this is not just a question of fairness and perceived fairness in the system. It goes actually to the kernel of the incentive structures around risk taking. And that forms the logic which underpins the proposals which I first advanced when I outlined our approach to a regulatory response to the global financial crisis to the UN General Assembly a few weeks ago. The Treasurer has been acting on parallel tracks to this.
And I'm signalling is that APRA will now be developing a template not just for here in Australia, but for adaptation or adoption through the Basel II arrangements around the world as well. Necessary, I believe, to get a better set of rules in place to reign in any executive greed, and at the same time, point in the best direction possible for greater stability in the financial system in the future.
RILEY: Mark Riley from the Seven Network, Mr Rudd. I want to ask about your first homebuyers extension. The concern of certainly Commonwealth Treasury and State Treasuries is that first homebuyers grants are just capitalised into the system and people get very little benefit from them over time. What gives you confidence that this will work other than how it has in the past? And, what are the benchmarks? How will you know if it's working?
PM: Well, on the first part of the question, if you simply had a demand side measure absent any supply side measures, then we'd face a problem. But can I say, the Government already has out there a couple of billion dollars worth of programme activity on housing, two large slabs of which deal with the supply side challenge - that's the rental affordability scheme and the housing affordability scheme.
Prior to that, (inaudible) during the previous Government, they didn't exist - there were no supply side measures. So going to the second part of your question about how we will know whether it's worked or not, well, we'll have benchmark data in terms of where first housing starts were as of when this package was introduced. We'll have benchmark data in terms of what happens at the end. There is no guarantees in this business. We believe it's the right course of action, which is properly balanced by supply side measures as well.
But the overall intention, in these critical periods which lie ahead, is to do what is necessary to underpin activity in the economy, and through that, to provide also a further basis for optimism and confidence in a critical sector in the overall building of Australia's growth data. A big driver of the national accounts, a big driver of growth, and it's got a big multiplier effect across other sectors as well.
That's why we're prepared to get behind this measure in a balanced way.
COOREY: Good afternoon Mr Rudd, Phil Coorey, Sydney Morning Herald. When you announced on Sunday that you would guarantee the borrowings of the banks, the money the banks were borrowing, you said the guarantee would stay in place until the global crisis ended. I imagine there'll be sort of varying views on when it's ended, especially from the banks. Do you have a more definitive exit strategy on when you  - 
PM: The week after next, the week after that?
COOREY: Who's version of the crisis ended will be  -  do you have an exit strategy basically, other than the ‘crisis ends'?
PM: Well there are objective measures which you can begin to apply to this and they go to of course the cost of borrowing in normal commercial markets by banks. And what you want to see is evidence over time that the current spread which banks in their interbank lending are having to endure begin to contract to historical norms.
That is a ways off, that is a long ways off. And you know something, we will be taking a very cautious and conservative approach to this and we will be doing so in very close consultation with our regulators, bearing in mind that it is our regulators who advise us that this course of action was necessary in the first place.
Can I say also that it was very necessary to do this when we did it. If you look at the subsequent actions in Europe, providing a similar guarantee to term wholesale funds arrangements on the part of major banks in France and Germany and Austria and elsewhere, there was a real risk that we would have been seriously outflanked by all of that with real risk to our own banks' ability to raise international finance going forward.
We acted at the right time and we acted decisively.
FRANKLIN: Hi Prime Minister, Matthew Franklin from the Australian.
PM: Hi Matthew.
FRANKLIN: I would just like to change the subject if I may.
PM: What to Matthew?
FRANKLIN: The indigenous intervention.
PM: (inaudible) on the right hand side of the front page of your paper today.
FRANKLIN: You said in opposition that you support the intervention and that you would heed the findings of an inquiry into its progress. The inquiry is back as I understand and says that the, you are called upon to reinstate the racial discrimination act and to wind back compulsory income management. Will you do that? And secondly on the same issue really, did Cabinet or did Jenny Macklin order a rewrite of the draft version of the report which contained language that was quite damning, far more so than the final report that was released?
PM: On the second point Cabinet provided no such instruction at all. And by the way I draw your attention to a statement by the chairman of the review board, Peter Yu today which says the report that has been published is the report of the independent review board. And he goes on to make other statements as well.
On the first point though which goes to the policy. You know, I stood up in the House of Representatives at the end of, I can't remember the exact month now, when the previous Prime Minister introduced the Northern Territory Intervention.
And we didn't have much time to review it. In fact we had limited time to review it, but we believed it was necessary to provide bipartisan support for that measure because we had formed the conclusion well before that, the previous methods of dealing with the challenges in the NT and I have got to say, elsewhere, were not working.
We were also seized by contents of the Little Children are Sacred report. And it makes graphic and horrible reading. Therefore, we were prepared to support it. I have done so consistently since the election as well.
On the, you indicated that the Government has received this report. It may well have. I am unaware of it because I have been preoccupied with other things in recent days but I am sure once it is in and deliberated on, we will provide our response for the future.
Can I say more generally on the question of indigenous policy: this Government is not in to rolling the clock back to some sort of ancient business as usual approach in dealing with the challenges of Indigenous Australia.
Most of them failed. We are on with the business of what works. And it will be a completely new approach. And I have got to say, embracing all those things that have worked in the intervention and being mindful of where there may have been shortcomings and how we improve them, that's our approach.
This Government has no ideology on this whatsoever. This Government is driven by one thing: how do you close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians and what in practical terms makes that work.
That is the soul basis of our judgement for the future and will be in our evaluation of the review boards report once cabinet deliberates on it.
BONGIORNO: Paul Bongiorno, Ten News Prime Minister. The US Federal Reserve has just announced that the United States is now officially in recession and we know that the IMF figures for Australia, with the 2 in front for growth pre-dated developments of the last two weeks and indeed as I understand it, the fate of Lehman Brothers.
Were these figures in your mind when you formulated a $10 billion package, one per cent of GDP, to keep Australia falling into negative territory in this quarter, given that everything you have done is to take effect almost immediately?
PM: Well the important thing when you are dealing with a difficult and in some cases parlous global economic circumstances, is to act early, act decisively, act hard. And that is what we have done.
No point sort of twiddling your thumbs and thinking about it, get on to the business and do it and that is what we have done.
Certainly the figure that you referred to for growth in the Australian economy is based on our most recent advice. But it doesn't give you a huge buffer for any error into the future. That is why we believe it is important to provide further support for positive economic growth into the future, including into the near and medium term future as well.
We think it is the right course of action. I noticed some people sort of arguing around the edges, who I thought yesterday were providing this package with bipartisan support. That seems to have lasts 12 hours. Can I say, the measures that we have embraced as a Government are designed to provide that support for the economy, for households, for pensioners ASAP, ok? It is the judgement we have made, we stand by it, we think it is the right thing, given the circumstances which bear down on us internationally.
PROBYN: PM Andrew Probyn from the West Australian. Your speech seemed to contain an appeal for China to come to the aid of the region and the world, given the global financial crisis. What is the Government being told about the softening of commodity prices, especially given you took it upon yourself to ring Wen Jiabao last Monday to seek some assurances from China.
And on a housekeeping issue, when you come to releasing MYEFO, will you promise not to do it after 4 pm on a Friday?
PM: Ken if we could make that 3.50? On the question of China, the speech speaks for itself in terms of my analysis of the critical importance of the Chinese economy to the global economy right now. And the Chinese are facing their own domestic constraints because part of their economy is of course export derived and of course they too are responding to the circumstances that confront them in the global economy.
But I am heartened by the change in monetary policy that we saw recently and I would hope also that we will see some action from the Chinese on the fiscal policy front as well. You know if you look at the pure numbers about where capital export is occurring around the world at present and in recent times, if you look at 1.8 trillion in US dollars in foreign reserves in China. If you look at sovereign wealth funds in China, which based on the last report that I saw - and these may be subject to some revision both depending on recent exposures and certain foreign markets  -  that those sovereign wealth funds were in the vicinity of half a trillion.
It follows from that that China has a significant role to play. It is very important also to look at where China acted historically after the Asian financial crisis in 1997. The Chinese do not sit to one side and say, ‘well that's a big problem'. The Chinese went out there and frankly supported the recovery growth path of much of the region.
So the Chinese will make their own decisions on that but from our point of view we encourage and support the positive growth messages coming out of China so far and we would be positively receiving of further such decisions by the Chinese in the future. 
Important for Australia, important for the region, important for the World.
KENNY: Mark Kenny from the Adelaide Advertiser Prime Minister. You talked about how the world had changed fundamentally since you had come to office, I am wondering whether you could in the privacy of this room, take us into the corridors of power and just give us a bit of the flavour of some of the conversations that you and Wayne Swan and Lindsay Tanner have had and the sort of things you have been saying to each other as this has unfolded?
PM: We are on family television at the moment.
Things like ‘oh damn', ‘oh bother Wayne', ‘dash it Lindsay'. It's been an interesting time. I'll say this with some of the officials are in the room  -  Australia's institutions have worked well through this. And I say this publicly about senior staff from Treasury and from Finance and from my own department, Prime Minister's. They have worked as a very effective team in partnership with the regulators.
So far, we've been ahead of the pace and that is, I think, a tribute to the excellent professional work that they have done. And we've worked as a team with them. There have been a few white knuckle moments on the way through but that's just life and we think that the team has worked well, that reflects the institutions of government working well and it reflects positively also on the role of APRA and the bank and ASIC and having acted in the way in which they've done in a pretty difficult and unprecedented set of challenges over the last year. But we've maintained a good degree of corporate good humour on the way through.
GRATTAN: Michelle Grattan from The Age. I'd also like to change the topic, Mr Rudd, to Afghanistan, which the experts tend to agree at the moment is going to hell in a hand-basket.
PM: Which experts are they?
GRATTAN: Well, a range of military experts. Do you believe still your earlier position that this war is winnable? Should there be a change in the overall coalition strategy and if the new American President asks for more Australian troops can you pledge that you would never ever say yes to that request?
PM: Firstly, on the question of the war itself, there's no point being engaged in a military action unless you have a view within government that that action is winnable. 
Secondly, in the definition of the mission in Afghanistan, the stabilisation of the country, remains for us foremost, as does the other objective, one of strategic denial of an operating base for international terrorist organisations like Al-Qaeda to roam the world and do their worst as they did 6 years ago in Bali when they murdered so many innocent Australians.
I take the mission of strategic denial very seriously. The worst thing that happened in the period prior to 2001 was to have that mob run rampant across Taliban controlled Afghanistan as a free range training camp to do their worst world-wide.
That cannot be offered to organisations like Al-Qaeda ever again. So we must remain resolved in the execution of that mission of strategic denial. In answer to your last part of your question, we have no plans whatsoever, to provide any additional troops to Afghanistan. 
Our mission in Oruzgan Province is clear cut.
We believe we are doing a good job there through the ADF. I know that their work on the ground is positive and constructive and we're also now working very closely in Oruzgan Province with the Afghan national army in order to consolidate that province further. And doing so in great cooperation with our Dutch partners.
MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, Karen Middleton from SBS Television. If I could take you back to yesterday's measures, especially the money for first home buyers, those measures are, well that measure, is a behavioural one, it depends on what people do in response. Now you've said, I think, that you estimate 150,000 people might take up that measure.
If it's successful, or more successful than you anticipate, isn't it true that it could cost a lot more than 1.5 billion. So can you tell us, firstly, whether you anticipate it could cost more, how you reached that 150,000 figure and don't you risk creating a spike between now and the end of next June and then a slump after that?
PM: You know, life's not a perfect institution and when you're dealing with an unprecedented, or virtually unprecedented global financial crisis with real roll-ons to the global economy and a real recession out there in the industrialised economies in the world, you've got to act. And you know something  -  when you act, you've got to act decisively and clearly and early. In terms of whether we yield the final outcome on the numbers that you referred to, time will tell. 
But, you know, I'm not in the business of dying wondering. I'm in the business of getting out there, making it possible for people and to see what behavioural change occurs. Activity in this economy is critical.
Can I just say a lot of people will nitpick around bits and pieces around the edge of the Economic Security Strategy we unveiled yesterday, and that's their right, that's fine. But the core element of this strategy is a macro-economic instrument designed to inject further growth into this economy which would not otherwise exist when the major economies around the world are heading south rather than north. That's why we've done it and I think it's the right measure to do.
ALEXANDER:Mr Rudd, yesterday's $10.4 billion package had over $10 billion of that spent in non-productivity related measures. My question is, what would have been the disadvantages of including in the massive spend measures that would have enhanced productivity so that after the cash splash in December, there'd be something to show in the long term?
PM: Firstly, these two missions are not irreconcilable. They are just part of the same operation. We are acting now to provide immediate support for positive growth in the economy and on the way through providing positive support for families, pensioners and carers and for those wrestling with the difficult decision about buying their first home right now.
I've already indicated that one of the big drivers of long-term productivity growth is dealing with the infrastructure challenges in the country. We, and I've indicated this again today, will be bringing forward the Infrastructure Australia priority list and other priority lists in health and in education come December and we'll be acting on that as well.
Further, I'd say our  -  the other big driver of course of long-term productivity growth, apart from infrastructure, is what you do in the skills generation, the skills revolution. The education revolution program continues to be rolled out. You've seen already the injections we've made into universities in the last budget  -  half a billion dollars.
You've seen the other injections that we've provided through the rolling investment in computers in schools, the rolling investment in trades training centres and schools as well as the doubling in the number of training places which were part of the package yesterday as well.
So therefore, the productivity agenda, be it through education, skills and training, be it through the infrastructure bring-forward that will come to a head in December, all through the continuing agenda of business deregulation, that all continues apace. But you know something  -  you can do both of these things at once. We're doing it, we believe it's the right thing now for the immediate challenges of growth in this economy and families and others doing it tough and continuing to prosecute the growth and productivity agenda for the future.
Thank you very much.


Governments have many tasks.
But none is more important than the defence of the nation.
None is more important than ensuring the security of the nation.
The men of foresight who drafted Australia's Constitution were clear on this point.
One power they explicitly gave to the new Commonwealth Government was that of Defence.
For 107 years since Federation, Commonwealth Governments have debated, shaped, and implemented the nation's defence policy.
It is a policy that has been through many changes.
And the changes reflect the evolution of the modern independent nation that we now have.
In the pre-World War One era we saw ourselves as part of the Empire  -  with the words of Andrew Fisher still ringing in our ears down the corridors of time.
In World War One, through the work of Charles Bean in many ways, we began to see ourselves as something different, something unique.
It was the story of Gallipoli  -  so clearly and directly told by Bean  -  that helped shaped that national identity.
During the course of the Second World War our defence relationship with the United States deepened and was the harbinger of our future alliance.
The birth of the alliance reflected a new and different stage in our evolution.
Throughout the years of the Cold War, our defence policy clearly cemented our role as a US ally.
At the same time, we increasingly contributed to United Nations peacekeeping operations as we began to fulfil our role as a middle power that wanted to make a contribution to a stable global order.
As our defence policy has developed, the role of the press and the historians has been critical.
Perhaps no single individual has been more important than Charles Bean.
100 years ago  -  in 1908  -  he began his career as a journalist.
His first assignment that year was to cover the visit to Australia of the US Great White Fleet.
He did so from the flagship of the Royal Navy squadron on the Australian station, HMS Powerful.
And, after his assignment, he published a book about the experience of sailing around the South Pacific.
But his book was more than a retelling of this journey.
It also contained in it the argument for an independent Royal Australian Navy.
He was not alone in advocating the need for an Australian navy distinct from the Royal Navy.
He was joined by Deakin.
And more strongly by Fisher and the latter's demand that this be a separate command to the Imperial Fleet.
But his writing  -  even before his reporting from Gallipoli brought him to wider attention  -  set an example of what quality writing on matters of national security can do.
Early on Bean was making a contribution to the debate about the defence of the nation.
Bean set the standard here.
His was a unique contribution.
His writings about Gallipoli told, in simple, direct language, how Australian men fought at Gallipoli.
He told the story of the conflict from the point of view of the soldier.
He told the real story.
And in doing so he told Australians about themselves.
He told Australians that theirs was a nation to be proud of.
That their representatives in the horror of the trenches of Gallipoli were showing the qualities that made us great  -  determination, commitment to one another, and courage.
Bean of course then carried this reporting to the next level with the official histories.
The histories are one of the most important and seminal works in Australia's history.
They tell the story of Australians at war.
And they set a new standard for military history writing around the world.
Bean made military history about the men fighting the battles, not only about the generals setting the strategy.
It was a uniquely Australian approach.
An egalitarian military history.
Not one written for the General Staff.
In telling the history so powerfully, Bean also made the military an important part of our history.
More than any other individual, he was responsible for telling the story of ANZAC and making it a thread that weaves its way through the fabric our national character.
Bean is an example of how journalism can be a powerful influence not just on the development of policy  -  but also in shaping the national soul.
Bean, in his own way, became the narrator of the nation's story.
And in some respects, after Lawson and Paterson, the first narrator of the nation's soul.
Certainly, for me, Bean's history of Australia's involvement in the First World War together with Manning Clark's general history of Australia, had something to do with my own intellectual foundation.
And I believe fashioned some of the primal forces of Australian nationalism.
This is as true today as it was 100 years ago when Bean began his career.
Because in a democracy, it is critical that we have a well-informed national debate about defence policy and the conflicts in which we are involved. 
Our military forces today are operating at a very high tempo.
The major combat commitment we currently have is in Afghanistan.
We have almost 1100 Australian troops deployed there.
And, rightly, it attracts the interest of the media.
In recent months we have seen the debate in Australia and internationally turn to the question of whether we are making progress in Afghanistan.
In short, I believe that the answer is that we are making progress  -  even though this is slow and subject to setbacks.
I would also argue that we must make progress.
I would like to speak tonight about why we are involved in Afghanistan, what we are trying to achieve and how we are trying to achieve it.
Our commitment to Afghanistan is critical.
It is critical because it is clearly in our national interest.
First and foremost, we have seen the dangers of allowing Afghanistan to fall under the heel of the Taliban.
We have a direct security interest in strategic denial  -  preventing terrorism by denying terrorists free access to Afghanistan  -  and at the same time helping that nation to overcome 30 years of civil war to become a more stable state.
Under the Taliban, the people of Afghanistan lived in an environment of oppression and extreme poverty with the constant threat of violence.
This was a period where the basic needs of Afghans were left ignored  -  indeed people's lives went backwards  -  amid the pursuit of a violent ideology.
It was an ideology that bred hatred.
It was an ideology that brutalised women.
It was an ideology that found fellow travellers in Osama Bin Laden and Al Qaeda when they were ejected from Sudan.
The end result was the death of 3000 people in the United States in September 2001, including 10 Australians.
The end result was a global terrorism movement that roamed the world and reached into South East Asia, Europe and the rest of the world.
That threat is yet to be eradicated.
In fact, our successes in disrupting terrorism have made some complacent about the threat.
But we should not be complacent.
Al Qaeda and the terrorist groups with which it is linked continue to train.
They continue to plan.
They continue to seek opportunities to attack.
We felt the immediacy of the threat from terrorism on 12 October 2002 when 88 Australians were killed in Bali.
Those behind the attack had trained in Afghanistan.
So, a more stable Afghanistan  -  one that supports security rather than offers succour to those who seek to undermine it  -  will make for a more secure world.
This goal is something we share with the 40 nations contributing in Afghanistan.
And it is a goal endorsed by the United Nations Security Council.
It is a goal that has been authorised and is supported by the Government of Afghanistan.
Beyond the immediate and direct threat of terrorism, we have a second national interest at stake.
Working with our partners in Afghanistan, we show that we are a committed to doing our fair share to tackle international security challenges as an engaged middle power and as a real partner in our alliance with the United States.
We are a regional power with both regional and global interests.
It is right for us to play a role in meeting global security challenges.
We do not just talk about security cooperation.
We are also prepared to do our fair share of the work.
It is dangerous work and it is hard work, and our diggers' lives are on the line every day.
It is part of being a real ally of the United States.
It is part of being an active member of the United Nations.
It is part of contributing to a stable international order  -  and not just being a passive observer of events.
There are, therefore, two compelling reasons for our commitment to Afghanistan.
The first is preventing the spread of terrorism by directly taking on this threat and helping Afghanistan to rebuild itself into a more peaceful and stable state.
The second is demonstrating our capacity to play an active role in enhancing international security  -  both with our allies and with the wider international community.
If our primary objective is to prevent Afghanistan from again becoming a place where terrorist organisations can find refuge and train and plan, and export their terrorism to other nations, we need to provide the conditions for a stable government to develop.
Afghanistan needs security, good governance and economic opportunity.
This is a long-term challenge and we are in for the long haul.
There will be setbacks along the way.
Success is not guaranteed.
And we offer no blank cheque.
In the short term, the most important task is disrupting the insurgency to allow the Afghan Government space to develop.
It is difficult for any government to deal with a violent insurgency campaign, let alone a government that is new and comes to power with few structures and organs of state in place.
History shows us that counter-insurgency operations take a decade or more to win and a key part is winning the support of the population.
Our troops have shown that you can have success against an insurgency.
But disrupting the insurgency is not enough in itself.
We also need to assist the Afghan Government as it matures.
That means helping the Afghan security sector  -  the police and the armed forces  -  to develop.
We need to provide training and support.
We need to show that well trained forces under the command of a civilian government offer the best chance for stability  -  for the government and for the population.
We need to build the confidence of the people of Afghanistan that they can build a future free from the fear and intimidation of the Taliban.
And we need the support of the Government of Pakistan to ensure stability in its border regions with Afghanistan.
Stability in Afghanistan and around its borders will lead to a better future for the people of Afghanistan, for its neighbouring countries such as Pakistan and for the wider world.
Instability in Afghanistan would put further pressure on Pakistan from extremists.
But what we are trying to achieve is more than just rebuilding the security sector.
Working with the Government of Afghanistan and our international partners and other donors, we are also trying to rebuild a nation.
That means rebuilding infrastructure and institutions.
Hospitals, schools and government organs need to have both their physical structures and their knowledge bases rebuilt.
It is an enormous challenge.
It will take years.
It will require a huge investment of funds  -  we have already committed $600 million in development assistance since 2001.
The task of rebuilding a nation is still more complex than building security, infrastructure and institutions.
It is also about helping people to rebuild their lives.
Afghanistan needs training opportunities and education assistance for its people so that they and future generations do not have to rely on violence as a means to fulfil their daily needs.
This will also help to curb economic reliance on the narcotics trade.
Afghanistan needs farmers to feed its people.
It needs people with trade skills to help build and maintain infrastructure.
This will all take time to build and it will take assistance from countries like Australia.
We need to help Afghanistan build security, good governance and economic opportunity because it helps us to achieve our goals.
Australia's primary focus as part of the International Security Assistance Force coalition is the province of Oruzgan.
It is just one of Afghanistan's 34 provinces.
It is an isolated, rural and poor area of Afghanistan.
It has some of the lowest levels of primary education and some of the highest levels of infant mortality in the country.
But we have made progress.
Our military forces have had a positive impact there.
Our personnel in the province work with their Dutch and Afghan security partners to provide stability.
In recent weeks Defence has released details of successful operations to target insurgent leaders.
At the same time the Reconstruction Task Force has also worked to build schools, provide basic training in trades like carpentry and has rebuilt bridges and irrigation systems.
Oruzgan Province also demonstrates the importance of having a coherent military and civilian strategy  -  something that Australia has pushed for in discussions with our NATO partners.
It is not a matter of either or.
Nor is it a matter of one first and then the other.
The civilian and the military are two parts of one strategy.
They cannot be separated.
Either without the other is unsustainable.
This brings some real challenges when dealing with a province like Oruzgan.
It is not that civilian structures have to be rebuilt.
They have to be established.
And they have to be established in a way that recognises and complements existing traditional structures.
Complex power relationships exist in Oruzgan between villages, tribal groups and other interest groups.
All have a stake in the status quo.
The challenge is to work with these groups where possible to build a more stable environment.
To get a long-term solution to Afghanistan's internal tension (both in Oruzgan province and nationwide), there will need to be a carefully integrated civilian, political and military strategy.
The Government of Afghanistan has to win over its opponents and show them that a peaceful future is not only possible but is far preferable to a future of ongoing violent conflict.
As it works to overcome the challenges it faces, the Government of Afghanistan will need our support.
We need to work closely with our partners to achieve the goal we all seek.
Now that Australia has a voice in the NATO councils that set the strategy for the task in Afghanistan we are better placed to make a more meaningful contribution.
The NATO Summit in April in Bucharest which I attended helped to strengthen international commitment.
We welcomed in particular announcements of increased troop commitments by France, Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States.
We welcomed the United Nations' commitment to increasing its effort and presence in Afghanistan.
And we welcomed agreement on a process to assess progress in Afghanistan.
Given the investment we are making, we need robust analysis of progress.
The International Support Conference for Afghanistan held in June sustained the momentum of the NATO Summit.
At the Conference, the international community pledged 20 billion dollars of support and the Afghan Government launched its own national development strategy.
Our Afghanistan policy is a comprehensive one.
We have a strong military commitment  -  one that includes training and mentoring as key roles.
We have a broad development assistance program  -  one that helps to build skills and soft and hard infrastructure.
But the challenges that remain are enormous.
And the resources that are needed are significant.
But Australia remains committed.
We will subject our commitment to annual review against the mission we have set for ourselves.
Against the integrated civilian and military strategy agreed with NATO.
And against the application of those strategic objectives to our particular charge in Oruzgan province.
Where once again I underline publicly the appreciation for the work being done on the ground by our troops and our diplomats in Afghanistan.
Still in harm's way.
All doing their work with absolute professionalism  -  in the great tradition of those who wore the uniform of Australia before them.
There will be more casualties.
This is a dangerous theatre of operations.
But the mission is important for Australia. 
100 years ago C.E.W. Bean became a journalist.
In 1914 he became Australia's first official war correspondent.
And, in the trenches at Gallipoli where he was only overlooked for the Military Cross because he was a civilian, he showed a great dedication to the people around him.
And a great dedication to the truth.
It is a remarkable achievement that Bean was at Gallipoli from the very first day  -  and as a result of a wound he sustained during the campaign, he carried a reminder around with him for the rest of his life  -  a bullet in the leg.
It is a remarkable achievement that he followed the Australians to every one of the major battles they were in on the Western Front.
He was determined that the story of the Australian soldiers be told to the Australian people.
And at the end of that conflict  -  and over the next 23 years  -  he produced an official war history unlike anything the world had ever seen.
Of course, Bean's efforts also led to the establishment of this great Australian War Memorial.
This great temple to our great Australian war dead.
This temple to the 100,000 names inscribed on its walls.
A temple to the million and more who have worn the uniform of Australia.
Bean's epitaph lies equally in the words of his history and in the stories of this building.
In both, Bean gave the nation its memory.
And in doing so, inspires the nation in the crafting of its future.
C.E.W. Bean  -  a great Australian who will transcend the ages.


I am delighted to join you this evening as we recognise and promote scientific excellence:
     * excellence in scientific research, and
     * excellence in teaching science and inspiring the next generation of Australian scientists.
Science and innovation underpin the continued improvements in living standards that we in the modern world take for granted.
Scientific discovery and application is the reason why we now live longer and healthier lives, why we can communicate globally at almost zero cost and retrieve information from any part of the world through the internet.
Our lives continue to be transformed by the new frontiers in science.
As our world continues to change rapidly, and the global economy is transformed by the rise of China and India, science is going to become more critically important to our future.
As an economy, Australia can't compete against the large emerging economies on price alone.
We will never have the scale or the low labour costs that will make us cheaper than those nations.
But we can compete through education, innovation and excellence.
That is why science plays such an important role in the Government's vision for Australia's future  -  for a stronger economy, and for competing successfully in the global economy of the 21st century.
Science is also critical to tackling the challenges of the future:
     * putting Australia in front in clean green energy and other climate change technologies;
     * creating the fulfilling, high skill jobs of the future;
     * achieving breakthroughs in medical research that can help the management and cure of chronic diseases like diabetes, cancer and dementia;
     * ensuring a strong future for our rural industries and communities, as they face water shortages yet growing world food demand.
Australia needs a strong base of science teaching and scientific research  -  in our schools, universities, government agencies, and our research organisations.
That means in particular that more must be done to retain our best and brightest scientists and researchers within Australia  -  or giving them good reasons to come home.
Australia has a strong record of scientific achievement.
But we can still do better.
Consider the facts:
     * A decade ago Australia was ranked 16th out of 28 countries for the strength of our research collaboration between industry and universities. The most recent evaluation in 2004 saw Australia's position collapse to being the bottom of the table.
     * Australia has only 8 PhDs per thousand people in the workforce, compared to 11 per thousand in the United States, 20 per thousand in Germany, and 28 per thousand in Switzerland.
I believe we can turn this around.
Not overnight.
Not in one Budget.
Not even in the life of one Parliament.
But with a long term vision for science policy, we can capture the creativity and ingenuity of our people and build a more prosperous future for the country.
Even now, we produce 3 per cent of the world's research papers with just 0.3 per cent of the world's population.
In a world where most scientific discovery and application will occur offshore, it makes sense that a major part of our science strategy is to build stronger ties to the international science community.
That has been a priority for the Government in our first year in office.
Australia has established the Australia-China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.
Australia has become the first associate member of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory, a multinational facility dedicated to basic research.
And in August, the New Zealand government agreed to support and campaign for Australia's bid to host the $2 billion square-kilometre array radio telescope.
This iconic project won't just revolutionise our understanding of the universe  -  it would also have a transforming impact on scientific endeavour here in Australia.
Winning this project, which is being jointly developed by researchers in 19 nations, would have an enormously beneficial impact on Australian science.
The Australian Government has committed over $100 million to this initiative.
If Australia is successful, we stand to benefit from a potential multi-billion dollar investment.
This Government believes science has an important role to play in informing the policy making process.
I strongly believe in evidence-based policy.
That includes greater use of scientific evidence in the process of making and evaluating policy.
The Chief Scientist has an important role in providing a scientific input into the policy process, and that is one reason why the Government has upgraded the position of Australia's Chief Scientist to a full-time role.
I am delighted that Professor Penny Sackett, an outstanding astronomer, will shortly commenceher five year appointment to this role as the leader of the nation's scientific community.
Professor Sackett is a strong advocate for the scientific community and she will play a key role in promoting science across the country  -  from classrooms to boardrooms, and across the entire nation.
Professor Sackett's valued advice is complemented by the other members of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council, which meets twice per year.
The Council gives me the opportunity to hear from scientists directly, on matters as diverse as the regional impacts of climate change, water supplies in our cities, Indigenous healthcare, and new technologies.
When we met last week, we focused on the future of the National Innovation System.
The Review of the National Innovation System, conducted by Professor Terry Cutler, provides policy recommendations for the Government across science, research and innovation.
The Government is reviewing those recommendations and will be responding to the report with a White Paper on innovation policy in the near future.
The Government has already moved to address the urgent priorities facing the science sector.
The first is in teaching.
Australia needs more people studying maths and science.
We need more of those graduates to go back into our school classrooms and teach the next generation of scientists.
That is why our Government is investing $626 million in financial incentives to do just that.
From 1 January next year, new maths and science students will see their HECS fees slashed from over $7,400 to less than $4,200.
The message that sends to students is simple: “We want you to study maths and science, and we'll back you for making that choice.”
We're also cutting HECS for maths and science graduates who go into related occupations like teaching these subjects in secondary school or becoming primary school teachers.
Because teaching the next generation is a wonderful use of scientific talent.
The Government is also committed to strengthening scientific research.
     * We are investing $209 million to double the number of postgraduate scholarships to higher degree research students.
     * We are investing $326 million to create 1,000 mid-career Future Fellowships.
     * And we are investing $239 million for our new Laureate Fellowships program.
Together, these three initiatives provide a boost across the research spectrum  -  higher degree, mid-career and peak of career researchers.
Tonight is an opportunity to celebrate the achievements of those who have dedicated their lives to scientific endeavour.
The achievements of each of tonight's winners are truly world-class.
There are fewer greater contributions a person can make to our society than dedicating themselves to breakthroughs in human knowledge and to passing scientific understanding on to the next generation.
So tonight, I join you in applauding these achievers for their dedication and excellence.
And I look forward to our nation producing many more such examples of excellence in coming years. 


It gives me great pleasure to award the 2008 Prime Minister's Prize for Science to Professor Ian Frazer.
The award and $300,000 grant recognises Professor Frazer's ground-breaking work in the creation of vaccines which protect against the virus that causes cervical cancer. Two of these, Gardasil and Cervarix, are now available commercially.
Every year, approximately 230,000 women worldwide die from cervical cancer  -  Professor Frazer's work provides invaluable protection against cervical cancer and makes an enormous contribution to the health of women around the world.
In collaboration with the late Jian Zhou, Professor Frazer created virus-like particles using proteins from the shell of the human papilloma virus. This breakthrough led to the development of the vaccines which prevent infection from the virus responsible for most cervical cancers.
Professor Frazer is also developing two further two vaccines, now in clinical trials, which are designed to treat women who have already been infected with the virus.
To extend the reach and benefits of the vaccines, Professor Frazer and his team are working to make them available in developing countries. He and his colleagues are currently working in Vanuatu and Nepal to understand how best to establish and run much-needed vaccination programs.
I also award the $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Primary Schools to Adelaide teacher Bronwyn Mart.
Ms Mart has developed an innovative approach to teaching science which capitalises on children's natural curiosity about the world around them. Her results have demonstrated that science is important and interesting to primary school students and has a central role in the primary school curriculum.
And the $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools goes to Clay Reid, a teacher in South Australia's Clare Valley.
During a career spanning 20 years teaching science in secondary schools, Mr Reid has forged a reputation as a respected and inspirational teacher and leader, both in his rural community and in the wider science teaching community. A passion for the science of wine making has proved topical and popular with students in this famous wine making region.
These prizes remind us that Australia's innovation system is driven by great science and great science teachers.
It is part of the Australian psyche to question the world and to come up with new and better ways of doing things. Science is an integral part of that process.
Congratulations to all recipients of this year's prizes.


Thanks very much.
Treasurer, Assistant Finance Minister, Craig Emerson the Minister for Small Business and Heather and all those from the Ai Group, and it's good to be in this gathering today, an important stage in this country's economic history, and an important stage in this country's economic future.
It's been an interesting week, this week. In the space of five days the Australian Government has guaranteed all deposits and all depositors in Australian banks, building societies and credit unions.
The Australian Government has provided a guarantee to the wholesale funding arrangements for Australia's banks until market conditions stabilise.
The Australian Government has increased to $8 billion its activities through the Australian Office of Financial Management and the purchase of residential mortgage backed securities.
And the Australian Government has announced a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to assist in underpin positive economic growth into the future.
That's been the last five days.
This is an intense period of government effort and it will be intense for a long period to come.
My message to you today is along these lines. First, that throughout this year, the government has been planning ahead. Planning ahead  mindful of unfolding threats, mindful of unfolding challenges and acting ahead of the curve.
The second is this, the government in the period ahead remains determined, absolutely determined, to take whatever action is necessary to continue to underpin economic growth and to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system.
And the third message is this, that government, business, the unions, the community  -  we're all in this together. And together, we're going to come through this thing. We're going to come through this thing in good shape.
Government action in the year so far. Earlier this year, not long after the government was elected, the Treasurer and I sat down with the Treasury and with others and it became clear to us that we faced an uncertain year ahead.
This year was reinforced by my discussions in the United States and United Kingdom and in Brussels in March/April, reinforced by the Treasurer's discussions with his counterparts in many foreign capitals in that time period as well. Reinforced by recent meetings with leaders, when I was recently at the United Nations General Assembly. And reinforced again most recently in the week just past by the Treasurer's meetings in Washington as part of the International Monetary Fund and the G20.
All through this year, we've been conscious of these unfolding economic circumstances. Today it's unnecessary to go to the question of the causes of what has happened. Today it's more important to explain what has been done and what we still intend to do.
During the course of this year the government has acted in absolute close coordination with our financial and economic regulators. Can I say, in this having spoken now to many foreign heads of government, we are profoundly well served by our regulators. The Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, the Reserve Bank of Australia, ASIC and the Treasury.
In very difficult and virtually unprecedented circumstances they have performed a first class job. We are well served by them.
The government has worked in close coordination with them throughout the year. Often, in fact invariably, below the radar, as is often best the case.
Throughout this year, and invariably without much fanfare, the Reserve Bank of Australia has injected more and more liquidity into markets.
Throughout this year, measures have been taken of a legislative and regulatory nature when most particular action was required at that time, but to make sure that we had a capacity to act when action was necessary.
The Treasurer back in May introduced legislative authority for Australia to extend its activities in the Commonwealth Government securities market. Extending our activities with the bond market to the quantum of $25 billion, releasing $5 billion in the shorter term.
Furthermore the Treasurer introduced legislation to make it possible for the Australian Office of Financial Management to engage in the purchase of residential mortgage backed securities. Again, ahead of the curve.
Again, earlier this year the government foreshadowed legislation for a financial claims scheme as it relates to the long term security of depositors. Again, ahead of the curve.
The point in raising these things is to say that your regulators have been hard at work, they've been ahead of the game providing us with timely advice about when it's been necessary to act and the government has so acted.
This brings us to the dramatic decisions of recent days, those announced by myself on Sunday and through close collaboration again with the regulators and the Treasurer on the phone from Washington, and also with the other members of the strategic policy and budget committee of the Cabinet.
The judgment we took, based on the advice of the regulators, is that notwithstanding the fact that Australia's mainstream banks are in absolute first class working order, well regulated, strong balance sheets, and across the world with 20 AA rated banks our four, our top four, being among those 20. There was a danger that with the provision of foreign government guarantees for wholesale term funding on markets, on capital constrained markets, that our banks despite their (inaudible) ratings, were going to be compromised. That is, that those banks operating in foreign jurisdictions with less robust balance sheets, with then the new underpinning of government guarantees in the marketplace, would be in a more competitive position than our banks in order to secure term funding for the future.
This is not an abstract debate about finance policy; it's a real debate about future lines of credit into the Australian economy. It's a real debate about how, in fact, you provide secure lines of credit into the Australian economy for the purposes just described before by Heather in her presentation. Making sure there's enough credit for loans to businesses out there engaged in real economic activity and in the real economy.
And that certainly was foremost in the government's mind when it took the unprecedented step of providing that guarantee.
Secondly, because other foreign governments had acted, and a number of other governments prospectively were going to act, the guarantee in relation to all deposits, all depositors, for all banks and building societies and credit unions, was a necessary second step.
Necessary because we could not say and look squarely in the eye the citizens of Australia and say that guarantees should be extended to banks for elements of their commercial operations and not provide a guarantee for working Australians concerned about their deposits long term.
Again, as the bad news filtered its way through the television screens over time, concerns were beginning to emerge in Australia about this deluge of bad news from abroad that someone there'd be some concern about the security of our financial institutions here at home. And again, the government was determined to act ahead of the curve.  And we did so.
The second area which has confronted us in recent weeks has been the flow through impact of these extraordinary convulsions on financial markets through credit markets, through stock markets, onto the real economy. And again, it has been necessary to be ahead of the curve.
If you look at the emerging economic data from around the world in the industrial economies in recent months, the downward revisions in growth projections across the OECD and beyond have been significant.
The world economic outlook from the document that was produced by the IMF only a couple of weeks ago indicated clearly that  growth projections in the global economy were down one per cent for the calendar year ahead, '09, for the industrial economies down one per cent for calendar '09, and for industrial economies at best bumping along at zero and something worse than that as well.
And the quotation from the IMF managing director referred to by Heather before is a steely quotation  -  it focuses the mind. That is, for the major economies around the world that they are either in recession or on the cusp of recession. That's that data from which we have been presented.
That data was presented by the IMF collating the data from across member economies prior to the extraordinary convulsions that we saw in the last two to three weeks in the United States.
That series of events, from the bail out of a range of name institutions through to the troubled passage of the measures put forward by the Bush Administration through the United States Congress and through to subsequent actions from other governments including in Europe.
The conclusion therefore that the Australian Government reached in close consultation with our advisers was that given that growth was being revised downwards across the developed and developing economies around the world, and that those most recent downwards revisions occurred prior to the recent dramatic events in the United States. That the only prudent and responsible course of action looking forward was to engage in a substantial stimulus package for the economy.
We stand by that decision, it is the right decision - it is absolutely the right decision for the times that we confront.
When you're confronted with these sorts of challenges to the real economy and how they flow through to real growth and real jobs in Australia, the three dictums which apply are as follows when it comes to fiscal policy  -  go hard, go early and go to households. And we've done so. Some were surprised by the dimensions of the package which we released the other day, the Economic Security Strategy, we stand by that resolutely as the appropriate response for the circumstances that we now confront.
And the point I make to you today, parallel to what I said earlier on, is that we remain equally determined to take resolute action in the future as is necessary to continue to support economic growth in the economy.
Of course, that Economic Security Strategy which we announced on Tuesday is built on the back of the government again planning ahead.
In May this year when the Treasurer brought down his first Budget, we set aside a substantial government Budget surplus for the purposes of providing a buffer for us for the future. A buffer for Australia for the future. A buffer against tough times. A Budget framed against the discussions that both the treasurer and I have had around the world prior to the framing of the Budget.  I'm glad that we did so.  Those tough times have come. And we're now drawing, using and deploying the financial resources available to the government through that surplus.
Of course, the other thing is that as of 1 July this year the Government, also through the Budget, legislated going forward a $55 billion plus package of family support measures anchored in a $44 billion plus tax cut agenda, the first of which flowed through from the 1st of July against some of the counsel of some of the commentariat at the time. I'm glad we took that decision as well.
But also reinforced by other measures designed to assist the family budget, including the increase to the childcare tax rebate. 
So from July, we had those stimulus measures flowing into the economy. By setting aside the surplus through careful preparation of the Budget, the capacity to act with the economic stimulus package that we announced on Tuesday of $10.4 billion, activity which will flow into the economy over the period ahead, and I'll come to its detail in a minute.
Then, moving forward again, come December, the Government will bring forward its nation building agenda, its infrastructure agenda. And you'll see announcements flowing from that from early next year. 
The Government unapologetically is a Government of nation building. We've said that before the election, we set aside funds for that purpose, again through our Budget preparations in May this year. And the time has come again to deploy those resources, building infrastructure. Not necessary just now, but necessary importantly for the long term productivity of the economy as well.
And then from 1 July next year the next round of tax cuts flow as well. What we've sought to do therefore through this integrated set of measures is to provide continued injections into the economy. Tax cut based activity flowing through from 1 July. Furthermore, on top of that, the economic security strategy which I've just referred to, the $10.4 billion stimulus package announced on Tuesday. And on top of that again, what comes in December, the nation building agenda, the first instalment of which will be announced at that time. And flowing through again into the first round of tax cuts which flow from the 1st of July next year.
That's on the fiscal policy front.
On monetary policy you've seen the dramatic action taken recently by the Reserve Bank of Australia in its decision to reduce rates by 100 basis points. If you read carefully the statement of the Reserve Bank Governor issued at the time, he refers quite explicitly to a material change in our economic circumstances. That's why he acted, and that's why we have acted. Fiscal and monetary policy working together against the challenges that we now face.
On the package that we just announced on various measures, you're familiar with those which flow directly to households, those which flow directly to pensioners. I draw particular emphasis on those which flow through to the housing sector. We've been mindful of the construction of the growth drivers in the economy. We've been mindful of the role of consumption, private consumption, and we've been mindful of the role of private dwelling investment as a big driver of growth in the economy and its flow on effects across the economy.  And that's why when it came to private dwelling investment that we took the measures that we did, unprecedented, to double the first home owners grant from $7,000 to $14,000  -  but then on top of that, to triple the first home owners grant if the first home owner in question proceeds to invest and buy in a newly built home.
Now, this has been done with the clear objective, which is to stimulate the housing sector. As for the measures done, they've been taken to stimulate consumption.
The credit related measures I referred to before have a weather eye plainly on the challenges which business face in terms of private fixed capital investment into the future as well.
And, when it comes to the infrastructure agenda, that goes to the other main driver of economic growth, namely what happens through public expenditure in public investment.
The purpose of my running through all these measures is to indicate this has been planned, in terms of Budget preparedness, well in advance. It has been executed in a systematic way for the future. And, when it comes to further measures which may be necessary in terms of fiscal policy and the future underpinnings of economic growth, the government remains determined to act as is necessary.
There is a third area where the government has sought to be ahead of the pace, ahead of the curve, and planning ahead. And that is I believe the other part of the competence equation.
I've spoken so far about the necessary measures which have been taken in ensuring the continued stability of the Australian financial system. I've spoken about the measures we've taken so far in terms of proper investment into the real economy through the fiscal stimulus measures that I've just referred to, and those which are coming down the track. But there is a third part of the real economy, real financial markets, and confidence equation as well. And that is what the governments of the world choose to do in terms of their global response through regulation to the overall challenge of the global financial crisis.
I believe what the markets of the world have been saying to the governments of the world in recent times is collectively ‘will you please get your acts together'.
A stimulus package here, a regulatory initiative there, a liquidity measure over here, the economies A, B and C or X, Y and Z  -  that's terrific, tick the box, wonderful. But I think the markets of the world are saying this in what is a definition in global financial crisis mandates an integrated global regulatory response and a global policy response.
Those are the the debates in which I've been deeply engaged, and which the Treasurer has been deeply engaged with his Finance Minister counterparts in the G20 and in the IMF most recently.
What I'll be releasing later today is a proposal which I'll be putting to heads of government across the G20 about how we, the governments of the world, agree on a long term reform package going to the future of the global financial system.
The Treasurer will attend a meeting of the G20 Finance Ministers in November. It's important that we in Australia build political consensus around the world to ensure that this is not a meeting, that it actually produces a considered and reasoned outcome for the future.
The Australia proposal, and it is consistent with the proposal that I advanced recently in an address to the UN General Assembly  -  there are five action points. The first is that systemically important financial institutions should be licenced to operate in major economies only under the condition that they make full disclosure and analysis of balance sheet and off balance sheet exposures.
Systemically important financial institutions are not just commercial banks, but can include investment banks, insurance companies, hedge funds and financial clearing houses.
Which institutions are systemically important will vary by one country over time. The central bank in each country should have responsibility for financial systemic stability. This should be reflected in the agreed best practice code for financial regulation and monitored and assessed by the International Monetary Fund, through its FSAP and surveillance activities.
Action 2, we need to ensure that banks, other financial institutions, as some of the additional earnings that they make in good times, using predictable rules to build up capital as a buffer for the bad times. Supervisory frameworks need to be counter-cyclical not pro-cyclical.
The Basel rules need to be changed to deal with this.
Action 3, financial institutions need to have clear internal incentives to promote financial stability. Regulators should set high capital requirements for financial firms that have executive remuneration packages that reward short term returns or excessive risk taking. Again, the Basel rules need to be changed to deal with this.
Action 4, supervisory systems must be compatible with financial stability. We need to make sure accounting rules used to evaluate risk take a more medium term perspective and do not encourage institutions to think that risk is low just because current asset prices are high, or recent asset price volatility has been has been low. Again the Basel rules need to be changed to address this.
And action 5, the International Monetary Fund must be given a strengthened mandate for prudential analysis. International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Forum, in which Australia is an active member, should provide early warning of vulnerabilities and provide advice and remedial policies. These prudential reports by the IMF should form the basis of active engagement with the G20 to shape understanding and action on global risk and system stability.
I will be corresponding with heads of government counterparts across the G20 in the next 24 hours in support of that proposal and in anticipation of the G20 Finance Ministers meeting which will be held in Brazil next month, which the Treasurer will be attending.
Also, there'll be upcoming meetings of heads of government at APEC and heads of government meetings in the East Asia Summit as well. It will be important to deploy political momentum from those meetings in support of an integrated global reform agenda.
Again, the government has sought to be ahead of the curve. The government has sought to be in the business of planning ahead and through these proposals, in concert with some positive proposals coming out of the British government and other governments in recent times, we believe that we can make real progress. More importantly, we must achieve this outcome because the stability of the global financial system underpins all the other discussions which will be alive around this table today.
To conclude, for the future, actions by government planning ahead is just one part of the equation. Planning ahead on needs for maintaining the stability of the Australian financial system, as I've said before, we will act as necessary.
Similarly, we will act as is necessary for the future stimulation of the Australia economy. And we will act as is necessary in concert with other governments in bringing about a consistent regulatory regime for the future, because until that is finally got right I believe we are going to face continuing uncertainties on global financial markets.
But that is what governments can do. The other part of the equation is what we do with business. And part of the reason we're here today with you is to hear what business has to say firsthand about their own experiences. It's important that we maintain a continuing dialogue with business and with the general community while this global financial crisis works through Australia's economy.
This is going to be a tough time, it's going to be a hard time, and it will require from time to time unprecedented measures and unprecedented actions. We wish to do so collaboratively and in a consultative fashion with business. And that's part of the reason that we're here today.
You are part and parcel of the agenda of maintaining confidence in Australia. Government is part and parcel of the agenda in maintaining confidence in Australia. Consumers are part and parcel of the agenda in maintaining confidence in Australia. We're all part of that overriding economic mission now.
I was challenged before by Heather and by others as to what happens with the rest of the government's continuing economic policy agenda.
My attitude to that is the productivity agenda  -  full steam ahead. Australia will come through this. We can't use this as an excuse to push to one side necessary long term productivity reforms aimed at producing higher a productivity force outcome in the overall Australian economy.
So our investment in education, skills and training will continue apace. Our investment in infrastructure will continue apace. Our investment of policy and political energy in the national business deregulation agenda through the Council of Australian Governments will continue apace. And there are currently 27 separate items of national business deregulation which are up for decision by COAG in the period ahead.
Similarly, I was challenged about the continuation of the government's approach to climate change and important and critical technologies like carbon capture and storage. These problems do not just disappear; they are with us for the future. They need to be acted on, systematically, sensibly, rationally; on a continuing basis and the government will continue to do that. As reflected recently by the government's announcement of its intention to establish a global carbon capture and storage institute. The core reason is our technology is good, our economic need is great because we are the world's largest coal exporting economy, and the rest of the world needs us to take the lead, and we intend to do so.
Finally, this is as much about what we do and the concrete actions we take as it is about the spirit of the nation as well. You know, people can get gloomy and down in the mouth and there is a lot to be gloomy and down in the mouth about if you watch the news all the time. That's true. But you know something, part of leadership, nationally and in corporations and in the general community, lies in pointing realistically to the challenges and threats we face, but equally realistically to the strengths that we have as an economy and as the community.
And I look to the spirit of the Australian nation, they're not a bunch of panic merchants, they're a bunch of very practical people who believe passionately in the future of the country.
I believe with the policy settings we have, we the policy actions we've taken and with the active participation of you, the men and women of Australian business, and with the broader community, we'll see Australia through in a very strong shape indeed.
Thank you.


SPEERS: Prime Minister, welcome. Can I start with the hardest question first. Can you explain in simple terms how this financial crisis happened and why it's affecting us in Australia?
PM: There are two reasons it happened Kieran. The first is, loans were made in the United States many years ago coming off the period in the early 2000s  -  loans which could never be repaid by lenders and by mortgage holders who simply didn't have the assets or the capital to ever repay them. That's the first problem.
But the second cause was this  -  that you then had a whole series of other financial institutions around the world who then securitised, that is, spread the risk from those dodgy loans across a whole range of other financial institutions. And that spread right across the world and done in a non-transparent way.
So when the original mortgage payments couldn't be made the cancer didn't just stay local, it spread across the world to all the other institutions who'd been wrapped up in it, and that created a problem of confidence across the system and that's what we've been dealing with ever since.
SPEERS: I noticed you didn't mention there George Bush as one of the potential causes of all of this and yet in the United States both Barack Obama and John McCain do seem to agree that the Bush administration should have seen this coming, and should have done more to prevent it. Do you agree?
PM: Well, you know, in terms of the regulatory system of the United States which allowed this to happen, obviously there has been legitimate criticism from around the world on that.
But the key question is not to engage in some sort of finger-pointing exercise now  -  the key challenge for the moment is what do we do to fix that system of rules and regulations for the future and in the immediate term do two things.
First of all, rebuild confidence in the financial system now, so it's got enough liquidity, and secondly because this global financial crisis has now spread to the real economy, take measures like those we've taken in recent days to stimulate the economy, to underpin growth into the medium term and therefore underpin jobs in the medium term. That's the practical response.
SPEERS: Let's look at some of those measures. You've guaranteed all bank deposits and you've also given the economy a $10.4 billion sugar hit in the form of handouts to pensioners and families. As you know the Opposition is questioning how you arrived at this $10.4 billion figure. Can you explain that to us  -  it obviously wasn't plucked out of thin air.
PM: Well, the bottom line is this  -  the government, when it received the information about what had gone on in the United States in the last several weeks, in its discussions with Treasury concluded that we needed to bring in a stimulus package for our economy now because we didn't want to turn around in nine months time and say ‘Boy, I wish we'd given the economy a bigger buffer for growth and for jobs for the future'.
The second point is this  -  the most recent information from the International Monetary Fund in its World Economic Outlook pointed to a downwards revision in growth for the world economy and for the most advanced economies of one per cent. But that was just before the events of the last two to three weeks in America and across the world where we've seen stock markets go through huge losses.
Therefore, the conclusion we reached  -  it's better to act decisively and early to provide a buffer for our growth for the future, and we stand by the decision. It's the right thing to do. It's also designed to continue to underpin confidence in Australia as well.
SPEERS: You've mentioned the IMF forecast, but just to be clear, are there any new Treasury estimates of what's going to happen to growth and unemployment that you're not sharing with us or aren't there any new estimates as of yet from Treasury?
PM: When the Australian government, and this has occurred over many, many years  -  you have the budget forecasts and then six months later you have the mid-year forecast. They come out six months later. And they'll be released, of course, in November.
But of course the logic of the Liberal Party's position is this  -  they would say that you should wait until basically the car starts to sputter through lack of petrol in the tank before you put more petrol in, and you wait for final and conclusive evidence of that.
Now, if they were saying that you wanted final and conclusive evidence that would mean waiting for the mid-year economic forecasts which come out in November, that's six months after the budget, or wait for the future national accounts data, which comes out even much later, but guess what Kieran  -  by then it's too late.
You need to act decisively and early because it takes some time for these stimulus measures to flow through to the economy and that's why we acted in the way in which we have.
SPEERS: Now, just on the stimulus measures. There are handouts to pensioners and for families, but I want to ask you about those who are feeling the worst effects of this crisis right now  -  self-funded retirees. People who've worked all their life, invested for their retirement, but are now watching those investments crumble as the markets tumble. What are you doing for them?
PM: The first and fundamental responsibility we have for those Australians, and all Australians, but those in particular who are depending on super funds, who have investments in stock markets, is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and to work internationally to restore the stability of the international financial system.
That's the challenge because what we have here is problems in credit markets which then spill into problems in stock markets which spill into problems in the real economy. That's what we're dealing with.
So our measures in Australia, whether it's the guarantee to bank deposits, whether it's the guarantees to the banks for their term lending for the future, whether it's the other, regulatory decisions taken by the prudential regulatory authority, the Reserve Bank, and by the government in coordination with Treasury, has that as one objective.
Stabilising credit markets so that that in turn, over time, stabilises what we see happening in the gyrations on stock markets because that flows through to superannuation earnings.
SPEERS: You've also, Prime Minister, called for tougher rules on executive salaries in the financial services sector. Is it the size of the salaries that worries you, or is it the part of the salary that's linked to risk-taking, to encourage risk-taking by these executives. Or is it both?
PM: I believe, Kieran, the key thing  -  David I should say  - 
SPEERS: I was going to correct you  - 
PM: It's alright. I've been talking to him in Canberra here.
The key thing is this - to make sure that we have in corporate remuneration packages in the financial sector a set of rules which apply, which discourage excessive risk taking. At present, we believe the rules which exist need to be improved, need to be hardened. That's the first principle.
The second is we've got to make sure for the long term also that the Australian community maintains confidence in these arrangements for senior level executive remuneration in the financial sector as well because the Australian community is doing it tough, and we've got to make sure that if you're out there taking measures to support the long term stability of our banks and other financial institutions as well, that there is some fairness in this overall approach as well.
The primary objective, the primary objective, however, goes to the core stability of the financial system for the future. And that means having a set of rules for executive remuneration in the financial services sector which reduces risk taking to the greatest extent possible.
SPEERS: Just on the salaries themselves, is there a figure that you think is too much for an executive to earn? I mean, is $5 million too much? Is $10 million too much? Or aren't you willing to put a figure on it?
PM: What I've signalled quite clearly, David, is that the government, through the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority and through the Treasury, will now in the months ahead work through the detail of a set of changes to the rules, rules which we will then seek to put on the international agenda too, because remuneration arrangements for financial institutions internationally are as important to what applies nationally here in Australia.
The key thing is to get that formula right so that we have a set of rules which discourage, as I said before, excessive risk taking. And you can link that to the prudential standards which are then applied to each individual financial institution.
We intend to get that right, we're going to be thorough about it, and that's why we're in the process of working through the detail with the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, and with the Treasury.
SPEERS: I want to ask you, Prime Minister, about what this crisis means for the global fight against global warming. Overnight, eight Eastern European countries, and Italy, have now walked away from their commitment to reducing emissions by 20 per cent by 2020. Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi says ‘now is not the time to be playing Don Quixote on climate change'.
Is this financial crisis a setback for the environment?
PM: It certainly makes the international environment tougher for dealing with what is already a tough set of negotiations.
But what I'd say to leaders around the world and to the community here in Australia is that the problem of climate change and global warming doesn't disappear because of the global financial crisis. It is there, it needs to be dealt with, and it also has a huge economic cost attached to it, it's called the economic cost of inaction. And that cost is greater than the economic cost of action.
Therefore, it's important for the international community, and Australia, to begin setting the rules for the future. Because unless we deal with this, the roll on consequences for the economy over time in the rural sector, agricultural production, and overall security of water supply, is huge.
And huge for the Australian economy because we are already the hottest and driest continent, therefore we have an acute national economic interest at stake in making sure there is an effective international set of rules.
SPEERS: And is that the message you'll be giving business leaders at the summit you're attending today?
PM: When I attend this meeting with business leaders in Sydney, we have a very clear objective which is to obtain their feedback about what needs to be done further in dealing with the consequences of the global financial crisis for the real Australian economy.
We announced the other day our approach in a $10.4 billion economic security strategy for the future.
That is designed to provide much needed stimulus for the economy in the immediate period ahead. That follows on a decision by the Reserve Bank to reduce rates by 100 basis points only a week or so ago. On top of that we have the measures that we have announced on the security of bank deposits and the guarantees to bank lending into the future, that is, , their term finance arrangements.
But you know, it is very important to hear directly from the business community on the ground about what is going on and about what further actions may be necessary in the future. Canberra is not the ultimate repository of all wisdom, I have said that many times before.
So we will be out and about talking with the business community and the general community over what is still going to be a very very tough time ahead.
SPEERS: A final question Prime Minister, are you willing to put the budget into deficit to avoid a recession in Australia?
PM: You know as well as I do David that the long standing economic policy of the Labor party in opposition and the Labor Party in Government is to maintain a budget surplus over the course of the economic cycle.
We have said that repeatedly in the past prior to coming to office. That is our position now and will be into the future.
Fortunately, we took a decision in the May Budget this year to set aside a substantial budget surplus as a buffer against the future, as a buffer against tough times.
Well those tough times have come and we now are drawing significantly on that surplus. But we will still be able to land through this financial year in a comfortable position. But we also remain determined, absolutely determined to take future action as is necessary with two objectives in mind: supporting the long term strength of the Australian economy, supporting continued positive growth in the Australian economy and supporting households on the way through.
We believe that is the right course of action in what is still going to be a very uncertain time ahead for the global economy and therefore its flowthrough impact on Australia.
SPEERS: Ok but a surplus over the cycle, your commitment there, that does mean you can go into deficit if necessary?
PM: Well as we have said repeatedly and the Treasurer has said repeatedly, it means maintaining a budget surplus over the course of the economic cycle. That is the responsible course of action, it is one we have committed to over many, many years, I have committed to since becoming leader of the Labor Party, since becoming the Prime Minister. The Treasurer has confirmed that, that will be our policy into the future.
It is the right policy, it is the responsible course of action and I believe through our conservative economic management in the period that we have been in office, we have demonstrated fundamentally our strong credentials on this matter.
SPEERS: Alright, Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


PM: Well the purpose of my being here this evening is to talk about the global financial crisis and its effects on households right across the country. And more importantly it is to hear what you have got to say and to try as hard as I can to answer your questions  -  about the implications for the national economy and implications for the household economies.
A few words first about how we put all of this into context.
When you look at this financial crisis a lot of people are asking, how does it happen, how does it actually come to be like this, particularly for those of us here in Australia who had nothing to do with the way in which this started.
First and foremost, a year or so ago a whole bunch of American banks lent a whole lot of money to a whole lot of people who could never afford to repay those loans for houses.
Well that was one problem, but then it got much worse because a whole lot of other banks in the United States and elsewhere around the world then decided to underwrite those loans. And as a result the cancer spread. And they didn't disclose what they were doing.
That created a crisis of confidence for the banking system and then on top of that you had slowly, the freezing up of global credit markets?
So what are the implications for Australia?
Well there has basically been three for countries around the world and for us. The first is this freezing of credit markets and a lack of confidence in the banking system around the world.
Because if credit dries up it means it cannot flow through for normal lending for households and for businesses creating jobs. That is the first point.
Now the second is, it begins to effect over time, the real economy, that is, real growth, real jobs. And therefore for what you see around the world is the wash through of all this in ways which we don't quite know yet how it is all going to turn out, but over the next 12 months, it is quite critical, that is the second one.
And then of course you go to what you have seen in stock markets. Credit markets, stock markets, real economy. And stock markets you would say, well it is just a whole bunch of people playing with shares. Well, no, it affects superannuation funds and superannuation earnings.
So what has the government been doing to respond? Two or three things, before we get to your questions. The first is we have been working to maintain the stability of our Australian banking system. Our banks are in really strong working order, very strong working order. Great balance sheets, well regulated.
But to make sure that their reputation worldwide continues to be underpinned, a week ago we made a statement as the government to guarantee deposits and to guarantee also the banks lending from overseas, because they use a lot of that lending to support what they do in providing loans to business in Australia.
The other thing we did was, on the jobs question, on the economic growth question was that we released this $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy. That was on Tuesday.
The reason we have done that is to provide support for growth in the economy and to support further growth for jobs in the economy, because we are worried about all of this happening overseas on our real economy in the year ahead.
We set aside a big surplus at the beginning of the year and the time has come to draw down on that surplus. It was set up for tough times and those tough times are coming.
But we have got to do so responsibly and still do it while maintaining a comfortable surplus for the future.
And the third thing, we will come to the detail of that from December, but it is about a Nation Building Agenda for Australia also to support economic growth, but to get out there and to build the infrastructure we need for the long term as well.
Hospitals, schools, educational institutions but also roads, rail and ports. We have got still a lot of work to do and we will take whatever action is necessary to underpin the long term strength of this economy, but it is going to be tough. Over to you for some questions.
AUDIENCE: Mr Prime Minister, if I may call you Kevin?
PM: That is fine, I have been called worse.
AUDIENCE: I am Max (inaudible) I am a local real estate agent. My area of expertise or my area of marketing hasn't been as badly affected, but I have friends in areas that are in developing areas. These areas were selling off now at prices, at a percentage of what they bought them for some years ago. Some of these people went in on first home buyers grants and GST rebates the first government put in place.
I notice that you just increased the first home buyers grant. Is this going to be a repeat of mortgage repossessions over the next couple of years and what is the Government doing to try and protect this?
PM: Now we are quite worried about housing. Let's take the whole economy first and as you know, your industry, the housing sector has a huge impact on growth across the economy. Because it is not just the building of a house which is important, but it is what goes in it, that stimulates the economy as well.
So, as I have looked at the data carefully, what we have had since the end of last year is starts, that is housing starts, construction starts down by about 18 to 20 per cent. And then if you look at famous state of NSW who are running at 30 and 40 year lows in terms of housing starts, we have got a real problem on our hands.
Therefore what we have tried to do is two sets of things, before this really bit, the Government put out about $1 to $1.5 billion worth of measures forward on the supply side, that is to boost housing construction.
And rental affordability and the rest, they are part of that. But the other thing we have done in this package the other day is to try and encourage people who are thinking about buying their first home, to make it easier for them. And that is why the first home owners boost goes from $7,000 to $14,000 if you are buying your first home between now and 30 June next year. But also on top of that, if you are then buying a first home which is a new home, then that grant goes up to $21,000.
The idea is to put this huge shot in the arm to housing sector which is currently experiencing some real weakness.
Long term, this is your question as well, about how you balance it, a shot in the arm here and maintain stability down the track. We believe that by balancing supply side measures, boosting construction, as well as the demand side measures, which is making it easier for people to go out and buy a house, we should be able to get the balance right.
But we want to make sure that housing is playing its role in providing further economic growth in Australia while the rest of the world is slowing rapidly.
AUDIENCE: You haven't answered the guts of the question if I may say and that was the mortgage and possession part. We are seeing more mortgage possessions than we have seen for a long time, a lot of these work people went in with no savings for first home buyers grants, and are we going to see this again? And that is a worry to me as an Australian I don't like seeing people in mortgage repossession.
PM: Well let me give you a couple of figures on that. First of all housing arrears in Australia haven't changed. For the national data, and I am talking about national data, not in your area, because I am not familiar with your area, they are standing at about 0.55 per cent and that is where it has been for a long, long time.
We haven't seen that kick up yet, it could. I can't as Prime Minister of the country, shape each individual buyer's decision. What I can try and do is make it easier at the entry point, balance it on the supply side, because the supply side, there is about 50,000 extra units.
But you know, part of our responsibility lies in ensuring our lending institutions are being responsible in what they lend. And that is, and that is, making sure that when the bank or the building society or the credit union extends a line of credit, it is based on a realistic assumption about a person's ability to service that debt long term. 
And one of the things that we are doing as a national government and we got the states and territories to agree on this recently, was to create for the first time an agreement with all the Governments in Australia for the national government to have regulation for all credit lending institutions.
It doesn't solve the problem you just pointed to, the government cannot fix everything. In terms of getting the framework right and given what we want to do for the national economy, it is the best we can manage.
AUDIENCE: Oh hi Mr Rudd, I am Cheryl Darcy. I work in a butcher, a small retail store in my area.
I am also the mother of two teenage children who are coming close to finishing their schooling and going into training, and the wife of an Australian serviceman. While my husband was away I decided to gain a skill in a trade because I have been an unskilled worker all my life.
While it was a great experience for me and I had the support of my family, I actually witnessed what is happening first hand to the tradespeople in Australia. People cannot stay in apprenticeships, they are not taking up apprenticeships and I feel like this thing that is happening at the moment with giving people these one off payments for things, and this is what has happened with apprentices as well, it is not keeping people in apprenticeships and it isn't helping us build a skilled workforce.
And you talk about all these other things to fix the economy, I feel like if we could have a skilled workforce and we could have our kids and maybe even older people like me go into apprenticeships with other ways, other than just handouts all the time. Maybe tax breaks, obviously larger wages and also, the TAFE courses are all closing down their sections.
Where I did my course, there is only one place in the whole of Sydney to go and do your course, and that is at Granville. It was hard enough for me, but I can imagine if you are a 15 year old young person having to travel two hours a day just to go and do your course, yeah and I saw it and it is just impossible.
And I just wanted to know what was happening.
PM: These are god questions. You know, it is not either or. It is not either bring about an economic stimulus package now to provide support for growth and support for households in the critical 12 months ahead, and do nothing else.
We are doing that because of the impact of the global financial crisis which I talked about before. But the other part of what we are doing is continuing to roll out our program for what we call, the Education Revolution in education, skills and training. 
Here is a couple of facts. For example, in the high schools, the country desperately needs long term, more tradespeople.
So therefore what is the Government doing? We are investing in building trades training centres, new ones, up to $1.5 million in every secondary school in the country to upgrade what you do in terms of woodwork, metal work and all of those basic skills, through the secondary school.
Because we are not getting enough through put there.
The second thing that we are doing is that we have set aside funds for what we call an education investment fund for the future and that is designed, and it is a multi billion dollar fund, to invest not just in universities but to invest in TAFEs.
Now we have been in government for nine or ten months, we have put aside the funds and we are about to unroll the investment in TAFE from those funds as well.
The last thing is this, and it is the package that I announced the other day, is that one of the big challenges we find out there in the community is that people are still saying in various parts of the country, we can't get enough with this set of skills.
Or someone is in an area where there may be some contraction and people lose their jobs so they have got to move over here and do a different set of, a different job with a different set of skills.
So what Julia Gillard, the Deputy Prime Minister has put forward is a new grant which effectively doubles the number of what we call productivity training places across the country, what is called Certificate II, Certificate III, Certificate IV, to move you from one set of skills to another set of skills.
And in the Budget we allocated funds for 57,000 of those places.
In the statement I released on Tuesday we doubled that, because we think the demand is huge. So with the schools coming through, or TAFEs, investing long term or right now in productivity training places, short term training courses to get you from job A to job B with a new set of skills, we are on to this.
It is going to take us time, but it is not an either - or, we are actually doing both.
AUDIENCE: Mr Rudd I am Maureen and I am a retired nurse. My husband is also retired, he is from a pharmaceutical company. And we are in a bit of a dilemma at the moment because of the share market. Income is dropping rapidly and I am just wondering, I suppose the question is which I think many would share is, I am thinking tomorrow, do I cash up or do I trust the market at the moment.
PM: Well you know something, the last thing I can do responsibly as Prime Minister of the country is give you individual financial advice. I just don't know your circumstances and I know when to stop and start. My first responsibility is to take a national view of the entire financial system.
And I became really concerned a week or so ago, not because of anything happening in Australia with our banks and our financial system: well regulated strong profits, etcetera, but I was getting really worried about what was happening overseas and the wash through effect on to us.
And that is why last Sunday, the two measures that the Governments announced, unprecedented in the history of Australia: to guarantee all deposits, all depositors, without limit, banks, building societies, credit unions out to a period of three years.
And also to provide a guarantee for the banks themselves going out to borrow money. Why were those necessary? To ensure the continued stability of the financial system.
Now where that dovetails with your concerns is, unless you have got underlying continuing stability in the financial system, it flows through to the stock markets. 
And the stock markets are what directly impacts people who have superannuation funds because, on average, a slice of the superannuation fund will be in shares, a slice will be in property and a slice will be in cash. So we have done that to provide stability for the future.
But you know, it's a rocky road. But if you take a historical view, if you go back 35 years if you were taking our superannuation policy way back then, on average, I'm advised that your growth and earnings over that 35 year period after inflation is about five per cent a year.
So if you take a long view of history, a long term view of superannuation, the advice remains valid. That it is the best way to secure your long term future. That there are going to be gyrations along the way. And what I'm trying to do at present is to reduce down the size of this current rollercoaster by making sure that we can underpin stability in the financial system. Because that is fundamental.
AUDIENCE: Good evening Kevin, John (inaudible) is my name. I've got a history going back over many years of running marketing operations for major corporations across Europe. And I came back to Australia and ran my own company and I sold it a few years ago to retire or become a consultant or a commission salesman. So every penny I earn has got to do me for the future.
What really gets up my nose in a big way, especially when I hear people like George (inaudible) who ran AMP and worked on the buy-out of GIO, and really obliterated both companies. After 14 months, he was allowed to walk away as a failure with $15 million. And I now hear so many people in major corporations that are walking away with millions and millions of dollars (inaudible) people in the audience could ever get in a lifetime. What I'd like to know is now that your government has guaranteed savings, what is your government doing about looking at contracts because you've effectively become a de-facto partner in these financial institutions where you are guaranteeing savings. What are you doing about contracts and looking at bonuses and pay-outs for these people, especially when they are in negative earning and badly run companies?
PM: Your question is absolutely right because it goes to I think a deep sense in the Australian community that enough is enough is enough.
And, when you look at what's happened, I don't know if you've seen the testimony in the United States recently where I think it was a guy from Lehmann's Bank, was it $400 mil? I mean, I don't know how anyone could earn $400 mil in a salary, but there you go. Notwithstanding that Lehmann's doesn't exist anymore. I mean, I find that remarkable.
So to go to your question about what we're doing.
I went to New York about two or three weeks ago and spoke to the UN General Assembly. What I was doing in that speech was spending most of the time outlining our response to the global financial crisis and what we believe needed to be done globally.
What we do in Australia, that's important. Getting it lined up for what we need to have here done in Australia, like the measures I spoke about before on our bank guarantees, and, economic security strategy that I was referring to before in what it provides for growth for the economy long term.
But you know, those things don't work unless you are getting the same sort of action internationally. A lot of the financial institutions that we're talking about operate internationally.
So in that speech I actually ran through a whole series of measures, one of which was this, it's called corporate governance. And within that, what I said was making sure the remuneration packages for the future in financial institutions are directly linked to performance and are directly linked to the standards which are applied to those financial institutions by the regulators.
So, if you want to be a financial institution that is going to have a higher remuneration package which is linked to a higher degree of risk, then the central bank of the country in question should insist that that company has to attain a much larger amount of money in its reserves to deal with bad times.
Now what we are doing in terms of that is working with all governments around the world to put forward a specific proposal in detail about what that will look like in terms of dollars and cents, but more particularly, the conditions attached to it.
So that's the work agenda for the next two months. And, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, with us and the banks, are working on that because it's part of the long term stability of the system.
So you should have from us a detailed draft rule which we'll apply across the world for us and the rest of the world by year's end.
AUDIENCE: Can you (inaudible) at the executives of these financial institutions to (inaudible)
PM: I think sometimes you'd like to. But it's a free country governed by laws. And, ultimately shareholders are going to hold the boards of these companies accountable.
Why do these financial institutions (inaudible) a big difference. And again, I go back to the point I was making earlier. They were actually part of what you could call the systemic stability of our system. Companies out here that were manufacturing other things, or providing other services, they are important, they provide jobs, they provide growth. But financial institutions, credit underpins so much. It underpins what happens at the stock market, it underpins what happens in the real economy as well. And so, that's why we can't allow these guys, the Gordon Gekko's of the current age, any more rope. Game over. We've got to rein them in.
AUDIENCE: My question to you is, why won't you allow the superannuation funds to invest in our own homes? I'm locked out of superannuation (inaudible) equity (inaudible)
PM: Our view on superannuation is this: it is really important, really important, to provide to people long, long term retirement. Most people are in superannuation funds for 35-40 years, they then draw upon them for 15 or 20 years or more. Therefore, getting it right is really important. The second thing is this, Australia, through the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, supervises in detail each of the 600 plus superannuation funds in Australia to make sure that they are properly cashed up, that they are doing the right thing, because they occupy a position of trust in the community. And the decision that we have taken, and governments before us as well, is that the best thing to do is to have a balanced portfolio between stocks and property, and then, on top of that, ensuring that you've got sufficient holdings in cash as well so that if there is a problem in one area, you can balance out that time in another area.
But you know, most superannuation systems of the world don't require that. In fact, in the United States, I'm advised, that firms which run their own super fund for that company often have no limits on how much they use the superannuation fund to reinvest in the firm. And again, I think it's Lehmann's and I stand to be corrected, not only did the company go bust and everyone lost their jobs, all of the employees had their superannuation go up in smoke because their laws enabled the managing partners of that firm, and again I stand to be corrected that I've got this not completely right, to simply invest that into the company concerned.
Now, the reason I go through that in some detail is we've got to stand back from each person's individual decisions about their house and their street and their area and say, ‘look, we're concerned about your long term earnings. And if you happen to make yourself a dud investment in a particular house, the overall attitude of our regulators is we want you to be best protected long term'. It's not a perfect answer to your question, but we're trying to look after people (inaudible)
AUDIENCE: (Inaudible) sleep each night you knew your investments were safe. At the moment, we're relying on people in Wall Street and other areas  - 
PM: Except in Australia, our laws require that each of these funds is handled by an independent board of trustees that under law are required to look after only you. Under law. And furthermore, they can't invest those funds in their own corporate operations. I think there is a limit of about five per cent that could go into an individual company's super firm.
So, and again I go back to this question of risk, a lot of people put their money in super, don't feel confident about their own personal financial management. They would rather it be in the hands of a board of trustees who can make sensible long term decisions.
Ouor super funds across the spread of history have performed pretty well. It's a rocky time right now, I understand that, but our job as the Government is to try and make those governments as smooth as possible over time despite these huge gyrations in the stock market which occur from time to time. And let me tell you, this is a big one.
AUDIENCE: Hi Mr Rudd, my name is Sean Matthews and I work in the not-for-profit sector. What I'm finding is with a lot of pensioners, carers and disabilities, that the money that you've offered in a one off payment is welcome, but wondering whether you're looking at the long term of increasing those pensions. And maybe you're looking at doing it now rather than waiting for next year? Because these people have been struggling on pensions that are fortnightly paid $272, and to give them a one off payment is great, but really, they're looking for an increase in their pension and they would like it now. And I think it's long overdue.
PM: I think you're absolutely right to raise this. And one of the things that we as the government have been concerned about since the election is that frankly it's been decades since anyone properly examined the underpinnings of the pension system long term. In particular for the single aged pension. And what we have done is commission a bunch of people to do that. It's very complicated, because everything relates to everything else, including, if you call it more broadly the retirement incomes, including how you treat superannuation.
So we're trying to get that right.
But rather than have pensioners, carers, those on disability support pensions, widows and veterans  -  wait for us to finish that, and it'll be finished some time in the first of next year. That's why we took this measure now to bring forward these one off payments.
It also helps deeply in dealing with the challenges of maintaining growth in the economy in what's going to be a very difficult nine to 12 months ahead. And those amounts that we've spoken about, those one off bonuses, they do relate into a single aged pensioner, for example, of getting the equivalent of an extra $35 a week and for a married pensioner, something like $24 a week. And all together, that's a bill of about $4.8 billion. It's expensive to do, but what I'm saying to you is, we are going to deal with this long term as of when these one off payments conclude, and that will be by the May budget next year.
AUDIENCE: So, it's the one off payments paid out and the money spent and perhaps wait for a period of time, how long will they be waiting for their pensions to be reviewed or an increase in the pensions?
PM: Well, the review will be concluded in the first half of next year. And as we've said, we'll bring in long term pension reform in the Budget next year which is in May. But given the challenges that we have right now, the judgment we took was to provide pensioners, carers, and those on disability support pensions, with help right now. Equivalent to the amounts I just described.
So in other words, you've got this coming though now, but the time you get through to May next year you will have delivered long term pension reform.
It's not perfect, but I am trying to deal with a system that hasn't been touched for the previous 12 years. Frankly, it just wasn't touched in terms of the underlying base rate of the pension. We're trying to fix it.
AUDIENCE: Hi I'm Margaret. I'm a mature aged student.
Prime Minister, my concern is the money that you're handing out  -  the concern is that it's not enough to stimulate our economic state?
PM: It's okay, I understand exactly what you're saying. That it might not be enough to actually make a difference  - 
AUDIENCE: Yeah, to stimulate. My question is, what is plan b?
PM: Sure. In stimulating the economy now, there are two options. You can wait until it's too late, you can wait until all the numbers come in and, you know, in several months time or in early next year turn around and say, ‘oh gee, we've got a problem with growth and people losing their jobs, what are we going to do about it?'. Economic history tells us these things  -  when you know from what is happening around the world that there is going to be an impact on Australia, for the reasons I outlined at the very beginning, then the best thing you can do is act early, act decisively, and act hard. And hence, the $2.4 billion economic security strategy.
That's the equivalent of one per cent of gross domestic product. That may not sound like a lot of money, but in terms of what will be a couple of critical months ahead in the economy, it's actually pretty important.
What I'll be doing in December is unfolding the next stage of our economic security strategy, that's the nation building agenda. That's investing long term in ports, road, rail, hospitals and education institutions. We set aside a lot of funds for that purpose. The country needs that long term. We are, by instinct I believe, a country of nation builders. That is, it's not just doing what we need for tomorrow lunch time, it's building what we need for 10, 20, 30 years time, including a national high speed broadband network. That we've brought forward to December. So that will come out then. And by the way, by the time we get to July next year there'll also be a further round of tax cuts which come in effect as well.
So what I'm trying to do is assistance now and support now for economic activity through this $10.4 billion economic security strategy. Part two will come with the nation building agenda which we'll begin to unfold by the end of the year with projects to flow for next year. And part three, the next round of tax cuts which come into effect from July next year.
AUDIENCE: (Inaudible)
PM: Kevin Rudd in Chinese, hello.
AUDIENCE: (Inaudible) I came to Australia 14 years ago and one of the many things (inaudible) tiny international community trading company and also we have some small investments in Australia, resources stock. As I can say you and your government have tried everything to protect Australia and Australians from the bad damage impact of this the financial crisis. And I was (inaudible) China slowing down and (inaudible). Has your government considered some other resources to fill the gap such as (inaudible) uranium production and exportation? (Inaudible)
PM: Well, the key thing for Australia is, not just the challenge we face now but our long term economic strategy is to make sure we're building an economy which is as diversified as possible, as strong as possible, so that if we have some setbacks here or some setbacks there, we still have some drivers of growth going forward. And we're seeking to do that.
I said prior to the election that I wanted to make sure that Australia would have a strong economic base for the future for that day when the mining boom may end. You've got to plan ahead and part of that lies in the building Australia, nation building, infrastructure agenda that I was talking about before. High speed broadband in particular.
China, I've got to say, is absolutely critical for Australia's economic future. It's already our largest trading partner. It is, and together with Japan, represents a huge part of Australia's economic future.
I was talking to the Chinese Premier only a week or so ago about their growth strategy for the future. You are right, their growth numbers have come back a bit by about two percentage points. And that means something for us. But they are still growing, in the year ahead, by about nine per cent. The rest of the world is growing at about three, and the developed economies growing at about zero, and slightly less, according to the International Monetary Fund.
So China is really important. And that's why we, as the government, are embracing our Chinese friends at the moment in making it possible for them to invest in Australian resource projects and other projects, because China itself possesses $1.8 trillion in foreign reserves, sovereign wealth funds of about half a trillion dollars in size. So we want a strong relationship with China. And, the Treasurer and myself are spending a lot of time with our counterparts in Beijing on this question.
You raised uranium. Right now one of nuclear safeguards agreement that we negotiated with the Chinese since last year, it's possible to sell uranium to China. I think we've still got a few things to nut out. So, I think once that's done, and together with any other country in the world, do long as there is a nuclear safeguards agreement, and we've done one with China, then sales can flow. That's one part of the future. But China is much bigger than that. And in the 21st century part of our mission for Australia is to make sure that we are best positioned to take every advantage of a region where we are. Where the economic powerhouse of the 21st century is going to be. That's part of the mission statement of being in government.
AUDIENCE: Hi Prime Minister Rudd, my name is Penny and my partner and I are currently renting. We're saving for a deposit so we can buy our first home, so we were really happy to hear about the increase in the first home owners grant. But I'm also a little bit worried that with the cut off for the increase, at least June 2009, that it may put some pressure on young Australians to perhaps rush into buying a house and taking on a mortgage earlier than they might have otherwise done. And they may not be able to meet those mortgage repayments. So I guess while it is a good initiative in the short term, do you think it's perhaps a negative long term impact for young Australia?
PM: It's one of about three things that we're doing which may help.
The first is some time ago Tanya Plibersek, our housing minister, announced first home saver accounts. That means, to save up a deposit, having an incentive which runs for about five years whereby if you put money in the bank to save for a deposit for a first home and you use it for that it will be treated in the same preferential way, for tax purposes, as we treat superannuation deposits and earnings.
So, that's one thing we've done, first home saver accounts. Go down to your local bank, I think some of them have already for them operating.
So, you know, you shouldn't feel compelled to do anything next week. I mean, that's there for a long term plan.
But if you're at that pointy where you can make a decision, you are wondering whether you should or not, that's why we provided some of the additional incentives. And beyond that period, 1 July, there will still be a continuing first home owners grant of about $7,000.
But the other thing is this, a lot of people starting out want to go into something which is affordable  -  really affordable  -  in the rental market. And this is where there's a huge gap in what's around the place in many parts of Australia now. So we're investing now in the national housing rental affordability scheme about $600-700 million to co-invest in making about 50,000 units of affordable rental accommodation across the nation as well.
In the past, the federal government didn't do this sort of thing, and we've got it done in the last nine months. We think housing and the great Australian dream of owning your own home own day should be kept alive. So you're going to see a lot of activity from us in the housing area. And, some of these policies will continue into the long term future. Others are designed obviously for the short term stimulus effect that I described before.
AUDIENCE: Thank you for being with us today, Mr Rudd  -  I was going to call you Kevin.
PM: It's okay. As I said before, I've been called a lot, lot worse.
AUDIENCE: Fair enough  -  my question is, my husband Gary and I, we own a small business, a (inaudible) company, we're fairly new at it and we're concerned about the future of small business and the financial crisis at the moment it's tricked down and it's affected our customers and employees. And, I suppose the other thing that hasn't trickled down is the current cut in interest rates. And 96 per cent of all businesses in Australia are owned by people like us and we're very concerned about, there seems to be a blind spot in the current policy and I want to know how you are going to inspire confidence in small business owners and people who actually want to become small business owners. Perhaps a GST vacation, or something?
PM: I've never heard of anyone voting for a tax going up, only got a tax going down or going away all together.
Hey listen, I reckon a big part of it, and you're dead right, you're absolutely right, the small business community, people are feeling the impact of confidence in the economy as are our larger businesses as well. And also in the housing sector, which is why we brought in some of these measures to say ‘look, here is something to help you to make that decision'
I will say to the country at large, because it affects so many people that will be going down to make a purchase at a local small business, is this: this country is in fundamentally good order. In levelling with the Australian people about the challenges we face for the future, and I've been as upfront about them as I can in terms of growth and in terms of unemployment and in terms of the challenges in maintaining the stability of our financial system.
We should also be upfront about the extraordinary strengths of this economy as well. Because that's part of reminding people just how strong Australia is. And the underlying strength of our banking system, frankly, puts us leaps a part compared with many countries and businesses operating in those countries around the world.
Second thing is, a lot of small businesses depend on their growth on having larger credits in the bank. The core reason why we as a government have extended the guarantee to the banks in what is called getting their term wholesale funding right, that is, the money that they actually get from the financial institutions, is to provide money to provide loans for small businesses.
We don't want any credit strike coming from overseas to affect tthe way in which banks lend here to small businesses and that has been a core driver in the decision we took last Sunday.
So I've got to say, the consumer initiatives that have been taken as well, both for Family Tax Benefit A recipients by the end of the year this payment of $3-4 billion, the payment of (inaudible) to pensioners, carers and disability support. Recipients as well of what we do in the housing sector. It's all designed also to provide extra activity in the economy now, so that small businesses and the customers that support those small businesses continue to have that extra money in the economy as well.
There is no magic solution. There are three things that we've done. We've been very mindful of small business in that second decision. Namely, guaranteeing the banks so that the credit lines remain open to business and small businesses across the country.
AUDIENCE: Mr Rudd, my name is (inaudible) and with my wife Rebecca we have a small family, two young kids, single income, and a healthy mortgage to go with it. And, when we were given the opportunity to come in and speak with you, we sat around our kitchen table and we tried to work out what works for us and what doesn't. And one of the things  - 
PM: I'm all ears.
QUESTIONS: And one of the things we see not working for us is our superannuation. You said earlier that we should be looking at about 35 years at about five per cent growth, and with the current markets we're certainly not seeing that now. We may in the future, bnut that's still uncertain. 
What we do see working for us in the money we put in our mortgage off-set account  -  the reduces the interest we pay on our mortgage. Currently our mortgage rate is (inaudible), you also mentioned that the home saver accounts are treated like superannuation for those saving for a house. So what we'd like to see is for those who already have the mortgage and have the house the ability to invest our super as a mortgage off-set. Not straight on the mortgage, but as an offset, to help to pay the interest that we pay on our mortgages. Help us own our home sooner, and spend the money on the economy.
PM: You know, I could give you the very populist answer and the very populist answer to that would be to say ‘yep, no problems'. But I can't. And I just want to level with you.
And that is, when you're dealing with something as complex as superannuation, as the Prime Minister of this country, for goodness knows how short or how long, my job and the government's is to make sure that the superannuation system is there to look after you in 20, 30 and 40 years time. And that means, and I go back to my answer to our friend up the front here, that means making sure that those decisions are being taken in a conservative way across a spread of years so that when you do retire that there is a reasonable income stream there. It's tough on the way through, it really is.
What I can do is this on the way through for a family such as yours is go to the other ways we try and help the family budget. As of 1 July this year, we brought in $44 billion worth of tax cuts. I'm not probing about your income level, in terms of kids, I don't know whether you've got school aged kids or pre-school aged kids  -  one of each, okay. Well, for the school aged kids as of 1 July next year we are going to start funding an education tax refund which means that whatever you invest in some specific areas to support your kids education at secondary school and primary school, you can claim 50 per cent of that back up to a given threshold at the end of the financial year. $1500 a year per kid at secondary school, $750 per kid at primary school level. And for the pre-schooler, as of 1 July, the biggest change in childcare tax rebate that there's been, it's gone from 30 per cent to 50 per cent, and you get paid quarterly.
So in terms of the actual family budget, you're dead right. The feedback I get across the country is that people are really finding it tough to make it all add up. What we're trying to do is help on the tax front, try to help on the childcare tax rebate front, and help also on the education tax refund front.
Other measures in the future are possible, but I can't honestly say to you that I can simply flick the switch on the super measure that you'd like, otherwise I would just be fibbing.
AUDIENCE: Tony (inaudible) three years old a family man and a self employed  - 
PM: And a Rabbitoh's supporter  - 
AUDIENCE: And a Rabbitoh's supporter.
PM: We all have our problems.
AUDIENCE: As such, I understand Budgeting and cost cutting and I believe there's an awful lot of waste (inaudible) at the moment. I think the prices can come out of greed and our life of excess and I think of the $10.4 billion, while necessary, is probably, it may just be a temporary measure, sort of a band aid solution. Something that might help us every year from now might be the fact that we are very over-governed in this country, and I think the duplication between federal and state government. I believe that we should remove state government and I would like your  - 
PM: Starting where?
AUDIENCE: Also in areas like health and education, I would like you to consider a referendum to consider the issue. Section 128 of the constitution.
PM: That's a really good one. The Rabbitoh's, thanks for that idea.
On the waste and duplication between the Commonwealth and the States, and to some extent between the states and local government, you're dead right, it's a problem. I'm not going to stand in front of you folk and say it's all find and dandy  -  it's not. I just spent nine months with the premier and the chief ministers since basically the first month I was elected, and we've met now three times to deal with this question.
The rubber will hit the road, and I'm not going to guarantee the outcome yet because I don't know if they will agree with me, in the middle of November of health and hospitals. We will either come up with a system on health and hospitals which is properly funded long term, but secondly deals with this mindless duplication and overlap between primary health care, that is, prevantative health care, what you do with accident emergency, what you do in acute care hospitals, what you do with aged care, what you do with dental care. Because what I find across the system is basically it's the blame game. It's people throwing each other hospital passes the whole time, literally. Rather than anyone taking responsibility. So you've got to clean up the lines of responsibility about who does what, fund it properly for the long term future.
But as I've said before, and I said it prior to the last election, if we can't get there with a decent rational system for the future, I've said that next year I would make a decision about whether we went to the people through a referendum about the commonwealth taking over the hospitals.
AUDIENCE: Should we confine ourselves to that, though?
PM: Well, it's a fairly big one to bite off to start with.
Health and hospital expenditure around the country is, you look are looking at tens and tens and tens of billions of dollars each year. And it's not a decision to take lightly. I think you've got to move your way through this systematically. The other thing we've got up for a decision with the states and territories in the middle of November is the future of the Australian education agreement  -  basically the funding package for schools, that's another huge slab of activity.
I'm determined to throw everything I can at fixing this, fixing the federation, to get rid of to the absolute greatest extent possible waste and duplication and to clean up the lines of responsibility about who does what.
And plan b, in relation to health and hospitals, is to go to the people. And we'll make that decision next year.
AUDIENCE: Mr Prime Minister, my name is Peter Henderson, I'm a 70 year old self funded retiree. I've been very interested to hear about the $1,000 you are going to be giving pensioners and people with children and carers, etcetera, etcetera. But I am puzzled by the money coming into the economy in such a very short period of time, December, January, February this next year. There will be a gap before the (inaudible) measures like the infrastructure measures come to the fore, 12 months to three years, these things take a long time to build. How do you see that gap being filled so that our economy will keep going and our share market will keep going up?
PM: Well I think I'd put it in these terms. First and foremost, I will do anything that is necessary to maintain tbhe future stability of the financial system, that's the bedrock, that's the foundation stone, and that's what's taken so much of our time, making sure that we're kept free of the contagion from overseas by the measures that we've taken.
The second is the measure that you've just described, and I tried to be as frank and open as possible about the fact that the measures that I announced the other day are temporary measures. They are designed to provide stimulus to the economy now, in what I am concerned will be a period where the wash through effect of recession overseas is going to have a bad effect on Australia.
Let me just remind of you of a few figures. Around the world right now, in the major economies in the major seven economies, six of the seven are either in negative growth now or are in zero growth now. And our last numbers have the Australian economy still running at about two per cent plus growth.
So, what I'm trying to do is to make sure that we continue activity in this economy now when the impact of those recent effects and movement on stock markets has been huge in terms people's confidence and real activity in the economy. So there's a real problem here and now.
You're right about the infrastructure agenda, it takes a while to spend and to spend intelligently. And we're going to do this investment. We'll be investing from early next year in projects that are ready to roll. And so you'll see some activity happening quicker than would otherwise be the case.
But the next instalment, as I mentioned over here also, is another significant slab of tax cuts which come through as of 1 July next year.
We're trying to phase and stage these in order to provide further underpinnings to growth, because I want to make sure that when we look back that I can say to myself it's been tough, it's been hard, nothing is guaranteed, but we've done everything that we logically possible at the time to keep this economy as strong as possible given the impact of the global financial crisis.
AUDIENCE: Prime Minister, I'm Laura, and I'm (inaudible) and this is (inaudible) my husband and he works for an investment bank. We're a young professional couple trying to do the right thing and save and we've been doing that for about two or three years. We, like the other young couple, are happy that you've extended the first home buyers grant. However, we don't think we're going to be able to rush in and use it to be able to go and get our dream first home. We do understand that the first home buyers account  - 
PM: Name me the non-dream first home.
AUDIENCE: No, we're going to get here.
So, with the first home buyer account, we know about that. However, we're probably only going go to buy our home in about two years. The first home buyer account you have to have it for four years. Could you possibly look at having a transitional sort of arrangement so that if we can show the bank that we have been saving for those two years that we can open the account that get the benefits (inaudible) for three years (inaudible) and are trying to save.
PM: Well look, in fairness to your question, Wayne and I, and I'll get you these after the program and I'll pass you to the Housing Minister Tanya Plibersek, we've had a huge internal debate and discussion about the rules underpinning this first home savers account. And there were tos and fros with the bank about what was doable what what was not. So rather than me mislead you, I will plug you in directly with Tanya with what, if anything, can be done about what you just put forward.
But can I just go back to a point I made before. Maybe getting into the housing market, now you don't get the ideal home first up, maybe it's just pitching down a little bit. But, I think the key thing for all of us is to get in as early as you can. And, if you're an account, I'm sure you'll take it very carefully on the way through.
[break]
KOCH: And welcome back to the program.
It's almost been like direct democracy tonight, hasn't it? Questions have been absolutely fantastic.
Prime Minister, what have you learnt from tonight? You've seen lots of questions, what are you going to take away from it?
PM: That people are really worried about their super. And, about how it is deployed, how it is used, how it is growing.
There have been a lot of other questions raised as well, but I think that is heard loud and clear.
And the second one is I think people just having had a gutful with greed in terms of the obscene salary structures in the financial institutions. And I think people's response to the question put by the gentleman up the back there is felt right across the country. People think ‘enough is enough'.
KOCH: I must admit, our Rabbitohs mate over here, Russell Crowe's good mate, are we just over governed, it seems. Everyone is being asked to trim down corporates, households, becoming more efficient except government. Do you reckon we're over governed?
PM: I think we're intelligently governed in the structures we've got. That's what I really think. And what I'm trying to do is do it in two stages. Fix up the structures cooperatively. If that doesn't work, as far health and hospitals are concerned, go to plan b.
I think the mood of the country is to do that. I think we're now 107 years old as a country, as a nation. And we can't just assume that what we crafted together back in 1901 fits for today.
KOCH: I said this last week when you announced a $10 billion package, it came as a bit of a shock to everyone and shocked them into thinking, ‘oh, things must really be tough, what does he know that we don't know?' What is treasury telling you? How bad could it get on unemployment and things like that?
PM: Look, I just think it's really important to be up front with people. I look at what's happening around the world, economic history tells us that what happens around the world effects us. And there's often a lag in time. So, if I see negative growth around the world and I see rising unemployment around the world, and then I see what we saw on Wall Street in the last two or three weeks, you know, you can't just sit around and say ‘oh, gee, we should sit around and see what happens'.
The key to it, having seen those things unfold, is to say, ‘we need to act early and decisively to make sure it's done'.
It's like car, you can either wait until the car starts to run completely out of fuel or you can see that the gauge is getting and bit and say ‘let's whack in some fuel'. That's what we've done. But we've done it responsibly and we've done it early.
For example, the surplus. I'm so glad we put aside a big surplus in May. Because doing that has enabled us to take this decisive action and still enable us to deliver the next Budget with a comfortable bottom line, a comfortable surplus still. But I'd much rather look back in a year's time and say, Kochie, ‘we acted early and decisively, and not just in terms of the money that gets injected into the economy, but the confidence question out there that so many people have been concerned about as well'.
KOCH: Will we avoid a recession?
PM: You know, every number that we've got in the government now says that we have positive growth ahead. But I fear that the buffer is too thin. That's why the government has done what it has done. It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, but as I said, responsibly, we reserve our capacity to take whatever action is still necessary into the future to underpin growth, jobs and, of course, the needs of households.
KOCH: That's pretty decisive. Thank you for your frankness tonight. We really appreciate it. And really appreciate your time.
And also thank you for everyone who asked a question, they were just sensational.
PM: Can I add something? Years ago they used to have things called town hall meetings in politics. They sort of disappeared about 30 years ago. So it's really good that you've taken some time out to be here. In my electorate in Brisbane, I have done this regularly with what I call mobile offices  -  just talking to people to keep in touch with what is actually happening. So what you are doing is the same. So, I always come from these meetings believing that I've heard something new, and I have. And, it informs our thinking. Thank you.
KOCH: You'll be back some time next month on Sunrise?
Thank you for watching at home. Hopefully you've learned a lot from tonight and can take some comfort in what the Prime Minister has outlined.


The extraordinary thing is the number  -  two and a half million people. That's an army of care. That's an army of concern. That's an army of love out there.
And it's quite humbling for those of us who are engaged in paid political life to reflect on that, and what I'll say from the very beginning is thank-you. It's a truly remarkable thing. Thank-you.
The extraordinary part of the story of carers is the number, the intensity and the personal dimensions of each story. If you look up the side of this room here: “I worry about the future”  -  Sally. “I want to make a difference” - Aaron. I like Aaron's story. He has been looking after his mum since he was 11. We have just heard of course from Lois and the other stories along the side of the wall as well. “I don't finish at 5” and “I sometimes feel invisible”.
The great thing about what you are doing here is giving a truly personal dimension to what is an extraordinary national story. The story of carers in our country is a narrative about Australia itself, it's a narrative also about those who provide that care individually and each story is different.
So whether it's what is contained in this 2020 report, in the book which Jenny launched before, or in the stories which go through this extraordinary campaign as we saw reflected just now in the DVD, this is all part of a further wake-up call to the nation about what is happening out there in so many families.
The other thing about being a carer is a very sober and personal reflection. At some stage in our life, all of our lives, we will be receiving care. At some stage of our life we will probably all be giving care in one form or another. It's a very humanising reflection to realise that this is an experience, if not ours at the moment, it will be soon in one form or another.
And the dimensions of it, not just in providing for aged parents, but the sheer happenstance of not knowing when you are going to find yourself in a situation where through a young child who is born with an abnormality, with a disability or through an extraordinary accident and suddenly your world is turned on its head.
So this is not just a reflection of good national policy, not just a reflection of what is very good about being Australian, it is also a reflection I think on each of our personal journeys in life and again I thank Carers Australia for introducing us to that today.
Last year, as Jenny indicated before, we began examining the cost of living pressures faced by pensioners through an inquiry we recommended to the Australian Parliament. In this year's Budget the Government delivered $7.5 billion to deliver increased financial security to seniors, carers and disability support pensioners.
The Budget also delivered an $822 million package for carers which included:
     * $293 million for carers of children with a disability or severe medical condition in response to the recommendations of the report ‘Carer Payment (Child): A new approach'
     * Secondly $428 million for bonus payments for carers, and
     * And thirdly $100 million for supported accommodation facilities for people with disability.
And Jenny was right, the impact which that lady had on us as a Government at a meeting of community cabinet in Penrith where she simply detailed her story, about what does she do as the loving mother of a 26-year-old boy.
Hearing this  -  “I worry about the future”, and that is, what happens when she can no longer provide that care. Which led to an active discussion in the Government about simply the adequacy of the provision of effective supported accommodation for those who have had care provided to them by their parents, but for whom that prospect becomes more difficult as the years roll by.
The Government has also embarked on a focused examination of the pension system through the Harmer Review, to reform that system to ensure it delivers for carers and other pensioners over the long term.
The Government's commitment to seniors, to carers and to people with a disability is deeply held. Now for us, this is simply a matter of fairness and getting it right. And fairness we believe is part of the Australian DNA, it is also part of this Government's DNA and we want to get it right and get it right for the long term.
From 8 December also, almost 130,000 Carer Payment recipients and 714,000 Disability Support Pensioners will receive lump sum payments of $1,400 for singles and $2,100 for couples.
This is a recognition of the strong view expressed to Dr Harmer's review that the current single pension rate which has remained just 60 per cent of the combined couple rate over the last 12 years is just not enough.
In the nine months between now and when we intend long term pension reform to take effect, these payments provide the equivalent of an additional $35 for single pensioners and $26 for each member of a couple pensioner household.
We will also provide a one-off payment of $1,000 for more than 400,000 Australians who receive carer allowance in recognition of the tireless support they provide for children and adults who are ill or who have a disability.
This means that in the 12 months that will be our first year in office, we have invested an additional $12.3 billion in assistance for pensioners, seniors and carers.
In the 12 months that we have been in office we have established a process to achieve long term pension reform  -  to deliver economic security for carers and the people for whom they care. This is the right thing for Australia to do.
Supporting carers in our community goes beyond providing financial security.
That is why the government has asked the House Standing Committee on Family, Community, Housing and Youth to conduct its own examination into the provision of better support for carers.
This cross-party review, led by Annette Ellis, the Member for Canberra, who is with us today, is looking at how we better recognise the needs of carers and the necessary support for them. I commend Annette and the committee members for their work.
I am delighted this morning to be presented with the report of the Carers' Virtual 2020 project.
This project provided an opportunity for carers from all over Australia to provide their views and experiences on being a carer. This provides the personal stories which we have spoken of already.
I look forward very much to reading the report and listening to carers' views during this Carers Week. The Government recognises that carers make enormous personal sacrifices. We know that caring responsibilities can impact on a carer's capacity to participate in the community at large, both socially and economically, and individually. We recognise also that the burden of care can be especially heavy on young carers and women.
Around five per cent of Australians under the age of 25  -  that is 350,000 young people  -  provide care to another person. That is an extraordinary figure, 350,000 people under 25 acting as carers. Of these, more than 20,000 are the primary care giver.
More than 170,000 young carers are under the age of 18 and, among these, the average age is 12 to 13, another extraordinary figure. Each day, young carers face constant challenges trying to juggle their study, their work and their caring responsibilities.
At a time when most young people are out there enjoying life and a new independence, these young carers, I would call them young Australian heroes, are out there shouldering the responsibilities of adults.
That can mean restricted opportunities and increased stress compared with the lives of other kids.
In particular, their capacity to participate in secondary and tertiary education may be limited because of their caring role, which, in turn, limits their career options and their employment opportunities and puts them at risk of some long term disadvantage.
Earlier this year, the Government provided more than $7 million to the Young Carers' Program to enable it to continue providing respite, general support and information services to young carers.
This will also give young carers who are at risk of not completing secondary education because of their caring responsibilities much-needed access to education, training and recreational activities.
The Government has also provided $20 million over three years in respite support for carers of young people with severe disabilities.
The Government is committed to engaging and consulting with young carers so that they can provide us with advice on how to give them better support.
Young carers will have an opportunity to influence future government policy and give the government their views on future policy direction when they meet at a national forum on 26 and 27 November this year.
Another aspect of caring that has been highlighted by the NATSEM-Commonwealth Bank research is that primary carers are most often women. In 2003, almost 55 per cent of carers were women, with the number of primary carers who are women likely to increase to 70 per cent by 2013. This is a huge responsibility.
The NATSEM-Commonwealth Bank report notes that “women carers pay a high price in terms of their health and financial well-being for taking on a primary carer role.” Carers suffer greater ill health, reduced earnings and less financial security.
The lessons in this are threefold:
     * First, we must provide greater financial support and assist carers to build retirement income.
     * Second, we must assist carers to participate in the paid workforce.
     * And third, we must work harder to help carers themselves stay in good health.
    Making progress for carers starts with achieving a better understanding of our nation's carers and the work they do, and the help they need and the support they deserve. And that is the purpose of this Carers Week.
If I could say thank-you to Carers Australia for the extraordinary work that you do. This is a labour of love. It takes a lot of effort, far beyond a normal working day.
I have learnt from both Jenny and from Justine in the time that we have been in Government, the extraordinary efforts put in by your association to effectively argue the case for carers, I think is worthy of real commendation. Put your hands together for them.
But beyond that in this Carers Week if I as Prime Minister of Australia could say this one thing: the nation thanks the army of carers, of unpaid carers, the 2.5 million carers who make this country continue to tick.
You are heroes, each and every one of you. The country recognises your achievement and through the forms that we have begun and those which we have yet to conclude, we intend to honour you.


The Rudd Government will host a Small Business Summit on the global financial crisis in Brisbane this Friday.
The forum will allow small business operators and their representatives to discuss with the Prime Minister and Ministers how the global financial crisis is affecting the small business community.
The Government does not hold all knowledge when it comes to dealing with economic turbulence and input from the small business community is essential.
Friday's meeting is being organised in collaboration with the Council of Small Business of Australia and Commerce Queensland.
Treasurer Wayne Swan and the Minister for Superannuation and Corporate Law Senator Nick Sherry will also attend the Summit.
Major bank lenders will be invited to explain their lending policies for small businesses.
Small businesses are usually the first to feel the effects of an economic downturn.
The Government is committed to supporting Australia's small businesses through this financial crisis.
Our Economic Security Strategy will inject $10.4 billion into the Australian economy, stimulating consumer spending to the benefit of Australian small businesses.
The Rudd Government has also moved to guarantee all deposits of Australian banks, building societies and credit unions and Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks.
This guarantee will operate for a period of three years and there is no cap on the deposit amount.
The Government will continue to liaise with both big and small business as we work on a co-operative and sustained strategy to see this crisis through.


In the midst of a global financial crisis, this is an important gathering.
We're here today because we, as the business community, we as a nation must work together to protect the nation's economic future.
Today's gathering brings together economic decision makers in the government and the commercial acumen that each of you represent, from the business community.
It's an opportunity for us to discuss economic conditions in the small business sector and how policies can help address the challenges that we face.
It follows a meeting that the Treasurer and I and the Small Business Minister Craig Emerson had with the business community in Sydney last Friday.
As many of you will be aware from your own experiences, our country faces difficult economic circumstances.
What began as a sub-prime crisis in the United States mortgage market has quickly become a global economic problem spreading to Europe, spreading to Asia, spreading from financial markets, spreading now to the real economy.
Australia is a robust economy  -  but we are not immune from what happens in the rest of the world.
That is why our government has been determined to take decisive action to protect our long term economic prosperity.
We've acted to maintain the stability of the financial system with a government guarantee for deposits.
We've acted to support continued bank lending to business by providing a government guarantee to the term wholesale funding arrangements of the banks.
We've acted to stimulate the economy with a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
These three actions are unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth.
We are in the midst of unprecedented times.
All three of these actions have been necessary to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and to maintain positive economic growth.
All three of these measures have been necessary to maintain confidence in the financial system and in the economy.
And as I said at the time with each of these measures and when they were announced, the Government stands ready to take whatever action, whatever action is necessary in the future to continue to maintain the stability of the financial system and to continue to maintain positive growth in the economy.
The truth is that the international financial system and the international economy are travelling through virtually unprecedented times.
And the truth therefore is that the Australian economy and the Australian financial system are travelling through uncharted waters. And there will be rough waters ahead for us to negotiate. Challenges will continue to arise that need to be dealt with.
And as the Government we will work through each of these systematically, calmly and methodically. Together with our financial and economic regulators we will work through each of these.
As a business community we will work through each of these with you. As a nation we will work through them together.
In the midst of this global financial crisis, Australia remains in strong shape.
It's important in a crisis to be mindful of the challenges we face, neither to understate them nor to overstate them. It is equally important to be mindful of the strengths that we have.
We have the best regulated banking system in the world. The World Economic Forum recently rated Australia's banking system equal second out of 134 banking systems in the world when measured against soundness and stability  -  with those of the US and UK ranking 40 and 44. The world today has now approximately 12 AA rated banks  -  and four of those 12 are the four major Australian banks.
Our banks' balance sheets are strong. Our banks are profitable.
Since the introduction of the government's guarantee 10 days ago, the banks have reduced their mortgage rates by a further 20 to 25 basis points  -  directly attributing these moves to the actions taken by the Government.
Spreads in interbank lending have also started to reduce - although they remain high by historical standards. The Government's bottom line is also in excellent shape.
The Government set aside a large budget surplus in May as a buffer for the future, as a buffer for tough times ahead. And those tough times have come. That's why we were able to act quickly, effectively and decisively on the $10.4 billion stimulus package last week.
Most other governments around the world are faced with the similar need for a stimulus package, but were not in the same strong position as Australia because most were already in deficit.
Australia by contrast has been able to harmonise fiscal policy stimulus with the recent monetary policy moves by the Reserve Bank of Australia  -  the 100 basis point interest rate cut.
The Government has also indicated that come December, we will begin to bring forward our nation-building agenda on infrastructure  -  needed for our economic future, needed also to provide continued stimulus to the economy.
As a result, while most of the developed world has gone into negative growth, we continue to project positive economic growth for the future  -  although at a rate considerably slower than before.
And while this will be tough to maintain, the Government remains absolutely determined to do what is necessary, to do whatever is necessary to continue to support positive growth, to continue to support stability, to continue to support confidence into the future.
Part of the Government's strategy lies in the proper coordination of policy action with the global economic community as well. A global financial crisis requires a global financial solution on liquidity, on regulation, on transparency.
A global economic crisis also requires global economic action  -  including coordinated fiscal policy action. After intense economic and political diplomacy in recent weeks, Australia now has a formal seat at the negotiating table of the world when the G20 heads of government sit down on these matters in Washington on the 15th of November.
Some argued that the G7, the Group of Seven Nations of old, was just sufficient for this purpose. We argued the reverse.
I congratulate the Government of the United States for its decision to recognise the reality of the 21st century economic order, where the centre of gravity in the global economy is increasingly moving to the Asia Pacific region.
Australia has vital national interests at stake in the negotiation of the new rules of the global financial system and the new rules of the wider global economic order.
Australia will be playing an active role because decisions taken in Washington and in the meetings that will follow the Washington summit will directly affect our economy, our financial system, our businesses and our jobs.
Getting the international regulatory system in order is also part of the overall confidence equation for the future as well.
And confidence is critical, hence my earlier remark to be absolutely objective about the strengths we in Australia have, as well as objective about the challenges we face.
Confidence is also built on the integrity, the independence and the performance of our financial and economic regulators: The Treasury, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority and ASIC.
These are national institutions. They are first class national institutions. They are national institutions worth defending and they have served this nation well at a time of unprecedented financial and economic challenge. At a time of global financial crisis, all Australian leaders should be supporting our institutions, not undermining them.
To attack these institutions at a time of global financial crisis is not just irresponsible. It is also reckless given the impact such attacks have on confidence and on the real economy.
When people's businesses, people's jobs and people's confidence in our financial institutions are at stake, this is not a time to play political games.
I believe that small business also has a crucial role to play in fortifying our economy during difficult economic circumstances.
Australia's two million small businesses employ four million. Australia's small businesses contribute one third of our nation's gross domestic product. If small business is strong, the overall economy is strong. It is as simple as that.
If small business is held back then the economy is held back and it is as simple as that.
Running a small business can be a tough job at the best of times. I know that from my own experience, having run one for a time myself. While many people depend on you, sometimes the only person you can depend on is yourself.
Customers want deliveries on time and on budget. Suppliers want payment on time.
Employees want reliable hours and payment and career opportunities.
But if there is extra paper work to be done, or another crisis to solve, it's your responsibility, as the owner, to look after it. There's no government policy that is going to make running a business easy but I do believe that we can make it less hard.
And that's what I am here to talk to you about today and that is why the Ministers are here together with you today to hear what you have to say to us. This is a two-way dialogue.
And how we can do this, that is, bring about good policy for the future in an economic climate such as what confronts us at the moment represents a unique challenge to us both.
But I believe we can do it.
We've heard a lot about the global financial crisis but there's been less public discussion of the impacts it has for small business. It is well known that small business is the first to feel the effects of weaker economic conditions.
Customers close their wallets. Orders drop. Cash flow dries up.
Small business is also the first to feel the effects of tighter credit markets. Getting credit in the current environment is not only about business growth and new opportunities, it's about also having sufficient credit to sustain cash-flow and staying afloat.
Recent evidence paints a sobering picture of the challenges facing our small business community.
According to the October edition of the Private Business Barometer published by PricewaterhouseCoopers: sales growth is down from 13.2 per cent to 10.9 per cent in the past year; profit growth is down from 11.3 per cent to 10.3 per cent; hiring intentions have fallen from 46.1 per cent to 26.7 per cent; credit availability is a growth impediment in two-thirds of businesses; and the family home is security to obtain business finance for two-thirds of businesses.
That data precedes the most recent twists and turns in the global financial crisis.
These findings are backed up by the macroeconomic indicators available for Government showing lower consumer and business confidence, lower new housing starts, and lower motor vehicle sales.
These sort of findings have also underpinned the Government's decision to introduce the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy last week.
That strategy was designed to provide stimulus to the economy, stimulus to households through payments through the family payments system of $1,000 per child over the next nine months. Payments also to pensioners, single pensioners and married pensioners, $1,400 for single pensioners, $2,100 for pensioner couples  -  again designed to provide stimulus to the economy.
Beyond that we have been mindful of the impact which the financial crisis is having directly and indirectly on the housing sector.
That's why as part of this economic security strategy we are investing $1.5 billion in the First Home Owners Boost to strengthen the housing sector:
Doubling the First Home Owners Grant to $14,000. Trebling the First Home Owners Grant to $21,000 where a first home buyer chooses a newly constructed dwelling.
These are designed to provide a much-needed shot in the arm for the housing sector and to provide a boost for small businesses such as builders, material manufacturers, and those working in the property market more generally.
By strengthening lines of credit and strengthening consumer demand, the Government is doing its best to strengthen the small business sector in this economy during this difficult period.
As I said before, Government cannot make running a small business easy, but we can make it less hard.
What I'd like to propose today is a government guarantee to pay all of the federal government's contracts, up to $1 million, to small business, on time, within 30 days. That's almost 70,000 contracts a year. And if we don't, the proposal is this: you and small business can charge us interest until we do. We intend to lead by example.
I'd also urge larger businesses to pay on time as well. It makes a big difference to small businesses with cash flow challenges.
Another aspect is procurement. Every year the Commonwealth spends about $30 billion on goods and services. And today I commit the Government to making it easier for small businesses to gain access to Australian Government business.
Following on from the SourceIT template contract design for simple ICT procurements, we're moving to standardise other procurement documents. Agencies will also be required to review their operations and simplify procurement processes.
Greater consistency and simpler processes will make it cheaper and easier for small business to participate in tenders.
I'm also aware that the Tax Office is committed to working with small businesses that are having difficulty in meeting their tax obligations, including allowing for tax debts to be paid by instalments over a period of time.
If businesses are having problems, they should talk direct to the Tax Office. Assistance offered will be based on the taxpayer's individual circumstances.
And today I'm also announcing that we're putting an extra $4 million into business enterprise centres and other registered business organisations to assist in getting information out to the small business community on the sorts of services which are available and on information necessary to negotiate some of the difficult times which will lie ahead.
These initiatives build on our recent economic policies for the broader economy in our stronger commitment to a prosperous small business sector.
Many thousands of small businesses already have access to the advice and assistance through the Government's $42 million Small Business Advisory Centre initiative which provides Commonwealth funding for the first time to 36 business enterprise centres around Australia.
Ladies and gentleman, these are the beginning of the government's response to the challenges that small business faces as consequence of the global financial crisis.
More fundamentally, we're been concerned to ensure that this economy continues to generate positive economic growth. That has underpinned the government's decision to bring forward this significant stimulus package which equals some one percentage point of GDP.
But the stimulus, as I've indicated before, that is step one.
Step two will come in December when the Government unfolds its plans for the beginning of a roll out of our national infrastructure program  -  a Building Australia program  -  building infrastructure for the future. Ports, roads, rail, hospitals, education institutions and the rest. All to support the country's long term infrastructure needs. All for continued sustained economic stimulus in what will be a challenging time ahead.
But finally, also in providing the guarantees that we've provided to our banks for their term wholesale funding arrangements. Anchored in this simple principle, that as a business it is absolutely necessary to have lines of access to credit. And therefore, in the face of a global credit squeeze which has come off the back of this global financial crisis, to provide the necessary guarantees by government, unprecedented guarantees by government in this country, to ensure that our banks can continue to access effectively international lines of credit in order to make credit available to business users in this country.
These are the measures we've taken so far. As I've indicated before, we stand ready to take other measures as becomes necessary to maintain continued confidence and stability in the Australian financial system and to continue to support positive economic growth in Australia.
To do that, we need the cooperation and support of the Australian business community, we need the cooperation and support of the small business community within it, and we look forward to your comments today.


Small business will be supported through the global financial crisis by a package of Rudd Government initiatives launched by the Prime Minister and the Minister for Small Business at a special Small Business Summit held in Brisbane today.
Small business will benefit from new measures announced today including:
     * Small Business Support and Advice during the financial crisis from Business Enterprise Centres and other registered business organisations, through a $4 million Government investment over 2008-09 and 2009-10;
     * A guarantee of on-time payment for new small businesses contracts with Commonwealth Government Departments  -  up to $1 million, from 1 December, within 30 days  -  otherwise small business will have the right to charge penalty interest; and
     * A commitment to developing standard procurement documents for co-ordinated procurement and standard approaches to make it cheaper and easier for small businesses to sell to the Government.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd also said the Australian Tax Office is committed to working with small businesses that are having difficulty in meeting their tax obligations, including often allowing for tax debts to be paid by instalments over a period of time.
If businesses are having problems, they should contact the Tax Office on 13 11 42. Assistance offered would be based on the taxpayer's individual circumstances.
The Government also welcomes the assurances provided at the Summit by banks about the availability of finance to small business.
All these measures are about improving small business cash flow.
Small Business Support and Advice builds on the Government's measures to strengthen the financial system by guaranteeing all deposits from all depositors in Australian banks, building societies and credit unions and for wholesale funding arrangements for Australia's banks.
In paying bills to small business on time, the Government is leading by example, and urges larger businesses to pay their small business suppliers on time too.
Every year the Commonwealth has over 65,000 contracts under $1 million and spends almost $30 billion on goods and services. It is therefore critical that Government is a good partner for small business.
Minister Emerson encouraged all small businesses to register on AusTender (www.tenders.gov.au) to get automatic notification of new Australian Government business opportunities in their industry.
Small business will also benefit from the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy, which provides:
     * consumers with extra cash to spend on small business goods and services; and
     * an extra 56,000 new training places to ensure a skilled workforce.
Small businesses in the real estate and housing construction sector are set to benefit directly from the $1.5 billion First Home Owner Boost, which provides a much needed shot in the arm for the housing industry.
These measures build on the Government's strong commitment to a prosperous small business sector that is supported by initiatives across skills, infrastructure and innovation policies, and a reformed industrial relations and regulatory environment.


MEL: We are joined by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, good morning to you. Thanks for joining us Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning to both of you.
MEL: Will there be any more changes do you think to the Bank Deposit Guarantee?
PM: Well the fundamentals of course is to maintain the stability of the banking system and there are millions and millions of people watching this program, mums and dads with their deposits in banks who want to know whether those deposits are secure.
That's why we acted on the basis of the Reserve Bank advice, the Treasury advice, to provide that guarantee for all bank deposits and that covers $800 billion worth of deposits across the country and on top of that also a guarantee from the Government for what's called the term wholesale funding of the banks themselves. What does that mean? Enabling the banks to continue to lend to business. That covers some $1.2 trillion, that is a lot by way of Government guarantee, those two things are the fundamentals of our system.
But on the implementation of this on the way through, the Government, the Treasury, the Reserve Bank, the Prudential Regulatory Authority will work through the implementation details of all of this through every aspect of the financial services industry. Bearing in mind what challenge do we face, a global financial crisis, which is driving down stocks, driving down property as well and also lifting hugely the cost of capital.
KOCHIE: Ok because you have got the Government guarantee on bank deposits, so people who don't have bank deposits are wanting to take their money out of other investments like mortgage trusts and stick ‘em where there is a guarantee. Now that puts pressure on say mortgage trusts, because now they can't fund a lot of the redemptions there, have you thought of extending the guarantee to products like them?
PM: Kochie, there is a basic different here. A deposit in a bank is the money that you put in knowing that with a given interest rate that is what you are getting back. And as you know, that is the condition under which a banking licence is issued and we take seriously our responsibility to the millions of Australians who do that. That is a deposit.
Over here you have an investment which as you know, you're a person who works in the financial services industry historically, a bit today as well, is that an investment is a form of financial activity with a different rate of return over time depending on market circumstances. It's linked to the global economy, it's linked to the state of the property market, it's linked to the shares market.
Now the question arises - if you provide a guarantee to people who are depositing in their bank accounts and that is as I said you know $800 billion worth across the country, that is a fundamental on the system. Providing guarantees to market linked investments  -  that's quite something else.
KOCHIE: So you won't extend them?
PM: We will work through the implementation of this over a long period of time but market linked investments goes beyond the scope that the guarantee that the Government announced the other day and we did so directly on the advice of the financial regulators of Australia, that's the responsible thing to do. And remember why are we having this discussion, this is a global financial crisis so the alternative was, I presume this is Mr Turnbull's position, not to extend a guarantee to all bank deposits.
Remember the alternative position of the Liberal party is only give it to deposits up to $100,000. That leaves three quarters of a million  - 
KOCHIE: Okay, leave the politics aside because we're going to get sidetracked here  - 
PM: No actually, let me just finish this. It's very important that you understand this, and your viewers understand this.
There's been a lot of debate on this bank guarantee. We provide a guarantee for all bank deposits. The alternative being put forward by Mr Turnbull leaves three quarters of a million deposits out there with no guarantee whatsoever.
What would the implications of that be if that was the policy of the government today? It would be mayhem in the financial system.
KOCHIE: Will the financial crisis get worse? And are you prepared for the Budget to go into deficit to fight that financial crisis?
PM: We've been doing our numbers, we believe that we can maintain the Budget in surplus over the course of the economic cycle  - 
KOCHIE: Is that important though? Do you care if it goes into deficit?
PM: Our view is that it's important to maintain surplus over the course of the economic cycle.
But let me tell you why we think that's deliverable. Back in May this year when we framed the Budget for the year ahead, the Treasurer and I and others were concerned about how the economy would unfold, that's why we put aside a very large Budget surplus.
As you know, in the decision we took just under two weeks ago, the economic stimulus package, the Economic Security Strategy, $10.4 billion, we're able to draw on that surplus for that purpose while still maintaining a comfortable surplus on the way through.
We still need a buffer for the future. We're in very uncertain times here with the global financial crisis, but right now Australia is better positioned than most countries in the world.
MEL: Can I ask you very, very briefly one of the things affecting a lot of families is petrol. The Petrol Commissioner says prices should come down this week. If they don't, what can he do?
PM: Well, our job through the Petrol Commissioner is to provide maximum competition policy pressure on the petrol retailers. Part of our job is to make sure the information gets out there about when people are being ripped off  - 
MEL: But it's all well and good for me to know that I'm being ripped off, but what can you actually do to prevent it? Can he have powers to make them drop their prices?
PM: Well, ultimately, the Government of this country does not regulate prices. That's set in the market.
But can I say, why have we argued all year for FuelWatch, which has been working in Western Australia now since 2001 but which the Liberals are going to oppose in the Senate, which is why they are relevant to this general debate, they can block legislation in the Senate. On FuelWatch, if you're in Perth today and there is a 20 cent a litre difference between one petrol station and the other, you can know that 24 hours in advance and you can go there rather than there. We've tried to take that nationally to provide that information to consumers, but that's been blocked in the Senate, we can't do it.
So ultimately, short of the national government say, regulating the price of petrol each day and saying ‘it'll be this, it'll be this, it'll be this'  - 
KOCHIE: Which you won't do.
PM: Which is like regulating the price of bread  -  you don't do that. But what you do is maximise the consumer power pressure back. It's what we're trying to do.
KOCHIE: Good to see you, and good to see you supporting Pink Ribbon Day.
PM: Well, good to see you guys supporting it. Very important day, important to be out there supporting a very important cause.


First of all, if I could begin by thanking the Governor-General. The Governor-General, Her Excellency Quentin Bryce, is no fair weather friend to this cause - going back now 13 years, a regular and continuing participant, supporter and high level advocate of this important centre and the work that it does.
Your Excellency, we thank you for your commitment past, present and future.
We're often asked why we are engaged in particular causes in public life. And there are many causes. Almost all of them exceptionally worthwhile.
When I look around Australia today and I see the extraordinary range of families who are affected by this extraordinary disease  -  breast cancer - this is a very personal cause for so many families who are so personally affected.
And I look at those numbers, 12,000 freshly diagnosed each year, that is an extraordinary number. An extraordinary number of people's lives who are changed in an instant, and whose life journey changes for the future.
There's one reason I'm here, because those numbers speak for themselves, they are huge. And we need to do something about it.  We need to do more about it.
The second reason is entirely personal. I'm here because of mum. Mum was diagnosed with breast cancer back in 1963. I was five years old. She had a radical mastectomy. Rural Queensland. Not much to go by in those days. She had a recurrence in 1973.
And my message to you all who are sufferers from this disease is that mum died in 2004 of different causes, 41 years later.
What I do remember, I remember clearly, as a little boy and then growing up, what she lived with all that time in terms of the challenge, the uncertainty, the difficulty, the at that time variable medical treatment that was available. And that she was a survivor, a true survivor.
So, for all of you who are here today as women who have survived and who continue the fight and are part of families who are part of that fight, I congratulate  you for this thing alone  -  your human courage and example.
A lot's happened since 1963. As Tanya mentioned before, we now have a survival rate at five years of 88 per cent. This is an extraordinary number, the product of early detection, a lot of work that has gone on aided and supported by the work of this extraordinary centre and foundation.
Also the extraordinary work which has happened with our researchers, our scientists, our medical pioneers. This has been an extraordinary effort by the nation to turn this around and I salute each and every one of you who are professionals in the field.
In our most recent Budget we have allocated $40 million explicitly for dealing with the challenge of Breast Cancer. In September we have provided $2.5 million to the National Breast Cancer Foundation to partner with them in a new $5 million study of 100,000 and more Australian women about this important disease.
And today I would confirm a further allocation of $800,000 to NBOCC for their work as an additional grant for their work in 08/09*. Your work is worthy of this support.
I am also proud to launch today NBOCC's cheeky check up campaign to promote breast cancer awareness in young women. I am not sure why I have been given that task but have and I am discharging it as effectively as I can.
Research undertaken by the NBOCC has revealed that many young women are not informed about what to look for, are less likely to seek medical advice if they find a symptom and are unclear about the important risk factors for breast cancer.
Armed with this evidence the centre has developed a campaign to help young women be proactive about their health. It's an approach the Australian Government fully supports.
We believe that keeping people well and preventing disease is an important part of managing and caring for those who are sick. Giving younger women the information they need to know more about breast cancer and dispelling some myths equips them to act early, and acting and detecting breast cancer early is the best way to assist in treatment and improve chances of survival. The Government which I lead is proud to be a partner with NBOCC in this great cause.
Working together we can make a real difference to the quality of lives of many women diagnosed with breast cancer around Australia, their families and their carers who every day confront the realities, the very practical realities of this disease. I want to congratulate the National Breast and Ovarian Cancer centre for all its great work.
And as I close, each of you who work in this field as medical practitioners, as nurses, as scientists and those at the coalface who are providing care, I would encourage each of you in your work.
You know as a country, as a nation we need to do much, much better in the war against cancer, cancer in all its forms. It's time as a nation we renewed our national effort in what must be a national war against cancer and I look forward to being an active, very active partner with you in that great cause.
Thank-you very much
*09-10


To mark Pink Ribbon Day, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon today announced that the Australian Government will provide $800,000 a year to fund innovative programs to extend early intervention and support for breast cancer.
The extra funding will go to the National Breast and Ovarian Cancer Centre (NBOCC) for programs to improve early detection and management of breast cancer in younger women, Indigenous women, and in men.
Pink Ribbon Day is the culmination of Breast Cancer Awareness Month, and provides a focus for efforts to raise awareness and funds for research into breast cancer.
Australia has made great gains against breast cancer in recent decades. Death rates have reduced and our five-year relative survival rate is 88 per cent for women, up from 72 per cent in 1986.
Nonetheless, more than 12,000 women and 100 men are diagnosed with breast cancer in Australia each year. The Government has demonstrated its commitment to reducing the burden of this disease with a number of announcements in the past two months:
     *  $31 million over five years to reimburse some of the costs of external breast prostheses for women who have had a mastectomy;
     *  $2.5 million over five years to the National Breast Cancer Foundation for a jointly-funded study of up to 100,000 women on the impact of the disease;
     *  $12 million over four years to the McGrath Foundation to recruit, train and employ breast care nurses in 44 communities across Australia. 
The Australian Government, with the State and Territory Governments, also funds the national mammographic screening program, BreastScreen Australia.
The Rudd Government is committed to helping tackle cancer, and will continue working to find new ways to support those at the frontline of this challenge. 


Today the Rudd Government is announcing additional funding for the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA), the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) and the Department of the Treasury. 
This will ensure that our regulators continue to have the resources they need to maintain the strength of Australia's financial system during the global financial crisis.
Australia's regulators are first class and these measures will ensure that the Australian people can continue to have absolute confidence in the performance of our regulators during the global financial crisis.
Our regulators have stepped up their monitoring and other activities as the global financial turmoil has unfolded. This has been critical in ensuring the strength of Australia's financial system, in the face of the most significant upheaval in global financial markets since the Great Depression.
The intensification of the global financial crisis over recent weeks has resulted in a greatly increased workload for our regulators. This additional funding will ensure that the regulators continue to have sufficient resources to fulfil their roles in light of global developments.
The additional funding to APRA will also enable it to respond to applications from entities seeking to become authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), where they are able to meet Australia's prudential regulatory requirements.
As ADIs these entities would be able to take deposits and would be eligible for the Government guarantee on deposits.
The additional funding totals $83 million over four years with $21.5 million in 2008-09, $43.5 million in 2009-10, $9 million in 2010-11 and $9 million in 2011-12.
Of this additional funding, APRA will receive $9 million in 2008-09 and $18.5 million in 2009-10, and $9 million in each of 2010-11 and 2011-12 to enable it to manage the effects of the global financial crisis.
This funding will be provided from the Budget, rather than being recovered from levies on the financial sector. These arrangements will be reviewed in the 2009-10 Budget context and in light of developments in global financial markets.
Of the additional funding, ASIC will receive $10 million in 2008-09 and $20 million in 2009-10 to help it manage the domestic and international implications arising from the global financial crisis.
This funding will provide ASIC with additional ‘front-line' resources for market monitoring and enforcement activities to further strengthen confidence in Australia's financial markets.
Of the additional funding, Treasury will receive funding of $2.5 million in 2008-09 and $5 million in 2009-10 to ensure Australia's regulatory environment continues to be world's best practice and to pursue reform of the global financial architecture, through the G20 and other international forums.
The Government will ensure our regulators remain appropriately resourced throughout the global financial crisis and will continue to review funding requirements as the crisis unfolds.


Australia today finds itself confronting extraordinary economic circumstances  -  a global financial crisis of a magnitude not seen since the Great Depression.
Some of the world's oldest and most revered financial institutions have either collapsed or been bailed out.
In the United States. In the United Kingdom. And in Europe.  All within the space of a few months.
Three months ago few would have predicted the scale and ferocity of the dislocation of financial markets that we see today.
And few are willing to predict where we will be three months from now.  We are truly in uncharted waters.
And the challenge for policymakers is to navigate those waters, deploying all the possible instruments available: fiscal policy, monetary policy, regulatory policy. 
For the Australian Government, we confront three critical challenges.
     * To anticipate future events and, where possible, act ahead of the curve.
     * To respond to unfolding events with early, decisive, strong action.
     * To lay the underlying long term policy framework to build an economy which emerges from the current crisis stronger and more resilient for the future.
And our challenge as leaders is to do all this while building confidence through decisive policy action in the national interest, rather than by undermining confidence through partisan political manoeuvring.
The question many Australians are asking themselves right now as they see the daily avalanche of bad economic news on their TV screens is “how did we get here?”
The alarm bells on this financial crisis started to ring far away in the distressed mortgage belts of American suburbia some fourteen months ago, when we all started to learn about this hitherto obscure financial instrument known as sub-prime mortgages.
What we have seen since then is a series of escalating events overseas  -  including dramatic contractions of debt markets and significant losses on equities markets.
We had seen the failure or bail out of four major banks: Northern Rock in February, Bear Stearns in March, Countrywide and IndyMac in July.
By the middle of this year, however, markets appeared to be calming.
Some analysts said the worst was behind us.
But then, on September 7 the world changed.
The unprecedented $100 billion bail out of US mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac began a chain reaction which drew the financial crisis into a new and dangerous phase.
Within a week Lehman Brothers  -  formerly the 4th largest investment bank in the United States - had collapsed  -  producing the largest bankruptcy in US history.
On the same day, Merrill Lynch  -  another iconic Wall Street name and the world's largest brokerage firm - was rescued by Bank of America.
Three days later the Federal Reserve announced that it would put US$85 billion on the line to stop the collapse of American International Group (AIG)  -  the world's largest insurance company.
And by the end of September, seven more major institutions had reached crisis point: Washington Mutual; Fortis Group; Wachovia; Bradford and Bingley; the Icelandic Glitnir Bank; German finance company Hypo Real Estate, and European Dexia Corporation.
The collapse of so many financial institutions caused share markets to fall dramatically in the United States and around the world.
With fear and anxiety paralysing the financial system, the economic crisis had the potential to deteriorate into a full blown catastrophe.
As the head of the IMF, Dominique Strauss-Kahn said on 12 November:
“the global financial system [is on] the brink of systemic meltdown.” 
Unprecedented times call for unprecedented measures  -  and the world's governments swung into action.
On September 21, U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson proposed a plan under which the U.S. Treasury would acquire up to $700 billion worth of mortgage-backed securities  -  an action that would amount to more than $4000 per working American.
On October 8, the British Government announced a bank rescue package of around £500 billion  -  including £50 billion to recapitalise banks.
These actions were followed by Governments around the world  -  all prepared to take extraordinary measures to deal with these extraordinary events.
As the crisis unfolded, most governments were immersed in the immediate imperative of averting financial disaster.
But in the back of their minds they knew that even if they were successful, they would face a long hangover as the financial turmoil spilled over into the real economy - causing slower global growth and rising unemployment.
Even before the events of late September, the IMF had revised down its estimates of global growth.
The IMF predicted that:
“The world economy is now entering a major downturn ... and the major advanced economies are already in or close to recession.”  (IMF WEO)
For the fourth time in 12 months, the IMF revised down their forecasts for growth in the major advanced economies from 0.9 per cent to 0.1 per cent in 2009.
The IMF is now forecasting growth in 2009 of less than 1 per cent in six of the G-7 economies. 
This will be the slowest growth in the advanced economies for over a quarter of a century. 
And since that forecast was released, the UK economy has recently recorded negative 0.5 per cent growth in the third quarter - the first quarterly contraction since 1992.
We face challenging times in the global economy for the year ahead.
     * More than 25 banks around the world have collapsed or been bailed out.
     * Liquidity has become scarce with the LIBOR-OIS spread reaching around 300 basis points this month  -  more than 30 times its average level in early 2007.
     * Global stock markets have fallen by as much as 40 per cent.
     * Consumer confidence has fallen to its lowest level in three decades across OECD economies, and to the lowest levels in one and a half decades in the US, UK and New Zealand.
Australia has exhibited great resilience in the face of the shockwaves of the global financial crisis.
The fundamentals of the Australian economy are sound.
We have a strong regulatory framework.
Our banking system is profitable and well capitalised.
We have four of the world's 14 AA rated banks.
We are in a stronger fiscal position than almost all other developed countries  -  with the budget surplus we set aside.
We go into this period ahead with higher growth than most other countries.
And we go into this period ahead with lower unemployment than most other countries.
But we must level with the Australian people: we are not immune from this crisis.
We are feeling its impacts now.
And we will be feeling its impacts long into the future.
Already the ripple effects of the financial meltdown in the United States have affected Australia.
     * The ASX200 has lost nearly 40 per cent of its value since the crisis began.
     * Business confidence is low - NAB's September quarter business survey released today shows business conditions are at their lowest level in seven years.
     * Consumer confidence is also low - the Westpac-Melbourne Institute Index of Consumer Sentiment fell by 11 per cent this month.
     * Housing credit growth is now at its weakest level since 1983. 
     * Building approvals are down by 8.6% from last year to the lowest level since April 2001.
And the crisis is already having an impact on the Australian dollar.
In the past, financial crises including the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and the tech wreck in 2000 both had a very significant impact on the Australian Dollar.
The Reserve Bank has independent authority to operate in the market in relation to the Australian dollar if and when they believe it is appropriate.
In response to the global crisis, the Government has taken decisive action in two critical areas:
     * To maintain the stability of Australian financial markets; and
     * To underpin growth in the economy.
On 12 October the Government took two unprecedented decisions in the history of the Commonwealth.
The Government provided a guarantee on the deposits of all Australian regulated deposit taking institutions - banks, building societies and credit unions - to maintain confidence in the system.
Second, the Government simultaneously announced a guarantee of banks' term wholesale funding to ensure they could access global credit in the future and therefore continue lending to business.
The first of these guarantees covered $800 billion in deposits, covering more than 15 million Australian deposit accounts.
The second covered an extraordinary $1.2 trillion in bank funding.
These actions covered the core elements of the Australian financial system.
They were necessary in the national interest.
In the weeks preceding the government's announcement, it became clear that events were entering a dangerous spiral.
Globally, confidence in the banking and finance sectors was shattered.
Money market liquidity reached a record low, credit spreads widened and exchange settlement account balances rose to record highs in both Australia and around the world.
On October 7 2008, the main indicator of interbank liquidity in the Australian market (the spread between the 90 day bank bill and the 3 month overnight indexed swap) closed at 141.3 basis points, around 10 times the pre-crisis level.
Exchange settlement account balances at the RBA averaged more than $9 billion in the week preceding the 12 October announcement, after reaching more than $11 billion on 30 September. 
This compares with a typical level before the start of the sub-prime crisis in mid-2007 of less than $1 billion. 
It was an even worse story in many other markets throughout the world.
In the United States, the comparable credit spread (3 month London Interbank Offer Rate  -  the LIBOR - and 3 month overnight index swap) reached almost 350 basis points, when the pre-crisis level was typically around 10 basis points. 
Equity markets were also collapsing.
The Australian market fell more than 8 per cent on Friday 10 October  -  the worst day since October 1987.
The US Dow Jones had its worst week ever, even worse than the 1929 stock market crash.
Financial markets in many countries were closed as a result of significant share price falls.
By October 1 more than 25 major banks around the world had failed.
Around the world, people were losing confidence in their banking systems.
And the contagion was spreading  -  as people watched a nightly stream of negative news on their TV screens.
Despite Australia's internationally strong banking system, the Australian government listened to concerns that the introduction of comprehensive banking guarantees in other parts of the world may accelerate liquidity problems in our system.
We were also listening to the concerns of depositors.
Confidence in our banking system was beginning to be called into question  -  and banking organisations began communicating their concerns to government.
We knew we had to act to restore confidence in the banking system.
Our guarantee was comprehensive  -  it was an historic policy decision.
It had to be.
The scheme is available for 100 per cent of the deposits in eligible Authorised Deposit-taking Institutions. 
Of this, something like 99.5 per cent of deposit accounts are covered free of charge, with institutions able to choose to seek coverage for their remaining depositors in return for a fee. 
The financial regulators supported the measures the government adopted.
APRA Chairman John Laker said:
“The Government's deposit term and funding guarantee, which APRA fully supports, has calmed what was a growing disquiet on the part of some depositors.”
RBA Governor Glenn Stevens said:
“...  Steps in these directions, in the context of what other countries were doing, were sensible and the RBA supported them.”
Australia was at risk of large withdrawals by domestic and international depositors if we did not act  -  despite the strength of our banking system. 
A confidence problem was emerging because of the tide of international sentiment and the actions of various foreign governments.
A failure to act could have meant significant difficulties accessing credit, higher loan rates.
This would have in turn affected investment and consumption and ultimately our growth and employment. 
If the government had only guaranteed deposits up to $100,000, as some argued, we would be excluding around 40 per cent of all deposits by value and some ¾ of a million deposit accounts.
The consequences of a partial guarantee under the prevailing circumstances would have been destabilising in the extreme.
It would have left those depositors with the largest amounts of cash without a guarantee - and therefore inclined to move their money to the big four banks and away from a range of other financial institutions.
Or even withdraw their cash entirely from the Australian banking system.
The effect of the Government's decisive action on that critical weekend was to maintain confidence and stability in the banking system.
Australian financial institutions are now lending to each other again.
Since the guarantee has started to flow through, exchange settlement balances held at the RBA have fallen from a peak of $11.2 billion on 20 October to $6.3 billion on 24 October. 
Importantly for Australian families:
     * It has given mums and dads the confidence that their deposits are safe;
     * And it has put downward pressure on bank funding costs and therefore on interest rates.
Since the guarantee, several major banks have reduced their rates by around 0.2%.
And in doing so, they noted that the Government's guarantee was part of the reason they were able to do this.
As Ahmed Fahour, NAB Executive Director and CEO Australia, said:
" policy measures announced by the Australian Government earlier this month have started to have a positive impact .... we hope to be in a position where we can pass on further interest rate cuts to our customers."
As the ANZ Chief Executive Officer Australia, Brian Hartzer said:
“We are pleased to deliver on the promise we made in January to pass on reductions in funding costs as we see market conditions easing.
“...policy  measures both here in Australia and around the world have restored some confidence to the global investment community and this is resulting in an easing of high wholesale funding rates.”
The Government has acted decisively to protect the economy, protect the banking system and help the countless Australians who are going to benefit from reduced interest rates.
We are making sure that millions of mums and dads know their savings are secure.
And that is critical for confidence.
The Government's guarantee does not extend to market-linked investments.
The Government has an obligation to protect bank deposits as these are held within APRA-regulated authorised deposit taking institutions.
Guaranteeing bank deposits is one thing.
But guaranteeing market-linked investments with pre-advertised risk profiles is another.
All elements of the financial system benefit from the stability given to the core elements of the system (i.e. the deposits and loans of Authorised Deposit-taking Institutions) by the Government's guarantees.
Just as all elements of the system have been directly affected by the global financial crisis.
And that includes market-linked investments  -  given the extraordinary movements that have occurred on global and Australian equity, property and capital markets as the global crisis has intensified.
The truth is, a number of investors had been shifting out of market-linked investment products for some time as the global financial crisis worsened and it became clearer that the assets underpinning these investments were being buffeted.
It is a matter of public record that before the turmoil of the first two weeks of October, and the Government's guarantee announcement that followed, more than 10 pooled retail mortgage trust funds had already frozen redemptions as there had already been a shift away from various investment products toward banking products.
This has also occurred many times in the past as a consequence of previous global economic downturns.
The Government continues to work with the non-APRA regulated institutions to help find solutions to liquidity problems in these extraordinary times.
Treasury, in consultation with ASIC and APRA, is systematically working through the challenges faced by these institutions in dialogue with them and their peak bodies.
As part of this process, Treasury has taskforces dealing with each category of market-linked investments institutions in what is a complex sector involving highly diverse and risk-differentiated investment products.
For example, the Treasurer announced recently that Treasury and ASIC are investigating the impact of the global financial crisis on cash management trusts to provide advice on what actions might be appropriate to support this sector of the economy.
As the Treasurer also announced, ASIC is specifically examining its powers to provide additional flexibility to funds managers and trustees to allow for redemptions in investor hardship cases, where redemptions have been frozen.
Similarly, Treasury officials are examining (in consultation with industry) the impact of the global financial crisis on mortgage trusts, debenture issuers and other non-prudentially regulated investment entities and to provide advice on what actions might be appropriate to support this sector of the economy.
But in all this, there is a fundamental bottom line for taxpayer supported government guarantees  -  and that is the difference between prudentially regulated deposit-taking institutions on the one hand, and market-linked investments with higher risks and higher returns on the other.
No Government can, in good conscience, put tax-payers' dollars at risk to support financial institutions which are not open, transparent, and properly accountable to Australian regulators.
That is why the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) will accelerate its processing of applications by investment vehicles to become prudentially regulated  -  if they so apply.
APRA stands ready to respond to applications from entities seeking to become ADIs where they are able to meet Australia's regulatory requirements.
This will not be possible for all institutions which apply, but this opportunity is available to those market-linked investment vehicles which wish to move into the prudentially regulated sector.
Subject to the successful application of these financial institutions (which means meeting the prudential standards), they will of course be covered by the government guarantee.
But only if they meet the prudential standards of deposit taking institutions.
APRA, ASIC and Treasury will be resourced as necessary to deal with this increased work load both in relation to the unprecedented demands on regulators as well as expeditiously handling an increased rate of applications for prudential regulation.
Australia's regulators are first class.
They have consistently outperformed their international counterparts.
They are national institutions.
And they require absolute bipartisan support  -  in word and in deed.
To do anything other is reckless at a time of global financial crisis.
The Government has drawn on the economic policy machinery in the government and the independent regulators to advise us during these challenging times.
These institutions have performed well.
The Council of Financial Regulators, which comprises Treasury, the Reserve Bank, APRA and ASIC, has been closely monitoring developments and assisting the government to ensure Australia has the best financial policy responses in place at a time of global financial crisis.
Each morning, I meet with the Treasurer, the Secretary of my Department, the Secretary to the Treasury and other senior officials to assess the latest economic and financial market developments, both in Australia and abroad, to get a clear measure of the domestic and international outlook and any necessary policy responses.
The Government has also mobilised the International Economic Policy Group to provide coordinated advice to the government on its international strategy  -  with particular focus on the G-20 meetings as well as the upcoming APEC Leaders meeting and East Asia Summit leaders meeting.
The group includes senior officials from my department, Treasury, the Reserve Bank, DFAT and the Office of National Assessments. 
This is also an important mechanism to ensure consistency in our domestic and international initiatives.
All critical matters are brought before the Strategic Policy and Budget Committee of the Cabinet for decision.
During this unprecedented crisis, with critical events occurring across multiple time zones, often requiring officials to work in shifts, the machinery of government has been working well.
But the challenges ahead remain great and there are many tests that lie before us.
The Government's economic strategy has two fundamental objectives:
     * to maintain the stability of the financial system;
     * and to support positive economic growth at a time of likely global economic recession.
In acting on the first, the Government enacted on October 12 the double bank guarantees.
In acting on the second the Government announced a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy on October 14.
This is equivalent to 1 per cent of GDP.
Through practical support for households and across the economy more broadly, we are supporting continued positive growth.
The elements of the package are:
     * a $4.8 billion down payment on long-term pension reform
         * single pensioners will receive a lump sum payment in December of $1,400 and pensioner couples will receive $2,100
         * carers will receive $1,000 for each person they care for;
     * $3.9 billion in payments to eligible children
         * this will provide a payment to families of $1,000 per eligible child
         * there are about 3.8 million eligible children;
     * doubling the first home buyers grant to $14,000 and tripling it to $21,000 for those who buy a newly constructed home;
     * doubling the number of productivity training places to 113,000 in this financial year; and
     * bringing forward the Government's nation building agenda on infrastructure.
This package will provide a boost to families in need.
It will provide a boost to pensioners and carers.
It will provide a boost for the construction sector as well as helping families realise the dream of owning their own home.
And it will address long-term productivity challenges by boosting training and bringing forward investment in infrastructure.
It is an Economic Security Strategy to see us over the short-term challenges and to position the economy to continue to grow in the long-term.
Another critical element of laying the foundation for long-term economic growth is our nation building agenda.
We kick-started the process by establishing Infrastructure Australia earlier this year.
Infrastructure Australia is an independent statutory council headed by Sir Rod Eddington.
Its first task was to produce an audit of the nation's infrastructure by the end of 2008.
In response to the global financial market crisis, the Commonwealth agreed at the October COAG meeting that they would bring forward an interim report on the National Infrastructure Audit and the Infrastructure Priority List in December.
In just ten months of Government, we have committed to a long-term $76 billion infrastructure investment program for the future including over time:
     * We'll invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
     * We'll invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport and communication priorities.
     * And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
     * We'll also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, trade training centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
     * We'll invest $11 billion in health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we will boost economic activity during a time of global uncertainty and build the foundations of future prosperity.
Remember it is critical that through this global financial crisis, we continue to advance the Government's long-term economic reform agenda  -  to build long-term productivity growth:
     * through a continued quantitative and qualitative investment in the education revolution  -  in education, skills and training;
     * modernising the nation's infrastructure; and
     * embarking on comprehensive regulatory and tax reform; and
     * reforming the Federation, the last remaining frontier of micro-economic reform in Australia.
Because of the nature of the global financial crisis, we also need to do more than just respond at home.
The global financial crisis has brought home to us all one message very clearly  -  we live in an interconnected world.
A financial crisis in the United States has reverberated quickly and in devastating fashion around the globe.
The Australian Government has taken rapid action to counter the domestic impacts of the crisis.
But we need coordinated, effective international action as well.
I warmly welcome President Bush's initiative in calling a meeting of leaders of the member of the Group of Twenty nations  -  the G-20.
This is a first-class initiative.
The G-20 was established after the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis.
It has brought together on a regular basis the finance ministers and central bank governors from the world's major developed and emerging economies.
It includes the United States and Japan; it includes China and India.
It is a group with real economic clout  -  both for the present and the future.
     * Its members represent 85 per cent of the global banking system.
     * They represent 90 per cent of global economic activity
     * 80 per cent of world trade.
Because of its broadly representative membership, the Group has legitimacy when it comes to dealing with a global crisis.
The meeting called by President Bush for 15 November in Washington will be an important opportunity for the major players to coordinate our responses to the global financial crisis and the economic impact it is having.
At this meeting, the leaders of the G-20 nations must agree on clear, strong, action.
The outcomes must include a framework for the international community to work together to better manage the current financial crisis.
And we must agree to learn from our mistakes and to work towards common solutions that will serve to mitigate the risks of similar crises re-emerging in the future.
And beyond these two important objectives, a third objective must be coordinated action to support the global economy to deal with the emerging reality of a likely global recession.
These outcomes are not assured.
G-20 nations will need to work hard to implement clear, strong, action-orientated outcomes.
Australia has a real national interest at stake in shaping the international response.
A fundamental role of leadership in the midst of a global crisis of the type we are experiencing is to underpin confidence.
Confidence in our financial institutions.
Confidence in our markets.
Confidence in our economy.
Because confidence in the current environment is a fragile commodity; whatever the strength of the fundamentals.
We all saw the huge blow to confidence from the US Congress's initial failure to pass the recent bailout package.
It is incumbent upon all of us in political leadership to be very careful about what we say.
Now is not the time to be questioning the head of the Commonwealth Treasury.
Now is not the time to be attacking the head of the Reserve Bank.
Now is not the time to talk about bipartisanship and then turn around and undermine political support for the guarantee on bank deposits.
John Stewart of the National Australia Bank - a highly respected figure by all sides of politics in this country - said at the weekend that the design of the wholesale funding and deposit guarantees was sensitive, complex and it had been important to take the time to get it right; and furthermore that the politicisation of this process had been unhelpful in the markets.
Mr Stewart is absolutely right.
Confidence is a delicate but necessary commodity at a time of crisis.
It is maintained by concrete actions by governments and private institutions.
It is maintained by support for the independence and integrity of our national institutions.
It is also maintained by being frank with the Australian people about the strengths we have and the problems we face  -  and not playing or pandering to fear.
There will be difficult times ahead for Australia.
Even when markets do begin to stabilise, the impact of the global financial crisis on the real economy in Australia will be felt into the future.
On jobs.
On growth.
But with the right fiscal policy decisions, and monetary policy playing its role, there are rational grounds to be absolutely optimistic about Australia's future.
Optimistic that we can see through the impacts of the global financial crisis.
Optimistic that we can see the Australian economy emerge in stronger shape in the future.
The path ahead will not be smooth.
There will be difficult decisions along the way.
Decisions that won't be popular.
But decisions which will be taken in the national interest.


For 100 years Andrew Fisher has arguably been the least known of the 10 Australian Labor prime ministers who have served the Australian nation.
100 years later David Day's biography sets this to right.
By any historical benchmark, Fisher's most basic political achievements are the stuff of legend.
As a member of the Ayshire miners' union he worked for Keir Hardie who founded the British Labour Party.
He became one of Australia's first Labor members of Parliament, elected to the Queensland Assembly in 1893.
In 1899 he became a minister in the Dawson Government, the first Labor government anywhere in the world  -  or as the then Queensland Governor Sir Samuel Griffith said more prosaically in his dispatch to London: “the first instance in which a purely ‘Labour government' has been formed in any part of his majesty's dominions.”
While also noting with apprehension that six of the seven new Labor ministers had been, and I quote Griffith's dispatch, had “been engaged at some time in manual labour”.
In 1904, Fisher became a minister in the Watson federal government  -  the first national Labor government anywhere in the world.
And in 1910 Fisher achieved the truly extraordinary; at a general election becoming prime minister of the first majority Labor government   -  again the first anywhere in the world. Incidentally, with a majority in both houses.
By any measure this is an impressive series of firsts.
Fisher's critical legacy for Labor was to establish for the future that Labor was not only a viable political force but also most critically a successful electoral political force.
All achieved less than a generation after the formation of the party as the political voice of progressive politics in Australia.
Or as one newspaper recorded at the time, the Labor party was now “recognised by the representative of Her Majesty as one of the great Constitutional Parties of State from which Her Majesty's advisors are drawn.  There lies the triumph for Labor.”
These were not easy achievements. These were great achievements.
This also was the message that rang out across the world as nascent labour parties, social democratic parties, and democratic socialist parties across Europe watched with amazement, wonder and awe as Australia led the world, when through the ballot box they elected the working people's party to become the democratically-elected government of a sovereign state.
For the European parties this was still the stuff of dreams.
For many Europeans, the debate was whether any progressive political, economic and social reform could be achieved in the absence of violent revolution.
For the Europeans, the Australian Labor Party's political success represented new, peaceful and progressive political possibilities for the future.
In the great sweep of history, the history of ideas and the history of political movements, establishing the political fact that reform could be achieved by parliamentary means rather than revolutionary means was of seminal significance.
Fisher was in the midst of it.
Few Australians realise that when Fisher returned to Britain as Australian Labor Prime Minister, he was hailed as a national inspiration for what Labour could achieve in Britain.
For the British, nearly another generation would pass before Ramsey MacDonald was able to form government through a majority in the House of Commons.
Of course Fisher's contemporaries in Australia were less prone to take the broad view of Labor's early electoral successes in Australia.
Sydney's Daily Telegraph described the 1904 Labor Government as “a political freak”.
Echoed by The Times of London which warned in stentorian tones, as only The Times, could do, that having a Labour Government would prove to be a “painful lesson for Australians”.
The passage of time, however, does enable us to take a broader and more generous view properly informed by history.
Andrew Fisher should be honoured in Australian history as a political pioneer, as a social reformer and as a great Australian nationalist committed to the great task of Australian nation building.
I have spoken of Fisher the political pioneer.
But what of Fisher the social reformer? Fisher's visceral sense of social justice came of his experience as a child worker in the Ayshire coal mines.
These mines and the working conditions associated with them had barely emerged from the dark and bleak shadows of the Dickensian world of the late Industrial Revolution.
And for Fisher and his time and his experience this is not the stuff of literature. This was the stuff of cold daily hard reality. Miners dying in mine collapses; others being injured without any form, hope or prospect of compensation and still others dying the long and painful death of “black lung”.
Fisher's social justice was equally shaped by his experience of the Scottish Kirk. A deep belief that singing hymns on Sunday was rancid hypocrisy unless matched by work on Monday to help liberate the human condition not just the eternal souls of all human kind.
For Fisher, being a Sunday school teacher and a union activist was part of a seamless personality, a seamless reality, for him, a seamless mission in life.
His union advocacy was fearless, causing him to be black-banned from one pit after the other  -  and eventually forcing him to find a new life in Australia.
In Australia he campaigned for women's suffrage, he campaigned for workers' compensation, he campaigned for the aged pension, and as Prime Minister, served as Prime Minister when the first aged pension was paid on 1 July 1909.
He campaigned for the arbitration system and in 1912 he introduced something called, remarkably, a “baby bonus”  -  some 90 years before a certain other political party may have claimed to have done the same for the first time. But again, this is the stuff of history.
Fisher's social reform agenda was as deep as it was rich as it was broad.
But what of Fisher the great Australian nationalist? Fisher the nation builder?
Fisher introduced legislation to establish this nation's capital, Canberra. Fisher established the Royal Military College at Duntroon. The Fisher Government introduced military aviation training.
Fisher insisted that the newly formed Royal Australia Navy be under “complete local control”  -  words underlined by his own hand and with his own pen in the relevant Cabinet Memorandum.
Fisher introduced our first national currency. Fisher introduced national postage stamps which for the first time featured Australian national symbols rather than simply the monarch's head. Fisher Australianised the Australian coat of arms.
Fisher patronised the emergence of the Australian national school of painting  -  often retreating, as David Day's book describes, to the artists studio adjacent to his Melbourne parliamentary offices where the likes of Roberts and Streeton of the Heidelberg School were hard at work with the birth of Australian impressionism, crafting a new vision of Australia.
Fisher supported, although this was subsequently thwarted within the bureaucracy, the sending of an Australian team to the Stockholm Olympics in 1912 with an Australian team uniform and with Australian Government support. That was the promise, unfortunately a promise not delivered on.
Fisher brought the Northern Territory under the control of the Commonwealth for the first time in 1911. And in order to bring Western Australia more fully into the national fold he launched the trans-continental railway across the Nullarbor.
In sensing early the need for a distinctive Australian diplomatic presence and voice in the world, he personally commissioned the construction of Australia House in London  -  the building finally opened when he was High Commissioner in 1920.
Andrew Fisher was in every fibre of his being a passionate Australian nationalist, not just in idle and romantic sentiment, but much more importantly in the concrete, practical acts of nation building.
Barton had spoken of a nation for a continent, a continent for a nation. It was Fisher however who sought to shape these words into a reality, crafting a nation out of the idea of a nation.
But beyond all of these things, what of Andrew Fisher the man?
The stories I like most in David Day's biography are those of this simple son of the Ayshire coal fields and the Scottish Kirk visibly squirming at the prospect of having to wear court dress in order to meet the King in London.
Refusing time and time again to take imperial honours; and even at war's end, the war which scarred Fisher and the Labor movement for the following generation, refusing to accept the French Government's offer of a Legion of Honour.
These are signs, simple signs yet cogent signs of a gentle humility and dignity in Fisher which speak forcefully of this great man's integrity.
Australia is a greater nation because of the work of Andrew Fisher. Australia is a fairer society because of the work of Andrew Fisher. Australia has a more secure future because of the work of Andrew Fisher.
Andrew Fisher  -  a great Australian Prime Minister. And with great pride I launch this great biography of this great Australian. I thank you.


O'BRIEN: Earlier tonight I spoke with the Prime Minister in our Sydney studio. Kevin Rudd can we clear up a simple question at the outset. Will you be launching your Carbon Reduction scheme in 2010 regardless of what's going on in the global economy?
PM: I have said consistently Kerry and I will say it again on your program tonight, our ambition is for the scheme to be launched in 2010. And we have a timetable we put out there, and that will mean getting a white paper out at the end of the year.
O'BRIEN: And yet right now you have absolutely no real idea of what the state of the global economy will be. You won't know whether the world is in a deep and prolonged recession still, by then, you don't know right now what the real state of the Australian economy will be.
PM: Kerry the challenge here is to act responsibly, and to act responsibly in terms of the immediate challenge we are confronted with, with the global financial crisis, I believe we are doing that, there's more work to be done. But also to act responsibly for the medium term and long-term challenges as well.
There's an economic cost attached to not acting on climate change. It all factors into the one equation. And we believe if we are calm, cool, methodical about getting this right, it's important for the long-term well being of our economy as well. And business wants the certainty of a regulatory environment for the future on climate change, not continued uncertainly.
O'BRIEN: But they are also very nervous about what the impost is going to be, and what economic circumstances they're facing when you bring it in. Will you at least leave open the option that if a deep and prolonged recession has hit the world economy and Australia is also struggling to recover, that you might lower your ambitions on - at least on an initial carbon price to give industry a softer introduction to the brave new world than would otherwise happen if the economy was steaming along OK?
PM: You know something Kerry, we are a practical bunch of blokes in the Australian Government.
O'BRIEN: And women.
PM: Blokes in the generic, and you pre-empted me from saying that. And - by which I mean we are going to implement this in a responsible way. We are very mindful of the circumstances in business.
Penny Wong the Minister, Wayne Swan, the Treasurer have been in direct and deep contact with the business community over many, many months now, as have the other Ministers: Kim Carr the Industry Minister, Simon Crean the Trade Minister, Martin Ferguson the Resources Minister.
We know what industry is saying, we know what business is saying, and they are also saying this to us: they want certainty for the future. And we'll be very practical about what sort of trajectory, what sort of pathway we achieve for business and for Australia from 2010 through to 2050. That's the key challenge.
O'BRIEN: Okay, the modelling finds that over 40 years to 2050 the carbon reduction scheme would only slow economic growth on average by one-tenth of one per cent per year. That sounds neither here nor there, but one assumes in the early years the impact on business and consumers will be at its most dramatic, that will be the high end in the early stages. And so presumably the cost to growth would also have to be significantly more at the front end than over the 40 year average.
PM: Kerry our attitude is this. For adjustment for industry, and there's two types here - one is what is called the energy intensive trade exposed sector, the other is called strongly affected industries, principally power generators.
With those industries and those industry sectors we are negotiating an adjustment package which recognises the cost of adjustment. And similarly for households, we have said for low income households we'll ensure that they are looked after.
So we are tailoring the adjustment package to the imposition, the implementation of this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. That's the responsible course of action. What would be irresponsible is to say, ‘Here's the rules for the future, drop you in it, bang, let's see what happens'.
We don't intend to do that. We are cautious, sober and practical about this.
O'BRIEN: The modelling suggests that there's virtually no change in impact on economic growth whether you apply conservative targets of carbon reduction or ambitious reduction targets.
If that's the case, why not go for broke, set high targets and at least match the best case scenarios around the world?
PM: Well as you know from the modelling there is some difference, and it's important to be mindful of that, because we are talking about a spread over time.
O'BRIEN: But it is very minor.
PM: It is spread over time in the economy going out 40 years. And we take our long-term responsibility seriously. The bottom line though is our choice of the trajectory, of the options which have been presented will be made clear when the Government releases its White Paper.
We are some time off that. We have got further work to do. The Cabinet colleagues and I have a lot of midnight oil to burn on this and other challenges in the weeks ahead.
O'BRIEN: And we will come to those shortly. What do you say to the critique of leading climate scientists that even the most ambitious targets assumed by the Treasury modelling that cover Garnaut would still leave the world facing risks of dangerous climate change, that somewhere along the way we would have gone beyond the tipping point, yet Garnaut has favoured a very slow path to 60 per cent reductions by 2050.
Do you accept that very real prospect that if everyone in the world follows the Garnaut path, that the global condition could be catastrophic by 2050?
PM: We accept the scientific evidence as presented by the International Panel and we accept of course, the range of options which were presented to us by the economic modelling from Treasury. Our challenge as political leaders in this country is to craft the path up the middle of that. I believe we can do so responsibly and at the same time, jag the rest of the international community into action.
That is the hard bit. But we face an election very soon in the United States, both Republicans and Democrats are committed to action. One of our first challenges will be to engage the incoming American administration on working with us on this.
If America is on board with concerted global action and the Europeans and critically, the emerging economies, China, India and elsewhere, we have a prospect, a prospect of getting there.
That is a point in terms of carbon intensity in the atmosphere which is still capable of producing a secure environmental future for the planet. All I know is, the alternative, the one we were handed 10 months ago when we got into Government, was zero.
O'BRIEN: But you have suddenly gone from  - 
PM: We have gone from zero to where we are in ten months.
O'BRIEN: But you are saying, that is some prospect of achieving that. Some prospect. That doesn't fill you with confidence, does it? On the one hand, the Treasury modelling appears to make the heroic, a heroic assumption that science will have found a way to produce acceptably clean coal by 2020. But on the other hand it appears to ignore the impact of meeting 20 per cent renewable energy targets by 2020.
Don't both of those factors, or the absence of them, represent serious flaws in the Treasury modelling?
PM: When you come to, for example clean coal technology, CCS, carbon capture and storage, on which this government has done a lot of work in recent times, with our proposal for a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, it is quite clear from previous work that has been done by the International Energy Agency for example that the carbon price in the vicinity of $20 or $40 per tonne, that the use of clean coal technology becomes economically feasible.
One of the reasons that we are doing this work through the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute is in fact to work out how Governments and industry work together to close any financial gap in this very important, exciting and revolutionary technology.
The other part of your question was about renewable energy. Renewable energy is of course important for the future for this reason: that if you bring in renewables through a renewable energy target, what you do is you bring forward a lot of investment in those new energy producers early on.
O'BRIEN: Yes but the Treasury, Treasury hasn't even taken that into account in its modelling. I would have thought that was a big positive.
PM: Well the renewable energy sector is embraced in the Government's overall strategy.
O'BRIEN: But it is not in the Treasury modelling.
PM: Well the assumption that the Renewable Energy sector will be enhanced by the RET, the Renewable Energy Target, is quite clear.
That is, that is that you will have this early jagging of investment in renewable energy technology early on. And the purpose of this is to achieve a critical mass of solar, of wind and the other renewables early on in order for them to be able to play their role in the overall Carbon Reduction Scheme.
O'BRIEN: Very briefly, you have taken time out from this little thing called the global financial crisis today to focus your attention briefly on the Treasury modelling. How much of your time is the global crisis taking up on a day to day basis right now, how much of your time?
PM: A truck load.
O'BRIEN: Nearly all I would think.
PM: It is a fair old truck load. It is a fair bit of time. I mean we are working intense hours and we have for quite some time. When I say we, it is the team, you know the Treasurer, myself, the Finance Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, and in the case of Climate Change of course Penny.
A lot of time, a lot of work, a lot of effort and supported by a great team of officials.
O'BRIEN: But this is the core of your government, certainly in the economic sense and the point I am about to make is that given that you and the cabinet were already famously working overtime to implement your election agenda, this crisis must be a massive distraction for you and your senior economic ministers, from much of the rest of the agenda.
For instance, you're off to the US for the G20 Global Crisis meeting on November 15. Back for a minute for the local Government Summit on the 18th, then off to Peru for APEC on November 22, then back for COAG.
That is a brutal schedule.
PM: Well, I don't know what you are recommending, a cup of tea and a Bex and a quick lie down?
O'BRIEN: No not at all, I am asking the obvious question, something has to suffer?
PM: We are supported by a very good team. Look the truth is, these are huge challenges. It stares you in the face. And I have got to say talking to many of my counterparts around the world, other heads of Government, they are all facing the same challenge.
In our case it is even a little worse because we are in this time zone. We have teams who actually almost around the clock following international financial market developments in the American hemisphere, the European hemisphere and then here. Because each of these things can affect us like that, so we have to be on top of it.
It's tough, but frankly it is the reason we were elected, be on our game, be ahead of the curve, where we can, and to take decisive action, which I believe we have.
O'BRIEN: Well under the circumstances I won't take up any more of your time, Kevin Rudd thanks for talking with us.
PM: Good to be on the program.


The Rudd Government today signed the Australian Employment Covenant.
The Prime Minister pledged Government support to the AEC earlier this year when the CEO of Fortescue Metals Group, Mr Andrew Forrest, announced the private sector initiative to create 50,000 jobs for Indigenous Australians.
At a ceremony in Sydney today, the Prime Minister joined Mr Forrest and other members of the AEC steering committee to officially launch the initiative.
Andrew Forrest and his steering committee are encouraging Australian employers to join with Australian Government and Indigenous Leaders in addressing Indigenous unemployment with real jobs. 
The Rudd Government has committed to halving the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous employment within a decade.
The AEC initiative will forge corporate and philanthropic partnerships with Indigenous communities to deliver real outcomes towards reducing Indigenous disadvantage. 
The Minister for Employment Participation, Brendan O'Connor, has been working with the AEC steering committee to develop a framework which will facilitate the Government's support to the development and success of these partnerships. 
Under the Covenant the Rudd Government will make resources available to:
     * coordinate and facilitate training to the appropriate job standards of the employing industry; and
     * facilitate post-placement and mentor support for eligible Indigenous Australians in guaranteed AEC jobs. 
We will involve employment services in helping with the take up of AEC jobs by eligible Indigenous job seekers through referral, placement and support services.
At today's launch, the Prime Minister also announced the Australian Government will provide $400,000 in immediate assistance to the AEC to establish a call-centre to take inquiries from interested employers and for a communications and marketing strategy.
This initiative has the potential to significantly broaden job opportunities for Indigenous Australians.
It builds on the great efforts of many Australian companies which have committed to Indigenous employment and challenges other Australian companies to commit to creating more opportunities for Indigenous Australians.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil.
MITCHELL: The Bali bombers will be executed soon, perhaps even this weekend. Has the Australian Government been officially notified of that?
PM: Not that I'm aware of, Neil. I've seen the press reporting myself.
MITCHELL: Can we just get this clear. Does the Australian Government approve the execution of all terrorists?
PM: Our position, as I've said I think on your program before and elsewhere, we're universally opposed to the death penalty. We make no exception to that. And that's been a bipartisan policy between us and the Liberals.
And secondly, the other part of our policy is when any individual is convicted with the death penalty anywhere in the world, we the Australian Government only intervene in the case of Australian citizens, that's our policy.
MITCHELL: But you are opposed, even opposed, to the execution of the terrorists?
PM: It's our universal policy. The Liberals policy, our policy, which is one of opposition to the death penalty. We've voted that way in the United Nations before, we'll continue to do so in the future.
MITCHELL: Does that mean that you do not welcome the execution of the Bali bombers?
PM: Well the Bali Bombers are murderers. I have said that many times before and many of the people listening to your program would have been directly affected by their murderous, cowardly and callous act. It's appalling. But I'm not going to pretend to you Neil that our policy on the death penalty has changed. It's always been one of universal opposition.
MITCHELL: But you have said in the past they are getting what they deserve  -  they're getting justice?
PM: Well, justice means being convicted of the offence, and these people were tracked down by a combination of the Indonesian national police, the Australian Federal Police and others, in order to establish their guilt. That has occurred, and their impact on the lives of all of these Australian families is there for us all to see.
I've been in the ceremonies and services we've had at Parliament House in Canberra and seen the huge impact on people's lives. It makes your heart weep when you see not just what happens a week later, but a year later and five and six years later. It's horrendous.
MITCHELL: I agree. I was at the anniversary, the first anniversary, up in Bali when we had that ceremony there. But just in very simple terms  -  does the Australian Government, or do you, support the execution of the Bali bombers or not?
PM: Well Neil, our policy is as I've said before. We oppose the death penalty universally. Secondly, we only make interventions in support of Australian citizens. And I think that policy speaks for itself.
MITCHELL: The United States has cut interest rates to one per cent, which shows how serious the situation is. Our Reserve meets on interest rates next week. Do we need another cut?
PM: Well, they make their independent judgments. I think the Reserve Bank were ahead of the curve globally last time when they took down official interest rates by 100 basis points, that's one per cent. And, I think following that you saw a number of other central banks act the same sort of way.
I think what is increasingly apparent, Neil, is this global financial crisis is a real threat to growth and jobs around the world. It's a real threat to growth and jobs in Australia. And, quite apart from stability in the financial system itself, which is what we've been working on for quite some time here, the real challenge now lies with growth and jobs for the future.
Coordinated action by central banks around the world to bring down interest rates is important. In addition to that, coordinated fiscal policy action, that is support through the budgets of the major economies of the world to add to economic growth, like what we did with our $10 billion package the other day.
MITCHELL: So does the United States cut down to one per cent, does that have a flow through to Australia or are we already ahead of that?
PM: Well, we're in a rolling and unfolding crisis. I think the US action is important because it's the world's largest economy. And, as we know, the United States economy has suffered reduced growth, significantly reduced growth, in recent times. And reduced jobs. Therefore, their acting on their growth affects the rest of the economy because what they buy from the rest of the world affects growth and jobs here.
MITCHELL: What is your most recent forecast on growth in the Australian economy and on unemployment in Australia?
PM: For the economy, our growth forecast is still with a 2, plus 2, in front of it. And with unemployment, of course, the Budget forecasts were 4.75 but we've also seen, of course, further pressure on unemployment as well.
I think the truth of it  - 
MITCHELL: So what's the latest forecast on unemployment?
PM: Well, as I said the Budget forecast was for 4.75  -  but I'm simply being straight up and down with you that  - 
MITCHELL: You would have had another forecast since the Budget, though?
PM: Well, we're going to have the Mid Year Financial and Economic Outlook, which will be produced during the course of November. But, it's quite plain that unemployment is under real pressure. It's quite plain that growth is under real pressure. I don't wish to mislead your listeners at all. That's why we introduced that $10.4 billion economic stimulus package two weeks ago because we know, because the global financial crisis, that Australia is under real pressure.
MITCHELL: I see several respected economists, JP Morgan, Deutsche Bank, today saying that Australia is headed into recession. You don't agree?
PM: Well, the most recent numbers we have in front of us from the Treasury continue to have positive economic growth into 2009. But, the global financial crisis is a real threat to growth and to jobs. We recognise that when you've got so many other major economies around the world going into recession, this is going to be very tough, very tough indeed, for Australia. But, that's why we've acted early, again ahead of the curve, by injecting $10.4 billion into the economy in the stimulus package I announced Tuesday two weeks ago.
MITCHELL: I see some of these economists are saying they don't expect that to be spent?
PM: Well, put a tribe of economists into one room, Neil, and how many opinions will you get?
MITCHELL: Fair point.
PM: And, what I'll say is, if you were to speak to your listeners in terms of some of the real needs that they currently have, because families, pensioners and carers are under real financial pressure, if we're providing additional payments to pensioners, additional payment to families, as well as providing a boost to first home buyers, we believe that a fair proportion of that will find its way into real economic activity.
MITCHELL: We'll take calls for the Prime Minister as well. Paul, go ahead please, Paul.
CALLER: Yeah, good morning Neil, good morning Mr Rudd.
PM: G'day Paul, how are you?
CALLER: I'm well thanks. A couple of quick questions, if I might. One in relation to infrastructure, and the other in relation to bank deposits.
PM: Yeah.
CALLER: In relation to infrastructure, there's been a lot of talk about that, there's been a lot of talk about creating jobs. Is it as simple as maybe commissioning four or five large projects? Could you build a nuclear power plant to service every capital city? That would use up some of our massive uranium reserves and get us off brown coal. Could you commission a project that would convert cars to natural gas and get us off Middle Eastern oil?
MITCHELL: Hang on Paul, you've got too many questions. First, the nuclear power plants, Prime Minister?
PM: Paul, we won't be building a nuclear power plant. But can I say this, you're right on the money about the need for large scale nation building projects. We've set aside billions of dollars for big infrastructure projects for the future. Some of those will be focussed also on parts of the energy sector as well. But whether it's road, rail, ports, hospitals, schools  - 
MITCHELL: Tunnels?
PM: Tunnels are part of roads.
MITCHELL: Okay.
PM: And, also, what we do in building a national high speed broadband network. All of these require big long term investment. We're prepared to do that. The first step will be a bring forward by us in December, a statement on our first major set of infrastructure investments for the future.
MITCHELL: Okay Paul. And quickly, the second part was one on banks.
CALLER: A yes/no question. Does the Government guarantee on bank deposits only apply to accounts domiciled in Australia? So if I was an entrepreneur up in Manila or Jakarta and I thought I had my money in a shaky investment, could I front up to the National Bank in Singapore and deposit it into the NAB and benefit from the government's guarantee?
PM: Well look, I'm not going to go into the detail of off-shore investments. But can I just be very clear what's covered here. It's deposits in what is called Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority authorised deposit institutions.
What does that mean in layman's language? Banks, building societies, credit unions in Australia. As well as subsidiaries of foreign banks in Australia and foreign bank branches in Australia.
MITCHELL: So is money coming into Australia from overseas to take advantage of that guarantee?
PM: Well look, I have no advice or data on that, Neil. All I can say is that the guarantee extends to $800 billion worth of Australian mums' and dads' deposits in their bank accounts, their credit unions, and in their building societies. And what I know from mums and dads across the country is that they want that guarantee to be there. We've delivered it.
[commercial break]
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, your government today releases some detail on the emissions trading scheme. Now, we've got an economic crisis, continued drought, business uncertainty. Will you today still pledge to introduce the scheme by 2010?
PM: Our ambition remains as I've said to you before on this program, Neil, and that is to introduce the program in 2010. The reason for it is the economic cost of inaction and delay is greater than the economic cost of action. That's been our long standing view. And, we believe it's the right course of action, not just for the environment, but for the economy.
MITCHELL: But we've talking today about how quickly the situation with the economy is moving  -  surely the very modelling you are releasing today on this is already out of date? It's changing by the day.
PM: Well, you know something Neil, the economic circumstances are constantly changing. They have been in the past, they will do so in the future. But those who do economic modelling factor in as many variables as possible. 
The key thing is when you introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, which is what we are doing, it's necessary long term for the environment. Otherwise the economic impact through rising sea levels, coastal inundation, further and more intense drought, as well as the impact on tourism in the wetlands and elsewhere, is huge. And that all costs jobs.
MITCHELL: I guess nobody is really debating that any more but is now the time to do it? Is now the time when we have drought, when we have massive economic uncertainty, when we have business confusion and nervousness, when we are seeing international recession, is now the time?
PM: I suppose what I am saying to Neil is, it is important to act, both for the immediate term and for the long term. You cannot simply delay the challenges which are rolling down the railroad tracks towards us as well.
On the immediate term, what we have done in terms of stability for the financial system, you are familiar with  -  the guarantees on bank deposits, guarantees on bank lending so that credit continues to flow to businesses.
For the economy and growth and jobs, what you and I have been talking about, that is why we have brought in the $10.4 billion stimulus package recently, with payments to pensioners and families and the rest. But you know something? The medium term challenges of how do you lift productivity growth in the economy, how do deal with the challenge of climate change and energy efficiency and infrastructure such as Paul, your caller, referred to before, they don't go away.
They are still there. You have got to act on them.
MITCHELL: Hello Vic, go ahead please Vic.
VIC: Yes hello good morning.
PM: G'day Vic how are you?
VIC: Morning and good morning Mr Rudd. Listen I have a, just a question about, all this talk about home, you know reducing interest rates on home loans, making it easier for families or whatever. Over the last sort of, couple of years, and I am one of them, you have to use your credit card basically to live especially if you have got a significant home loan or a significant loan.
Now fortunately the rates are starting to come down and hopefully they will come down a little bit more, on the home loans. But credit card rates are around 18  -  20 per cent and no one seems to be talking about those.
MITCHELL: Yeah that is a good point, Prime Minister?
PM: Well you are absolutely right Vic. Credit cards are a huge part of the way in which many people have managed their finances in recent years. Secondly, on the numbers of credit cards, or credit card products out there, the last advice I got was there was something like 500 or 600 different types of credit card products, with interest rates ranging from something in single digits to something like 28 per cent, depending on which credit card firm that you are referring to.
In terms of the responsibility of the banks or those credit cards linked to banks to bring down their rates appropriately as well, yes that should happen. Is it happening as fast as it should? Well I think we would all like to see faster action on these questions. But can I say, out there in the credit card market and I just say this to you as someone who uses one, there is a huge variety of cards offering a huge variety of interest rates. It's really important also to shop around.
When I saw these numbers which said that rates can vary between 8 per cent and 28 per cent on cards, this is a huge difference.
MITCHELL: That would indicate there is a bit of profiteering going on though wouldn't it if there is that sort of range?
PM: Well I am concerned about the effective regulation of the credit card industry in the past and we will have more to say about that in the future, because we have been in government for nine or ten months and when I have seen this extraordinary spread of interest rates being charged on credit cards, I have become concerned.
But we will take a measured approach to this and we will have more to say about it in the future.
MITCHELL: In the future you are looking at regulating credit cards?
PM: No what I am saying Neil is that we looking at the existing regulations on credit cards. They don't exist in complete sort of free range chickens out there, but at the same time, I am concerned about the extraordinary spread of interest rates out there.
And of course consumers can choose, that is what I am urging Vic to do as well. But we are having a very close look at the extent to which this is being properly regulated.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister the estimates are 250,000 people have got money frozen in managed funds. Are you one of them?
PM: My own circumstances are these: I am a part-owner in a house with my wife. I have super and as far as my wife is concerned, she has her funds in a blind trust. And that has been the case since 2007.
MITCHELL: So you don't even know if they are in managed funds or not.
PM: It is a blind trust and it was established for the very reasons which form the basis of your question. We have no idea.
MITCHELL: Ok, the funds don't seem to happy about the proposition of being turned into banks. They say it is not a short term solution. And some of them it doesn't appeal at all. I mean it is changing their business entirely.
PM: Well let's put it into context. First of all, for mums and dads out there, and pensioners and carers, $800 billion of bank deposits, credit union deposits and building society deposits have been guaranteed by the Government. Secondly, for those financial institutions regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, we have also guaranteed what is called their term funding.
That means, their ability to raise funds around the world to provide continued loans to small business.
We have guaranteed $1.2 trillion worth of that. Now these are two fundamental underpinnings of stability in the financial system. But what we have sought to underpin with the Government bank deposit scheme is deposits, not to guarantee people's investments.
When you are talking about investments, investments are a different category of beast. The Treasury however, ASIC and APRA, the relevant regulators are working daily with each element of the finance industry, whether it is with managed funds, whether it is with mortgage funds, whether it is with cash management trusts et cetera, on the details of their individual industry sectors, and frankly, the details of individual firms.
There are hundreds of these out there.
MITCHELL: Okay you have been critical of excess in corporate life. Are you therefore comfortable with the chief executive of Australia Post Graham John collecting a one million dollar bonus?
PM: My position up until, in recent statements Neil, has been about executive remuneration packages in the finance sector, because the financial sector is absolutely fundamental for the stability of the entire economy.
And when you have had executive remuneration packages in financial institutions, in investment banks, like that bloke at Lehmans, frankly, and where you have got those financial packages linked to high risk behaviour, that is a systemic problem for all of us and affects mums and dads.
In the general economy beyond the finance sector, people should exercise restraint, I have said that before, but my comments most recently have focussed explicitly on what you do within the finance sector.
MITCHELL: So are you comfortable with the chief executive of Australia Post getting a one million dollar bonus given it is approved by a board that you appoint?
PM: Well hey, I haven't appointed that board.
MITCHELL: Oh well the Government appoints it.
PM: Presumably I have inherited that one from Mr Howard. If you asked me who was on the board, I couldn't tell you.
But secondly, this is an independent board appointment and they should make remuneration packages consistent on performance. I think Australia Post from what I have seen has performed well over many, many years, and performed responsibly over many, many years.
And that's in stark contrast to what I think we have seen with many merchant banks, other financial institutions around the world, where these exorbitant packages of hundreds of millions of dollars, linked to very risky behaviour which then affect the rest of the economy for the rest of us.
MITCHELL: So you support the Australia Post bonus?
PM: I support the independence of the board to make its decision.
MITCHELL: Just quickly I know you need to go away, the internet, the internet change, the filtering of the system you have promised, I see the Greens are opposing it, but one thing that surprised me, will this slow down the internet for the rest of us? If you have this filter on the providers which stops nasty stuff getting into the country, will it slow down the system?
PM: Well we support proper protections out there because as you would know there are a whole bunch of predators out there. But secondly on speed, rather than just give you a glib answer on that, can I come back to you and give you a detailed answer?
MITCHELL: I also, I understand, and I was talking to one of them earlier, you met with a number of the young people in Melbourne who are trying to run a campaign to clean up the streets, to stop the violence on the streets of Melbourne.
They are an impressive lot aren't they?
PM: Yeah they are really good kids, well they are not kids anymore, they are in their twenties. But ‘Step Back, Think' is their campaign slogan and as you know they have done so in response to one of their mates being basically king hit and rendered in a terrible state a couple of years ago.
They have a given us a couple of practical proposals to work on as a Government about education in the schools and about public education through the media. We are now working on that within the Government and I said I would get back to them by the end of the year on what we will do on those two measures that they have given us.
MICTHELL: So it is interesting because it basically a state matter but you think the federal Government might be able to help with a Melbourne problem?
PM: Well Melbourne's problem is also the nation's problem. And one of the things that, I think it was Olivia, from that group and another bloke there was Clancy, who I remembered from the overflow.
MITCHELL: And Dan.
PM: And Dan, and I can't remember the other bloke, Jonathon?
MITCHELL: Jono.
PM: Yeah, that's ok, Jonathon. A few nights ago now.
MITCHELL: A few meetings since.
PM: Yeah a few meetings since. But they made a very good case about this: what do you do in terms of boys in particular in the classrooms of Australia during the secondary school period in particular, to change their attitude to the acceptability of violence.
And what I have asked the Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard to do is to put this on the agenda for the Education Ministers meeting of the nation to see what can be done in terms of formal programs within the school system on this.
And secondly, public information campaigns more broadly.
MITCHELL: That's terrific. I thank you for seeing them. We are off to the US tomorrow to broadcast from there for a week including election day. Are we going to report a Barack Obama win?
PM: I was about to ask you, who is going to win?
MITCHELL: Well he is so far in front, what do you think?
PM: No you give me your opinion.
MITCHELL: I think yours is more important.
PM: Look, you know what I have learned in this business, it is not over till the fat lady sings. So let's just wait and see what happens with the election. Can I just say both these candidates who I have spoken to a couple of times now, Senator Obama and Senator McCain are fine individuals, fine human beings, Australia will be well served by the election of either.
MITCHELL: So you could work with both, or either rather.
PM: Yeah, yeah. Well not both, I think that is constitutionally problematic.
MITCHELL: I think that is right, you could work with either. Thank you very much for your time.


Today the world confronts the most profound financial and economic challenges in our lifetimes.
My purpose tonight is simple:
To define the Government's strategy to see Australia through this financial crisis;
To articulate our strategy to support the real economy in the face of a looming global recession;
To reaffirm the Government's long-term reform agenda beyond the crisis;
And to invite you, the leaders of Australia's business community, to join with the Government in sustaining that most important asset of all during a crisis such as this  -  and that is confidence.
The global economy today faces unprecedented challenges.
We are in the midst of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
And that financial crisis is beginning to spill over into the real economy where it threatens to precipitate a deep and protracted global recession.
A recession that will threaten growth and jobs in Australia and around the world.
And on this it is important to level with the Australian people.
Consider just a few statistics defining the impact of the crisis on property and equity markets:
Shares on the New York Stock Exchange have lost more than a third of their value since this crisis began - falling 36.5 per cent.
Property values in the United States have fallen at a record rate, with the S&amp;P/Case-Shiller index showing house prices down 16.6 per cent per cent from a year earlier.
The financial crisis has spread beyond the United States to affect Europe as well as emerging markets in Asia and around the world.
     * In the last 12 months, the wealth held on major stock markets has fallen by a third.
     * In the last month global markets have lost US$11 trillion  -  equivalent to around 18 per cent of world GDP.
     * Japan's sharemarket is down more than 60 per cent  -  with the Nikkei Index at a 26 year low on Monday.
     * London's bourse has lost 36 per cent of its value.
     * The Shanghai index is down around 70 per cent.
The turmoil on equity markets reflects the turmoil on credit markets.
     * Liquidity has become scarce with the LIBOR-OIS spread reaching around 300 basis points this month  -  more than 30 times its average level in early 2007.
     * According to the Bank of England's latest Financial Stability Report, the global financial system is digesting mark-to-market losses on debt instruments of around US$2.8 trillion.
     * And the combined impact of a lack of liquidity and falling asset values has caused more than 25 banks around the world to collapse or be bailed out.
And turmoil on credit, equity and property markets impacts, of course, on the real economy.
Some economists are now estimating that the falls in stock markets and property markets alone will wipe $15 trillion dollars off the wealth of U.S. households  -  equivalent to an incredible 105 per cent of nominal US GDP.
And that means lower growth and higher unemployment.
Extraordinary times have called for extraordinary action.
Governments around the world have taken unprecedented action to prevent catastrophe.
Within the three weeks between September 7 and 25, the US government took decisive action to shore up many parts of the financial system:
It launched a US$100 billion bail-out for each of the two US mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac;
It loaned US$85 billion to American International Group (AIG) to avoid bankruptcy;
It launched a US$700 billion financial rescue plan for troubled assets;
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation seized Washington Mutual; and
The Federal Reserve agreed to provide US$900 billion in short-term cash loans to banks.
In the same period, governments around the world have acted as well:
In an unprecedented move, central banks in the US, the UK, China, Canada, Sweden, Switzerland and the European Central Bank cut interest rates together by up to 0.5 per cent.
Countries including the UK, France, Germany, Italy, Denmark and Spain announced increased guarantees for depositors and new guarantees for wholesale funding.
Several European countries injected billions of dollars into their financial systems to partly nationalise their largest banks.
And in the coming weeks, members of the Group of 20 Nations will meet to discuss further global action to address the crisis.
This meeting in Washington on 15 November will provide a mechanism for the world's major economies to coordinate our responses to the global financial crisis and the economic impact it is having.
President Bush's leadership in calling this meeting of the G20 has been decisive.
It is the right decision because it looks to the future.
And it is a decision that Australia welcomes.
Australia has responded to the crisis with early action.
We have responded with decisive action.
We have responded with strong action.
Through the course of this year the Government has acted to maintain financial stability by:
Ensuring liquidity in our financial system by legislating to increase to $25 billion the maximum value of government bonds that can be issued at any one time;
Acting to protect financial institutions from predatory speculators by introducing an immediate ban on short selling;
Supporting competition and liquidity in the mortgage market by announcing a program to purchase up to $8 billion of residential mortgage backed securities;
Reaching agreement with the States on the reform of the regulation of credit in Australia by moving to a seamless national regulatory framework, and;
Taking a prominent role through the Financial Stability Forum to develop recommendations to reform international financial regulation.
In each of these areas, Australia has acted early, invariably ahead of the curve  -  anticipating events, rather than simply reacting to them.
On October 12 the Government took two further historic decisions to guarantee Australian deposits, and to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The Government's action was necessary to maintain the stability of the financial system in the midst of destabilising developments abroad.
Importantly for Australian families:
It has given mums and dads the confidence that their deposits are safe;
It has put downward pressure on funding costs, and thereby downward pressure on interest rates; and
It has helped to stabilise financial markets.
As APRA Chairman John Laker said recently:
“The Government's deposit and funding guarantee, which APRA fully supports, has calmed what was a growing disquiet on the part of some depositors.”
All of the major banks have seen their costs of funding fall since the guarantee.
As Ahmed Fahour, NAB Executive Director and CEO Australia, has said:
"Policy measures announced by the Australian Government earlier this month have started to have a positive impact .... we hope to be in a position where we can pass on further interest rate cuts to our customers."
In the last two weeks, each of the major banks announced they will reduce their interest rates by around 0.2 per cent.
The Government has acted decisively because we know that our primary responsibility is to maintain confidence in the financial system.
A failure to act on the guarantees could have meant significant difficulties for Australian families and businesses seeking to access credit  -  as well as having to pay higher interest rates.
This could have in turn affected investment and consumption and ultimately our growth and employment. 
If the government had only guaranteed deposits up to $100,000, as some argued, we would be excluding around 40 per cent of all deposits by value and some ¾ of a million deposit accounts.
The consequences of a partial guarantee under the prevailing circumstances would have been destabilising in the extreme.
It would have left those depositors with the largest amounts of cash without a guarantee - and therefore inclined to move their money to the big four banks and away from a range of other financial institutions.
Some large depositors may have even withdrawn their cash entirely from the Australian banking system.
Any partial guarantee of deposits in the prevailing circumstances would have been irresponsible.
In relation to market-linked investments not covered by the deposit guarantee, the Government is working systematically with industry to maintain a secure, strong and diverse financial system. 
Treasury has taskforces dealing with each category of market-linked investments institutions in what is a complex sector involving highly diverse and risk-differentiated investment products.
I indicated on Tuesday that APRA is preparing to fast-track applications by mortgage funds and other financial institutions seeking to attain the status of a prudentially regulated APRA institution.
A number of financial institutions have indicated their interest in becoming APRA regulated ADIs  -  and their applications will be handled in the usual way by the regulators.
There is also an important role for the market in addressing some of the broader liquidity problems in other parts of the financial system.
Larger and more liquid institutions  -  including the major banks  -  could provide liquidity to various market-linked investment vehicles within the financial system by buying their securities at market prices.
Our major banks have performed responsibly during this crisis.
The banks are the beneficiaries of banking licences, and the Government's guarantee on deposits and wholesale funding.
It is not unreasonable, therefore, to expect that the banks will play a continuing role in supporting the wider financial system and thus the Australian national interest.
The Government has asked David Murray, Chairman of the Future Fund and former Chief Executive of the Commonwealth Bank, to assist the Treasury in its liaison with relevant financial institutions on this and related matters.
Mr Murray will be assisted by senior officers from the Treasury, APRA and ASIC.
As I have previously indicated, the Government will continue to respond in a calm, measured and methodical way to deal with the challenges that will continue to emerge in this sector in the future.
The Government has drawn on the economic policy machinery within the bureaucracy and the independent regulators to advise us during these challenging times.
The Government is in daily contact with the Treasury, the Reserve Bank, APRA and ASIC.
The International Economic Policy Group, the Strategic Policy and Budget Committee of Cabinet and the Council of Financial Regulators are meeting regularly to address the crisis in a coordinated fashion.
These institutions have performed well, giving timely advice and helping Australia stay ahead of the curve in addressing the crisis and maintaining confidence.
A lack of confidence can have devastating consequences for all market participants and lead to irrational behaviour by individual investors.
That is why governments, business and all responsible leaders have a joint responsibility through what we say and what we do to support confidence, not undermine it.
Confidence is a precious commodity at a time of crisis.
It is maintained by strong action by governments and private institutions.
And it is also supported by recognition of the independence and integrity of our national regulatory institutions.
It is also maintained by being frank with the Australian people about the strengths we have and the challenges we face  -  and not playing or pandering to fear.
The decisive policy action by governments around the world has helped stabilise financial markets more generally compared with the parlous state of affairs the world faced on the weekend of 12 October.
But now policymakers must also deal with the consequences of the crisis on the real economy.
Few economists now doubt that even if we escape catastrophe in financial markets, we face unprecedented challenges in the real economy.
There is no doubt that the global economy is entering what will be one of the most painful periods in recent decades.
The coming year will be characterized by declining global growth and rising global unemployment.
The International Labour Organisation has estimated that the number of people who are unemployed worldwide could increase by 20 million to 210 million by late 2009. 
Even before the events of late September, the IMF had revised down its estimates of global growth.
The IMF predicted that:
“The world economy is now entering a major downturn ... and the major advanced economies are already in or close to recession.”  (IMF WEO)
The IMF has downgraded its global growth projections of the major advanced economies by 0.9 percentage points since July to 0.5 per cent in 2009.
The IMF is now forecasting growth in 2009 of less than 1 per cent in most of the G-7 economies. 
This will be the slowest rate of growth in the advanced economies for over a quarter of a century. 
And since that forecast was released, the UK economy has recently recorded a contraction of 0.5 per cent in the third quarter - the first quarterly contraction since 1992.
Policymakers around the world  -  most of whom have been immersed in the response to the financial crisis  -  must also now turn their attention to the emerging crisis in the real economy.
On Monday I received an email from the American economist, Jeffrey Sachs.
Sachs, together with other economists, is among the growing number of people looking beyond the current financial turmoil to the consequences for the global economy.
They recognize that just as we needed unprecedented coordinated global action to address the financial crisis, we will need unprecedented global action to address the coming global slowdown in the real economy.
There is an emerging global consensus that part of that action involves further monetary policy loosening through coordinated central bank interest rate cuts.
And further, that the world will also need to undertake a coordinated fiscal expansion. 
China and many Asian economies have the resources and the need to increase spending  -  to stimulate their economies and accelerate much needed investments in infrastructure and social spending.
Oil producing countries must look through the current slide in oil prices to use their wealth of reserves for productive long-term investments around the world.
The U.S. and Europe, despite their large budget deficits, would also be well served to support positive growth through appropriate fiscal expansion.
The challenge for policymakers is to ensure that fiscal expansion is coordinated across countries to boost the global economy  -  and that this does not occur too late.
And to ensure that a substantial part of this new spending is also used to fund productive investments which will make the global economy stronger into the future.
The fact is that the financial boom and the inflation of asset prices over the last decade has masked a slowdown in the real driver of prosperity  -  productivity growth.
And that brings us to the need globally and nationally to continue to prosecute a long term economic reform agenda to boost productivity growth.
During the 1960s, productivity growth in OECD economies peaked at an average annual rate of 4.7 per cent.  The 1950s and 1960s were a ‘golden age' of growth, development and productivity for western countries.
The most likely cause for rapid productivity growth in the 1950s and 1960s was the massive investment in technology during the war and in infrastructure during reconstruction.
Since the 1960s, productivity growth in OECD economies has been trending downwards.
In the 1990s, the transformative effect of investments in information technology drove strong productivity growth.
Since then productivity has been in decline  -  falling to an average annual rate of 1.7 per cent so far this decade. 
The current crisis is a painful reminder that - in the words of former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers:
“Finance led growth is problematic.  The wealth and income gains from the easy availability of credit are highly concentrated in the hands of a fortunate few and the benefits are often temporary.” 
Financial innovation is not a substitute for productivity growth throughout the economy.
As RBA Governor Glenn Stevens noted last week, this crisis should teach us that the historical role of the finance sector is to be the “‘handmaiden of industry” rather than the master of industry.
Stevens is one of many economists calling for:
“a renewed focus on the processes in the real economy which generate growth in productivity.” 
In Australia, the Government has also acted ahead of the curve to support continued positive growth in the Australian economy.
Given what is happening around the world, this will be a tough challenge.
Australia has been one of the first governments to adjust our fiscal setting to the new global economic reality.
We were able to take early and strong action because of the prudent budget surplus we had accumulated this year.
That surplus was meant to be a buffer for tough times ahead.
And those tough times have arrived.
The Australian economy now needs stimulus.
Fiscal and monetary policy must now work together to strengthen the Australian economy.
Some of that support will come from the tax cuts, which came into effect in July.
Some will come from the 100 basis points cut in interest rates this month.
And some will come from the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
Through practical support for households and across the economy more broadly, we are supporting continued positive growth.
The elements of the package are:
     * a $4.8 billion down payment on long-term pension reform;
     * $3.9 billion in payments to help around 2 million families; and
     * doubling the first home buyers grant for the purchase of an established home to $14,000 and tripling it to $21,000 for those who buy a newly constructed home.
This package will provide a boost to families in need.
It will provide a boost to pensioners and carers.
It will provide a boost for the construction sector as well as helping families realise the dream of owning their own home.
The Government's Economic Security Strategy however goes beyond fiscal stimulus.
It also contains actions to deal with long-term productivity challenges by boosting training and bringing forward investment in infrastructure.
     * we have doubled the number of productivity training places to 113,000 in this financial year; and
     * we will be bringing forward the nation building agenda, with further announcements in December.
It is an Economic Security Strategy to see us over the short-term challenges and to position the economy to continue to grow in the long-term.
Through these policy measures, the Government is dealing with: the immediate challenges of financial stability; the subsequent challenges of economic stimulus; and the long term challenges of productivity growth.
This Government will not be in the business of pushing to one side the productivity agenda while we negotiate our way through the present crisis. 
As we argued throughout 2007, action on productivity is both urgent and overdue.
Throughout last year, this was the core of my argument for why Australia needed a new wave of economic reform and why we needed an education revolution.
Long-term prosperity is built through the hard work of building productivity growth.
With few exceptions, the nations that build and sustain the greatest wealth aren't the nations with the most resources.
They're the nations that use their resources to invest in their human and other productive capital to remain on the productivity frontier. 
Australian experience underscores that basic economic fact.
Treasury data shows that 80 per cent of the improvement in the living standards of Australians over our past 40 years has come from increased productivity.
The long-term economic challenge for Australia is the long-term decline in productivity, as the Reserve Bank Governor has noted.
During the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, we averaged productivity growth of 3.3 per cent each year.
During the productivity cycle from 1998-99 to 2003-04, productivity growth fell to 2.1 per cent.
And in the current cycle since 2003-04, productivity growth has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent.
We cannot turn that around overnight.
There are long time lags between planting the seeds of future productivity growth, and reaping a harvest.
But the payoff of those reforms will endure for decades.
That is why we need to start today  -  to act ahead of the curve.
It's why the cooperation of State and Territory governments on the COAG agenda is so important.
It's why productivity defines the Government's core economic plan for Australia's long term economic future.
The Government's productivity agenda contains five parts:
     * the education revolution on skills, training and human capital formation;
     * a nation-building infrastructure plan;
     * innovation and growing the industries of a 21st century economy;
     * long-term tax reform; and
     * the COAG reform and deregulation agenda, where we are working on 27 priority areas to build a seamless national economy.
In our first year in office the Government has been prosecuting each item on this agenda.
And we have been informed along the way by our consultation with business  -  including the positive contributions of the BCA on productivity, on deregulation and infrastructure.
We kick-started the productivity agenda by establishing Infrastructure Australia earlier this year.
In response to the global financial market crisis, the Commonwealth agreed at the October COAG meeting to ask Infrastructure Australia to bring forward an interim report on the National Infrastructure Audit and the Infrastructure Priority List by the end of 2008.
In just eleven months of Government, we have committed to a multi-billion dollar infrastructure investment program, allocating funds for key priorities such as transport, communications, and social infrastructure.
We'll invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
Over time we'll invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport and communication priorities.
And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
Over time, we'll also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, Trade Training Centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
Over time, we'll invest $11 billion in health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we will build the foundations of future prosperity as well as supporting economic activity during a time of global uncertainty.
In recent days there has been conjecture  -  here and internationally  -  about the implications of the global financial crisis for climate change policy.
Some have said that the financial crisis means that the Australian Government should postpone acting on climate change.
The Government does not share that view.
And the Treasury modelling of the costs of acting on climate change  -  which we released this morning  -  does not support this view.
The modelling shows that Australia and the world will continue to grow strongly over the long term  -  and that growth is only slightly trimmed in responding to climate change.  The modelling also shows that robust growth in real household incomes should continue while we reduce the carbon intensity of our economy.
The modelling also shows that action pays dividends.  Those countries that begin structural change earlier will have a head start.
They will have more time to adjust their infrastructure and industrial structure smoothly for a carbon constrained world, avoiding more disruptive change later.
Such countries will be able take full advantage of the emerging growth opportunities.
The International Energy Agency has estimated that to halve global emissions by 2050 will need additional investment globally of US$45 trillion.
The business community has said that they look to the Government for certainty.
Far from assisting industry, deferring climate change policy action would fuel uncertainty in the investment outlook  -  particularly in the energy sector.
It is important to remind ourselves of the original case for action on climate change.
We know from the work of Professor Ross Garnaut that the costs of inaction are high.
Garnaut showed that if we do not address climate change, we face a rapidly increasing negative impact on wages and output.
Taking responsible, co-ordinated action in Australia and globally will insure us against severe and possibly catastrophic consequences for our material wellbeing during this century.
And it will help to avoid damage to Australia's environmental assets.
We also know that there are international risks from not acting responsibly.
We need to be aware of the potential for unilateral and protectionist action, ostensibly in pursuit of climate goals. There are live proposals for border tariffs in a range of major economies.
For that reason, we must set also act responsibly.
In light of global financial instability, it is also worth reiterating some features in the Government's Green Paper proposals for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
We proposed in the Green Paper that businesses can access international carbon credits to meet their obligations under the scheme.  That feature is likely to reduce the cost of the scheme in Australia, given the availability of lower-cost emission reduction opportunities overseas.
We have also committed to allocating a significant share of free permits for those industries which face challenges to their competitiveness during the transition period until a comprehensive international agreement is in place.  The Treasury modelling finds that this proposal significantly eases their transition to a low-carbon economy.
We will continue to progress this important reform in a careful and methodical way, taking into account the needs of households and industries as we do so. 
Our policy response will promote clarity and predictability for industry. 
Only that kind of response will provide a firm foundation for investment and job creation in the future.
The alternative  -  i.e. to keep deferring the decision, as our political opponents have done for years  -  is to continue to promote uncertainty in the investment environment.
The challenge of climate change is no less real today than it was before the financial crisis.  Addressing climate change is part of laying the foundations for long-term economic growth.
While we recognise that climate change, productivity and the global financial architecture are critical and urgent problems, we have to acknowledge that for the most disadvantaged in Australia they may seem remote, academic and of little practical relevance to their daily lives. 
In particular, too many Indigenous Australians face disadvantages arising from the neglect and policy failures of past governments.  We cannot allow their situation to continue unaddressed.
As Greg has just said, yes, we must focus on urgent challenges like the global financial crisis, but we must not lose sight of what's also important in the long-term, like closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Like many of the challenges we face as a nation, Government cannot close the gap alone.
Everyone  -  the corporate world, the non government sector, Indigenous communities  -  has a part to play. 
That's why the BCA's announcement tonight is a positive development.  It tells the country and Indigenous Australians in particular, that the corporate sector is collectively buying into this national challenge.
The Government has outlined its closing the gap priorities:
     * to close the seventeen year gap in life expectancy within a generation;
     * to halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade; 
     * to ensure all Indigenous four years olds in remote communities have access to early childhood education within five years;
     * to halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for Indigenous children within a decade;
     * to halve the gap for Indigenous students in year 12 attainment or equivalent attainment rates by 2020; and
     * to halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a decade.
To harness the unprecedented goodwill following the Apology we are developing a strategy for business action to encourage corporate partnerships  in the following core areas:
Jobs - The basic building block for building personal wealth, establishing financial independence and interacting with the community
Education and training  -  To ensure that individuals are fully equipped for a life of success in learning and employment
Sports, arts and recreation  -  Those everyday community activities that give life meaning, and which most Australians love
Governance and community development  -  Helping organisations and communities to better manage their social and economic development
Economic development  -  to ensure that everyone has the opportunity to share in the prosperity of the nation
I want to recognise the efforts of many of your members who are already doing extraordinary work to help close the gap in Indigenous disadvantage.
For example the National Australia Bank's initiative to expand its not-for-profit business opportunity loans and microenterprise loans program. 
BHP Billiton has, since 1996, participated in Reconciliation Australia's Reconciliation Action Plan program which has seen the company provide education, employment and training to Indigenous Australians as well as involving Indigenous businesses in their supply chain.
The results speak for themselves.
BHP has 10 contracts with Indigenous businesses worth an estimated $350 million and an Indigneous workforce of around 10 per cent in its iron ore operations in West Australia.
Earlier today I launched the Australian Employment Covenant, led by Andrew Forrest, to create 50,000 new Indigenous jobs. 
One of the Covenant's strengths is its focus on industry and private sector employers as the drivers for change  -  but the Government is committed to supporting the Covenant through:
         * coordinating training to the appropriate job standards of the employing industry;
         * ensuring Government services support the take up of AEC jobs by eligible Indigenous job seekers; and
         * facilitating ongoing support for employees.
Both the BCA's announcement tonight and the AEC announcement earlier today, along with the existing work of major corporations like NAB and BHP, are exemplars of the kind of business action the Government wants to encourage.
As another example of businesses working with government to tackle Indigenous disadvantage, we have an array of organisations providing exceptional scholarship programs for Indigenous kids. In July this year Macquarie Bank committed $2.6 million for a further three year's funding for the Higher Expectations Program which offers scholarships for Cape York children to study at our best boarding schools.
Tonight I am delighted to announce the Australian Government will be working with the newly formed Australian Indigenous Education Foundation (AIEF) to improve the educational outcomes of young Indigenous people around Australia.
One of AIEF's key strategies is to provide scholarships for Indigenous secondary school students from rural and remote areas to attend boarding schools in major cities around Australia.
Secondary school options for many Indigenous students, particularly in remote areas, can be limited.  This initiative will provide families with the choice of sending their child to a high-performing secondary school, which will bring with it access to quality learning environments and educational opportunities that might not otherwise be available.
In order to achieve these outcomes, the Government will provide $20 million over three years, starting next financial year, and AIEF has agreed to raise at least this much again in matching funding from business. 
These monies will be invested in an endowment fund, and combined with investment revenues, will provide up to 2,000 six-year scholarships over the next two decades.
These scholarships of up to six years will cover tuition and boarding fees, and any other expenses that families might not be able to meet, such as uniforms and sporting equipment.
AIEF is the product of a strong existing partnership with Australian business.
The Commonwealth Bank and the Tenix Foundation are major foundation investors in AIEF, having also been major supporters of the St Joseph's College Indigenous Fund since its inception several years ago. 
Andrew Penfold from AIEF who is with us tonight will be moving through the audience later to expand that base of support to help achieve the organisation's ambitious target of $20 million to match our investment in the education futures of Indigenous kids.
The Government will continue to act decisively on the challenges we face today and the challenges we face for the future. 
We are acting at home and in cooperation with our partners abroad on the immediate challenge of financial stability.
We are acting ahead of the curve to strengthen the Australian economy in the face of the coming global recession which threatens growth and jobs.
We are acting on the medium term challenge to improve Australia's productivity performance.
We are continuing to respond to the long term challenge of climate change.
And we remain determined to act on the enduring challenge of indigenous disadvantage.
The business sector plays a valuable role in helping Australia to meet these challenges. 
I am confident that together we can overcome these challenges. 
We are a people not given to panic.
We are by instinct a people given to productive action.
To deal with challenges as they arise.
And to chart a strategy through those challenges.
This government is of the same mind.
This government is resolved to take whatever action is necessary in the unchartered waters that lie ahead  -  to see Australia through.


When I think back on how all this began, and I was talking briefly to Andrew as I walked into Kirribilli this morning, I go back to the discussion we had several months ago, at Coolum in Queensland. He had begun talking about this, that is what do we do about employment. And the most basic form of social justice available to any person at any time and in any place: that is the right to a job.
As he spoke, what appealed to me and struck me profoundly was his passion for the enterprise. He then said as a responsible and pragmatic businessman that on when this initiative could be begun, he said in six, or at most nine months time.
My response to him was, I hear you Andrew, let's launch it tomorrow  -  if you are up for it. Which if you know Andrew, is the best way to get him to agree to anything, ‘if you are up for it'. And he was. And that is why we are here.
You know, we are in the midst of a whole lot of bad news at the moment. But this is a good day for Australia. This is a good day for Australia. It is a good day involving good people seeking to do good things for the long term and the very long term.
In part I suppose, the apology to Indigenous people earlier this year in February has helped. The apology to Indigenous people was to set to rights an historical wrong. But it also had a view which said, let us build a bridge to the future. And that bridge was to be one of respect.
We can't begin talking to one another as a wider Australian community, or with anybody for that matter, unless there is respect among and between us.  And that in large measure was what the apology was about.
But having built a bridge of respect, you then move to what is then the next and most essential task: How do you then close the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians? And that is a very practical task. It is a very measurable task. It's a very hands on task.
Let me read to you what closing the gap actually means. To close the gap, and this is what we have committed to as a Government, to close the gap in life expectancy within a generation. And that life expectancy gap now is 17 years.
To halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade. To ensure that all indigenous four year olds in remote communities have access to early childhood education within five years.
To halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for indigenous children within a decade. To halve the gap for Indigenous students in year 12 attaining an equivalent attainment rate by 2020 of year 12 graduation.
And most critically, to halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians within a decade.
These are known in the trade as ‘measurables'. These are known as outputs. These are known as things that you put in your annual report and you are measured against. Which is why when Andrew said to me, greeting me this morning as I arrived, ‘Prime Minister this is courageous'.
It's at that point that you have a Sir Humphrey Appleby moment because when someone says to you that you are providing courageous leadership you become instantaneously nervous. But you know something, I am really glad we have done it. I am really glad we have actually stepped across the line here.
So from Apology to closing the gap, to the future. And what are these practical steps to make that mission statement a possibility? You know something, there is something quite deep that we are celebrating here today.
I think we are celebrating also the death of ideology on this question, the absolute death of ideology. Because what we have recognised - and I say this for our political opponents as well- is this is no longer a question about can Government fix all these problems. As I say resolutely on behalf of the Government, Government cannot fix all these problems. We cannot. Let's just be honest about it, be upfront about it, tell the truth about it.
Because so many of the drivers here, so many of the core factors, lie way beyond the possibilities of Government. That is not to say that Government absolves itself of responsibility at all. Ours is to provide the framework, ours is to provide funding and resources to make other initiatives possible.
And we will do that and we will do it in spades. But you know something, it doesn't fix the problem. And the death of ideology lies in the fact that we are all here together as Australians. Indigenous, non Indigenous, all sides of politics, about one objective. That's how to fix this thing.
Whether it's through the work being done here on employment or more broadly, as I look across the community, the extraordinary work that has been done by some of our education institutions: the great boarding school revolution that is under way at the moment, as more and more of our private boarding schools are opening their doors to Indigenous kids around the country. That's great, that's fantastic. That's part of Government saying, ‘hey, you know something, this requires a much broader effort'.
When I look at outfits in Perth like the Clontarf Academy and what they're doing with sport and beyond sport in providing apprenticeship opportunities for young Indigenous people from across WA and across the Territory and now beyond. The emerging work in the Australian Rugby League and others.
This is all part of also recognising, you know, this is a bigger national effort.
And then we come to jobs. And we come to you as the leaders of Australian industry.
As Prime Minister of the country I just have one thing to say to you today, and that's thank you. Because you could have not come.  It's a tough time. Everyone's got a lot of other stuff on their plate. I understand that. I understand that more than many in terms of what's going on out there.
But you know, the great thing about this country is that we don't suspend the nation when we're dealing with a current challenge or crisis. The business of the nation goes on. And part of the business of the nation is to fix and to set right this great historical wrong.
And so this Australian Employment Covenant only works when you who provide jobs and provide jobs in difficult economic circumstances are willing to become partners with us and Andrew's great initiative.
And we'll succeed or fail based on you working with us and critically us working effectively with you.
One of the great hazards of government and bureaucracy is that it can be this great provider-driven monolith which sort of is an extension of some Soviet Union instrument of central planning, and just chugs along irrespective of what's actually happening out there. There's been a lot of essays written on this.
It also applies to training. And that is you have these great chugging monolithes out there providing blocks of training for this, that and the other, often, not always, often, oblivious to what actually is being demanded by businesses in concrete circumstances. That's our part of this covenant. That's going to be tough. Because you are going to say, ‘we're prepared to take on 100, 300, 500 indigenous people in employment, but we need the following skill-sets in the following locations delivered flexibly across this time frame.
And the old machinery of government is going to go “argh, how are we going to do that?”. And that's Brendan's responsibility. That's called the public delivery of the hospital pass. No, it's our responsibility.
But, this is hard. But we are determined to do it and to make it work. Because if these two things work together, your preparedness despite the circumstances you now confront to offer a job and the guarantee of a job, and our ability to work with you flexibly, creatively, and over time, in the specific training that you need to make that person job-ready or training-ready. Then, that's our part of the deal.
You know, when Noel spoke before, and I'm glad you stopped when you did stop about our earlier experiences working together a long, long, long time ago. Neither of us have changed since then. He used a very interesting phrase. And he used it repeatedly in his remarks just before. He described this as an act of faith. He said it again, an act of faith, and as an extension of I presume early-Lutheran theology, then referred the need to take a leap of faith. He went to a Lutheran college so I assume that is the case. And you know, he's dead right. Because faith is about something that you don't have concrete evidence for right now. It's actually embarking into the unknown and the partly unseen, but with a clear mission statement about what you want to do.
And there are two ways in which you can do these sort of things. You can sort of hang back and wait till all the Ts are crossed and the Is are dotted and all the facts and figures are certain, and probably wait another decade and nothing will happen, because it is an uncertain business, or, alternatively, you can gather together a group of good women and good men from across the country, people in business, people in Government and people beyond, set a mission statement for us all and then embark upon the journey. And that's what we're doing.
And this is going to be tough, because when it comes to delivering the measurables, not just of this program but more broadly of what we described before as closing the gap, others will hold up a sign at some stage in saying that you've only got two thirds of the way there, you've only got one third of the way there.
Okay, I accept all those criticisms in advance, if someone could record that for the permanent political record. But you know, I'd much rather in two years time, in four years time, be 20 per cent along the way, 30 per cent along the way, or 40 per cent along the way, or better, rather than having one rolling national workshop of national integrated hand-wringing about what we should do. I think we're past that.
Rupert's right. Right now there is I think an unprecedented mood in the nation to fix this despite our difficulties. And our challenge is to seize the day. And I thank you for seizing the day with me.
To conclude then, for you who lead us in industry and in business, I thank you from the bottom of my heart because you're critical to this.
To Jenny and to Brendan, as ministers, I thank them because this has been a very substantial piece of work.
To our Aboriginal leaders, to Noel, to Warren who is here as well, and other Aboriginal leaders, thank-you because this will only work as a three way partnership. It will only work as a three way partnership.
And so with those remarks, it is in this act of faith that I officially launch at Kirribilli the Australian Employment Covenant.


PRICE: Good morning, how much trouble are we really in?
PM: Real challenges lie ahead. We intend to deal with each of them as we have so far. That means for example, on basic things like the bank guarantees for all the mums and dads out there, knowing that their deposits in banks, building societies and credit unions are safe and guaranteed.
And similarly other actions that we have taken to provide stimulus to the economy and to jobs. And that is the $10.4 billion package we announced recently which helps pensioners, which helps families and which supports first home buyers.
PRICE: I want to talk to you about that in a moment and about whether that funding might have been more closely targeted, but first can I just ask you, the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank, have you seen his comments this morning, Ric Battellino, who says we can avoid a recession. Do you agree with him?
PM: I certainly agree with what the Deputy Governor has said because this is the core challenge of the government to do whatever is necessary to support positive economic growth. I think the other thing to say though Steve in levelling with people is this will be tough, very tough because most other developed economies around the world are either in recession or heading there right now.
And we are part of a global economy. That underpins the reason for what the Reserve Bank did recently in bringing down interest rates by one per cent and that underpins the reason why the Government two weeks ago introduced this $10.4 billion stimulus package.
PRICE: He is also confident housing prices won't plunge. You move around the country more than anybody, is that what you feel?
PM: Look it is a different picture, Steve, wherever you go in the country. But we wanted to provide a buffer for the housing industry as well and that is why we've doubled the first home owners grant for first home buyers and tripled it to $21,000 for those who are buying their first home as a new home. Because we believe it is important to provide that extra shot in the arm to the housing sector.
It is important for overall growth in the economy, not just building the houses but the things that go in houses and on top of that it is also important for first home buyers trying to realise the Australian dream.
PRICE: Your stimulus package, the theory is that the money injected back into people's pockets will trickle down through the economy. Is there any proof that that will actually work? I mean are you confident for example that a family on Tax Benefit A that will get $1000 for each child might not waste that money?
PM: Well Steve at the end of the day I can't predict what each individual consumer is going to do with their money. I mean again let's just be frank about what you can know and what you don't know.
But what we are confident of is that if you are putting the equivalent of about $10 billion into people's pockets - pensioners, carers, those who are on veterans pensions as well, together with families on low and middle incomes with kids - we are confident that a fair whack of that will be used to pay the bills and to do other things.
PRICE: Well you can't preach but you would hope that that money doesn't just go on Christmas gifts or at the bottle shop or you know, into a poker machine.
PM: Look you are right Steve, I can't preach what people do with their individual consumption.
I think working families and pensioners and carers from my overwhelming experience spend their money wisely. And at a time when you are faced with a global financial crisis which poses a real threat to jobs, and a real threat to growth in the future, having met with the leaders of business in Sydney last night, at the Business Council of Australia annual dinner, I think this is one of those times when the entire nation will try very hard to pull together.
Business leaders doing their bit, consumers doing their bit, and I see evidence of that in various parts of Sydney and the sort of reports I have seen in the Sydney Daily Telegraph for example and beyond that it is important for Government to do its bit as well.
But you know something? It is not going to be easy, it's not just going to be one set of decisions. We intend to take a calm, measured, methodical approach to this and as I have said before whatever further action is necessary for the economy to help support positive growth and jobs and to maintain the stability of our banking and financial system. Those decisions the Government is prepared to take.
PRICE: Speaking of business you spent time yesterday with two of our leading businessmen - Rupert Murdoch and Andrew Fortescue, what are they telling you about China?
PM: Yesterday we talked only in part about China because Mr Murdoch and Mr Forrest together with -
PRICE: I should have said Andrew Forrest of course, not Andrew Fortescue. Andrew Forrest of Fortescue mines.
PM: You're absolutely right, his company's name is Fortescue. Don't worry mate, I regularly do this. We had about 100 or so leaders of industry to support the Australian Employment Covenant to provide jobs for Aboriginal people, real jobs, real businesses, supported by tailored Government training programs.
But on your question about China, it's clear that there is evidence of some slowdown in the Chinese economy and that will affect us as well and again that's one of the international challenges we face. But at the same time, and based on my own discussions with Chinese leaders in recent weeks, you begin to see evidence also of the Chinese providing stimulus to their own economy.
In the last few weeks we have seen two decisions by the Chinese to reduce their own interest rates. That's important and I believe we are going to see further action from the Chinese on what we would describe in this country as fiscal policy to add to growth in that economy. They need to do that domestically for themselves to continue to generate jobs and what they do domestically is important for the rest of us because it is such a huge market for the goods and services of the world.
PRICE: Mr Murdoch's Daily Telegraph today, I am not sure if you have seen it yet, calls on your Government to slash small business taxes. Do you agree that small business is paying too high a burden?
PM: The first thing I would say about small business is that they are the cornerstone of the Australian economy. Absolute fundamental in terms of jobs and in terms of keeping the economy ticking over.
Secondly on broad tax reform one of the reasons we established in the Henry review of taxation in the last Budget, a comprehensive review of all taxes including those affecting small businesses, is to make sure that we have a comprehensive tax reform agenda for the future. That includes business tax and those taxes which affect small business.
But that has got to be done systematically. The reason I say that is that every element of business tax and for that matter personal tax is invariably connected to something else. Therefore you have got to deal with it as a job lot.
PRICE: But you are responsive to cleaning up some of the taxes that we find ourselves burdened with, are you?
PM: Exactly. We believe that the taxation system now, particularly as it affects small business in complexity and detail, is just right over the top. That's one of the outcomes of the 2020 Summit that we had in March was the business community said to us loud and clear there - hey look there are two things you can do for business in the future, one is comprehensively review the absurd complexity of the Australian tax system as it affects business and secondly make sure that we appeal as much as possible to international tax competitiveness.
The other thing they asked for us is in the 21st Century Australian economy, we need to have a seamless national economy rather than different rules and regulations for small and medium businesses in six states and two territories. That's what we're working on. We've got 27 areas now of business regulation under review by the Council of Australian Governments with a view to realising that objective. A seamless national economy, a seamless better business regulation, so the business can go on out there without the government getting unnecessarily in its hair.
PRICE: Two of your predecessors are not helping you much today. I notice Paul Keating criticising the way we've embraced Gallipoli, and Gough Whitlam saying wait until the Queen dies before a referendum on the Republic. Is Paul Keating right on Gallipoli?
PM: I haven't seen what Paul has said, but on the question of Gallipoli, can I say, for me it is absolutely fundamental to the Australian national identity.
I've just finished reading, by the way, Andrew Fisher's biography, the Labor Prime Minister at the time of Gallipoli. This was such a searing national experience at the time and thousands upon thousands upon thousands of brave Australians lost their lives. That's part of our national consciousness, it's part of our national psyche, it's part of our national identity. And I, for one, as Prime Minister of the country, am absolutely proud of it. 
PRICE: Well, he said the motives of Australians visiting Gallipoli were misguided. He said he'd never visited Gallipoli and never would. He says without seeking to simplify the bonds of the empire and the implicit sense of obligation or to diminish the bravery of our men, we still go on as though the nation was born again or redeemed there. So you would disagree with those comments?
PM: Yeah, I think Paul is completely wrong on that. Completely and utterly absolutely 100 per cent wrong.
The bottom line is our men and women in uniform, whether it's on the shores of Gallipoli or the trenches of the western front, on the jungle track of Kokoda, at Milne Bay, or at Buna or at Gona, and in other theatres of war right through to our troops today in Afghanistan and those still serving in parts of Iraq, each of them does this nation, each of them causes us enormous pride. And the reason is they are engaged in ultimately a selfless act  -  putting their lives on the line for the rest of us.
We may quibble as politicians and as the political community about some of the decisions which led to particular military engagements. But that's for politicians and that's for historians.
The sheer naked act of courage of Australian men and women in uniform, putting their lives on the line on behalf of all of us, that is core to the shaping of the Australian national identity for more than 100 years.
And certainly that's my view, and I'm proud of each and every one of them, including those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice  -  the 100,000 who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in 100 years of our federated history.
PRICE: I'm sure all Australians will be pleased to hear you say that. Just finally, do you think, or will you be told me the Indonesian Government in advance of the execution of the Bali bombers?
PM: I don't know the answer to that, Steve, is my honest response. And I haven't seen any communication from the Foreign Minister or others on that. And that'll be a decision I presume will be taken independently by the Indonesians.
PRICE: Appreciate your time. Thanks very much.
PM: Thanks, Steve.


CURTIS: Prime Minister, welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning Lyndal.
CURTIS: Does the Treasury modelling show that far from having a big impact on the economy, Australia could afford to cut emissions harder without doing significant damage?
PM: Well the Treasury modelling examined four particular scenarios for the future with different rates of a carbon price. And that is important for our evaluation in terms of what model or what approach that we hit upon for the future and that will be determined when the Government produces its White Paper later in the year.
CURTIS: But they all show a relatively small impact on economic growth, don't they?
PM: That's correct. I mean if you look at the modelling, its overall impact in terms of the debate is as follows. The first is that under the four scenarios which are examined, we have growth in the economy continuing, growth in each case only reducing slightly and furthermore that with the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the overall economic logic is the earlier you begin to act the more economically advantageous it is because you are not in the business of having to act sharply, dramatically and drastically in the future.
CURTIS: There will be a bigger impact on some selected industries like aluminium, coal and coal fired power stations. Do those industries as we know them now have a use-by date?
PM: Of course not. Our attitude is this. When you introduce a system, a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the objective of which is to bring about a more carbon friendly world, more carbon friendly Australia in the context of a more carbon constrained world and a more carbon constrained Australia, obviously there are going to be adjustment mechanisms which are necessary, we understand that.
That's why in the Government's Green Paper we outlined how we would do that with what is called energy-intensive trade-exposed industries such as those you just listed, but also other strongly affected industries such as the electricity generation sector including coal fired generation.
What we have proposed in the Green Paper is a series of adjustments for those industry sectors and they are still the subject of discussion and negotiation between the Government through the Climate Change Minister and others and the industry.
CURTIS: Is there a chance you will have to increase the amount of money you spend on adjustment and help for those who will be hardest hit by the emissions trading scheme such as lower income earners and displaced workers because they will also be dealing with the effects of the financial crisis?
PM: Well let's take it in order. Firstly for households and the impact on them, the Green Paper outlined how we would deal with low and middle income households in ensuring that they don't cop a hit in terms of their energy prices which is not compensated for through the family payments or the transfer payments system. That's the first principle.
The second is when you come to other industry sectors like we were just discussing before, of course we are into deep and detailed negotiations with those industry sectors about the form of adjustment which will be necessary in their cases. And we will do that entirely mindful of the submissions they have made, at the same time mindful of the fact that we have got to move to a lower carbon Australia and a lower carbon world.
And we will get this balance right. What the modelling demonstrates is that we can achieve this while still generating growth in the economy, with growth only being brought back very slightly as a consequence of the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, but most importantly the finding that the earlier that you act in transitioning to this type of economy the more economically efficient it is as well.
You don't want to get to a stage in 10, 15, 20 years time where suddenly you have got to make a massive transformation. Because the other international reality we face is the emergence of the debate in other parts of the world about environmentally punitive tariffs against countries and economies which refuse to act on climate change.
CURTIS: Given those debates are going on and given economies are also dealing with the Global Financial Crisis, what are the chances of getting international agreement on climate change that everyone can sign up to?
PM: Well I have been discussing this with Penny Wong, the Minister responsible for our international negotiations as well, and she of course has just returned from meetings in Poland which are beginning to prepare for the Poznan meeting in December which is the big stepping point to the Copenhagen meeting a year later.
I think it is fair to say in my discussions with Penny that these international negotiations are going to be tough, very tough indeed. But there is one big outstanding factor here and that is the attitude which will be taken by the incoming administration of the United States.
Because whether the Republicans win or whether the Democrats win, both candidates are committed to making significant cuts in American carbon pollution and as a result that will affect significantly the international climate of negotiations. But I am not going to mislead your listeners by saying this is going to be some walk in the park, it's not.
CURTIS: You talked about last night the building consensus for global action to address the economic slowdown and that part of that should be further coordinated interest rate cuts. Should Australia be part of that and can we afford another big interest rate cut at a time as the Reserve Bank deputy Governor says we are still dealing with an inflation problem?
PM: In the case of the Australian Reserve Bank, as I have said many times before, both as the leader of the Opposition and now as Prime Minister, the Reserve Bank is independent in making any decisions on Australian monetary policy settings. What the Reserve Bank may or may not do in consultation with its international partner banks, other central banks around the world, is a matter for it.
What I did say last night was that there is an emerging global consensus that concerted macro economic action, that is by the relevant agencies responsible for monetary policy, that's interest rate settings around the world and through Budget action or fiscal action is in the long term and in the immediate term necessary because we believe in Australia that the impact of this global financial crisis has been felt not just in financial markets, not just in growth, not just in credit markets, not just in stock markets but it now poses a real threat to jobs and growth in the real economy in Australia and around the world.
And to assist that, governments need to act not just unilaterally, governments need to act as far as possible together in order to provide coordinated global stimulus to growth because we are all in this together.
CURTIS: The polls in the United States point to a win by Barack Obama in the Presidential election and polls in other parts of the world seem to favour Senator Obama. Could a victory by him give the world a shot of confidence that it badly needs right now?
PM: Well the decision by the voters of America is to be done privately and independently by them in their great American democracy. So I comment even less on polls in overseas countries than I do on polls within the Australian democracy.
Australia will be well served by the victory of either candidate because both of these individuals, Senator McCain and Senator Obama, are first class candidates, they are positively disposed towards Australia and I believe are committed to coordinated international action, as in fact has President Bush been in his decision to convene the G20 meeting of heads of government in Washington soon.
CURTIS: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Good to be on the program.


PM: In the midst of a global financial crisis we are dealing with three big sets of challenges. One is taking whatever action is necessary to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system. That requires national action and coordinated international action of the type that the Government announced for this double guarantee for the banks.
Secondly the Government also has to be mindful of the implications of the global financial crisis on the real economy and jobs. That's why the Government announced not long ago a $10.4 billion economic security strategy for the future to provide much-needed fiscal stimulus for the Australian economy when our growth and our jobs are under threat, direct threat from the global financial crisis.
And the third is this, the third challenge for the future is to maintain the program of reform for the Australian economy long term. And that means productivity reform and that means building long term productivity growth and that means investing in long term drivers of productivity growth and that means the education revolution. And that's what we are here to talk about today.
That's why we are here in this school community in Brisbane and that's why I have made the remarks I have when I opened this classroom block here at Bulimba State School.
Mr Murdoch has made some comments today about education. Can I say this - that he is right. For a 21st century economy Australia needs a 21st century education system. It means Australia must have an education revolution. And what we invest in our pre-schools, what we invest in our schools, in our high schools, in our TAFEs and in our universities and the quality of that investment including the quality of teaching - unless we get this right we will fall behind the rest of the world long term. So Mr Murdoch's right. A 21st century economy demands a 21st century education system.
An education revolution is our response, investing in the quantity of money that we put in to the education system, the quality of that investment, but also making sure that we are pulling the States and Territories together in such common projects as a single national curriculum.
That's what Australia needs for the future together with a high speed broadband revolution, which will turbocharge education in this country in the 21st century. That is core business for us as a Government, core business together with our responsibility for the general economy and supporting growth and jobs in what will be a difficult, tough and ugly period ahead, and also taking whatever action is necessary to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if the Reserve Bank cuts rates and people want to blow it all on a punt, which Presidential candidate should they whack it on?
PM: The great American democracy will sort that out within a day or two and both these candidates, Senator Obama and Senator McCain, are fine Americans, they are fine individuals, I have had conversations with both of them and Australia's interests will be well served by the election of either.
JOURNALIST: The CFMEU have been critical of Government today saying they are not doing enough to protect jobs and they have called for a jobs summit, how do you respond?
PM: Well, the $10.4 billion economic security strategy was about supporting growth and jobs into the future. Part 2 of that economic security strategy is our bring-forward of our national infrastructure plan, our Building Australia plan, for December. These are two concrete steps, actions by Government, substantial actions by Government to underpin growth and jobs into the future.
Growth in this economy and jobs are under direct threat from the global financial crisis and as I have said before, the Government stands ready to take whatever other decisions are necessary to continue to support growth and jobs in the future.
It will be tough, it will be difficult, it will be hard, it will be ugly, particularly when you look at the unfolding economic data from around the world and the beginning of a global economic recession.
JOURNALIST: Is that a no to a jobs summit though?
PM: I said the Government remains prepared to take whatever action is necessary in the future and action of the type that I have already described that the Government has already taken with the economic security strategy, action of the type that I have described with the decisions that we will take and begin to take in December on infrastructure, infrastructure investment and actions like that are much more important than having summits talking about actions.
JOURNALIST: As a Brizzie boy would you give some thought to helping restore City Hall?
PM: As a four-year-old I remember being taken up by my mum to the clock tower in the City Hall and surveying from its great heights the city looming beneath it. It's part and parcel of Brizzie, it's part and parcel of Queensland.
I am disturbed by these reports about the state of the building. I have had a discussion briefly on this with the Lord Mayor quite some time ago when he mentioned it in passing.
What I also would say is that the Infrastructure Minister Anthony Albanese has already indicated that we will be establishing a community infrastructure fund in the future. The Brisbane City Council should make submissions to that. This is a council facility, we will want to be helpful but we need to see a submission first.
But for Brisbane and Queensland the City Hall is part of us and we are prepared to play our part but we need to see a detailed submission first.
JOURNALIST: Just back to US Politics, did George Bush really say what is the G20?
PM: The President of the United States has consistently emphasised the importance of the G20 in its response to the global financial crisis. Secondly the purpose of my call to the President of the United States was specifically to discuss the role of the G20 in responding to the global financial crisis and that was the explicit purpose of the call and the President did not make the remarks that have been attributed to him in the article in question.
JOURNALIST:Do you know where that leak came from...
PM: Sorry...
JOURNALIST: ... do you know where that leak came from was it from...
PM: No, sorry...
JOURNALIST: ... you don't know or it wasn't from your office?
PM:... as I said before the President has been clear cut about this, absolutely clear cut and his commitment to the G20 and the role it plays in responding to the global financial crisis. Secondly the purpose of my call was explicitly to discuss the role of the G20 in dealing with the global financial crisis, and thirdly the President did not make those remarks. And furthermore the spokesman from my office underlined that fact in subsequent statements once that particular article was produced.
Let me just add one point, I notice Mr Turnbull jumping up and down about alliance politics. The Liberal party only last year said that the election of Barack Obama would be a victory for Al Qaeda. The Liberal party this year has continued its attacks on Senator Obama through statements by two Liberal party front benchers.
My call on Mr Turnbull and the Liberal party is to apologise to the Democrats and to apologise to Senator Obama for those remarks, for those statements. It is extraordinary that one side of politics could make such extraordinary partisan remarks. I go back to what I said before, Australia and our interests will be well served by the election of either of these individuals, Republican or Democrat, that's a matter for the Americans.
But for the Liberals last year to say that Senator Obama's victory would be a victory for Al Qaeda, that remark has not been repudiated by the current Liberal leadership, in fact this year they have added to those attacks.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clear up that point. Did that leak or was that briefing from your office or elsewhere?
PM: The point about the content of the conversation is as I described. That is, the President in the conversation was absolutely explicit, absolutely explicit, about the role of the G20 in responding to the financial crisis.
On the source of individual stories, you know as well as I do Lane, that there are multiple conversations with multiple people from political offices and elsewhere which lead to the construction of a story.
What I know to be the facts are these.
One, that the President made no such remark.
Secondly, that the purpose of my call to the President was explicitly to discuss the role of the G20 in responding to the financial crisis.
And that thirdly, the President had already been on the record about the significance of the G20 and other institutions in responding to the crisis.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, what happened with the action taken by the previous Howard Government was that you saw the effective undermining of the finances of Australia's universities by the abolition of previous arrangements which basically took a huge funding stream out of the universities. And therefore, an ability for those universities to continue to provide those services. That's the key challenge.
Secondly, the universities have therefore had a gap in their funding.
What have we done to help? First thing we've done to help is this  -  we have in the Budget brought forward a half billion dollar capital works program, on top of normal allocations to universities, to assist them on the way through. But on this one, we also believed it was necessary to give the universities options, an option to impose this charge. And furthermore, with the flexibility attached that they can make HECS type arrangements with students to pay for it.
But can I just make this point, this is a contribution which goes to the universities, not to any individual student union. And it is entirely at the discretion of the university.
JOURNALIST: If the Reserve cuts interest rates tomorrow, would you expect the banks to pass on the full amount given that they're getting a helping hand through the bank deposit guarantee?
PM: The first thing I'd say is that interest rate decisions are the independent preserve of the Reserve Bank  -  first point. The second is that the fact that the government has provided the banks, the commercial banks, with a double-guarantee has made it possible for the banks since then to pass on further interest rate cuts to consumers.
And the third is this, after ten interest rate rises in a row during the period of the Liberal Government, recent interest rate cuts have been welcome relief to working families who are doing it tough at present. 
Our policy, on the question of any future interest rate cut, is we would expect the commercial banks to pass through any official cut in interest rates as rapidly as possible.
JOURNALIST: Who are you backing in the Cup tomorrow?
PM: On the Cup, well, if you have heard from the year 2s here at Bulimba, they've been checking out the location of the local TAB.
I think the Cup is an important event for all of us and my tip for you all is ‘Zipping'.
You might ask why I've chosen ‘Zipping'.
JOURNALIST: Why have you chosen ‘Zipping'?
PM: Why have I chosen ‘Zipping', Lane?
The bookmakers have it at seventh favourite, and that's no particular reason. But, can I say that why have I chosen ‘Zipping', because, it's time to zip.


Opening this centre today symbolises one of the great traits of Australians and that trait is resilience.
Beaconsfield's history is full of great achievements, some setbacks and always the strength of a people, a local people and a local community of always fighting back.
The opening of the Beaconsfield Mine and Heritage Centre today demonstrates that the people of this town are proud of their past and equally optimistic about their future.
And I would like to personally congratulate each and every one of you as members of this community, who have rallied behind this great cause.
Like many towns in Australia, mining was the reason Beaconsfield grew into a regional centre in the 19th century.
More than 130 years ago when gold was discovered here in 1877, miners looked for work as the gold rush on the big island to the north had passed its peak and then they came to Beaconsfield, on the big island in the south.
And Beaconsfield really took off when underground mining began here in 1879. The mine at the time was one of the most advanced in the world. The investors had put up their money because of the richness of the great reef of gold discovered deep underground.
I understand that the Tasmania Reef is still regarded as the best in Australia and possibly the world.
The Hart Shaft, the Main Shaft and the Grubb Shaft that were sunk in the 19th century brought employment and prosperity to this town and to this region.
Beaconsfield became the highest yielding gold mine in Tasmania.
But in 1914 operations ceased.
Despite using state-of-the-art equipment, the flooding in the mine shafts could not be stopped and the mine was abandoned.
It was a blow, a cruel blow to the town. The main industry was shutdown.
And the town felt the impact.
Jobs were lost.
People moved away.
But the town still kept growing.
For more than 70 years Beaconsfield kept going without a mining industry.
In that 70 years there were two world wars.
The great Depression came and went.
Australia continued to grow and develop as did this community here in Beaconsfield.
And then in the 1970s, prospectors realised that there was even more gold in the reef than previously thought.
A combination of more gold and better technology meant that the mine could be re-opened.
Once again, gold mining became the main industry of this town.
The work was, and is as the nation now knows all to well, dangerous work. Difficult and dangerous work. Difficult, hard and dangerous work.
The economic impact of mining on the town was clear  -  just as it had been back in the 19th century.
And once again the ore came out of the ground.
In 2006, the mine was still producing gold.
The gold price was high.
Things were going well in Beaconsfield.
But in April of 2006 the reality of the danger of this business was brought home to us all.
On ANZAC Day there was a collapse in the mine.
Larry Knight tragically lost his life that day.
And Brant and Todd were trapped underground for weeks, their families waited.
For two weeks, the whole nation watched Beaconsfield.
For two weeks the whole nation waited on Beaconsfield.
For two weeks the whole nation prayed for Beaconsfield.
And we all know every detail of the rescue efforts that followed.
For the people of Beaconsfield, for the miners and their families this was more than a story on television.
This was life in their community, life in your community, it was your community.
And the remarkable thing, the great thing, the truly wonderful thing is that this community pulled together.
Everyone threw themselves into the rescue effort.
The miners in the rescue teams doing whatever they could to rescue their mates.
The community coming together to support the families and hold vigils.
The CWA providing meals.
All the emergency workers and volunteers doing what they could to support the rescue teams.
The mine management and the Australian Workers Union, led by Bill Shorten working together in the best Australian way, working together.
It was a true example of what makes this country such a great country.
Because whether it is a bushfire or a flood or a mining tragedy, when we are faced with trials, when we are faced with tragedy, our instinct is to pull together, it is a great Australian trait of character.
Australians  -  particularly those in smaller communities  -  always pull together at times like that.
This was a terrible tragedy that Larry Knight lost his life and let us pause to reflect on his life.
This was a terrible ordeal for Brant, for Todd and their families, an ordeal that they came through.
And this was a terrible time that left Beaconsfield facing new challenges  -  uncertainty about the future of the mine, uncertainty again about the future of the town.
But the town of Beaconsfield has not only survived, it's bounced back.
I acknowledge the decision of the previous Commonwealth Government in providing $8 million to the Beaconsfield Community Trust, this was a good decision. It was a decision which we happily supported and which we happily continue to support.
This fund has in part supported this project that we are here today to celebrate.
You know Beaconsfield has a lot to be proud of in its history.
And the new centre that is being opened today brings that history to life.
At the same time the new centre is also about the future, because gold mining is not the only industry in this town.
Tourism has become a major industry in north-eastern Tasmania.
And the tourists come here to appreciate this wonderful of Australia's natural beauty, they come here to appreciate the local history and they come here to appreciate the fine food and your even finer wine and it's terrific.
This centre will help support this growing tourism industry in this great state of Tasmania.
You know I grew up in a small town a bit like this in rural and regional Queensland - population of 162 was the town a grew up in, called Eumundi.
It was a fantastic place to grow up in, a real sense of local community.
And that is what many of us who have come here, myself for the first time today but many of my friends and colleagues who have been here many times before tell me about this, your community as well.
A community with a history to be proud of. A community that has risen to the challenges that have come its ways and critically overcome those challenges.
And a community, therefore with a great future ahead of it.
And it is this sense of community - and let me say this to the nation at large today  -  it is this sense of community, this real sense of community, a real sense of looking after one another that will help see our nation through the challenging times that lie ahead of us now.
This spirit that we saw alive and we see alive in Beaconsfield.
It is therefore ladies and gentlemen with great pleasure and great pride that I participate today in the opening of the Beaconsfield Mine and Heritage Centre. 


The Rudd Government will invest $148 million to immediately establish new GP training places, allowing 175 additional new doctors to begin training to become GPs over the next two years. 
This will help tackle the nationwide GP shortage, which currently affects six in 10 Australians  -  delivering more GPs, and helping more families to access basic health services.
It is not good enough that with a GP shortage stretching right across the country, potential GPs were being knocked back from training places because of a cap imposed by the previous Liberal Government.
The Rudd Government has acted to fix this, as an immediate down payment on future workforce reform.
With more and more graduate doctors coming out of our universities each year, it is crucial that they are encouraged and able to join disciplines  -  such as general practice  -  where there are shortages.
There will be 75 new general practice training places in 2009 and 100 new places in 2010, bringing the total number of training places to 675 in 2009, and 700 in 2010.
This investment will be of particular benefit to Tasmania which has been allocated five additional training places for 2009 as a result of this initiative. This means that five suitable applicants who missed out on a training place will now be able to be re-considered.
Immediate priority will be given to existing eligible applicants who have applied for a 2009 placement, but have not yet been offered a position.
The most recent Medical Workforce Survey, released last Friday, shows that the overall supply of primary care practitioners fell from 101 to 97 full time equivalents per 100 000 population between 2002 and 2006.
The Rudd Government will ensure that the increasing numbers of medical graduates coming online in the coming years are supported to work in areas where the community needs them most - providing frontline care to those who do not enjoy the same good health outcomes as the rest of Australia.
Doctors training to be GPs on the AGPT program train in general practice settings in rural and urban locations. This investment also provides funding so that trainees can choose to undertake training time in Aboriginal health services. Attractive incentives are offered to those who commit to rural or remote general practice locations.
The Government is also investing an extra $18.4 million in the Remote Vocational Training Scheme (RVTS) for medical practitioners in remote and isolated communities throughout Australia.
This program helps remote communities retain access to their GP because training is structured to allow them to continue to provide general medical services to their communities while accessing distance education and supervision.
The new funding will increase the number of places from 15 to 22 from 2011.
The Rudd Government believes all Australians should be able to get the health care they need, when and where they need it.
This action is an early and important step towards that goal.
The process for applying for the GP training places is available through the Australian General Practice Training program website at www.AGPT.com.au



Democracy is at work here today, it has been at work in the United States of America as well. 
If I could publicly acknowledge and congratulate the election of Senator Obama as the next President of the United States.
The great thing about Senator Obama was so much of his campaign was about hope.
It was about what we can do to change the world, what we can do together to tackle the great challenges the world faces together, the great global challenge of climate change. What we can do as a community of States, as a collection of peoples, as a organisation of States to act together on this great challenge.
And also the other great challenges of our age, including the global financial crisis.
But there is something more I think in Senator Obama's message.
It's so much about the inspiration from this individual himself and that is: this is a person who has come from an extraordinary background in American politics and risen to the highest elected office in that great American democracy.
I think he speaks as an inspiration in terms of his own personal journey in addition to his message of hope to the world.
We wish him well, we wish him god speed.
This is a great challenge he faces for us all.


The great democracy that is the United States of America has once again demonstrated to the world the greatness of the democratic idea at work.
45 Years ago Martin Luther King dreamed of an America where men and women will be judged not on the colour of their skin but on the content of their character.
Today what America has done is turn that dream into a reality.
This is a great testament to the great strengths and maturity of the American democratic process.
Senator Obama's historic win in this election has inspired a nation through his message of hope.
Senator Obama's message of hope is not just for America's future, it is also a message of hope for the world as well. A world which is now in many respects fearful for its future.
The world looks to America for global leadership on the great global challenges of the 21st Century: the global financial crisis, the challenge of climate change, the great challenges and opportunities of the Asia Pacific century - that is the 21st Century - and the continuing challenges of security.
Australia has been a strong and continuing ally of the United States since 1941. Our alliance has prospered in the past under 13 Australian Prime Ministers and under 12 American Presidents, Republican and Democrat, Labor and Liberal.
Our alliance has truly prospered in the past and this alliance will prosper into the future.
Australia looks forward to working in the closest possible way, in the closest possible partnership with an Obama Administration, acting together to deal with the great common global challenges we face as democracies.
I also want to acknowledge the role of Senator McCain, a strong friend of Australia and a strong advocate in the fight against climate change.
In the months ahead Australia looks forward to continuing to work closely with President Bush and his administration on the many immediate challenges we share.
Above all on tackling the global financial crisis where the Presidents continuing leadership remains so important.
I would also congratulate US Ambassador McCallum on his service to the Australia-US relationship, noting Ambassador McCallum's decision to resign from his position as he announced today.
The world has relied on strong American leadership for much of the century that has passed. Given the great challenges we face for the future, the world even more relies on strong American leadership into the future.
Australia looks forward to working closely, in close partnership and in close friendship with an America under this new Obama Administration.
I'll take your questions
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Meet with President Elect Obama (Inaudible)
PM: Well first things first. There is one President of the United States through until the inauguration of the next administration which occurs in January. Therefore I think it would be unrealistic to expect that the 20 heads of Government when they are in Washington for the upcoming meeting would separately meet with President elect Obama.
In the meantime I look forward to the opportunity of speaking with Senator Obama on the phone.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Phone Call to President Elect Obama (Inaudible)
PM: Yes we will be doing that ASAP now that Senator McCain has conceded and Senator Obama has given an extraordinary speech.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well these are early days for an administration that is not fully formed. America has a great challenge on its hands both in Iraq and Afghanistan. As an ally of the United States we will continue to work closely with our American friends and allies to deal with these challenges ahead.
These will be difficult challenges, I fully concede in both of those countries, but we will work closely with Washington on these in the future as we have in the past.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Senator Obama is a good man and he has delivered to the world and to his country a very good message of hope. And this is a message of hope over fear and as I said before the world at present is in part fearful for its future.
Hence why I say Senator Obama's message of hope is not just for America, it's for the world.
This is, I believe, a great day for the American democracy. And let us celebrate this day with our friends in America.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: How the Liberals commented on the prospect of an Obama win is a matter for the Liberals now to explain to the Australian people and to make proper account of to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: (inaudible) US Administration is between election day and inauguration day is a period in which Cabinet Secretaries are selected and then there is a period of confirmation before the Senate. This will take some time.
But fortunately I've had the chance of having two good conversations with Senator Obama so far. As I said before, I believe him to be a good man. A good man who also has the interests of the world at heart.
And therefore, we will be looking for early opportunities to not just congratulate him on what is an extraordinary personal triumph for himself, but also to begin to flesh out the work we wish to do as two democratically elected governments for the future. And I'm confident we can do so.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today opened the $1.7 million Beaconsfield Mine and Heritage Centre.
The Centre has been redeveloped using $1.28 million from the Australian Government Beaconsfield Community Fund and is a significant addition to Tasmania's major tourism industry.
The $8.3 million fund was established following the April 2006 mine collapse that resulted in the tragic death of Larry Knight and saw the nation hold its breath for two weeks while Brant Webb and Todd Russell were trapped.
Mr Rudd said the opening of the redeveloped and expanded Centre is a testament to the Beaconsfield Community following the mine collapse.
“This Centre shows that Beaconsfield is proud of its history and optimistic about its future.
“Opening this Centre today symbolises one of the great traits of Australians  -  resilience.
“Beaconsfield's history is full of great achievements, some setbacks, and always the strength of the people.
“I am pleased that the Australian Government has been able to help through supporting this important redevelopment.”
The aim of the Beaconsfield Mine and Heritage Centre project is to improve and upgrade the visitor experience at the Heritage Centre.
The project included an upgrade to museum signage and interpretation materials as well as the construction of new museum buildings. AusIndustry funds also went toward the development and installation of the Mine Rescue Display. In total, 17 projects have received funding under the Beaconsfield Community Fund. 


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today opened the Sydney Ozanam Learning Centre, a facility that will provide new opportunities for homeless people.
The St Vincent de Paul Society facility will enable homeless people, and people at risk of homelessness, to participate in educational and recreational activities.
This represents a realisation that the time for providing just a hot meal and a bed is well and truly over. We need to tackle the underlying causes of homelessness.
Education is critical for people to begin participating again  -  in their community and in the economy.
People who are homeless will only become more excluded if they do not have access to opportunities to learn.
The opening of Ozanam marks a significant new direction for the Society's Matthew Talbot Homeless Services, and one which runs in parallel to the Rudd Government's direction on homelessness.
Recently released Census data from the ABS shows that despite our efforts, the numbers of homeless Australians has increased.
Every night there are now 105,000 people in Australia are homeless. This is an increase of 5,000 from Census night 2001.
That is why reducing homelessness is a major priority for the Rudd Government.
The Government's first White Paper will set the agenda for reducing homelessness over the next decade.
The White Paper will include a national action plan to reduce homelessness.
It will be bold and ambitious, setting the agenda for reducing homelessness over the next decade to 2020.
We have had consultations on the White Paper and we are discussing the White Paper with the States and Territories  -  through COAG.
The White Paper is a once in a generation opportunity to drastically reduce the unacceptable rates of homelessness in Australia.
The Rudd Government congratulates the St Vincent De Paul Society on this significant achievement today.


On the 13th of November in 1972 at the Blacktown Civic Centre, Gough Whitlam, having paused momentarily to touch Graham Freudenberg on the shoulder, walked on to the stage and uttered the words ‘Men and Women of Australia'.
These are words that continue to stir the Australian soul. They continue to lift our spirit, they continue to spur us to action because within the cadence of these few words and of the poetry and the prose that followed, we were animated towards hope.
Hope that the Australian political project could be something more than the tawdry accretion of greed and self interest.
Every Australian of a certain age and certainly everyone here remembers the optimism and the hope that that moment generated. As well as the suspense which then ensued. Could our hopes and our dreams of a better world, of a fairer world, of a more prosperous world for all and not just for some, be made into a reality?
Or was it instead all cruel illusion as the conservatives and their singularly dismal political project would always have us believe. The answer is as follows: that the prospect of measurable human progress, of social progress, of economic progress, of political progress does lie within our political reach.
It does lie within our political power so long as our political resolve remains firm. For were it not so, and were the conservatives instead right for the century or more history now of our federation, then why is it that we have things called an aged pension? Why is it that we have things called workers compensation?
Why is it that we have things called the Racial Discrimination Act? Why is it that we have universal education? Why is it that we have universal health insurance? For if the conservatives were right and this was all a matter of cruel illusion, none of these things would have changed. And they have and they have been achieved through the agency of progressive politics.
You see, in the history of this nation, it has invariably fallen to us to be the builders and to them to be the ones that tear down. We seek to unite, they seek to divide. We seek to include, they often seek to exclude.
Our position, our project, our prospect is a project of positive hope; theirs often constructed on the basis of negative fear.
There was an exchange recently, unreported and unremarked on in the House of Representatives, where in what I thought was light-hearted banter with a colleague of mine on the other side of the House, I asked this question, half rhetorically, half seriously, ‘What is it that unites the Liberal Party?'
The answer from the manager of opposition business was ‘what unites the Liberal party is our hatred of the Labor party'.
Therein lies more than a kernel of truth. Ours is a positive project; theirs, the reverse. And on days such as this, it is important to reflect on that core continuing kernel of truth which underpins so much of the divide in Australian politics this last century. And that of course brings us back to Whitlam.
It brings us back to the period in which Whitlam was in power - cut short, those two years and 11 months of Government ushered in a period of progressive change that despite their desperation and determination to do so, the conservatives more than 35 years later have never managed to demolish.
I want you to think of those achievements for just a moment. The transformation of education in Australia, of which I am one beneficiary. I am the product of a Whitlam education. Were it not for Whitlam's education reforms, I doubt that I would have ever darkened the doors of a university. For which Gough, I thank you.
The creation of a national health insurance scheme. The focus on Indigenous Australians. The focus on urban development and the future of our cities. And the change that caught my attention as an earnest teenager in the backblocks of Queensland, the recognition of China and the great helmsman's wider engagement of Asia.
If you reflect on each of those achievements and their impact over time, what is clear about all of them was that EG Whitlam was ahead of his time, well ahead of his time. Or, to use the word of our time, ahead of the curve, well ahead of the curve.
Gough Whitlam woke Australians from a long, long slumber and doze that were the Menzies period. And Gough Whitlam fulfils so much of the promise he set out in that great speech at his campaign launch in November of 1972.
But just here I am getting a little ahead of myself because Gough's speech and the program it set out is the point at which Jenny Hocking's momentous new biography ends, and this in fact is the book's great strength.
It lets us see who Gough Whitlam the person was before he became Gough Whitlam the politician. And how this progressive agenda was in fact formed. We learn a lot along the way through the pages of this biography. And could I say it is an elegantly written and elegantly crafted biography.
Some of what we discover is surprising, like the fact that Gough is a member of that peculiar elite segment of Australian society, the convict aristocracy - his great grandfather having been jailed for forgery. A more elevated form of the felony of the petty theft that my own convict forebears were sent down for. But then again, the Whitlams were always a cut above the rest.
And the fact that he comes from a long line of what he himself is affectionately referred to from time to time as ‘Bible-bashing bastards'. Sin and salvation, those hardy perennials of the universal human story, and of the story of this land, Australia.
Some of the book's revelations of course, are less surprising. Like the story of how his mother, finding her toddler Gough sobbing in her room, asking him what was the matter, only to be told that he'd just learned that Persephone, daughter of Zeus, wife of Hades and queen of the underworld, had been taken away from her parents - and that made him very sad.
You might say in a normal Australian household, toddlers may become saddened by a perhaps the loss of a ball, or someone stole my blocks. Only a toddler like Gough could have been saddened by the unfortunate twists of Greek mythology. But therein lies the man.
And then there's the revelation that while the baby Gough was slow to speak, when he did he not only skipped baby talk but spoke in complete sentences, presumably in the active voice, with a subject, an object, a verb and where appropriate, Latin declensions. And remarkably, all this occurring before Graham Freudenberg was even born! And the many linguistic adornments that Graham would later provide, to our own, our very own Pericles.
Imagine had Gough, with his adoration of classical languages, had been born a Catholic. A career in the Roman Curia would have been almost inevitable. Culminating at least in the red cap if not going all the way to the white.
That will get me into strife too.
As this precocious youth became a man, Jenny's book chronicles how his world outlook was also formed. This is where this biography comes into its own. It points out the importance of growing up in Canberra and the connections of his father, the Commonwealth solicitor-general, to his belief in potentialities of National Government and what National Government could do in the nation's interest.
And the profound influence of his war service. One day would find him navigating his Ventura bomber through the Japanese flak over Timor and the next would find him agitating with his squadron leader for support for the 1944 war powers referendum, resolving that the war when it ended must usher in a better world.
These are genuine renaissance qualities, here in the Antipodes, the art of war and the even more taxing art of constructing the peace. Jenny Hockings' book describes in detail how those war time experiences led Gough to the great political theme that became known as Whitlamism. His associations with the people of Gove and Cooktown had contributed to the development of his understanding of the needs of indigenous Australians. His contact with New Guinea, Indonesia and the Philippines which gave him his first insights into the need to put the fading colonial empires in our region out of their misery once and for all. And his deep admiration for the Curtin Government and its efforts to extend Commonwealth powers for the task of post war reconstruction which made him a lifelong constitutional reformer.
Most of all, beyond all these particular projects, we get a sense of how that war time experience gave him courage, audacity and determination. Crash through or crash, these are qualities of character and those qualities of character have served this leader well.
When you have flown through anti aircraft fire scanning the skies anxiously for marauding Zeroes and guided your bullet-riddled plane back to the tiny remote airstrip on only one engine, taking on the sectarian culture of Arthur Calwell, Eddie Ward and the Victorian Trade Union Defence Committee look like a walk in the grass. Probably these things did not hold many terrors for E G Whitlam.
So Gough took on the big fights within our party, fights which have been forgotten by many but which are in the record. Big fights over the US alliance, State aid for schools, the White Australia policy and in each of these fights, in each of these great policy debates Gough Whitlam prevailed.
The end product of this journey through war and peace was the fashioning of a political style and a policy program characterised by unbounded optimism, unbounded passion for the progressive political project and an absolute fearlessness in assaulting the citadels of conservative political power.
As he said: “Nostalgia should beset conservatives, not socialists.” Or put differently the central organising principle of our political project, the progressive political project, should always be the future not the past.
Gough Whitlam's ideas were based not on left or right but on the essential ideas of progress, a progress based on a deep intellectual immersion in the Labor reformist tradition. He took the kernel of what wartime Labor stood for under Curtin and Chifley, social equality and national progress, and fashioned a program for a new Australia for the half century that followed the war.
Jim Cairns once asked about Gough: “Whose party is it; his or ours?”
The answer of course is that following his conflict with the faceless men it became his party and through that once again it became our party rather than the party of self appointed oligarchs.
Over the decades since 1975 there has been a great debate about the Whitlam legacy. None of us are perfect, although Gough in his own modest world view gives it a good go.
Gough's legacy on legal reform, on social reform and on our place in the world has stood the test of time. Reforms like expanded educational opportunity, a quality public health system, funding the basic infrastructure needed for the future of our cities, our engagement with Asia and enhancing and not undermining the role of the United Nations.
When Gough made that great speech at the Blacktown Civic Centre on the 30 November 1972, those first words ‘Men and women of Australia' were the words originally of John Curtin. Gough took them and gave them new life, new life for a new era. Utilising the full capacity of our constitution and our national political arrangements to bring about progressive change, not to dream about it, not to think about it but to bring it about.
Today we continue that tradition, through a new era of national reform. An education revolution from early childhood education to universities, with the single unifying ambition which goes back to Whitlam's time of turning Australia into the best educated country anywhere in the world.
A new nation building agenda - this time built around the infrastructure of the 21st Century, a new national broadband network. Ratifying Kyoto and implementing a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme so that we can act together to save the planet. An Apology to indigenous Australians and a national reform agenda to close the gap. A foreign policy agenda to act on disarmament, to build an Asia Pacific community and to engage in the creative diplomacy of progressive middle powers in building a more resilient international order for the future. One capable of dealing effectively with the global financial crisis, with the global financial system, with the global challenge that is climate change and with the great challenge and opportunity represented by the rise of China and the dawn of this the Asia Pacific century.
These are the challenges which now lie ahead of us, these are the challenges to which this reformist Government is committed to addressing.
And for Australia that will mean building the closest possible partnership with the United States under this new Obama administration, the closest possible partnership.
Our alliance with the United States is not the preserve of any individual political party. Constructed and formed and shaped under 12 American Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers over many decades, Labor and Liberal, Republican and Democrat. It is not the political property of any single political party and that's why it has been wrong for one political party in Australia to - from time to time - have seen it in their political advantage to attack a candidate for the Presidency of the United States. Let us hope that error is not committed again in the future, it is not in our national interest that it should ever occur again.
Barack Obama spoke of hope, hope for America and hope for the world. The challenges are great and we need to be inspired by hope and committed to a program of common action and this Government in Australia stands prepared to work with the incoming administration of the United States in dealing with these challenges of the global order. Fuelled by hope, fuelled also by a practical resolve to get real results for our common humanity.
Like Jenny Hockings' fine biography, can I just say this: that the reformist project is a task that's only just begun. I am personally looking forward very much reading the next volume of Gough's achievements for the Labor party in Australia.
For Labor as a party in progressive politics, ours by definition is always a work in progress.
It is my pleasure now to declare this biography officially launched and in so doing honouring Gough, honouring Margaret, honouring their children and their grandchildren and their wider family.
And importantly and some might think unusually but importantly given the scope of this great biography honouring also the family that gave Gough his nurture, the family that gave Gough his passion, the family that shaped his intellect and the young EG Whitlam growing up and in so doing prepared Gough Whitlam for his career in service to our nation Australia.


PM: This morning I had a great opportunity to speak on the telephone with President elect Barack Obama. It was a good conversation, a friendly conversation and follows on earlier chats that we have had on the phone through the course of the presidential election campaign.
The president elect and I spoke about the strength of the Australia-United States relationship and our commitment to take that relationship to even greater strengths into the future. We spoke of the common challenges we face and our resolve to act together in dealing on the global financial crisis and also working closely together on the great challenge of climate change.
Strong, creative cooperation between our two administrations in the future. We also spoke of current challenges of security and those which continue to confront our troops in the field in various theatres around the world.
We also undertook to stay in close contact with one another into the future and the period leading up to the inauguration of the new president on the 20th of January. This is a good conversation, it follows on earlier contact that I have had with the President and of course, continuing contact which many of us have had with various members of the Obama transition team in the United States as well.
From my own point of view, I look forward very much to working with President Obama into the future. The challenges we face are great, they are global challenges, they are regional challenges, but I believe that Australia will have a strong friend and partner in this new president of the United States. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister did you speak of a numbers commitment with Australian troops in Afghanistan?
PM: I think it is fair to say the US presidential elections occurred two days ago and it is some time yet, in fact more than two months before Barack Obama is sworn in as the next President of the United States.
There is plenty of time to work through the details of our common commitments on Afghanistan into the future. And as I have said before to President Bush and I have said again today to the President elect of the United States, Australia intends to be in Afghanistan for the long haul.
That is a commitment I have made publicly in the past and we remain steadfast with that commitment into the future.
JOURNALIST: Would you entertain increasing that commitment (inaudible)
PM: Well let's look at a few facts there. The first is that of the non NATO country contributing to Afghanistan at the moment, Australia has the highest contribution of all non NATO participants in the Afghanistan war.
We have more than 1000 troops in the field. Secondly we think that is about right. We have got no plans to increase in the future, but there is going to be plenty of time to discuss the new administration's plans on Afghanistan in the period ahead. I look forward to doing that.
As I have said before and I will say again, Australia has stated publicly its commitment and resolve to be in Afghanistan for the long haul. And part of the reason for that is as follows: we must be resolute in dealing with the continued campaign against terrorism and we must be absolutely focussed on the fact that the terrorist threat has not gone away, it is there and the last thing any of us want is for Afghanistan to become a future significant base for global terrorist operations of the type that we saw at S-11.
JOURNALIST: Did you invite him to come and visit you in Australia?
PM: He and I have chatted about these things in the past. This morning was more of a, well it was a congratulatory call on my part and an opportunity to talk about the relationship in the broad. But Barack Obama will always be welcome in Australia but I am sure we will have an opportunity to discuss that possibility when we catch up again.
JOURNALIST: In light of the IMF figures that came out today haven't they shown within two days of your economic forecast being released that your forecasts are too optimistic?
PM: Absolutely not. The projected growth for the Australian economy both by the IMF and in the mid year forecast released by the Treasurer are basically about the same. I think there is a difference of about 0.2 [per cent].
The bottom line is the global economy has suffered a huge whacking as a consequence of the global financial crisis. What follows from that is that the Australian economy is not immune. It will affect growth and jobs as the Treasurer has said before, and as I have said before.
The challenge is this  -  our future course of policy action. We've sought to underpin positive growth and continued support for jobs in the Australian economy off the back of the $10.4 billion economic security strategy. Furthermore, the Government will have fresh announcements to make on the question of future infrastructure funding. And on top of that, we remain resolved to take whatever future action is necessary to continue to support positive growth for the future.
But I believe in being upfront with the Australian people. This will be tough, it will be hard, it will be difficult. As the IMF confirms, the major economic the world are sliding into a global recession. That's the import of the IMF report today.
JOURNALIST:Will new infrastructure funding be moving in a different direction to the (inaudible)  - 
PM: Sorry, can you say that once more?
JOURNALIST:Will new infrastructure funding be directed in a different area to the package that you've already announced?
PM: The Government is still finalising our approach to infrastructure. As I've indicated already before, we'll make statements on this come December. And it'll be the first of a number of statements for the future.
What's the challenge with infrastructure? One, building what is necessary for the Australian economy for the long term. Long term economic growth needs. A national broadband network, hospitals, universities, TAFEs, schools, roads, rail, ports  -  these are things that the national economy needs for the future.
But we also need to do what we can responsibly to bring as much of that investment forward in order to support continued positive growth.
That's the double challenge we face. Making sure it's right for the long term, but also dealing with the challenges we now face coming off the back of this gloomy prognosis from the IMF on the global economy and a global recession across the major economies next year.
JOURNALIST:Just on ABC Learning (Inaudible) Is the Government considering a bailout package?
PM: Well, we take seriously the impact which this difficulty that this company is experiencing has on working families right across Australia and the employees. This series of centres, more than a thousand of them across the country, currently, as I'm advised, provides childcare for a very large number of Australian kids, some 120,000 children across the country, and also provides employment for about 16,000 Australians.
This, therefore, is an important priority for mums and dads, for the littlies, and for the people who work in these centres.
Secondly, that is why the Government has established its own taskforce to work with the administrator and with the creditors to ensure that all that can be done is being done.
The Government's priority is to ensure that all working families reliant on ABC Learning can continue to have access to childcare into the future. That's our base line concern.
This task force, involving the government, involving the Treasury and involving the administrator and involving the creditors, has been hard at work on the detail of all of this and that work continues.
JOURNALIST:What about the staff members who may not be able to get their entitlements over the very important Christmas holiday period?
PM: Well the difficulties that this company has experienced which resulted in the administrator being called in is a major difficult development for those families affected. Let's be completely upfront about that. The practical challenge is to work our way through the problems which come out of this systematically.
The taskforce which is hard at work with the administrator and the creditors is examining the detail of all of this.
As for any further implications which flow from this for employees then the Australian Industrial relations laws would apply and that means that the full provisions of Australian industrial law consistent with the employment agreements which these employees have would need to be honoured.
But I emphasise again the Government takes the impact of this on families very seriously. This has been a huge provider, some 25 per cent of child care places in Australia I am advised, 120,000 kids, 16,000 employees. Therefore that's why the Government has had a taskforce hard at work in very detailed discussions with the administrator and the creditors.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister in practical terms what will the taskforce be able to achieve that the administrators can't?
PM: Can I say that this is a very complex set of negotiations, complex set of discussions which have been going on for some time and our responsibility to mums and dads is to leave no stone unturned when it comes to ensuring that we can continue to provide parents with this fundamental undertaking - that is, to ensure that working families can continue to have access to proper childcare into the future.
It is difficult work, it is complex work but it is ongoing.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible) just re-regulating the childcare industry?
PM: Can I say our task right now having inherited these arrangements - a party which was in Government for 12 years before us - is the immediate challenge now. I am concerned right now as is Julia Gillard with what happens with 120,000 kids, thousands of family depending on these centres and on top of that, and on top of that 16,000 employees. That's the immediate task.
What follows from that in terms of the proper regulation of the childcare industry in the future and what further regulation may be necessary, including questions of market concentration, is something for us to address very soon.
JOURNALIST:(Inaudible)
PM: Oh we have had a few chats in the past. But today was all about the strength of the relationship between the two countries.
I'm convinced that we are going to have a first class working relationship with President elect Obama. As I have said before publicly I believe him to be a very good man. I have also said publicly that his message of hope for America is I believe equally a message of hope for the world and the reason for that is that the challenges we all face nationally are truly global challenges.
The financial crisis, climate change, security, these are things which individual nation states need now to work actively in partnership with other countries to effectively resolve and I believe in President elect Obama, Australia will have a good friend and partner.
Thanks very much


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in the human history. 
When you say that, it still takes your breath away. It reflects I believe not just the extraordinary privilege we have in this country of having among us our indigenous brothers and sisters, but what parallels that is also the great responsibility which is our lot as well, an extraordinary thing, the oldest continuing cultures in human history and still among us here in this land we call Australia.
Tonight we honour a great Australian.
Tonight we celebrate the contribution to our nation of a great Australian.
Tonight we award the Sydney Peace Prize to Patrick Dodson.
Patrick has been called and rightly so “the father of reconciliation”.
The citation for his award of the Sydney Peace Prize reads, in part:
“For courageous advocacy of human rights, for distinguished leadership of the reconciliation movement and for a lifetime of commitment to peace and justice.”
These are great words and they describe a great man. Throughout his life  -  as a priest, as the inaugural chairman of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation and as a leader of the Lingiari Foundation  -  Patrick has worked to bring people together.
Through his deeds and his words, he has given us an example of what leadership can achieve, of what leadership can inspire and what leadership can all give us to hope for.
Hope is a precious commodity in life. Hope points to the possibilities of the future rather than simply being weighed down with the despair of the past.
In the United States we have seen the triumph of hope, we have seen the exuberant triumph of hope. The triumph of hope after some centuries of despair.
And with hope now forming the basis of a new program of policy for America, for the world and for the future.
Senator Obama now faces a mountain of expectation.
Senator Obama's story has become the inspiration of a nation and now he carries the aspiration of the world. A world hungry for solutions, a world tired of excuses.
But the world must give him time, because the global challenges we face are great, they are deep and they are broad.
But together as people of good will the great challenges of peace, the great challenges of our planet and its survival and the great challenge and the enduring challenge of a proper sharing of the resources of the earth  -  these challenges can be met and they can be overcome. That is the message of hope.
Patrick has dedicated his life to closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
It is a goal that this government shares.
Closing the gap is a national priority, it is a national necessity. The gap itself is a national obscenity.
We must give Indigenous Australians hope, we must give Indigenous Australians the rational basis for hope, not pious promises but concrete programs of action to turn hope into reality, that is our charge.
Hope that Indigenous Australians can have the same opportunities for the future that the rest of Australia takes for granted.
We as a Government have set concrete targets.
     * halving the gap in infant mortality rates;
     * halving the gap in reading, writing and numeracy for children
     * halving the employment gap; and
     * Over the next generation: closing the 17 year gap in life expectancy  -  the obscenity of all obscenities.
And, in the next five years:
     * giving every Indigenous four year old in remote communities access to an early childhood education.
These are tough targets. And we will be attacked for not meeting them. But we are absolutely determined with every fibre of our being and every element of our political personality to have a go.
And do more than that - to summon forth the resources of the nation, both governments at all levels and with our corporate community and the community at large, to turn these targets into reality.
The alternative, which is not to set ourselves these goals to realise, is simply to wallow. To engage in a rolling seminar of national hand-wringing. I do not believe that is the stuff of which Australians are made. We identify a problem, we identify a path through a problem. We resolve to act. And then we act. And that is the course of action we propose for this enduring scourge on the nation's soul.
Achieving this, that is closing the gap, is a national imperative that will shape Australia's future. It will shape how we view ourselves, it will shape how the world views us. That is a sobering reality.
The national apology has been a necessary first step. But it is only a first step. And it was conceived as a first step to build a bridge called respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Because in the absence of respect for one human being and another, nothing, nothing can be achieved. Nothing of permanence, nothing that can endure. Nothing of substance.
To build a bridge of respect. A bridge built by doing the simplest, but at the same time the hardest of things. And that was simply to say ‘sorry'.
But in doing so, building a bridge to the future.
A bridge on which we can now join hands with confidence to forge a common future. That was our aspiration. That must be our destiny.
All Australians have a role in closing the gap.
The targets of which I spoke before form the basis of closing the gap and this in turn forms the basis of a major reform agenda that has put Indigenous Australians at the heart of this Government's agenda.
We are committed to some basic guiding principles in how we go about this.
First, evidence.
The Government's abiding determination is hard data  -  what actually works.
We're not interested in what is popular or what might be ideologically fashionable with the left or the right or the ups or the downs.
We're only interested in what gets results  -  hard results, measurable results, results that turn closing the gap from being a policy into a reality. That is the goal.
Second, we know that Indigenous Australians must be deeply engaged in developing the solutions.
Otherwise the solutions simply will not work. They will exist on paper. They will be the stuff of seminars, the rolling national seminar of enduring national hand-wringing of which I spoke before.
What we need instead is deep engagement on the part of our indigenous leadership with the nation's leadership.
An engagement based on mutual respect and mutual responsibility.
In all of this, indigenous leadership is fundamental. And we know that efforts to rebuild indigenous communities won't get far unless indigenous leaders themselves drive this change. That's why tonight is so important.
Because we are recognising, and together we are honouring, an Australian leader.
A leader for Indigenous Australians, a leader for non-Indigenous Australians. A leader for all Australians.
Patrick Dodson is a bridge builder. He has been fundamental in moving the nation forward to a new phase of Indigenous and non-Indigenous relations.
He's a man who understands the past, but a man who is focussed on the future.
Someone who understands the importance of the cultural ties that bind. A true Australian leader. A man of forthright views. A man of plain speaking. Sometimes exceptionally plain speaking, Patrick. But we forgive you for that, we understand the reason why. And we respect you for it. Because these are the signs of the strength of leadership.
We are determined as the government to find more ways of supporting and nurturing indigenous leadership. Leadership from elders, leadership from young people, leadership from women, leadership from men, leadership in the most remote communities. Leadership in regional communities, leadership across our urban communities.
A starting point, of course, is forging new approaches in Indigenous education.
Because education is the key to expanding young people's life chances.
And a decent education means real choices about life and work opportunities.
It means new pathways to employment and higher living standards.
A decent education is the most powerful antidote to disadvantage that there can ever be.
And a decent education also helps to develop community leaders.
We are also working with dedicated teachers in local schools in remote communities who are working hard to turn around school attendance and improve student achievement.
Teachers however, do more than provide an education.
They inspire their students. They help to develop the next generation of leaders.
And that's why teachers are so important. They are the unsung heroes of the nation.
They have the nation's future in their hands and that is so much more the case in the Indigenous communities of Australia as well.
And that is why our teachers deserve our absolute support and our absolute respect.
A decent education can transform children's lives.
Take Patrick Dodson's own story.
A student first at local schools in the Northern Territory, and later a boarder and school captain at Monivae College in Victoria, Patrick Dodson is the embodiment of the power of education. And its forceful link to leadership.
Of course, education is part, but unless we move also on health and on housing and then cross the entire spectrum of reform, our targets of closing the gap will not be realised. That's why we must advance on all fronts and advance together in partnership with the Indigenous leadership of our nation.
Employment is important. We are reforming the Universal Employment Service program and indigenous employment programs to give Indigenous people the skills and training they need to get and to keep a job.
We are also developing a business action agenda to harness the commitment and will of the corporate sector to help close the gap.
Last week here in Sydney I helped launch the Australian Employment Covenant, a major private sector initiative driven by Andrew Forrest to create 50,000 jobs for Indigenous Australians.
Once again, this will be hard to do. It is easy to say, it is much harder to do. But if I experience one thing as we launched that Aboriginal and Australian Employment Covenant last week, it was this: the resolve of the corporate leadership of the nation to again end the hand wringing and get on with the business of creating jobs and permanent jobs for indigenous Australians across the country.
We see this in the corporate community. We see this in the education community. We see this in our sporting community. We see an extraordinary spirit across the entire breadth of the Australian community to take the spirit that was alive in the apology and to turn it into something new and good for our nation.
Much needs to be done and each of you in this great hall here in this great university in Sydney tonight have a role to play. And as you leave tonight I challenge you to reflect on what that role might be in your life.
A major and consistent thrust of Patrick Dodson's leadership has been to emphasise the importance of culture.
Culture and economics, tradition and jobs, these are not mutually exclusive propositions. They are mutually reinforcing propositions, seen correctly.
That is why we will begin the dialogue necessary to acknowledge the unique contribution of Indigenous Australians into our founding document, the Australian Constitution.
Closing the gap and respecting the inherent wealth of Indigenous cultures is a great national challenge and a great national opportunity.
And we all have a role to play  -  governments, Indigenous Australians, the corporate world, the community sector, the wider community. Each of us as individuals.
And it is a challenge that needs many more leaders to turn into reality, leaders of the calibre of Patrick Dodson.
A true leader, of whom all Australians can be proud.
We are here tonight to celebrate a peace prize, a Sydney Peace Price. On peace in this country, we often take that thing called peace for granted. But peace is much more than the absence of conflict.
Peace ultimately is the presence of justice. The presence of fairness, the presence of equity, the presence of opportunity, the presence of dignity. And therefore, for social justice to be realised, each and every one of us, animated in the deepest pit of our souls, must become warriors for justice, each of us.
Because in so doing we become warriors for peace.
Patrick, as Prime Minister of Australia I congratulate you on being the recipient of the 2008 Sydney Peace Prize.
It is a recognition of the leadership role you have played in our nation for many, many, many years. And as Prime Minister I am honoured to present you with this, the 2008 Sydney Peace Prize.


JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the execution of the Bali Bombers overnight?
PM: I think today is a time for us all to bear in our thoughts and our prayers the 200 Australian and Indonesian families who were shattered by the Bali Bombing six years ago.
Their lives remain shattered. They have been changed fundamentally by that murder. So it is their lives that we think about today.
JOURNALIST: Is it something you particularly reflected upon during your time in church this morning?
PM: I was thinking, as Therese was, about all those families. When memories come searing back, it is really hard. This is more than 200 families, Australian, Indonesian, from elsewhere in the world. Lives which were just completely changed in the most horrific of ways by the Bali Bombing.
So let's think about them today, it's really important.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a change in Government in New Zealand overnight?
PM: Yeah last night I rang the Prime Minister elect John Key. I congratulated John on his election, a fine win for himself and for his party. The great thing about the Australia New Zealand relationship is it really goes beyond party politics.
We have committed afresh to building this important relationship for both of us.
I have also invited John to visit Australia at the earliest opportunity and for him to undertake an official state visit. I think that would be a great opportunity to begin this new period in the relationship.
JOURNALIST: New Limited is reporting today that Malcolm Turnbull has complained about being snubbed by Therese. Can I please get your reaction to that?
PM: Oh look, I think that is a matter for Mr Turnbull, isn't it?


PM: I am very pleased to be here today to launch a new Green Car Plan for Australia's future. 
You've heard my remarks. I don't propose to elaborate on them. Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, this country has always believed, at least for the last decade or two, in moving towards free trade. These tariff cuts were already legislated. Our job was to work with industry on a decent, forward looking industry policy, innovation policy, for the future to help the industry transform. If you transform in the direction of what consumers want in the future, which is more fuel efficient cars, cars which produce less greenhouse gas emissions, that's what the future is about, where there is partners to do that. Both for the domestic market and of course for export as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: This plan is a forward looking plan for the future.
It is not a blank cheque. As the minister said before, there is a significant commitment to the industry, but we expect a significant commitment back from the industry as well. And the way in which this assistance is structured, it is provided in response to actual investments and commitments by the car companies on the ground  -  all three of them. And that's the way we will be implementing it in the future.
The key significance of today, however, is us, the Government, saying unequivocally that we believe in this industry's future. We're prepared to provide long term support for innovation policy to help the industry's transform for the future so they can themselves act with confidence that government is going to be there as a partner.
The alternative is the government turns its back and walks away. That's the alternative course of action, that's what some are still advocating. I believe in manufacturing, I believe in the car industry, I believe in the 200,000 jobs which are supported directly and indirectly by the industry. And this government is proud to be out there in support of this industry for the future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The Australian automotive industry is a strong industry. Just today, looking at the innovation which the big three are undertaking, and the component companies are undertaking, and the research institutes are undertaking. This is an industry with huge potential for the future. And the spin off, in terms of other related industries, is huge.
Therefore, for us to get behind it is the right thing to do. Not just to support the 200,000 jobs indirectly and directly which are part and parcel of this great industry, but for the broader interests of the economy as well.
With a global financial crisis and a global economic downturn, you can either sit on your hands or take action. We've taken decisive action and we stand by it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, the minister himself has been to Detroit and we've both been to Nagoya and spoken with (inaudible) HQ in all three cases. And of course we've dealt with their representatives extensively here in Australia as well.
Obviously globally the car industry is going through a difficult period of transformation. But the key challenges for the future is transformation, in the direction of long term fuel efficiency and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This $6.2 billion investment for the future is all about making this innovation possible in Australia, supporting the environment, supporting the economy and supporting jobs.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The car companies as I understand it have already indicated publicly their support for this initiative, support for this investment by the Government in the future. And as I said before each allocation of funding from the Green Car Innovation Fund as well as the Automotive Transformation Scheme that we have for the future, will be based on actual commitments and actual investment decisions in the future as well.
We have put this together in a very practical way with the industry, said ‘here is our money, but it is money delivered in response to a real effort on their part' and with investment ratios of the type I described in my speech before.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CARR: There are a range of initiatives we are taking with State Governments to assist with the development of the Green Car Innovation Fund. They will be partners in that. They will also, we are talking to them about their attitude in terms of taxes and charges for the automotive industry.
So that is a matter for them to actually announce. But we are in the business of building partnerships right across this industry, from workers to company owners, to ensure that consumers get a better deal to be able to provide high wage, high skill jobs for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CARR: Well that's absolutely critical and we will be announcing over the next few months a range of new initiatives as a result of these discussions which will indicate precisely what the levels of investment are from the companies.
So irrespective of the global crisis that we are facing, in Australia the car industry is doing a lot better. I am confident we will be able to secure new investment and ne0w projects will demonstrate that and will strengthen the Australian automotive industry through the next little while.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CARR: Well we are in the business of encouraging the highest level of skills development and new jobs created. There will be downturn in the industry, there is just no way around that. There are some 200 component manufacturers, some 60 of whom at the moment are facing considerable levels of stress. We are working with the industry to minimise the number of jobs that are lost in the short term so that we can strengthen investment for the long term to ensure that there are new job opportunities that emerge in this industry.
PM: At a time when there is a lot of global pressure on the industry, the attitude of Government can either be to wash your hands of it and say, ‘not my problem', or to step in as a partner. We believe in partnership. We believe in partnership with the Australian auto industry. And we believe in that partnership for the long term future.
Part of our response to the global financial crisis and global economic crisis is to create the rational grounds for confidence in the future as well and us putting a solid step forward with this decisive action today, a $6.2 billion investment for the future, is part of the confidence equation for the future as well.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We're acutely conscious of that, in fact in my continued discussions with the Australian Treasury and their continued discussions with the finance company sector in general on those dealing with the auto sector we are acutely conscious of the challenges which lie there.
Right now the Treasury is in continued discussions with many of those companies in terms of providing appropriate ways forward for the future, we know that auto finance is part of it and I am sure the Government will have further to say in the future once our discussions are concluded with the finance company sector.
Last one folks because I have to fly back to Canberra and go to question time.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The same assurances I give to the Governments of NSW, Queensland, South Australia, the ACT and any other I can mention.
The bottom line is this, this Government believes in infrastructure, we believe it's necessary for our long term economic future, we also believe it is necessary to provide necessary support for the Australian economy and jobs in the period ahead. That's because of the global financial crisis and the global economic downturn.
Each of the projects which was put forward by State and Territory Governments will be subjected to rigorous analysis by Infrastructure Australia and based on their assessment the Government will be supporting projects of merit which have been appropriately prepared, appropriately analysed and which have a strong business case.
But that work is in progress, we will wait until its conclusion, but I just say this, this Government unlike its predecessesor believe that there is a national role in laying out infrastructure plans for the future, our ports, our rail, our road systems, our hospitals, our universities, our TAFE's, our national high speed broadband network.
In the great tradition of Labor Governments in the past we actually believe in building things, just like we believe in manufacturing and that's where we will be in the future as well. Necessary for the economy in the short term in terms of support, growth in jobs, necessary for the efficiency of this economy in the long term to have world class infrastructure.
[ends] 


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced a $6.2 billion plan to make the automotive industry more economically and environmentally sustainable by 2020.
The Green Car Plan will feature an expanded $1.3 billion Green Car Innovation Fund which will provide Australian car companies with the opportunity to receive Government funding to design and sell environmentally friendly cars.
The Innovation Fund will see the Australian Government match industry investment in green cars on a $1 dollar to $3 dollar basis over a ten year period from 2009.
This is another chapter in the Rudd Government's green investment strategy to transform Australia's economy into a low-carbon emission, internationally-competitive economy of the future.
This is decisive and strong action to protect the Australian economy during the global financial crisis.
The 13-year New Car Plan for a Greener Future is about manufacturing competitive, low-emission, fuel-efficient vehicles in Australia. It will create well-paid, highly-skilled green jobs for the future.
The plan is expected to generate $16 billion in investment in the Australian automotive industry over the life of the plan.
Further the overall Green Car Plan will provide:
     * A better-targeted, greener, $3.4 billion assistance program, the Automotive Transformation Scheme (ATS), running from 2011 to 2020;
     * Changes to the Automotive Competitiveness and Investment Scheme in 2010, consistent with the Bracks review proposals, to smooth the transition to the ATS ($79.6 million);
     * $116.3 million to promote structural adjustment through consolidation in the components sector and to facilitate labour market adjustment;
     * $20 million from 2009 - 10 to help suppliers improve their capabilities and their integration in complex national and global supply chains;
     * $6.3 million from 2009 - 10 for an enhanced market access program;
     * A new Automotive Industry Innovation Council, bringing key decision makers together to drive innovation and reform; and
     * A $10.5 million expansion of the LPG vehicle scheme, to start immediately, that doubles payments to purchasers of new vehicles using LPG technology.
The plan implements the recommendations of the Review of the automotive industry, including a reformed Automotive Transformation Scheme, an expanded Green Car Innovation Fund, and measures to promote industry competitiveness.
Automotive tariffs will be cut to 5 per cent, giving Australia the third-lowest tariff regime among economies with a well-developed automotive industry.
Australia will continue to pursue a free trade agenda because the future of the industry lies in innovation and global integration, not industry protection with old fashioned quotas and tariffs.
The $7.7 billion automotive industry is critical to Australia's economic future because it employs over 60 000 Australians, and is critical to national R&amp;D and exports.
Automotive manufacturing sits at the core the nation's manufacturing effort, because building a modern car involves almost every advanced technology we use, from microchips to light metals.
Only 15 or so countries in the world can design, engineer and build a car from scratch and we are determined to maintain that capacity.
The plan has a high level of support at the beginning to accelerate reform and renewal, eventually tapering down to zero.
The plan works in four key areas. It will:
     * Attract new investment in long-term, sustainable vehicle production;
     * Green the industry  -  improving fuel efficiency and reducing carbon emissions;
     * Strengthen the local supply chain and boost skills; and
     * Link to international supply chains and improve market access for Australian manufacturers.
A New Car Plan for a Greener Future provides the investment certainty the industry needs as it adjusts to significant new challenges.
The plan demonstrates the government's commitment to modern manufacturing and to providing high-skill, high-wage jobs for Australians.
For more information on A New Car Plan for a Greener Future, including the full government response to the Review of Australia's Automotive Industry, visit www.innovation.gov.au/automotivereview


First of all thank you very much Kim, our Industry Minister. He has just said some nice things about me, let me just make this very plain. 
This Minister is passionate about manufacturing and passionate about the Australian auto industry and I have got to say we would not be here today were it not for his deep engagement with each of you from industry, from the unions and from the associated research institutes across the nation - here in Melbourne, Adelaide, elsewhere and beyond.
So mate this is very much your work, I really appreciate it, you have been there with your sleeves rolled up.
You know there is a lot of gloom and doom out there, but on days like this what we are doing is, in the midst of a global financial crisis, rolling up our sleeves and coming out in support of Australian manufacturing and the Australian car industry for the future. That's why we are here.
At a time of global financial crisis the Government today takes further decisive action to support Australian industry, to support Australian jobs. Because we believe this industry has a future and a big future in Australia's economy of the 21st Century.
We take decisive action to build an internationally-competitive, green economy for the future.
Australia needs a green car industry that manufactures the fuel-efficient, low emission vehicles of the future and that creates the well-paid, highly-skilled green jobs of the future.
We do not have to choose between having a growing economy in the short term and a green economy in the medium to long term.
We can work effectively to develop both and that's a large part of what today's package is all about.
Australia must have the green industries and green jobs of the future.
I know in the United States some have advocated a ‘green recovery' achieved through investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy strategies.
One think tank in America  -  the Political Economy Research Institute  -  has estimated that there are two million jobs to be had in the US through a green recovery.
I believe that Australia needs green investment as well.
And the automotive industry is critical to a green investment strategy for the nation.
The automotive industry is already a cornerstone of manufacturing.
Consider the numbers again, they command respect, more than 60,000 people employed directly in this industry. Altogether 200,000 Australians employed directly and indirectly in this industry.
Some $8 billion worth of Gross Domestic Product, $5.6 billion worth of exports, our largest manufacturing export and among our top 10 exports period and some 3,000-plus researchers working in the field.
This is a first class industry which demands support for the future. This industry is a powerhouse of exports and innovation and it's also part of the climate change challenge we face for the future as well.
Transport is responsible for 14 per cent of our nation's greenhouse gas emissions.
That means we need to transform the industry if we're going to improve our long term climate change performance.
As I indicated before more than 3 000 researchers and technicians are now working on new technologies.
We have seen some of that work here this morning as I walked around and spoke to the lads and the lasses from Deakin, from Monash, from our older established automotive parts industries and companies, the work that they are doing as well as our big three manufacturers and the extraordinary innovation which they are representing in their product lines for the future.
This is an exciting industry to be in and I believe it has an exciting future.
We will need literally thousands more Australians to become green car workers if we are going to transform the industry for the long term future.
We won't transform this industry by a combination of slogans or ideology.
What we need is innovative industry. We need a supply chain working together. We will need a supportive policy framework. We also need an automotive industry vision.
And that's why I am here today to launch a New Car Plan for a Green Future for Australia.
Before going onto the detail of today's announcement, it is worth us understanding the unique economic times in which we live.
We currently have the worst economic conditions in the global economy for many, many, many decades. We have the worst financial crisis since the great depression.
Since the global financial crisis began, more than 25 banks around the world have failed or have been bailed out.
The US and Europe are on the verge of recession. Growth in China has been slowing dramatically.
The Australian economy is sound but we will not be immune from the impacts of the global financial crisis.
There are no easy solutions and no quick fixes to this Global Financial Crisis.
But it is important to have a rational grounds for confidence in the future and this industry, the auto industry is part of that future and part of the reason why we should remain confident about our future.
This is going to be a long, drawn out crisis which will have a real impact in Australia.
There will be slowdown, there will be increased unemployment.
The Government has already taken decisive action and early action to protect the economy and all Australians during this crisis.
     * We have guaranteed bank deposits
     * We injected $10.4 billion into the economy to stimulate growth through our economic security strategy
     * We will bring forward major investment in infrastructure, in roads, rail, ports and boost economic activity in these critical areas that our economy will need for the future.
     * And we are investing in the capital needs for our education system and our hospital system as well.
These are all part and parcel of our economic strategy to see Australia through these tough economic times, driven by the global financial crisis.
The next step in our response to the global financial crisis is to build the low-emission, green economy of the future.
By implementing a green investment strategy today, we can transform our industry and create green jobs for tomorrow.
Today, at this the Cooperative Research Centre for Advanced Automotive Technology, we have a ‘Green Car Showcase'.
It is a window into the future of the automotive industry and a window into the future of our economy.
It's a future in which we should have absolute confidence - fuel-efficiency technologies, low-emission technologies, better designed and safer vehicles.
By creating these technologies and using them to manufacture vehicles in Australia, we can have the green car industry of the future. And we can be world leaders in this.
Getting there won't be easy  -  it will be hard.
That's why we're here as the Government, in order for us to go forward together arm in arm. This must be a partnership between Government, our researchers, business, industry, unions, workers, apprentices - a national effort in support of an important national industry.
If you think of how hard this country has worked to build the automotive industry we have today, it gives us real hope of what we can build with a green automotive industry for tomorrow.
Here is an important fact which all those less familiar with the industry should focus on: Australia is one of only about 15 nations in the world today that can create a motor vehicle from scratch  -  taking it from the drawing board through to the showroom floor. One of only 15 nations in the world.
The 60 years since the first 48-215 Holden came off the production line in 1948 have seen dramatic changes in automotive technology, in the structure of the industry and in the way in which we design industry policy.
In Australia, we've abandoned economic protectionism as a plank of industry policy. Tariffs and quotas are no longer industry policy levers. We've embraced international competition. But through the Button car plan of the Hawke Government we had the policy foundation for the industry to survive and to prosper. We intend to continue on that path.
Today, the Australian automotive industry faces a whole new set of market, economic and environmental changes and challenges.
The domestic market for cars has become more fragmented. Australian car makers do battle in a very crowded field with 60 other car brands. Consumer preferences have shifted away from family sedans to both smaller vehicles on the one hand and four wheel drives on the other.
Higher petrol prices have driven expectations of more fuel efficient vehicles  -  for smaller cars, but also more fuel-efficient medium and large vehicles as well.
Competition from regional players has become intense. Up until a couple of months ago, the exchange rate was at levels that made exporting very difficult. It's true that the recent exchange rate depreciation improves the prospect of the automotive export industry.
But it's hardly a welcome development when it's associated with a global financial crisis that is hammering the parent companies of local manufacturers; restricting access to credit from auto finance companies; and plunging the global economy into a recession.
The sector is also at the epicentre of the long term challenge of climate change. The industry knows that the transport sector produces 80 mega tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions every year. That is 14 per cent, as I said before, of Australia's annual greenhouse emissions.
Between 1990 and 2006, transport emissions grew by over a quarter.
We clearly have to turn these trends around if we are going to tackle climate change. The automotive industry has a key role to play responding to climate change.
The industry must reduce vehicle emissions by producing smaller, lighter, and more fuel efficient vehicles that produce fewer greenhouse gas emissions.
Faced with this complicated set of industry challenges  -  markets, economies, and the environment  -  some might say it's not worth trying to have a car industry. That is not my view. It is not the view of the Australian Government and it never will be the view of any Government which I lead.
I don't believe that car making is yesterday's business, or something better left to the Germans and Japanese. But I also don't believe that industry policy is about ‘saving' the automotive industry.
It's about helping to transform the industry to meet the challenges of the future. It is not about passive assistance. It is about active support for innovation and change.
That is why I say that in the 21st century, innovation policy is industry policy. Innovation policy is industry policy. They are the same thing for the economy of the future.
Let's again consider what is at stake with this important automotive industry.
This industry is worth almost $8 billion worth of value-added business.
64,000 directly employed, three-quarters of them in Victoria and South Australia, 3,000 researchers, technicians and other supporting staff in undertaking R&amp;D.
The auto industry also creates in other industries from iron, steel and rubber to mechanical repairs, wholesale trade and business services, many, many other jobs. An estimated 200,000 owe their jobs directly and indirectly to this industry.
In the future, the industry will have more ‘green car' jobs: manufacturing cleaner engines, fuel cells, and batteries; installing turbo-charging and direct-injection systems; designing lighter and more fuel efficient vehicles.
The Australian automotive industry already invests over $600 million a year in R&amp;D  -  and that will grow over time.
GM Holden has a regional design and engineering centre. Ford has a design and engineering ‘Centre of Excellence'.
Toyota's regional technical centre contributes to Toyota's global platforms.
Building the modern car integrates just about every advanced technology we use, from microchips to composite materials.
That is why the automotive sector is a cornerstone of Australian manufacturing, worth as I said before more than $5 billion a year in exports, making it one of our nation's top 10 export industries.
All this spill-over activity means that having an automotive industry makes economic sense for Australia.
Australia can enjoy the benefits of a prosperous automotive industry.
But it needs national policy vision. That is why today I am pleased to launch the Australian Government's New Car Plan for a Greener Future.
The New Car Plan for a Greener Future is a bold plan to transform the Australian car industry. Transformation so it can become more competitive.
Transformation so it is more responsive to changes in the pattern of consumer demand. Transformation so it's better equipped to respond to the challenge of climate change. And transformation so it is more integrated with global markets and supply chains.
The New Car Plan for a Green Future will ensure that car-making goes on contributing to Australia's prosperity in the future. The New Car Plan for a Greener Future is a 13-year, $6.2 billion automotive industry vision.
It is about strengthening the economy against the global economic downturn.
It is about creating the new green jobs for the future. The New Car Plan for a Greener Future has at its core, competitive, fuel-efficient, low-emissions vehicles, produced right here in Australia.
The centrepiece of our plan is an expanded and extended Green Car Innovation Fund. The Green Car Innovation Fund is now a 10-year, $1.3 billion initiative.
It will foster investment in research and development and plant and equipment for green vehicle technologies.
The Green Car Innovation Fund will be brought forward to operate from 2009 so we can start work on the cars of tomorrow today. That is what we are on about, sleeves rolled up, getting on with the job and getting on with it now.
Through an average 1:3 co-investment ratio, the Green Car Innovation Fund will generate over $5 billion in investment over the next 10 years.
Second, we will invest $3.4 billion between now and 2020 in a new Automotive Transformation Scheme.
Through this scheme we will co-invest in industry research and development on a 1:2 basis and in new plant and equipment on a roughly 1:7 basis.
The scheme provides investment certainty for the sector and improves the industry's competitiveness long term. This scheme is designed to help the industry reinvent itself. The Automotive Transformation Scheme will generate at least $12 billion in investment by 2020.
$12 billion for the Automotive Transformation scheme and an additional $4 - $5 billion from the Green Car Innovation Fund. $16 to $17 billion in investment in the future, that's why the Government is in this industry with you.
This is a massive investment for the future. We have also taken the policy decision to proceed with the cut in automotive tariffs from 10 per cent to five per cent in January 2010.
With this move Australia will have the third lowest tariff regime in the world amongst economies with a well developed automotive industry. This means cheaper cars for Australian motorists.
It is also a clear signal to overseas governments that our country believes in free trade. I don't believe we can or should shield our industry from free trade and open markets. I believe we must secure the industry's future with open markets through global integration and innovative capacity.
Our New Car Plan for a Greener Future also recognises that there are substantial pressures on the automotive supply chain. That is why we'll immediately establish from this month a $116 million structural adjustment program.
It will promote strategic consolidation to achieve scale economies and productivity improvements.
It will also provide for labour market adjustment where, if appropriate, fair and reasonable assistance will be made available to employees made redundant through automotive restructuring.
The New Car Plan also includes: a $20 million program to help suppliers integrate into a complex global supply chain; $6.3 million investment in an enhanced market access program; a $10.5 million expansion of the LPG vehicle scheme that doubles payments to $2,000 to purchasers of new LPG vehicles.
We will also establish an Automotive Industry Innovation Council to provide high level advice on the sector's strategic direction. The Plan I am launching today is a strong endorsement of the recent review of the automotive industry by the panel led by Steve Bracks. And again I thank him for his work.
The work done by the review team laid the foundations for the policy package I am unveiling today. The New Car Plan for a Greener Future is the next step of decisive action being taken by this Government in the midst of this global financial crisis.
To support our economy during the global economic downturn. To support jobs in our economy during the global economic downturn. To build a green car industry and create the green car jobs for the future.
It is part of our green investment strategy, it is part of our manufacturing strategy. Both with an eye firmly fixed on the future and fixed on the future with confidence. This is decisive action today in order to build a great and prosperous industry for tomorrow.
I said before I became Prime Minister of Australia that I did not want to be Prime Minister of a country that did not manufacture any more. I meant it then, I mean it now and I mean it for the future.
It is with great pleasure therefore that I officially launch this great new green car plan for a greener future for Australia.


On the 90th anniversary of the end of the First World War, the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Veterans' Affairs Alan Griffin, joined Australians at home and overseas to honour all those who have served and died in wars, conflicts and peace operations.
More than 102,000 Australians have lost their lives in the defence of our country.
Today the nation paused for one minute to remember every one of those lives lost, those who had served, and those who continue to serve.
Speaking at the Remembrance Day ceremony at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, the Prime Minister paid tribute to the heroism, courage, mateship and resilience displayed by the hundreds of thousands of Australians who have put their lives at risk to serve their country in war. He said that on this day of remembrance we must commit ourselves to peace.
On the Western Front, Mr Griffin represented Australia at the Remembrance Day ceremony in Ypres, Belgium, before reading the Ode and laying a wreath at the Menin Gate.
Remembrance Day 2008 is particularly significant as it marks 90 years since the signing of the Armistice, finally bringing an end to terrible war that cost millions their lives.
In Australia, of the 416,809 men who enlisted, more than 60,000 were killed, with a further 156,000 wounded, gassed, or taken prisoner. These immense losses were sustained by population of less than 5 million people.
Australians have served with distinction in many more conflicts, including the Boer War, Second World War, Korean War, Malayan Emergency, Indonesian Confrontation and Vietnam War, and more recently in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Prior to the Canberra Remembrance Day service, two panels were unveiled on the Memorial's Roll of Honour.
The Afghanistan panel now includes the names of the five Australians who were killed on active duty in the past year.
The Indonesian Confrontation panel was amended to include the name of an Australian who died of illness in 1965 as a result of his service in Sarawak. The addition of his name corrects a 1960s administrative oversight.
Family members of all six Australians were present at the unveiling ceremony.


Fellow Australians, friends of Australia, Veterans of Australia 
90 years ago today, the great guns fell silent.
After fours years of bloodshed, the battlefields were silent.
Great empires had been broken.
Millions, millions lay dead.
Among them, sixty thousand Australian heroes whose final resting place will forever be foreign soil.
And then there were the wounded  -  a further one hundred and fifty thousand whose bodies and minds were to be forever scarred by the horrors of war.
And all this from a country of some four millions.
The scale of the carnage; the new ways of killing on an almost industrial scale; the tiny pieces of land over which so much blood was spilt; the sheer, stark horror of life and death in the trenches  -  made all peoples hope that this could never happen again.
It was called the War to End All Wars.
But we now know that it was not.
It was the First World War.
The League of Nations did not prevent a Second.
Barely a generation had passed before the killing began again.
This time on a mass scale that saw civilians too as the target of war.
Once again the years of destruction made victors and vanquished alike commit afresh to peace.
Once again an international institution was established to maintain the peace  -  once again representing the hopes and aspirations of all humankind.
But war has continued and the innocent continue to die.
Causing us all to ask, is war our permanent condition?
Must every generation go through war to be reminded why there should be no war?
Or can we dare to do something different, can we dare to think something different.
Not just to be informed from history.
But to learn from history.
We have all endured a most bloody century.
But let us resolve afresh at the dawn of this new century, this century of the Pacific, that this might just be a truly (inaudible) peaceful century.
Let us resolve afresh to build the habits of cooperation rather than to yield to the inevitability of conflict.
Let all peoples of goodwill resolve afresh for peace, resolve afresh a century free from the threat of nuclear war.
So that our world community can work with one heart and one mind for the great challenges of our age.
Of course tyranny cannot and can never be wished away with a pen.
Tyrants must always be confronted when all other options are exhausted.
And that means that the price of peace remains eternal vigilance.
That is why we need our men and women in uniform.
That is why we are proud of our men and women in uniform.
That is why we are proud of the 100,000 names etched in the walls of this great memorial.
We as a nation have paid a great price.
Think of the war which ended 90 years ago today.
Gallipoli  -  26,000 casualties.
Fromelles  -  5,500 Australian casualties.
Pozieres  -  nearly 7000 Australia casualties.
Bullecourt  -  7500 Australian casualties.
Ypres  -  38,000 Australian casualties.
Today these numbers are mind-numbing, they are horrific in their magnitude.
90 years ago the Australian troops on the Western Front were at the forefront of the fighting.
The Australian Corps played a critical role in the actions that helped bring about the end of the war.
They brought some of Australia's greatest victories.
They saw some of the greatest acts of heroism.
In August, led by Monash, the Australians attacked from Villers-Bretonneux and Hamel, fighting side-by-side with our Americans allies for the first time.
They drove back the enemy lines.
Ludendorff described it as “the black day of the German army”.
In September, Australian diggers fought at Peronne and Mont St Quentin.
In October, Australian troops of the Second Division broke through the Hindenburg Line at La Motte Farm and Mushroom Quarry.
And again they drove the enemy back.
This was the last engagement of the Australian troops in the war.
These victories helped to set the path for the Armistice to be signed in November.
They are part of the proud tradition of the Australian military, each one of them heroes of Australia and we honour them.
And today too we honour our friends and our allies who have been with us in the thick of battle.
Behind every name on the walls of this great memorial is a story.
The story of someone in uniform, someone who gave their conflict, a very human story, a very personal story, a story of a family and families changed forever.
The story of communities changed forever.
For the loss of one of their sons.
This great memorial, looking down this great avenue of heroes, honours them all.
As we as a nation honour them today.
It honours what they have achieved in the name of Australia.
And through honouring them, we remember them.
In the words of Charles Bean, in this memorial “Here is their spirit, in the heart of the land they loved.”
It is right that we honour the service and sacrifice of the fallen today.
It is right that we honour all those who have served.
And it is right that we remember today those who are still serving.
For there is no higher calling in Australia than to wear the uniform of Australia.
What is the message of this 90th Armistice Day?
I believe each of the fallen would say to us this, be forever vigilant and be equally unstinting in the preservation of the peace.
Today we remember those who fell.
We honour the contribution they have made to this great nation Australia.
We honour the contribution they have made to the world.
And we commit ourselves to upholding the values for which these Australians, these hundred thousands and more Australians who gave their lives in the service of this nation.
And we commit ourselves afresh to the great cause of peace.
We honour them. 


What is it about this extraordinary conflict which so animates the Australian mind and so animates the Australian soul? We are all shaped by our own experiences and I am no different to anyone else in this room.
What I remember as a small child growing up in a Queensland country town is being woken before dawn to go on the dawn Anzac day march. A town of barely 200 people, but a march well attended. And I always remember in the dim, very early morning light, hearing the gentle clink of medals. In those days, in those days, these were veterans of the war we speak about today.
As I reflect again on the experiences as a kid growing up and through the 70s and the 80s when ANZAC seemed to dim a little in the nation's imagination and the crowds became thinner for a bit. And then the crowds came back, and they keep coming back and they get stronger and stronger and they get bigger and bigger.
So I go back to the question that I asked, what it is about ANZAC, what is it about the First World War, what is it about the war to end all wars, what is it about Australia's national military experience which so moves the Australian mind and plumbs the depths of the Australian soul?
It is I think as I struggle to answer this question, made up of many things. It is in part the grand narrative of nations. Nations aligned through the concert of Europe deciding to go to war once again. It is in part about the grand narrative which is the failure of peace and the resort to war.
In part, in our own case, Australia, it is the sheer dimensions of the sign up. Volunteers from all over this country, this vast country of ours so thinly populated in those days and so thinly populated still.
Walking, riding, travelling, days, weeks on end in order to sign up. The dimensions of it, the size of the voluntary effort, volunteering for the cause. Then there is the dimensions of the odyssey. The travel, the distance. Here we are in our part of the world, embarked as a national force of volunteers to embark on a military campaign at the other end of the world and land on the shores of Turkey, the Ottoman Empire.
If you were a kid growing up in Bowral and of enlistment age, would it have crossed your mind as you went to school that you could in a year or two's time, be fighting in the trenches of the Dardanelles, in the trenches of the Western Front? Names that you could barely pronounce, let alone places you had ever been to, or with which you had any particular connection to or emotional attachment. The distance from here to there at a time when people did not travel as they travel today.
The other great part of why this war so sears the Australian historical imagination is the great divisions over conscription, the great debates which certainly tore asunder the party which John (Faulkner) and I represent today. A debate about conscription which tore asunder much of the nation.
But the other reason that I think this affects so much the nation's imagination and the nation's soul are the purely personal dimensions of this extraordinary feat of arms in this extraordinary chapter in human tragedy, because it is both those things.
If you look at the grave fields across the Western Front, thousands upon thousands of white crosses. And I don't know if you are like me but I always ask myself a question when I go to one of these cemeteries. What would this young man's life have been like? Killed in action, aged 19, what would have his life been like, how long would he have lived, what family would he have raised, who were the children who never knew him or the children he had he didn't know any further.
I think what partly animates our souls as Australians is the truly personal dimensions of this. What is wonderful about these national archives and the exhibition that we will see soon is each of those personal essays again come to life and that is what is so important.
Then there are the dimensions of the recovery. Sure 60,000 lie dead and we honour them as did yesterday. 150,000 who were wounded and who came back to try and piece together a shattered life, as John said a shell-shocked life, a life which could never be the same.
Again even as a kid growing up in a little town called Eumundi in country Queensland I remember my mum and dad saying ‘just be gentle with so and so, he is still suffering from the shell-shock'. I am talking about the early 60s, of events more than half a century removed.
The recovery, the recovery of each of those lives. Not just of the 150,000 wounded but of the horrors which were witnessed by those who were not. The mental trauma in an age and a time when no one knew what trauma was. When there wasn't a psychiatrist or psychologist within cooee, people couldn't spell the name let alone dispense the practice. Yet they were there - these brave young men of Australia and their suffering families coping with the sheer dimensions of physical, emotional, psychological recovery.
I cannot begin to think how I as human being could have survived those trenches. I cannot begin to think how I could have survived. To have watched, to have heard and to have seen people blown apart in front of you and for their remains to be buried under acres of mud not to be discovered and brought to dignified burial for some decades following, half centuries following, nearly full centuries following.
It is a sight when you put it into your imagination, you think how could any human endure watching that and surviving. The physicality of the brutality and the searing emotional scars and psychological scars stayed with so many of these veterans for a lifetime.
I think that's also part of what captures the Australian imagination, the Australian soul today. Because it is not just the grand narrative of nations, each of these essays, each of these essays of the 333,000 who served is a very personal essay.
I think the other thing for those who did not enlist, who were women and who kissed goodbye to their sons and their lovers and their husbands. These silent heroes of this great tragedy and the silent heroes of every war waiting with fear for the arrival of the minister or the priest, that terrible, terrible part of the nation's story.
Women walking to the other side of the street when they saw the priest walking up the street in case the priest was coming to their home to deliver the bad news that they had lost a son or a husband or a father.
I think that's also what commends an extraordinary feat of arms, this extraordinary chapter of human tragedy to our minds and to our souls. And then the challenge of reconstruction, of resettlement, the agency of government working through the 20s and the 30s with these shattered and battered lives to craft out a new existence.
The trials, the tribulations and the tragedies of the soldier settlement scheme of which we've studied much, of which we've seen some success and much failure in the various parts of Australia in which it was embarked upon.
And here we saw the first efforts, the first efforts to try and refashion people's lives and to rebuild the communities from which they came after the extraordinary impact on the economies of those households and those communities through the loss, such huge loss of life.
And in the sweep of our history, something which is reflected on with great intensity by those charged with the responsibility of the reconstruction after the Second World War. Chifley, Curtin and the others reflecting on what had gone wrong post 1919 and how to handle and support the challenges of reconstruction, resettlement and repatriation.
It is a lesson we still must learn again today as we welcome back our veterans from wars still being fought.
And the final part of why I think this is such an extraordinary story for our nation's narrative, our nation's still young narrative, is the absolute standout messages of human courage and endurance.
What staggers me about the First World War, and for those of us who know something about the writing of military dispatches and what an incomplete art and science they could have been, is how many stories of heroism have never gone recorded. You hear snippets of them, in the second and third hand accounts of great battles and great encounters.
Simple, brave acts of heroism, not sufficiently corroborated for the purposes of the military historians and those who dispense of the military honours but they're part and parcel of the fabric of the Australian experience.
Heroic feats on the field of battle, heroic patient achievements in dealing with the aftermath of battle. Weary Dunlop writ large. Simpson and his Donkey, Weary Dunlop in a different war and so that tradition proceeds as well.
Courage, sheer courage.
A friend of mine, who was a prisoner of war in the last world war described his job as having to tend the cremation of each of the Australians who died. I cannot imagine having the courage to do that. As each of his mates died his job was to dispense of their bodies. Imagine the courage required in doing that.
So why is this war so significant in our nation's story? Why is the aftermath of this war so significant in our nation's future story? I think it is all these things. The grand narrative of nations and the personal story of families. People at their absolute best. People suffering the absolute worst.
A nation without history is like a person without memory, and that is why these Archives are such an important part of our nation's memory.
I thank those who have put together this great exhibition and it is with great pride as Prime Minister of Australia that I declare open this exhibition Shell-shocked: Australia after the Armistice.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today met with representatives of Australia's Greek community.
Greece and Australia enjoy a close and constructive relationship, based on strong community ties and one of the largest Greek-speaking populations outside Greece.
According to the 2006 Census, almost 110,000 Australians were born in Greece, with a further 365,147 children of Greece-born parents living in Australia.
The Department of Immigration and Citizenship estimates that each summer, there are as many as 100,000 Australians in Greece, many of whom are dual nationals.
In 2006-07, two-way trading between Greece and Australia was about $A232 million.
Representatives of Australian Hellenic Councils from across the country thanked the Prime Minister for his Government's continued support of United Nations Resolutions relating to Cyprus, the provision of federal police to the UN Peacekeeping contingent there and the appointment of a special envoy.
They also strongly supported the Rudd Government's proposal to establish a national curriculum for primary and secondary education.
They also discussed the Australia-Greece Social Security Agreement which came into effect on 1 October, 2008, after more than two decades of negotiations.


For those of us on the Labor side of politics, Sunday 25 November 2007 should have been a day of absolute happiness because of the election result.
But you know, November 25 wasn't quite like that for a number of us and each of us here today knows why.
All of us missed Matt on last year's election campaign and we miss him still today and there'll only ever be one Matt Price.
Today however, as Matilda has just said, isn't a sad occasion; it's a happy occasion. 
Because this book is a celebration of one of the greats of Australian journalism.
It's a celebration of a man who could write as informatively about AFL, about cricket, about golf, as he could do about the daily business of the Australian Parliament, the Doobie Brothers or the onset of middle age, an affliction which besets most of us in this place.
It's a celebration of he, who John Hartigan described, I think last year as a quality bloke.
It's a celebration of Matt, dedicated husband, dedicated Dad, dedicated family man.
It's a celebration of a man for all seasons. In fact, one of the bloggers at the time of Matt's death last year said of his writings “he always puts a bit of himself in everything that he writes”.
And I think that's what makes it stand out because all these things  -  Matt the Dad, Matt the family man, Matt the keen observer of political events, Matt the lover of bat and ball and all things to do with sport, Matt the community man.
All these things found their way in one way or another into things that he wrote and he did it with such style.
From politics to sport, music to culture, Matt's musings on just about anything, reminded of a fully rounded human being that Matt was. In fact he was the genuine all-rounder.
He could bat, he could bowl, he could field, he could probably keep as well and then turn around and describe the game afterwards. He's that sort of guy and we see that again alive in his writings.
One thing I'm reminded of in wandering through Matt's columns is just how often he strayed beyond the boundaries of his topic, whether it was politics, sport, the arts, family life. There was something always uncontainable about Matt.
Just as his trousers could never quite contain his shirt tails, and the phone could never quite contain his booming, joyful voice - a column could never quite contain Matt to a single topic, unless he was writing about of course, the Fremantle Dockers.
Matt could somehow start an article talking about politics and by the time it was over, he'd ranged far, wide and broad, from his high school reunion, to a Bob Dylan concert he'd gone to, taking you for a spin in his Volvo and then he'd have you over for a meal with the family. All in 800 words  -  stunning stuff.
And it's always more than an entertaining tumble of words  -  Matt always seemed to have a point, a fresh observation and a fresh observation freshly put and therein lay the art and the style and the panache.
He starts a column talking about the 80-something-year old down the street named Joe, who'd never recovered from losing his wife - and by the end of it he's writing sympathetically about “the abiding joy of sport” and how to quote him “the grandstands, the pubs, the lounge rooms of the world are filled with sad people seeking occasional solace in the quirks of a bouncing ball.”
If you think about it, there is something extraordinarily insightful in that observation.
If you think about it, it is an observation of the human condition, rendered in almost exquisite poetry and that is why it's memorable.
Because I think also an observation like that, you see Matt the compassionate human being, who experienced and saw other people's pain.
These are thoughtful articles, always insightful, but were never plodding, never ponderous and never heavy in their style.
As Paul Kelly remarks in his book  -  in this book I should say  -  there's a special lightness in Matt's writing, a lightness of spirit, perhaps reflecting Matt's ability to keep politics in perspective and in its place in the bigger story of life.
Something much needed in this, our own temple of democracy, where from time to time we become excessively preoccupied with the (inaudible) of our own politics and our own personal political ambitions.
Matt always seemed to be writing on a broader human canvas, and that I think is what commends him so much to us today.
That lightness often reflects too Matt's very Australian sense of the plight of the underdog  -  something so deep that he was even prompted to support the English in the 2005 Ashes series, which reminds us, there were times when Matt's sense of fair play transcended the rational.
It's a sensitivity too that shone through in little stories he'd convey about people he encountered, or in those extraordinary, difficult times, like the tragic Yogyakarta plane crash involving Press Gallery colleagues Morgan Mellish and Cynthia Banham.
Of course Matt was not always so sensitive.
He sharpened the pencil a little when it came to dealing with politicians, his meal of choice.
He saw through our foibles, he exposed our follies, he exposed our vanities and our inconsistencies. And that was just the Liberal Party. He really got going when he got onto the Labor Party. He saw that as the main course.
He made us relax a little bit, laugh a little bit at ourselves and always laugh a whole lot more when others were suffering from his sharpened pen.
I suspect my colleagues would quietly confess that once you'd felt the sharp end of Matt's pencil, you always had a faint shiver as you opened the Oz to see what he'd said in today's Sketch.
Though if your opponents had had a rough day in the Parliament the day before, you'd open the paper with relish to see what Matt had to say about their experience of the day before.
So when I opened the contents page of Top Price, I can't say I didn't shudder just a little to see an entire chapter dedicated to what has been called ‘Kevinism'.
Matt didn't show much mercy to me at the beginning, or actually, towards the end of my time of association with him.
First opening up a front on my carefully manicured hair style  -  in Matt's words, quote, “with the greatest respect, Kevin, it's a shocker”.
I've been affected by that ever since. Much more so my hairdresser in Brisbane who to this day still wishes to remain nameless.
Then there was the scientific dissection of my hand movements  -  the Count Manoeuvre, the Karate Chop, the Fist Thrust Forward and the Thumb Over the Shoulder. That “don't throw fairness out the back door”.
And as I said, if you'd grown up watching television in the 60s, on the earlier occasion, and watching some of those marvellous puppet shows, then frankly you were condemned to that in your future political career as well.
I worry about how much footage he must have watched to come up with the analysis of my hand movements and I'm only glad he didn't write particularly on the question of the examination of my ear on a particular day in the House of Representatives.
Then there was his outrageous assertion that I often deliberately sought out media coverage. And he said this, I think this is most unfair, he said “had Rudd been born female, buxom and American he'd have left Paris, Britney and Anna Nicole in the shade” unquote.
Unfair, not necessarily untrue.
But I might let that one just go through to the keeper.
But still, there were the good days, mostly days when my name wasn't in his column.
And every day, Matt brought colour and warmth to the often bland debates of the parliamentary chamber.
You see, he literally did write a “sketch”  -  because while Matt used words, in fact, what he was doing was painting pictures. He was actually drawing cartoons and he was enlivening our mind's imagination in a different way.
That was his gift and it was an extraordinary gift.
Like the column in which Matt writes that Labor's strategy in parliament  -  I think this refers to my own period  -  was having on my then political opponent Mr Howard. He described it as this, quote: “roughly the same effect as a brace of redback spiders in the prime ministerial boxer shorts” unquote.
It takes a unique mind to actually put those two visual metaphors together  -  Prime Ministerial boxer shorts  -  let's not dwell on that, and a brace of redback spiders. But to unite them in a single phrase I think requires, and took and reflected genuine talent, inspiration and poetry.
I'm not sure how he came up with that particular image, and I'm not sure I want to know how he came up with that particular image. It's certainly evocative, particularly for those of us who grew up in rural Queensland for whom the thought of a late night visit to the little house down the back, and the threats of arachnophobia, the fears of arachnophobia  -  I suppose arachnophobia is a fear  -  visiting the outhouse with spiders in the middle of the night. Maybe that was part of Matt's own experience, I'm not sure.
But as I sat opposite Mr Howard in the Parliament last year, images like that, that is of a brace of redback spiders in the Prime Ministerial boxer shorts, never entirely left my mind. And that again, we can skip.
Then there's his passing observation last year that when the worm turns in politics, it can wrap itself around your throat and strangle you. Wow.
Or his comment in late 2005 that the legislation had been tumbling through the Parliament like dirty underwear in an industrial drier.
These are remarkable phrases. These are remarkable expressions. Each of them indelible.
Sometimes disturbing, often incisive and forever fresh, but above all, simply first-class writing, and a tribute to his profession.
Matt was a sophisticated master of the ancient art of political satire  -  poking fun at us politicians, personalities and institutions and with just one image or phrase, cutting through the mounds of blather, which affect us all in our various professions from time to time in this place.
Matt's great skill was that he was never just clever and funny, he was never just informative, he was never just arguing his point.
He was always doing more than any of those things, or all of those things together.
There was always something a little extra in a Matt Price column  -  a touching aside, a breathtaking analogy, or a startling new general theory, like his argument, that I thought of a lot, that you never need more than four albums from any musician.
And that's why his writing gave us so much pleasure.
Congratulations to HarperCollins and to the team at News Limited for the good work of putting this compilation together.
It's a fitting tribute to one of our best, to one of your best, to one of the nation's best.
And it lets us all enjoy some of Matt's best columns a second time round.
I hope this book can be an inspiration for a new generation of writers.
If it can help spark in tomorrow's writers some of the curiosity, some of the style, some of the exuberance that belongs to Matt, the newspapers still have a very bright future indeed.
Susie, to Jack, Matilda and Harry, we're delighted, absolutely delighted, that you can be with us today  -  and we know that this has been a tough year for each of you.
Well, we don't really know how tough it's been because this is a very personal experience.
But we also know that you have been among friends - that you've been among real friends.
For me, it is now a singular honour, a singular honour, to officially launch Top Price  -  Matt Price on Sports, Politics, Music and Life.
Matt Price, an Australian renaissance man: Top Price, top bloke, top journalist, top dad, top husband, top mate, top Australian.
Thank you.


MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us again.
PM: Good to be with you.
MIDDLETON: You're off to the G20. What is the minimum required to fix this thing?
PM: Well as you know, the global financial crisis affects not just financial markets but the real economy and that means jobs. Around the world and in the future in Australia. What do we need to do with an international community? Work together on three things. The first is an agreement of principles on how we deal with liquidity or stability in the financial system now. Secondly, agreement on courses of action for governments through budget policy and interest rate policy to boost growth now. And thirdly, agree also on principles for changes to the financial system rules for the future, including on transparency, including on capital adequacies of financial institutions and proper risk management systems, as well as remuneration arrangements for executives. These three sets of changes are needed because they're important for the future.
MIDDLETON: How far advanced then are you on this proposal for restrictions on remuneration of executives and penalties, in terms of capital ratios and so on.
PM: Well, there are 20 governments at work on this at the moment and there are bits of paper flying around the world at a pace of knots and ours is one of them, and our embassies have been active in 20 capitals, advancing our view on what needs to go into each of those three areas I mentioned before.
But on the question of executive remuneration, that'll obviously be the subject of discussion. I couldn't predict now what the outcome will be but I do detect across a whole range of governments, there's a simple view that with the system as it was, it cannot be sustained into the future. Executive remunerations of financial institutions have to change. And that means changing for those institutions which are systemically significant, in other words, those that can affect the whole economy.
You can't have a rewards system which says to people maximise your risks and we'll maximise your pay check. That's just dumb, it's wrong and it's bad. It's bad in Australia and it's bad overseas. We need to change that, but the detail of it is what we're in Washington to look at.
MIDDLETON: This meeting has been convened by President Bush who's just weeks away from leaving office. His own administration's actions, in particular, driving countries budgets deep into deficit, in fact aggravated (inaudible) the global financial crisis. Why would anyone listen to him?
PM: The President of the United States has done the right thing in convening this meeting of the G20. The alternative was to bring a narrower group of economies together, principally in Europe. But because this global financial crisis affects the global economy, developed economies and developing economies, the G20 which brings together the major developed economies and the major emerging economies is the right form. President Bush has made the right decision there.
Our job is to work with him, as the President of the United States, to come up with detailed approaches to the three areas of challenge  -  stability of the financial system now, growth in the economy now, through what budgets can do and what interest rates can do, and thirdly, rules for the financial system for the future. And us getting together in Washington at this time is one important part of the process of fixing that. Working groups will then be created, I presume, and that'll take a little while to iron out all the details.
MIDDLETON: Before we move on, speaking of being listened to, why would President Bush listen to you given the fracas over what he may or may not have said to you in your conversation with him about, whether he knew what the G20 is or isn't?
PM: I notice Mr Turnbull seems to be going on and on about this. Can I just say that if the White House says and I have said and the US Ambassador has said, that the reported remarks in this article were not made. It's always been my view, and it is my view today. From the point of view of the US Ambassador, that's the end of the matter and that's certainly our view as well.
But Mr Turnbull's other point is this  -  that there's some problem then in conducting diplomatic relations. I spent this morning on the telephone with the US Secretary of State. A perfectly normal conversation about other matters that we're attending to. The business of government and international government goes on.
Mr Turnbull's interest is this. Prosecuting a political point scoring campaign when the relevant governments have said this matter is dealt with. That's my view, it's the American view  -  the only one who doesn't have that view is Mr Turnbull.
MIDDLETON: You have denied that the President said this, but did you or anyone in your office use the words ‘What's the G20'?
PM: What I have said right from the beginning is that the President of the United States did not make those remarks and that's been my view right from the beginning and I'm not changing that view because it's the truth. That's exactly what transpired. I've also said that newspapers put together their own stories  -  it's a matter for them as to how they assemble their stories, as I've said in the past.
But again I draw your attention to the fact that the White House has said, the US Ambassador has said, and I have said that this matter has concluded. That's my view.
MIDDLETON: Is it possible that any of the people who were at dinner with you that night, the Editor-in-Chief of the Australian Chris Mitchell, The Australian Newspaper, might have ever heard words to that effect?
PM: You know something, Jim, people can rattle on about this as much as they like, but the bottom line is there are important matters at stake now in dealing with the challenges of the global economy, dealing with the G20 meeting in Washington and the only person who has any political interest in prosecuting its agenda is one Malcolm Turnbull. It's in his political interests.
If the government of the United States says that this matter is concluded, and that's my view as well, and if on the day that we're having this interview I'm talking to the Secretary of State about the normal business of two governments working together, frankly I think that says it all. It says it all about Mr Turnbull's party political agenda which he prosecutes on a daily basis. So good luck to him, that's party politics. I'm on about dealing with the real challenge of jobs, the financial system and whether people's bank deposits are secure for the future around the world.
That I think is what the mums and dads of Australia are interested in, that's what I'm interested in, not in Mr Turnbull's political gains.
MIDDLETON: What did you talk about with Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State, in your conversation? Did she call you or did you call her?
PM: Well, the Secretary of State telephoned me as part of the normal discourse between states.
MIDDLETON: Indeed, indeed. You congratulated China earlier on this week on its massive stimulus package, but with China's economy in far, far better shape than the United States, for example, if China is taking such drastic action, doesn't that suggest that things could get even worse that even you have been suggesting in recent times?
PM: Well, the global financial crisis is real and is affecting the real economy and that means jobs and growth in the developed economies and the developing economies.
This is affecting us all which is why this meeting in Washington is actually unique. We are at the beginning, if you like, of a new international period. Because this crisis is so overwhelming for so many economies, we have no alternative but to work together on this, and that includes the Chinese, that includes the French, ourselves and the Canadians, the Americans, the Brazilians because we're all in this together and I think all the governments of the world have finally woken up to that fact.
On the question of the Chinese economy, I certainly welcomed the stimulus package which they announced the other day. It is significant and it does reflect their concerns about slowing global growth, because China's own growth is in part export dependent.
The slowing global economy, it means that China's own export growth would be affected as well. But China also I believe is acting not just in its national interest, but has also realised that if it reflates its own economy, or should I say adds to growth in its own economy, it helps the wider region and it helps the global economy as well. As China did after the 1998 Asian Financial Crisis. Important for us in Australia as well.
In fact I was speaking on Chinese television about this a couple of days ago to a Chinese audience about our experience of the financial crisis and what China can continue to do to assist the global economy and adding to growth is one of those things.
MIDDLETON: Would floating its currency be another?
PM: Well Chinese attitudes to its own currency policy, as you know, is a very sensitive matter. And certainly it's been caught up in the bilateral difficulties which have arisen from time to time between China and the United States in particular in recent years.
There has been some movements in Chinese currency over time. The Americans have argued that it's not as fast as it should have been, but I think it's important for us all to work together through budget policy, through monetary policy and other coordinated actions to assist growth in the global economy and Chinese domestic demand is a huge part of it. 1.3 billion consumers with access to credit to consume more helps us deal with this challenge and that's why I think the Chinese have been helpful to the world so far.
It's certainly part of the discussions I had with Chinese leaders here in Canberra over the weekend as well.
MIDDLETON: Australia's announced, already announced, it's own fiscal stimulus package, quite a big one by Australian standards, growth is still on the slow  -  are you prepared to go into deficit to prop up growth?
PM: Our view is that, first of all, we can keep this economy growing in positive terms. That is going to be difficult because the rest of the world is now sliding into a global recession.
But we believe that through the actions that we've taken in fiscal policy, supported by the actions by the Reserve Bank on monetary policy, can continue to support positive growth, but it's going to be tougher and tougher and tougher as global conditions get worse and worse and worse -
MIDDLETON: So you wouldn't rule out deficit if necessary.
PM: - that's on the question of positive growth. Let me go onto the question of the budget. Our policy as you know is to support a Budget surplus over the economic cycle.
That's been our position since the days of Opposition, it's the position I took to the election campaign, it's our position today and you will see from the midyear financial and economic outlook that we are projecting modest surpluses across the years ahead. That remains our position but again that challenge will get tougher and tougher and tougher.
MIDDLETON: And you have had at least one of your Ministers, Assistant Treasurer Chris Bowen acknowledge the possibility of deficit and also indeed (inaudible) as markets eased (inaudible)
PM: Well the Government's policy is clear cut, that is we support a Budget surplus over the economic cycle and the action that we have taken, strong decisive action in support of a fiscal stimulus package of $10.4 billion, about 1% of GDP and crunched into a 9 month period reflects the strong, sensible, conservative Budgeting we did in May to prepare for contingencies like this, and we are glad that we have done so.
The Government also remains prepared to take further decisive action as is necessary for the future. But you know something this is going to be tough and hard and bumpy on the way through. There are no quick fixes here, you are dealing with a global challenge.
But this Australian Government is determined not to simply stand idly by as I think Mr Turnbull would have us do and wait for things to happen. But instead act on the Budget stimulus $10.4 billion, act in support of the auto industry $6.2 billion, act in terms of nation building and infrastructure with a package that we will announce presently and for the future, as well as match the strong action which has been taken on monetary policy or interest rates by the Reserve Bank.
This is a decisive way forward, the alternative is to simply act as a casting commentator which seems to be Mr Turnbull's preferred position.
MIDDLETON: Before we wrap this up, (inaudible) the way in which the world financial system is to be run and regulated is changed, should China and perhaps India be given a real seat at the table, real decision making powers?
PM: I believe that China and India do deserve a greater place at the international table, one of the ways in which that can be secured is through the continuation of the G20 into the future and that will depend in part on how this is managed through this conference in Washington. If we deliver a good outcome, a good outcome then it does suggest itself as a meeting of major emerging economies including China, India, Brazil, Mexico and others including Indonesia, as an appropriate vehicle for dealing with these challenges longer term.
MIDDLETON: But the bigger the group the harder it is to get effective decision making, if you get beyond the G8 and China certainly, possibly India that's really about the size, a manageable size, anything bigger than that becomes too large to play cricket (inaudible).
PM: You know something, what has been the big let up of this global financial crisis so far. Everything is connected to everything else, who would have thought that banks in Iceland would have a huge impact on what's going on in London and elsewhere and they have. Because of the interconnected nature of the current global financial system and economic system, having the major developed and developing economies together in a common body to deal with these challenges I believe is a smart way to go.
The virtue of the G20 represents something like 90% of global GDP, represents a huge slice of global trade, a huge slice of global stock market equity and a huge slice of the global financial system together around the table.
And that's about the size of an Australian Cabinet, 20 people. Can I suggest it's actually not a bad vehicle for dealing with these challenges for the future. But it will depend entirely on how countries as diverse as Brazil, India, Germany, Japan, Indonesia and Australia fashion a common outcome, that will be the test of leadership and this will be tough. We will see what happens.
MIDDLETON: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time, happy trails for this official visit.
PM: Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today, one hundred years since Andrew Fisher became Prime Minister of Australia, is an excellent opportunity for us to recall an often neglect Prime Minister, who did so much to build the economic, social and defence foundations of our nation.
History has perhaps allowed Fisher to be overshadowed by the larger-than-life personalities of contemporaries like Billy Hughes and Alfred Deakin.
But as a Prime Minister of a country still in its first decade of nationhood, his achievements were remarkable.
And one hundred years on, it's time we give Andrew Fisher his due recognition.
It is often noted that Fisher led the first Labor Government to command a parliamentary majority in any nation in the world.
That is an achievement of historic significance.
As David Day's new biography shows, Fisher's life story really is the stuff of legend  -  from the grinding poverty of a Scottish coal mining town, to a new life in Australia at age 22, his election to the Queensland State Parliament in 1893 and his elevation to the office of Prime Minister at the age of 46, just 15 years later.
But to Fisher, politics was never just about getting there.
It was about what you did once you'd got there.
Fisher was interested in reform, not just acclaim.
It's his achievements in government that are the most remarkable feature of Andrew Fisher's life:
     * as a great nation-builder;
     * as a social reformer who helped embed the great tradition of the fair go into the nation's soul. and
     * as a strategist for Australia's national defence.
As Clem Lloyd wrote, as Prime Minister Andrew Fisher “embarked on an exhilarating wave of public policy inception, innovation and embellishment, seismic in its dimensions and impact.”
And it's those achievements we can celebrate today.
Fisher's achievements as a nation-builder are nothing short of extraordinary.
His Government established:
     * the national capital;
     * the transcontinental railway;
     * the Commonwealth Bank;
     * a national paper currency;
     * the reform of Federal/State financial relations by shifting to per capita payments;
     * the single penny rate for postage across the nation, and
     * the fostering of the arts with a distinctly Australian sensibility.
Many of these ideas had been talked about for years.
Andrew Fisher's great achievement was to turn those ideas into action - bringing a sustained political commitment to the legislative, financial and logistic challenges of national development.
Fisher's legacy is an enduring one.
Consider the establishment of our national capital.
That we even stand today in this building, in this national capital, is in part because of Fisher's legacy.
As Dr David Headon noted last month in his Senate Occasional Lecture, the so-called ‘Battle of the Sites' had raged since the earliest days of the Federation movement, and as the years rolled by, it had increasingly become a war of attrition.
It had engendered intense colonial rivalries and jealousies, with communities across the nation scrambling over each other to promote themselves as the future national capital.
It's extraordinary to think that the nation's founders deliberately searched for the coldest possible locations for the nation's capital  -  because of a widespread belief that Anglo Saxons and Anglo Celts, as Dr Headon says, “functioned at their best, their British Empire best, in a cold climate” .
Indeed, the West Australian Premier John Forrest had urged that the new capital “ought to be a cool place; indeed the coolest place in Australia”.
Those of us who've survived a few Canberra winters might think this place would have swiftly knocked out any rival towns.
But in fact Canberra wasn't the founders' first choice  -  there were even colder options.
The first choice of the nation's Parliament in 1904 was in fact the town of Dalgety on the Snowy River.
Not everyone was convinced  -  Dr Headon notes that one Queensland MP spent a few nights in Dalgety and warned its winds were so fierce that if you ventured outside in winter had to hang on for dear life.
Another MP warned Dalgety was so freezing cold that it would “kill half of the older men”.
In any event, Dalgety was not to be.
The NSW Government refused to hand over the land at Dalgety, and demanded a site closer to Sydney.
What followed was four more years of investigations, arguments and tours of possible sites across NSW by Federal MPs.
This didn't end until Andrew Fisher became Prime Minister and settled the question of the nation's capital  -  recognising how important it was to the nation's future.
Fisher himself was not an early advocate for the Canberra site  -  as he said in introducing the Seat of Government Act to the Parliament, his preference had been the town of Dalgety.
But he recognised that a nation needed a capital, and he wanted the question settled.
Just a few weeks into Fisher's first term, Parliament passed the Seat of Government Act  -  and Australia at last had that capital.
And Fisher's Government got on with the job of building the new capital, overcoming opposition from among his own Senators to provide the funding to get the new capital going.
Fisher's successful establishment of the Commonwealth Bank was another great major nation-building achievement.
After the widespread collapse of financial institutions in the 1890s Depression, Labor had strongly advocated the establishment of a national bank.
But this only became a reality when Fisher delivered the parliamentary majority at the 1910 election that made this initiative possible.
Fisher also played a key role in making sure the new Commonwealth Bank was effective, personally recruiting a highly experienced banker to establish the new institution.
The Commonwealth Bank improved Australia's financial and economic self-reliance, making it easier for Australian businesses to borrow and for the Government to obtain a source of cheap loan funds, independent of the English banks.
The Commonwealth Bank also guaranteed the security of bank deposits, as well as making Australia less reliant on English banks for future borrowing needs.
Another major nation-building achievement of the Fisher Government was the transcontinental railway across Australia, a piece of national economic infrastructure that connected the east to the west.
The transcontinental railway had been talked about for many years.
Indeed Western Australia had sought to include in the federal Constitution a provision relating to its construction by the Commonwealth.
But it was not until Fisher that the talk ended and the action began  -  with the Commonwealth authorising construction of the railway through the Kalgoorlie to Port Augusta Railway Act in 1911, and then financing its construction.
The nation-building agenda strengthened the Australia's economic base, built foundations for future prosperity and fostered a sense of national identity in a nation that had been in existence for little over a decade.
Fisher's extensive social reforms are a second enduring legacy of his time in office.
Fisher believed that national governments had an important role in overcoming injustice and building a fairer society for working people and for all the people who would otherwise fall through the cracks.
Fisher campaigned vigorously for the age pension throughout his political career.
When Deakin as Prime Minister adopted a lesser version of the age and invalid pension plan than Fisher had been advocating, Fisher put politics to one side and supported Deakin's plan.
Pragmatically deciding that half a loaf was better than none for Australians unable to work and without means, Labor joined with Deakin's Liberals and the Invalid and Old-Age Pensions Act became law in 1908.
Importantly, Fisher tackled the problem of broadening the Commonwealth revenue base  -  the challenge that for almost a decade had prevented the establishment of the age pension.
The result was that in July 1909, Prime Minister Andrew Fisher presided over the introduction of an age pension for women over 60 and men over 65  -  a great and enduring social reform. 
Fisher also fought for decent workers' compensation throughout his parliamentary life - a deeply personal fight for him, after he had lost his brothers James and Robert in mining accidents and his father had contracted black lung disease.
Just as he had championed workers' compensation legislation in the Queensland Parliament, as Prime Minister Fisher secured the passage of the first Commonwealth Workmen's Compensation Act in 1912.
Fisher was also strongly committed to advancing the role of women. Earlier in his career he had strongly supported women's suffrage  -  a cause to which Margaret Fisher also gave prominent support when she participated in a suffragette's march while visiting London in 1911.
In office, Prime Minister Fisher introduced the first ‘baby bonus' or maternity allowance in the nation's history  -  a payment designed to help women with the medical cost of a doctor or midwife at childbirth, thus reducing the risks to both mother and baby.
These measures  -  for working people, for mothers, for the aged, sick and injured  -  all reflected the strength of the Fisher Government's commitment to social reform and building a fairer society.
A third enduring contribution of the Fisher Government was its role in planning for the defences of the young Australian nation.
Fisher worried deeply about potential security threats to Australia, a concern reflect in his first cabinet meeting as Prime Minister where he undertook to take the lead on defence policy.
The establishment of an Australian navy had been part of Labor's platform since 1902.
Fisher vigorously pursued the aim of an Australian navy under Australian control.
He rejected the widely held belief that the Royal Navy would always be there to protect Australia.
He wasn't anti-British  -  indeed, he is famous for his pledge that Australia would defend Britain “to our last man and our last shilling” - and he accepted the Admiralty's wartime control of the Australian fleet.
But he understood that the new Australian nation needed to take responsibility for its national defence.
That is why he established Royal Australian Navy.
The Fisher Government introduced compulsory military training, a step that substantially strengthened the Commonwealth armed force.
Fisher opened the Royal Military College at Duntroon in 1911, following the recommendations of Lord Kitchener review of Australia's defence in 1910 initiated by the Deakin Government in 1909.
The Fisher Government also approved the first funding for military aviation training in 1911.
Fisher also appointed the first chief of Australia's general staff, Colonel William Bridges  -  a soldier whose death from injuries at Gallipoli underscored the gravity of Australia's losses in the war.
With this record of achievement, it is significant that when the First World War broke out during the 1914 election campaign, Australia turned to Fisher and Labor for leadership.
All up, Fisher had less than five years in office. The obstacles he faced were huge - yet his achievements were prodigious.
He faced war, reluctant coalition partners, financial constraints and a government with still relatively limited infrastructure.
Yet he led one of the most productive and industrious governments in Australian history.
As he set out from Gympie for the first sitting of Australia's new national Parliament in 1901, Fisher had told his local supporters that he had “one aim in life”:
“to assist to the best of his ability in making the Australian people the most happy and prosperous on the face of the earth.”
Fisher didn't achieve everything he aspired to.
But he did fulfil this one, simple, noble, aim.
And he left a rich legacy in so doing.
A hundred years later, it's time we rediscovered it, and gave Fisher and his achievements the recognition they so justly deserve. 


The passage through the Senate today of the legislation setting up the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority marks a new era of hope for people needing organ transplants.
The authority, the centrepiece of the Rudd Government's strategy to increase Australia's low rate of donation, will implement and oversee Australia's new organ donation and transplantation system.
The Rudd Government will work with states and territories, clinicians, consumers and the community sector to build a world-leading system to reduce unnecessary suffering for thousands of Australians who are waiting for donated organs.
Now that the legislation has been passed, the Government expects to announce the head of the authority as quickly as possible so that the authority can begin operating early in the new year.
A dedicated team within the Department of Health and Ageing has been working full-time on the new national donation and transplantation system to ensure that implementation can progress as quickly as possible.
The Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority created today is part of a national reform package worth $151.1 million, including new funding of $136.4 million over four years.
The key features of the reform package include:
     * $67 million to fund dedicated organ donation specialist doctors and other staff in public and private hospitals;
     * $46 million to establish the authority, to be set up by 1 January 2009;
     * $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
     * $13.4 million to continue national public awareness and education;
     * $1.9 million for counselling for potential donor families; and
     * Other significant measures including enhanced professional education programs, consistent clinical protocols, ‘clinical trigger' checklists and data collection for organ transplants in hospitals.
The Rudd Government encourages individuals to do two things to help bring the gift of life to the thousands of Australians who need it:
     * Talk to your families if you are considering becoming a donor. A decision to donate that is fully understood and supported by your family is the best decision.
     * Register your consent for organ donation on the Australian Organ Donation Register, which is administered by Medicare Australia. People can obtain registration forms at the Medicare Australia web site, www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/organ , by calling Medicare on 1800-777-203, or by visiting their local Medicare office.


PM: Well, today we have met, the Treasurer and I, with former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who has been designated by the President-elect Barack Obama, as the representative to deal with incoming foreign heads of government.
We have just had a good and long conversation about the global financial crisis and other subjects.
I was able to reiterate our congratulations through Madeleine Albright to Senator Obama and his team on their recent election.
And also to reaffirm the fact that the Australian Government will work closely, very closely, with this incoming Obama Administration on the challenges that we now face around the world. Of course, principal among which is dealing with the global financial crisis.
It was a good meeting, a friendly meeting, it was a long meeting, and I've met, of course, Madeleine Albright on many occasions before.
President-elect Obama has designated Madeleine Albright as his representative in dealing with the range of incoming foreign delegations who are here for the G20 summit.
On the question of the challenges which lie ahead of us, it's quite clear from the Treasurer's recent discussions with his colleagues as G20 finance ministers, and more broadly, that the world faces grave economic challenges ahead.
In fact, every economy in the G7 has now experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth. And of course, we've had recent developments in the case of the German economy as well.
Here in the United States, some 1.2 million jobs have been lost since January, and around the world the International Labour Organisation is forecasting that unemployment will rise to 210 million next year.
Therefore, we face a challenge as a global community. We face a global challenge. We as Governments of the world must engage in a global war against unemployment. This is a challenge for all of us. It affects growth, it affects jobs. It affects every community and economy around the world. And therefore, the need for government action in this most difficult time.
Turning ahead to the G20 Summit itself, it's quite plain that this meeting reflects the fact that a global crisis of this dimension requires a global solution.
We're all in this together, whether we are from the Asia-Pacific region, whether we are from Europe, whether we are from Latin America. The challenges are common challenges. No-one's economy is immune. No-one's labour forces are immune. No-one's financial systems are immune. We are in this together and together we need a common solution for the future.
That is why this decision to convene this meeting of the G20 heads of government is so important. This gathering of G20 economies represents some 85 per cent of global GDP. And together, we need to work against the challenges which now present themselves to us collectively.
What we need, of course, is to work on in the days ahead on how we stabilise financial systems around the world, the future shape of regulation for financial markets into the future, and what concerted actions government can and should take to support growth and to support jobs into the future.
Our challenge here in Washington as leaders of the major economies around the world is to put together the building blocks for the future. Building blocks on stabilising financial markets. Building blocks on better regulation for those markets for the future. And most critically, building blocks about government investment in growth and jobs at a time when the world is facing an impending global economic recession.
I'll take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, would you like to see some kind of group fiscal strategy out of this meeting like it was seen on monetary policy a few weeks ago?
PM: The challenge all governments face now is to put together the building blocks for growth for the future. Right now we see the data emerging about this global economic recession. Therefore, governments must step into the breech here and now.
In Australia, we've taken early action in terms of our Economic Security Strategy. Some one percentage point of GDP - $10.4 billion. Globally need to see concerted, cooperative action by as many governments as possible around the world on using their budgets and monetary policy to support growth into the future.
The principles of that I'm sure we'll discuss as heads of government starting here in Washington in the next 24 hours and during the deliberations on Saturday. That, I believe, is critical for the future.
Let's call a spade a spade: this is a really tough time. This is going to take a long time to get through, there are no quick fixes. You can either stand, however, to one side and allow growth to plummet in the principal economies in the world and jobs to suffer as a result, or government can step in and government through Budget policy can support growth and jobs.
That is our view, reflected in what we have done in Australia. And I believe what you will see from governments around the world is an active deliberation on what we can now do together to support growth and jobs into the future through government investment.
JOURNALIST: Since you've announced your package, Mr Rudd, the figures that have come out have shown the economy is headed for a somewhat worse state, or at least a marginally worse state. Do you think it would be appropriate soon to augment your fiscal package and put a bit more into the economy?
PM: Michelle, we don't rule anything out for the future. And the reason is we are in unprecedented times. We are facing the world's worst global and financial crisis in three quarters of a century. We have taken early and decisive action on the guarantee to banks. Early and decisive action in the fiscal stimulus package of $10.4 billion. And we have also announced a $6.2 billion package for the auto industry in Australia as well.
As I have said from the beginning, we as a Government, however remain prepared to take whatever additional and further action that is necessary to support growth and jobs.
The alternative, which is government to stand to one side, is simply to see these numbers spiral out of control. We in Australia don't intend to do that. The Government has a role to play  -  we intend to play that role.
JOURNALIST: In terms of timing, how crucial is it in terms of timing there be the concerted action that you're calling for now, and what would delay mean? And secondly, when you keep saying ‘concerted action', are you hoping to walk out of here with an agreement whereby 20 countries will commit to do some action, be it a spending boost or working on availability of credit to sort of apply the paddles to the chest and go ‘pow' in an unprecedented way?
PM: Can you do the ‘pow' bit again? I've been distracted from the first part of your questions. I got the ‘pow' bit.
JOURNALIST: Timing.
PM: Timing, okay.
JOURNALIST: What happens if we don't do it now?
PM: Both the Treasurer's view and mine is that, frankly, every week, every month, which lies ahead, is critical. We in Australia have taken the view that it is absolutely important to be ahead of the curve here. You see, if you have an implosion in financial markets, which is what we have seen, the flow through impact which that has on the real economy, frankly, the economic history books are there to tell you what happens.
You can either sit around and wait for data to emerge, or act decisively. That's why we believe every week, every month, is important. Which is why we acted when we did, and remain prepared to take further action.
On the second point about the expectations of the G20 itself, a starting point, and I referred quite deliberately before to building blocks, is this  -  one of the building blocks is an agreement across heads of government about the need for coordinated fiscal and monetary policy stimulus against the actual dimensions of the decline in economic activity which has occurred off the back of the crisis.
We have a $60 trillion world economy. Some trillions of dollars have been sucked out already and prospectively because of this crisis. 
The challenge, therefore, is who begins to plug the gap? If the private economy is under severe stress because of what's occurred in financial markets, government has a responsibility to act to assist to plug that gap. No single government can do that along. Governments acting cooperatively is the only way for3ward, and what we'll seek to do this weekend is to begin to assemble the building blocks of doing that.
Do you want to add to that, Wayne?
SWAN: Certainly, look, swift action of fiscal policy is absolutely critical in the current environment. That was recognised by finance ministers in Brazil. Indeed, this was recognised at the last meeting of the IMF.
When you are faced with a very strong slowdown in growth, swift action on fiscal policy is one of the most positive actions that you can take to prevent a damaging loss of output. Because at the end of the day, this is about protecting households, it's about protecting businesses. And the one thing that government can control and move very swiftly on is fiscal policy.
JOURNALIST: Are you guys here to stave off a depression collectively?
PM: Our challenge is to do everything humanly possible to support growth, and to support jobs. And the reason is we are facing the gravest global financial and economic crisis in three quarters of a century. 
Therefore, you can stand to one side and wait for data to roll in, or you can act.
Furthermore, apart from national actions, and we'll be taking more, apart from national actions, the key challenge with these heads of government, representing 85 per cent of the global economy, is to take that action to the greatest extent possible, together. That is critical in terms of the real economy. It's equally critical in terms of confidence for the future as well.
SWAN: Just one other point, one size doesn't fit all. Not every country will have the same capacity to expand their fiscal policy. But together, if a number of nations act, that really carries great weight.
PM: I come back again to the power factor that our friend from the Oz was referring to before, think of the numbers  -  there's a $60 trillion global economy. Some trillions have been sucked out because of what's happened. That then flows through to jobs. The ILO's figure is some 210 million jobs around the world. Now, the alternative is what are the options  -  the private sector to backfill that immediately? Given what has happened, that's going to be a challenge. We can assist the private sector in so doing and we will do so.
But more broadly, it is a role for governments acting to the greatest extent possible, to assist in filling that gap. The government of China has acted already with an $850 billion-plus stimulus package over two years, representing some seven per cent of GDP. We've had a 50 trillion yen package out of our friends in the government of Japan. We have had decisive action also, of course, from a number of other OECD economies, including our own. But this is just the beginning of what the world needs to do.
JOURNALIST: The Obama transition government has talked about a second stimulus package when Obama takes office. Will you be urging Mr Bush to perhaps move sooner, and did you get any indication from Madeleine Albright about what the new government will do here?
PM: We had a good and general discussion with former Secretary of State Albright about the global financial crisis and how Australia will work as close as possible with the Obama Administration on the response to that challenge for the future, not just on financial market regulation but also in terms of stimulus to the real economy.
The challenge we all face is to get the detail of this as right as possible. A lot of the data is opaque  -  that is, it is still emerging. But what we know from economic history is if you wait for all the data to become crystal clear and pristine in its clarity it is often too late.
Our strong view, therefore, as the government of Australia, is that as early as possible that the global community can act within their economic capacity to stimulate global growth, the better.
The numbers are stark  -  a $60 trillion economy, some trillions having already been sucked out, who's going to put that back in? That must be done on a concerted basis.
JOURNALIST: President Bush was making the case today strongly against greater government regulation of financial markets. That puts him at odds with you somewhat, doesn't it?
PM: The President's speech was dealing what the challenges which open economies face for the future and I think the President's speech also spoke quite clearly about some of the problems of regulation which have occurred in the past.
What's the challenge here? This is not a debate between capitalism and socialism. This is a debate about getting the regulation of open markets right for the future. That's what we're on about here  -  making sure that the core principles which underpin a market economy  -  transparency, proper capital adequacy, proper consistency across capital jurisdictions  -  that these are right, clear and transparent.
This is not an argument for more regulation. It is an argument for better and more effective regulation for the future. That's what we're on about.
JOURNALIST: When you say that you need coordinated fiscal stimulus, given that some countries have already acted and others haven't, are you saying that countries that already have acted should do some more as part of this coordinated move?
PM: Michelle, I can see where your mind is going immediately, as you join these dots together. The onset of the financial crisis which has been occurring for most of the period that we've been in office, and intensifying in the last several months, means that we need to take into account is fiscal policy decisions already taken and those which still need to be taken.
It is the aggregate of actions and decisions taken and those which still must be taken which is important here.
Again, the question is one ultimately of mathematics. You can't suck out trillions of dollars from the global economy and expect there to be no employment consequences.
The practical question of mathematics is who puts it back in? A private sector which is battered and bruised by what's happened in the financial markets  -  and we'll support them to the greatest extent possible, as we are doing, for example, with the auto industry in Australia, and/or the role of government?
And we constantly argue that in these exceptional times, these extraordinary times, these virtually unprecedented times, there is a decisive role for government in providing the stimulus that's necessary. Embracing actions already taken. Foreshadowing actions which still need to be taken and for that to be done to the greatest extent possible collaboratively across the world.


PM BROWN: Thank you very much for joining us. I'm delighted to be meeting Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister of Australia.
Kevin Rudd is taken a very big leadership role in trying to address the problems of our financial system. The Australian Government has just announced a major fiscal stimulus and his leadership is proposing reforms in the international financial system which are very important to the conclusions I believe we'll reach today.
I think the key thing is that we need to stabilise the banking system. We need to show that monetary and fiscal policy is working to best effect so that we can take our economies through these difficult times. And we need to continue the momentum which is absolutely essential to reform the international financial system to deal with these obvious failings that have been exposed over these last few months. And at the same time, by making the changes, to make people more confident about the financial system so that they can feel sure that their savings are safe, that their mortgages will be dealt with in a proper way, and of course, that we can have our jobs and our economy and the prosperity that people want.
These are all the issues that we will be dealing with tomorrow, but I wanted to thank Kevin for his leadership in all these areas.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much, Gordon.
The British Government and the Australian Government have been working closely together in recent weeks and months and most particularly in the lead up to the G20 Summit here in Washington. And I thank the British Prime Minister for the excellent work which he and his representatives have been doing in capitals around the world to seek to forge a consensus to move towards this important meeting in Washington tomorrow.
The challenge we face is this  -  this global financial crisis has become a global economic crisis with impacts on the real economy and on jobs. It affects families right across the world, whether you are in a developed economy or a developing economy, large countries and small, rich and poor.
So this is a challenge of global dimensions requiring an intrinsically global response.
Therefore, as we meet as heads of government of economies representing some 85 per cent of global production, the challenge we face is: one, the stabilisation of the financial system now; two, proper regulations for the future operations of financial markets; and three, most critically, to the greatest extent possible, coordinated fiscal and monetary policy action to support growth and jobs in the critical year which lies ahead.
This is not just a question of high policy debate. This is of direct relevance to households right across the world. And again, I commend the British Government for their leadership across the world in preparation for this important meeting in Washington tomorrow.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said how crucial it is that these international institutions are reformed and the regulatory (inaudible) is reformed -  what are the dangers of this weekend that that's going to get swept aside in favour of talking fiscal and monetary stimulus? And, also (inaudible)
PM BROWN: Well, I've been pushing both immediate reform of the financial system and the stimulus that is necessary for the world economy to move forward. I think immediate reform is necessary and I hope we will set a timetable for that reform to be agreed and implemented because we have got to show people that there can be confidence in the financial system.
Yes, we want to do these reforms so it avoids a crisis in the future, but to make these reforms it's important to do it now so the people are more confident about the financial system that is responsible for their savings, for their investments, for their pensions, for their mortgages.
But I've also been pressing, as has Kevin, for an immediate fiscal stimulus. We've seen monetary policy, interest rates cut, but we also need to see as everybody I think is now seeing in every different continent of the world a move on fiscal policy so that we can make our economies move more quickly forward.
Now, I'm conscious all the time that our undivided attention as government is on homeowners who are worried about their mortgages, pensioners worried about their savings, people worried about their jobs. And therefore it's essential that we combine greater certainty about the financial system from reform and making our interest rates policies and our fiscal policies work so that people can actually see the economy moving forward over the next period of time.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, how important is it going to be this weekend that America falls in line with the rest of the world? And also, you've left the way open for further Australian spending. Looking at the numbers, won't that inevitably push us into deficit?
PM RUDD: Well, the United States has taken the right action in convening this G20 Summit here in Washington.
As I said before, this is a global challenge requiring a global response, and the United States in convening the meeting representing some 85 per cent of world production has done the right thing.
Secondly, in doing so, they have brought together both the developed and developing economies and major emerging economies. And this is precisely the forum necessary to deal with the challenges which are going forward.
Furthermore, on the question of regulation of financial markets, on the question of support for economic growth and stimulus, we believe that we can work all those things through with all of the participating governments  -  that includes the government of the United States as well.
The US, I believe, has done the right thing in convening this meeting, and what we've seen through the US in their work with all of us in the preparation of decisions for leaders in the lead up to tomorrow's meeting, they've been very active, very supportive, and very constructive.
On the second part of your question which goes to the need for coordinated stimulus, as Prime Minister Brown has just said, this is a view of governments practically all across the world.
We are facing a major assault on growth and jobs into calendar year 2009. This is a major challenge for households across the world. You can either stand back and do nothing, or you can act, and act decisively through the policy instruments available to us. Both in interest rates policy as well as direct Budget stimulus.
For us in Australia, we have made forward provisioning for the package of measures that we have announced, and we stand ready and determined to take up whatever further action is necessary to support growth and jobs into the future.
If I could add one final point, this in Washington is a critical first step. What we will also need to do is to as leaders convene again. And that is going to be important to draw this important work which we are currently engaged in to its proper conclusion. And again, I support Britain's leadership in not just assisting and forging a consensus around tomorrow's meeting, but in providing necessary support for the work going forward as well.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean yes on the deficit?
PM RUDD: On the question  -  well actually, that wasn't directly asked  -  but let me just go to that because I was -
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM RUDD: Sorry, I lost the end of it, this is the question I answered last night.
Our policy remains to maintain a Budget surplus across the economic cycle. Our policy has been that since before the Australian election, it's been that since the election, and the same going forward. But we remain determined to take any policy action necessary to support growth and jobs into the future, consistent with our policy of retaining a surplus across the economic cycle. 
Thanks very much, got to go.
PM BROWN: Thanks very much.


This Summit representing some 20 economies around the world represents about 85 per cent of global GDP, and the Summit has been responding to a challenge facing the global financial system and the global economy and affecting, therefore, the future of us all.
The Summit, as reflected in the communiqué, has been blunt about the causes of this crisis, attributing those causes formally to a failure of the regulatory system underpinning our financial institutions.
The Summit has been equally blunt about the consequences which this crisis poses, not just for the financial sector, but more broadly for the real economy and, more broadly again, for employment. The Summit has also been clear about the necessary response for the future in three particular areas.
The first, of course, is to ensure that we undertake the necessary financial system reforms to prevent this type of crisis from occurring again. And in doing so, the Summit has agreed on five major core principles to guide regulatory reform.
Firstly, transparency of firms' disclosures of their financial product, including the future of credit default swaps and also the operation of over-the-counter transactions; secondly, the reform of executive remuneration, rather than the rewarding of excessive risk; thirdly, the strengthening of prudential oversight; fourthly, the strengthening of the oversight of credit rating agencies; and fifthly, action to prevent market manipulation. That's one series of actions for the future.
The second, of course, relates to the real economy and a commitment to economic growth through cooperative action  -  cooperative economic policy action to support growth and to support jobs, including, and I quote the words of the communiqué: “Immediate steps to use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demands to rapid effect.” Various leaders reflected the fact that stimulus packages already adopted around the world account for some $1 trillion.
Listening to the International Monetary Fund, it's quite plain that in the year 2009 we'll see the withdrawal of a further $1.8 trillion in activities in the global economy. Therefore, the challenge we face is to continue to provide further stimulus, and that is clearly reflected in the decisions contained within the communiqué itself. Failure to act on this in the future will result in significant unemployment.
The third area of decision for this communiqué goes to the future of free trade. The Summit not only has rejected protectionism, but has agreed to an objective of reaching a new global free trade agreement by the end of 2008. The objective there in turn is to boost growth and to boost jobs  -  and, of course, to turn our back on protectionism and so to learn the lessons of the past.
Importantly, the action plan identified in this communiqué is to be completed by 31 March 2009 and, in turn, subject to a concluding summit, in by the end of April 2009, which Australia will also attend.
This summit's conclusions are sound, but the implementation of recommendations contained within the Summit will be critical, and that is why the time frame which has been outlined is of itself critical. Recovering from the global financial crisis will be a slow and difficult process for the future. There will be an impact on growth and an impact on jobs.
Australia has already set its own national course of economic action in dealing with the global financial crisis at home. And today Australia has been part of setting an international course of action with other states, in charting an international course of action ahead.
There is a long way to go. This will not be a smooth ride, it will be very bumpy indeed, but we are determined to stay the course in cooperative endeavour with our international partners through this G20 Summit and into the future. I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: Firstly, as you know, the stimulus package we've launched is one per cent of GDP and to be released within a single year. So against a single year measure it's actually in excess of one per cent of GDP.
Secondly, in terms of further measures that we will announce on infrastructure, that will add to the dimensions of our overall stimulus package. In terms of the precise financial dimensions of that, we'll have further to say on that once we return to Australia, according to the timetable I've already announced down there.
Thirdly, the other element to that is what I reflected some days ago in Australia in terms of our assistance to the motor vehicle industry but, plainly, that is spread over a number of years and does not relate to the immediate time frame.
So, firstly, one per cent of GDP already out there through the economic stimulus package we announced a month ago, with a further addition to come on that, vis-à-vis infrastructure.
That remains, at this stage, our two principal vehicles for acting, but as I've said before, the Australian Government remains determined to take whatever additional action is necessary to support growth and jobs in what will be a very difficult year for the global economy in 2009.
QUESTION: [Inaudible]
PM: [This is] a tough objective, but one which we have to rise to the occasion to meet. The Doha Development Round and the Doha agenda was the subject of extensive discussion by leaders at the recently concluded lunch as well. In fact, most of the interventions dealt with Doha and the challenges which lie ahead.
I believe there is a political resolve to act, and the reason for that is because the decision, a) not to turn inwards on protectionism is real on the part of these leaders, and b) the decision to further open the global economy to more trade and therefore greater growth and jobs growth through trade now seem to be more urgent because of the pressures bearing down on the real economy off the back of a global financial crisis.
I should add one further point. One of the great challenges also we face across the world is in the area of trade financing. That is, the financing arrangements, particularly on the part of various developing countries to sustain their normal trade arrangements. This also has been the subject of extensive discussion on the part of leaders and the World Bank and other institutions are at work on this.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: The key thing with executive pay is this  -  first of all, people around the world are fed up and angry with these outrageous packages paid to financial company executives who have contributed so much to what has gone wrong in the global economy. And who pays the price? Working people and their jobs. That's the first point.
The second is, what you need for the future is a set of principles for executive remuneration which calibrate remuneration levels with the risk profile of individual firms.
This can be done in a way which is then perfectly compatible with principles to be incorporated in the Basel rules for financial institution operation into the future.
You can do that without specifying a number, you can do that without specifying a range, but you can specify in terms of the risk profile on one hand of a firm and not rewarding excessive risk taking by executives of that firm at the same time.
This has been the subject of extensive work by the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority in Australia, and we are in the process of collaborating in detail with our international partners on taking those principles across the rest of the world.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) what is the timing of the announcement of that (inaudible) depend on (inaudible)
PM: No, what I've said consistently in the past, Michelle, and I'll say it again  -  the next stage in terms of fiscal stimulus in Australia lies in the initial set of infrastructure announcements we will make in December  -  I've said that before.
I've also said before that there'd be further statements on infrastructure into the new year. And we're doing it deliberately in that programmatic way because we believe that it is necessary to get going smaller projects ready to roll which have a limited lead time. But, be very mindful of the longer lead times which are necessary for those with extensive planning horizons.
You get these things right and in sequence. So what you will have in December is the statement by us in terms of those shorter term infrastructure projects which can be got going very soon. What you will have from us later on are longer term projects which require greater lead time in the planning.
On the precise timetable for that second set of statements, we are still working through that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: What you've not had from us is either detailing of the projects or the quantum attached to those projects for the timeframe ahead. That's what we're working on at the moment. That's December, there'll be subsequent statements after December, and on top of those two undertakings, as I've said before, the Government remains ready and determined to take whatever additional action is necessary as well into the future to support growth and jobs. 
The need to take fiscal policy action is underlined by the gravity of the employment and growth consequences of this financial crisis. What is important in this statement on the part of heads of government here at the Washington summit is their commitment to cooperative efforts to undertake immediate steps to use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect.
The language of that agreed upon by 20 heads of government from the largest economy in the world through to the rest of the other 85 per cent of GDP represented around the table is significant.
Why is it there? Everyone recognises there is a large challenge now to support growth and jobs in what will be a very difficult and challenging year in 2009.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) deficit (inaudible)
PM: Michelle, I'm willing to restate the government's policy - long standing - that we will support a budget surplus over the course of the economic cycle. Always been our policy in the past, and will be our policy in the future.
That's also a responsible policy, as you know, Matthew Franklin.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Our discussions have been entirely focussed on the agenda at hand. I've had many discussions over the past period of time with the President, with the Secretary of State, with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Treasury and with the President's economic advisers on the core task at hand which is the global financial crisis and how we will respond through the detailed contents of this communiqué.
This is actually tough detailed substantive work.
Our officials have been hard at work, but it's also been necessary to exchange views, conclusions and our courses of action at the political level as well.
And as for the other part of your question, those other matters were not canvassed by anybody.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: In the opening part of my formal intervention in the summit today I said broadly as follows  -  that this was an important decision by the United States to bring together for the first time a gathering of developed and developing economies to formally participate for the first time in the decision making of the future direction of the global financial system and the global economy.
This is the first occasion on which this has formally occurred. And therefore, it is a point of historical significance.
I also went on to say that it is not rational for the future directions of the global economy and the financial system to be taken in the absence of major emerging economies like China, like India, like Korea, like Brazil, like Mexico, like Indonesia  -  and others  -  it doesn't make sense. And furthermore, this is another factor as well, which is that if you look at the impact of the global financial crisis - it has begun in developed economies. It has now spread to the developing economies where the impact will be even worse.
And furthermore, in terms of the long term health of the recovery and the speed of the recovery, it will be very much driven by the recovery in developing economies as well.
So it is an historic day, and the decision by the United States to bring together these economies, the traditional and continuing members of the G7 together with this wider range of emerging economies and others, is a significant milestone in the beginning of a new century where the impact of globalisation is such that, frankly, all major contributors to the global economy must be on the decision making bus.
What was fascinating today was that countries and economies and societies as diverse as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the People's Republic of China, the Republic of Indonesia, Japan, the French Republic, ourselves, all acting to a common set of problems, all acting on the basis of the common solutions which we must now embrace. And there was, I believe, a common sense across that great diversity of the depth of the challenge we face, and the fact that the path to recovery is going to be difficult, bumpy and hard, but there is no alternative course of action other than for us to act internationally and cooperatively.
The days of unilateral national action to in one fell swoop solve a global economic problem have been dispensed with. This summit reflects that fact. And what has been good about this summit is such a diversity of states have seen able to agree on the principles for a common course of action for the future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) everyday mums and dads of Australia feel today (inaudible)
PM: You know something, in Australia what we have done is chart a national course of economic action in response to the global financial crisis. You see that through our guarantees on bank deposits, and our guarantee on bank funding, the support we have given to families through the $10.4 billion economic security strategy. That's our economic course of action nationally.
But because we are one part of a global economy, what has been missing is a concerted international course of action. So, what we've had as a consequence of our participation in this is Australia, being already on the road to implementing our national course of action on the economy, but now together with 85 per cent of the rest of the world economy, bring upon an international course of action.
For every person in Australia, the pace for recovery will be slow, it will take time. But what I know for a fact is that if we were acting completely separately from the rest of the world it would be even slower and even more difficult. This is one significant step in the right direction, but many more need to be taken.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Around this conference hall, at dinner last night, prior to dinner last night, we've had multiple conversations, I've had with multiple heads of government about various subjects. That is normal, that is what happens at these sort of encounters. As I have had with a number of the President's advisers in the course of yesterday with the Secretary of Defence, formally out at the Pentagon, and with the Secretary of the Treasury out at the Treasury. That's the normal thing that you do out in Washington.
And I've got to say, given the enormous constraints which this summit has been convened under, we have an administration in transition, a global financial crisis becoming a global economic crisis becoming a global employment crisis, that the outcomes we have achieved here, the course of action which has been embarked upon, the three areas of agreement that we have reached, and furthermore the fact that there is a timetable set for the implementation of these agreements by 31 March at the end of next year with a further summit to conclude that process, indicates the seriousness and the resolve of those who participated.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well what I'd say to that, Tony, is that as I've said consistently in Australia, is that the remarks that were reported in the article that day was not made by the President. That's not my view, it's not the view of the US Ambassador in Australia, and not the view of the White House. It's been my view from the beginning and it's my view today. And that view hasn't changed.
Anything else? Good. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: On the question of my conversation with the US President, these questions have been presented to me in the House of Representatives on multiple occasions on multiple days.
The US Ambassador has said on behalf of the US Government that he regards the matter as concluded  -  I do as well. And, that remains the position today.
Can I say that on the general inference which is being conveyed by Mr Turnbull in Australia that this somehow represents a difficult in the conduct of relations with states generally  -  Australia has been engaged in general discussions with governments from across the world in the course of the conduct of this summit, including the government of the United States, because of the core course of action which is necessary for the global economy. That's not been impeded in the slightest.
And can I just say that in the normal course of action and in the normal dealings between one government and another, this is one of those challenges that as far as the summit is concerned, getting to grips with a common course of action on the global economy, on jobs, on next steps, on financial market reform, on the future of Doha  -  this is what it's all about, You know, there are always going to be bumps in the road with one thing or another, it's just life, but the core course of action here and the core agenda is as described. And I am pleased that the government has been able to work cooperatively and constructively with all governments represented here.
And if I can conclude with this, paying also a particular tribute to my officials who have acted themselves not only professionally, but diligently with all our counterparts. Not only today and in the last couple days, but with officials in 20 capitals around the world over the last several weeks in injecting an Australian view. They've done it effectively, they've done it professionally, and I believe that Australia's national interests have been well served by it.
Thank you.


PM: I just had a good conversation with the Chinese President Hu Jintao. We spoke for about an hour about the global economic situation and about our bilateral economic relationship.
This was a good meeting, a good discussion. This is the third time I've met with President Hu this year. And of course, I'll be meeting him again at both APEC and at the East Asia Summit before year's end.
This is important given the underlying economic significance of the Australia-China economic relationship.
I said to President Hu that Australia, and I think the rest of the international community, appreciates the stimulus package which the Chinese Government has delivered to its own economy. Obviously China has acted in its national economic interests, but in addition to that, it's been to the advantage of the regional economy and the global economy to add further growth at time of economic downturn.
I also said to the Chinese that we appreciated the fact that China had taken such a positive and constructive role in the conclusion of the communiqué from the G20 Summit.
Obviously, Australia will continue to work closely with China as we work towards the next summit which is to be held by the end of April next year, and we believe that we're in a strong position to do that.
Bilaterally, the Chinese and I discussed the importance of our economic relationship. We discussed also how we could adopt a fresh approach to speeding up the conclusion of the Australia-China Free Trade Agreement, both in order to accommodate the importance of the investment links between our two countries, and of course the trade in goods and services.
China is a major economic partner of Australia's, and it will continue to be so into the future. China's significance will continue to grow and grow. Not just for Australia, but for the wider regional and global economy as well.
This has been a good meeting, and we intend to take these discussions further when we meet again over the course of the next month.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any deadline in mind for the FTA or hope for a deadline? And secondly, what were you told about the latest prospects for Chinese growth?
PM: On the question of the free trade agreement between Australia and China, this is really important for us and for the Chinese long term. China has great interest in the Australian market in terms of long term access to energy and raw materials. We have great interest to greater access to China's market in goods and in services.
On the timetable for it, we agreed when we met in China in April to get our officials working much more intensively than they had been in the past. At an officials level, at a technical level, some progress has been achieve through the course of the last six months.
We've agreed to adopt a fresh approach to speeding up the conclusion of this agreement even more. I can't put a specific timeline on that, but we will be reviewing progress again when next we meet.
The other part of your question goes to Chinese growth levels. The Chinese reiterated their current growth projections for the period ahead. But the Chinese, like the Australian Government, is very mindful of the impact of the global financial crisis over the last couple of months, and into next year as well. We agreed this will be a tough time for all of us, but it therefore means it's an important time for governments like China and Australia to work very closely together. And we intend to do that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in a speech earlier in the year you raised your concerns about the development of a regional arms race  -  comments that were widely interpreted as being a reference to the Chinese submarine program. Did you raise that with Mr Hu today or have you previously? If you did, what did he say? And if you didn't, why didn't you?
PM: Well, the content of my discussions with the Chinese in their full breadth and depth will remain between the Chinese and ourselves. What the Chinese and ourselves have agreed to emphasise from our discussions today, are the economic dimensions, in particular the free trade agreement dimensions, as well as the future cooperation which we'll need to undertake the G20 context leading up to the next summit.
On the question of security policy and strategic questions, the bilateral security dialogue between our two countries continues. And all matters relevant to that, in terms of our perceptions and China's perceptions, are canvassed within that forum. That's the natural way in which these things proceed.
In our nearly hour-long conversation today we focussed exclusively on the economic relationship and that is appropriate given the challenges we face today.
JOURNALIST: Did you discuss the election of Barack Obama and what that might mean for the US-China relationship?
PM: We didn't discuss American politics, we discussed the global economic situation, the global financial situation, our bilateral economic relationship, and the challenges we all face.
Right now, China, Australia, the rest of the world, are facing the challenge of slowing growth and unemployment, and the need therefore to work together.
We intend to work very closely with our friends in China given the size and significance of the market.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it's been reported that you will announce a $100 million infrastructure package when you attend the meeting of Australia's Mayors in Canberra. Can you give us some details of that package, how many projects there might be, is that figure correct?
PM: No, I haven't seen that report. The answer to that is 9,861 projects...I wouldn't have a clue (laughter).
Can I just say that I am looking forward to catching up with the Council of Australian Local Governments I think as soon as I get back off the plane in Australia.
This is the first time that the Australian Government will call together representatives of each of Australia's 565 local authorities. Why are we doing that? We wanted to establish a new relationship between the commonwealth and local government, one which has not formally existed in the past.
Secondly, we're of the view of how we can best support local government into the future given that they are the most basic level of delivering services to the Australian community.
And thirdly, we want to get their input in terms of what is a pre-election commitment of ours which is of constitutional recognition of local government.
JOURNALIST: So will you be telling that meeting the specific amount of money that you've got in mind to spend in setting up the criteria for this infrastructure spending?
PM: First of all, we already, with local governments, have financial assistance grants which we the commonwealth provide to local governments.
Secondly, in terms of any longer term enhancement of that, I will consider that with my colleagues over time, not necessarily in advance of this coming meeting.
The purpose of this meeting is to establish a framework for us to deal and work with local government  -  that hasn't existed in the past.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) constitutional recognition in a referendum at the next election?
PM: We said prior to last election that we would honour our pre-election commitment on constitutional recognition. We haven't determined a time line for that and the reason for that is we're spending time with local government to find out the form of that recognition  -  in other words the language which best suits that objective both from their point of view and from our point of view.
And rather than us simply dictating from on high what that should be, we want to take their views into account.
So it'll be that, the constitutional recognition question, secondly looking at their long term provision of services and infrastructure, and how the commonwealth can assist long term. And thirdly, a framework for actually dealing with local government into the future.
This is the first meeting in the history of the commonwealth of the Council of Australian Local Governments whereby we the Commonwealth invite 565 Australian Mayors to Canberra and work with them on the range of challenges they face. They are very important to local communities and it's time, high time, in the history of our nation, that the commonwealth government took local government seriously.
JOURNALIST: So to clarify, you're not going to use that meeting to unveil this infrastructure package and give them more details?
PM: We'll make a decision on what we announce when I get to the conference. And it may not be anything at all.
JOURNALIST: Are us Aussies like to see any dramatic changes do you think as a result of what happened here over the weekend? Australians (inaudible) what's going to happen now? What will we see?
PM: If you look at the impact of the financial crisis on stock markets and on property markets and the real economy and jobs, where does all this affect working families across Australia? Firstly, in terms of people's superannuation funds, that is, the earnings of stocks and shares which have fallen dramatically because of the financial crisis.
Therefore, the interest which working families have, and those approaching retirement age as well, and those who are now living off their superannuation earnings, is to restore the global economy to health as soon as possible so that normal earnings over time can be restored to equity markets.
That's the first thing.
Another, of course, is the availability of finance for the normal operation of businesses and normal extension of credit to people wanting to buy homes. And therefore, the actions, the decisive actions, we have already taken to guarantee bank deposits and to guarantee term wholesale funding for banks has been essential to begin to restore normality to those credit markets.
The importance of this meeting over the weekend, the summit here in Washington, has been it reflects combined action by governments on those questions.
And what's the third one, the third one goes to the important matter, and again I discussed this with President Hu this morning, of us all investing in economic stimulus now to support jobs into 2009.
Jobs, availability of credit for loans, as well as long term earnings on superannuation investment funds from stock markets, these are very basic things for working families across Australia. No single national government action fixes all of those problems, it is only international action that does. 
The G20, which Australia attended, represents 85 per cent of the global economy. We have made one step forward on what is going to be a long, long road to economic recovery.
But by virtue of having taken that one step forward, we are that much closer towards getting to a recovery. But it is still a ways off.
The next summit will be important as well on implementation but galvanizing the thoughts of these leaders have been the basic concerns not just of their economies as a whole but their impact on families across the world. Jobs, retirement income, availability of credit for loans. These are very basic things which fuel the thoughts and the policies of the leaders represented around that table.
JOURNALIST: You told the other leaders that you'd fear something worse than a global recession if they didn't get it right. Are you talking about a Great Depression if they don't come up with the fiscal stimulus strategy that you are seeking?
PM: It is a logical point that if the financial crisis has caused global growth projections to be revised down by nearly $2 trillion that that means around the world a loss of jobs. Therefore, the practical question is who fills that gap?
Governments in the mean time through economic policy action, like the decisive action we've taken in Australia, can help fill that gap because private companies, because of problems in credit markets, find it difficult at present.
If governments therefore manage to stabilise credit markets and act themselves through direct fiscal stimulus, it means that the overall impact will be less. If governments fail and if we don't restore health to credit markets than that recession becomes deeper. That's logical.
That's why concerted international action across those measures in necessary. That's why I'm in this business. That's why I'm in Washington. I'm not here for a fun and a frolic. If it was that I'd be back home thank you.
These things are really important because our national actions, our decisive actions taken on the home front on economic stimulus much be matched by parallel actions around the world. That's why we're here in order to lessen the impact of this global recession and to lessen the impact on jobs. This is a long, hard road ahead. We've taken the first step.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the latest Nielsen poll suggests people are still pretty confident in their spending over the Christmas period. Do you take heart from that for your package and do you think that the full impact of what's happening, is perhaps, still not being fully understood by the electorates?
PM: The purpose of our economic stimulus package is to support domestic consumption. I've said that repeatedly. $10.4 billion, payments heading out the door from the 8th of December, earlier in the case of first home buyers, in terms of the increase of the first home ownership boost to $14,000 for first home buyers and $21,000 for first home buyers of a new home.
That's out there, or it's about to be out there, and there's one clear, stated policy objective  -  to boost domestic consumption  -  now. Not in six months time, not in twelve months time, now and we have needed to do that, to take that decisive action, in order to support positive growth into the future.
JOURNALIST: Can, I just have one question?
PM: One, then I've got to go see the Chairman of the Fed.
JOURNALIST: In the trade agreement  -  just so we understand it. Did you agree with Hu that you should expedite the conclusion of the agreement in light of the global financial crisis? And what were some of the stumbling blocks, if any, that you addressed with him, could you identify and what progress did you make?
PM: That's four questions Tony. First of all, the first part of conversation focused on the global financial crisis and its impact on both of our economies.
Secondly, following on from that, we agreed that we should hasten the conclusion of our Free Trade Agreement while recognising the obstacles which still lie in the path. Progress has been achieved over the last six months. The Trade Minister Simon Crean is hard at work at this, to go to his Chinese counterpart and we are confident that we can get real progress in the period ahead.
I don't wish to mislead people by giving a completion date but there is political will on both of our parts to get this thing done. And we believe it's important to both of our economies, to both of national economic interests, our resources and energy, investment long term for China.
Our access to China's market when it comes to financial services, when it comes to mining services, when it comes to engineering services, education services, agriculture and the rest. Therefore what we're on about is finding a balanced agreement which suits the long term economic interest of both economies.
And I've got to zip because I've got to see the Chairman of the Fed. See you later.


The Rudd Government will hold its ninth Community Cabinet meeting in Geelong on Sunday 7 December at Corio Bay College.
This will be the first Community Cabinet held by the Australian Government in Victoria.
Geelong MPs Richard Marles and Darren Cheeseman welcomed the announcement as a great opportunity for the community to meet face to face with the Prime Minister and Federal Cabinet Ministers.
Federal Cabinet has met with more than 4000 people in Community Cabinet meetings in 2008 and held more than 500 one-on-one meetings.
The global financial crisis is putting pressure on local families and it's important that they are able to have their say, directly to Government.
The Government has recently announced a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to strengthen the Australian economy during a global crisis and help pensioners, carers, working families, Commonwealth Seniors Card Holders, disability pensioners and veterans deal with the economic slowdown.
Community Cabinet is a further opportunity for Federal Cabinet Ministers to hear first hand about the impact of the Global financial crisis on the real economy.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said today;
“Holding Community Cabinet in Geelong is a great opportunity for me and all the Cabinet Ministers to meet with people from Geelong and talk about local issues and discuss what the Federal Government can do better in Geelong.”
Richard Marles the Federal Member for Corio believes;
“Community Cabinet will be a fantastic moment for Geelong. It is the biggest gathering of Federal Government ministers to have happened in Geelong in our history. It comes at a time when Geelong faces many challenges with the changing economic environment. It is a unique opportunity to make our case about Geelong's future to our country's leaders.”
Darren Cheeseman the Federal Member for Corangamite said today;
“It's an honour for our region to be chosen for a Community Cabinet meeting within the first 12 months of a Rudd Labor Government and reflects the importance the Prime Minister is putting on our region. It will be great for the people of Geelong to meet with and talk to all of the Federal Cabinet Minister's and the Prime Minister.”
All interested members of the public living in and around Geelong are welcome to attend and should register their attendance in advance.
The registration period is from 9am on Monday 17 November until 5pm on Friday 21 November unless full capacity is reached earlier. Registration can be done by:
     * Filling in the registration form online at www.pmc.gov.au/community_cabinet or
     * Phoning PM&amp;C on 1800 088 323 (toll free) or (02) 6271 5563 (Monday to Friday)
Cabinet Ministers will also be available for one-on-one meetings. Interested members of the public can lodge their requests for meetings by phoning on the above numbers during the registration period.


Tonight we're here to celebrate achievement and tonight we're here also to celebrate achievement against the odds. And we're also here to celebrate achievement that has added to this nation, Australia's great strength.
And that is those who have achieved in this great field of business.
As I was reflecting tonight on the work of Joseph Assaf, it in itself is a story which I think speaks to the heart of Australia. This book, which hasn't been launched yet Joseph, In Someone Else's Shoes, is a great story writ large about the lives of so many who have come to this country from afar and made this country great.
The story of a young Joseph, 40 years ago, lining up at the airport in Beirut, as a young Lebanese, who didn't even have the gumption to tell his parents that he was coming to Australia, and to discover at the airport that he had to have a new, clean pair of shoes in order to get past Australian customs and quarantine.
And then having been turned back the first time because the flight was cancelled and gone back home to reappear on a subsequent day, and to be then told that the pair of shoes that he had had, which were then new and clean, on the previous few days, were no longer new and clean. They had a bit of dust on them. And so he could not be allowed on the aircraft.
Well enter into central casting some nameless Australian immigration official who shall be forever sainted, whoever he or she was. Because in the great spirit of Australia, and probably us being the convict colony, he resorted to some forms of felony instead to help the young Joseph out.
He procured another pair of shoes. I didn't say nicked, he procured, obtained is the neutral word. And having done so, provided the young Joseph with a new pair of shoes, tan in colour, Joseph's favourite colour. In fact he hates tan.
Twice the size of his normal size in shoe and there he was allowed to board the aircraft and begin his new life in Australia.
And so goes the circumstance and the happenstance of so many people who make their lives here in this great country of ours. Not just this century, not just the one that has passed, not even the one before that.
So many different stories from so many parts of the world, each rich in its own depth and diversity. But each united in one thing  -  coming here to Australia not just to make a new life but with a sense of determination to make that life an absolute success.
The good thing about the Joseph story though, is his reflections contained in this book - which hasn't been launched yet - but let me read you something from it.
It's about what you pick up when you arrive here in Australia. And if there is a theme to this book, it seems to be that the great thing which has crafted his business career, that through it, what crafts the success of so many business careers here in this country, is not just a celebration of diversity but the actual deployment of diversity for what you do in business and in life.
He says here, ‘I enjoy the fruits of thousands of years of collective wisdom'. That is an elegant phrase. He says also that ‘from my own people, the Lebanese, or the ancient Phoenicians, I've learned how to learn from everyone else'.
If you anything of the history of the Phoenicians and their role in the history of the Mediterranean prior to the rise of the Greeks and prior to the rise of the Romans, the Phoenicians knew everybody, they knew everywhere, they knew every language, and so they traded.
There was a great wisdom in the work and lives of the Phoenicians and he says, coming from Lebanon, the land of the Phoenicians, ‘I have learned how to learn from everyone else'.
He goes on to say, in a celebration of some of the cultures he encountered here down under, ‘I quickly began to understand the cultures of the Arabs. It was they who opened my eyes to the meaning of hospitality. That welcoming smile and that genuine desire to open ones' heart and home to both friends and strangers.'
He speaks also of his second language, French. ‘And with this linguistic tool I was able to mix with a new set of friends who taught me a healthy respect for language.'
He then talks of his arrival and dealings with genuine Aussie mates, who encouraged each other to be fair dinkum.
I am not sure what the Ancient Phoenician for fair dinkum was, or what the Arabic term for fair dinkum is. But that became part of Joseph's experience.
And then he speaks of his encounter with his wife, who is herself, an Italian. Angela Bianca, who he has described, I think in the introduction, as ‘my angelic Bianca, or my white angel'.
And he says ‘while the Italians taught me about what it means to be passionate, indeed my wife Angela is Italian and she taught me a lot too'. And he says with some modesty, ‘and not just about passion'.
What is nice about this book, what is elegant about this book is that it is a story of reflection, about one man's experience of arriving on these shores of Australia from distant shores and absorbing all that we had to offer, in all of its diversity and then adding some. A new richness, a new depth, a new diversity.
Which brings me to why we are here this evening. Each one of you, from whichever community from which you come, brings to this great land Australia something new and something different. Something quite wonderful.
I have often said, as someone who is 100 per cent Anglo Celtic, that were it not for the arrival of so many of the ethnicities represented in this room, this nation in its second century and its third century would have been condemned to a future based entirely on English cuisine. Could you think of a fate worse than death?
But it is not just that. It is that what you bring to this country is a sense of determination to succeed. A sense that you will make not just a success for yourselves and your families but a success for your new land Australia.
My family has been in the country since the days of the Second Fleet. But you know that each group of Australians who arrive here by boat, by plane, they bring something new, something special and something different, and something which then becomes quite uniquely Australian.
In business, and Joseph made mention of this in his remarks before, there is something more for us to be grasped in terms of the diversity which you give us in our place in the commerce of the world.
You are our automatic bridge to the world. In so much of what we do in commerce, export, in imports, in trade and investment and what is now the worldwide economy transacted digitally, you form such natural, wonderful, diverse, fluent, culturally sensitive human bridges to the rest of the world, that you are for us an enormous national strength and one to be celebrated.
And so in these days when we are confronted with the global financial crisis, becoming a global economic crisis, becoming in turn, a global employment crisis, the passions and the talents and abilities and the capacities of the women and men of commerce represented in this room becomes even more important for the nation and for its future.
And so my invocation to each of you as men and women of Australian business is - as the days get harder, and they will, to draw on every element of the talent and the skill and the linguistic and cultural connectedness that you have with the rest of the world, to get out there and to work hard and to carry forward with confidence the great name of Australia in business.
And I am confident you will.
For those of you who are here tonight as finalists in these ethnic business awards, can I say as Prime Minister of Australia, congratulations. Whether you win, whether you come second, whether you come third, congratulations. It is a great thing that you are here.
Because you represent the hopes of us all.
I conclude with these remarks of the author, whose book has not been launched, this is it, he did not know I was bringing it this evening and that is true, and therefore his work I could not possibly quote in anticipation of the release date, but I have.
There have got to be some advantages in being Prime Minister.
But I conclude with these words, more eloquent than mine and by the author himself, he says:
‘Multiculturalism is not a passing fancy. It is not a hobby. It is not a Government policy. It is not a nice thing to do or a marketing opportunity.
‘Equally, diversity is not a choice. It is not an option. It is not a public relations exercise or an employee relations program. In Australia diversity is a fact of life and multiculturalism is a way of life. May it ever be so.'
[ends]


The Rudd Labor Government today announced a $300 million program to build local community infrastructure in all of Australia's 565 local council areas.
This $300 million Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program (RLCIP) will boost local economic development and support jobs in communities around the country.
Today's announcement is further decisive action from the Rudd Government to stimulate the Australian economy during a severe global financial crisis.
The program is also an initial down-payment on the Government's plans to meet urgent needs in communities and create long-term infrastructure.
Funding will be delivered under the program by 30 June 2009 to ensure the stimulatory effects of this package are delivered to local economies as quickly as possible.
The Government made the formal announcement at the inaugural meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government  -  a direct partnership between local and federal governments to undertake nation-building.
Today's infrastructure program will target projects that can be delivered promptly, providing an immediate boost to local and regional economies.
This $300 million down-payment will be delivered as follows:
     *  $250 million 
         * A one-off grant of $250 million allocated to every council and shire for local community infrastructure;
         * Each council will receive a minimum payment of $100,000;
         * Councils above 30,000 people in areas of high growth, as classified by the state and territory local government grants commissions will receive an additional $300,000 growth component;
         * Allocations would range from $100,000 for councils with fewer than 5,000 people to $2.9 million for the largest council, based on population growth and needs;
         * Councils would be required to submit proposals that meet the program's guidelines in order to claim their allocation.
     *  $50 million fund
         *  $50 million strategic projects fund for larger-scale community infrastructure to help deliver an additional injection of investment in communities; and
         * This will be competitive, application-based, accountable and open to only those projects seeking a minimum Commonwealth contribution of $2 million.
Some examples of community infrastructure that would be eligible for the $300 million funding include:
     * Social and cultural infrastructure, such as town halls, community centres, libraries, parks, public squares;
     * Sport and recreation facilities, such as sporting grounds, stadiums, pools, walking tracks and playgrounds;
     * Tourism infrastructure, such as walkways and tourist information centres; and
     * Access facilities, such as footbridges, bus shelters, jetties and boat ramps.
Smaller local projects would accelerate and encourage economic development as well as improving the quality of life in local communities. 
The RLCIP builds on the Government's multi-billion dollar commitment to national infrastructure and our new partnership with local government to deliver results for communities.
In addition, it will allow local government to get on with the job of addressing their infrastructure backlogs and delivering quality facilities to communities.
The first meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government is part of the Rudd Government's commitment to establish a new relationship between the Commonwealth and local governments  -  a framework for working together, which has not existed before.
The Government is determined to work with local government to improve the delivery of services to our communities and work towards the Government's pre-election commitment of constitutional recognition of local government.
The Australian economy is sound, but we are not immune from the global slow-down and the real possibility of a global recession.
There are no easy solutions or quick fixes, but we are taking action at the local level through the RLCIP.
This is a significant opportunity for local councils to rise to the challenge and address local infrastructure needs. Councils are encouraged to develop high quality proposals so that funding can be released as quickly as possible. .
Final guidelines and timetables will be released shortly following consultation with local government.
Ongoing funding for the RLCIP will be determined as part of the May 2009 Budget. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Welcome to the nation's capital, and welcome to one of the biggest gatherings of elected representatives in Australian history.
Today we launch the Australian Council of Local Government.
And today we turn a page and begin a new era in the relationship between Australia's national government and the local governments that represent local communities across our nation.
Today brings together more than 400 mayors and representatives from councils and shires across this nation.
Never before have councils from different states and territories been brought together in a forum like this.
We gather today for three reasons:
First, to establish a new, stronger and more coherent relationship between the federal and local spheres of government.
Second, to receive your input on our election commitment to the constitutional recognition of local government, rather than us simply imposing our view.
And third, to begin work on a planning reform agenda to improve infrastructure and service delivery across this country.
In the past couple of hours I have arrived back from the G-20 Summit meeting in Washington  -  convened in response to the global financial crisis.
The Summit was an important milestone for the global economy  -  bringing together the leaders of the world's 20 largest economies, comprising 85 per cent of gross world product.
The fact that the US brought these 20 nations together reflects the size of the challenge we now confront.
The US and Europe are on the verge of recession.
Germany and Japan, the second and third largest economies in the world are already in recession.
An economic slowdown has hit our own region  -  including China.
The Summit also demonstrated a recognition of the changing centre of gravity in the world economy.
Simply put, global economic growth won't get back on track without the G-20 economies of our own region  -  China, India, Indonesia and South Korea  -  economies that now comprise a large share of global economic growth.
The Summit resolved that member economies would take “immediate steps to use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect”.
Where the private economy cannot fill the growth gap, let us be clear  -  government must step in.
That's what the Australian Government resolved last month when we announce our Economic Security Strategy.
That's what global governments resolved in their communiqué last weekend.
To begin to chart a course of action to see us through this great challenge.
We know there are no easy solutions or quick fixes to the global financial crisis.
This is going to be a long, drawn-out crisis that will have a real impact in Australia - leading to slowing economic growth and increased unemployment.
The Australian economy is sound but we will not be immune from the global slowdown and the real possibility of a global recession.
Australia has already taken decisive steps to stimulate our economy.
Our $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy provides a substantial fiscal stimulus to underpin growth.
Last week I announced a thirteen-year, $6.2 billion New Car Plan to transform the Australian automotive industry and support Australian manufacturing and Australian jobs.
These initiatives build on the $47 billion in tax cuts for working families that we delivered in this year's Budget.
This is important progress.
But it is only the beginning.
Because we are waging a war against global recession and global unemployment  -  and we are determined to deploy every tool at our disposal.
The government will take whatever decisive action is necessary to protect economic growth and jobs for Australians.
We have also taken strong and decisive action to stabilise our financial system.
We guaranteed bank deposits to build confidence in our banks and protect people's savings.
We have also guaranteed the term wholesale funding of banks so that credit can continue to flow.
As with the real economy, growth and jobs, the Government remains determined to take whatever action is necessary to maintain the stability of the financial system into the future.
Once again we still face many challenges.
And once again, through the Washington Summit, the G-20 has resolved to combat these challenges together through the reform program we have agreed on.
Just as the G-20 meeting was critical to the future of the global economy, today's meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government is also important to our national economy.
You cannot have a strong Australian economy without a healthy global economy.
Equally, you can't have a strong national economy if you don't have strong local economies.
Because local government has an important role in strengthening and stimulating local economies, local businesses and local jobs.
That is one of a number of reasons why the Government attaches priority to a new partnership with local government.
Your role in the local economy.
Your role in the delivery of local services.
Together with your enduring role in supporting the local community fabric, including the voluntary sector.
Analysis of Federalism
It is often said of Australia's system of Federalism  -  Commonwealth, State and Local Government  -  that if it didn't already exist, and we were starting again today, we'd be unlikely to create the system we have now.
Some services are provided by three levels of government.
Some services are inadequately provided by any level of government.
Duplication in some policy areas.
Buck-passing in others.
The complexity of the Australian system of government is revealed by analysis of the budgets of the Commonwealth, State and local spheres of government.
Consider how revenue is collected:
     * The Commonwealth collects 82 per cent of government revenue.
     * The State and Territory Governments collect 15 per cent.
     * Local Governments collect just 3 per cent of revenue.
This suggests the Commonwealth has all the money.
But we don't see a quarter of the revenue we collect.
It goes in one door of Treasury and out another  -  primarily into the hands of State and Territory governments, but some to local Government as well.
The financial churn and redistribution of revenue between levels of government makes it difficult for the public to know where their money is actually going.
Our federal system is no less complicated on the expenditure side of the budget.
The Commonwealth's main expenditure items are:
     * social security and welfare  -  a third of the national budget
     * health and hospitals  -  another sixth of the budget;
     * education is $19 billion a year;
     * national security is $18 billion a year.
The State and Territory government's main expenditures are:
     * Health and education  -  each about a quarter of their budgets;
     * Transport and policing  -  each about 10 per cent of their budgets; and
     * A range of other community services.
Local government budgets must be stretched across many priorities, including health, social security, welfare, housing, community amenities, business development, transport, communications, recreation and culture and general public services.
Rather than answer the question of ‘what do local governments do?', it is better to ask ‘what don't local governments do?'
In individual areas of policy, there is extensive overlap between the responsibilities of different levels of government.
A Business Council of Australia study, Infrastructure Action Plan for Future for Future Prosperity, highlighted the complexities in the delineation of responsibilities for economic infrastructure among the different levels of Government.
It found that:
     * While the Commonwealth government is responsible for aviation services, state, territory and local governments are responsible for regional airports
     * While national roads are funded by the Commonwealth, they are built by state governments
     * While local governments are responsible for local roads, they are funded by the Commonwealth and state governments as well
     * All levels of government have some involvement in railway infrastructure provision and services
     * And in areas that currently fall within the sphere of local and state government, including public transport, water, and energy, there are greater demands for Commonwealth involvement.
The Australian Government has a deep commitment to reforming the Federation.
Necessary for the Australian economy.
Necessary for the Australian people who demand better services.
Necessary for the Australian system of government which requires greater accountability.
We must have cleaner lines of responsibility.
We must have less duplication and waste.
And we must have stronger partnerships between levels of government.
The people are demanding we cooperate  -  rather than perpetuate conflict in order to avoid problems.
Local Government is critical to Australia's system of government.
It is critical to our national economy.
Local government directly supports more than 168,000 jobs around the country.
That infrastructure and those services in turn underpin hundreds of billions of dollars of economic activity.
From water supply to childcare provision; from road construction and engineering to planning and development; from essential community services to building a more sustainable economy  -  local government is much more than just an adjunct to State and Territory governments.
Local government is the level of representation closest to the Australian people.
The Government that I lead believes in supporting local government.
We believe in investing in local government.
We believe in partnering with local government.
And we believe in partnering with local government in a long term reform program that better serves the nation, the economy and local communities.
The Government's commitment to a new partnership with local government is part of our wider commitment to new ways of governing that are relevant to the 21st century.
The establishment of the Australian Council of Local Government is part of this reform program.
And this is the start.
It is our goal to build on the strong tradition of partnership with local government established by previous Federal Labor governments.
As long ago as the 1940s, Ben Chifley thought local government was so important that even while Prime Minister he continued to serve on the Abercrombie Shire Council in Bathurst.
The Curtin Government initiated a series of Commonwealth-State conferences on regional economic development between 1944 and 1947, believing that all three tiers of government needed to work together to ensure successful regional development, management of population growth, and provision for housing and water supplies.
After Gough Whitlam came to office in 1972, he established for the first time a direct relationship between the Commonwealth and local governments.
Whitlam understood the role of local government in nation-building, establishing direct grants to local government bodies for regional development in 1974.
From the 1974-75 Budget, ongoing General Revenue Assistance grants were introduced.
The Whitlam Government invested in critical local infrastructure such as sewerage systems in the new suburban estates of fast-growing cities.
These grants also funded flood mitigation, community health centres, urban renewal, recreation facilities, environmental projects, infrastructure for tourism and other local infrastructure.
Today, communities around Australia are still benefiting from the hard infrastructure built in those years through Commonwealth and Local Government collaboration. 
The Hawke and Keating Governments revived the Commonwealth commitment to local government and local economic development.
In 1986 the Hawke Government launched the Country Centres Project to fund community-driven initiatives that generated local economic development.
In the 1990s, the Hawke and Keating Governments invested in local capital works to stimulate economic growth, providing direct grants to local government for social and economic infrastructure.
The Building Better Cities program under Brian Howe involved a significant investment in urban consolidation, urban renewal and economic development projects that embraced Commonwealth, State and local governments.
This led a revival of inner city areas and provincial centres, redeveloping public housing and improving public transport networks  -  with an innovative funding model built around achieving real outcomes.
The Government I lead is also committed to strengthening local government.
In this year's Budget, the Commonwealth is providing $2.2 billion through financial assistance grants and Roads to Recovery funding.
We have also committed to working with local government to address housing affordability through our Housing Affordability Fund and developing our regions through our Better Regions program.
As I said earlier, the federal government has three purposes for today's Council meeting.
     * First, to establish a new, stronger relationship between the federal and local spheres of government.
     * Second, to receive your input on our election commitment to the constitutional recognition of local government.
     * And third, to begin work on a planning reform agenda to improve infrastructure and service delivery across this country.
The starting point for our reform agenda is a stronger relationship between the Commonwealth and local government.
Until now, there has been no mechanism for the Australian Government to consult local government as a whole.
The role of local government has never been clearly defined.
This is why we have established the Australian Council of Local Government. 
With the ACLG in place, we will now have a framework for future coordination.
Greater coordination will help give local government a direct voice into Commonwealth policy making, as well as accelerating the implementation of program innovation, performance improvements and accountability in service delivery.
The ACLG also provides a mechanism for the Australian Government to consult local government on Constitutional recognition.
At the last election, Federal Labor said that we would take steps towards Constitutional recognition of local government. And we intend to deliver on that commitment.
The people in this room know that previous governments have sought to give recognition to local government in the Constitution twice before  -  in 1974 and 1988.
However, they were both unsuccessful. 
The Liberal and National parties opposed both.
And they were lost.
That's why we have not pre-determined a time line or a set of words.  This must be got right.
And rather than us simply dictating from on high what that should be, we want to take your views into account.
I understand that ALGA is undertaking a serious consultation process with member councils  -  and I know that ALGA is aware of the challenges in forging a consensus among all local councils.
The Commonwealth Government will also support and respect that process.
I understand it will culminate in a special convention in Melbourne in December, and the outcomes from that meeting will be especially important for the Commonwealth as we move forward on this important matter.
The third aspect of today's Council meeting is for us to begin the task of improving infrastructure and service delivery in this country.
We need a planning reform agenda for local government.
Local governments already play a significant role in planning the nation's infrastructure.
They are responsible for 657,000 kilometres of roads across the nation.
They have a total asset stock worth over $214 billion.
A significant amount of this infrastructure is now under great strain.
Indeed, a report by PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2006 estimated that there is a $1.1 billion annual under-spend in the renewal of community infrastructure by local government.
Local governments are facing both rising costs for infrastructure provision and in many areas, growing demand for services in local communities.
Today is an important step in the Commonwealth's commitment to immediate infrastructure investment.
But we also need to deal with the long term reform of the management of infrastructure as well.
We must improve asset management and financial management.
Councils that plan and manage their assets effectively are councils that can deliver value for money to their communities. 
The quality and transparency of financial management varies greatly across different local governments.
Successive reports have noted difficulties in obtaining the level of information necessary to calculate the level of local infrastructure investment that is now needed to renew and replace existing infrastructure assets.
We need to know what we've got, what condition it is in, whether it needs to be repaired and how much it costs to maintain. 
This is the most basic level of information.
All States and Territories have agreed to adopt and implement nationally consistent financial and asset management and planning frameworks for local government developed by the Local Government and Planning Ministers' Council. 
But implementation has been patchy.
Where appropriate, the Government will consider making resources available for a long term reform fund to support councils as they improve their asset management and financial plans. 
The Commonwealth will also consider making its future infrastructure investments linked to the implementation of nationally consistent asset management systems.
This is good public policy. 
And it will provide the Commonwealth with the confidence necessary to provide further support in the future.
Next year at the ACLG I would like to be having a discussion about infrastructure needs that is informed by an agreed set of information based on council asset and financial management plans. 
That discussion should not be one that looks back, but one that looks forward.
Councils need to identify their asset needs for the coming years.
Successful businesses plan their capital expenditure over decades, not months  -  and so should governments. 
Next year at the ACLG I would like to be having a discussion that looks at our infrastructure needs for the next decades and beyond.
We should not be focussed just on fixing or replacing what we have.
We need to focus on laying the foundations for the future.
This is particularly important in our high growth areas. 
Infrastructure takes time to build.
Working with States and Territories, local governments need to predict where we will need infrastructure in five or ten years' time and get started on it now.
The Commonwealth will also support steps to improve the utilisation of infrastructure and service delivery  -  including options for shared services, joint purchasing or sharing of resources and expertise as ways to capture the benefits of scale economies. 
The Commonwealth can also help local government in achieving economies of scale.
The Australian Government is currently introducing coordinated contracting arrangements for common areas of procurement, with a view to getting better value for money for Commonwealth departments and agencies. 
Once these coordinated contracts are established, the Commonwealth will examine the options for local governments to take advantage of these arrangements as well, to help reduce costs and improve outcomes for local ratepayers.
Our starting point in our nation-building partnership with local government is a dedicated Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program to address the needs of local communities.
In May this year we announced that this fund will commence in 2009-10.
However, in light of economic conditions and the urgent need for investment in community infrastructure, we have decided to bring forward this investment.
That is why today I am pleased to announce that we will make immediate provision for $300 million to local governments through the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program.
And by immediate, I mean immediate.
It means now.
It's ready to go now.
This funding is the next phase of our economic stimulus strategy for the nation.
This purpose of this action is to build local infrastructure and help support local economies and jobs during the global financial crisis.
We expect that the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program will create thousands of jobs  -  for tradespeople, engineers, and administrators who are in charge of rolling-out our new infrastructure or repairing existing infrastructure.
This initial $300 million injection into the program will be delivered by 30 June 2009 in two programs.
$250 million will be allocated to each council and shire, based on a formula that recognises need and population growth, but with a minimum allocation of $100,000.
We expect this funding to be allocated to new initiatives to repair and build community facilities  -  initiatives that are over and above those already planned and budgeted.
Those initiatives might include upgrades to local sporting grounds, refurbishing a community centre or local pool, upgrading a streetscape, building a tourism information centre or building an indoor sports centre.
To claim their allocation, councils will be required to submit proposals that are ready-to-go and meet program guidelines.
Second, the Commonwealth will invite bids for a further $50 million to be invested in larger-scale local projects such as new sports stadiums, entertainment precincts and cultural centres that require a larger Commonwealth contribution  -  $2 million or more. 
With these investments, we aim to leverage greater investment such as from States or groups of local governments, to deliver a stronger economic boost to local communities.
Local governments have the capacity to roll-out smaller-scale infrastructure projects quickly.
We will be asking local government to implement a speedy rollout of infrastructure investment to deliver both immediate economic benefits and long-term community benefits.
Monies from both funds will need to be expended by the end of September next year.
Improved workforce capability is also critically important to building the effective 21st century local government.
Skill shortages are especially acute in local government management, engineering and urban planning.
Attracting and retaining skilled local government staff, ensuring the ongoing training and development of local government personnel and establishing local government as an employer of choice are significant challenges for local government.
This problem has been recognised at the state level, and state governments are undertaking valuable work in collaboration with state-based local government associations and the Local Government Managers of Australia.
However, across Australia there is lack of coordination and uptake of these training opportunities which address local government skill needs.
It will always be the primary responsibility of local governments, and States and Territories working with local governments, to ensure that local governments have the skilled professionals they need.
However, the Commonwealth can take steps to support and enhance the professionalism of local government.
That is why today I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government will contribute up to $8 million in funding for a new centre for excellence for local government.
The Australian Government will provide an endowment to showcase innovation and best practice across local government and encourage the wider adoption of innovative practices and solutions. 
We will shortly run a competitive process to identify the best candidate university or other provider for this centre.
We intend this to be based in a university, but delivered virtually as well as physically to maximise access across all of Australia's 565 local authorities.
This funding will also contribute to the development of specialist local government leadership programs that will enhance the profile of the sector and contribute to its capability through its workforce.
This is an important reform for the future.
In closing let me make a couple of remarks about today's program.
First, I want to acknowledge the substantial work that has been done ahead of today's conference by the Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, Anthony Albanese, and by his department.
There's no doubting Albo's commitment to local government.
Indeed, his passion for local government goes right back to his first job in politics, working for Tom Uren, the architect of the Whitlam Government's urban development agenda, and local government minister in the Hawke Government in the 1980s. 
Second, the program that's been put together for today is intended to give you the opportunity to focus on matters of greatest relevance to your local community.
The break-out sessions have been structured to address specific challenge in infrastructure, productive cities, local government efficiency, regional communities, local environments, constitutional recognition, housing affordability, social inclusion and Indigenous engagement.
I want today's discussions to be the beginning of a new partnership  -  a partnership that can bring together the expertise and experience of local governments across the nation with the Commonwealth.
But it is only a beginning.
If we succeed together it will be one long step forward in reforming the Federation  -  and ending the blame game that has plagued our nation in its first century, a blame game that should have no place in our second century when the challenges the nation faces are far too great to ignore for any longer.


The Prime Minister today announced the Australian Government will provide immediate, additional assistance to the people of South East Queensland seriously affected by the storms that ravaged the area on Sunday.
Those eligible will be able to receive a one off Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment of $1000 for adults and $400 for each child to help relieve their hardship.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will provide financial assistance to people whose principal place of residence has been destroyed or significantly damaged, as well as those who have been seriously injured and hospitalised for more than 48 hours.
The Commonwealth Disaster Plan has also been activated, with the deployment of 350 Australian Defence Force personnel to help the SES clear roads and storm-affected properties.
These ADF personnel will be available to help for as long as they are required.
Under the Disaster Plan, the Commonwealth will also provide tarpaulins to help those affected by the storms in South East Queensland.
This assistance is on top of the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) which were activated by the Rudd Government yesterday.
The NDRRA includes grants for food, clothing, accommodation and emergency repairs to housing.
Thousands of people, particularly in the north-west suburbs of Brisbane, are facing the huge task of cleaning up.
Many are still without electricity and in some cases homes have been completely destroyed.
The Rudd Government will continue to work with the Queensland Government, Local Government and community organisations to support people as they get on with the job of repairing their homes extensively damaged by the violent storms.
For information on the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment call the Australian Government's South East Queensland Storms Hotline on 180 2266.
More information on Australian Government assistance is available at www.disasterassist.gov.au


PM: Well this is truly horrible. I've just got back to Brisbane and I am here with the Lord Mayor and the Premier of Queensland looking at what has happened to families' homes on a large scale.
As I have been briefed this morning by the SES and others  -  some 4,000 homes with structural damage, some 200 to 300 with serious major structural damage, 20 - 30 homes at least uninhabitable. This is a natural disaster, big time, and it affects so many families in this part of Brisbane.
And this is when Australians pull together. You see it in the streets, neighbours looking after each other. You see it in the different levels of government working with each other. You see it with our fine men and women in the SES and the Australian Defence Force as well.
In response to the request of the Queensland Government we activated the relevant arrangements to release the Australian military to help - 350 military are hitting the streets, and have been hitting the streets - and we have also been assisting with the supply of tarpaulins.
If we need more troops to help clean this mess up, they will be provided immediately.
And we will respond immediately to the requests of the disaster management coordination authorities.
The other thing that we have done in response to the request of the Queensland Government yesterday was activate the national disaster relief arrangements and the payment details of those you will be familiar with.
What I further announce today is that the Commonwealth through Centrelink, will be making available further payments - $1,000 per adult, $400 per dependent child - in circumstances where there has been significant damage to the principal place of residence. And the Australian Minister for Families Jenny Macklin will be making a further statement today on the details of that. For people (inaudible) access to money, you simply go to Centrelink and that will follow.
This is just the beginning of what is going to be a very long-term clean up and I think the thing for us all is to keep faith with the people who have been horribly affected by this with only a few minutes' notice in many cases.
I just visited the home of the Wallaces and you can see, you can begin to see I should say, the effect which this has on a person's life when all those collectibles, all those things that they put together in the course of their life are exposed to the elements and damaged. And you can just begin to get a sense of how this would affect people's state of mind, their sense of wellbeing. This is a real assault on the soul, this storm, for the families it's affected.
These good folk haven't yet got back but their kids are looking after the place and I commend them for doing so.
So the key thing for us all is house by house, street by street, go through this methodically, make sure that the levels of government are working intimately with each other, dealing with each problem as it arises and we will do that.
Problems will arise in this, they always do in natural disasters. Then, if the aid hasn't got through within the hour that it has been promised, our job is to make sure that each of those problems is dealt with on the way through.
We the three of us resolve to do that.
JOURNALIST: Is it possible the military will be brought in from other areas?
PM: Well, we have a large military base at Enoggera, which isn't far away, and we'll deploy those as is necessary. If we need more troops, they will be deployed. It is as simple as that. And they will be here quick smart.
JOURNALIST: How do you feel coming back to your home city and seeing this?
PM: It looks like a war zone and feels like a war zone. What is good about it is the people pulling together and neighbours looking after each other, that is really good.
But you know my experience of these over the years is: day one, two and three, that is important. It's day 21, day 22, day 23, that is what is really important, when people are trying to put their lives back together and have to work out where you get the money from and how do you actually organise your accommodation, how do you look after the Christmas presents, all those sort of practical things. And that's where the community really has to come together.
The great thing about Australia is that when natural disasters hit, we pull together. That's as we should do, that's part of being an Australian and you see the evidence of this in the streets in Brissie today.
JOURNALIST: Premier, how do you feel about the emergency response? Do you think it was adequate?
BLIGH: There's no doubt that this is a very significant event and we have to throw every possible resource at it. I am very pleased to see up to between 700 and 1,000 more people out on the streets today between extra army resources and additional SES volunteers.
We've got people coming from northern NSW, far north Queensland, they'll all arrive this morning.
The army is out on the streets now. I certainly hope that these streets look much better by the end of today than they do right now.
JOURNALIST: But the initial response, do you think it was adequate? There were reports that SES crews still hadn't been ordered out on the roads at two o'clock in the morning and things like that.
BLIGH: There is no doubt that all of our resources were overwhelmed when the storm first - when the damage from the storm was first realised. But I think it is fair to say that many of our workers, the Energex workers, the SES, the council workers, have really pulled together.
Every level of government, council, state, the army, the federal government - they are all out there and everybody is pulling together and doing their best. That is what happens in these sorts of circumstances. And I'm very pleased, I have to say, that we've got extra resources where we need them on the streets today.
JOURNALIST: What about yesterday?
NEWMAN: Can I answer that? Look, this is an unparalleled sort of scene of disaster here in the Gap. If you go back to Sunday night, the power's out, the streets were dark, there were 560 cables down across the greater Brisbane area. The mobile phone network was affected and landlines were also out as well in this area.
I wanted to actually come out on Sunday night myself to inspect things and see what was going on. I was literally told, you will not be able to get in because of the police road blocks. And that was by talking to a number of individuals. I couldn't even get into the area.
I was out here first thing yesterday morning. A lot of work had already been done overnight to actually make the cables that were down safe and to permit access. And that was the first moment that decision makers like myself, and people in the SES, people in Brisbane City Council could get in to assess the damage.
At 8 o'clock at our meeting yesterday morning, I conveyed the urgency of the situation, the magnitude of the problems, but that was the first time, literally, that a clear view of the extent of the devastation could be established. So at that point, we did ask for the army assistance. And army assistance was requested at about 9.00, 9.30 yesterday morning, and that was happening by just after lunch.
So could we have done things better? Well if we all had cell phone implants in our ears or something like that and could have got the message out, maybe.
But I'd say there has been a superhuman effort by Energex, by the SES, by council workers, and I think we are going to see some very big efforts by the Australian Defence Force over the coming days as well.
So it is the magnitude of the event, it is the loss of communications, it is the danger presented by power lines down, and also the impact of huge amounts of vegetation blocking streets.
You couldn't move around these streets at dawn yesterday morning. By last light you could move around.
So a lot has been achieved over the first 24 hours of the response.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll just say this. You know the key thing is, it is how we deal with this from now. This is massive. And as I said, the clean up is going to be what really affects people.
I congratulate the SES, I congratulate the coppers, I congratulate the military and the council workers and other volunteers who have been out helping in the field.
From a Commonwealth point of view, I will also, I am about to go to Canberra, I will get a cabinet Minister up here for the rest of the week to ensure that our part of the recovery effort is being delivered so that when problems arise we can attend to it and punch through really quickly.
The experience of natural disaster recovery is that problems always arise, that is just the way it is. The challenge for us all is to deal with each of those practically and quickly as they hit. And that is what we will be doing. See you later folks.


The Rudd Government today announced HMAS Sydney II and HSK Kormoran will be protected under the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976.
Today marks the 67th anniversary of the battle that led to the sinking of the two ships. Commemorative services were held around the nation to honour those who lost their lives  -  the 645 crew of HMAS Sydney II and the 78 of HSK Kormoran.
Earlier this year Australians marvelled at the discovery of HMAS Sydney II and the German raider HSK Kormoran off the coast of Western Australia.
Now the final resting places of the crews have been permanently protected.
For more than 66 years the fate of HMAS Sydney II and HSK Kormoran had been the subject of much public speculation and heartache and the finding gave the opportunity for closure for many families and friends of the crew.
The Rudd Government moved quickly to put temporary measures in place to prohibit unauthorized intrusion into these sites and ensure respect of the war dead of both our nations.
We have now made these measures permanent under the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 prohibiting the damage, disturbance or removal of the vessels and their relics and requiring a Commonwealth permit to enter the sites.
Through the Australian Heritage Council, the Rudd Government has begun an assessment for the National Heritage Listing of both sites. 


On this day 67 long years ago 645 Australians gave their lives in defence of their nation.
On 19 November 1941 HMAS Sydney was lost with all lives.
Prime Minister Curtin announced the news to a stunned nation on 30 November.
Mourning the “loss of a fine ship and her gallant complement” stating that “the people of Australia will be proud that she and they upheld the traditions of the Royal Australian Navy and completed a glorious career in successful action against the enemy.”
Curtin later continued that they, the crew of the Sydney, “had rendered to this nation the full measure of their devotion”.
The War Cabinet had met the days previous hoping against hope that survivors would be found. But there would be none.
When the War Cabinet met and agreed that day on what was to be done, they resolved also that the name would live on in the Royal Australian Navy.
The War Cabinet agreed that day that there will always be a Sydney and so it has been.
HMAS Sydney was the pride of the fleet. She had earned her battle honours in a distant and ancient sea in the battle of the Mediterranean.
Her lines were beautiful. Her men, well seasoned. Her captains bold.
She had returned home to a hero's welcome when the world still seemed dark and the victories few, victories that could nourish a nation's soul through war.
Through Sydney's streets they marched as heroes. The city embraced the ship that bore her name and then towards work again to stand guard at our nation's sea lanes to Suez.
And the rest is tragedy.
A tragedy that seared the nation's soul, both then and down the tunnels of time. Families shattered, mothers grieving, fathers silent, brothers, sister ashen. Newlywed wives left staring uncomprehendingly with a grief unspeakable.
Their children, little children, were left for a lifetime wondering why.
And then there were their mates, some still with us today, and wondering still why they were spared that last, final and fateful voyage.
And let us also remember today the men who lost their lives on the Kormoran for they were men too with mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers, children, families all.
And now, they have been found. These two great, grey ships of the deep, now silent sepulchres of the sea. Great tombs of our nation's dead.
What would the brave souls of the Sydney say to us today?
Because death is the unwelcome guest that one day greets us all.
I believe they would say it is well to have died...
I believe they would say it is well to have died for the highest human cause  -  not just the defence of the nation, but the defence also of the idea that had given this new nation birth, barely a generation before.
 And that idea was freedom. Freedom is little discussed in our current age. Perhaps it is because freedom is something we know from its absence rather than its presence.
But when since the war we have seen millions upon millions coming to these shores in search of freedom: freedom to pursue their lives, freedom to pursue their faiths, freedom to pursue their commerce.
We know from this fact, that Sydney's work has been work well done.
And that is the further message to us today, from the men of Sydney.
In a word, it is vigilance. There are those who would wish the enemies of freedom away, would that it were so, but it is not. We cannot build castles in the air.
We are a practical people. We must therefore be prepared to defend the peace and across the vast theatres of the world, prosecute the peace, when others would threaten it. And to do so with our friends and allies and our partners, and through the great councils of the United Nations.
And so we will continue to build great ships like Sydney as the symbols and the substance of our strength and so speak plainly of our capacity and our resolve to act, should the time come.
What finally would the warriors of Sydney say to us today at this the dawn of our pacific century?
I believe they would also say this, be warriors for peace.
I believe they would cry as one, may there be no more wars.
I will believe they would say to our peoples our diplomats and our statesman, let us strain every sinew, not only to preserve the peace, as if war was somehow our natural human condition, but to build together a new habit, a new culture, a new practice of peace for the future.
We face a new century where much is uncertain, where we could once again slip into old, bad and destructive habits.
Or we could do something entirely new:
Fashioning a truly united nations;
Building on the habits of cooperation;
Resolving to work for the common good and so confronting the great common challenges of our age which now bear down so greatly on us all.
But beyond all these great things, this day, this Memorial Day, this 67th Anniversary of the lost of this great ship, is about the 645 souls lost to the love and to the embrace of their families.
To you, the brothers, the sisters, the sons, the daughters, the grandchildren, the families and the communities who love them and who gave them nurture, and to  you their mates, a grateful nation today says thank you.
For Australia is a greater nation for them, for their service and for their sacrifice.


Thank you Ross (Babbage), for that wonderful exercise in expectation management. ‘You've spent 25 years of your career preparing for this speech tonight.' I'll pay you back big time mate.
Ross actually was one of my teachers at the Strategic Defence Studies Centre at the Australian National University and upon election to this office I asked him to shred all of my university assignments and he's done so. So my thanks to him and why he can treat me with such cavalier disregard.
To my good friend Ambassador Rich Armitage, who has given me heaps over about 15 years and when he's been in power and not in power, but Rich, I regard you as a long, enduring friend of Australia and it's great to have you with us here today.
To Ambassador Robert McCallum, where is the Ambassador, I saw him here I think earlier on. Robert is coming to the conclusion of his assignment here in Canberra and could I publicly use this occasion, when we have so many Americans with us in the room, to acknowledge his contribution to the Australia-United States relationship and alliance.
Robert, you go from this country with us as Australians knowing that you are a true friend of Australia and a great supporter of this alliance and we thank you for your work.
Also in the room tonight we have my good friend Stanley Roth, former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia in the Clinton Administration. We have also Lieutenant -General Fraser, Deputy Commander US Pacific Command and thank you General Fraser for the hospitality you and Admiral Keating showed me and my party when you recently spent some time at PACOM in Honolulu.
Greg Combet, Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Procurement, Air Chief-Marshall Angus Houston, Chief of the Australian Defence Force, Michael L'Estrange, Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Peter Varghese, Director General of the Office of National Assessments, the Honourable Kim Beazley, good to have you with us here Kim, Chancellor-elect of the Australian National University, a great Australian national institution and leading members one and all of the Australia-US security policy community.
Firstly, I should apologise now for interrupting your dinner so early and delivering this address at the time that I'm so doing and the reason is I'm about to head out the door and head off to Lima in Peru for APEC.
Normally, I'd be leaving tomorrow morning but there is industrial action in Papeete. Papeete is normally the place where we would refuel. I'm reliably informed that because of the industrial action on the part of trade unionists in Papeete, we could safely land the Royal Australian Air Force aircraft on which I'll be travelling but not necessarily take off again, which could lead to some embarrassment if I was in fact in Tahiti for the three days that I was supposed to be in Peru for APEC.
So that's why you have me now, speaking, because I literally zip out the door and jump onto an aircraft to travel to Lima via Honolulu, via Acapulco, in order to land in Lima on time. Think of me.
It's great to be here also at an institution which is named after Kokoda. For Americans who are with us tonight, Kokoda holds a particular significance. Many will be familiar with it, as I know Rich and others are. Others who may be visitors for the first time with us may be less familiar.
It is a story, rich in Australian heroism, rich in an Australian attitude of absolute defiance and rich in the story of us inflicting the first defeat on land to the Imperial Japanese army in the Second World War. And for us therefore it holds particular significance.
At a personal level, I actually walked the Kokoda Track a few years ago. For those of you who have not done it before can I say you are very sensible.
The Kokoda Track is 93 kilometres over the Owen-Stanley Ranges and it is as horrible now to walk as it was back then.
I walked it with a team of people, without a rifle on my shoulder and without even a pack on my back and it nearly killed me.
It is an extraordinary piece of terrain. We did so in the end of a monsoonal season. By the time we got to the end we had developed, all of us practically in our team, the 21st century equivalent of footrot, or trench rot, which as you know  -  sorry, you're eating at this stage  -  which as you know was endemic across many of the trenches in the Western Front in the First World War.
By the end a number of us had feet which had swollen up to be the size of footballs, mine included, and they were not a pretty sight to see. In fact, they had swollen up so large that it was impossible to wear shoes.
My complication was the afternoon after concluding the walk at Popendetta and then flying back to Moresby I was due, as Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, for a meeting with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Sir Michael Somare.
Sir Michael, as you may know, usually wears sandals but I then walked into his office wearing socks and no shoes. He looked at me, looked at the shoes, looked at the non-existence of shoes, looked at my socks, looked at the size of my feet, and said ‘Kokoda'. I said ‘Yeah' and he said ‘You silly European bastard'.
He was right.
Can I say to our American friends who are here this evening, you are genuinely welcome guests in our country.
This engagement with our friends across the Pacific, our allies and partners across the Pacific goes back a long, long time and it is given continued vitality by the continued presence of so many of you who engage with so many of us in all dimensions of the security policy relationship between us.
We value that. We valued it in the past. We value it now and we will value it in the future. Because this, for the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, is for us the most critical relationship. And so you are welcome.
The Australia-US Alliance is a relationship reflecting the deep and enduring interests of both our nations.
It is an alliance whose long-term operation transcends any partisan divide.
It is also an alliance which has survived 13 Presidents, 12 Australian Prime Minister, Republic and Democrat, Labor and Liberal, and it has flourished, and it continues to do so.
It is also in Australia's view an alliance that has helped underpin the security and stability of the wider region.
Through its network of alliances in our region, the US presence in the Western Pacific has been a force for stability for more than half a century.
As I said to President-elect Obama when I spoke to him to congratulate him on his election victory, Australia is looking forward to further strengthening our relationship with the United States in the future.
A strong and enduring US Alliance will contribute and continue to be the basis for our close security cooperation with his Administration, as it has been with all US Administrations for the last 60 years and more.
I very much welcome President-elect Obama's commitment in his foreign policy plan to forging a more effective framework in Asia and working to build an infrastructure with East Asian countries that can promote stability and prosperity for the future.
Australia looks forward to working with the Obama Administration:
     * on the ongoing coordinated response to the global financial crisis;
     * on the long-term political, economic, and strategic architecture of the Asia-Pacific region;
     * on the great and enduring challenge of nuclear non-proliferation; and
     * on the great challenge also of climate change, which is of major relevance to our region with the rise of China and with the rise of India.
These are challenges we intend to embrace together, Australia and the United States, and I look forward to doing so.
The Asia-Pacific region will in the 21st century increasingly become the focus of a global shift in the centre of geo-strategic and geo-economic gravity.
I look forward very much to working with the Obama Administration in the future  -  just as Australia has worked closely on the great challenges that lie ahead with President Bush's Administration in the past.
The theme for this year's conference goes to the heart of Australia's interests.
Put simply, what goes on in the Western Pacific is vital to Australia's enduring interests.
History makes this point very clearly.
In 1941 and 1942, the direct security threat to Australia  -  the first we had faced as a nation  -  came to us across the Western Pacific.
The Western Pacific became the battleground on which we fought for our national survival. And our partner in that fight, our ally in that fight, was the United States of America, something Australia will never forget.
For Australian policy makers, the geo-politics of the Western Pacific and our relationship with the United States have always been intimately linked.
And today it is no different.
The Western Pacific still contains potential military flashpoints that could have enormous ramifications for Australia.
The Taiwan Straits have not gone simply gone away, they are still there and they do represent a potential source for instability in the future.
We welcome recent moves towards better relations between China and Taiwan.
But the Taiwan Strait remains highly militarised and the core political disagreements between China and Taiwan still today remain unresolved.
The Korean Peninsula too is home to unresolved tensions.
North Korea maintains one of the largest armies in the world. And it has sought to develop nuclear weapons.
The armistice at the 38th parallel has held for 55 years but the fact that no peace treaty has been signed reflects the ongoing tension.
We also face a range of other security policy challenges here in our own region.
International terrorism is far from defeated and we must maintain our vigilance.
Terrorism may be out of the newspapers for a while, terrorism continues to be a threat to us all and we must maintain vigilance.
Fragile states face internal security threats and require our support.
We face a complex range of security challenges in our region therefore.
For the first time in the nation's history, this Government will soon deliver a national security statement to the Parliament.
This document will provide a conceptual framework for dealing with the complexity, the density and the interconnectedness of the security policy challenges Australia now faces.
The document will bring greater discipline to the way we approach national security policy at all levels of government and across the full dimensions of the threat spectrum.
Sitting under the national security statement we will have a series of other guiding documents.
The Defence White Paper will be delivered in the first half of 2009.
The Government has made it clear that it will require a comprehensive White Paper.
The White Paper will set out the strategic terrain we foresee for the region and beyond.
And we want a White Paper that addresses all of the defence enabling capabilities  -  such as personnel, IT, logistics, and facilities  -  which are also critical to ensuring military success.
In addition, the Government has made it clear what we expect to see a White Paper as being, namely, properly costed.
We want a properly costed resource plan that covers major capability projects, and the critical support areas that I mentioned.
The White Paper will outline how we propose to structure our defence forces to meet those challenges for the long-term future and it will outline how we fix any gaps in the short term.
It will be a long-term planning document that will bring new discipline to our defence capability planning.
And I would like to say again tonight to this audience that this will include a particular emphasis on the maritime capabilities that will become increasingly important in our strategic environment in the Asia Pacific region over the period of the White Paper.
At the same time as planning for our long-term defence needs, we are strengthening our defence cooperation with crucial partners in our region.
Enhancing our security and defence cooperation has been a key theme of my visits recently to Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore.
We in Australia intend to deepen our defence cooperation with these countries. We have also proposed to enhance our security cooperation with India and our security policy dialogue with China. These are important friends and partners for the future.
Australia's long-term national security also hinges on our long-term economic security.
The Global Financial Crisis is an important reminder of the close links between economics and security.
The Western Pacific will be the leading centre of global change in the 21st century.
The region's economic weight is increasing rapidly. This economic growth, this economic weight is driving substantial changes in strategic weight.
The challenge for all nations in the region is to cooperate effectively to manage the economic and security changes and challenges that are now unfolding.
It will take some time for the full effects of the crisis to be felt.
But unless we handle this crisis effectively on both a global and regional basis, it has the potential to increase the fragility of some of the economies of the region and to reduce their ability to respond to the challenges that lie ahead.
History should be our teacher.
That is why the common resolve of the G20 recently convened in Washington to shun protectionism and to embrace free trade is a positive sign for the future.
We now know that closing our borders is a counter-productive approach to economic problems such as the global financial crisis.
But history also highlights the need for a coordinated global response to such crises.
President Bush's initiative in convening the G20 Summit was important, positive and necessary.
But the Washington Summit is but the first step in a long process of global economic recovery.
The crisis needs to be addressed through determined, coordinated and positive action in the critical months that lie ahead.
G20 leaders have laid down a clear path to help us weather the current crisis to prevent this type of crisis from happening again, and by acting on the demands of the real economy.
The statistics of the G20 speak for themselves. These members account for 80 per cent of world trade, 85 per cent of the world's banking system, 85 per cent of global gross national product.
But the importance of this group is more than just the statistics would suggest.
It brings together for the first time in a formal forum, developed and emerging economies. It brings together the critical economies and nations of the Americas, North and South, from Europe and from Asia.
Its strategic economic weight and its representative nature provide the G20 with potential for real long term authority. Of great importance for Australia and for the United States is that the G20 also includes key partners in Asia.
China and India as two emerging economic giants must be part of solutions to global economic and financial challenges, they must be a formal part of the solution, the considered solution to global economic and financial challenges.
It no longer makes sense for them not to be so. So too must Japan, still the world's second largest economy. South Korea also has an important role to play. It is a major exporting nation and a country that has weathered the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis and has come out stronger.
Indonesia is a voice for South East Asia in the G20, in addition to being the largest Muslim country in the world.
What this means is that alongside Australia, these nations give our region a greater voice in the affairs of the global economy and beyond.
There will be another Summit by the end of April next year to confirm the action agenda agreed in Washington. With the increasing economic importance of the Asia Pacific Region, the G20 will provide a continuing forum for the countries of the Asia Pacific to craft the international responses to the financial crisis and the impact on the real economy.
Coming as it does just a week after the G20 Summit, the APEC economic leaders meeting in Lima provides a further opportunity for APEC economies to commit to the actions agreed to in Washington.
APEC has always demonstrated an ability to respond to new challenges that threaten its core objectives of trade and investment liberalisation.
The crisis and the international response is already at the top of the APEC leaders' agenda.
As a group of economies accounting for more than half of global GDP and around half of world trade, APEC is well placed to provide political and practical support to the consensus reached on the crisis in Washington.
APEC can also assist by staying focussed on removing barriers to trade across the region and beyond.
Australia has been a leading proponent of the removal of trade barriers in our region.
And Australia will continue to emphasise the importance of free and open trade.
The international community must at every level work together to ensure responses to events such as the global financial crisis do not include any resort to protectionism nor undercut efforts toward economic growth and development in the region.
Regionally, the Bogor Goals of removing trade and investment barriers in developed countries by 2010 and developing countries by 2020 remain the clearest commitment of APEC leaders to open markets across the region.
And Australia has demonstrated its commitment to the goals of free trade through the negotiation of free trade agreements with a range of economies throughout the region.
On top of our free trade agreements with the United States, New Zealand, Thailand and Singapore, we signed a free trade agreement with Chile in July this year.
We are actively negotiating Free Trade Agreements with Japan and with China.
When I met President Hu Jintao in Washington on Sunday, we agreed to adopt a fresh approach to speeding up the conclusion of this agreement.
And we are both committed to achieving a high-quality outcome as soon as we can.
We have finalised an ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement which covers a combined market of around 600 million people with a total GDP of more than two trillion US dollars.
FTAs can boost trade by expanding the size of the market that exporters have good access to.
When you look at the size of the combined market we have delivered though all of our FTAs taken together, it amounts to nearly 30 per cent of global GDP.
If we succeed with China and Japan, the size of that market reaches around 45 per cent of global GDP.
And we are committed to promoting APEC's agenda on regional economic integration and continuing on the path towards a Free Trade Agreement of the Asia Pacific.
These developments are important, and bilateral and regional free trade agreements are a valuable means of achieving significant trade liberalisation outcomes.
But it is important to note that an ambitious outcome from trade liberalisation negotiations through the WTO remains the best way to bring about trade liberalisation that has the greatest positive impact on the global economy.
The reinvigoration of the Doha Round of trade negotiations will be an important basis of economic growth by helping promote a free and open global trading regime.
And Australia remains strongly committed to achieving an outcome from these negotiations.
I was very pleased that the G20 Summit agreed to the goal of reaching a new global trade agreement by the end of 2008.
This is ambitious but we must work for it.
And Australia will be working to encourage cooperation toward the successful conclusion of the Round.
And at a time of global financial crisis and global economic crisis, there could be no better outcome for the global economy than to achieve a Doha Free Trade outcome for the world.
As a striking example of the interdependence of nations and the interconnectedness of the challenges we face, the global financial crisis highlights the need for coordinated responses and coordinated approaches to dealing with problems.
We need to ensure that we have a regional architecture that can drive regional cooperation to meet existing and emerging challenges.
Regular dialogue across all areas of government and at all levels will be essential to positioning the region to address the range of security and economic challenges which we are set to face.
Challenges such as:
     *  Managing the geostrategic changes taking place in our region;
     *  Responding to threats such as terrorism and natural disasters and emerging challenges such as food and resource security;
     *  Maintaining and building on free, open trading regimes; and
     *  Acting together on climate change.
The development of ASEAN is a great example of how regional organisations can contribute to security and stability.
ASEAN was created at the height of the Cold War when the future of the region was much less than certain.
The South-East Asia of the 1960s had been divided by the conflict in Indochina.
It was a group of countries with few substantive ties and diverse, in fact, conflicting political, social, religious, cultural systems.
Today, ASEAN has helped forge a sense of community across what remains a diverse region.
Through building a dialogue, ASEAN has developed cooperation, rather than confrontation, as the driver of responses to new challenges the region faces.
And it has played a crucial role in maintaining peace in the region.
This experience illustrates the importance of pre-emptively shaping our future environment to position the region to address future challenges, and highlights the need for us to develop strong institutions which foster trust and cooperation to underpin peace and stability.
This is a key factor driving this Government's proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community.
Through this we have started a constructive dialogue on the development of a broad-ranging, effective forum for engagement between regional countries.
I am pleased that the initial consultations in the region of my Special Envoy for the Asia Pacific Community, Richard Woolcott, have gone well. More discussions will occur.
As I outlined in my address to the Asia Society in June, this will be a gradual process. And this is as it should be.
Our ambition remains to create an Asia-Pacific Community by 2020.
And that is a single pan-regional body that brings together the United States, China, India, Indonesia, Japan and the other countries of the region with a broad agenda to deal with the political, economic and security challenges of the future.
As we know, no such body in the region does that at present, either by dint of its membership or by dint of its agreed agenda. It is time we moved towards such a body.
The challenge will be to determine the best option for the development of such a body which best meets the interests of the region.
I will be discussing the proposal further with leaders in Lima this weekend.
Our discussions will continue in capitals as well in the year ahead.
And my Special Envoy will be looking to consult with the new US Administration at the earliest opportunity.
For this concept, the Asia Pacific Community, to succeed, ASEAN must be at its core. And we look forward to continued dialogue with our ASEAN friends on its final constitution.
The Western Pacific is a dynamic environment. The geo-political terrain is shifting.
The economic character is changing as new powerhouse economies emerge.
It is the emerging centre of the climate change agenda.
The challenges this presents highlight the need for cooperative responses to developments in the region, and the importance of shaping our future environment by developing mechanisms to address these challenges.
Australia and the United States are well placed to work together in this region.
We are well placed to do so bilaterally given the strength, depth and breadth of the defence and security relationship between us. We are well placed to do so multilaterally through the institutions which exist and those which we may one day form together.
Australia and the United States have shared values. Australia and the United States have shared interests. Australia and the United States have a shared future.
May our common resolve be to build an Asia Pacific century that does not repeat the errors of the European century of the one past  -  one characterised by national conflict and international conflict; but instead a century that by dint of our efforts together is truly peaceful, truly pacific, prosperous and sustainable for all the peoples of our region.
QUESTION:I noticed Prime Minister in your comments tonight you renewed your commitment to the regional initiative that you announced to the Asia Society in June. What I would like to do is to ask you, wouldn't it be more advantageous to look at this in terms of modification and adaption of existing institutions rather than attempting to create a new institution?
PM:Paul on the question of the future shape of an Asia Pacific Community, we in the Australian Government remain completely open. The one principle is that ASEAN should be at its core. And I think our friends in ASEAN have demonstrated the remarkable achievement of converting what was a significant region of conflict into a significant region of cooperation.
If you think back to the ‘60s and the divisions between communist Indochina and what was happening in the rest of South East Asia, it is extraordinary that 40 years later, these states, these countries are together in the same organisation and, 
despite difficulties from time to time, working and speaking together, by and large with a single voice.
On the form which this may take, subject to open discussions with our friends in the neighbourhood, that is, whether in the future an Asia Pacific Region, an Asia Pacific Community takes within its umbrella the future functions of APEC, that is matter for what our friends and partners in the region may think.
Whether it has a wider capacity to become a further iteration of other regional bodies, that is a matter for our friends and partners in the region. My interest is not the question of substitution or innovation. My interest is this, to encourage now a regional dialogue on how do we go about drawing the threads together of our pan regional cooperation in order to encourage and institutionalise the habits of cooperation across the policy spheres.
At present as you know APEC deals with an exclusively economic agenda and as you know the other bodies currently exclude the United States. I would like to see a pan regional body which includes America and which is also capable of embracing a wide policy agenda which covers the breadth of our interconnectedness - political, economic and security in the future.
But Paul at the end of the day it will be shaped by the dialogue and the discussion. And because the endpoint that we have established is a 2020 objective, there is plenty of time to do that. But Dick Woolcott, my Special Envoy, has been busy.
He has been around most capitals in the region but not all so far. And that process of discussion will continue for some time.
QUESTION:Prime Minister Peter Nicholson, of the Kokoda Foundation. You spoke about the abnormal influence that the economic present financial crisis, and the economic weight that is going on now and the means of dealing with it through the G20 but particularly its impact on the fragility of other regional economies.
Could you outline the kinds of mechanisms you might see that we can prop up these economies or stimulate them in the same way that you are doing in Australia and is happening in other national economies?
PM: I think the great thing is that right now the Bretton Woods institutions are playing a very strong role, both the Fund and the Bank recently in discussions with both Dominique Strauss-Kahn who heads the Fund and Bob Zoellick who heads the Bank, indicates the sort of proactive actions they are taking. The Bank in particular is very active in this space and I would commend publicly Bob Zoellick's leadership on this. Basic things like how you deal with trade financing challenges, basic things like how you deal with immediate demands for development.
And as for the fund, of course, particular challenges which might arise on the external accounts of various emerging economies.
On this challenge, I think our two principal Bretton Woods institutions are doing a good job. We the rest of the international community should get behind them and it was pleasing to see most recently the government of Japan extending such significant support to the work of these institutions in the future.
And that will be increasingly required by a number of developed economies as this crisis unfolds across more fragile economies in the developing world.
QUESTION:As you can imagine, there's a cottage industry going on in Washington on transition papers for the incoming administration. It's easier on Asia policy  - 
PM:When I was in Washington on the weekend, Stanley, it looked like an industrial combine at work.
QUESTION:Fair enough. Easier on Asia policy than many other areas because there have been so many successes in Asia policy in the last eight years, this coming from a former Democrat political appointee. But there has been a perception that the bilateral policy had been more successful than the regional policies, and particularly in South-East Asia, a lot of angst - ‘is the US engaged, are we focussed entirely on the Middle East. Are we looking out for them and their institutions? Are they going to have to accommodate with China?'
A couple of practical ideas coming out, such as, (inaudible) new ones, joining the ASEAN summit, the annual event, convening an ASEAN Honolulu conference, the one that was aborted in particular, those two institutional changes. What would your view be about those two proposals?
PM: I suppose my first view would be not to provide public advice to the incoming US administration because the transition arrangements in Washington are deep, complex and mysterious and will have their resolution as we all know, on the 20th of January.
Can I say this though, looking carefully at what President-elect Obama has said about the important of the Pacific to his presidency. We in Australia are encouraged. We think that will build in important ways on the Pacific engagement of the Bush presidency.
Let me make one remark about the United States' engagement with China over the last eight years. I've said this before privately, and I'll say it today publicly.
I think an outstanding success of the Bush Administration has been the way it's managed the China relationship in what could have gone radically in the wrong direction and I think it speaks well of the outgoing administration in terms of our interests and stability in this region.
And that is a good platform from which to build.
Secondly, part of the purpose of my remarks tonight was to underline the importance of not just maintaining strengthening the fabric of our bilateral security and defence policy engagements between the US, its friends and partners in the region and Australia separately doing the same, but also to work together on developing further the habits of multilateral cooperation.
As I said, ASEAN does stand out as something of an example of what could be done and certainly one of the areas where I wish to engage early with the incoming US administration is on what we can do more broadly across the region, hence our proposal for an Asia-Pacific community, and hence why we wish to engage our American friends in due season on that.
But I'm very mindful of how thick the in-tray is in DC these days. 


When the Government was elected just one year ago, we committed to building a modern Australia equipped to face the challenges of the 21st century. 
In our first year in office we have been delivering on that commitment.
Just a few of our achievements include:
Cut taxes in the last budget for working families and low income earners;
Starting our education revolution by building Trade Training Centres in high schools and installing new computers in nearly 1000 schools;
Abolishing the previous Government's extreme workplace laws;
Implementing the Water for the Future plan to restore the health of the Murray Darling Basin and securing our future urban water supplies with funding to build desalination, water recycling and rainwater harvesting projects;
We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol and signed Australia up to international action to tackle climate change;
And we are introducing a $480 million dollar national solar schools program to encourage schools to switch to solar power.
We are establishing over 1000 new training places for nurses and providing incentives to encourage thousands of nurses who are out of the workforce to return to work, because we need them.
By the end of the year we will have held nine community cabinets across the country as part of our commitment to hear people's ideas and concerns first hand, wherever they live.
And we have said sorry to Indigenous Australian on behalf of the Australian Parliament.
But you know? This is just the start. 
Australia now faces the worst financial crisis since the 1930s and we've taken early and decisive action to protect our economy and to protect Australian jobs and business.
We guaranteed all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions for the next three years.
We invested $10.4 billion into the economy to stimulate economic activity and to support jobs.
And we are bringing forward investment in major infrastructure like rail, roads and ports to boost economic activity for the long term.
Together we will steer our economy through these rough waters and at the same time deliver on our commitments to take Australia confidently forward into the future.
Thank you for listening.
A video of this speech is also available.  The Goverment's One Year Progress Report is also available.


PM RUDD: Well, it's been good this evening to meet again with John Key, the new Prime Minister of New Zealand. 
I congratulated John in the person to person for his election win recently in New Zealand.
This is the second time we have met, we had an opportunity to get to know each other in Auckland before the election and it's going to be a good partnership between us.
The thing about the Australia-New Zealand relationship is that it really does transcend the party political divide. And the reason for that is that our people have so much in common. In fact, if you look around the world you can't find two peoples that have more in common than the people of Australia and the people of New Zealand.
Our values are the same, our interests coincide practically everywhere around the world, and we are therefore good partners when it comes to doing good things in the world.
Therefore, the challenge we have ahead is to take our existing relationship to new heights.
The challenges we face in terms of the global financial crisis and the impact which that has on the real economy in Australia and New Zealand are going to make that task even more important. We are going to have to work even more closely together through institutions such as APEC, more closely together through the international financial institutions like the World Bank and the IMF, and other international agencies, in the overall response to the global financial crisis.
The global financial crisis, as I said in my remarks today at the APEC Business Leaders Conference, is non-discriminating  -  it affects us all, it doesn't matter where the national boundaries lie.
The real economy, real businesses, real jobs affected around the world and on both sides of the Tasman.
Our challenge as governments is to work effectively and in a coordinated fashion together to reduce the impact of this crisis on our businesses and on our people and on jobs and we intend to do that.
Our discussions which will continue later this evening will cover the range of other interests that Australia and New Zealand have in common. Interests, of course, in the Pacific. And New Zealand's strong and good contribution to what we have done over a long period of time now both in the Solomon's and in East Timor. And again I publicly thank the government and the people of New Zealand for their continued support there.
Beyond that, we have of course a range of other matters on the bilateral front which we will continue to work our way through. But I will simply make the point  -  this is a good relationship, and I believe we have got off to a good start, and I'm absolutely confident that Australia will win in the Rugby League tonight in Brisbane. But we'll see what happens in the cricket.
PM KEY: Look, Prime Minister, thank you.
The fact that Kevin Rudd was the first leader to ring me as I virtually left the stage on election night, I think it's a sign of the relationship. And Prime Minister Rudd, your commitment to the relationship, I want to thank him for that. We work very hard to make sure that it is a good relationship between New Zealand and Australia. There is more work to be done, and I look forward to looking at that very closely. And I wish the New Zealand rugby league team all the very best. They may need it.
JOURNALIST: In what practical way what can you do to work more closely together in the future?
PM KEY: I think there are a number of factors from our point of view. (Inaudible) we were very supportive of the view that the G20 should get together in Washington last weekend. Here at APEC we will be pushing very strongly, I made comments this morning and I think the Prime Minister would agree, that we need to advance Doha and make sure that that's a successful round that comes off the back burner where it is currently parked.
You know, there is a number of (inaudible) trans-pacific partnership that Australia has indicated it will be joining the P4 along with Peru and the United States. (inaudible)
PM RUDD: To turn to that question from an Australian point of view.
We have been participating in the G20 most recently held in Washington as the next stage of that there will be a further meeting of the G20 in March-April next year, and that's to confirm implementation of the measures announced that it would consider further measures for the future.
We'll be working very closely with our friends in Wellington about where that agenda goes for the future.
Secondly, within APEC itself our challenge of the next 36 hours is to make sure that the clear cut commitments to those core sets of agreements in Washington are reaffirmed by the major economies of the Asia-Pacific region.
This is an opportunity to extend the G20 mandate to a wider net of nations in terms of the actions which need to be taken on stabilising financial markets now, stabilising financial markets into the long term, adding to economic growth through appropriate fiscal and monetary policy stimulus. And, as John has just said, a clear cut commitment to doing everything humanly possible to get a decent outcome on Doha. And that's where Australia and New Zealand have worked so effectively in the past. But in the critical month ahead we are going to have to work even more closely to try and make Doha a success. That will be a huge shot in the arm for the global economy and to confidence if we get it right.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Doha round (inaudible)
PM RUDD: I think, as John described to me before, that if the G20 dropped the ball on this it would represent a failure of political leadership. That is exactly the sort of remarks I was making last weekend in Washington. That's my view.
The world expects political leaders to act, not simply to describe events. There is now a substantially advanced boutique industry called gloom and doom  -  it's all about describing what is going on and telling everybody how bad it is and how much worse it is going to get. That's terrific, that's called commentary.
So you can either be part and parcel of that process, or you can take up the mantle of leadership and do something about it.
That mantle has fallen to the G20 at present, and that process began through the decision to convene that meeting in Washington last weekend. But, the test will be where we have got to by March-April next year. The resolutions contained in that communiqué are good. But the test will lie in their implementation. And, one of those implementation points will lie in the future of Doha.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask both Prime Ministers to articulate their view on monetary unions between Australia and New Zealand?
PM KEY: Well, I think where that debate is within New Zealand, it is understands the adoption of the Australian dollar. In reality, given the proportional size of the two economies. I don't think it's something that is on the agenda in the short term. I do think there is more we can do to enhance our economies, and there has been work occurring beyond (inaudible) trade deals into the services sector and capital markets. But at this stage I wouldn't (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) medium term?
PM KEY: No. I don't see it as being an issue. At this point there are a lot of other things we can do to enhance the single economic market.
PM RUDD: I think from an Australian perspective we would have a similar view. Currency union is not on the table. What is on the table is further practical steps to be taken in making the single economic market more of a reality. We still have some more practical work to do there. Our officials have been hard at work. And I'm sure, given John's nature and mine, we will be cracking the whip to make sure it happens.
JOURNALIST: Is a common emissions trading scheme a possibility (inaudible) ?
PM RUDD: Well, John and I just had a discussion about our respective approaches to emissions trading. I don't wish to characterise the New Zealand position, other than to say that New Zealand of course will make its own decisions about how it responds in terms of the climate change challenge.
In Australia, our position is clear in terms of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and we have a White Paper to produce before too much longer.
Of course, within our future arrangements for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we will leave open the principle of international connectedness generally with other compatible emissions trading schemes in the future. But we are still at the design phase in terms of other schemes around the world.
We in Australia are trying to get ours right, now.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM KEY: Well from a New Zealand perspective, I intend to make sure that New Zealand plays its part when it comes to climate change. As you are aware, we are going through the high level review on whether there will be a reworked emissions trading scheme (inaudible). If it is a reworked emissions trading scheme, then I think the compatibility with Australia is something that we would have to very closely consider. I don't think we can rule out an Australasian market for that.
JOURNALIST: Do you still think Mr Key that an emissions trading scheme can be achieved in a year (inaudible) ?
PM KEY: In my view yes. A lot of the work has been done. So this is the point to make sure that we take those submissions, give it the due reference that it deserves. There are a number of issues to consider there, but that's still the likely outcome (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd, in your speech back home before you left and your speech today you talked about your Asia Pacific Community proposal. (inaudible) ASEAN at the core of that. How much of that (inaudible)?
PM RUDD: I think ASEAN featured, from recollection, quite prominently in my initial speech at the Asia Society in Sydney in the middle of the year. And it's always for me been pretty basic - that ASEAN is a great success story in our own region, bringing together historically communist Indo-China with non-communist rest of South East Asia, and then deciding one day to cooperate, and look what happened 40 years later.
Therefore, it's simply common sense that ASEAN would constitute the core of what might subsequently unfold to be an Asia Pacific Community.
Secondly, I spoke with Dick Woolcott, our special envoy in Canberra just before I left to come here whatever day that was, it was in recent living memory, and Dick has been around a lot of the region. I understand Prime Minister you haven't spoken to him yet because New Zealand has been preoccupied with matters political in recent times and we can all understand why. But Dick's recent round has been pretty good. But, we are up for a long term discussion and I, as I said in my remarks today to the APEC business leaders, fully anticipate that there will be points of agreement and disagreement on the way through  -  that's normal and natural. But we are determined to be consultative about this.
The end point  -  an Asia Pacific Community by 2020, is about bringing together the great powers and the great economies of this region which will be at the fulcrum of the 21st century, the Asia Pacific Region.
The United States, China, Japan, India, Indonesia and others, into a body which can have on its collective agenda political security and economic matters. We don't have such a body now.
At minimum what is occurring now is a discussion about the region's long term future, and that's what I've sought to encourage at minimum through this proposal.
But, Dick has still got some work to do, and then we'll take it to the next stage.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask what your view is Prime Minister Key of a new grouping, do you think it is valuable?
PM KEY: Well I haven't been fully briefed on that yet. But two things, one, I think it is always good to have a goal. And the second thing is that over the next decade or two I don't think there is any doubt that the fastest growing region will be Asia. The fact that Prime Minister Rudd has shown leadership in that area is something to be welcomed. And, I think we should just let it run its course and see whether it builds behind it a constituency of support.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM RUDD: Well, as I said in my remarks today to the APEC Business Leaders Forum, our challenge as leaders is to work at both levels, the immediate and the long term. The immediate challenge we are all familiar with in this room and that's the global financial crisis turning into a crisis for the real economy, businesses and jobs. And, prospectively, a large impact on employment around the world.
We are all focussed on that. It's tough, it's hard, it's difficult. And both of our governments are spending a lot of time and effort working our way through the best leadership responses.
Over here, the continuing long term agenda doesn't change. And that is one of which we have just discussed  -  how do you shape the future of the Asia Pacific Region, and the Asia Pacific Community being one possibility.
Climate change doesn't disappear, and Australia's domestic circumstances, nor does water, as a major concern for us for the future. Getting our productivity agenda right for the future and building long term productivity growth. In the case of Australia, dealing with the challenges of our federation.
So what I am saying to you is that for us these two sets of challenges have to be prosecuted simultaneously.
When it comes to APEC, climate change will form part of my contribution to the discussion. Part of my contribution to this discussion over the next 36 hours will be about climate change and the fact that it has to remain on the global agenda.
And as I said again today, to be real long term we need both the United States and China on board consistent with the principles already agreed on the common differentiated responsibilities.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned cricket earlier. We understand that you have dumped ‘The Don' from the citizenship test. Is that right?
PM RUDD: Do you know something  -  when Mr Howard was Prime Minister ‘The Don' was contained within the booklet, and guess what, under the Rudd Government, ‘The Don' is contained in the booklet. And guess what? ‘The Don' wasn't contained in the questions set under Mr Howard and ‘The Don' is not in the questions set under me.
Nothing has changed. ‘The Don' is as preserved as ‘The Don' has been in the past.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM RUDD: Can I just suggest that question in terms of the detail of it, that's why we have Chris Evans back home.
PM KEY: If it's Donald Bradman, rest assured that he as well known in New Zealand as he is in Australia. So, we understand our cricket. If we could borrow a few of your players (inaudible)
PM RUDD: ‘The Don' has retired, and he's gone to a higher place.
I think John is absolutely right. ‘The Don' is revered by us all. And actually, in terms of the booklets for our citizenship test, it is part of the rolling Australian narrative. That's why he's there. It's important. All of us grew up with tales of ‘The Don'.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you're about to celebrate your first anniversary in Government. Do you have any advice for Mr Key about the realities of government and the difference to the expectations?
PM RUDD: It would not cross my mind to provide gratuitous advice to a colleague about how to conduct their own government.
John has a huge challenge ahead of him in terms of what we now face in Australia, which is the roll on implications of the financial and economic crisis. This will be very tough. And, the practical point of your question is, are we going to work with each other and learn from each other on things that need to be done. And I think, yes, as I said in my initial remarks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Key do you have any idea how long this recession is going to last?
PM KEY: I don't think anyone knows the answer to that. But, what we do know is that (inaudible) improving at the moment. I think there is some (inaudible) with the global financial crisis. I mean, it's the movement into the real economy now which is the bigger challenge. But, what we do know is that if we are proactive, if we can resolve things like the Doha Round, countries ensure that they don't put up protectionist barriers, and if we stay committed to stimulus packages that both New Zealand and Australia have committed to, then the world can come out of it more quickly that (inaudible).
PM RUDD: Thanks very much, folks.
[ends]


When the Government was elected just one year ago, we committed to building a modern Australia equipped to face the challenges of the 21st century. 
In our first year in office we have been delivering on that commitment.
Just a few of our achievements include:
Cut taxes in the last budget for working families and low income earners;
Starting our education revolution by building Trade Training Centres in high schools and installing new computers in nearly 1000 schools;
Abolishing the previous Government's extreme workplace laws;
Implementing the Water for the Future plan to restore the health of the Murray Darling Basin and securing our future urban water supplies with funding to build desalination, water recycling and rainwater harvesting projects;
We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol and signed Australia up to international action to tackle climate change;
And we are introducing a $480 million dollar national solar schools program to encourage schools to switch to solar power.
We are establishing over 1000 new training places for nurses and providing incentives to encourage thousands of nurses who are out of the workforce to return to work, because we need them.
By the end of the year we will have held nine community cabinets across the country as part of our commitment to hear people's ideas and concerns first hand, wherever they live.
And we have said sorry to Indigenous Australian on behalf of the Australian Parliament.
But you know? This is just the start. 
Australia now faces the worst financial crisis since the 1930s and we've taken early and decisive action to protect our economy and to protect Australian jobs and business.
We guaranteed all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions for the next three years.
We invested $10.4 billion into the economy to stimulate economic activity and to support jobs.
And we are bringing forward investment in major infrastructure like rail, roads and ports to boost economic activity for the long term.
Together we will steer our economy through these rough waters and at the same time deliver on our commitments to take Australia confidently forward into the future.
Thank you for listening.
A video of this speech is also available.  The Goverment's One Year Progress Report is also available.


Since the end of the Cold War nearly 20 years ago, the world has entered a new era of economic globalisation.
This new era of economic globalisation has also unfolded at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century.
The facts speak for themselves: the global centre of geo-economic and geo-strategic gravity is shifting to the Asia-Pacific region.
Our century has come but with it comes grave responsibilities:
     * to preserve peace;
     * to build security;
     * to widen prosperity; and
     * to act on climate change.
We have entered a new age of global and regional interdependence.
This age has brought great opportunities.
Capital, ideas, technology, services and products flow around the world creating jobs and delivering better prices to consumers.
But this age of interdependence also brings great challenges.
If one part of the global system experiences difficulty, it quickly flows to other parts.
That's why we need to make sure that the global financial and economic system is sustainable  -  through good times and bad.
In our region we need stability between nations.
We also need economic stability.
And we need long-term sustainable development.
These are all interconnected.
Sustainable political and economic structures require a sustainable environment.
All of this can only be achieved if governments in our region work together with a degree of cooperation and coordination unprecedented in our history.
And in doing so, we need to partner with the business community to develop our policy responses  -  both short and long term  -  to the great challenges that lie ahead.
The global financial crisis is now having a clear and immediate effect on real economies, real growth and real jobs around the world.
Already, in little more than a year, the financial crisis has caused the loss of nearly half of the wealth held on global stock markets.
And is expected to lead to a loss of 3 per cent of global GDP next year - that is $1.8 trillion.
For families it means lower living standards and frustrated ambitions.
It means the erosion of financial security for older people as their savings shrink.
It means a new generation of young people will find it more difficult to find their first job.
The ILO estimates that the numbers of jobless will rise to 210 million next year.
The impact will be felt in all nations  -  developed and developing.
A one percent decline in developing country growth rates will push an additional 20 million people into poverty.
The IMF is currently forecasting developing countries to grow at just over 5 per cent in 2009, down from 8 per cent in 2007.
That decline  -  of some 3 per cent  -  will condemn 60 million people to poverty.
As confidence across the world falls it begins a vicious cycle that leads to further caution on the part of households; leading to further falls in consumer spending; leading to further falls in business investment; leading to lower growth, and fewer new jobs generated.
But the test of political leadership is not simply to describe political events.
It is not to talk about them.
It is to act on them.
To act on them decisively.
And, where possible, to act ahead of the curve.
In other words, to make a difference.
This must be done nationally to support growth and jobs.
It must be done internationally.
The world must now act decisively to deal with the crisis we face.
The strength of open markets lies in its marriage of freedom and responsibility.
Freedom means that we are able to make economic decisions in our own interests unencumbered by excessive government restrictions.
Responsibility means ensuring that markets are properly regulated and that market participants support rather than undermine the integrity of the system.
But the origins of the current crisis lie in the largely unregulated sectors of our financial markets that brought out the absolute worst in the most extreme forms of capitalism.
And the consequences have not just been borne by those who abused the system.
It has been borne by the system itself, the real economy, and those whose jobs and standards of living depend on the orderly functioning of both for their livelihood.
As private demand falls, governments must step in to take up the slack.
This will require further monetary action.
And it will require fiscal action.
Nationally.
Internationally.
Coordinated.
And with urgency.
Many APEC members have already moved to boost their economies.
China has injected a massive 586 billion US dollars into its economy and that is a significant boost to the global economy.
Japan has announced a package of 68 billion US dollars.
The Korean Government has announced an 11 billion US dollar fiscal stimulus package of public expenditures and 3 trillion Won of tax cuts.
Indonesia has taken decisive action through both fiscal and monetary policy.
Australia has implemented a 7.7 billion US dollar Economic Security Strategy  -  equal to one per cent of GDP.
But more can be done.
Globally and regionally, more must be done.
Governments acting in isolation from one another cannot deal with all of the consequences of the crisis.
Nor can they hope to prevent such a crisis from happening again.
No country's economy is immune from the impact.
No country's labour force is immune from the impact.
This crisis will only be overcome by coordinated action.
President Bush's initiative in calling a Summit meeting of the Group of Twenty nations was the right response to the crisis.
The Group of Twenty  -  the G20  -  brings together the major economies in the world and the countries that have the greatest interest in and impact on the stability of the global financial system.
The members account for:
     * 80 per cent of world trade;
     * 85 per cent of the world's banking system; and
     * 85 per cent of global gross national product.
But the importance of this group is about more than the statistics.
It brings together developed and emerging economies.
It brings together five nations from the Americas, five from Europe, five from Asia and five from the rest of the world.
And while being a representative global body, it also reflects the increased economic might of the Asia-Pacific in the global deliberations of the 21st century.
In responding to the financial crisis and its effects, the G20 is also the most appropriate mechanism for the future.
And last weekend in Washington, we began to take some coordinated action.
We agreed on the need for countries to stabilise their financial systems.
We agreed that all countries would use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand.
More than the short term, we also agreed on the need for long-term changes to strengthen transparency, accountability and therefore the stability of the financial system.
     * Financial firms should be fully and accurately disclosing the level of risk in their products.
     * Capital adequacy regimes should be adequate to cope with the range of market fluctuations.
     * Financial executives should not be rewarded in the short term for excessive risk taking.
     * Incentive structures for financial firms should reward the building of sustainable business.
To make this effective and to prevent similar crises erupting in the future, we need national and regional regulators to implement consistent rules and regulations for the future.
The G20 meeting made a good start.
And it tasked ministers to develop a timeline to implement these commitments.
Leaders will meet again early next year to confirm implementation.
In the face of these challenges, the Australian economy remains strong.
Our financial sector is robust.
     * Australia has four out of the world's 12 remaining AA rated banks.
     * A recent World Economic Forum analysis listed Australia as the equal second highest of 144 countries in terms of the soundness of our banking institutions.
     * And since the government moved to guarantee deposits and wholesale funding, we have seen a material improvement in liquidity and narrowing of spreads.
Australia's real economy is currently holding up well.
     * Australia is one of the few advanced economies for which the IMF is forecasting positive growth in 2009.
     * Unemployment is near historic lows at 4.3 per cent.
     * And have continued to maintain a forecast budget surplus even after implementing our Economic Security Strategy.
Through the crisis, the Australian Government remains committed to our long term reform agenda.
We are continuing to invest in boosting Australia's long term productivity.
     * We are working to ensure that Australia has the best-skilled and best-educated workforce in the world.
     * We are lifting the administrative burdens on business through a deregulation program.
     * We are investing in building our infrastructure.
     * And we are working to realise the APEC goal of structural reform by tackling behind the border measures including trade facilitation, customs reform and harmonisation of product standards.
We are resolved through this agenda  -  to not only get through this crisis  -  but to emerge stronger for the future.
This provides a rational basis for optimism for the future rather than simply contributing to the now thriving boutique industry of doom and gloom  -  in turn becoming a self-fulfilling prophesy.
Throughout all of this, we are also committed to remaining one of the most open economies in the world.
We already have free trade agreements with the United States, New Zealand, Thailand and Singapore.
We signed a free trade agreement with Chile in July this year.
We have finalised an ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
We are actively negotiating FTAs with Japan and China.
Yesterday we announced our decision to join the United States, New Zealand, Brunei, Singapore, Chile and Peru in negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement.
This agreement could lay the foundation for our long-term goal of a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific.
If we succeed in concluding all these agreements we will have linked ourselves to markets that represent over 45 per cent of global GDP.
Of course the continuation of global trade flows is critical now  -  not just for the future.
World Bank president Robert Zoellick said recently at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting in Brazil that world trade could decline in 2009  -  the first fall for 27 years.
Part of the reason for the disruption in trade is the dislocation of credit markets which has denied shippers access to short-term credit.
The World Trade Organization has estimated that up to 90 per cent of trade shipments use some form of trade finance  -  the WTO estimates that the current liquidity gap in trade finance is 25 billion dollars.
As the G20 Leaders noted last weekend, all nations need to do more to ensure credit is available to finance trade.
In this context the recent introduction of a new trade finance facility by the World Bank is particularly welcome.
There has been conjecture  -  in Australia and internationally  -  about the implications of the global financial crisis for another crucial global challenge  -  the challenge of climate change.
Some have said that the financial crisis means that governments should postpone acting on climate change.
The Australian Government does not share that view.
Climate change presents a very real threat to global economic growth, jobs and prosperity.
But we can significantly reduce the impact with ambitious global action to reduce emissions.
Taking strong and urgent action will help safeguard economic and environmental stability.
It will insure us against severe and possibly catastrophic consequences for our material wellbeing.
The Australian Government recently completed a major economic study of the costs of taking action on climate change.
This study shows that Australia and the world will continue to grow strongly while taking the action required to avert dangerous climate change.
The study also shows that earlier action pays dividends.
Countries that begin structural change earlier will have a head start.
They will have more time to adjust their infrastructure and industrial structure smoothly to a carbon constrained world, avoiding more disruptive change later.
Australia  -  and other countries that take early action to reduce emissions  -  will capture the emerging growth opportunities in new low emission technologies, products and services.
This is turn will generate new jobs in cleaner, greener economies of the future.
The alternative is inertia  -  and the real economic and environmental costs of inertia are incalculable.
The Australian Government's emission reduction policies will promote clarity and certainty for industry, and provide a firm foundation for investment and job creation in the future.
Action to reduce Australia's emissions is a necessary part of our response to climate change.
It is necessary, but not sufficient.
Action by all major emitters is required to avert dangerous impacts of climate change.
Even if developed countries reduce their emissions to zero, current trends in developing countries could see greenhouse gases in the atmosphere rise to 650 parts per million by 2050, and further after that.
As a result, global average temperatures would likely rise more than three degrees above pre-industrial levels.
This change would bring high risks of adverse and potentially massive consequences for the global environment and the global economy.
This highlights the need for an ambitious, broadly-based global agreement that includes all sources of emissions from all countries.
As a developed country, Australia is prepared to accept its responsibility.
We respect the aspiration of developing nations to secure their economic development and deliver rising living standards for their people.
For this reason, we need to move away from the developed versus developing country divide that characterises current approaches to climate change.
We are all in this together.
Australia is working in partnership with its developing country neighbours to support action on climate change and action on development in tandem.
Building on our long-standing and close relationship, Australia and Indonesia have forged an innovative climate change partnership that can be a model for others.
It is a model which takes a practical approach to reducing emissions from deforestation.
Under the Indonesia-Australia Forest Carbon Partnership, we are working together on practical on-the-ground activities that support Indonesia in developing policies and systems, including in carbon monitoring and assessment, to reduce emissions from deforestation.
Emissions from deforestation represent about 20 per cent of total global emissions  -  more than all emissions from the transport sector.
Market-based approaches are at the centre of this partnership.
Market-based approaches set a real dollar value on the carbon stored in forests.
As a result, they provide opportunities for economic development.
Sustainable forest management provides a path to a better economic future for people in many developing countries.
Australia and Indonesia will also work together in multilateral negotiations to support a market-based approach for deforestation under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change.
Cooperation between developing and developed countries, which involves concrete and decisive action to reduce emissions, can provide confidence that all countries will benefit from an effective global response to the challenge of climate change.
This must also occur between the world's largest emitters  -  China and the United States.
Any global agreement on climate change without their participation will be inadequate against the real task of reducing significantly global greenhouse gas emissions.
Australia, with a close relationship with both countries, intends to work closely with both Beijing and Washington to try to fashion the ingredients of a long-term agreed solution  -  incorporating US and Chinese actions consistent with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
Governments and businesses in our region face short and long-term challenges.
We face challenges ahead in responding to the financial crisis and preventing such crises from occurring again.
We face challenges like climate change.
To respond to these challenges effectively in our fast changing region we need political stability.
We have come a long way since APEC was first established 20 years ago.
And the business community has been at the forefront of the evolving architecture of our region.
APEC has been successful in addressing economic and other challenges because it has had the business sector as a partner.
APEC has helped to build support for open trade and investment.
And it is these flows that have made our region the most dynamic in the world today.
But we also need to be thinking today about the shape of our region tomorrow.
We also need to shape the evolution of our regional institutions to meet the needs of tomorrow.
This is necessary because of the emerging economic integration of our region and the complexity and inter-connectedness of economic, political and strategic agendas we confront.
The region is already home to the world's two biggest economies  -  the United States and Japan.
The region is also home to the world's two biggest emerging economies  -  China and India.
Businesses on both sides of the Pacific now consider the region the primary sphere of interest.
To achieve ongoing growth, we have to have the right structures in place  -  not just for now, but also for the future.
APEC has helped to build support for economic and trade liberalisation and has built a strong sense of economic community across the Asia-Pacific region.
In addition, ASEAN has built a sense of community in South East Asia  -  a community that consults on the shared challenges and consults to manage emerging problems.
And bodies such as the East Asia Summit, the Six-Party Talks and the ASEAN Regional Forum are contributing to regional cooperation in a range of areas.
But we need to now think about the next 20 years and beyond.
The rapid changes taking place in our region are certain to throw up a myriad of economic, political and security and environmental challenges.
And we need to position the region to respond effectively to all of these challenges through a single forum that brings together regional countries such as the United States, China, India, Indonesia and Japan.
We need a forum that builds habits of cooperation and dialogue across the full range of regional challenges.
No current regional body fills that role fully.
In Australia's proposal for an Asia Pacific Community by 2020, we have sought to start a constructive dialogue on regional architecture to address future challenges.
I have appointed a Special Envoy, Dick Woolcott, to consult with governments, academics and the business community in the region about the future of this concept.
Mr Woolcott has already held many discussions and has presented me with an interim report.
And his report has made two things clear.
First, there is great interest in the region about the sort of institutions we need for the future.
We have for the last six months been engaging in a regional conversation with our friends and partners and inevitably there will be different perspectives along the way.
Second, thinking about the detail of how our region might evolve will continue to develop.
This conversation about the future of our region will take some time.
But it is an important conversation because in the future we will face a stark choice.
We can either let our region simply drift along.
Or we can choose to shape our region.
I believe we must choose actively to shape our region.
The habits of cooperation cannot simply be assumed.
They have to be crafted, encouraged and institutionalised across the full spectrum of our regional agenda.
The alternative is to allow things to slip  -  and to default into the familiar pattern of conflict that we have seen in centuries past.
It is not beyond our collective wisdom to craft something different.
And the first step in shaping our region's future is discussing where we are now and where as a region we want to be in little more than a decade's time.
This global financial crisis caused the world to deploy a new structure to deliberate and determine causes of action needed to stabilise global financial markets and to underpin the recovery of the real global economy.
Similarly, here in the Asia-Pacific region, we must begin our discussion on the new structure our region needs to deal with the challenges of the future.
Structures which bring together the major powers and major economies with smaller powers and smaller economies.
Structures also that have a capacity for flexibility to deal with the vast new and interconnected agenda we must all confront for the 21st century.
An agenda in which there is new and increasingly seamless connection between political relations, economic relations, strategic stability, human security, climate change.
The challenge for governments  -  like corporations  -  is to be thinking, planning and acting ahead of the curve.
If we do that in a cooperative, coordinated and decisive way, there is a rational basis for optimism.
We have shown that we can work together to achieve real results.
We now have to intensify that cooperation.
That for us at the dawn of this Pacific century represents a particular imperative for us all.


(Translated from Spanish)
I would like to thank you, niños y niñas, for that wonderful performance.
I am deeply moved being with you all today. What a wonderful partnership this community has with the Australian Sisters Joan and Patricia.
Congratulations on the advances you are making together, especially in health and education.
(Reverts to English)
Sister Joan, Sister Patricia, friends here at this wonderful community. It is a great joy for all of us in Australia to visit this great work here in this part of Lima.
It is wonderful to see happy children. It is wonderful to see good health work being done. It is wonderful to see those who benefit from the women's centres. It is wonderful to see the work of kindness and love at work.
Years ago in Australia the Sisters of Mercy taught me how to play the piano. They are very good teachers. They have a great heart of compassion. And it's wonderful to see that heart of compassion here at work in Peru.
At a time of a global financial crisis, it is easy for people to forget the poor. None of us ever should forget the poor because we are all one human family. And wherever people are poor, those of us who are not poor have a responsibility. And that responsibility we see worked out in the lives of these wonderful Mercy Sisters here in Lima in Peru.
The practical work done here to support the health of 13,000 people is a great thing to see. Our job is to try and help that work in a practical way.
For those from Australia, if you want to understand what the modern day spirit of ANZAC is, it is this. On ANZAC Day in Santiago in Chile they raised money for this centre, our Ambassador in Santiago and our Consul-General here in Lima.
But on top of that there is a further practical need in this centre. We've seen the work done in primary health care. We see the wonderful work by the dentists who still terrifies me. And all of the other good work done here with the help of this poor community.
The one thing the good sisters have told us they need is an x-ray machine. So today I confirm we provide this centre $40,000 to have an x-ray machine.
The good Sisters of Mercy always believe in three great virtues  -  faith, hope and charity. Their charity we have seen. It takes faith, however, to build this centre with a vacant room ready for an x-ray machine when there is no x-ray machine. And the Lord works in mysterious and wonderful ways. We're happy to provide an x-ray machine to fill that x-ray room.
It gives me also some joy to unveil this today. This basic equipment has been provided through our Development Assistance Program. These are small things to help the very big work being done by the Sisters.
I finish by saying this. Why do countries like Australia support the millennium development goals? The reason we support the millennium development goals is to support small children, young people, and poor people, in communities like this. And anyone who has doubt as to why we should do so, spend just one minute looking into the eyes of one of these little children. And have all your doubts pushed to one side.
And could I say in conclusion  -  viva Peru, viva Australia, viva Joan and Patricia.


PM RUDD: Ladies and gentleman, this is an important day in the practical relationship between Australia and Indonesia. 
The people of Indonesia, the people of Australia, the people of the wider Asia-Pacific region are subject to natural disasters on an increasing scale.
Already many countries within our region are affected by earthquakes. And we see the impact of that in China, in Indonesia, the Philippines and other countries.
Also our region is subject to intense volcanic activity.
And now we see as a consequence of climate change, increased storm activity and with greater intensity.
With natural disasters, none of us can predict who will be next affected. Who will be hit next. And the problem is there is so little notice when they come.
Therefore, the challenge which the President and I have discussed back in Jakarta in June is how we can do better on this as two major countries within our wider region.
And therefore, we've had our officials study this question intensively in recent months.
This has lead to this practical proposal for an Australia-Indonesia Disaster Reduction Facility.
Specifically, we in Australia will be investing some $67 million over five years in this Institute. And the purpose of this facility is as follows:
One, to organise joint exercises which enhance inter-operability in pre-disaster periods.
Two, to develop the use of realistic scenarios concerning natural disaster management.
Three, pursuing better integration of military actors and civilian lead elements in both exercising and planning.
Four, also working through this facility to integrate its efforts with other counterdisaster management organisations which exist across the region.
We believe that this provides a great opportunity for Australia and Indonesia to develop together a world class facility which becomes very important in the future in both preparing for, training, as well as long term deployment of counter natural disaster elements in dealing with disasters when they hit.
We can either stand back and do nothing on the basis of what we have seen in recent years, or, as Governments, we can act together. And what we the Government of Indonesia and the Government of Australia have decided to do is to take the lead within our region to bring this important facility into being.
This will take some time to develop. It will take some time to properly integrate with other efforts across the Asia-Pacific region. But we believe it is the right course of action rather than simply to wait until the next major natural disaster hits.
The reason why our two governments have done this, apart from the friendship which exists between Australia and Indonesia, is this  -  we also, Australia and Indonesia, are co-chairs of the APEC taskforce on emergency preparedness.
And let us never forget the reason we are co-chairs is because we together confronted the terrible tragedy which was the tsunami in Indonesia. The impact which it had on Aceh, the impact which it had on hundreds of thousands of lives at that time, at that tragic time. That's why this became a matter of concern for our two countries, that's why it became a matter of concern for our wider region through our friends in APEC. And that's why we have resolved together to undertake this practical action in establishing this Australia-Indonesia Disaster Reduction Facility.
The work has begun, and I would thank our friends in Indonesia for the strong cooperative approach they have taken in bringing this idea to fruition. We look forward to its implementation from next year on. And if there is one thing which we have done together in the future which we can hopefully look back on in years to come as making a practical, tangible difference to the lives of many in our region and across the Indonesian archipelago we will hopefully be able to say the creation of this facility on this day with this announcement was the beginning of that good work.
I thank you very much, Mr President.
[ends]


The Prime Minister of Australia and the President of Indonesia, leaders of the two economies co-chairing the APEC Taskforce on Emergency Preparedness, met today to discuss regional disaster coordination  -  one of the themes of the current APEC Leaders' meeting in Peru. 
Both expressed their deep concern about the impact of natural disasters in the region. They noted that many parts of the Asia Pacific region are disaster-prone, and that the number and severity of disasters is increasing because of, among other things, climate change and urbanisation.
Australia and Indonesia have examined the existing mechanisms for disaster management in the region and have found that there are shortcomings in areas of coordination and coherence and, critically, insufficient focus on preventing and mitigating disasters. There are also shortcomings in the building of national capacity for nations to self-manage disasters.
We have agreed to establish an Australia-Indonesia Disaster Reduction Facility in Jakarta which will be operational by April 2009.
The Facility will support Indonesia's and the region's efforts to reduce the impact of disasters and to improve self-management capabilities through training and outreach; risk and vulnerability assessment; and research and analysis on emerging regional threats.
The total value of this Facility will be A$67 million (approximately US$42 million) over five years.
A focus on disaster reduction saves lives and saves money. Countries that adopt a disaster reduction approach will be better equipped to lead and manage disaster response.
Australia and Indonesia will develop and sustain the Facility's relationship and collaboration with ASEAN, ASEAN Regional Forum, APEC, SAARC, the United Nations, the Red Cross/Red Crescent movement and regional disaster management mechanisms and programs. It is envisioned to broaden its scope to include cooperation with Pacific partners. The Facility will work closely with the APEC Task Force on Emergency Preparedness to share its experiences, tools and strategies with APEC member economies. The Facility will also encourage greater involvement of the private sector in disaster management - an APEC priority - and look for opportunities to support APEC's efforts to build community and business resilience in the region.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced $45 500 in funding assistance for the Lima based Sisters of Mercy Family Health Service.
Before attending the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, the Prime Minister visited the Service and said the new funding would significantly improve the quality of healthcare provided by the Australian-based Sisters of Mercy Congregation.
The Sisters will purchase their first x-ray machine with the new funds. This machine will mainly be used for chest x-rays due to the high incidence of tuberculosis in the local area. 
The Australian Government has also funded some additional medical equipment including two centrifuges and a fetal heart monitor.
The Mercy Family Health Service, directed by Joan Doyle, was established in 2002.
In the last 12 and half years the Sisters have worked closely with the local people to establish three women's houses and two childcare centres in addition to this medical service.
The Prime Minister looks forward to seeing the future achievements of the Sisters of Mercy as they continue to devote their life's work to this most important cause.


PM: The important thing that APEC has done this weekend is sign up to the G20 communiqué and the action plan which the G20 has agreed to on the global financial crisis. 
My discussions with leaders from the Asia Pacific Region this weekend have been sobering, confronting, on the global financial crisis. But there's also been a clear determination to embrace a practical course of action to deal with the impact of the crisis on the real economy. And that of course is contained within the G20 communiqué from Washington.
Action on the stabilisation of financial markets in the short term. Action on long term financial market stabilisation. And a commitment to coordinated economic action  -  fiscal and monetary  -  to support real growth and jobs.
Because what my discussions with world leaders have indicated in the last few days is that all are concerned about the impact of this crisis on the real economy in their countries, and on jobs in their countries into the future as well.
There's also, I believe, a clear realisation on the part of participating governments that this crisis presents us with a unique challenge as governments. Looking the year ahead, a large slice of growth is being pulled out of the global economy, which cannot in the year ahead easily be filled by business and the private economy. Therefore, governments in the period ahead have a critical and key role to play through public investment.
And there has been a lot of discussion about the forms of investment, and in fact a lot of inquiries of the Australian Government about the actions that we undertook in our economic stimulus package earlier this year.
Another important outcome has been the commitment in the statement on the global financial crisis produced by world leaders on the Doha round. This statement does not just confirm the communiqué which was released a week ago in Washington. For the first time it requires trade ministers to meet in December in order to do everything possible to bring the free trade round to a successful conclusion.
Again, what world leaders have recognised is the importance that trade plays in the real economy now, on growth and jobs, and not just avoiding protectionism in 2009, but looking into the future beyond that, the important shot in the arm which a positive outcome on Doha would give to the global economy.
Therefore, directing trade ministers answerable to these heads of government to meet in Geneva in December is one further step forward to bringing about that difficult objective that is a successful conclusion to the Doha free trade round.
Another aspects of today's deliberations was the positive response from a large number of leaders in the discussions about Australia's Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute  -  the CCS Institute. This came out of the discussions on climate change. As you know, Australia some months ago launched our CCS initiative, and that's in fact how you bring about clean coal for the purposes of energy generation for the future.
The Australian Government is committed to investing up to $100 million each year to turn this institute into a reality. And what's it about? Helping to bring on-stream at-scale commercial projects for power generation using coal over the next decade that demonstrates not only the usability of CCS technology  -  clean coal technology  -  but also to demonstrate price and cost.
There was more than, shall I say, general and polite interest on this question in the conversation. A number of governments, including the Koreans, the Russians, the Canadians, Mexicans and others, indicated their interest in having more information on this institute, what it's doing, and potentially becoming participants in it as well in terms of investment.
In terms of climate change - looking ahead, one third of greenhouse gas emissions into the future will come from coal fired power stations. Therefore acting in this area is of critical importance for the future.
Finally, on the question of counter-disaster management, again the Australia-Indonesia initiative which was launched yesterday was noted by participating governments, but then triggering a substantial discussion about the adequacy of the region's ability to respond to future natural disasters. There's grave concern about the impact of climate change on the frequency and intensity of natural disasters. And therefore, the outcome of the implementation of this new joint Australia-Indonesia facility on natural disaster risk management will be important for the future.
We intend to provide a report further on its implementation when next we meet at APEC.
The problem with natural disasters, by definition, is that no one knows when they are going to hit next or who they are going to hit next or how hard it's going to be. And we, as Australia-Indonesia, following the tsunami, accepted co-chairpersonship of the APEC taskforce on natural disaster management. This brings that response to a legitimate and I believe practical close. We now need to implement and build on that facility for the future.
Preparing for natural disasters, making sure we've got proper exercising for them between various agencies military and non-military, as well as various hardening exercises or measures when it comes to various regions of the world, or in our part of the world, vis a vis guidelines for building construction and the rest. This is an important facility. We've done a lot of work to make sure that it doesn't duplicate anything else. And judging by the response from leaders, we believe that this will be the subject of further positive discussion in the future.
Finally, the bilateral discussion with the President of Russia was positive and constructive in terms of the future of the bilateral relationship and the economic relationship between our two countries. And we intend to continue those discussions at a bilateral level at the next G20 meeting.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you spoke of the importance of governments of continuing, and if necessary increasing, public investment in the short term of the next year, I think. But are you prepared to do that if required to the extent that it pushes the Budget into deficit, or is deficit still a dirty word?
PM: Well, our attitude is this  -  the global financial crisis has already reduced the government's revenues by some $40 billion. Secondly, it's getting tougher and tougher out there as far as the global economy is concerned. But as you know, from the government's Mid Year Economic and Financial Outlook, we are projecting a modest surplus into 2009. Under current circumstances, therefore, we don't see the need to borrow for the purposes of investing for growth in the economy for the future.
It's a difficult situation and a tough situation and certainly one which has been the subject of general discussion by all governments here.
JOURNALIST: It was noted that your Asia Pacific Community was discussed. Was is merely noted? Was there any enthusiasm for it?
PM: Well look, it was certainly referred to by the President of the session. I gave a presentation on it and it's certainly been the subject of some considerable discussion in the various bilaterals I've had as well.
As I've said all along, this is going to be a slow and steady process, and we'll also be discussing it again at the East Asia Summit when it meets in Chiang Mai before too much longer.
I see this as a process unfolding over some years. The purpose of today was for me simply to provide an upfront direct briefing to heads of government on the content of the Australian proposal, and the process going forward.
We still have Dick Woolcott, my emissary on the Asia Pacific Community, who is travelling still across the region. That process hasn't concluded yet. There are still a number of governments to visit. And then we have got next steps from there. But, so far, so good.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, outside of the disaster relief and the global financial crisis, reading through the communiqué, nothing happened. Doesn't that vindicate your claim that (inaudible)
PM: You know, what's important about this gathering is building on the Washington summit, is I believe a common resolve for governments to act through government spending and investment to stimulate the global economy. This will not happen all at once. But coming directly to your question  -  what is important about this gathering along with the one that preceded it in Washington is that the fabric of the discussion which has occurred between heads of government now makes further action of a coordinated nature more possible than before. For that to occur, you need to have governments on the same page.
They need to understand collectively and have an emerging common view about the gap being left by the suck-out of economic activity off the back of the crisis.
The IMF reminds us, between and three per cent of global GDP, $1.8 trillion, a clear view that monetary policy in most economies doesn't have much further to run.
Because in most economies, interest rates are down to negligible levels. And then, where does that leave you? Government spending and investment, and it was a way to inject growth into the economy.
Therefore what I have found even in the evolution of the discussion from Washington last weekend and to the discussion this weekend, is an increasing, what I would describe as emerging political consensus of the need for further action, further action next year and the beginnings of the understanding of the need of the added benefit which comes from coordinated action, based on some advice we have already received from the IMF, which is if you act together to stimulate, it has a double stimulatory effect.
So you say there is not a beacon of loud, clear calls for a particular course of action in the pages of this. What I see over the last two meetings is the emergence of a clear consensus for action in what will be the critical year for us all on the economy, real growth and jobs in 2009.
And what Governments I believe are discovering is that the imperative for coordinated and cooperative action now is unprecedented. Governments haven't had to gather like this before. I mean APEC is a regular institution, the G20 was not, but Governments have rarely had to come together and say, ‘here is a major assault on jobs in our economies, next year and in our real economic growth. What can we do about it, what must we do about it and how can we do it together?'.
That would not have been possible in the absence of these two I believe important summits on subsequent weekends.
One final point, before coming back quickly to the APC is the decision reflected in the communiqué to direct trade ministers to meet in December was not there before.
That was a direct resolve from the meeting to get things cracking now. Because experiences of trade bureaucracy internationally are such that many things can unravel.
That resolve was clearly stated for the first time for that meeting in Geneva to occur in December.
Asia Pacific Community is a long term proposition, understandably, because it seeks to bring together the threads of economic cooperation necessary now for political and security cooperation. That political cooperation is beginning to emerge off the back of, frankly the crisis which now confronts all of us, which is the global financial crisis.
Unprecedented political cooperation is emerging and the conversations around the table have been intense, acute and focussed on that.
JOURNALIST: There seems to be some umming and erring ... about whether it will be 18 months before the crisis is over, and did you discuss the sale of uranium with the Russian leader?
PM: And the connection between the two is? (Laughter.) On the first, the introductory statements I think in the first paragraph of the communiqué were those from the Peruvian President. The Canadian Prime Minister has made that clear as has various other Governments. We all know for a fact that the recovery from the global financial crisis and the global economic crisis is going to take a period of time.
We cannot be absolutely specific about that and certainly the Peruvian President Garcia was expressing his views on that.
On the second matter, yes those matters were discussed with the Russian President and I indicated to the Russian President the reservations which have already been raised by the joint committee on treaties of the Australian Parliament and that still has some ways to work its way through, and that we would be responding in due course as a Government to the recommendations of the treaty committee.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd I understand that the Government is still projecting a budget surplus but as you know that's a moveable feast. As well many of our finest economists are now saying that  - 
PM: Name them, name them.
JOURNALIST: Well Chris Richardson for a start, I won't go on from there, but Chris Richardson is saying that a budget deficit might be an economic necessity, that it might be something the Government actually ought to do for our economic good. Isn't it time that you levelled with the Australian people and said whether you are philosophically opposed to ever taking your budget into the red, or whether you agree with those economists and if it is necessary, that you would take our budget into the red. Isn't that a fair question?
PM: I think the clear philosophical position this Government has had since opposition and since becoming government is this, that we believe in maintaining a Government and budget surplus over the economic cycle.
Secondly what I have said very clearly is this: under the circumstances which present themselves now, we do not believe there is a need to borrow for the Government to invest and spend.
I have also levelled with the Australian people that the circumstances we face in the world are rapidly changing and as you can see from the mid-year financial and economic outlook where we reduced down, radically, future Government revenues by $40 billion, we recognise, based on Treasury's analysis, the softening in Government revenues and the general economy coming off the back of the global economic recession.
That is levelling. There was a lot of commentary and there has been for some time about deficits, about automatic stabilisers, about public sector borrowing requirements. What I am saying is, under current circumstances, we do not see the need to borrow for the purposes of Government spending and investment.
Circumstances rapidly change. They have been changing. We level, we will level with the Australian people, as we are now, based on every piece of information that we have got.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you say you don't see the need to borrow, are you making a distinction there that if the budget were to be in deficit, that could be funded through the accumulated surplus in the Future Fund and other funds such as the infrastructure fund?
PM: Well the purpose of the funds is clear cut and that is to support infrastructure investment, and on each year that you draw down on the funds, it of course goes to the budget bottom line, that is clear.
We have known that and we have said that all the way through. What I am talking about is borrowing for the purposes of Government investment or spending and what I am saying to you loud and clear is that based on current circumstances, we do not see the need to borrow.
We have already trimmed, and it has been a big capital T trim, $40 billion of projected revenues from the budget bottom line based on the softening of the global economy off the back of the global economic recession.
We will be upfront with the Australian people, there is a tough year ahead, uncertain times lie ahead. We have based our current forecast based on the data we have, and that has been absolutely clear cut and upfront about the information which is at hand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back home it's the 24th. You talk about a tough year ahead, can you tell us what sort of a year it's been on your first anniversary?
PM: I'm about to lose my voice, I think, that's what sort of year it's been.
For us as a Government, what has been important has been to implement our election commitments to the Australian people and to tackle with both hands and act decisively on the global financial crisis.
You ask how I feel, what I feel is that next year is going to be tougher and harder. It is going to involve a lot of hard work and a very tough year ahead.
Not just for the Government, for the economy, the Australian people, families. This will be a very difficult year and every head of Government I have spoken to in the last 36 hours has not varied from that point of view.
JOURNALIST: Has the job been what you thought it would be and have you achieved what you expected you might achieve in the first year?
PM: What I think is really important is honouring what we told the Australian people we would do. We have been as meticulous as possible in putting together what we said we would do and implementing them. Some people may be bored to tears by that but we actually take it very seriously. So you know, that is a good thing to do because it is part of maintaining trust with the Australian people and trust is really important in what is going to be a very hard year ahead.
There will be tough decisions, and tough decisions are made possible if a relationship of trust exists between Government and people.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, how likely is it in your opinion that (inaudible)
PM: Oh how long is a piece of string? Look, we have had 20 heads of Government or so around the table in Washington, we've had 20 heads of Government or so, or economies, around the table here in Lima. All have said it is critical to conclude Doha. It is reflected in the language of the Washington communiqué. It is reflected in the language of the Lima communiqué. We've directed trade Ministers to meet in December.
Where we got to in July was actually quite a narrow band of disagreement involving a limited number of countries. What's now required is a huge political heave to get it across the line. Will we get there? Dunno. Went to church this morning, I hope that helps but will we get there? It's tough.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there've been various predictions emerge on what form your new regional structure might actually take  -  it might be be built on ASEAN or it might be built on APEC (inaudible) or that it might be a new body. Have you developed any ideas or was there any sort of weight of opinion in the summit on this?
PM: You know, in discussions with various leaders and others it's quite plain that there are a range of views on this in terms of how such a body could emerge, in terms of existing structures.
To me, that is not important at this stage. What is important is to have the leaders of our region focus on the end point of where we want to be as a region in a decade or so's time. Focus on that and do you want to have a region which begins to drift, and drift in the direction of old and bad patterns of behaviour based on conflicts? Or do you want a region which actually, in its structure and its culture encourages cooperation?
Now, that's what I call an Asia-Pacific Community, bringing together main players across the broad agenda to look at security and economic matters. We don't have that at present.
How we get there is now a matter for discussion and the end point is simply a matter for discussion, but the important thing is to get the ball of discussion rolling, and I believe that's what we've done.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, would you support or oppose our ally in Afghanistan Hamid Karzai, entering peace negotiations with the Taliban's Mullah Omar as he has said he would like to do?
PM: In response to that, I haven't seen what Hamid Karzai has said. I'd like to study it carefully. His domestic political circumstances in Afghanistan are complex. When it comes to Al-Qaeda, there can be no negotiation with terrorists under any circumstances. We are absolutely committed to that principle.
On the broader prospects for political reconciliation in Afghanistan, I'd like to study carefully what Hamid Karzai has said before commenting further.
JOURNALIST: But you do make a distinction between Al-Qaeda and Mullah Omar?
PM: What I'd like to do is look carefully at what Hamid Karzai has said. Let's also be clear about the Taliban. Now the Taliban didn't actually run a Sunday school picnic when they were running Afghanistan.
This is a brutal, bloody regime which killed women by stoning them to death.
I have no particular time for them. But I'd like to study carefully what has been said by Hamid Karzai before commenting further. Tony, do you want to ask a question or are you just waving? Okay, that's fine. I've got a spotlight in my eye, I couldn't quite see to be quite honest.
JOURNALIST: As for the Doha round, since the talks last failed, the world economy has taken a bad turn for the worse, the US Administration is now in transition, a lot of governments have taken (inaudible). What gives you any sense that there is hopefully a breakthrough (inaudible)?
PM: You know, in this business you can either play a strategy which risks nothing, and get nowhere or you can have a go. And I think the resolve of heads of government is to have a go.
I think it's going to be really tough and I've been speaking to our trade negotiators, to be really tough. But the alternative is for heads of government to say ‘oh, too hard, too complicated, let's forget about it for another half decade'. I actually don't think that's the right way to go.
The way you maximise the pressure of a negotiating process is to do what heads of government have done both here and in Washington, and the requirement for the Trade Ministers to be in Geneva for a meeting in December is an important advance on that.
JOURNALIST: You've always said that you and all of your colleagues are only there for as long as you perform. Do you rule out, given that you've been in office now for a year, do you rule out say in the next year a Cabinet reshuffle based on your judgments about whether your colleagues have performed?
PM: First of all, as I said the other day in a number of interviews, I am proud of the Cabinet and the Ministry, the Executive, because they've performed very well in the first year in office.
They have been diligent, they have been hard working, and for those of you who have dealt with them, I'm not wishing to put words in your mouth, I think they have performed as a very good team and that's my view and I haven't changed from that.
My other view is that we've all got to remain on our mettle. That includes me. All of us have got to remain on our mettle.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, does that mean yes or no. (inaudible)
PM: What I said was everyone is performing well, and we must all remain on our mettle and that's my answer to your question. Thank you. Gerard.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just from your earlier remarks, it sounds like (inaudible) financial crisis take much longer than 18 months (inaudible).
PM: No Gerard. What I'd say is the time for recovery is not able to be clearly predicted. Therefore I'd much rather be upfront with the Australian people and just say we're in this for the long haul. We are doing everything possible through government economic policy to reduce the impact on families and businesses to the greatest extent possible.
We are facing many off-shore uncertainties in terms of what happens with global financial institutions and the roll-on effect and contractions in global growth and export. Therefore, this is a box of challenges we face. I'm not going to stare down the barrel and say to the Australian people it's going to be over by X date or Y date. I don't think that's being fair dinkum.
What I know is it's going tough and hard in ‘09 and what I need to be upfront about is the measures we're taking in order to deal with it. Fashionista.
JOURNALIST: The first anniversary (inaudible) ... great big brown blanket?
PM: I guess it's kind of part of the APEC colour and movement show isn't it? That's kind of what you do, isn't it?
JOURNALIST: Do you think you're going to wear it again?
PM: What are you, sort of asking me out or what?
JOURNALIST: No, I'm asking if you're going to wear it again. Do you think you're going to wear it again?
PM: We haven't left Peru yet. I think it's a very nice poncho and it's a good poncho  - 
JOURNALIST: Is it your colour?
PM: I hope that's a reflection on what we would describe in Queensland as the old guard, but I just take that as a personal insult from you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, while you were wearing the poncho I noticed you were in very intense conversation with President Hu Jintao. I wonder what's your  - 
PM: We were checking poncho sizes.
JOURNALIST: What is your assessment of the role China is going to play in the period ahead  - 
PM: I've forgotten what was the end of the question, but okay.
JOURNALIST:  -  (inaudible) engage in the efforts to resolve the crisis (inaudible).
PM: Look, I believe, as I've said before publicly, that China has acted responsibly in terms of the stimulus to its own economy. I draw attention to what the Chinese leaders have said - that one of the best things they can do for global economy is to maintain growth within the domestic economy.
Now if you have 1.3 trillion people - 400 million of them still lie south of the poverty line, I stand to be corrected on the exact number, but something like that - then it is a huge challenge.
I also believe that the Chinese government will continue to act responsibly into the future. I have nothing to cause me to conclude that China is anything but aware  -  nothing to cause me to conclude that China would do anything other than act responsibly in the future.
If there's a common feeling, a common resolve, a common sentiment in the room today, it is this - on the global financial crisis, everybody recognises that we are in this boat together and the extent to which we reduce the impact on our economies and jobs and families will depend entirely on the extent to which we work together effectively in the future.
I'd better run. Thank you.
[ends]


This morning I returned from APEC where my discussions with leaders from all around the region confirmed what we already knew: that the world economy is deteriorating rapidly.
The impact of the global financial crisis, which began out of the US sub-prime crisis only 12 months ago, has grown from a trickle to a flood.
It is now sweeping across the world - from China to Chile, from Germany to Japan.
It has affected the traditional economic powers of the North Atlantic and the emerging economies of the Asia Pacific. Every nation. Every government. Every economy.
Or as many leaders said in discussions over the weekend: we're all in this boat together. 
There is no point in sugar coating the situation. The global economic downturn is accelerating. It will get worse before it gets better.
Every morning we wake up to more sobering developments from abroad.
Bank bailouts  -  30 and counting.
Diving sharemarkets  -  down 50 per cent and counting.
Government rescue packages  -  from 15 countries and counting.
Major developed economies, like dominoes, are falling one by one into recession.
Japan; Germany; Italy and the eurozone have already fallen.
Other major economies have already experienced quarters of negative growth this year: including the United States; the United Kingdom; France; Italy; Canada among others.
And the projections emerging for the US for the fourth quarter are not good.
These are all fundamentally strong economies.
But all have been unable to sandbag their economies against the worst financial and economic crisis the world has seen in over three quarters of a century.
The Australian Government has been upfront about the global financial crisis from the beginning.As the world's 14th largest economy, we experience the good and bad of economic globalisation.For the past decade and more, globalisation has served Australia well.For 10 years we have ridden the wave of a commodity price boom which has filled the Treasury coffers.We sailed through this period with record terms of trade, leading to low unemployment and high growth.But the global tide has changed  -  and the good times have now turned to bad.
And our economy is now being pulled in a new direction.
It is important to continue to be absolutely upfront with the Australian people about the challenges we face and the strategy we shall prosecute to see Australia through.
The impact of the global financial crisis on our economy will be real.Its impact on our businesses will be real. Its impact on our families will be real. Its impact on our workers will be real. Its impact on our country will be real.
Mr Speaker, today my intention is to update the house on recent developments in the global financial crisis  -  especially the most recent outlook for the global real economy; to outline the possible effects on the Australian economy for the period ahead; and to reaffirm the Government's commitment to continue to take whatever action is necessary to support growth and jobs and to protect Australians from the worst effects of an economic crisis they did not create.
Mr Speaker, the global financial crisis began in the mortgage markets in the United States where easy money, lax regulation and excessive risk taking led to an extraordinary asset bubble.
The unwinding of that bubble brought heavy losses for the network of financial institutions involved in the origination, securitisation and ownership of mortgage assets.
The cancer in the system  -  in this form of extreme capitalism  -  has been the operation of credit default swaps which led to a collapse of trust between financial institutions as no-one could say with confidence who owed what to whom.
This assault on transparency  -  and the perversion of reward structures that gave rise to greater and greater risk decoupled from any direct sense of responsibility for that risk  -  caused this crisis in the US mortgage market to spread throughout the global financial system.
This in turn has created a crisis of confidence both in the financial sector and more broadly in the real economy.
The Government has been acutely aware of the profound effect that the global financial crisis was already having on economic growth now and the risks that it has created for the global economic outlook for 2009.
Already by the end of October, global share markets had fallen by 37 per cent over 2008 - this represented a massive destruction of wealth of some US$27 trillion.
Each of the world's seven largest advanced economies had recorded a negative quarter of growth in the first three quarters of the year.
And government budgets around the world were being battered  -  with every member of the G7 bar Canada having already gone into deficit. 
Australia is not isolated from events abroad  -  and our forecasts have reflected this fact.
Global funding conditions had affected borrowing costs here at home, with households and businesses facing sharply higher interest rates as banks passed on up to 60 basis points of their higher costs of funding.
Our stock markets had fallen by 38 per cent in the year to October  -  similar to other comparable stock markets around the world. 
Quarterly household consumption had fallen for the first time in 15 years in the June quarter.
In addition, MYEFO indicated that the global financial crisis has also had a profound effect on our Budget position.
The Government projected that tax receipts would be nearly $40 billion lower over the forward estimates than had been anticipated at the time of the May Budget.
The last six months of the global financial crisis has resulted in a quantum shift in Australia's economic and financial position  -  as it has in practically all other economies.
Mr Speaker, beyond the economic statistics, the global financial crisis is imposing a very real personal cost on Australian businesses and Australian families.
Put simply, the global financial crisis means tough times ahead for many people.
It means Australian families will find it harder to make ends meet.
It means more challenging conditions for older people whose incomes derive from share market investments.
It means harder conditions for the more than two million small businesses and independent contractors who form much of the backbone of the Australian economy and employment.
And it means a tougher employment environment for many people who will find it more difficult to find their first job.
A few weeks ago I received a letter from a shop owner in regional Queensland, which contained the following. “I write to you at my wits end ... The people who shop in the shopping centre I am in are struggling... my business has dropped 65 per cent in sales over the last 3 months. I have already had to lay off three of my seven staff... I'm scared I'm going to lose my business to bankruptcy. I'm scared my parents are going to lose their family home as it is security for my business loan.”
Mr Speaker, I've received many other letters like this one. I am sure many other members have as well.They show the unfolding personal dimensions to an unfolding international economic crisis. In recent weeks, the global economic crisis has taken a further turn for the worse.
The most recent data released in November indicate that the United States is unlikely to avoid a deep and protracted downturn 
US equity markets have fallen dramatically in the last month  -  now down 50 per cent from before the crisis.
Data released on the 19 November shows US housing starts fell in October to the lowest level since 1959 and building permits fell by a massive 12 per cent in the same month.
Data released on the 14th of November showed US household consumption has slowed sharply, with October nominal retail sales experiencing the sharpest monthly fall since the series began in 1992.
In the year to October, the big three car companies of Ford, General Motors and Chrysler have seen their sales fall by at least a third.
Data released on November 7 indicated the US unemployment rate has jumped to 6.5 per cent, up 1.7 percentage points from a year ago and the highest rate since March of 1994. More than half a million American workers were added to the ranks of the unemployed in October alone.
And, as of this week, US financial giant Citigroup now appears to be joining the list of US companies requiring a Federal bail out including AIG, Bear Stearns, and Merrill Lynch.
Both the IMF and the OECD are predicting a prolonged downturn for the US economy, with growth contracting sharply until at least the middle of 2009.
The deterioration in other advanced economies has also been rapid.
The OECD warned in its Economic Outlook published overnight that: “Many OECD economies are in or are on the verge of a protracted recession of a magnitude not experienced since the early 1980s.”
In our own region, the IMF expects growth in emerging and developing economies to slow to 6.1 per cent in 2009, the slowest rate of growth in more than 6 years.
The latest economic data from Asia paints a sober picture of economic activity:
Growth in China has already slowed by 2½ percentage points over the past year. The global slowdown has had a heavy impact on Chinese businesses  -  especially in coastal export zones where Chinese Minister for Social Services described the employment situation last week, frankly as “grim”.
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore have all recorded negative growth in the September quarter. Singapore and Hong Kong are already in recession.
Mr Speaker, I wish I had better news to report to the House from my discussions with global and regional leaders, but the truth is these discussions they have reinforced the gravity of the challenges we all face  -  and reflects the gravity of the data released during November.
It is important to remember that the Australian economy has so far fared well relative to our peers in advanced economies.
However, the global events of the last few weeks have brought further bad news for the Australian economy as well.
In the last three weeks Australian share markets have fallen by a further 17 per cent, bringing losses since the start of the year to over 50 per cent, the same as for the United States.
These falls have been coupled with falling house prices which have now dropped for two consecutive quarters.
Consumer confidence data released on 12 November shows confidence remains at levels not seen since the early 1990s. 
Retail sales data released on 17 November shows volumes grew only marginally in the September quarter, after falling for the two previous quarters.
Car sales data released on 19 November also fell sharply over the quarter by 8 per cent.
Building approvals data released on 5 November show that approvals plummeted in the most recent data (that is, September) to the lowest level since April 2001  -  indicating that housing investment is likely to be very weak over at least the next six months.
The outlook for business investment has also deteriorated.
Credit conditions continue to be challenging with the November ACCI-Westpac survey showing that the incidence of businesses reporting difficulty in obtaining finance has grown to a 26 year high.
Weaker global growth will make it for a more difficult for our exporters to find markets.
Of all of our major trading partners that have reported growth numbers for the September quarter, only Korea has published positive growth.
Countries to which we send nearly half of our exports, we find that those countries are already in recession or are beginning to slow. The deteriorating outlook for the global economy, particularly the slowdown in China, has also seen the expected demand for commodities soften, resulting in sharp falls in spot commodity prices.
As a result of falling commodity prices, the outlook for Australia's terms of trade is weakening.
As detailed in MYEFO, we are forecasting a fall of 8½ per cent in the terms of trade in 2009-10.
A sharper fall cannot be ruled out if the global downturn intensifies, and this would further reduce national income growth.
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government has already taken swift and decisive action across a range of fronts to support growth, families and jobs  -  during these troubling times.
The Government has been proactive in addressing the effects of the crisis.
We have sought to be ahead of the curve from the start.
And to the extent that it is humanly possible, we intend to remain ahead of the curve for the future.
The Government's economic strategy this year has been framed against the background of this unfolding global financial crisis.
In May, the Government delivered a strong budget; in the budget the Government delivered: $9 billion in tax cuts to help ease the cost of living pressures facing all Australian taxpayers, and to create further incentive for individuals to participate in the workforce.
The Budget built a strong surplus which has proven to be a crucial buffer  -  giving the Government the flexibility to respond to the global financial crisis as it has unfolded.
This equates to about 1 per cent of GDP in July 2008.
In October the Government acted to strengthen the economy further and deliver much needed support to Australian households through the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
As part of the Strategy, Australia's four million pensioners, carers and seniors will receive lump sum payments. Around 2 million families who are entitled to Family Tax Benefit Part A will receive a one-off payment of $1,000 for each child in their care.
As part of the ESS $1.5 billion has been allocated to first home buyers.
At the end of November, the Government intends to make a third investment through the substantial but responsible proposal we will put to the states and territories in education, health, and in other critical services.
The Commonwealth is prepared to invest more than $11 billion more into critical government services over the next 4-5 years, starting in 2009.
Not only is this designed to prosecute the Government's long term economic reform agenda - in particular its productivity agenda.It also provides further stimulus to the economy now by creating more jobs and better paid jobs in health, education and beyond. As a general principle, a further $10 billion in public investment will add 75,000 additional jobs.
Mr Speaker, these measures are in addition to the $6.2 billion the Government will invest from 2010 onward to support the long term future of Australia's auto sector.
This sector is under great stress globally  -  as recent developments in Detroit and Washington have demonstrated.
And while much global uncertainty lies ahead, the Australian Government has decided to do its part to co-invest with this industry long term to help support the more than 200,000 Australians who are employed directly or indirectly in this sector.
Beyond all these measures - short, medium and long term - the Government remains ready to take whatever additional action is necessary to help steer Australia through this current crisis.
Mr Speaker, throughout this, the Government, ably supported by the economic regulators, will continue to keep a weather eye on the continuing stability of the financial system.
We have weathered the first part of the storm well.
But as recent events overtaking Citigroup demonstrate, we are by no means through the storm yet.
Furthermore, deterioration in the real economy in turn can produce a further round of effects on the balance sheets of banks and the non-bank financial institutions if loans arrears become more of a problem.
The Government maintains the closest possible rolling consultation with the financial sector on both continuing and any emerging problems that arise in these unprecedented times.
Once again, the Government has throughout the year acted ahead of the curve against the deepening global financial crisis. 
Throughout the year, the RBA has responded to the uncertainty in financial markets by providing additional liquidity to the market as required.
In May this year, the Government announced that it would increase its issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities to the tune of $25 billion.
In September ASIC acted in concert with regulators around the world to put temporary restrictions on short selling. In November ASIC lifted the ban on short selling of non-financials, while the ban on financials continues.
In September the Government also announced that the Australian Office of Financial Management would be authorised to purchase Australian residential mortgage-backed securities.
In October the Government secured final COAG agreement for a seamless national consumer credit regulation funded by a government commitment of an additional $71m.
And in October also, the Government also provided a guarantee for the deposit and wholesale funding liabilities of authorised deposit-taking institutions.
Mr Speaker, in addition to the measures I have just outlined, the Government continues to operate taskforces in conjunction with most branches of the financial services sector to deal with the range of practical problems that continue to arise as a result of the massive dislocation caused to that sector by the global financial crisis.
Mr Speaker, domestic policy action by the Government on the financial system and the real economy is necessary.But to be fully effective, this must be accompanied by decisive international policy action as well. At the G20 Summit on 15 November in Washington leaders made three fundamental decisions.
First, having taken extensive and, in some cases, radical action to stabilise financial systems, leaders agreed to take whatever further actions were necessary to stabilise the financial system into the short and long term future, and agreed on a concrete action plan to that effect.
Second, as global economies slow down because of the financial crisis, global governments need to step in to stimulate aggregate demand and stabilise the economy through coordinated macroeconomic action.
G-20 countries committed to further use their national budgets to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect, given the different economic needs and budget flexibility available to each government. Around the table, leaders agreed that the best way to protect jobs is to sustain aggregate demand.
The mathematics are like this: the reality is that the global financial crisis is projected to cut global growth by three per cent of global GDP. Which means that in a US$60 trillion global economy, coordinated government macro-economic action is necessary to inject some $1.8 trillion into the global economy at a time when the private sector cannot be relied upon to act.
The alternative is larger scale global unemployment.
The third decision made at G-20 was to open global trade and investment further.
The G-20 leaders agreed that we must not put up new barriers to investment and trade. Moreover, we resolved to conclude the WTO's Doha Development Agenda this year with an ambitious and balanced outcome. Furthermore, APEC leaders directed their Ministers to meet in Geneva in December to conclude the Round.
Mr Speaker, the Government, based on the data available, has been upfront about the impacts of the global financial crisis on the economy, and on the budgets and on jobs.
But the emerging data on the global financial crisis continues to evolve in unpredictable ways. 
We face great uncertainties ahead. There are great volatilities in the data. Meaning it is impossible to predict the future with absolute precision.
If global growth continues to deteriorate in the period ahead, consistent with the economic data that is emerging during November, then there will be a further slowing of growth in the Australian economy  -  as surely as night follows day. If Australian economic growth slows further because of a further deepening of the global financial crisis, then it follows that the Australian Government revenues will reduce further.
Under those circumstances, it would be responsible to draw further from the surplus and, if necessary, to use a temporary deficit to begin investing in our future infrastructure needs including hospitals, schools, TAFEs, universities, ports, roads, urban rail and high speed broadband.
Mr Speaker, under those circumstances, such action would support growth, would families and jobs and would be undertaken in the national interest. In fact Mr Speaker, failing to do so would be irresponsible  -  and would sacrifice growth and jobs. But any such action would need to be temporary, consistent with the discipline of maintaining a surplus across the economic cycle.
These circumstances do not prevail in Australia at present. Our current circumstances do not require us to embrace such a course of action. And the Government will do everything possible to swim against the global tide to support both growth and the surplus  -  but this is becoming tougher and tougher.
The Government will continue to be candid with the Australian public about the volatile global economic environment that has been created by the global financial crisis and the uncertainties that therefore, lie ahead. Amidst these uncertainties, the Government remains prepared to take whatever action is necessary in the future to support economic growth, families and jobs.
Over the decades ahead, historians will write the history of this global financial crisis in three chapters.
Chapter one will be the impact of the global financial crisis on international equity and debt markets.
Chapter two will be the impact of the global financial crisis on the real economies of developed and developing countries around the world.
And chapter three will be the impact of the global financial crisis on employment.
The challenge for the leaders of today is to do everything humanly possible to ensure this period is recorded as a snapshot in history, not an enduring memory.
That we deliver decisive policies which stimulate demand and lead to a strong rebound in growth.
That we deliver policies which create jobs and boost long term productivity growth.
That we put the mechanisms in place to ensure a financial crisis of this scale does not occur again as a consequence of extreme capitalism, out of control.
And that through our actions to deal with this crisis, and the sharp temporary measures necessary to deal with it, that we do not sow the seeds of the next.
Mr Speaker, this is the Government's mission.
This is the nation's mission.
This is also the mission of the international community.
To be candid about the challenges, to prosecute a coherent strategy in response to those challenges, and create a rational basis for confidence in the future.
That is the course of action to which this Government is committed.


PM: I'm deeply saddened today to hear of the death of an Australian soldier this morning in Afghanistan.
On behalf of the Government, I wish to extend my condolences to the family of this soldier.
The soldier's name has not yet been released but he was serving with the Special Operations Task Force in Afghanistan.
I'm sure I'm speaking on behalf of all Australians when I say that our deepest sympathies are with this young man's family, his friends and his colleagues.
Two of his fellow soldiers were wounded in the same engagement  -  thankfully, their wounds are not serious.
I ask all Australians to remember the families of these soldiers and to hold them in their thoughts and in their prayers at what is a very difficult time.
Sadly, as a result of this incident today, seven brave Australian soldiers have now been killed in Afghanistan fighting Taliban insurgents.
Our troops in Afghanistan are engaged in dangerous work. They are engaged in important work. And they perform their role with distinction and with dedication, with bravery and with professionalism.
They perform their work in the best traditions of ANZAC.
I have said before that there is no higher call for any person than to wear the uniform of Australia. And today we are tragically reminded of the risks that come, the terrible risks that come with that calling.
Again I would say our prayers and thoughts are with the family, as they are with this brave man's fellow soldiers on duty in Afghanistan.
If I could add also to my earlier statement in the parliament today on the tragic events today in Mumbai.
As I said earlier today in the parliament, the situation in Mumbai continues to be fluid and ongoing and the exact number of casualties remains unclear.
We understand from latest reports that up to 101 people may have been killed and 200 injured. We understand that the situation is still unfolding and that attackers may still be present in hotels.
There are reports of hostages being held in various locations across Mumbai including hotels. Some media have reported that those detained at the Taj Palace Hotel have been released. We are seeking to confirm that.
The Australian Government is urgently seeking to confirm the safety and welfare of Australians who may be affected.
At this time, as I indicated in the parliament, we can confirm two Australians have been injured. The Department has been in contact with their families in Australia and is providing consular assistance in Mumbai.
For privacy reasons, we are unable to provide further details at this stage.
I have been further advised of one fatality and the possibility of more.
Our staff in Mumbai have confirmed the death of one Australian. Again, privacy considerations prevent us from releasing further details at this time.
This is a terrible unfolding tragedy. We need to make sure that we thoroughly check any further reports and we'll make further public comments when appropriate.
As I indicated again in the Parliament, I would draw all Australians' attention to the travel advisory, urge them to read it, and urge them to follow that advice.
I've just again also spoken with our High Commissioner in Mumbai and discussed with him the situation on the ground.
I'll take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can you give us any details of the deceased, of the circumstances, or of the hotel or  - 
PM: I'm sorry, at this stage we can't go further than I've just indicated. This is unfolding and fluid and as I'm sure you'd all be familiar, having seen developments unfold on your television screen, chaotic on the ground.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with this latest death in Afghanistan, are you considering increasing our troop numbers?
PM: Our position hasn't changed. I've said before that we believe that our current troop numbers in Afghanistan is about right and we have no plans to increase that deployment.
JOURNALIST: On Mumbai, how many more fatalities might there be  -  you used the word ‘more' as opposed to another, because there've been reports of two fatalities. Have you identified all, or has Australia identified all Australians in the region?
PM: Obviously, given the number of Australians registered in the region, we have not been able to do that. Furthermore, the Australian diplomatic and consular staff are working around the clock at present to seek to confirm the presence of all registered Australians and others.
In terms of the numbers themselves, I would rather be absolutely cautious in everything I say, and do so on the strictest advice from our officers in the field and as I said before, we'll make further statements as appropriate on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us an update on the support we've provided to the Indian authorities (inaudible) Has that been (inaudible) yet?
PM:My direction earlier today following a meeting of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet, just prior to question time in Parliament, I directed the government, through the Prime Minister's Department to advise the government of India through the High Commission here that we would provide any form of assistance, AFP, non-AFP, that may be required or of assistance to our Indian friends at this terrible time.
The response to that, I'm uncertain of at this stage. My overwhelming concern was to make sure that that extension of an offer of assistance was made across the board, and early. Our friends in India have an enormous challenge on their hands. Any unfolding operation of this nature is massively complex.
The purpose of the decision and the direction taken to the National Security Committee of Cabinet was to make sure that should external assistance be required that our friends in Delhi would know that we would be prepared to provide anything that would be of practical use now.
Thank-you.


I'd just to assure you, each and every one of you, that this morning's events have been entirely planned.
We were setting a test for calmness and whether you'd respond with calmness under pressure, flexibility in response to direction and above all, a sense of good humour. And I'm pleased to say that all members of diplomatic corps have passed with at least 9 out of 10. And I'll give 10 out of 10 to my good friend the Russian ambassador who said that this is normal in Moscow.
So I thank you all for being with us in the spirit of the occasion.
This is a good day because all of us as representatives of the governments of the world know far too much, know far too much about what human conflicts mean. And about what natural disasters mean and the tolls on human lives, the communities and societies.
There are practically none of the governments or nations represented here today who have been through the last century without physically feeling the impact of some extraordinary event of nature, or some extraordinary event in civil and political and military conflict and the consequences for local communities and the people have been huge.
We in this country, proudly, since the birth of the United Nations in 1945, have been engaged in tens, dozens, up towards a hundred of peacekeeping operations around the world in one form or another, in practically in all continents of the world.
We've also been engaged in responding to natural disasters. We've also been in engaged in responding to other forms of humanitarian intervention.
So the practical challenge is this, you know, this is our national experience in this part of the world which regrettably is increasing the focus of unprecedented natural disasters  -  what can we learn from all of this and pool together into a body of knowledge, a body of practices, a body of procedures, training manuals and cooperative approaches which can benefit all of us in this wider region and beyond.
That's what this is about, and I commend therefore the idea, and it's Mike's idea, in pushing this through the system, because I believe its time has come, at this beginning of the century of the Asia-Pacific.
Natural disasters are no respecters of human boundaries. They are no respecters of political boundaries. We've seen the terrible events of the tsunami, we've seen what has happened  -  floods in Bangladesh, what has happened in Myanmar, the extraordinary earthquake in Sichuan in China and this is all within recent times and recent memory, recent months, recent years and stretched back over time and looking forward with the intensity of the climatic changes coming off the back of climate change. Regrettably, this will become more of an intense challenge for us all.
Therefore, what do we do about it? This Centre is on about, as I said, pooling the expertise. But what we then do is extend an invitation to you, the other governments of the world, to work with us in building this centre up, because we need to ensure the body of knowledge which has developed here and the practices and procedures are universalised to the greatest extent possible.
Our experience on the ground is that the most effective operations have civil and military operations working like this. When I was on the ground myself in Banda Aceh in those very early days following the tsunami, and some of the challenges which our friends in the Indonesian military and the Australian military and other militaries encountered in dealing with the multiplicity of arriving aid agencies and humanitarian organisations, and the local civilian power which had been partly decimated by the tsunami itself - it would be very useful to have a template to operate from, learning from those experiences
Too often we go through these things, those that participate in them, engage, learn and then sometimes it is lost.
The value added here is to consolidate the learning, to consolidate the practices and consolidate the procedures.
We see this as one of a range of centres which can operate cooperatively around the world. It was my great pleasure in Lima just the other day to launch with His Excellency Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono the President of Indonesia, a Jakarta Centre on counter disaster risk reduction for the wider region and for the Indonesian archipelago.
If we are to have a vision for ourselves for the future it's to have centres like this linked around the region and beyond the region globally to build up the body of expertise, to build up the body of common practices, to build up the body of procedures.
So that when the next big ones hit, and who knows where they will be, that we will be in a better position than we have been in the past to deploy quickly, rapidly, effectively and most critically, seamlessly.
To conclude my remarks, again I would thank Mike for his vision. He is largely responsible for: a) coming up with the idea and b) pushing it through the system. And I am sure none of you in your various Governments around the world have any problems with bureaucracy.
Okay, in Australia we can have troubles with bureaucracy, it is unique to our national condition. 
The fact that we have had someone of his calibre push this through and deliver on a commitment we made to the Australian people prior to the election, to centre this in Queanbeyan is due in large part to his personal efforts.
And with those remarks it gives me great pleasure to declare open on this auspicious and partly rainy day, this Australian Government Asia Pacific Centre of Excellence on Civil-Military Cooperation. 


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's the latest information you've had from India?
PM: Well, this is still an unfolding situation. We've got grave concerns for families who are concerned about their loved ones and this is a terrible time.
The Australian Government has established that there have been some 70-odd Australians in the area at the time. What we're seeking to do is to work our way through that list and to confirm the whereabouts of those individuals.
We are still seeking to confirm contact with some 36 people and we are working our way through that. It is a difficult situation, it is very fluid. We, through our consular staff, however, are doing everything possible to establish the whereabouts of those 36.
JOURNALIST: And a second death overnight confirmed?
PM: We have one confirmed death. As for a second reported death, the family of another person have issued a statement to that effect. The government has to go through certain procedures separately to confirm that that is the case.
JOURNALIST: And needless to say, it's a reminder, this terrorist attack, that the fight continues?
PM: Well, this is a horrible reminder for Australians that terrorism continues as a real threat to Australians and that at any given time with a million Australians offshore that this is a constant concern for us all. That's why I'd urge all Australians as they travel please, please, please read the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website travel advisories, because it contains the best information available on terrorist threats and other security threats in various parts of the world.
JOURNALIST: Just lastly, the reports that have appeared that another two Australians have been killed  -  you're not able to provide or shed any further light on that?
PM: As I've said, what the Government is seeking to do now through our team of officials on the ground in Mumbai is to establish contact with 36 Australians. Now this is a precautionary measure against the information that we have.
In terms of fatalities, we can confirm one, and there have been reports of a second, which has been the subject of a separate statement by the family.
As for the other reports that you just referred to, we are not in a position to confirm those numbers.
JOURNALIST: Is there any other information you'd like to add?
PM: For the Australian Government, support services that we are seeking to provide affected Australians in this terrible set of circumstances are for those Australians seeking to exit the country, if they contact the Australian consulate general in Mumbai, as much practical information as possible will be provided on exit arrangements.
The other thing we are seeking to do is to dispatch an emergency response team to Singapore so that if people transit Singapore, they are given help at the airport, and support, including counselling services, because many Australians will be traumatised by these events.
And finally, on return to Australia we have other support and referral services if people need other practical help escaping from what has been a real hell hole for people.
JOURNALIST: Just lastly, how grave are your own personal fears that the number of casualties above the one confirmed dead may rise?
PM: I'm deeply concerned for the wellbeing of our fellow Australians who we can't track down yet. As I said in parliament, I fear these numbers may rise. But, we are doing everything we can to confirm the whereabouts of these 36, and we will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Thank you for your time.


STEFANOVIC:Prime Minister, Canberra. Prime Minister, good morning to you. Thank you for waiting and listening.
PM: Good morning, Karl.
STEFANOVIC: Can you give us the very latest on your understanding of what is happening in Mumbai right now?
PM: I spoke to the Australian High Commission in Mumbai about 15 minutes ago and the situation is still tense on the ground. You reported earlier on the statistics in relation to numbers of people killed and the number of people who have been injured.
Our understanding is that the situation at the Oberoi Trident Hotel is still tense, and our understanding also is that there is still activity elsewhere. I don't wish to be more specific than that, other than that this terrorist incident is still unfolding in parts of Mumbai, and therefore we are getting ready for a very difficult day ahead.
STEFANOVIC:When you say a “difficult day" are you able to confirm yet or have authorities there been able to confirm that Australians are being held hostage at the moment?
PM:The Australian High Commissioner and we have about a dozen staff on the ground now in Mumbai - as of yesterday from our embassy or our High Commission in New Delhi the consulate general in Mumbai - have been working very closely with the hotel authorities and also with the Indian authorities to establish lists, essentially, who was registered in which hotel, to ensure that we have some corroboration of that as well, to corroborate that in turn with people we've subsequently identified and to work out who we have yet to establish contact with.
This is a very methodical but difficult task. I think everyone watching your program would understand how chaotic this is on the ground. Our consular and diplomatic staff are working around the clock in shifts at the moment to try and get all this right. And are working in close cooperation with colleagues from other embassies as well, because other embassies are running into people or having contact with people, and so there is a lot of sharing of information as well, as you would expect.
STEFANOVIC:So the short answer is you're not sure at this point?
PM:We have concerns, but I am not authorised to go into specifics in relations to numbers. I would much rather get all of our facts absolutely right first. The worst thing you can do in these circumstances is provide people with inaccurate or misleading information.
But what the High Commissioner, John McCarthy, told me a little while ago is that everything physically that can be done is being done on the ground by staff working around the clock in shifts to work our way through this ugly, awful terrorist incident which has ripped at the hearts of people from right around the world, including our own country.
STEFANOVIC:Okay so at the moment, it stands that you have concerns that there may be or may not be Australians involved in being held hostage at the moment. What about the -
PM:Karl, I won't go beyond what I said before. I think that's the responsible course of action.
STEFANAOVIC:Fair enough, too. In terms of the Australians that are in hotel rooms in Mumbai at the moment, what do they do? Because to some extent it is probably safer for them to stay where they are, but that is also dangerous. How do they get out and what are you doing in order to get them out?
PM:Well, Karl, I don't propose to go into that on a television interview from here, and the reason for that is we have our own processes in place, some of which are working better than others depending on the extent to which communication lines remain open.
But these are sensitive, difficult, delicate areas and our authorities on the ground, together with our authorities elsewhere, are doing everything physically possible to assist people in difficult circumstances.
Now, this will obviously mean that there'll be problems, for example, such as those referred to by those you just interviewed, Brooke and David, I understand that. But look, every mission, every diplomatic mission, consular mission on the ground is dealing with an extraordinary event and we are trying to work our way through all of all of this.
STEFANOVIC:Alright, so what is your response to those people who are saying this morning in Mumbai who are potentially facing life-threatening situations that the Australian Government isn't doing enough for them?
PM:Well, all I would say is that we understand how terrified people are by this incident. We've deployed staff as rapidly as possible to Mumbai to supplement the existing consular staff there.
When was speaking to the High Commissioner yesterday on the telephone, he was physically outside the Taj Mahal Hotel directing the Australian effort. I mean this is a very hands-on operation. The professionalism from our diplomatic and consular staff is absolutely first-class.
Now, on the specific matters raised before about exit arrangements, what I could also say, Karl, is this: that the Government yesterday has been in direct contact with Qantas. Qantas has advised us that they will maintain their regular services to Mumbai during this period. 
Qantas has also advised us that they will provide special additional services if that is necessary. On the particular points raised before by those whom you were interviewing, I will ask the consulate general in Mumbai to get back in direct contact with them to confirm and with any others calling in, what are the best set of administrative procedures to go through in terms of exit arrangements.
Understand the priorities here. One, identify those who have been killed and injured. Two, work out who is missing. Three, work with the Indian and hotel authorities to try and identify where physically they are. And four, do everything practical to support them in difficult circumstances.
That's been our priority. Getting people out of the country and out of Mumbai is also important and I take seriously what has just been said and we will act on it.
STEFANOVIC:Alright and difficult as well. We understand there will probably be frustrations on both sides there.
PM:No. It's just tough. There is one other thing I would say, too, as people return from Mumbai to Australia, the Centrelink family support service will be on hand at Australian airports to provide teams of social workers, counsellors and referral services to people who will experiencing all levels of trauma from an event like this.
And furthermore, the Minister for Family Services will make further announcements today about support services for them. These are the procedures that we click into gear when there have been other such incidents involving Australians in terrorist incidents or extreme events like this abroad.
STEFANOVIC:Prime Minister, simultaneously we are mourning the loss of another soldier in Afghanistan, fighting for our beliefs and ideals in Afghanistan. We see that these terrorists have gone into Pakistan, they have come from Pakistan now into India.
Would it not be prudent to increase our numbers in Afghanistan to try and get on top of this. Would it make any difference do you think?
PM:Well firstly what I would say Karl was, let us today mourn the loss of another son of Australia. This is a brave young man who has given his life proudly wearing the uniform of Australia. Let's also remember his family and his two comrades who have been wounded. This is a day of mourning for us all.
On the broader question of Afghanistan, as I said most recently in discussions in the United States and elsewhere, we believe our current commitment in Afghanistan is about right. We have no plans to increase that. I have also said that our military commitment in Afghanistan is for the long haul but it doesn't involve a blank cheque. I have also said it is subject and should be subject, together with other countries, of formal annual review against the civilian and military strategy necessary to secure our goals.
You see let's remember the families today. This is a bad day for the Australian army. A bad day for our men and women in uniform in Tarin Kowt and elsewhere in Afghanistan and it is a tragic day for this young man's family.
STEFANOVIC:I agree wholeheartedly with those sentiments. Prime Minister, there is, correct me if I am wrong, but a sense of real frustration and also anger that Australians are feeling here where we are fighting this war in Afghanistan yet these attacks keep going and keep happening. How do we hit back, where do we hit back and who do we hit back against?
PM:I think you are right Karl. There's a great feeling of anger and frustration across the Australian community about basically, the faceless presence of terrorism.
Think of our friends in India right now and people going about their workaday lives. People in the Jewish community in Mumbai who have come under particular attack as well as tourists, American, Australian, British.
The challenge we have with terrorism is in it's faceless a lot of the time. It is international in its reach. Therefore the practical challenge is what do you do about it. In the case of Afghanistan, what's our strategic objective? To prevent Afghanistan from becoming an unfettered base for global terrorist operations again as it was in the events leading up to September 11. That is an objective.
Secondly however terrorist cells and terrorist organisations continue to operate around the world. And at a practical level, what it means is that our intelligence authorities and police authorities like the Australian Federal Police are in daily contact now with each other, frankly, following people around the world.
But often, it's a needle in a hay stack. And I salute the intelligence of our police and intelligence officials for doing a lot of work which will never be publicly recognised, preventing events from occurring which people will never find out about.
But this, this tragedy that we have seen in Mumbai, and the ongoing scourge of terrorism is an enemy of all people, of all civilised people and I think the only way to deal with this in the future is to be hardline in our domestic terrorism laws at home. Hardline and practical and pragmatic in the cooperation we extend to other countries including India to deal with the terrorist threat which of course, given we have so many Australians abroad at any one time, is a threat to so many of us as well.
STEFANOVIC:You said it right in Parliament yesterday PM, that they are cowards. They are indeed. There is a lot on your plate at the moment. They are troubled times and we do, and our viewers do appreciate your time in talking to them. Thank you.
PM:Thanks very much Karl.
[ends]


KING: Kevin Rudd, good morning. 
PM: Good morning, Madonna.
KING: What's the latest you have on the situation in Mumbai? Particularly the missing Australians?
PM: Madonna, I spoke this morning to Australia's High Commissioner to India, John McCarthy, who is on the ground in Mumbai. He has a team of about ten or a dozen Australian staff who are working around the clock in shifts.
And what they are trying to do is this  -  deal with the local hotel authorities, the local Indian authorities, to cross reference lists of Australian registration to hotels, put that together with other information that we've got, and simply to check one against the other.
That work continues as well as other support services we are providing to Australians in the area.
The death toll for the overall terrorist attack in Mumbai is now at 125, and more than 300 people have been injured.
This is a terrible assault on not just India, but the entire international community.
KING: The Australian victim is a Sydney businessman who was on a trade delegation. Is there any word on the rest of that delegation, Prime Minister?
PM: I don't want to go into individual details Madonna, for the simple reason that this is the last area in which you want to infer any incorrect information. 
We have been very careful about what we have confirmed so far. And we wish to be very, very diligent about details before going further.
Suffice to say, that all support that can be physically provided is being provided to Australians in this area. And, we have staff working around the clock on the ground.
And I spoke to the High Commissioner last night who was physically standing outside the Taj Mahal, directing operations. It's that level of difficulty, complexity, in fact, chaos, on the ground.
KING: Can you tell us how many Australians remain unaccounted for?
PM: I don't wish to go into that because we haven't finally got a comprehensive list. What we do know is that a significant number of Australians have been registered as living in the area with the Australian consular authorities in the past. We are working our way through that carefully as well.
One other thing I can say Madonna is that as Australians return from Mumbai, we, through Centrelink, will provide a family support team at airports at the point of entry. A lot of people who have been caught up in this terrorist attack will be traumatised by it understandably. Therefore, we are providing teams of social workers to assist those returning to provide support through counselling, personal support, or referral. And practical levels of assistance. And the Minister for Family Services Jenny Macklin will make a further statement on that today.
KING: We've just put our guard down perhaps on terrorism and this happens. Do we know much about those claiming responsibility?
PM: I had a meeting of the national security committee of the Cabinet yesterday. I think, as I indicated in the parliament yesterday, the name of this organisation is generally not known to the officials that work in this area. There are other known terrorist organisations in India. What is unclear is that who ultimately the perpetrators of this cowardly and murderous attack have been.
On the question of travel advisories, which is the information provided to the Australian public, our travel advisory for Australians seeking to travel to India as of the 31st of October advised Australians to exercise a high degree of caution in visiting India. It went on to say in its summary that we had unconfirmed information suggesting terrorists may be planning attacks in Mumbai, possibly against hotel and tourist sites.
I then simply use that as an illustration as why it is really important for all Australians travelling anywhere to consult the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade travel advisory on the DFAT website. Read it carefully, because that contains the best information that we've got about countries abroad, cities within countries where we've got information about the threat of terrorism and other threats to security.
KING: Now, you've offered help to the Indian Government. What kind of assistance can Australian provide?
PM: Well, through the Australian Federal Police liaison, we would offer the full range of policing assistance as would be required. When you are dealing with complex hostage environments there are a range of expertises within the police establishment which are very important. What I've indicated through the Indian High Commissioner here in Canberra, and separately the Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith has indicated to his counterpart Foreign Minister Mukherjee in India, is that any form of police and/or security assistance that our Indian friends would want we would be willing to provide. That offer lies with them, the Indian authorities have expressed their appreciation for that and we stand ready to assist. Of course, we still at this stage do not know how long this will endure.
KING: This, still while on international news, a seventh soldier dead in Afghanistan. What's your updated information there?
PM: As I indicated last night, we had the terrible and sad news yesterday of the loss of this young Australian soldier and he was killed in operations. Two of his comrades were injured, wounded, during those operations. His family have been advised but we are not authorised at this stage to release this brave soldier's name. This is still a very difficult and dangerous operating environment for Australian forces and I'm sure the Vice Chief or Chief of Australian Defence Force staff will make a statement as soon as further can be said on this matter.
KING: There's certainly no backing down on our commitment there?
PM: As for the future, we have indicated that we will be in Afghanistan for the long haul. It's important to draw these threads together. The reason we went into Afghanistan in 2001 was on the back of the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington and elsewhere which claimed thousands of lives, including from memory, nearly 20 Australians. And that was because Afghanistan was offering safe havens, sanctuary and a training base for Al-Qaeda's operations around the world.
That's why you can't simply stand back and allow that country once again to become an unfiltered, free to roam, terrorism operating base for the future. That's why we're there, that's the mission. It's a difficult and dangerous mission but as I've indicated to our friends in the United States, we are there for the long haul. But from Australia's point of view, this is not a blank cheque. We'll subject our commitment to regular review.
KING: You are listening to 612 ABC Brisbane, the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. You've caught a cold, have you?
PM: I've got a bit throaty in recent days, I think it's fair to say Madonna. It's been  - 
KING: All that air travel perhaps.
PM:  -  a bit fast and furious. Well we had the G20 Summit in Washington on the global financial crisis a week or so ago, then I came back to Australia, then we had the APEC Summit in Lima, Peru also on the global financial crisis and then we've had Parliament and we've got the Council of Australian Governments meeting on health and education here in Canberra tomorrow. (inaudible) matters that we've just been talking about.
KING: Yeah, can I just ask you about that COAG meeting and a couple of domestic issues quickly. Given the financial crisis, do states  -  are you expecting them to come tomorrow reigning in their requests?
PM: I believe from the Premiers and the Chief Ministers there should be an understanding that all of us are under grave financial pressure in the course of the global financial crisis. We've been completely upfront with the Australian public by saying that the global financial crisis has reduced Australian Federal government revenues by $40 billion over the next four years. That's a huge amount of money. That's what's happened. Governments around the world, based on my discussions with those heads of those governments are in the same situation. Therefore, when it comes to our long term national reform program, building better hospitals and for the federal government to be playing more of a role than in the past, building the education revolution through schools, TAFEs and universities  -  we're on, still, the national reform bus.
We will be investing, but this is not a blank cheque. There are limits to public finance and I'm confident our state and territory colleagues will understand that.
KING: People listening will want to know about this financial crisis. Are we on the way out of it do you think? Have we reached the (inaudible) of it?
PM: I wish I could give you a direct answer about that. This is very, very difficult. The advantage of having spent a lot of time with heads of government from the major economies around the world and the region in the last week or so, is that everyone senses and knows that we're in this together.
I think it's fair to say that 2009 is going to be a very difficult year. What began as a financial crisis in credit markets in the United States has through these, shall I say, extreme forms of capitalism, reached now through the entire financial system across the world.
The second phase of this global financial crisis is that when it affects the real economy. That is, through stock markets and property markets resulting in reduced demand in the economy and less economic growth.
The third phase is the impact on employment. The reason why the Australian Government has been so actively engaged a month or so ago in launching our stimulus package of $10.4 billion, containing support for pensioners and for families and for first home buyers, is to get ahead of the curve and to provide stimulus into the economy, to support jobs at a time when we fear that the impact of the global financial crisis will make it harder and harder for jobs in the year ahead.
And that is why we intend to continue to provide economic stimulus into the future.
KING: And as you say it is difficult to read where we are in that cycle but Barack Obama has talked about trying to limit the number of golden handshakes, some of the pay packets of our CEOs. A survey came out yesterday showing that our average CEO who walks away in the last year receives $3.4 million in a golden handshake. Is that something that you need to look at given people are opening their super and seeing how much their shares have fallen?
PM: What I have done most recently in Washington is in the agreed action plan across the 20 major economies in the world, one of the reforms for the financial system in the future attacks this very question of executive remuneration packages within the finance sector.
Particularly where you have these massive payments to merchant bankers around the world which have been upped hugely almost disproportionately whereby the amount that a person is remunerated seems to go up with the amount of risk that they are taking, forgetting about the consequences of that risk, either for the shareholders of that company or for the general economy and financial system which gets affected by the collapse of any such institution.
That proposal which we worked a lot on behind the scenes. Has now been taken up by the G20. It is one of the items of work to be put into the global system of rules for the future and when the G20 meets again, of major economies in the next three months, that is work that we will have to confirm the conclusion of.
You are right to raise it. It is obscene. It is wrong. But more than that, we have been at the lead internationally, in getting action on this.
KING: Very briefly, there are a couple of local issues. A train crash involving a tilt train and truck near Cardwell. Would any of your infrastructure funding go to financing boom gates at level crossings or redirecting highways so you don't have trains crossing highways?
PM: On the details of this particular tragedy around Cardwell, of course, I don't have confirmation of the details yet apart from the tragic loss of life and for the families of those who have been killed, if I could through your program pass on my condolences, this is terrible news.
On the details of what has happened, I understand that the Australian Transport Safety Bureau has been asked by the Queensland Government to form part of the investigation into what has happened and I am sure the Federal Transport Minister Anthony Albanese would act on any recommendations.
Beyond that, when you talk about our investment in future infrastructure, the scope is broad. We are interested in long term investment in roads, rail, ports, national high speed broadband, our hospitals, our schools.
But on this particular one Anna, ah Madonna, I would rather look at very much the detail of what comes out of the Transport Safety Bureau investigation.
KING: Were you just promoting me to Premier of Queensland? Speaking of the Premier of Queensland -
PM: You have an interest in politics have you?
KING: No, no, no. The issue of recycled water has created all sorts of emotions in Queensland. The National Water Commissioner has come out urging states to look at recycled water. You are looking at taking over health, is the issue of water something that you need to have a look at and see whether states on masse should recycle water?
PM: Every state jurisdiction has its own view in terms of the appropriateness of recycling - and when recycling water for what purposes, human consumption or industrial usage. And different investments have been made in different parts of the country.
When you talk about our support for state Governments on water, what we have been doing since we have got into office is to get up and running our proposals for investment support with the states for desalination plants around the country to the extent that they are necessary to support, urban water supply.
In terms of the rest of the water system within the country, a huge amount of our effort this last year has been spent on the Murray Darling. Australia's greatest inland river system, where we have engaged in, for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth, the buyback of water entitlements to take some of the stress and pressure off the system.
We have begun that work. None of it was done prior to the change in Government. That is one solid step in the right direction but there is much more work to be done.
KING: Kevin Rudd, thank you.
PM: Thanks Madonna. 


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning. 
PM: Good morning.
MITCHELL: It's the sort of incident isn't it, in Mumbai, that really just shakes the whole world, shakes you up?
PM: It does. I mean, there's this whole range of emotions from fear, anger, disbelief. Many people I'm sure listening to your program have been to Mumbai or had friends who have either lived there or have studied there or have been through. But because it's such a cosmopolitan centre, people are there from all over the world, and it's this horrible reminder that terrorism is no respecter of international political boundaries.
MITCHELL: What's the most recent information you have? Are there still two Australians dead?
PM: I spoke to the Australian High Commissioner, John McCarthy, in Mumbai about an hour or so ago. We have a team of about 10 or 12 Australian consular and diplomatic officials who are working in shifts around the clock to go through lists of hotel registrations, corroborating those with local hotel and police authorities, and then seeking to make contact.
What we have indicated so far is that we have one confirmed dead, that we have three confirmed injured. Beyond that, we have grave concerns about one other. But, beyond that, we are still working our way methodically through these lists. We want to be very careful about this, Neil.
MITCHELL: There is a delegation from Monash University there in Melbourne, they're all okay. But the New South Wales education delegation (inaudible)
PM: (Inaudible) details, at this stage, Neil, because it is very, very detailed work. Our consular staff on the ground are working through this as methodically as they can, supported by Australian police and other authorities back here in corroborating information from home, information from hotel registrations, and information from the local police authorities.
You don't want to get any of this stuff wrong.
MITCHELL: Yeah, fair comment. The tactics have changed here, haven't they. I mean, this isn't a bomb set off, this is a deliberate assault of individuals on the ground against Westerners?
PM: That's right. And we convened a meeting of the national security committee of the Cabinet yesterday to be briefed by the intelligence community and others about this group as it describes itself. I think concerning what many others have said around this world, a group by this name has not been known so far, we understand, to the western intelligence community. There are, however, other terrorist organisations which have been active in India in recent times.
The tactics are obviously designed to maximise the impact on the Indian economy. Mumbai is India's financial centre. It is driven, I think, as Greg Sheridan rightly says in The Australian today, by a high degree of envy and contempt of the success that we see in so many aspects of Indian society, and in the economy. But, of course, in this globalised world, Australians, Brits, Canadians, Americans, others travelling around the world, as that extraordinary discussion that you referred to just before with Justice Guest indicates that you become the unwitting victims in this act of cold-blooded murder.
MITCHELL: Is there a possibility that it will have the desired impact on India? That it will affect the economy?
PM: I've spoken most recently to Prime Minister Singh at the G20 Summit in Washington about a week or so ago. What I'd say about Prime Minister Singh and his government is that they are a pretty resilient mob. The Foreign Minister Stephen Smith spoke to his counterpart, Foreign Minister Mukherjee, or External Affairs Minister Mukherjee last night, offering the Indians any form of practical police or security assistance that they would need at a time like this.
I think it's fair to say that the resolve of the Indians is very strong. They've known terrorist attacks in the past. And this is the challenge we all face. When terrorism strikes, do you haul up the white flag and choose not to resume a normal life, or do you get on with it?
And if you look at what the good people New York have done in the last several years, those in Washington, those other centres around the world, whether it's Madrid or other centres, the right response is to get on with it, at the same time making even more vigilant our counter terrorism cooperation with other countries.
MITCHELL: Australians are notoriously world travellers. The number of young Australians, university students, in Mumbai at the moment is showing that. Do we have to continue that? There might be a temptation for people to say, ‘no, I'll stay home'?
PM: Well, my only advice for anyone listening to your program Neil, and it's serious advice, is that whenever mums and dads or kids are thinking about travelling, please, please, please sit down and taken half an hour to get online, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website, and have a read.
What is put up on that website in terms of travel advisories on individual countries, and where possible cities within countries, is the best information we have about threats to security in those places. Please have a long close and hard look at that. It's put there based on the best information available.
For example, in relation to Mumbai, as of the 31st of October, the travel advisory said that Australians should exercise a high degree of caution when visiting India, and that there were, and I quote, unconfirmed information suggesting terrorists maybe planning attacks in Mumbai, possibly against hotels and tourist sites unquote. This is the sort of stuff which all of our diplomats, our consular officials around the world and the intelligence community spend their life doing  -  getting this information together. And we try and put it out through the travel advisories to provide as much information as possible so people will make intelligent decisions.
MITCHELL: Is there a possibility al-Qaeda is behind this?
PM: We don't know is the honest answer to that, Neil. As I said before, the group that has claimed responsibility for this so far, I'm advised, is not known to the intelligence community. But more broadly, other terrorist organisations we know have been highly active in India in recent terrorist attacks.
It's a reminder to us about the need to maintain absolute vigilance and a hardline approach to counter-terrorism laws in Australia and procedures and proper resources.
And secondly, you know, this is where it gets really hard. At any one time, we've got a million Australians offshore. We're a country of 21 million  -  one million of our people are offshore at any one time. Anywhere from Washington DC to Wagadubi, right across the world and that means there is a huge demand, legitimate demand placed on the government to provide as much physical support to those one million Australians at any one time.
But the terrorist threat and security threat obviously differ from country to country.
MITCHELL: Is it possible this could be designed as a message to Barack Obama?
PM: Look, I'm in no position to speculate on that because what we don't have is that  -  what we don't have is a clear identification yet of where these individuals fit in to the overall terrorist network.
India seems to be blaming Pakistan. Again, let's wait for the interrogation of those who have been incarcerated and let's wait for further cooperation from the Indian police and intelligence authorities before we reach any conclusions, but it's very important, very important, that we establish the facts.
The other thing to emphasise, Neil, that this saga continues to unfold in Mumbai and  - 
MITCHELL: Well there might still be Australians at risk, may there not?
PM: As I said before, we're still working our way through those lists. As of my discussions this morning with the High Commissioner, there had still been fighting at the Oberoi Trident Hotel. There were still concerns in other parts of the city as well and of course there now, as I'm advised, breaking news with reports of further explosions in Mumbai, although this is unconfirmed and the embassy, or the High Commission's now seeking to confirm that.
MITCHELL: Okay, we'll do the same. Now onto another tragic issue  -  an Australian soldier killed in Afghanistan. Are you in a position to release his name yet?
PM: Not at this stage Neil. His next of kin were advised of this terrible, terrible loss to them only yesterday afternoon and once that had occurred then the Vice Chief of the Defence staff made a statement and I then followed.
And again, I'd simply say through your program to your listeners how saddened I am and the government is at the loss of this brave young man who has given his all, proudly wearing the uniform of Australia, and our deepest condolences go to his family.
MITCHELL: I hear speculation today, we may have to increase our numbers in Afghanistan. Do you think that's likely?
PM: We have no plans for any such increase Neil. I've said before to our friends in the United States that we believe our current commitments to Afghanistan are about right. I've also said to the Americans and to others we also believe that our commitment, while being there for the long haul, should be subject to annual review against the mission we've set for ourselves.
Remember, we went to Afghanistan after the terrorist attacks on September 11 which killed, murdered more than 3,000 people including a number of Australians. And we went into Afghanistan to eliminate that country as a base for basically unfettered global terrorist training and operational deployment by Al-Qaeda around the world.
We cannot surrender that country back again to Al-Qaeda.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, we'll take a quick break and let you get a glass of water. You don't sound all that well. We'll take a quick break and come back with more from Kevin Rudd.
[commercial break]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with us. Mr Rudd, just those explosions you mentioned  -  there's an agency report I've just been handed  -  two loud explosions heard near a Jewish centre in Mumbai where the Islamic militants are believed to be holed up. They came from an area inside Nariman House, a business and residential complex where the Jewish centre's located. We don't know any more than that.
PM: No, we're still trying to confirm those facts as well. I think the point which arises from what you just said, Neil, is that we're legitimately concerned about the impact on Australians. There are families around the world who are watching this with great anxiety including our friends in the Jewish community because again, Nariman House, which is a centre for the Jewish community in Mumbai has been one of the identified targets in this attack.
MITCHELL: Okay, now if we might move onto the economy  -  GST  -  would you look at cutting it to stimulate the economy?
PM: We've got no plans to do anything of that nature, Neil. We believe that the right thing to do is to provide a stimulus to the economy of the type that we did through the economic security strategy a month or so ago, that $10.4 billion strategy, but we'll do more in infrastructure soon.
MITCHELL: Okay, now as is happening to you no doubt, I've got the business community in my ear, regularly  -  couple of things  - 
PM: I'm surprised by that.
MITCHELL: (laughs) A couple of things have come forward. Would the government look at giving preference to Australian business, not just manufacturing but service industry as well, so if you're taking your government contract, give it to an Australian company?
PM: What we're bound by there, and I'll take advice on this and come back to your program Neil, is the rules of the World Trade Organisation. In other words, if every country around the world started to put up barriers about where they bought stuff, then the materials that we sell to foreign countries for use by foreign governments would start to be penalised. That's the problem.
But let me come back to you with a detailed answer on that because there are certain exclusions and I will strive to be accurate in the answer.
In terms of your broader point about business community suggestions, we're up for any proposal from the business community to consider. This is a challenge for all of us  -  business, unions, the entire community - as this global financial crisis hits the real economy and jobs in 2009 and we want to work constructively with the entire community to see Australia through.
MITCHELL: Are you looking for some wage restraint from unions?
PM: I believe in the period ahead, and I'd say this more broadly, profit restraint, executive remuneration constraints, and wage restraint may well be necessary, because what's our overriding objective in 2009? To support jobs. You see, this global financial crisis has three phases to it.
Firstly, a crisis in credit markets. That's what began in the United States and the cancer spread throughout the world.
Secondly, that then affecting the real economy with growth coming down as demand for goods and services has come down and confidence has tanked around the world.
And thirdly, the third phase is where that flows through to jobs. And why we are in the business of supporting stimulus packages for the economy is to provide the greatest possible support for jobs. And that $10.4 billion package we announced in October would normally be capable of generating 75,000 jobs.
That is the sort of stuff we will be doing.
MITCHELL: The other idea put to me by business - apparently Governments, state and federal Governments are notoriously slow payers. If they could speed that up they told me that it would help enormously.
PM: You know your business community friends have got something in that observation. When I, together with the Treasurer, addressed a small business summit in Brisbane about, from memory, a month ago, one of the proposals we put forward and I will come back to your program with the detail of it now is if the commonwealth does not pay its bill within a finite period of time, then anyone who hasn't had their bill paid gets to charge us interest.
And I issued that as a commonwealth directive. I think the statistic I had at the time is that 94, 95 per cent of the Commonwealth bills were paid within the agreed period. But I am out for not having small business having to cop any problem, particularly when their profit lines are going to be challenged by the crisis.
MITCHELL: You have got the COAG meeting this weekend, will the deal be done on infrastructure spending, will the states find out what they are getting?
PM: No, this weekend is not about infrastructure spending, that comes later. What we are on about in this COAG meeting is the work we have been doing all year in two or three critical areas. One, the future of federal investment in our hospitals and health system over the next four to five years.
In the past, the previous Federal Government walked away from that. We have got to provide a better growth formula for our public hospital funding for the future. That is the first thing, as well as dealing with the workforce needs of the hospital and health system as well.
Second, on education.
MITCHELL: Just before we leave health, $6.5 billion extra for public hospitals, is that right?
PM: We have indicated already to the states overnight what our proposal would be on the numbers. And you know something Neil? I reckon there is going to be some argy bargy, when we actually sit around the table.
MITCHELL: But is $6.5 billion the starting point, because that has been reported today?
PM: Yes I have seen those reports. I am not in a position to confirm where the Treasurers' negotiations are up to.
MITCHELL: Imagine a state government leaking Prime Minister.
PM: I am so shocked Neil. I am sure you have never experienced that in your time.
MITCHELL: Not at all, not at all.
PM: At least not enough for 3AW, is that right?
MITCHELL: That's right. Now the situation with the men's health ambassadors. It was a silly error by the Minister wasn't it? But are you comfortable with Tim Mathieson, Julia Gillard's partner being one of them?
PM: Oh absolutely, he is a great bloke. And on the broader question, Nicola Roxon is a first class health minister. It is just life. I mean, mistakes happen, let's just be upfront about it. And she has taken it on the chin. Good on her. She is doing a fantastic job as Health Minister.
Tim's a great bloke. And the point about having health ambassadors is that this isn't a paid position. It is completely honorary. And that is, he is just doing it for, you know love and public duty. So good on him, I mean he is out there.
If you are a bit like me, Neil, blokes are notorious about not having any interest in their health until it sort of hits them between the eyes. And the more blokes you've got out there, average blokes, blokes in various positions around the country talking about it, about you know, what sort of check-ups you should get, what you should do on the preventative side, I think that is great.
MITCHELL: Well I agree with you. I hope he gets out there and sells as you said, no public talking yet.
PM: Well I am sure that will come. He is probably waiting for November to pass so he can get rid of his Movember. Do you do the moustache stuff by the way?
MITCHELL: No mine is permanent.
PM: You didn't remove it for Movember?
MITCHELL: No I should have done that. $800 million to computers within schools so when will, we are a year on from the election, when will kids have the computers?
PM: Okay, here is our commitment. $1.2 billion over five years. Our target is to achieve one is to one to students, student computer ratio by 2011.
We have done round one of funding, that is $116 million to 896 secondary schools across Australia. That funds 116,000 computers and already I am told that 16,000 computers are expected to be delivered by 31 December this year to 186 schools across Australia.
That is what we have done so far. Round two of the fund closed recently and a total of 1,420 schools across Australia applied - 793 Government, 342 Independent, 285 Catholic - and by the end of the year, all of these non government schools will be receiving funding for their computers as well.
MITCHELL: Ok, look thank-you for speaking to us, you are not too well. You have got a cold?
PM: I think it is just a lurgy, a lot of people get the lurgy at this time of year. But I have been at the G20 Summit on the global financial crisis in Washington I think a weekend or so ago, then back to Australia. Then we had the APEC summit in South America, also on the financial crisis and on the trade deal that we are trying to sort out for the world and then we have got COAG this weekend and stuff you and I have been talking about earlier in the program.
It has been a big week or so.
MITCHELL: When do you have a day off?
PM: I am looking forward like you are, Neil, to Christmas.
MITCHELL: Have you had a day off this year?
PM: Oh yeah, sure. I've had days off. But it has been a very, it's been a difficult year for everybody. You know people have been concerned out there in the community about the impact of this rolling financial crisis on them, firstly, and their businesses and jobs. And we as the Government have got a responsibility to burn the midnight oil to do whatever we can.
MITCHELL: But can you keep that travel schedule up, it has been extraordinary?
PM: Mate, I would happily not get on a plane again in my life. I really would. I mean, I used to be a diplomat and I have seen as much of the world as I would actually like to. But if in the national interest, I've got to travel  -  in the global financial crisis you've got to - and I will do so.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks Neil.


SANDY: Prime Minister good morning.
PM:Good morning.
SANDY: Are we offering help to the Indian authorities to try and find out exactly how this occurred?
PM: Yes. Yesterday the national security committee of the cabinet directed the Department of Foreign Affairs to tell the Indian High Commissioner here that we would provide any form of assistance necessary, either to deal with the current circumstances in Mumbai, or beyond that, to track down perpetrators.
We have also reinforced that in a conversation had overnight between our Foreign Minister Stephen Smith, who is in London, with the External Affairs Minister of India, Minister Mukherjee.
DON: Don Burke here Prime Minister. I was just looking at it and you think, this is a bit of wake up call to all of us, that yet a new way of inflicting terrorism on the world. I suppose as Prime Minister this is a bit of a reality check for you too?
PM: Well for terrorism, it hasn't gone away because it hasn't been on the front pages of the newspapers for a while. It is out there. It's a cancer still and it's still a cancer which has to be eradicated.
That is why all of us at home and for all those one million Australians who at any one point of time are living overseas, this is a rolling challenge for us all. And therefore, we have to remain vigilant.
That is why our domestic counterterrorism laws have to remain strong. That is why our international cooperation with the Indians and with others, the Indonesians in our own immediate environment, has to be as close as possible at the intelligence level and the policing level.
This hasn't gone away and it won't go away.
SANDY: Did our Government or any other Government that you know of have any intelligence to suggest that a terrorist attack might be imminent in Asia?
PM: Well we seek to provide advice to the Australian public through our travel advisories. On the travel advisory that we have on the 31st of October, it said that Australians should exercise a high degree of caution in visiting India.
I am just quoting from the text as it existed at that time. It when on to say that there were unconfirmed information suggesting terrorists may be planning attacks in Mumbai, possibly against hotels and tourist sites.
It went on to advise that Australians should exercise a high degree of caution because of the high risk of terrorist activity by militant groups.
And further it went on to say that terrorist attacks can occur anywhere in India including local transport networks, it also refers to hotels.
DON: And the other sad bit of news Prime Minister, the seventh Australian soldier has died in combat in Afghanistan.
PM: This is a great tragedy for the nation. This brave young man has died wearing the uniform of Australia yesterday. And he joins the ranks of others who have paid the ultimate price.
And our thoughts, our prayers, our condolences go to his family and to his comrades at Tarin Kowt in Afghanistan.
SANDY: Prime Minster I know you say that we are in Afghanistan for the long haul at this stage, but are Australians right to question why we are there given this soldier is the seventh to die in Afghanistan.
PM: I have said the entire time that I have been Prime Minister, and before that as well, it is important to be in Afghanistan for the long haul. Let's remember how all this began. It began with terrorist attacks on September 11 which killed thousands of innocent people in New York and in Washington, including many Australians.
And what we then did is join with our ally, the United States and others in removing the Taliban regime because they had given complete sanctuary and safe operating (inaudible) conditions to Al Qaeda's global terrorist network.
The worst thing we can do is simply to allow Afghanistan to be reconsolidated again as a base for global terrorist operations.
It is a difficult war but that is the strategic objective. You don't want to provide complete, free, open operating training bases and operational support bases for global terrorist networks out of that country.
DON: On that basis, are you satisfied with the level of level of international assistance? Or could more be done?
PM: Well, for the non-NATO countries we in Australia are the largest troop contributor in Afghanistan. I think there is always room for some of the other Europeans in particular to increase their commitment.
We believe we have got our numbers about right. We have no plans to increase them. And I've said before, while we are in Afghanistan for the long term, because it is part of dealing with the challenge, the global challenge and scourge of terrorism, it's not a blank cheque, we will review our commitment there annually. I said that in March-April last year, we'll do that every year.
SANDY: Do you think Prime Minister that Afghanistan will become the new focus of the Obama Administration?
PM: Obviously it follows from what President-elect Barack Obama has said that the future of the US civil and political strategy in Afghanistan is a high priority for him. This is very difficult military engagement and obviously it is going to be a priority for the incoming administration.
I've indicated to President-elect Obama that Australia intends to be in Afghanistan for the long haul, but I look forward very much to hearing his plan direct about how the United States intends to prosecute this campaign into the future.
DON: And just lastly Prime Minister, Australians who are thinking of maybe travelling to India, what advice would you give them?
PM: Well, just before, Don, what I did was read out the travel advisory which existed as of 31 October. That has now been upgraded further as of 8:10pm last night, and it says specifically, “due to an increase in the overall threat level in India to the extent that Australians are advised to reconsider their need for travel”.
Again, I would just say to all of your listeners: the reason the government, through the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, runs these travel advisories throughout the world is to give the Australian travelling public the best information we have - it won't always be perfect - about what our fears and concerns are about various countries and cities within countries around the world.
DON: Just thinking you sound a little bit croaky, I guess you haven't had a lot of sleep?
PM: It's been a busy time and there has been a lot going on. I was at the APEC Summit which dealt with global financial crisis matters last weekend in Latin America. And we have had parliament now, we've got the Council of Australian Government meeting on the future of health and education coming up tomorrow in Canberra, and we've had these tragedies both in Afghanistan and Mumbai to deal with. But, that's what you're in this job to do.
SANDY: Not much sleep probably in the next couple of days. Thanks Prime Minister for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on your program.


It is with great sadness that we have today learned of the passing of Jørn Utzon. I extend my sincere condolences to his family and friends.
Jørn Utzon was a visionary architect whose legacy includes one of the world's most spectacular and inspiring buildings, the Sydney Opera House. Standing proudly on the edge of Sydney Harbour the Opera House is one of the most internationally recognised symbols of our nation.
Utzon's vision has brought pride to all Australians and many beyond our shores. Just last year the Sydney Opera House was declared a World Heritage site in recognition of its universal values.
Today I honour him and his creation and know that all Australians will join me in celebrating his legacy. 


PM: Today the governments of Australia, the Commonwealth and the States and the Territories have agreed on a $15.1 billion package to create 133,000 jobs to stimulate the economy and to drive a continued national reform agenda in health, in education, as well as in housing and in business deregulation. 
This package, this $15.1 billion addition to the Commonwealth's investment with the States into the future is aimed at boosting our investment in education and health, improving our hospitals, improving our schools, and also training more quality teachers, nurses and health professionals.
To go to the detail of it, on the health front, what we the Commonwealth and the States have agreed is for a new Australian Healthcare Agreement for the period ahead of $60.5 billion. This represents an increase of $4.8 billion on the previous Australian Healthcare Agreement.
In addition to that, there are a number of separate national policy partnerships  -  national partnership agreements  -  which have been agreed between us as well.
One, for $750 million aimed at improving the throughput of emergency departments in all of Australia's hospitals. The second is a significant new investment by the Commonwealth in health workforce reform, a $1.1 billion new national partnership in order to invest in the future training of health professionals.
Specifically, what does that mean? New places for 212 GPs across the country. New places for 73 specialists across the country. New training for 18,000 nurse supervisors across the country, as well as new training for 7,000 medical supervisors across the country. This has been a big missing area in the Commonwealth's engagement in health reform in the past, dealing with the national health workforce challenge. Doctors, nurses, and other health professionals.
What the Commonwealth has done in partnership with the States is put its best foot forward and say, ‘here is a new $1.1 billion investment from us in lifting the number of health professionals'.
In education, the Commonwealth and the States have agreed on a new $42.4 billion agreement, the National Education Agreement. This represents a $3.55 billion improvement on the past. It includes again a significant reform agenda. A core condition for this new partnership between the Commonwealth and the States in the roll out of the education revolution is in bringing about a new era of public transparency in the reporting of schools on their performance across the nation. That is a core part of the quality education reform agenda for the future.
We have also agreed national partnerships worth half a billion dollars or more, $550 million, to support teacher quality, and critically this, based on an explicit conversation today between myself and the Premiers and Chief Ministers, a commitment to enhancing school leadership. That is, principals across the country.
Many of us in recent days have had the opportunity of speaking with Chancellor Joel Klein from the United States. And the absolute emphasis he has placed there, in which we believe we must place here, on leadership within schools so that school principals become change agents for the future, particularly those schools which are in the most disadvantaged parts of Australia, is critical.
Therefore, this new national partnership, this $555 million national partnership on quality teaching and quality school leadership seeks to do that.
Better rewards for teachers, quality teachers, better training, better professional development, specialist training, specialist professional development, for our school leadership of the future. Critical in turning many of these school communities around.
Also, recognising the challenges which school leaders will face in various parts of the country, the Commonwealth has also agreed to a national partnership of $1.1 billion of new investment in lower SES schools across the nation.
This is a significant education reform agenda. It is a large increase on the quantum of investment on the past. It is a clear statement that this government intends to prosecute the education revolution based on, also, a new era of transparency in schools reporting to their communities and the nation at large on their actual performance.
Finally, across the other areas of agreement we have reached, we have achieved new agreements in national partnerships and other agreements in the area of Indigenous health and Indigenous housing and more generally closing the gap.
Also, in homelessness and in housing we have also agreed on a new national partnership agreements, similarly in disability. 
In the area of business deregulation, I make this point, in an era when business and small business are facing increasingly difficult times, what we have also agreed to do is to give effect to the deregulation agenda that we have spoken about in previous COAG meetings.
Some 27 areas of business deregulation are underway. That is, to create a seamless national economy. What we have created today is a $550 million incentive pool for the future to drive the full and final implementation of the creation of a seamless national economy. This is very good reform, and I'm pleased that the States and Territories have signed up with the Commonwealth on it.
Finally, the overall structure of the reform of Commonwealth/State relations. In the past, Commonwealth/State relations in the area of what is called specific purpose payments, we have had some 96 separate, detailed, often overlapping, specific purpose payments. What we have done with this series of COAGs this year is reduce that list of 96 down to five. Five large agreements which for the first time will be driven by a rigorous commitment to the measurement of the actual outcomes, outputs, results that we achieve through this agreement, these agreements.
This is one of the largest reforms to the structure of Commonwealth/State relations that we have had in the recent history of the federation. And it has been a good thing that we have done so.
This has been the culmination of a very productive 12 months in our engagement with the States and the Territories beginning at Government House in Melbourne in December last year, when we decided to embrace upon a reform program targeted on the future of our hospitals and health, education, housing, business deregulation as well as closing the gap. We still have much further work to go in the future, and I'll come to that in one minute.
Looking to the year ahead. There is much work to be done between the Commonwealth and the States in the area of climate change adaptation and the rest. The future of renewable energy targets, the future of energy efficiency and one of our first COAGs next year will be targeted on that.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth and the States have agreed that we'll meet in the Northern Territory before the middle of the year on a specifically dedicated Council of Australian Governments Meeting on Closing the Gap and that will be important given the additional funding which we've agreed today through the Commonwealth and the States on the Closing the Gap payments.
Also, a reform agenda priority for next year will be a comprehensive examination of the roles and responsibilities allocation between Canberra and the States.
To conclude where I began, this has a $15.1 billion additional injection into the national economy in providing stimulus for 133,000 extra jobs and a continuation of the reform agenda in health and education in our hospitals and our schools.
The next step for the Commonwealth of course will be the bring forward of our Building Australia fund list for December this year and we intend to prosecute that and we'll have more to say about our national investment in infrastructure from that time forward.
I'd thank my colleagues, the Premiers and the Chief Ministers for the cooperative attitude they've brought to today's deliberations. A solid, responsible outcome for the nation, a solid responsible outcome in health, a solid and responsible outcome for the future of education reform as well.
And this I believe is what the nation expects of us to prosecute this long term reform agenda, provide stimulus to the economy and jobs on the way through in the midst of this rolling global financial and economic crisis.
I'd like to ask the Premier of Queensland, who's now the Chairman of CAF to provide some remarks on behalf of the States and Territories.
BLIGH: Well thank you Prime Minister. 12 months ago the Council of Australian Governments met in Melbourne. At that meeting we set ourselves a bold reform agenda, nothing short of transforming the relationship between the Commonwealth and the States.
We resolved to build a more cooperative working relationship and we resolved to completely redesign the architecture of Commonwealth State relations.
Since that meeting in Melbourne, just one year ago, the world has become a dramatically changed place. We are conducting this meeting today in the midst of the most serious financial crisis the globe has faced and our nation has faced. Despite those circumstances, the agreement that we have reached here today demonstrates that we have achieved in large part the very bold agenda that we set ourselves 12 months ago.
What we see is not only a complete redesign of the agreements that underpin service delivery to Australians right across this country. We've also seen, including a reduction as the Prime Minister said from 96 agreements down to 5. Importantly, from the States' perspective, those agreements are now focussed on outcomes rather than being tied up at the front end with the Commonwealth dictating in minute detail how every dollar should be spent.
The Commonwealth has identified the outcomes they expect to see achieved and I think very sensibly left it up to States to determine in the context of their own jurisdictional circumstances the best way of achieving those outcomes.
The accountability is there, the outcomes have to be achieved, they have to be reported and how States get to them can be delivered in ways that suit the circumstances of each particular State and their service delivery systems.
In relation to health, the health systems of this country have been neglected by the Federal Government for a very long time. What we've seen over the last decade particularly is federal funding and the federal share of hospital funding go backwards.
What we see with today's agreement is an agreement that stops the backward slide in federal funding for the first time in a decade.
The states identified health as our number one priority. We accepted that in the context of very difficult financial times that we would have to understand the need to do what could be done in the confines of that financial envelope.
What's been delivered is an outcome that will see significant new services in our emergency departments, significant new surgical procedures in all of our hospitals, as well as real efforts to start tackling issues that have been off the agenda from a federal perspective for too long such as work in the area of preventative health.
In relation to education, the States believe that this delivers an outcome that will lift the educational standards of the schools of Australia. It will lift standards by putting an investment, particularly in the primary school sector, which has been a poor cousin to secondary funding from a Commonwealth perspective for too long and we welcome the decision to put parity in funding between primary and secondary schools.
We also welcome the decision from the Commonwealth to allocate another $807 million into the computers for schools program. What this means is that the computers for schools program can and will be delivered by States to the schools of each and every jurisdiction.
In relation to the housing allocation, from the States' perspective, this is a very important part of today's agreement. It not only delivers real solutions and new homes for people who either are homeless or at risk of homelessness, particularly those who are going to be under pressure in the private rental market. Importantly, what it does is put a very much needed stimulus into the construction market.
What we see in this housing package is real dollars which will be matched by the States into the construction of new social housing. This is an important part of looking after the most vulnerable people in our community, but it's also a very important part of keeping the construction market moving in what are very difficult times in the property sector.
Additionally, the allocations into both indigenous reforms and the area of disabilities, from our perspective, again looks after the people who are the most vulnerable in our community and we welcome the fact that the Commonwealth has been able to invest in these areas, despite the financial constraints that we are all operating under.
So in summary, from the States' perspective, we see this as an agreement that firstly, does start the process of transforming Commonwealth State relations. It has been done on the basis of cooperative federalism. It sets us up next year and the year after and the year after that to start really working on some of the tough issues around roles and responsibilities and we look forward to doing that.
It's a package that puts investment straight into the economy to keep the economic motor running. A package that will boost education and productivity, most importantly, it's a package that will look after those people who really rely on government services in the areas of health, disabilities and housing.
PM: Okay, I might turn it over to you for questions if that's okay.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you clearly have decided to let the good states keep control of the hospital system. As I recall, you said during the election campaign that you wanted to see some progress and improvement to this point. Can you cite some figures that show since you were elected waiting times have been better or any measure of hospitals are better that has helped convince you that you shouldn't take over?
PM: Let me answer that in two respects then I'll ask the Premier of Victoria, who is to my left, to add to my remarks.
The first is what I indicated is that we would look towards the middle of next year, that is mid-term for us, in terms of how the implementation of the cooperative arrangements between the Commonwealth and States on hospitals was proceeding.
There is a logic to that because the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission reports in the middle of next year. And that remains our timeline.
Our challenge this year has been to get the funding lines as right as possible given the constraints of the global financial crisis.
Secondly, you ask for some specific data. One of the areas in which we have been at work at already between our election and now is in the area of elective surgery procedures. We have provided in our commitments to the States some $600 million on that from the time that we were elected into the future. A proportion of that has already been allocated to the States, and the States have indicated that they have already made productive use of that in producing additional procedures.
The Premier of Victoria will now tell you what the additional procedures registered in Victoria have been.
BRUMBY: Thanks Prime Minister. I think everyone will remember at the first COAG meeting that we had in Melbourne we talked about the future of the health system and one of the funding initiatives that was brought forward was the elective surgery funding initiative.
I think it's a great example of cooperative federalism and how governments can work together to get better outcomes, and it goes directly to the question that is being asked.
In partnership with the federal government, we put in place a $60 million elective surgery waiting list strategy. We set a target of 9,400 treatments, and I'm pleased to say that we achieved that target two months ahead of schedule.
And it's a great example of the improvements in outcomes that are occurring in our public hospital system.
And I think, I'd just reiterate a point that both the Prime Minister and Anna have made today. We have had a hospital system which has been starved of money. A hospital system which has been funded by the Commonwealth at way below what has been required. And what we have got today and we what we have had over the last year is some additional funding from the Commonwealth which has been tied to specific outcomes. And, I can certainly say from my point of view, and I think on behalf of all of the Premiers, we came to this COAG meeting wanting more money on the table, but wanting too to be tied to specific outcomes. In other words, more money in, more treatments going out. More throughput through hospital emergency departments. More patients being treated. And that is the essence of this agreement which has been reached today.
So I think all of us want to see more efficient government services. All of us want to see reform, as the Prime Minister has said. And what we have got from the agreement today is more funds for a hospital system that needs it, which will see the public of Australia benefit through more people being treated.
In addition, if I could just add, the NPs which we have announced today, I think is a fantastic outcome for Australia. You know, we have moved away from this idea where the only thing that matters in health is the hospital system. And there is a terrific national partnership here in preventative health, tackling chronic disease. We spend 75 per cent of our health budget on chronic disease. So getting on top of things like diabetes is absolutely crucial. And that's one of the NPs that we signed today.
And can I just say more generally from Victoria's perspective, we came to this COAG meeting wanting a number of outcomes, and I think this COAG meeting is a fantastic outcome. It ticks every box. In terms of cooperative federalism, it is a great example of what can be achieved. In terms of the public of Australia, more money on the table, more jobs, more economic stimulus, but better outcomes.
In terms of our schools, better outcomes. Better outcomes for parents, better outcomes for communities. In terms of the business community, seamless national business regulation. The national guidelines that read on PPPs. And the other thing which I was delighted about today was what we agreed on social housing and homelessness.
And the Prime Minister has been particularly strong about homelessness. There is $400 million on the table today from the Commonwealth to be matched by the States, plus social housing, so there is more than a billion dollars there in terms of tackling the housing issues stimulating jobs and driving investment going forward.
So I think in every sense it is a great outcome, it is a great reforming outcome, it is great cooperative federalism. It shows what can be achieved. And all Australians will get the benefit of this package in the years to come.
PM: To the example just on hospitals, by the way. You know we just talked about elective surgery. That investment produced that change which the Premier of Victoria just referred to. Building on that, one of the particular matters which the Premiers and Chief ministers raised today was parallel challenges in emergency departments.
This NP, national partnership, we put forward of $750 million, that will result in more than a million extra emergency department presentations being able to be handled in the system. That's good, it's practical, it is measureable  -  that's why we are doing it.
JOURNALIST: When will this funding start? How many years are we talking about it being stretched over? And where is the money coming from, seeing as we just had new surpluses announced two weeks ago, is that where the money is coming from?
PM: Well the answer to those three questions, there are a range of specific purpose payments here and national partnership agreements which have different timelines. The average is between four and five years.
Let me give you an example  -  the new Australian Education Agreement begins as of 1 January next year. The National Hospitals Agreement begins next year as well. So the average time span is between four and five years.
Secondly, in terms of our ability to fund these with the Commonwealth, we can do so still while maintaining a modest surplus.
JOURNALIST: You said that you spoke about better rewards for quality teachers, and also a new era of transparency in schools. And you also said that you want school principals to become change agents for the future. I'm just wondering if you can explain what you mean on those three points and provide us with a little bit of detail?
PM: Well, on the question of transparency of reporting, we had a discussion about this, and what is great about the attitude brought to bear by the Premiers and Chief Ministers is that, I think without exception, we are on the reform bus. That is, transparency of reporting of school performance to the public.
Mums and Dads having a right to know how their school is going. There has been some resistance historically on that, as people who have followed these debates closely would know. Now, what we have signed up to as a conditionality of the new $4.8 billion addition to the Australian Education Agreement, is that. That's the first thing.
In terms of the national partnership agreement on quality education, it provides a funding base, some $550 million from recollection, to do two things  -  one is to provide states with greater capacity to make differential rewards to quality teachers. And secondly, it also provides a basis for the separate and specialist training of those who are about to be appointed as principals.
The latter is very important. If you want a principal going into a difficult or a disadvantaged school to really be a change agent and turn that from being a so-so school into a fantastic school, then you better make sure that that person is equipped with the leadership skills to do it. 
And then, where that dovetails with our special resource package for lower more disadvantaged schools, and that's $1.1 billion worth of separate investment as well, covering 1,500 schools plus across the country is first class leadership in those schools. The best reward for the best teachers in those schools. Transparency of public reporting to keep everyone honest about where they were before and where they are going to in the future. And, a bucket of resources to assist investing there as well. One thing without the other is nonsense  -  you need all four together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your initial offer of $11 billion extra for the states and territories seems to have increased. Where is that extra money going to and is any of that going to a higher indexation of the Healthcare Agreement that you originally proposed?
PM: What we have done is the Australian Healthcare Agreement continues to escalate by us under this proposal at 7.3 per cent. I make this point to you  -  under the previous Howard Government, the Australian Healthcare Agreement, the escalation clause was 5.3 per cent  -  that is a huge difference. And frankly, when you look at the escalation costs faced by States and Territories running their hospitals and health system, that was simply not sustainable. That is why we have changed it. That is the basis of the $4.8 billion addition.
But, there is more. That is, the national partnership agreements that I've just referred to. One which relates to emergency departments. Another which relates to hospital and health workforce needs. Another which relates to the provision of sub-acute beds within hospitals. And if you put those together, in addition to preventative health and indigenous health, the overall quantum of the increase of Commonwealth funding for the States is significant and vastly in excess of the 7.3 per cent escalation clause contained explicitly within the Healthcare Agreement.
And in the case of the emergency departments' national partnerships agreement, the national partnership agreement, that of course goes directly to hospitals.
JOURNALIST: Premier Bligh, (Inaudible) you were asking for a nine per cent house indexation. Are you happy with what the federal government has offered you?
BLIGH: What has come out of this agreement (inaudible) is between the special purpose payments and the new partnership arrangements, what we will see is a financial outcome over the five years of the agreement that meets what Queensland was asking for. So, we're satisfied. For Queensland this is a $1.7 billion increase over the next five years in health spending from the Commonwealth.
That certainly, put all together, takes us much closer to where we think we need to be for the Commonwealth's share of hospital funding. It didn't come in the package marked escalation of indexation, but in real dollar terms what it means for us is that at the end of the agreement is an investment which is equal to what we were asking for.
PM: You put together these two things, which is what Anna was just saying, the Australian Healthcare Agreement there, 7.3 per cent escalation which is two percentage points higher than existed under the Howard Government. Add to that, the three, four or five national partnership agreements which is specifically targeted in the areas which I have just referred to. That's an increase in excess of 10 per cent.
JOURNALIST: Premier Brumby, can you tell us what the ratio of health funding will be after this point? You've often talked about the 50:50 target you were searching for?
BRUMBY: What you will see through this agreement is some improvements in relation to the funds share. And I guess you'll see the biggest improvement up front with $750 million for hospital emergency departments. So two things are happening here. You get the SPP happening on health, $500 million built into the base and the indexation at 7.3 per cent. That's way better as you've heard from what was in the forward estimates at 5.6 so that starts to bridge that gap and secondly if you imagine $750 million straight into emergency departments, from Victoria's perspective our share of that would be a little under $200 million, so that will lift the Commonwealth's share  -  it's not going to get it back to 50/50 and no one's suggesting that it will, but it starts heading it in the right direction and it makes those substantive improvements that the Prime Minister has referred to.
So I couldn't have come up here and wanted I don't think for a better set of health outcomes. And I say that because it's not just money on the table, it's not just the old days with money for inputs, this is linking that money to specific outcomes and that's what we want to see.
And as I said before, it means more throughput in our hospital emergency departments. It means more elective surgery treatments, it means lower waiting lists and in the national partnership there is, as I've said, whether it's indigenous health, or whether it's in workforce development, or whether it's in preventative programs, these are things which will get significant benefits for the community over time and the money again is linked to outcomes and of course in many cases to matching state funding, so I couldn't have got a better set of outcomes from Victoria's perspective. I think in terms of the reform agenda, in terms of delivery of state services, in terms of the Commonwealth paying more of its way, I think it's a great set of outcomes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
If you look at emergency patients, it depends on the types of patients that go through so you know when people come into emergency, they're triaged, and their either very serious or there's not much wrong with them. So it depends which category, so you could put an aggregate number, but that might assume that they're all at the easiest category, so some will need a hospital bed, some will just need a treatment. Some will be seen and there's nothing wrong them. So it just depends on what type of patient category they are, but certainly you're looking at a substantial increase, a very substantial increase on what we can do at the moment.
PM: In fact depending on the nature of the intensity of the triaging treatment, our calculation is for that $750 million, looking at an additional between 1.1 or 1.8 million emergency department presentations nationally.
QUESTION: My question is to Colin Barnett. Do you think it's responsible economic management for any Australian government to rule out going into deficit regardless of the economic conditions and Prime Minister, what impact has the financial meltdown had on the money you've been able to bring to the table today?
BARNETT: Look, I think one of the realities of this COAG meeting was that both the Commonwealth and the States and Territories recognise that we are in the same situation. We're experiencing around this certain international environment, the loss of confidence in sectors of the economy and revenues falling.
For the States its probably more property taxes, for the Commonwealth direct taxation is affected.
If the Commonwealth or States slide into deficit, it's probably more to do with falling revenue than increased expenditure, and I think what's important is that everyone came here today with a sense of determination to reach agreement and to maintain services and improve the quality of those services.
Now I think all of us, I mean I won't dare to speak for the Commonwealth, but Western Australia faces a scenario where we could be into a deficit in 2 to 3 years. Now we will take some corrective action to avoid that, most certainly, but that's the reality of declining revenues.
QUESTION: So is Malcolm Turnbull wrong to say to go into deficit is irresponsible?
BARNETT: Look, I'm not going to comment on what Malcolm has had to say. I think if you have, and hopefully we won't, but if there is a sharp downturn into the Australian economy, governments will find themselves in deficit, that's an economic certainty.
PM: On the question of the impact the global financial crisis. I think  -  we had a very frank conversation over brekkers this morning at the Lodge about how this is all affecting all of our budget bottom lines, and it's just the truth. You've seen what we had to say in MYEFO and that's $40 billion reduction in government revenues.
While State and Territory colleagues, through a different taxation basic (inaudible) the same and with differing degrees of intensity.
So, it's an overhanging reality in what we're dealing with. But what is good about this, what we've agreed to today in a responsible and cooperative atmosphere is two things.
One  -  in the midst of a global economic downturn a $15.1 billion package which provides stimulus, creates the capacity to make some 133,000 jobs and continue reform in hospitals and schools. That's the good outcome that we've got in very difficult circumstances.
It'll be a tough year, 2009, for all of us, but if there's a good resolve among us it's that we intend to hunker down together and work together.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, on the state of Australians in Mumbai please.
PM: Our most recent advice from the High Commission in Delhi and the High Commission on the ground in Mumbai itself, is that the exact number of casualties remains unclear. We believe around 83 Australians were in the areas directly affected by the attacks.
Consular officers and the Australian Federal Police have confirmed the safety of 79 Australians following security operations at the Oberoi and the Taj Mahal Hotels.
We have also confirmed as you know, the death of one Australian, Gilbert Taylor, and we are still in the process of confirming the death of another individual who's family's advised us that he was killed. The practical reason there lies with our inability to access the site where this witnessed event occurred.
Of the 83 believed to be in the area, we remain concerned about 2 people, reported to be Australians. We can confirm that again, that three Australians have been injured.
If there is some small good news to emerge overnight on this, it's that those who we were having grave difficulty contacting and confirming their whereabouts yesterday, has significantly reduced in the last 24 hours. But we are, and we remain concerned about two people, in addition to the lists of those dead and injured to which I've referred already.
QUESTION: Just further to that question, are there any more efforts being made to secure the safety of Australians in Thailand?
PM: On the events in Bangkok, we convened on that and other matters a meeting of the National Security Committee last night of the Cabinet to go through Mumbai and consular procedures in place to support travelling Australians in Thailand given the difficulties at the airports.
A lot of work is underway right now in cooperation with airlines to provide support to get Australians out. It's difficult and it's hard because of the blockages at the airports themselves, but there is a massive consular effort currently underway by the Australian government to support a very large number of Australians who have been left stranded by these events.
QUESTION: You may get your 1.1 to 1.8 million extra throughput through emergency departments but how do we know that it's not simply people who, because there's no general practitioners out and there's a shortage, and people are closing their books, how do we know that they're not just people who have got colds who are going to the states and thereby this is simply just a cost shift?
PM: Well, there are two answers to that. One is, everything is related to everything else. That's why in this package, you see the Commonwealth rolling up its sleeves to assist significantly for the investment in training of extra GPs, the training of extra specialists, the training of extra nurse supervisors and medical supervisors.
That's part of our responsibility as well  -  GPs of course being in place. The second is this, and it goes to wider reform of roles and responsibilities. And that is the reform agenda I pointed to for next year which will be shaped by the reporting outcomes of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission mid-year.
Classically, what happens if the Commonwealth are being unhelpful is that they retreat to their bunker. And they basically pull up the walls around aged care and allow people who are being classified by the (inaudible) system as effectively frail aged remain in acute hospital beds which create problems there.
Our interim solution to that is to provide an additional 2,000 transitional beds for people in those categories.
But there is a systemic question which underpins it and that's part of the reform focus next year.
On the other end of the spectrum it is to ensure that we don't have the Commonwealth simply saying, ‘well we do GP land, and we don't care what happens in emergency departments, cos' that's your problem'. What's our response in the interim on that, it's to do what we've just done with the $750 million emergency department national partnership agreement.
So those two things are significant measures, but you are right to point out that there are underlying structural tensions in the function of responsibility between the two levels of government. And that was on our agenda to deal with next year.
RANN: If I could just add to that and I do not want to be controversial at all, that is not my way  -  but the fact of the matter is that happened today could not have happened 18 months ago. Because the issue of healthcare reform was banned from discussion at COAG meetings. So even though we are in difficult economic times, difficult on the global situation, we are actually able to through the COAG process to deal with issues like climate change, which was also for a while banned under the previous administration, let alone health reforms.
Sort of piecemeal things like diabetes, very important, and the new health call centre, but I mean, the difference is that under this process that you can actually have a dialogue and actually make some progress.
I mean, someone asked about the outcomes in the last year or so. I can tell you the outcomes in my state over the last six years, and that is in a small state like South Australia in terms of population, and extra 902 doctors, and extra 2,800 nurses. And while we were putting more and more money in, the Howard Government was taking it away.
On education, a very good deal today. And strongly supports the idea and the concept of giving principals more empowerment and authority. I mean, we think in South Australia that teachers should run class rooms, principals should run schools and that the government should run the education system, not the education union.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've announced today a lot of funding for some very ambitious goals. I was wondering if you could tell Australians when they might see better services and more resource facilities in the schools and hospitals? When do you expect these funds to actually deliver results on the ground?
PM: Well firstly, can I say, not everything simply starts with this $15.1 billion additional package of measures announced today. For us to look at computers in schools for example, that's been flowing out through the course of the last six months. There has already been funding allocated for the provision of literally more than 100,000 computers. By the end of December I'm advised that you'll have some tens of thousands of computers already committed.
So that's one practical area. The second area, if you want a one-off example in the health space, it's what I referred to you with the Premier of Victoria, it's in elective surgery. That's work that's already done.
Thirdly, on the $15.1 billion worth of measures here, that starts rolling as of 1 January, or in some cases 1 July. And, they roll out over four to five years.
What are we concerned about here? Shouldering our part of the nation's burden, partnering with the States and Territories, in delivering better schools, better hospitals, better trained teachers, and better trained doctors and nurses. That's what we are on about. There's no magical solution here, it doesn't all happen by 4pm next Thursday night. But you know something, we are a bit closer to getting to a decent national outcome than we were a year or so ago.
What Mike Rann said, you know, it might sound party political, but it's kind of right. The easiest way for the previous federal government to balance the budget was to say, ‘okay states, get lost, and we'll give you five per cent indexation clause on your health agreement because that just means I can prop up more money myself as the Commonwealth and pretend to be a fine fellow and spend it on something else'.
Well, that's terrific, that's cute politics and will get you anywhere in terms of delivering better hospital services.
We believe we put a solid, strong step forward. If we were in a better revenue environment, we probably could have done better. But it's tough, it's a really tough environment. We're all facing that but we think this is a good mix of economic stimulus, $15.1 billion, 130,000 jobs through this package and solid reforms in hospitals and schools into the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you promised to end the blame game. 12 months on can you declare it? Can you declare that you have ended the blame game?
PM: Look, you know, what's been good about this process is, and I think we've met now four times, or is it five? It's becoming an excessively familiar relationship and well what is good about the discussion is that people have a genuine passion for a national outcome and I don't see people in this gathering wanting to just play, sort of, cheap politics about this stuff, they actually want good outcomes for the country and for their communities.
JOURNALIST: At an end to this cute politics can you assure the residents of New South Wales that the hospitals with problems that have been floating the hospitals will get better and how quickly will the situation get better?
REES: Oh, look, I think that, on balance, this is a very solid package that we've been able to negotiate with the PM today. A package that is both responsible for the times, as has been pointed out, but also responsive to our needs and of key interest there, is the additional money for emergency departments. New South Wales has the biggest in Australia, some 2.4 million presentations each year, and there's no question this will go some way towards helping out those stressed emergency departments.
But equally, the PM and others have talked about the reform process. Well, this isn't simply reform for its own sake, it's strategic reform around how we better deliver a health workforce, how we better deliver an education workforce, how we better measure outcomes and how we set our systems up knowing that we have in many cases shortages of some workforce areas particularly in health.
How we fix those and set the system up for the medium and longer term and that's why I, at my first COAG resolution here today, I'm very encouraged at the strategic focus of the deliberations.
JOURNALIST: My question (inaudible) do you think you'd transport infrastructure funding through today?
BRUMBY: Well, the Prime Minister addressed that earlier and he'll get the report from Sir Rod Eddington in December, by mid-December, that'll be the interim report. So I got everything that we wanted today including a very good discussion about infrastructure and that's confirmed what the Prime Minister has indicated previously and that is that there'll be a strong infrastructure program, they'll be some announcements as the Prime Minister has said in the next few weeks in relation to infrastructure and there'll be major announcements again next year.
That's very positive from our perspective.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the States should publicly report the outcomes of the (inaudible) so the public have a basis to judge whether they're a success or not, and then you do you expect in the discussion next year on roles and responsibilities to result in constitutional change?
PM: On the question of public accountability and public reporting, the data that will flow from the outcomes measures in each of the specific purpose payments and for that matter, in the national partnership payments from my point of view should be their for all to see in due season and this is designed to frankly improve the performance of a lot of us.
That's if you like, at a local level, (inaudible) in schools, that's what we're trying to do within communities, make sure that schools own their data for how they're performing.
To conclude, can I just say, we've had a $10.4 billion stimulus package. That's been an important step. This $15.1 billion package also helps to stimulate the economy. The Premier of Victoria said before we've got more to do yet on infrastructure.
2009  -  a very hard year but we're going to be putting every effort and taking every decision necessary to continue to support growth and jobs. It will be a tough year for Australia and for families.
Thanks for your time.
[ends]


The Rudd Government will help create 133,000 jobs, invest $15.1 billion to stimulate the economy and drive significant reform in health, education, housing, business deregulation, and closing the indigenous life expectancy gap.
Through COAG, the Australian Government will invest $15.1 billion in a national reform package focused primarily on improving schools and hospitals, and training more quality teachers, nurses and doctors.
This investment by the Commonwealth Government will deliver a significant stimulus to the Australian economy in the face of the global financial crisis.
HEALTH
The Australian Government will deliver a massive $64.4 billion investment in health and hospital funding, including through the National Healthcare Agreement.
This will deliver more doctors and nurses and will take pressure off our hospitals by investing in keeping people well.
This demonstrates the Rudd Government's determination to work with the States and Territories to end the blame game and help rebuild our public hospitals.
In exchange for this funding, the States and Territories will be required to report on key problem areas, like avoidable deaths and infection rates.
To equip our hospitals for the future, the Government will invest in:
     * A new National Health Care Agreement that will deliver an extra $4.8 billion for public hospitals and a higher rate of annual indexation  -  7.3 per cent into the future
     * A one off injection of $750 million in 2008-09 which could support up to 1.9 million emergency department services to take pressure off emergency departments.
The agreement includes a series of National Partnerships, in which clear benchmarks have been set, including:
     * $1.1 billion to train more doctors, nurses and other health professionals  -  the lifeblood of our health system
     * $500 million as a one off contribution in 2008-09 to deliver an additional 1,600 sub acute beds for over 31,000 patients
     * $448 million to deliver preventative health measures, including reward payments to the states for meeting specified outcomes
     * $806 million to improve Indigenous health and close the life expectancy gap
The additional ongoing resources provided by the Rudd Government in the National Health Care Agreement will be able to provide the equivalent of:
     * 350,000 additional emergency department presentations
     * 200,000 additional same day stays
     * 170,000 additional overnight stays
     * 2.5 million extra services in clinics attached to hospitals
Together with the investments the Government has already made in hospitals, this could support an additional 3,750 beds in 2009-10, growing to 7,800 additional beds by 2012-13.
EDUCATION REVOLUTION
In a new chapter for the education revolution, the Australian Government will invest in an historic education reform package.
This unprecedented COAG reform package will deliver greater transparency in schools, improve teacher quality, improve literacy and numeracy and lift up the most disadvantaged schools in this nation. 
The education reform package includes:
     * $42.4 billion National Education Agreement
     * $550 million National Partnership on Improving Teacher Quality
     * $540 million National Partnership on Literacy &amp; Numeracy
     * $1.1 billion National Partnership on Low SES School Communities
     * $807 million for computers in schools on-costs
     * $970 million for Early Childhood reforms
Improving teacher quality requires both improved school leadership by principals and new approaches to teacher recruitment, retention and reward. COAG today agreed to deliver through a specific commitment of $50 million for world leading professional development and support which will empower principals to be able to better manage their schools to achieve improved student results and higher quality.
The $42.4 billion National Education Agreement includes an additional $557 million for government primary schools due to the Rudd Government ending an unfair funding practice where government primary schools received a smaller proportion of funding per student (8.9 per cent of the average cost of educating a child) than government secondary schools (10 per cent).
The Australian Government will offer States and Territories an additional $807 million to meet legitimate and additional costs of the new computers purchased through the National Secondary School Computer Fund, bringing the total commitment to $2 billion over five years.
A STRONGER ECONOMY AND BETTER FEDERATION
New National Partnership Programs payments will also include major reform of the Commonwealth-State relations that will deliver better services to Australian families.
This landmark agreement comes at a difficult time for our economy, in the midst of global crisis that has reduced Commonwealth revenues by $40 billion. These investments will be funded from the existing surpluses over the forward years.
The agreement reached today by the Commonwealth and State and Territory Governments has a strong emphasis on reviving our flagging productivity growth, especially in education and infrastructure investment which will boost Australian economic capacity.
That means this agreement will be crucial in providing ongoing stimulus for economic growth over the medium term, over and above the initial GDP stimulus from the agreement.
Today marks a new beginning in Federal-State relations and heralds a new era of co-operative federalism, with governments from across the political divide working together to strengthen the economy, protect jobs, and deliver better services to the Australian people.


The Rudd Government will invest $1.1 billion in training more doctors, nurses and other health professionals. 
This is the single biggest investment in the health workforce ever made by an Australian Government.
This funding will support a massive expansion in undergraduate clinical training places in public hospitals and other health settings.
Doctors and nurses are the lifeblood of our health system, and this will ensure there will be far more doctors and nurses in years to come.
The Commonwealth contribution to the Health Workforce National Partnership includes:
     * Almost $500 million to support the expansion of undergraduate clinical training places, and directly subsidise clinical training for undergraduate medical, nursing and allied health students
     * $86 million to provide 212 additional ongoing GP training places and 73 additional specialist training places in the private sector, boosting the total number of GP training places to over 800 from 2011 onwards  -  a 33% per cent increase on the cap of 600 places imposed since 2004.
     * $28 million to help train approximately 18,000 nurse supervisors, 5,000 allied health and VET supervisors, and 7,000 medical supervisors  -  to ensure there is sufficient capacity to supervise additional students coming through the system
     * $175.6 million investment in capital infrastructure to support training of the future health workforce, including funding for the construction of new and mobile high-tech simulated learning environments and the expansion of education and training facilities at major regional hospitals
     * $264 million will be provided for other important initiatives including the establishment of a National Workforce Agency  -  to better coordinate clinical training across a range of workforce settings, and assist with workforce planning, as recommended by the Productivity Commission in its 2005 report on Australia's Health Workforce.
In order to practise as doctors, medical graduates need to be trained in clinical settings. With student numbers rising, and hospitals under pressure after years of underfunding by the Commonwealth, there would not have been enough training places.
Student numbers are expected to increase from 63,000 in 2009 to 78,000 in 2013.
In 2013, this funding will support undergraduate clinical training for an additional 2,500 medical students, 10,800 nursing students, and 1,500 allied health students, compared to 2009.
Without this funding, a significant bottleneck in training for doctors would have been created. Many doctors would have emerged from university, with no training places to go to. The Rudd Government's investment will prevent this from happening, with increased GP training places and specialist training opportunities.
States and Territories have agreed to provide matching funding of $540 million for the training component of the National Partnership.
The Rudd Government's investment in clinical training recognises that training the health workforce for the future is a shared Commonwealth-State responsibility.


Through the Council of Australian Governments, the Rudd Government will make an unprecedented investment in schooling to drive long term education reform.
As promised, the Australian Government will deliver critical transparency measures in a four year $42.4 billion National Education Agreement from 1 January next year.
The National Education Agreement will include $14 billion for government schools over the next four years, plus $807million for digital education revolution on-costs.
In addition, the Australian Government will deliver a National Partnership on Teacher Quality worth $550 million, a National Partnership on Literacy &amp; Numeracy worth $540 million and a National Partnership on Low SES School Communities worth $1.1 billion over five years.
Together, the National Education Agreement and National Partnerships will reform education in this country and deliver education excellence in all schools to ensure every Australia child receives a world class education.
National Education Agreement $42.4 billion
The National Education Agreement will provide the foundation for delivering the Rudd Government's Education Revolution to all of Australia's schools.
The funding and accountability arrangements delivered under the proposed National Education Agreement will provide a strong foundation for reforms in the schooling sector which will better link investment in schooling to improved educational outcomes.
As promised, the National Education Agreement will achieve a new era of transparency and stronger use of evidence to inform the allocation of resources.
For the first time, parents, teachers and members of the community will have access to nationally comparable information that details a school's results, its workforce, its financial resources and the student population it serves.
The information available will enable comparison of each school with other local schools and with schools serving similar student populations around the nation. These same transparency and accountability requirements will apply to both government and non-government schools.
Through the better monitoring of performance at the student, school and jurisdictional level, educational outcomes can be lifted across all schools and all sectors.
The National Education Agreement will commence operation on 1 January 2009.
National Partnership on Improving Teacher Quality $550 million
The National Partnership on Improving Teacher Quality will deliver reforms targeting critical points in the teacher ‘lifecycle' to attract, train, place, develop and retain quality teachers and leaders in our schools and in front of classrooms.
The Australian Government will work together with States and Territories to deliver a number of national reforms, including:
     * Attracting the best graduates to teaching through additional pathways;
     * Improving quality of teacher training in partnership with universities;
     * Develop national standards and teacher registration to aid teacher mobility and retention;
     * Develop and enhance the skills and knowledge of teachers and school leaders throughout their careers;
     * Improve retention by rewarding quality teachers and school leaders; and
     * Improve the quality and availability of teacher workforce data.
Teacher quality is the single greatest in-school influence on student engagement and achievement.
This National Partnership acknowledges that improving and maintaining the quality of the teaching workforce in this country will be fundamental to any overall improvements in Australian schooling.
The National Partnership also acknowledges that high performing, high quality school principals are pivotal to improving teacher quality and school quality.
Consequently, $50 million will be dedicated to professional development and support which will empower principals to be able to better manage their schools to achieve improved student results and higher quality.
National Partnership on Low SES School Communities $1.1 billion
The Australian Government will provide $1.1 billion to support the needs of low socio-economic status school communities by facilitating reforms to bring about improved educational outcomes for students.
The National Partnership will fund a range of within school and out-of-school reforms that will support the educational and wellbeing needs of students and schools in low socio-economic status communities.
Believing that disadvantage is not destiny, the Australian Government will support nationally significant reforms which aim to lift the quality and quantity of education received by students from disadvantaged backgrounds.
The National Partnership will focus on evidence-based measures which will be vigorously evaluated for potential system wide transformation, including:
     * Attracting high performing principals and teachers to underperforming schools;
     * Providing funding for intensive learning activities and additional coaching for those students who are falling behind;
     * Creating a robust network of parents, other schools, local communities and businesses to help students in transitioning successfully to work or further education; and
     * Providing incentives for individual schools to extend their reach through longer opening hours, after-school study support, sports and other activities to help keep students engaged in their studies.
The funding individual schools receive will depend on their size, the extent of reforms undertaken, degree of reform ambition and the level of State/Territory co-contribution. Costings assume an average school cost of $500,000 per year.
The Australian and State and Territory Governments will develop a list of schools based on an agreed measure of relative disadvantage. The non-government school sector will be invited to participate in the National Partnership.
Through the National Partnership on Low SES School Communities, around 1500 schools will be empowered to improve student learning outcomes and wellbeing, to better equip students for future labour market participation and address social exclusion and Indigenous disadvantage.
National Partnership on Literacy &amp; Numeracy $540 million
As promised in the 2008-09 Budget, the Australian Government is prepared to invest $540 million to drive improvement in the foundation stones of literacy and numeracy.
The National Partnership will fund a range of approaches to accelerate improvement in literacy and numeracy outcomes for targeted students and schools.
These approaches will focus on:
     * Effective and evidence based teaching of literacy and numeracy;
     * Strong school leadership and whole school engagement with literacy and numeracy; and
     * Monitoring student and school literacy and numeracy performance to identify where support is needed.
The National Partnership with States and Territories will, overtime, ensure there are more students achieving above the national minimum standard in literacy and numeracy, allowing Australian students to progress successfully through their schooling and actively participate in the workforce and contribute to their community in future years.


The Rudd Government will provide more than $1 billion towards creating a seamless national economy on the back of an historic agreement made by COAG today, helping to lift business confidence.
Under the agreement the states and territories have secured a $550 million package to implement a range of regulatory and competition reforms in areas including:
     * National consumer policy and product safety regulation
     * National trade licences
     * Financial services regulatory reforms
The Rudd Government is also investing $475 million on landmark reforms such as the creation of a national system for registering business names and taking over responsibility for the regulation of all consumer credit.
The reforms also make way for a new national electronic conveyancing system, which could save homebuyers hundreds of dollars on every house purchase, and will help support the Government's work on affordable housing.
The new system to create a national register for business names alone has been estimated by Ernst and Young to save Australian businesses $1 billion over the next 10 years.
Federal and state governments have been working all year towards removing regulation differences across borders in 27 areas.
Never before in Australian history has a government attempted such an ambitious program of reducing unnecessary business regulation.
We are moving Australia from being nine markets to one and putting an end to “rail gauge” economics that have plagued the business community for more than a century.
The Rudd Government is vigorously pursuing the reform of Australia's tangle of business regulation because it will help lift productivity growth off the floor. This is essential to ensure Australia's future prosperity and for job creation.
The cooperation of the states and territories has been instrumental in pursuing these reforms that are so vital to Australia's future.
The Business Council of Australia (BCA) has also shown strong and constructive support for the package.
“Our current fragmented economic regulation creates a whole range of unnecessary burdens and costs for business and the wider economy,” BCA President Greig Gailey said. (BCA press release “COAG meeting a chance for economic growth” - 28 November).
“Right now we need businesses to have the confidence to employ and invest. Businesses will have significantly greater confidence when they see governments pushing ahead with reforms that enhance the productive capacity of the economy.
“The economic burdens of ending this inefficiency have been estimated to be as high as $16 billion annually.”
The Government will continue to press ahead with economic reform while managing the impacts of the global financial crisis.
The result of yesterday's COAG meeting is good for business confidence, good for jobs growth and a plus for national productivity.


PM: Well, this Opera House is not just Sydney's great symbol to the world, it's Australia's great symbol to the world. And we owe this great symbol to this great man who has now passed away. 
JOURNALIST: Your thoughts about the fact that politicians were brave enough to embrace that design all those years ago. Do you think that would happen again? It was a very brave and courageous move on their part.
PM: Well, look back to the 60s. Australia was a little more conservative in those days. I think all those who were party to the decision to build this great building which becomes Australia's great symbol to the world and Sydney's great symbol to the world owe that to, I think, the courage of the architect, owe that to the courage of those who approved the design.
JOURNALIST: Your thoughts about the fact that, I suppose, it is quite sad in a way that he never actually saw the completed building?
PM: Well, often there are controversies associated with great buildings like this. But you know, in the great sweep of history, what we are left with is a beautiful building, Sydney's symbol to the world, Australia's symbol to the world, and owed in large part to this great man. A son of Denmark, but I've got to say, in terms of his spirit, a son of Australia as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could I ask you about Mumbai? Developments overnight, seems to be some hope that we are just looking at just one Australian outstanding?
PM: We are now still concerned about a small number, a very small number, of Australians. We are trying to be very thorough about this, person by person, check by check. And we'll do that all the way through. But what is good to see is so many Australians now returning safely home in what has been a terrible, terrifying experience for our people.
JOURNALIST: And your offer to India of experienced investigators  -  has that been welcomed?
PM: The Indian Government, through both the Foreign Minister and the High Commission in Canberra, have expressed appreciation for Australia's offer of help, including a full range of Australian Federal Police services.
Of course, it is a matter for the Indian authorities now that this event has virtually concluded to decide what then follows. We stand ready to assist.
JOURNALIST: Are you encouraged by Pakistan's statements overnight re: any connection?
PM: The Government of Pakistan has made appropriate statements. But I've got to say, what is called for in the period ahead is calm between Islamabad and New Delhi in what could be a very difficult period ahead.
Terrorism is an enemy of all civilised countries and all civilised peoples. And our challenge is to work with all of our friends, allies and partners in the world to tackle the scourge - its causes, as well as its ugliest manifestations, which we have seen most recently in this great city Mumbai.


The Rudd Government will invest $872 million over six years in preventative health, to help keep people well and take pressure off hospitals. 
This is the single largest investment in preventative health ever made by an Australian Government and supports an historic new emphasis on early intervention and tackling disease sooner.
Preventable chronic diseases like cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer are major drivers of the growing burden of disease. With around 670,000 preventable hospital admissions every year, tackling chronic disease will help take pressure off our hospitals too.
Importantly, a proportion of the funding will be reserved for reward payments, which will go to States and Territories which meet agreed targets.
Short-term targets include increasing the proportion of their population who meet guidelines for:
     * Healthy weight
     * Physical activity and nutrition
     * Reduced smoking rates.
Long-term targets include:
     * Reducing the hazardous consumption of alcohol
     * Increasing the proportion of children and adults at a healthy body weight by 3 percentage points within 10 years
     * Reducing the daily smoking rate from 16.6% to 10% within ten years.
The funding will deliver preventative health programs and drive reform, including:
     * Healthy Children initiatives, to provide preventative health programs targeted at children in schools, pre-schools and child care centres  -  including healthy eating and physical activity programs
     * Healthy Workers initiatives, to provide programs which reach into workplaces, including smoking cessation programs; information to workers about health risks caused by excessive alcohol consumption; and support for employers to provide programs which improve the healthy weight of their workforce
     * The extension of the Australian Better Health Initiative ‘Measure Up' campaign to promote healthy weight, and expanding the National Nutrition and Physical Activity Survey
     * Establishing a National Preventative Health Agency.
This package will help keep people healthy, tackle the growing burden of chronic disease, take pressure off public hospitals, and help equip the health system to meet the challenges of the future.


Australian Governments will invest $1.6 billion in Indigenous health to help close the appalling gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people within a generation.
This funding, including an $800 million Commonwealth commitment, will deliver more health professionals to Indigenous communities, expand health services, and help tackle key risk factors like smoking.
This investment will target chronic disease, the single largest contributor to the current life expectancy gap.
Chronic diseases like cardiovascular disease, diabetes and cancer account for about two thirds of premature deaths among Indigenous Australians.
Around $470 million will be provided to improve chronic disease management, including:
     * Incentives and support for general practice to manage the coordination of care of Indigenous patients
     * Additional support for Indigenous patients with chronic diseases to access specialist and allied health care services
     * The expansion of the Medical Specialists Outreach Assistance Program to increase access to specialist and allied health services in rural and remote areas
     * Supporting patients with chronic disease to better self-manage their conditions
$171 million will be provided to increase the capacity of the frontline primary care workforce to care for Indigenous Australians with chronic diseases, including:
     * 160 new Indigenous Outreach Worker positions (including on the job training and support) to help Indigenous people access the health care services they need
     * 75 extra health professionals and practice managers in Indigenous health services
     * 38 new GP registrar training places in Indigenous health services
     * Expanded nurse scholarship and clinical placements
The package also includes $161 million to tackle the key risk factors for chronic diseases in the Indigenous community, like smoking.
Both mainstream and Indigenous community controlled primary health care services will be eligible for the additional funding and support.
States and Territories have agreed to contribute an additional $772 million to provide additional resources for tackling smoking, expanding allied health and other State Government-funded services provided to Indigenous people, and introducing strategies to improve care provided to Indigenous people in public hospitals.


COAG has agreed to nearly $10 billion in funding for the National Affordable Housing Agreement (NAHA) and its associated National Partnership payments. 
These agreements commit Governments to pursue reforms in public and community housing, provide additional support for homelessness and to tackle the current state of remote Indigenous housing.
The National Partnership payments will provide additional funding towards:
     * $800 million over five years to reform and improve our response to homelessness
     * $1.94 billion over 10 years ($834.6 million over five years) to improve the quality of Indigenous housing and tackle overcrowding in remote communities ; and
     * $400 million over two years for social housing as a down payment on longer term reforms.
The Commonwealth and the States agreed to a new NAHA, commencing on 1 January 2009 and providing $6.2 billion over five years from 2008-09.
Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin and Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek said the agreements demonstrated the Australian Government's leadership role in helping Australians into secure and affordable housing.
Secure and affordable housing significantly improves economic and social outcomes, it also assists people to establish themselves in the broader community, and these agreements will help all levels of Government to work towards these goals for all Australians.
For the first time the National Affordable Housing Agreement covers all Government housing programs from home ownership to homelessness.
COAG has agreed to commence reform of the public and community housing system including greater national consistency and a national regulatory framework for the not-for-profit housing sector.
State and Territory Governments have agreed to publicly report on their performance on housing affordability in key areas of homelessness, Indigenous housing, affordable rental, affordable home purchase and the efficiency and responsiveness of the housing market.
The agreement also includes commitments to increase housing supply. The Australian Government will be working with State and Territory governments to develop supply targets based on the work of the National Housing Supply Council and planning authorities.
The National Partnership on Remote Indigenous Housing will improve the living standards of Indigenous Australians in remote areas by tackling overcrowding, homelessness, poor housing conditions and severe housing shortages.
Under the National Partnership agreement on homelessness, the Commonwealth and the States will work together to reduce significantly homelessness by 2013, through a national strategic approach focused on prevention and early intervention, breaking the cycle of homelessness and creating a new outcomes-focussed service model.
This will be achieved by improving the service response to homelessness, with the aim to end homelessness by driving integration between mainstream and homeless specific services and improving service quality.
This funding package will also help address the housing needs of Indigenous people in urban and regional Australia.
The agreement will contribute to the delivery of the Australian Government's White Paper on Homelessness to be released in coming weeks.
The National Partnership agreement on Social Housing will establish a Social Housing Growth Fund, which will be spent on building additional public and community housing including specialist accommodation for people who are homeless.
The funds from this agreement will need to be spent over the next 18 months as an immediate stimulus, providing a boost to the building and construction industry.


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has agreed to an additional $4 billion to improve housing, health, employment and to drive fundamental reforms to Indigenous service delivery over the next ten years.
This is a major step forward in the national effort to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
The Australian Government is providing $3.07 billion in new funding over ten years ($1.96 billion over five years) to the States and Territories to drive fundamental reforms to Indigenous affairs.
Taking into account the October COAG decision to allocate $564 million to Indigenous early childhood initiatives, COAG has committed $4.6 billion this year to Indigenous-related initiatives to close the gap.
Indigenous Remote Housing
The Australian Government is providing $1.94 billion in new funding over ten years ($834.6 million over five years) to the States and Territories to lay the foundations for major reforms to Indigenous housing in remote Australia.
The National Partnership on Remote Indigenous Housing will mean up to 4200 new houses and 4800 major upgrades to existing houses in remote communities.
Over 9,000 Indigenous families will benefit from improved housing over the next ten years.
Funded by the Australian Government, the remote Indigenous housing reform package will be delivered in partnership with State and Territory Governments and will include:
     * improved tenancy management services to ensure rental houses are well maintained, rent is collected and support services are in place;
     * A requirement that new and existing housing assets be held under secure tenure, including long-term leases;
     * economic development opportunities through increased local training and employment opportunities for Indigenous people in construction and housing management;
     * an ongoing maintenance and repairs program; and
     * access to affordable accommodation options in regional centres to support employment, education, training opportunities and access to support services in regional areas of high unemployment.
The state of Indigenous housing across remote Australia is the most visible and enduring evidence of the failure of Governments, over decades, to address Indigenous disadvantage. In some Indigenous communities, fifteen to twenty people live in a single house.
The Australian Government is determined to address the appalling living conditions in remote Indigenous communities.
Decent housing is essential for protecting children, improving health, education and employment and re-building positive community norms.
Work on the program will start in early 2009.
COAG has also agreed to provide $400 million over 2 years for social housing and $800 million over four years in new homelessness initiatives  -  a total package of $1.2 billion in additional funding.
This funding will help address the housing needs of our most disadvantaged citizens, including Indigenous people in urban and regional Australia
Indigenous Health 
COAG has agreed to invest $1.6 billion over four years in Indigenous health to tackle chronic disease in Indigenous communities.
The funding, including an $805 million Australian Government commitment, will deliver more health professionals to Indigenous communities, expand health services, and help tackle chronic diseases.
Chronic diseases like cardiovascular disease, diabetes and cancer account for about two thirds of premature deaths among Indigenous Australians.
Around $470 million will be provided to chronic disease management, $171 million to increase the capacity of frontline primary care workforce and $161 million to tackle the key risks for chronic disease, including smoking.
States and Territories will contribute an additional $772 million to tackle smoking, expand allied health and other State Government-funded services provided to Indigenous people, and improve care provided to Indigenous people in public hospitals.
Jobs and Indigenous Economic Participation
The Australian Government will invest $172.7 million over five years and the States and Territories $56.2 million to help up to 13,000 Indigenous Australians find and keep a job.
Around 2000 jobs in Government service delivery, previously subsidised by the Community Development Employment Program, will be fully funded.
This additional funding will help meet our target of halving the employment gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a decade.
Remote Service Delivery 
The Australian Government and the States and Territories will invest $291 million over six years to better coordinate early childhood, health, housing and welfare services in remote communities.
This funding, including a $154 million commitment from the Australian Government, will enable Governments to put in place-coordinated service delivery in 26 key communities across remote Australia.
Together these COAG initiatives will kick start the reform agenda needed to reach our long term targets for closing the gap in life expectancy, health, education and employment.
We will continue to build on this reform agenda through a dedicated Closing the Gap COAG meeting in 2009.


Government primary schools will receive an additional $635 million over five years as part of the new National Education Agreement agreed at COAG yesterday.
Primary schools are a vital part of the nation's education system and play a crucial role in preparing young Australians for the future.
The Rudd Government's new investment will see the end of an unfair funding practice where government primary schools received a smaller proportion of funding per student than government secondary schools.
Under the previous schools funding agreement between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories, government primary schools were awarded only 8.9 per cent of the Average Government School Recurrent Cost (AGSRC) index, while government secondary schools received 10 per cent of the AGSRC.
From 1 January 2009, this inequity will be abolished and funding for government primary schools will be increased to 10 per cent of the primary school AGSRC.
This change will see an increase of around $100 per primary school student in each of the new National Education Agreement.
The new National Education Agreement has been developed to deliver long term benefits our nation through improved attendance and engagement in school, improved literacy and numeracy performance.
The agreement will also lead to a new era of transparency, in which Australia will have a world class school performance measurement and reporting, tailored to the needs of the Australian community and drawing on the experience of other countries.
Primary schools will also benefit from the additional funds of $550 million to improve teaching, $540 million for literacy and numeracy and $1.1 billion for disadvantaged schools.
Primary schools represent a crucial stage for developing the knowledge and attitudes to learning that will shape future life chances.
Children who do not achieve basic standards of literacy and numeracy at primary school have a far lower chance of completing year 12 and making a positive transition to further study and work.
That is why the Rudd Government is prepared to make this significant additional investment in primary schools as part of the new National Education Agreement.


The Australian Government will provide $5.3 billion over five years for a new National Disability Agreement with the States and Territories to improve and expand services for people with disability, their families and carers. 
This includes a significant injection of $408 million of new funds for more services and to drive important reforms to create a more effective and accessible disability service system.
The Agreement demonstrates the commitment of the Australian Government to provide additional assistance to people with disability, their families and carers.
The Australian Government is providing the States and Territories with an additional $1.3 billion in funding over five years  -  $408 million for growth and reform and $901 million for more accommodation, respite and in home care.
From 1 January next year the Australian Government's contribution to the National Disability Agreement will be indexed at around 6 per cent over the five-year agreement, compared to the current rate of around 1.8 per cent.
The Australian Government will maintain its oversight, coordination and leadership role in disability policy and will continue to work cooperatively with State and Territory Governments to implement these reforms.
COAG has also agreed to an ambitious program of reforms, including:
     * single access points for entry into the disability service system, with an emphasis on early intervention;
     * nationally consistent assessment processes; and
     * improved quality assurance in line with nationally agreed principles and benchmarking.
People with disability will also have easier access to disability aids and equipment when the reforms are implemented.
The States and Territories will work closely with the Australian Government to improve data collection to better measure the need for disability services.
The new Agreement will come into effect from 1 January 2009 and will include a $70 million sign on bonus for reform of the disability system.
In May, the State, Territory and Federal Disability Ministers agreed to a $1.9 billion package to provide more than 24,000 places in supported accommodation, respite and in home care.
This comprised $100 million for supported accommodation, $901 million for accommodation, respite and in home care from the Australian Government and $900 million from the States. This funding will be incorporated into the new National Disability Agreement.
COAG agreed to undertake further work on roles and responsibilities in community based care over the coming year. 


The Rudd Government will deliver a massive $64.4 billion to boost health and hospital funding and drive reform including through an historic National Healthcare Agreement.
This is an increase of more than $20 billion, or 50 per cent, over the last agreement.
This will help rebuild our hospitals, deliver more doctors and nurses, and tackle key pressure points in the public hospital system.
It will also deliver significant reforms, with stringent accountability measures, performance reporting, and reward payments for meeting set targets.
The $64.4 billion investment consists of:
     * An extra $4.8 billion for public hospitals
     * $1.1 billion to train more doctors, nurses and other health professionals
     * $750 million to take pressure off emergency departments. This is the equivalent of funding an extra 1.9 million emergency department services. This one off payment provides additional funds to support emergency departments that are providing an increasing number of primary care services as a result of GP shortages created by the Howard Government.
     * $500 million in measures to provide additional sub-acute care. Sub-acute care beds improve health outcomes, quality of life, productivity and reduce hospital readmission rates. They enable many older people to leave hospital and will help free up hospital beds.
     * $450 million in a Preventative Health National Partnership
     * $800 million in an Indigenous Health National Partnership
The extra $4.8 billion for public hospitals includes an increase to base funding of $500 million, and an annual indexation rate of 7.3 per cent. This growth rate will help put the Commonwealth funding contribution on a sustainable long-term basis.
This is compared to the last agreement under the Howard Government which cut $1 billion from public hospital funding and provided an average indexation rate of only 5.3 per cent.
The additional ongoing resources provided by the Rudd Government will be able to provide the equivalent of:
     * 350,000 additional emergency department presentations and
     * 200,000 additional same day stays and
     * 170,000 additional overnight stays and
     * 2.5 million extra services in clinics attached to hospitals.
The new, more transparent system of performance reporting will include reporting on areas including superbug infection rates and other adverse events. It will also allow implementation of a nationally consistent system of activity-based funding.
This will drive improved quality of care, efficiency and innovation.
This historic agreement demonstrates the Rudd Government's determination to work with the States and Territories to end the blame game and help rebuild our public hospitals.
The funding will be distributed as follows:
     * $20.5 billion for NSW
     * $15.5 billion for Victoria
     * $12.4 billion for Queensland
     * $6.2 billion for Western Australia
     * $4.9 billion for South Australia
     * $1.4 billion for Tasmania
     * $900 million for the ACT
     * $570 million for the Northern Territory


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we live, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Why did we do the apology? You know, saying sorry is both hard and easy.
It's hard because it admits that you've done something wrong, and we did. Big time.
It's easy because it's a word, and unless you add action to your words, I think as I may have said in the apology itself, it has all the attractive appeal of a clanging gong.
And it's both those things which actually bring about real reconciliation, real transformation and real rebirth.
The apology was good  -  good for Australia, for indigenous Australia, and as I've discovered remarkably for Indigenous people around the world.
I was in Peru last week at the APEC summit, with a small community which had been supported and tended by the good Sisters of Mercy from Australia for the last decade or more.
And what struck me was among the many presentations of simple gifts from the local communities serviced by those good sisters was a very simple presentation also from the local indigenous community, saying thank-you.
Thank-you for advancing the task of global reconciliation between settled communities, settler communities and indigenous communities around the world.
And I remember when I was first introduced to the concept and the language and the content of closing the gap, on the 40th anniversary of the 1967 Referendum, and the ceremony at the Old Parliament House here in Canberra.
At that time, someone sang for us a song which you've all heard before, but which had a remarkable poetry and resonance and substance on that day and subsequently, which was this  -  From Little Things, Big Things Grow.
And that's what struck me about what we've done together, in the Australian community, on the question of the apology  -  from little things, bigger things grow.
And it is a wonderful thing to watch those things grow.
As I said before, lighting the candle of hope is one thing. Building a bridge called respect between indigenous and non-indigenous communities is another thing.
Crossing that bridge and then embarking upon the practicalities of reconciliation, that is something else and that is why we're here today.
That is the good thing that we are.
You'll be surprised to know in this job that I have, I actually read these things from time to time.
I've got a confession though  -  I only read it while the others were speaking, with no disrespect to them.
This Reconciliation Plan by NAB  -  this is a very good plan and I turn to the fifth page that says ‘making it real  -  turning principles into programs'.
It talks about dealing with financial inclusion and that is of course the provision of credit services to indigenous communities around the country and the great work that was already being done by the Traditional Credit Union, which I'm familiar with.
It speaks also about the second area of practical work for sustainable indigenous employment.
And thirdly, creating understanding and awareness.
And there are practical things to be done under each of those headlines.
This has been the subject of much work. To all the good people from National Australia Bank, all 24,000 of them who work right across Australia in more than 1000 branches, (inaudible), and who are watching this morning, I should say this to you all  -  you should be very proud of your bank.
It is a very good document and you have done a very good thing.
The other reason why it is a good thing is because other companies will learn from it.
There are already reconciliation action plans out there and many of them good. But you know, this is right up there in terms of a good document.
So for those in corporate Australia who have not done so yet, or are in the process of so doing, or would like to have another run around the track, have a look at this one. It is worth having a look at. It is a good document.
So an apology is one thing, doing something about it is another. And what this corporation has done about it is, I believe, substantial. What the rest of corporate Australia needs to do about it needs to be equally substantial. But I commend corporate Australia at large for what I have discerned and see as a genuine spirit, a genuine commitment, a genuine desire to do likewise.
And they are doing likewise. Mention was made before of the Australian Employment Covenant and the commitment that we have fashioned together as large corporations and as Governments at a meeting recently at Kirribilli on creating over time 50,000 sustainable indigenous jobs in Australia.
That's a very big commitment. Let me tell you in the time of a global financial crisis, it's a super commitment. But what struck me in terms of the attitude and the dispositions of CEOs who were there that day - Michael was there from memory and Rupert Murdoch and others from banking and from the principal employer organisations as well - is that they are fair dinkum about this. And this is a good thing.
But there is a third leg to this partnership in making the aspirations contained in the Apology something real. Indigenous communities must be partners with us. Corporate Australia must be partners with us, the Governments have to lift their game as well.
What we sought to do in the meeting in this building only two days ago as the Council of Australian Governments was lift our game. You know, I'd like a buck for every speech that has been made about this for the last 50 years, you would be a very rich man.
You would be somewhat poorer if you were to measure the bucks against what's actually happened out there in the field. But you know, it wasn't a bad outcome. There is a solid, new, concrete financial commitment from the Commonwealth and the states, the numbers of which are reflected in the communiqué which goes to the core of how we close the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australia.
Let me remind you what closing the gap actually is, and then you can collectively all suck in breath. To close the life expectancy gap within a generation. To halve the gap in the mortality rate for indigenous children under five within a decade. To ensure all indigenous four year olds in remote communities have access to quality early childhood education programs within five years.
To have the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for children within a decade. To halve the gap for indigenous kids in year 12 attainment rates, or equivalent attainment by 2020 and to halve to gap in employment outcomes within a decade.
These are big goals and some would say it is probably the right time to start muffling those goals a bit because they are all looking pretty hard. I would say the reverse. Let's hook into it and let's be real about it.
I believe Indigenous leadership is real about it. I believe corporate leadership is real about it.
What I am saying to you out of the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments on Saturday and the funding bottom line against commitments in Indigenous housing and Indigenous health and Indigenous education, and support for remote area service delivery for Indigenous communities which make up 25 per cent of the Indigenous population of our country, finally Governments at last are real about it as well.
And that is the missing part of the triangle. Indigenous Australia, Corporate Australia and Government.
Get those three together and we can start to close the gap. And I think in our own small way, that has started.
So to conclude where I began, this is a really good document. And I would say to others in the Australian corporate community, go to the NAB website and have a look at it. This is a good thing for the nation, it is a good thing for the Aboriginal community.
And with those few short remarks, which bear no relationship to the prepared text which may have been circulated to some of you, could I therefore on behalf of the Government, officially launch this, the National Australia Bank Reconciliation Action plan, aimed at closing the gap.
I thank you. 


Sixty years ago, in the aftermath of the deaths of some 70 million people in the Second World War, the nations of the world came together to endorse the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was an event with no historical precedent  -  the nations of the world embracing a global expression of the basic rights and freedoms to which all human beings are entitled, and a standard which all nations could adopt for themselves and a standard by which all nations could also be held to account. 
Sixty years on from 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights remains the global benchmark for the protection of human rights. It remains as relevant to every person in a world of 6¾ billion today as it was to the 2½ billion people who were alive in 1948.
It speaks to our responsibilities wherever there is a violation of human rights against any person for any reason and in any part of the world, by any government, any corporation, any organisation or any individual. It transcends nations; it transcends cultures; it transcends politics; it transcends personalities; it transcends creed and tongue.
It speaks to the murder of innocents in Darfur, the treatment of political prisoners in Burma and the ongoing conflict in the Congo that has recently displaced hundreds of thousands of people. It speaks to the plight of millions of refugees around the world who have fled their homelands in fear. It speaks to the severe poverty that contributes to the premature deaths of 18 million people around the world every year and one in three people dying from preventable diseases. And it speaks to the responsibilities of the international community in all of these areas.
Some of these threats to human rights are close to home; others are far from our shores. But for Australians our belief is in the fair go for all, and this belief does not stop at the continental shelf. It transcends our shores; it extends to the world at large. We believe in a fair go for everyone, everywhere, and that belief in a fair go means that as a nation we seek to make a difference and support human rights and fundamental freedoms around the world and at home. We, therefore, do not just stand idly by while there are denials of basic freedoms and basic rights, wherever that may occur. We recognise that the casualties of inaction are dignity, fairness and justice.
That is why today I move this motion in recognition of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and its continuing importance in the 21st century. As Australians we can be proud of our long history of involvement in the promotion of universal human rights through the United Nations.
Following the Second World War, Australia played a significant role in shaping both the Charter of the United Nations and the universal declaration itself. Alongside 16 other states, Australia was an inaugural member of the human rights commission that began work on the universal declaration, which was originally proposed to be an international bill of human rights. Australia was also one of eight countries represented on the subsidiary drafting committee. Along with 47 other nations, on 10 December 1948 at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, we voted in a plenary session of the general assembly to adopt the declaration.
The exceptional contribution made towards these documents by the Minister for External Affairs in the Curtin and Chifley governments, Dr HV Evatt, is widely acknowledged. Evatt understood that economic security and political freedoms were critical to international security. He fought tirelessly for a strong and positive commitment to those rights and freedoms in the universal declaration. And he had the honour to be the President of the United Nations General Assembly when the universal declaration was finally adopted. That was a good day for Australia.
Indeed, the Australian delegation to the third session of the general assembly in 1948 reported in relation to the universal declaration:
Australia has from the beginning been one of the leaders in this field. We urged at the Paris Peace Conference that the peace treaties with enemy states should contain effective guarantees of human rights. We have also played our part from the beginning as a member of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights which made the first draft of the convention. Australia was one of the first countries to urge that economic and social rights should be included in the Declaration.
The Australian delegation has worked successfully to keep each article clear and concise, expressing the broad fundamental human rights in which we believe. It has resisted attempts to write in a series of limitations, which would properly be done in a legally binding convention.
That, I believe, reflects a good Australian contribution to a good Australian document on what was and remains a good day for Australian diplomacy.
The government that I lead stands proudly in the strong tradition of the defence and promotion of human rights. As a middle power, we believe in a creative use of diplomacy to build stronger human rights protections in every part of the world. One of the most important ways Australia can contribute to advancing human rights today is through the Millennium Development Goals.
The Millennium Development Goals are among the most important commitments to human rights that the international community has made since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 1948. Around the world, nations have pledged to substantially lift their efforts to help achieve these goals and to eliminate the extreme poverty that denies more than 1.4 billion people the most basic life opportunities.
The government's strong commitment to the MDGs is reflected in our pledge to lift Australia's overseas aid to 0.5 per cent of gross national income by 2015. Our MDGs commitment involves a contribution of just half of 1c of every dollar of our national income, yet it is large enough to make a real difference in the lives of so many millions of people in forgotten parts of the world and in forgotten parts of our own region. In this time of global economic downturn, which inevitably has its greatest impact on the world's poorest people, we reaffirm, as a government and as a nation, our commitment to the MDGs and urge other nations also to lift their efforts to these crucially important goals.
The Australian government is lifting our development assistance efforts in key areas such as health, basic education, water, sanitation, the environment and adaptation to climate change. We are giving priority to working with nations in our region towards the Millennium Development Goals through our own Pacific Partnerships for Development. Already the government has signed partnership agreements with Papua New Guinea and Samoa, and further partnership agreements are planned for the year ahead.
We have also recently outlined a stronger engagement with development efforts in Africa, which faces the greatest challenges in achieving progress on the Millennium Development Goals. Australia's commitment to help make poverty history in the 21st century represents an embodiment of the vision laid out in the universal declaration to ensure that, for all people, the rights to food, clothing, housing and medical care - the core components of wellbeing and a decent standard of living - are, in fact, delivered.
The Australian government is committed to advancing human rights at home as well as abroad. We are prepared to commit Australia to new human rights instruments where appropriate. Where we genuinely believe in the policy objective and genuinely believe we can adhere to our obligations, we will adopt and implement those instruments. We are committed to a positive engagement with the UN human rights system in implementing Australia's international human rights obligations. And we are willing to consider appropriate changes to laws, implementing our human rights obligations here within Australia. This approach is reflected in action we have already commenced on international human rights instruments relating to disability, discrimination against women and the use of torture.
In July this year, the government ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The government has also conducted consultations with states and territories on Australia's accession to the optional protocol to that convention. The government is also incorporating assistance for people with disabilities into our international development assistance program. The Development for All policy aims to improve the quality of life for people with disabilities and to promote international leadership on disability and development. The government is committed to the protection and promotion of the rights of women, both at home and abroad. The government recently moved formally to accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women - and it was high time.
The government is also committed to action on the optional protocol to the convention against torture, and consultations with the states and territories and other stakeholders on this matter are underway.
Australia's renewed engagement with the UN human rights system is reflected in the government's extension of a standing invitation to human rights rapporteurs to investigate the protection of human rights domestically.
We should have nothing of which we are ashamed. We should be open to global scrutiny. We should have always been open to global scrutiny. The previous government resisted such visits because it did not want the practices that were occurring in Australian detention centres exposed to scrutiny. We take an entirely different view. We believe that a universal declaration of human rights means what it says - that a civilised, modern government must be consistent in its respect for human rights at home and abroad. That does not mean that we will always accept every criticism of Australian practices made by human rights bodies; but it does mean that we believe in openness, engagement and transparency and that we should have absolutely nothing to hide. It means considering seriously any criticism of Australia's human rights practices, and it means making changes when our policies do not live up to our national commitment to the proper protection of human rights. That is why, in our first year in office, we have ended the inhumane, unfair and wasteful Pacific solution, ended temporary protection visas and substantially reformed Australia's detention policy. We have restored fairness and humanity to our treatment of people seeking asylum in Australia, while also returning strong and effective border security.
During the past 12 months the government has demonstrated its commitment and made significant progress in promoting and protecting human rights domestically.
Throughout the history of European settlement, our record of respect for human rights has been marred by the treatment of Indigenous Australians. The parliament sought to address one of the darkest chapters of that history earlier this year, when we offered a national apology to Indigenous Australians for the policy of forced removal of children that led to the stolen generations. The apology has helped to build a bridge of respect towards a better future for Indigenous Australians.
The apology was long overdue. The government has committed to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. This will be difficult to achieve; it nonetheless should be a goal for us all. To achieve this, the Australian government in partnership with the states and territories, has set six targets, including closing the gap in life expectancy, child mortality, early childhood education, literacy and numeracy, school attainment rates and employment outcomes.
We know that these are profoundly ambitious targets. Closing the gap is about making a reality of the universal declaration here in Australia today. These targets will require new approaches and substantial investment and they will not be achieved by the Commonwealth alone. They will require new partnerships with the private sector, the community sector and with states and territories. Towards these goals, the Council of Australian Governments last weekend agreed to invest $4.6 billion in initiatives across early childhood development, health, housing, economic development and remote service delivery over the next decade.
Another important aspect of human rights protection is recognition of human rights at work. With the Fair Work Bill 2008 introduced to parliament last week, Australia will close the book on Work Choices. In its place we will have a modern industrial relations system that recognises fundamental workplace rights, including the right to be represented by a union, the right to protection from unfair dismissal and the right to collective enterprise bargaining. These are basic and universal rights.
Another important step during our first year in office is the removal of discrimination against same-sex couples and their children. The government's same-sex reforms will set a new standard for fairness and consistency in Commonwealth laws. Their combined effect will be to eliminate such discrimination from around 100 laws of the Commonwealth. They aim to ensure that, in each amended law, same-sex couples and their families, for all practical purposes, have the same entitlements as opposite-sex de facto couples. The government will also soon deliver on our commitment to undertake an Australia-wide inquiry to determine how best to recognise and protect human rights and responsibilities into the future.
In 1943, only five years before the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was agreed, a German pastor and theologian wrote a universal truth when, in his book, he said that ‘what is dearest to God is precisely the need of one's neighbour'.
As a churchman, Dietrich Bonhoeffer resisted the violation of human rights under the Nazi regime because, he said, ‘Only those who cry out for the Jews have the right to sing Gregorian chants.' Dietrich Bonhoeffer was right then; he is right today and he will be right into the future. Dietrich Bonhoeffer paid for that conviction with his life in 1945, but his message and that of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which arose out of the carnage of the Second World War are as relevant today as they were then.
Sixty years after its adoption, the declaration remains one of the most defining documents on the protection of rights and freedoms in the history of humankind.
Today this House affirms again - consistent with those who have gone before us, consistent with the efforts of those of previous Australian governments to secure the passage and the adoption of this great international instrument - Australia's strong commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and our resolve as a nation, as a government and as a people to work on our own soil and to work with governments around the world towards the realisation of these rights for all peoples.


Today the Australian Parliament and the Australian Labor Party mourn the passing of the Honourable Frank Crean. 
Mr Crean passed away peacefully today aged 92, as the oldest former member of the Australian Federal Parliament.
Frank Crean was a genuine Labor legend, he played a seminal role in Labor politics helping build and rebuild the Party in some of its darkest days, and served as one of the finest ministers in the Whitlam Government.
After service in the Victorian Legislative Assembly, Mr Crean was first elected as the Federal Member for Melbourne Ports in 1951.
On the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972, Mr Crean entered Cabinet as Treasurer, delivering the first Labor Budget after 23 years in opposition. Following a period as Minister for Overseas Trade, in 1975 Mr Crean was appointed to the position of Deputy Prime Minister of Australia.
During the life of the Whitlam Government, Frank Crean's dedication, determination and commitment to his beliefs was legendary.
At the 1977 election Mr Crean retired, having served the people of Melbourne Ports and the people of Australia with great distinction for 26 years.
It is testament to his passion and enduring commitment to Labor values that Frank Crean continued attending local branch meetings well into his twilight years.
Frank Crean was the patriarch of a great Labor family with two sons also serving as Ministers in Labor Governments, including my cabinet colleague and friend, the Trade Minister Simon Crean.
My sincere condolences go to his family and friends, in particular his wife Mary, who shared a partnership and life together with Frank over 63 years of marriage.
The Australian Labor Party and people of Australia owe Frank Crean a significant debt of gratitude for his contribution to Australian public life.


It is precisely one year ago today since the day I stood with my colleagues at Yarralumla and took our oaths of office. 
The twelve months that have passed since then have been exceptionally challenging for all of us  -  whether you are in the financial sector, in other industries or in government.
As a new government, we have been exceptionally well served by the quality of Australian public institutions such as the Treasury, the Reserve Bank and our economic and financial regulators.
This has of course also been a challenging time for representative bodies like the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, dealing with both the developments in the economy and the transition to a new government with an ambitious policy program.
The priority of our first year in office has been to take early and decisive action to do everything possible to protect the Australian economy, families and jobs from the full impact of the global financial crisis.
The crisis that began 16 months ago in the mortgage market in the US, because of the excesses of what I have called extreme capitalism, has now spread across the global financial system and the global economy:
     * More than 30 financial institutions around the world have collapse or needed to be bailed out.
     * Stockmarket capitalisation around the world has lost 50 per cent of its value.
     * The OECD is projecting a year of negative growth for developed nations in 2009  -  for the first time since 1971.
     * Unemployment has risen in practically every country around the world.
     * 15 nations have implemented emergency economic and financial rescue packages.
     * And 6 out of the seven biggest economies in the world are already running budget deficits  -  with forecast deficits of 4.6 per cent of GDP in the United States in 2009; 5 per cent of GDP in the UK; and 3.9 per cent of GDP in Japan. The stimulus package announced by the European Commission last week is expected to add around 1.5 percentage points to deficits across Europe.
Today we had the release of the National Accounts for the September quarter showing that real GDP grew by 0.1% in the September quarter to be 1.9% higher through the year.
This is a positive outcome for Australia, especially during this global financial crisis.
To put this in context, every member of the G7 major economies has experienced a negative quarter of growth in the past year.
Four of these seven countries  -  the US, Japan, Germany and Italy - are in recession.
While most other countries are contracting, our economy continues to grow. 
At 1.9% through the year growth Australia has an annual growth rate well above all G7 major economies.
In addition, Australian business investment  -  a crucial indicator of the economy's future performance - remains strong.
New private business investment rose by 1.8% in the quarter to be 12.5% higher through the year.
We know that the Australian economy isn't out of the woods yet.
The Government has been upfront with the Australian people that this global crisis will affect growth and will affect jobs.
This will be a long drawn out crisis.
Unfortunately there are many indications that the global economy will get worse before it gets better.
Today's figures show we cannot resist the pull of international economic forces, but our economy is better placed than other nations to face this global financial crisis.
We will continue to take whatever action is necessary to support growth and limit the impacts of the global financial crisis and global recession on Australian families and jobs.
All arms of policy are directed towards buffering our nation and its people from the worst the world can throw at us.
We know that Australia will not be immune from the global recession. 
There are no easy solutions and no quick fixes, either for global economy or for Australia.
A lesson of the last 16 months is that his will be a long, drawn out crisis.
Economic growth will slow.
Budget revenues will be reduced.
And unemployment will go up.
The Government has provided early and decisive leadership in both our financial markets and our economy.
At the same time, we remain committed to our long term program of economic reform. 
The events we have seen this year have only underscored the basis of the entire economic program we took to the election 12 months ago.
As I said throughout last year, Australia cannot rely only on strong commodity prices and the hard work of the mining industry to build our future prosperity.
We need to restore strong productivity growth through a comprehensive productivity reform agenda. 
And we need to support innovation, and build the businesses of the future, businesses that can succeed in the highly competitive global marketplace.
In our first twelve months in office we have taken substantial action on the productivity reform agenda across every area of economic policy  -  in education, infrastructure, business deregulation, COAG reform, taxation, health care, climate change and water, and workplace relations.
And in 2009 we plan to make substantial progress on the productivity agenda, while continuing to deal with the incoming challenges from the global economic downturn.
While the global economy is facing acute difficulties in 2009, we should not ignore the positive developments that have occurred in recent weeks.
The need for a coordinated global response is now widely accepted.
The G20 meeting in New York, and the APEC meeting in Lima, have shaped a growing consensus around the imperative for coordinated and comprehensive action to deal with the impact of the crisis on the real economy, growth and jobs.
Governments around the world are providing stimulus to their economies.
Central banks have also been implementing a rapid easing of monetary policy. Interest rates have been cut:
     * by 425 basis points in the US;
     * by 275 basis points in the UK;
     * by 100 basis points in Europe; and
     * late last week, China cut its lending rate by a further 108 basis points after a cumulative 81 basis points of cuts in September and October.
We are therefore seeing coordinated fiscal and monetary policy action across the global economy.
In addition to the global fiscal and monetary policy response, there is also fresh hope that this crisis might focus attention again on the global trade agenda. 
APEC leaders agreed in Lima we must bring trade ministers from around the world together in Geneva in December to conclude the Doha Round.
A breakthrough on the Doha Round would be a major boost to confidence in the global economy  -  and would be particularly positive news for Australia's economic outlook.
The Government is acting decisively on both the immediatee and long-term challenges Australia faces.
Through the past twelve months, the Government has worked closely with Treasury and with our regulators to take strong, decisive action and stay ahead of the curve.
Australia has also been active in international fora such as the East Asia Summit, G20 and APEC in pursuing a coordinated global solution to these global problems  -  addressing both the immediate challenges, and tackling the longer term challenge of reforming financial markets to avoid the future recurrence of such crises.
Earlier this year, we acted on the challenges of supporting our financial markets through increasing the issuance of Commonwealth bonds.
We acted when short selling was threatening major Australian businesses.
We acted to support the residential mortgage-backed security market when it was largely frozen by the credit crisis.
We adopted a Financial Claims Scheme and secured agreement on a consistent national approach to the regulation of consumer credit, replacing a complex patchwork of inconsistent state laws. 
When it became necessary in October, we provided a guarantee for 15 million bank deposit accounts and for the term funding of our banks, building societies and credit unions.
We have also acted decisively on the threat to the Australian economy to protect jobs, protect Australian families and invest in the drivers of economic growth during the global financial crisis.
We were able to act so decisively because we'd built a strong surplus in the May Budget as a buffer for the future.
The first phase of the Government's response to the global financial crisis was the announcement of a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy - delivering relief to pensioners, low income families and first home buyers, as well as a significant boost to job training.
It is estimated this will help protect the equivalent of 75,000 jobs.
The second phase of the Government's response was our $6.2 billion commitment to Australia's automotive industry from 2010 onwards. 
This is an important industry that directly and indirectly supports 200,000 Australian jobs.
The third phase of the Government's response was our $300 million commitment to local infrastructure programs though the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure.
This will create thousands of jobs throughout Australia.
The fourth phase was the agreement reached at the Council of Australian Governments last weekend when we increased our funding to the states and territories by $15.1 billion to help create up to 133,000 jobs while driving forward our reform agenda.
The fifth phase of our response will be making an early start on ready-to-go nation-building infrastructure projects, after we receive an interim national infrastructure priority list from Infrastructure Australia shortly.
In addition to these measures, the 300 basis point cut in the last four RBA meetings has already delivered $600 a month in relief for someone with a $300,000 mortgage  -  welcome relief after ten straight interest rate rises in a row under the Coalition.
The Government has made it clear that we will continue to undertake whatever further steps are necessary to support growth and jobs in response to the global financial crisis.
Every responsible government in the world has moved to protect jobs through fiscal stimulus  -  even though the stimulus packages have an impact on the budget.
Like other responsible governments, the Australian Government won't sit on its hands while jobs are lost and Australians suffers from a crisis we did not create.
Right now we are still forecasting a modest surplus this year, despite a $40 billion hit on the Budget bottom line resulting from the impact of the global crisis.
But we recognise that we are in a very fluid environment.
The reason why the Government built up a large surplus in the last Budget was so that we could prepare for the difficult times that lie ahead.
Those difficult times have now arrived.
If the global financial crisis gets worse and puts the Australian economy more at risk, then the Government will take decisive action in the nation interest (including a temporary deficit) to stimulate the economy build infrastructure, and support jobs, families and Australian businesses.
It is important that we understand Australia's outlook is still better than much of the developed world.
As I've mentioned, recent months have seen sharp falls both in global stock markets and economic growth forecasts.
Global commodity markets have also seen dramatic falls, with many commodities losing more than half their value. 
The mining boom is among the strongest and most enduring commodity booms experienced in Australian economic history.
     * The Reserve Bank's index of commodity prices almost doubled between mid-2003 and September 2008.
     * These soaring commodity prices drove an extraordinary increase in Australia's terms of trade  -  from 76.9 in 2002-03 to 112.9 in 2007-08, an increase of 47 per cent.
     * This year's Budget estimated that the impact of the mining boom on our nation income this year will exceed $100 billion, and a cumulative $260 billion over the five years to the end of 2008-09.
     * While commodity prices have fallen sharply, Australia will be reaping benefits from the mining boom for some time to come.
The terms of trade is still expected to rise strongly in 2008-09, with an expected 10.75 per cent increase due to the flow-through of US dollar contract prices for iron ore and coal, which are locked in until the end of March 2009.
As a result, it will be a considerable period of time before the full impact of lower commodity prices is felt across the economy.
The substantial fall in the Australian dollar will cushion the impact of the sharp fall in commodity prices.
In addition, we are likely to see substantial new mining capacity coming on stream in the medium term.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics has reported that 22 major minerals and energy projects worth $11 billion were completed in the six months to October.
A further 85 projects worth a projected $67 billion are at an advanced stage.
And while commodity prices have fallen, forecasters do not expect prices to permanently fall back to pre-2003 levels.
We do not anticipate a full unwinding of the income boost delivered to the Australian economy through the mining boom.
Nevertheless, we anticipate a gradual unwinding of the boom, which will have an impact on our national income over the medium term.
This means Australia will be in a very different economic environment to recent years.
We can no longer rely on rising commodity prices to drive continued increases in our national income  -  and this underscores the need to tackle Australia's long term productivity deficit.
From Opposition and in Government, the Government has always welcomed the mining boom and the enormous boost to economic growth and job creation that it has brought to Australia - especially to Queensland and Western Australia which have grown by around 50 per cent above the national average for the past five years.
It is competitive, productive and in several respects world-leading.
But the economic argument we made throughout the mining boom was that we cannot rely on our mining industry alone to build our future prosperity.
Our argument was that the long-run key to prosperity for all nations is productivity growth.
As US economist Paul Krugman has said, productivity isn't everything  -  but in the long run, it's almost everything.
Productivity growth has been responsible for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in Australian living standards during the past three decades.
In other words, ultimately it's productivity growth that allows us to grow the profitability of our businesses, increase shareholder value, lift personal incomes, create high-paying jobs and invest in better services for our community.
The great opportunity created by the mining boom has been for Australia to invest the proceeds of the boom in our future, and in building long-term productivity growth.
Unfortunately, when economists and historians sit down in future years to assess the previous Government's economic legacy, they are likely to conclude that the previous Government missed the opportunity to invest the proceeds of the mining boom in the nation's long-term future.
Already the OECD has made this assessment in its 2008 Economic Survey of Australia and I quote:
“Over the past few years, there has also been a sharp rise in spending, the quality of which was not always ensured... growth in government investment has been modest and spending on education or health care, which are likely to have beneficial effects on human capital, has been lacklustre.”
The budget surpluses gave Australia the opportunity to tackle the ever-widening deficits in infrastructure, education and the long-term drivers of productivity growth.
Unfortunately, those investments were not made, and as a result the Government inherited what might be described as a significant deficit in productivity growth.
Australia has seen a long-term decline in productivity growth in recent years, from an average of 3.3 per cent in the productivity cycle of the mid-90s to an average of just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
As I said in my Budget Address in Reply speech in May last year, quoting the words of President John F. Kennedy, the time to fix the roof is when the sun is shining.
The challenge we face now is that we've got holes in the roof, but there's also a storm overhead. 
Australia needs large infrastructure investments in transport, broadband and water infrastructure.
We need to turn around the situation where other nations were rapidly upscaling their public investment in education, while ours were falling. 
We need to put Australia back in the lead of the low carbon energy industries of the future like solar, wind and other renewable and clean coal technologies.
And we need to fix the Federation so that it serves the needs of a modern economy.
The Government is alive to the scale of these challenges, and we recognise that it will be more difficult tackling them now than it may have been in the better economic conditions of recent years.
The global financial crisis presents us with many challenges, but I want to make this clear - the global financial crisis will not result in us dropping off the productivity reform agenda.
These tough conditions only strengthen our conviction and our resolve to prosecute the productivity agenda that we outlined last year before the election.
Because Australia's long-term prosperity depends on it. 
Our long term prosperity depends on building a modern economy with advanced infrastructure, a highly skilled workforce, and a modern Federation with a seamless national economy.
And it depends on building an economy that makes a successful transition to the low carbon economy of the future.
That is why we began to invest the proceeds of the boom this year with our first Budget  -  establishing our three nation-building investment funds, the Building Australia Fund, the Education Investment Fund and the Health and Hospitals Fund.
Last weekend's COAG agreement sealed a new era in Commonwealth/State relations.
We agreed on restructuring the financial relationship between the Commonwealth and the States  -  simplifying 96 separate and overlapping payments down to five.
We secured agreement from the States and Territories to new levels of accountability in health, education, housing, business deregulation, and closing the indigenous life expectancy gap.
The States will now be accountable for delivering actual outcomes that will affect the day to day lives of Australians and their business  -  while giving the States the freedom to determine how they deliver those outcomes.
The system of accountabilities is an approach that has never before been implemented across the full range of Commonwealth/State financial relations. 
As a result of that agreement we will move towards a seamless national economy with simpler business regulation.
We will have better teaching quality in our schools, we will ease the pressure in hospital emergency wards, and we will reduce the shortage of doctors and nurses.
We are also taking further steps in the reform program for education, nation-building infrastructure, climate change and business deregulation.
We are also moving ahead on the education revolution. Last week we announced our program to recruit top university graduates from areas like commerce, law and science into teaching through a new pathway that ensures the best and brightest are attracted into the profession.
We have secured support through COAG for the National Curriculum Board, with the role of establishing agreed national curriculum in school subjects. 
We are also investing in school infrastructure, with hundreds of millions of dollars now being invested in school computers and trades training facilities in schools across the country.
On climate change, we are progressing with the implementation of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and will release a White Paper outlining the final scheme design soon.
The Government remains committed to commencing the CPRS in 2010 as the primary mechanism for Australia to transition to a low carbon economy.
This week the Parliament is also debating the passage of the Fair Work Bill.
The Bill delivers on our commitment to build a simpler and fairer workplace relations system that gets the balance right.
We appreciate the substantial efforts that ACCI has made through the consultation process on the details of that legislation during recent months. 
We know there will always be a wide range of views on industrial relations policy.
But we believe the Fair Work Bill has genuinely struck a balance of fairness  -  reflected in the modern safety net - and flexibility, which has been built into every part of the system.
The principle at work in this reform is to provide proper protection for the weak, and support for those who can look after themselves to negotiate maximum flexibility.
It is a system designed for the competitive global economy of the 21st century by maximising productivity growth through the full range of employment options:
     * Enterprise agreements
     * Common law agreements
     * Modern awards
Within each of these three options, there is substantial individual flexibility. 
Enterprise agreements allow employers and employees to make their own enterprise-level arrangements to maximise productivity in the workplace, as has been done since the early 1990s.
The Bill provides greater flexibility for common law agreements which have previously all been required to comply with all award provisions, no matter how highly paid the employee.
Employees earning above around $100,000 will now be free to agree their own pay and conditions without reference to awards, through common law agreements. 
All modern awards and enterprise agreements will include a Flexibility Term identifying the award or agreement provisions that can be varied through an Individual Flexibility Arrangement.
Examples include where employee asks to start work early and leave early to collect children from school, or allowing an employee working a regular shift pattern to average their wages over the cycle.
In addition to the flexibilities inherent in each stream of the workplace relations system, we are retaining tough rules on industrial action and the system of permit and the notice requirements for unions' right to enter workplaces. 
The Government strongly believes that Work Choices swung the pendulum too far in one direction.
But rather than swing the pendulum to the other extreme, the Government has worked hard to build a balanced system that reflects the realities of a 21st century economy.
Australia has very tough economic challenges ahead, but the Government is committed to acting decisively as needed, while pressing ahead with our longer term reform agenda.
We will act in the national interest  -  supporting Australian families through the current difficult times, while implementing the long-term reform that will help us build the businesses of the future and create the jobs of the future. 
And our investments in the productivity agenda will also provide a support to economic growth in the immediate future.
The Government is committed to continuing to act in the national interest in response to the global financial crisis  -  as we have done in financial markets, through our bank guarantees, and in each phase of our response to the global economic downturn.
We will do this in partnership with the business community. Together, we can get through the difficult period ahead - and we can look forward to build a stronger Australian economy.


The idea for a National Portrait Gallery was first raised by a painter  -  his name was Tom Roberts - in the early part of the last century. Though best known nowadays for his landscapes, Roberts was also a significant portrait artist.
He sensed the emergence of a distinctive Australian identity and saw the need to develop a collection of artworks to capture this.
Fortunately, these views were shared by others.
At the time, Roberts, along with Arthur Streeton, were painting at their Collins Street studio in Melbourne, set up by Hugh Paterson, a fellow painter and its administrator.
One of the regular visitors to this studio was the Prime Minister of the time, Labor Prime Minister Andrew Fisher. His office was literally next door. He liked to pass away the time and to escape the rigours of political office by spending time with artists. There, Malcolm, lies a reflection for both us for the future.
The friendship between Andrew Fisher and Hugh Paterson led to several initiatives to promote the development of Australian art, like the establishment of an Historic Memorials Committee, an Art Advisory Board to commission Australian artists to paint prominent politicians and significant national events.
These set the foundations for Australia's national art collections and bring us to where we are today: standing between our own National Gallery and the National Portrait Gallery.
So what is a National Portrait Gallery?
There are different examples around the world, and the directors of most of them are here tonight to welcome their Australian sibling into the family, this great, global family of national portrait galleries.
Common to each is the panorama of history on display and the representation of women and men through the ages whose actions and deeds have contributed to the fabric of their nations and their societies.
A portrait gallery brings to life the arid pages of history.
It reminds us of events, people, places often forgotten.
It presents us with the faces, the flesh, the blood, the human spirit of real women and real men.
Not great theories at work in international politics or the rise and fall of nations, but human beings  -  failed, flawed and great, and all at the same time.
Portraiture is important to memory, both collective and individual, and a nation without memory is a nation without soul.
There are innumerable examples of great portraits presenting great people who've achieved great things  -  or others simply portraying an idea, a moment, an event or a person unnamed.
I'm sure we all have our favourite portraits. Hans Holbein, the Younger's portrait of Sir Thomas More  -  unforgettable.
The many portraits of Queen Elizabeth I, designed to show us her strength and power, and her ability to defend England against all its foes.
Vermeer's portrait of the Girl with the Pearl Earring, capturing the beauty of an unknown girl, yet leaving us with a sense of the vibrancy of youth and richness of life in Delft during the Dutch Golden Age.
Contrast that with Rembrandt's Self Portrait As An Old Man, indelible in the memory  -  once you've seen it once you never forget it - in which we confront our own physical decline or mortality.
Or, more hauntingly, disturbingly Goya's great image of the “Third of May” depicting the execution of young Spanish citizens who defended Madrid against the French. An image of fear and death, yet defiant pride, heroism and fervent nationalism.
Each of these portraits tells a story, a very human story, a very personal story.
They tell us also of connected political and cultural events and in times and places which stir the collective memory.
Which brings me to a second question: what is a portrait?
Portraiture, as the word suggests, is about portrayal.
The capturing in a picture, a photograph, a sculpture, or video of something more than a person's physical likeness  -  more than just a face.
It reveals something of the psychology of the person. It reveals something of their spirit.
A reminder of their great deeds, or the hardships that they've endured.
It gives us a window into their everyday life, their physical surroundings or social context.
If you enjoy portraiture as much as I do, then the thing which often grabs me apart from the face which has been captured and the person who lies behind that face, it is usually the things which surround them in the picture.
The artefacts of the age, the things which were nearest and dearest to their work-a-day lives.
Great reminders of an earlier age, often a simpler age, but not always so.
It reminds us also of their humanity, their vulnerability and above all their mortality.
Those great portraits with the human skull placed beside them on the desk, again a reminder of the mortality of politicians, I fear.
The portrait tells us more than who these people are  -  it tells us what they are.
The National Portrait Gallery is a story of Australia and it's meant to be an Australian story.
The story of who we are. The story of where we have come from. The events, the ideas and the forces that have shaped this thing called an Australian identity. The people who make us Australian in all of our wonderful diversity.
Our National Portrait Gallery paints the great sweep of Australian history, starting with Indigenous Australians.
The images given to us by Indigenous Australian artists tell us of their place on this continent, on this - their continent. Of their relationship to their surroundings; of their spiritual beliefs; of their dispossession, their struggle, their past injustices as experienced from we, the secular community.
At the start of the permanent collection we see Tituni posts which commemorate the dead from the Tiwi Islands.
These objects are more than just decorated poles: they are Indigenous representations of people and of their being.
They too are portraits.
Portraiture is an art from which we readily engage.
As individual art critics, we have an opinion about how the artist presents their subject: if the likeness is accurate, amusing, pompous, fair or dignified; if the picture is one dimensional or if it tells us a wider story; and most certainly, whether the subject was even worth portraying in the first place.
The National Portrait Gallery's remarkable collection weaves together the different strands of experience from our national story.
It connects us as Australians - sometimes in the most unexpected way.
One of the most powerful images in this gallery is a small black and white woodcut by Ludwig Hirschfield Mack, who fled Nazi Germany only to end up in an internment camp for enemy aliens in Australia during World War 2. After the war he became head of the art department at Geelong Grammar School.
His self portrait, made in the camp during the War, is of a solitary figure: incarcerated, trapped, powerless, staring at the night sky. With that wonderful symbol of Australian identity, struggle and the ability to overcome the odds - the Southern Cross  -  visibly painted overhead.
His displacement, but connection to Australia, is replicated in an adjacent image by Indigenous artist Kevin Gilbert, himself in gaol when he portrayed the isolation of a group of Indigenous people looking at the night sky and that same potent symbol: the Southern Cross.
Most visitors will be amazed at the path of history contained within these walls, and also at just how up-to-date the collection is.
There is literally something for everybody in the National Portrait Gallery: explorers, political figures, artists, musicians, singers, actors, comedians, sportsmen and women, bushrangers, writers, judges, scientists, immigrants, academics, well known Australians, unknown Australians. And that is as it should be, because that is the Australian family.
Some of the works are challenging and thought provoking; others are just amusing and plain fun.
One of the more famous - ‘Perished', artist Sidney Nolan's representation of the doomed Bourke and Wills expedition - shows the explorer finally having succumbed, sinking in death back into the harsh Australian landscape. It is an arresting work.
Robert Hannaford's most moving portrait of Lowitja O'Donohue, shows us the face of dignity, wisdom, experience and great sadness. It still does, Lowitja, it's good to have you with us.
Lewis Morley's hilarious portrait of Dame Edna Everage, photographed as Christine Keeler from the scandalous 1960s, and there is a mental image best purged from your mind.
Or how about the iconic image of singer Nick Cave.
There are many ideas on display in this building: the struggle against nature and the harsh landscape; our determination and success across all fields of endeavour; creativity and resourcefulness; our fight against injustice and for fundamental fairness and human rights; the idea of Australia as a collection of unique individuals who all should have the opportunity to contribute to this unique nation.
Put together, the collection is about all of us. It's about Australia, writ large in all of its diversity and in all of our national imperfection.
The National Portrait Gallery is a welcome addition to the parliamentary triangle, providing another piece to Walter Burley Griffin's vision for significant national cultural institutions to reside within this precinct.
I believe Griffin would be happy tonight to see this great building in his great triangle.
This vision for Walter Burley Griffin's triangle is yet to be completed. There's more work to be done.
But this building within this triangle is quintessentially Australian.
It is a shining example of Australian national design and workmanship and contains building materials  -  timber and stone - from each State and Territory.
The architects have created an inviting gallery on a human scale that ties in well with the natural surroundings.
The use of light and glass creates an open feeling and allows us to glimpse the Canberra landscape as we move between rooms.
In this way, the building feels natural and easy to move through.
A gallery that you want to walk into, where you feel comfortable once inside. Not overwhelmed, not intimidated  -  a place where you'd like to spend a bit of time.
In that sense, this is a very Australian place.
When Andrew Fisher, Labor Prime Minister of a hundred years ago, and his circle of artist friends from the Heidelberg School started to talk about the development of an Australian vernacular art form, Canberra was not a reality, let alone any place to house such a collection.
Much has happened in a hundred years, as we've built the Australian nation, and built great national institutions, such as this great national gallery.
So many years later, we now have a gallery which presents the story of Australia's identity, Australia's history, Australia's creativity, Australia's culture, and all through portraiture.
I congratulate each and every one who is here this evening who has given birth to this idea, but most critically, has seen the idea through  -  each and every one.
This has been an extraordinary project and I congratulate the resilience in seeing it through to this marvellous completion.
I now have great pleasure to declare open the Australian National Portrait Gallery. May this be a grand reflection in the future of the Australian national soul.


National Security Statement
This Statement outlines the Government's national security policy. It describes the scope of national security; our national security interests, principles and priorities; and outlines the Government's vision for a reformed national security structure.
Introduction
The first priority of government is the nation's security. 
Mr Speaker, consistent with this priority, I seek leave to present to the house Australia's first National Security Statement.
This statement forms part of the Government's long term reform agenda by setting out our national security policy framework for the future.
The Government's reform agenda embraces the full scope of government responsibilities, including how we build:
     * a more secure Australia given the complex array of national security challenges we face for the future;
     * a stronger Australia given the long term challenges to our economy;
     * a fairer Australia given the levels of disadvantage that continue to exist among us; and
     * an Australia capable of meeting the sweeping new challenges of the 21st century, including climate change.
Mr Speaker, today is an historic day in the evolution of Australia's national security policy. For the first time, this country will have a coherent statement of the national security challenges facing Australia into the future, and of the comprehensive approach we propose to adopt in responding to those challenges.
Australia cannot afford a short term, reactive approach to national security.
Our's must be an integrated approach based on a clear-sighted view of our long term national security interests.
Australia must be clear in its analysis of the threats we face, actively manage and address those threats, as well as seize the opportunities we have to enhance our overall national security environment for the future.
What is meant by national security? Freedom from attack or the threat of attack; the maintenance of our territorial integrity; the maintenance of our political sovereignty; the preservation of our hard won freedoms; and the maintenance of our fundamental capacity to advance economic prosperity for all Australians.
This statement provides a strategic framework to drive policy development in the various departments of state with responsibilities for our national security.
It provides context for the Defence White Paper, which will detail the way forward for our defence over the next twenty years.
It will inform a regular Foreign Policy Statement to the Parliament.
It will shape the upcoming Counter-Terrorism White Paper.
As well as guide the development of the Government's first National Energy Security Assessment.
It incorporates the recommendations of the Homeland and Border Security Review commissioned by the Government early this year.
In short, this statement begins the process of binding the detailed and diverse work of the national security community into a coherent, coordinated whole.
The need for a regular national security statement is clear, but it has been long overlooked.
The global and regional order is now changing so rapidly that we must continue to reassess our evolving national security needs. We need periodically to adjust the lens through which we view the challenges to our security and the arrangements we establish to protect and advance our interests. This requires greater institutional agility than in the past.
Increasing complexity and inter-connectedness is a fact of life in the modern, global environment. Classical distinctions between foreign and domestic, national and international, internal and external have become blurred.
At the same time, Australia is a regional power, prosecuting global interests.
The security environment that we face today and into the future is therefore increasingly fluid and characterised by a complex and dynamic mix of continuing and emerging challenges and opportunities.
So while our national security interests remain constant, Australia needs a new concept of national security capable of embracing and responding to the more complex and interconnected operating environment that we will face for the future.
The Principles of Australian national security
Of course, not all security challenges we face are by definition national security challenges.
Some, such as community safety and low-level criminality, quite properly fall outside the scope of national security. Our state and territory governments have constitutionally-mandated responsibilities for these.
This distinction allows the Australian Government to focus on clear and enduring security interests that transcend the scope of state and territory jurisdictional responsibilities. These include:
     * Maintaining Australia's territorial and border integrity.
     * Promoting Australia's political sovereignty.
     * Preserving Australia's cohesive and resilient society and the long term strengths of our economy.
     * Protecting Australians and Australian interests both at home and abroad.
     * Promoting an international environment, particularly in the Asia Pacific region, that is stable, peaceful and prosperous, together with a global rules-based order which enhances Australia's national interests.
These interests are not only enduring, they are common to most countries that share our values and goals. These interests reflect the fact that nation states continue to protect and promote their sovereignty, but do so in an increasingly interconnected and interdependent world.
The Government will strive to advance the national security interests outlined in this statement based on a number of enduring principles:
     * Australia will seek, wherever possible, to develop self reliance across the range of relevant national security capabilities to ensure an effective contribution to our own security  -  and to the security of our friends and allies.
     * The United States alliance remains fundamental to Australia's national security interests  -  both globally and in the Asia-Pacific region.
     * As our security is linked inextricably to the security of our region, regional engagement is crucial. This includes strengthening our bilateral relationships and effective engagement in regional institutions. It also means seeking to positively influence the shape of the future regional architecture in a manner that develops a culture of security policy cooperation rather than defaults to any assumption that conflict is somehow inevitable.
     * At the global level, we are committed to multilateral institutions, and in particular the United Nations, to promote a rules-based international order that enhances our security and economy. We believe those that share the benefits of these systems must also share the responsibilities of supporting and enhancing them.
     * National security policy must be also be advanced through the agency of creative middle power diplomacy  -  an active foreign policy capable of identifying opportunities to promote our security and to otherwise prevent, reduce or delay the emergence of national security challenges.
     * Australia must also apply a risk-based approach to assessing, prioritising and resourcing our national security policy across the defence, diplomatic, intelligence and wider national security community.
     * The Commonwealth must work in partnership with state and territory governments where our national security responsibilities coincide or necessarily complement each other in an increasingly interconnected operational environment.
Our national security interests must also be pursued in an accountable way, which meets the Government's responsibility to protect Australia, its people and its interests while preserving our civil liberties and the rule of law. This balance represents a continuing challenge of all modern democracies seeking to prepare for the complex national security challenges of the future. It is a balance that must remain a conscious part of the national security policy process. We must not silently allow any incremental erosion of our fundamental freedoms.
National Security Challenges for the Future
Today we live at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century. With it comes the potential for fundamental change in the global order, resulting in both economic opportunities and potential security concerns for Australia.
While the likelihood of conflict between the major powers is currently low, their interactions still largely shape the international order in which Australia must operate.
The Government believes that the future strategic stability of the Asia-Pacific region will in large part rely on the continuing strong presence of Australia's closest ally, the United States.
The most crucial relationship, in East Asia and globally, will be between the United States and China. For Australia, the relationships between China, the US and Japan will affect our security and our economy, given the importance to us of our relationships with each of these nations and the material impact on the wider region of any significant deterioration in the relations between them.
The rise of India will also be an important new factor in the strategic stability of the Asia Pacific region. India will need to respond to the growing threats of domestic terrorism and manage its relationship with Pakistan. Global growth, trade patterns and financial flows are also being increasingly shaped by India and other emerging powers.
South-east Asia will continue to be of great national security interest to Australia because of geographic proximity and the processes of continuing political and economic change. This diverse range of countries will, over the long term, experience continued economic growth, development and improving governance. But a number will also be faced by ongoing challenges of terrorism, insurgency and communal violence.
Australia will also continue to cooperate closely with New Zealand in the continuing security challenges faced by the island states of the South-west Pacific. This history of cooperation between Australia and New Zealand goes back to the ANZAC spirit forged in the trenches of World War One. Today our two nations continue to strengthen our cooperation, not just through combined military deployments to places such as Timor Leste, Solomon Islands and Tonga, but through a wide range of economic, diplomatic and security initiatives.
In response to this changing landscape, we need to both help shape our region through constructive engagement as well as be prepared for any unforeseen deterioration in the strategic environment.
National Security Policy Responses
Australia's national security policy builds on a number of enduring capabilities. First, an activist diplomatic strategy that is aimed at keeping our region peaceful and prosperous. Second, making sure that we have an Australian Defence Force that is ready to respond when necessary, in a range of situations from combat operations to disaster relief. Third, building and maintaining national security agencies and capabilities that work effectively together.
It is in Australia's interests to be proactive about shaping the strategic environment in the Asia-Pacific, and our own future, through regional engagement. Our diplomacy needs to be pervasive, formative and influential and it needs to be resourced for the challenges that Australia faces now and into the future.
Our alliance with the United States will remain our key strategic partnership and the central pillar of Australian national security policy. Closer engagement with the US gives us the tools to better meet the security challenges of the future  -  both regional and global.
The Government has also decided to strengthen security policy cooperation with a number of regional partners including Japan, South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. I have visited all of these countries and discussed opportunities for strengthening our security cooperation.
The Government also wishes to expand our security policy dialogue with China and our security policy cooperation with India.
We have proposed the development of an Asia-Pacific Community by 2020 as a means of strengthening political, economic and security cooperation in the region in the long term. Many of the challenges we will face cannot be addressed by one country alone. Enhancing the regional architecture is an important step in working towards combined solutions. It is also about inculcating and institutionalising the habits of cooperation  -  as our friends in ASEAN have so successfully done over the years within their community.
In pursuit of our national interests, the Government is committed to an Australian diplomacy that will be more activist than in the past  -  in the tradition of creative middle power diplomacy.
Australia's national security policy calls for diplomatic resources that are more in depth and more diversified than currently exist. This must be built over time. Given the vast continent we occupy, the small population we have and our unique geo-strategic circumstances, our diplomacy must be the best in the world.
The pursuit of Australia's international interests and the welfare of Australians abroad also require this commitment given that at any one time there are about one million Australians abroad  -  many experiencing a growing number of security needs.
These increasing challenges have not been adequately reflected in the historical resourcing of the Australian foreign service relative to comparable governments around the world. Over time, this must change.
Creative middle power diplomacy must be reinforced by a robust defence policy. The Defence White Paper is mapping the strategic terrain we will face out to 2030. It will include the emergence of new challenges, such as changing levels of military spending and capability in our region, as well as new threats such as cyber warfare.
The Defence White Paper will identify the military capabilities and force structure that the Australian Defence Force requires to protect Australian interests and where necessary operate with our friends and allies.
But it must go further than that. We need greater rigour in defence planning. We need greater efficiency in Defence spending. And we need greater certainty in the allocation of resources through the Defence Budget. The White Paper will foreshadow a range of reforms that will improve the management of Defence to ensure Australia is able to maintain a world class defence force for the long term.
The contributions our men and women in uniform are making around the globe today must not go unremarked.
In Afghanistan, our objective is to reduce the spread of terrorism by helping Afghanistan build a more peaceful and stable state and so reduce the risk of that country once again becoming a safe haven and a training base for terrorist organisations with global reach. Through these efforts, Australia is also demonstrating its capacity to play an active role in enhancing international security  -  both with our allies and with the wider international community.
In Iraq, we have changed the configuration of our commitment following the professionalism demonstrated by the Australian Defence Force in achieving the mission they were set. We have expanded our program of assistance in Iraq to build a relationship anchored in economic development, personnel training and humanitarian initiatives, to help the people of Iraq recover from the war and hardship of recent years.
Australia will also need to continue to guard against espionage and foreign interference on the home front. Australian policy, military and intelligence institutions, directions and capabilities are attractive intelligence targets for foreign powers. And Australia is also seen as a potential alternative source of sensitive defence, intelligence and diplomatic information shared by our allies. Electronic espionage in particular will be a growing vulnerability as the Australian Government and society become more dependent on integrated information technologies. Both commercial and state-based espionage, while not visible to the public eye, are inevitable. This challenge must and will be met with full vigour.
The Government's approach to national security encompasses more than just traditional statecraft and classical military capabilities. 
Counter-terrorism and protective security challenges were catapulted into prominence with the attacks of September 11, 2001 in the United States. Of course, Australia had previously been exposed to terrorism through serious terrorist attacks in Australia. This led in the 1980s to the establishment of domestic terrorism protection and response capabilities, which have been refined over time to provide world class response arrangements to protect our community.
But the threat to us from those responsible for the September 11 attacks and their sympathisers is different from that of the past. Australia has been explicitly and publicly mentioned as an ‘enemy' by Islamist extremists and Australians have been specifically targeted in Bali, Baghdad and Jakarta. Even in the terrorist attacks in Mumbai last week, two Australians lost their lives and a number of others were injured. In our own community, individuals have also been convicted by Australian courts on charges relating to preparing for attacks in this country.
Terrorism is likely to endure as a serious ongoing threat for the foreseeable future. Extremism leading to violence or terrorism continues to pose a direct threat to Australia and Australian security interests.
Next year, the Government will release a Counter-Terrorism White Paper responding to the continuing threat to Australia from terrorism and, where appropriate, make adjustments to our counter-terrorism policy arrangements. This will include our bilateral arrangements and capacity building activities with regional countries.
The Australian Government is committed to combating terrorism to protect Australians and Australian security interests, and to promote international security. Effective mitigation of terrorist attacks involves the combination of an appropriate security response with broader strategies to enhance social cohesion and resilience and lessen the appeal of radical ideology.
Australia's security and law enforcement agencies are playing a critical role in protecting Australian citizens, both at home and abroad. The Government is committed to ensuring that our agencies are resourced appropriately to meet the challenges of terrorist threats. And we will continue to work with the states and territories and with international partners to ensure that our responses are comprehensive and effective.
Beyond the threat of terrorism, concepts of national security have continued to evolve since the end of the Cold War.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including the possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of terrorists, is a threat of increasing international concern. Efforts to strengthen the global non-proliferation regime must focus on both state and non-state actors.
The Australian Government is strongly committed to increasing Australia's role in international efforts to strengthen nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and will work with our friends and neighbours to advance practical, effective steps to achieve this goal. That is why we have established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
Intrastate conflict in our region and beyond will continue to flare. It will be caused by weak state institutions struggling to cope with a complex mix of political, socio-economic, cultural, criminal and religious factors. And it will bring disastrous consequences to local communities when it occurs.
Australia has made major long term commitments to help resolve conflict in Solomon Islands and Timor Leste. But the risk of fragile states disrupting stability and prosperity in our region is an ongoing challenge. The Government is committed to a policy of cooperation with the island nations of the Pacific through Pacific Partnerships for Development and in particular helping them to reach the Millennium Development Goals. This is designed to build the basic capacity for long term economic capacity building  -  essential to long term political stability.
The humanitarian implications for the people affected in these conflicts are also of concern to Australia's national security and foreign policy interests. We expect to make practical contributions in times of crisis, commensurate with our role in the international community. Failure to do so at source also runs the risk of refugee outflows to neighbouring states, including Australia.
The list of non-traditional threats or new security challenges is also growing.
Transnational crime  -  such as trafficking in persons, drugs and arms; people smuggling and the illegal exploitation of resources  -  will remain a continuing challenge.
These activities can undermine political and social institutions, inflict economic and personal harm or contribute to other forms of violence. And it is here that the role of non state actors is critical.
The Government is committed to deploying all necessary resources to prosecute those criminals who seek to undermine Australia's border security. We will work with our partners in the region to shut down the illegal operations of people smugglers and see them put in jail where they belong. The Government has recently agreed to a series of new measures at a cost of $44.1 million to further combat people smuggling in cooperation with regional partners.
Organised crime more broadly is a growing concern for Australia, one the Government is determined to combat. The Australian Crime Commission has estimated that organised crime costs Australia over $10 billion every year.
The Government will develop two initiatives in the related areas of border management and serious and organised crime. We will strengthen border management by simplifying arrangements and improving coordination across all agencies.
Second, we will clearly define the role of the Commonwealth in combating serious and organised crime and enhance coordination among Commonwealth agencies.
Let me return for a moment to the serious matter of people-smuggling, that is, the organised, unauthorised arrival of people by boat to Australia.
The arrangements the Government has inherited involve a wide range of government agencies but lack unified control and direction, and a single point of accountability.
The Government has decided therefore to move quickly to better enable the existing Australian Customs Service to meet this resurgent threat to our border integrity. To this end we will in coming weeks establish new arrangements whereby the Australian Customs Service is augmented, re-tasked and re-named the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. This arrangement will create in the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service a capability to task and analyse intelligence, coordinate surveillance and on-water response, and engage internationally with source and transit countries to comprehensively address and deter people smuggling throughout the operating pipeline from source countries to our shores. The co-location of agencies and capabilities in this way is a concept strongly supported by the Homeland and Border Security Review.
In terms of other new security challenges, it is increasingly evident that the sophistication of our modern community is a source of vulnerability in itself. For example, we are highly dependent on computer and information technology to drive critical industries such as aviation; electricity and water supply; banking and finance; and telecommunications networks.
This dependency on information technology makes us potentially vulnerable to cyber attacks that may disrupt the information that increasingly lubricates our economy and system of government. A number of actors may carry out such attacks ranging from hackers, to commercial entities and foreign states. The same technology also provides tools for terrorists, who use computers to share information, recruit, communicate and spread their message of hate and violence. They exploit the freedom provided by the internet and the power of tools such as encryption to operate beyond the law.
The Government will enhance Australia's e-security and is considering the recently completed e-security review.
The irony of technology today is that, while on the one hand we are seeking to invest in sophisticated information, intelligence and military technology, on the other, we have to protect ourselves from the extreme use of basic, readily available technology and hardware by terrorist groups.
As a consequence of rapid advances in technological capability, Australia must remain technologically and scientifically alert, agile and robust so as to anticipate and respond to new and emerging threats arising from the ongoing technology revolution. To achieve this, the Government is now developing a National Security Science and Innovation Strategy which embraces the full breadth of national security threats arising from the rapid changes to the technological capabilities of those hostile to Australia's national security interests.
The impact of globalisation and advances in technology mean that the partnerships between industry, governments and the community that have evolved since 2001 are vital and will remain an important part of any future national security policy.
Of course, crises may not be caused by human action alone. Even today, we recognise the potential for disease, especially a pandemic, to have dramatic consequences for the economies and societies of our neighbours, and for Australia. A pandemic is bound to create real physical and social hardship and policy challenges for Australia, whether it has a direct impact upon us or not.
In addition to these changes, a range of new and emerging challenges such as climate change and energy security, unless properly dealt with by effective policy action, will have long term security impacts  -  locally, regionally or globally.
Over the long term, climate change represents a most fundamental national security challenge for the long term future.
Less attention has been given to the security implications that climate change could bring to Australia compared with other traditional security threats. Significant climate change will bring about unregulated population movements, declining food production, reductions in arable land, violent weather patterns and resulting catastrophic events. This is an area of emerging consequences which will require the formal incorporation of climate change within Australia's national security policy and analysis process.
Demographic changes will also affect the region with total population exceeding four billion by 2020, or 56 per cent of the world's total. The demographic changes in our region will mean that by 2020 when we look to our north, we will see a very different region to the one we see now  -  one where population, food, water and energy resource pressures will be greater than ever before.
The Government is committed to ensuring Australia's long term energy security. We are developing a strategy to make sure Australia has access to adequate, reliable and affordable energy now and into the future. An important step in this process is the National Energy Security Assessment or NESA. The NESA provides a comprehensive assessment of critical energy policy challenges per sector and identifies how these challenges could affect long term energy security. This assessment will be an important input into the Energy White Paper, which will put in place policy settings to ensure Australians enjoy reliable energy security into the future.
Given the breadth, depth and complexity of Australia's emerging national security challenges and the range of inter-connected policy responses to which they give rise, Australia will need to develop a new level of coordination in national security policy matters both within the Commonwealth and across all levels of government.
Australia's National Security Structure
One of the fundamental assets we have to promote our national security objectives is our underlying strength, resilience and cohesion as a nation.
We are the world's largest island nation.
We are rich in physical resources.
Australia's ‘soft power' assets are also significant.
We are a modern, democratic and tolerant country.
Our population is relatively small, highly urbanised and educated.
Our economy is competitive, outwardly-focused and resilient.
And internationally, we have a proud record of contribution to global security and economic stability.
We are widely respected for our ideas and our actions. We can, and do, make a positive difference in the world.
Australia also has a wide range of dedicated tools to actively achieve our national security interests. These include our technologically advanced and well-trained defence force Australian Defence Forces and Australian Federal Police, our highly effective diplomatic service and our well coordinated international development assistance efforts.
Our border security and transport security agencies have generally performed well although there remains a capacity for further improvement.
We have well-established and well-integrated intelligence agencies that collect intelligence and assess the implications for our security environment  -  although once again, there remains scope for continued improvement.
Furthermore, legislative, regulatory and administrative oversight measures provide an integral framework from which our overall efforts are empowered.
It is also important to recognise that our national security assets extend beyond the Commonwealth Government to include the states and territories, who are first responders to security incidents within their jurisdictions.
We have highly capable police services which respond to a spectrum of challenges from threats to public safety to terrorism; and emergency response organisations that protect the community in our most vulnerable times.
The Commonwealth will also provide physical and financial assistance to states and territories during an emergency when requested to do so; and coordinate assistance to Australians affected by emergencies overseas.
I would like to emphasise two other assets, outside of government, which make an important contribution to our national security - they are business and the general community.
In some areas, up to 90 per cent of our critical infrastructure is owned and operated by the private sector. Our economy and our future as a trading nation depend on our ability to protect national assets such as our airports, ports, bridges, and water and power facilities from catastrophic failure. We will work with the private sector, and state and territory governments, to protect this infrastructure and the people visiting our national icons and monuments and other places where large numbers of people gather.
The business community has a great deal of knowledge and expertise and plays a vital role in our combined efforts. The wider community also plays an important role in national security. The Government knows that it is essential to engage with the Australian people on the threats we face and the role the wider community can play in responding to those threats.
Through community engagement we can achieve important national security outcomes ranging from sustaining support for our forces deployed overseas, undermining the influence of violent ideologies and preserving the social cohesion of our diverse society. Just as neighbourhood watch programs promote security at a local level, so we recognise the contribution all Australians can make to promoting security at a national level.
In Australia we have a strong tradition of volunteering to support our communities, especially in times of emergency, demonstrating the innate resilience and collective responsibility we all share as Australians. This trait is a great strength within our community, a strength the Government will continue to encourage and nurture for the future.
But it is one thing to have great institutions of state, effective partnerships between governments and with business and the community. We also need to be smart about how we use these to protect and promote national security.
I believe that Australia's national security community is highly effective and has proven highly adaptable. But in an increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, we need a more integrated national security structure that enhances national security policy coordination.
The House will recall I commissioned Mr Ric Smith, former Secretary of the Department of Defence and Ambassador to China and Indonesia, to report on the best and most efficient way to coordinate our overall national security arrangements.
Mr Smith has now finished his work. We have considered his report and strongly agreed its recommendations. The Office of National Security within my department is preparing to implement these recommendations.
The Government in opposition made a number of commitments on national security upon coming to office. Perhaps the most hotly debated was the proposal to create a Department of Homeland Security.
The Smith Review considered the option of achieving greater cooperation by creating a Department of Homeland Security, and did not recommend that model for Australia. The Government has accepted this strong advice. Mr Smith's advice is that big departments risk becoming less accountable, less agile, less adaptable and more inward-looking. What we need is the opposite.
At the same time, Mr Smith has concluded that existing national security departments, agencies and capabilities do need better coordination.
The Government has therefore concluded that the best solution for Australia is not another agency, but a new level of leadership, direction and coordination among the agencies we already have. We will therefore build on the existing community of relatively small, separate agencies, ensuring they remain nimble, accountable and above all, properly joined-up.
This will create integrated arrangements that enhance national security policy coordination and action. The arrangements will focus on optimising and refining mechanisms for strategic planning and coordination. In short, the ‘function' of central policy coordination is being adopted but implemented by a different means.
The first new step in creating our national security structure will be to appoint a National Security Adviser (NSA). The NSA will be the source of advice to the Prime Minister on all policy matters relating to the security of the nation, and to oversee the implementation of all national security policy arrangements.
Today I am pleased to announce Mr Duncan Lewis as the first National Security Adviser. Mr Lewis has served governments of both political persuasions with distinction. Also, as a former SAS commander, Mr Lewis has a distinct combination of military and civilian experience.
Why do we need a National Security Adviser? Put simply, to provide improved strategic direction within the national security community; to support whole-of-government national security policy development and crisis response; and to promote a cohesive national security culture.
The National Security Adviser will be appointed at the Associate Secretary level within the Prime Minister's Department and interact directly with agency and department heads. The National Security Adviser's responsibilities will complement the roles and responsibilities of the current heads of agencies by enhancing whole-of-government coordination. This new position will be assisted by a Deputy National Security Adviser and a Group within the Prime Minister's Department that includes the Office of National Security - an election commitment we delivered on in December last year. The Office of National Assessments will remain a separate entity within the Prime Minister's portfolio.
One of the first tasks I have asked the National Security Adviser to undertake as part of his responsibilities is to establish an executive development program in national security. This program will initially be aimed at senior officials, with a view to broadening over time to include counterparts in the private sector, academia and the non-government sector. This new initiative will enhance the capacity of senior officials across the broad national security community to achieve whole-of-government outcomes and to lead cultural change within their own areas. One of the options under consideration for delivery of this program is a National Security College.
The second new element of our national security architecture is a strategic policy framework. This framework will guide and coordinate effort across the national security community by setting priorities, allocating resources and evaluating performance. As a corner-stone of this framework, I intend to present periodically a National Security Statement to Parliament. This statement will set priorities and shape detailed policy development. The National Security Adviser will work towards a coordinated budget process for national security, to advise on the best allocation of resources across portfolios to most effectively achieve our priorities and to assist in the preparation of Australia's first national security budget.
The final element of the strategic policy framework is an evaluation mechanism, coordinated by the National Security Adviser. It will consider performance against whole-of-government outcomes in light of the priorities set out in the National Security Statement and help inform future resource allocation.
We will, of necessity, make choices concerning the relative priority to be afforded to future national security capabilities and policies, and the effective and efficient use of existing resources. The new strategic policy framework will ensure that we do so in an informed, accountable and whole-of-government manner.
In terms of our governance arrangements for national security, at the Ministerial level, the National Security Committee of Cabinet, which I chair, remains the peak Commonwealth ministerial decision-making body on national security matters - and the main vehicle for coordinating the Government's efforts in this regard.
The Secretaries Committee on National Security, known as SCNS, remains the peak inter-departmental committee which considers national security policy and operational matters of an ongoing nature in addition to all matters to be put before the National Security Committee of Cabinet. Reflecting the Government's new approach to national security, the Secretaries Committee will broaden its agenda, and expand its membership, to strengthen its coordinating role on homeland and border security matters - similar to the pivotal role it plays in regard to international security policy. The National Security Adviser will act as Deputy Chair of SCNS under the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
The third, and new, element of our governance arrangements is the establishment of a National Intelligence Coordination Committee, or NICC. This committee, which the National Security Adviser will chair, will ensure the national intelligence effort is fully and effectively integrated. This will make sure that our intelligence efforts - including foreign, defence, security and transnational law enforcement intelligence - are closely aligned and accord with Australia's national security priorities.
The Office of National Assessments will continue to exercise its statutory responsibilities, while working closely with the National Security Adviser and the Office of National Security. The Director General of ONA will continue to provide independent assessments on international political, strategic and economic developments to the Prime Minister and senior national security ministers.
The fourth, and again new, element of the governance arrangements involves improving our national crisis management capabilities. The Government will consider the recommendation made by Mr Smith to establish a Crisis Coordination Centre to support government decision making during crises.
The Crisis Coordination Centre would subsume the existing Attorney-General's Department coordination centre. The centre will improve inter-agency whole-of-government management of major crises and be supported by new facilities for secure ministerial participation in rolling national security crisis management.
I have asked the Attorney-General to develop the detail of this proposal in consultation with the National Security Adviser and relevant ministers for consideration through the Budget process.
Conclusion
The fundamental purpose of the Government's periodic national security statements is to set out whole-of government national security priorities.
In this, the Government's inaugural National Security Statement, as noted through my preceding comments, our new priorities include:
     * improving the coordination of national security policy with reform of the structure of national security decision making through establishing for the first time a National Security Adviser;
     * implementing the recommendations of the Smith Report on Homeland and Border Security.
         * this includes the initiatives I have announced on organised crime, border security and science and innovation;
     * enhancing ADF capabilities;
     * strengthening the US alliance;
     * strengthening our cooperation with regional partners;
     * promoting an Asia-Pacific Community;
     * actively pursuing nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament through the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament;
     * enhancing economic development in the South-west Pacific to underpin long term security;
     * enhancing Australia's e-security capability; and
     * incorporating the implications of climate change and energy security into the formal national security decision making framework.
This inaugural national security statement outlines the new approach the Government is taking to address current and future national security challenges.
It is intended that this become a regular statement to the parliament of the state of Australia's national security and the new and emerging challenges that we face.
Just as the annual Budget Statement provides an annual review of the state of the economy.
Our world and our region are in a significant period of transition.
Australia will therefore need to be adept at adjusting our policies and capabilities as appropriate in order to maintain our enduring objective of a secure Australia and a strong Australia in the face of unprecedented changes and challenges that lie ahead of us in this the century of the Asia-Pacific.
Summary and Conclusions -  Report of the Review of Homeland and Border Security
This document outlines the summary and conclusions of the Report of the Review of the Homeland and Border Security which was undertaken by Mr Ric Smith AO PSM and presented to the Australian Government on 27 June 2008.
Summary and Conclusions
At any time Australia faces threats from a range of sources which in different ways can put our institutions of state, our people, our economic assets and our technology at risk. These hazards include espionage, foreign interference, terrorism, politically motivated violence, border violations, drug trafficking, cyber attack, organised crime, natural disasters, industrial accidents and biosecurity events. In 2008 - 09 the Australian Government will spend an estimated $4 - 4.5 billion in countering, mitigating and responding to these hazards.
Some of the threats Australia faces are as old as our society. Globalisation has however magnified many of them and enabled new ways of delivering them. It has also generated new threats. At the same time, expectations of government have grown, and the pace and velocity of government business have increased.
One response to these changes would be to create new organisations or merge existing ones - some countries have done this. This approach raises several risks. It could disrupt unduly the successful and effective work of the agencies concerned and create significant new costs. Large organisations tend to be inward-looking, siloed and slow to adapt, and thus ill-suited to the dynamic security environment. For a number of the agencies concerned national security considerations are embedded with a broad range of other service delivery, policy, program and regulatory functions which could be jeopardised by restructuring them around their security roles.
The other response would be to recognise and build on the strengths of existing institutions but to identify weaknesses and address them. This is the approach this Review considers is more appropriate for Australia. It has several benefits. It would recognise that our existing arrangements are generally effective and that for the most part our departments and agencies are working well with each other. Above all, the smaller, separate agencies which comprise this model are likely to be more agile and accountable than large agencies.
In building on the existing Australian model, two things are required. First, the departments and agencies concerned, both those dedicated to security functions and those which contribute to national security as well as performing other functions, should be regarded as a community. This is important both to enable the Government to make strategic judgements across a wide range of hazards, including on the allocation of resources, and to ensure that the agencies benefit from access to each others skills, experience and other capabilities. Second, the departments and agencies concerned must be well connected and networked, and cultural, technical and other barriers minimised.
Strategic framework, leadership and connectedness
While Australian Government agencies are committed to whole-of-government performance and generally understand their roles in the broad national security community, there is a need for an overarching policy framework and for strategic direction. Such a framework would better equip the Government to plan and evaluate the activities of agencies and to ensure targeted resource allocation that reflects current priorities.
These needs could be addressed through periodic statements by the Prime Minister about the Government's approach to national security, and the articulation of its strategic priorities. Strategic direction would be reinforced by reporting on whole of government outcomes and decision-making enhanced by a coordinated national security budget submission which would provide more rigorous cross-portfolio data than is presently available.
The appointment of a National Security Adviser, with a deputy, in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet would provide a new level of leadership and help ensure that agencies are properly joined up. The NSA's focus would go beyond coordination and committees - which could in fact be streamlined - to promoting a cohesive national security community culture, including through training, secondments and joint units. The NSA would also facilitate the Commonwealth's work with the states and territories which contribute many of the powers and capabilities needed to support the national security effort. The Attorney General's portfolio would continue to be a locus for a wide range of national security issues within the Commonwealth.
This better integrated and more strategic approach would be supported by broadening the mandate and membership of the Secretaries Committee on National Security to embrace the full range of national security issues. Within SCNS itself and in the National Security Committee of Cabinet there should be scope for more forward looking strategic policy discussions. Key areas for this high level whole-of-government deliberation could include strategic policy frameworks for border management, the role of the Commonwealth in combating serious and organised crime, national intelligence priorities across the foreign, defence, security and law enforcement domains, and a national security science and innovation strategy.
While crisis management by the Commonwealth has generally been done well ‘on the day', the current hazard-specific approach and the absence of consistent national arrangements for handling significant crises exposes the Government to several areas of vulnerability. The role of the existing National Crisis Committee should be expanded to provide the Australian Government with an all hazards central coordination body equivalent to those in other jurisdictions, and appropriate crisis management facilities created both for ministers (an Australian Ministerial Briefing Room) and for operational coordination by officials (a Crisis Coordination Centre).
The increasingly enmeshed nature of foreign, defence, security and law enforcement intelligence points to the need for a single, overarching framework for national intelligence coordination and priority setting. There is also a need for a closer relationship between the Australian Intelligence Community agencies and the intelligence analysis units established within non-AIC agencies in response to newly emerging threats. In an environment in which the sharing of intelligence and data is critical, intelligence and law enforcement agencies must ensure that their relationships are seamless.
While there have already been significant improvements in access to national security information, some legislative, technical and cultural barriers to information sharing - within and between governments and the private sector - remain. These should be addressed by the NSA, supported by a National Security Chief Information Officer. Leadership will be critical in creating the appropriate culture and fostering the mindsets required to achieve greater integration across the national security community.
The agenda beyond terrorism
Particularly since 11 September 2001, the national security agenda has emphasised counter terrorism arrangements and focused on prevention, preparedness and immediate response. This reflected the growth in the terrorist threat to Australian interests and the potentially extreme consequences of an incident. That focus has led to substantial investment and development of capabilities, and high levels of inter agency and cross-jurisdictional cooperation. Having regard to what has been achieved in this area, the Review considers that it is timely to provide an additional focus on other threats and hazards.
Emergency management across all hazards has received limited senior attention within the Commonwealth. But non-terrorist disasters, such as industrial accidents and natural disasters, are frequent and have significant impacts - natural disasters are estimated to cost Australia on average over $1 billion a year. While emergency management is primarily a matter for the states and territories, the Commonwealth does have important roles in contributing money (particularly recovery assistance), providing some capabilities and facilitating national coordination, capability enhancement and interoperability. It also provides assistance in response to natural disasters overseas, and plays a part in capability development in countries in our region.
A more integrated national approach to emergency management would optimise efforts and address fundamental gaps such as the lack of effective arrangements to deliver community warnings and of a national emergency plan to deal with catastrophic disasters. To help address the current distinction between responses to terrorism and other disasters, the National Security Adviser, or the deputy, should chair the Australian Emergency Management Committee, and the work of it and the National Counter-Terrorism Committee should be better integrated.
Serious and organised crime, as an ever present threat to the safety and prosperity of Australians and a challenge to the integrity of our institutions, is as important as any other security threat, with an estimated cost in excess of $10 billion per year. Crime is increasingly sophisticated and transnational. The states and territories have major roles and the Commonwealth needs to engage effectively with them in this area. The current arrangements for coordinating Commonwealth efforts and priorities are limited. There are some gaps in national efforts, such as limited sharing of police capabilities and case management databases, and more attention could be given to criminal intelligence collection and analysis. A strategic framework for Commonwealth efforts in relation to serious and organised crime should be developed for consideration by government.
Electronic attack is a significant new means of compromising national security and enabling criminal activity. Governments, businesses and individuals are increasingly vulnerable to such attacks. The Commonwealth has a special role to play in this area given its high level capabilities in e-security and the cross-jurisdictional nature of the threat. It is however difficult to quantify the magnitude of the problem and the potential economic and social consequences, particularly of a large-scale cyber attack. An independent risk analysis of the e-security environment should be commissioned to better inform the strategic direction of our efforts. Current arrangements within the Australian Government for ensuring effective e-security generally work well, although it is an area in need of consistent senior policy attention. In some areas roles and responsibilities should be clarified to avoid confusion and possible duplication of effort. These issues should be addressed as part of the current e-security review being led by the Attorney-General's Department, which has the lead role in this area.
To date the Commonwealth's role in research and capability development activities has been focused predominantly on counter-terrorism. More could be done to reach beyond counter terrorism and support research in other areas of national security. There should also be more formalised coordination between peak national committees in the areas of counter terrorism, health and emergency management to ensure Australia has the capabilities it needs in the current threat environment.
Better protecting Australia's borders
Controlling the border is critical to effective national security. Australia has to date retained control of its border, but this is a complex task which will become significantly more challenging in the longer term with substantial projected growth in activity across our border and within our maritime zone. Rather than bringing key border functions together into a ‘single border agency', a whole of government strategic planning framework would better suit Australia. Such a framework should cover the full range of border management functions across all agencies, bringing them together to ensure they are consistent and complementary and that investment is appropriately prioritised.
Some particular border security issues will require further attention:
     * New data analysis and biometric techniques are available that would improve the identity and national security checking of non-citizens. Investment in this area will be required if Australia is to remain at world's best practice.
     * Quarantine services and the set targets for intervention do not sit well with the more advanced risk management approaches taken in relation to other border services. This is likely to be considered as part of the current Quarantine and Border Security Review.
     * Aviation security measures - including policing and screening of passengers and cargo - must be kept under review to ensure they are consistent and continue to be appropriate and effective. These measures must keep pace with forecast growth in the aviation sector. Consideration is needed of the implications of international flights into more Australian airports and of air cargo security issues. In view of the links between criminal activity and security threats at airports, the enhanced police presence at major airports which followed from the Wheeler report serves an important purpose. But the current Commonwealth-led model faces significant management challenges and should be reviewed in consultation with the states and territories.
Australia's maritime domain is large. Managing the threats is legally complex and involves many different agencies. Despite the challenges, risks posed by illegal foreign fishing and people smuggling have been well managed to date at the operational level and relationships between agencies are sound. Agencies are satisfied with the increasingly effective role of the Border Protection Command. Customs' processes for planning their strategic capability requirements are maturing and should place the Government well for the major decisions that will be needed as the existing patrol boat fleet ages.
That said, there is scope to streamline the legal framework for maritime enforcement activity, to improve the budget information available to government, and to better integrate search and rescue and other operational functions. While the Government could choose to re-name the Border Protection Command as a ‘Coastguard', the current substantive arrangements should be retained and built upon rather than revamped.
Partnerships
Addressing the threats we face is clearly not a task for one agency, or any one government, acting in isolation. Many current threats are cross jurisdictional or transnational in nature. In many areas it is businesses or the general community that are threatened. And the capabilities and capacities to take action for identifying, preparing for, responding to and recovering from incidents lie not just with governments but also with business and the community.
The Australian Government therefore depends on a series of partnerships to help in its task of safeguarding Australia. The NSA will need to work closely with both government and industry partners, and should do so on the basis of a clear appreciation of the appropriate role of the Commonwealth in critical areas.
States and territories
States and territories have a primary role in responding to many of the threats we face. They have engaged with the Commonwealth in developing common national approaches to counter-terrorism. The National Counter-Terrorism Committee is a salient case of Australia's nine governments working effectively together to counter a particular threat. In other areas the Commonwealth's role is regarded with varying degrees of equivocation by state and territory governments. As noted above, there is scope for greater national collaboration in areas such as policing and emergency management.
Business
Businesses in Australia and Australian businesses abroad face a number of threats. While business owners and operators must manage these risks themselves, there is nevertheless a responsibility on government to assist business to understand and mitigate the threats they face. Current arrangements for protecting Australia's critical infrastructure - which is largely privately owned - are generally regarded as a significant improvement on past efforts, and highlight the success of a partnership approach.
Community
Governments are increasingly working in partnership with communities to mitigate the impact of disasters at the local level, and ensure communities are resilient. Of the other components of national security, it is counter-terrorism that is the most sensitive in terms of public confidence and the impact on community relations. While ‘counter radicalisation' programs like those in the United Kingdom have their place, it is important for governments to work closely together in this area and to be clear about their respective roles and the perceptions their activities may generate.
Commonwealth contribution
The Australian Defence Force and agencies of the Defence Department have built significant expertise and capability that can be used in domestic security and emergency management and response. Other agencies work beyond the border to protect Australian interests overseas and mitigate threats to Australia at their origin. These significant contributions to national security should be sustained and mechanisms developed to better quantify their value.
 Documents
    First National Security Statement - RTF 400KB | PDF 127KB 
    Summary and Conclusions - Report of the Review of Homeland and Border Security RTF 125KB | PDF 121KB 


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today presented Australia's inaugural National Security Statement (NSS) to Federal Parliament, outlining initiatives to improve national security policy advice, coordination and governance.
The NSS is a key part of the Government's reform agenda to build a more secure Australia, and addresses some of the emerging challenges Australia may face in the 21st Century.
The NSS will become a regular statement to the parliament on the state of Australia's national security and the new and emerging challenges we face.
Today's NSS includes the announcement that the Government will appoint a National Security Adviser, Mr Duncan Lewis AO, to provide a new level of leadership, direction and coordination to our national security agencies.
The Government believes it is essential to engage with the Australian people on the threats we face and the role the wider community can play in responding to those threats.
Australia's national security community is highly effective and has proven highly adaptable. But in an increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, we need a more integrated national security structure that enhances national security policy coordination.
The NSS sets out the Australian Government's strategic direction on national security. It articulates Australia's national security interests and organising principles and describes the Government's comprehensive view of security challenges facing Australia.
The government's comprehensive concept of national security recognises that Australia has particular circumstances and interests that differ from other nations. 
The strategic environment is increasingly complex and inter-connected, and the boundaries between international and domestic security issues are increasingly blurred.
The NSS also addresses the recommendations of Mr Ric Smith, AO, PSM, in his Homeland and Border Security Review.
Mr Rudd commissioned Mr Smith, the former Secretary of the Department of Defence, to report on the best and most efficient way to coordinate overall national security arrangements.
Mr Smith has now finished his work. The Government has considered his report and strongly agrees with its recommendations.
Mr Smith's advice is that big departments risk becoming less accountable, less agile, less adaptable and more inward-looking.
The Government has therefore decided that the best solution for Australia is not another agency, but a new level of leadership, direction and coordination among the agencies we already have.
The Government has also decided that an enhanced Customs and Border Protection Command is the preferable structure for Australia to meet the complex border security challenges of the future.
In addition to the appointment of a National Security Adviser, our national security structure will be improved by the creation of a strategic policy framework, a National Intelligence and Coordination Committee and enhancing our national crisis management arrangements.
The National Intelligence Coordination Committee will have responsibility for foreign, defence, security and law enforcement intelligence.
Our national crisis management arrangements will be improved through the establishment of a Crisis Coordination Centre, following consideration in the Budget context.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced the appointment of Duncan Lewis AO to the new position of National Security Adviser to the Rudd Government.
The position has been created as the first step in the Rudd Government's new national security structure, and was announced as part of the National Security Statement released in parliament.
The NSA will be the source of advice to the Prime Minister on all policy matters relating to the nation's security, and will oversee the implementation of all national security policy arrangements.
Mr Lewis has a long and distinguished career of public service. He served for more than 30 years as an officer in the Australian Army, including three tours with the SAS.
He was awarded the Conspicuous Service Cross for his services as commanding officer of the SAS Regiment, the Distinguished Service Cross for his command of Australian and New Zealand peacekeeping forces on the border in Timor Leste in 2000, and was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia for his service as the inaugural commander of the Special Forces Command.
Mr Lewis retired from the Regular Army in 2005 as a Major General commanding Australian Special Forces and was appointed to the position of First Assistant Secretary of the National Security Division in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
In October 2005, he was appointed to his current position as Deputy Secretary, Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, with responsibility for coordination policy development, and advice to the Prime Minister on national security, defence and intelligence, domestic security and international relations.
Mr Lewis is the co-chair of the National Counter Terrorism Committee, Chair of the Strategic Maritime Management Committee, Chair of the Strategic Policy Coordination Group and chair of the Australian Government Counter Terrorism Policy Committee.
He is an ex-officio member of the Council of the Order of Australia and the National Australia Day Committee.


PM: Thanks very much Brendan and Tim and Premier John Brumby and Albo, the Minister for Infrastructure, Maria Vamvakinou, everyone else. It is good to be here. The Government is committed to nation building. Nation building is about infrastructure and what we see here is a first class piece of infrastructure being laid out for the people of Melbourne and the people of Victoria.
And our Government is proud to be partners with the Victorian Government in building this infrastructure. 
We are investing some $900 million in this great project for this part of Australia. And this is going to be a good thing. Good infrastructure but also at a time like this, a good investment in the national economy.
If you put together our investment with that of the Victorian Government, we are creating here, construction jobs in the order of about 6500 over time and some 5500 flow on jobs. Important stimulus for the economy at the time of the global financial crisis into the future and secondly, importantly also laying out critical road infrastructure for this important part of Australia's national economy. The other thing of course is this - it helps people in their work a day lives. It helps people get to where they need to get quicker. And that is what we are on about as federal and state governments in partnership with each other, delivering better services for the taxpayers of Australia.
And that is what this piece of road infrastructure is all about. Specifically, what we the Federal Government have done is bring forward our commitment. We said last year that we would invest $900 million into this road and we are going to do that. 
Today we are honouring that commitment given to the people of Victoria, the people of Melbourne, prior to the last election; a commitment of nearly one billion dollars. But beyond that, because of the challenges that we face in bringing forward infrastructure to support the national economy, we have also brought forward some of that money to construct this early part of this road here with the Victorian Government and also invested a further allocation of funds to do the project design and detailed design work on the rest of the road early, so that construction for the entire system of the road can be brought forward as well.
That is why we are here today. So this national Government of ours is proud of its partnership with the Victorian Government because we together with the Victorian Government, believe in nation building. We believe in infrastructure. We believe in putting our shoulder to the wheel and making infrastructure work. Critical for the economy long term, critical for stimulus of the economy in the shorter term and importantly, delivering services to working families, trying to get to work on time. Over to you John.
BRUMBY: Well thank you very much to the Prime Minister and to the Federal Ministers who are here today to Brendan, to Anthony Albanese, to Tim Pallas, the state member and Federal Members. It is absolutely fantastic to see the Prime Minister in Melbourne today.
And of course this day last week, we were in Canberra for the historic COAG meeting.
And it was an historic meeting because it was all about the Federal Government working in partnership with the State Governments to end the blame game, to bring forward works, to bring forward funds, to do more for Australia and to work together in an era of cooperative federalism.
And you see that again today with this project. This is a project of course which was, as we have heard, promised by the Prime Minister when he was Opposition Leader. But today what we are doing is starting work bringing forward this project, the first $12 million of this project and then as you have heard from the Prime Minister, bringing forward the second part of that, $900 million from the Federal Government, $300 million from us, in a project which will generate something like 6000 direct jobs and 5500 indirect jobs.
And so it is a great example of working together. It is a great example of when Governments work together. You can bring forward projects, you can make the investment and you can generate the jobs that we need at this time of global economic slowdown.
Can I also say it is great to see Anthony Albanese here and it is only a couple of months ago, we were in Wodonga when we were both operating the (inaudible) the digger there for a $501 million partnership on North East rail standardisation. And again, couldn't have happened under the former Howard Government.
Funding provided by the Rudd Government: $501 million of investment in nation building rail infrastructure. Improving our freight system, improving the efficiency of it, improving the economy and generating jobs on the way through.
This is a key road for our state. I said to the PM a few moments ago I would say something about his home state of Queensland and I will. We love Queensland but  - 
PM: Why are you saying but?
BRUMBY: But the point I want to make, it is an important point to make for the Prime Minister while he is here in Melbourne. The last six months, the state which has added more people than any other state in Australia is Victoria. 
You know, twenty years ago, if you said that Victoria was going to be outgrowing Queensland in terms of population, people would have laughed at you. But the last six months Victoria has added more people than any other State in Australia. And the reason I mention that is because it puts pressure on our transport system.
It means congestion in our transport system unless Governments work together to tackle it. And that is why the bring-forward of this road project is so important. This road, the Western Ring road is about 140,000 vehicles a day. 16 percent of those vehicles are freight. And so the investments we make here don't just mean that families can spend more time together. I don't just mean that motorists will save 20 minutes when this project is complete, 20  -  25 minutes.
It makes the efficiency of the freight system in our State and across Australia so much better than it would otherwise be. And at a time when we need to compete against the rest of the world and a more competitive era than ever before, this sort of investment, giving families more time and making our freight system more efficient is so, so important.
So Prime Minister we are delighted with your leadership, we are delighted that you have brought forward this project and this road, which so many Victorians use every day. This road will be immeasurably improved by the bring-forward of funding and the substantial investment that we are partnering together on today. So we thank you for that.
PM: Thank you John. Any questions from the ladies and gentleman of the press?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what is the and how do you reconcile this with the news earlier this week that Victoria is growing at a rate it can't sustain?
PM: Well this is a growth State as Premier John Brumby said before. There are two alternatives for the Federal Government. One is the script used in the past which said, basically ‘over to you John, you are on your own' or our approach, which is how can partner with you. We take the second approach. It costs us money.
What we did in the Premiers conference - Council of Australian Governments meeting last Saturday - was decide as an Australian Government to provide an addition $15.1 billion to the states and territories for the four to five year period ahead. On top of what was provided in the past.
That is partnership, putting your money where your mouth is, it is bringing about a series of national reforms, but on infrastructure, also indicating clearly that we will partner with the states and territories as well.
I am for growing the national economy. Victoria is a huge slice of the national economy. In a time of global financial crisis, we want to support every state and territory and this one here has so much to give to Australia into the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
PM: Well I am not across the detail of the State Government's transport plan, I am sure Albo has been over it and up it like a rat up a drainpipe, have you mate? (Inaudible) 
So we will take each thing step by step but I say this loudly and clearly that in the past the Australian Government said on infrastructure this was not a job for the Australian Government, it was only a job for State Governments.
When you have growth, where you have massive pressure on roads, rail, ports, broadband, hospitals, universities across the country because of growing population, the conclusion we have reached as the national Government is that there is only one path for the future and that is for us to be partners in infrastructure into the future.
But can I just add one thing on that. At a time of global financial crisis, we the Government stand for nation building and at this time the Liberal Party federally are divided right down the middle on nation building. And they can't even agree on who should build a sand castle. They can't even agree on who should have the bucket and who should have the spade.
We have a clear strategy for the future, it is called nation building. They have none. They are divided right down the middle.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ANZ has announced today that they are cutting more jobs than earlier stated, trade unions say they are using the financial crisis as an excuse to sack workers, do you think that is right?
PM: Well on the details of ANZ's announcement, I am not familiar. Any person losing their job during the global financial crisis, it is a difficult and awful time for that person and for the families who depend on that person for an income and for support.
Our job as a community and through our systems of support is to do whatever we can to soften the blow with individual firms, to help where we can and to help also through the income payment and support systems offered by the Federal Government.
This will be a tough year ahead. I have tried to level with the Australian people about this. '09 will be very hard on employment and unemployment. One of the reasons John and I are here today is to say, in the midst of the pile of global economic gloom, we are helping to step into the (inaudible) supporting infrastructure now because it generates jobs.
In this case, 6500 direct, some 5500 plus indirect, over time. That is doing something constructive about the global financial crisis.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel a bit ripped off by the ANZ, you guaranteed bank deposits (inaudible)
PM: Every individual company faces different circumstances, our first responsibility has been to do whatever the Australian Government can do to underpin the stability of the Australian financial system. Bear this fact in mind. Worldwide right now I am advised, something like 13 AA banks remaining, AA rated banks.
Australia has four of that 13 globally. It is partly because we have run the regulatory system in this country in a conservative way. But it is also because we the Australian Government have been keen and active in supporting our regulators doing their job.
On top of that, the stability of the financial system, we have acted also decisively to guarantee 15 million individual deposit accounts around the country, for all Australians. And secondly to provide a guarantee for the banks to be able to raise money offshore so that businesses out here in this part of Melbourne can still have the possibility of accessing corporate finance into the future.
If the finance dries up, and in many parts of the world it is drying up, then you have a massive problem on your hands. This is going to be hard, it will be difficult, I accept that and I have said that from the beginning. Our job is to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: The finance sector unions says that the bank guarantees (inaudible)
PM: As I said before, each individual banks' circumstances are different. We would encourage and urge the banks to continue to provide maximum employment for their workforces. That is the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: And it is important that we as Governments, state and federal also do what we can to support economic activity in the economy. Can I say, as of Monday this week, the 8th of December, there begins to flow through some eight to nine billion dollars in stimulus to the general economy through our economic security strategy.
Why are we doing that? Because we know that out there in the economy, small businesses, right through to the financial institutions themselves are feeling the pressure arising from a reduction in demand in the economy.
That is why we are injecting nearly $10 billion through measures for pensioners, for families and to support first home buyers.
It is step one in our economic security strategy to help support growth and jobs into the future when the global financial crisis is reaping its havoc.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that ANZ has made this announcement not only after it got (inaudible)
PM: I would urge all the banks to do whatever they can to maintain their employment levels into the future. This is a very difficult set of economic circumstances for everybody. It is very difficult for families as well. 
Our job in the economy is to provide continued support for growth and for activity at a time when we are going to see a whole lot of trouble out there in the workforces of Australia because of the global financial crisis. There is no single silver bullet solution to this. Our job as the Government is to continue to support economic activity through the measures that I have outlined.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well Australia's superannuation laws have been long established.
JOURNALIST: What about infrastructure, would you like to see State Governments have more of a focus on providing public transport rather than continuing to focus on providing more roads?
PM: Can I say, that belongs squarely within the province of the Victorian Government. In terms of  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No let me just answer that in this broad sense. Effective infrastructure planning is done at the state level. What I have seen in infrastructure planning in the state of Victoria is they are pretty good at it. We can all do better, and that is us as well at the federal level in terms of what we do.
But the integration of what is best done for road, what is best done for rail, what is best done for freight rail, what is best done for passenger rail, these are detailed questions which are particular to every locality.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look our attitude is very simple, there is a global financial crisis under way, it is having a huge effect on the global economy and its impact will be felt on the Australian economy. Step by step we will take every action we deem to be necessary to continue to support growth and jobs.
This will be very hard, there are global forced bearing down on us. We have done an economic security strategy, ahead of the curve ahead of most other countries and that represents some $10 billion.
We have also released this $15.1 billion to the states, some $3 billion plus of which will flow additionally in the year ahead. Beyond that we have further infrastructure announcements to make ourselves. Can I say we will do this each step of the way, mindful of what needs to be done to continue to support growth and jobs. But the task will be really hard. And let me repeat one thing I said before.
At a time of global financial crisis, what the nation expects is strong leadership on nation building. And what we have is a Liberal Party divided right down the middle on nation building and on infrastructure and I thing at a time like this, is an absolute disgrace.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I say that it is relevant to use because it affects votes in the Senate. Minister Albanese has been burning the midnight oil to secure passage of the legislation which underpins our future ability to invest in national infrastructure projects. The Liberals can't work out whether they are Arthur or Martha in the Senate.
It's not a question of making a political comment, it is a basic fact of the numbers in the Senate to ensure passage of support for the legislation which underpins our ability to invest in infrastructure in the future. That is why it is relevant and that is why I am making the comments I have.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well firstly on the detail on the funding arrangements, I would prefer to be better briefed on that. That's the first point. The second is on these sorts of decisions, are best done on the basis of the (inaudible) advice of medical specialists dealing with individual women. If politicians were to get involved in those processes I think is frankly, a recipe for disaster. It is the right thing that this be handled sensibly, properly and professionally by medical specialists who know what they're talking about.


Six months ahead of schedule, the Prime Minister and the Premier of Victoria turned the first sod on the $2.25 billion upgrade of Melbourne's Western Ring Road.
The Western Ring Road upgrade will support up to 6,500 jobs during construction and 5,500 flow-on jobs.
By acting early and decisively to bring construction forward on projects that are ready to go, we are creating jobs and boosting the national economy during the global financial crisis.
Once complete, the construction works will add extra lanes and enhance traffic management systems to improve traffic flow on the 38 kilometre road between Princes Freeway in Laverton North and the Greensborough Freeway, Greensborough.
The Rudd Government committed $900 million at the last election towards the upgrade and has brought forward $5 million in 2008-09 for construction to begin today.
The early works will commence on the extra Altona-bound lane from the Deer Park Bypass to Boundary Road and are expected to be complete by mid-2009.
The Australian and Victorian Governments are also investing $12 million towards planning, scoping and modelling works on the full upgrade project.
The Ring Road is a key freight route and an important connection for many growth areas in Melbourne, currently carrying up to 142,000 vehicles per day, of which 16 per cent are freight traffic, with capacity often exceed during peak periods.
Traffic on the Western Ring Road is heavily congested, with speeds as low as 20 kilometres per hour in peak periods.
This project will significantly help cut down travel times for motorists and the freight industry.
Once complete, the upgrade will also help improve safety for motorists and local families on a road that has seen nine fatal and 750 casualty crashes in the last five years.
The Ring Road connects with a number of major freeways and arterial roads such as the Western Highway, Calder Freeway, Tullamarine Freeway, Sydney Road and the Hume Freeway.
Melbourne's population is expected to grow by 1.4 million by 2036, with nearly 50 per cent growth to occur in areas serviced by the ring road such as Werribee, Melton, Hume and Whittlesea.
In 2008-09, the Rudd and Brumby Governments are investing almost over $1.1 billion in road and rail projects in Victoria, including:
     * $331 million for the Deer Park bypass and Leakes Road Interchange;
     * $618 million for the Geelong Ring Road; and
     * $174 million for the Dynon Port Rail Link.
The Rudd Government is also investing $51 million in 2008-09 to make an early start on election commitment projects, including:
     * $25 million to start the Westgate Bridge rehabilitation;
     * $6.5 million to start the 4A section of the Geelong Ring Road; and
     * $5 million to start the Western Highway duplication planning.


The Rudd Government today announced a boost to the Geelong economy with Chemring Australia Pty Ltd awarded $1.8 million from the Geelong Investment and Innovation Fund.
The grant will create 40 full-time jobs and inject $18 million into the local economy.
It will help stimulate the Geelong economy during the severe global financial crisis.
The new Chemring facility will include a leading edge research and development lab, further cementing Geelong's reputation as a centre of industry and innovation.
It will also help secure Australia's place on the world stage, sending the message that despite the global financial crisis, Australia and Geelong are open for business.
Chemring Australia, a subsidiary of UK-based Chemring Group PLC, manufactures countermeasures and pyrotechnics for the defence sector.
They have recently been awarded a 10 year, $160 million contract to supply countermeasures and pyrotechnics to the Australian Defence Force.
The grant awarded today will allow Chemring Australia to invest in state-of-the-art infrastructure, double its highly skilled workforce and boost its innovative capacity.
The increase in manufacturing capacity enabled the Lara site to win the work ahead of other international Chemring Group locations.
It will assist Chemring Australia to establish itself as the principal supplier of countermeasures and pyrotechnics to the Australian Defence Force.
It will also be critical to Chemring's pursuit of investment and opportunities in the Joint Strike Fighter program, which would lead to many more jobs in Geelong.
The Fund is a partnership between the Commonwealth, the Victorian Government and Ford Australia and this collaborative approach is critical to its success.
The Fund is about ensuring the Geelong region continues to be a hub of innovative manufacturing in Australia, creating high-skill, high-wage jobs.
The first round of funding is already creating 193 sustainable, full-time jobs, and injecting $27.2 million into the local economy.
Applications for the second round of the $24 million Geelong Investment and Innovation Fund are being assessed. An announcement is expected in early 2009.


Thank you all for coming out on a Sunday afternoon to meet with us here in this meeting of the Federal Cabinet, the Cabinet of the Australian Government here in Geelong and here at Corio Bay senior college.
Thank you also to the staff and the students at Corio Bay Senior College for turning out and welcoming us today in the way in which they have.
Think of this: Year 12 students, the school captains, having to come back and greet me on the 7th of December and put their school uniforms back on again.
There is no higher calling than to have to put your school uniform back on again, and come back and pretend that you haven't already left the place.
They are great kids and they are both waiting eagerly their notifications of acceptance to university. One in Melbourne, one here in Deakin. So we wish them well for their futures.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And thank you for the welcome to country from David Tournier and Jason Tournier for your didgeridoo playing. And thank you for making us feel so welcome here today on behalf of the Wathaurong people.
Can I begin by introducing my colleagues, because we have got a good line of folk here today. Beginning up on the far left and contrary to the list that I have been given, it always pays to read it carefully  -  I have Anthony Byrne, who is Parliamentary Secretary to myself as Prime Minister (inaudible), Bill Shorten who is Parliamentary Secretary for disabilities, Tanya Plibersek the Minister for Housing. We have Robert McClelland the Attorney General, we have Kim Carr the Industry Minister.
Stephen Conroy, the Minister for Communications, Lindsay Tanner, hiding behind the (inaudible) make sure you ask him a very hard question (inaudible) he is the Finance Minister, known affectionately in our show as Dr No.
Justine Elliot, who is the Minister for Aged Care, today also representing the Minister for Health. John Faulkner, Special Minister of State and Cabinet Secretary, Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister of Australia.
We drove through her electorate on the way here today, and it is a fine electorate indeed. So my best regards to the people of Lalor who are next door.
We also have to my right Joel Fitzgibbon who is the Minister for Defence, Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Families, Anthony Albanese the Minister for Infrastructure, so all questions about local road funding go to him.
Peter Garrett, the Minister for the environment, Joe Ludwig the Minister for Human Services and Rich and Darren, I think you have already met them.
Could I say as Prime Minister how delighted I am by the work that they put in as local members. You in this community should feel proud of the fact that your two local members spent a long time getting in the face of the Prime Minister.
If there is stuff happening here, we soon hear about it. And that is what a local member is supposed to do. And you have two very good local members in this community to do that, not just with me, but right across the ministers of this cabinet who are here assembled before you today.
So they have done a really good job. And we have still got hard work to do, as Richard just said, it is going to be a tough year ahead. But in terms of getting their message through to us, they are your first port of call.
And they are very effective at getting the message delivered to us.
This community cabinet is what we as a new Australian Government do. And it is deliberate. It is intentional. It is now our practice and our achievement as well.
Right around Australia this year we have sought every month or so to take the Cabinet out of Canberra and take the Cabinet to the people. And we have done so in Penrith in Western Sydney, we have done so in the outer suburbs of Brisbane, we have been to Mackay in North Queensland, Indigenous communities in Arnhem Land. We have taken the Cabinet to southern suburbs of Perth, the southern suburbs of Adelaide.
We have been most recently to Launceston in Tasmania and we are here with this great community in Geelong.
And can I say there is one single reason for us doing it - now having taken the cabinet to every state and territory in the country in our first year in office - and that is, to keep in touch with what you the community expect of us.
It is really easy to get disconnected by virtue of spending so much of your time in Canberra. It happens. Therefore one of the best antidotes we can have is to take the cabinet out of town.
And your opportunity today to ask us questions, difficult or easy, make comments, supportive or critical, meet with us one on one afterwards, it is all part and parcel of the process. And for us it is really important to remain plugged in with what working families across Australia, pensioners, carers and others, are expecting of their Government, their national Government, at a time of unprecedented global financial and economic challenge.
You have read a lot about the global financial crisis. A lot in the newspapers. A lot of gloom and doom. And 2009 will be a difficult year and we will see a reduced growth in the Australian economy and we will see higher unemployment. I see no point at all in trying to gild the lily with the Australian people. We are in tough times. There will be tough times next year.
But my overriding message to you all is this: if we as a country stick together, and recognise the fact that we are all in this together, then we will see Australia through. Business and unions, employers, employees, Government and business, Government and community, national Governments working with State Governments, national Governments with state Government and local Government.
We are all in this together. And those around the world who will come through this virtually unprecedented global financial and economic crisis, those who come through this well, will be those who stick together, recognise the fundamental fact that we are in it together.
(inaudible) right across the show, from business, from unions, from Government, often doing things we have never done before, unusual things that we have never done before, but necessary things in order to see us all through.
And for those who get damaged and wounded on the way through, to be there to actually extend a helping hand and a supportive hand. That is what being Australian is all about. We are in this together, we will come through this together and our responsibility as members of the great Australian family is to extend support to each other when the times get tough.
The Government's response to the global financial crisis has been, one, to stabilise the Australian financial system. We did that by providing a government guarantee to bank deposits right across the country, 15 million of them, to make sure that each person could be confident about their deposits in their bank, necessary in order to underpin confidence in our financial system.
But further to provide a guarantee to our major banks so that they can continue to secure funding from the international financial markets so that they can in turn continue to deliver finance to businesses across the country and other investment purposes across the country to keep the wheels of the economy rolling.
Stabilising the financial system is just step one. Step two has been to support the economy, growth and jobs. And that is why in October we delivered a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
This Strategy is designed to underpin growth and underpin jobs when around the rest of the world you see one economy after another sliding into recession or you see unemployment rising in one economy after another around the world, and where in this country we have sought to act as early and as decisively as possible to support growth and to support jobs.
What does a $10.4 billion stimulus package mean? It delivers relief to pensioners, to carers, to families and first home buyers.
In fact, two million Australian families and four million pensioners will begin to receive their payments under the Government's Economic Security Strategy over the coming fortnight. Single pensioners will receive $1,400 and pensioner couples $2,100.
And around two million parents will receive a payment of $1,000 for the 3.9 million Australian children in their care.
The consequence of these payments, together with what we are doing with first home buyers - which is to effectively treble the first home owners allowance to $21,000 to support those buying their first home when they are buying a new home, and thereby to support the housing industry - is overall to continue to support jobs as well.
Supporting families, supporting pensioners, supporting first home buyers, but through the additional activity which comes in the economy as a result of doing that, also supporting jobs.
And that $10.4 billion I have spoken of before is capable of creating 75,000 additional jobs across the economy in the period ahead. That is why we are doing it, that is why we are doing it.
My message to these two million families and four million pensioners receiving these payments is to go out and spend this money that you receive to help make ends meet.
Because by spending their payments, families and pensioners will help create more jobs across Australia, and strengthen the Australian economy.
That's important.
These payments start arriving tomorrow, just 17 days before Christmas, and I urge families and pensioners who have been doing it tough to spend their payments in a responsible way to make their Christmas all the more special, and also do their bit to support the economy and jobs as well.
That is why we are acting.
Of course the Economic Security Strategy I have spoken of is just stage one.
Stage two is being what we have done longer term to support the automobile industry. The Industry Minister Kim Carr and I have spent a lot of time working with car manufacturers this year on the necessary package to support jobs in this critical sector of our economy and doubly critical sector of this regional economy around Geelong.
A $6.2 billion new car plan for Australia. That's a lot of investment and the reason we are doing that is because we believe in the future of manufacturing.
We believe in the future of the car industry. We also believe that the role of Government is not just to stand back and have a look and say, ‘gee there are some problems in that industry, I wonder what is going to happen'.
That is called observing, that is called watching. At worst it is called commenting or commentating. The alternative is to do something and to lead.
We chose the latter. And that is why we are investing this money over a long period of time, to give the industry over a 10 year time horizon, confidence and certainty about what Government will do to support the industry in order to enable the industry to transform itself.
To transform itself in the direction of cleaner, greener cars, which Australian consumers will want in the future. That is what it is about. That transformation within the industry, serving our environmental objectives, but equally importantly, serving our employment objectives.
And as Richard mentioned before, within a very short time of the Minister Kim Carr and I announcing that package for this region, we have had Ford turn around on the decision to which they had announced back in 2007, and instead make it absolutely clear that the Geelong engine plant would remain open for business. I regard that as a positive step forward.
It doesn't mean that all problems are solved. It doesn't mean that at all. There is going to be tough times ahead and we will see bad news as well. But what I am saying to you today as good members of this very good community is that we intend to be long term partners in this community's progress.
And that means supporting decisively, effectively, intelligently, the development of local industry. And that includes the automotive industry.
The automotive industry has been under stress at multiple levels, and another way in which we are seeking to help the industry is the special purpose vehicle which was announced with the support of the Australian banks quite recently.
And that was to assist with the provision of car finance across the country. Car finance has been threatened by the withdrawal of a number of the leading car finance firms. If you don't have car finance firms you have got a problem on your hands in terms of car dealerships and their ability to operate.
And if they are not operating effectively, guess what happens? It boomerangs back to the car manufacturers and then you have got a problem.
So together with the major banks and the Government, we have established this temporary special purpose facility to try and plug the gap which has arisen as a result of the impending withdrawal of some of the private providers of car finance in Australia.
And I would like to publicly acknowledge the support we have received from the CEOs of the Commonwealth Bank, the National Australia Bank, Westpac and ANZ together with representatives of the automotive industry, and in particular the Motor Traders Association of Australia.
This again is one practical step that we have taken and this facility will be in its overall projected size probably in the vicinity of some $2 billion. But the purpose is to make sure in these very difficult times, that we can help see the industry through.
The alternative is to stand back and say, ‘it is all too hard, let's just observe, let's just watch'. Well, we are not like that. We want to get in there and pitch in and have a go.
Again, it won't solve all problems, but let me tell you, it is better than not acting and that for us is never a possibility.
Here at the local level, we have had a lot of engagement with local representatives both state and federal and our good friends at the Geelong Advertiser, where are they? Put your hand up Geelong Advertiser, we will come and get you later on.
On the question of the Geelong ring road. The Advertiser tells us this is priority number four in the region. Let me just put some facts on the table for you. I am pleased to report that the Australian Government is already delivering on this project.
We have committed nearly $300 million to build the Geelong Ring Road.
The first three stages will open next Sunday following the community celebration day.
That means from next Monday, motorists will save up to 45 minutes in travel time and avoid 29 sets of traffic lights. There will be fewer cars and trucks through the centre of Geelong.
This is a very practical step forward in which we are proud to be co-investors.
We are also getting on with the job of completing the final stages of the Ring Road. Construction on stage 4A of the project will start in early 2009 and be done by early 2011. And Minister Albanese has recently approved $62.5 million in Commonwealth funding for this project.
So when it comes to the Geelong Ring Road, we have listened carefully to what the community has said to us through local representatives and we have acted and our funding is being delivered and I think that is a good thing for this community.
Finally in terms of others areas where we have been active locally, let me just mention a few.
On road projects apart from the Geelong Ring Road, stages one, two, three four, and four A that I have just referred to, we also have a $110 million allocated to the Princes Highway West upgrade duplication.
$20 million for the Geelong Mildura rail upgrade project. $50 million upgrade for rail access to the Port of Geelong. $7.5 million upgrade to Colac-Lavers Hill Road, together with other lesser road projects.
Mention was made before of education and the digital revolution in the classrooms. Here in this area, Trinity College Colac, Lorne-Aireys Inlet College, Colac College, Bellarine Secondary College, Corio Bay City College, where we are today and Geelong Baptist College  -  all recipients of funding for computers in schools.
And if I put those together, that is funding which comes to something like seven or eight hundred (inaudible) thousand dollars we have committed to the secondary schools in this area. All with one objective, and that is to ensure that we provide computers in the classroom, for years 9,10, 11 and 12.
The objective is to make sure that every kid has the best education possible.
Again, this doesn't solve all problems in education, it doesn't solve all problems in the classroom.
But I would much rather that every kid going to a secondary school in this part of Australia was given the same opportunities as others who have already got computers and laptops on their desks, in other parts of Australia.
That is what we are on about, making sure that every kid gets the best start on their education as possible.
In higher education, we have allocated $13.8 to Deakin University over the new Better Universities Renewal Fund. In health, $7 million towards a GP Super Clinic at Southern Geelong.
On water, $20 million for the Geelong Shell Water recycling project. $10 million for a new recycled water plant.
We have also had local Government funding coming out of the local community infrastructure program, including funding delivered at the recent meeting we had in Canberra of $2.5 million to the Greater Geelong City Council, $525,000 to Colac-Otway Shire Council. $469,000 to Goulburn Plains Shire Council, $343,000 to Surf Coast Shire Council, and $100,000 to Queenscliffe Borough Council.
And on sport and community facilities $14 million for the Geelong Football Club for the redevelopment of the Skilled Stadium, increasing the capacity by 3,000.
And I think you were robbed, by the way, in the Grand Final.
Can I say, also, the reason for running through that list is to indicate that in the 12 months that we have been in office, we have not just been busy nationally, we have sought to be active locally in funding a range of projects across roads, across schools, across the local university of Deakin, across local community health facilities, as well as sport and community infrastructure as well.
And for us this is simply the beginning of our investment with you, as well as supporting local government.
As I close, can I say you live in a wonderful part of Australia.
Therese, my wife, the kids and I have holidayed in this part of the world before, down to the Great Ocean Road, driven it. And as loyal sons and daughters of the great state of Queensland, it sort of passed people's minds in Queensland as passing strange that you'd spend a summer not on the beach in Queensland, but down here.
But you know we didn't regret it one bit. You have an extraordinarily beautiful part of Australia. It is stunning. It is remarkable. It is beautiful and you should be proud of it.
And proud of those communities associated with the great assets which mother nature has delivered to you. Enough from me, and now it is over to you.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh today announced they will begin the search for Australian Hospital Ship Centaur.
They have agreed to a $4 million cap for the search.
The Centaur was sunk without warning by a torpedo from a Japanese submarine on 14 May 1943 about 50 miles east north-east of Brisbane. Of the 332 persons on board, only 64 survived. It is understood three Centaur survivors are still alive.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said he hoped the search might provide closure for those survivors and the families of those who perished in the tragedy.
“I think it is proper that we should make this attempt, not only to provide closure to the families of the victims and the survivors, but to honour the victims themselves,” Mr Rudd said.
“We know that this search will be very challenging because of the nature of the ocean floor in the area where the ship was lost.
“If we are successful it would mean that we could go about protecting this very significant site - the final resting place of 268 Australians.”
Ms Bligh thanked the Prime Minister for responding to her request to jointly undertake the search.
“If we can find the Centaur, it will be of considerable emotional significance for many of the relatives of those lost on her.
“This site is part of our State and nation's history and we should try and find, preserve and protect it.
“For them and their families it is right that we try to find and mark its exact location.
“The 268 Aussies and their lost ship are reminders of what we as families, a State and a nation have lost in war. It is right that in our remembering them we can say exactly where they lie,” she said.
A Joint Steering Committee will be established and will call for tenders in the coming weeks.
The Premier wrote to the Prime Minister on the 14th of May 2008  -  the 65th anniversary of Centaur's sinking.


Today is a story about defence, it is a story about industry, it is a story about jobs and it is a story about Geelong. And let me say a few things about each of those. 
This is an important part of Australia's defence architecture.
If you look at these aircraft here, the Royal Australian Air Force in doing its job relies upon air decoys to be protected. And each time I have flown into Iraq and flown into Afghanistan I have been fully briefed on the importance of these particular devices.
This is making our air force safer to do its job when called upon to do its job. And I congratulate those who have added their professional expertise here to making that job easier for Australia because without an effective national defence, ultimately, our security and as a consequence, everything else is compromised.
Industry, you know something? This Government believes in industry policy. We make no apology for that. We believe in being partners with industry, and where we can, putting our shoulder to the wheel with industry to make their job a bit easier.
And through this allocation from the Geelong investment and innovation fund, to make it possible for Chemring to grow its business. Grow its business not just now but into the future as well, because we believe in businesses like this, businesses which have shown a long track record of commitment to Australia. 100 years is quite a long time between drinks, in terms of when you have started and when you are still going.
So we think they are reasonably reliable partners. But this is important for us to be partners, partners with industry not just here but as the Industry Minister said just before, with the automotive industry, the automotive supplies industry, the fact that we and the Victorian Government can work together to assist companies like Ford and turn critical decisions around.
The Government is proud of its $6.2 billion car plan for the future. It is part of our co-investment with industry into the future.
There's a lot of gloom and doom out there, a lot of problems in the global economy at present. And if we all got paid a dollar for every time we turn over the page of a newspaper to find another negative story about something happening somewhere else in the world, then we would all earn a lot of money.
But guess what, that doesn't get you anywhere. What gets you somewhere is actually sitting down with business and working something through and that is what we have done at a very practical level here, with this very good business.
Which brings me to jobs. It is not just supporting defence, not just supporting industry, it is making sure that we can also generate jobs. I was with the Victorian Premier yesterday and we were launching a significant new $900 million Commonwealth investment in road projects here in greater Melbourne.
Very important for Melbourne, important for Victoria, but important for the nation. By virtue of that investment, we are investing in jobs. Some 5000  -  6000 in the construction phase and in terms of indirect jobs, another 5000 or 6000.
But you know it is not just the big projects like that, it is smaller ones because they all add up. They all make it count and so by virtue of our investment here into this business, important for defence and important for industry, we are also creating a capacity for Chemring to add another 40 staff.
So at a time when people have nothing but gloom and doom to talk about, our attitude is, well people can do that if they want, we are going to get on with the business of growing the nation, growing industry and growing jobs wherever we practically can and we are proud of being partners here.
Of course, in the future, it is entirely possible that with the JSF, the Joint Strike Fighter project, that Chemring as a consequence of this investment is capable then of lodging a successful bid for new work coming off the JSF.
JSF final decisions are a ways away yet but if that were to come off then the employment consequences again for this firm Chemring in providing air decoys for an entire new generation or part thereof of Australian fighter aircraft, would be significant indeed.
Each is a building step. Each is a building block along the way.
Which brings me to my last point, about Geelong. You know this is a community which has got I would say, intestines of steel. They have seen ups and downs over the years but always have come through, and come through with flying colours.
And you see that through the great strength and enduring strength of what we have seen in the automotive industry, despite the knocks, despite the hits, despite the whacks over time. And I have already said something about our commitment for that recently, through the agency of the Industry Minister, Kim Carr, and through the support we have received directly in partnership with the Government of Victoria.
But this is a great community. It is a great community because it believes in industry and it believes in picking itself up, working with Governments at all levels and looking at, how can we now secure the future again.
And that is what we are in the business of doing and that is why we are here to bring our cabinet to Geelong today.
So these are four very good stories. About our defence, about industry, about jobs and growing jobs. But also about supporting this great community which is a great part of Australia.


I was concerned by what John Hartigan just said. He said that this A-Span was about live coverage as it happens of the internal machinations of government. Conroy, you told me none of that before I accepted the brief to be here this morning  -  you're in deep trouble.
Also, the thought that Steve just suggested that this is going to be the subject of, shall we say, broadcast to the United States and other parts of the world  -  I'm looking forward to the subtitling service which will now become a boutique industry. Rendered in American English ‘you scumbag', underneath it being registered ‘this is not deemed in Australia to be a desirable person'.
‘You sleazebag on wheels'  -  this is deemed in Australia to being an even less desirable person. I think there's a whole boutique business which will be spawned out of this in terms of the subtitling of Australian English.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be among such a distinguished gathering of Australian journalists and therefore, given that we're here to launch A-Span, I can't let the chance go by without saying something about the story of the day and that's the economic security strategy - $10.4 billion.
I've urged pensioners and families to spend this money responsibly, to use this money to make ends meet, to help out their kids, to help out their grandkids and they're going to be doing that in the time ahead. And I know the government will inevitably face some criticism about how some of this money will be spent.
Tthe government understood this reality when it embraced this stimulus package but we decided then and we believe now that one-off cash payments to pensioners, carers and young families were the best way to stimulate the economy.
If the government doesn't empower consumers at a time like this in the midst of global financial crisis, then in fact, we'll have even greater challenges ahead.
So the government understands that we'll be criticised for how some of this money is spent, but the alternative is for government to do nothing to stimulate the economy, for government not to invest in jobs, in growth, in families and this government, by contrast, has resolved to act.
To the business of the day  -  A-Span. It's almost 30 years to the day that a young Congressman named Al Gore stood to speak in the United States House of Representatives and made history with the first broadcast on C-Span.
From that moment, C-Span promised that Americans would have gavel-to-gavel television coverage of every session of Congress.
Since that day, March of '79, a generation of Australians visiting the United States have had the experience of stumbling across C-Span while sitting in a hotel room recovering from insomnia, unable to sleep at all, flicking through 50 to 60 cable television stations and chancing upon a US Congressional Committee on a subject unknown to any other people on the planet, dealing with deliberations, obscure only to that particular group of Americans concerned with it, but a half an hour later, you find yourself totally engrossed in the deliberations of said committee.
And with firm views about the intelligence levels of various members of the committee  -  in other words, those who rely exclusively on notes to participate and those that can actually run with an argument.
It's good stuff and I've always enjoyed it.
Consistently, C-Span educates and informs its viewers, giving them a fly-on-the-wall view of what's happening on Capitol Hill.
Australians returning from the United States have often asked a simple question  -  why don't we have our own C-Span?
This same question as John has just indicated was asked this year at the Australia 2020 Summit here in Parliament House.
As the final report of the Summit concluded, participants felt that there was a need for first-hand, unedited access to the records of public policy debates.
A program along the lines of C-Span in the United States or Canada could be established.
An Australian version of C-Span, what they called AuSpan  -  this is in the 2020 Summit  -  will make a big difference to the public policy debate.
It was hoped that a public affairs digital network would be established by 2020.
Well, you've got cracking  -  I'm impressed by that. As John Hartigan said 11 years ahead of time.
The name's almost the same  -  AuSpan's become A-Span and it's a very good thing.
Today's announcement on behalf of A-Span is I think a good thing for our democracy. It's a superb initiative, it's 100 per cent industry funded.
A-Span will be available to 2.2 million subscribers and 7 million Australians who pay to subscribe to Pay TV.
Importantly, it will also be available to Australians to watch online.
The launch of A-Span is therefore good news for all.
Political junkies will of course love it  -  they'll now have one more way to drive their family and friends absolutely mad.
But A-Span will also be valuable for the wider public  -  students, for educators, for people following a particular policy debate, and for all Australians who want to understand more about how democracy works and how they could become more involved in it.
A-Span is therefore good for Australian democracy. I think one of the charges we all face as those who participate in the workings and life of this great democratic institution is thinking of the generation ahead  -  how do you breathe life into it again? How do you actually sustain the arteries and the life force of a democracy?
The debate about right to know, which John has been so intimately involved in, the debate about how we bring more meaningfully the deliberations of this place and the other legislatures of Australia, into the lives of Australians. I think each generation of politicians has a responsibility to make sure that the institutions are kept not just alive and well but reformed, reshaped, transmitted to those who come after us.
You know this great kernel of an idea called democracy is actually quite young in the history of nations, of modern nations. The experiments in Athens we know about, but in the rise of modern nation states, this is effectively a 20th Century phenomenon.
And therefore, each of us has this charge to transmute again and I believe this is a way in which it can be helped and helped done effectively.
Think also of what could have happened in times past had we had A-Span in operation.
It could have caught live on film for all to see, and entertained everyone, Gough Whitlam throwing a glass of water over Paul Hasluck, imagine what that would have been like as a captured piece of footage. The great speeches of Fred Daley and Jim Killen.
Or in more recent times, Tony Abbott squaring up to Her Majesty's loyal opposition at the time, ready to knock their lights out on the floor of the House of Representatives. Paul Keating's great exultation to John Hewson that he was about to ‘do him slowly'.
If this was done resplendently across live television across the country, I am sure it would have had a palpable impact on the body politic, for good or for ill I am not sure. But it would have been for real, live and unplugged.
We would have had full and dynamic displays of all of our best parliamentarians from both sides of the chamber. And I think that does well also for the life of our democracy.
Think also of bringing live to people around the country, the deliberations of Robert Ray and John Faulkner in earlier lives, as part of that team of grand inquisitors engaged in the Senate Estimates process, good cop, bad cop, or as they like to say, ‘bad cop and worse cop', in the Estimates process.
And I think that, the Estimates process when properly conducted is a great exercise again in the way in which the Australian lifeblood of democracy is continued into the future.
A-Span will be a valuable addition to existing news offerings. It will complement the coverage already provided by the ABC, Sky News and by the Parliament's own website. It will show the substantive debates and processes that represent democracy at work.
Australians will be able to see and understand our parliamentary processes more easily than ever before. A-Span will not just be a one-way process between Government and the Australian people, it will also give voice to many others in the public debate through its coverage of significant meetings held by major private institutions.
That means a better educated public, a more informed public debate and stronger democracy.
The Australian Government strongly supports new steps to strengthen our way of governing and to constantly reinvent the way in which the country is governed. One small contribution by those of us in the political process is what we did yesterday again in Geelong, taking cabinet to the community.
This is the eighth or ninth occasion we have done this, this year. And for those who are here as members of the parliamentary press gallery, it is, I have got to say, a live and raw experience dealing with communities upfront, personal, all ministers present, or most of them, with a gathering of people from that local community. From members of the La Rouche Society at one end of the spectrum, through to others at another end of the spectrum and all points in between.
But you know something? And I think Sky from time to time has covered our community cabinets, the playback we have had from the community at large, about cabinets engaging people at the local level, has been very good.
It is not that we expect to be patted on the head by the community when we go to each place, in fact that is rarely the case. You often cop it between the eyeballs and that is as it should be.
But it is a good thing. It is part of reinvigorating a democracy and maybe that flows in to the coverage which will come from A-Span as well.
Community cabinet, is as I said, a part of the Government remaining engaged with the local community and rejuvenating our democracy. And A-Span will give Australia a new window into the parliament and the workings of Government.
A-Span will also give Australians a window on to other English speaking democracies including the United States Congress, the House of Commons in the United Kingdom and other major parliaments and this is a good thing as well.
I would also like to congratulate A-Span on the relationship it has established with C-Span which will allow program content from the Australian parliament and from around Australia to be sent to the US for broadcast on C-Span.
I am not still entirely sure what our American friends will make of it and 12 months into your return to the United States Robert, you could give us a first-hand analysis of how it is going down. My experience of America though is we will probably develop a thoroughly boutique and well informed audience of those who find Australian politics as their unique province of political connoisseurship.
And it will be fun to see. Six weeks from now, on January 20 2009, Barack Obama will be sworn in as America's 44th President and that will be a profoundly historic day, not just for the United States, the great democracy, but also an historic day for the world.
And the launch of A-Span on that day will take on an added significance therefore for Australia.
Congratulations to subscription television and Foxtel, Austar and Sky News for their work on this great initiative. An important initiative because I believe, as I have said already, the strength of democracy depends on well informed and an engaged citizenry.
I look forward to watching it. I hope many Australians become regular viewers. And on behalf of the Australian Government I welcome the official announcement of the launch of A-Span and so too today, as Prime Minister of Australia and current leader of this great democracy, I launch A-Span and all those who sail within her.


It was with great sadness this morning that I learned of the passing of Kerryn McCann after a long battle with breast cancer.
Kerryn McCann was a phenomenon, a mother who took on and conquered the toughest of all athletic events.
From her local playground, Kerryn built a sporting CV that was the envy of Australian athletes everywhere.
Kerryn was the pride of the Illawarra, one of Australia's true sporting nurseries.
Kerryn represented Australia at three Olympics, won two Commonwealth Games Gold Medals and in between time took on all comers in the great marathons of the world.
Her remarkable victory at the 2006 Melbourne Commonwealth Games has rightly taken its place as a great moment in Australia's rich sporting history.
Kerryn's legend and legacy stretched beyond the track and pavement.
For mothers across Australia, Kerryn McCann was their athlete.
They cheered her every stride, celebrated her victories and struggled with her through her brave battle.
Our thoughts today are with Kerryn's husband Greg and their children Benton, Josie, and Cooper.
Today our nation mourns the loss of a wonderful wife and mother, a champion athlete and a truly great Australian


The Prime Minister today was honoured to accept his appointment as official patron of the Northern Territory Football Club that will take part in the Queensland Australian Football League (AFL) competition for the first time in 2009.
Today's announcement marks the realisation of AFL NT's vision and builds on the Rudd Government's $2.5 million in funding to support an NT team to enter a major league competition and to support the development of AFL and Netball in the NT.
The new Northern Territory Football Club will provide Territorians with a home grown team in a major competition.
AFL NT has for some time been seeking to join a state AFL competition to provide a more effective pathway for elite players to participate at the highest level, as well as provide role models for junior Northern Territory players.
Some of the great names in AFL history forged their careers in the NT including Michael Long; Maurice Rioli; Michael McLean, Gilbert McAdam and current stars Peter Burgoyne, Cyril Rioli and Andrew McLeod (current All Australian captain).
There are currently 28 Northern Territory players on AFL Club lists.
But many of the NT's top players have had to leave Darwin and Alice Springs in order to pursue their pathway into the AFL.
With the establishment of Northern Territory Football Club, these players can now stay at home.
The Rudd Government's funding will be used to employ players on traineeships and apprenticeships.
All players will be required to either work full-time, or undertake study through school, university or TAFE, or complete a traineeship or apprenticeship. This will provide players with invaluable life skills that they can take back to their communities after their playing career with the Northern Territory Football Club.
The team will have training bases in Darwin and Alice Springs. Alice Springs will provide a hub for players from Central Australian communities to train and play.
In 2008-09, $230,000 has been earmarked for the following development initiatives:
     * regional Development Managers and trainees employed in the Barkly and Alice Springs Communities to deliver football and educational programs;
     * coaching and umpiring development clinics;
     * delivery of schools programs; and
     * delivery of various regional carnivals, and support of development camps and junior programs.
     * The Territory Team will be coached by Michael McLean, a member of the AFL Indigenous Team of the Century. He played more than 200 AFL Games and twice was named Brisbane Bears Best &amp; Fairest.
The Rudd Government commitment to Northern Territory Football Club is in partnership with the NT Government, the AFL, ERA/Rio Tinto, Pratt Foundation and Qantas.


The Government will provide $10 million over four years to support the expansion of Clontarf Academies to improve the education, life skills and employment prospects of 700 Indigenous young men in Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
As part of our commitment to Closing the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians, the Government will provide $10 million to match private and state funding for:
* six existing Clontarf Academies beyond 31 December 2008;
* six new academies from 2009-10; and
* a further three new academies from 2010-11.
The additional funding represents the first stage of a long term commitment by the Government to helping the Clontarf Foundation to expand its network of Academies throughout Australia.
This initial $10 million investment will enable Clontarf to expand its services in Western Australia, the Northern Territory and other interested states.
Clontarf academies currently operate 23 Academies in 18 locations and this funding will allow the organisation to expand its activities in Western Australia and the Northern Territory and to other interested states.
It will assist an additional 700 Indigenous young people to gain the confidence and skills to achieve at school and make a successful transition to work. This will expand Clontarf's reach from around 1,400 young people to 2,100 - a 50 percent increase in participants.
The Clontarf Academies have been successful in engaging young Indigenous men with school education. They also provide assistance to participants seeking employment or wishing to undertake post school education.
Clontarf currently has 280 students participating in Darwin and the surrounding locations. Aggregated attendance at these top end academies was better than 73% and some 90% of the students were recorded as having improved their literacy and numeracy levels.
These results demonstrate the value of the Clontarf approach to better engage young Indigenous men with school education and help in ‘closing the gap' between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.'
The Government believes that we should celebrate this success and take further advantage of the Clontarf approach by establishing additional Clontarf Academies in new locations.
The Australian Government committed $19.6 million over four years in the 2006-07 Budget for the Sporting Chance program, which includes Clontarf academies.
This announcement follows the Government's recent commitment of $20 million to the Australian Indigenous Education Foundation to provide boarding scholarships to up to 2,000 Indigenous secondary school students.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced that Australia will host a major conference on the future of the Australia-Indonesia bilateral relationship in Sydney from 19 to 21 February 2009.
The conference will bring together up to 120 leading Indonesians and Australians from a diverse range of backgrounds, such as government, business, the media, universities, community organisations, faith groups and youth.
This important conference for the region's future will discuss challenges faced by both countries, including:
     * strengthening democratic institutions;
     * maintaining economic growth; and,
     * protecting the environment.
It will give people from different backgrounds the opportunity to generate ideas about the Australia  -  Indonesia relationship, and to help shape its future.
Prime Minister Rudd and President Yudhoyono had previously discussed holding such a conference in earlier bilateral meetings.
Both leaders firmly believe this conference will assist both Indonesian and Australian people to better understand each others' perspectives and priorities which will, in turn, assist in strengthening the already excellent bilateral relationship between the two countries.


Distinguished colleagues. The job of a government is to serve and to protect its people. In doing so it is necessary to strike the right balance between allowing Governments to set policy directions and protecting the rights of its citizens.
Based on the evidence of history, our belief is that democratic governments are the best way of getting that balance right.
Democracy and development are good long term partners. As global geo-strategic and geo-economic weight shifts to the Asia Pacific region in the 21st Century, how Governments in our region seek to strike this balance now becomes a matter of global importance.
In this respect, I am taken by the remarks contained in a letter from Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda to colleagues in convening this forum.
The Foreign Minister said and I quote his letter, ‘the idea of such a forum is premised on the fact that Asia is the most populous region in the world's economic centre of gravity with an immense diversity of cultural heritages. Asia is therefore called upon to make a commensurate contribution to the political development of the world. And political development to my mind, means the growth and spread of democracy, the increasing participation of the people in the decision making processes that affect their lives and their future.'
That, I believe is an important statement.
I want to personally congratulate president Yudhoyono for his vision and his regional leadership in convening the Bali Democracy Forum.
It is a forum to consider the role of democracy and fostering peace and security and economic growth and development in the worlds' most populous region. I congratulate President Yudhoyono on his leadership of this nation and congratulate the people of Indonesia for the example they have set for the world.
The transformation of Indonesia has been extraordinary. It has been achieved peacefully and within Indonesia's constitutional framework. Indonesia is now the world's third largest democracy after India and after the United States.
And the people of Indonesia have themselves embraced democracy. (inaudible) it was my privilege to be here at the rebirth of Indonesia's democracy only 10 years ago. Then, as a young member of the Australian Parliament, I came here as a parliamentary monitor for the Indonesian elections of that year, 1999.
And I witnessed first-hand, the excitement and the exuberance and the enthusiasm of the people in the outer suburban areas of Surabaya where I spent a week watching the pre-election preparations, helping monitor the counting of the vote, and being there for the declaration of the results.
It was for me a very deep and moving experience and I would congratulate Indonesia and the people of Indonesia for the fact that today, voter turnout in this re-born democracy is among the highest in the world, consistently more than 75 percent.
Freedom of speech is valued at defended, it is underpinned by a vigorous and active media and today's meeting is convened in the spirit of Indonesia sharing its experiences with other nations. And so for these reasons I am proud to co-chair this meeting with President Yodhoyono.
Our two nations, Australian and Indonesia have different histories of democracy. But we are both fiercely proud of our democratic credentials. Democracy we would regard as a universal standard. Indonesia's Foreign Minister Dr Wirajuda referred to the need for the spread of democracy representing political development in his letter to participants. He said that we could assess political development by the degree to which people could participate in decision making processes that affected their lives.
I agree with that. Put simply, there is something fundamentally right about the idea that the people should be given a say in how they are governed. Democracy is neither the property of the west, nor is the property of the east. Democracy is the property of all human kind.
This is not just my view. It is reflected in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Sixty years ago, at a meeting presided over by Australia's foreign minister at the time - he was also serving as president of the General Assembly of the United Nations - we, the countries of the world, adopted the universal declaration.
Let us reflect on what we adopted within that declaration. Article 21, which sets out the basis for democracy, it says, and I quote, ‘the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government'.
By including these words, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognises that democracy is not restricted by ideology, by religion, by culture or by state of economic development. It proclaims that democracy is a universal standard to be aspired to by all peoples and all nations. This is our solemn declaration 60 years ago. This remains our solemn aspiration for all countries and all communities in the world.
Democracy is far from universal. In the Asia-Pacific, as in a lot of regions, democracy has not always been easy to achieve or readily embraced. Our job is to work to see its reach expanded. And through today's forum we can help to advance democracy. Through our discussions we can help to consolidate democracy. And through our discussions and deliberations we should seek to deepen our democracy.
His Excellency the President just referred to the fact that we need to build institutions to promote democracy within our region and to engage in the exchange of democratic ideas, processes and procedures.
These are the basics of democracy. Ensuring governments are aware of the needs of citizens and responding effectively to those needs; ensuring that our governments are accountable to the people for our decisions; fostering the free flow of information; fostering the competition for ideas; promoting a culture of participation and ensuring that the poor and the vulnerable are not left behind.
Every democracy has its own particular mechanisms. But what they have in common is that institutions such as parliaments, the judiciary and the media provide checks and balances on the exercise of power. And through these checks and balances people's voices are heard, their rights and interests are protected and we get the best outcomes.
I believe that Australia has something to share with others through this Bali Democracy Forum, in the spirit of cooperation described by Dr Wirajuda and President Yudhoyono.
Australia was among the first countries in the world to adopt a number of innovations, which today are considered basic principles of democracy. Australia counts itself as one of the world's five oldest continuing democracies.
In Australia we were the first to introduce the secret ballot. Together with our friends in New Zealand we were the first to recognise the right of women to vote. Australia is the first country in the world to give women the right to stand for parliament.
We are therefore proud of our history of democratic development. When the six States of Australia united to form a single country in 1901, it was done through a peaceful democratic vote.
Yet we also recognise that democracy is not static. The institutions of democracy need to be constantly reviewed and improved. In Australia, our Government has committed to increasing transparency and accountability. This is a continuing process. None of us ever arrive at a point of democratic perfection.
We are in Australia involved in the process of reforming freedom of information policies, reforming our electoral laws, reforming our laws concerning political donations and public funding. And we are committed to effective and responsive democracy. This is a continuing work and challenge for us all.
Our people also pass their judgment on democracy by whether it delivers the results. Does it deliver development? Does it protect its citizens? Does it allow different voices to be heard? And does it hold governments accountable?
When President Yudhoyono wrote to me inviting me to Co-Chair this forum, he wrote to me and said ‘the global situation demands from all governments a democratic response, that will effectively deliver good governance and socio-economic development while directly involving the citizenry in the decision-making processes that effect their lives and the future of their children.'
History shows that responsive democratic institutions can assist governments in responding to economic challenges in promoting growth.
The global economic crisis is in an immediate challenge for all of us. We need everyone to work together to develop the best responses. We need nations to work together. And within nations we need the private sector, government and the broader society to debate and to develop the best responses to the current crisis.
Democracy provides a channel for that to happen. Democracy is about open government and that means accepting the best answers might sometimes come from outside of government.
To conclude, the job of government is to serve and protect its people. The people are best served and protected by democracy. We need to support the development and spread of democracy within this, our region and our region will be the region of the 21st century.
We are all served if we have better governance and more democracy in our region. So Mr President, I would support your remarks that we through this forum, this important forum, the first time where governments of our region, as you said before have convened such a forum on democracy, rather than simply consigning it to the realm of academic discourse.
We've convened governments to talk about the future of democracy. Building on that I believe, flowing from this important Bali Democracy Forum, we should develop mechanisms to continue the dialogue among us (inaudible) power our practical processes within democracies can be developed and taken further. And for those who have not yet fully embraced the democratic path, how we can assist them in so doing.
Australia therefore, is proud to support Indonesia and President Yudhoyono in particular in this most significant and important regional initiative.
Building and consolidating democracy truly represents a strategic agenda for Asia. The title given to this forum, Setting a New Strategic Agenda for Asia is a good title. The 21st Century extends a challenge to all of us to rise to this new aspiration for our peoples. Mr President, I thank you.


YUDHOYONO TRANSLATOR: This morning I had the honour to receive his Excellency, the Prime Minister of Australia Mr Kevin Rudd who is coming to Indonesia upon my invitation and who will also be my Co-Chair in the Bali Democracy Forum. And I'm glad that we just had a very good bilateral discussion with him. 
To explain what we just discussed I am glad to give the Prime Minister the first opportunity to give his remarks about our meetings now.
PM RUDD: It is good to be back in Bali and it's good to be back here with our friends in Indonesia. President Yudhoyono and I met many times during the course of 2008 and it's been a challenging year for both of our countries in the midst of the global financial crisis.
We've worked we together in the meeting of the G20 in Washington, we worked well together in the most recent APEC Summit in Lima and we continue to work well together on the great challenge of climate change and the implementation of the Bali Roadmap. A Roadmap, which exists because of the President's personal intervention in a conference held here only 12 months ago.
Firstly, if I could begin by congratulating President Yudhoyono on his initiative in convening this Bali Democracy Forum. This is an important initiative because it is, the Republic of Indonesia, a newly re-formed democracy taking the message of democracy to the wider region and beyond.
In the Asia-Pacific region we have seen so much contribution from this region in the economic development of Asia and the wider world. Now also we see through this initiative of President Yudhoyono a further chapter, a further contribution from Asia to the rest of the world and that is the continuation and the expansion of the idea of democracy.
So President Yudhoyono I congratulate you on this initiative, it is a very good initiative and it is my great privilege and honour to be Co-Chair with you today. Also, his Excellency has indicated that to provide continued institutional support for the democracy process that we'll discuss at this conference today, that the Peace and Democracy Centre here in Bali will be also, established.
We in Australia because we believe in the importance of this project will become a foundation investor in this institute with an investment of three million Australian dollars.
That is because we believe this is a good initiative for Indonesia to take, one we wish to support now and into the future. Because the democratic idea is worth supporting.
A second area which the President and I discussed this morning dealt with people smuggling. And I can thank very much, the President for the continued strong and deep cooperation between our two countries on this continuing challenge.
I also express my appreciation for the decision by the Indonesian Government to submit to the Indonesian Parliament its proposal for ratification of the relevant UN Protocols dealing with people smuggling. This is an important matter for Australia and an important matter for Indonesia and an important matter for the wider region.
Secondly, I welcomed the decision by the President and Government of Indonesia to extradite Mr Ahmadi to face people smuggling charges in Australia. We regard matters relating to people smuggling as very serious indeed. And the matters surrounding Mr Ahmadi's case can now be brought before Australian courts.
Finally, on the question of people smuggling, the President and I agreed that we will further deepen our cooperation at the operational and field level in dealing with the challenges of people smuggling, into the future.
And my newly appointed National Security Adviser, Mr Duncan Lewis will be working closely with his Indonesian counterparts on extending that field cooperation to new levels.
One further area for discussion this morning was the impact on the global financial crisis and the global economic crisis on our respective economies and the challenges which lie ahead. This is important for both of us to continue to work on closely.
We have of course through Australian officials and Indonesian officials and the Finance Department of Indonesia, the Treasury Department in Australia, been working closely on Indonesian proposals for stand-by loan facilities for the future.
Australia will of course act as a friend and neighbour of Indonesia as we have done in the past decade with a billion dollar facility during a different financial crisis.
The details of this are of course being resolved between our officials. Australia is taking early and decisive action to tackle the financial crisis at many levels; at home, in the region and internationally.
And as I said to (inaudible) President, Australia in the past and today and into the future will be a good friend and good neighbour to Indonesia.
Finally, we discussed also the fact that in February next year in Sydney we will convene a major international conference on the future of the Australia-Indonesia relationship.
This will be held in Sydney between the 19th and 21st of February. We are expecting a very large delegation from our friends in Indonesia to attend. We regard this as a significant watershed in the Australia-Indonesia relationship as we bring together experts from across the fields dealing with the Australia-Indonesia relationship to help chart the next decade plus in the Australia-Indonesia relationship, for Australia this is an important relationship.
We attached great importance to it. We are in a period of great change and flux in the world at present. And it's time for our two countries to again, put our best minds and best talent and best brains together, in thinking through where we want this relationship to be in a decades' time.
Babak President thank you for your hospitality today, I appreciate it very much. And I look forward after your remarks to taking questions from ladies and gentlemen of the press.
YUDHOYONO TRANSLATOR: Thank you Prime Minister and for my part I would like to express our thanks for all the cooperation and assistance that Australia is providing us.
Our first thanks is for Australia's support and cooperation for the Institute for Peace and Democracy, which I will inaugurate today in Bali.
The second thanks is for the provision of stand-by loan for Indonesia if needed in case or if the financial situation in Indonesia requires it. As all of us know there are many countries who require financial support in all its forms, including stand-by loans, including Indonesia.
The Indonesian Government has decided that we will tackle or address the financial issue with a different format than we applied ten years ago, when we applied the direct cooperation between Indonesia and IMF. This time will be different, we will adopting a different format that is cooperation with World Bank, ADB, Japan, Australia and European Union.
The stand-by loan arrangement with Australia is placed in this context of our needs. And my next thanks is for Australia's prompt response in apprehending Indonesian citizen in Australia by the name of Ariawan who is a suspect for corruption in the BLBI Case involving some 1.9 trillion (inaudible). We hope that he can soon be extradited to Indonesia.
On trafficking in person and smuggling, we will intensify our cooperation. Now I am pleased to inform you that in the very near future Indonesia will extradite a person by the name Ahmadi of who is suspected of being involved in smuggling operation, people smuggling operation to Australia.
Ahmadi is an Iranian citizen who has been involved, who has been suspected to be involved in a number of crimes leading to people smuggling. And out courts in Indonesia have decided that he can be extradited and our Government is following up on this.
Prime Minister Rudd and I also agreed to intensify our bilateral cooperation to deal with people smuggling by stronger implementation of the Lombok Treaty, which will lead to stronger cooperation and partnership in the field so that we will have faster and more effective cooperation in dealing with transnational crimes.
I also informed the Prime Minister that Indonesia is near a process of finalising the ratification of the UN Convention, UN Convention on Transnational Crime and (inaudible) two particular protocols. Firstly, the protocol on the prevention and suppression of trafficking and prevention of trafficking in persons and second one is the protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land, sea and air. That we would have a very strong legal foundation to promote our cooperation in this area.
And that is all and we will now take questions. We will take two questions, two from the Indonesia journalists and two from the Australian journalists. I will point to the Indonesian journalists and Fiona will point to the Australian journalists. The first Indonesian journalist is (inaudible) from the Jakarta post. Can you rise up please.
JOURNALIST: I was just wanting to ask about the people smuggling. Does this people smuggling issue effect the relationship between Australia and Indonesia?
YUDHOYONO TRANSLATOR: For Indonesia this is an important agenda. Important in the context of the implementation of Lombok Treaty and for our overall bilateral relations.
Of course, I do not expect to disturb our bilateral relations. In fact, on the contrary, I expect that for us to intensify our cooperation to tackle this common problem.
PM RUDD: I think I would agree with what President Yudouhono has said. This is a common challenge for both of our countries. Our law enforcement agencies work closely together. This is a challenge not unique to Australia and Indonesia. It is a global challenge, if you look at what is happening with unlawful people movements in various other parts of the world, including the Mediterranean. Therefore, it is challenge for all of us.
At a practical level, the work being done between our agencies is very good. What we have resolved today is to take it also to a even greater depth at the field level and we will work constructively along those lines with our friends in Jakarta. The fact that the Lombok Treaty makes provision, explicitly for this form of cooperation, is why we all agreed to the Lombok Treaty in the first place.
In fact I believe our work together on this will further be a reflection of how good and strong the relationship is. But can I just say this, this will be a continuing challenge for the future because there are still push factors operating in many countries around the world, and when you have push factors at work, and people are being pushed by a range of circumstances, into the arms of people smugglers, this is a reality we are all going to have to continue to confront in the years ahead.
That is why intensified security cooperation and political cooperation between our two countries and other countries is so important.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister you have announced this increase in measures regarding people smuggling problem. Will you concede that people smugglers have in fact been taking advantage of our Government's relaxed approach to asylum seekers and will these measures be enough to avoid a tragedy at sea like we have seen in the past?
PM RUDD: Well if you look at the question of people smuggling, it has never gone away. There is sometimes an erroneous view that people smugglers simply disappeared, they did not. They have been active and working over a long period of time. And if you were to compare the numbers year on year in terms of arrivals in Australia, it shows that we have had a continuing problem in recent years.
The practical challenge for us all though is simply to work together and to deal in a practical way with challenges as they arise. And the good thing about our relationship at the political level and the level of the police, intelligence and security agencies, is that this is working quite effectively, and we have decided today to take further measures to deepen that level of practical cooperation.
But to reinforce what was asked just before by the representative from the Jakarta post, this will be a continuing challenge into the future. This is going to require continued hard work by all of us and not just the Governments of Indonesia and Australia, other regional governments and other governments beyond the immediate region where we see a number of these push factors at work as well.
JOURNALIST: Welcome to Bali Prime Minister.
PM RUDD: It is good to be in Bali.
JOURNALIST: I have two questions. One to the Prime Minister is, just now you mention about the (inaudible)
TRANSLATOR: The second question was, the Bali Democracy Forum is an important initiative for Indonesia, what does Indonesia expect to achieve from this Bali Democracy Forum in terms of promotion of democracy in Indonesia and in other places, in Asia.
PM RUDD: On the first part of your question concerning the Indonesian standby loan facility. I think as President will himself, confirm in a minute, the entire scope of the facility which you have just described, namely in relation to the $5 billion plus, extends to a range of countries. I think his Excellency referred today to Australia, to Japan, to the European Union, to the World Bank and to the Asian Development Bank.
And we are simply one prospective participant in that. And secondly, the scope, as we have indicated before of our proposed participation is in the vicinity of $1 billion. Now, as I indicated before, Australia will of course act as a friend and good neighbour of Indonesia as we have done in the past, a decade ago, providing a financial facility of around about $1 billion, in a different financial crisis.
This is the sort of thing good friends and good neighbours should do to help one another in times of global financial crisis and global economic crisis. Because our government is determined to act at home decisively to support growth, to support jobs, to act regionally, to do the same, and this falls within that context, and also, to act globally as both His Excellency and myself are seeking to do through the G 20 process.
YUDHOYONO TRANSLATOR: On Bali Democracy Forum, I should point out that is a process. It is a never ending process, it is constantly evolving process. So we can always talk about democracy.
(inaudible) unique because it has Eastern values, Western values, Islamic values and even though democracy has universal applicability, it must also be matched and mixed with local conditions.
Through the Bali Democracy Forum we can each and we can all conduct a dialogue and discussions and sharing experience on how each of us will advance the democracy in our respective countries.
There are a lot of problems in the world that are due to the problems of democracy and what we need to do is to build bridges to open opportunities and Bali is just, it tries to provide the room for this dialogue and I am glad that I am able to be co-chair of this process with the Prime Minister of Australia and that is the essence of what we are trying to do with the Bali Democracy Forum.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Prime Minister 12 months ago you came to Bali as a newly elected Prime Minister and your Government gave an in principle commitment to reduce carbon emissions by between 25 and 40 per cent. Now it reads in today's paper that the Government is considering a far less ambitious target of around 10 per cent. Why has that target changed?
Secondly, President developing nations have pushed very hard for the developed world to take on targets of between 25 and 40 per cent. Are you disappointed by Australia's lack of ambition on climate change?
PM RUDD: Firstly, when I attended the Bali conference on climate change 12 months ago, the Australian Government explicitly stated at that stage that we would not be committing at that stage, to midterm targets. That is exactly what I said. And secondly, when it comes to what mid terms targets we do commit ourselves to, we will next week be releasing our white paper on the Carbon Pollution Reduction strategy for Australia, Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme for Australia, the CPRS. And that will make clear what we believe should be Australia's medium term targets.
Furthermore, we believe that this is going to be a complex negotiation for the 12 months which transpire between the Poznan conference which is under way now, and the Copenhagen conference, at which, agreement is hoped to be achieved.
There is a long way to go in terms of the overall negotiation. But in terms of our position, vis-à-vis mid terms targets, as I have said consistently in Australia, consistent with the position that we have articulated before, that will be made clear in the CPRS, Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme white paper which will be released on Monday.
Also, long term on climate change, it is important for all economies, developed and developing, to embrace the challenge of climate change. As I have said consistently in Australia, this challenge is not going away. It is not going away because of the global financial crisis. It is here and it is real and it is continuing.
The challenge for us all is to get the absolute balance right, a responsible course of action on bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, involving actions by both developed and developing countries. And secondly, making sure we get the balance right also in the context of the real challenges which confront our economy as well.
YUDHOYONO TRANSLATOR: My answer is twofold; one is general and secondly is about Indonesia's cooperation with Australia on climate change.
First on the general question the basic guiding principle of common and different responsibilities and respective capabilities. Both developed and developing countries must do more. They must invest in partnership and they must work together to achieve our common goals.
Developed countries must take the lead and in fact, developing countries also are willing to take their part, but they are unable to do so because of their lack of resources.
In moving forward I think the most important thing to do is the financing and also transfer of technology, to help us adapt and mitigate the challenge of climate change.
We also have a very cooperation between Indonesia and Australia especially on the question of forestry management and we are actively trying to improve and implement this cooperation.
In my meetings with Prime Minister Rudd, we always discuss how Indonesia and Australia can cooperate closer both bilaterally and also multilaterally to tackle the challenge of climate change. Thank you very much.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced a $3 million assistance package to support the new Bali Democracy Forum (BDF) and the Institute for Peace and Democracy in Indonesia. 
The Prime Minister made the announcement in Bali where he is co-chairing the BDF with the President of Indonesia, HE Dr Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
The BDF and the new Institute at the University of Udayana in Bali are aimed at fostering democracy in the Asia Pacific and are timely regional initiatives by President Yudhoyono.
Australia strongly congratulates President Yudhoyono for his vision and his regional leadership in convening the Bali Democracy Forum.
The Forum will be open to all countries from across the region and will meet regularly at a ministerial level. It will be supported by the new Institute which will organise workshops and research on democratic processes, such as electoral systems, the role of civil society and the media, the judiciary and the role of the military.
It is in Australia's own national interests to support an initiative aimed at strengthening democratic process and good governance in the Asia Pacific.
It is fitting that this initiative has been launched by President Yudhoyono, in Indonesia, which has undergone a remarkable transformation in recent years to become the world's third largest democracy.
Australia's assistance to the BDF will provide:
     * Support for a partnership between the Institute and Australia's Centre for Democratic Institutions at the Australian National University;
     * Start-up financing for the Institute;
     * A mixture of short- and long-term “democracy scholarships”, established in partnership with the Institute which will bring students from the region to study in Australia.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today officially opened The Bendigo Centre  -  the first Australian bank headquarters to be sited outside a capital city.
The Rudd Government is determined to invest in rural and regional Australia to keep communities strong, and is pleased to see the business community showing the same commitment to rural jobs.
Bendigo and Adelaide Bank's decision to open its head office in Bendigo, Victoria, means 850 staff can live and work in regional Victoria.
The bank's commitment to saving water and energy is also on display at The Bendigo Centre  -  one of the first Five Star Green Star designed buildings to be built in a regional location.
The Bendigo Centre uses half the energy of a typical office building, with solar panels to reduce black power usage and automated lights which dim or turn themselves off according to the natural light available.
Its Recycling Water Treatment Plant saves 20,000 litres of waste water a day, cutting potable water use by more than half.
In its 150th year, Bendigo Bank deserves praise for its commitment to regional Australia, regional jobs and the environment.


O'BRIEN: It's been a rollercoaster year, Mr Rudd. In January you were warning in the midst of a resources boom that inflation was out of control. You're ending the year battling to stay out of recession. You must regret now that the Reserve Bank, like you, was so fearful of inflation then that it really crunched confidence in the economy with those rapid succession interest rate hikes, just as the global crisis was coming around the corner.
PM: Well Kerry you referred to January this year and the first speech I delivered on the economy, in Perth from memory, I indicated that Australia was subject to conflicting economic forces. There were those which were fuelling inflation at home and those which were acting to curtail growth abroad.
And those were the two tensions we were dealing with then. Those tensions were reflected also in the statements delivered by the Treasurer at budget time.
You mentioned the impact of cumulative interest rate rises. Let's just put a few facts on the table there. Ten interest rate rises in a row under the Liberal Party over a two or three year period. That has a huge effect on confidence in the business community and in the housing sector and the ability of people to pay home mortgages.
That is the circumstances we inherited. We've had to deal with the challenge of the global financial crisis, we've outlined our strategy for doing so and we are determined to see Australia through.
O'BRIEN: But without casting blame you have to wonder, or you must have wondered once or twice as you've been trying to grapple with this crisis how much better shape Australia would be in to handle it today if we hadn't copped those last two interest rate rises as we did in quick succession?
PM: Well again the reality in the first six months of the year, as reflected by statements by myself and the Treasurer, was that we were dealing with these dual conflicting challenges - inflation at home and recessionary pressures abroad. And those were alive in our comments then.
Secondly, what we did at budget time, mindful of those two sets of challenges, was put away a very large budget surplus to be prepared for when times got worse. And of course times did get worse. Times rapidly became worse after the acceleration of the global financial crisis in September.
That put us in precisely the position we needed to be in October to bring forward an Economic Security Strategy of $10.4 billion; one per cent of GDP. And thereby our strategy was able to deliver the response we needed when the time came.
O'BRIEN: Well you're doing your best to stimulate the economy now as you're saying, urging people to spend the $8 billion or so that you're sending out to pensioners and people on lower incomes. I'm sure the irony hasn't escaped you that the reason the developed world is in this mess is because people have been on a spending spree for years, including to some extent Australians. Living beyond their means and creating a massive debt bubble. We understand the strategy but the irony is there, isn't it?
PM: Well step back in terms of what has actually caused the global financial crisis: A complete failure of effective regulation of financial markets most particularly in the United States. That's where this crisis began.
And as a consequence, the cancer through the various forms of unregulated financial instruments spread right across the global financial system. That in turn created a credit crunch. That in turn has created a crisis of confidence in financial institutions. That in turn has created a real crisis in the real economy, including employment.
My job as Prime Minister of Australia is to respond.
O'BRIEN: But Australia too had and has its own debt problems, doesn't it, both at a personal level and at a business level?
PM: Well levels of indebtedness have grown over a long period of time as you know from the statistics Kerry. But I'm not inaccurate to say that this current crisis was born out of the US housing market. That's where it was financed and refinanced by a series of exotic financial instruments.
As I've said repeatedly the extreme form of capitalism, which gave rise to the unregulated financial markets, enabled this risk to be spread throughout the financial system, a cancer which of course has now brought about real consequences for growth and jobs in countries like Australia.
O'BRIEN: You're saying to people now to spend. But can you blame them, those of them, for being cautious after all the warnings as Glenn Stevens says they might actually want to save it at least temporarily or heaven forbid actually use it to pay off debt, which is not really what you want right now.
PM: Well, Kerry, Australians are grown-up people they'll make up their own decisions. I've simply been very blunt from day one when I brought in this economic security strategy, with a large allocation of funds to pensioners, carers, as well as to families and to first home buyers that the objective was very clear and very simple.
It was to stimulate this economy when so many economies around the world are already either in negative growth or in recession. Therefore my motivation, our objective, has been clear from the beginning.
At the end of the day you can't mandate what individual consumers do. But, I've been in Bendigo today and stopped for a coffee on the way back to Melbourne, I ran into lots of people who are out there doing their bit. One lady said she was going off to get herself a new set of false teeth using her money. I thought that was kind of nice. I presume that's going to be Australian made.
Another lady said that -
O'BRIEN: That's a big assumption.
PM: No, well, another bloke said that he was off to buy a rainwater tank.
Another one said that she was buying extra Christmas presents for the kids and then having a holiday.
Everyone is going to make their own decision. My job as Prime Minister is to provide as rapid a response possible to the rapid global deterioration in the economy and to try and support growth and jobs. And this is the best instrument available to government at this stage. But as I've said before, there are other actions for government to take including nation building, including infrastructure investment.
O'BRIEN: Of course, China has slowed down now as a double whammy for Australia. What was our strength is now a serious part of our problems. It's certainly looming that way. Does your intelligence out of China agree with that of the Reserve Bank Governor that China's industrial production, as he said a couple of nights ago, has probably been in decline since July?
PM: Certainly in our multiple discussions with the Chinese leadership, they are concerned about the state of growth in the Chinese economy. That underpinned the extraordinary stimulus package we saw announced by them only a month or so ago.
I believe also the Chinese will act further in the future, to further stimulate their economy. But the challenge which they face is almost in some respects like the challenge of other economies - to stimulate domestic demand at this time, because when you have a global financial crisis becoming a global economic crisis the opportunity simply to generate an export-led recovery is reduced because all economies are experiencing contractions in demand.
Therefore the challenge for the Chinese, like we've just been talking about for Australia is to boost domestic consumption. And the Chinese leadership will act in this area.
But remember in our part of the world Kerry, we are still seeing positive economic growth from major economies like China - revisions down from plus ten to something like eight or a little less.
O'BRIEN: Well yes, you must be concerned though at the rapidity of that drop. I mean, the Chinese predictions keep being revised like everyone else's, they're now down to seven and a half and presumably falling.
PM: Well we are in unprecedented territory here. This is a global financial crisis. But when I look around the major G7 economies and look at the fact that practically all of them are either in negative growth or in recession, the fact that we are in this region and we are linked so much to the economies of this region has provided us with some support.
But I've got to say, this country is not out of the woods yet. This is a long, long row to hoe but we are determined to take whatever decisive action is necessary to support growth in jobs.
O'BRIEN: Well there are those who are saying of course that we are really just going into the woods. Looking at Rio Tinto's reaction to the post-boom realities: a huge global cutback in its workforce, including in Australia, and a halving of its capital expenditure. What do you say to those who are now predicting and they're a growing band of voices, who are now predicting a recession in Australia for much of next year?
PM: Well I've looked at the statement by Rio Tinto and obviously that is bad news. Let's just be blunt about it. But I don't intend to engage in the business of simple economic commentary. The job of political leadership is to provide a strategy through.
And what I've said is, here is stage one: stabilisation of the financial system through the bank guarantees we've provided. Stage two, the stimulus package, the $10.4 billion plan we've just been discussing. Then the other measures that we've done in recent days, including a $15.1 billion package for the States, $3 billion of which flows additionally in the coming year. And further action yet on infrastructure.
These are concrete measures supporting also a 300 basis point reduction in interest rates. These are practical measures designed to stimulate jobs and stimulate the economy.
But Kerry - 2009 is going to be very tough and I don't wish to try and gild the lily with people watching your program. And, we're all in this together. If we stick together  -  business, unions, employers, employees, governments at different levels  -  we can see Australia through. It's going to be a pretty bumpy road.
O'BRIEN: After you introduced your $10 billion package, you and the Treasurer have indicated that if there has to be a further stimulus then you're up for it. One has to assume since you made that more recent economic statement in the parliament that conditions now are even more critical globally than they were when you made that commitment. Then one assumes that the prospect of a second stimulus, the necessity of another stimulus is increasingly likely.
PM: Well Kerry I've always been blunt about the fact that we'll take whatever further decisive action is necessary to support growth and jobs and families.
That package was announced on, I think 12 October. The payments, one and a half million payments I think, made yesterday and another 1.6 million today to pensioners, carers, seniors, families and more to come next week.
But you're right. Further stimulus is necessary, particularly to support infrastructure investment, and as I've indicated already we'll be making another statement on infrastructure before year's end. And also, we intend to deliver a further statement in the first part of the New Year.
That is because we want to embrace a series of measures to support growth in what will be a very difficult, late ‘08, early ‘09, in terms of the growth numbers. And I intend not to get to the end of next year and scratch my head wondering what would happen, what would have happened had I acted.
I intend to act as far as possible ahead of the curve, do the right thing to support growth, try and support business confidence, try and support consumer confidence but against the great odds of a global financial environment which has been extraordinarily difficult to deal with.
O'BRIEN: You're also grappling with climate change policy. The Australian Industry Group, as a group one of Australia's biggest employers or representing Australia's, amongst Australia's biggest employers, is pleading with the Government to recognise the diabolical dilemma as they call it, for business. Trying to deal with the economic crisis themselves and face up to your climate change policy, introducing an emissions trading scheme in 2010.
Heather Ridout says, of AIG, says the nation's commitment to address climate change was conceived in times of prosperity. She wants you to delay its introduction until the economic storm has passed. Will you consider that?
PM: Kerry, what the business groups, like the Business Council of Australia, have said is that business wants long-term certainty about the rules which will govern carbon emissions into the future. And remember we're talking about an introduction in 2010, not on the first of January 2009. We're talking about some time hence.
But it's important that the rules are out there so people can understand them.
The second point I'd say is this. This Government is determined absolutely to get the balance right. We understand the need for decisive action on the environment long term. If we fail to act there the economic and environmental consequences for Australia are horrendous, as they would be globally.
Secondly, we intend also in framing our approach to the carbon pollution reduction scheme to be entirely mindful of the difficult economic circumstances Australia and the world is facing as well. And I'm sure when this is delivered early next week, we'll get attacked from the left, we'll get attacked from the right. We'll get attacked by various radical green groups saying that we haven't gone far enough because we haven't closed down the coal industry by next Thursday and  - 
O'BRIEN: I think that's a little unkind but  - 
PM: Well I think it states the  -  no, Kerry, this is absolutely true. We'll be attacked from the far right and by various business groups, I suppose, certainly the Liberal Party for doing anything at all. We'll be attacked by extreme green groups for not taking the most radical course of action. We intend to steer a balanced course.
O'BRIEN: Okay, I won't try and get any targets out of you before Monday, I know that's a wasted exercise. But are you saying that regardless even of a recession next year, regardless of many businesses facing going under, many jobs potentially being lost - one way or another you are committed to introducing your emissions trading scheme in 2010?
PM: Kerry let me put it in context. We have not changed our ambition in terms of that 2010 reduction. Secondly -
O'BRIEN: But will you consider it?
PM: No. I've just said our ambition remains and we have no cause to change it. But let me add two further points. Firstly, is that in introducing this carbon pollution reduction scheme we're talking about 2010, we're not talking about the events in the economic cycle in the first, second and third quarters of 2009.
Secondly, in terms of the immediate challenges of the economy, this Government is introducing a massive range of stimulus in the economy to help business to help business.
And finally, when this scheme is introduced, as you would have seen in the Green Paper we put out, we have outlined a whole range of industry transition measures to support industry in a very gradual transition path to a lower carbon future. This is a responsible and balanced course of action.
O'BRIEN: I assume  -  last question for the year  -  I assume you must have learnt some lessons from your first year in office. What is one outstanding lesson learned? Briefly.
PM: Get a good night's sleep.
O'BRIEN: How about, how about don't have journalists to dinner if you know you're about to receive a call from the White House?
PM: [Laughs] It's important to have a good night's sleep and I wish your viewers a very happy Christmas and I hope you get a good night's sleep in your break over Christmas as well.
O'BRIEN: Same to you Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program. 


Thank you very much. Premier John Brumby, former Federal Member for Bendigo, Steve Gibbons, present Federal Members for Bendigo. Steve has a remarkable power of gentle persuasion to get me to fly from Melbourne to Darwin, to Indonesia, to Melbourne and drive to Bendigo in 48 hours. Well done Steve.
Bob Cameron MP, State Member for Bendigo West, Jacinta Allan MP, State Member for Bendigo East, Damian Drum MLC, State Member North Western Province, Kevin Gibbons the Mayor of Bendigo, Robert Johanson, Chairman of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and Rob Hunt, Managing Director, Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and you, the good citizens of Bendigo. It's good to be here.
And I too begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
What a great day for Bendigo. What a fantastic day. Here we are on this wonderful sunny morning, in this great, vibrant regional centre, in regional Victoria, celebrating a great Australian regional and now national institution, the Bendigo Bank.
As I stand here this morning and look out at this crowd I am reminded very much of a community in regional Queensland I grew up in. The great thing about communities like this is that you stick together. You work together. You have a civic pride. You have a community pride. You believe in building local institutions. You believe in adding to them year on year, decade by decade, generation by generation.
And it's that great sense of continuity and commitment that I believe is the lifeblood of regional Australia. And you see it writ large in this great civic community, this great wider community of Bendigo and I congratulate you and the Bank on your contribution to the nation.
Bendigo has always has a special grace and special grandeur about its public buildings and its monuments. With the landmark buildings that speak of the city's origins from Gold Rush days, Bendigo has always been one of Australia's great regional cities.
Even as a kid growing up in regional Queensland, we learnt all about Bendigo. It was part of our grade three, grade four, grade five, grade six, grade seven curriculum at school.
But you know Bendigo is not just a city of the past. Bendigo is a city of the future.
With this outstanding new landmark, Bendigo says to the world  -  this is not just an historic city. This is now a very modern city. A city for the future.
This is a city that can drive innovation that changes the face of something as basic to towns and cities across our nation as community banking.
A few generations ago, Bendigo's Lyric Theatre stood where the Bendigo Centre now stands. I understand the Lyric Theatre was the hub of activity in its time.
Just as the Lyric Theatre brought the Bendigo community together on this site last century, the new Bendigo Centre revitalises the city centre today. Not just with a new place of work but also with new public space that the Premier has just opened, through the new Lyric Square.
The Bendigo Centre has also achieved the highest standards of environmental sustainability. In fact the builders have been unable to identify any other major building outside of a capital city that is Five Star Green Star rated.
It offers to save four and a half million litres of drinking water annually by recycling 75 to 80 per cent of its water usage. With innovative design features like sunshades, an abundant use of natural light and an under-floor displacement air conditioning system, it promises to cut power usage and cut down its carbon pollution.
And can I say having just had a wander through this building, it's a fantastic building. It's alive, it's open, it's a place where staff like to be and like to work. And also when you see the abundance of natural light through it, you've got to congratulate the architects and those who had the vision to place this great building at Bendigo's centre.
This remarkable building is worthy of the remarkable story of Bendigo Bank. If we wound back the clock 150 years, all that we'd see around us might be few clumps of makeshift tents for the miners who had rushed here to build their fortunes.
But inside one of those tents, a few locals might be talking enthusiastically, sharing a dream  -  that one day, but one day, here in Bendigo the miners might be able to live in cottages of their own.
This was the dream that inspired 150 people to throw in five pounds worth of capital each and establish the Bendigo Permanent Land and Building Society 150 years ago, in 1858.
Today, we call it the Bendigo Bank - or to use its full title, the Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, following the merger last November.
It was a remarkable beginning for an organisation that today is known around the entire nation and manages more than $43 billion in loans under management.
What is remarkable about Bendigo Bank today is not just how it has grown but what it stands for in the eyes of Australian customers.
From the top end to the southern tip, and from towns lapped by the Indian Ocean to the nation's east coast, Bendigo Bank stands for local community banking and local community spirit.
A bank that believes in local communities and invests in local communities. A bank that gives local communities a real say in how their banking service is run. A bank that helps Australians make the dream of owning their own home a reality. And a bank that also helps local businesses grow.
Some in local communities across Australia, when people see the name ‘Bendigo Bank' they don't think of Bendigo. They think Atherton or Innisfail; of Bundaberg or Bunbury or Mount Gambier or Mildura. They think of their own home town.
This is a remarkable achievement, a remarkable accomplishment given that the idea was born here. It helps explain why we're opening this building today and why Bendigo Bank now provides jobs to 1,000 people in this city and in this building.
Australians remember that when many banks were leaving local towns and suburbs, Bendigo Bank did, as the Premier noted before, exactly the opposite.
They swam against the tide, opening new community branches, supporting local communities and creating local jobs. And they've been rewarded for it.
Today, Bendigo's community banking model continues to grow, with 220 community banks now operating around Australia. Bendigo Bank now helps more than 1.3 million customers to achieve their financial goals.
It makes an important contribution to a competitive and innovative Australian banking sector. Bendigo's record of innovation goes well beyond the community banking sector for which it is most well known.
It being the first financial institution to introduce Visa debit and credit cards back in 1982. Being the first financial institution to introduce a mortgage offset account, introducing Australia's first Green Loans in 2002, forming its banking joint venture with the not-for-profit sector known as Community Sector Banking, in 2002 as well.
In addition, Bendigo Bank is a leader in social responsibility, with its charitable arm, the Community Enterprise Foundation, giving back to the community through many local charities and community projects.
Ladies and gentlemen 2008 has been a very tough year for the financial sector around the world. Indeed, it has been one of the toughest for the financial system of any of the 150 years that Bendigo Bank has been in business.
The global financial system came close to complete meltdown. We saw more than 30 major banks around the world collapse, or have to be bailed out.
Many institutions and many businesses got caught up in the global financial crisis through no fault of their own.
This crisis has made it necessary for governments around the world to step in  -  to stabilise institutions, to inject equity and to restore confidence.
Australia has not suffered the extremes seen in the markets of many of our closest friends and allies. But Australia has not been immune from the global financial crisis.
The Government has taken early and decisive action to do everything possible to protect the Australian economy, families and jobs from the full impact of the global financial crisis.
That's why the Government acted decisively in October to offer a guarantee for all of Australia's 15 million bank deposit accounts - unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth. That is why we've also acted to provide a guarantee for banks, building societies and credit unions. Unprecedented again in the history of the Commonwealth.
It's why we injected $8 billion into residential-backed mortgage securities market. Unprecedented, again, in the history of the Commonwealth. All these measures necessary to stabilise the Australian financial system. And the global financial system is still not out of the woods yet.
The global financial crisis has of course become a global crisis in credit markets, stock markets and through that also, in property markets. The global financial crisis has become therefore a crisis for the real economy. And a global crisis in the real economy becomes a global crisis in employment.
And that is why the Government has begun, through the Economic Security Strategy, providing payments to families and to pensioners, carers and people with disabilities all around Australia  -  as part of a $10.4 billion package to stimulate the economy, to support jobs, and create through it 75,000 additional jobs.
That's why we've backed the new car plan for Australia, a $6.2 billion plan for the future. That's why we've also invested $300 million to support local activity and investment by local authorities across Australia through the recent meeting of the Council of Australian Local Governments.
And why we have in the week just passed, agreed on a package of $15.1 billion with the States and Territories to invest in hospitals, schools, education and social housing. Again with a capacity to generate a further 133,000 jobs across the nation.
Can I say to you, ladies and gentlemen, citizens of Bendigo that this for us must just be the beginning. This will be a very difficult year ahead. The Government stands ready to take what additional action is necessary to support Australia through this most difficult time. And the difficult times are with us.
Let us not forget that in dealing with the global financial and economic crisis, these are not simply statistics and numbers on some balance sheet.
It's the financial security of hard-working Australian families, of pensioners, of carers that is at stake. It's the livelihood of working Australians that is at stake. It is also the jobs of Australians that is at stake.
And these are the things that matter and therefore the task of Government is to whatever is possible to reduce the impact of the global financial crisis on Australian jobs. And we've been reminded of the difficulty of that task today with the announcement of Rio Tinto's job cuts.
I believe as a community, as a national community, we can steer our way through this crisis for the future. I believe as a community, if we all pull together and recognise that we in this boat together we will come through in a strong way. I also believe that this is what the Australian people expect of us.
You know the great thing about Australia is that when you are in a crisis our habit and our custom and our history is to stick together. And guess what, we're in a global financial crisis and the challenge for the period ahead is for us all to stick together.
Each and every person of this great gathering in Bendigo today is in this together. Business, unions, employers, employees, governments - Federal, State, Local all of us - community organisations. And if we unite through this crisis we will take Australia through this crisis and we'll emerge stronger for it.
Ladies and gentlemen congratulations to those responsible for this striking building design. Bligh Voller Nield Architecture and GrayPuksand, working with ESG Consultancy Connell Wagner.
One of Bendigo Bank's property team, Richard Hasseldine, comments on the short video about the building on the Bendigo Bank website that this building aims to send the message to the local community that “we're here for long term”.
I would have thought after 150 years you didn't actually need to say that.
Congratulations to the staff of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and to Robert Johanson and his board. May Bendigo Bank continue to thrive and prosper and give life and energy to this great city for many years to come.
And having made those remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it is with great pleasure and great delight that I declare the Bendigo Centre open, finally and formally for business. 


PM: Well it's great to be here in Bendigo and to have the opportunity to be at this opening of The Bendigo Centre.
It's great to see what the Bendigo Bank is doing in supporting financial services across regional Australia, but also supporting jobs across regional Australia as well.
So it is a great opportunity for me to be here today, to be a part of what is genuinely an important local community event.
Speaking about jobs brings us back to the global financial crisis.
The Government's task is to do whatever is possible to reduce the impact of the global financial crisis on Australian jobs.
And that now is brought into sharp (inaudible) again by the announcement of Rio Tinto on its own jobs cuts.
The global financial crisis is becoming a crisis for the real economy across the world, which in turn becomes a global employment crisis as well.
The task of government is this  -  to do whatever is possible and practical to stabilise the financial system, to support employment and to support families during this challenging time which lies ahead.
That underpins the Government's decision to introduce its Economic Security Strategy - $10.4 billion in payments to pensioners and to carers and to families, and to support first home buyers.
This is stage one of the Government's response to the impact of the global financial crisis on the real economy and jobs, and the Government will have further announcements to make in the future about what needs to be done further to reduce the impact of this global crisis on the Australian economy.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are you doing to support regional businesses, we've suffered a lot of job losses (inaudible)
PM: First and foremost, the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy goes right across Australia. For example, in the last few days we have had payments which have gone out already to pensioners and carers right across the system.
That's been really important in terms of ensuring that those payments goes to pensioners in rural and regional Australia as well.
So on Wednesday and Thursday of this week, literally millions of dollars in payments going out to pensioners and carers in Bendigo, pensioners and carers and families right across the country.
Really important because guess what, every local shop, every local supermarket, every local store needs to be supported by Australian consumers going out there and using these funds which the Government has provided through the Economic Security Strategy.
But that's just one. Secondly, recently I've convened a meeting of the Council of Australian Local Governments in Canberra, including representatives from local authorities in regional Victoria and regional Australia.
And what we've done through that is provide a $300 million up-front stimulus package to go to local authorities right across the country as well, including here.
On top of that again, we have made a further payment of $15.1 billion to the states and territories through the Council of Australian Governments - $3 billion plus of which flows through in the year ahead
And that means more funding for hospitals, more funding for schools, more funding for other critical government investment, including social housing across regional Australia as well.
None of these things add up to a total solution. But if I was to put these three things together, the Economic Security Strategy phase one is capable of creating some 77,000 jobs.
The Council of Australian Governments package - $15.1 billion - capable of creating some 133,000 jobs.
All of these measures are designed to support the economy, support jobs and support families.
But this is tough, and 2009 is going to be tough as well, but we stand ready to take whatever future action is necessary to support jobs as well.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee the Government will fully fund the Bendigo GP Superclinic?
PM: We will honour fully our pre-election commitments. Absolutely and fully.
And the reason why we made undertakings about GP Superclinics is to make sure that we've got the best spread of GP services and specialist services in local communities like this.
For example, I was in Darwin yesterday, the day before. Felt like yesterday. This week in Darwin, in Palmerston, the pre-election commitment we made to open a GP Superclinic there will be honoured.
It's difficult doing the organisational work on the ground to get it ready. Make sure that your expression of interest process is proper and done thoroughly. But let me tell you we are absolutely determined to honour in full, our commitment to every local community.
Why? Mums and dads want to make sure we've got the best provision of local GP and other allied health services on the ground.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ABC Learning (inaudible)
PM: This is a really tough challenge for working families with little kids right across the country.
The previous Government allowed this company, ABC Learning to get 25 per cent control of the long day care child care market in Australia.
And therefore when that company gets itself into trouble, guess what, a huge slice of the mums and dads of kids in Australia find themselves in real trouble.
So either you could say, ‘Well that's not my problem, we'll just let the market sort that out' or you say, ‘actually mums and dads have got a real problem on their hands right now'.
And our belief is this, that it's really important to support mums and dads and little kids at this time.
So therefore the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Education, Julia Gillard, has acted entirely properly in providing two amounts of funding, totalling about $50 million to ensure that those companies, which have been deemed by the receiver to be unviable, can remain open through to January and in some cases March, to enable parents to transition to other viable child care centres.
Otherwise, you just leave people in the lurch and I don't think that's the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you plan to apologise to the hundreds of Australian who are raised in institutions?
PM: On the particular report that you're referring to?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Which report are you referring to?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've just returned to Australia about one this morning. I'll get fully briefed on that one and I'm sure the Government, through the relevant minister will make the appropriate statement.
The other thing I could just add in terms of the questions which have been asked, is to make a general comment about climate change as well.
There's some debate out there in the general community at the moment about climate change. Can I just say, it's very simple to this Government.
This Government is determined to get the balance right on acting on climate change.
This Government will get attacked from the left and from the right. This Government will be attacked by green groups on the left for not going far enough. We'll be attacked on the hard right by various businesses for going too far.
Our job is to get the balance right, because if we do not act on climate change long-term then let me tell you it will come and deliver a huge economic burden to Australia if we fail to act, quite apart from the environmental consequences.
So you're going to have people out there on the left, some of the green groups saying that we should shut down the coal industry overnight.
You're going to have people out there like the Liberal party on the far right saying don't do anything at all.
We intend to get the balance right, and the Government is confident it will get the balance right. It will be a tough debate but we believe it is necessary for regional Australia, rural Australia, it's necessary for the whole nation and it's necessary for long-term planning for the future.


It is with great sadness that I learned of the passing of Mr Ali Alatas. 
Mr Alatas was a great friend of Australia and made an outstanding contribution to the Asia-Pacific region.
I had the pleasure of meeting him on many occasions over the years.
Mr Alatas was Foreign Minister of Indonesia from 1988 to 1999, and his legacy can be clearly seen in the excellent relationship we enjoy with Indonesia today.
As Foreign Minister, he made a personal commitment to developing Indonesia's relationship with Australia.
He did this on the basis of strong, practical cooperation on issues of importance to both countries.
Mr Alatas contributed both vision and hard work to strengthening the political, economic and personal links between our two countries.
Fittingly in 1995 he was awarded an Honorary Award in the Order of Australia for service to Australia-Indonesia relations.
Mr Alatas also made an enormous contribution to the Asia-Pacific region including the Cambodia peace settlement, during which he co-chaired the Paris Peace Conference, the establishment of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) process and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), for regional security discussions.
He went on to serve with distinction as Indonesia's permanent representative to the United Nations and as an adviser to President Yudhoyono.
As a measure of the great regard in which he was held, Mr Alatas was appointed as a Commissioner on the Government's International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
In October I hosted a dinner for the Commissioners at Kirribilli and had the great pleasure of catching up again with Mr Alatas on that occasion.
Today we honour the memory of Mr Alatas and his significant contribution to developing and strengthening relations between our two countries. 


The Rudd Government today announced a $4.7 billion nation building package to strengthen the Australian economy and create Australian jobs.
Today's package is a timely investment in road, rail, and education infrastructure, as well as vital tax changes to help Australian businesses during a global recession.
These national infrastructure projects and the assistance to business will boost the level of GDP and help create up to 32,000 Australian jobs.
There are three key infrastructure elements in today's package:
     * Inject $1.2 billion in new funds into the Australian Rail Track Corporation
     * Bring forward $711 million in road spending to this financial year and next and more than double funding for the Black Spots program
     * Invest $1.6 billion in critical university and TAFE infrastructure
Today's package also includes two vital tax changes:
     * A 10 per cent temporary investment allowance to encourage capital investment by Australian businesses
     * A 20 per cent cut in the next quarterly pay-as-you-go (PAYG) tax instalment for 1.3 million small businesses
Today's package builds on the Rudd Government's $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy, the $6.2 billion New Car Plan, the $300 million local infrastructure funding boost, and the $15.1 billion COAG package.
The Government will make further announcements about nation building projects, funded from the Building Australia Fund, and subject to the Infrastructure Australia priority list, early next year.
$1.2 Billion Investment in Rail Infrastructure
Over the next two years, the Rudd Government will inject $1.2 billion into the Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC) in 17 projects to improve the reliability and competitiveness of the nation's rail freight network.
$580 million of today's investment will be used to expand capacity along the rail corridors connecting Hunter Valley coal mines to the Port of Newcastle. This $1 billion project will more than double the amount of coal being transported to export markets from 97 to 200 million tonnes a year.
Other Rail projects funded today include:
• $55.8 million for Queensland border to Acacia Ridge track upgrade 
• $45.1 million for Sydney to Brisbane line  -  new, extended and upgraded loops
• $29.7 million for Melbourne to Junee line  -  passing lanes
• $45 million for Seymour to Wodonga track upgrade
• $91.5 million for Cootamundra to Parkes track upgrade
• $105.7 million for Western Victoria track upgrade
• $50 million for Wodonga Bypass duplication
• $42 million for Cootamundra to Crystal Brook line  -  new and extended loops
• $76 million for Melbourne to Adelaide line  -  extended loops
• $23 million Adelaide to Kalgoorlie line  -  new and extended loops
• $45 million towards the $90 million Advanced Train Management System (ATMS) trial set to bring train management into the digital age
$711 Million Investment to Build Better Roads
The Rudd Government will bring forward $711 million in spending in this year financial year and next to accelerate the commencement of 14 road projects.
Today's package will also more than double our investment this financial year in the highly successful Black Spots program from $50 million to $110 million.
Other road construction projects bought forward by this package include:
• The NSW Hume Highway  -  Woomargama Bypass
• The NSW Hume Highway  -  Tarcutta Bypass
• NSW Pacific Highway  -  Bulahdelah Bypass
• NSW Pacific Highway  -  Sexton's Hill, Banora Point
• QLD Ipswich Motorway  -  Dinmore to Goodna
• QLD Pacific Motorway  -  Springwood South to Daisy Hill
• QLD Bruce Highway  -  Douglas Arterial
• VIC Western Ring Road Upgrade
• VIC Goulburn Valley Highway  -  Nagambie Bypass
• VIC Western Highway  -  Anthony's Cutting
• VIC Princes Highway  -  Traralgon to Sale
• WA Mandurah Entrance Road
• SA Northern Expressway
• TAS Midland Highway  -  Brighton Bypass
On top of this road funding the Government will also set aside $195 million for investment in agricultural and social infrastructure to develop irrigated agricultural land around Kununurra following assessment of the projects by the State and Federal Government.
$1.6 Billion to Build Better Universites and TAFES
Today's $1.6 billion investment in building better universities and TAFES will include fast tracking the spending of $580 million into 11 projects focussed on strengthening the research facilities at Australian universities, funded through the Education Investment Fund.
The Government will also fund a one-off $500 million investment to target capital expenditure towards the development of teaching and learning spaces in Australia's universities. This funding will be delivered through the Teaching and Learning Capital Fund for Higher Education.
Today's package also delivers a $500 million injection into public skills and training infrastructure through The Teaching and Learning Capital Fund for Vocational Education and Training.
Two Vital Tax Changes
The Government will invest $1.6 billion in a 10 per cent temporary investment allowance  -  provided as an additional tax deduction  -  which will encourage capital investment by Australian businesses. The allowance will be equal to 10 per cent of the cost of an eligible asset.
Today's package will also help small business by cutting the next quarterly pay-as-you-go (PAYG) instalment for 1.3 million small businesses by 20 per cent. This reduction in the February instalment will provide immediate and much-needed cash flow relief to small businesses over the summer.
The Budget will remain in surplus once this and other packages announced this year are taken into account. This nation building package is another step in the Rudd Government's long term nation building agenda. 
The Government's Nation Building - Rail, Road, Education &amp; Research and Business document is also available.


PM: Today the Government announces a $4.7 billion nation building plan to strengthen the Australian economy and help create 32,000 Australian jobs at a time when the global financial crisis continues to bear down on the Australian economy.
I made a commitment to the Australian people that this Government would use nation building infrastructure to boost Australian jobs and to strengthen the economy. Today's $4.7 billion statement represents a significant instalment delivering on that commitment.
The global financial crisis continues to affect not just economies around the world but here in Australia as well. Five of the world's largest economies have already fallen into recession, including the US, Japan, Germany and France.
And the OECD has predicted that we'll see something like eight million jobs lost across the advanced economies in the period ahead. Australia is not immune from this crisis and our response to it will obviously confront the fact that we have long term challenges ahead.
There are no quick fixes. We will need to deal with what will be a long and drawn out crisis. And we're already beginning to see the impact on Australian growth and jobs.
Today's statement builds on earlier action taken by the Government, drawing your attention to the $10.4 billion economic security strategy announced in October and on top of that a $6.2 billion long term plan for support for the automobile industry.
$300 million worth of investment in local infrastructure through the meeting of the Council of Australian Local Governments and most recently $15.1 billion invested in a national plan for education, health and housing reform delivered through the Council of Australian Governments.
Today's package, today's statement, is capable of creating a further 32,000 Australian jobs. That comes on top of the 133,000 jobs which we've argued are capable of being created as a consequence of the package agreed by the Council of Australian Governments and the 75,000 jobs capable of being created through the Economic Security Strategy.
Secondly, the reason for this nation building statement is not just to respond to the global financial crisis, although that is of central importance. It is also to look beyond the crisis for the long term capacity we need for this economy and build on long term productivity growth.
That is why we are focusing on infrastructure because infrastructure is one of the key drivers of productivity growth. That's why we are also focusing on education.
This package will deal with critical infrastructure in transport. It deals with rail, it deals with roads. It also deals with education. It also deals with how we support private investment.
Firstly on infrastructure. There are three key infrastructure components to this package. First in rail. This represents the single biggest Australian Government investment in rail in the history of the Commonwealth.
And in two years what this Government will be investing in the ARTC represents more than the previous Government invested in 12 years.
We will inject $1.2 billion in new funds into the Australian Rail Track Corporation. For example, $580 million of today's investment will be used to expand capacity and rail corridors to service the Hunter, the Hunter Valley coal mines and of course their connection to the Port of Newcastle.
This $1 billion plus project will more than double the export capacity at Newcastle, from 97 to 200 million tonnes per year.
Secondly on roads. The Government is bringing forward $711 million in roads spending to this financial year and next, and will more than double funding for the Federal Black Spot program.
Also, this effectively brings forward a total of $4.7 billion in the AusLink II Roads program.
The third component of infrastructure lies in education. This is a $1.6 billion investment made up of 11 specific education research projects, which have been evaluated separately by the EIS.
And secondly the investment also of two amounts, one of half a billion dollars into the immediate capital needs of the universities to deal with additional teaching and learning spaces. And a further investment of an additional half a billion dollars in the provision of teaching and learning spaces for Australia's TAFE and VET facilities.
Those are the three infrastructure elements of the package.
If I can now turn to the business measures. There are two sets of business measures here and one relates to the small business tax instalment program.
Small business is critical to the future of the Australian economy. This measure advantages some 1.3 million small businesses and we are very mindful of the fact that small business across Australia employs some 3.7 million Australians.
What we are doing is in effect reducing the December quarter tax instalment on PAYG by 20 per cent so that businesses pay less tax up front, giving them effectively a cash flow boost.
This will mean there will be a $440 million effect for small business sitting in small businesses' accounts and tills, rather than the treasury coffers. That's the first measure.
The second is a most significant measure indeed. This is a $1.6 billion investment by the Government in the provision of a 10 per cent temporary investment allowance for the Australian business community to encourage capital investment for the period ahead.
It comes into effect immediately and applies for a 12 month period for capital acquisition decisions made up until the middle of next year, which must be deployed within a 12 month period following.
It is a temporary measure. It is also a temporary measure that we have spent some time consulting with our friends in the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry on.
Why have we done this? We believe that it is important to provide a positive incentive for the private sector, making investment decisions for the period ahead. And to know that in this period, where we are faced with considerable economic pressures from abroad, that they can expect this additional 10 per cent temporary investment allowance to assist them and encourage them in making those decisions.
Overall the Budget will remain in surplus once this and other packages announced this year are taken into account.
To conclude, before I turn to the Treasurer, the Government has made this decision today because we believe that the challenge arising from the global financial crisis is very basic.
When the private sector is under great challenge and great threat and we are seeing a contraction in private sector activity, Government must step in. Government must step in, in a temporary and targeted fashion and as well, do so with our investments, while building the nation's long term economic infrastructure and encourage private sector investment in capital as well.
That is why we have framed this package in the way in which we have done. We believe it is the right package for the times. We believe it is the right level of stimulus that we need to invest at this time.
But as I said before, this significant infrastructure statement precedes what will be a more substantial statement in the early part of next year. Treasurer.
SWAN: Thanks Prime Minister.
This package recognises the fact that we experiencing a very difficult time in terms of the global economy. We have the Economic Security Package out there at the moment, focused, focusing on households and lifting consumption.
The important thing about this package today is that it focuses on business. It gives a cash boost to small business and it gives that at the beginning of next year. And I'm sure that will be welcome.
But what it also provides is an additional incentive, a 10 per cent tax deduction for business to invest in capital items. And that will be important as we go through next year. And combined with the Government's initiatives when it comes to infrastructure, that will give a very significant boost to our economy.
These actions are all necessary in the face of the most uncertain period in the global economy in living memory. Over to you.
PM: Just before we do. This  -  and we'll take questions across each element of the package and the Deputy Prime Minister and Infrastructure Minister here, are here to respond to questions as well.
The Government unequivocally believes in nation building. We've said that from day one, we believe it today. It will be our doctrine into the future as well.
We believe in nation building because it provides stimulus to the economy now, at a time of great stress, coming off the back of the global financial crisis. We also believe in nation building because it is necessary to lay out the infrastructure and the productivity enhancing measures for Australia's long term future.
Nation building for stimulus now. Nation building for long term productivity growth. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: You said the Budget will remain in surplus but how much do today's announcements wipe off the surplus? What is it now down to? For this year.
PM: Let me go to those questions, and then I'll ask the Treasurer to supplement.
As I said at the outset, this is a $4.7 billion package. Some of this, a large proportion of this, is new money. Some of it, consistent with our previous statement is a bring-forward of money from our outer years in the existing forward estimates.
We are confident that in delivering this package, based on our advice from the Treasury that it can be delivered, together with other announcements made in this year, 2008, while maintain a Budget surplus.
SWAN: The package is affordable. The Budget does remain in surplus over the forward estimates but it is the case that we don't publish on a package-by-package basis all of those figures. The previous Government never did that and we don't intend to be doing that either.
We have a Budget in surplus, it's an affordable package and it's one that is necessary and timely given the international economic environment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible).
SWAN: Because the previous Government never published those figures.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible).
SWAN: No I think what we do is account in a timely way for what we do. We've had the mid-year economic review. Those figures were published in November.
There are swings and roundabouts in terms of Budgets and developing Budgets and putting them together takes time. You have upwards swings and you have downwards swings in terms of your spending.
We are going through the Budget process in the normal way and as we go through next year we will publish all of those estimates and a full bottom line and a full accounting in next year's budget.
JOURNALIST: How much of the $4.7 billion is new money? Over what period will this money be spent? And are all these projects new or are some of them as promised by the Howard Government and have just been rebadged under this package?
PM: Let me be specific on your question. For the $4.7 billion that we've announced in this package today, $1.5 billion flows through in 08-09, $2.7 billion flows through in 09-10, $700 million flows through in 10-11.
What's the rationale for doing that? What are we most concerned about in terms of the impact of the global financial crisis? What happens this financial year and what happens in the subsequent financial year? And if you look at all the IMF projections about what's happening in the global economy that is where all of our concern should lie.
Also, you may bear in mind that what I said at the time of the Premiers' Conference before last in terms of a bring-forward; that we were concerned about bringing forward to the greatest extent possible longer-term projects in order to get activity flowing straight away.
Let me give you an example. Auslink. All those projects, which are detailed in the document and you'll see it fully outlined project by project, were scheduled for start later. We've now, through bringing forward funds, having those projects start much earlier in the cycle.
Why are road projects in particular important in terms of overall economic activity? They are dispersed across the country.
Secondly, the ARTC proposal for example, the rail proposal is significant new investment and again is dispersed across the country.
What we are looking at are a series of measures which give a reasonable spread of economic activity geographically in infrastructure which is necessary, but bringing forward all that can physically be brought forward to maximise activity now and in the financial year ahead.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd, did the (inaudible) Australia board advise you on the priorities in this package? And will it still be possible to get the spending on that Infrastructure Australia priority list flowing in the next financial year?
PM: Firstly, the advisory boards, both for infrastructure and for health and hospitals, and for education, continue to do their work. We anticipate that the principal flow-through of their work will come through in what I've described as the more substantial infrastructure package for early next year.
What we have done here is in the case of the education package is take some deliberations from the advisory work that's been done in relation to the Education Investment Fund. On top of that we have added initiatives of our own. For example, a half billion dollar investment in teaching and learning spaces. A half billion dollar investment in vocational education and training teaching and learning spaces as well.
So, you will see the principal flow-through from those advisory boards into the substantial infrastructure statements that we make next year.
JOURNALIST: WA, the economy's powerhouse, is not even getting double Tasmania's money. What's the thinking there? And, what about Oakajee Port for example?
PM: Well, can I just say that one of the proposals put to us by the WA Government which falls outside the framework of the three funds is concerning a possible significant expansion of agricultural land in the Ord. That's why we have indicated through this statement a preparedness to co-invest with the West Australian Government up to $195 million, subject to the conclusion in about a three-month period, of a joint and final feasibility study between us.
If, for example, that feasibility study is not successful, then that money will flow through to other infrastructure projects in WA.
Secondly, you raise the question of Oakajee. The Commonwealth is supportive of the Oakajee project, this is the Oakajee Port project, it's significant for the WA economy, significant for the national economy. And we will work with Infrastructure Australia and the WA Government to determine its final feasibility and any (inaudible) contribution to the project.
More broadly, on WA, you've got allocations coming out of the half billion dollar fund for university, teaching and learning spaces, half billion dollar fund for the vocational education training spaces, as well as the 195 allocation that I've spoken about in relation to the Ord.
As for, and to partly build on the answer that I gave before, as for many of the significant larger, longer lead time infrastructure projects which have been the subject in large part of deliberations by the three advisory boards, they will flow through to the substantial statement we make on infrastructure early in the New Year.
JOURNALIST: Two questions actually. One on the investment allowance for business. Can you just clarify what the size of the business is that would qualify for that? And are there any estimates on the impact of the $1.6 billion that you offer and what that would mean for business investment generally? Would it stimulate further investment?
And the second question is on infrastructure, some of this stuff would seem to be export related infrastructure, shouldn't there have been a focus on more export related infrastructure, is that something that Albo may like to comment on?
PM: Well I'll take the second first and having hopefully delivered the ball close the boundary, I'll then ask Albo to lift it over the boundary.
Look carefully at the ARTC and the significant investment that is attached here to Hunter Valley, and I made reference to this in my remarks before. This represents a significant expansion of the rail network which services the Port of Newcastle and is therefore highly relevant, and I'll ask Albo to add on that and other export-related elements of the rail proposal in particular.
Also bear in mind when it comes to other export-related infrastructure projects, we have more to do in terms of the significant, more substantial infrastructure statement next year.
Albo.
ALBANESE: Yeah, the ARTC project is aimed very much at boosting productivity. If you take the Hunter proposal by itself, it is a $580 million injection by the Commonwealth towards the ARTC.
That will be backed up or supplemented by $420 million of borrowing by the ARTC. That will more than double the capacity of the rail network in the Hunter. That is critical, critical for our export performance.
If you look at the other ARTC projects that are outlined, if you look at the upgrade - we're asked about WA  -  the Adelaide to Kalgoorlie link, that is very much aimed at exports. As is the Western Victoria link.
These ARTC projects are very much aimed at boosting our productivity. We'll have the benefit also in terms of passenger rail when you have duplication or triplication of lines, then you free up capacity for passenger rail network.
But the ARTC is primarily concerned with freight, and primarily concerned therefore with boosting our exports. These projects is the largest, as the Prime Minister said, the largest investment, single investment by the Commonwealth in rail since Federation.
Aimed very much at that productivity agenda, which is one of the reasons why we chose to bring it forward as part of this nation building package.
PM: On the investment allowance. Can I just answer the second part of the question too, well the first part of the question which I skipped over before.
On the investment allowance question, we worked reasonably closely with ACCI on this. The threshold that we've agreed on is investments in plant and equipment over $10,000, which are acquired or ordered by the end of the current financial year.
This of course is in addition to any other deductions which may be applicable, after the purposes of capital investment by firms. And again, this is a significant slice of money. We want to go out there and say to people in the private economy, that private capital investment is so important, the overall shape of our national accounts, the overall shape of growth.
We understand the pressures they are under and here is an effort on the Government's part to provide a helping hand at making critical infrastructure decisions in the year ahead.
JOURNALIST: Could you just clarify how much in the $4.7 billion is new money?
PM: As I said before, the $4.7 billion is made up of, the flow-through in 08-09 is $1.5 billion and 09-10 is $2.7 billion. On the ‘new' question, you have a budget bottom line impact in terms of new allocations of $2.5 billion and a bring-forward of the rest. And that includes the investments in education as well as in the bring-forward of Auslink.
As I've said consistently, this is bringing forward and it is new money. There is a combination there.
SWAN: $2.5 billion over the pool.
PM: But what you're looking at in terms of the totality of the package is the concentration of funding that we've indicated before.
Which is $4 billion by the way into the economy, over the next 18 months when it is most needed in these areas.
REPORTER: Given that you've spending, you're pumping a lot of money into construction projects, you know railroads, whatever, have you, are you adequately staging it so that in putting all this money out there you don't actually drive up the cost by contractors?
PM: You know, at the end of the day you don't have perfect knowledge on these things. But we've taken a lot of soundings out there from the business community, there's a lot of emerging spare capacity in construction around the economy at present.
It's different in different parts of the country. There's no one-size-fits-all here. But in, for example, underpinning positions to provide a significant boost to capital investment in the universities and TAFEs, which as you know are spread across the country, we're quite confident there's a lot of spare capacity out there to basically rise to that challenge.
SWAN: The rails, something like $1.2 billion I think, Minister Albanese can tell you the plans for when that can be spent because the focus here is on projects which we can get going relatively quickly.
ALBANESE: Well we've outlined a few, if you look at your booklet. Project by project is outlined in terms of the timeframe we expect to bring forward. There are major benefits for jobs, we certainly sat down and consulted with the ARTC about the timeframes of their agenda.
Just to give in terms of some job examples. On rail we'll need as a result of this over one million new concrete sleepers. The major plants for producing those are at Grafton, Wagga Wagga and Geelong. 120 jobs in the manufacturing sector in each of those regional towns. And of course there is the multiplier effect of that.
On road, for example the projects that we're bringing forward for the Hume Highway. For this, they'll produce small concrete bridges on site. The stone for the pavement comes from local quarries and is crushed by local contractors. The sand is sourced locally and local contractors do all the jobs such as fencing and landscaping around the site.
So in terms of stimulating local economies and local jobs, if you look at each of the projects, they are timed to maximise the output that we can have in terms of stimulating jobs at this time.
PM: What we've tried to do with this nation building document is maximise local jobs, maximise early stimulus, and maximise long term economic benefits in infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: Can (inaudible) enough to avoid an Australian recession next year?
SWAN: We have to do everything that is possible to strengthen our economy, to support businesses and to support households.
This package I think will add or boost GDP by about a quarter to one half of a per cent, and it will create up to 32,000 jobs.
And of course it must be seen in the context of the Economic Security Strategy, and those monies now are flowing through into the economy. They will through the December quarter and also through the first quarter of next year.
And in addition to that, we have the other initiatives the Government has put forward in terms of our COAG spending and so on.
And on top of that, we have a very significant depreciation of the Australian dollar which will also boost the competitiveness of this economy. So I think, in addition to that we also have a very substantial easing of monetary policy.
All of those things are now working in tandem to strengthen our economy, to support households and to support businesses. So we're giving our best shot.
PM: Can I just say on the five drivers of our national accounts, where does this fit into the overall strategy  -  consumption, private residential investment, capital expenditure by firms, capital expenditure by governments, and net exports  -  they're your drivers of the national accounts.
What we've done through the Economic Security Strategy is provide significant stimulus to private consumption. We've been upfront about that, that's what we've been on about.
Also, through the $1.6 billion component of that economic strategy in dealing with first home owners, first home buyers, we have sought to boost also our private residential investment.
And there has been early, early, very early positive signs that we may have helped on that score. But you know, one swallow doth not a summer make.
Thirdly, on the question of CAPEX, private capital investment, that underpins the logic of this significant 10 per cent temporary investment allowance that we have provided to private firms.
Then on infrastructure, what governments themselves do and invest, fourth driver of our national accounts. That is why you have got such significant investment in this statement on roads and rail and of course in education, and net exports, the Treasurer has just addressed.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you and the Deputy Prime Minister to respond to the UNICEF report that says that we are near the bottom of the table of 25 countries in terms of early childhood care and education. Given your emphasis on education and early childhood, how much more are you likely to have to spend to improve those standards?
PM: I will ask Julia to respond to that.
DPM: Thank you very much Karen. People would have seen reported today the new study about how this nation has fallen behind on investment in early childhood education particularly. Now sadly that is not news. We knew through OECD studies and the like that this nation was coming pretty close to the back of the class. We believe that's the legacy of more than 10 years of neglect of this vital agenda, when all of the worldwide research was telling us that intervention in the early years can make the biggest difference.
This government was elected with a broad range of policies to make a difference in the early years and we have already started the roll-out of them, including our very significant investment in bringing universal pre-school right around the country.
So whatever setting children are cared for, whether they are at home and going to a stand-alone kindy or in childcare, they will get the benefit of those vital literacy and numeracy programs, pre-literacy, pre-numeracy programs  -  pre-literacy, pre-numeracy - to make sure they get off to a good start at school.
We are also investing in the early learning workforce, very significant investments there. You would have seen those all through the last COAG package in the last few weeks. A lot of money rolling out, making a difference. In addition of course we are developing an early learning framework, work is underway on that and more work will be done there during the course of 2009 to bring all of these initiatives together in an early years framework to make a difference for Australian kids.
But you are right, desperately neglected agenda under the former government and we have taken quick action to deliver our promises to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: If I could ask you about Fiji, it now appears that the March elections won't happen. Has Frank Bainimarama been allowed to get his own way? Has the international community not put enough pressure on Fiji?
PM: When I attended the Nuie Pacific Islands Forum, there was an unprecedented statement on the part of Forum Government leaders on the unacceptability of the Fijian leader's attitudes to the restoration of the normal processes of democracy in his country.
The position of Pacific Island leaders, based on my most recent advice, has not changed. Furthermore, I believe that subject to recent advice from the Foreign Minister that you will see further action from Pacific Island Forum countries on this matter in the period ahead.
This Government takes democracy in the Pacific Island countries seriously. It is not optional. It is what we do in our part of the world. And for there to be any exception, particularly in the way in which this bunch have belted around the free media for example, in Fiji, and have traduced the democratic processes, we are not about to simply stand idly by while that happens.
We have taken a hard diplomatic line on this. Further actions, as necessary, will be taken.
Can I add by the way to the answer on early childhood education, then I will come back.
You know, January last year, the first policy statement I launched as leader of the opposition was on early childhood education. I was completely upfront about the fact that Australia, according to the then OECD analysis, were the international wooden spooners on early childhood education.
This, for this Government will be a signature long term reform. The more we invest in early childhood education, the more we are serious about long term productivity reform. What is the problem for Governments is that for these investments to be yielded over time to show their real effect, you're looking at a 10 to 12 year lag, which is often an excuse I suppose given by politicians for not worrying about it too much.
We are determined to turn this around and we will do so. Our commitment in terms of providing early childhood education for those kids in the year before their formal schooling commences, of 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year, with emphasis on pre-literacy and pre-numeracy training remain. It is being implemented. It will take time.
But we are determined to prosecute it.
JOURNALIST: Patrick Dodson today has attacked Warren Mundine, Marcia Langton and also every Government on their position on remote outstations. (inaudible) what is your policy in relation to Aboriginal remote outstations? Do you think there should be a policy to encourage indigenous people to move into bigger centres that are more economic?
PM: Look, without having seen the text of what Patrick has said, I wouldn't simply respond to it randomly. The Government is determined to prosecute a long term program of reform for all indigenous communities and that means reducing long term welfare dependency, it means moving from welfare to work, it means providing every necessary incentive to do so.
Secondly when it comes to reforms for remote communities, it is not just what Government does itself, it is what we do in partnership with others. In Darwin a couple of days ago I announced a further release of funding by the Commonwealth to the Clontarf Foundation.
The Clontarf Foundation, excellent, the Clontarf Academy, excellent mob who operate out of Perth, teaming up football, football training, with mandatory school attendance. And what I have seen of their early work in so many of the communities in WA and the NT is first class. And in one fell swoop, what we have done is effectively double their budget.
Secondly, I allocated recently, $20 million to the indigenous boarding school initiative being run out of Sydney by Mr Penfold, and that is designed to provide funding for a large number, a very large number of indigenous boarding school opportunities, some of the most elite boarding schools in the country.
Then we have Twiggy's initiative in terms of Indigenous employment, which has been signed up to in terms of a covenant by a whole bunch of firms across the country. Each part of these reforms is designed around one thing and that is, to reduce welfare dependency, to increase economic self reliance, and to provide opportunities for these communities to stand up.
We intend to keep going on this front.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to go into the three nation building funds and how much will be available for each of them when they start being allocated next year?
PM: The answer to your second question is, a lot. And answer to the first part of your question is, we are on track to invest from these funds, big time, because we believe it is necessary for the nation long term.
I have described next year's statement on this as being more substantial, it will be. These are long lead projects. They have to be deliberated on carefully. We want to make sure that the investment counts long term for the productivity of the economy once we are through the global financial crisis. But can I just say this, nation building isn't something that we invented in the last three weeks.
Nation building is something I have been talking about since becoming leader of the opposition. Nation building is in this government's DNA. Nation building is what we are prosecuting through this significant statement today and you will see it up there in lights with our more substantial statement early in 2009. And we've got to zip.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, small business first. We've got a large small business audience and you've got a Christmas present for them, a tax break. What is it?
PM: Well, there are a lot of small businesses out there in the country and what we are trying to do for 1.3 million small businesses with a turnover of less than $2 million a year is to help with their cash flow for the period ahead.
Small businesses currently employ about 3.7 million Australians and are the backbone of the economy. They usually pay their tax on a quarterly basis, on PAYG. What we're doing is to provide them effectively with a 20 per cent tax cut for the December quarter.
And that is to help of course with their cash flow for the period ahead. It is not a magic solution to everything but we know this is a tough period.
MITCHELL: So is it a deferral or will they not have to pay?
PM: Well put it this way. Here are the calculations. Normally you would look at the budget papers. Budget papers back in May projected that small businesses would increase their tax payments by, would have an increase in their turnover by eight per cent. Okay? That was the projection back in May.
When we put out the mid-year economic forecast in November, we reduced those down to two per cent, simply because of a reflection of what is happening in the global economy.
Therefore if we applied the normal rate, as it was in the past, of an eight per cent increase on previous tax payments for the last year by small businesses, they would pay that upfront, have a cash flow problem and then they'd have to wait for a rebate later on in order to, or a refund later on, to get their money back.
So what we've done instead is to bring it down for this quarter. So it helps them with their cash flow now. Otherwise they'd be waiting another year or so to get it back through the tax refund.
MITCHELL: How much money does it involve? What are the estimates?
PM: Just under half a billion dollars and that we believe provides some help. Again Neil, this is not a magic solution to everyone's problem but we think in this difficult period which many small businesses are going through and businesses in general, this provides some help with cash flow in the immediate period ahead.
MITCHELL: It's another area, I'm getting a lot of messages from small business about is, that banks are not passing on interest rate cuts on business loans. Is that fair?
PM: Well the banks have performed differently on this question. For example in the case of the most recent interest rate cuts by the Reserve Bank, a number of those passed them on in full, I'm advised, to small businesses.
That is not always been the case historically, you're right on that. And that is something we continue to work with the banks on. Not just a full pass on for those who hold mortgages but for those with small business loans as well.
MITCHELL: Do the banks accept that you've got, you've got some real moral pressure here, given the decision to guarantee them in the past?
PM: Well Neil, we meet with the banks, the Treasurer and I, on a regular basis and we raise all these concerns and I think it's fair to say that on the question of mortgage holders, the banks in recent times have been much more responsive to what the Government and the community have been saying.
On the question of small business loans, which is a legitimate point of your question, we saw, I believe, a better performance with the last round of interest rate cuts than we had before. We will continue to apply pressure in the future.
You're right. The banks have benefited from the fact that we the Government have extended two guarantees. One for all deposit holders in the country and two, a guarantee to them for the purposes of their international capital rating.
So we have, I believe an ability to continue to apply pressure to the banks.
MITCHELL: Have they done enough on credit card interest rates yet?
PM: Last time I looked, Neil, there are like, literally hundreds of different credit card products across the country, some 300. And again the interest rates on those credit cards vary from something quite modest to something quite huge.
What I'd strongly suggest to your listeners; if you're getting ripped off with your credit card  -  change it. Shop around because there is a huge variety in the market. But generally, banks need to do more in reducing interest rates pass through to all customers whether it's using credit cards, whether it's using business loans or in the case of home mortgages, we've seen a much better performance anyway.
Can I just add one point though.
MITCHELL: Sure.
PM: Stability in the banking system is still fundamental. What I have to balance as Prime Minister is making sure that our major banks continue to perform well. Maintaining the stability of the financial system, with solid and healthy bottom lines.
Around the world today there are only about 13 double-A banks, rated banks, left. Four of those 13 worldwide are Australia. So in terms of international financial assessment of the Australian financial system, maintaining our banks in double-A rating standard is an important priority.
MITCHELL: Confident we're through the crisis the banks faced?
PM: I don't think we're, any of us are out of the woods Neil. I don't wish to mislead people. I believe we've negotiated the crisis so far reasonably. But 2009 is going to be very tough across a range of things including further challenges to the stability of the global financial system.
But the real challenge that we are most concerned about is the flow through effects to the real economy, to businesses and employment. Hence the measure we just talked about before, which is this $440 million assistance to cash flow for small business.
MITCHELL: I see some speculation today that because the unemployment figures weren't as bad as expected yesterday that we could be in for a soft landing. Do you think there is any hope of a soft landing for Australia?
PM: Oh look Neil. We're doing everything we can at the Government level to inject activity in the economy in order to fill the gap, which is left by the private sector cutting back.
That's what we're doing. The overall effect of this in 2009  -  too hard to tell. I just don't want to turn around at the end of 2009 and ask myself this question: was there any more I could have done in terms of injecting activity into the economy through Government investment in infrastructure and the rest? And through the economic security strategy and payments to pensioners and carers, which has just flowed through in the last week.
I don't want to turn around the end of 2009 and say, is there more that we could have done that we haven't done.
MITCHELL: Well what do you say to the average person going into next year. Where is this going to touch them  -  jobs are insecure aren't they?
PM: Well what I'll say is this Neil, and from the beginning of this crisis I have not believed in gilding the lily, and saying that this is just a minor thing, it is a major challenge for us all.
Secondly however, I refuse to join the gloom and doom industry and say that there is no hope. What we've got to do is construct a rational basis for optimism for 2009. That underpins the economic strategy we've deployed so far.
And that's through the economic security strategy  -  $10.4 billion; $15.1 billion through the Premiers, the State and Territories, $3 billion of which flows next year; and we'll also be making a further infrastructure statement today.
MITCHELL: Okay, you've got more up your sleeve for next year as well?
PM: Well, we'll make an infrastructure statement today. It will be significant. But we will have a much more significant statement to make in the New Year.
We're currently working through the detail of all that. But we believe that our responsibility is to do everything possible at the level of government investment in the economy, in growth and in jobs, to take up the slack which was left by small businesses and businesses generally, who have been left in many cases reeling of the consequence of the global financial crisis.
MITCHELL: Is John Brumby going to be happy with your infrastructure statement today?
PM: Well, John's state of karmic well-being is a matter of John. I'll leave that for you to sort out with him.
I had a good chat with John yesterday in Bendigo. I was there with the good people of Bendigo opening the new Bendigo Centre with the good people from Bendigo Bank.
This statement today will be a significant statement on infrastructure and other matters. But next year, it will be much more significant across the nation building agenda.
So I think we're more likely to see many of the matters that have been raised explicitly by Premier Brumby in recent days dealt with in the statement we've made in the earlier part of 2009.
MITCHELL: So what's the aim of the statement today? How much does it involve?
PM: Well we'll have to wait for the statement itself, Neil, but I've already indicated we'll be making a statement.
It will be significant. And again the objective is this  -  to invest money into the economy, to do that through infrastructure that we need, bringing forward as much infrastructure investment as we can, and also to provide through that, necessary support for business.
I, as I've said before, at the time I brought down the $10.4 billion package for pensioners, carers, and first home buyers, and families, the Government remained resolved to do anything necessary, to take whatever further action was necessary, to continue to support growth and jobs.
This is another instalment in that strategy.
MITCHELL: I was talking to one of your members at parliament last week about unemployment and this was privately, so I won't name them,.
PM: Give me a hint.
MITCHELL: Well you give me the infrastructure statement.
PM: (laugh) Okay, fair swap.
MITCHELL: You go first.
PM: No, no, no. You keep it.
MITCHELL: The point that he was making was, was that the voters tend to judge Labor very harshly on unemployment because they expect Labor to be a sort of party of full employment, and his point was if unemployment gets up around eight, eight and a half per cent, it could well cost you government.
Do you think that's a possibility?
PM: Well look, I'm not in the business of commentary Neil. I'm doing whatever I can through leadership and taking decisions and acting, to reduce the impact on the Australian economy and Australian jobs of the global financial crisis.
That's what I'm employed to do.
I don't have a crystal ball, I can't tell how everything will turn out.
What I do know is, based on the information I have, the world's in trouble. It's rolling out the effect, the real economy, worldwide, and jobs worldwide.
So you can either sit around and join the commentary brigade, or hop in and have a go.
And what we've done for the last three months, building on our budget strategy in May, is to deploy the various measures that I've described already.
That $10.4 billion package by the way, in that within a 12 month period represents more than one per cent of GDP, it is a big injection in the economy by any global standard and since then, we've added the $15.1 billion package for hospitals and schools and social housing, and today, a further injection as well.
We don't want to be left wondering.
MITCHELL: The figures on China are pretty pessimistic today. Can we not look to China as at least the support of the resources industry?
PM: Well, the Chinese economy is going through reduced growth projections for the period ahead. I spent some time talking about this with the Chinese President when I was in both Washington and in Lima recently.
They've brought about a very big stimulus package of their own which got some reporting about a month or so ago. I believe the Chinese are likely to continue to review what's necessary for them and take further action as is necessary.
But you see, boosting Chinese demand is critical for us because that affects the demand for Australian resources. If their growth goes down, so does the demand for Australian resources.
MITCHELL: We'll take quick call and then we better take a break. Peter, go ahead Peter.
PETER: Good morning Neil and Prime Minister. I just, in regards to our superannuation, nine per cent that employers put in, I was just wondering if we should cut it back to six per cent that we put into our superannuation and have the three per cent flow into our pay packet and to stimulate the economy.
MITCHELL: Yeah so you have got your hands on it now.
PM: Well I think I have heard that argument before Peter and I understand the basis of concern which you know, gives rise to you putting that point of view. But the superannuation laws for Australia have been designed to help people for their retirement incomes and to get us through good times and in bad.
Because the fact is, we are all going to need a decent retirement income when we get to that point and that is why we are not proposing to change the contribution scheme now.
MITCHELL: We will take a break and come back with more from the Prime Minister in a moment.
AD BREAK
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with us. Mr Rudd, a caller off air wants to know whether the infrastructure package, will it be focussed on spending with Australian companies?
PM: Well our focus is to make sure that we get maximum take up from Australian firms, that is obviously what we are concerned about because we are concerned about Australian jobs. Also bear in mind this Neil, that a number of people who are employed in retail outlets in the country are selling both Australian manufactured goods and stuff that is imported  - 
MITCHELL: Yeah but if you are putting money into infrastructure and big projects presumably, will there be any preference given to Australian firms?
PM: We want maximum take up by Australian firms and I think people generally should be supportive of the sort of package that we are going to deliver. But my other point, which is just about what we did on consumer support earlier on, which is in the previous package we did.
Our concern is to support Australian jobs wherever those jobs are found.
MICTHELL: And we have still got to get Government to pay quickly haven't we?
PM: Absolutely, and as I indicated as a statement to small business in Brisbane recently, if the Federal Government is not paying its bills on time, we are going to pay interest back to small businesses and punish the departments concerned.
MITCHELL: But The Age is reporting RMIT research today that suggests 300,000 Australian households will actually owe more on their house than their house is worth, they will have negative equity next year.
That is quite a frightening figure isn't it.
PM: I haven't seen that report Neil so I couldn't comment on the detail of it. But look, it is, these are very tough economic times, I don't want to pretend it is anything other than that. And our job is to try and support people and families and businesses and the general economy as much as possible.
MITCHELL: That just looks like the banks have been lending unwisely though when you look at those sort of figures.
PM: Well, obviously, people will have made individual lending decisions and the circumstances surrounding them will be different. But remember also that in the last few months we have had a three percentage point cut in interest rates, and remember also that people were dealing with interest rates over the last several years which saw 10 interest rate rises in a row.
These are still difficult circumstances, but we remain resolved to do whatever is necessary.
MITCHELL: Childcare, a UN report rates Australia for childcare at the lowest of the developed countries. What will you do about that?
PM: Well we said something similar prior to the last election 12 months ago which is that according to the OECD we ranked stone motherless last.
What we have done is embark upon as part of our education revolution, a complete overhaul of early childhood education. Our commitment is to provide universal access for all kids in the year before formal schooling starts.
That means 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year. It is going to cost us half a billion dollars over the five years the program is being implemented.
MITCHELL: What is, what is the long term answer with the ABC crisis? I mean you can't keep throwing money at it can you?
PM: Well the alternative we face with the ABC childcare crisis is as follows. Either you could just fold your arms and say, well that is a private sector problem and not do anything, or instead as Julia Gillard has done, I think, very effectively, put herself in the position of all those you know, mums and dads and anxious parents out there and saying, well, how does this affect us and what can we do to smooth the transition.
MITCHELL: But I guess, what business won't you bail out? Because there are a lot of small business people saying, well if I hit the wall, you are not going to help me.
PM: Yeah but what we are talking about with the ABC Learning Centres is this: you remember the previous government allowed ABC Learning to get 25 per cent of the long day care market in Australia which meant that one company going wrong, going bad, meant that you had literally, you know, 25 per cent of parents out there in strife.
All we have tried to do, and Julia has done this very effectively and her department, is help smoothe this arrangement. And remember of those 1,000 or so ABC Learning Centres, they have been able to determine that 720 will remain viable, of the 241 which are unviable, and this is where the Government's cash injection has come, is to enable those to remain open for the months ahead so that parents can make appropriate transition arrangements.
The alternative would have been just absolute mayhem out there for mums and dads and we weren't prepared to do that.
MITCHELL: Can you ever see yourself or the Government taking, reasserting control of the whole industry?
PM: I think what, the lesson of all this Neil is that we have got to be very very careful about allowing any single private company to get a quarter of the total market when it is dependent also on a large degree of Government subsidy.
I don't think that is healthy for the future. It is not good for mums and dads. So I think there will be an overall rethink about the way in which we deliver childcare. Many for-profit centres out there are doing a first class job, run as first class businesses.
That was not the case in relation to the way in which ABC Learning conducted itself.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, are you a tough boss? I see 40 per cent of the new staff you've hired haven't lasted?
PM: Well, the government has a pretty demanding schedule, Neil. We've had three priorities this year. Implement our pre-election commitments, secondly to lay out our long term reform agenda for the education revolution, climate change and hospitals and in others areas, and thirdly to deal with the immediate challenges of the global financial crisis.
It's tough and it's demanding, but normally there is a pretty high turnover in political staff jobs. It's just the nature of the beast, people come in and they go out.
MITCHELL: Are you really trying to lose weight?
PM: I beg your pardon?
MITCHELL: I read that you'd hired people to get you to lose weight?
PM: That I'd what?
MITCHELL: That you'd hired staff, or hired advisers, to try to get you to lose weight?
PM: That is comprehensively untrue. And, you know the best to keep your weight under control for someone as antique as you and I, Neil  -  just watch what you stick in your gob.
MITCHELL: Well, it's a bit hard when you're attending all these rubber chicken lunches, isn't it?
PM: Yeah, yeah. Frankly, I am probably doing okay, as much as any other bloke who is about 50 does. So you just do whatever exercise you can, watch what you eat, watch what you drink and that is about it.
MITCHELL: Will you travel less next year?
PM: I think as I may have said once on an earlier time on your program, I would happily never step on to an aircraft ever again in my life, anywhere.
But you know as Prime Minister of the country when you are dealing with a global financial crisis, which is becoming a global economic crisis, I will travel whenever the national interest dictates that I do so.
And it is therefore, in any given year, unpredictable what will be required. I have got to say, during the year that has just passed, the amount of travel I have done internally within Australia has been huge.
Each state and territory I have visited on many, many, many occasions and I regard getting around this country, including conducting our Community Cabinets in every state and territory in the country during the course of 2008, that's part and parcel of doing the job as well.
MITCHELL: So you don't see your schedule changing, you think you will have to travel as much?
PM: I think it just will be tailored to the demands of the year.
My job, for example at the moment in the global financial crisis, global economic crisis is to, with other Governments, coordinate our actions as much as possible, and that means participating in fully, meetings like the G20 and APEC but secondly to go out there and also argue the case for Australian business and the Australian economy worldwide.
And you don't get that by sitting in the lounge room at The Lodge.
MITCHELL: Are you going to have a holiday this Christmas?
PM: Yeah I will  - 
MITCHELL: How long?
PM: I haven't quite sorted that out, I will very soon but I will certainly be having a break. Now Mr Howard quite rightly had a decent break each year and I will be doing exactly the same.
MITCHELL: What will you do?
PM: Read trashy novels, watch trashy television, and spend a lot of time with Therese, the kids, our friends and the cat and the dog.
MICTHELL: Yeah, you need a dose of trash every now and again don't you, I agree with that. Thank you very much for your time and all the best for Christmas.
PM: And to you Neil and to all of your listeners, I wish them a very happy Christmas.


The Hill is an elemental part of Sydney cricketing culture and The Hill is therefore an elemental part of Australian cricketing culture.
It's probably remembered most vividly by visiting fast bowlers who happened to be innocently recovering at third man as they experiences an initiation to frank, fearless, forthright but always fair commentary from the crowd here seated, on their latest achievements with the ball.
Renowned for delivering the most colourful of these initiation rites was of course, was Yabba.
Yabba's most memorable advice was saved for one of Australia's greatest adversaries on the cricketing field, England captain during the Bodyline series Douglas Jardine.
Noticing Jardine swishing away a fly, Yabba cautioned: “Leave our flies alone, Jardine. They're the only friends you've got out here”.
I'm please to hear that Yabba is appropriately immortalised in the new stand by a bronze statue in the front row. That's a good thing.
In 1985, the Hill was interred for the first time, physically but not necessary in spirit, as it was replaced by the Doug Walters Stand.
Douggie was a legend of my childhood; a bit of a hero of mine for all kids growing with a bit of an interest of cricket at the time.
I remember the first book on cricket I was ever given by my dear Mum, was a book on batting technique featuring the young Doug Walters, providing advice to up and coming cricketing aspirants on how to master the off-drive.
I remember the book well. I read it diligently. Almost as diligently as any political wannabe would read the Hansard records in those days.
But there was always this eternal chasm between aspiration and achievement when it came to cricket, at least in my case.
I remember reading Doug's chapters as he meticulously followed through the technique of the ball leaving the bowler's hand at one end and dispatching the ball comfortably to the long off boundary on the other.
Bat up early, wait for it, wait for it, front foot forward to the pitch of the ball, then allow the bat to descend in a perfect arc. And then watch the ball disappear swiftly to that boundary at long off.
That as they say was the theory. And for me it was never entirely executed, in the sense that there was always a problem in terms of what they would describe as eye-hand coordination in my case.
But I always managed to translate Douggie's advice into how to be the recipient of the perfect yorker on every occasion, almost every occasion.
I never made it past the Yandina C team in rural Queensland cricket. And that I think was a fair estimation of my skills at the time. But I digress.
It's appropriate that in this magnificent new stand that the bar will be named after Doug, recognising the contribution he also made off the field, as one of the game's great characters.
I am also advised that card tables are being installed as we speak. Another one of Douggie's great past times.
But the man we are here to recognise today is the great Victor Trumper.
Over several generations and across many continents, much has been written about this glorious game.
And over a century since his passing, well about a century since his passing, more words of regard have been devoted to this man than almost any other.
Wisden, the great cricketing authority, described him as a “genius”, “the best and the most brilliant” of his generation, and possessing “remarkable powers”.
For a game so dominated by stats and figures, Trumper is actually not done justice by his record, which alone does not place him too far apart from his peers.
His test career spanned 48 matches, resulting in 3,163 runs at an average of 39. At first class level, he amassed 42 centuries at just under 44.6 runs per innings.
On Trumper's first trip to England in 1902, the Australian side arrived at the Old Trafford Test leading the hard-fought series 1-nil.
Trumper and the team in 1902, bore with the hopes and aspirations of the newly founded Australian nation.
Batting at the top of the innings, Trumper achieved something never seen in cricket before - an even-time century, and notching three figures before lunch.
During this rain-drenched tour he scored 2,570 runs at an average of 48, including 11 centuries.
But he never scored more than 128 on the tour. Mind you, I wouldn't mind scoring 128 on any occasion. 28 on any occasion would have done me just fine.
It is written that Trumper would throw away his wicket on favourable pitches to give his less accomplished team mates a go.
One team mate, Vernon Ransford, said that had he been greedy, he - Trumper -would have scored 4,000 runs on the tour, not 2,500.
This did not mean that Trumper was any less of a competitor when the going got tough.
Jack Fingleton, the Australian opening batsman (and later Press Gallery legend) wrote of Trumper that he and I quote, “rose to heights on wet wickets where others tumbled to earth and to death”.
Such as his gutsy 74 out of a total of 122 on a dangerous Melbourne strip in 1904  -  the stuff of legend.
This was the Trumper style  -  and he remains a great exemplar of a time when cricket's work was measured more on how you contributed to the team's overall performance, rather than the individual statistics that could be read on paper.
It's the mark of the man's popularity that in his home state of NSW, the Registry of Births records a sharp rise in the number of boys called Victor in the early 1900s.
In 1900 there were 167 boys named Victor. A decade later, this figure had risen to 195  -  ranking the 35th most popular name. All of you wanted to know that.
Meanwhile, even in 2007, the name Kevin is only ranked at 132nd here in NSW, with only 73 recordings.
Mind you, I'm Kevin and I'm from Queensland. I doubt I'd be doing much better there either.
Trumper was also renowned for his generosity. He ran a prominent sports store, but never cared much for making a quid.
One yarn told again by Jack Fingleton, revolves around his most revered knock at this ground.
At his shop and running late for a Test at the SCG, Vic quickly grabbed a new bat off the rack and came down to the ground to strike an effortless 185 not out. The days of great amateurs.
On returning to the shop, Trumper was met by an adoring fan who asked if he could buy one of his used bats. Vic typically agreed, and amazingly offered the bat he'd just used.
When settling on a price he said to the excited boy: “well, it was a forty five shilling bat but now it is second hand. You can have it for a pound.”
That's a great story about Vic Trumper.
While the Trumper legend for later generations is grounded in that great black and white photograph of him launching that powerful Trumper drive  -  you know that photograph, it just sits in your mind and your memory  -  what is often overlooked is that Victor Trumper was more than just a great cricketer.
He was the truly great all rounder of his day.
He played representative rugby union and Australian Rules football on this ground.
And not content with being a part of just the one code, Trumper was a founder of the initial ‘breakaway' rugby code that we now know as the NRL. Trumper the revolutionary.
In fact, he also played the new code, rugby league, here at the SCG. And I'm sure he would be pleased to know that the game lives on just next door.
I suppose for Queenslanders like myself, Trumper could therefore be best described as a combination of Wally Lewis, John Eales, Michael Voss and Matthew Hayden.
This great stand built to honour this great legend of this great game  -  in his home town and his home ground  -  will add to the rich history of the game here in Sydney.
A ground that is an icon not just for Sydney, but for those of us who come from beyond this great city's shores. This is an icon for Australian cricket and throughout the world.
I'm told that shortly before Trumper's time, the man who would go on to become Australia's first Prime Minister, Sir Edmund Barton, once umpired a match between NSW and a touring England side on this very ground.
It is written that such was the enthusiasm of the crowd, for the game, not for the umpire  -  for he was a politician, at least an aspirant  -  that the match was abandoned for a day following several pitch invasions.
This Prime Minister will content himself not with umpiring games, not playing games, but simply humbly taking the advice of others who suggest to me who should be members of the Prime Minister's XI.
At this ground that has been central to our cricketing history and to our national identity, it is fitting that Trumper will long be remembered directly opposite a stand named after Monty Noble.
Monty was one of the first to back the young Victor Trumper's ability and called his team mate a genius without compare.
Victor Trumper was a great cricketer who inspired a young nation.
Victor Trumper was not just a great cricketer. Victor Trumper was a good man, and the good, as they often say, died young.
He died from Bright's disease at just 37 years of age, a tragedy.
As it has been now about a century, and through what we are here to mark today, I am certain the spirit of Victor Trumper will remain alive for many generations to come.
A celebration of Australian cricket. A celebration of cricket here in Sydney. A celebration and an honour to a great Australian.
It's an honour therefore as Prime Minister of Australia to officially open the Victor Trumper Stand.


PM: Well it's good to be here at Port Botany. And this is Australia's second largest container port, and this is vital to the Australia's future export performance.
This Government is on about nation building and part of nation building means supporting our exports for the future.
This is a first class port and they are in the process of doubling their capacity, virtually doubling it by 2011.
And that means that we're going to have a huge new significance attached to this port when it comes to Australia exporting its goods to the rest of the world.
But having a good port and a bigger port is one thing. You need an effective national rail freight network to support that port at the same time.
So through our nation building program, we are supporting a rail freight network which makes ports like this better able to do their job for the Australian economy.
The $1.2 billion investment that we've announced for the Australian rail freight network is designed to make ports like this more efficient and more effective in getting Australian goods to the rest of the world. That's what it's all about.
We do that more effectively and more efficiently, we're generating more jobs for Australia. That's what it's all about as well.
You know, the $1.2 billion announced yesterday, in terms of the Australian rail freight network, will improve efficiency and effectiveness across many lines across the country.
The objective is this  -  to make sure that goods get to port quicker, get there cheaper, get there more efficiently, so that when we sell those goods to the rest of the world, we are more price competitive. That's what it's all about.
At a time of global financial crisis, one of our key challenges is to boost Australia's exports. That means therefore having the most efficient ports in the world, it means also making sure that we've got the most efficient rail freight network supporting these ports as well.
That's what this nation building agenda is all about.
The second point is this, by expanding the rail freight network and supporting it, port expansion like we see here at Port Botany, we're also adding to Australian jobs.
Australian jobs are crucial to the future. The global financial crisis has going to create real pressures on Australian employment and unemployment in 2009.
This Government is determined to take whatever action is necessary to support investment in infrastructure, to generate jobs in the shorter term and to build critical infrastructure for our economy for the longer term. That's what is all this about.
And the package that we've announced is capable of generating some 32,000 jobs, and in addition to what we intend to announce by way of further infrastructure statement next year, this will represent a positive injection into the national economy, the economy of New South Wales, and here at this important container port here in Sydney.
Minister, you wish to add.
ALBANESE: Yesterday's announcement was of course the biggest rail announcement in Australia's history since Federation. $1.2 billion injected into the Australian Rail Track Corporation, and we can see the benefit in practice just behind us here, where the southern Sydney freight line, together with the work that's taking place at the Enfield terminal, will make a huge difference.
Now this is important not just for productivity and for freight, also if you take containers onto rail and off trucks, you make a difference in terms of commuter transport whether it be on rail or on roads, throughout our cities such as Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.
Now yesterday's announcement will take one hour off the Sydney  -  Perth route, and half an hour off the Melbourne  -  Brisbane route.
This is a major investment and it's notable that the Rudd Government is committing more in our first two years into rail than were committed by the previous Government under its 12 years in office.
PM: Finally can I just say this, nation building is about building an effective national rail freight network. That's important to the economy now, important for jobs of the future.
This Government is determined to invest more in Australia's rail freight capacity into the future.
We're going to make sure that we've got world class rail freight network. World class port facilities. And to ensure that we do our bit to boost the economy in what's going to be a very challenging year ahead.
Over to you folks:
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let me say one or two things before I turn to the Minister.
Firstly, a challenge is to make sure that we have as much dedicated rail freight lines as possible in order to take pressure of the commuter network, that's the first thing.
The second is, through other work which may be possible in the future, to ensure that you've got a road network which has got as much dedicated capacity or dedicated road freight purposes as well.
The overall purpose is this  -  to take as much pressure off big, important cities like Sydney in terms of the legitimate needs of commuters.
The second point I would make is this. I indicated that we have a further statement to make on infrastructure in the early part of next year.
And Infrastructure Australia and its advisory board is working its way through a whole range of proposals from governments right across Australia, on further infrastructure in transport area, including those affecting commuter transport as well.
This is a process which we've gone through methodically, calmly, rigorously, but this Government is determined to invest long term, for rail freight, but also for broader transport needs for the nation, including the good people of Sydney.
ALBANESE: Infrastructure Australia was created to make sure that the Government got independent advice. That it got advice based upon the contribution which particular projects could make to national productivity, but also taking into consideration social and environmental needs.
Infrastructure Australia met once again yesterday in Melbourne to continue the work it is conducting. And they will be, along with the Government, releasing prior to the end of the year the infrastructure audit which is taking place as well as the interim priorities list which is being taken down from the more than 1,000 submissions for projects that they had.
Now it is important in terms of the long term, that when we make this statement next year, we will certainly be giving consideration to that.
This statement yesterday was all about what we can do for projects that are ready to go right now in the next 18 months, to assist, give an economic boost given the global financial crisis.
But as for the longer term projects including projects looking at commuter transport issues, that will be a matter for the deliberations of Infrastructure Australia and for further announcements next year.
So I make this point, the previous Government didn't spend one cent on urban transport. Indeed they argued that it was not the role of the Commonwealth to even give consideration to urban transport, whether it be rail or bus transport.
This Government has re-engaged with the cities. We've established the major cities unit based in Sydney as part of Infrastructure Australia, and we want to work with state and territory governments around the country to address these issues.
JOURNALIST: How will the infrastructure investment specifically help Port Botany?
PM: Let me put it in these terms. Here you have a port which has got an expansion program underway which I'm advised this morning will be concluded some time in 2011. A doubling in effect, almost the container through put at Port Botany.
What the Australian Government has done is to take control of the rail freight network which services this port.
Over here, as late as, as recently as last week, we had the ARTC, the Australia Rail Track Corporation, take control over the holding yards here at Port Botany.
Secondly, the ARTC is in the business of extending the rail freight line from Enfield to Moorebank.
Thirdly, there are further increments to be added to that expansion as well.
And fourthly, the rest of the upgrades to the rail system across regional Australia, but feeding into the Port of Botany, which were announced by the Minister yesterday, add to the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the rail freight network, which gets goods to this port quicker, cheaper, and therefore better for exports.
So every part relates for the whole and that's why our job in partnership with Port Botany and other major container ports in the country, is to make sure that we've got the best Australian rail freight network possible to service the needs of our export market.
ALBANESE: If I could just add one thing also is that yesterday's announcement wasn't just about new infrastructure, it was also about using existing infrastructure better.
And a major part of the announcement was $45 million for the Australian Rail Track Corporation for their $90 million trial using GPS technology, rather than the existing manual signalling system.
Now it's estimated that that could, by reducing the gap between trains, increase productivity and efficiency by some 45 per cent, using existing infrastructure but using it much better.
And that is one of the major parts of yesterday's announcement. I think we need to always look towards how we can use existing infrastructure as well as building new infrastructure.
PM: Just to add more broadly to that, when the history of this Government is eventually written, whenever that might be, we want it to be known as a government of nation building.
A government which for the first time, in a long, long time in the history of the Commonwealth, saw its responsibilities as also centrally investing in the nation's future infrastructure needs.
Our predecessor explicitly rejected that role.
We embrace that role. It's necessary for the economy for the long term. Necessary for other long suffering Australians who are using our commuter networks and our road networks within large metropolitan centres. But it's necessary for jobs and stimulus in the shorter term as well.
Anything else? We'll head off. Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Just one more - what's your reaction to the backflip of the Liberals on IR today?
PM: Well, less than 12 months ago, Mr Turnbull said that WorkChoices was the most important reform to industrial relations in the history of Australia.
Then less than 12 months later, he says that he is now completely opposed to WorkChoices.
I'll let the Australian people work out which is the real Malcolm Turnbull, and will the Malcolm Turnbull please stand up?
Thank you.


I'm announcing today that the Government will bring forward the full amount of our Renewable Energy Fund  -  the full half billion dollars  -  for investment in the next 18 months.
$100 million will be available to be spent in 2008-09, and $400 million will be available in 2009-10, subject only to availability of suitable demonstration projects.
The Fund was established to help to reduce the cost of demonstrating and deploying key energy technologies that may play a critical role in energy supply and security over the next few decades.
The Renewable Energy Fund includes the Renewable Energy Demonstration Program, the $15 million Second Generation (Gen2) Biofuels Research and Development Program and the $50 million Geothermal Drilling Program.
Bringing forward this funding will:
     * Turbo charge investment in solar and renewable energy projects
     * complement the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme
     * stimulate the economy, and
     * create low pollution jobs of the future.
The Government believes the time has come to prepare a solar revolution, and renewables revolution, for Australia's future.
It's good for jobs and good for our low pollution future.
Applications for funding through the Geothermal Drilling Program close on 5 January 2009 and applications for funding through the Second Generation Biofuels Research and Development Program close on 30 January 2009.
We will be releasing the guidelines for applications to the Renewable Energy Demonstration Program early in the new year.


Australia's newest solar farm is now delivering clean emissions-free energy to an outback Queensland town.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh inspected progress at the $4.5 million solar power farm at Windorah, in the state's remote south-west, today.
Windorah is the first of many Queensland towns to go solar with clean energy powered by the sun.
The solar farm uses five 14-metre diameter solar dishes to capture sunlight to help power local homes and businesses.
The giant dishes follow the sun as it tracks across the sky from sunrise to sunset.
Innovative cloud monitoring and prediction software to be trialled at this site detects when a cloud moves in front of the sun and employs a battery system to maintain the same generation capacity until the cloud moves away.
Diesel generators kick in if the cloud cover persists and to maintain the continuous flow of electricity at night.
Last week, for the first time, all five dishes worked together to create solar power that was exported into the local grid, supplying about 60 homes and businesses.
In ideal conditions, such as long sunlight hours and low dust, the solar farm could generate enough electricity to supply the entire day time needs of the town and its 100 residents  -  a Queensland first.
Solar energy could revolutionise the way power is produced for remote communities that are not on the national electricity grid and rely on diesel power stations feeding into small local grids.
The Queensland Government, through Ergon Energy, has invested more than $3.5 million to build the solar farm at Windorah.
The Australian Government, through the Renewable Remote Power Generation Program administered by Federal Environment Minister Peter Garrett's Department has contributed another $1 million to build the solar farm at Windorah.
The Windorah solar plant will produce around 300,000 kilowatt hours of electricity annually and reduce diesel consumption in the town by more than 100,000 litres per year.
More significantly this will reduce the town's carbon footprint by an estimated 300 tonnes of greenhouse gas per year.
Engineers will continue testing the system until February next year, when the solar power station is officially commissioned.
Federal funding support for major projects under the Renewable Remote Power Generation Program totals more than $50 million and has stimulated a total investment of more than $107 million in renewable generation projects around Australia.


PM: Tomorrow I'll be announcing the Government's approach to carbon pollution reduction, through the release of the Government's CPRS White Paper.
Today I'm announcing that the Government is bringing forward a half billion dollar Renewable Energy Fund to be invested over the next 18 months.
It's time for Australia to begin a solar revolution, a renewable energy revolution, and we've got to fund it for the future.
It's good for jobs. It's good for stimulus. It's good for acting on climate change, and that's what we're on about here.
We need to make this solar energy revolution, this renewable energy revolution real for households across Australia. Real for communities across Australia. And also real for businesses as well.
That's why it's good to be here today with the Queensland Premier Anna Bligh, because we're co-investing in this solar farm out at Windorah.
This solar farm is a good investment, a good example of cooperation between the Queensland State Government, the Australian Government, and this local community at Windorah.
Capable of generating 120 kilowatts, this supports what is the normal winter demand for this community and it supplements the current efforts of the diesel power generators which are out here.
But the overall result is this - it reduces the use of diesel and therefore cuts back on greenhouse gas emissions.
So by our Governments co-investing in this solar farm here at Windorah, we are making contributions here at the local level on cutting back on greenhouse gas emissions.
The nation needs a solar revolution, a renewable energy revolution right across the board.
And that's the reason why we begin by bringing forward this half billion dollar investment in renewable energy into the next 18 months.
Over to you Premier.
BLIGH: This is how we beat climate change. Inch by inch. House by house. Town by town.
Today, we start moving Queensland from the sunshine state of Australia to the solar state of Australia.
We have got an abundance of sunshine, we've got plenty of land, and we've got a lot of remote communities like Windorah that need energy.
Last week Windorah became the first Queensland town to be powered by solar energy.
It's the first of a number. We'll move to Cloncurry next.
Bringing solar energy here to Windorah is the beginning of making Queensland the solar state of Australia.
We're moving from the sunshine state to the solar state. We've got many remote towns that, just like Windorah, can be using solar energy.
This is a four and a half million dollar investment between the Federal and State governments to bring solar power to remote parts of Australia. And Queensland is - where else but Queensland could put solar energy right on the world map?
PM: And just to conclude, as the Premier said, this is a nation rich in sunshine.
It's time at the beginning of the 21st century for Australia to harvest this sunshine for our renewable energy purposes.
So this solar energy revolution which we begin, this renewable revolution which we begin, will complement what the Government releases tomorrow, when I release our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme White Paper.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Is this going to be endorsing more projects like this?
PM: The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme deals with the management of that scheme to reduce carbon intensity in the economy over time.
Obviously, what does that do? Creates more of a market opportunity for renewable energy into the future.
But we'll have more to say about renewable energy in the New Year.
JOURNALIST: This new fund, will it just be for solar or will it be for a number of alternative energy sources?
PM: It's for solar and renewable, and we are deliberately at this time bringing forward a half billion dollar fund, which is spread out at present across five years plus, into the next 18 months.
And that effectively brings forward about $450 million worth of investment in solar and renewable.
And we will have the guidelines out for the use of that very early in the New Year.
It's part of what needs to be for Australia  -  a solar energy revolution, a renewable revolution to complement the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
JOURNALIST: Do you know how much emissions that will save?
PM: This one here?
JOURNALIST: Your half billion dollar scheme.
PM: It depends entirely on the forms of investment which would be supported through it. But once each of those is commissioned, project by project, we'll be able to give you a number like the one which applies here at Windorah.
JOURNALIST: Do you see things like this all over Australia?
PM: Look at this technology from this great Australian company. What they've been doing is putting together some unique Australian technology in the blend of cooling systems and the array of panels that you see here before us, specifically designed for remote and hot communities.
Across the Northern Territory, there are something like three projects, with ten of these panel stands currently in existence.
They exist in South Australia. This is the first one here in Queensland.
There are many remote communities across Australia. I would think that the fund that we're talking about would be capable of supporting these projects into the future, across the nation.
BLIGH: Just by way of comparison, this project will save 300 tonnes every year of greenhouse gas emissions.
When we fully price the cost of carbon, this sort of process will become much more competitive in cost terms.
So when we see the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme paper tomorrow, when we see the Prime Minister's White Paper tomorrow, I think we'll have a much better understanding of how these sorts of projects will be competitive with more traditional forms of energy.
But I see this as the future of energy in remote Queensland.
PM: I often say about the CPRS is that it won't reduce the number of flies.
(laughs)
JOURNALIST: Will the Fund can also be used to encourage people in metropolitan areas to take up solar power?
PM: Well, the key thing through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is to set a price for carbon in a responsible way, and secondly to encourage also other energy uses as well, including clean coal, including more solar, including more renewable energy.
But we'll have more to say about that as the year unfolds.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well a lot of work has been undertaken now between the Commonwealth and States on this very subject.
I've got to say on the question on energy efficiency, renewable energy, and certainly on the question of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, I think the nation has achieved more progress from the last 12 months, than we've seen in the last 12 years.
And that I believe is because the Government, supported by State and Territory Governments, is serious about this mission.
Necessary for the economy, necessary for jobs, and remember the green jobs that are generated out of projects like this, but necessary also to bring down greenhouse gas emissions in this, the driest continent on earth.
JOURNALIST: Can we expect a breakthrough or an agreement on feed-in tariffs next year?
PM: There is some work to be done on that. But everyone is chipping away on it.
But I said we've achieved more progress on these questions on the last 12 months, than it's been in the last 12 years.
The thing is to bring it altogether.
To bring together the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the future of solar, the future of other renewable, the future of energy efficiency, the future of clean coal, so that we have an integrated climate change strategy for the nation as well as a way of doing that responsibly which boost jobs on the way through.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned that Cloncurry is going to be a 24 hour (inaudible) next?
BLIGH: Ergon Energy currently supplies 33 remote communities throughout Queensland, mostly with diesel power.
This is a great example of converting diesel powered energy to solar powered energy.
Cloncurry will be the next town.
We'll take the learning out of Windorah and look at the next possible site in western Queensland.
We haven't picked it yet, but it's on its way.


Today the Australian Government announces one of the largest and most important structural reforms to our economy in a generation, the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Climate change is an inconvenient truth and a truth that we can no longer conveniently ignore.
No sustainable leadership can ignore an elephant in the room of this proportion.
To do so would be to threaten the future of our people, our nation, and our planet.
Today the Australian Government responds to the threat of global warming, longer droughts and more extreme weather by embracing a responsible plan of action on climate change.
Climate change is one of the greatest, enduring challenges that we face as a nation and as an international community.
Climate change is nothing less than a threat to our people, our nation and our planet.
It is a threat that, if left unaddressed, has the capacity to permanently to affect our way of life.
The incontestable truth of climate change is that a decision not to act is in fact an active decision  -  an active decision to place the next generation at grave risk.
Today, this generation - our generation - stands at the crossroads of history.
We are the first generation empowered with the fullest understanding of climate change.
And we are the first generation to experience the tangible effects of climate change on our planet.
So the question for our generation is simple.
Do we act on the knowledge that we have in our possession?
Or do we wait  -  leaving the effects of climate change to our children and our grandchildren by which time it may well be too late?
Do we reduce our pollution today so our children and grandchildren can experience the same beautiful and bountiful planet that we have inherited?
Or do we wait  -  knowing our grandchildren may never see the grandeur of the Great Barrier Reef, or experience the wonder of the wetlands at Kakadu.
Do we become more energy efficient today so that we can start down a path towards a sustainable low pollution economy?
Or do we wait  -  knowing our children and grandchildren will experience longer droughts, declining food production, rising sea levels and more extreme weather events.
I say we can wait no more.
The time has come for action.
And what I outline today is a program of responsible action.
Costs of inaction
Australians understand that climate change threatens our economic prosperity, our unique natural environment and our way of life.
As one of the hottest and driest continents on earth, Australia's environment and economy will be one of the hardest and fastest hit by climate change if we do not act now.
11 of the 12 hottest years in history have all occurred in the last 12 years.
Scientists predict that temperatures in Australia may rise by around 5 degrees by the end of the century.
And without action, rising temperatures will have dramatic effects on Australia.
     * Rising sea levels and storm surges will threaten those who live and work along our coasts;
     * We will face declining food production from our farms through longer, more frequent and harsher droughts; and
     * Many of our natural treasures and the tourism industry they support will be at risk.
We simply cannot afford to ignore climate change any longer.
The case for action is clear.
The cost of inaction is equally clear.
We need to take responsible action to reduce carbon pollution over time, to invest in the low pollution jobs of the future and to do so in concert with other economies around the world.
Just over one year ago, during the 2007 Federal election, I promised to end the 12 years of climate change denial under the previous Government.
To end the 12 years of climate change inaction under the previous government.
12 years of opportunities squandered, rather than opportunities seized.
I made the commitment that, if elected, I would make Australia part of the global climate change solution  -  not just part of the global climate change problem.
I undertook to ratify Kyoto, to underpin out commitments abroad.
The Government has honoured that commitment.
I undertook to release in our first year our blueprint for reducing carbon pollution at home.
Today, notwithstanding the economic challenges of the last 12 months, the Government honours that commitment.
The Government has been working hard all year to deliver on our commitment to tackle climate change, against a background of the worst financial crisis in three quarters of a century.
Five of the world's largest economies have already fallen into recession, including the US, Japan, Germany and France.
The OECD has predicted that we will see around eight million jobs lost across the advanced economies in the period ahead.
Australia is not immune from this crisis.
We're already beginning to see the impact on Australian growth and jobs.
We will need to deal with what will be a long and drawn out crisis.
That is why the Government has taken early and decisive action to support growth and reduce the impacts of the global financial crisis and global recession on Australian families and jobs.
Last Friday I announced a $4.7 billion nation building plan to strengthen the Australian economy and help create up to 32,000 Australian jobs.
This builds on four previous steps the Government has already taken:
     * the $10.4 billion economic security strategy to help create around 75,000 jobs;
     * the $6.2 billion long term plan to support our automotive industry and its 200,000 direct and indirect jobs;
     * the $300 million investment in regional and local government infrastructure to sustain local communities and protect local jobs; and
     * the $15.1 billion investment in education, health and housing reform delivered through the Council of Australian Governments, capable of creating an estimated 133,000 jobs.
Taken together, these measures are designed to provide economic stimulus capable of creating nearly a quarter of a million jobs over time.
The Australian Government will continue to take whatever further action is necessary in the months ahead.
But today's difficult circumstances should not be used as an excuse to ignore the threat climate change poses to Australia's long term economic prosperity.
Instead, investing in the clean energy jobs and industries of the future must be part of our response to the global financial crisis.
The work of the Treasury and Professor Ross Garnaut demonstrates that the longer we wait to take action on climate change, the more it will cost.
Furthermore, the Treasury has advised that taking responsible action on climate change will, at most, cost the economy one tenth of one percent of GDP growth measured against no policy change.
In designing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we have been mindful of the challenges facing the Australian economy today.
Our primary objective has been to get the balance right.
To set in place a scheme that reduces carbon pollution and supports economic growth.
This means supporting Australian jobs and assisting households today, while moving to the low pollution economy that will help create the jobs of the future.
Hundreds of thousands of jobs will be created over time as Australia makes the transition to a low pollution economy.
Treasury modelling estimates that taking responsible action on climate change will see the renewable energy sector alone grow to 30 times its current size by 2050, creating thousands of new jobs.
If Australia is to be a leader in the new clean energy industries, we need to build a low pollution, clean energy economy.
If we accept the premise that we will all be living in a carbon constrained world in the future, it follows that the economically responsible course of action is to prepare for that constraint today.
If we begin to act now, the transformation can be engineered at a manageable pace.
If we continue to put it off, the transformation will be abrupt and the dislocation acute.
Acting now will enable us to develop the skills base, trial the new technologies, and refine the business models that will help Australia become a leader in the low pollution industries of the future.
Acting now also helps us shape the global outcome on climate change action that Australia needs.
To delay any longer - would be reckless and irresponsible for our economy and for our environment .
The truth is that 12 years of inaction under the Liberals makes our transition to a low pollution economy more difficult today.
Today, Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberal Party are still divided and still debating whether climate change even exists.
Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberals are now looking for excuses not to act again.
Australia is today the biggest carbon polluter in the developed world on a per capita basis.
This is the country the Liberals left us.
This is a record of which we should not be proud.
Yet we are the developed country with the most to lose from climate change.
This has been a triumph of the worst kind of short termism Australia has ever seen.
On climate change, we are not ahead of the curve.
We have been behind the curve.
How could it be that we pioneered breakthrough solar technology in Australia and the previous government sat idly by while we lost that technology to China.
That company, Suntech, is now one of the world's largest solar cell makers and employs 3,500 people.
The Government will do everything we reasonably can to deliver business certainty; to ensure as smooth a transition as possible to a low pollution future, and to boost the renewable energy sector in the future.
We will do this because we know this is the economically responsible course of action.
We will be attacked from the far right for taking any action at all.
We will be attacked from parts of the far left for not going far enough by refusing to close down Australia's coal industry.
The Government believes we have got the balance right.
The White Paper released today is the culmination of a robust and intensive process underpinned by the extensive Treasury Modelling exercise; the Garnaut review and the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper.
Over the past year we have put a strong focus on assessing the scientific evidence, conducting the economic modelling and consulting widely with businesses, expert groups and the wider community.
The plan we advance in this White Paper represents an evolution of the proposals in the Green Paper  -  retaining the overall design, while refining a number of key features - as a result of our extensive consultation.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to start in 2010 will reform the way our economy works:
     * by, for the first time, putting a cost on carbon pollution which will encourage major carbon polluting businesses to lower their emissions;
     * by using the funds raised by the scheme to help industries that pollute, to lower their emissions, transition to a low pollution future and to secure jobs in these industries;
     * by using the funds raised to assist households to adjust to the scheme, making sure Australian families are not asked to carry the full cost burden of climate change; and
     * by creating a market incentive that builds on the Government's direct investment in clean energy technologies to expand solar energy, wind farms, geothermal, and other renewables and new technologies like carbon capture and storage.
For the first time in history, we will begin to include the cost of carbon pollution in the price of goods and services.
By making the cost of carbon pollution visible, we will begin to redress what Sir Nicholas Stern rightly described in 2006 as the greatest market failure in history.
And the time has come for Australia to embrace this future.
The Government was elected with a long-term commitment to reducing Australia's carbon pollution by 60 per cent from 2000 levels by 2050.
The Government reaffirms that commitment.
Today I announce the Government's medium-term target range: in other words, our 2020 target to reduce carbon pollution.
These targets are appropriate and responsible.
They deliver necessary reform to tackle the long term challenge of climate change, while supporting our economy and securing jobs during this global recession.
By the end of 2020, we will reduce Australia's carbon pollution by between 5 per cent and 15 per cent below 2000 levels.
5 per cent below 2000 levels is our minimum, unconditional commitment to reduce emissions by 2020, irrespective of the actions of other nations.
15 per cent below 2000 levels is our commitment to reduce emissions further, if there is a global agreement where all major economies commit to substantially restrain emissions and advanced economies take on comparable reductions to that of Australia.
This is a substantial commitment and will require us to turn around current trends which, if there is no policy change, have Australian emissions growing by around 20 percent between 2000 and 2020.
To maximise certainty, today we have announced the rate of reduction in Australia's emissions for the first three years from 2010 to 2013.
By introducing the scheme in 2010 Australia will start reducing our contribution to carbon pollution the very next year, 2011.
To further increase business certainty, at all times, we will provide clear scheme caps for the following five years.
For up to a further ten years we will provide a range for emissions reductions to provide guidance on the path of future scheme caps.
Treasury modelling demonstrates that we can deliver on this 5-15 per cent commitment while maintaining solid economic growth.
By starting work towards this target range now, we will ensure the carbon price is introduced gradually  -  giving the economy time to adjust - rather than with a sharp shock further down the track.
Australia's medium term targets for reducing carbon pollution compare favourably with those of other nations that have announced targets, such as the European Union.
The EU's 20 per cent target announced over the weekend is equal to a 24 per cent reduction in emissions for each European from 1990 to 2020.
Our 5 per cent unconditional target is equal to a 27 per cent reduction in carbon pollution for each Australian from 2000 to 2020  -  and a 34 percent reduction for each Australian from 1990.
That is because Europe's population is not projected to grow between 1990 and 2020.
By contrast Australia's population is projected to growth by 45 per cent over the same period.
In fact if the Europeans were to adopt the same per capita effort as Australia is proposing, their economy wide cuts would be around 30 per cent by 2020.
Second, it should be emphasised that not every European country will each reduce their emissions by the 20 per cent that Brussels has recently announced. Depending on their circumstances  -  taking into account population growth and resource base - different European countries will make different contributions. Some will make less than 20 percent; some more.
Third, it should be noted that at this stage the incoming US administration is committed to a mid-term target of 0 per cent growth against 1990 levels by 2020  -  albeit with an ambitious 2050 target of 80 per cent.
Fourth, demonstrating that we can make real cuts to Australia's carbon pollution while continuing to grow our economy will encourage other countries to join the global fight and see that reducing emissions is consistent with solid economic growth. 
The Government also confirms today that it accepts the findings of the Garnaut Climate Change Review that it is in Australia's interests to pursue a fair and effective global agreement delivering deep cuts in emissions, so as to stabilise concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at around 450 parts per million or lower by mid century.
However, we also realise that achieving global commitment to such action in the near term will be challenging.
The Government is therefore pursuing responsible action now, to help move the economy to a low pollution future and position Australia to be part of a comprehensive 450ppm agreement in the future if that proves possible.
Of course, as part of our efforts to help shape a global solution, Australia stands ready to adjust our post-2020 targets to play our full part in achieving a 450ppm agreement.
This includes reconsidering our 2050 target, should it become necessary to play our part alongside commitments from both developed and developing countries.
Should that become necessary, as part of a truly ambitious global agreement around 450 ppm, the Government would of course seek an explicit mandate at the next election in support of a 2050 target beyond a 60 per cent reduction.
At present, such an ambitious outcome is an extremely difficult prospect.
But if all major economies were to move as one towards a truly ambitious target, Australia's comparative advantage would not be disadvantaged.
Australia's targets for 2020 however will lie between 5 and 15 per cent.
We are not going to make promises that cannot be delivered.
We are starting the scheme with appropriate and responsible targets  -  targets that are broadly consistent with those of other developed nations.
In the circumstances we currently confront, this is a responsible course of action.
The government will use every cent raised by the sale of pollution permits to transition to a low pollution economy and help households and business adjust to the Scheme.
The reality is, that there is no cost-free way to transition to the low pollution economy of the future.
We are being completely honest and upfront about that.
While big businesses will need permits for their carbon pollution, households will ultimately face increases to the price of electricity, gas, petrol and other goods and services as the cost of those permits is passed on.
With a starting carbon price of $25, the impact on most households will be modest  -  resulting in an average increase in spending of $4 a week on electricity, $2 a week on gas and other fuels, and an estimated overall increase in the cost of living of 1.1 per cent in 2010-11.
The Government nonetheless recognises that many Australians are already doing it tough.
The White Paper sets out a comprehensive new package of financial assistance for Australian households worth around $6 billion a year to be funded from the sale of carbon pollution permits. This assistance will be available from the commencement of the Scheme in 2010.
Our household assistance package contains 5 core undertakings:
     * Pensioners, seniors and carers will receive additional support, above indexation, to fully meet the expected overall cost of living flowing from the scheme.
     * Other low-income households will receive additional support, above indexation, to fully meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme.
     * Around 90 per cent of low-income households (or 2.9 million households) will receive assistance equal to 120 per cent or more of their cost of living increase.
     * Middle-income households will receive additional support, above indexation, to help meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme. Around 97 per cent of middle income households will receive some direct cash assistance. For middle-income families receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A, the Government will provide assistance to meet at least half of these costs.
     * Motorists will be protected from higher fuel costs flowing from the scheme, by ‘cent-for-cent' reductions in fuel tax for the first three years.
     * The Australian Government is also providing substantial assistance to secure Australian jobs as we transition our industries to the low pollution economy of the future.
In determining the level of assistance to be provided to business and industry, the Government has been very mindful of the present day challenges facing Australian firms.
With this in mind, we have listened closely to the concerns of the business community and made a number of significant improvements to the Scheme as a result of their feedback.
The package of assistance to emissions-intensive trade-exposed firms that we have set out today has been designed to support Australian jobs, today and into the future.
For industries that produce significant amounts of carbon pollution and who face international competition, introducing a carbon price in Australia in the absence of appropriate adjustment mechanisms could lead to carbon leakage  -  that is, an activity could be displaced from Australia, only to reappear elsewhere with a higher carbon footprint.
To manage the risk of carbon leakage, support jobs and ease the transition to a low pollution future, the level of assistance to be provided to firms performing emissions intensive activities has been significantly increased from the proposal outlined in the Green Paper.
These changes mean that a number of important Australian industries that would not have received assistance under the Green Paper model will receive significant assistance.
When the Scheme commences, all firms that qualify for assistance will receive free permits to cover at least 60 per cent of average emissions in their industry.
Based on the changes that we have made it is likely that both LNG production and petrol refining will receive assistance at the 60 per cent rate. These industries would have missed out on assistance under the Green Paper model.
The most emissions-intensive activities like aluminium smelting and integrated iron and steel production will receive free permits at a rate of 90 per cent.
Our package of assistance for emissions intensive trade exposed industries will support growth, jobs and new investment in these industries.
The total level of assistance to emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries at the commencement of the Scheme has increased to around 25 per cent of total carbon pollution permits  -  or 35 per cent if agriculture is included  -  rising to around 45 per cent by 2020 if agriculture is included in the scheme after 2015.
In contrast, in the Green Paper it was proposed that assistance to these industries would commence at around 20 per cent of the total permit pool  -  or 30 per cent if agriculture were included  -  and remain constant around this level going forward.
This comprehensive assistance package for emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries is designed to keep these industries strong in the absence of a carbon price being in place in competitor countries.
At the same time, it is also designed to ease the transition of this sector to the low pollution economy of the future  -  increasing carbon productivity over time and thus global competitiveness into the future as the rest of the world moves to cut emissions.
Importantly, those receiving assistance will still face a strong financial incentive to reduce emissions, as they will be able to sell the permits if they are able to reduce their emissions by investing in new cost effective production methods, cleaner technologies or energy efficiency.
Today, I announce that the Climate Change Action Fund will be allocated $2.15 billion over five years. The Fund will smooth the transition to a low pollution economy for businesses (not allocated to free permits) community sector organisations, workers, regions and communities. 
The Fund will have four streams.
The first stream will provide information to businesses and community service organisations about the scheme, and about how to become more energy efficient.
The second stream will support investment in energy efficiency and low emissions technologies in businesses  -  particularly small businesses  -  and community organisations. This stream help will fund capital investments, such as lighting and air conditioning upgrades, or other energy-saving equipment.
The third stream makes a provision for structural adjustment assistance in the event that workers and communities face unanticipated challenges.
The fourth stream will promote reductions in carbon pollution in the coal mining sector, while assisting the sector to adjust to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme over time.
Australia enjoys high levels of energy security underpinned by a solid regulatory environment. A key priority for our Government in designing the Scheme has been to maintain these high standards and foster a positive investment environment for the electricity sector into the future.
As part of this, I can announce the Government will provide assistance to the most emissions intensive coal-fired electricity generators through the Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme.
This assistance will be delivered through a fixed allocation of free permits - worth approximately $3.9 billion - to be provided over five years. A review will take place after three years to ensure the windfall gains made by power generators under the European Union scheme are not revisited here in Australia.
Australia's three energy market bodies were asked by the Government to consider the broader Scheme design and the ESAS package. All three concluded that risks to energy security had been significantly mitigated.
The Australian Energy Regulator (AER) noted that the risk of Scheme-related plant shutdowns are low.
The Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme will play a key role in supporting a positive investment environment for the electricity sector and in-turn, a secure overall investment environment for Australia.
Given the scale of investment we will see in our energy sector as we move to the low pollution economy of the future, a secure investment environment in the electricity sector is critical.
Moving to a low pollution economy will require significant investment in new electricity generation from renewable sources like solar, wind and geo-thermal energy. It will also require us to find a low pollution way to continue using coal by making Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) work.
The Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme represents a necessary and important contribution to support this essential new investment in Australia's electricity generation sector.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will deliver a market incentive to build on our investments in renewable energy, carbon capture and storage and low emission technologies.
We recognise that the scale of the economic transformation required is so large, the barriers to change are so high, and the imperative to change so pressing, that additional measures are required to enhance the market incentive provided by the Scheme.
We are taking substantial action to accelerate the large-scale development, demonstration and deployment of new, clean energy technologies.
The Government is driving this transformation through measures such as the Renewable Energy Target, which will require 20 per cent of Australia's electricity to be generated from renewable sources  -  like solar, wind and geo-thermal - by 2020.
This is further supported by the Government's $500 million Renewable Energy Fund, to support the development and commercialisation of advanced renewable energy technologies in Australia.
Yesterday I announced that we would make the full $500 million available over the next 18 months to accelerate the demonstration and commericalisation of new renewable energy technologies.
To secure Australia's position as a major energy exporter, our carbon productivitiy must improve significantly.
Carbon capture and storage technologies will play a crucial role in this transformation.
The Government has already made a range of substantial commitments to the development and deployment of this important new technology. These commitments include:
     * the establishment of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Initiative
     * funding of up to $100 million a year towards a new Global CCS Institute
     * the provision of $500 million over eight years through the National Low Emissions Coal Fund, and
     * the development of a new legal framework for carbon capture and storage through the Offshore Petroleum Amendment (Greenhouse Gas Storage) Act, which Parliament passed earlier this year.
Both renewable energy and CCS are likely to be deployed in regional areas. By supporting these technologies, the Government will further secure low pollution jobs in Australia's regions.
We are also assisting industry to respond to climate change, with the $500 million Green Car Innovation Fund and the $240 million Clean Business Australia Fund.
We know some groups will say we are not doing enough.
Other groups will say we are doing too much, too soon.
That is why we have worked hard to get the balance right.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the best way to achieve a low pollution economy for the future cost effectively, and across our whole economy.
The most important decisions a government makes are never the easiest.
Establishing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme won't necessarily be easy or popular.
The easiest thing to do in response to the global financial crisis is to do nothing.
Instead the right course of action is to set robust and responsible targets, establish a real price for carbon and to begin the long term process of transformation.
Without action on climate change, Australia faces a future of parched farms, bleached reefs and empty reservoirs.
And we risk being left behind as other nations invest in the clean energy jobs and industries of the future.
Recently a bloke named Jason from Ballina in northern NSW wrote to tell me seven practical steps he is taking to reduce his greenhouse pollution - like using the cold water cycle on his washing machine, and turning off his computer at night.
A few months ago a school girl at our community cabinet meeting in the southern suburbs of Adelaide asked me pointedly, if I'm Prime Minister, why can't I get all the office blocks to turn their lights off at night?
A 61 year old grandmother from O'Connell in the NSW Central Tablelands wrote to tell me that she's never voted Labor before, but she feels that more than ever in our nation's history now is the time when Australia needs strong leadership, because of the impact on climate change for our kids' future.
One after another, in their own way, Australians are saying they are willing to do their bit, but the Government must provide leadership.
Today's White Paper on climate change is about responsible leadership in the context of a global financial crisis.
Australia faces a choice.
We can either wait and allow the challenges to get worse, or we can take action now.
No longer can Australia's government ignore this crisis.
No longer can Australia's businesses miss this opportunity.
Today, the Australian Government has chosen to take the reasonable and responsible action that will set Australia on the path towards a more secure and more prosperous low pollution future.
I am pleased to formally launch the White Paper on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future.
The White Paper Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future is available on the Department of Climate Change website.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You at the Treasury website.


JOURNALIST: Lenore Taylor from The Australian, Prime Minister. Obviously feelings are running pretty high about the target that you announced today. I was wondering if you could explain three things. First, what are the characteristics or criteria of an international agreement under which Australia would cut its emissions by 15 per cent by 2020? How are they different from an agreement where we cut our emissions by 10 per cent? And why have you not quantified what our full part would be in an ambitious 450 parts per million agreement? Do you no longer believe the 25 per cent as outlined in Professor Garnaut's report is right?
PM: The first thing I would say in response to that Lenore is that we are in a negotiation. If you look at the sorts of discussions the minister had most recently at Poznan, we have a long, long way to go on the road between now and Copenhagen, and possibly beyond that as well.
That is the first point.
Secondly, consistent with a number, but not all other nation states, we have indicated what will be our unilateral course of action, that is, irrespective of whether there is an agreement or not, because we believe we have a responsibility to turn the corner, to get to a stage where Australia can stand up and say, ‘we have actually in year X begun to reduce greenhouse gas emissions'.
Thirdly, on the question of our criteria which we would apply to moving towards 15, we have said and said repeatedly that we will want to see robust commitments from developed and developing countries in the context of global negotiations.
Those negotiations continue and this will be the usual process of international argy bargy that we have seen in the past and there is a long, long way to go in the process.
Finally, on 450 parts per million, can I say this: we have taken Professor Garnaut's conclusions on this and the observations contained in the international panel's conclusions on this most seriously.
That is why we believe that this must remain part, a core part of the future negotiations. It follows, as I have said as a matter of logic, that if you are to embrace 450 parts per million as a long term objective for Australia and for the world, in our case that would mean an adjustment beyond 2020 for our target, it would also mean adjusting our long term target from 60 per cent overall reduction to a higher figure.
However, given I have made a commitment to the Australian people about it being 60 per cent reduction by 2050 against 2000 levels, and that would bring about a change, I am not prepared to embark upon that course of action until I have obtained a further and separate mandate from the people on it.
But the fact that we have dealt with this so deliberately, both in my remarks today and as outlined also in the White Paper, reflects how seriously we take the environmental challenge, the need to stabilise. And Australia, in the negotiations, will be ambitious and working hard to bring about a maximalist agreement. But a maximalist agreement which brings all economies on board.
That has got to be the objective and we are going to be in a process of significant global haggle in order to bring that about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Karen Middleton from SBS TV. At the target you have set for 2020, environmental analysts tell us that the Barrier Reef and the Murray Darling river system could well be gone by 2020. Do you dispute their analysis about that?
And given what you have said about the difficulties for the economy in reaching targets beyond where you are today, what are you saying to Australians about the prospects of saving the Barrier Reef and the Murray Darling in the medium term and do we have to give up on them?
PM: I believe and it reflects the comments I have just made, that we must remain ambitious for a long term target for the planet of 450 parts per million because that is relevant to Australia, it is relevant to the reef, it is relevant to Kakadu. It is relevant to the entire enterprise in which we are engaged.
We are not engaged in this business of a climate change debate because it is an interesting policy frolic. It proceeds from the science. That is why we are doing it. Secondly, the challenge then lies in calibrating that with the economics. It lies in calibrating with where we are, given the challenges we now face with the global financial crisis and calibrating with where other national economies are moving.
We are bringing into being, one of the most comprehensive emissions trading schemes anywhere in the world - 75 per cent coverage of the economy, 75 per coverage of total emissions. This is significant.
Secondly, we are taking these targets which we intend to deliver, entrenching them in the legislation and making it happen. These are not aspirational targets and the reason we are also keeping alive the prospect of a more ambitious long term future is because we take the science seriously.
It is calibrating the scientific reality with a negotiating reality with other states, with the economic adjustment process. This is a very difficult public policy process, both at home, within our own constraints and calibrating that without global negotiations.
But the Minister and I will remain globally active and ambitious on that, which is why so much treatment has been given to the 450 part per million target, in my remarks and in what is contained in the White Paper.
JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan at The Age. Mr Rudd will this now be translated immediately and directly into your legislation or are you willing to entertain any more representations from industry? And would you be looking first to the opposition or to the minor players as Senate partners to get this through? And finally will you be personally attending Copenhagen?
PM: What are you doing next Christmas Michelle? Wonderful wonderful - I won't try and sing the song. Danny Kaye wasn't it? (laughter) At least someone remembers down there. Sorry, I haven't lost my complete train of thought. Copenhagen, open question, it is supposed to be a meeting of Ministerial parties and it is unusual for heads of Government to attend. So we'll leave that simply open.
The other part to your question was, are we translating this through into legislation? On the question of, well actually you said two things, are you putting this into legislation and will you take further representation. The purpose of the white paper is to outline what the policy agenda and direction is, the drafting task is to put that into the black and white letter of the law. We have said here in the document that we will then circulate an exposure draft of legislation so that industry and others can comment on the extent to which the policy outline contained within the White Paper is translated into the legislative process.
That is the right way to proceed, that is the rational way to proceed, that is what we intend to do. So that is the sort of commentary that would invite and respond to.
Just one other thing which is about the other parties. I got lost in the Copenhagen song. Can I just say to all Australians who are engaged in the political process, whether it is from the Greens or whether it is from the Liberals, that there is a national interest at stake here. None of this is easy. It is real hard. And secondly, it is like turning around the Queen Mary, it is turning around the Queen Mary.
The status we now find ourselves in as Australia, as I said before, is that we are the highest emitters per capita now in the OECD. That is where we have been left. How do you turn this enormous ship around? It is very hard.
What we have tried to do through our efforts this year, and I believe have succeeded in doing, is get the balance right. Our target range, five to 15, together with keeping alive our 450 parts per million, ambitious future.
That is the right course of action. And the necessary adjustments, three of them, for industry, to assist them in adjustment process and for households, so that there are social justice attached to this as well so that the burden just doesn't flow through to those who can afford to pay the cost of climate change impost on goods and services least. It is a reasonable package. Therefore I would appeal to all Australians engaged in the political process to get behind it.
There is going to be, as there should be in a democracy, arguments from both sides about whether it has gone too far or whether it goes far enough. I accept that. I respect that.
That's why we have a democracy.
But you know, what I would say to the Liberal in particular is this. I said it before in other contexts like WorkChoices. Time for the real Malcolm Turnbull to stand up. Is it the Malcolm Turnbull who was supposed to be gung ho about this 12 months ago? Or is it the Malcolm Turnbull of today seeking some short term political advantage?
12 years we've wasted. Let's not waste another 12. Let's get on with the business. That's what we're doing. We're ambitious for the future.
JOURNALIST: Emily Rice, Network Ten, Prime Minister. If you're giving householders help to cope with higher energy costs and fuel costs, what are the incentives for everyday Australians to actually change their behaviour?
PM: Well, you will find that we have of course built into the scheme the necessary incentives for those who produce goods and services which are consumed by households to change over time.
We spoken about those who are going to give the allocated administrative (inaudible), what I call I suppose concessional permits at are either 60 per cent or 90 per cent, those who will be allocated free permits.
But across the entire spectrum of the economy there is a huge built incentive for people now to switch to more energy efficient production and to produce therefore more energy efficient goods.
Secondly, on the individual consumption side, it is plain if you look carefully at what the White Paper says, that we're of course have been very mindful of low income earners and have properly compensated them to ensure that the costs which flows through from this scheme is more than off-set by the compensation package provided.
We do not make the same provision in the White Paper for all income earners.
And we've offered help in terms of middle income earners and we've provided a substantial degree of help, but there is enough by way of price signalling there for people to begin to adjust over time as well.
There's a final thing as well. We have a lot more to do in terms of other measures within Government to encourage and to support actively energy efficiency review homes and within businesses across Australia.
And this Government continues to have a bold and vigorous agenda on that.
Three arms to this Government's climate change policy: One, for the first time in the history of Australia, having a carbon price set for the country.
Two, actively supporting on the supply side, renewable energy and clean coal; and three on the demand side, an active agenda further to be developed on energy efficiency.
These are the three arms of policy. We'll be vigorous in the prosecution of each.
JOURNALIST: Hello Mr Rudd. Cathy Alexander from AAP.
PM: Hello Cathy.
JOURNALIST: Hi. Just a further question on targets. We've heard from some young people during your speech who seem to think that what you've announced today is not good enough and doesn't go far enough.
And I note, that I think Professor Garnaut said the Government should leave option, open the option of a 25 per cent cut in emissions by 2020, in the context of a strong international boom, which he thought was unlikely, but his recommendation was of that be kept open.
What you've done today is you've said it is a 15 per cent absolute maximum and you've also revealed that you'll be willing to change the 2050 target and to look at pursuing that 450 parts per million, perhaps in the longer term.
My question asked in a rather roundabout fashion is why not do it sooner? Why do you have to wait till after 2020 to pursue that kind of a climate pact?
PM: Well it begs the question of what's the magical difference therefore is between 2020 and the period beginning in 2021.
Let's look at the overall scheme as outlined in this plan of ours.
Firstly what we've said in laying out our targets for the period ahead that we, when the scheme comes in as of 2010, we'll have annual targets produced for five years subsequent to that - each of the five years subsequent. That that takes you out to about 2015.
We've also said that beyond 2015 for a further decade, we then outline what will be a gateway, that is a range of, say likely maximum and minimum targets for the decade following.
What's all that about? In order to produce some certainty for business.
Therefore you're going to have those real and indicative targets going out 15 years, taking us from the time this scheme is introduced in 2010 out to 2025.
Therefore if in the meantime we, and I'm talking about in the years ahead, are able to realise our ambition and this Government's ambition as well for 450 parts per million outcome, then it follows the capacity to begin to reflect that into the scheme, post 2020, is there.
The reason we have kept it alive as I said in my response to the earlier questions, because we take the science seriously. But right now, the prospect of realising that are limited.
That's just a call of political reality. And we're in the midst of a negotiation. Therefore we believe this is the right course of action.
Can I just say one other point on this question of targets as well.
It's time people began to translate through these targets into the per capita impact for this country.
As I said in my remarks, this country's population grows.
This country's population will grow by 45 per cent from 1990 through to 2020.
Europe's remains static.
If you were to achieve the quantitative reductions in total Australian emissions that we're suggesting, even if the most modest end of the spectrum, five per cent, then the per capita impact from that is about as substantial as what the Europeans are proposing through there externally more ambitious sounding target.
If the Europeans were to embrace the same per capita obligations that we're about to embrace, then we'll be seeing European reductions in the vicinity of 30 per cent.
So there is a headline effect here in terms of (inaudible) quantitative economy wide undertaking, but there is also a real comparison to be made in terms of the substantive comparative efforts per capita in countries like this.
Quite apart from the minor challenge of turning the Queen Mary around.
JOURNALIST: Hi Prime Minister. Alison Rehn from The Daily Telegraph newspaper. Prime Minister, single parents earning $80,000 a year are more than compensated by the Government to adjust to the emissions trading scheme.
In fact, they receive an extra $500 a year or so in government help. But at the same time, the single person earning $80,000 a year has to pay $640 to adjust to the scheme.
Prime Minister, I'm just wondering why do you have vent against childless people?
PM: Well we don't at all. And guess what, any scheme of compensation support is not going to be perfect to all players.
Let's just acknowledge that up front, accept that. What we have tried to do is provide to robust undertakings out there.
One is that when it comes to low income earners and those least able to afford the adjustments necessary that they are more than compensated.
And that's why we've been most concerned about low income earners with or without kids in ensuring that the outcome is delivered for them.
For middle income earners, obviously the spread is somewhat different.
We're particularly concerned about the additional burdens which flow to households which have additional mouths to feed as well, and that means additional impost when it comes to energy consumption, given that energy consumption is a large part of the CPI effect which flows from this.
So Alison, this ain't perfect. But I'll tell you what, our social justice imperative is to make sure that low income earners are not going to be penalised by this scheme.
And that when it comes to middle income earners, using the normal definition through the family tax benefit system, that we are delivering reasonable help, substantial help, for those who those who need it through the adjustment period.
Ultimately there's going to be price signals which flow through the economy for this.
And the objective, as I indicated into response to an earlier question, is that for businesses and for those with more disposable income over time, to begin to make the adjustments necessary both in production patterns and in consumption patterns, because the objective is to bring down global greenhouse gas emissions.
This country needs to bring down its total level of emissions. We've got to actually turn the corner here. It's tough and it's hard. But this is the best way forward that the Government's identified.
JOURNALIST: David Alexander, Canberra Times. Prime Minister, I'm just wondering if the inter-governmental panel on climate change were to revise its temperature estimates, would the Government revise its targets?
And secondly, if you've accepted as you seem to  - 
PM: Under the standing orders that's usually regarded as a hypothetical question. Given you're long standing observation of standing orders perhaps you could reflect on that as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) if you accept that Australia faces graver threats from climate change than any other industrialised country and if you accept, as you seem to, that the economic modelling says that the impact on our economy will be minimal. Why have you settled on targets that are comparable to other countries like the UK, rather than pushing harder diplomatically for higher targets to share the burden?
PM: Well firstly, on the first part of your question. Our job David is actually to respond to what global science says to us and I've said to global leaders, when we've convened on these matters recently, I mean the international panel of climate change scientists aren't a bunch of ‘funsters'
These are folks who have come to meetings, wearing white coats, essentially humourless and tried to deliver the science.
And that is as it should be. They are in the measurement game. They're there to give us the bad news and the worst news. That is what they're for. Almost as bad as the (inaudible) science.
But we are therefore required to respond to the data as given. That's why in response to so many earlier questions I said that 450 parts per million must remain core to Australia's ambitions for the future because it affects us most.
Secondly, you implied in the second part of your question that we were pursuing a less than ambitious diplomatic strategy. Quite the reverse David, quite the reverse.
This country's national interests are served by us securing the most ambitious global outcome possible. But it must be a global outcome, which involves all major emitters. 
That's why we have taken significant unilateral action, which in per capita terms is comparable or in excess of various European norms I have spoken of before.
Secondly, outlined a further ambitious proposal in the event (inaudible) we have major commitments from developed and developing economies at the conclusion of this process.
And at the same time saying that if the global community rises to the challenge of 450 parts per million, which we will be arguing that they should, then it's time to adjust of course our longer term targets and work accordingly.
That is what our diplomatic strategy is. It is consistent with everything I've said today and what the Minister has been saying most recently in Poznan as well.
JOURNALIST: Simon Grosse from ScienceMedia.com.au. You mentioned in your speech that you're looking for a robust commitment from other countries.
When Ross Garnaut was last in this room he said, he was optimistic about China joining an international deal on emissions and he told us what he thought, would be the best deal we could get from China.
And that would not be that China would reduce its emissions but China would aim to limit the growth of its emissions at half the rate of its economic growth.
Assuming China achieves its goal of eight per cent growth economically, that's four percent growth a year starting from about seven billion tonnes this year. On that rate it would add a billion tonnes every four years.
So by 2020 China will be emitting 10 billion tonnes, at the same time that you think Australia would have reduced its emissions by about 100 million. Is that the kind of commitment from China that you see as robust?
PM: You know I'm glad Ross is confident about what China might deliver because I am less confident in terms of being predictive at all about what China will deliver at this stage.
I think it's fair to say that in China the body politic over the last 18 months has shifted its view on climate change because they see the immediate intersection with this and its real growth rate in the long term future. And there is a battle, obviously, as it would be in any country in resolving the best way forward for them.
Secondly, what has happened since then is that, and you would have seen in the television news reports last night of the trilateral summit between the ROK, Japan and China, is that these economies are now wrestling with unprecedented financial and economic challenges coming off the back of the financial crisis.
Therefore the contest within China's policy debate on the climate change imperative and the financial and economic growth imperative will be acute and sharp as unemployment rises in the coastal provinces and the factories depending on US markets for access.
So this is going to be a very tough year. But again I go back to answers to earlier questions about what is sensible and smart for Australia to do unilaterally as opposed to a broader strategy over time, part of a negotiation which has a conditionality attached which brings other economies along with it.
Our job, in Australia in the 12 months ahead, will be to strain every muscle, to exert every effort, to try as hard as we can to fashion an arrangement which would involve the Chinese and other major emitters from the developing world and to see what we can do to have that pass muster with the new administration in Washington as well.
What America does in terms of medium term targets is of critical importance - bearing in mind that the Obama administration is currently committed to zero per cent growth in emissions against 1990 levels by 2020.
We are promising to go backwards five and conceivably 15. So there you have the American position under the Obama administration, not withstanding they've got an ambitious long term target of 80 per cent. And the Chinese as you know are with no formal position in terms of numbers.
What has Australia got to do as a job? We have a huge interest in getting these two huge emitters to agree. And the task of Australian diplomacy this year will be to exert every effort to get a substantive agreement from those major emitters.
What they do is hugely consequential for what happens here in this country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Damian Smith from the Seven Network. You have told us what Jason from Ballina is doing to reduce his carbon footprint, I wonder if you could share with us what Kevin from The Lodge and Kirribilli is doing to reduce his?
PM: Nice question. Our modest decision some time ago was to obviously go to a hybrid car and that is in terms of the car which Therese uses. I get driven around in a different blunder bus for reasons which I think you in the press gallery would be familiar with. That is a decision we took quite some time ago because it is a personal choice about what sort of car you drive and I think that is the right thing to do, at least for us.
And an extension of that of course has been the activity which I have been engaged and the Industry Minister, if he is here, Kim Carr have been engaged in securing agreement from Toyota towards supporting hybrid car manufacture in Australia as well.
So you want a practical example, it is going for the hybrid, and learning from that, trying to make hybrid production possible in Australia, because Australians still at the end of the day like to support Australian made cars.
And we are trying to bring those two worlds together.
JOURNALIST: Laura Tingle from the Financial Review, Prime Minister. I would like to take you to policy positions 12.10 through to 12.12
PM: I knew you would ask a question like this Laura.
JOURNALIST: Yeah I am sure you, I thought you would probably have committed them to memory. (Inaudible) Essentially they are about the Emissions Intensive Trade Exposed Sector and the assistance they get. The change, one of the changes you have made since the Green Paper is that you have increased the free permits that some groups can get, and you have, they are not going to disappear quite so quickly over time.
My question goes to fiscal sustainability. On your forecasts you are conceding that this sector may end up with 35 per cent of permits. If that sector grows faster than the rest of the economy, it could easily go up beyond 50 per cent. What are the risks that, given the extensive compensation you are offering, this scheme will not be self funding within 10 years or beyond and do you see, have you had any advice about whether there is a prospect you would have to dip into the deficit?
PM: No, we have discussed this considerably internally and we are confident that the scheme can remain self funding. And the reason for that is that you would have seen I think the allocations under, or the dollar equivalent of EITES concessional permit allocation is something in the order of about $3.1 billion a year. And with I think a reasonable reduction rate over time. But also allowing for the entry of new participants into the market and as you said quite rightly, us foreshadowing an increase in the total proportion of permits issued to Energy Intensive Trade Exposed industries rising from 25 to 35 per cent over time.
It follows also though if you look at the other adjustment packages that we have identified and there are two others within the scheme, that over time it is proposed that they be time limited. We have been upfront about that and we have indicated that and therefore if intensity continues vis-à-vis the fiscal impact, or should I say the dollar impact of issuing permits at a concessional rate to Energy Intensive Trade Exposed industries, then there are other elements of the package which will reduce over time, and that is what we have had in mind in terms of sustaining the financial self contained nature of the overall regime.
JOURNALIST: Hi Mr Rudd, Phil Coorey from the Sydney Morning Herald. Just, can I just take you off the topic of climate change for a sec to another one (inaudible) another one of your largish election commitments was the broadband network and we have learned this morning that Telstra has been punted out of the bidding process because it didn't measure up. Are you confident that the broadband project can be delivered more or less on time and as promised without Telstra's participation?
PM: The answer is yes because our commitment as you know prior to the election was not conditional on any particular industry participant. We regarded this as a necessary investment in the nation's infrastructure and we would do so on the basis of a competitive tender process. That panel that has been at work has been fully at arms length from Government and has reached its own conclusions and though I've been pre-occupied with other things this morning, they have as I understand reflected their response to the Telstra submission.
So in answer to your question, we're determined to implement our pre-election commitment.
And we'll do so consistent with the process that we've initiated, and the recommendations of the panel.
You know why, because it's the right thing for the country, and we're going to get it done.
JOURNALIST: Lucy Skuthorp from Rural Press. Mr Rudd, how hard will your Government push for changes during the negotiations over international accounting rules, so that carbon storage, not just emissions, can be measured to provide some abatement options for the farm sector when it joins the scheme?
PM: This is a really complex part of the negotiations. I'm glad you raised the question.
One of the great complexities associated with the inclusion of agriculture within the scheme is of course the multiplicity of the actual producers of emissions within that sector.
Remember, for those not familiar with this debate, for the 75 per cent of emissions that we're talking about which fall within the coverage of the scheme, that covers about 1,000 firms across the economy. And we've got literally millions of businesses in this economy. It's 1,000 firms that we're focused on.
Which is why in the process for developing this scheme, Penny and other ministers have achieved significant progress in dealing with many of these firms directly, often confidentially, in making sure we have adjustment mechanisms in the three industry adjustment schemes as right as possible.
Agriculture is phenomenally complex because of the multiplicity of the actual producers of emissions which are contained within it.
Therefore we have a lot of work to do.
That's the truth of it - between now and a 2015 decision about agriculture's conclusions, the terms of its conclusions, the consequential implications which flow from that in the international negotiations.
Wish I had a neater, easier answer for you than that, but every time I've sat down and gone through this one, frankly the head spins and it does for most people because it is so phenomenally complex.
But because it represents a significant slice of emissions we intend to work as hard on it.
You'll be familiar with the provisions of the White Paper, both on avoided deforestation and on the capacity for planted forests for possible inclusion within the scheme's overall architecture.
That's been done deliberately and consciously based on the best advice. We have a lot of more work to do on agriculture.


Today I announced one of the largest and most important structural reforms to our economy in a generation, the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Climate change is one of the greatest, enduring challenges that we face as a nation and as an international community.
Climate change is nothing less than a threat to our people, our nation and our planet.
We are the first generation to experience the tangible effects of climate change on our planet.
The case for action is clear.
The cost of inaction is equally clear. Our announcement today sets out our medium-term target range: in other words, our 2020 target to reduce carbon pollution.
These targets are appropriate and responsible.
They strike the right balance between tackling climate change and supporting our economy and jobs during this global recession.
Our scheme will start in 2010.
We will put a cost and a charge on carbon pollution which will encourage major polluting businesses to lower their emissions. The funds generated from this charge will be used to help industries that pollute, lower their future emissions.
We will also use the funds raised to invest in the green-collar jobs of the future  -  in solar energy, on wind farms and in jobs using new technologies like clean coal and geo-thermal energy.
Key to the success of the strategy will be our plans to assist households adjust to the scheme  -  Australian families won't carry the full cost of climate change.
Over the next couple of days and weeks you will hear lots of different opinions.
I encourage you to read the Climate Change White Paper  -  or at the very least read “The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You”, you will find a link here on this website.
I think you will agree we have achieved the right balance. Of course people are going to have different views and we will get attacked from the left and from the right for either not doing enough or for doing too much. That's why its important to get the balance right. Get the balance right for the environment, get the balance right for the economy and jobs.
I wish you and your family a very safe and happy Christmas and all the best for 2009.
A video of this speech is available. 
The White Paper Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future is available on the Department of Climate Change website.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You is available on the Treasury website.


Today I announced one of the largest and most important structural reforms to our economy in a generation, the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Climate change is one of the greatest, enduring challenges that we face as a nation and as an international community.
Climate change is nothing less than a threat to our people, our nation and our planet.
We are the first generation to experience the tangible effects of climate change on our planet.
The case for action is clear.
The cost of inaction is equally clear. Our announcement today sets out our medium-term target range: in other words, our 2020 target to reduce carbon pollution.
These targets are appropriate and responsible.
They strike the right balance between tackling climate change and supporting our economy and jobs during this global recession.
Our scheme will start in 2010.
We will put a cost and a charge on carbon pollution which will encourage major polluting businesses to lower their emissions. The funds generated from this charge will be used to help industries that pollute, lower their future emissions.
We will also use the funds raised to invest in the green-collar jobs of the future  -  in solar energy, on wind farms and in jobs using new technologies like clean coal and geo-thermal energy.
Key to the success of the strategy will be our plans to assist households adjust to the scheme  -  Australian families won't carry the full cost of climate change.
Over the next couple of days and weeks you will hear lots of different opinions.
I encourage you to read the Climate Change White Paper  -  or at the very least read “The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You”, you will find a link here on this website.
I think you will agree we have achieved the right balance. Of course people are going to have different views and we will get attacked from the left and from the right for either not doing enough or for doing too much. That's why its important to get the balance right. Get the balance right for the environment, get the balance right for the economy and jobs.
I wish you and your family a very safe and happy Christmas and all the best for 2009.
A video of this speech is available. 
The White Paper Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future is available on the Department of Climate Change website.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You is available on the Treasury website.


COLIN BARNETT: Good morning, I'd just very much like to welcome the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to, not only Western Australia, but to the Ord.
And the Commonwealth and the State are working together to make finally Ord Stage 2 a reality and I think today's visit, Prime Minister, is an important step towards that.
From the State perspective, we've already allocated some money and we can anticipate some construction work starting virtually in the New Year.
But I would like to hand over to the Prime Minister and welcome to the Ord.
PM: Thanks very much Premier. It's great to be here in the Ord.
I'm told by the locals I'm the first Prime Minister to be here in 23 years.
And I think it's high time we actually looked imaginatively and boldly about where we can take this development in the future for Australia's long term agricultural planning.
We've been talking recently about climate change.
Climate change for the Australian Government falls into three big areas - one, reducing greenhouse gas emissions; two, mitigating the effects of climate change; and three, of course global negotiations to bring out a fair deal for the planet.
Yesterday of course on that first question, we released our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, I'll come back to that in a minute.
Second, climate change mitigation goes to the very question about what you do to support sustainable agriculture and to Australia's long term future.
We all know from climate change that we're having a big impact in terms of drought, and farming conditions across southern Australia.
The south-east and the south-west.
So therefore we've got to look boldly and imaginatively about where we turn for Australia's next food basket.
Now of course, the Ord can't solve all the nation's problems, but you know it can start to make a positive contribution for the future.
The other day when I introduced the Government's Building the Nation Plan, I said that we would be prepared to invest $195 million, dollar-to-dollar with the WA State Government.
I'm here today to re-affirm that commitment.
Secondly, what the Premier and I have just agreed to is that in the next three months, between now and the end of March, we'll conduct and conclude a joint feasibility study.
As I said the other day, you've got to pass that hoop before the money flows from the Commonwealth.
The other thing is that we've got to make sure that we tick off also other necessary approvals.
But the point of being here today, apart from being briefed, is to send a very loud and clear signal that the Commonwealth is open for business.
The Australian Government is open for business in partnerships with the States, in partnership with WA to how we develop long term solutions for Australia's agricultural and farming needs off the back of climate change.
One final thing I'll say is this on climate change real generally.
The Australian Government, given the global financial crisis, makes no apologies whatsoever for introducing responsible medium term targets to bring down our greenhouse gas emissions, capable of being built on in the future more ambitiously.
That's what we've done.
We believe it's a responsible course of action, given the global financial crisis. Necessary for the economy. Also a strong step forward in dealing with this environmental challenge.
Minister do you want to add?
BURKE: In the context of a global financial crisis, agriculture's been one of the drivers that's actually been helping with Australia's growth figures.
And what today says is that the planning for the future and with the challenges of climate change, agriculture remains absolutely part of the nation building agenda.
People have been talking about the Ord Stage 2 for so long. Some people when I was here, not that many months ago, were wondering if we'd ever get there.
Well today you've got the cooperation between the WA Government and the Australian Government saying ‘let's start to move forward on this' and let's start to acknowledge that wherever we can open up extra options for farmers and extra potential food production then we're taking those steps in the right direction.
PM: Good. So just to conclude; climate change means we've got to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and plan for Australia's long term agricultural needs. That's a sensible long term strategy for the nation, and the Premier and I want to see the Ord as part and parcel of that long term future.
Over to you folks for any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister. The funding for this, will this be coming from Royalties to Regions and if so will it be coming from currently existing funds in Royalties to Regions or will it depend on the mining sector in the future?
PM: No, the Commonwealth funding commitment for the financial year 08-09 is straight from the Budget. That is what we've indicated that we would do and we believe that's the right way to go.
As I said before and I said last Friday in Canberra - joint feasibility first, done in three months; secondly we'll deal with the necessary environmental approvals. But the money is there, it's allocated and for this financial year.
JOURNALIST: And why another feasibility study when we've been having feasibility studies and environmental impact statements up here for 50 years?
PM: Well that is what the Premier and I have agreed to do because we need to make sure that the taxpayers' dollars are being properly invested.
So if you're at the point of commissioning $195 million of federal taxpayers' money then you've got to tick off on the bottom line that this investment is sound. We're confident that, having just seen this great potential new food basket for Australia, that this is part of the nation's future. It's part of nation building.
That's why we've allocated the 195  -  done. We'll still cross these two remaining hoops.
JOURNALIST: You've described it as a food basket. What do you think about the sandalwood industry up here?
PM: Well agriculture is a broad and varied feast. It is things that you eat and things that you build with as well. So whether it is sandalwood or whether it's horticulture or whether it is other crops, all these things are building the nation.
This Government wants to be a government of nation building. Part of nation building means building the nation's long term agriculture in all of its dimensions. Horticulture, other forms of crops as well as of course, the sandalwood products I've been introduced to today.
JOURNALIST: So when you look at this country here, what would you prefer to see grown? Food, fibre, (inaudible)?
PM: You know something? I grew up on a farm. We had dairy and beef. And I know enough about farming to know what I don't know. And that's to provide these farmers here with advice about what they should put in here.
They are smart about this soil. They are smart about what grows here. I grew up in south-east Queensland. It's different.
JOURNALIST: And when agriculture-
[Laughter]
PM: I think they kind of, they agree.
[Laughter]
JOURNALIST: When agriculture faces the music of an emissions trading scheme, will you allow for deductions like the resources sector? Say, like New Zealand has done for dairy?
PM: Well the first thing is, we've got to make some decisions between now and 2015 about the inclusion of agriculture into the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. This is really complex, as I said at the National Press Club yesterday.
The reason is, if you look at the rest of our national scheme, it deals with the thousand largest Australian carbon emitters; a thousand large companies. When you look at agriculture, while it does represent 15 per cent of Australia's total greenhouse gas emissions, you're looking at a huge number of individual emitters. It becomes very difficult to actually design a system around it.
That is why the Minister has strongly advised me, I think in consultation with the farm industry groups, that we should hasten slowly, get this right, that's why we've made provision for it but for 2015.
If ag is included, then of course we would be clear then about the conditions attached.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: What does the funding mean for Kununurra and the Ord, Premier? More than currently exists.
I think it is time for the nation to think boldly about its future. You know, Australia is at its best when we're laying out big plans for the future. And implementing them  -  not just doing bits here and bits there. Bit of piecemeal here, bit of piecemeal there.
We've got to actually look at strategic threats and strategic challenges. Wht's the strategic threat: climate change. How do you deal with that as a strategic challenge?
Well, reducing greenhouse gas emissions - that is important. Dealing effectively in global negotiations to get other countries to do the same -that is critical. Preparing for climate change, in terms of its impact on farming, is just as important.
And the truth of climate change is that when we look to Northern Australia, the potential in terms of rainfall, obviously creates different circumstances to what exists in the rest of the country.
So you know something? We're positive about this plan.
But this community to which I've been introduced this morning at Kununurra is a great little town. Community of seven or 8,000 people and we want to be partners in its long term future.
I'd thank the local authority for their briefing to us this morning about turning this into sustainable communities, supporting sustainable agriculture and with opportunities for inclusion of long term sustainable Indigenous employment.
The Premier is passionate about indigenous employment. We've talked about this at COAG. I am too. We want to make this work for Indigenous people as well.
JOURNALIST: And do you wish this was taken on by the Northern Territory Government? (Inaudible) development on their side?
PM: I know enough about Commonwealth-State relations not to preach beyond the State line. And the State line is over there.
[Laughter]
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: But you know. Ord 1 is here in WA. Ord 2 is here in WA. Ord 3  -  we'll have some discussions with our friends in the Northern Territory and of course the WA State Government about its long term feasibility as well.
But the Government embraces ambitious plans for the nation's future. Ambitious plans for our farming future. Ambition  -  ambitious plans for what can be done here. Okay folks? All done?
JOURNALIST: One more question. When can we expect to see the first heavy lifter? Like, the first earth mover?
PM: Premier.
BARNETT: The State Government has already put some money aside, around $30 million, for some of the initial works in the existing M1 area. For example, widening the M1 channel. So we expect that work to be underway basically in January. So we'll start.
And just following on from what the Prime Minister was saying, apart from the development of the M2, the extra 14,000 hectares, essentially doubling the size of the irrigation area, a lot of money will go into upgrading the school, work into the airport, roads.
So there is a broad economic, social and infrastructure program and that adds up to the $195 million -thank you Prime Minister - which the State Government will match, which will see, after 50 years Ord finally realise its potential.
I think that I can say that this is the farming frontier of Australia up here. This is the future of the country in many respects. So I am delighted the Prime Minister could come today and I'm delighted with his commitment to supporting the development of the North, and particularly the east Kimberley.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today said the East Kimberley Region would receive $195 million to support further economic development in the area.
The Prime Minister made the comments while visiting the Ord River Irrigation Area in Kununurra, Western Australia, today.
Under this important package, the Rudd Government will contribute a total of $195 million over 2008-09 and 2009-10 to support economic development in the East Kimberley region through investment in roads, ports, power.
The East Kimberley Development Package will double the available irrigated development area from 14,000 to 28,000 hectares to provide possible large scale expansion of agriculture.
Key investments for the region could include:
     * an upgrading of the M1 channel to service up to 16,000 hectares in the Weber Plains area;
     * investments in local roads around Kununurra;
     * the extension of the Kununurra airport runway; and
     * an expansion of the Wyndham port facilities to address constraints and deficiencies in supply chain logistics which currently affect irrigated agriculture, mining, tourism and other export focused activities.
The social infrastructure component of this package would include investment in schools, health, early childhood, aged care and recreational facilities.
The West Australian Government will match the Rudd Government's contribution, which is conditional on a joint assessment of the most effective infrastructure investments to meet the social and economic development needs of the region.
The Commonwealth's Office of Northern Australia will lead the joint assessment process, under the Parliament Secretary for Regional Development and Northern Australia, Gary Gray. The group will report in March 2009.
The assessment process will consider the long term economic viability and environmental sustainability of irrigated agriculture for the region.
On 12 December 2008, the Rudd Government announced a $4.7 billion nation building infrastructure investment package to strengthen the Australian economy and create Australian jobs.


***TRANSCRIPT INCOMPLETE DUE TO POOR AUDIO QUALITY***
(Inaudible)
...we weren't quite sure whether it was going to happen or not. But with a bit of perseverance and some help from our Dutch friends and allies, we're all here and we're all here in one piece.
More importantly we're here to actually have a yak with each one of you. The purpose of being here is very simple, very, very simple. And that is to you, the men and women of the Australian defence force, for me as Prime Minister of Australia to say thank you. Thank you, thank you, for what you're doing.
Now the country looks to what you do with pride and admiration. You know sometimes if you're stuck up here, you must think you're a long way from everybody and everyone's forgotten. Well I'm also here to say to you  -  we haven't forgotten.
We know what's going on here. We follow, as a Government, day by day, week by week in terms of what you're up to. And we've had that experience, that you've all had, which is saying goodbye to some of your mates.
And that's been tough. It's tough for you because they have been your mates. But you know something? It's been tough for their families - it's also been tough for the nation.
Australia feels it when we lose one of our men and women in uniform. They feel it, they feel it in their gut. They feel it in their heart.
I've been to too many funerals. I don't like going. But you know something? When we say goodbye to one of our own, the nation is united in a common purpose.
That is not just to honour what they've done but on top of it, to reaffirm to every person back home in Australia what they have done and what you are doing is important.
You know flying over this country coming here, you scratch your head a bit and say how is it for hundreds of years people have fought over this place? You scratch your head, don't you?
And it has been handed to the good people of Afghanistan; over the last several decades one wave of difficulty after another. Our job is to give them a fair shake. To give them a fair chance, to give them peace and opportunity.
You know when I speak to the Afghan community in Australia, and there is many of them, they, to a person, appreciate what we are doing here. (inaudible)
And here in this vast country, which has known such a bloody history, giving these people in Afghanistan a decent shake at their future. That is really important stuff. Cos' they haven't had much. It's been pretty bad.
The fact that in a year ahead, they can go to the ballot box and elect their own people to run their own country, that is an advance of centuries compared to where this place has been.
The fact that young girls in this country, rather than being denied any form of educational opportunity as declared under the Taliban, can now go to school. And have a decent chance in life. And be shown that there are pathways to their own personal future.
Men and women of the ADF are out there building bridges, building infrastructure, connecting one part of the country with, to another  -  that is progress.
The fact that you're out there, pushing the enemy back - step by step, mountain ridge by mountain ridge  -  that is progress. The fact that you're here also training, raising a force in partnership with our friends and allies  -  that is progress.
Have we got anywhere? Remind them of each one of those core facts. And remind them of what this place was like, this place, let's never forget that as well.
Our ally, the United States was attacked by a terrorist organisation Al Qaeda, which had as its training base, this country run by the Taliban. And we are a loyal ally of the United States said ‘well, bugger that for a joke  -  we're in'. And we still are. And that is as it should be; standing up for your allies, invoking the formal obligation of the alliance with the United States.
And by denying the enemy the opportunity to use this country as a training base, as it was unfettered for Al Qaeda in the past, that also is progress.
Their ability as a terrorist organisation to reach out and wreak havoc and hell across the world, as they've done in the past, we've got a job as a community of civilised nations to deny them that opportunity. And that is what you are doing.
Christmas is coming and for those of you who are here and separated from your wives, your husbands, your partners, your girlfriends, your boyfriends, you mums, your dads, kids and grandparents and those who love you in the communities from which you come - I bring a message on behalf of each of them as well. And I've met a few of them in recent days. That is, they are proud of each and every one of you. Proud of what you're doing for Australia. Proud of what you're doing in this country.
It doesn't make it any easier to be apart from them at this time of year. I'm going to go home and spend Christmas with my wife and three kids and you're not. And I understand that that's hard.
But you know, at this time of year in particular, as the families of the nation settle down around a Christmas tree and share presents, the nation will be thinking of you as well.
But I've been thinking of you as well: exhibit A. I was told I could not bring you several cartons of beer.
[Laughter]
I was told I couldn't bring you several crates of beer. In fact I was told I couldn't bring you any beer at all. So, we left that to one side.
But there is a Test series coming up between ourselves and South Africa. And so we thought that the best way to provide some R and R and some encouragement for the Australian Test team was for you to, on camera, to show how it's done.
So here is a brand new, all bits and pieces attached, cricket set for this great group of men and women. Oh and girls, I expect you to be out in the field as well.
There is a further task, which is that by the end of your tour of duty, I expect you to have introduced the Dutch to the finer points of the game. It is part of our ongoing friendship and partnership with them.
But this is for you and it's my idea, so if you think it stinks you can blame me and not the CDF. Okay?
[Laughter]
But it is part of us giving you a bit of a Christmas present.
Today because it was a bit of a hassle getting here, and you may have heard some of the detail of what that involved, our time has been cut a little bit shorter than it would.
But I've got one interest in being here apart from saying thank you and that is to shake each of your hands and to have a yak about what is going on and about any extra stuff that you might need.
So to conclude, on behalf of a grateful nation, thanks for what you're doing. Have a really happy Christmas and keep safe. That's what the country wants  -  keep safe.


Well you know something? I've been Prime Minister for a year now and I've learnt one thing. And that is, you blokes who look really ugly with beards belong to the Special Forces.
[Laughter]
And blokes without beards don't.
It's good to see this operation again as I was here this time last year.
You know, that was a very impressive display of fire power and an impressive display of what you do when you harness the kinetic force of this operation again an enemy.
I know enough about what you've been doing the last 12 months to know that that is not just for show for visits by the Chief of the Defence Force and myself today but that is what you actually deploy in the field.
And this is an ugly operating environment. It doesn't look a bit like the Gold Coast to me. And can I say, each time you've lost one of yours we go through it, and we have a report from the Chief of the Defence Force about what happened and about who you're up against and how ugly it was.
And what I want you to know, as your Prime Minister, is that each of us who sit around a table and listen to that take it very personally.
So when you're out there in this God-forsaken part of the world, doing your stuff, you need to know that back home, not just the nation's behind you, the people running the show like the Defence Force Chief are behind you and the Government is behind you as well.
What I admire about what you blokes do is that it is full of skill. What you just displayed [inaudible].
I know enough about what you deploy and what you do but skill is one thing [inaudible].
[Aircraft noise obscures audio]
...and again, saying goodbye to one of your own. I've been there too often. Look after yourselves, be careful, do your job.
And I haven't brought it out with me but what I've brought from Australia is, is, is  -  I was going to bring a crate load of beer but that wasn't allowed.
[Laughter]
I was going to bring a smaller crate load of something harder than that and that wasn't allowed either.
But the Test Series is coming up so for the Boxing Day Test between you blokes and the reconstruction fellas down the hill, there is a brand new cricket kit for each of you. Bats, balls, wicket keeper's gloves, pads, and - given that I understand that some people here are of a serious standard - protectors as well. So it is all there.
When I was out at Holsworthy the other day, I ran into two ladies who asked me to plant a kiss on the cheeks of Sergeant [inaudible].
[Tape ends]


The winner of a design competition for a national memorial honouring more than 30,000 Australian peacekeepers was announced today.
The memorial, to be built on Anzac Parade in Canberra, has been designed by Super Colossal, a Sydney based architect firm led by Marcus Trimble. 
The Australian Peacekeeping Memorial will pay tribute to Australian peacekeepers and their roles in more than 50 peace operations around the world since 1947. Australia has contributed to peace operations in a number of countries including Namibia, Cambodia, Somalia, Rwanda, East Timor, Iraq, Afghanistan and the Solomon Islands.
Australian peacekeepers have built a reputation for outstanding service, in helping to restore order in dangerous environments and coming to the aid of victims of conflict.
We currently have nearly 1000 personnel engaged in nine peace operations overseas. Australians involved in peacekeeping operations come from the Australian Defence Force, federal and state police forces, and Australian Government agencies.
It is important we acknowledge the contribution our peacekeepers make to security in our region, and the world. This memorial will be a tangible reminder of what our peacekeepers have achieved, particularly those who have lost their lives while peacekeeping.
Now the winning design is selected, the memorial committee will focus on raising enough money to get the project underway.
The Australian Government has committed $200,000 but more is still needed.
The memorial will cost $3.5 million and we encourage Australians to give generously to ensure the efforts of our peacekeepers are honoured through this memorial.
For details on how to make a donation visit www.peacekeepingmemorial.org.au/donations.php 


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced Australia will provide $5 million to support the 2009/2010 Afghanistan elections.
The Prime Minister made the announcement after returning from his visit to Tarin Kowt in the Oruzgan province, where he met Australian personnel on deployment to Afghanistan. 
The Australian Government will provide $3 million to the United Nations Development Program to help the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission (AIEC) build a national voter registration campaign which will sign up more than 2 million new voters. 
Further, the Government will provide $2 million towards the Asia Foundation's work with the AIEC and civil society partners to implement electoral education and public outreach programs in Afghanistan. 
The 2009 Presidential and Provincial Council elections and the 2010 Parliamentary elections are crucial to international efforts to help build a stable and democratic Afghanistan.
It is vitally important that efforts continue to strengthen democratic governance and to promote economic development in Afghanistan, to build on the successes of Australia's troops and other security forces. 
For the elections to be considered free, fair and credible, the international community needs to ensure that the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission is sufficiently resourced. 
Ensuring there is broad and equitable participation by all Afghans, including women and displaced persons, is critically important for building the legitimacy and credibility of the election process. 
The Asia Foundation had been helping to deliver Australia's assistance to the AIEC since 2005 through:
     * Providing short-term training of staff at the Australian Electoral Commission;
     * Running an observation mission to the 2007 Australian federal elections; and,
     * Providing direct support to AIEC offices.
The Australian Government, through the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID), will continue to provide assistance to Afghanistan in partnership with the Afghanistan Government.
In 2008-09, AusAID will provide an estimated $62 million of much needed development assistance to Afghanistan.


The White Paper on Homelessness, The Road Home, was launched today by the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and the Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek.
The White Paper outlines a plan for reducing homelessness in Australia by 2020, with specific goals to:
     * Halve overall homelessness; and
     * Provide accommodation to all rough sleepers who seek it.
There are currently 105,000 homeless people in Australia, of whom around 16,000 sleep rough.
The White Paper is a huge injection of funds. It provides an additional $1.2 billion over four years - a 55% increase in investment in homelessness and a substantial down payment on a twelve year reform agenda.
It includes a commitment of $800 million over the next four years for new support services for homeless people and $400 million over the next two financial years for social housing, to house the homelessness.
This injection of funds is part of a $15.1 billion package agreed by the Council of Australian Governments that will stimulate the economy and generate up to 133,000 jobs over coming years.
In response to overwhelming feedback from consultations on the Green Paper, the White Paper focuses on three core strategies:
     * Turning off the tap' - better prevention of homelessness
     * Improving and expanding services to help more homeless people
     * Breaking the cycle of homelessness by providing long term housing and support.
Through new funding and reforms we aim to:
     * Help up to 9,000 more young people to remain connected with their families; 
     * Help up to 2,250 more families at risk of homelessness to stay housed;
     * Provide day to day support to an extra 1,000 adults with mental illness; 
     * Build up to 2,700 additional public and community houses for low income households who are at risk of homelessness;
     * Fund a network of 90 Community Engagement Officers within Centrelink to support people at risk of homelessness; and
     * Build up to 4,200 new houses and upgrade up to 4,800 existing houses in remote Indigenous communities 
     * Allocate aged care places and capital funds for at least 1 new specialist facility for older homeless people every year for the next four years.
Homelessness is everyone's responsibility and the White Paper offers a once in a generation opportunity to reduce homelessness in Australia.
This White Paper was the first to be announced by the Rudd Government, which promised to make tackling homelessness a priority.
The White Paper delivers on that promise.
The Government will continue to monitor developments in homelessness and will take further action where necessary.
The Government recognises the critical need for national leadership, a clear vision and measurable goals.
Reducing homelessness is a shared responsibility that will take a sustained financial and reform effort by all levels of government, business, charities and the community.
The White Paper is available at Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA) website or by calling 1800 774 055.


The Rudd Government today announced a co-investment agreement with GM Holden and the South Australian Government, for Holden to build an all-new, fuel-efficient, low-emission small car in Australia, supporting up to 1200 jobs immediately. 
The new, front-wheel-drive, four-cylinder car will be manufactured from the third quarter of 2010 at GM Holden's Elizabeth plant in South Australia. Design and engineering work will be done at Port Melbourne in Victoria.
The new car, part of the global Delta small car platform, will, in its first phase, include both petrol and diesel variants. It will support up to 600 jobs at Holden and up to 600 jobs in the automotive supply chain. Further phases of the this new small car will create even more jobs.
The new small car will redefine GM Holden in Australia, adding a second line alongside the Commodore and adding capacity that will reinforce the long-term sustainability of manufacturing in Australia.
The new car will provide Australian motorists with an Australian-made car that is around 20 per cent more fuel efficient and produces 20 per cent less in carbon emissions than current larger vehicles.
Families travelling 20,000 km a year will save almost $500 a year in fuel costs and produce around 1.7 tonnes less in carbon emissions.
The Holden small car lays the ground-work for the introduction of hybrid engines and alternative fuel systems, including LPG and E85 (ethanol-blended fuel) and CNG (Compressed Natural Gas).
The Holden small car will introduce the new-to-Australian manufacturing, low-displacement, forced-induction petrol engine, for enhanced fuel efficiency. These innovative technologies will complement programs for the Holden's large family cars.
The Commonwealth will contribute $149 million over three years starting in 2009-10 to this project. This co-investment deal is the first green car grant of funds since the launch of the Government's $6.2 billion New Car Plan for a Green Future, which is designed to transform the Australian automotive industry to produce fuel-efficient, low-emission vehicles and create high-skill, high-wage jobs.
The project is also supported by the South Australian Government.
The New Car Plan is part of the Government's broad economic strategy to stimulate activity and create jobs during the worst global economic and financial crisis in living memory.
The announcement is a significant win for families, the environment, jobs and the economy.


I am pleased to announce today the appointment of two Departmental Secretaries.
The position of Secretary of the Department of the Environment, Water Heritage and the Arts will shortly become vacant following the announcement by Mr David Borthwick PSM of his retirement in early January 2009. The position of Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism will also become vacant in January, following the appointment of Dr Peter Boxall AO as a Commissioner of the Australian Securities and Investment Commission.
I pay tribute to the dedicated services of both Mr Borthwick and Dr Boxall and wish them well.
The position of Secretary of the Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts will be filled by Ms Robyn Kruk from 2 March 2009. Ms Kruk has extensive experience in public policy, having been Director General of the Department of Premier and Cabinet in NSW, Director General of NSW Health and from 1994-1998, Director General of the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Services.
Ms Kruk's experience includes policy development and management in the areas of environmental planning and assessment, water management and reform, resource security and endangered species protection. She spearheaded development of Australia's first State Biodiversity Conservation Strategy, has been a member of the NSW Heritage Council and Chaired the Indigenous Protected Areas Advisory Council. Ms Kruk's achievements will, I am sure, fit her well for the many challenges of her new role.
Mr John Pierce will become Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism, also from 2 March 2009. Mr Pierce, a resource economist, is currently Secretary of NSW Treasury and Chairman of the NSW Treasury Corporation. He has held a number of senior positions within the NSW Treasury and has made a major contribution to the COAG reform process.
Mr Pierce drove the largest reforms to the NSW electricity industry in 43 years and led NSW's participation in the development of the national electricity market. In recent times he has been responsible for assessment of the economic and financial impacts of carbon emissions trading schemes and the development of strategies to facilitate private sector investment in the NSW electricity, retail and generation sectors. He will be a major asset in the portfolio of resources, energy and tourism.
Both appointees will bring to their positions not only extensive experience in the public sector but also specific expertise and experience relevant to their respective Secretary roles. The appointments are for terms of five years.
From 3 January, until Ms Kruk takes up her appointment, Mr Gerard Early will act as Secretary of the Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts. Mr Drew Clarke will act as Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism until Mr Pierce takes up his appointment.


GILLARD: I obviously grew up in South Australia and am well familiar with Proclamation Day. It is an important event in the South Australian calendar, to mark the time that we became a colony.
It has been great to be here today and it has also been particularly good to be here to see the first participation by the local indigenous people in the proclamation day ceremony. So it has been a delight to join the Governor, to join representatives of the South Australian Government, fellow MPs and of course, the local council in celebrating this special event.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) suggesting a presentation that a bill of rights should be developed for indigenous Australians. Is that likely to happen in the near future do you think?
GILLARD: The process that the Government is undergoing is our commitment to closing the gap. Obviously during the course of this year, the Government took the historic step of delivering an apology on behalf of the nation to the Stolen Generations of Indigenous Australians.
Now our commitment is to substantial closing of the gap targets. There is a big gap in life expectancy, in educational attainment, between Indigenous Australians and non-Indigenous Australians.
That is our focus, not a bill of rights, but practical action to close the gap.
JOURNALIST: On to other matters. The Sunday Telegraph reports today about the misuse of Government provided credit cards by (inaudible) defence force. What is your reaction to that news today?
GILLARD: As I am advised these credit cards have been in use for around four years. There are 58,000 such credit cards. There have been a very small number of incidents of fraud or misuse and they have been vigorously pursued.
Obviously we have robust measures in place to make sure that any incidence of fraud or misuse is detected and dealt with. The Government is also involved in a major review program throughout Defence, to deal with efficiency measures.
That is being overseen by my colleague, the Minister for Defence Joel Fitzgibbon. But I would stress that given there are 58,000 such cards in use, for legitimate purposes, that the incidence of misuse has been very small indeed and there are robust systems for dealing with any incidence of misuse.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) there is still $100,000 odd dollars of taxpayers money that is still (inaudible). What sort of, will that be repaid or  - 
GILLARD: Well as I am advised, when there has been evidence that cards have been misused, that has been pursued, including by criminal charges where that has been justified. So there are robust and strong systems for dealing with any misuse. Obviously any act of dishonesty needs to be detected and needs to be punished. That is the perspective the Government takes.
It takes it in relation to all matters, but including the use of these credit cards. As I am advised the detection systems are robust. And I do think we need to remind ourselves that the number of cases of misuse is very small indeed.
We are talking about 58,000 cards that have been used over four years and we are talking around 200 cases where there has been evidence of misuse. So a very small proportion of misuse in relation to these cards.
So overwhelmingly our Defence Force members are doing the right thing and doing their jobs to the highest standards of professionalism, all day, every day and we should never forget that.
JOURNALIST: So you are satisfied that the use of these credit cards is being closely enough monitored?
GILLARD: Well we are involved in a thorough going review of defence measures. That was instigated by my colleague Joel Fitzgibbon earlier in the year. We are always on the look out for efficiency measures.
We are always on the look out to do things better. But as I am advised, there are robust measures in place in relation to the use of these credit cards to make sure they are used for appropriate purposes and to detect and deal with any measures where there are concerns.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) national drug study (inaudible) suggesting a move from alcohol to ecstasy. Does that concern you?
GILLARD: Any use of illicit drugs concerns me. Any use of alcohol, inappropriate use of alcohol, heavy drinking, binge drinking, is obviously of key concern to the Government.
During the course of the year we obviously dealt with the tax on alcopops. We believe that alcopops were not sufficiently taxed compared with other alcoholic beverages and we moved to act on alcopops.
We believed that there was a lot of evidence that alcopops were the favoured drink for teenagers who were binge drinking, particularly at young ages.
Any use of alcohol for binge drinking or illicit drugs is obviously a concern to the Government. We engaged in a number of public health campaigns to warn people of the dangers of illicit drugs and to warn people of the dangers of the misuse of alcohol.
And I would repeat all of those messages, particularly as we move towards New Years Eve. People have to stay safe, they have to look after themselves, so that is obviously saying no to illicit drugs and only drinking in moderation. And certainly when people are driving in the holiday season, we too often see the consequences of the misuse of alcohol and combining it with driving.
So it is very important. People have a good new years eve, but keep safe.
JOURNALIST: But that is just the point, they are saying that it is the cost that seems to be a factor for (inaudible) and that alcohol is too expensive and they seem to be having a better night out on illicit drugs because they can spend less on those than they can on the cost of alcohol. (inaudible)
GILLARD: Well I think the ultimate thing here is to get the message through that whether it is misuse of alcohol or whether it is use of illicit drugs, these can jeopardise people's heath.
They can end up in unsafe situations. Obviously we want people, particularly young people to be able to go out and have a good time. But as the television campaign of warnings we have in place now shows, misuse of alcohol, use of illicit drugs can end in tragedy. And I would be saying to all Australians, but particularly young Australians as we move towards New Years Eve, to have a good time, but to stay safe, and staying safe means confining drinking to drinking in moderation and not using illicit drugs.
JOURNALIST: Miss Gillard, the action by the ETU and other (inaudible)
GILLARD: Well look that is a matter for the unions involved and if they choose to raise something at the ILO then that is a matter for them. What I can say about the Government's industrial relations laws is we believe we have got the balance right.
When I introduced the Fair Work Bill into the Australian Parliament, I fully expected that there would be some employers who said we had gone too far, some unions who said that we hadn't gone far enough.
We believe we have got the balance right and importantly, we have delivered on our promises to the Australian people, to sweep Work Choices away and to replace it with a fair and balanced industrial relations system.
JOURNALIST: Is this going to increase business (inaudible)
GILLARD: We have been very clear since we first launched our workplace relations policy in 2007 that pattern bargaining would not be legal under Labor's laws. Pattern bargaining is not legal under our Fair Work Bill. That is a situation we have made absolutely clear month after month, day after day.
Our bill is about having a safety net for all Australians that they can rely on, standards at work that can't be stripped away from them. It is about bargaining at an enterprise level and it is also about being protected from unfair dismissal.
WorkChoices stripped away the safety net and people could be dismissed on a whim and have no remedy. Our bill fixes that.
JOURNALIST: What is the Federal Government's reaction to the military action in the Middle East over night, with reports that up to 200 people have been killed.
GILLARD: Well obviously this is a deeply concerning matter. Clearly, we are calling on Hamas and other militants to cease shelling Southern Israel. Obviously they have broken the ceasefire and engaged in an act of aggression against Israel.
Israel has responded. We are echoing the calls from around the world for parties to move back to a ceasefire.
We are saying in relation to this that Hamas has engaged in an act of aggression, Israel has responded. We are saying to the Hamas that they should cease any further action.
We are saying to the Israelis that all care should be taken to avoid injuring civilians and obviously the world would want and I am sure all people who want peace, would want the ceasefire to re-emerge and for all violent action to stop.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Israel overreacted (inaudible)
GILLARD: Clearly the act of aggression was engaged in by Hamas, that commenced shelling with rockets and mortars into Israel. That is what breached the ceasefire and Israel responded.
In terms of any response, we would make it clear that all care should be taken to try and avoid injuring civilians and obviously people. Care needs to be taken by Israel in that regard. But for all us I think who care about peace around the world and peace in the Middle East, what we would be urging is for the ceasefire to start again and for all violent action to stop.
JOURNALIST: There is a new advertisement out today which is critical of the Government's climate change targets, saying that five per cent is something that John Howard would have been proud of. Do you think the Government has let voters down on that percentage having promised stronger targets?
GILLARD: I believe the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme that the Government announced in mid December gets the balance right - gets the balance right in dealing with the profound challenge of climate change and making sure that our nation is responding to that profound challenge, whilst ensuring of course the we are supporting Australian jobs and we are making sure that we are not creating circumstances where there is carbon leakage, where things that should be occurring in Australia go offshore.
So we believe that we have got the balance right. We believe that it is an effective scheme to deal with the profound problem of climate change. Once again, when we launched the carbon pollution reduction scheme, we expected that with an issue like that, there would be some people that thought we had not gone far enough and others that thought we had gone too far.
We worked hard through a very consultative process, led by Senator Penny Wong, of this state of South Australia, to work with everyone to get the balance right, and we have achieved that.
[ends] 


GILLARD: Well I'm here today with our Minister for Tourism, Martin Ferguson.
Today some figures have been released by our tourism forecasting agency about expected tourism figures next year and beyond.
Unsurprisingly they show in this forecast that in 2009 it's likely to be a tough year for the Australian tourism industry. In light of the global financial crisis, obviously the impacts have been felt throughout our economy, including in our tourism industry.
The forecast shows we are likely to expect less inbound tourists from overseas in 2009 than we have had in recent years. However the forecast also shows that we are expecting a slight rise in domestic spending on tourism, that is, Australians holidaying in Australia.
In light of these figures and in light of the global financial crisis generally, the message from the Australian Government is very clear. There has never been a better time to holiday at home in Australia. There's never been a better time for Australians who were thinking about taking a bit of leave to decide to take that holiday here in our own country.
Whether it's the Margaret River or Kakadu. Whether it's the Great Barrier Reef or the Blue Mountains. Whether it's seeing the National Gallery or our own Great Ocean Road here in Victoria. Whether it's visiting the Barossa Valley or going to our Apple Isle. This is a nation with world class tourism attractions and it's a great time to be holidaying at home.
I'll turn to Minister Ferguson for the details of the forecast and then we'll be happy to take any questions.
FERGUSON: The tourism industry are going to do it very tough over the next 12 months. Clearly the global financial crisis is having a major impact on our traditional international markets such as North America and Europe.
In terms of where the industry goes it also comes back to Australians actually starting to think about having a holiday here at home. Australians have 121 million days of accumulated leave representing $31 billion. By having a holiday at home you actually can help your mates. You don't have to go away for extended trips, you can actually just go on day trips or away for a couple of days. Even a question of going to the movies, going to the cricket or going out for a meal, it's all part of the tourism industry.
I simply say to the tourism industry, the Australian Government understands your plight. The economic security package is also about the disposable dollar. Tourism like retail actually competes with the disposable dollar. People now having experienced a bit of retail therapy over the last couple of days ought to think about a trip or two with their family. Have a break from work because remember this, no leave means no life.
JOURNALIST: How long is this industry downturn likely to last?
FERGUSON: I would expect that the tourism industry is going to do it very tough for the next 12 months internationally. Alternatively from a domestic point of view we expect an increase in spending.
That is related to the fact that the Australian dollar has weakened, therefore it is less attractive to go overseas, and also the price of fuel is down. So to Australian families and their friends will get together and think about going away for a couple of days. It can be as Julia said, down to the Margaret River or the Flinders Ranges, the Blue Mountains, the Gold Coast, the Apple Isle, to Canberra or whatever. Doesn't matter where you go, spend a bit of time with your family because in the end, you actually have a break from work, it's better for your family and you go back to work an even better worker.
JOURNALIST: Aside from encouraging people holiday domestically though, what is the Government going to do to assist these tourism industries which are struggling?
FERGUSON: The tourism industry is clearly about expenditure. We've got the economic security package which meant 1.5 million Australians have had an increase in disposable income in December.
We'll also next year got the tax cuts actually starting to cut in to assisting the Australian community. So in terms of the domestic market, whilst the international market is becoming very tough, the domestic market becomes more and more attractive, especially given the weakening of the Australian dollar is less attractive to actually go overseas. So all the economic indicators in some ways actually encourage people to actually have a holiday back at home.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
FERGUSON: Obviously from an industry point of view, it's not just about the short term, it's also about the long term. I've been in the process of developing a long term tourism industry package, which also has a focus on the skilling, the issue of training and also infrastructure. That's about positioning the tourism industry as we come out of this international economic slump in 12 to 18 months time, so as to make sure that we are well positioned to grab economic opportunities in the international market as they become available.
JOURNALIST: Would the Government consider direct assistance to tourism operators though in the short term?
FERGUSON: Look in terms of direct assistance, the best thing you can do is actually to invest in the future. That's about investing in skills and infrastructure. But I can also say that we have done the best thing by the tourism industry by putting money in the hands of Australian workers and their families through the economic security package. That's about disposable dollars and the tourism industry like the retail sector is now getting out there. It's offering competitive packages from the airlines' point of view, from the hotels' point of view, to actually trying in encouraging people to actually use the tourism opportunities that are available in Australia here and now.
JOURNALIST: Does this make the Tourism Australia, the new ad campaign, a waste of money?
FERGUSON: The Tourism Australia campaign is not a waste of money because you'd understand, you have to maintain a market presence. We don't continue to spend and market Australia internationally, then in 12 and 18 months time it's going to be impossible to break back into those markets. That's what the tourism industry is telling me in places such as North America and Europe and Japan  -  we expect you to give a clear commitment you are here for the long haul and the Tourism Australia campaign is about marking our spot and building our international appreciation.
JOURNALIST: Did you holiday here or overseas last year, this year I should say?
FERGUSON: I'm pleased to say I'm on a holiday today talking to you.
(laughs)
GILLARD: Holidaying in Melbourne.
FERGUSON: Ok, can I go. I can say to you that neither I nor my wife have ever had an overseas holiday. We've always had a holiday here at home.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you believe that the Baz Lurhmann campaign has been an expensive failure?
GILLARD: No, I agree with what the Minister just said which is it's very important to keep a presence in overseas tourist markets. Obviously, the movie Australia with all of its scenery of the Australian landscape is important to that marketing venture and the marketing campaign that's been engaged in, works with that, works with that new presence for Australia in international markets.
JOURNALIST: There's been lot of criticism of Paris Hilton's whirlwind trip to Melbourne and particularly her spending of $6 thousand in 40 minutes. Do you think you could spend that in 40 minutes in the Boxing Day sales?
GILLARD: I don't think I could. No, I'm obviously not as practiced at shopping as Ms Hilton is. But having said that I think Ms Hilton is onto something very important which is whether or not you want to have a holiday that's about fashion or about a big night out, Australia's a great place to do it. She's come to Australia to do just that, so I think in her own way she's reinforcing the message that Minister Ferguson and I are giving to the Australian community today, which is Australia is a great place to holiday.
JOURNALIST: Do you agree with Tim Costello though that she should donate that money to charity instead?
GILLARD: Well obviously Tim Costello, who has worked so long and so hard for charities both here and overseas, would always have that at the forefront of his mind. I can understand why he's made those comments. But I would say Ms Hilton in doing her shopping in Melbourne is reinforcing that Australian fashion is at the forefront of fashion around the world.
JOURNALIST: Just on the situation in the Gaza Strip, the Government has been criticised for standing by. When would the Government condemn what's going on over there and the subsequent death toll?
GILLARD: Well I made a number of statements about this around 48 hours ago. And can I say very clearly, obviously the Australian Government is deeply disturbed by the resumption of violence and we are saddened and concerned by the loss of civilian life. We unreservedly condemn the shelling of southern Israel by Hamas and other militant groups, and whilst we recognise Israel's right to defend itself, we strongly support the United Nations Security Council resolution calling for an immediate halt to all violence.
We would want to see an immediate halt to all violence. We are saddened and concerned by the loss of civilian life. I would also say to Australians that this reinforces the need for Australians to check our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade travel advisories. Obviously our travel advisory is there strongly advising against travel to the region immediately near the West Bank within 12 km. That travel advisory is something that Australians should take note of.
JOURNALIST: On a much lighter note, there's been calls for topless beach goers to be banned. Do you think topless beaches are inappropriate?
GILLARD: I think it's all a question of context and clear signage and marking. I think people want to go to the beach and use the beach in a variety of ways. Obviously family groups want to go to the beach, people who want to get a bit of sun all over also want to go to the beach. As long as people know what the rules are and know what to expect, then I think it's a matter for the individuals involved. But I should I think reinforce, particularly with my complexion and standing next to Minister Ferguson, that we are people who would strongly urge sensible conduct in terms of sun smarts. So there's also a stage where people should be getting the hat on, getting the shirt on, and getting the sunscreen on.
JOURNALIST: On a more serious note, is the Government going to apologise to Mohamed Haneef?
GILLARD: The Government is anticipating receiving a compensation claim from Mr Haneef's lawyers. In those circumstances, the Government won't be making any comments in relation to the question of compensation or any other form of redress from Mr Haneef.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed by the Australian cricket team's collapse?
GILLARD: I am not going to pretend to be a cricket expert, I'm not. The Prime Minister is an expert, I believe the Minister standing next to me might be a man of considerable expertise as well. But on the potential fortunes for today, can I say whilst there's life there's hope.
JOURNALIST: Did you holiday overseas last year or this year I should say?
GILLARD: No, the last day trip, well overnight stay I took for holiday purposes was in Lorne and earlier in the year I had a day trip and overnight stay in the Bateman's Bay region outside the ACT.
Thank you.
[ends] 


New year is a time for us to reflect on the year that's just past and of course, to look to the year that lies ahead. 
2008 saw some outstanding and memorable achievements around the world, including in the Beijing Olympics in August, the Paralympics in September and at the year's end, the historic election of an African-American as President of the United States.
At home, Australians came together as we made the historic apology to the Stolen Generations and pledged to work together to close the gap on indigenous disadvantage.
We hosted around 150,000 young people from around the world for the remarkable World Youth Day celebrations in July. And this year we showed again the great strength of Australia's democracy with the smooth transition to a new Federal Government.
But for much of the year our news was dominated by the worsening global financial crisis, the likes of which have not been seen in almost 80 years.
This has created a lot of uncertainty throughout our community as people worry about their jobs, their businesses and their retirement savings. As the global financial crisis has unfolded the Government has taken early and decisive action to do everything possible to stabilise our financial markets and to stabilise the Australian economy, families and jobs from the full impact of the crisis.
As we enter 2009, we know it will be a very tough year for the global economy. And it will be a tough year for Australia as well.
What is important is that we remember we are all in this together.
The Government is determined to do all we can to support Australian families and the jobs and businesses of Australians. And if we stick together, businesses, unions, employers, employees, governments at different levels, federal, state and local and the whole community, we can and will see Australia through.
Australia is a great nation and so often the hardest times bring out the best in us.
We're a tough people, we're a resilient people and in hard times we also care for each other and for other members of the community.
Let us each have a restful break this holiday season and let us enter 2009 with optimism and with renewed energy.
In this spirit I extend to all Australians, country and city, big towns, small towns, our biggest cities to the distant outback my best wishes for a happy, healthy and fulfilling new year.
[Ends] 


MORRISON: We have on the line the Acting Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister by normal role, Julia Gillard, good morning to you.
GILLARD: Good morning.
MORRISON: All the very best and thank you for being on the program this morning too. I guess at the end of 2008, it's easier to sort of sit back and reminisce but the challenge is well and truly ahead of us here in Australia, in so many different fronts but particularly on the economic front.
GILLARD: It certainly is. 2009 is obviously going to be a year in which we're dealing with the effects of the global financial crisis on our economy. We've been up front with the Australian people, we always said we weren't going to be immune and clearly there is going to be implications for Australian jobs. Everything the Government has been doing has been about investing in jobs and protecting jobs. That's why we did the more than $10 billion economic security statement.
It's also when we look at the stuff we've done through the Council of Australian Governments and our new infrastructure investments, it's all about investing in and protecting jobs. And this will also be a year of big changes. We laid the foundations for long term reform in education and health in 2008, and people will see those changes flow through in 2009.
MORRISON: You talk about jobs. I don't know how it all sets with a headline today in the major national newspaper, “Jobless heading for a million”. Significant respected economists that are saying that's where we're going, unemployment eight per cent. Look, you know, I know, everyone knows someone who has lost a job so far and plenty of people who thinks it's ahead of them too. What do you say?
GILLARD: Well of course there are all different sorts of forecasts and figures out there, today's newspapers have some forecasts from economists. The Government published its official forecast in 2008 and we did say we're expecting unemployment to go up to around five per cent in the middle of the year.
Now obviously the global financial crisis is feeding through, and it's feeding through into unemployment, so the loss of any job is a huge problem for the individuals involved and what we do as the Government, is be out there investing in jobs, protecting jobs, and helping people who lose their jobs in one part of the economy to get into the parts of the economy that is still growing. And amongst the things that we've done to respond to the global financial crisis and as part of our $10.4 billion economic security statement, we made available 56 thousand new productivity places, they're training places, training for work, training for jobs, training in those areas of the economy where people are still crying out for skilled labour.
MORRISON: Yeah 56 thousand though, they're talking a million and even if we are to take the Government's projected of five per cent unemployment by the middle of the year, that's I mean these are small percentage points, but they're massive numbers of people. Well we just can't meet this. We are entering in a phase I sense, and I'd be interested to hear what the Government's response to this is, we're entering a phase that a lot of people and a lot of people who voted for you have never felt.
GILLARD: Well can I just say about the 56 thousand places to help people train for jobs. That was an extra investment  - 
MORRISON: No good. I know that's good that you do that, but how do you confront that  - 
GILLARD: If I can just finish that sentence. That was an extra investment to bring to a total 700 thousand training places so we are talking about mammoth investments.
MORRISON: Oh yeah, but we're also talking about school leavers entering the workforce  - 
GILLARD: So that's 700 thousand in total.
MORRISON: I appreciate that and we talk of big numbers, but you know the reality that there are a lot of younger people that voted, perhaps for the first time that have never known tough times and they are the ones that are facing being laid off from their jobs. They're the ones that the casual work is drying up already and it's not there. This is, this is a major turning point that a lot in this country has never felt.
GILLARD: Look I agree with that. Obviously the global financial crisis is the most significant event we've seen on global markets in modern times, and you know people who are, you know even in middle aged, would not have seen events like this in their lifetime. So the global financial crisis, a huge turning point for the world economy and consequently for our economy.
What do you do in the face of such a huge turning point in the global economy, is you respond, you respond quickly and you do everything you can to keep our economy growing and to keep jobs in this country. That's why we've done the things that we've done as quickly as we've done them, because we wanted to stay ahead of the curve.
So whether it's the investment in the car industry, the $10 billion in the economic security statement, the new training places, our infrastructure investments, it's all been about staying in front, keeping the economy moving and therefore keeping jobs.
MORRISON: Yeah. I just listening to you talk about those things there, I'm sure you've heard this feedback but everyone I talk to, each day they read the paper there's another bit of money being spent here and spent there, and we start to say to ourselves, well you know it's tough times and we've got to spend money, but this is going to dry up eventually. I wonder when the announcements are going to stop?
GILLARD: Well we are in a situation where we had, when we did the May Budget, a big budget surplus. We deliberately created a big budget surplus and you do that because you want to have the money available to assist you in tough times. Now those tough times came very quickly because the meltdown in global financial markets started to take hold and then became a contagion that spread around the world. But because we had created such a big surplus, there was money available to put into the kind of economic stimulus we need after the global financial crisis to keep the economy moving.
So the Government has been in the situation where we've been hording money if you like in the good times, in order to have it available there to use to invest in the economy in the more difficult days that are upon us now.
MORRISON: Yes, well you've been hording our money. Oh yes  - 
GILLARD: It's absolutely your money, it's taxpayers money, it's not Government money. There's not a cent that the Government has that doesn't come from people who work hard and pay taxes, and we understand that. And I think that when people work hard and pay taxes, what they want to see is they want to see action taken to keep the nation as prosperous as possible. So that's what your money is going to.
MORRISON: Thank you. I just wanted to have it acknowledged that's all. Look it's interesting, we're heading to new year, I'll be keen to see what you've got planned for the night but I noticed the whole world's happening. There's this massive story in the Middle East, the economic stimulus package that you're having to deal with in the role of Acting Prime Minister as well. And then last night I switched the news on and there's someone who's asking you a question about Paris Hilton. I just kind of wonder if there was ever a point when you entered the job and thought I'm the Acting Prime Minister now that you would be expecting to answer a question about Paris Hilton.
GILLARD: I have to say it's not normally a Prime Ministerial role to wake up in the morning and say what do I think about Paris Hilton today. That's not normally at the forefront of my mind, but obviously Paris Hilton is in Australia and creating a bit of a splash all round. And I'm glad to see that she's a supporter of Australian fashion because we do have great designers in this country, so that's a good thing.
MORRISON:All the best. Well look, what are your plan tonight. Where are you going to be?
GILLARD: I'm going to have a quiet one at home. Barbeque on the back deck with some friends coming round.
MORRISON: You mean you're not going to go to Kirribilli. I hear there's a house party at Kirribilli House.
GILLARD: (laughs) No, I will be at my house in Altona in Melbourne with the barbeque on and maybe an occasional glass of wine to see the new year in.
MORRISON: All the very best. Thank you for your continuing availability to this program and have a happy new year. All the best.
GILLARD: Thank you very much and to you too.
MORRISON: Julia Gillard, the Acting Prime Minister.
[ends] 


The Australian Government is gravely concerned by the escalating violence which has followed the breakdown of the cease-fire arrangement between Israel and Hamas in the Gaza Strip.
Australia is deeply saddened by the resultant, tragic loss of life in recent days, and strongly condemns the firing of rockets and mortars into southern Israel by Hamas and other militant groups.
While recognising Israel's right to defend itself from such indiscriminate attacks, the Australian Government supports the United Nations Security Council's call for an immediate halt to all violence.
The Australian Government also urges Israel, Hamas and other militant groups to make every effort to avoid causing further suffering to innocent civilians.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip remains a significant concern, and the Government believes it is essential that Israel meets its humanitarian obligations to ensure the people of the Gaza Strip have access to basic necessities and humanitarian assistance.
For this reason, Australia therefore welcomes the movement of some humanitarian aid into the Gaza Strip over the past several days.
As part of its commitment to help support people caught up in the conflict, the Australian Government will make an immediate commitment of $5 million in additional assistance to the people of the Gaza Strip and stands ready to consider further assistance in the future.
This assistance is in addition to the doubling of Australian aid to the Palestinian people to $45 million in 2008, including $10 million of assistance which Mr Smith announced during his visit to Israel and the Palestinian Territories in October.
This assistance will go towards helping to ensure that the people of the Gaza Strip have adequate access to much needed basic goods, such as food and medical supplies, and will be delivered through multilateral agencies, such as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, other UN agencies and international non-governmental organisations.
The Australian Government wishes to emphasise that the recent events in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel also highlight the importance of all Australians remaining aware of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's travel advice.
The current travel advice for Israel and the Palestinian Territories strongly advises Australians to not travel to the Gaza Strip or the West Bank or within 30km of the perimeter of the Gaza Strip because of the extremely dangerous security situation.
Australians who are in the Gaza Strip should remain in a secure location indoors and monitor the media for information. We also urge them to contact the Australian Embassy in Tel Aviv immediately (+972 3 693 5000).
Australians in Israel and the Palestinian Territories should pay close attention to their personal security at all times and monitor the media for information about possible new safety or security risks.


Australia, along with a number of other friends and allies of the United States, has been approached to consider resettling detainees from Guantanamo Bay.
This is a request from the Bush administration, and follows President Bush's statement that he would like to see Guantanamo closed. This is not a request from President Elect Obama.
The Bush Administration first approached Australia in early 2008 with a request to resettle a small group of detainees from Guantanamo in Australia.
After appropriate consideration, Australia declined to allow resettlement of that small group in Australia.
The Bush Administration approached Australia again in early December 2008 with a second request to assist with relocation.
Australia, as an ally of the United States, is examining this second request.
Notwithstanding that it is unlikely Australia would accept these detainees, given the fact that the Bush Administration has formally approached Australia with this request, the request demands proper consideration.
The Australian Government makes no apology for taking a very hard line against terrorism, which includes continuing to work closely with the United States and other allies worldwide in the global effort to defeat terrorism.


GILLARD: Since the start of the new year Australians would have seen a variety of predictions in the media about unemployment in 2009. Today's newspapers contained some predictions. The Government has been clear with the Australian people that we expect 2009 to be a tough year.
The global financial crisis and the looming recession in developed countries around the world is not going to leave this nation untouched. It's not going to leave us untouched when it comes to jobs for Australians.
The Government has said that we are understand that the loss of even one job has human consequences, for the person who's lost their job, for their family, and for the economy. We also understand that employers around the country view their staff as their most valuable asset. And my message to employers today would be to think about the long term when they are contemplating potential job cuts in 2009.
The Government has taken action already to invest in jobs and to protect jobs. That's what our $10.4 billion economic security statement was all about. Protecting jobs, investing in jobs. That's also why we made available $300 million to local governments around the country, why we're investing in infrastructure around the country, and why we've made available a $6 billion package to support our car industry.
The Government will continue to act in 2009 as necessary to protect jobs and to invest in jobs. But we would ask employers to consider the long term of their business, their valuable staff and the skills that they bring to their enterprise, when they're considering their future employment decisions in 2009.
JOURNALIST: Are you disputing the figures that have been carried about?
GILLARD: The Government has published its own forecast, we did that in our mid-year economic and fiscal outlook, and the Government made it clear in those figures that we are expecting unemployment to rise slightly during the course of 2009 and into 2010.
They're the published forecast. We understand these are difficult and unpredictable times. We understand employers and employees are still assessing the impact of the global financial crisis and looming recession in developed countries around the world on their businesses. But we will continue to act decisively to protect jobs and to invest in jobs.
JOURNALIST: Has the Government made a decision about whether we will take prisoners from Guantanamo Bay?
GILLARD: Can I say about that issue, that earlier in, sorry I'm going to get, it's 2008, 2009. Can I say about that issue that early in 2008, we received a request from the US Government to consider resettlement of a group of detainees. That first request was denied by the Australian Government. In December 2008, we received a second request. We have considered that request and last night Australian time, Friday US time, we advised the United States Government that we would not be agreeing to those resettlement requests.
Those resettlement requests have been considered on a case by case basis, against our stringent national security and immigration criteria. Assessing those requests from a case by case basis, they had not met our stringent national security and immigration criteria and have been rejected. For the future we will consider any future requests on a case by case basis against the stringent criteria for both national security and immigration.
JOURNALIST: Can you elaborate a little bit on what those criteria are and what the sticking points are?
GILLARD: Well clearly when we deal with any movement into this country, we bring to bear very tough national security assessments, very tough character assessments for immigration, those tough assessments will continue to be made. They were brought to bear on this matter, they would be brought to bear on any future case by case assessment. But we have now advised the US Government, Friday American time, that the most recent request to us, the request received in December 2008, has been denied.
JOURNALIST: Does that now put our Government at loggerheads with Barack Obama's?
GILLARD: Well I think we need to be very clear about this. Each request that the Australian Government has received about resettlement for Guantanamo Bay detainees has been received from the Bush Administration. The request earlier in 2008 was received from the Bush Administration. The request in December 2008 was received from the Bush Administration.
I note yesterday in his comments, the Leader of the Opposition appeared to infer that this request had been received from President-elect Obama. That is simply not correct and the Leader of the Opposition I think in a rushed judgement here, did not fully inform himself of the facts.
JOURNALIST: Are the Australian Government's view then that these people should stay in Guantanamo Bay?
GILLARD: Well the Australian Government makes decisions about who comes to this country. We've made those decisions based on our stringent national security and immigration criteria, and the American Government has been advised about our decision.
JOURNALIST: Can you elaborate on why they were, why particular individuals were rejected?
GILLARD: Well we assess on a case by case basis. We assess against our national security criteria and our immigration criteria, against that very stringent set of circumstances. These case by case assessments failed the test and we have advised the US Administration of that.
JOURNALIST: Have we received any other requests for resettling within Australia for people who are not from Guantanamo Bay, since the beginning of the last year?
GILLARD: The request to us in December was about persons at Guantanamo Bay.
JOURNALIST: Have there been any other request about resettling persons here?
GILLARD: No. The request to us was about persons from Guantanamo Bay.
JOURNALIST: So there've been no other requests to Australia from the United States Government about resettling persons?
GILLARD: No. The request to us was from Guantanamo Bay.
JOURNALIST: Given Australia's involvement on the war in Iraq and Afghanistan, do we have some sort of moral imperative to at some point take these people from Guantanamo Bay?
GILLARD: Well we for the future, will assess on a case by case basis, but we will always assess against our stringent national security criteria, and our stringent immigration criteria. The decisions we make will be against those criteria and they'll always be in the best interests of this country.
JOURNALIST: Has the Government have any involvement in Gaza. Have you been briefed on the situation there?
GILLARD: I've been continuously updated on the situation in Gaza and obviously I've made clear on behalf of the Australian Government, our very deep concern about the resumption of violence. Our condemnation of the actions of Hamas in shelling into southern Israel. Our concern about civilian casualties. Our concern about the humanitarian situation in Gaza. As a result of our concern about the humanitarian situation, on New Year's Day the Government announced that it would make available an additional $5 million of humanitarian aid, that is being made available through UN and non-government relief agencies, to provide access to basic food stocks and medical supplies for people in Gaza. It comes on top of almost a doubling of our aid to the Palestinian people during 2008.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) production in the United States has halved in the last three months. Does the Australian Government have the view about the United States of subsidising its (inaudible) industry, possibly to the detriment of the Australian steel industry?
GILLARD: I'll discard the decisions obviously of that nature. First and foremost the decisions with the US Administration, obviously anything that amounted to a trade barrier could be dealt with through World Trade Organisation processes. This is a Government that has acted here domestically, to support jobs in this country, including through our $6 billion car plan.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of what happened to Ron Barassi on New Year's Eve.
GILLARD:  Well I was really saddened, indeed sickened to hear about the violent incident involving Mr Barassi. Obviously Ron Barassi has been an inspiration for many Australians and this was a particularly sickening incident. I think the message from the whole community needs to be this kind of violence is unacceptable. This sort of street thuggery is unacceptable.
JOURNALIST: How do find about the decision of Evan Thornley to have walked away so easily having been given an armchair ride to the Upper House in Victoria?
GILLARD: Well clearly that's a matter for Mr Thornley and for the State Government and State Members of Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Are you personally disappointed by it?
GILLARD: Well it's a decision for Mr Thornley and it's obviously been made.
Thank you.
[ends] 


HOST: Israel has been continuing its drive into Gaza with land forces in the face of international calls for an end to its attacks. For Australia's view on the latest Israeli action and other political issue in the news today, we're joined by the Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard. She's speaking with Marius Benson.
BENSON: Julia Gillard, good morning.
GILLARD: Good morning Marius.
BENSON: Now as you heard there, there is a growing number of international voices calling for an immediate end to Israel's action in Gaza. What's the Australian Government's view at this stage?
GILLARD: The escalation of the conflict in Israel and Gaza, the new movement of ground troops by Israel obviously underlines the urgency of getting a diplomatic solution to this problem. We've said all along that Australia strongly supports the resolution of the Security Council of the United Nations to see a halt to all violence. We obviously want to see an end to this conflict and a lasting solution for peace in the Middle East.
We strongly support the diplomatic efforts that are happening now to find a path forward. They involve the United States, the European Union, and of course the United Nations Security Council.
BENSON: The United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon has called for an immediate end to the ground assault by Israel. Would Australia support that call?
GILLARD: Well our consistent position has been to support the resolution of the United Nations Security Council, which calls for a halt to all violence. We obviously want to see a lasting and sustainable solution to this conflict. We have condemned in the strongest possible terms the action of Hamas in sending rockets into southern Israel. Obviously, Israel has responded, we've now seen a further escalation. We have consistently said we support the United Nations Security Council resolution for a halt to violence, we're very concerned about casualties amongst civilians caught up in this conflict and we very strongly support the urgent diplomatic efforts that are in train now to find a lasting solution.
BENSON: You condemn the Hamas rocket attacks on Israel. Does Australia also condemn Israel's attacks on Hamas and the Palestinians generally in the Gaza strip?
GILLARD: We've always said we recognise Israel's right to defend itself, but we have urged Israel to be very mindful of the civilians involved, of the prospect of civilian casualties, and obviously we have seen civilian casualties. And we have been strong in our continuing endorsement of the United Nations Security Council resolution for a halt to all violence.
BENSON: You spoke there of the right to defend itself on the part of Israel. Can I just run some figures from the weekend papers past you? Hamas rockets have been fired into Israel over the past eight years. They've killed a total, according to a couple of different estimates of perhaps 19, perhaps 21 Israelis in that time. In that same period of eight years, Israeli fire has killed three thousand Palestinians and in the past ten days, 500 more Palestinians have been killed. The Palestinians say that's disproportionate. Are they right?
GILLARD: What I would say here is those figures would underline in my mind, the need to get a lasting solution so that there is an end to violence. Obviously what we want to work towards, what I believe diplomatic efforts in train, working towards is a lasting and stable solution which ends violence in Gaza and Israel, ends the shelling of southern Israel, ends all violence in these circumstances.
BENSON: Can I turn to domestic matters, unemployment is expected universally to be going up this year. You have been joined by the Treasurer Wayne Swan in appealing to employers to do what they can not to sack people, and there's also been a re-announcement of a $41 million innovation fund to provide work for particularly disadvantaged groups. Does the Government have anything else up its sleeve, particularly financially in terms of trying to deal with what is expected to be certainly a great increase in unemployment in 2009?
GILLARD: The Government's been working consistently to protect jobs and to invest in jobs. Our $10.4 billion economic security strategy was about protecting and investing in jobs, about keeping our economy moving in difficult times after the global financial crisis and its impact started being felt around the world. We've also moved decisively to support our car manufacturing industry with our $6 billion plan. We've moved to inject money into local government, $300 million, because that's important to local jobs. And we've moved quickly on new infrastructure development which is all about jobs too.
We have said that we will keep acting as necessary to protect and invest in Australian jobs. But we've been very clear with the Australian community, the global financial crisis is not going to leave this nation untouched. We're not immune from this huge global event and its impact on economies around the world. But the Government continues to do everything that we can and we will continue to act in the future to protect jobs.
BENSON: Just looking back over the past year, your first in Government. There is a bit of a honeymoon for a new government. It was a year, in to a significant extent a year of promise and review, and looking to programs to be implemented. This year, 2009, there's an expectation of a year of delivery for the Government and you have to deliver it in dire economic circumstances. A reasonable person would assume that in about 12 months, the public estimation of the Government will not be as high as it is right now.
GILLARD: Well I'll leave the estimation of the Government to that, to members of the public. Obviously people will make their own individual decisions, whether they think the Government's performing. What's our job? Well our job has been to deliver our promises and we've been very rigorous about ensuring the Government implements the things that we promised the Australian people. In my own area, that's been the steps taken in the Education Revolution and of course the introduction into the parliament of fair and balanced workplace relations laws to sweep away Work Choices, but right across all of the portfolios of government, we've been meticulous in implementing the promises that we gave the Australian people.
Then of course our job has been to build the foundations of long term reform, and we've taken steps in that in a number of areas, across the areas of education and health, and big strides forward were made in ending the blame game through the Council of Australian Governments. And obviously we've taken some big steps forward in dealing with climate change with our carbon pollution reduction scheme and the announcements made shortly before Christmas about its design. We'll continue to be building on those foundations for long term reform. And then the challenge of the global financial crisis has changed so much, you're right about that. It's changed the world as we know it. It's been the biggest shock in financial markets in the modern age. It's caused many developed countries around the world to go into recession.
In this country, we've obviously taken a series of major steps to keep our economy moving and to keep this nation in front and this year of 2009 will be so much about focusing on our economy and focusing on protecting jobs as the full aftermath of the global financial crisis is felt.
BENSON: Okay can I just close on a personal note with your standing in the Government and I don't know whether you've had time to look at page 2 of The Australian today, but there is an article there headed, ‘Stellar year earns Gillard solid respect', which reads in part ‘More than any other Rudd Government Minister Julia Gillard has had a stellar year without so much as a hiccup, the member for the Melbourne seat of Lalor has transformed from isolated left-winger to the most widely respected and successful member of the Government, leading many to ask whether the current Acting Prime Minister will be the country's next leader.' Is that a question we should be addressing?
GILLARD: (laughs) Well you know I would, I would thank The Australian newspaper for those kind words but the circumstances I experience day to day, is I love my job as Deputy Prime Minister and it has been a tremendous privilege to spend twelve months working on implementing the promises we gave in education and workplace relations and building to some big reforms, particularly in education in the future.
2009 is going to be a year where I trust, we will see the Australian parliament pass our Fair Work Bill. We still don't 100 percent know what the Liberal Party will do to try and stop that. We'll be working to get fair laws in workplaces around the country and to sweep away what remains of Work Choices and I'm passionate about delivering more of our education reforms because there's nothing more fundamental to a nation's future in a sense of fairness than making sure every kid gets a fair chance and the best possible education.
BENSON: Julia Gillard, thank you very much.
GILLARD: Thank you very much Marius.
[ends] 


PRIME MINISTER: I am deeply saddened to learn of the death of an Australian soldier in Afghanistan. This brave soldier, wearing the uniform of Australia died the field of duty wearing his nation's uniform and wearing it with pride.
On behalf of the Government, I extend my condolences to his family and to his friends and to his loved ones. Our prayers and those of the entire nation are with his family and his friends and his loved ones on this most tragic of days.
In accordance with the wishes of the family, the soldier's name will not be released at this stage.
This soldier was killed when Taliban insurgence engaged an Afghan forward operating base. And Australians were present and they came under rocket attack. Sadly, as a result of this incident today eight brave Australian soldiers have lost their lives in Afghanistan, fighting Taliban insurgents.
Our troops in Afghanistan are doing dangerous and difficult work and this work continues, it continues as we speak here today. They are in the field, they are doing their job for Australia and it is dangerous.
I've said before that there is no higher calling for any Australian than to wear the uniform of Australia. And on a difficult and tragic day such as today, we are reminded of the cost of wearing that uniform - and that is to ultimately surrender your life for your country. And that is what has happened.
Fighting the war in Afghanistan continues as an important part of the fight against terrorism, the fight against Al Qaeda.
It is also part and parcel of our obligations to our allies and friends, given that this war in Afghanistan began following the terrorist attacks on September 11 by Al Qaeda resulting in the murder of thousands of innocent civilians.
My thoughts, my prayers go out to this young man's family. The nation grieves with his family today. The nation grieves with his comrades today. The nation grieves with his friends today. I'll take your questions.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER: None of those details will be made public at this stage and that has been at the request of the family. And these are deeply and understandably personal matters.
The Australian Defence Force has a well established protocol for engaging with the families of those who have lost their lives or those who have been wounded. Those protocols are being adhered to and what is of paramount importance to us is respecting the wishes of the family, as we're doing today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the Government be reconsidering troop numbers in Afghanistan?
PRIME MINISTER: As I've indicated before, the Government believes that our current troop disposition in Afghanistan is about right. We have no plans to increase those numbers.
And remember our troops in Afghanistan, whom I visited recently, are doing a first class job. That is also the view of our allies and friends. That is also the view of the Afghan Government.
We believe the work that they are doing both in pushing back the enemy, both in training the Afghan National Army and engaged in necessary reconstruction work in Oruzgan Province is proceeding calmly, smoothly, methodically but there are always risks, there are always dangers, and we're reminded tragically of those dangers today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister were there any other Australians at that base? Or how many were there?
PRIME MINISTER: Again I would adhere to the protocols, I think important protocols laid down by the Australian military. We'll make further comment as it is appropriate.
We're always mindful of the ongoing security of our troops in the field at times like this. And having seen something, a small part of their operating environment again recently - this is a difficult, dangerous and bloody place.
JORUNALIST: [inaudible] Gaza [inaudible]
PRIME MINISTER: Australia is deeply concerned by continued violence in Gaza and in Southern Israel. Australia recognises Israel's right to self-defence, while we call on all parties to avoid any actions which result in unnecessary suffering or increased suffering on the part of innocent civilians.
The escalation in the conflict, following the incursion by Israeli ground forces, underlines the absolute importance of bringing about an effective diplomatic solution.
Any solution, any diplomatic solution, must find a way of bringing a halt to rocket attacks against Israel by the terrorist organisation Hamas. Any diplomatic solution much also bring about a halt of armed shipments into Gaza.
Any diplomatic solution must also bring about the opening of the Gaza crossings. Any diplomatic solution must also involve an immediate ceasefire. And in that connection, we the Australian Government support the actions of the United Nations now in seeking to bring about an immediate ceasefire.
Furthermore any diplomatic solution must form part of a longer term compact involving Israel and Palestine, based on a two-State solution.
All Australians are concerned about the humanitarian implications of this conflict. And it is critical therefore for Israel to meet its humanitarian obligations under international humanitarian law towards the people of Gaza, in ensuring that they have access to basic goods, food and humanitarian assistance and medical supplies.
The Australian Government has already in the last 12 months have doubled our level of assistance to the Palestinian people to nearly $50 million. And on 1 January, the Government announced a further allocation of $5 million for additional assistance to the people on the Gaza Strip. This is designed specifically to be delivered through UN agencies and international non-government organisations to provide food and much needed medical supplies to the people of Gaza.
The Australian Government also stands ready to deliver further assistance as is necessary.
Okay. Thank you.


KOCH: Julia, good morning to you. Happy new year. Couple of things to get through today but first up, can you give us anymore details about that soldier?
GILLARD: I'm not in a position to do that Kochie. The family has requested privacy at what is obviously a difficult and very tragic time for them and I'm sure the hearts of all Australians go out to them as they deal with and grieve for their loss. So the name of the soldier has not been released yet. Ultimately the name of the soldier will be released, indeed the Chief of our Defence Force said yesterday every Australian will know his name in time, but at the moment we're respecting at the wish of the family for complete privacy.
KOCH: Because it focuses all our attention back on Afghanistan. Do you still believe we have the right amount of troops in Afghanistan or should we be following the US and sending more troops and just sorting this out once and for all?
GILLARD: We believe our deployment numbers there are about right. We've got a substantial deployment there for a country this size. We've got around 1000 personnel over there. We've sustained that deployment overtime so we think that that contribution is a sizeable one, and we think it's a contribution that's making a difference. Obviously the US is going to be grappling with this issue as we move with new President Obama to new thinking and new policies and it maybe the US in time chooses to deploy more troops. But for this country we think our deployment numbers are right.
KOCH: Just remind us about why we're in Afghanistan because a lot of people see us withdrawing from Iraq but still stay really committed to Afghanistan. How important is it for us to stay there and why?
GILLARD: Well I think the best way of thinking about this is to remember where you were and how you felt on the day that the World Trade Centre came under attack in New York on 9/11 as the Americans would say when we heard about that loss of life.
Of course that was an act of terrorism, an act of terrorism conducted by al-Qaeda, and Afghanistan is the home of that terrorist movement. It's where much of its training is done, where many of its leaders are. And so we initially deployed to Afghanistan to fight that terrorism and we're still fighting it.
And of course this country too has been touched by acts of terrorism, most particularly the Bali bombing which killed so many Australians and left so many Australians who are still today grieving for their loved ones lost when the bombing happened in Bali. 
So if we're going to deal with that threat of terrorism to this country and around the globe, then we need to be in Afghanistan dealing with the problem where much of the source of the problem is and much of the training of terrorists has occurred.
KOCH: Now we can never let the Taliban back in there, they are just appalling. Let's move onto the other big issue of the day and there is some confusion, help us out here, about this pulp mill in Tasmania, the Gunns pulp mill. Environment Minister Peter Garrett has put a hold on the Gunns project, but apparently they can still go ahead and build it. Now he said it hasn't met all the environment conditions the Federal Government wants, there's three outstanding, but then apparently saying you can start the building. What's your understanding of it?
GILLARD: Well this is a big project Kochie and it's a project that's got a number of stages. The construction works are considerable and there's been environmental assessment of those and they've been given the all clear, so Gunns can start the construction. And it's such a big construction project it's obviously going to take a number of years to complete.
The Environment Minister exercising his legal obligations under the relevant federal law and advised by independent experts, has said he wants more work done on the environmental conditions that will be applying to the mill when it's actually in operation.
So we get all the construction done, then when the mill is actually working there is a question particularly about what goes into the ocean and how that moves around the ocean, a sort of modelling of where the discharge will get to in the ocean. That still needs to be done and Gunns has been asked to do that further work so that the environmental process can be worked through to its full conclusion.
KOCH: Okay and you'd be prepared to stop the project being operational if those last three environmental standards aren't met, despite them spending millions to build the thing, you'd be prepared to go to the wall on it if they don't come to the party on these three outstanding?
GILLARD: Well what we want to see here of course is the best possible environmental standards. We've always said that to Gunns, the proponents of this pulp mill, and they've always said that they themselves wanted to acquit great environmental standards. So that part of the approvals process is still there, more work needs to be done, Minister Garrett made that perfectly clear yesterday. But construction can start.
KOCH: Okay. Alright thanks for your time. How are you enjoying the top job over the summer break?
GILLARD: Well I'm just here putting in some days obviously as Acting Prime Minister and Kevin will be back in January. So it's just doing all the things we normally do, but I've managed to spend some time with family and friends over Christmas as well. So I've had a good time thanks Kochie.
KOCH: Good on you. Okay, happy new year to you. Thanks for joining us.
GILLARD: To you too, thank you.
[ends] 


JULIA GILLARD: It's terrific to be here today at the Wintringham aged care facility with my colleague Justine Elliott. It's been my great pleasure today to announce that the Rudd Labor Government will be investing $3 million in the development of a new facility in Dandenong for homeless aged Australians. This is obviously a major problem. The Government has been focused on the issue of homelessness and I'm sure Australians right around the country do not want to think of this nation as one where Australians have to sleep on the streets and sleep rough. That is the situation that confronts too many older Australians.
In order to make a difference for those older Australians, facilities like this one are so important. This is making a difference for the lives of its residents. We want to see a new facility in Dandenong that will make the difference for the lives of 60 other homeless older Australians. I'll now turn to the minister for details of today's announcement.
JUSTINE ELLIOTT: Thank you. This Government is committed to making sure that we're providing services for our older Australians. In fact, we're investing $41.6 million over the next four years when it comes to the aged care sector. When it comes to our homeless older Australians, of course there are very complex needs. And it's been great to be here today to make this announcement of $3 million towards the construction of a new centre for our homeless older Australians. When we look at some of the figures, over 14,000 people aged 55 and over are indeed homeless so there is a major need to be providing services particularly for our homeless older Australians.
And for the people here at Wintringham, they do a remarkable job in providing services for our homeless older Australians. And today we've made the commitment of $3 million towards the construction of a new facility for homeless older Australians. And in the coming years also we're committed to providing funding for each year for a new facility for homeless older Australians and a greater recognition of those homeless Australians within the Aged Care Act as well. This of course is part of our plan to tackle homelessness right across the nation with a special emphasis of course on our homeless older Australians, and this announcement today towards the construction of this facility will make a huge difference in the lives of many homeless older Australians here in Victoria.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you. So we'll take any questions.
JOURNALIST: When will the facility be completed and open?
JUSTINE ELLIOTT: Well, I understand that construction will be underway shortly so I'm hoping it will be completed and we can be there for the opening of it with Eunice who was here today who the facility is named after, a remarkable older woman. But I understand they're very keen to get started shortly with that.
JOURNALIST: And have they told you when it will be open?
JUSTINE ELLIOTT: Well, they're hoping to get it started shortly and have it completed as soon as possible, so when that happens we'll be there with them at that opening. So they're very keen to get it started and the people here at Wintringham do and have done a remarkable job when it comes to homeless older Australians and they'll continue to do that with the construction of this new facility.
JOURNALIST: Julia, with the tough financial times looming, is homelessness something the Government is preparing to be on the increase?
JULIA GILLARD: The Government has been focused on the challenge of homelessness since we were first elected. In the very early days of this Government the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd asked each Labor Member of Parliament to go and visit a facility working with the homeless in their electorate. And he commenced at that time a process of discussion and dialogue which led to our recent white paper on homelessness and new investments to try and prevent people becoming homeless, and then to address the situation if they do become homeless.
So we are obviously focused on the challenge of homelessness. That challenge has been with us in the best of times economically and in the worst of times. It's a complicated problem, a complicated problem for Australians who battle mental illness, who battle substance abuse, who fall into hard times and fall into homelessness. Many of them, as the Minister has said, are older Australians. Many of them are women with children fleeing domestic violence.
This is a complex problem that requires a range of solutions, and the Government has been prepared to look at the problem and to invest new money to make a difference. And the $3 million today is about making a difference for homeless older Australians in Victoria, and particularly in and around the Dandenong region.
JOURNALIST: US President-elect Barack Obama is currently in temporary accommodation as well. What do you think of John Howard keeping him out of the White House for a bit longer?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, this is a matter for Mr Howard and Mr Bush. This is a matter between them for discussion - Mr Howard and Mr Bush - and I'll leave my comments at that.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect unions to heed your call to forego pay rises over the next 12 months or so and protect jobs?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, the global financial crisis has obviously changed our world. It has impacted on economies around the globe, many developed nations have moved into recession. In this country, the Government has been acting to keep our economy moving and our main aim has been to protect jobs and to invest in jobs. That's what our $10.4 billion Economic Security Statement was about, and new investments in local government and infrastructure, our support for the car industry.
My call today, to unions and to employers, is to put jobs first. We want to make sure that Australians have the benefit of work. I would expect that to be at the forefront of people's minds as they negotiate workplace arrangements for their enterprise.
JOURNALIST: So are you saying no pay rises, or keep a lid on pay rises? What are you actually saying to them?
JULIA GILLARD: Labor's workplace relations system is a fair one and a balanced one with the emphasis of working at an enterprise level. Our system is a flexible one. It says people should negotiate in the enterprise in which they work for the best circumstances for that enterprise.
When people go through those negotiations, people are going to talk about a range of issues. Right at the top of people's agenda should be making sure that employment is protected and that there are jobs. We understand that of course employees are going to look for pay rises and there will be discussion and dialogue at an enterprise level about pay rises, about training, about all sorts of issues, but in those discussions the key focus needs to be about jobs.
JOURNALIST: So what's reasonable and what's unreasonable?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, the great benefit of Labor's system is it's a fair system with a safety net for all Australians that can't be stripped away. The great vices of the Liberal Party's Work Choices laws was that it allowed the safety net to be stripped away, and some of the Australians most at risk of being treated badly at work were the ones that suffered the greatest under Work Choices. But a great benefit of Labor's system is it's also enterprise based. So each enterprise should work through what's best for it. I'm not going to mandate what should happen in an enterprise...
JOURNALIST: The CFMEU in Western Australia asking for a 30 per cent pay increase; is that unreasonable?
JULIA GILLARD: Look, what I've said about pay increases is they need to be worked through. Arrangements need to be worked through at enterprise levels, and working at an enterprise level, at the forefront of people's mind needs to be protecting jobs.
JOURNALIST: So is the CFMEU's pay [indistinct due to wind] unreasonable in your opinion?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I've asked the CFMEU as I'm asking other unions and employers to have jobs at the forefront of their negotiations and their mind as they go through enterprise bargaining processes.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible question]
JULIA GILLARD: We obviously want people to have fair outcomes at work. That's why we're going to make sure all Australians have the benefit of a safety net. One of the reasons we were so critical of Work Choices is it allowed that safety net to be ripped away. Too many Australians had basic conditions ripped off them like overtime rates and penalty rates.
So we stand for a fair workplace relations system, one where people bargain at an enterprise level, where they always have the benefit of the safety net. But I'm asking people in that bargaining to bear in mind that we want to protect jobs, we want to see Australians in work.
JOURNALIST: Well, what do you say to Sharan Burrow in particular?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, I would echo what I've just said, and I am sure that the union movement overall including Sharan Burrow, as one of the key leaders of the ACTU, is vitally interested in the question of maximising employment. Indeed, I know that Sharan Burrow herself has made public comment about the need to be protecting jobs.
JOURNALIST: There's also some debate around changes to workplace training. What's the Government's position on that?
JULIA GILLARD: The Government has been investing in new training places, investing in 700,000 new training places. In the Economic Security Statement we added in a new 56,000 training places. That is because we want people to be able to access the skills they need to get the jobs that are available.
Even in today's economy after the global financial crisis, there are some employers who are crying out for skilled labour in some areas where we know there aren't enough Australians with the relevant skills. Our Productivity Places are training for those work skills, so people can get the skills that employers need.
JOURNALIST: There's reports of increases in anti-Semitic insults and attacks, especially in the Melbourne Jewish community, with the Gaza situation. What's your response to that?
JULIA GILLARD: My response to that would be to be appalled. There is no excuse and, from my point of view and the Government's point of view, absolutely no tolerance for any sort of racist conduct or any sort of anti-Semitic conduct. It's completely unacceptable.
JOURNALIST: Also, the Government's position on the Steve Irwin docking at Hobart. Is that evolving or are you still sticking by what you're saying?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm advised we have not received an impending vessel request from the Steve Irwin. Should such a request be received, then the Steve Irwin will be permitted to dock at an Australian port. There is insufficient reason to prevent the Steve Irwin from doing that.
What we have said to the Steve Irwin and generally, is that when the Steve Irwin is in the Southern Ocean, that is obviously a dangerous stretch of water, it's very far removed from land. We want people when they are in that stretch of water to conduct themselves in a way which ensures that they stay safe and others are safe.
JOURNALIST: And what are the chances of Vegemite getting banned?
JULIA GILLARD: [Laughs] I'd have to say I'm a happy little Vegemite. I'm a very happy Vegemite eater and there is no way in the world that Vegemite would be banned in this country. Vegemite is part of being Australian, part of our history, part of our future, and I'll be continuing to wake up in the morning and having it on my toast.
Thank you very much.
ENDS 


WALEED ALY: Australian Prime Ministers of course, it's hard to think of one who didn't like to think of themselves as a cricket tragic, I don't know about Acting Prime Ministers though. So we are going to find out. Here with us in our studio is Julia Gillard, Acting Prime Minister did you take in the excitement yesterday?
JULIA GILLARD: I took in the excitement but I am not going to pretend to be a cricket expert. I'm going to let you down on your analysis of prime ministers in the past, acting prime ministers must be a different category.
WALEED ALY: Does that disqualify you from office?
JULIA GILLARD: [laughs] Look I'm not sure, I'll leave that to others to judge but I take an interest in the cricket but compared with John Howard and Kevin Rudd I am not a cricket tragic.
WALEED ALY: Not in the same league.
JULIA GILLARD: No. Don't start quizzing me on test results from the past, you know, 20 years, I won't pass.
WALEED ALY: I'll try to avoid it. No I want to start with the story that's around today about unions because we understand that some unions are now calling for wage increases and trying to negotiate that and your argument seems to be that they need to be careful to do that because there could be economic damage that's done from that.
But isn't that sort of union boldness just the kind of thing that happens under Labor governments with astonishing regularity?
JULIA GILLARD: Our message to everybody, to union, to employers, is these are difficult times. After the global financial crisis, our economy is not going to be untouched and the most important thing is to make sure that Australians are still in work. We want to minimise any job losses and we're obviously asking people to take a responsible approach to that.
The Government's been doing everything it can to protecting jobs, invest in jobs, that is what our Economic Security Statement was about and certainly, the biggest thing on our mind as we move into 2009 is protecting Australian jobs. So my call is a fairly simple one, let's have that at the forefront of everybody's mind as we move into 2009.
WALEED ALY: We're talking about the mining sector largely here, which has been profiting handsomely and one of the companies involved Alcoa has said that Australian jobs will not go in the cuts, in the global cuts at least as far as its concerned. So doesn't that weaken the whole unemployment argument in this case?
JULIA GILLARD: What I think it says to all of us is obviously different businesses are in different positions. That's true. And that's why our new workplace relations system is going to be based on enterprise bargaining so that particular arrangements can be structured that are the best arrangements for that enterprise.
But we do know, looking across the economy overall, Alcoa has said that it isn't restricting jobs in this country, though of course there are job losses in that company in other countries. We know the mining industry is going to be facing a different era to the one it's been in, with prices for commodities coming down. So all of that has to be weighed in the balance; simple message  -  think about jobs first.
WALEED ALY: The mining sector has been enjoying unthinkable profits, what for probably close to a decade now. Surely, I mean why shouldn't the unions be trying to push to get some of that, those profits coming their way. Particularly given that some of the workers they're representing were earning a lot less than some of the people higher up in the organisation.
JULIA GILLARD: Of course it's the job of unions to represent their members and they're going to be there saying what they, their members want to employers. That, that's true.
What I'm asking unions to do and employers to do is to make sure that they are thinking as they structure new arrangements about maximising employment. And when we think about what is on the minds of working people and their trade unions, obviously keeping people in work is one of the big things that would be on their mind.
WALEED ALY: Just to move on to the situation in Gaza. We've done a lot about that over the course of the week, so we're not going to talk about it at length but I'm interested in Australia's response to this because initially it seemed Australia's response was almost, to say very, almost nothing really. And then the EU stepped in and tried to broker a ceasefire and Australia then jumped on board and said well yes we support that kind of diplomatic initiative. Why was Australia following rather than actually staking out a position of its own [inaudible]?
JULIA GILLARD: We've been commenting on this constantly as the situation has emerged. In the very early days of the resumption of violence we were there saying that we wanted to see a ceasefire, we supported the call of the UN Security Council for a ceasefire...
WALEED ALY: But you're initial response was to say that well, nearly that Hamas broke a ceasefire and Israel responded. It wasn't to call for a ceasefire straight away. The call for a ceasefire came after there had been calls from around the world, I guess is what I am saying.
JULIA GILLARD: Our position consistently was to call for a halt to violence from the earliest days of this conflict we were calling for a halt to violence. I did say in the early days and I would happily say it now that obviously there was Hamas shelling into Southern Israel and Israel responded.
We've seen an escalation of action since. We've said consistently that we want to see a ceasefire that is lasting and durable. We would welcome in that regard the initiatives of Egypt on trying to work on a ceasefire as well as the others who have been involved in discussions, of course the EU, the UN and the US have all been there trying to broker a ceasefire arrangement.
WALEED ALY: What role does Australia play in this sort of thing? What role can Australia play in an international crisis like this?
JULIA GILLARD: Well in this international crisis first and foremost we've provided and extra $5 million of humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza. That comes on top of $45 million of assistance provided to the Palestinian people in 2008. I think people watching their TV screens would have been moved by the humanitarian circumstances facing the people there.
So we are there with more assistance, to provide food and medical supplies. That money is being made available through the UN, through the Red Cross, through the World Food Organisation.
Then of course as a member of the UN we have our voice heard in the UN Chambers and Councils as these issues are discussed. Indeed as recently as the last 24 hours we made a statement in the United Nations recording this nation's deep concern about the escalation of violence, our desire to see a lasting ceasefire arrangement, one that would have an end to shelling into Southern Israel by Hamas and other militant groups, an opening of borders and end of arms shipments into Gaza. We want to see a lasting arrangement that brings peace.
WALEED ALY: Well I think we all want to see a lasting agreement that brings peace, the question is how, I guess.
JULIA GILLARD: On the question of how, I think it is to be welcomed that Israel has said it would consider what is being put forward by Egypt and I that that does need to be welcomed and we will see what happens there in the coming few days.
WALEED ALY: One of my most enduring memories of question time last year was to see you standing in the parliament waving around...
JULIA GILLARD: Mouse pads.
WALEED ALY: Talking at nauseam about the paraphernalia with Work Choices that the Howard Government had created. Is it a little embarrassing now that is has been revealed that you've spent some 13.9  -  your Government  -  has spent $13.9 million on advertising around climate change.
JULIA GILLARD: Look I think this is an incredibly different circumstance.
We look at the Work Choices campaign, it was $120 million that was spent on TV advertising, mouse pads, pens, fridge magnets, you name it  -  it had Work Choices all over it. And it was obviously a desperate attempt by the then Howard Government to shove down the throats of the Australian people extreme workplace relations laws that they found unacceptable and unfair. And the Australian people spoke on that in the 2007 election.
On the question of climate change, obviously dealing with climate change is about what the Government does and that is about our carbon pollution reduction scheme, our investments through our climate change [inaudible] new technologies and new ways of generating energy but it is also about what every individual in this country does. It is about new ways of living and consequently having advertising, having public information that helps people understand what climate change is and the way that we can all respond to it, I think is very important.
WALEED ALY: But there seems to be a disconnection though because you're talking about people acting to help reduce climate change yet the Government policy on climate change seems to have been fairly slow, [inaudible] the targets that the Government has put forward now on carbon emission cuts is much, far more modest than initially anticipated.
How do you resolve that gap that seems to be there, the expectations more on individuals than it seems to be on government policy?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I wouldn't agree with the premise of your question I'm sorry.
WALEED ALY: I suspected you wouldn't.
JULIA GILLARD: No, you suspected I wouldn't. In the earliest days of this Government, indeed on the same day that Kevin Rudd was sworn in as Prime Minister and I was sworn in as Deputy Prime Minister we ratified Kyoto. One of the first things the Prime Minister did was to go to the Bali Climate Change Conference.
We spent the last year in intensive work on our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. This is a huge transformation in our economy, it's a complicated issue, we wanted to work through it in a consultative way and we did that though a Green Paper-White Paper process where people get plenty of time to comment.
But we're talking about major change to deal with climate change. We've made huge new investments in clean coal technology, in greener motor vehicles, in renewable energy. All of this work has been done, is continuing to be done. Climate change is not going to be something that is a one year policy setting. It's going to be about the long term for this country. We've started and we've got policy settings in place.
WALEED ALY: I guess, with the advertising though. Don't you think that there is a risk that it just sounds like you're attempting to promote yourselves rather than actually take substantive action on the issue in a hurry?
JULIA GILLARD: The substantive difference here is we have guidelines, Auditor General Guidelines that are brought to bear on the question of Government advertising.
Of course in the Howard era, in the era of the Liberal Party it was an anything goes regime. Anything that they wanted to advertise on, they did advertise on and that is why you could see more than $120 million spent on advertising Work Choices -clearly party political propaganda.
We have got that independent set of guidelines now and we work to them and the Government advertising needs to pass those tests before it goes out there.
There are always going to be legitimate things for governments to advertise on, I would say that climate change advertising is part of that. Obviously when benefits change or arrangements change about individuals, individuals need to do things, they need to hear the information, they need to know about what to do when they go to Centrelink or fill in their tax return. Then it seems to me that is important material to get to the public and the kind of thing that you do advertise.
WALEED ALY: Just on an issue that's close to my heart at the moment, child care and the closure of a lot of child care centres because of the ABC collapse. This creates a fundamentally different marketplace for child care. Wouldn't it be a good idea for the Government to provide precisely the same rebates and, discounts and tax rebates for private nannies as it does for child care centres?
JULIA GILLARD: We provide child care benefit and the child care tax rebate, which of course we increased for approved care  -  it's not for private nannies, you're right about that. Obviously there are always debates here but in terms of the subsidies for child care, the subsidies are there for approved care and it's a considerable amount of money  -  I mean billions of dollars of Government funds go into subsidising child care.
WALEED ALY: But it's not the same. And the point I guess is, you're now going to get a lot of carers coming out of child care centres losing their jobs in that place and you're going to get increased demand for private nannies but it's just out of the reach economically for a lot of people. So isn't there an imperative to make, to bring that within people's grasp?
JULIA GILLARD: Well there are obviously distribution and equity issues here about where subsidies go and private nannying tends to be something that people will upper incomes can do and if you provided a subsidy you would have to look on the income scale, who that money is going to and whether you think that's the right distribution of it.
But can I just address the part of your question, which is about whether we will see increased demand for private nannies. What has happened with the shake out of ABC, the collapse of ABC, which was a big mess, I absolutely agree with that.
I mean we saw a circumstance where under the former Government the private market was allowed to rip, you had this huge company ABC that was the dominant player in many parts of the child care sector and it collapsed. We've stepped in to manage that, working alongside the receiver.
55 centres have closed, they did close on the 31st of December but the parents of children in those centres were offered alternate places at nearby centres either ABC centres or other child care centres. So people haven't been just left with the provision of no care. The receiver went through a process to make sure people were offered alternate places.
WALEED ALY: Can you guarantee that more centres won't close though?
JULIA GILLARD: Oh well I can't issue a guarantee about every child care centre in this country but I can tell you very forensically about ABC. Where we are with ABC is 55 centres closed, that's true. The receiver then identified several hundred centres, which are viable and ongoing, people know that they will be able to get their care there and the ABC receiver is managing the process of sale of those centres.
WALEED ALY: Have you found buyers for them?
JULIA GILLARD: Well that is a matter for the receiver of ABC. They are viable centres that the receiver of ABC is working on a sale process for.
Then there are around, just over 200 other centres that we have stepped in and said we would manage the process for. They are not commercially viable on the ABC management model but we believe that they are centres that local governments, community based organisations, maybe other for-profit providers, small providers will want to step in and take over and we're working on that process now. But those centres are guaranteed to be in operation to the 31st of March. So that process is being managed.
Overall, can people run childcare centres profitably and sustainably in this country? Yes they can and out there many private providers and not-for-profit providers do, so there is no reason to assume that there will be you know closures in childcare. The industry is a stable industry. ABC got itself into trouble and we are working strongly to manage the consequences of that.
WALEED ALY: You're on 774 ABC Melbourne, Waleed Aly and let's say eight minutes to nine. We're going to take a quick call here on something we've been discussing. Cliff is in Oakley. Good Morning. Cliff, are you there?
CLIFF: Good morning.
WALEED ALY: Good morning. You have a question for the Acting Prime Minister?
CLIFF: Good morning Julia. How are you?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm good thank you.
CLIFF: I actually, see when you were having a very good comment about electronic media and promotion and about everything about the weather and the climate change. Couldn't you be comfortable enough to send an email to every living Australian around and make it easier rather than spending those millions in the media? Technically it doesn't make the most easiest job and the most economical way to do it?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I don't think we've got the email address of every Australian but what we do of course is use the internet and websites to post up information about and you will find information climate change and you will find information about all sorts of government services and policy issues on the Australian Government website.
We've obviously just been talking about child care to take that one example, we have a website called www.mychild.gov.au where you can get on and you can look for child care centres in your area and you can get information about caring for children. So the Government does make full use of the web and that way of getting information to people.
WALEED ALY: Thanks very much for joining us today Julia Gillard. One question before you go, are you going to make an appearance at the Twenty 20 cricket on Sunday?
JULIA GILLARD: I'm going to make an appearance in the sense that I will be there watching it and presumably learning some more about cricket.
WALEED ALY: And by your previous admissions, there's a fair bit of that to do?
JULIA GILLARD: [laughs] there is a lot of that to do and I don't think I am ever going to catch the cricket tragic like Kevin Rudd in terms of depth of knowledge or John Faulkner I'd have to say. And our former Senator Robert Ray, they could easily take up commentating for a living but I don't think they'll be doing that.
WALEED ALY: Okay. Thanks very much for your time this morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.
[ends] 


Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard today expressed the Government's concern about those affected by the floods in North West Queensland and confirmed that the Australian Government will provide support to Queensland to assist in the relief effort.
Through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Assistance (NDRRA) program the Government is currently providing assistance to 12 disaster-declared Queensland local government areas following monsoonal flooding in the state's North West.
The damage to local roads and public infrastructure is estimated to be $21.5 million though this is likely to increase. 
The Australian Government will provide partial reimbursement to the Queensland Government for its expenditure on a range of natural disaster relief and recovery measures, including personal hardship and distress assistance (such as emergency food, clothing and accommodation) for those affected by the recent storms in North West Queensland. 
The Australian Government will also reimburse between 50 and 75 per cent of eligible state expenditure on a range of other measures including restoration or replacement of essential public assets such as roads and schools.
The Australian Government works closely with state governments in times of disasters to support the delivery of assistance to affected communities.
For further information on assistance available for personal hardship, contact the Queensland Department of Communities on 1800 173 349.


The Australian Government pays tribute to the life of pioneering Australian aviatrix Nancy-Bird Walton, who died today in Sydney.
Nancy-Bird is and will remain an Australian icon.
Nancy-Bird led the way for women pilots, becoming the first Australian female to gain a commercial pilot licence at the age of 19 in 1935, having learned to fly from Sir Charles Kingsford Smith at the age of just 17.
Ever since her first flight, she helped dispel the myth that flying is solely a man's domain.
Along with Kingsford Smith, Bert Hinkler and Reverend John Flynn, Nancy-Bird's name is synonymous with Australia's aviation history.
Nancy-Bird's achievements both on the ground and in the air have inspired generations of women to forge careers in the aviation industry and reach for the skies in all walks of life.


The Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard today confirmed that the Australian Government is closely monitoring the fires in Port Lincoln and stands ready to provide assistance. 
The damage and loss of property in Port Lincoln is particularly distressing for a community that was ravaged by fires only a few years ago. 
Firefighters and local volunteers have done a fantastic job in bringing the blaze under control throughout the night and into today and are to be commended for their brave efforts. 
Australian Government funding under national aerial firefighting arrangements has enabled the leasing of additional aircraft to fight the fires, supplementing existing state firefighting aircraft.
At this stage the South Australian Government has not requested additional assistance from the Australian Government. The Australian Government is ready to provide assistance under Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements should this be required. 


JULIA GILLARD: This morning the Australian Bureau of Statistics announced the Labour Force Figures for December. What these figures show is that the unemployment rate in December reached 4.5 per cent, having increased from 4.4 per cent in November.
What these figures are telling us is that the Australian economy is not immune from the global financial crisis. What these figures are telling us is that the global financial crisis has resulted in job losses in this country. 
When we look around the world we see that the unemployment rate in the US is 7.2 per cent and in the United Kingdom, it's six per cent.
Today's figures tell us the unemployment rate in this country is four and a half per cent.
For the individuals involved, obviously, the loss of a job hits them hard and it's a distressing and difficult time. I understand that, the Government understands that. And that's why we've moved to act decisively to keep our economy moving and to protect Australian jobs. 
In the last three months, the Government has invested $36 billion, in a targeted and focussed way, to invest in Australian jobs and to protect Australian jobs. 
Those investments include our more than $10 billion Economic Security Strategy which is an investment to support around 75 000 Australian jobs. 
Our investments include our more than $6 billion car plan, our $300 million investment into local government, our more than $4 billion investment into infrastructure. And our investments also include a more than $15 billion package of reforms through the Council of Australian Governments, which is estimated to support around 133 000 jobs.
The Government has always said the Australian economy wouldn't be immune from the global financial crisis, and of course, the global financial crisis is going to have continuing impacts. We're going to feel further impacts from the global financial crisis in the period ahead.
The Government's also been upfront with the Australian people, that we did expect to see unemployment rise but that we would be doing everything we could to protect Australian jobs. We've acted with the $36 billion investment to date, and of course, we stand ready to act further, should the international circumstances deteriorate further.
I'm happy to take any questions. 
JOURNALIST: Some employer groups say the best thing you can do to protect jobs to delay or water down your industrial relations changes. Is that something you would consider? 
JULIA GILLARD: Well let's remind ourselves that the people who said Work Choices was good for employment were the people who supported Work Choices. There's no piece of government modelling, no piece of government paper that verifies that Work Choices was good for employment. The people who said Work Choices was good for employment were the Howard Government ministers who believed in Work Choices. They're the same people who told us Work Choices was good for working Australians at the same time data was flooding in telling us about the rip-offs and the way working Australians had been hurt by Work Choices. 
Now I expect those who want to see the continuation of Work Choices to use any argument they can to support trying to keep Work Choices as the laws of this country. The Government is committed to a balanced approach, to a fair set of new workplace relations laws. That's why we've brought our Fair Work Bill to the Parliament and our Fair Work Bill is a Bill focussed on enterprise bargaining which the experts tell us is good for productivity. 
Today's productivity growth is tomorrow's future prosperity. So we believe our Fair Work bill is good for working people, good for employers and good for this nation's future, including the future of its economy. 
JOURNALIST: But on the eve of such a downturn, is it really sensible to hand more power over - introducing legislation at some stage that hands more power to the unions, drives up wages and costs jobs?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I disagree with every premise of your question because these laws and a fair and balanced package. These laws are about putting the industrial relations pendulum in the dead centre. These laws are about making sure that working Australians get a fair go at work, whilst at the same time, driving productivity and driving flexibility in Australian workplaces. These laws are balanced. They're there to be good for employers, good for employees, good for productivity and consequently good for the future prosperity of this country.
JOURNALIST: They were conceived in an economic boom though, and now we're in a far different environment. Do you not concede that there is a need to re-tailor them to them to current climate?
JULIA GILLARD: Labor in opposition deliberately designed these laws so that they could be the workplace relations laws of this country in good times and in difficult times. We designed a workplace relations system that was ready to meet the challenges this nation could face in the future; a workplace relations system that would be fair to employees, flexible and productive no matter what was going on in the economy. Consequently, our Fair Work Bill is there to set the workplace relations laws for this country for the long term.
JOURNALIST: Some of the estimates were that the unemployment rate would about be five per cent at this stage. So is the 4.5 per cent figure actually a better result than was expected?
JULIA GILLARD: We are obviously seeing from economists and many others in our newspapers and on our media various estimates of what's going to happen in our economy in the future, including various estimates of where employment and unemployment will be.
What the Government has said through its official forecasts is we expect unemployment to reach five per cent by the middle of this year, and five and three quarter per cent by the middle of 2010. Now, this is a difficult period. In the context of a difficult period, we did expect to see an increase in unemployment. We've seen a slight rise from November to December. We do expect to see -  as we predicted in our official figures - unemployment move to around five per cent in the middle of the year. This is the global financial crisis showing in our economy. 
JOURNALIST: Are you most concerned about the loss of full-time jobs, which are down around 45 000, I think, from the previous month Is that the main concern for the Government - the big loss in full-time jobs? 
JULIA GILLARD: We're concerned about the loss of any job, whether it be full-time or part-time. But you are right, these figures show a loss of full-time jobs and that is concerning. What I would say in these figures is that in all aspects, they show the global financial crisis and its impact on our economy. We've said that economy won't be immune from this contagion that is moving through the economies of the world.
But we've also said we believe our economy is more resilient as we face these challenges and the Government has acted decisively to invest in the protection of Australian jobs in recent months. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) What about the slight increase in part-time employment? 
JULIA GILLARD: These figures, as you are rightly saying, show a loss of full-time jobs and an increase in part-time employment. That would be the circumstances of individual decisions in workplaces. Obviously these figures catch the December period in which part-time work may be available in the circumstances of the Christmas period. We'll need to track that through figures in the coming few months.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the loss of jobs in your home state of Victoria? I think the unemployment rate went from 4.4 to 4.6, which is worse than the national trend. Is that something that concerns you?
JULIA GILLARD: I think as we look through these figures, because they are telling us about the global financial crisis and its impact on our nation, obviously those states, particularly manufacturing states, you would expect to see some impact in the figures as a result of the manufacturing base. 
JOURNALIST: Julia, miners seem to be concerned about the loss of mining jobs, leading to some regional centres shutting down. They've called on the Federal Government to meet with the resources sector. Is that an offer you will take the resources sector up on?
JULIA GILLARD: The Government meets very regularly with the resource sector and representatives of the resources sector. I do, in my capacity as Minister for Employment, Minister for Education, Minister for Workplace Relations. We talk to the resources sector about all of those issues. Of course, my colleague, the Minister for Resources, Martin Ferguson is in very regular dialogue with the resources sector.
We're obviously always open to listening to what the resources sector has got to say. 
JOURNALIST: What do these figures mean in terms of a recession? 
JULIA GILLARD: Well the Government's been clear that these are difficult days. We've also been clear that our estimates, the figures to date have shown that our economy has continued to grow even in difficult circumstances. That was the figure in the September quarter. 
What the Government has done is act decisively to keep our economy moving, to stimulate growth in our economy in these difficult days. What we've done is protected jobs, acted to protect jobs in these difficult days. We are obviously standing ready as necessary to continue to invest in keeping our economy moving, in stimulating growth in our economy and in protecting Australian jobs. We stand ready to do that, obviously monitoring the international situation and whether it deteriorates further. 
JOURNALIST: You've put forward a lot of money for the car industry and yet today we've had news of further job losses out at Ford. Is what you are doing working?
JULIA GILLARD: Well the car industry package is about the future of the car industry in this country for the long term. Obviously there have been some announcements in the car industry that have been heartening announcements including in relation to employment in Geelong; including announcements in South Australia in relation to new vehicle manufacture there, so making sure that there is continued production there. So I would say that those announcements show that the car package has been important. The car package is going to continue to be a package over time, to develop the car industry in this country and to keep it for the long term.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
JULIA GILLARD: Well obviously the move by Ford finance is a concerning development. We are obviously concerned about the loss of any job. But on the car industry overall, obviously the car industry package - focussed as it is on the manufacture of cars in this country  - I think, has already led to some announcements that have been good news for the car industry for this country and as the Prime Minister says, for the long term, we want to be a country that manufactures goods, manufactures cars and the car package is about ensuring a long term future for the car industry in this nation. 
JOURNALIST: Is the current economic climate and the fact that you are expecting unemployment to rise give further push to a case to extend the First Home Buyers Grant beyond the period after it currently runs out?
JULIA GILLARD: Well, the data from yesterday shows that the First Home Buyers Grant has made a difference. We saw a 17.8 per cent increase in the number of first home buyers. So that is obviously good news for the housing industry and it's good news for those first home buyers who are on their way to getting their place in the Australian dream and their very first home. The increases we made to the First Home Buyers Grant are scheduled to end on the 30th of June this year. Obviously the Government will continue to monitor the housing industry but that initiative is scheduled to end on the 30th of June.
JOURNALIST: So you won't extend it? 
JULIA GILLARD: Well the Government will continue to monitor developments in the housing industry but that policy is scheduled to end on the 30th of June.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to employers who say that the Fair Work Bill will drive up wages and is a threat to jobs? 
JULIA GILLARD: Well, what I would say is that the Government believes it has the balance right. And if we look in recent days we've seen commentary from the union side that the bill doesn't go far enough; we've seen commentary from some employers and employer groups that they think aspects of it go too far. 
What we believe that shows is that Government got the balance right. What the Government's Fair Work bill does is get the industrial relations pendulum in the centre. It is balancing the interests of employers and employees in the centre. We always expected when we brought the Fair Work bill into Parliament that there would be union people with criticisms, that there would be employers with criticisms.
We are seeing that in the public domain. But the balance, in our view, is right. It's a good piece of legislation for employees and employers and for the future of this country. 
And can we remind ourselves what was Work Choices about? Well, Work Choices was about allowing the safety net to be ripped away from working Australians. And we know, in particular young workers and other workers at risk, bore the brunt of Work Choices .
And I'd certainly say this, I've never had an employer say to me that they thought the future prosperity of this country depended on ripping off 15-, 16-, 17- year old kids. So the Government is about fairness at work, about a safety net at work that every working person can rely on. That's what we campaigned on at the last election; that's what the Australian people voted for and it's what the Fair Work Bill delivers. 
JOURNALIST: But the employers are saying is that it needs to be calibrated to the times  -  right now the times are pretty tough -  but you don't seem to be willing to amend or change it or delay it in any way. Is that correct?
JULIA GILLARD: We wrote the fair Work Bill for the long term. We wrote the Fair Work Bill to be the long term way in which this country approached workplace relations. If we reflect back over the period of the Liberal Government, there were many changes to workplace relations laws, each of them causing confusion, causing costs, causing concern. And then we had Work Choices, which Australians rightly rejected as extreme. When we wrote the Fair Work Bill, we wrote it to create a stable platform for workplace relations for the long term so that industrial relations laws didn't need to be re-written frequently; that there would be a stable, understood system for the long term. We wrote those laws therefore so that they would work in all sorts of different economic climates. 
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, just with Fiji, can you give us an update on the plight of Australians stranded there? 
JULIA GILLARD: The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is assisting Australians who are caught up in Fiji, particularly assisting people to get on flights. There has been an increase in the number of flights into Fiji, meaning that for those people who have been able to get to the airport, there have been more opportunities to get on flights to move out of Fiji. 
There are numbers, telephone numbers that people can contact for assistance, if they themselves need assistance or if they're worried about the circumstances of a family member or friends. The Australian number is 02 6261 3305. 
There's also a number in Suva that people can contact which is available on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website and we can certainly circulate it for people. 
JOURNALIST: Just on the Fair Work Bill, why won't you do any economic modelling on the effect on employment from the changes that it provides?
JULIA GILLARD: When we put the Fair Work Bill together and when we put the policy that it's based on, Forward with Fairness, together, we obviously looked at the economic commentary and we particularly looked at those economic studies that talk about collective bargaining and its positive impacts for productivity. What we want to see in Australian workplaces is productive workplaces where there are gains for both employers and employees to share. 
What we can say about Work Choices is that its period of operation coincided with a period of very low productivity growth. What we also say about the workplace relations in this country is that the advent of enterprise bargaining in this country under the last Labor Government coincided with a period of high productivity growth. Academics and economists would tell us collective bargaining is good for productivity and that's at the heart of the Fair Work Bill.
JOURNALIST: There's no specific modelling for the Bill  -  is that correct? 
JULIA GILLARD: The employment and economic outlooks of the Bill are the employment and economic outlooks that we brought to bear designing the Forward with Fairness policy and operation and the Fair Work Bill in Government.
JOURNALIST: A US judge has said that some Guantanamo detainees were tortured. Will that cause the Government to reconsider its decision not to take some of those former inmates?
JULIA GILLARD: What the Government said about Guantanamo Bay remains our position. That is, if there was a future request by the US to consider any of these detainees, that would be considered on a case by case basis against our very stringent national security and immigration assessments.
Last question. 
JOURNALIST: Anzac Day this year falls on a Saturday. Currently only the ACT and WA Governments are going to give the Monday straight after as a public holiday. Would you like to see the other states and territories follow suit?
JULIA GILLARD: That's a matter for the states and territories involved. Obviously the gazetting of public holidays is dealt with on that basis.
JOURNALIST: But it's un-Australian, would you not say, that, you know, we can't properly observe probably our most, you know, traditionally observed public holiday, have, you know, a proper weekday?
JULIA GILLARD: Well I'd have to say the important thing in my view about Anzac Day is the remembrances that occur on Anzac Day itself. 
Thank you 


The Prime Minister and Treasurer will undertake a two day working visit to the World Economic Forum in late January to promote the need for a coordinated international response to the global financial crisis. 
The Prime Minister and the Treasurer will use the World Economic Forum to continue to promote the comparative strengths of the Australian economy during this severe economic downturn.
Over 40 world leaders and many corporate leaders will participate in this important meeting of the WEF, where the major focus will be to discuss the key challenges facing the world and the global economy in 2009.
Prior to the World Economic Forum, the Prime Minister will make an official working visit to India on January 28. India is now becoming one of Australia's significant economic partners.
The Prime Minister will use the World Economic Forum to engage with political and corporate leaders to discuss the world's response to the financial and broader economic crisis.
The World Economic Forum is also an opportunity to map out the way forward for the World Trade Organisation's (WTO's) Doha round negotiations.
Further, the Prime Minister will engage with world leaders on climate change and will emphasise Australia's commitment to securing an effective post-Kyoto outcome.
The World Economic Forum will take place in Davos, Switzerland and the Prime Minister will attend from January 30 to 31.
During his one day visit to India, the Prime Minister will undertake talks with Indian Prime Minister, the Hon Dr Manmohan Singh, and his cabinet ministers, on a range of bilateral, regional and international issues including economic cooperation, security, the global financial crisis and climate change. 
The Rudd Government is committed to taking its relationship with India to a higher level and engaging with India on a long-term, strategic basis.
The Prime Minister will also address a business event to be attended by key Indian business figures and representatives of Australian companies in India.
Australia and India have a significant economic relationship which has grown steadily in recent years.
India is the world's twelfth largest economy and was one of the fastest growing over the past decade.
India is Australia's eleventh largest two-way trade partner, with total two-way goods and services trade in 2007-08 valued at $13.9 billion, and the potential to increase considerably, including in sectors such as ICT, biotechnology, education and tourism.
Australia is the second most popular destination for Indian students seeking an education overseas, with more than 85,000 enrolments by Indian students in Australian institutions in the year to September 2008.
On 27 January, the Prime Minister will also visit Papua New Guinea for a special meeting of Pacific Islands Forum leaders hosted by Sir Michael Somare, to consider the situation in Fiji.
Pacific leaders agreed at their meeting in Niue in August 2008 that this meeting was needed because of the interim Fijian Government's refusal to hold elections by March 2009.
As agreed in August, Pacific Islands Forum leaders will consider special measures in relation to Fiji to encourage a return to democracy, which is essential to a stable and prosperous future for the people of Fiji and the Pacific.


GEORGE: Julia Gillard is the Acting Prime Minister at the moment and we have her on the line. Good morning and our first question is now going to be our second question because the first question is going to be different. Good morning.
JULIA GILLARD: Good morning.
GEORGE: Our first question is what do we actually call you? The reason we ask you is on that our weekend program we always called John Howard ‘Mr Howard' and listeners would get very upset if we did it a different way and so on. So what should we call you?
PAUL: Yes  -  are you Julia or the Acting PM, Gillard  -  who are you today?
JULIA GILLARD: Who am I today? Well I think everyday I'm Julia.
GEORGE: You want to be Julia?
JULIA GILLARD: That's fine.
GEORGE: You'll be Julia with us. Now question two: where's Kevin?
JULIA GILLARD: Kevin's been on a few weeks holiday in Sydney with his family. He'll be in Canberra on Monday and back at work.
GEORGE: OK, so it all gets sort of back to normal from what, from Monday, does it?
JULIA GILLARD: That's right, it does. Kevin'll be back.
GEORGE: All right now the unemployment figures  -  4.5  -  I just said before you came on the line, of course, 4.5 is still reasonably low. But we're all worried and we've been reading about it for months about how tough things are going to get.
JULIA GILLARD: Of course last year had the global financial crisis which shook the world and it's now feeding into economies around the world. Our unemployment rate yesterday went to 4.5 per cent. The United States is at 7.2; the United Kingdom is at six per cent. So I think the figure that we got yesterday  -  4.5 - is showing the impact of the global financial crisis on our economy and as a Government we've always been clear with people  -  our economy wasn't going to be immune from the global financial crisis but we have acted to keep our economy moving and to protect jobs. That's what the Economic Security Strategy, the $10 billion statement was all about; it's why we've been so focussed on infrastructure, on protecting the car industry, on money for local government because that's about local jobs. So over the last three months there's been $36 billion of investments which have been focused on protecting and investing in jobs.
PAUL: Are you encouraging employers to keep workers on lesser hours or just keep them on as much as they can just to get them through these hard times, Julia?
JULIA GILLARD: Well one of the things we've certainly seen in the past when there have been economic downturns is that people have let staff go and then when times improve they're all screaming because of skills shortages and they can't get the staff that they need and I think one of the things that is probably informing the employer outlook today is that they know, as recently as a few months ago when they needed that extra skilled staff member, they were finding them really hard to get. And so having fought so hard to get skilled staff, many employers I think will take the view that retaining their staff is very important to their business. Many business people I meet would, you know, very freely say, the first sentence, they would say the first words after good morning or good afternoon is that their business is all about their skilled staff, most valuable asset for their business and I think that's why they're reluctant to let them go.
GEORGE: And in many ways employers do say that all the time so this is a chance I guess now to prove that, isn't it.
Now Barack Obama, the inauguration coming up on the 20th, are we represented there? I know U2 are playing there so surely we'd send somebody, wouldn't we?
JULIA GILLARD: Certainly our nation is represented through our ambassador who goes to the inauguration. The convention with inaugurations is that ambassadors go.
GEORGE: You don't send prime minsters or deputy prime ministers or anything?
JULIA GILLARD: No, no, that's not the American tradition.
GEORGE: OK.
JULIA GILLARD: It's not an occasion for visiting heads of state but it is an occasion for other nations to be represented through their diplomatic staff and it's going to be an enormous and exciting event. I mean so many people are going to converge on Washington. It's truly going to be amazing.
GEORGE: All right. Now we've got to move fairly quickly because there's so many things and we've got so little time. The other thing is that there are calls by Australians for our Government to do something about the tourists stranded in Fiji. Have you got a response to that?
JULIA GILLARD: Our Department of Foreign Affairs has been working to assist people who are having problems in Fiji. It's been in contact with people on the ground. There are special contact numbers for people in Fiji to get in touch with the department to get assistance. There have been more flights into Fiji so for people who have been able to get to the airport there's been a few more options to get out of the country. But for anybody who needs assistance, get straight on to the Department of Foreign Affairs and they're standing by ready to help and they have been helping Australians there.
PAUL: Is there anything new on the family stranded overseas where the mother's been put in jail and the sons have been put in jail for what seems to us to be quite barbaric charges? Can we help them in anyway, Acting Prime Minister?
JULIA GILLARD: I don't think that there are any developments overnight on that. But certainly of course we act on behalf of Australians overseas who get caught up in all sorts of circumstances including these circumstances so we'll keep working through that through our diplomatic and foreign affairs structures to assist that family.
GEORGE: All right now yesterday you defended the Fair Work Bill which I'm sure I mean you, I mean you put a lot of working into getting it into place, but there's also criticisms on the emissions trading scheme and I think these criticisms are about the impact on the economy at this time while we're having such a rough time and it looks like getting worse. So what do you say there?
JULIA GILLARD: In both doing the Fair Work Bill and the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we had a long period of consultation, we listened to everybody, we particularly listened to businesses. The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme was designed through green paper-white paper process where we said this is what we're thinking, come and tell us what you think and we believe that we've got the balance right. We are very mindful about protecting Australian jobs  -  you don't invest $36 billion to keep the economy moving without thinking about Australian jobs each and every day.
GEORGE: But can I also say, if you don't mind - sorry to cut in - but there are, as people would say, ok you've got the plan in place - why not put it off for a couple of years until this all recovers?
JULIA GILLARD: Because it's very clear from all of the expert advice and discussion about climate change that the costs of inaction are greater than the costs of action. If you start now you can start dealing with this in a measured way. If you leave it and leave it and leave it then of course huge adjustments are going to have been made very quickly.
GEORGE: Why don't we leave it until China and India and the United States get involved?
JULIA GILLARD: Well what we've said of course is that we've set targets for this country. We will work internationally. We obviously want to be engaged in the global debate and should other countries come into arrangements which mean that they have set targets then we would review the targets we have set but we've set targets which we think are appropriate for this country. And we believe in setting those targets we've got the balance right so that we're looking after employment but we're also starting to make the adjustments we need to given the huge impacts of climate change.
PAUL: Ok, the recent $10.4 billion in handouts, we get the impression that most people think that it didn't work simply because it wasn't enough. Do you think it's time to bring the tax cuts of next year forward?
JULIA GILLARD: Well the $10.4 billion was a very big stimulus package and I believe it has made a difference. People have been out there obviously in spending the money and that's been part of keeping our economy moving and keeping people in work. The estimates were that the $10.4 billion was support for 75,000 jobs. It's not the only thing we've done though. Of course we've made some big new investments in infrastructure. Building infrastructure takes a lot of labour obviously so it means jobs and new investments through the Council of Australian Governments.
GEORGE: The clock has beaten us I'm afraid. We've got to go. The clock has beaten us. Wonderful to talk to. Thank you very much.
JULIA GILLARD: Thank you. 
ENDS 


HAYDEN COOPER: Well, Julia Gillard, this week alone, hundreds of jobs have been cut across the mining sector. Are these the unmistakeable symptoms of a recession?
JULIA GILLARD: This is the global financial crisis hitting our economy. We obviously said last year when the global financial crisis first emerged and shook the world; that our economy wasn't going to be immune, that it would be touched and we would see rising unemployment as a result.
Obviously every job lost is a real difficulty, a dreadful time for the Australian involved and that's why we've been investing in protecting jobs, in bolstering jobs, and in keeping our economy moving. That's what out $10.4 billion Economy Security Statement was all about as well as our new investments in infrastructure, in local government so that there can be expenditure on local jobs and of course, our car industry plan. In the last three months that totals $36 billion of expenditure which is targeted and focussed on jobs and protecting jobs.
HAYDEN COOPER: Has it really worked though, given that 44,000 full time jobs were lost in December?
JULIA GILLARD: We've always said the global financial crisis was going to touch our economy, we're not immune. But what we can do is we can act decisively to keep our economy moving. The Government has done that and of course, we stand ready to continue to act should international conditions deteriorate further.
But if we look around our globe, our unemployment rate has gone to 4.5 per cent. In the US they have an employment rate of 7.2; in the UK, six per cent. These are all the signs of the global financial crisis impacting on the real economies of the world and on jobs, and of course, our economy is not immune from that.
HAYDEN COOPER: Do you believe it's reasonable at the moment for businesses to be shifting to part-time workers and to be cutting back their hours?
JULIA GILLARD: Businesses are going to make decisions based on their individual circumstances. But one thing I think is at work in the labour market today as businesses think about what they are going to do in these difficult times, is many businesses have fought hard to get the skilled staff that they need. And I think that is going to be a big factor on the minds of business people as they make decisions in these difficult days after the global financial crisis as we feel its effects.
HAYDEN COOPER: Can you guarantee that your emissions trading scheme and that the new workplace laws won't put more people out of jobs?
JULIA GILLARD: What I can certainly say, is in designing the Fair Work Bill, in designing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, what was in the forefront of our minds was getting balanced schemes that were going to work for Australia and making sure that those schemes met our economic needs including our need to keep creating jobs.
If I can specifically say about the Fair Work Bill, we believe we've got the balance right and that the Bill is good for employees, good for employers and good for the economy and future productivity and prosperity.
HAYDEN COOPER: The unions though, are pushing for a return to pattern bargaining and business in fact says the Fair Work Bill makes that possible. Was that your intention all along?
JULIA GILLARD: The Fair Work Bill clearly outlaws pattern bargaining. Clearly, directly, section by section...you can pick it up and read it. Pattern bargaining is outlawed and that's how the Fair Work Bill will stay.
ENDS 


It is with great honour today that we commend the valour of Trooper Mark Donaldson with the presentation of the first Victoria Cross for Australia.
This is a truly historic day.
Trooper Donaldson's bravery will forever be engraved in Australian history.
Generations of school children will now know of the story of Trooper Mark Donaldson.
It is a story all Australians should know.
It is a story of a hero  -  one which will be told in classrooms, workplaces and watering holes for many years to come.
Trooper Donaldson's courage and selflessness in the face of such unspeakable danger is not only a great tribute to him and his family  -  it epitomises the spirit of the Aussie digger.
The soldiers that he saved will be forever indebted to him.
The nation will be forever indebted to him.
It is 40 years since a Victoria Cross was presented to an Australian. The last Victoria Cross (Imperial) was awarded on 24 May 1969, to Warrant Officer Keith Payne VC OAM for gallantry during the Vietnam War.
In 1991 the Victoria Cross for Australia replaced the Imperial Victoria Cross.


Trooper Mark Donaldson VC. Your beautiful wife Emma. And your wonderful, wonderful child. And distinguished Australians one and all.
Today Trooper Mark Donaldson joins the ranks of Australian heroes. And his feat of arms, his feat under fire, now becomes the stuff of Australian legend.
Today Trooper Donaldson joins the ranks of Jacka, of Cutler, of Kingsbury, of so many who have earned this medal of gallantry. Of Simpson, of Payne, and others who have been honoured over the years.
He joins the ranks of our bravest and our finest. In the 153-year history of the Victoria Cross, fewer than 100 Australians have been awarded this highest military honour. And now Trooper Donaldson is one of them.
Trooper Donaldson is the first Australian to receive this award in 40 years. Trooper Donaldson is the first in history to be awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia in the national form of this historic award that was established nearly 20 years ago.
This award is not given lightly, this award has never been given lightly. The scroll on the Victoria Cross is inscribed with two simply words, but two most powerful words. Those words are “for valour”.
It is awarded in recognition of exceptional bravery, of extraordinary courage in the face of the enemy.
What is courage? How is courage measured?
The answer perhaps lies best with those who have known the profession of arms.
General Sherman of the Union Army wrote as follows: “Courage is the perfect sensibility of the measure of danger and the mental willingness to endure it.”
And I read Trooper Donaldson's citation from the Defence Force, and I read it, and I read it again. Because this was courage writ large. It leapt from the page. Bear with me while I read part of it to you again.
“During the conduct of a fighting patrol, Trooper Donaldson was travelling in a combined Afghan, US and Australian vehicle convoy that was engaged by a numerically superior, entrenched and coordinated enemy ambush. The ambush was initiated by a high volume of sustained machine gun fire, coupled with the effective use of rocket propelled grenades. Such was the effect of the initiation that the combined patrol suffered numerous casualties, completely lost the initiative and became immediately suppressed. It was over two hours before the convoy was able to establish a clean break and move to an area free of any fire.
“In the early stages of the ambush, Trooper Donaldson reacted spontaneously to regain the initiative. He moved rapidly between alternate positions of cover engaging the enemy with 56 millimetre and 84 millimetre anti-armour weapons, as well as his M4 rifle. During an early stage of the enemy ambush, he deliberately exposed himself to enemy fire in order to draw attention to himself and thus away from wounded soldiers. This selfless act alone brought enough time for those wounded to be moved to relative safety.”
And in reference to the saving of the interpreter: “His movement, once identified by the enemy, drew intense and accurate machine gun fire from entrenched positions. Upon reaching the wounded coalition force interpreter, Trooper Donaldson picked up and carried him back to the relative safety of the vehicles and then provided immediate first aid before returning to the fight.
“In subsequent occasions during the battle, Trooper Donaldson administered medical care to other wounded soldiers whilst continuing to engage the enemy.”
In our workaday lives, that is the stuff of legend. It is the stuff of Australian legend.
It is the spirit of Kokoda where nobody is left behind.
It is the spirit of ANZAC, as the great CEW Bean has written: “ANZAC stood, and still stands, for reckless valour in a good cause, for enterprise, for resourcefulness, fidelity, comradeship, and endurance that will never own defeat.”
Mark, these men of ANZAC would nod with a knowing pride of your achievements and your feats in the field of battle in Afghanistan.
Within this last week, we have buried one of our best who lost his life in his country's name. And he is one of too many who have done the same, fighting for the values for which Australia stands in the distant mountains of Afghanistan. Many others still have been wounded and I am fearful that there will be more.
As a nation we are proud of all of our men and women in uniform. For there is no higher honour than to wear the uniform of Australia.
Trooper Donaldson, by your deeds you honour your family. By your deeds you honour the Army. By your deeds you honour the country. This country Australia.
At a time of national difficulty, you also speak to the nation's spirit in a way you may not yet understand.
CS Lewis wrote: “Courage is not simply one of the virtues but the form of every virtue at the testing point.”
Trooper Donaldson, you met the test and you passed with flying colours.
Trooper Donaldson, the nation salutes you. A man of valour. A man who consciously took the decision to place his own life in peril to save the lives of others.
I salute you.


Premier Rees and distinguished guests.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is always good to speak at Australia Day events, because it gives me a chance to talk about our country.
Where we are heading.
What challenges are before us.
And what steps we are taking, as a nation, to meet them.
It is particularly good because Australia Day comes at such a great time of the year.
Over the summer, most of us have had a chance to rest, to spend time with family and friends, to enjoy the bush, the beach or the backyard, and to recharge our batteries ahead of the New Year.
Australia Day is a day in which  -  through our honours system and the Australian of the Year Awards  -  we recognise and thank Australians who inspire us  -  in the local community, in education, health, business, sport, the arts, and in so many fields.
Through their example, we see the best of what we can be as a nation and as a people.
But this year the nation is overshadowed by uncertainty and anxiety over the global financial crisis at our door.
I understand that worry, and I can tell you that 2009 is going to be a tough year.
The current economic turmoil is unlike any we have seen in our lifetime  -  and unlike any since the Great Depression of 1931.
It is not a crisis of Australia's making, but it will hurt Australia, as it is hurting every other country.
Over the next week, starting today, I plan to deliver a series of addresses on the global economic situation, how it will affect Australia and our framework for responding.
I am doing this because I intend to be absolutely straight with Australians about the impact of the crisis, and what we intend to do about it.
The impact will be big.
But so will our response.
In fact, it's been substantial so far, including $36 billion of new measures.
We are determined to chart a course that will see Australia through this crisis.
We are determined to navigate that course and to craft a more resilient Australia as a result.
We will do so with a combination of steely economic management and compassion for those who need support.
And we intend to prevail through the energy, innate optimism and decency of the Australian people.
The magnitude of the global financial crisis almost beggars belief.
By next year, up to 25 million people around the world may have lost their jobs, according to the OECD.
In the United States, the origin and epicentre of the earthquake, nearly three million jobs were lost last year  -  the largest decline since World War Two.
In December alone more than half a million people lost their jobs.
Global share markets have lost half their value since they peaked in October 2007  -  the greatest fall since the Great Depression.
That is $32 trillion  -  the equivalent of the total annual GDP of the G7, the group of seven of the world's wealthiest nations.
The Australian share market has been hit as well: it fell by 43 per cent last year, the largest annual fall since records began in 1982  -  and twice the previous largest calendar year fall.
It is now clear that even though global capital markets helped drive the strongest period of economic growth in three decades, they had become structurally unsound and unsustainable.
A culture of excessive risk taking - a culture of greed - a culture of excess has brought massive economic disruption to global financial markets and the global economy.
These markets were inadequately supervised and, in the period ahead, one of the tasks of the global community will be to devise warning systems to ensure such a disaster never happens again.
The good news is that Australia has weathered the turbulence far better than many similar countries.
Our banks had a very low level of exposure to bad debt generated in the US.
Of the more than 40 major global financial institutions that have gone bankrupt or been bailed out since the crisis began, none are Australian.
However, Australia is not immune from these events, and difficult days lie ahead.
The US, Japan, Germany and the rest of the euro zone - plus, in our region, New Zealand, Singapore and Hong Kong - have all slipped into recession.
Critically, China has been hit much harder than forecasters had predicted.
Its growth has slowed sharply  -  from 12 per cent in 2007 to 8.5 per cent last year.
Its manufacturing sector  -  which is 40 per cent of its GDP  -  has been contracting for five months.
Because China takes 15 per cent of our exports, its slowdown will affect Australia.
This is an unprecedented crisis that demands an unprecedented response.
In October, for the first time in our history, the Government guaranteed deposits of up to $1 million in all banks, building societies and credit unions.
Our Economic Security Strategy injected $10.4 billion into the economy via payments to pensioners, low and middle income families and first home buyers.
We made a $6.2 billion commitment to strengthen Australia's automotive industry, which directly and indirectly supports 200,000 jobs.
And last month we announced a $4.7 billion nation-building plan to invest in ready-to-go infrastructure projects in road, rail, ports and education.
These are investments that will not simply stimulate the economy now  -  they will build Australia for the long term.
The industries we are investing in  -  including education, information technology and renewable energy  -  are industries of the future that will ensure Australia emerges from this downturn with a stronger, more diverse economy.
We are all in this together
This is a difficult time, and in the short term there is no quick fix.
Things will get worse before they get better.
That is where all of us  -  not just government  -  have a role in lessening the effects of the crisis.
We are all in this together: business, unions, governments, the community sector  -  and every nation in the world.
In these times, employers must do their utmost to protect their workers from dismissal, knowing that these workers will serve them well when times turn good again.
Workers, too, must restrain any wage claims.
I know there are employers who have asked their workers to accept shorter working hours rather than lose their jobs.
That encourages me, because at this time Australians need to look out for each other -- as we have done so many times in the past when the going has got tough.
I repeat  -  we are all in this together.
Right now it's jobs that matter most  -  because the global financial crisis has been the destroyer of jobs.
As I travel around the country, I sense a steadiness among our people  -  an awareness that times are hard, but also a willingness to help each other, to stick together.
I have not the slightest doubt that we as a people will rise to the challenge that lies ahead of us.
And we will emerge from this a stronger, more resilient nation than before  -  and a nation which never loses its heart.
[ends]


PM: Well it's great to be back here in South Australia and Adelaide for this fantastic race, the Tour Down Under. This is a great addition to South Australia's place in world tourism. I was talking to the Premier about the fact that right around the world today you've got 150 million people seeing the great sights of South Australia. This is fantastic for tourism in what is a difficult year for the national economy.
A race starting in Norwood, moving through great towns like Williamstown and Gawler, finishing here at Mawson Lake, this is just great. And the scenery through the hills, just superb. So what you're doing is great for tourism, great for South Australia, great for the country.
We've just been having a yak to Lance Armstrong. Mike and I have been giving our advice on the finer tips of cycling, and he's promised to take that advice on board. What's great about the Lance Armstrong story is not just that it's been a great boost, a global boost to the standing of this great event around the world, he also has another message. That's the message about cancer. And I think what he has done in terms of spreading the word worldwide about the fight against cancer, on the campaign against cancer, and the resources we as a community need to dedicate to it, is I think first class. And we'll be talking more with Lance in the period ahead about other things that we can do.
Here in South Australia today, what I'd like to confirm is the Government is announcing $3.7 million, a program grant, for Professor Lopez's work here at the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science here in South Australia. This is very important in enhancing the critical research done at this centre in specific cancers like leukaemia.
Nearly $2 million of this amount will go fund four major national clinical trials in areas such as sarcomas, neuro-oncology, and children's cancers.
This is really important. Part of the national and global cancer network. Excellent work's been done here in South Australia by this great Institute, and the Federal Government today's getting behind it with a further $3.7 million program. A practical way to add to our national campaign in which we have injected hundreds of millions of dollars in the last 12 months additional, and as part of the global campaign which great heroes like Lance Armstrong are champions of.
Over to you Mike.
RANN: We'll certainly, absolutely once again welcome this commitment from the Commonwealth. Yesterday at a great commitment from the Federal Government, $50 million for a new children's cancer centre at the Women's and Children's Hospital, and today of course this $3.7 million for the principal aim of terms of tackling the great issue of leukaemia. I have to say that's an area where South Australia has shown real leadership, and people like Marjorie Jackson-Nelson of course being a hero over decades of raising money for leukaemia research.
So we're very grateful for this partnership with the Commonwealth. As you know I'll be making a series of announcements over the next few days on what we're doing here in South Australia in partnership with various groups to support the fight against cancer. And as I said yesterday, we will triple the funds raised by the Cancer Council this week as part of their big fundraising drive which involves Lance Armstrong.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is your Government considering another stimulus package to keep the economy going?
PM: The global financial crisis is biting hard across the world and here in Australia. I say right up front that jobs for us are front and centre.
This is going to be a hard year. It's going to get harder. And therefore what the Government said last year is what we say again this year - we stand ready to take whatever action is necessary in the future to continue support the stability of the financial system, and to continue to support positive growth and jobs.
The two options here  -  you can sit to one side, sit on your hands and moan, or you can get out there and have a go. This Government's in the business of having a go. And I just say this as an addition, since this crisis hit, the Government has also initiated $36 billion worth of measures, including a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy which has been out there supporting jobs, particularly in the retail sector in the critical months over this period. It's not the final answer, it's not the full answer, but you know something, it all helps.
The Government stands ready to take whatever action is necessary in the future, and we'll continue to work our way through this challenge in partnership with governments around the world.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said the Government stands ready to take whatever future action is necessary. Any further action that's necessary. This crisis before we go into the inevitable list of questions about ruling ins and rulings outs which I'm sure you've been provided by your various editors and sub-editors, this crisis has a long way to run. It's a deep crisis. And it's one which Australians didn't cause. It began in the United States of America. But you know something - the Government is determined to take whatever action is necessary to support jobs in what will be a huge year of challenge for all Australians.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said we'll just stand ready to take whatever action is necessary. We've done this in a calm, measured, considered way since the crisis hit. One step at a time. And what we've done last year is a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy which provided assistance to first home buyers, first home buyers boost, provided one-off payments to pensioners and carers, provided also assistance to families with kids. On top of that, a $4.6 billion infrastructure package which has assisted in providing investments into critical university infrastructure here in South Australia. A $15 billion additional package for the states through the COAG arrangements. A $3 million investment into local government. All these things have been undertaken with a view to supporting jobs and economic growth, when the private economy is contracting.
You can either sit back and watch that happen and say, woe with me, or you can get in there and have a go.
JOURNALIST: Are tax cuts on the table as a measure to  - 
PM: We remain resolved to take whatever action is necessary, and we will do it a calm, measured, and methodical fashion. Next go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm puzzled by that because when the package was announced, Mr Harvey said he saw it as a boost to confidence in the economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you take a call from George W Bush before he left office?
PM: No, I've not done so. But I certainly wish President Bush as he still is, all the best in his retirement and the strong contribution which he has made to the Australia  -  United States alliance. I look forward very much to working with President Obama, the next President of the United States, because we have a huge challenge ahead, and it begins with working together on the global financial crisis.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said before, this is a very, very difficult and deep crisis. A crisis which began in the United States which has spread globally. A crisis which I note the Leader of the Liberal Party describes as being over-hyped before Christmas. That's never been our view and we believe that the right course of action is to implement a carefully considered stimulus strategy. We've laid out five steps and stages of that strategy by Christmas. We stand ready to take whatever other action is necessary.
By the way, something, if you haven't caught up with this today, today's front page of the Los Angeles Times, President-elect Obama in Washington, and here we have Lance Armstrong in Adelaide. There you go, front page.
[ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
In South Australia I know you take Australia Day very seriously.
For example, on Monday the City of Whyalla is hosting the Great Aussie Thong Throwing Championship.
Followed by the Great Aussie Dummy Spitting Championship.
Followed by a distribution of lamingtons on the foreshore.
What a great day -- I would love to be there.
Australia Day is also a day when -- through the honours we present and the Australian of the Year Awards -- we recognise and thank those people who inspire us  -  in the community, in education, health, business, sport and the arts  -  in so many fields.
It is a day that shows us the best of what this country can be.
And a shining part of that is the work of our medical researchers.
That is why I am delighted to announce $5.6 million of new funding for cancer research -- $3.7 million of which will go to the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science here in Adelaide for its research into blood cell cancers such as leukemia.
We are very pleased to fund its groundbreaking work.
Today I met the extraordinary Lance Armstrong, who as you know is making his professional cycling comeback in Adelaide after seven Tour de France wins and surviving his own battle with cancer.
Lance has become a passionate advocate for cancer research - and my government strongly supports his cause.
Our last budget included $300 million of funding to fight a disease that leads to the death of more than 38,000 Australians every year.
This week, I am attending Australia Day functions around the country to deliver a series of address on the global economic situation and how the Government is responding to it.
I am doing so because I intend to be absolutely straight with Australians about a crisis we did not cause -- but the effects of which we cannot escape.
I know that many Australians are worried  -  and I understand that worry. 
The Government stands ready to take whatever action is required to see Australia through the difficult times ahead.
The impact of the crisis will be huge  -  but so too will be our response.
We have already spent $36 billion to stimulate the economy, protect jobs and build the high-skilled economy of the future.
With a combination of strong, determined economic management and compassion for those who need support we will craft a more resilient Australia. 
In Sydney yesterday I spoke about the underlying causes of the global financial crisis  -  in particular the ineffective regulation of financial markets as part of the free market fundamentalism, excessive greed and the exorbitant salaries that rewarded irresponsible risk across the financial world.
Today I want to talk specifically about the collapse in credit markets, the difficulties our banks face - and what the Government is doing to respond.
There is no more potent a measure of the dimensions of this crisis than what has happened to equity markets over the past 12 months.
The numbers are frightening.
Global share markets have lost almost half their value since they peaked in October 2007  -  the worst decline since the Great Depression.
That is a loss of US $32 trillion dollars  -  the equivalent of the total annual GDP of the G7, the group of seven of the world's wealthiest industrial nations.
The Australian share market has been hit, too.
It fell by 43 per cent last year, the largest annual fall in Australian stock markets since 1900.
Share markets have been in freefall because investor confidence has collapsed.
At the same time, the cost of borrowing for banks has increased dramatically.
In just over one month between September and October the banks' cost of obtaining credit increased by about five times in Australia, as well as the US.
Since then, credit conditions have eased a little, due to extraordinary measures taken overseas and here.
Nevertheless, credit remains restricted.
For example, the banks' cost of obtaining credit remains double what it was in early September.
Fortunately our banks remain profitable and well capitalized, leaving our banking system better placed than most other developed countries to withstand the global financial crisis.
Because they have lent carefully, they are far less exposed to bad debt from housing loans or failed securities than most of their American and European counterparts.
For example, the sub-prime housing market that triggered the crisis makes up about 15 per cent of the mortgage market in the United States.
In Australia non-conforming loans make up only an estimated one per cent of outstanding loans.
But the Australian economy is global in nature and therefore affected by the health of global banks.
Some cash-strapped foreign banks are scaling back their lending in foreign markets such as Australia.
If banks do not allow clients to re-finance as they would in normal conditions, then companies can be forced to sell assets, often at low value.
This endangers their financial health and that of the whole economy.
According to Merrill Lynch, lending by overseas banks represented more than half of the 285 billion in syndicated loans that have been issued to Australian businesses since 2006.
Of those outstanding loans, 75 billion is scheduled to fall due over the next two years.
If foreign banks do not roll over their share of these loans, it would be difficult for Australia's four major banks to fill the gap on their own.
The withdrawal of foreign bank lending, the tightening in domestic bank lending and the dramatic falls in stock markets are all hurting the real economy.
Growth in business debt more than halved in the six months to September, compared to the same period a year before.
When businesses cannot get loans and are not confident about the future, they can't or won't invest, meaning they can't create jobs and they can't grow.
The supply of credit affects real businesses and affects real jobs.
Australian credit markets are international  -  and Australia has gained much from the internationalisation of our banking system over the last 20 years. But internationalisation comes with risks that must be managed.
In particular, since companies in Australia often raise finance with banks in another country  -  global financial problems abroad can quickly affect our real economy at home.
As the global financial crisis affects banks around the world, some foreign banks are seeking to reduce their exposures, causing them, in some cases, not to roll over their existing credit to Australian businesses.
The Australia government has already developed a special purpose vehicle for the car finance industry to support dealerships as their foreign-owned financiers left Australia, and we will continue to work in partnership with the private sector to do what we can to support Australia's credit markets.
Despite the size of these challenges, I can't stress too much that Australia is better placed than perhaps any other country in the developed world to ride out this crisis.
The Government has moved swiftly and decisively to ensure the stability of the financial and banking sectors, and to support the real economy.
We announced a guarantee of all deposits up to one million dollars held in Australian banks, building societies and credit unions and Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks.
We extended that guarantee to wholesale term funding  -  the money financial institutions raise on the capital markets  -  so that Australian banks, building societies and credit unions could continue to raise funds overseas.
And we acted to support the residential mortgage-backed security market when it was largely frozen by the credit crisis.
We did so by authorising the purchase of eight billion dollars worth of securities from Australian lenders so that they could continue to fund their operations.
Together with the four major banks, we have established a Special Purpose Vehicle worth up to $2 billion to help car dealer financiers who have encountered financing difficulties because of the global financial crisis.
These actions have helped to ease credit conditions  -  as has the Reserve Bank's three percentage point cut in the official interest rate in the three months to December.
The fall in interest rates has provided mortgage relief to families and to small businesses.
The Government has no greater priority than maintaining confidence in the economy.
And maintaining confidence in the banking sector is absolutely crucial to confidence in the broader economy.
And the Government stands ready to take whatever further action is necessary to stabilize financial markets, and to help reopen the private lines of government to business, to get blood flowing through the arteries of the economy.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I said earlier, Australia is part of the global economy.
That means that we can never be completely immune from an economic disease of this potency.
But it is equally true that we can only find a cure for this malaise through concerted international cooperation.
These are grim times right around the globe.
However, I do believe that the darkest hour is just before the dawn.
It is after midnight in Washington right now - but in just a few hours time Barack Obama will be sworn in as the 44th President of the United States.
Throughout their history Americans have distinguished themselves by being at their best when times are at their worst and just such a time has arrived for America and for the world. 
They responded to the divisions that threatened their great Union by electing Abraham Lincoln.
They responded to the ravages of the Great Depression and the Second World War by electing and re-electing Franklin Roosevelt.
And now they have set Barack Obama the mighty task of rebuilding the American economy and leading the recovery of the international economy: a great task for a great man.
I believe from everything I have seen, read and heard and from the conversations that I have had with him that the American people have chosen well in their new President.
I believe that the measures President-elect Obama is preparing to take will sit well with the approach of the Australian Government.
He is committed to a major economic stimulus package. Ours is already underway.
He will move for much stronger regulation of the financial markets rejecting the “anything goes” approach which has so clearly failed.
Last year while addressing the UN I called on the international community to adopt “globally agreed best practice standards of financial regulation”.
I will continue to press this position and welcome any moves by his Administration to support better regulation of financial institutions in America and abroad.
If there is one thing we all now know it is that only when America properly regulates its own financial institutions will Australia's markets be immune from the mess we are now managing.
As I have said before  -  “when markets fail, governments must act”.
These are dark times but a new age and a new optimism  -  tempered by the magnitude of the challenges ahead  -  is about to dawn across the Pacific.
Barack Obama truly is the hope of our time and I say this to the new President and to the new people, Australia as always stands ready to work with America in the great challenges that lie ahead.
In these difficult times, confidence is not just an economic concept.
It is something we can all generate.
Confidence in each other and confidence in ourselves, confidence in the nation and all the strengths that we have deployed at difficult times in our history.
We are all in this together all Australians and we can all help each other to get through this time together.
Jobs matter most and jobs are being lost.
Together with sacrifice all round we must rebuild jobs.
This will be hard.
But we either just watch as the global financial crisis wreaks its havoc on Australian jobs
Or we can have a go.
This Government will leave no stone unturned to see Australia through.
And if we a community are united we will see Australia through - building on our strengths, supporting the weak and crafting a more resilient Australia for the future.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced $5.6 million in funding for new research and clinical trial initiatives to reduce the impact of cancer on all Australians. 
In South Australia, the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science (IMVS) will receive $3.7 million in National Health and Medical Research Council Program Grant funding for its work on better treatment for blood cell cancers such as leukaemia, and inflammatory diseases.
Professor Angel Lopez, head of the human immunology research team at IMVS and co-head of the newly-formed SA Centre for Cancer Biology, will lead the research, which focuses on a group of protein hormones and their receptors which are implicated in blood cell cancers such as leukaemia and inflammatory diseases for which current treatments are inadequate.
Prof Lopez's research will help Australia develop new drugs which are more specific to cancers such as leukaemia, and have fewer side effects.
The program funding is spread over five years starting in 2010 and will support the Centre, which has about 120 staff.
The Rudd Government will also make available through Cancer Australia a total of $1.9 million of funding for four national cancer clinical trials groups.
The funding  -  part of the Rudd Government's $20 million investment in clinical cancer trials over the next two years through the Support for Cancer Clinical Trials and Boost Cancer Research programs  -  will allow three established clinical trials groups to continue their important work in sarcoma, neuro-oncology and children's haematology/oncology research. It has also funded the establishment of a new Primary Care Cooperative Cancer Clinical Trials Group to focus on prevention, detection and care of people with cancer.
Clinical trials build evidence on the best ways to improve the outcomes for people with cancer and contribute to a reduction of premature death and disability.
Cancer is a major killer in this country, leading to the death of nearly 40,000 Australians each year.
Medical and clinical trials research is part of our continuing commitment to improve outcomes for Australians affected by cancer.
The Rudd Government has set in place substantial strategies to combat cancer and to better care and support for people living with cancer, including:
• $87.4 million over three years for a national bowel cancer screening program;
• $50 million over three years to establish a Comprehensive Cancer Centre in Sydney;
• $31 million over five years to subsidise breast prostheses for women who have undergone mastectomy as a result of breast cancer; 
• $15 million over five years to set up two dedicated prostate cancer research centres;
• $15 million over two years for construction of a purpose-built Children's Cancer Centre at the Women's and Children's Hospital in Adelaide;
• $15 million over three years for better support for people living with cancer  -  through new youth cancer networks;
• $12 million through the McGrath Foundation for breast care nurses in 44 locations;
The Rudd Government is confident that its coordinated effort, working in cooperation with the States and Territories, researchers, funders of cancer research, universities, policy makers and people affected by cancer will provide lasting benefits for all Australians.


Your Excellency Governor Marie Bashir, Administrator of the Commonwealth  -  which makes you Marie, my boss. So I promise very much to behave. At least for this week.
And to Nick. To Premier Nathan Rees. To Karen and other members of Bernie's family. It's good to see you all here. You've grown hair since I last saw you. It's much longer. Good to see you mate.
And brothers, his family, his friends, work colleagues, all those suffering from asbestos-related diseases.
Bob Carr, and I would reinforce entirely every word entirely of what Nathan just said. Bob demonstrated real leadership in taking that mob on. That's what it was, taking that mob on and prevailing. And I think that is a great achievement.
Professor Nico, our welcome guest from the Kingdom of the Netherlands. And may you long reside with us.
John Murphy, our local Federal Member, a Parliamentary Secretary in the Federal Government. Senator Doug Cameron I think is here as well and distinguished guests one and all.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as the oldest continuing culture in human history.
I walked in here just a minute ago and one thing struck me, and that was that photograph. He's looking at us as he looks at us still. Staring into our hearts and staring into our souls and asking this deep and searching question: are you buggers fair dinkum? That's what he is saying to us.
You know that face is an extraordinary face. It is a face which speaks of suffering. A face which speaks of strength. A face which speaks loud and clear and with resonance and with compassion. And that's why he leaves such an indelible imprint on all of us. All of us.
You know, I only met Bernie a few times during the course of 2007. And each time you met him you took something else away. I mean I felt as though I was being pastored to rather than doing the pastoring. And other people have had this experience as well.
He was an extraordinary bloke. And this country, Australia, is the richer for him. And it continues to be the richer for him and the celebration of his memory.
Today history was also made and lived in the United States with the inauguration of the first African American President in the history of that great American democracy.
This is a great moment not just for the people of America but for all people around the world who believe in democracy, who believe in freedom, who believe in progress, and who believe in fairness.
The United States of America is one of Australia's closest and our most important ally. And the passing of the presidency from President Bush to President Obama is another link in the chain that ties our two nations together.
President Obama today became the 13th President of the United States to become joint-custodian of the Australia-United States Alliance. Thirteen US Presidents, 13 Australian Prime Ministers have now served and strengthened this alliance. An alliance that transcends governments of whichever political persuasion and links our two great people and our two great nations.
From Roosevelt, from Curtin, across two-thirds of a century, uniting two great peoples in a common mission of hope, of freedom, of fairness, of progress.
President Obama's message of hope is a message that resonates not just across the continent of the United States but across Australia and across the globe. Hope is the fuel of progress. Hope is the fuel of human progress, and the fuel of human progress throughout our human history.
And President Obama's message of progress, fuelled by that hope and achieved by hard work, has rarely been a message as prescient as it is, given the challenges of today.
Economic storm clouds are on the horizon. The task of tackling climate change lies before us. As allies we share great challenges in Afghanistan and beyond. But in President Obama I say this, Australia will have a friend and an ally to shoulder these challenges together.
To mark this historic day I'll be writing to President Obama on behalf of the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, to offer him our congratulations and to offer him our support in shouldering these challenges of the future, together.
Today we honour the memory of this great Australian Bernie Banton in opening the world's first dedicated asbestos research centre.
This centre has just one purpose - to improve the lives of asbestos victims and their families through new inventive treatments and solutions to asbestos related diseases. The centre's work is important for the lives of every person whose exposure to asbestos, however small, has resulted years later in asbestos-related diseases.
I believe Bernie would be proud of everything that we are doing here today. Bernie was a true believer. Bernie was a true believer from central casting. Bernie was a fighter. Bernie was a prize fighter. Bernie was an Australian through and through.
He never gave up in fighting for a fair go for the asbestos workers and their families. A fair go from James Hardie, for a fair go in getting access to good and decent medical care for all who needed it.
Because of Bernie's tireless efforts, many more Australians are now aware of the terrible nature of asbestos-related diseases such as mesothelioma. But few of aware of just how this incidence is rising.
Every year around 600 Australians are diagnosed with asbestos-related diseases, of which 350 occur here in NSW. Next year around 750 Australians will be diagnosed with asbestos-related diseases.
These are bad figures. The incidence of these diseases is rising because it takes decades from the time of exposure to the time of diagnosis of the disease. By 2020 it is estimated Australia will have 13,000 cases of mesothelioma, and a further 40,000 people will have contracted asbestos-related cancer. These are very bad figures.
All kinds of Australians can receive the diagnosis of an asbestos-related disease. Of course many of those who contract these diseases were exposed at work, especially in asbestos production.
Some were full time factory workers, others just students or casual workers doing a summer-time job. Some may be once, maybe a few times inhaled a few of those deadly fibres, like the wives or mums who shook out and washed the dusty worker's clothes.
And others were just kids having fun playing around on a building site in their street or in their backyard when renovations were being done and there were building materials lying around.
These were just honest Australians. These were just innocent Australians. These were just working Australians, supporting their families, supporting themselves. Doing no harm to anybody but great harm was done to them. Working Australians whose lives and whose families' lives were changed forever because of a few tiny fibres breathed in some 20 or 30 years ago.
I am proud and we are proud to have known well one of those victims - the bloke we honour today in the naming of this new research institute.
The establishment of this centre is a major boost to the research into asbestos-related diseases conducted here on the Concord Hospital Campus where Bernie was treated. I am pleased that the Asbestos Disease Research Institute has recruited Professor van Zandwijk, an internationally renowned thoracic oncologist and asbestos researcher to lead the centre's work.
You're a welcome guest in our country.
The Australian Government is committed to being a partner in the national efforts to improve the diagnosis and treatment of asbestos-related diseases.
From 2007 the Government has provided $6.2 million over three years to the National Research Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases, which links together 11 asbestos research centres around Australia.
Last month the Government announced $2.5 million from 2010 for the establishment of a Centre of Research Excellence into Asbestos-Related Disease. The Government has also announced the Bernie Banton Asbestos-Research Fellowship, to support an eminent researcher working in the area of mesothelioma or asbestos-related diseases.
To build on these initiatives I'm pleased to announce today that the Commonwealth will contribute $5 million to support the Bernie Banton Centre's final fit-out costs and to provide a dedicated research facility.
Asbestos carries a terrible human toll. And it is important for the Commonwealth to partner in national efforts to improve treatment which will give hope to the victims of asbestos related diseases.
Let me say a few more things about Bernie and some of the things that he stood for, and the movement which supported him through it all. Bernie Banton was a union man. Bernie Banton was about the rights of working people. Bernie Banton was about jobs for working people.
The truth is 2009 will be one of the toughest years Australia's faced in decades as the global financial crisis wreaks havoc on Australian jobs.
The financial crisis began in the sub-prime mortgage market in the United States. But because of the excesses with the extreme capitalism it has now spread across the world. This statistics are bad. But the human reality behind those statistics is much, much worse. Every job that is lost is a person or a family anxious about how bills will be paid, how children or dependents will be cared for, how they can contribute to society without a job.
We're all in this together, each and every one of us. This crisis was not of Australia's making. Let me tell you the Government of Australia will be at it day and night to respond with strength and determination in dealing with it. The Government's been up front about the fact that Australia will be affected. Growth will slow, unemployment will rise. And given the deteriorating global outlook we must acknowledged that conditions could even get worse.
Already we've seen job cuts at many Australian major corporations. And many small businesses are also finding it tough to keep their staff employed. In the coming year it's jobs that matters most, because the global financial crisis has been the destroyer of jobs and Australian jobs.
I simply say this to you and to the nation. In the year which unfolds, I don't intend to gild the lily one bit. What I intend to do is to be upfront about the impact of this global financial crisis on the economy and on jobs all the way through. I intend to be upfront with the Australian nation about what we are doing and intend to do about it. The great thing about Australia, the great thing about a bloke like him, is that we come through tough times together.
Bernie Banton. You know something, he meant a lot to those of us who met him for a time. But for those for whom he was a loved member of family, husband, dad, grandfather, and others, he was something much deeper. He was a dad, grandfather, husband, mate. For the rest of us he was also an Australian hero. You know, he was a hero in an age where we've now come to believe that there weren't any heroes anymore. Bernie proved all those cynics wrong. He's one of them.
He was in so many ways, some would say, an ordinary Aussie bloke. But an ordinary bloke with an extraordinary heart, and an extraordinary resolve, an extraordinary strength, an extraordinary determination. A man who just didn't spend years battling his own diseases, horrible as they were, but who also lost his brother Ted from mesothelioma. He lost many of his mates and also saw his brother Albert contract asbestosis.
Yet Bernie never became bitter. Through his darkest days he stayed full of fight and full of life. He never stopped thinking of how he could help those who suffered from these devastating diseases. To make sure they'd have support and help in those long years they'd spend battling declining health. And to make sure their families weren't left with nothing after their loved one had gone.
Bernie was as tough as nails. He had to be to keep up the fight campaigning across the country and in and out of court cases, year after year. I still don't know how he did it. I still don't know how he could front each day and take up the fight. Any of you who had been sick at anytime, think about the national preoccupations of life. How do I physically get through the day? How do I mentally get through the day? And then, okay it's time to front in court to take on the other mob. What an extraordinary quality that this bloke had. Extraordinary. Anytime you feel sorry for yourself, have a look at this bloke's life. Extraordinary.
Many of you here today stood alongside Bernie through his long battle. And for those, too numerous to name in this gathering, I would salute your continued solidarity with him through to the end. The political level, the union level, of course his family, his mates and his loved ones.
As I said before my own association with Bernie was fairly short, just a few meetings during the course of 2007. I remember sending him greetings on election night 2007. Those meetings left me with a strong and lasting impression of this man of great courage, determination and heart. And one of my earliest duties after being elected Prime Minister, and one of my saddest, was to attend his funeral.
Yet ultimately, Bernie's life was about hope. It's about how you can make things different. How you can make them better. Not sit around and mope and wallow, do what circumstances may cause you to conclude you can only do. Bernie was elsewhere engaged. How can I make this better? If not for me, then for a whole bunch of other people. That's what marks him out there in that extraordinary column of human beings that make a difference.
You couldn't help but be with him and not be inspired by him. He took everything life could throw at him and yet at the end he was still standing tall. That's why Bernie caught the nation's imagination, something we saw in the extraordinary response to his death in November of that year. And I believe Bernie will long be remembered as one of the great Australians of our times.
I would like to congratulate everyone who's been part of making possible the vision of this dedicated research facility. In particular the University of Sydney. The ANZAC Research Institute. The Government of New South Wales. The Dust Diseases Board and Concord Hospital. As well as Bob Carr, who I referred to before. Each of whom, each of which, has played a key role in supporting and funding and building this centre.
I listened carefully to what the Professor had to say before about the motto - informal or formal I'm not sure of this new centre  -  ‘join forces'. I think that's a good motto because when you're dealing with a disease as insidious like this, it's across the spectrum. Translational research taking an observation of a patient through to how we conduct a clinical research and laboratory about what the patient exhibits, back to the patient for further trial, and then through to a better outcome.
I plied the Professor before with key and searching questions about how long it will take till we get to the cause of this thing and to a cure of it. These are tough things and scientists hate those questions posed by politicians.
But you know something? The job of all governments is to get behind you. What we've done today is volume one. You need more - come back to us. This is important stuff.
It's important because it affects working people everywhere, here and around the world. And it's important because this bloke taught us it was important. I thank you.


The Rudd Government will contribute $5 million to the new Bernie Banton Centre, the world's first dedicated asbestos research institute.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd made the announcement at the opening of the Centre, a major co-development between the NSW Government and the ANZAC Research Institute at Concord Hospital in Sydney.
The federal government contribution will go towards the final fit-out costs of the Centre, also known as the Asbestos Disease Research Institute.
The Centre honours Bernie Banton, a man of exceptional decency and humility who stayed full of life and fight during his darkest days, battling to help and support victims of mesothelioma and asbestos-related disease.
The establishment of the Centre is a major boost to research conducted on the Concord Hospital campus, where Bernie Banton was treated.
Its work will be complemented by the ongoing work of the National Research Centre for Asbestos-Related Diseases (NRCARD), which links together 11 research centres around Australia.
It will also work alongside the future Centre of Research Excellence into Asbestos-Related Disease, which will be established from 2010 with $2.5 million in federal funds to support world-class research.
The Rudd Government has also previously announced the establishment of a Bernie Banton Asbestos Research Fellowship under the National Health and Medical Research Centre fellowship program for researchers of renown.
Mesothelioma is a cancer, and is usually fatal. It typically occurs 20 to 30 years after exposure to asbestos.
By 2020, it is estimated that Australia will have 13,000 cases of mesothelioma and a further 40,000 cases of asbestos-related cancer.
The Rudd Government recognises that those suffering asbestos-related disease face enormous challenges.
The Bernie Banton Centre at Concord Hospital will promote prevention and education about asbestos-related disease in Australia and throughout the Asian region.


Thank you David. And to all my parliamentary and ministerial colleagues and Dick Adams, Julie Collins, Duncan Kerr, Carol Brown. Others from the State parliament, friends one and all.
It's great to be here in Tasmania, in the lead-up to Australia Day.
I'm doing something a little different this year, which hasn't been done in past years. And that is as we move to Australia Day itself, to get around to each of the State capitals and to participate in celebrations with local people.
I'll be in Melbourne this afternoon, I was in Adelaide the day before and I was in Sydney the day before that. I'll be getting around, including Brisbane, where I come from and then over to Perth.
Because you know something? This nation of ours is bigger than the nation's capital. It's writ large and it's writ deep and it's writ broad in the lives and the experiences of Australians across this vast continent. That's why it's so good to be here.
I'd like to thank David for his inspiring oration. I notice that baby Sophie then went to sleep.
I think that was in anticipation of my speech. She's a sweetheart.
And for the other proud parents of young bubs, the half a million Tasmanians, that's a great league to be in. This will be a time when they look back at the bub photographs on their 21st birthday and say I was there at an important point of this State's history and its future.
It's also good to be here in Australia's oldest backyard. I was given a potted history of where we are as I walked in. These Commissariat Stores behind me were built in 1808, the oldest, I'm advised, public building, the oldest building, the oldest remaining building in any capital city in Australia. It's extraordinary, just extraordinary.
And as David rightly reminds us Australia Day involves other reflections as well. And I begin my remarks by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The great thing about Australia Day is we reflect on our strengths as a people, as a society, as a nation. Where we've come from and where we hope to take our nation to.
And if you look across this vast land of ours and begin to reflect for a moment on its absolute diversity in terms of where we've all come from, the parts of the world from which we've come, the backgrounds from which we've come and yet together we've forged a nation for a continent; a continent for a nation. This is an extraordinary achievement for peoples who have come from every part of God's earth.
My own forebears are almost 100 per cent convict. We didn't make it to Port Arthur but obviously came from straitened circumstances when they landed here. And if we reflect on the convict history of Australia, whether it is at Sydney Cover or Port Arthur or our other convict settlements around the country, these were harsh and bleak times. Harsh and bleak times also for indigenous Australians. Harsh and bleak times for those who tried to craft the continent out of the bare earth.
But it says something about the resilience of Australians that we did it. We came through this; we built this great nation which is the envy of the world.
There is a tolerance and a decency about this country which we rarely find in other parts of the world. There is a strength, there is an individualism, there is a determination, there is a character about this country which is something of which we should be collectively proud.
We don't simply rely upon others to do things for us; we get out there and do things for ourselves. But at the same time, alive in our hearts and alive in our history, alive in our personality as a people is also this character on which says, ‘if my neighbour is in strife, let me do something to help my neighbour'.
In other words what we call giving every person a fair go. Giving everyone a hand up. Helping when our fellow Australians are in need.
David said before and he is right, that as we embark upon this year 2009, we're embarking upon what may be one of the most troubled years of our age.
As we look around the world and we the unfolding events of the global economic crisis, these are grave, these are broad, these are deep forces. The crisis which began in the mortgage markets of America, which now have spread to every economy, every society and virtually every community across the world.
And this will test us. Every one of us. It will test governments, national and state. It will test our businesses, it will test our unions, it will test our communities, it will test our basic sense of solidarity.
So that when someone loses their job - and they have, and they will - our job is not just to, our responsibility is not just to see that person as a statistic. Our responsibility is to reach out and help. At the level of Government, at the level of community and at the level of being someone's neighbour.
That's what being Australian is about. The job we have as a nation, as we confront this global economic crisis in a nutshell is this. As the private economy goes through a period of contraction and withdrawal across the world, the job of Government is to do everything humanly possible to fill that gap, to fill that space, in the economic activity of our nation. That is the challenge.
You see in recent times the private economy has not been served well by the unregulated nature of global financial markets. You had extreme capitalism, you had market fundamentalism and we had extreme greed and excess.
And we've seen what has happened with all of that as it's washed down from Wall Street in the United States across the entire globe. And it's an ugly thing to see. It's a very ugly thing to see.
So Governments' charge and challenge is to step into the breach and that is the charge and challenge we have as leaders of Government. This will not be easy. It will not be easy for anybody.
But as we reflect on the challenges we face and the concerns and the anxiety and the fear which people experience and feel right now, let us equally reflect on the course of actions that will see Australia through.
Let us equally reflect on the strengths we have as an economy, as a community, as a society, as a nation. Because our reality today is made up of all these things, there are things that are going wrong.
I intend to be on this day as I have been last year and throughout the year ahead, upfront and direct with the Australian people about how difficult the challenges will be but equally upfront and direct about the course of action that we intend to prosecute as a Government, to see this nation through. And we will.
One part of that challenge is this. How do you stabilise credit markets? Our actions to provide guarantees for bank deposits, our actions to guarantee inter-bank lending of our principal banks, so that they have sufficient flow of credit themselves to on-lend to Australian businesses.
It has been and remains a core part of the challenge to unblock the flow of the blood through the arteries of the economy and that is the provision of credit. And we have more to do.
But also to looks at the rules that govern financial markets for the future and to change them and to say that the days of casino capitalism have gone. We need to have a decent set of rules for the future so that this sort of crisis is not visited on people again. That's the second part of our strategy.
And the third is this. Through the agency of Government and what we do to provide a helping hand to families who need it and to invest in the infrastructure that we need as a nation for the 21st century to step into the breach.
We've begun that. From last year to now the national Government has announced some $36 billion worth of additional measures. $36 billion worth of additional measures.
A $10.4 billion stimulus package, a $6 billion new car plan, a $5 billion infrastructure plan for roads, for infrastructure, for rail and for our universities and for our TAFEs. And a $15 billion new partnership of additional investment with the States, to invest in our teachers, to invest in our nurses, to invest in other critical service areas. $300 million direct investment to our local authorities to assist them in doing the job which they have been elected as well.
I say to you as my fellow Australians, this is the beginning. We have more to do.
There are two courses of action, you know, available at a time like this. For Government to stand to one side as the free market fundamentalists would have us believe and wash our hands and say ‘not for me, don't have a job to do, let the market sort it out'.
There is another approach which says that active Government is the way through this. It won't be easy, it will be ugly from time to time. But we have a course of action to see Australia through.
That is made more possible be an extraordinary event we witnessed yesterday. The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President of the United States. What an extraordinary event for the world.
But with Barack Obama's election we also see this, the rebirth of American global leadership.
Because what we do in Australia for us and our economy and our communities and the challenge of joblessness which is there, staring us in the face, what we do as a Government and as a community is important. It is critical. It is stepping into the breach.
But unless that is harnessed by the combined agency of Governments around the world, then we cannot finally prevail. And that's where this new American President and his message of hope for the global economy and the global community is of such strong resonance and importance to us all.
I look forward to working with this President. America's global leadership is now more important than it has been for a generation and more. And with him in the White House, understanding full well the depths of the challenge which he has inherited and understanding that this is not just a challenge of the American domestic economy but a challenge which as a consequence of failures in the American economy is now for us a challenge for the economy of the world..
I have confidence that in him we're going to have leadership, policy and execution which will enable the world to come through this crisis as well.
So times will be tough, challenges ahead but my message also to each of you here today as we begin to think about the celebration of our National Day, is this. Be mindful of the pressures we face, be mindful of the strengths we have but beyond all that never ever allow our spirits to be crushed.
Confidence in ourselves, confidence in our community, confidence in our State, confidence in our nation, confidence in our businesses, this is critical to preserve. As important for the future as the objective things which governments themselves do.
So David, thanks for having me here to your barbie. Thanks for having me here at your archaeological site for your barbie. Thank you for all the proud mums and dads of these new additions to your fair State. Each of them one and all prospective taxpayers. So look after them mate. Nurture them well.
But I say to you all as members of the great Tasmanian family and therefore members of the Great Australian family, let's go forth with confidence this year, weather the challenges together because we are all in this together.


Distinguished Australians one and all. And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We reflect on that for one moment - the oldest continuing cultures in human history. What an extraordinary privilege it is for those of us who arrived in recent times, to share this continent with our Indigenous brothers and sisters.
Those from around the world look in wonder and awe at this fact, that we have among us this living link to deepest antiquity. I think people in this country often overlook that fact. Those around the world often have a deeper and broader perspective.
Mention was just made at the fact that it is not yet a year since the apology to the Stolen Generations was delivered. That apology was just the start. It is the start of a long, broad and big road to national reconciliation. A long, broad and deep road about closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. It will be a hard road. It will have many pitfalls. But the good news is this, we have begun to walk that road together. And we're going to walk it, and we're going to walk it through.
As I listened today to the beautiful voice of Deborah Cheetham and I was so moved by the beauty of her voice and her art, it reminded me again of the depth and breadth of this enterprise we have called reconciliation. It is about saying sorry. It is about closing the gap in very practical ways. It is equally about all of us as Australians comfortably owning our wonderful Indigenous heritage, comfortably owning our wonderful Indigenous heritage. Being charged and challenged by its art, being charged and challenged by its music, being charged and challenged by its spirituality. And all these things, fashioning and shaping, something new and I believe potentially quite wonderful in this land called Australia.
Australia Day, we'll look at the diversity. This morning I've been in Hobart at a breakfast, cooking snags with the Premier. Today I am here and tonight I am in Brissie. And the wonderful thing as I travel around the nation is to again, sample and see how out of the enormous diversity of this land Australia we have fashioned a nation, a continent for a nation, a nation for a continent.
And we have come from all over. Every part of God's earth. Yet when we have come here there's been something which has been binding and fusing about the sentiment of this place which is, whatever our differences great and small, there is a bout of character which is this  -  built on respect, built on tolerance, built on looking after one another, and about this thing called fashioning a common destiny for us all.
For in all this diversity there is unity. In things essential, unity, in things non-essential, diversity. And in all things, this community called Australia. It is a wonderful country. And if you travel around the world as so many people in this room do, you could come again to these shores and recognise how truly wonderful it is.
What I have done this last few days and in the week leading up to Australia Day is a bit different. Normally, Australia Day I am told, as you occupy the Office of the Prime Minister and are handed your brief on Australia Day, consists of the following: get up out of bed; go to Australia Day reception in and around Parliament House, Canberra; come home and have reception at Lodge in Canberra; go to bed. Therese and I thought we would do it differently.
And so what we've done this week and Therese has been with me for part of it and is here today in Melbourne as well, is each day in the week leading up to Australia Day to spend some time in each of our state capitals and to spend some time with local communities such as we have here and gathered in this marvellous ballroom here in Melbourne, talking and reflecting for a moment on our triumphs past, our tragedies past, but also our destiny ahead. And it has been good and an honour for me so to do these last several days.
And today to be here in Melbourne, this is a marvellous city. I say that with all the inbuilt objectivity of a Queenslander. This is a truly wonderful place. Therese is a little bias, she did a fair bit of her schooling here but I forgive her for that. As you wonder these streets and you sample its culture, what you see here is a truly marvellous city, a jewel in the crown of the nation - its architecture, its intellectual depth, its cultural life, its dynamism. This is a great city and yours is a great contribution to the nation.
I wander its streets - and my habit unlike my predecessor is not to don the green and gold and wander of the morning, but to much less obtrusively or shall I say more unobtrusively, wander around of an evening and go for a walk - and just to see this city lit up at night, it is a beautiful place. And Lord Mayor, I'm looking to you to keep it that way.
In his inauguration speech yesterday, President Obama spoke of the impact of the great economic crisis which washes across the world. He spoke of jobs lost. He spoke of businesses shutted. And these things are true, not just in America, for what began in America has now been extended across the world. Every economy, every country, every community on earth. People are anxious, people are concerned, people are afraid. And these things are true because the consequences of which we speak are real.
But what is equally true is the strengths with which we as a nation have. What is equally true is the strengths which we as an economy have. And what is equally true is the strengths with which we as a people have. Deep strengths of resilience. And strength also in the course of action that we have now embarked upon to see this nation through, to see Australia through this crisis and to have an Australia even more resilient through the burnishing and testing of this crisis.
But the strength that we have as a nation and the policy that we have formed as a Government are enhanced by something new, something intangible but something profoundly real.
I speak here of the rebirth of American leadership. President Obama spoke directly of that which others have hinted at obliquely in recent times and he said, and I quote him, “less measurable but no less profound, is the sapping of confidence across our land. A nagging fear that America's decline is inevitable.”
So said the President in his inaugural. But then, both in the content of his address, in the strength of his character and equally by the very fact of his election, the President demonstrated once again America's great capacity for renewal.
The world needs American leadership now more than ever before. The world needs American strength now more than ever before. The world needs American resolve now more than ever before. For America to harness the great power of its economy, for America to harvest the great energy of its democracy, for America to draw from the great well of its essential decency.
For America, a leadership in deliberation of policy that is consultative and not unilateral. And a leadership that still in the execution of that policy is resolute and unwavering.
For again I say today what I have said so often throughout my public career. America remains an overwhelming force for good in the world. It has been so in the past. It will be so in the future. And that force is now needed more than ever before.
We see now the rebirth of US global leadership across the full spectrum of challenges we collectively face. In security policy, a clear message to terrorism. In foreign policy, the hand of friendship extended to the Muslim world. In development and new commitment, to the poorest of the poor, across the poorest nations of the world. In climate change where American leadership has been so lacking for so long, now a new and vital engagement. And critically, most critically now, the global economy - the re-stimulation of the American economy, the proper regulation of financial markets, the reform of the international financial institutions. And equally global engagement with the other major emerging economies, including those of China and India in rebuilding this global economy.
Because the message for the world is a message for us all here in Australia. We are all in this together. We are all in this together - within Australia, across the world.
What America does is crucial. What Europe does is crucial. What China does is crucial. What China does is not just crucial in terms of aggregate global demand as one of the world's largest surplus economies, it is doubly critical for Australia.
China is now stimulating its domestic demand, of vital importance to its own growth given the collapse of American and European export orders. But vital also for taking exports, more exports from America, from Europe and from others in order to contribute more broadly to global economic recovery.
The stakes for Australia are doubly high. Consider this. China's growth projection for 2009 has fallen by $US 200 billion, about one third of the entire size of the Australian economy. And that means a massive $5 billion fall immediately in Australian exports. Just because of China alone, and with a $5 billion consequential impact on Australian jobs.
We are all in this together. China's economic recovery therefore is as important for Australia's recovery as it is for America's recovery. 
The good thing about the lines of America's response to the current crisis is that there are now so many parallels with our own. President Obama's rejection of free market fundamentalism. To quote the President again, “the question before us”, he said yesterday, “is not whether the market is a force for good or ill, it's power to generate wealth and expand freedom is of course unmatched. But the crisis has reminded us that without a watchful eye, the market can spin out of control. And the nation cannot prosper long if it favours only the prosperous.”
This parallels our approach, this Government's approach here in Australia. The days of extreme capitalism and unrestrained greed must be gone forever.
The dimensions of the crisis are truly global. The dimensions of our policy response must also be equally global.
There are four essential elements to the global response to the crisis. First, governments around the world must act to restore the stability of the financial system, so that access to credit improves. Credit flows have been devastated by the worst disruptions to financial markets since the Great Depression. According to the Bank of England's latest financial stability report, the global financial system is digesting mark to market losses on debt instruments of about $2.8 trillion, $2.8 trillion.
And the combined impact of a lack of liquidity in falling asset values has caused more than 30 financial institutions around the world to collapse, or to require rescuing through partial nationalisation or full nationalisation. As banks suffer, so too does private credit, credit which is essential to support businesses to operate and grow, and to support household consumption.
In recent months, global credit markets have all but dried up with credit growth at its lowest levels since the Second World War.
And 2009 as it begins, it becomes clear that financial markets are continuing to deteriorate. Around the world the December quarter bank reporting season exposed more losses and write downs. Merrill Lynch, Bank of America, Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, the numbers in each breathtaking. In response to expected losses by its banks, the British Government has acted in the last week to provide another 350 billion pounds of assistance as part of a new bailout package. This is in addition to the 500 billion pounds package announced by the British Government in October.
Around the world, governments are implementing a range of complimentary policies to support the banking system, including injections of capitals as well as measures to take toxic assets off balance sheets. These are unprecedented measures by national governments, amounting to the effective nationalisation of large parts of the banking system, as well as a massive risk transfer to the state. Beyond immediate stabilisation, the world must also face up to the need of radically reforming global financial markets.
The prevailing neo-liberal orthodoxy that has dominated financial market regulations over the last several decades held that global financial markets would ultimately self correct. The invisible hand of unfettered free market forces would find their own equilibrium.
As Joseph Stiglitz, the renowned American economist, has caustically observed, the reason the invisible hand often seems invisible is that often it is not there. Financial markets have not self corrected. The state has been called in. The state has been called in.
Governments now realise that in response to this crisis, nations must work together to craft consistent global financial regulations. We must establish stronger global disclosure standards for systemically important financial institutions. We must also build stronger supervisory frameworks to provide incentives for more responsible corporate conduct, including executive remuneration.
Third we must take this opportunity to reform existing global public institutions, in particular the International Monetary Fund. The IMF must be provided with the powers and with the resources necessary to act effectively in the current crisis, with the various national economies, particularly emerging economies that will be badly affected by the crisis. Further, the IMF's authority to undertake prudential analysis must be expanded and its early warning system for institutional vulnerabilities enhanced. And its governance arrangements must be reformed. It makes no sense for the governance structure of the global financial system today, to reflect the balance of power as it existed in 1944 when the IMF was established.
The fourth element of the global response is of course to deal with the whole challenge of stimulating the global economy through macro-economic policy. The cost of failing to intervene as a government, and not stimulating the economy, would be extraordinary. Former Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom has encouraged governments around the world to spend saying that governments should do whatever it takes to get the blood pumping back around the financial system again.
This Government will not sit on its hands while Australians lose their jobs, superannuation, and house values. We will act to get the blood pumping around the economy again. That is what stimulus is all about.
Here at home, the Government has sought to act decisively to strengthen the Australian economy at this time of unprecedented external duress.
There have been four key dimensions to our response. We have acted to support and to stabilise our own financial markets, firstly guarantees to retail deposits in Australian banks, to underpin confidence.
Second, maintaining liquidity in our financial system by legislating for an increase in future issuance of government bonds, by up to 25 billion. Third, acting to protect financial institutions from predatory speculators by introducing a ban on short-selling on financial markets, and yesterday taking a decision to extent that temporary ban on short-selling of financial stocks.
Four, supporting competition and liquidity in the mortgage market through the purchase of $8 billion of residential mortgage backed securities. And five, reaching agreement finally with the states on the reform of the regulation of credit across Australia with a seamless, national regulatory framework for the future.
In each of these areas, Australia has acted early. Often anticipating events. But one of greater short term challenges is to help support credit. Second, linked to financial stability, the Government is acting to restore credit flows in the private economy of Australia. This is of fundamental importance. Credit flows are the blood which flows through the arteries of the economy to enable businesses to continue to invest or to sustain their existing investments.
The availability of credit is essential for the health of business. It's essential there for the health of households and the health of employment. Total credit in Australia today is $1.9 trillion. Nearly one trillion of that is housing. Over three quarters of a trillion is for business and about $150 billion is for other personal lending. ABS data in November showed that growth in Australian private credit has halved from a year ago.
The slowing in credit growth is evident across all of the sectors  -  housing, business and other personal credit. To ensure that Australian banks have funds to lend, the Government took a historic decision, October 12, to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The Government's decision has helped to soothe financial markets. We have seen an immediate effect in the wholesale guarantee. As the global financial crisis deepened in September 2008, there was increasing difficulty in raising funds offshore. By September, their raising had fallen to $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
In October there were no raisings at all. The guarantee that we introduced had an immediate effect. By December offshore raising was back to $15.4 billion, the highest in the past few years and this was all guaranteed by government guarantees.
Had we not done so, the consequences would have been extraordinary. In January 2009, this amount has already grown to $19.8 billion. Domestic raising almost all of it again using the Government guarantee, has also recovered, domestic raisings for $7.7 billion in December and $6.4 billion so far in January, again the highest in recent years.
This increase in the bank bond issuance is positive for Australia. It will give our domestic banks much needed funds to support lending in Australia. The Australian economy is global in nature and therefore limited, therefore effected by the health of global banks as well as the impact of those banks on Australian banks.
Some cash strapped foreign banks are scaling back their lending in foreign markets, including Australia. If banks do not allow credit to refinance, as they would in normal conditions, then companies can be forced to sell assets, often at very low value. This endangers their financial health and the financial health of the entire economy.
According to Merrill Lynch, lending by overseas banks represents more than half of the $285 billion in syndicated loans that have been issued to Australian businesses since 2006. Of those outstanding loans, $75 billion is scheduled to fall due over the next couple of years. If foreign banks do not roll over their share of these loans, it will be difficult for Australia's four major banks to fill the gap on their own.
A significant share of this is in the commercial property sector.
Foreign banks have more than $45 billion in exposure to Australian commercial property, around 28.5 per cent of total bank lending to the sector. The supply of credit, foreign and domestic to real businesses in Australia effects real jobs. Everything is related to everything else.
As the global financial crisis effects banks around the world, some foreign banks are seeking to reduce their exposures. And there is a risk of some not rolling over their existing credit to Australian businesses.
The Australian Government, in partnership with the major banks has been working through this challenge in recent weeks and months. And we continue to work on this challenge in close partnership with those banks. And we intend to do whatever is necessary to continue to support the flow of private credit to the Australian economy.
Alongside these efforts, the Government is also engaged in the other arm of policy and that is through fiscal stimulus supporting total demand. What we have sought to do through the measures we have announced is to combine the need to stimulate the economy now as well as build the infrastructure that we need for tomorrow.
That is the right approach - supporting growth, supporting jobs and building productivity for the future. That underpinned the decision we took late last year in support of a special $4.6 billion announcement of infrastructure, much of which, or part of which flowed through here, to the state of Victoria.
There is more to be done. The Government's determination on the question of stimulus for infrastructure is again to do what is ever necessary to continue to support growth and jobs in these difficult global circumstances.
The twin goals again: jobs in the short term, supporting where we can; and productivity the long term through building the infrastructure we need for the 21st Century. These are the challenges we face and these are those we intend to embrace in the period ahead.
This is just the beginning. 2009 will test us all. It will test Governments, national, state and local. It will test unions, it will test businesses, it will test families, it will test individuals, it will test community and charitable organisations. It will test the very fabric of who we are as a people and as a nation.
The good thing about this country is that we are a resilient lot and we do, consistent with our best instincts, look out for one another. We are all in this together, every one of us. Australia did not cause this crisis. This crisis came from abroad. But Australia must now deal with this crisis, as we have been.
As Prime Minister my intention is to continue as I did last year, which is to speak straight and direct to the Australian people about two things: the level of the problem we face, as well as the strengths that we have and the strategy to see Australia through this crisis as well.
This, I believe is the necessary element of leadership required in helping navigate Australia through these difficult times. Franklin Delano Roosevelt once said he didn't believe on what he described as the ‘bally-ho' school of politics. That is, bally-hoeing people into believing that they should be confident when there is nothing to be confident about.
What I believe and what FDR believed in is this: realistic hope, realistic optimism, realistic confidence. And for that to have content and substance and deliverability, key elements of decisions must underpin them. That is why we have acted to stabilise financial markets. That is why we have acted to inject stimulus into the economy. That is why we are acting to invest in the infrastructure of the 21st century. And that is why we will take whatever decisions are necessary to underpin those goals in this difficult year which lies ahead.
Confidence, confidence is key. Getting it right in policy, getting it right in the projects we support, in laying out the roads and rail systems, the ports, the upgrades, the broadband, the schools, the universities, the Tafe colleges, the hospitals  -  all those things that this Government will be embarking upon to build in the year ahead, that is one part of it.
But the other part of it lies here. It lies in the attitude. It lies in the spirit. It lies in the confidence of the people, and that is where we have all got a role to play. Together, as we are all in this together, we will see Australia through.
[ends]


PM: Can I say it's great to be here in Tasmania in the lead up to Australia Day. So much of our nation's early history, early settled history is here in this great state. And one of the great things about Tasmania and its economy is how grounded it is, in our national tourism industry. All industries are doing it tough at present with the global financial crisis. Many Australians have been holidaying at home, that is good. But when we look at this state and what it has to offer in terms of richness, of historical tourism sites, as well as the beautiful natural heritage of Tasmania, there's so much on offer.
It's been good to see here this morning at the Museum of Tasmania and the Art Gallery, there plans for future expansion. I'm sure that will go through the decision making processes with the Government in Hobart and in Canberra. But these are the sorts of projects which governments over time need to get behind. You know why? It's good for the economy in terms of building things. It's good for the economy in terms of tourism. And it's good for Australia because it preserves and enhances our heritage.
The other thing I say is this. Being in Tasmania with the Premier and with our local members, underlines the importance of every level of government pulling together and responding to the challenge of the global financial crisis. And this is a challenge as I said before which applies to governments national, governments states, governments local. Through the COAG agreements we've sought to provide additional investment through the states, for teachers, for nurses, and for other workforce needs in critical services. With local government we had a local government summit in Canberra recently, and provided additional resources there. But as I indicated in my remarks just before, this is the beginning. We've got a lot more to do. And the challenges here and for anyone losing their job here in Tasmania are as real for the government that I lead, as anyone else across the country. We are all in this together.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Can we get your reaction please to some controversial comments by a Melbourne Islamic cleric about rape and domestic violence?
PM: I just looked at the text of these. The quotes as I see them are along the lines of how can a person rape his wife, then in relation to violence the quote is, first of all advise them that is your wives, you beat them, but this is the last resort. These are the reported remarks that come from this particular Islamic cleric. Could I say that these remarks have no place in modern Australia at all, at all. I would call upon this Islamic cleric to publicly apologise and repudiate his remarks. Under no circumstances is sexual violence permissible or acceptable in Australia. Under no circumstances. Under no circumstances are other forms of violence, physical violence towards women, acceptable in Australia. Nor are they acceptable in my view to mainstream Muslim teaching. So I say to this Islamic cleric, Australia will not tolerate these sort of remarks. They don't belong in modern Australia. And he should stand up, repudiate them, and apologise.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The question of jobs is front and centre for the nation in 2009 as it had been in 2008, in the Government's preparations. Any job loss anywhere is important. It's not just the fact of someone losing their job, it's the human person and their dignity and the impact on their family which lies behind that as well. So what can you do about it?
Three things. One, government through its own investments taking the place to the greatest extent possible of a private sector in retreat, and that is why we've announced $36 billion worth of measures in recent months. And through those measures to create tens of thousands of jobs through these efforts of government, that's the first thing.
The second thing is to help business still retain and invest in their own employees, that's why before Christmas I announced also that we would through our $4.6 billion stimulus package, invest not just in roads, not just in rail, not just in universities, not just in TAFE, but also one to two billion dollars of that representing a temporary investment allowance of ten per cent to businesses, to help them with their bottom line, to help them in turn maintain employment.
The third thing is this, for those who lose their jobs, the government and the community to do everything physically possible to support them, everything physically possible. So I've said before on jobs, I intend to be upfront and direct with the Australian people. This is a huge challenge for all of us, we're all in this together, and we have a strategy for dealing with the challenge. It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, and it's not going to be perfect. There's a huge world out there which is washing over Australia, but our strategy and our course of action is clear.
JOURNALIST: Just on the pulp mill, the Labor member for Bass, Jodie Campbell has refused to say about whether or not to support the Gunns pulp. Why do voters have a right to know where she stands in the issue and bring it such a controversial issue in her electorate?
PM: What all of our members support is the proper process being engaged in by Minister Garrett. He's operating under the law. And the law says that this pulp mill has to go through a whole range of environmental approvals under Commonwealth law. Mr Garrett's made clear those elements of the approval process which he has supported, and those where he says further work needs to be done. That's the process Government members support. That's the process the Government supports because our responsibility is to get the balance absolute right, and we intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: Gunns Ltd have suggested that the Commonwealth might like to pay to upgrade the treatment of their (inaudible), the tertiary standard to something that Peter has spoken about. Can you rule that out or is it something you might consider?
PM: What I want to see is the completion of the approval process. And what the Minister determines independently, this is his independent decision under Commonwealth statute on the question of the impact of any proposed pulp mill on associated marine areas. That's what the law says. Let's see where the regulatory decision lands first.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the whaling issue, the Sea Shepherd left Hobart yesterday for more direct action. Japan's repeated its possibility of withdrawing from the International Whaling Commission. What possibility or what progress do you see in diplomatic dialogue with Japan on this?
PM: Minister Garrett through his partners in the IWC, is engaged in a lengthy process concerning the future of so-called scientific whaling. Minister Garrett initiated a review process along these lines at the last meeting of the IWC. My most recent advice is that review process will reach its conclusion sometime around about the middle of this year. It is within that framework that Australia, together with other countries is directly engaging the Government of Japan. We will wait and watch carefully what the outcome of that is, because our policy has not changed one bit. We are engaged however in a process of diplomacy to see with our friends in Tokyo, where we can work our way through this. That's what's underway right now.
JOURNALIST: So dependent upon that PM, you would consider legal action (inaudible).
PM: What I'm saying is that diplomacy is a varied and wondrous beast. And that we will see what it produces between now and mid-year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know, when it comes to the emissions trading scheme, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme sought to get the balance right in taking a responsible course of action against the need to act on climate change and a long term threat of water shortages across so many parts of Australia, and it's a consequence. And the on the other hand, the real impact of the current global economic crisis. These are both real challenges. Responsible governments can't afford to walk away from either. You've actually got to rise to the challenge with both.
I believe we've got the balance right. If you look at the adjustment packages that we have built in for the electricity supply industry and for the emissions intensive trade expose sector of the economy and for households, we believe we've got this balance right and it's one part of a necessary global agreement. And let me say one other thing. In adjusting for the future the lower carbon world, there are enormous economic opportunities which lie in investment, in renewable energy, in carbon capture and storage, as well as energy efficiency. President Obama has been speaking about these things in recent times. I believe President Obama is absolutely right and I thank you.


Your Excellency the Governor of Victoria, distinguished Australians one and all, distinguished representatives of foreign governments one and all. 
This Australia Day as in times past provides us with a national moment for reflection. A national moment for reflecting on our nation's past achievements and a national moment for reflection on the challenges which lie ahead.
It is also a time where we reflect more deeply of the values which inspire us as a nation. Those which have shaped us over many decades and centuries and those which will shape us and guide us for the years ahead.
One of those deepest values is respect. Respect for one another, respect for the traditions we variously bring to these shores and respect most fundamentally for the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as the oldest continuing culture in human history.
This is a marvellous land. A land rich with opportunity, a land where we have managed to craft a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation. We've done so through blood, sweat and tears over many generations. We've done so through times which have been difficult and through times of triumph. Times of tragedy, times that have required great feats of human endurance.
And through all of that, what we have exhibited is this core value as well. Not just respect. Not just tolerance. Not just acceptance of difference. But above all these things, an overpowering sense of our unity as a people and as a nation.
The wonderful thing that I celebrate each day about this nation of ours, Australia, and which I see reflected on the faces around this room is from where we have come to fashion this thing called Australia. Each person bringing to this great culture and to this great land something new, something different, something diverse. Yet all united in this great value that we attach to this land, Australia.
A land which we hold dear, a land which we will defend and a land which we will use for the benefit of others as well, beyond our shores. Unity and diversity, what an extraordinary and great achievement of this land, Australia; this country, Australia.
His Excellency said before that, in his remarks, that he's recently been with our Young Ambassadors for Science. I think I can spot them from their shirts. There seems to be a veritable squadron of them here, from Australia and from beyond our shores. If I could add my words of welcome to each of them.
And then with a word of encouragement. This nation, shaped by great values of respect and tolerance, great values of our unity of purpose amidst the diversity, which has given our nation expression. Also values of deep learning, the pursuit of knowledge through education and within that the absolute importance of science.
A nation prospers to the extent to which it values the education of its young. A nation prospers if within that education we also attach great priority to the wonder that is science. And science is a wonder. It is to be encouraged and fuelled and instilled in the minds of the young across our nation.
So for those of you who are contemplating what the future may hold for you in the sciences which have grabbed and arrested your passions, what I'd say to you as your Prime Minister is  -  seize hold of that passion, hold it dear and fashion a future for yourselves, your country and the world.
If we reflected back on a mere 200 years of the settled history of this country and where scientific knowledge stood for the latter part of the 18th century and where it now stands, and wonder aloud at the achievements of our scientists from Banks to the present - Joseph Banks, not those which take your money - this has been an achievement writ large; an achievement from which we have all benefited. An achievement which lies under so much of what we now benefit from in medicine, from what we so benefit across all the applications.
This nation, Australia, as it approaches its 21st century must and will invest in our education. Must and will invest in our schools, in our early childhood centres, in our universities, in our technical colleges, in our research institutes, and within that take the status of science to a new level.
My vision for this country is that we are the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world. To do that we don't just sit around and hope for it to happen. We have to fashion it, we have to structure it, we have to fund it, we have to invest for it.
But that is one thing. The other part of this - to have among us a new cadre of young, enthusiastic scientific pioneers who will take that message of science into the future. So that is our vision.
Beyond that, as his Excellency has also indicated, the year ahead contains within it extraordinary challenges given the impact of the global financial crisis.
I said in remarks in Melbourne earlier today that I have great confidence in our ability as a nation to see our way through this crisis. I have great confidence in our people to exhibit a resilience, a steeliness, a calm and a resolve which together with appropriately formed policy will see Australia through.
Resilient, strong, purposeful. But through that purpose and through that process, extending always a helping hand to others at home and abroad. This crisis will be a test of who we are as a people, who we are as a community and who we are as neighbours because many will be hurt by it.
One response will be ours as Government to extend an appropriate hand of support for those who need it. And we will. But at a different level, at a very personal level, at a very pastoral level, it is important that each of us takes on the responsibility of extending the hand of friendship when those who suffer from this crisis experience that suffering.
As I look out across this extraordinary room, which I'm told is his Excellency's breakfast room, which he uses on small occasions. I'm sorry. It's the lunch room. It's not a bad room is it? You know the whole story about Buckingham Palace and the Ballroom so I won't take you though that one again.
But when I look out across this extraordinary room, this sea of faces, all people of leadership within their communities, each one of you in your own sphere - leaders. Reflect on this as the year unfolds.
Leadership will be called for at all levels, to support and encourage those who are going to find this year tough and rough. Not just within the churches and the charitable sector, that is their permanent mission, their lot, their vocation. But beyond that as well.
Leadership in every community organisation, every sporting group, every other social organisation in our country. Small business, local government. The task of leadership will be out there to extend the hand of friendship and support as well. And as I look in the faces of those here, I have absolute confidence that those values of leadership will be called forth and delivered, as the nation at times requires.
I might conclude on a personal note, and say something about this great city of Melbourne in the great state of Victoria. As I said earlier today I can do so with complete impartiality of being an independent Queensland observer. You doubt the independence of Queenslanders? Well spotted.
You know you live in a fantastic city. This is a wonderful part of Australia. This city is a jewel in the nation's crown as I said in earlier remarks today. And I believe it has an enormous future in shaping Australia's destiny. Hold it close. Husband it well. Shape its buildings and its culture, its intellectual life and its cultural life in a way which enriches the nation as you have so much done in the past. This is a fantastic part of Australia and be proud of it.
And to conclude on one further personal note. We have among us today a centenarian in training - Dame Elisabeth Murdoch. (Applause)
By the way how just great to see, I visited Dame Elisabeth this afternoon. And I was down there at Cruden and extending Therese and my birthday wishes for an event which is about to unfold. I left there at about ten past five. I got here at four minutes past six. Dame Elisabeth was happily saying farewell to me. And she arrived three minutes after me here. This is a centenarian on wheels, with turbo-charge.
And if his Excellency would extend to me the great indulgence which I'm about to exercise even if he doesn't, but I ask you one and all, in anticipation of this event which is about to happen, her birthday, and to reflect also her great contribution philanthropically to the state, to the city and to this nation - Three cheers for Dame Elisabeth Murdoch. Hip hip. Hooray. Hip hip. Hooray. Hip hip. Hooray. And a very happy Australia Day.


Can I say first of all that one of the great things about our anticipation of Australia Day is a reflection of the contribution of indigenous Australia, to Australia's past and to Australia's future. So I begin by acknowledging the first Australians whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history. 
Reflect on that fact; the oldest continuing cultures in human history. When I mention that or it is mentioned to me by heads of Government and heads of State from around the world, it causes a moment of reflection and awe that we in this country are so privileged as to have among us those who represent the deepest link to antiquity. And our future.
It's great to be back at Government House. I remember coming here the first time as the slightly acneous private secretary of the then Leader of the Opposition Wayne Goss. Wayne I think is here with us this evening. And that was as he was about to go through that magical transformational moment of becoming, from Leader of the Opposition to becoming Premier of Queensland. And always being a publicity hound myself, the official photograph has me doing this [leans into shot] in the background as a mere private secretary. I still have it in my office in Canberra.
It's great to be back. I've been here a few times since.
As I reflect on the extraordinary history of this State of Queensland, it has been an extraordinary transformation. Your Excellency, I have never been able to successfully, repeatedly pronounce the word sesquicentenary; so I'm not going to. 150 years is a good innings.
And think back on those 150 years. This is where the briefing papers of the Commonwealth constantly are different from those of the States. My briefing paper says that when this colony was separated from the colony of NSW, in fact the public coffers stood at ninepence, not seven pence ha'penny.
As Sir Leo Hielscher will recognise, there is a continuity to this theme. Queensland under-Treasurers always understating the case when it comes to the actual case of Queensland finances as they make representations to the Commonwealth. Or in those days to the Crown.
But those 150 years have been just extraordinary. The events of 1859, the small band of dedicated souls who assembled at the Botanic Gardens to greet the Governor-elect, or the Governor-appointed, and Lady Diamantina Bowen. And from those extraordinary humble beginnings to fashion this great State. It's a remarkable achievement.
If you travel around the world and see what has happened with the evolution of democracies and economies and communities and societies across the world, these have been fashioned and shaped not just over a century or two but have been fashioned over the millennia. It has not been the case here.
This State, this great part of Australia was fashioned from the soil. There was nothing. And in so doing, this great contribution to Australia has been brought 150 years later.
One of the great contributions of Queensland is not as it once did, constantly celebrate how different it was to the rest of Australia. The great contribution and transformation of Queensland has been now this  -  to say how much it contributes to the rest of Australia. And it does. In every field of endeavour.
Whether it is through the appointment of Her Excellency the Governor General Quentin Bryce, who is performing an extraordinary function as the first woman in the history of the Commonwealth to occupy that position, or whether it is through the contribution of extraordinary Premiers, like the one you are blessed to have in this State - Anna Bligh.
Or whether in the field of business or the professions or in medical research, the extraordinary contributions that are now made from Brisbane and the rest of the State to the country at large. These are good contributions indeed.
And they bespeak, I believe, a sense of quiet assurance and confidence about our part in this great Federation called Australia. And that is good. And we have much to contribute. Although I keep have to wondering, wonder to myself if I can continue to say ‘we' because those south of a particular river, wonder who I am speaking for when I say ‘we'.
As they say you can take the boy out of Queensland but you can't take the Queensland out of the boy.
Australia Day. The Federation and its future. The history of this Commonwealth is one of equally remarkable achievement. To think that those who came up with this idea of founding a nation and to fashion a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation. The Federation dream, the Federation vision. And barely a century later to have turned this into the modern reality we celebrate as Australia.
This too is an extraordinary achievement. An extraordinary achievement of all States of the federation and those who have crafted the federal vision and turned it into a national reality. But if you go to its core, beyond the achievements of politicians, beyond the achievements of those in business, beyond the achievements of those who have been formally charged with the administration of justice and the laws of the Commonwealth, what has actually caused this country to come into its own are deep qualities of our people. Deep qualities of a type referred to by Anna just before.
What are those qualities? They're qualities of extraordinary resilience. Extraordinary resilience. A capacity to actually confront obstacles and to see a way through and to emerge from those obstacles and those challenges stronger and more determined.
Resilience, also courage. Recently in Canberra we had the opportunity to honour a recipient, a new recipient of the Victoria Cross; the highest order for gallantry in this country. As I signed off the letter to Her Excellency the Governor General to be passed to the Queen to approve that Honour, I read the citation of this young man and what he had achieved in the fields of combat and the mountains of Afghanistan.
And if any of you ever doubt or question what quaint concepts, as described by some, are these words courage, valour and gallantry  -  read this young man's citation. It is the stuff of heroes.
But he also reflects a value deeply embedded in this Australian soul as well and that is a value, the value that we've seen writ large in our men and women in uniform over so many fields of conflict, over so many decades, back to the engagements at Gallipoli.
But courage more broadly as well. Those of you in the medical and caring professions deal with courage with the tragedy and the adversity with which people are confronted. Of a dying child, of a relative who is afflicted sadly. And the courage of those who care and the courage of families who support says something deep and great about the values which are writ large in the heart of our nation.
Which leads me to the third of those qualities and that is compassion. Compassion is not the sign of weakness, compassion is I believe is a sign of greater strength. Because it has about it a sense and quality that says ‘when I see someone in need my response is automatically one of immediate empathy and identity and as a consequence of that  -  action'.
We call it different things in Australia. Some call it the fair go, some call it looking after your mates, some call it making sure that everyone gets a fair shake of the sauce bottle. But you know what it's about? It's about looking after people and regarding a fundamental Australian value is this, that it's not just how I look after myself by how I in fact care for others.
And those are great Australian qualities. Whether people are of faith or not of faith, it is a deep, I believe, Australian value. Writ large in our history but also to guide us for our future.
Resilience, courage, compassion, care for others. The Premier has made mention - as I have in recent days as I've travelled across the country and I travel to Perth tomorrow - one of the great challenges we face with this global financial crisis, which has become an economic crisis, which has become and employment crisis, affecting the jobs and lives of working Australians and working peoples across the world.
Those affected by this crisis did not cause it. The causes of this crisis lie beyond our sores and regrettably the causes of this crisis lie in qualities we would not wish to speak much of. Qualities of greed, qualities of unrestrained greed.
But our job as a community, as a nation, is now to attend to the problem which we have been given and in so doing deploy the qualities of resilience, of courage and of looking after one another.
The Government is determined to chart a course through this time of crisis. We'll do so by acting to support the stability of the financial system. We'll do so by acting to support the continued supply of credit to the Australian economy. We will do so by actively taking the resources of Government and seeking to fill that gap which is left by the problems now caused within the private economy.
And through the demand and the investment of Government and the critical things we need for our future  -  our roads, our ports, our bridges, our railways, the needs of broadband, the needs of new communications technology, our new hospitals, our new universities, our TAFEs, our schools  -  to lay out a greater investment than would otherwise be the case called upon by Government at a time like this, to fill that gap.
That's the task of Government. We're embarked on that task, we'll be resolute in its execution but much lies ahead.
That is one half of the battle. The other half lies with each of us as human beings, each of us as members of our community, each of us as members of families, each of us deploying those other qualities of which I spoke before.
That is, when we see our neighbours, we see our friends and we see others doing it tough through these times, we actually extend out the hand to help. We do that without complaint, we do that as a sense of duty, of obligation and just doing the right thing.
We've done this in times past, we're going to be called upon it to do it again. But these values which guide the direction which the Government I lead, which guide also I believe the heartbeat of the nations it seeks to deal with the damage of these extraordinary damage being wrought by this extraordinary set of events, will see Australia through.
And this State, Queensland, will help see the nation through.
Thank you for your kindness in greeting me back home. It is good to be among you. Being home is part of being in Queensland and I've got to say this is a great State and Therese and I are so blessed to be here with you tonight.
Happy Australia Day. 


The difference between Cottesloe Beach and Sunshine Coast, Sunshine Beach where I grew up is that, we don't really have any stingers there either, at least not many. We deploy them purely on unwelcome foreign tourists. There is a difference between the stinger concentration along the Queensland coast - that's a matter for subsequent discussion. 
Your beaches here are just extraordinary. Even I as a Queenslander have wandered along Cottesloe before and you are blessed with a beautiful natural environment here and this is truly a blessed part of God's earth.
As Prime Minister I am doing something a little different this year. In previous years, in previous decades, my predecessors of whichever political persuasion have usually and properly focused on national day celebrations in the nation's Capital. And they will occur as they should on the 26th of January in Canberra.
The nation is much bigger than Canberra. The nation extends - at least at my last report - beyond the boundaries of the Australian Capital Territory. This is a vast nation.
And what I have sought to do this week is to take some time to travel to each of our State capitals, beginning in Sydney, then to Adelaide, to Melbourne, last night to Brisbane and to here today. And back to Canberra this evening.
And the purpose is simply this, to be among the people of the nation and its leaders to reflect together across all the great diversity of this great country Australia on our achievements past and our aspirations for the future. And it is a good thing for all of our national political leaders to be with the nation's people out across this vast land.
Australia Day of course means many things. It's a day when we celebrate our achievements, our experiences and the values that we share as Australians. It's a day in which we share stories about those achievements, experiences and values as well. Stories from our past, stories from the present and hopeful stories for the future. Stories about the building of the nation, sometimes in periods of great hardship, about the forging of one people from nearly all the peoples of the world, forging a continent and a nation. Forging a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation. An extraordinary achievement.
Also, a time to reflect on the stories of indigenous Australians. Their ancient but still evolving art, their unique understanding of the land, their contribution deep and spiritual to Australia's emerging identity.
Australia Day is also a day on which we honour heroes, people who have shown outstanding leadership across the country, in education and health and business, sport, the arts and so many different fields. Australians who inspire us, particularly in terms of what can be done in the face of adversity. Through their example we see the best of what we are as a nation and who we are as a people.
But this year Australia Day has come at a time, a hard time, in our country's history. This year the celebration of Australia Day is mixed with the concern, the anxiety and the fear that is felt from the global financial crisis and economic crisis which now affects all nations across the world, including this nation, Australia.
Throughout the past year I said that 2009 was going to be a tough year and so it has come to pass. The news from around the world has not been good, nor has it been good here in Australia.
On Wednesday BHP announced it would cut more than 3,000 jobs in Australia. A large number of those jobs cut here in Western Australia. Communities like Ravensthorpe, Hopetoun. 1,800 jobs, three to four hundred immediate local jobs.
This is where the statistics of the impact of this thing called the global financial crisis translate into the lives of living Australians and the challenges they face for the future.
This is not just a crisis of nations and economies, it is one which affects real, living human beings, their lives, their families and how they seek to shape their way through it.
Also, this week we've seen new growth figures from China. We've seen a reduction in China's growth performance this last quarter and we understand the impact which then has for Australia. China, to remind everyone here present, absorbs more than 15 per cent of Australian exports. 15 per cent.
Their falling growth, which amounts to about a $200 billion reduction in Chinese output, translates into $5 billion worth of lost exports for Australia, which in turn has a massive impact on Australian exports and Australian jobs.
These announcements are of deep and immediate concern here in Western Australia as they are for the nation as a whole. The magnitude of this global financial and economic crisis is underscored by a few simple, stark facts. Let me just give you four of them.
The United States lost three million jobs last year, the biggest loss in a year since World War II. Second, the global share markets have lost half their value since they peaked in October 2007. The greatest single fall since the Great Depression. Third, last year the value of the Australian stock market fell by 43 per cent, the biggest fall in a year since 1900. And now the International Monetary Fund predicts that advanced economies will contract this year by 0.25 per cent for the first time since World War II.
These sharp and stark statistics underpin the global dimensions of that which we all face and which therefore Australia faces as well.
An unprecedented crisis demands and requires an unprecedented response. That is why the Government has moved swiftly and decisively to guarantee all bank deposits, to underpin stability in the banking system. Unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth.
That is why the Government has moved decisively to guarantee the borrowings of our private financial institutions on global markets. Again, unprecedented in the Commonwealth's history.
That is why the Commonwealth has now invested in the last several months, $36 billion to stimulate the economy, sustain confidence and support jobs, and through our investments - $5 billion in infrastructure and local government projects and through our commitment to more than 700,000 new training places - laying the ground for a stronger, more resilient economy that will emerge from the crisis and position Australia well for the future.
Our challenge as a Government is to chart a course of strategy through this crisis. We've embarked upon that strategy, our resolve is to prosecute it and to prosecute it to the full.
There are two options available for governments in dealing with the crisis. One is do nothing and hope that it all sorts itself out in the end; that markets automatically self-stabilise. And that is what some of the market fundamentalists would have us believe.
Or the other. To act decisively through the agency of Government to seek to step into the breach where the private economy has begun to falter.
The Government I lead has decided to embark upon that second course of action. And that is our resolve and we do so without apology.
And today I would confirm a further step which the Government has taken. An again unprecedented response to the global financial crisis. And that is to intervene directly in order to support the flow of private credit to good Australian businesses and the jobs which they provide.
As I've said before, to ensure that Australian banks have funds to lend, the Government took a historic decision on October 12 to guarantee term wholesale funding for regulated banks by the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority and building societies and credit unions.
In addition the Government as a course, as I said before, acted to guarantee all deposits.
The Government's action has helped to soothe financial markets but here is the important point, before the guarantee Australian banks were finding it increasingly difficult to raise funds off shore.
In September last year their raisings had fallen to $1.7 billion, down from more than $13 billion they averaged each month earlier in the year. Then in October offshore markets dried up almost all together and Australian banks raised no money at all. In this climate the guarantee provided by the sovereign Government of Australia had an immediate effect.
In December offshore raising was $15.4 billion, the highest in the past few years and this was all guaranteed funding by Government. In January 2009 this amount has already reached $19.8 billion, again all guaranteed by Government.
These are extraordinary measures for extraordinary times. An unprecedented crisis demanding an unprecedented response.
Our banks are strong and well capitalised and the guarantee has enabled them to raise the funds they need to lend to Australian businesses. But the Australian economy is global in nature and therefore affected by the health of foreign banks as well as Australian banks.
Some cash-strapped foreign banks are scaling back their lending in foreign markets and that includes Australia. If banks do not allow clients to refinance as they would in normal conditions then companies can be forced to sell assets, often at low value. This endangers their financial health and that of the whole economy.
According to Merrill Lynch, lending by overseas banks represents more than half of the $285 billion in syndicated loans that have been issued to Australian businesses since 2006. Of those outstanding loans $75 billion are scheduled to fall due over the next two years.
If foreign banks do not roll over their share of these loans, it will be difficult for Australia's four major banks to fill the gap on their own. The mathematics is fairly straightforward.
A significant share of this is in the commercial property sector. Foreign banks have more than $45 billion in exposure to Australian commercial property, around 28 per cent of total bank lending to the sector. And supply of credit affects real businesses and affects real jobs in this sector.
As the global financial crisis affects banks around the world, some banks, foreign banks are seeking to reduce their exposures. That is why today the Government confirms that it will establish a $4 billion Australian Business Investment Partnership with the four major Australian banks.
This $4 billion partnership is a temporary contingency measure to provide liquidity support to viable, major commercial property projects in Australia. This is an initial $4 billion and could be extended via the issuance of Government guaranteed debt to create up to $30 billion of loanable capital.
And its purpose is this  -  to help fill the gap left by any possible withdrawal of foreign banks from Australian businesses and therefore from Australian jobs.
Again, extraordinary measures for extraordinary times.
The alternative is to do nothing. The Government that I lead will not embark upon that course of action.
The partnership I've described will support the commercial property assets of viable Australian businesses which without financing would be forced to retrench thousands of workers. Commercial property projects that could be supported by this initiative include shopping centres, office towers and factories under construction. As well as existing properties of that nature.
The commercial property sector itself employs about 150,000 people in Australia. Many of the 150,000 workers employed in the commercial property sector are tradespeople, plumbers, electricians, carpenters.
Without action, a combination of weak demand brought about by the global financial crisis and tight credit conditions brought about the global financial crisis could see up to 50,000 people in this sector lose their jobs, according to Treasury. With flow on effects to jobs in other parts of the economy.
Small and medium sized businesses which service the commercial property sector could also be devastated by weak demand and tight credit conditions in the sector. This Government will not sit idly by and watch these jobs and small and medium sized businesses be wiped out by fluctuations in global credit markets.
Instead we have resolved to act.
The partnership I've described will be structured to minimise the exposure of risk to Australian tax payers. And any risk is equally shared between Government and the four major banks. The alternative is to do nothing and to simply carp from the sidelines while Australian businesses and jobs are sacrificed to the global financial crisis.
This Government will not do that. This Government will act.
As we approach Australia Day and the period ahead, the challenge ahead is not simply that of governments and what governments do. The responsibility of Government is to chart a course for the nation not just in good times but in hard times and to help steer the nation through and this Government is so resolved. But that is part of it.
The other part is to recognise this core principle. We are all in this together. Every State of the nation. Every community across the nation. Business leaders, union leaders, community leaders, governments at all levels, national, state and local. Working together based on one simple and single recognition  -  we are all in this together.
Australia did not cause this crisis. The crisis began elsewhere. And the product of values on which we should reflect in due season. But we are dealt now a practical challenge and a challenge which we must meet together. All of us, working together.
My resolve is to do so in partnership with the Government of Western Australia, in partnership with businesses here in Western Australia, in partnership with local communities here in Western Australia.
The shape which this takes over time, we will see and we will work through each of the challenges which emerges and in partnership with governments across the country.
But what governments do is one thing. What you the community do is something else.
This is a time which calls forth fundamental Australian values. Values of courage, values of resilience and values of compassion. Looking out for one another. So that when we see somebody who has been affected by this crisis by losing their job, whose lives have been thrown into turmoil, who then must move from one community to another, the kids' schooling being upset as a result, that our response as human beings and as neighbours and as members of the community is to reach out a hand of friendship and support.
If we do this together, government, business, unions, the community, those individual Australians, calling forth the great values which have shaped Australia over so many decades, then we can together see Australia through the crisis which lies ahead of us.
For me it's a great honour to be among you here today in Western Australia to celebrate this Australia Day. This State is known for its vitality, this State is known for its optimism, this State is known for its determination and its can-do attitude.
All those values and virtues are going to be needed by the nation in the year which lies ahead. I am confident in the nation's future, I am confident in this great State's future.
I wish you all a very happy Australia Day.
[Ends].


To help support Australian jobs the Rudd Government will establish a $4 billion Australian Business Investment Partnership.
This $4 billion Partnership is a temporary contingency measure to provide liquidity support to viable major commercial property projects in Australia.
The Partnership will support the commercial property assets of viable Australian businesses which, without financing, would be forced to retrench thousands of employees.
Commercial property projects that could be supported by this initiative include shopping centres, office towers and factories under construction, as well as existing properties of that nature.
The commercial property sector employs about 150,000 people in Australia.
Many of the 150,000 workers employed in the commercial property sector are tradespeople, such as plumbers, electricians and carpenters.
Without action, a combination of weak demand and tight credit conditions could see up to 50,000 people in this sector lose their jobs, according to Treasury, with flow-on effects to jobs in other parts of the economy.
Small and medium size businesses which service the commercial property sector could also be devastated by weak demand and tight credit conditions in the sector.
The Government will not sit idly by and watch these jobs and small and medium size businesses be wiped out by fluctuations in global credit markets.
The Partnership will be structured to minimise the exposure risk to Australian taxpayers. It will not allow the major banks to pass on any underperforming assets to the Australian Government. Safeguards will ensure the banks continue to finance the projects to be supported, and that projects will only be considered where a member of a syndicate has actually decided to exit.
Foreign banks in Australia
Foreign banks play an important role in the Australian financial system, but the global financial crisis means that some foreign banks may consider withdrawing their funding from good Australian businesses that require funding to invest in growth and jobs.
That is why the Rudd Government will establish the Partnership to ensure viable Australian construction and commercial property projects, and the jobs and businesses they support, are not wiped out because of unrelated and uncontrollable fluctuations in global credit markets.
The Australian Business Investment Partnership
The Australian Business Investment Partnership will support only high quality Australian assets suffering as a result of global weakness in capital markets.
The action the Government is undertaking does not in any way reflect on the health of the Australian banking system. The banking sector remains well capitalised and Australia has withstood the impact of the global crisis better than many of its international counterparts. 
However Australia is not immune from the global crisis and the actions being announced today will help shore up our system against ongoing uncertainty. Disruption in the commercial property sector credit market could have a devastating impact on Australian jobs, which is why the Government is determined to act.
The Government and the major banks have committed capital to this fund in equal partnership and will only offer loans by unanimous agreement between all parties. The Partnership will provide financing on fully commercial terms for commercial property where the underlying assets, and the income streams from those assets, are commercially sound.
This Partnership will be initially capitalised at $4 billion, with the Government contribution of $2 billion matched by an equal contribution by Australia's four major banks. The initial $4 billion capitalisation could be extended via the issuance of government guaranteed debt to create up to $30 billion of loanable capital.
The Partnership will be limited to the re-financing of existing Australian commercial property syndicated loans on commercial terms when the withdrawal of funding by a participant of the syndicate threatens the refinancing of the loan.
The Partnership will focus on completed commercial property investments and partly completed development projects with secured pre-commitments (for example, retail shopping centres, commercial office and industrial property). It will be structured to allow sufficient flexibility to provide financing in other areas of commercial lending, should the need arise and the Government and four major banks jointly agree.
Completed commercial property projects would be included in this partnership to ensure that systemic instability in the commercial property sector does not undermine investor confidence.
The Government and the major banks will continue discussions over the coming weeks to finalise arrangements for the implementation of the Partnership, with a view to having it operational by March 2009.


As we celebrate Australia Day with our friends and families - over barbeques, picnic tables and beach towels - I know that many of you share my concerns about the impact of the global financial crisis on our families.
This year will not be an easy one, and to be frank, we face some very big challenges.
But I am confident that, if we all pull together, we can come through this together - and come out even stronger and emerge from this crisis even more resilient than before.
Australia is better placed then almost every other nation to deal with the global financial crisis, but it's going to be tough.
Our history as a nation is one of resilience - to confront obstacles and see a way through, to emerge stronger and more determined.
From the struggle of Indigenous Australians for recognition and respect;
From the courage of our diggers in Gallipoli, 
on the Western Front, at Kokoda, 
in Timor Leste and 
in Afghanistan;
From the determination of miners on the goldfields, of women for the right to vote and of workers for a fair go at work.
This is not an ordinary nation... This is an extraordinary nation.
Resilient, courageous, and purposeful, without sacrificing compassion.
In 2009 we will be calling on all those great Australian qualities because we are all in this together.
The Government stands ready to do whatever is necessary to support the stability of our financial institutions at a time when others around the world are under threat; to support the economy during a global economic recession; and to create new jobs through government investment as other jobs in the private sector come under pressure
Our shared history as Australians shows that together, we can meet the challenges the world might throw at us in 2009.
I wish you a very happy Australia Day.
You can view the video of the Prime Minister's Australia Day message in the media hub. 


To Adam Gilchrist, Chair of the National Australia Day Council, Warren Pearson, National Director of the National Australia Day Council, Australian of the Year finalists, one and all. And where is Aaron Paul? Put your hand up. Aaron Paul, seriously decent bloke. Distinguished Australians, one and all.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Australia Day.
First of all, on behalf of Therese and myself, welcome to our home. It's an honour to have you with us this morning. And that's not a statement of politeness. It's not that. It's that having spent a little time speaking with each of as you've come in the door and to be reminded of who we are privileged to have among us today.
Each of you are leaders within your communities and therefore leaders across the nation. And you're not here for idle purpose, you're not here for random reasons. You're here because of the things that you have done, and because of the things that you will do and that's a good thing.
Leadership is really important and each of you in your own spheres have demonstrated those qualities of leadership which begin with one core and enduring quality, and that is service.
As I look through the extraordinary array of talent we have here, we have town leaders, community leaders who've bridged the gap between cultural and ethnic divides. We have sea rescuers, we have wildlife rescuers. We have businessmen, philanthropists, we have band leaders, those engaged in the campaign against childhood obesity.
Founders of youth charities, Paralympians, victim support workers, indigenous sports heroes, indigenous leaders, advocates and representatives of the stolen generations. Sporting legends. We also have motivational speakers who assist with those who are doing it tough. Sporting legends also who have now chosen to make a difference when it comes to the great fight against cancer.
We have also young writers and artists, scientists, medical specialists. We have literacy advocates, revolutionary school principals, church leaders and leaders in their local communities.
And then we have Peter Cundall. Yes, you. Gardening expert extraordinaire. Whose first line as he walked into The Lodge this morning was ‘what a waste of lawn'. His second great remark to us all was ‘I'd turn that into a potato patch'. So Cundall, whatever happens for the rest of the day, you're now on informal, unpaid commission. Therese will be in contact, smarten up and get your ideas ready.
None however could beat the extraordinary greeting I had this morning from Sam Cawthorn, if you've met Sam it's a unique experience. He's the bloke who knows the serious meaning of a firm handshake. As he leaves his hand in your hand.
He has an artificial hand. It's more than a party trick, let me tell you it takes your breath away. I met Sam the other morning in Hobart, his, he's told me this morning that his little girl, his little daughter provided him with an Australia Day dare to do that to the Prime Minister. What's your daughter's name?
CAWTHORN INTERJECTS: Emilia.
Emilia. Mission accomplished. I am still recovering and still in therapy.
This is going to be a great day and tomorrow will be an even greater day. It's great because it's a time when we acknowledge not just the ties that bind and form this nation Australia, not just acknowledge the wonder of the achievement of bringing about a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation and achieving such extraordinary unity under such extraordinary diversity.
It's all those things and each is important. But in terms of this event it's about honouring leadership and achievement. As I said at the beginning these things are not lightly considered nor are they lightly given. So however things turn out, know this from me as your Prime Minister: I admire and respect deeply what each of you has done and what each of you will do.
Equally I admire the achievements of our former Australians of the year. We have one slightly famous country and western singer  -  where is he? Oh there he is up there, bloke in the funny hat. Not you Dodson. D1, D2  -  B1, B2.
But thank you for your work this year. It has been a good voice for rural Australia in what has been a hard time for the bush.
As I conclude these remarks and they are purely remarks of welcome for what will be a couple of days of great celebration in the nation's capital - let's hold fast to this core truth about Australia and where we are in our current national voyage.
And it's the truth which has been with us for centuries past, sometimes better and in greater strength than others, but certainly with us today. And that is whatever challenges lie ahead for us this year and lie ahead for us in the century ahead, we are all in this together. Every one of us, wherever we have come from.
Businessmen, union leaders, indigenous leaders, other community leaders, those who are town mayors, shire presidents in the farthest outback, in the bush, our State governments, our national government, our cabinets, our church and community organisations. Those who are out there at the forefront of the medical and caring professions, those who are out there at the pioneering edges of science and innovation, those of you who are out there pushing the boundaries in terms of literary and creative endeavour.
And the challenges which lie ahead in the great admixture which equals this nation Australia, your talents in the year ahead will be called forth as community leaders. Many of us in this nation will need encouragement which as community leaders you are perfectly positioned to provide that.
In a much more difficult time in our history, one former resident of this grand old house, John Curtin, had this to say. The people of the nation are the 'strength of the nation'. The people of the nation are the strength of the nation.
Here we have leaders of the people, each and every one of you, and in you lies our strength this year as we the nation will prevail.
A very happy Australia Day.


As we celebrate Australia Day with our friends and families - over barbeques, picnic tables and beach towels - I know that many of you share my concerns about the impact of the global financial crisis on our families.
This year will not be an easy one, and to be frank, we face some very big challenges.
But I am confident that, if we all pull together, we can come through this together - and come out even stronger and emerge from this crisis even more resilient than before.
Australia is better placed then almost every other nation to deal with the global financial crisis, but it's going to be tough.
Our history as a nation is one of resilience - to confront obstacles and see a way through, to emerge stronger and more determined.
From the struggle of Indigenous Australians for recognition and respect;
From the courage of our diggers in Gallipoli, 
on the Western Front, at Kokoda, 
in Timor Leste and 
in Afghanistan;
From the determination of miners on the goldfields, of women for the right to vote and of workers for a fair go at work.
This is not an ordinary nation... This is an extraordinary nation.
Resilient, courageous, and purposeful, without sacrificing compassion.
In 2009 we will be calling on all those great Australian qualities because we are all in this together.
The Government stands ready to do whatever is necessary to support the stability of our financial institutions at a time when others around the world are under threat; to support the economy during a global economic recession; and to create new jobs through government investment as other jobs in the private sector come under pressure
Our shared history as Australians shows that together, we can meet the challenges the world might throw at us in 2009.
I wish you a very happy Australia Day.
You can view the video of the Prime Minister's Australia Day message in the media hub. 


I don't think I need to say Happy Australia Day. You seem very happy already.
Can I say this to Australians one and all? Let's acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we honour and celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Think about that for just a moment, the oldest continuing cultures in human history. Our deep link with deep antiquity and we uniquely in Australia have the opportunity to share that heritage with our Aboriginal brothers and sisters. What a great privilege it is for all Australians.
I was told recently that in the traditional welcome to country in many parts of the country, the welcome translates a bit like this. The welcome says: ‘we offer you the fruits of our land for all that you need to live. The food, the water, the berries; all that you need to live.' We have much to learn from that intrinsic spirit of generosity and welcome.
As a kid growing up in a country town in Australia, I remember in that small country town of one or two hundred people, a similar spirit of generosity when people came to the town for the first time or when some left. That spirit was there which said ‘what's ours is yours because you're part of our community'.
And you know something? It's drawing on that great spirit and those great qualities, those great Australian qualities which we will need all to draw on in the year ahead.
These deep Australian qualities, qualities of courage, qualities of resilience and qualities of compassion. These are great Australian values and you see them writ large in Australian heroes past, Australian heroes today and those of tomorrow.
We see them in our volunteers, those out there fighting fires as we speak. We see them in our troops in the field in Afghanistan, standing in the line of duty. We see it in those who staff our hospitals and care for the sick and the dying. These are great Australian values.
And we see them also writ large in the lives of those whom we will honour in just a moment. Those who've become finalists in this great Australian of the Year contest.
In the year ahead my message is simple. It will be tough but if we as a country draw deep and extend out the hand of support and friendship to those who need it, then we as Australians and as a nation will come through.
To all of you gathered here in the nation's capital, to all of you participating in the great celebration that is Australia Day, can I say this? This great nation recognises that we are all in this together.
The challenges which lie ahead, we are all in this together.
Businesses, unions, indigenous Australians, non-indigenous Australians, those from diverse communities, governments at all levels, federal, State and local. Whatever the world throws at us in this year ahead remember this core truth. We are all in this together. And together we will come through this year more resilient than we have been even in the past.
Happy Australia Day.


Thank you Terry for that challenge. I've always been lousy on the didge. But I'm up for a tutorial.
Distinguished Australians one and all. And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Reflect on that fact for a moment on this our national day. That we are privileged to have among us these cultures who link this nation with deepest antiquity, unique across the world, unique across the world, in the dance, in the music, in the beautiful paintings we find etched in the caves of the Kimberley and beyond. Paintings more ancient than those we read about in our history books, in ancient Spain and ancient France. Indeed the deepest reach to our deepest past. And we are so privileged as a people and as a nation to share this continent with these great cultures.
On this Australia Day, what are the values that have shaped this vast land into the great nation that it has become? I believe there are three  -  courage, resilience and compassion. Courage, knowing the dangers that lie ahead on the road, but defying those dangers and taking the decision to proceed. Resilience, when the road becomes hard and the comforts scarce, staying the course until the journey's end. Compassion, when we extend an outstretched hand to those who fall by the road, who stumble or who are injured, and to help see them through as seeing them through is seeing all of us through. Mateship, a fair go, a fair go for all.
These great values have enlivened our national soul for more than a century. They have shaped our past, they steel us for the present, and they secure our future. They are part of our nation's moral compass, they are part of our nation's moral purpose. We see these great values etched deep in our pioneers, in our farmers, in those who have championed women's suffrage, those who have fought in the mud and the blood of the Somme, those who forged the spirit of Kokoda. Courage, resilience and compassion.
We see them at work across our nation today. The army of volunteers who literally are the lifeblood of every local community across our nation. Those who care for the sick and for the dying, without commendation, without public recognition, but because it is the right, humane and human thing to do. And those who we see today still proudly wearing the uniform of Australia in foreign lands. The amazing story of Trooper Donaldson VC, a hero writ large for our nation today. Once again courage, resilience and compassion.
Values that have shaped our past that steel ourselves for the present, values that will secure our future. Values on which we will now need to draw deeply as we confront the great challenges of the year that lies ahead, replete with its uncertainties. Challenges from crises beyond our shores.
This great global crisis is not of Australia's making, but as Australians we are left to deal with it. And deal with it we will. The causes of this crisis are complex. But ultimately they go to a set of values that are the very antithesis of our own. Values of unrestrained greed, encouraged by an ideology of unfettered markets. Nothing of courage and certainly nothing of concern or compassion for others, or the consequences of their actions.
But now we face the living consequences here at home of this unrestrained greed abroad. And those consequences are not statistics, they are the jobs, they are the lives, they are the families of working Australians across our nation. From the south west tip of Western Australia, to the Bowen Basin in Queensland, and as the year unfolds, most points in between as the rising tide of unemployment that last year inundated America and Europe and China now laps on our shores as well.
Our challenge as a Government is to steer Australia through. It will be hard. There will be setbacks. But of this I am absolutely persuaded, that steeled by the values of our past and guided by the policy we have set and supported by a community engaged by the needs of our neighbours, we will prevail. As a nation, we will come through this crisis. We will come through this crisis more resilient than we were even before.
Courage, resilience, compassion. Three great values that anchored in the realisation of a fourth, and that is that we are all in this together. We are all in this together. Business, unions, bosses, workers, government, the community, governments federal, state and local. Those who have come to this land 200 years ago, those who are welcomed into the nation's family today. Indigenous Australians, non-Indigenous Australians. We are all in this together.
To our Indigenous leaders, and those who call for a change to our national day, let me say a simple, respectful, but straightforward no.
We are a free country and it is natural and right from time to time, that there will be conversations about such important symbols for our nation. It is equally right as a free country that those of us charged with political leadership provide a straightforward response.
There is much controversy in many lands about national days. Examine the history of France, of Spain, of Italy, of Germany, of the United States. The Declaration of Independence at a time when one third of the American colonists supported the British Crown. There've always been controversies about national days.
But this is not the point. The central point is what we then resolve to fashion as a nation? That is the central point. And whether the nation we fashioned through our resolve, our energies and our efforts is a nation which includes all, not just some. And that is why I support this, our national day. Because in Australia, we have resolved to build such a nation. A nation for Australians all, not just for Australians some.
A nation which has apologised for the mistakes of the past, and there have been many. But a nation now resolved to close the gap. A nation now resolved to close the gap in education, in health, and employment, and those things which matter in people's daily and practical lives. A nation of Australians all. Not just of some. So let us embrace this great practical challenge which lies ahead in closing the gap. Embraced and supported by the goodwill of all Australians, to get behind this great project, so that the gap that exists between us in the life opportunities which present themselves can be closed.
To those of you who join us today as members of the Australian family for the first time, can I say welcome. Welcome to the nation's family. When citizenship was introduced by Ben Chifley 60 years ago, it was to reflect this great wave of migration which came to our shores after the last world war. And Chifley and those who worked with him said among themselves, let us embrace formally this construction of the new Australian nation. No longer British subjects past, but Australian citizens future.
And today you join their ranks. And as Prime Minister of Australia I am so glad that you are doing so, because you bring with you dynamism, you bring with you determination, and you bring with you diversity.
The great spirit of Australia has been this - to fashion unity from diversity. And to do so through tolerance and respect, and through the energisation of the nation. And that is what your joining us today does for the year ahead and for the future.
As we have done throughout our national history, resolving afresh to fashion a nation for a continent, and a continent for a nation, and you our newest members. The values on which this nation has been built and which will guide us for the future  -  courage, resilience, compassion, and to add that fourth to realise that we are all in this together. And shaped with these great values that have guided us so well in the past, let us proceed with absolute confidence, with absolute confidence to embrace the challenges that now face us for the future.
A happy Australia Day to you all.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today signed Pacific Partnerships for Development with Prime Minister Sikua of Solomon Islands and President Tong of Kiribati.
This significant signing occurred at the Special Pacific Forum Leaders' Meeting on Fiji in Port Moresby.
The Partnerships signed today are designed to make a real and practical difference to the lives of ordinary people in the Pacific. 
Pacific Partnerships for Development are the centre piece of Australia's new approach to the Pacific region which commits Australia and its Pacific partners to working together to meet common challenges
The Partnership with Solomon Islands will have an initial focus on:
     * better service delivery, particularly in rural areas;
     * more sustainable economic growth and reform; 
     * improved economic livelihoods; 
     * and improved economic infrastructure.
The Partnership will complement work to support peace and prosperity being 
undertaken through the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Island (RAMSI). 
The Partnership with Kiribati will have an initial focus on:
     * improved basic education; 
     * workforce skills development;
     * and improved growth and economic management. 
The goal of the Partnerships is to advance the prosperity of the region and raise the standard of living of people living in the Pacific.
Most Pacific Island countries are not on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in areas such as health and education by 2015. 
Up to a million children in the region do not attend school, and as many as 18,000 children die each year from preventable causes. 
The Pacific Partnerships for Development aim to realise better development results by committing Australia to provide new and additional assistance. 
They embrace important commitments from Solomon Islands and Kiribati to continue to improve governance, increase investment in economic infrastructure and to strive to achieve better outcomes in health and education and other areas.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced this year's Pacific Islands Forum will be held in Cairns in the first week of August 2009.
In Port Moresby in March last year, the Prime Minister announced Australia's nomination to host the Forum, reflecting Australia's reengagement in the Pacific region.
As the Port Moresby Declaration affirms, Australia is committed to working with Pacific Island nations towards a new era of cooperation and positive outcomes for the people of the Pacific.
The city and people of Cairns will warmly welcome Australia's friends from the Pacific for this year's Pacific Islands Forum, the region's pre-eminent annual meeting.


PM: This has been a good meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum. The challenge before us was, in a word, democracy. How to defend it, how to preserve it, and how to restore it here in our own region.
When we met at the Pacific Islands Forum in Niue last year, the challenge was the message we sent to the Interim Government of Fiji and whether the Pacific Islands Forum was going to be fair dinkum about the restoration of democracy in Fiji. Well, through the Niue declaration last year, we demonstrated that was the case. And through the Port Moresby communiqué today, we have done so again.
What has occurred here in Port Moresby is for all countries in the region to send a loud and clear message to the government, the interim government in Fiji that they must return to the ballot box, and they must send the soldiers back to the barracks. That's a message which is important within Fiji. It's a message which is important right across the South Pacific region.
This is a region where Australia has fundamental interests. And part of those fundamental interests is to ensure that our neighbourhood is a democratic neighbourhood. On the content of the actual communiqué, what we had today was a resolution on the part of Pacific Island leaders to establish a clear and unequivocal timetable for the restoration of democracy in Fiji.
A clear timetable for 1 May for the Interim Government of Fiji to declare its intention to hold an election, and secondly for that election to be in fact held by the end of this year. Failure to do so will result in automatic suspension from the meetings of the Forum.
That has never occurred before in the history of the Pacific Islands Forum. This therefore was an important threshold for the Pacific Islands leaders to cross. And they've crossed it today, and they've done so unanimously. And the reason is, all countries within the neighbourhood, all leaders within our regions, are resolved that democracy is too fundamental a principle to be sacrificed and a line has to be drawn in the sand. A line that's been drawn in the sand with this communiqué.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister. Ilya Gridneff, AAP. Considering the capricious nature of Bainimarama, Commodore Bainimarama, how likely are you expecting this communiqué to be lived up to or has to be followed through?
PM: The Interim Government of Fiji has shown complete contempt for its previous commitments to hold democratic elections by March of this year. They gave that commitment to a meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum way back in 2007. The Pacific Islands Forum gave them until March of 2009 to hold an election. The Interim Government of Fiji has thumbed their noses at that. Therefore, we Australia, are sceptical, deeply sceptical about the bona fides of this political leader, and the Government, interim Government, that he represents. Nonetheless, the timetable which has been agreed upon by Pacific Islands leaders, provide ample and reasonable time to conclude whatever internal consultation has to be done within Fiji itself, and for the physical preparation of an election this year. Otherwise suspension follows. And that is the decision, clear cut which has been taken here unanimously in Port Moresby today.
JOURNALIST: So you are expecting suspension will happen?
PM: The ball now is very much in the court of the Interim Government of Fiji. Let's see what they do. The Pacific Island leaders have been reasonable, flexible but firm. They've established timelines in the sand. At which point, no further discussion, automatic suspension would ensue if an election is not held this year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Steve Marshall from the ABC. The region's given Fiji a lifetime, a lot of time. Why extend their timeframe, why not call for tougher sanctions and internationalise those things - call upon UN or the Commonwealth (inaudible).
PM: Well the United Nations and the Commonwealth are separately engaged in the internal processes of consultation within Fiji as we speak. And of course, other forums stand ready to assist with those consultation processes among the political parties. But in the history of the Pacific Islands Forum which is a long one, never before has an automatic tripwire for suspension been concluded by leaders. This is a break from past convention, and that is because Fiji has broken past conventions. Namely, the honouring of democracy in our region.
Also, it's important for the Forum to speak with one voice. And we have. Countries large, countries small. Melanesian states, Micronesian states, Polynesian states. Those with the closest possible relations with Fiji and those somewhat more removed. Unity across the region is important and it sends a clear message to the body politic within Fiji itself that this action by the military must be drawn to a close.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Paul Toohey from The Australian newspaper.
PM: Hi Paul Toohey.
JOURNALIST: Hi, how are you?
PM: Good. I am Kevin Rudd from the Australian Government.
JOURNALIST: What do you do?
PM: I used to be from Queensland and I was here to help.
JOURNALIST: Given what we know about this guy, well firstly, have you ever spoken to him?
PM: No. Not that I can recall. May have been in some gathering somewhere, in case any of your photographic archives find me at some time 1986 in (inaudible), Brisbane or something, I don't know.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the threat of suspension is likely to put a (inaudible) in his power?
PM: You know the key thing here is for the region to speak with a clear voice about what the region stands for. You see either this region is one which says that a military coup is acceptable, or is one which says it is not. And what we've done today and through the communiqué in Niue last year is say it is not. And there is a clear timetable through which suspension will ensue. So we as a region have spoken with a clear voice of democratic resolve.
The second thing is this. We've also said loud and clear to the good people of Fiji, that it's time their Government returned the soldiers to the barracks and restored the democratic process. Because their friends and neighbours within the region do not regard this as right. Those two principles are important and they've been upheld today in the deliberations of the Forum.
JOURNALIST: But (inaudible) more handy if he speaks at the UN General Assembly (inaudible) removing racism and ethnically stacked elections and things like that. And he wants electoral reform before he has an election. Do you think he's got time to get in electoral reform before the end of this year?
PM: The resolve of the Pacific Islands Forum is that he has ample time in 2009 to draw these processes to a conclusion and to proceed to the ballot box. This has also been the clear reflection of the time it would take to hold an election by the ministerial contact group we have engaged separately with the Interim Government of Fiji. Time is a plenty, and remember in 2007, the Interim Fiji Government said then that 18 months later in March of 2009, no if's no buts no maybes, they go to the ballot box, and they didn't. So, Pacific Islands in the countries and the leaders have said, here's a test, you've got to pass it, this year's it, otherwise automatic suspension ensues. And that is what is new in this declaration.
JOURNALIST: It's been repeated by everyone who's come across it in the wires today that it could take five to ten years for the reforms that he wants to bring about. And the representative of Fiji, that was the Attorney General that was here, repeated the need for these reforms saying that you know we had four coups in the last two decades and if we rush this, there's no point having false elections that is perpetuating the same problems. Is this timeframe too short?
PM: Well those remarks about five to ten years, which were conveyed in the Fijian media today underlines the problem. You said that the Attorney General of the Interim Government of Fiji made reference to timelines. I quizzed directly (inaudible) Attorney General about five to ten years in his leaders' statement in Fiji yesterday. And I myself concluded that the answers were not satisfactory. You see, you can't allow this to drift on forever. You have to be clear cut about it. You have to be reasonable given the complexities of Fijian internal political life, but flexibility with a firm timeline is what we have agreed upon, after long and constructive and positive deliberations, and I'll commend the chairmanship of the Premier of Niue and the Grand Chief for hosting this important meeting. Remember in the history of the Forum, this hasn't been done before. It is new, and this with a significant stake (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the Chair of the Forum, the Premier of Niue, consistent with the communiqué of the Niue Forum meeting, was under an obligation to convene a meeting at the mutual convenience of 13, 14, 15 individuals across the region, and did so, and that was agreed to be here in Port Moresby today. In fact the Niue communiqué called upon us to meet by the end of December. So the Chairman was doing the right thing. The Chief was also doing the right thing and doing everything possible to ensure the head of the Interim Government of Fiji could attend. He chose not to be here and remember, he chose not to attend in Niue last year with an excuse that was entirely unbelievable.
JOURNALIST: Is it your view Prime Minister that the people of Fiji suffer at this time under Frank Bainimarama?
PM: I believe that anyone who is deprived of their democratic voice, anyone who is deprived of fundamental freedoms of the press, and for goodness sake let's look at what's happened with the publisher of the Fiji Times today, are deprived of the lifeblood of being in a normal, democratic community. All people deserve, have a right to free access to the media and information. As I said earlier today, in a direct remark to the Attorney General of the Interim Government of Fiji, the decision to effectively expel the publisher of the Fiji Times is an absolute outrage. On a day when the Interim Government is seeking to convince us that it's all fine and dandy. The same day that the head of the Interim Government of Fiji says it might be five or ten years before they restore democracy. Again, the Forum reflected on all these factors, and that's why we have such a clear and unequivocal statement, and a process for automatic suspension.


Can I acknowledge the President of ACT Cricket, also James Southerland, CEO Cricket Australia. Heather Ridell, Acting High Commissioner of New Zealand. Where are you Heather? You're lurking here somewhere I know. There you are. I see you.
I see lurking in the distance the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia and I'll come to her in a minute. Ambassadors, High Commissioners, those from the diplomatic core who love and to support this great game of cricket.
Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshall Angus Houston. Where are you Angus? What's this got to do with the defence of Australia more to the point? Absolutely nothing is the answer to that. Mind you if I was you I'd be going to the cricket too.
And Andrew Barr, Minister for Sport in the ACT and can I acknowledge also members of the 1948 Invincibles. Arthur Morris, Neil Harvey and Sam Loxton. Every time I meet these guys I still sort of draw a deep breath at the thought of here I am dealing with members of the Immortals and their great contact with that great side of that great year and it is an honour to have you among us.
ACT cricket officials, members of the New Zealand team, great to have you here. Members of the Prime Minister's XI, even better to have you here. Umpires who've already been given their instructions by me, to be fair, impartial and Australian. Sponsors one and all. And of course the two captains of the two sides.
And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It gives me great pleasure to welcome the New Zealand Cricket Team, the Prime Minister's XI, Cricket Australia and the ACT Cricket Community to Canberra once again for the Prime Minister's XI match.
The PM's XI has become one of the most notable days on the Australian cricketing calendar, and it's wonderful to see New Zealand here to take on this challenge for
the fourth time.
The history of this match, first taking place in 1951, serves to reflect Australia's great love of cricket  -  and often that of the cricket tragic of the Australian Prime Minister of the day. And of course 51 takes us back to the great days of Sir Robert Menzies.
For our New Zealand friends less familiar with the history of Sir Robert Menzies who was a long-serving post-war Prime Minister. Ming as he was affectionately known in Australia's great habit was to organise every official visit to the United Kingdom to take in an entire Ashes series.
These days if we're abroad for more than two or three days, the questions are raised as to what you're doing there. Menzies could get away with two or three months and no one would ask why. As he just appeared not just at the test game, not just the test matches, not just at Lords, but at most of the country games as well. We pine for an earlier and more civilised age. Alas it has passed us by.
However, despite the prominent role that we've grown accustomed in recent days, which is fixture there was a time when the game wasn't played for twenty seasons through to the early 1980s. Of course the Arch Deakin of its resurrection was none other than Bob Hawke, cricketer extraordinaire.
We all know that great shot of Bob himself playing cricket. Bob fancied himself as a cricket played of renown and that great shot of him having his glasses removed by fast delivery by members of the press gallery, which reflects their general contempt for the Office of Prime Minister.
One of the stands at Manuka, where we will be playing tomorrow, is named after Bob. And this is very appropriate, as he played no small part in reviving this great tradition.
In Hawkey's first effort overseeing the team in early 1984, a young stocky Tasmanian from Launceston by the name of David Clarence Boon put his name in lights and earned himself a test spot after scoring a run-a-ball 134 in all against the fearsome West Indies attack of that day. And so Boonie's career began.
David Boon would go on to amass 21 test centuries and 7,400 runs for his country in over 100 appearances in the baggy green and is one of its most proud custodians and of course a high celebration of Australian fashion and culture as well. Where's Boonie? Is he here? That's good, I've insulted him in his absence.
It was also the last time that we would be blessed with opportunity to see the great D K Lillee in an Australian XI, who picked up 2/21 leading the attack in a typically effective and economical display.
Australia went on to win that day, a rare victory against ‘the Windies' who were at the time very much at the peak of their powers.
Bob Hawke's Midas touch as a cricket selector I'm sure will surprise few, as has been his way in most areas of his most extraordinary life.
Over the years this match has retained that reputation as a curtain raiser for future stars, and also a most appropriate opportunity to recognise some of Australian cricket's most revered champions.
This year we are privileged to have Justin Langer captain the Australian side, honouring his commitment and enormous contribution to the game. Good on you Justin.
Few Australian cricketers have worn the baggy green with such pride and distinction as Justin. His test debut was a baptism of fire against other, another fearsome West Indian attack in 1993.
Until his retirement in 2007, Justin got every last ounce out of himself, compiling one of the most impressive test records in the modern era.
He played an extraordinary 105 Tests for Australia  -  14 against New Zealand  -  and formed one half of Australia's greatest ever opening partnership with Matthew Hayden. Who came from Queensland. I just thought I'd mention that. So do I.
With 23 test centuries and over 7,600 test runs, Justin's application, passion and dedication to the cause will go down in cricketing folk lore.
It was very appropriate that Justin retired from international, retirement from the international cricketing circuit occurred after Australia regained the Ashes with a five nil whitewash against the old enemy. That's what we describe in politics as social justice. That is a five nil whitewash of the Poms. Is the British High Commissioner here? That's good.
With Justin Langer, it was the team that always came first.
We are honoured that he will once again represent Australia and for the second time in his career, captain the Prime Minister's XI.
It is also great for us to welcome Daniel Vettori and all the Black Caps to our nation's capital before they tour the country in the Chappell/Haddlee series.
Our two countries have met at Manuka Oval on four occasions, with New Zealand claiming victory on all occasions, with the exception of the one match that was abandoned. That's very disturbing when you think about it. Isn't it Justin? No pressure mate.
As is always the case in our traditional trans-Tasman rivalry, New Zealand will do everything they can to knock us off, and ensure a tough game of cricket.
While I have no doubt that the Black Caps will prove formidable opponents, it is my sincere hope that the Australian XI will prove too strong tomorrow and take out their first win against New Zealand, and the first win in my Prime Ministership. Otherwise I'm in deep trouble too.
Finally, I wish to offer my appreciation to Cricket Australia and the ACT Cricket Association for their ongoing support and commitment to the PM's XI.
With your partnership and great dedication, I am sure that we will be enjoying this day of cricket for many years to come.
My very best wishes to both teams for a competitive game of cricket.
I'd also as I said in my earlier remarks, draw attention to the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister. A few things have changed this week, I today was due to be in New Delhi because we had an official visit planned to India and the Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister Singh unfortunately became ill so that visit was cancelled, hence why I am able to be with you.
Now the person who was ready to stand into the breach is, was the Deputy Prime Minister and about to be Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard. And the look of panic on Julia's face as I explained to her, her responsibilities including the toss, active involvement in team selection and batting order and bowling order and in fact general advice [inaudible] game, was a look I shall always treasure.
So Julia, good to have you with us. I'm sorry that I'm here talking your place.
Can I say to all of you, those of our friends who've come across the Tasman and the members of the PM's XI that this is a great game, it's a great tradition in Australia and I'm glad that you are part of this continuing chapter of the Australian cricketing story.
I was with your Prime Minister yesterday in Port Moresby, John Key. And for those of you who have not seen the New Zealand Prime Minister in recent times, he's broken his arm in three places and I just assure the New Zealand team I had nothing to do with it.
He said to me to pass on to you his best wishes for the game and they are best wishes [inaudible] I am sure you will honour the great name of New Zealand in your feats on the field tomorrow.
Everyone is here because they love the game of cricket. And this is something that unites not just Australia and New Zealand but I've got to say countries and peoples across the world. Transcends racial divides, it transcends cultural divides, it transcends language divides and it is just a great celebration of life in itself.
And this small part of it, this great game and institution in Canberra each year, the Prime Minister's XI, I believe is one part of a much grander tale and that is the grand story of cricket itself.
Ladies and gentlemen thank you for being with us, let's celebrate the game tomorrow.


(Acknowledgements)
Thank you John Gallop for that tactful and diplomatic reminder of the fact, and I quote you, that New Zealand was supposed to be part of the Federation. I am sure that will be reported positively in tomorrow's New Zealand press. Your career in Australian diplomacy is once again assured.
Speaking of the diplomacy which unites our two great lands, I was speaking earlier to Sir Richard Hadlee, where is Sir Richard, gone somewhere? Can't see him (inaudible). Anyway, that means I can misrepresent grossly what he actually said. We were talking about his contribution to diplomacy and his experiences on an Australian tour in the early 1980's, when one of my distinguished predecessors was Prime Minister, RJ Hawke.
He said it was a provincial game in Australia against Geelong, or Victorian Country I think, Victorian Country XI  -  where one little kid at the end of the day raced on to the field and said to Sir Richard, ‘you know, you're a real mongrel'.
Now Sir Richard, as you know him well, is a proper chap and has a sense of proper decorum in behaviour. He then told me that he then chased after the kid across the ground and then proceeded to give him a solid dressing down.
This is of course partly caught on camera, which then caused Sir Richard when interviewed to widen the tent of his attack, and then say it was obviously a reflection of parental standards generally in Australia. And how could the Australian education system possibly produce such people, and wasn't this a problem for the current standard of Prime Ministerial leadership.
So that's what we call in the business of politics, escalation with intent. And your comments this morning John, were near brushes in the breeze compared with all of that.
Can I just say this about the Australia  -  New Zealand relationship though, it is the closest relationship that this country has. And for those of you who are here from across the Tasman, and having spent some of the last week with John Key, the new Prime Minister of New Zealand - from our point of view as Australia this is a fundamentally important relationship; has been in times past, will be for the future. And I think of no two countries with a closer set of ties than those between those from the other side of the ditch and ourselves.
I was perusing the record on how previous Prime Ministers have fared in this series. There is an interesting mathematical principle which derives from this which I have just invented.
Ming, Prime Minister Menzies, probably I think cricket tragic extraordinaire, even compared with Mr Howard. I mean I think Ming would regard himself and I think people would regard Ming as almost co-definitional with the game to the extent of tours of England that I referred to last night.
Ming however when it comes to the Prime Minister's XI, has this as his result: seven games played for one win, four losses, one tie and one no result. Not a very good score, Ming.
RJ Hawke who is thought himself as not only keen sport enthusiast, but in at least Hawkey's estimation, a damn good player of all sports as well. Bob always has a virtue when it came to, let's call it, self-confidence. Hawkey: eight games played, four wins, three losses, and one no result. So a bare pass for RJ Hawke but considerably better than Ming.
Mr Howard: 11 games played, six wins and five losses, again a bare pass.
Guess who gets the best result overall? That well-known national sporting enthusiast, PJ Keating. Three games played and three wins, no losses.
I am not sure what the mathematical principle is here but if you have a Prime Minister in office who has no demonstrable interest in this game, the national team will do better.
For myself, who actually really enjoys the game, I am following the historical trend. I've been Prime Minister for one game so far and I lost it. So I am sure Paul would be encouraged by that if he could actually understand the statistics of the game. We love Paul. It's just that as you know, he wasn't a big fan of sport.
It's a great pleasure of mine to welcome you all here today to this event and it is a real fixture in the annual calendar. As we look out on this field, and I saw this, this morning when I was here for the toss, we looked at the Jack Fingleton scoreboard. And it is my working assumption that most people in this room are either political or cricketing junkies or both - the life and times of Jack Fingleton were dominated by both in equal measure.
Jack donned the baggy green on 18 occasions for Australia in the early 1930s. This included fronting up at the top of the order in the infamous Bodyline series of 1932-33, a challenge that only the bravest competitors could ever wish for.
This was also a series for which he would go on to write the definitive historical account later in his life.
At the conclusion of his cricketing career he moved to the nation's capital, where he could cover politics for Radio Australia from the Parliamentary Press Gallery for a remarkable 38 years.
The scoreboard to our right was for many years located at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, overseeing test matches and football games alike for a generation, before she came here to retire gently and elegantly at the Manuka Oval.
I think it would be more apt, that in this fine city of Canberra, this scoreboard resides here as an ongoing reminder of his legacy to both of his professional pursuits: politics and sport.
One of the great things about this event, this game between the Prime Minister's XI and visiting touring sides, is its history.
Sir Robert Menzies as I said before, a great cricketing tragic, a great fan of the game, initiated this series a long, long time ago. And I believe it has done the city of Canberra proud by adding it to the annual events which we celebrate here.
More importantly though if you look at the role which this game has played, or this match has played in encouraging players who are younger in years. And if you look at today's list of the Prime Minister's XI, you will note that eight of the eleven players are in fact selected with an age under 25. And let's wish them all well for their future cricketing careers.
Justin Langer, I referred to at length and positively last night and I will qualify my remarks as appropriate by the end of today's play. No pressure Justin if you are listening to this anywhere and I'm sure you're not. You're concentrating on an encouraging session with the players downstairs.
The Kiwis have left us with a formidable task after lunch, five for 271 is a reasonable score here at Manuka but I am confident that we will do well in rising to the challenge and the occasion. After all, I have my own modest score line to be mindful of over here.
Mind you, when it comes to games or matches between Australia and New Zealand even it was marbles or tiddly-winks, it would bring out a degree of intensity and a performance on the field. And I believe we have seen that this morning and we will see it again this afternoon.
Already the battles between the teams representing both sides of the Tasman have been formidable. In the limited (inaudible) game there have been 112 games between Australia and New Zealand. And I believe they have contributed a lot to the overall condition of the game or the new form of the game.
The less that is said about the underarm scandal of 1981 the better. I have chosen not to mention it because my notes here actually provide an egregious joke about it which would get a big run in the New Zealand newspapers. So I am not going to do it.
In recent times, New Zealand and Australia have struck the Chappell-Hadlee Trophy, for which our visitors are here this summer. This I believe is a fantastic initiative that enables us to recognise on an annual basis the unique relationship we share on the cricketing field. And I am sure this is going to be a great season between the two of us.
So ladies and gentlemen, it's great to be here at Manuka. I appreciate the support which the local business community in particular provide to this event each year.
I appreciate the fact that the good denizens of Canberra themselves come out and support this fixture. And I think it is a great thing that here in the nation's capital we have this great sporting event each year.
If I could just say this about the great game of cricket itself more broadly. I was talking to Sir Richard Hadlee about this earlier today. We should never forget the role which this game plays, and our great national sporting culture in general plays, in underpinning the nation's spirit at times of challenge. 
It has done so in times past, it does so today and will do so in the future.
Some say well it is just a game, well it is. But you know we see reflected in the way in which this game is played, in the intensity of it, on the questions of character which are brought to bear in each game, endurance and courage and all those things.
Things that actually have a wider role to play in the character of a nation and the character of a people as we deal with challenges of life more broadly.
And those challenges will be delivered to us in large measure in the year ahead.
This is a great game. I enjoy it heaps. And I look forward very much to seeing which side prevails through the course of the afternoon. I am sure all of you will get out there and impartially back the best team, Australia.


Over the last week, the International Monetary Fund has predicted for 2009, the worst year for the global economy since the war. All major economies around the world are in recession. In China, the world's largest emerging economy and Australia's largest trading partner, having a $200 billion fall in its growth as of the end of 2008.
Today we see two new sets of bad economic data. One from the United States, whereby as of the end of 2008 we see its economy shrinking at an annualised rate of nearly four per cent  -  and the IMF also predicting for Australia for 2009, notwithstanding the fact that we would have the highest growth among the major developed economies for the year ahead, it would nonetheless, according to the IMF, be just below zero without any further measures adopted.
The bottom line is this, that when we look across the global economy now, two core principals emerge. And that is that the global economic recession is resulting in falls in economic growth, employment and revenues right across the world, including for Australia.
And second, that therefore this Government remains resolved to take whatever further action is necessary to deal with these falls in revenues, growth and employment for Australia, caused by this global economic recession.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) implications for employment (inaudible)
PM: Well if you look at the impact of the global recession around the world, unemployment in every major economy and in the major emerging economies is increasing all the time. As you know, the Government's most recent projections of unemployment we forecast an increase in unemployment in '09 and in '10.
Therefore it underlines the rationale for the Government's action taken through its various stimulus packages last year. And as I said before, the Government remains resolved to take whatever further action is necessary to continue to support growth and jobs and to deal with also, the collapse in Government revenues which has been caused by the global recession.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Treasury's forecasts for the economy (inaudible)
PM: The Treasury's most recent forecasts are reflected in the Mid Year Economic Outlook, as of the end of last year. Treasury of course continues to examine its growth projections for the year ahead given changes in the global economic data.
JOURNALIST: The IMF (inaudible) I gather they are saying we are either on the brink of or heading into recession in Australia. Do you think they are unduly pessimistic or do now acknowledge recession is (inaudible)
PM: The Government remains committed to Treasury's existing forecasts, though as I indicated in the answer to the previous question, Treasury will continue to examine its growth assumptions for the future, based on changing global economic data.
I emphasise what I said before as well, namely that for those who criticised the stimulus packages released by the Government in the last part of last year, the emerging dire economic data from around the world on the impact of growth in the last quarters of last year, underpins the correct nature of the action we took then.
Further I say again, unequivocally, that the Government remains determined to take whatever further action is necessary to deal with the falls in growth, employment and Government revenues, caused by the global economic recession.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in response to your 7000 word essay (inaudible)
PM: Mr Turnbull has stated his view that free markets should sort out all of our problems. This Government does not have that view because free market fundamentalism, underpinning greed, caused the global financial crisis which has now caused a global economic recession, effecting every county in the world.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: My view has always been that Labor as a political philosophy and as a Government in power, must always achieve the balance between harnessing the power of markets and properly regulating those markets and at the same time ensuring prudent long term financial management.
I have said that from the first days of my first speech in this Parliament. I have not departed from those principles and I will not.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) you have now called yourself a social democrat in an essay being published this week (inaudible).
PM: Well spotted, well spotted. They aren't. And I have always called myself a social democrat before you go on any further, including during the election campaign.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Of course, they are entirely consistent propositions. You have two clear alternatives here. Mr Turnbull argues that the free market should sort all these problems out. Well that failed spectacularly with the global financial crisis. We say, properly regulated markets for the future, is the only way in which we save a future free enterprise system.
JOURNALIST: Will this be a fundamental shift then do you think? After the financial crisis?
PM: Anyone who looks at the absolute economic carnage which has occurred through unfettered free market fundamentalism, turbo charging greed, and the economic consequences for working families across the world, who doesn't draw some conclusions about the failure of this system, is not looking at the evidence.
What I am saying is the proper, balanced approach for the future is: harness the power of open markets, but do so by properly regulating those markets which means, through a proper role for Government.
Let me add this - to whom have the free market fundamentalists turned to seek rescue at this time of global financial crisis? They have turned to Government, the agency of Government to deal with these challenges.
Therefore it reasserts the fundamental principle for which I have stood for more than a decade and is absolute contrast to free market fundamentalists who argue the reverse.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) can you tell us, will this imminent stimulus package (inaudible) bigger than the previous package and when can we expect it?
PM: Well there are two embedded clauses in that Glen. The first is your assumption about there being an imminent stimulus package. As I said before, the Government remains resolved to take whatever action is necessary to continue to support growth and jobs and to deal with falling Government revenues as a consequence of the global economic recession.
And secondly we are strongly of the view that any such future action has to be calibrated against the global economic circumstances which we are confronted.
There are two overall approaches to this. Either you stand to one side and simply say, ‘let the free market rip', well we can see what is happening with that. Or government acts - government acting through the proper regulation of financial markets and government acting through fiscal stimulus to ensure to the greatest extent possible, that you can help fill the growth gap left by a retreating private sector, because of what has occurred in private credit markets.
JOURNALISTS: Mr Rudd the Treasurer and the IMF have said in recent days that tax cuts do not deliver necessary stimulus fast enough to the economy. Do you share their belief and (inaudible)
PM: Well it is a matter of logic that if you wish to provide stimulus in a timely fashion to the economy, that tax cuts of themselves represent a much longer burning fuse. That is, they do not have immediate effect. The crisis which we face in the economy now, 2009, worldwide, and the challenge we face in Australia means that you need to draw clear conclusions from what form of fiscal stimulus is most effective.
When we considered this matter carefully, when the Government unleashed the stimulus package through the Economic Security Strategy in October last year, we had these debates long and hard internally as to what was most effective.
I said publicly then and I have had no cause to change that view since, that the Treasury's advice to us was go hard, go early, go households  -  that was the right response for the time.
As I said the Government remains determined to take whatever further action is necessary, but in terms of your core point about the IMF's position and about what the Treasurer has correctly stated publicly, I am as one with them.
JOURNALIST: Does this mean that (inaudible) tax cuts have no role however in a package of measures, and your view seems at odds for example with Heather Ridout who was arguing (inaudible)
PM: The key thing also, as I said last year in describing how you approach stimulus questions, is to ensure that they are temporary and they are targeted. That is important. Secondly it is also important to underline that, as we did through the assistance provided to the business sector with the temporary investment allowance in December last year, that there are temporary measures which are possible.
Temporary, sharp and focussed. And we underlined that through the content of the package which we delivered then. But I simply go back to the point, again that the challenge we face is an immediate one, as do all government's around the world.
What measures can you take now to support growth and employment and at a time of collapsing Government revenues. This is a core challenge caused by the global economic recession off the back of the global financial crisis.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can we just go back to the shrinking GDP in the US and also Barack Obama talking about slicing imports, or at least decreasing them. What does this latest news from the US mean for Australia?
PM: I haven't seen the final and formal text of remarks by the US President on any measures concerning US trade policy. The Australian Government's position has never changed. It is a position informed by history and the appalling history of the Smoot-Hawley tariff from the 1930's. It is informed also by our experience of how you grow this economy and the global economy since the ‘80's and ‘90's on, and that is through having an open global trading environment.
We all have to be very wary of any beggar-thy-neighbour approaches. Now I do not say at all that this administration has given any indication that it would embark upon that course of action. I have no evidence of that whatsoever. But our policy has simply not changed.
We support open markets and will continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) infrastructure problems we have seen overnight (inaudible) what more can the Commonwealth do to assist Victoria?
PM: As you know in the course of the last week I have been in discussions of all premiers about long term needs for infrastructure and I will continue to engage in those discussions. By the way could I also say about Victoria, which is why I paused when I heard you begin to raise your question, the fires in Gippsland, appalling damage to property.
These are ugly times for all families and communities effected and I think the hearts and prayers of all decent minded Australians go out to those families who are suffering, those communities suffering from these appalling fires.
The southern part of the nation is a tinder box at the moment. It is just appalling. And if I have got one message to all Australians, it is simply to exercise extreme caution at this time. This is a very, very dangerous time of the year. If we reflect back on the terrible lessons of previous harsh Australian summers.
[ends]


The Rudd Government today announced five key $950 one-off payments for low and middle income households and individuals.
The Government is providing these cash payments to immediately support jobs and strengthen the Australian economy during a severe global recession.
These targeted cash bonuses are a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support up to 90,000 Australian jobs.
To immediately stimulate the economy in the shortest possible time, five groups of one-off cash bonuses will be paid in March and April 2009.
These five key bonuses include a:
     * Tax Bonus for Working Australians of up to $950 paid to every eligible Australian worker earning $100,000 or less. This will support up to 8.7 million individuals.
     * $950 Single Income Family Bonus to support 1.5 million families with one main income earner.
     * $950 Farmers' Hardship Bonus paid to around 21,500 drought affected farmers and farm dependent small business owners receiving exceptional circumstances related income support.
     * $950 per child Back to School Bonus to support 2.8 million children from low- and middle-income families.
     * $950 Training and Learning Bonus paid to students and people outside of the workforce returning to study to help with the costs of education and training.
To support jobs in the middle of a severe global recession the Government must stimulate the economy in the most immediate manner possible.
That is why one off cash bonuses to people and families who are doing it toughest are a key part of our Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
These one off cash bonuses reflect the weight of economic authority  -  including the advice of the International Monetary Fund  -  that targeted one off payments rather than generalised tax cuts spread over a lengthy period are more likely to be consumed, and thus provide a more effective economic stimulus and provide more support for Australian jobs.
There will be no quick fixes, but the Government is determined to act swiftly and decisively to support Australian households, growth and jobs.
These cash bonuses will stimulate consumption quickly, supporting economic activity and jobs until our nation building initiatives have an impact. 
This $12.7 billion package is a major economic initiative to deal with these extraordinary economic times and is in addition to the Economic Security Strategy that the Rudd Government delivered in December 2008.
Tax Bonus for Working Australians 
The Government will provide an up-front, lump-sum tax bonus of up to $950 to around 8.7 million Australian workers earning $100,000 or less. 
A lump-sum payment of up to $950 will be made to eligible taxpayers from April 2009. The bonus will be available to Australian resident taxpayers who paid tax in the 2007-08 financial year after taking into account available tax offsets and credits.
The bonus is subject to an income threshold test which determines that a:
     * $950 bonus will be paid to eligible taxpayers with a taxable income of up to and including $80,000;
     * $650 bonus will paid to eligible taxpayers with taxable incomes exceeding $80,000 and up to $90,000; and
     * $300 bonus will be paid to eligible taxpayers with incomes exceeding $90,000 up to and including $100,000.
Taxpayers will not need to apply for the payment. The Australian Taxation Office will automatically make the payment after determining eligibility. 
Single Income Family Bonus
The Government's Single income Family Bonus will provide an up-front, one-off bonus payment of $950 to approximately 1.5 million families who receive Family Tax Benefit Part B (FTB-B). The bonus is intended to provide additional assistance to families with children that have one main income earner. 
The payments, which will be made automatically by Centrelink in the fortnight commencing 11 March 2009, will be non-taxable and will not be counted as income for social security purposes. 
The small number of families who claim FTB-B as a lump sum, will receive their one-off payments from Centrelink in 2009-10 and 2010-11 after their 2008-09 tax returns have been processed by the Australian Taxation Office. 
Families who are eligible for FTB-B on 3 February 2009 will receive the Single Income Family Bonus.
Farmer's Hardship Bonus
The Government will provide $20.4 million in 2008-09 for an up-front, one-off payment to farmers and rural-dependent small business owners receiving exceptional circumstances related income support. 
A lump-sum payment of $950 will be made to people who, on 3 February 2009, are receiving:
     * Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment for Farmers;
     * Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment for Small Business;
     * Interim Income Support for Farmers;
     * Interim Income Support for Small Business;
     * Transitional Income Support; or
     * Farm Help Income Support.
The payments will be made in the fortnight commencing 24 March 2009, to approximately 21,500 recipients and will provide additional support to groups of Australians who are in hardship. These payments will not be taxable and will not be counted as income for social security purposes.
Back to School Bonus
The Government's $950 Back to School Bonus will provide a one-off, up-front bonus to be paid to families eligible for Family Tax Benefit Part A (FTB-A) on 3 February 2009 for each eligible child of school age (aged 4 to 18 on 3 February 2009).
This will help meet education costs for the 2009 academic year and is in addition to and separate from the Education Tax Refund. 
The Back to School Bonus is expected to help 2.76 million children aged 4 to 18 in just over 1.5 million families across Australia. 
Training and Learning Bonus
The Government's $511 million Training and Learning Bonus provides an up-front, one off bonus to eligible students to assist with the costs for the 2009 academic year. It also provides a temporary (until June 2010) additional incentive for social security recipients to return to education and training. 
The Training and Learning Bonus consists of two categories:
Category 1 
     * A one-off $950 bonus for recipients of: Youth Allowance (students and apprentices); Austudy; ABSTUDY and related payments 
     * The one-off bonus will also be available to recipients of Sickness Allowance and Special Benefit (under age pension age). 
     * If a student attracts the Government's Back to School Bonus they are not eligible for the one-off $950 Learning and Training Bonus.
Category 2
     * A temporary supplement (from 1 January 2009 to 30 June 2010) to the Education Entry Payment (EdEP) of $950. This is in addition to the existing EdEP payment of $208, which provides assistance with the costs of training courses, for income support recipients who are returning to study. 
     * A temporary extension (from 1 January 2009 to 30 June 2010) of the EdEP to Youth allowance (other); and 
     * A temporary relaxation (from 1 January 2009 to 30 June 2010) of the requirement that recipients must have been receiving social security payments from 12 months to 1 month.
Around 440,000 students and people returning to study will be paid this one off cash bonus. 


The Rudd Government today announced a $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support jobs and invest in future long term economic growth.
This historic long term and targeted Nation Building and Jobs Plan is a further decisive step in the Government's response to the severe global recession.
Treasury estimates that today's Nation Building and Jobs Plan will support up to 90,000 jobs in 2008-09 and 2009-10.
Key measures funded by today's Nation Building and Jobs Plan include:
     * Free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes
     * Build or upgrade a building in every one of Australia's 9,540 schools
     * Build more than 20,000 new social and defence homes
     * $950 one off cash payments to eligible families, single workers, students, drought effected farmers and others
     * A temporary business investment tax break for small and general businesses buying eligible assets
     * Significantly increase funding for local community infrastructure and local road projects
The initiatives in the Nation Building and Jobs Plan will provide a boost to economic growth of around ½ per cent of GDP in 2008-09 and around ¾ per cent to 1 per cent of GDP in 2009-10.
By investing in jobs and long term economic growth the Plan strikes the right balance between immediate support for jobs now, and delivering the long term investments needed to strengthen future economic growth.
For every $1 spent providing immediate stimulus to the economy the Government has invested more than $2 on long term investments that will generate future economic growth.
The Global Recession
The world is now caught in the worst economic crisis since the Second World War, a crisis that has delivered recessions in the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and the Eurozone.
The IMF is now forecasting advanced economies to contract by 2 per cent collectively in 2009. Growth has also slowed dramatically in key emerging economies, China in particular. All these factors have caused a rapid unwinding of the mining boom in Australia, with major consequences for Australian revenues, growth and jobs.
In fact the global recession has already pushed the Budget into deficit, even before policy action is taken. Decisive action is now required to strengthen the Australian economy and in these circumstances, a temporary deficit is the only responsible course of action to support jobs and economic growth.
National action alone cannot reverse the global forces buffeting the Australian economy; these global forces can only be fully turned around with a coordinate global response.
Long Term Nation Building Investments
Direct investment by the Government in goods and services has significant scope to boost economic growth and productivity and support jobs because it adds directly to demand. There are five major components of the Nation Building and Jobs plan.
Building the Education Revolution
     * Build or upgrade large scale infrastructure, such as libraries and halls in every primary school, special school, and K-12s school in Australia.
     * Build 500 new science laboratories and language learning centres in schools that can demonstrate need.
     * Up to $200,000 to every Australian school for maintenance and renewal of school buildings.
Energy Efficient Homes
     * Installing ceiling insulation in 2.7 million Australian homes which will cut around $200 per year off the energy bills of these households
     * Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by around 49.4 million tonnes by 2020, the equivalent of taking more than 1 million cars off the road
20,000 Social and Defence Homes
     * Build 20,000 new social housing dwellings and 802 new houses for the Australian Defence Force.
     * Urgent maintenance to upgrade around 2,500 vacant social houses
Small Businesses and General Business Tax Break
     * A 30 cent in every dollar investment tax break for small and general businesses buying eligible assets.
Black Spots, Boom Gates, Regional Roads and Community Infrastructure
     * 350 additional projects in the Black Spot Program and the installation of around 200 new boom gates at high risk rail crossings
     * $650 million funding boost for local community infrastructure and maintenance on Australia's national highways
Immediate Stimulus to Support Jobs and Economic Growth
Targeted bonuses to low and middle income households will provide an immediate stimulus to the economy and support Australian jobs. In conjunction with the payments delivered as part of the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy announced in October, these measures have been designed to assist those groups most affected by the flow-on effects of the global recession.
The five one off cash bonuses includes in today's plan are the:
     * Tax Bonus for Working Australians of up to $950 paid to every eligible Australian worker earning $100,000 or less. This will support up to 8.7 million individuals.
     * $950 Single Income Family Bonus to support 1.5 million families with one main income earner.
     * $950 Farmers' Hardship Bonus paid to around 21,500 drought affected farmers and farm dependent small business owners receiving exceptional circumstances related income support.
     * $950 per child Back to School Bonus to support 2.8 million children from low- and middle-income families. 
     * $950 Training and Learning Bonus paid to students and people outside of the workforce returning to study to help with the costs of education and training.
The $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan builds on the stimulus measures already in place to support economic activity and jobs.
Stimulus measures already implemented by the Rudd Government include the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy, the $300 million program to build local community infrastructure, the $15.2 billion COAG funding package and the Nation Building Package announced in December 2008.


To support jobs and invest in the long term future of the Australian economy and the Australian community the Rudd Government will construct over 20,000 new homes.
Under this historic program, the Government will construct 20,000 new social housing dwellings and 802 new houses for Australian Defence Force personnel.
This program will also fund urgent maintenance to upgrade around 2,500 vacant social houses that would otherwise be unusable as social housing.
This program is a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support up to 90,000 Australian jobs over the next two years.
The vast majority of houses built under this program will be completed by December 2010  -  a massive and immediate support for jobs in the housing and construction industry.
This historic investment in housing infrastructure is also an investment in the future quality of life of low income Australians and Australians who serve and protect Australia in the Australian Defence Force.
Social Housing
This Program is a long term nation building investment that will build around 20,000 new social housing dwellings to provide much-needed accommodation for low income Australians who are homeless or struggling in the private rental market.
By increasing the supply of social housing, this package is a practical demonstration of the Rudd Government's commitment to halve the number of homeless families and individuals in Australia by 2020.
The construction of new social houses will take place in two stages.
The first stage involves bringing forward for construction of approximately 2,300 social housing dwellings which were already planned and approved.
The second stage involves a Commonwealth Government-approved tender for new construction, including the spot purchases of house and land packages for use as public and community housing.
The majority of the second stage of construction will be completed by December 2010.
The package also includes an additional $400 million over two years for States and Territories to undertake urgent maintenance to lift the quality of public housing dwellings and upgrade approximately 2,500 vacant public housing dwellings that would otherwise be unable to remain as public housing.
These competitive tender funds will also be used to progress the Rudd Government's reform agenda for public and community housing including the achievement of greater transparency and accountability, better economic and social participation for social housing tenants, and the growth of the not-for-profit housing sector.
Defence Housing 
The Government will also provide $252 million to Defence Housing Australia (DHA) to build 802 new houses in metropolitan and regional centres nationwide.
Construction will commence in April 2009 and run through to March 2011, will be carried out in 17 areas including: Adelaide, Brisbane, Canberra, Darwin, Melbourne, Hobart, Townsville, Cairns, The Hunter, Ipswich, Sale, Sydney, Wagga Wagga, Wodonga, Nowra and Toowoomba.
DHA plays an important role in delivering housing and housing related services to Defence personnel and their families. DHA currently manages approximately 17,000 properties across Australia.
This additional investment will provide a much-needed stimulus to the building and construction industry while providing support for jobs and flow-on effects to other parts of the economy.
This assistance for social and defence housing builds on the affordable housing measures announced by COAG late last year, the $2.2 billion of initiatives in the 2008 budget and the $1.5 billion for the First Home Owner Boost announced as part of the Government's Economic Security Strategy in October last year. 


To boost jobs and invest in Australia's long term future the Rudd Government will build or upgrade buildings in every one of Australia's 9,540 schools.
Building the Education Revolution is a $14.7 billion long term investment to improve the quality of facilities, like gymnasiums, libraries and science labs in Australian schools.
Building the Education Revolution will commence in 2008-09 and will:
     * Build or upgrade large scale infrastructure, such as libraries and multipurpose halls in every primary school, special school, and K-12 school in Australia.
     * Build around 500 new science laboratories and language learning centres in high schools with a demonstrated need for upgraded facilities.
     * Provide up to $200,000 to every Australian school for maintenance and renewal of school buildings and minor building work
This historic nation building investment by the Rudd Government will not only support jobs  -  it is also a down payment on the long term strength of the Australian economy.
By improving the quality of education received by every Australian child, this program will help deliver the stimulus of today and underwrite higher productivity tomorrow.
Building the Education Revolution is a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support up to 90,000 Australian jobs over the next two years.
Building the Education Revolution
Building the Education Revolution will commence in 2008-09 and will be rolled out over the next three years. Building the Education Revolution is divided into three key programs.
Primary Schools for the 21st Century is a $12.4 billion long term investment to build or upgrade large scale infrastructure in all primary schools, special schools, and K-12s. New school buildings funded by this program will include libraries and multipurpose halls.
Science and Language Centres for 21st Century Secondary Schools is a $1 billion long term investment to build around 500 new science laboratories and language learning centres in schools with a demonstrated need, readiness, and capacity to complete construction by 30 June 2010.
Renewing Australia's Schools is a $1.3 billion investment to refurbish and renew existing infrastructure and undertake minor building works. Under this program, every Australian school will receive up to $200,000, based on the size of the school, for maintenance and minor building works.
Building the Education Revolution will also help to support local communities, as a key requirement of the package is that major facilities in primary schools which are built or upgraded with this funding, such as halls or indoor sporting centres, are made available for community use at no or low cost.
This historic nation building investment builds on the Rudd Government's commitment to an education revolution in all schools through the National Secondary School Computer Fund and Fibre Connections to Schools elements of the Digital Education Revolution.
Building the Education Revolution also brings forward up to an additional $110 million to fund quality proposals in Round Two of the Trade Training Centres in Schools Program.
Building Trade Training Centres helps to provide high quality, relevant education and training opportunities, which is an important step in increasing the proportion of students achieving Year 12 or an equivalent qualification.
The program will be delivered through cooperation between Commonwealth, state and territory governments and the non-government school sector. 


To support jobs and set Australia up for a low carbon future the Rudd Government will install free ceiling insulation in around 2.7 million Australian homes.
This investment will support the jobs of tradespeople and workers employed in the manufacturing, distribution and installation of ceiling insulation during a severe global recession.
In addition, under the Energy Efficient Homes investment the Solar Hot Water Rebate will be increased from $1000 to $1600 from today and the Low Emissions Plan for Renters rebate will increase from $500 to $1000.
The Energy Efficient Homes investment will:
     * Install ceiling insulation in around 2.7 million Australian homes; 
     * Cut around $200 per year off the energy bills for households benefiting from these ceiling insulation programs; 
     * Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by around 49.4 million tonnes by 2020, the equivalent of taking more than 1 million cars off the road.
Energy Efficient Homes is a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support up to 90,000 Australian jobs over the next two years.
2.7 million Energy Efficient Homes
Insulation is typically the most cost effective way to improve a home's energy efficiency. Although all newly-built homes must be insulated, many older homes  -  up to 40 per cent of Australia's housing stock  -  remain uninsulated.
This results in many householders paying much more than they need to in energy bills.
Once installed, households could save around $200 per year on their energy bills, as well as improve the comfort and value of their homes.
The Energy Efficient Homes package will modernise Australia's homes, it will enable almost all Australian homes to be operating at a minimum two star energy rating by 2011.
For a time-limited period of two and a half years, from 1 July 2009, owner-occupiers without ceiling insulation will be eligible for free product and installation (capped at $1,600) simply by making a phone call.
As an interim arrangement, from today and until 30 June 2009, eligible owner-occupiers who install ceiling insulation in their homes will be able to seek reimbursement (up to $1,600) after the program commences. The Government estimates 2.2 million owner-occupied home will benefit from this program.
Many of Australia's most vulnerable households are renters, who do not own their own home. To help these households lower their emissions and save money on energy bills, the Government will also double the rebate available under the Low Emissions Plan for Renters for landlords to install insulation in their rental properties  -  from $500 to up to $1,000  -  from today until 30 June 2011. The Government estimates 500,000 rented homes will benefit from this program.
The Energy Efficient Homes investment also increases the Government's Solar Hot Water Rebate from $1,000 to $1,600 from today until 30 June 2012. This rebate will not be means-tested.
Under this Energy Efficient Homes package, homeowners will be able to access either the insulation program or the solar hot water rebate.
These investments will ensure that the maximum number of Australians  -  both homeowners and renters  -  will have access to practical measures that help them to reduce their energy use and save on energy bills prior to the introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
As well as supporting jobs during a severe global recession the Energy Efficient Homes investment delivers on the Government's commitments in the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme White Paper to ensure all households receive support to take practical action to reduce energy use and save on energy bills.


To support jobs and Australian businesses  -  especially small businesses - the Government will fund an investment tax break for all Australian businesses. This temporary business tax break will help Australian businesses boost business investment, bolster economic activity and support Australian jobs.
Businesses in Australia  -  especially small businesses - are the engine of the Australian economy and deserve direct support during a global recession. This $2.7 billion Business Tax Break is a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support up to 90,000 Australian jobs.
The Small Business and General Business Tax Break will mean;
     * A small business that buys and installs a $2,000 computer before the end of June 2009 can claim an additional $600 deduction in its 2008-09 tax return.
     * A business that buys and takes possession of a $60,000 backhoe by the end of June 2009 can claim an additional $18,000 deduction in its 2008-09 tax return.
Small businesses can claim an additional 30 per cent tax deduction for eligible assets costing $1,000 or more that they acquire from 13 December 2008 to 30 June 2009, and install by 30 June 2010.
For eligible assets costing $1,000 or more that they acquire from 1 July 2009 to 31 December 2009, they can claim an additional 10 per cent deduction where they are installed by 31 December 2010.
To benefit from this tax break a small business must have a turnover of $2 million a year or less. Other businesses can receive the same deductions for eligible assets greater than $10,000. This will further boost business investment and confidence in the Australian economy in the face of the global recession.
Assets eligible for the allowance are new tangible depreciating assets and new expenditure on existing assets used in carrying on a business for which a deduction is available under the core provisions of Division 40 (Capital Allowances) in the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997.


O'BRIEN: And if Australia does manage to avoid recession as nearly every other major developed economy hits the wall, Kevin Rudd will have a powerful message to take to the next election. But his highly publicised high wire act of economic management could rebound nastily, if things don't go to plan after he's built the expectation that he has the answers. I'm sure the Prime Minister is only too well aware of the political risks and he joins me now from Canberra.
Kevin Rudd with all your injections of cash back into the economy, and all the interest rate cuts, after all that, can you say with any confidence that Australia will avoid recession?
PM: What I refuse to do Kerry is to haul up the white flag and say, as the Liberal Party have done, that recession is inevitable. My judgment is this  -  we will act, act decisively and take substantial significant measures to do every humanly possible to continue to support positive growth and jobs. You're right in your introduction or in Michael Brissenden's introduction to say that we are in the midst of a global economic recession, there are many variables beyond our control. Based on what we know now, and by adopting this $42 billion Nation Building Plan, we are seeking to do two things  -  support growth and jobs now, to seek to do every humanly possible to maintain positive growth, and secondly, to build education, school assets, housing assets, energy efficiency measures for households, which also serve Australia's long term interests. That's our strategy.
O'BRIEN: Okay. But as you said in the package today as has been made plain, all of this is premised, your growth projections and so on, all of this is premised on the global economy not getting any worse and we all know that the solid body of belief on this is that this year is going to be a horror year. It's going to get worse. That being the case will you have anything more in the tank for yet another stimulus package?
PM: Well Kerry, the impact of this global financial crisis which has become a global economic crisis, and is now about to become a global employment crisis, of course has had a huge effect in terms of government revenues. $115 billion has been cut off the top across the forward estimates  - 
O'BRIEN: Which could get significantly worse again.
PM: We, however, having undertaken that adjustment in our revenue assumptions for the forward estimates, have already taken a prudent approach to where our revenues are likely to lie for the future. But you know something, the Government of Australia cannot control the destiny of the global economy. We must respond to the data as we are presented with it, and put our absolute best foot forward based on the best advice from the Treasury about what will provide the necessary stimulus for the period ahead. And secondly, to also through that activity, to build the schools we need for the 21st Century, to invest in the social housing we need for the 21st Century, and to invest in energy efficiency measures for our households to act also on climate change. These are our two objectives.
O'BRIEN: Okay. Well let's a little more closely at the practical, the ways these will happen. Your stimulus package. How quickly will people start getting their cheques for $950 because I think it starts in April. Is that going to happen almost instantaneously, we're talking about a lot of people and you're hoping that that money will be spent and will stimulate the economy to an extra half per cent of economic growth in three months from April to the end of June.
PM: Well first of all Kerry, the way in which we have devised our strategy over the last several months since the global financial crisis turned into a crisis for the real economy worldwide, is to bring about a series of measures, each of which have an effect on stimulating the economy over time.
Firstly, of course you have the economic security strategy we brought out last October, payments were delivered in December. There'll be some washover of that into we assume, into the March quarter. Because we are concerned about the period ahead, the March quarter, the June quarter, and into the rest of 2009, we've adopted these other measures as well, but again in a staged manner. Some to support households and early consumption, payments due in March-April, depending on the Senate's deliberations. But beyond that also, short term infrastructure, the school building program to kick in from the beginning of the next financial year  - 
O'BRIEN: I'll come back to that in a moment  - 
PM: These are staged to flow activity through in this way. To keep the underpinnings of growth and activity there, particularly when the global economy is in retreat.
O'BRIEN: Okay. People who will be entitled to this $950, do they just wait at home and the cheque turns up in the mail? They don't have to do anything?
PM: These are measures which will be initiated by combination of FAHCSIA, that is the family payments system, and by the Australian Taxation Office. They'll be directed and initiated from the Government. And they're designed to help households, then the infrastructure package kicks in.
O'BRIEN: Malcolm Turnbull has been saying for two months now that the evidence from America suggests most people in this scary economic environment, won't spend your handouts. That they'll save them, which keeps it out of the economy. Can you show conclusive evidence from your last package, that the money was spent rather than squirreled away?
PM: Well let me give you one example of that. It is real data as opposed to theoretical projections from you know, Mr Turnbull or anybody else. And that is there is some data produced today by Westfield. They own supermarket complexes in Australia and in the United States and in New Zealand. The results that they put out show that there was an increase in retail sales in December in Australia, contrasted with major decreases in the United States and New Zealand where they also have assets. This is one piece of substantial data.
Does it equal the total solution, of course not. But before people decry the impact of consumption on economic activity, some basic points need to be made, namely that the retail sector, the small business sector are crucially dependent, not just on the confidence of consumers, but also on the ability of consumers to spend. We've been mindful of this together with all the other measures including those directly supportive of small business, and fashioning an integrated strategy with two objectives  -  to continue to support positive growth and to build long term infrastructure which the nation needs.
O'BRIEN: The $15 billion skills building program which sounds great by anyone's standards I guess, but you're actually going to have to rely on the States to deliver it, and in a hurry if it's going to boost jobs and the economy in the way that you hope it will. Some States will do that better than others, I'm sure you'll agree. In New South Wales for instance, the public wouldn't trust their Government, dare I suggest it, to build a Lego classroom let alone a real one.
PM: Kerry, the $15 billion investment, which is the single largest modernisation of Australia's schools in the country's history, will be of course implemented in partnership with those state and territory governments and with the non-government sector. 7,400 primary schools, government and non-government, this is a big program that's going to require phenomenal organisation to deploy.
O'BRIEN: Which comes back to my point.
PM: No. We're determined to do that. Let me say this very clearly to anyone out there in State Government land. One, this Government will not tolerate for one minute, any State Government of whichever political persuasion, withdrawing effort, as a consequence of the Federal Government, the Australian Government, moving into this area of building and rebuilding schools.
We will simply not tolerate that. The whistle will be blown and there will be punitive financial measures imposed in terms of a withdrawal of those moneys from the subsequent general revenues grants to the States.
O'BRIEN: How tough has your rhetoric been to the Premiers direct, along these lines?
PM: Well the Premiers were not apprised of the details of this package prior to it being announced. We have been working on elements of it in consultation with Premiers in terms of the costs of particular constructions, in the social housing area, as well as the schools area.
So we are determined to ensure that this strategy is implemented within in a timeframe which delivers real stimulus.
O'BRIEN: So let me just ask you this - how quickly would you hope and expect schools to see the first roll out of activity, the actual classrooms starting to be built, the maintenance starting to happen, how soon would you expect to see that actually happening, concrete being poured?
PM: In terms of maintenance programs, and there are grants of up to $200,000 to each school in the country for this, this small scale maintenance, that activity can flow through very quickly indeed, over the course of the next several months.
In terms of the actual construction of 21st Century libraries, of multipurpose halls, and of language laboratories and science labs in secondary schools, that will take a couple of months at least, to organise the consolidation of plans for each of those and for construction to begin in earnest, from the beginning of the upcoming financial year. It will then spread out over a couple of years in waves, but we have spoken at length to the States about model plans and blueprints which exist for each of these categories of buildings.
They will have a limited time frame now to negotiate with individual school communities so that those agreements are made about which of these plans for which categories of buildings which will be built on what schools. It will then be sequenced. And this has been meshed also with spare capacity which exists within the construction sector.
O'BRIEN: Okay, you have delivered another address to the nation tonight, just like the one you did after the last stimulus package. You have got the Parliament and an army of media to explain your actions and report your statements. Why this extra little bit of drama? Why is it necessary? I mean, arguably you keep underscoring the sense of crisis, this sense of danger. This is another national security stimulus package, which surely just feeds the public anxiety and becomes counterproductive to at least some degree. I know you have got to inform, but why this endless kind of packaging as a sort of package of anxiety?
PM: Kerry I completely disagree with your point of view. And the reason for it is as follows: you can't, as FDR said in the 1930s, simply subscribe to the ballyhoo school of politics, which is, you just tell people to be confident because it kind of sounds good.
People out there are concerned. There is fear in the community. I understand that, and most members of parliament who are in connect with their local communities, understand that as well. Therefore what you need to construct is a rational basis for optimism, confidence and hope. And that means explaining to people, not just what the problem is frankly, but also the structure of your response, the dimensions of your response. What is going to be done, how much money over what period of time, what is it to be invested in.
People need to know therefore, that there is a basis for optimism, hope and confidence: what I call a rational basis for hope. That is why I believe in direct communication and I did it once before in October last year, three months later, can I just say the global economic environment has deteriorated considerably further since then.
And this is a significantly larger package which therefore demanded a separate explanation.
O'BRIEN: Okay, we have got very limited time left. On interest rates, you said today that you expect the banks to take quote, "an open hearted and compassionate approach to people and small businesses struggling to meet their loan commitments", that's not exactly the banks' culture, is it?
PM: Well I think the banks have to be very mindful of their long-term corporate reputation. Look, on the one hand, our major banks have fared well in this crisis so far. And the stability of our  - 
O'BRIEN: Well the Commonwealth today has announced another $2 billion half yearly interim profit.
PM: And can I just say, if I am to contrast that with the state of the commercial banking sector worldwide, I am supportive of us having a strong mainstream banking system because in those countries where it doesn't exist, the crisis of which we have been speaking is in fact, much worse. I have got to balance that on the one hand, and on the other hand, the supports we have given to the banking system by measures such as the Government guarantee for all deposit holders, the Government guarantee for interbank fundraising and loans, and say to the banks directly, we expect them to play their part of the bargain, their part of the social contract with Australia, and take an open-hearted and compassionate approach with small businesses and others, including people who are struggling to pay off their bills, to apply a long-term view to their customer base as well.
No magic to this, but that is my appeal directly to them.
O'BRIEN: You accept that you'll be judged harshly by the Australian people next year if your economic management of this crisis is seen by them to have failed or at least not lived up to your promises and your expectations while leaving a legacy of Budget deficits.
PM: Kerry, I will leave the political judgment of me and the performance of the Government that I lead to the Australian people to make whatever conclusion they wish to make later on.
My responsibility here and now is to act in the national interest. And based on the best advice available to me, we are doing precisely that. No silver bullets in this, I cannot guarantee a perfect landing with this. No responsible Prime Minister speaking frankly to his people today, anywhere in the world could say that, and I don't intend to either.
I tell you what, this is a strategy which we have designed to see the country through. And we intend to get behind it.
O'BRIEN: Now I had read your 7,500 word essay on neo-liberalism and economic orthodoxy in the hope that I could ask you a few questions about that tonight but we are out of time. So hopefully at some point in the future we will find the time to do that. Kevin Rudd thank you for talking to us.
PM: Thanks very much Kerry.
[ends] 


PM: Because Australia is facing an unfolding national and international economic emergency, the Government of Australia is today launching an unprecedented $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to support jobs and to invest in Australia's long term economic future. 
Australia faces a very stark choice. That is whether government acts, seeks to intervene to reduce the impact of this unfolding global economic recession, or the alternative which is for government simply to fold its arms and to allow the free market to let rip.
Well this government has charted its course of action and is resolved to act, and it will continue to act. The government cannot reverse of course the impacts of a global recession, but this government will move heaven and earth to reduce the impact of that global recession on Australia.
Nearly three quarters of this $42 billion plan is directed towards nation building and support for business. First and foremost within this nation building plan, is the single largest school modernisation program in Australia's history. This investment in every one of the nation's seven and a half thousand primary schools is designed to build the primary schools we need for the 21st century. It's building the education revolution. Each one of the nation's 7,500 primary schools will be funded to invest in either a 21st century library or a multipurpose hall or classroom modernisation.
Added to the investment we will make in secondary schools, a further billion dollar program where secondary schools can apply for funding for new science wings and new language laboratories to the tune of $1 billion and an additional school maintenance program to assist with those things which P&amp;C's and P&amp;F's need now. This is a massive education, a massive investment into the nation's school education system.
Second, the government some time ago said that we were committed to halving homelessness. If you look at the census data, we have around the nation according to the census data some 100 thousand people who are homeless. Our advice is that given the concentration of households represented within that, represented something like a 80 thousand deficiency in the total national housing, social housing stock.
Therefore applying our previous policy commitment by 2020 to halve homelessness, that would mean adding an additional 40 thousand to the social housing stock of the nation. In this program over the next two to three years we're going to get half way there by building 20 thousand additional units of social housing, and through an associated maintenance package of some $400 million, bring also on stream some 2,500 units of social housing stock which is simply at present not up to scratch. This again is a concrete measure, some $6 billion worth, aimed at providing stimulus to the economy and contribute to the long term policy goals of the Government.
And third is this: what do we do in terms of the practical challenges of energy efficiency to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to deal with the long term challenge of climate change. The Government's advice has been that the single most effective measure in terms of household energy efficiency is insulation.
We're also advised that more than two million households across the country, houses across the country, owner occupied dwellings, do not have insulation. The Government's objective through this program is to have all owner occupied houses in the country insulated. The greenhouse gas emission impact of that will be to reduce total greenhouse gas emissions by some 49 million tonnes of carbon equivalent. That's the equivalent of taking one million cars off the road. This is a very useful thing for the planet, for greenhouse gas emissions, but beyond that as well, stimulus in the economy.
These are three very practical nation building measures. We spent a lot of time working our way through these because the practical challenge we faced is this: how do you mesh intensive investments in nation building measures now to provide the necessary additional stimulus to the economy and jobs now, in order to make a difference now. By which we mean, in the next year or two. And hence you will see the concentration of those construction programs are made within that overall timeframe.
Also you will see outlined in the document our commitment to a further significant direct assistance to small business and to business. Now you have a temporary investment allowance of some 30 per cent, and for it to be applicable in the case of small businesses for any capital acquisition, north of $1000.
The objective is to make it possible, more possible for small businesses to make those capital purchases that they need to keep their businesses running, but to do so with confidence looking ahead about what their cash flow will be as a result of making those purchases. And this sits on top of the existing announcement of last December about a 10 per cent special investment allowance for a more extended period of time.
Finally, there are also measures here which are outlined in the document to support households and to support households under budgetary pressure and households' necessary role in consumption. I know there's been a lot of criticism about consumption measures. I'd suggest strongly that support for households in consumption is important in the overall mix of measures in underpinning economic activity in the immediate period ahead.
Again in summary, about three quarters of the measures here are about nation building, are about support for business, and something a little more than a quarter of them are support for households. Taken together, they are designed to provide necessary support and stimulus for the economy.
The economic rationale for this package of measures is again outlined in the document. If you looked carefully at the Treasury prognosis for the period ahead, minus this stimulus package, it would be quite clear that the economy would run a grave risk of generating negative growth, most particularly in the 09/10 financial year. Therefore the challenge that we have faced is, what measures assist in providing necessary fiscal stimulus to give us a much greater prospect of generating positive growth in that period. That's why we have embraced the measures we had in the magnitude that we have and in the construction that we have put to maximise the flow through of investment in the year ahead, and just beyond.
On unemployment, the document also is clear that this package of measures is designed to support up to 90,000 jobs in ‘09 and ‘10. The document is equally clear that unemployment by Treasury is estimated to rise from where it is now at 4.5 per cent to 7 per cent. 4.5 per cent unemployment now is some 500,000. 7 per cent would mean an additional 300,000. Treasury further estimate that one third of that 300,000 would be made up of individuals losing their jobs, two thirds made up of individuals unable to access the labour market.
The impact of the measures that we have put forward, as I said, represent support for 90,000 jobs. I indicated also in my remarks to you yesterday that the Government will take further measures in relation to labour market programs which will be relevant to our overall meeting of the challenge of the jobless matter for all Australians.
Finally, on the question of the deficit itself. Nobody likes being in deficit and I don't like being in deficit at all. This is not a question of choice. This is what we're required to do. The key question is our exit strategy from deficit in the medium term.
The clear policy articulated in the Government's statement today provides a policy framework for explaining how we will return the budget to surplus over time.
One, as I indicated to you yesterday, that when economic growth resumes at trend or above, action will then be taken to restore the budget to surplus. Two, taxation revenues, additional taxation revenues which then flow at a time when economic growth has returned to trend and above, would then be dedicated to restoring the surplus. And three, future discretionary expenditure would be limited to two per cent per year into the future. This is the doctrine that we embrace here formally for returning the budget to surplus.
Nobody knows how long and deep this part of the economic cycle will be, what I have articulated to you over is our strategy for returning the budget to surplus once trend and above trend growth resumes.
Finally, this plan is part of our strategy to see Australia through this economic crisis, a crisis not of Australia's making. We believe it is a strategy in which the nation can have confidence. There is much lack of confidence across the world and our own country today because of the avalanche of bad news on people's television sets, in their radio stations, in their newspapers.
This strategy, this plan today as part of a broad strategy on which we have embarked last year, provides a basis to see Australia through this economic crisis. It is a strategy in which the nation can have confidence and as I have said before it is a strategy to which we will add in the future as is necessary.
The Government remains determined to take whatever further measures are necessary to continue to support growth and jobs and the stability of financial markets into the future.
There is no silver bullet with any of this. I have not the slightest intention of misleading the Australian people on this. This represents a strategy on our part and a plan on our part to reduce the impact of this global economic recession on the Australian economy, on growth and on jobs and on household incomes.
It does not represent the removal of the problem. It is our best effort to reduce the problem but we remain resolved to take whatever further action is necessary in the future.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] When you announced the ESS you were talking about the $10 billion in Government spending creating jobs. Today you are talking about spending supporting jobs, can you explain the difference between those two terms?
PM: Well when you're supporting jobs you're doing either of two things. You're either creating additional direct jobs through public sector activity or supporting the retention of jobs which currently exist within firms or elsewhere in the economy. That is simply a broader concept and it just describes the reality.
By the way in terms of the ESS and its capacity to generate jobs, I would just draw your attention to what Westfield has released today as well. Spending in the month of December in 2008 was up 2.5 per cent from the previous year. This is in contrast to their overseas sales which was down 14 per cent in the United States and 7 per cent in New Zealand. And that is one part of a complex picture, one part of an overall plan, of which a further instalment is revealed today.
JOURNALIST: In terms of the exit strategy, when you say that those, the new [inaudible] when growth returns to trend. What exactly does that mean?
PM: Well it is when trend growth returns. Trend growth is normally defined at around three. When trend growth to the economy resumes at that or above, that's when the, this doctrine applies and the principles that we've articulated. And I think that's a responsible course of action.
It puts a necessary doctrinal constraint on the future public finance behaviour of the Government and it's entirely consistent with the doctrine of financial constraint we imposed upon ourselves prior to being elected, which is to support a budget surplus across the economic cycle.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the document mentions the need for the states to sort of follow your lead in this area and it notes that if they don't you'll look at it through COAG. To what extent have your meetings in the last week or so, with state premiers created a pact so that they won't be doing things in their budgets that run counter to your aims and policies and doctrine?
PM: This Government will adopt a zero tolerance approach to any State Government whatever its political complexion, to any substitution of effort, let's be very clear about that.
The whole purpose of this extraordinary package, designed for these extraordinary times is through public demand, to offset the contraction in private demand within the economy, so that we minimise the overall effect on households and jobs.
Therefore it makes no sense whatsoever for us to up our effort and for the States then to withdraw theirs in order to repair their bottom line or whatever.
We will take an absolute hard line on this with the following consequences. First, when we engage the states on the implementation of each arm of this plan, this $42 billion plan, on the implementation, we through Treasury officials will exchange in detail, what is in the state governments' budgets forward estimates for their capital works for the entire forward estimates period: in social housing, in school construction and in any other relevant area.
Secondly, if we through those Treasury processes detect, observe any withdrawal of effort against that benchmark: A, I will make that public myself. Secondly, an equivalent amount of money will be withdrawn from those states' future general revenue grants. We are hardline on this.
Furthermore we'll be speaking with the states directly about the implementation timetable for each of the public investment programs involved in this $42 billion plan. Particularly the school modernisation plan as well as the social housing plan which I referred to before.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know you've quoted some comments from Woolworths on this but to what extent is the speed of this recession, has the speed of this recession forced you to craft a $42 billion package? In particular the $12.7 billion or whatever it is in quick payments.
Has forced you to craft that package without really having anything like the data, you would like to know whether the first package did the job it was supposed to do. You're working in the blind here to an extent, aren't you?
PM: When we had this debate last year about how or whether the Government could respond to the unfolding economic crisis, the debate devolved down to essentially two sets of arguments. One was, wait for all the data to come in, by which stage it is usually too late to have an effect. Or two, act now, knowing that there are still uncertainties into the future.
Secondly, therefore, what the Government has done is saying, here is a global recession. here is the further deterioration in the global economy, reflected in the data over the last several months.
Here therefore, based on Treasury advice, is the likely further gap in growth, in the Australian national accounts, and therefore, what do we need to do by way of investment to seek to fill that gap.
Then it is a question of what can you do most quickly and most productively to fill that gap. And to do two things: one, provide the necessary stimulus now in the shorter term and secondly, wherever possible, mesh that with long term infrastructure which the nation needs.
Our schools will be great beneficiaries from what will be the biggest school modernisation program in the nation's history. Every primary school in Australia is going to become a centre of economic activity, every one of them. Every one of them.
And that is what we intend to do. 7500 centres of economic activity. And you know something, rolling this out is going to take a feat of national organisation and planning, we haven't seen since the ‘40's.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) labour market programs, if we are looking at 7 per cent unemployment, shouldn't the labour market programs be included in today's statement? Is there a reason why they are not and what kind of labour market programs do you have in mind?
PM: I may have said this yesterday, but this is intensely complex work to make sure that labour market programs are tailored not just to emerging national data, but are regionally and locally applicable as well. We are determined to get this as right as possible.
It is going to take a bit more time. We know the dimensions of the challenge. Remember, I referred here already to Treasury's advice that some 200,000 people, based on the projections out to 2010, under current circumstances, would not be able to enter the labour market.
Our challenge therefore, is to meet that huge challenge, that huge task.
It is complex, it is hard, it is detailed. And we are working our way through it. And I would much rather we got it as right as possible, rather than produce a press release, which doesn't have the necessary implementation machinery behind it. We haven't done this sort of work, at the Commonwealth level, for a long, long time.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd are you limited about what you can do on the labour market programs because there are tenders out for the Job Network at the moment? Is there, are you compromised by that process or could you do something additionally?
PM: Well labour market programs as a concept are broader than what the Job Network itself does. And in terms of the intrinsic of what happens to be in the current tender arrangements for the Job Network, I am sure the Minister is well apprised and well capable of juggling these two realities.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the timing of this package on the day that the Reserve Bank is expected to cut rates again - was that designed to increase the confidence factor?
PM: Our judgement as a Government was that as soon as the new data, and you saw some of it globally through the IMF report the other day, began to become absolutely clear about the next level of challenge that we faced, was to hop to it and do it.
We have been chugging away at this over the summer. And a lot of work has been put in on this and you would have seen a fairly intense level of activity at the relevant committee of the cabinet in the last several weeks as well.
It is ready to roll and that is why we have done it today. At the end of the day, Government action through fiscal policy, accompanied by what we have seen is reductions in interest rates, have one objective, and that is to stimulate the economy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the document mentions global recession which you are referring to now, as intensifying the risk of recession in Australia. Do you think that recession in Australia is inevitable and how confident are you that the budget deficit in the future will peak at $35 billion.
PM: On the first part of your question Dennis, this Government will never haul up the white flag on the inevitability of a recession as I notice the Liberal party has. We will throw everything at this. There is no guarantee of success but we will throw everything at this because we believe it is important for confidence and for jobs that we do so. That is the first point.
The second is, in terms of the exit strategy from deficit, I have nothing really to add other than to do doctrinal statement, if you like, I made before in response to the question from over here.
And of course the trigger for that is a return to growth at the point at which, we have returned to above trend growth.
JOURNALIST: Given Treasury's prognosis and the scale of the economic downturn, do you nonetheless concede we will be in deficit for years and do we now stop calling it temporary?
PM: The Government is, if you look at the structure of the Government's stimulus package, it is both temporary and targeted. It is like this. That is what it is about, and therefore it is designed to provide, as I said before, and ability to partly fill the gap left by this temporary contraction in private demand.
As the general economy and the global economy recovers, our requirement to do that will lessen. The economic statement today is absolutely upfront about the impact on the bottom line, going forward. And absolutely upfront about the fact that we will have to borrow for it, that is the bottom line.
There is no point sort of pretending that black is white and white is black. That is just the truth of it. As I said before, nobody likes being in deficit, neither do I. But the alternative would be to throw another 100,000 Australians into unemployment.
I don't intend to do that, I intend to everything possible to reduce the burden.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what is your message to the banks today about passing on any interest rate rise and also longer term with 300,000 people either not having access to the labour market or losing their jobs? What attitude would you like to see the banks take towards people who become under mortgage stress and face the real possibility of losing their homes (inaudible)
PM: First of all, on the question of the banks, there should be a full pass through of any further interest rate reductions as rapidly as possible. Secondly, I would say this to the banks: the banks have benefitted from various things the Government has done for them, not least of which are the two sets of guarantees which are the subject of some debate here, last year: that for depositors and most critically for interbank lending.
Therefore I would say to the banks, given what the Government has done to support the continued strength of our banks and that is important in the financial system, I would strongly urge the banks to take an open hearted and compassionate approach to people and to small businesses who find themselves in strife, for which those people are not to blame.
Can I just add one further thing on the benefit of what we have done for banks. The guarantee which the Government has provided to bank, to interbank lending, has been of enormous consequence in successful capital raisings by the banks offshore, in the last period of time.
Were it not for that intervention which we undertook last year, again amidst considerable controversy, the banks, the ability of the banks to raise the billions of dollars that they have in the last month and a half, would have been fundamentally undermined.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the prospect of deficits of $35 billion in each of the next two years leaves scope for further discretionary spending in the May budget?
PM: Our attitude to discretionary spending as a matter of general principle prior to the point of economic recovery is that it should be offset by savings elsewhere through appropriate reprioritisation. That's our general approach and it has been. We maintain the same fiscal discipline on that approach as we've always embraced. The challenge that we face, given these extraordinary circumstances, is to define and implement a clear cut strategy for exit from deficit at the earliest opportunity. And we intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, has the revised economic outlook given the Government any (inaudible) to reconsider what you're doing in terms of workplace legislation and also the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme?
PM: You know something, the free market fundamentalists out there who said we should have no regulation of capital markets, basically the ones who also say we should have no effective regulation in labour markets. The one thing that's been spectacularly proven in recent times, I believe they are wrong on both counts, absolutely wrong on both counts, there's a clear role for Government regulation and effective regulation in both. That has been demonstrated hands down when it comes to financial markets.
And when it comes to labour markets, particularly at a time when people are concerned about the future of their jobs, let me say, the attitude of families is, they want decent protections in the labour market. They don't want things stripped away from them, which is what the AWA revolution, the deregulation revolution, the let it rip revolution, of our Liberal predecessors prescribed.
Neoliberals as I've said in stuff I've written recently, you know, it's basically an anti-regulation agenda across the board. Don't want regulation in financial markets, don't want regulation in labour markets, and if they can possibly get away with it, look at the history, they'd prefer to turn health into a private market as well. First the assault by the front door by trying to get rid of Medicare, then by the back door by defunding the public hospital system.
Given the time of day, and Question Time, I've got to zip.
[ends] 


Good evening, in the last three months, the global financial crisis has deteriorated dramatically.
We now face a global economic recession - with a massive impact on jobs right across the world.
What began with unrestrained greed on Wall Street has now spread across every economy in the world.
For Australia this reality has also hit home. Six of our ten major trading partners are now in recession.
Our biggest trading partner, China, has had its growth forecasts halved in the last year.
Australia faces a stark choice.
Act now to reduce the impact on the economy, families and jobs.
Or fold your arms and allow the free market to run its course.
The policy of this government is to act and to act decisively.
Today we have launched a massive nation-building plan to support jobs and small businesses in the short term and to build schools, energy efficient housing and roads for the long term.
The centre piece of the Plan is the largest single school modernisation program in Australia's history.
We will fund a new 21st century school library, multipurpose hall, or classroom modernisation for each of Australia's 7,400 primary schools.
We will also provide funding for new science labs or language centres for 500 secondary schools.
We will provide grants of up to $200,000 for individual school communities to fund much-needed maintenance.
Second, the Government will install ceiling insulation in up to 2.7 million Australian homes  -  with the aim of having insulation in every Australian owner/occupier house  -  good for the environment and good for jobs.
Third, we will fund the largest ever single investment in housing by building more than 20,000 new community and defence homes to help keep our tradesmen and women employed.
Fourth, we will act to support households bearing the brunt of the crisis by stimulating the economy now by paying $950 one-off tax bonuses to low and middle income families, singles, students, drought affected farmers and single income families.
Fifth, for small business we will deliver a 30 cent in every dollar investment tax break for the immediate period ahead.
In this plan, we are investing in the future and investing also to support Australian jobs.
Because of the global recession the Government will go into temporary deficit and once the global economy recovers, act to restore our budget to surplus.
That's the responsible course of action for the nation.
I recognise that a temporary deficit may not be popular.
But that is the global reality we face with virtually all Governments now in deficit.
I cannot remove the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
But by Government action we can reduce it.
I have absolute confidence that this strategy, combined with the great underlying strengths of the Australian economy and people, will see our nation through this crisis.
I thank you for listening.
A video of this speech is also available.


The Rudd Government today announced $890 million to support Australian jobs by improving community infrastructure and safety on the nation's roads.
Black Spots, Boom Gates, Regional Roads and Community Infrastructure is an investment that will improve road safety and quality of life in local communities.
The program is a key element of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Package to support up to 90,000 Australian jobs.
This local community focused program underscores the Government's commitment to reducing the number of accidents on Australian roads.
This long term nation building investment will fund:
     * Around 350 additional safety improvement projects under the Black Spot Program
     * Bring forward the installation of around 200 new boom gates and other safety measures at high risk rail crossings
     * A $500 million expansion of the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program  -  Strategic Projects
     * $150 million of critical maintenance works on Australia's national highways
Construction of local community infrastructure will commence almost immediately and be mostly completed within two years. This rapid injection of funds into local communities through community infrastructure projects will deliver local jobs to specific communities in the short term and long term.
Black Spot Program
The Government will allocate an additional $30 million in 2008-09 and $60 million in 2009 10 to extend the coverage of the Black Spot Program. This will deliver around 350 additional safety-improvement projects.
This is on top of the Government's announcement in December 2008 that it would more than double Black Spot funding for 2008-09 from $50 million to $110 million. The Black Spot Program targets ‘black spot' sites that either have a history of serious accidents or have characteristics associated with a high risk of accidents.
It is estimated that for every $1 spent on the Black Spot program the community saves $14 in reduced road trauma costs. A portion of the additional funding announced today will be allocated to black spots on Australia's national highways, which until now were excluded from this program.
Boom Gates for Rail Crossings
Recent serious accidents at rail crossings across Australia have highlighted the need for action to address the risks faced by road and rail users at these intersections. Tragically there are around 100 accidents at level crossings around Australia every year.
The Rudd Government will invest $50 million in 2008-09 and $100 million in 2009-10 to speed up the installation of around 200 sets of boom gates and other safety measures at high risk rail crossings without such controls. Submissions will be sought from the States and Territories that identify priority rail crossings based on robust assessments, including assessments of the most appropriate control mechanism in each case.
Repairing Regional Roads
The Government will also provide a further $150 million in 2008-09 to help the States and Territories fund a backlog of maintenance projects on Australia's national highways.
This funding will be conditional upon States and Territories signing up to the $22.3 billion Nation Building Program for 2009-10 to 2013-14. This funding will allow more projects to be undertaken that address the safety risks posed by sub-standard sections of road, and at the same time, can promote the more efficient use of our road network by allowing higher speed limits in some cases or higher weight loadings, and by lowering vehicle operating costs.
Community Infrastructure
The Government will provide an additional $500 million over two years to expand the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program  -  Strategic Projects. This program funds local government community infrastructure projects such as town halls, libraries, community centres and sport centres.
This $50 million Program was established in November 2008 to fund larger-scale community infrastructure and to deliver an additional injection of investment in communities. The expanded investment will mean more projects in the existing application process receive funding. Successful applications must commence within six months of the contract being signed.


The Rudd Government is acting decisively to strengthen growth and support Australian jobs in the face of the deepest global recession since World War II.
The global financial crisis has driven almost all major advanced economies into recession. The key emerging economies of China and India are now also slowing sharply.
The global commodity boom which has provided significant stimulus to the Australian economy over recent years has come to an end. No country will escape the impacts of the global recession, which is causing falls in growth, job losses and budget deficits right across the world. The weight of the global recession is now bearing down on the Australian economy. Economic growth is slowing and employment will weaken.
That's why the Rudd Government is implementing a $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to provide immediate support for jobs and growth. The Plan will add around ½ of one per cent to GDP growth in 2008-09 and around ¾ to 1 per cent to GDP growth in 2009-10, and support up to 90,000 jobs over the next 2 years. In the midst of this global recession it would be irresponsible not to act swiftly and decisively to support jobs and invest in nation building.
The Nation Building and Jobs Plan has been crafted to strike the right balance between supporting growth and jobs now, and delivering the lasting investments needed to strengthen the economy for the future.  The global recession, dramatic slowing in China and unwinding of the commodity boom has now wiped a total of $115 billion from budget revenues and pushed the budget into deficit.
A budget deficit is now forecast for 2008-09 of $22.5 billion (1.9 per cent of GDP). The global recession has hit budgets hard all around the world, with the IMF now forecasting a collective budget deficit of 7 per cent of GDP for advanced economies. The Government reaffirms its commitment to deliver budget surpluses, on average, over the course of the economic cycle.
As the economy recovers, and grows above trend, the Government will take action to return the budget to surplus by:
     * banking any increase in tax receipts associated with the economic recovery, while maintaining its commitment to keep tax as a share of the economy on average below the level it inherited; and
     * holding real spending growth to 2 per cent a year.
In the face of these extraordinary global conditions, the immediate and overriding priority for fiscal policy must be to support growth and jobs. There will be no quick fix to this global recession and many of its effects are still to be felt  -  but the Rudd Government is taking the necessary and responsible action to help see Australia through this global crisis.


Good evening, in the last three months, the global financial crisis has deteriorated dramatically.
We now face a global economic recession - with a massive impact on jobs right across the world.
What began with unrestrained greed on Wall Street has now spread across every economy in the world.
For Australia this reality has also hit home. Six of our ten major trading partners are now in recession.
Our biggest trading partner, China, has had its growth forecasts halved in the last year.
Australia faces a stark choice.
Act now to reduce the impact on the economy, families and jobs.
Or fold your arms and allow the free market to run its course.
The policy of this government is to act and to act decisively.
Today we have launched a massive nation-building plan to support jobs and small businesses in the short term and to build schools, energy efficient housing and roads for the long term.
The centre piece of the Plan is the largest single school modernisation program in Australia's history.
We will fund a new 21st century school library, multipurpose hall, or classroom modernisation for each of Australia's 7,400 primary schools.
We will also provide funding for new science labs or language centres for 500 secondary schools.
We will provide grants of up to $200,000 for individual school communities to fund much-needed maintenance.
Second, the Government will install ceiling insulation in up to 2.7 million Australian homes  -  with the aim of having insulation in every Australian owner/occupier house  -  good for the environment and good for jobs.
Third, we will fund the largest ever single investment in housing by building more than 20,000 new community and defence homes to help keep our tradesmen and women employed.
Fourth, we will act to support households bearing the brunt of the crisis by stimulating the economy now by paying $950 one-off tax bonuses to low and middle income families, singles, students, drought affected farmers and single income families.
Fifth, for small business we will deliver a 30 cent in every dollar investment tax break for the immediate period ahead.
In this plan, we are investing in the future and investing also to support Australian jobs.
Because of the global recession the Government will go into temporary deficit and once the global economy recovers, act to restore our budget to surplus.
That's the responsible course of action for the nation.
I recognise that a temporary deficit may not be popular.
But that is the global reality we face with virtually all Governments now in deficit.
I cannot remove the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
But by Government action we can reduce it.
I have absolute confidence that this strategy, combined with the great underlying strengths of the Australian economy and people, will see our nation through this crisis.
I thank you for listening.
A video of this speech is also available.


PM: The Government has launched a nation building plan with two clear objectives: how do you support growth and how do support jobs now, and secondly, how do you use that to build the sort of infrastructure that Australia needs for the 21st Century, including for schools like this.
And that is what brings us here to St Gregory's today. I have just spoken to the Principal and the local parish priest with Julia and this is a school, I am told, of about 600 kids.
Under the program that we have announced, a parish school like this, a parish primary school like this anywhere in Australia would be eligible for up to $3 million to either build a 21st Century library, learning resources centre, or to build a multipurpose hall, so that the whole school community can come together, use it as an indoor gymnasium, use it for performances, use it just to bring the school together. Or to assist with classroom modernisation. I notice that schools like this, I think from what the principal told me before, have I got this right, have some demountables, is that right? And that is what this is about, practical stuff on the ground.
But also, to provide construction jobs. And not just here at St Gregory's, but right across the nation, through the 7500 primary schools which exist across Australia, Government and non Government.
Here at St Gregory's they are in the process of spending, I am advised, $1.5 million, on the refurbishment of that building there as a 21st century library, learning resources centre.
That is really good stuff. And so what the principal said to us that may be one of the discussions they will have with Catholic Education, will be the need for this parish community, this parish school, to have its own multipurpose hall, which they don't have.
They have got two campuses, bring the whole school community together with a single location. And maybe, to assist in funding the replacement of some of these demountables.
These are the local decisions which will be happening with this plan, in every primary school across the country, that is what we want to see. And what we will also see as a result of that is construction jobs. Jobs for tradies, jobs for plumbers, jobs for carpenters, jobs for builders, that is what we want to see.
Mr Turnbull's liberals in the Senate now stand in the way of the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, financial support for Australian households doing it tough, and support for up to 90,000 jobs in this economy, because of his ideology, of letting the free market rip.
That is what this decision of his adds up to today. Who will pay the price of Mr Turnbull's and the Liberals' road blocking this, obstructing this in the Senate. I tell you who won't be paying the price, and that is the merchant bankers of this world.
I will tell you who will be paying the price: the people who will be paying the price, are those mums and dads now struggling with back to school costs. The people who will be paying the price are tradies, plumbers, carpenters, builders, who are now out there desperately looking for work across the country, with new construction projects around schools like this.
The people who will be paying the price are those small businesses who are out there hanging out for the sort of support we offer through the new accelerated investment allowance for small business. That is who will be paying the price, not the merchant bankers of this world.
Therefore, the choice is clear - the Government strategy is clear cut. We intend to get on with the job. Now Mr Turnbull and the Liberals have said that they oppose this. And as I said, it is clear who will be paying the price as a result of his opposition if it succeeds.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Mr Turnbull will have access, as he is entitled to, to any official briefing he wants on any element of the package. There are ample resources available for him to be satisfied on every element of detail.
The Government hasn't decided upon their strategy because they have plucked it out of thin air. We have responded to the rapid collapse in the global economy, coming off the back of a global economic recession. We have sought to shape a strategy for the future which deals with our dual objectives, of how do you support growth and jobs now, and build the infrastructure we need for the 21st Century.
And to do so, given the immediate demands of stimulus in this critical year of 2009, and beyond. That is what we have done, our reasons are clear, based on the clearest also Treasury advice. As I said before, Mr Turnbull can have access to official briefings, that is right, that is proper.
He should reflect on those briefings. So let's face facts. Within 12 hours, 24 hours, of the Government outlining this nation building plan for the 21st Century. Mr Turnbull simply says, ‘no'. I say again, what Mr Turnbull is doing in seeking to block this nation building plan, is say no to the biggest school modernisation plan in the country's history, say no to support for up 90,000 jobs and say no to those households who are doing it tough who need additional financial support now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Senate processes have existed since time immemorial and they will be applied as they would normally be applied. What I am saying is that if households in Australia, given that this parliament has just resumed for the year and households in Australia need financial support now, then of course the legislation providing that support has to get through the parliament quick smart.
On the nation building component for the package, then of course we have indicated that we would be prepared to have, you know, wider senate deliberation. But there is a timeline to this. What I am surprised about is the ideological nature of the response. You say, there is no ideology in the Liberals' response.
It seemed to be fairly clear cut in the response delivered even yesterday by the leader of the Liberal party. What we are on about? Nation building, supporting jobs, in the midst of the greatest global economic challenge we have faced in three quarters of a century.
What Mr Turnbull appears to be on about is the negativity of opposition. The challenge for the nation is too big for that. We intend to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I noticed that Mr Turnbull's old firm Goldman Sachs said yesterday, it should be even bigger than what we have put forward, but I will leave that to one side. On the question of the dimensions of the package that we have embraced, let's just look at the basic rationale in terms of growth.
One is, absent this package, the IMF was projecting growth of negative 0.2 for Australia for '09. So you can either haul the white flag up on that and just say recession is inevitable, which is what the Liberal Party has expressly said on the record, or you can fight it and fight with the level of stimulus that we have recommended both for households, one quarter of our package, and for investment in infrastructure, three quarters of our package, to try and deliver the extra growth and jobs necessary to keep the economy positive.
There is no guarantees in this business, but I am determined to have, to put our absolute best foot forward, move heaven and earth to try and support positive growth and jobs.
On the hospitals point, can I just remind the Liberal Party of this: in the period that we have been in, the Liberal Government of course hasn't been such a friend of public hospitals over the years.
We have been in Government for about a year, just a year. $4.8 billion to rebuild our public hospitals in the COAG package which we agreed at the end of last year, $1.1 billion to train more doctors, $750 million for emergency departments, $600 million for additional elective surgery, and we have yet to hear the full and final deliberations of the advisory committee for the health and hospitals fund.
This is a huge advance from where we were on hospitals, given what had happened with the defunding of public hospitals under the Liberal Government, and we have further to do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there was perhaps naturally some confusion over who will get the $950 and who won't. Can you help clarify for us, would a person who was not working in the critical '07  -  '08 financial year, but have since gained employment at an under $80,000 job qualify for this? And conversely would a person (inaudible)?
PM: Tim there will be a full statement on all eligibilities by the Minister for Family Services, when the relevant legislation is introduced into the Parliament and can I just say the criteria outlined for the $950 one off bonus is clear cut. That is that if you are paying tax in the previous financial year, then up to $100,000 you are eligible for a one off bonus of up to $950. That is point one. And as you know, it scales down at two points subsequent to that.
Secondly, there is a further bonus of up to $950 for those in receipt of family Tax Benefit B, why  -  because they are single income households and therefore the first set of benefits apply to those which may have two income earners in the same household, so how do you provide equity for that. The full detail of the implementation schedule etc, for each of these payments will be made clear when the relevant legislation is introduced into the House.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what effect do you think that will have on families and what response (inaudible)?
PM: Well you know as I have spoken to families myself in the last little while about just the cost of back to school. You know, people are anxious and worried and so, cost of school uniforms, cost of all those things, how can you help.
This is fuelled and informed the Government's thinking about one of the things that can be brought forward there. And so depending on the Senate's deliberations, this back to school bonus is designed to flow through in March, that is next month, to help on that.
I would say to Mr Turnbull and the Liberals again, the people who pay the price for his political obstructionism are families, already doing it tough, are schools waiting for new buildings like this, and for small businesses waiting for a helping hand at a time when they are considering how many of their staff to keep.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the issue of coordination, you said yesterday that dealing with this infrastructure delivery would be the biggest thing since the ‘40's in terms of coordination. Could you take us through how, for example in this electorate, there are how many schools, and they have all, they are all going to build a building, they can't all build at one, how are you going to organise that?
PM: The Government will be announcing the appointment of an Office of the Coordinator General who will have responsibility, together with separate and specific coordinators for each of the four principal programs which I have already outlined in my statement yesterday, to ensure that this program is implemented nationally and in a rationally sequenced fashion.
That means that we adhere to the timetable that we have put out, the stimulus must flow and therefore, as I said before, you are looking at a level of organisation here, the likes of which, the national government has not had to engage since the 1940's.
Well you can either just wash your hands of that, and say, ‘oh it is all too hard, we haven't done that for a long time' or you can change your structures to make it happen. Now we are going to have a go, a big go, at changing the structures.
And, can I just say, we are going to have someone behind on the line, in each one of the states who will be the responsible person to make sure it happens there as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) every builder in the district together and say, look we have got all of these projects (inaudible)?
PM: Matthew, each one of those, and you are right to actually raise each of these questions, because if you had been party to the deliberations of the Strategic and Budget Committee of the Cabinet, then we tossed this around in enormous detail. And one of the matters which will of course be on the agenda with the premiers when they come to Canberra tomorrow, will be precisely this.
We intend to deliver this stimulus because it is necessary to support jobs and growth. You cannot have a withdrawal of state effort as the Commonwealth moves into the field. The economy demands this action, we intend to get on with it. And as I have said before in my statements to you, this provides a strategy to see Australia through this crisis.
I intend to be upfront about the challenges we face. I intend to be equally upfront about the strengths we have and equally upfront about the strategy to see the nation through and I believe we will see the nation through.
Cheap politics lies in just throwing a few pot shots from the side, and kind of turning around in 12 months time and saying, ‘I told you so, I told you so', without having a go. This Government is in the business of having a go. That is: taking every possible effort and energy to deal with the impact on the people of Australia who haven't caused this crisis, but who are now the victims of this global crisis. Thanks very much.


ALOISI: Prime Minister, good morning. 
PM: Good morning Mike, good morning Sandy.
ALOISI: And these are dangerous, fairly unchartered waters that we're in. How confident are you that this package will work?
PM: I believe this strategy will see Australia through this global economic crisis, this global economic recession. The key challenge is this: as we respond to each new piece of economic data to make sure that the package of proposals we put forward is best placed to support growth and jobs in a global environment, which is very, very volatile indeed. There are no guarantees in this whatsoever because we're in unchartered global economic waters.
My job as Prime Minister however, is to shape a strategy which helps support jobs and helps also to build necessary infrastructure like building and rebuilding schools which are needed in the long term as well.
CARLTON: There has been some criticism that you've sold us too much gloom and doom - that you might have spooked us all into saving rather than spending. Does that concern you?
PM: My job as Prime Minister, Mike is to be up front with the Australian people about two things: the challenges that we face and they are real, I will neither overestimate nor understate them. Secondly, to be equally up front about the great strengths we continue to have in the Australian economy and the strengths of course we've got in the Australian people.
And on top of that, to explain clearly our strategy for seeing Australia through. It would be wrong for me to say there is not going to be huge turbulence on the way, and it would be equally wrong for me to say that there is no way through.
I've got to provide a rational basis for optimism, hope and confidence for the future. That's why we put out this detailed plan which builds on the detailed previous parts of the plan we announced in the last quarter of last year.
ALOISI: But the money needs Prime Minister to start flowing into the economy very quickly doesn't it? If families use their money, say to pay off debt or even just keep it in the bank it won't be as effective.
PM: When you provide support to households as we did in the last quarter of last year and again through what we are proposing in the first two quarters of this year, it does a couple of things.
Firstly, based on a lot of international evidence we know that a lot of that goes directly into consumption. And that supports the retail sector and there are millions of Australians employed in the retail sector.
Secondly, obviously we can't control what each person does with their money and they will perhaps save some, they will retire some of their own personal credit card debt, but as they do that, what they are also doing is freeing up their capacity, a little later on in a few months time to spend money which they would then otherwise save.
You see all these things relate to each other but if you do these things on support for households, but most importantly bear this in mind, three quarters almost of the $40 billion package that we announced yesterday, goes into direct Government investment in modernising schools, in energy efficiency in homes, in new investment in social housing, in local government roads and other infrastructure. As well as a tax support for small business, these measures go straight to activity in the economy.
CARLTON: Alright, have you read Peter Costello's comments this morning. He's accusing you of a monumental U-turn and a return to the big spending days of Gough Whitlam.
PM: No I haven't seen that.
CARLTON: (inaudible) Sydney Morning Herald.
PM: No I just, I haven't. I have been head down and completely focused on developing a strategy and implementing a strategy to see Australia through.
Let's be very clear about the alternatives here. First of all, what we have had across the world in every government across the world, is a collapse in government tax receipts because of a global economic recession which came out of unrestrained greed and unregulated financial markets in America and elsewhere.
In Australia's case, that has taken $115 billion off the tax receipts going into the Commonwealth. That's the first thing. Therefore automatically you go into deficit. That's what happens and that's what has happened in every, with every government around the world.
The second thing is this. On top of that, we the Government as a have all governments around the world, decided to invest in separate stimulus into the economy to reduce the impact of this recession on unemployment and to continue to support growth. And that's what we have put forward (inaudible).
It follows that for both those things, that is the collapse in Government revenues and the additional money that you spend by way of stimulus, that you need to go into deficit and you need to borrow.
The Liberal Party surely is not suggesting that you could somehow go out there and not balance your budget by borrowing in order to offset the collapse in tax receipts, or are they suggesting that?
CARLTON: Well I don't know what they're suggesting because they haven't -
PM: Well are they suggesting there should be no stimulus package and you don't borrow for that. You can either play cheap politics on this, which is what they are doing, or you could actually go to the real problem which every concerned government around the world is trying to grapple with - this global economic crisis, the likes of which we haven't seen the 1930s. Therefore, it's all hands to the pump.
CARLTON: Are they likely though do you think to block it in the Senate? I mean Malcolm Turnbull this morning is saying they want to consider that, and see the Bills I guess first of all, but there is chance they might try and obstruct you in the Senate.
PM: Well this is why the position of the Liberal Party is not just of passing interest. They have a huge influence in the Senate and so if there are households out there who need support, through the payments that we've outlined, including the back-to-school bonus of up to $950, including the one-off tax bonus of up to $950 for people earning up to $100,000 - or, if you want to see school modernisation in every primary school in the country, with new 21st century libraries or new multipurpose halls or classroom renovation, all of which generate jobs and build good things for the future - if you want all those things then you've got to get in behind this package.
If you're going to play short term politics as the Liberal Party seem to be suggesting, then they're going to oppose it.
I think they are playing with fire here, because what we're trying to deal with is a bushfire, and economic bushfire which has spread throughout the world, which Australians and Australia did not cause but which this Government now has to deal with.
ALOISI: Nonetheless Prime Minister, with the $42 billion package you've announced, you're still forecasting unemployment to rise I think 300,000 people extra on the dole queue in the next 12 months is what's being predicted. What can you say to those people who may now use their jobs?
PM: On the question on unemployment, this is, goes to the absolute core of why we've announced the package that we have announced yesterday.
I cannot eliminate the impact of a global economic recession. What I can do is try and reduce its impact. We have been as up front as we can with the numbers that we've been provided by the Treasury about the impact of this global economic recession on unemployment in Australia.
The 300,000 figure you referred to, I am advised is made up of two parts: 100,000 who would lose their jobs, 200,000 who would be prevented from entering the labour market. 
The impact of our package is to support up to 90,000 jobs. As I said, I cannot eliminate the impact of this global recession. I can however reduce its impact.
It's what responsible governments are doing. In fact just on that point you raised before about the Liberals, I note also that the Liberal Government of Western Australia through its Treasurer has said, and I quote ‘the type of stimulus, whether it impacts on consumption, expenditure or investment is something that the State Government of Western Australia welcomes.'
It seems the Liberals in Western Australia, in Government know the challenges the nation faces. The Liberals in opposition it seems in Canberra are trying to bury their head in the sand and just play short term politics.
CARLTON: Prime Minister on this business of unemployment benefits. You can ease up on the rules for claiming. I mean the Howard Government went out of its way to bash people who had the nerve to walk in the door at Centrelink. Can you make it easier, I suppose, less punitive for people who really, genuinely do need help?
PM: Mike, I think when it comes to how the Government, the country and the community responds to the challenge of those who find themselves unemployed through absolutely no fault of their own, we're going to have to go through every one of these measures.
And I know for a fact that the Deputy Prime Minister and relevant Ministers are working through all elements of labour market programs and the rest about how you respond to people who find themselves unemployed (inaudible)
Work is underway. We'll have more to say on this before too much longer.
CARLTON: But are you inclined to that view that it should be not such an ordeal now, to claim unemployment benefits.
PM: Well my view Mike, very simply is that Government and the community have to be humane and compassionate and sensible about how we handle this challenge and therefore all these things have been gone through as we speak.
Remember, anyone who is affected by this global economic crisis which comes out of unrestrained greed on financial markets, it strikes me again as curious that the Liberals, these free market fundamentalists, haven't had pause to reflect on how this thing actually came into being in the first place, this crisis which now engulfs working people across the world.
Our job as a Government is to help stabilise, as a Labor Government is now to help stabilise financial markets, how to try and keep the economy going through growth, through direct Government investment and support of families. And thirdly, how you also then help those who are the victims of this crisis - the unemployed.
ALOISI: Prime Minister pensioners and self-funded retirees feel a little left out of your package. When are you going to make a decision on pensioner reform?
PM: Well on the question of pensions, first of all you recall the very large provision we made for pension at the end of last year, in terms of the one off payments.
HOST: That was a one off though.
PM: I understand that. I was just going to run through what we said then and how our position hasn't changed.
Secondly, I also indicated that we would, through the upcoming budget determine the final shape of pension reform and that of course is the budget which is due in May.
Can I also say in terms of self-funded retirees and you mentioned them in your question as well. If self funded retirees for example paid tax in 07-08 then they of course become eligible for the one-off bonus, one-off tax bonus of up to $950, for those on incomes up to $100,000. That's one point.
And secondly, self-funded retirees at the end of last year, if they were in possession of the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card and a large number are, would (inaudible) for the one-off payments of $1400 for singles and $2100 for couples.
CARLTON: Okay. Last question, when do you think you might know if this is working. When will the indicators start showing green, if you like?
PM: The problem we have Mike is every two or three months when the new wave of global economic data comes in, it has A - changed and B - got dramatically worse.
I'll give you one example. When we did the mid-year economic forecast in November last year we indicated there had been a $40 billion collapse in Government revenues, tax revenues coming off the back of a global financial crisis. Come this statement, we've indicated there has been a further $75 billion collapse, that's $115 billion off our bottom line.
So the problem is this: I can respond to the circumstances as they present themselves to me now, based on the information which has come in from across the world including the halving of China's growth which so directly affects us and shape a strategy to see the nation through.
To go back to one of your earlier questions. You know, this nation will come through this crisis. And we'll come through it more resilient than we were before because we've got a strategy here which seeks to support growth, support jobs and provides therefore a rational basis for optimism for the future. We intend to get on with it.
CARLTON: Prime Minister thanks very much for your time, much appreciated.


MITCHELL: On the line, the Prime Minister, Mr Rudd. Good morning.
PM: Good morning, how are you?
MITCHELL: How will people get their money and when?
PM: Well there are two parts to that. The first is for those which have paid through the Centrelink system. If the Senate passes this legislation soon, we expect those payments to be made during the course of March. For those payments, that is the one-off tax bonus for 8.7 million Australians who are earning under $100,000 or less, that will be paid during a course of April. And again that depends on whether the Liberals support passage of this through the Senate.
MITCHELL: How will it be paid? Will people have to do anything or just turn up?
PM: No in both cases, the information is already accessible, both through the tax system, through the Australian Taxation Office in the first case, and that applies to the one-off tax bonus of up to $950. As I've said that benefits 8.7 million Australian workers. And then for the other one, of course the Centrelink system has access to those who are currently in receipt of Family Tax Benefit B.
They are the two systems which automatically click in. But Neil if I can just add this, the claims you've just referred to make up in total about something about one quarter of the total package we released yesterday. The vast bulk of this package yesterday is about building schools, school modernisation program, building roads, energy efficiency for homes, and increasing our overall stock of housing in the country.
MITCHELL: Yes I understand that. You mentioned the Senate. What is the Senate won't pass it, what would you do?
PM: Well there is a problem. The Senate therefore has a responsibility to consider the economic interests of the nation at a time of unprecedented global economic crisis. And to rise to the occasion, or to play short term politics.
MITCHELL: If they play short term politics, what can you do?
PM: That's a matter for them. They, I believe -
MITCHELL: What are your options? Would you look at double dissolution?
PM: No the ball lies squarely in their court Neil. And I think if you look at the sense of concern across the country and quite rightly before you mentioned that our central preoccupation now must be with the unemployed, and the rising ranks of the unemployed, I cannot eliminate the effect of a global economic recession. I can reduce its impact, reduce its impact on employment, and this package overall is designed to support up to 90,000 jobs. So anyone in the Senate who seeks to stand in the way of it is standing in the way of assistance to overall employment in the country as well as standing in the way of new schools, and direct payments to families under pressure.
MITCHELL: Given this is so important, given you say the Opposition's digging in, is there a possibility this could force us to an early election?
PM: Neil, I just believe in taking everything one step at a time. We have been framing this package over some time. We are doing so in response to emerging bad global economic data. My job is to chart for the nation in a strategy through which is clear about how we can see Australia through a crisis which is not of our making. I would expect other politicians in the parliament, including those from the Liberal Party, to rise to the national challenge. I note the Liberal Government of Western Australia through its Treasurer yesterday came out and explicitly supported this package.
MITCHELL: Sounds like you're not ruling it out if necessary.
PM: No I'm saying Neil that my job is to examine the data, come up with a right response to it  - 
MITCHELL: And implement it, and if you're frustrated in implementing it, what do you do?
PM: Well Neil. I'm sure you've got a whole series of hypothetical questions in mind there. My job is to take things one step at a time.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, you're the one who raised difficulties in the Senate. You said you'll have trouble with the Senate. I'm asking you what you do about it?
PM: Now I'm saying Neil, I'll take it one step at a time.
MITCHELL: That's not an answer.
PM: Yes it is. The matter's before the Senate now.
MITCHELL: Okay. Did you look at cutting the GST instead of this?
PM: On the question of tax cuts of a long term nature - the reason we rejected that generally was because it doesn't provide sufficient upfront stimulus. What's our big challenge now? If you look right around the world, with collapsing growth in so many of the economies, there is a real problem in calendar year 09 moving into 2010. The key question therefore is how can you concentrate the economic stimulus activity now.
We've done that through two things. One, the payments to families you've just mentioned which represents about a quarter or so what we're doing. And about three quarters of the package represents what we're doing by way of direct investment in school modernisation in every primary school around the country. Home insulation, new housing, new roads, as well as a new package of support by way of tax benefits to small business.
MITCHELL: Did you consider cutting the GST instead?
PM: No, that's what I'm saying. We ruled out the reduction in taxes because it didn't provide sufficient upfront stimulus.
MITCHELL: Because the GST is bringing in about $40 billion. You could have had two years of GST for the package.
PM: Yeah but our challenge here Neil is to respond to the best advice about what provides us with the greatest stimulus now because my task is this  -  how do I support the maximum number of jobs now and, through that, deliver the sort of infrastructure the nation needs long term, for example, across all 7,500 of the nation's primary schools. That's what I'm concerned about.
MITCHELL: Is the GST untouchable?
PM: Well you've already seen through the data we put out on tax in the last couple of days, that each of those tax categories including the GST is down. We don't believe that playing around with tax rates at this stage is useful in terms of the provision of necessary stimulus.
MITCHELL: You say at this stage. I'm saying is the GST untouchable? Is it a possibility in the future?
PM: We have no plans whatsoever to adjust it.
MITCHELL: What about further tax cuts in the future?
PM: Well remember that in the Government's first Budget in May last year, we've already legislated for a further round of tax cuts which come into effect in July this year. So those will have effect as did the ones which came into effect on 1 July last year.
MITCHELL: One of your advisers Paul Keating says this could last seven years. Is he right?
PM: I'm not sure why you would put Paul into that category. I talk to a whole bunch of people.
MITCHELL: I think Wayne Swan said you talked to him regularly and got his advice on such matters. He does know about recessions, Paul Keating I think.
PM: Well nice piece of verballing there Neil.
MITCHELL: Serious point, he said it could last seven years. Is that correct?
PM: Neil, as I respond to the global economic data, what I know is the situation of the last three months has changed radically and got worse which is why we've done what we've done yesterday. It is very difficult to predict the period ahead because if you stand back from it all, we're having a debate now, how do you stimulate the Australian economy? Overriding all of this is what's happening in the global financial markets which represent the dominant factor in the entire pattern and speed of global economic recovery.
It's getting those global financial markets right which is important, so therefore that's something which will lie beyond the control of this national government. We're working on that internationally. It is difficult to predict how long and how deep this global recession will be.
MITCHELL: Okay that's true. We don't know where it's going. So that's the next question. What is the next shot in your locker?
PM: Well as I said at the announcement of the Government's Economic Security Strategy last October, I said that the Government remains prepared to take further action as is necessary to support growth and to support jobs. What we have done since then is that $10 billion injection. Secondly, what we did just before Christmas was a $4.6 billion long term infrastructure investment which covered rail freight as well as a range of other infrastructure projects. What we have done through this particular package is provide a further investment primarily weighted in the direction of schools, in the direction of roads, and in the direction of housing. And we remain prepared to take whatever further action is necessary as further economic data unfolds.
MITCHELL: Okay, so do you have a next steps strategy. As you say, we've got no idea how deep this is. You can't define it, I think the ‘29 crash only really became obvious how bad it was in the early ‘30s. So what is your next steps strategy?
PM: Well Neil, I've always said that the challenge for the nation, is also to examine carefully our long term infrastructure needs as well. And that is a part and parcel of what we have said up until now, when you look at the long term needs of our hospitals, the long term needs of our universities and our TAFEs, the long term needs of our transport infrastructure, all these are real, all these things I've been discussing at length at various state governments around the country.
What we sought to do in this particular package is deal with shorter term infrastructure needs, and build for example the schools that we need for the 21st Century education revolution.
MITCHELL: So the next step is the bigger ones, is it?
PM: Well, we will move through this step by step. You asked what are the things we're working on. I've just given you a direct answer on that. Also  - 
MITCHELL: Specifically though, I mean fast train to Sydney or dams or what, what sort of things you look at?
PM: You're getting ahead of yourself Neil. We're working through each of this very methodically. Each of them is very expensive. And they've got to pass muster in terms of proper analysis. Look, you see the challenge here Neil is to do two things at the same time. One, to provide the stimulus that the economy needs to continue to support jobs and positive growth. And secondly, to build the infrastructure the nation's needs for the 21st Century. In education, in health, and our transport systems, and of course dealing with the great challenges of energy efficiency as well.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, Barack Obama has written a ‘buy American' clause into his package which is causing some angst in Europe. Would you urge the same thing when people get this money? Do you want them to buy Australian?
PM: I think across our country, what we've all got to realise is that this is an open economy. If every economy around the world shut its doors and given Australia is so trade exposed, and we have to look back to the history of the 1930s, it was the Smoot-Hawley Tariff of the early 1930s which actually brought on the Great Depression. Protectionism just effectively throws a spear at the heart of the economy because so much of our jobs, so many of our jobs are generated by the trading sector of the economy. Of course the measures that we have put forward, for example the energy efficiency  - 
MITCHELL: Sorry does that mean Barack Obama's got it wrong?
PM: Well I haven't looked at the detail of his deal package which I think is the one you're referring to. To be blunt, Neil, I haven't had time to go through that. I had my mind on our own package. But I'll do so as soon as I'm able. But I have articulated general principle and response. If you look at our package, I've been very mindful of the fact that when we're dealing with energy efficiency, take insulation for example, we're proposing to add ceiling insulation to 2.2 million Australian homes  - 
MITCHELL: Most of them in Queensland by the way. 42 per cent of Queensland doesn't have insulation. Only 42 per cent has insulation. 72 per cent of Victoria has.
PM: Well, I wouldn't have a clue, but there you go, in terms of geographical breakdown of that. But what I do know is that if we get this one right, we take about 50 million tonnes equivalent of carbon pollution out of the atmosphere, and reduce energy costs for households.
But the point I was about to make is that most of this insulation material is manufactured in Australia. I'm advised that about 70 per cent of solar hot water systems are made in Australia. Both are relatively labour intensive when it comes to installation.
These two things form the basis of what we're saying in terms of the energy efficiency measure. So we've been mindful of what's capable of being produced locally, but I'm not going to lie to people. Of course inevitably, some material will end up being imported. That's just the way it is. And if you look at our retail sector, and all those people employed in shops around the country, all those people employed in retail are often selling stuff which is made overseas. You don't want to throw them out of jobs.
MITCHELL: Which just leads me to the next point. You want people to spend this money don't you? You're telling them to spend rather than save?
PM: Our encouragement to people as I said last year is to continue to spend and invest in Australia's future. Some people have said, critical of this proposal and of the previous one, that people will just put it in the bank, will pay off their credit card debt. People will make their own decisions Neil, everyone makes their grown-up decisions, I fully respect that.
But if for example you're going to pay down a $2,000 credit card debt and reduce that to a thousand or whatever, then what it does have in terms of the impact on the economy is mean that, that is $1,000 less worth of paying down of your credit card debt, which would otherwise get diverted later on to paying down your credit card debt. In other words, people will start to spend again.
You see it's not just a simple, you know, in-out equation here. It's complex. And that's why those who've examined the impact of these sorts of supports for households around the world have recommended them, so long as they are balanced with direct investment by government infrastructure that we need, which is why our package, $30 billion of this $40 billion package goes into direct investment. Into schools, into roads, into housing.
MITCHELL: Need to take a quick break. More from the Prime Minister in a moment.
[advertisement break]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with us. We'll take a caller but please be quick because we've got a lot to get through in the next few minutes. Yes John?
JOHN: Yes, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: G'day John. How are you?
JOHN: Good thank you. You talk about jobs and growth. What about self-funded retirees?
PM: Yeah, good question John. Let me say two things about that. Firstly, if you're a self-funded retiree and paying tax in the 07/08 year, then you would become eligible for that one-off tax bonus of up to $950 if you are earning up to $100,000.
Secondly, if you're a self-funded retiree who is in receipt or in possession of the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card, and of course at the end of last year you became eligible for those one-off payments of $1,400 for singles, $2,100 for couples.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, there's another issue there I was looking at today. Would you look at changing the rules on the minimum amount they have to take out, the self-funded retirees, because if you enforce them, and I know the Americans have done this, if you enforce them you tend to force them to realise paper losses. I think the minimum requirement is under 65  -  four per cent, 65 to 74  -  five per cent. Could you look at reducing those?
PM: Well Neil, if there are practical proposals along those lines we'll look at anything in the current environment, but no absolutely no guarantees. People, I mean self-funded retirees are doing it really tough at the moment. Look at the impact on superannuation funds of this collapse of global stock markets coming off the greed in global financial markets. That's huge, there's been a 50 per cent reduction in total market capitalisation on stock market value over the last year or so.
MITCHELL: And they're getting hit with the interest rates as interest rates come down.
PM: Well it's really bad.
MITCHELL: Can you do more for them?
PM: Well as I just said in response to your caller, there are two things which apply, but as I said to you before, we will continue to examine all measures which can be of assistance. But I'd just like to be very blunt about this Neil. I cannot eliminate the impact of a global economic recession on every person and every industry group. But I'll tell you what. I'm all in the business of trying to reduce it to the greatest extent possible.
MITCHELL: I understand that but do you seriously believe that if the world goes into recession, you can spend your way out of going into recession?
PM: What we're doing, three quarters of this package Neil is investing. And $40 billion, $30 billion of which is investment in schools, every primary school in the country, all 7,500 of them  - 
MITCHELL: Oh yeah that's good, but part of that is to avoid recession.
PM: All the subbies for example listening to your program this morning Neil, if they're concerned about their construction jobs, and I have had people like them first and foremost in mind, what I want to see is building activity in our primary schools right across the country. There'll be projects up to $3 million worth in our larger primary schools. There's 7,500 of these across the country. What am I trying to do? I'm trying to provide a rational basis of keeping, of taking up the slack which is emerging in construction, spreading that across the country and building schools we need for the 21st Century, but it ain't a silver bullet.
MITCHELL: I understand that. But if the rest of the world goes into recession, we just can't avoid it can we? I know you're going to try and I know this is part of the strategy, but if the rest of the world is in recession we're kidding ourselves that we can avoid it.
PM: Well look at the most recent figures put out by the International Monetary Fund, it has us projected for 2009, as the most solidly performing of the developed economy. Now, you know something, that's going to be really tough to keep that way. Even that IMF data had us coming in at 2009 at negative point two, just under zero growth. That's one of the reason why I've put full throttle forward with the package that we have announced yesterday. But you know, you're right there's no guarantees in this but I'm not going to haul up the white flag.
The Libs have said recession is inevitable. I'm not in the defeat game. I'm in for throwing everything at this because the psychology of the nation is important, confidence is important, having a really hard go is important, getting the nation behind you and doing good stuff for the future like in our schools is important, and that's what we intend to do.
MITCHELL: You describe this as an emergency which I think is a reasonable term. If it's an emergency, why can't we be bipartisan?
PM: Well the question perhaps should be put to Mr Turnbull who has opposed every one of the measures in effect that I put forward last year. Every one of them.
MITCHELL: Given it's an emergency, aren't the forecasts a bit optimistic. Seven per cent unemployment, surely we're looking at least nine?
PM: Well, I can respond only to the advice that I'm provided by the Treasury who look carefully at every sector of the economy. What I do know is this - those numbers are very bad when it comes to the future in fact on joblessness in Australia. And what I'm on about is reducing that impact. As I said, I want to make sure that we can support up to 90 thousand jobs through this package across 09 and 10.
The alternative effectively recommended by the Liberals is to do nothing. Other than, their one policy is bring the July tax cuts forward. I've just had a look at that. If you took those 09/10 tax cuts I referred to earlier in our conversation Neil, if you look at the impact on a taxable income of $65,000, that gives you $150.
That's the Turnbull plan. Give you a $150 benefit from that tax cut and bring it forward. What am I doing? I'm giving you $950 through the one-off tax bonus, as well as bringing in those tax cuts I've just referred to on 1 July. You see they don't even equate, let alone provide the necessary stimulus for households in the current environment.
MITCHELL: Tell me, when did you find time to write 7,000 words?
PM: I just got angry over the summer mate, because I started reading a lot about the unrestrained greed in financial markets, in unregulated financial markets which has brought this crisis which affects so many working families right across the world. So I sat down and wrote about it.
MITCHELL: You don't mind me saying you look a bit tired. You might have been better off with a holiday?
PM: Well actually, what happened was, I flew up to Port Moresby the other day, I had to because there was an emergency session at the Pacific Islanders Forum which went for a day, and I got some lurgy when I was there for the day. Up until then I was fine, then I got some lurgy and now I'm just about through that.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much.


The Rudd Government has today activated the Commonwealth Disaster Plan, approving the delivery of urgently-needed aviation fuel to flood-affected communities in Far North Queensland.
The fuel will keep local communities supplied with essential goods.
Vast areas of Queensland are now flooded, with towns such as Ingham and Karumba cut off completely from ground transport. This situation is likely to continue for some time. 
Given the seriousness of the situation, the Queensland Government has requested this assistance and the Rudd Government has immediately provided it.
Queensland emergency services have been working around the clock to ferry essential personnel and supplies to the isolated areas, but their fuel supplies are almost depleted.
The Rudd Government has authorised Australian Defence Force aircraft to deploy from Townsville. Three Blackhawk helicopters will transport more than 6,000 litres of aviation fuel to the affected regions.
The men and women of our Defence Forces do an outstanding job to help Australians in their times of need. Assisting with disaster relief efforts is an important part of the work of our Defence forces.
The Rudd and Bligh Governments are also providing assistance to 35 disaster-declared shires through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
This includes personal hardship and distress payments of $165 per eligible person and up to $765 per family. Means-tested Essential Household Contents Grants, worth $1635 for individuals or $4910 for a couple or family, are also available.
Residents in need should call the Queensland Department of Communities on 1800 173 349 to get information on whether the grants apply to them.


PM: Well first of all, if I could thank all the Premiers and Chief Ministers and the head of the Australian Local Government Association for coming to Canberra, the nation's capital, at short notice to deliberate on and agree on a new national partnership for the implementation of the Government's Nation Building and Jobs Plan. 
Today, the governments of Australia have agreed on an implementation arrangement for dealing with this new national Nation Building Plan and Jobs Plan. And the reason for that is that all governments across Australia are engaged with how do we best respond to the global financial crisis which has become a global economic recession and therefore impacting employment right across Australia as well.
I would congratulate the Premiers and Chief Ministers for the goodwill that they have displayed. Not just by being here at short notice but also in the practical arrangements which I'll go to in a minute for the implementation of this plan.
$30 billion of the Nation Building Plan, almost, goes to infrastructure. And the implementation of a lot of that infrastructure depends on getting it done by our partners in State and Territory governments. That's why this meeting today has been important. It reflects the urgency which the Government and all governments attached to dealing effectively with the crisis.
For nation building to work, it's got to be translated into real projects on the ground and translated onto the ground quick smart. Therefore what we've done today is agree on a timetable for implementation for what will be the single biggest school modernisation program of the Commonwealth in the nation's history.
What we've been discussing today are those projects which are shovel-in-the-ground ready. We're also looking at those which will take a little longer to make sure they are properly prepared.
For the school modernisation program, affecting 7,500 primary schools, we have divided that into three rounds. First round of which will involve 20 per cent of the entire program, and for that first round we have agreed that construction will commence by June of this year. It may be, in the case of certain States and Territories, that construction can commence earlier than that. This is important. Then the subsequent two rounds will be agreed in the period later in the year, but all to be rolled out over the course of '09 and '10.
Having a clear and agreed construction timetable, which you will find detailed at Attachment A of the communiqué today, has been an important part of the detailed work we have done together. Round one  -  20 per cent of schools. Round two  -  40 per cent of schools. Round three  -  40 per cent of schools. And with construction to commence no later in the case of round three by 1 December 2009, and for those projects to be completed by no later than March 2011.
That deals with the primary schools program. We've also agreed on a timetable on the implementation of the secondary school modernisation program for new science wings and for language laboratories.
We've also agreed, as you would see at page 13 of the communiqué, on implementation timetables for the social housing program, as well as on page 14 of the communiqué for the rollout of the Commonwealth's new investment in black spots, boom gates and repairing regional roads. That's on the timetable. And we've agreed on that after detailed discussion among it. And the reason for that detailed discussion is that it's got to be real and practicable, though all this is ambitious.
In my original discussion with the Premiers and Chief Ministers at the beginning of the meeting today, I said that we were in uncharted, unprecedented times. This is going to require us cracking heads, knocking skulls together to make sure it all happens on the ground quick smart.
It won't be just business as usual for our bureaucracies. We are in a national economic emergency and we're going to have to all roll our sleeves up and take a direct, personal, and rolling interest in the implementation of this. Which goes then to the question of machinery.
We've also agreed on an arrangement whereby there will be a Commonwealth Coordinator-General, who will have responsibility for oversight for that entire program. The Commonwealth Coordinator-General will be Mr Mike Mrdak, who is currently Deputy Secretary in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, a senior and professional public servant who has some 20 years experience in the Department of Transport within the Commonwealth bureaucracy and is known to many of his state colleagues.
In each of the program areas, the Commonwealth will nominate also coordinators for the overall national effort. This structure will be mirrored at the state and territory level as well. There will be a single Coordinator-General in each State and Territory jurisdiction, and as appropriate separate program coordinators in the three to four program areas, and arguably four to five program areas depending on what the Commonwealth does longer term on long term infrastructure.
Therefore, putting that altogether, what we have done today is a very practical piece of work for the nation. What we put out two days ago as this $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs plan for Australia, is to reduce the impact of a global economic recession on the Australian economy, on families and jobs. But the practical work has been to agree a timetable and to agree a machinery to make sure it happens on the ground.
I say again as I said at the outset, I want to see our schools right across the country become new centres of economic activity as we all deal with the challenge which the global economy has presented our nation with.
Finally, we also agreed as Premiers, Chief Ministers and myself as Prime Minister, that when the next Council of Australian Governments meets in the months ahead, at the top of our agenda we'll be dealing with the whole question of the problem of unemployment, the problem of labour market programs, the proper coordination of Commonwealth and state labour market programs, so that what we do to deal with the problem of people losing their jobs right across the country is dealt with in the most seamless and sophisticated way possible. We are now engaging our officials in preparation for that meeting. If I could turn to Anna now for comment, and then over to you for questions.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister. These are extraordinary times and they are times that demand action, action that has confidence, courage and conviction.
In our view, the package announced this week ticks all of those boxes. We are confident as Premiers that this package will actively stimulate the construction industry in each of our states, thereby protecting jobs and securing family incomes.
We also believe that this can and will be delivered faster than you would normally see these programs rolled out. But it can only be delivered if all sides of politics, and all levels of government work together. What we've seen here today is an unprecedented level of cooperation between the Commonwealth and the state governments where we put aside our old ways of doing business, and cut through, guaranteeing that these programs can and will be delivered with a degree of speed that is required.
What we've seen today is a commitment that no bureaucratic hurdles, no red tape, no delays in the approval, the acquisition of land or the procurement processes will get in the way of these funds getting to the front line as quickly as possible in every part of our states. Every Premier and First Minister has been able to confirm that they have lists of schools ready to go and will now work with the Commonwealth to make that happen.
These are as I said unprecedented and extraordinary times, and the Premiers and First Ministers stand ready to answer the call that is being made of them.
PM: Before we take questions, I just again say this and pass my thanks to my colleagues. It is been good and necessary in the national interest for governments both federal and state from all sides of politics, to work together in the national interest in response to this international economic crisis. For the benefit of members of the parliamentary press gallery, Question Time has been delayed until 2.30. So I just draw that to your attention in terms of the time available for your questions.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, has money been allocated amongst the States on a per capita basis?
PM: The money will be distributed according to each of the programs which means that if you look at the allocation for primary schools, it goes down to the number of primary schools and the population density of those schools. It will be allocated on that basis. And as that represents some 15 or close to $15 billion of the program, that's what will happen there.
On the details of administrative arrangements for each element of this Nation Building Plan, it is inevitable that's going to have to be nip and tuck on the way through. We're doing something huge, unprecedented and there's going to be always problems in implementation. Let's just ‘fess up to that from day one. That's why we've established flexible, high level and empowered officials, coordinators-general, to make sure it happens but with a sufficient flexibility at the edges to make sure that it gets done.
JOURNALIST: You indicated the other day you'd have a zero tolerance approach to any of the states of withdrawing their own funds so that they can use yours. What kind of commitment have you demanded and have you  - 
PM: Well that is reflected in the Communiqué and in the agreement that we have just signed, and it is of the type that I described the other day. The encouraging thing from the colleagues is that no one was scratching their heads saying, how can I weasel out of this or weasel out of that.
I think there's a great sense across the nation that this is, these are unprecedented times, and we have all got to pull together and make this work on the ground.
The Commonwealth, for us, we have not been engaged in this level of intensity of activity, of program delivery, of construction, since post war reconstruction really. And that is why this takes such a huge amount of cooperation and I am pleased that none of the colleagues have indicated any predisposition to withdraw effort in these areas.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will this agreement that you have signed today stand if details of the package are amended in the Senate?
PM: This program, this, I should say, National Partnership Agreement remains rock solid. I expect the Senate to pass this package.
JOURNALIST: Further to Matt's question, because you have been given some lists of projects that can go on straight away, presumably these were projects that the States were going to do anyway - I see you shaking your head, Premier - but can you, if that is the case, then can you make sure, how can you make sure that that money that has been put aside in capital expenditure is shifted elsewhere? 
PM: There is a process which we have agreed on which is reflected in the Communiqué, I am going to turn to my colleague from Victoria, to give you a case study, if you like of the sort of projects which John has been talking about this morning.
But just before doing so, the Treasury, this is the machinery point, the heads of Treasury's commonwealth and state, are going to benchmark now through a process which is outlined in the agreement what the States and Territories are committed to doing now in each of these areas across the forward estimates, okay, so it is going to be a completely transparent benchmark.
Therefore, and that committee of heads of Treasuries will be the monitoring agency in terms of any breach, advertent or inadvertent, of that principle.
The overall principle remains, there will be no substitution of effort in these areas, we are on about adding to the national cake.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thanks Prime Minister, and just if I could, to give you an example on that, what we have agreed today is that going forward, what the States will spend for example in education is what was in their forward estimates, what they are were going to spend plus what we are receiving from the Federal Government.
So if you take our State: next year, we were going to spend $350 million on education. You add that with the, let's say $500 million which might come through from the Federal Government, our spend would need to be $350 plus $500 equals $850 million.
So in all areas of Government, that will be the same, and as the PM has said, we've signed up today to strict accounting protocols, opening up our books, so that the Federal Government can see what is in our forward estimates so that all of this is additional effort.
What the extra money does, if you look in our case, we've quadrupled our spending on schools but we've still got a backlog. We have still got a backlog in the primary sector, there is still more we would want to do in the secondary sector.
So what this enables us to do, in partnership with the Prime Minister, is to bring forward a huge number of school projects and get them up, get them underway, get them generating jobs, without delay.
So I have said to the Prime Minister today, we have got projects next week which we can announce, combined state and federal funding projects in the schools area. This is projects which are fully planned, community consultation, ready to go.
All we have got to do is let the contract, and those projects are somewhere between $200 and $300 million. So you know, all of the things the states have wanted to do in recent years, we have been held back by the previous Federal Government. You know we haven't seen money from the Federal Government for infrastructure in the best part of a decade.
And so as the PM has said, we have got $30 billion worth of funding running through. $15 billion of it alone, $14.7 in education. This is the biggest boost which the Federal Government has ever given the states for infrastructure, and so we will utilise it and the trick here is to turn this into projects, quickly.
And ditto can I say, in social housing in Victoria, we have got 377 social housing projects. Again, site procured, community consulted, all ready to go. And with the Federal money that has been agreed to today, we can go out to tender with those, literally, within the next two weeks, select the builders and have people employed in jobs.
And can I just conclude on this, this is the most important thing about this package. You know, because of the strong fundamentals in the Australian economy, and the fact we have come through last year in pretty good shape, but what is happening internationally is a wave that is about to break over Australia. And we spent a couple of hours this morning going through all of the latest economic data and information.
So we have been well positioned, but when you have got your six major trading partners all in recession, when you have got the US declining by two per cent, when you have got Britain declining by what, four, five per cent in the next year, this will break over Australia.
And so this package, it is a fantastic package, you know it is such a timely package, it will get the construction industry up and underway and generating jobs, just when we need it.
And from the States' point of view, can I say, we haven't had such good news since the last COAG meeting.
You know, it is a great injection, well we haven't, when we got great Commonwealth/State agreements on health and education, and now to get this boost, and what it means for the average Victorian, what it means for the average Australian, it means jobs.
You know, it means certainty. It means confidence, it means security. So it couldn't be better timed and our commitment is to hit the ground running and deliver these projects.
PREMIER RANN: Can I say on behalf of the smallest state, for us this is very important. We guaranteed the Prime Minister a six-pronged increase in our own infrastructure funding compared to seven years ago under our predecessors.
And that is guaranteed with or without the extra federal money that we strongly welcome. But what this allows us to do in South Australia, and we are calling a summit, of every school principal, every school council chairperson, in just over a week from now and bringing them in and we are giving them a couple of weeks of to come in with a series of projects that we can back with this money from the Federal Government.
So we are appointing a Coordinator-General straight away. We also have $200 million worth of school maintenance projects ready to go right now. So what we are doing is offering to the Commonwealth, a slate of projects, small and big that can start straight away, in fact many of them can be starting in the next few weeks.
We set up our own School Pride initiative a few years ago so we have got a template of how we can roll out projects to improve our schools, but also employ local contractors and local people.
I think there is an absolute feeling amongst all of us, that we face is the economic equivalent of war in terms of global financial crisis about to roll over us and we are absolutely united in wanting to make sure we defeat that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the next COAG meeting is still going to include the possibility of ticking off on those big infrastructure spending items under the Building Australia fund, and given that you said it is also going to be targeted at unemployment and the labour market, can you tell us your current thinking on the arguments for and a permanent increase in Newstart?
PM: Let me do the second part of your question first and then come back to long term infrastructure.
The colleagues and I, led by Julia Gillard the Deputy Prime Minister, have been working our way through this again in recent days. We are going through a whole range of options, dealing with kids just coming out of the schools system, who are going to find it difficult entering the labour market, dealing with the challenge of people who are in jobs who may lose their jobs, the geographical concentration of that, the adequacy of the information flow, and the adequacy of supporting labour market programs for all the above, and the existing social security network as well.
All these things are being worked through but we have not reached any finality on any of this yet. As I have said, I think in previous discussions with you in recent days, we have to try and get this as right as possible. The value of the conversation with the colleagues today from the States and Territories is a strong willingness on their part to calibrate their education, training and labour market efforts with ours.
What often confuses people and I fully understand why, if you lose your job or you are worried about your son or daughter leaving school and where do they go, it's the plethora of information, often not properly coordinated, from various levels of government about what is available.
How do we actually break that down? This is what we are working on.
On the first part of your question which deals with long term infrastructure, we are waiting on the deliberations of infrastructure Australia in March.
I will work out with the colleagues, the timing of the next COAG meeting. I have indicated dealing with the challenge of unemployment will be high on its agenda.
On the question of long term infrastructure, we will work out between us, between now and then, how that is best deliberated, once Infrastructure Australia comes down with its recommendations.
So on the inclusion of it, on the next COAG agenda, we haven't reached finality on that yet. So that is a direct answer to your question.
JOURNALIST: Mr Barnett, do you feel a little bit conflicted, given your federal counterparts have described this spending as excessive, as irresponsible, as driven by panic?
PREMIER BARNETT: No I don't. And can I just say that the document that we have just signed, the national partnership agreement is essentially about the education funding for schools and the social housing components and I strongly support those.
And I, certainly as far as Western Australia is concerned, will ensure that that money is spent quickly, and well spent.
And one of the points that has come out this morning is the importance I think of using that to improve the quality and standards of education and to make sure that they are facilities that go into schools where the need is greatest.
So I am quite happy about that. As far as housing is concerned the West Australian Government announced on Monday that we would commit to 1,000 additional units of public and housing for Government employees in country areas and would ensure that that will not be sort of, sliding under this Commonwealth funding.
So look, the total value of that is around $22 billion. Now, Malcolm Turnbull obviously is debating the package, as he should, and I assume that will happen in the parliament over the next few days, next few minutes, or hours.
JOURNALIST: What about the cash bonuses aspect of it? Does the WA economy need that injection as well?
PREMIER BARNETT: Well I will be quite honest, I am less enthusiastic about that component of the package than I am about the housing and education components but the part that affects this agreement and the part that West Australia and other States and Territories have a say in, is basically the housing and educational part. And we have agreed to deliver that in conjunction with existing programs in the States.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER BARNETT: Look I am not going to tell people that they can't get a payment. That is not something that concerns me in my role as the Premier of Western Australia. But you know if you ask me about my levels of enthusiasm, they are high on housing and education. Maybe a little bit less enthusiastic on some of the other parts. But that is not my issue, that is the Prime Minister's issue and Malcolm Turnbull's issue as Leader of the Opposition.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just one question away from the economy involving the West Gate Bridge tragedy of Darcey Freeman. The outpouring of emotion has prompted her relatives today to call for an annual children's day, much like Mother's Day, to be held around January 29th, close to her death.
Should we have an annual children's day in Darcey's memory? And Mr Brumby, if I can get your response to that, and whether or not you would like to see an inquiry into the authorities' handling of the matter following criticism from relatives that there was a lack of response from them leading up to her death.
PM: I think this tragedy has been gut wrenching for the entire nation. People have been really affected by this. Anyone with a touch of humanity in them finds this just unspeakable. And you just recoil in horror at all of this, just recoil in horror.
When I was just about to walk in here, I was actually told about this proposal for a national children's day. And I'm told there could be all sorts of technicalities associated with it, and I don't know really what the processes are. But I support the idea. Let's see what the community has to say in the discussion which will happen.
But I think this is, this has affected everybody, and out of such an appalling tragedy how do we turn it to good, cause people to reflect on the protection of little ones? I think it's a good idea.
PREMIER BRUMBY: We have, we have in Victoria, I think it's the first week in October, we have a Children's Week, and I think as part of that it also coincides with International Children's Day. And you know, I'd like to hear what the community says as well.
I think as the PM has said, if we can turn this horrible tragedy into something which is more positive, that will be a great outcome for the community. Perhaps it's the way in which we run Children's Week, perhaps it might be an element of Children's Week.
But I think in terms of the, the way the year's structured, this event there, it marks International Children's Day as well, that's probably I think a good time to do this, but I think we'll hear from the community about that. And you know, if there's good debate about this, I think the better, that's a healthy thing for the community.
On the issue of the authorities, I don't have information on that. The preliminary information I've got is that there's no record of any contact with the authorities, that's the preliminary advice I've got, but obviously if I get subsequent advice to that I'll advise you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, state government tax revenues are deteriorating even more rapidly than the Commonwealth's. Was there any discussion this morning about the possibility of Commonwealth support for State Governments in terms of filling their deficits with borrowing?
PM: I think there's a rolling discussion as you'd expect to be normal between state treasurers and state treasuries on all those sorts of matters, that is normal, that is appropriate, and that is how it's unfolding.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two points. The House this morning passed your package in toto. How important is that vote? And the Senate's decision to delay the package for consideration for a week, will that impact on the timing of the bonus payments for families?
PM: I've been in here all morning with my colleagues working on the implementation of the stimulus package. And I'm sure I'll apprised soon on what's going on in other places both the Senate and beyond.
It is critical that we move heaven and earth to make sure these payments reach families as quickly as possible. It's critical that we implement the programs which have been referred to here in schools.
And I would just say to everyone who's a member of parliament in this place, whatever their politics, is to rise to the national interest here and get this investment and the support for families out the door where it can do some good now.
As I believe both the Premiers of Victoria and South Australia indicated before, the challenge coming to us from the international economy is washing over our shores. Remember at the end of last year there was debate about whether we had acted too early in support of stimulus then. I say if we roll the clock ahead in three months time, I wonder where we would be had we not acted both then and now.
So I think it's time for people to push their political disagreements to one side. This is really important stuff. As I've said before, I cannot, nor can the Commonwealth nor can any government remove or eliminate the impact of this global economic recession on Australian households and on unemployment. I cannot eliminate that, I cannot remove it, but I can reduce it and these are all part of practical measures to do that.
Ladies and gentleman, I've got to go and get ready for Question Time. Thank you very much.
[ends] 


PM: Today in Canberra, some 200 businesses and organisations have come to the nation's capital to help plan the implementation of the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan. And only Mr Turnbull is standing in the road.
200 businesses and organisations determined to act in the national interest to support jobs and to build long term infrastructure, only Mr Turnbull stands in the way. This Government's nation building and jobs plan, that will support jobs in every community around the country and will improve every primary school in the country, and give a tax break that every small business could benefit from.
More than 200 organisations have come to the nation's capital today because they want to support local jobs and national jobs at a time of national and international economic emergency.
The Master Builders' Association, the Housing Industry Association, the Business Council of Australia, the Council of Small Business, the National Farmers' Federation  -  all these organisations want to act in the national interest and so do we.
And again, only Mr Turnbull stands in the road.
What's clear from my meetings so far today with these Australian businesses, small and large, and from those representing the social housing sector and of course the broader education sector, is that they all have projects ready to go.
They all have projects which are shovel-ready. What's standing in the road of those projects beginning is Mr Turnbull. There are school halls and libraries, public housing, the insulation of home projects ready to go, ready to start, creating jobs and preparing for the future.
Only Mr Turnbull stands in the road.
Therefore I would say to Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Party, get out of the road of the Government getting on with the job of nation building and supporting jobs at a time of national economic emergency.
When we have organisations such as the International Monetary Fund, the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Australian Industry Group saying loud and clear to governments like Australia that it is time to act through stimulus and where necessary to borrow for that stimulus, that is counsel enough for this Government to get on with the business of doing it.
And again I would say to Mr Turnbull, it's time to get out of the road.
What is the alternative plan that's being advocated here? I don't know. All that it is, it seems to me, is rank political short term-ism and opportunism, driven by the internal dynamics of the Liberal Party.
Well this, Government has an agenda and a strategy to see Australia through this economic crisis, it is time Mr Turnbull got out of the road. The rest of the country, from every school community, from the small business community, from the mainstream business communities of businesses large, wants the Government to get on with this task. We intend to do it.
Questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you explain, or Treasurer how you decided that the lowest paid Australians, those million or so plus earning less than $11,000 per year, wouldn't get the workers' bonus. Aren't they the people who are most likely to spend it and stimulate the economy?
SWAN: It is not true to say that there is a huge number of low paid Australians who are not receiving support through either the payments that we made, through the economic security package back in last December, or through this package, through this Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
It is true that the tax bonus only goes to those who had a tax liability in the 07/08 financial year. So if you paid one dollar of tax in that year, you receive the tax bonus. Effectively what that means is that if you take into account the LITO, it will be paid to people, people will be paying tax over about $11,000 per year.
So the group you are talking about are under $11,000 a year. Many of them will receive payments, will receive payments through the measures contained in the Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
Let's just look at the figures. The total amount here in terms of direct payments is $12.7 billion, less than two thirds of that is the tax bonus alone. More than a third goes to low and middle income households who may not be eligible for the tax bonus.
There is monies being paid to people through training allowances and so on, on Newstart. There are people on parenting payments who are receiving this, and there are people who will receive payments through the back to school allowances. So a very large number of people will be receiving support who may or may not receive the tax bonus.
And if you look at both packages, the economic security package, which came down in October and payments were made in December, and this package, something like 95 per cent of singles and families will have received a payment.
JOURNALIST: But Mr Swan, the Government's immediate problem is that the crossbench senators and the Greens are already expressing concerns about the stimulus package, that there's not enough for low income people, nothing for the unemployed and (inaudible)?
SWAN: Look can I just say, all the efforts of this Government, from day one, have been directed towards assisting people on low and middle incomes. The tax changes last year, from the 1st of July, were directed to lower income earners who had been left behind. If you look at the structure of the payments that were there in the October package, they overwhelmingly went to lower income earners, and most particularly to support people with families, and with children.
So this Government has put in place over the last 12 months very substantial assistance to people on low and middle incomes and that flows again, as I have just explained before, in this package.
So I think the package has been misrepresented by some, I don't know why. But I would like to make this point, it's a very important one.
Without the support of the Liberals, the vital nation building investments contained in this package and in payments which will go to people on low and middle incomes are at risk. And I think it's been made very clear by evidence before the Senate, last night and this morning, that if people muck around with this package in the Senate, they will delay vital payments to Australian families and delay vital investment which will support jobs.
Now this morning, we've heard from a lot of people and we're going to hear from the business community in a little while, but it's pretty apparent for the Prime Minister and I from our discussions this morning that a lot of jobs out there, particularly in the construction industry, depend upon the speedy passage of this legislation.
What Malcolm Turnbull is doing is playing with fire and playing with people's lives. A stimulus is needed now, the Treasury Secretary made it very clear last night why that was the case. The Government has acted and the political game-playing of the Liberals is putting all of that at risk.
PM: Two quick points in addition, on lower income earners. $6 billion in social housing, the largest single injection of national funding in social housing in the history of the Commonwealth. Point one.
Point two, on the question of, I think you said before, the green credentials of what is being done, $4 billion in investment in the insulation of homes. Many of the homes not currently insulated are those often owned by lower income people.
These are two important points and to back up something the Treasurer just said about jobs, the Housing Industry Association said this in the morning session, they are desperately concerned about builders losing their jobs now because they have no confidence that new projects are flowing through. This is what the industry has told us this morning. They therefore said that from their industry's point of view, getting the passage of this through the Senate is of critical importance to maintaining sufficient confidence to keep those built businesses running.
JOURNALIST: Are you the guys playing politics here? The Liberals have made their decision. It's clear they're not going to support this. Shouldn't you be dealing with the minor parties instead of trying to score points against Malcolm Turnbull, this is clear?
PM: It is time for the Liberal party to demonstrate some national political leadership. This is all about the Liberal party's internal dynamics. It's got nothing to do about the policy merits of the argument. Let me go back again to the arguments which were occasionally deployed in this debate over the last two days in this building.
If you have the International Monetary Fund, a well-known front for international socialism, if you've got the Business Council of Australia, another front for international socialism and communism too I presume, and the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the AIG, a bit suspect, if they're all out there saying that the responsible thing for any government to do under these circumstances is to borrow in order to stimulate the economy now, I would suggest that it is a mainstream economically conservative course of action, which it is.
The alternative is in fact not only radical, but opportunist. And I would say to, to go to the core of your question, I would say to Mr Turnbull, it's time for him to reconsider his position because the national interest demands it and the jobs of people, hanging and swinging in the breeze in the construction industry, depends on him showing some leadership.
SWAN: I just want to add to that, and it will probably go to the question you're about to ask. The only certainty of this legislation passing in a speedy way and delivering payments to families and low income earners and starting the critical investment is if the Liberal party votes for it. Everybody in this room would be familiar with the passage of legislation for last year's budget, and the hurdles that it had to go through in the Senate and all of the speculation there was about where minor parties and Greens would vote.
I say to you, there is no certainty that all of the minor parties and Independents will vote for this legislation and therefore no certainty, without the Liberal party's support, that this will pass in a speedy way. But we will talk to the Greens and to the minor parties in a constructive way.
But our imperative, and it's in the national interest, is to make sure the legislation does pass in a speedy way so we can deal, so we can deal with this economic slowdown that has been imposed on us, not by a legislative timetable in this country, but by events right around the globe.
And that is what is driving the need for this legislation to pass, and I can't believe the Liberal party could be so reckless as to encourage uncertainty about the passage of this legislation given the importance of confidence, given the importance of confidence in the current circumstances in which we find ourselves buffeted by the rest of the world.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, how many low income workers do you think will miss out on direct payments under your package, and are you prepared to talk to the Greens and the Independents about extra payments for them and the unemployed?
SWAN: We are prepared to talk to the minor parties in a reasonable way. But what we are delivering here is very substantial payments to people on very low incomes. Let's make no mistake about this, no mistake about it at all - very substantial payments.
Payments which for the first time for example, are like our package at the end of last year, will go to low income singles without dependents, as well as couples without dependents. So there is a significant payment going to a lot of people on modest incomes, and we are delivering it this way, as the Tax Commissioner would have testified I'm sure when he was before the Senate Committee, because it can be done now. The earliest any payment can be made in the tax system is in April. And it is being done this way for administrative simplicity. To meet the needs of the time.
PM: And speaking of the needs of the time, the industry groups await us. We're late for them and I'm sorry we were late for you. Thank you.
[ends]


The Rudd Government today announced additional assistance to residents in Far North and Northern Queensland seriously affected by the floods.
Those eligible will be able to receive a one-off lump sum payment of $1000 for adults and $400 for each child to help support their recovery. 
This will be available through Centrelink.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be made available to those people adversely affected by the flooding that commenced in the Far North/Northern Queensland regions on 31 January 2009.
The Rudd Government will continue to work with the Queensland Government and community organisations to support those people and families affected through this difficult time. When the flood waters recede, a fuller assessment of the impact will be possible.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will provide financial assistance to people who have been seriously injured, or whose principal place of residence has been destroyed, significantly damaged or is inaccessible for 48 hours or more as a direct result of the floods.
Over the coming days and weeks there will be further work to do for these communities to fully recover.
Information on the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be available through the Australian Government North Queensland Floods Hotline on 180 22 22.
This assistance is over and above the support being provided by the Commonwealth Government under the long standing Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
Through these arrangements, partial reimbursement is provided to the Queensland Government to provide assistance such as grants for food, clothing, accommodation, emergency housing repairs and for expenditure on public infrastructure restoration.
More information on Australian Government assistance will be available at www.disasterassist.gov.au


MITCHELL: On the line is Prime Minister Rudd, thank you for speaking to us.
PM: Good afternoon Neil on what's an awful day for Victoria.
MITCHELL: It's just staggering the extent of this devastation, isn't it?
PM: Yeah. I flew down to Melbourne this morning early and went to the State Disaster Centre and just, if you look at that map of the whole of Victoria and see the state erupting in front of you. Then been up to Kangaroo Ground and now just to Whittlesea, there've been a whole lot of people who have just come out of devastation in Kinglake, Kinglake West and places like that, and it's not just vast in its scope, it's just immediate, personal and horrifying as well.
MITCHELL: Now I understand you've been in $5 million and the State Government as well. I'm afraid this is just going to be the beginning isn't it. There's a long way ahead.
PM: Absolutely, I was speaking to John Brumby earlier this afternoon at Kangaroo Ground, and we just both agreed we needed to kick off a community appeals straight away, so there's $10 million. A lot of people want to give and we just want to get that up and going. The detail in terms of the account et cetera to give to, we should hopefully have up by about six this evening. But when we get it up and running, but you're right Neil, this is just very much a first step. The personal devastation, the personal losses, quite apart from the human losses. It's going to take a long long time to rebuild.
MITCHELL: New South Wales, there's trouble as well, although the New South Wales Premier is just offering all the help to fire victims possible. Have you, you've spent quite a bit of your life in country areas. Have you ever seen anything like it before?
PM: No, the fire I remember as a kid were called the Queensland bushfires of 1967 and they were large, but talking to your fire authorities here, and simply listening to what they have said to me, and I'm in no position to judge but they regard these as worse in their intensity and the bringing together of the record temperatures, record dryness over ten or eleven years, and the most appalling wind conditions that you can imagine, they say the worst in the settled history of Victoria.
MITCHELL: What do we need to do now. What can, the people are anxious to help as they always are at a time like this. What do you think we need to do?
PM: Look, the State Government through the relevant Management Authority has its hands on the reigns and look, it's very important that we work in a coordinated fashion with them. In the immediate task which is dealing with the dead and the bereaved and the injured, of course we at the commonwealth level offer the state government every level of assistance including the defence force, including I'm with Jenny Macklin at present, the Families Minister, the provision of counsellors, social workers, people to deal with the immediate personal devastation in their lives.
Then, there's the question of a real need and some of these fire affected areas for heavy duty army bulldozers to clear paths, clear tracks, make firebreaks, that's the question John and I discussed on the phone late last night. And that's been activated today. Any form of assistance that the Government Victoria wants from the Australian army, the defence force or generally, is forthcoming. And that we will do whatever is within our power.
Then you get down to practical questions of, that effect the people I've just been talking to out at Whittlesea, these are the people who literally just come down, you know off the mountain with you know, the shirts on their backs. Their stories are just heart-rending. And the immediate thing of where do they go to get cash overnight and in the morning in order to buy some clothes, buy some toiletries, et cetera, that's why Jenny Macklin has recommended to me and have agreed that the Commonwealth Emergency payments will be forthcoming  -  a $1000 for eligible adults, $400 per child  -  and they are available immediately, and the contact number is the Centrelink Victorian's Fires Hotline on 180 2211. So they're the practical and immediate steps Neil, but that's just what we need to do now.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time. I know you're very busy. Thank you Prime Minister.
PM: And to all your listeners Neil, can I by the way say this service you're providing this afternoon is very important. People are feeling isolated, they're feeling fearful, they're feeling alone and I think having the community talking with them and through them through the radio is very important, and I just wish your listeners the very best in what is an awful day for the good people of Victoria.
MITCHELL: We'll help anyway we can. Thank you for your time.
[ends]


The Victorian fires have been extremely devastating and this is an extraordinary natural disaster with high loss of life and property.
Our thoughts and prayers are with those families who are suffering from these cruel and horrific events. 
Our gratitude goes out to the fire-fighters and other emergency services workers, many of them volunteers, who have endured the unbearable heat to help defend life and property.
Centrelink family liaison officers will be made available in relief centres in Victoria to provide counselling services.
Given the devastation caused by the bushfires in the state of Victoria, the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be made available to those people adversely affected by the fires. It is $1,000 for eligible adults and an addition $400 per child.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be paid to those seriously injured and hospitalised as well as who have lost their homes, or whose principal place of residence has been destroyed or seriously damaged, as a direct result of the bushfires.
The Payment will also be available to an immediate family member of those who lost their lives in the fire. 
It will be paid through Centrelink and available from Monday. The Australian Government Victorian fires hotline 180 2211 has been established to take claims and enquiries. 
Centrelink staff will also be in relief centres today to take claims for the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment.
The Australian Government will also provide funeral assistance for the immediate family of a person who has lost their life as a direct result of the fires. This assistance will be up to $5,000.
Authorisation has been provided to deploy twelve Army bulldozers and support crews to help fire protection efforts near Yea in north-east Victoria.
The Defence Force personnel will help build containment lines surrounding the town, which is being seriously threatened with fire. 
In addition, the Australian Government is also providing 150 portable beds or mattresses to relief centres in the Baw Baw Shire in West Gippsland.
With the extreme conditions throughout Victoria, it is essential that emergency workers are able to get sufficient rest to continue their tireless work.
The bedding is being delivered to Victoria as fast as possible. 
The Rudd and Brumby Governments are working closely together to ensure that the people and emergency workers in Victoria have all the support they require during this difficult time.
This assistance is over and above the support that will be provided by the Australian Government under the long standing Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
Through these arrangements, partial reimbursement is provided to the Victorian Government to provide assistance such as grants for food, clothing, accommodation, emergency housing repairs and for expenditure on public infrastructure restoration.
The Australian Government is currently continuing to monitor the impacts and will be considering what further assistance can be provided to individuals, families and communities, especially through community organisations that are responding so well to this devastating event.
The Australian Government is working with the Victorian Government to establish a Victorian Bushfire Appeal for people to make donation to assist those affected by the fires. More information on how to donate will be made available as soon as possible.
More information on Australian Government assistance will be available at www.disasterassist.gov.au


EASTLEY: Prime Minister good morning. What was your reaction when you heard of what happened in Victoria last night?
PM: Like the rest of Australia, absolutely horrified. This is an appalling loss of life. An appalling loss of property. This is a terrible and devastating tragedy. And my thoughts and prayers go out to all those families and communities who've been affected by this extraordinary natural disaster.
EASTLEY: What sort of briefings have you been able to get given that you heard about it only last night.
PM: Well obviously Emergency Management Australia have been working their way through this, in coordination with the Victorian authorities during the course of yesterday. Late last night in Parliament House, Canberra we convened a meeting with the Director of Emergency Management Australia and the Financial Security Adviser and others, spoke directly to the Victorian Premier about particular forms of assistance which may be necessary. Following on from that meeting, the State Emergency Response Coordinator in Victoria has made a formal request for the activation of the Commonwealth Disaster plan. Immediately what's been requested is the supply of temporary bedding for emergency relief centres in the Baw Baw Shire. The Commonwealth Government of course has responded positively to that, and that will be activated immediately.
EASTLEY: What can the Commonwealth offer as you say, apart from you know what you mentioned there. Are there other areas that your team looked at last night?
PM: Yes, there are a range of capacities available in terms of dealing with natural disasters like this. Of course, the full capacities of the Australia Defence Force are at the disposal of the Government of Victoria if any practical request is made. That is the first and formal mechanism that we have to assist in natural disasters. Secondly in terms of relief, of course there are a range of emergency payments in which the Commonwealth is either a co-contributor to or a complete contributor to in providing emergency relief payments to those most of it immediately affected, which is why in part of being in Melbourne today to deal directly with the responsible minister, Jenny Macklin in Melbourne about what and where any such payment should be made.
EASTLEY: Okay, the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Thanks for joining us this morning on AM.
PM: Thank you.
[ends] 


PM: Hell in all its fury has visited the good people of Victoria in the last 24 hours and many good people now lie dead, many others lie injured. This is an appalling tragedy for Victoria but because of that, it's an appalling tragedy for the nation. And Australia, the country stands behind Victoria at this awful time.
To echo what the Premier said before our first response as human beings is one of just the deepest empathy for people whose lives have now been devastated. This loss of life, the numbers of injured and horrific injuries, our thoughts and our prayers go out to each and everyone of them as they now try and deal with this tragedy and recover from the damage which has occurred.
Also as human beings we salute the extraordinary courage of all the emergency services workers. And, the Premier and I've heard just some small stories of this today, they'll be others larger told later on. And this is a great testament to all of our emergency services personnel right across the spectrum  -  Police, Fire, Country Fire Authority, those who work in our hospitals, those in the SES.
Can I also say that at times like this, the nation stands behind states like Victoria when the Australian Defence Force is needed. And all of the resources as required by the Victorian authorities from the Australian Defence Force will be provided. Wherever that is, whichever community it is, whatever the defence force can do, we will do. Some of these communities don't have anything left much. And so it may mean that we've got military logisticians working their way through together with the state disaster relief coordinators to work out what can be done in each community, simply to make them immediately as functional as possible. This is very large scale stuff.
Secondly, on the question of the automatic desire across the nation to give and to give generously, the Premier and I've agreed on this community recovery plan this morning. We kick it off with $10 million between us. And my appeal to all Australians is to dig deep as people's lives have been shattered. And the details of that relief fund will be made public a little later in the day.
The Commonwealth itself through the normal Centrelink payments, emergency Centrelink payments has kicked into gear. I'll ask the Minister Jenny Macklin to detail those in a minute, for those who are in immediate need of financial help now. That's what we do through Commonwealth, through Centrelink, immediate need financial help now through emergency payments.
There's a long road ahead. But again I conclude with where I began, the national Government will be with the Victorian Government through the awful and ugly days that lie ahead, and in along the path of recovery.
MACKLIN: Thanks very much. Well Centrelink have established a Victorian Fires Hotline and the number is 180 2211, 180 2211. People can now call that hotline number and the emergency assistance will be made available as quickly as possible. It's $1000 for each adult affected and $400 per child. So these immediate payments are there for people who find themselves in very very difficult circumstances right now.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Alright, thanks Jenny.
MACKLIN: Sorry I might just add the other important service that Centrelink will be providing in conjunction with the state department is the critical role of counsellors. We know that in the relief centres that have been established, there are many people who are suffering not only the loss of their property, but also they know members of their families, members of their communities who've passed away. So we'll be providing Centrelink social workers and counsellors into the relief centres and to the communities where people have been so devastated, to provide that personal support and that will be done as quickly as possible.
PREMIER BRUMBY: And can I just say in relation to that. This is one of the big areas of need that we've got, and the support from the Federal Government in this regard is just so important. There are so many families, there are many firefighters and many that I spoke to last night in Bendigo, they've been out there in their own area, many have been out outing fires, they've lost their own home. We've had cases where firefighters were out fighting fires when they've lost members of their families, and the need for support and counselling services is very significant. And to get the support from the Federal Government, the South Australian Premier today also offered his support in this regard, this is going to be, as I said the top priority is to provide that support.
Can I also just say, just to reiterate a message we've been getting out all day that the fires aren't over. You know, they're a long long way from over. We've still got ten or twelve fires, ten to twelve which are serious. We've got 26 that are still out of control. This morning in Wondong, the fire flared there, and a fire that was believed to be contained in that area's again quite active. So this is not over. The message has been going out about sightseers, we don't need sightseers out there, we've got active fires around right across the state. We've got strong wind over the next few days and this, this isn't over yet.
Can I also say the Leader of the Opposition is here today. I spoke to Mr Baillieu and to Peter Ryan, the Leader of the National party this morning. Peter Ryan is with Bob Cameron in Gippsland and I know Ted's available to make some comments later on. If you wish but, this is an occasion obviously where there is a bipartisan approach to making sure whatever steps are necessary to put in place, to do the things that need to be done, will be done.


KOCH: What was the first thought that came into your mind when you saw the scale of this disaster?
PM: That the nation needed to begin to brace itself and the nation needs to begin to brace itself again today. These numbers are numbing in terms of those who have lost their lives and I fear they may rise further. It's - you're at Whittlesea I think is that right David?
KOCH: Yeah, that's right.
PM: I was there yesterday talking to families and just to sit quietly with folk and listen to the absolute trauma of each and every human encounter with the flames is - leaves you in awe about how people survive this and the courage of those around them to help them out. But for those who've lost their lives, this wreckage and this devastation, this has just begun.
KOCH: And I don't know about you but when you come down here, you come with a sort of expectation that when you see it, it is just, it is mind numbing. The devastation and you shake your head, you just wonder how this could be don't you?
PM: Yeah, if you listen to these individual stories and then you begin to look at the pictures of what has happened in so many parts of Victoria, your heart goes out. The challenge for us all David is not just to extend, you know, the hand of friendship and support and that is so necessary as people deal with this pure physical and psychological trauma of having been through hell, but it's also now action.
That's why we have deployed the army. That's why we'll be deploying every possible resource of the Federal Government in partnership with the State Government to deal with what is still an unfolding crisis.
KOCH: Now what about financial help for the victims and the community?
PM: Well what we did, when I was speaking to Premier Brumby on Saturday night late, early Sunday morning, we began working our way through this. As of this morning, the key challenge for example for many of those good people that you will be meeting or have met today at Whittlesea, and people like that across Victoria, is many of them just have the shirts on their back and nothing else.
So as of this morning we've got Centrelink offices spanning out right across these affected communities, I think in 13 so far and I stand to be corrected on that, to make sure that people's upfront cash payments - $1,000 for adults, $400 per child - are made, so people can go out and do something very basic this morning which is buy extra clothes, toiletries, the things that get you through the next day or two.
And then, we have to tend to the further task of how we go about rebuilding these communities and that's why we have the defence today, the Defence Department, the Army, headed by Brigadier Arnold and Colonel Greet - Brigadier Arnold of Four Brigade, Colonel Greet - embedded here at Victorian Counter Disaster Headquarters, and the Army will be fanning out as well to begin to assist with reconstruction tasks.
KOCH: Yeah. Well look, they need all the help they can get from right around the country Prime Minister. Thanks very much for joining us this morning.
PM: Can I add there, everyone who said this but everyone should dig deep. It's not just the next day or two. This is the next year or two for the rebuilding of these communities. And as a nation let's pledge this, that we'll rebuild these communities.


Flooding in North Queensland continues to overwhelm communities such as Ingham, where more than 3,000 homes have been affected.
I am committed to ensuring that the available services are delivered quickly and effectively to those Queenslanders seriously affected by these floods.
I have today asked Craig Emerson, the Minister for Small Business, Independent Contractors and the Service Economy to travel to North Queensland to oversee the delivery of Commonwealth support to people who have suffered as a result of widespread flooding in the region.
Mr Emerson will work from North Queensland to make sure help gets to those in need as quickly as possible.
Over the weekend, Treasurer Wayne Swan travelled to North Queensland to visit the township of Ingham, where flood waters last week peaked above 12 metres.
The Australian Government made provision last week for support to those affected by the Queensland floods under the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements.
Through these arrangements, partial reimbursement is provided to the Queensland Government to provide assistance such as grants for food, clothing, accommodation, emergency housing repairs and for expenditure on public infrastructure restoration.
The Government has also activated the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment for residents in Ingham to provide financial assistance to people who have been seriously injured, or whose principal place of residence has been destroyed, significantly damaged or is inaccessible for 48 hours or more as a direct result of the floods.
The AGDRP is a one-off lump sum payment of $1000 for adults and $400 for each child to help support their recovery.
These payments are available through Centrelink to eligible recipients.
The Australian Defence Force has also provided assistance directly to Ingham residents. Jet fuel was transported to the area on Thursday to assist with flying in relief assistance. Today, the ADF completed the supply and delivery of 4500 ration packs.
I have also asked Mr Emerson to continue to work closely with the Queensland Government to ensure any additional requests for help receive a timely response.
The Commonwealth Government through Emergency Management Australia continues to monitor conditions across North Queensland closely.
More information on Australian Government assistance will be available at www.disasterassist.gov.au 


More than 450 Australian Government personnel will be deployed to Victoria over the coming days to provide emergency services, logistical support and counselling to the hundreds of people who have lost family, friends and property in the devastating fires. 
The fires have devastated Victoria, causing a massive loss of life and property. The nation is in shock as this disaster continues to unfold.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the families and communities ravaged by these devastating events.
Centrelink workers are today arriving in 19 relief centres established around Victoria.
They will provide counselling and support as well as helping people affected by the fires to access financial assistance. Two hundred Centrelink Community Recovery staff and 70 social workers will be at the centres over the coming days.
More than 200 Defence personnel have been assembled to provide specialist and emergency support, including clearing roads, searching houses and erecting tents.
The Australian Government will continue to work closely with the Victorian Government to ensure those affected by these devastating bushfires receive all the support and assistance they need.
We will use all our resources to help those people who have lost so much in the fires and will be constantly monitoring the situation to respond to and meet their needs.
Currently, the Australian Government is providing the following assistance to people affected by the fires:
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) has been activated, with payments available to those people adversely affected by the fires. It is $1,000 for eligible adults and an extra $400 per child.
The Australian Government is putting together a jobs and medium-term income support package to assist those whose workplaces have been destroyed by the fires, or whose businesses/employers no longer have an income.
Funeral Assistance will be provided to the immediate family of a person who has lost their life as a direct result of the fires. This assistance will be up to $5,000 for each deceased person.
Two Centrelink Mobile Service Buses will arrive in Victoria early this week to provide emergency services. 
Commonwealth Disaster Plan has been activated. Under COMDISPLAN the Defence Force is providing a range of assistance:
     * Tents, stretchers and sleeping bags to accommodate 200 people at the Yea Recreation Reserve, in North East Victoria.
     * Heavy machinery including bulldozers, front end loaders, chainsaw crews to assist with fire containment, reopening roads and fire fighting.
     * Supply of aerial imagery aircraft to search the affected areas and identify damaged or destroyed residences.
     * Deployment of 100 Australian Defence Force personnel to provide search and recovery assistance.
     * 150 portable beds or mattresses provided to relief centres in the Baw Baw Shire in West Gippsland for emergency workers.
The Australian Federal Police have provided 90 AFP personnel to assist Victoria Police with the ongoing investigation and response to the bushfires. This includes a team of 16 disaster victim identification specialists.
Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangement (NDRRA) has been activated for 21 local government areas across Victoria. 
Through the NDRRA, emergency personal hardship grants are available, worth $427 per adult and $213 per child. Temporary living and re-establishment grants worth up to $8,650 can also be accessed.
The Australian Government and Victorian Government have established a $10 million Community Recovery Fund to assist the recovery effort in affected communities. The Fund will cover the restoration of community infrastructure damaged or destroyed in the fires, above and beyond the replacement of essential public assets. 
The Australian and Victorian Government have donated $4 million to the Victorian Bushfire Relief Fund. The public can make tax deductible donations by calling Red Cross on 1800 811 700 or www.redcross.org.au
Information Lines 
     * Victorian Bushfire Hotline  -  1800 240 667
     * Centrelink assistance information line  -  180 2211
     * More information on Australian Government assistance is available at www.disasterassist.gov.au


JOURNALIST: What did you make of what you saw?
PM: Well this is devastation on a scale that most of the old hands, the fire fighters themselves have never seen before. This is the worst set of conditions, I was advised, in the history of European settlement in Victoria. And the sheer face of human tragedy as people deal with anxiety, grief, despair, this is something where the nation has a responsibility to reach out to all the good people of Victoria and these communities who are suffering so much right now.
JOURNALIST: What immediately can the Commonwealth do to help those people whose lives have been turned upside down by this tragedy?
PM: Two or three practical things. The first is - in response to conversations late last night and in the early hours of this morning, we activated all of our defence assets and the army is out there providing whatever support is necessary in individual communities and that will vary depending on what part of the State we're talking about.
The second is this, a lot of the good people that you've just been talking to at Whittlesea for example, where I was earlier today have literally come out of this with just the shirts on their back. So what we the Commonwealth are doing through Centrelink is making available straight away cash payments, emergency cash payments so that people can go and buy some clothes and you know, buy some toiletries and basic stuff like that. That's underway.
And thirdly of course the Victorian Premier John Brumby and I have launched a public appeal on top of our combined community fund of $10 million.
And that public appeal, if you don't have the number already, is 1800 811 700 for all Australians wanting to pitch in and help these very good people who are, who have suffered a huge kick in the guts.
JOURNALIST: You've just announced the $42 billion stimulus package, can you also afford to consider maybe more medium term help for some of the people whose lives have been turned upside down?
PM: Let me say this to the people of Victoria, all Australians through the Australian Government are going to stand in absolute solidarity with these communities and we're going to be partners in their rebuilding.
The Government of Victoria and with the local authorities, you've come through bad times before and we'll come through this one and this Government will be behind these communities.
I fear in the days ahead though the news is going to be bad and I believe the nation needs to prepare itself as the full facts become known.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] the extent of this suffering. The Premier told us that many parts of the State are still a tinder box and it really could be touched on many times if there is a wind change. Do you stand ready to put defence force personnel, man power, bulldozers in the line if they're needed?
PM: As I said before, we have done that. The conversation I had with John Brumby at you know 11 o'clock last night, one o'clock this morning whatever it was, all Australian defence and army assets are available to the emergency authorities here in Victoria.
And whether that's heavy bulldozers, whether it's emergency accommodation, whether it's bedding, whether it's logistical support, and we've now despatched a high level defence team to Victoria, I'll be meeting them again in a few minutes time, to go through each community, community by community to work out what we can physically do in each place, apart from of course a practical thing for families who have lost everything is to give them cash in their pockets straight away.


STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, good morning to you. Your thoughts on this, another dark day where the death toll is now 108?
PM: I think it's very important that the nation braces itself for more bad news. This is of a scale which takes your breath away and I fear things will get worse before they get better. The practical challenge -
STEFANOVIC: I understand.
PM: - is to make sure that we've got people out there in the field. I've just come now from an extensive briefing with our defence personnel and local police who will be surging something like three to four hundred defence personnel out into these areas today.
A combination of searches of individual homes, a combination of bulldozers, front-end loaders, chainsaw gangs, as well as those going to these communities, the worst affected communities which have literally been destroyed, with a view to seeing what can be done to immediately begin reconstruction of temporary reception centres. These are the practical tasks that we're engaged in but that list will grow longer during the day.
STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, I understand that you have had a briefing this morning - that you may have even just come from CFA headquarters. What are they saying there? What are authorities saying?
PM: Well when I say I think the nation needs to brace itself, I think that's it. This is of a level, a level of horror which few of us have anticipated. There are practical tasks today. The two in which we are engaged at the Federal Government level are these  -  defence I've just talked about and I've had embedded as of last night the Army representative Colonel Greet and Brigadier Arnold from 4th Brigade here in Melbourne, fully embedded into the operations here in the recovery effort.
Practical things like satellite imagery of the affected areas to make sure we can do before and after shots of where we still need to get to, and that's of course impeded sometimes by weather and cloud cover.
But then at a very practical level for the families concerned is, it's money in the pocket as of you know, nine o'clock this morning when people have escaped with just the shirt on their backs, they need money to go out and buy clothes, to buy toiletries, temporary bedding, temporary accommodation. We're in a position to offer about 600 units of accommodation through various military bases across Victoria. We're also surging the ability of temporary bedding as well.
STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, we spoke to a number of people yesterday in the Kinglake area and as you say, they've got nothing left. Some of them didn't have insurance, they've lost absolutely everything. Can you guarantee them that they will have assistance now or as soon as humanly possible?
PM: Well I spent a lot of time last night with Jenny Macklin, the Families Minister, and the Centrelink Director for Victoria. We'll be rolling out Centrelink services in each of these affected areas during the course of both yesterday and today, to make sure that cash payments now can be made, and that's the immediate challenge we've got to make sure people can get through the immediate period ahead.
And of course people will make their contributions to the Bushfire Appeal, which both Premier Brumby and I have contributed to and to the National Community Recovery Fund which the two governments have committed an immediate $10 million to.
But these are just starts, Karl, this is just the start. We're barely a day or so into this and these figures will get much, much larger. But I say this to the people of Victoria  -  Australia is with you and we are going to rebuild these communities. We're going to rebuild these communities with a combined national effort, community, governments, working together.
STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, we know that the Victorian Premier John Brumby was moved to tears yesterday. As the leader of our country visiting these areas, can you communicate to the rest of Australia what your personal thoughts and feelings were when you visited those areas?
PM: Not really. The expressions of solidarity from around the world -
STEFANOVIC: It is extremely hard.
PM: - have been very important.
STEFANOVIC: I am so sorry to interrupt Prime Minister it's so, go on -
PM: When we've had our telephone calls from the British Prime Minister, the New Zealand Prime Minister and others offering very practical support, the New Zealand Prime Minister rang yesterday offering 100 firefighters, that's been conveyed to people here in Victoria. They'll be supplied as is necessary.
500 extra firefighters are surging today from South Australia, from Tasmania, from New South Wales and the ACT. The British Prime Minister rang late last night to express the support of the British people. This is very good in terms of a combined national effort.
We're engaged in a very practical task here, and in terms of those at the front line of that task, bear a thought today for all those people who are anxious and frightened as each of these houses is searched. Bear a thought in mind today also for the individuals who are charged with the responsibility, be they from the Army or the Police, to search each of these homes and each of these communities. This is an awful task.
But as a nation we're going to come through this and we're going to come through it stronger.
STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, I am just first of all so sorry to interrupt you then, I am on a slight delay and it's very difficult to hear you. But having been out to those communities and talked to people who had conversations with their children, saying goodbye to their children, dealing with grief on this scale is comparable to the Bali Bombings and it's a lot closer to home and these people are going to need every ounce of help they can get.
PM: This is, in recent years Australia has become unfortunately familiar with disasters affecting our own people around the world. Now we have a disaster like that at home and deep within our home, here in this wonderful community of Victoria.
So the practical challenge with those immediately affected by this is to provide the hand and heart of human friendship. It's one of the reasons why Jenny Macklin and I have been working hard yesterday to make sure that we've got a full supply of grief counsellors, social workers, et cetera out to these areas for the families concerned, for those who've been injured, but also for firefighters and emergency services personnel.
There is a huge demand here in terms of people dealing with the physicality of the trauma of what's involved. It's dealing with that, it's dealing with the defence task of clearing and heavy road works and search and reconstruction, it's dealing with the Centrelink task of money in the pocket.
But we're working our way through each of these systematically. I've asked the Families Minister Jenny Macklin to remain here as my representative in Melbourne all week. I'll stay as long as is necessary and as I said Army are fully embedded together with Centrelink in a combined operation here, but there will be many difficulties on the way. This won't be smooth sailing and as I said before the nation needs to brace itself for what I believe will be a very challenging time ahead.
STEFANOVIC: Do we know yet and this is a very difficult question, how bad when you say bracing for worse, how bad it is going to be?
PM: No, I mean our police personnel are all cautious and methodical about these questions as they should be, and it's just very tough and uncertain out there at the moment. So but this is, the evidence through the course of yesterday as you would have known from publicly disclosed figures is this has got worse as time has progressed.
STEFANOVIC: And Prime Minister we're hearing this morning more news - I'm sure you've been briefed by the Police, but we were talking to Christine Nixon a little earlier and it has come to light that it appears that a number of these fires that have claimed so much life and so much damage in terms of property were deliberately lit. So much anger and frustration here understandable.
PM: Yeah. What do you say? What do you say about anyone like that? What do you say? I don't know. Just. There's no words to describe it, other than it's mass murder.
STEFANOVIC: Alright and we hope that the police can get on with those investigations and lead to prosecutions. What is in store for you today? Will you be visiting more of the areas?
PM: What the Minister and I, Jenny Macklin, who is responsible for Centrelink, and myself, the National Security Adviser and the Head of Emergency Management Australia, is we want to systematically begin working our way through each of these areas to make sure that the Australian Government's effort is being fully deployed and that is quite a detailed checklist in each case.
It will take a bit of time but that's what we propose to do and we'll be getting around as much as we can. Many practical things I discovered yesterday on the ground and the Minister, which we're able to filter back into our own defence and Centrelink effort and I'm sure there'll be more such to be learnt today and quickly responded to.
STEFANOVIC: Well Prime Minister I do appreciate your time and I know that it's difficult for everyone to deal with all of this. I think there is no person in Australia who hasn't been touched by this including yourself. We appreciate your candour and all of your support and we hope that the people here at least can feel a bit better about that. That there is help there from the Government.
Thanks PM.
PM: Thank you and to your viewers, thank them for their support. Dig deep for the Victorian Bushfires Appeal, it's going to be not just this week, it will be a year and more of recovery but we're going to do this thing together. Thank you. 


HOST: Prime Minister, thank-you for your time. Firstly your reaction to the thought there that some of these fires are the work of arsonists?
PM: If arson is proven to be a cause for some of these fires then I simply underline what I said the other day. Such people if they are convicted are guilty of mass murder. The laws of the State provide that they can be put away and put away for life. 
My own personal view is they should be allowed to let rot in jail, that's my view. This is unspeakable murder on a mass scale. But the facts in each case have to be established.
HOST: Okay now today you've announced an extra $5 million in funding, the total is up to $15 million. Where does that extra five go? What's the breakdown?
PM: That's just one very small part of what we've announced today. That's simply to provide extra cash to great organisations like the Salvos and to the Red Cross to continue providing that emergency upfront assistance as people walk in the door.
More importantly, beyond that what we've indicated today is one, anyone who is losing their jobs as a result of this, or can't resume their normal business or farming operations, they're immediately able to access Newstart for a period of 13 weeks and then we'll further review it after that. Those are Newstart payments which will begin straight away.Also we've indicated we'll establish a small business and farming fund, assistance fund to help people get back their enterprises that they had before.
Together with the measures that you outlined before and assistance for housing and for the rebuilding of schools, these are the sorts of measures I outlined in parliament today.
HOST: Now Prime Minister, you've been here, you've seen the devastation, you've spoken to the people here and the emotion is felt right across the country. As you return back to Canberra what did you take with you emotionally from that experience?
PM: I think two things. The first is to have some small sense of the trauma that these poor people have gone through. And that is reflected very much in the other statements made to the parliament today by members on all sides of the house.And the second is this, the extraordinary feats of courage by people across the board and our fire, country fire authorities and elsewhere and neighbours and friends standing in the breach, putting their lives on the line. These I think are the great, empowering messages to the nation. And we as a nation intend to stand behind the rebuilding of these communities. These communities will be rebuilt, it will take time, but we are going to see this through. And we're going to see it through together.
HOST: Mr Rudd we thank you for your time tonight.
PM: Thank you.


The 7th of February will become etched in our national memory as a day of disaster, of death and of mourning. This nation has been scarred by natural disasters, disasters that remind us of our tenuous hold on this vast and forbidding land: ‘Her beauty and her terror', as our nation's poem reminds us, of this ‘wide brown land'. Except that the land is now black, the earth scorched, and the people in mourning. 
Fire holds a great terror for us all. Its power, its speed, its roar, its relentless destruction, its capricious shifts in course, its want of mercy; all personal stories I've heard from its survivors in recent days.
And the numbers just mount and mount. So far 173 deaths, more than 500 injured, nearly 1,000 homes destroyed, thousands now homeless, 365,000 hectares burnt, 25 local government authorities affected, entire towns gone.
Mr Speaker, our first response as Australians must be as it has been, to extend the open hand of friendship, of empathy and of giving. The people of Victoria are not alone in this disaster because the entire nation is with them. And not just the nation but good people across the world, an expression of our common humanity.
In the last day or so I've received calls from President Obama, from Prime Minister Brown, President Barroso of the European Union, the Secretary General of the United Nations, the Prime Ministers of New Zealand and Turkey, our ANZAC brothers.
President Obama said that we should know in Australia that the prayers of himself, his wife Michelle, their family and of the American people are with the people of Victoria, the people of Australia today.
We've also received messages from others from around the world - Andorra, Brazil, China, Cuba, East Timor, France, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, Nauru, Peru, Pakistan, Samoa, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, The Solomons, Thailand and others.
Expressions of sympathy have also been accompanied by offers of practical help. France and Japan have made urgent inquiries as to what assistance they may offer. Thailand is proposing a financial donation to the bushfire victims. Indonesia has offered assistance with disaster victim identification. New Zealand has offered 100 fire fighters, Singapore has offered to deploy Super Puma helicopters. The United States Department of the Interior is in discussions with the Government of Victoria on the provision of personnel and assistance.
Mr Speaker, we welcome each of these offers of support and these expressions of sympathy from around the world. It is good that they have come.
Mr Speaker, all Victorians and all Australians should know that in this darkest hour, that they are not alone.
Since Saturday night the Australian Government has been working closely with the Victorian Government in response to this disaster. The Commonwealth disaster plan has been activated. The Australian Defence Force has established a Victorian-based joint taskforce of more than 450 personnel under the command of Brigadier Michael Arnold, commander of 4 Brigade.
The Joint Taskforce which includes full-time and reserve defence members from navy, army and airforce has provided tents, stretchers, sleeping bags, to accommodate 120 people at the Yea Recreation Reserve. 140 soldiers from Puckapunyal are assisting with this task. 160 reserve soldiers have been deployed to assist police with search and recovery.
The Joint Taskforce has also provided 150 portable beds or mattresses to relief centres in the Baw Baw Shire. This is to enable emergency workers with facilities so that they can get enough rest to continue their tireless work.
The taskforce also includes heavy plant, chainsaw, sections and logistics support, which have been assigned to the clean-up task. Graders, bulldozers, front end loaders and their operators have been asked to assist with fire containment measures, reopening of roads and fire fighting measures around Yea and elsewhere.
Defence Force Personnel will help build containment lines around Yea, which is still being seriously threatened with fire. Four communications-dedicated armoured personnel carriers have been sent to the town to assist defence force engineers, and to provide an emergency medical capability if required.
The ADF has also been asked to provide aerial imaging of affected areas. This will enable the identification of all residences affected by fire.
Ninety personnel from the Australian Federal police have also been deployed to help Victorian police with the investigation and response to the fires crisis centre operations and general responsibilities.
The AFP team comprises some 16 disaster victim identification specialists, 14 members from the AFP Melbourne Office to assist with the national registration inquiry service and 60 from the international deployment group operations response group.
Minister Macklin and I have both conveyed to the Victoria Police that if any further ADF personnel or AFP personnel are required they will of course be made immediately available. That will include any assistance required in the investigation into the causes of these fires.
Emergency Management Australia is also providing critical support and coordinating our response across the Government and liaising with Victorian Government agencies. Tony Pearce, director of Emergency Management Australia, has been providing me and my office with written and verbal briefings about the fire situation throughout each day.
Mr Speaker, the House will be aware that we have made available the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. This payment is $1,000 per adult and $400 per child for those affected by fires, in order to provide immediate cash help.
As honourable members would be aware, people escaping from fires have often arrived simply with the shirts on their back, if that. Therefore the provision of immediate cash to help get the necessities to get through the next day has been of vital importance. Payments started flowing Monday. Mr Speaker I am advised that as of close of business 9 February, we have received 2027 claims, with 427 paid, 1,600 pending. Cash payments were made at Yea, Warragul and Alexandra yesterday.
Other relief and recovery that did not have access to banks will have cash available from today. Indeed a number of banks have agreed to establish facilities at local recovery centres to make cash payments there and then.
593 adults and children have been provided with assistance worth $493,400. And authorities are working to provide further assistance as quickly as is humanly possible.
Mr Speaker, the Government's national disaster relief and recovery arrangements currently apply in 25 local government areas. Alpine, Baw Baw, Cardinia, Corangamite, Greater Bendigo, Hepburn, Horsham, Indigo, Latrobe, Macedon Ranges, Mitchell, Mount Alexander, Murrindindi, Nillumbik, Southern Grampians, Wangaratta, Wellington, West Wimmera, Whittlesea, Yarra Ranges and Lake Mountain Alpine Resort. Today South Gipsland, Greater Dandenong, Casey and Knox were added to the list. And the list continues to grow.
NDRA assistance involves measures to help with those suffering personal hardship and distress assistance. Emergency personal hardship grants, $427 per adult, $213 per child up to a maximum of $1,067 per household and temporary living and re-establishment grants of up to $8,650.
On Sunday the Commonwealth announced a $10 million contribution to an immediate community recovery fund to assist local communities, small businesses and primary producers. We are currently working with the Victorian Government on the specific details of the operation of this fund.
The Commonwealth has also made a $2 million to the Victorian Bushfire Appeal fund. I understand it currently has received donations of more than $15 million and I urge all Australians to make a contribution to this appeal. And I thank from the bottom of my heart all of those Australians who have dug deep, it is a great testament to what Australians do at times like this.
Mr Speaker, I announce to the House today that the Victorian Government in partnership with the Commonwealth Government will establish the Victorian Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority to coordinate bushfire recovery activity across Victoria. The Authority will be responsible for coordinating the effort of all local, State and Commonwealth Government agencies and the many community organisations involved aimed at helping communities to recover and to rebuild.
The Authority will be established under existing State Government legislation. The Head of the Authority will be the outgoing Police Commissioner of Victoria Christine Nixon, who will be responsible to the Premier. A CEO will be appointed. The Premier will be assisted by a ministerial advisory group. The group will include the Commonwealth's coordinating Minister, Minister Macklin.
The Head of the Authority will chair an inter-agency taskforce comprising all relevant State and Commonwealth Government agencies and local government representatives. The Authority will be supported by a dedicated project team with the specialist skills needed for the reconstruction recovery task. Community input and consultation will be directed through a community reference group.
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government can also announce today further steps to assist the natural disaster-affected areas of Victoria and Queensland.
The Government will provide an additional $5 million for emergency relief for our most recent natural disasters in Victoria and Queensland. 
This will be provided immediately to church and other non-government organisations working in the field  -  organisations such as Anglicare, the Salvation Army, St Vincent de Paul, Uniting Care and others to help them provide food and other essential supplies to those affected.
For councils in these natural disaster-affected areas, the Australian Government will allow them the opportunity to reprioritise their projects under the Government's $250 million Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program to better meet their needs. These councils will be notified of this change in program today.
In order to assist fire-affected Victorian local governments and flood-affected Queensland local governments, I have asked that the payments for the local government Financial Assistance Grants also be accelerated. As a result, the final payment for the 2008-2009 financial year, which is due on 15 May 2009, will be brought forward to 23 February 2009.
All Victorian and Queensland councils, including those affected by the current emergency, will receive these advance payments. 
This will provide fire-affected councils with an immediate injection of funds to ensure that recovery can commence immediately. 
Mr Speaker, these funds are untied and can be spent on local priorities determined by individual councils. These priorities will vary from council to council depending on the individual circumstances of the council and the impacts of this terrible disaster. For example, Murrindindi Shire Council has lost about one-quarter of its houses. This has affected its rates base and, consequently, its ongoing cash flows.
In addition, the Commonwealth Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government will consult with all affected councils and communities in Victoria and Queensland to determine the immediate and long term needs of their communities.
Mr Speaker, the Government today will also put in place an Income Support Recovery Assistance program for individuals who have lost their primary source of income, including small businesses and farmers, as a direct result of the Victorian fires and the floods in Queensland.
This assistance will be in the form of an ex-gratia Newstart-like payment up to the maximum rate of Newstart, for a period of 13 weeks, to be extended if necessary. 
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government, through Medicare and Centrelink, will also work with the Victorian Government to assist individuals to re-establish their identity for those who have lost licences and other proof of identity.
Mr Speaker, when you meet persons, victims of this extraordinary disaster the desperation is compounded by those who have lost every form of establishing who they are. It is something which, unless you've experienced it, is beyond imagining. It's not just the loss of memories and photos and entire family histories, it's the loss of the certification of who you are and your legal personality.
So we will provide the resources necessary through Centrelink and other agencies to assist in the immediate provision of necessary means of identification for people to begin the difficult and long task of establishing anything approaching a normal life.
Mr Speaker, job seekers in the affected areas of Queensland and Victoria, who volunteer to help with clean up and recovery efforts or who live in locations where job opportunities have effectively been destroyed will not be asked to look for work for a period. Job seekers who have been personally impacted by the tragedy would also be subject to a waiver of compliance obligations for a period of time as well.
The Australian Government will also enter into negotiations with the Victorian and Queensland governments to establish a Farming and Small Business Assistance Fund. Businesses in affected regions will be able to apply for capital grants to purchase or replace premises, machinery or other capital needs. The Australian Government's $6.4 billion Social Housing Fund - announced as part of the Nation Building Plan recently - will be available to State Governments responding to social housing needs in disaster-affected areas. The Government of Victoria will be able to draw on its estimated $1.5 billion share of the Social Housing Fund to assist families in need as a result of the Victorian bushfires. 
The government of Queensland will similarly be able to draw on its estimated $1.3 billion share of this fund to meet the needs of those affected by flooding in North Queensland. In dealing with the reconstruction and repair of schools in disaster-affected areas, the Australian Government will make available funds from the $14.7 billion Building the Education Revolution Program. 
The Victorian Government will be able to give priority to construction of school infrastructure in communities affected by bushfires. 
The Queensland Government will also be able to give priority to repairs and upgrades to those schools which may have been damaged by flooding in North Queensland.
Mr Speaker, this is a start in dealing with the tragedy that has unfolded before us in Victoria and Queensland. The Australian Government stands ready to assist in any other possible way to assist our fellow Australians in rebuilding their lives.
Given the magnitude of this study, we have deliberately made the decision to place no cap on the Commonwealth's contribution to the recovery and reconstruction effort.
This Government will be partners for the long term in the rebuilding of each of these communities.
As members of the House will be aware, it is important that all facts concerning this extraordinary natural disaster are made known. The Government will provide all assistance we can to the Royal Commission that has been announced by the Victorian Premier.
As the House will be aware, the Royal Commission will be examining all aspects of the Victorian Government's bushfire strategy and as the Premier has said, everything will be on the table.
Mr Speaker, we must do all that is possible through this Commission so that we properly prepare for the future. And we await the deliberations of that Commission and its subsequent findings.
Mr Speaker, while the Victorian firestorm has been unleashed on the good people of so many communities in that State, floods have been ravaging towns in the North of our country.
As was announced yesterday, the Minister for Small Business, Independent Contractors and the Service Economy, Dr Emerson, has gone to North Queensland to ensure funds flow quickly to flood victims and to coordinate the Commonwealth's contribution to the relief effort there.
Dr Emerson will be giving all possible support to local staff, who are doing a highly professional job, and to ensure any necessary decisions can be made quickly.
Yesterday, the Minister met with Centrelink and the Queensland Department of Communities in Townsville. He was advised that the Centrelink payments of $1,000 per eligible adult and $400 per child are flowing to victims. The payments are for people who have either been seriously injured or whose home has been destroyed, significantly damaged or inaccessible for more than 48 hours.
So far, 600 claims have been received.
This morning the Minister was briefed by the Director-General of Queensland Emergency Services. Today the Minister is meeting with Commonwealth and State officers and relief staff and local residents in Ingham, where the road is now open to 4WD vehicles for the first time in a week.
And today 20 Centrelink staff have travelled to Ingham to join those already on the ground. In Ingham, 3,000 homes have been affected with 90 per cent of businesses still closed. The town of Halifax is still isolated, but supplies are getting in by helicopter.
Mr Speaker, the Government continues to monitor closely the unfolding events in North Queensland as well.
In recent days, Mr Speaker, the nation has observed a legion of heroes at work, our emergency services workers. The CFA, the Country Fire Authority of Victoria and all those country fires authorities who have come from across the country to support their brothers and sisters in arms in dealing with their common enemy, is a testament to the enormous spirit of CFA authorities across Australia.
Their courage has been remarked upon in recent days and having heard some of the stories first hand, theirs will again be the stuff of legend. The CFA, the police, the SES, ambulance workers, those working in hospitals and those with the extraordinary and delicate task of working in the burns units of hospitals - all these deserve our utmost respect and commendation from this the Parliament of the nation and so they receive it.
In each of the centres also, Mr Speaker, the army of volunteers, the Red Cross, the Salvation Army, and others who materialise in a way best known only to God at times like this, helped I am sure by extraordinary feats of organisation by those good ladies, invariably good ladies but not always, some men as well, who are there in an instant to make it work.
It is a rolling miracle of the Australian volunteer community, of the church and charitable sector, that this great army of people immediately comes and is there, without complaint, without request for anything in particular. Prepared, with sleeves rolled up, quietly, effectively, assiduously doing the job, And in each centre that I visited yesterday and the day before, Yea and Whittlesea and Alexandra and also other centres as well, this army of volunteers, working quietly and effectively.
In one centre I visited, literally acres of bedding provided by local shops, local families, ready to be made available to those who now have nothing. Entire gymnasiums full of clothing, kids' clothing, toys, bedding, anything else that you might need to start up a household all materialised within a day or two of the ask going out. An extraordinary testament to those communities. An extraordinary testament to the church and charitable and community organisations who have made the physical organisation of it possible.
Mr Speaker, we are left speechless at the thought and the possibility that some of these fires may have been deliberately lit. Every member of this House cannot comprehend how anyone could ever do that.
Mr Speaker, something which the nation must now attend to as a matter of grave urgency is the problem of arson. Where it happens, why it happens, what more can be done about it.
There is no excuse for this. None at all. This, as I said yesterday, is simply murder on a grand scale. Let us attend to this unfinished business of the nation and come to grips with this evil thing.
Mr Speaker, the fires continue. And as we assemble here in the nation's parliament today to reflect on what has happen in days past and the acts of heroism and the experience of tragedy, let us each one of us remember that they are all still in the field today. In so many different parts of Australia.
In Victoria, in New South Wales and elsewhere, fighting the great elements of nature which bear down on communities. We salute each one of them.
We also, as we gather here today, reflect on the lives and families which are now permanently shattered. This is an unspeakable horror for those families. Unspeakable.
The ability to recover from events of such extraordinary trauma will be sorely tested in the days, weeks and years ahead. One of the things that the Minister Jenny Macklin has been determined to do has been to try and make sure we have a sufficient availability of counsellors in the field now.
Counsellors for the families who are now bereaved. Counsellors for those who are friends and neighbours and know or who have seen their friends and neighbours perish. The trauma of scars and blackened vehicles along the road, that I saw yesterday in Marysville.
The trauma also of country fire authority personnel, who have confronted this firsthand, and the police and the emergency services personnel dealing with the aftermath.
The physicality and the emotional scar of trauma reaches deep into people and this is a much and necessary area of work to be done and done as well as possible in the days ahead.
Mr Speaker, we do not know what lies ahead. What I have outlined to the House today is our response to date. Let us all work with governments at all levels and at all communities and with all community organisations with to deal with each challenge as it presents itself.
I say this to the country at large - whatever community you are from, if it has been rendered to ashes, if it has been destroyed, hear this from the Government and the Parliament of the nation, together we will rebuild each of these communities.
This will take time. It will take effort.
Yesterday I sat in the community hall at Alexandra and spoke with a lady of a certain age who was the town's local historian. The town in question being Marysville. And she asked this question of me, ‘What is to be the town historian, for a town who is no more?' She said this year the town was about to celebrate the 40th anniversary of its historical society. Would there be a 50th?
I told her, Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Government and I believe the Parliament, that there will be. That this town and others like it will be rebuilt. Brick by brick, school by school, community hall by community hall.
Because that must underpin our long term resolve as a Government, as a Parliament, as a Nation. To be there with these communities not just in the trying and difficult days and weeks that lie ahead but in the arduous task of the months and years that lie ahead, until one day we can look back before too much time has gone and say, these towns, these communities have been reborn.
Mr Speaker, I read the contributions from members of the House on both sides of this debate yesterday. I thank them for it. I acknowledge the contributions of individual members of parliament, some of who understandably are still not with us today but attending to their local communities. I have sought to speak to a number of those members during the course of today.
We have a large task ahead of us and it will be uneven in the recovery, that is the nature of things. But let us resolve clearly, in full witness of the nation at large, that this will be our common resolve: to rebuild each of these communities so that these communities can live again.


Most Australians know that our farmers and small businesses have been hit by years of drought and extreme weather events, including the recent heatwave in southern Australia.
They've also had to deal with rising input costs, fluctuating commodity prices and, now, the global financial crisis.
Our Nation Building and Jobs Plan will support jobs and investment in rural and regional communities, to help ease these pressures.
It will stimulate economic activity and boost domestic demand for fresh agricultural produce, fish and timber products.
Our plan will help to sustain rural cities and towns by putting money directly into the pockets of drought-stricken farmers and investing in long-term infrastructure.
More than twenty one thousand farmers and small businesses owners currently receiving drought relief payments will receive a one-off Farmers' Hardship payment of $950, starting from March 24.
Regional roads will benefit from $390 million in new funding for maintenance, improving safety at around 200 rail crossings and fixing around 350 dangerous blackspots.
We will construct or upgrade a building in every country school.
And we have committed an extra $500 million over two years to expand the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program - which is used by regional councils and shires to build town halls, libraries and sporting facilities.
All of these measures from the Nation Building and Jobs Plan are in addition to existing support for regional communities.
This includes on-going drought funding, tripling our investment in climate change research and development to $46.2 million and helping farmers with climate change training courses.
As you know, we can't make it rain and we can't change global prices.
There is no silver bullet to the problems faced by our rural and regional communities.
The Government's tough decisions in response to the global recession strike a responsible balance between supporting our jobs and our farmers now and communities we need for future growth.
The Rudd Government's forty two billion dollar nation building and jobs package is strong and decisive action to support jobs and the economy in the face of the worst global recession since the Great Depression.


I'm Tanya Plibersek - the Minister for Housing.
Australia is facing the deepest global recession since World War 2.
We need to act decisively and urgently.
That is why our Nation Building and Jobs Plan includes an historic $6.4 billion to build new homes for Australians who are doing it really tough.
We will build 20,000 new social housing dwellings over the next three years.
We will also repair and upgrade around 2 ½ thousand run down homes to make them liveable again.
This is the biggest single investment in social housing this country has ever seen.
It will make a huge difference to people's lives -  like the 28,000 pensioners who are in the private rental market paying half of their pensions in rent;  like the 16,000 Australians who are sleeping rough every night; and the thousands of women and children leaving homes where there is domestic violence.
Just before Christmas we pledged to halve homelessness by 2020.  This package is an important step towards making that happen.  
It also builds on our previous housing measures - the first home owners boost, the National Rental Affordability Scheme and others.
This $6.4 billion package meets a number of needs  -  it will help homeless Australians and people struggling to keep a roof over their heads.
It will bring growth and reform to social housing and it will also help keep our economy strong by boosting building and construction.


Australia now confronts a deep and protracted global recession that's making business very uncertain about investing.The Government understands conditions for some businesses are very difficult  -  especially in the construction sector.But we won't sit by and watch as our economy and Australian jobs are put at risk.That's why we acted so decisively with our Nation Building and Jobs Plan  -  a $42 billion investment to support, business, the economy and jobs.We've struck the right balance  -  investing in a massive nation-building plan to support economic growth, jobs and small businesses.It's focussed first on immediate economic stimulus but also on investing in infrastructure and encouraging the private sector to invest as well.We'll install ceiling insulation in up to 2.7 million Australian homes and build more than 20,000 new community and defence homes.And for small businesses, a 30 per cent tax break on capital investments worth more than $1000 or more than $10,000 for other businesses.We welcome the recent cuts to official interest rates and have urged the banks to pass it on in full as rapidly as possible  -  to business borrowers and homeowners.We'll do everything possible to cushion the pain but there's no silver bullet.Backed by the Government, Australian families, businesses and the whole community will do as we always do  -  pull together and emerge from this crisis stronger.



     * The Rudd Government's Nation Building and Jobs Plan will roll out energy efficiency to Australia's suburbs on an unprecedented scale, and provide critical support for clean, green jobs.
     * The $3.9 billion Energy Efficient Homes program will drive demand in industries that can deliver real energy savings for around three million Australian households, relieving cost-of living pressures.
     * The program will also deliver greenhouse gas abatement of 49 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent by 2020  -  the equivalent of taking 1 million cars off the road every year.
     * The centerpiece of the program is providing insulation to around 2.7 million Australian homes.
     * Insulation is typically the most cost-effective household energy efficiency improvement, yet many older homes  -  up to 40 per cent of Australia's housing stock  -  remain uninsulated.
     * Through the new Energy Efficiency Homes program, around 2.2 million owner-occupier households will be able to make a simple phone call to arrange for ceiling insulation to be installed, providing possible savings of $200 on their energy bills, reducing their heating and cooling bills by up to 40%.
     * The program also includes rebates of up to $1,000 to install insulation in around 500,000 rental homes, which are often some of the most vulnerable households in terms of cost-of-living pressures.
     * And we've ramped up one of the other most cost-effective household energy efficiency improvements, increasing the Solar Hot Water Rebate from $1,000 to $1,600. This rebate is not be means-tested.
     * This is a true solar revolution for Australia's suburbs, helping families save as much as $300-$700 a year on their energy bills.
     * The program is also part of the Rudd Government's commitment to comprehensive action on energy efficiency  -  action to help tackle climate change and action that's good for the economy and green jobs.
     * The Energy Efficiency Homes program is already open for business  -  and you can go to my Department's website at www.environment.gov.au to get on board.


MCGUIRE: Now, ladies and gentlemen, it's time to cross to Canberra and the office of the Prime Minister and it gives me the greatest pleasure to welcome the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd. Welcome Aboard, Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks to you and all the other guys are doing down there for this fantastic telethon, it's good to see Australians are digging deep when our fellow Australians need it. And it makes me proud as the country's Prime Minister just to see such huge generosity.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, far North Queensland has its own problems with the flood, Victoria has been devastated by the fires, we have got the world financial crisis still happening all around us, yet the people of Australia have responded as we always would hope for, but they have done it exactly the way that we could only pray for?
PM: That's right Eddie. I mean, back on Australia Day, I was saying a few things about what this spirit of Australianness is all about. I think it's about three things. It's about courage, it's about resilience, and it's about compassion. You know, looking after your mates and looking after your neighbours and people you haven't actually even met before.
And what I see across the response to floods in the north and these terrible fires in the south, are all those great Australian values and virtues on display in a very practical Australian way. It just makes me feel proud to be an Australian.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, you announced today there will be a national day of mourning. Can you tell us a little bit more about that?
PM: It's important, Eddie, that the nation has a formal opportunity to grieve. I mean, first and foremost for the families who have been directly affected, but for their communities but also for the country at large.
I mean, we have all been assaulted by this in our deepest emotions. That's why the Premier of Victoria and I have agreed, and together with the Leader of the Opposition here in Canberra, on a national day of mourning and on a national memorial service.
The details will be announced very soon, and they are being worked out at the moment with the Council of Churches.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, there are stories in the paper today and in the media about the implementation of an early warning system, is that on the agenda now? It seems a lot of people are frustrated that had been parked for a number of years. Is that something that will be implemented?
PM: Well you are right Eddie. This has been bouncing between governments since about 2003. I am determined to see this thing implemented across the nation in a nationally consistent way as rapidly as possible in the year ahead. We have just got to make this happen. If it means cracking heads to make sure it happens for the future, then we will do that.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, touching scenes in Parliament during the week. It uplifted the whole of Australia I think to see our leaders from both sides, just not only standing for the minute's silence as we are seeing in the House of Representatives but to hear such moving and touching speeches from both sides of the House, in fact from everyone who spoke.
That must be something that makes you proud when you see our leaders, certainly for us, to see our leaders stand up and stand for something?
PM: I think what has been really good about the Parliament and the way in which it has responded to this week is politics all pushed to one side, the normal sort of stoush as people have concentrated on what's really important.
I think one of the best speeches this week in parliament was delivered by one of the Liberals, Russell Broadbent, who actually spoke with real passion and his experience of Ash Wednesday personally, about what it's like to be in the middle of hell.
But you know, the real heroes aren't the bunch of politicians. It's every CFA volunteer out there who has been a hero in the front line, and to each and every one of them watching tonight, can I just say as Prime Minister of the country, how proud I am of each one of you. Each one of you is a living Australian hero.
MCGUIRE: Prime Minister, finally in wrapping up, a moment for you now to speak to the whole of Australia, particularly those people who have been affected the most by this disaster?
PM: Thanks Eddie. You know, what we must do as a nation is rally around. That's what all of you are doing tonight by tuning in to this telethon and digging deep. But you know, here's the trick: it's not just what we do today and this week and next week when it's all fresh in the news, it's what we do throughout the year and next year and the year beyond.
And what I say to all Victorians and all Australians is, we are committed to rebuilding each of these communities, brick by brick, school by school, house by house, until the job is done. And with the support of the Australian people, digging deep like they are tonight, we are going to get the job done.
MCGUIRE: Thank you very much Prime Minister.


The Rudd Government is making an historic $14.7 billion investment to build the Education Revolution in our schools.
This funding will not only provide a massive boost to our economy but will provide the modern, state of the art facilities our schools need to provide a world class education.
Every school in Australia will benefit from this new investment.
Primary Schools for the 21st Century will see $12.4 billion to build or upgrade large scale infrastructure like libraries or school halls in all primary schools, special schools and K-12 schools.
Science and Language Centres for 21st Century Secondary Schools is a $1 billion investment to build around 500 new science laboratories and language learning centres in our secondary schools.
An additional $1.3 billion will be available for all schools to refurbish and renew existing infrastructure and undertake minor building works.
This new $14.7 billion infrastructure investment is in addition to the $2 billion Digital Education Revolution, the $2.5 billion Trades Training Centres program, and new investments of $550 million in teacher quality, $540 million in literacy and numeracy and $1.1 billion to lift the quality of education in disadvantaged schools.
The Rudd Government is committed to delivering an Education Revolution for all Australian schools.


A year ago today, the Australian Parliament formally apologised to members of the Stolen Generations for the policies of past governments.
The Apology was a starting point for reconciliation, and the beginning of building a bridge of respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
The hardest work is ahead of us.
Our challenge, as the Government outlined one year ago, is to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians  -  so that Indigenous Australians can share fully in the life of our nation.
This will not be easy, and it will require our entire nation to work together  -  Indigenous communities, Commonwealth and State governments, business, community organisations and people all across our nation.
But there has never been a more united sense of purpose across our community, to make a real difference in the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
And there has never been such agreement as there now is between all levels of government to work together and make a difference.
Later this month, when Parliament next sits, I will deliver a report card on progress in the first 12 months since the apology.
This is the next step towards one of the greatest and most important challenges facing our nation.


The Australian Government has appointed eminent Australians, Professor Lowitja O'Donoghue and Mr Gregory Phillips, to establish a Foundation to address trauma and healing in Indigenous communities, with a strong focus on the unique needs of Stolen Generations. 
The Foundation will be established to provide practical and innovative healing services, as well as training and research.
Professor O'Donoghue is a senior Stolen Generations member and former Australian of the Year and Mr Phillips is an academic with recognised expertise in healing and trauma.
They will head up an interim team which will work with Indigenous Australians to ensure broad ownership and support for the Foundation.
The Apology to Australia's Indigenous people, in particular to the Stolen Generations, has created a new climate of hope and commitment.
It was a first step to build a bridge of respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians and generate the mutual trust and respect needed for closing the gap.
We must keep moving forward. We must help people to heal if all Australians are to have a better future.
We understand the vital role of healing in expanding people's life chances.
We also understand the vital role of pride in culture in shaping people's aspirations and choices.
The Foundation will help develop new approaches to healing the pain caused by past governments' laws, policies and practices.
The Government is also expanding the Link Up program with 11 more Link Up Caseworkers and five more administrative staff to help more members of the Stolen Generations trace, locate and reunite with their families.
By expanding the program, we aim to bring more people together with an extra 351 family reunions and around 100 ‘Return to Country' reunions.
Funding for the Foundation will be announced in the 2009-10 Budget context. 


Firstly, this is an honour to be with you today because you're a community which is surviving and building and becoming strong again.
A little while ago, I think a day or two ago, I was telephoned in my office by a lady I'd never met before. Her name was Rose. Where are you Rose? There she is. She's a persistent lady. (Laughter and applause.) And so, I had this message there from Rose could I please call back. There's been a few calls into the office this week about a range of things. So I'm sorry it took a day or so to come back, but I spoke to her the other night and she described a little bit about what's happened in your town.
It was good to talk to someone local about what has happened here. Because what has happened is a story of what is happened everywhere. But it's also very special for you as members of this community.
This morning I had the honour of sitting down with each of the representatives of your local council. People who you've elected, voted for and they speak for you. It was a very good meeting as we went through each of the practical challenges which lie ahead. But beyond that, it gave me a sense of just the scope of what has happened here. And I thank the Mayor  -  Sue, where are you? - and other councillors, for spending that time with me and with Jenny Macklin who is with me today.
What do you say in the midst of tragedy?
I think there are two things that I can say. One is this, to know that you are not alone. You are not alone. It's not just that your community here in Wandong, and the Wandong district has rallied behind you in such strength and such force - so too has the entire state and the nation and the world.
Yesterday, after speaking to Rose, I spoke to Tim Fischer who had just come from the audience in Rome with Pope Benedict XVI. The first words of the Pope were about your community here. The Pope wanted to pass on through our representative, Tim Fischer in Rome, his deepest prayers, his deepest sympathies and his deepest love for all of you. I do that this morning on this the day of service and of worship.
So if there's one thing to say is that you're not alone.
The other is to say this, together we rebuild. Together we rebuild. And brick by brick, house by house, street by street, we rebuild. And we rebuild together. And not just for tomorrow, not just for next week, and not just for next month, but until this community is rebuilt completely.
I heard a little bit this morning from your councillors about the scope, the size of this community. Some - correct me if I'm wrong Mayor - 2,200 people in Wandong and Heathcote Junction and in the Wandong District.
(MAYOR: Yes, that's correct.)
I got a tick.
And of, among those people, good people who live in this good community, some 200 houses are now gone or destroyed or damaged.
So our first responsibility to understand the scope of that, that's one in 10. So we have a very practical challenge to work through. And we will do that. House by house, street by street, although it will take time. Time to do well.
There are those who are injured, and they must be attended. Injuries to the body and injuries to the soul. This brings me to the three of your number who have perished in these flames. I've heard these stories this morning. And they are the human face of absolute tragedy.
So as we move forward, what I say to you as Prime Minister is this - we intend and we resolve to be with you every step of the way from here.
This is an easy thing to say, it is a much harder thing to do. But I am determined that we will honour this commitment to you and each of these communities that have been ravaged by these fires.
I cannot promise to you that it will be done perfectly each step of the way. We're all human beings. But I can undertake to you this. That we'll be with you every step of the way until each community is rebuilt.
As Australians we reflect on what make us Australian. I often put it into these terms, and these fires have brought it home again: one of the great virtues and values which we hold dear and have held dear since ANZAC to present  -  courage, resilience, compassion.
I see an army of courage out here to my right called the CFA. (Applause)
Wandong Brigade, Kilmore, those who have helped from further afield. The fact that you could have your Wandong Brigade people out there defending everybody in this scarred landscape which is 20 metres from where I speak, and at the same time their own houses, four of them, or half a dozen of them, burning down. I've met this morning this young family and in exactly that situation, and others who have lost their homes as well.
You know what they've said to you blokes, and the good woman who runs you, and the good women in your number, is that you have genuine guts, genuine strength, and you do something for the nation's soul at hard times. Because you know what you've done in these actions? You put yourself last and put the community first. And as Prime Minister of Australia I thank you. (Applause)
Around the world we see our boys in green led by the Chief of the Defence Force who I've brought here today, Angus Houston, doing that all the time, putting themselves last and putting their comrades in arms first, and putting their country first of all. And our army boys have been out there too helping (inaudible).
Resilience, well you know, that's sticking to the task. We've all got a challenge of resilience. That's something which happens in your heart and in your stomach.
And I heard from the local authorities here you're going to get together for a community festival soon. This is good, it's part of resilience. And compassion.
The army of people here who are chaplains, who are from the churches, who are from the Salvos, who are from the Red Cross, who are from every community and charitable organisation supported by the arms of government through the Victorian Government and the Federal Government, and the local government.
There is an army of courage and we are surrounded by a sea of compassion, and you are part of it. And not just what you say, it's not just putting an arm around somebody although that is important, it's what you then do. And each of you is in the business of doing.
But coming here to Wandong today, thank you Rose, by the way we've also discovered something else in Wandong today, and that's what happened to Elvis. Elvis is still with us. Dropping 9,000 litres I gather in a hit in Wandong, I gather.
But here at Wandong and hearing these great stories and these very sad stories, you in this community, full of courage, resilience and compassion, telling your message to the nation and the world at large. As Prime Minister of Australia, I salute each and everyone of you.


The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Premier of Victoria John Brumby today announced that a National Day of Mourning would be held on Sunday 22 February, 2009 to honour the victims of Victoria's devastating bushfires and to recognise the courage and tireless efforts of emergency service workers. 
A community memorial service will be held in Melbourne at 11.00am on Sunday at Rod Laver Arena and surrounds to mark the National Day of Mourning, giving Victorians and Australians an opportunity to come together to mourn.
Mr Rudd said the memorial service would provide Australians with an opportunity to grieve as the nation came to terms with its worst natural disaster.
“February 7 will become etched in our national memory as a day of disaster, of death and of mourning and it is very important that the nation grieves,” Mr Rudd said.
“The National Day of Mourning will allow us all an opportunity to honour those who lost their lives in the fires, support those who have suffered and recognise the work of our emergency services.
"This day will give all Australians the chance to reflect and remember this terrible tragedy, as an important step in rebuilding these communities."
Mr Brumby said Victorians had shown overwhelming support and generosity for fire-affected communities and it was important that all communities could come together to mourn the fires.
“So many lives have been lost, so many people injured, houses and possessions wrecked and whole communities virtually destroyed because of these devastating fires,” Mr Brumby said.
"We will reflect on the devastation of the bushfires and steel our collective resolve to emerge from this terrible tragedy with stronger communities.
“This memorial service is about ensuring our communities have an opportunity to mourn, to reflect and to be together.
"It is also about ensuring those communities know the rest of Victoria and the rest of the country supports them in their time of need.
“And while we are inviting all Victorians to attend, no venue is going to be big enough to cater for all those Victorians, and indeed all Australians, to express their sorrow and compassion for those affected by these fires.
“That's why the Victorian Government is approaching both television and radio outlets offering them access to transmit the service to every corner of Victoria and possibly around Australia  -  we want people wherever they live to be able to participate in this service.
“Every support will be given to people in fire-affected communities and emergency service workers involved in the fire-fighting effort who wish to attend the memorial service.
“And in recognition of the incredible support Victoria has received from interstate, Premiers of other states will be invited to attend the memorial service or to host memorial services in their own states to mark the National Day of Mourning.”
Further details about the memorial service will be available Monday at premier.vic.gov.au


The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Trade, the Hon. John Murphy MP, has advised me that he will be standing down from his position in the Executive.
Mr Murphy has been a dedicated and committed member of the front bench of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party since 2001.
After nearly a decade of determined work on the front bench, Mr Murphy has decided to step down for family reasons.
Since 2001, Mr Murphy has served with commitment and professionalism as Parliamentary Secretary to the Shadow Minister for Health and Ageing, the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister for Trade.
Through all of these roles Mr Murphy made a significant and strong contribution to the election and establishment of the Rudd Government.
I thank Mr Murphy for his tireless assistance, his dedication to the work of the Executive and his good humour and good counsel.
Mr Murphy remains a valued member of the Rudd Government and I will continue to seek his counsel.
Mr Murphy has served the people of Lowe with great drive and enthusiasm since his election to Parliament and will continue in this important role.
Mr Murphy will recontest the next election with my unequivocal support. 
I will be recommending to Her Excellency the Governor General that Senator Mark Arbib be appointed to the position of Parliamentary Secretary.


The Australian Government has today announced assistance measures for the people of Bourke and surrounding areas following extensive flooding in the region.
Following the activation of the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements, the Rudd Government will reimburse the New South Wales Government for the following measures that will be provided to eligible people and businesses:
     * Personal hardship and distress assistance to people who have damaged property; 
     * Concessional interest rate loans to eligible primary producers, small businesses, and voluntary non-profit bodies to restore facilities damaged or destroyed;
     * Freight subsidies for eligible primary producers of up to 50 per cent of the cost of road transport of livestock and emergency fodder;
     * Grants to local councils to meet the additional costs of emergency work to restore essential services; and
     * Assistance to sporting clubs to restore their damaged facilities.
For further information on how to receive this assistance please call the State Disaster Recovery Centre on 1800 018 444.
The Australian Government stands ready to provide additional support to the people of New South Wales if required during this difficult time.
Approximately 200 mm of rain fell in a 15 hour period on Friday 13 February. This is the equivalent of two-thirds of Bourke's annual rainfall.
Many people remain seriously affected by the flooding, with predictions of further significant rainfall in the next 24 hours.


The Commonwealth and the Victorian Governments are standing by businesses directly damaged or destroyed by the bushfires, with the $51 million first stage of a joint package to assist small businesses focusing on subsidised low-interest loans, business assistance grants and business re-start mentors.
The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and the Premier of Victoria John Brumby today announced the package aimed at businesses directly damaged or destroyed by the bushfires.
“Thousands of small businesses have been directly damaged or destroyed by these terrible bushfires  -  and the Victorian and Commonwealth governments are targeting assistance to rebuild these businesses,” Mr Rudd said.
“We are committed to rebuilding the towns destroyed by these terrible bushfires. This business assistance package is a key component in the action we are taking to help communities rebuild.”
Mr Brumby said up to $25,000 was available to businesses damaged or destroyed by the bushfires, with an initial payment of $5000 up front.
“Providing help to small businesses straight away is crucial to helping them get back on their feet. So many people in bushfire affected towns have put their heart and soul into their small businesses  -  and this assistance will be crucial to helping businesses and communities rebuild,” Mr Brumby said.
“The initial $5000 payment will help business owners with their immediate needs. From a new fax, to a new tool box, it helps people open their doors to local residents and the thousands of Victorians working on the massive rebuilding effort.”
The Commonwealth's Coordinating Minister for the bushfire disaster Jenny Macklin said advisers would work on re-establishment plans with businesses and evaluate how much additional assistance those businesses required to get back up and running.
“The Commonwealth and Victorian governments are standing by small businesses damaged or destroyed by bushfires in their time of need,” Ms Macklin said.
“This assistance package will help individual businesses get back on their feet and help to stimulate local economies  -  so crucial in the rebuilding effort.”
The Treasurer of Victoria, John Lenders, said the Commonwealth and Victorian Governments also were making available low-interest loans for small businesses and farms damaged or destroyed by the bushfires through the state government's Rural Finance Corporation.
“A stream of low cost finance will help businesses into the medium term and give them some hope for the future,” Mr Lenders said.
Under the subsidised loan arrangements, business can borrow up to $200,000 at 3.2 per cent interest.
The Victorian Minister for Regional and Rural Development Jacinta Allan said the government would help to provide business advice to the many business owners and managers in urgent need of help following the most devastating natural disaster in Australia's history.
“Within a week, the first of 100 business advisers will contact local businesses providing free, on-the-ground advice on how to get each individual business up and operating again,” Ms Allan said.
She said the business advice and support counsellors were being made available through Victorian Employers' Chamber of Commerce and Industry (VECCI) and the Small Business Mentoring Service.
Further information on the assistance package including the eligibility criteria is available from Business Victoria at www.business.vic.gov.au or by phone on 13 22 15. 


On March 4 to 6, the President of the Republic of Korea, H.E. Mr Lee Myung-bak will visit Australia.
Australia and the Republic of Korea enjoy a substantial and growing bilateral relationship based on strong economic, people-to-people and historical links.
I look forward to meeting President Lee during his visit to discuss opportunities to further strengthen the excellent bilateral relations between our two countries, including in the areas of trade and security cooperation.
I will also discuss with President Lee the shared regional and global challenges we face, including responding to the global financial crisis.
Korea is Australia's sixth-largest trading partner and fourth-largest export market, with total trade in 2007-08 of $22.8 billion and exports from Australia worth $16.1 billion.
Around 115,000 people of Korean descent live in Australia and towards the end of 2008 around 35,000 Korean students were enrolled to study in Australia.
We share common democratic values and interests in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond.


When I came here tonight I was accosted by Jamie Mackie, and he's entitled to do that. He's been around for a bit. And his questions is always disarming but frank, which is ‘How goes the relationship? Are you taking it seriously?'
My response to him was along these lines - that in the year 2008, the President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and I met on seven occasions. We've now entered that into the Guinness Book of Records under the bilateral relations heading.
Stephen Smith, the Foreign Minister, says that in 2008 that the two-way traffic in terms of ministerial visits was 32. If you look at the official fabric of the relationship, there is a lot going on. And this is a very broad, important and vital relationship for us, as is reflected by that level of contact and having been myself to Indonesia three times in the last year.
What does all that mean? It means for us in our part of this relationship that it is of vital importance to Australia. It means therefore, that whatever challenges we face together in our region or the world at large, we in this country Australia have a first instinct, which is how do we work with Indonesia on this.
Geraldine's anecdote before about the UN conference that she visited is I think an interesting insight. Somewhere in the world, if we are there and you are there, we often find ourselves quite rightly talking closely with one another because after more than half a century of dealing with one another, I think we now know each other. And this is a very good thing.
The familiarity of that and the ties that bind were at work most recently in the extraordinary natural disasters which visited Australian shores  -  the fires in Victoria. The extraordinary generosity of the Indonesian Government and people in their remarks, their sentiments, their gifts of money to the bushfire appeal, the personnel that they sent, are known across Australia. This is a very good thing, and I thank our Indonesian friends for it.
As I said in the House of Representatives last week on this question, through those actions and through those words we know one thing in Australia - Indonesia is not just our neighbour, Indonesia is our friend. And what you said and what you did spoke very clearly to that reality. And as I also said in the parliament last week, I believe our friends in Indonesia discovered the same of us at the time of the tsunami.
There was this unspeakable act of nature, inflicted upon so many people across Aceh and also in Sumatra. But the instantaneous response in this country was that of our common humanity and that of friend and neighbour. Summed up in a few words  -  how can we help? What can we give?
And I think as we confronted these great challenges of nature which have left most of us speechless, in their ferocity, in the intensity and the death and destruction that they have left, it has been a sober reminder for us all. But not just of brutal power of nature, but of the enormous strength of our common humanity as neighbours and friends.
There is a text of my remarks tonight. If you wish to read it, it will be on my website. I don't intend to bore you with it.
Let me say a few things about this relationship and where it has been and where I hope it might go in the future, and to the role of this institute and this conference in that regard.
When we in the Australian Government, and this Australian Labor Government, look back at the history of the Australian-Indonesia relationship, we are intensely proud of our role in the events of 1947. We know them, we actually understand that Prime Minister Chifley and Foreign Minister Evatt at the time were doing something quite unusual for a Western country in relation to a colonial power, namely the Kingdom of the Netherlands, with what we said as a party in the government at the time was, we will side with the people of Indonesia in their act of self-determination.
And I believe that pride is shared more broadly across the Australia political spectrum, as from the beginning, from those difficult days of independence and the difficult times which were experienced by your independence movement at the end of the Second World War, that we have some pride in what our government did then in support of Indonesia's legitimate expression of its right to self-determination.
And I look back at what has happened with the great Indonesian Republic since 1947, and look to the present, I see this extraordinary transformation. This extraordinary act of nation building. It is remarkable across the 17,000 islands. More than 230 million people. You have fashioned this vibrant democracy. You have fashioned this strong and growing economy despite the challenges we all now face. And a society which is intrinsically tolerant.
Mention before was made of the study of pancasila and the whole concept of diversity and unity, and unity and diversity.
For Australians, this may seem to be an interesting concept as we think we have diversity here and we do. Spending a few weeks or a few months rolling around Indonesia is where you really encounter diversity. From Banda Aceh in one extreme to West Papua at the other and all points in between. From the high cultures of Borobodur through to the outermost parts of Kalimantan and Sulawesi, it is a remarkable thing which Indonesia has done. To fashion this vibrant country, this robust democracy, this growing and strong economy, and this cultural tradition of tolerance and mutual respect. I personally would simply congratulate our friends in Indonesia for the extraordinary achievement of your national community.
When I look at the present and where this great country and this high civilisation now stands in the councils of the world, Indonesia's place in our region is well-known and well-established and well-secured. But I believe there is a broader mandate. There you are in Indonesia as the largest Muslim country in the world. There you are as an extraordinary and dynamic Muslim democracy. And there I think you have an extraordinary role to play in the wider councils of the world and we in Australia would like to be partners with you in that.
The democracy of which I spoke before of course has been hard fought. I remember, and some of you have heard this story before, being an election monitor in the 1999 elections on behalf of the Australian parliament in Surabaya. And watching in the couple of weeks of that formal election campaign as all the parties paraded by, I won't name them in case I offend anyone here, but it was this great individual celebration of Indonesian democracy. And given that there had been some pause prior to that, the fact that those elections and these subsequent elections can be conducted so effectively is again a tribute to the way in which the Indonesian people celebrate the freedoms with which they have.
As we turn to the future, I think there is something new which is now happening for us both. If you look at what has been our preoccupation in Canberra and Jakarta since the '40s, it is often - not always but often  -  been about how we deal with each other. I really like the analogy about Tom and Jerry by the way. Tom and Jerry are now getting on pretty well. And they will.
But you know, here's the different thing. And it started in the '80s, when we began fashioning regional organisations which would embrace all of our friends and partners across South-East Asia and beyond. Your role obviously historically within ASEAN but more broadly of course with APEC. And now more recently again the Australian Summit. And this is good. Because the habits of cooperation between nations and cultures do not happen automatically, they have to be crafted, they have to be grown, they have to be nurtured.
If you look at the history of ASEAN for example, and there are those in this room who are of much greater scholarly depth in this question than I am, the history of ASEAN is a group of adversaries back there in the '60s, not all but some, who now more than 40 years later have a habit and a culture of cooperation and mutual respect about themselves which is remarkable in the transformation which has been achieved. The historical conflict between non-communist South-East Asia and communist Indo-China, this is a remarkable achievement of institution building where Indonesia has been at the centre.
But now we enter a new period again, where the challenges we face are within our region but beyond our region, because we now are in, as we know full well from the events of the last year or so, unbridled globalisation.
And that means that in managing this extraordinary set of global challenges we now face, most acutely those now of the economy, Australia and Indonesia now find ourselves, not looking at each other, but working with each other and looking to the world.
How do we fix this? How do we work together? How do the major emerging economies and countries including Indonesia, work with other countries, including Australia, through the G20, to deal with the great challenges we now face?
How do we bring about the stabilisation of global financial markets? How do we deal with the challenges of restoring stability to global banks who currently have problems with bad assets on their balance sheets, which is in turn polluting the extent to which private credit markets can be restored to anything approaching normal health.
How do we in the meantime achieve sufficient levels of fiscal stimulus within our economies to provide the level of economic growth and jobs and performance in our economy so that our peoples are not subject to the full wrath and full impact of this crisis which is not of their making?
How do we design the rules for the financial order of the future? What should be the future role of the International Monetary Fund?
What Indonesia and Australia are now doing as a developed and a developing country, and through my good friendship and relationship with President Yudhoyono, is now we are working together on the problems of the world.
That is the new thing that we are doing. Not just looking at each other and working out whether we like each other or not, that is the past. I think we have worked out that we do.
It is not just building the institutions of our region, there is a lot of work still there to do. And we have proposals which we are discussing on that front as well.
But I believe there is now a much bigger and broader mandate. And if we exercise effectively the opportunities now presented to us by our common participation in this organisation, then together we can make a good contribution to the world together.
There's a funny thing that happens at that point. When the rest of the world looks at a developed country of Christian heritage, primarily in Australia, working in close and effective collaboration with the largest Muslim country in the world, seamlessly, this actually has a very powerful message to those beyond our region.
And I think that's something we should bear in mind as well.
The challenges we face as modern democracies and economies in 2009 are virtually unprecedented in the century which has passed. This will test all of our mettle. It will test the calibre of our officials, it will test the content of our policy, it will test our ability to cooperate internationally on dealing with the great challenges we now face.
But I am confident that we, together with our friends and partners across the world, can determine and execute a strategy which will see us through. It will not be easy. The challenges that we will face at the upcoming London summit of the G20 will be great indeed.
But if we focus our efforts on these great challenges and we again encourage the habits of cooperation, then there is a way through. Central to that challenge is this: to work globally to deal with the challenge of bad assets on a large continuing number of major global banks and their balance sheets, because until that is dealt with effectively in many countries around the world, the restoration of normal credit flows through the private credit markets will not occur.
We can act on stimulus, we can support growth in jobs through what we inject through budget but until that challenge is wrestled to the ground then our recovery will never be complete.
This institute and your conference, and it's 20 years since this institute was founded, is wrestling with a challenge also at a different level. Which is, how do you take what I have just described as the healthy broad fabric of the official relationship between our two countries and take it to the highways and the byways, to the kampong? And how do we in Indonesia and in Australia, make sure that as we embark upon what will be the century of the Asia Pacific, that this is not just a relationship which is constructed between officials and nurtured through official circles, but in fact is much broader, deeper and base in our common peoples.
I believe there is a great spirit of goodwill across our peoples towards one another and that's reflected in their responses most recently to natural disasters.
But there is more to be done and part of the pathway to doing more is looking again at how we do better these great challenges of language, of culture and religion. Australia needs to do better, a lot better, in our level of Indonesian language study, in development of Indonesian studies within our universities and in our schools and our understanding of the enormous complexity that is Indonesian Islam.
And what we have as vision for Australia, as the Government of the country is this: to create in this country in Australia, the most Asia-literate country in the west. A country which, as Geraldine said before, regards the languages and cultures of this wider region as not foreign but familiar. That we understand, intimately, the cultures and high cultures of this great region, including those which are contained within modern Indonesia.
So we have a challenge and that is to do better than we have and we intend to rise to that challenge. One of the proposals the President of Indonesia and I have agreed on is in the area of faith and belief. How do we as Australia and Indonesia, for the future, become models for how the great dialogue and understanding which can occur between Christianity and Islam, be taken further?
And we will between us, at an appropriate time soon, host between us a great conference, a large conference on interfaith dialogue. Some may say, well that is soft and that is not really a core part of a hard political or economic relationship. I disagree. I think this is in fact exceptionally important to the way in which our peoples' understanding of one another unfolds into the future.
So it is through practical measures such as that, in language and culture and faith and interfaith dialogue, that there is much to be done and this Government of Australia intends to do it.
Finally, for your conference itself. There is no point in having a conference like this unless I give you homework and I think Bapak Hassan would agree. So in your deliberations, we through the Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith would like to hear back your concrete ideas about what we do in the future of this people-to-people relationship.
None of us in this room have any monopoly on wisdom. I certainly don't. When I hear the stories from the three young people before about their experiences, for me they speak with eloquence about the opportunities which have been extended to them.
How do we make their experiences multiply by 1000 and 10,000 and 100,000? That is the challenge I would like you to reflect on. And that is the challenge I would like you to deliver some possibilities for those of us in Government to contemplate in the years' ahead.
Bapak Hassan, you are a welcome guest in Australia as always and to you and your ministerial colleagues, I know from their reports back to me today and the progress which has been achieved in discussions also between Simon Crean and his most elegant counterpart, that we are making progress in that part of our relationship as well, in trade.
It is a good thing that we have such high level representation from our friends in the Indonesian government at this conference and let us see this conference and the ideas which come from it as providing yet another stepping stone, another building block into a new period in the Australia-Indonesia relationship where we become joint participants in the great enterprise of dealing with the problems which the worlds needs our collective answers on.
I thank you.
ends


The Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Right Honourable John Key, will visit Australia from March 1 to 2.
Australia and New Zealand have long enjoyed a strong relationship founded on a unique shared history and outlook.
The intensity of our ties has been underscored vividly by the support and sympathy of the New Zealand people during the Victorian bushfires.
Australia and New Zealand are also close economic partners.
New Zealand is Australia's seventh-largest trading partner and our third-largest destination for investment overseas.
Official discussions are expected to focus on:
     * revitalising work to drive further economic integration through the establishment of a single economic market across the Tasman;
     * cooperation on Pacific and regional affairs; and,
     * key international challenges and opportunities for the two nations, including tackling the global economic crisis and climate change.
The Prime Minister looks forward to welcoming Prime Minister Key to Australia.
The two Prime Ministers have previously met in Lima (APEC) and in Port Moresby (Pacific Island Forum Special Leaders' meeting). 


The President of Malta, HE Dr Fenech Adami, will visit Australia from 21-28 February to discuss opportunities to further strengthen the warm relationship between our two countries.
President Fenech Adami will visit the ACT, NSW, Queensland and Victoria to meet with the Maltese community in Australia.
He will attend the National Day of Mourning Memorial Service for the Victorian bushfire victims on Sunday.
Australia and Malta have a friendly and constructive relationship based on strong people-to-people and historical links.
The large and respected Maltese community in Australia makes a valuable contribution to Australia's vibrant culture. There are currently around 153,000 Australians of Maltese ancestry living in Australia and around 43,000 Australian residents were born in Malta.
Malta is a member of the European Union and President Fenech Adami's visit reflects a new era of creative engagement between Australia and Europe.
Australia's reinvigorated relationship with the European Union is founded on the Australia-European Union Partnership Framework Agreement signed in Paris in October 2008. 


MITCHELL: Prime Minister thank you for speaking with us.
PM: It is a pleasure Neil and it is an extraordinary day, an extraordinary day for Victoria, an extraordinary day for the country.
MITCHELL: What do you hope will come out of today, what do you hope it will achieve?
PM: A national day of mourning is to provide a single national opportunity for all people who have been affected by this extraordinary tragedy to grieve, to mourn. Some say that mourning and grieving is an entirely personal matter and I understand that. But when you have events which go across whole communities and by the extension of the national family, the whole country, it is appropriate that we grieve together. There is one thing.
And then the other is to provide an opportunity for the nation to resolve together to work together to rebuild these communities which have been, in so many cases, destroyed.
MITCHELL: So this is the, the point from this, to move on? From here, we move on?
PM: I think we must now set our sights absolutely squarely on the rebuilding task. And this will be a bumpy road. Each one of the families who have lost loved ones, who have lost their homes, their circumstances and details are going to be unique to them.
But the responsibility of the community and government at all levels, is to bind together with each of them, in each of their circumstances and to help rebuild. And to stick with them. Not just for the next week, the next month, the next three months, but into the next year and the year past, until the rebuilding is done.
WALTER: Prime Minister, Dennis Walter. The outpouring of emotion from politicians, Julia Gillard, yourself, from all sides of politics, has been just an amazing thing for people to experience and a very humanizing thing to see the deep effect that it has had on people of all walks of life.
PM: I think all Australians, from you know, Cape York to Cape Lewin, have just stood still and watched and cried as they have seen what has happened to these poor communities. And at the same time, and I think in a great Australian way, have said one simple thing to themselves, ‘how can we help'.
This morning for example, I was talking to our ambassador in the United States, Dennis Richardson. Last night in Washington, he tells me that there was a function organised by the business community there, which in a small dinner raised $70,000 for the bush fire appeal and with other pledges of corporate donation, that figure will go into $200,000, plus.
That is one dinner in one city, in one part of the world, of Australians affected deeply right across the world, and our friends who are not Australian, in the same way.
I think it says so much about who we are as a people.
MITCHELL: Just to pick up on Dennis's point, you have been, you have covered all the areas, you have been there since the very early stages, is there one moment that defines it for you, one person you met or one incident or one thing you saw that really defines it for you?
PM: You know, it is always hard isn't it Neil, you have spoken to so many people. And I have got to say by the way, I think your program, what you have done through your radio station is absolutely fantastic. That is, you helped to bind people together and provide opportunity for expression and to convey basic information over the weeks since the fire.
And I just take my hat off to you. You have been very good at this.
MITCHEL: Thank you.
PM: On my own experience. I think standing in Kinglake itself last weekend, with the Kinglake CFA and just being, having the privilege of being among them, standing among them, for just a bit and just knowing that I was standing in the company of heroes, because I knew what they had done. And it is not, of course as you know, just them, the CFA, it is every volunteer. But it was standing, if you like, in the epicentre of hell and looking in these faces of men and women and saying, ‘you have stood the test', and being quite awestruck by them.
MITCHELL: They are heroic, they don't like being called heroes do they. They are a very humble lot.
PM: No they are actually, they, you know what struck me is that they are all up for a joke. And you know that is very Australian, amidst tragedy just finding an opportunity to find some humour. And I take my hats off to them. But you are right, they don't stand on ceremony, they don't expect all that sort of stuff. But you know something, they deserve all that sort of stuff.
WALTERS: Prime Minister, being out, just going out shopping yesterday and just wandering around and people coming up and saying hello and talking about it. This outpouring of emotion, that one of the things that came through to me yesterday were people wanting to, they want to watch the rebuilding and all aspects of it very closely. That they don't want to feel detached from the process. And that is marvellous snap of our wonderful community.
PM: I think that is absolutely right, as I said before to Neil I think, you know the big thing here is not just what we say and how we feel today, the big test of us all, including me, is where we are a year from now.
And what I want to be able to do a year from now is to put the measure over it and say, ‘how much progress have we made, what still is to be done and what is the plan to complete the task'.
And I think you are saying something else as well Dennis, which is, the people themselves, those who have dug deep, those who have volunteered, in fact the entire country, wants to be kept closely engaged with you know, progress each step of the way. And it is going to be uneven. There will be problems, I just know. I mean, (inaudible) there is going to be problems, because at the end of the day we are all but human beings involved.
But what I have said to the communities when I have spoken to them, and I say to your listeners today is that we intend to stick with them every step of the way as each problem rears its ugly head, we are going to tackle it, get through it, so that we can turn around one day and say, ‘the rebuilding is done'.
MITCHELL: I know they will be very reassured by that because there is a fear of, you know that time will move on and they will be abandoned. Prime Minister just one final question if I may, these reports today that you are supporting the idea of permanent memorials, what is the thought there?
PM: The Premier of Victoria John Brumby and our own Government, Jenny Macklin, have been talking about how best to provide an appropriate memorial. We are still working our way through the detail of it. But certainly, if is the view of the community, and if they are behind this idea squarely, then I am sure the Victorian Government and ourselves will do it. 
What it is, where it is, how it is shaped, I think we are going to have to involve everybody you know. Because these are very sensitive matters as I know you know most particularly.
MITCHELL: Final, final question, just watching you move around and a couple of very emotional moments on television and I am sure more privately, has this changed your life?
PM: You know Neil, I think it has probably affected the likes of you and the likes of me quite deeply and perhaps in ways we don't quite yet fully understand. I mean, it is, when you and others are upfront and close and personal with people who have lost everything and who are without hope, we are all engaged totally by that. And I think it affects us. 
But you know, how I feel, how you feel, slides into nowhere compared with those who we honour today in this national day of mourning, who have lost everything.
MITCHELL: Very true. Thank you very much for your time, I appreciate it, thank you.
PM: Thanks Neil, thanks Dennis.


Fellow members of the great Australian family.
When the histories of nations are written, there are times which sorely test each nation's soul. 
Whether through the carnage of human conflict or through the terrifying forces of nature unleashed.
This nation Australia has just been put to such a test.
And you the people of Australia, you the people of Victoria, and most especially you the people of these fire-ravaged communities - you have faced the test - and you have not been found wanting.
As a people, we weep for the lost. 
We tend the injured. 
We console the suffering.
And yet our work has barely begun.
In meeting this great test, as a people, and as a nation, we have drawn deep on our ancient values and given them fresh voice in our modern age. 
Values of courage. 
Values of compassion. 
Values of steely resilience. 
These are Australian values. Values also of our deepest common humanity.
For on Black Saturday, what we saw at work was the worst of nature yet the best of humanity.
What is courage?
We know it by instinct. We see it. We feel it.
Courage is a fire fighter standing before the gates of hell - unflinching, and unyielding and with eyes of steel saying this: "Here I stand, I can do no other". 
Courage is neighbour saving neighbour.
Courage is stranger saving stranger.
Courage is all these things as brave women and men in their lives and in their deeds these last weeks have written a new chapter in our nation's story.
A new army of heroes where the yellow helmet evokes the same reverence as the slouch hat of old.
Courage. And compassion.
In recent days, we have witnessed unspeakable suffering.
We have lost mothers and fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters, the tiniest of children, family and friends and neighbours.
All these are precious lives. No words can provide solace for grief so personal.
But simply know this: you who suffer are not alone.
This great Australian family, here assembled and across the nation today, is with you. And led by an almighty army of Australian volunteers stretched across this vast continent. 
And beyond our shores, know too that you are also surrounded by an ocean of compassion from every country on God's earth.
In some countries, tragedy exposes the fault lines in a nation. 
The strong abandoning the weak; one region indifferent to the sufferings of another, one culture uncaring as to the needs of another. 
But ours is a different nation. Our nation has been as one.
Australia - a nation of compassion. Courage and compassion. And the third of these great values: resilience.
What we have seen in each of these communities is resilience writ large. 
Resilience reflected in the absolute and resolute determination to rebuild. 
And this is where the nation comes in.
A solemn contract with each of these communities to rebuild: brick by brick, home by home, school by school, church by church, street by street, community by community. 
Governments of all persuasions and at all levels have failed communities in the past. Let us resolve not to fail these communities in the future.
To say this is easy. To do this will be hard and the path will be uneven. 
But let us resolve, learning from the mistakes of the past, to rebuild together.
To rebuild Marysville, Narbethong and Toolangi.
To rebuild Kinglake, Kinglake West and Flowerdale.
Strathewen, St Andrews and Humevale.
Wandong, Heathcote Junction and Upper Plenty. 
Churchill, Callignee and Koornalla. 
Steels Creek and Yarra Glen. 
These names and others that are now etched deep in the nation's memory.
For the truth is this: each of these communities is Australia - and we would be a lesser Australia without any of them. So let us to the task.
Last Sunday as I travelled on the road to Kinglake, it was as if I was walking through the valley of the shadow of death.
Last night I spoke with a young woman from a community nearby who had lost everything but survived. She told me she had spent yesterday with her Dad, starting to clean up the wreckage.
She told me the first thing they did was to plant a charred sapling in the burnt ground as their flag pole - and put up our nation's flag.
She told me she and her Dad then sat quietly together just looking at the flag - and then to work.
Our nation's flag now flies across the charred remains of these precious communities - flags by the hundred.
Flags of courage. Flags of compassion. Flags of resilience. Flags of hope.
Great Australian values that will see Australia through this great testing of our nation's soul.
So let us resolve today that from this time forth, on every 7th of February, this nation's flag will fly at half mast, this nation will pause for a moment's silence, to honour those lost and to reaffirm afresh, this great rebuilding for the future.
As we rise together in hope, from the ashes of despair.


To His Excellency Dr Edward Fenech Adami, President of Malta, and his charming wife who is with us here this evening. To other members of the Maltese delegation led by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs. To the Leader of the Opposition Mr Turnbull, friends of Malta, and in this country you are all friends of Australia.
Could I say, having spent now some time speaking with the President of Malta, how good it is to be among friends? We have reflected on the ties that bind. And the ties that bind this small country, this small island in the middle of the Mediterranean and this larger island in the middle of the Pacific is an extraordinary tale of history. It's a tale of culture, it's a tale of history, it is a tale of peoples, it is a tale of war, it is a tale of suffering, it is a tale of comfort and of course it is a tale which has its future in what we now do together.
When you reflect on this extraordinary culture and community in this island of Malta, those of us who are minded of history reflect upon the significance of this island in Mare Nostrum, the Mediterranean, and the extraordinary unfolding of the empire that was Rome.
But as his Excellency the President reminded me, the ancient cultures that have occupied that island for millennia before Rome built structures which remain today, which remain the oldest built structures anywhere in the world.
Of course in the wider spread of the history of our civilisations, the fact that St Paul was shipwrecked in Malta, the fact that he stayed in your midst for three months, the fact that Malta as a consequence has been a large part of the New Testament story is a part of Maltese history and its future contribution to Christian civilisation.
Malta itself of course has been the home and host of these ancient orders, the Orders of St John and of course those whom we describe today as the Knights of Malta. This is an ancient tale but it's still a modern tale because in that history in the Order of St John Hospitaller, you have also the beginnings of a medieval chivalric order, which centuries later then provides hospice and comfort as well as healing to Australian diggers who had just returned from the shores of Gallipoli.
There they came, together with others from across the world, in engagement on Gallipoli's shores and then for their rest, their recuperation but for many their dying and their passing and their eternal rest, Malta was the place to which they went. And still today, tended by the good people of Malta as of this day, lie on her soil sons of our soil, cared for tenderly by the people of that extraordinary island.
Last year when I was in London I spent some time with Her Majesty the Queen. Her Majesty the Queen opened by asking me about Malta. I found this a curious start to the conversation and as all conversations with Her Majesty the Queen, they should remain private. So I won't elaborate other than to say that her affection for your country, given her time there as a young woman when she was a princess and not yet queen, was told to me as a visiting and fellow member of the Commonwealth with great affection and with great warmth. And with an intensity of memory which suggested to me that she regards your island and your country as very near and dear to her heart and to her family.
Which brings us of course to the bonds which now exist between us as members of the Commonwealth. Malta, Australia, working together. This is a good thing. And there are many practical challenges for us to attend to in the councils of the Commonwealth and the councils of the world. This is important work. Some have decried the value of the Commonwealth. I do not.
My simple view of international relations is this. Whether it is the United Nations, whether it is the Security Council, the General Assembly, or the great councils of the world, or other councils including the Commonwealth, where we are working together for the common good as we are, through the councils of the Commonwealth, this in fact is a good thing.
His Excellency the President, who is a person more experienced in politics than myself, being a person who has been in Maltese politics both Prime Minister and the President over not just many years, but many decades, passed to me the observation from an earlier meeting of the Commonwealth Head of Government.
That here you have this extraordinary collection of governments from around the world, from as parts as distant as the United Kingdom itself, Malta, India, Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, Canada, and the members of the Caribbean, all united of course by a common experience of England, sometimes a challenging experience, but united still by a bond of language which actually makes our common discourse more possible. But beyond that a sense of common values which cause us as a Commonwealth to be good citizens of the world.
For Australia, we have yet a further advantage when it comes to our friends in Malta. And it is this. So many of your sons and daughters have chosen to become our sons and daughters. 150,000 from this tiny island in the middle of the Mediterranean are now one of us. And they have been for some generations. In fact, as His Excellency reminded me, and the High Commissioner earlier, going back well into the 19th Century.
The Maltese people have been great contributors to our nation, our national life, our businesses, our communities, our cultural diversity. And our national family as Australia would not be as complete were it not for you being part of us. One of the great tales, Excellency, about modern Australia is this. We have about us this characteristic as Australians, which is unity through diversity. And in all of our diversities, still unity still. And this I believe is a great strength and as part of that strength we have this community from this distant island which is now part of us and part of our identity. And for that,Your Excellency, I extend through you our thanks to your community back home, that so many have chosen to be one with us.
Your Excellency, we are honoured by the fact that you have chosen to visit us. And we are honoured by the fact that you have chosen to spend time with us in Australia. We are honoured by the fact that as a key member of the European Union, you choose to be an active participant and fellow contributor with Europe and Australia in dealing with common challenges which now confront the international order. Challenges of security, challenges of how we deal with the global economic crisis, challenges of climate change, challenges as are known only too well in the Mediterranean of dealing with persons who are displaced from various countries from around the world and the challenges of asylum.
I therefore Mr President, would conclude with these remarks. Know in Australia as this, that you are among friends because your people have become our friends, and in fact have become one with us. And know also this, that in Australia there is a government which wishes to work with you and the councils of Europe and in the councils of the Commonwealth to assist to craft a world for the future in which we can all have pride.
Your Excellency, I thank you for your visit.


The Commonwealth and Victorian Governments will fund and deliver the site clean-up and demolition program crucial to rebuilding communities devastated by the bushfires, the Prime Minister of Australia Kevin Rudd and the Premier of Victoria John Brumby announced today.
Mr Rudd said the Commonwealth and Victorian Governments had agreed to jointly fund the clean-up and demolition program, with work set to begin this week.
“The Commonwealth and Victorian Governments have promised to rebuild fire-affected communities brick by brick  -  and this clean-up and demolition program is the key first step in our commitment,” Mr Rudd said.
“Delivering a government-funded program that is sensitive, safe and timely will help families and communities to focus on rebuilding and putting their lives back together.”
The program will be voluntary. For people who elect to take up the offer, the service will be free of charge. For the small number of people who have already engaged licensed contractors, they will be reimbursed.
Many households are facing clean-up and demolition bills running into the tens of thousands of dollars. This program, funded by both levels of Government, will ensure they can spend that money on rebuilding their homes.
Mr Brumby said the clean-up and demolition program would take at least six months and involve multiple crews working simultaneously across fire-affected communities.
“We will work with local communities in the delivery of the program. The size and scope of the rebuilding task cannot be under-estimated, but nor can the resolve of communities and all levels of Government,” Mr Brumby said.
“We are determined to push ahead with the task of rebuilding communities as quickly as we possibly can, without delay. This decision represents a major step forward for fire-affected communities.
“The risk of hazards, such as asbestos, is so high, that Governments are taking these extraordinary steps to pave the way for rebuilding.
“We have seen the strength of human endeavour over the past fortnight, with communities determined to rebuild. The Victorian and Commonwealth Governments are with those communities every step of the way.”
Federal Minister for Families Jenny Macklin said the clean-up and demolition works are an important first step in helping communities get on with the task of rebuilding their lives.
“The clean-up is a major step in the rebuilding process. We are determined to use all our available resources to help those who have lost so much in the fires,” Ms Macklin said.
“This program will ensure the necessary demolition works are carried out sensitively and with the appropriate respect and care.”
The Victorian Government is close to finalising negotiations with a project manager for the program, which is expected to draw on the skills of local, appropriately qualified and licensed, tradespeople in affected communities.
The demolition program is expected to run for approximately six months, pending the necessary work of Office of the Victorian Coroner and Victoria Police.
The key steps of the process are:
     * The Coroner with Victoria Police approve access to the site;
     * Site assessment for risk, and removal of risks such as burnt gas bottles, dangerous trees, unstable chimneys;
     * Site owners given an opportunity for a final recovery of any possessions at the site;
     * The site will be cleared by licensed contractors.
The Commonwealth and Victorian Governments will release the cost of the program; the name of the contractor; and details of program registration once negotiations are concluded.
The contractor will release the schedule of works shortly thereafter.
The costs for clean-up and demolition will be shared equally by the Australian and Victorian Governments.


To support Australian workers during a global recession the Government today announced a $298.5 million additional investment in employment services in Australia.
This targeted investment will ensure any Australian worker made redundant will now receive immediate and personalised assistance to help them get back into the workforce.
Rather than having to wait at least 3 months to receive intensive personalised assistance from today all newly redundant workers will now receive this support immediately.
This intensive assistance will be the equivalent to Stream 2 services such as:
     * career advice;
     * a comprehensive skills assessment;
     * skills development training;
     * IT support and stationery support to help with job applications;
     * targeted referral to appropriate education and training;
     * $550 credit to the Employment Pathway Fund to pay for items such computer courses, heavy vehicle license, safety boots and work uniforms.
Today's targeted investment builds on the Government's $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to invest in nation building, support jobs and Australian workers during a global recession.
The Government is determined to take all action responsibly possible to help those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own during this global recession.
Providers of employment services will also receive increased resources in recognition of the extra workload. In addition, providers will be eligible to receive outcome payments if they directly assist an individual to obtain a sustainable employment outcome.
These changes build on the Rudd Government's investment of more than $4 billion over three years on a new, more effective, employment services system that will provide better targeted support and do more to assist disadvantaged jobseekers from 1 July.
Today's announcement will allow workers made redundant from today access to more intensive services from April 1. The Job Seeker Account is also being made more flexible to allow funds to be used to assist job seekers without the need for unnecessary red tape.
In addition, the Rudd Government has committed $75 million to assist newly retrenched workers access training.
10,000 additional training places will be made available under the successful Productivity Places Program and delivered by Registered Training Organisations.
Productivity Places Program provides participants with new skills and qualifications that can lead to a pathway of further training and employment.
Training will be provided at the Certificate III and Certificate IV levels and will be offered across a wide range of industries.
The $2 billion Productivity Places Program is a major long term commitment that will deliver 711,000 training places over five years. Since April 2008 more than 80,000 Australians have enrolled in a training course through the Productivity Places Program.
A highly skilled workforce provides individuals with greater job opportunities and will benefit the Australian economy in the longer term.
The Government will take further action to assist people who lose their job into the future.
More information on these measures are available at the  Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations website.


PM:   The global economic crisis takes many forms and one of the forms it takes is  its impact on jobs and its impact on people who lose jobs through no fault of  their own. Absolutely no fault of their own. 
The  Government's response has been to embrace a nation building strategy. First,  stabilise financial markets. There's been hard work done on that. Second,  nation building through infrastructure investment for the future to provide  support for jobs in the near term as well as build the infrastructure that Australia  needs for the longer term. Hence, our $15 billion investment in the biggest  school modernisation program the country has seen. Third part of it is this, to  support those workers who through no fault of their own lose their jobs or at  risk of losing their jobs because of this global economic crisis.
Today  the Government announces two new measures. The first is to provide immediate  employment services support for retrenched workers. At present what happens  under the existing system is that a person has to be out of work for three  months before being eligible for intensive assistance. That now changes as a  result of the decision of the Cabinet, this will now be immediately available  as of today to anyone who becomes retrenched.
That  means that persons in those circumstances would be immediately available,  immediately able to access what is called stream two services. Career advice,  comprehensive skills assessment, skills development training, IT support and  stationery support to help with job applications, targeted referrals to  appropriate education and training and also a $550 credit to the Employment  Pathway Fund for items such as computer courses, heavy vehicle licences, safety  boots and work uniforms.
This  is a practical set of supports available to retrenched workers but the big  change is, it is available now as opposed to workers having to wait three  months. That is the change that we're announcing today. That is one element of  what the Government's decided today.
The  second is this, the Government has also providing funding for a further 10,000  Productivity Places for redundant workers. This is important. If a person has  lost their job through no fault of their own, then what we need to have  available is a sufficient number of training places for those persons to use  their time of unemployment to obtain further skills or to build up their  existing skills. And that's why an additional allocation of 10,000 training  places specifically targeted on workers who have become redundant is an  important part of the overall plan.
This  of course builds on something which the Deputy Prime Minister announced last  week which is a $145 million program to provide out-of-work apprentices, that  is apprentices who are currently doing their apprenticeship but whose employer  can no longer retain them, to provide assistance specifically for them and that  of course was to the tune of $2,800 per individual apprenticeship place.
These  are three practical measures to assist with the problem which arises for people  who lose their jobs, or are losing their ability to sustain their  apprenticeship through no fault of their own.
There  is no silver bullet in this. These are practical measures to assist on the way  through. But I would say this, the Government remains resolved to take whatever  further measures are necessary to support workers and their families who lose  their jobs through no fault of their own.
If  I could turn to the Deputy Prime Minister and then the Minister.
GILLARD:   Thank you very much. Just briefly as the Prime Minister said, last week I  announced a practical step to help apprentices who find themselves out of  trade. We've met some young people this morning midway through their training.  If they hit a circumstance where they lost their job, the Government wants to  take practical measures to help them secure a new opportunity so that they can  finish their apprenticeship, hence the announcement of $2,800 in incentive  money to get a new employer or a group training organisation to take that  apprentice on, give them a new opportunity and give them a new way of  completing their apprenticeship. 
It  also comes with additional resources for training organisations to find  pathways to completion for apprentices who lose their jobs.
Today, building on that measure, we announced 10,000 new productivity places  for redundant workers. This builds on our very successful productivity places  program and the Government has already allocated and budgeted for more than  700,000 places.
These  10,000 places will be there to help workers who are made redundant get the  skills they need to get new opportunities in our workplaces.
What  we know from past economic downturns is when the economy turns down, people  stop training. When the economy then grows, everybody is crying out for skilled  labour. We want to do everything possible through these kinds of practical  measures to change that cycle, to continue to invest in the Australian people,  even in these difficult days following the global financial crisis - to make  sure that they have got the skills they need to get new opportunities in our  economy.
O'CONNOR:  Can I just add to the comments made already by the Prime Minister in relation  to the initiative. Can I say firstly it's critical that the Government  intervene as early as possible to assist retrenched workers and that is why we  are dedicating almost $300 million to provide the support that's needed to get  people back into work as quickly as possible.
What we do know is that the current services provide only a resume and indeed  provide only one meeting prior to three months for the first three months.
These  new initiatives will provide personalised intensive support for retrenched  workers. It will include assessing their skills, referring them to training  providers to get them trained in areas of skilled need as quickly as possible,  and provide opportunities for them to find work.
There  is nothing worse than a worker being retrenched and this Government is acting  swiftly to respond to the need of those retrenched workers.
JOURNALIST:  Prime  Minister, is there enough money for the maternity leave plan to go ahead this  year? 
GILLARD:   Well what I have said in the past about that, and what remains my view is that  the Government was elected saying that we wanted to have a Productivity  Commission inquiry into paid maternity leave.
We said that because we wanted expert advice on how to design a system that  would build on and not displace some of the things that companies around the  nation are already doing on paid maternity leave. 
The  Government's going to receive that report by the end of this month and we've  always said that any financial matters flowing from that report would need to  be considered in the budget context.
JOURNALIST:    Is it going to be time to bite the bullet soon, as Mr Rudd said last year? 
PM:      Well I remain personally committed to paid maternity leave. But as Julia has  quite rightly pointed out, what we said was we would look at the Productivity  Commission report  -  it's due soon - and that we'd consider it in the budget  context. That is the right way to do public policy. 
JOURNALIST:    Mr Rudd, you are an advocate of four-year fixed terms as I recall. Do you think  that now with first West Australia and now Queensland Premiers calling  elections well ahead of time, at great public expense for nothing but their own  political advantage, do you think people have a right to be sick of that and  will you undertake to serve a full term yourself (inaudible).
PM:   Firstly what I'd say about Queensland is this - the Queensland Premier Anna  Bligh has been upfront about the challenges that the State faces as a result of  the global financial crisis. She's laid bare the State's balance sheets and  said that what the State needs is certainty and confidence going forward. Anna  Bligh as Premier can provide that. When I hear the words Premier Lawrence  Springborg, confidence and certainty are not the first two words which spring  to mind. 
Secondly,  in terms of fixed year terms our position is absolutely clear. That's the  position I have long advocated, that's the one I believe in for the future for  the Federal Government. Every individual State Government makes up its own  mind. Mark.
JOURNALIST:    Ms Gillard, what did you mean yesterday when you called Mr Pyne a mincer? 
GILLARD:   Well in Question Time you've got to have your moments of humour and I think  that that was a moment of humour. 
PM:   [inaudible] 
GILLARD:   As is a matter of public record I think the Member for Warringah Tony Abbott  was interested in the job. I think anybody who's seen Tony Abbott in action  would say he's got a very different style to Christopher Pyne. 
JOURNALIST:    Mr Rudd are you a toxic bore? 
PM:   Can I say that anyone, anyone  -  you wrote about this today Matthew.  (Inaudible). If you are dealing with the totality of a global economic crisis,  unless we have a restoration of private credit markets and private credit flows  across the global economy and normal flows in Australia, then we're never  dealing with the full dimensions of the problem. That's what I was saying in  the Parliament yesterday, that is the reality which every government in the  world is wrestling with - 
JOURNALISTSo does that mean yes? 
PM:   - that is the reality which every government is wrestling with. Secondly,  stimulus along the lines of nation building plans and what we described before  are part of providing near to medium term support while private credit markets  are being restored. I think it's important to be upfront with the Australian  public about the dimensions of the problem which are occurring in the global  banking system, what's causing that, where the solutions may lie. 
Secondly,  what we in Australia are doing in the near to medium term to support growth and  jobs on the way through. That's the right course of action and I'll be sticking  to it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Tony Abbott who described you this morning as a toxic bore - how would  you describe him? 
PM:   I think when you're dealing with a global economic crisis it's important to be  serious about, of course there's a problem and what you can do about it. This  Government is in the practical business of trying to fix problems and can I say  people losing their jobs isn't funny. What we're trying to do is provide  support for people losing their jobs and through measures which the Liberal  Party opposed only a week or so ago help create, support new jobs by  construction activity in schools. 
JOURNALIST:Are you getting nervous about emissions trading and is there a chance that that  you could actually be rolled on this one? 
PM:The Government will legislate the contents of our White Paper on the Carbon  Pollution Reduction Scheme as we announced last year. 
We  have no intention whatsoever of changing our course of action on that. It is  necessary for the long term future of the planet. It is necessary to also do it  in the balanced way we outlined in the White Paper, mindful of the challenges  of the global economy.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
If you have heard the stories of those who have suffered from chronic diseases, and been given the gift of life through a transplant  - 
Or if you have heard the stories of the families for whom a donor organ never arrived in time  - 
You can be in no doubt this is a cause that really matters.
It's a cause worth fighting for.
There is no question that Australia delivers excellent clinical outcomes for transplant patients.
But our donor rates are too low.
And the Australian Government is determined to change that.
So that instead of lagging behind other nations, Australia can be a leader in organ and tissue donation and transplantation.
If you have any questions about how important this is, just look into the eyes of my 2 year old friend who is here today, Cordelia Whatman, the thankful recipient of a liver transplant.
Or her 4 year old sister, Octavia, who is nearly big enough and old enough to be made an ambassador for organ donor awareness.
Or speak to 8 year old Taleaha and 4 year old Rory here, whose mum Kylie is waiting for a double lung transplant.
Australia has a transplant waiting list of around 1,800 people.
That is 1,800 Cordelias and Kylies.
1,800 Australians for whom a transplant may be the difference between a normal, healthy life and debilitating chronic illness.
We're here today for them  -  and for thousands more Australians, in the years ahead, whose lives will be changed by an organ or tissue transplant.
In July last year, I said national leadership to lift organ donation rates was long overdue.
I said it was time to end the blame game between different levels of government and different parts of the health system.
I said we needed to take action, and focus our efforts in the places where we can actually get results.
That is why the Government is investing an unprecedented $151.1 million over the next four years to reform the national organ and tissue donation system and save lives.
The plan was endorsed by all State and Territory governments on July 3 last year at the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
That plan centres on taking action where it matters most  -  in our hospitals.
The plan aims to ensure that:
     * potential donors are properly identified at hospitals across the country;
     * every family of a potential donor will be asked about organ donation;
     * a dedicated specialist will work with the potential donor and their family to provide support through what is often a very, very difficult process;
     * hospital staff will be able to focus on donor care knowing that the hospital has a separate budget to cover organ and tissue donation;
     * families receive the support they need at the time of organ donation and afterwards; and
     * there will be an equitable and safe process for managing transplant waiting lists and allocating organs once they become available.
There are five components to the national plan I announced in July last year.
The first component is $46 million to introduce a coordinated, consistent approach under the leadership of a new, independent national authority - the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority.
The legislation for the new Authority went through Parliament last September, and it is now up and running.
It is led by Karen Murphy, an experienced CEO with a proven track record of successfully managing change in large organisations and working collaboratively across both the public and private sectors.
Under her leadership, the Authority is working quickly to build its capacity and implement this ambitious reform agenda.
Our plan also allocates $67 million to employ trained medical specialists and other staff dedicated to organ donation.
They will work closely with emergency department and intensive care unit teams in selected public and private hospitals across Australia.
The third element is $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
The fourth component is $13 million towards raising community awareness and building public confidence in Australia's donation for a transplantation system.
The fifth component is funding of $2 million for counsellors to support donor families.
This is a comprehensive plan.
It tackles the point at which our organ donor system is currently failing - where we need dedicated staff in emergency wards and intensive care units, trained to help families through the difficult circumstances they confront just at the time when getting consent matters.
It was developed on the basis of evaluating international experience  -  evidence that highlighted the need for national leadership, and the need for dedicated specialist staff.
Today I announce the next step in implementing the national plan.
For the Authority's efforts to be as successful as possible, it needs to get the best advice  -  both from within the medical community and from a wide range of community voices.
We know that we need to engage with the wider community so that more Australians understand just what a gift of life organ donation can be. 
That is why we will establish an Advisory Council - to provide ongoing advice and input to the Authority.
The Advisory Council will consist of members selected on the basis of substantial experience or knowledge in at least one of the following fields:
     * organ or tissue donation and transplantation; 
     * public administration; 
     * business; 
     * management; 
     * finance and 
     * health consumer issues.
I'm pleased today to announce that Sam Chisholm will chair the Advisory Council.
Sam Chisholm is one of the most experienced hands in the Australian business community  -  most famously as the Chief Executive and Managing Director who led the Nine Network through the many years when it dominated Australian television ratings.
If anybody knows how to get Australians to watch and listen, Sam does.
Sam is also the recipient of a double lung transplant in 2003.
He's also been a director of the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute.
So he will bring to this role the same grit and passion he's famously demonstrated throughout his professional life.
Sam will be supported by the following members of the Advisory Council:
     * Professor John Horvath AO, the Chief Medical Officer
     * Dr David Boadle, Tasmania's Deputy Chief Health Officer
     * Prof Don Chalmers, Dean of the Law Faculty at the University of Tasmania with expertise in health law and ethics
     * Ms Anne Cahill Lambert AM, a tireless advocate in this area waiting herself for a double lung transplant; also a former CEO of the Royal Australian College of Medical Administrators and former CEO of the Women's Hospitals Australasia and the Children's Hospitals Australasia
     * Professor Geoff Dobb, head of the Royal Perth Hospital's Department of Intensive Care with expertise in brain death and organ donation
     * David Koch  -  Kochie has of course done a huge amount to promote donor awareness on the Sunrise program and brings business and financial expertise
     * Professor Jeremy Chapman OAM  -  one of Australia's most highly experienced transplant specialists and a clinical professor at the University of Sydney
     * Mrs Rachel Martin, donor family member 
     * Dr Marisa Herson, head of Victoria's Donor Tissue Bank
     * Dr Anthony Cross, emergency physician and intensivist at the Box Hill Hospital
     * Dr Gerry O'Callaghan  -  Senior Consultant, Intensive and Critical Care, Flinders Medical Centre
     * Ms Amanda Rischbeith  -  National President of the Australian College of Critical Care Nurses
     * Dr Dianne Stephens OAM  -  Director of Intensive Care at the Royal Darwin Hospital
     * Professor Russell Strong AC  -  Medical Director, Queenslanders Donate
These members give the Council a tremendous depth of skill expertise ranging across critical care, transplantation, the medical and nursing professions, donor families, transplant recipients and those on the waiting list.
I want to thank each Council member for taking on this responsibility.
Your advice will be important to making the national plan successful.
Progress on the national plan is also advancing in other areas as the Authority begins taking the practical steps that will help get the results to which we are committed.
Health Ministers have agreed to the implementation of national ‘clinical triggers' across all public and private hospital Emergency Departments and Intensive Care Units.
These clinical triggers will help clinicians on the ground to rapidly and accurately identify potential donors.
Consultations with the medical professions are now underway.
The Authority is also working to implement the new National Paired Kidney Exchange Program.
This will help link potential donors to recipients across the country, where a family member or friend who is willing to donate is not compatible.
The Organ Donor Awareness Week is an excellent opportunity to raise awareness and get the message about Cordelia, Kylie and thousands of other Australians.
So I am pleased to launch this week's efforts.
And I am particularly pleased to be launching the Terry Connolly ORGANised Walk that will set off at 7am tomorrow from Regatta Point.
This is a great initiative to encourage people to talk with their families about registering for organ donation.
Helen reminds me that it was Terry who, back in the 1980s while I was in China, made sure that my ALP party membership dues were processed and kept in order.
And it was also Terry who recruited the Deputy Prime Minister to the Labor Party on campus at the University of Adelaide in the 1970s.
We will be walking tomorrow in memory of Terry, and in support of increased donor awareness.
The success of this week's efforts is important to increasing donor levels and achieving the vision that is behind Australia's national plan for organ donation.
Let me finish with this appeal to all Australians.
Take action and have a meaningful and informed discussion with your family about your wishes in relation to organ and tissue donation.
If you are not now on the organ donor list, please think about it and get your name on to it.
And I appeal to the nation's media: tell the stories of organ donation and the gift of life it can be.
These stories get people thinking and acting.
They really make a difference.
Each of us can play a role in this great cause.
And many Australians will enjoy happier, longer lives as a result. 


The Rudd Government has today announced a 15-member Advisory Council to help drive its new national approach to lifting Australia's organ and tissue donation and transplantation rates.
The Advisory Council will be headed by businessman and double-lung transplant recipient Sam Chisholm.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announced the membership of the Advisory Council when he launched the ACT Australian Organ Donor Awareness Week today.
The Rudd Government is committed to establishing Australia as a world leader in best practice organ and tissue donation for transplants.
Despite more than 90 per cent of Australians supporting the idea of organ donation, Australia has a longstanding shortage of organs for transplantation, with nearly 1,800 Australians on official transplant waiting lists.
The Advisory Council will support the recently-appointed Chief Executive Officer of the new Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority, Karen Murphy.
Together these organisations will lead a best practice, coordinated national approach to organ and tissue donation for transplant in Australia. The Advisory Council will be comprised of a cross-section of people across Australia involved in the organ and tissue donation sector.
This new body will bring the widest possible perspective to help drive the Government's much-needed reforms in this area  -  from the Chair's own experience as a transplant recipient, to a range of stakeholder and consumer interests, including donor families, people awaiting transplants, health professionals and experts in the field.
The Rudd Government is investing an unprecedented $151.1 million over the next four years to reform organ and tissue donation in Australia and boost the number of life-saving and life-transforming transplants.
These reforms present a genuine opportunity to make a real difference to the lives of thousands of Australians. We are committed to achieving a significant and lasting increase in the number of transplants in Australia.
A key element of the reforms is a four-year national community education and awareness program to give Australians regular, clear, factual and relevant information about organ and tissue donation, the benefits of transplantation, and how they can make a difference.
The campaign is encouraging all Australians to discuss their wishes about donation with their family, friends and loved ones.
Members of the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Advisory Council
            Name
            Role
            Key Expertise
            Mr Sam Chisholm
            Chair
            Business and executive experience in the media sector, and double-lung transplant recipient
            Dr David Boadle
            Member
            Public health administrator, with a particular interest in organ and tissue donation and transplantation
            Ms Anne Cahill Lambert AM
            Member
            Consumer advocate for organ and tissue donation and related health issues, and awaiting a lung transplant
            Dr Anthony Cross
            Member
            Emergency physician and intensivist
            Prof Don Chalmers
            Member
            Expertise in health law and ethics
            Prof Jeremy Chapman OAM
            Member
            Renal physician, with expertise in bone marrow and cord blood treatments
            Prof Geoff Dobb
            Member
            Intensivist, with experience in brain death and organ donation
            Dr Marisa Herson
            Member
            Donor tissue expertise
            Prof John Horvath AO
            Member
            Public health administrator, awarded an Order of Australia for services to medicine
            Mr David Koch
            Member
            Business and financial expertise
            Ms Rachel Martin
            Member
            Family of a deceased donor, and works with children with special needs providing early intervention and family support services
            Dr Gerry O'Callaghan
            Member
            Intensivist, with experience in brain death and ethical guidelines for organ and tissue donation
            Dr Amanda Rischbieth
            Member
            National President of the Australian College
            of Critical Care Nurses
            Dr Dianne Stephens OAM
            Member
            Intensivist, awarded the Medal of The Order of Australia for her role in the management of critically ill Bali bombing victims
            Dr Russell Strong AC
            Member
            Liver transplant surgeon and experience in a state based organ donation agency


I am pleased to announce that Her Excellency the Governor-General has agreed to the following changes to the Ministry.
Senator the Hon Mark Arbib has been appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Government Service Delivery within the Prime Minister's portfolio.
The Hon Greg Combet AM MP has been appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change. Mr Combet's previous responsibility for defence procurement will be assumed by the Minister for Defence.
Mr Combet is a former coal mining engineer and has an economics degree. In his time as ACTU secretary, Mr Combet was involved in complex industrial negotiations, including fighting for justice for the James Hardie asbestos victims, and developed good links with business which will serve him well in the Climate Change portfolio.
The Hon Mike Kelly AM MP has been appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Water, in addition to his duties as Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Support.
As the Member for Eden-Monaro, Dr Kelly has seen firsthand the water challenges facing the country. Dr Kelly will work on these challenges in consultation with stakeholders to develop and implement innovative policy solutions to ensure Australia's water sustainability into the future.
The Hon Bill Shorten MP has been appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Victorian Bushfire Reconstruction. Mr Shorten will help with the rebuilding of the lives, homes and communities which have been devastated by these tragic fires.
Mr Shorten will continue to drive the development of a National Disability Strategy to support carers of adults with disability, positively promote employment and improve early intervention services for children with disability in his role as Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities and Children's Services.
The Hon Anthony Byrne MP has been appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Trade in addition to his duties as Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. Mr Byrne's additional responsibilities are a reflection of the significant contribution he has made to the Government in his current role.
Senator the Hon Ursula Stephens will soon be sworn in to administer the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs to better reflect her duties as Parliamentary Secretary for Social Inclusion and the Voluntary Sector.
As foreshadowed last week, the Hon John Murphy MP has stepped down as Parliamentary Secretary to the Trade Minister. I thank him again for his service.
Other Ministerial arrangements remain unchanged.
A  printable version of the Ministry List is available on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website.


The Rudd Government will invest $58.3 million to help tackle eye and ear diseases in Indigenous communities  -  including diseases rarely seen outside the third world. 
Too many Indigenous people suffer avoidable vision loss and hearing loss. That is unacceptable, and this investment will help turn that around.
The $58.3 million over four years includes:
     * at least 1,000 additional ear and eye surgical procedures will be made available, reflecting the high need for these services
     * a major increase in services to address trachoma, which will enable at least 10 regional teams to treat and help prevent the disease in NT, WA, SA and other states where trachoma is identified
     * expanding the Visiting Optometrist Scheme, to provide new and increased numbers of optometrist visits to remote and very remote communities
     * increased training of health workers to make sure they can pick up any hearing problems of Indigenous people as early as possible
     * investments in hearing medical equipment including audiometers, tympanometers (machines used to test hearing loss) and video-otoscopes (devices for looking inside the ears)
     * hearing-health promotion to increase awareness of ear disease and the importance of providing and following treatment to reduce hearing loss in Indigenous communities
The measure will also boost the qualifications of health professionals by increasing accredited training and will improve co-ordination of care.
This is about helping Indigenous kids get the start in life they deserve.
It will help them get a better start to education, which should deliver improvements in literacy and numeracy, which in turn has flow-on effects to improved employment outcomes.
This is an important initiative, and another downpayment to mark the Rudd Government's determination to help close the appalling life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Approximately 20,000 Indigenous children suffer from trachoma in Australia.
Our objective must be clear: to eliminate trachoma among Indigenous Australians within a finite timeframe.
Many Indigenous children suffer from significant hearing loss. Rates of ear disease and hearing problems for indigenous children are three times those of non-Indigenous population.
Hearing problems are commonly linked to poor school attendance and educational outcomes. The early onset of middle ear infection, which results in fluctuating hearing loss, reduces active participation in education and limits future employment opportunities.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are also at increased risk of developing avoidable blindness and vision loss and are less likely to visit eye health care practitioners than other Australians.
The Rudd Government is already investing:
     * $805.5 million, as part of a landmark $1.6 billion Indigenous Health National Partnership, agreed by COAG in November 2008. This investment will target chronic disease, the single largest contributor to the life expectancy gap.
     * $564 million for the Indigenous Early Childhood Development National Partnership, agreed by COAG in October 2008. This investment will increase access to antenatal care and related health services, and child and maternal health services, and establish 35 Children and Family Centres across Australia, supporting the Government's goal of halving the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under 5 years within a decade.


Brisbane-based firm Richard Kirk Architects Pty Ltd was today announced as the winner of the design competition for two new national memorials to honour the more than 1.4 million Australian service men and women who served in the First and Second World Wars.
The winning design was selected from 43 entries during a national and international competition conducted in 2008.
The memorials will be built on the northern shore of Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra, at the foot of Anzac Parade, to frame the view of the Australian War Memorial.
The winning designs are symbolic of the spirit, sacrifice and commitment of Australians during both World Wars.
The memorials will honour more than 100,000 Australians who died in the World Wars and will be a permanent legacy to those who served or supported the war effort, both at home and overseas.
The Memorial(s) Development Committee is to be congratulated on its initiative, vision and commitment to this project.
Now the winning design is selected, the Committee will focus on raising enough money to see this important project through to completion.
The Memorials will cost an estimated $21 million. The Australian Government has committed $250,000 to the project.
The Government strongly encourages all Australians to offer their support to the construction of this new national monument.
For details on how to make a donation visit www.mdc.org.au.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today announced a new fast track process so that homeowners can start applying for free ceiling insulation immediately.
Through the Government's $3.9 billion Energy Efficient Homes Package, households can now apply for one of the following upgrades from today:
     * The Homeowner Insulation Program. This installs free ceiling insulation (capped at $1,600) in the homes of eligible owner-occupiers.
     * The Low Emission Assistance Plan for Renters. This provides assistance of up to $1,000 for installing insulation in private rental properties.
     * The Solar Hot Water Rebate. This provides rebates of up to $1,600 for installation of solar hot water systems.Today's fast track guidelines make it even easier for Australian households to apply for this program.
By visiting the website people can check immediately whether they are eligible, arrange for a skilled tradesperson to do the work and send in their receipts for the rebate.
This package will eventually install ceiling insulation in around 2.7 million homes across the country.
Prime Minister Rudd and Minister Garrett made the announcement while visiting Canberra company Just-Rite insulation  -  which is one of many Australian small businesses set to benefit from the new fast track process.
The Rudd Government announced the $3.9 billion Energy Efficient Homes package on 3 February 2009 as part of the $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
Energy Efficient Homes has been welcomed by industry. It will create thousands of jobs in the manufacturing, distribution and installation of ceiling insulation and solar hot water systems during the global financial crisis.
For more information on the fast track application process please visit http://www.environment.gov.au/energyefficiency/ or call the hotline on 1800 808 571.


PM: The Government in response to the global economic crisis has advanced its nation building plan for the future. Part of that nation building plan of course is our $3.9 billion plan for energy efficient homes in Australia.
And that of course involves a home insulation program, which entails free insulation capped at $1,600 in homes which an eligible owner occupiers. The low emissions assistance plan for renters which provides assistance of up to $1,000 for installing insulation in private rental properties and thirdly, the solar hot water rebate which provides rebates of up to $1,600 also for installation of solar hot water systems.
These are practical plans all designed to generate jobs in the Australian economy and on top of that to do something real for the environment at the same time.
Today what I announce is that the guidelines for the operation of this energy efficient plan for Australia will become available and open for people to use across the country. It's like this, from the guidelines which go out today on the website, households across the country will be able to make their practical plans for engaging tradies, for working out what is needed in their individual home situation and to make arrangements of course with suppliers like the one we're visiting here today in Canberra.
Then, once they've spent their money in getting this work done, they can then apply to the Government for a rebate. From 1 July on of course the Government will have a system in place as we indicated before as of when the Government will pay up front to the supplier or the provider. But in order to get this stimulus going now, and the work done now, these guidelines are up and running today.
So what we're doing is fast-tracking the guidelines, fast-tracking the insulation and therefore fast-tracking the jobs which will come from this nation building program.
This is important, it's one practical part of a strategy for dealing with how do we support the economy, jobs and families at a time when we have a global economic recession to deal with. Over to you Pete.
GARRETT: Thanks Prime Minister. Australian homes are ready to be insulated by this plan and Australian tradies are ready to get out and get this insulation in people's ceilings. This is the most exciting, ambitious energy efficiency program that we will ever see and it's open for business.
What we know is that we've been inundated with calls from tradies, from the business in question, wanting to know how quickly they can get going on putting insulation in people's homes.
If we look at the barriers to rolling out energy efficiency nation-wide what are they? Upfront costs, split incentives and lack of available and good information for people to be able to access. Today we address those upfront barriers straight away and by providing for people with the opportunity to access these guidelines, get the work done as the Prime Minister said and be reimbursed for that work, this means this is a jobs ready program, it means that there's hope for the small industries and small businesses that want to get into this space and do this work and it also means that for Australian home owners and householders, they'll be able to reduce their energy costs and see that they're taking practical action on energy efficiency in the homes.
One other thing to point out to you and that is that the guidelines provide for the rebate to apply where in fact there may be a very low degree of insulation in the home. Let's just say someone is in a pretty old dwelling that's got less than point five R-value insulation in it, that'll be deemed to be an available space to apply for this rebate and for this rebate to come into play.
Nearly three million Australian homes will be able to have ceiling insulation, 2.2 million home owners and about 700,000 through the low emissions plan for renters, an absolutely strong, upfront and ambitious commitment not only to energy efficiency but to producing jobs for Australia.
PM: Okay folks, over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Senator Kim Carr says, and I quote, this morning he said on radio, “I wouldn't say anyone's job is safe.” I know you say you've got to be honest with the Australian people but that's going a bit far, isn't it?
PM: Dealing with a global economic recession means being upfront about the problems we face and upfront with the Government strategy to see us through the crisis. That is what this Government's approach has been from the beginning.
For us it's very clear. We have as a Government, hope, optimism and confidence for the future of the Australian economy, but based on an economic strategy to see us through the crisis. The strategy, the Nation Building strategy that I have been outlining today.
The alternative is clear. We have an economic strategy to see us through the global economic crisis. The Liberal party and the National party have a political strategy.
A political strategy which seeks to take political advantage of the crisis.
There is no clearer contrast between our position and our opponents' position on dealing with that which is a grave crisis facing households, families and jobs across the country.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, do you share President Obama's optimism for the US when he says the US will emerge stronger than before. Do you believe that Australia will emerge stronger than before?
PM: I believe, based on the economic strategy the Government has developed and is implementing, that we will see Australia through the crisis and we will be a more resilient economy and country as a result.
This will be tough along the way. The alternative is to do nothing. The alternative is to carp from the sidelines.
These are grave questions for Australia and the Australian economy, workers and families right now. We have a clear cut nation building plan. Our opponents, the Liberal Party and National Party, have a script purely based on negative criticism.
JOURNALIST: Earlier in the week in parliament you painted what sounded to me like a doomsday scenario about the existence of toxic assets on the balance sheets of internationally important banks. What is your solution to that problem? How can we isolate those assets and is the fact that that really is the heart of the global financial crisis an indication that there is only so much Governments can do, it is beyond you?
PM: Consistent with what I said before to an earlier question, I believe in being upfront with the Australian people about the problems that we face and upfront about our strategy to see Australia through the crisis.
Let's take it in two parts. Now one is the problem obviously in terms of global credit markets, and I have been upfront in the parliament and elsewhere about the problems in globally, significant banks about bad assets on those bank's balance sheets. Australian banks are in fine working order. And Australian financial markets are operating as normally as is possible given global circumstances. We have acted domestically in our own credit markets through the interventions in car dealership finance, residential mortgage backed securities, as well as the commercial property market. On top of that, we've acted in our own financial markets with the double bank guarantee.
These are very important in terms of making sure that Australia's financial markets are stable and operating as normally as possible.
Global action within the United States, within the United Kingdom, and of course within various European capitals, nationally and at a coordinated level, dealing with their individual problems of bad assets on balance sheets is equally important. The challenge for the international community is to work in a coordinated fashion with and between those individual governments to make sure that those assets are dealt with effectively over time. That is a key question in terms of restoring credit flows. That's on financial markets.
What we've been talking about also is how do we deal beyond private credit flows with the fiscal stimulus necessary to support growth and jobs on the way through. That's why we've done what we have done. Practical steps each step along the way.
And here you see with this product, these workers and the people that are going to put this material in ceilings right across Australia in nearly three million homes, a practical job program. It's practical stuff.
JOURNALIST: How many jobs, do you know?
PM: On this one, it will depend entirely on the rollout over time. It will depend on what happens with the transportation, distribution, installation, impacts of the measures that we've put but we're confident this is going to be a positive, significant jobs boost across the country.
JOURNALIST: On Sol Trujillo, what will his legacy be from his time?
PM: That's a matter for others to reflect on.
JOURNALIST: What about Kim Carr's comments though? Do you think he's overcooked it. He says “I wouldn't say anyone's job is safe.” That doesn't seem to fit with your -
PM: What I'm saying - it's very clear cut that we have a real problem with the global economic crisis which means there is a real problem there for Australian jobs. Therefore, what we have is a clear alternative. Either you embark upon an absolutely clear cut economic strategy to see Australia through the crisis, or the Liberal and National party approach which is a political strategy  -  aim to take political advantage of the crisis.
Either you have a strategy which aims at creating practical jobs and supporting practical jobs across the Australian economy through programs such as this, or what you do when jobless figures come up, pop the champagne corks which is what the Liberal party is doing. There is a challenge of leadership here.
Let me say this about leadership. At least with Mr Howard, you knew where Mr Howard stood. I don't know where the Liberal party actually stands. What we have from the Liberal party is a flood of criticism but a drought of positive ideas for how we deal with the real challenge of jobs (inaudible).
One here, then back to you.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the time to rethink how the Defence Chief operates and Joel Fitzgibbon a victim of that culture?
PM: Look, this has been a practical problem which has really affected a number of people in the defence community. The Minister has handled it well.
Of course, I've noted comments from Brendan Nelson today about historical problems in the relationship between the ministerial arm and with the services arm. These will be worked through over time. The key thing though is to make sure that the practical problems that we've identified in terms of these payments are deal with in a practical way.
JOURNALIST: Speaking of John Howard, you invoked him. He said recently  - 
PM: Now you are too.
JOURNALIST: Yeah. He said recently that the, what you should be doing is giving the States money so that they can give payroll tax holidays to the companies, so that they will be able to hold onto employees. Isn't that a good idea?
PM: Mr Howard like all former prime ministers, is entitled to his view and to his participation to the debate.
JOURNALIST: With Sol Trujillo's departure, is this a chance now for Telstra to set a good example with this incoming CEO and perhaps limit the salary?
PM: I'd say to all Australian corporates but particularly those in the financial services sector - the nation faces real challenges in '09. And when restraint is necessary across the nation to maximise our support for jobs, that restraint has to be shared by the CEOs, in particular the financial services corporations.
We've got to as a nation act responsibly with people on these multi-million dollar salaries. I think that's a fair ask and a fair cop on the part of those who are doing it and will be doing it very tough through a global financial crisis which they did not create.
JOURNALIST: Has the Government received any advice from (inaudible) companies of further job losses in the near future?
PM: I would imagine that the Minister and ministers depending on the nature of the firm concerned are in constant dialogue, as would be the right call and situation with individual firms about the challenges they face. And therefore, what we as a Government can do to try and assist on the way through.
But what the fundamental help that's necessary? The fundamental help that's necessary is a whole of economy strategy aimed to lift total demand in the economy and to provide interim stimulus until we see global economic recovery. That is the responsible cause of action, that's the responsible strategy on jobs, as opposed to an irresponsible strategy which just sees this as a political opportunity.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you need to modify the Fair Work Bill, given evidence, given what people regard (inaudible). Now is not the time to introduce uncertainty?
PM: Well the Government at the previous election received a mandate in relation to Fair Work Australia and the contents of our policy Forward with Fairness. In the 12 months since then, and concluding at the end of last year, we through the Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, negotiated an outcome in terms of the content of the Fair Work Bill and we intend to legislate that bill. That is our resolve and we don't intend to change course.
JOURNALIST: Is it unministerial for Peter Garrett to be singing with Midnight Oil?
PM: Depends on your taste in music but I think  - 
GARRETT: We think it's a pretty good idea.
PM: I think it's, actually I think it's a great idea that Pete and the Oils are getting back together for this concert. It seems that Senator Abetz has a different idea. I'm not quite sure what that's all about.
I think it's a good thing that Oils are out doing their bit. I think you did that for the tsunami, didn't you? And look, this has been a crisis on our shores and a whole lot of families affected. I think it will be a great concert at the end depending on when you're going to do it. I'll rock along myself.
JOURNALIST: Any reaction to Sol Trujillo's departure? Any reaction from you Prime Minister?
PM: Um, adios.
JOURNALIST: Will people be entitled to be angry if he walks away with a multi-gazillion dollar payout?
PM: That will be a matter for the many, many individual Australians, hard-working Australians who are currently Telstra shareholders. And holding their board and their executive to account on executive remuneration is important as a general principle in corporate governance.
And as I said in response to an earlier question, it's important that everyone shows - on these multi-million dollar salaries - restraint, given that restraint has been asked of workers in order to preserve jobs now.
[ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Mr Speaker, a year ago, at the opening of the 42nd Parliament, I made a formal Apology to the indigenous peoples of Australia.
In particular to the Stolen Generations.
I did so on behalf of the Government and the Parliament of Australia.
I also said that the Apology would help to build a bridge of respect between Indigenous and other Australians, so that we could begin to turn the dream of reconciliation into a reality that we could see and feel and know.
That is why, on that day, I pledged that the Government would lead a new, national effort to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
The gap in health, in housing, in educational opportunity and attainment, in employment.
And the obscenity of the 17-year gap in life expectancy.
These are ambitious goals.
Some said I should not set them, for fear that they could not be realised.
But my response was that unless we have agreed national goals that guide our national effort, we would be guaranteed of one thing  -  that we would achieve virtually nothing.
Too much time  -  too many decades -- have already been lost.
We must seize the opportunity that the Apology provides us.
Or else, put simply, we will lose that opportunity.
To speak fine words and then to forget them, would be worse than doing nothing at all.
To underline our accountability to the great task we have assigned ourselves, and to keep it fresh in the mind of the Parliament and the nation at large, I undertook also to report to Parliament at the beginning of each year on our progress in closing the gap.
And so, Mr Speaker, today I make the first of these statements that outlines the dimensions of the challenge we face and sets out our plan to close the gap.
Mr Speaker, I believe that the mark of this government is our commitment and capacity to address the immediate crises of today while also embarking on a program of reform to deal with the challenges of tomorrow.
That is why we must strain with every possible resource of government to deal with the impact of the global economic recession to reduce the impact on the Australian economy, businesses and jobs.
This is why we must continue to prosecute our long term reform agenda implementing the Education Revolution to drive long term productivity growth.
Why we must create a blueprint for nation-building to construct the infrastructure we will need for the 21st century.
Why we must deal with the blight of homelessness.
Act effectively  -  nationally and internationally  -  on the great challenge of climate change.
And act to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Indeed, in confronting a national economic emergency, the actions we take to stimulate and support our economy can also substantially contribute to dealing with our nation's long-term challenges.
And that includes the long-term challenge of closing the gap.
But this task is not merely a matter for government  -  important though the role of government is.
It is equally a matter for Indigenous people, for corporate Australia and for our whole community.
Unless there are relationships anchored in mutual respect and articulated through mutual responsibility  -  then the great enterprise of reconciliation on which we have embarked will fail.
Mr Speaker, we stand at an extraordinary moment in the history of Indigenous affairs.
A time of despair, but also a time of hope.
A time of great challenge, and equally a time of great opportunity.
Let us, always, start with hope.
We are so fortunate, as Australians, to have among us the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Cultures that link our nation with deepest antiquity.
We have Aboriginal rock art in the Kimberley that is as ancient as the great Palaeolithic cave paintings at Altamira and Lascaux in Europe.
These paintings remain as part of the culture of Indigenous peoples today, expressing the traditions and spirituality of the Traditional Owners in the region.
We have a culture of Indigenous art that is alive, changing and a source of wonder to the world.
We have Indigenous dance -- both traditional and contemporary  -  that astonishes the world.
And music, a unique and beautiful music, that is celebrated all over the world.
Mr Speaker, there is a reason why the cultures of Indigenous Australia inspire such fascination.
And that is that they represent a unique way of thinking about the world.
A vision that over tens of thousands of years has risen out of the land, the power, the very being of our continent, Australia.
But my reasons for hope extend far beyond the depth and breadth of Indigenous creativity and culture.
Across the country, Indigenous communities are now trying new approaches to old problems.
There are Indigenous Australians making great strides in education and in the workforce.
The successes of ordinary people, sometimes against extraordinary odds  -  the stories that we don't often hear about.
Consider the fact that Australia now has 129 Indigenous doctors, and 129 medical students.
Or consider the success of the best Indigenous organisations.
The chairman of the Productivity Commission, a judge on last year's Indigenous Governance Awards, found that the best Indigenous organisations  -  and I quote -- ''outclass most mainstream organisations and enterprises in Australia.''
Or consider the work of Dr Chris Sarra, director of the Queensland Government's Institute for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Leadership and former principal of the Cherbourg primary school in Queensland  -  and the transformation of that local school.
These are just a few examples of change that is happening on the ground in Indigenous Australia.
Therefore, when we publicly reflect on the challenges facing Indigenous Australians  -  and they are many  -  let us have the habit of reflecting on what is going right as well as what is going wrong.
Nonetheless, we cannot ignore the despair that exists in too many Indigenous communities.
The chaos, violence and abuse that blight so many lives.
The absence of law-enforcement, of housing that is fit to live in, of basic services that the rest of the nation takes for granted.
It is indeed an obscenity that in this prosperous nation, Indigenous males die on average at the age of 59  -  18 years earlier than non-Indigenous males.
And Indigenous females only live to 65 on average  -  compared to 82 for non-indigenous females.
And while the mortality rate of Indigenous Australian babies is declining, it remains at more than 12 for every 1000 live births  -  a rate nearly three times that of non-indigenous infants.
Mr Speaker, in some outback Indigenous communities infection rates of the eye disease trachoma are as bad as they were 30 years ago, when Professor Fred Hollows, Professor Hugh Taylor and others began their celebrated campaign to eradicate the disease. 
And Australia is the only developed nation among 57 listed by the World Health Organisation that still has blinding trachoma.
In December, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education said she was ''hit in the guts' by the latest figures on the extent of illiteracy among Indigenous students in remote Australia.
Her words were strong, but justified  -  because in remote Indigenous communities, only 30 per cent of children in Year Three meet the minimum standards for literacy.
Mr Speaker, in recent years a sense of deepening despair had settled on much of Indigenous Australia.
Many people felt they were not consulted; that decisions about their welfare were made without reference to them.
That they had even become invisible to the nation.
While efforts had been made  -  well-motivated efforts.
For the nation at large it had all just become too hard.
The Apology opened the opportunity for a new relationship based on mutual respect and mutual responsibility between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
Because without mutual respect and mutual responsibility, the truth is we can achieve very little.
But I also believe, Mr Speaker, that another great bridge was crossed in the events of February 13 last year.
And that was the death of ideology.
Let us not forget the great wave of goodwill that has been unleashed across our community this last year to tackle Indigenous disadvantage.
After two centuries of European settlement, I believe we have finally concluded that this great challenge transcends ideology  -  both of the left and of the right.
Mr Speaker, both Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians are eager to embrace a new approach.
An evidence-based approach, where two questions come before all others.
One, what is most needed to close the gap in each community?
And two, what works best to meet that need in each community?
Of course, the Apology has also raised expectations.
Expectations that change would be swift, results sudden.
But generations of Indigenous disadvantage cannot be turned around overnight.
Some say that little has happened in the year since the Apology.
But that is not the case.
Progress has been made.
Houses are being built.
Since the end of 2007, 80 houses have been completed or are nearing completion in remote Northern Territory communities.
We have negotiated four township leases in the Northern Territory.
This means we can start housing construction by mid-year, using the $672 million investment in Northern Territory housing.
Housing precinct leases have also been negotiated in five Territory communities.
In Tennant Creek, following a lease negotiated with the local Aboriginal corporation, pre-fabricated kitchens are being installed employing local Indigenous people.
There are also more police on the beat.
An extra 65 police have been deployed to remote Northern Territory communities that did not previously have a police presence.
With more night patrols, less alcohol consumption and more safe houses, families say they are feeling safer.
In the Northern Territory, 75 community stores have been licensed for income management, so women can buy fresh food and essentials for their families.
Almost 13,000 child health checks have also been undertaken.
In Western Australia, 121 people have voluntarily signed up to have their welfare payments income managed so money can be spent in the interests of families.
In Queensland, the Family Responsibilities Commission is making good progress with its community-led income management model.
Nationally, we have driven reforms through employment programs to give more Indigenous peoples the skills they need to get and keep a job.
In the past year, the foundations of our closing the gap agenda have been laid  -  and they are strong foundations.
Let me describe the four pillars of that agenda.
One, all our efforts in Indigenous policy must be governed by the sincere objective of closing the gap.
Our six targets are:
     * To halve the mortality gap between Indigenous children and other children under age 5 within a decade.
     * To provide access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four-year olds in remote communities within five years. 
     * To halve the gap in literacy and numeracy achievement between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students and other students within a decade.
     * To halve the gap between Indigenous and non-indigenous students in rates of Year 12 attainment or an equivalent attainment by 2020.
     * To halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians within a decade.
     * And finally, to close the shameful gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians within a generation.
Mr Speaker, based on these objectives, both levels of government  -  State and Federal, Liberal and Labor  -  agreed to a national investment of $4.6 billion over 10 years to programs aimed at closing each of these gaps.
To give one example, new funding of $1.94 billion, added to existing programs, means that over the next 10 years $5.5 billion will be spent on housing in remote Indigenous communities.
Good for the construction industry.
Good for business.
Good for jobs.
Good for Indigenous Australians.
It is the largest single outlay that government has ever made to address the chronic underinvestment in remote Indigenous housing.
Furthermore, the partnership of all Australian governments establishes a genuine national approach to closing the gap.
It establishes who will formulate policies, who will deliver programs, who will collect the data and who will evaluate that data.
It establishes a mechanism for measuring whether we succeed.
Whether  -  as is more likely  -  we partially succeed.
Or whether we fail.
And should either of the last two happen, we should have the courage and the maturity to admit it, and to adjust our policies and programs.
Above all, we will never take our eyes off hard data, or careful measurement of progress as we move forward.
For example, Indigenous year 12 attainment rates are 45 percent compared to 86 percent for non-Indigenous students.
And they have widened over the past five years.
Meeting our target of halving this gap by 2020 will require an improvement in Year 12 completion rates for Indigenous students of up to 2 percent each and every year.
We have in place the statistical collections that will allow us to measure progress each year.
If it becomes clear we are not on course, we will adjust our policies.
And the Council of Australian Governments Reform Council, assisted by specialist resources, will report each year on progress against each of our targets -- thereby providing an independent assessment of government commitment and progress.
The second pillar in our national strategy is resetting the relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government consulted widely with Indigenous groups in the lead-up to the national Apology.
This year we are moving towards establishing a national Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representative body  -  to give Indigenous Australians the voice in national affairs that they lost.
We are undertaking extensive consultations with Indigenous communities on the nature of the representative body.
We are moving toward recognition of the First Australians in the Australian constitution.
But, Mr Speaker, our commitment to consultation will not prevent us from moving quickly, when necessary, to protect vulnerable people  -  especially, women, children and the elderly.
When manifest failures on the part of individuals and communities place others at risk of harm, we will act.
That is why we are continuing the Northern Territory Emergency Response, in order to stabilise some of the Northern Territory's most troubled communities.
And why we are continuing a program of income management in remote communities.
I know that income management is controversial, but we have maintained it for a simple reason  -  it has been shown to work in many communities.
It helps to protect vulnerable groups such as women, children and the elderly by enabling the purchase of food and other essentials.
Mr Speaker, that brings me to the third pillar of our national strategy for closing the gap, which is re-building the everyday social norms that underpin strong families and healthy communities.
We must address the dysfunctional culture of violence and neglect that blights some communities.
We must all work toward shared values.
Indigenous women and children must know they will be safe from violence and abuse.
Our investments to rebuild communities will help people increase their personal responsibility.
We will support people to be responsible parents, tenants, students and employees.
But this alone is not enough.
We need people to take responsibility for changing their lives, and those of people around them.
That is why we are trialling a program in six Northern Territory schools, in which welfare payments are conditional upon parents making sure their children attend school.
Mr Speaker, a growing number of Indigenous community leaders are determined to reject family violence, alcohol and drugs.
Leaders such as the brave women of Fitzroy Crossing who fought for alcohol restrictions.
And who, since the restrictions came into force in 2007, can report a 43 per cent drop in reported domestic violence and a 55 per cent drop in alcohol-related attendance at hospitals.
Leaders such as male health manager John Liddle, who read out a statement that had been signed by nearly 400 Aboriginal men at a Central Australian male health summit last July. The Inteyerrkwe Statement was a collective apology to women for past violence and abuse. 
It read:
''We acknowledge and say sorry for the hurt, pain and suffering caused by Aboriginal males to our wives, to our children, to our mothers, to our grandmothers, to our granddaughters, to our aunties, to our nieces and to our sisters...
''We also acknowledge that we need the love and support of our Aboriginal women to help us move forward.'
I believe that these men are part of the way forward for this country.
And that is our fourth pillar: the building of partnerships across all sectors of the Australian community to help to close the gap.
Where the wider community  -  including business, the education sector, sporting groups and the community sector at large  -  become partners in bringing about measurable change in Indigenous communities and Indigenous lives.
That is why the Australian Government is supporting the Australian Employment Covenant  -  an initiative led by mining executive Mr Andrew Forrest that seeks to engage corporate Australia in creating jobs for Indigenous Australians.
It is an ambitious plan, and it will be hard to achieve, but despite difficult economic times, 34 companies have already pledged to create 10,000 jobs under the Covenant. I thank them for it.
The Covenant builds on the great efforts many Australian companies have already made in Indigenous employment.
Companies such as Rio Tinto, Qantas, the NAB, the ANZ -- and the Indigenous Engagement Task Force of the Business Council of Australia, among others.
Mr Speaker, the Commonwealth is also contributing $20 million to provide scholarships for up to 2000 Indigenous secondary school students through the Australian Indigenous Education Foundation.
And we are providing $10 million over four years to support the expansion of the remarkable work of the Clontarf Academies  -  which now number 23, mainly in Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
I now turn to the building blocks of our strategy to close the gap.
Housing
Mr Speaker, if we are to improve health, education and employment outcomes we must start in the homes of Indigenous Australians.
The appalling state of housing in so many remote Indigenous communities is a major contributor to entrenched disadvantage.
Communities in which an average of 10 people  -  and up to 17 and even 20 people  -  live in one dwelling.
Houses where you cannot cook a meal, bathrooms where you cannot bathe a child, taps and toilets that don't work.
No child can do homework or even get a good night's sleep in such conditions.
No adult can properly hold down a job.
In addition, the Bureau of Statistics estimates that there are 3000 Indigenous people in remote areas who are homeless.
The Government is determined to bring major change to remote Indigenous housing.
From July we will begin to fund the construction of 4200 new houses - all connected to power, water and sewerage  -  in remote communities.
And 4800 houses that are either in shocking disrepair or uninhabitable will be upgraded.
That means up to 9000 Indigenous families will benefit.
We recognise that progress is slow.
Overcrowding and decades of inadequate or non-existent maintenance mean that houses fall quickly into disrepair.
But we are determined to tackle these challenges.
This includes making funding for communities conditional on the reform of land tenure arrangements that obstruct new housing investment.
Only with clear, well-functioning tenure arrangements will government agencies, housing authorities and private businesses make substantial housing investments in remote communities.
We are driving an aggressive land tenure reform agenda, which is necessary to underpin sustainable tenancy management, give tenants the assurance that routine repairs and maintenance will be carried out, and lay the foundations for economic development in remote communities.
For the first time, remote Indigenous citizens will have access to mainstream housing arrangements that public housing tenants in cities and towns take for granted.
And, over time, remote Indigenous citizens will have a realistic opportunity to own their homes.
In return, Indigenous tenants -- like all public housing tenants -- will be expected to pay rent on time, to cover the cost of any damage and to not disturb the peace of their neighbours. 
     * If people fail to pay their rent, action will be taken to deduct it from their accounts automatically as a condition of remaining.
     * People who damage their homes will be made to cover the cost of any damage and be required to enter into acceptable behaviour agreements.
     * People who allow unacceptable behaviours to occur on their premises will be subject to further action including orders by the Commissioner for Tenancies.
     * And people who wilfully fail to meet these commitments will face eviction.
Reform of public services
Mr Speaker, our housing strategy is closely linked to our plan to create a new model for service delivery in remote Australia.
We have chosen to focus on 26 selected remote locations  -  of which 15 are in the Northern Territory, and have already been identified for significant housing and infrastructure investment.
The goal is to invest sufficient money in these places to make a substantial difference, before we apply our reforms more widely.
Mr Speaker, these 26 communities will also be the first to benefit from the $291 million we are investing over six years in a new model for delivery of services to remote communities.
Unlike current arrangements  -  which too often fail to deliver basic services  -  the 26 locations will have one point of contact with government. 
One contact point to co-ordinate the delivery of housing, health, early childhood, welfare and education services. One contact point to deliver services to communities in a form that respects their culture and, where necessary, uses their languages.
To ensure our best chance of success, I am pleased to announce today the creation of a new position of Co-ordinator General for Remote Indigenous Services. It will be a statutory position, responsible to the Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs. The Co-ordinator General will have the authority to cut through bureaucratic blockages, and to help make sure services are delivered and conditionalities enforced. 
Too many government initiatives have failed in remote communities because essential preconditions have not been put in place, and planning has not been undertaken.
A Co-ordinator General will help ensure that instead of being planned and delivered in isolation, the delivery of government programs is coordinated and as a result, those programs deliver better results.
Health
I turn now to our health policy for Indigenous Australians.
Mr Speaker, today I am pleased to announce that the Commonwealth will invest $58.3 million over four years in order to fight chronic eye diseases such as trachoma.
Our objective must be clear: to eliminate trachoma among Indigenous Australians within a finite timeframe.
Trachoma currently affects approximately 20,000 Indigenous children. This should not be the case.
The investment we announce today will also target chronic middle ear infections and the risk of hearing loss which regrettably remains a real problem in Indigenous communities.
This investment will expand services to combat trachoma, train health workers for hearing screening, and provide extra ear and eye surgery, especially in remote and rural areas.
This funding comes on top of the $1.57 billion that the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments have committed over the next four years to improve Indigenous health outcomes.
Mr Speaker, three-quarters of Australia's more than 500,000 Indigenous people live in urban and regional areas.
Their needs are central to our health agenda.
Too many Indigenous people across Australia die well before their time of treatable, chronic diseases.
Illnesses such as rheumatic heart disease, kidney disease, diabetes and cancer account for about two-thirds of premature deaths among Indigenous people.
Our strategy focuses on these and similar illnesses.
And it does so largely through the mainstream health system, because that is where 70 per cent of Indigenous people are treated.
Over four years, the Commonwealth will invest $806 million to improve the management of chronic disease.
We will appoint 160 new Indigenous health outreach workers to help improve Indigenous health outcomes.
We will offer financial incentives to GPs to encourage them to identify and better manage chronic illness among Indigenous people in their area.
Critically, we will fund two free health checks over the next four years for half the Indigenous adult population aged 15 to 65.
These checks are intended to identify chronic disease early  -  and will lead to more than 90,000 Indigenous people being provided with a program to help them manage their own illness.
Importantly, these health checks will provide governments with better aggregate data on the state of Indigenous health across Australia.
Smoking is one of the biggest single killers of Indigenous Australians.
A national Indigenous Tobacco Campaign will provide information, skills and support to enable people to quit smoking  -  using programs that have been shown to reduce tobacco use.
Early childhood development
Mr Speaker, we know that high-quality early childhood education is critical to the physical, emotional and intellectual growth of the child.
Over six years, the Commonwealth, State and Territory governments will invest $564 million to act on the critical needs of Indigenous infants and young children.
Indigenous babies are still twice as likely as other babies to be born with low birthweight, a condition linked to ill health and poor performance at school.
To improve the health of babies we need to work with pregnant mothers  -  especially teenage mothers.
We need to tackle conditions such as birth trauma, foetal growth, and foetal alcohol syndrome.
Conditions that are often linked to ill health or substance abuse.
The Commonwealth will fund the States and Territories to improve access to antenatal care for young Indigenous mothers.
We will create at least 35 new Indigenous Children and Family Centres that will provide support for families and pregnant mothers, as well as child care and early learning services.
To achieve lasting progress in closing the gap we must start at the earliest stages of the lives of Indigenous Australians.
These centres will play a vital role in addressing the earliest causes of disadvantage.
Schools
Mr Speaker, during the past year the Australian Government has made substantial commitments to reform the nation's schools, with a strong focus on the nation's most disadvantaged schools.
This reform agenda will particularly help Indigenous students, many of whom attend schools that are among the group of up to 1500 disadvantaged schools that will each get half a million dollars a year to build better quality in their schools.
The Government has announced a total investment of $1.1billion on all disadvantaged schools, $550 million to improve teacher quality, and more than $540 million for literacy and numeracy programs.
To qualify for funding, those schools must sign up to a set of outcomes  -  including our targets to halve the gaps in Indigenous literacy and numeracy achievement and in Year 12 attainment.
Workforce participation
Mr Speaker, at the time of the 2006 census, just 48 per cent of the Indigenous workforce-age population was in work  -  compared to 72 per cent of other workforce-age Australians.
To halve this gap to 12 percentage points by 2016, 100,000 more Indigenous Australians need to be employed -- 63 per cent more than were in work in 2006.
The Commonwealth, State and Territory governments have set a target of helping 13,000 Indigenous people to find and keep jobs.
We recognise this will be very difficult to achieve given the severity of the global economic recession.
But we are committed to working towards this goal in partnership with business and with State and Territory Governments.
The way forward
Mr Speaker, if we are to deliver on our nation's commitment to close the gap, we will need an unprecedented level of cooperation and coordination between Commonwealth and State and Territory governments.
That is why, later this year, a meeting of Commonwealth, State and Territory governments will focus on progress in our closing the gap agenda.
And from July 1, the new agreements we have struck with the State and Territory governments come into force.
That means we will prepare to build the new houses and early childhood centres and to start the new health programs.
Change is coming to Indigenous Australia.
And change is coming from Indigenous Australia.
The task ahead is difficult.
The transformation of communities and of lives will take many years.
And there will be many bumps and setbacks on the road.
The alternative is to do nothing.
We are determined to have a go.
In this country, the burden of history falls most heavily on the First Australians.
The disadvantage they have suffered for more than two centuries have placed great obstacles in our way.
But I also believe that we stand at a moment of great historical possibility.
Mr Speaker, let us seize the moment.
Let us work together, as Australians, with a sense of urgency but also of hope, knowing that we have the capacity and the compassion, the mutual respect and the mutual resolve to act, and so change our nation for the better.
Let us now begin.
Mr Speaker I now table the first annual report on Closing the Gap on Indigenous Disadvantage: The Challenge for Australia.
Mr Speaker, I thank the House.
The Closing the Gap on Indigenous Disadvantage: The Challenge for Australia report is available on the  Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs website


Ladies and gentlemen. More than 1.4 million men and women served our nation during the first and second world wars. This is an extraordinary number of people for a small country. 
The First World War helped shape our national character. The Second World War saw us defending our own shores. We have a proud record of fighting to defend our nation, our freedom and the freedom of others.
Our servicemen and women who served in both world wars as they do today, with courage, with resilience and with compassion.
These qualities not only shaped our past but they also steel us for the present and prepare us for the future. Those are the same qualities that we've seen again displayed in the lives and deeds of so many assisting in the Victorian bushfire effort. Courage in the face of danger, resilience in the face of adversity, and compassion to those around them who have suffered.
The Australians who served in world wars secured for our nation our safety. But they secured our safety and our security at a price. Along with our allies, many Australians made the ultimate sacrifice and never returned to their families, they never returned to our shores.
More than 100 thousand gave their lives in these two world wars. Ponder for a moment that number, 100 thousand. 100 thousand lives which in their impact on their families and their communities extended across the generations of the 21st century. An extraordinary sacrifice. Personal and national.
It is right therefore that we commemorate all those who served. All that they've achieved and all those who gave their lives. It's also right that we honour those who worked in Australia on the home front supporting the war effort.
We already have memorials commemorating World War I and World War II in the state capitals. and the Australian War Memorial born out of the first World War, opened during the second stands as a great monument to our past in these great conflicts. But I am delighted to be here to participate in this launch of a design for a dedicated World War I and World War II memorial on Anzac Parade. On our avenue of heroes, which is how I describe Anzac parade, we should commemorate the heroes of those two world wars.
I am pleased to announce today Richard Kirk Architects of Brisbane submitted the winning design for these memorials. I am sure Richard Kirk and his team will work the Memorials Development Committee to develop a timeless national monument for the appreciation of all Australians and to honour these brave men and women as we should.
Richard and his team are widely respected for their interest in the role well-made building play in the communities and environments they serve. And the memorial will play a crucial role in the life of our nation. It will join the other monuments on Anzac Parade and provide a focus for reflection and commemoration for those two world wars.
As you can see from the model it fits brilliantly within Walter Burley Griffin's plan for the national capital. The memorial will communicate an inspirational and timeless message that reflects the spirit, sacrifice and commitment of the Australian nation during these two great conflicts. I will remind us of those who served, it will remind us of those who supported the war effort on the home front and it will remind us that in rising to the challenges of war, we've forged a national character that gives us strength in difficult times.
There is something important about monuments, something that those associated with this memorials committee I'm sure themselves, have reflected on long and hard. As we visit and travel to see the great monuments to these wars, whether in Washington or London or another capital and see the importance which they have in telling their national stories about the participation in these great conflicts, we in Australia have embraced the same spirit of seeking in the monuments we construct and the buildings we fashion, a way of never forgetting them.
So that any school child, at any time, who takes the walk up Anzac Parade need not at that stage have opened a history book but they will see in the monuments that we've constructed in our nation's capital, monuments to heroism, bravery and those who forged our national character.
I congratulate the Memorials Development Committee on its vision and its commitment. I congratulate Richard Kirk and his team on their design being selected and I strongly encourage all Australians to offer their support to the development of this new great national monument for our nation's capital. I thank you.


Mr Philip Green OAM has been appointed as my Senior Adviser on Foreign Affairs, Defence and National Security. He will commence in the position in early March.
Mr Green is a senior officer of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and a former High Commissioner to South Africa (2004-2008) and to Kenya (1998-2000).
He was head of the Secretariat of the Flood Review into Australia's Intelligence Agencies (2004).
He holds the degrees of Bachelor of Arts with Honours and Bachelor of Laws from the University of Sydney. He was awarded an Order of Australia Medal in 2003 for his work on Australia's response to the Bali bombings in 2002.
Mr Green will replace Gary Quinlan, who will be Australia's new Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations (UN) in New York.
I thank Mr Quinlan for his valued service as my senior adviser over the past 15 months.


I am pleased to announce that I will visit the United States to meet President Obama on 24 March.
I will be discussing with him a coordinated international response to the global economic crisis and how we can work together in Afghanistan.
We will also discuss how we can have even closer cooperation between our two countries on the great shared challenges of climate change, nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, and the future shape of the Asia-Pacific region.
Our alliance with the United States is the bedrock of our foreign and security policy. A strong relationship with the United States is critical for Australia's future.
I look forward to using my meetings in Washington to build on the strong ties that already exist between our nations.


PM RUDD: Well first of all, if I could thank the New Zealand people and the New Zealand Government for their extraordinary expression of friendship, support and solidarity with Australia and the people of Victoria during these recent tragic bushfires. This has meant a lot to Australians. Australians have dug deep in support of all those communities so terribly affected by these fires and as a nation we have acted as one.
But you know John, the great thing is that Australia hasn't felt alone during this either. As the expressions of friendship, support and solidarity have come from across the world, from our friends across the Tasman, from the Governments of the United States, United Kingdom, the Presidents and Prime Ministers on the phone asking about people, and practical expressions of support.
And this money helps in terms of the bushfire appeal because in rebuilding these communities, the businesses and supporting the families, it's going to take a long time and therefore this practical support for the Red Cross is much appreciated.
And also, your Kiwi firefighters have been fantastic. Thank you very much for that. And we look forward to that continued close practical cooperation between the emergency services of both countries and firefighters as we struggle with the elements.
On that point, I just again draw everyone's attention to the statements made today by the Victorian Premier about weather conditions in Victoria in the immediate period ahead. It's very important for people to be vigilant and to listen very carefully to what the Victorian authorities and the CFA are saying to people in the period ahead.
Today and last night, Prime Minister John Key and I had a really good and long conversation about the trans-Tasman relationship, where we are up to now and where we want to take that relationship into the future.
It's important on occasions like this to reaffirm one core principle. And that is for Australia the ANZAC relationship, the trans-Tasman relationship, is for us an absolutely key relationship. And I didn't work on that line.
PM KEY: It's a good line though.
PM RUDD: In the sense that if you go right across what we're trying to do on the economy, what we're trying to do on security policy and foreign policy cooperation, and work together in the south west Pacific, the natural compatibility of our interests and our actions together is second to none. And so on an occasion like this when the Prime Minister is undertaking a working visit to Australia, it's important to reaffirm that as a core principle of the foreign policy of this country Australia.
Secondly, last night in particular and again this morning, the Prime Minister and I have spent a long time discussing, analysing and working through appropriate global policy responses to the global economic recession. This is a global economic recession which neither Australia nor New Zealand caused. But let me tell you, it's a global economic recession whose impact washes over both our shores. So therefore as we approach our national responses and our global responses to this global recession, we as governments will remain in absolute close contact on appropriate actions.
At home, I notice that one of the actions embraced by the New Zealand Government only last Friday was how to work together with their banks in establishing joint vehicles to deal with the problems of challenges in private credit markets at the moment. Practical sort of initiatives, practical sorts of initiatives we've had to wrestle with here in Australia as well as you see, private credit markets contracting across the world because of the problems in the global banking system.
Secondly, as we approach the G20 summit in London, we'll also be working closely with our friends in Wellington on the best set of responses there on globally coordinated stimulus, on the question of returning private credit flows to normal as soon as possible through action on toxic assets, on bank balance sheets, as well as other actions necessary to improve the regulatory regime for the future for globally significant financial institutions. These have been front and centre to our deliberations today as Australia prepares to participate in the G20 summit in a few weeks time in London.
Beyond the global economic crisis, we've also spent a lot of time discussing how we accelerate the Closer Economic Relationship between our two countries. Worldwide, this is the model Free Trade Agreement. It's been around for a quarter of a century. It's pretty good and we're determined to make it better. Any obstacles remaining in the investment field and other fields, we're determined to punch our way through and we've talked about a couple of practical measures where we can take that work forward because these two economies have such a huge interest in the future in being like that, being like that. And so, that's a practical job that we've now got in our in-trays, and there are a couple of practical areas that we would be working on, on that in the area of investment and also in the area of how to improve and make easier travel between our two countries so that the travelling public don't have as many hassles as they currently have in moving from one side of the Tasman to the other.
The other thing I'd touch on before turning to John for comment is this - our common interests in the region and the world are also of great importance to us. Australia and New Zealand working closely in the South Pacific, closely on the question of development assistance cooperation to our friends and partners and neighbours in the Pacific Islands. Working closely together also in the lead up to the Copenhagen conference on climate change. And our officials will continue to collaborate closely with the objective of ensuring there is the greatest possible degree of harmonisation between New Zealand's approach and Australia's approach to carbon pollution reduction within our respective jurisdictions.
Overall, this has been a very good conversation. Not just between the Prime Minister and myself but for a large part of the morning between the Prime Minister and key members who are here in Sydney today from the Australian Cabinet including the Treasurer, the Finance Minister, the Trade Minister, the Defence Minister as well as the Attorney General and the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. We've had a good session and we have a program of work between now and when I would hope the Prime Minister is able to return here on an official safe visit sometime later in the year - which he threatens to have coincide with the Bledisloe Cup game. These events make Australian Prime Ministers nervous. I hope to make the New Zealand Prime Minister nervous on that occasion but we look forward to having you back John on an official state visit later in the year. Over to you.
PM KEY: Well let me just start by saying I think the relationship between New Zealand and Australia has probably never been in better heart with tremendous goodwill on both sides to ensure that we have the strongest possible relationship to deal with the challenges that we have in front of us. Both New Zealand and Australia face significant issues from the global economic challenges but the strength of our banking system which is so closely inter-related between two countries gives us a head start over and above a lot of other countries in the world.
We are committed as governments to ensuring that we come up with practical solutions for those challenges. And I think we're learning off one another and supporting one another in the actions that we might take. I think in the months and years ahead, progress can be made on some of the issues that have been lurking on the agenda for quite some time but which progress hasn't been successful. I'd like to think we can progress this issue of people being able to travel between New Zealand and Australia more easily because I think that's of tremendous benefit to both citizens, citizens of both countries.
I think it does make sense for New Zealand to look closely at climate change policy here and the development of that in Australia. There is I think from New Zealand's point of view, we look at CER as arguably the most successful trade document that have ever been formed and the movement to a single economic market and from our point of view developing climate change policies which were at odds with those in Australia would seek to sort of separate a single economic market rather than bring it together. So we will be in the course of the work that New Zealand is undertaking in redefining its emissions trading scheme, be spending some time across the Tasman here to look at where progress can and can't be made.
Just on a couple of other minor issues but that will be significant over time, New Zealand has indicated our strong support for the Square Kilometre Array project. That's a potentially $2 billion investment, that's again a great example of the collaboration that can take place between New Zealand and Australia and where the sum of the parts is greater than the individual pieces. We'll be making a financial contribution to that project. I think that can have real scientific benefits for both countries, I think that's very important and we're certainly very supportive of the work that's happening on climate capture and storage because again tackling those climate change issues with practical, technical responses is very important.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much Prime Minister and I think we're taking one a side today. Why don't you pick a journalist from New Zealand?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talked about wanting to make international travel between Australia and New Zealand [inaudible] How soon do you believe that might be possible and what are the barriers?
PM KEY: Well the barriers are in a number of areas, they would obviously be bioecurity, they are around political security, quarantine issues, but I believe that they are surmountable and we have agreed to have elevated the issue to our various departments of Prime Minister and Cabinet so that we can get some focus around the issue and see whether it is possible to advance it.
Now last year the leadership group when it met set an objective of reaching more common borders by 2015. In my view that's far too long. I mean if we're serious about wanting to progress this issue we should be much more ambitious in a time scale.
PM RUDD: So we're going to do some practical work on this. John tells me our both our Governments have laboured energetically in the field on this since 1992, so our progress has been meteoric and we can both blame our predecessors.
PM KEY: It's always a nice thing to do.
PM RUDD: Going back into deepest antiquity. But the bottom line is this is a practical thing. Can we do it? Well that involves security questions, immigration questions, customs question, quarantine questions. How do we make it work at a practical level so that someone jumping on a plane here in Australia going to New Zealand goes through one set of arrangements and then can jump off in New Zealand at a domestic terminal and the reverse from New Zealand travellers coming to Australia?
So, it's one of those things that we've decided to crunch it, see if we can get agreement within the year and if we can't we'll explain to you why. But I think we've decided rather than just have it languish out there in never-never land, to bring it into decision making territory.
PM KEY: Particularly when Canada and the United States are proving it to be possible [inaudible].
PM RUDD: If those guys can get it together then I presume we can as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister we got more data showing that manufacturing -
PM RUDD: One here and then there.
JOURNALIST: I just wanted to ask you, you talked about the importance of keeping credit flowing. Nathan Rees this morning has foreshadowed that there's the possibility of a bigger than expected budget deficit in NSW. Queensland's just downgraded its credit rating. What is the Commonwealth going to do keep these States' ability to raise debt and to help them?
PM RUDD: Well I haven't seen those comments from the NSW Premier. Our responsibility at the national government level is of course to ensure that through our national economic policy settings, the stabilising of financial markets, double bank guarantee important to that. Secondly while global credit markets don't recover, then to act as appropriate within national credit markets to support them. We've done that with the commercial property market, car dealership finance and the residential mortgage backed securities because we're both wrestling with gaps which are emerging in credit markets through factors beyond our control in the global financial system and I mentioned before the New Zealand Prime Minister's approach announced last Friday of how do they establish a joint vehicle with their banks to deal with potentially troubled assets in the real economy.
Then we go to the realm of what we can do to provide interim support for economic activity through stimulus packages. New Zealand has a significant package of around about four to five per cent. We agreed before, put our two stimulus packages together and they're in a similar order of magnitude and over a couple of years period and we have two per cent flowing through in calendar 09.
These are the core of what we are doing. In terms of the State Governments' requirements in Australia in terms of capital investment, the circumstances of each State is different, it depends where they are in the capital investment cycle and I'm sure all those technical level discussions are occurring as they have been for quite some time between heads of Treasuries around the country in terms of long term needs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister.
PM RUDD: I think we, back to a New Zealand question.
JOURNALIST: You talked about harmonisation of emissions trading schemes. Why not have one single carbon trading market [inaudible].
PM KEY: Well that may be a conclusion as a result of all the work we do. But ultimately at this stage we need to look to see where the differences are, how possible it is for New Zealand to align itself with Australia. There are obviously fundamental differences between our economies.
If you think about New Zealand, half of all our emissions are coming from agriculture. It's about a quarter I think of the Australian economy's emissions. So there are differences that may preclude that. But we can start the process of seeing from the New Zealand side whether there is gains to be made by being more closely aligned with Australia.
PM RUDD: Kieran.
JOURNALIST: On the manufacturing data that's out today, it shows a slide. I wanted to get your response to that. The other question is related to the defence bungle, with Defence Minister [inaudible] we've seen tensions between the Minister for defence, between the Army and the defence offices, will there be any ramifications from the SAS bungle or [inaudible]?
PM RUDD: On the question of, I think I'll take your first question first then I'll come to the other. On the question of the state of the global economy and the state of global manufacturing, I saw as I came in here revised data out of the United States for the fourth quarter which is a revision downwards in terms of negative growth for that quarter from, if I've got these data correctly, from one to one point six.
The avalanche of negative from around the world is painting a common picture around the world, which is all economies are under stress. That is being felt in all sectors in the economy including manufacturing and manufacturing is so employment intensive and the implications for people and their jobs is immediate and acute. Of course the effect exists within other sectors of the economy as well.
The key question is what do you do about it? I go back to the armoury of the policies available to governments, such as the ones we lead. One is, in terms of providing interim support for demand in the economy, including for manufactured products, it is absolutely critical that governments around the world are engaged in coordinated fiscal stimulus. The International Monetary Fund has called for that action. The reason they called for that action is that it spreads out the demand for products and services across the general economy.
New Zealand is doing its bit, Australia is doing its bit and it's important that's coordinated across the global economy. Because if people beg out from that in any way, it actually sucks demand further out of the global economy including for manufacturing products.
Secondly, what you can also do is to assist through Government policy efforts to maintain the stability and effectiveness of our own national financial markets to the greatest extent possible. We've been doing that through the actions that I outlined before.
And then with individual firms and individual industries to work with them as creatively and as constructively as possible as I'm sure the New Zealand Prime Minister is doing with the manufacturing sector in his country as possible.
These are difficult and challenging times and we face a very hard year ahead. But we intend to leave no stone unturned when it comes to necessary action to support demand in the economy through stimulus, necessary action to stabilise financial markets at home and to the extent that we can influence abroad and to work with firms and their workers, who lose their jobs through no fault of their own, to assist them as well.
On the question of defence. Look I think the whole question was best summarised by the Shadow Minister for Defence several days ago in Canberra when I seem to recall him saying that he was satisfied that the SAS soldiers concerned were being appropriately handled. There is a whole lot of political controversy which surrounds these sorts of things, but the bottom line is just getting on with the job, fixing the system in place and ensuring that that is done.
What the Prime Minister and I discussed this morning was is in fact the core piece of defence policy work under way in Australia and effectively in New Zealand. We are reaching conclusion soon on a Defence White Paper which governs the architecture for Australian defence policy out for the decade ahead. New Zealand is about to embark upon this exercise.
This is a core element of how we defend our countries and how we cooperate together in the security policy sphere in the period ahead. That's where the core work is going to be. We'll always have problems in individual systems here and there and they have to be attended to on the way through but the core work of the defence policy, that's where it's going to lie in the period ahead and you'll see our Defence White Paper in the not too far distant future.
PM KEY: I'll just make one comment there and that would be - there will always be casualties that come out of an economic recession, and in fact that will rebalance your economy and it's appropriate sometimes that will take place.
The challenge that governments are facing around the world at the moment is not that there won't be casualties, it's that who companies that would otherwise survive but because of the totally dysfunctional nature of international credit markets they now have their livelihood threatened.
And what I think New Zealand and Australia have to be careful of is that in this 
sort of economic storm, that the barn doors aren't blown off the economy which leaves us with a manufacturing sector and a productive sector which is totally dysfunctional, not because it doesn't deserve to survive but because the credit markets can't support it.
They are ultimately the lubricant of economic growth and that is requiring government I think to consider much more laterally what tools are available to them. These are extraordinary times and we need to look deep in the toolbox.
PM RUDD: And on that the Prime Minister has a luncheon to address with the business community, he's due there I think within 15 minutes and we should allow him to depart. Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen. 


Prime Ministers Rudd and Key held their annual talks in Sydney on 1-2 March 2009.
Mr Rudd expressed deep appreciation for the strong support provided by New Zealand in the face of Australia's worst bushfires, including assistance from 100 New Zealand fire-fighters. Prime Minister Key presented a cheque from the New Zealand Red Cross for NZ$2m for the Australian Red Cross Victorian bushfires appeal.
The major focus of discussions between the two Prime Ministers was the global economic crisis, the worst since the Second World War. The most recent IMF forecast is for global growth to slow to ½ per cent in 2009.
Both agreed on the imperative for continued strong and coordinated international action to restore confidence and global economic growth and to protect jobs. They agreed to cooperate closely in the lead up to the meeting of G20 Leaders in London on 1 and 2 April. They underlined the importance of collective action to normalise global private credit flows as soon as possible, supported by strong stimulus measures and reforms to the global financial system.
In the face of the global economic downturn they pledged renewed ambition to achieve new levels of trans-Tasman economic integration. These efforts will be built on:
     * the strong trade results delivered by 26 years of Closer Economic Relations, which have set a global benchmark for free trade
     * the vital role of the Single Economic Market initiative in aligning and strengthening the two economies, stimulating business activity, competitiveness and job creation
     * high quality, responsive domestic financial regulatory systems and institutions 
     * a determination to foster open markets, flows of capital and credit and to resist protectionism in order to uphold confidence in the international economy; and
     * the dynamism and strength of Australian and New Zealand companies, and the ideas and energy of bodies such as the Australia New Zealand Leadership Forum. 
The two Prime Ministers committed to:
     * accelerate regulatory harmonisation and alignment in order to stimulate business and create jobs
     * finalise in 2009 an Investment Protocol to promote investment between the two economies through a reduction in regulatory barriers and compliance costs for business 
     * complete a new comprehensive Tax Treaty between Australia and New Zealand to reduce tax barriers to trade and investment, further protect the tax base in each jurisdiction and simplify and improve certainty for those with Trans-Tasman business interests
     * conclude a scheme for the mobility of trans-Tasman retirement savings which will enable pension funds to be moved between Australia and New Zealand
     * undertake a review of CER Rules of Origin, and an updating of the Australia-New Zealand Joint Food Standards Treaty
     * reduce remaining barriers at the borders to ensure that people and goods can move more easily between the two countries, including through effective air links 
     * further strengthen cooperation to promote open markets and trade opportunities for exporters, including through the ASEAN Australia New Zealand Free Trade Agreement signed on the weekend and a successful conclusion of the WTO Doha Development Round
     * expand joint trade promotion activities to increase global market shares for the Trans-Tasman economy 
     * undertake further work on therapeutic product standards between the two countries.
The Prime Ministers agreed on the need for substantial progress in all these areas in 2009. The CER Ministerial meeting in July will provide a report on progress to the Prime Ministers at a further meeting between them in Australia in August.
Prime Minister Key indicated that New Zealand would collaborate closely with Australia in its bid to host the Square Kilometre Array Radio Telescope Project (SKA). This project will be the world's premier radio telescope and will be constructed over the period 2012-2020.
Extending the configuration of the SKA to include New Zealand will significantly add to the reach of the project, increasing scientific innovation and economic benefits for both countries. Over its fifty year life the SKA will generate significant spinoffs in supercomputing, fibre optics, renewable energy, construction and manufacturing.
Both Prime Ministers emphasised the importance of a successful Copenhagen Climate Change conference in December to decide on a post-Kyoto international climate change framework beyond 2012. Both countries will work closely together in the lead up to the Copenhagen conference. The Prime Ministers agreed on the desirability of harmonising to the greatest extent possible the emissions reduction regimes in both countries. Prime Minister Key expressed support for Australia's initiative to establish a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
The two Prime Ministers agreed on the need for continued close cooperation on developments in the Pacific, especially helping Pacific island countries achieve the Millennium Development Goals. It will be essential to sustain support for developing Pacific island nations in the face of the effects of the global economic crisis on the region. They announced a joint Australia - New Zealand study on the regional implications of the global economic downturn to be completed before the 2009 Pacific Islands Forum meeting to be hosted by Australia in August. The crisis will be a major focus of the Forum discussions.
The Prime Ministers also discussed a range of common international interests, including Afghanistan and regional and global security challenges.


As we confront the reality of a global economic recession, we must as a nation reaffirm the great strengths that we have, as well as recognise the great challenges that we face. 
Australia's strengths are formidable. Australia's economic strengths are formidable. Just as the Australian character in handling adversity is formidable.
In 2008, the Australian economy had stronger growth than any of the G7 economies and most recent figures suggest that Australia had the fifth highest growth rate of the 30 OECD members. Our unemployment rate is lower than all but one of the G7 and is the fourth lowest out of the 30 members of the OECD.
Our budget deficit to GDP ratio is the lowest compared to any of the G7 and among the lowest of the OECD. Our public net debt to GDP ratio is nearly one tenth that of the public net debt to GDP ratio of the OECD economies. Our banks' exposure to sub-prime mortgages represents less than 1 per cent of total mortgage assets. Our regulators are independent, strong and competent. Our consumers, notwithstanding the crisis, remain among the most confident in the OECD.
And our nation has taken early, decisive action to support the economy ahead of the curve. That is in large part why so far we have fared well against the rest of the developed world. 
As of the end of 2008, seventeen OECD economies had already entered recession; the US, Japan, Germany, the UK, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Singapore, Hong Kong, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Portugal, Turkey, Ireland and New Zealand.
Additionally, a further ten OECD economies have generated at least one quarter of negative economic growth; France, Canada, Korea, Norway, Austria, Belgium, Luxemborg, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic and Mexico
Given that 17 of the world's advanced economies are in recession and 27 have had at least one negative quarter of economic growth, it becomes harder and harder for Australia to single-handedly resist the global economic tide but we will continue to give it all that we have got.
Australia has only been one of four OECD economies not to be recession or to have a quarter of negative growth as a result of the crisis. Australia will need to draw on all these strengths to meet the unprecedented challenges we face as a nation. This is the first truly synchronised global economic downturn involving developed and developing economies since the war.
The impact is seen daily on global financial markets, in the real global economy and in rising global unemployment. The reality is an open economy like Australia cannot escape the impact of a global economic recession because there are no silver bullets.
But the Government can help to cushion the impact of the crisis on Australia. Through early action  -  being ahead of the curve. Through decisive action  -  because this is not the time for half measures. Through strong national leadership  -  because this is not the time to wait and see. And through strong national partnership with Australia's business leadership. Because the truth is we are all in this together.
It is therefore by acknowledging our strengths, by identifying the challenges we face and by prosecuting a clear strategy to steer us through, that we can see Australia through this current crisis. 
Some say we should just be talking about confidence but words without actions are hollow. Comforting words without a coherent strategy to underpin them are hollow. Talking about confidence without investing in the economy to build confidence is in fact a dead letter. 
The reason the Government is confident that we will steer Australia through this crisis is because of the concrete actions we have taken  -  which build on the great underlying strengths the national economy enjoys.These are the strong foundations on which we seek to build  -  foundations which underpin a rational basis for confidence, optimism and hope for the future.
Despite the challenges, despite the twists and turns that we will encounter; despite the setbacks that we will inevitably confront along the way, I have every confidence that not only will we come through this crisis but in doing so, we will build a stronger, tougher, more resilient Australia than ever before.
The global economic recession began in the United States, spread to Europe and then to Asia  -  and now impacts on all economies, including Australia. The distinctive feature of the current Global Financial Crisis, as George Soros himself has noted, is that it has emerged from inside “the system itself.” The crisis has its roots in a long period of global imbalances, lax regulation and easy credit  -  all turbo-charged by greed out of control.
The last decade has seen the growth of global imbalances on an historic scale. Current account positions of major economies have rapidly diverged in recent years. Excess saving in surplus economies has been recycled into deficit countries, creating a massive wave of liquidity which helped to push real interest rates to record lows.
These conditions gave rise to unprecedented growth of debt and credit in some developed countries  -  particularly in the United States. This also fostered a climate where investors were focussed increasingly on speculative gains, rather than long term productive investment.
The largest explosion of debt was in the financial sector. Financial sector debt grew from 22 per cent of GDP in 1981 to 115 per cent of GDP in 2007  -  a growth rate nearly ten times as fast as the growth of debt of non-financial corporations. And the balance sheets of many of the world's largest banks more than doubled in five years.
At the same time there was unprecedented growth in financial sector innovation. Banks developed the ‘originate and distribute' model  -  under which loans were passed on to securitisation companies that repackaged them into residential mortgage-backed securities and on-sold them into the global financial system.
Securitised credit increased five-fold from just over $500 billion in 1997 to nearly $2.5 trillion in 2007. As the economist Joseph Stiglitz has remarked, “many of America's big banks moved out of the ‘lending' business and into the ‘moving business'. They focused on buying assets and repackaging them, and selling them, while establishing a record of incompetence in assessing risk and screening for creditworthiness.” Unquote.
Other exotic financial instruments emerged in an attempt to spread the risk from the banks originating these loans  -  therefore spreading the contagion across the financial system. Credit default swaps, effectively insurance policies taken out on a debt, grew from less than one trillion to more than $60 trillion, the equivalent for around 100 per cent of global GDP.
And the core problem which emerged over the last decade, and which remains with us today, in the form of toxic assets, was this unprecedented explosion in credit and debt, which was left unconstrained by any national or effective international regulatory regime governing financial markets.
This was capitalism out of control.
This explosion of easy credit, combined with rapid financial innovation and the lack of regulatory constraints, led to financial collapse. The epicentre of the collapse was the “sub-prime” mortgage market  -  and the reckless loans written during the boom to uncreditworthy borrowers.
As interest rates began to rise, and property markets started to decline, many of these sub-prime borrowers were unable to meet their repayments. As sub-prime default rates rose, it became impossible to know the real value of securitised assets and the loans that they had been packaged into.
These became so called “toxic assets”  -  which became lodged on the balance sheets  -  not just of the originating financial institution but through the bank intermediation market  -  almost the entire financial system.
Official and semi-official estimates of potential losses on toxic sub-prime and related credit assets range from between $2.2 and $3.6 trillion. 
These toxic assets sitting on bank balance sheets in the United States and in Europe have become a poison in the bloodstream of the global financial system. Right now, toxic assets represent one of the greatest challenges to global economic recovery. This contraction in lending because of this problem is denying much needed credit to the global economy.
As President Obama said last week “there will be no real recovery unless we clean up the credit crisis” ... “the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy.”
Australian banks have very little exposure to toxic assets. That is one of the reasons why they are among the best performing banks in the world today. But Australian banks, Australian businesses and the Australian real economy are also impacted by the global credit crunch that toxic assets in the major global banks have caused. And that makes the consequences for Australia very real indeed.
If the flow of global credit is restricted to Australia because of the impact of toxic assets on the major global banks' balance sheets, then economic growth is choked off and unemployment rises. Then Australian families have a harder time getting credit to purchase goods and services and so demand falls. And Australian businesses have a harder time getting credit to buy equipment, expand their operations, and grow their business, and so investment falls. 
That is why the challenge of dealing decisively with toxic assets in the major global banks is so important both to the global economy and to the Australian economy. Furthermore, if toxic assets in the major global banks are not dealt with, the ability of those banks to lend to provide also, normal flows of credit around the world is undermined  -  and with what scarce global credit remains, it is then repatriated to try and repair the balance sheet in the home jurisdiction. That in turn means that the normal supplies of foreign credit to Australian banks, businesses and consumers is reduced.
To put this into statistical context for Australia, foreign banks' lending represents up to thirty per cent of the debt provided to the $252 billion commercial property sector in this country, which in turn employs some 150,000 Australians.
The consequences of toxic assets on the global economy are also stark. 
The International Monetary Fund has estimated that without action to address bank balance sheets, global credit growth in 2009 could fall by an annualised 6.1 per cent  -  or a combined fall of at least US$3.9 trillion.
On the basis of historical ratios between credit and growth, a credit decline of this magnitude would be associated with a fall in economic activity of around US$2.1 trillion on an annualised basis or 3.5 per cent of global GDP  -  significantly explaining the IMF's pessimistic growth forecast for 2009.
This very directly affects global recovery, global growth, and jobs around the world, including here in Australia.
That's why governments in the US and Europe acting decisively to toxic assets is so critical to global economy recovery.
Since coming to office, the Australian Government has been confronted with a global economic crisis which began in US banks, spread to Europe, Japan and China and now affects economies right across the world, including Australia.
What started as a crisis brought about by unrestrained greed in under-regulated financial markets is now impacting the real economy, real jobs and families across the world, including Australia.
In responding to the global economic crisis, the Government has taken decisive policy action to cushion Australia from the full impact of the crisis. The Government has done this through a five part economic and fiscal policy framework.
One: acting to maintain the stability of domestic financial markets because private credit flows are essential for economic recovery.
Two: injecting economic stimulus through a nation building plan to support growth and jobs in the short term and in a manner which allows the Government to continue to prosecute a long-term strategy of economic reform to build long term productivity growth.
Three: providing additional support for those who lose their jobs, through no fault of their own, to maintain existing skills or to retrain with new skills in preparation for when the economy recovers.
Four: implementing a medium term economic and fiscal policy strategy which maintains borrowing and spending discipline.
Five: engaging with other governments to help shape critical global decisions and to shape those decisions on the core problems which have caused the global economic recession  -  namely, restoring global private credit markets to restore private credit flows to the real economy.
Australia's banks remain strong. The Chairman of the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority advised the Government yesterday that:
“Though the environment has become more difficult, APRA remains confident that the fundamental strength of the Australian banking system will continue to assert itself...The Australian banking system remains sound and well capitalised...”
To maintain stability in the financial sector, on 12 October 2008 the Government took the unprecedented step to guarantee all Australian deposits and the term funding of Australian banks.
Before the guarantee, the confidence of Australian depositors was beginning to be undermined by developments in the global banking system. We acted to restore that confidence and for the first time in Australia's history, the Government acted to explicitly guarantee all deposits.
Furthermore, before the guarantee, Australian banks had increasing difficulty raising funds offshore.
By September last year, raisings had fallen to $1.7 billion, down from $13 billion, a month earlier in that year. In October there were no raisings at all.
The Guarantee had an immediate effect on inter-bank lending by Australia's banks.
Australian banks have now raised more than $75 billion under the guarantee the Government provided  -  funds critical to ensuring access to the funds needed to lend to Australian businesses and households to support growth and jobs.
The second arm of the Government's strategy has been to pursue an active policy of macro-economic stimulus to support economic growth and jobs  -  again until such time as the private economy recovers on the back of the recovery in turn of private credit markets.
This has meant a coordinated approach to monetary and fiscal policy.
Interest rates have been cut by 400 basis points since September to stimulate demand.
The Government has reinforced this with strong fiscal policy.
In May last year the Government used the budget to build a strong $21.7 billion surplus as a buffer for tough times.
Those tough times came sooner than many predicted.
Drawing on this surplus, the Government took initial action in October through its first stimulus package, when it became clear that the world economy was slowing rapidly. We judged that the risk of not acting quickly was greater than the risk of acting early. 
The Economic Security Strategy of last October provided an immediate boost to demand while helping families, pensioners, and first home buyers.
This was evident through data showing that retail trade has subsequently risen by 3.8 per cent in December 2008  -  a remarkable figure given the state of the global economy and the depths of consumer confidence globally.
The Economic Security Strategy has also helped employment. As Deutsche Bank Chief Economist Tony Meer has said, in response to the January Labour Force figures:
“Retailers [were] ... bolstered by the cash-bonus-inspired strength in sales, they have responded in January by retaining higher than usual post-Christmas staff levels”.
And the Economic Security Strategy has had a significant impact also on the housing market.
Housing Finance data from the ABS shows that in November 2008 the number of first-home buyers increased by 21.3 per cent - pushing their share of new loans to 25.4 per cent - the highest since December 2001.
Since October, the Government in December and in February this year, made further stimulus announcements totalling some $47 billion to support the economy and jobs for the year ahead and to build for our long term future.
In December we announced a $4.7 billion plan for infrastructure  -  roads, rail, ports and other critical infrastructure.
In February the Government announced the $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
This plan is expected to support up to 90,000 jobs over each of the next two years. The plan is expected to boost GDP by around one half of one per cent in 2008-09 and by around three quarters of per cent to one per cent in 2009-10.
I would like to publicly acknowledge the business community for their constructive contributions to the development of elements of the package.
ACCI played an important role in promoting the temporary business investment allowance, which we announced first in December and then expanded to 30 per cent in February.
ACCI recognised early that, and I quote them, “investment allowances have been an important feature of efforts to support economic growth which in turn will assist job retention”.
Around 70 per cent of expenditure under the Nation Building and Jobs Plan is focused on initiatives to build prosperity for the future.
This includes the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, investment in building public housing and improvements in energy efficiency across Australia. The key is this: to invest in infrastructure, build for the future, but to provide stimulus for jobs in the economy in the here and now. That is what it is all about.
Supporting those who lose their jobs: while we have taken decisive action to try to limit job losses, we have also taken action to help those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
In October, the Economic Security Strategy included $187 million to create 56,000 new training places for the 2008-09 Productivity Places Program.
In February, the Government added a further 10,000 training places specifically for those made redundant.
The Government has also announced $145.6 million further to provide a pathway for out of trade apprentices and trainees to stay connected to the workforce and to maintain their training. This program will benefit up to 58,000 out of trade apprentices and trainees.
More recently, the Government announced nearly $300 million in additional investment in employment services and $75 million to assist newly retrenched workers accessing training.
These targeted investments will ensure any Australian worker made redundant will now receive immediate and personalised assistance to help them back into the workforce.
Fiscal strategy: the Government's approach to fiscal stimulus and temporary borrowing has been broadly supported by industry, unions and international economic agencies and most economic commentators.
ACCI Director Greg Evans has noted: “Such is the scope of our current economic difficulties that this package ...
- referring to the Government's stimulus package  - 
“... is absolutely essential. The size of the package ... is appropriate [and] we recognise and accept that a temporary deficit is required to fund the program.”
The BCA has said: “The Budget will almost certainly move into deficit at some point over the coming two years. The BCA considers this appropriate for the economic times.”
The regulators have also supported the Government's policy of acting early to support economic growth and jobs, rather than waiting for the global recession to hit.
As the Governor of the Reserve Bank has said “...the longer you wait, the more ammunition you will end up having to use.”
So let us be clear. The International Monetary Fund, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Australian Industry Group, the Council of Small Business Organisations, the Housing Industry Association, the Australian Property Council and the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors, have all supported the Government's Economic Stimulus Strategy. 
The Government has also been clear cut that the actions we take today must be also part of a medium term fiscal framework. The Government's consistent policy has been to keep the budget in balance over the economic cycle. The Government's plan to return the budget to surplus is a straightforward plan. Our economy, once our economy recovers, we'll cut spending to ensure the budget gets back to surplus. But if the Government pulls out too early, you delay the recovery, lose more jobs and make it harder to get back to surplus.
Our policy is that when the Australian economy recovers to above trend, the Government will take action to return the budget to surplus.
By first, allowing the level of tax receipts to recover naturally as the economy improves, while maintaining the Government's commitment to keep taxation as a share of GDP below the 2007-08 level on average.
And second, holding real growth in spending to two per cent a year until the budget returns to surplus. Of course, the current collapse in government revenues caused by the global economic crisis, and the need temporarily to stimulate the economy, will have a temporary impact on Government borrowing.
The Government will use future surpluses to repay temporary borrowings.
The critical point is this: temporary and targeted economic stimulus, supported by temporary budget deficits and a temporary increase in Government borrowings represents the only responsible course of action to make up for the collapse in private sector activity in the Australian economy that has been caused by the global economic crisis.If the Government instead had decided to sit on its hands, the impact on the Australian economy, businesses and jobs would be much, much worse. That is a simple fact. 
This is an unassailable fact which any honest person contributing to the public policy debate in Australia much accepts.
Engagement with other governments.
The fifth element of Government's economic policy framework is international  -  based on the Government's recognition that whatever actions Australia takes domestically to cushion us from the impact of the global economic recession are fundamentally shaped by the actions of other governments (individually and collectively)  -  both to stabilise their financial institutions and to stimulate global growth until private credit markets recover.
This brings us back to the core economic challenge of how major global banks and the governments responsible for regulating those banks, deal now with the core problem of toxic assets on those banks' balance sheets. 
There can be no long term economic recovery until we get global private credit flowing again. 
This is the core problem in the United States and in Europe where toxic assets continue to impede the restoration of private credit flows. 
Because of the size of the European and US banking systems, it also matters for the rest of the world. And therefore it matters for Australia as well.
That is why the challenge of toxic assets must be addressed at the forthcoming G20 summit in London on the 2nd of April. Sick and unhealthy assets have the capacity to affect healthy assets and banks  -  it's like a virus which, if left untreated, can easily spread.
We now know the cause of the virus. It is now up to the G20 (and those governments within the G20 responsible for regulating impaired banks within their jurisdiction) to now treat the virus. 
This is a difficult challenge. 
We at present are working hard with other G20 members to find an effective global framework for dealing with this core problem.
Just as we are working with other governments on coordinated fiscal stimulus and on strengthening the regulatory framework for the financial system for the future. 
The Obama Administration recently announced its Financial Stability Plan and other governments have announced their plans to restore the health of their banking systems. 
It is essential that design and implementation of these plans is done not in isolation by each country, but in cooperation with each country. 
Proper coordination is important for global confidence at a time when confidence in markets and the economy is so poor. 
Cooperation is also important to share technical expertise on challenging questions like valuing assets and dealing with financial entities that operate in multiple jurisdictions. 
Cooperation is important for emerging economies  -  who cannot deal with these problems on their own. Cooperation is vital because we must avoid financial nationalism  -  policy actions which encourage banks to reduce their overseas lending.
And cooperation is important to ensure that we do not engage in a race for finite global capital. Absent cooperation, as governments take unprecedented steps to secure their financial systems, the scope for financial protectionism is large.
Financial protectionism (intentional or otherwise) has every danger of becoming the new Smoot Hawley tariff of the 21st Century. 
Smoot Hawley was introduced as a protectionist measure in the United States in the 1930s against the physical trade in goods. 
Far worse, in the current century, given the dimensions of global financial interdependence, would be any new form of protectionism which goes to the very arteries of the global economy. 
While Australian banks are not affected by toxic assets, several countries, including Australia, are working towards principles to guide affected governments in their response to toxic assets in their banks.
The core elements of these principles include the following:
First, all weak and all systemically significant financial institutions should be subject to stress testing. The public and governments need to know with confidence that the assets on bank balance sheets are sound. 
Second, all non-viable banks must be closed. Keeping insolvent banks alive is itself systemically damaging. 
Third, all toxic assets on bank balance sheets must be neutralised. This can be achieved by creating a publicly owned asset management company as the Republican Administration did in the United States in the 1980s to deal with the savings and loan crisis; or publicly-funded insurance mechanisms; or other effective mechanisms deploying public and private capital to ring-fence and then remove toxic assets.
This needs to be done quickly and comprehensively, and may require compulsion. 
Fourth, the price of bad assets should be derived from a transparent and simple formula. A simple rule  -  transparent, easily understood, and one which can be implemented quickly. 
Fifth, it is essential that the private sector and governments and international financial institutions work closely together on delivering this outcome. 
Sixth, a critical element must be to recapitalise banks  -  so they have the capital they need to then lend and to reopen the arteries of credit. 
Finally, once adequately capitalised, banks must formally agree to maintain regulated levels of lending in return for Government support through sovereign guarantees on deposits and/or interbank lending. This set of principles must apply to all globally, systemically significant banks with toxic asset problems today.
Given the differences in domestic institutional structures, it is up to individual national governments to decide on the precise model through which they would apply any agreed framework of international principles such as the one I have just outlined. 
But it is essential that action is rapid, comprehensive and global.
The G20 Summit on the 2nd of April will provide an opportunity for concrete cooperation in the common interest of individual countries and the global economic good. 
I repeat  -  dealing effectively with toxic assets and the balance sheets of globally significant banks is fundamental to the recovery of private credit markets and therefore, to medium to long term economic recovery  -  across the global economy and for the Australian economy. 
That is why it is core business for us all.
To conclude, there is little doubt that 2009 will be a tough year for the global economy.
It will be a tough year for Australia.
The Government remains determined to take whatever other action is necessary to help steer Australia through the current crisis. 
Further temporary interventions may be necessary in credit markets. Further stimulus may be necessary through investment in long-term economic infrastructure. Further measures will be necessary to support those who lose their jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships through no fault of their own, where once again Government will have a responsibility to provide appropriate support until the economy recovers.
Just as we must never lose sight of the fact that the real long term recovery path lies in coordinated international action, both at the London Summit and beyond.
The carnage in the stock market in the United States overnight is a further reminder that notwithstanding the actions we take here in Australia, in a global recession we are always subject to global events. 
That is why Australia must act at home to stimulate the economy but also act abroad to contribute to the global policy response. 
Now is not the time to sit back and watch this crisis unfold on CNN. 
Now is the time for Australia to engage in the global response. 
Australia won't solve this crisis alone  -  but nor can the global crisis be solved without the contribution of Australia and other nations who represent important parts of the global financial system.
Our first national priority must always be supporting Australian jobs and the Australian economy - but pursuing a global response is a critical part of that national priority. 
In the year ahead, despite the challenges we face, because of the strength of our strategy and the calibre of our people, I maintain absolute confidence in our economy's capacity to come through this crisis. 
Let us remind ourselves afresh of the great strengths that we possess. 
The strengths of our institution.  The strength of so much of our business leadership. The strength of our community, which possesses a resilience which in times past has seen us through times of great adversity. And a resilience which we will must now draw upon for the future as well.
The truth is we are all in this together: government, business, unions, the wider community. 
Just as Australia is in this with the rest of the world. 
But together, guided by a clear-headed strategy and enabled by the resolve of our people, we will see Australia through this crisis together  -  a stronger, more resilient and more productive nation than ever before. 


Thousands of young Australians will get training and support to develop the basic skills they need to get and keep a job under new Australian Government funding announced today. 
From 1 July 2009, an additional 3,650 pre-vocational training and support places will be made available for vulnerable young jobseekers through the Australian Apprenticeships Access Program. 
The Rudd Government will invest $30.2 million to expand the Australian Apprenticeship Access Program, which provides at-risk jobseekers with the support they need to pursue an apprenticeship or training and then move into skilled employment.
This measure will provide assistance of around $6 million for an estimated 730 young Queenslanders.
The Australian Apprenticeships Access Program gives job seekers who experience barriers to skilled employment nationally recognised pre-vocational training, support and assistance. The program is provided at no cost to participants.
The new places will support 19-24 year old jobseekers who are most likely to be affected by the impact of the economic downturn on the labour market and also those made redundant.
Eligible young jobseekers will receive tailored support to move into an Australian Apprenticeship or further training and ultimately into skilled employment as the economy recovers.
These new places will see participants receive:
     * a minimum of 150 hours of pre-vocational training to improve their basic skills in areas like literacy and numeracy; 
     * up to 13 weeks job search support; and 
     * post-placement support in an apprenticeship, further training or employment.
This measure builds on recently announced measures to secure Australian Apprenticeships and assist retrenched workers, including: 
     * $145 million to assist apprentices and trainees who have lost their job to complete their training with another employer or a group training organisation 
     * $9.7 million to assist apprentices and trainees to continue their training through a registered training organisation. 
     * preference to be given to businesses which demonstrate a commitment to retain and employ new trainees and apprentices when new Australian Government funded infrastructure projects go to tender. 
     * $298 million to be invested in employment services to ensure workers made redundant receive personalised assistance and advice to help them find work as soon as possible.
The Government has acted decisively to support economic activity through its $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy, and the $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan. 
This action has been specifically designed to support demand for labour in the economy. 
For those people who through no fault of their own are unable to gain or retain work during the economic slowdown, the Government is investing in a range of measures to help people improve their skills.
These investments will increase the ability of people who are now out of work to gain better and higher paying jobs in the future. 


PM: I begin by making some remarks about events in the last 24 hours in Pakistan. This is a shameful, cowardly attack on innocent cricketers. A shameful, cowardly attack by terrorists on innocent cricketers. It deserves universal condemnation. It gets condemnation from Australia.
Cricket occupies a special place in the hearts of sports lovers and Australians, but also sports-lovers across the world and therefore, this therefore is a doubly atrocious act given that it has been perpetrated against those who give us as Australians and sports lovers across the world such pleasure in watching the game.
It reminds us that terrorism remains a threat in various parts of the world. It reminds us again of the absolute requirement to maintain vigilance in our counter-terrorism measures both within Australia and around the world.
Secondly, I'd like to make some remarks about today's national accounts figures. The Australian economy has contracted in the December quarter, reflecting the impact of the global economic recession. With 17 of the world's most advanced economies already in recession and 27 of the advanced economies already experiencing at least one quarter of economic growth, Australia cannot continue to swim against the global economic tide.
Australia can reduce the impact, cushion the impact of the global economic tide but we cannot stop it altogether.
The Government's economic stimulus package last year and repeated with further action this year is designed to cushion the impact of the global economic recession on Australia, as reflected in the fact that in the December quarter, the Australian economy was among the top five performing economies in the industrial world.
What this demonstrates is that had the Government not introduced its stimulus package at the end of last year, the impact on Australian jobs and the Australian economy would have been worse.
This underlines the Government's resolve to continue to take whatever further action is necessary to underpin growth and jobs in the future through actions to stabilise financial markets, actions through our Nation Building program, actions also to support employment, apprenticeships and training, and actions also in international responses which will soon be brought to a head with the G20 Summit in London.
That is important because until global credit markets are properly stabilised, it follows that we are going to continue to have a major cause for continuing concern in the global economy, a continuation of the global recession and the roll-on impact on the economy in Australia as well.
This also reminds us that at times of great economic challenge such as Australia is going through at present, we are all in this together. Government at all levels, business, unions, workers, the community, and in this together we are going to come through this together as an economy and as a nation.
I said before that Australia and the Australian Government stands ready to take whatever further action is necessary to continue to support growth and jobs in the future. And part of that means action to assist employment and to assist apprenticeships and to assist traineeships, which brings me into the particular question of the matters which the Premier and I have just been discussing here in Gladstone and the work that we have seen here today at this great apprenticeship workshop here in Gladstone.
One of the practical things we can do as a nation - government, federal and State, the Australian Government and the Queensland Government - is to get in behind practical programs to support apprenticeships, to keep people in apprenticeships and where people are being pushed out of apprenticeships anywhere to find other ways that we can maintain their skills out of trade apprenticeships.
What we are announcing here today in Gladstone is an additional 3,650 pre-apprenticeship places around Australia, which means some 730 of those pre-apprenticeship places will come here to Queensland. This is a practical piece of policy to support young kids, like those we've been talking to here this morning in Gladstone, get into their apprenticeships in the first place and to make sure they've got the skills to sustain those apprenticeships.
In particular this program is designed to provide assistance with pre-apprenticeship training - often when kids are going into apprenticeships there are still continuing problems with literacy and numeracy - up to 13 weeks' job-search support as well as post-placement support in apprenticeships as well.
I noticed here from what I've been told in Gladstone, there has been something like a 98 per cent success rate in placing these good, young Queensland kids into apprenticeships and from apprenticeships into positions in the real economy. We want to support that through practical measures such as I've outlined today. They build on other measures announced in recent times by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education and Training, Julia Gillard, and they act in partnership with those which are being supported by the Queensland Government.
If I can turn now to the Premier.
BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister, it's great to join with you here in Gladstone today, talking about apprenticeships and skills. Can I also join with the Prime Minister and express my condemnation on the attacks on the Sri Lankan cricket team, on behalf of all Queenslanders I send our very best wishes to the team and hope, wish them a very speedy recovery. We look forward to seeing the Sri Lankans playing out here safely in Australia very soon.
The strength of the Queensland economy has been evident today, defying the national trend, when we see growth in the December quarter for the Queensland economy. It's not as strong as we predicted because we have seen the Queensland economy take some effect from the global financial crisis. But the fact that we see continued growth in the Queensland economy is evidence that Queensland is still a strong State. We keep our State strong by investing in skills, so that as we come out of the global financial crisis we will have what it takes to take advantage of the opportunities that will present themselves.
Today, as part of investing in those apprenticeship skills, the Queensland Government commits to expanding our 10 per cent apprenticeship policy on government projects.
For a number of years, we have as policy required Queensland Government projects in the government sector to have 10 per cent of apprentices as part of that building project. We will now extend that policy to all building projects that we administer using federal Government funds, we will extend it to all building projects undertaken by our government-owned corporations like Queensland Rail, like our Port Authorities, and we will extend it to other forms of contracting than traditional procurement, including joint ventures, alliance contracting and PPPs.
In effect this will mean that the apprentices that are employed on government building projects in Queensland will double. It means that in the next financial year we will see close to 1,100 more apprentices as part of our building program.
Queensland has the largest building program in the country. Our building program is house for a very large part of our economic growth and that's why I am committed to keeping every single project.
Next year, our building program will see $14.5 billion of State funds and that will be added to by the Commonwealth's stimulus package. We will see as a result of that, more than 1,100 new apprentices. This makes good economic sense and it gives real opportunities to young Queenslanders to get the skills they need so that they can be part of growing the Queensland and the Australian economy.
PM: Thank you. Now over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do fear that a recession is now likely given these figures came on the top of the stimulus package (inaudible)?
PM: I believe that governments, Australian and State, need to work together to continue to cushion Australia, to continue to cushion Queenslanders from the full impact of the global economic recession.
The reason we have brought in an economic stimulus package at the end of last year, the reason that we have brought in a much bigger one in February this year, which hasn't even begun flowing through to the economy yet, is because we fully get the fact that around the world, the global economic recession is biting deep. And it gets harder and harder for Australia to swim against the tide.
Of course we stand by what we have articulated in the most recent economic forecast put out by the Australian Government. Obviously, the news since then continues to get worse from around the world. And obviously all the risks as we said then are on the downside.
But we believe we have a strategy which will see Australia through this crisis and we're embarked on that strategy with a practical course of action. Stimulus package last year. Stimulus package this year. A four percentage reduction in interest rates. And we have still as a government more to do.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's going to be enough - $42 billion to stave off another fall in growth and therefore recession?
PM: As I said repeatedly from the beginning of the global economic crisis, what the Australian Government can do, in partnership with governments like Queensland which are out there investing in infrastructure, is that we can cushion Australia from the full impact of the global economic recession. We cannot eliminate that impact.
The point underpinning the address I gave in Sydney yesterday on the international economy was to underline one core fact and that is  -  we need to see a return to normality in global financial markets, a return to health in the major global banks. That is the core of the global economic problem at present. Affecting in turn private credit flows across the global economy, affecting in turn the Australian economy and the economy of Queensland. These are the facts. That's what's bearing down on us globally. What we can do nationally and at a state level, is through our investment in nation building, through our investment in necessary infrastructure, cushion the impact of that global economic recession. But the truth is as I've always said is that it is cushioning because there is no silver bullet available to any level of government in the midst of a global economic recession.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I've known Anna for a long, long time. She's a first-class Premier. The thing about Anna Bligh is that she understands that the global economic recession is real for Queensland as opposed to Mr Springborg who has said that this is not relevant to Queensland. Can I just say to all Queenslanders - when you see the global economy going into a significant recession, when you see the impact on the Australian economy and jobs, including here in Queensland, it is real for Queensland, it is not peripheral for Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to any other seats in Queensland during this election campaign?
PM: Oh look, I'm sure I'll be back in Queensland. I live here. It's home and I get here as often as possible so I'm sure we'll sort that out over time. I'm here in Gladstone today, back in Gladstone today. Been here many times before and I'm looking forward to being back.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I go back to the core question here which is, we've got a global economic recession which is affecting growth and jobs across Australia, across Queensland and in regions like this in Queensland. It is real. As governments we must work together to reduce the impact of the global economic recession on Queensland growth and jobs and families, whereas Mr Springborg says it's not relevant to Queensland families, growth and jobs. There is a stark problem here. It simply does not add up.
It's a bit like his approach to how he's going to fund his election promises. Those figures don't add up as well.
JOURNALIST: Can you do three per cent without cutting jobs and services, when he was talking about his productivity dividend yesterday?
PM: You know something. In the Federal Government, when we have used an efficiency dividend in the 08/09 Budget for the whole country, we yielded $412 million worth of savings. Mr Springborg is saying that in one year in the Queensland budget, he can yield $1 billion worth of savings and mysteriously not affect jobs. Mr Springborg's figures don't add up. The only way in which Mr Springborg's figures add up is if his $1 billion is yielded by removing 12,000 jobs from critical services delivered by police, by nurses, and by teachers. There's no other way to do it.
JOURNALIST: Has he flattered you by (inaudible) a similar policy (inaudible)?
PM: There's a big difference between the Australian Government and the state government is that the state government of Queensland, like all state governments, is intensively engaged in the delivery of hospital services through nurses, through education services, through the employment of teachers, and of course law and order services through police and emergency services.
The overwhelming concentration of what state governments do is to deliver these critical services to the community. That stands in complete contrast to the structure of the Federal Government. This is a huge difference.
And notwithstanding that difference I refer you back to the figures that I reflected to you before - and Anna will add to this right now - is that Mr Springborg's figures don't add up on how he intends to fund this cut in 12,000 jobs, but I understand that if he doesn't believe the economic recession globally is relevant to Queensland.
PREMIER BLIGH: If I can I just add to the Prime Minister's comments about the federal efficiency program, what the Commonwealth Government did, like my Government, is that we look for efficiency but we do it carefully and thoughtfully and we actively protect frontline service delivery.
So the Commonwealth efficiency dividend did not apply to defence, it did not apply to state hospital grants, it did not apply to state grants for schools or non-government schools. They protected those frontline service delivery areas.
Mr Springborg's program is across every part of government. We have a state budget of over $35 billion, three per cent of it is $1 billion. And you cannot get $1 billion out of the Queensland Government unless you take something out of every single part of it. It is simply mathematically impossible, and anybody who understands what's happening in the global economy could not have proposed as Mr Springborg has to cut jobs and to cut services.
JOURNALIST: Your efficiency dividend, you are saying it (inaudible).
PREMIER BLIGH: No. We protected all of those areas from any efficiency dividend. And we have directed that to savings which are modest but achievable, without job losses. Have to be from areas like publications, from areas like advertising, from areas like consultancy.
PM: Can I just add to this on the question of these job losses and through Mr Springborg's plan - again the Australian Government has been in its efforts in 08/09, yielding savings through an efficiency dividend which produced at the end of the day a public service, we employ about 240,000 Australians. About the same size.
That's the sort of work that you actually have to do in order to yield savings which actually don't result in large job losses. And I contrast that again with this blunt instrument which Mr Springborg proposes to take a billion dollars out of nurses, out of teachers, and out of police. There's no other way in which you make those numbers stack up.
Secondly, for the period ahead 09/10, our position is this. The aggregate impact of our efficiency dividend at the Australian Government level for 09/10 will result again in no aggregate reduction in the overall size of the Australian Public Service.
That is responsible. It's doubly responsible in the current global economic environment. Mr Springborg who says that the global economic recession's not relevant now says the smart thing to do is to cut 12,000 jobs in frontline services. It doesn't add up.
JOURNALIST: How much room is there in the Budget for another stimulus package?
PM: Well I've said repeatedly that the Australian Government stands ready to take whatever further action is necessary. Remember this applies in four key areas. The stabilisation of financial markets, much as been done, we continue to monitor financial markets closely because what happens with supply of private credit in the economy is a fundamental and critical concern.
Secondly, in terms of nation building, in terms of the infrastructure which we are co-investing in and co-building in some cases with the states like the $15 billion we invested in the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history, a large slice of which will happen here in Queensland. Those practical measures we'll implement but we'll also keep a weather eye on what further needs to be done.
Thirdly, those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own, governments have a responsibility to assist employment, apprenticeships, training as well as providing for enhanced job search services as well.
Finally, international policy action to deal with the cause of the cancer of the global economic crisis and that's the problem with global credit markets. 


PM RUDD: The President and I have spent a long time discussing the upcoming G20 Summit in London. Korea and Australia are middle powers in the world. We are significant powers together in the Asia-Pacific region. Our economies are fall within the top 15 economies worldwide. And therefore because we are together in the G20, we have common interests and common responsibilities in acting on the global economic recession. 
Korea is affected by the global economic recession. In the December quarter there was a significant fall in Korean growth. Similarly in Australia, we're also affected by the global recession as well.
That's why our two countries and our two governments working closely together on the G20 summit is so important.
Specifically, the President and I discussed the very big problem of toxic assets on globally significant banks. We benefited in our conversations from the President's description of Korea's own experience of dealing with toxic assets in its banks 10 years ago, and the mechanisms embraced by Korea in doing that.
We intend to work closely together between now and London to seek to work on a common global solution to this problem affecting private credit markets around the world.
The second point I would emphasise from our discussions today is that I would like to announce today that Australia and the Republic of Korea have agreed to commence formal negotiations on a free trade agreement between our two countries and our two economies.
This is a significant day. Korea and Australia are major trading partners with each other. From Australia's point of view, Korea is our fourth largest export market in the world. And our two ministers, our trade ministers will commence these negotiations in May.
We take what is already a very good economic relationship between the two of us, and we intend to make it even closer, even bigger, even better. And I thank the President for agreeing to a suggestion I put to him when I visited the Blue House in Seoul only last year.
Thirdly, I would also welcome the fact that today we've agreed to develop a closer defence and security relationship with each other. And we believe that this important through a joint statement between us on this for our military to work more closely together, for our defence planners and specialists to work more closely together, and to deal with some of the common challenges of security together in the Asia-Pacific region.
To conclude, many Australians lay down their lives in defence of the Republic of Korea in the early 1950s. And for that reason, so many of our veterans in Australia have a special place in their heart for the people of Korea. We understand the continued security challenges which the people of the Republic of Korea face on the Korean Peninsula. And I've said to the President today, Australia remains a strong friend and partner of Korea, not just in our history but also in our future.
I conclude my remarks there and invite the President to speak and to make some remarks about the discussions just now.
PRESIDENT LEE (THROUGH INTERPRETER): So ladies and gentlemen. During today's talk, Prime Minister Rudd was kind enough to share with me his specific thoughts on how to manage the toxic assets.
And upon hearing his explanation, I also shared with him our experience, Korea's experience during the 1997-98 financial crisis in Asia, the historical experience that we went through in order to manage toxic assets.
I explained to Prime Minister Rudd about the creation and the establishment of Korea Asset Management Company and how that, KAMCO, was able to manage and reassess and manage the toxic assets. And I also explained to him what we are doing now in terms of fighting the global economic and financial crisis. And we vowed that we would work together and cooperate very closely in order to manage the issue of toxic assets.
So Prime Minister Rudd and I, we exchanged and shared our respective views regarding the issue of toxic assets and we agreed that we will be attending the G20 London Summit with specific plans for action. And we will also in the meantime do our very best in order to encourage and convince other global leaders of the necessity of such measures as we prepare for the G20.
And also ladies and gentlemen, we all know that Korea and Australia has enjoyed a very close economic relationship, and now we believe it is time for us to upgrade this economic partnership up a notch. And that is why Prime Minister Rudd and I agreed to begin official negotiations on a Korea-Australia free trade agreement.
Now we all know that Doha negotiations currently is going through some difficulties, and in the meantime, while not diminishing the importance of multilateral trade regimes and its negotiations, Prime Minister Rudd and I agree that it is important to pursue bilateral free trade agreements at the same time. And of course that is the background behind why we believe now is the time for us to pursue this endeavour.
Prime Minister Rudd gave us some very useful and constructive recommendations in terms of security cooperation in the region. And also as you know ladies and gentlemen, the Korean Peninsula is still divided between South and North Korea and we have our North Korea policy which Prime Minister Rudd strongly supported and which I expressed my gratitude to, to him. And of course we agreed that he and I will continue to cooperate in terms of regional security but also matters of global concern.
So ladies and gentlemen, I believe that today's meeting with Prime Minister Rudd will first of all be an opportunity for him and I to renew our common resolve to work together to overcome the current global economic crisis.
And secondly, I hope that it will be an opportunity for us to really strengthen what is already a very close partnership into that of a genuine partnership and friendship for the future.
So once again Prime Minister Rudd, thank you. Thank you for this very constructive and productive meeting that we had today, and also once again thank you for the very warm welcome extended to me.
PM RUDD: Now, ladies and gentlemen. We are going to have some questions from the ladies and gentlemen of the press. Two from Korea and two from Australia. And I'll ask the President Lee to invite questions from the Korean travelling media party.
JOURNALIST: Mr President and Prime Minister. The question goes out to President Lee of Korea. First of all, Mr President you have agreed today to begin official negotiations for a Korea-Australia free trade agreement. However we know that the trade balance between Korea and Australia in terms of that, that Korea has been posting roughly $13 billion in trade deficit in n terms of its trade relationship with Australia. And how do you envisage the Korea-Australia FTA when we take this into consideration? And number two is, you also agreed on a joint statement for enhanced cooperation on global and security matters with Australia today. What is the reason behind signing, issuing such a joint statement when Australia is rather geographically far apart?
PRESIDENT LEE: First of all, as for the Korea-Australia free trade agreement, once we have that finalised and implementing it, I believe that bilateral trade volume will increase dramatically, and I think with that we will have the natural adjustment so to speak of the discrepancy that you just mentioned.
And I believe, apart from that, the significance of having a free trade agreement with Australia that in itself is also very important. And also it is because we have a mutual and complementary economic structure that will in the long term benefit both the interest of Korea and Australia as we sign the free trade agreement.
Second question you asked, why did I sign a joint statement with regards to security with a country that is far away from Korea? Well if you look back 50 years ago as I mentioned, during the Korean War it was people from a country that was very far away that contributed its soldiers, its men and women to fight and defend a country that was very far away.
And also Australians suffered tremendous losses and sacrifices where hundreds were killed. And as Prime Minister Rudd mentioned, the remains of the veterans of the Korean War are still very much honoured and in place in the UN cemetery that is in a city called Pusan in South Korea.
And so you can say that the geographic distance, it is very far away but compared to 50 years ago, the distance between Korea and Australia, it really is not a matter that will keep us away from each other. And I believe that when we have a future-oriented relationship, security issues must also be discussed and due to such cooperation in the security area, that we can ensure peace and stability of the region.
PM RUDD: From the Australian side.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you both, yesterday the world's been focused on recession and dare I say shrinking budgets. But yesterday China announced a near 15 per cent increase in defence spending. Can I ask you both, do you think that, that perhaps should be better explained as to what the reasons for that were? And President Lee can I ask you, with the current aggression and threats of a long range missile launch from North Korea, what are the reasons do you see for this at the moment. Is this to put pressure on your government and the US, or do you see genuine aggression in that?
PM RUDD: On the question of Chinese military expenditure which you referred to, I've not seen that report and so I can't comment on those figures or the accuracy of those figures.
What I would say is this, what we need across the Asia-Pacific region more generally for the long term is a body which is capable of enhancing transparency on military matters, military operations, for all countries in the region.
And it is for that reason that Australia has proposed the establishment of an Asia-Pacific Community and I'm pleased that the Republic of Korea has expressed some support for that proposal. This is a long term idea.
But the reason for it is that we don't yet have an organisation across the Asia-Pacific region which can bring together a common dialogue on security including a dialogue on transparency of military budgets and military activities across the wider region, for all countries.
On the second point, you referred to recent threats by the North in terms of other activity. Can I say that the regime in Pyongyang needs to be very mindful of the relevant UN Security Council resolutions when it comes to such threatening language.
Secondly, I think it would be very wise for the regime in Pyongyang to get back properly to the negotiating table through the six party talks, and to adopt a reasonable posture to bring about a long-term peaceful solution to the Korean Peninsula.
As the President indicated before, Australia fully supports the policies of the Government of the Republic of Korea in dealing with these threats from the North. And we will continue to do so into the future.
PRESIDENT LEE: To answer your question, first of all with regards to Chinese military spending increasing 15 per cent, like Prime Minister Rudd I haven't seen the exact reports so I would be rather reticent to comment on it.
But I think one important point would be how much did the Chinese Government spend last year and how much of an increase was that in terms of the actual money spent in military spending? I do not have those exact figures with me so, but what I can say is that in North East Asia, it is not desirable to have countries engaging in a race for military build up or increasing their military spending.
Of course the North-East Asian region in particular is a very, very dynamic and volatile region with North and South Korea still remaining, and also we have the issue of China building their military spending and I think we have to be mindful of how that can affect other countries as well in the region.
And second with regards to North Korea, North Korea is a very exceptional regime I consider, or a country, for because of the last 60 years, generation after generation, it has maintained its grip in power. So naturally one of the things that they're very good at is negotiating with others.
And so now we have a new US administration under President Obama, and now we are trying to figure out a way for the future of the six party talks, and so there are many things happening at the moment which would give the North Koreans a reason for them to try and seek a more, how can I say, more positive position for their, on the negotiating table so that perhaps could be a reason why they decided to threaten, continue to threaten, to test fire a missile.
PM RUDD: Thank you. One more question from the Korean side. The gentleman here.
JOURNALIST: First question is, when is the first negotiating session for the Korea-Australia FTA set to take place, and when do you expect the FTA to be ratified and signed? And secondly, with regards to the joint statement on enhanced global and security cooperation between Korea and Australia announced today, in it there is a clause saying the two countries will work together and cooperate in order to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. And some people are seeing that this leaves room for the possibility of South Korea taking part in the US-led initiative called the Proliferation Security Initiative or the PSI, and I was wondering if Prime Minister Rudd would like to make a comment on that.
PM RUDD: Firstly on the question of the free trade negotiations between Australia and the Republic of Korea, I'm confident that they will start on the 17th of May of 2.30pm in the afternoon - I don't know exactly. Alls I know is that it's May and so, and as to when they will conclude, add a bit of time after that and a bit of goodwill, and a bit of a few drinks and a bit of kim chi between our two trade ministers and I'm sure it will work out in the end.
On the question of the PSI, the Proliferation Security Initiative, Australia has been a longstanding participant in that initiative. We have worked with a range of countries. Here of course is from our point of view a useful initiative in relation to non-proliferation measures concerning a number of possible problem states.
The decision by the Republic of Korea on this question is entirely a matter for the Government in Seoul. Every country's strategic and security and defence circumstances are different. I'm confident that our good friends in Seoul will make wise and proper decisions on their best response to the proliferation challenge that we face.
Finally, on the broader question of non-proliferation, together with the Government of Japan Australia is co-chairing an international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, headed by the former Australian Foreign Minister, Mr Gareth Evans and his former Japanese Foreign Minister counterpart, Madame Kawaguchi. That work is underway at present, it's important work, they will reach their recommendations later this year in preparation for the NPT review conference in 2010. This is practical set of measures which Australia is also supporting.
And I think we have a final question from the Australian side.
JOURNALIST: A question for the Prime Minister and one for President Lee. Prime Minister, on emissions trading was it a mistake this morning when you said it might not, the emissions trading scheme would not start until the end of next year? Can you just clarify the start date of emissions trading?
PM RUDD: Today the President and I have talked about emissions trading and Korea's recent decision in relation to a carbon trade system for itself. Our position hasn't changed one bit. And we're talking about introduction from the end of the '09-10 financial year, beginning at '10-11 financial year. That's our position. It's been constant all along and we don't propose to change.
JOURNALIST: President Lee, I have a question for you on the issue of wheat shipments. How serious are the concerns in South Korea about delays in wheat shipment from Australia? Are South Korean flour mills looking elsewhere to source their wheat and have you used your visit here to urge Australia to sort out the capacity constraints that are causing those delays?
PRESIDENT LEE: Well thank you for the question because I up to this point did not realise that we had any significant problems in terms of importing wheat from Australia. But once I go back I will make sure and promise you that I will look into the matter and get back to you if needed.
But let me just make it clear that Korea whenever it imports or exports or otherwise, we are a very open economy, we believe in the principle of free trade and I do not envisage any problems or there shouldn't be any problems of wheat import from Australia to Korea.
PM RUDD: And on that happy note, why don't we conclude our conversation with ladies and gentlemen of the press and again I thank our Korean friends, and you as members of the Korean press for your visit to Australia as well.
Thank you very much.
PRESIDENT LEE: Thank you.
[ends]


HOST: Can we start with Pakistan Prime Minister. There is something especially nasty when sport is hit in this way. Can we expect to see more of this do you think?
PM: I think this one hits us all in the guts in a particular way. It's, we like the cricket and so many people around the world love their cricket, they love their sport. And then for terrorism to be brought into the heartland of sport and the heartland of cricket is just you know a whole new, a whole new experience. It's ugly.
Obviously we together with the rest of the world have condemned this, but the critical thing is this, it reminds us that terrorism is alive and well. It reminds us of the absolute importance of vigilance in preparing for terrorist contingencies in the future and we the Government together with other Governments around the world are actively engaged in looking at the downstream consequences of these recent atrocities in Pakistan.
HOST: Does it suggest to you that Pakistan really does not have this under control? We know Osama Bin Laden is living somewhere in those border territories, it seems to be almost free reign for terrorism in Pakistan, does it not?
PM: Well Pakistan of course is next door to Afghanistan itself and a lot of Taliban and we assume some Al Qaeda have found their way across the border over time. This is a huge challenge for the world, remember in Australia a lot of those who have represented terrorist threats to us have been trained in Afghanistan. And their support bases are in that wider area.
So when we're talking about acting on terrorism it's not just ensuring that we are working as effectively as possible in Afghanistan but increasingly our focus has got to be in the wider region as well because it all comes back to home here as well in Australia.
HOST: Let's talk about the economy then Prime Minister. You'll hate this word but do you accept that we are in recession now?
PM: Well when we put out our economic data only a month ago, we said that all the risk was on the downside and since then there has been further bad economic news from around the world. Japan, our largest export market produced figures the other day of a three point three percent collapse in growth in the December quarter.
You know, with seventeen of the world's advanced economies already in recession and twenty seven of the world's most advanced economies either in recession or with a quarter of negative economic growth, it gets harder and harder for Australia to swim against the global economic tide. That's just the truth of it.
HOST: All the economists seem to agree that we are in recession, I mean I suppose who can haggle over technical definitions till we're black in the face but we are in trouble aren't we?
PM: Well this is, what we're dealing with here is a global cyclone.
HOST: Yes.
PM: It's like a global economic cyclone. Remember it begins in America, sweeps to Europe, then engulfs the rest of the world and we're part of the rest of the world. The key question though is this, you can look at this thing and make sure that your defences are as strong as possible, you can make sure that your preparation is as good as possible but at the end of the day you can't go out there and say to the public ‘I can stop a cyclone from coming', what you can say is we're making the preparations as good as possible to reduce the impact of the storm as it hits.
That's what the Government has been on about rather than just throwing the windows open as others have suggested and letting the free market sort it out for itself. Well that didn't work so well in recent times.
HOST: Do you think the stimulus package then cushioned the fall somewhat, or are you disappointed that more people did not spend?
HOST: The pre-Christmas one.
HOST: Or are you disappointed that more people didn't go out and spend?
PM: It is absolutely clear cut that had we not begun the Economic Stimulus Strategy last year that the impact now on the Australian economy and jobs would be much, much worse. It's not just us asserting that. Let me give you two pieces of evidence:
Retail sales in Australia in the December quarter were up three point eight percent. In the rest of the major economies around the world, retail sales collapsed. Do you know how many people are employed in retail around Australia? This is of huge consequence.
The second thing is that when you look at bodies like the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and last time I looked they weren't a sub-branch of the Australian Labor Party. 
The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, who campaigned actively against us at the last election announced in fact yesterday after the economic data came out, that were it not for the Economic Stimulus Strategy that these results would have been much worse for jobs, for employment and for the real economy.
They're the two big points about the impact of our strategy and had we produced the negative growth numbers that we've seen elsewhere in the world, then you'd have a result for Australia somewhere between one and one point five percent worse. Do you know what that translates into? If we'd done the same sort of numbers in the December quarter as other economies. You'd have up to 100,000 more Australians losing their jobs over the next financial year than would otherwise be the case.
HOST: Now I see that the next Leader of the Opposition, Peter Costello, is doing the rounds this morning accusing you of failure, saying you should have spent on infrastructure and the fact that that big bang before Christmas simply didn't work?
PM: Well I haven't actually seen what he's had to say but look.
HOST: Well that's the guts of it. He's saying that you failed, that the money was wasted it was saved instead of spent.
PM: But what's all this saying? In the midst of a global economic crisis, rather than the Liberals fighting on the question of jobs and the economy, they're fighting only for one thing alone and that's the Liberal Party and who gets to run it.
This is, this is a rolling civil war between Mr Turnbull and Mr Costello and inevitably the Liberals are going to go back to the past to Mr Costello and Work Choices, that's what is happening. They may not declare that publically but the key thing is this; the nation is now faced with a global economic crisis. We are focused on how you reduce the impact of that crisis and what the Liberals are focused on only is themselves.
HOST: I think what he said about the economy too was, he would have brought forward infrastructure spending and subsidised business to create jobs. What do you say to that?
PM: Well as part of the rolling civil war within the Liberal Party you've got one group saying let's invest in infrastructure, another group saying let's not. I mean it's very hard to get a handle on whether this is a real alternative, or simply a tool in the internal Liberal party struggle.
All I know is in the midst of a crisis for the country and for the economy and for families and for jobs, it should be all hands to the pump by everybody. Instead what you've got is the Liberal Party tearing themselves apart yet again.
HOST: Do you think Costello still wants to be Leader of the Opposition and eventually Prime Minister?
PM: I think Mike it's inevitable that in this rolling sort of fight over the Liberal Party leadership that the Liberals are going to go back to Mr Costello and to Work Choices and everything which was associated with Work Choices in the past.
HOST:  Alright, now your new stimulus package that I think kicks in from next week, this is the $42 billion. Is that going to make a difference?
PM: You know I have always said from the beginning of this thing, is that our job is to cushion the impact on Australia and I have said how that happened in the December quarter so far. If we were producing the same negative growth numbers as the major economies around the world did in the December quarter, let me tell you, you would be having up to 100,000 more Australians out of a job than would otherwise be the case, with the stimulus package.
Secondly, in terms of the measures which come through this year which includes a $30 billion investment in schools, in social housing and in energy efficiency within housing, this is all jobs on the ground, construction, in every community across Australia.
Again, we believe that this will cushion the impact but I am not going to mislead people and say that in cushioning the impact that you can eliminate this global cyclone.
HOST: Do you still think that we will look at seven per cent unemployed by say middle to late next year, late this year rather?
PM: I believe absolutely in being upfront with the Australian people about the real challenge we face, including on unemployment which will get worse, and upfront with the Australian people about the great strengths that we have and the strategy we have to steer Australia through and to cushion us from the worst impact  - 
HOST: (inaudible) will it be around seven per cent though?
PM: We have said in our most recent forecast that it will be tough, it will get bigger than it is at the moment. Right now, right now, we are among the top five performing economies of the industrial economies in the world. And that includes on where we are on growth and employment as well.
HOST: It sounds like you are shying away from that seven per cent figure (inaudible)
PM: No we have said that explicitly in the past. That is what is in our papers, that we would go from where we are to that number. But the key thing is this. You can talk about numbers all the time, the key thing is, are you taking everything you can by way of responsible action to reduce the impact on Australia and that is what we are seeking to do.
HOST: Can I toss this at you, we got a call yesterday from a union delegate at Bonds, you know, Pacific Brands. He says people losing their jobs there can't get the dole from Centrelink until they have spent their redundancy pay and entitlements. He wants you to scrap the, I guess you would say the Howard Government's miserable tight fisted rules to make it easier to obtain unemployment benefits. There are going to be a lot of people needing that. Can you do it?
PM: Well what we are now working on with Julia Gillard, the Deputy Prime Minister and she is responsible for employment as well, is working through every practical measure for those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
One of the things we have done, just last week is change the rules from the past, in terms of people's ability to have access to immediate employment assistance, that is, I have lost my job, do I have to wait three or six months to get assistance from the job network  - 
HOST: That is his point, that is what he wants.
PM: Well on that we changed this rule last week, so that at the point at which you obtain a redundancy, through no fault of your own, you can walk into a job network office and then get assistance in terms of what you need by way of any further training or retraining, what other assistance you need to try and find an alternative job because there still are areas of the economy which are not yet directly affected, directly affected by this global economic crisis.
ALOISI: Can I throw another one at you, also from our listeners, we get a lot of calls about what they describe as the obscene packages that CEO's of companies leave with. When a company is going down the drain, we put this to the Treasurer yesterday, I understand it is difficult, but is there not something you can do, for people who are losing their jobs, watching these people waltz off with in many cases -
CARLTON: Fat cat pay outs.
ALOISI: - millions of dollars?
PM: Working Australians, working families, seeing jobs lost have every right to be outraged by excessive executive pay outs.
CARLTON: So what are you going to do about it?
PM: The problem is, all these laws which made this possible were put in over the last decade or so and so you have got these laws which work now, but what we are working our way through now for finance sector executives, and more broadly, for executive remuneration, in other public corporations around the country, publicly listed corporations, is a new set of rules for the future.
But you know something you have got make sure that it is also consistent with what is happening in other countries. And one of the things on the agenda at the London meeting of the Group of 20, industrial economies in the world, which I will go to soon, is what do you do about the future of financial sector remuneration.
You have got to remember, it is unrestrained greed in financial markets, with unconstrained free markets, which caused this crisis, yet you see no effective action globally, on the question of their remuneration levels. This has to be acted on, not just because it is not fair, but because it is part of the cause of the cancer in the system. People are being remunerated at huge levels to take huge risks and who pays it? The worker who loses his job at the end of that economic cycle.
CARLTON: Is it time now, given the troubles we are in, is it time now to postpone an emissions trading scheme, businesses screaming they can't afford it, they want it delayed for at least two years?
PM: When we put forward the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we were very conscious of the fact that we had to get the balance right between the economy and jobs on the one hand and the long term interests we all have as citizens of the planet, to bring down carbon pollution levels. Because if you don't, the economic cost long term, of not acting on climate change, is far greater than the cost of acting.
Remember when we put forward our package we got attacked from a whole lot of people from the left and some people from the right, about it going too far in both directions.
We believe we have got the balance right. Because you know if you push this off into the future, and our scheme is not proposed to be introduced until the end of 2010, if you push this off permanently into the future, the political will necessary around the world to begin to put together the agreement necessary for all countries to act, just falls through the cracks.
HOST: Alright (inaudible) I think you have got to go and do something else. One last question, it is just the President of South Korea or something, make him wait.
PM: Actually, the President of Korea is in Australia today. I do have to go to Canberra and you know he is a very important friend and partner of Australia. Their economy is going through let me tell you, like everyone else, just real, real challenges.
HOST: Yeah, last question. Do you find it bizarre that the entire defence department can't work out a soldier's pay packet?
PM: This is very difficult. How someone in the front line cannot have their pay adjusted when the Minister, it was brought to his attention at the end of last year, said ‘fix this', said this last October ‘fix this', and several months later it hasn't been. It's been a very frustrating experience for everybody, I've got to say the people for whom this should not be a price and a cost is our men and women in uniform. It's got to be fixed.


Today the President and I have agreed to two major steps which mark the start of a new phase in the Australia-Korea relationship. 
First, we have agreed to begin negotiations towards a free trade agreement. 
Korea is Australia's fourth-largest export market  -  making this free trade agreement an important goal for us. 
Second, we have released a joint statement on security cooperation. 
With our shared values, our common alliance ties to the United States and our history of defence cooperation, this statement will provide a framework for taking forward our defence cooperation into the future. 
We also agreed on a number of other initiatives. 
2011 will be the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations and we are announcing that it will be a “year of friendship” between Australia and Korea with a program of cultural and other activities. 
We will arrange a dialogue between opinion makers from both nations in the near future for them to chart a course ahead for our relationship. 
Beyond the bilateral meeting today, we discussed regional and global challenges - in particular, the global economic recession and the upcoming G20 leaders meeting in London. 
We agreed to coordinate our approaches very closely, particularly on the key challenges of dealing with toxic assets and reforming the International Monetary Fund. 
I would like to congratulate Korea on becoming the chair of the G20 next year. The President and I today discussed the future of our region and agreed that we need to focus on the future of our region and the institutions that serve it. 
Australia and Korea were instrumental in the formation of APEC. We plan to maintain that historical level of cooperation between our Governments. 
On regional challenges, I told President Lee that we support him and his Government in dealing with the challenge of North Korea. 
See the Joint Statement on Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation Media Release.


On 5 March 2009, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd of Australia and President Lee Myung-bak of the Republic of Korea met in Canberra.
The two leaders:
Acknowledging that the Australia-Korea relationship, forged during the Korean War, had developed into a broad-based partnership, including substantial trade and investment links and strong people-to-people ties;
Committing to further strengthen the relationship on the basis of shared democratic values, commitment to human rights, freedom and the rule of law, and mutual respect, trust and deep friendship;
Recognising that Australia and the Republic of Korea share key security interests in Northeast Asia, the Asia-Pacific region and beyond, with peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in East Asia, including the early resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue, critical to the prosperity and security of both countries; and, in this context, confirming the strategic importance of their respective alliance partnerships with the United States;
Affirming the two countries' common purpose in working actively together, and with other countries through fora such as APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum, the East Asia Summit, and the G20, to advance the development, stability and security of the Asia-Pacific region, particularly in the face of the international financial crisis;
Affirming also the two countries' commitment to cooperate together and with other countries through the United Nations and other multilateral institutions to promote and help ensure global security;
Recalling that during their meeting in August 2008, they agreed to explore opportunities to expand global and security cooperation;
Reflecting the extent to which Australia and the Republic of Korea already cooperate on a wide range of issues;
Have agreed to a comprehensive Action Plan for Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation between Australia and the Republic of Korea (attached), under which the governments of Australia and the Republic of Korea will:
     * Consult closely and meet regularly, including at ministerial level, to discuss matters of common strategic interest in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond and to continuously explore and develop opportunities for cooperation.
     * Cooperate more closely on law enforcement to combat transnational crime, including trafficking in illegal narcotics and precursors, people smuggling and trafficking, money-laundering, counterfeiting currency and arms smuggling, piracy and armed robbery against ships, and on border security issues.
     * Consult and cooperate bilaterally, and in regional and multilateral fora, on counter-terrorism issues, including on cyber-security and cyber-terrorism, and to advance the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
     * Continue to expand cooperation on global disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery through a range of mechanisms including the United Nations and its associated agencies and the International Commission for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
     * Build on the established good level of strategic dialogue and cooperation between the two countries' defence forces by exploring opportunities for defence engagement in areas such as peacekeeping, civil-military cooperation, defence management, joint exercises, training and exchange programs and the establishment of linkages between the Asia-Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence and Korean institutions.
     * Conclude a bilateral agreement on the protection of classified military information that will enable the secure exchange of classified military information between defence organisations and related industry contractors, thereby facilitating further opportunities for practical defence and defence industry cooperation.
     * Promote greater cooperation between the Australian and Republic of Korea defence industries, including by exploring cooperation on Airborne Early Warning and Control aircraft, including through sharing information to assist in developing future enhancements; and by examining possibilities for cooperation on other defence industry and materiel procurement and maintenance activities.
     * Enhance cooperation on development and humanitarian assistance, including to promote achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and improve aid effectiveness.
     * Cooperate more closely on disaster and emergency preparedness, response and management.
Action Plan for Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation between Australia and the Republic of Korea - RTF 329KB
Action Plan for Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation between Australia and the Republic of Korea - PDF 57KB


O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, the national accounts today show that the national economy, with the exception of the farm economy, is in recession. The non-farm economy has now recorded its second successive quarter of negative growth. What are the most worrying aspects of today's figures for you?
PM: Well, the first point Kerry is that you know that growth numbers have been calculated since time immemorial, including both the non-farm and the farm sectors of the economy. And going back some time we've had some periods of negative contribution to growth from the farm sector as well. So these things change over time.
If you go to the actual elements of the national accounts themselves, there are strengths still, but there are weaknesses.
And you asked specifically about weaknesses - the one which stands up out of those national accounts, of course, is the fact that there has been a recourse to inventories by firms, rather than bringing in new production into their warehouses for the purposes of on-selling to consumers.
Well why has all this happened? We're in the midst of a global economic cyclone. These are global factors at work. They're buffeting every economy in the world and we're not immune.
O'BRIEN: Are you concerned that your first economic stimulus package hasn't worked?
PM: The key question with our stimulus package is this; had we not done it, what would have been the impact in terms of growth and jobs?
O'BRIEN: It's not a question of had you not done it but if you'd done it differently.
PM: No, for us the key question was this - and I think I said this on your program or others at the time - the advice from Treasury was ‘when you see the emerging economic storm, this global cyclone building, intervene with stimulus, go early, go hard, go households'.
You compare where we are, even with this performance on growth in the December quarter, against the rest of the advanced economies in the world. This economy is still performing as one of the top five economies of all advanced economies in the world. Let's put this into context.
And secondly if you look at some of the drivers of that, in the rest of the big economies around the world, you've seen a collapse in retail sales and consumption, at least in the large number of them.
And in Australia, by contrast, in the December quarter we saw an improvement in overall retail sales. That comes directly off the back of what we've done in stimulus.
O'BRIEN: Mr Swan acknowledged today that a significant part of your package went into household savings rather than household savings rather than household spending. That suggests, doesn't it, that there's some strength in what Mr Turnbull was arguing that the package should have been differently directed via tax cuts?
PM: But Kerry, I have consistently said that government can't mandate how individual consumers use their money, whether they spend it, whether they save it or what they spend it on.
And if you look at what has been assisting households in recent times, you've had a four percentage point cut in interest rates, and if you're on a $300,000 mortgage, that translates into about a $9,000 a year saving.
Some people are using that to pay down their mortgage further; others are putting it into other forms of savings. That's happening over here with monetary policy.
Then on fiscal policy, through the payments we made to households in December, and remember that was just one month in the quarter, obviously some of that was spent and I've just referred the retail sales figures to you relative to the collapse in retail sales elsewhere in the world. But some of it obviously would've been saved as well.
The key question is this: there was no credible alternative strategy and we are absolutely convinced that had we not done this then we would have placed at risk many more Australians in terms of the prospect of job loss than is currently the case.
O'BRIEN: You said at the time of the first package that it was the equivalent of one per cent of GDP, that it would create 75,000 jobs. Do you now have any evidence of what jobs have been created? Or even of what jobs have been saved or of what GDP growth your package has actually produced?
PM: Well Kerry, let's be statistically realistic about this. These payments flowed in December. That is about, you know, two or three months ago.
In terms of putting together the complete retrospective analysis of the data, that's simply analytically not possible at this stage.
O'BRIEN: But isn't it true that it's never really going to be possible to demonstrate it?
PM: Well, on that basis you then flip into the camp of opinion which says the data's always incomplete and therefore do nothing. I have never been in that view and when presented with the warnings -
O'BRIEN: But again, again, with respect, it's not about doing your way or doing nothing. It's about doing it your way. Mr Turnbull asked, Mr Turnbull argued for alternative ways of spending.
PM: Well, Mr Turnbull actually supported the Government's economic stimulus strategy last December.
He now opposes the Government's economic stimulus strategy because Mr Turnbull is a political opportunist, not interested in an economic strategy for dealing with the global financial crisis, just a political strategy to take advantage of the crisis.
O'BRIEN: Your most recent Budget update said that $115 billion had been wiped off tax revenues for the year. It's a foregone conclusion, isn't it, that tax revenues are going to drop further, probably significantly because we're some way from feeling the full effects of the business investment bust that's on the way, or happening already, the big drop in export earnings from the resources boom that's still in the pipeline. That does mean an even bigger Budget deficit, doesn't it?
PM: Kerry, we have taken this one step at a time based on what is an unfolding global economic cyclone and we have been upfront with people about the collapse in revenues which has occurred with other governments around the world.
We've been upfront with people, therefore, about the need for temporary borrowing in order to deal with that and for temporary borrowing to deal with the need to stimulate the economy.
O'BRIEN: But to come back to the point -
PM: Yes, I'm coming to that -
O'BRIEN: It is inevitable that we're going to see a significantly bigger Budget deficit, isn't?
PM: Kerry, we take this one step at a time. The next point in the process which is the Budget, which only lies two months away and we will be obviously engaged in complete and sober analysis of the numbers up until then.
We've said with the last statement on the state of finances that all the risks are on the downside. Wayne Swan, the Treasurer was upfront about that and I have been as well.
And the reason is this is a global economic cyclone. Starting in America, off to Europe, through rest of the world. What's our strategy going to whether we could have done anything different? It's this.
You can either seek to prepare people, prepare the country, prepare the economy, put up as many defences as you can against a cyclone but you know something? You can't actually stop the cyclone from hitting.
Mr Turnbull's approach is don't worry about the defences, let the free market sort it out - .
O'BRIEN: Again with respect Mr Rudd you're over simplifying Mr Turnbull's responses. He's not saying do nothing; he's saying do it differently. But I'd like to move on.
PM: Well, I'd beg to differ on that because it's difficult each day to know each day what the Liberals position is, and I use the example I used before.
O'BRIEN: Yesterday you laid out the argument that you'll take to the next summit of the G20 in April - to isolate the huge bundle of toxic assets preventing the biggest banks to get the money back into the global economy. You say all non-viable banks must be closed. Have you really thought through what that would mean?
PM: Well, the challenge we face right now is - and you and I have just been having a legitimate debate about the forms of fiscal stimulus and their effectiveness, and these are debates that are happening in every capital around the world.
But that's one part of the economic policy dilemma. The biggest part of the global economic policy dilemma is how do you restore the world's biggest banks to health in order to restore global capital flows to anything approaching normality? Because that's what directly affects jobs and investment right across the world, including Australia.
Therefore, as we lead up to the G20 summit, the big challenge is this: do you simply push that into the too hard basket or do you seek to develop a framework with which those governments who are faced with these banks with toxic balance sheets in their jurisdictions to restore those banks to proper health?
Part of the problem is if you have banks, big banks at the moment, in various parts of the world which have very bad balance sheets, what happens is that the rest of the banking system becomes so suspicious, so lacking in confidence of those banks that normal interbank credit doesn't flow anymore. That's part of the problem now.
So, it's important that the global financial community and those governments responsible for the regulation of these banks cauterise the wound. Otherwise you will still have bleeding throughout the financial system and that in term affects the artery of the system, which is private credit flows. That's why I argue in this direction.
O'BRIEN: There are so many banks around the world right now who are only still floating because they're being propped up one way or a Government or even partially nationalised by Government. But is this what you'll be telling President Obama when you see him later this month: all your non-viable banks must be closed? I, Kevin Rudd, believe you've got to close all your non-viable banks?
PM: What I absolutely believe Kerry, is that whether it is in the United States or in Europe, the UK, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, the Netherlands - this is where we've got a lot of these banks which are domiciled in those countries which have problems with their balance sheets and represent such a huge slice of global credit including that which comes here and to our business - is that the governments of the world can't just do uncoordinated actions in each national jurisdiction.
You know why? Because global financial markets will look at that and say that's not going to work, because if you have systems set up in one country which don't properly evaluate the assets of a major bank, say, in the United States, against what is perhaps being used as system in the UK or in Germany, then markets will still vote no in terms of confidence.
What they're looking for, markets, is coordination, a common regime of principles, and for governments to act within an agreed time frame. And that's why I believe the G20 has a responsibility to move in the direction of establishing such a framework for all governments to agree to.
O'BRIEN: A leading market economist, Saul Eslake, said people approaching retirement, say they're 60, perhaps have five years to go before they retire, don't stand a chance of making up what they've lost from their savings, from their superannuation investments, their retirement funds. That they're either going to have to work longer or just cop a reduced standard of living in retirement. Is there anything you can say to those people? I mean, you're powerless to help them, aren't you?
PM: I haven't seen Saul Eslake's comments, but I always listen carefully to what he has to say. He's been a close observer and analyst of the Australian economy over a long period of time.
Through Nick Sherry, the responsible Minister, we are in deep and rolling consultation with the superannuation industry in Australia. This is a period of great stress for that industry and for those depending on the retirement schemes based on stock market investments.
But you know the core of the problem in dealing with this is what you and I have just been talking about; you cannot effectively look at a restoration of anything approaching normality in equity markets, stock markets, until you get back to the normal flow of credit.
O'BRIEN: But the core of their problem is the money's gone.
PM: This is a crisis, as I've said before, caused by extreme greed, turbo-charged by under-regulated and unrestrained financial markets.
The key thing is to get the rules right for the future but in the meantime act on the question of restoring banks, global banks, to normal credit flows, and that's why the global agenda here is of core importance if we're to see a return to economic normality in Australia as well.
O'BRIEN: Very briefly, Ross Garnaut, the architect of your plan to reduce carbon emissions and tackle climate change, said in a speech last night that the economic crisis gives you some breathing space in mitigating climate change, perhaps two or three years. Given the enormous pressures on business right now for at least the next year or two, given your desire that you express all the time to protect jobs in this crisis as much as possible, hasn't Professor Garnaut given you the opportunity to now delay and to justify delaying your Emissions Trading Scheme by a year or even two?
PM: What Ross is obviously pointing to is the fact that global emissions will not grow as much as people thought because global economic activity is now slower than what was thought or concluded by international organisations and others in recent years.
Can I say Kerry, when we framed the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme we did so to get the balance right between protecting jobs on the one hand and dealing with the long term challenge of greenhouse gas emissions -
O'BRIEN: But the whole economic landscape has changed massively and you are saying on the one hand you're in the game right now to protect jobs, to save jobs. On the other hand you're being told by business jobs are going to haemorrhage; jobs are going to bleed if you persist in introducing your ETS scheme in 2010.
PM: Kerry, when we framed this through the good work of the Minister Penny Wong, the challenge was to get the balance right. We were attacked from the left and from the right on this scheme.
We believe we have got the balance right. Our intention is to legislate the scheme. We think it's the right long-term strategy for Australia and the planet.
But we are very mindful, acutely mindful, of ensuring that we manage the proper protection of jobs the way through. That's why there is so much built in the scheme to do that.
O'BRIEN: We're out of time. Kevin Rudd thanks for talking with us.
PM: Good to be with you. 


The Governor-General, Ms Quentin Bryce AC, will visit Africa this month to strengthen Australian engagement with Africa at the highest levels of Government.
The Governor-General has been invited to visit Mauritius, Namibia, Zambia, Botswana, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and the Seychelles in a series of State and official visits.
These visits will involve high-level meetings with the leaders of those countries, as well as support for trade and investment, significantly expanded development and humanitarian assistance, and co-operation on peace and international security issues.
A visit to Africa of this scale by Australia's Head of State will express the seriousness of Australia's commitment to heightened political and diplomatic engagement, and to building our bilateral relationships with African countries and the continent as a whole.
It will also reflect the growing interests that Australia has in Africa. Trade is growing fast, and there have been substantial Australian investments in recent years. African countries have an increasingly important role in finding collective, multilateral solutions to global issues such as trade reform, the global financial crisis, climate change, arms control, terrorism and regional conflicts.
The Governor-General will engage African leaders on a range of regional and multilateral issues in which Australia has a key stake.
She will highlight Australia's expanding aid program to Africa and convey the commitments made by the Australian Government directly to the countries that she visits. 
The visit will take place from March 15 to April 3.


MITCHELL: First though, for his regular spot on the program. On the line, the Prime Minister. Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: In a moment the recession, but first given what's happened in Pakistan this week with the terrorist attack on the cricketers, are you comfortable about Australian athletes going to Delhi next year for the Commonwealth Games?
PM: What we do Neil is all the time, we are engaged with discussion through our security agencies and each of these sporting bodies, constantly with Cricket Australia and we've been doing that for a long period of time as far as their engagements with Pakistan are concerned.
More broadly, we'll do the same as well with all sporting bodies. Our fundamental concern for all of our sports men and women going overseas is to make sure we've got the best possible advice for any security trip to them, convey that to the sporting organisations that provide and to make sure that we make the best preparations as possible as well.
MITCHELL: Given what's been happening, you have to say the Commonwealth Games would be under close scrutiny, there would be some jeopardy wouldn't it?
PM: Well I'd rather not publicly speculate until I've been through the exact and precise security assessments. These are very complex and detailed matters. As you know, the world's awash with terrorist organisations and frankly in many parts of the world, you've got risks and threats.
And while I'm talking to your listeners this morning, again if people are travelling, please, please always go to the Department of Foreign Affairs travel website to see what the terrorist threat warning, security threat warning is if you're planning to go anywhere in the world. It's really important people are informed.
MITCHELL: Fair enough. If the Games are called off, do you think Australia should take them over. Should we have them here?
PM: You know something Neil, I think that will get me a whole lot of strife as of first thing this morning. And  - 
MITCHELL: Sorry, what did you mean?
PM: Well if you begin to speculate now that X country's about to move away from those things, the Commonwealth Games, then we're going to step into the breach. One step at a time mate. I think the key thing, the key thing is to get the security analysis right and we'll be working closely with other international authorities to do that. Because we take security of our sports men and women very seriously. All of us are horrified by the events most recently in Lahore.
MITCHELL: Another aspect that concerns me, I was talking to Steve Davis, our umpire, one of our umpires yesterday. They were abandoned by the security forces. They were left in a van for at least eight minutes while the security forces went off with the Sri Lankan players. There were bullets flying. Those blokes could not, they could have been kidnapped or killed or anything, they're very angry about it. Will we be raising that issue with Pakistan?
PM: Yes. I read those reports this morning as well and I'm unhappy about them. So we will get to the bottom of what actually happened from go to whoa, with the provision of security in this particular motorcade. I read those reports and I'm sufficiently concerned about what's been said by the Australians that we need an explanation and we intend to get one.
MITCHELL: It did reach some analysts saying they now believe Pakistan is more important and even more volatile than Afghanistan or Iraq. Do you agree with that?
PM: I think if you're being honest about it, there are real problems with terrorism in Pakistan itself. It's next door to Afghanistan and what's happened over the last period of time that we've had the military conflict in Afghanistan itself, there's a whole lot of Taliban and Al-Qaeda have pushed over the border. And it's not just a safe haven, but also arguably they're beginning to develop their own networks there as well.
This is massively complex and it's also bear in mind that population in Pakistan is into the hundreds of millions. And it is a very large country which is an Islamic state. I think this is a big challenge for all of us in the future.
MITCHELL: Just another issue, do you believe that people who lost houses in the Victorian bushfires but were uninsured, should they get government help or compensation to help rebuild?
PM: Yeah Neil, this is a real tough one. I understand all the arguments from both sides of this one, which is, you know, people should make preparations for themselves and why should everyone else look after them in these circumstances.
My attitude is this. This has been an appalling, let's say a once in a century event, just appalling. And therefore I think we've got to be appropriately compassionate in the way which we respond. I mean like yourself, I would have run into so many people out there who aren't properly insured, who aren't insured at all. Then we've got to look I think at what investigations like the Royal Commission may come up with in terms of what should be the best form of insurance arrangements for Australia for the future.
MITCHELL: Like compulsory insurance, you mean?
PM: Well, all those sorts of options. But let's see how this is (inaudible). In the meantime you've got independent decisions being taken by John Landy and his team about how to help individual households in different circumstances. I think they're in the best position, compassionate and appropriate judgments right now given each individual's circumstances. I mean you would know yourself having spoken to so many people, you know, what do you do when you're confronted with this, you know this visit from hell.
MITCHELL: There is, there are obviously there is so many involved, both insured and uninsured, that there's not going to be enough money despite the generosity. There's not going to be enough money in the Bushfire Fund. Will the Federal Government look to putting money towards this?
PM: Well, on the question of insurance, first responsibility of course lies with the insurance companies themselves. Then you go onto the question you've just raised. What we've said, remember I've said this I think from the very beginning, when it comes to the overall reconstruction effort, our commitment is uncapped. And we're partners with the Victorian Government.
I just think Neil, what we've got to do is work through each individual case that's going to be so vastly different. Then, in terms of policy for the future, let's try and clean that up on the back of recommendations of the Royal Commission. I think that's the compassionate way to go, but also the rational way to go for the long term.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, on the economy and I understand, I see yourself and your various frontbenchers and backbenchers avoiding the word recession because we need technically two quarters of negative growth. However, isn't it a reality that we are living in recession at the moment?
PM: Look Neil, I reckon I've been brutally upfront with the Australian people for the last six months about the global economic cyclone we're facing. People are going to argue till the cows come home about the technical definition of a recession - two consecutive quarters of negative economic growth, and Australia's just had one.
But the practical reality is that we all know it's bad. I've said that the risks are on the downside and the practical question which people constantly put to me is, what are you doing about it? What's your plan of action? How can you reduce the impact? And that's the business that I'm in.
MITCHELL: But why the sensitivity about the word?
PM: Well as I've said is that debate I've just described to you about definitions of a recession. The other thing is this Neil, is that I'm the Prime Minister of the country, I'm not here as a commentator. I'm here to say ‘it's bad, here is our plan of action to steer Australia through, this is what we're doing about it', and on the basis of that, to continue to rebuild confidence in the economy given that we are in the midst of a global economic cyclone.
I think that's the core of it. You know, you can sit back and you can wait and you can talk about recession, or you can get out there and act in order to reduce the impact of the global economic  - 
MITCHELL: Well yeah, but it's not inconsistent to do both, to accept that we are in recession and this is what we're going to do about it. We went through this in the early ‘90s with Paul Keating. I remember having exactly this debate with him, and then finally he said yeah it is a recession, it's the recession we had to have. Now I guess, would you accept that the next sort of figures are going to confirm we are in recession because surely nobody could argue that the position we are in the moment is better than it was in December. Will the next figures confirm recession?
PM: I think it's really important Neil just to be upfront about how bad it is and how difficult the challenges are and what we're doing about it. But I'm not in the business of being paid as a commentator.
A recession, as you know, there's technical debate how one quarter or two quarters of economic growth. I'm in the practical business of being upfront and saying it's bad, people are losing their jobs, I want to make sure we've got a program of action to act on it, rather than have a rolling sort of talkshop about the definition of terms. I want to get on with the business of dealing with the reality, acting on it, and through that as Prime Minister of the country, act responsibly to rebuild confidence given this global economic cyclone everyone's being battered by.
MITCHELL: Well what would you expect for the next set of GDP figures?
PM: Well, we're still a quarter away from that. I said consistently all the  - 
MITCHELL: A quarter? They're out next month?
PM: Yeah. Well the next quarter's growth. You're talking about the March quarter, well they'll come out some times around about the Budget or just after.
MITCHELL: Yeah and if we get those and it's another, it's another quarter of negative growth, will you then accept we're in recession?
PM: Neil, you know the debate about the technical definition of recession, we've just been through.
MITCHELL: Well I'm asking what you will call it and what do you expect from the next set of figures?
PM: Well what I've said consistently is that all the risks are on the downside. I've said that for months and months and months and since we put out the Nation Building and Jobs Plan a month ago, all the global economic data that's come out has been negative, including our biggest export market Japan which went through the floor in the last quarter of last year.
Despite all of that, Australia as of now remains among the top five performing economies in the advanced economies of the world. But you know something? All the risks are on the downside. I'm on a practical business of what action I take and to reduce the impacts this global economic recession on Australia.
MITCHELL: Well fair enough. You've used the words of analogy, it's a cyclone. If it's a cyclone where is Australia? In the middle of the cyclone or where is it?
PM: Well it's, the way to look at it Neil is this. Global economic cyclone as you know, begins in America, switched to Europe, affects everywhere else in the world. Secondly, what you can do when you know a cyclone's on the way is to try and harden your defences in order to reduce the impact of the cyclone.
MITCHELL: But the cyclone  - 
PM: But hang on, hang on. You cannot say to people and I've never said to people, that any government can get out there and say, well I can stop a cyclone from coming. What you can do is reduce the impact of it. The alternative which some others argue is do nothing and just let people be buffeted by this wild storm.
My job is not to delude people and say that I can prevent a cyclone from coming. My job is to do this. As a Government, we can reduce the impact and had we not acted with the measures we've taken, and we were generating instead the collapse in economic growth we've seen in places like the United States in the December quarter, we'd be looking up to a hundred thousand more Australians who'd be losing their job in the upcoming financial year  than what would otherwise be the case.
MITCHELL: What do you expect from the next set of figures?
PM: Well, we don't have the next set of figures.
MITCHELL: I understand that. What do you expect?
PM: I said all the risks are on the downside.
MITCHELL: What does that mean. Another negative term?
PM: All the risks on the downside and it's not responsible to pluck a speculative figure out of space. We have to respond to data as we are given it. But, as I said to you before, you can either sit around and have a discussion about the definition of a recession, you can sit back and talk about it as others are doing, or you can get on with the practical business of simply saying ‘situation's bad, here's a practical cause of action, here's how we protect people's bank deposits, practical action taken, here's how we try and stimulate the economy through jobs, through a $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan, $15 billion into the schools, practical actions like that'.
MITCHELL: Is it reality to say we're either in recession or heading into it?
PM: Well right now, we've experienced one quarter of negative economic growth.
MITCHELL: Okay so you're rejecting that we're in it. Are we heading into it?
PM: Well as I said all the risks are on the downside. And it will continue to be that way based on the global economic data.
You know something Neil, you can either play the game which some others are playing, which is to basically engage in a bit of a political strategy on these questions, and I know the Liberal party's been predicting recession since the beginning of last year and at the beginning of this year.
Well you know something, out there people want to know what is a rational basis for confidence in the future, what are you doing what's already bad, and how can you rebuild confidence.
That's what I'm on about as Prime Minister, rather than playing a political game which others may be playing at the moment, all about the leadership of the Liberal party.
MITCHELL: Okay, so you deny you're avoiding the word. Is the word such poison  - 
PM: Absolutely not.
MITCHELL: You're not avoiding the word recession?
PM: I've been talking about global economic recession for the last six months. And secondly  - 
MITCHELL: Australian recession. What about Australian recessions?
PM: And secondly I have said we in Australia are not immune from the impact of this global economic recession. For Australia itself you can either have this rolling technical debate about definitions or you can get on and simply say upfront to people, it's bad and the risks are on the downside, here are the practical courses of action for dealing with it.
That's the responsible thing to do as the leader of the country, not to have some sort of rolling talk test about what one set of data means over the other. Everyone knows it's bad, everyone wants to know whether - the tradies listening to your program this morning want to know when will the school building program begin in my local primary schools and high schools so I can get a job as a tradie? They want to know the practical course of action that I'm engaged in to try and reduce the impact. That's what I intend to do. 
MITCHELL: We'll take a break, come back with more including calls for the Prime Minister in a moment.
(Ad break)
MITCHELL: It's nine to nine, the Prime Minister is with us. We'll take a call, Chris go ahead please Chris.
CHRIS: Morning Neil, morning Mr Rudd.
PM: Morning Chris, how are you?
CHRIS: Not too bad. I work in Nunawading HoleProof and I'm just wondering what you feel about the company getting so much money from the Government and then just abandoning Australia.
MITCHELL: Have you lost your job Chris?
CHRIS: Yeah.
MITCHELL: So you're one of the Pacific Brands workers that have lost their jobs?
CHRIS: Yeah.
MITCHELL: Okay. Prime Minister?
PM: Well I think what Pacific Brands has done is frankly you know, in so many respects, beyond the pale. In terms of the monies that they've got from the Government, we'll go through all of that in terms of what can be extracted back from them.
The key thing for you mate, Chris, is to do whatever we can to support you right now and that means assisting you and all your other fellow workers who have lost their job through no fault of their own because of the decision of this company.
That means what we do to support you in terms of NewStart, what we do for you in terms of support through access to any further training or retraining you need to find a new job and support in getting that job.
MITCHELL: Chris.
CHRIS: Yeah but I look at it, all the ripple effect that this company is causing, it's not only the 1,800 workers at Pac Brands, it's the suppliers of everything, how many of those companies are going to go down? It'll be much more than the 1,800 workers.
MITCHELL: Do you agree Prime Minister?
PM:   Well as Chris is right to be concerned. I've been concerned about what's been happening in the car industry for example for a long time. One of the reasons we've been out there working with the car industry is to reduce the impact of this global recession. In the textiles, clothing and footwear industry, it has been really, really hard.
The Industry Minister Kim Carr is working with this company and other companies now. But mate, that doesn't make it any better for you. And all I can say is that in terms of your needs, your circumstances and those of your fellow workers, we're going to be doing everything we possibly can to assist you, given the decision by the company.
MITCHELL: Thanks Chris, thanks for calling. You mentioned Kim Carr who said to me that nobody's job in Australia was safe, including mine. That's been addressed since but do you accept that there will be a lot more jobs to go yet?
PM: Well what we said in our most recent economic forecasts Neil was that unemployment would rise to seven per cent. And.
MITCHELL: That's optimistic now though isn't it?
PM: Well that means you are looking at the prospect of a lot of people losing their job.
MICTHELL: But isn't that seven per cent optimistic now?
PM: A lot of people are also not being able to enter the workforce, or voluntarily leaving the workforce in some cases because it's just too hard. Look as I said to you before, all the risk here is on the downside.
MITCHELL: What does that mean? Everything is on the downside, we are likely to go into recession? Unemployment is likely to go higher than seven per cent? Is that what it means?
PM: Look Neil if I had any fresh economic data to give you, I'd give it.
MITCHELL: I'm asking you for an interpretation as the man in charge.
PM: Yeah but I'm saying if I had fresh economic data I'd give it to you and interpret it but I don't. I can act on the basis of what I have. And secondly, what I can do is, this goes directly to your listeners, what can I do to make sure that another 100,000 individuals, another 100,000 Australians don't lose their jobs? And had we not acted with our economic stimulus package, the impact if we were showing the same figures as we've seen in America and in parts of Europe in the December quarter, would have resulted in a much worse outcome along those lines.
MITCHELL: Okay well look, Wall Street is down again overnight, the Bank of England has dropped interest rates, what is the next shot in your locker? What do you do next? You've had the ten billion before Christmas, you've had the new stimulus package, we are  -  everything is this on the downside as you say, what's your next shot?
PM: As I've said from the beginning in this Neil, there's no silver bullet but let me try and step you through how I think this is best dealt with in the year ahead, which is going to be a very tough year for Australia and for Victorians.
Firstly, these stimulus packages that we've referred to are to provide extra injections of investment into the economy during the course of 2009 to reduce the impact on jobs.
You know what's coming in terms of schools, in housing and in energy efficiency programs, that's about $30 billion worth of investment in those programs, in the period ahead.
Secondly what we're trying to do is to support those in the housing industry by this trebling in the first home ownership bonus and if you look at the economic statistics which came out in the last quarter of last year, we've seen a ten per cent increase in those who are using, those who are out there investing in new homes as a result of that bonus and this is a good thing.
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister we know these things are going into place. What I'm saying is what else have you got? Is there anything else or are we relying on what you've declared so far?
PM: No, what I was going to say is, as appropriate what we will then work our way through is longer term infrastructure needs for the State and for the nation. You and I have discussed these on your program before. But let me just turn to one final factor which is what underpins all of this.
You see, what I can do Neil as Prime Minister of the country and with partnership of Government like the Victorian Government, is reduce the impact but what's underpinning this is what you just correctly referred to just before. That's the sickness in global banks, so at the upcoming meeting of the Group of 20 countries in London, I'm going to that on behalf of Australia, these are the 20 effectively biggest economies in the world.
Our job is this, to work with the US, the UK and a couple of other European governments who have these major banks in their systems which have real problems in them, because they are strangling the global supply of credit and that in turn ricochets back to Australia in our economy and the money available to lend to businesses and to households. That's the core of the problem and that's why we've got to deal with that internationally.
MITCHELL: Just on banks and I know you took the decision - well accepted - to guarantee deposits, so you've got a bit of moral power here. Australia's banks' latest figures show that fees are 22 per cent higher than the UK, 11 per cent higher than the United States, they're taking in $5 billion in fees from us in a time we can't afford it. Will you impress on them that they should try and cut their fees?
PM: Absolutely. The Treasurer and I meet, or we've met again with the banks in recent weeks and we have raised expressly the question of bank fees and charges. We are fully aware of what impact this has on people in the community.
The Treasurer has already reflected his view in terms of ATM charges and we will continue on this because everyone out there - businesses, households, everyone - is facing a really tough time and we don't want see anyone adding to that burden by unnecessary charges.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your help. Peter Costello wants to help. Do you want to hear from him?
PM: I think Mr Costello wants to help Mr Turnbull by replacing Mr Turnbull in the job. But you know something Neil? That's a matter for them.


This is a great and good day for the Australian Defence community and for the Australian Defence family.
I'm sure the gentle rolling hills of Bungendore were far from the mind of General Sir John Monash when he led our forces at the Battle of Hamel, 90 years ago on the Western Front. The landscape he confronted in Northern France would certainly have looked very, very different from this and certainly very, very different after almost four years of trench warfare in that bloody conflict.
Yet we are here today to open these Headquarters of the Joint Operations Command in large part because of the lesson demonstrated near the town of Hamel in Northern France in July of 1918. The lesson of Hamel is the simple truth about coordinated military operations - that our defence forces are far more effective, vastly more effective when they work together. And it is this lesson that inspires this Joint Operations Command.
In the space of only 90 minutes at Hamel, the German Forces were defeated through an innovative strategy. A strategy that coordinated artillery, armour, infantry and aircraft, deploying a vast army of the brave men and women of the Australian, British and United State armed forces.
The lesson of Hamel was used to even greater effect in the Battle of Amiens later that year. It is a lesson that helped change the course of that war. The success of this insight of coordinated military action, of coordinated military operations that represented the principal reason why years later the British Commander Field Marshall Montgomery described Sir John Monash as the best General on the entire Western Front.
We should be proud of Monash. You in Army are proud of Monash, you in the armed forces are all proud of Monash, the nation at large should be proud of Monash, for his legacy lives on.
Monash had shown the great and critical importance of coordinating strategic and tactical elements of warfare, to give troops in the field clear direction and support. The Joint Operations Command grows out of the lessons learnt from this pioneering military history and this lesson is even more important in the 21st century than it was almost a century ago on the Western Front.
The importance of coordination today is especially critical given the complex challenges in our current strategic environment. Our armed forces must be ready to respond to a wide range of contingencies; civil strife, natural disasters and armed conflict.
The demands on our military are great. The Australian Defence Force is in a period of sustained high operational tempo. Today the Australian Defence Force is deployed in some 15 operations overseas and at home. And as Prime Minister of Australia I am proud of each and every member of the Australian Defence Force in each and every one of these operations because they do the name of Australia enormous pride.
These operations range from confronting terrorism in Afghanistan, to providing much needed support and help to the thousands of people whose lives have changed forever because of Saturday's Victorian bushfires. The ADF's joint taskforce involving up to nearly 900 ADF members at its peak has done an outstanding job in Victoria providing specialist and emergency support in response to the worst natural disaster our nation has ever faced. The ADF's response to this tragedy underscores the enormous contribution that our armed forces continue to make to Australia both at home and abroad.
The challenge of coordinating a massive range of recovery and reconstruction operations after so many towns lost everything - power, water, communications and other infrastructure, and an estimated 2,000 and more homes - has test the mettle of all involved but they have done well. Though the challenge lies ahead of us still.
The scale of this most recent challenge is indicative of the complexity of some of the challenges that the staff at these headquarters will be wrestling with day after day as they confront the strategic challenges of planning and coordinating our nation's defences.
The fundamental work for the nation is to provide for the security of the nation and we pay tribute to all who are engaged in providing for the security of our nation, Australia. Because for any Government of Australia the most fundamental responsibility is this: to maintain this nation's national security and its political sovereignty. And so therefore it is with great pleasure that I am here today at the opening of this marvellous facility.
Headquarters Joint Operations Command, HQ-JOC, will be a central element of the Government's commitment to our comprehensive whole-of-government national security arrangements.
As we have seen, contemporary threats to Australia's national security are increasingly fluid and complex. Meeting these threats will require an equally sophisticated response whether it involves counter-terrorism operations off-shore or assisting civilian authorities at home.
The recent terrorist attack in Pakistan reminds us all that terrorism is alive and well, from Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Horn of Africa and beyond. And therefore we must remain vigilant against terrorism and the threat of terrorist attacks everywhere.
The Government is committed to securing Australia and ensuring that the spectrum of national security challenges we face do not threaten our way of life. We can no longer view national security tasks through a narrow spectrum that relies on the designation of tasks to individual government agencies or to a particular branch or sub-branch of the military. In short we need to approach emerging challenges as an integrated national security community across all levels of government.
HQ-JOC will help us to achieve that integration. This place will be the focus of joint services operations and it will help the ADF to work with other agencies engaged in national security tasks when required like border protection, active engagement in operations abroad and responding to national disasters at home and abroad.
The establishment of HQ-JOC will not only enhance coordination across national security agencies, it will also help promote a cohesive and cooperative national security culture. The development of this national security culture will be essential in responding effective to the range of challenges likely to be faced by Australia now and into the future.
These headquarters are therefore important to the nation's future. Important to the building of a more secure Australia. Important to the effectiveness of our operations at home and abroad. And important to all those who serve proudly in the Australian Defence Forces.
There is one other respect in which this facility is important. It will bring new families into this area and bring a new stage to the history of Bungendore, Captain's Flat, Major's Creek, Womboin and other towns and hamlets in this region.
Before officially opening Headquarters Joint Operations Command, I'd also like to formally associate myself with the tribute just paid now by the Chief of the Defence Force to the source of this great facility's inspiration; General John Baker.
General Baker was a fine Australian. He was a fine military officer. He served his country with distinction in Vietnam and in command roles in Australia. He also was a military leader who understood that our defence forces must be led across the forces. He had always a whole-of-defence view. He was from the army, but he was army, air force, navy. He was defence.
As we already heard he was instrumental in shaping the ADF's high level command structures. This facility is very much the embodiment of General Baker's dedication, professionalism and commitment to excellence and a proper reflection of his professional spirit and we honour him. We are indebted to his vision.
Through the successful operation of these Headquarters, General Baker's legacy to our nation will endure.
And it is therefore with great honour and in the presence of Mrs Baker and so many of her family here today that I invite Mrs Baker to unveil the bust of General Baker as I declare the General John Baker Complex officially open.
[ends]


The Prime Minister of Iraq, HE Nouri Al-Maliki, will visit Australia from 11-15 March 2009.
The Prime Minister looks forward to welcoming Prime Minister Al-Maliki to Australia to discuss the future of the relationship between our two countries as we transition from a military focus to a more broad-based engagement.
The success of Iraq's recent provincial elections in January 2009 is evidence of growing security and stability in the country.
Australia is strongly supportive of measures Iraq is taking to strengthen democracy and welcomes the recent free and fair elections, giving 
Iraqi citizens a voice in the future of their country.
Australia continues to provide significant development assistance to Iraq to support its efforts to bring greater prosperity to the Iraqi people. 


International Women's Day provides all Australians with the opportunity to celebrate the progress made in advancing gender equality and the role of women in our society, while also encouraging us to continue to work together to create a world where the contribution of women is fully valued and appreciated.
Australia is a long-standing supporter and advocate of women's rights, being one of the first countries to grant women's suffrage and the first country where women could stand for election for national parliament. This year also marks the 25th anniversary of Australia's Sex Discrimination Act.
While our history is strong in this respect, we continue to pursue three key priority areas -  improving women's economic security and independence, ensuring women's voices are heard at all levels of decision-making, and reducing violence against women.
UNIFEM Australia's theme this year - Unite to End Violence Against Women - provides an opportunity to reflect upon this serious problem. In November 2008, Australia signed on to UNIFEM's Say NO to Violence against Women campaign.
In May last year, the Government appointed a National Council to develop a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children. The Plan will aim to reduce the incidence and impact of sexual assault and domestic and family violence.
It will be a real step towards a world where relationships are based on mutual respect and where all women and girls are able to thrive and look ahead to a bright future.
Today, we celebrate the role of women in our lives, and their important contribution to society. Today we also focus on the need to advance further the opportunities for women and celebrate the progress that we have made thus far.


Commonwealth Day is an opportunity to celebrate the unique association of Commonwealth members. It is a partnership of countries who share a common interest in improving the livelihoods of their peoples through a commitment to the fundamental Commonwealth principles of democracy, good governance, the rule of law and the protection of human rights. This year marks the 60th anniversary of the London Declaration, when the Commonwealth's colonial legacy was transformed into a partnership based on equality, choice and consensus. 
The Commonwealth Day theme for 2009, ‘thecommonwealth@60  -  serving a new generation', highlights the importance of youth in addressing the shared challenges facing Commonwealth members. The Commonwealth's commitment to youth is clearly exhibited by the work of the Commonwealth Youth Programme, which is dedicated to empowering young people. Through our engagement with the Commonwealth and the broader international community, Australia will continue to work actively to ensure young people have the opportunity to become active citizens who understand their rights and responsibilities.
Australia continues to provide opportunities to young people. The Youth Ambassadors for Development program has enabled more than 2,500 young Australians to share their skills and knowledge in developing countries and make a difference in some of the world's poorest nations. Furthermore, the Australian Government provides up to 1,000 Australian Development Scholarships each year to contribute to the long development needs of Australia's partner countries.
As we look to the next 60 years of the Commonwealth, I am confident that we can make a significant contribution towards empowering young people throughout the Commonwealth and continue to address the shared challenges of our era, and those of the next.


PM RUDD: This is the first time that we have the visit of an Iraqi Prime Minister to Australia. It is truly an historic occasion. The Prime Minister and I have had extensive discussions this morning with each other, with our senior advisers and then just now between our ministers in a meeting conducted in the Cabinet Room. 
Australia's relationship with Iraq is entering into a new phase. The Prime Minister and I have agreed that it is time to build a strong relationship based on our broad commercial and economic ties and we have outlined today specific areas in which that will unfold in the future.
Australia's security relationship with Iraq will continue to remain important. We still have a small number of Australian embedded forces in Iraq. We still have Australian forces defending our embassy in Baghdad. Of course we still have our naval frigate in the Gulf. These are important, continuing contributions to the security relationship.
But today we've also agreed to open a new page in this relationship, anchored in our commercial and economic ties. And we've agreed to develop that in six specific areas.
First, agriculture. Second, resources and energy. Third, public health. Fourth, education and training. Fifth, continued cooperation in other forms of security assistance. And sixth, in trade negotiations.
In agriculture, when I visited Baghdad about 12 months ago, I had a very simple question to my friend the Iraqi Prime Minister, which was ‘how can we in Australia now help you?'
His Excellency's answer to me was very quick. He said ‘in Australia, could you train as many of our agricultural experts as possible, with expertise in particular in dry land farming?'
My response then was immediate - that in the year to follow, we would have 100 agricultural experts being trained in Australian institutes. I'm pleased to report we've exceeded that, we now have 120.
But this is simply the beginning in what we intend to build as a very big, broad and strong relationship in agriculture. Both on the research side and on the commercial side. Australia has much to offer given our vast expertise in this area. And I'm pleased to report that the Prime Minister is welcoming of my initiative for Minister Tony Burke to take an Australian delegation to Iraq later this year.
I'm pleased to note the statement made just before by the Iraqi Trade Minister that Iraq has also agreed on new wheat sales from Australia to Iraq.
Secondly, a few remarks about resources and energy.
Australia and Iraq will cooperate closely again in the training of Iraqi personnel in the oil and gas exploration industries, in partnership with our support for the large Australian resource companies in their desire for increased commercial opportunities in Iraq. We will work within both those areas to enhance our overall cooperation in resources and energy.
And finally in the area of public health, the Iraqi Prime Minister informed me today that various Australian firms have already tendered successfully for aspects of public hospital construction in Iraq. A number of other Australian firms aim to tender for further large scale teaching hospital projects in Iraq, and of course we in Australia have lent our strong support to their interest in securing this important work in building the new public health system of Iraq.
So in this new phase of our relationship, this new economic phase of our relationship, we intend together to build on these six strong pillars. And we will develop and agree on appropriate memorandums of understanding and institutional arrangements to take each of these core areas of the economic and commercial relationship forward.
And finally if I could again at a personal level welcome the Prime Minister to Canberra as he welcomed me to Baghdad only a year ago. Prime Minister, you should know that in Australia you are seriously among friends; genuine friends. The ties between our two peoples go back a long, long time. There are many Iraqi Australians and more broadly Arab Australians who make a huge contribution to our life in this country. You are a welcome guest in our country and I invite you to respond to my remarks.
PM AL-MALIKI (translation): Thank you very much and I would like to express my gratitude for the reception and the hospitality that you afford us. I bring my gratitude and the Iraqi Government's gratitude for the contribution by the Australian forces in Iraq in helping rebuild Iraq, particularly in the security sector.
I also would like to take this opportunity to thank Australia for forgiving Iraq's debts, which were accumulated due to the policies of the previous regime due to its ill-conceived adventures and wars.
My visit to Australia reflects the desire of my Government to strengthen the relations with Australia and to move forward in the new phase that Iraq has entered. The visit has been successful so far and it reflects the new phase that Australia and Iraq have entered and also reflects the stage, the new stage that Iraq looks forward to go.
The meeting that I had with the Prime Minister this morning was very constructive and it dealt with several areas of cooperation that we both look forward into capitalising on in the next few months. The Prime Minister and I and our respective Ministers have also dealt with several areas and we look forward to the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding.
The Prime Minister has outlined the areas for the Memorandum of Understanding. In this Memorandum the agricultural sector is the most important. Unfortunately it has deteriorated so badly in Iraq due to the policies of the previous regime.
What we discussed was two areas. One is the training of staff and experts working in the agriculture sector, as well as inviting Australian companies to invest in the agriculture sector in Iraq.
Australian private companies and organisations have already entered the Iraqi market and they have expressed interest in the construction sector and the first result is the building of teaching hospitals in Baghdad.
Australia also has vast expertise in the energy and oil field and two big Australian companies have entered the field of developing Iraqi oilfields.
Trade is another area, and also the security sector where Australia is helping Iraq in strengthening the abilities of the police sector and in crime fighting in Iraq.
A number of Iraqi police officers have been trained in Australia and at the moment there is another contingent of Iraqi police officers receiving their training in Australia and the future is promising again for another group of police officers to come to Australia.
In response to a decision by the Prime Minister, the Australian Minister for Agriculture would visit Iraq soon to discuss matters of cooperation with his counterpart in Iraq.
At the moment our Minister of Foreign Affairs is meeting with the Australian Ministry of Energy to examine and to put the final touches for the protocol, I beg your pardon, for the Memorandum of Understanding.
This Memorandum of Understanding would be agreed upon and signed this evening. It reflects the desire of the two Governments for further development and further relations in the several areas that the Prime Minister has outlined.
PM RUDD: Ladies and gentlemen, we will take two questions from Iraqi and Australian journalists, if we could begin with this gentleman here.
JOURNALIST (TRANSLATED): Mr Prime Minister, after the support that Australia has afforded Iraq, would Australia reconsider dropping all the debts that Iraq owes Australia, in the next phase.
PM RUDD: I'm waiting for something to be lost in translation.
JOURNALIST (TRANSLATED): The United Nations Security Council is reviewing the sanctions against Iraq and will Australia be supporting Iraq in agreeing to the dropping of all the sanctions in the next phase?
PM RUDD: Our attitude to the new Government of Iraq is one of great support and our delegations are working closely together in New York on this important matter. We strongly support the interests of the Iraqi Government on this matter and we believe that we can make positive progress on it.
I think our friends in Baghdad should regard us as a very strong friend in court on this matter.
I know there will be some technical controversies concerning it but we believe this is a positive step forward and we will be working closely with our friends in Iraq in that direction.
JOURNALIST: Mr Al-Maliki, there have been 60 people killed in two mass attacks this week in the Baghdad area after a period of calm. What does that say about the Iraqi security forces' ability to protect the country once the US forces have gone? And when will the Australian security attachment be required to leave your country?
PM AL-MALIKI (TRANSLATED): That was a lapse to a good period of calm in Iraq. Nevertheless it was a regrettable event. The Iraqi police and the security authorities in the country are trying to do their best to bring the perpetrators to justice.
I must stress, notwithstanding the gruesome operations that took place and the large number of victims, Al Qaeda extremists and terrorists in Iraq have lost their capabilities of confronting and challenging the security forces in Iraq.
However, what happened was and appears to be an attempt by them to prove that they still exist in Iraq but we are intent on doing our best to secure the situation in the country.
The situation in Iraq has been positively developing, not only in the intelligence area but also in operations as well.
The situation keeps continuing and is getting better day after day and that is through the close cooperations between the people and the security forces in Iraq.
When it comes to the withdrawal of the American forces, I believe that Iraqis will be able of taking the whole situation in their hands.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd if I could get you on a few domestic issues. Can you explain why you didn't fight harder to keep in place the existing guidelines on AusAID funding for abortion and are you worried that it would put Steve Fielding offside in the Senate?
And the jobs figures have just come out, they are now 5.2 per cent. Can you comment on those? And who would you prefer to face on jobs at the next election, Peter Costello or Malcolm Turnbull?
PM RUDD: On the first matter, these are matters of conscience which are voted on conscience grounds and that was the case within our parliamentary party.
On the second matter if I could say this, any job loss in Australia is one too many as far as I am concerned. But had we waited and done nothing, instead of acting decisively, these unemployment figures would be much worse.
And on the other matter that you raise, that's entirely an internal matter for the Liberal party.
(inaudible)
Could I also as I conclude, Prime Minister, acknowledge the presence with us now of members, both Government members and opposition members of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs, Trade and Defence, who are with us today.
And they are in attendance specifically to honour your presence with us.
[ends] 


Salaam Alaykum.
Ahlan wa Sahlan si Australia.
Today is a day of historic significance.
Your Excellency, your visit is the first ever by a Prime Minister of your country to Australia. It is therefore a day of great celebration. It is a day which has become therefore a great symbol of all that your country has achieved in the face of great turmoil in recent years, that we can now welcome you to Australia.
This building in which we meet is the symbol of Australian democracy and it is proper that we should host you here because you represent through your personal courage a continuing but increasingly successful struggle to establish a democracy in a place that was the cradle of civilisation.
Many of us in Australia studied the history of ancient Mesopotamia, studied the history of Ur of the Chaldees, the history of what was called the Fertile Crescent. To see this modern state and democratic state of Iraq emerge from such and ancient and revered history to join the society and community of nations today is indeed a good and a great thing.
Mr Prime Minister, I met you for the first time in Baghdad in December 2007, shortly after I came to office. Your own personal courage in acting against the Shia militia in 2008 was a turning point in convincing the people of Iraq that you led a government for all Iraqis.
Your and nation and its people have been through extraordinary difficulties and your leadership has been a critical element in helping your nation overcome these difficulties.
Of course great challenges still lie ahead. Just this week we have seen in Baghdad terrible, terrible suicide bombings. We and all countries of the world condemn all such terrorist acts and admire you, Prime Minister, for your continuing courage in standing up to these terrorists.
And I can say Prime Minister that in the midst of continuing challenges in your country, the Government and people of Australia particularly appreciated your sending your condolences and those of the Iraqi people following the recent tragic bushfires in Victoria.
Prime Minister, I am pleased that you have been able to visit Australia so we could discuss today how Australia and Iraq can work in the partnership in the years that lie ahead because I think the time has come for Australia and Iraq to begin a new phase in our relationship.
Through our discussions today, we are settling the framework for a new relationship that is broadly based and not simply focused on military and security relations.
That is why today we agreed to enhance cooperation in six key areas  -  what we described as the six new pillars of the Iraq-Australia relationship. Agriculture, resources and energy, trade, public health, training and research and of course security.
And I am pleased that our officials have been busy at work today since you and I in our discussions this morning agreed that these would be the six pillars of the new broadened relationship between our two countries, our two economies and our two peoples.
I am pleased that this evening, following dinner, we will both sign the document which our officials have worked on today.
By my calculation this agreement has been concluded within eight hours of its conception - that may be a record in global diplomacy, which says something about the speed with which global diplomacy normally operates.
Prime Minister, I was particularly pleased today that we agreed to enhance our cooperation in agriculture.
Iraq as we know is an ancient home of farming.
It is at the heart of the Fertile Crescent that saw great developments in agriculture that spread throughout the world.
Today Australia too is a proud innovator in agriculture and given that we both face dry climates, we have much to learn together and we have much to gain from working together.
We already have 120 Iraqi students in Australia on scholarships learning about world's best practice in livestock management, in environmental management and in agricultural administration.
Our aim is simple  -  to provide a group of specialists for your country with the skills to develop a strong agricultural sector.
It is an important part of our development assistance cooperation with your nation. It is also, I believe, an important foundation for the commercial relationship in agriculture between our two countries as well.
Prime Minister, your desire for your country to obtain food security for your people is understandable, legitimate and one to be supported. We in Australia wish to be partners with you in securing that ambition for your country and for your people.
Today we agreed on a new $17 million program that adds another strand to this cooperation, this cooperation in agriculture.
At the same time, we are also looking to develop our economic links more broadly.
Australia and Iraq can do a lot more together. Australian resource companies can help Iraq develop its natural resources and Iraqis are welcome to learn from what expertise we have to offer.
Furthermore we also have expertise in design and construction in many areas.
This evening, Prime Minister, I was pleased to be able to introduce to you representatives of the Australian design and construction industry who have already tendered successfully and hopefully in the future will tender successfully again for the construction of public hospital facilities in your country, as you build your public health system.
We also look more broadly for greater cooperation in the overall area of education, training and research. At the high-tech end of the spectrum Australian firms have also much to offer our friends in Iraq.
Whether it is in the field of border surveillance or health systems, Australian firms are world beaters in their fields. There is ample scope for greater economic and trade relationships between our nations, and our two economies.
Prime Minister your nation has been through troubling times. But under your leadership, it is emerging into a much brighter future. And you are to be congratulated for it.
Before we spoke of our aspirations for our wider region - yours in the Middle East, ours in East Asia and the Pacific but more broadly in terms of our engagement with the world.
Our common aspiration was expressed in an Arabic expression which runs something like this  -  Al-Sadieq wallah adu waheed. Which for the fluent Arabic speakers in the Australian parliament of whom there are none, hence my confidence in saying what I just said, means ‘to have 1,000 friends but not a single enemy'. This is a great aspiration for a government leader and for a leader of a new democracy in so troubled a region as the wider Middle East.
Australia wants to be a partner with you, Prime Minister, and a partner with the people of Iraq in building that future. These are not just fine diplomatic sentiments as you would expect on a formal state occasion, these are very much the practical aspirations of the Australian Government and the Australian people in working with you in the new six pillars of our economic relationship, this new phase in the Iraq-Australia relationship.
Today we took important steps towards achieving that goal.
We now have a framework for our vital work together in the future.
Prime Minister I thank you for your cooperation and please know this -personally and to members of your delegation, you are indeed welcome guests in our country, Australia.
I thank you.


Today the Prime Minister met with Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki of Iraq.
Mr Al-Maliki is the first Prime Minister of Iraq to visit Australia and his visit is of historic importance.
The Prime Minister congratulated Mr Al-Maliki on the significant improvement in Iraq's security situation over the past year and on Iraq's continued economic and political progress, reflected in successful provincial elections in January.
Prime Minister Al-Maliki conveyed his and the people of Iraq's deep appreciation for Australia's continued strong commitment to a secure, prosperous and democratic Iraq.
The leaders agreed that as the security situation in Iraq continues to improve, there is increasing scope to strengthen and broaden the bilateral relationship.
A major focus of discussion was strengthening trade and investment links. Over the past four years Australian contracts in Iraq have totalled some A$3 billion.
The leaders committed to build on this strong performance, particularly using Australia's world leading agricultural and resource sector expertise.
Australia will appoint a Senior Trade Commissioner to contribute to stronger commercial links.
The leaders agreed that there should be more engagement by Australian firms in the oil and gas sector in Iraq and encouraged training opportunities in resource fields in Australia.
The leaders also discussed Iraq's interest in increasing Australian wheat imports, and Australian business interest in the construction of hospitals and other scientific facilities in Iraq, and border monitoring technologies.
The Prime Minister reaffirmed Australia's commitment to assisting Iraq with its development needs, with a strong focus on agriculture, public sector governance, improving basic service delivery and supporting vulnerable populations.
Australia will also have an AusAID presence in Baghdad to support the Government's A$165 million three-year development assistance commitment.
The leaders agreed to an Australia-Iraq Agricultural Partnership focused on bolstering Iraq's agricultural productivity and food security as a central element of Iraq's reconstruction and development.
As a first step in this Partnership, we agreed that the Australian Minister for Agriculture, the Hon Tony Burke MP, would lead an Australian delegation to Iraq this year to discuss further agricultural cooperation, including in the commercial sphere.
Prime Minister Al-Maliki welcomed the commencement this year of more than 100 Australian agricultural scholarships to train Iraqis in livestock, plant, water and environmental management.
Prime Minister Rudd announced that Australia will begin a new range of agricultural initiatives, including:
• a $4 million initiative to address soil salinity around Baghdad and Southern Iraq
• a $9 million initiative on quarantine and border control training, and
• a $4 million initiative to create rural businesses through rural finance.
As a start to building international mechanisms to underpin this growing relationship, the leaders agreed to a bilateral Memorandum of Understanding on Education and Training to facilitate people-to-people links between the two countries.


The Prime Minister and the Prime Minister of Iraq Nouri al-Maliki met on 12 March 2009.  They agreed that the first visit to Australia by a Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq symbolised the strength of the bilateral relationship and opened a new era of cooperation.  Both underlined the genuine friendship between the two countries.
The Prime Ministers committed to further strengthening the bilateral relationship, including by broadening cooperation across a wide spectrum of shared interests and through intensifying trade and investment links.
They agreed an integrated framework to deliver a new era of bilateral cooperation focused on key areas of complementarity between the two countries.  This will be based on six pillars: agriculture; resources and energy; trade cooperation; education, training and research; public health; security and border control.
To take forward this framework, the Prime Ministers agreed to the conclusion of six Memoranda of Understanding to be completed by no later than June 2009:
     * A Memorandum of Understanding on Agriculture, including a focus on: 
         * Strengthening Iraqi capabilities; for example, through training, research and development, technology cooperation and administrative support
         * Strengthening commercial links related to agriculture.
     * A Memorandum of Understanding on Resources and Energy, including a focus on: 
         *  Iraq-Australia collaboration on the development of Iraq's oil and gas industry, including human resources
         * Australian investment in Iraq's resources and energy sectors
     * A Memorandum of Understanding on Trade Cooperation, including a focus on: 
         * Strengthening bilateral trade and investment
         * Capacity building for Iraq in international trade
     * A Memorandum of Understanding on Education, Training and Research, including a focus on:
         * Collaboration between institutions
         * Scholarships in areas of mutual interest
     * A Memorandum of Understanding on Public Health, including a focus on: 
         * The continued development of Iraq's health system; for example, medical professionals, medical research and support for primary health care
         * Use of Australian expertise to provide public health infrastructure
     * A Memorandum of Understanding on Security and Border Control, including a focus on:
         * Strengthening border surveillance and monitoring capabilities
         * Support for Iraq's Ministry of Interior; for example, capacity building in forensics and DNA technology and strengthening police capabilities.
The Prime Ministers agreed to a mechanism for overseeing the implementation of these agreements.  This will involve establishment annual talks by senior officials who will report to respective Ministers, with respective Foreign Ministers to review progress annually.


BEAUMONT: The Prime Minister of Australia is in Perth and he joins me on the program now. Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Simon. Thanks for having me on your program.
BEAUMONT: Kevin, can I ask have you looked at the paper this morning? Have you seen the community reaction to these acquittals?
PM: I must admit, I got into Perth at one o'clock this morning local time, coming from Canberra, and the first thing I read this morning was the front page of The West Australian. I had to read this article twice. I mean, I'm stunned by it all. I'm reluctant to comment on the individual details of the case because I'm simply not familiar with them because I've been in Canberra.
But can I just say this about police? I mean, our police including here in WA put themselves in the front line every day in very difficult and dangerous circumstances, most of which are never reported. I think it's high time the community just got absolutely behind the police in everything they do.
I mean, it's time we had a new attitude of respect for the police because they are dealing with problems of violence, of domestic violence, of alcohol-induced violence, of binge drinking. Every police commissioner I've spoken to in the eastern states has told me how hard things are getting in central business district areas in particular.
And I think what we have here is a wake-up call for the community to rally behind our police. They are doing a first class job in the community, and I think it is absolutely important that we, you know, use this event to, as a focal point to rally behind our police.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, do you support in broad terms the jury system in Australia?
PM: Yes, I've been a longstanding supporter of the jury system. And these matters concerning overall law reform are dealt with from time to time by the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General between the various states and territories. But that does not mean from time to time errors don't occur in the administration of justice. That's not a comment I make in particular reference to any particular case.
But these laws are defined in every state and territory to the Commonwealth, and they have been around for a long time. But we need to focus again on this extraordinary event and as I said, let's use it to focus again on what we can do more to protect our police on the beat.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, on matters federal. The $900 payment that has started turning up in people's bank accounts. Tell us today, give my listeners some advice on what they should use it for.
PM: Well Simon, I've never been in the business of directing consumers how to spend. That's a matter for them. Some will save some of it. Others will spend most of it. And these will be individual decisions.
But let me put it into the framework of why we've actually done it. There's a global economic recession out there. It's like a cyclone. It started in America. It's worked its way through Europe. It's now across the rest of the world.
Responsible governments cannot say to their people that we can stop a cyclone from crossing our shores. What you can say is you can reduce the damage.
The question of how do you do that? And what we've done is three specific things. One, stabilise our financial institutions by providing guarantees for every deposit holder in the country. Secondly, short term stimulus to provide in payments to pensioners, to carers, to families, to veterans, as well as to farmers in hardship, and the reason there is to provide support to them in the midst of a global recession.
But in particular this, we have one and a half million Australians employed in the retail sector including in WA, and the health of our retail sector is critically dependent on keeping consumption up. Otherwise the unemployment consequences would be much worse.
The third thing we're doing, of course, is our own infrastructure package which is going to hit schools right across West Australia soon, every primary school in West Australia and every primary school in Australia being the beneficiaries of the $15 billion school modernisation program to provide local jobs for local tradies as well as modernise our schools.
That's our strategy to reduce the impact of the recession on Australians and West Australians, and these payments are one part of it.
BEAUMONT: Mr Rudd, if some of the payments are a portion to families based on the number of children that they have, does it not necessarily follow that the expenses should be outgoing based on bringing up kids for education, books, uniforms, kids' sport, doesn't it logically follow you expect families to spend that money on their kids?
PM: Well we have entitled this set of payments of course, back to school payments, to assist families with the extra costs that they face at the beginning of each year in getting their kids back to school. And certainly in my discussions with mums and dads across the country, wrestling with the very practical expenses of uniforms and books and all those other things, I think they appreciate the support. But could I say Simon, the other part  - 
BEAUMONT: You don't expect them to spend, it's called correctly, it's titled back to school, but you don't expect people who receive it may just spend it on education.
PM: Well Simon, I cannot as I said at the beginning of our interview put out a directive on what people can and can't spend this money on. The key thing is that we want to provide support for families who are doing it tough. Families have been helped by a four percentage point cut in interest rates since last September. We're providing additional support as well.
But the overall benefit is in addition as follows  -  to provide support for the retail sector because it employs one and a half million Australians and that's about 14 per cent of the entire Australian workforce. It's a very big sector and if I look around the world at what's happening with unemployment levels in other countries going through the absolute roof, and I look at the collapse in retail sales in all those countries to have gone through the floor, there is a direct relation between the two of them and the importance therefore of supporting jobs in our retail sector.
BEAUMONT: Do we need warnings on bottles of packaged alcohol. Do we need a health warning on alcohol do you think?
PM: Well our overall approach through the Health Minister in working on proper health warnings for alcoholic drinks is we believe that consumers need as much knowledge as possible in terms of what they're drinking and the impact on their health. Often this is detailed and specific to different categories of drinks, and these are things obviously to be worked out between the relevant health ministers and the health professionals. But overall I'm always on the side of proper consumer protection and knowledge.
BEAUMONT: So you do support warnings on bottles?
PM: Well it depends on the category of drinks we're talking about. As a general principle, I'm in full support of ensuring that we've got full knowledge out there for consumers in terms of what they are drinking or what they are eating, in terms of its potential impact on their health. But as I said, I'm sure there are technical debates between the health experts in different categories of drinks, and what works most effectively in different cases.
BEAUMONT: Do you think alcohol advertising should be banned during sports broadcasts before 8.30 at night?
PM: Look on the overall question of advertising, my general approach has been that consumers have the ultimate right of choice on these matters. They can be informed about what's available out there in the product market but at the same time there are public advertising campaigns in most of the states to be warning people also the impact of excessive drinking on their health. I think it's important to get this balance right and that's certainly been our approach.
We also have a view that it's important to ensure that consumers have as much information as possible about the impact of drinking and young people in particular the impact of binge drinking. Because the evidence that we've been presented with as the Federal Government on excessive alcohol consumption by kids as low as 17, 15, 13 on their subsequent brain development, not to mention the problems of foetal alcohol syndrome for young girls in particular who become pregnant when they are intoxicated, is a grave and emerging problem. Problems by the way I've discussed at some length with Dr Fiona Stanley here in Western Australia.
BEAUMONT: Alright PM, I'm not really sure what you think about either of those issues, about alcohol labels on bottles or  - 
PM: Well as I said my general principle Simon is that I believe that we're going to have proper consumer knowledge, but what I'm not prepared to say here and now is that we have a blanket approach to the question of labelling of every category. I would much rather take the advice of the health experts on that rather than simply you know, issue a general directive. But I would like to see much more consumer information available to people by way of appropriate labelling and warning than is currently the case.
On the question of television advertising you were asking about before, I believe it's important to get the balance right. Consumers should know what's available for them. There are also responsible drinking (inaudible) out there by parts of the alcohol industry.
I also believe governments have the responsibility to warn young people in particular, up front and direct, that the impact of binge drinking on their lives and the evidence I've seen is that it's all bad.
BEAUMONT: Alright. PM we're running out of time. The oil spill in Queensland, off your home state of Queensland, off the coast. They're now saying it could be up to a hundred tonnes of oil, 40 kilometres of damaged beaches. Can you commit federally to any cleanup or any resourcing?
PM: We will, as of today, we'll work very closely with the Queensland Government and authorities on a maximum pitch-in by the Commonwealth to assist the state authorities in dealing with this potential environmental tragedy. We're still working our way through the details of it.
But on, I've got to say, when you're looking at such treasured assets as we have along the Queensland coast, it's important for all governments to pitch in. And we'll certainly be doing that with the Queensland Government notwithstanding the fact that they're in the middle of an election.
BEAUMONT: Alright, Mr Rudd thanks for your time today. We appreciate talking to you as always. You're in Perth for sadly for Bev Gallop's funeral. Is that right?
PM: Yes Simon I am. And whatever people's politics are, listening to your program, I think most West Australians hold Geoff Gallop in high respect as I certainly do. He's a longstanding friend, and this has been a real tragedy for Geoff and his family. And it's an important day for us all to pay respect to her contributions to the state of West Australia and through her, his great contribution to the state and the nation as well.
BEAUMONT: Alright. Mr Rudd thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Simon.
[ends]


It's so good to be back home.
It's good to be back home in Queensland.
And it's good to be back amongst many old friends.
And one of those friends I've known for 20 years.
Now that's a fair slice of time.
You do get to know somebody over 20 years.
We worked together under Wayne Goss.
Since then, she's worked as a Minister for Communications, Education, Treasury, Deputy Premier and now Premier.
That friend is Anna Bligh.
A good person.
A strong leader.
With a no nonsense, practical down-to-earth approach.
Someone who speaks her mind  -  and in my experience, speaks her mind forcefully.
And a person refined through the fire of public office.
Friends, we live in a time when leadership such as this is now put to the test.
We live in a time where there are no easy choices.
Only hard choices.
Since Anna has become Premier and I Prime Minister, we have seen the onset of the greatest global economic crisis, the greatest global economic recession in three quarters of a century.
For the first time since the Second World War, the global economy will shrink in 2009.
For the first time since the war, global trade will shrink in 2009.
More than 30 global banks have either collapsed or been bailed out by their home governments.
Stock markets around the world have lost more than half of their value in the last year.
Superannuation funds have lost more than one fifth.
And no country, including Australia, and no state, including Queensland, is immune from this global economic storm, as jobs are smashed across the world.
Virtually every political leader in the world recognises the size and seriousness of the global economic recession except Mr Springborg who says it's “peripheral to what's happening in Queensland”, and Mr Turnbull who says it's all “overhyped”.
How can you begin to deal with the threat that now confronts Australia and Queensland, created by the global economic recession, if Mr Springborg as Premier, says the warnings about the seriousness of the threat are “absolute nonsense”?
Friends, there are two possible responses to the global economic recession and its impact on Australia and Queensland jobs.
You can either sit back, wait and do nothing and leave people to face the full force of the global economic storm unprotected as the Liberals and Nationals recommend.
Or you can act decisively, to stimulate the economy, to support jobs, to reduce the impact of the storm - as the Queensland Government is doing.
That is the absolute choice here in these difficult and dangerous times.
Let every Queensland family fend for themselves against the storm, or instead have a government that steps into build our defences against the storm - because we are all in this together.
Friends, together with Anna Bligh I'm in the business of building our defences against the global economic storm and its impact on Queensland jobs.
That's why we're working together to invest up to $2.5 billion in every one of Queensland's 1,449 primary schools.
To the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, to boost jobs and to build better schools for the future.
That's why we've worked together to invest in building state of the art trades training centres across 85 of Queensland's secondary schools, to boost jobs and to build the skills we need for the future  -  with more to come.
That's why we've worked together to invest in 48 thousand new computers in Queensland's secondary schools  -  with more to come.
And in partnership with Queensland, we've now created places for nearly 14 thousand people in Productivity Places programs, undertaking pre-apprenticeships, and out of trades apprenticeship, to help our young people through the global recession and to build the skills we will need for economic recovery.
Here's to the practical stuff of governments that we do together to reduce the impact of the storm, not just to stand back and say I have no responsibility at all to protect people from the storm.
The Liberals and Nationals have an approach which says that somehow they have no responsibility to defend us from the onslaught from the global economy.
We have a different approach.
Friends, that's Anna's plan and our plan to work together to steer Queensland through these stormy economic seas that lie ahead.
Mr Springborg offers a different plan in three parts.
To deny there is a global economic threat to jobs here at home.
To refuse to support practical projects to reduce the damage to Queensland jobs.
And worse, to add to the damage, by deliberately throwing 12 thousand Queenslanders out of jobs, by cutting $1 billion from Queensland's public services.
I say to Mr Springborg  -  wrong, wrong, and wrong.
Mr Springborg's policy of sacking another 12 thousand Queenslanders in the middle of a global economic recession is not just risky, it's not just reckless, it's downright dangerous.
I ask Mr Springborg this  -  how on earth can you credibly tackle unemployment by deliberately making another 12 thousand people unemployed?
Friends, Queensland and Australia are now staring at the eye of the global economic storm.
Now is not the time to risk an unstable minority government led by a man whose explicit policy is to make another 12 thousand people unemployed.
Now is the time for a Premier capable of strong leadership and a practical plan to boost jobs, and build the infrastructure we need for our future.
Friends, please welcome one such leader, Anna Bligh, Premier of Queensland.


When Brian was introducing me before and said that I'd be treated with due courtesy, I thought I'd come to the wrong establishment; knowing something of the history of this establishment.
But I was also handed as I walked up a note from a hopeless Irish romantic which reads as follows:
Dear Mr Rudd, if possible could you wish my wife Angela a happy 20th wedding anniversary? We got married on the 16th of March 1989 in Dublin, Ireland and emigrated to Australia two weeks later. Thank you. Miles Warren.
Miles Warren  -  stand up. (Applause)
Well ladies and gentleman, it is customary on St Patrick's Day for politicians to lay claim to their Irish ancestry, however tenuously. To wax lyrical on the bonds of history that tie Australia - and in fact one in 10 Australians who come from Erin's shore - with Ireland itself and to so kiss the blarney stone on a night such as tonight that in fact we see fact itself form a seamless bond with folklore and fiction - so that by night's end, courtesy of a Guinness or two, you'll all be believed that in fact you are led by a lady called Anna O'Bligh and that her opponent is Liam Patrick O'Springborg.
Such is the power of Guinness.
But you will hear no such blarney from me when I tell you that in fact I am a direct descendent of St Kevin, which of itself is problematic when you reflect upon the fact that St Kevin founded an ancient monastic order. Think about it. Problematic but not impossible.
But St Kevin is in fact much misunderstood because there is not an unreasonable school of thought in Irish history which says that indeed St Kevin and not St Patrick should be Ireland's patron saint.
Personally I have no such view, none whatsoever. Others could for example commend St Kevin's virtue, the sheer piety and poetry of his name. You mock. A poetry so deep and so broad and so rich that Dame Edna herself has written that it's impossible for anyone reputable, let alone as Prime Minister to be possibly called Kevin, which is why I have formed an International Society of Much Misunderstood Kevins. Kevin Costner is our patron.
And being an Irish dinner I imagine there are a few Kevins in the room. Any Kevins in the room? All misunderstood, each and every one of you.
But I digress. But should Eamon, upon his return to the Irish Republic, take this view as something of merit and in his discussions with the Irish church and with the Dail and chooses to change of course the Saint's name, the patron saint of Ireland, there will be no objection officially from the Antipodes.
But should that not be possible, and I fear it won't be, I can lay claim to ties less spiritual but more familial to Erin's Isle because beyond the blarney, my maternal grandmother Hannah Cashin was the daughter or Irish parents, both coming from a small parish of Ballingarry in Country Tipperary. Anyone here from Ballingarry? Much misunderstood.
Those parents, Owen Cashin and Johannah Maher, arrived here in Brisbane in 1887, they may well have known each other from their home town, having both been baptised in Ballingarry's Church of the Assumption. Ballingarry might have only been a small parish in County Tipperary but I am pleased to report it looms large in the history of the Irish rebellions of the 19th century.
It's a town where the Irish national tricolour of green, white and orange was first unfurled by the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848 - in dramatic scenes where instead of the rebels taking siege in a local house, the police had to take siege in a local house against the rebels because the police didn't have the numbers. It was a clearly a much troubled town. The house still stands today as a national monument or so I'm advised. And the leader of that rebellion, William Smith O'Brien, was punished with one thing worse than death by hanging - transportation to Australia.
In fact, Eamon, you may well be aware that one in five Irish convicts transported to Australia came here guilty of political insurrection. And most of them later joined the Australian Labor Party.
Not only was my grandmother from a town of rebels, her father's family the Cashins were deeply entwined in an Irish factional fight which raged across Tipperrary through most of the 19th Century between the Shanavests and the Caravets.
Indeed, local newspapers in 1838 reported the murder of one William Cashin, my forebear - well not exactly, related - in a fight between the Shanavests and Caravets at Ballingarry Fair. A stone deal the mortal blow to his forehead.
So there you have it - republicans, seditionists, murderers, faction fighters, all in the family tree. I was therefore destined for a career in the Labor Party.
However, one crook note I should record for posterity  -  in preparing these notes, my senior adviser whose name is Annie Bridget Mary O'Rourke, from guess where, and it's not Germany, she let it be known to me that her forebear was transported from County Tipperary to Australia in 1838 on conviction of murder. She assures me that there is no connection between the demise of my forebear and the transportation of hers. You know what political staffers are like. It's all mere coincidences. Just an accident. Anyway, just for the record.
To balance this out, let me give you just a few moments on my father's side of the family heritage. I stand proud of my Mum's Irish heritage. Dad, is a different story. English, lumpen Protestants, the lot of them. Every one of them. Who makes my mother's Irish forebears the actual picture of respectability.
Block your ears, Justice de Jersey. On my father's side, no less than seven distinct convict lines. Crooks, forgers, highway robbers, the lot. There are separate records of different English ancestors of mine being convicted for stealing clocks, sugar, counterfeiting, robbery on the open road, and a theft of 200 pounds of glue. Sticky business, crime. That was a seriously terrible joke.
But I say this that when I was last in England and was a guest of Her Majesty at Windsor Castle, I didn't mention to Her Majesty that my very forebears had also been guests of Her Majesty. A different Her Majesty, and a different type of being guest.
But there you go. English, Irish forebears but all making Australia ultimately their home. The Irish imprint on the Australian character is indelible.
As I said before, one in three convicts was Irish and of those, one in five was sent here for their role in the very Irish Rebellion, and one in 10 Australians today claim Irish ancestry. Some say Australia is the most Irish country outside of Ireland itself, in its spirit, if not in its numbers.
And few states can claim a stronger Irish influence than Queensland. Those strong links are reflected here in the Queensland Irish Association, the only ethnic association of Brisbane to maintain an unbroken line for more than a hundred years. Give yourselves a clap.
The roll call of Australian history is of course thick with Irish names, whether in politics, in church, in business or in the wider community.
As Thomas Keneally observed in The Great Shame, as they spread to other lands, the Irish learn to wield the political and social clout that they were denied on their own soil.
And the roll call here in Australia includes at least six of my predecessors at The Lodge  -  James Scullin, Joseph Lyons, John Curtin, Francis Forde, Benedict Chifley, Paul Keating, as well as four from Queensland, at least. Thomas Joseph Byrne, Thomas Joseph Ryan, Ned Hanlon and dare I say it, Vincent Patrick Gair. We're all entitled to at least one black sheep.
All these have shaped our past. They steel us for the present. And they shape our future. 
As we in Australia and those of our friends in Ireland now confront the great challenges which the world presents as today, we are all now called on to call forth those great Irish Australian virtues and quality.
Virtues and qualities of pride, of tenacity, of fortitude in the face of adversity, of struggle, of faith, and of an abiding good humour in the face of adversity. Great Australian qualities. Great Irish qualities.
Eamon, you are in Australia as our guest. You are truly a welcomed guest among us. We are honoured that in this place, in Brisbane, we hosted your grandfather, the great Eamon de Valera in 1948. A legend of Irish politics. I'm told that Eamon de Valera in the midst of the troubles of 1916, while in full flight to delivering a speech such as this - I assume more eloquent and more political, because in this speech, a long speech, as speeches in Ireland can be from time to time, and sometimes in Australia, in a long speech - in walked the constabulary and arrested Eamon de Valera and threw him in the slammer for a full year.
In Australia it is a remarkable thing to be physically arrested for the length of your speeches - but not an entirely unwelcome development.
Can I say Eamon because of your grandfather's rich lineage, because of he himself having embraced this hall a half a century or more ago, and because of the great friendship which exists between the Irish Republic and the Commonwealth of Australia, it is a great joy to have you with us this evening.
In these tough times which we now face around the world, Ireland and Australia stand together.
And it is in that spirit that I now ask you to charge your glasses and to stand and toast Australia our nation, a country greatly enriched by its Irish heritage and proud of it. Australia.
I thank you one and all.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh today announced that respected international dive company Blue Water Recoveries will manage the search for the torpedoed World War 2 Australian Hospital Ship AHS) Centaur.
Blue Water Recoveries' proven deep-sea specialty in research, location and filming of shipwrecks proved the winner of the tender process with the six-member intergovernmental joint steering committee.
Blue Water Recoveries played a key role in last year's finding of HMAS Sydney II.
The AHSCentaur, brightly lit and clearly marked as a hospital ship, was torpedoed by a Japanese submarine south east of Cape Moreton in May 1943. The Centaur caught fire and sank withinn minutes. Of the 322 persons on board, only 64 survived.
Estimates are that the AHS Centaur rests at depths of up to two to three kilometres.
Mr Rudd said finding the Centaur would complete the story of one of Australia's and Queensland's greatest maritime disasters.
“If the search is successful, suitable memorial activities will be undertaken to acknowledge AHS Centaur's resting place and it will be duly declared as an historic shipwreck under the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 in recognition of its social and historical significance to all Australians,” Mr Rudd said.
Ms Bligh thanked the Prime Minister for responding to her request to undertake the search.
“This is an important part of the State's history and for the sake of those who died, their families and loved ones it is right that we try to find its resting place,” Ms Bligh said.
The Project Manager's first responsibility will be to develop a detailed Project Plan which will outline the likely search area, the timeline for the search, and the estimated costs of the project.”
Once the search area has been best defined, a tender process will then be undertaken to contract an appropriate search vessel and equipment. It is envisaged that the search could begin as early as November this year.
A Reference Working Group, made up of the Steering Committee's Chair, Department of Defence representatives, Blue Water Recoveries (Project Manager), Centaur Association representatives, RSL and historian Captain Foley will convene later this month.
Blue Water's other successful searches include HMS Hood, flagship of the British Royal Navy sunk in 1941 by the German battleship Bismarck ; the Lucona, a cargo ship sunk by a time bomb as part of an Austrian insurance fraud scheme; and the Rio Grande a German Blockade Runner sunk in WWII and found at a depth of 5,762 metres.
The Rudd Government is matching Queensland's $2 million commitment for the search.


CARY: Mr Rudd, Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Good morning Greg.
CARY: It's good to talk to you. Two soldiers killed in Afghanistan this week. I think we all admire the ability, the bravery of all those serving there. What I struggle to understand and I'm sure I'm not alone is what exactly are they fighting for, what's the goal, and what is the strategy to achieve that goal?
PM: Greg, first let me just say for the families and friends of those who have just lost their lives and to the nation, that we all are saddened by this further loss of Australian life in Afghanistan. These are very brave men as you've just indicated, and this most recent death involves someone putting himself literally in the frontline to look after his mates.
On the question you raise, it's very important that we remind ourselves of what is our mission in Afghanistan. Let's never forget that we have had something like a hundred Australians in recent years who have been killed in terrorist attacks and those responsible for those attacks have primarily come from Afghanistan. That is, trained in Afghanistan. Let's also bear in mind that with the Bali bombing, that a number of those responsible for that horrific murderous terrorists attack were trained in Afghanistan.
Let's not forget the fact therefore that terrorism is alive and well. Not just in the Middle East, but across the world, and we have to remain vigilant about the threat of terrorism here on the home front in Australia as well.
So you go to the question as to the mission. The reason why al-Qaeda was able to operate unfettered for so long was because they had Afghanistan as virtually their open range, free range training base. That's what it was all about.
That's why we went into Afghanistan after the attacks on September 11 with the United States. Not only did thousands of Americans lose their lives on September 11, but Australians were killed in the attacks on the Twin Towers as well. And since then, in other terrorist attacks including at Bali, we've had, again, individuals trained in Afghanistan.
So the mission is to disrupt and to deny Afghanistan as a open training and operational base for al-Qaeda because we've seen what al-Qaeda can do in the past. Our job is to make that as hard as possible for them for the future.
CARY: Understand that. Are we achieving that mission though? And part of that question, I suppose would include Pakistan, the north-west provinces at least which now appear to be controlled by al-Qaeda.
PM: Well, you're right to point out that it's Afghanistan, plus because of the large amount of cross border movement between Afghanistan and Pakistan, this other part of the country which is generally called Waziristan as well, which is across the border regions. This is a real problem and that's why we've got to be very mindful of the wider theatre of operations as well. It's a combination of diplomacy with other governments, intelligence and security cooperation with agencies around the world, as well as on the ground hard military work in Afghanistan itself.
Our soldiers in our province of Oruzgan, the one where the Australian Defence Force are operating, are doing a first class job. What they are doing is registering a large number of successes. And if we were doing as well in the rest of the country as our soldiers together with our Dutch partners are doing in Oruzgan, then we would be better off overall.
But I've got to be upfront with you. Afghanistan-wide, there are real problems with the strategy. That's why President Obama recently called for a full review of US and allied strategy in Afghanistan and one of the things I'll be talking to him about in Washington next Tuesday is their current and future thinking on how to prosecute this mission.
CARY: Prime Minister, when you speak with President Obama, if he requests a greater Australian troop commitment to Afghanistan, will you give him that?
PM: What I've always said, Greg, is that we think our current commitments are about right. But we've also said that the change in administration, it's entirely conceivable that they may put forward further proposals to us. And what we've always said is that we would consider each of those proposals on their merits because we're all in this together with our US ally, the British, and a large number of other NATO forces as well. And we've all got to be working to a common strategic mission. But listening to what President Obama has to say, reflecting on it, does not necessarily mean agreeing with it. We'll consider everything on its merits and we've said that from the beginning.
CARY: As you sit down with President Obama, what will be on the top of your priority list there?
PM: Top of the list, obviously we're concerned about continuing security threats around the world. But we're also concerned about threats to economic security and that brings us back to the global recession.
And as I go to the United States, that is of course in the lead-up to the G20 Summit in London a week or so later, where together with the leaders of the top 20 economies around the world, we'll be looking at specific measures to try and restore confidence to the global economy and, in particular, get global credit flows going again so that our global big banks are working properly because from that point on, you can start to track the pattern of economic recovery. But a lot of work has to be done and we've been working very hard behind the scenes with the Americans and the British and others, to try and advance that program of agreement.
CARY: Are you confident that we are getting on top of this thing?
PM: I think we've made progress. The G20 Finance Ministers meeting, group of 20 largest economies' finance ministers meeting, was in London last weekend. Treasurer Wayne Swan attended that representing Australia, as did the Governor of the Reserve Bank from Australia.
There was a significant piece of progress through an agreed set of principles between all those governments on how to deal with, let's call it the problem on the balance sheets of the world's biggest banks, what's called in the debate toxic assets.
And what we did with our partners around the world was put together a framework of principles, for actually dealing with that problem. Why is that so important? Unless you get these big banks' balance sheets back in order, and it's done in a coordinated way across the world, then you've got a real problem when it comes to getting the flow of private credit going again, worldwide.
And that means through to Australia as well because it's only when you got a return to normal credit flows that you begin to see also a return to normal levels of economic activity.
What we do as governments, through our economic stimulus strategy, through our work with investing in the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history, investing in social housing, in insulation to increase energy efficiency - these are all good but interim measures to support growth and jobs in the economy, providing extra jobs for tradies and the rest.
But it's all against that day that we get a return to normal credit flows in the private economy. And that's why we're so active internationally as well.
CARY: I know you've got a big day. Just one final question. The Fair Work Bill amended in the Senate last night. And under the change, small business would be defined as being 20 employees as it relates to unfair dismissal laws. Now you wanted 15, the Opposition eventually wanted 25. So we're down to 20. Now that sounds a fair compromise. Will you now pass it in the House of Reps?
PM: Greg, we take our mandate from the Australian people very seriously. We went to the last election saying that the number was 15. And if we were to accept this amendment it would mean throwing half a million workers out there to the wolves without any form of protection in terms of unfair dismissal.
Now in a time of a global recession, I think that's a real problem. It's like the Liberals and Nationals have Work Choices in their DNA. And you see this across the spectrum, not just on Work Choices, but also on things like economic stimulus.
They support Work Choices, they oppose fairness in the workplace, they oppose economic stimulus where it supports jobs in the workplace, and you see the same up in Queensland as well. I can't understand Mr Springborg's position for example of saying he's going to rip $1 billion out of the state budget, throw another 12,000 people onto the unemployment queue, teachers, nurses and police  - 
CARY: Yeah. With respect Prime Minister if we start to get into the local election which I really wanted to avoid in this interview, I just don't think it's fair because then I'll have to give the other side  - 
PM: Well, I'm sure you could interview whoever you would like on this one including Mr Turnbull, but I'm just making a very simple point about contrast. Our approach on Work Choices and our approach on jobs. And our approach on jobs is to stimulate jobs and our opponents, state and federal, are saying the Government doesn't have a role to invest in infrastructure. And the contrast is very clear.
CARY: But Prime Minister, just on that point, if the legislation is that important, if WorkChoices is so bad, if the Fair Work Bill is so good, why stick over the difference between 15 and 20?
PM: Because we take the wellbeing of half a million workers very seriously, and that is the difference between 15 and 20.
And if you're a person out there in the midst of a global economic recession, concerned about your work and the security of your jobs, you want to know two things. Is your government out there investing in infrastructure to support jobs, one thing. And the second is, is your government out there providing proper protections in the workplace for your jobs, vis-a-vis unfair dismissal and remember Work Choices ripped away redundancy as well.
This is a big dividing line between us. And that's why we'll be sticking to our guns in the Parliament in Canberra today, and I expect the Parliament to respect the will of the people which they made very clear on Work Choices, when they last went to the Federal election.
CARY: Good to talk to you this morning. Safe trip overseas.
PM: Thank you very much.
[ends]


UHLMANN: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
UHLMANN: Now we'll get to Queensland and other election matters in a moment. But another Australian has died in Afghanistan. What can you tell us?
PM: This is another sad day, a very sad day for the nation. Yes, yesterday in Afghanistan we were advised by the Chief of Defence Force that we have lost another Australian. This was an incident involving an improvised explosive device. Further details will be released later, including the soldier's name, as contact is still being made with the family.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, your workplace bill has been returned by the Senate. What will you do?
PM: It's quite clear that the Government has a mandate to provide proper protection from unfair dismissal for Australian workers. Let me be very clear about what we took to the people at the last election: we said that an employee who is employed by an employer who employs fewer than 15 employees must have been in employment for 12 months. That's the exact provision that we took to the Australian people. We were absolutely clear-cut about the 15 cut-off.
Why is that important? Because if you were to accept the amendments which were put through the Senate last night, it would leave another half-a-million Australians out there without effective protection from unfair dismissal. Our mandate's clear.
Mr Turnbull, as Leader of the Opposition, only three months ago said he accepted our mandate. That's why we believe it is absolutely right to do this. Mr Turnbull changes his position by the day  - 
UHLMANN: Alright, so what will you do Prime Minister? Do you amend the Bill again and send it back to the Senate today?
PM: Our intention is to do exactly that because our mandate is clear-cut. And I believe that in a global economic crisis, where you have a global recession and people are concerned legitimately about their jobs because of that, what the Australian people expect is for their Government to provide proper protection and for us to be able to implement that for which we got a clear vote at the last election.
UHLMANN: And if the Senate rejects it again, is it time to take it back to the Australian people?
PM: Our intention is to put this back to the Parliament today and I would expect the Australian Parliament to respect the will of the Australian people, stated absolutely clearly at the last election.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, how does pushing up the cost of labour protect jobs?
PM: Our belief is that when you look at all the measures that this Government and, for example, governments like the Queensland Government, are investing in the economy through infrastructure; we are out there supporting jobs at the same time as the global economic recession is having an effect on pulling jobs out as well. But  - 
UHLMANN: But you're making labour more expensive.
PM: But what we believe is that the right thing to do, consistent with our undertaking to the Australian people, is to provide proper protections.
UHLMANN: But those protections cost money and business has to pay it.
PM: But can I say to you that the overall balance in our workplace relations reforms is right. We crafted this over a long period of time in Opposition; a lot of consultation with Julia Gillard and business over the last 12 months to get the balance right. This is part of the balance, and if you're out there and you're one of half-a-million or so workers who would be thrown to one side by Mr Turnbull and his latest flip-flop on policy, well, that's a matter for Mr Turnbull  - 
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, I can just establish this. You say you're pushing the balance back and you're pushing it back towards employees, that makes the cost of labour more expensive for employers, doesn't it? And your award changes will do the same thing. How does that protect jobs?
PM: The whole challenge with a workplace relations system is to get the balance right, and in the economy overall to make sure that we are doing the right thing to provide support for economic activity.
You've got workplace relations here, implementing our mandate, getting the balance right, and at the same time, us quite clearly investing a large amount of money in the economy at a time of global recession to lift the prospect of further jobs in the economy.
UHLMANN: And in a time of global recession, do you need to make the cost of labour more expensive? Won't that just mean that employers will not hire people?
PM: At a time of global economic recession, what you need to do is to honour your word, get on with the business of providing proper protection for people in the workplace, as we said we would, as Mr Turnbull said we had a mandate to do, and if you are one of those half-million Australians right now, you're going to be looking for the protection which we promised to give them. Only the Senate and the Liberal Party stand in the way of that.
UHLMANN: One last question. Doesn't more expensive labour mean less jobs?
PM: What you do, as far as overall economic management is concerned, is you advance on a range of fronts. You get out there, you invest in infrastructure to support jobs, you provide payments to people to support 1.5 million employees in the retail sector, you are out there across a whole range of different policies supporting jobs in the economy, and at the same time, as part of a balanced overall approach, giving proper protections to people in the workplace.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, you're heading off overseas. Among other things, you'll be seeing the US President Barack Obama. Isn't it true to say that until the United States fixes its banking system, there will be no solution to this crisis?
PM: The problem of so-called 'toxic assets' on bank balance sheets is the absolute core of the global economic problem, and that means toxic assets on the big banks, be they in America, be they in Europe or elsewhere. Therefore that's why the big progress that we made at the G20 finance ministers meeting last weekend, attended by Australia, to get a common set of principles to deal with this is one step forward.
Because you're right - we need to see action across the board from all governments with these major troubled banks because until we see the return of private credit flows in the economy globally, then we're always going to be placed in this position of using things like budget policy, investment in infrastructure and the rest to support jobs on the way through. That's our strategy, that's why we're active nationally, that's why we're active internationally.
UHLMANN: And until the banks are fixed, fiscal stimulus is throwing more good money, more good money after bad.
PM: Every government in the world, every government in the world is engaged in direct economic stimulus because we are in the midst of the worst economic recession globally since the Great Depression. Therefore right across that group of G20 countries you see economic stimulus being employed to support jobs while we try and restore private credit flows through the banking system.
One party stands in the way of that in Australia - that's the Liberal and National Party. They are out there, saying that somehow you should just throw all these people to the wolves -
UHLMANN: But you're throwing money at something that won't be fixed until the banking system is fixed, Prime Minister. Is just because every other government in the world is doing it reason enough?
PM: Can I say that we embarked upon this course of action before most governments around the world had embarked on this sort of action. It's simply the best advice to follow when you have an unprecedented, virtually unprecedented global economic downturn. If you're going to support jobs, you've got a policy to do it. Otherwise, you're out there and saying that in the midst of a global economic storm, like the Liberals and Nationals, throw everyone to the elements and let them look after themselves.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, tired, old, out of touch, failing to properly invest in infrastructure and failing to take advantage of the mining boom - now isn't that just as true of Anna Bligh's Government as it was when you said it of John Howard's?
PM: When you're faced with a global economic crisis, you've got a big choice on your hands: either you're out there, through investment and infrastructure supporting jobs, or you're doing, as Mr Springborg says, rip a billion dollars out of the budget and allow 12,000 police, teachers and nurses to be thrown to the wolves and onto the unemployment queue.
That's a very clear alternative, and you know something? It is an ideological choice.
UHLMANN: Well, the public sector union says you've thrown 3,000 public servants on to the unemployment queue.
PM: Well we have a rolling set of argy-bargy with public sector unions nationally which goes back a long time. But I can say that we have a strong course of action to support jobs in the economy.
But here is the absolute rub: If you're in the midst of this sort of crisis, what you need is competent leadership. And when I look at Lawrence Springborg, someone I have looked at carefully over 20 years when I worked in the Queensland government, what I see is a person who's simply not up to the job.
That's not a party-political comment. You know why? Because when I look at someone like the WA Liberal Premier, we have our differences, but I look at somebody who basically is across his brief. That's my experience of him so far. When I look at Lawrence Springborg, I see someone who is not up to the job.
And when you look also at the possibility of a minority Springborg government, this I think is a further cause for uncertainty when the people of Queensland and Australia want certainty in the midst of a global recession.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you.
[ends]


An online gateway to keep Australians informed about the economy and the Australian Government's Economic Stimulus Plan has been activated today.
The website http://www.economicstimulusplan.gov.au/ will provide information and updates on the progress of the $42 billion Nation Building-Economic Stimulus Plan as the Australian Government acts to cushion the nation from the worst effects of the global economic recession.
Subscribers to the website will receive regular economic notes by email from the Treasurer, focussing on the real economic story, without hype or drama, to keep Australians informed of the latest developments.
The website will also keep Australians up to date with the Government's progress in funding projects which will have lasting benefits for communities across the nation.
In getting on with the job, the Australian Government is funding:
     * A new 21st century school library, multipurpose hall, or classroom modernisation for each primary school in Australia;
     * New science labs or language centres for 500 secondary schools;
     * Grants of up to $200,000 for individual school communities to fund much-needed maintenance;
     * Ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes;
     * Increased rebates for solar and heat pump hot water systems; 
     * 20,000 new social housing dwellings;
     * 802 new houses for the Australian Defence Force;
     * Urgent maintenance to upgrade around 2,500 vacant social houses;
     * An additional 30 per cent tax deduction for small and general businesses buying eligible assets;
     * 350 additional projects in the Black Spot Program;
     * Installation of around 200 new boom gates at high risk rail crossings;
     * $650 million funding boost for local community infrastructure and maintenance on Australia's national highways;
     * One off cash payments to eligible families, single workers, students, drought affected farmers and others; and
     * $900 payment to eligible taxpayers. 
The website is http://www.economicstimulusplan.gov.au/


MITCHELL: Prime Minister Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Another soldier dead in Afghanistan. This is two in a week. Can you explain the circumstances in this latest death?
PM: Neil, this is another sad day for the nation. We were advised last night that we have lost another soldier. He was killed by an improvised explosive device while conducting operations in southern Afghanistan. Soldiers were conducting a route clearance when the IED was detected and in the course of dealing with the device there was an explosion. And we understand that the soldier was killed instantly.
Beyond that, we do not have further details to hand.
MITCHELL: Can you just, as a layman, you'd have to say that will have to be one of the toughest jobs wouldn't it, to walk up to a bomb and try and defuse it? It requires extraordinary bravery.
PM: Well, I think you've hit the nail right on the head. If we put ourselves in the position of this very brave soldier and those like him employed throughout the Australian Defence Force who do this as their profession, each day is a day of courage, and I can only be in awe and admiration of our men and women in the field, and this group of professionals in particular who do this very dangerous work.
MITCHELL: How do you feel personally because, and I remember asking other Prime Ministers about this, effectively you're the person who is responsible for these people being there.
PM: Yes I am responsible. And it is my responsibility. And I accept it. And I shoulder it. And every time this happens and this is the 10th soldier that we have lost, since I've been Prime Minister and I'm sure Mr Howard did the same before me, you take it personally, as you should. These soldiers are in the field because of the decision by my government and the government which preceded me. Which is why I believe it is my responsibility when we lose a soldier, I speak to each family personally.
MITCHELL: Have you as yet spoken to the family of this man?
PM: No, because the confirmation of all the next of kin has not been concluded yet. But once that has occurred I will do as I've always done.
MITCHELL: Yet you have spoken to the family of the man killed earlier in the week?
PM: That's correct. Yeah. That's my normal practice and I think that's the right thing to do.
MITCHELL: What on earth do you say to them? It's so hard.
PM: These are very personal conversations, Neil, as I think all your listeners would understand.
MITCHELL: Yeah.
PM: But I think what's really important, apart from reflecting on the fact that this is a daily exercise in courage on the part of those in the field, and on the part of those who have been there already and who may yet still go. That is so important to remember. But on top of that, to remind ourselves of the purpose of this operation.
Remember what happened with the Bali bombings. We have lost something in the order of about a hundred Australians through acts of terrorist violence in the last several years. And those terrorists have primarily been trained in Afghanistan. And therefore, when you look at something like the Bali bombings where you had a number of the bombers themselves trained in Afghanistan, our strategic mission there is, in partnership with our friends and allies, to prevent Afghanistan from becoming again this sort of open field of training and operations for a global terrorist group like al-Qaeda.
MITCHELL: So you have no doubt in your mind we have to be there?
PM: I believe it's the absolutely right thing to do. Remember, remember just the horror of September 11, remember the horror of Bali, we lost Australians in both. And I am deeply concerned about how you deal with global militant terrorist organisations, and therefore it means making sure that our protections on the home front are as strong as possible. It means making sure that our actions internationally with our friends and partners are as intelligent as possible, and making sure that when we've had what was a free reining training base, a free range training base for al-Qaeda, which was what Afghanistan was under the Taliban administration, that we together with the Americans, the British and so many other countries are there, doing whatever we can militarily to deny that space to al-Qaeda as they had it as their free range of operation in the past.
MITCHELL: Do you agree with the American President we are not winning in Afghanistan?
PM: I think President Obama's summation of the war is about right, which is why his administration has called for a review of their military and political strategy in Afghanistan. My understanding is that review is coming towards its conclusion. And certainly one of the matters I'll be discussing with President Obama is how the overall strategy in Afghanistan for the future will be deployed. And I've got to say in our province, Oruzgan province, our soldiers have achieved remarkable success. Can I say across the rest of the country, it has been a much more mixed picture.
MITCHELL: There are military experts today saying we need to send more troops because we are fighting battles twice - that we fight a battle and then can't clean it up properly because haven't got the follow-up. Will you look at sending more troops?
PM: On the question of, and I've had many, many discussions with military experts with experience in the field and lots of discussions in Afghanistan itself with our field commanders. One of the core challenges is this Neil, once you've got our, you know, men and women in uniform have gone out there and obtained control over an area of ground, what you then need is back-up from the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police to ensure that we have consolidation of the ground.
That is why in recent time we've moved towards also a training role for the Afghan National Army. What's our mission statement? To deny this part of Afghanistan to al-Qaeda and terrorists organisations, and secondly to train the Afghan Army so that they can replace us over time so that our troops, our boys, our men and women in uniform can come home.
MITCHELL: But do we need to send more troops?
PM: Well, the President of the United States, I've said up until now Neil that we believe our commitment to Afghanistan is about right. What I want to do with President Obama is see what his forward thinking is. He hasn't put any particular proposals to me. But I cannot answer those sorts of general questions until such time as I know where the future of the US military strategy lies. I've got to say to you at this stage though, that broadly speaking I believe that our deployment is about right. But we'll listen carefully to what the Americans have to say to us.
MITCHELL: So if the Americans ask for more, you'll obviously have to consider it.
PM: Well, what the Foreign Minister and others have said before is that if the Americans put proposals like that, of course we consider them. Whether we accept them or not is a separate question. But I'm saying that's part of the reason for being in the United States because it's not just Australia that's there, there are literally dozens of coalition partners working with the United States.
MITCHELL: Are you concerned two deaths in a week, 10 overall, are you concerned that the public, the Australian public will lose their appetite for this war, lose their support for this war?
PM: I think the Australian public have always been concerned for the welfare of our troops abroad, be they in Iraq or Afghanistan. I think it's very important for everyone to understand in national leadership that Australians do not like their troops being sent out abroad unless there's a very good reason. And that's why it's important to remind people that this terrorism threat is still very close to home. I'd say to everybody out there, the threat of terrorism hasn't disappeared. The threat of al-Qaeda hasn't disappeared.
What we can see however since the early part of this decade when we went into Afghanistan is that the ability for al-Qaeda to operate without impediment, which is how they use to operate in Afghanistan in the past, has been reduced because we and other allies are there. And that comes back to, as I said before, we've lost a hundred of our own people, a large number in Bali, and these terrorists in large part trained in Afghanistan.
MITCHELL: The final point on this. With Spring in Afghanistan, we're now heading into the fighting season, are we not, and we've got a pretty tough time ahead?
PM: Neil, I would like to be able to say to people that I'm confident about security for our troops in the future, but I don't believe in misleading people.
This is a tough, rugged, difficult, dangerous, bloody environment. And it will be very tough in the period ahead. But I would say this about our troops in Oruzgan province. And this I base on what US and other allied field commanders have said to me, they're not only doing a first class job of which all Australians can be proud, but in Oruzgan itself we have had remarkable success in consolidating the position.
And I wish that was the case across the rest of the country, and these are the matters obviously I'll be talking to President Obama about soon.
MITCHELL: It seems somehow indecent to go on to talk about political matters after such a discussion. We'll take a break here and come back and talk about those political issues with the Prime Minister in a moment. Just before, hello Yvonne's just called in, Prime Minister. I think you might want to speak to her. Yes Yvonne?
YVONNE: Hi, good morning Neil, good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Yvonne.
YVONNE: My son's 19. He's currently over in Afghanistan. He's part of the OMLT team.
PM: Yeah.
MITCHELL: 19?
YVONNE: We're very, very, proud of him. And  - 
PM: So you should be Yvonne.
YVONNE: We are. And he's, it's what he always wanted to do from the age of seven. We support him wholeheartedly. My concern is that every so often he will say, I need a piece of equipment, and he will have to buy it himself. And I'm not quite sure why my son is spending $300 of his hard-earned cash  - 
MITCHELL: What sort of things you mean Yvonne?
YVONNE: Just stuff, you know the, I'm not really sure of this correct technical terms so please bear with me.
MITCHELL: Oh sure, sure.
YVONNE: But just recently, only in the last couple of weeks, I got a parcel sent from somewhere in Coburg that was, it's basically, I think they call it strapping or something like that, that he then attaches pockets to, that have got velcro on them, that he puts in ammunition and so on and so forth.
The camelback, you know because obviously they need to hydrate through the day. He, the one that the army suppliers only, I think it's only one litre of fluid. And obviously when it gets really warm, a litre of fluid to last them an entire day isn't enough.
MITCHELL: So what, did you bought another one of those?
YVONNE: Yeah.
MITCHELL: Which carries how much?
YVONNE: Two and a half litres.
MITCHELL: Okay. Prime Minister?
PM: Well Yvonne, what I suggest you do is, and I'll leave a number with the program, get on to my office and we'll actually track down the details of this one. Secondly, one of the things which myself and the Defence Minister are constantly asking our field commanders in Afghanistan and the Chief of the Defence Force - do our soldiers have all that they need? This a standard question that we ask, and we are very mindful of any operational need which the troops have the ground, that's why I'm particularly concerned about your question, and if through Neil's program you can get onto us, we'll get an answer back to you.
MITCHELL: Is that okay Yvonne. You're happy to hold  - 
YVONNE: Yeah. I mean I know that it's not just my son. If I thought it was just my son being, you know like being a 19 year old, got to have the latest iPod and got to have the latest, you know who-gee-ma-call-it. I wouldn't be so concerned. But I did recently read in the Army newpaper, there was actually a letter written to, into the Army newpaper saying why are we still having to do that? So it's not just my son that's you know got to have the latest whatever, it definitely seems to be an operational, things aren't meeting operational needs.
MITCHELL: Okay, well look, Yvonne if you just hold on, we'll get a number for you, and pass it on to the Prime Minister's Office. Obviously that's of concern if that's widespread Prime Minister?
PM: Of course, and that's why I'm very keen to hear what Yvonne's got to say and also the letter in Army News that she refers to as well.
MITCHELL: Can you imagine a 19 year old son over there. I've got a 21 year old son. I can't imagine it.
PM: When I was last there Neil, just talking to the troops. I asked them their ages, and this young fellow I'm sure was 18 from memory, and I looked at this young man, much taller than me I've got to say, that's probably why he's in the military, but strapping bloke, and but a bit like Yvonne's son of whom she's so proud, this is all he ever wanted to do and they want to serve Australia in the uniform of Australia, and as I've said in the Parliament just this week, there is no higher calling in this country than to wear the uniform of Australia.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break.
(Ad break)
MITCHELL: In a way it seems almost trite to go onto matters, but the reason we are in Afghanistan is exactly so we can take these other sort of matters like the alcopops tax, like the workplace laws, the Prime Minister's with us. Mr Rudd, the tax has been rejected, the alcopops tax, the workplace laws have been bounced back by the Senate earlier this morning. What are the chances of going to an early election before the end of this year?
PM: Well Neil, we believe the Senate's got its job to do today, and the Parliament's got its job today, that's why we're sitting Friday and that's why we'll be sending back to the Senate, what we have a mandate from the people to do and that is to provide proper protection from unfair dismissal.
If we were to take Mr Turnbull's amendment, which went into the Senate last night, that would leave about a half a million people out there without any protection in the workforce, and we have an absolutely clear cut mandate to do this. We were completely upfront about it before the last election.
MITCHELL: But times have changed since the election. Times have changed massively. You know that better than anybody.
PM: But I think that when you look at the impact of a global recession Neil, what workers around the country want is some protection from unfair dismissal, they also don't want, which is what WorkChoices provided, to have their redundancy payments stripped away.
Therefore we've got to get the balance right in our workplaces. The balance right between business and between employers and employees, and I've just got to say Mr Turnbull himself said in December last year, the end of last year as Leader of the Opposition, that he respected the fact that the Labor Government had a mandate for these changes on unfair dismissal. Now he has flipped flopped because he's got some brawl within the Liberal Party with Mr Costello.
MITCHELL: So are you willing to go to an early election or not?
PM: What I'm willing to do Neil is to honour my obligations to the Australian people  - 
MITCHELL: And if the Senate continues to frustrate you?
PM: - And to put this back to the Senate. That's, we'll take all this one step at a time.
MITCHELL: So you won't, I mean you know the speculation's around these two issues. The economy's getting worse, the best thing politically for you would be an election before the end of the year.
PM: The best thing for the nation and for the Government and for the Parliament is for what we said to the Australia people that we'd do, for the Parliament to allow us to get on and do that.
If we were just pulling this out of the air for which we have no mandate, there be some legitimacy to the debate. But when I say to Mr Turnbull in the Parliament, not only do we have a mandate, not only is it in black and white what we put to the people on this, but you yourself said only three months ago as Leader of the Opposition that you respected our mandate. Why the change? I don't understand.
MITCHELL: Can you guarantee these new laws won't cost one Australian their job?
PM: What I can guarantee Neil is that every Australian needs basic protections in the workplace. And you know as well as I do that every employer out there including all the small business people listening to your program, they're going to make decisions everyday about their firms based on a whole range of factors. And  - 
MITCHELL: Yes, but there's also argument being put that these new laws will cost jobs. Mining industry, retail industry, hospitality industry very much so. The new laws will be a disincentive and will cost jobs. Can you guarantee that won't happen?
PM: As I said to you before Neil, in every workplace across the country you've got stacks of small business people listening to your program this morning. They're going to make decisions based on a whole stack of factors. There's constant change in the workplace. You know that as well as I do.
MITCHELL: But some of the factors they're saying being added in are your laws which are negative factors and will cost jobs. That's what they're saying.
PM: Well some of the factors being added in Neil are also the massive investment we're putting into the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history to create jobs for tradies, for sparkies, and for all those other categories of work in the construction industry right across the country. We're putting out a $30 billion stimulus package into construction to provide job opportunities for people.
Therefore it's getting the balance right. We're out there in the one hand investing a lot of money in the economy, to boost employment in the retail sector through the payments we made to pensioners, to boost job opportunities for the construction industry by this big building program, and at the same time we still believe it's right to have balanced laws for the workplace.
MITCHELL: Alcopops. Now you've got $300 million that you're giving back to the industry. The industry says unequivocally they don't want it. Why not, what's wrong with the idea of taking that money and using at least some of it to campaign on alcohol and binge drinking. Why not use it now you've got it?
PM: Well I understand Neil that the industry's now having a debate among itself about how much, once it's returned to them under law, how much they themselves voluntarily give back. But let's just  - 
MITCHELL: Yeah but you can change the law. I mean the Opposition's offered to support you to keep it and use it in the way it should be used.
PM: Let's go back to the very basic principle here Neil. They are seeking to, in this measure on the $300 million, to use that as a bandaid to cover up the fact that they are providing a $1.6 billion tax bonus to the alcohol companies. It's all about  - 
MITCHELL: But you don't have to give it to them.
PM: - Make it look better than it is. If the individual alcohol companies, having got their money, want to then hand it over to charities, well that's a matter for them.
MITCHELL: Oh, but that's like putting the poacher in charge of the game reserve. What is wrong with the Government holding onto that $300 million and using it over a period of years with a lot of consideration on tackling binge drinking?
PM: This is an absolute attempt by the Liberal Party and the alcohol industry together, to have a bucket of hush money to make it look more moral than it is. And you know as well as I do, this is a $1.6 billion gift to the alcohol industry  - 
MITCHELL: But you'd be spending it. But you'd be deciding how it was spent. That's our money. You've got it. You could decide how it was spent so it's got nothing to do with the industry or the Opposition.
PM: - A $1.6 billion gift to the alcohol industry when we know, the jury's already come in on the effectiveness of our measure Neil, we know from the data which has been produced that from the Australian Taxation Office, that up until January 2009, alcopop sales have slumped 35 per cent. We know it works -
MITCHELL: Yeah but the sale of hard alcohol, of hard liquor went up. And the sale of beer went up. They just went to different things.
PM: Well, what I've got here is a figure in terms of the overall increase in general spirits consumption which is something like about 17 or 18 per cent on one set of figures, and there are other figures as well which point in different directions. But the point is this. 35 per cent slump, according to the Tax Office in alcopops sales and we know for a fact, that this form of drink is overwhelmingly preferred by young female drinkers. When this was brought in, this big tax loophole by the Liberals in 2000, the increase in drinking on the part of young females was huge. That's why I say massive public health  - 
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister, you've got a $300 million opportunity here to do something and it strikes me that for political reasons you won't do it.
PM: No, it strikes me that there's an overwhelming political deal between the Liberal Party and the alcohol industry to use this hush money to make them appear to be more moral than they are. If the alcohol industry Neil, who are working in absolute cahoots with the Liberal Party, are now being struck by conscience, then let their conscience be individually resolved in terms of what they do with the money.
MITCHELL: But why won't you, I mean I repeat it's the poacher in charge of the game reserve. Why don't you use the money to do it?
PM: Well the poachers seem to be in cahoots with the Liberal and National Parties because they were the ones who actually rejected this tax increase in the first place. It's the right thing to do for public health reasons. You know all the groups out there in Australia are in support of it. And we're not about to allow the Liberal Party to claim some sort of hush money, some sort of bandaid, as some sort of excuse for them doing the wrong thing.
I said to them in the Parliament yesterday Neil this. I said each and everyone of you know that what you've done with this measure is the wrong thing. Not a single person raised a voice of objection. It's a triumph of ideology over common sense and the people who will pay for this are emergency workers, our police, those who have to deal with the challenge of binge drinking in the emergency departments of our hospitals.
MITCHELL: Can I ask one very quick question, we've only got a few seconds left. The IMF forecasts are much worse than expected. It will obviously affect your Budget. Are the pension rises locked into the Budget?
PM: We've said and I've said I think repeatedly on your program Neil, that we will honour our commitments on pension reform. And you're right, global economy's getting worse, our job is to deal with what the global recession serves up to us. These recent reports make it worse, it will obviously have an effect on our Budget bottom line. But we intend to get on with the business of delivering pension reform.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much. The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.
[ends] 


OAKES: Mr Rudd welcome to the program.
PM: It's good to be on the program Laurie.
OAKES: Now there's good news for you from the Queensland election yesterday, were you relieved and surprised by the result?
PM: I think this goes down to a gutsy performance by a very gutsy leader, Anna Bligh. It's full marks to her. I mean she was up against a cyclone, an oil slick, a conservative billionaire throwing billions at the Liberals and Nationals campaign but she came through.
And I think it's a great day for Queensland women and Australian women. This is the first elected woman Premier in the country's history and I think that point needs to be marked in history as well.
OAKES: Were there federal implications there, federal factors in this result?
PM: Well in the period I've been Prime Minister we've had I think four State and territory elections. The Labor Party has won three, we've lost one and in each of those I've said these have been overwhelmingly determined on the basis of State and territory issues and I think that's my view of this one as well.
OAKES: But this is in your State, your State of Queensland, I know-
PM: It's a good State.
OAKES: - pamphlets were issued where you personally endorsed the Labor candidates. So how much of this is Kevin Rudd's popularity, your high opinion poll ratings?
PM: This is, I've got to say, this is Anna Bligh's strength of leadership. And I've known Anna for 20 years and obviously I've been talking to her during the last week and she's been out there powering along.
I think though there's something in this for us all to reflect on. It's in the midst of a global economic recession, people don't like politicians just playing politics out of the recession. They want instead head down, tail up, getting on with the hard work of reducing the impact of the recession. I think that's what Anna was on about.
OAKES: How much of it though, was in a crisis when you're worried about the economy you stick with the devil you know. Was that a factor?
PM: I think it's more like this Laurie. It's about everyone knows that this global recession is serious because it affects people personally. That's why they don't like politicians who just talk and play politics about it.
They want their politicians to be head down, tail up, practical work, how do I cushion the impact of this recession on the people in my area? And that's what Anna was on about.
OAKES: What does it mean for the merged Liberal/National Party in Queensland and what does it mean for the proposal to merge the Coalition parties federally?
PM: I think obviously that's a matter for the Liberals and Nationals to sort out. I have enough challenges on my plate in terms of steering Australia through the current global recession.
But I think what it does mean underneath it all is you've got to stand for something. People want consistency of leadership through these things and you can't have political leaders at the national level or state level running around and saying that the recession is peripheral, that it's been hyped up, that it's been manufactured, which is what the Liberals and Nationals have been saying. People expect consistencies of approach, not just opportunism, and I think that's the message for all political parties.
OAKES: Now you're heading off tomorrow morning for your first meeting with Barack Obama. What kind of relationship do you want to develop with him? Do you want the kind of relationship that John Howard had with George Bush?
PM: Look Laurie I want a good relationship with President Obama and we've been chatting a bit on the phone both before his election and since and I think we've struck up a good rapport.
The key thing though is to work with America on the big problems which confront us all. I'd much rather be working with America on how do we deal with the big challenges of security in Afghanistan, dealing, working with the Americans on the huge challenge to the global economy right now and at the G20. And on the big ones of climate change and the future of our region and China within it and I'd much rather be working practically on each of those.
Doesn't say we're going to agree on everything, as I've said before. I mean our job is to look at everything in terms of Australia's national interest but I think I'm going to have a good relationship with President Obama and I'll be working practically in that direction.
OAKES: Are you going to have the guts, I suppose, to tell him when you think he's wrong?
PM: Absolutely. I mean that's, none of us have perfect wisdom. I expect that some of my friends around the world would pick up the phone and say I think you got this one wrong mate.
And so if that happens, and I see no evidence of it yet, my responsibility of Prime Minister of Australia is to say we're with you on this, we're with you on that but actually we part company on this and that's the approach I think the Australian people would expect of me.
But we're dealing with a President with a new mandate and a President who gets the challenge of the global economic recession. One of the big things coming out of the global finance ministers meeting, G20 finance ministers meeting just a week or so ago, which Treasurer Wayne Swan attended on Australia's behalf was America's back in the game of providing global economic leadership. That's so important given what we all face and the implications back home in Australia for jobs and the economy.
OAKES: So what's the main thing you want to achieve in your meeting with President Obama?
PM: The global recession has global causes. And a core part of those global causes are the problems we still have in the big global banks; American and European. Now what we've achieved so far is a framework for dealing with problems on those big banks' balance sheets in order to fix those banks to get private credit flowing again. But we still need further action within those countries and on a global level.
So that's number one for America and number two is working to make sure that the International Monetary Fund has enough resources itself to deal with any second wave crisis around the world because we don't want that to become second wave toxic assets or second wave sub-prime.
OAKES: My impression is that the Washington talks are all about lobbying in preparation for the G20 meeting in London a week or so later. I understand you've put together a document on how the IMF should be reformed, or reforms the G20 should agree to. Can you tell me in simple terms the kind of reforms you're proposing. Simple and brief.
PM: No, no, no, I understand Laurie and this is important stuff. As I said we don't want a second wave sub-prime crisis. How could that occur? It could occur if you've got a huge implosion in the economy say in central and Eastern Europe or elsewhere in the developing world, which then washes back into the world's major banks again, and that affects all of us, quite apart from those countries themselves.
So what do you do about it? The International Monetary Fund, set up at the end of the Second World War, needs to have more resources than it's currently got, more flexibility than it's currently got, to intervene early with those emerging crises.
So one of the reforms that we've been talking with other Governments about around the world is providing more resources to the IMF but greater flexibility and here's the key bit, it means a greater role for China.
Everyone is expecting China to put its money on the table, that's fine. But you know in the IMF, China's voting rights are currently the same as those of Belgium and the Netherlands. Now let's just get up with the realities of the 21st century.
So, what we going to be trying to be fashioning? A greater role for new countries like China in the decision making powers of the International Monetary Fund.
OAKES: As I understand it you've sent your reform plan to all the G20 leaders. Are we overreaching here? I mean why would big economies listen to a little country like Australia about a global crisis?
PM: Well Laurie, Australia is a member of the G20 and the G20, made up of the larger economies in the world, everyone has a voice. This country Australia is the number 14 and number 15 economy in the world. Therefore we can be listened to with respect so long as we've got content to our ideas.
Take for example what we've just been talking about, how do you fix up the major banks? Several weeks ago I circulated a paper to, a working paper, always subject to change, on how to fix up these bad assets on bank balance sheets around the world.
In the work which was agreed to by the G20 finance minister's meeting, that incorporates a large slab of Australian ideas. It incorporates other ideas as well, so that's work we've done. On the IMF working paper that we put around and I'm sure it will be subject to further change, it's just to push ideas, try and shape a consensus.
What's my mission for Australia in this? I said before the election I want to see Australia acting with creative middle power diplomacy, trying to fashion a consensus around the world where we can help. But the alternative is just walk away, all too hard, hope it gets better one day. That's not my approach.
OAKES: What do you say to President Obama in the Oval Office if he asks for a larger Australian military commitment in Afghanistan?
PM: Well, what President Obama has already said is that the current military strategy and broader political strategy for Afghanistan is not working.
OAKES: That's right. So he's said that we're not winning.
PM: Yeah that's right and let's just be blunt about it. I think people need to just be up-front about the reality.
Secondly, the Americans are right now engaged in a root and branch review of their overall strategy. So what's my mission statement in Washington - is to go through that review with the President and with his advisers to work out where the Americans will be going to in the future.
Now they may put to me a request for further Australian commitment and I'll, together with my colleagues, consider all those things on their merits. It doesn't mean you say yes or say no; it may mean some change in the current configuration of what we do. But this all has to be taken one step at a time.
OAKES: Australia's lost 10 brave soldiers in Afghanistan so far. If we're not winning and the President admits it, is this sacrifice justified?
PM: The core mission we've got to remind ourselves of Laurie is the Twin Towers coming down with September 11. We can never forget that. We can't forget the fact that there were many Australians killed that day as well. We can't forget the fact that we've lost nearly 100 Australians to various terrorist attacks since and those terrorists who did that were by and large trained in Afghanistan.
So what's the mission? To deny Al Qaeda from having Afghanistan again as its strategic operating and training base for the future.
This mission of strategic denial is core to what we're on about but let me tell you, it's very hard. And for our brave men and women in uniform there, this is difficult and dangerous and bloody work.
And I've been speaking to parents, and loved ones recently of those who have lost their lives. This is awful stuff but if we are to take the mission seriously in partnership with the Americans and others to continue to deny al- Qaeda these sorts of free range operating bases, then it's a mission we must support.
OAKES: We've also got to look after our diggers. The latest digger to die was killed while trying to defuse a roadside bomb. Are you certain that the people doing this, the Australian troops doing this have got the best possible equipment?
PM: Laurie with each of these deaths of our Australian troops, the right and proper procedure with each of them, undertaken by the Chief of the Defence Force is for a proper military investigation of each of the circumstances and that is underway in relation to the case that you've just referred to.
OAKES: The reason I ask it is that 15 months ago another digger was badly wounded defusing one of these devices and there was concern expressed then, questions asked about why Australian troops there have to defuse these things manually. I mean other NATO countries do it all by robotics.
PM: Laurie, what we will do with the investigation of this brave soldier's death is go through all the circumstances surrounding it. And if there are implications flowing from it in terms of operations on the ground, equipment or any other matter, I am confident the Chief of the Defence Force will let us know. Because we want to make sure that our men and women at the front line have what they need.
OAKES: Okay, back to the economy. There's been a lot of bad news lately. The IMF is getting more and more pessimistic. Where do you now think the Australian economy is headed? How bad will it get?
PM: I think the global economic recession is getting worse before it gets better. And it's clear that the impact of a worsening global economic recession will make it virtually impossible for Australia to sustain a positive economic growth for the period ahead with impacts of course for budget and employment, which underlines the importance of global action in response to the global recession.
OAKES: Now Wayne Swan's already admitting that the latest unemployment forecasts of seven per cent is too conservative and it will go beyond that. What's your worst fear? How high could unemployment go?
PM: I had a look at the report from the International Monetary Fund during the last few days. The revision down for growth for the global economy for the period ahead is a big one and therefore it does have direct roll-on consequences for Australian growth, employment and the budget. That's just as night follows day.
This economy of ours, this trillion dollar plus economy of ours, a huge slice of our economic activity comes through the traded sector of the economy.
If the global economy therefore is shrinking and global trade is shrinking for the first time in a quarter or a century, then it's going to have roll-on consequences for our growth, our jobs and our budget, and therefore the need to do everything we responsibly can to support jobs and activity on the way through until we get to global recovery through the sorts of measures we were talking about earlier in the interview.
OAKES: Will we need more stimulus packages and can we afford them?
PM: Laurie, we've taken this one step at a time. The Government's economic stimulus strategy is based on firstly, stabilising our own financial markets through the bank guarantee. Secondly short term stimulus, pension payments and others to support the one and half million Australians working in retail. Longer term stimulus, the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history but beyond that we reserve the right to take whatever further action is necessary to continue to support the economy and jobs.
One of the things I'll be discussing with my counterparts in London in a week or so's time is what they'll be doing for the period ahead. The International Monetary Fund has been reporting on the need for stimulus, not just for 09 but for 2010 as well.
Therefore are there further measures which globally we need to take? What would Australia need to do in that context as well? This is one of the things also on the agenda for London.
OAKES: How tough is the budget going to be? How tough does it need to be?
PM: Really tough because what have you got on one side of it is collapsing Government revenues coming straight off the back of the global economic recession; happening with every other budget around the world. The Chinese budget has gone into deficit I'm advised.
Therefore on the revenue side we've got a huge challenge.
Then on the expenditure side, we need to do whatever we can to support the sort of investments we've just been talking about to cushion the impact of the recession. So Wayne Swan's hair will be getting greyer and greyer and greyer as we prepare the budget over the next month or so.
OAKES: We're already seeing job losses in Government departments, the Australian Bureau of Statistics is putting off people. I mean won't that affect the quality of data you're getting on the economy. Can you afford that kind of-
PM: The data from the ABS is really important and we'll be looking carefully at their future resourcing needs. We need to make sure that we're providing proper job opportunities for people in the Australian Public Service and in addition through these stimulus measures turning every school, primary school in the country, into a construction site to provide jobs for local tradies as well.
OAKES: And what about pensioners? Are they going to get their rise despite the tough budget or are you having a look at that again?
PM: Laurie our view is that we need to deliver on pension reform. Our pensioners have been doing it really tough and we believe that in the midst of a recession globally, that you need to support our pensioners, our veterans and our carers. It's not just the right thing for them but it also pumps through to the retail sectors and there's one and a half million people out there working in retail.
Look at the number of, look at the impact on retail sales in Australia through the economic stimulus strategy we've provided against the absolute devastation you see in retail in so many other Western countries.
OAKES: Alright. But if it's going to be a tough budget, can you even contemplate spending half a billion dollars on a bigger performance theatre in the Opera House?
PM: Well I know there's been a fair bit of lobbying on that. I've got to say personally I'm pretty sceptical. We'll go through it but I am primarily focused on the infrastructure front with what we need to do to invest in our hospitals, in our roads, in our rail and also in the telecommunications infrastructure of the future.
OAKES: I think everyone would say they're more important. So how can a cash-strapped Government like the Nathan Rees NSW Labor Government say it wants to spend half a billion on the Opera House when it can't pay its hospital bills and it's cancelling rail projects? That's mad isn't it?
PM: Well that's a priority decision for them to sort through and I haven't had that direct conversation with them on this particular project.
OAKES: Will you tell them it's a dopey?
PM: I'm not a big fan of this one, that's in terms of the Commonwealth dollar. Now I remain open to be persuaded by those who can tell me to the contrary vis-a-vis jobs generation.
But when I look at the $15 billion or so we're about to pump in to seven and a half thousand primary schools across Australia and a large number of secondary schools, my overwhelming priority is to build those schools and provide those jobs for tradies right across the country.
OAKES: Prime Minister, we thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Laurie.
[ends]


PRESIDENT OBAMA: Hello, everybody. It is good to see you. Just had an excellent meeting with Prime Minister Rudd and his team. Obviously there are very few countries that are closer than the United States and Australia. And Prime Minister Rudd's government, I think, has shown the kind of vision not just domestically but on the international stage that we greatly admire.
I expressed thanks to the government of Australia for everything that it's done with respect to Afghanistan, and we discussed the fact that we're engaged in a strategic review process at this point that will lead, I hope, to a more effective coalition strategy. It's not yet completed, but there's going to be close consultation between our two governments.
We spent the bulk of our time talking about the global financial crisis and what's been happening with respect to our respective economies and the world economy. And in the runup to the G20, I feel that there's a great meeting of the minds between Prime Minister Rudd and myself in terms how we should approach it.
The importance of doing what's necessary to support global demand and job development and economic growth; the importance of a financial regulatory mechanism that prevents the kind of systemic risks that have done so much damage over the last several months; and finally, making sure that, as an international community, we are looking after the severe threat that poor countries, emerging markets, are under as a consequence of this financial crisis, and recognizing that our own growth, our own success in rebounding from this crisis is going to be tied up with what happens around the world.
And it's going to be important for the relatively wealthy nations like ours to take leadership in assuring that we don't see a continued downward spiral that has an even more devastating impact in some of these emerging markets.
So I'm very grateful for Secretary - or for Prime Minister Rudd's friendship. He has been one of the people who I've called on various occasions to - right after the election and repeatedly over the last several months. I think he's doing a terrific job, and I'm looking forward to partnering him for some years to come.
PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Thank you, Mr President, and it's great to be back in Washington.
This alliance of ours between Australia and the United States has been going for about 65 years or so, and some 13 US Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers. And it's a first-class alliance and it's a first-class partnership between our two countries. And the purpose of this visit is to reaffirm it and to examine its future and to work on its future together.
As the President has just indicated, we spent some time talking about our common challenges in Afghanistan. It's important to remind ourselves why we're there, and that is never to forget those who lost their lives on September 11th; never forget those who have been killed in terrorist attacks since; never forget that many of those responsible were trained and given support in Afghanistan. And so our mission remains to ensure that that country doesn't become a safe haven for terrorists in the future.
As the President has indicated, we spent a huge part of our time discussing what is a global recession, a global economic crisis coming out of a global financial crisis. And a global recession requires a global solution, and that's why so much of our discussion today focused on common actions we need to take together at the upcoming G20 summit in London.
I think the actions taken by the US Administration and the statement yesterday by Treasury Secretary Geithner on impaired asset management is an important step in the overall road to global economic recovery. And actions of that type in Europe and elsewhere are also necessary parts of our long-term global economic recovery.
I look forward to working with the President in London on the concrete actions that we need to agree on there, stimulating our economies, working on the future of the IMF, and working also on what we do to better regulate the global financial system in the future.
The President and I also had an opportunity to discuss the enduring challenge of climate change, and this is an economic challenge and an environmental challenge. It presents challenges and it presents opportunities. But we look forward very much to partnering with the United States in dealing with this big one for the future.
It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, it's going to require a lot of political leadership. But with our partners around the world, I think our governments are determined to make a difference, and not just to push this one away permanently into the too-hard basket. I think that's good.
And I'll just say it's great to have America on board. It's great to have America on board on this one.
And Mr President, to see the return of US global economic leadership, we appreciate that very much, and it's going to be necessary in the difficult times which lie ahead for some time.
Thank you very much for all your hospitality today.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, thank you. We've got a couple of questions, so we're going to start with David Alexander.
JOURNALIST: Yes. Secretary Geithner told members of Congress this morning that he needs the authority to shut down non-bank financial institutions like AIG when they get into trouble. Should that authority rest with the Treasury Department directly or through an existing regulator? And how long do you think it'll take to convince Congress?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, I hope it doesn't take too long to convince Congress. I know that Barney Frank, the Chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, as well as Chris Dodd on the Senate side, their Republican counterparts, Richard Shelby and Congressman Bachus, were sitting in this room to discuss this issue.
Right now we do not have resolution authority for a non-bank institution like AIG that is comparable to what we have for banks that get into trouble using the FDIC. And in the absence of that capacity, you end up with the situation that we've been in, a systemic - or an institution that poses systemic risks to the system, but a lack of capacity to shut it down in an orderly way, renegotiate contracts, sell off bad assets, and do so in a way that doesn't endanger the entire system.
So we are already hard at work in putting forward a detailed proposal. We will work in consultation with members of Congress. That will be just one phase of a broader regulatory framework that we're going to have to put in place to prevent these kinds of crises from happening again.
And as Prime Minister Rudd and I already discussed, it's going to be important that even as individual countries take actions to prevent these kinds of crises, that our regulations spur a race to the top as opposed to the race - a race to the bottom.
If the major economies aren't coordinating in some fashion, then what you end up having is potential capital fleeing to the places with the least restraint, the least transparency, the least openness. And in a global market with capital flows that end up being in the trillions moving in the blink of an eye, it's very important that this end up being a coordinated effort, and I'm confident that working with people like Prime Minister Rudd, we're going to be able to hammer out a better approach than we've been taking recently.
PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Now on the Australian side -- the President is very well prepared; he's got a list of two Australian journalist names there. I do not know who the two American journalists - (laughter) - who are the two Australians? Over here.
JOURNALIST: Lyndal Curtis. Mr President, sub-prime loans make up just about one per cent of Australian mortgages, yet Australians are suffering because of the financial crisis - losing retirement income and even losing jobs. What assurances can you give the Australian people that everything you do will work to fix this crisis? And, Prime Minister, how confident are you that the President will be successful?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, as Prime Minister Rudd indicated, this is a global crisis, and what we've seen is a pattern that's been building up. In this case, sub-prime lending was the initial trigger but there's a larger problem, and that is huge unregulated capital flows, a reliance on bubbles as a driver of economic growth.
And what we have said is that it is very important for us to return to a much more stable approach to economic growth: one that's built on improved education; making sure that we are developing the new clean energies of the future; having a regulatory system in place that protects consumers - in the case of housing, for example, here in the United States you saw people being peddled loans that they could never hope to pay back - but also protects the system by ensuring that you're not leveraging off of one shaky loan huge numbers of other financial products that ultimately prove to be worthless.
So this whole issue of financial regulation is going to be absolutely critical. We are very confident that we are going to be able to work in concert with the other major economies to stabilise the financial system.
I think all of us are going to have a set of challenges. All the - both wealthy countries as well as emerging markets are going to have a challenge in finding new areas of economic growth that I think are going to be necessary to replace some of the financial shenanigans that have been taking place over the last several years.
One area where we agree there's enormous potential is in the area of clean energy. Both Australia and the United States have vast coal reserves, but we're also very interested in figuring out how do we reduce the greenhouse gases that are causing global warming.
If we can take some intelligent steps and we start to discuss how we could work together on this, figuring out how to sequester and capture the carbon that's emitted from coal, as just one element of a broader range of energy initiatives, that's an example of something that can create jobs; also deal with a potential environmental crisis - that's the kind of economic growth that I think we're going to be looking for.
PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Just on what the President said on jobs coming out of clean energy, I welcome today the fact that President Obama has indicated that the United States will become a partner with Australia and many other governments around the world in the Australian initiative for a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. And that's going to be welcome around the world. Generating jobs through clean coal and carbon sequestration technologies is critical. It's also critical in terms of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions.
On your broader question about US actions, can I just say this - the central economic problem is how you restore normal private credit flows across the global economy. And one of the - the significant impediment to that so far around the world has been the problem of impaired assets on the balance sheets of the world's biggest banks.
What you've seen in the United States is decisive action by the Administration through the plan further outlined by Secretary Geithner yesterday. This is really important stuff. It's really fundamental stuff. And a framework within which that occurs and is implemented globally - including by our friends in Europe - once done, you actually then can track the pathway to global economic recovery. That's why the statement, the announcement by the Treasury Secretary yesterday is so important, and welcomed by us and, as you can see, by markets around the world.
The other thing I'll just say is the stimulus packages by the US Government and - deployed in recent times - is fundamentally important.
We are doing things similar in Australia. The International Monetary Fund says we should all be aiming towards generating two per cent of GDP with the stimulus over the next couple of years. That's right to provide temporary support for growth and jobs in the period ahead while we're seeing the recovery in credit flows.
So again, in answer to your question, the stimulus package deployed by the US is important not just for this economy, but globally - as are similar actions around the world.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Roger, from Bloomberg.
JOURNALIST: Yes. Mr. President, thank you. I'd like to talk about the G20 a little bit. The French Prime Minister, in a news conference here in Washington this morning, said that you will be supporting tighter international regulations on hedge funds. We've not heard that from you, so is that true, number one? And number two, what exactly do you have in mind?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, I have not seen the quote from the French Foreign Minister [sic], so I don't want to respond to his quote.
JOURNALIST: Do you want to go for tighter regulations, though?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Here's what I've said - and I think Secretary Geithner has indicated as much - is that it is important for us to have a regulatory framework for various flows of capital and financial instruments that could pose a systemic risk to the system.
How we do that, whether it's a matter of each national government dealing with this and then coordinating effectively across borders, how much of it is reporting and disclosure and transparency versus restrictions on how these various instruments operate - I think that's all something that needs to be worked out. That's part of the effort that we're going to be initiating here in the United States. We will be discussing it at the G20.
And I know that this is an area of particular interest to President Sarkozy. I will be speaking with him this week, and our respective finance ministers have already spoken. So my expectation is, is that coming out of the G20, there will be a framework to deal with a whole host of these financial regulatory issues.
Not all of them may get resolved immediately; many of them are highly technical. But I think the important - the important theme to the whole process is going to be making sure that we are not simply regulating the banks under a framework that was created back in the 1930s, at a time when the global financial system has evolved in a thousand different other directions. There's got to be a more comprehensive view than the one that we've been taking so far.
JOURNALIST: Mr President, Phil Coorey, Sydney Morning Herald. If I could go back to Afghanistan, there's a fair degree of anticipation in Australia that we'll be asked to extend significantly, if not expand, our commitment to the war. There's also dwindling support amongst the Australian people for that, for that sentiment. Could you tell the Australian people on the other side of the Pacific why they should - why they should support any such commitment - extended or expanded commitment? And could you offer them any suggestion as to how long that commitment may continue?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, we are in the process of a strategic review. I don't want to prejudge what is still a work in process. What I shared with Prime Minister Rudd, though, is something that I think the Australian people understand, just as the American people understand, that the threat of terrorist attacks from al-Qaeda and their affiliates is not a threat that's going away. We have to take it seriously.
Obviously the United States has in its memory - what's been burned into our memory is the events of 9/11. But I think the Australian people remember what happened in Bali. That's not something that we will forget. And as a consequence, it's important for us to stay on the offensive and to dismantle these terrorist organisations wherever they are.
It is a difficult task. It's one that requires us to stay focused. It requires effective coordinated action. It requires a recognition that we will not just solve these problems militarily, but we're also going to have to be much more effective diplomatically; we're going to have to be much more effective on the development front. And my expectation would be that over the next several years you are going to see a more comprehensive strategy, a more focused strategy, a more disciplined strategy to achieve our common goals.
I think the American people, just like the Australian people, are always frustrated with the need to send our young men and women overseas for extended periods of time. Not only does it cost in terms of dollars, it puts enormous strain on families, and some don't return. And that's - that's always something that weighs on the minds of the public.
But I think that the American and the Australian people also recognise that in order for us to keep our homelands safe, in order to maintain our way of life, in order to ensure order in - on the international scene, that we can't allow vicious killers to have their way. And we're going to do what's required to ensure that does not happen.
Thank you so much. Thank you, everybody. Appreciate it.


PRESIDENT OBAMA: Hello, everybody. It is good to see you. Just had an excellent meeting with Prime Minister Rudd and his team. Obviously there are very few countries that are closer than the United States and Australia. And Prime Minister Rudd's government, I think, has shown the kind of vision not just domestically but on the international stage that we greatly admire.
I expressed thanks to the government of Australia for everything that it's done with respect to Afghanistan, and we discussed the fact that we're engaged in a strategic review process at this point that will lead, I hope, to a more effective coalition strategy. It's not yet completed, but there's going to be close consultation between our two governments.
We spent the bulk of our time talking about the global financial crisis and what's been happening with respect to our respective economies and the world economy. And in the runup to the G20, I feel that there's a great meeting of the minds between Prime Minister Rudd and myself in terms how we should approach it.
The importance of doing what's necessary to support global demand and job development and economic growth; the importance of a financial regulatory mechanism that prevents the kind of systemic risks that have done so much damage over the last several months; and finally, making sure that, as an international community, we are looking after the severe threat that poor countries, emerging markets, are under as a consequence of this financial crisis, and recognizing that our own growth, our own success in rebounding from this crisis is going to be tied up with what happens around the world.
And it's going to be important for the relatively wealthy nations like ours to take leadership in assuring that we don't see a continued downward spiral that has an even more devastating impact in some of these emerging markets.
So I'm very grateful for Secretary - or for Prime Minister Rudd's friendship. He has been one of the people who I've called on various occasions to - right after the election and repeatedly over the last several months. I think he's doing a terrific job, and I'm looking forward to partnering him for some years to come.
PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Thank you, Mr President, and it's great to be back in Washington.
This alliance of ours between Australia and the United States has been going for about 65 years or so, and some 13 US Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers. And it's a first-class alliance and it's a first-class partnership between our two countries. And the purpose of this visit is to reaffirm it and to examine its future and to work on its future together.
As the President has just indicated, we spent some time talking about our common challenges in Afghanistan. It's important to remind ourselves why we're there, and that is never to forget those who lost their lives on September 11th; never forget those who have been killed in terrorist attacks since; never forget that many of those responsible were trained and given support in Afghanistan. And so our mission remains to ensure that that country doesn't become a safe haven for terrorists in the future.
As the President has indicated, we spent a huge part of our time discussing what is a global recession, a global economic crisis coming out of a global financial crisis. And a global recession requires a global solution, and that's why so much of our discussion today focused on common actions we need to take together at the upcoming G20 summit in London.
I think the actions taken by the US Administration and the statement yesterday by Treasury Secretary Geithner on impaired asset management is an important step in the overall road to global economic recovery. And actions of that type in Europe and elsewhere are also necessary parts of our long-term global economic recovery.
I look forward to working with the President in London on the concrete actions that we need to agree on there, stimulating our economies, working on the future of the IMF, and working also on what we do to better regulate the global financial system in the future.
The President and I also had an opportunity to discuss the enduring challenge of climate change, and this is an economic challenge and an environmental challenge. It presents challenges and it presents opportunities. But we look forward very much to partnering with the United States in dealing with this big one for the future.
It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, it's going to require a lot of political leadership. But with our partners around the world, I think our governments are determined to make a difference, and not just to push this one away permanently into the too-hard basket. I think that's good.
And I'll just say it's great to have America on board. It's great to have America on board on this one.
And Mr President, to see the return of US global economic leadership, we appreciate that very much, and it's going to be necessary in the difficult times which lie ahead for some time.
Thank you very much for all your hospitality today.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, thank you. We've got a couple of questions, so we're going to start with David Alexander.
JOURNALIST: Yes. Secretary Geithner told members of Congress this morning that he needs the authority to shut down non-bank financial institutions like AIG when they get into trouble. Should that authority rest with the Treasury Department directly or through an existing regulator? And how long do you think it'll take to convince Congress?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, I hope it doesn't take too long to convince Congress. I know that Barney Frank, the Chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, as well as Chris Dodd on the Senate side, their Republican counterparts, Richard Shelby and Congressman Bachus, were sitting in this room to discuss this issue.
Right now we do not have resolution authority for a non-bank institution like AIG that is comparable to what we have for banks that get into trouble using the FDIC. And in the absence of that capacity, you end up with the situation that we've been in, a systemic - or an institution that poses systemic risks to the system, but a lack of capacity to shut it down in an orderly way, renegotiate contracts, sell off bad assets, and do so in a way that doesn't endanger the entire system.
So we are already hard at work in putting forward a detailed proposal. We will work in consultation with members of Congress. That will be just one phase of a broader regulatory framework that we're going to have to put in place to prevent these kinds of crises from happening again.
And as Prime Minister Rudd and I already discussed, it's going to be important that even as individual countries take actions to prevent these kinds of crises, that our regulations spur a race to the top as opposed to the race - a race to the bottom.
If the major economies aren't coordinating in some fashion, then what you end up having is potential capital fleeing to the places with the least restraint, the least transparency, the least openness. And in a global market with capital flows that end up being in the trillions moving in the blink of an eye, it's very important that this end up being a coordinated effort, and I'm confident that working with people like Prime Minister Rudd, we're going to be able to hammer out a better approach than we've been taking recently.
PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Now on the Australian side -- the President is very well prepared; he's got a list of two Australian journalist names there. I do not know who the two American journalists - (laughter) - who are the two Australians? Over here.
JOURNALIST: Lyndal Curtis. Mr President, sub-prime loans make up just about one per cent of Australian mortgages, yet Australians are suffering because of the financial crisis - losing retirement income and even losing jobs. What assurances can you give the Australian people that everything you do will work to fix this crisis? And, Prime Minister, how confident are you that the President will be successful?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, as Prime Minister Rudd indicated, this is a global crisis, and what we've seen is a pattern that's been building up. In this case, sub-prime lending was the initial trigger but there's a larger problem, and that is huge unregulated capital flows, a reliance on bubbles as a driver of economic growth.
And what we have said is that it is very important for us to return to a much more stable approach to economic growth: one that's built on improved education; making sure that we are developing the new clean energies of the future; having a regulatory system in place that protects consumers - in the case of housing, for example, here in the United States you saw people being peddled loans that they could never hope to pay back - but also protects the system by ensuring that you're not leveraging off of one shaky loan huge numbers of other financial products that ultimately prove to be worthless.
So this whole issue of financial regulation is going to be absolutely critical. We are very confident that we are going to be able to work in concert with the other major economies to stabilise the financial system.
I think all of us are going to have a set of challenges. All the - both wealthy countries as well as emerging markets are going to have a challenge in finding new areas of economic growth that I think are going to be necessary to replace some of the financial shenanigans that have been taking place over the last several years.
One area where we agree there's enormous potential is in the area of clean energy. Both Australia and the United States have vast coal reserves, but we're also very interested in figuring out how do we reduce the greenhouse gases that are causing global warming.
If we can take some intelligent steps and we start to discuss how we could work together on this, figuring out how to sequester and capture the carbon that's emitted from coal, as just one element of a broader range of energy initiatives, that's an example of something that can create jobs; also deal with a potential environmental crisis - that's the kind of economic growth that I think we're going to be looking for.
PRIME MINISTER RUDD: Just on what the President said on jobs coming out of clean energy, I welcome today the fact that President Obama has indicated that the United States will become a partner with Australia and many other governments around the world in the Australian initiative for a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. And that's going to be welcome around the world. Generating jobs through clean coal and carbon sequestration technologies is critical. It's also critical in terms of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions.
On your broader question about US actions, can I just say this - the central economic problem is how you restore normal private credit flows across the global economy. And one of the - the significant impediment to that so far around the world has been the problem of impaired assets on the balance sheets of the world's biggest banks.
What you've seen in the United States is decisive action by the Administration through the plan further outlined by Secretary Geithner yesterday. This is really important stuff. It's really fundamental stuff. And a framework within which that occurs and is implemented globally - including by our friends in Europe - once done, you actually then can track the pathway to global economic recovery. That's why the statement, the announcement by the Treasury Secretary yesterday is so important, and welcomed by us and, as you can see, by markets around the world.
The other thing I'll just say is the stimulus packages by the US Government and - deployed in recent times - is fundamentally important.
We are doing things similar in Australia. The International Monetary Fund says we should all be aiming towards generating two per cent of GDP with the stimulus over the next couple of years. That's right to provide temporary support for growth and jobs in the period ahead while we're seeing the recovery in credit flows.
So again, in answer to your question, the stimulus package deployed by the US is important not just for this economy, but globally - as are similar actions around the world.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Roger, from Bloomberg.
JOURNALIST: Yes. Mr. President, thank you. I'd like to talk about the G20 a little bit. The French Prime Minister, in a news conference here in Washington this morning, said that you will be supporting tighter international regulations on hedge funds. We've not heard that from you, so is that true, number one? And number two, what exactly do you have in mind?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, I have not seen the quote from the French Foreign Minister [sic], so I don't want to respond to his quote.
JOURNALIST: Do you want to go for tighter regulations, though?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Here's what I've said - and I think Secretary Geithner has indicated as much - is that it is important for us to have a regulatory framework for various flows of capital and financial instruments that could pose a systemic risk to the system.
How we do that, whether it's a matter of each national government dealing with this and then coordinating effectively across borders, how much of it is reporting and disclosure and transparency versus restrictions on how these various instruments operate - I think that's all something that needs to be worked out. That's part of the effort that we're going to be initiating here in the United States. We will be discussing it at the G20.
And I know that this is an area of particular interest to President Sarkozy. I will be speaking with him this week, and our respective finance ministers have already spoken. So my expectation is, is that coming out of the G20, there will be a framework to deal with a whole host of these financial regulatory issues.
Not all of them may get resolved immediately; many of them are highly technical. But I think the important - the important theme to the whole process is going to be making sure that we are not simply regulating the banks under a framework that was created back in the 1930s, at a time when the global financial system has evolved in a thousand different other directions. There's got to be a more comprehensive view than the one that we've been taking so far.
JOURNALIST: Mr President, Phil Coorey, Sydney Morning Herald. If I could go back to Afghanistan, there's a fair degree of anticipation in Australia that we'll be asked to extend significantly, if not expand, our commitment to the war. There's also dwindling support amongst the Australian people for that, for that sentiment. Could you tell the Australian people on the other side of the Pacific why they should - why they should support any such commitment - extended or expanded commitment? And could you offer them any suggestion as to how long that commitment may continue?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, we are in the process of a strategic review. I don't want to prejudge what is still a work in process. What I shared with Prime Minister Rudd, though, is something that I think the Australian people understand, just as the American people understand, that the threat of terrorist attacks from al-Qaeda and their affiliates is not a threat that's going away. We have to take it seriously.
Obviously the United States has in its memory - what's been burned into our memory is the events of 9/11. But I think the Australian people remember what happened in Bali. That's not something that we will forget. And as a consequence, it's important for us to stay on the offensive and to dismantle these terrorist organisations wherever they are.
It is a difficult task. It's one that requires us to stay focused. It requires effective coordinated action. It requires a recognition that we will not just solve these problems militarily, but we're also going to have to be much more effective diplomatically; we're going to have to be much more effective on the development front. And my expectation would be that over the next several years you are going to see a more comprehensive strategy, a more focused strategy, a more disciplined strategy to achieve our common goals.
I think the American people, just like the Australian people, are always frustrated with the need to send our young men and women overseas for extended periods of time. Not only does it cost in terms of dollars, it puts enormous strain on families, and some don't return. And that's - that's always something that weighs on the minds of the public.
But I think that the American and the Australian people also recognise that in order for us to keep our homelands safe, in order to maintain our way of life, in order to ensure order in - on the international scene, that we can't allow vicious killers to have their way. And we're going to do what's required to ensure that does not happen.
Thank you so much. Thank you, everybody. Appreciate it.
[ends] 


PM: It's great to be back in Washington. It's great to be back in America to begin a new and important chapter in the Australia - United States relationship. This relationship, this alliance between our two countries, has prospered under 13 American Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers, and now the responsibility which we face is to chart a further course for the future. The alliance, of course, is grounded in questions of security and of course those matters of security including in relation to Afghanistan will be the subject of discussions which I'll be having with President Obama tomorrow.
Beyond questions of security, Australia and the United States are also already working closely on the G20 and our cooperation to deal with the global economic recession and the global financial crisis. The G20 has major work ahead of it. Major work on the question of coordinated global economic stimulus to support growth and jobs and the economy now. Secondly, in agreeing upon rules for the global financial system for the future, and thirdly on restoring our major banks, our major global banks, to health.
On the question of our major global banks, I welcome today the statement by Treasury Secretary Geithner on the financial stability plan and the particular operation of the public/private partnership which he has outlined within that plan. In Australia, you will know that the government has spoken for some time and at some length on the question of fixing up the balance sheets of the big global banks. This is the core of the global economic problem. It is the core of the global financial problem.
The first step in America to dealing with this problem was taken when Secretary Geithner released his financial stability plan some six weeks ago. This is an important second step today in his outlining the details of how the public/private investment partnership will operate within that plan.
This, of course, is important in the broader framework of acting on global bank balance sheets that is necessary right across Europe as well. That is why Australia has been so active with other governments at the most recently concluded G20 finance ministers' meeting to agree on an international framework for dealing with toxic or impaired assets on the balance sheets of the big global banks.
Therefore this statement by Treasury Secretary Geithner is very important as part of the global move towards coordinated action within that overall framework. Again I say, this is the core economic problem, the core financial problem, in dealing with the recession which we are now confronted with across the world through the global economic recession.
Finally, I'm looking forward to my discussions with President Obama, not just on the security questions which I have referred to, the great economic questions that I've referred to, as well as the current global economic crisis, but also on the enduring challenge of climate change.
It is good to have America in the global game on climate change. America must be part of the global solution on climate change and, with this new Obama Administration, we look forward to working with them closely as we work our way towards the Copenhagen Conference at the end of this year.
To conclude, however, the core focus of this visit is to reaffirm this alliance, the core focus of this visit is to begin this new and important chapter in the Australia - US relationship, and the core focus of this visit is to deal with the challenge facing all of us around the world right now, concrete action on the economy, concrete action on jobs. If progress is achieved there and in London, then that's important for jobs in Australia as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned security. Will that involve a discussion on an exit strategy from Afghanistan, as flagged by the President on television last night?
PM: Our view about Afghanistan, and I've said this repeatedly since becoming Prime Minister, is that Australia's commitment is not a blank cheque. Therefore, I know that the United States in recent days has been engaged in a fundamental, a root-and-branch review of its Afghanistan strategy. One of the things I look forward to discussing with President Obama tomorrow is his conclusions as they are emerging on the future of US strategy, and how Australia dovetails with this.
And I say again, for us, there is no blank cheque when it comes to Afghanistan.
But we have to deal with the cause of what brought us to Afghanistan in the first place, and that is that for Australia, of the hundred or so Australians who've been killed in terrorist attacks around the world, those responsible for those terrorist attacks have primarily been trained in Afghanistan.
And neither America nor Australia have an interest in Afghanistan in the future becoming once again a safe haven for the training of terrorists from around the world.
JOURNALIST: An opinion poll shows that public support for the war in Afghanistan is slipping in Australia. Do you need that public support to move up again, do you need to sell the message better if Australia is going to eventually commit more troops?
PM: Every time we lose one of our brave men and women in uniform in Afghanistan, I understand fully the concerns of the Australian people about this war and about where it goes in the future. President Obama has that concern as well. That's why we'll be working together on it.
There aren't any easy answers here but, as a new Administration, what he has done is absolutely the right thing, which is his root-and-branch review of their strategy for the future. We look forward to being partners with America in that. As I say again, as the Prime Minister of Australia, there are no blank cheques in this business.
JOURNALIST: But are the Australian people wrong in not wanting to reinforce our Australian commitment, our exit there?
PM: As I said just before, Michelle, I fully understand the concern of the Australian people given that we have suffered loss of life -
JOURNALIST: But are they wrong?
PM: - I fully understand the concerns of the Australian people given that we have suffered a loss. That is the natural, human response to what has happened there with the loss, again most recently, of our brave men in uniform.
The challenge we face is to craft an effective political and military strategy for Afghanistan for the future. That's what I look forward to discussing with President Obama, recognising that the core reason for being there is to ensure that this country does not become a safe haven for the training and deployment of terrorists, al-Qaeda, in the future because that is where terrorists came from and then inflicted damage and death on Australians around the world.
JOURNALIST: You were saying these very same things a year ago when we were overseas on Afghanistan and nothing has really improved over there. What makes you think it's going to be any different in a year's time?
PM: What's fundamentally changed with the election of the Obama Administration is that they are undertaking their own fundamental root-and-branch review of the future of their political and military strategy in Afghanistan. That is the big difference, that's one of the reasons I'm here, to work that through with the President in terms of our participation and to work out what is the best possible mix for Australia for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said previously that on the issue of toxic assets, it's important that there be coordinated global action.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: To what extent is the statement out of the US today just half the job and how will you be pursuing the rest of the job being done through the issue, through the banks of Europe when you go to the G20?
PM: To state again in response to your question, this is the core economic and financial challenge facing the international community right now in America and in Europe, which is home to the world's biggest banks and until they are fixed, the restoration of normal credit flows around the world, including into the Australian financial system will be undermined.
Therefore this statement by Secretary Geithner today is very good news. Markets, as I understand, in America have responded positively today. When Secretary Geithner released the financial stability plan six weeks ago it was stated intentionally as being the first step on the part of the United States in responding to this challenge.
Today, what we have is the second step, and the outline of the details of the operation of this private-public investment partnership in dealing with a whole challenge of impaired assets within the American banks. Action also needs to occur in Europe.
What advance have we achieved, apart from this good action in America, is the action achieved  -  the agreement achieved in London a weekend or so ago when the finance ministers met and for the first time agreed on an international framework of principles for dealing with impaired assets, toxic assets on bank balance sheets worldwide. Getting the framework right and then action within the framework by each national jurisdiction  -  once that is done, you begin to be able to chart a pathway to global economic recovery.
That is why you've heard me on and on and on about this problem for some time. If you sit down and analyse it, this is the core of it. Our debates about stimulus, our debates about other actions in the economy are all about supporting growth and jobs on the way through until you see the restoration of global private credit flows.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just on the domestic economy, I believe that you said that it was virtually impossible for Australia to avoid another quarter of negative growth. Why won't you utter the ‘R' word and say Australia is headed for a recession?
PM: What I was responding to there, Daniel, was the most recent data from the World Bank which was formally projecting global growth in negative territory of between 0.5 and 1.5 negative for 09.
It follows as night follows day that that will have a flow-on consequence for all economies including ours and I was being upfront about the fact that because of that, it's virtually impossible for Australia to sustain positive economic growth for the period ahead.
That's just a matter of logic and that's why I've been upfront about it and that has consequences for employment, it has consequences for the budget. Do I have fresh figures to throw at you? No, but I'm simply saying one flows from the other.
JOURNALIST: Why not be upfront about the use of the word recession if that's what you're talking about?
PM: What I'm talking about is you've got a global economic recession, we've had one quarter of economic growth and then you've got this new data from the World Bank. It projects negative growth for the first time in a long, long time for the global economy in 09 and therefore the consequences for Australia are huge. Negative economic growth and the need therefore to deal with it. As soon as we have further data on these questions, of course we'll be releasing it.
JOURNALIST: PM, another domestic issue. The running brawl through the airport, apparently between bikies there. Is this an indication of a more serious element of crime in Australia that the Federal Government should be paying more attention to?
PM: Bikie violence, bikie thugs, and organised criminal activity, from my point of view, should have zero tolerance.
Therefore I'm advised from Australia today that the next meeting of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General will be looking specifically at what further actions across the nation are necessary.
This sort of behaviour by bikies and others engaged in organised criminal activity is unacceptable in Australia. Absolutely unacceptable.
JOURNALIST: What are you going to do? Make it illegal to ride a motor bike?
PM: I said organised criminal activity on the part of bikie gangs so I'm not verballed by you, my good friend. Have you ridden a bike yourself?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: There you go.
JOURNALIST: No, well, seriously what can you do?
PM: Let me go onto that. So on the question of the uniformity of legal treatment of organised activity like this, this is now on the agenda as I'm advised of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General.
Furthermore, I understand that there is, as there should be, a thorough police investigation into this particular incident and if further precautions, if further resources are necessary for the future, police resources necessary for the future, then those actions will be taken.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, does this show that security is inadequate at Sydney Airport?
PM: It shows that we have a problem on our hands when it comes to organised bikie gang violence across the country. I find it unacceptable. It is unacceptable. It's repugnant.
Therefore, both on this specific incident, with an investigation underway, and dealing with it and any further actions and resources necessary for the future, that's now underway. Secondly, on the broader question of organised criminal activity, and involving organised criminal activity involving bikie gangs, if I've linked all those together, then that's something which the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General will work on.
JOURNALIST: Just back to Afghanistan. It's been years now that that war has been going. You say there's no blank cheque. Shouldn't there be some sort of time limit? Can you send any kind of marker along the road to the Australian people? How much longer should they be patient and what are the markers, the concrete markers, that you want to lay down that mean if nothing's achieved, Australians leave?
PM: I think there's an important principle in the question that you raised which is how do you equip the Afghan national army and the Afghan national police to take over the security role?
That is why one of the big emphases of our current deployment in Afghanistan, and will be into the future, is training Afghan National Army people because unless you have Afghan battalions able to stand up and take over the security role, then, obviously there's going to be a lack of clarity about exit points.
So my answer to your question is, we need to embark and to continue on and to expand a strategy of training Afghan national army and police forces, battalion strength plus, in order to provide the basis for Australia in the future to exit the country. That is a core part of our mission for the future, a core part of the mission I'll be discussing also with the President when we meet tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Chief of the Defence Forces said several times over the past year that this is a 10-year war, that we have to make a 10-year commitment. Is that what this is? Is it a 10-year war?
PM: I haven't seen those particular comments from the CDF, but this has been going on for a long time. I accept that, let's just be blunt about it, and progress has been mixed, and you've seen what the President has said about the strategy so far. I agree with him, let's be frank about that, let's not try and gild the lily. That's part of the reason for being here, to examine what the forward strategy is.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just, just to finish because I think we're all freezing and we'll go inside, is to, those security questions are core to this visit to Washington. Also core is America's global economic leadership in restoring global growth and global jobs through our combined actions for the G20. Getting that right on the global economy, with America demonstrating global leadership, is critical to the restoration of growth and jobs in Australia as well. And let's all have a warm cuppa.
[ends] 


PM: Thank you Bob. It's good to be back here at the World Bank. Today in Washington I've had a series of meetings with the Secretary of Defence, Bob Gates. Also with the Secretary of Energy. And also with the Senate Leadership, both the Majority Leader and Minority Leader. We also were just now with Senator McCain. So today, we've been involved in further legwork in the Australian-US relationship, the Australia-US alliance.
Also, I would like to indicate today I think the concerns of all Australians about the injuries which have been suffered by our troops in Afghanistan. This has been the subject of commentary and expressions of concern from many of the Senators that I've met this morning. And all expressing their concern and their support for our troops and all troops currently in the frontline of battle in Afghanistan.
Also, here at the World Bank what Bob Zoellick and I have been discussing of course, the challenges which confront the international community in the lead up to G20. And also the need for the international community to rise to the challenge and forge the political consensus necessary to deal with the global financial crisis and the global economic recession.
Part of that's challenge lies in what's occurring now in developing economies. What's occurring in emerging economies. This is a real concern to those economies in themselves and of course the wash over effect, to the global economy at large.
Much debate in recent times has legitimately focused on unfolding developments in Central and Eastern Europe. But more widely, across the developing world, real challenges are emerging.
Therefore, as we approach the summit in London, it is important for all G20 leaders to bear in mind equally the impact of this recession on those who have the least resources available to them, to deal with its consequences. Those who do not have levels of social security or support in their countries, that's where the work of the World Bank is so important. And I'd commend the work in which the World Bank is currently engaged, advancing the cause of concern of those countries and their citizens.
ZOELLICK: Well, we very much appreciate the partnership that we have with Australia and in particular, with my good friend Prime Minister Rudd.
A few weeks ago we worked together to put together a very important support package for Indonesia, which is the country that typifies those that are feeling the stress of this financial crisis through no fault of themselves.
They actually had a very good fiscal program, but when the President and Finance Minister approached us to see if we could offer some support, we at the bank working with Australia, Japan, and the Asian Development Bank were able to put up a package to help Indonesia be able to run a very modest budget deficit through safety net and infrastructure support.
Before the crisis, we were also working with Australia in some of its special challenges for the Pacific Island states. We have a special office in Australia where we've actually also engaged some Chinese officials so we can try to work cooperatively with China and Australia, on some of the particular development challenges in that region.
And over the past weeks, I've spent a number of hours talking with the Prime Minister, because as I talk to Prime Minister Brown and others in preparation for the G20 meeting, Prime Minister Rudd has been one of those leaders in trying to look at the full set of actions.
The fiscal stimulus program of which Australia had a very good package, the banking recapitalisation, Australia's banks are in better shape than others, but this issue is going to be critical globally. And also, some of the regulatory and supervisory challenges that one has to take on.
And, one that the Prime Minister and I share a particular interest, keeping open trade markets. Australia's been a very strong and vocal supporter to try to complete the Doha Round, and to resist protectionist actions and these are some of the points that the Prime Minister made personally at the last G20 meeting that we both attended.
So I'm really pleased he could take time in this, in his visit here so we can compare notes. We'll both be in London next week and I look forward to working with him there.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, a domestic question. Joel Fitzgibbon is allegedly being investigated by his own department. What do you think about the behaviour if it's correct and what are you going to do about it?
PM: I've only just become aware of these reports as they've just emerged in, as I understand, the morning newspapers in Australia. I'm advised that neither the Secretary of the Defence Department nor the Chief of the Defence Force staff have received any such reports. 
I'm further advised that the Secretary of the Defence Department is conducting a further investigation into this matter. And therefore, I will await the outcome of that investigation.
JOURNALIST: But is it proper for the Defence Department though, to be investigating in this instance?
PM: Well as I would simply repeat what I've just said, my advice is that neither the Secretary of the Department nor the CDF have received any such report. Therefore, I will wait to see the outcome of their investigation. Plainly there are always tensions, well there have been for quite some time, within or between Defence Ministers of the past and the Defence Department. There's nothing particularly unusual about that. 
But on this particular matter I simply relay to you the advice I've just received from Canberra.
JOURNALIST: There seems to be a difference in standards between the people on the frontline and the (inaudible) in Canberra. Doesn't that concern you?
PM: The men and women in uniform are there with the full support of every citizen of the Commonwealth of Australia, and as I found here in Washington today, with the support of our friends, partners and allies around the world. Let's see what other facts emerge in the investigation which the Secretary of Defence has commissioned on this matter. And as I said before, the advice to me was that neither he nor the CDF have received any such report.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, isn't this Defence investigating Defence?
PM: Well, let's get to any further facts on this matter. As I said at first pass, if I'm advised that neither the Secretary of the Department nor the Chief of the Defence Force have received such a report, then I think that speaks for itself. But the Secretary of the Defence has commissioned a further urgent investigation we will wait to see the outcome.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you spoken to Minister Fitzgibbon. Are you aware of his relationship with this Chinese businesswoman. Have you spoken to him about it, what investigations have you made, will you be speaking to him and seeking assurances from him?
PM: No, as I said earlier I've only just become aware of these reports, as they've just emerged in the morning newspapers in Australia. And no I haven't spoken to the Minister. Secondly, my advice is that this has been a family relationship with the Fitzgibbon family going back some 16 years.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the matters, a question for both of you, you spoke of your concerns about developing nations and the position which they are put in through no fault of their own. Is there a concern that that would cause some political stability, security problems within those nations. And to what extent to Mr Zoellick is that in your mind?
PM: Well, one comment from me and then I'll turn it to Bob Zoellick. Bob Zoellick referred to comments I made at the first G20 Summit here in Washington in November last year. Very simply then that, the global financial crisis was becoming a global economic crisis, which is becoming a global employment crisis. And for some countries in around the world, in turn becoming a social crisis, and for some again a political crisis.
And that basically is, as how it unfolds. And my views since November last year haven't changed. And if you look at some countries around the world, we can already see the emergence particularly in the developing world, of social tensions rising.
That is why it's absolutely important that when we get to London, we are not just focused on the developed world, but the developing economies as well. None of us want to see social crisis, political instability in across those economies and across those countries. It is not good for them.
But furthermore, it is not good for the international community or the global economy as well. We are in a globalised world where what happens in emerging economies, what happens in developing economies washes back in through the financial system to the rest of the global economy as well.
So there is enlightened self-interest here, and there is the right thing to do which is to look after those who are least able to look after themselves.
ZOELLICK: I normally make the point about the financially, economic, unemployment, social, political crisis. But since I lifted it from the Prime Minister, it's only fair that he gets to use it first.
You know last year  - 
PM: (inaudible)
ZOELLICK: I get tired so I just adopted it myself though. Imitation is the highest form of flattery.
During the food crisis, what we saw was that there was over 30 countries that had serious social and political unrest. Some governments being toppled, people in the streets, and we're already seeing this now. You saw it in some of the Central and Eastern European countries. Haiti lost governance and had a hard time recovering. And that's where I can in a sense, illustrate this for you as Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the Head of the IMF and I had an informal session with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in the US last week.
And as you start to go through some of the countries that people are concerned about, Pakistan and Afghanistan, you have to ask yourself well how does this financial crisis affect their overall stability. The Haiti, the Liberians, obviously some of the countries in the Pacific that are already vulnerable as you start to get economic slowdown, many of them have relied on remittances from workers. So some of those people are being sent home.
So, as this crisis lengthens and deepens, I think one of the great concerns will be the social and political aspects of it, and the wave effects. And that's one reason why the Prime Minister and I, are particularly focused on the protectionism issue because as unemployment increases, people will start to get pressured to do something. If they feel that they've used other tools, they might to start to take steps that become highly negative.
So as I said last week, I think 2009's a dangerous year, economically. The IMF just came out with its forecast for a decline in global growth of about one per cent. You haven't seen numbers like that since 1945. It really means the 30's.
And to put it in very human terms, we've worked with Australia and the other countries in the UN on these millennium development goals, and one of the ones that is most poignant is infant mortality. We estimate that with the slower growth another 200 to 400 thousand babies will die every year. So this is one of the reasons why the preparation for the G20 session which Australia has played a key role in is very, very important because while much of the focus has been on the developed world, it's a global crisis and we're going to need a global solution.
PM: Just before we go into that, just to add to what Bob's said, that's why we're a participant and a close supporter and co-funder of the World Bank's global food crisis response. This is all happening at the same time, often it doesn't make the front pages of our newspapers or those in many western countries but it's real, it's happening and that' why we've all got to play our part.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister and Mr Zoellick, the President of the European Union has described the spending packages by Obama's Administration as the road to hell. I'd like you both to comment on that and I ask, when we come out of this crisis, given there's so much government money now washing around in the world, how do we not have hyper inflation, how does the United States begin to pay back the debt that's now building up?
PM: I'll make, I haven't seen the text of those remarks and so let me make general point in response to the general proposition so I don't characterise the remarks of the Czech Presidency. Firstly the IMF, the International Monetary Fund has said that what we need in the global economy is fiscal stimulus of around about two per cent in calendar year 09, and about two per cent in calendar year 10.
My advice is that what you have from the US Administration is something in the vicinity of about two percent in calendar year 09. Therefore, it's consistent with considered international opinion from what has historically been a conservative institution in the International Monetary Fund. That's the first point.
Secondly is that the alternative of not acting, the tens of millions of people who would be out of work around the world were it not for this level of fiscal stimulus by those governments, members of the G20 and beyond, who are currently investing. That's the second point.
And thirdly, is that as we've said in Australia and you'll see this reflected also in the comments most recently by President Obama, that once you do see a return to trend growth in the global economy, that of course a medium term fiscal exit strategy is necessary. For us that means when growth returns to three percent plus, you take action to restore budgets to balance and to use those funds to pay back temporary borrowings.
President Obama in his remarks last night to, on national television in the United States was talking about the action he plans for reducing a budget deficit here in this country. Take these actions together, stimulus in the short to medium term, fiscal recovery strategy in the medium to longer term to deal with inflationary challenges down the track, that is a proper conservative approach to economic management under these extraordinary global economic circumstances.
ZOELLICK: I just add three brief points. One, you know with all the discussion about stimulus programs, people recognise this is a very uncertain environment, so there's questions about size, there's questions about composition of tax and spending, and it's one reason the Prime Minister has come up with an idea that I certainly will try to also push, which is that the G20 should build in some feedback loops. None of us know for sure how this is going to work, so there needs to be some mechanism, perhaps through the IMF to be able to review what's working to see what needs to happen over time.
Second point, as the Prime Minister said, you do have to build in an exit strategy on the fiscal side, otherwise you actually could start to create problems for currency values, trust in markets and so there is this fine line you need to be able to meet the needs for aggregate demand with the fiscal expansion program, but you also need to show you have a route back.
The third is on the monetary side. You need something similar. Both Chairman Bernanke at the Fed, and John-Claude Trichet of the European Central Bank have emphasised and talked about the tools they would use at the appropriate point to withdraw liquidity. But of course the devil is in the details and the timing of that. And that's one reason why this crisis is so multi-dimensional is that you have to act now, but you do have to be ready to withdraw at the appropriate point too.
JOURNALIST: To both of you, do you see the need for a super regulator coming out of these G20 deliberations for (inaudible) existing institutions like the FSF, and the International Monetary Fund. Do we leave an additional body do you think, a question for both of you?
PM: The future shape of the global regulatory regime, obviously the subject of discussion between governments now. I think the important guiding principle for all of this is that at a minimum, that regulatory regimes on systemically significant matters and in relation to systemically significant institutions is coordinated and consistent across jurisdictions.
There is a separate debate then, between whether you have complementary measures across jurisdictions, or coordinated or consistent measures across jurisdictions, or on the other hand a single regulator. I know the British Government for some time has suggested we put forward the idea of councils or conferences of regulators, which is almost a halfway house between those two.
I think it's important that we leave time for heads of government to work their way through these things but I say this in absolute clarity  -  there must be consistency and a coordinated approach to the future regulatory regime, otherwise you simply have capital fleeing from one regime to another, to move from tighter regulations to more slack regulations, and that in fact creates systemic problems for all of us given the significance which some of those economies may represent to the overall global economy into the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you support the British position by the way (inaudible).
PM: I think the British position is worthy of continued and close examination in the days ahead.
ZOELLICK: I'll just be very brief. I agree with what the Prime Minister said. I just mention that I think every country now is going to be considering how to deepen their regulation, but obviously they have very different systems.
The United States is a very complicated system, you know as a federal country and they've got some (inaudible) insurance and some different banks.
I think you're going to see every one of these countries, look to see how they cover all institutions and how to do so better, and one of the striking things is that some of the institutions that got in trouble were unregulated but some of the institutions that got into trouble were very well regulated so there's lessons to be learnt.
I think on the financial stability forum, that will also I think go through a change in London. That used to be for more small group of countries, it's now expanding and includes some of the developing countries, so some of the points that the Prime Minister mentioned about building coordination, I suspect might be done through efforts at that forum.
[ends]


LEHRER: Mr Prime Minister, welcome. On this comment that President Obama quoted you on, he said you spoke very forcefully about the need for nations to essentially step up to the plate and do what needs to be done to abate this terrible financial economic situation in the world. What nations were you referring to?
PRIME MINISTER: Well nations with capacity, and if you look across the world today, the capacities vary. But, Jim, this gap which has been caused by the retreat of the private sector because of the problem in private credit markets  -  governments have got two options, either stand back and just let people around the world take the full brunt of the storm, or governments temporarily step into the breach and provide temporary support through their budgets.
I think that's the right strategy. And remember, the International Monetary Fund  -  that's a pretty conservative body  -  out there saying that developed economies, G20 economies should be out there providing two per cent of gross domestic product in stimulus through their own actions in '09. It's what we're doing, it's what President Obama's doing. I think it's the right course of action.
LEHRER: But some of these countries are not doing it, right?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been a few who have been less enthusiastic to step up.
LEHRER: Mostly in Europe?
PRIME MINISTER: There are some. I mean, the picture varies, and it becomes a little more problematic when you start looking at the needs for 2010.
That's why this London summit is very important to provide the concerted political support necessary to get behind this temporary global action pending recovery in private credit markets.
LEHRER: Of course one of the major economies in the world is China. Is it doing its part?
PRIME MINISTER: The Chinese have stumped up a reasonable stimulus package so far. It's probably something in the order of about half a trillion. This  - 
LEHRER: What does that  -  put that in perspective. What does that mean? A half a trillion. Is that a big package? Or is that in Chinese terms?
PRIME MINISTER: There are different ways of calculating such a package in China, and of course there's a certain opaqueness with some of the numbers in China. And there are other things which the Chinese may not be currently declaring, for example how credit is being released through their banks to support businesses and consumers.
But if governments around the world  -  this debate on fiscal stimulus is getting going a bit at the moment  -  let's just look at the possibility of governments not stepping up to the plate with what they've already done. The IMF has calculated there'd be 20 million, nearly 20 million more people on the unemployment queue across the G20 economies today, including China, were it not for fiscal stimulus. I think the responsible course of action is to get behind this as a temporary measure.
LEHRER: And you don't see any signs, though, at the G20  -  you're going to carry this message, Obama's clearly going to carry that message. Is it going to be up to you and a few others to try to make this case to the other G20s, that if they don't do it  -  the others in the G20  -  we're going to have even further economic disaster in the world? Is that what you're saying?
PRIME MINISTER: I think when we look at the global economic crisis, it's important to step it through. The first thing is to stop the house  -  it's like a fire  -  it's to stop the house from burning down.
How do you do that? What you do is you step in with temporary economic stimulus to lessen the impact on economies and jobs.
The second thing you do  -  stop the fire from spreading. That's why it's important for the G20 to act to prevent an outbreak of protectionism, because that will just make it worse.
But the third thing is to start rebuilding the house, and that's why dealing with the damaged financial institutions  -  what's called toxic assets on the balance sheets of the world's biggest banks  -  is part of the rebuilding process.
Doing all of these three things together, and fixing up the rules and procedures for the future  -  that's an integrated strategy, and that's what I see from the Obama administration as well.
LEHRER: How much responsibility for this whole mess does the United States deserve?
PRIME MINISTER: It's a global recession. It has global causes. And to fix it, we need a global response. Sure, America is the world's largest economy. A lot of stuff has happened here, but a lot of stuff has happened in Europe as well. The key thing is this: Toxic assets on balance sheets  - 
LEHRER: Toxic assets (inaudible) cover a great many things  -  there are housing, there are also, there are all kinds of things that people have that used to be worth something and aren't worth anything anymore.
PRIME MINISTER: That's true. Absolutely right.
LEHRER: Okay.
PRIME MINISTER: But the impact on the real economy, which is the point I was going to make, is toxic assets for example on a Wall Street bank is intimately linked to whether a plumber keeps his job on a construction site on Parramatta Road in Sydney, Australia. Because the global economy is so connected.
That's why fixing up the balance sheets of the world's biggest banks  -  not just American, but European as well  -  is the core economic problem, which has to be dealt with and addressed. It's why Tim Geithner's plan released here in Washington just the other day is such an important step forward.
LEHRER: Now, for all practical purposes, Australia has escaped the recession up until now, correct?
PRIME MINISTER: We've maintained very modest positive growth through calendar year '08, though in the final quarter, we dipped negative for the first time. But like the rest of the world, it's a global economy, and events on Wall Street translate through to, as I say, construction jobs in cities in Australia too.
LEHRER: So you don't believe that Australia has done anything wrong in terms of running your economy and your financial system, it's just that you're the victims of others having made mistakes?
PRIME MINISTER: You know, Jim, we've all joined up to this thing called the global economy over a long period of time, and we've all benefitted from many of the things that have flowed from it, in terms of boosted prosperity, but now this has happened. It's time to pause and reflect, and I said, deal with the fire intelligently, in the way in which I suggested before.
The alternative, which I think is just wrong, is this kind of radical sort of right-wing, free-market ideology that just says, “It'll all sort itself out.” Well, I don't think that ideology served us particularly well when we got into this mess in the first place. Government has a role. That's why I support what the Obama administration is doing temporarily to step into the breach and to set up better rules for the future. And that's the challenge we've got on our plates in London.
LEHRER: You've suggested in some of the things you've written and said that you believe that there's a golden opportunity for  -  that's my word, not yours  -  for the United States as well as the rest of  -  Australia, and the rest of the so-called “developed world” to collaborate more with China and kind of move together as partners in some of these areas involving economic and financial matters. Explain your point there.
PRIME MINISTER: Right now, we're trying to deal responsibly, globally, with this global recession through the G20. Now what's the G20? It includes 20 of the largest economies in the world, with a few exceptions, but it's got some representativeness to it, because together they represent about 80 or 90 per cent of global GDP.
But it's also a small enough body that you can actually get together and broker some decisions politically, and in the past, a lot of our international institutions have broken down because an agreement couldn't be reached.
Now China is a player in the G20, and therefore, when we look at one of the decisions we are going to have to make soon, which is the reform of the International Monetary Fund, China will be expected to step up to the plate and put more resources into the fund. But China right now, its voting rights within that fund are the equivalent of Belgium and the Netherlands.
Well, I think you've got to change that so that China has a bigger place at the table, rightly, but also the world can then draw upon the resources which China puts responsibly into an international financial institution. That's one example of how this G20 group can help frame an outcome for the future of the International Monetary Fund, which also brings China into helping with the solution.
LEHRER: In a more general way, I mean, you are a China hand; as a professional diplomat, you speak Mandarin Chinese. Should China  -  what would be your advice to Americans as to how they should view China now? As a competitor? As a potential ally? As an enemy? As a potential problem? What does China represent, should represent to the average American  -  put it in any terms you want to?
PRIME MINISTER: Jim, I think China represents a huge opportunity for us all for the 21st century. The numbers speak for themselves. The centre of global economic gravity is moving to the Asia-Pacific region in the 21st century.
It's what's happening in China, we see it also with India, we also see it with many other economies in the region, in South-East Asia, Indonesia, but China is big - and of course the continued strength of Japan as well. Therefore, when you look to China in the future, I don't think anything is to be served by simply assuming it's all going to go bad.
I think the challenge is this, and for our friends in America to do the same, work with us in integrating China into the institutions of global governance, on the political side, on the security side, also on the economic side, through, for example the G20, and also integrate them front and centre on the great challenge of climate change as well.
If you engender that sort of environment, then you enable China to do as head of the World Bank, Bob Zoellick, once said, for China to play the role of a responsible global stakeholder. Now if China were to turn its back on that or not be responsible, the world would soon know.
But I think the smart course of action for us all is to involve them. They're not perfect. They've done some bad things in the past. But let's look at the opportunities rather than simply assume it's all threat and all risk.
LEHRER: Another subject. Afghanistan. Did  -  in your meetings with President Obama, did he ask you to send more Australian troops to Afghanistan?
PRIME MINISTER: No he did not. Our discussion was about the American thinking as it's unfolding through America's own review of its long-term strategy, civilian and military and diplomatic for Afghanistan. And I understand the President will make that public in due course, and also converse with America's NATO allies as well. Once we're through all that, of course we'll work with our American friends and allies about how we implement that strategy long term, but that lies a ways ahead.
LEHRER: There is no Australian policy now that you have, about whether or not to send more troops or take more troops out at this point, right?
PRIME MINISTER: What I've said repeatedly since becoming Prime Minister of Australia, we are there as a strong, reliable ally of the United States, and I've said also, we are there for the long haul. Now this war, as evidenced by introduction, is increasingly unpopular. That's just the truth of it.
LEHRER: In your own  -  in your country.
PRIME MINISTER: In Australia, I'm sure in Europe, and I would imagine in the United States. I have not seen polling here on it. But the bottom line is this: It's the right place to be.
I mean, think about Afghanistan, think about this: I cannot remove from my mind the image of the Twin Towers coming down. We are there because terrorists operating out of the safe haven of Afghanistan caused that to happen.
They also, having been trained in Afghanistan, were responsible for murdering nearly a hundred Australians in Bali a year later. We have therefore a combined responsibility to do whatever we can to make sure Afghanistan does not become a safe haven for terrorism again. It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, it's going to be difficult, and dangerous.
LEHRER: Mr Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PRIME MINISTER: I appreciate the opportunity.
[ends] 


The Australian Government is pleased to participate in Earth Hour 2009.
Earth Hour is a great home-grown Australian initiative.
It began just two years ago.
But it's already a worldwide movement  -  with more than a thousand cities participating in 2009.
Its message is simply this.
Climate change is a challenge for all of us.
And we all need to put our shoulder to the wheel, to tackle this immense challenge.
That message is absolutely vital this year, as the nations of the world work together ahead of the Copenhagen Summit laster this year. 
It's crucial that we reach a deal on cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
This is not only an environmental challenge  -  it's also a massive economic challenge, a political challenge and one of the greatest moral challenges of our age.
Every country must play its part  -  developed countries must take the lead, but developing countries must be a part of the solution.
Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, we have all been on a carbon-heavy path of economic development.
That must change. 
We must transition to the low-carbon path. 
We must be able to grow our economies, while reducing carbon pollution.
That will require international cooperation on a level we've never seen before  -  to reduce emissions, to share technologies, and to support those nations who can't make this transition by themselves.
Australia is making its contribution internationally, and at home.
We've committed to reduce our emissions by between 5 and 15 per cent by 2020 compared to 2000 levels.
That's a reduction of between 34 and 41 per cent per head of population.
And by 2050, emissions will be down by 60 per cent.
In recent days the Government has released the draft legislation for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, to achieve these targets. That scheme will for the first time put a cost on carbon pollution and create the incentives to reduce emissions, starting from next year.
We've also committed to generating 20 per cent of our electricity supply from renewable sources by 2020. That means our entire household electricity needs will come from renewable sources.
Early this year the Government announced a $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to help support jobs and growth in the face of the worst global economic recession since the 1930s.
A core part of this Plan is the largest investment in energy efficiency in the nation's history  -  which will pay for insulation or solar hot water for 2.2 million Australian homes.
The Australian Government is taking action globally, and at home.
And all Australians can show their commitment to action on climate change as well  -  by participating in Earth Hour 2009.
Thank you. 
You can view the video of the Prime Minister's Earth Hour message in the media hub. 


The Australian Government is pleased to participate in Earth Hour 2009.
Earth Hour is a great home-grown Australian initiative.
It began just two years ago.
But it's already a worldwide movement  -  with more than a thousand cities participating in 2009.
Its message is simply this.
Climate change is a challenge for all of us.
And we all need to put our shoulder to the wheel, to tackle this immense challenge.
That message is absolutely vital this year, as the nations of the world work together ahead of the Copenhagen Summit laster this year. 
It's crucial that we reach a deal on cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
This is not only an environmental challenge  -  it's also a massive economic challenge, a political challenge and one of the greatest moral challenges of our age.
Every country must play its part  -  developed countries must take the lead, but developing countries must be a part of the solution.
Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, we have all been on a carbon-heavy path of economic development.
That must change. 
We must transition to the low-carbon path. 
We must be able to grow our economies, while reducing carbon pollution.
That will require international cooperation on a level we've never seen before  -  to reduce emissions, to share technologies, and to support those nations who can't make this transition by themselves.
Australia is making its contribution internationally, and at home.
We've committed to reduce our emissions by between 5 and 15 per cent by 2020 compared to 2000 levels.
That's a reduction of between 34 and 41 per cent per head of population.
And by 2050, emissions will be down by 60 per cent.
In recent days the Government has released the draft legislation for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, to achieve these targets. That scheme will for the first time put a cost on carbon pollution and create the incentives to reduce emissions, starting from next year.
We've also committed to generating 20 per cent of our electricity supply from renewable sources by 2020. That means our entire household electricity needs will come from renewable sources.
Early this year the Government announced a $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to help support jobs and growth in the face of the worst global economic recession since the 1930s.
A core part of this Plan is the largest investment in energy efficiency in the nation's history  -  which will pay for insulation or solar hot water for 2.2 million Australian homes.
The Australian Government is taking action globally, and at home.
And all Australians can show their commitment to action on climate change as well  -  by participating in Earth Hour 2009.
Thank you. 
You can view the video of the Prime Minister's Earth Hour message in the media hub. 


Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack, Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar, Brigadier General Blake Crowe, from the Department of Defence. Fire fighters of America, friends of Australia, friends of the United States. 
We are here today in both sorrow and in friendship. With sorrow we remember the impact of the terrible fires in the Australian State of Victoria. More than 200 people lost their lives. Nearly half a million hectares  -  close to one million acres  -  of land laid to waste. More than 2000 homes destroyed, leaving more than 7000 Australians homeless.
We have experienced bushfires in Australia before, just as you have here in the United States. But Black Saturday in Victoria was something different, something more terrible, for us an unprecedented tragedy.
But we are also here in today to honour friendship. At our lowest point, when the fires were raging, our friends were there and we in Australia have no closer friend than the United States of America.
President Barack Obama was among the first leaders to call me, expressing sympathy and offering practical assistance. And this contact from the President  -  as with contact from other leaders from around the world  -  was a real boost to the morale of the Australian people and those in the fire affected areas in Victoria.
When I was visiting the burned out areas and talking to those who had fought the fires, and those who had lost family, friends or property, the fact that people from right across the world were there expressing their solidarity and offering their comfort, their support, their money and their men, that meant a lot, it meant a real lot.
So, on behalf of the people of Australia, thank you America. Thank you Agriculture Secretary Vilsack and Interior Secretary Salazar. We were very grateful for your joint efforts to deploy a team of 73 wild land fire-fighters from the US National Wildfire Coordination Group to Victoria. Most of them have now returned but a 13-person Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) team is still in Australia.
Thank you also to the US Department of Defence for carrying to Australia on one of its aircraft new stocks of fire retardant, ensuring that Victoria remained fire ready. Brigadier General Crowe and Ms Jessica Powers  -  thank you for your support.
I also want to acknowledge the support of our friends in the United States State Department who have been just wonderful friends and though you Dan Clune, Charge d'Affaires at the Embassy in Canberra  -  you and your team in Australia and the State Department team here in Washington, thank you for making all that happen and happen so quickly.
And of course there are the people who were doing the real work, helping us out on the ground. Eric Bush, Tony Johnson and Bodie Shaw from the National Interagency Fire Centre in Boise, Idaho  -  as representatives of the 73 Americans that came to our assistance in Australia  -  I say a very deep personal thank you mate.
And can I also say thank you Brodie for working with the US Wildland Fire Fighter Foundation to raise money to help Australian fire fighters who lost their homes in the Victorian fires, and to benefit the family of fallen fire fighter Mr David Balfour.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of Alan Goodwin, Assistant Chief Fire Officer from the Victorian Department of Sustainability &amp; Environment. Alan helped coordinate cooperation between Victoria and the US authorities.
The truth is friends, we never know when fires are going to strike and the sorrow they bring along with the devastation. These fires in Australia challenged our souls, they challenged our humanity, they challenged our compassion, they challenged our courage. But all that was made more possible because we had so much by way of friendship and support and courage and determination from our friends in America.
I spent a lot of time in these fire affected communities. These are tough people, they are good people. But they themselves, and I know I speak on behalf of them, feel so much by way of gratitude to you our friends in America for what you did.
I was speaking before with the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior about the challenges you face here through fire. Your fire season, I'm advised, is going to get underway soon. I was also advised that in any given fire season you can be fighting up to 10,000 fires.
Can I just say to each of your fire fighters my personal appreciation and admiration for your sheer courage and professionalism. To put yourself in harm's way in defence of others with something so awesome and so terrible as a wild fire or what we call a bush fire requires genuine courage and I salute you.
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the people of Australia and the people of the State of Victoria in particular, I thank you our friends in the United States of America.
[Ends] 


PM: It's good to be here in New York and to have an opportunity to argue Australia's, the strength of Australia's economic take to many of the large corporates who are home based in this city. To argue also the strengths of the Australian economy. 
This is tough time for the global economy, it's a tough time for all economies. But out there across the OECD, our growth in Australia has (inaudible) in the top five of seven of the OECD. Our budget circumstances, relative to the rest of the OECD remains strong. And similarly, our overall position in terms of net borrowing remains strong as well.
These are important underlining strengths for Australia, the economic name of Australia, as well as the particular interest we have to advocate with corporates here in New York.
As we head towards the G20 Summit in London next week, it's going to be important for the G20 heads of government to register progress on the question of fiscal stimulus worldwide. With the progress on the question of sufficiently (inaudible) for International Monetary Fund to deal with problems in emerging economies. Progress also on how we deal with the continued problem of impaired assets and the back balance sheets of big banks around the world. And also, progress on the overall question of financial market regulation, and to get the balance right. The balance right between encouragement of initiative on one hand, with the balance also in providing proper protection and stabilisation mechanisms for the overall economy.
These will be difficult challenges in the week ahead. Agreement has not yet been reached across all governments. Officials are still working hard. And there's still a lot of work to be done between now and next Wednesday in London.
But the economic stakes with the global economy are high, and because of that, the economic stake for the Australian economy and jobs in Australia are also high. As I said the other day, in the global economy at the 21st Century, there is a very, very rapid connection indeed between what happens here on Wall Street, and what happens in the main streets of Australia. What happens here on Wall Street directly affects jobs, and construction sites along Parramatta Road in Sydney, and in Brisbane's Queen Street Mall.
The interconnectedness of the global economy is such that we have to deal with all of these problems globally, because all their implications are self evident. Some have argued that what is this whole debate about, as far as impaired assets or damaged assets held by the world's biggest banks. Well, because of the global economy, when you've got a problem with the world's biggest banks here on Wall Street, it flows through to jobs on construction sites and jobs for plumbers on Parramatta Road in western Sydney.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I believe President Obama's outlined new strategy for Afghanistan is absolutely right. I also believe it is right because it represents a new integrated approach to our military, our men and women in uniform, and then complementing with work of trainers for the Afghan National Army and Afghan National Police, as well as the support necessary to be delivered through the civilian made efforts in Afghanistan as well.
Australia and the United States and our other allies and partners and friends, need a credible long-term strategy capable of securing the strategic mission. And the strategic mission is all about denying Afghanistan as a state for free operation for terrorists, to have safe haven and training grounds to launch attacks in the future.
Let us always remind ourselves, particularly here in New York City, that this is where this campaign began. When the Twin Towers came down, it was an attack by terrorists, supported out of Afghanistan that caused a huge loss of life in this city, including Australians as well.
When terrorists attack our own in Bali in 2002, the bulk of those terrorists were trained in Afghanistan. Our strategic mission is to deny those terrorists a free base for training and operational deployment in the future.
And the strategy announced by the President has Australia's support.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said to you the other day, we have been waiting for the President to release his strategy. We have been waiting for the President to be able to outline his strategy to the NATO partners as they meet next week in Europe. And we ourselves will be looking at how we shape our own military and civilian contribution to Afghanistan in the future.
A key component as I outlined in my remarks here today, the other day, is what do we do better by way of training the Afghan National Army in the future. If we in Australia want to get to a stage where we can handover the security responsibilities in the province which we're responsible for with others present, namely Oruzgan, then we have to have a credible long-term strategy to (inaudible) an Afghan National Army Battalion to take over that role.
And that is obviously something that we'll be looking at in the period ahead. These are subject to deliberations.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We haven't provided any undertaking to the President on this question at all. We'll work it through in the period ahead and that's because we need to play our part, but we also need to make sure that our friends and partners in Europe are playing their part as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, back home, you have blamed the global recession on extreme capitalism, neo-liberals, free marketeers, let it rip merchants. I'm just wondering if you had a chance today to share your thoughts on these matters with your hosts, and what is your level of confidence that President Obama, as the real anti- (inaudible), given American politics be able to put these guys back into their boxes?
PM: What I was talking to our hosts today about was the need to get regulation for financial markets for the future right and globally coordinated. We need to get the balance right, and we need to get that balance right at the beginning with the way in which the London meeting held next week, addresses global financial market regulation. Hedge funds as well as other areas as well. That's important.
On the question of regulations as well, and you asked about President Obama and the Government of the United States, I draw your attention particularly to the remarks and the address given yesterday morning to the United States Congress by Treasury Secretary Geithner on this very question.
That is, how can the US better regulate its financial markets for their future? This is a huge financial market in America. It has huge global implications in terms of how it's regulated. So I think you see in that statement by the Treasury Secretary yesterday, where the US wants to take this debate.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) Malcolm Turnbull had accused you of being too close to China, and wandering around America herding China's bidding on the IMF. Are you worried (inaudible)?
PM: I think a lot of governments around the world are talking about how China can play a greater role in the IMF. That's just normal, because we want to see the IMF active in the global financial debate, in dealing with some of the problems of emerging and developing economies.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible). Do you have full confidence in Joel Fitzgibbon?
PM: Yes, I do.
JOURNALIST: Just on some of these Treasury Geithner's remarks on Wednesday (inaudible)?
PM: Well look, on the details of what is in the Geithner plan, the particular application for developments of the US financial system - the US domestic debate will have its own course, and the statements (inaudible) made yesterday and my understanding from discussions with US officials, is there will be more to be said on this over time. But I would prefer not to buy piecemeal in to the unfolding US debate, when not all elements are yet out there for public discussion.
The point I made in response to Matthew's question before, was the US have said that there is a problem with a lack of comprehensiveness and coordination in its overall national regulatory arrangements for its financial markets, and Secretary Geithner was saying yesterday morning that they intend to change direction
JOURNALIST: (inaudible). Do you think that being here with the chief executives of some of the most wealthiest companies in the world, the fate of billions of dollars washed through, people make millions every year, that this is an opportunity to rebuild capitalism, to be more humane and help those children in harm and the one in five children in America living in poverty (inaudible)?
PM: Well, in terms of the future of open markets and free enterprise, I've said throughout my parliamentary and political career, I support open markets and I support free markets. The whole debate lies in how you regulate those markets.
Companies like Channel Seven are publicly listed on the stock exchange and depend on the attitudes of shareholders to their market capitalisation. And that's as it should be.
But Channel Seven and other companies are also engaged in individual acts of corporate responsibility. Let me give you an example. For the telethon held each year in Perth, it's largely a Channel Seven enterprise that raises millions of dollars for the Western Australian public and to support charitable enterprise, and that's a good thing. Other media outlets do similar things in Australia, and other publicly listed companies.
The key to furthering and supporting the future of open markets worldwide is to get the balance right. To get regulation right. To make sure that working people also receive their part, receive their benefit, from this free market system.
Free market system as I said I think in my first speech in parliament, is an enormous generator of wealth and creativity across the global economy. That is right and as it should be.
But it also needs to be properly regulated, and you also need to have the provision of public goods. And public goods also depend on the taxes that you raise from corporations and others to provide universal health care, universal education, and also critically, the bringing of services to the most poor and underprivileged.
I think what we've seen in the events of the last 18 months, is where the balance was just got all wrong. And it's time to restore the balance.
Thank you.
[ends] 


PM BROWN: Can I say I am delighted to welcome the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd, a very good friend, and welcome to London for the meetings of the G20. But it has also been a chance for us to discuss the very close relationship between Australia and Britain and to build for the future.
We have a commitment to greater bilateral cooperation on security, that we agreed this morning. Australian troops continue to serve in Southern Afghanistan, alongside British troops and I believe that the bilateral relationships between our two countries are very strong indeed and strengthening every time that we work together.
Now Kevin and I discussed the challenges that the world economy is facing. And let me say that he has been doing an amazing job in the run up to the G20 London Summit. He has been chairing and building consensus on a number of the difficult issues that we have got to deal with. 
And we will need to solve the great challenges that are presented by the global economic crisis over these next few months. All countries meeting together, and let us not forget that it took 16 years after the Wall Street crash in 1929 for the world economy to come together to agree new principles of action, and we must never make the mistakes that were made then. 
A previous summit of major economies took place in London in 1983 and it collapsed in disunity with the world then descending into a downward spiral of protectionism, and we will never allow that to happen. And it was not until the Bretton Woods summit in 1945 that the world was able to unite and agree a new international architecture, and these are the subjects a new international architecture for the international institutions that are on the agenda this week.
So we want to demonstrate that we have acted quickly and that we are taking the necessary decisions to safeguard future of the global economy. 
I believe that the global economy is meeting its first big test as a global economy. The speed and the scale of global change has overwhelmed the old national systems of rules and regulations. And we have to show that out of the global problems we face, we can forge global solutions. And the London Summit on Wednesday is the chance to show that we can work together.
Now we have already made some good progress in advance of the summit. Every major economy has taken action to stimulate growth. There have been coordinated cuts in interest rates. There have been cuts in taxes, there has been increases in spending and new ways of injecting resources into the economy.
The economics of doing nothing but spending cuts and retrenchments has been firmly rejected in almost every country across the globe. 
Action has also been taken in Britain, America and Australia and many other countries to tighten financial regulation and we are bringing regulatory structures into line with the reality of global 21st century financial markets.
The fact of this meeting has already resulted in many of the major tax havens committing to end their worst practices. And all of this would have been unthinkable a year ago, let alone in previous global downturns.
But we are seeing an unprecedented global response to an unprecedented global crisis. But there is still more to do over the next few days if we are to forge the new consensus that is necessary to put the world economy on a path back to recovery.
First, we must, and I believe will, agree the principles of the new international framework for tighter financial regulation, and that will include hedge funds and what is known as the shadow banking system. That will mean more accountability, transparency, a new approach to pay and bonuses that replaces the old excesses and the old short-termism. The world should be for responsible, long term success. 
Second, I believe we are ready to reaffirm our commitment to global markets and open trade, and that means governments and international institutions agreeing to step in and provide support for trade finance. 
Third, we need to do what is necessary to support growth, continuing to push back against the global recession and supporting families and businesses. This is not the narrow issue only of fiscal policy, it is about the wider range of action to stimulate our economies and crucially the vital role that emerging markets and developing economies can play in developing the recovery that is necessary.
These countries, the developing and emerging market countries, are counted for 70 per cent of global economic growth in the past decade. And their success is also the key to our future prosperity and it is vital then that the international economic cooperation as such, that they have the resources to deal with their banking problems. 
This is a decisive moment for the world economy. Growth has stalled around the world. We have a choice to make, we can either let the recession run its course and retreat into protectionism and isolationism.
That is a do-nothing approach that will push us further into recession, but we can resolve with the world community to unite, to act and to fight back against the global recession that is hurting people in every country and in every continent.
This is the test we face and the test we will meet in London this week. 
PM RUDD: Thank you very much Prime Minister, and thank you for your hospitality in receiving me here again at Number 10 today. Why are we in London? We are in London because we are dealing with a global economic recession. And we are London to develop and implement a global strategy for economic recovery. Gordon has rightly pointed to the lessons of economic history.
It took between 1929 and 1944 for the world community to get together at Bretton Woods and work out what should be the form and pattern of global economic cooperation to recover from the events of the great depression. Three quarters of a century later, we are confronted with a great economic challenge again. And if you look at the earlier attempts to deal with that challenge with a failed conference in London in 1933. 
The world community and its leaders have been seized of that failure and therefore what constitutes the necessary ingredients for success, and they must therefore focus on the ingredients of a global strategy for economic recovery.
If we look back at what has occurred since the Washington Summit at the end of last year through until now, we have seen substantial considered progress across key areas of macroeconomic coordination. Across stimulus, across coordinated monetary policy action and across the sorts of new forms of cooperation in resourcing we need for the international financial institutions. 
Never before in modern economic history have governments of the leading economies cooperated so closely on so grave an economic crisis, and it is important to point to the trillions of dollars worth of economic stimulus which has already arisen from the action by individual Governments, in response to the call at the Washington Summit to act together. And if we act together on the great challenge of stimulus, then the overall impact it has on economic activity is that much greater. 
Australia and the United Kingdom are old friends, old allies, with a shared heritage. And in the G20, I find it difficult to point to a country with whom we have a closer relationship that the United Kingdom. 
And what I would like to say to Prime Minister Brown is that his efforts in pulling this exercise together, in pulling together the efforts necessary to underpin global economic cooperation, have known no bounds. Prime Minister Brown's energy and determination to fashion a global economic outcome here and prior to this, in the lead up also to the Washington Summit, deserve appropriate public recognition. 
His energies have been such in recent days that the Prime Minister's voice is starting to falter, he is on the phone so much, and particularly with some of our friends in recent days who he will be meeting again soon from Latin America.
In both the White House and in Number 10, Australia has strong friends and allies who together will shape the content of this global strategy for economic recovery. This is necessary to deal with the great challenge of jobs.
Because by acting together in fashioning and implementing a global economic strategy, we are dealing with jobs, in Birmingham, in Brisbane, in Manchester and in Melbourne and these are jobs which are important to underpin.
Finally our actions together through the stimulus which has already been agreed have worked out across the participating economies, has already supported some 20 million jobs across the G20 economies for the year ahead. This is important action so far, and we still have much to do in terms of the meeting which will be held in London later this week.
On our bilateral relationship, as the Prime Minister indicated, we have discussed common questions of security, our common work together in Afghanistan, and we have also today, also agreed on a new national security partnership between the United Kingdom and Australia.
This brings together the various strands of our cooperation and coordination in defence, in security, in counter intelligence, in new threats to security, right across the spectrum.
This is an excellent security policy relationship. For the first time, we bring these elements of our cooperation together into a single document and we have resolved together to work even more closely on the common challenges we face into the future.
So Prime Minister, thank you again for hosting me here to Number 10. We have a big week of work ahead of us, but again I would commend the British Prime Minister for being so much the driving force in making sure that governments around the world act together in this unprecedented exercise in global economic cooperation given the challenges we all face.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the G20, has it now become impossible do you think to get a meaningful agreement on further fiscal stimulus given the hardening positions of for example on one hand the Europeans and on the other hand Britain and the Americans. And on Jacqui Smith, how can you retain full confidence in her (inaudible) she is now in serious danger of losing all respect, all the respect of the general public.
PM BROWN: Well first of all on the economy, let me say that we're making very good progress. These are very difficult issues that are complex issues, but we have over the last few months seen governments agree or about to agree, $2.5 trillion dollars of fiscal stimulus and that is something that the world has never seen in response to a downturn before. 
We've never seen the same coordinated cuts in interest rates and we haven't seen the same coming together to look at what we can do for trade and what we look to can do for the emerging markets and developing countries. So the world is coming together and we are not making the mistakes of doing nothing that were made in the past. 
As for the future actions are concerned, I think you will find that we are prepared to do whatever is necessary to restore the world economy (inaudible) and I believe that the discussions that we're having will show results in that way by the time we get to Thursday. 
As far as Jacqui Smith is concerned, this is very much a personal matter for Jacqui, she has made her apology. Her husband has made it clear that he has apologised. I think the best thing is that Jacqui Smith gets on with her work which is what she wants to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) there does seem to be in the public discourse at least, a pessimism about the potential outcomes of the G20 meeting. I'm just wondering if you could reflect on exactly what is at stake here. Wouldn't failure be a massive blow to the global economy and confidence and potentially to the stock markets and to what extent do each of you believe that you can bring the kind of leadership to drive the outcomes you're looking for?
PM RUDD: On the question of a global strategy for economic recovery, the first thing to note is what has been achieved so far. It is important to ask this question: where would the global economy now stand if the $2.5 trillion dollars worth of stimulus to which the Prime Minister just referred to had not been injected?
That is a very important consideration and secondly had central banks not been working with each other in terms of co-ordinated action on monetary policy change. These are sizeable, substantial achievements. 
We go to the ingredients of what's on the table now, which is an international framework for dealing with impaired assets on bank balance sheets. The core of the economic problem never before in modern economic history have banks and governments agreed between themselves a framework for dealing with this core part of the economic impediment to recovery which is restoring our banks to health. Here, the United States and in Europe more broadly. 
Also the additional resources and reforms necessary for the International Monetary Fund to deal with the challenges which now face us from the deep difficulties in the economies of the emerging markets and developing economies, most particularly and most recently those in Central and Eastern Europe. 
On top of that, and as the Prime Minister has just referred to, a coordinated frame work for dealing with regulation for the future for the financial system more broadly, and to act as appropriate in the future on further stimulus given the challenges still. I think it is important for us all to frame very clearly these alternatives. One approach is to stand back and do nothing and let the markets rip and we've seen what's happened with that in the past, or alternatively, governments, nationally and internationally, acting to step into the breach.
And on these core elements of this emerging global strategy for economic recovery, progress has been achieved, progress will be achieved in London and further progress will be necessary as the year progresses as more data emerges about the challenges in 2010.
But this against all historical precedents, I have got to say, has reflected a strong coordinated action agenda across the participating governments.
PM BROWN: I want to thank Kevin Rudd for his leadership but particularly his proposals about how we can change the international institutions and how we can restructure our banking system and Australian proposals are very important to what we are now discussing in the communiqué for the G20.
Look, this is a testing time for the world. In previous downturns, the world has not been able to rise to the challenge. So we have long periods where recession happened and no coordinated action was taken.
What we are seeing at the moment is coordinated action in interest rates, te biggest interest rate cut we have ever seen in the history of the world, what we're seeing is coordinated action also on the stimulus and new investment in our economies and more has been put in and is being put into our economies round the world than at any time in history. 
And we're also seeing a coordinated attempt to restructure our banking system, to deal with the problems of tax havens, to get international responsibility in all countries about remuneration of banking and financial officials, and we're trying to stimulate world trade. 
So the world is coming together and the results this week will show that global problems, because these are global problems, require global solutions and I believe that the world will rise to the challenge and to defeat those who say that to do nothing is an option and defeat those who say protectionism is an option. I think you'll find that coordinated action is the way ahead, not just now but for the future as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM BROWN: The Home Secretary is doing a great job, and I don't think this issue should be allowed to detract from everything that she is doing to ensure we protect the public and keep on making things safe, and she's done the right thing by taking steps to rectify the mistake that was made as soon as she became aware of it, and I think that is generally acknowledged.
The savers of the Dunfermline Building Society will be fully protected, and the fact that we are finding new ways of administering departments so that we have offers from public companies that have been enabled to take up some of the workers of the Dunfermline Building Society shows that we're taking all steps necessary to protect both the savers and the people who rely on the Building Societies for mortgages for the future. But let's face facts  -  the Dunfermline Building Society is the author of its own mistakes; mistaken investments; mistaken policies. We have had to step in where the Dunfermline Building Society has failed, and we have stepped in in such a way that we can protect both the savers and give those people who depend on the building society for mortgages a way to move to the future.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) I have a question on China for both Prime Ministers.
Prime Minister Rudd, you have had at least 2 meetings with senior members of the Chinese Government in recent months which you didn't disclose to the Australian public, and yesterday your staff asked for you to be seated away from the Chinese Ambassador. I'm wondering why you're so sensitive about your connections with China.
And Mr Brown, how critical is China to the success of this week's G20 meeting?
PM RUDD: I actually stayed the weekend with the British Foreign Secretary, David Miliband, who's a friend of mine. We were both on set together and it was kind of a natural thing to actually wouldn't mind parking yourself next to each other as well. I think people should all that into a bit of context.
You know why China's important for us all? China's important because it's Australia's largest trading partner. It became that way in fact, I recall, in recent years, probably under the previous government.
The reason why China is important to Australia as being our largest trading partner is this: Australian jobs depend on that. The more we export to China with its vast economy which itself like other economies is going through some difficulties in recent times, the more we sell to China the more Australian jobs we create. 
That's the bottom line here. I'm in the hunt for Australian jobs, as is the British Prime Minister for British jobs. And the reality is you're looking at these emerging growth economies and my interest long term, and the Australian national interest for the long term, is act effectively in the national economic interest to maximise our interests in that Chinese economy, because now it's akin to Australian long term jobs. As do our other international economic relationships. 
But this is a big one and China is emerging as a big global economy and therefore it is absolutely necessary for any Australian Prime Minister that we maximise our economic interests and the interests of Australian jobs in developing that relationship further, and I intend to do that.
PM BROWN: China is a very important party to all of us. Our trade with China has been increasing substantially even in the downturn our exports having been rising. I had long conversations with Premier Wen who was with us in London only a few weeks ago, and President Hu is coming to the Summit this week. I believe the Chinese are enthusiastic about the plans for recovery that we are discussing and we look forward to working with them. I think our relationship with China is a very important part of any modern economic policy and that's why they're part of the G20.


1. On 30 March 2009, Prime Minister Gordon Brown and Prime Minister Kevin Rudd met in London to reaffirm the importance of the relationship between the United Kingdom and Australia. 
2. They reviewed the progress made to strengthen further bilateral relations under the Progressive Plan of Action on Common Interests agreed on April 7, 2008  -  encompassing cooperation on significant global challenges such as climate change, trade, development and global institutions.
3. The Prime Ministers agreed on a complementary initiative for a new National Security Partnership between the United Kingdom and Australia. 
4. They agreed that providing security for the nation and its citizens remained the most important responsibility of government. They shared the view that globalisation had brought significant global benefits, but also increasingly diverse, complex and interconnected security threats. 
5. They noted that the United Kingdom and Australia both released in 2008 new National Security strategies responding to these evolving security threats, focused on comprehensive and integrated approaches  -  including working more closely with key partners to address security threats.
6. The Prime Ministers agreed the respective new National Security strategies provided a strong framework for intensified cooperation to ensure that the bilateral relationship continued to meet contemporary security challenges. 
7. They emphasised the bedrock of longstanding and extensive bilateral security cooperation on which a new era of cooperation could be built. They underlined shared core values at the heart of this enduring cooperation: freedom, tolerance, opportunity, justice and democracy. They recalled the history of combined sacrifice by the United Kingdom and Australia for global peace and security. 
8. The Prime Ministers agreed that the new National Security Partnership would strengthen bilateral security cooperation based on four key pillars: responses to traditional security threats; responses to broader, emerging non-traditional security threats; integrated, whole-of-government responses to national security; and the commitment of both to shared international alliances. 
Strengthening Bilateral Cooperation on Traditional Security Threats
9. The Prime Ministers acknowledged the current substantial bilateral diplomatic, defence and intelligence relationships to protect and promote both countries' sovereignty, and to promote a stable, peaceful and prosperous international environment. 
10. They agreed that these links had been enhanced in recent years through close cooperation on the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, and within multilateral fora, including significant collaboration on international counter-terrorism efforts, and working jointly to address the threat of the spread of weapons of mass destruction. They agreed that the bilateral relationship was well placed to continue this high level of cooperation, and committed to further strengthening these traditional security links  -  in particular by:
Conclusion by June 2009 of the Joint Review of the United Kingdom-Australia Defence Relationship aimed at continuous improvement of the extensive defence relationship.
     * In 2009 further develop regular bilateral discussions on strategic defence planning, including exchange of strategic policy documents, to strengthen the UK-Australia bilateral relationship. 
     * Holding regular high-level Defence Policy Talks by November 2009 to take forward the findings of the Joint Review of Australia-UK Defence ties, and bring further strategic focus and coordination to the many strands of the bilateral Defence relationship.
     * Reviewing under the Anglo-Australian Memorandum of Understanding on Science and Technology framework by December 2009, priority areas for Defence Science and Technology Cooperation.
     * Intensified planning, strategy and operational cooperation on mutual efforts in Afghanistan.
     * Development of aligned Counter-Terrorism Strategies for South East Asia and South Asia characterised by complementary capacity building programmes and counter-radicalisation initiatives. Exchanges of UK and Australian officials.
     * Establishment of a Senior Officials Asia-Pacific Dialogue to enhance bilateral cooperation related to significant regional geo-strategic change, particularly the increasingly important role played by the region in international affairs, and the development of regional structures. 
     * Further development of the significant intelligence cooperation relationship.
     * Agreement to escalate Joint Work Against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, including in relation to Australia's and Japan's International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament initiative, the Proliferation Security Initiative, fuel cycle security, and as part of the international effort to tackle the need for transparency in nuclear programmes, as well as the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
     * Agreement to strengthen exchanges on conventional arms control measures, including pressing internationally for a legally binding Arms Trade Treaty, stronger global arms export controls and ratifying the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
Strengthening Bilateral Cooperation on Non-Traditional Security Threats
11. The Prime Ministers agreed that national security was no longer limited to defending against threats to the integrity and interests of the sovereign state but increasingly extended to defending against threats to citizens and respective ways of life in the United Kingdom and Australia, including related to the environment, global poverty, trans-national crime, energy security, pandemics and natural disasters. 
12. Within the framework of the National Security Strategies of the United Kingdom and Australia, the Prime Ministers agreed to strengthen cooperation on non-traditional security threats to ensure a comprehensive approach to the bilateral security relationship as it confronts wide-ranging and increasingly interdependent global threats. They agreed that while there was a considerable degree of pre-existing bilateral cooperation on non-traditional security threats, there remained scope for deeper and broader bilateral links in this area. 
13. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed commitment to the United Kingdom-Australia enhanced partnership of April 2008 to address climate change, underlining that it represented a fundamental long term national security challenge. They agreed that the current global economic crisis must not be used as an excuse against securing an ambitious, equitable and effective post-2012 international climate change agreement in Copenhagen at the end of the year. 
14. They welcomed intensifying bilateral cooperation on climate change, including support by the United Kingdom for Australia's Carbon Capture and Storage Initiative. They endorsed recent joint work to consider the potential security implications of climate change, with a particular focus on Africa, Asia and the Pacific. 
15. The Prime Ministers agreed that poverty, poor economic development and governance and lack of opportunity are all highly correlated with insecurity, both in individual countries and across regions. They agreed on the importance of maintaining political, economic and security support to help reduce global poverty and welcomed the increased commitments by the United Kingdom and Australia to assist achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
16. The Prime Ministers agreed to expedited implementation of the recently agreed United Kingdom-Australian Development Assistance Partnership identifying nine priority areas for cooperation, including the MDGs, post-conflict support, food security, disaster risk reduction and health. This includes an annual bilateral dialogue of senior aid officials to agree future areas of collaboration.
17. The Prime Ministers agreed to a range of further new initiatives to strengthen bilateral cooperation on emerging security challenges, including:
     * Establishment of a bilateral inter-agency Border Security and Management Forum to promote the exchange of leading technologies and enhanced information flows.
     * Collaboration on Building Aviation Security Capacity in South East Asia.
     * Development of a bilateral Organised Crime Strategic Framework to combat transnational crime, including through strengthened information sharing and leading practice benchmarking.
     * Continued informal bilateral dialogue on energy security to promote secure, reliable and affordable global energy supply.
     * Increased cooperation on Critical Infrastructure Protection.
     * Increased Collaboration on Cyber Security, including through enhanced participation in respective national cyber security exercises and formalised information exchanges.
Building Integrated, Whole-of-Government Responses to National Security
18. The Prime Ministers agreed that the diverse, complex and interconnected nature of contemporary security threats requires diverse, interdependent and integrated responses that cut across departmental lines and traditional policy boundaries.
19. They noted recent work in both countries to ensure whole-of-government responses using all instruments of national power to address security challenges. They agreed that both countries would work closely together to assist each others' development of integrated national approaches to security policy and the building of associated capabilities, including to bolster prospects for future bilateral security cooperation.
20. The Prime Ministers agreed to the following initiatives as a first step:
     * Annual Senior Security Adviser Discussions aimed at sharing information and building cooperation on integrated, whole-of-government security policy.
     * Cooperation on the development of Integrated Political-Civil-Military Solutions, including improving bilateral deployable civilian capacity in response to global conflicts and fragile states, including through collaboration between UK agencies including the Stabilisation Unit, and Australia's Asia-Pacific Civil Military Centre of Excellence and Headquarters for Joint Operations Command.
     * Incorporation in annual bilateral Senior Officials talks of a Policy Planning Dialogue designed to strengthen respective capacity for strategic thinking and prioritisation across the national security spectrum, spanning traditional boundaries between domestic and foreign policy, defence and security and intelligence and diplomacy.
     * Enhanced opportunities for the secondment of UK and Australian National Security Officials to respective national agencies and departments.
     * Regular Exchange of Information and Lessons Learned in achieving greater coherence and effectiveness across government on national security policy.
Cooperation on Strengthening International Institutions
21. The Prime Ministers underlined each country's strong commitment to strengthening international institutions and international rules-based approaches to addressing global security challenges. They agreed that the United Kingdom and Australia would intensify joint efforts promote stronger, effective international institutions, including through reform of the United Nations and its security council and a strengthening of the international financial institutions  -  especially the IMF and World Bank  -  to sustain a framework for global economic stability, growth and open markets as a fundamental precondition of security and stability. 
22. In this context, the Prime Ministers agreed on the importance of the G20 Leaders process in catalysing decisive and prompt international action to address the current global economic crisis. They noted the G20 brought together the established and emerging powers: representative of more than 80 per cent of global GDP, 85 per cent of global trade and two thirds of the world's population, encompassing all major regions. They agreed that the G20 provided a vital forum for addressing the current global economic and financial crisis and that the implementation of actions agreed in London must be followed up at the highest level.
Implementation mechanisms
23. The Prime Ministers agreed that regular AUKMIN meetings between UK and Australian Foreign and Defence Ministers were a key mechanism to monitor strategic and security cooperation, and to identify further areas for future cooperation. They agreed that, given the range of non-traditional challenges to security that our two countries face, AUKMIN should be enhanced to include other UK and Australian ministers as appropriate. They agreed that this mechanism would be supplemented by the range of existing bilateral frameworks for dialogue and security cooperation, and the new ones agreed upon today, which would continue to play an important role in developing and orchestrating strong outcomes at AUKMIN. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you, Stephen, and to Australian Business for hosting us here today.
Thank you also to Michael Gutman, Managing Director of Westfield for the UK and Europe.
Lord Carter, Minister for Communications, Technology and Broadband.
The Right Honourable Helen Liddell, British High Commissioner for Australia.
Mr John Dauth, Australian High Commissioner.
Members of the diplomatic corps.
Distinguished guests.
Ladies and gentleman.
This week in London, leaders of the 20 largest economies of the world will met to forge a Global Strategy for Economic Recovery. There has been a lot of public discussion about the expectations for the meeting's outcome, but let me begin with a simple historical point.
During the Great Depression, it took nations some 15 years - from the crash in 1929 to Bretton Woods in 1944 - to agree on a global response. The delay of 15 years, deepening the slump in international trade and the soar in unemployment, had devastating impacts for economies, societies and world peace.
During those 15years, an opportunity for global policy coordination presented itself to world leaders - again in London. As I noted in a speech last week in Washington, 66 nations gathered at the World Monetary and Economic Conference in London in 1933 with, as HG Wells described, "a stout determination to be brilliant", but the fanfare to which the Conference opened dissipated as the three great Atlantic powers failed to reach agreement on policies to stabilise their currencies and would not commit to working against protectionism.
Instead, each nation advanced its own interests and pursued its own agenda of protectionism.
It was to take another 11 years and the tragedy of a World War for nations to gather and agree at Bretton Woods on the post-War global economic architecture.
In contrast, today, global leadership has come together rapidly, meeting in the first year of the crisis in Washington in November and again in London in April. The sense of urgency and the spirit of cooperation are a reflection not only of the depths of the crisis that we face but also of the political will that is galvanising concerted government action.
Australia, too, has taken early and decisive action to implement a strategy to see Australia through the current economic crisis.
This action has included an economic stimulus strategy in three parts:
     * Action to stabilise domestic financial markets,
     * Short-term economic stimulus to support growth and jobs, and
     * Long-term economic stimulus aimed at building the infrastructure that Australia needs for the 21st century, including the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history.
Our discretionary fiscal stimulus action amounts to around 4.5 per cent of GDP over the forward estimates. These various measures have contributed and will continue to contribute to Australia's economic growth and the stability of Australia's financial institutions.
While through-the-year to the December quarter all G7 economies had recorded negative growth, Australia's through-the-year growth to the December quarter was positive (0.3 per cent). Australia's economic growth remains among the top seven of the advanced economies. Our export volumes in the December quarter were higher than those of all G7 economies, and the third highest of the 30 OECD members.
In 2009-10, Australia's net public debt is projected to be 1.4 per cent of GDP - around 30 times less than the projected OECD average in 2010 of 48 per cent. Australia has the lowest Budget deficit when compared with the deficits of the G7 economies and one of the lowest in the OECD. Australian banks make up 4 of the world's 11 major banks that still retain an AA credit rating.
The Australian Government remains prepared to take whatever additional action is necessary to continue to support Australian economic growth and jobs and to continue to maintain stability in Australia's financial markets. Nonetheless, whatever national action Australia takes cannot be fully effective in the absence of coordinated international action, given the dimensions of the global economic recession that we will now confront.
The current crisis has shown that existing international bodies are in need of renovation if they are to meet the challenges of the 21st Century. In recent decades, international structures have not kept up with the growth in the pace and complexity of the global economy.
Between 1987 and 2007, real global GDP more than doubled. The value of world stock market capitalisations has increased more than three-fold, in nominal terms, from US$17.1 trillion in December 1995 to US$62.7 trillion in June 2008. Foreign exchange markets show a near tripling, in nominal terms, in daily turnover from US$1.2 trillion in March 2001 to US$3.2 trillion in March 2007. And most spectacularly, the notional contract amount of outstanding debt derivatives increased from US$72.1 trillion in June 1998 to US$683.7 trillion in June 2008, a 9-fold nominal increase in a period of just 10 years.
But during this same period, the international institutions that were designed to ensure stable functioning of the global financial and economic system went through no fundamental reform. In this period, the global centre of economic gravity began to shift as the emerging market economies played a greater role in driving global growth. We therefore face the global economic crisis of 2009 with international institutions designed in the wake of the Second World War and when the world was a vastly different place.
What has emerged is a gap between the capacity of existing global institutions and the sheer quantum and complexity of the economic problems we face. We need to update our institutions so that they assist governments in responding to global crises.
We do not need to start from scratch. Global architecture is struggling but it is not moribund. We still need institutions like the UN, the WTO, the IMF and the World Bank to help prevent conflict, promote trade liberalisation and financial stability and reduce poverty, but we must recognise that we need a mechanism to focus the international political will needed to develop responses to new challenges.
What we need is a driving centre. We need a grouping reflective of the distribution of power in the 21st Century and capable of providing leadership on the great challenges of the future, the stability of the global financial and economic system and the new threats to global peace and security, including climate change.
The G20 is the best on offer. It is not perfect. Realising its potential will take time, involving an evolutionary process, but the G20 has much in its favour. It brings together the established and the emerging powers. It straddles all continents and all major regions: five from Europe, five from Asia, five from the Americas, and five from other regions including Africa. It contains the major emerging powers of China, India, Brazil and Mexico. It includes the largest Muslim nation in the world, Indonesia. Its combined membership makes up 90 per cent of global GNP, 85 per cent of global trade and two-thirds of the global population. It is small enough to take decisions and large enough to be representative. It bridges the strategic and economic weight of the present and the future.
The individual interests of the G20 countries are not always aligned. It embraces different political and economic systems, but this diversity, coupled with its strategic and economic reach, makes it suited to help drive an agenda of global economic action for the future.
The G20 already has a strong existing base of cooperation to build on. The G20 was formed in 1999 after the Asian Financial Crisis - its finance ministers have been meeting together for a decade.
If we want the G20 to take on a broader role in developing global solutions to a range of problems, we need to elevate its level. Ahead of Thursday's meeting, it is important that we focus on the immediate agenda of tackling the global economic crisis - I will focus my remarks today on that challenge - but, in doing so, we must also have an eye to the future. We need to think about what sort of institutions we need to help craft global solutions to the sorts of global problems that national governments cannot solve.
The G20 is a strong starting point for that longer-term task.
The London Summit this week is only the second ever G20 leaders' meeting. Already, the leader level forum has enhanced the political drive behind the institution and helped to deliver concrete action to address this global recession.
The G20 Washington Declaration, agreed in November last year, outlined an ambitious program to help restore growth and begin much-needed reform of the world's financial system. In Washington, leaders recognised the need to: "use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect, as appropriate."
Since then, leaders have acted on that commitment with unprecedented and coordinated discretionary fiscal stimulus. For the G20 as a whole, the size of discretionary fiscal stimulus is around $2.5 trillion, and is estimated by the IMF to save up to 20 million jobs. This is on top of the impact of the automatic stabilisers, which are very large in some G20 countries. And the IMF estimates that the impact of national fiscal action has been increased by a bonus of 50 per cent because it was implemented jointly and virtually at the same time across open economies.
Two weeks ago at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting, the Communiqué recommitted G20 nations to further macroeconomic action as necessary. The Communiqué noted: "Fiscal action is providing vital support for growth and jobs ... we are committed to deliver the scale of sustained effort necessary to restore growth...we will ensure the restoration of growth and long-run fiscal sustainability".
For all the talk of disunity and the 'transatlantic fiscal fight' that dominates some parts of the press - these facts and these policy declarations that we have already witnessed unprecedented action and unprecedented coordination on fiscal policy. In addition to fiscal policy, G20 leaders have also taken extraordinary action to support lending in our financial systems, already having:
     * eased monetary policy and made the largest global reductions in interest rates around the world in modern times,
     * protected savings and deposits, and
     * provided liquidity support, including the use of government guarantees
     * injected capital into financial institutions, and
     * strengthened banks' balance sheets, including through dealing with impaired assets.
This was highlighted in the agreement reached by G20 Finance Ministers on 14 March for a framework for restoring lending which outlined principles for dealing with impaired assets. The principles, which underpin a globally coordinated approach, include the eligibility of assets and institutions, risk transfer and burden sharing, transparency and disclosure, valuation and monitoring. We also committed in Washington to resist protectionism, realising that we must avoid beggar-thy-neighbour policies and sustain the benefits over open markets and globalisation.
While this has not been 100 per cent successful - and some transgressions have occurred - so far these have tended to be venial rather than mortal sins. No doubt part of the reason protectionism has been limited is the pressure exerted by the G20 through their monitoring and public report-back mechanisms to leaders' meetings.
There has also been substantial progress on strengthening the financial system regulatory framework and advancing the 47 action items agreed last November. This was highlighted by the G20 Finance Ministers on 14 March where they identified measures including:
     * the expansion of the Financial Stability Forum to include all G20 countries,
     * improved regulatory oversight over Credit Rating Agencies, and
     * principles for compensation which avoid excessive risk-taking.
To help emerging markets and developing countries cope with the impact of the crisis, the G20 has been instrumental in supporting a major increase in the resources of the IMF and accelerating IMF reform.
The achievements to date represent important early steps to deal with this global crisis. 
But there is much more to do as the crisis develops and unfolds. The London G20 Summit this week must make progress towards a Global Strategy for Economic Recovery.
The agenda is broad, but the fact is that the Summit will be judged on one overarching outcome - whether leaders can agree on a forward work plan that helps to restore confidence to a global economy sorely lacking in confidence. In order to provide people with a rational basis for confidence, the London Summit must deliver more than words.
We must reach a substantive agreement on five key areas: further macro-economic action, addressing toxic assets to restore lending, reform of the international financial institutions, reform of the global regulatory framework and holding the line against protectionism.
On supporting growth, leaders must reaffirm Finance Ministers' commitment to take "whatever action is necessary until growth is restored", and we must operationalise this commitment by directing the IMF to report and advise us on the need for further stimulus.
Second, we must act to address the root cause of the crisis - the 'toxic assets' on the balance sheets of systemically significant banks. Secretary Geither's public-private investment plan announced last week is an important initial step in support of confidence in the banking system, but the problem of banking systems in developing countries facing increasing stress will continue to have dangerous flow-on consequences for large Western banks with exposure to emerging markets. We must therefore endorse the Finance Ministers' framework for impaired asset management, including mechanisms for cooperation through the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF.
Thirdly, we must agree to increased resourcing and reform of international financial institutions, with particular attention to the IMF. We should aim to double and, if required, to triple, the pre-crisis level of the IMF's resources. We should also support reform of the IMF ownership structure to better reflect current global economic weightings.
Fourthly, we must work towards addressing the weaknesses in the global regulatory framework - not least because of the necessity of demonstrating to an under-confident public that we are rectifying the regulatory failures of governments that allowed the crisis to occur. We must implement the Washington Action Plan against firm timelines. We must subject all global financial institutions, markets and products to a level of regulation appropriate to their systemic importance. Macro-prudential oversight and FSF coordination of the development of tools to address systemic vulnerabilities could better prevent the build-up of systemic risks.
Finally, we must hold the line against acts of protectionism, be it physical goods or the new forms of financial protectionism that now confront us - the Smoot-Hawley Tariff of the 21st Century.
If substantive agreement to tackle the key causes of the crisis and to mitigate the consequences of the crisis is achieved, the green shoots of confidence can credibly grow.
These substantive outcomes will be a significant achievement, but the actions we not of themselves immediately fix the crisis. That will take some time. The IMF now forecasts growth of between minus 0.5 and minus 1 per cent in 2009. The OECD's Interim Economic Outlook released today says the world economy is in the midst of the deepest and most synchronised recession in our lifetimes. The OECD expects output in its 30 member economies to contract by 4.3 per cent in 2009. These numbers are a wake up call for the G20 Leaders meeting in London.
Looking ahead, the IMF predicts that in 2010, global growth will be between 1.5 and 2.5 per cent, down from 3 per cent predicted few months ago, but the fact is that the risks are on the downside, and the economy could turn out to be substantially worse than these forecasts.
The first major risk to global recovery over the next year comes from the potential economic collapse in emerging markets and developing countries. Most focus in this respect is on Central and Eastern Europe, which will need to roll over US$413 billion of external debt in 2009. According to IMF estimates, Eastern Europe will have a financing gap in 2009 of US$123 billion and of US$63 billion in 2010. The capital needs of Western European banks would be exacerbated by losses in Eastern Europe, with total exposure to the region at about US$1.6 trillion. There are also risks to developing countries in other regions.
The second major risk to global recovery is the process of deleveraging that may depress growth even as the economy recovers. Many advanced countries have experienced decades of low saving and over-consumption. Households and firms have already begun to change their saving behaviour, saving more to restore some of their lost wealth.
In the United States, personal savings rates are estimated to have recently increased to up above 4 per cent, the highest level for fifteen years and up from less than 1 per cent for much of 2005 to 2008. This deleveraging will affect growth in advanced economies. Indeed, the IMF is concerned that this deleveraging will lead to lower consumption, investment and skills acquisition, reducing long-term growth rates and increasing unemployment in the long term by up to 1 per cent.
The risk of a deepening economic crisis in the short term, and depressed long term growth, presents broader challenges. Last November, at the Washington Summit, I observed the likelihood that the global economic crisis would, in some nations, become a political and social crisis. History speaks to the likelihood of this reality.
The President of the African Development Bank, Donald Kaberuka, recently vocalised the concern, observing - "I fear for social stability, I fear for political stability, and it is happening already".
In his 'Annual Threat Assessment of the Intelligence Community" to the Senate in February, which typically focuses on terrorism and nuclear proliferation, the new US Director of National Intelligence, Dennis Blair, claimed that "the primary near-term security concern of the United States is the global economic crisis and its geopolitical implications". Looking forward at potential impacts, the US Director of Intelligence also noted that "statistical modelling shows that economic crises increase the risk of regime-threatening instability if they persist over a one to two year period".
Projections and modelling aside, devastating social impacts are already emerging. 
According to the World Bank, an extra 53 million people will be trapped in poverty this year alone as a result of the crisis, and the crisis will hurt the world's most vulnerable, with the World Bank estimating that infant mortality will increase by between 200,000 and 400,000 children per year from 2009 if the current crisis persists.
Dealing with these risks and the evolving nature of the crisis will require the G20 to continue to adapt its work program. A future program should have the following three elements.
First, to deal with the risks to emerging markets, we must ensure close monitoring and regular quarterly feedback from the IMF and World Bank on the risks to emerging markets, as well as their systemic impact on the global economy.
Second, we need follow-up on the implementation of our commitments concerning stimulus, toxic assets, IMF resourcing and reform, regulatory reform and holding the line against an outbreak of protectionism.
Third, we need to commission and develop - through the IMF, World Bank, Financial Stability Forum and other relevant international bodies - an integrated, sustainable medium-term growth agenda. This medium term agenda should include the following elements:
     * how do we make the most of our education and training systems?
     * how do we use our capital and labour most effectively?
     * how do we increase energy efficiency and expand the role of renewable energy?
     * how do we ensure that our regulatory systems are consistent across borders?
All these are important medium term challenges.
In closing, there are two challenges ahead of us this week.
First, we have to tackle the short term economic challenges that confront us today and provide consumers and markets with a rational basis for confidence. This means real outcomes at the London Summit, but the other task ahead of us this week is to look to a further horizon. 
We must take steps towards laying the foundations of the global institutions and decision-making architecture that will serve the people, underpin the markets and help us tackle the next great challenges we will face. Based on these short- and long-term reforms, we must also build a credible public narrative surrounding a global strategy for economic recovery.
The content of that strategy (as outline in my remarks today) is critical. How global political leaders describe that strategy in their communications with their peoples is equally critical. Re-building confidence, both for businesses and consumers, must embrace both; that is, a strategy that will work, and a narrative which explains the implementation of that strategy to the people.
That is why when leaders emerge from London this week, it is critical that, collectively, we lead the international debate on the return of the global economy to growth levels that secure our collective long-term economic future.


PM: Well it has been another busy day here in London. We have, in the last period of time, met with the President of Indonesia, the Russian President Mr Medvedev, and also with the new Prime Minister of Thailand.
And I have just come from Buckingham palace where I had the privilege of an audience with the Queen and lunch with the Queen and the Prime Minister of Canada.
In London, we are right now in the process of forging a global strategy for global economic recovery. This process is hard. This process is difficult, this process must be done, because the global economic strategy we are in the business of forging here in London, ultimately shapes the future of jobs around the world, including jobs in Australia.
At this summit, at this summit here in London, we may have Presidents and Prime Ministers around the summit table but what they do effects jobs for plumbers, for printers and police officers right around the world, including Australia.
The discussions in this summit begin today but the action happens tomorrow. And that action is critical to the future of jobs around the world. What sort of action are we contemplating taking? First, we are implementing coordinated fiscal and monetary policy action around the world to support jobs.
And again I emphasise the numbers, that that addition to global economic growth, off the back of that level of stimulus, has helped support nearly 20 million more jobs around the world.
Second, action together on toxic assets, the core of the economic problem and the re-capitalisation of the world's biggest banks.
Thirdly, action on the IMF to deal with emerging problems in central and eastern Europe and right across the world, so that they don't become problems for the whole pace of global economic recovery and jobs.
Action on new rules for the financial system for the future. And of course, what we need further is action to govern the way in which the global financial system operates for the long term. If we do that, and prevent a further outbreak of protectionism, you can begin to map a pattern, a trajectory, for long term global economic recovery.
And that is fundamentally important. National actions in Australia, necessary for what we can do to support economic growth and jobs at home. International action, equally necessary, in fact, essential to support the future of economic growth and jobs back home.
I have said before in the United States and elsewhere, that this global economic crisis has been like a fire. And therefore, what we must do is stop the house from burning down, that is about stimulus. What we must do is prevent the fire from spreading, that is stopping protectionism. What we must do is begin to rebuild the house and that is acting on toxic assets in banks and recapitalising those banks.
And what we have got to do is have rules for the future which make it less likely that we have this sort of damaging fire in the global economy again.
Just before taking your questions if I could add on an entirely different note, our congratulations to the Socceroos who I understand have won 2-0 over Uzbekistan in Sydney. 
Great outcome for the Socceroos, I am reliably informed by the soccer nuts in my office, that this puts us within a hairs breadth of qualifying for the next World Cup, all the best to the Socceroos, well done. 
Australia is proud of you. You did fantastically at the last World Cup, we look forward to a similar Australian performance next time around. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, are you going to get another summit before you come out of this meeting?
PM: Michelle, I think what we see with the Governments assembled is an emerging consensus that there is going to be another lot of work to do, and therefore it would not surprise me that we end up with a further summit of the G20 and that there would be a further summit of the G20, later this year or early next year.
That is I think a rational course of action, but government's still continue to work that through. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you say with any level of assurance that 24 hours out from the communiqué that that communiqué will contain more than just motherhood statements or statements of intent, will there be anything concrete this time tomorrow?
PM: Let me, I referred before to five areas of work. Let me just drill in on one of them which is absolutely essential. If we don't agree on new resources for the international monetary fund, new resources, and if we don't agree on more flexible ways for the IMF to operate in the future, then the consequences for big problems in the global economy later this year, will not be dealt with and they will become problems for all of us, including back home in Australia.
So to go to your question, increasing significantly, the resources of the International Monetary Fund, to act in those economies which may otherwise go under and their financial systems as a result of the global financial crisis, is real progress, not just for the world, but frankly, if it is not dealt with, it ricochets back into Australia through the global financial system. 
JOURNALIST: And just on that institutional (inaudible) the Japanese put a hundred million into the line of credit into the IMF, are you asking for new resources that (inaudible) will we be tapped for more money?
PM: Australia, as under previous Governments, will always do its bit, will always act according to its fair share. That is the right principle. Whether it is under our Government, the previous Liberal Government or back into the decades since the foundation of the IMF back in 1944, that has always been the case. 
I think the other thing to bear in mind is that after the last Asian Financial Crisis, Treasurer Costello was out there, legitimately providing some billions of dollars worth of lines of credit for a number of developing economies within our region.
But Australia will play its part, we will do our fair share and the finality of the overall arrangements for the IMF are still being worked through.
JOURNALIST: Will it be more or less (inaudible)?
SWAN: Not until we see the outcome (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: In 24 hours time will you be able to stand here and say, Australia is going to contribute X amount in loans to the IMF?
PM: We will know in a day or so time what the total funding commitment is for the IMF, it will then depend on which of the individual instruments within the IMF, we as Australia will contribute to. And that in turn will shape our overall allocation. 
It is complex stuff but they are about several different instruments within the IMF which have different contribution formulas associated with them.
But I go back to the principle: we have always played our part, we have always been up there, contributing our fair share. It has happened in the past, we will do so in the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can you give as a, your latest and fairest assessment of  -  
PM: I will give you my latest assessment.
JOURNALIST: the alleged, or the apparent, or the real discord between France and Germany and the rest of the world on tomorrow's outcomes, because what they are saying publicly and what Obama is saying and what you have said previously don't seem to add up. 
Are they just playing to a domestic audience? Political audience?
PM: I am always reluctant to contribute to unnecessary discord prior to a major international conference such as this. But let me say that from time to time, governments do what they have got to do in various parts of the world. The key thing is what governments do together here in London.
And that is where the rubber hits the road. Here, what is agreed in this place, what is agreed in this city. We are at an important point in history right now and I think in the discussions I have had with global heads of government, including the Russian President this morning, there is an acute sense, of what failed in this city, once before, the London conference of 1933, you have heard me speak of this in recent speeches.
And there is an acute sense of the challenges we face are now acute and requiring leaders where necessary, to step beyond their national briefs to agree on a overall international strategy for the global economy.
Because for the first time, all leaders around this table, I believe are seized of one thing. What each of us do nationally, helps reduce the impact of this global recession on local jobs, but it is only through coordinated global action that there is a way in which you can actually bring about a global economic recovery.
JOURNALIST: But can you explain the apparent difference between what you and Obama and Gordon Brown are saying and the posturing for want of a better word, of Sarkozy, what is going on?
PM: Well there are different senses of constraints in different countries. And if you are referring in particular to debates about fiscal stimulus, that goes in part to perceptions in certain parts of Europe in particular about where they stand, and their capacity to act further. 
These things change over time depending on the sense of need for the future and the sense of what is necessary right here and now. That is why as I have said to you before, it is important for us as all governments gathered here in London to be attentive to what the International Monetary Fund says to us for the future as well. 
We know what the IMF has said for 2009, we know what so far they have said for 2010, but 2010 is three quarters away. So the key thing is to be, continue to be responsive to advice from the IMF about what further stimulus, for example, may be necessary for 2010.
But I just know this, at the end of the day, this London Summit is about global action on jobs. Global action on jobs around the world and global action on jobs therefore in Australia. That is why we are here, that is why the Treasurer and I are here. 
That is where the rubber ultimately hits the road. What further jobs can we create through stimulus? What jobs can we protect through appropriate actions around the world, and what pathways to recovery in private credit flows to underpin small businesses in the future, can we achieve. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what did you talk to The Queen about?
PM: You know, as well as I do, that that is a question well worth asking and one which the response is a universal one from Prime Ministers of Australia, going back to Ming and beyond, conversations between the Prime Minister of Australia and Her Majesty the Queen, remain confidential.
It was a very good conversation. If I could say one thing about Her Majesty the Queen. She remains deeply concerned about the recovery efforts in the Victorian bushfires and she has been generally at pains to make it plain that her concern and other members of the royal family is acute, on how families and communities are recovering in Victoria. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the eve of the summit, are you more optimistic that pessimistic?
PM: I am born as an optimist and that is, that it is easy to tell everyone what is going wrong, it is much harder to tell people what is going right and how you fix those things which need fixing. I am in the fixing business. I am in the problem solving business. I am in the, how do we turn something bad into something good, how do we take what we have got and make it better.
That is why we are here and that is why Australia will always be a positive voice at conferences like this, because we believe problems have to be wrestled to the ground, dealt with, and a solution shaped.
JOURNALIST: If the communiqué's vague on the stimulus issue as is likely we won't know whether you have really taken any concrete steps to solve the problem.
PM: Well Michelle, let me answer it in these terms, back in November at the Washington summit there was a commitment to undertake fiscal stimulus as was necessary to support growth for the future. It didn't specify numbers, it just said we should take fiscal stimulus as necessary to support jobs for the future and we should be mindful, as I recall it, of what the international agencies have to say on this and that includes the IMF. 
Guess what, we were. And we've taken that action. Trillions of dollars into the economy based on reportage also from the IMF. Also, certain governments back then for various reasons said they doubted whether stimulus was necessary. Certain of those governments since then have taken a lot of stimulus, a lot of stimulus. 
Rolling the clock forward to what's necessary for 2010, the sensible thing to do is this: reaffirm the impact on jobs of stimulus already taken and make it plain to the people of the world that this sort of action translates into jobs on the ground as it is in Australia.
Secondly commit to future action as is necessary to fill the growth gap left by the retreat of the private economy. And thirdly and I think intelligently, be mindful of what the IMF will say in the period ahead, about what we need for 2010.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can I ask you about the protest that flared today around the Bank of England, they smashed the windows of the Bank of Scotland. Can you understand why these people have so much angst about G20?
PM: When it comes to acts of violence, these are as unacceptable on the streets of London as they would be on the streets of Sydney or the streets of Melbourne. I have no truck with acts of violence. 
People have a legitimate right to protest, I understand that. People around the world are concerned about the impact of the crisis which they did not cause, and its impact on their families and their communities through the loss of jobs, I understand that. That does not provide any justification whatsoever for acts of wanton violence in London or any other city of the world.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, are you planning a further stimulus package in the budget?
TREASURER: I don't speculate on the contents of the budget Matthew, I don't speculate about it at all.
JOURNALIST: Well logic says your actions here at the finance ministers meeting and again here at the summit is all about stimulus, well surely there's going to be a stimulus package in the budget.
TREASURER: Well Malcolm, I would draw your attention to OECD report that's come out in the last 24 hours which points to the fact that Australia has implemented, a very significant stimulus package or stimulus packages. 
First of all last October and again in February. And that report points to the effectiveness of economic stimulus that we have delivered, first of all through payments to support demand and importantly through direct investments  -  in schools, housing and so on. 
So this government has been ahead of the game and put in place very effective stimulus and we've done it earlier than many other governments in the world. But as we've said repeatedly we will see what's occurring in the global economy and if further action is necessary then it will be on the table. But these are matters to be considered in the Budget context and as I just said to Matthew I don't speculate about that.
JOURNALIST: What then are the benchmarks that you have for whether the last stimulus has been a success and what you will have to do next?
TREASURER: Well I think we've seen a fair bit of evidence of how important economic stimulus has been in Australia. Look at what has occurred with retail sales, look at retail employment. Compare that to what is happening elsewhere in the world. I mean we are much stronger in that area than just about any other developed country. 
Look what is happening in the housing market. Look at the OECD forecasts for '09. These things all demonstrate that Australia is in a much stronger position than many other developed countries and one of the reasons for that, highlighted in the OECD report, has been the concrete action and steps taken by this Government, since last October.
PM: Let me just add one, let me add one point, and that is, on this debate about retail sales, retail trade back home. Retail trade in Australia remains 2.3 per cent higher than in November 2008.
This compares with falls in retail trade in so many other parts of the world. Japan, retail trade was 2.1 per cent below it's November level, US 1.4 per cent below, New Zealand 1.8 per cent lower, Canada 3.3 per cent lower. 
And Wayne just made the point before about employment in the retail sector, employment in the retail sector rose by more than 16,000 over the three months to February.
There are two fairly significant bits of data. So you are going to have, I presume some people sort of having a go at the February numbers, can I say, compared against what is going on elsewhere in the world and looking at this huge challenge to jobs around the world, the fact that we can generate growth in employment in the retail sector along the lines of those numbers, I think speaks for itself. 
And I conclude on this, because we have got something else we have got to do, is, and it goes back to thinking about success or failure on this overall summit and success or failure if you like in other policy settings. You can either sit around and do nothing, as some recommend back in Australia, or you can act and have a go, and we have done that and there are some runs of the board. But let me tell you, there is a long way to go, a long long way to go.
And similarly internationally you can sit back, moan and criticise, and there is going to be a whole lot of people who do that tomorrow as well, about how much more could have been done here there and everywhere, or you can get in and have a go globally, as global leaders are now doing and make a difference.
None of these are perfect solutions to a global recession, but let me tell you, they are much better than doing nothing and they are much better than the alternative, which is simply to throw people into the unemployment queues, without any support from Government nationally and internationally.


Community Cabinet participant: We're here to meet Kevin Rudd and to hear what he has at his Cabinet meeting and what he has to say...
Community Cabinet participant: I don't know, it's a pretty good opportunity, I suppose, to meet the cabinet so... I'm a politics student so, yeah...
Community Cabinet participant: I think that it's really important that the government does come to the people, I mean we're the people that they're looking after and if they become more than just a public face, they become a person and they see that we're people, with real problems and real issues that we want them to listen to...
Community Cabinet participant: I am a local resident and I also represent the Partners of Veterans Association in Western Australia...
Community Cabinet participant: Interest, just to see what he has got to say in person and, yes, just nice to see somebody talking in the flesh, rather than on the news and what's going on there so just, yeah...
Community Cabinet participant:Well, look, I'm an elderly person, grey beard and everything, so I'm going to see the minister for the aging not the aged, aging...
Community Cabinet participant: I'm going to be talking about the employment and training of aboriginal kids, youth...
Principal of Ballajura Community College, Dr Steffan Silcox: ... One relates to mental health and problems of trauma, placing some of the students that are refugees, issues relating to child abuse and how we can address some of those issues as a school...
Community Cabinet participant: The biggest challenge is the global financial crisis and looking after Australian jobs at this very difficult time and that's, I think, the major focus of the federal government...
Community Cabinet participant: I think it's a good sign of democracy because WA usually gets missed-out so it is a good thing that we are actually being acknowledged.


PM: Today, 20 governments from the 20 largest economies in the world have agreed on a global strategy for global economic recovery, with real commitments against real timelines. 
It's been Prime Ministers and Presidents who have struck this deal, but it's small businesses, tradies and young people who will benefit from it over time because global action is necessary to support local jobs.
On stimulus, what governments have agreed is to do whatever it takes to restore growth.
On financial regulation, real changes have occurred. Today's agreement begins to crack down on the sort of cowboys in global financial markets that have brought global markets undone with real impacts for jobs everywhere.
Also, on executive remuneration, what we have done today is take further action. We haven't resolved the whole question of risky behaviour by financial institution executives being rewarded by excessive payments, but we have made a significant and first step, and I would draw your attention to the fact that the regulators now, through this global agreement, begin for the first time to cast their regulatory net over remuneration packages for financial institution executives. I'll come to that in a minute.
Third point concerns the IMF. In a worst case scenario, the International Monetary Fund is the thin blue line between failing national economies and global financial chaos. And the key has been to make sure that the IMF has the resources necessary to act. And what we've done today is to ensure that is the case.
Let me go to these measures in some detail. Firstly on the question of stimulus and growth. I draw your attention to paragraph 10 of the Communiqué, where it says that last month the International Monetary Fund estimated that world growth in real terms will resume and rise to over two per cent by the end of 2010, and further goes on to say this, and I'll quote the Communiqué: “We, the leaders of these 20 major economies commit today to take whatever action is necessary to secure that outcome.”
Furthermore, what we call upon is for the International Monetary Fund to assess the impact of the actions that we have taken and critically also to assess what further global actions are required. This is an important commitment on the part of all the economies, all the governments represented around the table.
Second, on the question of toxic assets. As I've said on many occasions before, both here and the United States, and back home in Australia, dealing with toxic assets in the balance sheets of the world's biggest banks is the core of the economic problem. Extracting them is the core of the economic solution. And then, the recapitalisation of those banks to restore global private credit flows. And this was a consistent view across most of the heads of government represented in the G20 meeting today.
Drawing your attention to paragraph eight of the Communiqué, it goes again to the whole question of adopting an international framework for dealing with impaired assets. It goes on to say we are committed to take all necessary actions to restore the normal flow of credit through the financial system and ensure the soundness of systemically important institutions, implementing our policies in line with the agreed G20 framework for restoring lending and repairing the financial sector.
Therefore, these 20 governments through their heads of government have committed themselves to this international framework for toxic asset management, one which the Government of Australia was, among others, instrumental in shaping before the G20 Finance Ministers meeting a couple of weeks ago.
Thirdly, on the question of the International Monetary Fund, let me again draw your attention to that section of the Communiqué, in particular to paragraph 17. And the funds which are now committed to the international financial institutions. Some $850 billion:
     * $500 billion to the IMF, a trebling of its resources;
     * $100 billion for the various development banks around the world including the Asian Development Bank within our own region;
     * On top of that, $250 billion by way of trade finance facility to continue to support global trade.
     * Also, we have a further $250 billion provided to global liquidity through a further, through a general SDR allocation which is referred to in paragraph 19 of the Communiqué.
What I would point to is this. These amounts of money, these amounts of loans are necessary to equip the International Monetary Fund, the global financial policeman, with the money necessary and the loans necessary to support economies around the world where they run into major systemic problems, and prevent those systemic problems for them cutting across and affecting the rest of the global economy.
Absent those resources, as I've said a number of times before, there's a grave problem of a crisis in confidence again emerging in financial markets about the inability of the IMF to act in the event of major failures in Central and Eastern Europe or elsewhere in the emerging market world, the emerging economy world.
This is a major decision to deliver a major new amount of loan funding globally to the IMF to do its job in the future to reduce the risk of further financial failure in the world spreading across the entire global economy again, and worsening the recession we currently have across the world.
If I could also draw your attention fourthly to what the Communiqué has to say about strengthening financial supervision and regulation. In particular, I draw your attention to paragraph 13 and 14 and 15. What we say there clearly is that in the view of these governments, confidence will not be restored until we rebuild trust in our financial system. And it goes on to answer the question as to how that should occur.
And that answer is delivered by G20 governments concluding that we need systemic cooperation and greater consistency between governments in providing effective global financial regulation for significant financial institutions.
And within that principle in para 15 and most significantly in the attached document, Strengthening Financial Systems, there are detailed commitments against detailed timelines in each of the following areas  -  the future work of the Financial Stability Board which now represents a wider membership; furthermore, the requirement for the FSB, the Financial Stability Board to collaborate with the International Monetary Fund to provide early warning of macro-economic and financial risks.
Furthermore, through the new system of supervisory colleges to provide appropriate new macro-prudential analysis and oversight for those institutions across the world, which are of significant size.
Furthermore, to extend regulation and oversight to all systemically important financial institutions, and most critically, instruments in markets - that is, the whole range of those financial innovations that we have seen in recent times which have escaped the purview of the regulators.
And furthermore, I draw your attention to this one  -  to endorse and implement the Financial Stability Forum's tough new principles on pay and compensation, and to support sustainable compensation schemes and corporate social responsibility for all firms.
Turning to the attached document in terms of what does that mean on executive remuneration, I draw your attention to the entire part of the attached Strengthening Financial System Declaration which deals with compensation. In particular, what it has to say about the international banking committee, otherwise called the Basel Committee, integrating the following principles in their risk management guidance by autumn of 2009, across the global financial system.
What are those principles of guidance?
One, firms' boards of directors to play an active role in design, operation and evaluation of compensation schemes.
Two, compensation arrangements including bonuses to properly reflect risk and timing and composition of payments, to be sensitive to the time horizon of risks. Payments should not be finalised over short periods where risks are realised over long periods.
Third, firms to publicly disclose clear, comprehensive and timely information about compensation.
And fourth, supervisors will assess firms' compensation policies as part of their overall assessment of their soundness. Where necessary, they will intervene with responses that can include increased capital requirements.
These are four new concrete sets of principles to be anchored into the global financial regulatory system, concerning executive remuneration and risk in significant financial institutions worldwide. National regulation on this is inadequate. Global regulation on this is what is required given the global nature of the current financial system.
I conclude on this. On the question of trade, the fifth area where we have been active on this broad agenda of economic policy considerations in the G20 meeting today, the provisions contained in paragraph 22 of the Communiqué.
In particular, because governments gathered here today in London have concluded that a protectionist outbreak would undermine fundamentally the prospects of economic recovery, that it is necessary to extend further our combined commitment not to engage in further protectionist measures through until the end of 2010.
Furthermore, to require the WTO to report on any violations of the same. And furthermore, to support trade itself through a recommitment to reaching an ambitious and balanced conclusion to the Doha development round which is urgently needed. On top of these, a $250 billion new trade finance facility to assist the restoration of normal trade flows involving the developing economies.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are the five key elements of this global strategy for global economic recovery. Each is part of a whole, each is important in itself, each one without the other would be incomplete.
The last thing I would say is this. Many people coming into this G20 summit said that it would divide right down the middle, between those who wanted one thing or another, that there was insufficient political consensus to drive this important global summit towards conclusion.\
My experience of the summit today and of the chairmanship of Gordon Brown, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, and supported by heads of government around the world led by President Obama, was an overwhelming drive towards achieving a real outcome with real commitments and real timelines in order to provide a pathway to global economic recovery.
Everyone said around the room there are no silver bullets in this. But you know, it's very easy to point to a glass and say it's half empty. What I would say to you in terms of what we have delivered today is an outcome that is more than half full. There's more work to be done. This gathering, this meeting, this summit will continue and we'll meet again by year's end.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I ask you just on the IMF and the bolstering of its resources, has Australia increased its contribution and by how much and in what form?
PM: As I've said and the Treasurer's said on a number of occasions, Australia as always in the past and will in the future, consistent with previous government practices, make a contribution consistent to its fair share, first point.
Second is, the form through which this assistance is provided is not by way of grant, it's by way of loan. And furthermore having provided a loan to the IMF, it doesn't follow automatically that that lending facility is actually used, and if it used it doesn't affect the Budget bottom line. Why? Because an asset then is created on the other side of the ledger.
The broad scope of what the previous government engaged in following the Asian financial crisis, in terms of the individual financial loans provided to national governments, when combined with that which was provided to what's called a new arrangement to borrow back in '97/98, was something like $US5 or 6 billion.
We haven't yet settled numbers and the reason is, our contribution will be contingent on the number of other states contributing and how much they contribute and that will be not known until the spring. What we've agreed upon is the quantum.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, in terms of the question of China's contribution, quantums on that have not yet been set by the Chinese Government, as I'm advised, and the question of future voting rights within the IMF for China and other countries who have contributed to the IMF would be resolved consistent with the Communiqué by January 2011.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, he may be referring to a different facility to the one that I've just been referring to. But I'm saying the voting rights question is not resolved until 2011.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the Finance Ministers said back in two weeks ago here in London, the Finance Ministers said that they had brought forward the resolution of the voting rights question for China to January 2011. That has been reaffirmed, or affirmed at a head of government level in this Communiqué. And I'm sure there will be progress between now and then as I've indicated in my early remarks.
JOURNALIST: Has today's agreement killed off the let it rip economy, rampant capitalism, and put the neo-liberals to the sword, and have we seen an actual change in the nature of world capitalism today?
PM: I think what you've seen Matthew is governments around the world, both from the developing economies and the developed economies, out there in support of open markets. And with this conditionality attached  -  properly regulated open markets. And you see that language reflected also in the opening paragraphs of the Communiqué. And that is the overwhelming sentiment of heads of government.
And discussions which I've had with them privately and collectively last night when we met at Downing Street and here again today, it's how do you maintain global public confidence in a system of open markets which ensures that those open markets are there for everybody and not just for some. And that is a strong and unifying sentiment.
That is why for example, you see in the early parts of this Communiqué, a clear cut statement that what we are seeking to do is to enhance jobs around the world. That is, what affects people, what affects working people. I quote you from third paragraph of the Communiqué: “Our global plan for recovery must have at its heart the needs and jobs of hardworking families.”
So I answer your question Matthew by saying it's getting the balance right. A properly regulated financial system which delivers the results in terms of employment in the economy, and also provides a proper balance of regulation for the future and one I've referred to at some length, which is regulation for financial executives in the financial services sector.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd, how does this Communiqué, how will it impact Australia's financial sector salaries and bonuses?
PM: Well, as you know in Australia we've already made a clear cut statement about what we expect in terms of shareholder approval of salary arrangements in firms which have executive remuneration arrangements  - 
JOURNALIST: Non-binding though.
PM: No, hang on, just about to go on to the rest. Pointing out what we've done domestically so far. And secondly, on top of that specific undertaking, we've made a formal reference of course to the Productivity Commission through Allan Fels, and that has some time to report.
The advance here is as I described before, for significant firms in the financial sector, significant financial institutions, for these principles that I referred to before to be incorporated in what is called the Formal Risk Management Guidance of the Basel Committee, global committee responsible for setting the rules here, by autumn of 2009.
They therefore, once adopted, will flow back into significant firms within the Australian financial system. These two exercises of ours, one local through the inquiry which is obviously underway in Australia, and secondly through these obligations which we've taken on internationally, will make for a difference.
And I can just go to one core difference. It goes to remuneration systems in the short term and risk calculations over the long term. What this clearly says is that these things have to be harmonised. In other words, a set of remuneration arrangements for a company executive, a finance sector executive, has to be made consistent with a risk analysis over the long term, not just a short snapshot of time. Over here.
JOURNALIST: Just on the role, the influence which Australia has had at this G20 summit. You wrote to your counterparts before coming here, putting forward your proposals. I guess, putting your modesty to one side, how much or  - 
PM: There was general guffawing at that point. Led by Farr by the way.
JOURNALIST: With this deal struck today Mr Rudd, with this deal struck today, how much of it is a reflection of what you put forward?
PM: I think in all honesty, this has been a contribution from a whole bunch of governments in a whole bunch of different ways. I mean, I've seen so many iterations, so many versions of communiqués over recent times and bits of communiqué, that everyone's made a contribution.
What I was trying to do way back when, when I addressed the UN General Assembly in September last year, as saying we have a problem. What I said in that address was, here is a bunch of things we need to be doing and I spoke about it at some length. There's been a lot of work by us done internally since then, a lot of work done by us internationally since then. You're aware that we submitted working papers on toxic asset management across the global financial system, and on the reform of the International Monetary Fund, and other contributions elsewhere.
We've been one of a number of countries, but I've got to say in due deference to our host, Gordon Brown, his energy and his activism in pulling all these threads together across 20 governments who are not in the habit of working at this level of detail with each other in the midst of a global financial crisis deserves to be recognised and applauded.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there are allegations in newspapers across Australia today that your conduct on a VIP flight reduced an air force hostess to tears. What happened?
PM: As I recall it, there was a flight I think from Port Moresby, and I had a discussion with I think one of the attendants about the provision of food. Didn't last very long. And if anyone is offended by that, including the attendant concerned of course, I apologise. And my recollection of the incident concerned is that, some time during the flight I also indicated to a member of the crew, that was just it, you know it was, um, that was not to worry about it. I think that was my language.
JOURNALIST: Did you apologise (inaudible).
PM: I said to the member of staff not to worry about it. But as I said if anyone took offence, of course I apologise for it. Prime Ministers make mistakes. I'm sure I've made mistakes, that would be one of them. And if people have been offended, I apologise for it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I didn't observe any.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what do you say to the plumber in Parramatta Road, I mean about when we know this is going to work, this summit?
PM: Sorry what happened down there?
JOURNALIST: What's your message to the plumber in Parramatta Road about when we're going to know that this summit has worked or not?
PM: What the summit realised and concluded in discussions both informal and formal was here is how much you can do nationally to deal with the problem of jobs and economic activity on the home front, and here's what must be done internationally to make a difference. Unless you're doing both these things together, ultimately it doesn't work.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll come to that. What I refer to again is the reference on stimulus at the beginning of the Communiqué in para 10 which points to our advice from the IMF about world growth resuming in real terms to over two per cent by the end of 2010, and committing ourselves to take whatever action is necessary to secure that outcome.
This is therefore a concrete plan by us to try and reduce the impact on joblessness in all our countries including Australia, and to improve the level of stimulus and other measures in the economy.
But I would say very loud and clear that there are no silver bullets in this. This is about reducing the impact of the global economic recession. It's not about immediately removing it. I just want to be upfront with people about that. It's parallel to what I say within Australia which is our actions on stimulus and interim interventions in financial markets are about reducing the impact of the global economic recession, rather than eliminating it. I don't believe you should mislead people.
But I would say this, the core of the economic problem is what's happened to the world's biggest banks. And dealing with the core of that problem, what we have been able to do is advance a set of principles for dealing with toxic assets on bank balance sheets to try and restore health to those banks over time, in a consistent way across the world in order to restore private credit flows and secondly, equip the International Monetary Fund to deal with any second round effect of toxic assets coming out of other economic problems elsewhere in the world. These are designed to be measures to deal with the core of the problem.
The other measures that we have embraced are dealing with the effects of the problem. But we must be dealing with the core if we want to have a real prospect of getting out of this global economic recession, because that directly affects plumbers on Parramatta Road, plumbers right across the world. All forms of work, all professions, all trades.
The thing about this is during a gathering with the Kind of Saudi Arabia, the President of Communist China, the President of the United States and representatives from other major developing countries, everyone has a sense, a real sense that the core of their challenge is to achieve recovery in support of jobs in their economies and they know it can only work if we work together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister at the last conference in Washington you resolved to combat protectionism and you also resolved to try and complete the Doha round and the World Trade Organisation did monitor what happened and 17 of 20 economies went ahead and introduced protectionist measures. Essentially, what is different in what you're saying today to what you said then and don't we not just have to watch what the Governments of the world say but what they do?
PM: The reference I'll draw your attention to is para 22, which says this: “We reaffirm the commitment made in Washington to refrain from raising any barriers to investment or to trade in goods and services, imposing new export restrictions or implementing WTO-inconsistent measures to stimulate exports. In addition we will rectify promptly any such measures.” Further commitment and furthermore “extend this commitment to the end of 2010”.
I would argue that the absence of that commitment back then, which was only four months or so ago, in the absence of WTO monitoring since then, we would have had a far, far worse and more serious outbreak of protectionism across the world as has happened in previous economic downturns when there was a less robust set of trade institutions acting as policemen around the world.
Is it good now that there have been breaches? Of course it's not but none of those individual breaches are terminal. What I would worry is everyone stepping back and saying it's open slather. So what I say is what we can as heads of Government do is reduce the problem, reduce the natural impulse to protectionism in certain countries to an absolute minimum. And I think that's the right way ahead.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I just go back to Emma's question on, Emma Alberici's question on financial, you know whatevers. I just want to, I'm just trying to narrow-
PM: (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Is it your domestic approach, is it right to say your domestic approach is to wait until the Prod Commission Report is in before you'll do anything legislatively domestically? Is that, is that what you were saying?
PM: We said that we would obviously wait for the conclusion of the Alan Fels report and that's the logical thing to do. I note here for the record that this Communiqué commits us to a set of actions which include the Basel Committee integrating these principles I referred to before in their risk management guidance by autumn 2009. If therefore those principles require us to take further domestic action, legislative or otherwise, of course we will.
What I said I think earlier in response to this question here, these two exercises must proceed in tandem with each other because we have financial institutions which operate in a global financial environment.
So what we've achieved and I draw your attention very much to the contents of this compensation section, this is the first time that global regulators have stepped in to, you know, wild corporate cowboy behaviour as far as their remuneration is concerned, completely detached from the risks that they were creating for the whole financial system.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: If I can just ask-
JOURNALIST: Bob Geldof told us that you were going to go to .7 today, is that right?
PM: I haven't spoken to Bob Geldof. Our commitment is to go to 0.5 by 2015, as I said at St Paul's Cathedral a couple of days ago, but we remain rock solid on that commitment and we'll honour that commitment because let me explain why, it's not just the right thing to do because what is invisible to many of us here are the impact of this global financial crisis and economic crisis on the developing world.
We had a moving presentation today from the President of Ethiopia about what's happening across Africa right now. And the impact are not about people losing their jobs, which is bad and it's horrible, it's about people losing their lives through the increase in starvation which is occurring through the food security crisis which is unfolding.
So we'll honour our commitments and it is important that other Governments do the same.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if I could just ask-
PM: There, there. Actually this person, you haven't had a question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well that's what the IMF has said globally, it's going to be a tough long haul for Australia and what I've said back home as what we've reflected here abroad is that we will take whatever measure, whatever action is necessary to continue to support growth and jobs in what is a spectacular economic downturn.
In our dinner last night I reminded all of my colleagues from around the world what the OECD data had to say 24, 48 hours ago. Those are horrendous numbers, absolutely horrendous numbers for the global economy. A contraction projected for the developed economies of 4.6 in 2009, for the global economy from memory 2.7 thereabouts and the unemployment consequences as a result. These are bad numbers, therefore it places the wood on us to do whatever is possible on stimulus on the one hand and our commitment to sustain that in the future as far as the global economy is concerned but critically through coordinated interventions elsewhere in the economy as well and mainly to return our banks to health and the restoration of private credit flows in the future. Sue.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: One of the biggest transactions across the board in Asia of course is Chinalco's approach to Rio Tinto and it's under the Foreign Investment Review Board. Would you support such an acquisition with Chinalco and what would be the timeframe for such a decision?
PM: Let me re-say to you what I would say domestically in Australia. These are matters which are always assessed in the national interest. The decision maker in this case in the Treasurer of Australia. There is a process underway which is entirely consistent with our laws, our internal procedures, it will take some time to work through. Our decision will be in the national interest and we will spend some time arriving at those conclusions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if I can just-
PM: Can I have a question back here from someone who hasn't had one?
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to give up any of Australia's quota at the IMF so that China and other countries can [inaudible]. And secondly are you prepared now to (inaudible) to not introduce any more industry assistance plans or other initiatives in Australia that would be in breach of the spirit of your trade commitments here?
PM: On the question of industry assistance, we have always been intensely mindful of a compatibility of any actions we take domestically with our obligations under international trade law and that has been the case with all of our deliberations internally so far and we will do so into the future.
On IMF reform we will work through the detail with the international community in the months ahead. This will be complex and as I said the conclusion of the process isn't until January of 2011.
JOURNALIST: There's a report in one paper in Australia today that your office identified that last year on a trip to Beijing there was an attempt to spy on you and your staff, to tap into emails and mobile phone networks, what do you have to say about that allegation?
PM: No security concerns that I'm aware of have been raised with me and my office in relation to that particular trip to the Beijing Olympics.
The other thing I'd draw your attention to is this, the Government's National Security Statement which was released in December of last year, the Government will always remain vigilant in relation to cyber-security and will ensure our agencies are always properly equipped to detect and thwart potential cyber-attacks. The National Security Statement clearly identified the threat of cyber-attacks in Australia and clearly stated the following: “This challenge must be and will be met with full vigour” unquote.
On the specifics of any individual national security circumstances I don't comment on the generics, which is that response by us in the National Security Statement, I believe it speaks robustly for itself.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said on specific, on the particular matter that you raise which goes to the Beijing Olympics, I am not advised that we have any such advice from the Australian security authorities, that's the first point. The second is our robust generic approach, the generic approach to the whole question of cyber-security and I've got to zip. Oh, Malcolm you hadn't asked a question, I'm sorry.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) just going back to the earlier question, do you have a bad temper?
PM: Oh right. The, all of us are human, I'm human, I'm not perfect, and as I said before if I upset anybody on that particular flight I am really sorry, I apologise for it and, as I said at the time to one of the staff on the plane, that's it. It's, well Malcolm I think we've, as I said we're all human, we're all human, we all make mistakes, your Prime Minister included. See you.
[ends]


Principal, Dr Steffan Silcox:[Choir performs] Ladies and gentlemen, it is now with great pleasure that I introduce the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr Kevin Rudd, to speak to us.
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia:Thank you Dr Silcox and Ted for your friendly welcome to this great part of our country and to you, the members of this local community, thank you for coming out this evening.
My first thing to say is that I am sorry I am late. It's all Julia's fault [Laughter], it sounded like a good excuse at the time, it does happen to be true. But I really appreciate the fact that you've come out on an evening like this to be with us.
We began this series of Community Cabinets as a government that, within a month or two of being elected, and we began this series of Community Cabinets here in Perth, from memory, in January or February of last year. And I remember them saying at the time they'll never keep it up, they'll never stick to it, it's all too hard. I can tell you it is hard, but since then we have gone around the country and we're going round the country again, and we have held Community Cabinets of this type in every State of the Federation. We have been in communities in Queensland and New South Wales, Victoria, Aboriginal communities in Arnhem Land, here in the suburbs of Perth, both in the north and in the south. We intend to keep doing it, and the reason we're doing it is because it keeps us as a government linked to what you in the community have to say to us. It's very easy for governments in Canberra to become detached from what's going on out on the ground. I don't intend to allow that to happen to this government and one of the antidotes is to make sure that we are up and out there on a regular basis engaging local communities like you good people who have come along this evening. Thank you for that round of applause from this guy up the front here. And I'll buy you a beer later.
The purpose is not so much to hear from us, we'll do our best to answer the questions you put to us. The purpose is for us to hear from you. There's none of these Community Cabinets that I have attended that we have not learned something and taken something up and taken the idea, often coming from local community experience, about what we can do to apply that idea nationally, and engagement with local groups such as the ones that will speak with our Ministers separately after this evening's Q &amp; A about the issues of great concern to you here in this local community. Understand this, it triggers ideas in our mind about other things to do as well. So you are legitimately here arguing the interests of your local community, that is right, that is good, that is proper and we are here to say what we can do and what we can't. Some of the answers we won't have at our fingertips this evening and we will undertake to get back to you within a reasonable time. I'll seek to answer any questions put to me, but if it is genuinely too difficult, it will head off to one of the Ministers, and we can blame them for not having the answers. Folks, thanks for your attendance this evening. It's over to you. [Applause.]


Acknowledgements 
     * Tony Nicholson, Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence
     * Cr Daniel Mulino, Deputy Mayor, City of Casey Council
     * Cr Bill Pearson, Mayor, Cardinia Shire Council
     * Deputy Prime Minister
     * Minister for Employment
     * Anthony Byrne
     * State Members and Local Councillors 
Introduction
Two days ago, I was at the G20 Summit in London.
Today, I am with you in this great local community in the City of Casey in Melbourne.
Both these meetings are about one core challenge: in the midst of a severe global recession, how do we rebuild our economy, and how do we rebuild jobs?
The truth is we are experiencing the worst global recession in three-quarters of a century.
Every country.
Every economy.
Every industry.
Virtually every community.
And for the first time in three-quarters of a century, all at the same time.
But in the midst of all the complex economic jargon, all the political debates, and all the media commentary, where the rubber hits the road is in one basic thing: jobs.
Jobs in local communities like this one in the City of Casey.
And in local communities like it all over the world.
Because the impact of this global recession is very local.
Which means we must act locally as well.
It affects community life.
It affects family life.
And it affects individuals in a deep and often scarring way.
Unemployment can undermine human dignity, and self-respect.
Our responsibility as Australians (government and community together) is not to stand idly by and allow the unemployed to be simply thrown to the wolves as the victims of some failure of a fundamentalist free market ideology.
Our responsibility is to intervene.
Because those who lose their jobs are not to blame.
Our responsibility is to intervene.
Not to deny the problem.
But to embrace it in all of its depth, its complexity and its gathering speed and force.
And then to act by deploying the full resources of government and the community to reduce its force while recognising we cannot eliminate its impact.
And that is what I am here to talk to you about today.
And also to hear from you about what more we can do.
Because the truth is we are all in this together:
     * all nations around the world;
     * all levels of government within our nation Australia (federal, state and local);
     * businesses large and small;
     * business and unions together against a common foe, unemployment;
     * the community itself, in all its local dynamism, local creativity and local sense of the possible.
Because as I have learned over the last 16 months as Prime Minister, all wisdom does not lie in Canberra.
But as Prime Minister I am also here to issue a national call to arms: and that is for the nation to bind together as one in a national campaign against unemployment.
Everyone has a part to play.
While government must take the lead, everyone has a part to play.
And our end point is clear: to do whatever it takes at the global, national and local level to support local jobs and to help those who lose their jobs to retrain and to find a new job.
Global Action
The causes of the economic crisis are global.
And global action is necessary to underpin the prospects of global economic recovery.
In a global economy, Australia, like other countries, is not an island.
Australian jobs are directly affected by our trade with the rest of the world; our investment in the rest of the world and them in us; and the continuation of global financial flows, the life-blood of business and employment everywhere.
The good news is that in London we agreed on a global strategy for global economic recovery.
When I sat down the other night with fellow leaders from 20 of the biggest economies in the world, I said to my colleagues around the table that what began as a global financial crisis had already become a crisis in the global economy and was now becoming a global crisis in unemployment.
None of my colleagues disagreed.
Not one of them.
Because they all know it to be true, from their own local experience.
And what they also know to be true is that rebuilding local jobs can only happen through concerted global action.
It is an unusual but an empowering thing, to sit down with the King of Saudi Arabia, the President of communist China, the President of capitalist America and Presidents from countries as diverse as South Africa, South Korea and Brazil, all speaking different languages, but all speaking the one language: what must we do to rebuild jobs?
That is why in the very beginning of the London Communiqué issued only a day or so ago, it states in black and white that ‘our global plan for recovery must have at its heart the needs and jobs of hard-working families...'
The good news is that despite those who never thought it possible, governments from all continents representing 85 per cent of the global economy agreed on a global strategy for global economic recovery.
A strategy on global economic stimulus, on restoring global banks to health, on acting ahead of the curve on future global financial markets, on reforming the regulations on banking to reduce the risk of future crises; and to hold the line on new protection which would destroy more jobs everywhere.
The sobering news is that this will take time to implement and to yield its full effect.
These combined actions do not represent a silver bullet.
And there's more work to be done.
But they do however represent the combined resolve of the world to act as one and to embrace a global economic strategy for global recovery never seen before in modern economic history.
And with one galvanising objective: how to restore growth and support jobs.
National Action
Global action must also be reinforced by concerted national action  -  right here, on the home front.
That's why the Australian Government is implementing an economic stimulus plan for the nation, to reduce the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
This plan has four main parts.
First, beginning last October, we have acted to stabilise Australian financial markets including providing a Government guarantee to every single Australian depositor in a bank, building society or credit union, to maintain confidence at home while we have seen confidence shattered abroad, with the result that our four major banks remain among the 11 strongest banks in the world.
Second, also starting last October, we took early and decisive action to stimulate the economy by providing payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and families doing it tough, thereby supporting the 1.5 million Australians whose jobs are in the retail and wholesale sector.
Third, also to stimulate the economy and support jobs we have invested directly in our housing sector with a trebling in the First Home Buyers assistance, the single biggest government investment in affordable housing in history, a new plan to install ceiling insulation in every owner-occupied dwelling in the country and all supported by a record 4 percentage point cut in interest rates.
Fourth, to further stimulate the economy we have begun a massive long-term investment in the nation-building infrastructure we will need for the 21st century, including the largest school modernisation and repair program the country has ever seen  -  to provide work for carpenters, plumbers and electricians across each of Australia's nearly 10,000 primary and secondary schools.
Finally, we have done this by drawing on the strong Budget surplus we delivered last year.
These are hard decisions for the Government to take, but we are living in very hard times.
Temporary deficits based on temporary borrowings, to boost the economy in the downturn, is the responsible course of action.
Our resolve throughout will be to take action to return the Budget to surplus once global economic growth recovers and then use those surplus funds to repay our temporary borrowings.
Notwithstanding the fact that our borrowings as a percentage of the economy are one tenth the average borrowings of the world's developed economies.
As with global economic action, our national economic stimulus plan does not represent a silver bullet.
As I have said before, I cannot stop this global recession from crashing across Australia's shores.
But I can act to cushion the impact of the storm once it has hit.
The most recent growth and employment data from the OECD makes it virtually inevitable that Australia will go through a period of negative economic growth ahead.
28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are already in recession or have experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth.
Seven of Australia's ten largest trading partners are already in recession
Because of the deepening global recession, the economy is likely to get worse before it gets better.
Our budget will come under greater pressure.
But the alternative is to do nothing.
And rather than reduce the impact of the global economic storm as we have done, to instead expose all Australian workers to its full force.
That is not our approach.
Nor will it be our approach.
Our strategy is right for the times.
A strategy to see Australia through the storm.
Local Action
The impact of this global recession is not merely a matter of global and national economic statistics.
Statistics are lifeless.
The impact of this global recession is felt here on the ground, in real families in real local communities like this one in the City of Casey.
It is communities like this where unemployment hits early and hard.
I have no intention whatsoever of gilding the lily.
In February, unemployment rose by 47,000 people.
In Dandenong, a short drive from here, the numbers applying for unemployment benefits in January rose to nearly 3000  -  a 13 per cent rise over the previous month.
In Glen Waverley and Springvale it was more than 13 per cent.
In Cranbourne, right here in this community, it was 15.5 per cent.
Fifty jobs gone from Nissan in South Dandenong, 115 from Kenworth in Bayswater, more than 150 from Bosch in Clayton. 
And 255 gone from Holeproof  -  a Pacific Brands company  -  just down the road in Nunawading.
Those of you who live in this community know the stories only too well.
These local impacts demand a national response.
And they demand a local response.
That is why I have come to the City of Casey today, to announce a new Jobs and Training Compact for Australia.
Our Jobs and Training Compact will have three parts:
     * A Compact with Young Australians;
     * A Compact with Australians who have been retrenched;
     * A Compact with Local Communities  -  communities like Cranbourne - where unemployment has hit hard.
     * First, our Compact with Young Australians.
This Government has resolved not to repeat the mistakes of previous governments  -  which is to reduce their commitment to training in a downturn in order to save money.
We cannot afford today's school leavers becoming tomorrow's long-term unemployed.
Nor do we intend to shy away from the great ambitions we have set for the nation in the implementation of our Education Revolution.
In fact now is the time to drive these reforms even harder, because they will strengthen our economy by improving the skills of our workforce  -  skills which can be fully deployed as we emerge from the global recession.
ABS data shows for example that 20 per cent of 19 year olds  -  about 60,000 young people  -  do not have Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.
About 16.5 per cent of 20 to 24 year olds  -  238,000 Australians  -  do not have Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.
The time has come to act on this problem  -  a problem rendered even more urgent by the unfolding economic downturn and increasing unemployment.
The government has already announced new measures to support apprenticeships:
     * 3,650 additional pre-apprenticeship places;
     * $145 million to support thousands of ‘out-of-trade' apprentices who have been laid off by their employers; and
     * a preference provision for businesses engaged in our $30 billion Nation-Building and Jobs Plan, who demonstrate a commitment to retain and employ new apprentices and trainees.
Second, unemployed young people are also eligible for one of the 711,000 training places released under the $2.1 billion Productivity Places Program  -  designed to help all workers upgrade their skills for the future.
But more needs to be done  -  much more.
That's why at this month's meeting of State and Territory Governments, the Australian Government will be proposing that every young Australian under the age of 25 is given a school, apprenticeship, training or higher education place to ensure that our young people are properly skilled for when the economy recovers.
This Compact with Young Australians will mean that young Australians under the age of 25 will have an entitlement to a training place or any registered course in which the young person can meet admission requirements, and which will result in improving that young person's current qualifications.
Second, we will also ask State and Territory Governments to lift the mandatory age at which young people must be in school or engaged in training or employment  -  and we will ask them to bring forward the already agreed COAG goal of 90 per cent Year 12 or equivalent attainment from 2020 to 2015. That will mean starting now.
Third, the Australian Government intends to alter the participation requirements for income support for young people and their families by making education and training the single most important precondition for receiving Youth Allowance.
So at a time when employment prospects are poor, the Australian Government wishes to send a clear message to Australian young people.
If you haven't completed Year 10, you should be in school.
If you are under 17, you should be in full-time school, training, higher education or full time work.
If you don't have a Year 12 or equivalent qualification you should be in school or training to attain an equivalent qualification.
I will not stand idly by and watch a generation of young people have their potential, their talents and their enthusiasm wasted in an economic downturn.
All these measures are aimed at helping our young people to use the difficult time that lies ahead in an employment market that is not of their making, to lift their skills for the future.
Good for young people.
Good for the Education Revolution.
Good for productivity.
And good for the Australian economy.
Compact with Retrenched Workers
The second part of our new Jobs and Training Compact is our Compact with Retrenched Workers.
Already the Government has announced measures to make it easier for retrenched workers to access Newstart Allowance by making the eligibility criteria twice as easy to meet as it was before.
We have also invested a further $300 million to help retrenched workers to get immediate access to appropriate employment assistance to help find new training or a new job. This brings our investment in reformed and upgraded employment services for jobseekers to more than $4 billion.
We have also invested more than $2 billion to fund more than 711,000 training places including 319,000 places identified for jobseekers, 10,000 places for workers in industries facing long term decline, and 10,000 places for workers who have been newly retrenched, concentrating on Certificate 3 and 4-level qualifications.
In less than a year since we announced this overall program, some 92,000 jobseekers have already enrolled in training courses.
However the immediate problems facing many families whose breadwinners have lost their jobs is the anxiety and fear which arises from: how do I pay my mortgage, how do I pay off my car?
These are real bottom line concerns around kitchen tables right across Australia.
That's why some time ago, I asked the Treasurer to negotiate an agreement with Australia's big four banks on a comprehensive package of assistance to working families who lose their jobs.
So today, I am pleased to announce the outcome of the Treasurer's work with the banks, which provides for the better handling of borrowers in hardship through loss of employment.
In relation to mortgages, the banks will now work with borrowers suffering from employment hardship to negotiate postponing for up to 12 months the dates from which payments are due under their mortgage contract, with interest to be capitalised into the loan.
The banks are also prepared to consider extending the period of the mortgage contract and reducing the amount of each payment due under the contract.
Banks also indicated that on other loans (including car loans) they would be prepared to consider providing interest-only repayment options where appropriate.
The banks have also indicated their preparedness to consider fee waivers for borrowers in hardship cases.
Of course, these options won't be appropriate in every case, and banks will make assessments based on the borrowers' ability to meet new contractual obligations in the long term.
But the Government's purpose in its negotiations with the banks has been clear  -  to ask the banks to provide maximum flexibility for borrowers suffering temporary hardship through enforced unemployment for the 12 month period ahead.
I'd like to publicly thank the banks for the goodwill they have demonstrated so far in this area, including the decisions announced by the Commonwealth Bank a few weeks ago.
Whether you're a banker or a battler, it's in every Australians' interest that we pull together; because that's the only way we will see the nation through these tough global conditions.
More remains to be done for retrenched workers and the government stands ready to build on our new Compact with Retrenched Workers as necessary in the future.
Compact with Local Communities
The third part of our new Jobs and Training Compact is our Compact with Local Communities which have been hardest hit by the global crisis.
Already the Government is acting at a local level through, for example, the local implementation of the $30 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan passed by the Parliament last month.
Our ambition is to turn every one of our more than 7,500 primary schools in the country into a construction site; to do the same for 500 of our secondary schools; and for billions of dollars of repairs, maintenance and minor works across every school campus in the country  -  all designed to generate local jobs and to improve local school and community infrastructure.
For example, schools in the City of Casey (one of only 565 local government areas in the country) like Holy Family in Doveton, Cranbourne Primary School in Cranbourne and Casey Grammar in Cranbourne East will be eligible to receive Australian Government grants of up to $3 million each over the coming months.
Second, the Government is also implementing an $800 million program, in partnership with local government across the nation through our Local Community Infrastructure Program.
We are doing this because we believe as a general rule that local governments are good at getting local community infrastructure projects going quickly.
And because these projects can be done quickly, local jobs can flow quickly.
Again let me give you a local example where this area has already received over $2 million in investment in the first instalment of the program.
These projects include:
     * Upgrading of the Casey Fields Sportsground;
     * Refurbishment of 16 tennis courts;
     * Upgrade of 13 playgrounds and a netball pavilion;
     * The construction of a new cafe and kitchen at the Aquatic Centre; and
     * The landscaping of Berwick Springs.
But more needs to be done.
That's why today I am announcing that we will invest $20.8 million to employ Local Employment Coordinators in regions most affected by job losses.
We will initially appoint them to seven regions:
     * Here in Casey, covering communities in south-eastern Melbourne
     * In Canterbury and Bankstown covering south-western Sydney
     * In the Illawarra, south of Sydney
     * In the Ipswich - Logan corridor in south-east Queensland
     * In northern and western suburbs of Adelaide
     * In south-west Perth
     * In northern Tasmania
These Coordinators will be appointed by next month.
More will be added over time.
The mission statement of these Local Employment Coordinators is to work directly with local government, with local business, with local community organisations helping to make sure that new national training programs are being properly delivered locally and that local infrastructure programs are being implemented in the best way possible to maximise local employment, and that new projects are brought forward.
They will help to match demand for labour created by our nation building efforts with supply of labour at the local level.
In doing so, they will also work closely with local networks of job services providers.
Their job will be to add value and to act as a regional coordination point for those already engaged, and who will be engaged, in the core task of generating new jobs and training opportunities from the ground up  -  not just from the top down.
In other words, these Local Employment Coordinators are intended to become local jobs champions, and are intended to be experienced, senior people, capable of making things happen - in the closest possible collaboration with the local community.
Today I can also announce I have asked industry legend and great Australian Lindsay Fox to work directly with our Local Employment Coordinators across the country.
I want Lindsay to be able to advise employers in disadvantaged communities on practical ways they can keep on their workers and even take on new apprentices and employees.
Lindsay did great work in the early 1990s when he teamed up with union leader Bill Kelty and travelled the country to help create up to 60,000 jobs at a time when jobs were hard to find.
And Lindsay has asked Bill to help him in this task once again.
But beyond Lindsay and Bill, I am also today making a broader call to the nation: that is, in these high unemployment areas, for all men and women of goodwill to rally around our Local Employment Coordinators and the consultation structures they create with local government and the wider local community to boost local jobs, local training and other forms of support for local people who lose their jobs.
And the reason is: we are all in this together.
Government alone cannot solve this problem.
But with creative, entrepreneurial ingenuity from the community level up, we can do a power of good to reduce the problem.
It will also give practical expression to the great Australian tradition of extending a helping hand - and giving everyone a fair go when times are tough.
It may be something as simple as checking out how your neighbours are going, or some of the parents from school, if you hear there have been job losses in the family.
Word of mouth, or the bush telegraph, is still often the best means of connecting people who need a helping hand with those who can provide it.
I am absolutely convinced that Australians will rise to the challenge, as times of crisis bring out the best in our national character  -  uniting the nation rather than dividing it as we have seen from time to time in other parts of the world.
Finally, this new compact with local communities also needs to have its own bigger resource base to draw upon for the future.
That's why I am also announcing today the establishment of a $650 million Local Jobs Fund.
This temporary fund will support other local projects that will create job and training opportunities for people in communities most affected by the downturn.
It will help local councils build new and improved community infrastructure, such as playgrounds, bike paths and in the restoration of heritage buildings.
It will also be designed for start-up capital for innovative social enterprises for the not-for-profit sector.
There are also many good organisations like St Vincent de Paul, the Salvation Army, the Exodus Foundation in Sydney and of course the Brotherhood of St Laurence here in Melbourne whose donor base is currently under pressure because of the downturn  -  precisely at the time charitable organisations are needed most.
We would like to see organisations in this situation to be able to make application for temporary support under this fund.
This Fund, together with other government programs will also provide an opportunity to transition Australia towards the new green jobs of the 21st century  -  part of a sustainable economy with burgeoning employment potential for the future.
The Fund includes the commitments made in February in Parliament with Senator Bob Brown of the Greens and Senator Steve Fielding to provide support for local green jobs, and to get communities working.
I would like to thank both Senators for their practical cooperation and their political commitment to supporting local community employment during the downturn.
Again I repeat my call to the nation at large  -  to local Chambers of Commerce, church, community, charitable organisations and the not-for-profit sector more generally, to come together locally  -  with one objective, which is to make a difference locally.
To make a difference with local jobs, local training, and to reduce local hardship.
It's the Australian thing to do.
Conclusion
These then are our plans for the future  -  for the dark and difficult times that lie before us.
Acting globally,
Acting nationally,
Acting locally, to help those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
And in all these things our guiding light is this:
     * to reduce the impact on Australian jobs in the global recession;
     * to build new jobs by building the new infrastructure we need for the 21st century and the new sustainable economy we need for the 21st century; and
     * to train and retrain our workforce during this downturn to equip them and the nation with the skills we will need for the recovery.
This is our strategy for the future.
People often talk about the need for confidence.
I agree.
I also agree we can be confident in our future.
Not because some of us might say so.
Words without action count for nothing.
But words based on action count for a lot.
And what I have outlined today is a comprehensive plan of action.
More will need to be done.
But our strategy is clear.
And based on this strategy we have a rational basis for hope, a rational basis for optimism, and a rational basis for confidence in the future.
Because of the deepening of the global economic recession, there will be more bad economic data ahead, as night follows day. 
For the economy.
For employment.
And therefore for the Budget.
But this government intends to stay the course.
This government intends to prosecute the strategy I have outlined, to steer Australia through the global economic storm.
And together, with communities like this community in Casey, we can build an even stronger Australia for the future.


The Australian Government strongly condemns today's missile launch by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK). 
We are deeply concerned by this provocative act which breaches United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718.
Even if the launch involves the deployment of a satellite, Australia considers that the use of missile technology  -  the same technology that the DPRK uses for its offensive ballistic missile program  -  breaches the UN Resolution.
We urge the United Nations Security Council to immediately consider further action.
Instead of engaging in this provocative action, the DPRK is urged to work constructively with others involved in the Six-Party Talks towards resolving the challenges on the Korean peninsula.
Australia is a strong supporter of the Six-Party Talks and will continue to work closely with member countries to encourage the DPRK to denuclearise and abandon its ballistic missile program. 


The Government will appoint Local Employment Co-ordinators to marshal training, infrastructure and Jobs Fund investments to maximise job opportunities in seven local communities hit hardest by the effects of the global recession.
The Government is providing $20.8 million for the Local Employment Co-ordinators to work in regions and communities affected by higher unemployment and job losses.
Trucking magnate, Mr Lindsay Fox, has agreed to support the work of Local Employment Co-ordinators by advising employers in communities affected by the economic downturn how to keep their workers. He will be assisted in this task by Mr Bill Kelty.
While the effects of the global recession are being felt across the nation, some regions are experiencing higher unemployment and job losses.
The Government is determined to take all action possible to help those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own during this global recession.
Local Employment Co-ordinators will work with employers and not-for-profit organisations to identify new job opportunities and will help match the employment and training needs of local communities with available Commonwealth services and funding.
They will work in seven initial areas:
     * Canterbury Bankstown and South Western Sydney
     * The Illawarra, south of Sydney
     * Ipswich  -  Logan in Queensland
     * Northern and Western Adelaide
     * South Eastern Melbourne
     * South West Perth
     * Northern Tasmania
These regions were identified using a range of labour market and social indicators with further regions to be identified.
Local Employment Co-ordinators will also work with identified communities to access funds under the $650 million Jobs Fund and to develop projects that will create employment, training opportunities and deliver new infrastructure and services.
Mr Fox has agreed to work in partnership with these coordinators, acting as a Local Jobs Champion, advising employers how to find alternatives to laying off workers. 
Mr Fox will also promote Government support and assistance available to individuals, employers and communities.
These initiatives form part of the Government's Jobs and Training Compact which aims to support retrenched workers, young people and local communities to get back to work or learn the skills required for future jobs.


A new $650 million Jobs Fund announced by the Rudd Government today will support local jobs, build skills and improve facilities in local communities.
The new Jobs Fund is part of the Rudd Government's Jobs and Training Compact with Australians who have been hit hardest by the global recession, and builds on the Rudd Government's $42 billion Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan. 
The Government is acting decisively with targeted investment to support Australian jobs and invest in our future long term economic growth.
The Jobs Fund includes three streams:
     * $300 million for Local Jobs to invest in community projects of up to $2 million that help protect the environment or promote sustainability and will include $60 million for community heritage projects, and $40 million for commuter bike paths.
     * $200 million to Get Communities Working which will invest in local council and not-for-profit projects of up to $2 million to upgrade vital community facilities and build community capacity.
     * $150 million for Infrastructure Employment Projects to be initiated by the Australian Government for the construction of local infrastructure that will create immediate jobs in communities affected by the global economic downturn.
Projects will encourage local government, community organisations, employers and employment service providers to work together to give people employment or training opportunities in their local area.
They will also ensure charitable institutions, unable to secure philanthropic support during the economic downturn, are supported to meet growing need for assistance within the community. 
Projects in regions and communities with higher unemployment or facing large numbers of jobs losses due to the global recession will be given priority consideration.
Most projects will commence from 1 July 2009 with submissions sought from May. Some heritage projects in the Local Jobs stream will commence sooner. 
The Jobs Fund includes the commitments made by the Government as part of the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan.
The $300 million Local Jobs and the $200 million Get Communities Working programs have been developed with Senator Bob Brown and Senator Steve Fielding.
The new fund builds on other Rudd Government initiatives to create jobs and training opportunities and build community infrastructure.
The $800 million Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program will support national productivity and community well-being and local governments to stimulate growth and economic activity across Australia.
The $41 million Innovation Fund will encourage innovative projects to connect disadvantaged job seekers to training and employment.
The Government's Jobs and Training Compact aims to support retrenched workers, young people and local communities to get back to work or learn the skills required for future jobs.


The Rudd Government today announced a Jobs and Training Compact with Australians affected by the global recession promising training, support and local initiatives to help them get back to work.
The Compact is the next step in the Government's response to the global recession following earlier action to stabilise financial markets, stimulate demand through direct stimulus, measures to boost housing and nation building through infrastructure investments.
The Jobs and Training Compact will have three elements:
     * Retrenched workers - $300 million to provide immediate access to employment support, an additional 20,000 Productivity Places for retrenched workers and financial assistance including a new agreement with the big four banks to assist those with mortgages.
     * Local communities - A $650 million Jobs Fund to help support local jobs and training through community projects in regions hardest hit by the economic downturn and the appointment of Local Employment Coordinators in seven key locations to coordinate effort to support jobs and training.
     * Young people - Measures to be agreed at COAG later this month to keep young people at school or in training and post-school education to prevent them becoming long term unemployed.
As the global recession bites it is having a real impact on local communities.
The Government cannot prevent the global recession from impacting on communities across Australia, but it can cushion the impact by taking local action to support training and jobs.
The Jobs and Training Compact provides an opportunity for the Government to work in partnership with employers, local government, non-profit organisations and communities to tackle the common foe of unemployment.
The Rudd Government's Jobs and Training Compact with Australians who have been hit hardest by the global recession builds on Rudd Government's $42 billion Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan. 


The Government has appointed Mr James D. Wolfensohn to the position of Chair of the International Advisory Panel of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
Mr Wolfensohn is the Chairman of Wolfensohn &amp; Company, LLC, and Chairman of Citi International Advisory Board.
Mr Wolfensohn is the former President of the World Bank and a highly respected member of the international financial community who will bring vast experience, international influence and strategic vision to this role.
The Government is delighted that he has agreed to take this important position.
The Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute is being established by the Government to accelerate the deployment of carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology globally and the sharing of information.
The Institute will play a key role in achieving two of the three pillars on which the Government's climate change policy is built.
It will help us meet our emission reduction targets by advancing CCS technology through support for commercial scale demonstration projects in Australia.
It will help shape an international solution to climate change by building momentum for the G8 goal of 20 large scale CCS demonstration projects globally by 2020, and through research and the dissemination of information.
The International Advisory Panel will provide broad strategic guidance to the Institute and work globally to enhance its international reputation and networks.
Australia has had strong international support for the Institute, and the inaugural meeting of Foundation Members will be held in Canberra later this month.


Today, the Rudd Government has released a Regulatory Reform discussion paper to seek public comment on ways to improve telecommunications regulations to make it work more effectively in the interest of consumers and businesses.
The existing regime needs to be reformed to improve competition and strengthen consumer safeguards, as well as remove redundant and inefficient red tape. A vibrant, competitive telecommunications sector is important for delivering lower prices, better quality and more innovative services for consumers and businesses.
“The Regulatory Reform paper I am releasing today seeks views on the options the Government will consider for reform of the existing regime to make it work more effectively, particularly during the rollout of the NBN”, said the Minister for Broadband. Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Conroy.
A wide range of stakeholders, including telecommunications carriers and consumer groups, have expressed concerns about the effectiveness of the current regime.
The Regulatory Reform paper canvasses a range of options for reform, including:
     * streamlining current regulatory processes, by allowing the ACCC to set up-front access terms for companies wanting access to Telstra and other networks;
     * strengthening the powers of the ACCC to tackle anti-competitive conduct by allowing it to impose binding rule of conduct when issuing competition notices;
     * promoting greater competition across the industry, including through measures to better address Telstra's vertical and horizontal integration, such as functional separation
     * addressing competition and investment issues arising from cross-ownership of fixed-line and cable networks, and telecommunications and media assets;
     * improving universal access arrangements for telephony and payphones; and
     * introducing more effective rules, requiring telephone companies to make connections and repairs within set time-frames.
The Government is seeking submissions by 3 June 2009, before making final decisions and introducing legislation into the Parliament.
The Government does not favour any specific reform option. It is, however committed to ensuring that the regulatory framework in this sector is effective in promoting the long term interests of end-users, without imposing any unnecessary burdens on business.
Copies of the Regulatory Reform discussion paper and further information on the enhanced National Broadband Network are available at www.dbcde.gov.au/nationalbroadbandnetwork 


PM: On behalf of the Australian Government can I express my condolences to the Government and people of Italy and the families of the deceased as a result of the terrible earthquake overnight just 100km north of Rome. Official recorded deaths at this stage are less than 30 but regrettably estimates of further casualties are high and they could run, we're advised, into the hundreds.
To date no foreigners are being reported as being amongst the deceased, at this at our officials in Rome have no indication of any Australians being caught up in this terrible tragedy. Given the extensive people to people contact between Italy and Australia it will almost certainly be the case that members of the Australian-Italian community will have family or friends adversely affected by these terrible events and our thoughts and our prayers are with those families as they await the news of their loved ones.
Today we are here to make an historic announcement about broadband, jobs and the future of the Australian economy. Just as railway tracks laid out the future of the nineteenth century, and electricity grids the future of the twentieth century, so broadband represents the core infrastructure of the twenty-first century.
Slow broadband is holding our national economy back. Let's consider some of the facts. Australia is in the bottom half of the OECD countries for broadband take up; 16 out of 30 in 2008. Australians pay more for broadband than most OECD countries, we come in at 20 out of 29 in the OECD in 2007. And thirdly, Australian small business pay more than all but two other countries for fixed line services. Years of failed policy have left Australia as a broadband backwater.
As you know the former Australian Government failed to deliver fast broadband for Australia, in fact over a twelve year period there were some 18 failed plans. The previous Government never understood the fundamental economic importance of broadband in turbo-charging Australia's economic future. They failed to build for our nation's future economic prosperity beyond the mining boom.
As you are also aware prior to the last election we committed to build a National Broadband Network in partnership with the private sector. Last year Minister Conroy issued a challenge to the private sector to come forward with proposals to partner with us, the Government to build a National Broadband Network. These proposals were scrutinised by a panel of experts and they provided a report to the Minister. The Minister has considered the report and accepted the advice contained within it that none of the national proposals offered value for money to the Australian tax payer. The panel noted the rapid deterioration of the global economy had a significant impact on this process. The Minister therefore has formally terminated the request for proposals process.
What this process has shown is that no company, none of the proponents and not Telstra, have been willing or able to meet the National Broadband Network that meets the Government's requirements in Australia's long-term national economic interest. So what's the alternative? We can either choose to continue to neglect the future of Australia's future infrastructure needs, we can do nothing, leaving us on the sidelines of the twenty-first century global economy or instead we can seize the opportunity.
We believe that fast broadband is absolutely essential for our nation's economic future. It is essential for long-term productivity growth, essential for our global economic competitiveness and for creating jobs for the future.
That is why I announce today the single largest infrastructure decision in Australia's history.
Today I am announcing that the Australian Government will move ahead to establish a company in partnership with the private sector that will build and operate a fibre-to-the-home National Broadband Network to deliver super-fast broadband to Australian homes and businesses up to one hundred times faster than what many people use now.
This new super-fast National Broadband Network is the single largest nation building infrastructure project in Australia's history. It is the most ambitious far reaching and long term nation-building infrastructure project ever undertaken by an Australian Government. Like the building of Snowy-Hydro, like the building of the Sydney Harbour Bridge, this is an historic act of nation building.
What the Government is demonstrating today is our confidence in our nation's future. This announcement sets a path for economic recovery and for building a twenty-first century economy with twenty-first century jobs.
The new network will connect 90 percent of schools, homes and workplaces with optical fibre known as fibre-to-the-premises. It will provide fibre-optic transmission links connecting cities, major regional centres and rural towns. It will deliver affordable broadband services with speeds of up to 100 megabits per second, 100 times faster than those currently used by most people. It will connect all other houses and businesses in Australia with next generation wireless and satellite technologies that will deliver broadband speeds of 12 megabits per second.
What are the advantages of going in this direction? High speed broadband has many benefits, high speed broadband will create jobs, high speed broadband will spur innovation and enhance our economy's growth and productivity in the long-term. High speed broadband will make businesses more efficient and make them better able to serve their customers both at home and abroad. Small businesses will be major beneficiaries as high speed broadband allows them to compete on a level playing field. High speed broadband will revolutionise teaching in our classrooms. High speed broadband will revolutionise health care in our medical centres and our hospitals. High speed broadband will help our regional towns grow and stay connected and high speed broadband will plug our nation into the global economy and help us overcome the tyranny of distance.
What about the impact on jobs, on the here and now. This is a major nation building project that will support 25,000 jobs every year on average, over the life of the project.
At its peak it will support 37,000 jobs. This investment is expected to generate additional economic activity worth some $37 billion over the life of the project. An additional quarter per cent of GDP every year for the life of the project. Given the productivity gains associated with this investment the full benefits will continue to flow for decades beyond the projects' completion.
It has also been estimated that innovation from information and communications technology is the single biggest driver of business productivity. It drives 78 per cent of productivity gains in service businesses and 85 per cent in manufacturing.
What about the cost of implementation? The Government proposes to be the majority shareholder of this company but significant private sector investment in this company is anticipated.
The Government will make an additional investment in this company but intends to sell down its interest in the company within five years after the network is built and fully operational, consistent with market conditions and national and identity security considerations.
This company, jointly owned by the Government and the private sector will invest up to $43 billion over eight years to build a national high speed broadband network.
Regulatory changes: today's decision also injects a new competitive force in the Australian telecommunications market. The broadband network will be Australia's first national wholesale only open access broadband network not controlled by Telstra.
This solves once and for all the core problem created when the previous Prime Minister privatised Telstra a decade ago without ever resolving the conflict of a private monopoly, owning the network infrastructure and dominating the retail market.
That decision has blocked competition and investment for a decade. Today we draw a line under a decade of policy error and neglect. In developing this proposal, our source of advice on the National Broadband Network has been informed by a range of experts, the panel of experts, including the Secretary of the Treasury, and the ACCC have encouraged the Government to invest in optical fibre technology, supplemented by next generation wireless and satellite technologies.
To conclude, some critics might say, that just let broadband be sorted out by the markets, it will all fix itself up in the end. Well that hasn't occurred over the last decade, it is time we bit the bullet on this. What the Government says is that we need a nation building Government, we need nation building infrastructure. We are getting on with the job.
Good for jobs. Good for the economy. Good for Australia's future.
Over to you Minister.
CONROY: Well good morning everyone and thank you Kevin. As Kevin has mentioned, broadband is a vital nation building infrastructure. It will drive productivity, create jobs and help small businesses.
It will provide a platform for innovative health and education applications and connect our regional areas to the digital economy. For business it means reduced travel costs and broader trade opportunities.
For small business, it means better access to services, information, partners and customers.
For the frail and unwell it means remote diagnosis and care, reducing the need for hospitalisation.
For the environment, it means better planning and control of energy and water supplies.
For industry it means more efficient production and distribution.
For schools, it means classrooms connected to the globe.
As you have just heard the Government will establish a new company to build and operate an enhanced National Broadband Network, investing in fibre to the premises broadband puts Australia among the world leaders, such as Japan, Singapore, New Zealand, Korea and Malaysia, all driving the roll out of fibre based high speed services.
We have also announced a comprehensive review of the current regulatory framework to improve competitive outcomes while the network is being rolled out.
These actions represent a historic moment for the telecommunications sector. In addition we are moving to immediately improve the competitive markets in regional Australia.
We will make an immediate $250 million investment in backbone fibre optic transmission links. These are the broadband highways that connect our towns, our cities and rural areas to the wider world.
In parts of Australia, particularly links connecting our rural and regional areas, competition is limited. There is only a single provider of these services. The ACCC has confirmed this includes connections to places like Geraldton in Western Australia, Mount Gambia in South Australia, Broken Hill in New South Wales, Mildura in Victoria, Mount Isa in Queensland and Darwin in the Northern Territory.
This is an indicative list. We will be consulting and conducting a competitive process before making final funding and roll out decisions for our immediate investments. However it demonstrates how serious we are about immediate improvement for services in regional and rural Australia. It also contributes to the immediate stimulus impact of the National Broadband Network.
This is a historic moment for Australia's telecommunications sector. It sets the scene for our broadband future, and the growth of the digital economy.
PM: Before I take questions, can I just say this to all those good Australians out there who are wanting a future for Australia which has competitive price and competitive access to high speed broadband services of the type that you will be able to get elsewhere in the world, that this is the decision for the times.
Going beyond fibre optic to the node, to fibre optic to the premises, is the right way to go. It puts us in the slot, when it comes to being competitive with the world economy of the 21st Century.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how much extra money is the Government going to have to chip in to get this (inaudible)?
PM: Well the figure that I referred to before which is that the National Broadband Network Corporation will invest up to $43 billion, is a significant investment.
We have also indicated very plainly that we wish to do this in partnership with the private sector.
The Government proposes that it would have some, it would welcome private sector participation up to 49 per cent. We have also indicated that once this National Broadband Network Corporation is up and running for a period of five years, that we would then sell it.
Our objective is this, to make sure Australia has this technology for the future. Right now under market conditions it is not possible to deliver this through pure market mechanisms, so either you sit back and wait and hope that something happens or you get on and do it. We are going to do it.
It is a nation building decision, but once it is up and running in delivering those services then we would within that five year period, sell it to the private sector.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what makes you confident that you will even get the private sector investment and is there a role that Telstra could play here?
CONROY: We are inviting all companies in the Telco sector to join us and partner in this. So there is an invitation to all, Telstra included, to be a participant in this network. What the conditions are is that it is open access and that it is wholesale only.
So individual companies, there will be caps, we will be having an implementation study over the next eight to nine months to work through all of those sorts of issues in terms of the cap sizes.
And in terms of our initial contribution it is the $4.7 billion which we have talked about at length over the last few years. So we believe that we are able to deliver this project very responsibly and we believe that there is genuine interest in being a partner in this proposal.
PM: Plainly at present we're in a capital constrained world. We understand that. That's why the Government's putting its best step forward, because we don't want the Australian economy to suffer a comparative disadvantage, relative to other economies in the world.
But, we believe that with an implementation study to be rolled out during the course of this year, and with companies looking at what will be a first-class investment opportunity for the future, and with the possibility of the Australian public being able to invest through Aussie infrastructure bonds, that we will have an opportunity for all Australians, institutional and individual, to have a stake in the country's future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this stage of the game and taxpayers' are going to have to do it. What's the risk to public money here?
PM: Well, we believe this is a first-class solid investment for the nation, and because the nation's economy will need this infrastructure for the future, that is the first thing.
Secondly, absent the taxpayer investing in this corporation, this technology would not be provided, it would not be laid out.
Thirdly, we are dead set serious about the prospect, what we've said in our statement today, that once this is up and running, we have no long term interest as a Government in retaining public ownership of this. In other words, it would then be on sold to the private sector within, at the five year point, within the five year point, of the business being operated.
Obviously right now we are dealing with a capital constrained world. But we have acted on the advice of an expert panel, containing within it the Secretary of the Treasury, expert advice also from the ACCC about this thing being the right way to go.
Otherwise, we wouldn't be here. We've actually tested the market through the exercise we've been through, shaped by the current state of the global economy. That has not produced an outcome which we believe and we've been advised, makes the best use of the taxpayers' dollar. This does, and at the same time provides a fundamental reform for the way in which broadband services are delivered to the economy at large, to the country at large, by achieving the separation between the wholesale and retail networks. And I draw your attention in detail to the Policy Discussion Paper which is being issued at the same time today, which goes to proposed reform for the rest of the telco sector.
This is a big day, not just in terms of a National Broadband Network, high speed, up to a hundred times faster than what current users may have available to them - but a big day in fundamental reform in the separation business.
JOURNALIST: When do you plan to start building?
CONROY: The Tasmanian Government put a proposal into the expert panel and we believe it's a very exciting proposal. We'll be negotiating with Tasmania in the next 24 hours to be able to start rolling out. We understand that they've been ready to go for a considerable period of time, so we believe that the Tasmanian roll out of the National Broadband Network can actually be commenced by the middle of the year, June-July.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CONROY: This scoping study, the implementation study that we're going to be engaged in will map out the rest of the process, but we're able to start in Tasmania, we're able to start what we call the black spots (inaudible) we're able to start all of those this year.
Tasmania, we believe can be up and running, it's ready to go with its proposal. It will be an augmented proposal, that is what the discussions will be about in the next 24 hours, and we believe we'll be able to say something very positive about that very shortly.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) will the Government be putting in initially more than the $4.7 billion you've already said you were putting in, and what do you expect out of the course of the program before the sell down starts, the quantum of taxpayer investment will be?
PM: The Government intends to invest $4.7 billion as our initial equity investment. That will be drawn primarily from the Building Australia Fund, because it's a national infrastructure investment.
Secondly, the purpose of the implementation study is of course to define the precise likely scope of private sector participation in the project, and of course we will be refining also the most appropriate equity and debt mix within the project. But the initial investment is as you've described.
We believe it's necessary to do this. We've tested the market. Our expert advisers have said that this doesn't deliver value for the taxpayers' dollar. So as I said there are two big options  -  sit back, hope it all sorts itself out in the end, the guiding philosophy of the Howard Government for 12 years. Result, nothing happened. Or you get on and do it. And we intend to do that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the timeframe though, when will all Australians be expected to have access to  - 
PM: Yes, well this is a very large project as you can imagine. It goes right out across the country. Tasmania, the plan is that we start as of around about the middle of the year. For the nation at large, we are looking at a build which will take something in the order of seven to eight years.
Now, it will be rolled out progressively across the country. And we'll be aiming to roll it out, not just in the cities but in the regional centres as well, so that we connect all Australians with this vital communications technology for businesses across the nation, for health providers across the nation, for education providers across the nation, and for individual Australians who want to link themselves to the global economy of the 21st Century.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the question about that, given the  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the question about that, we have based the projected construction period of seven to eight years on the advice available to Government, including our conclusions from the work done by the expert panel, which has been working on this for some time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) $1 billion of debt a week at the moment and now you're looking at issuing Aussie Bond infrastructure. How confident are you that there is a market for more debt in this current (inaudible)?
PM: The Australian public, I believe, would have a bit of an interest in investing in Aussie Infrastructure Bonds because this is a very good proposal. It is solid infrastructure for the future. And if you look at what's happening around the world and what governments are doing around the world in order to equip their economies and their communities with this enabling technology of the 21st Century, let me tell you we're not Robinson Crusoe on this. There are a few others doing it as well.
Secondly, I don't intend to be a Prime Minister of Australia which consigns our 21st Century to a 20th Century technology. I just don't intend to do that. It requires action.
Now, on the question that you raise, I might invite the Treasurer and the Finance Minister.
TREASURER: I just want to say there couldn't be a better time for a more important investment than this one in the middle of a global financial crisis. There's no better time to lift our productive capacity. There is no better time to invest in the future of the nation. And I think there'll be a lot of interest, particularly from retail investors, in Aussie Bonds. I believe this is a responsible investment. We are establishing a commercial entity. We are putting it together on commercial terms and it should give a return over time to the Australian people. So, there couldn't be a better investment. I don't believe it has implications of the nature that you raised.
TANNER: The body that we're establishing will be for the first phase of its life a government business enterprise with a minority private sector stake, broadly equivalent to something like Australia Post. Australia Post borrows on its own account and so we would anticipate that the National Broadband Network company would borrow on its own account.
We, in order to establish the initial equity stake on the part of the Government, will be contributing $4.7 billion  -  which is of course the figure that was committed from our election commitment  -  and will be drawn essentially from the Building Australia Fund. The additional equity that will be required will be financed by Aussie Infrastructure Bonds that we are indicating. I believe that that is entirely sustainable. And the key thing here is Australia can't afford not to do this. We are in a capital-constrained world where we've got significant difficulties economically. We have to move ahead with this productivity-enhancing investment for the future, and the Government is taking the lead in doing that. It is a sustainable framework that will enable us to do that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TANNER: No.
JOURNALIST: Will the bonds be guaranteed by the Government?
TREASURER: The Aussie Bonds will be issued by the AOFM, okay. So, they're certainly guaranteed. The entity will borrow in its own right but the Aussie Bonds will be issued by the AOFM to fund our equity.
But on the broader point about quantum, we still believe over time there will be significant private sector investment which can come in in terms of either debt or equity in its own right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the national broadband was of course a key election commitment. We've now got 18 months, or 16 to 18 months or whatever it is, into the Government's term, and we've had, effectively, (inaudible) now you're going a different way. Isn't this really a lot of time wasted to get this point?
PM: We have tested the market and that's what we said we'd do. Remember when we originally put forward our proposal for a national broadband network, we were going to do so in partnership with the private sector. We've tested the market in an entirely proper, professional manner. That has been the subject of deliberation by an expert panel, including the sustained participation of the Secretary of the Treasury and others. The conclusions have been reached.
Secondly, the recommendation from the panel is that we move to the next generation, not fibre optic to the node, but fibre optic to the home, fibre optic to the business, fibre optic to the premises. That's where the 21st Century economy is. So, we've decided, given the current state of the global economy, to step over this stage of broadband network development to where the economy would need to land anyway. This is a huge enabler for the Australian economy for the 21st Century.
This is a very big project and this Government is proud of it. It's the right thing for the future, great for jobs, great for infrastructure and I'd encourage all Australians to get behind it.
Thank you.
[ends] 


The Rudd Government today announced the establishment of a new company to build and operate a new super fast National Broadband Network.
This new super fast National Broadband Network, built in partnership with private sector, will be the single largest nation building infrastructure project in Australian history.
This new National Broadband Network will:
     * Connect 90 percent of all Australian homes, schools and workplaces with broadband services with speeds up to 100 megabits per second - 100 times faster than those currently used by many households and businesses
     * Connect all other premises in Australia with next generation wireless and satellite technologies that will be deliver broadband speeds of 12 megabits per second
     * Directly support up to 25,000 local jobs every year, on average, over the 8 year life of the project
Under the Rudd Government's new national broadband network every house, school and business in Australia will get access to affordable fast broadband.
OWNERSHIP AND FINANCING
The Rudd Government's National Broadband Network will be built and operated by a new company specifically established by the Australian Government to carry out this project.
The Government will be the majority shareholder of this company, but significant private sector investment in the company is anticipated.
The Government will make an initial investment in this company but intends to sell down its interest in the company within 5 years after the network is built and fully operational, consistent with market conditions, and national and identity security considerations.
This company jointly owned by the Government and the private sector will invest up to $43 billion over 8 years to build the national broadband network.
The Government's investment in the company will be funded through the Building Australia Fund and the issuance of Aussie Infrastructure Bonds (AIBs), which will provide an opportunity for households and institutions to invest in the national broadband network.
The new investment is also the biggest reform in telecommunications in two decades because it delivers separation between the infrastructure provider and retail service providers. This means better and fairer infrastructure access for service providers, greater retail competition, and better services for families and businesses.
This announcement follows the Government's decision to terminate the NBN Request for Proposals (RFP) process on the basis of advice from the independent Panel of Experts that none of the national proposals offered value for money. The Panel noted the rapid deterioration of the global economy had a significant impact on the process.
This historic nation-building investment will help transform the Australian economy and create the jobs and businesses of the 21st century.
SPECIFICATIONS
The new superfast network will:
     * connect homes, schools and workplaces with optical fibre (fibre to the premise or ‘FTTP'), providing broadband services to Australians in urban and regional towns with speeds of 100 megabits per second - 100 times faster than those currently used by most people  -  extending to towns with a population of around 1,000 or more people
     * use next generation wireless and satellite technologies that will be able to deliver 12 megabits per second or more to people living in more remote parts of rural Australia
     * provide fibre optic transmission links connecting cities, major regional centres and rural towns
     * be Australia's first national wholesale-only, open access broadband network
     * be built and operated on a commercial basis by a company established at arm's length from Government and involve private sector investment
     * be expected to be rolled-out, simultaneously, in metropolitan, regional, and rural areas.
Every person and business in Australia, no-matter where they are located, will have access to affordable, fast broadband at their fingertips.
High speed broadband is increasingly essential to the way Australians communicate, and do business. It will help drive Australia's productivity, improve education and health service delivery and connect our big cities and regional centres.
The Government will invest in this major nation-building infrastructure to stimulate jobs in the short-term and pay a dividend to the Australian people through enhanced productivity and innovation in the long-term.
This is a major nation-building project that will support 25,000 every year, on average, over the life of the project. At its peak, it will support 37,000 jobs. Given the productivity gains associated with this investment, the full benefits will continue to flow for decades beyond the completion of the project.
The Government's announcement today has been informed by expert advice. The Panel of Experts has encouraged the Government to invest in optical fibre technology, supplemented by next-generation wireless and satellite technologies. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has also endorsed the use of FTTP as a superior technology to Fibre to the Node.
The preliminary estimate is that the enhanced NBN network will cost up to $43 billion, which has been developed taking into account advice from specialist technical advisers.
The Government's objective is to achieve 90 per cent coverage of the FTTP network, and remaining coverage to be delivered through wireless and satellite technologies, within this funding envelope. Initial advice to the Government is that this objective is achievable, but this estimate will be subject to an implementation study.
The Government will seek private investment in the company to draw on private sector capacity and expertise. However, ownership restrictions will be established to protect the Government's objective of a wholesale open-access network.
PLAN OF ACTION
To turn its vision into action the Government will immediately:
     * Commence an implementation study to determine the operating arrangements, detailed network design, ways to attract private sector investment  -  for roll-out early 2010, and ways to provide procurement opportunities for local businesses 
     * Fast-track negotiations with the Tasmanian Government, as recommended by the Panel of Experts, to build upon its NBN proposal to begin the rollout a FTTP network and next generation wireless services in Tasmania as early as July  -  an immediate start on a nation-wide investment. 
     * Implement measures to address ‘black spots' through the timely rollout of fibre optic transmission links connecting cities, major regional centres and rural towns - delivering improvements to telecommunication services in the short term.
     * Progress legislative changes that will govern the national broadband network company and facilitate the rollout of fibre networks, including requiring greenfields developments to use FTTP technology from 1 July 2010. 
     * Make an initial investment in the network of $4.7 billion.
     * Commence a consultative process on necessary changes to the existing telecommunications regulatory regime.
The initiative announced today is a historic nation-building investment focused on Australia's long-term national interest. It will fundamentally transform the competitive dynamics of the telecommunications sector, underpin future productivity growth and our international competitiveness. 


O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd on interest rates first, two of the big four banks have already indicated  -  one, NAB, not passing on the rate cut at all; the Commonwealth are only passing on 0.1 of one per cent. That's in the face of your plea to pass on the full rate. But it would seem to me there is nothing you can do about that. 
PM: Well Kerry, I would urge the banks to reconsider. And you're right, the banks ultimately set their own rates here. And if we look back at the more than four percentage point cut in interest rates since last September, the bulk of that has been passed through.
In the case of the Commonwealth Bank, I think of the 425 basis point cut, they probably passed on all but 20 or 30 basis points of that.
At the same time, however, this decision is disappointing and I would urge them to reconsider.
O'BRIEN: Well, you are doing a lot for the banks as the Government. Wouldn't you be expecting them to reciprocate?
PM: Yes I would Kerry and that's why I am urging them to reconsider. At the end of the day this is a competitive market and we will see what all the banks do in response to this decision. And as I said -
O'BRIEN: Well the expectation of the market is that they will all go pretty much the same way and in the end they might tell you yes, we've reconsidered, and stiff, can't do it.
PM: Well they may do that, I am urging them to reconsider. And as you know, we are in constant dialogue with the banks on a range of things.
For example, one of the measures that I announced over the weekend was negotiated between the Treasurer and the banks in recent times about what to do with people who lose their jobs through no fault of their own. What can the banks do for those people in terms of providing some sort of a deferral period for the payment of mortgage payments, should they be made redundant?
Now the banks have been cooperative on that, and I thanked them over the weekend for this.
For the decisions announced by two of them today, I don't thank them for that, one bit.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, you are touting this broadband plan as the greatest infrastructure project in Australian history. But it's true, isn't it, that it has been forced on you after the nation's biggest telco was thrown out of the ring, and after the collapse of the tendering process. If this proposal is so great, why didn't you go straight to it more than a year ago?
PM: When we framed our policy prior to the last election Kerry, we went to the people and said that we would put forward a project or a proposal to do fibre optic to the node and that we would do so in cooperation with the private sector.
Having been elected, we honoured that commitment. We established our own expert panel to call for submissions from around the country. They did so. And the advice of the expert panel to us was that none of those adequately gave value to the taxpayers' dollar. And as a consequence, the panel's advice to us was to go to the next stage and then to invest instead in fibre optic to the home, the business or the premises.
That's what we are doing here. We are following this one step as we go along the way and this comes up off the back of our predecessors having spent 12 years doing nothing.
O'BRIEN: But this is just another way of acknowledging that your original proposal had deep flaws, so much so that the tendering process collapsed.
PM: That's absolutely wrong Kerry. What we are now dealing with is a financial market which is grossly stressed by the global economic recession. As a consequence, and we are advised of this as well, the relative unavailability of capital out there in financial markets was a factor in causing them to conclude that those participating in the bid process or the tender process were not able to deliver an outcome which met the national economic interest or the specifications put forward by the Government.
Therefore, that's the reality. The Government now, in our case, is stepping into the breach to deal with this challenge. We believe we've got the right solution, because broadband has to be done, the 21st Century economy.
The alternative is to sit back and do nothing.
O'BRIEN: You're offering 49 per cent of this project to private ownership, but it's guesswork right now isn't it, how much of that 49 per cent will be taken up, because that 49 per cent ownership would have to inject $20 billion into the proposal?
PM: Well first of all this is a project which we believe represents the best technology for the 21st Century. It is the railway network of the 21st Century. It is where all countries around the world are going.
Secondly, we will spend between now and the end of the year completing an implementation study on all those technical aspects and other aspects we would need finally to be resolved.
Therefore companies interested in investing will have an opportunity to examine their own financial circumstances during the course of the year, and what we have put forward as the final business case.
We are confident that we will get some response from institutional investors, from corporations within the telecommunications sector.
We are also leaving open the opportunity for the public themselves to invest through Australian Infrastructure Bonds. We think this is the right way to go.
O'BRIEN: Okay, but the bottom line is, there is still a lot of ifs and buts, a lot of uncertainties about who will take up what, and still a very uncertain market for the superhighway that you are proposing because there is no way of knowing how many people will be content to take up fast wireless technology by then.
PM: Well again our advice from our technical advisers is that fibre optic systems, fibre optic technology, and in this case, fibre optic to the premises, to the house, the small business, the school, the hospital, it is by far and above the superior technology for the foreseeable future.
So therefore we can either sit back and wait for some resolution of a future technology capable of delivering 100 megabits plus per second, or you can act on the advice, the technical advice which we have today from the expert panel, from the CSIRO, from others, and get on with the business of doing it.
Other countries around the world are doing it. We believe this is the right step for us.
O'BRIEN: But you are obviously, I mean any Government, you are obviously putting the best gloss on this and I suppose I am testing how good the best gloss is, because in the end it's true isn't that you might end up with 70 or 80 per cent ownership of this project, which means that instead of the $23 billion, you could be up much more towards that $43 billion?
PM: Kerry, we are determined that this piece of critical national economic infrastructure is done. That's why we have said that the public trading enterprise which will be set up like Australia Post will get on with the business of doing it.
We are at the same time making it absolutely clear that we will welcome private sector investment up to 49 per cent and once the thing is up and done and operating for five years, within that period of time, that we would then sell it because our objective is to get the infrastructure done.
You know something, Kerry, nothing in this life is certain, what is absolutely certain is that doing nothing for Australia's future  - 
O'BRIEN: Okay but let's assume you are going to do it. The question is that the Government may end up wearing the great bulk of the money to pay for this project, depending on how much gets taken up by the private sector, and secondly, you are not going to know how much you will actually be able to recoup of taxpayers' money when you sell it.
PM: Kerry, we anticipate that there will be a strong response from the business community to this. There have been positive responses from practically all in the industry today. We think the case will be pretty good for those who want to come on board. And as I've said for individuals, there's the opportunity to invest also in Australian Infrastructure Bonds.
And if you are around Australia today and concerned about where to put your money, this is a pretty good investment in the future. And therefore, we would have confidence that this is going to be well supported in the marketplace, but most critically, government has resolved to step into the breach, particularly a time of stressed financial markets, because we cannot afford to be left behind in the economy of the 21st Century.
O'BRIEN: But you're anticipating that there'll be a substantial take-up but you also anticipated 18 months that the Government would only be putting $4.7 billion into a project that you're now committing at least $23 billion and potentially much more. So anticipating is one thing, delivering is another.
PM: Kerry, prior to the last election, neither us or the Liberal Party went to the Australian people and said that there was going to be the worst global recession in three-quarters of a century. It happened. It's a fact. And it's directly affecting global financial markets.
O'BRIEN: But that is, sorry with respect, that is also one of the things that will directly affect how much companies are prepared to put in towards the $20 billion that you hope they take up.
PM: Yes and can I also say this point Kerry, that in terms of the roll-out of this National Broadband Network, delivering this super speed broadband service to the Australian economy and community, it will be done over a seven or eight year period, it's not one lump of investment in year one. Therefore, over that seven to eight year period, there will be obviously opportunities for us to attract investment from the private sector.
And secondly, we remain resolved on, determined on our resolve to sell down the company once it's up and running.
O'BRIEN: You've also released a discussion paper which seems to make very clear that, or very clear intent, that you're going to break Telstra into two separate operations, wholesale and retail, to reduce its domination of the telecommunications market in this country. Is that so?
PM: That discussion paper speaks for itself. That is, that we want to see what the response is from industry and the community for reform proposals for the broader telecommunications sector.
As far as broadband is concerned, it's quite plain that we are acting decisively to establish a wholesale network with an open access regime for retail providers across the country. That is a major breakthrough in terms of reform of the overall telecommunications broadband sector.
As for the rest of the telco sector, well, we're engaged in a discussion paper process with the community, and we'll reach our policy resolution on that once we have response back to the discussion paper.
O'BRIEN: Is it true as I'm told that you want to see Telstra restructured by the end of the year?
PM: How we determine final policy on this matter will be shaped very much by the response to the discussion paper. And can I say also relevant to that regulatory question, the broader proposal we've put forward through the National Broadband Network to go out and roll out this entire network across the nation, the Liberal Party today said that they will block it.
Now this is a significant statement from the Liberal Party as obviously elements of the proposal we've put forward, both of a regulatory sense and as far as the corporation itself is concerned, is likely to involve legislation.
I find it remarkable the Liberal Party on day one says they will block this piece of infrastructure for the 21st Century as part of some blind ideological pursuit of theirs, or continuing their policy when they were in Government, which is to do nothing to provide Australia with this technology for the 21st Century.
O'BRIEN: On another note Mr Rudd, your popularity went up after the revelations before the last election about your strip club visit in New York. Now it's gone up again today after adverse headlines about how you apparently reduced an RAAF flight stewardess to tears over a meal. What does that say about your fellow Australians and how they judge people?
PM: Kerry, I think I've said in previous discussions with you, if you want some human saint as Prime Minister, I'm not the person.
O'BRIEN: This is a question, not so much about you, but about how other people make their judgments. That your popularity's actually gone up.
PM: I just say a couple of things in response to that. Look, I'm me. I'm Kevin Rudd, warts and all. And I'm not perfect. I make mistakes. That's been clear in various discussions I've had with you guys in the media over quite some period of time. I've never pretended to be anything different to that. And no one's perfect. I'm certainly not.
On the broader question though of opinion polls, can I say that what really matters is whether you're fair dinkum about the business of getting on with charting a course of action through this global economic recession. We don't have a perfect plan for this, every government around the country, around the world is struggling to chart a way through this global recession. But we're having a go at it. And we believe it's the right course of action for Australia.
And can I say as this recession around the world deepens and its impact bites on Australia, then obviously the Government in the future will take a pounding. I fully anticipate that. But the right thing to do is to get on with the job. We're doing that and we're not going to engage in populist opposition politics on the way.
O'BRIEN: I was talking more about the kind of headlines that divert from the job that you're endeavouring to do. Veteran political journalist Laurie Oakes has written that you've actually been involved in what he called a long running spat with the Squadron that runs the VIP flights. He says this incident with the stewardess blew up because there was history. Has there been a build up of tension, is it true that you've been less than impressed with VIP services at other times as well?
PM: Absolutely not. And secondly, I'm unaware of what Laurie's referring to. Look from time to time, obviously there's going to be you know frictions between ministers, myself, staff, this government, previous governments and the public service, the Australian Defence Force, that's part and parcel of the business of government.
I go back to what I said before. That when you look at someone like me, I don't pretend to be perfect. I'm not. I make mistakes. And the key thing is to get on and do the job of trying to steer the country through these very difficult economic times, and I intend to do that.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks very much for talking with us.
PM: Good to be with you.
[ends]


The Australian Government and the Tasmanian Government today announced that Tasmania will be the launch state for the Commonwealth's new super fast National Broadband Network.
This new National Broadband Network will begin rolling out in Tasmania as early as July 2009, before a full national roll-out in early 2010.
The Tasmanian Government, in conjunction with Aurora Energy, will construct a fibre to the premise network which will deliver speeds of 100 Megabits per second, connecting over 200,000 Tasmanian households and businesses.
The FTTP network will also extend to all hospitals and almost 90 per cent of schools.
The Tasmanian Government will construct a wireless network and the Australian Government's National Broadband Network satellite solution will service the remainder of the state with speeds of 12 Mbps or more.
This announcement means Tasmanians will begin benefiting from broadband speeds up to 100 times faster than currently available within a matter of months.
Tasmania currently has the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state or territory  -  39 per cent compared with the Australian average of 52 per cent.
Tasmanians will also be the first beneficiaries of hundreds of local jobs that will be created during the 5-year life of the project.
This nation building network will be the most significant infrastructure project in Tasmania's history.
It is another example of the Rudd Government investing in nation building infrastructure in order to support local jobs in communities across Tasmania.
The decision to launch the National Broadband Network in Tasmania was based on the advice of the Government's independent Expert Panel.
Given the long standing disadvantages faced by Tasmanians in accessing high speed broadband, the Australian Government happily accepted this advice.
Last year, the Tasmanian Government submitted a proposal under the Request for Proposal (RFP) process to roll out a National Broadband Network. The Tasmanian proposal combined use of fibre to the home and workplace and high speed wireless services.
Although the RFP process has been terminated, the Panel of Experts encouraged further negotiation with the Tasmanian Government.
The Australian Consumer and Competition Commission also noted that the Tasmanian proposal raised no issues from a competition perspective.
As a result of this advice, the Australian and Tasmanian Governments have entered into negotiations with the Tasmanian Government to progress the roll-out of fast broadband as part of the enhanced National Broadband Network.
The Australian Government's commitment to Tasmania is an early demonstration of its plan to support the deployment of new high speed broadband infrastructure nationally.
The rollout of superfast broadband in Tasmania will revolutionise its economy and dramatically improve the lives of all Tasmanians.


PM: Well good morning everybody and it's great to be here with the Premier with local members including Sid Sidebottom and Dick Adams, as well as the Minister Stephen Conroy. 
This is a good day, it is a great day for Australian infrastructure, a great day for Tasmanian infrastructure and a great day for jobs, here in Tasmania and for the nation at large.
What we are designing here and what we are about to roll out across the nation is the infrastructure we need for the 21st Century. So much of this nations' productivity was built on the back of rolling out our railway network in the 19th Century, rolling out our electricity grids in the 20th Century, but the big turbo charge of productivity growth for the 21st century is going to come from high speed broadband, so what is the problem?
Nationwide, we have I have got to say, one of the slowest and most expensive broadband networks across all the developed countries. We can't afford to be in that position any longer. We can't afford to be down the bottom of the OECD table - when it comes to speed, when it comes to price, when it comes to take up. Because this will so much underpin productivity growth for businesses, productivity growth for small businesses in the services sector and also productivity growth for manufacturing long term as well.
Really important for business in the economy, really important also for communities and for Government service delivery also through our hospital network and health network and our schools.
Here in Tasmania we actually have a problem which needs to be fixed as well. And it is like this: currently Tasmania has the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any State or Territory. 39 per cent compared with the Australian average of 52 per cent.
The national average isn't good enough by global standards and the Tasmanian average isn't good enough by national standards. That is why the Premier here has been so strong in taking the lead in the proposals he has put to the Federal Government on rolling out broadband in this State. So what we are on about is making sure that this happens here in Tasmania and happens across the nation.
And the good news for Tasmania is that this new National Broadband Network is going to start its rollout here in this State, because the Tasmanian Government has been so far ahead of the game. And can I also say this: that what it therefore means in Tasmania is that we are going to be in the business, with Aurora, of constructing a fibre to the premises network, which will deliver speeds of up to 100 megabits per second, to something like 200,000 premises across Tasmania, businesses, households, to make sure that they are all linked with the global economy of the 21st century.
It also means that this fibre to the premises network will be connected to all hospitals and some 90 per cent of schools. This again is a terrific outcome for this State.
We want to make sure that it works well for everybody, and for those with whom we cannot make the connection to this fibre optic to the premises network, we will also be deploying of course, a wireless network and new satellite technologies to make sure that those communities have speeds of 12 megabits per second. This is critical for the future.
Can I also say what this means in terms of jobs for Australia and jobs for Tasmania. This new National Broadband Network is critical for building the economy of the 21st Century but also in providing jobs in the here and now.
We can see some of the jobs which are being provided through the work already being done here in Tasmania through Aurora and the Tasmanian Government. But nationwide, let me just confront you with this figure, when this rollout starts nationwide, for each year, out to the seven or eight years it will take to complete this rollout nationwide, we are looking at 25,000 jobs each year rising to 37,000 jobs at peak in that particular year.
This is a big shot in the arm at a time when we are in the midst of a global recession which is impacting jobs right across Australia and in particular in this part of Tasmania.
Therefore, we want to do our bit, play our part by providing this injection of stimulus now. So what does that mean for Tasmania, we will be having hundreds of jobs generated off the back of this state-wide rollout, this state wide rollout of the National Broadband Network. Good for Tasmania, good for Australia, good for the future.
One disappointing thing which has emerged overnight is the statement from the Liberal party and Mr Turnbull that they will now block this, vote to block this in the Australian Parliament.
The Liberal Party has indicated that they will vote to block this 21st century equivalent of the Snowy Hydro scheme - that the Liberal Party has said that they will vote to block 25,000 jobs a year for Australia, including what happens here in Tasmania.
That the Liberal Party will vote to block this necessary piece of infrastructure to build productivity growth for the future.
I think it is time that Australians made it very plain and very loud and clear what they think of this blocking opposition tactics. This is serious stuff. The Liberals have enormous influence in the Senate.
This therefore is not just a political debate, it goes down to the core question of whether the underpinning legislation for changes to regulations and for the corporation we are proposing to establish, will find its way through the Senate or not.
That is why the position of the Liberal Party is important. So I would simply say loud and clear, for Australians who want this infrastructure rolled out, make it very plain, absolutely crystal clear what you think about this proposal and what you think about a political party which for opportunistic reasons wants to vote it down.
And I conclude by saying this: it is absolutely wrong for Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Party, to be voting to block 25,000 jobs a year and to vote to block the 21st Century equivalent of the snowy hydro scheme.
Now if I could turn to the Premier and then we will have the Communications Minister as well. Over to you Premier.
PREMIER BARTLETT: Thank you Prime Minister and ladies and gentlemen it is a great pleasure to be standing here welcoming the Prime Minister, welcoming Senator Conroy and providing Tasmania's thanks for I believe the extraordinary leadership we are seeing from this Federal Government in challenging times.
But not seeing that ‘bury our head' attitude, seeing an attitude that looks to the future with big ideas, with nation building ideas that will make a real difference for decades to come. I said on the day I became Premier that I wanted to build a Tasmania that is clever, kind and connected. Well I think you can put, after today, a big tick next to the connected box.
But I also think that it is this sort of infrastructure that will enable us to build on the clever and kind aspects we want to build too. This will make a difference in education, this will make a difference in health. This will make a difference in innovative, high knowledge based industries in Tasmania. Now all Tasmanians understand deeply what hydro industrialisation meant for the last century in Tasmania, and still means for Tasmania now.
And as I look around and talk to some of the Aurora people here today, I know that they were deeply part of that transformation of Tasmania. I talked to one gentleman who had 46 years up here. And that transformation, that was brought about in Tasmania throughout the last century by hydro industrialisation, is about to start again.
But start again with new technology. These optic fibres, this optic fibre, these telecommunications will be to this century, what the dams, the poles and the wires were to the last century in Tasmania and it will, it fills me with great pride, I have got to say, to see a company, a state owned company like Aurora, again at the forefront of that innovation, of that leadership, of that economic and social development.
And in fact, I believe today is as significant, as the day in 1916 when the Governor General of the day said this at the opening of the Watermana power station, he said ‘ I trust this undertaking will open up a new era, not only in Tasmania but for the whole Commonwealth, from the harnessing of water power. And Tasmania will develop many flourishing industries which will attract much more additional skilled labour to this State and provide much employment here, and add to your State's population and prosperity'.
And today is as significant as that announcement that the Governor General made nearly 100 years ago, for the future of Tasmania and on that, I do want to express my personal thanks to both the Prime Minister and Senator Conroy, whose vision in this area accords very closely with the Tasmanian Government's vision.
And we are looking forward to the work ahead, to the creation of jobs, from everything from digging trenches through to very high end, high technology and project management and professional skills that will be needed to make this project happen. So thanks very much.
MINISTER CONROY: Thanks very much. I wanted to echo the comments of both Kevin and David. Broadband is a vital national building infrastructure. It will drive productivity, create jobs and help small businesses.
It will provide a platform to revolutionary health and education applications. And connect our regions to the digital economy.
For businesses, it means reduced travel costs and broader trade opportunity. For the frail and unwell, it means remote diagnosis and care, reducing the need for hospitalisation.
For the environment, it means better planning and control of energy and water supplies. For industry it means more efficient production and distribution. For schools it means classrooms connected to the globe. It is absolutely fantastic that we are here in Tasmania, a state that is ready to embrace these future opportunities.
The Tasmanian Government and Aurora have shown great vision and leadership. There were a lot of doomsayers, naysayers who said ‘it is a waste of time, why are Tasmania bothering'. Well today, what you are seeing is that vision becoming reality.
The roll out of super fast broadband in Tasmania will revolutionise this economy and dramatically improve the lives of Tasmanians. This is a historic moment for Australia's telecommunications sector and it sets the scene for our broadband future and the growth of the digital economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there are more than 60 small towns in Tasmania with under 1000 people (inaudible)?
PM: First of all, let's be very clear about what we went to the last election with which was to promise speeds of 12 megabits per second to 98 per cent of Australians and for the remaining two per cent, speeds somewhat slower than that delivered by what then existed by way of wireless and satellite technologies.
What are we now providing? We are now providing through fibre optic to the home, fibre optic to the business, speeds of 100 megabits per second for 90 per cent of the country. And for the rest of the country, speeds of 12 megabits per second using the next generation wireless and satellite technologies.
This is a big advance on where we were. On the question of the individual communities that you refer to and I might ask the Premier to add to my remarks in a minute, can I just say this: the opportunistic negative politics today that I have seen reported from I think, it is Senator Barnett, down here, which produces lists of communities that would miss out. First of all, let's focus on what we are doing.
This is a huge advance on where we were, particularly measured against the previous Government which sat on its hands and did nothing for 12 years, despite all the revenue arising from the mining boom. Secondly, the particular layout of Tasmania's smaller towns is such, given the location of the backbone trunk network, is that you will find a number of smaller towns with populations less than 1000 in Tasmania, which because of the way in which things are structured here, will have access to fibre optic to the home and fibre optic to the premises.
And so I think it is going to be very interesting indeed to measure this statement of outright opportunistic negative politics from the Liberals in Tasmania, on day one, against what we intend to do positively for the state and for the nation, including people in the smallest communities.
Ask yourself this question as well, what broadband speed did these communities of under 1000 people have available to them, after 12 years of Liberal Government?
Well that is a very good question, which I think those who are now in the business of saying what they would have done, and what should now be done, should honestly ask themselves.
They have had 12 years to act on this. We have been in office for a bit more than a year. We have a plan for the nation, a plan for the state, including for regional and rural areas as well. Premier do you want to add to that?
PREMIER BARTLET: I am very happy to add to that because I am very confident that we with this broadband rollout will be able to go to towns as small as 50 premises, that we will be able to deliver well into towns in Tasmania, of less than a 1000, and to meet the 200,000 premises that you have heard the Prime Minister speak of this morning, we will need to do that, in actual fact.
So towns like, Wynyard, towns like St Helens, towns like Oatlands, Tunbridge, Melton Mowbray, Kempton, will have the fastest broadband available in the world following this rollout.
PM: Which I think is a great advance for those communities and again, against what benchmark, a federal government which for 12 years under Mr Howard, did nothing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well can I say, right around the world, a whole bunch of Governments in the developed economies are doing exactly what we are doing. And Australia has been falling behind. And those governments are not doing this around the world for idle sentiment.
They have actually made a calculation about where this stands for the future, why it is necessary for businesses, why it is necessary for communities, and why it is necessary for the future of delivering of e-services be it in health or in education.
We are absolutely confident that this will represent a good strong business opportunity for the future. We have got further work to do through the implementation study for the rest of 2009. But let me tell you, this is exactly the direction which the smartest Government's around the world are headed. We are not Robinson Crusoe on this, but we are absolutely determined not to allow Australia to fall behind.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we are confident that through the implementation study, that once we have, that we will produce of course a final business case by years' end for the national broadband network.
But we are confident that if you have a system which makes this brand new technology, 100 megabits per second, available to homes, and available to businesses across the country, that the actual take up use of those services will be very, very big indeed. This is transforming the way in which businesses operate, it is transforming the way in which firms internally do their business. It is transforming the way in which communities relate to each other. It is transforming the way in which the health department, the education department deliver their services. Take an example, you will have a school here in this electorate of Braddon which will go immediately online in real time with a school somewhere in Japan or Indonesia or wherever else, and being able to interact in terms of your language classes.
So you ask me what I think the take up will be, I think it will be huge.
JOURNALIST: How expensive do you think it will be (inaudible)
PM: On this one I will ask the Minister.
MINISTER CONROY: Look thanks. I have seen some fairly wild back of the envelope suggestions from analysts yesterday. We registered the company yesterday and some analysts said that we needed to get five million customers. That would be if we were a retail company. It is a wholesale operator. So analysis based on that we have to attract half a million customers, starts from the wrong premise.
As Kevin has indicated, we are going through an implementation plan, we are pulling together experts who will design that. We haven't even finalised the structure of the company. We are inviting private sector to buy in. So to say that on the day we have registered the company, that we have to have a retail price, when we are in actual fact a wholesale company, misunderstands what this Government is doing. We are building a wholesale only company. And these sort of analyses are literally back of the envelope and have zero credibility.
PREMIER BARTLET: Can I just add to that, because this debate about take up and I noted the Leader of the Opposition, Malcolm Turnbull, and echoed by Will Hodgman here in Tasmania, has completely missed the point.
Malcolm Turnbull was on the radio this morning talking about, well why do I need a web page to load half a second quicker. What he has totally missed the point of is that the platform that this will deliver will deliver services that haven't been even dreamt up yet - in recreation, in education, in entertainment. The furore in Tasmania in the last few weeks over Tasmanians missing out on a new pay TV channel, will see Tasmanians in their homes, mums and dads, sign up to these sorts of services because they will see new content, new delivery, new interactivity. These are services that haven't even been dreamt of yet, that content providers, new application providers, will be swarming to Tasmania and to the rest of Australia over time, to ensure that mums and dads and consumers have access to these things.
PM: And finally, on the question of the wholesale network. What are we designing here? A wholesale network for the nation - so that it has an open access regime for retail companies to operate. Why do we want that? We want maximum competition for the best prices possible for consumers across the country.
We are achieving two things here: A very big regulatory reform, something which the previous Government squibbed on for years and years and years. And secondly, getting on with the business of laying out this wholesale network for the country because absent it, you won't have competitive retail providers.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look I think the other thing to say about the project itself is that it will be rolled out over seven or eight years. That is a long period of time. We are also confident based on the positive reactions that we have already seen in the marketplace to what we have proposed, that there will be a good response from the market. But we also believe that Government has to put its best foot forward.
You see, let's just put it again into context, for 12 years the previous Government sat on this sort of gush of financial resources into the country, off the back of the mining boom and didn't invest in national infrastructure.
The result is that with something as critical for the 21st Century as high speed broadband, we are missing out, and we are going to fall behind. It is time for Government to step in and take the lead. That is what this Government is on about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We are absolutely of the view that it is necessary for Government to take the lead. We have also been very attentive to the advice that we have received from the expert panel, which has included the Secretary of the Treasury and a range of experts within the sector. And of course, unless Government does take the lead on this, this network will not happen, or it will not happen in the timeframe which the nation needs.
We are absolutely confident that this piece of nation building is necessary for the 21st Century, as was the rollout of electricity grids in the 20th century, and the roll out of railway networks in the 19th century.
Just imagine if you had had this kind of narrow conservative view of what governments should do, where the railway network of Australia would have got to in the 19th century. How far would the electricity have got in the 20th Century?
This is because Government's have had to go out there and take the lead. Governments, I have got to say, in the past, Liberal and Labor have put their best foot forward and lay out the infrastructure.
And the purpose of laying out the infrastructure is it supports, the private sector getting on with what it does best, which is building businesses off the back of it.
We are confident this decision is absolutely right and having said that, I have got to zip, see you folks.
[ends]


The Australian Government strongly condemns today's abrogation of the Constitution in Fiji and calls upon the President to take the opportunity of yesterday's Court of Appeal decision to take Fiji forwards and not backwards.
Yesterday's Court of Appeal ruled clearly that the ousting of the democratically-elected Qarase Government in 2006 was invalid, that Bainimarama's interim Government was illegal and recommended that elections should be held promptly.
This is the right course for Fiji and the only way forward for the people of Fiji.
Instead today's decision by President Iloilo - at the behest of coup leader, Commodore Bainimarama - to abrogate the Constitution, remove the judiciary and defer any elections until 2014 is yet another backward step.
The delaying of elections to 2014 is completely unacceptable.
Australia remains firmly of the view that Fiji needs to be returned to democracy as soon as possible, consistent with the position taken by the Pacific Island Forum Leaders in Port Moresby in January.
At that meeting, Pacific Leaders also considered suspension of Fiji from the Pacific Islands Forum if it failed to act quickly to return to democracy. Today's actions can only increase the likelihood of Fiji's suspension.
Today's announcements move Fiji further from democracy and the rule of law. Australia's commitment of friendship to the people of Fiji remains strong but with the Fijian economy already in decline this is a grave and unwelcome development.


JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that this has happened again in Thailand, this instability is (inaudible) very important meetings (inaudible)?
PM: Well the East Asian Summit brings together heads of government from right across our region  -  from Japan, from Korea, from China, right across South East Asia. So this is disappointing for all heads of government. There's important business to discuss on the future of the regional economy given the impact of the global economic recession. And we'll have to of course reconvene this meeting at a later time.
JOURNALIST: It's been cancelled twice now effectively, what confidence would you have for democracy in Thailand if they cannot hold this sort of meeting?
PM: Obviously there are deep problems in Thai domestic politics at present. I think all friends of Thailand want to see a return to political normality in the Kingdom of Thailand. It's going to be important for the future for that to occur and we all urge all parties to adhere to peaceful, democratic means to return Thai politics to normal.
JOURNALIST: Just about Fiji as well, you talked about-
PM: One other thing on Thailand if I might say this. All Australians in, either in Thailand at present or contemplating travel to Thailand, should consult carefully the Australian Government's travel advisory. It's important that Australians remain closely in touch with the most recent details about their safety and security within Thailand as well.
JOURNALIST: There's no evidence that tourists are being targeted in Thailand though are they?
PM: I would just urge all Australians to consult the travel advisory, which urges people to apply appropriate caution in their movements within Thailand and in making decisions to travel there.
JOURNALIST: And Fiji, talking about instability in the region, you must be deeply disappointed with what's gone on in there in the last few days?
PM: Australia condemns unequivocally this action by the military ruler of Fiji to turn this great country Fiji into virtually, a military dictatorship, with the suspension of freedom of the press and actions which undermine prosperity for the ordinary people of Fiji.


I am pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Allan Gyngell as Director-General of the Office of National Assessments (ONA). Mr Gyngell's appointment will commence on 13 July.
Mr Gyngell has a distinguished track record both within and outside government in the analysis of international issues. 
He was the founding Executive Director of the Lowy Institute for International Policy, a position he has held since 2003.
In government, his career has included senior positions in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Office of National Assessments and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
He has had diplomatic postings in the United States and in Asia. He served as foreign policy adviser to former Prime Minister Paul Keating between 1993 and 1996. 
I would like to acknowledge the contribution of the current Director-General, Mr Peter Varghese, in leading the work of ONA since 2004.
He has been particularly effective in managing the development of ONA's responsibilities, and in implementing the changes to intelligence community machinery in recent years.
Mr Varghese will be taking up a senior diplomatic appointment in the coming months.


I am delighted to join you this morning for this inaugural meeting of members of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
It's almost 18 months ago since Australians elected a new Government. The first act of that Government, after I was sworn into office, was to sign the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
We sent a clear message to Australia and to our friends around the world.
We made it clear that we would honour our commitment to end an era of denial about climate change and its impact on the world, our own nation, our own environment and on the economy.
And we made it clear that we would act on climate change, at home and abroad, because without one another, without acting with each other it's impossible to bring about real change. And we made it clear that Australia would begin to shift from being part of the global climate change problem to being part of the global climate change solution.
We have taken a number of steps forward in the past 18 months on each of the three pillars of the Government's response to climate change: reducing Australia's carbon pollution, helping to shape a global solution, and adapting to the impacts of climate change that we cannot avoid.
On the first pillar of this strategy, we have made extensive progress on our plans to reduce Australia's greenhouse emissions through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, to place a price on carbon. And by boosting renewable energies in Australia and by boosting energy efficiency measures, including investing in home insulation that will help reduce the carbon footprint in some 2.7 million Australian households.
On the second pillar of our approach, the Government's climate change strategy, we have worked extensively with other nations to advance a global agreement on reducing carbon emissions ahead of the summit in Copenhagen this December. This was a major item in my discussions with United States President Obama in Washington earlier this month.
And on the third pillar of climate change adaptation, we have invested significantly in initiatives to help those parts of Australia most exposed to the impacts of climate change  -  including our farming communities.
The Government's climate change strategy is being implemented step by step, recognising the urgency of the environmental and the economic imperative for action. The economic imperative is becoming clearer and clearer, as Australia is among the first nations in the developed world to feel the economic impacts of climate change.
The Government believes that the economic cost of inaction on climate change is far greater than the cost of action and that sustained inaction imperils our economy and the global economy.
That's why after a decade of inaction on climate change, this Australian Government is committed to a systematic program of action both at home and abroad. And that's why today we take another important step forward in the Government's response to climate change  -  as we launch this Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
The GCCSI is a major initiative to drive global cooperation to deploy technologies that can play a very important part in our transition to the low carbon economy of the future. In just seven months, we have obtained the support for the GCCSI from 85 of the most significant governments, corporations and institutions around the world  -  supporting a project to deal with the reality of coal-fired electricity generation over the next decade and beyond.
This Institute recognises the cold hard reality that coal will be the major source of power generation for many years to come  -  with the 2008 IEA World Energy Outlook forecasting that the share of electricity generation sourced from coal will rise from 41 per cent now to 44 per cent by 2030. This is a reality we have to deal with.
Australia therefore has a national and shared global responsibility to establish the workability of this technology and to establish it at scale. If we succeed together, Australia and the world will benefit greatly in dealing with the challenge of climate change. If we fail through this and other shared enterprises around the world and establish that CCS cannot deliver the outcomes we need, then the challenge of global climate change action will be even greater than we currently contemplate. The stakes are very high in the gathering to which you have come here in Australia today.
That's why the time for coordinated, accelerated action on CCS has well and truly come. The world cannot afford to waste another year. That's why we must bring together governments and industry and relevant financial institutions together in this great economic and environmental enterprise. And that is the vision that underpins the Australian Government's support for this Global Institute. And we emphasise the world global. I say again to each and every one of you in this room, together we can act, if we act simply separately we will not achieve the outcome the world needs.
The Institute will play an important role in two of the three pillars of the Government's climate change strategy. At home, this initiative is an important complementary measure to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. It aims to help us to reduce our carbon pollution by advancing technology that will capture and store emissions. And abroad, by building momentum for the deployment of CCS technology, the Institute will help shape an international solution to climate change.
To those of you who represent governments from around the world or from corporations headquartered in countries other than Australia, can I simply say this: in recent weeks and months as I've travelled around the world and spoken to various of your heads of Government about this Institute, it engages a level of interest and enthusiasm beyond the diplomatic and beyond the polite because governments around the world and the largest corporations around the world understand instinctively how critical this work is.
And whether it's been at the APEC Summit in Lima, whether it was at the first G20 meeting in Washington last year or the recently concluded G20 meeting in London, and in other bilateral engagements I've had with heads of Government around the world, I would simply say to you that this is generally accepted as being an important initiative for us all.
Working closely with the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, our vision is to build an institute that will galvanise global efforts to demonstrate and deploy CCS technology.
Since the Institute's formation was announced on September 19 last year, it has received strong and widespread support from governments and key industry groups around the world and today we are announcing the initial 85 members of this Institute.
National members of this important initiative will include the European Commission, the United States of America, Japan, Germany, China, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Canada, Mexico, the Republic of Korea, The Netherlands, Indonesia, Norway, South Africa, New Zealand, the Emirate of Abu Dhabi, Papua New Guinea and others. And I acknowledge also the active support of all of the State Governments of Australia.
On the industry side, we also have members from the coal, oil and gas, electricity, technology, finance and research sectors, who have also become members of this Institute. And on behalf of the Government of Australia can I say to each of you as corporate leaders, I thank you very much for being part of the solution.
The World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the International Energy Agency are also major participants and I thank them for the credibility they bring to our table by virtue of their institutional engagement. And certainly in my discussions with the heads of a number of those institutions, most recently the President of the World Bank, I am confident that that institution together with others will be active supporters of this enterprise.
Two weeks ago I announced the appointment of the former head of the World Bank, Jim Wolfensohn, to chair the Institute's International Advisory Panel, which will provide strategic advice and direction to the Institute's global activities. Jim Wolfensohn brings vast experience and international influence and strategic vision to the Institute and we are delighted that he has agreed to accept this position.
And today I am pleased to confirm Mr Nick Otter as the interim CEO of the Institute. Nick has been doing a first class job in getting the Institute up and running since January, when he was seconded from his position as Director of Technology and External Affairs at Alstom Power. As an important priority, Nick will be working closely with the existing international and regional forums, particularly the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, in order to define their separate roles and responsibilities, so that we together can maximise the positive impact we can have together through the agency of this GCCSI.
Why is the GCCSI needed? The GCCSI will drive global cooperation on a key component of the solution to climate change. We know that the global community will only solve the challenge of climate change if it works together. Notwithstanding the impact of the global recession, our world is still riding an upward curve of greenhouse gas emissions, an upward curve that carries the threat of accelerating climate change impacts.
Coal is the greatest single contributor to greenhouse gases emissions created by human activity. The underlying demand for coal as a source of energy for electricity generation continues to grow. If we are to respond effectively to the enormous threat of climate change, across the world we must increase energy efficiency, diversify into less carbon-intensive energy sources and crucially we must reduce carbon emissions from fossil fuels. This will require investments across the world in research and in technology solutions that can reduce greenhouse gas emissions, while also ensuring energy security. But we need to develop those solutions fast. We do not have any more time to waste.
Globally, the latency of greenhouse gas emissions means that for every day we delay global action on climate change, we intensify the long-term impacts of global warming. We face an enormous global challenge in reconciling the irresistible force of growing global demand for energy and the immovable reality that we must act to combat climate change.
In the years to 2025  -  a mere 16 years - the world's urban population is forecast to grow by 1.4 billion people. More than 60 per cent of that population growth will occur in Asia alone. That means 840 million more people in Asia consuming electricity and fuel, as they move towards living standards that we in the developed world take for granted.
Of course, the two emerging giants are China and India, giants that are hungry for cheap energy to power their growth. Giants, therefore, hungry for coal and that between them, hold around one-fifth of the world's coal reserves. By 2030 around one quarter of global electricity production will be from coal-fired power stations in China and India.
There is no single solution to climate change. We need to act on every front to implement solutions to the challenge of climate change.
Given the trajectory of increased coal consumption in the decades ahead, carbon capture and storage is crucially important to solving the global challenge of climate change. It is therefore urgent that we drive an international portfolio of industrial scale CCS demonstration projects. Industrial scale demonstration CCS projects.
In July last year, the G8 group of leading economies endorsed an International Energy Agency and Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum recommendation and committed to at least 20 fully-integrated, industrial-scale projects by 2010, in order to achieve the broad deployment of CCS by 2020. The clock is ticking.
Following the G8 decision, the Australian Government commissioned the Boston Consulting Group to review the status of CCS projects worldwide. That report found that although there are several important demonstrations of both capture and storage, there are at present no integrated industrial-scale CCS projects anywhere in the world. Our conclusion was that more, a lot more, needed to be done if the G8 goal is to be achieved.
I then announced the Australian Global CCS Institute in September and we commissioned Bostons to develop a business model for the Institute. The proposed business model was then tested at a preparatory meeting in London in November, where the basic structures were debated and agreed. Now, here in Canberra in April 2009, we are taking the Institute to the next stage with specific work plans and governance structures.
The task of this Institute  -  along with the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum  -  is to work together to achieve this goal, alongside the IEA's target of carbon capture and storage contributing one fifth of all global emissions reductions by 2050. We need to support the targeted research and development necessary to advance the commercialisation of this technology. And we need to create a regulatory environment that will encourage private investment in CCS.
I believe the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute will be a key driver in achieving each of these objectives globally. Getting large scale demonstration projects underway is not easy, I acknowledge that. It's hard work and in the context of a severe global recession, it has become much harder.
That's why cooperation between governments and industry participants is more urgent than ever before and that's why this GCCSI is such an important initiative for the environment, the economy, for industry and for jobs.
The GCCSI was built on the excellent work already being done in many of the member countries represented in this room and by many of the companies and organisations that are here today as well. Australia will be making a strong contribution as the host of the GCCSI, as a major driver of CCS projects.
Last year the Australian Parliament passed the world's most comprehensive legal framework for carbon capture and storage  -  the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act. The establishment of an effective regulatory regime for the allocation of storage sites is an important step forward in advancing the commercial application of the CCS technology.
As the Institute scales up its activities, projects for carbon capture and storage are also advancing around the world and around Australia. Agencies such as Geoscience Australia, the Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Technologies, the Centre for Low Emission Technology and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, the CSIRO, have a wide range of research projects underway.
At the end of last month, the Australian Government announced the world's first commercial release of greenhouse gas acreage for industry. Ten offshore areas have been released to allow industry to undertake further assessment of potentially viable greenhouse gas storage sites. Australia is also working with other stakeholders to undertake world-class CCS research, development and demonstration.
The Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies has commenced a project demonstrating that up to 100,000 tonnes of CO2, extracted from a nearby natural accumulation, can be safely piped, injected and stored.
At Callide in Queensland, construction is underway on a demonstration project that involves the world's first conversion of an existing coal fired generator to capture CO2 using oxyfuel combustion. This project is being undertaken by a consortium from Australia and Japan and I thank our Japanese friends for their help.
The government has also provided funding to the Commonwealth Scientific Industrial and Research Organisation, the CSIRO, to undertake Post Combustion Capture trials at two power stations in Australia and two in China. And I thank the cooperation from our friends in China on this project as well. The first of the China trials commenced at Beijing's Gaobeidian power station in August last year. There is work underway in Australia, we are working already with projects abroad but this, my friends and colleagues, is but the beginning.
To conclude, carbon capture and storage is not the only answer to the climate change challenge. But it is a very important part of the global transition to a lower carbon global economy, a transformation of the global economy every bit as significant as the industrial revolution in the 18th century and the information revolution of recent times.
Australia's leadership in establishing the GCCSI reflects the importance of coal to our economy. Australia has a major stake in the fossil fuel industries, as do many of the Institute's members. Australia is the world's largest exporter of coal and the fifth largest exporter of LNG. We have just below one-tenth of the world's known coal reserves. Coal has been a major contributor to our nation's prosperity and that of many of our trading partners. But with that prosperity also comes a responsibility.
The GCCSI shows Australia is acting on this responsibility. Acting on this responsibility and also preparing for one of the greatest long-term challenges facing Australia and facing our global community, our global environment and our global economy.
Australia's leadership in establishing the GCCSI reflects the importance of coal to our economy. But the Institute is not just about coal, it is about capturing CO2 from any fossil fuel source and permanently removing it from the atmosphere. It's also important for oil and gas and I acknowledge the participation from companies in this sector as well, in particular Chevron's plans for north-western Australia.
To each of you participating in the work of the Institute, I want you to know that your work is important, vitally important. Important for the prosperity and livelihoods of millions of people around the world now and vitally important for those who will come after them.
When we announced this initiative some seven months ago, I said that it had two components; a Global Institute and a commitment to invest in CCS demonstration projects in Australia. And I confirm to each and every one of you in this room today at this important international conference, that this Government will honour those commitments - to the Global Institute, to its future operations and to invest in CCS demonstration projects.
That is why the Australian Government has advanced significant funding for this Institute already. But this Australian initiative will not succeed unless we are working seamlessly with the world. Together we can achieve great things. Together we can achieve great things. Separately we will not achieve nearly as much.
That's why I appeal to each and every one of you to get behind this Institute, to bring your energy, your talents, your expertise, your networks and collective efforts to make this Institute, this initiative a success. Enormous responsibility rests on the shoulders of those of you in this room today. Governments can go so far and this Government, the Government of Australia can take this project so far. It is only by the active, personal, political, diplomatic, corporate, financial, technology-based expertise and the enormous networks represented in this room that we can turn this vision into a reality. There is therefore an enormous weight of responsibility on your collective shoulders and I am confident that you will rise to that challenge.
Together therefore let us resolve to throw our every effort at making a lasting and real difference on climate change through this critical technology; for the future of our planet, the future of our economy and the future of the peoples of the world.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd formally launched the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute at the inaugural meeting of Institute foundation members in Canberra today.
The Institute is being established by the Government to accelerate the deployment of carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology globally and the sharing of information.
It has already received strong and widespread international support with 85 bodies, including 16 national Governments and more than 40 major companies, signing on as foundation members and collaborating participants (see list below).  More members are expected to join by 1 July 2009 when the Institute will become a separate legal entity.
The GCCSI is an important part of the Australian Government's response to the environmental and economic challenge of climate change.
The Government's climate change strategy is designed to reduce our carbon pollution, adapt to the impact of climate change we cannot avoid and help shape a global solution.
The Australian Government believes that carbon capture and storage has the potential to play an important role in the global transition to a low carbon economy.
The Institute is an initiative to help drive global cooperation on CCS projects and technologies.
It will help shape an international solution to climate change by building momentum for the deployment of CCS technology.
It will make an important contribution reducing the level of carbon pollution in Australia by advancing technology that will capture and store emissions.
It will also play a key role  -  along with the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum  -  in achieving the G8 group's goal of the broad deployment of CCS technology by 2020.
The Government announced the Institute in September 2008 with annual funding of up to $100 million to accelerate the deployment of commercial scale CCS projects globally.
The Government appointed Mr Nick Otter as interim CEO and recently appointed Mr James D. Wolfensohn to the position of Chair of the International Advisory Panel of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
Participants of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute
Foundation Members
The Government of Australia
The Emirate of Abu Dhabi
The Government of Canada
European Commission
The Government of France
The Government of Germany
The Government of Indonesia
The Government of Italy
The Government of Japan
The Government of the Republic of Korea 
The Government of Mexico
The Government of Netherlands 
The Government of New Zealand
The Government of Norway 
The Government of Papua New Guinea
The Government of South Africa 
The Government of United Kingdom 
The Government of United States of America
The State Government of New South Wales
The State Government of Queensland
The State Government of South Australia
The State Government of Victoria
The State Government of Western Australia
Asian Development Bank
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Alstom Power Ltd
AMEC Plc
Anglo American Services (UK) Limited 
ARUP Pty Ltd 
BHP Billiton
BP Australia Pty Ltd
Chevron Australia Pty Ltd
Chiyoda Corporation 
Doosan Babcock Energy Limited 
The Dow Chemical Company
ENEL 
Exxon Mobil Australia Pty Ltd
General Electric International Inc
Greenhouse Gas Storage Solutions (GGSS)
Hitachi Corporation
Hydrogen Energy International Limited
INPEX Corporation
Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Corp
Nippon Steel Engineering Co. Ltd
Macquarie Capital Advisers Ltd
Mitsubishi Corporation 
Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd
Parsons Brinckerhoff Australia Pty Ltd
Peabody Pacific Pty Ltd
PricewaterhouseCoopers
Rio Tinto Ltd 
RWE Power AG
Santos Limited
Senergy Alternate Energy Ltd
Services Petroliers Schlumberger 
Shell International Petroleum Company Ltd 
Southern States Energy Board (US)
StatoilHydro ASA
Taisei Construction Corporation
Toshiba Corporation 
Total E&amp;P 
TRUenergy Development Pty Ltd
Woodside Energy Ltd
Worley Parsons Services Pty Ltd
Xstrata Coal Pty Ltd 
ZEEP Australia Pty Ltd
Australian Coal Association
Carbon Capture and Storage Association
Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies (CO2CRC) 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) 
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) 
The Clinton Foundation 
Glówny Instytut Górnictwa (Poland)
Japanese Coal Energy Center (JCOAL)
National Low Emissions Coal Research and Development Ltd (Australia)
Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth (RITE, Japan)
South African National Energy Research Institute (SANERI)
The Climate Group 
Underground Coal Gasification Association
University College of London
World Coal Institute
Collaborating Participants
International Energy Agency
The World Bank
The Government of the Peoples Republic of China
China Huaneng Group


Each of us is here today because of a bloke who has shown incredible leadership, incredible vision and incredible courage. 
He's inspired us, each and everyone of us.
He's challenged us, each and everyone of us.
And for many of us here today, he's also become a friend. And I now regard Chris O'Brien as a friend of mine.
And we're here today together, to launch the new Sydney Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA.
I wanted this thing to be called the Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre, and his response to me was ' not on your nelly'.
I wanted to name it this because I thought it was a proud product of his vision, his determination and his leadership.
And again his response was a firm and irrevocable ‘no'.
And what I've learnt over the last couple of years of knowing this bloke is you don't cross him. It's not worth the trouble. So I haven't.
And hence we have the name of this great institution, of this great institute, which is before you today.
And Chris has defied all the odds for the aggressive, highly malignant brain tumour that he was diagnosed with back in 2006.
The diagnosis that was delivered like a “hammer blow”, as he says in his book, Never Say Die, his wonderful autobiography that I had the privilege of launching last year.
A diagnosis delivered with no hope for the future.
They gave him six months just back then.
And he's here with us today fighting on.
And all the way along, Chris has kept battling for his vision for integrated cancer care.
A vision for the new Sydney Cancer Centre to be a true centre for excellence that brings all the elements of cancer treatment together within a single facility.
So that patients diagnosed with cancer no longer have to feel they're on their own in finding their way through all the different elements of dealing with their illness.
Others would have been devastated by a cancer diagnosis.
But Chris has truly transformed personal adversity into national opportunity.
An opportunity to understand cancer treatment from the other side of the doctor's desk.
An opportunity to fight so much harder for cancer patients and their families.
And an opportunity to achieve lasting change in the way we treat and prevent cancer in Australia.
I know Chris doesn't want us only talking about him today  -  no matter how much he has been an inspiration for so many of us.
After all, Chris hasn't been fighting for himself.
He's been fighting for each and every one of us.
There is no Australian, literally no Australian, who goes through life without being touched by cancer in some way.
Whether it's in their own diagnosis, or that of a family member, or a friend, or a workmate.
All of us are affected by cancer in one way or another. I remember as a child my mum being diagnosed with breast cancer. I was three or four years old. She was 39 years old.
Mum survived and died at the ripe old age of 83. Having been a marvelous mother and friend to me.
In the end however she died of lung cancer. And died as someone had been a teetotaler and a non-smoker all her life.
Cancer touches us all in one way or another.
And because cancer is a personal story for so many of us, it is also therefore a national story for all of us.
And all of us have a stake in improving cancer prevention, detection, treatment and cure.
The fact is, cancer steals away too many lives, far too many lives.
Before the age of 85, one in two Australian men and one in three Australian women will be diagnosed with cancer.
It claims up to 40 thousand Australian lives each year  -  making it the leading cause of death.
And cancer numbers will only increase as the population ages and grows  -  making cancer one of our greatest health challenges for the future.
Of course cancer is not just one disease  -  there are many different types of cancer.
For some cancers, treatment is very successful.
Five year survival rates for breast cancer and melanoma are now around 90 per cent.
Other cancers however, are far more biologically aggressive.
There are the ones that pose the greatest challenge. There are those which are more manageable.
And they are why the word “cancer” still strikes such fear for all of us when we are in a doctor's waiting room.
The reality is -  - thanks to our great doctors and support staff like many of you here today -  - a cancer diagnosis is not a death sentence.
No matter the diagnosis there is always some hope.
Each year in Australia, there are more people surviving cancer, and living beyond it.
Indeed 60 per cent of Australian men and 65 per cent of women are alive five years after their cancer diagnosis.
By international standards, our cancer survival rates in Australia are high.
But we can as a nation do much, much better.
I want to advance a vision for Australia. For us to become world leaders in cancer detection, in cancer treatment, and in cancer research.
As we improve early detection and treatment, we can improve the body's capacity to fight cancer, and we can continue to improve survival rates.
And we can greatly reduce the stress and anxiety of the cancer journey for patients and for their families.
This is central to the vision for integrated cancer care centres like the new Sydney Integrated Cancer Care Centre  -  Lifehouse at the RPA.
The integration of cancer care  -  represented by Lifehouse  -  is the next great step forward in our battle with cancer. Our national battle with cancer.
It is also the next step forward in the Australian Government's health reform agenda.
I am proud to be here today with my colleague and friend Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, to launch the new Sydney Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at the RPA.
Because this centre offers one the best models of care delivery in the world.
It brings clinical care, research and education, and outreach into a single organisation.
As Chris has long argued from experience in the United States where there are over 60 such centres, integrated cancer centres radically lift excellence in treatment, excellence in care, and excellence in research - each informing the other on the way through.
I remember sitting down for the first time with Chris when I was back as Leader of the Opposition, I seem to remember over a coffee in the attic of a hotel. As he carefully, painstakingly, for a poor political brain such as mine, unfolded the concept of what integrated cancer care was. And after a half an hour conversation, I finally got it. It stuck with me since. And that's why I'm here today.
Medical research supports the case for centres such as this.
It's also just a matter of common sense.
As Chris says if Australia can create world-leading facilities for entertainment and sport, why in heaven's name, can't we equally have world leading clinical and research facilities to fight one of the nation's biggest killers?
Well Chris, that's what we intend to do.
The Lifehouse at RPA will offer all types of cancer treatment including chemotherapy, radiation, surgery, supportive care and complementary therapies.
Lifehouse at RPA will operate as an independent not-for-profit charitable organisation, treating both public and private patients.
More cancer patients will also be able to take part in potentially life-saving clinical trials, especially for selected uncommon and more complex cancers.
The Integrated Cancer Centre  -  the Lifehouse at RPA  -  aims to increase patient participation in clinical trials from the current level of about 8 per cent to something approaching 20 per cent or more.
That means we can undertake more research and undertake better research.
And that means faster breakthroughs in improving patient care.
And with a centre of excellence such as this Australia will do better in attracting and retaining the best medical professionals from across Australia and across the world.
The centre will also give young cancer specialists, researchers and medical staff first-rate training and experience, helping us develop a new generation of world class cancer experts.
Mentoring young staff has always been integral to Chris' vision for the practice of medicine, as readers of his autobiography can attest.
And that vision will be reflected here at Lifehouse RPA as well.
There'll also be partnerships developed with other research networks, including the University of Sydney, the Garvan St Vincents Campus Cancer Centre and the Centenary Institute.
The vision for Lifehouse at RPA is an inspiring vision. It's a good vision. It's a right vision for the nation.
And that's why last year I came here to announce that the Australian Government would give $50 million to the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation for Lifehouse at the RPA.
But the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation still needs another $200 million to bring the full vision of the Integrated Cancer Centre to life.
So Chris, I'm back again today, to announce that the Commonwealth will be tripling its contribution.
In addition to the $50 million we announced last year, the Government will now provide an additional funding of $100 million to the Sydney Cancer Foundation.
And there's one reason for that, and that's you mate.
With the additional $100 million that I am announcing today, the Commonwealth is now providing half of the $300 million required for the Lifehouse.
That takes us a long way towards delivering the vision for this new Sydney Integrated Cancer Centre.
Today, I'm also delighted to launch the Chris O'Brien Capital Appeal for the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation with the goal of raising a further $50 million.
Chris' model of an Integrated Cancer Centre will be a centrepiece of the Australian Government's vision of tackling cancer over the coming years.
This will be part of our national vision to deliver integrated cancer services across the nation.
Eighteen months ago, I said that I believed Australians were sick of the blame game between different levels of government, and sick of no one taking responsibility just for making things work.
I promised Australians that if elected as Prime Minister, I would work hard to end the blame game.
One of the first things I identified was that we needed to make sure that we deal with the historical underinvestment in cancer services.
Since taking office a little more than 12 months ago, the Australian Government has invested more than $250 million in Cancer alone. This includes:
     * $87.4 million for a national bowel cancer screening program;
     * $30 million for cancer centres in Melbourne, and Adelaide;
     * $15 million for prostate cancer research centres in Brisbane and Melbourne;
     * $31 million for a new program to provide for the first time a nationally consistent framework for financial support for women who require external breast prostheses as a result of breast cancer;
     * $15 million to better support adolescents and young adults living with cancer through youth cancer networks; and
     * $12 million for the McGrath Foundation for breast cancer nurses.
Today, we open a new chapter in the Government's commitment to tackling cancer.
Lifehouse at RPA will deal with uncommon, more complex and potentially untreatable cancers that can only be managed by co-located expert teams.
It will also manage a high caseload of the more common, large volume cancers.
This unique combination of roles will place Lifehouse at RPA at the centre of what will be a rolling agenda across the nation for the Government.
An agenda to develop better access to cancer care through connected services  -  which put the patient's needs at the centre of the system. 
An agenda with a long term goal of delivering consistent best practice treatment across our nation.
And the result is that we can deliver real improvements in patient care.
And we, the Australian Government will be putting our shoulder to the wheel.
And you, the business community and the wider community can also put your shoulder to the wheel, by contributing to the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation.
Together, we will deliver on Chris O'Brien's vision and deliver a state-of-the-art, world-class integrated cancer care centre that will set the benchmark for cancer treatment around the nation.
Capital works, as indicated just before, should commence later this year, with Lifehouse officially opening in 2012.
This new Sydney Integrated Cancer Care Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA will also be the first project to be funded from the Australian Government's Health and Hospitals Fund. Another first for the nation.
Important in generating economic activity and jobs on the way through. Critically important in building the health infrastructure we need for our nation's future.
An important part of the Australian Government's investment in our nation's long-term challenges.
I would like to conclude by making a few final remarks of a more personal nature about our friend, and about my friend, Chris O'Brien.
Chris' experience with cancer has given him the moral authority to push, to advocate this model of integrated cancer care to the highest offices in the land.
You've succeeded.
In the two years since I met Chris I've come to know him deeply. To respect him deeply. To admire him deeply. To love him deeply as a first class human being.
He embodies the finest traditions of the medical profession.
It's one of the terrible ironies of life that a man like Chris would be diagnosed with the very type of cancer he did so much to fight against in his own patients.
But Chris has made much good of it.
He's shared with us his cancer journey.
And on the way he's kept reminding us  -  if it's been tough on someone as knowledgeable and as optimistic as Chris, what's it like for ordinary Australians who have to negotiate their way through the complex web of health services without any inside knowledge.
And imagine how much harder all that would have been without the love and support of Gail, Adam, Juliette and James, and the whole team here at this centre.
Chris' message has been so very practical.
As he's said, sometimes it comes down to little things like the difference of being driven into hospital each day by Gail for treatment, while one of his patients had to catch two buses to get there.
That's what we've come to love about this bloke  -  a profound compassion for his fellow human beings.
His visceral reaction to injustice and to human suffering.
And his profound sense of duty to use his great talents to very good ends.
If there's any young man or woman out there wondering whether a life in science or medicine is worth the years of struggle and hard work, Chris' life should resolve that question for you.
This bloke is an inspiration. An example to the next generation of health professionals.
His vision for Lifehouse at RPA will come to fruition.
And it will not only benefit those living with cancer now.
It will leave a profound legacy for generations to come.
In ten years' time, in twenty years' time, in thirty years' time, who knows what breakthroughs will be made possible because of this model.
And for this Chris, the nation thanks you.
I'm proud to be here today with a friend, a fighter and a builder, of our nation's vision for the future.
Together, together. All of us here assembled, will deliver on this, your vision.
For Sydney, and for the nation, and to make Australia a world leader in this critical area of integrated cancer care.
Cancer won't wait for the global economy to recover.
So please, do all you can now to support the Chris O'Brien Capital Appeal.
Because this truly will change the lives of many Australians now, and in the years to come.
This is what being Australian is all about.
Looking out for each other.
Looking out for each other when times are tough.
And it is my great honour therefore, to launch the Chris O'Brien Capital Appeal for this new Sydney Integrated Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA. 


PM: The reason I've been delayed talking to you this morning is because I've been talking to Chris O'Brien. I think those of you who had the privilege of meeting him would understand the significance of his life, his work and what we're here to do today. And it's all about one thing. Improving the level of cancer care and cancer treatment and cancer research for Australians. 
That's why as Prime Minister of Australia I'm pleased to be in Sydney, to support what is a critical new addition to the investment of the health infrastructure of Sydney and New South Wales. This integrated cancer care centre is designed to provide additional support for public and private patients, for families of those suffering from cancer. It's an important step forward in the nation's fight against cancer.
Today I've announced a trebling of the Australian Government's contribution to this appeal. I'm confident that we are going to see this building launched later in the year. There is a small amount of money still to be made up, but I think we can get this thing going.
And what's the end point? To integrate the proper research, treatment, care and outreach that's needed for all those families of cancer sufferers around the country. There are 40,000 deaths from cancer each year, the largest single killer in Australia. We have a national responsibility to lift our national effort. And I would commend again publicly the enormous visionary contribution of Chris O'Brien to this great national cause.
Furthermore, could I simply update you on the latest advice that I have received from Border Protection Command on the incident which occurred recently off Ashmore Reef.
First of all, I'm advised that all of the 33 critically and seriously injured patients from the vessel involved in the incident off Ashmore Island, have arrived on the Australian mainland and have been transported to hospital.
Passengers from the vessel were transferred from the Royal Australian Navy Patrol Boats, HMAS Childers and HMAS Albany, under the control of Border Protection Command by helicopter to Truscott in Western Australia. Medical officers assessed the 31 passengers in Truscott before they were transported to the most appropriate medical facilities.
The eight passengers with the most severe injuries were transferred to Darwin and all arrived by approximately 6am local time. One patient was sent to Broome for an urgent surgical procedure and will remain there until stable enough to be moved to Perth.
The remaining 22 patients were transferred to Perth. Four patients were moved on a Challenger jet that arrived at 2.50am. Two stretcher patients were transferred on a Royal Flying Doctors Service aircraft which arrived at 7.00am. The A C130J aircraft from the Australian Defence Force is due to arrive with the remaining 16 patients this morning. My latest advice is that this will occur at 10.00am. The passengers on the C 130J aircraft do require medical treatment but the situation is not as critical as those who were transported earlier.
The remaining 13 passengers from the vessel are on the HMAS Albany. I'm advised the latest estimated time of arrival of the HMAS Albany to Darwin will be this afternoon, 1.15pm local time.
Furthermore, an update on the investigation. I've also just received advice in relation to the ongoing investigation of this matter from Border Protection Command and it is as follows. I've been advised by Border Protection Command that it's still too early to confirm the cause of the explosion on the vessel in question. In line with that advice I will not be speculating on the cause of the explosion today until that investigation is concluded. I believe that to be the right and responsible cause of action.
The AFP have advised the Government that they have currently 18 people deployed to Darwin and Perth to assist with the Northern Territory Police investigation into the explosion yesterday. The joint AFP/Northern Territory Police operation is called Operation Devario.
AFP assistance includes investigators, forensics personnel and criminal intelligence officers.
Let me just conclude by making some remarks about people smugglers themselves. People smugglers are engaged in the world's most evil trade and they should all rot in jail because they represent the absolute scum of the earth.
We see this lowest form of human life at work in what we saw on the high seas yesterday. That's why this Government maintains its hard line, tough, targeted approach to maintaining border protection for Australia. And that's why we have dedicated more resources to combat people smuggling than any other Government in Australian history.
Over to you for your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd is it true that there are more of the, these boats in Indonesia preparing to send out (inaudible)?
PM: All these activities across the Indonesian Archipelago more broadly are under constant surveillance from our authorities. This has been the case going back a long period of time and I would commend our naval authorities, our customs personnel, our aerial surveillance staff for the excellent work that they have done.
This is an ongoing challenge and as has been underlined by various comments in the last 24 hours, there are global factors at work here. Global factors concerning security, which are leading to additional push factors around the world and we have to respond to that with all our resources, and we'll continue to calibrate our resources to threats as they emerge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: If you think our stance is strong enough against people smugglers, why are they still trying to get to Australia?
PM: As the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has indicated you have global factors at work, you have tens of thousands of people arriving as refugees on the shores of countries right around the world and it means therefore that in our response to these global factors affecting countries in the Mediterranean, affecting countries right around the world, that we must continue to match our efforts and resources to the emerging challenge.
Now our staff, our naval staff, our coast watch staff, our aerial surveillance staff and others, our police, are doing a first class job backed up by our intelligence officers as well, also in collaboration with partners across the region. But we will continue to match the resources necessary to the challenges that unfold and I say again this is a challenge facing so many countries around the world at the moment. Our job in partnership with our neighbours is to respond to the challenge here as it unfolds further.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what exactly (inaudible) what exactly is the Government going to do to bolster border protection?
PM: Let me say that the measures we have in place, measures which resulted in the interdiction of this vessel on the basis of our surveillance of the vessel indicate of themselves the deployment of effective resources in the field. Furthermore, as the challenge through these global pressures mounts further and further, we will up also our resource allocation. That is the normal and appropriate way to handle these things. This has been a process that has been underway for some time going back to earlier boat arrivals as well.
The other thing is this, what we dedicate by way of resources, maritime resources, naval resources, as well as what our customs people do and what our intelligence office is doing, that is one thing. The other thing is to deepen our cooperation with our friends and partners and neighbours because the ability for us to work effectively with Indonesia, with Malaysia, with a whole range of other countries is as critical in this fight as is anything else.
And the third thing is this, because it is a global phenomenon and we are finding push factors operating from around the world, our active partnership with international governments and international agencies like the UNHCR is equally critical. This is a fight on many fronts. It is a fight which we have been engaged in for some time and a fight which other governments around the world are equally engaged in with us.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the Opposition is playing politics with this issue?
PM: Well I seem to hear my good old friend Joe Hockey and Mr Broadbent and others indicate today that they also recognise these global factors are at work.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: People smugglers are the vilest form of human life. They trade on the tragedy of others and that is why they should rot in jail and in my own view rot in hell. That is why this Government is absolutely committed to dedicating all resources necessary to fight the fight against people smugglers, to maintain a hard line, tough and targeted strategy in maintaining this country's border protection. We are dedicating more resources to border protection than any previous Australian Government and we will continue to calibrate the resources we need to the challenges that unfold, a challenge faced as I said before by governments across the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) to be asylum seekers will they be given (inaudible)?
PM: They will be treated under the normal provisions of the law through the examination of each of their individual cases.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister as a means to an ends (inaudible)?
PM: Well I don't answer hypothetical questions and I think you would have studied carefully what I said before and that it is important that we proceed in a calm, methodical fashion in establishing the facts concerning this case.
I have indicated before the Australian Federal Police resources dedicated to this in partnership with the WA police and with the Northern Territory police, as each fact is determined and established then we will make that public to you. But prior to that I don't intend to engage in speculation on what might or might not be the case. I don't think that's responsible.
JOURNALIST: What is really happening with the flow of information (inaudible)?
PM: We have no cause for concern on that front and can I just say in terms of questions which I understand have been put more broadly to the Government on the supply of video information and photographs. Our commitment as a Government is this: as soon as this information becomes available to us within any reasonable timeframe we will be turning it over to you good folk in the media. We believe in transparency on these questions, it's very important because where we've been in the past on some of these questions, it's very important that you in the media are in the know about what's happened. So our understanding is that the Australian authorities engaged in this, as soon as information is provided to Government then quick smart we will get that through to you in terms of photographic material etc.
JOURNALIST: How long can we expect to wait before we can get (inaudible)?
PM: Well you know it's often a challenge establishing the facts in any individual case and that's why I think, particularly burdened by historical experience, that we should be careful, methodical in establishing all the facts and we intend to do this in a transparent fashion.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That, when it comes to this Government's approach to border protection it is hardline, tough, targeted and integrated with the border protection efforts of our friends and partners around the world. We have dedicated more resources to border protection than any previous Australian Government and furthermore will dedicate what further resources are necessary as this threat, this global threat, unfolds not just for us but for other countries around the world. Thank you very much.
[ends]


The Rudd Government today announced a further $100 million for the new Lifehouse at RPA cancer care, research and education facility at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney. 
The not-for-profit Lifehouse at RPA will be a state-of-the-art treatment centre combining all facets of clinical care for both public and private cancer patients.
The new centre will bring experts together in cancer treatment and research and will have a particular focus on using new research discoveries in patient care.
The centre will also give young cancer specialists, researchers and medical staff first-rate training and experience  -  helping us develop a new generation of world class cancer experts.
This $100 million announcement today is in addition to the $50 million already committed by the Rudd Government for this important centre. This will bring the total Government investment to $150 million over the three years to 2011-12.
Lifehouse at RPA will be built adjoining the Royal Prince Alfred-Sydney University precinct in Camperdown.
The centre is the culmination of work undertaken by surgeon and cancer patient Professor Chris O'Brien  -  who has long advocated that bringing different cancer services under one roof would provide the best conditions for comprehensive treatment breakthroughs.
Building is expected to commence in late 2009, with the official opening scheduled for early 2012.
Over 100,000 new cases of cancer are diagnosed each year. The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare estimates that one in three men and one in four women will be diagnosed with cancer before the age of 75.


PM: Thanks very much Premier and it's great to be back in Adelaide and back in South Australia. Today is good news for the South Australian economy and for South Australian jobs. It's also good news for the future of the Australian Defence Force.
This investment of some 700 or 800 million dollars will bring, on the back of what we've done through the Nation Building and Jobs Plan, the figure to something like $2.5 billion that the Australian Government is investing the South Australian economy and jobs in the immediate years ahead: $2.5 billion.
Now, you can either in the face of a global economic recession stand back and do nothing, or you can get in there and have a go. And what we're doing through our investment in schools, our investment in social housing, and our investment also in critical national infrastructure including our Defence infrastructure is having a go.
I was talking to some of the folk out here on this great super base project today, and about just the number of projects caught up in this activity here at RAAF Base Edinburgh. 150 separate projects. Already hundreds of workers on site. And prospectively when the project construction is at its peak, more than a thousand workers on site. And that's before we move to the next stage of all of this, which is what happens when we see the relocation of 7RAR from Robertson barracks in Darwin, here to Adelaide.
This is good for the local economy. Good for jobs and I am proud to be here with the South Australian Premier, investing in this additional activity, in this economy at a time of a global economic recession.
The other piece of good news is the Australian Defence Force itself. I said before in my remarks to our men and women in uniform here today how proud I was of them.
For them to do their job means having the proper defence systems and equipment and basing to make it possible. And that means making sure that this super base is transformed from the vision into the reality. And what we're going to have here is a first class piece of national kit and equipment, building on the great skills and facilities which exist here already.
When recently I've been in the Middle East and seen what our Orions can do, let me tell you these are an essential part of Australia's Defence future. And therefore, what you do here to make that capacity possible for us to forward deploy, is of critical importance for the future of Australia's Defence.
And as I said earlier, we'll be building on this further, Australia's Defence preparedness and when we take our final decisions to release the Defence White Paper in the period ahead.
One other set of remarks I'd make before taking your questions is this, and concerns of course the recent events off Ashmore Reef. Firstly, I'd like to report to you on my conversations in the last 24 hours with the President of Indonesia and the Prime Minister of Malaysia.
I spoke yesterday with Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia and with President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono about the common challenge that we face in dealing with this great challenge from people smuggling and illegal activities across our region.
What both heads of government emphasised to me in their discussion with me was the fact that they, together with Australia, are facing new global factors - new global security factors, new global economic factors - out there causing an increase in the overall number of people moving illegally across our region from the Middle East, from South Asia and from other countries within South-East Asia.
We also as heads of government reaffirmed our commitment to work closely together on enhancing all levels of cooperation currently between the Australian, Indonesian and Malaysian Governments to ensure that we are doing everything physically possible to deal with this challenge, represented by people smuggling across our wider region.
The reality is, we are facing huge additional numbers across the Archipelago, coming off global factors. The UNHCR underpins that. Other commentators underpin that. Our regional partners in Indonesia and Malaysia underpin that as well. And a critical challenge is how we continue to calibrate our response to this emerging threat.
The second thing I'd like to update you on is the current status of patients arising from the incident that I referred to before. In relation to the status of the passengers on board the vessel and their treatment, I've been provided with the following information as of this morning. Of the passengers on board the vessel, 11 are currently in Royal Darwin Hospital. Of those 11, nine are in the burns unit. Seven are currently in Royal Brisbane Hospital. Of the seven, four are in the ICU and three are in the burns unit.
23 are currently in Royal Perth Hospital and of the 23, seven are in ICU, two are in isolation, and 14 in the burns unit. The remaining three passengers who are not in hospital are currently in immigration accommodation at Berrimah in Darwin.
These are of course in addition to the three persons who died in the incident. An additional two persons remain missing and who are presumed dead.
Finally, if I could update you also on the status of investigations into this incident. I'm advised that the Northern Territory Police investigation currently underway is called Operation Mentor. Operation Mentor involves the following.
One, 45 Northern Territory Police officers. Two, the investigation being conducted on behalf of the Northern Territory Coroner and involves an investigation of the following matters  -  the manner and cause of the explosion; therefore the manner and cause of the fatalities of the three persons on board; and also whether those deaths occurred as a result of a deliberate act or misadventure.
I'm advised that the Australian Federal Police currently has 18 personnel deployed to Darwin and Perth to assist the NT Police investigation. The Australian Federal Police operation is called Operation Devario.
I'm further advised that the Northern Territory Police are also responsible for determining the identity of the deceased and in turn, identifying and notifying their next of kin. The Northern Territory Police advice that they are also in the process of collating witness statements and forensic evidence at the NT Police Crime Command Operation Centre, and forensic laboratories at the Peter Macauly Centre in Berrimah.
The Northern Territory Coroner, Greg Cavanagh, has today released a statement which confirms a coronial investigation is being conducted on his behalf by the Northern Territory Police and associated agencies. The Coroner has also released the results of the autopsies on the three deceased persons. He has confirmed that the provisional cause of death is drowning. This find is provisional and is subject to toxicology and other forensic pathology tests.
The coronial investigation is still underway. However, the Coroner has confirmed that once he's received a completed investigation brief he has determined that the deaths will be subject to a public inquest. The NT Coroner has confirmed that all findings of this request - this inquest will be made public. I repeat, the NT Coroner has confirmed that all findings of this inquest will be made public.
Finally the head of the Northern Territory Police Crime Command, Peter Bravos said in a statement today and I quote him “this is a police matter and recognition of such by Government and Government agencies is appreciated. Speculation has the potential to compromise an investigation”.
And I would say this in conclusion, this Government will not undertake any action that would in any way compromise the possibility of a police investigation or a possible subsequent prosecution of people smugglers being in any way compromised. Remember people smugglers are the scum of the earth. People smugglers are so much part of the cause of this problem and I say again - this Government will not be party to any action which would compromise a police investigation or which would compromise a possible prosecution of people smugglers because people smugglers represent such a core part of the problem that we are dealing with.
Over to you for your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what are your thoughts about, it's been reported that Government sources have confirmed that the deck was doused on the deck of the boat as a deliberate act of sabotage? How long can you insist that you don't know what the cause of the explosion (inaudible)?
PM: Well I draw your attention to what the Northern Territory Police Crime Commander said in a statement today and I'll just read it again very carefully. “This is a police matter and recognition of such by Government and Government agencies is appreciated. Speculation has the potential to compromise an investigation.” Unquote.
That's what the Northern Territory Police Commander has said. Therefore this Government is of a view that we should not undertake any action which compromises (a) the police investigation or (b) a possible prosecution of people smugglers, given that people smugglers are not just the scum of the earth but lie very much at the core of the problem that we've had to confront in our northern waters.
JOURNALIST: In light of what's happened today are you rethinking your border strategy?
PM: The challenge for the future is to (a) be very clear about what new emerging pressures are coming upon us in terms of the global factors that I referred to before. The Indonesian President, the Malaysian Prime Minister, myself, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees are all of the view, as are leading members of the Liberal Party, that there are new global factors at work.
The key challenge therefore secondly is to make sure that our response in terms of the assets we deploy, the defence assets we deploy, naval assets, air assets, maritime surveillance as well as customs assets as well are calibrated against the emerging threat. We've done that in the past, we'll continue to do so in the future. This is a real challenge but we will continue to marshal our assets and resources against the challenge as it unfolds.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull has said that reintroducing temporary protection visas should be at the top of the Government's agenda. Is that being considered by the Government?
PM: I noticed today that the Liberals' immigration spokesman, that they had no such policy on the question of people smuggling. They have no policy as yet to declare on people smuggling, I would be very interested to see what the detail of that policy might be.
JOURNALIST: So would you look at reintroducing those TPVs?
PM: The question of calibrating the country's response to the assets that we need in the air-sea gap to our north, that's where the critical business lies. Knowing what is coming down the track towards you because of global factors which neither this Government or other governments control, these are global factors at work. Political instability in the Middle East, political implosions within Sri Lanka, difficulties also in Burma, difficulties being compounded by the global economic crisis. Some of these factors I discussed in great detail with the Indonesian President yesterday.
That's what's coming down the track towards us. These are the challenges we face and therefore the second response must be how do we work to better, work better together as governments across the region to deal with this challenge.
Second challenge is, how do we best deploy in an intelligent way all the assets which exist to interdict vessels which emerge on the high seas and to deal with them appropriately?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry say that again.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I don't have such plans at this stage but I have been receiving daily updates on the medical condition of those who have been affected by this tragic incident and we will continue to receive those updates as we have been receiving regular updates on the progress of the police investigation. That is appropriate.
JOURNALIST: So do you think that the Howard Government's immigration policies would not have stopped any of the people who are coming down to Australian waters now?
PM: One thing I'll just draw to your attention is that my understanding is that some of those who have most recently sought to leave for Australia and in fact began their exit to Australia when (a) Mr Howard was Prime Minister and (b) his policies were very much in place. This is a practical question for us. How do we deal with this real global problem that exists? How do we deal with its manifestation here in our region and how do we do so by most intelligently using our cooperation with regional governments and our cooperation, and our best deployment of our defence and maritime assets.
What our navy is doing in the air-sea gap at the present is first class work. What our air force is doing in the air-sea gap at present is first class work. What our surveillance staff are doing in the air-sea gap at present is first class work, supported by our men and women in Customs and they are doing a first class job in a very difficult and challenging environment.
And remember - they are dealing with global factors, global factors which are making the work out there on the high seas very hard for our men and women in uniform. But I repeat, this Government will not do anything to compromise a police investigation or compromise any possible prosecution of people smugglers because people smugglers lie at the core of the challenge that we are dealing with, with this new threat emerging across our northern waters.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The matter is subject to a police investigation and therefore we will know the conclusion of that police investigation once it is concluded, not prior to that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what would your reaction be if one of your road safety ministers came to you and said he had more than 30 speeding fines?
PM: I think my reaction to that would be to take up a football and hospital pass it to the Premier of South Australia which is what I am about to do. Thanks for your time folks.
[ends] 


The Prime Minister visited RAAF Base Edinburgh today to turn the first sod on construction of a $46 million Combined Mess as part of the Government's $623.68 million Hardened and Networked Army (HNA) initiative.
The HNA initiative will increase options for Government, in terms of both the combat weight of the force that can be deployed and the duration that forces can be sustained on operations.
There are currently 350 construction workers employed on site at RAAF Base Edinburgh, and the number is likely to increase to 700 at full construction capacity.
The facilities are being constructed to enable the 7th Battalion Royal Australian Regiment (7RAR) to move from Darwin to South Australia. 
RAAF Base Edinburgh has long been an important military base for the Australian Defence Force and this investment reinforces its significance.
The project includes working accommodation, training facilities, a driver training area, a vehicle wash point and common user facilities for both Army and RAAF including health, combined mess, fitness and community facilities as well as extensive upgrades to the existing base infrastructure.
Construction of the HNA facilities project commenced in late 2008 and will be completed by December 2011.
Once the new facilities are built, 7RAR will relocate to South Australia along with supporting artillery, combat engineer and logistics troops.
Upgrading Defence facilities will be a major focus of the upcoming Defence White Paper.
While the White Paper will decide on major new commitments, it is also important to renew, repair and refit the kit that already exists, and the facilities that support it.
It is crucial to remediate the degraded facilities that have gone without much-needed investment over many years, such as the nearby weapons testing range at Woomera.
There is no point in buying advanced new air weapons without the proper facilities to test and validate their effectiveness.
That is why the Government will be spending $118 million over the next four years to fix the Woomera range facilities that were neglected for so many years by the former Government.


Thanks very much for the warm Adelaide welcome. And it's great to be back into the city of my wife's birth, and a city which I've come to know and love over many years now.
The list of representatives of federal, state and local government have all been acknowledged appropriately and I don't choose to repeat them. Other than to say this, that the reason we are gathered here today in Adelaide is to talk about something which is important for the nation, important for this community.
And that is what do we do about cushioning the impact of this global economic recession from the lives, the working lives and families and community life of this important part of the Australian family.
This is as much a question about national economic policy as it is about how we work together effectively, as all levels of government work effectively as local community representatives and business representatives to make a difference.
In the last few weeks since returning from the G20 Summit in London, I've attended two gatherings like this around the country. As I got off the plane from London, I went to Melbourne and spoke to a gathering of about this size, from a community there which is suffering the direct impact of the global economic recession on them, and we spent time working through what we could do to make a difference there.
Not to promise the undeliverable which is to say that this global economic recession can be wished away, you can't do that. But to engage in very practical business of what you can do to reduce its impact.
And a week later I did the same in north western Tasmania where again the impact on local jobs is being felt sharply and keenly. And now, here in Adelaide where I know in this part of Australia, particularly given the concentration of manufacturing jobs, but particularly given the weaknesses which are emerging in that sector of the economy nationally and globally, the effects are also real.
It's an important opportunity also for us to remind ourselves that when we look at the statistics on unemployment, when we look at the statistics on economic growth, when we look at the statistics on trade, at one level these are pieces of economic data. And they guide and shape the decisions which policy makers must take.
But at a quite different level, each of these represents a human being. Each of these represents a family. Each of these represents the impact on a local school community. Each of these represents an impact on the fabric of a local community more broadly.
And part of our challenge as Australians in dealing with the impact of the global economic recession is this - to remind ourselves afresh on every day that we get up, on every day that we confront the global economic news, to recall and to record and to remind ourselves that Australians of one core principle and it is as follows  -  we are all in this together, each and every one of us.
Doesn't matter what part of the country we're from. Doesn't matter whether we're from business, whether we're from the unions, whether from the community sector, the church sector, the charitable sector, whether we're from federal government, state government or local government.
We are all in this together. And the actions we take together are infinitely more powerful, infinitely more potent, if they are taken together in a coordinated manner, one reinforcing the other.
The worst thing that can happen and you see this occurring in various societies and countries around the world, is where the impact of external economic shock fractures societies, fractures local communities. That's not the Australian way, that's not the way in which we design, that's not part of the Australian DNA. We're actually designed to do things differently.
At our absolute best we are a mob who get on with the business of sorting out practical solutions, looking after each other on the way through in the hard times. And that's what we are here to do.
Not to engage in the unrealistic politics of saying you can wish these things away. You can't. The fact is, you're all familiar with, you've read the international media, you've read the reports, you understand what's happening with the global economy.
But the core challenge is how do we cushion the impact in communities such as this and economies such as this, in order to make a difference in the lives of local business people, the lives of local workers, the lives and fabric of local communities, until such time as we can negotiate a trajectory for global economic recovery.
When I was in London recently, we sat down as the G20, the Group of 20 leaders from the largest economies in the world. As I listened to the presentations from my colleagues from all parts of the world, the President of Communist China, the President of capitalist America, the King of Saudi Arabia, and all points in between, what was extraordinary was the commonality of the challenge.
That is, all government leaders from whatever political systems they came from, whatever part of the world they came from, wrestling with this extraordinary event which has occurred - the worst in three-quarters of a century of global economic history.
Let's make no mistake about it. This global economic recession is the worst global recession we have seen since the 1930s. That's the reality. And each economy, each country, each society, is seeking to work effectively to respond to the challenge which has been presented to it.
But my comments to my colleagues from around the world, was the same that I've reflected to you here in Adelaide this morning. And that is, we are all in this together. Because this is not a time with such a globalised economy for an individual national economy to think that they can somehow wave a magic wand and produce a solution to the problem. They cannot.
However, if you do act together, and do act together effectively, you can begin to chart a strategy for economic recovery, and you can cushion the impact of the global economic recession on the way through.
If you look at the London Communiqué a couple of weeks ago, that's what the leaders of 20 or so governments from around the world sought to do. And we came out with a positive declaration as to the course of action that we would embrace.
One, that as governments around the world, we would engage in the business of economic stimulus. Because as governments around the world, we concluded that if you simply stand back and allow the ravages of this recession to wash over people's shores, then the impact is extraordinary. And we need to reduce that impact on the way through.
Trillions of dollars of invested activity by governments around the world in a coordinated action since we first met in Washington in November last year, through until March/April this year. Were that not the case, the tens of millions of people around the world who would now be out of work would be extraordinary. Again not eliminating the problem of unemployment but reducing it.
Similarly, dealing with the problem which lies at the core of the global economic crisis which is the state and the financial health of our principle financial institutions. Dealing with that in an effective way which makes a difference.
In the professional debate it's called how do you manage and restore to health toxic assets on the balance sheets of the world's most principal financial institutions. And there was a problem there. But what we agreed in London was a framework , an international framework which we assisted in crafting as Australia for the world's largest private banks to resolve their balance sheet difficulties, their toxic or impaired assets over time with one objective  -  to restore private credit flows to something approaching normal.
Because until that happens, the flow of credit through to Australian financial institutions and the flow of credit from those institutions and through those institutions to businesses which make a difference to employment here in this community in Adelaide is suspended.
And thirdly, a combined piece of action we did was this. We agreed to provide proper resources for the International Monetary Fund. And you might say well what on earth has that got to do with me here? Let me explain it. Right now there are emerging problems in the economies of Central and Eastern Europe, and in their financial institutions. And if they are not dealt with in an effective way, that will in turn ricochet back into the financial institutions of the rest of the world, and we'll have a second round effect of what we've already seen over the last year or so.
We don't want that to happen. And therefore, what we sought to do in London was to say, here is the international global institution which is relevant to handling these challenges, the International Monetary Fund. How do we make sure that it's got sufficient resources to deal with the challenge?
And how do we know, and how can we ensure that it's got the policy flexibility to act early and decisively and effectively, with financial institutions which show themselves to be in diabolical trouble in the emerging economies of Central and Eastern Europe. And that was core to the decisions we took in London as well.
Absent that with those problems emerging, the crisis of confidence which then could prospectively emerge in other financial institutions around the world, would pose great consequences for us all.
And finally, to work together on designing the rules for the future global financial system. None of us want to see what is happened most recently happen again. None of us want to see such unrestrained greed at work, inappropriately regulated by the rules governing financial markets and financial institutions.
And the resolve of governments around the world is to make a fundamental change to the way in which we design the rules of the system. Complex work, detailed work, now charged with the appropriate institutions working for us. To make sure that we get the balance right in the future between proper regulation and to ensure still, that there is sufficient flexibility for the private economy to get out there and do its thing as well.
And to draw a line also as governments around the world on the challenge of protectionism. Some people will argue that the best way to handle this challenge of the global economic crisis is to shut the gate. And that is that if you keep out imports from the rest of the world, it's the best way ahead.
Can I say that if every government did that around the world, where do you think we'd land up? If you had retaliatory action of that order of magnitude across the world today, then Australia's export markets would shrink and disappear.
And if there's one core lesson to learn from the events of the 1930s, it is this - when you are faced with a synchronised global economic recession, don't make it worst by erecting protectionist barriers against one another, because you take what is already a bad situation and make it much, much worse.
You shrink the global economy even more. You shrink jobs even more. You shrink those businesses which here depend on exports for their survival.
For the good news I have for you, coming out of the events in London, is that global governments in their own imperfect way, given the fact that global governments like domestic governments are made up of politicians and you may have observed, that there are some flaws in our political processes, and there are even some flaws in the politicians themselves. And none of us have perfect knowledge.
But the good news I have for you today is that governments meeting around the world in London were faced with two stark choices. To retreat into themselves and to take uncoordinated national actions against one another, or to act as a community of governments. And the good news so far is that they have taken the second course of action.
As we met at No.10, I also reminded my colleagues from around the world that there was a similar meeting in London in 1933. They brought together representatives from the economies affected by the events of '29-32 to London for a global conference on the global economy and its future directions in 1933. 66 economies from around the world.
It was a complete unmitigated disaster. And the result was the construction of protectionist walls. The extension of the economic pain of the early '30s throughout the '30s, and we know the consequences which then erupted by the end of the '30s.
That is one script which is alive to the world community and presents itself as a possibility. It's not one which this government of Australia will ever be party to. This government of Australia is into the business of how you cooperate and coordinate your actions with your colleagues and counterpart governments from around the world.
But let us be clear about the dimensions of the challenge. I've described the global action that we have taken, but let's be very clear about what we now face. 28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are already in recession, or have experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth in 2008.
Be very clear about that - 28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are either already in recession, or have already experienced one quarter of negative economic growth.
Second, seven of Australia's 10 largest trading partners are already in recession. Seven of them. The severity of the global recession has made it impossible for Australia to avoid a further period of negative economic growth.
The worst global economic recession in 75 years means it's inevitable that Australia too will be dragged into recession. The challenge for government is to cushion the impact of the recession on businesses and jobs, through the actions we take through our economic stimulus strategy.
That brings me too what we do nationally. I've described so far what we've sought to do internationally. Our national actions have sought to be consistent with the principles of how do you deal with maintaining financial stability in the here and now. How do you also deal with providing jobs and stimulus and support for business and the economy on the way through.
On providing stability for our financial system, the terrible and dark days of last October need to be reprised for us all. Following the collapse of Lehmann's in the United States, there was an audible tremor across the global economy as financial systems around the world began to shake and financial institutions, some of them, collapsed.
The actions we took in October last year to provide a guarantee for bank deposits for Australian bank deposit holders in banks, building societies, credit unions across Australia, the first time this has ever been provided in the history of the Commonwealth, is absolutely fundamental to maintaining confidence and stability in the Australian financial system.
For those who have from time to time chosen to criticise that decision, I ask them one simple question: And what was the alternative? And furthermore, what would have happened had we not taken that early and decisive action, clear for all to see?
And parallel to that, to engage also in an unprecedented position to provide government guarantees for the term wholesale funding or inter-bank lending of Australia's banks to make sure that their lines of credit could remain alive from around the world.
Why is all that important? Because such a large slab of the finance which is delivered into local businesses in this community here comes through the Australian banks, a slab of which in turn is accessed through their access to global capital markets.
And if that tap was being turned off as it was in the last months of last year, we had to find a radical means by which to turn it back on. And we did so. And we do not apologise for it. It was absolutely the right thing to do. Tough, early, decisive action necessary to stabilise the financial system of Australia.
And if I look at the comparisons between the stability of our financial system in the months since then against what is occurred in so many economies around the world, this was the right thing to do.
Stimulus, however, to provide support for jobs and businesses in the interim is of equal importance. And that's why from day one, the Government has also embraced an economic stimulus strategy. Not for the sake of simply spending money, but for the sake of stepping in to provide support for the private economy when it's taken such a battering, when businesses are taking such a battering through no fault of their own through the global factors that I've described before.
And so that's why we took a decision unapologetically to step in and say we will support the one and a half million Australians who work in the Australian retail sector by providing support to pensioners, veterans, carers, families in need of support to make sure that the retail sector would get a necessary shot in the arm on the way through in order to support the one and a half million Australians who work out there in that sector. And the businesses who provide so much of the products which are sold in our major retail outlets.
Secondly, if you look at the international economic data of what happened around the rest of the world when governments, countries and economies did not act to support consumption in their economies, did not act to support retail employment, the absolute killing fields that you have seen in retail sectors around the world as people have lost their jobs, hand over fist.
Compare and contrast what happened with Australia's retail sales figures for the December quarter last year and into the first months of this year against most other economies in the world. There is one difference between our performance and that of the economies around the rest of the world, and that is that we intervened, acted decisively to provide direct and deliberate support for consumption in the economy through the payments we made to pensioners, carers and to others, for which we make absolutely no apology.
The consequence in terms of employment in the retail sector and the roll on consequences of so many people in retail losing their jobs, had we not taken that action, would have been catastrophic for the general economy.
Consumption, however, and support for that sort of short term stimulus is one thing, it's also creating for us time to invest in long term infrastructure of the type that we need for the future and to provide also an opportunity for stimulus and the creation of jobs on the way through. That is why we have invested in a $30 billion nation building and jobs plan. The $30 billion nation building and jobs plan is about one thing: how do you provide as much activity and support for jobs in the economy now, most particularly through construction, and at the same time build the infrastructure we need for the 21st Century?
That's why in that $30 billion injection into the national economy we've embraced three main projects.
One, out there with the single largest school modernisation that this country has ever seen, $15 billion to build state of the art libraries, 21st Century libraries for our primary schools to make sure that they have the best by way of multi-purpose halls. That our secondary schools have access to the best science centres, the best language centres. And to do all these things in a way which makes our schools the best schools that we can have for the 21st Century and on the way through, turning every single primary school in Australia into a construction site with no apology.
The whole purpose is to make sure that we are generating economic activity here at the grassroots in the schools in these communities here in Adelaide. Each one of them now working with their State Education Authorities or in the case of the Catholics or the independents, their respective education authorities to make sure that you're getting the best deal possible for the new and additional classrooms or facilities that you want to build at a particular local school.
The objective? Build the education revolution for the future. Make sure that we have state of the art teaching infrastructure for the future and at the same time generating tens of thousands of jobs on the way through: tradies, sparkies, electricians, those who are concerned and engaged in the business of design and project management and project completion. That's what it's about.
The other part to it is this, as I look across the nation and I've looked carefully at the census date in recent years about the level of homelessness in Australia, how can we have according to the census data in a country such as this 100,000 Australians who are still homeless? And so what we committed ourselves to do some time ago when we produced our Homelessness White Paper was to ensure that we radically invested in the amount of social housing available in Australia because there is a huge undersupply of social housing.
And the one directly relates to the other. You have a whole lot of people who are homeless because we have such a radical undersupply of social housing. And again what the Government has done through a $6 billion investment is to undertake the biggest single national investment in social housing that the country has ever seen. 20,000 units of social housing right across the country, in order to make a difference, in order to make a radical difference. Of course the work will still not be complete as far as homelessness is concerned. But it is the single largest step in responding to the challenge that the country has seen so far. But critically, employing and creating jobs for people in housing construction.
The third thing we have done, complementary to the second, is of course to introduce a First Home Owner's Boost. Treble the rate if you're out there buying a new house, double the rate if your new home is an existing dwelling and again I ask you to look carefully at the economic data. Look at the housing construction statistics for Australia since the end of last year to the early part of this year relative to any other economy in the developed world and ask yourself this question: why are we doing better? It ain't perfect, it's still taking a battering but relative to the rest of the world let me tell you it is a significant and radical improvement.
And that is because you have these arms of Government policy directly engaged saying we can help first home buyers take advantage of low interest rates by getting into the housing market by trebling the first home owner's grant on a temporary basis in order to provide people with the incentive to enter and secondly this significant injection in social housing at the same time, as well as some of the other housing initiatives which the Minister Tanya Plibersek currently has underway.
The housing data is extraordinary relative to the rest of the world. And when I look at housing construction I say to myself, this helps preserve asset prices for working Australian families across the country, it also helps provide employment in local communities across the country and keep going a vital industry which is taking an absolute pounding in so many other parts of the world.
The third part of what we've done or the fourth part of what we've done on stimulus is this. Looking again to the future and what do we do to act to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The decision we took is that a practical ambition for the nation was to ensure that each owner occupied dwelling in Australia should have ceiling insulation, pulling out the equivalent of 50 million tonnes of greenhouse gas equivalents across the country. A massive investment in energy efficiency, a massive investment in reducing electricity costs for families across the country and a $4 billion investment on our part therefore to work with the industry in supplying insulation material, the transportation of insulation material, the installation of insulation material and all the things that support that and the jobs and employment process, again making a difference in terms of local employment.
So my message to you as this community is that what you see us doing nationally on the question of supporting stability in the financial system and providing economic stimulus on the way through to cushion the effect of this recession on local communities is of the type that I've just described. These are not just a series of statistics which are put out from the nation's capital, they reflect concrete projects on the ground in each community across the nation, including those here as well.
If I was to look for example at the impact of what's underway with some of these decisions here in these suburbs of Adelaide, the impact of the school program for example is significant. 237 schools in northern and western Adelaide regions of South Australia will be eligible to share in approximately $454 million under the plan that I've just described. This is not a small amount of money, this is not sort of a (inaudible) press release from you know someone on the edge of a Friday news cycle. This is real money, real investment in order to make a real difference in these communities. That's half a billion dollars spread across 237 schools in these regions of South Australia.
This comprises $419 million under the primary schools for the 21st Century program and up to $35 million under the National School Pride program. 158 schools in this region have already had schools approved under round one of the National School Pride program, this is for much-needed maintenance programs by the way, within schools and that in itself totals $23.5 million. This include $5.7 million allocated to schools in the electorate of Makin such as the Modbury Special School and Golden Grove High School for refurbishments and reconstruction. $8.3 million allocated to schools in Wakefield such as the Gawler High School and Elizabeth North Primary School for refurbishments and construction.
These funds also build on what we've invested in trades training centres and the provision of computers for the 21st Century. $16.6 million for three trades training centres benefiting seven schools in Makin and $9.6 million for two projects benefiting eight schools in Wakefield.
And across the computer program, 1,921 new computers in 14 schools have been funded in Makin; 1,780 computers in 19 schools in Wakefield. These are practical investments aimed to make a difference in this local community. A difference in terms of jobs and economic activity but a difference also in terms of what we do to create the best possible learning environment for our kids for the future.
A stimulus of the type that I've described also involves how we engage with the real challenge of local jobs here in communities such as this. The jobs figures coming out of these suburbs has been really bad. I don't intend to gild the lily, let's just be upfront about this. I don't think anyone's interests are served by us pretending a problem doesn't exist when it does. Our responsibility in positions of leadership is to embrace the problem, understand it, explain it and to reduce it. That's the business of practical leadership and that's why we're engaged in these important projects.
Since January 2009, over 450 redundancies have been announced in Northern and Western Adelaide. In Elizabeth, 12 jobs gone at Ceva Logistics, 40 at Exide Technologies, 38 at Hirotech Australia, 49 at Premoso Pty Ltd in Elizabeth South. In Edinburgh, 50 jobs gone at Futuris Automotive Interiors, 24 jobs went at Codan in Newton in February, and 44 at PMP in Salisbury South  -  just to name a few.
That's what's happening and you know it far better than I because these are your communities. The purpose of my mentioning them is to underline the fact that I see, as I underlined before, no point whatsoever in trying to gild the lily about this. This is happening, it's real. Our challenge is to take the bull by the horns and cushion the impact of it through the proposals that we have explained so far and ones which I will now turn to in addition.
When I returned from the G20 I said we needed to act nationally, we needed to act globally but I also said we needed to be acting locally. And I've described already some of the projects which give rise to a credible strategy to see Australia through this global economic recession.
What I described in a speech in Melbourne was that we needed a new compact on jobs and training for Australia to deal with the impact of this global recession. A compact with young Australians who are going to find it tough to land a job out of school or out of university or out of TAFE, and some of them finding it tough to keep a job out of school, out of university or out of TAFE.
Secondly, a compact with workers who have been retrenched through no fault of their own and what we provide to them by way of support.
Thirdly, a compact with local communities so that we can make a further difference on the ground in areas where we have higher levels of unemployment than would be the case nationally.
On a compact with young Australians, we are proposing to the Council of Australian Governments which will meet at the end of April that every young Australian is guaranteed access to a school, apprenticeship or higher education place. The goal is to ensure that our young people are properly skilled when the economy recovers.
We'll also be asking the Council of Australian Governments to lift the mandatory age at which young people must be in school or engaged in training or employment and we'll ask them to bring forward the already agreed Council of Australian Governments' goal of year 12 or equivalent attainment from 2020 down to 2015.
The purpose of these elements of our compact with young Australians is to make a difference because when I look back in economic history, when previous recessions have hit the Australian economy, one of the tragedies which has occurred is that we have lost too many of our young people not just for the one or two years of economic dislocation, then for a generation, then beyond a generation. Our resolve as an the Australian community and our combined resolve as a local community must be to exert every effort from preventing that happening again and that underpins our proposed compact with young Australians. So that with our young people, whatever qualification they may be, for whichever course they may be qualified, be it at university, be it TAFE, be it an apprenticeship, be it at school, that we the Governments of Australia would make that possible for them.
To use this time of economic downturn to obtain new skills to sustain the skills that you've got but also and much more critically to equip yourselves most effectively for the economy once it recovers.
A compact with retrenched Australians. So many Australians through no fault of their own are losing their jobs. One of the key concerns that have been put to us by many people from around the country is what happens if you lose your job and your ability to pay off your mortgage. We've worked with the Australian Big Four banks on a comprehensive package of assistance to working families who lose their jobs. The banks have now indicated to us they will now negotiate with mortgage borrowers suffering from employment hardship to postpone up to 12 months the dates from which payments are due under their mortgage contract, with interest to be capitalised into the loan.
And the banks are also prepared to consider extending the period of the mortgage contract and reducing the amount of each payment due under the contract. They have also indicated that on other loans including car loans they would be prepared to consider providing interest-only repayment options where appropriate. Furthermore they have also indicated their preparedness to consider fee waivers for borrowers in hardship cases.
Of course, these options won't be appropriate in every case. Banks will make assessments based on the borrowers' ability to meet long term contractual obligations. But this is important, there's a set of arrangements with Australia's major banks to remove some of the immediate pressure on families if the breadwinner loses his or her job through no fault of their own and ends up being retrenched.
Finally a compact with local communities. I said before that what we are doing nationally translates through locally in the school projects and the rest. But also what is important to underline here today is what further we can do from the ground up, engaging you as a local community. Each of the projects I've referred to, for example the four to five hundred million dollars in school modernisation projects to generate jobs and activity and opportunities will flow from that.
But we have to be in addition particularly mindful of those areas where there will be high concentrations of unemployment, such as this region. That's why I've announced $20 million for local employment coordinators in the regions most affected by job losses. We will initially appoint them to seven regions including here in the northern and western suburbs of Adelaide. These coordinators will be appointed by next month. In the interim here in Adelaide Lyn Rawley has been appointed to begin the task of working with the local community to identify opportunities at the local level to create and support jobs. She has a long history as a local community champion, having worked with Centrelink previously and with the Commonwealth Employment Service.
The first task of the local employment coordinators will be to identify projects for the Government to support through a special $650 million Local Jobs Fund. Jobs that are ready to go and to work also with proponents for those proposals to ensure effective delivery on time. The coordinator will link with industry and service delivery organisations to identify new jobs in the region and to maximise employment and training opportunities for redundant workers. The intention is for the employment coordinators to work directly with local government in order to make a difference and to coordinate effectively with what local governments have by way of their local, own local infrastructure plans.
We've also been offered the assistance of the Australian trucking industry legend Lindsay Fox who will be working directly with our local employment coordinators across the country alongside Bill Kelty and he'll be providing advice to local employers on practical ways that they can help by keeping on their workers and even taking on new apprentices and employees.
Part of the reason for this discussion this morning, as I conclude my own remarks, is for you to begin to think as a local community about how you could make best access of this Local Jobs Fund to team up with our local priority employment coordinator. This is going to be very important practical work. So much of what I have described so far is what the Government is doing as it works from the national level down but this will only truly work if it is matched by a parallel effort from the community up.
And what I know of Australian communities is that they are full of good ideas, full of good enterprise, full of good initiative, and good and full of good spirit when it comes to making a difference on the ground.
So the challenge I leave you is this. It is not simply to come here and say this is what we're doing, aren't we a bunch of fine fellas. It's to say here actually is a structure. Here is a person. Here is a fund. And here is an opportunity for you as local communities, working in partnership with each other, to make an additional difference as well.
That's the purpose for my being here. To hear from you. From church and charitable organisations, from local chambers of commerce, from local trade unions, from employers. From those who are passionate about the future of their local communities about how we can make this difference also from the ground up.
And you know something? I'm convinced we can make a difference. I'm convinced that if we take to heart the principle that I put to out my colleagues of the G20 meeting only a few weeks ago, that we're all in this together.
That if we're serious about this principle, that we'll make a difference here in this community by being in this together. For the challenge, ladies and gentlemen, lies with you. Work with us. Work through your local members. Work through the local priority employment coordinator. There is no monopoly of wisdom on our part in terms of what's going to work in this community. I know enough about local community life from where I come from the People's Republic of Queensland, that everywhere is different, okay. Everywhere is different. And everyone's got their own best ideas about how things should be done and you've got your own best knowledge and your own best networks.
What I've sought to do is provide the structure and the funding and the personnel to try and make a difference.
Over to you.
[Ends]


The Australian Government welcomes the action by President Yudhoyono yesterday formally approving the extradition of an alleged people smuggler to Australia for prosecution.
The action by the Indonesian President opens the way for Hadi Ahmadi to face prosecution in Australia for a range of serious people smuggling offences relating to his alleged involvement in four boat arrivals in 2001 carrying more than 900 unlawful non-citizens.
Ahmadi is wanted by the Commonwealth for prosecution for 21 offences contrary to the Migration Act. It is alleged that Ahmadi was responsible for the accommodation and living arrangements in Indonesia of a number of passengers waiting to board the vessels.
This is a very welcome development in the fight against people smuggling.
This action further demonstrates the close cooperation between Australia and Indonesia in the fight against people smuggling and proves that those allegedly involved in this serious crime cannot escape justice.
The final decision by the President follows high level discussions between the Prime Minister and President Yudhoyono last year.
We understand that the signing of the papers yesterday is the formal approval required from the Government of Indonesia before extradition can take place. Administrative arrangements will now be made to hand over Ahmadi to Australian authorities.
Australia is very grateful to Indonesia for its assistance with this matter and thanks President Yudhoyono for approving the extradition.


PM: Thanks, I'll say a few things and then happy to take your questions. Firstly on the economy and employment and what we are doing here locally and then secondly on a further development in relation to people smuggling.
On the, it's good to be here in the City of Cockburn with our local member Melissa Parke and to be discussing with this local community how we can make a difference with the impact of the global recession on jobs in this part of Australia.
And the purpose of our gathering today in this local jobs forum, here at the City of Cockburn, is to work out practical ways in which we can make a difference.
The truth is this. The global economic recession makes it inevitable that we'll have a recession in Australia which means that as we frame the budget we're going to have to make even stronger our economic stimulus strategy because unemployment will rise even further.
Therefore, the whole point of that is to cushion this community and communities like it from the full impact of the recession.
We've been speaking today in this gathering about the global strategy which the Government has been engaged in through the G20, to support stability in global financial markets and support local economic stimulus.
We've spoken also about what we're doing nationally through our support for stability in Australian financial markets, the bank guarantee and short, medium and long term economic stimulus including our investment in infrastructure to generate jobs.
But we've also been here today talking about local initiatives and how we partner with communities such as this to make a difference. And our appointment today of a priority employment coordinator in this part of Perth to work together with the local jobs fund to make a difference with local government, local church and charitable and community organisations, local small businesses, local unions, in order to again provide additional jobs and training opportunities here at the local level.
As Prime Minister of Australia I can't wish this global economic recession away. As Prime Minister of Australia what I can do is work with local communities through our local members, through our priority employment coordinators, to make a difference to reduce the problem, to reduce the impact, to cushion local communities from the full force of the global economic gale.
The second point I'd like to touch on concerns people smuggling. Last night, President Yudhoyono approved the extradition to Australia of alleged people smuggler Hadi Ahmadi.
This is a major and very welcome development in the fight against people smuggling.
This extradition comes soon after the third prosecution this year of a people smuggler in Perth here on Friday afternoon.
Mr Ahmadi, believed to be a dual Iraqi and Iranian national, is wanted in Australia to face prosecution for a range of extremely serious people smuggling crimes.
Mr Ahmadi is accused of organising four boat arrivals into Australia from Indonesia on 25 March 2001, 22nd of April 2001, 4 August 2001 and 22 August 2001, collectively carrying over 900 unlawful non-citizens to Australia.
Mr Ahmadi was arrested by Indonesian authorities on 29 June 2008 at Australia's request, and has since remained in police detention.
Australia's formal extradition request was presented to Indonesia on 29 July 2008.
Mr Ahmadi's extradition proceedings were heard in the South Jakarta District Court - the Court found that Ahmadi was eligible for extradition to Australia.
The matter then turned to President Yudhoyono to consider whether to extradite Ahmadi to Australia.
President Yudhoyono's decision last night clears the way for Ahmadi's extradition to Australia.
This action further demonstrates the absolute importance of the closest possible cooperation between the Australian and the Indonesian Governments in dealing with the scourge of people smuggling.
Also, effectively prosecuting people smugglers is the most effective way of dealing with the problem of illegal movements of persons around South East Asia and more broadly.
Finally, our approach simply is this  -  tough border protection regime and reinforced also by the professionalism of our police services, our border protection personnel, and our naval and military staff as well.
This is the best and most effective strategy for dealing with the challenges of the future.
Working closely with our regional partners and friends, working effectively to provide proper resourcing and support for our naval assets, our military assets, our police assets and our surveillance assets, and getting on with the business of dealing with this global push of unlawful movements of people from around the world.
Can I say this as I conclude. This approach on the Australian Government's part stands in absolute contrast with the shambles on border protection policy we see from Mr Turnbull and the Liberals.
Mr Turnbull and the Liberals policy on border protection could be summed up, I believe in three words, chaos, confusion, and opportunism.
Chaos, confusion and opportunism. That's what we see from dawn till night with every statement by the Liberal Party on border protection policy.
It's driven by political opportunism. The Government's getting on with the business of making sure that our border protection forces are properly resourced, properly supported and properly engaged with their partners around the region to do their job, which is to maintain this country's border protection, and to do so in a manner consistent with our international legal obligations.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The policy of the Australian Government has been consistent on this and that is consistent with that policy, our naval assets will continue to interdict vessels as appropriate on the high seas.
We've done that in the past, we continue to do that and we continue to deploy all of our military, naval and other surveillance assets in pursuit of that mission and to do so consistent with our international obligations. Nothing has changed on that front.
What we are dealing with are new global factors at work which are pushing a greater number of people out of the Middle East, out of South Asia, out of Sri Lanka, out of Burma, and governments right across the region are having to deal with these additional new push factors.
Our challenge is to make sure that our military, naval and air assets continue to reinforce a strong approach to border protection, a hard line approach to border security and to do so consistent with our international obligations.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Prime Minister (inaudible). Banks are starting to raise their fixed interest rates. Is that an appropriate action given the current economic climate?
PM: I saw some reports of this morning. What I'd say to all Australian consumers is that they should vote with their feet. If they are finding their banks are unacceptably raising interest rates for fixed term deposit - for fixed term loans or fixed interest rate loans, then customers will make up their minds as to what's the best deal for them.
I say again what the Australian Government has done through the provision of bank guarantees is to make it possible for our banks to effectively operate in a very difficult set of global economic circumstances, given the contractions occurring in global financial markets.
Banks therefore have a social and community obligation with the Australian community. But for individual consumers I'd say, if the rate's been jacked up for the future, as I'm advised that it is in the case of a couple of banks, than individual customers should vote with their feet if those arrangements are unacceptable to their family budgeting arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Why are you now saying it's inevitable we'll go into recession given you previously refused to pre-empt official economic forecasts?
PM: Well it's quite plain that we have seen most recently economic data from China, it's quite plain that we have also seen the fact that during the first quarter of 2009, a range of data emerge from various economies around the world which have a direct influence on Australia, that most of that data has been negative. That's the first point.
The second is, the International Monetary Fund is obviously currently analysing and will report again I think later this week on the state of the global economy. Australia is not an island. Australia is directly impacted by global economic factors and the first quarter of 2009. Most of those economic data coming out of those economies which directly affect Australia were negative.
Therefore, as night follows day, it affects Australia. Therefore the global economic recession is making it inevitable that there will be a recession in Australia, and the challenge for framing the Budget is to do as much as possible through continued economic stimulus to cushion Australia from the effect of rising unemployment coming off the back of this global recession.
JOURNALIST: What form will that further economic stimulus take in the Budget and are we likely to see another stimulus package?
PM: We have maintained a consistent strategy of economic stimulus right back to the events of the fourth quarter of 2008. And we have, as consistent by my remarks in the City of Cockburn local jobs forum today, outlined and implemented strategies to support one and a half million jobs in the retail sector through what we have done through payments to pensioners, veterans and carers and others.
Secondly, invest in the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history. In Western Australia, injecting some $2.6 billion worth of additional investment and infrastructure.
And thirdly, getting on with the business of long term infrastructure, rolling out a National Broadband Network.
What I'm saying today is that because the global economic recession means that a recession is inevitable in Australia, unemployment will therefore rise further and, as a result, continued strong economic stimulus will be necessary through the Budget.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you talking more about the chances of Australia falling into recession to detract from the asylum seeker issue?
PM: The International Monetary Fund will be reporting in a few days' time about the state of the global economy, and the state of various economies within it.
Furthermore, if you look at the recent conclusion, obviously of the first quarter of 2009 following on from the negative quarter which was the fourth quarter of 2008, if you have two quarters in succession of negative growth, technically therefore you are moving into recession. That's the technical definition.
If you look at the data that's emerged from all those economies which directly affect Australia, it follows inevitably that this huge impact of global economic forces on Australia is going to have an effect.
And if you look most recently at the China data, while it wasn't falling through the floor and there was some turning or at least arresting of the collapse, the impact on Australia of China's economic performance - given it is our single largest trading partner - is clear.
I believe dealing with forums like this around the country, it's very important to be upfront and direct about the emerging problem of the global recession, its impact on unemployment at the national level and the local level. I'd much rather have a continuing conversation with local communities about that, rather than pretending that things are better than they are.
JOURNALIST: Can I get a quick comment about Richard Pratt, reports that he is gravely ill. How do you see to date his contribution to Australia?
PM: I've seen those reports. I'd rather not comment on that further, until I've had the opportunity to confirm personally with his family his circumstances.
The thing about Mr Pratt is that he and his wife Jeannie have been significant philanthropists over a long period of time. And that's been particularly reflected in the state of Victoria but beyond that as well.
But in terms of Mr Pratt's health, I would not comment on that further until I've had the opportunity to confirm it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you set to release your response to the 2020 findings any time soon?
PM: Yeah, we think it's appropriate to get that up and out there. And the reason is, that it's about a year since we gathered Australians from right across the nation to plan our future, and to do so in a way which we've sought to do here again reflecting the spirit of 2020, with this community in the City of Cockburn today.
What we did a year ago was say, here's the next decade plus, here are 10 big challenges the nation faces, and what therefore are our strategies for making sure that Australia realises its full potential.
What we said is that we would then deliver the outcome from the 2020 Summit by year's end last year. What interrupted that of course was the impact of the global financial and economic crisis.
And as a result therefore, there's been a delay of some three months in concluding that report. But we'll be releasing it very soon. And I say this in conclusion.
Our challenge is dealing with the impact of the recession in the here and now. Also, maintaining fairness in Australia to make sure that we're looking after those who are least able to look after themselves. And thirdly, to make sure we're also laying out a strategy for the long term future as well.
The big challenges on education, the education revolution, on health and hospitals, as well as the future of clean green energy - these remain with us. And they need to be addressed, embraced and planned for and acted on as well.
Our strategy as a government is to move ahead on all these three fronts. It's a necessary course of action for the future.
And I believe I've got to zip because I've got to catch a plane to Esperance.
See you folks.


A year ago, more than 1,000 Australians gathered in Canberra to be part of the Australia 2020 Summit  -  an important event in the Rudd Government's first year in office.
The Summit participants came from across the Australian community to help shape a vision for the nation's future and to explore new ideas and ways to meet the major challenges that lie ahead.
Many others joined in the conversation through local Summits across Australia, a Youth Summit, more than 500 School Summits, and we also received 8,800 submissions.
The Summit generated 962 ideas during an extraordinarily lively, engaged and incisive conversation.
The Government has already acted on many of these ideas, including:
     * Commencing a major review of Australia's Future Tax System;
     * Implementing a broad program of reform of Commonwealth cooperation with the States and Territories;
     * Releasing our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme; and
     * Releasing a major new White Paper on Homelessness.
Tonight, the Government is releasing its response to all 962 ideas.
Not only did the Summit support, influence or cause the Government to re-evaluate a range of existing priorities and commitments, it also proposed a number of practical new ideas.
Tonight, the Australian Government can announce that it will immediately begin work on nine specific ideas from the Summit:
     * A Deployable Civilian Capacity to respond to emergencies in our region;
     * First steps towards an Indigenous Cultural Education and Knowledge Centre;
     * Mentoring in the Workplace to facilitate the passing of knowledge between skilled mature age Australians and business and the community (Golden Gurus);
     * $50 million for research towards the development of a bionic eye;
     * A Prime Minister's Australia Asia Endeavour Awards Scheme to support scholarships for students in Australia and Asia and deepen cultural understanding;
     * A dedicated ABC Children's Channel;
     * A Business and School Connections Roundtable to enhance opportunities for business and schools to partner together to improve educational outcomes;
     * A Skills for the Carbon Challenge initiative to equip workers and businesses with skills for sustainability; and
     * A Vocational Education Broadband Network to build a single post-secondary high speed broadband network, connecting the Australian training system to a similar network to that currently serving universities.
These initiatives reflect the range, strength and quality of ideas emerging from the Summit.
Other ideas will be studied in ongoing policy processes, while some ideas are better taken forward by other groups.
The 2020 process was just the beginning.
The Australian Government is committed to an open style of government that engages the community and welcomes new ideas as we work together to address the challenges of the future.
The Government is undertaking Community Cabinets across Australia and is developing a wide range of community engagement strategies to ensure it remains in contact with the community and continues to be open to new ideas and different points of view.
The Australia 2020 Summit - Government Response is available on the Australia 2020 website.


I said before it's good to be back in this great city, it's good to be back in this great state of Western Australia. In the 15 months or so that I've been Prime Minister this is the seventh time I've visited and for the future you can expect me back on a regular basis every couple of months or so. 
When I come back here and I'm here, I always learn something. It's not just that you feel welcome in a State like this - coming from the great state of Queensland there are degrees of commonality between our two views on life - but it's also this is a genuine place of excitement and dynamism and what I've described as a positive attitude of having a go.
I think in the great debate about future directions in the economy at present, both in this country and abroad, effectively they're divided into two camps. Those who are prepared to sit at the sidelines and carp and complain and describe everything that is going wrong, and those on the other hand who are prepared to get out there and have a go. Have a go at making a difference, have a go at making a decision, have a go at taking those hard continued decisions about continuing to maintain your economy levels, keeping people in a job, wrestling with the difficult challenges which confront you on a daily basis and a weekly basis as you look at your balance sheets.
That's the positive attitude, the constructive attitude, the engaged attitude that I sense every time I cross the Nullarbor and come here. And it hasn't changed since the global economic circumstances have deteriorated. So I congratulate you as representatives of one of the most dynamic business communities in the country, it's a reputation you deserve.
The facts and figures for Western Australia speak for themselves. WA accounted for 36 per cent of goods exports for the Australian economy  -  more than any other state. WA has been so much the economic powerhouse of Australia and I have absolute confidence that that will continue to be the case and this Government, the one that I lead, intend to be your partners in that pursuit of progress. Of course conditions now are tougher in the global economy. Exports are weakening. Unemployment as you know is rising. It's harder for businesses.
Tomorrow, the International Monetary Fund will release revised forecasts for the global economy. This will be the fifth revision to the IMF's forecasts for 2009 since April of last year. Five sets of revisions. That alone highlights the force with which the global financial crisis has knocked the global economy and its uncertain trajectory.
The outlook for the world economy this year is worse almost than any of us has seen in their lifetime. We are in an exceptionally deep and widespread global recession. 28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are already in recession or have experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth in 2008. Seven of Australia's 10 largest trading partners are already in recession.
Today I'd like to spend some time talking to you about four or five challenges we face. Firstly, the key challenges which we the Australian Government confront in framing a national budget in the midst of a global recession.
Secondly, why it is necessary to support economic activity through the agency of Government while the private sector is under stress and difficulty and therefore why it is necessary for governments to engage in temporary deficits and temporary borrowings in order to do so.
Thirdly, to outline our strategy of action: local, national and global to chart a course for this economy through these difficult times which we now confront.
Fourthly, our specific strategy for investment here in Western Australia, and finally what I would describe as a rational basis for hope, optimism and confidence in this State's and this country's economic future.
Global conditions have never played a greater role in the framing of the budget that we now currently confront. Framing the budget in this current context is incredibly tough. Framing the budget in these circumstances has never been framed at a more difficult time. As I have said since the beginning of the global economic storm, Australia is better placed than most other countries as we make our way through this storm. But that doesn't mean we can be immune from such a deep and widespread global slump.
As Glenn Stevens, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, said yesterday and I quote him, “it is very rare for Australia to escape an international downturn and there is no precedent for avoiding one of this size”.
So what is our economic strategy to see Australia through this global crisis and how do we intend to prosecute that in the weeks and months and years that lie ahead?
Let's be clear about the facts. This global economic recession is the worst in 75 years and it has also dragged Australia into recession, and that means higher unemployment, lower government revenues and therefore the toughest Budget to prepare in modern economic history. 
Since the collapse on global financial markets in the second half of last year, the Government has taken strong, early and decisive action through an economic stimulus strategy to support business, to support jobs and to cushion the impact of the global recession on Australia.
That's why a core part of our continuing economic stimulus strategy through the upcoming Budget will be to support business, jobs and confidence - by investing in our nation's future infrastructure, by building the schools of the 21st century and by building long-term infrastructure including a national broadband network. In short, by creating jobs we need for today while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
This global economic recession has also dragged Australia into recession and has also produced the single biggest collapse in government tax revenues in post war Australia. That is why temporary government deficits are necessary and temporary government borrowing necessary as well. Necessary to support businesses and to support jobs until the private sector recovers.
The alternative would be to make the recession worse, throw more people out of work, put greater stress on business, therefore resulting in larger deficits and greater borrowing in terms of Governments.
That is not a responsible economic strategy. The core fact is more than two thirds of the government's temporary deficits and temporary borrowings are exclusively the result of the collapse in government tax revenues brought about by the global recession. Revenues are being hit hard by falling profits, the collapse of capital gains, lower incomes and rising unemployment.
These are basic unalterable facts and that's why we've got to make some tough calls in this year's Budget, which is being ravaged - the economy more broadly - by the impact of the global recession.
Downward revenue revisions have already been published in November's Mid Year Economic, Financial and Fiscal Outlook, and in February's Updated Economic and Fiscal Outlook. In November, those downward revisions in revenue amounted to $40 billion across the forward estimates.
By February, those revisions had risen to $115 billion across the forward estimates. The downward revisions in revenue already announced amount to 63 per cent of the change in next year's Budget outcome since last May. And they make up almost two-thirds of the Government's anticipated borrowing requirements over the forward estimates.
With the further deterioration in the global economy since early February, the revenue outlook and the budget forecasts are now substantially worse than the forecasts released in February. 
In the current unprecedented global conditions, a temporary budget deficit is not an option - it is an inevitability. Every government, every responsible government around the world is being forced into greater levels of temporary borrowing. At the end of last month, the OECD forecast that budget deficits across the OECD will average nearly nine per cent of GDP in the OECD next year and rising.
In this respect it is necessary briefly to touch on the current national political debate over budget policy.
The Leader of the Opposition knows that the Government refusing to engage in temporary but necessary borrowing in the current economic environment would in fact be a recipe for an economic catastrophe in Australia. That is why the Opposition has admitted themselves that they too would also undertake fiscal stimulus and borrowings in the current climate.
It's important to underline some facts here.
In February Mr Turnbull acknowledged that a government led by him would still need to borrow at least $177 billion. At the same time, Mr Turnbull and the Opposition are attempting to criticise this Government's temporary deficit and temporary borrowings. This I would suggest is the very definition of opportunism.
Politics can often be a contest between policy consistency on the one hand and political opportunity on the other. And when it comes to temporary deficit and temporary borrowing I regret to conclude that Mr Turnbull's remarks indicate that he has chosen the opportunistic path.
If Mr Turnbull wants to criticise the temporary, responsible and necessary borrowing by government during a recession, then he should be clear-cut, absolutely clear-cut as to what the alternative strategy is.
Again, the facts are these  -  the collapse in tax revenues and the operation of the automatic stabilisers would result in a budget deficit and borrowings even without a single dollar having been spent on fiscal stimulus.
Therefore, the Opposition Leader needs to explain just how he could deliver fiscal stimulus without undertaking greater borrowings. He needs to explain how he could provide economic stimulus while revenues are collapsing without undertaking further borrowings.
The point I make is this  -  it just doesn't add up, and every mainstream economic commentator knows it doesn't add up.
Our strategy is clear  -  temporary deficits, temporary borrowings are necessary in order to support economic activity in our national economy, including the economy of Western Australia, until such point as the private economy recovers.
This is not a choice, it is a necessity, and it is the right choice under our national economic circumstances at present.
As the Reserve Bank Governor remarked yesterday, macro-economic support for aggregate demand is a condition for economic recovery. Indeed as Mr Stevens said, the role of fiscal policy is more prominent on this occasion than has been the case in many years.
But what is also important, as Governor Stevens noted, is that we articulate also a medium-term path with a budget back towards balance. The Australian Government recognises the importance to confidence of sound public finance and we set out a clear path back to budget surplus.
Our position is that when the economy recovers and grows above trend, government will take action to return the budget to surplus, by first allowing the level of tax receipts to recover naturally as the economy improves, while maintaining the government's commitment to keep taxation as a share of GDP below the 2007-2008 level on average.
And second, to hold real growth in spending to two per cent a year until the budget returns to surplus. These are important fundamental fiscal policy disciplines.
Of course the current collapse in government revenues caused by the global economic crisis, and the need temporarily stimulated the economy will have a temporary impact on government borrowing and debt.
But as the economy recovers, the government will use these future surpluses to repay these temporary borrowings. That is the responsible, prudent and cautious approach to public finance policy and national economic policy given the circumstances we now confront in the midst of a global economic recession.
I said also I've spent some time talking to you today about the government's strategy of global action, national action and local action to confront the crisis which the global financial implosion has presented us with.
When I attended recently the G20 Summit in London, what struck me as I sat with leaders from around the world was a common realisation of all sitting at the table that we were all in this together.
Whether it was the King of Saudi Arabia, the President of capitalist America or the President of communist China  -  all of us around the table not bigger than a few of these tables put together, each speaking with common purpose about a common challenge.
The good news out of London is that governments around that table concluded that they needed to craft a global economic strategy for global economic recovery.
Leaders around the table were enormously seized at what had happened with their predecessors when they met in London in 1933 at a similar conference. In 1933, leaders from so many economies around the world gathered in London in a major international conference to devise a strategy to chart the world out of what was then unfolding as the Global Depression.
The 1933 conference was a spectacular global failure. It was not just a failure of politics, it was a failure of economics, and the consequences there etched in black and white in the economic history texts.
Governments failed to coordinate their actions  -  governments instead resorted to unilateral national actions. They threw up the protectionist barriers around the world and as a consequence, what we saw in '29, '30, '31 and '32 continued, intensified and deepened through the 1930s, culminating in the catastrophic events of 1939.
The good news is that leaders of the G20, seized of that historical precedent, decided to act differently, and decided to act differently in five specific areas.
One  -  coordinated global economic stimulus. Here is a figure: the governments around the world representing those 20 significant economies concluded that they should act together to inject and invest $5 trillion into the global economy. The size of the global GDP is something in the order of $63 trillion. $5 trillion by way of investment by these economies, by these governments, represents a significant difference.
If you were to withdraw that, and if for example you can withdraw the effort currently being injected by the Chinese government in their own domestic stimulus programs there, the roll-on consequences for activity in all our economies would be acute and unemployment would be even higher.
Furthermore, all of those leaders gathered together in London realised the absolute premium attached to coordinated action. One government here, another government there deciding to stimulate their economies is one thing  -  acting together as a further multiplier effect of that on the back of combined monetary policy actions by the central banks across the world has had a significant stimulatory effect.
That's the first thing that global governments agreed upon.
The second is this, and it goes to the absolute heart of the financial crisis which we currently confront, and that is what is happening in terms of the overall health of the balance sheets of the world's leading private financial institutions  -  what is called in the professional literature ‘toxic asset management within the banks of the world', and that's principally the large funds which deliver the biggest slice of global capital funds.
Why is this of relevance to every businessman and woman in this room today? It goes to the heart of the continued delivery of private credit flows to our economy and to businesses within our economy, both large and small.
The fact that so many of our Australian banks have raised their capital from abroad in turn makes us entirely dependent on the health of the world's leading financial institutions.
The core of the problem is this  -  how do you restore the impaired assets, the toxic assets, currently lying on the balance sheets of a number of the world's leading financial institutions to health? And secondly, how do you recapitalise those banks back into normal credit flows? Because it is until that happens, we have a normal restoration of credit flows at reasonable quantity, availability and price, that will continue to be impeded in our overall trajectory of economic recovery.
That is why the Australian government, in partnership with the Brits and others, spent a lot of time going to that London summit preparing a draft international framework for toxic asset management for the major banks around the world.
The good news is the governments of the world signed and agreed on that common approach, and the application of it, both in the United States, the United Kingdom and other national jurisdictions is underway.
Some early signs of the restoration of normal levels of activity are beginning to emerge but there is a long way to go.
But absent coordinated action and policy resolve by governments gathered in London to do so in a coordinated, integrated fashion would I believe to cause all of us to end up just spinning our wheels, waiting for the restoration of normal credit flows.
Now we have a trajectory towards recovery, although the time will still be there for the taking before it has direct effect.
The third concrete action we agreed upon in London was this  -  something which hasn't been on the front page of the local newspaper here, or many newspapers anywhere, but is of fundamental and deep importance, and that is providing enough money, resources and power to the International Monetary Fund to deal with any other systemic financial shocks later this year.
Regrettably, the data emerging from the economies and financial systems in Central and Eastern Europe and other parts of the emerging economy world and the developing world are concerning.
What will be doubly concerning is if you had fundamental implosions in those financial systems is that an absence of resources on the part of the IMF and others to deal effectively and early on those problems as they emerge.
The alternative, absent proper resourcing and power on the part of the IMF, would be this  -  that the current exposure which the major European banks have to their Central and Eastern European counterparts and to the economies of those countries would cause a rebound effect back to the major European banks and onto the rest of the global financial system which would create a second round of toxic effect for the rest of the global economy including Australia.
Everything in the 21st century is connected to everything else, and therefore, us acting together, and Australia played its role, together with other governments, in crafting a reform strategy for the International Monetary Fund. A working group which Australia chaired in the leading up to the G20 summit, was to ensure that one, the IMF had the resources and two, the power and flexibility to act.
And once again, global leaders reached that agreement in London.
A fourth area of outcome  -  the rules governing the financial system. Those of you in this room who are either engaged in the financial services industry or who are customers of the financial services industry would all have different views as to what should be the proper balance of regulations for the future.
Guess what? We're not Robinson Crusoe  -  those debates have been had in every country, in every economy around the world and are being had between governments as well. The challenge is to get the balance right between what was an under-regulated environment in the past, to one which we don't wish to become over-regulated in the future. To preserve enough flexibility, opportunity and capacity for innovation of the financial services industry on the one hand while matching that with proper and prudent management of risk and exposure and systemic difficulty on the other.
What we did in London was agreed on principles to do that and commissioned an expert global body - the Financial Stability Forum, which Australia is on - to craft those new regulations for the financial system for the future.
To get the balance right on future prudential standards, to get the balance right on executive remuneration within the financial services sector so that risk is properly calibrated with reward.
And to get the balance right more broadly on how the financial services sector operates in the future globally, because confidence cannot be fully restored in our economy or anyone else's until the economy and the country and the people at large believe that the rules of the financial system are right for the future.
Finally, an outcome from London was this  -  we agreed in London that governments of the world learned from the lessons of the 1930s and draw a line underneath an outbreak of the rampant protectionism that we have seen in earlier decades.
Protectionism, let off the leash, has a capacity to completely throttle, destroy, strangle and suffocate economic recovery.
We cannot allow that to happen.
In the 1930s that's precisely what they did allow to happen. The good news from London is that through the resolve of that communiqué, building on the resolution we achieved in Washington only four months before, that we resolved as governments leading the economies representing 85 per cent of GDP that any further protectionist measures inconsistent with our WTO obligations would not be contemplated, considered or implemented by any participating governments.
Whether there are going to breaches at the margin of that undertaking, well, time will tell. But what I do know, is that in the absence of that declaration, the absence of that concerted effort and decisions to enable the World Trade Organisation and others to monitor compliance efforts between now and when we next meet as the G20 Summit, this is an enormous step in right direction compared with what the alternative would be. Protectionism would throttle the global economic recovery, it would certainly throttle economic prospects in a great state like Western Australia as well which is so export-led.
My purpose in making these remarks to you about the global course of action is simply to underline that your Government, the Australian Government, has been into this big time with our partners from around the world. Often in ways which are invisible to the domestic debate and policy debate in Australia and understandably so.
But it rests ultimately on an unassailable piece of logic, that unless we are in there with the rest of the world helping to craft a pathway to global economic recovery, our national and locals actions will not add up to a lot, which is why we've been doing it.
As to our national efforts - and I will not speak long on this as you're more familiar with it- but the decisions we took last October to underpin stability in the Australian financial system were fundamental to the continued wellbeing of the Australian economy. Those of you in the financial services sector will understand full well what a near-run thing the events of last October were.
The events following Lehmanns and the implosions on Wall Street and the extraordinary events of September and October last year, had we not in that critical weekend in October acted to provide Government guarantees for the deposits of Australian bank deposits, building societies and credit unions, as well as provide a guarantee for our banks for their inter-bank lending in order to secure their external lines of credit, there would have been a fundamentally different scenario that would have unfolded for Australia following that critical weekend.
No Australian Government in the history of Federation has ever been asked to make either of those decisions. It was a sobering moment. Had we not made those decisions the consequences for the real economy and for the businesses represented in this room, I believe, would have been catastrophic.
The second arm of our national action has been this. Consistent with what I said before, given the contraction that is occurring in the private economy, the Australian Government has stepped up to the plate and engaged in a conscious, deliberate national economic stimulus strategy.
That is why we have invested in providing support for the one and half million Australians who work in the retail sector through the support we have provided through the payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and families. That is why we have stepped up to the plate by investing in the largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. We are injecting some $15 billion, the equivalent of 1.5 per cent of GDP in creating a state of the art 21st century school across the country.
And our objective is this, is to turn every single primary school in this country into a construction site. Some may object to that for noise reasons. I don't object to it for economic reasons because what we're on about is providing opportunities for sparkies, electricians and tradies and everyone else down to the local level in order to provide jobs now to build the infrastructure we need for tomorrow and so too large scale investments in social housing, large scale investments in energy efficiency, large scale investments in our nation building and jobs plan which had this as its fundamental rationale: getting activity in the economy now, some $30 billion worth of direct investment and on top of that creating the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's it in a nutshell.
And beyond that as well, longer term infrastructure of the type which is alive in our announcement of the national broadband network and creating an information superhighway for the 21st century. This will be a project with investments in it of up to $43 billion. This is not a pipe dream. We will start rolling out this network as of July in Tasmania. Jobs now. Economic opportunities now. Creating infrastructure for businesses of the future as well.
Global action, national action but beyond that again local action. One of the reasons I've come to Perth in these last few days has been to spend time with local communities as I did around Fremantle and the City of Cockburn yesterday, speaking to a local jobs forum. Because the human face of all that I've been describing is when people lose their jobs through no fault of their own and their families are put at risk and as a consequence their communities suffer as well. How do we support them? How do we do it right? How do we do it better than we've done in the past? How do we engage the great talents of business and others operating at the local level to make a real difference to people's lives?
It's not just providing additional resources to those who are dealing with genuine hardship cases  -  what St Vincent de Paul do, what the Salvation Army do, what other charities do with emergency payments. That is fundamental, that is necessary, and that needs to be supported as well, particularly at a time when so many of these charities are already under stress because of the contraction of the corporate sponsorship dollar and we the Government are stepping up to the plate on that.
But the other challenge is this. In areas of intensified local unemployment as a consequence of this recession, how do we act effectively from the ground up in local communities through effective partnership with local chambers of commerce, with local unions, with local government and with local church, charitable and community organisations and so forth to make a difference.
The purpose of the local jobs forum that I addressed in the City of Cockburn yesterday which had several hundred local people representing all of the sectors I've just described, was how do we tap into their talent and enthusiasm and ability and ideas on the one hand and how to coordinate that with the levels of stimulus that we the national government are providing as well as what we are doing by way of additional training programs being offered nationally as well.
As I said to that community of Cockburn and I say this to all of you represented here today, this will work on the basis of enthusiasm from the ground up. It will work on the basis of good ideas generated from the community up. It's not for me to mandate from the vast and distant shores of Lake Burley Griffin as to what the solutions the City of Cockburn should be because inevitably we will get it wrong.
What I do know, however, is that local enterprise, local small business working in partnership with local government and the local community sector can come up with some powerful ideas and to make that additional capacity, we have created a $650 million local jobs fund to be, to support the efforts of our priority employment coordinators in each of these priority areas and that's a challenge here as well.
Global action, national action, local action. We put these things together and we've got a powerful opportunity not just to see Australia through this global economic recession but to actually do it infinitely better than would otherwise have been imagined. And that depends on us all putting our shoulders to the wheel against the realisation that we are all in this together.
For Western Australia and I'll conclude on this and I understand I will take some questions. Each of the investments I have described actually hits the ground here in the West as well. For example the Nation Building and Jobs Plan I referred to before - $1.8 billion worth of direct investment from the Australian Government coming here in the months ahead, which would otherwise not be the case.
Similarly it applies to each of the other elements of the stimulus strategy that I've referred to as well. Each and every one of the training programs I referred to as well. Each and every one of the local government infrastructure projects I referred to as well and the fact that our trebling the first home owners boost is out there supporting the residential housing sector in this state as well.
What I have described nationally is hitting the ground here in the West as well and it is important that it does, because my mission as Prime Minister of Australia is to make a difference on the ground here, in every suburb, in every community and in every town and in every city that is bearing the brunt of something which they did not cause; this global economic recession.
So in the weeks and months ahead what we'll be doing is monitoring closely how we are delivering each of those projects on the ground here and we'll be doing so in partnership with the WA Government, we'll be backing large projects here in Western Australia, as we've already done via our investment in the Ord.
Within not a long time of taking office, proposals came to me from the WA Government about what we could do to invest together in the Ord. My response was let's go and have a look to see if it stacks up and hop into it. And we did and we are. Within a few short months you'll have a $195 million investment for us to go partners with the WA State Government on how we can make this work.
Regard that as a template of how we intend to do business with the rest of the State. Our job is to make a difference and we intend to so in partnership with all of you here.
Lastly if I could comment on confidence and I'd like to conclude by reflecting on the comments also made by the Governor of the Reserve Bank in his remarks yesterday.
The financial year ahead is obviously a difficult one, it is going to be tough for businesses and tough for people seeking to hold on to their jobs. But let us focus also on the fact that our glass is more than half full. Let us not become preoccupied with focusing on the glass being half empty.
When we realise the collective strengths we have as an economy, when we realise the great strengths that you have here in the Western Australiam economy, let us be confident about how we can see this national economy and State economy through this crisis. And the fresh and new opportunities which it will generate.
We believe there are strong grounds for confidence in Australia's economic future and again I underline what the Governor said yesterday and I quote him: “Australia's genuine long-term economic prospects remain good, and there remain good grounds to think that we will continue to weather the storm better than most.”
The Governor then went on to make reference to six reasons as to why in this global recession Australia still offers a more attractive proposition to international capital than most other nations. First he said, and we take this for granted, we enjoy an assured political stability. And I would remind those in this room that that is not necessarily the case in many countries and many economies where this global recession does its work and (inaudible).
Second, the Government is free of the difficult governance and exit strategy matters that will arise in other nations that have given direct financial support to banks or taken ownership stakes. Let us remind ourselves of the fact that worldwide today there are eleven remaining double A class rated banks, four of those banks worldwide are Australian banks. Five of them are Canadian and it doesn't leave many besides.
This is a powerful selling point as you track around the world and I sat down with the executive of the New York Stock Exchange for lunch recently in New York and with a number of major listed companies represented. That fundamental fact together with our prudent approach to public financial management speaks volumes in terms of the global economy's confidence in what we are doing here in Australia.
Third, our public finances remain in very sound shape, with modest debt levels and a medium-term path for the budget back towards balance. Fourth, we have sensible macroeconomic and microeconomic policy frameworks. Fifth, we remain open for trade and investment. Sixth, we enjoy strong links with the Asian region, which enjoys the most dynamic growth potential in the world.
These are the six strengths referred to by the Governor in his remarks yesterday. He is right to refer to those strengths, they are enduring and fundamental strengths of this economy.
As we go forward - you in the West, ourselves nationally - let us be mindful therefore of this glass being more than half full. Let us also be mindful that the Government which you have elected nationally is engaged in economic stimulus strategy and a wider economic strategy to charter a course for Australia through this economic crisis.
We are resolved so to do that, we look forward to doing so in partnership with you, the women and men of the business community of Western Australia and your colleagues around the nation. I thank you for your attention.


PM: It's great to be in this beautiful part of Perth with Sharryn Jackson the local member, Anthony Albanese the Minister for Infrastructure and Local Government as well as the Mayor of the City of Swan. 
This is about practical action we take on the ground to build the infrastructure for tomorrow and to create jobs for today. That's why we're here. This is practical action at work. Dealing with the challenges of the global economic recession, dealing with the challenges created with the impact of this recession on Australia and acting locally to make a difference. Jobs today and creating the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Today what we're announcing is a $2.4 million funding contribution to this 15 hectare Swan River Regional Park development, a project to create a new, significant recreational facility in Perth's east. Importantly this project is the first project we are launching nationally out of the $800 million community infrastructure program that we announced earlier this year. Projects like this in this beautiful part of Perth, we intend to announce, release and get the action going on the ground right across Australia in the days and weeks ahead. And it's all part of doing two things, acting locally to build jobs now and create the facilities and the infrastructure we need for our communities for the future.
If you look to the detail of this proposal it's fantastic. This beautiful recreational reserve and the spirit behind it, backed by our local member and by the city council is how do we open this up and make it even better for the local community. A huge tract of walkways which is going to be constructed involving jobs and work for our local people as well, as well as some of the restoration work which is occurring here with local lagoons off the actual Swan River itself.
This is the sort of project which local communities want. It's evidence of what we do as a Government acting in partnership with local government across the country. And we intend to do more of this across Australia, across West Australia and across of course the city of Perth. To make a difference locally, create jobs locally and build the infrastructure that we need for tomorrow. Albo? I might ask you to make some remarks as well.
ALBANESE: Yeah thank you Prime Minister, it's good to be here with you and with Sharryn Jackson and with the Mayor who I met with last night, along with a number of other meetings with local government representatives I've had here in Perth during this visit.
This $800 million community infrastructure program has three objectives; creating local jobs, stimulating local economies in the short term and medium term, but also in the long term providing long lasting benefits for communities. And there is no better example of it than this project just here.
We have a view that local capital works is an excellent way to ensure that we stimulate local economies as part of the cushion against the global recession and that's why we're partnering with local government. Previously local government was regarded as something that was not engaged with the Commonwealth. Last year we brought every Mayor in the country to Canberra for the first meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government to start the new partnership between the national government and local government. And we'll continue to do that.
The first phase of the community infrastructure program was the $250 million component where funding went to each of Australia's 565 local government areas in proportion to their size according to the local government funding formula. That has produced approval for some 3,600 projects, that's 3,600 community infrastructure projects on the ground where people are being employed, where local economies are being stimulated and where long lasting benefit is being created for local communities.
This is the first announcement of the strategic projects section, $550 million. Where projects had to be, each council could put forward a single project of value above $2 million. We've gone through a rigorous assessment process and cabinet has now approved a list of projects and those projects will be announced right around the country and they'll be in proportion to the entire country.
Previously we saw with the former Government's regional partnerships program, which was about $70 million, we saw just 10 Coalition electorates get two thirds of the funding. That is not Labor's approach. Labor's approach is to have a rigorous assessment and to provide funding based upon need so electorates right around the nation will benefit through a number of these projects being rolled out and that will be good for jobs in these local communities. This project here is a good example of one which we can see is supporting these local jobs being created here but one which will have that long-lasting benefit for the community.
The projects which have been approved are across a range of areas, particularly sporting facilities, recreational facilities, community centres, libraries, all of these projects will be given funding as a result of the $800 million community infrastructure program. One of course which was voted against by the Opposition in the parliament when the Rudd Government's economic jobs plan and economic stimulus plan went forward to the parliament earlier this year. But we will roll out these projects, I believe they will be well received by local government. Because they've been selected by local government there is rigour in them. There is no project here that are for private profit, these are all projects selected by the elected local representatives of the community - put forward, gone through a rigorous process and one which I think will be of long-lasting benefit for the nation.
PM: Just before I take your questions I'll just add one or two other things about the release overnight of the IMF Report. The IMF Report paints a very bleak outlook for the global economy and puts beyond doubt that this is the toughest budget in our lifetime to frame. According to the IMF Report out today, advanced economies are expected to shrink by an unprecedented 3.8 per cent in 2009. This is the fifth downgrade in global growth from the International Monetary Fund in just over six months. Five downgrades in global growth in just over six months is an ominous sign of the depth and complexity of the severe global recession we all face.
As the IMF itself has said, by any measure this downturn represents by far the deepest global recession since the Great Depression. The International Monetary Fund has confirmed that this global recession is the deepest recession the world has seen since the Great Depression.
2009 therefore will be a tough year for Australia, a tough year for framing our Budget for Australia as well. Some of our key trading partners have far worse recessions projected for 2009. In the European area the economies are forecast to contract by a massive 4.2 per cent, in the United Kingdom by 4.1 per cent and Japan by a massive 6.2 per cent. These are stunningly disturbing figures. The IMF's bleak assessment presents the most challenging global economic backdrop to the framing of an Australian budget in recent memory.
The deepening global recession will have severe consequences for our Budget and our forecasts for growth, for unemployment and for taxation revenues. We are in the deepest global recession since the Great Depression and we are at the cusp of the longest and deepest global recession of our lifetimes.
One other thing is this, this is a difficult time for Australia but the forecasts for growth for our economy for the year ahead are nearly three times better than the forecast growth for all other advanced economies together. And four times better than what is projected for Japan.
One of the factors at work here for Australia has been our unapologetic investment in nation building and infrastructure for the future to cushion Australia from the global recession which is unfolding. To make that possible, to make the investment in nation building and jobs that we have done, of course the Government has had to engage in temporary borrowing and temporary deficit. That is the responsible course of action embraced by this Government and governments right around the world.
However, at times like this is when you do see some of the shonkiest, snake-oil arguments come out about why governments shouldn't borrow temporarily and shouldn't engage in temporary deficits in order to support jobs and investment when the private sector is in retreat. Unfortunately, Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey have become the ‘dodgy brothers' of Australian politics. On the one hand attacking the Australian Government for temporarily borrowing to support infrastructure and jobs but when pressed themselves admit that they would borrow $170 billion themselves. This is fundamentally inconsistent.
I would simply say to you all that this Government is determined to continue to implement our strategy for the future, we believe we've got the balance right, we will continue to implement that strategy with one objective - to cushion the blow from this global economic recession across Australia and on communities like this.
I conclude with this. As the Minister has just said, what we've just launched here today, this $2.4 million investment, one project among $800 million worth of community infrastructure projects, we will now roll out across the country.
This project was voted down by the Liberal Party and the National Party in the Australian Parliament. And every one of the other projects as well.
We're in the practical business of rolling up our sleeves and making a difference with our friends in local government.
The alternative is simply to sit back and to do nothing, and to carp hypocritically from the sidelines.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Did the latest IMF report give you a better idea of just how long or how deep this Australian recession could be?
PM: The stark conclusion by the IMF is contained in this quote, and it is a quote of historic importance.
The International Monetary Fund says today and I quote  -  By any measure, by any measure, this downturn represents by far the deepest global recession since the Great Depression.
Those are words not used lightly by the International Monetary Fund. It means that we are in the midst of the deepest global recession in three quarters of a century. It's therefore going to take time to chart our strategy to see Australia out.
But against the performance projections for the other advanced economies, Australia is doing nearly three times better than the rest of the advanced economies together. And in part, that is because we've had our sleeves rolled up with early, decisive, strong action to invest in economic stimulus across the country, building jobs today, but creating the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: Will you be winding up the first home owner's grant by July?
PM: Well as I said in a community gathering last night, we should all underline the fact that all good things at some stage come to an end.
We embraced the trebling of the first home owners grant, what we call a First Home Owners Boost, to up to $21,000 for one reason alone. And that is to provide a shot in the arm to the building industry across the nation and here in Western Australia, in order to make a difference.
And in terms of the difference that we have made, it's significant. I was looking at some figures from this morning in Western Australia itself. 4,205 recipients of the First Home Owners Boost in WA in just four months.
And that means $62.5 million delivered here in WA to first home owners. What are we trying to do?
Give a helping hand on the way through, add to confidence in the economy, and on top of that boost jobs for our tradies right around the states.
As I said, we've been very clear in our announcements about how long this program would last. And as I said before, all good things do come to an end.
JOURNALIST: Is the Government considering means testing the 30 per cent private health insurance rebate?
PM: You know, there is the usual blizzard of pre-election, it's not pre-election, pre-Budget speculation. And there's just a blizzard of it.
And guess what? It happens every year. You know it happened to our predecessors as well. And consistent with what Mr Howard and Mr Costello said time in, time out, I will not be engaging in pre-Budget speculation.
JOURNALIST: Are we going to hit eight per cent unemployment?
PM: What we've said consistently is that based on the emerging tale of global economic doom, it follows that Australia will be affected and that our forecast unemployment will be higher.
The impact on our taxation revenues as a result of that will be even more significant. These things follow from lower economic growth.
And what you see in the IMF report is a clear statement of what's going to happen with global economic growth, their forecast for growth in advanced economies including Australia, and the roll-on consequences for that which means higher unemployment than forecast because of the global economic recession, and significantly, lower taxation revenues as a result.
JOURNALIST: Do you think unemployment won't reach double figures this year or next year?
PM: We have said consistently that the unemployment figures will go higher, and our mission in government through practical projects like this and the blokes I've just met up here, is to make a difference.
I would rather be here on the banks of the Swan River, investing $2.4 million to make sure that these blokes have a job in the year ahead.
That's the difference. And I intend to make a difference like that in local government areas right across Australia. I want to make a difference in the local school up the road here.
That school up the road, whether it's a secondary school or a primary school, is going to get a direct injection of funds from the biggest school modernisation program that Australia has ever seen.
Each of these things is designed to provide opportunities and jobs for tradies, for sparkies, for electricians, for plumbers, and to in turn inject that money back into local communities.
I cannot stop this global economic recession. What I can do, through a continued strategy of economic stimulus to build the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, is reduce its impact and to boost jobs.
JOURNALIST: Asylum seekers picked up yesterday are believed to have originated from Sri Lanka. Given the recent turmoil in the past day or so, are you concerned that more might be coming?
PM: Clearly we have a global spike in people smuggling and therefore that is why Australia is on high alert concerning further boat arrivals.
In terms of specific global factors in Sri Lanka, it is clear that with the intensity of the civil war in Sri Lanka, that you are seeing push factors at work as well.
Push factors in the Middle East. Push factors still through the war in Afghanistan. Push factors through the civil war in Sri Lanka. As well as other disturbances in wider south east Asia. Adding to that, the impact of global economic factors as well.
This has been the focus of discussions I have had in recent days with the President of Indonesia. A day or so ago with the President of Sri Lanka. And of course, with the Prime Minister of Malaysia as well.
This is a global spike in people smuggling. Reinforced by global factors which I note the Liberal Party say are driving this as well. And we therefore as a response must deploy every necessary asset, every necessary naval asset, air asset, surveillance asset, as well as our Customs and Border Protection authorities to meet the challenge as it unfolds.
JOURNALIST: You must be concerned Prime Minister that a boat that was tailed for that long can get to WA's oil and gas fields?
PM: Well can I say that our naval and maritime surveillance authorities are doing a first-class job. They are out there, making interdictions, and doing their job enormously effectively on the way through.
Look at the map and see how vast this ocean expanse is. And we have our men and women in uniform, and our staff and our surveillance authorities, our intelligence agencies, as well as those working for Border Protection Command, doing a highly professional task.
Surveilling vessel, interdicting them, doing their job. And I'm proud of what they're doing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well the operational challenge for our surveillance authorities differs with every vessel. That's just the bottom line.
The key thing is that the vessel is interdicted. They've done their job. But let's be realistic. As the Immigration Minister has said in recent days, there is a global spike in people smuggling activity. And on top of that, we have therefore real new challenges emerging. That's a fact confronting us, confronting Indonesia, confronting Malaysia, confronting countries across the world.
Our challenge is to marshal all of our resources as effectively as possible to make a difference.
And folks, I have got to zip.
Thank you very much.


The Rudd Government today announced $2.4 million funding for the 15-hectare Swan River regional park development  -  a project to create a significant regional facility in Perth's east.
The funding is part of the Government's $800 million Community Infrastructure Program  -  the largest one-off investment in local infrastructure in Australia's history.
Managed by the City of Swan, the Swan Riverside regional park project will create jobs and provide a direct stimulus to the local economy.
The Rudd Government is supporting jobs and stimulating local economies during the global recession by investing in the construction of important community infrastructure.
Projects like this will also deliver lasting benefits to the local community.
The $7.3 million Regional Park project will deliver a great environment with historical and cultural significance for both the Swan region and the entire state of Western Australia.
The Park will become a magnet for tourism, recreational, social and cultural activity.
The regional park will include:
     * An all-abilities eco-cultural discovery play space for families and children;
     * Dual-use paths to connect the park to the Swan Valley tourism precinct;
     * Creation of the Blackadder Creek Wetland to reduce salt-water incursion into the area, which will help to improve the health of the site.
Local councils and shires across Australia submitted more than 3,600 community projects for funding under the Community Infrastructure Program.


PM: Today our thoughts are with the Pratt family at this difficult time.
Dick Pratt is a great supporter of the General Sir John Monash Foundation and it's just one example of his generosity in helping younger generations fulfil their potential.
I would also like to acknowledge today the presence of Dame Elisabeth Murdoch  -  another great supporter of programs to help young people develop their talents, including through the Monash Foundation.
Can I further acknowledge the great work of the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce in hosting today's function, in supporting the relationship between Australia and Israel, and enabling me to confirm again publicly before you all what I have said throughout my political career, that I am a lifelong friend of the state of Israel.
On the question of Israel, Australia has made absolutely clear its determination not to participate in the Durban Review Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in Geneva.
The Durban Review Conference should have been an occasion for the world to unite against racism in all its forms. Australia has worked with a range of countries in Geneva in weeks leading up to the conference, promoting an acceptable outcome document from the review conference.
Regrettably it became clear that that was not the resolve of other states participating in the Geneva conference. Some other states. And instead, the conference was heading in the reverse direction.
Australia cannot support and will not support a document which reaffirms the 2001 Durban Declaration and Program of Action. That 2001 declaration singled out Israel.
Inflammatory remarks of President Ahmadinejad of Iran at the conference are unacceptable and underline the Australian Government's decision not to attend the Durban Conference.
The Australian Government condemns the continued campaign of anti-Semitism on behalf of the Government of Iran.
Today, ladies and gentlemen, we gather to honour a great Australian.
Today we honour arguably the greatest Australian.
And it is good that we honour a man who never held political office but who across the generations has inspired the nation.
General Sir John Monash was a man whose view of the world still holds true today.
His values, his passion for education, his passion for excellence, his passion for nation building.
And in doing so, he brought to bear the great qualities of his Jewish heritage  -  qualities that across generations have helped build the Australian nation.
Every Anzac Day, the nation pauses to reflect on the Anzac spirit  -  -  on the courage of the men who faced the most terrible odds at Gallipoli.
But Gallipoli was only part of the Australian battle experience during the Great War.
The heroism of Australian troops in France and the killing fields of Flanders are of equal part and equal measure in the proud military history of the Australian nation.
Monash was a Renaissance man of commanding intellect, an engineer by training who could discuss the intricacies of a Beethoven symphony in as much detail as he could describe Napoleon's battle strategy at Austerlitz.
In fact, he saw the two as close analogies.
He described a modern battle plan as “a score for an orchestral composition” where every instrument had to play its part.
Monash was also an innovator.
As the historian Michael McKernan observed:
“When we think about war, we think about ordinary blokes doing extraordinary things. We don't think about leadership. We don't think about creativity. We don't think about genius yet Monash was all that and more.”
John Monash's approach to the repatriation of some 160,000 Australian troops in the first nine months after the First World War ended was a show of determined pragmatism alongside the genuine care for the wellbeing of his men.
And it was underscored by his lifelong belief in the power of education.
The AIF Education Scheme was possibly one of his greatest achievements.
In it, Monash stressed the need to elevate the troops' dedication to co-operative citizenship and national aims.
Troops took to the scheme with alacrity and returned home to Australia with new knowledge, and a purpose and a plan for life.
We have with us today Katherine Daniell who received a Monash Award in 2005.
Katherine's great grandfather served under Monash.
In a letter home to his parents on September 19, 1918, Edward, her grandfather, described Monash as a grand fellow.
He saw Monash as less a professional soldier and more a shrewd, keen, compassionate engineer who realised how men should be treated.
To quote her grandfather and with Katherine's blessing, here is the letter:
“So if we are out for the winter resting, his idea [that's Monash's idea] is not to drill and drill and drill us again; no  -  he says, give men an education, give them a fresh outlook and they will be keener soldiers.”
There is great wisdom in Monash's leadership and I believe this to be a reflection of true leadership.
The General Sir John Monash Awards, and the extraordinary young Australians who have won them in the past, are helping to keep the name and legacy of Monash and his men alive.
These uniquely Australian awards are a great boost to some of our best and our brightest.
Katie, Rebecca, Tim  -  I congratulate you on your 2009 awards and know you will do the memory of General Sir John Monash proud.
You are part of an alumni that we hope will provide leaders for the nation for the coming decades.
You have been chosen because you are widely involved in contributing to many cultural, sporting and community spheres of Australian life as well.
Each one of you has passion, has energy, has vision, and the desire to work with others to change lives for the better.
That's why I am announcing today that the Australian Government is committing $720,000 to this Foundation.
This will provide four of Australia's brightest and best young people with the opportunity to study at any one of the world's best universities for three years starting in 2010.
This will enable the Foundation to offer a total of eight awards next year.
These are prestigious, national scholarships for our brightest and our best, and we should as a nation be proud of them.
But there is a catch  -  each person who we honour with such a scholarship, we also expect to contribute mightily to the nation. No pressure to those of you in the room. We'll be watching. We'll be monitoring. We'll be measuring.
Monash would have expected nothing less. With you, we support, we encourage and we nurture and expect the highest contribution back to the nation.
I encourage you all to support the General Sir John Monash Foundation because in doing so you are supporting the leaders of tomorrow.
Developing the talents of the younger generations is a task for the whole community.
When we think back to the war in which Monash led, we can only wonder how many future Prime Ministers, doctors, lawyers, writers, Nobel Prize-winning scientists, architects, teachers, sportsmen, who were cut down in their prime  -  a war that left more than 61,000 of our fellow Australians dead.
When I sit in the MCG I often reflect on that great stadium full at capacity  -  100,000 souls gathered. 100,000. The same number of all Australians who have made the sacrifice, the supreme sacrifice in all wars. A haunting thought.
Lest we forget.
Ladies and gentlemen, we confront challenges of a different type today. Those of the world economic recession.
And some of the virtues and values that Australians have demonstrated in times of great duress in the past will be called forth again.
The International Monetary Fund has reminded us in recent days that we confront now the worst global recession since the Great Depression three-quarters of a century ago.
These are stark and difficult times. We must face up to the fact that this is the reality that all countries, all economies face now.
The challenge for us all is what strategy we shall embrace in dealing with it. And to chart a strategy to see not just Australia through, but to see the global economy through as well.
What this Australian Government is doing is engaging in the actions  -  globally, nationally and locally  -  to make a difference - in order to provide for us a basis for optimism, hope and confidence to see Australia through.
There is no point in simply sitting down and doing nothing. There is no point in simply sitting down and saying there is nothing to be done. There is every point in galvanising the energies and intelligence and resources of the nation to make a difference.
I cannot stand before you as Prime Minister of Australia and say I can stop a global economic recession from washing over this nation's shores.
What I can tell you as Prime Minister of Australia is that we can act globally, nationally and locally to reduce the impact of that recession. To cushion the impact of that recession, in order to save as many jobs as possible and for those who lose their jobs, to provide training opportunities for the future, when the economy recovers and their skills will once again (inaudible) by businesses in full recovery mode.
That is the strategy upon which we are embarked. A strategy which seeks to provide as many jobs and training opportunities now, and through that also, building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Our global action is as follows. Recently you saw that I attended the G20 in London. A gathering of the heads of government from the 20 largest economies in the world.
History weighed heavily on our minds. As some of you who attended a function I addressed at the Exhibition Building here in Melbourne last night at the Committee For Melbourne, I said in London as did many of my colleagues, that when global leaders gathered last in London for a conference of such significance, was in 1933.
66 nations from around the world gathered in London on that occasion to fashion their response to the global Depression. They failed.
That conference erupted in acrimony, and as a result protectionist measures adopted by each nation's state, one against the other, compounded the length, severity and debt of what was then the unfolding of the Global Depression throughout the 1930s, culminating in the catastrophic events of 1939.
The resolve in London was to learn from history and to act in a different direction. And what we did in London was five key things.
One, agree on a program of global economic stimulus. $5 trillion worth of investment in the global economy, an economy which equals $63 trillion in total global GDP each year. A significant difference in terms of the number of jobs that we save through our activities as opposed to being lost.
Second, we agreed on an international framework of toxic asset management in the world's most significant private financial institutions. The truth is, as so many of you know in this room here tonight, is that until we see a restoration of normal private credit flows in the global economy, we are simply providing stimulus in the interim for that recovery in the private economy, through private credit flows to occur.
But until toxic assets or impaired assets are effectively dealt with by the world's largest banks and those banks are in turn recapitalised, then our recovery will be delayed.
What was agreed in London was an international framework for doing that. And for the fruits of that endeavour, and the separate and related actions by national governments in the United States, the United Kingdom and elsewhere, to restore their banks to health is beginning to show signs of effect and recovery.
The third thing we agreed in London is this. To resource and empower the International Monetary Fund to act in the event of significant implosions in the economies of Central and Eastern Europe and other parts of the emerging economic world and the developing economy.
The reason for that is that absent the IMF's ability to step into the breach, with sufficient resources and sufficient policy flexibility so to do, the possibility of those economies in turn to default, and or the implosion of individual significant financial institutions in Central and Eastern Europe, reverberate back on the major banks of Europe and the rest of the world, and create a second round effect across the global economy, is indeed significant.
Therefore, for markets to have confidence that the global community is prepared to act early, decisively and effectively through the International Monetary Fund required us to act.
And we did in London. Agreement was reached on providing the IMF with $1 trillion worth of resources and the policy flexibility to intervene should that become necessary.
Australia, in this and on the earlier matter I mentioned concerning toxic assets management, was active in fashioning the (inaudible) report to the G20 London Summit meetings for other to agree.
Fourth, we agreed that we would establish new rules in the global financial system, to get the balance right between regulation and creativity, enterprise and innovation. And we've empowered the Financial Stability Forum, now the Financial Stability Board made up of the central bankers of the G20 economies and those which advise them, to fashion those rules for our subsequent agreement at the upcoming Summit which will be held later this year.
Five and most critically, the leaders of the world, mindful acutely of the lessons from the 1930s drew a line against protectionism. What we did in London was agree that we would take no national protectionist measures inconsistent with our obligations under the World Trade Organisation and we would extend that commitment out for further eighteen months.
This is necessary, coordinated, global action to prevent an outbreak of protectionism which would compound the global recession and delay the global economic recovery.
So my message to you here today in Melbourne is that these actions taken globally in which your government of Australia is an active and direct participant through the G20 Summit in London provided one of the key building blocks to chart a pathway to economic recovery for the nation and for the world.
Secondly I just referred to national action. The actions that we have taken last October to stabilise Australian financial markets have been fundamental to ensure the continued viable operation of the Australian economy and the continued flow of credit.
Our decision taken on October 12 last year in a difficult and dark weekend for many to provide a government sovereign guarantee for deposits in Australian deposit taking institutions and to provide a further sovereign guarantee for inter-bank lending in Australian financial institutions was fundamental to maintaining stability and confidence in the Australian financial system.
Had we not done so I fear what the consequences would have been. This is the first time in the history of the Commonwealth that any Australian Government has had to act in this direction. We did so and did so without apology. It was necessary to maintain confidence.
I report to you today that of the eleven remaining double A plus rated banks in the world today, four of them are Australian. Five are them are Canadian and that doesn't leave many besides. The stability of our own financial markets has been fundamental to the Government's strategy to chart Australia through this difficult period of recession.
That is one part of our national strategy, the other part is this: how do we act effectively to inject stimulus, growth and confidence into the economy while the private sector is in retreat. We have acted early, decisively and effectively by implementing an unapologetic national economic stimulus strategy to act in a counter-cyclical fashion against the retreat in activity evidenced in the private sector. It's the right and normal thing to do. Governments around the world are doing this as well. Governments represented by the G20 are doing it as well.
When you look at that figure of five trillion dollars being injected into the global economy, it's because all of us are acting in the same direction to provide additional support for jobs, activity and growth at a time of national economic duress.
For us we have invested unapologetically in providing stimulus through payments to pensioners and carers and veterans and to other families because we are entirely mindful that one and a half million Australians are out there working in the retail sector. (inaudible) and trust, the figure for Australian retail sales for the end of last year and early this year compared to what has occurred in many other developed economies.
Secondly we've invested also in medium term stimulus with the largest single school modernisation program this country has ever seen. $15 billion worth of investment turning every primary school in the country into a construction site. Rolling that out early and fast to provide activity for tradies, for apprentices, for those working as electricians and plumbers in order to make a difference.
Also, long term infrastructure. Our decision to invest up to $43 billion in partnership with the private sector in a national broadband network. The purpose in all these things is as follows: to provide jobs and opportunities now as well as building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's the idea, that's the strategy, that's what we're doing.
If you were to aggregate these measures in terms of the impact on this economy in Victoria as I said to the gathering at the exhibition building last night, our aggregate investment through economic stimulus is putting into this Victorian economy an additional $8.3 billion now. That is the equivalent of three percent of gross state product in this economy.
These are not nominal measures, these are not rhetorical measures, these are real measures and they are flowing out into the real economy because we take our responsibility deeply and profoundly, in this environment, in this virtually unprecedented environment, to make a difference on the ground.
Finally, we cannot allow this global economic recession to distract us from long term challenges as well, dealing with how we roll out the infrastructure we need for the twenty-first century, hence high speed broadband.
Rolling out our program for the education revolution so that we have the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce for the twenty-first century. Rolling out our long term reform program for health and hospitals. Rolling out that long term reform program for acting decisively and effectively and intelligently on climate change.
Our reform program also for closing the gap with Indigenous Australians and also the long term challenge which is how do we prepare the nation for its defence and security needs for the twenty-first century as well.
As we prepare for the security challenge of the twenty-first century, the Government in recent days has been engaged in the finalisation of the Defence White Paper for the future. The first responsibility of any Government is to provide for the national security of Australia, but for this Australian Government there is no higher priority than the national security of our country.
Last December I announced the first National Security Statement to the parliament of Australia which for the first time sought to integrate the range of threats we face, the range of assets we must deploy in response to those threats.
I also announced for the first time the appointment of Australia's first national security adviser, to integrate all dimensions of national security policy from cyber security, counter-terrorism, border protection, entity security to classical defence.
The truth is our national security assets are [inaudible] increasingly integrated strategy and each of our agencies is responding well to the challenge. Our defence force lies at the heart of our national security framework, that is why we have invested a great deal of time and effort in developing the 2009 Defence White Paper that will be released soon.
The delivery of a White Paper at this time is acutely challenging as we work to defend ourselves from the global economic storm. It is the most difficult environment to frame the Australian budget in modern economic history. It is also the most difficult environment to frame our long term defence planning in modern economic history as well.
Nevertheless the Government will not resile even in the difficult times from the requirement for long term coherence of our defence planning for the long term security of our nation. This is core business for government. That is why we have forged ahead in our preparation of the Defence White Paper because national security needs do not disappear because of the global recession. If anything those needs become more acute.
The Government's ambition is to develop a far-reaching and comprehensive plan that will deliver an effective defence force for the next twenty to thirty years.
Much has happened since the last White Paper in 2000. In order to meet the new challenges of the 21st century, a new White Paper is essential. The security environment is less certain, more dynamic and requires us to prepare for a greater range of contingencies.
Since the last White Paper we have seen the growth of transnational terrorism and its effects in New York, London, Madrid, Bali, Jakarta and Mumbai. The list is far too long. We need to ensure that Afghanistan does not once again become a safe haven for terrorists, and that Pakistan remains a stable democratic state and does not itself become a safe haven for terrorists.
We have seen the global rise of illegal immigration because of a range of global security and economic factors: from instability in the Middle East, the continuing war in Afghanistan and civil strife in Sri Lanka.
We have seen changes in the distribution of global power  -  in particular the rise of China and India in economic influence, political influence, foreign policy influence and strategic influence in the Asia-Pacific region, across the Pacific and Indian Oceans. We have seen the growing nuclear ambitions of states such as North Korea and Iran  -  ambitions that introduce an increased level of risk within our own region.
There is also the wider risk of continued weapons of mass destruction proliferation in general and nuclear weapons proliferation in particular. Stability in our immediate neighbourhood also requires our ongoing attention on the political, economic and environmental fragility of micro-states.
There are also growing threats of cyber-security and cyber-warfare confronting Australia and our allies. Furthermore, we are witnessing the still unfolding impact of the global financial crisis  -  its influence on the region  -  in terms of economic, social, political and military stability  -  and will bear watching closely.
So it is in this context that we need to examine what our future strategic environment will look like, what kind of forces we will need to operate within it and we face a range of future challenges which must be dealt with. Terrorism will continue to remain a threat well into the future  -  terrorists will seek to do us harm and employ whatever means at their disposal and therefore create a real challenge for our intelligence, police and allied security assets, all of whom must remain vigilant and properly resourced.
Border protection will demand the effective deployment of whole-of-government assets  -  including military assets  -  to meet this evolving global threat. Conventional military capabilities will become more sophisticated as the Asia-Pacific region becomes more prosperous  -  weapons and platforms will be more effective.
The potential proliferation of WMD and ballistic missile technology is a threat to us, our region, and our allies. New kinds of threats, such as cyber and space-based threats, are likely to become more prevalent  -  changing the way we need to think about preparing and protecting our forces.
Increasing security risks associated with climate change, resource security and energy security are likely to exacerbate existing problems in developing states. Many countries in our immediate region will be especially vulnerable to rising sea levels, droughts and reduced access to food and energy. Natural disasters, compounded in some cases by the impact of climate change, also pose an increasing demand on our defence and wider national security assets.
Intra-state conflict will be an enduring feature of the future strategic environment  -  we will need to be prepared to operate in a whole-of-government context to integrate our security objectives with a broader political strategy. And we of course can never discount, never discount the possibility of major wars between states. And all of these trends of course occur, and will intersect, in an increasingly interconnected world.
The advantages of globalisation and instant communication will also provide great benefit but also produce additional risks. Events on one side of the world are not self-contained  -  oftentimes their impact and influence is immediate and far-reaching. And the convergence of multiple trends  -  such as population movements, demographic change, global public health risks and environmental pressures  -  will further complicate our future security environment.
Consequently the Australian Defence Force and our wider national security assets and agencies will be required to undertake a diverse range of tasks in a complex environment where the only certainty is change.
But in executing all these tasks, Australia will remain anchored in our alliance with the United States  -  an alliance forged during the last World War, under President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Curtin; an alliance that has prospered under 13 US Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Republican and Democrat, Labor and Liberal. An alliance that will continue as the bedrock of Australia's national security for the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are the challenges we face. They are hard challenges, they are difficult challenges but these are challenges to which the Government will rise in its response to the Australian Defence White Paper and articulate our detailed strategic response to it.
We'll be faced with challenges concerning the remediation of our existing defence assets, plugging the gap which already exists in the defence force that we've inherited from our predecessors as well as building the defence force we need for 2030. That's the challenge which lies ahead of us, a difficult challenge but one which is necessary to provide fundamentally the long term security of this nation.
Of course the strategic environment we face will not be static. Every five years we propose to review and refine the assessments in the 2009 White Paper and make any necessary changes to the force structure. But what we have in the 2009 Defence White Paper provides a long-term plan for Defence capability and capacity to promote a secure Australia. It's the right thing to do. It's the necessary thing to do. We must never allow our defence forces to be ill-prepared for the challenges that lie ahead.
Monash had to lead a virtually entirely volunteer force with limited basic training. They nonetheless acquitted themselves magnificently in the field. Our troops made the difference and Monash's leadership made the difference as well. Through proper planning, and detailed preparation, Monash and the Australian Army Corps made a difference. They made a decisive difference. Through the great battles at Amiens in 1918, and later in breaking through the Hindenburg line, Monash's impact was in fact decisive.
Sir John Monash was instrumental in the success of the allied war effort in France. The Australian Defence Force continues this proud record in all theatres of war today. Our soldiers are respected for their courage and their skills and rightly so. There is no higher calling in this nation than to wear the uniform of Australia. And we the Government of Australia owe it to them and future generations to have the very best Defence Force we can to protect our national interest and safeguard our national security for the future.
I thank you.
[ends] 


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: There seems today to be massive confusion about the first homebuyers grant. Now will it be dropped, will it be cut, will it be extended?
PM: Well, as in times past, Neil we don't speculate on contents of Budget. But as I said yesterday in Perth at a community gathering, or the day before actually, all good things must come to an end.
This has been an important boost for first homebuyers. I understand the representations made to us by the housing industry about its continuation. We've also got to make judgments about long term financial sustainability of this scheme from the Government's point of view as well.
MITCHELL: That's a pretty big hint though. ‘All good things must come to an end'.
PM: Well don't they?
MITCHELL: Isn't it?
PM: Well we could keep going this way as you'd like, but I think it's been a big help. I've looked at how many people have been helped with this so far. The figures I've got here are about 30, I think it's got a total of 36,000 across the country. Here in Victoria, 8,600. That's quite a lot of people who've been out there supported with this trebling of the first homeowners boost, to enable them to get their first home.
MITCHELL: But what about the arguments it's just put up the market, it's just put up the price?
PM: Well I notice some have said that. But, let's go to the core of where we are with the global economic recession.
When we looked at this decision for government last October, it was very practical. How could you reduce the impact of this recession on Australia?
Two big areas which have an immediate impact on jobs in Australia. One is retail and that's why we've provided unapologetically payments to support pensioners, carers and veterans in order to boost sales in the retail sector, when if you look around the rest of the world, hundreds of thousands of jobs being slashed, and one and a half million Australians - and many people listening to this program this morning - work in retail, first thing.
The second is, an immediate action we took was given the enormous number people also employed in housing and the residential construction sector. And this boost, as the industry's told us and many people have told us, has helped keep our housing construction figures up when the rest of the world has actually been falling in reverse.
I noticed Mr Hockey today has said that this first homeowners boost of the Government's represent a distortion of the market.
Now we have the Liberal Party attacking the first homeowners boost. This is extraordinary. I thought they were supposed to be supporting it, and there are 36,000 Australians, many young Australians out there benefiting from this program.
MITCHELL: But has it inflated the market? I mean it might be creating jobs but is it actually helping the first homebuyer, or are they just paying it over to the building industry or to the vendors?
PM: Neil, the difference in prices around the country and around the city of Melbourne and around Victoria, as you know, each region's different, each locale is different. I can't give you a direct response on price fluctuations in a given area.
What I do know is this. When the Housing Industry Association come into us, and the other construction-related associations come into to say to us that this has been essential to keeping employment up in the construction sector, we take that advice seriously. That's why we've done it, and we think it's been an important part of cushioning Australia from the full impact of the global recession.
MITCHELL: There seems to be a misunderstanding about - you extended it. I'm assuming when you say all good things come to an end, you're talking about extension. You wouldn't do away entirely with the first homebuyers grant.
PM: You're right to point that out. The continuing grant which is $7,000 has been the case in the past and will be the case in the future. What we're talking about is the boost which is to double that if you're buying a home which is already built; to triple it, if you are buying a new home.
And again the intention is to keep up the level of activity in the housing sector and again I draw people's attention, if you looked at our housing construction figures in Australia relative to practically every other developed economy, it's chalk and cheese.
MITCHELL: What about all other subsidies and levies. Are they under review?
PM: In the Budget, we look at everything, Neil. Not knowing where your next question's going to go  - 
MITCHELL: Neither do I?
PM:  -  but I have a sense of it. I thought this was going to be a come in spinner question. But, no look. We take a serious expenditure review committee process to everything the Government does, led by Lindsay Tanner, a Melbourne bloke who's the Finance Minister. And he's very serious about this, so we go over everything both in terms of what spend and what we raise.
MITCHELL: The point I am getting at generally is that obviously we'll see some subsidies cut and some levies increased.
PM: All I can say Neil, and consistent with the bloke you used to interview in this studio from time to time in times past, John Winston Howard, we don't speculate on the content of the Budget.
But this is tough. If you stand back and look at what the International Monetary Fund has said to us all, which is that this is the worst global economic recession since the Great Depression in the 1930s, what we're faced with is framing in the most difficult global economic circumstances possible, this Australian Budget.
It's going to be very tough. We have spent a lot of time working our way through this and we've still got some work to do.
MITCHELL: I think before the last election you said no new taxes. Does that promise stand?
PM: What we've always said is that we would not increases taxes as a proportion of gross domestic product. That's been our commitment and  - 
MITCHELL: In income tax or overall tax?
PM: No, total tax as a proportion of gross domestic product, because what are you concerned about in the economy? Not allowing taxes to consume too much of economic activity. And we think that's a reasonable discipline to apply on average over the cycle. And we have done that.
MITCHELL: But that doesn't rule out new taxes though, does it?
PM: What we've, well there's always going to be possible changes at any time to the taxation mix, but the aggregate discipline remains which is how do you actually keep the lid on the overall, shall we say, creep of taxation over time?
You see our challenge also is in dealing with the global recession, and also on how we provide necessary economic stimulus now to support jobs today, and build the infrastructure we need tomorrow, like the school building program, is that we have to engage therefore in a temporary deficit and temporary borrowing.
That's what governments are doing right around the world, and therefore, it's equally important that you have an exit strategy from temporary deficits and temporary borrowing which means that the way to do that is to ensure that once the economy returns to normal growth, that taxation is able to recover and you are able to use that then to restore the Budget to surplus, and you're able then to use that to pay the temporary borrowings.
That's the way in which  - 
MITCHELL: So how do you do that? Do you have it ready to go, do you have it in place?
PM: Well we have a clearly stated fiscal sustainability strategy reflected in the last statement we made on the financial outlook.
And that goes to return to trend growth which is when the economy recovers from this current economic recession which is why global economic coordinated action has been so necessary through the G20 and others.
Secondly, allowing taxation to recover. And thirdly, also keeping a cap - and we say this quite plainly - on two per cent on future spending growth as well.
Put those things together, you have the necessary elements of a return to Budget surpluses and to repaying down on temporary borrowings.
MITCHELL: Are you willing to extend the deficit beyond $200 billion?
PM: We have said that we need to ensure that we can pay first of all for the impact which the recession has brought about, through the collapse in taxation revenues.
That means, for example what we're doing already, more than two-thirds of temporary deficit, temporary borrowing are arising from a pure collapse in taxation revenues. That's company tax, that's income tax and all the rest.
Happens to governments around the world. And I'll come straight back to your question in a minute.
The alternative is to say there's been this massive collapse, so far $115 billion collapse in taxation revenues. We've been upfront about that. That's what happened. And with these new growth figures which have come out from around the world, there'll be a greater reduction in taxation revenues as well looking forward.
You've got two alternatives under those circumstances. Either you completely slash and burn everything government does and throw tens of thousands of extra people onto the unemployment queues and cut funding for hospitals and schools, or you engage in temporary borrowing.
Mr Turnbull has said the collapses in taxation revenue, he would borrow as well. And that represents more than two-thirds of what we're doing at the moment.
The other bit is what you do by way of, let's call it discretionary economic stimulus. The investments we're making in the school modernisation program, social housing and the rest. And of course we engage in temporary deficit and temporary borrowing for that.
We believe that it is important always to calibrate the amount that we need for our future expenditures and therefore our temporary deficit and temporary borrowings based on, most primarily, what happens with future changes in the tax base.
MITCHELL: So will you go beyond $200 billion?
PM: We don't see the need for that at this stage. But we are very concerned about what happens in the future about further collapses in taxation revenue.
That is the key variable here. As I said, it represents two-thirds of our problem up until now. If taxes collapse further, we have a continuing problem and the alternatives are as I've just described.
MITCHELL: So there's a mixture there, you borrow more if necessary and you increase taxation?
PM: Well, there is, on the question of taxation which we discussed before, our discipline is don't allow taxes to get out of control because you don't want to strangle an economic recovery.
That's important, that's why we stick to this principle of not increasing taxes as a proportion of the economy. But as I said within that, then of course there's always possible to have changes in the taxation mix.
But I say again Neil, we're still working our way through this. The Budget's still some ways off. It's hard, it's difficult and it's very hard to frame a Budget in the circumstances which we're presented with, the worst global economic recession since the Great Depression.
MITCHELL: Well is it time for those who are still well off to pay more? To pick up more of the load?
PM: Well, I think, this is not a comment in relation to the upcoming Budget, but as a general principle, we've just got to be very mindful for example of how do we pay for pensions. You and I have discussed this many times on your program before.
I don't think anyone listening to your program would believe that our pensioners are being overpaid at present.
Therefore, if you're going to have fundamental pension reform, and make sure it is possible for people on the pension to deal with the costs of living, then we're going to have to have long term reform, and we've committed to do that.
But you know? You've got to therefore undertake other measures to offset that. And that is why the Finance Minister, the Treasurer, and myself have been going through line by line elements within the Budget to see what we can do to make the necessary savings by what you send, by what you spend, and also what other measures may be necessary to support pension reform.
MITCHELL: I gather the principle is, if pensioners get more, the well off have to pay for it.
PM: Well pensioners get more or we can make savings elsewhere, okay, when in terms of other programs which may not be essential, or longer term you have to look at what can be afforded by way of additional support from those who are better off.
MITCHELL: What is better off? $100,000, $200,000?
PM: Well we've, as you know, how long is a piece of string? But as you saw from our Budget last time, we introduced some changes in relation to $150,000 threshold. Which in terms of various welfare related reforms which we thought began to be a reasonable, not inviolate, not permanent, not you know, cast in stone, but way of delineating.
And if you're looking at a pensioner who's you know, not out there earning $150,000 a year, there's a question about fairness in Australia as to how you balance it out.
MITCHELL: So if I'm earning over $150,000, I could be a target?
PM: Well, nice segue from what I said to your last question Neil. But I've got to say, we think that Australia is all about fairness. People who are at the upper end over time perhaps could be in a position to provide greater support. Perhaps. And I again make no specific comment in relation to the upcoming Budget.
But if you are going to engage in a fundamental pension reform, then the rule of thumb we've used in the past is between every $10 a week you increase the pension, that's about $1 to 2 billion a year by way of extra funds which have to be found in the Budget. It doesn't grow on trees, you either achieve it through savings or you achieve it by other means.
MITCHELL: You have made the point that you want to be honest with the Australian people. So in this climate, before I move onto other matters, deal with a couple of things very quickly. But there is pension reform promised, that you're not backing  - 
PM: Remember I said before, in the Budget we would commence pension reform. And we are upfront about that. I'm also being equally upfront that it costs a truckload of money to do it.
And I note also that the attacks from the Liberals on our allocations to pensioners, carers and veterans, one-off payments recently, I don't think demonstrate that they are any way in touch with how difficult it is for pensioners to make ends meet.
MITCHELL: Just another quick one on the economy. In that spirit of honesty, will unemployment go beyond 10 per cent?
PM: Our internal figures, which you saw produced last time we put out our economic forecast, projected seven. You've seen the figures contained most recently in the International Monetary Fund which are higher than that. Look, as we've said very bluntly in recent weeks, unemployment is going to go higher. I wish I had a perfect crystal ball on this Neil. I don't. But our projections are as contained in the last forecast, the IMF has slightly up on that, I think from memory 7.8, hence underpinning the need for economic stimulus.
Can I make one point about where we are relative to the rest of the world? International Monetary Fund put out these appalling figures for the global economy for 2009, all advanced economies to shrink by 3.8 per cent in 2009. This is a massive figure.
The projection for Australia is a contraction of 1.4. We are doing almost three times better than the rest of the advanced economies. And a core reason for that is the economic stimulus strategy we're engaged in is out out there pumping demand into the economy.
We're trying to do it in what the economists would describe a counter-cyclical way, working against the cycle of the economy. Where the private sector is in retreat, Government steps in temporarily and then once the economy recovers, let me tell you I'd much rather be out of there.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break, come back with other issues for the Prime Minister.
[advertisement break]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with us, we'll take a quick call, Richard go ahead please.
RICHARD: Good morning.
PM: Hello Richard.
RICHARD: Just before I ask you a question. When are the kids going to get their computers that you promised? But you know, if you want stimulate the economy Mr Rudd, you've got to do something about these local councils. You try and get a planning department planning permit and you can't get it, it takes-
MITCHELL: Is that to build a house or something? Alright. Two questions there, the computers and local councils which is I suspect a state issue.
PM: Two rounds of the Computers in Schools have already gone out and the Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard is working through the schools of the country systematically. Each area that I've been to in last week in Western Australia and South Australia, I've gone to communities where literally thousands of communities, computers have been distributed to those local schools.
In terms of your school sir, can I suggest that through the program you let us know what the school is and we'll get back to you in terms of when your school will actually come within the program but we're doing it round by round by round across the country and it's the right thing to do.
Second part of the question was? Local authorities?
MITCHELL: Was local authorities. That's a state one.
PM: Look, local authorities operate in Victoria and elsewhere under State Government law and of course under their local ordinances but you talk about stimulus. Yesterday  -  key fact  -  in Perth I launched the first project under the community, local community infrastructure program; $2.4 million there for improvement of a park reserve adjacent to the Swan River. These are now rolling out to the tune of $800 million right across Australia wide. Local authorities are very good at rolling out quick, immediate, short term stimulus projects which build local community infrastructure for tomorrow and provide jobs today.
MITCHELL: Okay thank you for calling Richard. The AM program today interviewed an asylum seeker who has actually got approval as a refugee, an Iraqi man in Indonesia. I'll just play you very briefly what he said but he's effectively, he's saying that your policies have encouraged him to try and sneak into Australia.
ASYLUM SEEKER: Kevin Rudd. He changed everything about refugee. If I go to Australia now  -  definite, definite, maybe accepted but when John Howard (inaudible) Australia he said come back to Indonesia.
MITCHELL: Okay well obviously the perception there is among some of them at least that your policies are softer and therefore they get a better deal.
PM: The UNHCR, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees recently in Indonesia actually, described our policies as tough and hardline. The bottom line is that with this global push in illegal immigrants coming out of global insecurity, people are going to have a range of different perceptions all the time.
I ran into a bloke the other day who hopped on a boat in 2001 in the midst of Mr Howard's Prime Ministership and, as I was advised, was informed that once he got to Australia under Mr Howard there'd be two free houses and three free tractors, there you go. I mean look it's a rumour mill out there. What's the key thing?
MICTHELL: But haven't you added to the rumour mill with the different policies?
PM: Can I say that the key question here is having the best, most hardline deployment of our defence, maritime, aerial surveillance assets in the air-sea gap in Australia, doing their job. And these vessels have been interdicted and taken to Christmas Island. That's the key thing.
All our folk on the beat up there and I'm proud of each and every one of them, they're doing a very professional job in Australia. Look at how cast the archipelago is, look at the civil war in Sri Lanka and when you've got civil wars in Sri Lanka, a rolling war in Afghanistan and cross, instability across the Middle East and this vile trade of people smuggling still rolling on out there, you're going to continue to have all these push factors affecting every country in the world. Our job is to maintain strong border protection in the air-sea gap.
MICTHELL: Well have you seen the, an Australian Federal Police Report saying the same as this man is saying, saying that the policies will lead to a new influx?
PM: I'm unaware of any such report. But-
MICTHELL: Not because you would have seen it if it existed, presumably?
PM: Neil, there are literally a large number of federal police, intelligence officers and those involved in the broader national security policy establishment who at any given time will have a range of views on what should or shouldn't be done. I accept-
MITCHELL: Did you ask to see it after it was reported that it existed?
PM: Neil, the advice that I receive on these sort of questions comes from the National Security Adviser of the Commonwealth of Australia, Mr Duncan Lewis. And when I speak with Duncan about these matters we seek to calibrate our responses to the emerging threat. There is no silver bullet here when global -
MICTHELL: If this report existed, exists and we don't know that it does, Did you ask if it exists because it's been reported that it exists?
PM: Our responsibility also Neil is to say this; on any report relevant to intelligence matters we do not comment publically.
MITCHELL: But you said you hadn't seen it? Did you ask if it exists?
PM: The responsibility that I have through the, the arrangements I have for national security are through the National Security Adviser. As I said, in any given day, there will be an avalanche of reporting from around the world. We have an extensive police intelligence network and on these sort of questions we also depend on those reports being distilled and provided by the National Security Adviser -
MICTHELL: Yes but I'm not asking you what's in or if it exists. But it was front page of a newspaper, this report exists saying that your policies, you've been told, the federal police believe your policies will lead to an influx of asylum seekers. Did you not at any stage say, does that report exist?
PM: As I said to you before Neil, I am unaware that it exists. If there are concerns about elements of our policy we'll work our way through that in response to advice as I said through the channels that we've established. Any individual officer across our police and intelligence agencies will have a different view at different times about what should be done. That's just normal, that's them doing their job.
MICTHELL: The James Hardie people are saying they mightn't have enough in their fund to pay compensation because of the global financial crisis. What can be done about that?
PM: I was appalled at seeing that report last night, absolutely appalled. Now your program has been very good on this question, others have been in Sydney as well. We intend to now, work very closely on this question. I will not tolerate any of those workers who have been affected by this appalling disease and have been treated so badly by this company to run short.
MITCHELL: When is the election due?
PM: Last time I remember we were elected at the end of 2007, plus three, we haven't changed the Electoral Act since then.
MITCHELL: What are the chances of going full term?
PM: I believe that it's important for governments to serve out their mandate and we were elected for three years. But I would say this about Mr Turnbull and the Liberals, it's very important that they don't block everything in the Senate as a matter of course.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thanks Neil.


The Australian Government will commission commemorative medallions to recognise the assistance provided to Australians during World War Two by Fuzzy Wuzzy Angels in Papua New Guinea.
The medallions will be available from August to those PNG citizens who served as civilians helping the war effort, or to their widows or widowers.
Some 55,000 PNG citizens served as civilians and carried supplies, built bases and airfields and evacuated the sick and wounded during the fighting in Papua New Guinea. Their contributions saved the lives of many Australians.
The medallions will feature the image of a Fuzzy Wuzzy Angel helping a wounded Australian along the Kokoda Track - one of the iconic images of World War Two and testament to the strength of the bond between our two nations.
These medallions express the Australian Government's appreciation for the service of these individuals.
PNG citizens can apply for the medallions through the Australian High Commission in Port Moresby.


PM RUDD: Good morning ladies and gentleman and it's a pleasure to have here in Canberra, in the nation's capital today an old, old friend of Australia, the Grand Chief Sir Michael Somare, Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea. I've known the Chief for a long, long time, he has known successive Australian Prime Ministers for an even longer time, going back to the days of independence in the mid-1970s and Chief, you are a welcome guest in Australia and we are privileged to have you with us today. 
We have had a good meeting this morning about the future of the Australia-PNG relationship. This is a relationship rich in history and a relationship with a rich future because what we do together is important not just for our two peoples but also important for the wider Pacific region.
Reflecting on our past, it's been our privilege just now to meet with veterans of the Second World War. Veterans who are great Diggers from Australia who fought on the Kokoda Track, veterans of the 3rd Battalion, we are honoured to have you with us today.
We are equally honoured to have with us today two representatives of the Fuzzy Wuzzy Angels and all of us in Australia know full well the enormous support, practical support and friendship extended to Australian diggers during the last war by the Fuzzy Wuzzy Angels. And it's been our privilege today to confirm that we'll be issuing medallions to be issued by the Australian Government to honour the service and the sacrifice of the Fuzzy Wuzzy Angels who are so much part and parcel of our ability to prevail in the New Guinea campaign in the darkest days of World War II.
The Chief and I also discussed today our new Pacific Development Partnership. This is a new framework for development cooperation between Australia and Papua New Guinea and also an important framework for Australia's development cooperation relationship with other Pacific Island countries. What we're seeking to do is to anchor our Pacific Partnerships for Development in lifting the major development indicators across the region. Development indicators in terms of education achievement, health achievement, health outcomes, child and maternal health as well as a range of other clearly measurable indicators.
And one of the indicators that we've agreed to frame within our Pacific Partnership for Development for Papua New Guinea for the future is to raise the level of primary school participation from its current level of 53 percent to 70 percent by the year 2015. This is going to take a lot of work but until we get school education right in all the villages across Papua New Guinea and up the level of attendance in schools and then there will be big challenges for the future and I appreciate very much the Chief's support for that particular initiative.
The Chief and I also discussed today the importance of our wider region, the Pacific Island Forum and within it of course recent developments in Fiji. Papua New Guinea has taken a strong line on the question of Fiji and the actions taken by the Fijian Government. In particular the most recent decision by the Fijian Government to suspend its Constitution, to suspend press freedom and also the assault which has been delivered to the independence of the judiciary in Fiji. These decisions have received appropriate condemnation from around the world, including on behalf of our Government as well.
What is necessary is this - that the declaration that we arrived at conjointly in Port Moresby earlier this year concerning Fiji's actions and Fiji's automatic suspension from the Pacific Island Forum to take effect as of 1 May proceeds.
Fiji has not responded positively to the suggestions that were made by many of the Pacific Island leaders in the period since January for them to return to democratic rule and to announce a timetable for an election. In fact the Fijian Government have gone in precisely the reverse direction.
Therefore, two important milestones lie ahead of us. One is Fiji's suspension from the meetings of the Forum and that is a decision which was taken by leaders back in January to take effect from 1 May in the absence of Fiji taking any steps to the contrary, like announcing an election date.
The second of course lies in Fiji's future status within the Commonwealth. Australia's position is hardline and that is that you cannot sustain within a family of democracies within the Pacific Island Forum or a family of democracies within the Commonwealth a Government like that of Fiji which simply treats with contempt the most fundamental democratic institutions and press freedoms of its people.
Finally the Chief and I also discussed something which is near and dear to the hearts of his own people and ours, which is the great game of rugby league. And what can be done further to develop the code in Papua New Guinea and in particular how players from Papua New Guinea can have greater opportunities in Australia as well. We are working to refine a proposal between us which we hope to have concluded by the time our Ministerial Forum meets in June in Brisbane.
The broad concept is this, how do we working together, the Government of Papua New Guinea, the Government of Australia, develop a genuinely comprehensive national competition across PNG, with proper coaching, with proper support for players and teams. And secondly how do we better integrate the PNG competition long-term within the activities of the Queensland Rugby League, the Australian Rugby League and the NRL. This of course also goes to the adequacy of major facilities within Port Moresby as well.
And our idea is this, and we want to do some work on this to reach conclusion at the Ministerial Forum in June, is if we develop effectively rugby league nation-wide in Papua New Guinea and pair that with a school attendance strategy and with a public health strategy,
then we believe we can achieve great results.
For example, if participation in this new, elevated, national rugby league competition and the training programs associated for kids in their villages across Papua New Guinea can be made conditional on school attendance, primary school attendance and the rest, then we begin to make some progress. We've seen progress in other such programs in Australia and the Chief and I have discussed the possibility of the application of that approach within Papua New Guinea as well. Good for primary school education, good for education attendance and more broadly good for public health promotion including HIV-AIDS awareness.
Chief, this has been a good discussion. We appreciate very much the work which we undertake together within the South Pacific and I would acknowledge your continuing leadership across the region, particularly in dealing with difficult questions like Fiji. Over to you Chief.
PM SOMARE: Thank-you Prime Minister. I have only a few comments to make. All I want to say first is it's always, every year, we always renew our acquaintances between Australia and ourselves. Australia has been our very close partner and friend, partner since before independence and after independence and continues to give us the support, give us support to Papua New Guinea and budgetary support in support in all fields. Particularly in terms of our relationship it has been an excellent relationship that we've had. We have small ups and downs but all the governments that there have been in Australia, in my role and other Prime Ministers who have come in Papua New Guinea, our appreciation and our thanks to Australian people and Australian governments for always giving us support.
In terms of our trade relations and all, we have discussed these issues between the two of us. There is a lot of good will and good understanding between Australia and us. Australia's trade with us is always, we take it as a number one, as paramount to us because they are a very close neighbour, much closer than anyone else and we have always seen it as very important for us in Papua New Guinea.
We are now trying to divert ourselves in trying to make sure that you know, we, with our technical assistance program, we talked about education earlier on this morning and education, we just want to place more emphasis on primary and secondary education and of course up to tertiary education. I think that's an area where we have an understanding now and I'm sure that the Ministerial Forum in June when it meets will come to some of the final conclusions of our understanding and MOU to reach an agreement on.
Also on the other aspects of (inaudible) like sports, we're putting more emphasis now on our sports, particularly rugby. Australian Government, Australian people have been taking great interest and of course most of us in those days are going to school, a lot of them who came down to Australia were indoctrinated with rugby. Some of us play soccer of course with different friends, and Victorian Football, I don't know if there is such thing as Victorian football -
PM RUDD: It still exists.
PM SOMARE: It still exists? Okay, right.
PM RUDD: And it's spread.
PM SOMARE: And it's spreading and I think with our sports in PNG, we are taking a great interest, which we, we are also preparing our people for, we will be having a South Pacific Games soon. We've asked for 2015 for South Pacific Games to be held in Port Moresby and we're preparing our stadiums and so on. So I think with sports, foundation now we've established, we want to pay a lot of money, $20 million we hope that with the Australian assistance we will be able to expand not only rugby but all the other sporting facilities.
And I'd like it in schools, I think it's lacking. I remember in my old days every school that we go to had sport as a very important part of the curriculum and going back to reviewing our primary education curriculum, I think athletics is very important.
Discipline is one thing in our schools. We have to make young people adhere to the rules in schools. Some of our schools are now getting a little bit out of hand. Maybe not enough discipline but I think we manage it, we've managed and a lot of our young people are now in schools and in university, some leaving and going to find their jobs elsewhere.
In other fronts like, I'm very proud of the fact that we could, I could be here to witness the recognition of the effort by our Fuzzy Wuzzies, and Australian Government that's now decided and we'll be hoping the medals sometime this week for veterans' medal, to be worn by our people.
Our people take great pride in the support they've given and we are very thankful that you know, our arrangements in our cooperation, we've also taken into account the, particularly the Kokoda Track, and the development along the track for people who reside in the area.
I also want to express our sympathies for those who took part and I think recently, I think two weeks ago, about a week ago, we had two people (die). It's hard exercise and I think a lot of people need exercise and when you walk our mountains, can be very steep.
You feel the experience of how veterans like this, two gentlemen sitting in front of us here, have walked the hills of Papua New Guinea. It's not that easy. I think you can survive in deserts of Australia, but you can't survive on the hills and mountains and rivers of Papua New Guinea.
And I think this great effort by these men, supported by our people, I'm very thankful that Australia's now recognising those efforts.
On the other matter like Fiji, we've taken, I've been very vocal in the Pacific about Fiji's situation. And I have been trying to get the leadership of Fiji, political and military interim Prime Minister Bainimarama now has been declared. And we are not very happy with Fiji because now they've suspended the Constitution, and you have a country that has no constitution, no common law system and a legal system, that was suspended, and I think it's not very good.
All the Pacific leaders are not very happy with the outcome of what has happened in Fiji. We always, I've always said the door is open for Fiji to negotiate with them and to make sure that people of Fiji are given an opportunity to stay within the Forum.
But I think the exercise they've taken recently, particularly the suspension of the Constitution and dismissal of the judges, leaves no room for others because what's in Fiji now without a legal system. Legal system in many democratic countries are very important. People have to work within the framework of a constitution, and if you don't have a constitution, how do you administer, how do you make things work in your country.
So we are disappointed, but I'm hoping that there's still room for them to reconsider. But I think Forum has taken the stand, the Forum gave an ultimatum that if Fiji does not agree to set the date for elections, then the Forum has no option, Forum has to declare for its suspension.
I think the majority, most Forum members have taken that stand, apart from two or three leaders have some reservation about the suspension of Fiji, but I think the outcome recently would now make them also realise that how important it is to have a country with a constitution, and constitutional framework and strong legal system.
So with Fiji, as I said you know my view has been that I've been giving, and the Australian Government, particularly the Australian Prime Minister - Kevin has been very flexible because of my demands for what I think we could reach the decision on Fiji, and so is the new Prime Minister of New Zealand and then Prime Minister Helen Clark. They have always been flexible, particularly when I made an appeal to give an opportunity to Fiji to come back.
Now Fiji has decided. You know opportunities are given, even the Australian Government went to the extent to allow Fiji to have its diplomatic mission still operating in Australia. And so is New Zealand.
They've all bent over backwards. We have bent over backwards. I have. I've tried my best, but they've decided to suspend the Constitution, which is not in the books of those who like to profess democracy in their respective countries. So with Fiji that's something that Fiji themselves will have to decide and let the Forum, but the Forum has made its mind and the Forum will now be looking at next Forum meeting what would happen to Fiji. That's on the question of Fiji.
On the media, on the media front, I think I believe that the media was, our media's always, Australian media everywhere in Papua New Guinea and Fiji and Samoa and Tonga, everywhere. Media also have a responsibility too. Free press comes with the responsibility. And sometimes when you are dealing with countries, that societies which are different, when you're dealing with those countries you find that though suddenly something has happened to the press. And it's always asked what the press do.
You have to have some responsibility when you are writing or when you are criticising certain countries. Of course on the very tense issues, you must be a little bit cautious, because sometimes people are people and they retaliate in their own way. And that's what Fiji has done with the press. Now, I think our PINA association has come out, PINA is the Pacific Island News Association, Papua New Guinea and Fiji have come out to condemn what has happened, but it's a military government and sometimes very difficult.
And I always say this, someone with a gun in his hand, a rifle in his hand, it's very difficult for him to decide that's his fighting weapon. The Fijian Prime Minister has used that and got rid of the press. We're not very happy with what has happened.
I get it all the time in Papua New Guinea. Press doesn't give me a good run at all in Port Moresby. Never give me a good run.
I sympathise with him because they don't understand a lot of these things. So I just forgive them for their wrongdoings, for what they write about me, because they don't even know me. They think they know but they don't. So with the press, that's my view on press in Fiji.
So all I want to say is thank-you very much Prime Minister Kevin Rudd for inviting me to come down and work, I mean be with you today and wonderful hospitality that you've extended to me yesterday and today.
And I'll be also travelling to Melbourne. I don't why you organised this, but I am going down to Melbourne also and then to Townsville. The Victorian Premier asked me to be included in the list of people visiting the State. So I'll be in Melbourne and of course Queensland, always up there. I'm going up to Townsville to look at the flood-affected areas and the fire in Victoria. Because we did, Papua New Guinea did give some support for the national disaster that affected Victoria and northern part of Queensland.
So I've been invited to do that so, thankful that your hospitality has been extended to me and my delegation, and Australia I think, you can rest assured that that will be extended to you when you make your next visit up to Papua New Guinea.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much Chief and before we take two questions a side, I should also acknowledge as I did at the time in the Australian Parliament, the contribution which was made by the Government of Papua New Guinea to the victims of natural disasters in Australia, for which I'd again publicly like to acknowledge my thanks.
Now, questions.
JOURNALIST: Colin Barnett, the only Liberal leader in power, has made the bold promise to never preside over a Budget deficit. As the Labor Prime Minister, can you tell Australians today when you plan to bring the Federal Budget back into surplus, and how you plan to do it?
And secondly, can I ask what was the intention of sending Mike Pezzullo to Beijing ahead of the White Paper delivery sometime later this week, or next week. What were you trying to reassure China about?
PM RUDD: On the first question concerning public finance, all governments around Australia, and all governments around the world are wrestling with one core challenge which is the collapse of taxation revenues, coming off the back of the global economic recession.
You've already seen the write-down in Australian Government revenues which came off the back of the impact of the recession so far. You've seen what Access has had to say further about that today.
And therefore, given the collapse in government revenues, it follows as a matter of course that to offset the collapse in government tax revenues that you, as a responsible government, have to engage in temporary deficit and temporary borrowings.
On the question of Liberal governments and the Liberal Party more broadly, could I say this. It's time for Malcolm Turnbull to get fair dinkum about his own $177 billion deficit and debt strategy, which when he is pressed he admits to, and then in the next moment, seeks to attack temporary deficit and temporary borrowing on the part of the Government.
Will the real Malcolm Turnbull stand up on deficit and debt.
On the second question that you raised which concerns the Government White Paper, I can only assume that government officials are visiting a range of capitals to discuss elements of our thinking and I presume elements of our wider foreign policy context.
On the detailed travel arrangements of the gentleman you refer to, I would need to take further advice as to where he's travelling and for what particular purpose in particular. But can I just say it is probably normal to speak to a range of countries within the region and our allies about any thinking that we have in relation to the long term trajectory of our defence planning.
Now next question.
JOURNALIST: On the flu epidemic, airports throughout the region are equipped with these thermal scanners. Why don't we have them and do we have any plans to introduce them, and also on that, will there be a national distribution of face masks? What's our approach to dealing with the crisis and do you think we can avoid it?
PM RUDD: This is a serious international concern for public health and therefore we share that concern with other Governments around the world, which is why the Australian Health Protection Committee has been actively monitoring developments around the world and providing the Australian Government with advice as to the necessary sequence of actions to take here.
First of all, in terms of public awareness, you would be familiar with the establishment of the relevant swine influenza hotline, and the associated Health Department website. That is an important piece of public information about the nature of swine influenza.
Secondly, as of midnight last night, all planes landing from the Americas will be required to report on the health status of passengers. And from 5am today, airports will also have a clinical presence with nurses available as well.
On top of that, as you may be aware, the Australian Government for some time has been stockpiling anti viral drugs. We have one of the largest per capita stockpiles of these drugs in the world and that has been put in place against any such contingencies for the future and of course that will be drawn upon, based on the advice of the relevant Australian Health Protection Committee.
Furthermore, the Chief Medical Officer with whom I have been speaking over the course of the weekend and the Health Minister will be briefing cabinet today on the current status of the swine influenza crisis around the world.
I notice also, I would note also that the World Health Organisation overnight raised its influenza pandemic alert from Level Three to Level Four.
So this is an evolving threat. We base our actions on the expert advice of the Australian Health Protection Committee. The Commonwealth Medical Officer, the Chief Commonwealth Medical Officer will be briefing the Cabinet today on actions taken to date and whatever further actions will be necessary.
This is a serious matter. The Government takes it seriously. All necessary resources will be deployed to meet the threat, calibrated to how it unfolds.
Next question  -  do we have questions from the Papua New Guinea side?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what are some of the likely tough measures you will take against Fiji (inaudible)
PM RUDD: Well the decisions that we took in Port Moresby in the meeting chaired by the Prime Minster of Papua New Guinea was clear cut.
The communiqué issued in Port Moresby at the time went to the whole question of if Fiji does not announce a timetable for elections within a reasonable period of time, then Fiji will automatically be suspended from the meetings of the Forum and Forum bodies.
That was a decision taken, taken unanimously in Port Moresby, giving Fiji a final opportunity to do the right thing.
What the Fijian Military Government decided to do was exactly the reverse. The wholesale assault on the constitutional integrity of the Fijian state by the suspension of the constitution, the wholesale assault on press freedom by the wanton acts against journalists, both print and electronic, in Fiji and furthermore, the assault on the independence of the judiciary. Fiji has therefore done this to itself, in warranting suspension from the Pacific Island Forum.
Let us be clear about this. In the history of the Pacific Island Forum - I stand to be corrected on this chief, you have been around longer than I- but this has not happened with any other state before. This would be a first. The Pacific Island Forum has been around for a long time and we pride ourselves in one thing: we are a family of democracies. We have our problems, we have our challenges but we are a family of democracies.
And an important member of our family, through its military leader, has turned his back on the way in which this community of states chooses to organise its democratic affairs.
The second thing I referred to in my remarks before is what the Commonwealth now chooses to do. There is an important meeting of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, from memory on the 15th of May.
Important decisions will need to be taken then about Fiji's future status.
Also, there is one further point, and that goes to the United Nations, over recruitment arrangements in relation to peace keeping forces which come from Fiji. The revenue remittances to Fiji from Fijian forces working with UN operations around the world are important sources of revenue back into military families in particular within Fiji.
Through our own interventions with the United Nations and supported by New Zealand and other countries, the United Nations now is not going to engage future or new Fijian troops for new operations.
There is a question which now arises, given the actions taken by Fiji on the 10th of April, as to whether there should now be a further tightening on top of that, of the approach taken by the UN.
What is the common denominator with all these things? It is to send a clear cut message to the people of Fiji, the people of Fiji with whom we have had a wonderful relationship over so many decades, that the military Government which now presides over them is unacceptable because of what it has done to traverse, what it has done to traduce I should say, basic democratic principles.
Is there a further question from the Papua New Guinea side? We were supposed to do two a side. If not, I'll go to you Daniel.
JOURNALIST: I have got a question for Mr Somare. As a witness to your country's poverty, I know that there are children starving, scavenging the streets for food, living out of cardboard boxes. Can you guarantee Australians that every cent of their $300 million is going where it needs to? And Mr Rudd are you 100 per cent satisfied that $300 million is being well spent and that Papua New Guinea is fulfilling its role under the United Nations Millennium Development Goals?
PM SOMARE: We have of course people in the streets of Port Moresby, the streets of Lae who don't have, who don't reside in their villages, come and of course their parents may be looking for work and you find that there are (inaudible)
You find, if you compare Papua New Guinea, with starvation, I think you have got it completely wrong, because our people have plenty in their villages. We have village society, we live in our traditional villages.
When one village is poor, the other village helps. In Port Moresby it is a different situation. Now you may have just visited Port Moresby recently and witnessed what is there. There is no-one in Papua New Guinea starving in the traditional villages. You probably see one or the two in Port Moresby - kids who come to look for opportunities for education and health, when they miss out, then they of course roam the streets.
We have catered for all our provinces and our districts. We, when we allocate the budget, it's first time in the history of Papua New Guinea since I know Papua New Guinea from the beginning, it is the first time we have allocated amount of almost 980 million kina to concentrate on the districts, improvement of village, farming, infrastructure development, education and health.
Most people, most people live in the villages. What you see in Port Moresby is similar. If you look around, you look around some of the other countries like Papua New Guinea, maybe third world countries, you look at, see what is happening, what is being televised by CNN in Ethiopia, in Africa, in these places.
We don't have circumstances like this in Papua New Guinea, and I can assure you, what you have seen, what you probably have seen in Moresby are kids who did not have places in schools, maybe because of the expansion of the population, influx of more people coming in, looking for opportunities in Port Moresby, could not get chance for them to provide food.
But everywhere in Port Moresby alone, if you have been in Moresby, you see the hills and mountains, people have gardens, they have sweet potato gardens, they have tapioca gardens, they have bananas.
And I don't think anyone in Papua New Guinea starves. If you are talking and you might be talking about the people who come into the city looking for job opportunities and bring their kids along with them and I think that could be the kind of people you are talking about.
But I just want to give you assurance that Papua New Guinea, no one is starving in Papua New Guinea. We always have something to eat.
PM RUDD: I think when I became Prime Minister, in relation to Governments across the South Pacific, I was not happy with the then framework of official development assistance relationships.
I believe we need to anchor our official development assistance relationships in the Millennium Development goals. And the reason for that is that they are measurable, absolutely clean cut measurable. As you know there are eight of them, and a number of them go to specific measure on health outcomes and education outcomes and maternal health outcomes for the people.
The reason for the Pacific Development Partnerships is to anchor these within the new structure of our official development assistance relationship, and for it to be subject to mutual measurement and monitoring over time.
What the Chief and I agreed to today among other things is that at the Ministerial Forum in June, five implementation schedules for the Pacific Development Partnership of Papua New Guinea will be agreed. And these go across the core components of the Millennium Development Goals.
Furthermore, what the Chief and I discussed this morning was problems in the historical aid delivery into Papua New Guinea whereby too much money has been consumed by consultants and not enough money was actually delivered to essential assistance in teaching, in infrastructure, in health services on the ground, in the villages, across Papua New Guinea.
I am in the business of making a difference on the ground. I am in the business of making a difference to the measures which are attached to the Millennium Development Goals.
I am into the business of measurement. Measurement can be a very uncomfortable thing for us all over time, but it is the best way to hold us all accountable as to whether the measures that we are embracing have effect. And it is within that framework that we are not just simply renegotiating our development cooperation relationship with PNG, but are doing so progressively across each of the Pacific Island countries.
And the reason for doing so, to return to where I began my answer to your question, is because I wasn't happy with the way in which those relationships were structured at the beginning, particularly on measurement, particularly measurement on poverty, particularly measurement on infant mortality.
Thanks very much.
[ends] 


The Australian Government today released Time for Action, the major report of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
The report makes recommendations designed to tackle the unacceptable levels of sexual assault and domestic and family violence in Australia, and gives all governments and the community clear directions about helping Australian women live free of violence, within respectful relationships and in safe communities.
Nearly one in three Australian women experience physical violence and almost one in five women experience sexual violence over their lifetime.
New research from KPMG commissioned by the National Council finds that violence against women will cost the Australian economy around $13.6 billion this year, rising to $15.6 billion in 2021/22 if appropriate action isn't taken.
The Government's position on violence against women is zero tolerance.
Laws must be strong enough to hold perpetrators to account and offer justice and safety for victims and their families.
We must also educate young people to prevent violence in future generations.
The Government has welcomed the Time for Action report and has agreed to immediately progress 18 of the 20 priority recommendations. The Government will further consider the other two within the context of developing the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
The Australian Government will immediately:
     * Invest $12.5 million for a new national telephone and online crisis service. The new service will be run by professional staff and make active referrals to follow-up services. The new service will operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; 
     * Invest $26 million for primary prevention activities including $9 million to improve the quality and uptake of respectful relationships programs for school age young people and $17 million for a public information campaign focused on changing attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence; and
     * Invest $3 million to support research on perpetrator treatment and nationally consistent laws;
     * Ask the Australian Law Reform Commission to work with State and Territory law reform commissions to examine the inter-relationship of laws that relate to the safety of women and their children.
     * Establish the Violence Against Women Advisory Group to advise on the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
Domestic violence is the single biggest cause of homelessness in Australia for women and the Government's White Paper on Homelessness, released in December last year, provides an additional $1.2 billion over four years.
This is a 55 per cent increase in investment in homelessness, including a commitment of $800 million over the next four years for new support services and $400 million over the next two financial years for social housing.
The Government also announced a $6.4 billion investment to build at least 20,000 new social housing dwellings as part of the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan.
The Australian Government will also work with the States and Territories to: 
     * Enforce domestic and family violence orders across State borders through national registration;
     * Improve the uptake of domestic violence coronial recommendations; and
     * Identify the best methods to investigate and prosecute sexual assault cases.
The Government will refer the Time for Action report to COAG to consider issues relevant to States and Territories.
We want all governments to come on board and, by early 2010, achieve an endorsed, national approach to reducing the incidence and impact of violence against women and their children.
The Government would like to congratulate Libby Lloyd, Heather Nancarrow, and the nine other National Council members have done an outstanding job in bringing together such a comprehensive plan to guide us in taking action on one of our most pervasive social problems.


This is an important day for the nation. It's an important day for families. It's an important day for women. It's an important day for kids. It's an important day for men.
Because we are dealing with a great affliction on the nation. And that is violence. And we're here to do something about it.
I'm pleased to be here this morning to receive the ‘Time for Action' report from the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
This is a tough, but vitally important subject for our whole community  -  for women, for children, and most particularly for men.
And it's a subject on which we must end the silence. End it. Because for too long, silence has been seen as a form of tolerance. And our national resolve must be zero tolerance. Zero tolerance when it comes to violence against women and violence against children.
As the report highlights, the facts are profoundly disturbing.
Nearly one in three Australian women experiences physical violence  -  and nearly one in five experiences sexual violence  -  during the course of their lifetime.
This translates to physical violence against approximately 350,000 women and sexual assaults of 126,000 women every year. These are unacceptable figures for Australians. They are unacceptable figures for any civilised community. They are unacceptable figures for this Australian Government.
The physical, social, emotional and psychological effects on so many women are incalculable.
And the damage done to children growing up in homes where there is violence or the threat of violence is likewise incalculable.
The experience of seeing mum attacked or threatened with violence can leave scars on children that remain for many, many years beyond childhood.
For some, those scars never heal.
Beyond the profound and terrible effects on women and children, there is also an extraordinary economic cost.
Research commissioned by the National Council shows that violence against women costs the nation $13.6 billion a year.
The research also shows that if we do nothing, things will get worse.
By 2021, the research predicts each year an estimated three quarters of a million Australian women will be victims of violence  -  at a cost of $15.6 billion.
In politics, many things are complicated. This one is not. It's simple. It's as simple as this:
One women who experiences violence is one too many. One child who experiences or witnesses violence is one too many.
One person who thinks it's okay to assault a woman is one too many. One witness who turns a blind eye to such violence is one too many.
One woman turned away when she asks for help is one too many. And one perpetrator who is not held accountable for his violence is one too many.
We cannot allow the silence to continue.
That is why before we came to office we made the commitment that we would lead the development of a national approach to reducing wide violence against women and children. And we intend to honour that commitment.
It is why we established the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, under the leadership of Libby Lloyd, to advise the Government on a plan for the future.
The Council conducted significant research to assess the existing evidence, the operation of legal systems and the economic cost of violence against women.
The Council consulted more than 2,000 Australians.
Time for Action, the name of the report, contains the Council's recommendations for a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
And from today the Government moves to the next stage in the development of the National Plan.
One of the clear messages of the National Council's report is that all governments across Australia need to get our act together in how we respond to violence against women and children.
Responsibility for services relevant to women is spread widely across government agencies and across Commonwealth, State and Territory jurisdictions.
As a result, it's hard to get a coordinated government effort that could help to make real progress.
That's about to change. As Prime Minister, I'm determined to lead that change.
As I said before I came to office, it's time to end the blame game between different levels of government and actually get governments working together.
It's easy to blame someone else. It is so easy to blame a different level of government. But you know something, the Australian people are absolutely fed up with to the back teeth with that approach. They just want it to work. They just want the system to deliver. They want results. They want things to change.
And I believe they will back a plan which offers that real prospect and possibility.
The Government is committed to providing national leadership in reducing violence.
Many of the Council's recommendations require joint effort by the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments and the community more broadly.
That's why the Government will take Time for Action to the Council of Australian Governments.
We will work with the State and Territory Governments to develop the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women for release in 2010.
We will also act immediately to jumpstart a number practical and substantive initiatives identified in the report as urgent priorities.
Today I can confirm that the Government will invest $42 million on a package of new measures in services, education, community awareness and in the law.
First, we will establish a new national online and 1800 service to provide professional assessment, referral and counselling for victims of violence and their families, at a cost of $12.5 million over four years.
The current Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault Helpline provides only basic advice and referral services.
The new phone line will build on existing services to provide 24 hours a day/ 7 days a week assistance accessible from any place in Australia.
The new service will also offer counselling through an online forum  -  an important addition for those in rural and remote areas.
The new service will provide appropriately qualified, specialised domestic violence and sexual assault counsellors to assess and address problems directly with victims and their families.
It will also provide backup support to workers dealing with critical incidents and who are isolated from professional supervision. This extra support will help to ensure that their own health and wellbeing is also protected.
Second, the Government will invest $26 million for primary prevention activities to focus on changing attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence.
This will include $9 million to improve the quality and uptake of Respectful Relationships programs for school age young people and $17 million for a national campaign focused on men and boys.
As I've said before, it is our gender, it is my gender, it is the male gender, that is responsible for this violence against women and children. Therefore, the responsibility to act lies with us.
During this year we will test best practice in Respectful Relationships and promising new programs across 31 school and non-school sites nationally.
It is critical that all people, particularly young people, develop the skills to maintain respectful relationships.
Respectful Relationships programs will be implemented mostly in mainstream school settings and will reach up to 8,000 young people over a period of five years.
Programs will also be implemented in non-school settings and will target vulnerable young people including those with intellectual disability, young people who have left school and young people living in remote communities.
These include:
     * 15 Northern Territory schools;
     * Nine schools and non-school sites in Victoria, Tasmania, and New South Wales, focused on groups of young people who are particularly vulnerable to violence;
     * Four schools also in the ACT  -  including Narrabundah College;
     * Three remote schools in the Kimberley in WA; and
     * A pre-elite youth sporting squad for Queensland.
In the three Kimberley schools - at Fitzroy Crossing, Halls Creek and Oombulgarri - the Federal and Western Australian Governments will work closely with the local communities to remodel an existing Respectful Relationships program to suit the needs of those communities.
These programs will seek to build the skills of local communities, of men and women - not just relying on school teachers  -  to assist in providing this education.
We will test these three programs in other remote communities to establish their influence on young people's attitudes and behaviours.
We are also very pleased that the NRL has become a partner in the Respectful Relationships program  -  in particular, that they have identified pre-elite under 16s and pre-under 18s for the program.
The NRL will identify ex-players and other important role models in the Code to be trained as educators.
We commend the NRL for taking this opportunity to work with young players and to influence their thinking and behaviour about relationships and respect.
We will also evaluate the South Australian model, Keeping Safe, the most far-reaching Respectful Relationships approach currently being delivered in any state education system.
We will also develop a comprehensive social marketing campaign to change community attitudes and behaviours  -  with an investment of $17 million over four years.
The campaign will target young men and engage them to help us prevent violence against women.
These activities will provide an alternative way forward for young people who are growing up in and around violence and abuse.
The whole point here is that people can look to role models to inspire them to live their life free of violence.
We have to make sure that the mistakes of the past are not, are not repeated in the future.
That's why Respectful Relationships education will play such an important role in reducing violence against women.
Third, we will drive research and innovation to inform Australian approaches to violence against women, at a cost and an investment of $3 million over four years.
This research will particularly focus on evaluating best practice in the treatment of perpetrators of violence.
Libby said before, and I say again, the Government is interested and committed to evidence-based policy.
We are interested in one single thing  -  what works, what changes these behaviours, what brings about a measurable reduction in the statistical data on violence against women and children. That's why research is of such continuing importance.
Fourth, we will support a small expert advisory group to advise the Government on the National Plan.
And fifth, we will implement a series of detailed measures within the legal system to ensure perpetrators are held to account and victims have access to the justice they deserve.
At the recent meeting of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-
General, the Commonwealth Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, sought agreement for a working group to develop a national registration scheme for domestic and family violence orders.
The current system requires victims of violence to take steps to register violence orders when moving from one state to another, placing the onus on the vulnerable at a time when they are in need of protection.
The Government is working with the States and Territories to establish a scheme whereby the registration of domestic and family violence orders occurs automatically.
The Standing Committee also agreed to an unprecedented examination of the interaction of Federal, State and Territory laws relating to the safety of women and their children, in particular to examine where the interaction between these laws increases the risks to women and children.
And the Australian Law Reform Commission will conduct this examination working with law reform commissioners across Australia. And I would commend the excellent leadership by the Attorney-General Robert McClelland in these important areas of legal reform.
In developing the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women, we recognise there are many programs and strategies already in place at different levels of government.
In New South Wales, for example, the Staying Home Leaving Violence program aims to ensure the safety of victims and their children. This involves the police removing the violent partner from the home.
In the Northern Territory, the Strong Family, Strong Community, Strong Future program trains and supports people in remote communities to work with families at risk of violence.
In South Australia, the rape and sexual assault service Yarrow Place provides clinical, forensic, medical and counselling support to victims of sexual assault.
In Victoria, the Male Adolescents at Risk project in the Dandenong region works to change the attitudes and behaviour of young adolescent boys and men who have shown aggressive or violent behaviour.
Here in the ACT, the Couch Surfing program provides young homeless people  -  many of whom would have experienced or witnessed domestic or family violence or sexual assault  -  with alternative housing options.
These and a range of other initiatives show that there are many people working to both reduce the level of violence perpetrated against women and to minimise the damage caused by such violence.
I commend each of you in the room here today who are engaged in the frontline of this very important work. It's hard work. It's difficult work. And it's necessary work.
But despite these excellent programs, the stark truth is that statistics on the incidence of sexual assault and family violence perpetrated against women and their children remain disturbingly high.
That is why we must work harder and smarter to tackle this challenge.
At the core of the challenge is this reality. There are many causes of violence against women. But there's one main cause. And that is the attitude of men towards women.
As the Council's report says and I quote:
''Violence is never caused or invited by the victim. The choice to use violence always, always rests with the perpetrator.”
I agree.
Our challenge is to change the attitudes of many Australian men, especially young men.
Of course most men are not violent against women, and most find violence repugnant and unacceptable as I do.
But that is how it must be for every Australian man and every Australian boy. Everyone. Every one of us, every one of my gender, every one of the male gender.
Every Australian male.
We know that most physical and sexual assaults are perpetrated by men that the women know and at home, and that the abuse is often repeated.
But what we do not know enough about is what really works in stopping men's violence.
We must address this gap in our knowledge so we can do more for children and women affected by violence within their families.
And to guarantee that we will do more, I am taking the initiative to move toward a national response to this problem.
I will write to my colleagues on the Council of Australian Governments, seeking their agreement to use COAG as a forum to develop a cross-government plan of action to reduce violence against women and children.
I will be asking the Premiers and Chief Ministers to work with me to produce a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women for 2010.
COAG is the highest decision-making forum of the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments.
It's right that this challenge is on the COAG agenda  -  alongside the big challenges of health, education and building infrastructure for our nation's future.
And the Australian Government's leadership in making a referral to COAG will significantly improve the effectiveness of all our efforts to reduce violence against women and their children in Australia.
Sexual assault and family violence takes a huge toll on Australian families, on Australian communities and in particular on Australian women.
The Australian Government is determined to take action against violence - both by assisting victims and addressing root causes.
With today's announcements, we are taking the first steps in responding to the report from the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
And we look forward to working with State and Territory governments towards this goal.
I urge all Governments and all Australians to join us as we work together to prevent violence against women and children.
I echo Tanya's thanks to all members of the Council  -  to Libby, Heather, Rachel, Pauline, Lisa, Andrew, Maria, Mel, Dorinda, Vanessa and Moira - thank you for the enormous amount of work you have done to produce the Time for Action report. I'm sure there's been some burning of the midnight oil.
And to produce four volumes like that, more than the midnight oil is burnt I suggest.
The Australian Government accepts the challenge you have given us.
And we look forward to working with other Australian governments, with many experts and outstanding individuals working in the community sector, to tackle this blight on our nation, and to build a safer future for Australian women and children.
This is a difficult subject for the nation to discuss. It's a hard subject for the nation to discuss. It's not a happy subject for the nation to discuss.
But none of those factors should prevent us from elevating it to part of our rolling national conversation.
Silence can no longer be tolerated because violence can no longer be tolerated. And violence prospers in the silence.
The challenge for all of us, government at all levels, you in the community sector and each of one of you as the young people and as the future of our nation, lies in this - to act together to make a difference. Personally, socially, institutionally, politically, in all that you do and all that you say.
It may be that when we look back on this gathering, in a school hall, on a cold morning in Canberra in April 2009, that we might just be able to say this  -  that on this day, we began to turn the corner.
I thank you. 


I was reflecting on Kathy Sullivan's story just a little while ago about what she described as the James Wood dinner, from 1996 involving Queensland parliamentary Liberals. I now know how Wal managed to minimise his expense account because if he had such a dinner with Labor members at the time it would have Wal and Arch Bevis. Mind you, Arch can knock a few back. 
But these were thin pickings in those days. And I actually was a candidate for the 96 election hoping to be here. But those of us who remember the events of 1996, running for Labor in those years was a bit like going over the top in the Somme in 1916. You could hear the whistling sound of shrapnel and then discover a few minutes later that it was actually targeted at you.
David just mentioned before the impact which Wal's journalism had on a generation of Queenslanders, a couple of generations of Queenslanders growing up with an interest in politics. My father died when I was quite young. My father used to read me, in fact he taught me how to read, reading from the bush Bible, Country Life. And I would sit  -  members of the Country Party in here just relax - and I would be sitting on his knee at his farm, he'd actually read me the headlines from the bush Bible.
And then he said one day, “And son, this is The Courier-Mail'. This was like this arrival of this exotic new journal and that's when I first heard, as a very young kid, of someone who my father used to read, which was Wallace Brown. That was quite some time ago.
So the radical journal in our household was The Courier-Mail, the orthodox delivery of news was of course Queensland Country Life. And that's shaped of course my own political world view ever since.
Part of the reason I'm here today is because I regarded Wal in the short number of years that I knew him here, as a friend. And I listened carefully to what Kathy said before about what is the first word which comes to your mind when you describe Wallace Brown. And the word without any further reflection is the one she used; a gentleman.
He had about him a certain other-worldliness. It was as if he came from a different age and there was a civility about the way in which he conducted himself with politicians of whichever hue. And I think Kathy is absolutely right, I wouldn't have had a clue which way Wal voted but he had about him a way of dealing with people which left a lasting impression with those of us on this side of the political divide, that is the practitioners as opposed to those who write on what the practitioners are doing.
The other thing that affects you about someone like Wal is he had this, he had the enormous gift of time. And you might say reflecting on what was often described as an earlier and gentler age where of course people would have a greater gift of time then  -  I'm not sure that's necessarily so. People of every generation have been busy. People engaged in reporting the national political life have been busy people. But whenever I sat down with Wal in that cubicle of his up there, in the parliamentary press gallery, whatever he was doing, whatever time of day it was, he always, even to the lowliest form of backbencher as I was, he'd always have the gift of time. Sit, talk, chat, reflect.
And I think if there is one great malady in our current political life it is the absence of time, the absence of conversation and the absence therefore of the reflection which arises from considered conversation. He had that gift as well.
He had a wicked sense of humour and with, most of which is unrepeatable so I won't. He  -  but it was enormously endearing. He had an enormous institutional knowledge. There is a great gift reflected among so many here today but thinning in number, who place how we strut and fret our hour upon the stage - and I've heard no more - in the context of the tide and time and times of events past.
It always seems as if what we do today is the single most important thing in the world. The virtue of those of greyer hair and greyer beard, is that they know that not to be the case. And there is a capacity and there was a capacity in Wal's case to actually reflect on where today sat in its importance relative to what Menzies and what Evatt may have been doing decades previous. And that was part of the gift of conversation that I valued with Wal.
I did not benefit from Black Velvets. I'm not even sure what a Black Velvet was but I've just been told by his son that a Black Velvet was a combination of Guinness and champagne. Guinness and champagne? This is a unique Queensland cultural contribution to our nation. I cannot begin to imagine how that tastes.
Mention was also made of the fact that with Wal we had a passionate environmentalist. It's true. Those of you who know from your own experience in conversations with him and his passionate commitment for the preservation of national parks, particularly those of which he was personally and directly engaged, know that this was not some fleeting interest, it was not some latter day conversion to forms of political correctness or anything like that, just a deep passion for the environment, a deep passion for nature, a deep passion to do something about it. And he did.
And the other thing that stands the starkest in our recollection of Wal is that he was equally passionate about the great State of Queensland. For him it went without saying that this was the most important place on God's earth. And you're smirking from The West Australian there. I just regard that as an ex cathedra pronouncement not worthy of cynical reflection from some on the other side of the continent.
And for him even in those days when Queensland had certain oddities attached to it - I'm referring to those interesting and challenging days of Johannes Bjelke-Petersen - and he had a big sense of Queensland identity. And also a big sense of not just Queensland being different, as Menzies famously said, but of Queensland being an essential part of our national fabric and a great contributor for the nation as well.
Wal Brown was all these things but for those of you who were his colleagues in the parliamentary press gallery, he was most importantly a pre-eminent journalist and he exhibited both the skill craft and the professionalism which rank at the highest levels of work that is done in this place.
I like one story about Wal's journalism which has a particular Queensland touch. One of his first rounds as reporter was as the weather roundsman for The Courier-Mail. My father would regard that as the most important round. You read the bush bible, understand what the crop prices are doing and what the weather is likely to be.
And so Wal had this duty at The Courier-Mail, and he had the bad luck of reporting during a severe drought. One day he got a weather bureau forecast that rain was on the way so with his offsider Jack Lunn, later editor of The Courier-Mail, Wal decided to give the drought breaking news a sharper angle.
And after getting the necessary background facts from the CSIRO - are they ever wrong?- he opened the article with the following stunning statement, quote: “Thousands of tonnes of water were poised in the clouds west of Brisbane last night ready to break the drought today” unquote.
We in public administration describe that as courageous. His editor loved it and it led page one. I imagine you have that slightly tremulous fear sometimes when a story of yours which you think is almost right but not quite there is suddenly plonked on page one. Maybe not. The problem was, there was no rain.
The rain depression headed sharply south down the coast and this was the moment when Wally and his mate Jack Lunn had to dig themselves out of a very large hole that they'd dug for themselves. And after being greeted by a very sombre editor the next morning, they asked “well Mr Brown”, as people were addressed in those days at The Courier-Mail, I'm advised, “how are you going to get us out of this one?”
Jack Lunn and Wal then had a brainstorm which also ran on page one the next day. The following, I think, objective headline. “NSW steals our rain”. Fair. Balanced. Insightful. Objective. And it got a run most importantly. At the end of the day, a true Queensland patriot.
And that's the sort of bloke we're here today to honour and he's still part and parcel of the fabric of who we all are. His conversations are alive in our minds, that wicked and winning smile of his and that marvellously piratical beard that he wore later in life. And so we are here today to honour him through this important award.
And the idea that we have a Wallace Brown Young Achiever Award for journalism is an important one.
As Kathy said, because of his gift of time, because of his interest in other people, he was always in the business of bringing the next generation on. And that's why those who have come up with this idea have got Wal absolutely right because it's all about how you encourage new people coming along in what is a critical profession for the nation and our conversation as a people.
For that reason I am delighted to present the Wallace Brown Young Achiever Award for Journalism for 2009. I am pleased to announce that the runner-up, I am pleased to announce the runner-up and winner for the 2009 Wallace Brown Young Achiever Award for Journalism.
The runners-up are Yuko Narushima and Sharri Markson.
The winner of the Wally Brown Award for 2009, Daniel Street from the Nine Network.


Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to make a substantial statement on our future military commitment to Afghanistan. Today, I will outline Australia's proposed future military and civilian commitment to the campaign against terrorist forces in Afghanistan. 
In my National Security Statement to the Parliament last year, I indicated that Australia stood ready to play its part in regional and global security efforts that would strengthen the security of Australia, including security against terrorist attacks against Australians. 
We have a proud history of engagement in regional and wider security efforts, and in the men and women in the Australian Defence Force, we have an asset of truly global quality to support us. For some time now, leaders in many partner nations have been grappling with how to deal with the problems that confront us in prosecuting the campaign against terrorist forces in Afghanistan. 
In Afghanistan, Australia has two fundamental interests at stake. First, we need to deny sanctuary to terrorists who have threatened and killed Australian citizens. Second, we also have an enduring commitment to the United States under the ANZUS Treaty which was formally invoked at the time of the September 11 attacks in New York and Washington.
Afghanistan is a place that has served as the training ground for global terrorism for a decade. More than 100 Australians have been killed in terrorist attacks in recent years, many of which were perpetrated by terrorists who have trained in Afghanistan or Pakistan.
We must not allow Afghanistan to once again become the unimpeded training ground and operating base for global terrorist activity. Nonetheless as US President Obama has stated recently, allied forces at present are not prevailing in Afghanistan. If allied forces fail in Afghanistan, there is a grave risk that the world will see a return to the intensity of terrorist activity emanating from that country prior to 2001, 2002.
On the ground, our troops have been making a supreme effort and significant sacrifices to deny Oruzgan to terrorists. Under difficult circumstances, they have been making headway. Australian Special Forces have disrupted Taliban efforts in training and recruiting new fighters. An Australian mentored Kandak, as battalions are described in Afghanistan, supported by Coalition forces, is now becoming increasingly operational and effective. And the Mentoring and Reconstruction Taskforce has delivered several major infrastructure projects in Oruzgan Province. The sacrifice of our troops on the ground means Australia must insist on the very best civilian and military strategy from the international community.
Australia concurs with the United States that the current civilian and military strategy is not working. If anything, security in Afghanistan is deteriorating. On 27 March President Obama cleared a new plan of US action, both civilian and military, aimed at redefining the mission in Afghanistan and outlining a new strategy to realise that mission.
We also have engaged with partners at the 31 March meeting on Afghanistan in The Hague, where nations gathered to chart a new way forward for combined efforts in Afghanistan. We have also of course engaged deeply with our allies in Washington.
President Obama has defined the new mission in Afghanistan as, and I quote him “to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al Qaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan, and to prevent their return to either country in the future”. Australia concurs with this mission.
It intersects with our own definition of our own mission within Afghanistan, which is as follows: Strategic denial of Afghanistan as a training ground and operating base for global terrorist organisations; second, stabilisation of the Afghan state through a combination of military, police and civilian effort to the extent necessary to consolidate this primary mission of strategic denial; and third, in Australia's case, to make this contribution in Oruzgan Province in partnership with our allies, with the objective of training sufficient Afghan National Army and police forces and to enhance the capacity of the Oruzgan provincial administration in order to hand over responsibility for the province in a reasonable time-frame to the Afghans themselves.
Realisation of the third element of this mission statement would create the basis for the withdrawal of Australian combat units. Australia's current force in Oruzgan does not have with it sufficient training elements to build Afghan military and police capacity within a reasonable time frame in which to base an exit strategy. That is why it is necessary to build upon our existing training capacity.
Consistent with President Obama's redefinition of the allied mission in Afghanistan, the United States has increased its forces from 21,000, by 21,000 from 38,000 to nearly 60,000 and has requested allies to provide additional civilian and military resources to prosecute this mission. The United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy Poland, Spain and Turkey and many other partners have also agreed to send more troops to Afghanistan.
Australia has therefore decided to increase its medium term contribution to Afghanistan, not as a blank cheque but with the explicit objective of training Afghan forces so that responsibility for Oruzgan province can in time be handed over to the Afghans themselves.
The Australian Government has no interest in Australian forces being in Afghanistan for a day longer than is necessary. That is also why it is necessary to be absolutely clear about our mission and the earliest basis for an exit strategy.
To reduce the threat of terrorist attacks on Australian citizens in the future, the Australian Government has decided to increase our Defence Force commitment in Afghanistan. A measured increase in Australian forces in Afghanistan will enhance the security of Australian citizens given that so many terrorists attacking Australians in the past have been trained in Afghanistan.
The additional commitment will comprise the following: around 100 additional troops to form two further Operational Mentoring and Liaison Teams joining the one team we already have in Oruzgan.
By increasing our training teams, we will significantly increase the ‘through-put' of Afghan National Army trainees. The aim is to deliver an ANA, that's Afghan National Army 4th Brigade in Oruzgan, ready to provide security in the Province as soon as they are able to assume those responsibilities.
The Afghan National Army 4th Brigade would consist of a brigade headquarters, three infantry Kandaks - the equivalent of three battalions - a combat support Kandak, a combat service support and garrison Kandak, as well as a highway security Kandak. The total size of the Afghan brigade will be approximately 3,300 personnel.
Furthermore we propose to increase the logistic support forces and force protection elements necessary to sustain our operations in Oruzgan Province with a further 70 soldiers or so. Further, to provide an engineering construction team of approximately 40 personnel to assist in the extension and upgrade of the critical Tarin Kowt Airfield and camp facilities.
Furthermore, increase the number of embedded planning and staff officers to approximately 70. These embedded officers will be placed in United States or Coalition headquarters where operational and tactical decisions on the employment of Australian forces will be made, thereby ensuring we have a direct input and oversight of the involvement of our forces.
There are in these additional forces I have listed, no additional formed combat units. Our aim is to train Afghans to take a proper role in their own security and the primary role of the new units will be training. The new units will have the ability to defend themselves, given the nature of operations there and given that training of Afghan units will inevitably involve operations with the ANA forces in the field. Nonetheless I emphasise that the principal purpose of the additional forces is training.
The new commitment, like our existing involvement, will be under the United Nations authority of the Afghanistan mission, approved by the UN Security Council. I have asked the Chief of the Defence Force to take every practicable measure to ensure that our troops are supported in every respect for the task ahead of them. 
I have asked him to make sure in particular that our forces have the training, skills and equipment they need to protect themselves and do their important work in Afghanistan.
At the core of our strategy is the plan for Afghans to take a greater role in their own security. They must be trained and prepared. That is why, in addition to the reinforcement of ADF training teams that I have indicated above, the Government will also contribute around $55 million per annum to the Afghan National Army Trust Fund to further contribute to an effective ANA force in Oruzgan Province. Again our objective is to transfer security to the Afghans as soon as practicably possible.
Separate from the commitments set out above, Australia will also provide short-term military support to assist with security for the Afghanistan elections in August, for eight months. About 120 additional troops, an infantry company, will deploy to cover short-term security requirements of the elections scheduled for August and provide force protection for training teams immediately after the election. This company, which has a combat capability, will return to Australia following its eight month tour of duty.
We are as I said before, in Afghanistan for the long-haul. Ours however is not an open-ended military commitment. We must move with clear purpose to train Afghans to provide for their own security, thereby countering the insurgency and denying terrorists a haven for their training and operations. As our training effort in Oruzgan comes to a point of completion, we will then be in a better position to reassess what further contribution we might make. While our military contribution is not open-ended, by far the longest haul will be our civilian commitment to the country and the people of Afghanistan.
There is a real need to balance our significant military commitment with a strong economic development effort. Security, particularly in Southern Afghanistan, remains a key challenge to delivering an effective civilian contribution. To this end, we will increase our civilian efforts in terms of governance, reconstruction and development assistance.
Since 2001 Australia has committed $600 million for aid, capacity building and reconstruction, which includes a pledge by the Government in June 2008 of $250 million for development and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan over the next three years. We will also be increasing the number of AusAID officers in Afghanistan, who will work with other donors to support reconstruction, capacity-building and development efforts.
So far, Australia has been responsible for the following: constructing the Tarin Kowt Eastern Causeway and other vital road bridges; redevelopment of the Tarin Kowt Provincial Hospital; construction of the Afghan Health and Development Services Training Centre; upgrading the Yaklenhah Health Clinic; supporting the Tarin Kowt Waste Management project; constructing the Tarin Kowt Boys Primary School Redevelopment; upgrading the Tarin Kowt Boys High School; supporting the Trade Training School; distributing around 6,800 metric tons of emergency wheat; supporting the Afghan Red Crescent Society to provide emergency aid for approximately 50,000 displaced persons; and delivered Mine Risk Education to over 4,000 people.
And furthermore, in partnership with the World Bank, assisting in the construction of over 60 schools and we have delivered over 40 community infrastructure projects that improved water supply and sanitation.
Our people have been very busy in the field, doing good civilian work in the Province for which we have responsibility.
We will deploy an additional Australian Federal Police training and advisory team of approximately ten officers to train and advise the Afghan National Police. These civilian efforts will help ensure, for each military success that we have, that success is appropriately reinforced through policing efforts and development assistance that strengthens, also the local economy.
In order to support a successful outcome to the Afghan elections due in August, in addition to the infantry company, we propose providing a small team of civilian monitors to oversee the technical aspect of polling in Oruzgan. This adds to the $8 million in assistance we already provided to support voter registration in the election process.
Coalition partners agree on the need to make a greater effort to address the challenge of terrorist training operations across the Pakistan border in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. The porous nature of the frontier between Afghanistan and Pakistan means that problems with their source in Afghanistan have made their way into Pakistan.
To make the international community's efforts in Afghanistan effective, we and other partners need to engage diplomatically more deeply with Pakistan.
The Government will continue to work with the Government of Pakistan and encourage Pakistan to act on the problems of terrorist training and operations within its borders. This is vital work. Maintaining the viability and integrity of the Pakistani State  -  a country of some 175 million people  -  is of vital interest to Australia.
But importantly, our engagement with Pakistan is not limited to the challenge of security. Australia will work with Pakistan across a range of fields including through a significantly increased development assistance program and through trade.
Australia is a founding member of the Friends of Democratic Pakistan, and recently announced a significant increase in our assistance to Pakistan to deal with its internal challenges.
We want to help strengthen Pakistan, improving the lives of its people and engaging with its government to play our part in rolling back the threat of militancy and terrorism. We stand ready to assist the Government of Pakistan to meet these challenges.
To help coordinate and drive this new level of effort, the Government has decided to appoint Mr Ric Smith as Australia's Special Envoy for Afghanistan and Pakistan. Mr Smith will work closely with the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan and with the representatives of our allies and partners, including Ambassador Holbrooke of the United States. Our Special Envoy will ensure that Australia's new commitment is integrated into the broader international effort and that Australia's mission in Afghanistan is being implemented within a reasonable timeframe.
To conclude, we cannot ignore this cold hard strategic fact: less security in Afghanistan means less security for Australians. Handing Afghanistan back to terrorist control will increase the threat to all Australians.
This commitment that we have announced today is not a blank cheque but is focused on training the Afghans to manage their own security, thereby allowing Australia to bring our military combat operations to a close. The successful training of the ANA over time is our exit strategy for Australia's combat units in Oruzgan Province.
Today, I have announced an increase in our troop commitment from 1100 to around 1550. We will also increase our police training presence as well as our governance and development assistance efforts.
I have discussed this additional commitment with President Obama last week, following extensive deliberations by the National Security Committee of the Australian Cabinet. 
Cabinet yesterday, full Cabinet, endorsed this commitment.
As I make these further commitments today, I am acutely conscious of the fact that I am placing more Australians in harm's way. And I fear that more Australians will lose their lives in the fight that lies ahead.
I am also conscious of the price already paid by Australian service personnel in Afghanistan. I am conscious of the terrible toll on families and loved ones of the ten Australian personnel who have died and of the many who have been wounded. I am also conscious of the impact on our wider Australian community.
But Australia will not bow to the threat of terrorism in Afghanistan. And we will continue to stand by our American ally in confronting this threat because failure to do so would only compound the terrorist threat to Australian, American and other nationals at home and abroad. I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Do you have benchmarks built into the Australian commitment now, are you satisfied that the Americans have sufficient benchmarking? If not, is it meaningless to say we're not giving an open cheque (inaudible).
PM: The importance in the statement I have made today Michelle, is to clearly define the Australian mission, a mission concerning strategic denial, a mission concerning, providing the necessary support to the Afghan state to make to strategic denial possible, and thirdly, the application of that mission to our responsibilities within Oruzgan.
Therefore, for the future in benchmarking, it goes to the pace and intensity of the preparation of the Afghan National Army Brigade that I referred to.
This will take some time. The reason we are adding extra training units is because we need to train more Afghans now and do it more effectively.
Training an Afghan Brigade is a large mission. It is a large task. But that is now explicitly the benchmark to which we are attaching ourselves.
Secondly, to reinforce that with appropriate training for Afghan Police within that province, so that they can assume policing responsibilities in areas where the security footprint has been extended. And thirdly, to enhance the civilian capacity of the provincial administration of Oruzgan.
All three of these sub-elements of the mission, being necessary to do in order to reach the benchmark which justifies the withdrawal of Australian combat units. That is a very specific set of benchmarks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you accept that the only lasting solution to Afghanistan, and indeed neighbouring Pakistan, is some sort of political settlement? Maybe with elements of the Taliban, but certainly with the desperate, disparate rather, and more extreme elements of those two countries?
PM: An effective long term strategy for Afghanistan involves at least three elements. One, the military strategy to which we just referred.
Two, the civilian assistance strategy in order to boost provincial administration, particularly across the country, and I refer particularly to the province for which we're responsible.
Thirdly, a diplomatic strategy. A diplomatic strategy involving all those elements who make up the total security policy equation. And that means, that part of my remarks before concerning a deeper engagement with the Government of Pakistan.
I noted carefully what President Obama has said about the need to engage all elements, in order to bring about a long term effective political and diplomatic solution. I agree with him.
It is an integrated strategy which has the best prospect for success here, covering off the diplomatic, the political, the civilian aid component, and the military effort at its core.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you use the words reasonable timeframe, I think three times, twice in relation to a handover. Clearly the idea is important to your understanding of planning and of benchmarks. What is a reasonable timeframe for a handover?
PM: Our judgment on that Tim is that the best way of explaining that to our forces in the field and to the Australian people is to attach that to the benchmark of the training of this Afghan National Army Brigade and the associated elements of police and civilian infrastructure within the province.
I cannot tell you specifically which day and month that task will be concluded.
What I can say to you is that this is a clear cut benchmark to which we are moving.
It will take a lot of effort. It will take a fair bit of time. But I don't wish to mislead people about the precise length of time it will take.
There are always setbacks in the field in reaching the training targets to which I have referred. But the strategic mission is clear.
To handover responsibility to the Afghan National Army, police and civilian administration as early as possible, so that we can bring our combat units home.
JOURNALIST: More on the timeframe, Cabinet must have considered the range of possible amounts of time it takes to train a 4th Brigade of the ANA in Oruzgan. Can you not say in general terms about any precise dates of the timeframe?
PM: In our multiple discussions over a considerable period of time, we've been acutely conscious of what level of Afghan National Army presence you need to provide adequate security for the province long term. How many battalions make up that brigade and the training effort necessary to raise those battalions at a level of effectiveness over time. And the support elements from police as well as capacity of building within the provincial administration.
We also had many discussions about the setbacks which occurred. And if you looked at the evolution so far of the training effort involving Afghan National Army forces across the country, there are many models to look at, positive and negative.
That is why we believe it is much better to be clear cut about the fact that this is going to take some time, hopefully a reasonable timeframe to produce this outcome in raising this brigade.
But what I know for a fact is this: until that brigade is raised, with the appropriate support elements, then we cannot provide a basis upon which to transfer security to the Afghanistan National Army and to the provincial administration, as a basis for the withdrawal of Australian combat units.
Remember in the case of Iraq that is the points at which we finally reached in Al Muthanna Province.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Australian people might be running out of patience with regard to Afghanistan, Mr Rudd?
PM: I think this is going to become progressively an unpopular war. I accept that for the reality that it is. I am also seized at the fact that we have a responsibility to prevent Afghanistan from becoming a training base again for terrorists to go out and kill more Australians. And that we have a responsibility to our American ally consistent with our Treaty obligations.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, will the police be involved in a similar training role to the army, in that they'll be embedded with Afghan Police, and will they be armed?
PM: On the question of the precise elements of the police deployment, we'll have a further statement to make. We are working that element of it through with our friends in Afghanistan.
Already, we have some limited police elements on the ground working at the staff level, with our partners in the Afghan National Police, as I'm advised. We will expand that mission.
As to its detailed characteristics, I would prefer to rely upon a subsequent statement we will make once the finality of those administrative arrangements are in place.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned $55 million a year to a trust fund for the Afghan National Army, can you tell us what that will be spent on, is that going to salaries, is it hardware, how will that be spent?
PM: All of the above, because in our discussions with our American friends, it is quite plain that this is a way of providing, let's call it, an underpinning resource base to raise not just the force in the province for which we are responsible, conjointly, Oruzgan, but also to raise the necessary strength across the ANA nationwide.
There has been a lack of resources to do this up until now and certainly in my discussions with the Americans, including most recently on this particular subject, Secretary Gates of the US Defense Department, that this was a necessary part in the overall plan, a generic pool of funds, contributed to by allies and partners of the United States as well as the individual training efforts that we are putting in on a provincial basis.
Both are necessary in our judgement to get to the end point, which is to train sufficient Afghan National Army personnel to transfer security responsibility to them so that our combat units can be brought home.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) You are going to be meeting the Premiers tomorrow in COAG, just wondering if you could give us an idea as to your agenda for that and secondly, the extent to which  - 
PM: (inaudible) more peaceful than Afghanistan.
JOURNALIST: The extent to which the global recession is hampering your efforts as you outlined in the election campaign to use COAG to drive some major structural reform in this country.
PM: Matthew I take the view that, I may have said this not long after we assumed Government, is that COAG is a workhorse of the federation and that is the enduring long term tasks of microeconomic reform don't disappear because of a global economic recession, they continue to have to be prosecuted.
And in fact, when we look forward to a time of global economic recovery, it is going to be important to ensure that that reform agenda hasn't fallen by the wayside.
So those reforms will be front and centre to our deliberations in Hobart as well. Some of them will be by way of progress reports on what has been done so far. Others will be by way of commissioning further action.
The second point I would make is, COAG as a workhorse for the federation also means us working together to make sure that we are providing the best support for people who at present, for our fellow Australians who are finding it difficult to get a job, who are in danger of losing a job, or who have lost a job.
You heard me speak recently in Melbourne on a speech which I described as a ‘jobs and training compact with Australia'.
To make that work, particularly a compact with young Australians, we need to be working as one, with States and Territories, and that is so much part of the agenda which we have before us in Hobart tomorrow.
So on those two sets of practical areas, we have a job of work ahead of us in Hobart. There will be further meetings during the course of the year. Some of these meetings may be more or less spectacular than others, but we intend to drive a long term economic reform agenda forward, as well as immediate responses to deal with the jobs and training imperative brought to us courtesy of the global recession.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) commentators will say that we should be committing more troops to Afghanistan, that we should be looking to take complete control of the Oruzgan Province ourselves and that we should be committing more than you are committing today. What do you say to that?
PM: We believe that we have got the calibration of our response right. I mean I have had long, long conversations with Angus and with Duncan and with Stephen and with Joel and with their respective American counterparts. And we think we have got the balance about right here.
Remember, we are in one province primarily, Oruzgan. And I take seriously our responsibilities there to provide a basis for an exit strategy over a reasonable period of time for Australian combat units.
The logic flows from one point to the next - and I will take your question after another one over here - is that if that is the mission then it means you have got to train more people.
And you have got to train more people and raise the brigade that I spoke to before in partnership with our Dutch partners and others, we are going to have to get cracking to make sure the training occurs. And that is why the overwhelming emphasis of what I have described here today goes to that enhanced training effort.
JOURNALIST: On the question of timing, are you saying that the military cannot provide an estimate, a broad estimate if not a precise one of how long it would take to train (inaudible).
PM: What I am saying Michelle is that life experience in Afghanistan suggests, for every two steps forward you take, there is a step backwards, and that is particularly in relation to the training effort. Let's just be realistic about this and look at the experience of so many of our fellow combatants in Afghanistan in their training efforts.
I am not going to mislead Australians about how complex and challenging that is. It is. But what I want is clear cut mission statement as the end point we want to get to, which is to raise that brigade.
That is why I detailed this constituent battalion formation before and the other elements of the necessary effort we need in order to secure long term, a long term exist strategy. These are concrete benchmarks.
JOURNALIST: Sorry to interrupt you Mr Rudd, but essentially  - 
PM: Sorry to have interrupted you before (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Essentially this is drawing the line under the length and extent of our commitment to Afghanistan, you are basically saying we are definitely not going to be replacing the Dutch when they leave Oruzgan and so essentially, there is going to be no more, no further deployment of combat troops.
PM: As I said before, this deployment of ours, this additional deployment of ours has as its overwhelming emphasis, an enhanced training capability, with a strategic mission in mind, raising an Afghan National Army Brigade, because it is brigade strength which is necessary to transfer security in the province and to provide a basis for the exit of our own combat units.
I think the logic of that is pretty clear cut. In terms of the future disposition of the deployments of the Kingdom of Netherlands and others, and the United States, obviously those are matters for continued deliberation between Governments.
Our mission is as I have described it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: What I said before Bonge was, I defined clearly what the Government's mission in Afghanistan is, in three points. I said in third point it reflected precisely what we proposed to do within the Province, and the constituent elements of that, which go to the Brigade, which go to police support elements and which goes to enhancing provincial Government capability, so that you can turn around at a point and effectively say, here is an effective transfer of responsibility.
That, I believe is the responsible course of action. That is what we are embarked upon. And the overriding mission here again is to ensure that in our part of Afghanistan, for which we are responsible, that we are executing a proper and considered strategy of strategic denial for terrorists so that they no longer have Afghanistan as a safe haven or as an operating base for terrorist attacks against Australian citizens in the future.
Let us never forget what happened in Bali. Let us never forget the murderous attacks which have happened elsewhere in the world. And let us never forget that a large slice of the terrorists responsible for that were trained in Afghanistan, when it was an open running field of operations for terrorists from terrorism central.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd just on another topic, there has been renewed calls in recent weeks for Australia to rethink middle class welfare, I know you won't comment specifically on what is in the budget in two weeks time but can I ask you philosophically, do you share the view that Australia has over time been encouraged to have something of an entitlement mentality where even people in households that are earning pretty healthy incomes, feel like other taxpayers should be giving them (inaudible)
PM: We are in a nation where everyone has got to pitch in and do their bit. As I have said before this will be a very, very tough budget, framed under the toughest set of global economic circumstances any Government has faced for three quarters of a century.
That is just the reality that we face. As for the detailed elements of the answer which you seek indirectly, they will be reflected on Budget night.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) some of the tax bonus payments is being sliced off by tax agents?
PM: Well our interest is out there making sure that pensioners, veterans, carers, families, are getting the payments that we provide in order to provide short term economic stimulus to support the 1.5 million Australians who are out there working in the retail sector.
I regard that as important work and I get pretty upset if anyone gets in the road of that. Our objective is a huge slice of our Australian family, out there, working in shops across the country  -  and their jobs are really important.
We are also going to kick in with stimulus, medium term stimulus, with the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. And we will be kicking in with longer term stimulus to the biggest infrastructure project since we have seen since the Snowy and before the Snowy, with the National Broadband Network.
Operating at all these three levels, we are providing stimulus and I will be pretty disappointed if anyone is getting in the way of any of that.
[Ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is an honour to launch officially the John Button Prize tonight.
It is equally an honour to serve as a patron of the John Button Foundation.
This will be the most lucrative prize in the nation for political writing.
And it's long overdue recognition of the importance of critical, thoughtful, political discourse beyond the Kibuki play that often passes for political debate in this country.
A healthy, vibrant democracy needs nourishment from healthy, vibrant political discourse.
Separating wheat from chaff.
Separating substance from sound bite.
Separating good policy from pure politics.
This Prize is about encouraging such public discourse for Australia.
It is also about saying that Australians value good writing and good public intellectual debate is important.
It's about saying that while the daily news is important, the deep trends of the decade past and the deeper trajectory for the decades ahead is even more important.
Put simply, it is saying that ideas matter, and that they matter profoundly, including Australia's response to the great global events that now confront the nation.
The Prize will award $20,000 to the best piece of writing on politics or public policy in Australia in the past 12 months.
The Foundation also hopes to be able to make a separate award to the best piece of public policy research, and, funds permitting, award a scholarship to an Indigenous student working in political science or public policy.
I strongly applaud each of these goals for the Foundation.
John Button
I am also pleased to see an award that will honour the life of John Button, a proud son of the Labor Party, a proud son of Victoria, and a proud son of Australia.
John Button was an remarkable Industry Minister; almost certainly the most effective minister ever to serve in that portfolio in Australian history.
He was an integral part of a government that played a critical role in transforming the Australian economy, from the closed, almost sclerotic economy of McEwenism in the past to the open economy of the future.
He and his colleagues were audacious, adventurous thinkers, not afraid to take hard decisions in the pursuit of long-term reform.
And the end point of their agenda: to advance opportunity for all, to reward individual hard work, achievement and success while always protecting the weak.
The good society.
As others have called it, the Great Society.
A public purpose well beyond the mere aggregation of individual greed  -  an exercise in aggregation that neo-liberals afford the gallant term “a philosophy”.
Some may describe unrestrained greed as a philosophy.
Others more accurately, an ideology.
Others again, neither philosophy nor ideology, simply a malady.
But John Button's contribution to Australia therefore goes beyond his role in internationalising the Australian economy and the transformation of Australian industry during the 1980s and 1990s.
John always understood that it was ideas that changed politics, that changed economies and that changed societies.
He understood that as a minister.
And he understood it when he left politics to write three books about his experience and his outstanding Quarterly Essay on the future of Labor, Beyond Belief, that won the Victorian Premiers Literary Award in 2003.
As John Cain said at his funeral last year, John Button was never a one-dimensional politician.
Some would say he was a great writer whose talent was lost on politics.
Others might say he was a great politician whose talents were wasted on writing.
I'd say he loved both politics and writing  -  and he made an outstanding, unique, contribution to both.
John Button's life offers inspiration for us all engaged in public life  -  that there is a land to occupy between the sterile world of political apparatchiks on the one hand and dreamy almost other-wordly intellectuals on the other.
Some might describe this as normal-land, be it of the left or of the right.
I call it a real political life, driven by ideas for the future but enjoyed equally in the brutal praxis of the present.
John was a big fan of George Orwell as a writer, and Ben Chifley as a politician.
He liked people who said it the way they thought it.
And that view informed his life as a politician and as a writer.
In his autobiography, As It Happened, he wrote about his early ambitions: 
“I wanted to be a writer. Other things happened. My life went in different directions, including a long spell in politics.''
Well, we in the Labor Party  -  and all Australians  -  are much the better for that.
His spirit has helped shape the soul of the modern Labor Party.
And political debate in Australia today is the lesser for John having left us.
Australian political writing
The establishment of the John Button Prize comes at a time of great political and intellectual change in Australia.
The most obvious observation one can make is of course the threat to traditional media from technological change.
Business models are changing as old revenue streams dwindle and readers switch online.
So too, the nightly news bulletins face much heavier competition from round-the-clock news services and online publications.
Media organisations are also in the front line of those affected by the global recession because of their sensitivity to changes in advertising and marketing spending.
The result seems to be that fewer resources will be stretched further.
Yet at the same time, we see new voices emerging both in traditional media and online.
There has perhaps never in our lifetimes been such a range of publishers and small magazines, producing such thoughtful explorations of Australian politics and culture.
Melbourne is home to many of them.
Indeed, the innovation experts would tell us that the cluster of small publishing houses in Melbourne represent something of an “innovation hub”.
Although I am cautious about such pronouncements - as the Premier can attest, when you hear such statements with an interesting adjective attached to the word “hub”, they are usually to a plea for public funds.
Among magazines we would think of Quarterly Essay and The Monthly among others  -  which have both seen some outstanding contributions.
They've also seen some very lengthy but nonetheless outstanding contributions  -  like a certain 7,700 word essay on the global financial crisis.
I doubt that particular contribution will get any nominations for the brevity division of the John Button Prize.
Haiku it is not.
We might also think of titles such as Meanjin and Overland  -  both of them great Australian titles that have been reinvigorated in recent years.
As well as Heat in Sydney and Griffith Review in Brisbane.
Among publishers, there is Penguin, a great publishing house that in recent years has renewed its focus on Australian culture with the publication of some great non-fiction books; there is also Text, Black Inc, Scribe and Melbourne University Press in Melbourne; while prominent names in Sydney include Allen and Unwin, Random House, Harper Collins and University of New South Wales Press; and then in Brisbane, the Queensland University Press.
In short, at a time when we are all crying ‘time poor', when the digital revolution is said to be atomising our attention spans, when some accuse the mainstream media of sensationalising the news, the truth is we are witnessing a welcome enlargement of our national intellectual life.
And allow me to say something quite revolutionary against the norms advanced by my predecessor  -  this is a good thing, not a bad thing.
The new media environment
As we all know, the mainstream media is facing profound challenges.
Newspapers all over the world are challenged by the capacity of the Internet to eat into their traditional reader base and advertiser revenues.
And they are challenged by the changing habits of the young, who get so much of their news and entertainment on-line.
Some pundits in the publishing world divide their readership into two groups  -  the “digital immigrants” and the “digital natives”.
The digital immigrants are those over 35 who as adults have migrated to the new digital world unfolding so fast around us.
Those under 35, by contrast, are digital natives. They live with ease in the digital world and less familiar with more traditional products such as hard copy newspapers and magazines, and even mainstream television news and current affairs.
In this schema, I'm unashamedly an immigrant, and I carry two passports.
An immigrant who reads a lot on his blackberry.
But who loves going home to the thwack of the paper on the front step on the weekend, to read the news stretched out on a bold and physical canvas.
The challenge for both our professions  -  politics and journalism  -  or, more broadly, politics and writing  -  or politics and the media  -  is to continue to preserve a public commons through which the nation can continue to have a public discourse on the nation's present the nation's future.
This is not just the responsibility of public broadcasting, important as that may be.
It is a wider responsibility for us all in public and private broadcasting, new and old media, in politics and in journalism.
This challenge is made greater with the individualisation and the atomisation of debate that has been accelerated by the revolution in information technology  -  a process that has reduced the role of traditional media that serve as a common forum for the great debates of our age.
Because what is ultimately at stake here is how our democracy itself evolves - given the traditional means through which a democracy has had much of its life, being and conversation for the last half century is undergoing radical transformation.
This will require careful husbanding by us all.
But the encouraging news is that both because of and despite the information revolution, public intellectual debate in Australia is alive and well.
It's my hope that the John Button Prize becomes a prestigious award for the best of Australian journalism and political writing.
In particular, I hope it can throw a spotlight on the best emerging talent among writers.
And in an age when we can more easily treat ourselves to the best of international journalism, I hope it can nurture a distinctly Australian voice.
If it succeeds in so doing, it will help build a richer political culture, a stronger democracy and therefore a more humane future.
And it comes at a time when there is a whole new public debate opening up around the world on the future of social democracy after the collapse of the prevailing neoliberal orthodoxy  -  a debate about the future that is more open now than at any time in the last quarter of a century.
So with great optimism in the future of our democracy at large, and great enthusiasm for the great debate now launched on the future of our social democratic project both here and abroad, I'm delighted to launch the John Button Prize, and to pay tribute to John himself, a pioneer in this great enterprise.


PM RUDD: First of all to begin by thanking the Tasmanian Premier David Bartlett for his hospitality and that of the Tasmanian Government in hosting myself and colleagues from the other States and Territories in Hobart today at this meeting of the Council of Australian Governments. The Premier today reminded us that it's 15 years since COAG met in Hobart. In fact I attended that meeting as an official. And it's good to be back in Tasmania and it's been too long since COAG was last here.
COAG, in the period since I've become Prime Minister, we have sought to make it a work horse for the Australian nation. In other words taking key policy challenges which face us, getting the heads of Government together, reaching resolve and then moving on with the great tasks ahead for the future of our nation. One of which of course has been a rolling program of microeconomic reform and we've done that in the past and we'll continue to do that in the future. Another is to make sure that we are advancing our practical cooperative arrangements in key service delivery areas like health and like education and services to Indigenous Australians. It was very much the feature of earlier Council of Australian Governments meetings in which we've engaged.
And of course the great challenge that we've been wrestling with today is our response to the impact of the global economic recession. This recession is no respecter of persons, it's no respecter of countries, it's no respecter of economies and it's no respecter of State jurisdictional arrangements. It affects all of us. It affects our revenues, it affects our ability to deliver services to the people who depend on us to so do and of course it affects unemployment in each of our jurisdictions as well.
That brings us to the first core item that we sought to address today and that is what do we do to provide real help, real support and real assistance to those Australians who through no fault of their own have lost their jobs, may lose their jobs or who can't find a job. And that is why today we have agreed as the Council of Australian Governments on a new Jobs and Training Compact for young Australians.
Specifically what we are seeking to do is to make sure that through this time of global recession and the recession as it affects directly Australia, that our young people have an opportunity to use this time to obtain new skills, take their existing skills and upgrade them, so that when the global economic recovery kicks in, those new skills can be deployed by themselves and by businesses in the economy at large to underpin our next phase of economic growth. This we regard as an important step forward in our response to the challenge of unemployment.
Specifically, what do we mean by this? Firstly, there is a provision whereby anyone under the age of 17 must be earning or learning. They must be in full time school, training or work. Secondly it means that if someone is under the age of 25 and they are not working, they are guaranteed a training place to ensure that they have the skills needed to be part of the recovery. Thirdly what we've also agreed today, for the first time is that our national target of 90 per cent year 12 equivalent retention should be brought forward from the year 2020 to the year 2015. These are three concrete agreements which we've reached as part of our national compact with young Australians.
The point of these measures is as follows: we don't want to repeat the mistakes of the past whereby young people who lose their job today become the long term unemployed of tomorrow. That's the key organising principle here. And this action that we have taken together today is aimed to help ensure that young Australians who lose their job in this recession are ready as the tradespeople and the professionals of tomorrow once the recovery comes. We cannot allow and we will not allow as governments, the skills and training needed by a growing modern economy to skip a generation because of the global recession.
This compact with young Australians will ensure that every Australian under the age of 25 will be entitled to an education or training place. This is an important undertaking to the nation, an important undertaking to mums and dads concerned out there about their kids, an important undertaking to young Australians themselves.
The other part of this initiative is that we've also strengthened conditionality in welfare payments. To support this new Compact, the Commonwealth Government will strengthen the conditions unemployed young people must pass to receive the youth allowance. Anyone under the age of 20 without a year 12 equivalent qualification must be in education or training in order to receive Youth Allowance. The same conditions must be met if parents of young people in the same circumstances wish to receive Family Tax Benefit A.
This therefore, taken together, the three principles I referred to before, underpinned by these changes in welfare arrangements are designed to not repeat the mistakes of the past, to provide the best possible opportunity for young people affected by this global recession to make the most of this time to obtain new skills, which they can deploy for the economy, their families and themselves once the recovery comes.
Secondly, in terms of our response to the global recession, we were briefed today by the Commonwealth Coordinator General on the progress of the implementation of the Commonwealth's Nation Building and Jobs plan. This is a $30 billion investment in jobs today and the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. A $30 billion investment, including the largest school modernisation program in the country's history, the largest single investment in social housing in the country's history and also a significant investment in energy efficiency within owner-occupied dwellings through the installation of ceiling insulation.
The Coordinator General reported that so far over 5,000 schools have been approved for essential repairs across the country; money flows from next week. We're also advised that around 140 houses are already being built by Defence housing and state housing agencies across the country. We're advised that road safety work is now being done across the country under the national Black Spots Program. This is an important monitoring process for us to make sure that what we've agreed in Canberra is being rolled out across the nation.
I say again what I've said before, our ambition unapologetically is to turn every primary school in the country into a construction site. To provide jobs for tradies here and now and build the best schools possible for the 21st Century.
We also today received a report from the Deputy National Security Adviser on the current of state of the swine influenza situation as it affects Australia and the world. What heads of Government agreed to today was to take all necessary measures to assist in preventing the introduction, the establishment or the spread of swine influenza in Australia.
Various measures as you would be aware have been initiated by the Commonwealth already. Information has been provided to emergency departments and GPs on the known characteristics and risk factors of the disease. Travel advice has also been updated. We have established a swine influenza hotline. Airports have had a clinical presence, with nurses available, and on the advice of the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, the Government has included swine influenza to be a quarantinable disease.
Further to those measures, I am advised today that the Health Minister in Melbourne has announced new measures which will be undertaken to combat the outbreak of this disease. Firstly, upon receipt of advice from the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, thermal scanners will be switched on progressively in eight Australian international airports - Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane, Cairns, Gold Coast, Darwin. Furthermore, from tomorrow evening, all international passengers will be asked to fill in health declaration cards to report any flu-like symptoms. These are two practical measures.
There is a third which the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer has asked myself and the Premiers and Chief Ministers to convey to the Australian nation today, a very practical measure, which is for all Australians to engage in the simple practice of washing their hands with soap on a regular basis as a very practical measure to reduce the spread of this disease if and when it comes to Australia. And I would urge that advice on all Australians.
Furthermore we were today as heads of Government, meeting as the Council of Australian Governments, also focused on the most recent natural disaster in our country, the bushfires in Victoria. To remind the nation, this was the single largest natural disaster in our country's history. What we've agreed today is to develop a national telephone emergency warning system. The Commonwealth will invest up to $15 million to assist the States and Territories to establish this national system. It will be operated on an ongoing basis by State and Territory authorities and will be developed following an pen tender process.
This represents consistent coordinated actions on behalf of our officials and we believe represents an important step forward for the future. This will not be a foolproof system for the future but it does represent an important step forward in providing the best possible emergency warning system in the case of future natural disasters.
If I could conclude on this: one other practical piece of work and I might ask the Queensland Premier to comment on this presently is our agreement today in a national framework for the protection of Australia's children. This has involved a lot of work between Commonwealth and State and Territory officials over a lot of time and we believe that this represents an important step forward in protecting the most vulnerable of our Australian family; our children.
The Australian Government is providing $61.6 million over four years to help protect Australia's vulnerable children from child abuse and neglect under this new national framework for protecting Australia's children. I would thank State and Territory colleagues for their cooperation in bringing this about. It's involved a considerable number of changes in the procedures which have operated up until now between the various levels of Government. We believe this represents an important step forward for the future.
That's enough from me, I might then turn to the Chairman of CAF, the Queensland Premier Anna Bligh, to add to those remarks.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank-you Prime Minister. Today saw cooperative federalism take another step forward with a range of agreements in areas of critical importance to the nation. Not only in areas of immediate imperative such as actions between State and Federal Governments to deal with the prospect of a possible outbreak of swine flu in Australia but in those big areas of national challenge, namely dealing with the global financial crisis and its fallout and in addressing the long term impact of climate change.
In the area of addressing the economic issues, the Premiers are very, very pleased to be working with the Commonwealth to implement a new Youth Compact for the young people of Australia. The Youth Compact will ensure firstly nationally consistent arrangements for the first time for young people aged 15 to 17. There will now be nationally consistent requirements legislated that will require all young people aged 15 to 17 to be either in school, in work or in some form of training. Queensland legislated these requirements a number of years ago and we have seen very, very strong results, particularly in the training and apprenticeships field as a result.
In addition to young people in the 15 to 17 year group, Premiers have agreed with the Commonwealth to implement a guarantee or an entitlement for young people aged 19 to 24 who are not at work, who are able to access training places. So what we're looking to do is ensure that young people in these very difficult economic times can access training places. That will then stand all of us in good stead as the economy returns to prosperity with those skills ready to go forward and take advantage of new opportunities.
This decision for a Youth Compact reflects the determination of every State and Territory along with the Commonwealth to ensure that young people do not slip through the cracks of any of our systems as we confront the global financial crisis. Similarly, we have reached agreement on a new national licensing system that will see nationally consistent licensing arrangements for a range of trades and occupations. Again, streamlining the arrangements for businesses and for individuals as they move around as part of a nationally consistent model.
In relation to our determination to tackle climate change, States and Territories have agreed to the implementation of a 20 per cent Renewable Energy Target and agreed to put in place arrangements in their own states to facilitate the implementation of a Renewable Energy Target, as well as to begin the process of implementing more energy efficient building codes so that we can start to see much more efficient use of energy.
In relation to the Child Protection Framework that was agreed today, this is a very important of piece of protecting our children. Almost 10 years ago the States of Australia and the child protection systems in them agreed to a process to bring down and to remove any impediments to the sharing of information about children who are at risk or had been subject to abuse by their families so that if families who had been abusing their children moved out of States where they were being assessed and monitored by a jurisdiction could be picked up in other States.
Unfortunately, the Commonwealth Government had never been prepared to come to the party and lift similar impediments in relation to information held by organisations like Centrelink or Medicare that could assist in dealing with the protection of children in this circumstance.
The decision today in a national child protection framework for the first time brings the Commonwealth agencies into information sharing arrangements that in my view have the capacity not only to protect children generally, but importantly in very serious cases of child abuse, possibly save the life of a child.
So as someone who was involved in that process over a number of years, I'm very, very pleased to see the Commonwealth lift these barriers on confidential information sharing. I think it's the last piece of the jigsaw in terms of the best child protection network that we can provide, and it really does I think make measure a very positive step forward.
I thank the Prime Minister on behalf of the States for that particular initiative.
PM: Just before we take in your questions, if I could just turn briefly to our host David Bartlett for some comments, and then we'll open to questions.
PREMIER BARTLETT: Thank you Prime Minister, and can I just welcome my colleagues here as the Prime Minister has already mentioned the first time in 15 years that COAG has been held in Hobart. We also welcome, Tasmania welcomes the leadership that's been shown in provision of the various aspects of stimulus packages and of course, in the National Broadband Network in the rollout of optic fibre that will take place in Tasmania.
First in the coming months, the Prime Minister and I have taken the opportunity to further some discussions about the benefits of that program for Tasmania and for the rest of the nation.
Two great results here at COAG today that I just want to briefly mention are of course around the Jobs and Training Youth Compact, an area that each State and speaking for Tasmania, have invested much in, in terms of post year 10 reforms.
I welcome particularly the announcement by the Prime Minister of $100 million of reward payments to those States and Territories who can lift their retention rates, post year 10 retention rates to the very ambitious target, a great target to set, of 90 per cent by 2015.
Tasmania stands at the bottom of the pile, and therefore has the most work to do in this area, and welcomes therefore the reward that will come with those achievements.
Secondly, the acknowledgement today and agreement round the table of the re-introduction or introduction of the Renewable Energy Targets across Australia will have a massive and significant effect on the hundreds of millions of dollars of stalled projects, that were stalled by the short-sighted decision of the Howard Government to remove the Renewable Energy Target.
Hundreds of millions of dollars of investment in renewable energies. The State that of course provides and produces the most renewable energy in Australia now will benefit significantly from this with projects that are ready to go in the coming months being dusted off and providing significant investment not only in jobs right now, but of course in low emissions energy for the future.
PM RUDD: Over to you colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you seem to be  - 
PM RUDD: Matthew, go ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM RUDD: Or does someone else want to go first? Okay, over to you Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Okay, so you seem to be saying that, can you guarantee that everyone who is not earning and wants to do training, that there is a space for everyone under 25 who wants that? How much is it going to cost? And where are you getting the money from?
And secondly, historically during recessions, training efforts have declined not increased. What would be the effect do you think in terms of empowering the nation for a recovery by having this level of training?
PM RUDD: This is for us a universal entitlement. And as described by one of my colleagues before, this is about earning or learning. And we don't want young Australians to be out there doing nothing. We want them to use this time of economic downturn to get new skills, to prepare themselves to re-engage in full-time employment or other levels of employment once the recovery kicks in. That's the organising principle here.
Secondly, let's go to the two component parts of it. One in relation to schools, the other in relation to post-school training opportunities.
As the Tasmanian Premier has just indicated, we've established a performance-based fund to provide direct financial incentives to those jurisdictions who will be moving from their current level of year 12 equivalent retention to the 90 per cent target we've set for 2015. Remember that's only six years away. And a lot of jurisdictions are a long way south of that. Some of them are much closer to it. But we're on about making a difference.
For the long term, using this time of adversity to turn it to opportunity because we know from the OECD data, the higher your level of year 12 equivalent retention in the economy, the higher the level of productivity that you'll generate in your economy. That's why we're doing it.
But also to provide real opportunities for those young people now. So the basis of payment is the incentive pool which I referred to just then.
In terms of those beyond year 12 equivalent, in terms of the age bracket through until they turn 25, the Commonwealth is already investing in a very, very large number of Productivity Training Places across the nation  -  some 711,000. These are relevant across a range of certificate levels. We would imagine that in exercising therefore the take-up of this universal training entitlement, that we'll draw significantly on those places and other training places which have been offered by the Commonwealth.
States and Territories will be in there matching effort with us on the way through. But you know something. We're determined to make a difference. We are seized by what's happened in earlier history. We are seized by what's gone wrong in the past. Let's make a difference this time, and this Compact with Young Australians is designed to do that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you also acknowledge that the Jobs Compact has a political element in that it takes young people out of the official unemployment figures?
PM RUDD: Well, if I was mum or dad out there and looking at my young person, son or daughter, I think I'd rather have them at school for in a registered training place than anywhere else if they can't get a full-time job.
That's where I'd rather have them. And that's important for families, it's important for self-esteem, it's important for long term economic productivity.
I think that's just good policy, and it's the right way to go.
It is an attempt by us as heads of governments, national, State and Territory, to make a difference compared with where we've gone in the past.
I think it's the right thing to do for the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the National Broadband Network that's being rolled out first in Tasmania. Is there any more detail on when that will happen, what the cost is, how much cost will be borne by the Commonwealth, how much by the State, and whether those small towns of 1,000 people or less in Tasmania will receive the full 100 megabits per second.
PM RUDD: You want to name those towns by name?
JOURNALIST: 68 of them, I think. We could be here for a while.
JOURNALIST: But you would know the ones in the marginal electorates.
PM RUDD: You could name all 68. First of all, this is a very important exercise in nation building. This Government's response to this global recession is how do you make a difference? How do you reduce the impact?
One - short term stimulus in terms of the payments we have unapologetically made to pensioners, veterans and carers to boost stimulus here and now to support jobs in the retail sector and beyond.
Secondly, medium term stimulus. The investment in school modernisation, social housing, and in energy efficiency measures to make a difference now, but also build infrastructure and improve energy efficiency over time.
Thirdly, long term infrastructure. A National Broadband Network, rolled out over a seven year plus period, beginning here in the great State of Tasmania in the second half of the year.
I cannot give you the month nor the day. But it will be in the second half of the year. I do recall in my previous conversation with Premier Bartlett about the particular concentration of smaller settlements in Tasmania, smaller towns, and because of their concentration around particular transport arteries, then it will be feasible here to link up a whole bunch of quite small communities, which were they spread across you know the vastness of the Australian continent would not necessarily be possible.
Our national target remains 90 per cent provision of 100 megabits per second. We think it's the right way to go to present, to prepare this economy to participate in the information age of the 21st century and to turbo charge our businesses, but I'm optimistic you're going to see a more intense layout here in Tasmania, simply because it's one of the virtues of being geographically small and compact.
There you go.
JOURNALIST: The Centre for International Economics has said that any emissions trading scheme threatens the balance sheet of key industries. If the Greens policies and requests are unrealistic, is it time the government to compromise with the coalition in the Senate?
PM RUDD: I would like to simply point to the fact that Mr Turnbull has said up until now that he's been waiting for, first of all I think the Government Green Paper, then the White Paper, then our legislation, then their own piece of commissioned research before setting a target themselves for the future. I'm waiting to see the target.
We've simply crossed each one of those hurdles and what we've had from Mr Turnbull is a series of negative attacks, but not a positive policy on targets.
Each one of these studies have now been done and concluded. What's missing is the Coalition's policies.
So you say with whom should the Government cooperate? There is a complete vacuum in terms of Liberal Party policy nationally.
We believe we've got the balance right in this. We've worked and continue to work closely with stakeholders at the Federal and State level, with businesses and with others. This is tough policy, it is hard policy, it is difficult policy.
I fully accept that. And we are aiming to deal with two major realities. How do you negotiate your way through this global economic recession to provide maximum support for jobs and businesses on the way through? And how do you prepare Australia for a lower carbon economy, given the impact and the imperative of climate change?
Getting the balance right is really hard. We're determined, however, to prosecute a plan for the future. We've outlined our thinking. We've outlined our proposal. We continue to work with stakeholders. But it will be absolutely wrong for us simply to say, all too hard, push it in the too hard basket, and forget about it for the future.
Too many governments have done that in the past. We intend to get on with the business. I don't underestimate the degree of political difficulty.
Over there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will you get that carbon reduction scheme through the Senate when the Opposition today said it's deeply flawed and the Greens say it doesn't go far enough?
PM RUDD: Well if you are confronted with an Opposition in the Senate which says the Government's legislation is deeply flawed, that is not a unique statement on the part of the Opposition about everything we've put before the Senate so far. That's point one.
Point two, I noted carefully of course what the Greens and others have said about it. As we've approached the Senate in the past with important legislation, a whole bunch of things are said by people at different times. Our job is to try and punch this through. It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, and we'll continue to work with stakeholders on the way through.
The alternative is to do nothing. For 12 years, for 12 years our predecessors did nothing. Let us put this very starkly in headlines. This reality of climate change, the economic cost of inaction being far greater than the economic cost of action, has been before the previous Australian Government for a long, long time. And they pushed it into the too hard basket.
We don't intend to do that. We're going to have a go. And it's going to be tough.
JOURNALIST: You don't seriously hold out the option of getting agreement with the Greens who want to close down the coal industry. Ask Anna Bligh what she thinks about that. You're not serious are you?
PM RUDD: No, no, you just verballed into a position. I said that, which is something you've never done before either Matthew, and that is we'll continue to push hard through the Senate.
I mean I think I'd appeal to all politicians in the Australian Parliament, the Upper House. This is serious stuff for the nation for the 21st century. No one is pretending it's easy. I'm not. Trying to get the balance right in understanding what we need to do nationally, what we need to be doing consistently internationally to get a good outcome at Copenhagen, in order to bring about a long term stabilisation of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. This is really tough stuff. It's really hard stuff. Let's not pretend that it's not.
But up until now and the election of this government, no-one nationally has tried. We're going to give it a damn good go.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any discussion today, bringing us closer to know which businesses and industries might be exempt from having to pay increased costs associated with a Renewable Energy Target?
PM RUDD: We discussed the overall desirability of the Renewable Energy Target in this particular respect. I go back to a phrase I used before.
The costs of inaction on climate change are far greater than the costs of action.
One of the employment generators for the future will be what happens in the renewable energy sector. Recently, the Australian Government put out for expressions of interest nationwide, our half billion dollar Renewable Energy Fund.
You'll be surprised at the very large number of proposals which have come in from the private sector, from every State and Territory in the Commonwealth virtually, and practically every sector of the renewable energy industry  -  wind, wave, solar, geothermal. All wanting to get out there and have a go. Make a difference, generate jobs, new business opportunities, and also contribute to the Renewable Energy Target.
This therefore is where a whole lot of activity is going to come from. And that's on the upside. In terms of adjustments of the economy on the way through, of course there will be and these have been canvassed in terms of the careful analysis done by the Australian Treasury prior to production of the Government's legislation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's been some discussion today and even division I think between some States over bikie laws. In particular, concern that actions in one State in terms of legislation may force the problem into other States. Do you have a view, is it a time for the Commonwealth, maybe COAG to take a leadership role on this issue?
PM RUDD: Well Premier Mike Rann briefed us today on some of the actions that he's taken in South Australia. And I would draw attention to the fact that the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General considered this matter most recently.
They also agreed to work towards common legislative action, that is nationally consistent legislative action. That work today in relation to the work of SCAG - Standing Committee of Attorneys-General - is ongoing. It will report back to the Council of Australian Governments, both in relation to this and also organised crime more generally.
This is important for all jurisdictions. Obviously different States and Territories will have slightly different emphases but I draw your attention to the common resolve of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, and it will report back in due season to the Council of Australian Governments as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I was just going to ask on the Jobs Compact. Do you intend to provide extra recurrent funding for the States and Territories to provide this extra training? Secondly, were you able to give the leaders a briefing on how badly their Budgets are likely to be affected by the global financial crisis?
PM RUDD: On the first question which goes to support for, as I've described before in my answer to Matthew, both elements of this Jobs and Training Compact with young Australians. For young people, broadly at school age and those beyond school age.
The funding we provided by way of incentive pool operates into the future. Secondly, the investment we've already outlined for productivity training places in other categories of training places also rolls out into the future. I cannot recall the precise timeframe but it is many years.
Therefore this is not just, in the case of those training places, some one-off sort of snapshot of funding. We're actually in this one for the long haul.
Second part of your question?
JOURNALIST: Was just whether or not you were able provide a briefing or an update to the leaders on the global financial crisis and their Budgets.
PM RUDD: Yes and bad.
JOURNALIST: Just one more question?
PM RUDD: He has called time and I've got to get to a plane, but off you go.
JOURNALIST: There were some hopes that there might be a breakthrough on water today at the meeting particularly  - 
PM RUDD: Actually it wasn't our agenda today. We've got a whole program of work unfolding in these areas. And we had a very full agenda. But that was not part of our discussions today.
Thanks very much guys. We're going to rock and roll.


The Australian Government is providing $61.6 million over four years to help protect Australia's vulnerable children from child abuse and neglect under the National Framework for Protecting Australia's Children 2009-2020.
The Council of Australian Governments today endorsed the National Framework, an ambitious, long-term national approach to ensuring the safety and wellbeing of Australian children.
Protecting children at risk demands national leadership and a coordinated national response. All children deserve a safe, healthy and happy childhood.
Actions under the National Framework for Protecting Australia's Children are a significant investment by the Australian Government.
It is a key element of the Government's child-centred approach to family policy where children's best interests are the driving force of policy making.
Key National Leadership Projects
The Australian Government is demonstrating national leadership by providing $10 million over four years to key projects to support the development of evidence based and continuous improvement in services to protect children.
This includes the development of ambitious National Standards for Out-of-Home Care. National Standards will ensure that all children who cannot be cared for by their parents receive the quality care and support they need for their wellbeing now, and into the future.
National benchmarks will drive enhanced national consistency and lead to significant improvements in the quality of out-of-home care over time.
In addition the Australian Government will lead:
     * A National Research Agenda for Child Protection which will ensure governments and non-government organisations deliver the best possible support to vulnerable children and families. 
     * Improved information sharing and data consistency to improve our understanding of children at risk of harm and ensure that vulnerable children and their families do not fall between the cracks.
     * Workforce development projects including training and professional resources and tools to improve the capacity of all services working with families and children to identify children at risk early and respond appropriately.
Communities for Children Plus
The Australian Government will provide $10 million over four years to establish up to eight innovative integrated service delivery sites across Australia to reduce child abuse and neglect in disadvantaged communities. 
Building on the success of Communities for Children, this measure will provide intensive early intervention services to an additional 1,200 children and families over four years in their local community. 
Communities for Children Plus will bring Australian, and State and Territory Government services together to address the risk factors for child abuse and neglect before they escalate. This could include parenting support, mental health, drug and alcohol, family violence and housing services, as well as child protection services if required.
Enhanced access to quality child care for children at risk
The Australian Government is providing $36.6 million over four years to enhance access to quality child care for Australia's most vulnerable children through increased take-up of the Special Child Care Benefit. The Special Child Care Benefit covers the full cost of child care for children at serious risk of abuse or neglect.
Increased assistance for young people leaving care
From 1 July 2009, the Government will increase the Transition to Independent Living Allowance for young people leaving care from $1,000 to $1,500 at a cost of $5 million over four years.
The Transition to Independent Living Allowance provides practical one-off support for young people leaving care to assist with the costs associated with independent living such as moving, furniture, education or transport costs.
In addition, the Australian Government is refocusing $3.1 million each year under the Strengthening Families Program (part of the National Illicit Drugs Strategy) to provide focused parenting and substance abuse support where children are at risk. Current contracts have been extended to April 2010.
This is part of the significant focus on early intervention and prevention programs through the Family Support Program which currently provides $1.2 billion over four years to support vulnerable and disadvantaged families, and separated and separating parents and their children.
The National Framework is an election commitment and was developed in consultation with States and Territories and the Coalition of Organisations Committed to the Safety and Wellbeing of Australia's Children.
The National Framework for Protecting Australia's Children is available on the COAG website at www.coag.gov.au


COAG today agreed to establish a Compact with Young Australians.
This will ensure that as we recover from the global recession, young Australians have the skills required to realise their potential.
Under the terms of the Compact agreed today, every Australian under the age of 25 will have a guaranteed education or training place.
This education and training guarantee will ensure anyone under the age of 25, including those who lose their job, will be able to take part in further education or training.
The Compact is based upon three core principles:
     * Anyone under the age of 17 must be earning or learning, you must be in full time school, training or work;
     * If you are under the age of 20 and are not working, you will be provided with a training place with the first priority - a year 12 or equivalent VET qualification;
     * If you are under the age of 25 and you are not working you are guaranteed a training place to ensure you have the skills needed to be part of the recovery.
The Government anticipates that the Compact with Young Australians will provide up to 135,000 young people with higher qualifications.
We must not make the mistakes of the past and allow the young people who lose their job today become the long term unemployed of tomorrow.
In a global recession young people always feature heavily in the ranks of retrenched and laid off workers.
This Compact is to ensure that young Australians who lose their job in this recession are trained to be the tradespeople and professionals of the recovery.
We cannot allow the skills and training needed by a modern economy to skip a generation because of a global recession.
Strengthening conditions for welfare payments
To support this new Compact the Australian Government will strengthen the conditions unemployed young people must meet to receive Youth Allowance.
Anyone under the age of 20 without a year 12 or equivalent qualification must be in education or training in order to receive youth allowance.
This same condition must be met if the parents of young people in the same circumstances wish to receive Family Tax Benefit Part A.
If young people or their parents want to receive government benefits the quid pro quo is that the young person is working or earning a year 12 equivalent qualification.
Building on the Education Revolution
The Compact with Young Australians agreed today will form part of the Rudd Government's Jobs and Training Compact with all Australians.
Today's Compact has allowed COAG to accelerate by five years the COAG year 12 attainment goal.
COAG now aims to lift the national year 12 attainment level to 90 per cent by 2015.
The Commonwealth agreed to provide reward payments of up to $100 million for the achievement of improved performance against this goal.
The measures announced today build on the Government's Education Revolution which includes a $2 billion commitment to provide 711,000 additional vocational education and training places.
They build on historic and dramatic increases in investments in our schools  - public and private  -  to lift the quality of education for young Australians.
As a result of these investments, a total of $62.1 billion will flow to schools from 2009-2012. 
This represents an 85 per cent increase, or getting close to double the $33.5 billion invested by the previous Government in the last four years on recurrent funding and infrastructure.
Today's Compact puts education and training front and centre to ensure Australia's future productivity.


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today took a major step forward towards Australia's low pollution future.
COAG today endorsed the design of the expanded Renewable Energy Target and agreed to the introduction of new 6 star standards for houses and strengthened energy efficiency standards for commercial buildings.
As a result of today's decisions, work will immediately commence on five key measures to drive growth in the number of highly energy efficient homes and commercial buildings across Australia:
     * Increasing the stringency of energy efficiency requirements for all classes of commercial buildings in the Building Code of Australia from 2010;
     * Phasing in the mandatory disclosure of the energy efficiency of commercial buildings and tenancies from 2010; 
     * Increasing energy efficiency requirements for new residential buildings to six stars, or equivalent, nationally in the 2010 update of the Building Code of Australia, as well as introducing new efficiency requirements for hot-water systems and lighting; 
     * Phasing in mandatory disclosure of residential building energy, greenhouse and water performance at the time of sale or lease, commencing with energy efficiency, from May 2011; and 
     * Reforming current building energy efficiency standard and assessment processes to achieve consistency across the nation.
These represent the first measures under the National Strategy on Energy Efficiency that will be finalised by COAG in mid-2009.
By ensuring a coherent and unified approach to energy efficiency policy, the Strategy will provide a clear complement to the Commonwealth Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme  -  helping households and businesses reduce energy costs, improving productivity of our economy and reducing the cost of greenhouse gas abatement.
It will build on the Commonwealth Government's existing commitments to energy efficiency such as the Energy Efficient Homes package: a $3.9 billion package to install ceiling insulation in 2.7 million Australian households.
COAG also endorsed the final design of the expanded national Renewable Energy Target which will see 20 per cent of Australia's electricity being generated from renewable sources by 2020.
This endorsement will provide certainty for investors, driving substantial investment and employment in the renewable energy sector.
It will help transform the electricity sector and drive the low-pollution electricity generation that we need to tackle climate change.
The RET scheme will increase the renewable energy target by over four times, to reach 45,000 gigawatt-hours (GWh) in 2020. To provide renewable energy investors with even greater legislative certainty, the 45,000 GWh target will be maintained until 2030.
The expanded national RET scheme includes ‘Solar Credits' to assist with the upfront costs of installing small-scale renewable energy systems, including household solar photovoltaic (PV) systems.
COAG also agreed to provide partial exemptions to emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries. COAG recognised the impact of the RET on trade-exposed industries in the context of the CPRS and the additional pressures these firms are experiencing as a result of the global financial crisis.
Emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries will continue to support renewable energy, as exemptions will only apply above the existing Mandatory Renewable Energy Target of 9,500 GWh.
Legislation to implement the expanded target design will be in introduced by mid-2009, with new targets due to commence in 2010.
Details of the draft National Strategy on Energy Efficiency and the RET are now available on the COAG website (http://www.coag.gov.au). 


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today agreed to develop a national telephone emergency warning system. 
The Commonwealth will invest up to $15 million to assist the States and Territories to establish the national system.
It will be operated on an ongoing basis by State and Territory authorities and will be developed following an open tender process. 
The system will help warn the public in the event of a major emergency, and will add to a range of measures including television and radio alerts, public address systems, doorknocking, sirens, signage and the internet.
Under the early warning system, emergency warning alerts will be sent by recorded voice and text to landline and mobile phones based on an owner's billing address.
The system will be developed to ensure it can appropriately address network congestion issues.
Technological gaps currently limit the system to sending alerts to mobile phones based on the billing address, rather than where the handset is at the time of the emergency.
COAG has agreed to undertake collaborative research with industry on ways to deliver warning messages to mobile phones based on the handset's physical location.
The Australian Government has already committed $11.3 million for this purpose and to provide access to the Integrated Public Number Database (IPND) through a new secure database providing real-time access to up-to-date telephone numbers, while protecting the identity of individuals. The tender process to develop this database closed last week.
The Government has passed legislation through the Federal Parliament facilitating access to the IPND.


HOST: Good morning to you
PM: Good, it's a bright and sunny day in Hobart.
HOST: You're giving me your weather forecast, I'm just thinking as a Queenslander that it might be slightly chilly for you, but enjoy the crisp day anyway.
PM: I went for a long walk last night, it was crisp, refreshing. It was good to see Hobart. I gather you guys have won an award in the ABC, is that right?
HOST: 936 ABC Hobart have won metro station of the year and Tim who would normally be sitting in this chair has won broadcaster of the year so it's, it's a very celebratory day for us here.
PM: Congratulations to you all, I take it that's why he's taken the day off. Is that right?
HOST: He's still in Canberra. So I don't know if you take days off in Canberra but that's what he's doing anyway.
PM: No, no we've outlawed that.
HOST: Now looking at news overnight, the alert for the flu is now at level five. What's the latest information you have on the swine flu?
PM: Well the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, advised by also the input of all states and territories through the Commonwealth Health Protection Committee, continues to work directly with the Health Minister and continues to work through her to the cabinet.
Overnight we have had a further increase in the World Health Organisation description of the actual virus itself, they've raised the alert to Phase Five and that Phase Five is on the basis of a recognition that human-to-human spread of the virus has occurred in at least two countries within a World Health Organisation region.
What are we doing in Australia? The key things are these. Not only have we provided information to emergency departments and GPs on the known characteristics and risk factors of the disease, our travel advice has been updated, we've established a swine influenza hotline, airports have a clinical presence now with nurses available and on the advice of the Chief Medical Officer the Government has included swine influenza to be a quarantinable disease. And we'll continue to make further announcements and take further measures as is appropriate based on professional advice.
HOST: And you're confident that Australia is fully prepared to deal with whatever eventuates?
PM: We believe that we have taken a whole range of preparatory measures over a long period of time through earlier experiences of SARS, earlier concerns about bird flu and of course this most recent appearance of swine influenza.
The other thing which your listeners should be apprised of is that all incoming passenger flights will be required to report to the Australian Quarantine Inspection Service on the health status of passengers on the plane. Previously that was only on flight from the Americas and New Zealand.
Furthermore health declaration cards are now being provided, are being deployed to airports and airlines so that passengers themselves will be asked to fill in this card and report any flu-like symptoms, once that is system is fully deployed.
Also thermal scanners are being deployed to eight of Australia's international airports over the, over the, well it's already begun and they will be deployed operationally on the basis of advice from the Chief Medical Officer and we will continue to take appropriate action based on the best professional advice.
HOST: Okay well let's move to COAG now. Are the states going to be told today how much money they're going to get to spend on infrastructure under the Building Australia Fund?
PM: We said prior to the last election that we were in the business of nation building, building infrastructure in all states including Tasmania. You'll be aware in Tasmania that we made a recent announcement that we'd be rolling out the National Broadband Network, beginning here in Tasmania in the second half of the year. That will be a very large investment.
More broadly on other infrastructure needs, whether it's in terms of health infrastructure, whether it's in terms of what we do in education and research or what we do in other forms of physical infrastructure, all that will be done through the Budget process and we're still some ways off the Budget.
We'll talk more broadly about the state of the public finances of the nation when we meet with Premiers and Chief Ministers today but we've still got some way to go before the federal Budget is formally released.
HOST: And looking at the broadband rollout, what do you expect to learn from a rollout in Tasmania that you can realistically apply to other parts of Australia that are very different in terms of geographical area?
PM: Well I was talking to the Tasmanian Premier about this last night and I think what's exciting for Tasmania and important for the nation is the early evidence we will have on take-up by small businesses across Tasmania and the particular experiences that we will learn from how they deploy high speed broadband in growing their businesses.
Remember the great value of broadband is when properly applied it starts to overcome the tyranny of distance. That means it puts small businesses, medium businesses in touch with a far wider network of potential customers and a far wider network of their potential supply chain.
I think it is potentially one of the most revolutionary technology platforms for businesses for the 21st century. And the great thing about starting the roll-out here in Tasmania through the very supportive efforts of the Tasmanian State Government is that we're going to have early evidences of how that's working.
HOST: And will we have early evidence as well that it's affordable for the average person or for small business?
PM: Well obviously on the question of cost, we've got to make sure that first of all the physical service is provided and let's just remind all your listeners of this fact. Up until now Australia's broadband services in terms of bandwidth and band speed are among the slowest in the world's developed economies. That is not appropriate for a modern economy like Australia.
Secondly, we've got to make sure that once it's rolled out it is available at reasonable cost. All these things will be sorted out through the implementation process but we want to make sure that it just doesn't exist as a service in name, that it's taken up and of course that will be shaped very much by price determinations on the way through.
HOST: So a lot of these things to some extent are speculative, Prime Minister. When do you anticipate seeing the impact of the infrastructure stimulus package in all of these areas showing up on the economic figures?
PM: Well let's just look at the most recent data which was produced by the International Monetary Fund on their projections for global economic growth for the year 2009.
The projection for the world's most advanced economies is three times, almost three times worse than it is for Australia. One of the reasons at play there is because we in Australia took early, decisive and effective action through our national economic stimulus strategy and nation building strategy to inject investment into the economy very early, in the fourth quarter last year. That is rolling through.
First of all through the short term stimulus we provided through payments to pensioners, veterans and carers. Secondly, our investment in medium term infrastructure, the largest school modernisation program in the country's history, and thirdly through long term infrastructure such as the National Broadband Network which we referred to before.
What do all these things do? Create jobs today and at the same time, build infrastructure for tomorrow. If you look at our figures relative to the rest of the world, whether it's in the housing sector, whether it's the retail sales sector or in the International Monetary Fund's projection for economic growth for the 12 months ahead, while this recession has hit Australia - and there is no doubt about that and people are hurting - our relative performance, relative to the rest of the world is on average considerably better.
HOST: Are you confident though that states can meet the strict deadlines and timelines and will also have sufficient tradespeople, skilled workforce to do the building work in the time that you've set and to get the economic impact that you say will happen?
PM: You know something? I'd much rather be in the position of saying, have we got enough tradespeople around than the reverse, which is the case in housing and construction markets across Europe and across America at present. And the reason is we are pumping so much activity and investment into the economy.
Let's just give you one example. The first home owners boost, which has trebled the grant available to first home buyers buying a newly built home, has had a massive effect in housing construction levels across the country, particularly when measured against the rest of the developed world. It has been a very significant measure. The Housing Industry Association in Australia has welcomed it. If you look at the data on housing starts in our country relative to the rest of the world, it is clear evidence that the policy is having real effect.
On the question of the availability of tradespeople around the world, my mission, around the country, my mission for Australia is this: to provide in every primary school in the country a construction site through the addition of state-of-the-art, 21st century libraries or the possibility of investing in new language centres, new science centres or in classroom refurbishment or multipurpose halls so that our tradies right across Tasmania, right across Australia have an opportunity to obtain work, get a job now, provide employment now and build the best school infrastructure we need for our kids for tomorrow. That's our strategy.
HOST: Prime Minister Rudd, yesterday a report was released into poverty in Tasmania by the Tasmanian Council of Social Services and the Chief Executive of TasCOSS said on this program yesterday that the federal government could make an immediate difference to the situation by increasing income support benefits for all people on welfare and specifically looking at people on unemployment benefits. Will the budget increase, include an increase in employment benefits?
PM: Well as you know we don't engage in pre-budget speculation, that's just a matter of a standard public policy discipline which has been adhered to by all previous Australian governments.
HOST: Is it being considered?
PM: I'm just responding to you as Mr Howard would have responded to you as well. That's the first point. The second though is in terms of people who are doing it really tough and there are many, many, many across our nation including in Tasmania, what many of the welfare organisations have said to us as a Government is the critical underlying need here is the physical availability of sufficient social or public housing for people in the most abject need.
This has been an area of massive non-investment by the previous Australian Government under Mr Howard. What we have done again through the national economic stimulus strategy and nation building strategy is commission $6 billion worth of investment in the largest single addition to the social housing program that this country has seen. 20,000 additional units of social housing being built, providing jobs today  -  but critically, providing available and affordable social housing for people in real need.
At the end of the day there is a limit to what governments can do but we are taking these sorts of practical measures to help people in need now.
HOST: Mr Rudd we'll have to leave it there and let you get to the meeting of COAG. Thank you very much for your time on mornings.


Today, the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has agreed on a plan to achieve national regulation of the Australian legal profession.
COAG has agreed that:
     * Draft legislation providing uniform laws regulating the legal profession across Australia be prepared for consideration by COAG within 12 months; 
     * A specialist Taskforce be appointed by the Attorney-General to make recommendations and prepare the draft legislation; and
     * A Consultative Group be appointed by the Attorney-General to advise and assist the Taskforce.
The specialist taskforce will begin work immediately and will be supported by a dedicated Secretariat within the Attorney-General's Department.
The Taskforce will comprise the following members:
     * Roger Wilkins AO - Secretary, Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department;
     * Bill Grant - Secretary-General, Law Council of Australia;
     * Laurie Glanfield AM - Director-General, NSW Attorney-General's Department; and
     * Louise Glanville - Executive Director, Victorian Department of Justice.
The Commonwealth will also seek a further nomination to ensure that small jurisdictions are appropriately represented.
The Consultative Group will be chaired by the Hon Michael Lavarch, Professor of Law at Queensland University of Technology, and will include members from each State and Territory representing peak legal, business and consumer groups.
The Attorney-General will today write to the States and Territories as well as other interest groups inviting nominations for the Consultative Group.
This Consultative Group will play an important role in identifying issues, providing advice and developing recommendations on this important reform agenda.
The regulation of the legal profession in Australia remains overly complex and inconsistent, with up to 55 different regulators across the country.
As a result, different practices apply in different jurisdictions, including for example costs disclosure and billing, admissions and practicing certificates and complaints handling and professional discipline.
Australian lawyers and consumers no longer operate in just one State or Territory.
To deliver a seamless national economy we can no longer justify such disparate regulation for just one profession.
National regulation of the legal profession will benefit consumers, lawyers and firms alike:
     * Consumers of legal services will benefit through increased competition, reduced compliance costs and billing arrangements that are simplified and more transparent;
     * Lawyers will benefit by being able to easily operate across jurisdictions; and 
     * Legal firms will benefit by being more competitive in both the national and international arena.
The Commonwealth looks forward to working cooperatively with the States and Territories, and the legal profession on this important reform agenda.


PM RUDD: First of all to begin by thanking the Tasmanian Premier David Bartlett for his hospitality and that of the Tasmanian Government in hosting myself and colleagues from the other States and Territories in Hobart today at this meeting of the Council of Australian Governments. The Premier today reminded us that it's 15 years since COAG met in Hobart. In fact I attended that meeting as an official. And it's good to be back in Tasmania and it's been too long since COAG was last here.
COAG, in the period since I've become Prime Minister, we have sought to make it a work horse for the Australian nation. In other words taking key policy challenges which face us, getting the heads of Government together, reaching resolve and then moving on with the great tasks ahead for the future of our nation. One of which of course has been a rolling program of microeconomic reform and we've done that in the past and we'll continue to do that in the future. Another is to make sure that we are advancing our practical cooperative arrangements in key service delivery areas like health and like education and services to Indigenous Australians. It was very much the feature of earlier Council of Australian Governments meetings in which we've engaged.
And of course the great challenge that we've been wrestling with today is our response to the impact of the global economic recession. This recession is no respecter of persons, it's no respecter of countries, it's no respecter of economies and it's no respecter of State jurisdictional arrangements. It affects all of us. It affects our revenues, it affects our ability to deliver services to the people who depend on us to so do and of course it affects unemployment in each of our jurisdictions as well.
That brings us to the first core item that we sought to address today and that is what do we do to provide real help, real support and real assistance to those Australians who through no fault of their own have lost their jobs, may lose their jobs or who can't find a job. And that is why today we have agreed as the Council of Australian Governments on a new Jobs and Training Compact for young Australians.
Specifically what we are seeking to do is to make sure that through this time of global recession and the recession as it affects directly Australia, that our young people have an opportunity to use this time to obtain new skills, take their existing skills and upgrade them, so that when the global economic recovery kicks in, those new skills can be deployed by themselves and by businesses in the economy at large to underpin our next phase of economic growth. This we regard as an important step forward in our response to the challenge of unemployment.
Specifically, what do we mean by this? Firstly, there is a provision whereby anyone under the age of 17 must be earning or learning. They must be in full time school, training or work. Secondly it means that if someone is under the age of 25 and they are not working, they are guaranteed a training place to ensure that they have the skills needed to be part of the recovery. Thirdly what we've also agreed today, for the first time is that our national target of 90 per cent year 12 equivalent retention should be brought forward from the year 2020 to the year 2015. These are three concrete agreements which we've reached as part of our national compact with young Australians.
The point of these measures is as follows: we don't want to repeat the mistakes of the past whereby young people who lose their job today become the long term unemployed of tomorrow. That's the key organising principle here. And this action that we have taken together today is aimed to help ensure that young Australians who lose their job in this recession are ready as the tradespeople and the professionals of tomorrow once the recovery comes. We cannot allow and we will not allow as governments, the skills and training needed by a growing modern economy to skip a generation because of the global recession.
This compact with young Australians will ensure that every Australian under the age of 25 will be entitled to an education or training place. This is an important undertaking to the nation, an important undertaking to mums and dads concerned out there about their kids, an important undertaking to young Australians themselves.
The other part of this initiative is that we've also strengthened conditionality in welfare payments. To support this new Compact, the Commonwealth Government will strengthen the conditions unemployed young people must pass to receive the youth allowance. Anyone under the age of 20 without a year 12 equivalent qualification must be in education or training in order to receive Youth Allowance. The same conditions must be met if parents of young people in the same circumstances wish to receive Family Tax Benefit A.
This therefore, taken together, the three principles I referred to before, underpinned by these changes in welfare arrangements are designed to not repeat the mistakes of the past, to provide the best possible opportunity for young people affected by this global recession to make the most of this time to obtain new skills, which they can deploy for the economy, their families and themselves once the recovery comes.
Secondly, in terms of our response to the global recession, we were briefed today by the Commonwealth Coordinator General on the progress of the implementation of the Commonwealth's Nation Building and Jobs plan. This is a $30 billion investment in jobs today and the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. A $30 billion investment, including the largest school modernisation program in the country's history, the largest single investment in social housing in the country's history and also a significant investment in energy efficiency within owner-occupied dwellings through the installation of ceiling insulation.
The Coordinator General reported that so far over 5,000 schools have been approved for essential repairs across the country; money flows from next week. We're also advised that around 140 houses are already being built by Defence housing and state housing agencies across the country. We're advised that road safety work is now being done across the country under the national Black Spots Program. This is an important monitoring process for us to make sure that what we've agreed in Canberra is being rolled out across the nation.
I say again what I've said before, our ambition unapologetically is to turn every primary school in the country into a construction site. To provide jobs for tradies here and now and build the best schools possible for the 21st Century.
We also today received a report from the Deputy National Security Adviser on the current of state of the swine influenza situation as it affects Australia and the world. What heads of Government agreed to today was to take all necessary measures to assist in preventing the introduction, the establishment or the spread of swine influenza in Australia.
Various measures as you would be aware have been initiated by the Commonwealth already. Information has been provided to emergency departments and GPs on the known characteristics and risk factors of the disease. Travel advice has also been updated. We have established a swine influenza hotline. Airports have had a clinical presence, with nurses available, and on the advice of the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, the Government has included swine influenza to be a quarantinable disease.
Further to those measures, I am advised today that the Health Minister in Melbourne has announced new measures which will be undertaken to combat the outbreak of this disease. Firstly, upon receipt of advice from the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, thermal scanners will be switched on progressively in eight Australian international airports - Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane, Cairns, Gold Coast, Darwin. Furthermore, from tomorrow evening, all international passengers will be asked to fill in health declaration cards to report any flu-like symptoms. These are two practical measures.
There is a third which the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer has asked myself and the Premiers and Chief Ministers to convey to the Australian nation today, a very practical measure, which is for all Australians to engage in the simple practice of washing their hands with soap on a regular basis as a very practical measure to reduce the spread of this disease if and when it comes to Australia. And I would urge that advice on all Australians.
Furthermore we were today as heads of Government, meeting as the Council of Australian Governments, also focused on the most recent natural disaster in our country, the bushfires in Victoria. To remind the nation, this was the single largest natural disaster in our country's history. What we've agreed today is to develop a national telephone emergency warning system. The Commonwealth will invest up to $15 million to assist the States and Territories to establish this national system. It will be operated on an ongoing basis by State and Territory authorities and will be developed following an pen tender process.
This represents consistent coordinated actions on behalf of our officials and we believe represents an important step forward for the future. This will not be a foolproof system for the future but it does represent an important step forward in providing the best possible emergency warning system in the case of future natural disasters.
If I could conclude on this: one other practical piece of work and I might ask the Queensland Premier to comment on this presently is our agreement today in a national framework for the protection of Australia's children. This has involved a lot of work between Commonwealth and State and Territory officials over a lot of time and we believe that this represents an important step forward in protecting the most vulnerable of our Australian family; our children.
The Australian Government is providing $61.6 million over four years to help protect Australia's vulnerable children from child abuse and neglect under this new national framework for protecting Australia's children. I would thank State and Territory colleagues for their cooperation in bringing this about. It's involved a considerable number of changes in the procedures which have operated up until now between the various levels of Government. We believe this represents an important step forward for the future.
That's enough from me, I might then turn to the Chairman of CAF, the Queensland Premier Anna Bligh, to add to those remarks.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank-you Prime Minister. Today saw cooperative federalism take another step forward with a range of agreements in areas of critical importance to the nation. Not only in areas of immediate imperative such as actions between State and Federal Governments to deal with the prospect of a possible outbreak of swine flu in Australia but in those big areas of national challenge, namely dealing with the global financial crisis and its fallout and in addressing the long term impact of climate change.
In the area of addressing the economic issues, the Premiers are very, very pleased to be working with the Commonwealth to implement a new Youth Compact for the young people of Australia. The Youth Compact will ensure firstly nationally consistent arrangements for the first time for young people aged 15 to 17. There will now be nationally consistent requirements legislated that will require all young people aged 15 to 17 to be either in school, in work or in some form of training. Queensland legislated these requirements a number of years ago and we have seen very, very strong results, particularly in the training and apprenticeships field as a result.
In addition to young people in the 15 to 17 year group, Premiers have agreed with the Commonwealth to implement a guarantee or an entitlement for young people aged 19 to 24 who are not at work, who are able to access training places. So what we're looking to do is ensure that young people in these very difficult economic times can access training places. That will then stand all of us in good stead as the economy returns to prosperity with those skills ready to go forward and take advantage of new opportunities.
This decision for a Youth Compact reflects the determination of every State and Territory along with the Commonwealth to ensure that young people do not slip through the cracks of any of our systems as we confront the global financial crisis. Similarly, we have reached agreement on a new national licensing system that will see nationally consistent licensing arrangements for a range of trades and occupations. Again, streamlining the arrangements for businesses and for individuals as they move around as part of a nationally consistent model.
In relation to our determination to tackle climate change, States and Territories have agreed to the implementation of a 20 per cent Renewable Energy Target and agreed to put in place arrangements in their own states to facilitate the implementation of a Renewable Energy Target, as well as to begin the process of implementing more energy efficient building codes so that we can start to see much more efficient use of energy.
In relation to the Child Protection Framework that was agreed today, this is a very important of piece of protecting our children. Almost 10 years ago the States of Australia and the child protection systems in them agreed to a process to bring down and to remove any impediments to the sharing of information about children who are at risk or had been subject to abuse by their families so that if families who had been abusing their children moved out of States where they were being assessed and monitored by a jurisdiction could be picked up in other States.
Unfortunately, the Commonwealth Government had never been prepared to come to the party and lift similar impediments in relation to information held by organisations like Centrelink or Medicare that could assist in dealing with the protection of children in this circumstance.
The decision today in a national child protection framework for the first time brings the Commonwealth agencies into information sharing arrangements that in my view have the capacity not only to protect children generally, but importantly in very serious cases of child abuse, possibly save the life of a child.
So as someone who was involved in that process over a number of years, I'm very, very pleased to see the Commonwealth lift these barriers on confidential information sharing. I think it's the last piece of the jigsaw in terms of the best child protection network that we can provide, and it really does I think make measure a very positive step forward.
I thank the Prime Minister on behalf of the States for that particular initiative.
PM: Just before we take in your questions, if I could just turn briefly to our host David Bartlett for some comments, and then we'll open to questions.
PREMIER BARTLETT: Thank you Prime Minister, and can I just welcome my colleagues here as the Prime Minister has already mentioned the first time in 15 years that COAG has been held in Hobart. We also welcome, Tasmania welcomes the leadership that's been shown in provision of the various aspects of stimulus packages and of course, in the National Broadband Network in the rollout of optic fibre that will take place in Tasmania.
First in the coming months, the Prime Minister and I have taken the opportunity to further some discussions about the benefits of that program for Tasmania and for the rest of the nation.
Two great results here at COAG today that I just want to briefly mention are of course around the Jobs and Training Youth Compact, an area that each State and speaking for Tasmania, have invested much in, in terms of post year 10 reforms.
I welcome particularly the announcement by the Prime Minister of $100 million of reward payments to those States and Territories who can lift their retention rates, post year 10 retention rates to the very ambitious target, a great target to set, of 90 per cent by 2015.
Tasmania stands at the bottom of the pile, and therefore has the most work to do in this area, and welcomes therefore the reward that will come with those achievements.
Secondly, the acknowledgement today and agreement round the table of the re-introduction or introduction of the Renewable Energy Targets across Australia will have a massive and significant effect on the hundreds of millions of dollars of stalled projects, that were stalled by the short-sighted decision of the Howard Government to remove the Renewable Energy Target.
Hundreds of millions of dollars of investment in renewable energies. The State that of course provides and produces the most renewable energy in Australia now will benefit significantly from this with projects that are ready to go in the coming months being dusted off and providing significant investment not only in jobs right now, but of course in low emissions energy for the future.
PM RUDD: Over to you colleagues.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you seem to be  - 
PM RUDD: Matthew, go ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM RUDD: Or does someone else want to go first? Okay, over to you Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Okay, so you seem to be saying that, can you guarantee that everyone who is not earning and wants to do training, that there is a space for everyone under 25 who wants that? How much is it going to cost? And where are you getting the money from?
And secondly, historically during recessions, training efforts have declined not increased. What would be the effect do you think in terms of empowering the nation for a recovery by having this level of training?
PM RUDD: This is for us a universal entitlement. And as described by one of my colleagues before, this is about earning or learning. And we don't want young Australians to be out there doing nothing. We want them to use this time of economic downturn to get new skills, to prepare themselves to re-engage in full-time employment or other levels of employment once the recovery kicks in. That's the organising principle here.
Secondly, let's go to the two component parts of it. One in relation to schools, the other in relation to post-school training opportunities.
As the Tasmanian Premier has just indicated, we've established a performance-based fund to provide direct financial incentives to those jurisdictions who will be moving from their current level of year 12 equivalent retention to the 90 per cent target we've set for 2015. Remember that's only six years away. And a lot of jurisdictions are a long way south of that. Some of them are much closer to it. But we're on about making a difference.
For the long term, using this time of adversity to turn it to opportunity because we know from the OECD data, the higher your level of year 12 equivalent retention in the economy, the higher the level of productivity that you'll generate in your economy. That's why we're doing it.
But also to provide real opportunities for those young people now. So the basis of payment is the incentive pool which I referred to just then.
In terms of those beyond year 12 equivalent, in terms of the age bracket through until they turn 25, the Commonwealth is already investing in a very, very large number of Productivity Training Places across the nation  -  some 711,000. These are relevant across a range of certificate levels. We would imagine that in exercising therefore the take-up of this universal training entitlement, that we'll draw significantly on those places and other training places which have been offered by the Commonwealth.
States and Territories will be in there matching effort with us on the way through. But you know something. We're determined to make a difference. We are seized by what's happened in earlier history. We are seized by what's gone wrong in the past. Let's make a difference this time, and this Compact with Young Australians is designed to do that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you also acknowledge that the Jobs Compact has a political element in that it takes young people out of the official unemployment figures?
PM RUDD: Well, if I was mum or dad out there and looking at my young person, son or daughter, I think I'd rather have them at school for in a registered training place than anywhere else if they can't get a full-time job.
That's where I'd rather have them. And that's important for families, it's important for self-esteem, it's important for long term economic productivity.
I think that's just good policy, and it's the right way to go.
It is an attempt by us as heads of governments, national, State and Territory, to make a difference compared with where we've gone in the past.
I think it's the right thing to do for the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the National Broadband Network that's being rolled out first in Tasmania. Is there any more detail on when that will happen, what the cost is, how much cost will be borne by the Commonwealth, how much by the State, and whether those small towns of 1,000 people or less in Tasmania will receive the full 100 megabits per second.
PM RUDD: You want to name those towns by name?
JOURNALIST: 68 of them, I think. We could be here for a while.
JOURNALIST: But you would know the ones in the marginal electorates.
PM RUDD: You could name all 68. First of all, this is a very important exercise in nation building. This Government's response to this global recession is how do you make a difference? How do you reduce the impact?
One - short term stimulus in terms of the payments we have unapologetically made to pensioners, veterans and carers to boost stimulus here and now to support jobs in the retail sector and beyond.
Secondly, medium term stimulus. The investment in school modernisation, social housing, and in energy efficiency measures to make a difference now, but also build infrastructure and improve energy efficiency over time.
Thirdly, long term infrastructure. A National Broadband Network, rolled out over a seven year plus period, beginning here in the great State of Tasmania in the second half of the year.
I cannot give you the month nor the day. But it will be in the second half of the year. I do recall in my previous conversation with Premier Bartlett about the particular concentration of smaller settlements in Tasmania, smaller towns, and because of their concentration around particular transport arteries, then it will be feasible here to link up a whole bunch of quite small communities, which were they spread across you know the vastness of the Australian continent would not necessarily be possible.
Our national target remains 90 per cent provision of 100 megabits per second. We think it's the right way to go to present, to prepare this economy to participate in the information age of the 21st century and to turbo charge our businesses, but I'm optimistic you're going to see a more intense layout here in Tasmania, simply because it's one of the virtues of being geographically small and compact.
There you go.
JOURNALIST: The Centre for International Economics has said that any emissions trading scheme threatens the balance sheet of key industries. If the Greens policies and requests are unrealistic, is it time the government to compromise with the coalition in the Senate?
PM RUDD: I would like to simply point to the fact that Mr Turnbull has said up until now that he's been waiting for, first of all I think the Government Green Paper, then the White Paper, then our legislation, then their own piece of commissioned research before setting a target themselves for the future. I'm waiting to see the target.
We've simply crossed each one of those hurdles and what we've had from Mr Turnbull is a series of negative attacks, but not a positive policy on targets.
Each one of these studies have now been done and concluded. What's missing is the Coalition's policies.
So you say with whom should the Government cooperate? There is a complete vacuum in terms of Liberal Party policy nationally.
We believe we've got the balance right in this. We've worked and continue to work closely with stakeholders at the Federal and State level, with businesses and with others. This is tough policy, it is hard policy, it is difficult policy.
I fully accept that. And we are aiming to deal with two major realities. How do you negotiate your way through this global economic recession to provide maximum support for jobs and businesses on the way through? And how do you prepare Australia for a lower carbon economy, given the impact and the imperative of climate change?
Getting the balance right is really hard. We're determined, however, to prosecute a plan for the future. We've outlined our thinking. We've outlined our proposal. We continue to work with stakeholders. But it will be absolutely wrong for us simply to say, all too hard, push it in the too hard basket, and forget about it for the future.
Too many governments have done that in the past. We intend to get on with the business. I don't underestimate the degree of political difficulty.
Over there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will you get that carbon reduction scheme through the Senate when the Opposition today said it's deeply flawed and the Greens say it doesn't go far enough?
PM RUDD: Well if you are confronted with an Opposition in the Senate which says the Government's legislation is deeply flawed, that is not a unique statement on the part of the Opposition about everything we've put before the Senate so far. That's point one.
Point two, I noted carefully of course what the Greens and others have said about it. As we've approached the Senate in the past with important legislation, a whole bunch of things are said by people at different times. Our job is to try and punch this through. It's going to be tough, it's going to be hard, and we'll continue to work with stakeholders on the way through.
The alternative is to do nothing. For 12 years, for 12 years our predecessors did nothing. Let us put this very starkly in headlines. This reality of climate change, the economic cost of inaction being far greater than the economic cost of action, has been before the previous Australian Government for a long, long time. And they pushed it into the too hard basket.
We don't intend to do that. We're going to have a go. And it's going to be tough.
JOURNALIST: You don't seriously hold out the option of getting agreement with the Greens who want to close down the coal industry. Ask Anna Bligh what she thinks about that. You're not serious are you?
PM RUDD: No, no, you just verballed into a position. I said that, which is something you've never done before either Matthew, and that is we'll continue to push hard through the Senate.
I mean I think I'd appeal to all politicians in the Australian Parliament, the Upper House. This is serious stuff for the nation for the 21st century. No one is pretending it's easy. I'm not. Trying to get the balance right in understanding what we need to do nationally, what we need to be doing consistently internationally to get a good outcome at Copenhagen, in order to bring about a long term stabilisation of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. This is really tough stuff. It's really hard stuff. Let's not pretend that it's not.
But up until now and the election of this government, no-one nationally has tried. We're going to give it a damn good go.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any discussion today, bringing us closer to know which businesses and industries might be exempt from having to pay increased costs associated with a Renewable Energy Target?
PM RUDD: We discussed the overall desirability of the Renewable Energy Target in this particular respect. I go back to a phrase I used before.
The costs of inaction on climate change are far greater than the costs of action.
One of the employment generators for the future will be what happens in the renewable energy sector. Recently, the Australian Government put out for expressions of interest nationwide, our half billion dollar Renewable Energy Fund.
You'll be surprised at the very large number of proposals which have come in from the private sector, from every State and Territory in the Commonwealth virtually, and practically every sector of the renewable energy industry  -  wind, wave, solar, geothermal. All wanting to get out there and have a go. Make a difference, generate jobs, new business opportunities, and also contribute to the Renewable Energy Target.
This therefore is where a whole lot of activity is going to come from. And that's on the upside. In terms of adjustments of the economy on the way through, of course there will be and these have been canvassed in terms of the careful analysis done by the Australian Treasury prior to production of the Government's legislation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's been some discussion today and even division I think between some States over bikie laws. In particular, concern that actions in one State in terms of legislation may force the problem into other States. Do you have a view, is it a time for the Commonwealth, maybe COAG to take a leadership role on this issue?
PM RUDD: Well Premier Mike Rann briefed us today on some of the actions that he's taken in South Australia. And I would draw attention to the fact that the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General considered this matter most recently.
They also agreed to work towards common legislative action, that is nationally consistent legislative action. That work today in relation to the work of SCAG - Standing Committee of Attorneys-General - is ongoing. It will report back to the Council of Australian Governments, both in relation to this and also organised crime more generally.
This is important for all jurisdictions. Obviously different States and Territories will have slightly different emphases but I draw your attention to the common resolve of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, and it will report back in due season to the Council of Australian Governments as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I was just going to ask on the Jobs Compact. Do you intend to provide extra recurrent funding for the States and Territories to provide this extra training? Secondly, were you able to give the leaders a briefing on how badly their Budgets are likely to be affected by the global financial crisis?
PM RUDD: On the first question which goes to support for, as I've described before in my answer to Matthew, both elements of this Jobs and Training Compact with young Australians. For young people, broadly at school age and those beyond school age.
The funding we provided by way of incentive pool operates into the future. Secondly, the investment we've already outlined for productivity training places in other categories of training places also rolls out into the future. I cannot recall the precise timeframe but it is many years.
Therefore this is not just, in the case of those training places, some one-off sort of snapshot of funding. We're actually in this one for the long haul.
Second part of your question?
JOURNALIST: Was just whether or not you were able provide a briefing or an update to the leaders on the global financial crisis and their Budgets.
PM RUDD: Yes and bad.
JOURNALIST: Just one more question?
PM RUDD: He has called time and I've got to get to a plane, but off you go.
JOURNALIST: There were some hopes that there might be a breakthrough on water today at the meeting particularly  - 
PM RUDD: Actually it wasn't our agenda today. We've got a whole program of work unfolding in these areas. And we had a very full agenda. But that was not part of our discussions today.
Thanks very much guys. We're going to rock and roll.


This Community Jobs Summit is my crazy idea, okay? I'm to blame for it, if it works that's great, if it doesn't I'm responsible. I've sat down with Brendan the other day, the Minister, and Julia the Deputy Prime Minister and said how can we pool together the best brains, the best ideas, the best innovations across the country to make a difference at the local level to the challenge which now confronts us all with the global recession. A recession which now washes across Australia's shores as well and which then has a direct impact on local jobs in local communities across our country.
Therefore the purpose of today is simply to get our sleeves rolled up and have a go and see what ideas come out of this, how we learn from the past and how we innovate for the future.
As Tony has just indicated, I intend to be here for most of the day and I'm going to be in listening mode; I want to hear what you've got to say. Because a lot of you have a bucket load of experience in things that work and things that don't. And I have one central organising principle which is: I am all for positive ideas, and I'm all for positive ideas which work and which have some prospect of delivering a real result on the ground.
I'm not faintly interested in elaborate bureaucracies, I'm not faintly interested in new systems of government, at least in terms of today's conversation. What I am interested in is what works at the local community to make a difference in terms of local jobs and local training. Very practical stuff, each community and their circumstances are different but you know something? There are principles and there are lessons to be learned from the experience of valuable organisations such as yours. And the single purpose of today is to harness that. And then to go out to the fields and multiply. That's our intention. So thank you for spending this time with us today on a bright and a little frosty morning here in Melbourne.
The other reason that I wanted everyone here today is because I wanted to underline one core principle of the Government's response to the global recession and its impact on Australia and it is this: we are all in this together. Every one of us. Governments, unions, businesses, the community sector  -  every one of us. Governments at all level, federal, State, local. Businesses, big, medium and small. Unions, right across the country. The community sector, the church and charitable sector, the not-for-profit sector, the social enterprise sector. We are all in this together.
And the great thing about this country of ours Australia is that when we do things together in response to external adversity, we're absolutely fantastic. We do make a difference and if there's one difference I see emerging in this country compared with what I see in other parts of the world it is that in other parts of the world when you see duress, when you see stress coming off the back of deep economic challenges, many of those communities, many of those societies and in fact many of those nations fracture right down the middle.
The stuff of this nation is quite different. We're different to that because we do have an instinct that when there is a big, big challenge out there that if we team up and work with each other we can make a power of difference. And when I look at all you good folk from the community and social enterprise sector from across Australia, I see people who are deeply committed and deeply intelligent in their engagement about how to make a difference.
So one, we're all in this together. Two, I want to know what works at the local level and therefore I am going to be listening very carefully to contributions through the day and I'll be here for a large slice of it and Julia later on.
The Government has been upfront with the Australian people that the unemployment forecasts in the Budget will be revised up. There is absolutely no point in sugar coating this fact. The global recession is costing jobs in Australia, which will be reflected in significantly increased unemployment forecasts on Budget night.
The exact forecasts will be finalised and published in the Budget, which means they cannot be released until Budget night. But Australia is actively working, actively seeking to address the impact of the global recession on Australia and independent assessments so far of the Australian Government's response to the financial crisis, be it through the International Monetary Fund, through the OECD or through Access Economics have been strongly positive in relation to the actions we've taken so far.
But our purpose as a Government and as a nation must be absolutely clear cut. We must resolve together not to let this recession steal the future of a generation of Australians. And in particular, we won't let it condemn a generation of young Australians to chronic long-term unemployment. That must be our mission statement and working together we can make a huge impact on it.
I've welcomed already today our co-hosts, the Brotherhood, the Salvation Army, The Society of St Vincent de Paul and Mission Australia. These are good organisations, doing good work. I also want to welcome our seven temporary Local Employment Co-ordinators, who we have appointed in the areas of most intense unemployment across the country now. And they are already on the job getting on with the task of making a difference in those communities.
Furthermore, we are here today to work out how best we deploy the resources of our $650 million Jobs Fund and in partnership with our highly innovative and committed community sector, how we make the best use of those funds. And as I said we have the input also of the likes of Lindsay Fox and Bill Kelty to draw from their experience in times past but also critically, their ideas about how we address these challenges for the immediate future.
A word or two about the size of the sectors represented in this room today. The community sector is huge. It's a vibrant part of not just our society but a vibrant part of our economy. It has a lot to teach Government. According to our ABN records we have 41,000 not-for-profit organisations in Australia - 41,000. They employ 850,000 people and nearly two and a half million volunteers. That is a truckload of Australians, that is a huge number of our national community doing good work for the country.
Many more community sector organisations are among the 650,000 organisations that are set up as registered incorporated bodies or as trusts or similar structures. Most people in this hall today are part of this sector, and many of you work with disadvantaged communities. That means that puts all you in the front line of the work in which we are now collaboratively engaged in responding to the greatest economic crisis since the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago.
The Government in its response to the crisis has sought to deal with it at multiple levels; global action, national action, local action. Local action you'll be familiar with through the work that we have done in the G20. Work on global economic stimulus, $5 trillion worth of investment into the global economy by the governments representing the 20 largest economies in the world.
Combined action to also provide resources for the International Monetary Fund to make sure that it can intervene effectively should there be systemic collapse in the economies or financial systems of emerging economies around the world.
Collaborative action also to deal with the restoration of the health of the world's leading private financial institutions, the extraction of toxic assets, the re-capitalisation of the world's biggest banks in order to restore the normal flow of private credit in the global economy.
Action also collaboratively to design new rules for the global financial system because the old rules have plainly failed and failed miserably.
And finally action collaboratively to draw a line under protectionism because protectionism, if we're mindful of the lessons of the 1930s, is what took that extraordinary economic crisis and turned it into an even worse crisis culminating in the appalling events of 1939. Global action.
National action, you're equally familiar with. The work that we are doing to prosecute a national economic stimulus strategy to make a difference in this economy. There are two broad approaches. You either simply let the free market rip under these circumstances, that's the ideology which has landed us in large part in the mess we've got ourselves into across the world. Or Government stepping up to the plate and stepping in to make a difference.
Government can't solve all the problems which have been created by the mistakes made in financial markets but we can make a difference. Governments cannot prevent a global economic recession impacting directly on Australia but we can reduce the impact and that's what we're doing. This national economic stimulus strategy of ours is clear cut, it's about one central organising principle: how do we provide jobs and training now and at the same time build the infrastructure that we need for tomorrow? That's it. That's what we're trying to do.
How are we going about it? Short term stimulus, providing direct incentives by trebling the first home owners' grant to assist the private residential construction industry. Look at the data around the world, our residential construction sector against those in most other OECD economies, we're doing a lot better.
Also we're providing temporary and short term stimulus to pensioners, carers, veterans, through direct payments to support the one and a half million Australians who work in the Australian retail sector and again compare and contrast the growth in Australian retail sales here relative to what has occurred in retail sales in the United Kingdom, the United States and elsewhere. It's a direct consequence of government policy in both areas.
That's short term stimulus.
Medium term stimulus. We're now investing in the single largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. We're investing the equivalent of 1.5 per cent of GDP, about $15 billion, in building state-of-the-art libraries, multipurpose halls, state-of-the-art science centres, state-of-the-art language centres in the schools of Australia with one objective - to turn every primary school in the country into a construction site. To provide jobs for tradies and for others here and now and build the schools we want for tomorrow for our kids.
The same in social housing and the same also in our investment in energy efficiency.
And then long term infrastructure. Short term stimulus, medium term stimulus by building infrastructure like schools, long term stimulus by investing in much needed infrastructure such as the National Broadband Network - investment of up to $43 billion, more than 4 per cent of GDP, in order to provide the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, but a massive injection in providing jobs and training-related opportunities in the here and now.
That's our strategy in a nutshell but that's national action.
Local action is equally important. Local action, which has as its organising principle how do we take all these government stimulus measures, how do we take the Government's provision of training programs and make a difference with the community sector from the ground up?
The day after I got off the plane in London from the G20 Summit about a month ago, I went to the City of Casey here in Melbourne here in Melbourne and gave a speech. And the Brotherhood was with us on that occasion as well. It was about this: a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. Three parts to it. A Jobs and Training Compact with Young Australians, how do we make a difference? Secondly, a Jobs and Training Compact with Australians who have been retrenched through no fault of their own and thirdly, a Compact with local communities.
With young Australians, the principle is this - I do not want to see a generation of our young people saddled with unemployment and saddled with the impact of unemployment which causes them to become a lost generation. I do not want that to happen. I want us to take every creative measure possible to make a difference now on the way through. And that's why we've been absolutely clear cut about our earn or learn policy for people under the age of 25.
We want kids to make sure that they have a year 12 or year 12 equivalent qualification. If they're under 20, if they are without a year 12 graduation or an equivalent qualification, to go back and get one. If you're under 25 and you're out of work, to use that opportunity to go and find and obtain a local training place. And the Government providing a universal entitlement for those under 25 to give effect to that in order to make a difference with young Australians.
Secondly, our Compact with Australians who've been retrenched with no fault of their own. How do we make a difference there? And obviously that's where our priority employment coordinators come into effect as well.
But we've sat down with the banks for example and sought to organise an arrangement with them whereby if you are retrenched and you are in possession of a mortgage or a personal loan for a car, the banks subject to circumstances will engage in a negotiation with retrenched Australians in order to provide a better and more flexible arrangement for the repayment of mortgages and car loans over time. In order to provide some support at a time when families are at their most concerned for the loss of a job, particularly if it's the principle bread-winner.
Other measures as well that we've announced to support those Australians who've been retrenched through no fault of their own.
Third element, our Compact with Local Communities and this is where you the good people in this room come so much directly into focus. How do we make a difference from the ground up? How do we make a difference in terms of social enterprises tailored to the circumstances of each community across the country?
We're not just here to make fine sounding speeches, we're not just here to say “here's a bucket of money of the $650 million Local Jobs Fund, off you go”. We actually want to make sure that we do make a real difference and I've listened very carefully to what various of our leaders from the church and charitable sector have said in the past about the importance of not-for-profit initiatives. I've listened very carefully to that.
And so what we want to do is generally work in partnership, not just with a fine sounding speech saying “okay let's get together because we're concerned about this and you go off into the fields and have a go”. No. Us being partners with you. Partners with you by providing a fund which can be drawn upon. Partners with you by providing a network of priority employment coordinators and through them an ability to access the existing national training programs and other infrastructure initiatives which inject funds, capital and money into local communities which are under duress.
And that brings us right back to the purpose of being here today and that is to listen to what you folk have got to say and to present. When we talk about unemployment, when we talk about the impact of this recession, there is always a tendency in the national economic debate to talk about this in terms purely of statistics. Each one of those statistics, as you know well from your own life and commitment, is a human family, a human face, a human person possessed of an intrinsic dignity and our job is to make a difference to them.
Already the Government has sought to make a difference in some of these areas. Our investment in schools, much of it in the poorer schools of the country. Our investment in a new national healthcare agreement including additional funding for our public hospitals to help those Australians of limited means, our investment also in social housing to reduce the blight of homelessness in our community both through the new national housing strategy, our new strategy on homelessness, together with the $6 billion plus investment in social housing which I referred to before. Also our $4 billion plus investment in closing the gap with indigenous Australians.
These are measures we're taking nationally. They are being implemented. But what we are here to talk about is how do we make most advantage of these national programs to make a difference locally.
I do not come here as Prime Minister of Australia with a set of prescriptions or a set piece set of announcements to make after today's deliberations are done. I look carefully at this agenda, I am interested in it. I am interested in what you have to say in each element on this agenda. And if I'm not here for all of it, I want to hear a report back on what's been concluded.
Because the central purpose of this is to distill the deliberations in which we're engaged today and the principles which we can apply in priority unemployment communities right across the country and to give effect to that through our priority employment coordinators in partnership with you, the community sector.
So ladies and gentlemen, thanks for being here. I think it's time for us all to roll up our sleeves and in the best Australian tradition, have a go. Have a damned, darn good go at making a difference here in communities right across Australia. With your effort, your participation and your ideas, I believe we can do just that. I thank you.


FAINE: Kevin Rudd good morning.
PM: Good morning Jon.
FAINE: We'll talk about swine flu with Nicola Roxon a little later this morning so can we talk about financial matters first and the context of the budget turnaround of as much as $200 million and can you confirm that figure?
PM: Well, what we've already indicated is that we have had a write-down in tax revenues for Australia of $115 billion and given what's happened in the global economy more broadly, obviously we think the risks there are on the downside.
And frankly, you put all that together, it means that either you engage in temporary deficit and temporary borrowing to make up that shortfall in tax revenues, and the Liberals have committed to their own $177 billion deficit and debt strategy to that to make up for collapsing tax revenues-
FAINE: Yes.
PM: And if you don't do that, what it means is complete slash and burn of basic Government services like not paying people the pension. This is very big numbers.
FAINE: We'll come to some detail in a moment, but do you think overall Australians live beyond their means?
PM: I think Australians make sensible decisions about their life and their planning for the future. I think what all Australians have copped in recent time is a torpedo amidships from overseas and that's the global financial crisis which wreaks havoc in every economy in the world.
Australians didn't cause this thing but we are certainly suffering the consequences. Our job as the Government, through the actions we take, is to try and reduce the impact.
FAINE: But overall do we have to lower our standard of living?
PM: I believe that the entire nation, because we've taken a cut in national income as a result of the global recession, and because budget revenues have taken a huge hit, $115 billion I referred to before and the risks there are on the downside, it means that our investment overall for the future will obviously be shaped by that.
But this is a challenge we've been dealt with, no point complaining about it. What Government must do is reduce its impact and build long term strategy for economic growth while in the meantime building jobs now by also creating the infrastructure for tomorrow which is what we're doing with school modernisation programs across the country now and building the national broadband network as well.
FAINE: Are you going to make the rich pay?
PM: Look, we think that it's very important that in this nation we get the balance right. And we believe for example that pensioners who've been doing it tough for a long, long time, we've committed ourselves to pension reform but at the end of the day we've also got to make sure that our Budget is sustainable in the long term.
And that means everyone, everyone playing their part and obviously the wealthiest Australians have got more capacity to do that than others. But all will be revealed on Budget night Jon and you've heard the response from myself and my predecessors in previous years, we don't comment on the content of the Budget.
FAINE: There are some things emerging though, in particular the cut to the Youth Allowance where you're going to require unemployed or teenaged who are not in training to enrol in a course or lose the Youth Allowance. Is this for their benefit or for yours? Is it just to keep the unemployment rate down?
PM: The key thing here is to learn from the previous impact of recessions and what I am most concerned about is not to allow this global economic recession and the consequential recession in Australia to create a generation of young unemployed people. So how do you learn that lesson from the past and do it differently?
Our attitude is this - and I was here in Melbourne giving a speech on this three or four weeks ago  -  a national Jobs and Training Compact with Australians, part of which is a Jobs and Training Compact with young Australians. And the essence of it is this - anyone under 17 must be earning or learning, full time school, training or work.
Secondly if you're under the age of 20 and you're not working, you'll be provided with a training place with the first priority being a year 12 or equivalent vocational education training qualification.
And the third is, if you're under the age of 25 and you're not working, you're guaranteed a training place to ensure you have the skills needed to be part of the recovery.
We think that this will provide support for up to 135,000 young people by getting qualifications now that they don't have which help them with a job once the recovery comes.
FAINE: But Prime Minister, not every young person knows where their life's direction is. Some people need time out, some people don't find themselves at that age.
PM: It's important, it's important for our young people to be out there acquiring skills. For example I am advised that there are around 58,000 young Australians without a year 12 or an equivalent qualification receiving Youth Allowance.
Now what we want to make sure is that if you're out there and you're a young person receiving Youth Allowance, that you are engaged in training of one form or another. We're not going to mandate the type of training but we must ensure that our young people are getting skills today for use for themselves, their families and the economy tomorrow. That's all part of planning for the future.
FAINE: It's not one size fits all though, would you agree? That some young people go through life in different ways and this is going to make life incredibly difficult, you'll have more homeless youth, you'll have more people drifting around, you might even have more crime as a consequence.
PM: Well, we believe that one of the things that we must avoid is to have young people becoming a generation of unemployed and eventually unemployable people and the best way to do that is to invest significantly in training places.
Julia Gillard, the Deputy Prime Minister, is out there investing in more than 700,000 training places for the nation. We want to make sure that young Australians make full use of that. That's really important. Obviously each person's circumstances are different, that's why the training places are different too, across the entire spectrum of certificate level qualifications, but we want our young people to be skilled for tomorrow.
You talk about homelessness. Part of the national economic stimulus strategy to create jobs now to build the infrastructure for tomorrow is for us to invest some $6 billion in the biggest expansion of social housing this country has ever seen. 20,000 additional units of social housing now being built. This is a big investment in the homelessness challenge, we're moving on all fronts, making sure young people have skills but also expanding the availability of public housing for people in need at the same time.
FAINE: But aren't you ripping a big hole in the so-called Labor safety net, the Labor compassion, Labor commitment to looking after those who are slipping through and in fact you're going to leave more people without that sort of support.
PM: We believe Jon, firmly, that it's important to invest in providing a proper, decent and humane safety net for all Australians. We've already discussed this morning the importance of long term pension reform, that's part and parcel of it as well.
But also equipping young people with the skills that they need and all Australians with the skills they need for tomorrow. Our attitude is this, in the midst of this global economic recession, the worst economic circumstances in three quarters of a century, how do we learn from the past, how do we prepare for the future, and that's to through our national nation building and infrastructure program, built the best schools for the 21st century, build social housing for our needs today, invest in energy efficiency measures in households, create these things for tomorrow while creating additional jobs and training places for today.
FAINE: Alright.
PM: No solution is perfect Jon but I believe absolutely that this Compact with young Australians is the right way to go, given the circumstances we now confront.
FAINE: Prime Minister, to move to the Defence White Paper about to be released and some details have already been leaked through the press. The relationship with China is said to be being renegotiated because of this, Australia being seen to be re-arming on behalf of the United States. What signal does that send to China? Your great friends in China?
PM: Well Jon that question burries in it about 15 hypothetical assumptions, so let me just go to our overall approach to planning for this country's defence needs for the next 20 years. And that's what our task is.
We want to make sure that our defence force is equipped with the resources - our navy, our air force, our army - with the resources and the skills necessary to meet a whole range of future defence contingencies.
It follows very plainly that here in the Asia Pacific region, there are in certain parts of the region the build up of armed forces. We simply need to take a calm, measured, responsible approach for the future to make sure that our army, navy and air force have the resources they need for the future.
They're a fantastic group of professional men and women. We just want to make sure they're properly equipped for the future and proper defence planning means this, being prepared for the whole range of national security challenges in the future and that is what will be outlined in the Defence White Paper.
FAINE: There is no department that has a worse track record in spending enormous amounts of money than the Department of Defence. At a time of great economic belt tightening, why spend so much in a department that doesn't know how to spend?
PM: First of all I believe that the Australian Defence Force are a first class fighting force and they are under excellent leadership.
Secondly, of course there have been problems with defence procurement in the past and that has been the case for many, many years including under our predecessors as well, we accept that reality. That is why the Government has also commissioned its own work internally through what is referred to as the Pappas Review on the way in which defence procurement is done for the future. That's important as well as a set of internal reforms.
But what's the key mission here Jon? It's to build the defence force Australia needs for the year 2030. We're talking about 20 years time. Defence procurement lead times are very long.
But we've got to make sure that we're taking decisions now which means that those who come after us can look to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force and know that they've got the kit, the equipment, the skills, the manpower, the staffing levels that they need. That's our job, that's our responsibility, I take the nation's national security needs deeply seriously.
FAINE: Prime Minister the Fiji strongman General Bainimarama has said he wants to meet with New Zealand and Australia to talk about improving democracy, restoring democracy in Fiji. Will you meet with him?
PM: This is the bloke who just abolished freedom of the press in Fiji, this is the bloke who just sent independent judges, including those from Australia, packing. This is a bloke who just suspended the Constitution of Fiji. These are decisions taken by the military government of Fiji.
It's quite plain that the Pacific Island Forum countries - these are all the island countries of the Pacific, except Fiji, plus Australia, plus New Zealand - when we met in Port Moresby earlier this year, we said that we wanted Fiji to come back into the family of democracies which make up our South Pacific family.
We invited Fiji to announce an election timetable within a reasonable timeframe. Not only did they not respond to that but they then went in exactly the reverse direction by the three measures I've just outlined.
And as a consequence they are setting themselves up to be automatically suspended from the Councils of the Pacific Island Forum, something which has never happened before with any of our Pacific Island neighbours. It's with great sadness that these actions have been taken.
FAINE: Are you questioning his sincerity when he says he wants to meet?
PM: Well I always look at what people do, Jon. And if you've been out there kicking out journalists, shutting down freedom of the press, suspending your constitution and launching a fundamental assault on the independence of the judiciary, I don't think you need too much imagination to conclude that what all that equals in terms of a real commitment to return to democracy.
FAINE: So what do you want to see from Fiji before you will agree to meet?
PM: Well it's a question of what the Pacific Island Forum, which is the paramount regional body of states including Australia, New Zealand and all the other Pacific Island nations including Papua New Guinea, I met their Prime Minister in Canberra only a few days ago and we discussed this matter.
We laid out very clearly, both in a communiqué we released at the last Pacific Island Forum in Niue at the end of last year and at the special Forum meeting explicitly on Fiji in Papua New Guinea earlier this year, that what they need to do in Fiji is announce a timetable for elections, which is reasonable, which is within the immediately foreseeable future, not off in the total never-never, in order for us to begin to contemplate any form of normality in our relations with the Fijian military government.
But the bottom line is this, the people of Fiji deserve better than this. We, Australians have great relationships with the people of Fiji, they are a wonderful people but this military government has taken a fundamental assault on the institutions of democracy including the freedom of the press, I don't regard that as a basis for business as usual.
FAINE: Prime Minister, Nicola Roxon joining us in a minute to talk swine flu but just finally you've had a lot to do with someone that we have a lot to do on this program. Sally Warhaft is the editor or was the editor of The Monthly magazine, she's a regular on this radio program and you worked closely with her on your much-discussed essay about the economy post-collapse.
PM: I've written three essays.
FAINE: Yes indeed, earlier ones as well. She's been removed from her position as editor of The Monthly, will you-
PM: I read this.
FAINE: Will you continue to contribute to the magazine without her?
PM: Yeah of course. I think it's a great mag and I actually gave a speech on related matters for the launching the John Button Prize here in Melbourne last night and the great opportunities for considered political thinking, political writing, long term not short term, whether you're from the so-called political left or the political right, the platforms in our nation are really important.
The Monthly provides that one and it's a good read as are many other such magazines across the country. It's all part of the vibrancy of democracy.
And yeah, sure I'll be contributing in the future. I'm just waiting for a, you know a substantive response to the body of ideas I advanced in the last essay which was that neo-liberalism basically has been shown to be the Emperor without clothes when it comes to the causes of the global financial crisis because of their commitment to unregulated financial markets and their commitment to abolishing any effective functioning for the state and government at a time when, what's happened? Everyone around the world has turned to the State and to Government to try and bail out banks around the world which have failed and unregulated financial markets now needing to be re-regulated.
FAINE: I sense an occasional frustration in Kevin Rudd about the superficiality of political dialogue in Australia. Do you look more and more to overseas to get your juices flowing? And for how long do we retain Kevin Rudd's full attention in Australia?
PM: On the question of day-to-day political life in Australia, it's just important to keep your sleeves rolled up and do practical stuff. The core challenge I face as the Prime Minister of Australia, Jon, is to spend every waking hour working out what I can do to reduce the impact of this global economic recession.
You talk about cooperation with colleagues from abroad. This is global. The solution to the current recession lies in a combination of global action, national action, local action and why am I engaged in the G20? Apart from articulating strongly Australia's views, it's to help fashion cooperatively the responses to return to normality of private credit flows with the world's major banks, properly resourcing the International Monetary Fund, getting enough stimulus out there in the global economy and drawing a line under protectionism, because all those things make a fundamental difference about the pace and time and intensity of economic recovery here.
FAINE: Can I detect Kevin Rudd would be looking more to the United Nations in a couple of years rather than Australian politics for his future?
PM: Oh nice try Jon. Nothing could be further from my thinking, I've got to say. This is a really important job because a whole lot of folks listening to your program this morning have one basic concern, that is, is my job secure and what can the Government do to reduce the risks to my job.
One of things I'm doing today here in Melbourne, at a conference co-chaired with the Brotherhood of St Lawrence, is working out how we work together practically at a local level through the not-for-profit sector, the community sector, the social enterprise sector and local government to make a difference on the ground to rising unemployment.
It's that practical stuff, together with the national actions like our national economic stimulus strategy and our global actions through the G20, together that's our overall approach to reducing the impact of this appalling global recession. This is the worst challenge any government's been dealt on the economic front in three quarters of a century and we are exerting every effort, including me, to try and make a difference.
FAINE: Prime Minister you've been generous with your time and thanks very much this morning.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program Jon.


[Acknowledgements]
The national roll call is important I think because you are a family. And the Lions community across Australia is an important part of our national family.
It doesn't matter where I go in the country. What I have seen in town squares, in natural disasters, in all sorts of city and community occasions Lions out there working, working for the local community.
The fact that you have such extensive reach across the country and the fact that Lions has such an extensive reach across the world is because you are there doing good work for your communities and making them stronger. And if I could just say one word of encouragement to you today, all power to your arms here today.
You're so much a part of the fabric of our national life. And it is worth thinking this: Were it not for community service organisations such as Lions out there doing the voluntary community work in each of the towns and cities and rural districts and communities that you represent each day, our national life, our national community life would be infinitely poorer. So as Prime Minister of Australia, I salute the work of Lions.
Lions are also to blame for me being in politics. So any of you who have reservations about the things that I might do these days, they all began in a Lions Club in Nambour back in the 1970s. Anybody here from Nambour? Sunshine Coast? Okay, good on you.
So Lions year to year and I gather you're going to have a similar gathering here today with the national finalists. Now I first began public speaking at a Lions Youth of the Year competition, way back when. I think I made the local round, I think I got to the regional round and then I got to the district and then got knocked out. Something like that. And we kept the names and addresses of all those judges. I'm still here, you know. Cracking down to get to the end.
But the very important thing is you give young kids a go. And my father was a share-farmer, mum was a nurse and I wouldn't been much past primary school. It was the first of hard times and many of you come from those times. But given the youngster of the day from a Queensland country town and from the local state primary school, local state high school, you provide young kids an opportunity to spend up, think about what they believe in and (inaudible).
And you give them experience. You give them opportunities, the same time you infiltrate into those some people sense that life is not just about me, myself and I, it's about something broader as well. So, thank you Lions for giving me a go.
I said before that you're out there part and parcel, the fabric of our national community life. I saw that (inaudible) recently, evidence to the Victorian bushfires. Let's just pause and reflect for a moment about what that was. In the more than 200 years of settled history in this continent, this is our single greatest national disaster. Our single, greatest natural disaster. And the gates of hell were opened to the good people of Victoria.
When I in the days following that disaster, went around and talk to the people of those fire affected communities, it was organisations like Lions that I saw on the ground doing practical work.
I remember allocating a couple of hours to walk around in the community of Kinglake and many, many hours after that, talking, speaking with people whose lives had been destroyed in so many respects.
But then finally, the people making the hamburgers, the people making food, the people supporting those in the frontline, they were all from local Lions clubs, out there doing their work in a quiet, quiet understated by highly effective way.
And it's not just seeing Lions at work, acts at the cold face in the Victorian bushfires. But if you were to roll through the list of every natural disaster which occurred in Australia, Lions has been there as well. Working hard, sleeves rolled up. And not just natural disasters but at all other forms of community engagement, making a difference. Small projects, larger national projects, intensely local projects which mean things to local communities.
There with sleeves rolled up, doing the work. And this again returns to the theme of my remarks here today, this part and parcel of being part of our Australian family and community life.
Not just what you do here at home, which your Lions International President, with us today, (inaudible) work which you do internationally. Because wherever I travel in the world, across Asia and across Europe, I always see the Lions photograph, the local club ready to deal with the local community challenges in that country, in that community. And this is a good thing.
I was talking to your International President before about the work which Lions had done in responding quickly, to the supply of tents to the victims of the Sichuan earthquake in China, not many years ago. Tents which you previously given to Sweden which were flown from Sweden to China, courtesy of the Swedish Government. To make a difference, a practical difference for local people on the ground suffering the calamity of nature.
So whether it is work in your local community, work for the nation, or work around the world, there is an underlying ethos here which is that you are working for something bigger and broader than yourself. Bigger and broader than your self-interest. Bigger and broader than what is often described as the ethos of our age, summed up in three principles: me, myself and I. And you stand out, as living examples of (inaudible) ethos. And this is a good thing.
If you look at the importance of the community sector more broadly, it is important to see the work that you do as part of the wider work which the community, charitable, not for profit, non-government sector is engaged in this country and around the world.
I have a strong view which is that governments, while they can provide strong, national direction, can provide a strategy for the way in which the nation should go. It's made infinitely more possible and more effective by ongoing creative and constructive engagement with the community sector of which you're a part. Because if you go to the local fabric of local community life, what governments do is important. What we do to provide national policy, what we do to provide economic stimulus, what we do to provide support for the unemployed, what we do to provide support for the church and charitable organisations directly ourselves. But, the effectiveness of what is done on the ground is added to immeasurably by being partners with what you do on the ground. It makes a huge difference.
The idea that somehow governments, from remote locations like Canberra, can dictate what should be the solutions in Whittlesea, in Wanniassa or in other parts of our country is just wrong. Local, effective creative engagement with the community sector, the charitable sector, the not for profit sector, makes it infinitely more effective.
Which brings me to the challenge all governments around the world are facing right now. And that is the great challenge of the global economic recession. The great challenge of the recession which now washes across Australian shores and therefore how should we respond. Our response as a government has been clear cut. We're engaged globally through the G20. The largest economies in the world, Australia's one of them. Representing 85 per cent of global gross domestic product. And we have taken decisions after our terrific meeting in London on how to chart a strategy of the global economic recovery.
Acting on a global economic stimulus together, acting on the need to restore to global institutions like the International Monetary Fund to deal with the challenges which lie ahead. Acting to deal with problems of systematically returning the health of the world's leading private financial institutions, acting elaborately to craft the rules for the future of the global financial system, given the rules of the past have failed most dismally. And acting to draw a line under an outbreak of protectionism, which will retard any recovery and destroy jobs everywhere.
Nationally, engage also in every level of economic stimulus strategy to make a difference to jobs on the ground today while building the infrastructure for tomorrow. In a nutshell, that's what we seek to do. The biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history. The biggest investment in the social housing in the history of the Commonwealth. A strategy to make every Australian owner occupied dwelling energy efficient through the installation of ceiling installation. But all one objective in mind, creating jobs today and building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
And so for our long term infrastructure project, building a National Broadband Network again creating jobs today and it will begin in the great state of Tasmania in the second half of this year; a massive investment of up to $43 billion. Where the objective again is to create the infrastructure we need for tomorrow as well.
They're our national actions. But on the local front, that's where we come to partnership with organisations such as yours as well. Because we need to make a difference (inaudible) with each person, each valuable member of our human family who is affected and afflicted by the impact of unemployment. These are not statistics. These are valuable members of our Australian family. And therefore, this through no fault of their own, a person who loses their job or cannot find a job, or is at risk of losing their job.
Our job as an Australian family is to bond together around them, against one simple axiom and that is that we are all in this together. Each and every one of us. Governments: national, state and local. Business and unions. Governments and the community sector. All working together. Because this is a challenge and a threat which originated way beyond our shores. But its consequences we must deal with effectively at the local level.
The challenge of the local level is to make a difference. I've described this as a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. And yesterday at the Council of Australian Governments meeting in Hobart, we agreed as all governments of Australia, Liberal and Labor, national, state and territory, on a Compact with Young Australians.
What is it in a nutshell? For every young Australian under the age of 25, should either be earning or learning. Earning or learning. And that is, if you don't have a year 12 equivalent qualification, we're going to make that opportunity available to you. If you're under the age of 20 and you don't have a year 12 equivalent qualification, either through school or the vocation employment sector, to make a training opportunity available to you. If you're under the age of 25 and you can't find a job or you lost a job, to make a training place available to you. This guarantee, this entitlement to a training place for our young Australians, I believe is so important, so important to dealing effectively with the impact of this recession for a local level.
There are two points to it. One, to learn from the past and not create a generation of unemployed Australians. So that when this downtime occurs as a consequence of the flows on from the global economy, we turn adversity into opportunity and provide training opportunities for our young people to attain the skills necessary to upgrade their skills when the recovery comes. And secondly, it is very important also, that when the recovery comes that all of the skills available within the nation are tuned directly to participate in the demands of business. That's our guiding philosophy.
But it's also reinforced with the second principle, which is to make our welfare support plan for our young people conditional, on the way in which those young people engage in training opportunities. We need to do both these things together. Because what we want is to make sure that our young people are supported, which through no fault of their own can't find a job. But at the same time that they are provided with a training opportunity in order to secure a job once the recovery comes.
So we in Government are engaged directly with that work on the ground. But one of the things that makes it important, working with local community organisations is how can we team together to make a difference nationwide, with local community projects, local initiatives like local government, local training opportunities and other social enterprises to make a difference in your community. Each one of the communities that you come from, from across our great country.
When I leave here, I'm going to a conference for the better part of the day, co-hosted between myself and the Brotherhood of St Lawrence in Melbourne, to look at one question. How can the community sector, the not for profit sector, the social enterprise sector, partner with Government - state, local and national - to make a difference with local jobs and local training opportunities.
The intention is not simply to have fine words. The intention is to have local deeds. How does it work? And I'm not about to dictate from Canberra and from the distance of the nation's capital, what (inaudible) community.
So we want to engage every family and community organisations in each community of the country to make a difference in their community about the human face of unemployment. How do we generate local projects? How do we generate local social enterprise? How do we build local training opportunities? Taking maximum advantage of the national programs we put in place.
But that's for organisations like Lions (inaudible). Each one of you as community leaders will have an idea about what could and should happen in your community. So my invitation to all of you is to get involved. Walk into your local government authority and say ‘I've got an idea about what we can do'. There's a local jobs fund which will be established by the Australian Government, it will be delivered through the priority employment coordinators in the most unemployed affected, employment affected areas in the country.
But that is just half the equation. The other half is building on local community enterprise effort and initiative. And so what I'll be saying to your organisation and organisations right across in the country is one simple principle: we are all in this together and together we can make a difference.
I can't stand before you as the Prime Minister of Australia and say I can stop something as large as the global economic recession. What I can say, is that by deploying the efforts of government and engaging directly in the not for profit sector, we can make a difference. We can reduce the impact. We can cushion the blow.
And if we actually have a spirit about us which harnesses all the nation's energy and intellectual effort and its passion for justice and doing the right thing by our fellow Australians, then we're going to come through this in fine shape. But it will be tough and the road will be hard. But I'm confident of the ethos of (inaudible) and see Australia through.
To conclude, your organisation as I said in my introductory remarks is also active globally. Building the ties that bind across the world. Lions clubs everywhere. You may not be conscious of it but the work that you do and other international community organisations do, has actually created this great fabric of ties across the international community which transcends the great divide, which transcends religious divide, which transcends the political divide, which transcends the national divide.
This is important work and I commend you in it. Because when you take that work into account and build into it, the other work of global, community and service organisations, we again move towards our point in our global discourse of nations, that the big challenge of the future, the challenges for us all, challenges of the economy, challenges of climate change, challenges of water, challenges of police security - each of them beyond the purview by and large of single national governments. But as the global community acting together and cooperatively, we can make a global difference as well. As you seem to do with the good work of Lions International.
I congratulate you in your work and wish you every success in this great conference of this great organisation.


This is a good day for the Australian Defence Force, this is a good day also for the Australian nation. It is a good day for the men and women who serve our nation in uniform. 
The first responsibility of any Government is to provide for the national security of Australia. And for this Government there is no higher priority. Our defence force lies at the absolute core of our national security framework. Without a strong defence force, the rest of the framework would be weak, it would be hollow and it would be ineffective. With a strong defence force, our national security framework has strength at its core.
Australia's national security will face increasing challenges in the coming years as our security environment changes and the Australian Government must remain vigilant in responding to those challenges and to those changes. As the Minister said before, it is almost a decade since Australia conducted a thorough review of its national defence. That is why we have fulfilled our commitment to deliver a comprehensive Defence White Paper once we came to Government.
The decisions I set out today are designed to make Australia ready for the range of challenges that are likely to emerge.
Today this Government releases the Defence White Paper to build Force 2030. - the defence force Australia will need for the next generation to meet the national security challenges of the future. Today therefore is an important preparation day for the challenges that lie ahead, an important day also therefore for the nation itself.
Before discussing the kind of defence force we will need in the future, we must first assess our strategic operating environment. We launch this White Paper today in a strategic environment different from that described by the last White Paper almost a decade ago.
Some trends that emerged that had emerged before then, such as the increasing pace of globalisation and state fragility in our near neighbourhood, continue. But other trends such as the rise of terrorism, the realignment of global and regional power realities and emerging threats such as border protection, climate change and resource security represent newer dynamics that will also affect our strategic and security environment for the future.
The key features of Australia's future security environment are as follows. First it is our clear conclusion that the United States will remain the most powerful and influential actor out to 2030. No other power, no other power will have the military, economic or strategic capacity to challenge US primacy over the period covered by this White Paper.
Furthermore our alliance with the United States will remain the bedrock on which Australia's national security is built. It is an alliance that has prospered under 13 United States Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers and it continues with that strength for the future. This alliance is enduring and remains vital to Australia's future defence.
Within the Asia-Pacific Region economic growth should help foster stability and security but there are likely to be tensions between the major powers where the interests of the United States, China, Japan, India and Russia intersect.
While the chance of direct confrontation between any of these major powers is small, there is always the possibility of miscalculation.
China will continue to be a key driver of economic activity both globally and in the region in the period out to 2030. It will also be Asia's strongest military power by a wide margin, and China is likely to develop a significant military capability commensurate with its size. The management of the relationship between the United States and China will be critical for stability in the Asia-Pacific region.
Within Southeast Asia and Indonesia, economic and social development will continue. The evolution of Indonesia as a stable democratic state with strong social cohesion is important to our strategic interests and provides it with a strong platform for long-term stability and prosperity. The success of Indonesia's democratic transformation under President Yudhoyono and under his leadership is an important contribution to our longer-term regional stability.
In the South Pacific and East Timor, economic, social and political instability will continue to present challenges to our strategic interests. This may create conditions in which Australia might be required to respond with security and humanitarian assistance, as we have done in the past. Coalition operations in support of our wider interests will also remain critical. And as I stated this past Tuesday on our enhanced contribution to Afghanistan, we must not allow Afghanistan to once again become the unimpeded training ground and operating base for global terrorist activity.
Within this environment that sees shifts in the alignment of global power, regional uncertainty and the continuing threat of terrorism, we also see new challenges that will face our defence force out to 2030. Most significantly, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) is of serious concern. There is a risk that the number of states with a ‘break-out' capability to produce WMD will increase due to the proliferation of dual-use infrastructure and the continued operation of WMD proliferation networks.
And we see new security risks also emerging over the potential impact of climate change and resource security. These trends are likely to exacerbate existing problems in governance and population in developing countries.
The environment I have just described will present our defence forces with challenges of a new and different order to those we have faced before. We must have a flexible and effective force to deal with a wider range of contingencies. Contingencies that range from stabilisation operations and humanitarian and disaster relief to the more remote possibility of direct conflict.
In shaping Force 2030 we don't just need to know our strategic environment, we also need to know the primary tasks that our Defence Force will need to be able to perform. Australia's defence policy is based on the core principle of self reliance in the direct defence of Australia. This means that we must have the ability to conduct independent military operations in the defence of Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches and denying any potential adversary the ability to operate in our immediate neighbourhood.
There is no more important task for the Australian Defence Force than the defence of Australia and it is around this task that our force is shaped. But we also need to do conduct other tasks when it is in our interests to do so. This means we need to have the capacity to act independently where we have unique interests at stake and do not wish to be reliant on the combat forces of others, lead military coalitions where we have shared strategic interests at stake with others and make tailored contributions to military coalitions where we share wider strategic interests with others.
These objectives shape the priority tasks that our defence forces will be required to undertake in the strategic environment out to 2030. These tasks are: deterring and defeating attacks on Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches against credible adversaries, contributing to Stability and Security in the South Pacific and East Timor by assisting our neighbours in dealing with humanitarian and disaster relief, and on occasion stabilisation interventions as we have done in the past.
Further, contributing to military contingencies in the wider Asia-Pacific Region including by way of assisting our Southeast Asian partners to meet external challenges and contributing to military contingencies in support of global security by supporting the efforts of the international community in upholding a rules-based global order, where our interests align and where we have the capacity to do so.
In order to undertake these tasks in an increasingly demanding strategic environment, we will need a force that is capable of confronting a wide range of contingencies both now and into the future. Making that happen will require significant long term investment but that investment is in our long term national interest and will help secure our nation and our people for decades to come. That is why we have decided to acquire Force 2030.
One of the great mistakes of military strategy throughout history has been to prepare to fight the last war. The Australian Government is determined not to repeat that error. We need to ensure that our defence forces are shaped in the geo-political realities of the century ahead. That is why this defence paper looks forward to 2030 and seeks to determine what our defence forces will need over the next 20 years.
Force 2030 represents the most powerful, integrated and sophisticated set of military capabilities that our nation has ever acquired in order to plan effectively for our nation's future national security needs. It is a force that provides us with the reach, weight and flexibility to undertake the principal tasks for the Australian Defence Force.
Force 2030 represents a long-term investment in Australia's security, and the White Paper describes the key capability elements that comprise the force. These capabilities include increasing our major naval assets by one third, doubling the size of our submarine fleet and transforming our surface fleet from light to heavy Frigates and destroyers.
Force 2030 will include therefore the following:
     * 12 future submarines, which will be Australia's largest ever single defence project. They will be capable of anti-ship and anti-submarine warfare, strategic strike, intelligence collection and support for special operations forces;
     * Air-Warfare Destroyers and a new class of Frigates to replace the ANZAC class ships, to provide enhanced anti-submarine warfare and air defence capabilities. This will give us greater flexibility in protecting our air and sea approaches, and provide greater protection for our troops on operation;
     * New maritime-based land-attack cruise missiles to enhance the capabilities of the Air Warfare Destroyers and future combat ships and submarines;
     * New Naval Combat Helicopters, to further enhance our maritime capabilities and in particular anti-submarine warfare;
     * Around 100 Joint Strike Fighters, to provide a potent air combat capability to 2030;
     * New Wedgetail Early Warning and Control aircraft, to provide greatly enhanced situational awareness and an ability to control and coordinate other aircraft;
     * New maritime surveillance and response aircraft, to provide enhanced capabilities for protecting our borders;
     * Around 1,100 new armoured combat vehicles to provide greater protection, mobility and fire-power for our troops;
     * Networking of our land forces, to ensure that our men and women in uniform are more effective on operations;
     * Maintaining the capability edge and effectiveness of our Special Forces, so that their formidable combat edge is not only preserved but expanded; and
     * Enhancing our cyber-warfare capabilities, by establishing a Cyber Security Operations Centre that will provide a greater capacity to respond to cyber-threats and improve our response to incidents in cyberspace.
Force 2030 will mean the best fighter jets, the most versatile armoured vehicles and the most sophisticated submarines available to defend Australia's national security. This is only a brief snapshot of the capabilities that form the basis of Force 2030. It is a force that provides the ADF with greater depth, power and survivability for the next two decades. Force 2030 prepares us for the next generation of challenges that our defence force and Australia as a nation will face.
The White Paper also sets out a range of major new commitments. It is also important is to renew, to repair and to refit the kit and equipment that we already have and the facilities that support it. That is why this defence paper also focuses strongly on remediating the defence force we have today so this it can operate better for tomorrow.
Over the next decade, we will be devoting approximately $30 billion to fixing the existing force. This includes approximately $6 billion for more than 50 new projects to fill the crucial gaps that have been left in equipment and protection for our women and men in uniform. Approximately $18 billion to top-up existing projects that have been under-funded in the past and approximately $6 billion to fix systems and infrastructure that support our women and men in uniform.
Central to the strategy laid out in this White Paper is the need to ensure that our plan is affordable. Some have argued that in the global economic recession we should reduce defence spending to ease the pressure on the budget. But the Government believes the opposite to be true. In a period of global instability Australia must invest in a strong, capable and well resourced defence force.
Defence policy must look over the horizon, not just of the next year but of the decades ahead. In setting defence policy we must remember that the economic challenges of today do not negate the security challenges of tomorrow. We must deal with the challenges of the global recession today and at the same time prepare for the major, the major challenges in the future, central to which is the future challenge of national security for the nation.
Our dedication to our own security must be constant and uncompromising. That is why, for the first time, this Government has committed to real funding stability for Defence, to enable Defence to plan with certainty its capability goals in the long term. The key elements of this funding profile include maintaining three per cent real growth in Defence's budget out to 2017-18, 2.5 per cent fixed indexation designed to offset Defence against the cost of inflation to its business and long-term growth of 2.2 per cent from 2018-2030.
These measures will ensure that Defence is able to meet its goals for Force 2030.They provide Defence with a coherent funding envelope for long term planning. Importantly this funding envelope also ensures that any shortfalls against the White Paper funding I have just outlined will be fully offset by Defence. Because like every other sector of Government, Defence must be accountable and disciplined in its use of public resources.
None of these measures I have described today can be effective if we do not invest in the people that we need to operate, support and maintain our capabilities. That is why this White Paper describes a people strategy aimed at providing a more strategic approach to managing people in defence, nurturing the skills of our defence professionals, ensuring that defence families are looked after and enhancing our ability to attract and retain the very best of our men and women in uniform.
The people of defence, of the Australian Defence Force are a world-class group of professionals. They are the most valuable capability of a modern defence force. Theirs is our nation's highest calling. Supporting them is one of our greatest responsibilities in safeguarding our nation's security.
To conclude, the White Paper that we've released today is possibly the most significant contribution to defence planning in a generation. It outlines a clear plan for Force 2030 and how that will be achieved. It represents a commitment by the Government to invest in the future so that our defence force has the necessary capabilities to operate in a rapidly changing strategic environment. And most importantly, it provides a long-term plan for defence capability and capacity to promote a more secure Australia for Australians today and for the generations to come.
I congratulate the Minister for Defence, I congratulate the Department of Defence, I congratulate the Chief of the Defence Force, I congratulate individual service chiefs for they prepare great work, their great teamwork in preparing this Defence White Paper. Important work, critical work, vital work for the future of our nation, Australia. 


PM: Now it's time for ladies and gentlemen of the press to ask any questions they would like. Any easy question I will take, any difficult questions will be taken by those behind me. Any questions involving any level of insubordination (inaudible). Those people will (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: If the Government and Department fail to make the savings that you've envisaged over the next 10 years, what will be first capabilities to go by the wayside?
PM: What we have done is engaged with Defence in an enormous internal review of defence procurement systems and also of savings potential within the portfolio. We therefore are confident that within Defence's leadership that these efficiencies in procurement and also savings in the way in which Defence conducts its regular business will be made.
Second point I'd make is this, we're also not just resting that strategy on defence operating more efficiently and effectively in those two respects. We are providing significant, sustained, long term budget support ourselves in order to make sure Force 2030 is not an exercise on paper but is translated into the kit and equipment that our three critical services need for the future.
We have spent a lot of time going through the assumptions underpinning the force structure, the strategic environment which determines the force structure and capabilities, as well as the budget parameters within the (inaudible). We're confident that we're going to be able to plan this, it is necessary that we provide funding security for defence long term and I referred in my remarks before about the need for a proper planning certainty for the future in order to get there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what, do you have a message for China or any other regional power that might have concerns about the build up that you've announced today?
PM: As Prime Minister of Australia my first and foremost responsibility is the national security of Australia for which I make absolutely no apology to anybody. That's the first point. The second is this, we are faced with a series of changes and challenges across the wider Asia-Pacific region and we must therefore ensure that our men and women in uniform have the proper kit and equipment and assets to meet a range of contingencies in the future.
The truth is we are seeing a period of significant military and naval expansions in the wider Asia-Pacific region and it's important therefore that Australia makes proper provision for that in our own planning horizon. The force structure that we have for the capabilities that we need and the underpinning budgetary support.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister a lot of the recent discussion on the White Paper has been around, its premise being a slippage of US influence in the Asia-Pacific in the medium-long term and an increase in Chinese influence in the Asia-Pacific medium-long term. Is that the right premise? Is that the premise that you see this White Paper (inaudible)?
PM: Thank you Tim, and I will draw your ever eager attention to page 32 of the White Paper and I just happen to have chanced upon paragraph 4.17 as you were asking the question. And considering that it may be possible that you might have asked a question like that, let me read to you what is the considered conclusion of the Australian Government:
“It remains the case that no other power would have the military, economic or strategic capacity to challenge the US global supremacy over the period covered by this White Paper.”
That is our projection for the next generation. It is within that projection that we of course again reaffirm our commitment for the United States alliance and as I said in my remarks before it remains the bedrock of Australian security. On top of that, as I've said before, and I've said again today the core organising principle for Australia's defence remains the defence of this vast continent of ours Australia and therefore we need to be also prepared as the White Paper makes absolutely clear, for independent military operations on our own.
These two things proceed in tandem but the direct answer to your question is contained in the paragraph I just responded to and that is that it remains the case that no other power would have the military, economic or strategic capacity to challenge US global primacy over the period covered by this White Paper. The period 2030 is a fair old stretch of time.
Another question down there.
JOURNALIST: Thanks Prime Minister. The document also says that China does have the potential to (inaudible)?
PM: What I pointed to in my remarks before is that it is as plain as day that there is a significant military and naval build up across the Asia-Pacific region. That's a reality, it's a truth, it's there. So either you can simply choose to ignore that fact or to incorporate that into a realistic component of Australia's strategic assumptions about what this region will look like over the next two decades.
Secondly therefore, anchored in our alliance with the United States, it's important for our own capability requirement and force structure for the Australian Defence Force to be prepared to meet a range of contingencies arising from military and naval build ups across our wider region. That is prudent long term defence planning and we believe we have got the balance absolutely right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister at the moment you don't have enough preparedness to staff the submarines which we have. How can you be confident that that's going to change and (inaudible) but realistically why should people expect that you can staff this number of submarines?
PM: Well I was over at HMAS Collins recently and exploring the bowels of the ships with a very tall Chief of the Defence Force and how he managed to get through that without whacking his head I am still remain surprised.
But when I spoke to the submariners there and those responsible for our existing fleet of submarines our level of recruitment is actually turning the corner and that is important to note.
As I also reflected in my remarks before, we are deeply, deeply aware that the personnel element, the people element of the entire Australian Defence Force establishment is fundamental but we've got to be absolutely vigilant in the future about maintaining the relative attraction of coming to work in the Australian Defence Force.
Submarines are a particularly challenging operating environment. I was surprised the other day at what their showering roster is. These are particularly professional individuals given the constraints of a below sea, below deck operation but a more dedicated bunch I've never run into.
Recruitments are turning the corner but we're going to be very attentive to long term recruitment planning and necessary incentives to ensure that these submarines, which will be the largest submarine force ever in Australian history, are staffed, recruited, manned to ensure that they are there to do their job as and when that job becomes necessary.
JOURNALIST: While recognising the primacy of the US alliance Prime Minister, I refer to paragraph 6.15, is it fair to assume therefore that the message being conveyed by the Government in that paragraph is that Australians will be more tough minded and circumspect in the future in considering committing with the United States to Coalitions of the Willing outside the region?
PM: Thank you for drawing my attention to my attention to paragraph 6.15, Paul. I was reflecting on is that it was some time ago. Look the bottom line is this, our strategic guidance in the future is anchored in the sets of principles I referred to before. What are they? One, the defence of Australia. Two, particular requirements for interventions of a humanitarian or security nature in the South-Pacific area. Three engaging in wider military activity in South-East Asia as it's appropriate in the circumstances, it's appropriate and in corresponding to our obligations under international law. And on top of that to engage in wider coalition operations in support of global security of the type which we're currently engaged in, in Afghanistan.
That is the logical hierarchy for Australia to consider its future defence operations, consistent with a rational analysis of Australia's national security requirements. It begins at home, it goes to the immediate neighbourhood, it is mindful of what is happening in the wider Asia-Pacific region and acutely mindful of our obligations to be part of the international community in enhancing a rules-based global security order and enhancing global security.
Remember in Afghanistan we are there under the express umbrella of the United Nations Security Resolution and simultaneously under the express provisions of our obligations under the ANZUS Alliance which was invoked in 2001. That is the logical hierarchy for our operations in the future, clearly and explicitly stated in the Defence White Paper released today.
JOURNALIST: If you had to briefly summarise what is the continuity of what you've inherited and what is new in all this, how would you tell the Australian people what is different about today's announcement?
PM: Well firstly I would draw your attention to what we are doing specifically with the Navy. As I said before what you see is increasing the overall major naval assets by about a third and you have a doubling of the submarine fleet which is acutely intended to the sorts of challenges we're going to face in the future. And on vessels such as this we will be will merging some lighter Frigates and heavier Frigates and destroyers in the future. These are significant ships in terms of what Navy has by way of its assets and into the future. That's one area of challenge, of change if you like in terms of the past.
The second, a confirmation that we'll be moving to four squadrons of Joint Strike Fighters, this is a significant price of kit and equipment in terms of the necessary skills and capabilities we need for the air-sea gap around Australia. These are significant and formidable future air assets and we have decided to take CDF's advice and the Chief of Air Force's advice in terms of what is needed there, in terms of the overall size of that acquisition; around 100 aircraft.
In terms of Army, one of the key challenges we face is to make sure that our Army in the field has the best supporting armoured and related vehicles possible and accordingly the additional acquisition of more than 1000+ such vehicles, I believe represents us putting our money where our mouth is on that question.
If I could add one other to the list of what is different. We take fundamentally seriously the challenges of cyber-security in the future and you will see reflected in the Defence White Paper our acute concerns related to that and the actions we'll take in response to that.
There are four key sets of changes given the changing strategic environment and I believe challenging strategic environment where Australia will land itself over the next 20 years.
And as we look around to the youngest faces in the ADF here on this deck this morning, these men and women are going to be faced with a range of more complex and challenging circumstances than even we believe we are confronting here today. And what's our responsibility in 2009? As best we can to make proper, rational provision for that range of needs and to provide the best possible underpinnings in terms of security of budgetary support.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you expand on where you think Australia should go in terms of cyber-warfare?
PM: It's not a lot. It's (inaudible). The first thing it's a real problem. The challenge out there and we're clear about that in the Defence White Paper, we're clear about that at the end of last year in the National Security Statement, policy statement that I made to the Australian Parliament, the first such statement to the Parliament. This is a real challenge affecting all areas of Defence's future operations and more widely for our national security concerns. It would be negligent of any Australian Government now not to invest significantly in building this capacity for the future. We intend to do so and our resolve is underpinned in this Defence White Paper.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the submarines Prime Minister, can you just outline I guess the benefits of (inaudible) South Australia? (inaudible)
PM: Well when we say that this is a significant expansion of Australia's defence capabilities in the future, the other part of what I believe to be good news for the nation is that a lot of this construction will occur in Australia. The Defence Minister will be travelling to Adelaide soon to discuss with the South Australian Premier and Government about what can be put in place to support the construction of what will be the single largest defence acquisition project in Australia in our history.
This is very large: 12 large submarines of a capability larger than the existing Collins class. Therefore the South Australian economy with all those things in place, put in place represent a long term, will represent a long term boost to that economy. Of course we have to complete the final arrangements concerning appropriate tendering and the rest. I would say that the South Australian Government is mindful of future possibilities for itself to be keenly attentive to what might be possible under these circumstances.
I think there's another one over here.
JOURANLIST: Prime Minister if China attacks Taiwan in any way, will Australia help defend it?
PM: Thank you for that question. Australia's policy in relation to the Taiwan Straits has been one of a bipartisan consensus going back a long, long time and will be into the future. It contains two elements. One is that we do not speculate on any future contingencies concerning what may or may not happen in the Taiwan Strait. The second part of my response to your question is that Australia takes seriously its alliance responsibilities to the United States.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister I think if I have the numbers right you're relying on $20 billion in defence savings going forward to make this plan work, that infers a quite incredible change, turnaround I would have thought in budget efficiency dividends for this department. Do you agree that it does and what makes you think that you now can extract that kind of efficiency from the Defence Department where so many others have failed?
PM: First of all, parallel to this exercise, that is the production of the Defence White Paper, we've undertaken a parallel exercise in the deep and fundamental review of the systems underpinning defence procurement. This is an important area of future savings, the way in which we go about procuring defence force kit and equipment in the future as well as underlying savings in the portfolio as well.
These discussions have proceeded in debates within the national security committee of the cabinet, proceed with the same sort of intensity and depth as has had the actual preparation of the White Paper itself, they fold one into the other.
The Government has complete confidence in the administration of defence and in the leadership of the individual services headed by the Chief of Defence Force that we will get there and the reason for that is that our defence leadership is acutely conscious of their obligations, wider national obligations as well which is to work within overall defence budgeting parameters. Part of the contribution will come from savings and efficiencies as well as from the future defence procurement program but part of the compact also lies in us providing a secure defence funding element long term as well.
We believe we have achieved a good partnership approach with the defence leadership on this. We are confident we can deliver on this in the future.
And remember this, it is all about ensuring that in more than a generation's time those sitting on a deck of a vessel such as this can look back at these decisions and say we did everything possible to plan for the future defence needs of this Commonwealth of Australia, given the expenses involved, given the uncertainty in the strategic environment, in ensuring the raft and range of capabilities in our planning and therefore in the future at our disposal to respond to the challenges which arise in this challenging period ahead.
Ladies and gentlemen I thank you for your attention this morning and for bearing with us during this press conference and these presentations on a bright and sunny Sydney morning. This as I said before is a good day for the nation, a good day for the Australian defence force.
Thank you.


The Rudd Government will delay the start of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme by one year to help Australian companies manage the impacts of the global recession.
Australian businesses are currently dealing with the worst global recession since the great depression.
In this environment the Government has decided to act to further support jobs and assist businesses during these difficult economic times:
     * A one year fixed price phase will apply between 1 July 2011 and 30 June 2012. During the fixed price phase, each carbon pollution permit will cost $10. From 1 July 2012, businesses covered by the scheme will need to purchase permits at the prevailing market price.
     * A new Global Recession Buffer will be provided as part of the assistance package for emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries.
     * Eligible businesses will receive funding to undertake energy efficiency measures in 2009-10 as part of a $200 million tranche of the Climate Change Action Fund.
CPRS start deferred to 2011 and permit price fixed at $10 for one year
To allow the Australian economy more time to recover from the impacts of the global recession, the CPRS will commence on 1 July 2011 with a one-year fixed price phase.
During the fixed-price phase, an unlimited number of permits will be issued to liable companies at a price of $10 per tonne.
Fixed-price permits from the first year will not be able to be banked for use in later periods.
The expanded Renewable Energy Target will be in place as planned from 2010 to drive investment in Australia's vast renewable energy resources.
To encourage carbon pollution reductions before the scheme starts, reforestation will be eligible to voluntarily generate permits for carbon stored from 1 July 2010, creating economic opportunities in regional Australia.
A price cap will apply from commencement of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, with the 5-year EITE review to look at whether the price cap should continue into the future.
A number of other changes have been made to the EITE assistance program, including to the terms of the five-yearly EITE review (see Attachment A).
Global Recession Buffer
An additional Global Recession Buffer will be provided for emissions-intensive trade-exposed (EITE) industries for the first five years of the Scheme.
This Buffer will provide an additional 5 per cent free permits for EITE activities eligible for 90 per cent assistance, giving an effective rate of assistance of almost 95 per cent to these highly emissions-intensive trade-exposed activities in the first year of the scheme.
The Buffer will provide an additional 10 per cent free permits for EITE activities eligible for 60 per cent assistance, giving an effective rate of assistance of 66 per cent to these moderately emissions-intensive trade-exposed activities in the first year of the scheme.
Rates of assistance will decline at a rate of 1.3 per cent per year, in line with the Carbon Productivity Contribution set out in the White Paper.
Support through the Climate Change Action Fund
The Government has allocated up to $200 million to the Climate Change Action Fund in 2009-10 to support businesses and community organisations that do not receive EITE assistance, but do have significant energy costs, to take action to reduce carbon pollution through energy efficiency before the scheme starts.
The $200 million tranche of the Climate Change Action Fund for 2009-10 will include:
     * $20 million for a business information package to provide advice to businesses on how the CPRS will work and what impacts and opportunities may arise.
     * up to $100 million for Early Action Energy Efficiency Strategies for Business, including energy audits and capital investment.
     *  $80 million for capital investment grants for businesses and community organisations.
Together, these measures will help businesses cope with the global recession while making a contribution to Australia's comprehensive climate change response.
Attachment A
Elite Assistance Program
The CPRS legislation will include an ‘aims' clause which directly relates the EITE assistance program to the impact of the scheme on the international competitiveness of EITE activities.
When conducting their five-yearly EITE reviews, the Expert Advisory Committee will consider the following issues (amending and building on the position in the White Paper):
(a) the review of eligibility assessment for activities (e.g. taking into account falls in commodity prices etc as outlined in policy position 12.8 in the White Paper);
(b) whether modifications should be made to the EITE assistance program on the basis of whether it continues to be consistent with the rationale for assistance or is conferring windfall gains on entities conducting activities;
(c) the extent to which the Scheme has resulted in an increase in the cost of electricity and the extent of pass through to EITEs;
(d) the extent to which EITE firms are making progress towards world's best practice energy and emissions efficiency for their industry sector;
(e) the future shape of the permit price cap, recognising the need to balance the development of market mechanisms and business certainty;
(f) international developments, including the extent to which Australia has entered international agreements, tangible emissions abatement commitments have been made by countries which compete with EITE industries, and major partners or competing countries have introduced carbon constraints into their own economies; and
(g) whether broadly comparable carbon constraints (whether imposed through an explicit carbon price or by other regulatory measures) are applying internationally, at either an industry or economy-wide level, or an international agreement involving Australia and all major emitting economies is concluded, in which case the Committee would make recommendations to Government with regard to the withdrawal of EITE assistance; this assessment will draw on analysis by an independent expert body (initially the Productivity Commission) of quantitative measures of carbon prices or shadow carbon prices in major economies.
Five years' notice will be provided for any modifications to the EITE assistance program, unless the modifications were required for compliance with Australia's international trade obligations.
The continuation of the Global Recession Buffer beyond five years will be reviewed in light of domestic and international economic conditions and other relevant factors.


The Rudd Government will establish the Australian Carbon Trust to help all Australians to do their bit to reduce Australia's carbon pollution and to drive energy efficiency in commercial buildings and businesses.
The Government will also take into account the contribution of individual households that purchase accredited GreenPower in setting Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme caps.
The $75.8 million Australian Carbon Trust will incorporate:
     * a $50 million Energy Efficiency Trust, and
     * a $25.8 million Energy Efficiency Savings Pledge Fund.
Australian Carbon Trust  -  Energy Efficiency Savings Pledge Fund
A new website will provide a one-stop shop for individuals and households to simply calculate their energy use and buy and retire carbon pollution permits under the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Because the Pledge Fund will pool pledges, even small amounts can combine to make a big difference.
Households and individuals will be able to pledge as little or as much as they can afford to reduce carbon pollution.
The Pledge Fund will be entirely voluntary and contributions to the Pledge Fund will be tax deductible.
Australian Carbon Trust  -  Energy Efficiency Trust
The Government will provide $50 million in seed funding for an Energy Efficiency Trust to promote energy efficiency in the business sector.
The Trust will work by putting proposals to businesses to undertake energy efficiency measures that will save money over time.
The Trust would cover upfront capital costs of undertaking energy efficiency investments and put in place arrangements for business to repay the capital costs at a commercial rate as energy cost savings flow through.
For example, the Trust could identify lighting improvements in a business that would cost $2 million to undertake. The Trust would cover this $2 million cost, with the business contributing nothing upfront. The business would then pass the energy cost savings from the lighting improvements back to the Trust at a commercial rate until the full $2 million with interest is paid back to the Trust. Once the upfront capital is paid back, the business keeps the ongoing cost savings.
The Trust ensures participating businesses save money without having to tie up any capital.
The Trust also earns a solid rate of return on its investments and demonstrates to other businesses that energy efficiency pays dividends.
The Australian Carbon Trust will be developed in collaboration with the Carbon Trust in the United Kingdom, which is a leader in working with business to cut carbon and develop commercial low carbon technologies.
Supporting individual action through GreenPower
Many households, businesses and community organisations purchase accredited GreenPower to increase the supply of renewable energy and help Australia make the transition to a low pollution future.
As part of the new measures announced today, additional GreenPower purchases above 2009 levels will be directly recognised when the Government sets caps under the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Additional GreenPower purchases will be measured annually and future caps will be tightened on a rolling basis.
The Rudd Government has listened to Australian households who have raised concerns that their individual efforts to reduce emissions will not be adequately taken into account under the CPRS.


PM: Today the Australian Government is announcing significant changes to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. In response to three sets of factors, the first is obviously changes in the global economy and the impact of the global economic recession and the recession which impacts on our shores as well. 
Secondly, the need to continue to provide maximum impetus for a strong outcome at the Copenhagen meeting due at the end of this year and the reason for that of course is that a strong outcome in Copenhagen is in Australia's long term economic and environmental interests.
And the third factor is that it is in Australia's fundamental national interest to provide business certainty and investment certainty for the future and therefore to conclude these arrangements.
Firstly, let me go to the industry measures that we are speaking to. The package includes a number of measures to manage the impact of the global recession. The worst global recession since the Great Depression means we must adapt our climate change measures but not abandon them.
Firstly, the start date of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will be delayed one year to commence from 1 July 2011. Secondly, to further assist business a one year fixed price period will apply until 1 July 2012 and thirdly, we will then have a floating price through the full operation of the scheme from 1 July 2013* [2012]. Now this we believe represents an appropriate response to the current uncertainty.
During the fixed price phase an unlimited number of permits will be issued to liable companies at a price of $10 per tonne.
Furthermore a new global recession buffer will be provided as part of the assistance package for emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries. Industries eligible for 60 per cent of assistance will receive a 10 per cent buffer for a finite period, while industries eligible for 90 per cent assistance will receive a five per cent buffer for a finite period. Eligible businesses will receive funding to undertake energy efficiency measures from 1 July 2009.
Let me now go to the question of targets. On the question of targets the Australian Government remains committed to reducing carbon pollution by five per cent against 2000 levels by 2020, regardless of action taken internationally.
Secondly, we also retain our commitment to reduce emissions by up to 15 per cent of 2000 levels by 2020 in the context of a global agreement that falls short of the 450 parts per million outcome but satisfies criteria already specified in the White Paper.
Thirdly, we now commit to reduce carbon pollution by 25 per cent by 2000 levels by 2020 if the world agrees to an ambitious global deal to stabilise levels of CO2 equivalent in the atmosphere by at least 450 parts per million by 2050. This of course, 450 parts per million outcome, is an outcome consistent with Australia having the prospect of saving the Barrier Reef.
Furthermore, if this happened, that is if we did achieve that significant and ambitious and comprehensive global outcome around 450 parts per million, the Government has further committed to realising five per cent of that 25 per cent  -  up to five per cent of that 25 per cent  -  by the Government purchasing international credits including investment in the protection of international forests.
Thirdly, let me turn to individual action. The Australian Government has also been engaged in not just active discussions with business and industry, active discussions with the community at large, active engagement with the international community but also with those concerned about appropriate contributions to this important target by households themselves.
In terms of the household sector, we believe that this is best enhanced in terms of its contribution to bringing down greenhouse gas emissions by the establishment of an Australian Carbon Trust to allow households to do their bit by investing directly in reducing Australia's emissions and to drive energy efficiency in buildings.
Individuals and households will be able to calculate their energy use at home and pledge contributions to the $25 million plus energy efficiency savings fund to effectively offset their emissions. Individuals will be able to calculate their energy use and establish the savings they could achieve with a more energy efficient home. A household or individual could then make a tax deductible donation to the pledge fund, which the pledge fund would use to buy and cancel carbon pollution permits equivalent to that level of energy use.
Because the pledge fund will pool pledges, even small amounts can contribute to making a big difference overall. Also, as part of the Australian Carbon Trust, the Government will provide $50 million in seed funding to the energy efficiency trust to promote energy efficiency in commercial buildings and in wider business operations. The trust will bring together public seed funding, business skills and technical knowledge to leverage investment in energy efficiency projects. By demonstrating and showcasing commercially viable energy efficiency opportunities, the trust will promote the benefits of energy efficiency. In addition the Government will take into account the contribution of individual households that purchase accredited GreenPower in setting the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme caps.
On the question of the energy efficiency Trust, let me just give you one quick example as to how that would work. The Trust could identify lighting improvements for example in the business that would cost $2 million to undertake. The Trust would cover this $2 million cost with the business contributing nothing upfront. The business could then pass the energy cost savings from the lighting improvements back to the Trust at a commercial rate until the full $2 million is paid back to the Trust over time. Once the $2 million is paid back the business keeps the ongoing savings which it has achieved.
To conclude, what we have done in this business is work very carefully across the Australian community to deliver the best possible outcome for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the very difficult circumstances in which the global economy now faces. Firstly the Australian Government has listened carefully to the representations made to the Government by business, dealing with the challenge of the global recession in ensuring that their businesses can carve out their own business and economic futures in a very difficult environment.
Second, the Government has also listened carefully to international and environmental stakeholders committed to realising the best possible outcome at Copenhagen, which is scheduled for the end of this year, in order to achieve the best and most ambitious outcome necessary to stabilise long term greenhouse gas emissions at 450 parts per million, because applied to Australia's own circumstances long term, that creates the best economic and environmental dividend to Australia, including as I said importantly before, providing a scientific basis for us having a real prospect of saving the Great Barrier Reef.
And finally the Government has also been listening to households and the contributions which they wish to make voluntarily to this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, hence our decision to establish the Australian Carbon Trust.
Finally, the Government will now proceed to introduce legislation into the Senate. The Government through the Climate Change Minister, Senator Wong will now engage in consultations with all parties. We will be dealing with their relevant climate change spokesmen - the Liberals, who I understand have two spokesmen, the Nationals and the minor parties. And our objective of course is to provide business certainty for the future by providing a stable framework, legislative and regulatory framework for the future given that this is a set of changes which affects the entire economy long term.
On the question of the Liberals I would simply note as follows. The Liberal Leader has stated that these goals are shared by the Liberal Party in terms of action on climate change. Goals shared in relation to a slower start, goals also shared I note from earlier comments for the need for more ambitious targets overall.
But here's the rub, it's time to get off the fence Mr Turnbull and it's time to act in the national interest and to secure this legislation and certainty for the future. And on the key question of climate change, which affects the economic and environmental interests of this country long term  -  will the real Malcolm Turnbull please stand up? The time has come.
Before we go to your questions, can I just ask the Minister for Climate Change to add to my remarks about the nature of the negotiations in which she has been engaged and then we'll happily take your questions. Over to you Senator Wong.
MINISTER WONG: Thank you Prime Minister. Well today we're putting forward responsible changes to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We always said we would consult and in fact we have been consulting as you know in relation to this policy for many months now and all of you have been intimately interested I am sure in the consultations through the Green Paper, White Paper, draft legislation and to now.
These changes today are all about strengthening the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. They are to enable the economy to recover to support jobs at this difficult time but also changes which will help us secure the global agreement that this nation needs. We are putting forward these changes, they have been the subject of detailed consultation with the Business Council of Australia, with the Australian Industry Group, with representatives from the Australian Conservation Foundation, the World Wildlife Fund for Nature, the Climate Institute, as well as the ACTU and ACOSS.
And can I say, the Government thanks those stakeholders and representative organisations for the way in which they have chosen to engage in these discussions and consultations.
We do believe that this is a package that has been strengthened and improved as a result of those consultations. These groups have been prepared to look to the national interest in developing this package. That too has been the Government's focus.
This is a package that is in Australia's national interest, it is in our interest to ensure we have a phase-in of the scheme to support jobs, to enable the economy to recover. It is in our national interest to seek a global agreement at Copenhagen that gives us the best chance of avoiding dangerous climate change, and it is in Australia's national interest to pass this legislation this year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you broken a promise to voters by delaying the start of this emissions trading scheme to beyond the next election?
PM: We will be legislating obviously later this year. The key challenge we face is dealing with the realities of the global economic recession, responding to the stated concerns of business, responding to the need to get a good outcome in Copenhagen, and the absolute necessity of ensuring that we have legislation through the Senate which provides certainty for the future.
I am in the practical business of responding to realistic challenges with which we are now confronted and that's what the Government is determined to do. This is a hard piece of policy, it is difficult, it is complex, and made doubly and trebly so because of the global economic circumstances which we now confront.
That shouldn't get in our road of doing this. What you have effectively is a slower start to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and the prospect of a stronger, greener conclusion.
And the reason for that is to do what we can flexibly and intelligently to help business at a time of duress, while having a more ambitious target in terms of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions later on, to underpin the dynamic of getting a really positive outcome in Copenhagen, that is what we are on about.
JOURNALIST: The delay in starting the scheme plus the extra free permits you are giving to the heavy trade-exposed polluters, is that going to affect the material cost of the scheme, what it is going to cost people who aren't entitled to compensation, households, smaller businesses?
PM: We will be speaking, we are adhering to the principle that the scheme will be self-funding and we are confident that we can land that outcome, but let's be realistic about the fact that we have been confronted with the most difficult set of economic circumstances in which to bring in this long term reform to the economy.
Therefore, we think we have got the balance right. This is hard policy, difficult policy. But one thing I know for certain is that every business organisation we have spoken to wants a certain investment environment for the future.
And therefore, for anyone, Mr Turnbull or the Liberals, or anyone else, to simply play politics opportunistically on this on the way through damages long term investment certainty. Starting slower, because of the global economic recession, finishing stronger with the prospect of a bigger outcome on greenhouse gas reductions, by midpoint, by 2020, we believe, gets the balance right.
JOURNALIST: How can you say the ETS is being strengthened when it's being delayed. The heavier polluters are going to get a cheaper ride. And now 25 per cent, the higher figure, is dependent on Copenhagen (inaudible)
PM: It is strengthened because the balance reflected in the package addresses the difficulties of the recession now and a more ambitious target for later on. And the truth is we are not going to land a good outcome for the planet until we get a strong outcome later on. Let's go back to the core element concerning 450 parts per million outcome in relation to its implications for Australia.
You are either going to aim for an outcome which deals with the reality of the Great Barrier Reef or put it in the too hard basket, we think we should keep that aspiration and ambition on the table for Copenhagen.
And as for the additional assistance which has been envisaged through the emissions-intensive trade-exposed sector, it is a temporary measure, responsibly designed to provide support on the way through for firms who are doing it tough in the global economy at the moment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when the White Paper came out the Government was roundly criticised for not leaving 25 per cent on the table and we were told it was because it was just too hard and too expensive to turn the economy around in that time frame, so what has changed? And second, will you personally talk to Malcolm Turnbull about this in order to try to broker a bipartisan deal?
PM: On the question, as I said before, of the slower start to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and the stronger finish, we believe by doing that, we provide better circumstances to achieve that stronger finish, conditional on a global outcome being achieved.
Also remember, we are providing better adjustments for business on the way through, particularly for the next five years.
On the question of negotiations with other parties, I have got to say, Senator Wong has been engaged with all relevant industry and environmental groups and consumer groups over time. It is only rational and reasonable that that negotiation continue with the climate change spokespersons of the relevant parties and I think that is the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: When do you expect to put this legislation to the Senate?
PM: Basically as soon as we all get together for a very happy week next week, but very soon, as soon as the parliament hops back in together.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) you said broadly speaking you hope the scheme would be self funding. Now of course you are setting a price of $10 at the start. Prime Minister and Treasurer can you guarantee that it will be self funding?
PM: Well our belief is that the structure that we have outlined today does do that, but we have a number of outstanding minor technical issues to resolve. And that is why I am simply being realistic about the fact that that is our ambition. And this will be a very difficult Budget to frame for the reasons which the Treasurer and I have been speaking of in recent times.
And therefore, we have got to make sure that you know, we cut our cloth accordingly. That remains the ambition, we believe that the scheme will do that. We have two or three technical issues to resolve. Do you want to add to that Penny?
MINISTER WONG: Just a couple of points, first obviously assistance is scaled to the carbon price so household assistance and so forth will be scaled to the $10 fixed price. I comment also on Lenore's question, let's also consider what has changed since the White Paper.
Obviously the global economic recession, the global situation has worsened, but also there have been significant movements on the international front. We see for example, the Obama administration which has clearly outlined its willingness to take a leadership role on climate change internationally. The major economies forum which I attended in Washington recently demonstrated that engagement. We have the United Kingdom willing to put a higher target on the table.
We have always been in the cart for the most ambitious global agreement we thought possible. You will recall in the context of the White Paper, we did say that a 450 parts per million agreement was absolutely in Australia's national interest and we said we left open the prospect of adjusting our post 2020 targets to reflect that.
Given these changed circumstances and in particular the circumstances internationally, it is the view of the Government that we can provide momentum to these international negotiations by putting a 25 per cent target on the table. It is highly conditional; it is still a hard agreement to achieve. We absolutely concede that but we believe it is in Australia's national interest to seek to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on another issue, you said during the election campaign, made a number of promises including tax cuts and uncapped childcare rebates for people and you also placed a premium on political honesty, can you tell us today that you will not renege on any of your election promises either next week or in the subsequent months?
PM: Well can I say to you Matthew that the Treasurer was asked extensively about tax cuts yesterday on Laurie Oakes and we take our commitments on something as fundamental as that pretty seriously. It is actually very difficult in the current economic circumstances, as I am sure you can do the numbers and figure out for yourself.
There are tax commitments which were committed to prior to the last election. Since then we have had this enormous assault on the Government's revenue. But we believe not only in the integrity of the commitment that we have put to the Australian people but also in terms of where we are in the economic cycle, making sure that we have got continued activity - (inaudible) - can I just finish my sentence  -  is that we will remain therefore committed to those tax commitments, and in terms of let's call it, broader Budget speculation, I will deliver back to you what my predecessor and the Treasurer's predecessor has always said, we will not comment on the content of the Budget.
JOURNALIST: As recently as December 15, you said to us at the National Press Club, “to delay any longer would be reckless and irresponsible for our economy and for our environment”. So why, in your own analysis, isn't today's decision reckless and irresponsible?
PM: Well, what we've had is a deepening of the global financial crisis which has now become a global economic crisis and the worst recession in three quarters of a century, that's what's happened.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, actually the data has consolidated and been confirmed considerably since then. The write-down of revenues around the world has been reflective of that. The first quarter numbers in various economies around the world have underpinned the dimensions of that. The IMF report which I think the Treasurer and others have made reference to in the last several weeks underpins that. The global economic reality has worsened fundamentally over the last three to four months and we now face the worst global recession since the Depression. That's fact one.
Fact two is we are dealing with what we set up for the next 40 years, that's what we're dealing with, out to 2050 and with interim targets at 2020. So if I'm faced with the reality of how do you therefore get a proper balanced Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme up and through now because of the pressures which business face now while still providing the balance of a more ambitious target for 2020, I believe that's the most sensible, rational, balanced response to the fundamental change in economic circumstances today, and dealing with an environmental reality which doesn't disappear for tomorrow. I think it's the responsible way through.
JOURNALIST: You've said this will strengthen Australia's position for Copenhagen. If, however, you can't get it through the Senate, what will be Australia's line at that conference? And secondly, I don't think you addressed the earlier question of whether you'd be willing to negotiate face-to-face with Malcolm Turnbull.
PM: I did. I said that I think the appropriate way for which negotiations should be conducted on that is through the Climate Change Minister with spokesmen. The reason for that is that these are highly technical negotiations which involve a multiplicity of policy, technical and financial matters which have been exhaustively engaged in by the Minister and the Parliamentary Secretary with every business and environmental group in the country.
And therefore, if you're going to engage in a discussion about one element of the package which has consequences for the rest of the package, I believe the right way for that to be conducted is through the responsible Minister. I think it's the sensible way to go. I think the sensible course of action is to conduct technical and policy negotiations at that level.
Secondly, I'll just make a few points here. Remember, I seem to recall Mr Turnbull was saying, you know, one to two years, he was saying we needed a more ambitious target than 15 per cent. I go back to my proposition before. This is a major piece of long term economic environmental reform for the nation and for the world. It is time for Mr Turnbull and the Liberals to get off the fence. And will the real Mr Turnbull please stand up on the question of climate change? It's too serious to play opportunistic political games into the future on something as fundamental as this.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull wanted stronger overall targets and a delay. Has he had a big win today? Is that what you're saying?
PM: Well, I'm not quite sure where the Liberals currently stand on this question of more ambitious targets. They went out there and said they want something more ambitious than 15  -  I think it was carried in your paper from memory, Matthew  -  and then there seems to have been a period of eerie silence following that.
So, what exactly the current position is across this wide spectrum of views otherwise called the Liberal Party, I'm not sure.
But the bottom line is this: this is serious stuff for the nation. It is fundamentally important we get it right in terms of dealing with the recession impact on businesses now; holding out a real prospect for our negotiators acting internationally to get a strong outcome in Copenhagen at the end of the year  -  getting that balance right as well as reflecting our attentiveness to what households are saying about their desire to contribute voluntarily as well.
JOURNALIST: Minister Wong, given that today's announcement is partly about jobs  -  and many jobs have gone in the mining sector, especially in Queensland  -  why is there no assistance today for coal mines?
WONG: Well, can I say we have negotiated, or we have consulted, extensively with business groups and also with various individual companies, and that's resulted in the package that you have before you today. There do remain a range of sectors where there are further technical issues which will need to be worked through in the period ahead  -  and obviously you mentioned one of them  -  and I have asked Greg to assist with that and to work through the issues in the coal sector.
But more broadly, what you have before you today is a package that seeks to ensure that we move this economy over time to a low carbon economy that ensures we maximise the prospect of Australia securing a global agreement that is in our national interest.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, just on another matter. What details can you give us about Defence's investigation into the causes of the asylum seeker boat explosion of three weeks ago? Has that investigation been completed? Have you been briefed on it, and what were its findings?
PM: As I recall it, and I've been preoccupied with these matters over the weekend and this morning, that that investigation still lies within the purview of the Northern Territory police. I've not been advised that that investigation has concluded. As I've indicated in previous comments, once it has, then we will of course be making the conclusions of those findings public as is appropriate in consultation with the NT police authorities. We believe that's the responsible course of action.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is it looking into it independently?
PM: I'm unaware that that's the case. I'm aware of the Northern Territory police investigation, and its process and progress is as I've described.
JOURNALIST: The targets that you talked about today, increasing the 2020 target, you did say that if you were going to increase that target you would seek a mandate. What happened to that?
PM: It's very clear, and it follows on from a discussion before about timetables, the operationalisation of this scheme does fall beyond the next election. So, it will be absolutely clear cut where the long-term trajectory of this scheme goes, and I've been intensely mindful of that in putting this proposal to the Australian people.
This is big stuff for the nation. It's one of those things that we must get right for the long haul. And there will be an entirely legitimate debate about positions by participants in the political process on the way through and what happens after this. I understand all that. That's a normal, necessary part of political process.
My job as Prime Minister of Australia is to get this balance right and to get it through and to have a credible negotiating position for this economy, the global economy, our environment and the global environment, come Copenhagen and beyond. That's what we're talking about here. It's big stuff. And I wish it was easier to do this. It ain't. It's really hard. But you know something? This Minister and this Parliamentary Secretary have been head down, tail up for a long time trying to work their way through and we intend to get there. It is really important for the country.
Thanks folks.
*please note  -  the year is 2012


The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will be phased in from 1 July 2011 and a new, ambitious 25 per cent by 2020 target has been put on the table, as part of a package of new measures announced today by the Rudd Government.
The package includes:
1. A delay in the start date of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme of one year, to manage the impacts of the global recession.
To further assist businesses during these difficult economic times:
     * A one year fixed price period will be introduced. Permits will cost $10 per tonne of carbon in 2011-12, with the transition to full market trading from 1 July 2012.
     * A new Global Recession Buffer will be provided as part of the assistance package for emissions intensive trade exposed industries. Industries eligible for 60 per cent assistance will receive a 10 per cent buffer, while industries eligible for 90 per cent assistance will receive a 5 per cent buffer.
     * Eligible businesses will receive funding to undertake energy efficiency measures from 1 July 2009.
2. A commitment to reduce carbon pollution by 25 per cent of 2000 levels by 2020 if the world agrees to an ambitious global deal to stabilise levels of CO2 equivalent in the atmosphere at 450 parts per million.
If the world achieves this ambitious agreement, Australia will meet this 25 per cent target by harnessing the CPRS, the expanded Renewable Energy Target, and with substantial investment in clean, renewable energy and energy efficiency and strategic investment in carbon capture and storage.
Up to five percentage points of the 25 per cent target could be achieved through Government purchase of international credits, such as avoided deforestation credits, using CPRS revenue no earlier than 2015.
Should the world achieve this ambitious agreement, the Government would seek a new election mandate for increased 2050 targets.
3. The establishment of Australian Carbon Trust to allow households to do their bit by investing directly in reducing Australia's emissions and to drive energy efficiency in buildings.
In developing this package, the Government has embraced the views of the Australian community.
We have listened to calls from the business community for a later, more gradual start to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and additional assistance to help manage the impacts of the global recession.
This new commitment follows extensive consultation with environment advocates on the best way to maximise Australia's contribution to an ambitious outcome in international negotiations at Copenhagen this December.
We have listened to Australian households who have raised concerns that their individual efforts to reduce emissions had not been adequately taken into account under the CPRS.
Together this package of measures strengthens our response to climate change, ensuring Australia plays its part in global efforts to tackle climate change while managing any impacts on our economy.
We will also continue to work with interested groups on an ongoing basis to deal with other technical matters as they arise.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation will be introduced when Parliament resumes.
Passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation this year  -  including these new measures announced today - is squarely in Australia's national interest.
It delivers the investment certainty business needs during these difficult economic times.
And it enables us to advocate for the global agreement we need to protect future generations of Australians from the most damaging impacts of climate change.


The Rudd Government has today committed to reduce Australia's carbon pollution by 25 per cent below 2000 levels by 2020 if the world agrees to an ambitious global deal to stabilise levels of CO2 equivalent at 450 parts per million.
This new commitment follows extensive consultation with environment advocates on the best way to maximise Australia's contribution to an ambitious outcome in international negotiations at Copenhagen this December.
If the world achieves this agreement, Australia will meet this 25 per cent target by harnessing the CPRS, the expanded Renewable Energy Target, and with substantial investment in clean, renewable energy and energy efficiency and strategic investment in carbon capture and storage.
Up to 5 percentage points of this target could be met by purchasing international credits, such as avoided deforestation credits, using CPRS revenue no earlier than 2015.
In the White Paper, the Rudd Government emphasised clearly that an ambitious agreement to stabilise levels of CO2 equivalent at 450 parts per million or lower would be squarely in Australia's national interest.
At that time, we committed Australia to playing its full and fair part in an agreement, but assessed prospects for such an ambitious deal in the near term were challenging.
Since then, international developments have improved prospects.
The Obama administration has already injected a great deal of confidence in the process through its unambiguous commitment to play a leading role in global efforts to limit climate change.
President Obama has reinforced his election commitments to mid and long term carbon pollution reduction goals and to introduce an emissions trading system similar to the CPRS.
His Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate is helping drive progress in UN negotiations for a global agreement.
The United Kingdom has also recently announced a strengthening of its 2020 target for reducing carbon pollution.
Nevertheless, achieving an ambitious global agreement will still be very tough.
It will require a significant further shift in negotiating dynamics so that all advanced and major developing economies take serious action to restrain and then reduce emissions.
The Government will retain its White Paper target range of:
     * an unconditional commitment to reduce carbon pollution by 5 per cent by 2020; and
     * a commitment to reduce carbon pollution by 15 per cent by 2020 if there is an agreement where major developing economies commit to substantially restrain emissions and advanced economies take on commitments comparable to Australia's.
A Ratification Review will be established in addition to the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties (JSCOT) Process to assess whether the terms of any global agreement meet the conditions set out for Australia to adopt the 25 per cent target.
Should the world achieve this ambitious agreement, the Government would seek a new election mandate for increased 2050 targets.
Crucially, this new target reinforces the need to secure passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme this year.
Australia cannot responsibly sign up to targets without a means to deliver them.
The attached documents set out the conditionality for Australia's targets and the terms of the Ratification Review.
            Target at 2020
            Conditions
            Indicative date Australia achieves 25% below 2000 levels
            NOTE: In the following ‘advanced economies'refers to Annex 1 parties to the UNFCCC and at least some other high/middle income economies; ‘major developing economies'refers to non-Annex 1 members of the Major Economies Forum.
              5%
            None
            2034
            15%
            International agreement where major developing economiescommit to substantially restrain emissions and advanced economiestake on commitments comparable to Australia's (i.e. White Paper conditions)
            In practice this implies:
                 * global action on track to stabilisation between 510-540ppm CO2-e;
                 * advanced economy reductions in aggregate, in the range of 15  -  25% below 1990 levels;
                 * substantive measurable, reportable and verifiable commitments and actions by major developing economies, in the context of a strong international financing and technology cooperation framework, but which may not deliver significant emissions reductions until after 2020;
                 * progress toward inclusion of forests (REDD) and the land sector, deeper and broader carbon markets, low carbon development pathways. 
            2024
            25%
            (up  to 5 percentage points through Government purchase)
            Comprehensive global action capable of stabilising CO2-e concentrations at 450ppm CO2-e or lower.  This requires a clear pathway to achieving an early global peak in total emissions, with major developing economiesslowing the growth and then reducing their emissions, advanced economies taking on reductions and commitments comparable to Australia, and access to the full range of international abatement opportunities through a broad and functioning international market in carbon credits.
            This would involve :
                 * comprehensive coverage of gases, sources and sectors, with inclusion of forests (REDD) and the land sector (including soil carbon initiatives (e.g. bio char) if scientifically demonstrated) in the agreement;
                 * clear global trajectory, where the sum of all economies' commitments is consistent with 450ppm CO2-e or lower, and with a nominated early deadline year for peak global emissions not later than 2020;
                 * advanced economy reductions, in aggregate, of at least 25% below 1990 levels by 2020;
                 * major developing economy commitments to slow growth and to then reduce their absolute level of emissions over time, with a collective reduction of at least 20% below business-as-usual by 2020 and a nomination of a peaking year for individual major developing economies;
                 * global action which mobilises greater financial resources, including from major developing economies, and results in fully functional global carbon markets.
            2020
RATIFICATION REVIEW 
Purpose: To assess whether any international agreement satisfies the conditions under which Australia should reduce emissions by 25% by 2020 as part of global action to achieve a target of 450 parts per million or lower:
     * The Government establishes an independent review panel (with broad membership but including appropriate economic and scientific expertise) which conducts public hearings as to whether the conditionality set out by the Government is met.
     * The Review reports to Government which is required to table its response along with the Review report in Parliament within 90 days.
     * As part of the cap setting process under the CPRS, and after the above Review, the Government then proposes caps and gateways consistent with the pathway for Australia to reach its target by 2020 which is submitted to Parliament as a disallowable instrument. 
         * While not part of the CPRS, were the Government to decide to fund the purchase of international permits from auction revenue it would take this into account in setting the Scheme caps
     * If an ambitious international agreement is reached, the case for EITE assistance is significantly reduced and an EITE assistance review would be triggered immediately.


PM: I'd like to say something about the announced retirement of the AFP Police Commissioner. Mick Keelty has provided enormous service to Australia and to the Australian Federal Police.
I would like to publicly acknowledge the work that he did in response to the Bali Bombings where we lost nearly 100 of our own, Australians who were murdered in that horrific event.
The work which he in leading the Australian Federal Police team did in response to the Australian embassy bombing in Jakarta and also the work which the Australian Federal Police have done in so many other disasters which have confronted our country including the Canberra bushfires and other natural disasters.
And a lot of the work of the AFP will never be known because it's all undercover and this is an important part of the Federal Police's operations as well.
So what I would like to say to Mick on behalf of a grateful nation is well done and the nation owes you a debt of gratitude for the service you have rendered governments of all political persuasions, in ensuring that Australians have maximum public safety in a time of great threat to their security.
JOURNALIST: Has he told you why he decided to leave?
PM: I had a chat with Mick recently about these things. He's been in the saddle for a long, long time and after a certain period of time, from memory I think it is about seven or eight years or more, he wants to hang up his spurs and do something else so I think he is, I would have been delighted if he had chosen to stay on but he has made up his mind and when people reach a stage where they have decided they need a break and something new and fresh to do, it is, you can't really stand in their way.
JOURNALIST: So it's entirely been his decision to move on?
PM: Oh entirely. As I said to him, the Government would have welcomed him continuing in that position. He has done a first class job for Australia, a first class job for the Australian Federal Police, we would have welcomed him continuing in that position as well.
JOURNALIST: Did Haneef affair affect his decision?
PM: In my conversations with Mick, no, it's just the length of service.
Senior policing roles like this are very demanding and most of it is invisible to the Australian public. There are constant operational decisions to be made in the fight against terrorism, the fight against organised crime, in the international liaison work.
If I could add to my earlier remarks about his contribution, the fact that he has put in such a huge effort and with great success in building a strong professional relationship with the Indonesian National Police is a tribute to his personal diplomacy.
If you were to go back in history and find a time when the Australian police authorities had a comparable relationship of working with their Indonesian counterparts on the big challenges that we face, whether it's in terrorism or in other fields, this has been good work on his part.
And so as I said before, the nation owes him a debt of gratitude. The Australian Government owes him a debt of gratitude and I believe I would speak for Governments of both political persuasions on that score.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on another matter, (inaudible) surplus Budget (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say on the question of debt and deficit, I welcome a debate on this and the reason I welcome the debate on debt and deficit is because it is a debate being had in every advanced economy in the world in response to a global economic recession, the worst that we've had in three quarters of a century.
Australia's net debt will be the lowest of any major advanced economy in the world for the next decade. It is responsible for us to have embraced such a strategy to deal with the challenges presented to us and other economies with the global recession, and to do so within that responsible framework.
Here is the challenge today, why I welcome this debate  -  I notice Mr Turnbull is addressing the National Press Club today as we lead up to the Budget next week.
Here are the two core questions which Mr Turnbull and the Liberals must answer on their debt and deficit strategy for the future. They have, Mr Turnbull and the Liberals have already reluctantly admitted to $177 billion debt and deficit strategy of their own.
What are the two core questions which arise from that?
The first, will Mr Turnbull and the Liberals admit to borrowing for the $200 billion collapse in Commonwealth tax revenues, an amount equivalent to total Commonwealth payments on public hospitals to the States, or will he abolish Commonwealth payments to the States for hospitals? It is that equivalent amount of money.
Second question  -  Mr Turnbull and the Liberals have said they would also borrow for economic stimulus. How much?
They are the two core questions and unless Mr Turnbull and the Liberals come clean on those two core questions, then he's not advancing an alternative budget, in fact he should be out there selling steak knives. That is how simple it is.


The Australian Government will provide more than $2.1 million towards the $2.5 million redevelopment of the Coronation Park Netball Complex in Minto.
The Complex supports up to 6,000 players and is often used for championship level competitions.
The Rudd Government's investment will also support jobs in the community, with figures from Campbelltown City Council showing that the project will support about 60 jobs in construction, landscaping, plumbing and other repairs.
Federal funding is part of the Government's $800 million Community Infrastructure Program  -  the largest one-off investment in local infrastructure in Australia's history.
Through the Rudd Government's nation building economic stimulus package, we are investing in major projects like this to support local jobs and economies during the global recession.
The redevelopment will include:
     * Replacement of the grass court area with asphalt, relocation and enhancement of the children's playground area, and demolition of the existing 30 year old administration office and amenities block;
     * Construction of a new netball office administration building, including change room areas, meeting rooms, cool rooms, canteen and kitchen areas, offices, umpires rooms, amenities with disabled access, first aid rooms and baby change areas;
     * Redesign and installation of a new electricity substation, redesign and construction of the car park area;
     * Increase car spaces from 70 to 210 and provide a set-down area for buses and ambulances; and
     * Better entrance/exit roadways to improve flow of cars entering and exiting Redfern Road to provide easier, safer and more controlled access to the complex as well as set down areas for ambulances and buses.
This funding builds on $1.5 million that the Rudd Government has already delivered for 15 local projects in Campbelltown City this year. It brings our community infrastructure investment in Campbelltown to more than $3.6 million this year.
Nearly 70 per cent of the stimulus package is infrastructure with construction projects already underway. More than 3,000 projects are being funded through the Government's Community Infrastructure Program across Australia to support local jobs.


Mr Mick Keelty APM, has informed the Government of his decision to retire as Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police (AFP) effective from 2 September 2009.
Mr Keelty has been Commissioner of the AFP since 2001 and on 2 September will celebrate his 35th anniversary as a police officer.
Mr Keelty has led the AFP through a significant and challenging period, including events such as the 2001 September 11 terrorist attacks, the Bali bombings, the Jakarta Embassy bombing, the Indian Ocean Tsunami disaster and the 2003 Canberra bushfires.
He has played a key role in driving greater cooperation and interoperability with a number of Commonwealth and State authorities to effectively address the threat of terrorism, organised crime and drug trafficking.
Mr Keelty has forged important relationships with law enforcement partners throughout the region, overseeing significant efforts to improve the law enforcement capability and capacity of our neighbours, including the establishment of the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation.
The Government congratulates Mr Keelty on his long record of public service and wishes him and his family well for his retirement.
The Government will consider a successor to Mr Keelty and will make an announcement in due course.


[Acknowledgements]
We're here today to talk about one thing. And that one thing is jobs and how do we make a difference locally. I noticed before that it's been a long time between drinks since you last had a Prime Minister visit here. Say 13 years ago? I think I was a defeated candidate in the 1996 election 13 years ago. I'm (inaudible) last 13 years and that was pretty painful for us. But 13 years has been a long stretch of time.
This is an important part of the Australian family. This is an old, old part of Sydney, named after a distinguished botanist and a distinguished member of (inaudible). And this municipality is home to, the mayor tells me, 180,000 people. This is a large slice of our national family so what happens here locally matters nationally. What happens with families here matters nationally. What happens with community facilities here matters nationally because this is a large, large group of Australians of diverse backgrounds, part of our Australian family.
So when the problem of unemployment hits and hits communities like this, our job as the nation's Government is to be in there with you, in solidarity with this local community in order to make a difference. As I've said in other gatherings like this across the country, not to come and try and wave some magic wand and pretend that the Australian Government can say that the global economic recession will stop at the continental shelf and shall not cross the boundaries of the territorial limits of Australia but to be simply up front about the fact that what can instead do as an Australian Government is reduce its impact. To reduce the (inaudible). That's the practical challenge.
And in communities like this that I've spoken to in the last month or two, right across our nation - I started in the City of Casey in Melbourne, moving on to the northern and eastern suburbs of Adelaide, to the southern suburbs of Perth, to north-western Tasmania, where I spoke with the community of Ulverstone, yesterday in Campbelltown and today in Bankstown and tomorrow in Liverpool and also with visits still to make to other parts of the country as well where unemployment is hitting hardest - how do we as government, partner with you the community to make a difference? To make a difference locally. This is a very, very practical business, with a very, very practical set of questions.
Let me tell you a little bit about how we're approaching this as an Australian Government and what we're doing around the world, what we're doing nationally, what we hope to do in partnership with you here locally. I'm going to ask Toby Hall in a minute from Mission Australia to throw some ideas on the table as well about what may be working in local communities elsewhere to trigger our thinking about what might also be good to do here in addition to what is already being done.
This recession is global. And therefore the first response has to be how do we work together with the other largest economies in the world to make a difference globally? And that's why recently I attended the G20 Summit in London, that's why at that G20 Summit I worked with heads of government from around the world on core challenges. How do you provide enough stimulus into the global economy now to make a difference while the private sector is in retreat?
The good news out of London is that we agreed on a stimulus package globally of some $5 trillion to add to the overall size of the global economy while the private sector is in retreat and that makes a huge difference in terms of jobs.
Secondly we agreed, how do we actually establish a framework which is agreed between the largest economies in the world to restore the world's leading private banks to health because the restoration of private credit flows is so important to the vibrance of local communities and local businesses. And what happens with the world's largest banks is of direct relevance to the flow of private credit and the cost of private credit here in local communities across Australia and we agreed on an international framework to do that.
We also agreed to provide proper resources and funding and policy flexibility to the International Monetary Fund. A trillion dollars worth of resources. Why? We don't want to see a second round major shock reverberate across the global financial system without the IMF ready to handle that shock. Because if you don't have that in place what happens is it bounces straight back into the world's private banks which in turn affects the flow of credit and the cost of credit to the rest of the world's economies, including to businesses here in Australia, in Sydney and in South Western Sydney.
What we also agreed on was rules for the future of the financial system globally as well, so that we don't return to the sort of free market fundamentalism, the unfettered markets, the unrestrained greed that we saw aligned in financial markets causing this crisis in the first place. And we're working together on finalising rules for the future of the financial system worldwide as well. The risk and reward ratios as they apply within the world's largest financial institutions, the proper provision of what's called prudential or regulatory capital to make sure our banks are properly provisioned for the future around the world. And other similar measures.
And finally, drawing a line under protectionism. One big lesson from the 1930s - if you go out there and launch trade wars against each other, everyone suffers and as a result local recessions deepen, lengthen and more people are hurt and hurt harder.
These are the things we agreed upon as a gathering of the world's largest economies in London only a month or so ago and while it's not a perfect outcome it was probably the best outcome we've seen from a global gathering of economic leaders and political leaders at any time in modern economic history. Because what these leaders agreed is as follows: we the community of nations, the community of the largest economies in the world, the G20, recognise one core fact: we are all in this together. Every one of us. Whether it is the King of Saudi Arabia, the President of Communist China or the President of Capitalist America  -  we are all in this together and the actions of one will affect the actions of the other.
The second thing that we are engaged in and it's not just global action, but national action. Last October we took a number of fundamental decisions. We took a decision to guarantee each and every bank deposit in the country. Deposits held in credit unions and building societies because if we don't have confidence in the stability of the financial system then frankly everything else becomes second order. And that decision was fundamental, absolutely fundamental, the first time that any Government, any Australian Government in the history of this federation going back to 1901 has gone out and guaranteed everyone's bank deposits.
Had we not done so, the roll-on consequences for the Australian economy would have been horrific. We did so, it was the right thing to, subject to the usual array of criticism but the absolutely right thing to do given the circumstances we were confronted with at the time. And other related measures to ensure that our banks and our financial system remain in effective working order given that when you look around the rest of the world you see more than 30 of the world's largest banks go under or have to be bailed out. The stability of our financial system is fundamental and we've been head down, tail up in making sure that that stability continues and it's been challenging work.
But in addition to that we also invest in temporary economic stimulus in order to make sure that we, through direct investment in the economy, are helping to fill the gap that is left by private sector temporarily in retreat because of what's happened with the global recession. And that's why we make absolutely no apology at all for investing in a national economic stimulus strategy to build jobs and training today while investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's the strategy. Jobs, apprenticeships, traineeships today while building the infrastructure, the roads, the rail, the ports, the high speed broadband, the schools, the TAFEs and the universities that we need for tomorrow.
That's our strategy, that's what we're doing. We began with short term stimulus by providing assistance to pensioners and carers, veterans and to families in order to provide a shot in the arm to the one and half million plus Australians who work in the retail sector. Compare and contrast the retail sales figures we saw published yesterday with those in practically every other advanced economy in the world  -  you will see the difference. I take serious the jobs of Australians out there in the retail sector. That's why we did it without apology. It was the right thing to do and if you want to see some statistical evidence of its effect, look at those figures yesterday and compare them what is happening in other economies around the world. We can't prevent job losses occurring in the retail sector, we can reduce those job losses from what they would otherwise be. That's short term stimulus.
Medium term stimulus. Our investment in the single largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. Every primary school in the country, secondary schools as well. A comprehensive maintenance and repair program across all of Australia's 10,000 schools. With one objective, to be out there injecting $15 billion of activity into the economy in the period ahead to create jobs, apprenticeships, traineeships now while building the schools that we want for our kids for tomorrow. 21st century state of the art libraries, multi-purpose halls, classroom modernisations. In the case of secondary schools, 21st century science centres, language centres to make sure that our kids have the absolute best facilities in which to learn. And on the way through creating jobs, creating opportunities and apprenticeships.
I was talking to a bloke yesterday, (inaudible) I was talking to a bloke yesterday. We visited a firm of builders on my return from a local jobs forum out in Campbelltown, where I just ran through the number of trades and sub-contractors involved in single building site, putting together a single 21st century library, or a multi-purpose hall in a primary school. He rattled off to me something in the order of 20 to 25 separate trades. People who do the site clearance at the beginning to the site clean up at the end and every point in between. From plasterers to tilers to painters, to people who do the brickwork, the carpentry, the joinery and everything in between. Some trades I'd never heard of before and all there providing jobs. And he said in a project like that up to 60 tradies and subcontractors could be on the site at any one time, rising in some cases to 150 and beyond. With those projects going up for six to nine months.
We're doing that right across the country. And we're doing it for one express purpose: jobs, apprenticeships, traineeships now in order to build the schools that we want for tomorrow. Similarly with social housing; the largest single investment in social and community housing that an Australian Government has ever engaged in. 20,000 units of social housing, out there being invested in now to create the social infrastructure we need for tomorrow while supporting jobs and apprenticeships today.
Our investment in ceiling insulation. Those folks out there involved in the ceiling insulation business at the moment have got more work than they can poke a stick at. Right across the country our objective, to assist the environment, to assist in pulling greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, reducing our greenhouse gas pollution to realising our national ambition to create in every owner-occupied dwelling in the country, a dwelling which has environmentally effective ceiling insulation. Pulling the equivalent of a huge amount of greenhouse gas equivalents out of the atmosphere, at the same times creating jobs and traineeships on the way through. These are the elements around medium term stimulus strategy.
For our long term stimulus strategy you've already seen our announcement to build a world class national broadband network. That's an investment of up to $43 billion across the country. To create the information super highway of the 21st century so that businesses out here in Bankstown and south-western Sydney are on the same playing field as businesses in any other part of the country, able to jump on the information super highway, establish real time contact with customer bases and client bases across the country and across the world, which have not been accessible in the past and also accessing the most cost effective supply chains that those businesses might not have been able to access before as well.
And to turbo charge the way in which business does business and the way in which communities have government services delivered in health, in education. Schools in one part of the country hooking up with the best teachers in other parts of the country. You have a great lecturer in Japanese language studies located in Brisbane delivering a course online to the local school here in Bankstown. At the same time we have got a first class teacher of a particular area of matriculation level physics, online, teaching a bunch of kids in a provincial school somewhere in south western Queensland.
That is what we are on about. The best way to do it. In health as well, making sure that the radiography services, your scans for expectant mums, can be accessed online around the country for people who don't have immediate access to first class, immediately physically available hospital facilities.
So what are we doing? Creating jobs, apprenticeships and traineeship opportunities now in the building industry, while at the same time, creating infrastructure that economy and our communities need for the 21st Century.
This is our national program of action, but none of that works properly unless we are also engaged in a program of local action as well. And what I outlined in my first address to local communities like this about a month ago in the City of Casey in Melbourne was a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia.
And the Jobs and Training Compact with Australia is in a nutshell this: how do we make a difference here at the local level as well, how do we make a difference with local communities. What is our Jobs and Training Compact with Australia all about? Three things: A compact with young Australians so that every young Australian under the age of 25 must be earning or learning and provided a universal entitlement to a training place if that young person is not in school or is not in work.
That is what we are on about and we intend to do it, in order to provide the skills that a young person needs now, particularly if they are finding it difficult to get in to the labour market or have lost their job, to obtain new skills, to sustain their current skills or to enhance them, so that when the global economy recovers, they are in the best position possible to re-enter the workforce.
We don't want to repeat the mistakes of the past and have a generation of young people who find it very difficult to re-enter the workforce.
Second thing: a compact with Australians who have been retrenched through no fault of their own, providing an undertaking to workers in those circumstances, that we will be with them through the changes that we have made to NewStart, the changes that we have made to availability of services from Job Services Australia and the changes that we have also engineered in our discussions with the banks to make it easier for people who have been retrenched to get a year's grace in terms of mortgage repayments and personal loan repayments on things like cars.
Practical things which make a difference. It doesn't solve the problem, being retrenched is really hard, but in order to try and lessen the burden, lessen the impact, these are practical measures we can take, and there is more to be done here, in a compact with Australians who have been retrenched.
Thirdly: a compact with local communities, which brings us to the meat in the sandwich about what we are doing here today.
How can we partner with you as representatives of local business, local chambers of commerce, local community organisations, church organisations, charitable organisations, local representatives of the trade union movement, how can we work together with you in order to take all those things that we are doing nationally, add something and make more of a difference here locally.
That is what it's all about. We have established this thing called a Local Jobs Fund, $650 million nationwide, and we are seeking to deliver that in partnership with local communities through our local priority employment coordinators.
Now Zvia here has been handed this task by the minister and she will be your interim priority employment coordinator and the job which we will leave with her and the minister as I leave here today is to establish a network with you, the representatives of this community, you the leaders of this community, on how we can make difference here locally.
I am not going to tell you what you should do. We are here to listen to what you think you can do, what difference you can make.
If there are local social enterprises, or a local not for profit organisation which can be established, or expanded from what it currently does, how can we build on that in terms of creating more jobs, more apprenticeships, more training opportunities?
These are local business proposals in partnership with other businesses where the Government can help. Do your local authorities here have further additional local initiatives which we can partner up with and make a difference? You all know, because you live here, you love this place, you are part and parcel of the community. You know it well. You all know what is possible. Our job is not just to say well here is a bunch of fine ideas and just walk away. Our job is to partner with you through the presence of a Priority Employment Coordinator and we're keen to support her, working in partnership with your local members and on top that having access also to this Local Jobs Fund. And that's the challenge we're going to leave you with this morning.
One final and practical thing before I ask Toby to speak is this. If you want some evidence of the sorts of things we're doing locally, today I I'm also pleased to announce today that the Government will be providing $3.15 million towards the redevelopment of the Bankstown Arts Centre in South Western Sydney. I'll be visiting there later today. Why are we doing that? We're funding more than half of the $5.9 million for the project, the centre is expected to include a theatre, rehearsal rooms, foyer and exhibition space, studio, meeting rooms, storage, administration areas, as well as landscaped and paved grounds and car parking.
This will involve local jobs, about 40 in number during the construction phase and involve also the participation of community organisations and volunteers groups in support of its completion. It also builds on more than $770,000 that the Government has delivered for 19 local projects in Bankstown this year  -  bringing the Government's investment this year alone to nearly $4 million in these local projects.
None of these projects individually fixes the problem but if we're engaged in of all of these things together and adding some, with you coming up with ideas, local community, local organisations and business organisations saying hey we can do these extra things as well if you're partners with us, we can make a power of difference, make a huge difference locally. And being realistic about it, not eliminating the problems of unemployment, not eliminating it but reducing it and that is what we're here to do.
Thanks for listening.


: Just a few concluding thoughts from me about how you can make a difference with the intelligent direction of Government stimulus on the one hand and also what happens on the ground in the local area on the other.
Just to look at some of the figures here for south western Sydney. South western Sydney, if you look at the Government's stimulus strategy, the economic stimulus strategy, we have now proposed investment of around $3 billion in south western Sydney with the range of national programs I referred to before.
They hit the ground here locally. That is, homes, pensioners, carers and professionals, with the investment in skills, the investment in social housing, the investment in energy insulation and other local government infrastructure projects.
That is a sizeable investment into this important part of Australia. And a few other examples  -  our friend in Punchbowl made reference to this in part just before - under stage one of the National School Pride Program, south western Sydney has received $46 million to maintain and upgrade 277 local schools.
That's happening now, as we speak. Work on these schools is due to commence this month.
Stage one funding will improve 225 social housing projects in south western Sydney totalling $60.5 million (inaudible) the problems of disability and ultimately the related problem of the availability of social housing. 6,878 social housing units in south western Sydney will receive much needed repairs and maintenance totalling $28.5 million. That is before you go to other road and rail infrastructure projects - Woodward Rd in Bankstown, half a million dollars, Picton Rd in (inaudible) half a million dollars, and a range of other, let's call them continuing investments by the Australian Government as well.
Take computers in schools, in south western Sydney, $19.77 million has provided 133 schools to purchase a total of 19,496 computers. Kingsgrove North High School, Kingsgrove High School will benefit from $1.729 million in the great Kingsgrove Trade Training Centre.
I know that is the seat of Watson.
The University of Western Sydney will receive $37.9 million in funding for capital works, Port Botany road and rail access and handling improvements - $150 million.
Why am I reading through this list? These are rolling out our investments over the last 12 months into this important part of Australia, in terms of continuing investment in school education, in higher education and as well as in much needed basic economic infrastructure.
And in addition to that, the specific investments which now flow from the school modernisation program, the investment in social housing as well as other local Government infrastructure projects.
That's $3 billion worth of additional investments.
What is the organising principle? The organising principle is, how do we support jobs and apprenticeships and training today, in building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow?
Today's unemployment numbers for Australia have fallen from 5.7 to 5.4 per cent.
And while unemployment will rise in Australia in the future, it does mean together we can make a difference by supporting jobs and apprenticeships today and building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Thank-you for your participation in this roundtable with the community today.
This is just the opening session of a long Test match and therefore - given we are in Waugh country, I thought you would understand that analogy - frankly you are the team, you as representatives of the community organisation who may never have dealt with each other before, you as representatives of local businesses who have never dealt with each other before.
The ball is very much in your court. We are not just here to make a speech and make everyone feel better, that's not what we are on about.
We are here to make a difference. We have an employment coordinator, we have support now from Mission, we have a fund, a Local Jobs Fund. But the ideas, the initiative and the enterprise must now come from you.
Because if we can make a difference to number of lives, a number of families in this community, as a result our national family and our national community will much the better.
I thank you for your time.


The Australian Government will invest an extra $3.5 million to expand the Australian Apprenticeships Access Program to help vulnerable job seekers find and keep skilled employment. 
The program provides at-risk job seekers facing barriers to skilled employment with individualised pre-vocational training and support services to help them gain and retain an Australian Apprenticeship.
This new investment will create 1,850 additional places in 2009-10 to provide training and support for vulnerable workers aged 25 and over made redundant by the global economic recession.
This new commitment is in addition to the $30.2 million announced in March for an additional 3,650 pre-vocational training and support places in 2009-10 for vulnerable young job seekers aged 19-24.
Today's announcement brings the total places available in the Access Program in 2009-10 to 15,000.
These additional places complement the Australian Government's new Compact with Young Australians and its commitment to ensuring that Australia has a properly skilled workforce ready to work as the nation emerges from the global recession.
The Access Program assists job seekers who experience barriers to entering skilled employment to find and keep an Australian Apprenticeship, other employment or further education and training through an intensive package including skill formation, pastoral care, advocacy, job search support and post-placement support for participants and their employers. 


The purpose of our gathering today, as it has been in the last couple of days here in South Western Sydney, is very, very simple and very straightforward and very hard at the same time. And that is, how do we make a difference with unemployment here in the local area.
How many of you up there have been to forums I have conducted over the last few days? How many of you are here for the first time? It is pretty useful to know, given those who have been exposed to the sort of talks I have conveyed to local communities in recent days and who is here with us for the first time.
The challenge we all face is a very practical one. And in part it was underlined by the release of the national unemployment data yesterday. There is a global recession. It is washing across every single economy in the world, developed and developing.
The Western world, the Muslim world, Asia, Latin America, you name it. Every country, every economy is wrestling with the same challenge right now. Therefore, the challenge which each national government faces is how do we make a difference in terms of the impact of that recession on our nation, on our state, on our community.
What we have done locally also needs to be reinforced by what we do nationally and globally. Globally and for those of you who have not heard me speak on this in the last couple of days, our action has been primarily focussed through the work of the G20.
What does that mean out here in Liverpool? It means a lot. Ask yourself this very simple question. If you are a small business out here in Liverpool and if you want to get credit from your bank to do something, where does your bank get its credit from?
That bank gets its credit often through the way in which it raises funds offshore, through the international banking system. What's gone wrong in the international banking system? The international banking system, because of the unfettered, unrestrained greed operating in underegulated financial markets in recent years, has contracted the supply of credit available to the international banking system, which means that the globally significant banks, many of them, have either fallen over or reduced their credit operations worldwide.
Reducing credit operations worldwide, guess what, we are part of the world. And the result of that, there's a reduced credit flow to the Australian banks and as a result of that, the cost of credit and the availability of credit, the lifeline, the artery of the global market system, the artery therefore also of the Australian economy becomes constricted.
So people ask, what does it matter what is going on overseas and what is happening in global financial markets and what the G20 is seeking to do in response to those developments? It's very very very local.
What we do globally effects what happens here locally when it comes to the interconnectedness of the global financial system. And that's why we have been head down, tail up, engaging in everything we can do, sleeves rolled up, in bringing about the best outcomes possible through the deliberations of the G20, the Group of 20 largest economies in the world.
We had some success at that London Summit on temporary injection of stimulus to the global economy, on the proper provision of resources to the International Monetary Fund to deal with future shocks; on restoring the world's biggest banks to health through the removal of toxic assets, through the recapitalisation of those banks; through new rules to the global financial system for the future so we don't make the same mistakes as we have in the past; and through drawing a line under the outbreak of global protectionism that destroys economic recovery worldwide.
But there is more work to be done globally. The work done in London was good and solid work. And we were in there, on Australia's behalf, doing our bit.
The second part of our strategy is what we do nationally. And I go back to those unemployment figures yesterday. Unemployment in the future in Australia is going to go up. The fact that we're able to see the figures come down, yesterday's figures, is welcome news.
But we've got to be very realistic about the problems we face ahead. But what those figures remind us of is this: what we do nationally matters. It can reduce the problem. It can have a real effect. That is what economic stimulus is all about. That is why we are out there injecting and investing capital into the economy at a time when the private sector is in retreat. We are doing it deliberately, consciously and without apology, in order to make a difference.
And if you look at the quantum of what we are investing in the national economy, the State economy and here in south western Sydney, billions of dollars here in south western Sydney, it is to make a difference. It is to make a difference to local business, to make a difference to local jobs, to make a difference to local apprenticeships.
That is what it is all about. What is the organising principle for our national stimulus strategy? It is this: to invest in the infrastructure which we need for tomorrow, and in doing so supporting the jobs and apprenticeships we need for today.
That's it in a nutshell. Whether it is the school modernisation program, the largest single investment in the modernisation of our schools that the country has ever seen, whether it's our investment in social housing, our investment in energy insulation, whether it is through the roll-out of the national broadband network, there is a core organising principle.
Creating, and or supporting, jobs apprenticeships and training now, today, while building the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
You see, that is the stark alternative that we have right now. Our plan is very clear. Our plan is, we can make a difference to support jobs and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And the alternative plan, the Liberals' plan, I have got to say, is to slash and burn - $100 billion cut from the budget, cutting hospitals, cutting education and thereby deepening the recession and throwing more people on the unemployment queue.
That's the alternative we are looking at here. And therefore I believe that for the nation, it's a very clear cut choice of which we have to go in the future.
Which brings us down to what we are doing here locally. The programs I have described just now, global action and national action. That's all good, important and necessary. And were it not for the injection of extra activity in the economy through our national economic stimulus strategy, then the pace of activity in our economy now would be even slower than it is, and unemployment would be higher than it is.
But our purpose in being here today is to engage with you as the local community, here in Liverpool, about how we can make a further difference, how we can make it better than it would otherwise be through global action.
Some time ago, a month or so ago, I launched this thing called a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. It is designed to meet our current circumstances. It involves three parts.
Firstly a compact with young Australians which very simply is this: every Australian under the age of 25, this Government expects you to be either earning or learning, full stop. And unemployment benefits are being tailored and made conditional accordingly.
Our part of the compact, our part of the deal with young Australians is to make sure there's a universal entitlement to a training place if they're not in work or in school. That's what we are on about.
And the organising principle there is to make sure that our young people, challenged by what is happening with the global recession, do not become unemployable in the future.
We want them to be able to use this period of down time in order to obtain new skills, sustain their current skills or further develop a whole range of additional skills on top of what they have already got. For one purpose, so that when the global economic recovery comes, they are there to add to productivity, to our business needs, and of course to provide for their families and themselves.
That's our compact with young Australians.
Our compact with retrenched Australians is also important. It is about the business of how do we actually deal with the challenge of those who have been retrenched through no fault of their own.
Now if you look across the country right now, many business are under great stress and a number of workers have been retrenched and some workers still will be retrenched. The compact with retrenched Australians is very important too.
What is the first thing on the mind of someone who has just been retrenched  -  can I pay my mortgage, and can I continue to pay off my car. Very basic questions.
That is one of the reasons why the Government sat down about a month or so ago with the major banks and said, what deal can you do with them to make a difference. And the agreement we reached with the major banks is for a much greater approach of flexibility, the possibility of deferring people's mortgage payments for a year and car loan repayments for a year.
Now the banks have formed that agreement with us. They put it out there in black and white. We will be watching carefully how it is operational. But it is an important level of support, at a very practical level that we can provide families who are faced with that very practical question, the bread winner is losing his or her job, what can we do to pay the mortgage, what can we do to pay off the car.
Because if you don't have a car, it is really hard to get around in terms of accessing other things which you and your family need.
Other things that we have done for retrenched Australians are making it easier to obtain Newstart and also making it easier to access the services provided by Job Services Australia. But there is more to be done here.
The third pillar of our Jobs and Training Compact with the nation though is this: a compact with local communities, and that is why I have spent the last three days in south western Sydney.
I am told yesterday, at Bankstown it was the first visit by an Australian Prime Minister in 13 years. I don't know what my predecessor had been up to but obviously Bankstown was not on the agenda (inaudible).
But spending yesterday in Bankstown, the day before in Campbelltown and today here in Liverpool, there is one purpose in this which is how do we build this third pillar to the Jobs and Training Compact with the nation - the compact with local communities.
What does it mean, (inaudible) bunch of words. And I'm not much interested in words for their own sake, I'm interested in what we do.
It is this: right now the Minister for Local Government is out there announcing $800 million worth of local projects right across the country, making a difference in every community.
And Minto on Wednesday and yesterday in Bankstown, we made a couple of those announcements and there are announcements like that right across the country. And the organising principle again is this: jobs and apprenticeships today while building the economic and community infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
That's it in a nutshell. But reinforcing that, the Australian Government has also established a Local Jobs Fund with $650 million nationwide. And it is there to reinforce the presence of local priority employment coordinators, funded by us.
This is where the challenging bit comes. How do we work with you, the local community here, to make a difference, accessing that fund, with projects which make a difference in jobs and apprenticeships and training and projects which make a real difference in building some of the community assets you need for the next three, five, seven nine years.
How do we do that together? And when I say together, I mean together. That is that that we all as a global community (inaudible)? How are you going to partner with us? How is the local authority going to partner with us and have investment with us? How is the local chamber of commerce going to partner with us, how are local businesses going to partner with us?
How is the local community organisation going to partner with us? How are local civic leaders going to partner with us personally and how are local pillars of the community  -  and you would know who they are in this part of the world - going to partner with us to make this possible?
Rather than this being some sort of top down iniative, we need this to be a bottom up approach because the best ideas could be had locally. You know your community, you love your community and that is why you are here living this community and working in it.
Our job is to be here and say to you in loud and clear cut terms, we want to be partners with you. And that is why we have a priority employment coordinator, that's Zvia, please stand up. And Zvia here will be our coordinator of this area for the period ahead.
And she will have access to this $650 million Local Jobs Fund. She will work with the team which will be supported by Brendan, the Minister (inaudible) But you know, nothing will happen unless you come and join us to make it work.
And that is what I am here to do today, to listen to your ideas.
One other thing I would like to announce today is that the Government has committed $33.7 million over three years to expand and enhance the Australian Apprenticeships Access program.
Specifically, the Government will invest $3.5 million to fund 1,850 more places for pre-vocational training and support for retrenched employees aged 25 and over, facing barriers to employment in the year ahead.
This is in addition to the $30 million that we announced in early March for an additional 3,650 pre-vocational training and support places for vulnerable young job seekers aged 19 - 24.
Through this a young person or a retrenched worker can do a minimum of 150 hours of pre-vocational training plus 13 weeks of job search assistance, plus ongoing help once they are in a job. The training could include basic training which would involve retail, construction, (inaudible) or an apprenticeship or some other form of training.
I am happy to say that all access program brokers who operate in western Sydney have indicated their willingness to meet with community organisations such as Punchbowl Boys High and Canterbury (inaudible) for possible partnerships.
This is the practical stuff.
One of the things that we have encountered in our discussions with groups in Bankstown and Campbelltown and elsewhere is, what do you do in terms of pre-vocational training?
What do you do with people who are not quite up to a TAFE course or not quite up to going into an apprenticeship? What have we got that can flexibly be applied in this circumstances, both for the under 25s and over 25s as well. That is where this particular program comes from.
But nationally it is just a figure. Locally however, the challenge is to make it work and to apply it to people who can make proper use of it in local jobs, local infrastructure, local pre-apprenticeships, local apprenticeships, local training, local pre-training.
That is what we are on about, with one end point - when we look back in a few years time, how did we in 2009 make a difference? How did we take the unemployment rate down in this part of the world, which has already risen, I am advised to something in the order of 8.6 per cent in March, it has gone up 3.5 per cent, 50 per cent higher than the national average.
How do we take that number and make it better? How do we bring it down a point or two? And by doing this sort of work locally, we can have that effect. And by doing this sort of work locally, you know something, there's something enormously empowering about a community working together as well, to make a difference.
But enough from me, and I'm about to turn it over to you.


HOST: Did the Prime Minister spit the dummy when the army diggers he was visiting in Afghanistan couldn't produce a hairdryer? That is the claim from an opposition backbencher this morning.
We have summoned the Prime Minister to answer this question. Good morning.
PM: Morning Mike.
HOST: Did you?
PM: This particular allegation by Mr Turnbull is absolutely ridiculous and absolutely false, and designed I presume to distract attention from Mr Turnbull's own problems, in his own political party, which are considerable.
HOST: Nothing at all, no angry altercation about lack of hair dryer at Tarin Kowt?
PM: My time in Afghanistan with the Chief of Defence Force, with my National Security Adviser, with the Head of the Prime Minister's Department, was focussed exclusively on speaking with the troops about what they were doing on the ground.
As I said, the particular allegation by Mr Turnbull is absolutely ridiculous. I noticed his spokesman today walking away from it at a pace of knots.
HOST: It does seem the opposition though is trying to portray you though as rude and petulant after the VIP jet thing with the air force.
PM: Well if you are a Liberal Party without a positive proposal to deal with the global economic recession, then obviously such a Liberal Party is likely just to engage in personality politics. I think the expectation of the Australian people, when you've got unemployment going up around the world, when this global economic recession is biting, is what are your practical proposals for reducing the problem, instead of just playing personality politics.
HOST: You mention unemployment, yesterday those figures surprised just about everybody, did they surprise you as well?
PM: Well this is a really tough time and we're in the business of framing a really tough Budget, but we're in the business of taking decisions which reduce the impact of the global recession on Australian families.
We welcome positive economic news but there will be bad news to come.
HOST: But do you believe those figures are right?
PM: The statistician this morning has clarified that point of itself.
HOST: Well what do you think?
PM: The statistician, we have relied upon historically and we will continue to do so in the future. The Australian Bureau of Statistics is an independent body. Sometimes they produce data which certain politicians may regard as positive and sometimes they produce data which certain politicians regard as negative.
What is the key thing here though? The key thing is, what practicial difference can you make on the ground?
The facts are we've got the worst global recession in three quarters of a century which is causing revenues to collapse, tax revenues to collapse and causing unemployment to rise, right around the world.
Are we making a difference by what we're doing  -  early, strong, decisive action by investing in infrastructure tomorrow. And in the process of doing it, supporting jobs and apprenticeships today.
HOST: But unemployment will keep going up.
PM: Well we've already indicated that we believe that the forecast proposed level of unemployment will rise. That is what is happening right around the world. But the reason we are in there with a national economic stimulus strategy is to make a difference, to reduce the effect, again supporting jobs and apprenticeships today by investing in infrastructure we need tomorrow.
That is why we are in Sydney at the moment, working on our investment in the single largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen.
HOST: But not investing too much in NSW it seems this morning. Are you falling out of love with Nathan Rees, does he not have your full confidence Prime Minister?
PM: I was talking to the Premier of New South Wales at length about many of these matters only last week in Hobart at the Council of Australian Governments conference.
But on the question of New South Wales. A few facts and figures on stimulus investment in New South Wales. Total stimulus investment in New South Wales, $18.2 billion. Total stimulus in 2008 - 09 - around $7.3 billion, that is two per cent of gross state product, I am advised.
And if you go around the categories, in terms of what is going on in road, and rail and health and education, these are significant additional investments. Why? In New South Wales, in Sydney and everywhere, we want to make a difference by investing in the infrastructure we need tomorrow, to support jobs and apprenticeships today.
HOST: There are constant rumours of a chilly, if not icy relationship between you and Premier Nathan Rees and between your Government and the New South Wales state government, that they don't get on.
PM: We have a good working relationship with all Governments in Australia, all the state and territory Governments and that includes New South Wales.
I am in the practical business of just making a difference.
HOST: But you must be worried, I mean your federal election comes before the next NSW election and this Government is deeply on the nose here, in fact widely hated, the voters are there with a baseball bat ready to thump them. Do you worry New South Wales voters might take out on you first?
PM: I believe that the people of New South Wales like all Australians will stare me in eyeballs and say, ‘has this bloke been fair dinkum, been out there, trying to make a difference to the global recession, and has he been out there trying to make a difference in bringing down the level of unemployment over time?'
Can't stop this recession but you can make a difference in terms of its impact and that is what we are doing, head down, tail up, sleeves rolled up, having a go. And I believe that is the right thing. What judgment the good voters of this state or other states in the country make of me  - 
HOST: Or the bad ones.
PM: - that is a matter for them. I have got to simply take tough decisions. We've taken tough decisions in the Budget, tough decisions on temporary borrowing and temporary deficit, because that is necessary to support continued investment in hospitals, continued investment in providing the infrastructure we need for the future, because that generates jobs on the way through.
HOST: Now talking about infrastructure, the Herald is reporting this morning there will only be $100 million in funding for this Western Metro Line when the state Government was hoping for up to $2 billion, and no money at all for this CBD metro. Why is that? Are the propositions just not up to scratch?
PM: The first point is that we don't comment on what will be in the Budget; you know that as well as I do.
HOST: Someone has leaked it, obviously.
PM: That is a matter for you to pursue with your own journalistic sources. But in the Budget, we don't comment on its content.
What we have said loud and clear though is that we are investing in infrastructure long term - road, rail, ports, schools, TAFEs, universities, the National Broadband Network. This is the biggest single nation building plan advanced by an Australian Government since the Snowy. That is what we are engaged in at the moment. And when it comes to the provision of urban transport, you have got to make sure that all these projects are properly planned.
HOST: And this lot isn't apparently, right?
PM: You've got to make sure that any such project is properly planned and that all the work is done so that once the funding is committed, it happens. That is my base line concern, and concern that I would have expressed to every state and territory government in the country.
HOST: Without getting into the specific details, which you won't tell us but next Tuesday night (inaudible) are you set for a massive negative reaction from  - 
PM: Making tough decisions will not be popular. I accept that. But I am elected to take necessary decisions in the national interest.
This is a global problem affecting all Governments. The challenge we have is to reduce its impact. Therefore in doing that, in other words cushion the impact through our investments in the schools of tomorrow, creating jobs and apprenticeships today, it's necessary at this time to engage in temporary borrowing and temporary deficit.
Even the Liberals under Mr Turnbull say when pressed they have a $180 billion deficit and debt program themselves, they just don't like talking about it.
We're on with the business of trying to make a difference but that means you've also got to make tough decisions as well to make sure that we restore the Budget to balance over time.
HOST: Alright there was obviously another leak, this to The Australian this morning that the wealthy will lose their private health insurance rebate, it will be means tested. Yes or no?
PM: Well I go back to my earlier comment -
HOST: You don't comment on Budget -
PM: We don't comment and if you had Mr Costello here for the previous 12 years and -
HOST: They all do, they've said the same thing since Harold Holt.
PM: And back to good old Mr Holt as well, the same response would be delivered and there are reasons for that because the Budget is-
HOST: Well these things are all leaked though, very carefully.
PM: These things are deliberated on as a whole on Budget night itself. But I go back to the general principle, if you're going to engage in long term reform and for example do the right thing over time for our pensioners, it means that you've got to have an overall long term balance in the sorts of measures you take in the Budget.
HOST: I'll take that as a yes then.
PM: No, you've got to make sure that you balance things out over time.
HOST: And it wasn't balanced in the Howard years?
PM: Well when you look at the past ask yourself this question. Where was the single national infrastructure investment of the 12 years of the Howard Government?
HOST: On that stupid railway line up to the North, it didn't work and went broke.
PM: So if you were to look for example at the 12 years to invest for example in urban transport in Sydney, 12 years to invest in a national broadband network, 12 years to invest in our universities, when the cash was rolling in the door from the resources boom right around the world not a jot, not a jot was done.
Our job as a party and as a Government of nation building is to make a difference for the long term future but through the process support jobs and apprenticeships now so we can make a difference.
HOST: Alright this is not a Budget leak but are you committed to the tax cuts you promised?
PM: We have indicated quite some time ago that we believe that it's important to proceed with legislated tax cuts because it is necessary in order to provide families with support through a difficult time.
HOST: Alright but they're expected to happen in the Budget. Will they?
PM: I won't comment on the content of the Budget but I said before -
HOST: But that's a promise -
PM: I've said before that we believe it's important to honour our legislated tax cuts. I was asked this question in Canberra only a week or two ago and the bottom line is that's legislation in the parliament.
Families out there dealing with a whole bunch of uncertainties need to have that certainty and that's why we have proceeded on that basis. But this will be tough and going back to your original question, as what will be the reaction on Budget night, there will be many howls of protest about things that we are doing. I accept that, I take responsibility for it but we've got to cushion the impact of this recession today and restore the Budget to balance over time and that means-
HOST: It's no longer a temporary deficit.
PM: A temporary deficit and temporary borrowing and restore the balance -
HOST: A temporary deficit, you're still saying that?
PM: Absolutely because the objective -
HOST: Six years?
PM: - the objective of responsible economic management is to borrow now when you need it. Let's just take an example if you don't do that. If you don't borrow now to offset a $2 billion collapse in revenues and I noticed the Liberals were out yesterday saying they would halve the amount of borrowing.
One hundred billion dollars of borrowing now of about a two hundred billion dollar collapse in tax revenue; that is equivalent to defunding now for four years all Australian Government payments to the States for health and hospitals in one fell swoop. That's what would happen. Let's get real about this.
What we're doing is temporary borrowing and temporary deficit now to support jobs and infrastructure now and create infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Then taking the measures necessary to restore the Budget to surplus and to use that surplus to pay down the deficit over time. That is a responsible course of action now and a responsible course of action for the medium to long term.
HOST: I almost dare not ask because you'll only slap us down but do the pensioners, the single pensioners, get their thirty bucks?
PM: We've been working hard with pensioner groups on necessary reforms for the long term. We, Jenny Macklin the Minister has spent a lot of time with their representatives-
HOST: Do they get the thirty?
PM: And it will be very interesting to answer that question Michael on Budget night.
HOST: And the pain is going to be spread more broadly?
PM: Well -
HOST: Soak the rich, Prime Minister.
PM: No let's be clear about it. We need to look after people who are finding it tough, really tough right now. We've got to offset that over time to make sure that we've got a Budget which returns over time-
HOST: So wealthier Australians might be expected to make something of a sacrifice and a contribution?
PM: - a Budget over time which returns to balance and surplus. That's the responsible course of action; it's just as responsible to support temporary deficit and temporary investment now to cushion the impact of this recession.
If we were not doing that, unemployment in this country would be higher. Look around the rest of the world. Unemployment numbers going through the roof and at least for this month, we have actually our numbers have in the reverse direction but there is still a lot of pain to come.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks for coming in.
PM: Great to be with you.
HOST: Hair looks great.
PM: Yours is not too bad either.
HOST: I don't know about mine. Thanks.
PM: Is that receding or not?
HOST: Receding. The R word. The R word in the studio. It's retreating, it's vanishing at a great rate. The R Word. Thanks very much.
PM: The Prime Minister. 


The Rudd Government will deliver an historic Paid Parental Leave (PPL) scheme to support Australian families and prepare Australia for the economic and social challenges of the future.
This government-funded scheme will provide the primary carer with 18 weeks post-natal leave, paid at the adult federal minimum wage (currently $543.78 per week).
The cost of the scheme - approximately $260 million per annum - is a vital investment in improved productivity and workforce participation.
The scheme will not commence until 1 January 2011, giving the community and businesses time to prepare.
Paid Parental Leave will be delivered in a responsible and sustainable way which takes into account the impacts of the global recession.
The scheme will come into effect when the economy is expected to be recovering and the economic outlook improved.
To ensure the scheme is delivered in an affordable way, it will not mandate paid paternity leave at this time and employers will not be required to pay superannuation on Paid Parental Leave entitlements.
Currently, Australia is one of just two OECD countries without a national statutory paid parental leave scheme, along with the United States.
This historic Paid Parental Leave scheme will encourage women to stay connected to their jobs.
This will boost workforce participation which will be essential in meeting the economic and social challenges of an ageing Australian population.
Paid Parental Leave will help Australian families find a better balance between work and caring responsibilities and will allow mothers to spend vital time with their newborn babies.
The scheme is a huge step forward for all mothers and especially for low and middle-income earners who generally have less access to employer-funded parental leave schemes.
In 2007, less than one quarter of women on very low wages had access to paid maternity leave, compared to three quarters on high wages.
The government-funded scheme will be based closely on the recommendations of the final report of the Productivity Commission Inquiry into Paid Parental Leave: Support for Parents with Newborn Children, which will be released with the 2009-10 Budget.
However, the scheme will be targeted so that taxpayers' funds go where they are most needed.
To ensure the scheme is responsible and sustainable over the long-term, high income primary carers earning over $150,000 will not be eligible.
The Baby Bonus and Family Tax Benefits will continue to be available for mums who choose to stay at home. A stay at home mum with a partner on average earnings will continue to receive around $12,000 in government assistance in the year after the birth of their baby.
However recipients of the Government's Paid Parental Leave scheme will not be eligible to also receive either the Baby Bonus or Family Tax Benefit Part B.
The Rudd Government is proud to work with Australian mothers, families and businesses to meet the challenges of the 21st century.


PM: (inaudible). The first of them will be completed in 2014, the new HMAS Hobart. There have been two previous HMAS Hobarts. Both have served with distinction. One of course was laid down in the United Kingdom in the 1930s, a modified Leander Class frigate, and served the Royal Australian Navy with distinction throughout World War II. The second HMAS Hobart was a guided missile destroyer built in the United States. She also served with distinction in the Vietnam War and was one of the first ships to come to the assistance of Darwin in the aftermath of Cyclone Tracey.
Unlike the previous HMAS Hobarts, the third ship to have the honour of bearing that name will be built right here in Australia. The Air Warfare Destroyer Project is the largest defence project in our nation's history. The $8 billion project is a massive undertaking. The project will see at least three AWDs constructed utilising some of the world's most sophisticated defence systems and components.
To ensure success in this undertaking, Government and industry must work together in innovative ways. That's why we've put together a cutting edge alliance-based contracting strategy by bringing together the Australian Submarine Corporation, the Defence Materiel Organisation and Raytheon Corporation to this alliance. This project is also a chance for Australia to demonstrate our technological and ship building capabilities to the world.
Work on the project will be spread right across Australia, helping to develop our national skills and infrastructure base. Steel here at Port Kembla will be fashioned into hull blocks in northern NSW, South Australia and Queensland and the final ships will be assembled in South Australia. In doing so, we will enhance our defence industry and build a stronger national economy.
And today we mark an important step in that process because today we can announce that BlueScope Steel, an Australian company with a proud and long heritage, has beaten the world to win the contract to supply steel to the Air Warfare Destroyer Project. Congratulations BlueScope.
This is a great achievement. It shows that Australian companies can not only compete for defence projects with the best in the world, but they can win and win on their merits which is what BlueScope has done. So I want to congratulate BlueScope on this first class achievement. The contract will supply about 3,000 tonnes of high quality, specialist steel for each ship and in doing so it will importantly support jobs here in the Illawarra.
This steel plant, our nation's largest, is a major employer in this region. It produces steel for Australia and for the world. It's a business of which we can all be proud. And today I am pleased to be here to congratulate the company and all of the workers on their latest achievements.
Australian steel for Australian ships for Australia's defence. Australian steel for Australian ships for Australia's defence. That's what we're here today to celebrate. Australian jobs for Australian contracts for Australian defence, won on merit against global competition. Congratulations again BlueScope. Congratulations to the Illawarra and congratulations to the Navy.
I'm happy now to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we the Government are in constant discussion and negotiation with BlueScope about this industry's long term future and this is a fantastic first class Australian industry, look around you. This has been built with blood, sweat and tears over many decades and what they've done in recent times in particular is turn themselves into a world class, world competitive industry. The Government has great confidence in the industry's future and in this company's future, that's why we're working very closely with them on their proposals for the future and how we can be partners with them and we are confident we're going to get a good outcome with the company.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: When it comes to the provisioning for the Air Warfare Destroyers and the proposed doubling of the Australian submarine fleet, I am confident that we'll be able to obtain maximum local provision for this construction project, maximum local provision consistent with obtaining the best price and best value of course for the Australian taxpayer. These are multibillion dollar projects. We've got to make sure that we maximise in terms of the tax payer, build the defence assets we need for the next 20 years and ensure that we get maximum take-up by Australian industry.
JOURNALIST: So steel won't be the only building material -
PM: I am confident that it's going to be a maximum delivery of Australian project content in this project and in others.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept that the Government's carbon trading scheme might make it difficult for companies such as BlueScope Steel into the future?
PM: Well on that question we the Government have been in continued discussion with BlueScope. Those discussions are proceeding well. I note that the company has welcomed what the Government has said recently about its approach to a slower start to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. And we will continue to work through a range of technical issues with the company over time. This is a good professional working relationship and we're dealing with a tough set of challenges, sorting out things globally, acting locally, making sure that we're doing all that is necessary to support local jobs.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, unemployment is almost 10 per cent now in the Illawarra, what do you think is the key to reversing that and do you think there is a possibility for more regional stimulus packages?
PM: Well can I say the reason I am in the Illawarra today is twofold. One is to visit our good friends here at BlueScope and celebrate this great success for an Australian steel company. Secondly, to then speak at a Community Jobs Forum here in the Illawarra because we take seriously the fact that this region is experiencing higher levels of unemployment.
It's the same reason I've been attending local jobs forums in south western Sydney, in the southern suburbs of Perth, in the north eastern suburbs of Adelaide, north western Tasmania and the south eastern suburbs of Melbourne in recent weeks because the impact of this global recession has been felt across so many regions in the Australian economy.
Secondly, our response to that is to boost our investment through what we've done already, through our national stimulus strategy and our nation building plans and our infrastructure plans. So here at the local level we're also going to talk to the local community today about what we can do in addition to support local jobs in this area. The same discussion I had in south-western Sydney last week, the same discussions I've had in other major cities in recent times.
Can I just give you a fact or two? Total Australian Government stimulus investment in the Illawarra region now: $660 million. Total infrastructure investment alone, $374 million into this region.
Let me give you a couple of examples  -  1,374 social houses in the Illawarra region will receive repairs and maintenance; 26 new houses belonging to social and community housing will be built, total value nearly $12 million.
Under the Building the Education Revolution, round one of the Government's National Schools Pride Program - 52 minor infrastructure and maintenance projects worth $7.4 million across 53 schools here in the Illawarra. Also under the Building the Education Revolution, as my colleagues, your local members, announced last week - $48 million for 32 major infrastructure projects including libraries, multi-purpose halls, classrooms in schools in the Illawarra region. Road, rail and community infrastructure - $5.5 million for black spots, $2.9 million for the Cliff Road Promenade project and a massive $38 million direct investment in the University of Wollongong in the Smart Infrastructure Facility.
Can I just say, put these things together - you asked the question, what more infrastructure do you want? I've always got an open mind and my good friends in the Illawarra, pay attention to $374 million which we have ourselves directly put in, in very recent times in the categories I've referred to. What's the overall principle here, how do we build and support jobs and apprenticeships today while constructing the infrastructure we need for tomorrow? That's what the Government is doing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are all these good news announcements to distract us from the size of the deficit that is coming?
PM: You know something? There is a global recession, every government around the world is engaged in temporary borrowing, to thence temporary deficits, in order to plug the gap which has been left by the private sector in retreat and to do so temporarily. That's what governments around the world are doing.
Governments around the world are investing in short, medium and long term infrastructure. That's why we're investing in the biggest school modernisation program Australia has seen. That's why we're investing in a national broadband network for the long term. All to generate jobs, apprenticeships and training opportunities today, while building and investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's our strategy. We think it's the right strategy for Australia, it's also a strategy being employed by practically every responsible government around the world.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I ask you about paid parental leave and your thoughts on how the scheme has been received?
PM: Well I noticed today on paid parental leave that Mr Hockey said the Liberal Party would make radical changes to what Government has put forward. They've refused to indicate that they will support the Government's paid parental leave plan and therefore I can only assume they are saying they will vote against it in the parliament.
Can I say for all those parents out there, this creates huge uncertainty. For businesses out there, this creates huge uncertainty. Paid parental leave is necessary in order to provide extra support to parents with little bubs at home and secondly on top of that it also helps boost productivity in the long term. But we've got a proposal out there for paid parental leave. The Liberals today have said and signalled strongly they're now going to vote it down. I would just say to them it is time for them to stop blocking everything that we put into parliament, it's time we got ahead and got on with the business of putting through good reforms for the economy and for parents and for businesses dealing with the challenges of the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the means testing has been set at $150,000 (inaudible)
PM: Sorry I can't hear you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we believe that the important thing for the future is to make sure that if you look at the current scheme, frankly a very small proportion of families on low incomes have any access at all, any access at all to paid parental leave. When you go to the higher end of the income spectrum, more of that is available through employers.
What are we on about? Giving a fair go, frankly, to all parents and making sure that there's a proper system in place to encourage those on low to middle incomes to have a decent, a decent program for them. This is a good reform for parents, it's a good reform in particular for low and middle income earners, it's a good reform for the economy and I challenge the Liberals to stop acting as negative blockers on everything and get behind a positive proposal for parents and for businesses and for the economy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say it's an advantage for low and middle income earners but by putting the means test at $150,000 that's taxing a lot of upper income earners as well -
PM: Can I just say? My advice is that something like only 10 per cent at present of those on lower incomes, lower income spectrum have access to PPL of any significance, paid parental leave. My overwhelming concern is how do we fill that gap?
Secondly, the recommendation that we obtained from the Productivity Commission did not contain within it any form of means testing. We've actually believed that it's appropriate to introduce a level of means testing. But what are we on about overall? Making sure that we've got a system for the future which gives incentives for parents to look after their kids at home and ensure that we also boost long term productivity in the economy.
There's no magic in these particular numbers, we think we've got the balance right but what I'm particularly concerned about are those on the lower-middle income spectrum who frankly have very little access to anything.
JOURNALIST: Why $150,000 though?
PM: If you look across the range of measures that we've put in, in recent times, we have said including in the last Budget that this is a, this is a reasonable number in many income support systems provided and other entitlements provided by Government.
As I've said before there's no absolute magic in a number but you know something? You've got to draw a line somewhere, that's what we've done. My concern principally is with the figures which suggest themselves to us, which is only a small proportion of low to middle income earners have access to any form of paid parental leave now. We're about to change that. My challenge to the Liberals is, stop blocking this like you block everything else in the parliament these days and get on with the business of ensuring that this important reform for parents, for families, for businesses and the economy can get going.


BlueScope Steel, an Australian company, has been confirmed as a major supplier to Australia's Air Warfare Destroyer (AWD) Program, winning a contract to supply steel for the first of the advanced vessels. 
As announced in the Defence White Paper last week, the $8 billion Air Warfare Destroyer (AWD) Program will deliver three Australian-built Hobart Class air warfare destroyers  -  the most advanced ships to be operated by the Royal Australian Navy. They will form a key part of Force 2030, which will strengthen Australia's defence for the next generation.
The contract to supply the steel will be worth up to $20 million over six years and will see BlueScope Steel produce around 3,000 tonnes of steel per ship.
The steel will be provided in ‘ship sets' with the initial production run being for the first AWD, HMAS Hobart. The ships will be commissioned between 2014 and 2017.
BlueScope Steel has outclassed an international field to win this contract, demonstrating their ability to beat global competition. Through this new contract, they will support jobs for Australian workers and flow-on economic benefits for their communities.
Australian jobs for Australian steel for Australian defence.
This is good news for BlueScope Steel, good news for Defence, and good news for the people of the Illawarra. 


It's great to be back in Wollongong, great to be back in the Illawarra and thank you all for coming out to talk with us today.
To Sharon Bird, the member for Cunningham, Jennie George the member for Throsby, Brendan O'Connor, the Minister for Employment Participation, Jason Clare the Member for Blaxland, David Farmer, City Council General Manager, state ministers, state parliamentary colleagues, local councillors, ladies and gentlemen. And those of you have a passion for this region and its future.
That's why we are here, to talk about that and see what together we can do about that, given the extraordinary circumstances which the global economy has presented to us all.
I've just come with Sharon and with Jennie from BlueScope and good news today, we the Australian Government announced that the air warfare destroyers, the steel which will be necessary for their construction, will be provided by BlueScope.
Australian warships, made in Australia, with Australian steel and made here, in this, your local community. Good for the nation, good for the Illawarra, good for Australia's defence, good for the Navy. But you know what was great about the story of BlueScope is that they won that contract with the Royal Australian Navy against world competition because BlueScope are world class and they beat all comers from around the world.
This will be a very important project. They are rolling out thousands of tonnes of quality steel for those ships as they come off the line. These will be called a Hobart Class of destroyers.
The two previous HMAS Hobarts were not built in Australia - one laid in the '30s in the United Kingdom, the other laid down I think in the '60s in the United States.
The first HMAS Hobart to be manufactured, built, constructed here in Australia and using Australian steel. Good story.
We are here today to talk about jobs, right now. And what we do to confront the challenges which we are confronted with from this global recession. As I look here in the local area, the jobless rate in the Illawarra has jumped to 8.3 and the rate for Wollongong even higher at 9.1.
And my attitude to these sorts of challenges is very, very basic. The global recession is not discriminating against, or between I should say, countries or economies or between industries. It is affecting all countries, all economies, all industries, at the same time, everywhere in the world. 
That's why this is such a fundamental problem and challenge for all of us. But the message also for the countries and economies of the world, but also our national response here in Australia, is a very basic principle.
It is as follows: we are all in this together, each and every one of us. It doesn't matter where you come from in Australia, what level of government, whether you are from the state government, federal government, local authorities, whether you are from beyond government, working in the key businesses of this region, or whether you are working in the unions.
Whether you are from the church sector, the community sector, the charitable sector, the not-for-profit sector, out there at the coal face helping people who need help because of the impact of this recession on unemployment, and its impact therefore on people's lives and their ability to get through the day and the week and the month ahead.
Or whether you are from our great local university, the University of Wollongong. We are all in this together. And together you can make a difference.
There is no point standing up here as a political leader and saying, ‘you can stop the global recession, it will happen tomorrow morning at 1.45 AM'. I mean it is just nonsense.
Because the factors at work in this global recession to do with unrestrained greed and unregulated financial markets across the world have caused consequences for real working people everywhere.
Now the practical response, and the practical responsibility is to say, how can we take this thing, how can we take its impact on unemployment and how can we reduce it, how can we cushion the blow. How can we take those unemployment numbers for this region and make them a bit less. How can we make that possible.
And for those for whom unemployment is a reality, how do we make that experience of unemployment somewhat better in terms of training opportunities, or in terms of the decency of support we provide as a local and national community for people who lose their jobs for no fault of their own.
So what we're here to talk about today is briefly to tell you what we've been doing globally, briefly to tell you about what we're doing nationally, to talk about the framework we're seeking to apply locally and then to hear from you about what you can do in partnership with us to make those numbers on unemployment better than they would otherwise be here in the Illawarra.
As you know, we are in the worst recession, the worst global recession since the Great Depression. This is the worst set of global economic circumstances in three quarters of a century. That makes the challenge before us even greater.
Treasury's advice to be published in the Budget tomorrow is that the measures that we have put in place will support Australian jobs and significantly reduce the length of the Australian unemployment queues. This Treasury advice finds that if the Government had done nothing, national unemployment in Australia would have been forecast to reach 10 per cent.
However, due to Government action, unemployment forecasts for the country in tomorrow's Budget will be significantly lower. This Treasury analysis calculates the stark human cost of doing nothing.
This advice is the final nail in the coffin for those who argue that governments should do nothing to support jobs during a global recession. That is why tomorrow's Budget will support the jobs of today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
I said before that we are embarked on a program of global action, national action and local action. The causes of the global recession by definition lie beyond our shores. The good news is that we've been working together in partnership with the governments of the world to bring about a coordinated global response.
Australia does so through the G20, the group of 20 major industrial economies in the world. And that's the meeting which I attended and represented Australia at in London most recently and Washington at the end of last year.
The good news is this: governments around the world, whether it's communist China, capitalist America or the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, all have concluded that unless we act together then the consequences for us all will be disastrous.
That's why they agreed on an unprecedented $5 trillion investment in global economic stimulus; that's a large number when you consider that total global production each year is about $63 trillion, involving all the economies in the world.
They agreed to provide proper resources to the International Monetary Fund to guard against any future systemic collapse in the banking system, $1 trillion investment in the IMF guarding against future problems in fundamental financial institutions of regional and prospectively global significance in places like Central and Eastern Europe.
We also acted together to ensure that we would develop and agree a common framework for what's called toxic asset management. That is, restoring the world's major private banks to health, stripping them of toxic assets, recapitalising those banks in a globally consistent fashion so that private credit flows can commence again.
Because until that occurs, frankly, stimulus only can do so much. You need a restoration of normal credit flows, at normal prices through banks across the world in order for the private economy and the jobs that it generates to come back to normal.
We also agreed that we need to reform the rules for the financial system for the future. These days of unrestrained greed and unregulated financial markets, unfettered free markets, have come to a close. We actually need proper regulation. We need a proper balance in the way in which we do these things in the future.
And whether it's to do with prudential standards, other regulatory standards, the role of credit rating agencies and the rest, these now have formed a core part of the ongoing regulatory work of the Financial Stability Forum, commissioned by the G20 heads of government and reporting progressively in the months and years ahead. Step by step, inch by inch, returning to a properly regulated financial market worldwide.
And finally drawing a line under global protectionism. Those of you who are school students among us may have studied at school the history of the Great Depression, and what happened in the 1930s.
One of the things that happened in the 1930s is that the governments around the world got together and they failed to agree. There was a very important conference in London in 1933 where in fact they got together, decided there was a huge problem, and then had a barney.
That didn't get us very far. What it did is it actually deepened and lengthened the recession. Because what happened is they all then began to resort to acts of national protectionism, one against the other, which then contracted the size of the global market, contracted export markets for everyone else and the jobs depending on those exports.
People need to bear that in mind in the debate today as well. But the good news out of London is that all those Governments and all those economies representing 85 per cent of the global economy - the 20 of them together - decided to draw a line under that and not to engage in protectionist actions inconsistent with their legal obligations to the World Trade Organisation.
That's a few words about what work we have been doing together globally. Nationally, you will be familiar with what we have done.
Firstly, stabilising our financial markets, providing a guarantee to each and every depositor in an Australian financial institution. That is, a bank, a credit union, a building society. Something we did last October, never done before by an Australian Government in the history of the Commonwealth, absolutely necessary to underpin confidence and stability in the Australian financial system.
On top of that we've been engaged in an economic stimulus strategy designed to fill the gap to the greatest extent possible in our economy, while the private sector is in retreat, because of what's happening in private credit markets around the world and the contraction of global demand.
So what have we been doing? Firstly, short term stimulus, payments to pensioners, carers, families, to provide support for the 1.5 million Australians who work in Australia's retail sector. That is about 15 per cent of our workforce, really important stuff.
Secondly, medium term stimulus, by investing in the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. The flow through here in terms of projects which have been launched in this local area in recent times, I was talking to both Jennie and Sharon about that just before. Good stuff.
State of the art 21st century libraries popping up in local primary schools, multipurpose halls, classroom modernisation, secondary schools able to compete for state of the art science centres and language centres.
And guess what, it is not just here. In every one of the 7,500 primary schools across our country, our unapologetic ambition is to turn it into a construction site for the next year or two ahead.
And the reason is, building jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships today while constructing the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. So that we have got the best schools and the best learning environment for our kids for the future.
(Applause)
There must be a principal up the back there. (Laughter) I hope a lot goes to your school sir.
Secondly, the social housing. It is just wrong that we have got in this country today such high numbers of people who are homeless according to the Census data. How do we make a difference? Well, you are about to see the biggest single national investment in social housing the country has ever seen - 20,000 units of social housing being built right across the country.
What are we doing? Creating jobs, apprenticeships and traineeship opportunities today while building the social infrastructure we need for tomorrow, to bring down that level of homelessness.
Similarly, we have got a $4 billion investment in energy efficiency, what is our objective? To ensure that every owner occupied dwelling in the country has ceiling insulation in order to create job opportunities today and bring down greenhouse gas emissions for tomorrow.
That is our overarching principle. That is medium term stimulus.
Longer term stimulus you have seen us already announce one large project which is a National Broadband Network. We are serious about this. How can we be in 21st century Australia and have a broadband network which is one of the slowest, least accessible, and most expensive anywhere in the western world?
It's just wrong, it's retarding growth. If you're a small business operating in the Illawarra, why shouldn't you have the access to at least 100 megabytes per second to link you up with customers right around the world, at speed, or to a new supply chain for the businesses which you operate?
If you're teaching out at the University of Wollongong, why shouldn't you have access to at-speed, maximum bandwidth, maximum band speed to the delivery of your courses to anywhere and everywhere without impediment? 
And similarly, why can't you be using that platform to do so with the delivery of courses right around the world?
I am sure they are doing so at present, but this bandwidth and band speed that we provide simply turbocharges that, makes the platforms for delivery much better and much more efficient, much more rapid and makes it therefore more possible and more profitable.
Delivering e-health services. If you're dependent on health services from one of the big teaching hospitals in Sydney, how do we get that down the tube to you in the local GP clinic? Well, we need bandwidth in order to do that.
Similarly with our schools, similar to the way in which governments can put services online. We don't have the platform to do that.
Twelve years our predecessors were in office and I can't find any evidence of our national broadband network being built anywhere. I just can't. It's time to get on with it.
What again is the organising principle concerning our challenge for this great global recession? It's creating jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships now with an investment of up to $43 billion in building a National Broadband Network and creating the infrastructure, the nation building infrastructure we need for our businesses and for our health system and for our education system for tomorrow - that's the organising principle.
I talked about global action, national action; let's talk a little bit about local action. Here in this local area we have been injecting quite a lot of activity.
If I looked at the figures that I was handed before, and have carefully now left behind in my other folder - I stand to be corrected on these numbers therefore - we're injecting something like, through the National Stimulus Strategy, $633 million into this regional economy, the Illawarra. That is a lot of investment.
I was asked just before at the press conference ‘what are you doing in terms of infrastructure?', to which my answer was $374 million. That's actually quite a sizeable answer to that question.
If you go through what's happening in schools, what's happening with social housing and the local application of what I have just been describing, this is all being funnelled through to what is happening on the ground here. So that if you're a tradie, if you're a sparkie, if you're a person that is working in 20 to 25 separate trades, then you have got an opportunity to get access to jobs which are going to crop up through these local building programs operating in local schools.
That's why we are doing it. That's the difference, so whether it's in the schools, whether it's what we are rolling out in terms of the roads system, whether it's what we are doing as far as our TAFE and our universities as well.
The members reminded me this morning about the injection that we have just made in the University of Wollongong, some $38 million into a state of the art infrastructure planning facility. This is a really good investment in your local economy.
So what I have just been describing nationally flows through locally to the tune of $633 million. That is investment which would not otherwise be in this regional economy had this government not decided to step up to the plate and say there is a global recession on, how can we make a difference
And I simply again repeat the question, had we not done so, unemployment queues in this country would be much, much worse. Look at the international data. For what we achieved in terms of the unemployment data which was released just last week, one of the few economies in the world, at least for that month, which has shown unemployment come down a notch. Of course it will go up in the future, but what we are determined to do is to act globally, nationally and locally to reduce the problem to the greatest extent possible.
Of course here in the local area, there have been a number of job cuts and we know that we are going to have to act even more decisively in what we do locally in order to make further of a difference.
Of course another area in which we seek to make differences is what we do in the area of planning and in the area of apprenticeships and traineeships. Jennie for example has chaired the Illawarra Apprenticeship Pilot Program that's aimed at disadvantaged unemployed people and that has helped over 400 young people in this region through a pre-vocational course and into an apprenticeship with local business.
That's good local practical work. It's an example of how a government can work together along with businesses and local unions with the Commonwealth funding a coordinator for the project, the State Government funding a range of pre-vocational courses and the Illawarra Business Chamber now carrying the program forward. Good local practical work.
Jennie has also been involved with the Beacon Foundation's No Dole program in six local schools in the Shellharbour area. This is a program in which year 9 and 10 students make a public commitment to stay in education, training or employment with support from the local community and local businesses. It's consistent with what we are now doing nationally. Our approach for anyone under 25 is summed up in a single phrase; you are either earning or learning.
We are making a universal entitlement of an educational training place for anyone under the age of 25. Whether it's at universities, whether it's at TAFEs or whether it's at school. Because we need to make sure that our young people in this time of global economic downturn are seizing this opportunity to take those skills, to take them to a different level with a new set of skills. To enhance what they've got, so that when the global economic recovery comes they are in harness and ready to go. And I would commend Jennie on her local work in these areas
Also on the local front, we intend today to do some work with our local employment coordinators. And today we have with us Linda Mortimer. Where is Linda? This is Linda Mortimer. She is now your Local Employment Coordinator, for the period immediately ahead.
What is all this about? What we have done nationwide is look at those regions of Australia where unemployment is tipping up fastest and hardest. It's not just here, it's other parts of Australia as well. Last week I spent three days in south western Sydney , in Liverpool, in Bankstown and in Campbelltown. Talking to groups such as this about we can make a difference on the ground. Prior to that I was at similar meetings in the City of Casey in Melbourne, in Ulverstone in north western Tasmania. In the city of Mawson Lakes I think in the north western suburbs of Adelaide and then of course in the City of Stirling in the southern part of Perth on the way to Fremantle.
The challenges in these communities are similar and the reason I am coming out to speak with each of these communities is with one simple question - ‘How can we make a further difference locally?' We have appointed Priority Employment Coordinators in each of these regions. Secondly we're backing them up with the Local Jobs Fund of some $650 million. And we need to make sure that she is able to draw upon local good ideas about what we can do here locally to make even more of a difference.
But you know something? It won't work unless you the community pile in with your ideas, with your suggestions and wherever possible, with your co-investment of talent, time and where possible cash. We want to be partners with you. What I know from my own experiences in government is that these things work best when locals come up with an idea, get in there with you in a partnership and see it through.
My experience of having worked in Canberra as Prime Minister for a little more than a year now, is that not all wisdom proceeds from Parliament House Canberra. You may be surprised to learn that. I've discovered it quite recently. Not exactly.
But you know stuff works if you the community, who know your community, you're passionate about community, you love living here, that's why you're here. You have therefore got a deep emotional and practical engagement about how you can take what is currently on offer in this community and make it better. And that's what we are here to do, to be partners with you.
So we want to see social enterprise initiatives, we want to see good local business initiatives, we want to see what the local chamber of commerce has to say and to suggest, we want to see what your not-for-profits have to say and suggest.
And so when I turn this discussion over to your contributions soon, it is with an idea of harnessing your best positive ideas about ‘here we are now, what can we do in the immediate term to make it better'.
It's not just an open discussion which leads nowhere, no one has got time for that. You're all busy people and so are we. That's we have a Priority Employment Coordinator, that's why we have allocated $650 million to a national fund to support activities in local areas. But we won't do that unless you come forward with stuff which is actually going to work and have an effect.
How can you build your local social infrastructure? How can you build local micro-businesses? How do people who are currently out there unemployed who might be able to assist, into running their own enterprises? How can we got out there and augment some of the programs already being supported by the University of Wollongong?
How can we augment some of the good project work being done by BlueScope? How can we augment what is being done by your local authorities in this area? How can we build up jobs, apprenticeship and traineeships?
One final thought from me, before we go to your contributions from the floor.
And it goes to how we go to about planning for our infrastructure long term. I have spoken about national action, I have spoken about global action, I have spoken about local action. But also the whole question of how we plan better for our cities in the future.
And when I was recently in Hobart at our meeting of the Council of Australian Governments, bringing together all the Premiers and the Chief Ministers and myself and their treasurers, one of the things that we were discussing is how do we make sure that our major metropolitan centres are planned best for the future.
Our major cities must have better planning for the future so that we can plan better for their infrastructure for the long term. Our capital cities must have the best planning possible for the long term, including for the provision of infrastructure.
For example in NSW, Sydney must have better planning for the future - better metropolitan planning arrangements will help ensure consistent decision making, improve the efficiency of infrastructure investment and further contribute to productivity and economic growth.
If we do that, it means that infrastructure would be better planned, better connected: our roads; our railways; our ports; our airports; energy; water; broadband; universities; hospitals. We need to be planning better.
It would make certainly Sydney work much better. It would make it easier to get around between work, home and the shops. I know we have got to do better when it comes to the planning of our major cities, our capital cities in particular.
That's why in April I charged the Council of Australian Governments with tackling this challenge for the future. From my own experience in government, I know for example that Sydney's planning arrangements must include better coordination between all levels of government.
I understand this, which is why last year when we came to government we established the Major Cities Unit inside the Commonwealth Government. And I believe that the federal sphere of government does have a role to play in shaping our major cities and our capital cities in the future.
Big cities like Sydney may need an overarching body responsible for long term planning and infrastructure.
So how can we go about making all this work? We've used before the great planning and success stories for our nation and for this state and for the city of Sydney itself, during the Sydney Olympics.
SOCOG, the Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games, had three levels of Australian government and bipartisan representation and structure. How do we best deploy the best business brains, the best industry brains, the best brains from across the entire community to make that bipartisan mission best for the future?
I think it is time for us all to work together on the planning challenges which lie ahead for the future - for our major cities, for our capital cities, but in particular, for Australia's principal international gateway, Sydney.
Finally, on a very local point, I also spoke, I have been speaking with Sharon and the other local members about the delivery of Medicare services here in this community as well.
Jennie has reminded me to mention one matter of special interest to people in Warrawong. At the last election, we undertook that Warrawong residents would have better access to Government services. Ahead of tomorrow night's Budget I confirm that we are going to meet that commitment.
From January the 1st 2010, Medicare Australia services such as claiming Medicare rebates will be available from the existing Warrawong Centrelink office in the King Street shopping centre. And this is a precursor to a purpose-built centre for both Medicare and Centrelink offices.
As you as members of this local community, can I say we have a long hard road ahead of us, but you are a tough people down here. You have been through difficult times in the past and I believe in partnership with you and your passion for this community, we are going to achieve great things together in the future.
I conclude with where I began. The thing for us all to remember as we confront the reality of this global economic recession is that we are all in this together.
And if we tackle this thing together, with compassion and some commitment and some practical commonsense, with positive ideas on what can bring us together and make a difference for the local community, it is far better than simply having an acrimonious debate about those things which might divide us.
So the forum is very much now open to you.


O'BRIEN: Late today I spoke with the Prime Minister who was in his Parliament House office, an interview in which he would not rule out an early election if key elements of his Budget are rejected in the Senate.
Kevin Rudd, your plan to get the Budget back into surplus from massive deficit in five to six years and beyond is based substantially on the Treasury's very optimistic growth forecasts of 4.5 per cent a year, starting in 11-12 for six years. And you'd be familiar with their methodology because you've referred journalists to it. In arriving at those forecasts, what assumptions do Treasury make about global growth over these next few years?
PM: Well can I just go back one point there, Kerry? You're saying that our ability to return the Budget to surplus is based purely on growth projections in the two outer years of a five year cycle.
O'BRIEN: No, substantially. Substantially, not totally.
PM: Well, I'm just saying - no, I dispute the proposition to begin with. And secondly, we've brought about in this Budget $22 billion worth of structural savings which work their way through the system over time. That's the first point.
But secondly, going to your point about Treasury's methodology in calculating the growth forecasts for the two outer years of a five year cycle. Treasury, obviously, are a conservative bunch. They will work out their own methodologies for doing this. But what they've been doing in particular here is looking at how you best look at growth patterns over a long economic cycle.
They have moved for the first time to five years, not four, and what they are doing is looking at: how have we recovered in the past from previous recessions? That's the first point. Second, they've looked at what has been the overall trend growth over a seven to 10 year cycle. These are the broad parameters which have guided Treasury's underpinnings of those growth assumptions for the two outer years. And their argument to us -
O'BRIEN: Do you know what assumptions they have made about global growth over these next few years in arriving at these figures?
PM: Global growth in the Treasury's calculations are taken from a variety of sources; from obviously the IMF, they are also mindful of OECD data and there's also Treasury's own calculations about countries and economies of particular consequence to Australia, to wit China in our own region which is our number one trading partner. That's one factor.
The other is, as we've just discussed, is how you best calculate growth over a 10 year cycle. And against all the methodology that the Treasury's deployed, it is on balance a conservative methodology to do what they have done. Remember in the two previous recessions, Kerry, in the 80s and the 90s, the period that Australia was with below trend growth was about one year in one of those recessions, two years in the other of those recessions. What Treasury's projecting here is three years below trend growth. That is a more conservative assumption to begin with before they then go to the recovery trajectory which is again more conservative than has been the case in the past.
O'BRIEN: But this is a recession caused entirely by global forces. And even in its own Budget papers, Treasury quotes from IMF research to make the point that, "Recessions associated with financial crises, which this one is, or those that are highly synchronised across the world, as this one is, have been more severe and lasted longer than other recessions. And recoveries have been slower and characterised by weak domestic demand than the kinds of recessions Australia had in the 80s and 90s" that the Treasury has drawn on in the methodologies that you've just mentioned. You say yourself that this is the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression.
PM: Absolutely.
O'BRIEN: Shouldn't we be taking those forecasts with more than a grain of salt?
PM: Kerry, the point that I just made before is that Treasury, conservatively, is looking at a three year time table of below trend growth because it does take seriously the proposition that this is deeper and longer by way of recessionary impact than either of the two recessions, one in the 80s and one in the 90s, because of the globally synchronised factors that you have at work. And remember, a three year below trend growth period is a substantial one. It is by definition more conservative than that which has been applied to the previous ones, and therefore Treasury is confident of its methodology. And as you know, they're an independent mob, they arrive at their own conclusions and they provide that to the elected Government of the day, as they did to Mr Costello in the past as well.
O'BRIEN: Your other means of returning to surplus is by promising to cap new spending growth at two per cent each year into the indefinite future, I think. Are you aware that, historically, since the 70s, and I acknowledge that includes the Whitlam years, Budget spending has grown by an average of four per cent a year? Do you understand how hard it's going to be to enforce that two per cent spending cap?
PM: Absolutely, Kerry. We've had a detailed discussion of this within the Cabinet as we were framing the final form of the Budget with the colleagues. This will impose enormous disciplines on all colleagues as we go forward to the year ahead and, if we are successful at the next election, beyond that as well. We are into a whole new period. And stepping back from it, what does it mean? A huge chunk of Australian national income has been taken out by the enormous revision to the terms of trade. We are part of a global and regional economy which has just taken an enormous whack, and as a consequence, we're going to have to adjust ourselves to doing more with less as far as government is concerned.
O'BRIEN: But also because of the spending you've committed yourself to. Just to illustrate what is meant by that two per cent spending cap: Access Economics has calculated that your new spending in the next financial year grows by 3.9 per cent. In dollar terms, that's a difference of $7 billion in one year, $15 billion in a second year and $24 billion in three years. That is a very tough discipline to meet. And I would imagine the Opposition would say, given the way you've been spending in your first 16-odd months of Government, you'd have to be suspect to being able to apply that discipline.
PM: Well I reject that proposition in its entirety, Kerry, as you would expect. And the reason we have engaged in significant investment now is for classical counter-cyclical purposes. We are in extraordinary times. Were we not injecting this activity in the economy now, given what we've faced in terms of this synchronised global downturn - 32 of the 33 advanced economies in the world suddenly contracting, eight of our 10 leading trading partners now in recession - if we weren't out there injecting this activity in the economy now, short term, finite programs - and they are - through stimulus, then the effect in terms of this recession would be deeper and harsher. That's why our performance so far in this time has been better than most other economies.
The second point relates to what you call structural and continuing investments, as opposed to the one-off investments which come off by way of stimulus and the infrastructure that we're currently investing in. When it comes to structural spending within the Budget, we've been entirely mindful of the need to offset our major structural spends, for example on pensions, by a parallel set of structural saves. And we have done that by yielding up $22 billion worth of structural saves across the forward estimates which offset for example the cost of the pension reform which comes in at about $16 billion. And then you add together the additional investments by way of in higher education research. We believe we have done the right thing there to bring about a long term structural balance in what we're seeking to do. But you're right, the disciplines will be tough.
O'BRIEN: Family First Senator Steve Fielding has accused you of looking for a trigger for a double dissolution bill by putting the alcopops tax bill back into the Senate in June after the required three month gap that would give you that trigger. Will you pledge now that you will serve your full term, that there will be no early double dissolution election?
PM: Kerry, the reason we're putting back the legislation into the Senate on alcopops is because that whole regime has proven to be effective in reducing teenage consumption in particular of that form of alcoholic beverage.
O'BRIEN: Then why not put it back into the Senate now?
PM: Hang on, I'm just explaining to you the reason for putting it back into the Parliament. And that is, we can see from the data produced by the various health authorities that it's resulted in a significant reduction in consumption of that form of alcohol, and that reduction is not explained by a take up in other forms of alcohol. There is a genuine impact here, and that's why we're committed to it.
On the broader question of our mandate to serve through this parliamentary term, I have said from the very beginning I have a fundamentally conservative approach to these things, a little like my predecessor. And that is, I believe that we were elected to serve a full three year term. However, I've got to say we've gotta ensure that the financial integrity of the Budget that we've just put before the Parliament through the Treasurer's statement last night is upheld, because it contains within it the disciplines you and I have just been discussing. So when people start cherry picking about one bit after another, you've got to be very, very careful that we do not put the financial integrity of the Budget long term at risk.
O'BRIEN: And would the same apply to your climate change legislation, your ETS legislation? As a Budget trigger? As an election trigger?
PM: Well, climate change - well, you seem to be building in some nice hypotheses into the question.
O'BRIEN: Well, you have very clearly opened up the possibility of an early election on the basis of protecting the integrity of your financial strategies.
PM: I did no such thing, Kerry. What I said was the Senate needs to be mindful of preserving the financial integrity of the Budget. It's precisely what we said prior to the last Budget being delivered. So, let me just correct precisely what I said and how you then re-rendered it.
O'BRIEN: Well, because it is in the context of a question that said, "Will you rule out an early election?," and you're not doing that.
PM: Well I've said I have a conservative approach to these things and our intention is to serve our full term. I'm equally mindful of the absolute importance of returning our budget medium term to surplus. That means implementing the list of saves we have within the current Budget that the Treasurer put to the Parliament last night. And we therefore will be adopting that approach as we seek to obtain its passage through the Senate.
You mentioned the carbon pollution reduction scheme. I think the Climate Change Minister Penny Wong has done excellent work both with the environmental groups and with the Australian Industry Group and the Business Council of Australia in getting a good, balanced package through. Australia needs that if we're going to go to Copenhagen with a good position at the end of year.
O'BRIEN: But are you prepared to protect the integrity, as you see it, of that legislation by going to an election if the Senate obstructs it?
PM: Again, my instincts on this, Kerry, as I've said throughout the time I've been Prime Minister, are conservative. That is, I want to ensure that we are serving our full term, but I'm equally mindful of the absolute importance of getting our legislative program through.
O'BRIEN: In other words, you will not rule out an early election.
PM: My intention, Kerry, as I've said time and time again, and not just in interviews with yourself, but elsewhere as well, is to serve the term for which we're elected. But we also have responsibilities -
O'BRIEN: OK.
PM: - and we'll continue to prosecute those. And I think there's one other responsibility here too, Kerry: there's a Budget reply due tomorrow night. Very interested to see what Mr Turnbull has to say on debt commitments, deficit commitments and all the questions you've been putting to me. We need to know, because that posture is reflected in what they do in the Senate, and that materially affects the ability of get our legislation through.
O'BRIEN: We're out of time. Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Good to be with you.


UHLMANN: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Oh, good morning Chris.
UHLMANN: What will the Budget deficit be next year?
PM: The Budget deficit next year we are projecting is $57.6 billion or about 4.9 per cent of GDP.
UHLMANN: Why didn't the Treasurer mention that in his speech last night?
PM: All of the outline for the deficit for the next year and the year after outlined in the Budget papers in black and white and secondly the Treasurer made specific reference to what our net debt obligations would be over time.
That is a key measure and as far as net debt is concerned, the key factor is this - that we will have a net debt which is lower than that of the major advanced economies and furthermore when our net debt reaches its peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP, it will be something like seven times less than that of the major advanced economies.
UHLMANN: Well, if you are making comparisons, Prime Minister, we are going to go from below zero to $188 billion of debt in four years. Can you name another time in Australia's history where we have accumulated debt at such a rate?
PM: Can I say, Chris, we are looking at the worst set of global economic circumstances since the Great Depression. We are in unique times. These are unique challenges.
You can either stand back and allow a full visitation of this global economic storm onto the Australian economy or you can act and intervene, and our strategy is clear.
We will act and intervene by supporting jobs, small business, as well as apprenticeships today by investing in infrastructure for tomorrow.
That underpins our Budget strategy and we believe it is right and necessary because it supports up to 200,000 jobs next year and the year after when unemployment is cutting a swathe across the rest of the world.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, you say we are in unique times but without above trend growth, the Budget won't return to surplus, will it?
PM: We have already indicated in the Budget when we project the Budget to return to surplus. We will halve the deficit in about three years and our projection is to return the Budget to surplus in six.
That is a responsible course of action to take. If again you measure our Budget deficit numbers against the major advanced economies around the world, it comes in at less than half.
Therefore we believe we are taking a responsible action but necessary action to support the economy now and  - 
UHLMANN: But it is correct to say, isn't it Prime Minister, that you basing that assumption on a return to a position where you are in surplus on the fact that we will grow above trend, aren't you? That is a large part of the assumption that you are making.
PM: The assumptions contained in the Budget papers are provided through the independent advice of the Treasury, Chris, as has occurred through the same Treasury advisors to the previous Howard and Costello government. That goes to the growth assumptions for the out-years of the Budget cycle.
On top of that, can I say that when the Treasury analysts have looked at recovery patterns in previous recessions in Australia, then of course the methodology they apply is similar.
UHLMANN: But you are saying the last two recessions are going to be like this one. You just told us that this one was unique.
PM: I'm saying that the depth and breadth of a global synchronised downturn where eight of our 10 trading partners around the world are in recession, the fact that some 32 or 33 of the major advanced economies of the world are contracting, underpins the dire circumstances of the global economy. And in response to that, what we have is a positive plan to assist with the economy now and to set us up in terms of productivity enhancing investments for the future - infrastructure, skills, the sorts of things Australia needs for the future - in contrast to the predictable levels of negativity and opportunism we see from the Liberal Party and Mr Turnbull in their reaction.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, a very important part of this though, of your plan for recovery which you outlined last night is that we will grow above trend. Now the IMF doesn't believe that the rest of the world will. Why does Treasury and if we go back to what Treasury was saying 12 months ago, they were predicting a $21 billion surplus. That has turned around for this financial year to a $35 billion deficit.
Why should we trust this kind of forecast?
PM: These Treasury advisors are independent, hard-headed individuals who have advised independently the previous Australian government as well.
I notice that the Liberal Party have attacked again the integrity of the Treasury today as they attacked the independence of the Reserve Bank last year and last week attacked the independence or the professionalism of the Australian Statistician.
The key thing is, we have a positive plan for the future. We have outlined it. We believe it is sustainable. It is the right course of action and if you look at the state of the Australian economy now relative to most of the other advanced economies, whether it is in housing construction, whether it is in retail sales or in other areas, we are doing better on average than the other economies now but we have got a long, long way to go.
UHLMANN: So Prime Minister, no more cuts will be needed? You think that you can keep a lid on spending growth and we wait for the good times to return and that is how we return out of deficit?
PM: Well, the disciplines that we have applied in this Budget, Chris, are there for all to see.
UHLMANN: But is that the path, Prime Minister?
PM: The path is as follows - $22 billion worth of structural saves in the Budget to offset structural spends and investments including the adjustment to the single aged pension and the investments we've made in universities and higher education research.
Secondly, beyond that, we have applied ourselves a two per cent real spending ceiling for the future and beyond that again to allow the taxation base to recover as the global economy recovers.
Based on that, we have a credible strategy going forward and in those who would doubt it, I would just draw your attention to what Standard and Poor's have written overnight, this is the international ratings agency and I quote them, "We believe the deficits and associated borrowings do not alter the sound profile of the country's public finances." Furthermore Standard and Poor's say that the Commonwealth Budget is consistent with Australia's AAA long term credit rating.
UHLMANN: So you are utterly confident in these figures? That we will return from deficit quite soon in fact?
PM: You know something Chris, we are in a very difficult set of global circumstances. You speak to our Treasury advisors, we are looking at circumstances which their predecessors and those before them probably didn't have to deal with. We are looking back to the 1930s for precedents.
These are difficult decisions, they are hard decisions. We believe however we have got the balance right.
UHLMANN: Precisely Prime Minister but you talk about the 1930s then you use your examples of where we are going to grow from the 1980s and the 1990s. On one hand you say the circumstances are unique and then you say we will grow out of this recession the way we did in the last two. How does that add up?
PM: How it adds up, Chris, is that we are relying on the independent forecasters within the Treasury. The Government doesn't go to the Treasury and dictate what the projections are to the future. These are generated by the Treasury and I would suggest that those are the same advisors which provided advice to Mr Howard and Mr Costello in the past as well.
I would also say that for the next two financial years that the forecast provided by the Treasury are also consistent with those provided by the Reserve Bank, though the ones you are debating are the two outer years within the forward estimates.
Overall, their advice is sound, their advice is strong, they are a great bunch of professionals and I would simply say to the Liberals again, it is far better they engage in a positive debate about alternative strategies for the country's future than predictably, once again, rolling around in negative attacks on our independent officers, opposing everything and proposing nothing.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, what was the toughest decision in this Budget?
PM: It was very tough to look at the future of the aged pension. There have been two intergenerational reports in the past which have recommended, commissioned by Mr Costello, which recommended that Australia act in terms of the ageing of our population, the cost to public finance over time.
The previous government squibbed it entirely in terms of raising the age pension age. We have acted on that but acted in a reasonable time frame to give people sufficient time to prepare.
That was difficult. A number of news outlets have attacked that today but that's a tough decision which we believe is necessary for pension sustainability in the long term.
UHLMANN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Chris.


KOCH: Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister is with us this morning. You have heard the editorials, we have heard what Wayne Swan has said. What do you think of the reaction so far? 
PM: I think it is normal that you are going to have a complete mix of reactions across the country. If you listen to one of those newspapers, they are saying we were too tough. Others are saying we're not tough enough. I believe we have got the balance right.
You know why? Because we have got to deal with the reality of this recession now, pump as much into the economy right now, but provide a sustainable Budget over the period ahead.
That is what we have tried to do. I believe we got the balance right. 
KOCH: It was a bit wimpy though wasn't it, there is all this talk of beer up, cigarettes up, all that sort of stuff (inaudible) and cutting welfare. 
PM: I don't seem to remember us saying we were going to put beer up, cigarettes up. That was one of your colleagues in the newspapers who wrote that. Can I just say, our challenge is get the balance right. 
I mean, there are a lot of families out there, pensioners who are doing it tough at the moment. We've increased the single aged pension. That had been squibbed by the previous Howard Government for 12 years. We've done that. But to make that sustainable, we have also got to build in a large number of structural savings for the future. 
And when you say squibbing hard decisions, that is $22 billion worth of savings, built in over the next four years. That is what we have done.
KOCH: It is not much though. That is not a lot really.
PM: Well you offset that against the cost of the pension, that is in the ball park of what we need for the long term to make the pension sustainable. That's what people look at when you look at whether this Budget is there as a sustainable document for Australia's long-term future. But in the meantime, what are we on about with this recession, investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow to support up to 200,000 jobs which would otherwise be lost, next year and the year after. That is a big, big effect in terms of what would otherwise be the case. 
KOCH: Pretty impressive figure, $22 billion on infrastructure, stuff like that. You've announced all that in the past. We knew that was coming. There was really nothing new in terms of extra money for infrastructure. This is always going to come along. You just filled in the details. 
PM: You know something, filling in the details David, do you think people out there on the Pacific Highway want to know whether there is going to be the additions to the road at Kempsey? They want to know whether the F3 at Branxton is going to (inaudible) They want to know, they want to know whether there is going to be a metro rail link in Melbourne. 
KOCH: It was dressed up as new money coming in. It is not really. It is not a third wave of stimulus, it was always there anyhow. 
PM: David, that's absolutely wrong. And I think you know it. You know why? The money is now committed to individual projects. It flows. Prior to that, we had it in the bank, we saved it at the last Budget to invest in infrastructure. So your question is, is this new stimulus into the economy? You betcha. 
Road, rail, port projects right across the country, as well as an investment in the national broadband corporation to lay out high speed broadband across the country. Port investments in Western Australia, investment in our universities, our hospitals, our research institutes, a whole new set of investments in terms of cancer treatment right across the country. 
These are big capital investments, $22 billion, and where you are dead wrong is that was in the bank before. We have now committed to projects and the money now flows - to stimulate the economy and support those 200,000 jobs.
KOCH: You've tweaked  -  
PM: Have I convinced you?
KOCH: No, not really  -  
PM: It's true. You know that. You know that.
KOCH: You've tweaked a bit of the welfare coming through, sure you have increased pensions  -  
PM: Tweaked? (inaudible) for years. No one touched the pension.
KOCH: Hang on, but you have tightened up the tapering rules, you are changing the pension age, a long time into the future mind you - 
PM: Something's been sqibbed for 12 years, two intergenerational reports, always been discussed in the past, no one has actually had the courage to do it. We have and we will cop political criticism for doing so.
KOCH: Ok, superannuation. The age based extra contributions, you have cut in half. Why? Does this undermine the confidence in super, a lot of people say, ‘I won't invest in super, can't trust the Government because they keep changing the rules'. 
PM: You know the people who are affected by those changes to super, you know as well as I do, right at the very upper end. Average income levels I am advised, who are making access to those sort of payments now, are something in the order of $240,000 a year. With super in the bank, about $870,000 a year. These are current advantages built in by Mr Howard and Mr Costello to advantage people right at the upper end. We don't think that is sustainable. We want to help lower and middle income Australians.
KOCH: Put my business hat on. Nice little stuff in there for small business too, with extra tax write-offs in terms of new equipment, but cracking down on private companies that pay their shareholders or owners or get them to use business assets. So, a bit of pain but some good stuff there. 
PM: Well I think this 50 per cent deduction, and to all the small business people watching your program this morning, this is really important. They are doing it tough at the moment, because of the global recession. So what we are trying to do is extend a helping hand, between now and the end of the year you have got a capital investment, the definition will be had from the tax office online, then we are going to provide you with a 50 per cent deduction.
That is a temporary investment allowance to give small business a help. I ran into a bloke the other day who had bought his bobcat for his building business, his construction business, $70,000 and he is going to get 30 per cent off that. That is one of the previous arrangements we had in place, and I think that is a practical help. 
KOCH: Well you combine the two and basically buy equipment before the end of June and it is half price. 
PM: Well I have got to say, these deductions are real. They are there to help. And also extending as we have done, the First Home Owners bonus for the next six months, keeping it as it is for three months after the middle of the year, and then staging it down until the end of the year. That helps the building industry. 
All these measures add up Kochie, to providing stimulus to the economy now, building the infrastructure for tomorrow, supporting those extra 200,000 jobs in the meantime, when the rest of the world, frankly, is in all sorts of trouble. 
KOCH: Yep, absolutely we are a lot better off than the rest of the world. Good to see you. 
PM: Hey when you talk to Joe, ask him how much debt he supports. How much deficit he supports. He's a mate of you, you put it right on him.
KOCH: He is coming in at 8:00, I will put it to him. Good to see you.


SPEERS: Prime Minister good morning. This Budget contains the biggest deficit and the biggest debt Australia's seen. A lot of Australians would be worried about it. Now you blame the global recession, but do you also accept your government's played a part in this as well?
PM: Can I say David in response to the core element of your question, which goes to how this country is viewed around the world, Standard and Poor's the credit rating agency put out a statement last night and it says as follows, I picked this up this morning , Standard and Poor's rating services said that, “The Commonwealth Budget is consistent with Australia's triple A long term credit rating”. Furthermore it says, “We believe that deficits and associated borrowings do not, do not alter the sound profile of the country's public finances.”
So you can have a political argy bargy with the Liberal party about that. That is a statement of Standard and Poor's, who have gone through the numbers of our Budget yesterday, and can I just add one other point, that when our net debt reaches its peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP, not only will it be by a country mile the lowest of all the major advanced economies, it will be so by a factor of seven. So let's put all this into context.
SPEERS: When you make that international comparison, do you also have to acknowledge that you started this global recession in a much better position. No net debt, thanks to the Howard Government; a Budget surplus, a healthy Budget surplus, better than most other countries.
PM: The infrastructure investment, upon which so much of this Budget rests, is based on the fact that in our previous Budget, we put aside more $20 billion to invest in infrastructure, to invest in rail, roads and ports across the country. What's our strategy? Nation building for recovery, that is supporting jobs, apprenticeships and small businesses today, by investing in infrastructure we need for tomorrow -
SPEERS: But again -
PM: And we've done that on the basis of what we ourselves put aside in our last Budget. So let's just pin that for what it is, and accept the fact that there's going to be all this hoo-hah about debt and deficit and the rest. But can I just say, look carefully at the credit rating agency has said this morning. These are a tough bunch of customers, Standard and Poor's, they have gone through the Budget in detail, that's their conclusion, I think we should appropriately reflect on that.
SPEERS: But again the $22 billion infrastructure program you've announced last night, more than half of that is taken from funds the Howard government set up; the communications fund, the higher education fund. Don't you owe them a bit of credit?
PM: On the question of long term investment and infrastructure, there were repeated criticisms in multiple bulletins by the Reserve Bank over a long period of time as to why were not investing in the past in infrastructure and skills - the two great capacity constraints in the Australian economy. If after 12 years there is no National Broadband Network, don't you think that is a bit of a problem? We've actually got on and done something about it, like we are getting on with direct national investment in a national clean energy initiative. Massive investments in clean coal projects across the country. We will be out there tendering for what will end up being, I am advised, the largest solar power plant in the world.
These are the sorts of infrastructure projects we need for the future, but they are about supporting jobs and business today, when we are impacted by this global recession.
SPEERS: This budget does spend as well as save, but some commentators are saying you have squibbed it with the cuts here, that you haven't taken the opportunity to really make some deep cuts. Did you think about going further with those areas of so called middle class welfare?
PM: David, together with the team, we went through all of our expenditures. And in this difficult environment where we have a double challenge - one, to provide injection of activity in the economy now to support jobs, small business and apprenticeships because of the global economic recession and its impact on employment and secondly, to then build sustainable public finances through the budget for the future. That's our double challenge. So we believe we've got that balance right, which is why you see some papers this morning saying you have gone too far, too hard and others saying we haven't gone hard enough. We believe we've got that balance right.
SPEERS: Part of those cuts though involved breaking a few promises along the way. The private health insurance rebate, superannuation. You recently said that trust is the coin of politics, has your credibility been dented at all through this?
PM: The key question of trust here is dealing with the state of our nation's public finances when a $210 billion hole has been delivered in our national tax revenue because of the global economic recession. No one can wish that away with a magic wand. It's there, it's a fact, it's the single largest write-down in Commonwealth tax receipts since the Great Depression.
This is huge. Therefore the responsible course of action is, how am I going to plan for the future on that basis and obviously it involves tough decisions for which I accept full responsibility. I don't shirk that. My ultimate responsibility is to supply the soundness of public finance for this country into the future while dealing with the reality of this global recession, the worst in three quarters of a century today.
SPEERS: But will more promises be broken if things get worse?
PM: David, we believe that we have got to wrestle with this challenge presented to us with the great global recession which now confronts us. We've got to do that in a sensible, intelligent way on a daily basis and we have been getting on with this right from the days we were confronted with the Lehmann's collapse last September/October. And can I just say this, if we are going to have some truth and honesty in this debate, I welcome a discussion and a debate on temporary borrowings for temporary deficits, I want to know where does the Liberal party, Mr Hockey, stand on how much deficit and debt they'll have.
Which of the investments in this budget would they support and oppose? Which of the savings measures, the $22 billion of savings measures, do they support or oppose? Otherwise, whatever they say in this debate is purely white noise and hot air.
SPEERS: On pensions, you are increasing the qualifying age for the aged pension. What do you say to those baby boomers, who will now some of them, have to work an extra two years before they can get the pension?
PM: Well as you know, this increase in the pension age starts to phase in from 2017 and is completed by around about 2023. This is a tough decision. It has been part and parcel of two sets of intergenerational reports which were commissioned by the previous treasurer Mr Costello, which he never had the courage to do anything about. Long term our responsibility to government is to make the pension sustainable in our public finances. We have upped the pension by $32.50 for the single aged pension because aged pensioners need that support. But we have got to make this sustainable in our public finances long term.
That's one of the reasons we've done that, together with the $22 billion worth of other saves that we have achieved across the forward estimates of the Budget.
SPEERS: A $32 increase in the single aged pension but the unemployed didn't get an increase at all, the unemployment benefits now almost $90 a week less than the single aged pension, could you live on $226 a week?
PM: It's very, very tough. I accept that. What we are seeking to do with the great challenge of unemployment which has been brought about by this global recession is to provide maximum support by way of training places across the economy, so people can use a time of temporary unemployment or partial unemployment if they are losing a couple of days a week to maintain their skills or upgrade their skills for the future.
SPEERS: They're living by the poverty line.
PM: 711,000 productivity training places we've created across the economy, and for those contemplating going to university, we are also looking at significantly expanding the number of places there by around about 50,000. These are large investments in skills. Remember the two great productivity drivers for the economy of the future, infrastructure and skills. We are doing this for the long term future of our economy, while also supporting, remember, up to 200,000 jobs by our investments in infrastructure and other actions by government for the next year and the one after.
SPEERS: The unemployed, people who can't find a job, many of them will be living below the poverty line, do you accept that?
PM: We have also, as you know, changed some of the eligibility criteria for NewStart, we have also changed the criteria for being able to access assistance from Job Services Australia. We understand how difficult this is.
I have been around the country in practically every state and most capital cities, in high unemployment areas in the last month speaking to local jobs forums, talking to people and community organisations wrestling with this on the ground.
It's tough. What we're seeking to do however is to make a difference on the ground. We've established a Local Jobs Fund and the objective there is to do what we can on the ground, grassroots up, building social enterprises, building not-for-profit organisations, building and supporting local micro businesses to make a difference with high unemployment levels on the ground.
SPEERS: Just also on the pension area, sole parents missed out, all the other pensioners get an increase, why don't sole parents deserve an increase?
PM: We have to take some tough decisions about the sustainability of our pension changes over time. The single aged pension is a critical area. We've also provided support as you know for carers, that's important as well. But my ultimate responsibility is to ensure the public finances of this country are in sound order, for the medium to long term and we are doing the right thing by the economy in the short term on the back of this recession. And again David I would say, I believe we've got that balance right.
SPEERS: Just finally Prime Minister, the International Monetary Fund keeps telling us we'll have a slow recovery from this recession, a slow global recovery, but the Treasury forecasts last night looked pretty optimistic, that in a couple of years we'll be rocketing back to 4.5 per cent growth. Are we to believe that?
PM: I noticed today that Mr Hockey on behalf of the Liberal Party attacked directly the independence of the Treasury. Last year they were attacking the independence of the Reserve Bank, last week they were attacking the independence of the Australian Bureau of Statistics. We -
SPEERS: (inaudible) out of whack with some other forecasts -
PM: Hang on. We are using the same Treasury advisors as the Howard and Costello government used as well, that's the first point.
Secondly, I'd ask you to reflect on the data coming out of previous recessions in the history of the Australian economy. What happens with an uptake of growth once you come out - it tends historically to come out sharper.
Therefore if you look at both what they have done in previous years, what has occurred in previous years, together with the consistency of the advice provided by Treasury to previous governments, we will stand by the independence of the Treasury, and I would challenge the Liberal party, that when it comes to economic policy, take the debate head on rather than attacking the independence of our core institutions, the ABS, the Treasury and the Reserve Bank.
SPEERS: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Thank you.


PRICE: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is on the line. PM good morning.
PM: Great to see you. How are you?
PRICE: I'm really well thanks, how are you shaping up after that marathon effort last night?
PM: Well there's not a lot of sleep in this business these days Steve. So it was to bed early this morning I've got to say and up fairly early as well but that's what budget times are I like I think for whoever is in Government.
PRICE: Especially in this climate. Now the centrepiece last night was the $8.5 billion on road, raid and ports right around the country. That is going to happen to protect jobs and keep the economy moving forward. Those jobs will largely though won't they be in construction. How are we going to protect jobs in industries like finance, in manufacturing, in the car plants of Australia, place like Pacific Brands?
PM: Well let's take manufacturing for example. We last year announced a new car plan for Australia. A very large long term investment in the motor vehicle industry, which goes out to 2020. It's one of the reasons why the Australian car manufacturers have had confidence going forward despite the fact that there's been such a reduction in demand for manufactured motor vehicles because of the global recession. So we've been out there with a very active industry policy supporting it.
Second thing, in the budget last night is our response to what is called the Cutler Review into innovation policy. That is a further investment by the Australian Government in the commercialisation of Australian innovation. That will also help industry on the ground as well. One final point for businesses more generally, right now we have a special temporary investment allowance of thirty percent deduction for businesses who are out there buying plant and equipment and other nominated items up until 30 June. What we've done in the budget is for small businesses, continued that on and increase it to 50 percent through to the end of the year.
All of these measures are designed to help, none of them obviously solve the problem of the global recession, the worst since the Great Depression, but we're determined to make a difference.
PRICE: Well let's hope the banks actually lend those small businesses the money to actually go out and take advantage of those changes you've made. A million unemployed is the prediction, do you accept that prediction and would you always go for bigger deficits and smaller numbers of unemployed people?
PM: Well we take the challenge of unemployment seriously, those people around Australia now who have lost their jobs, who are under threat of losing their jobs because of this global economic recession. This has all happened through no fault of their own. It's because of the implosion of global financial markets through a financial economic system globally which has got right out of control. But what's our challenge? It's to make a difference with employment on the way through.
And here is the core point. With the investments contained in this budget to supports jobs, apprenticeships and small business today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And by the other actions we've taken.
The Treasury has advised us that we are supporting more than 200,000 jobs next year and the year after, jobs which would otherwise be lost with a Government not actively engaged. Now that is a huge number of additional families who would be affected. We can't eliminate the impact and you're right unemployment is going to go up. This year and next year. But our mission is to reduce the impact and I believe that through actions such as those we've taken, building roads, rail, ports, investing in a high speed broadband network, a clean energy initiative which supports large scale clean coal projects across Australia as well as commissioning what we believe to be the single largest solar energy plant anywhere in the world. These are the sorts of things which provide investment for the future but create jobs, apprenticeships and small business opportunities today.
PRICE: We're talking to the PM from his office. The forward growth figures, they predict growth to go into the negative point five percent in 2010 and then these figures that have largely overnight been looked at and dismissed, the two years of positive growth, 4.5 percent. That's a 400 percent turnaround. Where do the Treasury officials who are predicting that say that's going to come from?
PM: Let me just say about that Steve is that the same Treasury officials advised Mr Howard and Mr Costello before as well. These are independent advisers who use their own methodologies for making these calculations and forecasts for the future. That's the first point.
PRICE: That's wildly optimistic isn't it?
PM: Well secondly if you look at the pattern of recovery from previous recessions in Australia, the recovery years have often been quite sharp and as a result, Treasury, mindful of that in the general analytical approaches they apply to forward forecasting have arrived at the conclusions that they have.
Also I would say this that their forecast growth for the next two years is in line exactly with what the Reserve Bank has said and as for the two outer years of course they are applying the methodology which they've applied in the past.
PRICE: I'll talk to the pensioners groups in a moment. You delivered both for pensioners on single pension and married couples last night. There is some talk today and I think it's light hearted but some people suggesting it might be better off for married pensioners to get divorced.
PM: The, well the-
PRICE: Maybe not just for the financial reasons.
PM: I'll let you sort that out with your listeners case by case Steve. It should be interested talkback radio to listen to.
PRICE: But are you happy you could deliver on that promise?
PM: Look this has been really tough, this costs a lot of money. This investment that we've made to lift the single aged pension by $32.50 a week combined with the other changes that we've made for carers is going to cost the Government and therefore the taxpayer something in the order of $16 billion over the next four years. Now we've had to therefore offset that with savings and therefore we've had to take some tough decisions. Tough decisions to make the payments we've made to pensioners and the other investments we've made for the future sustainable in the budget for the long term. That's why we believe we've got the balance right.
PRICE: You're going to push the retirement age out to 67.
PM: That's one of the sustainability measures that we will be embracing but we're not starting that until 2017 and it won't fully take effect until 2023, giving people a lot of time to adjust. I notice the National Seniors Association came out overnight and supported that move because it underpins the long term financial sustainability of our pension reform.
PRICE: (inaudible) 70 would be reasonable.
PM: Well they can embrace that position for the time being. Our attitude is that this is about the right landing place, it's also been done by many, many governments around the world.
PRICE: You've left the dole at $220 a week, if a million Australians are on unemployment benefits, how are they expected to live on that?
PM: Well it is very tough, I fully agree with that Steve but one of the things that we've also done is to try and assist people who are on unemployment benefits with also a temporary training allowance and a temporary training allowance is available under certain circumstances called the training supplement of $41.60 per fortnight and can be paid to job seekers in receipt of new start and the parenting payment to undertake approved training. The other thing for unemployed Australians is
PRICE: It's not much money though is it? $220.
PM: I accept this is very tough, it's very tough to live on and I accept that but what we are also trying to provide is an opportunity for Australians who through no fault of their own can't be in the workforce at this stage have that by way of an assistance to support them obtaining qualifications and up-skilling their existing certifications during a period of unemployment. But on top of that we're investing massively in 71,000 training places across the country to provide maximum flexibility for firms, for people in local communities to take up training opportunities so that this period of unemployment can be used to up skill, to obtain new skills so that when the recovery comes people come back into the workforce with a new set of skills, which hopefully in the future would also assist in making them more generally employable as well.
PRICE: I know you're limited for time, a question on Sydney and the amount of money that Sydney didn't get in the infrastructure Australia Grants announced last night. We're on air across NSW and I think everybody in country NSW will be congratulating you on your roads and ports initiatives, $91 million only for suburban Sydney, the biggest city in the country, choked by traffic with inadequate public transport, is it only $91 million in a planning project for that underground because you don't trust the NSW Labor Government to spend the money properly?
PM: Oh look as far as inner city metro rail is concerned, Steve, we've got to get our planning right and it's not just in Sydney but also Melbourne and Brisbane.
PRICE: But you put massive money into that line out to Werriby.
PM: I know but I'm just saying that in terms of the inner city metro line that we're talking about we are also investing in pre-construction feasibility study work in Sydney, Brisbane and Melbourne. We've got to make sure that, that is done and done to complete satisfaction before we commit the substantial amount of money which would be involved in a co-investment in the construction of that metro-west line.
Another thing I would say is this, we're also investing in hospital infrastructure, there is investment in the Nepean Hospital in the greater Sydney area as well and can I say this right now? Across all of Sydney, if you're looking at your local primary school, that's about to become a construction site. We are investing massively in NSW by way of our infrastructure investment, billions and billions of dollars. The last time I looked at the figures, probably in the order of some $18 billion across the state in order to invest in the schools and the social housing and in the other hard infrastructure we need for the future, while creating jobs, apprenticeships and helping small business on the way through.
Of course Steve and if I can just finish on this, to do all this you've actually got to deal with the fact that we have suffered a $210 billion tax revenue loss because of the global economic recession. We've also had to invest in this infrastructure as well to support the economy on the way through. Therefore we've had to, responsible course of action is to have temporary borrowings for a temporary deficit. We've been upfront about that, we've said how much we're going to borrow over what period of time and when we'll be returning the budget to surplus.
But here's the rub. Today less than 12 hours after the budget comes down, the Shadow treasurer Mr Hockey and the Leader of the opposition Mr Turnbull have fundamentally contradicted each other on what sort of deficit and debt they would support. Mr Hockey has said they would have a total deficit of $25 billion less than the Government, simultaneously on a different radio program Mr Turnbull was asked the same question, he said it was impossible to provide a figure. Absolute chaos and confusion on something as fundamental as temporary borrowing for a temporary deficit and for net debt for the future. It's time the Liberal Party got its act together because the future of the budget in the parliament depends on what the Liberals do in the Senate.
PRICE: Appreciate your time on such a busy day Prime Minister. Thanks a lot.
PM: Thanks very much Steve.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil, thanks for having me on the program.
MITCHELL: Well thank you for your time. I know it is a busy day.
PM: A few things on.
MITCHELL: Will you apologise to the Australian people for directly breaking the promises you made before the election?
PM: Neil I accept full responsibility for that and for not being able to fulfil some of those policy commitments.
MITCHELL: It is not that, it is the promises broken.
PM: No, no policy commitments.
MITCHELL: Promises broken Prime Minister.
PM: Policy commitments that we haven't fulfilled, I accept full responsibility for that.
MITCHELL: But don't you accept there were promises broken?
PM: Well we are talking about exactly the same thing here.
MITCHELL: No we are not. I am not talking about policies, I am talking about promises.
PM: Well I think we are talking about the same thing because  - 
MITCHELL: Superannuation tax laws, the 12 (inaudible) there will be no change to superannuation laws, one jot, one tiddle. Is that a promise?
PM: That is a policy commitment given, you have called it a promise, I think we are talking about exactly the same thing and-
MITCHELL: Well why are you avoiding the word promise? Same on the private health rebate, absolutely no change, you said, it has been changed.
PM: Exactly the same thing Neil and my response to both those points is, I accept full responsibility for not fulfilling those policy commitments and the reason for so doing is because we have copped a $210 billion collapse in tax revenue to the Australian Government.
MITCHELL: I accept that and I believe people will accept the need to do it, I am not arguing that, but why can't we just be out front and say, ‘promises have been broken, I am sorry'.
PM: I have just said it. I have accepted full responsibility for not implementing those policy commitments which  - 
MITCHELL: Are you apologising for it?
PM: Which I gave to the Australian people. Of course I accept responsibility for it.
MITCHELL: Are you apologising for it?
PM: Yes Neil, you can use whatever language you like. I accept full responsibility for it and people can make their judgements of me based on that.
MITCHELL: Are promises for the future to be believed, or not?
PM: Well Neil, when we have copped the biggest single hit in our national income and in the tax revenue to the Australian Government since the Great Depression, it has created some fundamental rethinking, not just within our Government but all Governments around the world.
It is very tough to make ends meet so we have had to make tough decisions. You are right, there is going to be a lot of complaints about a number of those undertakings not being implemented by the Australian Government. I accept responsibility for that. I have also got to put our public finances in right order for the long term.
MITCHELL: And we don't know what is ahead so therefore, why should we trust the promises in this budget?
PM: Well we are acting on the basis of what their independent advisers in the Australian Treasury have mapped out for us for the year ahead  - 
MITCHELL: Which indecently the IMF and the RBA both disagree with strongly.
PM: Well on the question of the Reserve Bank, let's take that in order. The Reserve Bank's growth forecasts for the next couple of years are identical with those of the Treasury. The Treasury then extends growth forecasts for beyond that for an additional two years.
MITCHELL: They say we will go into boom in 2011-12. 4.5 per cent growth. Nobody agrees with that Prime Minister.
PM: Well the Treasury who advise us are the same Treasury who independently provided advice to the Howard and Costello Government as well.
MITCHELL: Well they were wrong last year. Now let's assume that they are wrong again. What happens? What happens to your strategy?
PM: Well Neil I think every government around the world is wrestling with these virtually unprecedented events. If you went back 12 months and asked, would 32 of the 33 major advanced economies in the world now be, would now be contracting in economic growth, that eight of our ten trading partners would be in recession, no one was predicting that. Therefore, our own Treasury is not Robinson Crusoe on that score. Our challenge is to engage in practical positive policies now and what we are doing is investing in infrastructure for the future and supporting jobs and apprenticeships today. (inaudible)
MITCHELL: So what if we, my point is, what if we don't get the boom that Treasury is telling you, you will get. And the international Monetary Fund and Reserve Bank say you won't get, what if we don't that boom?
PM: We believe that the forecasts which are being provided by the Treasury, independently Neil, we don't tell the Treasury how to think.
MITCHELL: Well you don't tell the Reserve Bank or the IMF either but they have come up with the opposite view.
PM: The Reserve Bank's forecasts as I said before Neil are consistent with the Treasury's for the two years that they provided forecasts.
MITCHELL: Yes but (inaudible)
PM: They don't actually provide forecasts for the two out of years, on that point they are silent. Now, going back to the question of the IMF, International Monetary Fund, they also obviously have a dim view in terms of the future of the global economy, but they also point to recovery as well. Again, we rely upon the independent advice provided, but the key thing is this, given all the uncertainties out there my job for the people listening to your program this morning is to make a difference. Either stand back, do nothing and allow the full force of a global recession to knock them over or to act to provide jobs in local schools, for local construction projects, local rail projects, including a $3.2 billion investment for the regional rail network in Victoria.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister we are all agreed times are tough aren't we?
PM: Yeah, it is exceptionally tough.
MITCHELL: So why have you given yourself 65 extra staff?
PM: Well the staff across the Government  - 
MITCHELL: Prime Minister and Cabinet I am talking about.
PM: Ah you mean the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
MITCHELL: Yeah.
PM: Well the central agency of the department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, during I think Mr Howard's time but I stand to be corrected on this, did not expand its overall policy staff at the same rate as the Treasury and Department of Finance, so when it came to core challenges of the economy in particular, we made a judgement that we needed to get greater staff resources there so that is why it was necessary to do so.
MITCHELL: 65 extra staff to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, at an extra $13 million in spending. I mean everybody else is cutting, your department is not.
PM: Well when you are framing a very difficult set of economic policy decisions Neil, first of all through the economic stimulus strategy we introduced at the end of last year, secondly through the nation building and jobs plan that we unfolded in February this year, which is turning every school, primary school in the country into a construction site to help the economy, jobs and apprenticeships and in framing the budget, you need the best economic policy advice that you can get. We needed to get more policy support into the Prime Ministers' department for that purpose. It was the right thing to do. I support the decision of my Secretary in so doing.
MITCHELL: I just make the point, it doesn't look good. Everybody else is doing it tough, your department is hiring 65 extra people and spending an extra $13 million, regardless of the reason.
PM: Neil we are dealing with a $260 billion or thereabouts budget and therefore, under those circumstances, it is important to get the best policy advice possible because these are decisions which affect every person listening to your program this morning. I think your listeners would want to know that in framing a budget such as this and making the difficult decisions that we have had, in investing for infrastructure for the future to support jobs and apprenticeships today, that we get it as right as possible. Get it as right as possible for what we are doing for first home buyers, for the tax deduction arrangements of fifty per cent for small business. Getting all those things right means getting the right advice.
MITCHELL: Do you accept Prime Minister, the industry claims that the changes to superannuation could touch 450,000 Australians? That's the change to the amount that you can put in.
PM: The advice we have from the Treasury is that the affected group there will be about 1.8% of the population, there average income level of those would be affected by it is in the vicinity of 221,000 and the superannuation holdings of those most affected would be in the vicinity of about 870,000 each.
MITCHELL: So what is it, a person whose waited to get into their super, build their super until they get over the age of fifty, the kids are off the hands, they've paid off the house, they are going to put as much of their money as they can afford into super and you are telling them they can't put more than $25,000? That's going affect a lot of people.
PM: What we are saying, is that the overwhelming benefit of the arrangements brought in by Mr Howard and Costello, assisted those at the very upper income range as I said, the Treasury's advice to us is $221,000 is the average income of those most using this particular provision and secondly with superannuation holdings on average of 870,000, Our job  - 
MITCHELL: Is that right, I mean, but what about the example I used. There is couple earning perhaps earning 100,000 a year each, they are both in their fifties, they've said okay, the kids are off our hands, the house is paid off, let's fix up our super. We'll put twenty, we'll put as much as we can each, they are going to have 25 grand each, they could put all of one's salary in if you let them and live on the other one. That affects them and they're not wealthy. They're an average working family.
PM: What I am saying to you Neil is that the profile of those who make most use of the existing program, which has been out there from the Howard and Costello Government, is as I just described it and its overwhelmingly benefited people of the upper end of the income scale  - 
MITCHELL: But you agree that it'll catch people in that situation I described? Who are not the wealthy.
PM: Individual circumstances as you know Neil I can't respond to, one off case studies  - 
MITCHELL: That's the generalisation I'm giving.
PM: No, that's true, but I just can't, I mean each individual case has to be put and we would have to respond on the merits, that is in terms how it fits in with the policy. But I can say  - 
MITCHELL: I'm sorry, I don't understand, what do you mean in terms of fits in with the, it's a simple case. But then, it's a case that is happening outside this window every day.
PM: Yeah, but what I'm saying to you is that if you look at the economy as whole, our advice is that it affects 1.8 per cent of people, average income 221,000 and their superannuation holding 870,000 on average. Therefore we've got to make sure that we've provided sustainable reforms for everybody, otherwise how do you pay for things like the much needed and necessary long awaited reform to the single age pension. $32.50 a week, you can't pluck that money out of air, you've actually got to, you've actually got to provide, offsetting savings elsewhere in the system and we've done so.
MITCHELL: Do you agree there is a danger that your changes to superannuation could lead to an increase in the tax minimisation industry?
PM: Well, the tax minimisation industry Neil, as you know, I think we all know, is out there flourishing all the time seeking to find its way around any new changes to the law.
MITCHELL: But this is going to drive people towards tax minimisation, away from superannuation.
PM: Neil, tax minimisation agents and those engaged in tax avoidance, will be out there trying to find their way around these rules as they've sought to do so with previous tax rules, nothing is new under the sun as far as that's concerned and I'm sure they'll find creative ways to make the most of the current system as well.
MITCHELL: Are you also reviewing the age at which people can access their superannuation? It's now sixty, are you looking sixty seven?
PM: We have no intention of changing that, I'm not advised of any such plans.
MITCHELL: It's in the Henry Report isn't it?
PM: Well, when it comes to the Henry Report we'll consider that in its totality.
MITCHELL: But you're not, you're not considering at any stage, even in the Henry Report, you won't be considering increasing the age at which people can access their superannuation?
PM: When it comes to the contents of the Henry Report I have not received any direct briefing from the Secretary of the Treasury as to its likely final sets of recommendations, so I'm not going to enter into a discussion about what it might or mightn't contain. What I am saying is, a tough decision we've had to make in this budget is concerning the aged pension and when you become entitled to it.
There have been lots of reports in the past according to Generational Report put together by Mr Costello when he was Treasurer, pointing to the, whether we could sustain payments in our health care, our age care system, our pension system for the future given the ageing of the Australian population. All those hard decisions have been squibbed, we've taken one hard decision, which is to phase in, the aged pension entitlement age to sixty seven starting in 2017
MITCHELL: Prior, yeah and complete in 2023 isn't it?
PM: That's correct, but it's a decision which been squibbed for the last twelve years, we're taking it, it's necessary when you go out to the next ten, twenty, thirty years, in terms of the long term sustainability of payments for pensions in our economy, given the aging of the population.
MITCHELL: As the economy is starting to recover we hope in 2013 and some very optimistic forecasts are in there, your carbon tax kicks in and takes out $13 billion in 2013. That's equivalent I read today of increasing the GST to 12.5 percent and it will be passed onto people. Will you look at delaying that? Given the fragile nature of the economy.
PM: Well the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Neil, we have already put forward our proposals which are supported in the broad by the Australian Industry Group, the Business Council of Australia, as well as three as the leading conservation groups in the country, including the Climate Institute as well.
We don't know what is going to happen in the Senate and whether they will pass this thing. I hope they do because business is crying out for certainty on this and that is certainly what the BCA and the AIG have been saying.
Let's see how it goes. We have got to get this right for the future, get the balance right and I believe we have in this package because, let's face it, around the world, we are going to have other economies who are going to begin to contemplate applying punitive environmental tariffs against countries which are not lifting, which are not engaged in taking their own appropriate action to bring down greenhouse gas emissions.
MITCHELL: Why is the level of debt sustainable and when do we go back into surplus?
PM: On the question of the budget surplus, we will halve the budget deficit in three years and our plan as reflected in the budget papers is to return the budget to surplus within six. On the sustainability of the debt, can I just read you what Standard and Poors have said overnight, this is a credit rating agency, they said and I quote them, ‘we believe that deficits and associated borrowings do not alter the sound profile of the country's public finances', furthermore they say, Standard and Poors rating services said that, ‘the Commonwealth budget is consistent with Australia's triple A long term credit ratin. ‘The Triple A rating is the highest rating assigned by Standard and Poors', unquote. That is their assessment of all of the temporary borrowings contained within our budget papers.
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister, you can take assessments from anywhere.
PM: Standard and Poors in my experience Neil are a pretty tough bunch of customers, they go through these things in fine  - 
MITCHELL: Well so are Moody's, have you read Moody's assessment  - 
PM: Fine, fine detail.
MITCHELL: Moody's Investors Service, have you read their assessment?
PM: I haven't got that one in front of me.
MITCHELL: Well it is contradictory to Standard and Poors, which one do we accept, quote ‘the Australian Governments' flexibility in trying to return to a surplus will be constrained by higher interest costs' unquote, Moody's New York. Which one do we accept?
PM: The overall rating of Australia, that is a Triple A rating is reinforced by Standard and Poors today. They have said that our public finances are in strong order.
MITCHELLL: Moody's is, well not contradicting it but taking a less optimistic line. Who do we believe?
PM: When it follows, it follows that if you are going to engage in the necessary stimulus that we have done for the economy, that you are required to rely upon temporary borrowings. Secondly  - 
MITCHELL: But (inaudible) why are you quoting Standard and Poors, but rejecting Moody's?
PM: Neil if I could finish my sentence in response to your question. 30 percent or so of the temporary borrowings that we have engaged in are to fund investments in infrastructure or to provide other forms of stimulus.
70 percent comes from the fact that we have had a $210 billion collapse in Government tax revenue. And here is the core point. If we do not temporarily borrow for that, that amount of money is equal to cancelling the Commonwealth's total payments to the states each year for four years for all payments to hospitals and health.
And one other thing I just need to add on that, and it is as follows. This morning, this is one day after the Budget, Mr Hockey, the Shadow Treasurer was asked this, what would their overall debt be? His response was that it would be $25 billion less than the Government. That was what he said. Simultaneously, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Turnbull said he couldn't name a number.
Now on one day, or 12 hours after the Budget is delivered, for the alternative Government not to have a position on temporary deficit and temporary debt and their ceilings, just shows complete chaos as far as Liberal Party policy is concerned.
MITCHELL: I will ask him about it later. The Australian Medical Association and various doctor's associations say that your changes to the rebate will lead to fewer people having operations, some people not even getting operations. Waiting lists will blow out and the standard of treatment will drop. What is your answer to that?
PM: Well again I go to the analysis which is provided by the Treasury about the impact of these measures which again affect people  - 
MITCHELL: You are relying a lot on Treasury. These are people on the ground.
PM: The Treasury actually distil all this data. There is a lot of people in the Treasury who are policy offices who collect the data from across the country, they are independent advisers, they give the same advice to the Liberals when they are in power. That is exactly how it works. Their advice is that as a result of these changes to PHI, that there will be something like a 99 percent plus retention of current policy holders. Therefore I think that is a useful projection for the future.
We believe that if you mix that with the other measures we are taking by way of assisting the states with elective surgery procedures. The first time the Federal Government has done so, large investments with each of the state hospital systems, we are making a difference there as well.
MITCHELL: So if the waiting lists blow out, does the buck still stop with you as it did before the last election?
PM: What I said before on the future of the hospital system Neil, was that we would get to about midterm, we would review the outcome of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's Report on the future allocation of responsibilities in health and hospitals between Canberra and the states. We'd look at the options they put forward and then we'd frame our decision on that and if we decide based on that, that we need to move forward and take responsibility for the funding for the hospital system in the future then I said we would also seek to get that support by way of going to the people directly by way of referendum.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister what are the unemployment benefits for a single person?
PM: I don't have that figure right in front of me at the moment.
MITCHELL: Do you know what the single pensioner gets?
PM: The single pensioner based on what we have just done will actually go to disability and carer pension, single aged weekly will be $304.19
MITCHELL: Okay I think that's including, (inaudible) unemployment benefits.
PM: That's correct and you're absolutely right on that and the, that affects 1,250,000 single pensioners, then of course you have the ten dollar increase which does to the 1,030,000 pensioner couples as well as what happens with other categories of persons receiving additional assistance from us including carers who will receive an additional one off payment.
MITCHELL: Given the debt and given the need to reduce deficit are future tax cuts off the agenda?
PM: I think what we've done in this budget Neil and there's been some controversy about this, is we have implemented the commitments that we gave prior to the last election on tax cuts for this year and for the following year and for this year and the following year let me just give you one number. If you're an average family on, if you're a family with a combined income up to about $80,000, if you aggregate this year with next year's tax cuts you'll be something in the vicinity of about $1050 a year better off.
Now that's covering this year and next year. Beyond that we'll be looking very carefully what the recommendations of the Henry Commission of Inquiry into the tax system has to say to us by year's end.
MICTHELL: Final question, could this be an election budget?
PM: Well this is, these decisions Neil are really, really tough, we believe we've got a mandate from the Australian people to serve out our full term but can I say it's really important, absolutely important that this budget is delivered in its entirety. We must ensure that our actions to support the economy now and jobs through infrastructure investment also and our payments to pensions and our payments on paid parental leave are supported by the $22 billion in savings.
MITCHELL: So it's all or nothing is it?
PM: Well we believe this is an important, integrated financial document. That's why it's actually important because of the Senate for us to know. Will the Liberals support and which will they oppose of the investments we put forward in the budget, which will they support or oppose in terms of the savings, the $22 billion of savings we've made and what on earth is their confused position on temporary borrowing and temporary deficit given that their Shadow Treasurer and Leader have fundamentally split this morning on this fundamental issue.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time.
PM: Thanks mate.


KELLY: The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us on his car phone on the way to Newcastle. Prime Minister thanks for being with us.
PM: Good to be with you Fran.
KELLY: Prime Minister, you've got your Budget on the table. What's the challenge now for the Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull in his Budget Reply speech tonight?
PM: Well very, in one simply sentence it's this Fran: if Mr Turnbull doesn't nominate any extra savings tonight in his Budget Reply, then he's therefore personally endorsing every single cent of temporary borrowing and temporary deficit contained in the current Budget. You cannot have it both ways. You cannot criticise the current Budget for borrowing too much unless you identify exactly that amount of savings that you're going to put forward or alternative taxes that you're going to raise. It's as basic as that.
KELLY: It's a bit rough though isn't it? I mean an Opposition doesn't have access to all the Treasury modelling and all the policy detail the Government has. Why should the Opposition have to say what it's policies would cost exactly? It's not in Government  -  you are.
PM: The Opposition for a considerable period of time have engaged in an entirely false attack in relation to temporary deficit and temporary borrowing. We have suffered a $210 billion revenue collapse, we have put forward specific investments in addition to provide stimulus to the economy. Mr Hockey the Shadow Treasurer yesterday said that the Liberal Party was committed to $25 billion less by way of temporary borrowing and temporary deficit than the Government. The challenge therefore is to identify that amount. That's the requirement in (inaudible)
KELLY: Prime Minister we're having a bit of trouble with your car phone. Oh  -  we're having a lot of trouble with that car phone. We'll try and get the Prime Minister back on the line.
....
KELLY: Thanks very much we've got you back.
PM: We're live on air now I presume now Fran?
KELLY: We are live on air.
PM: Okay that's good.
KELLY: The dangers of car phones. Prime Minister, the growth forecasts in your budget have been under serious question since they were released the other night. Described as heroic, miraculous even. Do you have a say in the growth forecasts the Treasury delivers? Is there one figure you get from Treasury or do you get a series of figures?
PM: These are independently nominated by the Treasury. It would be foolhardy for any Government to reject the independent advice of the Treasury on something as fundamental as the forward growth forecasts, whether they are on the upside or on the downside. I mean the Treasury -
KELLY: So you get one figure from Treasury?
PM: Treasury provide independent advice to the Government and it is the responsibility therefore of the elected Government to work within those parameters. That's the right way in which you do public policy.
I noticed that Mr Turnbull for example when any time he dislikes the numbers put forward independently, whether they are by the Treasury, or by the Australian statistician through the ABS or elsewhere, what then happens is the Liberal Party attacks those independent statutory office holders. It's quite wrong.
We work within the parameters that we're given by the professional and independent economists. That's the right way to do things.
KELLY: Can you understand why Australians though might be sceptical or confused by these optimistic forecasts because you've been describing the downturn in catastrophic terms for months, as driving a wrecking ball through government revenues. But now you're telling us that Australia's recession will be relatively mild and in two years we're going to zoom back to four and a half per cent growth?
PM: Can I say this Fran, first of all the impact of the Government's investments through its investment in short term, medium term, long term stimulus, medium term infrastructure, long term infrastructure, obviously that has a material effect on our economic performance in the economic, in the years immediately ahead, that is this year and next year.
However when we go to the outer years, of course it will be a different set of circumstances. Let us simply go to the basic fact here. First of all, when it comes to the period of which Australia will be engaged in below trend growth, in the previous recessions that was essentially a period of about one year to two years.
Now what we're projecting ahead is three years because three years is of course a conservative estimate in relation to the debt and intensity of the current recession. That's the right way to go. Therefore, Treasury's assumptions on that basis are conservative. It's the right way to approach it.
KELLY: Okay our panel of experts yesterday said that the budget parameters were pretty right for the first year, can't cut too sharply in the first year but there will need to be stronger cuts made later on. If growth starts to improve towards the end of the year, if things start picking up, do you have a list a list of savings (inaudible) and cuts ready to go when the budget can sustain it? Can we expect perhaps a tougher mini budget towards the end of the year, November-December.
PM: Well Fran -
KELLY: Some of these cuts that the experts are calling for.
PM: Well Fran the truth is the Government in embracing this Budget has two challenges. One, to provide stimulus to the economy at a time of global economic recession now and into the short term and secondly then to return the Budget to surplus in the medium term. They are our two challenges.
Therefore what we have done is already embrace $22 billion worth of savings, added to the ones we did last year of some $33 billion worth of savings. $55 billion worth of savings compared with that achieved by Mr Costello in his last two Budgets of only 7.5 billion.
We take saving seriously. This will be an ongoing challenge for the Government. We've set ourselves a fundamental discipline in terms of maintaining real expenditure growth once the recovery comes to, within two per cent real expenditure growth, that's the right way to go. It's a discipline for Government, we intend to adhere to it.
KELLY: It sure is a discipline. Let's go to the politics -
PM: Well Fran, we are in difficult times and if you're required to act in the national interest, in these extraordinary economic circumstances, the complexity of the budget task is great. As I said it's to provide stimulus in order to save and support jobs now and our measures are designed to support 200,000 jobs which would otherwise be thrown onto the unemployment pile for the following year and the one after that. That's why we're doing this in the short term, in the medium term the discipline we have to then have through the Budget is to restore the Budget to surplus. These are our two challenges, that's what we're addressing.
KELLY: Well you left the option of a double dissolution election open if the Senate blocks this Budget but yesterday the Treasurer Wayne Swan said the very last thing the economy in this country needs right now is an election. Do you agree with that? And will you rule out going early in the interests of the economy?
PM: Fran, I was absolutely clear cut about this in my interview with Kerry O'Brien on the ABC last night. First of all the fact is that the Australian Labor Party does not control the numbers in the Senate. The Liberal Party and the National Party together have a far greater number of seats than the Government in the Senate, that's simply a political fact.
Secondly, as I said last night, my instincts on these questions are always conservative and that is that it's important for the Government to serve its full term. In fact I said my instincts on these questions are very similar to my predecessor.
The bottom line is this - nobody in this country wants to see a double dissolution election. It is not in the interests of the economy for that to occur, it is not in the interests of the country for that to occur. I don't want that to occur.
But at the end of the day let us be very clear about the fact that the Government does not control the numbers in the Senate. These are effectively controlled by the Liberal and the National Party. That's why it comes back to the question you asked me before which is what attitude will Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Party and Mr Costello who will soon replace Mr Turnbull take on the key question of whether they support or oppose every element contained within the Budget because if they fail to do so they must identify how they would alternatively fund the public finances of the Commonwealth.
KELLY: But Prime Minister, your line in the sand surely cannot be that you expect your Budget to go through in toto as it is. No Government gets that.
PM: Can I say to you Fran that the Budget is an integrated financial document. We have put forward in it as I mentioned to you before some $22 billion worth of structural savings which go out over quite a large number of years.
The objective is to return the Budget to surplus for the medium term and that's why it is an integrated document. It is important therefore that the Senate in its deliberations on the Budget document understands the financial integrity of what we are putting forward and secondly understands the absolute imperative of returning the Budget to surplus in the medium term.
That is the right thing to, just as it is the right thing to do now to borrow temporarily in order to provide stimulus to the economy and to offset this extraordinary $210 billion collapse in public revenues because of the change in the taxation receipts coming into the Australian Taxation Office.
KELLY: Sure, and every government always says that, you know this has got to be passed in total, it's an integrated document but every Budget gets changed. Is, what's your bottom line, what would have to happen for you to throw it all up in the air and say okay we're going to go early?
PM: Well can I just say it's a very onerous responsibility which Mr Turnbull and Mr Costello when he replaces him have, which is to be mindful of the responsibilities in the Senate in ensuring that we have a proper fiscal strategy going forward to the medium term to returning the Budget to surplus.
As I said, we have a strategy clearly outlined for doing so within the Budget papers which is entirely geared to where we are in the economy now. Stimulus now, returning the Budget to surplus in the medium term. That strategy is there. If you start and pick and choose and undermine it, then of course you begin to threaten that overall strategy.
I therefore would suggest to Mr Turnbull as he approaches his Budget Reply tonight - again, if he doesn't nominate any extra savings tonight that he is personally endorsing every single cent of temporary borrowing or temporary deficit in the current Budget. You can't have this both ways.
KELLY: Prime Minister you've admitted in the past that you couldn't live on the single pension. When NewStart is now $100 a week less after the boost to the pension in the budget, $100 a week less for the unemployed than aged pensioners, could you live on the dole?
PM: Well as I've said in multiple interviews yesterday Fran, this is very, very difficult and it is very, very tough. One of the things the Government has done is to provide a temporary training supplement for various categories of people in terms of obtaining further training given the circumstances in which they find themselves through unemployment.
I understand that, I accept that and the other thing that the Deputy Prime Minister has done is provide a very large number of additional productivity training places for the economy as well.
We've also of course made the eligibility for NewStart easier than it was before. We've also changed the eligibility criteria for access Job Services Australia to assist people in finding alternative employment. These are all measures designed to help but the bottom line fact is absolutely as you describe it, it is very, very tough.
KELLY: It's ten to eight on Breakfast, the Prime Minister joins us this morning. The Prime Minister the emissions trading scheme, the ETS goes into the parliament today, the omens you'd have to say aren't good. Senator Xenophon says your model is unfixable, the Greens want a much higher target, possibly as high as 40 per cent, your only option is to cut a deal with Malcolm Turnbull. You're the Prime Minister. Why don't you sit down with him and make this happen?
PM: First and foremost Mr Turnbull has had about six different positions on the question of the response to climate change and in particular the contents of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. First of all he said that they would wait to form their policy until the Government released its Green Paper, we've done that, then our White Paper, we've done that, our draft legislation, we've done that, the Treasury modelling, we've done that. Then they said they'd commission their own independent examination through someone called Mr Pearce, they've done that. Now, once we've produced draft legislation on the eve of putting it into the parliament, what he then says is it now must be sent off to the Productivity Commission for a further examination.
The bottom line is Mr Turnbull is not serious. What are the politics here? He's frightened of the right wing of his party, led by Mr Costello who have always been climate change sceptics and therefore he is simply caught like a rabbit in the spotlight.
So you ask about the content of negotiations. Senator Wong, the Climate Change Minister is currently negotiating with all parties, both the minor parties as well as the Liberal and the National Party. But when you're dealing with the Libs and Nats you're dealing with three different spokesmen who have three different ideas.
KELLY: And Prime Minister just finally on another matter. Rugby League is again in the headlines over another sex scandal, this time focused on Matthew Johns. Does more have to be done in our sporting team culture when it comes to empathy and respect for women?
PM: It's very important for all leaders of sporting organisations, all sporting clubs and all sporting teams in everything they do to show proper respect for women.
This is a very difficult matter, it is a very sensitive matter but the bottom line concern here is to ensure that through players' behaviour, through sporting coaches' behaviour, through sporting teams' behaviour we take every reasonable and practical step to underline the absolute importance of treating women with respect.
KELLY: And just very briefly, does more need to be done on the school level at that? You're already looking at teen drinking, what about this issue?
PM: Well the challenge of treating women with respect and more broadly when it comes to something that I have spoken about a lot in recent times which is the challenge of violence against women and violence against children, we have a deep responsibility as a nation to ensure that the best possible attitudes are instilled into our young people and young men in particular at the earliest stages of their school education.
We are actively engaged through work led by Tanya Plibersek, the Minister for the Status of Women, in doing what we can with the school systems in this country on this question more broadly. Also through other programs and some of which of course will involve sporting organisations across the country as well.
This will be a long process, a difficult process but I think it's very important that as a country and as a community we seek to change deep level attitudes on these questions which have been a problem for our country going back for a long time.
I'm talking here about the undeclared levels of violence in our community towards women and we need to turn the corner on this. It is important that we do so as a nation. We cannot tolerate some of the statistics that we continue to be provided with about what is happening out there to women and children. It's time we actually turn the corner.
KELLY: Prime Minister thank you for joining us on Breakfast.
PM: Thanks very much.


This Government unapologetically is in the building business and the reason for that is as follows. We are committed to supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure our nation needs for tomorrow. Investing in rail, in road, in ports, investing in school modernisation, in our hospitals, investing in solar energy, investing in the things that will make a difference for the future. 
We are currently also investing in the single biggest school modernisation program Australia has ever seen. And the whole purpose is this: supporting jobs, apprenticeships and small business today while investing in the rail, the road, the ports, the broadband we need for tomorrow.
The practicality of it now confronts us. Rolling up our sleeves and getting on with projects like this. This is a good project. What we're investing in here is more than a billion dollars in the Australian rail freight corporation nationwide to make sure than we are boosting the productivity of this economy.
Look at this project here - $135 million to put in a third track which will have the result of increasing by about one third the amount of coal that we can get through to the Port of Newcastle. That's practical stuff. The federal Government in the past said ‘all too hard, not our problem, go away'. We've decided to roll up our sleeves and do something about it and it's happening. That's what is happening behind us. Making a difference with jobs and small business and apprenticeships now while adding to the rail infrastructure our economy needs for tomorrow.
Secondly, we're here today also to announce our joint funding, our joint investment in what will become the Hunter Valley Expressway. This is a $1.65 billion project where the Premier of NSW and the Australian Government are joint investors. This will be a good project as well. Investing in jobs, in business and in apprenticeships today while supporting the road infrastructure our community and our nation need for the future.
This particular road project, the Hunter Valley expressway is going to be good for this local community, it is going to be good for the State of NSW because it is going to reduce the travelling time between Sydney and Newcastle by nearly half an hour and it's good for the nation because of what it will do in terms of traffic on the Pacific and traffic on the New England. This is all part of our productivity agenda for the future, as well as being an important investment in this local community as well.
Here we have two practical rail and road projects which together are worth getting close to $2 billion. Investments in the future infrastructure we need and supporting jobs and business on the way through. That's the practical response to the challenges that we face with the economy today.
The alternative is, as our opponents did federally in the 2004 election, was promise to fund something called this F3 to Branxton and do nothing. That's what happened. A hollow promise. We're out here, we've committed our money towards doing this Hunter Valley Expressway, we're going to get on with the business of doing it.
Nation building, infrastructure, jobs and apprenticeships, helping business on the way through and doing so responsibly through temporary borrowing for a temporary deficit for the future. That's what leadership requires today, given the extraordinary impact of the global economic recession.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's my privilege to be here today. But this co-investment in the Hunter Valley Expressway would not be possible in the absence of partnership with the NSW Government.
And with those remarks it gives me great pleasure to invite the Premier of NSW to make some remarks.


The Prime Minister and the Premier of NSW today welcomed the announcement of funding for the new $1.65 billion Hunter Expressway between the F3 and the New England Highway near Branxton.
The new 40 kilometre dual carriageway will:
     * cut travel times between Newcastle and the Hunter by 28 minutes;
     * relieve congestion between Newcastle and the towns of Thornton, Maitland, and Rutherford, with forecast reductions in traffic of 15,000 to 30,000 vehicles per day from their level of 60,000 vehicles now;
     * support the growing Hunter region, where traffic is forecast to grow around four per cent a year; and
     * meet the growing freight task of the region, which is forecast to increase 30 per cent in coming years.
Construction will occur between 2010 and 2013 and support up to 800 direct local jobs, boosting economic activity in the Hunter region during the global economic recession.
The Federal Government will invest $1.45 billion and the NSW Government will invest $200 million in this important project.
This is part of the Federal Government's $22 billion infrastructure investment in the 2009-10 Budget, which includes transport, energy, broadband, universities, and health care.
The Prime Minister and Premier made the announcement at the turning of the first sod on the $134 million Minimbah Third Rail Track project, one of six projects delivered in the Hunter by the Australian Track and Rail Corporation as part of the Rudd Government's December 2008 Nation Building statement.
The project is a 10.8km new rail track that will support up to 150 jobs during construction.
Together, the Hunter Valley Rail Network improvements will lift coal capacity from around 107 million tonnes per annum to 165 million tonnes per annum to meet rising demand.
The Australian Government's nation-building initiatives include $11.6 billion in road and rail infrastructure in New South Wales.


PM: Any questions and then I'll, you all better be terrified by me hopping into the earth moving equipment, so I suggest you stand back a safe distance and just count your blessings and pray.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Expressway project is to commence next year so we would hope to have it up and running obviously as soon as possible. This is a massive investment; $1.65 billion. We've got to make sure that it's all ready and primed to go but it will be underway as soon as possible, that's the scheduled commencement date.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why was this project more important than road and rail projects in Sydney?
PM: Well what we've done through the Infrastructure Australia process is go through all of the projects which have been put forward from the various States across the country, all those which have been supported through Infrastructure Australia in the case of NSW have been funded. We're also engaged in some solid pre-construction analysis and work when it comes to Sydney Metro. That's got a little way to go and we intend to get on with the business.
Let me just run through a few numbers with you by the way. I've seen some reporting on this in recent days. We are currently investing through this Budget by the way $8.6 billion in transport infrastructure under the nation building program, a billion dollars through the ARTC, one of the projects we're seeing here today. $2.2 billion also now for the Hunter Expressway, the Kempsey bypass and of course the pre-construction work on the West Metro. Put that together that's $11.6 billion in the budget on transport infrastructure for NSW which represents about 32 per cent of what we are investing in transport infrastructure nationwide. That underlines the Premier's point, this is partnership and investment in the critical transport needs of NSW.
Second point I'd make is this, look at the overall investment which the Government has made by way of stimulus nation-wide to help us through the global recession. There is currently something like $21 billion worth of investment coming into the State of NSW on the back of what the Government has done through its various anti-recession measures.
This therefore again underlines the point that we are partners in the future with the NSW Government, working together, practical projects like this which spread right across the State in every category of infrastructure. We intend to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: As a proud Queenslander, do you have (inaudible) dealing with politicians in NSW.
PM: You know something? I have a great affection for our friends in NSW because we share the same religion and it's called rugby league so there you go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We are, one of my predecessors once said that we're all part of the same tribe. This is important work for the nation. Go back to the projects you're talking about. What the nation benefits from here is extra through-put of exports into the Port of Newcastle and here you have work by us here on the ARTC, here you have work by the NSW Government to the Port of Newcastle itself. The objective is to push up coal through-put which boosts our national exports.
Secondly, the investment of $1.65 billion in this important piece of road infrastructure, it also boosts economic efficiency for the nation. The Pacific is a critical corridor for the national economy. That is why we are investing $1.65 billion here. That is why we are also investing in the Kempsey by-pass. Why? We want to make sure that this becomes a critical part of an N1 transport artery from Melbourne through NSW, through Brisbane and through to Cairns.
That's got to be our vision. Building the road network that Australia needs for the future to turbo-charge our economy. Good for the state of NSW and therefore good for the nation of Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's why we're working on this critical piece of pre-construction work on the Sydney West Metro and this is a very large prospective project. We've got to make sure all the pre-construction work is done, that's why we're co-investing with NSW, from memory, $90 million to make sure that that work is done.
This is necessary to do and we look forward to being partners with NSW in future infrastructure projects. One step at a time, one building block at a time. Laying the foundations for future infrastructure development in NSW, but you know something? The Budget itself is a nation building Budget for recovery. That's what we're on about.
You can either sit back and carp and criticise and complain and do nothing about the global economic recession or you can get out there and create and support jobs, support small business for today and invest in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's our strategy, I don't see what the alternative strategy is.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've already spoken about this, this morning on a radio interview. It's very plain that it's very important for sporting organisations across the country to show leadership in demonstrating proper respect towards women and therefore the decisions which have been recently taken, I fully support.
JOURNALIST: Just on projects for the Hunter -
PM: By the way, in the Hunter do you know we are sinking about a billion dollars to the ARTC into the Hunter? That is a huge investment. A huge investment anyway, go to your next question. What else would you like?
JOURNALIST: The State Government has a report from the Hunter Development Corporation. When are we going to see that? (inaudible)
REES: I'll take that one. The issue here for those who are unfamiliar necessarily with the rail issue in Hunter City proper is whether or not the most extreme end of the railway line gets closed in order to open up that end of town.
Now there is a report, it's been prepared, it's currently being assessed by the relevant Minister but can I say this: that's a project that has attracted a great deal of controversy over recent years and when I was in the Hunter recently for a community cabinet I took the opportunity to speak directly with 25 people who were having their lunch in the mall in Newcastle. And you know what? 20 out of those 25 said that project has to go ahead. And they didn't just say ‘oh I think it might be a good idea', they said ‘it has to happen', they were absolutely vehement about it. So I think the view on the ground is very clear on that, notwithstanding some of the strong opinions around the place.
Can I just say in response to your earlier question around congestion. Look I was reminded, flying up here this morning of just how stunning a city Sydney is and we've recently tipped over seven million people living in Sydney. A third of Australia's population lives in Sydney. Now that does mean on occasion there are some challenges but you know what? Rail patronage has gone up five per cent in the last year. Patronage on our buses has gone up three per cent in the last year.
In the last two years alone, we've added another 385 bus services in and around Sydney. We are doing a great deal on public transport, we're doing a great deal on roads but the reason we have to do it is because Sydney is such a great city. I am sick to death as are many of the people I speak to, of people talking Sydney down. I'm sick of it and I won't have it. It's the greatest city in the world and I will shout that uphill and down dale. Seven million Australians choosing to live in Sydney because it is one of the greatest cities in the world. And you know what? More consuls-general in Sydney city than any other city in the world and I think that speaks volumes.


The Prime Minister and the Minister for Infrastructure today welcomed the announcement of the $613 million duplication of the Cooroy to Curra (Section B) stretch of the Bruce Highway.
This project will provide motorists with a four-lane divided carriageway that improves safety and reduces congestion for the 17,000 vehicles travelling on the road each day.
The Bruce Highway has crash rates 40 per cent higher than other roads on the National Network.
On the Cooroy to Curra Section B alone, 13 people have lost their lives since July 2002.
Traffic volumes on the highway continue to grow at four to five per cent each year.
Construction will occur between 2009 and 2012 and support up to 650 direct local jobs, boosting economic activity in the local region during the global economic recession.
The Federal Government will invest $488 million and the Queensland Government will invest $125 million in this important project.
This investment is part of the Federal Government's $22 billion infrastructure investment in the 2009-10 Budget, which includes transport, energy, broadband, universities, and health care.
The Australian Government's nation-building initiatives include $8.6 billion in road and rail infrastructure in Queensland. 


ALBANESE: Okay well what a beautiful day to be here on the Sunshine Coast. I must say as a Sydneysider I am a bit jealous of the upbringing that the Prime Minister and the Treasurer got growing up in this magnificent region of Australia.
I want to also acknowledge here today one person in particular and that is Mr Wayne Sachs who is the chief ambo for the Gympie region. A couple of months ago Mr Sachs made an appointment with my office, paid out of his own pocket to fly to Canberra to talk with me as the Infrastructure Minister about the real human tragedies that were occurring on this section of road.
He certainly put his case very strongly and in the lead-up to the Budget the Government of course had a responsibility to listen to economists but we also had a responsibility to listen to people in the community. And I listened to Mr Sachs, I told the Prime Minister and the Treasurer about the discussions that we'd had. And in the Budget on Tuesday night we were able to announce $488 million from the Commonwealth, together with $125 million from the Queensland Government means that $613 million will be available for the construction of the Cooroy to Curra Section B, the most dangerous section of this particular part of the Bruce Highway.
Construction will commence in August. This 12 kilometre section is expected to be completed by 2012. The $200 million which we've allocated during the federal election campaign and was included in the nation building program that we announced on Tuesday night will go towards planning, land acquisition and other activity to ensure that we can get up to the pre-construction phase for Section A of this road.
I'm very pleased that we're able to be here today. This is a critical piece of infrastructure, not just in terms of the job creation that will occur in the short term but the long term benefit for the nation. And I'd now ask the Prime Minister to make some comments.
PM: Thanks Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and Wayne Sachs, local ambo, and someone's mobile phone. Is this yours mate? It's very musical.
It's great to be back in Queensland and it's great to be back in Queensland after this Budget. This Budget, in response to the global recession, is about supporting jobs and small business today to invest in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Infrastructure like rail, road, ports, broadband, hospitals, schools, solar energy - why? Because we want to have a nation building strategy for recovery. That's what the Government is on about through this Budget.
And where the rubber literally hits the road is when we actually come to important road projects like this. This project has languished for far too long, far too long. It's time that we acted on important critical areas of road infrastructure like this.
How does it fit into our national plan? What we're committed to into the future is to build a new N1, a national road network from Melbourne through to Cairns, through Sydney, through Brisbane, through to Cairns. Because that's the sort of road infrastructure network we need for the future.
Of course this has to be done one building block at a time and what we're looking at here today is a further building block because what it does is it improves the economic efficiency of Australia but in critical areas of road like this it also deals with challenges of road safety.
And that's why I would also endorse the remarks just made now by Minister Albanese about the visit to Canberra by Wayne Sachs and briefing the Minister personally on the depth of road tragedy which has occurred on this stretch of road as it is at the moment.
This Labor Government in Australia is committed to investing where infrastructure needs are greatest across the country, irrespective of what is the local, political representation. This part of Australia where I grew up, since the war I don't think has ever had a Labor member of parliament but I can I say that doesn't stand in our road for doing the right thing by this region. It's a necessary thing to do. Necessary for economic efficiency, necessary also to act effectively on reducing the road toll with critical investments like this.
Before taking your questions, if I could ask Wayne to make some remarks as well.
SACHS: Well thanks Prime Minister, Treasurer and Infrastructure Minister Albanese. First of all I'd like to say thank you so much to the Minister for allowing audience with him in February because I realise his time is very valuable and that was just the first part of it. Secondly I would like to thank him for listening so intently and taking it on board so seriously and thirdly I'd like to congratulate the Federal Labor Government for acting so swiftly in moving this project forward.
This 12 kilometres of road infrastructure that is going to start very shortly in August is the worst, probably the most dangerous stretch of road in the country and I applaud the Government for taking their decision. It's going to save a lot of lives and I think you could all justly be very very proud of yourselves as politicians and I thank you for it and if there is anything else that I can do in the future to help in any way shape or form, please let me know.
PM: Over to you folks for some questions. But just before I do I might quote from what I understand is in the local paper today on this particular project, I saw it before, The Sunshine Coast Daily.
And its editorial says as follows, is someone from the Daily here? It says, ‘If ever there was a project worthy of nation building status as part of the Government's economic stimulus package, it is this one. But this is not just about nation building, it is about rebuilding our faith in our community, that their government, whether state or federal will do something about a situation which is causing untold heartache to this region.'
Well the Government has heard that message and we have decided to act. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Just a clarification for the on the road issue, Mr Swan the Budget (inaudible) said 25 kilometres and now it is 12, which is the right figure?
SWAN: It is 12.
ALBANESE: Section B of the road is 12 kilometres. There is four sections to the road, section B will be completed with $613 million, then $200 million allocated for Section A, or reallocated from the Commonwealth, for Section A, and we are having further discussions with the Queensland Government about those issues.
PM: So this connection through to Gympie occurs in stages, as those of you familiar with the local debate would know. And this is an important section of the road to do and of course the remainder lies ahead of us.
Can I just also draw your attention to what the local representatives of Main Roads told us before. Work here will start in August. We are looking at a three year project worth $613 million which will support 1,600 direct and indirect jobs. That is important for the economy, it is important for transport efficiency and it is important also for road safety.
This is about supporting jobs and small business today by investing in infrastructure we need for tomorrow. As Main Roads have just told me also, three separate contracts here. One for cutting, one for the temporary deviation and the other for finishing.
And each of those will generate all sorts of work for subcontractors here and elsewhere in Queensland.
JOURNALIST: How dangerous is this section of the road as it exists?
PM: Well I am advised and I think we heard something of this in the Parliament yesterday, that this has been classified as one of the most dangerous stretches of highway in the country.
And there has been, as Wayne's briefing to the minister has indicated, untold tragedy here. Of course, there are tragedies on many roads across the country. But the statistics here are confronting. So putting that together with the need to build an efficient, national highway network, our proposed N1 for the future, those two arguments came together.
JOURNALIST: How important was Mr Sachs (inaudible)?
PM: Well the Minister came and spoke to me afterwards. I mean, I've not met Wayne in my life, at least I don't think I have mate, even though I think we grew up on, sort of, neighbouring parts of the world. But Albo came and spoke to me and said he just heard from the local ambos about what it was like up here.
And then a few pennies dropped as well as to what stretch was being talked about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No listen, we have been through a process of proper national infrastructure planning. We believe it is important to get the efficiency of our N1 network right long term. There's an added argument here, which is why it is being considered separately, and that is, of course it being classified as one of the most dangerous stretches of road in the country. The two arguments come together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on another matter, the Opposition Leader seems to have hardened his opposition to key Budget measures, are we looking at a double dissolution by the end of the year?
PM: Mr Turnbull has been out selling his Budget reply today. I just note one thing is that despite all the bluster on debt and deficit, by indicating that he will be voting for the Budget, he has confirmed that the Liberals' debt and deficit strategy is not one cent less than the Government's and will not be repaid one day earlier than the Government's.
That is the bottom line, despite all the bluster. The second point is this: there has been a, I think quite stunning statement by the Liberal leader this morning.
The Liberal leader this morning has gone out into the media and said the following, selling his position on private health insurance. He has said, ‘In an ideal world, every Australian would have private health insurance, that would be the best outcome'.
Now I believe that we have had a long standing, I thought, bipartisan consensus in Australia that we have a double system of public health and private health.
And it has served Australians reasonably well. Today the Liberal Party have signalled and revealed that they are moving away from that bipartisan position. Mr Turnbull for the first time has said that all Australians should have private health insurance.
That means the end of universal public insurance through Medicare.
I am stunned that he has introduced this into the policy and political debate of our country. What we have here I think is something as radical as WorkChoices. You see what the Liberals are standing for as they approach the next election is the reintroduction of WorkChoices and now by this stunning statement today, the abandonment of universal public health insurance through Medicare. This is an extraordinary development.
JOURNALIST: You must admit though Prime Minister, the more people off the public system and on the private system takes the pressure off the public system?
PM: Well the modelling which has occurred in relation to the changes we propose indicate that about 99 per cent plus people would retain their private health insurance.
But the key thing is this, is that up until today there has been no debate about the abolition of Medicare. What Mr Turnbull and the Liberals have indicated today is that Medicare does not have a future, under a future Liberal government.
So bring back WorkChoices - that's strategy one, and strategy two is the abolition of Medicare. This is a stunning statement. I did not believe I would hear this from a Liberal leader, I thought this debate was put to bed a decade and a half ago.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) an election issue would you take him on?
PM: Well if Mr Turnbull is going out there and saying, as he has this morning, all Australians should have private health insurance and that is a fair rendering of what he has said here, that would be the best outcome, every Australian would have private health insurance. If Mr Turnbull is saying that he wants all Australians to have private health insurance, that means the abolition of Medicare and universal public insurance. There is a clear dividing line between us and the Liberals on Medicare, and us and the Liberals of course on WorkChoices.
JOURNALIST: Would you agree to Mr Turnbull, his offer to keep private health insurance rebate un-means tested?
PM: Our position on those matters were made absolutely clear cut by the Treasurer in his statement in the Budget on Tuesday night.
JOURNALIST: What about Mr Turnbull's idea of increasing tax on cigarettes (inaudible)
PM: All matters to do with tax as the Assistant Treasurer said last night are being dealt with by the Henry Review and they will be concluded later in the year.
JOURNALIST: Would you agree to Nick Xenophon's call for a Senate inquiry into the rebate?
PM: I haven't heard that particular call.
Back on this project here, can I just say this about the investment. Roads, rail, ports, broadband, solar energy, hospitals, the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, this government is at work.
We're out here making a difference with the impact on Australia, on Queensland, on the Sunshine Coast arising from this global recession. And I find it remarkable, that in an area such as this, it has taken a Labor government to deliver a major road project like this, when the National party have been represented here for decades and decades and decades, and have ignored their own backyard. Including by a local member who was himself in the past, I'm advised, the Transport Minister  -  extraordinary.
Can I also say in terms of Queensland more broadly that the investment we are making here in terms of overall stimulus is significant. Across the state of Queensland we are making huge investments in all categories of infrastructure.
Total infrastructure investment here is $11.7 billion, that's stimulus investment of which $6.8 billion is through infrastructure. In Wide Bay total stimulus investment of $345.9 million.
If you are looking at how do you make a difference to all those subbies, tradies and others looking for jobs and work opportunities around the Sunshine Coast and around Queensland at the moment, we are out there powering investment in here. Why? To support jobs, small business and apprenticeships today, whilst still building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. We've got to hit the road.
JOURNALIST: Any comment on the death of Bud Tingwell?
PM: On Bud Tingwell, I just heard this very sad news about Bud. Bud Tingwell is in every sense an Australian legend. An older generation knowing him through Homicide, a newer generation of Australians knowing him as the battler's friend in The Castle. He is so much part of the Australian character, as it has been shaped, and as it will evolve in the future. Great Australian and all Australians are sad to see his passing.


Bud Tingwell was in every sense an Australian legend.
Older generations knew him through Homicide. A newer generation knew him as the battlers' friend in The Castle.
Since his first film in 1946, he was a constant presence on our cinema and television screens, and behind the scenes as a director and producer for series like Cop Shop, The Sullivans and Prisoner.
His was an extraordinary life  -  from service in World War II as a RAAF pilot to his acting and directorial career in Hollywood, London and back home in Australia.
Bud was the consummate professional on set, and was renowned for his generosity towards young actors and film students.
In 1999, he was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for his contribution to the performing arts as an actor, director, producer, and to the community.
He was so much part of the Australian character, as it has been shaped, and as it will evolve in the future. All Australians are sad to see his passing.


I am pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Mike Mrdak as Secretary of the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government.
The position became vacant following the recent announcement by Mr Mike Taylor AO of his retirement. I express my sincere thanks to Mr Taylor for his dedicated service and wish him well.
Mr Mrdak, who will carry with him to his new position responsibility for the role of Commonwealth Co-ordinator General, will take up his appointment as Secretary on 29 June.
Until his appointment earlier this year as Co-ordinator General responsible for the implementation of the Government's Nation Building Economic Stimulus Package, Mr Mrdak was Deputy Secretary, Governance in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, with responsibility for corporate management, governance including Freedom of Information and electoral reform and Cabinet Secretariat.
Mr Mrdak previously served much of his public service career in the Infrastructure Department and its predecessors, rising to the position of Deputy Secretary.
He has extensive experience across the entire DITRDALG portfolio, including in policy development in the areas of aviation, road and rail transport, infrastructure investment and delivery and local government.
I am confident that Mr Mrdak's skills and experience equip him admirably for the many challenges of his new role.


PM: Well the Australian Government's budget strategy is this: to support jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow. And that's what we're here to do. Infrastructure like rail, roads, port, infrastructure like high speed broadband, infrastructure like hospitals, infrastructure like the biggest school modernisation program that Australia has ever seen but infrastructure including the clean energy future Australia needs for our future climate change needs and jobs as well.
What we're here today to talk about is our future infrastructure investment in clean energy. That's part of Australia's future and it is part of jobs and business and investment today. The Australian Government plans to co-invest with industry in the single largest solar power station in the world. By virtue of this investment in the single largest solar power station in the world we will be three times the size of the existing world's largest plant in California and on top of that we'll be producing about 1000 megawatts which puts a plant like this in a similar league to some of the biggest stations generated by alternative and other energy sources.
So let me put this into context. The Government plans to invest with industry in the biggest solar generation plant in the world, three times the size of the world's current biggest, which is in California. Why are we doing this? We are doing it in order to support a clean energy future for Australia, we're doing it to boost economic activity now and we're doing it also to provide jobs and much needed opportunities for business as well.
The way in which this plan will be rolled out is as follows. It's part of the Government's $4.65 billion clean energy initiative; $1.4 billion of which is into solar energy. In the next six months or so the Government will define the tender specifications for industry right across the country. In the first six months of 2010 the Government will nominate successful tenders. Our objective is to co-invest with industry in what will end up being a network of stations across the country. Co-locating as close as possible with the existing electricity grid, locating as best as possible in terms of access to Australia's biggest natural resource  -  our sunshine. And making sure that we are doing so in an effective and efficient way with business on the way though.
This also will parallel the Government's decision which I am announcing today to become a full member of the International Renewable Energy Agency. International Renewable Energy Agency will have its first global meeting in June; Australia will be a full participant in the first meeting of this agency. What is the Government's mission? Rather than to be solar followers worldwide we intend to be solar leaders worldwide. We don't want to be clean energy followers worldwide, we want to be clean energy leaders worldwide. While we want to be part of the climate change revolution of the future rather than simply being followers at a distance a long way removed on necessary action on climate change. All designed to do this: to support jobs and business. Jobs in the low pollution, non-pollution sector in the economy. Also supporting business activity, supporting contractors right across the country and investing in the sort of energy future we want.
There is one problem along the road and it is this. Today Mr Turnbull and the Liberals indicated that they would not support the $22 billion worth of budget savings that we've announced in the budget. In other words Mr Turnbull still leaves up in the air the Liberal's support for these $22 billion worth of savings. Therefore if Mr Turnbull and the Liberals are going to block $22 billion worth of savings from the budget, it puts at jeopardy funding for the increase in pensions and funding for the investment in this sort of solar energy technology for the future. I find that fundamentally disappointing.
Australia needs a strategy for the future, which supports jobs and investment in business during this global economic recession while at the same time investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: You said $1.4 billion for solar energy, is that (inaudible)?
PM: Our $1.4 billion solar initiative, our solar flagships project is for up to 1000 megawatts nationwide in locations, which will be determined by competitive tender process. We want to see them as close as possible to the existing electricity grid, we want to see those technologies most competitively deployed and it means also that we also are proving up the ultimate deliverability of large amounts of solar energy into the grid.
What our friends here at Macquarie Energy have done, very intelligently is collocate an eight megawatt station with an existing coal-fired power station. I am advised this is the only place in the world where this is currently done. This is a very good way in which to demonstrate how this sort of energy can complement traditional forms of energy. What we want to do is to co-invest with industry in taking this up at considerable scale right across the country.
What's our ambition? The Australian Government to invest in the world's biggest solar power generating plant, three times bigger than that which currently exists in California because this is a country rich in sunshine.
JOURNALIST: On another issue, have your Ministers been travelling too much? There's been an extremely enormous travel bill.
PM: I notice on that, that Mr Turnbull has himself defended Mr Howard's $20 million overseas travel and I would simply allow that to speak for itself.
JOURNALIST: Do you defend Mr Garrett's $250,000 travel?
PM: I think right across the Government all these things are properly accounted for as is Mr Howard's $20 million of travel himself.
JOURNALIST: Not incessant?
PM: I would say that Mr Howard's $20 million arrangements when he was Prime Minister which have been defended by Mr Turnbull this morning and the benchmark which has been established for the previous Government, we've acted within that.
JOURNALIST: Was it hidden on budget night? (inaudible)
PM: I am advised that these numbers have been released as soon as the bureaucracy has them prepared and I note again that they are consistent in broad measure with Mr Howard's $20 million investment. Mr Howard's $20 million expenditure on his own foreign travel.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well here in the Hunter you have, you have an extraordinary concentration of energy. This is one of the energy capitals of Australia. I am advised this morning some 15 percent of electricity generation in the nation comes from this region. Therefore it is great to see companies like Macquarie Energy taking the very smart decision to co-invest with solar energy and to use that in terms of its ultimate and overall generation into the electricity grid.
What we want to do is learn from the experiences of companies like Macquarie Energy and for the future we want to also ensure that we are doing everything which is logical to expand clean energy generation for the future and create solar energy projects at scale and to do so in the most competitive, transparent process possible.
Okay anything else folks?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said before there will be multiple locations, possibly four. The location of which will be determined in terms of maximum access to sunlight, maximum proximity to the electricity grid to minimise costs of transmission systems, as well as a number of other technical and design factors as well. We want to make sure that this generation capacity is established across our nation. But 1000 megawatts is a lot. As I said that is three times the size of that which exists in California. We need to be investing in this sort of infrastructure for Australia's clean energy future. That's what's necessary to do.


Australia will become a member of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), strengthening our role as a global leader in tackling climate change. 
IRENA's aim is to speed up the implementation of renewable energy worldwide.
This underlines Australia's commitment to tackling climate change by taking a global leadership role in reducing carbon pollution and supporting innovation. 
The Rudd Government is investing $4.5 billion in becoming a world leader in solar power and other clean energy initiatives, including:
     * $2.4 billion in low emissions coal technologies; 
     * $1.6 billion in solar technologies; 
     * $465 million to establish Renewables Australia to support leading-edge technology research and bring it to market.
These investments will increase Australia's clean energy generation, reduce carbon pollution, and support thousands of new low pollution jobs by stimulating economic activity.
Investments in solar power
The Rudd Government will invest $1.365 billion in the new Solar Flagships program.
Solar Flagships will seek to develop up to four individual generation plants on the national grid.
Currently, the largest solar energy project operating anywhere in the world is in California.
Our ambition is for Solar Flagships to generate three times as much power as that project. Together, they will have the generating capacity of an average Australian coal-fired power station (1000 MegaWatts).
The knowledge gained from operating the Solar Flagships program will then contribute to the worldwide fight against carbon pollution, through Australia's membership of IRENA. 
The Rudd Government is committed to ensuring 20 per cent of Australia's electricity comes from renewable sources by 2020. 
Australia's participation in IRENA complements Australia's establishment of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. Founded in January, IRENA currently has 80 members.
The Solar Flagship program will complement the Carbon Capture and Storage Flagship program, demonstrating the Government's commitment to both maintain the value of our fossil fuel resources and develop our renewable energy potential.
The two strategic technology priorities of CCS and solar will also be underpinned by supporting specialised research, development and demonstration programs.
The Rudd Government is committed to reducing carbon pollution, delivering significant savings through energy efficiency, while making the investments that will create the cleaner technologies, industries and jobs of tomorrow.
The Government will work with the private sector to position the Australian economy for a low pollution, high-skilled future.


The Prime Minister and the Premier of Victoria today welcomed the announcement of funding for the new $4.3 billion Regional Rail Express  -  the biggest single investment in the metropolitan rail project since the city loop was built and the first major new rail line for metropolitan Melbourne in 80 years.
The project involves:
     * a 40 kilometre dual track link from West Werribee to central Melbourne's Southern Cross Station via Sunshine;
     * construction of a new rail line from Werribee to Deer Park;
     * new stations at Tarneit and Wyndham Vale;
     * activating and lengthening Platforms 15 and 16 at Southern Cross station;
     * duplication of existing tracks between Sunshine and Kensington; and
     * at least four grade separations (separating road and rail)  -  so that no new level crossings are created by the project.
The project will support up to 10,000 direct and indirect jobs, according to the Victorian Government, which will boost economic activity in Melbourne and regional Victoria during the global recession.
The Australian and Victorian Governments are working to get this project underway as quickly as possible:
     * Public comment on the proposed alignment of the rail line will be released shortly;
     * Works on the initial stage of the project at Southern Cross Station will commence in August 2009;
     * The project is intended to submit a planning scheme amendment to reserve the land for the corridor in 2010; and
     * Major works will begin on the new track in 2010.
The project will deliver capacity for an extra 9,000 regional and suburban passengers every hour.
By segregating V line regional rail services from metro rail services it will also allow regional rail services to run express into Melbourne, increasing transport capacity and reliability for Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo regional rail services.
The project is critical to servicing Victoria's growing regional population, which will add almost half a million people in the next 30 years:
     * Population of Barwon Region (Geelong and surrounds) is projected to increase by more than 125,000 people to 395,528 between 2006 and 2036.
     * Population of Loddon Region (Bendigo and surrounds) is projected to increase by more than 86,000 people to 261,524 between 2006 and 2036.
     * Population of Central Highlands Region (Ballarat and surrounds) is projected to increase by more than 62,000 people to 210,229 people between 2006 and 2036.
The Federal Government will invest $3.2 billion in this important project.
The Australian Government has also committed $40 million to pre-construction work for the East-West Rail Tunnel  -  a major new underground rail tunnel.
The East-West Rail Tunnel's stage one will see the construction of a two-track tunnel between Dynon and St Kilda Road at Domain, with stops at Melbourne Central and Flinders Street and new stations at Parkville and St Kilda Road.
It will support an additional 120 trains during peak periods each day, or an additional 84,000 commuters. Construction on the tunnel is expected to commence in 2012 and is scheduled for completion in 2018.
These investments are part of the Federal Government's $22 billion infrastructure investment in the 2009-10 Budget, which includes rail, roads, ports, energy, broadband, and health and education infrastructure.
The Australian Government's nation-building initiatives include $7.9 billion in road and rail infrastructure in Victoria.


PM: The Australian Government's strategy in response to the global recession is nation building for recovery and that is why the Australian Government is supporting jobs and small business today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
What sort of infrastructure are we talking about? Rail, roads, ports, we are talking about hospitals, TAFEs, universities. We are talking about broadband, we are talking about the world's largest solar energy plant. We are also talking about Australia's biggest ever school modernisation program.
All about supporting jobs, small business, apprenticeships today, while investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And today, here in Melbourne, we are talking about rail. What the Premier and I are doing today is formally, here in Melbourne, launching this great investment partnership on the future infrastructure needs of Melbourne and Victoria.
This marks the single largest Australian Government investment in urban rail ever. It also marks, I am advised, the biggest addition of a major rail route to the Melbourne metro system in 80 years.
This therefore is an important day in terms of the national Government's partnership with the State on infrastructure, and also, in making a difference here, with these sorts of practical projects.
What does it mean in practice? This combined investment between us, of some $4.3 billion - $3.2 from the Commonwealth, $1.1 from the state Government, is to support up to 10,000 direct and indirect jobs and on top of that (train arrives) provide 9,000 of these folk per hour with greater transport possibilities.
Let me say that again.
So this $4.3 billion investment will support up to 10,000 direct and indirect jobs as well as providing extra capacity for 9,000 more passengers every hour. That is a good investment in the future, a good investment in making cities like Melbourne more efficient in the future, but a great investment in jobs and in infrastructure as well.
Let me say again, what we are also doing with the Premier today is confirming our combined investment, $40 million from the Commonwealth, in a final engineering and design study of the East West Tunnel - what would become the next link in the urban metro system for Melbourne.
Melbourne plays an important part in Australia's overall economy. This is all about investments for the future, to make the transport infrastructure of this city even more efficient.
But the overall strategy of the Government is very straightforward. That is: investing in nation building infrastructure for recovery, investing in major transport infrastructure, to support jobs and apprenticeships and business today while creating the sorts of rail networks we need for tomorrow.
BRUMBY: Well can I just say it is great to be here with the Prime Minister, with Julia, with Minister Albanese, with Minister Kosky, and also today with Sir Rod Eddington, the architect of course of our Eddington report and the chair of Infrastructure Australia.
This official launch of the Regional Rail Express today means that we are on track now to see the biggest addition to the public transport network in our State's history since federation.
This is going to be a huge project. It is by the way, according to advice I have from Treasury, it's the biggest single infrastructure project in our State's history. Bigger than anything we have ever built before, bigger than the City Loop, bigger than any of the other engineering construction projects. And work gets under way this year, on these platforms 15 and 16, work will get under way in August this year.
And the point about this project, its scale, the way in which it generates jobs now, as the PM has said, directly and indirectly, something like 10,000 new jobs as a result of this project, but it creates jobs now and builds infrastructure for the future. And I was just telling the Prime Minister a few moments ago, if you look over the recent building approval figures for Australia, in the months just past, 33.7 per cent of all new housing approvals in Australia were in our state of Victoria.
In other words, we are seeing record population growth and with the best housing affordability anywhere on the eastern seaboard, we are seeing people move to our state in droves.
All of that means that we need to put the infrastructure in place now to build for that growth in the future and that is what we are doing. And the area, in the west of Melbourne, from Werribee, around through Melbourne, through the Deputy Prime Minister's electorate, this is the fastest growing metropolitan area anywhere in Australia, adding more people per week than any other area in Australia.
And so we need to make this investment. But the point of the story and the point of today is there is no way that the state government could have undertaken this project alone.
The scale of it, the size of it, the investment required is beyond the capacity of the state. And so this is a great story about the Rudd Government and our Government standing shoulder to shoulder, partnering together, working together to generate jobs and to solve the infrastructure challenges of the future.
And as I have said, I believe it is a transformational project and without the work, I think, of Sir Rod Eddington and his report, we wouldn't have had the preliminary and fundamental work done to put this business case up and to get funding.
And I might say finally Prime Minister too, we appreciate very much the $426.1 million too that you have provided to our State for the comprehensive cancer centre.
We have matched that of course, all $426.1. This will be one of the 10 best comprehensive cancer centres anywhere in the world, and again it is a great example of the state Government and the federal Government standing shoulder to shoulder, generating jobs, but building the sort of infrastructure and services we need for our state and nation, in the future.
PM: Just before taking your questions, what the Premier and I are also confirming is that this project is shovel-ready. Work will commence on upgrades to this platform in August and next year, the major works on this 40 kilometre rail link, will start, generating big job opportunities in the here and now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed with the opinion polls (inaudible)
PM: Look, taking tough decisions to invest in infrastructure and jobs like this, and hard decisions on savings to return the Budget to surplus are never going to be popular, but it's necessary in the national interest.
JOURNLAIST: Are you surprised Prime Minister by the unpopularity of the decision to raise the pension age and will the rise in that pension eligibility age mean that people can't access their super until 67?
PM: Taking hard decisions in the national interest in the middle of a global economic recession is necessary for our country for the long term, supporting jobs here in the here and now, in the middle of a recession, but also responsible savings to return the Budget to surplus. That is what it is about and we will continue to prosecute these sorts of hard decisions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Prime Minister will people be able to access their super?
PM: All these matters concerning our retirement income policy and superannuation are carefully outlined in the Budget papers.
JOURNALIST: So there was (inaudible)
PM: Sorry say that again.
JOURNALIST: There was an editorial piece in The Australian this morning saying that China would rather deal with John Howard than you. Can you see any value in that?
PM: My job as Prime Minister of Australia is always to act in the national interest whether that is to the satisfaction of other governments or not. I take that responsibility seriously. When it comes to our economy, when it comes to our national security, I will continue to do so.
Taking hard decisions in the national interest is not a popularity contest. You've got to be very clear cut about where our nation has to be in the long term. That frames the decisions I take today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) Budget measure on employee share schemes (inaudible)?
PM: We believe, based on the best Treasury advice, this has been the right decision - as I said, taking tough decisions to restore the budget to surplus while taking the necessary measures to support the economy now by investing in infrastructure like this is the right way to go, though many of these decisions will be unpopular, I accept that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Treasury's estimates are to be relied upon. The Treasury's advice on these and related matters is to be relied upon. They provide independent and professional advice and I go back to the general principle. Taking hard decisions, tough decisions to invest in jobs and infrastructure now and making hard savings to return the Budget to surplus over time. It's not going to be popular but it's the right thing to do for Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) raising taxes on cigarettes?
PM: Well I notice on this question that the Treasury today has said that there is a $3.2 billion gap in what Mr Turnbull and the Liberals have put forward. This is very important. Mr Turnbull has put forward a tax proposal. Mr Turnbull's alternative Budget now has a $3.2 billion funding gap in it. And what Mr Turnbull said today was he conceded that there may well be problems with his calculation but furthermore went on to say he would offset any shortfall by making cuts into health and hospitals. This comes on top of Mr Turnbull last week saying that all Australians should have private health insurance.
So within the space of a few days what we have is Mr Turnbull saying everyone should be on private health insurance, farewell to Medicare and because of his hole in his Budget reply that there should now be cuts in hospitals. This says a lot about the Liberals' priorities when it comes to health and hospitals.
Let me say one other thing. On the bottom line, what does it also mean? If you've got a $3.2 billion gap, funding gap in a Budget where we've had to make tough savings measures, it means that when it comes to the Liberal scare campaign on debt and deficit it just doesn't add up. Because in fact they are now adding $3.2 billion to debt and deficit, meaning that it would therefore add further to the bottom line.
Labor in Government has a responsible strategy to return the Budget to surplus, outlined in the Budget speech.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Are you going soft on casinos? (inaudible)
BRUMBY: Well let me correct the record on that. What we're doing in this arrangement that we announced after the Budget is actually putting the tax up on the casino. The casino has enjoyed favoured treatment for a long, long time; the amount of tax that they paid on their gaming machines is well below the level of tax that other gaming operators have had to pay. So we've put the tax up, that's what we've done. And we've pulled the tax in the casino into line with the taxes which are paid with other gaming operators.
So if the Liberal Party, if the Liberal Party wants to vote against a Bill which will put tax up on gaming machines at the casino then that is a matter for the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BRUMBY: What I'm saying is that the agreement put in place by the former Liberal Government had a level of tax payable on gaming machines which was significantly below that paid by other gaming machine operators. We've now dragged the casino into line with the tax paid by other gaming operators and I would have thought by the way that that's the right thing to do, particularly in the global financial crisis where you've got to make the hard decisions. We took the hard decision, we've increased the tax and they will now have to pay the same level of tax as other gaming machines do across the State. And if the Liberal Party votes against it they'll be doing Crown Casino a favour by giving them in perpetuity a level of tax on gaming machines which is much more favourable that than paid by other gaming operators. That's the fact of the matter.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BRUMBY: Well that's not, that's not true either. You know and there has been no change to any of those entitlements since the casino was established and the big thing here is the gaming machines, right? The big thing in terms of problem gambling is gaming machines.
And what we've done is put the tax up, we've brought it into line with what other gaming machines pay and other operators pay across the state. So that's the right thing to do, it's the right social policy, it's the correct thing to do in a Budget sense and if the Liberal Party votes against it that will be a matter for them but they will be denying the state much-needed revenue to run our public hospital system.
JOURNALIST: What's your reaction to the fact that a stripper was hired (inaudible) before a football match (inaudible)?
BRUMBY: Well I think it just sends all of the wrong messages you know. It is completely inappropriate behaviour. And one of the things we're trying to do in Victoria is encourage young people to play sport, to take up sport and you open the papers today, you read about a football club that got a stripper in before a game. You know it is absolutely and completely unacceptable and inappropriate and it sends all of the wrong messages. So they need to be offering some, I would have thought some public apologies about this matter, it is just an appalling example to set young people and to set families.
JOURNALIST: Premier, just on the cost of this project. In an era when construction costs are falling. Isn't $4.2 billion (inaudible).
BRUMBY: Well I think you need to look at the project. So it's duplicated track, it will have a river crossing, it's got four grade separations and if you've seen from some of the grade separations they can be very expensive indeed. It's got a number of new railway stations, it's got the works underway here.
So they would be preliminary costings that were done. But at the end of the day with all of these things, we put them out in the market and the market will test the numbers. And if we can come in at a lower number, that would be a fantastic outcome but they're the rough assessments that have been done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)? Do you think there should be an independent inquiry into how people are appointed as a JP?
BRUMBY: Well the Department of Justice has a proper legal process in place. As you know on Friday the Attorney released a report from the Department of Justice, the Department of Justice had asked Mr Suleyman to show evidence by four o'clock Friday as to why he should not be suspended as a JP. He responded in time. The Department of Justice and is now considering that matter and they will provide the Attorney with advice as to whether Mr Suleyman should continue as a JP, whether he should be suspended or whether he should be terminated. That will be a matter for the Department to provide that advice to the Attorney and they'll do that as soon as they can.
PM: I might just (inaudible) the question here about the Fremantle by-election. That's a matter for the good people of Fremantle. And the great thing about is democracy is people make their own choices and that's what's occurred over there as well.
One final thing on infrastructure before we leave this great railway station this morning is that Mr Turnbull today I understand has also been contradicted by Mr Costello. Mr Costello it seems now supports investment in infrastructure.
This is a change from the Mr Costello we've known in the past. Mr Turnbull so far has refused to support these investments. We have Mr Costello now supporting investments by the national Government in infrastructure.
So within about three days of the Liberal's Budget reply in Canberra, first of all we have a $3.2 billion economic black hole, a Budget black hole which Mr Turnbull himself concedes is now a problem, which he would make up for by cuts to the health and hospital system.
And the second problem is that we now have Mr Turnbull and Mr Costello at odds about whether the Australian Government should be investing in infrastructure. Frankly chaos and confusion continues to reign when it comes to Liberal party policy on the economy and I've got to zip.


HINCH: Mr Rudd, good afternoon.
PM: Good afternoon, good to be back on the program. In fact, I am heading to a Community Cabinet meeting at the moment, up at Emerald and at the Emerald Secondary college.
I am driving up the Pakenham roads, if I break out and lose connection - that is why.
HINCH: Alright, your reaction to the community cabinets, I mean the opposition says they are an expensive rort, but you promised you would do this, I am sure you stand by the idea?
PM: Absolutely. We said before the election that we would do these around the country and the reason is to give access to local communities to all the members of the cabinet.
What we do is we sit down and we actually talk to local community organisations about what they need to build their communities. Secondly, we take questions from the floor, it is part of direct Government.
This is the 12th one we have done in the 18 months that we have been in office. So basically every six weeks or so, whether it is in, you know, north Queensland, Aboriginal communities in Mackay, the southern suburbs of Perth or other parts of Tassie or South Australia, back here in Melbourne, for I think for the second time.
We were in Geelong last year.
We are back in Emerald today. The whole point is to stay connected with the local community. You don't want Governments in Canberra to lose touch with what the community is saying to you.
HINCH: Alright let's get back to the topic. Page one headlines of course today, The Australian, the IMF doubts over speed of recovery. The opposition has been pushing this. You have been saying that these are old figures, they are a month old, but presumably you are using the same figures. The current polls though don't believe that your recovery is going to be as hot as you say, that four per cent annual growth will return next year, and that we're back in surplus by 2015.
PM: Well can I just say that our strategy is clear, it is strong and decisive action to cushion the impact of the global recession on Australia. And our plan is nation building for recovery by investing for our future, supporting jobs, small businesses, apprenticeships today, by building the economic infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Rail, roads, ports, TAFE colleges like the one I have been at today in Chadstone, here in Melbourne. Now, on the question of this nation building for recovery, we want to lift Australia out of the global recession as rapidly as possible.
And that is why we put together this strategy. The Secretary of the Treasury today, Ken Henry, the Governor of the Reserve Bank Glenn Stevens, both made statements about likely growth in three or four years time, based on what the Government said at the Budget.
Both supported the position which has been put forward by the Government. We believe it is reasonable, and it is based also on the experience of Australia in earlier recessions.
HOST: Yeah, alright ,we will go the budget briefly, the 67 is the magic number here, for the pensions, people are being phased in to 2023, in six monthly instalments over two years, that is being accepted generally, it would appear, but what intrigues me is that, I guess this hunch that come the end of this year, the 67 year old for super, why would you even consider that?
PM: Well we have all things relevant being considered by Ken Henry at the moment, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Henry review of taxation and related matters. We will examine carefully what he says then.
On the question of the eligibility age for the age pension, this was a tough decision.
I was surprised the other day, to see however, Tony Abbott, on behalf of the Liberal Party, saying they would bring it in much earlier. We think the right thing to do is to give people plenty of notice.
We don't begin phasing this until about 2017, it is not fully phased in until 2023. That gives people a lot of time to prepare. Other countries around the world also are increasing the age qualification for the age pension, and the reason is people are living a lot longer and as a result the impact on Government finances right around the world is being blown out by the age pension  - 
HOST: That is fair and that's understandable. But on super, I mean you seem to me to be developing this anti super ideology. I would have thought the more people that got on to super to become self funded retirees means they never go on a pension, means it would help out the case, and you would be able to pay people on pensions more money. The restrictions on super now and if you're going to say you can't get access to it until you are 67, if that's what you bring in, you seem to be, seems to be the wrong way to go about it.
PM: Well can I say, our attitude to super, like the age pension, is that we the Australian Labor Party in previous Governments brought in universal superannuation arrangements for the first time in Australia's history.
Remember also that most recently, we the Labor Government for the first time in a decade brought about a substantial increase in the age pension, $32.50 a week increase to the single age pension.
These things have been ignored in the past by the Liberals when in Government. In fact on superannuation, let's never forget this. When we brought in universal superannuation for the entire workforce back in the'90's, they said this would be very bad for the economy; well it was an important Labor government reform then. We stick by those reforms, we think it is important for the future of the country and of course from time to time, we have got to make sure that we are doing it absolutely right.
But I have got to say the two pillars upon which our future retirement incomes policy will be built, it will be superannuation on the one hand, we brought it in, and the pension, which we the Labor Government have just increased.
HINCH: OK, the, we have had some callers calling in saying, do you see a time, ever see a time when state Governments would be abolished and we'd come back to a federal system? We'd have a big government in Canberra and then have local councils to boost it?
PM: My attitude to that is that we were put together as a federation more than 100 years ago. And I think what most people around Australia want is to make sure our federal system of government works efficiently and effectively.
You can either have a system where you just play the blame game, that is one level of Government blaming the other for things not being done, or you get down, roll your sleeves up and have a go at making it work.
What we've tried to do in practical areas like, for example, elective surgery waiting lists is to partner with the states, provide additional injections of funding, to provide additional elective surgery procedures which would otherwise not be the case.
The Australian Healthcare Agreement which we signed with all the States and Territories at the end of last year reinvests a huge amount of money into the public hospital system of Australia.
HINCH: Because you said, you did a bit of a Harry Truman, you said if they don't improve everything in health within the next 12 months, I will take it back, I will run it all.
PM: What I said was, by the time we reached the middle of this term, which is around about the middle of this year, we will framing decisions about the future of the health and hospital system.
What we did 12 months ago was commission the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission to examine options for the future management of Australia's hospital system between the Federal Government and State Governments.
The problem now is that, as many of your listeners would be aware, is that you have got the Federal Government responsible for aged care, the State Government is responsible for hospitals, the Federal Government responsible for Medicare and payments to GPs.
Primary health care and preventative healthcare, a complete mixed set of responsibilities and the result is we don't have a total health and hospital strategy for the nation.
That is why we have commissioned this work, we will get it soon and we will be making decisions on the long term future.
HOST: Alright now, Mr Prime Minister, I know you don't have much more time. A couple of quick questions, is it true the Department of Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry have 49 staff members employed in media liaison and public relations?
PM: I am completely unaware of that number and what I will do is I will have the minister come on to your program just to confirm what the facts are.
All I can say is the Minister, Tony Burke is a first class minister, spends a lot of his time out there in rural and regional Australia with farmers, and I will have him answer directly that point. I don't wish to mislead anyone on any element of detail there.
HINCH: Alright. And on the case of Anicce Smoel which I know you are on, you are on top of, you are well aware of. But despite some hysteria here on 3AW today, I don't see what the Government can actually do apart from what you have done.
PM: Sorry you dropped out there.
HINCH: The Melbourne mother who has been jailed and now released on bail in Thailand.
PM: Well what we do with all consular cases is to make sure that the relevant Australian embassy is in there as quick as physically possible to provide every level of physical and consular support. That's what is being provided in the case of this person, as well as liaison with the family. And secondly, we also deal directly with the Thai authorities as well to make sure that every thing that can be done is being done.
That's being worked through at the moment. Our officials, I am advised, in Bangkok are doing everything practical on the ground.
It is always hard for families back home, I understand that. Also bear in mind Derryn, we could have had one million Australians overseas at any one time, and all of our embassy and consular officials are out there doing a first class job, providing support where it is needed, because Australians often find themselves in difficulties overseas.
HINCH: Well also because you have personal experience of getting drunk in a foreign pub and doing something you regretted?
PM: Well as you and I both said before, I think we are all human and we all make mistakes and I am one of them.
HINCH: Alright Mr Prime Minister, thank you for your time.
PM: Good to be with you.



JONES: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Good to be with you.
JONES: Are you prepared to accept that the hit you've just taken in the opinion polls is due to people's fear of the Government taking on massive public debt?
PM: Tony, those who were polled will answer that question. I understand that some of the decisions that we have taken are unpopular, decisions which are necessary, however, in the national interest. Decisions such as taking the strong and decisive action necessary to support jobs by investing in infrastructure, and in part that is supported by deficit and debt.
And secondly, by taking hard savings decisions to return the Budget to surplus in the medium term. Neither of these actions may necessarily be popular, they are however necessary and in the national interest. And my job as Prime Minister is to take tough decisions in the national interest in the midst of this global economic recession, which is the worst downturn in three quarters of a century.
JONES: Very briefly, is it debt that has people worried?
PM: Tony, I believe that a number of the decisions which the Government has taken are not popular, but I stand by them because they're in the national interest. It is easy for the Liberals to run a scare campaign on deficit and debt; that is what they're doing at the moment while seeking to camouflage the fact that in fact their response to the Budget in the Budget reply indicates that their own deficit and debt strategy is one dollar less than that of the Government's and that they would not repay that amount one year earlier than the Government. It is simply an exercise in politics.
JONES: Alright, but you've seen what the polls and the Nielsen poll has said. We can tell you that we've got some of tomorrow's Newspoll figures. You've dropped six points in the better prime minister stakes to 58 per cent. Malcolm Turnbull's gone up five points, and you've lost six points in the satisfaction rating. What do you think is actually happening here?
PM: Well, Tony, I do not care what is in opinion polls because my job is to act in the national interest. From time to time those decisions will be popular. From time to time those decisions will be unpopular. But let's go back to the (inaudible) here - we are wrestling with a global economic recession here which is creating a challenge for all economies around the world, and our strategy is this; we will support a strategy of nation building for recovery, investing in the jobs and small businesses we need for today by investing in the infrastructure our economy needs for tomorrow.
That's our strategy. But in doing that, we have to take hard decisions. One of which is to support our current investment in the economy, through temporary deficit and temporary debt, and secondly to then take hard measures, which are not popular, to return the budget to surplus in the medium term. This is a responsible strategy; it's one that we will prosecute. It is necessary in the national interest.
JONES: OK, but there's no question your team will be sweating on these figures, this is the first Newspoll since the Budget and on the other side of the coin in it, the important two-party preferred figure, Labor's actually gone up one point. It's now 56 to 44. How do you read those figures and the disparity between them?
PM: Tony, the truth is I don't, for the simple reason that these things go up and down. But the challenges facing the economy remain constant and in fact become more acute because of where we are in the midst of this global recession. I have said throughout my time as Prime Minister I do not pay attention to opinion polls when they've been up, I don't pay attention to opinion polls now.
The simple reason for that is that it is necessary in this job to act in the national interest, and when you're faced with hard challenges - and I fully accept the fact that our political opponents would run a dishonest scare campaign on debt and deficit, notwithstanding the fact that their policy, when you strip it away, is virtually identical to ours. I understand the politics of that. I understand the politics of the unpopularity of $22 billion worth of savings to bring the budget back to surplus.
But my responsibility as Prime Minister and that of the Government of which I lead is to act in the national interest and to prosecute a strategy which has as its mission to bring our economy back to recovery and to lift it from the global economic recession, which all, virtually all advanced economies, are now affected by.
JONES: OK. Let's move on. What's the peak figure of the projected public debt in terms of tens or hundreds of billions of dollars in the coming years? What's the peak figure?
PM: Well, these are clearly outlined in the Budget papers and they're usually expressed in terms of a percentage of GDP. We peak, in around about 2013, at about 13.8 per cent of GDP.
JONES: How much of that is in tens of billions or hundreds of billions of dollars; how much is that?
PM: Well, let me step back in terms of the elements of this. First of all, 70 per cent of our overall position here is determined by a $214 billion collapse in tax revenue. That's one slice of it.
JONES: OK. I understand - we understand that. So what is the figure of peak debt in hundreds of billions of dollars? What is the actual figure?
PM: Well, Tony, I'm about to come to that when I go to the constituent parts. About $214 billion comes from a collapse in tax revenue and that is happening right across all the advanced economies across the world. That's about two thirds of it. Then you go to the remaining third of it, which is made up of what we're investing in infrastructure and other forms of temporary stimulus. And of that remaining one third of our total borrowings, the largest proportion is made up through infrastructure investment and the smallest proportion is made up through other forms of temporary stimulus. Put that altogether...
JONES: But all I'm asking for is one figure.
PM: Well, I'm about to come to that, Tony. I'm taking you to the constituent parts. Put all that together and you'll see clearly outlined in the Budge papers that we're aiming to a gross figure of 13.8, which comes out at about 300. The Liberals have said about 275 for themselves and then they've failed to nominate or to support $22 billion of savings in the Budget, which makes our positions virtually identical. That's the point I was making.
JONES: That figure is $300 billion, is that right?
PM: As I said before, 13.8 per cent of GDP as described accurately in the Budget papers. There's nothing new about that.
JONES: Is there a political spin rule which says the Prime Minister must not say that figure? Because it seems very hard to get you to say $300 billion.
PM: Well, Tony, there seems to be a political spin rule on your part to go back to this time and time again. The Treasurer made this absolutely plain in the Budget papers. I said before the figure was 300 as the Liberals' was 275. Add $22 billion of non supportive savings, they come to a similar figure. The key thing, though, is this - let me just add this point. This comes to some 13.8 per cent of GDP by the time it reaches its peak at around about 2313, 2014, and then comes down to something like 3 per cent of GDP across the decade.
The point I wish to make is this: this is the lowest net debt of any of the major advanced economies. Secondly, it is lower by the factor of seven, that is it is seven times lower than the average net debt of the major advanced economies. And finally, Standard And Poor's international ratings agency, when they evaluated our budget, not only reaffirmed the Government's triple-A rating, credit rating for Australian sovereign debt, but on top of that, indicated in its statement that Australia's public finances were in sound working order. This needs to be put into absolute context, therefore, against the dishonest debt and deficit fear campaign being mounted by the Liberals.
And bear this in mind in addition - foreign debt, which was raised in the Parliament the other day by the Shadow Treasurer Mr Hockey, increased from something under $200 billion when Mr Costello first became Treasurer, and maxed out when he left at around $600 billion. Went up by 200 per cent. And remember, Mr Costello and Mr Howard said they would take actions in 1995 to reduce foreign debt; it went up by 200 per cent instead. And I really think the Liberals should think long and hard before they embark upon a fear campaign on debt and deficit given their extraordinary record on this.
JONES: Prime Minister, people fear debt. In their household budgets as times get harder they want to rein in debt, but now their Government is doing the opposite and they're confused. Why are household budgets different to national budgets?
PM: Our responsibility as a national government, learning from the lessons of the 1930s, Tony, is to act on what the economists describe as a counter cyclical fashion. That is, that when you have not only just an economic downturn nationally, but a synchronised global economic downturn there is one responsible course of action on the part of governments today learning from the lessons of the '30s, and that is to invest and inject activity in the economy now to support jobs.
Let me give the example of what we're doing. Treasury has calculated that the impact of this Government's actions, its stimulus actions since October last year, will support 205,000, 210,000 jobs more than what otherwise would be the case were we not to embark upon this course of action. That represents a critical difference compared with what the employment and the economy would otherwise be suffering at present.
Our actions are in that sense, similar to that being embraced by practically all of the rest of the G20. When I attended that meeting in London recently, each and every government around the world, learning from the lessons of the 1930s, is injecting activity in the economy to make unemployment less than it would otherwise would be, to boost activity, to support business until we get a normal return of private credit flows at which point stimulus is withdrawn. That's the core reason why government is doing what it's doing through temporary deficit and temporary debt across all the advanced economies.
JONES: How tempting is it to go to an early election before the economy gets worse?
PM: Tony, I go back to what I said to you earlier in this interview. I'm elected to govern in the national interest. I take my responsibilities as Prime Minister seriously at this time of great global economic crisis. Therefore what we have done is act early, decisively, and in a strong fashion, in seeking to inject activity into this economy now. We will prosecute that strategy, nation building for recovery, supporting jobs and small business and apprenticeships now by investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for the future.
JONES: OK, but what about the question?
PM: And we intend to implement it. Now as far as any interference with the financial integrity of the Budget is concerned, I said before, I said in an interview with Kerry O'Brien last week quite clearly that like my predecessor I'm quite conservative on the question of governments serving their full term. I don't believe it's in the economy's interest for there to be a double dissolution election. I simply say, however, it's important in these difficult economic times for the financial integrity of our Budget to be preserved. Why? Because we have a strategy to return the Budget to surplus and that requires honouring the $22-billion worth of savings contained in the Budget.
JONES: What does the double dissolution decision hinge on? Which Bills? What does it hinge on, when you issued that warning to Mr Turnbull; what does it hinge on exactly?
PM: Well, Tony, you're the one who's talking about hinging, I am simply saying that I have no interest in having a double dissolution election. I've simply stated the obvious point, however, that if we wish to return the Budget to surplus then the proper thing to do, the appropriate thing to do, is to embrace the $22 billion worth of savings we've outlined in the Budget. Whereas Mr Turnbull has already indicated and underlined the fact today through his comments is a $3.2 billion hole in the tax offering he made in his Budget reply last Thursday.
JONES: So does that decision on a double dissolution election hinge on the Opposition, the Coalition allowing everything in the Budget through?
PM: Tony, I'll say it again; I have no interest in there being a double dissolution election. What I've said equally is that I have a fundamental national interest to ensure that we return the Budget to surplus as early as possible. That means embarking upon our strategy to halve the Budget deficit within three years, return it to surplus within six. Mr Turnbull is currently threatening at least $3.2 billion worth of that through his actions on tax the other night. Furthermore, he's not indicated clear cut support for the $22 billion worth of other savings we've identified in the Budget. The responsibility lies with him on this score. I've got a responsibility to engage in sober public finance. I intend to do so.
JONES: Alright, let's move on. According to today's Nielsen poll, you've upset people with your plan to raise eligibility for the pension to 67. What are people supposed to do if they can't get work in their 60s and they have to wait yet another two years before they can get on the pension?
PM: As I indicated in my remarks to you earlier tonight, Tony, I mean the business of government acting in the national interest is not a popularity contest. These are tough decisions.
JONES: You have said that, but let me just put this to you. Why would a Labor Party make life tougher...
PM: Let me put this to you, Tony -
JONES: Well, hang on, why would a Labor Party make life tougher for people on low paid jobs, whose parents and grandparents only had to work until they were 65, and bear in mind here, we're often talking about people who are blue collar workers who might be exhausted from a lifetime of manual labour, and whose only alternative if there are no jobs available will be to go on a disability pension or unemployment benefits, putting them below the poverty line?
PM: Well, Tony, thank you for the question, and fair crack of the whip in the answer, which is this. This is the same Labor Government, and you've used that descriptor which has just brought about the single, largest pension reform in this country's history by a $32.50 in the single age pension, a Labor Government reform, followed by a $10 a week increase in terms of the married rate.
These were ignored by our predecessors for 12 long years. We have acted, but in so doing we have a parallel responsibility to ensure that the age pension is sustainable across the long term as far as Australian public financial management's concerned. That's our responsibility, and when we put this together, therefore, this decision as far as the age, the qualifying age for the age pension was part and parcel of it. When the pension was first introduced back in 1907, I believe, and the age pension age was set at 65, obviously calculations were then made in terms of average life expectancy beyond the age of 65. Things have radically changed in the intervening 100 years.
JONES: What hasn't changed is how easy it is to get a job in your 60s. And by the way, on the question of the vulnerable, there's nothing in your Budget for sole parent families. There's nothing in your Budget for the unemployed. Why is that?
PM: Tony, we have a responsibility to return the Budget to surplus in the medium term. If on the one hand we're injecting $16-billion - $16-billion - to provide justice for the single age pensioners of our country and at the same time, we're about to progressively introduce an increase to the age pension qualifying age from 2017 on, not kicking in finally until 2023, this provides in our argument a reasonable time in which people can prepare.
Furthermore, it provides an important reform in terms of long term financial sustainability of the new age care system, or the new age pension system we've introduced; as well as the support we're providing for carers. This government has acted where our predecessors failed to provide justice for aged pensioners in order to ensure in particular that the single aged pensioners are properly supported. Remember, the national Seniors' Association came out and has supported both these measures. One on the increase to the single age pension. And two, the increase in the qualifying age. It's necessary for the long term.
JONES: Is this recession worse than the recession in the 1990s?
PM: Well, I'm not quite sure where your next questions about to lead, Tony. I can only guess.
JONES: I'm sure you can imagine. Let me - I'll put it another way (inaudible) Since you're anticipating, have you asked the Treasury to explain why they think this recession is no worse than the one in the 1990s?
PM: No, well in answer to your first question, all of the advice indicates that this is the worst globally synchronised economic downturn since the 1930s. That's why the degree of economic difficulty we have at the moment in supporting our economy through this difficult time and reducing the impact of unemployment while still returning our Budget to surplus in the medium term is phenomenally complex.
JONES: Why does the Treasury think it's the same, or not as bad in fact, as the recession in the 1990s in terms of getting out of it?
PM: Are you referring to Treasury forecasts in terms of growth?
JONES: Yes.
PM: Well, I think it would be nice to be clear and upfront about the question, Tony, rather than trying to throw one down the leg side like that. Can I just answer the whole question about Budget forecasts in the following terms. In the recessions of the '80s and '90s, the years of it took for recovery to bring back the economy to reasonable growth were respectively one years and two years. The projections contained were embedded within Treasury's forecasts for growth on this occasion, rest on a three-year recovery timetable. So, in fact, their assumptions are more conservative on the time for recovery, both when compared against the recession of the '80s and the '90s and that is borne out from the economic historical data.
JONES: Kevin Rudd, as usual it's great to talk to you. It's all we have time for, but we thank you very much for talking to us tonight on Lateline.
PM: Thanks for that one down the leg side, Tony.


PM: The Government's strategy for dealing with the global economic recession is to support jobs, to support small business and to support apprenticeships by investing in infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Supporting jobs today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
And part of that new infrastructure is a National Broadband Network and part of what we need to service that is also the proper skills necessary to lay out this massive infrastructure project for Australia. $43 billion investment, up to 25,000 jobs a year for seven to eight years, work commencing in the second half of this year. This is practical work to make a difference to the impact of the global economic recession on unemployment.
You see through the Government's combined actions our support for jobs today and investment for infrastructure tomorrow will support up to 200,000 jobs and more in the coming years. These are jobs which would be otherwise lost to the Australian economy. Therefore, it's about making a difference and that's what we're on about today.
The other thing I would say about this project here at Central Gippsland Institute TAFE, GippsTAFE, is that this Institute I've been told has been here since 1928, that's a fair old length of time. I'm told that this investment we're making here today of some $16 million is the single largest in this Institute in its long 80 year history. That's because this Institute and TAFE have a huge history under, have a huge future under this Government, a huge future which requires further investment.
The investment here in expanding this TAFE to provide new facilities for the important work which these linesmen are being trained in now but critically new capacity to train so many of those workers who'll be laying out the high speed broadband network nationwide is really important.
So in summary it's this: $16.5 million worth of investment here at this TAFE, GippsTAFE. Part of nearly a billion investment in TAFE infrastructure right across the country creating jobs in building this extra TAFE capacity and on top of that through this particular TAFE institute we're going to add the training capacity necessary to support the rollout of National Broadband Network, that means extra jobs, extra training opportunities for the future, extra apprenticeships, 25,000 a year once the network is being rolled out.
And I conclude by saying this, these are the practical measures which make a difference in dealing with the impact of the global economic recession. The alternative is you sit on your hands and you do nothing and you carp and you complain. That's not our approach, this Government is out there making a difference. Nation building for recovery, nation building to build our long term economic future, nation building in order to lift Australia out of this global recession as rapidly as possible.
Anything you want to add?
GILLARD: I just, if I can add. This is obviously a great TAFE Institute giving people the skills they need for jobs today and jobs of the future. We are investing in TAFE right around the country both through our education investment fund and our special half a billion dollar allocation for TAFE.
Many of the TAFE facilities around the country are doing excellent training but they're doing it in facilities which were built a long time ago and our technical and further education institutions want to train people with the skills they need for tomorrow and to do that they need to do it in 21st century facilities.
So this facility here tells the story of TAFE right around the country, excellent training but new funds, new opportunities are going to make a real difference to the training they can offer for the skills and the jobs of tomorrow. And as the Prime Minister says, there is obviously no better example than the skills we will need for tomorrow than the skills involved in rolling out the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you aware of the case of Annice Smoel, mother of four, 36-year-old being held in Thailand against her will. Are you aware of that? Is there anything the Government can do about it?
PM: I've just been advised about this case. My understanding is that both the Foreign Minister and the Department of Foreign Affairs are on top of this case, they'll be providing every level of consular assistance that is possible to the family and of course the individual concerned and that advice that I had was as recently as half an hour ago.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) think she's, her friend has confessed to actually stealing the bar mat, she says that she's done nothing yet she's on bail in Thailand for 14 weeks, with her children at home. Will you be looking to hurry that process up a bit?
PM: The sort of consular assistance we provide for Australians in distress overseas is very practical and it is as immediate as possible. And so we take seriously our job to look after the interests of the million or so Australians who at any time are offshore, either working or travelling. This is a big job for the Department of Foreign Affairs to do. Remember we have Australians travelling in hundreds of countries around the world in any given time.
So in this particular case? Our consular officials, guided by the Foreign Minister and the Department of Foreign Affairs, will be in there providing every level of practical consular assistance to them and on top of that dealing directly with the Thai authorities as well in the most practical way possible.
JOURNALIST: You say you're about jobs and energy jobs. What do you say to the boss of a ceramic fuel-cell company who says that your policy on share schemes is going to make it impossible for him to employ people?
PM: Well I haven't seen that particular report but what I would say is that if you are investing in jobs in the future, as we are, by investing in the infrastructure of the future, you've also got to have a strategy to return the Budget to surplus. That means making tough decisions on savings. We've outlined $22 billion worth of savings and-
(Break in audio)
What is the Government's strategy? To support jobs and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That is to cushion Australia from the impact of the recession.
I mentioned before, Government actions add up to support the 200,000 jobs across our nation which would otherwise be lost. Secondly, you also need to have a strategy to return the Budget to surplus.
That is why we have to take hard decisions on savings, $22 billion worth, which are outlined fully in the Budget, and obviously a number of those will not be popular.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well what I have learnt in a long time of experience in these matters is let all the facts be established first. That is why the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Secretary of the Department and our consular officials in Bangkok will be exploring every practical measure possible to support the individual, to support the family, and to deal directly with the Thai authorities.
It is important to be very methodical about this in order to provide the right level of assistance which gets the best result as quickly as possible.
Sorry, back to you.
JOURNALIST: You say you made the decision, why then has Chris Bowen said the Government is going to consult (inaudible)
PM: Well on the implementation of all of our Budget measures, it follows that there will be implementation arrangements and technical details to be sorted out with affected industry. That is the logical and right course of action.
We have done it on multiple occasions before when we have brought in either new measures which have an effect on the expenditure or on effect on the revenue, and as a consequence, it is the right and logical thing to do and that is what Chris was talking about.
JOURNALIST: It's not the question that you have got it wrong?
PM: I have just said, when we implement hard, tough Budget measures, the right thing to do in the implementation of it is to work on all the implementation detail with affected businesses.
That is the right and responsible course of action. This Government actually believes in working with business. If you want evidence of us working with business, the fact that we are here today is because business have said to us over a long period of time, the national Government needs to invest in two main things for the future. One: infrastructure. Two: training for jobs.
Guess what, this Australian Government is doing that. Our predecessors failed to do so. These are the long term drivers of productivity growth for a whole series of jobs right across the country, also turbo charging long term productivity growth.
That is what we are on about, direct consultation with business, and this Government is proud of it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think is making MPs stressed?
PM: The matter that you (inaudible) arises from the suicide of a member of parliament, who was from Victoria here, about 10 years ago. The counselling services were established as part of an agreement with all parliamentarians and staff in parliament at that time.
The services that are available now, I am advised, are also available to all staff, working in Parliament as well. That is public servants as well as ministerial staff, and others who are working in the building.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I understand that as with any large employers, this is my advice, that the department responsible for the parliament in this case, it is probably the joint house department or one of the house departments, has taken this decision to support the needs of a very large workplace.
As I said this arises from a tragic suicide, a decade ago, involving a member of parliament known to us personally. And this was very tough, very hard, and like all workplaces across the country, big ones, including media organisations, the decision taken involving all parliamentarians, all sides of politics, was that this level of support was necessary within the workplace.
(inaudible)
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: My advice is that on the implementation of the arrangements, we will work through all technical details with the affected businesses, as we would in any other measure which affects savings or expenditure within the Budget.
That is what we have done in the past, that is what we will do in the future, nothing changes there.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the question of dealing with the implementation of this, can I just say that our job, in taking hard decisions nationally, is to ensure that we are returning the Budget to surplus. We are also advised in the case of these particular arrangements, that they have been particularly used, at one end of the spectrum, to engage in various forms of tax minimisation.
Therefore, under those circumstances, on the best advice of the Treasury, we have acted.
It is a necessary piece of action in order to deal responsibly with bringing the Budget back to surplus. These are hard decisions. I have never said before that these decisions will be popular. They will be hard.
But if you want to invest in infrastructure like this, and support training opportunities for young people like these guys over here, you've got to take a responsible approach to the management of the public investment necessary to support it. Which means, ensuring that you return the Budget to surplus in the medium term, that's our strategy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say on Lou Richards, I am a Queenslander, even I know who Lou Richards is. Lou Richards should be up there in the Hall of Fame. End of story. That's my view.
JOURNALIST: You're better on football than Malcolm Turnbull.
PM: Can I just say, I've met Lou, he is a legend, he should be right up there. That is a very simple view, and that is from someone who comes not just north of the Murray but north of the Tweed.
This bloke is an Australian legend and should be treated right. Thanks folks.


The Rudd Government today welcomed the announcement of $16.15 million in new training facilities at Central Gippsland Institute of TAFE (GippsTAFE).
The Government is pleased to announce today that these new training facilities will be used to help train workers to build the $43 billion National Broadband Network.
This means GippsTAFE will supply some of the on average, 25,000 jobs each year it will take to construct a National Broadband Network over the next 8 years.
Today's $16.15 million announcement will mean GippsTAFE can:
     * Upgrade its existing telecommunications, gas and electricity training yard 
     * The training yard allows trainees to learn how to lay underground and overhead telecommunications cable.
     * Build three new state of the art technology training classrooms; and
     * Construct a new fibre optic training room.
Today's announcement is one of the 31 projects funded in this year's budget as part of the $934 million round two funding from the Education Investment Fund.
GippsTAFE will become one of a series of technical colleges across the country with the specialist facilities to provide training for NBN workers.
The specialist training facilities at GippsTAFE's Chadstone campus will enable jobseekers to gain the competencies required to participate in the construction of the biggest nation-building project in Australian history.
This project will establish a world-class 21st century training and education facility in an area of identified skills need.
GippsTAFE is one of few specialist telecommunications and energy sector training facilities.
GippsTAFE is also investing a further $3 million towards this project.
The Education Investment Fund will transform our tertiary campuses into 21st century environments that will not only play a key role in delivering a sustainable future through teaching and research but also act as demonstration sites for new and emerging technologies and enable them to be tested at scale.
The GippsTAFE project at its Chadstone Campus will advance the Government's priority of creating a world-leading tertiary education sector in Australia. In addition, this investment will stimulate economic activity in the short term and expand growth potential in the medium-to-long-term.
The Government has also announced a nominal allocation of $500 million for EIF Round 3, which will include around $200 million for projects to help universities.
In some cases this will be facilitated through partnerships with vocational education and training (VET) providers to adjust to the new directions in higher education announced in the Budget.
In addition the Government will also undertake a special $650 million Sustainability Round of the Education Investment Fund in 2009.
The funding for vocational education and training providers and higher education and research institutions is an opportunity to give immediate practical effect to sustainable design, energy and research. 


BYNER: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us today.
PM: Good to be back in Adelaide Leon.
BYNER: Well I'm glad you are. Now, I know you're down south and I want to run by you a caller typical of those businesses in the region where you've been today.
PM: Yeah.
BYNER: His name is Jim and he said listen Leon, I run an engineering company and I can tell you that demand on our business has dropped between 50 to 60 per cent. And he said all these stimuluses are all very nice and sound great but for me and those like me here at Lonsdale, we're really under the pump. And I said to him, I said Jim what would you have Wayne Swan or Kevin Rudd do? And his answer was interesting, he said well look we're burdened with a lot of taxes and charges that right now are an absolute disincentive to even be here. And I said what do you mean by that and he said well for example, and this is a state issue I know but given that we've got both a state- federal Labor Government I think it's relevant.
And that is that, for example he says if I am a day late in my WorkCover payments, I have a 1,200 per cent penalty that I have to pay. And of course he knows that this is a State issue, that is a State government instrumentality, it's a statutory authority, but is there something that you believe can be done in cooperation with the federal government to help businesses like Jim's actually survive this crisis?
PM: Let me say one thing in response to Jim is that when he describes his orders as being down he's absolutely right. This global recession is cutting a swathe through economies right across the world. 32 out of 33 of the world's most advanced economies are now contracting, eight of our 10 biggest trading partners are now in recession. This is affecting everybody.
The key challenge is what do we as Government do to make a difference now to reduce the impact or cushion the impact on Australia. Let me give you two examples. On the question of investing in the economic stimulus, what we have done through the investment in schools, in social housing, in energy insulation and also what I've been announcing today which is our investment in the rail projects both on the Gawler Line and the Noarlunga Line as well as the O-Bahn, as well as the doubling the capacity of the desalination plant which I've just been down to visit the Premier with.
What are we doing? We are supporting jobs, apprenticeships and business now by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Now that desalination plant for example, our investment now will mean that what is currently on site there will involve another hundred or so jobs, a lot of involved with site engineering and site works.
Whether Jim, the bloke who has called into you, can access some of that work, of course I can't say that over the radio. But what I can say is that right across South Australia right now we are now investing in school modernisation projects in every primary school across the State. And you know what that means? Job opportunities for tradies, for carpenters, for brickies and the rest because we're trying to make a difference now in this recession and if Government wasn't acting now with the private sector in retreat it would be much, much worse.
The second thing I would say Leon is this, for businesses like Jim's - and this doesn't answer all of his problems at all and I wouldn't pretend to do so - but one of the things that the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry have put to us as the federal Government which can help is to provide a temporary investment allowance. That is, if businesses now are looking at the sorts of plant and equipment that they need for the future, what we've brought in through until the 30th of June this year is a 30 per cent temporary investment allowance. I ran into a guy running a building company the other day in Brisbane, sorry in Sydney, employs about 12 people, he went out and bought a bob-cat, he gets a special 30 per cent deduction on that from his tax.
If you're a small business what we announced in the budget is that we're going to up that to 50 per cent until the end of this year. Now this doesn't solve all problems but it gives people a lift on the way through together with the stimulus measures across the economy as well.
BYNER: Prime Minister, what of the issue that's come up recently and I know it's a practice that has gone on in many States, but the federal monies that were given for example for education where some students would benefit $100 a year for some years. We had revelations recently that a lot of that money hasn't been delivered and that the State in many cases takes if you like a little commission off the top to actually spend the money that you've said that States will get for specific purposes. Do you sit comfortably with that?
PM: Well the details of what you just referred to Leon, I'm not familiar with. What I can say is, just in summary since we've been in office which is just a little less than 18 months now, we've provided some 6,000 computers delivered to over 70 South Australian schools, we've invested $62 million in 23 Trades Training Centres, benefiting 75 schools and the School Modernisation Program that I've just referred to is massive. The School Pride Program, 783 projects at 511 schools involving $67 million, as well as the modernisation of primary schools where our investment will total some $314 million.
Now all this is happening as we speak Leon. Now the implementation of this of course is done in partnership with the South Australian State Government. But our intention is the same - supporting jobs, apprenticeships and training now while also building the best education facilities that our kids need for the future.
BYNER: Okay but in general terms though, how do you feel about States taking commission for monies you give for specific purposes?
PM: Well I am unaware of that particular practice that you refer to. What we do as the federal government when we deliver any of these programs, whether it's computers in schools, as I said 6,000 computers, or Trades Training Centres or modernising classrooms by building state-of-the-art libraries. We expect this to be done fairly and reasonably with state governments. I am unaware of the practices you just referred to.
BYNER: Alright. Now one question, Malcolm Farr who writes for the Sydney press has done a story which has gone national and that is that taxpayers are paying off the mortgages of politicians to the tune of tens of thousands of dollars a year. And he says that a growing number of federal politicians are buying homes in Canberra to live in when they're in town for parliamentary sitting weeks. Are you comfortable with that?
PM: Well the arrangement for entitlements for members of parliament have been around since, in their current form at least, since Mr Howard was Prime Minister. I think the current entitlement arrangements were set in place around about 96-97. Secondly, the actual amount that is that a member of parliament is paid when they are travelling to Canberra is determined independently by the Remuneration Tribunal and thirdly those guidelines also make it possible for members of parliament to use that allowance they have for when they are travelling to either stay in a hotel or to stay in other forms of rental accommodation or other forms of accommodation.
The net impact on the taxpayer is the same. These arrangements have been around for a long time, as I said I think the current set of arrangements were set in place by Mr Howard in 96-97.
BYNER: Alright. Mr Rudd what happens if we find that things don't get better and they may even get worse before we turn the corner. Are you prepared for yet another stimulus beyond what we've just announced?
PM: We believe we've got the right strategy now for economic recovery Leon. I think in my remarks before I would have painted a picture of how grim the global economy has been. And our challenge in Australia to implement a strategy to lift Australia out of this global recession. And you can either sit around and do nothing about it, sit on your hands and just complain as a number of people who have been launching political attacks on the Government are doing at present or you can get out there and have a go. What we're doing is having a go.
And as a result let me give you just two examples. Because of the stimulus strategy that we've engaged in so far, Australian retail sales are out there better than practically any other advanced economy at this stage.
BYNER: Are we prepared to spend more on the stimulus, and borrow more if things don't get better?
PM: I was about to say, what we're doing and the impact of what we've done already on retail sales is to support one and a half million  -  one and a half million Australians currently working in retail. Our housing construction figures than most of the other countries because of the trebling of the first home owners boost. These measures are having an effect. Secondly the investment in the school modernisation program, turning every primary school in the country into a construction site and rolling that out the door now, that's going to have an effect as well.
We believe we've got the strategy right.
The third phase of it is what I've just been here talking to the Premier about this morning, is our investment in longer term nation building infrastructure, rail, roads, ports, as well as in the case of South Australia desalination but investments in universities, in hospitals, as well as school modernisation, as well as in longer term infrastructure like high speed broadband.
BYNER: Alright.
PM: All these things together provide overall the aggregate effect on the Australian economy is to invest something like four to five per cent of GDP back into the economy when the private sector around the world is in retreat. If we weren't doing that Leon, you know what would happen?
BYNER: What?
PM: We would have unemployment much, much higher. We would have a much deeper recession and a much slower recovery and many other families hit hard and hit personally by this recession which is brought to us courtesy of the global financial crisis beginning in the United States.
BYNER: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Good to be back in Adelaide Leon. I'm told by my staff this morning this is my 10th visit, I'm down here about every six weeks or so, so it's good to be back and good to be with the Premier this morning.


PM: Can I begin on that question. I've just been talking to the Queensland Premier and there are risks of severe flooding in South-East Queensland at the moment. South-East Queensland in the last 24 hours has received almost half of its normal rainfall. There are quite a large number of people who are at this stage isolated in their vehicles, I'm advised. 
I am further advised that there a number of school students that have been cut off as well. Local authorities in South-East Queensland have all activated their disaster management plans. The Queensland Government is monitoring the situation very closely. We are in close contact with the Queensland Government should there be any specific requests for assistance and this requires careful attention in the immediate period ahead.
JOURNALIST: Have they asked for any assistance?
PM: Not at this stage, not at this stage.
JOURNALIST: What sort of assistance would you be expecting to provide if they did?
PM: Normal disaster management arrangements would be implemented upon any request from the Queensland Government. I've just literally come from the telephone call from the Queensland Premier now. They are watching the situation very closely. The Queensland Premier just linked up with all the mayors in South-East Queensland on the unfolding situation. So I suggest we deal with that at the outset.
The other thing I would like to talk to you about is the reason that we are here at Swannies today in Perth. This is about investing in the future of this State's health and hospital infrastructure. As I've just said to these fine nurses and staff inside a little while ago, we are on about supporting jobs and apprenticeships and business today by investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for the future. That infrastructure includes rail, roads, ports.
It includes broadband, it includes solar energy. It includes the biggest school modernisation program Australia has ever seen, involving schools right across the state of Western Australia. It also includes investment in hospitals and medical research institutes. It involves here an investment of $180 million in the next stage of development of this hospital here turning into the Midlands Health Campus in the future.
What does that mean in practical terms for people of this community? It means significantly extending the services available to all residents in this wider region. Six new operating theatres, it involves also 22 new obstetric beds, involves also 90 additional multi-day beds for acute medical and surgical patients, as well as the doubling of the emergency department. These are the practical measures that we are taking, not just here, but in other parts of Australia as well, to partner with State Governments in order to invest in the health and hospital infrastructure our communities need for the future.
Talking to these fine nurses before, they are looking forward to being able to provide better services to the community of which they are a part.
More broadly, if I could simply make this point as well. On the investment in health infrastructure across the board, we are currently providing a range of additional investments across WA.
From the health and hospital infrastructure project in WA, in the 2009 budget we have $255 million over six years for a new rehabilitation unit at the Fiona Stanley Hospital, $180 million over six years for the development of the Midland Health Campus to replace the Swan District Hospital, $8.6 million over three years to expand renal dialysis services in the Kimberley Region. $7.9 million over two years to replace the current stand alone paediatrics ward as part of the redevelopment of Broome Hospital and $2 million towards four primary care projects in rural Western Australia. Now, that by way of investment is coming out of the Health and Hospitals Infrastructure Fund for the Budget that has just been released.
More broadly, we are investing of course in the Australian Health Care Agreement, a new record $64 billion agreement on health and hospitals funding over the next five years. That represents something like a 50 per cent increase over the health care agreement negotiated by the previous Australian Government. In the case of WA, therefore, our investment both in terms of the Health Care Agreement and in terms of the additional Hospitals Infrastructure Fund that I just referred to will make a significant difference to the future.
Finally, let me just say, what we are doing more broadly on the economy for WA as well. As I said, our strategy as a Government in response to the global recession is to support jobs, small businesses and apprenticeships for today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Totally, by way of government investment in stimulus, the Australian Government has invested some $5.9 billion, including $3.5 billion for overall infrastructure development, here in Western Australia.
The largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. Every primary school in Western Australia becoming a construction site, modernising the schools.
Investing in 20,000 new social housing, a slice of which will be built here in WA.
Also investing in energy insulation and energy efficiency measures including ceiling insulation in homes. And these particular hospital projects I mentioned today. All this is designed to cushion the impact of the global recession on the WA economy.
All this is designed to support jobs and families in the here and now. All this is designed to build this sort of infrastructure which WA communities need for the future. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it appropriate for taxpayers to be funding public servants' weight loss programs?
PM: I was asked about this in Adelaide a little while ago and my attitude is as follows: I would take a lot of persuading, a lot of persuading, to be convinced that such services represent the best use of the taxpayer's dollar and I will be asking further questions about this upon my return to Canberra.
JOURNALIST: Is it happening?
PM: We are seeking to establish the facts and as I said I think it would be odd and unusual in the extreme for that sort of expenditure to be justifiable. I await to hear all the details.
JOURNALIST: On swine flu, there's been some new developments today. There's a child in hospital, there's a number of children in isolation. Are we facing a second wave of swine flu?
PM: The Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, and the Chief Medical Officer today made a statement on the two most recent infections in Australia: as I'm advised, an adult women in Sydney and a young child in Melbourne. I am further advised that further investigations are underway by the relevant health authorities to detect whether any further infections have occurred and appropriate measures have been put in place to prevent further spread of the infection as well. The health authorities take any such development seriously and are deploying all necessary assets to deal with this challenge.
As the Health Minister and the Chief Medical Officer have said at the onset of this challenge some weeks ago, given the global nature of this particular phenomenon, it was always going to be a matter of time before this arose in Australia. The question practically for the health authorities is to deal with it efficiently, competently and effectively and I know that professionals involved are absolutely first class.
JOURNALIST: Is the three month pay freeze for MPs long enough?
PM: Just to make it clear that last year, as a result of a recommendation of myself to the parliamentary Labor Party, there was a freeze in place on MPs' salaries last year. I understand that there has been an independent decision by the Remuneration Tribunal to defer their decision on this matter until September and we will wait to see what they come up with.
JOURNALIST: We had a couple of bikies shot yesterday - drug related and probably gang related as well. It is going on all around the country. Is it time for a concerted national effort instead of all these splintered attacks against bikies?
PM: I've seen these reports in WA and they are profoundly disturbing. This violence, this unjustifiable violence has got to stop. Gang violence of any description is unacceptable in this country, Australia. Organised gang violence of the type that you describe is unacceptable in a country such as ours.
I've seen actions which have been taken in various states including by the South Australian Premier. I'm sure appropriate actions are being taken here in the West as well. But I am deeply concerned about how widespread this problem appears to be getting and we'll be looking further at what national responses may be necessary.
JOURNALIST: Is it possible to use the anti terror laws in that regard?
PM: Well, they have a particular definition in the Australian legislation and in the (inaudible) arrangements we have with the states, terrorism is a particular offence defined under Australian law. What we are talking about here are forms of, it seems, almost organised crime and therefore we need to look very carefully at the adequacy of our coordination measures between States and see what further measures may be necessary. This is sort of thuggery, this sort of absolute thuggery has to stop and it is time we, the various governments of the country, State and Federal, look at what further measures may be necessary. 
JOURNALIST: On employee share ownership schemes, are there any unintended consequences of the $60,000 cap and are you prepared to change them following discussions?
PM: As we've said all along, our intention with these tough Budget measures is to restore the Budget to surplus in the medium term. What's our strategy? To support jobs, infrastructure, business and apprenticeship opportunities now by investing in what we need to boost productivity in our economy in the future.
That means taking some tough decisions on the funding of those investments now to cushion the blow of the global recession and that means Government stepping up to the plate now to fill the gap left by the private sector which is copping a buffeting because of the global recession.
That's one arm of our strategy. The second arm of our strategy is to return the Budget to surplus in the medium term and that requires taking tough decisions. We've announced those in the Budget - $22 billion worth  -  many of them are not popular at all but they are necessary in order to return the Budget to surplus in the medium term.
On the implementation of each of those measures, including the one that you've just referred to, we would always as we've done in the past, consult with the relevant industry groups on the implementation arrangements.
But the measures are important in returning the Budget to surplus in the medium term. That's why we announced them in the Budget  -  necessary in the national interest to do that, even though some of them may be unpopular.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that there could be some change to the Managed Investment Schemes and the regulations surrounding them?
PM: I think it is important to examine the details concerning that particular corporate event rather than to rush to immediate judgment, and I'm sure the relevant authorities will do so. And having said that folks, I've got to zip. See you folks.


HOST: Kevin Rudd joins us. Welcome to Adelaide Prime Minister.
PM: Good to be back, I've been back here a few times the last year and a half I've been Prime Minister, visit number 10 I am told. But today it is to be with Mike Rann to formalise our commitment of $228 million to the Adelaide desalination plant.
HOST: Prime Minister that project, a big infrastructure project, also rail lines will be able to go ahead now and be modernised in a north and a new rail line running to Seaford. The, the question though is that somebody has to pay for that. Do you have any sleepless nights over running up debt for these sorts of projects?
PM: Well the important thing is to realise where we are in terms of the global economic recession. What's our strategy for dealing with the global economic recession, the worst economic downturn in 75 years worldwide? It's a strategy of investing in nation building infrastructure for tomorrow and therefore creating the jobs and the support for small business and apprenticeships we need for today. That's the right thing to do. It's responsible to do that.
In fact, it's irresponsible for Government at these times of economic crisis to step back and simply to allow the recession to get even deeper and for the recovery to take even longer and for unemployment to be even higher. That's why we're acting in the way in which we're acting and secondly we're doing so in partnership with governments right around the world who are undertaking similar actions. The last thing I'd say on the question of debt and deficit is this, is that Australia's net debt when it reaches its peak under this current program will not only be the lowest of all the major advanced economies around the world, it will be seven times lower.
We therefore have taken a responsible strategy to support the economy now because of this global recession but also an equally responsible strategy in the medium term to return the Budget to surplus. It's the right way to go and it's also delivering infrastructure and jobs here in South Australia.
HOST: In simple dollar terms what will our net debt peak at?
PM: Well our net debt of course will peak at, in 2013, 2014 at around about 200. Our gross debt at about 300, the net debt figure is 13.8 per cent of GDP at that time and as I said that's something like six or seven times less that of the average of the major advanced economies around the world.
Importantly what we have decided to do is embrace a strategy also of tough savings, some of which are politically unpopular, in order to return the Budget to surplus. That's what we're doing and therefore our strategy is to provide support for the economy now, infrastructure we need for tomorrow, jobs we need for today and then returning the Budget to surplus in the medium term.
It's the right strategy, it's also the responsible strategy. The alternative would be to bring about a level of unemployment the likes of which the country has never seen before and I'm not prepared to do that.
HOST: Prime Minister 200 what and 300 what?
PM: These are billion figures.
HOST: So 200 billion dollars?
PM: That's correct,yeah, and as I said the normal way which it is expressed as a net debt figure, as a percentage of gross domestic product because that then gives you a comparison between ourselves and the other major advanced economies. For example in countries in North America, in the United States for example you will have net debt as a percentage of GDP very, very high indeed. As I said our figure will be something like one seventh or one sixth that of the other major advanced economies.
Those other economies have a different set of circumstance to us but the overall strategy is, given that we have this unprecedented global economic downturn, this unprecedented global economic downturn since the Depression, it is very important that we act now.
Those other economies for example, a net debt figure Japan 103 per cent, The United Kingdom 56 per cent, the US 61 per cent, then we have Canada at 26.2, France 65, Germany 51, Italy 111. These are the figures as they exist in 2009, and what I've described before is where our figures would be when our net debt peaks at 2013.
HOST: And Paul Keating had a problem with the R word. Do you have a problem with the B word, billion, I notice and this was on Lateline, you wouldn't say $200 billion and you still haven't said it. You say 200 and 300.
PM: That's exactly right, $200 billion, $300 billion, all I was explaining to you is the actual comparisons which exist between it and the performance of other relevant economies around the world.
But the other side to this equation, if I could just say this to your listeners this morning, is investing in infrastructure is also necessary to support jobs and to do that we of course also must make provision for our long term economic recovery. For example if we're going to invest $291 million towards the Noarlunga to Seaford Rail extension, that requires injection from the federal Government. $294 million towards the Gawler Line modernisation, that's an injection from the federal Government, $61 million for the O-Bahn extension, that's from the federal Government and $228 million for the Adelaide desalination plant to double its capacity up to 100 gigalitres and provide Adelaide with long term water security.
These are necessary investments in this State's and this city's long term economic infrastructure. Now I am prepared to take those hard decisions despite the fact that in the debate about debt and deficit we have an absolute degree of dishonesty on the part of Mr Turnbull and the Liberals. Because when if you listen carefully to the Budget reply, what does it say? They were saying that their net debt will not be one dollar less than that of the Government's. It will not be repaid one day earlier than the Government's. This is all a political scare campaign mounted by them.
Remember they did the same with the debt truck a decade or so on foreign debt. What happened with foreign debt under the Liberals at that stage? Foreign debt increased from some $200 billion to $600 billion with Mr Costello as Treasurer. Let's put all of this into some political context too.
HOST: Prime Minister what does the Budget tell us about when this country will be out of recession? What are the forecasts?
PM: Well when it comes to the economic forecasts for the future, we obviously are going to have a challenge in terms of the year ahead. We've already indicated that there will be a difficult period for economic growth, for the period of 09-10. We are projecting negative growth of minus a half. For 10-11, the Government projects that we will be back with positive growth of two and a quarter and then we have stronger growth in 11-12 and 12-13.
HOST: Well a large portion of your infrastructure spending won't happen for another one, two even three years and by that time based on what you've just said we should be well out of recession?
PM: In terms of the economic infrastructure in which we are investing already, can I simply underline a couple of points. Firstly, right now, we are investing, nationwide, some $30 billion across the nation in the, including the biggest school modernisation program Australia has ever seen.
HOST: Yes but a lot of this other infrastructure that you have just described such as the big rail projects, the desalination plant here in South Australia, a lot of that won't be built for another one, two, even three years. And by that time we should be well out of a recession. Is there a risk that you will be tying up labour and capital, just when the private sector needs it, and the public sector doesn't?
PM: I would think if you were to ask your listeners whether they would want to have their railway lines extended from Noarlunga to Seaford, or the electrification of the Gawler line, or the O-Bahn extension, wherever we are in the economic cycle, they would like to see those improvements.
HOST: I am sure they would but that's a reason for providing a service, it is not actually going to help us in terms of the recession. You have argued that much of this infrastructure spending is needed to help us get out of recession. By the time you are spending it, on your own figures, we should be out of recession.
PM: Well can I run through the sequence with which we have done these things. Firstly, with the implosion of the global economy in the third and fourth quarters of last year, the Government embarked upon a three-stage strategy of dealing with the challenge of the recession.
The first stage was in the economic stimulus strategy of last October, where we provided direct payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and others, and we also trebled the first home owners boost. Why was that necessary? To provide immediate stimulus to the economy at a time when other economies were falling through the floor.
If you want the evidence of the effectiveness of that, look to Australia's private residential construction figures and our retail sales figures against all other OECD economies, we have been stronger, they have been decidedly weak.
The second phase of our approach was in the nation building and jobs plan we produced in February. That contains within it short term infrastructure - 20,000 units of social housing, school modernisation across all of the country's primary schools and a large number of its secondary schools as well as an energy efficiency program for homes in terms of ceiling insulation.
That is to inject some three per cent of GDP in this period, that is this financial year, and the year beyond because this is when the economy is at its weakest. So we are building the schools we need for the future while injecting a large slice of economic activity now through this stimulus.
The third phase is what you have just pointed to. The measures outlined in the Budget, which create necessary long term infrastructure as well. A number of the projects that I have just referred to get going very soon.
So therefore, these things all dovetail with each other and the objective and the strategy is this: supporting jobs, small business, apprenticeships now, while investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for the future.
HOST: And Prime Minister just before you leave us, what is the latest on Annice Smoel, are you confident that you will be able to bring this Australian mum back to Australia soon or is it that she has really just got to work her way through the Thai legal system and there is not a lot that Australian authorities can do?
PM: What I would say is that whenever any Australian gets into trouble overseas, the Australian Government through the Department of Foreign Affairs takes each of those cases seriously and therefore, our staff at the embassy in Bangkok have been working directly with the individual, her family, as well as of course with the Thai authorities.
There is often a whole lot of complication associated with each of these cases and all our officials in Bangkok are working their way through this. What I could say to you and you listeners is that in this case as with any other case, we will spare no resources and no efforts to try and bring it to a satisfactory conclusion.
It will be difficult. The foreign minister has been dealing directly with our ambassador in Bangkok on this. But bear in mind, at any given time, we have about a million Australians who are offshore around the world, travelling or working, and this is a huge challenge when inevitably, people get themselves into trouble.
HOST: I mean you would have to think that if you locked up every Australian who knocked off a bar mat, half the country would be in prison.
PM: I think it is probably wise I don't comment on the specifics of the case, given that our objective is to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion. So people will make their own conclusions about that and the nature of the alleged offence.
What we are concerned about is to make sure that we provide maximum help and support to this individual and to her family in order to bring this to a very quick conclusion and we are working in that direction. But I don't want to underestimate the degree of difficulty.
HOST: Prime Minister, just finally, another Budget question, on the retirement age which will now be 67. What do you plan to be doing by the time you are 66?
PM: That is a terrific question. I wish I knew the answer to it. All I know is that for the next six months, I am focussing on doing everything I can to implement the economic strategy we have been discussing to try and lift Australia out of this global recession. And when it comes to my longer term future, people, other people other than myself will make those decisions.
My job is simply to do what I have been paid to do now which is to make some tough and at times unpopular decisions for the country's future.
HOST: We could assume though you won't be dragging insulation through ceilings or driving courier vans but many people are going to have to be doing that until they are 67, people who don't have any other means of retirement income.
PM: Well can I say that Governments around the world have been increasing the, when you, we are talking about the eligibility for the age pension here. And it is important to emphasise that is what we are discussing, increasing that from 65 to 67.
Governments around the world are taking these decisions to increase the eligibility age for age pension. And the reason is, long term financial sustainability of the age pension system. With the ageing of the Australian population, unless we make these changes for the long term, then its capacity to undermine the overall financial integrity of budgets in the long term, not just here but in other countries with ageing populations, is a serious problem.
The second thing we have done to make this fair is to give people lots and lots of warning. This does not start to be phased in until 2017. It doesn't obtain full effect until the year 2023.
And therefore, in terms of preparing for it, we think it's the right thing to do, particularly when the Australian Labor Government has just provided a very substantial increase in the single age pension by $32.50, and our predecessors sat around for 12 years and did nothing on this.
So we have increased the aged pension, but we have also taken a measure for the very long term, to ensure that we have got fiscal sustainability of the pension and retirement incomes policy in general.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks for talking with us.
PM: Good to be back in Adelaide.


PM: First of all, it's great to be in Geraldton. I'm advised by the Mayor this morning that the last Prime Ministerial visit to Geraldton was when young Mr Menzies was Prime Minister in 1954. So it has been a long time between drinks. It is good to be back. And for me it is of course my first visit here.
The reason we are here though is to talk about the nation's economic future. The Australian Government strategy for dealing with the global recession is to support jobs and business and apprenticeships for today by investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
And that's what we're here in Geraldton to talk about. This is a most significant proposal because what we are dealing with is a major new economic project for the nation. We are looking at, how do we actually take this development and turn it into the next chapter of Australia's national economic vision.
We are talking about Oakajee and the Mid West. We are talking about a new port, we are talking about a new industrial zone and we are talking about a new minerals province and wrapping these together. That's why we are here at different levels of Government, to support this project going ahead.
At a time of national economic difficulty, at a time of global economic recession, it's critical to lift the nation's economic vision for the future, and part of the vision for the future is Pilbara, a big name from the past and for the future, the North West Shelf. A big name from the past and for the future. Oakajee and the Mid West, a very big name now, for the future as well.
Pilbara, the North West Shelf and now Oakajee and the Mid West. These will become names in the economic history of Australia and what we are here today is to launch that third big name. Oakajee and the Mid West, part of Australia's economic future. Of course in making projects like this work, they don't just come about like that.
The Premier here has explained to me on the plane up from Perth today, that he has been investigating this project for 15 years?
BARNETT: Ten.
PM: Ten. Fair old stretch. And I imagine others in this region have been looking at it for some time longer. And I understand that some of the original examination of Oakajee as a possible port occurred way back in the 60s. Am I right?
Therefore, it has been around for a while as an idea. Getting the private sector together into this project is important. But what the Premier and I discussed prior to the Australian Budget was the absolute necessity of Government making the difference in getting this project going.
So, we the Australian Government are proud to be co-investors with the WA State Government in making Oakajee and the Mid West part of Australia's future economic vision.
You go to the ingredients of what's being talked about here. These are really important developments. It is not just the jobs that will be generated in this construction of a brand new port. It is also the jobs that will be generated through the running of that port in the future as well.
Secondly it is about also a new industrial zone attached to the port. And thirdly providing that common user infrastructure for the associated minerals and resource projects right across the Mid West province.
I am a proud Queenslander. In Queensland, we have this fantastic port and industrial zone called Gladstone. That's on Australia's Pacific Coast. We are now about to build something as big, with as much potential for the future, on Australia's West Coast.
And that's why I think the whole nation should pause for a moment and reflect on where this great project takes not just the great state of Western Australia, but Australia itself in the decades which Iie ahead.
So we are proud to be co-investors with the WA government.
One or two other things before I ask the Premier to speak about this project, another reason that I am here in Geraldton today is that Australian Government has announced that the HMAS Sydney Memorial in Geraldton has been recognised now as a national memorial.
The HMAS Sydney Memorial commemorates of course a tragic event in Australia's military history, the loss of HMAS Sydney and the entire crew of 645.
HMAS Sydney as you all know, was the pride of the Australian fleet during the second world war before she was tragically lost in November of 41. The memorial here at Geraldton was dedicated in November 2001, on the eve of the 60th Anniversary of the sinking. As you know, the wreck was located in March 2008, off the coast of WA.
The Government recognises memorials as being of national significance if they commemorate a significant aspect of our war history and HMAS Sydney Memorial does just that.
And this declaration today of the HMAS Sydney Memorial as a national memorial is in part a reflection of the efforts by the Geraldton area, the city of Geraldton and the civic groups such as the Rotary Club of Geraldton in constructing and maintaining this fitting tribute to the crew of HMAS Sydney.
So Mr Mayor I would congratulate you and the local authority and the local community for your efforts over a long period of time, and part of the purpose of my visit today is to affirm this new national declaration of this Geraldton memorial for HMAS Sydney, as a memorial of national significance, a national memorial.
And finally before I ask the premier to talk, could I also mention our friends in Queensland who are going through some terrible flooding, in South East Queensland.
I spoke with the Premier of Queensland yesterday afternoon about the situation there, and I am advised that parts of South East Queensland have now been declared a natural disaster zone by the Queensland Government.
This automatically means that Commonwealth assistance for these areas has been activated and will be available for victims of the flooding.
I was briefed as I said by the Premier late yesterday on this and our two Governments remain in close contact with each other.
The Government in Queensland is concerned that the weather could get worse before it gets better and I would urge everyone in flood-affected areas in Queensland to follow the instructions of the emergency authorities on the ground, because this is still a very difficult and in some areas, dangerous environment.
State and Commonwealth funded Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements under the NDRRA have been operating since 6pm last night. Under these arrangements, individuals can apply for a number of personal hardship grants and they are consistent with the normal arrangements.
To conclude where I began, this is an important day for WA's long term economic development but equally an important day for Australia's long term economic development. And the Australian Government is proud to be a co investor with the WA Government in making this project happen.
Over to you Premier.
BARNETT: Thank you Prime Minister and can I say, I agree with what the Prime Minister has just said. The Oakajee port development, with the industrial estate and the rail, is truly a project of national significance and it does give Australia a new deep sea port on the Australian West Coast.
The West Australian economy for a long time has been known as a dig it up, ship it out economy. And there is a lot of truth to that. But Oakajee allows for a multi user, multi product port, where you will see the further value-adding, the processing of minerals, of natural gas, even other products.
So this is a big step forward in terms of more sophisticated, more value-adding to the economy.
The other aspect about Oakajee is that this is a great example of collaboration. An infrastructure provider and developer in Oakajee port and rail; the state Government and the Commonwealth coming together to fund the $680 million worth of the major breakwater, the turning channels, the dredge channels, to ensure that it's a common user, everyone on an equal basis, port.
That will give great confidence and will see the project go ahead. The other, and final distinguishing feature of this project, and I can say so Prime Minister, this to me at least represents perhaps the greatest example of a truly joint project between Australia, Japan and China.
And it is the start of I think of a new generation of Australia's commercial relationship in that part of the world. So in every box I think this just stands out as just a great project and I thank you Prime Minister for the Commonwealth support for this project.
To Chris and Oakajee port and rail, you now have the job in front of you, but you have the Commonwealth Government and the State Government backing for an important national project.
Great thing for Geraldton, great thing for Western Australia and it will prove to be a good investment Prime Minister, I guarantee it. More money for the West.
PM: Mr Mayor, do you want to say something?
MAYOR: Mr Prime Minister and Mr Premier, this is indeed a historic day for the city of Geraldton. To see the level of cooperation that has been brought to bear here is just fantastic. The State Government, the Federal Government, we have got Australia, Japan and China all working together, private enterprise, Government, just fantastic and from the City's point of view, this is going to bring a great deal of prosperity here. There is absolutely no doubt about that. There is a lot of work to be done yet and we are looking forward to the challenges, I know Chris is.
So on behalf of the City, thank you very much for what you have done for us here today, and Mr Prime Minister, also thank you sincerely for declaring the Sydney Memorial a national memorial, it is most important to us.
And we are very proud of that. We are going to take you up there a little later and I am sure you would be very impressed. So thank you very much.
PM: Folks, any questions for the Premier or myself? We are very happy if there are none (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Much of the iron ore mines in the Mid West are magnetite and that's something that I guess uses 15 per cent less carbon emissions than perhaps steel produced from hematite. With the Government's emission trading scheme is there any, are you looking at maybe giving some concessions to these miners so that we can protect the investment in the Mid West and therefore investment in Oakajee?
PM: On the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we are faced with big national challenges. What system do we have in place to provide predictability for business for the future, given that we are in a global environment which is moving towards a lower carbon world?
And secondly, making sure that we provide sufficient transition and support for our major industries on the way through. Therefore, within the overall scope of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we have of course, provisions for energy intensive trade exposed sectors of the economy.
We also have specific provisions through our Climate Change Adjustment Fund for other industries and we continue to work our way through the implementation of those as it affects every industry group across the country.
Our job is to get the balance right. You cannot simply say, let's forget about carbon pollution reduction because the rest of the world, gathering in Copenhagen at the end of this year, is not going to forget about it.
They are going to take action of one form or another. So what business is saying to us, the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Industry Group, together with the Climate Institute, the WWF and the ACF, is we need predictability for the future and rules which provide business with confidence for the future.
This is tough, most governments doing this around the world are finding it tough. Particularly in the difficult global economic environment. And we are confident we have got the balance right and we are continuing to work its implementation through with all the affected industry groups.
JOURNALIST: On the employee share ownership scheme, you've indicated that there might need to be some changes to that. What will the changes be (inaudible) moving the threshold (inaudible).
PM: What we have done in the Budget is take a series of tough decisions. As I said before, our strategy is this - to support Australia at a time of global economic recession, by a strategy of nation building, supporting jobs, business and apprenticeships today by investing in infrastructure for tomorrow.
Rail, roads, ports, hospitals, school modernisation, National Broadband Network, as well as investing in critical developments in various parts of the country concerning water security.
This is what we are doing. That's one arm of our strategy. The other arm of our strategy is to return the Budget in the medium term to surplus. And that means taking tough savings decisions.
In the Budget we announced $22 billion worth of savings decisions; these are in the large part, controversial and will involve some pain. On each of those decisions, as we have done in the past, we will continue to work through the implementation arrangements with affected industry, and industry groups and those consultations continue. That is the right way to do it, we have always done it that way in the past.
But you need a clear strategy of nation building for recovery now, so that we get Australia lifted out of this global recession as rapidly as possible and secondly a strong Budget strategy to return the Budget to surplus in the medium term.
That is what we are on about. Tough business, but we intend to do it.
JOURNALIST: The unions are worried that their members won't have access to these share schemes. Can you clarify (inaudible)
PM: Well I think obviously there's been a number of concerns raised by various people in the industry and various people in the unions but they are not Robinson Crusoe there about various other concerns which have been raised by a whole range of measures we have taken in the Budget.
Budgets are about tough decisions. I imagine when the Premier brought down his state Budget the other day, there were a few complaints from various people around the place. Or maybe his was universally popular, I am not sure.
I haven't followed the press reporting of the Premiers' state Budget.
But you know something - Budgets are tough. They involve choices about the deployment of available taxation revenue. And therefore, we have had to take a series of tough decisions and we will not resile from taking them into the future.
JOURNALIST: You have indicated that there might need to be some changes there. Will you lift the threshold?
PM: No, what I have said is that together with every other measure that we've implemented in the past on the revenue side, including those outlined in the Budget, the normal thing to do is to work your way through the implementation arrangements with the affected industry groups. Those consultations are under way, as they are in other areas of intitiatives that we have put forward in the Budget as well.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull has been on morning radio this morning (inaudible)
PM: I am not surprised by that. I think it has happened before.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the exact figure?
PM: I have been talking about that on radio ever since I have been here. Here is a question though that I might sort of throw back in the other direction, which is on the, we have been having a debate about how you fund the Budget returning to surplus.
One of the measures we have put forward are changes to private health insurance and these are controversial, like the ones you have just been asking about.
But there is a part of that which also goes to the future of the dual system of public and private health that we have in Australia. So let me go to this.
Today, we had the opposition, federal opposition health spokesman say that, and if I get the exact quote right, that under his proposal, “we need” and I am quoting here, “to get private patients out of public hospitals”, let me quote that. “We need to get private patients out of public hospitals”.
Now I think the 40 per cent plus of Australians who have private health insurance would be surprised to learn that that is now federal Liberal policy. That goes to the heart of public financial management.
Our proposal on private health insurance is clear. It is out there, it is being debated. What we now have is this extraordinary statement by the federal Liberals, that they want to see private patients out of public hospitals. I think people will be surprised to learn that.
That is part and parcel of the Budget debate at present and that is part and parcel of the debate that we will have when parliament resumes.
But we all need to know where the consequences go. And this is a new departure in federal Liberal policy and I am quite stunned by, absolutely stunned by it.
Okay, are we ready to rock and roll?
JOURNALIST: Just lastly, what about your response, Bob Brown has called for a parliamentary inquiry into the entitlements, for an audit  - 
PM: Bob often calls for many things. What I have said also in radio interviews I think this morning is that we will always look at practical proposals to have a greater transparency in terms of parliamentary entitlements. The current arrangements have been around since Mr Howard was Prime Minister, I think in the mid-90s. Where there are further practical proposals in terms of greater transparency, we will always work our way through those. And particularly if they make sense and stack up.
Thanks folks, gotta zip.
JOURNALIST: And the woman in Thailand?
PM: Okay, one more, here we go.
JOURNALIST: Annice Smoel has come back from Thailand. Are you relieved?
PM: This is a, this has been of great distress to this woman's family and with little ones involved, everyone understands the anguish which families go through at this time.
Let me say this. What the Foreign Minister and the Department of Foreign Affairs have done is first class work, behind the scenes, helping the family, helping the individual and negotiating quietly with the Thai authorities to make sure that this can be dealt with.
And they have done a very good job and I congratulate them for them and I would say to the family concerned, that we are pleased that the little ones have that anxiety removed.


The Prime Minister and the Premier of Western Australia today outlined their vision for a $4 billion world-class deep sea port at Oakajee to spur the development of high value-adding iron ore and minerals processing industries in WA over coming decades.
|The Federal Government will invest $339 million in a 50/50 partnership with the Western Australian Government towards critical common user infrastructure including the channel, breakwater, turning basin, navigational aids, provision for tug and pilot boat pens, port administration offices, and roads and utilities.
This is part of a long term vision for WA to be not just world-class in mining, but also in industries along the value chain.
The Oakajee development includes both:
     * A deep sea port that can take cape sized vessels and unlock the economic potential of 300 million tonnes of iron ore across eight deposits and other mineral resources in the Mid West region; and
     * A fully-serviced 6,500 hectare industrial estate that will see the development of value-adding industries that could include gas processing, iron-ore processing, fertilisers, and chemicals.
Port capacity will expand from 35 million tonnes of iron ore per annum initially to as much as 63 Mt/pa by around 2023  -  making Oakajee a world class deep water port.
The WA Government has estimated that during the port and rail construction phase, from 2010 to 2014, the project will generate up to 2,000 jobs, with about 400 personnel operating the infrastructure when complete.
The Western Australian Government and Oakajee Port and Rail signed a State Development Agreement on March 20, with OPR investing $160 million over the next 12 months in further studies and detailed planning as part of the project's Bankable Feasibility Study.
Federal and State Government investment is subject to the outcomes of these studies and advice from Infrastructure Australia.
The Prime Minister also announced that the national advisory council, Infrastructure Australia, will work with the National Transport Commission to develop a National Ports Strategy during 2010 for consideration by the Council of Australian Governments.
Australia needs a nationally coordinated approach to the future development and planning of Australia's port and freight infrastructure.
It will cover both bulk commodity ports and container ports and identify:
     * the most effective regulatory and governance frameworks
     * ways to improve land planning and corridor preservation
     * the future infrastructure requirements of Australia's ports including road and rail links.
In the past, there have been examples where sea access and port side developments have not been coordinated with land side developments such as road and rail investments  -  a National Ports Strategy will address this.
Smarter regulation, governance, planning and pricing will make our ports more efficient and ensure they are part of a supply chain that efficiently moves goods from the farms, mines, and factories to international markets. 
Investment in Oakajee is part of the Federal Government's $22 billion infrastructure investment in the 2009-10 Budget, which includes rail, roads, ports, energy, broadband, and health and education infrastructure.
The Australian Government's nation-building investments include $3.4 billion in road and rail infrastructure in Western Australia.
Our approach to nation building is about supporting jobs today by building the infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.


The Australian Government today announced that the HMAS Sydney II Memorial in Geraldton, Western Australia, has been recognised as a national memorial.
The HMAS Sydney II Memorial commemorates a tragic event in Australia's military history  -  the loss of HMAS Sydney II and her entire crew of 645 men. HMAS Sydney II was the pride of the fleet and her loss was keenly felt by the whole nation in November 1941.
The Memorial in Geraldton was dedicated on 18 November 2001, on the eve of the 60th anniversary of the sinking. It overlooks the Indian Ocean where HMAS Sydney II was lost. The wreck was located in March 2008 off the coast of Western Australia.
The Government recognises memorials as being of national significance if they commemorate a significant aspect of war time history and play a major role in community commemorative activities. The HMAS Sydney II Memorial does just this.
This declaration recognises the efforts of the City of Geraldton-Greenough and civic groups such as the Rotary Club of Geraldton in constructing and maintaining this fitting tribute to the crew of HMAS Sydney II.
It also recognises the many volunteers whose dedication to sharing this memorial with visitors ensures that HMAS Sydney II will never be forgotten.


HOST: The PM has just turned up in our city and he joins me on the program now on the phone. Mr Rudd good morning to you.
PM: Morning Simon, in fact I'm with the Premier of Western Australia here in Geraldton, so that's where I've just flown and there's a lot of rain let me tell you which I'm told will be welcomed by the wheat farmers.
HOST: Yes it's heading from south to north so you'll get more of that throughout the course of the day. Mr Rudd there's a few issues - we have had Mr Turnbull on the program, I should preface our comments with that - and I know there are some issues bumping around nationally today.
Can I ask you first of all, this $32,000 that all MPs receive, federal MPs receive as an electorate allowance, the Greens are saying today there needs to be more checks and balances on how that 32,000 is spent. Do you agree?
PM: I'm happy to look at any further transparency measures. These arrangements have been in place as I understand it from when Mr Howard last looked at MPs' travel entitlements way back I think in the mid 90s. But if there are further measures to enhance transparency on this and other, we're open to those ideas, we'll work our way through them.
HOST: Can you tell my listeners this morning about the federal Budget. There's comment around, it's been around for a couple of days Mr Rudd, about your apparent avoidance of describing to us exactly what the federal Budget's deficit will be in years to come. Can you tell 6PR listeners this morning what it will be?
PM: Well, on the question of the federal Government's debt which has been the subject of debate in recent days - as I've said on a number of interviews in the last week, that I welcome a debate about deficit and debt because it is the right strategy for dealing with what is the worst set of global economic circumstances in three quarters of a century and the objective is to cushion the impact of the global recession in Australia by supporting jobs and small business today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
On the question of the actual debt and deficit itself, net debt peaks at about 188 billion in 2012-2013, gross debt at about 300 billion at about that stage. Net debt rises to 13.6 per cent of GDP. That is the lowest of any of the major advanced economies and represents, in fact it's about seven times lower than the major advanced economies.
If you go through the other advanced economies their net debt figures are something like this: Japan 103 per cent, United Kingdom 56 per cent, United States 61 per cent, Canada 26, France 65, Germany 51, Italy 111, ours will peak at 13.8.
I think it's important to put that into context and also, following the Budget being released, the international credit rating agency Standard and Poor's reaffirmed Australia's triple A credit rating. Therefore that reflects the fact that our overall approach to net debt at this stage is very conservative by global standards.
HOST: Mr Rudd, I asked our Premier this last week when he handed down the state Budget. You believe that Australia will haul out of this, this global situation more quickly than other countries. Mr Barnett believes that WA will haul out quicker than the rest of Australia. On what do you base your optimism about Australia's finances?
PM: Well, we've taken a responsible and conservative approach to the way in which we handle the impact of this global economic recession. Let's put it quickly into context. Eight of Australia's top trading partners right now are in a recession, 32 of the 33 major industrial economies around the world are now contracting. This is the challenge we face, it's the worst since the Great Depression of the early 1930s. That's the challenge that we've got. But what we're doing in partnership with state governments, including the WA state government, is investing in infrastructure for tomorrow and therefore supporting jobs and businesses today.
Our projections are that WA is powering along well given the relative challenges that every state and the country at large has at present. And I've been talking to the Premier about this on the plane coming up from Perth this morning to Geraldton - and we're off to look at our proposed joint investment in the Oakajee Port development - is that WA will be strong in the recovery phase. We also obviously project that this coming financial year we will see negative financial, negative economic growth, but we also project that in the following financial year we'll see positive economic growth. We think that Australia is doing better than most other economies now around the world, given the overall impact on all economies from this global economic recession. And our strategy is nation building for recovery.
HOST: You talk about being responsible and conservative, Mr Rudd, was it responsible and conservative to hand out the $42 billion, much of which was made up by these $900 payments and $950 payments, was that responsible and conservative?
PM: Well, Simon actually that point you just raised is actually wrong. Out of the $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan, about $30 billion is direct investment in the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen, the biggest investment in social housing the country has ever seen and the biggest investment in energy efficiency and residential houses the country has ever seen.
Now, let's put all that into context. Therefore, when you look across the state of Western Australia, we are currently as an Australian Government investing $5.9 billion worth of various forms of stimulus, the vast bulk of which is going into infrastructure, nation building infrastructure, state building infrastructure, port developments like at Oakajee, also the north ah, link project in the middle of Perth, together with hospital developments at both Fiona Stanley and out at the Swan District Hospital which I visited yesterday.
HOST: I understand that, I understand the infrastructure component, I understand it's not the major -
PM: But you have assumed that the payment to individuals was dominant, it's not, it's the smallest portion of what we are doing overall.
HOST: But there has been, has been, criticism - 
PM: The reason (inaudible) was to actually support activity in the economy at the point which we had near collapse of major financial institutions in the global economy last September-October. And the first and most important response you could do then was to provide direct stimulus to consumption and to housing by trebling of the first home owner's boost, while you then lined up infrastructure projects over the next several months
HOST: Well, let's talk about the payments then, from a detailed point of view. We now understand as I'm sure you do and I can only assume you roll your eyes when you hear, that people who've moved overseas and people who should not be recipients of this payment have, in fact received the 900 or 950. Um, that leads to criticism that this was done on the run and the systems weren't in place to make sure this money went to the right people, you must, you must concede that some people have got the money when they shouldn't have.
PM: Simon, our responsibility as the Australian Government, faced with the near collapse of the global financial system last September-October, was to act early, decisively and effectively to support the economy then through stimulus. We make no apology for that.
And if you look one and a half million Australians, including a huge slice of Western Australians, who work in retail, what happened to their counterparts around the world in most other advanced economies is that retail sales collapsed in the last quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year, shedding millions of jobs around the world.
In Australia, we acted early and decisively to provide support to that sector because it would have taken us at least six months to prepare for medium term investment in infrastructure like the school modernisation program and longer term infrastructure like the Oakajee Port Development I'm inspecting with the Premier today here in Geraldton.
Therefore, we had to take the Treasury's advice and to act early and decisively on that front. Of course there will be criticism, I accept that, but the alternative would be to produce an impact of this global recession on Australia, which would have seen hundreds of thousands of more Australians and Western Australians out of work.
And I wasn't prepared to do that, and we defend the Government's action.
HOST: Sp you won't concede that some people picked up the payment when they shouldn't have?
PM: Can I just say Simon, every decision is going to have, you know, certain unintended consequences, I accept that. But had we delayed the delivery of those payments, to pensioners, to carers, to veterans and to families, in order to make sure that every last element of uncertainty was removed, the impact on stimulus in the economy and keeping hundreds of thousands of Australians in jobs in the retail sector in the critical last quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year would have been undermined.
The Treasury's advice was we needed to act now. To put all those other matters into place would have led to unnecessary delay. And we needed to inject activity in the economy in that six month period, leading up to our investment in the school modernisation program which is about to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in the biggest school modernisation program that this country has ever seen.
HOST: Alright, PM, we get the message on school modernisation. I think you have said that three times.
PM: Well I think your local P&amp;Cs and P&amp;Fs are going to be pretty happy about that. If you don't have a multipurpose hall in your primary school, we are about to invest to make sure that there is one there, together with a library.
HOST: Fair enough. PM, can you tell the listeners to 6PR this morning, will we be going to an early poll, an early federal election?
PM: Look, I have said before Simon that I have a very conservative view of these things and that is that we are elected to serve for a three year term, federally. And my belief is that that's what we should be doing.
I have also said that when it comes to the passage of important elements of economic policy and public financial policy, including the Budget, that the savings measures outlined in the Budget have to be preserved.
We have an economic strategy which has two arms to it. Supporting the economy now at a time of global economic recession through our nation building and jobs plan, our investment in jobs by supporting investment in infrastructure, and secondly, having filled some of the gap left by the private sector now, once the global recovery gets underway to return the Budget to surplus.
That means supporting the $22 billion worth of medium term savings we have outlined in the Budget, because we believe it is important to return the Budget to surplus, that is why those difficult savings are contained there.
HOST: Mr Rudd, thanks for your time this morning, enjoy Geraldton won't you?
PM: Good to be back in the West, good to be back again.


PM: Like the Premier, the Australian Government acknowledges the contribution of the previous State Labor Government in the development of this project and of the current State Government in bringing the project forward to the Commonwealth for contribution.
Could I say that this strikes the Commonwealth as being a great project for the city of Perth? As the Premier and others have told me, this has been 100 years in the contemplation. And I know the wheels of Government turn slowly but 100 years is a little long and it's good, in fact it's very good, that we now have a plan and most critically funding for action. And we the Commonwealth wish to be partners with the State in making sure that the city of Perth has this brand new amenity in the centre of the city.
Our strategy as an Australian Government in responding to the global recession is to support jobs, business and apprenticeships today by investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow and that includes urban infrastructure like this. Making our cities work better.
This project seeks for the first time in 100 years to unite the city's north and south by building this Northbridge Link. It also seeks to create within the heart of that an appropriate open green space, what the Premier describes as a town square.
This I think is good for the city of Perth. But on the jobs front it also, I am advised, will contribute directly to some 350 jobs during construction. Tendering, I understand Premier, will conclude sometime later this year and construction commence next year. This is an important contribution to employment as well.
On top of that I am advised that as far as the urban development is concerned, you will see urban construction up to a value of some $2 billion over time. Therefore this is, as the Premier has just said, one of the most significant urban development proposals in Perth's recent history. Therefore we the Commonwealth are pleased to be partners in the city's progress.
I would also add that from our point of view these sorts of projects are fundamental to the sorts of infrastructure investments we the Australian Government are making across the nation today. Yesterday I was with the Premier in Oakajee committing the Commonwealth to our investment in creating this brand new deep-water port on the west coast of Australia. An exciting development for the long term future. An exciting development which brings together a minerals province, an industrial zone and a brand new port.
We're also committed in our most infrastructure announcements to investment in major hospital projects here in Perth as well and of course when we start unfolding the national high speed broadband network, that will come to WA and to Peth as well.
These are important infrastructure investments for the future but most critically they support jobs and apprenticeships and business in the here and now at a time of considerable economic difficulty.
If I could also just take this opportunity, given our friends from the media are here, to make a quick comment on the severe weather and flooding we're now seeing in northern NSW. That region is now being hit by the same weather system that created the most widespread flooding in Queensland in over 30 years most recently. I understand that overnight local emergency management authorities issued evacuation orders for Lismore and an evacuation centre has been established at Southern Cross University.
It is critical that residents follow the instructions of local authorities and as far as possible stay indoors and avoid the roads. I am advised that at this stage the NSW Government has not as yet declared the region a disaster zone. The Commonwealth through Emergency Management Australia, EMA, will remain in close and constant contact with NSW and the Government and we stand ready to assist in whatever way the Commonwealth can.
And with those remarks I'll open to any questions either of myself, the Premier or anyone else here who you want to throw a question at and the answer to which I can't provide.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just a story from the Daily Telegraph today, is it appropriate for the Liberals to have a website which is bragging that they have the hottest girls in Australian politics?
PM: Um. Should you be directing that here?
JOURNALIST: This is for Laurie Oakes, by the way.
PM: Pass. The um, I will leave that, Mr Turnbull is in town isn't he? Right okay I might leave that one to Mr Turnbull.
JOURNALIST: Are there hot women in the Liberal party?
PREMIER: Talented women.
PM: I think there are people of enormous ability in all of our political parties and I think I will just leave it rest at that.
JOURNALIST: Are the women hotter in Labor or in the Liberals?
PM: I believe we have great talent in the Australian Labor Party. But in terms of the Liberal Party, there are others more qualified to comment on this than myself. And could I say, that's a matter for the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you why, why have some of Australia's lowest income earners been excluded from your stimulus package?
PM: Well I think as the Treasurer would have said yesterday, if there have been any inadvertent omissions, then of course the opportunity exists to make amends for that.
JOURNALIST: Well it seems that there's lots of them, we are talking about people who pay tax as they go, but got it back when they filed the tax return but they have been, apparently a lot of them have been expecting that they would then get the $900 cheque. And they are not. And you have never said, you have never outlined that?
PM: Well Geof, I would say that if you are administering a system as complex as this, which is to dispense payments to millions of Australians and you are seeking to do so with urgency, in order to provide stimulus to the economy, obviously there are going to be individual omissions on the way. And I am sure there is a way in which that can be addressed and I am sure the Treasurer has made appropriate comments on that yesterday.
Let me go back to one other point.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) those people will get the $900?
PM: Let me go back to the general point. Why do we provide these payments in the first place? If you are looking at the depths of a global recession hitting in the final quarter of last year, then the Australian Government was faced with stark choices in terms of providing direct payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and also to families.
Those payments, based on the Treasury advice, had to be delivered as rapidly as possible to provide support to retail in the economy in the critical fourth quarters of last year and the first quarter of this year.
At a time when it was plainly impossible to bring on stream infrastructure developments, in order to provide stimulus to the economy then.
Therefore, we took the right and necessary action. Why is it that Australian retail sales have held up in this period of time, a sector which employs 1.5 million Australians?
Because we did the right thing in response to the advice from the Treasury. Therefore in doing that as rapidly as possible Geof, obviously there would be certain individual omissions which would have occurred in those arrangements.
I am sure the Treasury, in consultation with the Treasurer's office, will investigate any practical measures which might be possible to deal with any inadvertent omissions.
JOURNALIST: You'd agree that those numbers could run into the thousands?
PM: Any inadvertent omissions, when you are dealing with millions of payments and your macro-economic responsibility is to stimulate the general economy at a time when the global economy was crashing through the floor, our responsibility was to make sure that was delivered, in the here and now.
We executed that responsibility for which we make no apology whatsoever.
JOURNALIST: No I understand that, so are you indicating that those people, low income earners, who didn't get the $900 cheque, can make a case for it and you will pay them?
PM: What I have said before, quite plainly and this is consistent with what the Treasurer said yesterday, is that if there have been any inadvertent omissions, as would inevitably be the case in making such widespread stimulus into the economy, then I am sure the Treasury, advised by the Treasurer's office can work through any such individual cases.
That is the right way to do things, and if you are administering something as complex as the nation's family payment system, as large as it is, incorporating millions of families across Australia, inevitably, and this I believe occurs in relation to every payment, you will find individual omissions.
And these -
JOURNALIST: Did you make a mistake in excluding them?
PM: These omissions will always be dealt with administratively and in the correct manner.
JOURNALST: The money that you have pumped into the various infrastructure projects in different states, are they going to be offset or included in the formula for divvying out GST funds?
PM: On the question of GST payments, as the Premier and I have had many private conversations on this in recent times, that formula was laid down quite some time ago.
In fact it was laid down at the time which the then Howard Government reached a distributional formula with all State Governments at the time.
At that stage, I am advised, here in Western Australia, it was the Court Government.
That distributional formula remains in place. When it comes to infrastructure investments, we have made those on the basis of advice of bodies such as Infrastructure Australia and other departmental advice as appropriate, to ensure that we get the best value for money for the Australian taxpayer against our strategic objective, which is to support jobs, support businesses today and invest in this sort of critical infrastructure for tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: But will they be included or offset? I mean, will that come into the way that (inaudible) -
PM: The GST distributional formula remains at is has always been.
JOURNALIST: BHP Bilition is forging ahead with its plans to mine uranium in WA's goldfields. How do you feel about WA having a uranium mine?
PM: Well as you know, as leader of the parliamentary Labor party, I changed the policy of the federal Labor Party in terms of the whole question of the mining of uranium and the expansion of mines.
And that was a policy decision we took with great difficulty through the National Conference of the Australian Labor Party in 2007. National policy changed at that point. Simultaneously what I said at that stage was that individual state approval processes were then the matters for democratically elected State Governments. And different State Governments have had different responses to that. And that is as it should be.
And so therefore the policy framework was set by us in opposition, reflected in the actions we've taken in government and state governments therefore will act as appropriate on local approval.
JOURNALIST: Just on mining, the mining industry has said that under the current carbon trading scheme as it stands, 20,000 jobs through the mining industry will be lost as it stands now. I mean does that need to be reviewed before it's introduced?
PM: I think the only comprehensive modelling exercise of the whole-of-economy impacts of our proposed Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme has been undertaken by the Commonwealth Treasury. The Treasury modelling was released quite some time ago and indicated the overall net positive impact for the whole economy of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme of the type we've described. That is the only economy-wide modelling which has been done.
If I could make one other broader point as well - it is quite plain to anyone who analyses the numbers carefully that the economic cost of inaction on climate change is far greater than the economic cost of action. Also here in Western Australia, as the Premier and I discussed yesterday when we were in Geraldton, there are enormous renewable energy opportunities for the future, each of which is capable of generating new jobs.
For example, you have rich potential in this state not just in relation to solar energy, but also in relation to wind, wave, tidal energy and as I am advised also geothermal as well. These provide great opportunities and let me just make one final point; that is why, the Federal Government in the Budget has put forward a $4.5 billion National Clean Energy Initiative.
Why? Not just to carve out the new energy, clean green energy options for Australia's future, but to provide jobs on the way through as well. On the solar front, our friends in WA should pay particular attention to the opportunities which present themselves here as well. We've indicated a $1.4 billion-plus investment in what we plan to be the single largest solar energy initiative anywhere in the world, up to a 1000 megawatts, that provides huge opportunities also for employment for local business and also part of the clean energy future
JOURNALIST: Will that be enough to pick up the slack for the 20,000 jobs given the (inaudible)  - 
PM: Well, as I said the challenge of government is actually to chart a course of action which takes Australia through our current circumstances and into the medium and long term future as well. Therefore, the economic costs of inaction are far greater than the economic cost of action. If you wish to see evidence of that look carefully at what the Treasury modelling has to say of the economy-wide implications of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme that we have put forward.
It is a balanced scheme, it provides within it adjustment arrangements for various industry sectors. Any government around the world introducing such schemes at this time are obviously going to have to make tough decisions. We don't resile from those tough decisions, they are necessary for the future.
JOURNALIST: What about nuclear energy, Prime Minister? If a carbon capture storage ends up being economically and practically unviable, will the Government look at that?
PM: Well, our policy when it comes to nuclear power generation in Australia is clear and has not changed.
On the question of carbon capture and storage, CCS technologies, I mentioned before a $4.5 billion clean energy initiative in the Budget. $2 billion plus of that is in the direction of carbon capture and storage, CCS, a group of four related technologies.
Let's not forget this is the single largest coal exporting country in the world.
Therefore, we have a national and international responsibility to establish the workability of these technologies and at what price. And our long discussions with affected industries in coal and power generation have pointed to the absolute necessity of making these investments now to establish their technical feasibility and the price at which coal fired power can be delivered as a consequence of applying integrated CCS technologies.
Furthermore, we are seeking to do so internationally. We've established the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. Why? Because there is an absence of global coordination on this.
Look at figures for China on coal. Despite all that's been said, China's coal fired electricity generation will go up from what I understand is at present around about 40 per cent of China's power generation to about 43 per cent of China's power generation in the medium term future.
Unless we tackle the challenge of coal, than we are not properly tackling the challenge of climate change. That is why we are dealing directly with CCS technology investment. This is one of the largest governmental investments in carbon capture and storage technologies anywhere in the world.
And having said that guys, I've got to zip because I am due elsewhere.


It's a great day for the nation and it's a great day for Western Australia. Personally, it is a genuine honour to be in this house in Cottlesloe. I'm from Queensland, a fair way away, but no Australian grows up without knowing something of the life of John Curtin and this is the first time I've been here.
I think it says many rich things about Australia and our history. It says, as part and parcel of the great dream that is Australia, that any person of whatever modest beginnings can do and aspire to that which they wish in this great country Australia.
Curtin's origins were modest, this house is a modest house, but he rose to the highest office in our land. Of course, he was a person of talent and ability and dedication.
I think the other great thing which the story of Curtin says, which John Faulkner alluded to before, is here is a man and a very human man and full of human frailties and failings who had to wrestle with his own personal demons and in his own case, the great challenge of alcoholism. He struggled with that and prevailed.
He was therefore a person made of flesh and blood like the rest of us, but a person who saw that his contribution required him to rise above those challenges to make his contribution to the nation. And he did and we are the better for it.
Also, in a house like this, all of us engaged in the rough and tumble and the difficulties and challenges, and sometimes the brutalities of politics, understand that at the end we are nothing without our families. And here in this house, which has been here for the better part of three quarters of a century, you can sense that John Curtin was also the product of the nurture and the love of his family, as those of us engaged in public political life continue to be today. In a room like this, the warmth and the support, the succour, the friendship, the unquestioning love towards a person committed to political life - even in the case of national political life which would have you removed from this city for months and months on end to a distant place called Canberra - speaks much I think about the absolute and fundamental importance of the love of family. 
The last thing to say about this day is Curtin's extraordinary contribution to our national survival.
Yesterday, it was my privilege to visit with the Premier, Geraldton and to visit, in my case, for the first time the memorial which we have now designated a national memorial for the HMAS Sydney.
When Curtin became Prime Minister, this was one of many extraordinary sad tidings for the nation, the loss of 645 of our sailors in that engagement off the coast of Western Australia. From the end of 1941, through to the dark days of ‘42 and through to ‘43, his life in political office was full of one almost unending tide of bad news.
Yet it says something about the calibre of the man that in the midst of that tide of bad news that he could summon the energy, summon the courage and summon the quality of leadership to see that there was in fact a destination called victory. And he prevailed and the nation came in his wake  -  the nation I think also encouraged by the fact that they saw in Curtin one of us.
I'm pleased that the National Trust has this shovel-ready. I find it interesting that in my two days in the West that I've gone from Oakajee, where we spoke of thousands of jobs to the Northbridge Link this morning where we spoke hundreds of jobs to this humble abode in Cottlesloe where we are talking about 16.
So we are moving from deep sea ports to rail redevelopment to restumping the back verandah. Do whatever work's necessary. But you know something, this is good work because what it also says about those who attend here this morning is that one of the great qualities of being Australian is that on the things that matter we transcend the smaller things which divide us and that is reflected very much in the work of all in the preservation of this important monument for the nation. Thank you.


PM: Thanks very much and good luck, eh. I think, speaking on behalf of all Australians, this is going to be a fantastic series. The Ashes series is what it is all about in cricket and last time they were out here, you narrowly scraped home - 
PONTING: Just got over the line.
PM: Just got over the line. Five was it?
PONTING: Five-nil.
PM: Yeah we don't talk about that in case it puts the mockers on us, is that right? But it was a fantastic series last time and I saw a lot of that series. And I think all Australians are really looking forward to this series in England.
The team's going to be away, Ricky has just told me, for five months. This is a huge undertaking and think of the impact also on the families of players in what is going to be a long stretch away from the country. But the good wishes of all Australians go with this fantastic team in what is going to be a fantastic series in England.
All Australians should put their workplaces, their wives, their partners on notice that the season of bleary-eyed mornings is about to be upon us, as people tune into the cricket late at night and watch into the early hours.
And if I know something about Australians and our love for this game and their support for this team, led by this fine captain, that they will be up there supporting, watching, getting behind their Australian team who have done this country so much by way of national pride over such a long period of time and will continue to do so during this period ahead.
I will just say one or two other things then happily take any questions you've got.
Firstly on the floods in south east Queensland and in northern NSW. I have just received a report that, and I am advised that we have lost the life of a 70-year-old man in northern NSW as a consequence of the floods. Of course, our condolences go out to his family.
We continue to monitor closely the flood situation in northern NSW and in south east Queensland. The Minister for Human Services Joe Ludwig is in and around the Ipswich region today, working with local authorities on what needs to be done in terms of response to that extraordinary downpour and the damage which has resulted from it.
Also the Attorney General Robert McClelland will be in northern NSW this morning, working with local communities there on appropriate emergency response procedures and delivering whatever Commonwealth assistance is necessary to help those who have been affected by this extraordinary downpour.
One other thing I would mention is of course the developments in the last 24 hours concerning swine flu and I have just come from a telephone conversation with the CMO, the Commonwealth Medical Officer.
As you know, actions were taken yesterday through the statement by the CMO and by the Health Minister to move to a stage of containment here in Australia. This is necessary because what we are dealing with is a serious global public health challenge.
The Government has acted in response to each and every recommendation put to the Government by the professional health authorities across our nation. This will of course involve inconvenience in certain communities. Certain schools are temporarily closed down. We understand that that imposes inconvenience on families.
However, we also have a responsibility for the public health of the nation and therefore we will take whatever actions are necessary to underpin the public health of the nation, even if that involves inconvenience in certain locations.
We will continue to maintain the closest possible dialogue between the Commonwealth Medical Officer and his counterparts in each State and Territory and as anything further emerges on this front, we will act appropriately and act decisively.
The other thing I would ask you to all bear in mind is the preparations which the Government put in place well prior to this, this problem concerning swine flu and that was to ensure that we had a substantial stock of antivirals.
And that substantial stock of antivirals was put in place well before this particular problem emerged and we are well served by the presence of that stock of antivirals at this time. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Should Australia be prepared for deaths from swine flu?
PM: Look we take this swine flu problem deeply seriously because of what has happened around the world. We are part of a global community. We have seen deaths abroad, and therefore every effort by our public health authorities has been taken to avoid deaths at home. And that is what we are doing. As I said, our first responsibility as a government is to take whatever steps are necessary to support and maintain the public health of nation. 
That will involve inconveniences for a range of people and I understand that. But our overriding responsibility is to take necessary preventative action, containment action to reduce the risk of any fatalities from this disease in Australia.
JOURNALIST: Is it still 13 confirmed cases?
PM: As I am advised, the most recent information release by the CMO remains accurate. If there is any change to that during the course of the day we will advise you further.
The CMO, the Commonwealth Medical Officer is in constant contact with both myself and with the Health Minister and with State and Territory counterparts. It is important to proceed in a measures and balanced fashion in response to the information which we have at hand. And we are acting directly and immediately in response to any further information or advice we receive from the health authorities.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I spoke to the Commonwealth Medical Officer literally just in the last hour and the Commonwealth Medical Officer's advice is that we are currently taking all necessary and proper measures to support containment.
As for our concern to minimise risk to the public health, we believe that by taking the actions that he has recommended and implemented through State and Territory health authorities against containment, against early detection, against early treatment and the early deployment of antivirals, that all necessary steps that can be taken are being taken now.
JOURNALIST: On another subject, how concerned are you about reports that an RBA agency might have been offering bribes to win business?
PM: I understand that this company was established back in 1996, but I also note that the company has indicated it's referred all matters to the Australian Federal Police.
JOURNALIST: Ricky, could you comment on Gilchrist's performance (inaudible)?
PONTING: Yeah, it was pretty spectacular last night wasn't it? I think he brought up the fastest half century in IPL history - I think it was off 17 balls last night - and led his team to a very good win over Delhi who have been the frontrunners of the tournament right the way through.
So I think we will get a couple of the guys back from the Delhi team now to our camp on Sunday and Monday up at Coolum which will be a good thing for us so. Yeah Gilly and Matty Hayden and the guys that have retired from international cricket are certainly still playing very very well over there and it has been great to see them doing that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be touring any flood-affected areas yourself (inaudible)?
PM: I am keeping in contact with the local authorities on this and as appropriate I will visit myself. But as I said, we have the relevant line ministers; as you know in the Federal Government, the Attorney General is responsible for counter disaster measures, the Minister for Human Services is responsible for the delivery of a range of Centrelink payments and therefore they are the two line Ministers.
As appropriate I will visit these areas myself but will keep in close contact with the local authorities. The last thing you want is, frankly, politicians getting in the road when action is being taken on the ground. And therefore, the line ministers being there, given their particular set of responsibilities, is right and I will visit as appropriate, based on the advice of the local authorities as well.
One thing about the rain by the way is that, I suppose given where you are going, England, a bit of practice in the rain does help.
PONTING: It won't hurt us.
PM: A bit of practice in the rain won't hurt in terms of getting ready for what is usually a pretty damp season. Anyway, good luck to the team and thanks very much for being with us today.
JOURNALIST: Will there be any more (inaudible) assistance provided to the floods?
PM: Look, we will activate all the necessary counter disaster arrangements in response to any request from State Governments. We have always done that. It doesn't matter where natural disasters occur in Australia, rain, hail, flood, drought, we act in response to the advice that we receive and automatic natural disaster relief payments flow.
So that will be the same in this case, as it would be in the case of any other disaster-affected area.
Thanks very much.


The Rudd Government today announced $10 million to establish a ‘Walk-in Centre' at The Canberra Hospital, to help take pressure off its busy emergency department.
This funding will mean development of a new Nurse-led Walk-in Centre at The Canberra Hospital will begin in July 2009 and be operational in June 2010.
From June 2010, more minor cases will be able to be treated at the Walk-in Centre  -  helping to take pressure off the emergency department and allowing staff to concentrate on more serious and life-threatening cases.
The Canberra Hospital's emergency department sees approximately 53,000 patients a year  -  approximately 40 per cent of them with minor ailments such as coughs and colds, minor cuts and wounds, and muscle strains and sprains.
The new clinic will be operational 16 hours per day, seven days a week. It is estimated that it will provide up to 30,000 services annually.
The Canberra Hospital Walk-in Centre will be staffed by highly skilled Nurse Practitioners, complementing reforms in the 2009-10 Budget to provide MBS and PBS access for this group.
The Rudd Government believes access to public hospital services should be on the basis of clinical need and is committed to improving the function of our public hospital emergency departments. In 2006-07, 93.7 per cent of emergency presentations were treated in public hospitals.
Today's investment is funded from the $750 million committed at COAG last year to take pressure to take pressure off our emergency departments.
This commitment carries a performance benchmark of 80 per cent of emergency department presentations to be seen within clinically recommended triage times as recommended by the Australian College of Emergency Medicine by 2012-13.
Emergency department funding was part of the 2009-10 Budget's record $64 billion boost to funding for the nation's public health and hospital system  -  an increase of more than $22 billion, or 50 per cent, over the last Australian Healthcare Agreements under the previous Government.
The Government is committed to maintaining the balance of public and private in our health system  -  and this means supporting the critical role of the public hospital emergency departments in our health system. 


The Australian Government strongly condemns today's apparent nuclear test by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) and reports of a missile test shortly afterwards.
We join with our partners in the region  -  particularly Japan, the Republic of Korea and the United States  -  in taking a firm stand against the DPRK's behaviour.
We are deeply concerned by these latest provocative acts which breach United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718.
We join with our partners in calling for quick and resolute action by the United Nations Security Council in response to the DPRK's acts.
We urge the DPRK to cease its provocative and destabilising acts and work constructively through the Six-Party Talks process to resolve the challenges on the Korean peninsula.
Australia is a strong supporter of the Six-Party Talks and will continue to work closely with member countries to encourage the DPRK to denuclearise and abandon its ballistic missile program.


PM: Well this is a great day for Canberra Hospital and it is a great day of partnership between ourselves and the ACT Government and ACT health. Because this is where the rubber hits the road. This is about making a practical difference in emergency departments like this at this hospital.
This is a really busy hospital and the number of presentations here each year in the emergency department, I am advised is about 53,000. That is a lot of people. Therefore, what is the practical challenge we face?
How do you make it better for the folk who present here who have concerns with their kids in the middle of the night or late in the evening. How do you make it better also for the people who work here to get the best possible results from the good people who work at the emergency department?
Here today at Canberra hospital, I have just met stacks of nurses, stacks of wards men, stacks of doctors, who actually are here to make a difference, and they do. Because when you come here with uncertainty about your little one, late at night, you want to know that you are getting the best possible treatment.
What we have done most recently is provide an additional agreement with state and territory governments to improve the overall efficiency of emergency departments and in the case of Canberra hospital, what I am announcing today is $10 million to help take the pressure off this busy emergency department.
It will result in the construction of a new walk in centre here at Canberra Hospital, to be operational from June 2010. What does that mean in practice, it means that when you present here, at accident and emergency, there will an option for those less serious cases to be handled by the walk in centre.
If, having presented at the walk in centre, it is discovered that you actually need more serious treatment, then of course you are nearby and close by to this fully operational emergency centre as well.
The walk in centre though, I am advised will be operational 16 hours a day, seven days a week, and estimated to provide up to 30,000 services a year.
So what is the logic? To separate out those who need less serious attention, from those who need more serious attention. And this is part and parcel of a $750 million agreement that we made at the Council of Australian Governments at the end of last year  -  to take the pressure off emergency departments, not just here at Canberra Hospital but right across the public hospitals in Australia.
There is a performance benchmark attached and that is a performance benchmark of 80 per cent of emergency department presentations to be seen within clinically recommended triage times as recommended by the Australian College of Emergency Medicine by 2012, 2013.
This is part and parcel of making a difference with public health in Australia. It is part and parcel of making a difference for patients who present at emergency departments like this to get the best possible treatment. And what is happening here today at Canberra Hospital, we will see rolled out at public hospitals across Australia.
This is the right way to go. I might ask the Health Minister to add and then her counterpart from the ACT, I will say one other thing and then we will try to open to questions.
ROXON: Thank you very much Prime Minister and the Prime Minister has highlighted the importance of the announcement we are making today and I am pleased to be here with my friend and colleague Katy Gallagher because this is just an example of what is happening across the country. $64 billion, the most that has gone into a health care agreement in the history of Australia, a fifty per cent increase on the previous Government's health care agreement.
But those figures are almost so big that for most people it is hard to get your head around that 50 per cent increase. But for some of the fantastic nurses standing behind us today and other staff at the hospital, I think they understand that it turns into projects that can be supported on the ground in our hospitals. This is a $10 million project, it is going to be a nurse led walk in centre, something that the ACT has been pioneering by recognising our very highly skilled nurses.
And it comes on top of investments, that I think Katy is going to talk to you about, through our elective surgery funding, where three new elective surgery theatres are being built in Canberra.
The first across the whole country was opened at Calvary several months ago, another two are due to be opened here. This is our Commonwealth money, working in partnership, co -investing with the states and territories to make a difference in our hospital system.
And of course it complements our other workforce reforms like those for nurse practitioners with MBS and PBS prescribing, which is all about using our workforce strategically, and we know in hospitals - we have just had a cup of tea with some nurses and doctors - we know in hospitals, people understand the different skills and recognise and acknowledge the skills that nurses have, that doctors have, that specialists have, and this is a way of making sure we recognise those skills across the system, but we invest in the infrastructure that is needed so that those teams can work together at their optimum.
So I might ask Katy to say a few words and I think the Prime Minister wanted me to give you a quick swine flu update which I might do after this and then we will have some questions.
GALLAGHER: Thanks Nicola, well this is a pretty exciting time for the Canberra Hospital, it is the major tertiary referral hospital, not just for Canberra but for the region surrounding New South Wales. And over the past 18 months we have been working very closely with the Commonwealth over areas of pressure for us.
There is no doubt the emergency department, the amount of presentations that we get, we have had to look at different ways of doing things and one of those ways is through our nurse led walk in centres which we have been doing a lot of work over, and it is just fantastic that we have got support from the Commonwealth to actually fund that and get it up and running in this hospital.
But we have also got our new operating theatres too which are being built on the side of Canberra Hospital here, that will increase our operating theatres by 20 per cent and that is really important when you look at the numbers of emergency surgery that we do here, again being a major referral point for the region.
And just in last week's budget or two weeks ago in the federal budget, we were also lucky enough to get about $28 million for our regional cancer centre, to be built here at Canberra Hospital again.
So, fantastic for the region, it will service a population of about 600,000 and it really builds into the whole rebuild we are doing of our health system here. So you know these are real tangible projects that are going to make a real difference to people in the ACT and the region and it is through I think working with the Commonwealth, with them listening to us about our areas of pressure, that we have been able to get these significant wins for our community.
PM: Thanks Katy. Nicola, just on swine flu update.
ROXON: Look just very briefly on swine flu, can I give people a quick update. We now have 17 cases of swine flu confirmed in Australia, 11 in Victoria, two in South Australia, two in New South Wales and two in Queensland.
We currently have four schools that are closed, two in Adelaide, and two in Melbourne.
I do need to confirm for the public that all of the cases in Australia to date have all exhibited mild symptoms; we don't have anyone who has been severely ill yet in Australia from this disease. There have been some important developments over the weekend.
We do know that we have human to human transmission here in Australia. We do have a growing number of cases with no known contact to those who have travelled overseas. We do have another 40 people that are currently being tested today but these numbers are going to keep growing.
Obviously there are now 43 countries across the world who have swine flu and more than 12,000 cases worldwide.
You will have seen that most jurisdictions have made a decision that they are going to ask for the cooperation of parents if they have been travelling with their children, even if they are well, to ask them to stay home for seven days upon their return. We have had very cooperative response from the travelling public to date and from parents. I know that this will cause an inconvenience to many people but we do believe it is one of the most effective ways of trying to reduce the spread of this disease.
And we would ask for as much cooperation as people can provide in trying to limit exposure to those who might be carrying this disease, particularly who might be carrying the disease, before they are showing any symptoms. So I am happy to take questions on that later.
I understand that a number of my state and territory colleagues will be making some further announcements later today. As you would expect in this situation there are regular updates and my state colleagues obviously are the ones that would like to make announcements about particular cases, if and when they become confirmed in their jurisdictions.
And you will need to expect that throughout the course of today.
PM: Thanks very much Nicola. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that your Labor backbencher Yvette D'Ath (inaudible)
PM: Not at all. I mean, backbenchers will work their way through the numbers in the budget over a period of time. This is normal and part and parcel of the public debate which will now occur in relation to debt and deficit as a means of supporting Australia in the midst of the worst global recession that the world has seen in three quarters of a century.
That is a debate which will continue. It is a debate which we welcome, because our strategy is this, that when the private sector is in retreat, the Government must step in to make a difference.
You make a difference by investing in stimulus, and 70 per cent of our stimulus of course goes to the investment in public infrastructure around the country, infrastructure which helps set Australia up for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
ROXON: Well I think you would not be surprised to know that there are different views amongst the medical profession. I think if you talk to a lot of people working in hospitals, there is an appreciation, mostly that is where nurse practitioners currently work, of the highly skilled, or of the high level of skills that they bring to their jobs.
We need to make decisions as a government that are going to be best for patients. We are not going to make decisions that are just focussed on the needs of a particular profession. And we believe in Australia we have highly skilled nurses, as we have highly skilled doctors and specialists, and they too should be able to use their skills to their maximum ability.
Now that is not what today's' announcement is about but clearly they do complement the budget measures that we are taking. And in a country where we have growing health needs, an ageing population, more people with chronic disease, we have to use our workforce in a way that is smart. And this is aimed to help the profession work together, to deliver better services for the community.
That will be my benchmark and the Government's benchmark, whether we are making changes that will deliver better services to the community, and we intend to work closely with the profession.
The introduction of the new MBS and PBS items are November next year. We need to write the descriptors for the Medicare benefits schedule, we need to provide new provider numbers. We will be working closely with doctors and nurses to ensure we get those descriptors right and encourage the collaborative care that you see provided through hospitals where people are used to working very closely in teams.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think -
PM: I'll just take the question in one sec. Can I just add to what the Minister just said. I think it is fantastic that we have a greater role for nurses. It is great to see nurses out there delivering a whole series of services which are going to be great for the Australian public, great for the nursing profession and as the son of a nurse, as the brother of a nurse and my, and I have got so many nurses in my family that I lose track of them, this I think is a great step forward for the profession.
I think it's good that everyone embraces this as a necessary long term reform and it's going to be good here in this Emergency Department in Canberra. It's going to be good in emergency departments across the country. Sorry for interrupting you.
JOURNALIST: Do you think public hospitals in Australia generally have improved since Labor (inaudible)
PM: You mean since the federal Labor Government was elected? What I can say is that our investment in public hospitals has improved by the order of magnitude which the Minister referred to. Let's put this into a very stark context. The previous federal Government withdrew a billion dollars in Commonwealth payments to public hospitals in the states. We have stepped up to the plate through the Australian Health Care Agreement and made a significant additional investment for the future.
On top of that through the recurrent agreements that we have also reached, and we're just talking about one here today, the $750 million partnership with the states and territories to increase the efficiency of emergency departments, this is a practical step forward. Let me give you one example though and I'm sure the Minister can flesh out the numbers for me. On elective surgery waiting lists, one of the first things we did as an incoming government was say, rather than just blame the states and territories for problems with elective surgery waiting lists, why not do something practical about it?
Now what Katy has just referred to is the practical on the ground results of that investment here which is one additional elective surgery theatre already opened here, two more about to open and the throughput of patients, I think you've got some figures on them?
ROXON: The point the Prime Minister is making is when we reached this agreement on elective surgery we got the states and territories to agree to providing 25,000 additional elective surgeries, in fact they delivered 41,000 extra elective surgery procedures. What it showed was when there was investment from the Commonwealth and cooperation from the states and territories we could deliver more.
And you're seeing the capital investments being made in elective surgery, the capital investments being made in emergency departments, you see the recurrent expenditure being committed to through the healthcare agreement, a 50 per cent increase from the previous government. But we acknowledge it takes time to turn things around if you spend a decade neglecting your public hospitals. Now that's what we saw the previous Government do and now we see them out on a flight of fancy that they don't want people with private health insurance to be able to use public hospital facilities. So this is an outrageous change on their part.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
ROXON: I think it's very clear from the history of what was done by the previous Government in government, pulling money out of public hospitals, what they are doing now to defend rebates for millionaires rather than supporting investments in our public hospitals. You had Joe Hockey as the health spokesperson saying he would not have put this extra money into our hospitals. I think these are all a theme that is quite legitimate for us to highlight because we know the Liberal Party has no love for public hospitals and unfortunately we're seeing that in the comments that they've been making over the weekend.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
ROXON: Well I think that is absolutely what Mr Dutton has been saying. He has been all over the place on this, he has been all over the place on alcopops. I admit that the media as well as the public might have trouble following what particular position they have on any one day but I think it is quite clear that they have no love for public hospitals when we've been trying to invest in them.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Just before we go on to that, I'll just quote you directly what Mr Turnbull had to say Matthew. I'm just going to read you the exact quote. “In an ideal world”  -  this is on a related matter in public health debate  -  “every Australian would have private health insurance, that would be the best, that would be the best outcome”. That is a direct quote about the statement of the Liberal Party which says that they believe that in an ideal world everyone, everyone in Australia should have private health insurance.
Based on our numbers 12 million individuals or members of families currently either choose not to or cannot afford to have private health insurance. Mr Turnbull and the Liberals' solution for those individuals is go and get yourself privately health insured. That's his solution for the future, why are we engaging  -  I've directly quoted from his statement there  -  why are we engaged in this debate? We are engaged in this debate because there is a fundamental divide between us. We are passionate defenders of Medicare, we are passionate defenders of the public hospital system. That is why we are co-investing with the states and territories in a public hospital system, in terms of the services we're referring to today and what you have from the Liberal leader is a clear ideological statement about where the Liberal Party would like to land, that is everyone having private health insurance. If you want a clear divide between them and us on this, that's it, we have a different view. That's why we're here.
JOURNALIST: You're not going to get the CPRS legislation through in the next month, why not delay the legislation, you've already delayed the start of the CPRS, why not delay the legislation? And a second question, did you personally block a senior diplomat being sent to Berlin and why?
PM: On the question of the carbon pollution reduction scheme, business needs certainty. You have the Australian Industry Group, you have the Business Council of Australia saying that for the future they need clear guidelines, clear rules for the future for business certainty. What we have done through excellent work by the Climate Change Minister Penny Wong is negotiate an arrangement with the leading conservation groups, the WWF, the ACF and the Climate Institute and two leading business groups on a way forward.
Why is the time critical? One is business certainty and the second is we need to have as a national position, the position Australia will put on the table at the Copenhagen Conference at the end of the year. This is really important, it is important for Australia, it is important for climate change, it's important for the future of the reef, it's important for jobs. That's why we're doing it, that's why we've negotiated this way and if you're going to have opportunistic politics being played by others on this I think frankly the national interest is not served by this.
I understand that earlier today we had also a statement by the National Party, I think from memory Senator Boswell. You can always rely upon Ron to come out on these questions. And Ron has said that the Nats have effectively said to the Government you can all go jump in the lake when it comes to the carbon pollution reduction scheme. Well thanks Ron, thanks for spelling it out so clearly. What do we say about the Liberal Party who say they are still negotiating with us? Are they speaking on behalf of the Coalition? The Liberals? The Nationals? Half the Nationals, half the Liberals?
Our job is to run the country. Our job is to get the best possible solution for what is a huge environmental challenge, a huge economic challenge. We have come up with a formula  -  I will come to you in one sec mate  -  we have come up with a formula which directly addresses the question of, directly addresses how to get the balance absolutely right between jobs, business certainty and doing something concrete about the environment.
JOURNALIST: And on the diplomat?
PM: On the question of the Berlin Embassy. My recollection of conversations which we had with senior officers of the Prime Minister's Department was that we preferred to have people in positions who spoke the language well. How that applied in this particular case I do not know but I am just saying it is general philosophy and I think you know me well that when it comes to foreign diplomatic appointments I do place priority on languages, as does the Minister and last time I looked at Germany they speak German.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you say to those workers (inaudible) particularly in (inaudible) labour intensive industries, who think that working till 67 before getting the pension is too much of an ask?
PM: I think these are tough decisions Mark and you're right to raise this question. It is a controversial matter out there in the community and I accept that. It's a tough decision which is why we believe it's necessary to do two things. Long term pension reform, the single biggest increase in the single age pension that we have seen, by $32.50 a week, we have to pay for that over time by making pensions in the pension system financially sustainable. Also to return the budget to surplus in time as well. This is one of the reforms necessary to do that.
Therefore it is a necessary and tough long term decision. The second though is this, I noticed the Liberals have said it should be brought in very soon, much more, much sooner than we have said. That's what Tony Abbott has said, unless Matthew Franklin is about to correct me for a misrepresentation of what Tony Abbott may have said, I think that is accurate. The Australian concurs it is accurate.
The, therefore, can I say, they say bring it in ASAP, we say that is not fair. The Liberals say bring in the upping the age pension entitlement age really quick. What we say is we need to allow people to at least have a long slice of time to make arrangements for their future. This doesn't start to come in until 2017, it doesn't become fully operational until 2023, we're currently in 2009. Our judgement is that provides people with sufficiently long period of time to make adjustments for their planning for age, for age pension entitlement arrangements for the future.
Also most other governments around the world are heading in exactly this direction. Why? Ageing the population, huge impact on budget burden long term, therefore you need to act and take some tough decisions. There is a question up the back.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I think there is a general principle, my attitude to significant foreign appointments is that language is an important criteria. It may not be possible in all cases. It may not be possible. But it is an important criteria. And that is certainly something I have reflected to the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Prime Ministers' department more broadly.
And you know why? A huge slice of Australia's national wealth is generated through exports. I take seriously our ability to communicate with the major export markets in the world. And our major trading and economic partners. Therefore I believe language also helps for that.
On the first part of your question, this is as I said before Chris, a very difficult and a very tough decision. Governments around the world have found these tough decisions. These do involve difficult choices for people in the future, I accept that. But my responsibility as Prime Minister is, if you are going to increase the age pension, and we have significantly in terms of the single age pension, no one disputes that, we are required in parallel circumstances to give people fair warning, around about a decade, that we are moving towards a higher age pension qualification age. We think that is right for the future. It is necessary for the future because we have to return the budget to surplus. We also have to be very mindful of the implications of the intergenerational report on the ageing of population.
I will add one footnote. Mr Costello, Captain Courageous when he was Treasurer, produced a couple of intergenerational reports saying, ‘gee we have got a huge problem here, ageing of the population, huge problem here, how is the budget going to pay for it and what are we going to do about it, umm I'm sorry, forgotten about that'.
Well we have actually decided to act. You know why, it is the right thing to do. It is tough and it is hard.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) training packages for such people so that they could transition to a new career for that last 10 years?
PM: It is going to be important for us to, as a nation, if we are serious about the implications of the intergenerational report, which at its heart is this, a smaller number of people, working, supporting a larger number of people in retirement, that is the essence of it, how do we make that work.
What we have been discussing this morning, in this legitimate public debate about the age pension, is how do you get that right for the future. The other part of it is to make sure we have much more, as you correctly ask, targeted, flexible training arrangements so that in anyone's working career, there are in fact multiple work options.
We have to be more intelligent about this. It is, many people doing one job are going to reach a stage where they are no longer going to feel able to do it.
Our job as government is to step in and try and make that transition to a different form of employment easier. And having said that, we have got to zip.


The Australian Government today announced additional assistance to flood-affected residents of South-East Queensland, the North Coast and the Northern Rivers regions of New South Wales. 
Thousands of people throughout South-East Queensland and northern NSW have been affected by the flooding and now face the huge task of cleaning up.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be made available to people adversely affected by the floods that began on 20 May in South-East Queensland and which have also inundated parts of the North Coast and Northern Rivers regions of NSW. Those eligible will be able to receive a one-off lump sum payment of $1,000 for adults and $400 for each child to help their recovery. 
The payments provide financial assistance to people whose principal place of residence has been destroyed or significantly damaged, as well as those who have been seriously injured, or have lost an immediate family member.
The claim period for the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment is open for six months.
The Government will also provide recovery grants to small businesses and primary producers. 
The recovery grants, through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA), will provide small businesses and primary producers who have experienced severe flood damage with grants of up to $15,000 for clean-up and restoration activities.
The Government has also announced similar assistance for small businesses and primary producers affected by the flooding in northern New South Wales in late March.
The NSW Rural Assistance Authority will administer these payments.
This assistance is over and above the support being provided by the Australian Government under the long-standing Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements. 
Through these arrangements with the states, the Australian Government assists with the costs and resourcing of response and recovery activities associated with natural disasters. 
The Australian Government will continue to work with the Queensland and NSW Governments and local community organisations to support individuals and families as they get on with the job of repairing their homes damaged by the storms and floods. 
Information on the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment is available through the Australian Government's Qld/NSW Floods May 2009 Hotline on 180 2233 or by visiting your local Centrelink office. More information on Australian Government assistance is available at www.disasterassist.gov.au.
Information on the small business and primary producer grants is available from the NSW Rural Assistance Authority on 02 6391 3000 or freecall 1800 678 593, or via email rural.assist@raa.nsw.gov.au


The Prime Minister today signed a Pacific Partnership for Development with Prime Minister Edward Natapei of Vanuatu.
The Pacific Partnerships for Development are the centrepiece of Australia's commitment to strengthening its engagement with the Pacific region.
The partnerships commit Australia and its Pacific neighbours to work together to meet common challenges, particularly faster progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals and Pacific nations' development goals.
The Partnership with Vanuatu is the fifth signed since the Port Moresby Declaration and will focus on:
• increasing access and quality of schooling for all children;
• strengthening health services, particularly for rural communities;
• improving infrastructure, particularly rural roads, to support economic growth and service delivery; and
• reforming economic governance.
Through the Partnership, Australia and Vanuatu are working to lift primary school retention rates by phasing out school fees, in collaboration with New Zealand.
Combating malaria will be another important focus, building on the reduction of malaria rates by 38 per cent in 2008.
The global recession highlights the importance of addressing these challenges and realising better development results in the Pacific.
Prime Minister Natapei's visit also provided an important opportunity to discuss key priorities for the forthcoming Pacific Islands Forum, to be held in Cairns in August.
The Prime Ministers discussed key regional challenges, including the need for all Forum countries to maintain their close collaboration in encouraging the restoration of democracy and the rule of law in Fiji.


It's great to be back home here at the ANU  -  the place that, after I arrived as a student in 1976, in many ways helped shape my future, as it has done for generations of students since. 
The ANU gave the opportunity of a world class tertiary degree to this country boy from Queensland.
The ANU equipped me with the skills to speak Mandarin and begin thinking about Australia's future place in the 21st century, the Asia-Pacific century.
And somewhat more importantly, the ANU gave me Therese  -  whom I met over a bowl of cornflakes at Burgmann College in Orientation Week.
The ANU has been doing great things for generations of students from throughout Australia and from overseas, for sixty years.
When you walk around looking at the 200-odd buildings on the campus, you notice that the ANU doesn't have a lot of sandstone.
There's not a whole lot of ivy crawling up the outside walls.
But in just sixty years the ANU has created its own history.
Its researchers have made discoveries of international significance.
Its scholarship is world-class.
And in the Asia-Pacific century that lies ahead of us, the ANU is well positioned to make a very important contribution to the Australian nation and to our region.
Because the ANU holds a special place as a strategic endowment for our nation.
The Government's vision for the ANU is to build on this great national endowment.
That was Ben Chifley's vision, and it is mine. 
It's striking today to read again the parliamentary debates of the 1940s over the establishment of the ANU, as the ANU Reporter recently noted.
The ANU attracted far from universal support.
Some conservatives said that we shouldn't bother with the ANU, since Australia could never build an institution to match the splendour of the greatest British institutions.
Many looked across the meadows from Parliament House towards the ANU with scepticism.
Even Sir Robert Menzies, though a supporter of the Bill that established the university, scoffed at the pretension of calling the modest collection of buildings here a “National University”.
Some of the attacks sound remarkably familiar to us today.
The irascible Archie Cameron, the MP for Barker who had once led the Country Party but had since defected to the Liberals, complained in the Parliament that:
“I do not believe that the Federal Capital warrants a university of any kind. It is high time that this Parliament began to show some considerations for the downtrodden taxpayer, and realised that expenditure of millions of pounds on all kinds of projects that the Government is undertaking must cease.”
The Victorian Liberal Senator John Leckie fulminated in the Senate:
“What will be the purpose of this synthetic, provincial university?”
And the Independent MP for the Northern Territory, Adair Blain, was particularly disturbed by the fact that one of the research schools would be for social sciences:
“No doubt, provision of such a school has been inserted in the Bill as a result of the influence exerted on the Government by the ‘rat-bags' who attend the meeting of the Summer School of Political Science. 
In 1937 I attended the sessions of that school in Albert Hall, Canberra and was amazed at the ‘rat-bag' theories advanced by some of the speakers. Yet some of them are now senior officers of the Commonwealth Public Service.”
I suspect that final observation is something that Opposition Senators might wish to revisit in Senate Estimates today.
Despite all the criticisms, there were also many strong advocates for the ANU.
One of the keenest voices was that of the young Member for Fremantle, who three decades later would serve as the Education Minister who opened up a university education to the kids of the working class.
Today, his son is the Chancellor of the Australian National University.
Six decades after its establishment, the Australian National University is fulfilling the dreams of the great visionaries of the 1940s such as John Dedman, the Minister for Post-war Reconstruction; Sir Mark Oliphant; Sir Howard Florey; Sir Keith Hancock and ‘Nugget' Coombs.
Dedman's vision was that a great national capital needed a great national university  -  one that could bring credit to Australia, advance the cause of research and learning, and take its rightful place amongst the great universities of the world.
Today, we can proudly say that the vision they held for the ANU  -  against the cynics and naysayers of the day  -  has been realised.
The ANU is regularly ranked as Australia's leading university by global university ranking systems, including the Shanghai Jiao Tong University and the annual Times Higher Education Supplement rankings.
And the John Curtin School of Medical Research is a sparkling jewel in the ANU crown.
So it is terrific to see the university community coming together for today's opening of the School's new facilities.
As the world tracks the spread of the H1N1 flu strain, we're all reminded just how important is the work of medical research at schools like this one.
Yours is the work of saving lives  -  restoring, curing and protecting the young; the old; rich and poor alike  -  through world-changing discoveries and breakthroughs.
And the John Curtin School's track record in medical research is truly exceptional.
Over the past 60 years, scientists working here have made major discoveries and contributions to world health  -  including winning two Nobel Prizes.
Sir John Eccles won the Nobel Prize in 1963 for his remarkable and outstanding work on the neurosciences  -  and its impact is still being felt today in brain research.
Peter Doherty became a household name for his discovery of how the body's immune cells protect against viruses, winning, along with Rolf Zinkernagel the 1996 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
Many other international awards have been won by scientists from the School, notably among them Professor Frank Fenner.
More recently, immunology pioneer Professor Chris Goodnow has been elected as a Fellow of the prestigious UK and Commonwealth academy of science, The Royal Society.
And Dr Carola de Vinuesa - this year has won the Gottschalk Medal for research in the medical sciences by an early-career researcher  -  after also being award the Life Scientist of the Year at last year's Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.
Dr Vinuesa's research reflects the important role of medical research in another important priority for Australia  -  our contribution to global efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and make extreme global poverty history.
As a young Spanish volunteer medic working in Africa and India, Carola saw first-hand the impact of infectious diseases that still kill millions of people  -  and her research on immune systems offers hope for millions of people threatened by infectious diseases in some of the world's poorest nations.
Australia needs schools such as the John Curtin School to achieve the breakthroughs in medical science that prevent disease, cure illnesses and deliver a better quality of life.
This is why the Australian Government has provided a significant contribution towards the building of the new John Curtin School of Medical Research over and above our ongoing funding for the ANU.
In this month's Federal Budget, an additional $60 million from the Health and Hospitals Fund package was approved for construction of the Eccles Institute to house all neuroscience research activities at the School.
The ANU has also been allocated $90 million in the second round of the Education Investment Fund for Stage 2 of the ANU Science Transformation, the chemical sciences hub.
This will help develop education and research facilities which will form an internationally significant concentration of science talent and excellence and strengthen the ANU's reputation as a world class teaching, learning, research and research training university.
These initiatives will also generate local jobs during the construction phases, as well as permanently creating 15 additional high-tech positions, including several apprenticeships, and another 30 permanent academic and professional positions.
The Australian Government believes that innovation and research are crucial to Australia's long-term prosperity and building a 21st century economy that is not held hostage to the ups and downs of global commodity markets.
Universities and the research and innovation systems provide the intellectual fuel that drives our national innovation system, ultimately making us more productive, more competitive and better able to address the challenges of the 21st century.
The 2009 Budget has delivered significant long-term investments in higher education and national innovation.
As part of this package, the Australian Government is providing additional university funding of $2.2 billion over the next four years. 
This funding makes possible, among other things, the important reform of shifting to a university funding system that is based on student demand.
We have committed $490 million to introduce demand-driven funding arrangements. This will help us to acheive the Government's target by 2025, of having 40 per cent of Australians aged 25-34 with at least a Bachelor level qualification.
We are introducing more generous indexation arrangements - $577 million will be provided over four years to increase indexation of Commonwealth grants for teaching and research.
We are addressing the relatively low participation in higher education of students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
$436 million will be allocated to support increased participation of low socio-economic students, including enabling universities to run outreach programs, and rewarding universities on a per student basis for enrolling students from low socio-economic status backgrounds.
We're also investing in a new era of research and innovation, to support and reward Australian research groups performing at world-class levels.
The Government has committed $512 million over four years to correct the entrenched problem of cross-subsidisation of the indirect costs of research. 
A further $36 million has been committed to assist implementation of the Excellence in Research Australia measure.
And $51 million has been provided to increase the support available to Australian Postgraduate Award recipients.
Each of these initiatives will have an impact here on the ground at the ANU.
Further, as part of the Government's Nation Building Package announced in December 2008, the ANU will be allocated over $18 million from the Teaching and Learning Capital Fund.
This includes a special payment of $10 million recognising the ANU's unique mix of teaching and research.
These measures are all additional to the $24 million that the ANU received in 2008 under the Better Universities Renewal Fund.
These are all important measures that address the long-term neglect of tertiary education in Australia for more than a decade.
Looking ahead, the Government intends to develop compacts with each of our nation's universities as part of our long-term commitment to the education revolution.
Compacts will play a key role in implementing our reforms and ensuring results from increased Commonwealth investment.
Among other things, these compacts will set out the arrangements for distributing performance-based funding for teaching and research activity.
The Compact that we sign with the ANU will reflect the status of the ANU as a university of national significance.
I welcome Vice-Chancellor Ian Chubb's recent comments that this is the compacts approach “with teeth”.
Professor Chubb has long argued that Australia needs compacts that will hold universities to hard decisions.
Compacts that do not simply endorse what universities say about themselves, but chart a course for specialisation, diversity and excellence.
As the Government refreshes Australia's national commitment to the ANU, we intend to recognise its unique place in the national educational firmament.
That process will also provide the opportunity to address the funding anomalies which arose in part from the ANU's principled stand against the industrial relations policies of the last Government.
And the Compact will ensure that ANU can continue to play the leading role in advanced research that has taken it in just over 60 years to be among the top 50 universities in the world.
I believe that men like Dedman, Florey, Oliphant and Curtin and Chif himself would be immensely proud to see what the ANU has become.
But let's not get too comfortable with what's in the past.
Let's look to the future.
In the intensely competitive and globalised world of tertiary institutions, the ANU will need to fight hard to hold its place and advance its reputation in the decades ahead.
But as it does that, it will have the support of the national Government.
Because the work of this university produces great benefits to our nation  -  economic, social, educational and health benefits.
And the new John Curtin School of Medical Research will be a flagship for the ANU, as it continues to generate the research and breakthroughs that in past decades have brought such prestige and acclaim.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to declare the new John Curtin School of Medical Research building open.


The Rudd Government today completed the single largest purchase of water for the environment in Australia's history.
The Government is buying almost 240 gigalitres of water entitlements for $303 million from Twynam Agricultural Group.
That is equivalent to one half of all of the water used in Sydney each year.
The water purchased today will be used to restore the rivers and wetlands of the Murray-Darling Basin to health, with the water used exclusively for environmental flows.
This brings the total amount of water purchased by the Rudd Government to 297 gigalitres of water entitlements. The previous Government failed to directly purchase a single litre of water for the environment during its 12 years in office.
Historical over-allocation and climate change are having a devastating impact on the Murray-Darling Basin's unique environmental assets, and this purchase represents a major advance in tackling this challenge.
A crucial aspect of the Government's accelerated water purchase program is to smooth the transition to new, lower limits on water use that will start to take effect with the new Basin Plan.
If we don't start to make this adjustment now, irrigators and the communities who depend on them face a far tougher and more abrupt cut in the future.
The Twynam Agricultural Group currently operates farming properties in NSW with a total land area of approximately 285,000 hectares located on the Murrumbidgee, Lachlan, Macquarie and Gwydir River systems. Twynam's rural enterprises include cattle and sheep production, dryland and irrigated cropping and horticulture.
The family company has been realigning its agricultural enterprises over the past four years to diversify its Australian business operations. As a consequence of the drought, Twynam has been progressively changing its production mix from summer irrigated crops to winter dryland cereals. The water sale will help to progress the business transition.
Twynam will maintain its involvement in agriculture, with on-going farming enterprises, and we are advised by Twynam that the sale of the water is not expected to have any significant impact on the number of full-time and part-time employees.
Irrigated agriculture in the Murray-Darling Basin will benefit from the Government's unprecedented commitment to invest in improved water use efficiency and productivity in irrigation communities.
These major investments in irrigation efficiency will also provide a welcome boost to the economic and employment outlook for these irrigation communities as projects get underway.
The Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder will manage the water entitlements purchased from Twynam and will determine where allocations will be used, drawing on the best available scientific advice and collaborative input from Basin States. The water entitlements will be exclusively used for environmental flows.
A number of high-value aquatic ecosystems can be expected to specifically benefit from the water entitlements purchased from Twynam, for example, the Macquarie Marshes, Fivebough and Tuckerbil Swamps in the Murrumbidgee, the Gwydir Wetlands, the Booligal Wetlands in the Lachlan, and Menindee Lakes in the Darling.


The Prime Minister today announced the appointment of two additional Local Employment Coordinators in the Richmond - Tweed and Clarence Valley and Mid North coast regions in NSW.
The Rudd Government is providing $20 million under its Jobs and Training Compact for Local Area Employment Coordinators to work in regions and local communities hit hardest by the effects of the global recession.
Today's announcement takes the number of coordinators to nine. In April, coordinators were announced in seven initial regions, identified using a range of labour market and social indicators.
While the impacts of the global recession are being felt around the nation, some communities are experiencing higher levels of unemployment and disadvantage.
The global downturn has hit the tourism industry in the Richmond - Tweed and Clarence Valley and Mid North coast regions while recent severe flooding has severely impacted the agricultural industry.
The Government is taking all action possible to help those who lose their job through no fault of their own during this global recession.
Local Employment Coordinators will work with community stakeholders to bring together government, community and business partnerships to assist these priority regions in their recovery.
Local Employment Coordinators will also work with the community to identify and develop projects to be funded under the Government $650 million Jobs Fund.
The Jobs Fund builds on the Rudd Government's $42 billion National Building Economic Stimulus Plan and will support jobs and build skills for the future through community, environmental and social infrastructure projects.
The Government is currently considering proposals under the first funding round with a second funding round to be opened later in the year.


PM: Well it's great to be out in this beautiful part of the Murray-Darling river system and coming out here reminds me of living in Canberra in earlier days and bringing the kids out to this beautiful part of the world. It is an extraordinary part of nature.
But we are here today to do something very important for the river system and for the environment and today we are announcing that the Government has completed the single largest purchase of water entitlements in Australian history.
The Government is buying almost 240 gigalitres of water entitlements for the environment for $303 million from the Twynam Agricultural Group. That's the equivalent to one half of all the water used in Sydney each year.
The water purchased today will be used to restore the rivers and wetlands of the Murray Darling Basin to health, with the water used exclusively for environmental flows. Put this also into context, this brings the total amount of water purchased by the Government in the 18 months that we have been in office to nearly 300 gigalitres of water entitlements.
And I would simply emphasise the point of contrast with the previous Government. The previous Government failed to directly purchase a single litre of water entitlements during its 12 years in office.
We therefore have sought to make a difference and this is part and parcel of a process in which the Minister has been engaged for a long period of time, in order to act to restore health to the Murray-Darling river system.
It also opens up again the direct relevance to necessary action on climate change. Climate change as we know is having a radical effect in so many areas of our environment in Australia, not just the health of the Murray-Darling river system but also the Great Barrier Reef and Kakadu, which is why it is important to bring about early, decisive and effective action, nationally and globally on climate change in order to deal with the long term causes of the environmental challenges we face, including in this river system.
However, part and parcel of our strategy in the meantime is to purchase water entitlements and to do so at an order of magnitude, to make a difference. This is the single largest purchase of water entitlements from the Murray-Darling river system in Australia's history.
It is therefore designed to make a difference, it is designed to return this water for environmental flows, it is designed to make a concrete contribution to the important challenge of restoring this river system to health, a river system which is so important to so many Australians. I might just ask the Minister to add and then we will take some questions.
WONG: Thanks PM. Well I am very pleased to be here to announce this purchase of 240 gigalitres  -  that's 240 billion litres of water at a cost of around $303 million.
The group we are purchasing this water from is the Twynam Agricultural Group, and as the Prime Minister said, it is the largest single purchase for the environment in the nation's history.
Jut to put it into context, the total amount that South Australia draws from the River Murray for its critical human needs is less than the amount of water we are purchasing. And the amount of water that Adelaide uses in a normal year is also less than the amount we're purchasing.
So this is a very substantial purchase for the environment.
I also want to make the point that the group, Twynam, who is selling these entitlements, is making a transition from irrigated agriculture to dry land farming. They are already making that transition, reflecting of course the circumstances that many farmers find themselves in in the Murray-Darling basin. So we are pleased that we have been able to come to an arrangement with Twynam which enables them to utilise the money from this water purchase towards the continued operation of their agricultural operations within the basin,
This is a very important day, a day where we will begin returning this largest single purchase for the environment in the nation's history.
JOURNALIST: What is Twynam currently using the water for, what sort of irrigated crops? And are these just water entitlements or is it actual water?
WONG: Well, look, there is a lot of discussion about water entitlements; that is, how you purchase water. You purchase water entitlements. And why is that important? Because it means two things, it means first, we are reducing the amount of take from the rivers, which is good for the environment. The second is that it means as it rains, the rivers get a greater share. It is the responsible thing to do to purchase water entitlements.
I don't have all of the detail of exactly which irrigated crops Twynam was engaged in, I assume the usual set of irrigated crops that you see within the Murray-Darling Basin.
But clearly they have made a decision about transitioning. We are very pleased that we've been able to negotiate with them terms that have been acceptable to both parties, to ensure a good outcome, not only for agriculture but for the river.
JOURNALIST: Twynam would know how much water it was drawing each year so (inaudible) ?
WONG: Well that, as you would know Chris, the allocation towards each entitlement depends on how much it rains, and that can change from month to month. State Governments will allocate additional water as it rains, so that is a question the answer to which changes depending on available rainfall.
But what is important is purchase of entitlement because that means you are transferring entitlement from irrigation to the environment for the use of the environment to improve the health of our rivers. That's what is in the long term interests of the basin and that is what in the face of climate change we have to do to restore health to the Murray-Darling Basin rivers.
JOURNALIST: This is big against Adelaide's annual use. How is that against the total amount of water allocations that the Rudd Government would ultimately seek to buy? How much of the total job does this single purchase do?
WONG: Well can I say first, this is one-half of all the water used in Sydney each year so it is no small amount. And it is a very, very large purchase.
Just to put in context in terms of the amounts - as you would know what the Budget papers indicate over this and next, I think three years we're looking to purchase around $2 billion worth of water entitlements, so this is 303 million, it is a very substantial, very large single purchase, but we know there's a long way to go in the Murray-Darling Basin, we're making up for a lot of lost time. A failure to act on this issue by the previous Government over too many years and we will continue to progress the two tenders we currently have open, just as we said we would do before the election.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition's been running hard in parliament about your allegedly dubious projections. Have you been (inaudible) up the economy and debt, have you been telling fibs about this as they claim and is there anything at all to their case that the estimates don't have the relevant figures?
PM: I will stand by the Treasury and the strategy outlined in the Budget papers and the figures contained within it.
Interesting on the question of figures and numbers this morning. Here's a question for you, which was put by one of your own to the Leader of the Opposition this morning. Question  -  what does the Coalition regard as an acceptable level of debt? Answer, the level of debt should be no more than necessary. Question, what then? Answer from Mr Turnbull, “well it's not a question of a number”.
Can I just say that actually nails it in one. This entire strategy on this entire fear campaign on debt and deficit is undermined again, absolutely in the Leader of the Oppositions response this morning. Not just ducking and weaving about not answering a question about what the Liberal Party's debt and deficit target is, but this morning saying explicitly it's not a matter of a number. Let me tell you, the Government's strategy is clear and outlined in the Budget papers. This underpins again the nature of the fear campaign which is being engaged in. The Liberals  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said in the Parliament, it was based on the advice of the Treasury.
JOURNALIST: Are you embarrassed that so much of the stimulus money, $40 million went to dead people and ex-pats overseas?
PM: Can I just say this, that I think Mr Turnbull is treading on very dangerous, sensitive ground here when he talks about payments being made to people and to their estates, who have died in the last year. I think he is treading on very dangerous and sensitive ground. The level of grief felt by so many people over the recent loss of a loved one is something which we should all reflect on. We are talking about people who have died in the last year or so. Secondly, a number of people who have suffered bereavements and suffered the loss of a loved one have appreciated greatly the payments made to their estates.
The last thing I'd say is this. As we have indicated in previous the answers on this matter. In previous years, when one-off payments have been made by previous governments of one category or another, it is quite plane from the advice that we've received that they have also gone in certain circumstances to people in this category as well. But the point I make is just a human one. Just think about it for a minute, you've lost your wife, your husband, a member of your family in the last 12 months or so.
A payment arrives, which goes to that person's estate because a tax declaration was provided in the previous year. Now you got people jumping up and down making a political point in the Liberal Party and elsewhere today, talking about you know dead people as if it's some loose piece of political commentary. I think we just need to show a bit of respect here.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask what role did you play personally in the selection of Australia's Ambassador to Germany if any?
PM: Yeah, on the question of senior ambassadorial appointments, the Foreign Minister's practice and mine is we discuss all senior appointments. That was the practice also of my predecessor as I understand it with Mr Downer and therefore, that includes this particular appointment as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you be surprised and would you be comfortable if stimulus payments also went to a number of Federal MPs?
PM: I don't have any information to that effect. But, as I said, our  - 
JOURNALIST: Would they deserve it?
PM: Our advice, no, our advice, let's just go to the macroeconomic challenge here, let's just go to the core of it. The absolute truth of what's being transacted here, how do you make a difference? In the fourth quarter last year and the first quarter this year, to an economy at risk of tanking totally because of the global recession. Answer  -  provide direct payments based on the advice of the Treasury to provide an injection of activity into the economy now. Treasury's advice is very clear, use these criteria in deploying these payments to get that stimulus into the economy now, or wait and delay for a long period of time and for this stimulus to be delivered too late to have a proper effect, that was the basis of the decision we took and the debate therefore about payments going to deceased estates, payments going to persons abroad which have been canvassed before and which we've engaged in or within the overall logic of the advice given us.
It follows as a consequence that there is always going to be debate and controversy about who at the end of the day received a payment or who didn't. And I seem to remember last week being challenged about people who didn't receive the payment, who didn't lodge a tax return in the year concerned.
Our responsibility as national economic managers is to invest stimulus into the economy and I emphasise 70 per cent of our stimulus is in infrastructure, stimulus into the economy to make a difference and that is why so far Australia is doing better than most other economies in weathering this global economic storm.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) these payments could have been targeted slightly more specifically?
PM: Look, we actually had a long discussion in Cabinet at the time and we listened carefully to the Treasury's advice about how you would get that stimulus into the economy now. If you are going to wait and wait and wait for further changes to be made then the necessity for delivering that stimulus, given the enormous administrative machinery of state involved in getting that delivered into the hands of households would have not given us the stimulus at the time when it was needed.
Critical period for us was fourth quarter last year, first quarter this year as you know, the short term infrastructure projects involving school construction, housing construction and energy insulation, kick in, in the second quarter this year and particularly the third quarter. We have done this deliberately.
Phase one payments, quick immediate action. I seem to recall Access Economics reflecting on this recently. Phase two short term stimulus kicking in, in the second quarter this year, third quarter and progressively. Phase three, longer term infrastructure projects some of which will also kick in from the middle of this year as well.
We have done this deliberately in a staged fashion in order to provide continued pulse into the economy in what would otherwise be an environment which would shed, lose a further 200,000 plus people into the unemployment queues, we were not prepared to do that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just to be clear.
PM: There and then I will come back to you. Sorry can you say that again please.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know something? I said in the parliament yesterday there are 35,000 projects about to be rolled out across the country. And let me just say in advance and I've said this before, there is always going to be bumps in the road. But you know something? It's like what we've just been discussing here on some of the individual payments to families, there will be bumps in the road there too.
Our job is one of national economic leadership and one of acting in the national economic interest which is to ensure that that activity has been put into productive purposes long term and providing stimulus now. When I say our mission statement is to support jobs, business and apprenticeships today by investing in infrastructure for tomorrow we mean it.
We have applied every energy of Government to get this program out the door and done as effectively as possible. And I think against most global standards people should have a look at the quality of what we are doing relative to many other countries. This has been a Government which has sought to act decisively, early and ahead of the curve to make a difference and I submit to you in effect in relation to 200,000 jobs plus for each of the subsequent two years is a big effect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister that advice that your talked about from Treasury, did that specifically countenance the payments to dead people and to expats or is this something of a revelation to the Government.
PM: No, no, no, no the precise content of the conversation I can't quite recall but it was along the lines of the, that if we were to delay in terms of making further adjustments to the system it would mean significant delay in actually delivering payments into the economy. That was the overall thrust of the conversation, we had it and we acted on the advice to get that stimulus out into the economy now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister federal magistrates-
PM: Are you cold?
JOURNALIST: Yep.
PM: Whose idea was it to come out here?
WONG: I am actually kind of freezing into place here.
PM: Got any long johns?
JOURNALIST: Judges who earn more than you do and can afford long johns. They claim they are not paid enough. Do you have any sympathy for their claim that because barristers who aren't in fact Government appointees but are private sector people earn more than them, they should be paid more?
PM: Fools rush in where angels fear to tread. I'd rather get myself briefed on what has been said and by whom before I actually touch on that one if that is okay but we-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The member for Sturt. Our favourite.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Mr Squiggle. I'm sorry-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Do you think that you're coming on a bit heavy with these Coalition MPs?
PM: You know something? There is something enormously liberating about the truth? You know. And the truth is they voted against payments for the school modernisation program and in their electorates are they now pretending that they voted for these projects. It's one or the other, that's the truth here.
It's like the truth about the you know debt and deficit campaign we were talking about before. The truth is outlined in a statement today by Mr Turnbull. It is not about a number. Hold the phone what are all these questions been about all week in parliament if it's not about a number, I mean let's just get a bit real here. The truth ain't a bad strategy you know and we're saying as I've said in response to your questions today on stimulus.
You know the truth is we're in the business of making a difference in economic activity in Australia given the impact of this extraordinary global recession, the worst in three quarters of a century and we've done it deliberately in phase one, phase two, phase three to make a difference. That's the truth of it and the truth of it also, skipping out the side of the mouth of my old friend Joe Hockey is they'd do exactly the same. That's the truth of it. This is all politics. And  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, no I'm just saying what Joe said on the day after the budget, they'd be $25 billion less, except they're not supporting our $22 billion worth of savings measures, or maybe they will, maybe they won't, that puts them in the same ballpark as us. And that's the truth of it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well if it was any more refined than that, I haven't heard if I go looking at very carefully what Mr Turnbull said today, it's not about a number and the only number we've got is 25 billion less. And can I just say I think the truth does out on all this, when the rubber hits the road on this stuff and when it comes to them saying in their electorates they really like the investment in schools and saying in Canberra that it is a terrible, terrible thing that a Government could borrow to invest in these schools. This doesn't pass the truth test. That's what it's all about.
And you know something? If I reflect back on the Liberal Party in the last decade, what are they best at? Fear campaigns. And-
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Prime Minister.
PM: -the fear ultimately is something which doesn't rest in the truth. Fear campaigns on a whole series of things.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know something I think as I have said before this is a hard working Government, I work hard, I make no apology for that. And as far as appointments within departments are concerned that's a matter for the secretary, that's just life. We're going to get on with the business of governing and this government is not about to be accused ever of slacking off. We work hard, so do I, intend to do so. Thanks folks.


The Prime Minister will travel to Singapore on 29 May to deliver the keynote address at the 8th Shangri-La Dialogue.
The Shangri-La Dialogue is the pre-eminent defence and security gathering in the Asia Pacific.
It is hosted annually by the Government of Singapore and the International Institute for Strategic Studies.
This year the Dialogue will be held from 29 to 31 May and will be attended by defence and foreign ministers and military chiefs from around 25 countries.
This year's event will be an opportunity for regional policy makers to discuss strategic challenges facing the Asia Pacific and the need for countries to work together to strengthen economic, political and security cooperation.
In Singapore the Prime Minister will meet with the Prime Minister of Singapore, HE Mr Lee Hsien Loong, and Minister Mentor, HE Mr Lee Kuan Yew, and regional ministers at the dialogue.


PM: Well it's great to be back in the Territory. This is my sixth visit here since I've been Prime Minister and I've always made a point of getting back here every two or three months or so, and it's good to be back here looking the implementation of our nation building for recovery plan.
The Government's strategy is very plain. Because of the global economic recession, we are committed to a program of nation building for recovery. What does that mean? It means supporting jobs, supporting business, supporting apprenticeships for today by investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And where the rubber hits the road here in this area is housing infrastructure, defence housing infrastructure and that's why this is such an important announcement.
What we're doing in this part of the world is investing in 185 defence houses. This is going to be responsible, I'm advised, for something in the order of 200 direct jobs, 500 indirect jobs - creating the defence housing we need for tomorrow and creating the jobs we need for today, as well as the apprenticeships needed for today.
I'm told by the Defence Housing Authority that up here in Darwin this project will produce of itself some five additional apprenticeships and a larger number nationwide. It's part and parcel of what we're doing across the board because as this global economic recession hits and the recession hits Australia and it has, the job of government is to step into the breach.
The job of government is to put your best foot forward and to invest in the economy while the private sector is in retreat. And, when the private sector recovers as the global economy recovers, that's when it's time for government to pull back.
That's what we're doing and that's why we're engaged in the business of deficit and borrowing as well. It's the right thing to do to support infrastructure and jobs for the country and for families and for communities like this. Therefore, I am proud that this Government is investing in the defence housing needs of this community in Darwin for the future and creating jobs for Darwin and the Territory today. That's what it's all about.
On top of this particular announcement, could I also draw attention to a statement that the Government has also released today also involving the Australian Defence Force. There is a problem on the high seas off the Horn of Africa called piracy. And that problem is indiscriminate in terms of who it's hitting. It's hitting ships of all nationalities, cargo ships, passenger ships, sometimes involving Australians.
Let me give you some figures. In 2008, there 111 pirate attacks in the region with 42 successful hijackings. This year alone there have been 100 registered attacks including some 25 successful hijackings. Now, this affects all of our economic interest, it affects also the interest of people who travel in that part of the world on cruise ships.
Therefore, the Australian Government is stepping up to the plate and what we're confirming today is a contribution on Australia's part to the international effort on the high seas against piracy, which means in practice that we will now flexibly task our Frigate in the Gulf and our AP3C Maritime Patrol Aircraft that are currently based in the Middle East to be available for anti-piracy operations as well.
We believe it's part of Australia putting its shoulder to the wheel, together with our friends, our partners and our allies to make a material difference to security in the region because it affects all of our interests. What do Australians do best? We step in, we pitch in, we help in a practical sort of way. That's what we're doing when it comes to piracy as well.
Could I also emphasise one other point today and it goes to the question of stimulus and it goes to the question of what we're doing more broadly in the economy. There is a fair bit of criticism from time to time, that's normal in the cut and thrust of politics about what the Government may be doing here and what the Government may be doing there. And I've said what this program is about here, nation building for recovery, supporting jobs for today, building infrastructure for tomorrow.
What we've done as a Government is invest in stimulus in a number of areas. We began last October in response to the global recession by investing in direct payments to families, pensioners, carers, veterans. After that, we also then invested in payments to families and then this nation building and jobs plan which involves huge investment in schools in the Northern Territory, a huge investment in schools right across the country, an investment in social and defence housing of the type we're seeing today and an investment in energy insulation and ceiling insulation across the country.
And the third phase of our nation building program is long term infrastructure including a national high speed broadband network. That's the Government's plan, nation building for recovery.
One part of it though came in for attack yesterday by Mr Turnbull. And that was the payments that we've made to families who have lost loved ones. Now politics can be a tough business, I can accept that. But I don't accept legitimacy of Mr Turnbull's and the Liberal Party's attack on payments to the families of recently deceased loved ones. I think that goes beyond the limits of what is acceptable in our debate in Australia.
So my direct call today is for Mr Turnbull and the Liberals to retract their attack on payments to the families of recently deceased loved ones and to apologise to those families. It is the right and decent thing to do. We need some decency in this debate.
I'm quite prepared to cop criticism and attack on most things that we do, that's a democracy, that's great, but we're talking here about families who in the last 12 months have suffered bereavement and I don't think that's fair cop. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on your plan to take over the Tangentyere camps in Alice Springs, do you really think you can get the residents to cooperate if you can't get Tangentyere Council on board there?
PM: We've got to take hard decisions and we believe we've taken the right decision there. The Minister Jenny Macklin has spent a long time trying to negotiate with the Council, didn't work. So you either just haul up the white flag and say too hard walk away or you can actually put your shoulder to the wheel and have a go. We're going to have a go and we intend to make a difference.
The Minister is highly effective, she's knows what she's doing. This is the right course of action. I back her fully and this will be tough in the implementation, I grant you. But the alternative is to do nothing. This Government will not sit on its hands and allow what's currently going on in those town camps to continue. We intend to make a difference and we will.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why are you spending $3.7 million on plaques for schools?
PM: Can I just say the important thing is to build the infrastructure we need for the nation. That's really important. It's important also that we are out there investing $15 billion in schools, $6 billion in social and defence housing as well as what we're doing in energy insulation in homes, something in excess of four billion together with the $22 billion we're investing in long term economic infrastructure  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let me finish. On the detail of how each project might be opened in time, I'm sure that will be sorted out with the Departments concerned. That's of no particular concern of ours. What I am concerned about is to make sure the actual projects are up and running. We'll work through the details of that, I don't think that's going to be a big problem on the ground. We want to make sure the stuff is up and done, that's what's important. And to make sure it's done, making absolute contribution to the economy in this time of difficulty.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's some fears in the north that you might go soft on the intervention, are you going to stick the course?
PM: Absolutely. And the reason is, we have to make a difference. I was talking to a builder on a site before who said that he appreciated the fact that I delivered an apology to the Aboriginal people. And our conversation that we had briefly as I was attempting vainly to lay the brick - and I'd ask people to go back and check whether it was okay actually, I'm a bit worried about that, if we could make sure, a bit worried. He also then began talking about Closing the Gap. This is a practical program which I also announced in the Apology speech a year ago.
Closing the gap means different things in different parts of the country. As far as the Territory's concerned, we will remain resolute in the implementation of all the policies that we've put forward. These will involve tough decisions, they will be sensitive in various communities, but we're going to see it through because we are determined to have in place policies which materially close the gap in life expectancy, in infant mortality and in safety for Aboriginal communities, as well as improving the educational outcomes and the health outcomes for Aboriginal people.
Each of those will involve hard decisions. There'll be reactions against some of them, I accept that. But we will not be deterred. We intend to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is the Territory Government letting you down in terms of land release, because even the Defence Housing Association are saying they can't get the land they need to build all the properties that they need for soldiers?
PM: Can I say that we've had an excellent cooperative relationship with the Chief Minister and the Territory Government, and I think it's a great partnership in a very practical way. It's what we have with Governments around the country.
Let me say on the question of housing here in the Territory, what's a very practical contribution we can make to take some of the pressure of housing? And that is quickly expanding the amount of directly available defence housing stock to take some of the pressure off the rest of the market. Now, that's one contribution.
We'll work through all the other implementation questions with the Territory Government, but I'm confident that we can attend to this over time. The other thing I'd say is this - one of the other deficiencies in Australia is the lack of appropriate social housing or community housing or public housing.
Right now, we've been talking about defence housing. We have on foot now 20,000 units of construction of social, public and community housing across the country. This is the single biggest investment in public housing the country has ever seen. That's what we're doing right now in order to make a difference across the housing spectrum - defence housing, social housing, but also making it possible through our cooperative relationship with Councils to bring on better construction arrangements with local authorities as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, under whose auspices will the ADF operate in the Horn of Africa?
PM: In the Horn of Africa, I'll ask the Minister to speak about the details of that. But in the Horn of Africa, we'll be working closely with other allied forces.
One thing I neglected from my comments before is that we'll also play a significant role in broader maritime security efforts in the region by providing on a rotational basis, a Commander and Fleet Battle Staff to command counter-terrorism activities under International Taskforce 150 from the Combined Maritime Forces Headquarters in Bahrain. Additionally, Defence will provide a small number of Navy Planning Staff to CMF Headquarters, that's those Headquarters in Bahrain for multinational anti piracy and maritime security planning and coordination. Joel, do you want to add to that?
FITZGIBBON: No I don't think there is anything to add. Effectively we'll be plus tasking both our Frigate and our surveillance aircraft across 150, 151 and 152 taskforces and of course that means we will be placing our assets where they can deliver the best value at any given time.
We're making a real contribution to the international effort right across the maritime security spectrum.
JOURNALIST: On the water buyback, can I just ask PM, now that NSW have said that they're not going to allow any more from their region, where are you going to get the rest of the water? Will you have to look to Queensland now?
PM: Well can I just make one clear point? Twelve years of the previous Government - not one litre of water entitlements bought back from anywhere across the Murray-Darling Basin System. In 18 months of this Government, we have brought back 297 gigalitres of water entitlements across the system. That is a huge difference.
Each purchase will involve difficulty, controversy, negotiation and frankly, some good old jaw boning on the ground. We will work our way across the system in order to take pressure off the Murray-Darling system.
But you know, just to step back from the detail of it, what are the two practical things you can do about the Murray-Darling? One is climate change, acting decisively on that.
We have a plan for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Mr Turnbull and the Liberals say they don't want to have a bar of it. That is not leadership, that is just politics. That is in terms of the long term causes of what is bringing about effects in the Murray-Darling system as well as for the Barrier Reef  - 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister  - 
PM: I'm going to come back to -
JOURNALIST: With respect, you have actually covered this many times. I'm really interested in the forward planning. (inaudible) Queensland, because that's where there is water and if you're talking about practical measures -
PM: With respect, I'll finish my answer, which is that on the causes of the problem with climate change, we have to be dealing with that on the one hand, and then dealing with taking pressure off the river system, at multiple levels.
That's why I said before, let's step back from the detail and explain to you what the Government's overall strategy is.
Therefore, what does that mean? Acting on climate change, we have a national policy in place, Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We are engaged in international negotiations because we have ratified Kyoto. Mr Turnbull and the Liberals opposed all of that.
Secondly, pressure on the system, what can you do about that? You can take demand off the system by buying back water entitlements and you can improve the efficiency of use of water within the system by investing in irrigation technology.
We're advancing on both those fronts with the largest single national investment on both those, in both those areas. On water buy back, entitlements buy back, it is as I have described - 297 gigalitres so far. We will work with any possible part of the country that is open to further negotiations on the buyback of water entitlements in order to take the pressure off the system overall.
We have committed funds for that purpose, it is the right and responsible thing to do and we intend to get on with it.
Just before I finish this morning, can I just emphasise to those of you from the Territory, how proud I am of the achievements here of our local members, in their contribution to getting a good deal for the Northern Territory in the investments made so far by the Government.
Just to remind you all, investments like Tiger Brennan Drive, lack of Federal Government funding in the past, we have $74 million commitment under this Government.
Investments in computers in schools. In the Darwin area, some 900 computers across 12 schools. Investment in trades training centres in secondary schools across the Territory.
The investment in the Building the Education Revolution program which is involving enhancements to primary schools and others across Darwin and the broader Territory. We have a large scale investment underway as well. I was talking to the Chief Minister about it before - $29.6 million approved for major infrastructure projects already, and 13 primary schools in Solomon.
All of these investments are going on, these are large investments in the Territory, across not just defence housing that we are talking about here today, but in schools and in hospitals, the GP Super Clinic, the investments in Royal Darwin Hospital. This Government is not just about nation building for Australia as a whole, it is nation building here in the Territory.
We are proud of what the Government is doing. We have got more to do. But these members have been in Canberra, asking that we support the Territory and its future growth, we have been partners with them in that. And having said that, we've got to zip.


In only seven years the Shangri-La Dialogue has cemented itself as the pre-eminent defence and security dialogue in the Asia Pacific region.
The successful development of the Shangri-La Dialogue is symbolic, in some ways, of Singapore's own emergence as a critical player in our region.
From its independence 43 years ago, when some thought this new political entity, Singapore would not survive. Singapore has developed into a thriving, influential nation-state that it is today. 
Singapore has become a major centre of regional and world trade; a global transport hub and an international financial centre. 
Singapore has maintained a peaceful multi-ethnic society in a region where ethnic tensions have, from time to time, been acute.
And Singapore continues as a strong force for stability and effective diplomacy in our region  -  and therefore a most appropriate place for this regular dialogue to be held.
Ladies and gentleman, at the forefront of every government's mind today is the global economic crisis.
Twelve months ago, the International Monetary Fund forecast that the world economy would expand by 3.8 per cent. 
Earlier this month, the IMF announced that in 2009, world economic output would contract by 1.3 per cent. Much, very much has changed.
This is the first time the global economy will contract since the war.
What began as a financial crisis, has become an economic crisis and then an employment crisis; in some countries becoming a social crisis and political crisis, and prospectively fuelling a new range of security crises yet to fully unfold.
In Japan exports have contracted 43 per cent in just six months.
In China exports have contracted 33 per cent.
In South East Asia the total GDP of the ASEAN members contracted by around 13 per cent in the course of 2008.
The Asian Development Bank has predicted the global recession could in 2009 lead to an additional 62 million people living in poverty in Asia.
Through the G20, the international community is rising to these challenges.
Through the G20, national governments have responded with stimulus packages worth nearly 2.5 trillion US dollars to ameliorate the effects of this crisis.
Over one trillion dollars of that stimulus is government measures in our own region, in addition to the total stimulus measures in the United States worth one trillion dollars in its own right.
Japan, China, and Korea have also delivered large-scale packages that help to support not only their domestic economies but, importantly, regional commerce as well.
Through the G20, the world has also agreed to $1.1 trillion for the international financial institutions to guard against future financial crises, particularly in emerging markets.
And through the G20, we've also agreed to act against an outbreak of protectionism, which would only harm everybody's interests.
The governments in this region and the world have responded quickly, decisively and remarkably together to confront the common economic danger.
We have recognised that coordinated measures deliver the greatest results.
In short, we have responded to the crisis with cooperation.
When the Great Depression hit in the 1930s this was not the case. Each country responded to protect its national interests to the detriment of others.
The prescriptions they chose back then served nobody's interests.
The Great Depression was as long and as severe as it was because the international community resorted to nationalist competition rather than international cooperation.
These were the economic consequences of the Depression.
In seeking to protect itself, each country harmed itself.
Furthermore, the social, political and security consequences of this outbreak of rampant economic nationalism in the 1930s was disastrous for the world at large.
This time, we have, thankfully, responded differently  -  both at the Washington Summit in November and the London Summit in April.
When the governments of the world gathered most recently in London, they crafted together a global strategy for economic recovery.
The G20 brings together the established and the emerging powers. 
The G20 straddles all continents and all major regions: five from Asia, five from the Americas, five from Europe and five from other regions including Africa  -  as well as including the most populous Muslim country, Indonesia.
The G20 bridges therefore the strategic and economic weight of the present and of the future.
It is small enough to have efficiency but large enough to have legitimacy
Its combined membership makes up 75 per cent of global GDP, 85 per cent of global trade and two thirds of the world's population.
All of the largest economies in the Asia-Pacific region are represented in the G20  -  and ASEAN was also present at the London meeting.
What has also struck me as a participant of the London Summit about the G20 is the degree of transparency and cooperation countries have brought to the table at this time of great economic crisis. 
There has been a remarkable degree of collective determination to work together for the collective good. This has been good global leadership.
Leadership where the G20 through its membership reaches out to the wider international community to seek ideas to shape policy; to forge the political consensus for strong programs of action; and then to build support for outcomes once reached.
Much of course remains to be done.
And I look forward to the next G20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September to continue our collaborative responses to the global economic crisis.
Of course, this recent example of global economic cooperation, we have already seen at a regional level here in South East Asia  -  and across a much broader policy scope.
Back in the 1960s, South East Asia was faced with a choice.
In the midst of the Cold War, with newly independent nations finding their feet, the nations of this region were faced with a choice about their future.
The choice was how to shape their region; how to look beyond their own borders and to build a region that would support their ambition to grow in peace, stability and prosperity.
The nations of South East Asia  -  including of course our hosts Singapore chose, actively chose cooperation. They chose to shape their common future together.
They chose to form the Association of South East Asian Nations.
At its core was the notion that through cooperation, rather than conflict or competition, all members, all members would be better off.
Implicit in the choice made by those farsighted leaders in the 1960s is the notion of interdependence  -  that the future of a nation depends on the future of the nations around it; that by building communities of nations, all members of the community reap greater rewards than they could working alone.
The results of course speak for themselves.
ASEAN has played an important role in building a stable strategic foundation for South East Asia, when before its creation this was far from the case.
And that stability has enabled its member nations to grow from strength to strength. It has also allowed the influence of South East Asia to be felt in the region and beyond.
Tonight I want to draw on the great example of ASEAN and talk about the future of our wider region in this the Asia Pacific century.
I want to draw on the lessons of ASEAN and argue that as a wider region we also have long-term choices before us.
The choice is whether we seek actively to shape the future of our wider region  -  the Asia Pacific region  -  by building the regional architecture we need for the future, if we are together to shape a common regional future.
Or whether instead, we will adopt a passive approach  -  where we simply wait and see what evolves, whether that enhances stability or whether in fact it undermines stability.
Do we sit by and allow relations between states to be buffeted by economic and strategic shifts and shocks. Or do we seek to build institutions to provide anchorages of stability able to withstand the strategic stresses and strains of the future, when they inevitably arise.
In the first half of the 20th century, we saw the tragic consequences of rampant nationalism as nations competed for power.
Great powers in Europe bumped up against each other without the benefit of regional institutions to smooth problems as they arose.
The result was devastating conflict.
For our own region, we cannot simply assume that peace and prosperity are the inevitable products of human progress.
Will we make choices for cooperation or conflict?
Will we make active choices for cooperation; or allow drift to set in that takes us in the reverse direction.
Will we seek a framework of shaping the institutions of common security for our region; or will we allow traditional interstate tensions to evolve and in some cases escalate.
It will take us time to make the choices before us.
But the first step in this process is that we need to have the regional conversation about our trajectory for the future  -  about what sort of region we want to be in 2020 and beyond.
We need to have a discussion about what we have. We need to have a discussion about what we want to be. And, if there is agreement on this, what steps might be useful in realising our common regional future.
History tells us that cooperation delivers benefits in strategic stability, not just in economic growth.
The truth is we must work hard at peace and stability because the possibilities of miscommunication, of miscalculation, and misadventure are always great.
And that cooperation, transparency and common endeavour represent the exception, which means our conscious efforts to enhance cooperation must always be the greater because the natural default position tends to be suspicion rather than cooperation.
Within East Asia there are also other particular dynamics at play.
South-East Asian growth is altering traditional strategic, strong East Asian growth is altering relativities making the management of regional security even more complicated.
America's capacity for economic re-invention and renewal should never be underestimated. 
And, while China's remarkable development will continue, we should not underestimate the challenges China faces in balancing its engines of growth from exports to domestic consumption, potentially a turning point in East Asia's future economic growth. 
Managing major power relations  -  particularly in the context of the rise of China and India  -  will be crucial for our collective future. 
This will place a premium on wise statecraft, particularly the effective management of relations between the United States, Japan, China and India. 
Over the last half century the United States has underwritten stability in the Asia Pacific. This stability has allowed nations in the region to prosper. And our common interest is for this stability to continue into the future.
But just as economic cooperation cannot be assumed, strategic cooperation too is also a matter of choice. Asia includes the world's two most populous countries; the world's largest holders of foreign exchange reserves; two of the world's top three economies; and three of the world's five largest militaries, there's a lot going on in our neighbourhood.
The centre of global geo-strategic and geo-economic gravity is shifting to our region.
So not only do the countries of our region have an interest in the region's future stability, so too does the world at large.
The simple truth is this; that much of the critical history of the 21st century will be written, shaped and lived out here in our own region.
Together therefore we shoulder great responsibilities both regional and global.
Also in our region we have the United States, which will remain for the foreseeable future the single most powerful strategic actor through a combination of military, economic and soft power, and the only nation capable of projecting power globally.
This strategic primacy of the United States will continue to be vital in the maintenance of stability. As other countries become more affluent, their military spending will also increase.
Strategically therefore, our region will be dynamic, not static, adding further to the uncertainties we confront in the future. And in a rapidly changing region, we will therefore face a wide range of emerging security challenges  -  both traditional and non-traditional.
The convergence of: demographic change; population movements; environmental change, energy pressures; resource pressures; global public health concerns; mass migration flows; transnational crime and terrorism will increase rather than reduce the risk of conflict.
And the chance of conflict between states can never be ruled out  -  even if its frequency has declined.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including the possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of terrorists, is a threat of increasing international concern.
Iran's nuclear program is of continuing concern. North Korea's second nuclear test is a threat to the peace and stability of our region. The nuclear test, coupled with the North's ongoing missile development program, is yet another provocative act.
The international community must respond with one voice and with a common program of action against Pyongyang.
The United Nations Security Council must be of common resolve against a regime which is so reckless in relation to our common security. 
The security challenges we face are therefore many and complex.
And to help manage this complex security agenda in a region where security relativities are not static but dynamic, we will need together to calmly think through the mechanisms we may need to foster active collaboration for the future.
We need robust structures that can cope with dynamic environments.
We also need to build the habits of dialogue, discussion and cooperation that will help minimise friction and provide a mechanism for dealing with it when it arises.
We need mechanisms that help us cope with strategic shocks and discontinuities.
We need a body that brings together the leaders of the key nations in the Asia Pacific region  -  including Indonesia, India, China, Japan, the United States and other nations  -  with a mandate to engage across the breadth of the security, economic and political challenges we will face in the future.
Absent such a body, I am concerned in the long term about the possibility of strategic drift within our region, or even worse strategic polarisation; polarisation which I believe serves nobody's interests.
As presently configured, there is no single regional organisation with a pan-regional mandate that covers the full policy spectrum.
In June last year I proposed the development in the long term of what I have called an Asia Pacific community. An Asia Pacific community could help ensure that the process of regional economic and financial integration keeps moving forward. 
An APC could also help to nurture a culture of cooperation and collaboration on security  -  including a culture of military transparency, helping to build confidence and security building measures by providing information that reassures neighbours rather than alarms them.
An Asia Pacific community could also provide a vehicle for discussion and cooperation across the range of challenges with transnational reach, such as climate change, resource and food security, bio-security and terrorism.
Just as ASEAN built a strong measure of strategic congruence within South East Asia between many countries of different political systems, and, at times, with active hostilities towards one another, so also could an Asia Pacific community over time build up a sharper sense of security community across our wider region.
An Asia Pacific community could be seen as a natural broadening of the processes of confidence, security - and community-building in Southeast Asia led by ASEAN, while ASEAN itself would of course remain central to the region and would also be an important part of any future Asia Pacific community.
The regional groupings and institutions already in place in the Asia-Pacific region all make valuable contributions. 
ASEAN, APEC, the East Asia Summit, ASEAN +3, the ASEAN Regional Forum and other bodies are doing important work in enhancing economic and other forms of cooperation.
As part of our regional conversation about the future of our institutions we can draw strength from their accumulated experience.
That was my goal in appointing a Special Envoy on the Asia Pacific community, Richard Woolcott, a distinguished Australian diplomat who together with others did much of the diplomatic leg work in the formation of APEC twenty years ago. Mr Woolcott visited capitals in the region to discuss the Asia Pacific community proposal over the last 12 months.
The Government greatly appreciates the frank and constructive discussions Mr Woolcott was able to have with governments and non-government institutions across the region.
He has now provided his report to me and I would like to outline his key findings and where we might go from here.
First, there has been broad agreement on the value of a focused discussion about how regional architecture can best serve all our interests in the future.
Everyone, it seems, has been keen to put forward their view about the idea of developing an Asia Pacific community and understandably these views are far from uniform.
And this is something that I welcome. The whole point of this initiative is to begin the conversation about where we need to go.
Secondly, there is widespread recognition that our current structures do not provide a single forum for all relevant leaders to discuss the full range of political, economic and security challenges we face for the future.
Thirdly, it is clear that no-one wants more meetings. 
There is no appetite for additional institutions.
It is difficult enough for leaders to make it to the range of meetings we already have.
And coming from Australia, where every meeting involves another trip, another voyage, I wholeheartedly agree.
As I have said many times and as my envoy has stated around the region, I have a completely open mind on how we proceed and where we end up.
Australia has no prescriptive view. This is a complex and important matter which needs proper consideration.
The clear conclusion from my envoy's report is that there is interest in the region in this discussion  -  and there is a wish to explore the possibilities without any fixed or final views on a destination.
So my intention is to continue and deepen this conversation in the months ahead with interested parties across the region.
I am pleased to announce tonight that, following the East Asia Summit and APEC meetings later this year, where I will brief leaders personally on the outcomes of my special envoy's discussions and hear their views, Australia will convene a one-and-a-half track conference to further explore the idea of an Asia Pacific community.
We will invite key government officials, academics and opinion makers from around the region to come together and discuss the future of our regional architecture for the 21st century.
For us, this is the next logical step in an unfolding regional conversation.
I look forward to representation from as many countries as possible.
And I look forward to a free-flowing and open discussion about our region, its future and the institutions we might need to maximise our future peace and prosperity.
There will inevitably be disagreement along the way.
This is natural and normal.
In fact it would be abnormal to expect any immediate agreement on such a complex challenge.
That is why I have deliberately set a target of an Asia Pacific community by 2020: comfortably removed from the present but still sufficiently close to focus our collective mind.
Some of you may ask why Australia has put forward this proposal.
The answer is straightforward.
We're committed to active middle power diplomacy.
By ourselves, Australia cannot shape the future of the region we live in.
Nor do we believe our contribution is unique. It is not.
Through skilful diplomacy and through the strength of its contribution, Singapore has become a lynch pin of South East Asian regionalism  -  as this conference itself demonstrates.
Singapore is a model of how countries can use their best assets  -  their people and their ideas, to make a contribution to regional and global order and always with a refreshing, clear, realist perspective.
It is in that tradition that I am committed to Australia making a positive contribution to the international policy debate on the future of our wider region.
I do not believe we can afford to sit idly by while the region simply evolves  -  without any sense of strategic purpose.
In fact I believe this is potentially dangerous.
We do not bring to the table a misty-eyed idealism about some pan-regional utopia.
By contrast, the Australian Government takes a deeply realist approach to security.
But the realism of the international relations of the 21st century necessarily involves a high degree of structured regional and global engagement to be effective in our highly globalised world.
Australia is also a strong believer in the importance of military cooperation and military transparency as contributing to long-term security.
That is why Australia is building on our already strong defence and security relationships around the region.
And it is why we have recently released Australia's first Defence White Paper in nearly a decade.
If sovereign states are clear about their strategic perceptions and their military forces, the risk of miscalculation is reduced.
The White Paper is a frank document that describes how we see the world and how we are shaping our military forces to respond to possible challenges ahead.
It affirms the centrality of Australia's alliance relationship with the United States, and assesses that the United States will remain the most powerful and influential actor up to 2030, the timeframe within which our White Paper is cast. 
And Australia's close alliance with the United States will remain the bedrock on which Australia's national security is built. 
It remains also Australia's view that strategic stability in the region at large is best underpinned by the continued presence of the United States through its network of alliances and security partnerships  -  including with Japan, the RoK and Australia  -  and by significant levels of 
US military capability continuing to be located in the Western Pacific.
The Australian Government will also continue to strengthen its defence and strategic ties with our partners around the region.
We have concluded a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation with Japan.
In March of this year in Canberra, President Lee of Korea and I issued a Joint Statement on Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation between Australia and the Republic of Korea.
We are active in the ASEAN Regional Forum  -  as we were when it was established 15 years ago.
We maintain the Five Powers Defence agreement with our regional partners in Malaysia and Singapore  -  as well as with New Zealand and the UK.
And we are strengthening our bilateral security links, including with Indonesia through the Lombok Treaty.
The White Paper also makes clear our desire to expand our security dialogue with China and strengthen our defence relationship with India.
Australia has strong security and strategic interests that go well beyond our neighbourhood. Australia by definition is a maritime power with maritime interests.
We are, therefore, deeply focused on the importance of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean in our own long-term security. We also maintain a special relationship, along with our New Zealand partners, with the Pacific island countries, including uniquely strong ties in defence in a region of direct importance to Australia.
Equally, Australia is of unparalleled strategic importance to these island countries where Australia remains the pre-eminent economic development partner.
The Australia Defence White Paper makes clear our desire to have constructive military relations with a wide range of partners in our region and beyond. 
And, like all nations, our desire is to be able to protect ourselves if needs be. Our Defence policy is based on the need to ensure that Australia can act in its own self defence against a wide range of threats. 
This means that we must have the ability to conduct independent military operations in the defence of Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches and denying any potential adversary the ability to operate in our immediate neighbourhood. 
What we need also to do is build confidence on a solid foundation of transparency and cooperation. This can be done bilaterally. It can be done operationally.
It can for example be done if our combined forces coordinate in rapid response to large scale natural disasters in our region, a region is which regrettably is highly prone to such disasters.
All peoples benefit from such cooperation because natural disasters rather than armed conflict remains the largest threat to life in our region.
But also our militaries would be required to plan together and operate together on a regular basis against a common challenge, thus developing new confidence and security building and transparency measures for the future.
All this must also be done through effective regional institutions.
To conclude, you have some big days of discussion and deliberation ahead of you at this, the region's premier conference on regional security.
You will have the region's best strategic thinkers and shapers of policies leading your discussions. And I think you have a challenge before you. Your challenge is to go beyond describing the trends that we see. It is to go beyond reacting to the trends that we see.
Your challenge is to take the next step, the more difficult step, and think about how we can actively shape those trends for our common regional interests for the future.
We need to build on the strong foundation of regional cooperation we already have. We need to learn from the great experience embodied in ASEAN.
We need to engage the leaders of the key nations of the region in a single forum that makes sense for all, not just for some.
And to act and to actively work against any long-term polarisation of a region so rich in potential for all our peoples and in fact all peoples of the world.
My intention with beginning a dialogue about an Asia Pacific community was precisely that. An Asia Pacific community is not a short-term project. 
It will take time a long time to achieve. A very long time to achieve. History however shows that risks arise not from developing new initiatives for the future.
But from failing to act; failing to anticipate; and failing to shape new sets of strategic realities as they emerge. I am an unapologetic optimist about our region's future.
Just as I am an unapologetic realist about the choices we will need to make for our region's future together.
I thank you for your attention.


QUESTION: Prime Minister, thank you for your address, you provided a panoramic view of the economic and security issues facing this region, of which Australia is very much a part, and you talked also about the role that an Asia-Pacific community might play in meeting these challenges. In your address you also mentioned the new Defence White Paper, but the White Paper was not just about cooperation, it also outlined major changes in the force structure of the Australian defence force, and in particular it projected a major naval build up, including a doubling of Australia's submarine fleet, and the procurement and deployment in the medium to long-term of land attack cruise missiles. 
My question is whether there is any contradiction between the assessments of strategic challenges, which are inherent in your new defence white paper on the one hand, and Australian thinking about the potential for a regional community on the other hand. 
PM: I think the reality for all defence and strategic planners, and foreign policy planners, is to proceed on both tracks; each government and country represented in this room takes prudent national decisions to directly prepare for its own national defence.
In our case that is reinforced by our own strategic environment; we are a country of 21 million people occupying a continent with probably the fifth or sixth largest coastline in the world, and if you were to aggregate our combined maritime zones, one of the largest maritime zones to police worldwide as well, certainly within the top five around the world.
This therefore commands our attention in relation to the capacity of our naval forces to discharge that function in the future, and explains what we are doing in that space. However, making the prudent national preparations for national defence, shaped by our own strategic circumstances, is one track. 
The second track must always be how we shape the institutions, the cultures and habits of security policy, transparency and cooperation. That I fear that is where we currently lack an institution within the region to properly harness and further that.
One of the great things that has occurred under the leadership of Singapore is this dialogue that we are participating in today, and which your institute has been such a key partner in forming.
This takes us a fair way into a process of discussion with each other about common security and strategic perceptions, and where those security and strategic perceptions differ. I think though, institutionally, we need to lift this to a broader regional focus, so that the pre-existing tensions that exist in our part of the world, in part arising from unresolved territorial disputes that go back decades, if not centuries, as well as the new threats to security, can be properly openly discussed and maximally harmonised within an environment of common regional security community. 
I draw some inspiration from what has occurred in Europe. There are many critics of what has happened with the European Union , and I am certainly not foreshadowing the emergence of a European Union here in our part of the world, but when I look at the history of Europe prior to the formation of the Union in the 1950s, back to the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, this was a period that had a few problems attached to it.
And I think we'd like this region to learn from that and not replicate it, and therefore the institutional mechanisms that have emerged in the last 50 years, I believe, have ameliorated long-standing political and security tensions, and outstanding territorial disputes.
And over time not just done that minimalistically but maximally, shaped a common security view; we can learn from that in spirit if not in letter, and craft some of that into our own deliberations here, given this will be, as I said in my formal remarks, the centre of global geo-strategic gravity and geo-economic gravity for the century ahead. I believe we have got that challenge on our shoulders.
In our Defence White Paper we seek to prosecute both courses of action simultaneously, and I think that is the right way to go. 
QUESTION: Mr Prime Minister, Australia, like Singapore, like other countries in this region, has a strong and powerful vested interest in a positive and stable relationship with the US and China. We are currently in a rather unusual situation where the relations between the world's greatest power, the US, and the world's greatest emerging power, China, is actually positive and stable, but this goes against the logic of history.
As someone who speaks Mandarin and English fluently, you understand the interests and concerns of both sides; can you suggest two or three concrete steps that we in the region, or Australia, can take, apart from the idea of an Asia-Pacific community, to ensure that the rather abnormal situation we have, of a stable and positive relationship between the US and China, continues in the next decade or so? 
PM: Thank you Kishore, and I will acknowledge publicly your enormous contribution to scholarship and diplomacy over a long period of time. Where you rightly start your question is with what is going right in terms of the relationship between the two, and I said this to President Bush before he left office, that one of the things I commended his administration for, and certainly to his Chinese counterparts as well, was the fact that that relationship proceeded in a stable and a mutually beneficial way over a long period of time, under careful management at both ends of the relationship, and that is good.
Secondly, in my discussions with President Obama, it is quite plain to me that from the American perspective that that will be his intention with his administration in relation to China as well; my discussions with the Chinese leadership reflect exactly the same. We are therefore in a virtuous position, as far as this important relationship is concerned. 
A practical thing which has emerged, which I'd draw your attention to, albeit in the non-security space, is for the first time in the last six months we have China and the United States conjoined in the G20, with other states, including Australia, in forming decisions about the global economic order, in a body which before has not operated in this way. The very encouraging thing I have to report from the first and second of those summits, and the most recent one concluded in London, was the degree of collegiality, not just across that conference at large, but between China and the United States in particular.
The great stimulus efforts undertaken, for example, on the global economy by the US and by China, and by other states including Japan, have been fundamentally important in tracking this trajectory towards global recovery. Why do I use that as an example to respond to your question? I believe that contained within that possibility of where the G20 goes for the future, including its next summit in Pittsburgh, we see the emergence of a good body of global governance for the future, where these two states and others are directly engaged. 
The only other point I would make by way of furtherance of this discussion, is again an initiative that emerged during the Bush administration, and which has continued, and those of you in this room are familiar with it, in terms of the bilateral, strategic and economic dialogues between Washington and Beijing, which have been continued and, at least against one argument, elevated. This has been important, as it brings together key economic decision-makers, foreign policy decision-makers, and strategic policy decision-makers in both countries.
I think this is to be encouraged, and to be developed further, and certainly in my discussions with counterparts, not just in the White House, but also in the administration in Washington, there is a strong desire for that to continue. In summary, active engagement in a new forum wrestling with a common crisis that unites us all, which is how to jump-start the global economy back into life and to fix the rules up for the future, China and the United States are actively and constructively engaged on this, and it is good to see and be part of. Secondly, on the bilaterals, what is occurring with their strategic and economic dialogue is a very good thing both for those two countries and the rest of us combined. 
QUESTION: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us this evening, and I commend your optimism about the region. My question is this: is there anything that worries you about the future of the region, anything that keeps you awake at night, other than North Korean nuclear activities? 
PM: There is a lot that keeps me awake at night Bob, and a lot of those challenges are domestic, but they are also international as well.
The virtue of travelling from Australia, Bob, is you have a long time always to think on the plane before you get anywhere, and I was talking to our defence chiefs and others coming up here today on this subject.
If we look at the enormous challenges which are presented in our wider region, in terms of what is emerging in Afghanistan and Pakistan, I share entirely the sentiments recently reflected by President Obama on this question. Of course, you have just made reference to what has occurred with North Korea, and great uncertainties not just in terms of the nuclear trajectory of North Korea, but also uncertainties about the future evolution of its own leadership. 
Thirdly, the great and unresolved question of the Iranian nuclear programme; I made mention of that in my formal remarks, and this is of a direct concern to us as well.
If there is another though, which is periodically below the radar and periodically above the radar, it is what all those who are engaged in the wider security policy debate, wider national security policy debate, wider than a clinical definition of defence policy, are now seized with, and that is with global pandemics.
We have had three rounds of debate about this in our region, one with SARS, the second with Avian Influenza, and thirdly with the current H1N1. Based on my discussions with health policy analysts this below the radar concern, and now above the radar concern, should seize all of our national security policy establishments about how we best plan effectively to deal with this, if and when it becomes a large and immediate problem for us all.
I believe we have had several warning shots across the bows on this, and while it belongs in the non-hard security, but so-called soft security box, if it occurs it will seize all of our political establishments with a level of common need for endeavour that we have rarely been seized with in the past.
There are four that keep me awake at night, Bob, and there are a few others besides, and I am sure we can discuss that further over a drink. 
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I think you have done the conference a great service by starting off with the big picture [inaudible] but since you are leaving I would like to get your thoughts on the crisis of the moment, which of course is North Korea. Having exploded two nuclear devices, we at least have to ask the question whether it is possible that North Korea is no longer willing to voluntarily give up its nuclear programme and, if that is the case, then the question for all of us is: is there anything that can be done to compel them to give up the nuclear capability, particularly because of what you just referred to, the precedent for Iran and other potential proliferators in the future? 
PM: I have enormous sympathy for all countries represented in this region that have been part and parcel of the six party talks on the DPRK, and I would particularly publicly commend what the government of China has done in seeking to facilitate those talks over a long period of time. I can also privately reflect upon the frustration this must occasion in Beijing, to see what has happened most recently as well.
I have talked with those participating in the six party talks, and the processes that preceded it in various US administrations going back a long, long time; the only constant to emerge in all of this is the consistently non-cooperative approach of the DPRK regime. This most recent setback is an acute one, for reasons that you as defence policy analysts will be intimately familiar with.
When I said in my remarks before that the obligation we face at the UN Security Council is to arrive at a resolution that is not just with one voice, but with a concrete set of measures, I meant both parts.
Not just a universal statement of condemnation, which in part has occurred in the absence of the resolution, although it is necessary to do that for proper reflection in the instruments of international law, but secondly, the measures have to be uniform and strong as well. 
Regrettably the conclusion that I have reached is that one of the only effective ways of seizing the attention of the government in Pyongyang is by a harsh range of financial measures of a type which existed and then were lifted at one point. I believe they need to be re-embraced and hardened, and these may have some potential to arrest the attention of the regime, as I believe they did on an earlier occasion, prior to being lifted.
That's one point I'd make.
But the other is this. I have become, in my own dealings with representatives of the North Korean Government over a long period of time, completely persuaded of the view that those in North Korea only respond to a unified demonstration of strength on the part of the international community. If I thought there was something else in there that would work I would embrace that, but I believe strength and resolve is what is necessary to command attention and respect on the part of that regime.
All other governments represented in the six party talks, and others including my own, have tried all sorts of means by which to engage in a proper process with Pyongyang, and most of those have come to naught. I believe strength is necessary, and the first test of strength will be what measures we embrace as an international community through the UNSC. 


MITCHELL: On the line from Darwin is the Prime Minister. Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Is it time to start restricting social interaction?
PM: Neil, I think the important thing to do, as you have just quite responsibly said to your listeners, is wait till the advice of the medical authorities. The Commonwealth, from the beginning of this, has been working with the states through the Chief Medical Officer and we have sought to upgrade measures every step of the way, consistent with the advice from the health professionals.
Therefore, when it comes for example, for actions on school closures, that's in response to the advice of the health professionals, similarly actions in relation the use of antivirals, decisions concerning the purchase of vaccines, done in response to the health professionals. That's what we will do into the future.
So on your specific question about public venues, let's simply wait for advice. I think that is the responsible course of action. And I think all your listeners, all Australians, are legitimately concerned about this influenza across Australia, swine influenza, as are people around the world.
The challenge for us is to make sure we work our way through this calmly and methodically and act in response to each piece of advice that we receive, bearing in mind that on critical questions such as the stockpiling of antivirals, Australia is probably per capita the best prepared country in the world.
MITCHELL: Are you looking at mass immunisation?
PM: What the Health Minister, I believe, announced yesterday was that the Government had placed an order with CSL for swine flu vaccine. The vaccine is expected to be developed in a few months.
Doses will be purchased for about 10 million people, based on current expert advice, sufficient to contain spread and protect those at risk of complications. That is when it comes to the vaccine. The antivirals, which both Relenza and Tamiflu, as you know we have already stockpiled something in the order of eight or nine million courses and the Minister announced yesterday a further 1.8 million courses would be added as well.
MITCHELL: How would you decide who to vaccinate?
PM: On that question again Neil, we always respond to the advice of the health professionals. And therefore I think it is important to wait until we have first of all, an (inaudible) vaccine if developed, CSL are engaged in that work now and it's detailed complex scientific work, and secondly the health professionals will advise in terms of where it is going to be most and best used.
I think that is the right course of action. Similarly for example with decisions on the release of doses of Tamiflu or Relenza from the national stockpile to various states and locations, that is done on the basis of the advice of the health professionals as well.
MITCHELL: Okay but do you have a procedure where you say, okay this is when we move to this level as the World Health Organisation does, where we will ask people to restrict social engagement, that sort of thing?
PM: Well there is a spectrum of measures which go through each gradation of the influenza spread and as I said before we would take each of those steps calmly and methodically on the way through.
This, as I said just before in our interview Neil, I can understand people's concern about this. Flus, when they hit Australia each year, I am advised, affect around about 10 per cent of the population. We must therefore do, as the Chief Medical Officer said the other day, our absolute best to make sure that we can do better than that. And of course the proper deployment of antivirals and vaccines is one way of doing that.
Other containment measures, for example school closures and other decisions, are part and parcel of the process as well.
MITCHELL: Do you travel with Tamiflu yourself?
PM: No I don't. Well not that I am advised that I do anyway. So when I travel abroad, I am usually travelling with a medical doctor, as did Mr Howard before me but I haven't actually gone up to the doc and said, what have you got in your bag.
I wouldn't have a clue what he has got in his bag.
MITCHELL: It must be a concern though that this could, this could develop into a full scale epidemic.
PM: Well I believe it is really important Neil to be vigilant and calm. We are well served by among the best health professionals in the world, who are intimately globally linked with the spread of this influenza in other parts of the world.
The only advantage of this particular influenza hitting in other parts of the world first is that our experts have been able to study the type of spread of the disease in other countries in order to get as early as possible advice on how it should be best contained in our country as well.
Secondly as I have said, the stockpiling of our antivirals is probably, on a per capita basis, one of the best provisions anywhere in the world. And of course, why is that relevant? When people are confirmed as having swine flu, then the early administration of the antiviral, either Relenza or Tamiflu, I am advised by the CMO, is effective.
MITCHELL: And the vaccine is ordered is it? Because as of yesterday midday, it wasn't?
PM: My advice this morning Neil is that the Commonwealth has placed an order with CSL for swine flu vaccine as I said, for purchases to cover about 10 million people. And that again is based on the Chief Medical Officer's advice. And what we are waiting for of course is for the actual completion of the scientific work, the technical work on the actual finalisation of the composition of the vaccine itself, as you would be familiar with the preparation of any flu vaccine.
MITCHELL: Oh yeah sure. But they did tell me that there were three other countries in before us and they were a little anxious about that, but if it is ordered, that is the key thing.
I wonder if you mind if we take a call, because a lot of people would sort of like some reassurance or some help here in the way it is being handled. Yes Maria, go ahead Maria.
CALLER: Mr Rudd, with no disrespect, but you have no idea. My son was confirmed positive yesterday afternoon. I had to fight on Tuesday night at the hospital for him to be tested because he had a fever of 39.5. They had no swabs, I could hear them ringing everywhere to find supplies. It was worse than a third world country. I am ropable. I still don't know what I am meant to be doing.
MITCHELL: Have you spoken to the hotline Maria?
CALLER: I can't get through. I am just beside myself; this is just not good enough Mr Rudd. It's not good enough. You have not been prepared; the medical staff are not prepared. I had to go to be tested myself yesterday and I was mortified when I walked into the northern hospital, it looked like something from MASH. It is, is just not good enough.
MITCHELL: Ok so what do you need, you need help with advice on what to do?
CALLER: I would like to know what I am meant to do. Am I supposed to not walk out the door? I mean they did say be quarantined now. What does that mean? My son has not been given any medication.
They have put me on Tamiflu. He's sick and just miserable and I don't know what to do.
MITCHELL: How old is he?
CALLER: He is 19.
MITCHELL: Okay Mr Rudd any thoughts?
PM: Well Maria I can understand fully your concern, particularly if you've been to the hospital and had that experience that you have just described. Can I suggest two things? As soon as you get off the program this morning, leave Neil with your number.
I will have someone from the Health Minister's office ring you personally within the hour to work out where you fit right now, best within the system, and your son.
If you have not been able to get through to the established hotline of 1802007, which provides general information to the public on how to respond to this, then that is the next best provision of advice I can provide at this stage and we will seek to fill the gap that you have experienced in the system yourself.
MITCHELL: Are you happy to do that Maria?
CALLER: Yeah, but my other complaint is Neil, why were we not told where the flu was originated from. My son ate at Epping Plaza McDonald's on Sunday and we didn't know. He would not have gone there if it was disclosed. I am so angry.
MITCHELL: That isn't the Prime Minister's responsibility, Maria, but I couldn't agree with you more. Hold on, we will get your number off air. They were too slow to react to the problem, the confirmed case in the staff at the Epping's Plaza McDonald's. And only in fact when we revealed it did they close the place for 24 hours.
Hang on Maria, we will get a number for you. Prime Minister, if it is okau, we will take a break and come back with some other issues.
AD BREAK
MITCHELL: We will move on to other matters, but Prime Minister thank you, your office has already been in contact during that ad break and has got the number for Maria who is so distressed and also Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister's office has been on the line as well, so that is a very quick reaction, thank you for that.
PM: That's okay, Neil. I understand Maria's concern and what she said just before about early advice about where outbreaks of flu have occurred and localities. This is where actually, operation of programs like yours are really important to get information up and out there.
But I think in defence of the medical authorities - this is really tough, it is a bit like tracing where, you know, in a normal season, an influenza is occurring, particular locations, so there is, there are always going to be gaps in the information chain.
But I know that our health professionals are doing their absolute best to make sure the right information is got out as early as possible.
MITCHELL: We will also get on to the state health minister obviously. But thank you for that. Now something else is you cabinet getting a bit self-indulgent?
PM: By the way, can I just add one other thing. If it is of use to your program and to programs like it, I will speak to the CMO about, I mean I have just been reflecting upon Maria's distress just before, whether it is worthwhile and subject to your own views, having the CMO or someone representing him periodically taking calls on programs like yours to answer direct questions from the public. So you think that through and if that is of use, come back to us.
MITCHELL: More than happy to do that. I think that would be an excellent idea if he felt was a good thing to do, we are more than happy to make the time available.
PM: I will let your office sort it out with the Health Minister's office. I was just listening to her distress before, I think information is really important.
MITCHELL: I agree, I agree, we will get on to Nicola Roxon's office immediately.
Now is your government getting a bit self-indulgent, $3.7 million on plaques at schools saying you built them?
PM: Well I am not even sure about the accuracy of that number. But I have got to say Neil, we are out there investing in, I think $15 billion, going into schools for school modernisation.
MITCHELL: Yeah that is terrific, why do we need a plaque boasting about it?
PM: Well I tell you what we are not doing, is spending $120 million on television advertising Work Choices.
MITCHELL: Well that's history. I mean why do we need $3.7 million on plaques?
PM: Well part of the information I received this morning was that in previous times, not necessarily in all cases, but P&amp;Cs and P&amp;Fs with their particular upgrades may have been asked  - 
MITCHELL: Sorry what is a P&amp;C and a P&amp;F?
PM: P&amp;C is a Parents and Citizens association and a P&amp;F are Parents and Friends association, depending on what part of the country you are in. I don't know what it is called in your part of the world but there you go.
The parent bodies attached to schools in certain circumstances, when building enhancements would occur, would be asked themselves to actually fork out for a plaque or whatever. We don't think that is the right thing to do  - 
MITCHELL: But why do we need a plaque saying ‘Kevin Rudd built this'
PM: I don't think it will be saying that. If it had anything to do with that, it wouldn't be being done at all.
MITCHELL: Okay well why are you spending  -  but that is only one example. There is $60,000 sending four staff, first class, to London with Wayne Swan for the G20. Now business class, fair enough, but first class?
PM: Well as I'm advised, the arrangements that are in place of the travelling entitlements for the current Treasurer's office are identical with the previous Treasurer's office
MITCHELL: Well let's change them. Why not change them? We are in tough times.
PM: Let me just explain one thing, is that if for example, I know the Treasurer very well I have known him for years, you are being sent around the world on a regular basis, to engage in international meetings on the state of the global financial crisis and our response to it, then it follows in using the flight that you actually need an opportunity to work with your staff on the flight.
I presume that is the reason for it, I presume that is why Mr Costello had the same arrangement. I think that is a practical reason.
MITCHELL: So why did Peter Garrett take 12 people with him to Chile and spend $200,000? Did they fly first class?
PM: I don't have the details concerning that particular  - 
MITCHELL: You ‘ve even got a Labor Senator, Jacinta Collins, stacking on a turn because she had to travel by taxi rather than limo. I mean, you put all these things together and it looks self-indulgent.
PM: Well people will say that from time to time about any Government, Neil, and we will take criticism where it is due. But can I say more broadly, the Government is a very hard-working Government and the Ministers are out there working hard across the country, travelling a lot within Australia and making sure that we are getting out and about with the community.
That means a fair bit of travel. For example most recently I was attending a community cabinet meeting at the Emerald Secondary College in outer Melbourne.
And when that happens, let me just give you an example, we travel, all members of the cabinet. On top of that you have the senior public servants from your department travel. Why do we do that? To take the entire business of cabinet out to the community to expose ourselves to the local community for a large slice of time. Our predecessors never did that.
MITCHELL: Nobody's criticising travel, Prime Minister, but first class travel (inaudible)
PM: We got attacked by the others for doing that precisely. We would actually defend that sort of action, to make sure we are out there in the community.
MITCHELL: As I say, you put them all together, and then sending money to dead people and people who are overseas. I mean you add all that together and there is a perception here of waste in tough times - indulgence and waste.
PM: Can I say, Neil, I just reject entirely what you just said about the sending of payments to the families of bereaved. I mean let's just put all of this into context. Firstly, when the previous Government made one-off payments, they went to persons who had paid or delivered a tax return in the previous financial year.
That occurred in the case of the previous Government when they made one-off payments to what is called the low income tax offset  - 
MITCHELL: But why do we keep going back to the previous Government? I mean you assured us you would do it differently, and yet you are using the example of wasted money on advertising, which they did, but you were going to be better.
PM: Well Neil if you allow me to finish the sentence, I'll probably get through it. What I am saying is that first of all, that is what has occurred in the past. Secondly, as far as the deceased are concerned, this is where I disagree with you.
The payments that have been made in relation to deceased estates, people have died basically within the last year, are going to people in highly distressed circumstances.
If tax has been paid by the person who is now deceased, then I think it is fairly hard hearted to say that a payment should not therefore go to the estate.
MITCHELL: But you wanted this money spent quickly, if it is going to be tied up in a deceased estate, it is not going to be spent quickly.
PM: Well it is not necessarily going to be tied up for long period of time. Can I say with respect Neil that we have had communications from people in the public who have been in these circumstances, who have made very immediate use of these payments for reasons which are immediately related to loss of their loved one.
All I am saying is, in this particular debate and fair cop with any criticism of what the Government is doing, right, wrong or indifferent, but in terms of the families of the deceased, I do draw the line here. I think these people, and right around the country, that lost loved ones are often in very difficult circumstances in the last 12 months, should be treated with more respect that has occurred in the debate, certainly in the Parliament, yesterday.
MITCHELL: Okay, superannuation, will you rule out restricting accessibility to super until the age 67?
PM: We have absolutely no plans to make any change along those lines.
MITCHELL: But it is the recommendation in the Henry report, is it not?
PM: I am unaware of where Ken Henry will land on those questions, because he is not due to report until year's end. But in direct answer to your question, we have absolutely no plans in that respect.
MITCHELL: Well you know it is being debated and suggested, would you rule it out?
PM: Well can I just say Neil that the remit of the Henry review on taxation covers every element of taxation, and therefore, its treatment therefore of superannuation as well. Obviously therefore, the Henry Commission will look at all of those things in their totality.
All I can say to you is what the position of the Government is, that we have absolutely no plans to make any change of the type you have just described.
MITCHELL: You have no plans, but if it is put in front of you would you consider it or would you rule it out?
PM: You know something Neil, public servants constantly put a thousand things in front of you. That happens every day in Government. It happens with every minister in Government. But I can tell what the direction of the Government is on this one, and that is we have absolutely no plans to do that.
MITCHELL: Are you locked in to 67 for the pension? Till 2023?
PM: Neil, this is a very tough decision, but we stand by it and the reason we stand by it is because first of all we have done the right thing to give people a lot of notice. This does not become fully operational until 2023.
Secondly, if we are going to increase the age pension, your program, legitimately has run a long standing campaign to increase the level of the single age pension, which we delivered in the Budget, in very difficult financial circumstances.
Our challenge over time is to make the pension and retirement incomes policy financially sustainable for Australia in an ageing population. That is why governments right around the world are increasing the pension age.
MITCHELL: (inaudible) struggling to get to 65, and he has to work to 67? What does he do?
PM: Neil, this is a very legitimate question and this is a discussion we had within the parliamentary Labor party on this matter during the course of this week. And that is, obviously people are engaged in various forms of physical work, who in many cases are leaving the work force now, well before the age of 65.
Then we are going to have lift our effort over the next decade or so to create more and more training opportunities for people in these categories to qualify for other forms of employment.
And that is going to require an overall shift in the way in which we do things. If there is a lot of intense physical work, by the time workers in particular in their late 50s or early 60s, often that is becoming very very tough.
That is the case now. A lot of people are exiting the workforce well before the age of 65 at present, so I think, creatively what we have got to work on, is people in those areas of employment, how do we assist them transition to other areas of employment through really intelligent interventions in the workplace, and that is providing new and better training opportunities.
MITCHELL: A couple of very quick issues before we go if I may. The Indian Government has raised issues about the number of Indian students being bashed in Australia. Are you concerned by it?
PM: I am concerned about any act of violence in the streets and suburbs of Australia's cities and towns and particularly when we are obviously hosts to students from around the world. I also know that our law enforcement authorities are doing a first class job, but I can understand concerns from various parts of the world which crop up from time to time when particular students of particular nationalities have been the subject of violence.
It is appalling in every sense. Any act of violence, any decent human being just responds with horror at the sorts of attack which have occurred recently. But the key thing is to make sure our law enforcement authorities are doing the best they can. I am confident they are.
MITCHELL: These five people trapped in Papua, the five Australians, the suggestion is they are being paid off for our action against illegal fishing in Australia. Can you do anything to get them out?
PM: The normal processes with the handling of consular cases, including this one in Papua, have been gone through. The full and most recent details I don't have with me but all I do know is that the Australian Embassy consulate staff have provided extensive assistance to the Australians since shortly after their initial detention. They have maintained a continuous presence in that part of Papua since I think September of '08, until January of '09, after which Australian consular officials have made frequent visits to the area to check on their welfare.
The last visit occurred in May. Next visit is due to occur in June. We are working with the Indonesian authorities to do whatever we can. This like every other consular case is always complex.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time, are you a bad boss?
PM: Um, I think you have asked me this once before.
MITCHELL: Yeah I noticed somebody raised it again. But I tell you what I would like to know, have we  - 
PM: My response to that question Neil is, and I think my response in the past has been this - I work hard. The Government works hard. My Ministers work hard. And as a consequence, from time to time, people will find that a bit tough, I understand that but if you are in the midst of some very, very big challenges out there, like the global recession, huge impact on jobs, some of the decisions you and I have just been talking about, you know something (inaudible) -
MITCHELL: I am sorry, we have run out of time.


PM: Thank you. Today in the midst of the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century we have good news for the Australian economy although we are not out of the woods yet. 
Let's go to the core of what the national accounts data has to say to us today. Australia is the fastest growing economy of all the major advanced economies. Australia has the lowest debt and deficit of all the major advanced economies and Australia is the only advanced economy as of today not in recession.
The second point which I believe we should emphasise is how has this come about? I believe the good figures that we see for the Australian economy today, underpin the fact that Australian business, small business, tradies, workers, unions, have been out there doing their bit for the Australian economy, shrugging off the negative sentiment which has come from around the world off the back of the global economic recession and got out there generating economic activity and growth at a time when it's been very, very hard. And that's a tribute to them.
The second point is that the Government's economic strategy has been at work as well. And Government together with business, together with workers and unions has had a philosophy from the beginning that we are all in this together. The Government through its cash payments to pensioners, carers and others has kept the Australian economy going while the private sector is in retreat and until such time as our infrastructure investment kicks in.
Our economic strategy has been in three stages to respond to the impact of a global recession. The first phase is cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and to families to inject support into the economy when the global economic recession hit hardest in the fourth quarter last year.
Phase two of the Government's economic stimulus strategy has been to invest in medium term infrastructure, the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, and investment in more than 20,000 units of social housing, the biggest expansion of public housing the country has seen. And the large scale investment in energy efficiency measures in Australian homes.
The third phase of the Government's economic strategy is long term infrastructure investment. The National Broadband Corporation, ports, rail, roads as well as our investment in clean energy initiatives as well. And they spread out over into the future.
We have done this deliberately one stage after another to try and provide support by way of investment and injection of activity in the economy while the private sector is in retreat. It's been the right strategy under very difficult, global economic circumstances.
Of course had we pursued a strategy recommended by Mr Turnbull not to invest and not to provide payments, cash payments to pensioners, carers and others, Australia would be in recession today. We are not out of the woods yet. There is a lot by way of difficulty and obstacles which lie ahead of us. This is the worst global recession in three quarters of a century, we will face higher unemployment in the Australian economy and we are not guaranteed that we won't see negative growth in the future. These are tough times.
The Government however has acted early and decisively with an integrated economic strategy to make a difference to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of this global economic recession and today it represents some good news for the Australian economy at a time when the global economic recession is producing mayhem across the wider global economy. Over to you Treasurer.
TREASURER: Yeah thanks very much Prime Minister. Look this is a very strong outcome for our nation and it really does show what we can do when we all pull together. I think it's a tribute to the resilience and the courage of our people in the midst of this global recession, the worst that we've seen in something like 75 years.
Now it's the case that almost every advanced country is going backwards. And in that environment Australia is going forwards. That is something that is very important when you look at these figures. We have the strongest growth of any advanced economy in the world and that's a combination of the national effort that our people have put in as well as the economic stimulus, those cash payments the Prime Minister was talking about.
Now we're not out of the woods yet as the Prime Minister was saying, we are yet to feel the full impacts of the global recession. It has some way to run and it will certainly still be impacting on jobs here at home. And jobs will continue to be lost as we are battered by this global recession, so we are not for one minute complacent about the rocky road that lies ahead.
But what we do know is that we can make a difference and that we can cushion Australia from the worst effects of this global recession and that is why these figures today are so welcome.
I just wanted to spend a couple of minutes running through the figures. GDP rose by 0.4 percent in the March quarter and is 0.4 percent higher over the year. Now let's just put these figures into perspective. This is the strongest outcome of any advanced economy in the world as you can see in the chart there. The strongest outcome of any advanced economy in the world.
Now in the midst of this global recession look what is happening in other countries around the world. Japan's economy contracted by four percent, the UK by minus 1.9, the US by minus 1.5, Germany minus 3.8, France contracted by minus 1.2 and of course this week Canada contracted by minus 1.4. All up the major advanced economies contracted by 2.2 percent.
Now, the stand out figure in today's data is the positive result for consumption, a positive result for consumption here when you consider the weaker results for the rest of the economy. What these figures confirm is that the first stage of the Government's economic stimulus plan, our cash payments to families, to pensioners, to carers and veterans have cushioned Australia from the global recession and they have done this despite the deterioration in the global economy.
What occurred here? Household consumption rose, rose by 0.6 percent. Household consumption rose by 0.6 percent. And without the cash payments Treasury estimate that our economy would have contracted by around 0.2 per cent in the quarter and you can see that in the graph up there before you.
And let's just look for a minute at December. Without the stimulus, in December, the economy would have went backwards by minus 1.1 per cent. It went backwards of course by minus 0.6. That shows you the difference that stimulus made in December and of course look at the March quarter.
It would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter if it hadn't been for our economic stimulus. So that graph, I think demonstrates more than anything else in these figures, how important the cash stimulus payments have been.
Because essentially what they have enabled us to do is to avoid further job losses and they have saved the jobs of thousands of families, and breadwinners, in our community.
As I said earlier, we are certainly not out of the woods yet and you can see that also very clearly in the figures before us today.
Let's just go through a number of important figures which point to the rocky road ahead. New business investment fell by 6.3 per cent in the quarter, as businesses have been scaling back spending in the face of weaker global demand.
This of course absolutely reinforces the case for our nation building investments. The shovel ready projects that are in the system and the road, rail and port that was announced in the Budget.
But the other stand out figure here is the collapse in commodity prices. That has seen the terms of trade fall by 7.8 per cent in the quarter. That is the largest quarterly fall in 35 years, in 35 years. And of course that has hit our export earnings hard and whilst it is the case that volumes have held up, export earnings fell by $6 billion in the quarter.
That is the third biggest fall on record. Now of course dwelling investment also fell by 5.6 per cent in the quarter but as you know, recent data suggest more support for housing activity in coming months, from our first home owners boost and of course the record low interest rates.
So today's figures demonstrate that the Government's economic stimulus is working and it is positioning Australia as the best performer in the world. And of course much more of our stimulus is yet to flow. The Prime Minister was talking about phase two and phase three of our stimulus. Phase two is rolling out, 35,000 projects across the country in schools and energy efficiency, housing and so on.
So I think it is a pretty important day for Australia and it is not one I don't, I think we ought to be too political about. But I think, if this data demonstrates just one thing, the negative strategy out there of our opponents, to oppose stimulus, is completely shredded by these figures today.
These figures today show what the resilience of the Australian people can do when it is combined with a government that has a battle plan for the future and understands the challenges ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) different ways of measuring, I would be interested to know whether you and the Treasurer think that we are in recession or whether we are likely to get into recession?
PM: What we have done today is avoid a technical recession. The figure speaks for itself. As I said before in my remarks, we are not out of the woods yet. Regrettably, unemployment will go up because we are part of a global economic recession.
The Treasurer has also just made reference to the extraordinary corrections in the terms of trade and therefore it is going to be difficult yards ahead. Key thing for us though is to have a battle plan.
Key thing for us is to have a strategy. We have been implementing that strategy amid some controversy in the last six months. We believe that strategy is having effect.
To cushion the impact of this recession, we cannot avoid it in terms of its total effect, but to cushion the impact.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the impact of the stimulus to date. Given that we are looking at a very long period of sluggish growth, what are the forecasts on a quarterly basis for the impact of the stimulus in the period ahead.
Essentially, when does the spending that you have already got in place, run out and will it run out before the economy actually starts to pick up again.
TREASURER: Well I think the boost to GDP from stimulus in the system for '09  -  '10 is 2.75 and I would have to check the figure for the subsequent year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: No it is rolled out over a couple of years. If you take our nation building and jobs plan, essentially that really kicks in from about mid year. We have been out there working really hard. We have had a coordinator general who has been driving what is going on in terms of investment in schools and so on.
The social housing is coming on. So there is a very significant stimulus coming through in '09  -  '10 and it has a tail in '10  -  '11. So there is a very significant stimulus still to come.
It is all accounted for in the Budget, its impact on the Budget is there for everybody to see in the papers. So a lot more of the stimulus is yet to come but it is in that vital area of direct investment.
What the cash payments have done have filled the gap that was caused when the global economy contracted sharply and demand fell through the floor. We have seen now with the payments to pensioners, to families, to carers and to veterans, have actually worked.
And what is clicking in now is that direct investment in shovel ready projects, the 35,000 I talked about before, plus, over the longer term, some of them in this immediate period, the investment in road, rail, port and clean energy.
PM: In our planning of this, going back to when we began deliberating on this in third and fourth quarters last year, we have deliberately introduced our economic stimulus strategy in stages. Remember our earliest advice from the Secretary of the Treasury when the, around about the time of Lehman's week, had given the unfolding dynamics then, what was the responsible course of action for government?
Go hard, go early, go households.
We responded to that advice, amid some controversy at the time. That was phase one. Particularly critical, fourth quarter last year, the first quarter this year and into the second quarter this year.
Then phase two, which we announced primarily in February with an earlier announcement in December on infrastructure. But the February announcement on infrastructure of what we describe as medium term infrastructure projects, schools primarily, but also social housing  -  all have a lead time in terms of getting the planning right and getting the preparations right, but are beginning to kick in now.
I was in Darwin the other day, looking at defence housing already under construction. A large slice of the houses for that particular estate were coming directly off the back of the February announcement, within about three months.
But the huge surge of activity from this medium term infrastructure will be in the financial year ahead. And of course we then have the tail of the program which follows.
But we have deliberately staged this economic strategy with one level, taking over from another level, taking over from another level in order to provide the best possible protection to the Australian economy on the way through to try and ensure that the impact of this global economic recession is as shallow and as short as possible for Australia and that unemployment is kept to the absolute lowest level possible using every measure that we could possibly deploy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were you wrong then to say that Australia had been dragged in to recession when you did just (inaudible)
PM: The global economic recession is out there and it's unfolding. The Treasurer and the earlier data reflected what's actually occurring out there in the global economy with every major advanced economy currently in recession. That will continue to have its effect. That's why we're not out of the woods. I make no apology whatsoever for being conservative in our projections. We need to make...and for the fact that we have from the beginning been very upfront with the Australian people, about the degree of global economic threat we faced and about the urgency of the measures which were necessary to reduce the impact here amidst considerably controversy. We believe that our strategy is right for the times. Always there's going to be controversy about elements of it. We accept that. But in terms of being at this stage of the process and being able to produce numbers like this in partnership with the Australian community shows that we are headed in the right direction, but we are not out of the woods yet.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the key part of the Opposition's critique of your approach towards this has been the size of debt that you will accumulate. Is it fair to say that you guys see that the debt we will accumulate is a fair price to pay for protecting a large number of jobs and do you after today's figures feel more secure about the level of debt that you raised (inaudible)?
PM: Matthew, we believe our strategy's been right from the outset. And the reason for that is that we have been acutely conscious of the degree of economic challenge here. These have been very focused conversations within the government about how we reduce the impact of this global recession on Australia. It's a word which rolls quickly off people's lips, but when the data is reinforced globally to say this is the worst synchronised economic downturn in three quarters of a century, it is that. Therefore the measures which must be taken in response to it must be extraordinary as the circumstances we face are extraordinary. And therefore, go back to the numbers. As of these national accounts, Australia is the fastest growing economy of all the major advanced economies. We have the lowest debt of all the major advanced economies, we have the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies and we're the only major advanced economy at present not to be in recession. This I believe is a powerful case.
Can I also go to the negative fear campaign being run by those opposite on the question of debt and deficit. It's - at the end of the day and just rests on a falsehood, a falsehood that if they were in government at the moment that they would do anything substantially different on the question of debt and deficit. You've heard them say it might be $25 billion less. You've heard them say it might be $21 billion less. This is ultimately underpinning the falsehood of the proposition which is being put by them because what are the facts? We have the lowest net debt of all the major advanced economies. We have had our AAA rating reaffirmed since the budget has been brought down. Furthermore, they indicate when pressed that their bottom line on debt and deficit would be virtually the same as the government's. But still, they feel driven to run a negative scare campaign on debt and deficit. This is where it's dangerous. It actually has an effect on public sentiment, the public mood. And therefore when I say their strategy is to talk the economy down, I mean it. That's exactly what its effect would be unless it's corrected against the facts.
TREASURER: We're looking at a world where the international economic rulebook has been torn up. And one of the consequences of that is a revenue collapse to the Commonwealth government of $210 billion. The only responsible thing to do in those circumstances is to borrow to support employment, to support business. And of course the only responsible thing to do is to also put into place economic stimulus as we've done because we do appreciate the enormity of the challenge that we face. The irresponsible course of action is to engage in populous politics. Ignore the fundamental strengths of our balance sheets and ignore the fact there's been a revenue write down of $210 billion including in 08-09 where it was the worst since 1931. If they ought to be taken seriously and they believe that we shouldn't be borrowing, they should outline what services they are going to radically cut or what taxes they are going to radically jack up.
PM: Before I take the next one just here. Let's go again to what the Treasury have said today. They estimate that the Australian economy would've contracted in the March quarter by around 0.2% absence the government's stimulus payments. That is the direct answer to the negative campaign being run by the Liberal Party about cash payments to carers and to pensioners and to families. It is the difference between being in recession and being not. That is the truth here and the other truth is, the ultimate falsehood underpinning what the Liberals would do in the same circumstances were they in government.
That's why ultimately responsible national leadership requires at a grave time of global economic crisis not to engage in fear campaigns which are baseless in terms of debt and deficit. The lowest net debt of all the major advanced economies, AAA rating reaffirmed, I think it's time like the rest of the economy to come together. We are all in this together. Businesses are out there doing the right thing. Small business doing the right thing, tradie's doing the right thing, workers, unions doing the right thing. Pushing the economy forward in partnership with government, local government and state government. We're doing the right thing trying to make a difference. Now I challenge those opposite to get with the program, not talk the place down.
JOURNALIST: Don't the figures today show that the Treasury forecasts are a bit pessimistic? (inaudible)
TREASURER: We have been kicking around this country for three weeks about our forecast being too optimistic, when they have in fact been absolutely realistic. And of course I believe that the data today shows how realistic they have been. Because the data today points to those areas which are very challenging for us over the next two years, the collapse in business investment. Go back to the CAPEX figures last week and what they predicted in terms of future investment. Look at what's happening to the terms of trade. All of those things indicate the nature of the threat the threat that the country faces for some time to come. And you know, I can go to bed at night and sleep now knowing, knowing that we've made a very significant difference here. The Australian people working with the government have made a big difference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
TREASURER: Look, that's the sunny side but we've got a long way to go yet. And what we have to do is be realistic.
PM: Remember 70 percent of the government stimulus investment is in nation building infrastructure, schools of the future, public housing, rail, road, ports, high speed broadband. These are the things Australia wants to look back on and say ‘here are the things that turbo charged productivity growth in the future.' Step back just for one moment before I take the next question from Phil which is what we sought to do apart prevent an economic cataclysm in this country coming off the back of the global economic recession is at the same time act through our investment strategy to underpin the drivers of long term productivity growth.
That's why there's such a huge emphasis on investment and education skills and training, in universities, in higher educational research, in TAFEs, as well as the infrastructure investment. Why? We know for a fact that infrastructure and skills investment are the two classical drivers of long term productivity growth. And what's been the abiding structural weakness of the Australian economy in the last decade or so? A declining productivity growth factor. That's why we've sought to mesh our long term economic strategy with the stimulus and investment strategy now. But for the first six months it's been necessary to provide support through cash payments in order to underpin the numbers of the type we've seen today.
JOURNALIST: You'll be addressing the ACTU Congress tonight-
PM: As I'm advised.
JOURNALIST: With these figures as a backdrop to that speech, will your message still be one of constraint, as it has been before to the union movement, with regard to wages and so forth?
PM: Absolutely, and we have seen restraint on the part of a number of unions in relation to difficulties we face in the economy now. Let me give you one example. Yesterday I was in the Parliament, and I know Senator Carr spoke publicly with the CEO of General Motors here in Australia. What's happened with General Motors has involved a lot of collaboration between unions and management to wrestle with the current economic circumstances, preserve jobs, intelligently work with training opportunities to try and see that industry through, and we've been partners in that as well. So, there's been great examples of restraint, but we must continue to see restraint as well in what's going to be a difficult period ahead. We are all in this together, and that involves the unions as well, and we are working closely, of course, with the business organisations.
JOURNALIST: Treasurer, could you tell us what you consider to be the greatest external downside risk to the Australian economy at the moment, and how serious you consider that to be?
TREASURER: Well, let me give you some optimistic answers as well. I mean, one of the good things that has happened in recent times is that the financial system in the United States appears to have stabilised, and I think you can see some of the impact of that in financial markets. But the roll-through of this event into the real economy is still occurring and reverberating around the world, and you can see that in the very sharp falls in the March quarter across both developing and developed countries in Europe, but also particularly in Asia, and that all comes back to this country in one form or another.
So, that has a fundamental impact on business investment  -  down 6.3 per cent in these figures. And I mentioned earlier the CAPEX figures from last week. Big fall in the terms of trade  -  down 7.8 per cent. That's the largest quarterly decline in 35 years, and as you know, more to come because those contract negotiations are coming up, particularly for coal. So, I think we can expect to see further reductions in our national income. And if you go to the budget estimates there, they are reasonably realistic, but you might call them pessimistic.
So, we've got falling export prices as well, and that's going to impact on our export earnings. 
There's been a lot of commentary around about exports and the figures that were out yesterday. They are encouraging, but one of the reasons why those figures were so good yesterday was we saw a dramatic fall in imports, which it in itself reflects the overall weakness in the global economy.
So, all of those things are very big challenges. The very biggest challenge is the withdrawal of private sector investment, and that's why we have moved so decisively and so swiftly through shovel-ready projects in the nation building and jobs program first, and then after that in the Budget into our investments in road, rail and port. And our ambition is to work with the business community and the workforce to make sure that we can ensure as much of that investment that can happen actually happens.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to have a look at what's happened in Australia and mimic some of the policies that you've been undertaking.
PM: We're never in the business of providing public lectures to anybody else. I mean we've got a lot to work on ourselves, and as I've said repeatedly and as the Treasurer's said, we are not out of the woods yet. We have a long way to go. I think the stabilisation of the global financial system remains a key priority. The Treasurer rightly points to evidences of stability in America. We still have significant challenges in Europe. Those of you who were with us at the G20 in London will know that one of the concerns of a continuing nature which we and others have is the stabilisation of financial markets and institutions within Europe, and that represents a very large slice of global financial flows. That's one factor.
Another factor, to respond to your earlier question, Dennis, also we need to be alert to is where China goes in the long term transformation between a growth model resting primarily on export driven growth, a classic East Asian development model, against another model which combines that with increasing reliance upon domestic consumption, and the sustainability of that domestic consumption drive over time.
This is going to be a very difficult transformation for the Chinese leadership, and we should be respectful of it as it's being executed, because its consequences don't just affect China domestically, it affects hugely the unfolding pattern of global demand as well. So, what happens in China in terms of that transformation over time is critical.
What happens also in Europe, and let's just always keep the weather eye on this, to make sure we avoid some outbreak of global protectionism. The great resolution that we had at both the Washington summit and at the London summit was to draw a line under further protectionist measures across economies which represent about 85 per cent of global trade.
The huge lesson from the 1930s is to not allow any such outbreak  -  so far so good. But let me tell you, political pressures will continue to rise in various countries of the world and we must remain resolute as an international community, which is why I look forward to attendance at the Pittsburgh summit which is now being convened by President Obama for this September. It will be important to reaffirm that global political resolve because we cannot allow an outbreak on that score.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Just on that, I believe that this represents a modest breach of the pecuniary interest guidelines. I'm unhappy about it. The Minister's done the right thing  -  gone to the Parliament and made a statement and apologised to the House.
Thank you.


It's great to be back in Queensland, for this supreme parliament of working people, the Congress of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. 
But Jeff, Sharan, Joe  -  how on earth did you manage to schedule this speech on a State of Origin night?
And your second crime against humanity  -  to schedule this speech on a State of Origin night in Brisvegas when the home of the ACTU is in Melbourne  -  which is where the State of Origin is being held.
This is a total Victorian conspiracy.
To deny Queensland and NSW delegates of their birthright.
Where's Bill Ludwig or Ron Monaghan when you need ‘em  -  to explain to their Victorian colleagues about such sacred occasions.
Anyway, as Prime Minister I can only be seen to be speaking in the national interest - which is to back Queensland all the way.
As Bill Ludwig would say, what's good for Queensland is good for Australia.
But it's great to welcome Congress back to Queensland.
The State that was the birthplace of the Australian Labor Party  -  and the cradle of the Australian trade union movement in the tumultuous events of the 1890s.
This Saturday, Queensland celebrates its 150th anniversary.
It's a one hundred and fifty year-long history that's been greatly influenced by a strong history of collective representation for working people through the labour movement.
A labour movement that gave Australia one of our greatest Prime Ministers, Andrew Fisher  -  the first Labor leader anywhere in the world to win a parliamentary majority in a national election.
A good friend of Keir Hardie, the founder of the British Labour Party, who he'd served alongside in the prolonged miners' strike on the Ayrshire coalfields in 1881.
And a man whose contributions, a century after he came to office, are only now being understood: the Prime Minister who presided over the introduction of the age pension, which came into effect one hundred years ago on July 1st; a lifelong fighter for fair compensation for injured workers; a great Australian nation-builder who built a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia.
The hundred years since Andrew Fisher's government have seen extraordinary changes in this State and in our nation.
But if the changes of the past hundred years have been extraordinary, the changes in the past 18 months have been no less astonishing.
The Government has confronted the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century  -  the result of rampant greed, excessive speculation and unrestrained market forces.
The global crisis is the product of neoliberal ideology based on a form of free market fundamentalism that says that markets are always self-correcting, that markets are always right and governments are always wrong.
This global recession has spread faster, and gone deeper, than any economic slump in our lifetimes.
• every one of the major advanced economies is in recession;
• 24 out of all 30 of the OECD countries are in recession, and
• 29 out of 30 OECD countries have experienced at least one negative quarter of economic growth.
Growth rates around the world have collapsed.
In the first three months of this year, each OECD economy experienced an average contraction of 2.1 per cent - the largest fall in the 50 year history of the OECD.
Unemployment rates are soaring around the world  -  already rising to almost 9 per cent in the US, 8 per cent in France, Germany and Canada, and 7.1 per cent in the UK.
Australia is not immune to this massive global economic slump.
But today's National Accounts figures show what Australians can achieve if we all pull together as a country, and recognise that we are all in this together.
The National Accounts data today showed that the Australian economy grew by 0.4 per cent in the March quarter.
Australia has the fastest growth of all the major advanced economies.
Australia is now the only economy of the major advanced economies not to be in recession.
But we are not out of the woods yet.
Australia's economic performance is not the result of random chance.
It is because Australians have risen to the occasion and because government policy is working to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
Today's figures show that the Government's cash stimulus payments  -  which the Liberals loudly opposed - have worked to cushion Australia from the global recession until our infrastructure investments kick in over the medium term.
Treasury figures confirm that without the cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been negative 0.2 and Australia would have been in recession.
Among the major advanced economies, Australia has the lowest budget deficit, the lowest debt and the highest growth.
This result is a tribute to all Australians:
Employers and employees who worked hard to keep their businesses afloat.
Small businesses who took the decision to keep people in work.
Unions, businesses and families who showed resilience and confidence in the face of this global recession.
A tribute to all Australians working together.
The global recession has a long way to go  -  and there is more work to do.
There is no doubt that there will be more ups and downs before this global recession is out.
Growth will continue to be slow for some time.
Unemployment will continue to rise.
And there may be negative growth in the future.
That is why the Government has a long term economic strategy as well as a short term economic strategy.
Australia's response has been to step in with strong, early, decisive action as the private sector retreats.
Since October last year, the Government has invested $77 billion in economic stimulus through a combination of short, medium and long term support for the economy.
In the short term we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
Those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
Australian retail sales are now running at 4.8 per cent above their levels of November last year.
This contrasts with a 1.1% fall across the major advanced economies over the same period.
We invested $2 billion in the First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
In April, total building approvals rose by 5.1 per cent.
Private house approvals have risen for the last four months, to be at their highest level since August 2008.
And the Government acted early and decisively to stabilise the financial sector with a government guarantee for 13 million bank deposits.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term through shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including:
• the largest school modernisation in Australia's history;
• free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes, and
• the construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
We are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
And we'll be investing in major clean energy projects, including the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure.
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
Every one of these projects is necessary to help build our way out of this global recession.
Our strategy is this: nation-building for recovery.
Supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today.
By investing in the nation-building infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
And each time I visit one of these building sites, one of what will be 35,000 building sites, I am struck by the resilience of the Australian people as we all work together to try to cushion our economy from the worst of the global recession.
We have pursued this nation building for recovery strategy because we are unashamedly a Labor Government, committed to Labor values and to supporting working people in the toughest global economic collapse in 75 years.
These measures will support over 200,000 jobs over each of the next two years.
Jobs in retail. Jobs in construction. Jobs in transport. Jobs in hospitality. Jobs in education. Jobs in health. Jobs in small businesses. Jobs in the technology sector. Jobs across our public services.
These are important jobs doing important nation-building work.
And we are also creating new positions for apprentices across the nation, by ensuring that the tendering processes give priority to those businesses with a demonstrated commitment to trainees and apprenticeships.
Because now is the time for us to train a new generation of Australian tradesmen and women  -  instead of waiting until the next skills crisis, like the Liberals did over the decade just past.
Delegates, while we are by no means out of the woods, if the Government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in severe recession.
GDP would have been 2.75 per cent lower over the next twelve months, and a further 1.5 per cent lower in 2010-11.
Over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
And a generation of Australians would be facing years of exclusion from the labour market.
This Government has not and will not stand idly by while the economy suffers the greatest external shock in three quarters of a century.
This Government believes in making a difference.
We cannot wish the global recession away.
But we can act to cushion the impact of that recession on Australian working families - and that is what we will continue to do.
But there are still some people in Australian national life who would rather score a political point than support the jobs of Australia's working people.
Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberal Party oppose these nation-building investments and criticise the necessary deficits and debt that underpin them  -  pretending they'd never have happened if the Liberal Party was still in power.
As if the $210 billion collapse in government revenues had never happened  -  the largest single collapse in government revenues in history.
But when pressed, they admit they'd have virtually the same deficit and debt as the Government.
Our deficit is the lowest of the worlds most advanced economies.
Our debt is the lowest of the world's most advanced economies.
Our AAA credit rating was re-affirmed after the Budget.
Yet still they talk the economy down.
While we seek to build the economy up.
But if you want to see absolute hypocrisy on display  -  watch out for the stampede of Libs and Nats lining up for photo opportunities at local nation-building projects in their electorates.
Claiming ownership for them locally, while voting against them nationally.
The hypocrisy is breathtaking.
If Malcolm Turnbull had his way, the stimulus would not have happened.
The global recession would have thrown thousands more Australian businesses against the wall, and thrown hundreds of thousands more Australian workers out of work.
And a generation of young Australians would be condemned to long-term unemployment.
If the Liberal Party was still in power, Australia would still have Work Choices; still have AWAs; the Government would still be in denial about climate change, and the global recession would be wreaking absolute havoc on our economy as the free market ideologues sat on their hands and waited for the market to “self correct”.
As others have said in recent times, maybe one of the reasons it's called an invisible hand is that sometimes it's just not there.
Delegates, this Labor Government is rising to the challenge that the global economy has thrown at us.
This Labor Government is standing up for working people, against the massive threat of this global economic crisis  -  and we will continue to do so.
But let this be clearly understood.
The Government is nation building for a stronger long-term future, not just nation-building for jobs and recovery today.
Our $77 billion stimulus investment delivers the greatest-ever national investment in productivity-boosting infrastructure and education in our nation's history.
Because these are the investments that will build a stronger, more productive Australian economy beyond the recovery and for the future.
Investments that for 12 years were neglected by the Liberal Party when they were in power, as infrastructure crumbled and more than 300,000 young Australians were turned away from TAFE colleges.
The Government has begun to deliver an education revolution in our pre-schools, schools, TAFEs, universities and research centres.
We have also committed to a Jobs and Training Compact that delivers training, support and local initiatives to help Australians get back to work.
The three-pronged Jobs and Training Compact comprises a Compact with Young Australians, a Compact with Retrenched Workers and a Compact with Local Communities, with our efforts targeted to those at greatest risk.
Alongside these measures to support jobs and local communities, we're also supporting jobs in highly exposed industries like manufacturing.
Just yesterday, General Motors in the United States went into bankruptcy  -  the largest industrial bankruptcy in US history.
Industry Minister Kim Carr has worked extensively with General Motors Holden and the unions in anticipation of this event.
And the good news is that the bankruptcy filing in the US does not threaten Holden workers in Australia, and will not directly affect local engineering and manufacturing operations.
And as Holden has made clear, the forward-looking support from the Government's $6.2 billion New Green Car Plan has helped secure the future of Holden's operations in Australia.
Delegates, I have no time for those who constantly denigrate the Australian automotive industry.
As I said to the national Parliament yesterday, Australia is one of only 15 countries in the world that can produce a car from scratch  -  and we should be proud of it. 
And with leadership from the Government through the Green Car Innovation Fund, Australians can look to a future in which we will be producing more innovative, fuel-efficient vehicles.
Delegates, in just 18 months in office we have opened a new chapter in our nation's great tradition of the ‘fair go'.
The fair go is no longer heading out the nation's back door.
It's now back in the front room.
And it's there to stay.
We have stopped the Liberal Party's AWAs, which stripped away basic rights from working Australians.
Employees now have a right to protection from being unfairly sacked and to redundancy pay.
And for the first time in history, from July 1st Australian workers will have a right to good-faith collective bargaining.
I want to pay tribute to Julia Gillard for her extraordinary effort in working with the union movement, employers and other stakeholders to get the Fair Work Act through the Parliament, even though we don't have the numbers in the Senate.
The Government has also delivered record investments in homelessness and housing, education and training and in helping parents to balance work and family life.
We have delivered $46.7 billion in tax relief to working Australians, delivering an extra $60 per week for a family with a combined income of $100,000.
For the first time in our nation's history we have delivered a Paid Parental Leave scheme  -  a cause for which the ACTU has fought tirelessly.
For the first time in 100 years we have fundamentally reformed the single age pension.
We've delivered the nation's first-ever permanent carers' supplement of $600.
We have extended the child-care tax rebate to 50 per cent, invested in training child care workers and begun building new child care centres  -  with a total $12.8 billion commitment to child care.
We have delivered the nation's largest-ever investments to tackle homelessness, invest in 21,000 new social housing units and help younger Australians into their first home.
And after delivering the national apology last year, the Government has made a $4.6 billion investment in closing the gap in Indigenous disadvantage in life expectancy, health, education and employment outcomes.
The Government is also tackling the critical challenges of the future that for 12 years were neglected by the Liberal Party.
The Government has delivered successive chapters of the education revolution  -  establishing universal pre-schooling from 2013; the largest school modernisation program in Australian history; investing in the digital revolution for all middle and senior high school students; investing in trades training centres for the benefit of every Australian secondary school; providing 711,000 TAFE and vocational education and training places, and delivering the biggest long-term investment in higher education and research in our history.
In real terms, our investment in education over the next five years has been lifted by more than 50 per cent.
After 12 years of Liberal Party neglect, this is an education revolution.
We have also begun the reform of our health and hospitals system, with a new $64 billion funding agreement for public hospitals, a $750 million direct investment in emergency departments and a $600 million investment in elective surgery waiting lists.
We are investing in our health workforce - funding the training of approximately 18,000 nurse supervisors, 5,000 allied health and VET supervisors, and 7,000 medical supervisors.
We have invested $3.2 billion into 36 major health infrastructure projects, including a $1.2 billion national integrated cancer care initiative.
And already, more than 258,000 teenagers have taken advantage of our Teen Dental plan to get a preventative dental check.
We have also ended the era of climate change denial.
We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol.
We have invested $4.5 billion in a Clean Energy Initiative to support clean coal and solar and renewable energy technologies.
We have invested $4 billion in energy efficiency measures.
And this week Parliament has begun debating legislation to create the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
We know the design of the CPRS will never satisfy all the demands and expectations of its different constituencies.
But it is a fundamental reform for our economy and our environment.
It will make possible the transition to a low pollution economy, and help to generate the clean energy jobs of tomorrow.
Delegates, there's one measure of the partnership between trade unions and the modern Labor Party.
And it's not how many resolutions are passed at a national conference.
It's what we deliver that truly benefits the Australian people.
Labor's modern bargain with working people has two dimensions  - 
First, humanising the workplace, and second, cushioning working families against the coldest forces of an unrestrained free market.
On the first of these, we now have a fair industrial relations system that's built to last.
A system for the future.
A system under which the trade union movement will no longer be hindered in its important work of representing the concerns of working people.
A system that gets the balance right.
The Government that I lead sees the Fair Work Act as a fundamental reform in Labor's proud reform tradition - alongside such reforms as Medicare and universal superannuation.
These are historic reforms, delivered in partnership with the trade union movement, that have made Australia a fundamentally fairer nation for working people.
Both Medicare and compulsory super became so strongly supported by a majority of Australians, that even a Liberal Government that spent twelve years in office could not destroy them.
Remember that even as late as 1993, the Liberal Party was sworn to get rid of them both.
But by '96, that had changed  -  or at least until Malcolm Turnbull re-opened the debate on the future of universal health care just one month ago.
These fundamental reforms were secured because a majority of Australians understood them and benefited from them.
And importantly, they were supported by a partnership between Labor and the union movement.
Subsequent conservative governments did not abolish them, and could not abolish them.
Together, we must resolve to make the same thing true of the Fair Work Act.
I want Fair Work to be a long-term reform that endures for decades.
Our resolve as a movement must be that no future Liberal Government can get away with dismantling it.
But delegates, that won't be easy.
Because the Liberals remain committed to a return to Work Choices.
A return to AWAs.
A return to the past.
The Government believes it's now time to turn our focus to the second part of the modern bargain with working families and working people  -  the lifetime-long span of Labor reforms.
Our challenge is to ensure that all Australians have the support and the opportunities they need throughout each of the stages and points of transition in their lives - as they learn, work, raise a family, enjoy the security of proper health care, make the most of their talents and contribute to their communities.
This is nothing less than the modern equivalent of the Harvester judgement one hundred years ago...
The great decision that guaranteed workers a standard of living which was reasonable for "a human being in a civilised community."
A quarter of a century ago, the Hawke and Keating Governments formed a historic partnership with the union movement to develop the social wage - the partnership that delivered Medicare, universal superannuation and a strong safety net of support.
Ours must also be an historic partnership for the future  -  a 21st century social wage.
In this century, we must protect that legacy and build on those achievements by supporting the lifelong participation of every citizen in work and life.
A reform agenda that begins with the paid parental leave that helps parents to spend time with new-born babies.
That extends to flexible leave arrangements, quality care and pre-school during a child's earliest years.
That through the education revolution delivers a world class education, with excellent teaching, in modern facilities, with modern technology  -  so that we become the best educated, best trained and best skilled workforce anywhere in the world.
A nation that provides personalised assistance for those who struggle with the transition into work, the transition between jobs, or who need a hand when life's vicissitudes knock them down.
That supports Australians at key times like when they are sick, or when they buying a first home, and when they need help raising their kids.
And as the years pass, giving support for those who need to care for their loved ones.
And providing income security when we enter our retirement years, through superannuation and an age pension that lets older Australians live with dignity.
This is the modern agenda for a modern Labor Government.
And we value our partnership with the Australian trade union movement in developing and implementing these reforms.
Out of all the items swirling around in public debate, in ten, fifteen or twenty years' time, it's major reforms like these that will truly make a difference in the lives of working families.
And in partnership, we can deliver these reforms and write a historic chapter in our nation's history.
Delegates, in 18 months Labor in government has achieved much.
But much remains to be done.
But there is a hard slog ahead, and tough terrain to navigate.
We all know how important it is that Australians have a Labor Government to stand by them in these tough times.
As Australians, we're all in this together.
In this together - as business and unions; as communities right across our vast land.
And together, we can make our way through this recession and build an Australia that is stronger, that is fairer, prepared for all the challenges of the future, a place where the dreams and aspirations of working people can be fulfilled whatever their background, whatever the colour of their skin, whatever part of Australia they may come from.
For that was the Labor movement's mission in the past.
And that must be the Labor movement's mission for the future. 


PM: Good afternoon. At 1pm today the Minister for Defence tendered me a letter of resignation. I accepted his letter of resignation. Allow me to read that letter to you. It reads as follows:
“Dear Prime Minister, you'll be aware of questioning in Senate Estimates last night regarding meetings between Humana, my brother and the Minister for Veteran's Affairs and the Minister for Defence Science and Personnel. Having read the transcript of proceedings I decided to thoroughly examine the nature of any contact between Humana, my brother and my office.
“Having done so and despite having made it clear to all parties that it was important that I not be involved, I am not satisfied that contact between the various parties leaves it clear that I have entirely conformed with your Ministerial Code of Conduct.
“In particular, I have learned that one meeting between the parties was held in my Ministerial office. Further, I understand that members of my staff sat in on a number of meetings. Again, despite my decision to avoid being part of any discussions between the parties, I'm not absolutely satisfied that, that objective was achieved, to the extent necessary to ensure full compliance with your Ministerial Code of Conduct.
“On that basis and to protect the integrity of the Government I've decided resign as a member of the Executive effective immediately. Yours sincerely”
As I said before I've accepted the Minister's letter of resignation. I want to emphasise that at no stage has there been any agreement between the Government, Humana or NIB on any contract between any of those parties.
Let me place on record, what I believe to be a strong record of achievement on the part of a Minister. The Minister, as Minister for Defence has presided over the Defence White Paper which is a solid and fundamental piece of reform for the Government.
What we've done through that Defence White Paper is construct a Defence Planning Framework out to the year 2030, a basis for building Force 2030 in which the Minister has been directly engaged. I've worked with him on the National Security Committee of the Cabinet over a long period of time.
Furthermore, the Minister has successfully worked through the withdrawal of Australian forces from Iraq. Furthermore, the Minister has also directly engaged in the re-design of our Mission Statement in Afghanistan. The Minister in all three of these critical areas has discharged his functions as Minister in a first class manner which is why I've said before that the Minister has been a first class Defence Minister.
On top of that, the Minister is also engaged in a defence strategic reform program which has gone to the long term sustainability of Defence's Budget, its financial planning and its force acquisition program.
Nonetheless, as I've made clear to Ministers over a long period of time, the Government expects high standards of accountability on the part of its Ministers. All my Ministers' are familiar with that. And it is on that basis that the Minister has extended his resignation today and I've accepted it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Was this offered to you or did you seek his resignation and do you have any idea who's the replacement for Fitzgibbon as Defence Minister?
PM: The Minister came to my Office at about one today. The Minister offered his letter of resignation. I accepted it. I believed it was the right thing to do. On the question of replacement Minister for Defence, we will make a statement on that very soon.
JOURNALIST: Did you or your party (inaudible)
PM: Both my Chief of Staff and the Special Minister of State, Senator Faulkner spoke with the Defence Minister this morning and as a consequence of that the Minister came to my office and offered me his letter of resignation
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Minister's decision was to extend his letter of resignation at his initiative. I accepted that decision. It was the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, yesterday you said you were satisfied that that was that. What changed that led to Special Minister of State and the Chief of Staff speaking to him (inaudible) 
PM: Well what were dealing with in previous days has been a matter concerning the Minister's pecuniary interest declaration. That went to the question of a under declaration or a declaration of a matter which was for $150 in excess of the normal declaration limit, hotel accommodation specifically in Brisbane.
As I said yesterday, this in my view constituted a minor breach, but I was unhappy about it. But, we let that matter rest. This is a different matter. It goes to the question of the undertakings which the Minister made publicly in March of this year concerning the relationship between himself, his office and this particular company Humana and NIB which of course is headed by his brother.
What the Minister has confirmed in discussions with my Chief of Staff today and with the Special Minister of State, as reflected in his letter of resignation is that furthermore, members of his staff had sat in on a number of meetings subsequent to that with the company NIB on the Humana matter. And furthermore, that one of those meetings occurred within the Minister's Office. It's on the basis of those two things which are different from what the Minister had declared before, that he concluded that it was right that he extend his letter of resignation, he has done so, it is the right course of action.
JOURNALIST: Have you put too much faith in Joel Fitzgibbon?
PM: Joel Fitzgibbon has been a first class Minister for Defence. Can I go to the question of substantive performance as a portfolio Minister? The Defence White Paper is the first done in a decade. This is a large undertaking, I have been integrally involved in it and the Minister has presided over the most far reaching set of defence reforms out to the year 2030 compared with any of his predecessors.
This is an important piece of work both in terms of the future design of the Australian Defence Force, its force structure, but in particular also the funding parameters which underpin it and also the defence savings program which underpins it as well.
Secondly, to obtain and secure the successful and well executed transition of our mission in Iraq and thirdly to redesign our mission in Afghanistan has involved him integrally, he has discharged these functions well. Obviously the Minister has made mistakes on the way through in terms of these matters of accountability and he's paid a high price as reflected in his resignation today.
JOURNALIST: Would you describe this as deliberate wrongdoing or just carelessness?
PM: Well the Minister has accepted responsibility for these mistakes, they are mistakes. They are mistakes in relation to accountability. There have been a number of them. This one does represent a significant departure from the undertakings the Minister gave publically in March on this particular matter.
I emphasise one other thing, that on the substance of any contractual agreement between either NIB, the company Humana or the Australian Government, there has been none, there is none. This simply goes to a question of the probity of the process which was engaged in. 
The Minister indicated earlier on that he was not engaged in the handling of this matter, what he has informed us of today is that his staff did attend meetings with NIB on this matter and furthermore that one of those meetings occurred within his office.
The Minister therefore has acted appropriately in tendering his resignation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh I think Joel Fitzgibbon has been a first class Minister but we take the standards of Ministerial accountability seriously. The Ministers who work in this Government know that and that is why this Minister has acted appropriately in extending and tendering his letter of resignation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on different matter, has your office been involved in making representation to Treasury on behalf of car dealers, either Barton City Holden or John Grant from Ipswich?
PM: I am unaware of that so I am sure if you put those questions to the Industry Minister he might be able to assist.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you tell us what is the message in this event today for your other ministers?
PM: It's important that anyone who has the honour and the privilege of acting as a Minister in the Australian Government conform to the highest standards of accountability. These are tough standards and the Minister has made a tough decision in extending this letter of resignation.
But it is an important reminder to us all that standards of accountability must be kept high, high because the responsibilities with which we are charged as Ministers and as cabinet Ministers are great.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the allegation of the use of the Minister's office for lobbying was one of the allegations I think in the Fairfax anonymous document that is mentioned in the press in the last few months. We read today in the Canberra Times that there was actually someone in the defence security branch who was doing this. What's your comment on all that? Is it just coincidence that so much of the document has proven to be right?
PM: Laurie I actually don't know the answer to that question. What I do know is what the Minister has presented me with, that on one occasion a meeting involving the company, that's NIB, involving his brother occurred in his office and furthermore that he had members of staff which were attending that meetings and other meetings which did not occur in his office.
And they are the two grounds upon which the Minister has I think correctly put forward as the basis that is his resignation. As to any surrounding factors Laurie, I do not know.
JOURNALIST: Do think there is a broader opportunity for a reshuffle or (inaudible)
PM: I think it's important just to take these things step by step. I take a deeply conservative view of these things which is that it's important to get on with the business of Government, there are many challenges out there for us as a nation, as a Government you've got to get on with it. I've never been in the business of saying change for change's sake, I am into the business of trying to deliver the best result possible for the Australian people.
But if a matter of accountability arises which has to be dealt with then we must dealt with it and I believe we have dealt with it in the appropriate manner.
JOURNALIST: Beyond Joel Fitzgibbon being a good Minister, he is the first Minister that you've lost during this term of Government. How do you feel about that?
PM: I always feel sad about these things because Ministers work hard in this government and they put their heart and soul into their work. This Minister has as well and I think on these occasions we're all human beings and we recognise the strength that people's individual achievements while recognising in our common humanity, the weaknesses we all have and the mistakes which can be made.
And so therefore obviously I feel sad about this but it's important that we maintain high standards of ministerial accountability. That's why I believe the Minister has acted appropriately.
JOURNALIST: Has he explained why his earlier accounts were wrong?
PM: The Minister has simply provided me with this information at one today, and therefore I simply take it as he has said but having read the transcript of Senate estimates last night he's further reviewed the matter and obviously had discussions with his staff as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Mr Fitzgibbon was the victim of white-anting by his department?
PM: I've no basis to reach that conclusion Steve. I believe the Minister has had a good working relationship with the Department of Defence and with the Australian Defence Force. I have been privy to many, many professional dealings between the Minister and the head of Defence and the head of the Defence Force, the Chief of the Defence Force Angus Houston.
These have been, this is a good relationship. They work well together. It follows that in any dealing with a very large organisation from time to time things are going to go wrong. That's just life, but he's not Robinson Crusoe on that front either.
But I would like again to reaffirm publicly my confidence in the Defence Department and the Defence Force, because I believe that they are highly professional institutions which have executed their functions well. This has been an error on the Minister's part, for which he has paid a high price through his letter of resignation.
JOURNALIST: There have been some warning signals about Mr Fitzgibbon earlier this year. Do you feel that you were too trusting in him and do you think you will now be less trusting in the rest of your ministry?
PM: Well Dennis this is a first class team. They are good people, the members of this Government. They work their guts out. They, I believe have the interests of the country at heart in what they do and I have seen nothing but diligence and application to the task on the part of all of them.
It follows however inevitably in the course of you know, human events, that mistakes are going to be made. That is just life. It happens in any large organisation and mistakes have occurred here and the Minister, through extending his letter of resignation has paid a high price.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that, do you regret not asking for Joel Fitzgibbon's resignation earlier?
PM: You must always act on the basis of the evidence which is presented to you. And as I said yesterday, in response, or the day before, in relation to the matter of the pecuniary interests concern, that I believe that a matter which was a $150 variation of a $300 declaration limit, was an error, was it a hanging offence - no. Was it an error - yes. Was I unhappy about it - yep. But these things happen.
This is of a different matter. It goes back to assurances given to the public and others in March about this particular matter. And the Minister has acted appropriately and correctly.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is there any hope for Joel Fitzgibbon in the future (inaudible)
PM: I don't believe in anything called life sentences for these sorts of things. It is a matter about how people conduct themselves and what work they do and what application they apply.
And as I said before in my remarks about the Minister's substantive performance, this has been a good minister, who has worked hard at his portfolio, worked with great diligence in the very complex tasks of the Defence White Paper, a piece of work which extended over more than a 12 month period and reached culmination in what I believe to be one of the most far reaching elements of defence policy reform that the country has seen.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the Defence Minister of Joel Fitzgibbon as I understand is due at a NATO meeting late next week at which he was to receive I think quite important briefings on the US plan for Afghanistan.
Will Australia's new Defence Minister be there, and if so, how confident are you that they can cope with that level of detail and diplomacy.
PM: You betcha and absolutely, are the answers to those two questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry I have got to Q Time. I imagine there will be a few questions in there.
JOURNALIST: Did you see last night's skit on the Chaser in which the Chaser boys poked fun and terminally ill children. And if so what did you think of it and should the Chaser be pulled from air?
PM: I didn't see it. I didn't see that. But it has been described to me. You know I actually don't mind the Chaser taking the mickey out of me or any other politician, at any time, in any place.
That is fine, that is fair game. But, having a go at kids with a terminal illness is really beyond the pale, absolutely beyond the pale. These guys, collectively, should get up and hang their heads in shame. It is just wrong.
I have enjoyed so much of what they have done over the years. Taking the mickey out of me and whoever else. That is fine. But this is just way beyond it, way beyond it, way beyond it.


The Australian and Victorian Governments have agreed on landmark reforms to return more water to the environment in conjunction with Victoria's irrigation modernisation program.
The new agreement will enable the Australian Government to acquire 300 billion litres over the next five years from 2008/09, over and above those purchases already permitted under Victoria's four per cent annual cap from irrigation districts.
A significant part of this agreement is greater co-ordination of Commonwealth purchases 
with the $2 billion Northern Victoria Irrigation Modernisation Project.
Under the agreement, and subject to a review of progress on the modernisation project, Victoria will begin to phase out the four per cent cap on permanent water trades from irrigation districts from July 2011, with a view to removing the cap entirely by 2014.
The Australian Government has also committed $300 million towards a grants program to assist farmers in southern Basin States to improve on-farm efficiency to save more water for the environment.
Other key aspects of the agreement include:
     * The Commonwealth reaffirmed its in-principle commitment to provide up to $1 billion to Stage 2 of the Northern Victoria Irrigation Renewal Project to modernise leaky old irrigation infrastructure;
     * Water trades associated with the Commonwealth's Small Block Irrigator Exit Grant Package in Victoria will be allowed to proceed immediately, regardless of the four per cent cap.
Overall, the Australian Government expects to acquire 460 billion litres from willing sellers over the next five years from 2008/09.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Victorian Premier John Brumby said the agreement underlined the importance of securing water for our rivers and wetlands, while also investing in a sustainable, efficient and productive future for our irrigation farms and communities.
“We are facing a critical situation in the Murray-Darling Basin resulting from historical over-allocation, long-term drought and the emerging impacts of climate change,” Mr Rudd said.
“The Australian Government is determined to restore the Basin's rivers and wetlands to health, and help irrigation communities adjust to a future with less water.
“Longer-term, Commonwealth environmental purchases across the Basin will help to smooth the transition for irrigation communities to new, lower, sustainable diversion limits that can be expected when the new Basin Plan takes effect.
“The Australian Government remains committed to continued water market reform, because a free and fair water market provides the best way of ensuring that water can move to its most valuable and productive uses,” Mr Rudd said.
Mr Brumby said retaining the four per cent cap until July 2011 while allowing trades to proceed under the Commonwealth buybacks was a balanced outcome.
“This is a good deal for Victorian farmers, regional communities and the Murray River,” Mr Brumby said.
“Keeping the four per cent cap will allow communities sufficient time to adjust to large volumes of water being traded out of their region.
“At the same time, a coordinated approach to irrigation modernisation will mean more water can be returned through the buyback to the Murray River and its Victorian tributaries and wetlands.
“Under this agreement, buybacks will be targeted at less productive areas while irrigation infrastructure is modernised and reconfigured to ensure Victorian farmers have a more productive and sustainable future.”
The agreement follows lengthy negotiations between the Commonwealth and Victoria.
The Victorian Government recently announced it would legislate to remove the 10 per cent limit on the volume of water entitlements that can be owned without being associated with land. The limit will be removed by 31 October 2009.
The Australian Government's $12.9 billion Water for the Future plan includes $3.1 billion to purchase water from willing sellers to put back in the Basin's rivers and wetlands, and $3.7 billion in commitments already made to Basin state priority projects.
This includes an in-principle commitment of up to $1 billion for the second stage of the Northern Victoria Irrigation Renewal (Food Bowl) Project, and up to $106 million for the Sunraysia Modernisation Project.
Stages 1 and 2 of the $2 billion Northern Victoria Irrigation Renewal Project will return on average 175 billion litres of water to the Murray River and its tributaries and on average 175 billion litres of additional water for farmers, by modernising leaky old irrigation infrastructure.


O'BRIEN: Prime Minister, when were you first made aware of the detail that emerged in Senate Estimates last night regarding your Defence Minister's latest problems? Did you seek an immediate personal explanation from him about that?
PM: I became aware of these matters Kerry this morning after returning from Brisbane late last night and following that the Chief of Staff in my office and the Special Minister of State Senator Faulkner went and spoke at my request with the Defence Minister and the Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon then came and saw me in my office. That was around about 1.00pm today.
O'BRIEN: But when he came to you, did he come with his resignation prepared to hand to you?
PM: Yes he did.
O'BRIEN: Was there, at any point any message from you to him via Senator Faulkner or anybody else that you thought he should resign?
PM: What we are seeking to do during the course of the morning Kerry was to establish the facts and during the course of the conversation with my Chief of Staff and with Senator Faulkner those facts were established and the conclusion was reached that the Minister would resign. He did so. He offered his letter of resignation, I accepted it. It was the right course of action. It is a high price to pay for the Minister but the Government stands by high ministerial standards and therefore a high price to pay but a necessary price to pay on this matter.
O'BRIEN: Can we just take it that little bit further. You're saying the decision was arrived at, do you mean you arrived at the decision, you and Senator Faulkner together arrived at the decision, was it, was it your decision that was communicated to the Defence Minister?
PM: No Kerry. No Kerry. The Minister came with a letter of resignation of his own volition. It was the right decision that he took and I accepted his letter of resignation and-
O'BRIEN: But had you arrived at the view yourself, before you saw Joel Fitzgibbon, that you felt he should resign?
PM: I thought these were serious matters but as with any such matter I prefer to actually speak with the Minister or the person concerned and also what Senator Faulkner and my Chief of Staff were doing establishing the facts. Also bear in mind here Kerry that on this overall matter that we're talking about processes involving the Minister's dealings with this particular company. Let it also be made absolutely clear to the viewing audience that no contract was ever entered into on the part of the Australian Government or the Defence Department with this particular company, it was simply a problem about the Minister's staff's participation in meetings with this particular company and that was new information compared with what the Minister had put forward in March of this year.
O'BRIEN: Have you taken a close look at Mr Snowdon's, the assisting Minister, Mr Snowdon's role in this?
PM: I'm absolutely confident that both in the case of the Minister for Defence Personnel, Minister for Veterans Affairs that they have acted entirely properly in this matter. And remember also in the case of the Minister for Veterans Affairs who had partial charge of this matter than he was one of those Ministers who conveyed ultimately to the company concerned that there was not a prospect of the Government responding to the requests that they have made.
The Government acted properly in this matter. My concern was simply the standards concerning conflict of interest which the Minister Mr Fitzgibbon was aware of, his statements to the public in March of this year that he had no direct engagement in the deliberations and what became plain today is that his staff did engage in such conversations with the company and furthermore that one such conversation with the company occurred in his own office. And that's why the Minister concluded it was in the best interests of the Government that he would resign, he did so and he did so because he said in his letter that he did not believe his actions were necessarily consistent with the Ministerial Code of Conduct.
O'BRIEN: Is there any further repercussion with regard to staff?
PM: Well on the question of staff, these things are always dealt with as appropriate by my Chief of Staff and the Special Minister of State. I have no particular concerns which have been raised with me on that matter. The Minister has ultimately accepted responsibility for these matters and I respect the decision he has made. I would also emphasise for the benefit of your viewing audience tonight Kerry that the Minister has been a first class Defence Minister.
The Defence reform program, the Defence White Paper, defence planning out to the year 2030, the build up in the Australian Navy in addition to the successful withdrawal of Australian forces from Iraq and the redefinition of our mission in Afghanistan have all occurred under his watch and under his leadership and I respect that and pay public recognition of that. He has paid a high price for this problem in terms of Ministerial accountability.
O'BRIEN: You acknowledge today mistakes  -  plural - that there were mistakes prior to this one. How uncomfortable were you personally with the revelations of Mr Fitzgibbon's involvements, his trips to China, the issue of accommodation or whatever being paid by the Chinese businesswoman Helen Liu? How uncomfortable were you with what unfolded there?
PM: Kerry, I was absolutely comfortable with the decisions which have been taken in relation to Joel, up until today and today we were presented with a new set of circumstances. And again I go back to the point, that with both Joel and with other Ministers, in my judgement as Prime Minster they have been doing a first class job.
Obviously in the full spectrum of life and politics, which in the case of Joel goes back many, many years, both his time in opposition and as a backbencher, there are certain things which always going to arise which will be seen as less than perfect.
He is like that. Everyone who is honest about their own political career has got things like that that happens from time to time and of course his became the subject of some public controversy. That is life. Mistakes are made. The key thing here though, as far as this matter is concerned, which a company, headed by his brother, seeking to obtain business from the Department of Defence and a conflict of interest situation unfolding that the Minister's staff continued their engagement with it and he acted appropriately in choosing to resign.
O'BRIEN: I would assume you have taken the opportunity to reiterate rather firmly to all of your other ministerial colleagues that you'll want no repetition of this and that they should acquaint themselves if they haven't already very carefully with the letter and intent of the code of conduct.
PM: Well Kerry I'm confident that Ministers are doing it on a continuing basis, but remember our Minister's are exceptionally busy. It is a hard working Government. We are wrestling with a few things here. The global economic recession, challenges on that front, keeps a lot of us very busy. Secondly, implementing the Government's pre-election commitments and thirdly, long term reform agenda to set Australia up for the future.
This is a very hard working cabinet, very hard working Ministry. And one of the challenges is to make sure that all these individual items of personal accountability are attended to on the way through. But these are the obligations which are on us as Ministers of Government and they are expected.
O'BRIEN: How did it feel to lose your first Minister in this kind of way?
PM: As I said earlier today, Kerry, very sad. I regard Joel as a good Defence Minister, a good colleague and a good friend. But I respect his decision, taken in the best interests of the Government and its public standing, and it also, also his own view of the compatibility of his actions with Ministerial standards, that he took the right decision.
O'BRIEN: How quickly will you be able to decide on Mr Fitzgibbon's replacement? And will you take the opportunity for any kind of a reshuffle that might go a little wider than simply his portfolio
PM: Well I believe always in proceeding reflectively on these things Kerry and making sure we get the decisions right and we will do so. But we will move resolutely as soon as all these things have been properly concluded. I will talk obviously with colleagues and work our way through this. Ultimately it is my call and I will seek to make the absolute best call possible. In terms of any further changes within the Government, I believe the Government as a whole is functioning exceptionally well, in very difficult circumstances. I would not be foreshadowing any major changes.
O'BRIEN: You've had to face some personal questions yourself from the Opposition today about a car you were apparently given by a Brisbane car dealer John Grant Motors, if that's correct that you were given the car. What is the story of the car? What was the basis of the agreement that you had with John Grant Motors?
PM: Well Kerry can I just say one thing very plain and upfront, this has been in my pecuniary interest declaration for two years. It has been up there in black and white. What it is, is a local utility car which I use as a local mobile office vehicle. My habit in the past as a member of parliament up there, and whenever I can get the time these days up in the electorate of Griffith, is to go out and do mobile offices on street corners.
It is a ute, on the side it has, ‘Kevin Rudd's Mobile Office'. I have been doing this ever since I was elected, one way or the other. This vehicle was provided by the individual concerned, it was put on the pecuniary interest declaration two years ago and I have been completely  - 
O'BRIEN: Is it in a sense, is it a form of political donation?
PM: Absolutely, that is why it is on, that is why it is there on the pecuniary interest declaration. I have been absolutely upfront about this. Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Party have known about this for two years. It has been there, in black and white since before I became Prime Minister. I think what they were seeking to do today, having engaged in the politics of fear on the economy, where their political strategy fell in a heap yesterday, was now to go into the politics of personal smear.
And I can only conclude, can only conclude that given the declaration of this mobile office vehicle has been out there for a couple of years, completely transparently on the public record, that they have chosen to do it for these base political motives.
O'BRIEN: Well I would imagine if he was here, Malcolm Turnbull would say that he's perfectly justified in asking the question because it was your Government set up the Oz Car scheme, and his question relates to whether you have made personal representations on behalf of John Grant Motors to Oz Car about setting that company up a line of credit.
PM: And the fact is, Kerry as I said in the Parliament today, is that I have made no such representations. That is an absolute fact. So instead of simply standing up in the parliament today and retracting the insinuation and the allegation, Mr Turnbull just barrels ahead, engaged in a broad politics of negativity and personal smear.
The bottom line is, the Oz Car initiative is out there because across Australia today, and for the last six months, we have had thousands of car dealerships in real strife because of the contraction of normal sources of finance. At the end of last year, we had two of the major global providers of car finance to the Australian dealership industry, remove themselves from the market. We sat down with the banks, established a special purpose vehicle with them, for the Government to provide this support to the industry, did so in consultation with the industry association, and have made it available to the thousands of car dealerships across Australia.
Many members of parliament legitimately have made representations to the Government, to the Treasurer and to others about possible support from this scheme and why it is important  -  the motor vehicle industry generally has been experiencing great challenge and difficulty. We have been out there in the Government, on the front foot, doing the right thing by industry in general.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, we are out of time, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Thanks Kerry.


PM: Can I begin by making some remarks about Chris O'Brien and then talk about the position of Minister for Defence. And then I'll make some concluding remarks about Chinalco and then John will make some remarks and then over to you.
It was exceptionally sad news for the nation last night to lose Chris O'Brien. This bloke was out of the ordinary, he was an extraordinary Australian. He single-handedly turned adversity, personal adversity into national opportunity in advocating a cause of integrated cancer care across Australia.
I benefited enormously from my engagement with him over several years now. I first met him when I had become Leader of the Opposition and he'd just been diagnosed as having inoperable cancer. They gave him then six months to live so he told me and he soldiered on and soldiered on for two and a half years. A remarkable man, absolutely remarkable.
And I remember a long conversation I had with him that first night, which was mainly about literature, history and anything other than what he came to talk to me about, was he was a man who was of wide learning, deep interests, with an abiding passion about how we can work better on this great challenge to Australia's and the world's public health. Early detection, better treatment, integrated cancer care.
And I think he first explained to me as a lay-person what it was all about, and how you bring together the best brains in the country into single centres of excellence which have the best diagnostics, the best therapeutic applications, the best scientific research, all working in a virtuous circle, one reinforcing the other and doing that with large centres of excellence.
Which is why the Government, prior to Chris's death indicated that we'd be investing in the new Sydney Cancer Centre. And it's a large part of why you saw in the budget $1.2 billion invested nationwide in integrated cancer care. Not just in Sydney, not just at RPA, not just at the Garvin not just at Peter MacCallum but right across the country.
And the nation should know that that $1.2 billion investment in integrated cancer care nation-wide has been shaped so much by this single man's life and testimony. May he rest in peace.
I saw him last night just before he died and I went to Sydney and he is supported by an extraordinary family, an extraordinary family.
Cancer visits too many Australians and it's an extraordinary irony that a surgeon, a scientist, a pioneer such as him who has worked in this field for decades and decades, should himself become victim of the self-same disease.
I spoke to his wife Gail last night and again this morning. I have offered the family a state funeral. The family have accepted that offer and arrangements will be announced in due course.
Today I am pleased to announce that I will be appointing John Faulkner as the Minister for Defence. Senator Faulkner is a man of great character and of great integrity and one of the most experienced and accomplished ministers in cabinet. When it comes to experience John has served with distinction in portfolios including Veterans Affairs, as Minister for Defence Science and Personnel, in the previous Labor Government as well as having been Leader of the Opposition in the Senate between ‘98 and 2004.
Beyond that, John Faulkner is a man of unquestionable integrity and strength of character and that has been reflected in the multiple portfolios he has been responsible for both in Government and Opposition over a long and distinguished parliamentary career.
John Faulkner has a tough job ahead of him and that is to implement the reforms outlined in the Defence White Paper carefully crafted by Joel Fitzgibbon when he was Minister. This is a blueprint for the Australian Defence Force out to the year 2030. The construction, the building, the development of a new Australian Defence Force with the capital needs which it has, army, air and navy as well as in the critically important field of cyber-security.
Senator Faulkner will also have the critically important job of being a strong voice in Cabinet for our men and women uniform, many of whom are fighting in theatres abroad as we speak now. I have absolute confidence that Senator Faulkner will discharge this responsibility with absolute professionalism and integrity for which his career has already been known. I will be making further announcements concerning other changes to the executive in the coming days.
Finally, just some remarks in terms of Chinalco and Rio. I note that there has been a statement put out by Rio today and by jointly by Rio and BHP. This of course has been a commercial matter between Rio and Chinalco as is now a commercial matter between Rio and BHP. Any proposal concerning BHP would be very likely to require further consideration by the Foreign Investment Review Board. 
The Government would take the same national interest approach to any future proposal which is put before it, whether it involves BHP or any other applicant. I'd like to state again the Government's policy that we welcome foreign investment, because foreign investment has been and always will be an important part of the generation of Australian jobs for the future.
As for Chinese investment in Australia, we welcome Chinese investment in Australia just as the previous Government approved some $15 billion worth of Chinese investment into this country as well. I also would like to indicate that Chinalco beyond this particular proposal of course have a range of other interests in this country and the President of Chinalco is in Australia at present and has requested to see me and other Ministers and I'll be meeting the President of Chinalco later this afternoon.
Enough from me, I turn to Senator Faulkner and then we'll take your questions.
FAULKNER: Thanks very much Kevin. Well ladies and gentlemen I think it is indeed a great honour, certainly a responsibility and I would acknowledge, a challenge to be Australia's Defence Minister.
I am delighted that the Prime Minister has asked me to take on this responsibility, though of course like him and my colleagues, disappointed in the particular circumstances.
I look forward as Defence Minister to leading the implementation of the White Paper, the implementation of the defence reform program. Of course to ensure immediately I focus on ADF operations, particularly in Afghanistan and our region. I'd also acknowledge to you of course that I am now right at the bottom of a very steep learning curve for a new portfolio. And in the weeks and months ahead I'll have another challenge in clambering up that learning curve.
JOURNALIST: Senator Faulkner did you discuss with your old colleague Robert Ray before accepting the job?
FAULKNER: Well as a matter of fact, as a matter of fact I did. Robert Ray is a very, very good friend of mine. There are two former Ministers for Defence in the Hawke and Keating Governments that I've served within this parliament, Robert Ray and Kim Beazley. And I did speak to both of them. The one thing I can say to you however is that I rang Robert for a bit of a chat about this and I can confirm to you that Kim rang me - five times.
JORUNALIST: Senator the Defence portfolio has the particular challenge of being one where you have this element of sending people into mortal danger. What are your thoughts, what were your thoughts on that, have you considered whether you were the sort of person, whether you would have the ability to be able to do that?
FAULKNER: I think parliamentarians have huge responsibilities as they go about their public duties. There is no doubt about that. I hope I am a Parliamentarian and a Minister who treats those responsibilities with the utmost seriousness. And what you have said of course is an ultimate responsibility, not just for a Defence Minister, but I think clearly for a Defence Minister, as a Defence Minister recommends along with a Prime Minister, to their Cabinet, what approach a Government should take in these circumstances, not just for a Defence Minister, of course for a Prime Minister, all members of a Cabinet and the Government.
And I treat, and I treat such a responsibility, I have in the past, when I have been involved in all those decisions and I can assure you I will in the future, with the utmost seriousness and utmost responsibility.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what happens to your Cabinet Secretary role?
FAULKNER: Well Michelle, I think the Prime Minister has indicated and it is really a question better directed to him, because I think the Prime Minister will be able to confirm that I am not responsible for the allocation of ministerial portfolios in the Rudd Government.
PM: And given that question wasn't referred to me, I will refer you to the answer just given by the Minister.
FAULKNER: But Michelle, just can I just say to you, the Prime Minister has made clear that he is going to announce at a later stage some other, Ministerial changes and I am sure he will tell us all about that and I look forward to hearing what he has got to say.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said before, nice try. And we will make a comprehensive statement about any other ministerial changes over the next few days.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) large agenda in your own, in your previous portfolio, which was very dear to your heart (inaudible)
FAULKNER: It is true. I did have an agenda that for me personally was very important. That is true. I think it was very important for the Government. But it is an agenda that I am sure will continue to be prosecuted regardless of who the responsible Minister is in this case, the cabinet secretary and Special Minister of State.
Of course these are the sorts of considerations that Ministers bring to bear when they make assessments about a change of portfolio or when a Prime Minister requests you do so. I remain very much committed to the Governance reforms that I have been responsible for, the issues continuing to be (inaudible) as a Minister. And I will be a strong voice for that reform process in the Cabinet as Defence Minister.
JOURNALIST: Senator, Joel Fitzgibbon seems to blame Judas's in the department and in his own office for his downfall. How will you deal with those elements if they exist?
FAULKNER: Well of course I don't want to comment directly on what Joel has said. I would only say this to you Mark, I will have very high expectations of the Department of Defence as its new Minister and I also have absolute confidence that those expectations will be met. What I have had I think throughout my time as a Minster in a range of portfolios and as the Prime Minister has said, for a very, very long time, I think and I believe, a very professional, respectful and appropriate relationships with the Departments that I have administered.
That is my expectation in Defence, who I have had a long association with, a long association with, as a former Minister in that portfolio and also a very considerable engagement with Defence in parliamentary and parliamentary committee business. I know that Defence as well, will work very, very hard to have that sort of relationship with me.
JOURNALIST: Minister, there is a culture in Defence, are you confident you will be able to (inaudible)
FAULKNER: I will, as I have said, have high expectations of my new department. I have high expectations of Defence and I have a very high level of confidence that those expectations will be met.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The office are already referring to him as Field Marshall Faulkner but where he go with baton sticks is a matter for him. Look John is an exceptionally experienced Minister and member of parliament and he will deploy all of those skills in his engagement with the Defence Department and with the Australian Defence Force.
As I said to you yesterday, the relationship between the Cabinet, the Defence Department, the Defence Force is important and the relationships with senior Defence hierarchy, civilian and military are important  -  these are relationships to which I attach a great importance and have spent a lot of time engaging at that level.
The Minister is going to do exactly the same and will be drawing upon his vast experience. The other thing about John's background, two of those portfolios I have mentioned to you before are deeply engaged with elements of the wider defence establishment, the wider defence family.
John is well known in the Defence community, very well known. But also in his work in Opposition in terms of intelligence matters and others, he is a person who is well qualified for this new position, well respected within the defence community and I believe will make this job every success.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Not that I am aware of, can I say that these matters are always considered on their merits, first point. Secondly, what has occurred most recently is entirely a commercial matter between Rio on the one hand and Chinalco on the other. That is the truth of it, that is waht has happened here.
The Government maintains a policy of openness towards foreign investment. We will always make decisions in the national interest, as I assume the Chinese Government makes decisions in the national interest about what form of foreign investment it welcomes into its country at any given time.
But can I just say this, this has been a commercial decision, reached by Rio in terms of its evaluation of the proposal put to it by Chinalco. It is a commercial matter and I think it is very important that our friends in China focus on that fact.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well we are addressing coverage in India and in China, you know, life is a complex and varied feast. But our policy on foreign investment in Australia is non discriminatory. Our policy on foreign investment in Australia is open and it is welcome.
But consistent with all previous Australian Governments, we will make judgements in the national interest.
But on this, let me just underline it again, this is the nature of the commercial transaction, the commercial discussion, the commercial negotiation between Rio on the one hand and Chinalco on the other. That is where this has been transacted, and as I said before, in terms of what has been put out by way of public statement, in the joint statement today by Rio and BHP, it is highly likely that that too will become subject to separate deliberation by the Government through the Foreign Investment Review Board, it is the right way in which these things should be approached. 


Chris O'Brien was a man of leadership, vision and courage.
He inspired people, both through his work as a cancer specialist and through his own three-year battle with an aggressive, highly malignant brain tumour.
Chris transformed his personal adversity into a national opportunity, using his experience to fight so much harder for cancer patients and their families.
Chris's vision was for an integrated cancer treatment centre so that patients would no longer have to navigate their way through all the different elements of dealing with their illness alone.
His experience with cancer gave him the moral authority to advocate this model of integrated cancer care to the highest offices in the land, and he succeeded.
Just seven weeks ago, Chris and I were in Sydney together to launch the new Sydney Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA.
Chris would not let us name this new centre after him. But it will be an enduring legacy to a great man, and a dearly missed friend.
On behalf of all Australians, I offer my condolences to Chris's wife Gail and their children Adam, Juliette and James.
The Australian Government has offered the O'Brien family a state funeral in honour of Chris O'Brien's contribution to the nation. The O'Brien family advised me this morning that they would be pleased to accept this offer.
It is only in exceptional circumstances that Governments offer state funerals.
I believe Chris O'Brien has been a truly exceptional Australian


Today I announce a minor reshaping of the Executive  -  underlining the Australian Government's core priorities of nation building for recovery and strengthening Australia's national security
Yesterday I announced the appointment of Senator the Hon John Faulkner as Minister for Defence.
Senator Faulkner served with distinction as Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Minister for Defence Science &amp; Personnel, and Minister for the Environment, Sports and Territories in the Keating Government. He also served as Leader of Opposition in the Senate from 1998 through to 2004 and National President of the Australian Labor Party in 2007-08.
Since December 2007 Senator Faulkner has served as Special Minister of State and Cabinet Secretary. He will remain Vice-President of the Executive Council.
Senator Faulkner replaces the Hon Joel Fitzgibbon MP as Minister for Defence. Mr Fitzgibbon was a first class Minister who was instrumental in the delivery of the Defence White Paper and discharged his functions with a genuine compassion and concern for our men and women in uniform.
Today I am pleased to announce the further changes to the Ministry.
Senator the Hon Joseph Ludwig will become Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State and continue in his role as the Manager of Government Business in the Senate.
Senator Ludwig is a former barrister who has served in the Senate for more than a decade, including as Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate from 2001 through to 2007 and Manager of Government Business since December 2007.
The Hon Chris Bowen MP will enter Cabinet and be appointed Minister for Financial Services, Superannuation and Corporate Law, and Minister for Human Services. Minister Bowen has served with distinction as Assistant Treasurer since December 2007 and has overseen significant reform in improving fairness and integrity in the tax system and in important areas of consumer rights.
The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP, Minister for Small Business, Independent Contractors and the Service Economy and Minister Assisting the Finance Minister on Deregulation, will also become Minister for Competition Policy and Consumer Affairs. Minister Emerson's significant achievements in working with small business to reduce red tape will prove valuable experience in his expanded role.
Senator the Hon Nick Sherry will be appointed Assistant Treasurer. Senator Sherry is a former Shadow Assistant Treasurer and was Parliamentary Secretary for Primary Industry, Energy and Resources during the Keating Government.
The Hon Brendan O'Connor MP will be appointed Minister for Home Affairs, taking on the critical portfolio with responsibility for policing and law enforcement and the administration of Australian territories. Mr O'Connor's wealth of experience from his strong handling of the employment participation role during the global recession positions him very well to take on this critical national security role.
The Hon Warren Snowdon MP will be appointed Minister for Indigenous Health, Rural and Regional Health and Regional Services Delivery. As a proud resident of Alice Springs, Minister Snowdon is a tireless advocate for Australians living in rural and remote areas.
The Hon Kate Ellis MP will be appointed Minister for Early Childhood Education, Childcare and Youth and will continue as Minister for Sport. Establishing a Ministry for Early Childhood Education and Childcare for the first time reflects the importance the Australian Government places on these policy challenges.
The Hon Greg Combet AM MP will enter the Ministry as the Minister for Defence Personnel, Materiel and Science and the Minister Assisting the Minister for Climate Change.
Mr Combet is well prepared for this important position having previously served as the Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Procurement. He will also continue his important role in relation to the Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme by being appointed as Minister Assisting the Minister for Climate Change.
Senator the Hon Mark Arbib will enter the Ministry as the Minister for Employment Participation and the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Government Service Delivery. This will build on the work Senator Arbib has carried out in his role as Parliamentary Secretary for Government Service Delivery, in assisting with the roll out of the Government's historic nation building infrastructure investment.
The Hon Maxine McKew MP will become Parliamentary Secretary for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, to further assist in this infrastructure roll out, with a particular focus on community infrastructure and local government.
The Hon Gary Gray AO MP has been appointed Parliamentary Secretary for Western and Northern Australia. Mr Gray's extensive knowledge of the West and the Northern Territory, and its particular challenges for the future in terms of resource, land and infrastructure management and development make him ideally positioned to take on this role.
Jason Clare MP will be appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Employment. This will build on his current role as Special Adviser to the Prime Minister on Local Employment. As a Member from Western Sydney Mr Clare has firsthand knowledge of the impact the global recession is having on local jobs around the country.
Mark Butler MP will be appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Health. Mr Butler will bring to this new role his broad experience working with Government, providers, staff and professionals in the health sector, particularly in hospitals and in aged care, in his home state of South Australia.
Richard Marles MP will be appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Industry and Innovation. Mr Marles has a comprehensive understanding of the challenges faced by industry through more than ten years in the labour movement, and is well positioned to work across industry developing strong foundations for our emergence from the global recession.
After nearly 28 years of service in the New South Wales and Commonwealth Parliaments, the Hon Bob Debus MP has indicated to me that he will not recontest his seat of Macquarie in New South Wales.
In the context of the current reshuffle and the challenges of the global recession, Mr Debus has made the decision to retire from the Ministry in order to facilitate a strong team for the future to continue the Government's response during these challenging times.
Mr Debus has made an extraordinary contribution over this time, including in his dedicated service as Minister for Home Affairs. His discipline and integrity are legendary, and his application to the complex and challenging task of our national security has been outstanding.
On a personal note, I would like to thank Bob for his work over such a long period of time, and underscore the significance of his contribution to the Governments of New South Wales and Australia.
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Health and Ageing, Senator the Hon Jan McLucas, has informed me of her decision to step down from her portfolio responsibilities.
She does so in order to focus on her role as Senator for Queensland, given the particular challenges faced by regional, rural and provincial Queensland during the global recession.
Senator McLucas has made a significant contribution through her role as Parliamentary Secretary, and has provided valuable support to the Health Minister in a major area of policy reform and a priority area for the Government. 


: Let me begin by simply saying this to all Queenslanders whatever their political persuasion: happy 150th birthday Queensland. To reach 100 is a great achievement. To reach 150 is a stupendous achievement.
Think of Queen Victoria, she who is reputed to have said about many things ‘we are not amused'. If she was to reflect upon what this State has achieved in the 150 years since she signed the Letters Patent in 1859, whether she was amused or not amused Queen Victoria would be absolutely stunned by what has been achieved here.
Think of these 150 years. Queensland has moved from being a backwater to being the trailblazer. This is an extraordinary achievement. Think of those 150 years, a tribute to the women and men of Queensland who have crafted a future out of the soil of this great State.
A tribute to indigenous Queenslanders who were custodians of this soil for millennia before European settlers first arrived here less than two centuries ago.
A tribute to farmers who crafted a living out of the land, who literally fought flood and drought and natural plague to craft a living for themselves and their families from the soil.
A tribute to the men and women of business, those who pioneered the idea that we could have something called a Queensland and Northern Territory Airline Service, which three-quarters of a century later becomes one of the largest and oldest continuing airlines in the world.
A tribute to the men and women of the union movement who crafted the idea of the fair go into the national soul.
A tribute also, also to our educators, to our teachers, to those who have been out there in one-teacher schools 100 miles from nowhere. And those who 100 years ago dreamt of building something called a university, which became the University of Queensland.
A tribute to doctors and nurses and those with a pioneering vision who said ‘let us build something called a Royal Flying Doctor Service' to provide much-needed medical services to the bush and who dreamt to build something called the Royal Brisbane Hospital. A tribute to all these Queenslanders, each and every one of them.
And to our poets, those who have told the stories of where we have come from. Those who have described our identity. Those like Banjo Patterson who at Dagworth Station in 1895 crafted the words of Waltzing Matilda. And of course most importantly of all, our most ancient of sacred ceremonies, a tribute to Darren Lockyer and the Maroons who once again have thumped the Blues in what can only be described in a national exercise in social justice. But it is important not to be triumphalist. Just to be privately gleeful.
Friends, in these 150 years we have shaped something truly great in this State of Queensland, something truly, truly great. We have grown from some 30,000 people at the time that this State was separated from NSW to 4.3 million people 150 years later. We have gone from being at the margins of the nation's deliberations to being at the centre stage of the nation's deliberations. We have gone from being a backwater to being the trailblazers. All Queenslanders should be proud of what has been achieved in these 150 years.
Friends, the Australian Labor Party has been a part, a core part of this great State's development for 120 of those 150 years. Our Party and our movement were founded in this State in 1891. We formed the first Labor Government anywhere in the world in 1899. It was here that we gave rise to the first majority Labor Prime Minister in the world in Andrew Fisher, in the first decade of our nation's federation.
It was here in Queensland that we pioneered under Labor Premier TJ Ryan worker's compensation so that workers when they are injured at work could receive the attention they needed and not simply rely upon the bleak charity of the day. It was here, also in Queensland that we pioneered the notion of a free hospital system under a Labor Premier Ned Hanlon.
And then it was here most recently that again we wrote a new chapter in our nation's political history, for the first time electing a woman leader in her own right as the first woman Premier of an Australian state, in Anna Bligh.
And friends it was this state, Queensland, which made it possible in November of 2007 for the federal Labor Party to return a federal Labor Government for the first time since Bob Hawke's election in 1983.
Friends, these are the achievements which we have seen in Queensland these last 150 years. These are the achievements we have seen through Queensland Labor in these last 120 years. These are things legitimately we celebrate from the past. But ours has always been a party of progress. Ours has always been a party of the future, ours has always been a party which actually dreams of a light on the hill and marches resolutely in that direction. That has been our galvanising vision for 120 years. That will be our galvanising vision for our next 120 years as a Party and as a movement.
For this to occur we need leadership. Leadership prepared to confront the challenges which are thrown against this nation. In the last year or so that I have been Prime Minister of Australia we have had thrown at this nation an economic challenge of the type which none of our predecessors have faced since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
This has seen a stupendous global economic downturn. What we see across the world is all the major economies in recession, what we see across the world is across the most advanced economies who are members of the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development, practically all of those economies in recession and those who are not, the rest experiencing negative growth.
Friends this is one of the largest simultaneous global economic downturns the world has ever seen and certainly the largest the world has seen since the deep and dark days of the global Depression. And when these things are thrown at us and where you see the wheels of finance grind almost to a halt, where you see the wheels of commerce grind almost to a halt, where you see exports contracting across the world, where you see millions of workers being thrown onto the unemployment queues in economies around the world, you can do either of two things.
You can stand back and say this is not my problem. You can stand back and say I can do nothing. You can stand back and say I will blame somebody else. Or you can step up to the fight. You can stand in the breach. You can act as Government to make a difference. This federal Labor Government has resolved to make a difference.
Friends in the dark days of September-October last year, many here would not know how close we came to a complete collapse of the world financial system. We saw some 30 of the world's largest banks around the world either collapse or having to be bailed out by their national governments.
We saw the complete drying up of the flow of international credit to economies around the world including our own. It is perhaps not known by all delegates here that in the critical months of October-November-December last year, international lines of credit to Australia's major banks shrank to zero. That is how close we came to a global financial abyss in the critical months at the end of last year.
The Government, the Labor Government, the federal Labor Government met to resolve what action we should take. We resolved that for the first time in this nation's history we would act to guarantee every single bank deposit held by every single Australian, every single person with a deposit in a bank, a building society and a credit union for the first time in the 109-year history of our federation, guaranteed by the Australian Government.
For the first time in the history of the federation, the federal Government, the Australian Government acting to guarantee the inter-bank lending of our banks so that they could continue to secure lines of credit for the future so that people in small business, people out there needing finance for mortgages could still have access to the inter-bank lending which so necessarily underpins the overall credit supply to Australia.
These two decisions were without precedent in the history of our nation. We undertook those decisions in order to make a difference. To act decisively to underpin the stability of the Australian financial system and this Government succeeded.
Critically also on that weekend I sat down with my colleagues including the Treasurer Wayne Swan as we confronted the unfolding global economic data as we could see a financial crisis becoming a crisis in the general economy, becoming a crisis in employment and in turn a social crisis in so many countries around the world. And we debated how we as a Government, as a Labor Government could make a difference. And that is where we began our national strategy of response to this crisis.
Our mission was this, not to say that we could prevent a global economic recession from having an impact in Australia - that was not possible. But what we could do as a national Government is say that we can stand in the breach and make a difference. We can cushion the impact, we can help workers who would otherwise be being thrown out of their jobs. We can help those who lose their jobs to find dignity through other forms of training. We could act as a national Government unapologetically interventionist at a time of national global economic crisis. And that is what we did.
We undertook a nation-building for recovery strategy in three stages. The first, in October last year, to provide immediate payments, cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and others in the community. Why? To provide support to those in need of course, but also to provide necessary and immediate stimulus to our national economy at a time when retail sales around the rest of the world were imploding. As a Labor Prime Minister I take seriously the jobs of the one and half million Australians who work in our retail sector. These are important Australian jobs.
And delegates if you look at what has happened with retail sales around the world in the critical quarters of the fourth quarter last year and the first quarter of 2009, they have fallen through the floor. Millions of people are being thrown into unemployment. This Government by virtue of its intervention turned that around. This Government by virtue of its intervention brought about an increase in retail sales by some four to five per cent compared with more than a one per cent collapse in retail sales in the rest of the advanced economies. If you want clear cut evidence of Government policy at work, it is there making a difference, making an absolute difference.
And if you want to see further clear cut evidence of that policy at work, look at the growth numbers which were released for this economy earlier this week. You are now citizens of an Australian nation whose economy is the only advanced economy, the only one of the major advanced economies in the world which has registered positive economic growth.
All of the major advanced economies are now in recession. Here in Australia we have registered positive economic growth among the major advanced economies, the only one to register positive growth, the fastest economic growth, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. That's an achievement on the part of this Australian Government.
And delegates, these things do not happen by accident. They do not happen by chance. They do not happen because someone out there mystically has made things work. It is because we through conscious Government policy have chosen to intervene. 
Beyond those measures, we also last October decided to intervene in the housing sector. Why? Because housing as a sector generates so many jobs in Australia, it is critical to make sure that the wheels of the economy continue to turn. That is why we acted to treble the First Home Owners' Boost. In one step, what we have done is make it possible for so many tens of thousands of young Australians and young Queenslanders to enter the housing market. We have now provided First Home Owners Grants to some 70 or 80,000 Australians in the period since last October when this stream of funding became available.
And the result again is there to see. If you look at the housing sector construction figures for Australia against those of practically any other advanced economy in the world, this is a story of chalk and cheese and again delegates, not because of accident, not because of chance but because the Labor Government you elected decided to act and make a difference.
Friends, that was the first phase of our stimulus strategy. The second phase is unfolding now. Our decision to build and to engage in the single largest school modernisation program our nation has ever seen. Our mission is clear. We intend to turn every primary school in Australia into a construction site, without apology, without fear or favour. Government and non government. Why? We are determined to build the education revolution and we are determined also to build Australia into sustainable economic recovery.
That's what it's about. $15 billion worth of investment in our primary schools to build state-of-the-art 21st century libraries, to build multi-purpose halls. In our secondary schools to make it possible for schools also to have access to state-of-the-art language centres and science centres. Building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, providing support for jobs and apprenticeships and business today. A Labor Government at work.
The decision we also took to invest in 20,000 units of social housing, the biggest single addition to public housing that this nation has ever seen. And on the way through, undertaking repairs and maintenance for another 50,000 units of social housing which already exist. Why? We are determined to act in terms of reducing homelessness over time but determined to act now also to have an effect, have an effect on the economy by providing another boost to construction at a time when the economy needs it. A Labor Government at work.
Friends our challenge also with climate change. Acting again with a $4 billion investment to make it possible for every owner-occupied dwelling in the country to have access to ceiling insulation so that we can take out 50 million tonnes-equivalent of greenhouse gas emissions and at the same time provide an enormous boost again to the construction sector when it needs it. Again a Labor Government at work.
Friends, what is the organising principle here? What are we seeking to do? It is simply this, our strategy is nation-building for recovery. It is supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure we need for tomorrow, which brings me to the third stage, the third phase of our nation-building for recovery plan.
In the Budget the Treasurer Wayne Swan announced that we would be engaging in a $22 billion further investment in long term infrastructure projects. In roads, in rail, in port, in high speed broadband. Investing in our universities, investing in our hospitals, investing in our medical research. Investing also in clean energy alternatives for the future including the biggest single solar energy project anywhere in the world. These are the long term infrastructure projects to which this Government has committed and dedicated funding in the Budget and again it is a Labor Government at work.
Friends in all these things we are seeking to make a difference. It is leadership to make a difference. You can choose to sit on your hands and do nothing, you can chose to carp and be negative from the sidelines, you can choose to blame somebody else and hope that nobody notices or you can stand in the breach and act. The Labor tradition is this, when the private sector is in retreat we as Government stand in the breach and make a difference. That's what it's about.
But beyond these things delegates, beyond the actions we have taken to deal with this extraordinary global economic crisis which governments around the world now wrestle with, we have also been taking measures to build Australia's long term future as well. One where fairness is still grafted deep into the Australian soul. One where we're also equipping ourselves with the drivers of long term productivity growth for our economy and dealing with the challenges which face us for the future in the long term as well. Because the mission of Labor is always to look beyond the horizon, to see that which is confronting us in the days ahead and to act in advance and to prepare the nation and our people to meet those challenges.
Friends, fairness is part of our mission. Fairness in the workplace, fairness by getting rid of AWAs, fairness by getting rid of WorkChoices, fairness by doing and acting on homelessness, fairness by delivering an apology to the stolen generations. Fairness by beginning a program on closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians which aims to reduce the appalling gap which separates us in life expectancy, the appalling gap which separates us in educational opportunity, the appalling gap which separates us in terms of the security and safety of our home environments.
Fairness for indigenous Australians, fairness for those Australians who have no place to call home, fairness for those Australians who had their redundancy arrangements, redundancy entitlements stripped away from them by Mr Howard's unfair industrial relations laws. Fairness for all Australians. Fairness for our aged pensioners in bringing about these single greatest reform of the single aged pension that we have had in the 100-year history of this pension since it was introduced by Andrew Fisher 100 years ago.
Acting to deal with the recession, nation-building for recovery, grafting fairness again in the legislation and laws of the Commonwealth in ways which make a difference in the working lives of Australians everywhere. But also friends, equipping ourselves for the future, building the education revolution, our long term drivers of growth. Investing in our young people, building our universities, ensuring that our TAFEs are the best equipped and the best serviced of any in the advanced economies around the world. Building new productivity training places.
Julia Gillard's initiative of 711,000 new productivity training places across this economy. An extraordinary investment to lift our human capital and prepare us not just for the recovery but for the skills we will need for the economy long term. Also preparing us with the education revolution, universal early-childhood education for four-year-olds across the country. The education revolution; building this extraordinary modernisation program in our schools. The education revolution computers in classrooms. The education revolution; state-of-the-art trades training centres for our secondary schools across the nation. The education revolution; the single largest investment in our universities that this nation has seen for decades, including making it possible for another 50,000 Australians, young Australians, in particular from lower socio-economic groups to attend university for the first time. A Labor Government at work, acting for fairness, acting for the future.
Friends the challenges are many. Building the education revolution for tomorrow, building our infrastructure for tomorrow, acting on climate change, acting on water to make sure that we're prepared for the huge challenges of tomorrow. But can I say in all this we are animated by one core enduring value, which has been ours from the outset, ours since the Shearers' Strike of 1891, ours since the very beginning of our Party and our movement since the first Labor Governments were elected more than 100 years ago. And that enduring Labor value is fairness; a fair go for all. To make it possible for all Australians to participate fully in our national life and to make it possible for us to build the nation to give every Australian a participation in the nation's full national life.
Nearly 100 years ago, a great Labor Premier of this State, TJ Ryan said in Barcaldine, in his campaign speech in 1915:
“During the past quarter of a century the movement has progressed in the face of all the misrepresentations and all the forces which opponents have arrayed against it. Time and time again members of the Labor Party have been described as visionaries who could accomplish nothing by way of practical Government. With the progress of time however the Labor Party has proved to the people of Australia that it is a party of action, that it can seize bold national ideas and accomplishes what it sets out to attain, resolutely and fearlessly.”
So said a great Labor Premier, TJ Ryan, nearly 100 years ago. Ryan's words echo down the decades to us today. They echo down the generations to us today because our mission is always, consistent with governments of the past of our political tradition and consistent with governments of the future, is to hold high still the vision of a light on the hill. And in realising that vision deal with the enormous challenges thrown at us by the events of today. And for us today there is this extraordinary global economic cataclysm. But to wrestle with those challenges but still to deliver an outcome for working Australians everywhere.
This State is so much part and heart of our national vision and you as delegates to this national conference are so much part of our national heart and soul. You have made it possible for this Government to be elected in the critical events of November 2007, I salute your achievements. And I salute your contribution.
Let us all resolve together afresh for this conference today to fight for Labor's vision for the future, to fight for our Government's vision for the future, to see our nation through this extraordinary global economic recession, to make sure that we are prepared for the great challenges which lie ahead for all Australians and all Queenslanders, and to do so rock solid in our core and common belief that we as Australians, that we as Queenslanders are all in this together. If we are all in this together and if we act on the basis of us all being in this together, together we shall prevail. I thank you.


PM: Today I announce a minor reshaping of the Executive of the Australian Government, underlining the Government's continued commitment to its core priorities which is nation building for recovery and secondly, strengthening Australia's national security.
Yesterday I announced the appointment of Senator John Faulkner as Minister for Defence and I welcome his appointment. Today I announce further changes to the Ministry.
Senator Ludwig will become Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State and continue in his role as Manager of Government Business in the Senate. Senator Ludwig is a former barrister who has served in the Senate for more than a decade, including as Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate from 2001 to 2007 and as Manager of Government Business since December of 2007.
Chris Bowen will enter Cabinet and be appointed as Minister for Financial Services, Superannuation and Corporate Law and Minister for Human Services. Minister Bowen has served with distinction as Assistant Treasurer since December 2007 and has overseen significant reform in improving fairness and integrity in the Australian tax system and important areas of consumer rights.
Craig Emerson, Minister for Small Business, will have added to his responsibilities becoming Minister for Competition Policy and Consumer Affairs. Minister Emerson's significant achievements in working with the small business constituency in reducing red tape will prove valuable experience in what will now be his expanded role, an expanded role which is important in terms of overall national economic reform.
Senator Nick Sherry will be appointed as Assistant Treasurer. Senator Sherry is a former Shadow Assistant Treasurer and was Parliamentary Secretary for Primary Industry, Energy and Resources during the Keating Government.
Brendan O'Connor will become Minister for Home Affairs, taking on the critical portfolio with responsibility for policing and law enforcement and the administration of Australian territories. Minister O'Connor's wealth of experience from his strong handling of employment participation during the global recession positions him well to take on this critical national security role and I welcome his promotion to this position.
Warren Snowdon will be appointed Minister for Indigenous Health, Rural and Regional Health and Regional Services Delivery. As a proud resident of Alice Springs, Minister Snowdon is a tireless advocate for Australians living in rural and remote areas.
Kate Ellis MP will be appointed Minister for Early Childhood Education, Childcare and Youth and will continue as Minister for Sport. Establishing a Ministry for Early Childhood Education and Childcare for the first time reflects the importance that the Australian Government attaches to these key policy challenges.
Greg Combet will enter the Ministry as Minister for Defence Personnel, Materiel and Science and the Minister Assisting the Minister for Climate Change. That continued role on the part of Minister Combet will continue until such time as the Government completes passage of its Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme through the Australian parliament and continues his present role. Minister Combet is well prepared for this important position having previously served as Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Procurement. He will also continue in his important role concerning climate change as I have just indicated.
Senator Mark Arbib will enter the Ministry as Minister for Employment and the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Government Service Delivery. This will build on the work of Senator Arbib, which he's carried out in his role as Parliamentary Secretary for Government Service Delivery, in assisting with the rollout of the Government's historic nation building infrastructure investment.
Maxine McKew will become Parliamentary Secretary for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, to further assist in this infrastructure rollout and with a particular focus on community infrastructure and local government.
Gary Gray has been appointed Parliamentary Secretary for Western and Northern Australia. Mr Gray's extensive knowledge of the West and the Northern Territory and particular challenges based in rural and regional areas is heightened by his expertise in the resource, land and infrastructure sectors.
Jason Clare MP will be appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Employment. This will build on his current role as Special Adviser to the Prime Minister on Local Employment. As a Member from Western Sydney Mr Clare has firsthand experience of the impact of the global recession in areas of high unemployment around our country.
Mark Butler MP will be appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Health. Mr Butler will bring to this new role his broad experience working with Government providing also in the provision of health services across a number of critical areas and therefore we welcome his participation in his new role as Parliamentary Secretary and particularly in his home state of South Australia.
Richard Marles MP will be appointed as Parliamentary Secretary for Industry and Innovation. Mr Marles has a comprehensive understanding of the challenges faced by industry through more than 10 years in the labour movement, as well as being well positioned to work across industry, developing strong foundations for our emergence from the global recession.
After nearly 28 years of service in the New South Wales and Commonwealth Parliaments, the Honourable Bob Debus MP has indicated to me that he will not recontest the seat of Macquarie in New South Wales at the next election.
In the context of the current reshuffle and the challenges of the global recession, Mr Debus has made the decision to retire from the Ministry in order to facilitate a strong team for the future to continue the Government's response during these challenging times.
Bob Debus has made an extraordinary contribution over this time, including in his dedicated service as Minister for Home Affairs. His discipline, his integrity are legendary and his application to the complex and challenging task of our national security has been simply outstanding. On a personal note, I would like to thank Bob very much for his work over such a long period of time and underscore the significance of his contribution to the Government of New South Wales and the Government of Australia.
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Health and Ageing, Senator Jan McLucas, has informed me of her decision to step down from her portfolio responsibilities. She does so in order to focus on her role as Senator for Queensland, given the particular challenges faced in regional, rural and provincial Queensland during the global recession. Senator McLucas has made a significant contribution through her role as Parliamentary Secretary and has provided valuable support to the Health Minister in a major area of policy reform and policy priority for the Government.
As I said before, this represents a reshuffle of responsibilities within the Government's executive. This reshuffle underlines the Government's continued commitment to its core priorities - nation-building for recovery in response to the global recession. Getting on with the task of strengthening Australia's national security. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: How much of a part did Labor's factions play in your decision-making?
PM: One of the things that happened after the last election is for the first time in 100 years I have changed the rules. These decisions are now made by me exclusively and not subject to any deliberation on the part of the caucus. These decisions are mine, they are final. And they are reflective of the talents of the individuals concerned.
JOURNALIST: Why now, Prime Minister? Why are you making these changes now?
PM: Well it follows logically that the changes which have occurred in the Cabinet as a result of a resignation and now in the Ministry as a result of a further resignation because of Bob Debus' decision not to stand at the next election, a number of consequential changes flow from that. That's why these various changes have been made together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did Jan McLucas (inaudible) step down or did you approach her (inaudible)?
PM: I'm advised that Senator McLucas has expressed a desire to focus on her senatorial responsibilities for Queensland and wants to do that in the future, hence why she tendered to me her decision to step down from the executive.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) privatisation?
PM: Well, I'm Prime Minister of Australia, I am not the Premier of Queensland. Can I just say tough decisions have to be taken everywhere. Anna Bligh has to take tough decisions as well.
As I said at the conference this morning, Queenslanders at the last election voted for her and she has shown great strength of leadership in the past, great strength of leadership today and she'll show great strength of leadership in the future as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on Chinalco. Are you aware of Chinese interest in any other Australian mining companies?
PM: Not that I am aware of but if, this would not surprise me because Chinalco in the past has expressed interest I think in various mining interests in Australia. We run, maintain an open investment environment in terms of foreign investment, something I reiterated yesterday in my comments on the Rio-Chinalco matter in a press conference in Canberra.
What we do with each of these expressions of interest by any foreign company is that we make our judgment based on the application of national interest criteria. So we'll do so again in relation to any further interest by Chinalco in any other matter.
And on a rolling basis you have companies from around the world expressing interest in various aspects of the Australian economy including in the minerals and resources sector.
JORUNALIST: Can we just go back to the-
PM: Sorry, I'll just take this one and then come to you.
JOURNALIST: There's been some criticism that the FIRB process, the length of that process caused the deal to fall over. Do you think that's fair criticism?
PM: As I indicated in my press conference yesterday, this was a commercial matter between Rio and Chinalco and separately between Rio and BHP. These were matters resolved between those companies.
The Government as far as its Foreign Investment Review Board processes are concerned, will also be undertaken professionally with a proper consideration of all the information that needed to be assessed and necessarily that takes time.
We would also always take time on such questions, particularly when they involve large questions of the national interest. Sorry, over here.
JOURNALIST: Just going back to the State Conference. Have you spoken to -
PM: Yes I was there this morning. Were you there this morning?
JOURNALIST: I was indeed.
PM: Oh good.
JOURNALIST: Union leaders tomorrow are likely to come out against the privatisation, have you given them any advice to back the Premier?
PM: I've not spoken to any of those delegates about any matter which is before State Conference tomorrow. I am sure they will sort these things through and I am sure will be the usual argy bargy, after all it is a State Conference and argy bargy tends to happen at those.
JOURNALIST: The UK High Court has ruled, I'm not sure if you are aware, that the atomic blasts in South Australia (inaudible) can seek compensation (inaudible).
PM: I haven't seen the outcome of the decision. I'd like to examine its full implications first. I've always believed it's important to deliver justice to those who have been affected by atomic testing in Australia but I'd like to review first the text of the decision.
JOURNALIST: Would you support it (inaudible)?
PM: Can I just say I'd like to review the text of the decision and I've said my position of general principle is to have justice delivered to those who have been adversely affected by atomic blasts in Australia. It's the right thing to do but let's look at the text of the decision. These things, especially when they are legal decisions, decisions of the court have to be examined with a high degree of forensic detail.


CARY: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Greg, Kevin will do fine.
CARY: Kevin, Leigh Matthews (inaudible)
MATTHEWS: (inaudible) Prime Minister.
PM: Hey Leigh, how are you mate?
MATTHEWS: I'm well thank-you.
CARY: We were just having that discussion you've come in at the end of, as a result of a discussion I had earlier about obesity. There is a group saying we need to legislate more with certain products being not too healthy for our children, having little presents in them that they can advertise. My take was more we have got to get parents saying no more often to their children. How do you see that?
PM: Look I think with all these things, it's a question of getting the balance right. First and foremost, you have got parental responsibility and providing proper role models for your kids in terms of healthy eating and also providing proper and healthy food on the table.
And that ultimately comes down to a question of good parenting. Secondly, of course, there is a wider responsibility in terms of responsible advertising for food and food types which are healthy for you or less than healthy for you.
It's getting this balance right. I don't think there is a magical formula to this. I think one of the good things which has happened over time has been the complete revolution of the way in which food is provided in school tuck shops, I think that's been a really good thing.
I don't know about you Greg, but when I went to school, the stuff that we were served up at the tuck shop would probably be, you know, a good recipe for coronary heart disease.
CARY: Sausage rolls  - 
PM: Well yeah, with a Chiko roll chaser and then followed by a pastie of some description. All of which I don't think would make it to the good food guide as far as healthy eating is concerned.
And our tuck shops today are different. And that is good and that is to our P&amp;Cs and P&amp;Fs should be congratulated for that. It is getting the balance right.
MATTHEWS: Kevin how are the various Governments around the country going with trying to get a greater exercise level, because that's the other side of the coin of eating in our young, to try and provide the stimulus for them to exercise more.
PM: Leigh I think it is a really mixed picture. As I travel around the country it is quite plain that in the different state and territory education systems of Australia, what we used to call PE is taken with greater or lesser seriousness.
But you go to the actual heart of the problem. What are the two ingredients to a healthy lifestyle? What you eat and how you exercise. And we've just been talking about setting the right example for kids in terms of how to eat. Schools have a big role to play there and I think they are doing a better job.
But on the exercise front and having all kids active, this is equally critical. I think as a nation we can do better on this. I know our Minister for Sport and Minister for Youth, Kate Ellis, is passionate about this. She's 30 years old herself and wants to see a bigger, bigger national program.
If we get kids, by the time they leave school with two things drilled into their minds, “I should exercise every day” and “I should eat properly”, the impact on their lives would be huge but also the impact on the health bill of the nation in 20, 30, 40 years time would be better under control as well.
CARY: Yeah it comes to what, $68 billion or thereabouts. Prime Minister you would be very aware of the controversy here and the debate about the sale of public assets. Can I ask you as Prime Minister how you see the proper balance between the ownership of public and private assets?
PM: I think Greg it is all a question of having to make tough choices, as far as Anna Bligh is concerned. I said this at the state conference of the Australian Labor Party on Saturday when I was speaking. These are tough choices. From the Commonwealth point of view, we believe that there are certain things which are very important to retain in public ownership. For example we have that in relation to Australia Post, we think that these are important national institutions.
There is always going to be a debate about what should be in and what should not be. The key thing is to make sure the service is properly delivered to the Australian people, to make sure that it is delivered at a reasonable price to the Australian people, and to make sure that you get all those all balances right.
But Anna Bligh has had to make some tough decisions and tough decisions are rarely popular in my experience.
CARY: How are you feeling at the moment about the unfolding of the swine flu outbreak? We've had some bizarre circumstances over the last 24 hours related to State of Origin teams and a worrying inconsistency between how Victorian Health, Queensland Health and NSW Health are dealing with these things.
PM: I think all countries around the world are wrestling with the best possible response to swine flu. The Federal Health Minister Nicola Roxon and the Chief Medical Officer of the Commonwealth have been working exceptionally well on this since the outbreak of this, quite some time ago now. And given our country and given the fact that we've got six states and two territory health systems, it's worked relatively well. Remember also the preparations that we took as a nation for this, prior to this thing breaking out, which is to make sure we had sufficient stockpiles of antivirals, both Relenza and Tamiflu. And as a proportion of the population I think we are probably the best prepared of any country in the world, with something between eight and ten million doses of these antivirals either in our possession or currently on order.
CARY: Does it worry you at all on that, that we're worrying more about it than a disease?
PM: Look we have made a point Greg all the way through this to respond calmly and rationally to the advice given to us by the health professionals. And each time we have increased the public warning, we have done so purely on the basis of their expert medical advice. Each of the practical steps that we have taken in terms of changing the Commonwealth laws for example to enable mandatory quarantining where necessary. Also the arrangements put in place in various states in terms of temporary school closures and also the distribution of antivirals, all have been done based on the systematic advice of the health professionals. We think that's the right way to do it. It's important not to under-react. It's important not to overreact as well. We're trying to be as methodical about this as possible.
CARY: Okay a couple of emails on a story today on news.com.au, part of the Henry Review. Up to 90 per cent of recent retirees are unlikely ever to meet their expected investment returns after the market crash of the past year, many likely to run out of savings and wind up dependent on the aged pension. The Henry Tax Review considering proposals that would reduce the heavy dependence of retirees on the share market and I saw figures that said most countries at 10 per cent or less, with no other countries having more than 50 per cent according to IMF research, Australia has 80 per cent of her assets in shares or mutual funds, does that concern you?
PM: Well one of the reasons we have the Henry Commission of Inquiry underway at present, that's Ken Henry the Secretary of the Treasury, is to look at the future of the tax system. And that also includes the taxation treatment of superannuation as well, which goes also to the overall construction of retirement income policy. We've got to get this right for the future.
Secondly, remember we've had this extraordinary event on global share markets, and this has been an event which has been triggered by the worst global financial crisis we've seen in three quarters of a century.
But one of the things that we've done in response to the impact on people's earnings is on self funded retirees. There are 950,000 self-funded retirees in Australia, all of whom have taken a big hit because of the global economic and global financial crisis.
One of the things we've changed is, we've brought about what's called minimum drawdown relief. That is, if for example self-funded retirees who choose to take their superannuation benefit as an account based pension rather than a lump sum are required to draw down a minimum amount each year. What we've done because of the crisis is halve the minimum amount they have to draw down next year from their savings and the reason for that is to assist pension account balances to recover from capital losses associated with the global recession.
But also a few other things as well. The economic security strategy payments - that involved one-off payments of $1,400 for single, $2,100 for couples and that went to holders of Commonwealth Seniors health cards, as well as a number of self-funded retirees would also be eligible for the tax bonuses which came out as part of the Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
CARY: Yeah I respect that but I'm just wondering in terms, and I think this is where they are getting at in the Henry Review, about a real hard look at our superannuation and the priority placed on the balance of the monies in the share market.
PM: Well we of course will be very attentive to what the Secretary of the Treasury has to say through his review. Remember we still have a balanced strategy in terms of the holdings which people can have through their superannuation accounts in terms of equity markets and other forms of investment. And the advice I have is that as of the financial year to end April 2009, superannuation funds had medium losses of about 13.7 per cent and remember the decline in our share markets is something like 33 per cent in the same period and this is because we have in Australia an arrangement whereby there have to be balanced portfolio holdings.
Now let's see what Mr Henry has to say about any changes to the system in the future but one of the reasons the balanced arrangements were put in place in the past when the previous Labor Government brought in superannuation in the first place was to try and provide maximum protection, against complete risk.
MATTHEWS: Kevin, do you think that superannuation being such a long term mechanism has to be sort of above the various governments altering it?
PM: Well, I think it's, Leigh you're, it's very important that people have confidence in the future of the superannuation system. And therefore it's important to have continuity with it. There'll always be a need for some fine tuning, but Greg's obviously raised a pretty fundamental question just before in terms of the internal balance of the portfolios.
But remember, one of the reasons why an earlier Labor government brought in superannuation was to make it possible, most particularly through the taxation treatment of superannuation that people could provide properly for their long term retirement. The system remember hasn't been in all that long and it will take quite some time for it to become fully effective across the entire workforce.
But generally speaking, we need maximum predictability for the scheme but I think there will always be need for some level of fine tuning from time to time, that's why we're very attentive to what Ken Henry has to say. Of course, to put all these questions into context, Greg and Leigh, what we're wrestling with here is seriously the worst economic crisis in three quarters of a century.
Every economy around the world is being battered around the heads at the moment. The fact that in last year's economic growth, the last week's economic growth numbers, Australia was one of practically no other economies, of the advanced economies that was still growing I think indicates that we've had some success with the government's economic stimulus strategy. We're not out of the woods yet, but we'll still be pursuing our nation building for recovery plan to try and make a difference given that this global recession has belted so many people around the heads right around the world including their superannuation deposits as well.
CARY: Prime Minister, just before we go, and I know you need to go - we learned earlier about photos in Women's Day concerning your wife Therese who to her credit is on a fitness program and looking terrific and you must be very proud as well. And she must be very satisfied -
PM: How are you looking, Greg?
CARY: Terrific, and you?
PM: Leigh, Leigh, how's he looking?
CARY: (inaudible) Let's get off that topic -
PM: Greg, how's Leigh looking?
CARY: A million dollars. This is my point, you see, part of the unintended consequences of being in public life is the spotlight. You are entitled to accept it as part of the responsibility to a point. But when your wife goes to a gym, same as I go to a gym, Leigh goes to a gym, you go to a gym, you're entitled to be in there in privacy. How do you feel as both Prime Minister in a public sense and husband in a private sense that your wife's privacy is being destroyed by Woman's Day?
PM: I think I will probably just say two things. First is, I think Therese is looking terrific. I think she's always looked terrific and she's training to climb Mount Kilimanjaro.
CARY: Wow, good on her.
PM: So, good on her, she's been embarked upon that all year.
CARY: And you're not?
PM: That's far too rough for the life of me.
CARY: You did Kokoda.
PM: The tough people in our family -
CARY: (inaudible)
PM: That's right, well I walked Kokoda after Therese dared me. She'd walked it first and she said I wouldn't have it in me and she's probably right. When I came back I was a complete wreck.
CARY: But surely this is an invasion. We should say it loud and clear, it shouldn't be on.
PM: First thing I'd say is that I think she is looking terrific and she's embarked on this training program to train for Mount Kilimanjaro which she is going to be climbing a bit later in the year. Secondly if magazines choose to photograph people training at the gym through their cameras without their consent, well I presume that's a matter for those magazines. I think people will form their own judgment.
CARY: Yeah, yeah they will. They'll think it's terrible. I advocate that people not buy the magazine. Would you go that far?
PM: I think I'll just leave it there. I think people will form their own judgments. Greg, when people go to the gym I'm sure, Greg, Leigh when you go to the gym you're looking at your most glamorous, I always am.
CARY, LEIGH: Absolutely.
PM: Well, Leigh you'd be a lycra man I imagine.
LEIGH: That's the one.
(inaudible)
CARY: Trouble, trouble is there'll be more people going to buy Woman's Day because the media collectively, the written media hasn't got much respect to protect. All it is another bit of publicity. But you see, this Prime Minister (inaudible) made about the Chaser though. I think sometimes you've got to keep the focus on bad behaviour so as a community we can address the bad behaviour.
PM: Yeah, well it's a, I put up my hand to go into public life. I'm the bloke who gets elected and therefore whatever scrutiny I get, that's all fair cop, fair game. That's as it should be. I think others would have different views in terms of other members of your family, but she's one tough lady. I wouldn't like to be competing against her when she climbs Mt Kilimanjaro. I think she'd beat the three of us hands down.
CARY: Alright, you take care enjoy the day, talk soon.
PM: Thanks Greg.
CARY: Our Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd.


STANLEY: Mr Rudd good afternoon.
PM: G'day John.
STANLEY: Moving around the country at a pace again-
PM: (inaudible) to the annual conference of the Small Business Council of Australia. Some small business people getting together in Melbourne for their annual conference, talking to them about the economy and us working together with them to try and see business through.
STANLEY: On your message regarding the economy, we had today these figures on business confidence showing it was up in May, some of the commentators saying that that is a welcome increase in business confidence. You said last week we're not out of the woods yet in terms of the recession. Does this give you any thought that we might be coming out of it a bit more quickly?
PM: It's too hard to tell what lies down the track but - and I go back to what I said last week - we're not out of the woods yet but there's two or three positive things which have emerged. One last week as you know we had positive economic growth for the March quarter and we are the fastest growing economy therefore of all the advanced economies in the world, all thirty of them. And so therefore that puts us in a position where we've got the fastest growth, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies. That's good.
The business survey, the business confidence survey you just referred to, it's been going down in recent times, obviously reflective of the global economic recession but with this rise I'm told is the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989, that's the figures for May and it is now at its highest level since February 2008. So that's okay.
Then we've got some jobs data from the ANZ, job ads, job vacancies in Australia have been going down for twelve consecutive months but on this one that is again for the month just passed, it's stabilised. These three pieces of data I think point to the fact that we're seeing some positive response to the economic stimulus strategy that the Government put in place. Also the response to what small business and businesses generally are doing in the face of the worst economic conditions in three quarters of a century.
STANLEY: The prediction of eight and a half percent for unemployment for the next financial year, does this give you hope that it may be milder than that?
PM: It's still going to be tough, very tough. We've got unemployment data out later this week, I'll be very surprised if unemployment doesn't go up because of what we've seen right around the world. The whole point of economic policy by government at a time of global economic recession is that when the private sector is in retreat, the Government to step into the breach, to step into the gap and to make a difference.
And that's why we've implemented the stimulus strategy phase one through cash payments to make a difference in retail sales and the one and a half million Australians who work there. Phase two, the medium term infrastructure build, the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history, that's starting about now and phase three is long term infrastructure build which is roads, rail, port, high speed broadband, solar energy etc and the overall thrust of this is nation building for recovery. Supporting jobs and small business today, while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
STANLEY: You said earlier today that you chose your own Ministry, of course you unlike most Labor Leaders are able to choose your own Ministry. You said you-
PM: That's because I changed the rule.
STANLEY: You changed the rules that's right.
PM: [inaudible] had been around for 100 years that caucus chose the front bench. I thought we had to modernise and after the last election and when I was elected as Prime Minister I put it to the parliamentary party to change that so now it's my call as Leader.
STANLEY: And you said earlier today, I heard you on Sky News saying that in choosing your new Ministers you weren't even aware which factions they were from, can you seriously say that you chose Mark Arbib on merit and then thought ‘oh actually he's from the right'?
PM: No, no what I was saying earlier today, in response to that question, if you looked across my entire parliamentary party and said where do people come from in terms of those sorts of groupings, I probably couldn't tell you confidently in the case of each person.
In the case of Mark and this is a seriously well talented individual, very bright, very capable - if you've seen his performance so far as parliamentary secretary responsible for Government service delivery and he is therefore responsible directly for making sure that the $28 billion investment in medium term infrastructure I referred to before, schools, public housing as well as energy insulation is happening - he's been doing a fantastic job on that, particularly with the Coordinator General within the Australian Government Public Service - and therefore I believe that based on that and his general skills he was certainly worthy of going to this important portfolio of employment.
STANLEY: If I could pick someone else for instance Bill Shorten was a parliamentary secretary yet he remains a parliamentary secretary and you've had Mark Arbib promoted above him. (inaudible)
PM: Well Bill's doing a fantastic job, that's why I recently gave him expanded responsibilities for the Victorian bushfire recovery as well but he's doing a great job also in the area of disability services. As I said in an interview earlier today as well, in the future I am confident that there will be other opportunities for promotion of other talented individuals.
But we've got Chris Bowen who has now gone into the Cabinet from Sydney, we've got Greg Combet also from NSW going into the Ministry for the first time as Minister for Defence [inaudible] and Mark Arbib we've just spoken about, Minister for Employment and also on top of that continuing strong cabinet ministers in John Faulkner who is also from NSW and-
STANLEY: Can I just pick up-
PM: And also from NSW of course Tony Burke [inaudible]
STANLEY: [inaudible] All those people you've mentioned, those of us who follow politics closely know they're outstanding. You can add in Jason Clare the young MP from Blaxland.
PM: I was getting to him.
STANLEY: Is part of the problem that we have here in NSW at the State Government level that you've got all the good ones in your caucus and we've been left with the dregs in Macquarie Street?
PM: Look as far as the NSW Government is concerned I am sure there are many, many capable people in that Government.
STANLEY: But have you got the better ones from NSW?
PM: What I am saying is that I have got a great team federally who come to us from NSW and they, if I was packing down a scrum in, you know, the front row, you've got you know John Faulkner, you've got Tony Burke, you've got Chris Bowen. Fantastic Ministers. Cabinet Ministers. Then you've got in the outer Ministry now you've got Mark Arbib and Greg Combet and you've got people like Jason Clare now who've been appointed as parliamentary secretary responsible for employment, these are-
STANLEY: (inaudible) with John Della Bosca and Frank Sartor.
PM: Well these are individuals with great talent and ability but you know we at the federal level are also blessed with you know a strong level of talent, you know also in NSW you've got key ministers like Anthony Albanese who is the Minister for Infrastructure, in cabinet. Peter Garrett the Minister for the Environment in Cabinet, as well as a range of other Ministers.
STANLEY: All federal MPs again.
PM: I suppose my point to your listening audience is that this is a strong team from NSW [inaudible] and they are making a good contribution to this Government.
STANLEY: You haven't made much of a secret that you don't think the team at the state level is all that strong.
PM: Well look the NSW Government wrestling with all sorts of challenges and I understand some of those challenges and we've tried to work with them on some of them but we all are required to work with the resources at our disposal and many of the individuals within the NSW Government I have very high regard for, I have known and worked with over many years. But my job as Prime Minister is to put together the best Cabinet and Ministry and Executive possible nationally because we've got this huge challenge, worst global recession in three quarters of a century and therefore it's all hands to the tiller and that means emphasising infrastructure, emphasising jobs, emphasising recovery and getting the best talent to that task. As well as I've you know in this list I've just referred to, Maxine McKew for example, excellent job and she's now been promoted to working as parliamentary secretary in infrastructure and other parliamentary secretaries including Ursula Stephens.
STANLEY: A couple of quick ones if I can, I know you're pressed for time. First of all Julia Gillard, she's been getting very good press from the commentariat in Canberra, they're suggesting that now she would have universal support across the party if heaven forbid something happened to you, the proverbial bus. Do you acknowledge that now she is your, she is your successor in the same way that John Howard used to say that if he went under a bus it would be Peter Costello. Do you acknowledge that she would become our first female Prime Minister.
PM: Julia Gillard is an exceptionally talented individual. We work really closely, we are good friends. I think she is making an exceptional Deputy Prime Minister, she is, she has done an extraordinary job in getting parliamentary passage of the Government's new industrial relations legislation through the Fair Work Act, the Commonwealth Parliament. She's doing a great job also in the employment area given the enormous impact of the global recession. But can I say at any stage in the future Julia would be very, very hard to beat. She's fantastic, first class and my privilege of working with her as my Deputy since becoming Leader of the Labor Party in Opposition and through to us winning the election. I could not have hoped for a better partner to work with what has been a very, very difficult period for governments [inaudible].
STANLEY: But in the Party do you acknowledge that she would have support across the Party?
PM: I think what I'd say to that is that my answer to your earlier question which is I think we're getting beyond that at the national level and that's really good. The culture of our show - just to go back to the earlier conversation we had and merging with your current question  -  is increasingly one where we are solely driven by the merits of individuals and the contribution they can make to the show, and against those measures, Julia is outstanding and I think the country is well served by having her-
STANLEY: Will she be our first female Prime Minister?
PM: -as Deputy Prime Minister of the country. As I said, in the future she'd be very, very, very hard to beat.
STANLEY: And just finally Gordon Ramsey, have you caught up with the spat, I'm sure you have, do you have some comment on him?
PM: You know I've read the stuff this morning about what was said about  -  you're talking about Tracey Grimshaw?
STANLEY: Yes that's right.
PM: I think all I could describe his remarks as reflecting is a new form of low life. There you go.
STANLEY: I just can't imagine you and Therese sitting at home watching Gordon Ramsey. Do you?
PM: You've got it and I just thought the remarks about Tracey Grimshaw who, you know look, Tracey Grimshaw I have met a few times in life you know we're not personal friends or anything like that but I drew breath when I saw the sort of stuff that was said about her. I just think that's off and offensive and good on Tracey Grimshaw for coming out and giving him a left upper cut.
STANLEY: I'll leave it there, I'm running late but an emailer here asked me  -  you have always supported the Broncos, he claims that a few years ago  -  this is a major political scandal brewing here  -  he claims he saw you at a Parramatta game with a Parramatta tag on back in 2005.
PM: I'm sure the Eels at some stage have probably given me badges as most teams have around the country but I've been a Broncos man from going back way back when.
STANLEY: Good on you well that will sort that out for him. He was most agitated. Prime Minister thank you.
PM: So whether I was at that game or not I have no idea but I am sure the Eels at some stage have given me some paraphernalia as have many teams around the country.
STANLEY: I am sure they have. Thank you for your time.
PM: Broncos first and last mate.
STANLEY: And can those of us who follow the Dragons thank you very much for giving us your coach.
PM: Well the Broncos didn't do so well the other night. I'm in a state of moral mourning over that but we all have our ups and downs in life don't we?
STANLEY: We'll take Wayne Bennett any time. Thank you very much.
PM: He's a good man.
STANLEY: Indeed he is thank you.


SPEERS: Prime Minister, thanks for your time. Your new Ministers were sworn in this morning. We this be the line up you take to the election?
PM: Well, they are a first class team and I certainly expect that they will be with us through until we face the people.
SPEERS: When will that be?
PM: When the election is due. They're a good team. John Faulkner in Defence and supported of course by Greg Combet, also Mark Arbib is the Minister for Employment and of course a strong team of new Parliamentary Secretaries coming through as well. So, a good opportunity for renewal, but drilling into our key priorities which is nation building for recovery, infrastructure and jobs and that's what I think the Australian people expect of us.
SPEERS: You did make more changes than a lot of us thought you would. Is this a better team than you had before?
PM: It's always been the business of renewal when necessary. But as I said repeatedly, I'm not in the business of change for it's own sake. But I'm pleased with the changes that we've made. Faulks will be first as Defence Minister. But the range of other changes I think also speak well of the Government's future direction. Young Kate Ellis for example is now got an expanded responsibility for early childhood education and childcare together with her continued responsibilities for youth and sport. Early childhood education is a cornerstone of the education revolution and she has a lot of responsibility on her plate as well.
SPEERS: The one criticism has been she's the only one to take additional ministerial responsibilities - that there wasn't much for women in this reshuffle?
PM: Well, fair shake of a sauce bottle mate. If you were to compare what this Government has done in terms of the promotion of women of talent and ability compared with our predecessors, it is chalk and cheese. We have Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard, we have twice as many Minister's who are women in this Government compared with its predecessor under Mr Howard.
Twice as many Cabinet Ministers compared to the previous government. We have I think well more than a third of our members of parliament are women, probably less than a quarter under Mr Howard's government. We have appointed the first women as Governor-General of the Commonwealth Australia. Fair shake of the sauce bottle mate.
SPEERS: What about the factions? What role did they play in the changes you've made?
PM: Zip, zero and none. I changed the rules of the Australian Labor Party, its parliamentary party after I was elected as Prime Minister. That was the first time a rule change had been made for a 100 years. And so therefore as Leader of the Party and as Prime Minister I chose my frontbench then and I chose it again now.
SPEERS: So is it pure coincidence that you still have a pretty even mix between the factions? You must bear it in mind when you put these things together.
PM: Not really, if you were to ask me where everyone lined up on those sort of questions I'd actually have to scratch my head a few times. I actually don't think about it in those terms at all.
SPEERS: Do you think about the people who helped you get the leadership like Mark Arbib, Chris Bowen?
PM: I notice that there's been a little bit of commentary along those lines. Can I say, my attitude to all these questions of appointments is merit. And when I look at parliamentary secretaries coming through, new ministers, when I look at the people who have gone into Cabinet, that is Chris Bowen, these people have earned their stripes based on what they've done.
SPEERS: So what about Bill Shorten and Maxine McKew? Not ready for the Ministry yet?
PM: There are always going to be opportunities, I'm confident in the future for appropriate additional promotions as well. We are fortunate in the Government to have a whole range of people from the Cabinet, the Ministry, the Parliamentary Secretaries and those who have yet to enter the executive who are first class people. This is a very strong team if you were to compare it person for person to those opposite, we are in a very strong position, not just for now but for renewal in the future as well and I'm pleased that we have such depth and breadth of talent.
SPEERS: A few other issues around today Prime Minister. The unions are accusing you of sending in the ‘storm troopers' before the Labor conference next month over their push for more industrial reform. Are you being too heavy handed?
PM: I've seen those reports today. What I said prior to the last election is what I've sought to do since the election as has Julia Gillard the Employment, Industrial Relations Minister. And that is to have a fair and balanced industrial relations system.
We said we'd get rid of Workchoices. We've done that. We said we'd get rid of AWAs. We've done that. We said we'd bring in a Fair Work Bill. We've done that. But, there will always be a limit to how far we can responsibly go. And we have made that very plain to our friends in the trade union movement.
And also I would say this to our friends in the trade union movement, the first Government in this country's history to bring in paid parental leave, a major reform to the age pension, the biggest single addition to the age pension in its hundred year history as well as a whole range of additional improvements in terms of the increase in the child care tax rebate - all goes to the bottom interests of working families.
SPEERS: But they're particularly concerned about the building industry watchdog that you've kept and will replace with a new body from next year. Why should building workers face different rules to those in coal mining or manufacturing? Why is there no equality under the law for all workers?
PM: Well, the first thing I'd say is that I meant what I said prior to the last election. And I said about the future of the ABCC that it would continue and that there would be a replacement body by 2010. Furthermore, on the substance of it, you'd have to be Blind Freddy not to conclude that there have been historical problems most particularly in the Victorian and West Australian divisions of the construction division of the CFMEU.
SPEERS: And they still exist?
PM: Well, I'm simply very attentive to what Mr Wilcox said in his report. He is a person of sober judgment and therefore we have to be attentive to the advice that he's provided us. So therefore, I've been fair dinkum with the Australian people about what we said prior to the last election. We've commissioned Mr Wilcox, who has reached his own conclusions and we have a responsibility to make judgments for the overall strength of the economy.
SPEERS: Couple of surveys out today, some confusing news though business confidence is up, but the job ads are again down, thirteenth month in a row they've gone down. What's your take on where things are currently headed?
PM: Well, again fair shake of the sauce bottle mate. First of all, business confidence, I mean this is a strong increase in business confidence in a survey that's out today. Now, as I'm advised you've now got business confidence at where they were about February of 2008. Now that I think is a strong indication that we have made some progress in our strategy of nation building for recovery and that the Government's overall investment in the economy is having an effect, together with what businesses themselves of course are doing as well.
Secondly you point to the jobs data, the jobs ads as I understand it have been falling month on month for virtually a year. What we've had with this data is for the first time, stabilisation at around about zero, -0.2.
SPEERS: Are you encouraged by that?
PM: Well, one swallow doth not a summer make, or whatever The Bard said and - we're not out of the woods yet and I expect unemployment still to rise but -
SPEERS: (inaudible) this week when we see the data-
PM: Well I'd expect, just given what is still happening in the global economy. But when you've got this fall in job ads, month on month on month for twelve months and we've now got at least, a stabilisation this month, put that together, stabilisation of the job ads, put that together with an increase in business confidence, bringing it back to February 2008 levels.
Bring it back to the fact we are the only advanced economy of the 30 advanced economies in the world, or should I say we are the fastest growing of those 30 advanced economies and we now have the fastest growth, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies. This indicates that we are doing better than many other places in the world but we're not out of the woods yet.
SPEERS: We're not in a technical recession but Prime Minister do you feel like we are in one yourself?
PM: Well we respond to the data. What I did say the other day when the national accounts figures came out and showed that we have positive growth of 0.4 against all the other major advanced economies in recession and we are the fastest growing of the 30 advanced economies in the world - not a bad set of numbers given how difficult things are out there. But we're not out of the woods and I said I can't rule out the possibility in the future that we may still have a period of negative growth.
But can I say the Government's stimulus strategy, phase one cash payments starting from the fourth quarter last year to provide support to the economy when it was falling through the floor around the world. Stage two, medium term infrastructure investment with schools for social housing and the rest coming on stream now. Phase three announced in the budget, longer term infrastructure - ports, rail, road, high speed broadband. It's all part of the strategy for Government to step in to fill the gap in an economy where the private sector has been in retreat because of the global recession.
SPEERS: So Greens Leader Bob Brown is in a bit of trouble, he's facing possible bankruptcy and being expelled from the Senate if he doesn't come up with $240,000 in legal costs by the end of the month. I am sure you're not going to offer to pick up the Bill but would this be a disappointing way to see Bob Brown go?
PM: I've actually got a lot of time for Bob just as a person, just as a bloke I've got to know over the years and I actually know these facts since I read them in the press today so I am quite concerned about it for him personally. As to what can be done about it, that's a separate matter.
SPEERS: What do you think of State Forestry in Tasmania seeking to make a Senator bankrupt over something like this?
PM: Let me apprise myself fully of the facts, as I said I wasn't aware of this until I read it in today's press. Whatever our political differences are, Bob Brown and myself, I've had a lot of time for him personally and professionally over a long period of time and I was quite distressed to see the news today.
SPEERS: Another Brown, Gordon Brown is in a bit of trouble too, for different reasons. He's survived as Prime Minister overnight but there is pressure on him from many within his ranks. Have you spoken to him recently?
PM: Not recently. I last spoke to him, we corresponded about G20 matters and certainly our officials and advisers are talking with each other all the time as we get ready for the Pittsburgh Summit in September in the United States, the next meeting of the G20. But look Gordon is going through a difficult time but can I say this about him, his global leadership on the G20 and his global leadership on climate change and on the whole question of the Millennium Development Goals has been absolutely first class. He'll be judged of course within domestic politics in Britain like we're always judged domestically but when I engaged with this individual he is truly a first class global leader.
SPEERS: Just a final one Prime Minister. A women's magazine took photos of your wife at the gym without her permission, is that overstepping the mark?
PM: Well I'm very proud of Therese. She's probably fitter than you and I are going to be and she's in training to climb Mt Kilimanjaro. She is going to climb Mt Kilimanjaro with my son Nicholas before too much longer. So she's been flogging away and she's hard at it. But look, you know I think most women in Australia would feel that they should have some privacy when they go to the gym.
Look, if Women's Day want to take photos through the window, matter for them I suppose. Others will form their judgments of that but I think most Australian women at the gym would expect that they have a bit of privacy when they're doing their exercise routine.
SPEERS: Prime Minister thank you.
PM: Thank you very much.


It is a great pleasure to be able to speak to you today, and I thank COSBOA for the opportunity to address this forum again. 
I have said before that small businesses are the engine of the Australian economy.
That is not just a political statement.
It is a truth based on the quantifiable contribution of small business to our country.
Consider just a few facts:
     * There are approximately 1.93 million active small businesses in Australia.
     * Small businesses make up 96 per cent of all businesses.
     * Small businesses contribute around 35 per cent of Australia's total GDP.
     * Small businesses employ 3.8 million people, accounting for around 46 per cent of total private sector employment.
     * More than 17,000 small businesses are exporters which last year shipped goods to the value of $1.2 billion in total.
These facts underline the importance of small business to the Australian economy.
And these facts are the reason that the Government has been consistently focussed on the challenges facing small business.
And why we have renewed that focus in the context of the global recession  -  to make small business a key element of the Government's Nation-Building for Recovery Strategy.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
The global economy is forecast to contract by 1.3 per cent in 2009  -  this will be the first contraction since IMF records began.
Growth rates around the world have collapsed.
In the first quarter of this year, the average contraction across the OECD was 2.1 per cent.
Only 3 of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter.
Australia is now has the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
Australia is not out of the woods just because we avoided a technical recession.
There will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow and unemployment continuing to rise.
But Australia has fared better than most  -  because we acted with early and decisive action.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated an economic strategy to support the economy.
That strategy comprised a short, medium and long-term response.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed.
Credit is the lifeblood of the economy.
Small business people know that better than most.
Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
In September Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
As the chart indicates - in October there were no raisings at all.
Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - offshore markets had opened to Australian banks which raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month.
In January, banks raised more than $20 billion offshore.
With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much-needed funds to support lending in Australia.
In addition to securing the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
As the global economy deteriorated rapidly, the government recognised that we needed to act quickly.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
This is very important for small business, given that small retail businesses account for almost 94 per cent of all retail businesses across the nation.
As an additional immediate stimulus measure, the Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
This has been a significant boost to construction activity.
Compared to the same time last year, before the onset of the global recession, building approvals have fallen by only 16 per cent in Australia  -  and the recent trends has been upward.
That compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
The national accounts figures last week proved that the short term measures we put in place worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession.
Many businesses would not be keeping their heads above water through this global economic storm.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term through shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including:
     * The largest school modernisation in Australia's history, generating local jobs for businesses on thousands of sites around the nation;
     * The construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes, and
     * Providing free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
     * We are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
     * We'll be investing in major clean energy projects, including the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
     * We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term.
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
I welcome the news today that business confidence is on the rise.
The increase in business confidence for May was the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989.
Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
There is a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses can see some light at the end of the tunnel.
We are by no means out of the woods. 
But if the Government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in severe recession and the significant fall we've seen in business investment would be even sharper.
In aggregate, Treasury has estimated that without our nation building plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the budget.
And Australia's budget deficit and net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US, and 136 per cent in Japan.
By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
In addition to the Government's nation-building strategy for the Australian economy, we have recognised, and responded to, the specific challenges facing small businesses.
Since the financial crisis began, the government has stepped in with a range of specific measures targeted directly to small business.
First, we have taken decisive action to strengthen incentives for small businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 50 per cent Small Business Tax Break for capital investment.
This means that when a small business buys an eligible asset costing more than $1,000 before the end of this year, small businesses will have access to a 50 per cent tax deduction.
This is up from 30 per cent deduction introduced earlier this year and extends the period of eligibility by six months.
This is a major new incentive for small businesses, and will encourage small businesses to invest for the future and for economic recovery.
And we appreciate COSBOA's support for this measure.
This will not only have positive financial implications for small business but it will have flow on effect for other businesses.
Second, the Government has also announced tax measures that will deliver $720 million in cash-flow relief for approximately one million small businesses, by reducing the Pay-As-You-Go tax instalments in 2009-10.
Third, the Government also recognises that in the tough conditions that many businesses are confronting, small business owners need access to help and advice.
This is why we have moved to establish the Small Business Support Line to assist small businesses during the global recession.
The Support Line will provide initial advice to small business owners and also put them in touch with specialist advisers on matters such as obtaining finance, cash flow management, retail leasing, personal stress and hardship counselling, and promotion and marketing advice.
The Support Line will complement the Business Enterprise Centre network, which is providing targeted advice and support to small businesses.
Fourth, the Government wants to ensure that small business benefits from the national broadband network. That is why the budget also announced the Government's Small Business Online program to help small businesses seize the business opportunities created by the internet.
Operating online is essential for the economy of the 21st century and helps small business to seize the global opportunities.
Fifth, we are lifting incentives for small businesses to engage in research and development.
The incentive to undertake R&amp;D will be doubled for most small businesses from 2010-11, through the new Research and Development Tax Credit.
This will provide a refundable credit of 45 per cent that is not dependent upon a business making a profit in one particular year. This measure has been explicitly designed with the goal of focusing innovation incentives on smaller businesses.
Sixth, we are investing $196 million in a new Commonwealth Commercialisation Institute to help small and medium companies turn great ideas into commercial reality.
Seventh, I know that many small businesses are concerned about interest rates  -  and the rate at which official cuts are passed through to small business.
As the chart indicates, standard small business interest rates are currently around 7 per cent, having fallen from a peak of 10.10 per cent in August 2008.
But while interest rates for small businesses have fallen substantially, we understand that they have not come down as rapidly as other interest rates.
Over the same period the standard variable mortgage rate has fallen faster - by around 3 ¾ percentage points from 9.6 per cent to 5.75 per cent, and the cash rate has been reduced by 4.25 per cent, from 7.25 per cent to 3 per cent.
The Government has made the case both publicly and privately that it expects the Banks to pass on reductions in official interest rates to all borrowers as quickly as possible.
To ensure credit continues to flow to small businesses, the Government has put in place the wholesale bank guarantee.
The Government has also made available a small business banking complaints clearing house for businesses that believe they have been unreasonably denied credit.
And we will use this information to closely monitor the availability of credit to the small business sector.
At the same time as supporting small business through our nation building and other stimulus measures, the Government has been working on the implementation of the commitments we made to small business before the election.
Over the past two and a half years since I have become leader of the Federal Labor Party and then Prime Minister, I have made a number of commitments to small business.
We take those commitments seriously, and today I want to report back to you on the progress we have made.
First, at this very forum two years ago I committed to establishing a Small Business Advisory Council to give small business a greater say in government policy making.
Today I can announce the detailed implementation framework for the Small Business Advisory Committee.
The Committee will take the form of a panel that will be independent of the government and will be comprised of members who have extensive experience with small business.
This panel will be a strong voice for small business in government.
The panel will be consulted in the early stages of a policy's development, and then as the proposal is about to be submitted for final deliberation.
Next month, the Government will call for Expressions of Interest from suitably qualified people to be appointed to the SBAC Small Business Advisory Committee with the appointment of the Committee panel members to be made this year.
The second commitment I made to you in 2007 was to improve on-time payments of Government contracts.
Small businesses shouldn't have to wait for payments in their dealing with governments.
I can report that since 1 December 2008, all new federal government contracts up to $1 million with small business have been subject to the “on-time payment guarantee”.
That means accounts will be paid within 30 days, otherwise small businesses will have the right to charge penalty interest.
The third I made before the last election was to support 36 Business Enterprise Centres around Australia as one-stop advisory services.
The Government has kept that election commitment and the $42 million program is being delivered.
Building on this commitment, last October I also announced that the Government would provide an additional $4 million for small business advice.
That program, too, is now well underway, with 54 local small business organisations in suburban, regional and rural Australia being funded to provide advice such as preparing business plans and applying for finance.
Fourth, I committed to help small business better access the Government procurement market.
Since coming to power, the Government has issued revised Commonwealth Procurement Guidelines.
These guidelines will improve transparency, better inform small businesses about government contracts and clearly state a balanced approach to risk management in contracts.
The Minister for Finance and Deregulation, Lindsay Tanner wrote to all Portfolio Ministers asking them to ensure that agencies implemented the revised procurement framework so that small and medium enterprises would continue to have fair access to the government procurement market.
Fifth, we committed to strengthen the Trade Practices Act to ensure that small businesses were protected against abuses of market power by larger players.
I can report that the Trade Practices (Cartel Conduct and other measures) Bill 2008 was introduced into Parliament on 3 December 2008.
This bill includes tough measures to crack down on the abuse of market power by large businesses.
The bill introduces criminal sanctions for serious cartels involving bid rigging, market sharing, and price fixing.
Sixth, we committed to cutting red tape for small business.
As a part of our election platform we promised to introduce an optional and cost free superannuation clearing house for small business so that they could meet their superannuation obligations under the choice of fund arrangements with a minimum of fuss.
In our first Budget we allocated $16 million over three years commencing in 2009-10 to deliver on this commitment.
The details are currently being finalised and the clearing house will be operational by the end of the 2009-10 year.
The clearing house will allow small employers to make just one contribution payment to the central clearing house for all of their employees.
The clearing house will manage all of the choice of fund paperwork with the small business employees further reducing costs so that small businesses can get on with what they do best - supporting growth and jobs.
The Government is acting decisively and comprehensively to support economic growth and support the small businesses that help drive our economic growth.
We are also providing targeted direct incentives to foster small business investment.
And we are improving specific assistance to help small businesses to make it through the global crisis.
This represents a new partnership between government and the small business sector.
And it demonstrates that Labor is committed to deliver support and opportunities for small businesses.
The Government cannot turn around ill fortunes for every business, just as we cannot stop the rise in unemployment.
But as a Government, we can make a difference, and we can help cushion the impact of this global economic crisis on businesses and on jobs.
So I encourage small businesses to make the most of the measures in place, and for advisors to pass that message on.
Communities all around Australia depend on the prosperity and success of their small businesses.
And the Australian Government is determined to support you through very challenging economic times.
Because all of us are in this together - whether a business owner, an employee, a customer or supplier, or someone in government or other organisations.
And it's by working through each of the challenges of this global crisis together, that we can make it through and build a stronger Australia for the future. 


MITCHELL: Prime Minister, good morning
PM: Good morning Neil, sorry I'm late on the program
MITCHELL: No, no, I understand in Melbourne's weather. The Indian students, more protests overnight, vigilante students in Melbourne trying to protect other Indian students. This needs to calm down. Its' got an ugly feel to it hasn't it?
PM: I think what we need to see is a bit of balance in this debate. It's unacceptable for anyone to commit an act of violence against any student of any ethnicity anywhere in Australia. Chinese, Indian, Callithumpian, Queenslanders, anybody.
Any act of violence. And the truth is, in our cities right across the country, not just Melbourne there are acts of violence every day, that's just a regrettable part of urban life. That's one thing. But it's equally unacceptable for so called ‘reprisal attacks' and for so called ‘vigilante' action as well. It's equally unacceptable for there to be retribution attacks and for there to be vigilante action.
I think everyone needs just to draw some breath on this and I think we need to see a greater atmosphere of general calm. Australia, I'm advised is one of the safest countries in the world for international students, one of the safest countries in the world for international students, let's get our statistics right here. And furthermore, Australians in India at any time, run a risk also of some violence. When I was looking for data on this only a couple of weeks ago, in the last decade I was advised we had I think up to 20 Australians who had either been murdered or had various forms of assault committed against them.
Now, that's not the result of Australians being targeted in India, it's just a fact of violence in cities around the world. As you know, as you're walking down the streets of Paris or London there's always a risk that something's going to happen. So I do think we need some balance in this debate.
MITCHELL: I guess the danger is, the more publicity this has the more chance there is of dangerous elements within the community targeting people because they're Indian though, because it's getting that attention, sort of self feeding.
PM: Well, there is that real risk Neil. I think you're right to point that out. And therefore I fully support hardline measures, hardline measures in response to any act of violence towards any student anywhere Indian or otherwise. And furthermore, we also need to render it completely unacceptable people taking the law into their own hands and believing that retribution attacks or so called vigilante action is the right way to go. As I said, all cities from time to time are going to have acts of violence.
Let's put this into perspective. And Australia I'm advised on the statistics is one of the safest countries in the world for international students.
MITCHELL: But you're asking the Indian students to calm down as well here because of the protests in Sydney, another one overnight and the vigilantes in Melbourne.
PM: Well, I believe we need some balance on this. It's unacceptable for any acts of violence to be committed against Indian students. It's unacceptable for any student group to believe they can take the law into their own hands and engage in so called retribution attacks or vigilante action, as I said. We need some balance in this and you know what the balancing statistic is, this is one of the safest countries in the world for international students. Let's put all of this into perspective. And let's also put it into perspective in terms of politicians elsewhere perhaps seeking to inflame this debate as well.
MITCHELL: We've got an Indian student who's called in, if you don't mind we'll go straight to that. Hello Mickey, yes Mickey
CALLER 1: Hi Kevin, how are you?
PM: G'day Mickey.
CALLER 1: It's fantastic to speak to you.
PM: Yeah, it's good to talk to you mate. Where you from?
CALLER 1: I'm from Melbourne. Otherwise I'm Indian.
PM: Good.
CALLER 1: I just want to ask you, what should Indian people or Indian students should do at this stage where they've been bashed (inaudible) and what actions will be taken by the police or what should Indian community should do at this stage? Any message to the Indian community as well.
PM: Let me just say this upfront. In this country Australia, everyone is welcome. Every law abiding citizen of the world is welcome. We pride ourselves on that. We have an open door. And for the more than 200,000 Australians of Indian origin, they are fantastic first class citizens of Australia. I've known them for decades and decades in my own community in Queensland. I've known them right across Australia.
Secondly, for the 70,000 or 80,000 Indian students in this country, they are equally welcome. If any act of violence is committed against any student in your community, your first and immediate action has to be to get straight on to the police. What I heard in some report yesterday in Sydney, is that the police are sometimes not getting direct and immediate reports of what's going on. Any act, any threatening act any physical act of violence should be reported immediately.
If there is any concern about lack of follow up, immediately then contact your local member of parliament and demand an answer, okay. So first and foremost go to the right channels, which is the police, who I think in difficult circumstances are doing a good job. Secondly, if you believe that no action has occurred within an immediately reasonable period of time, straight on to your local member of parliament.
CALLER 1: Okay Mickey, thank you very much for calling. One of the underlying things that worries me in what's happening at the moment is whether we've got a future of racial tension. We do have many different races living in Australia as described. It's all worked pretty well so far. Could this be an indicator of what's ahead for us?
PM: Neil, I don't think so. If you look at the whole spectrum of our country over so many, many decades, what is the great defining character of Australia? It's inherent tolerance. It's inherent culture of allowing other people to be themselves. Remember with each new wave of immigrants in this country there's been debates and concerns and they've all faded and they've all been resolved.
After the war, debates about Italians and Greeks arriving. In the 70s and 80s, debates about Vietnamese arriving. In the 80s and 90s, about Chinese arriving. When the Indians actually arrived, I don't think anyone knows. But you know something, the country is enormously richer for all of these arrivals, the renewal which comes from them, the vitality.
Look at the contribution of the Indian business community to Australia. So my sense is, right across this vast country of ours we celebrate the diversity and I think occasionally you're going to have a flare up through a bit of misunderstanding. But let' just stand back and put it into historical context. This is an enormously tolerant society and I am proud of it.
MITCHELL: (inaudible)
CALLER 2: Hi Neil, how are you going?
MITCHELL: Okay.
PM: (inaudible)
CALLER 2: Hi Kevin, how you doing?
PM: I'm battling on mate
CALLER 2: Okay, I was an Indian student. I'm now working in Melbourne
PM: Good, are you earning a quid?
CALLER 2: (inaudible) not as a racial one, but as an issue of crime. What cultural (inaudible) the number of arrest that have or have not been made in relation to the incidents. It's true that Australia is one of the safest countries in the world, but of late, the number of incidents have gone up. What I think is the police are not taking sufficient action
MITCHELL: (Inaudible) the line isn't great. You're saying the number of incidents has increased and you don't think there is enough action from police. Is that your point?
CALLER 2: Yes (inaudible)
MITCHELL: Okay, Prime Minister?
PM: Look, my best advice from our police authorities whether it's in Victoria or in New South Wales or elsewhere, is they are doing a great job through what at present are quite difficult circumstances. If you in the community, the Indian community, have a number of reported incidents - let's just say over a given period of time it is X number - what you should do as community leaders is go into your local coppers and say, ‘these have been reported, what action has been taken?'
As I said in the previous caller, if you don't have a satisfactory response from the police on that, then go to your local member of parliament and demand an answer. That's the fall back in our system. But I would urge each member of the Indian community and more broadly across Australia - if there is an incident, even a threatening incident which doesn't physically result in violence, than let the police know, date time and event.
MITCHELL: Thank you for calling, some other issues. Have you told the Party to be on stand-by for a November election?
PM: Absolutely not. We are head-down, tail-up wrestling with the challenge of getting through this global recession. I mean that's, frankly the last address I had to the Party about implementing the Nation Building for Recovery Plan.
MITCHELL: So it's not a matter of being ready at any time?
PM: No, we're head-down, tail-up in terms of getting the roll out of this infrastructure program, 35,000 construction projects by years' end - making sure that's happening effectively, without stuff ups on the way through. Let me tell you Neil, that's a challenge in its self.
MITCHELL: Health, now your election promise was that the buck stops with you.
PM: I thought you were going to ask about mine. No I don't have swine flu by the way
MITCHELL: I'm pleased.
PM: How are you by the way?
MITCHELL: I haven't got swine flu either. The buck stops with you. You're approaching the deadline for the buck stopping which I think was June this year, yet the waiting list figures released today are worse. Now, you've given a lot of money to the states and in Victoria in fact it's gone backwards and NSW and Queensland I think. Other states have made small gains. Is it time for you to assume control of health?
PM: We said we would get a report from Ms Bennett on what's called a National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, which is due in the middle of this year, ok. And that's on the future direction of the entire health and hospital system.
We haven't received it yet. Once we've got it, we'll work our way through and we'll announce our course of action once we've been through its recommendations. And we may need to do some further work on elements of that as well. But that report is still not in our possession. On the waiting list for, was it elective surgery you just mentioned?
MITCHELL: Yep.
PM: My last advice is the extra money we provided the states has provided in the last year 40,000 additional procedures. That's 40,000 procedures which would not have happened, that's nationwide, I can't give you the breakdown for Victoria.
MITCHELL: That's true, but the waiting times have grown.
PM: Sure. What may be happening. This is what may be happening and I can't give you a definitive answer to this, I'd much rather come back to your program with a detailed breakdown by state and what's happening in each category, but if you've got 40,000 extra procedures occurring - and we've provided the money for that and we've measured those procedures having happened - is that others are now being added to the queue in even greater numbers. People who were originally discouraged from joining the queue. That may be the causative factor here, I don't know.
MITCHELL: What will prompt you to step in and say, ‘ok, this is buck stopping with me?'
PM: Well, first of all get this report which will go through trajectories for the future. What most concerns me about the way in which the health and hospital system has been run in the past is rather than co-investing in reducing in waiting times for elective surgery, in reducing waiting times in accident emergency or in allowing people to be in acute hospital beds when they should be in nursing homes, for there to be absolutely clean lines of responsibility between Canberra and the states rather than blurred lines resulting in one side just blaming the other for the problems. Cleaning up that is of fundamental importance. If we cannot clean that up, then course you've got to look at more radical action.
MITCHELL: So do you extend the deadline? It was June 2009.
PM: No, we said mid 2009 and we've got a report that's coming. This was commissioned a year or so ago and we haven't received it. And we'll work our way through it. Remember, these are very big decisions and we need to be calm, deliberative and decisive about the way in which we intend to proceed and we will.
But this involves the health and wellbeing of all Australians. You've got to get your preventative health care strategy right, you know what the impact of chronic diseases, the primary care stuff right, do we have enough support for GP related service, are we dealing with emergency and accident services correctly, or are they being clogged up by people that should be at GPs etc.
MITCHELL: Just another health issue. The rebate for cataract surgery was cut in the budget and it's going to cost about $400 an eye extra for people that do it now. Why? Why would you target cataract surgery?
PM: Well there are a range of changes to various of the professional fee arrangements through the budget. On the detail of cataracts, I'll have to get Nicola to come back to you on that as the Health Minister.
Look there have been tough decisions in the budget. Not all of them are popular. I accept that, accept the criticism for it. We rendered all together some $22 billion of worth of savings in the budget, these tough and these hard and many will be unpopular.
MITCHELL: Unions. NSW Unions are going into schools to try and recruit kid. They're targeting kids 14 to 18, it's a pilot program. The idea is that the kids pay $10 a month to join the union they get cheap tickets to movies and things like that. It's a real marketing exercise. Are you comfortable with that?
PM: I saw it for the first time this morning in the newspaper. I'd actually like to get some more information. I mean ultimately, I actually put trust in principals making the right decision in their schools about who comes in to do what, whether you got a representative from an employer organisation to talk in a local commerce course or someone from the union.
I'd rather get the detail first. I think local principals, P&amp;Cs  -  Parent and Citizens Associations, Parents and Friends Associations should be making these decisions. If there is anything more to be said on that I'll wait until I get all of the facts.
MITCHELL: On principle, you haven't got any objection to sort of politics within the school? Because it is certainly political.
PM: Well, you know in any school environment you're going to have kids who are studying history that turns into politics (inaudible)
MITCHELL: This is signing them up to joining unions.
PM: I was about to get on to that. People who are studying economics, people who are studying commerce, for those sort of things. When it comes to active recruitment join an organisation, active recruitment to join an organisation, I have some alarm bells starting to ring.
But I'd rather get the details first as to what's going in relation to this, and frankly any other association, for example political parties, Young Labor, Young Liberals, I mean these are kids of quite a young age can join these organisations. The question is whether that sort of activity is appropriate within the school. I'd rather get the detail.
MITCHELL: Speaking of unions, the Labor Party is traditionally the political wing of the union movement. Who runs the Labor Party now?
PM: Well that's a great question of political philosophy and history and we've got two minutes to answer it, is that right?
MITCHELL: No, no.
PM: The parliamentary party is a broad based church. I represent a tradition of the Australian Labor Party that doesn't come from the unions. I've never worked for a union. I've never been a union organiser or anything like that. And you know something, there's a whole spread of people in the Labor Party that are like that. Equally, there are people who have worked for unions -
MICTHELL: But the unions say you are not representing them.
PM: I was about to say, we for 100 years have come from both these traditions. And from time to time we have a barney about the best way, the best way for the future direction of the party and the movement, and the country. And sometimes we will tell our good friends in the trade union movement, ‘you've got it wrong'. Sometimes they'll tell us we've got it wrong.
But I am the Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party and I've been elected by the Australian people as their Prime Minister and I am accountable to the Australian people.
MITCHELL: What about the Labor Party conference? If the Labor Party conference changes its policy, asserts a policy on coercive powers for the building industry watchdog, will you follow that or will you stay with your line?
PM: The Government had an absolutely clear cut commitment prior to the last election about what it would do in terms of the building industry watchdog the ABCC.
MITCHELL: So regardless of the Labor Party conference -
PM: We will be adhering to our pre-election commitment.
MITCHELL: Regardless of the Labor Party conference?
PM: Absolutely. I take absolutely seriously my commitment to the Australian people prior to the last election. It was given explicitly on this question which is that when it came to the future of the building watchdog, that we'd bring about a change in 2010, that it would be folded into another organisation.
We said that, we were very explicit about it, we did not say at the time that we would be abolishing the function altogether. And we intend to abide by our pre-election commitment.
MITCHELL: You could have a union official going to jail under a Labor Prime Minister that would seem extremely unusual. What's your feeling about that?
PM: Well we are responsible for policing the laws of the Commonwealth of Australia. Whether they are politically convenient or not on a given day is a separate matter but we intend to implement the laws of the Commonwealth equally, without fear and favour and we take seriously our commitments.
The other thing I would say about this Neil is as follows. Are our friends in the trade union movement saying that there have been no problems of improper behaviour in various parts of the construction industry in Victoria and Western Australia? Are they really saying that?
MITCHELL: Is the CFMEU a rogue union?
PM: Can I just say there are real problems and there have been real problems with elements of the construction division of that union in WA and in Victoria. And that is just a fact. And so if there was an expectation that I'm just going to get a broom and sweep that under the carpet, guess what? They've got it wrong.
MITCHELL: Superannuation. Do you know if you did go to an election this year and well if you step down next year, do you know what your deal is worth?
PM: I wouldn't have a clue mate.
MITCHELL: $2 million.
PM: Right.
MITCHELL: And if you stay around till 52 it is $4.5 million.
PM: Well, first of all the question on my staying around lies in the hands of your good listeners, not in relation to me.
MITCHELL: But is that fair? I mean you've cut back superannuation abilities of the average person yet you've exempted politicians. Why?
PM: Neil you must have asked this question to my predecessor and probably his predecessor.
MITCHELL: No, no  -  but you've cut it back in the budget and you specifically exempted yourselves.
PM: You know that superannuation laws have been subject to multiple changes over the years. And as far as superannuation entitlements of members of parliament are concerned they've been around for a long, long time. Furthermore changes were made in terms of parliamentary superannuation going back about three or five years now I think.
MITCHELL: But that's only for people who joined (inaudible)
PM: That's true and that was made absolutely explicit. The rules had changes as of that time.
MITCHELL: But why did your exempt yourselves this time? I mean you're saying to people you can't put more than $25,000 in salary sacrifice, yet you didn't tough your own funds. Why?
PM: The superannuation arrangements for MPs, politicians have been established in law for a long period of time. The changes -
MITCHELL: But so were these for the rest of the population.
PM: Well Neil the laws for superannuation, both under the previous Government and mine from time to time are adjusted. And what we were concerned about is the ultimate sustainability of the taxation treatment of superannuation entitlements at the very upper end.
MITCHELL: But why not consistency? With yourselves. I mean you've got 15 percent going in for politicians, maximum of nine percent for the population.
PM: Well as I said, as of the arrangements which have applied for three or five years ago, that has changed. And that was a change brought amid great controversy at the time and as for the other arrangements within superannuation, the vast bulk of Australians now receive or continue to receive the same taxation treatment as before and as far as superannuation earnings are concerned, everyone, everyone out there in the community has taken a huge hit.
MITCHELL: Define benefit.
PM: Everyone out there in the community including those politicians who have come into the system since we changed -
MITCHELL: But not yourself, not Wayne Swan, not anybody before 2004.
PM: The politicians themselves changed the system in 2003-04.
MITCHELL: Okay. Are we seeing a turnaround? The economic figures are good, is it a real turnaround?
PM: Three things I would say. One, as of last week we are the fastest growing economy of the 30 members of the most advanced economies in the world. But we're still not out of the woods yet.
Two, we have for the first time a tip up in business confidence in the data released yesterday. And three, for the first time, job ads appear to have stabilised at least for this month. We have unemployment numbers out tomorrow. We're not out of the woods yet.
But what have we got so far? Government economic strategy, we have the fastest growing of the major advanced economies with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. We've still got a long way to go.
MITCHELL: Do you see your wife's feet in the paper today? (inaudible) in the gym, now they've photographed her feet.
PM: No I haven't seen that in the paper today.
MITCHELL: How does she feel about all that?
PM: You know every person but can I just say this, every woman I believe in particular, is deserving of some privacy.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.


PM: Well thank you Jenny for organising this fine and balmy Melbourne morning which -
MACKLIN: Very pleased to have you in West Heidelberg.
PM: As a Queenslander it just makes me feel right at home. No it's actually great to be here. Mark Arbib the new Minister for Employment Participation, Jenny Macklin the Minister for Families and of course local member, Richard Wynne the Victorian Minister for Housing, Peter Batchelor Victorian Minister for Community Development, Paul Bird Mission Australia State Director and friends one and all.
This is a really good day to be talking about practical things that work. Practical things that make a difference in people's lives and practical things that make a difference to the national economy.
You know, the country at large is wrestling with this thing called a global economic recession and it is a huge challenge for government's right around the world. And there are two options in wrestling with challenges like this. One is you can put it in the too hard basket, do nothing, sit on your hands and moan about it and blame somebody else. Or you can put your best foot forward and have a go.
The Australian Government has decided to have a go and our approach is very simple, it's called nation building for recovery. And what do we mean by nation building for recovery? It means getting out there and directly investing in the economy, in infrastructure, in training in order to lift Australia out of this global recession as soon as possible and to equip us for the future by building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow and by developing the skills we need for tomorrow, as well.
In short it's this: supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships for today by investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's nation building for recovery. We've done it in several phases. Phase one, starting last year - cash payments for families. And the reason we did that was we had to inject activity into the economy straight away as the global financial crisis hit, so that government was stepping in as the private sector was in retreat.
And that strategy has had some success. If you look at the economic data released last week, this economy Australia's, is the fastest growing of the 30 advanced economies in the world. Ok, the fastest growing. We have the fastest growth, the lowest deficit, the lowest debt of all the major advanced economies. And one of the reasons why that's the case is because at the end of last year we said we had to intervene, get activity into the economy now. And that's why we made those cash payments to pensioners, to carers, to veterans, to families, to make sure we could get activity into the economy now and support the 1.5 million Australians who work in retail.
Phase two: investing in the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. $15 billion for primary schools right across the country, 7,500 thousand of them, to make sure they've got state-of-the-art libraries, multi-purpose halls. In our secondary schools, to make it possible for them to have access to state-of-the-art science centres and language centres and a school renewal program and repair program and maintenance program as well.
Social housing, energy insulation, all together $30 billion worth of medium term infrastructure which is getting underway now so that by year's end, nationwide we're going to have 35,000 construction projects underway across the country. That's a truckload of construction projects. But the whole point again is this, supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships for today by investing in infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Phase three, long term infrastructure. In the Budget we announced a further $22 billion worth of investment in rail, roads, ports, high speed broadband, solar energy, the biggest solar energy plant or project anywhere in the world. And the whole point with these long term investments, together with huge injections into our universities, our TAFEs, our hospitals as well as our medical and other research institutes, again is to support jobs and business and apprenticeships today and building the long term infrastructure we need for tomorrow. These are the three parts of our nation building for recovery program.
There's another part to it as well which is what do we do with Australians who either haven't been able to get a job because of the tightness of the labour market or who have lost their job. And the part of our strategy which we have there is to make sure that we're supporting local employment initiatives as well. We've called it more broadly our Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. $650 million, programs across the country. A compact with young Australians to earn or to learn, a compact with local communities, a compact also with those Australians who've been retrenched through no fault of their own.
And what's the objective here? To make a difference in local communities like so that when you've got unemployment being visited upon people through no fault of their own, because of the global economic recession, through national actions and local actions, together we can make a difference. And that's what we're seeking to do.
And here with this particular program, under the innovations fund which is administered by the Minister for Employment Participation we're making a further difference as well. And today what I'm announcing is 33 projects to be funded under the first round of the Australian Government's Innovation Fund worth $20.4 million.
Round one will see a total of 6,652 opportunities for Australians through jobs, traineeships and work experience placements and mentoring programs across the country, benefiting some 9,000 individuals. Our objective again is to make a difference in these individuals' lives. Our objective is to make a difference in the lives of people like Cory and Shane. That's what it's about, making a difference here for their lives, in their work opportunities and to improve the social infrastructure of the good people of Heidelberg in this community. That's what it's about.
Here in Victoria, eight local projects will be supported through the Innovation Fund ranging from life skills training and mentoring programs to social enterprises and transitional work programs such as the project we're at here today. Through Mission Australia's urban renewal project, local trainees from the community have been involved in the construction of paths, park benches, cricket nets, basketball parks, basketball courts and tree planting to upgrade this reserve.
This is terrific stuff and it's not happening here. This enterprise will be expanded into other parts of Victoria. Also projects in Darwin and Palmerston like this run by Mission, as well as in Brisbane, Ipswich and Logan in Queensland. All through Mission, and for Mission itself, I think $1.4 million out of the $20 million that we're announcing today.
Good local initiatives, making a difference to local communities everywhere, improving the local amenities and just the physical look and appearance of suburbs like this and providing critical training opportunities for blokes like Shane and Cory.
Through the Innovation's funding, the project run by Mission is aiming to create an additional 285 transitional employment and work experience opportunities for highly disadvantaged job seekers across these three states. Here's a key stat, with 70 per cent of the participants moving into full-time employment or education and 80 per cent, or thereabouts, obtaining Certificate II or Certificate III qualifications.
So it's using these projects to obtain a registered qualification from a TAFE provider and these blokes have just been confirming what they've been on about with which TAFE is it?
RESPONDER: (inaudible)
PM: Okay, Mr Batman. And you're a Robin are you? Sorry, rotten joke. (inaudible) And then having done that, finding opportunities for employment as well beyond that. And those figures are really important, 70 per cent of participants move on to full time employment or education, 80 per cent obtaining Certificate II or Certificate III qualifications.
Before I close, I'll just give you a sense of the organisations we're partnering with around the country. Organisations like the Box Hill Institute of TAFE, the Brotherhood of St Lawrence, Catholic Care, Mission Australia, BoysTown, Community Bridging Services, Social Firms Australia Limited, Jesuit Social Services, NSW Technical and Further Education Commission, Adult Multicultural Education Services, The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Arch Diocese of Sydney and Catholic Arch Diocese of Maitland and Newcastle, TAFE WA in the Kimberley, Steps Disability Queensland Incorporated, Community Colleges Victoria Incorporated, Coffs Harbour Employment Service as well as the Uniting Church of Australia Assembly, the Wesley Mission in Sydney.
There are the organisation's we're partnering across the country but again the organising principle is this: how do we make a difference in individuals lives through the best training opportunities possible and work experience possible and how do we make a difference in local communities by building the infrastructure, social and economic, we need for the future.
That's this Government's strategy. We're proud of this strategy. We believe it is the right strategy for future, the right strategy for Australia - nation building for recovery - but equally importantly, the right strategy for local communities and good people like Shane and Corey as well. And I thank Mission for their participation. Well done guys.
MACKLIN: I just want to take the opportunity on the part of everybody from West Heidelberg, to thank the Prime Minister for coming here today. I see a lot of local people here who have worked so hard for tenants, for pensioners. Rose was here - I think she might have had to go back to work Prime Minister - and people who understand just how important it is to have a job.
These two young men behind us today have demonstrated that they can really step up and take advantage of the opportunities being offered by you Prime Minister, with the support of Mission Australia. And I'd like to say a very, very big thank you to Mission Australia for really showing these guys that it's worth getting out of bed in the morning. It is isn't it guys? Worth getting out of bed, worth learning, worth really being proud of what you do.
And if I can say on behalf of the people in Boyd Crescent, how pleased they are to have the new fences, to have the new garden beds, to have this park all beautifully fixed up, and done by local kids who otherwise weren't going to get a chance. It is all about jobs and thank you so much to Mark and to the Prime Minister for recognising the terrific work that is being done here in West Heidelberg. We appreciate it.
PM: Let's ask Mark the Employment Minister to say a few things as well.
ARBIB: Thank you Prime Minister, this is my first real day on the job. (Inaudible) I am just inspired to walk around today and talk to the young men involved and also the people actually providing the mentoring and the support. It is just outstanding. And these are the sort of projects that I am going to throw myself into over the next 12 to 18 months.
Because this is really the front line, the front line of the battle with the global recession but also in terms of fighting disadvantage. Helping young men like this get jobs, not just for the short term but for the long term. That is what the Rudd Government is about. That is what I am about. I am passionate about it and that is what I'll be working at into the future.
The best fact and the fact that means so much to me is just to hear that 70 per cent of the young people going through these programs go on to real jobs, real jobs. That is what these sort of programs are about. Thank you to Mission for all the work they're doing. Thanks to Jenny. Thanks to all the participants and certainly we'll be working closely with you in the future on these projects. And the Innovation Fund, another 33 projects announced today. So we are heading in the right direction. Thank you.
PM: Okay I think everyone has had their say. Over to you folks. Now it's time for your say. Okay there's no say -
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there was a report in the Sydney Morning Herald-
PM: There often are.
JOURNALIST: Yes, it suggested you're preparing for an election in November of this year and that you've spoken to people at the ALP about that. What's your reaction to that?
PM: I think pigs might fly. Look the bottom line is, I was asked about this on Neil Mitchell this morning. We are here to do a job: it's called helping to lift Australia out of this global recession. Everyone in this Government is head-down, tail-up working you know 18 hours a day to do that.
That's what our focus is on and we intend to get on with the job, making a difference and doing whatever we physically can to make sure that Australia continues to do better than the rest of the world in what is the worst set of global economic circumstances in three quarters of a century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister speaking jobs, retailers and pharmacists and some other industry groups are screaming that they won't be able to cope with the penalty costs of award simplification in this environment. I know you (inaudible) and other groups a (inaudible)
PM: We went to the last election with a very clear mandate, a very clear proposal about producing a fair and balanced industrial relations system including quite a comprehensive proposal about the mechanism for award modernisation. We fought that election. The Australian people supported that, we've got on with the job.
Now some of the decisions to be taken on the way through will be tough. I accept that, but we do have a very clear cut mandate to proceed in that direction. Fairness and balance in the workplace is important.
Can I just say this more broadly for the retail sector: this Government has injected something like $20 billion by way of direct support to the retail sector through our cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans as well as to other families. And you know what the result of that is? In Australia retail sales over the last period of time have been up by something like 4.8 per cent and the average across the rest of the advanced economies has been to collapse by between one and two per cent.
Why therefore are we doing better than most other economies at present? That's one of the reasons. And I'd say that to our good friends in the retail sector.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried it's going to take a nosedive when those stimulus payments run out?
PM: As I said before, we have structured our nation building for recovery strategy in three phases. Up front, to support immediately the economy by injecting $20 billion in cash payments in order to provide support for the retail sector and all those who feed off the retail sector. And that is one of the reasons why we are the fastest growing economy, as of the March quarter figures of all the advanced economies in the world. That's a direct reason.
Secondly, the reason we did that was because it takes time to get your infrastructure projects up and running. So, our school modernisation program which the Minister is directly involved in, kicks off in earnest about now. And it will kick into stream in about the second quarter this year but most particularly the third quarter this year.
So phase one: cash payments. Phase two: medium term infrastructure. Phase three: long term infrastructure. Phase two, injects something like $30 billion into the economy and phase three of course some $22 billion. So the objective is to continue to step up to the plate with different forms of investment in the economy, trying to fill the gap left by the private sector in retreat until the private sector recovers.
One other point, this economy, Australia under this Government as of now is the fastest growing of all the major advanced economies with the lowest deficit and the lowest debt of all the major advanced economies.
JOURNALIST: What were the reasons for stopping the solar rebates program (inaudible)
PM: We indicated at the end of last year that we would be moving to a new system, based on the renewable energy target and renewable energy credits as of the middle of this year and that's, the time has come and we think that is the right course of action.
Can I just make this point as well? I have noticed some of the, the crying of wolf on the part of the Liberal Party and others on this question. Point one, how many of these (inaudible) systems were solar panel systems, were installed under the previous Government. Answer to my own rhetorical question, I just happened to pluck it out of the air  -  10,000.
We've been in office for 18 months, guess how many we will be funding out of this scheme which is just winding down? About 80,000. In 18 months 80,000, in 12 years 10,000.
Secondly, what our good friends in the Liberal Party said to us is that, when we move to a means tested system as of the end of last year, that the sky would fall in, literally, and the industry would be in all sorts of strife. Well since then there has been a complete explosion of activity in the solar panels industry around the country and we've indicated quite clearly last year, come middle of this year we'd be moving to a new system and we've done that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) many of our new arrivals are coming here to Australia under the skilled workers scheme and they are unable to get jobs (inaudible)
PM: Well I'll just say something quickly about immigration policy and then I might turn to Jenny in terms of Centrelink payments. On the question of the immigration program, what the Immigration Minister Chris Evans has quite rightly done is calibrate, or adjust the skilled intake to the current state of the economy.
And so the overall number of skilled migrants will be brought down and those numbers have been announced, because that is the right and responsible thing to do when the economy is under stress and under pressure. Those numbers have been announced I think in two stages in recent time. On Centrelink payments -
MACKLIN: Thanks Prime Minister. This is a critical issue for us to make sure that people who are coming to Australia do get the chance to work and of course what we want to see if wherever possible, people getting the opportunity to get the skills and training they need so that they can participate in work.
Today is really all about making sure that wherever we find people who can't work, whether it's as a result of a lack of skills or as a result of a lack of opportunity, that we give them those chances. So we know that getting skills, getting training, getting work is critical and that what today is all about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) swine flu (inaudible)
PM: Look what we've done in relation to swine flu is act consistently and in response to the agreed medical advice of the Chief Medical officers of the Commonwealth and the States and Territories. This has been a good exercise so far in interstate and national cooperation and coordination. And we have acted at each stage along the way, both in terms of the public warnings which have been issued and the measures which have been taken, with the advice provided to us by the Chief Medical officer.
The Chief Medical Officer and the Health Minister are meeting and discussing these matters on a daily basis and we've sought to match our response to each new piece of information we get. Particular measures, including temporary school closures, measures also contained in various instruments of Commonwealth law concerning quarantining, have all been activated based on the best advice.
But I would say also more broadly on the question of swine flu, bear this in mind: of all countries in the world, this Government has been, this country has been best prepared in terms of its provision of anti-virals, Rulenza and Tamiflu. We currently have available some 10.3 million doses. As a proportion of our population, because of the early action that Government has taken, we have made sure that we are properly provisioned for this challenge.
So on this we're not out of the woods yet. There is still some real challenges ahead but we will take each decision along the way in response to the extra medical advice. I think that is what the Australian people would expect of any competent Government. And having said that folks, I have got to zip.


In the first round of the Rudd Government's Innovation Fund, $20.4 million will be provided in funding for 33 new employment and training projects.
The successful projects were announced by the Prime Minister during a visit to Mission Australia's Urban Renewal Landscape and Construction program in Heidelberg West in Melbourne.
Under the Innovation Fund projects, assistance will be provided to up to 9000 disadvantaged job seekers.
The delivery of projects will support over 6,600 jobs, work experience placement, training and mentoring opportunities.
Successful projects to receive funding include social enterprises, projects that boost literacy, numeracy and language skills, work experience placements and training opportunities.
The $41 million Innovation Fund is part of the Rudd Government's new $4.9 billion employment services program, Job Services Australia, which begins on 1 July 2009.
The Fund is a competitive grants program designed to encourage innovative employment and training solutions for disadvantaged job seekers including those with mental health conditions, homeless or at risk of homelessness, Indigenous job seekers, and families experiencing generational unemployment.
During the recent review of employment services, providers, employers and community groups said current ‘one-size-fits-all' system didn't encourage innovative, locally driven solutions to help the most disadvantaged job seekers.
The Rudd Government is investing in training and employment services to support the disadvantaged to secure a fair and productive Australia for the future.
The project will ensure that during these tough economic times of global recession, disadvantaged job seekers won't be left behind and get the skills they need to find new work and be ready for the jobs of tomorrow.
The new $4.9 billion Job Services Australia folds seven programs into a one-stop-shop that provides out of work Australians with more personalised services.
It includes more resources for disadvantaged job seekers to help them address employment and personal barriers to employment.
The full list of successful projects is attached and can be found at http://www.deewr.gov.au/Employment
Applications for round two are now open. Information on these funding rounds will also be available from: http://www.deewr.gov.au/Employment


The great thing about Fitz's books is that they are celebrations of Australia. They are part and parcel of the history of who we are and who we hope to become. And the great thing about his writing is it's also replete with the language of Australia and Australianisms. In fact I saw in this morning's press I was criticised for using some Australianisms. And I'd just say to, well I was having a Dad and Dave this morning  -  that's a shave  -  picked up my copy of the Oz and saw, was it George Megalogenis having a go at me and I thought, fair crack of the whip. Don't come the raw prawn with me George. Or coming from Queensland I'd say you'd get the rough end of the pineapple but enough of that.
Before I begin if I could acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today we come together to honour a truly great Australian, in Sir Charles Kingsford Smith. One who was beyond any doubt a person who has inspired the nation's imagination. One who pushed literally beyond the frontiers of our land and in doing so pushed beyond the frontiers of our minds. These are great achievements because Charles Kingsford Smith and his fellow aviator Charles Ulm are without doubt chapters in our nation's story, chapters in our nation's imagination, chapters in the sort of Australia that we wish to become.
It's also an honour today to be launching this book by one of Australia's most prolific writers. I think it is fair to say that Peter FitzSimons has been an extraordinary contributor to Australian writing. I am advised Peter that you have penned 20 books already. This puts you in the league of being a veritable front-rower for the Australian publishing industry and with awards as the nation's best selling non-fiction writer on three occasions in the past decade, I think it is fair to say therefore that Peter FitzSimons himself, in himself is a literary stimulus package self-contained. With appropriate impact on the macro-economy.
Peter's doing important work because he's bringing life to great Australian legends. Legends of sport, legends of war and the great legends of pioneering adventurers like our great aviators.
In particular, he has sustained a deep fascination in Australia over our role in the last World War; his books on Nancy Wake, Kokoda and Tobruk. As a writer, Peter brings to life the personalities behind the iconic stories of Australian history because the truth is we are shaped not just by impersonal forces - political, social, economic - as if we are simply hapless ships in the night. We are shaped actively by the active decisions of women and men. Decisions of courage, decisions which have turned the course of human history. Charles Kingsford Smith was one such man.
Peter's book does two things. First, it gives us a comprehensive picture of the man, Charles Kingsford Smith, from his earliest days in Queensland. Second it recounts, with enthusiasm and extraordinary detail, the birth of modern aviation. The story of modern aviation is itself a remarkable story. As Peter says with great eloquence, in some 66 years we went from being three foot off the ground to one foot on the moon. This is extraordinary when you look at the full spread of human history.
Australia also played an important part in this journey. As a nation, Australia, this nation of vast distances, was enormously changed by aviation. In many respects the aviation revolution achieved physically what the digital revolution is achieving electronically, shrinking time and space and so overcoming finally the great tyranny of distance. Aviation literally re-drew the map for us. It brought us together as a nation, enabling a vast expansion of trade and business activity in closing great distances with flights of just an hour or two. It's something that we now take for granted. It was not always so.
As Peter reminds us in this great history, we shouldn't take the aviation revolution for granted. It is in itself an extraordinary story. That's why we are all captivated by the simple thought of those magnificent men and their flying machines. A great Australian story also of courage, of innovation and nation-building and this transformation has all happened within the lifetimes of many Australians who are still with us today.
For many Australians, certainly those of my parents' generation, it's difficult imagine any person who more captured the imagination of a generation than Charles Kingsford Smith. ‘Smithy' as he was known to his mates and the nation, ‘Chilla' as he was known to his beloved family. He was Australia's greatest long-distance pioneering aviator and in doing so he exhibited great physical courage. Great physical courage. This is something which is written of less these days than it should be. Great physical courage as our veterans from Tobruk and Kokoda know full well from their own life experience.
Kingsford Smith's 1928 three-legged journey from California to Brisbane took extraordinary courage as he and his crew ignored all advice and flew from one geographical ‘speck' to the next. He was traversing what he described as - and I quote him - “virgin air”, perhaps not mindful of an entrepreneur some generations later who would copy the phrase and use it for defined entrepreneurial purposes. Others said he had undertaken a flight that would “stagger the imagination”. And he did.
After a total of 83 hours and 38 minutes in the air, Smithy and his crew landed the Southern Cross in a paddock which was to become Eagle Farm in Brisbane. This was an extraordinary moment for Australians. This conquering of the Pacific brought some 300,000 spectators out to Mascot Airport in Sydney alone. And again as Peter says in his book, eloquently, to bring the same number to the airport today you'd need to land a space-craft from Mars.
Today there are over 120 Boeing 747 non-stop flights flying more than 30,000 people between Australia and the United States every week. How the world has changed. Now, that flight takes around 14 hours, some 69 hours less than Kingsford Smith's pioneering flight.
The nation has never forgotten Kingsford Smith. Charles Kingsford Smith for three decades decorated our $20 note. Our nation's busiest airport is named after him. He was portrayed by the late Bud Tingwell  -  -  Bud's first speaking role  -  -  in the 1945 film ‘Smithy'. And for Queenslanders, the legend of Kingsford Smith has always been in our sights, as we pass by the Southern Cross on Brisbane's Airport Drive, a very physical reminder of those magnificent men and their flying machines.
Smithy's was a remarkable life, hair-raising from the start. Like the day he jumped from the roof of the family shed holding nothing but an open umbrella. How many of you have done that?
Like the day he also decided to join up and serve with Australia in the First World War. Smithy served in Gallipoli and survived. He served too on the Western Front and survived. He clocked up some 800 hours in the air with the Royal Flying Corps and survived. His courage, his physical courage was recognised by the award of a Military Cross for conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty  -  though he once quipped it was for acts of absolute foolishness.
Smithy could also inspire extraordinary confidence in those around him - a born commander and leader of men, who was fastidious when it came to preparing his plane for flight. Indeed his radio operator on the Southern Cross, Jim Warner, famously said he'd follow Smithy on a tomato crate with cracker-box wings if he said it would fly.
This book isn't just a biography of Smithy. It's also a history of Australian aviation. From its earliest days, when Australians acclaimed Harry Houdini as the first man to fly in Australia  -  provoking extraordinary scenes at Sydney's Rosehill racetrack, with men and women tossing hats into the air and weeping with excitement. Reminding us afresh that there is something exhilarating, something extraordinary about science, technology and innovation, about breaking through the frontiers of possible.
Today, the Australian aviation industry is a $6 billion a year business. It supports more than half a million jobs. It carries more than 25 million passengers on international flights and 50 million domestic passengers each year. In the great tradition of Charles Kingsford Smith, ours also is a Government that believes aviation has a role in shaping our nation's future, not just a part of its past.
We are the first Government to develop a National Aviation Policy, which I expect to be finalised later this year. We have already signed an “Open Skies” agreement with the United States, increased capacity in other markets including South Africa, Thailand and Malaysia, and we are in negotiations for a comprehensive agreement with the European Union. Aviation for Australia does not just have therefore a vital history, vital as it is. It has equally for us, a vital future.
Since the beginnings of the aviation industry, governments have played an important role in supporting and advancing the industry.
I haven't yet read all 700 pages of this book but there have been parts of it that I've dipped into. And one part where my attention has been particularly fixed has been an account of a bit of political deal-making one evening some time after the war to end all wars, when Billy Hughes, then Australian Prime Minister, was returning from Parliament in Melbourne to Sydney on the night train.
Prime Minister Billy Hughes was known as an avid early champion of Australian aviation. Travelling to Versailles for the peace conference after the First World War, and constantly flying back and forth between London and Paris had got our Billy thinking about the great distances that isolated Australia from Europe.
So much so that Hughes announced a 10,000 pound prize for the first all Australian crew or solo pilot who could fly from England to Australia in a plane of British make. Pity about Bleriot and all those other folks. Of British make.
Some time later, Paul “Ginty” McGinness, the driving force in the establishment of Qantas, was desperately looking for government support to expand the fledgling Qantas airline. He'd had little luck with Hughes but he persevered. He was a man of insight.
Knowing that Billy was on the train from Melbourne to Sydney one night, McGinness also boarded the train with one thing in mind  -  cornering the Prime Minister. There were no registers of lobbyists in those days. And McGinness managed to get the Prime Minister in a corner. Indeed, Hughes was willing to cut a deal as only Hughes could.
His message to McGinness was clear and was fully minded of the high policy considerations of the day. And that is, if the Country Party would just stop backing Labor in the Senate, then he would back the airline. And so too a deal was struck, that Hughes would find the money to subsidise a service between Charleville and Cloncurry. And so the deal was done. 
The fledgling Qantas spread its wings through a late night train deal between McGinness, a great Australian entrepreneur, and Hughes who was a person of chequered history in the history of the Australian Labor Party but nonetheless an Australian Prime Minister. And in time, politicians would find also a way to avoid the fateful night train between Melbourne and Sydney.
The life of Charles Kingsford Smith and his co-pilot ended tragically in 1935, when they were declared missing, presumed dead, after the Southern Cross disappeared over the Bay of Bengal. It was a tragic end to a life of extraordinary courage and of extraordinary vision. It was Charles Lindberg's mother who said, on hearing of her son's plans to fly from the United States to Paris, this quote from her I believe speaks down the ages: “For the first time in my life I realised that Columbus also had a mother.”
Today we have two men who did not get to know their fathers. And as Prime Minister of Australia, I honour the sacrifice of your family. The pioneers of aviation took great risks and they paid a very great price. We are proud of them. We are proud of them all. But it was the sacrifice of these great Australians who believed so ardently in the importance of flight to bring the world and its people together which actually made the sacrifice worthwhile.
Smithy's, alongside those other great pioneers of aviation, remains inspirational today as a story for us all. A life brought back to life by this great book by Peter FitzSimons. So well done, mate. Another great Australian epic.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to officially launch Charles Kingsford Smith And Those Magnificent Men and all those who sail in her. This is truly one for under the Christmas tree.


To Gail and to members of the family, to friends one and all of this great man, Chris O'Brien.
From time to time there are those who reach out and touch our souls, who shake us from our inward preoccupations. Who cause us to once again look up and then to look beyond ourselves. And then to realise afresh the simple, yet ancient wisdom of Saint Francis that it is in giving that we receive.
Lives such as these have a single distinguishing feature. They cause the rest of us to change. Chris O'Brien was such a man. Not just great company, of course he was. Not just a diligent colleague, he was that in spades. Not just a loyal friend, he was the best you could have. Not just a loving father, for his children are living and eloquent testimony of his extraordinary love for them. And not just a devoted life partner, because rarely have I known a relationship so tender, so close, so supportive as his with Gail.
For Chris O'Brien was all of these things and as the psalmists would say, ‘pressed down and running over'. But beyond all these things, and any one of them would be sufficient for any other man's eulogy, Chris O'Brien reached out beyond himself and fundamentally changed lives.
He did so of course with his hands, surgeon's hands, hands of great skill. And so he saved the lives of many.
But more critically, he did so with his heart and in a profoundly human and profoundly spiritual way. He did not deny his suffering, he embraced it. And then he deployed it. He sought to capture the nation's imagination on how as a nation we could do better, much better, much, much better in fighting a disease which afflicts tens of thousands of our fellow Australians every year. A disease which in one way or another has touched the lives of practically everyone gathered today in this great cathedral in Sydney.
And Chris's simple refrain was this - we can do better, we must do better and we will do better.
But beyond being the visionary that he was, he was also an intensely practical man. He painstakingly explained to me the first time I met him what integrated or comprehensive cancer care actually meant, or why it simply made sense to co-locate the scientists, the technicians, the clinicians, the carers and of course most importantly the patients themselves because the creativity of this virtuous circle of collaboration would of itself produce the best possible results.
And of course, Chris was right. But not only was he right, he has had an effect. He got inside not just the head of the nation, but the heart of the nation as well. He also got inside the head and the heart of his Prime Minister because of the compelling and overwhelming eloquence of the testimony of his life.
And so what are the effects? Well Chris, you had a big effect. This year the Australian Government announced $1.3 billion for the new National Cancer Initiative with integrated comprehensive cancer care at its heart, integrated cancer care across the nation.
That, Chris, is your life's legacy. Because without you mate, it wouldn't have happened, it's as simple as that. And here in Sydney, the project nearest and dearest to his heart, Lifehouse at the RPA, it will be built. No ifs, no buts, no maybes, it will be built. And the building will start by year's end if I have to drive the bulldozer myself.
I asked him whether we could call this Centre the Chris O'Brien Centre. He flatly said: “No.” I said: “We're paying the bills, so who are you to object?” Again he said: “No”. To which I say today, tough luck mate because this is a conversation I will now have Gail and members of the family and our friends at RPA.
Last Thursday evening, it was my privilege to spend a little time with Chris and his family just before he died. I read to him his citation for his appointment as an Officer of the Order of Australia. Her Excellency, the Governor General had already made special arrangements to confer that honour on him at Admiralty House this week. That was not to be.
I do not know if Chris heard the citation as I read it, but I felt that he gently squeezed my hand as I did. Here lies a man who touched my life. Here lies a man who touched the nation's soul and we, the nation, Australia, are the richer for him having lived and having worked among us.
Farewell my friend.


It is a great pleasure to be here today with friends in the business community to discuss the common challenges we face through the global recession. 
I thank AIG for organising this event, and especially Heather.
The Government has a strong relationship with AIG which operates in the spirit of open dialogue and regular consultation  -  across key challenges facing the business community including skills and training, infrastructure investment, tax and industry policy.
That dialogue between business and government is essential because it's only by working through each of the challenges of this global crisis together, that we can make it through and build a stronger Australia for the future.
The purpose of today is to continue that dialogue.
I want to discuss the challenges facing the global economy and the Government's strategy of nation building for recovery to see us through the global recession.
And I will be interested later to hear your perspectives about the challenges facing your business in this difficult time.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
It is important to note from the chart that the global outlook we currently face is significantly worse than in the previous two recessions in Australia:
During the early 1990s recession, world growth fell to around 1.5 per cent in 1991.
During the early 1980s recession, world growth fell to 0.9 per cent in 1982.
By contrast, the global economy is currently forecast to contract by 1.3 per cent in 2009.
This will be the first global contraction since IMF records began.
Growth rates in virtually every country have collapsed.
The average contraction in growth in the March quarter across the OECD economies was -2.1 per cent.
And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trade partners.
8 out of our top ten trading partners are in recession.
And growth in the remaining two countries, India and China has fallen dramatically over the last year.
Across the developed world, only 3 of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter.
In the March Quarter Australia was the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession.
There will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow, and unemployment continuing to rise.
But Australia has fared better than most  -  because we took early and decisive action.
The Government acted early and decisively to support the economy  -  to step in while the private sector was in retreat.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated an economic strategy to support the economy.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed.
Credit is the lifeblood of the economy.
Business people know that better than most.
Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
As the chart indicates, the financial crisis caused the price of risk to increase dramatically.
Credit spreads increased more than six-fold during the height of the crisis.
As interbank lending virtually froze, Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
In September Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
As the chart indicates - in October there were no raisings at all.
Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - offshore markets had opened to Australian banks which raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month.
In January, banks raised more than $20 billion offshore.
With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much-needed funds to support lending in Australia.
In addition to help stabilise the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
Our plan was simple: to support jobs today by building the essential infrastructure Australia needs for a stronger and more prosperous future.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area:
The key components of Gross Domestic Product are:
     * Consumption  -  about 54 per cent of GDP
     * Dwelling construction  -  about 6 per cent of GDP
     * Private Business Investment  -  17 per cent of GDP
     * Public Final Demand  -  22 per cent of GDP
In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy.
And we looked for measures that would support the economy right through the global recession  -  from immediate support, to the medium-term, right through to the long-term.
Our first measures were designed to provide immediate short term support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated rapidly.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth.
Second, we introduced another measure to stimulate the housing sector.
The Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
This has been a significant boost to construction activity.
Compared to the same time last year, before the onset of the global recession, building approvals have fallen by only 16 per cent in Australia  -  and the recent trends has been upward.
That compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
In the March National Accounts, private dwelling construction contributed minus 0.3 to growth  -  a solid result for a cyclical industry in the context of a global recession that has seen construction grind to a halt in most advanced economies.
In aggregate, the national accounts figures last week proved that these short term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession.
Many businesses would not be keeping their heads above water through this global economic storm.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term.
To support business investment we have taken decisive action to strengthen incentives for businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 30 per cent Business Tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for Small Business.
This is a major new incentive for businesses, and will encourage businesses to invest for the future and for economic recovery.
As the chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent  -  and much stronger than business investment in our peer countries.
In addition the Government has sought to boost public investment.
The Government has stepped in to boost the construction and associated industries by investing in the medium term in shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including, the largest school modernisation in Australia's history, generating local jobs for businesses on thousands of sites around the nation, the construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes, and providing free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
We are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
We'll be investing in major clean energy projects, including the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term.
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
As the chart indicates, public investment in Australia is growing strongly.
And the federal government is making up a large part of the increase, stepping in to use our strong balance sheet to support investment.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
In aggregate, Treasury has estimated that without our nation building plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
Today we have seen an increase in unemployment to 5.7 per cent  -  returning to where it was in March this year, although employment remained fairly steady, falling by 1,700.
This data confirms the global recession is continuing to have a direct impact on the Australian economy and on Australian jobs.
No-one likes to see unemployment rise. But we must not forget that even after today's data Australia's unemployment rate is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
While there is a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world.
Australians have every reason to remain confident that we will continue to weather the storm of the global recession better than most other advanced economies.
Among the major advanced economies, right now Australia has the fastest growth, the lowest deficit and the lowest debt.
Overall the government's stimulus will have a significant impact on growth. 
In 2009-10, Treasury estimates that growth will be increased by 2.75 per cent as a result of the stimulus.
And in 2010-11 growth will be increased by 1.5 per cent.
In the last few days we have received some positive indications that businesses and consumers are reacting positively to our stimulus package.
I welcome the news on Tuesday that business confidence is on the rise.
The increase in business confidence for May was the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989.
Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
Data out on Wednesday showed consumer sentiment was up 12 per cent in June.
This is the largest increase in 22 years.
Consumer sentiment is now up 20 per cent since the announcement of the Government's first economic stimulus package in October.
The consumer sentiment index is now at its highest level since January 2008.
There is a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses and consumers can see some light at the end of the tunnel.
We are by no means out of the woods. 
But if the Government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in severe recession that would have negatively affected confidence.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the budget.
And Australia's net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US, and 136 per cent in Japan.
By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
And Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is among the lowest in the advanced economies.
The Budget deficit in the US is 13.6 per cent of GDP, in Japan the deficit is 9.9 per cent of GDP, and in the UK the deficit is 9.8 per cent of GDP in 2009.
The Government is acting decisively and comprehensively to support economic growth.
This represents a new partnership between government and the business sector.
And it demonstrates that Labor is committed to deliver support and opportunities for businesses.
The Government cannot turn around ill fortunes for every business, just as we cannot stop the rise in unemployment.
But as a Government, we can make a difference, and we can help cushion the impact of this global economic crisis on businesses and on jobs.
So I encourage all businesses to make the most of the measures in place, and for advisors to pass that message on.
And the Australian Government is determined to do what we can to support you through very challenging economic times.
Because all of us are in this together - whether a business owner, an employee, a customer or supplier, or someone in government or other organisations.


DOYLE: Good morning to you, thank you for coming in.
PM: Good morning to both of you.
DOYLE: Swine flu is all everyone's talking about. The emails are coming in thick and fast. We've had rugby league players quarantined. We've had a Swimming Australia meet cancelled. A lot of the response at this point seems to be State-based and quite different between the States. Is it time to step in and coordinate a Federal response?
PM: Can I just say from day one that's what we've been doing. The Chief Medical Officer each day virtually links up with State counterparts and so does the Federal Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon, get on the phone with her State counterparts as well. And the overall response has been driven by the best medical and scientific advice. Our national responsibility is to make sure among other things that we've got an effective supply of antivirals, Tamiflu, Relenza. Per capita we've got the biggest supply probably or one of the biggest supplies in the world and to respond to individual state demands to make sure that's being distributed effectively from the national stockpile.
I think in terms of preparedness we're okay, but let's look at the fact that Australia is a highly mobile population and a lot of Australians travel internationally and as a result we've got some challenges to deal with. The committee which deals with this involving Commonwealth and State Officials will be meeting again this morning to look at the WHO's overnight changes in the global status. We need to work through this calmly, methodically, step by step.
KOCH: The funny is we're all thinking it's not that bad and we've overreacted. And then there's the World Health Organisation saying we're going to pump it up to the highest level because of Australia and we go what on earth are you talking about?
PM: Well, I think if you look at the WHO statement, it's in response to a range of developments around the world. That's one point.
The second is, we simply need to be just methodical. You know, there are practical measures to taken, you've all been conveying those on television, in terms of sneezing, washing your hands and those sorts of things. If people get sick, make sure they go to the doctor straight away. Make sure that an adequate supply of antivirals is around. But influenza in any given year can be a problem in any community. This is a strong form of influenza and we need to be very careful and we're doing that on a daily basis.
KOCH: Okay.
DOYLE: We have an email question, we are obviously as we know Australia's rejected the recession avoiding two negative quarters of economic growth but our -
KOCH: All because of our reject the recession dances -
DOYLE: Without a doubt (inaudible). Our unemployment rate  - 
PM: The dances have been good.
DOYLE: Did you like, yeah we'll bring them back, the choir, you know the choir. The unemployment rate  - 
PM: By the way we aren't out of the woods yet.
KOCH: Oh, here we go.
DOYLE: Okay, that's not what I want to ask you. (inaudible) unemployment -
PM: Oh no, it's not here we go, that's just a fact.
DOYLE: But unemployment is the biggest issue. I mean anecdotally we all hear, we all know friends, it's happening, it's spreading. We've got 1,700 more Aussies out of work. What can we do now to stop more people joining the jobless queue?
PM: Well, firstly on the figures, the unemployment numbers which came out yesterday put us among the major advanced economies, I think at probably the second best performing. I mean Japan has got slightly lower unemployment than we do. We have at present, of the major advanced economies, the fast growing economy with the least debt and the least deficit.
But one more unemployed Australian as far as I'm concerned is one too many. Therefore, what do you do about it? Two things. What we're doing through the Nation Building for Recovery program is continuing to inject activity in the economy.
Phase one, cash payments - subject to a fair bit of a debate, but if you want to know one key factor in terms of why the economy remained positive in the first quarter of this year, relative to others around the world, it's because we were out there acting early.
Phase two, the school modernisation program underway right across the country. That's kicking in about now.
Phase three, long-term infrastructure - National Broadband Network, road, rail, port. All for the Government to step in while the private sector is in retreat.
On people who have lost their jobs, the other thing we're doing in high unemployment areas is we've appointed local priority employment coordinators with a separate dedicated fund of $650 million around the country to get in behind local employment initiatives.
So if any of your viewers are coming from areas where it's going through the roof, what we want to see is ideas generated from those communities about what we can do with the not-for-profit sector, local chambers of commerce, local projects which mean something, so that you can build local infrastructure that provides training and apprenticeship opportunities on the way through, so that when the recovery globally comes we've also got people who've obtained new skills during the downturn.
KOCH: Yeah, when you consider America's 9.4 per cent unemployment, seven million unemployed, it puts it in  - 
PM: Well, this is a huge challenge and Government stepping in to make something of a difference through our injection to the national stimulus strategy has had an effect, but we're not out of the woods.
KOCH: Okay, speaking of stepping in, lots of viewers angry at your stepping in over the solar power rebate, cutting it off, solar panel rebate, cutting it off three weeks early because it was too popular. Brian in Queensland wrote to us expressing his anger. Tarah asks ‘how can you justify it when you spend $600 million a year on coal fuel power stations?' Soraiya from Queensland says ‘what about the advertising of solar panel companies, it's all been cut off early'. Why?
PM: But hang on, let's just put this into context. At the end of last year we said we're moving to a new system in the middle of this year. Prior to the election we said we'd have a $150 million program to fund 3,000 of these installations each year. Do you know how much we've invested so far? $700 million.
KOCH: That's fantastic though isn't it?
PM: That's right, let me just go to the numbers and that has supported the installation of something like 80,000 of these across the country.
KOCH: Beauty.
PM: From the industry's point of view, do you know how many are in the queue at the moment but waiting to be done, which will be funded under the pre-existing scheme? 63,000 of them. It's a huge amount of work coming through.
KOCH: Great.
PM: And we said we'd be moving, at the end of last year we said we'd be moving mid-year to the new scheme under the renewable energy certificates and that's what's happening. And the rebate under that will be a bit less, that's true, understand that. But we always said we were moving to a new system.
KOCH: But what's three weeks? A lot of people were waiting -
DOYLE: And eight hours notice (inaudible) -
KOCH: Yeah, exactly right, you know they were thinking about doing it in the next three weeks. It's great for the environment.
PM: Of course it is, that's why we've supported it. That's why we're about to construct the biggest solar energy plant project anywhere in the world, a 1000 megawatts. That's why we're out there with eight times the number of these installations compared with our predecessors. We believe in this stuff, but we also said we'd be moving to a new system.
KOCH: Yes, 30th of June.
PM: We said we'd move mid-year and the point is whenever we made that move, whenever we made that move, it was going to be unpopular, I accept that. That's just the fact. I accept that it is unpopular.
KOCH: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
PM: But for example -
KOCH: It's in even worse though when you change it and bring it forward with no notice, for a piddly three weeks.
PM: Well when you are looking at the new scheme which will come in place, for example, I was looking at some figures in Melbourne the other day. Once you use renewable energy certificates for these sorts of projects, you're still looking at subsidies which are in the many thousands of dollars. This will make a difference in terms of people making decisions for the future and your local retailers are out there selling this stuff, are able to act on behalf of the scheme, the renewable energy scheme, to use those certificates to actually bring the price down over the counter as well.
KOCH: Okay -
PM: But, as I said, 80,000 of these in 18 months.
KOCH: It's great.
PM: Sure.
KOCH: Can't put a price on that, that's the environment -
PM: Our predecessors in 12 years -
KOCH: Ah-ah, don't bring them in -
PM: Oh, I will. Our predecessors -
KOCH: Why?
PM: Well, because people have got to make a choice. You've got the other mob saying this is a terrible thing, 10,000 they installed in 12 years. Let's be fair about this.
DOYLE: Email from Richard. There's a lot of tension on the streets of Melbourne and Sydney involving Indian students. Richard asks, he wants to know how you plan to clear the air?
PM: Well, as I said I think a couple of days ago in Melbourne, I think it's time for everyone just to take a deep breath and just calm down. I mean there's too much action and reaction. As I said the other day, any violence against any student in Australia, foreign or domestic, Indian or wherever, is completely unacceptable.
It's equally unacceptable for anyone else to take the law into their own hands. Australia, I'm advised in the statistics is one of the safest places in the world for foreign students, international students to study. Let's put all of that into context. If you're a student in London, you're a student in New York, there's always a possibility that you're going to run into violence on the streets.
DOYLE: These pictures are going everywhere. What do we do? How do we stop this happening apart from just taking a step back? Do you think it's something we all stop talking and will end naturally or  - 
PM: Media make their own decisions and I have never been in the business of telling you guys what you should do. That's fine. Objectively I'm just conveying to you what is the underlying statistical data. This is one of the safest environments in the world. And obviously there are going to be people on various sides of the debate who have a bit of an interest in kicking this along. I understand that. Obviously, there is also a problem in terms of individual students who've being attacked. Let's work our way through it calmly and methodically.
As I indicated the other day, in the last decade or so in India, we've had something like 20 Australians who've either been murdered or the subject of sexual assault or other forms of assault. Well, these things happen in large cities where you've got, you know, where you've got evidence on a continuing basis of violence in urban communities. So let's just put it into context. Let's work our way through it, work with the student bodies. Julia Gillard's been doing some great work there. But everyone should just take a deep breath.
KOCH: Okay. Alright, can't let you go without asking you about your ‘ocker outburst' of late. And we reckon -
PM: Strewth Kochie! Strewth! Strewth!
KOCH: We reckon you're channelling another icon. Take a look.
PM CLIP: Oh, fair shake of the sauce bottle mate.
HOME AND AWAY CLIP: Strike me pink.
PM CLIP: Fair shake of the sauce bottle mate.
HOME AND AWAY CLIP: Strike me pink.
PM CLIP: Well, again fair shake of the sauce bottle mate.
HOME AND AWAY CLIP: Strike me pink.
KOCH: Joel from Queensland pointed out on page 77 of the Macquarie Australian Slang Dictionary the correct saying is ‘fair suck of the sauce bottle'. Are you fair dinkum? Or having a lend of us?
PM: Well, I grew up on a farm in country Queensland and my father always use to say ‘fair shake of a sauce bottle'. I'm the son of a farmer for God's sake, I come from, I come from -
DOYLE: Do you normally speak like that though? We just kind of haven't heard it, it's like when Kochie tries to get into groovy language and I sort of giggle at him.
PM: He's been with me on Kokoda. I mean, is my form of language always -
KOCH: Ah, no, not when he's climbing a (inaudible) grade hill. It's quite colourful language then.
PM: Can I just say, you know, if you're making a speech at the United Nations or whatever, you're going to speak in a particular way. If you're talking with an Australian, what's wrong with Australian English?
KOCH: (inaudible)
PM: I mean, what we're supposed to have homogenous kind of Hollywood English which sort of says this is the way you're going to speak.
KOCH: Can you say -
PM: I don't like the look of this.
KOCH: Can you say, ‘fair suck of the sauce bottle' in Mandarin?
PM: No I can't. And beyond that, beyond that our good Chinese viewers would not have a clue what I was talking about.
KOCH: Well, we'll let you hit the frog and toad. But before you do -
PM: Have you had a Dad and Dave this morning?
KOCH: Yeah, yeah, I have, but wish Therese and Nick all the best for climbing Kili too.
PM: Yeah, they're training hard, they're doing well. She's a strong lady.
KOCH: She sure is. And Nick did Kokoda with us, so we know he can do it.
PM: Yeah, yeah, he looked after me in the end.
KOCH: Thanks for coming in. Yeah, he sure did.
PM: And you.
KOCH: Alright mate.
PM: Thanks.
DOYLE: No wonder you took him. Thanks guys very much, there you go.


PM: Well this is a good day for defence housing, a good day also for an injection into the Australian economy. You see in response to the global economic recession what the Government has done is embarked on a strategy of nation building for recovery. What does that mean? It means building and supporting jobs, apprenticeships and small business today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. 
Part of the infrastructure we need for tomorrow is defence housing, part of the infrastructure we need for tomorrow is broader social housing, part of the infrastructure we need for tomorrow is to upgrade our schools for the 21st century, as well as ensuring that our homes have proper energy insulation as well. Roads, rail, ports, national high speed broadband, solar energy  -  these sorts of initiatives.
What we're trying to do, and our objective is this, is for government to step into the breach while the private sector is in retreat because of the global economic recession. If you go to the facts here what we have is an investment in this estate of some $10 million for the construction of more than 40 defence homes. Across Brisbane, an investment of some $32.5 million to support 103 additional defence homes. Nationwide the Nation Building for Recovery plan supporting 802 additional defence homes, an investment of $256 million. And that is before you add the existing base project of defence housing which is running out at a further 1000 homes on top of that as well.
What we have done in partnership with our friends in defence is to bring a whole lot of construction forward, funded now, providing jobs for tradies in this local area while providing necessary quality defence housing for our men and women in uniform in the here and now as well. This is good stuff.
On the jobs front I am told that this overall program of ours for defence housing will result in an additional 680 direct jobs, 1700 indirect jobs; that's about two and a half thousand jobs coming about as a result of this sort of investment. That I think is what it is all about, making a difference at a time when across the world we have rising unemployment, and the reason Australia is doing better than most countries is because we the Government have stepped in to try and fill the gap left temporarily by the private sector, in addition to the great initiatives out there in the private sector itself.
So today it is my great privilege to take this set of keys and to announce that the first two defence homes funded under the Nation Building for Recovery plan are now complete and to hand over the keys to this home behind us, to the Brigadier, on behalf of the Government to the Australian Defence Force, and may whoever occupies this house enjoy it.
Now I think that is enough from me, I think it is over to you folks to ask any questions.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Couple of different topics if we can Prime Minister.
PM: You can ask me about this one.
JOURNALIST: Oh do you want me to ask you about this one?
PM: No, no that's fine. Off you go.
JOURNALIST: I think you summed it all up beautifully. The education revolution spending, The Australian reports this morning that some of that money is going towards schools that are being either demolished or moved. Are they mistakes or is that something you're investigating?
PM: The bottom line is this. We are proud of the fact we're investing $15 billion in the biggest school modernisation program this country has ever seen. We are proud of the fact that we are ensuring that every one of Australia's seven and a half thousand primary schools has the opportunity to invest in a state-of-the-art 21st century library, a multipurpose hall, other forms of classroom modernisation and our secondary schools have the opportunity to compete for a program which would fund about 500 of our 2500 secondary schools to have state-of-the-art science centres, state-of-the-art libraries.
Go to communities like this. What is our local primary school here?
ARCH BEVIS: Ferny Grove and they just had approval for a $3 million assembly hall announced last week.
PM: So there you go Ferny Grove. [inaudible] So I imagine the good defence folks who are going to be living in this house behind us, built as part of the Nation Building for Recovery plan, they have kids who will go off to the Ferny Grove Primary School where for the first time in the history of that school they will have a multi-purpose hall. That's terrific. Go to your specifics  -  your specifics are this. If you've got two previous existing schools merging, then the money dedicated under our Building the Education Revolution fund is combined to go to the new school where those schools are being merged. If a school is being closed period and there is no replacement school, that is it is simply being shut down with no planned merger, then of course funding doesn't go to that project and that has been the case all throughout.
We're proud of this project, it's the right thing for education, it's the right thing for building the education revolution. I want the kids whose mums and dads will occupy these sorts of houses to have the best quality local primary schools possible and we the federal Government for the first time are investing to make sure that they've got decent, first-class facilities of the type that Arch has just described.
JOURNALIST: I believe in one specific example, I believe it is Bremer School, the money allocated was going towards a running track and some revegetation but that school is merging or- [inaudible]
PM: As I said to you before, if two previous schools are merging then the funding which would be dedicated to each of the previous schools will be combined into the new school. That is fair and right. If a school is closing down, period, with no replacement school then of course funding doesn't go to that.
JOURNALIST: There is no mistake here, it is quite simple?
PM: We are absolutely confident in the strategy we are implementing and can I say nationwide if you are going to roll out a modernisation program in every one of Australia's seven and a half thousand primary schools, and 500 of our two and a half thousand secondary schools, and having a maintenance and repair program in every one of our ten thousand primary and secondary schools, from time to time there is going to be a bit of controversy about a school here and a school there. That is life, but you know something? This Government is proud of the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history, ask any P and C, any P and F in Queensland whether they want a new multi-purpose hall, whether they want a new state-of-the-art library, whether they would like a new science centre, whether they would like a new language centre, I think there will be a pretty strong response they'd like to see Government step into this place.
But what it's also about is I was talking to our, some of our mates who are tradies here today. I mean it is providing jobs on the way through. Providing jobs like the ones which come off the back of this housing construction project here. I mean look around here, you've got folk working on each of these houses. This estate has basically I would say doubled in size and a bit more because of the stimulus strategy and a lot of these blokes working on it are coming from as far south as the Gold Coast and other parts of South East Queensland, because there is work here and we've made that work happen.
JOURNALIST: On swine flu, the World Health Organisation has now declared a global pandemic, does that change your or Australia's response?
PM: Our preparation for the swine flu epidemic has been among the best in the world, our stockpiling of antivirals, Tamiflu and Relenza, in terms of the amount in the stockpile relative to the size of our population is one of the best in the world. We have about 10 million doses available.
This is still going to be a challenge for both the World Health Organisation as well as national health authorities around the world. But our response throughout has been to respond calmly and in a measured way to the medical and scientific advice given to us daily by the Chief Medical Officer of the Commonwealth and of the States. We will work our way through this systematically and we will continue to do so in the future. Officials are meeting again today as they would normally do and of course in response also to the decision by the World Health Organisation to upgrade.
JOURNALIST: There has been a lot of controversy, I guess speculation about public events and community safety. This doesn't change your mind at all about having to close down any public events?
PM: Again our response as a Government is always to act in conformity with the advice of the health professionals, the Chief Medical Officer and his counterparts around the States and Territories. This is where elected Government officials should be responding directly to the professional advice of the medical experts, we've done that so far and we'll do so in terms of any future decisions on school closures, on quarantining, or any other event but we do that on a very systematic basis. Calmly, methodically.
JOURNALIST: May I ask Prime Minister are you going to the Broncos tonight?
PM: I've unfortunately got to be back in Canberra so once I have given a speech here in Brissy today I'd be, I'll be on a plane back there. I wish I was still in Brissy, I'd prefer to go to the game and as patron of the Broncos I hope they win.
JOURNALIST: Were you following the controversy in the last couple of days? The Broncos were a bit upset that they were in essence forced to play when they'd had no preparation.
PM: Oh look there has been a bit of confusion about all that, I understand, and I heard a bit of that on radio this morning, I was [inaudible] earlier on. I think this is a great team, I am sure they will rise to the challenge - we had a few difficulties last week, didn't we?
ARCH BEVIS: We did.
PM: We won't talk about that.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Karmichael Hunt should play?
PM: You know something? Nice try. I am not the Chief Medical Officer, nor am I the State Medical Officer, nor am I the medical adviser to the team. Next question.
JOURNALIST: I think I'm done.
PM: OK thanks folks, I appreciate it.


Today the Prime Minister announced the completion of the first Defence homes to be built under the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan (NB - ESP). He made the announcement visiting one of the homes in Brisbane.
These houses are the first completed out of the 802 Defence homes being constructed nationwide with funding from the Stimulus Plan. They have been completed ahead of schedule and on budget.
The Nation Building Plan will inject $104 million into Queensland's construction industry to build Defence houses. This will support over 200 local construction jobs and many more jobs in supporting industries.
The Brisbane region will receive $32.5 million worth of investment to build 103 new Defence houses.
As part of the Defence Housing Australia Apprenticeship Support Scheme (DASS) launched in early 2009, 20 new apprenticeship places are being created in the residential construction industry, including four in Brisbane and four in Townsville.
Suppliers, manufacturers and the building and construction industry have all responded to the challenge in difficult economic times and through the stimulus plan have cooperated to support employment and stimulate economic growth.


It's good, very good to be back in Brissy, sunny Brisbane today, when you come from cold Canberra as I do these days. And to be here today with our friends from the business community to discuss some of the challenges we face in response to this global recession. 
Also to thank ACCI for its assistance in organising this event and to reinforce something which Craig said before in relation to the temporary investment allowance, at currently 30 per cent, prospectively 50 per cent for small business through until the end of the year. You might say how did that come about and you might say what is the point of coming to gatherings like this?
Well I was at a gathering like this at the end of last year in Canberra with ACCI and sat at the table with the guys and girls from ACCI and they put this to me as an idea. So that's about how it went, I think. And I went back and badgered the Treasury with it and we bounced it around the table a few times. A bit of nip and tuck here and there but that's where it came from. It came from interaction like this with your representatives in peak industry bodies.
So the purpose of gatherings like this is twofold. One is to engage with you as the men and women of small business and of business in general about our strategy for dealing with the global economic recession. But the second is this, to also hear from you about any idea you have for us about how we can do things better. That is the purpose of being here today.
My simple message today is that there are strong factual grounds on why Australia can be confident about its economic future. There are strong factual grounds which underpin the proposition that Australia is doing better than most other economies at this difficult time.
My central purpose today here in Brisbane, as I have done in Melbourne and Sydney earlier in the week is to present the core economic data which underpins this message of confidence for our future and to outline the core elements of the economic strategy we are implementing which underpins so much of the data.
We all know what the global reality is; the global reality we together face. That the world is facing the worst global recession in three quarters of a century, that global growth is contracting for the first time since the IMF began keeping records. That global trade flows have collapsed and global investment flows have collapsed and the inevitable increase in global unemployment is well and truly underway.
But despite all of these global challenges, Australia is weathering the storm better than nearly all of our global competitors. Bear these three facts in mind. Our economic growth is higher than all the other major advanced economies in the world. Our deficit is the lowest of all the major advanced economies in the world. And our level of net debt is the lowest of all the major advanced economies in the world. It's important to bear these three facts, core facts, in mind.
When Lehman Brothers collapsed late last year, share markets around the world fell off a cliff and governments around the world dramatically revised down their forecasts for economic growth. I said that as a nation we were all in this together. Big business, small business, governments  -  federal, state and local - business and unions, government and the community sector, all in this together. Because if we fight this together as we have been, we can cushion Australia from the worst aspects, the absolute worst aspects of the global recession.
From day one, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry has played a strong role in meeting this challenge. The Government values its relationship with ACCI and the opportunity for regular consultation across the wide range of policy challenges facing the business community. That dialogue between business and government from our perspective is essential. I know that businesses around the nation are working hard to hold onto their staff and keep contributing to economic activity.
Today I want to tell you as Prime Minister of Australia that I appreciate your efforts. These are tough decisions, they are hard decisions. As Craig said before, for small business in particular, cash flow is key. When you have uncertainties concerning markets, when you have uncertainties concerning how the global economy will unfold in the future, these are tough and hard decisions. But those which you have made in terms of retaining your staff wherever that has been possible, we as the Government of Australia appreciate your efforts because we know it is difficult, difficult out there.
Today I want to outline the challenges facing the global economy and the Government's strategy of nation building for recovery to see us through the global recession. And I will be interested later, as I said before, to hearing your responses and any propositions or questions you put to us.
Let's turn to the data which is with us today. The global economy is experiencing the worst economic collapse in three quarters of a century. If you look at the data which is before us, the data here, and compare what we are projecting for 2009 in terms of contraction of global growth of 1.3, and contrasting it with what happened in the recession of 1991, 1.5 percent global growth positive and 1982, global growth positive at 0.9. And those two previous earlier recessions globally being in fact the low points since the IMF began collecting data back in 1951, you will see in relative terms where we are against economic history. These are, since the period of the data began to be collected, unprecedented times. For the global economy to be contracting as a whole in 2009 is unprecedented since the IMF began collecting data way back in 1951.
The average contraction in growth in the March quarter across the OECD economies was 2.1 per cent. And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trading partners. Eight out of our top 10 trading partners are in recession and growth in the remaining two countries, India and China - to the right of your screen - has fallen dramatically over the last year. This of course directly affects Australia.
Across the developed world, only three of the 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter. Australia was one of those three - we are the orange bar on the top right, growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter. In the March quarter Australia was the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries. And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession. There are many bumps in the road which lie ahead. I don't need a crystal ball to tell you that there will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow, and unemployment continuing to rise. But the bottom line is this, as the data demonstrates: Australia is faring better than most around the world, in part because we this Government, took early and decisive action.
The Government acted early and decisively to support the economy, to step in while the private sector was in retreat. When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated a comprehensive economic strategy to support the economy.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector. Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed. Members of ACCI and business people around the world know better than most that credit is the lifeblood of the economy. Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis, the global financial system went into meltdown and inter-bank lending ground to a halt. If you look at this particular chart you will see where the three month bank credit spreads were headed around the rest of the world. That in orange at the top shows a spread of in excess of 350 basis points in the United States. The black line is the UK which represents a credit spread at the peak of the crisis of some 300 basis points. And you can also see where those in the Euro-zone were with three month bank credit spreads as well, peaking at something 150 basis points to 200 basis points and Australia is the white line underneath, considerably south of that.
This was the challenge that we faced. It is the physical availability of credit and the price of credit given the constraints in global financial markets which occurred following the Lehmans' collapse. As the chart indicates, the financial crisis caused the price of risk to increase dramatically. Inter-bank lending virtually froze. Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
Again I draw your attention to the table. In September, Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year. As the chart indicates, in October there were no raisings at all. Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks. That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions. The guarantee, as you can see again from the slide, had an immediate effect. Remember there were no offshore raisings at all in October, none in November. Once the guarantee kicked in, in December you began to see a recovery.
To help the guarantee, offshore markets had opened to Australian banks and they were able to raise than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month. And in January they raised more than 20 billion offshore. With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much needed funds to support lending in Australia.
It is important also to look at what has happened to the composition of the fund raisings by banks in most recent months. The grey part of each bar of this offshore raisings, that which have been possible of the basis of the Government guarantee. The black part of the bar represents domestic raisings which have been made possible on the back of the Government guarantee and the little bit of white and orange underneath are those which have so far been able to be raised absent the Government guarantee. As you can see, as of the May data there is some emerging sign of some return to normality but my overall point to you is that absent the Government guarantee to inter-bank lending, the pattern that we saw evolve in October, and November and the beginning of September would have continued, effectively resulting in a strangulation of credit supplies to the Australian economy.
That is why we acted. It is the first time in the history of the Commonwealth that the Government has had to provide a guarantee, a sovereign guarantee to inter-bank lending. The consequences for the real economy and the supply of credit to businesses such as yours, however, would have been catastrophic in the absence of the provision of that guarantee. These then are the decisions that we have taken, that is why we believe it's important that all Australians and financial institutions are marching in the same direction.
That is why I believe Australians have every right to be furious with today's decision by the Commonwealth Bank to increase its home loan rate, hindering the efforts of the Government, the Reserve Bank and the business community to stimulate the economy during this global recession. We are all in this together, businesses, workers, government, the Reserve Bank. And today's decision by the Commonwealth Bank runs counter to this nation-wide effort.
In addition to helping stabilise the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy. Our plan has been simple; to support jobs today, small businesses today, apprentices today by building the essential infrastructure that Australia needs for tomorrow.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area. This is very much the chart that were presented with in the Cabinet last October in working out how precisely we could act by way of Government policy intervention to provide support for the economy in what was looming as a very difficult year ahead, given that the private sector was in retreat for the reasons I described before.
The key components of Gross Domestic Product in Australia of course are as follows: consumption - about 54 per cent of GDP; dwelling construction - about six per cent of GDP; private business investment - critically 17 per cent of GDP; and public final demand 22 per cent of GDP. In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy. And we looked for measures that would support the economy right through the global recession; from immediate support, to medium-term action, right through to long-term action.
Let me turn to some short term measures. Our first measures were designed to provide immediate short term support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated rapidly. Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand. Remember consumption represents some 54 to 55 per cent of the total (inaudible) economy. It's the place you go to if you need to have an immediate effect.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy through cash payments to families, to pensioners, veterans, and low income earners. As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector. While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November last year, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth. There is no doubt that without the economic stimulus package phase one that I have just described through cash payments, we would not have seen the positive numbers in last year's* National Accounts.
Of course there are other factors at play but without the stimulus measures we would clearly have fallen into a technical recession. This therefore I believe is an important set of data. Again if you look at the impact of retail sales in Australia relative to the Euro-area, New Zealand, Japan, Canada and the United States there is a clear and demonstrable effect which arises from the direct investment that we undertook beginning in the fourth quarter last year, necessary in order to provide immediate injection in the economy.
Second, we introduced another measure to stimulate the housing sector. The Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry. This has been a significant boost to construction activity. Housing finance commitments have increased substantially, particularly the number of loans for the construction of new houses, which has increased by 42.6 per cent since the First Home Owners Boost was introduced in the October statement of last year.
The recent trend in building approvals has also been upward, following the sharp falls in 2008. Compared to the same time last year but before the onset of the global recession, building approvals are down by only 16 per cent in Australia. That is 16 per cent down in Australia and that compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
In the March National Accounts, private dwelling construction contributed minus 0.3 per cent to growth, a solid result for a cyclical industry in the context of a global recession that has seen construction grind to a halt in most advanced economies. In aggregate, the national accounts figures last week demonstrated these short term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter, pushing Australia into a technical recession. Many businesses including a number of those represented in this room, particularly in the retail sector, would have found it very difficult to keep their heads above water through the global economic storm were this action not taken.
Again when you look at the, both sides of the slide, both in December ‘08 when you see the impact of the measures we took, on the left hand side in the light blue, the data without stimulus. Orange representing the actual stimulus having flowed through but in particular in March ‘09 you saw more stimulus flow through, the result again included below the line with the orange bar being that above the line following the stimulus.
The demonstrable effect of these actions is clear in the data. Beyond the immediate term, the Government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term. To support business investment we've taken decisive action to strengthen the incentives for business to make capital investments by introducing the 30 per cent business tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for small businesses. This is a major initiative for business and we believe it will assist in encouraging businesses to invest for the future and for economic recovery.
As chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent, a much stronger business investment than our peer countries. Again, if you look at the comparable data, all the other economies are south of the line among major advanced economies, and Australia just north of the line. In addition, the Government has sought to boost public investment. The Government has stepped in to boost the construction and associated industries by investing in medium term, shovel-ready infrastructure projects that we've spoken of so much of in recent times.
Firstly, the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, generating local jobs for businesses on thousands of sites around the nation.
Second, construction of 20,000 new social and defence homes and repairing almost 50,000 homes. I've come just early this morning from Upper Kedron, a classic example. This is defence housing for our men and women in uniform living in Enoggera. The current program nationwide is to roll out about 1,000 more, extra units of defence housing. With the arrival of the economic stimulus strategy, we've decided to increase that by a further 800 units of housing.
In the city of Brisbane, 103 of those units are being constructed at the moment. The people I met this morning out at Upper Kedron were in fact tradies from all over Brisbane working in considerable numbers on that site. In that particular part of the site I think we had some 40 or 50 houses under construction and I handed over the keys to the Brigadier from Enoggera. This is a program we announced in February. We've handed over the keys for first new houses as of the middle of June.
Given what you all know happens within the wheels of government, that ain't bad.
Third thing is providing free ceiling insulation for 2.7 million Australian homes and this has been of direct assistance to not just the ceiling insulation industry, not just of direct benefit of course in terms of its greenhouse gas impact, but also all the associated industries, transport, manufacture, installation and everything associated with it. All together these measures put in aggregate represent $30 billion or about three per cent of GDP being invested directly into construction, in construction related activity starting this quarter, kicking into full swing in the following quarter, that's the third quarter of ‘09 through until the middle of ‘10 and beyond and then tapering down.
The objective with this and the other measures is as follows; to build the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, in so doing support the jobs and the small businesses and the apprenticeships who need support today.
The school modernisation program in particular is of fundamental importance. We are turning every primary school in the country into a construction site - every one, government, non-government, without apology, 7,500 of them.
Our secondary schools - 500 of 2,500 will have the construction of new science centres or new language centres. In primary schools, 21st century libraries. And in all these schools -10,000 nationwide - injections of funds to support fundamental maintenance and repairs as well. The objective is to support jobs, small business and apprenticeships in local areas now and on top of that build the schools that we need for the 21st century. This is part and parcel of what will unfold in the months and quarters ahead.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation building for recovery. We are supporting jobs today by investing in the longer term infrastructure the nation needs for tomorrow as well, investing in major rail, road and port projects. Investing in major clean energy projects including what would become the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world of 1,000 megawatts. We'll also be investing up to $43 billion in partnership with the private sector to build a high speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia to the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total, about $50 billion for around 70 per cent of the Government's overall stimulus package is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to long term. And by the end of the year, we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country, 35,000. As the chart indicates, public final demand is set to grow strongly driven by a record 25 per cent increase in public investment in ‘09-10.
The Federal Government is making up a large part of the increase, stepping in to use our strong balance sheet to support investment. This strategy of short, medium and long term measures to support the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession. In aggregate, Treasury has estimated without our nation building for recovery plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work. Without government action unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
Yesterday we saw an increase in unemployment to 5.7 per cent, returning it to where it was in March this year, although employment remained fairly steady falling by about 1,700. This data confirms the global recession is continueing to have a direct impact on the Australian economy and on Australian jobs. No one likes to see unemployment rise as a result of the global recession. But Australia's unemployment rate is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
Again, bear this in mind - we have the fastest growth of the major advanced economies.
We have the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies.
We have the lowest debt of the major advanced economies and we have the second lowest unemployment rate of the major advanced economies.
In these difficult economic circumstances it is hard to produce results like this. Government policy action has been instrumental. Actions also, independently by you as the women and men in business have been equally critical.
While there's a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world. And Australians have every reason to remain confident that we'll continue to weather the storm of the global recession better than most other advanced economies.
If we go to the impact of all these measures on growth, overall the Government stimulus will have a significant impact on growth. In 2009-10, Treasury estimates that growth will be increased by 2.75 per cent as a result of government stimulus investments. In 2010-11 growth will be increased by 1.5 per cent. And again, I will draw your attention to the graph and the difference between pre-stimulus measures and post-stimulus measures as underpinned by the data which is in front of you.
In the last few days, we have received some positive indications that businesses and consumers are reacting positively to stimulus packages.
I welcome the news on Tuesday that business confidence has been on the rise. The increase in business confidence for May is the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989. Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
Data out on Wednesday this week showed consumer sentiment was up by 12 per cent in June. This is the largest increase in 22 years. Consumer sentiment is now up 20 per cent since the announcement of the Government's first economic stimulus package back in October. The consumer sentiment index is now at its highest level since January 2008.
There is still a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses and consumers can see some light at the end of the tunnel. And again I say by no means are we out of the woods yet. But if government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in a severe recession and that in turn would have negatively affected confidence, both business and consumer confidence.
The global recession has of course had a significant effect on Budget bottom lines, both in Australia and around the world. The Australian Budget has been hit with a $210 billion collapse in Australian tax revenues because of the global recession. This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a Budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers. But despite the revenue collapse and the measures that we have taken to stimulate the economy, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the Budget.
On debt and deficit, Australia's net debt is now lower than any of the other major advanced economies. Australia to the left of your screen and then you move through Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, the advanced 25, the Euro area and Japan.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US and 136 per cent in Japan. By contrast Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-2014 before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a stronger period of growth.
And Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is the lowest of the advanced economies. The budget deficit in the United States is 13.6 per cent of GDP. In Japan, the deficit is 9.9 per cent of GDP. The UK, it's 9.8 per cent of GDP. I'd say to you all as leaders of the business community it is important to bear these fundamental facts, the statistical data in mind as you confront a dishonest scare campaign on debt and deficit. We have taken these measures consciously to stimulate the economy and I repeat - of the major advanced economies, Australia is now the fastest growing with the lowest net debt, the lowest deficit and with the second lowest unemployment rate.
To conclude, the Government is acting decisively and comprehensively to support economic growth. This represents for us a new partnership between government and the business sector and it demonstrates the Australian Government is committed to the support and opportunities for business. In particular, I'd encourage all businesses to make the most of the incentives the government has implemented during the past nine months. I repeat and reiterate what Craig had to say before, to encourage all of you as businesses to take advantage of the 30 per cent general business tax break for eligible investments that are available until the 30th of June and the 50 per cent small business tax break that lasts until the end of this year. This tax break for investment is a measure strongly advocated by ACCI, as I indicated before, and we would like you as people in business, tailored to the circumstances of your individual business, to make maximum advantage, to take maximum advantage of it.
The Government cannot stop the global recession, we cannot stop the recession causing harm to businesses. We cannot cause the global recession to stop harming employment. But as a Government by acting we can make a difference.
There are two alternative strategies here. You can sit back and sit on your hands and do nothing. You can complain and you can moan and you blame somebody else for events that began beyond our shores and were not controlled by us, which began in US financial markets more than a year and a half ago.
Or you can say and conclude, as we the Government have done, that we have responsibility to act, a responsibility to intervene, a responsibility to make a temporary difference while the private sector is in retreat, by government stepping into the breach. That underpins the economic strategy we've embraced. And to do so on the base of a prudent financial strategy which sees the Budget return to surplus in the medium term and to use those surpluses to repay government borrowings. This has been a responsible strategy for Australia.
I believe we've demonstrated in the past nine months that by working together we, government and business, can cushion Australia from the worst impacts of this global recession. I say again, we are not out of the woods yet. There are still many problems that still lie ahead.
But we intend to maintain this active and dynamic partnership with business to see Australia through. Nation building for recovery, but equally nation building for the future using skills, using infrastructure and the other investments that we make now to support jobs, to support business and to support apprenticeships to use those investments also to turbocharge productivity growth for our economy into the future.
That's the Government's mission, thank you for your support


Friends of football, one and all.
And I begin also by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Well what a great day for Australian football.
That we as a people and as a nation could have the audacity, Frank, the sheer chutzpah, not to mention the organisational skills to launch a bid to host the greatest event on earth, the FIFA World Cup.
It is a stunning tribute to Frank's vision, his determination and his ability to get inside the head of any politician.
Frank, the smart bloke that he is, cornered me prior to the last election and said ‘how bout it Kevin?'
I'm sure he did the same thing to Mr Howard.
Well, whatever the outcome, Frank knew that he had the support of government and I appreciate the comments just now made by the Leader of the Opposition.
When I look by the way at this particular arrangement of the Great Hall in Parliament House here today, notwithstanding what the Leader of the Opposition just said, perhaps we could just leave it here.
Because we've got Question Time tomorrow, don the jerseys and off we go, be over in a shorter period of time. It could be more eventful. Perhaps this is one of the most creative and the public may think more useful purposes to which Parliament House has been dedicated in recent times.
I'm old enough to remember 1974. I remember watching it on black and white television in country Queensland as we made it for the first time. As a kid growing up I used to watch ‘Match of the Day' and it seemed to me unbelievable that a country such as Australia could've made it to the World Cup as we did in ‘74. And I remember that great game against West Germany.
And then beyond that the extraordinary achievements of 2006. Win against Japan, the great achievement against Croatia. And then of course going down to Italy and let none of us forget, Italy then went on to be the champions, something the Italian Ambassador reminded me of last night as we watched the rugby here in Canberra where Australia for the record won 31 to 8, but let's not dwell on that with any chutzpah.
And then, the extraordinary achievements in recent times on behalf of the Socceroos to secure for us our right to participate in 2010. Great result against Qatar, the great result against Bahrain and of we wish them all the best against Japan later this week.
2010, Australia in South Africa. I was just talking to Malcolm before. Frank said that I should go and help lobby for our rights to hold the 2018 or 2022 FIFA World Cup. May need me around for that, so if Malcolm and I could agree on a truce, than we could both be there together. On the condition of course that we have an equal truce but I probably have more sway with that because there is (inaudible) election held at that time.
If you look at the sheer odds that we're up against for 2018, this is tough. Let's be frank about it. We're up against nine other competitors from around the world at least that I know about. We're up against the United States. We're up against England. We're up against a combination of Belgium and the Netherlands, Spain and Portugal. We're up against Indonesia and others within our own region.
This will be tough. But the reason why the Government has got behind it with a significant investment early on of some $45 million is to make sure we as a nation can rise to the occasion. And when the world looks at us in the time between now and when decisions are made at the end of next year, what we want the world to conclude is that we are as one behind this great bid. Not just in politics, but the entire community, business, unions, all of us in this together supporting this great national bid.
I'm confident that we can do that.
Some ask why? The great doubters, the great naysayers will say why? Even if you have no passion for this game or sport at all, look simply at the economics of it.
This is an extraordinary opportunity for Australia.
Last time I looked the numbers of the cumulative viewing audience for the 2006 World Cup was in the order of 26 billion, 26 billion. The Rugby World Cup we hosted here in 2003 had a combined viewing audience of some 3.2 billion. It's projected that in 2010 in South Africa this figure will rise to something like 40 billion.
The total revenues to be derived for a country like Australia where you take the visitations in Germany, I think last time some two million international visitors. Add to that all the other associated opportunities for business. The calculations are that we stand to earn as a nation some $5 billion from this single event being held in Australia. And for the econometricians among us, that's 0.5 per cent of GDP. It's not to be sneezed at.
But you know something, this is much bigger than economics, it's much bigger than the opportunities for business. It's about providing an extraordinary opportunity for Australia to showcase itself to the world, an extraordinary opportunity for our young people to see in themselves the opportunity to play for Australia and to bring the world game, the global game in all of its dimension and anchor it finally and formally and fundamentally into our national culture. This I think is a prize worth fighting for.
As you've just seen on the great display around us, we are good at hosting big events. We've done it with the Olympics in Melbourne. We did it again with the Olympics in Sydney. We've done it with three Commonwealth Games that I can remember. I can't really remember Perth in ‘62 but the ones since then anyway, in Brisbane and again in Melbourne.
We've done it with the Rugby World Cup. We are good doing these things and it's the combination of that expertise, that national expertise in partnership with our friends in the State and Territory Governments that will underpin our prospects in realising this bid.
Ladies and gentlemen, the challengers are great, but the prize is much greater. I salute those who've had the courage and the initiative and the creativity to bring forth this idea. And I congratulate each one of you, our friends in the media, our friends in business for getting behind this great Australian national initiative.
It is therefore with great pride as Prime Minister of Australia on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian nation to officially launch Australia's bid to host the FIFA World Cup.


The Rudd Government will honour its election commitment to ensure there is a tough cop on the beat in the building and construction industry.
Tomorrow the Government will introduce legislation which responds to the Wilcox Review by amending the Building and Construction Industry Improvement (BCII) Act.
The legislation will honour our promise to abolish the Australian Building and Construction Commission and replace it with the Fair Work  -  Building Industry Inspectorate.
The existing coercive powers will be maintained, alongside new safeguards recommended by Federal Court Judge Murray Wilcox.
The Government's position on the Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC) has been clear for a long period of time.
There are problems in parts of the building and construction sector which cannot be ignored.
The Rudd Government has no tolerance for conduct which breaks the law, whether it be unlawful industrial action or underpayment of employees.
At the same time, this sector is full of hard working people helping to build Australia towards recovery.
That's why the Government is determined to get the balance right.
Last year the Government asked former Federal Court Judge Murray Wilcox to produce a report following months of consultations with stakeholders.
The Wilcox report came to the following pivotal conclusion about the ongoing need for coercive powers:
“I am satisfied there is still such a level of industrial unlawfulness in the building and construction industry, especially in Victoria and Western Australia, that it would be inadvisable not to empower the [Specialist Division] to undertake compulsory interrogation. The reality is that, without such a power, some types of contravention would be almost impossible to prove.
I have reached the opinion that it would be unwise not to endow [Specialist Division] (at least for now) with a coercive interrogation power. Although conduct in the industry has improved in recent years, I believe the job is not yet done.”
The Wilcox report also recommended important new safeguards on the exercise of the coercive powers.
The Government agrees with the principal conclusions of the Wilcox report and has determined to retain the coercive powers with the new safeguards Wilcox recommends.
Importantly, the Government is taking an extra step to respond to the Wilcox observation that parts of the building and construction industry raise increased compliance problems.
The Government has developed a mechanism to switch off the coercive powers for peaceful parts of the industry where such extra compliance arrangements are not necessary.
This will enable compliance to be focussed on those parts of the industry where it is needed most.
The Government has also accepted and implemented the Wilcox recommendations to equalise penalties for building workers with other workers and to sunset the coercive powers in five years' time.
Prior to the sunset there will be a review of compliance in the building and construction industry.


PM: Prior to the last election, we said that we would abolish WorkChoices and replace WorkChoices with a fair and balanced industrial relations system, through the Fair Work Act. We also said that in the construction industry, that the ABCC would be retained until 2010 and that we would replace it with a tough cop on the beat with proper procedural fairness. 
Subsequent to the election, as you know, the Government appointed Justice Wilcox to examine what should replace the ABCC. Justice Wilcox subsequently reported that the particular problems of the construction industry, particularly in Western Australia and in Victoria, warranted the retention of a separate legal jurisdiction for the construction industry, one which retained coercive powers and one which had better legal protections.
Over the course of the last week, the cabinet committee, the cabinet, the various committees of the caucus, together with a full meeting of the caucus just now, in an extensive and animated discussion over two and a half hours, has resolved that the Government will introduce legislation into the parliament for the creation of a new building industry inspectorate that will be based on Justice Wilcox's report.
There will of course be loud complaints from various people in the trade union movement. I accept that, there will be complaints also from various parts of industry, I accept that as well. But complaints from the union movement, complaints from industry would probably suggest that the Government has got the balance right in acting in the national interest.
Tough decisions of this type will not be welcomed by various parts of the trade union movement, but these are tough decisions which are important in the national interest, given the particular history of the construction industry, and its centrality in the economy.
Furthermore, I would like to underline in absolutely clear cut terms that this Government will not tolerate violence, threats of violence or intimidation in any part of the industry. And we believe we acted accordingly through the legislation which will be introduced in the parliament.
I will now ask the Deputy Prime Minister to go through the detail of what the new body, the Building Industry Inspectorate, will do.
DPM: Thank you. Thanks Prime Minister. Tomorrow I will introduce into the Federal Parliament, a Bill which will amend The Building Construction Industry Improvement Act. Those amendments will abolish the Australian Building and Construction Commission and from the 1st of February 2010, create it with a new specialist inspectorate for the building industry.
This is honouring Labor's election promise as given in the 2007 election.
On the powers of the new body, we will be guided by the report of Mr Justice Wilcox. The Government asked Mr Wilcox to report on the powers of the new body. He gave us a comprehensive report and I have described it as a good report.
We will implement his recommendation that penalty provisions between building workers and other workers should be equalised. We will implement his recommendation to keep the coercive powers for a five year period and to have a sunset at the end of the five years, with a review to be conducted prior to that sunset.
We have accepted his recommendation that these coercive powers need oversight and the legislation will include his recommendation that an individual exercise of the coercive powers should be approved by a presidential member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
We have also accepted his recommendation that the exercise of the coercive powers and the hearings that result should be videotaped, the videotape provided to the Ombudsman and the Ombudsman should periodically report on the conduct of those hearings.
We have also accepted his recommendation that a person required to attend for a coercive powers hearing should have all of their costs - wages lost, travel, and the costs of a lawyer - met.
Those recommendations are in the legislation which I will introduce tomorrow.
In addition, in the legislation, we have developed a mechanism to focus compliance in the building and construction industry where it is needed the most. His Honour, Murray Wilcox found very clearly that compliance problems tend to be concentrated in parts of the country.
He referred especially to the compliance problems in Victoria and in Western Australia. 
We accept his conclusions that there are more problems in some parts of the industry than others. Consequently, in this legislation, there will be the ability for the coercive powers to be switched off for projects that have good industrial behaviour and a good record.
That decision will be made by an independent assessor. It will be made on application. For good behaviour, good behaviour can be rewarded by the coercive powers being switched off. But for bad behaviour, the coercive powers will be there. These laws are there to show that we want to drive cultural change in the building and construction industry.
The Prime Minister has remarked that there are many law abiding citizens who work in the building and construction industry and there are many projects in this country that are completed on time, some of them before time, and on budget.
Good industrial behaviour can be rewarded under this legislation. But clearly, for those parts of the building and construction industry that aren't doing the right thing, the full force of these laws apply to them.
It will enable us to focus our compliance activities where that is needed the most, to deal with those parts of the industry that Mr Wilcox has pointed the Government to.
We believe that this package gets the balance right, gets the balance right for an industry where we have seen problems with unlawfulness in some parts of the industry, gets the balance right so there is always a tough cop on the beat dealing with compliance in building and construction and gets the balance right by creating a reward for good behaviour and driving cultural change in this industry.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) did your legislation or your initiative change at all over the course of the discussions with your colleagues over the last couple of days?
DPM: No not in any way.
JOURNALIST: Wouldn't it mean switching off coercive powers because surely if there wasn't a problem in that section of the industry they wouldn't be invoked anyway?
DPM: Well what it means is that an independent assessor will say that the coercive powers aren't necessary for that project, it's to be done on a project by project consideration. We think that's important because we think for those parts of the industry, those projects where there is good industrial compliance, that that ought to be acknowledged, and it ought to be acknowledged by saying the special laws that are necessary to deal with tough compliance in some parts of the industry are not necessary for that particular project.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
DPM: It will be possible for the independent assessor, particularly having received information from our new specialist inspectorate, to turn the coercive powers back on, should that be viewed as necessary. But what we are actually creating here is a system to drive cultural change, a system to reward good behaviour and most importantly a system to focus compliance, focus the attentions of the tough cop where those attentions are needed the most.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) penalties for non-compliance in the building industry create incentives for bad behaviour, reward bad behaviour in that sense?
DPM: Well the penalties in the Fair Work Act for industrial misconduct are considerable. They are considerable for the individuals involved, they're considerable for the industrial organisations involved. The independent report provided to us by his Honour Murray Wilcox considered this question, it is a very good report, he has reasoned through having talked to hundreds of people, the circumstances of this industry, in a very detailed way.
And he has recommended to us that he believes penalties should be equalised. He is obviously saying in that that the penalties available under the Fair Work Act are sufficient, but he has made his recommendations about the coercive powers. They are in this legislation and they are in this legislation with this particular focus about making sure that those parts of the industry that need the attentions of the tough cop, that the tough cop's attention will well and truly be there.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd now that you know, now that we all know what Peter Costello is doing, you have some surety, more than you did before, as to who you'll be facing at the next election. How will you beat Malcolm Turnbull at the next election and what is your response, were you surprised by the fact that he is gaining on you in the Newspoll?
PM: Julia and I have had this bet going for quite some time, that I thought I would be up against Mr Costello at the next election, I think I have said that to most of you around here, I don't think it is any surprise.
While I was surprised, it shows that she is smarter than me.
DPM: You owe me 20 bucks.
PM: And I owe her 20 bucks. There you go. Sorry. So that is the first point. The second thing is that this is a global economic recession and the next Australian election will be very, very tough, it will be very, very competitive, because we are in very, very hard economic times. The Government has a clear cut strategy, Nation Building for Recovery, Nation Building for the Future. I have yet to see what the alternative strategy is.
But our ground is clear, and on that point, can I say that we, in these difficult circumstances, are doing better than most other economies. Whether it is on growth, whether it is on unemployment, whether it is also on debt and deficit and on the question of recession, but we are not out of the woods yet, that's why this next election will be very, very tough indeed.
And on the last part of your question, this Government in the lead-up to the Budget took a whole series of very tough decision. And many of those tough decisions taken in the national interest are not popular, I accept that fact and I take full responsibility.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what's your message to bank executives today as they jack up mortgage interest rates and then apparently choof off for some Bacchanalian feast of champagne and caviar?
PM: A what?
JOURNALIST: Bacchanalian.
PM: Oh right. (Laughter) Could you put that question again please?
JOURNALIST: Chow down on champagne and caviar as they jack up interest rates Prime Minister.
PM: Okay, fine. I was just getting some clarification on what you were saying. I think everyone out there relying upon the banks for their loans would like some explanation of the circumstances surrounding this report about the CBA. I think that would be useful for everybody. These are tough economic times, people are making hard decisions out there in small business, hard decisions also about home loans. I think it would be good, very good indeed, if we had some explanation as to what are the circumstances surrounding this report.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) two banks today lifted their fixed rates because of the economic impact about. Why can't we do more to stop that?
PM: As you looked at the statement by the CBA, it was quite clear about the fact that of course the cost of funding is primarily shaped by offshore wholesale markets. And yesterday in the Parliament you'll recall that I detailed the extent to which offshore markets are shaped by the magnitude of the bond market. It is about 80, the figure I used yesterday I think was some 84 trillion dollars worth of bonds on issue and the Australian Government representing something like 0.001 per cent of that. Let's put all of that into some context.
Second point is this. On interest rates, notwithstanding these most recent unfortunate actions by the banks, we are currently experiencing interest rates at a 40-year low.
To put a point of contrast, interest rates when the government was elected, the standard variable mortgage rate was 8.55 per cent. Now, the standard variable mortgage rate is on average 5.78 per cent. So if you have an average mortgage of $300,000 you're now saving around $530 a month.
So interest rates now through six interest rate cuts in a row are now at 40 year lows in contrast to 10 interest rate rises in a row under our predecessors. The Government will always keep under review measures to enhance competition in the banking sector and we'll do so into the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Mr Costello - can you see a time when you might offer him a job to work with your government? He's very experienced in matters financial and he's not got a job.
PM: Have you got anything in mind?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I hope the Government has demonstrated in the period that we've been in office that we have a pretty open minded approach in terms of who we appoint to positions. We've appointed people like Tim Fischer to the Ambassadorship of the Holy See.
And as I said in the Parliament, I meant every bit of it - Mr Costello is a highly intelligent individual who's made a big contribution to Australian public life. So I would not rule out at all the possibility of appointing him to a position in the future. Do I have anything in particular in mind? No.
But can I just say this. This is a nation which should properly harness its talent, do you know what I mean? If I look back and I see one huge error made by our predecessors, all those bright people in the Hawke and Keating period, they just weren't properly used, and I just think that's just a bit of a national tragedy. We actually need to change our political culture a bit so that good people, intelligent people who have extensive national and international experience can be properly deployed.
Do I have anything particularly in mind in terms of Mr Costello? No. Do I rule out appointing him to such a position? Not at all. He's, as I said in the Parliament yesterday, a highly talented individual.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) can Craig Thomson remain as the Chair of the House Economics Committee while these allegations are hanging over his head?
PM: My understanding is that this independent report has been now submitted to the AEC and to the Industrial Registrar and we'll wait for the conclusion of those processes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you think about the New South Wales Government's push for a ‘made in Australia' ban China campaign which it's pushing in today's State Budget. Do you support it? And will it breach any of Australia's free trade obligations?
PM: What I'd like to do is I think their Budget's coming down about now is that right? I'd actually like to see it in black and white (inaudible) actually look at the detail of what's actually being proposed before making any further comment. Dennis, over to you mate.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the Queensland Government is bringing down its Budget this afternoon and we know quite a bit of what's in it  - 
PM: What is in it?
JOURNALIST: Well, asset sales, clamps on public service  - 
PM: Where's your copy?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) cuts to local government funding and the abolition of the fuel subsidy. Now these measures I guess might be a bit unpopular in Queensland. Are you concerned at all that your government might suffer some electoral blowback from this?
PM: Look, as I said in Queensland the other day when I was asked about these things - at least I think it was in Queensland or elsewhere - Anna Bligh the Premier is making some tough decisions. The details of what's in the Budget, I will wait until I actually see what's in the Budget papers consistent with my response to the question just now about New South Wales.
And having said that, I want to zip because I'm cold.


Thanks very much. If I could begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And could I also say at the very outset that this is a very good thing that you are doing, News Ltd and Microsoft, because you are in the business of encouragement, encouraging young leaders of today to become our nation's leaders for tomorrow.
One of the lesser known lights of the New Testament - this is not a Bonhoeffer lecture - is a bloke called Barnabas. You've probably never heard of him. But he was referred to repeatedly in the writings as the Son of Encouragement. And in what is often an ocean of despair, the actual physicality of encouraging people, particularly those of talent and ability is of real importance in shaping a person's life.
Not just to reach their own individual potential, but you take that further and to deploy that potential for the benefit of the wider community, the nation and broader humankind.
If we're honest about it, those of us who would regard ourselves as self-made men and women and we reflect on our careers, there have been people out there in the business of encouraging us along the way, small ways, large ways, family, friends, coaches, bosses and for those lucky enough mentors - always seeking to identify that which is good and of potential in a person's life and to show gently, occasionally firmly, but with direction a further way to go. And this is part of what is being celebrated here today.
Because in the oceans of negativity which often pass for public debate in this country, it is important, always important to be building up rather than to be tearing down. To create positive islands of possibilities rather than simply seas of despair and engaging in a fashionable celebration of the same.
To always be looking at how you can set things right, rather than simply wallowing in what's going wrong. That's the task of leadership. And that is why this important event today is being held. Because if there is one single continuing feature in the lives that I've seen described in this event today is that each and every one of them is seeking to make a difference.
Not simply content with the status quo in their own lives or in the professional environment in which they've grown up but a determination and a resolve to get out there and to make a difference, to push back the frontiers of what is known and to go on to do things which are not known but which are needed in order to advantage wider human kind.
I actually read through this list this morning in terms of those who have been part of this Next 100. Astronomers and astrophysicists, nanobot engineers, plant scientists, solar power innovators, bush fire scientists, oceanographers, water scientists, street university founders, youth mental health workers, eye surgeons, depression awareness campaigners, spinal pain researchers, metallurgists, artificial intelligence experts  -  we could just do with some natural intelligence around here; move to the artificial intelligence a bit later on.
AFL indigenous youth leadership coaches, Olympic champion divers, authors, conductors, choreographers of Aboriginal dance. Foreign policy analysts, Asia experts, environmental entrepreneurs, humanitarian campaigners, animal protection advocates, program designers for disabled youths, UN advocates. I just noticed in all this it's also got Alister Jordan, my chief of staff, how did that happen John? I just rang him on the way here and I said “I've just seen you on the list, how did that happen?” Anyway, we'll leave him to one side.
Can I just say this is an extraordinary impressive list of Australians out there seeking to make a difference. And I was taken by one of the references in this list in the science category to someone whose name is Nicole I think it's Kuepper. Am I pronouncing it correctly if she is here? K-U-E-P-P-E-R. Solar pioneer innovator at the age of 24. What were you all doing at the age of 24?
And she said: “It's often easier for scientists/engineers to work on the next bio-drug,” says Nicole Kuepper, a lecturer and PhD candidate at the Australian Research Council Photovoltaic Centre of Excellence at the University of New South Wales. “But there are some simple problems people in developing countries face. And that is how you can have low cost solutions for energy.”
And then she says: “We stumbled on a solar cell manufacturing process involving an inkjet printer, something like nail polish, and a pizza oven that has been deemed to be ‘i-JET cell concept' and I am working on that today.” Well, as you do at the age of 24.
As I say, that's what's good about this, encouraging persons such as Nicole and the other 99 in this list to make a bigger difference for the future.
Which brings us back to the theme that we are here to celebrate today and that theme is encouragement and encouragement for leadership for the future.
What are the qualities of leadership that I believe are seeking to be inspired and encouraged here today? Leadership that dares to look beyond the horizon, to identify the opportunities of the future as well as recognising the threat and then to do something about it. Leadership that resolves to act, not simply to stand idly by. Leadership that seeks to inspire others to follow, rather than simply leaving people behind. Leadership that always seeks to build up rather than engage in the business of just tearing people down. And leadership above all that seeks to encourage the absolute best in everyone else. That is why I'm so pleased and honoured to be part of this event today.
These qualities I believe are alive in the life experience, in many cases quite short, of this list of 100 that has been nominated by News Ltd today. What our nation needs beyond politics, is not just the next 100. What our nation needs is the next 1,000 leaders for tomorrow in every field.
To chart Australia's future, to have alive what I believe should be a vision for the nation. To become the best educated, the best skilled, the best trained workforce anywhere in the world. To celebrate the innovations in science and engineering and design. To honour our achievements, academic as well as in the sporting fields.
And beyond that, for ourselves and our particular part of the world, to have about us a vision which says, let us become the most Asia-literate, China-literate country in the collective west.
And to also in all of that have about us a culture which says, here is a land Australia, where you can have an idea, build a business up from scratch and turn it into a world beater, while never allowing the fair go to be thrown out the back door.
That I believe, these I believe are values which shape our vision for our nation's future. But none of that is possible in the absence of leadership and that leadership and its qualities are being so honoured here today.
I believe therefore, our nation's future is in safe hands when we honour leadership such as that which is being recognised today in this ceremony. I thank you very much. 


PM: Allegations have been made by a public servant concerning my integrity and that of the Treasurer. Firstly let me remind you what I said in Parliament on this matter on the 4th of June 2009, that one, “I have been advised that neither I nor my office have ever spoken with Mr Grant in relation to OzCar; two, neither I nor my office have ever been made, have ever made any representations on his behalf; and three, I have not been aware of any representations on his behalf made by anyone in the Government, including the referral referred to before by the Treasurer's office.” 
As of now, I have no basis before me which changes that position. The public servant in question has said this afternoon that he believes he had an email communication from Dr Andrew Charlton of my office, making representations on behalf of Mr Grant.
I also note what the public servant went on to say  - 
He said, ‘my recollection may well be totally false, faulty. But my recollection, and that is a big qualification, but my recollection is that there was a short email from the PMO to me which very simply alerted me to the case of John Grant. But my, I don't have the email.'
To this I would say the following, that there have been exhaustive searches conducted of Dr Charlton's computer and email systems, and no such correspondence can be found. My office has conducted extensive searches on Dr Charlton's emails and computer system and it has found nothing.
Furthermore following today's senate committee hearing and following allegations this evening by Steve Lewis, who I am advised claims he is in possession of an email from Dr Charlton to the public servant dated 19 February, which makes a representation for Mr John Grant. We requested both the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, and the Department of treasury to search both Dr Charlton's computer system and a computer system of the public servant.
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet's IT department has advised us tonight that no such correspondence can be found on Dr Charlton's computer system either for that date or the date preceding or following.
Let me quote from PM&amp;C's advice on this matter. This is a communication to my office this evening, part of the reason I am a bit late with you.
‘As advised, the Department has this evening undertaken a search of all of the emails in the Prime Minister and Cabinet's email system for the period 16 February 2009 to 22 February 2009. This search includes all emails from and to Mr Charlton. The search would include any material deleted from the system. PM and C captures a copy of all emails in and out of the Department's system.
The Department has not found any record of an email from Mr Charlton to Treasury which relates to motor vehicle dealerships or any related matters.'
That is what PM&amp;C have said to us tonight.
Furthermore, the Department of Treasury's IT unit has advised us that they also can find no correspondence between Dr Charlton or anyone in my office, and the public servant on that date. Treasury's advice will be circulated later on.
Furthermore, could I emphasise to all of you, that as a senior Treasury official made it clear in the Senate Inquiry today, the Treasury last night, conducted an extensive search of its computer systems to locate any such correspondence, from my office, or generally, or Dr Charlton in particular, to Treasury on the John Grant matter, and it has found none.
To this I would also add that Dr Andrew Charlton has confirmed repeatedly to me that he did not send any such email. And Dr Charlton has told me that prior to this having been raised in parliament, he had never heard of Mr Grant.
Second, in relation to the matters which have been raised in relation to the Treasurer. The Treasurer said when this matter was first raised in Parliament on 4 June 2009 that he had made representations on behalf of Mr Grant, and on behalf of others, including a car dealership in the electorate of the National Party's Kay Hull.
The public servant this afternoon said he believed the representations he had received from the Treasurer's office were stronger than others. I have no basis whatsoever to believe that the representations made in relation to Mr Grant or others were anything other than appropriate.
Nonetheless, given that these matters go to questions of integrity, I have decided to request that the Auditor-General conduct an inquiry on this matter. Based on advice from the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minster and Cabinet, I have now written to the Auditor General, and the following terms of reference, as recommended by PM&amp;C.
I will read you that  - 
‘Please investigate and report on, one, whether any representations in relation to John Grant Motors were made by the Prime Minister's office to the Treasurer's office, or the Treasury, after the announcement of the OzCar program. Two, the nature of any such representations, if any, and three, the manner in which such representations if any, were handled in relation to applicable standards and procedures. I ask that you report on these matters by 31 July 2009, if possible, and if you form the view that a full investigation report would require a more extended period, that you provide an initial report by that date.
I am further advised by PM&amp;C that the Auditor General is agreeable to conducting such an inquiry. And that is it, over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) discrepancy between Mr Swan telling Parliament that this was just another case that Mr Grant wasn't (inaudible) and what we can see in the email trail of faxes going to Mr Swan's home, emails being cc'd to the head of Treasury, large (inaudible)
PM: What I am saying to you, as I indicated in my remarks before, that I have nothing before me which indicates that representations in relation to this matter, or the dealership in Kay Hull's electorate or elsewhere were anything other than appropriate.
Can I say more broadly as well, that the specific allegation which has been put by the Leader of the Opposition about communication between my own office or myself and the Treasury on this matter, we simply have found no documentary evidence whatsoever, to underpin that.
And can I just add to this, if there was any doubt on this question, I mean we would have simply come out and told you all. We have actually  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Just wait a sec, and therefore, on the day one in parliament, went and did a search quickly, as you saw, my response in Parliament, subsequent to that, the office again, PM&amp;C, sorry the office again has searched Dr Charlton's email system. On top of that, given the particular points raised by Steve Lewis this evening concerning an email which he says he has in his possession of 19 February, we asked specifically, PM&amp;C's IT unit, and Treasury unit, to go through everything, including deleted items, and we can't find a thing. If there was something there folks, I would be the first one out to tell you.
So I am just saying to you that I am somewhat surprised by that. And I draw your attention also to, I am somewhat surprised, I draw your attention also to the statement by the public servant himself, today, where he said, ‘My recollection may well be totally false, or faulty'.
So I just say, that is where we got to, that is what we have looked at. And the advice that I have got from my own department, which has gone through everything on the dates which Steve has raised, came up with nothing. And that is the written advice I just read to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we just refer to the Treasurer for a moment, I asked both the Treasurer's office and you office this afternoon whether there were any other examples of information about these sorts of things going direct to the Treasurer's home fax number, or to the Treasurer directly, they must have conveyed that to you by now.
Are you aware of any other instances where that (inaudible)
PM: Chris, how each Minister deals with their fax systems and email systems, I would not have a clue. Wayne comes from Brisbane and I assume he has a whole lot of stuff which gets streamed to his home fax, I assume that is how it works.
And I assume each Minister has their own arrangements on that score, and I assume there is a pile of stuff that goes through.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd this is the man who is guiding Australia through the global recession. What is he doing, repeatedly reading emails on the apparent application by one car dealer in Queensland for help, when his attention is supposed to be presumably on far bigger matters.
PM: I know for a fact, Tim that the amount of work that the Treasurer puts in on the broad matters of economic management that you describe, is huge. Equally -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well can I just say, having worked with Wayne, from the onset of the global economic recession, I don't think anyone would challenge the Treasurer's work ethic and secondly, the level of attention he has addressed to all these matters that we have been talking about and debating about economic policy responses to the global recession.
Secondly, on matters which are put to him, I assume, from businesses right around the country, he will pay appropriate attention to those as they are put to him. There are people from the business community regularly coming into the office of the Treasurer, be it in this Government or previous Governments, asking whether particular representations could be made. I would assume that is completely normal. Over to you Steve.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd the head of Ford Credit Greg Cohen today told a Senate hearing (inaudible) During the emails that were released today involving Mr Swan, and there is one email there is constant reference to one of Mr Swan's senior advisers, to Mr Grant by his Christian name John, John, John, are you seriously telling the Australian people that Mr Grant was treated the same as every other of those dealers who approached the Government?
PM: Can I just say to you Steve, that on the question of Ford Credit, and its communications with whomever, I am not familiar with those details at all. That is the first point. Secondly, I assume there are multiple communications with multiple finance companies and banks  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You asked a question, I am about to respond to it and then I will go back to the specific matter that you put to my office this evening. And secondly, that the communications concerning various individuals who may have applications, or interest in this particular special purpose vehicle, which I remind you all, doesn't exist at this stage.
That is why I gather, a scheduled Senate Inquiry was held today, so let's all put this into context, it doesn't exist, no monies have been paid to anybody. But it legitimately goes to questions of integrity of process, I accept that.
So, just to go back to the other part of what Steve has raised, or what he has raised separately with my office. What Steve has said in his communication to my office, and I will just quote it,
“News Limited plans to publish the following email, sent by Andrew Charlton from the Prime Minister's office to Treasury official Godwin Grech. The email was sent on the 19th of February.
‘Hi Godwin, the PM has asked if the car dealer financing vehicle is available to assist a Queensland dealership, John Grant Motors, who seems to be having trouble getting finance. If you can follow up on this asap that would be very useful. Happy to discuss. A'”
All I am saying to you Steve is, we cannot find, anywhere in the system any such email. We have searched the, in our own office, and we have had other officers apart from Andrew Charlton go through his own system.
Secondly, he has assured me personally, along the lines I referred to in my remarks before, but thirdly, out of a complete abundance of caution, to then ask Prime Minister and Cabinet, who control the PMO's communications system, to go specifically to the date where you claim you have an email which says that.
They cannot find anything or anything that has been deleted there, and that is from our end. And finally, on the question of Treasury, that is a communication from one person to another, the recipient is alleged to be Treasury, that is, the public servant concerned, Treasury's IT unit have advised us this evening, they can't find anything either.
And I go back to my earlier remark, that were this sort of communication in existence, did I have information to that effect or the office had information to that effect, I would have informed you all at the earliest opportunity and informed the parliament.
JOURNALIST: And you are convinced this email doesn't exist, never existed? Senator Abetz seemed to be quoting an email in the committee this afternoon. DO you then believe you are being set up by people, a person or people?
PM: Based on the evidence that we have, Mark, all I conclude is the email referred to by Steve is false. Now if anything else is produced in the system which has been, which has escaped multiple searches by various parties, our own office, a generic search by Treasury's IT system last night, a specific search on the dates raised by Steve, through the PM&amp;C IT unit this evening following the evidence given today, and by Treasury's IT unit, all I can say is, I can only confirm to you what information we have in our possession.
And I confirm specifically, with PM&amp;C, that they had searched for deleted items as well, and they had.
JOURNALIST: One thing that doesn't seem to be in doubt though is that Treasury, met with the head of Ford Credit and said, can you help this mate of the Prime Minister, pointing out that he was a friend and acquaintance of yours, gave his number, John Grant's number to the head of Ford Credit. Is that appropriate?
PM: Whatever discussions occurred between Ford Credit and I think you just said the Treasury, is that correct? I am not familiar with the content of that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I am just not familiar with the content of that. The primary question here, as far as the attack on my own credibility is concerned, my own integrity is, have I made any such representations, or has my office?
And I am saying to you, and I think some of you were in parliament the day when this question was first raised, I was genuinely puzzled by it. I didn't know what on earth the Leader of the Opposition was referring to. Did not  -  no let me just go to this question  -  it goes to the whole point of any knowledge on my part, and I certainly have no recollection of any such conversation with Mr Grant and certainly no receipt of representation from him. Then, out of abundance of caution, you check in terms of the multiple staff you have working with you, in terms of what's in their recollection first up, and secondly, what's in the documentary record, and we can't find anything.
So on that score, I've just got to say, this has come to me as a complete surprise and I go back to what I said before in relation to Steve and the particular allegation being put in his email to our office this evening concerning what he says News Limited are planning to publish tomorrow. All that I can say is based on all of this, Steve, and I cannot go further than look at the systems that I have, which at this stage involve most of the machinery of government, to establish whether this exists or not, and nothing has been found.
JOURNALIST: Why does the public servant thinks he can recall the thing? I mean, does that worry you? Does that bring up to you that perhaps for him to think that he can recall this email, it perhaps existed at one point?
PM: Patricia, that's a great question. What's in the mind of a whole range of  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: - well hang on, hang on, hang on.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) having this email  - 
PM: I can also draw to your attention  -  Can I just draw to your attention what the public servant said, and I quote to you. “My recollection may well be totally false, faulty” he says. And then he goes on to say is “I don't have the email”. That's what he says. Now I would say that if this was a particularly remarkable matter, which obviously, you know, jolted the public servant in question, I would have thought it would have probably been retained, but then the public servant in question has said explicitly in evidence today “my recollection may well be totally false, faulty”. Do you see what I'm  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Mr Rudd. Is he not credible  - 
PM: All I can say Tim is that had I believed or known that there was any communication from myself making representations on this matter or on behalf of my staff, that I would have immediately come out and told you all. That's just actually how I operate. I mean, mistakes happen in government, you know how big it is, but  - 
JOURNALIST: Well given the proposition, Mr Rudd (inaudible) you mention the date the 16th to the 22nd that the IT department in PM&amp;C (inaudible)
PM: In going to your question Glenn, in anticipation, is that it's only a few hours since this thing was conducted. Those were the dates that explicitly contained in Steve's communication to us and given, there's always a volume of stuff to look at, that's where they've gone first. I'm sure they'll now look more broadly in terms of any other communication  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Absolutely. Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: The other thing I'd like to ask you is the Auditor-General's inquiry  -  will it be public, will it have the power to compel witnesses and will you appear if required?
JOURNALIST: And when will it report?
PM: You obviously went to sleep before Lenore, because I told you. The letter requests him to report by 31 July, he says, searching for the letter, and says that if he requires any further extension of time, to advise us but that he should provide an additional report by that time. In terms of the conduct of the audit, that would be entirely within the discretion, independently of the Auditor-General.
JOURNALIST: All these IT experts that you've talked to today, your office has talked to today, Mr Rudd, have they told you that it's impossible for an email to be erased from these systems without leaving some evidence that it existed at some time.
PM: Mark, I've been accused of many things over this time, being an IT geek is not one of them. No, no  -  hang on, hang on. The question I've asked is about deleted items and what the advice from the PM&amp;C people is that they have no record of this communication and they have searched deleted items, and I think you're familiar with systems to the extent that there are capacities to track whether a matter has been deleted or not.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can you ensure that there will be no repercussions against Godwin Grech for the evidence that  - 
PM: Absolutely. I mean, you know, if I've tried to establish a core principle since we've come to government it is the independence of the public service. We respect that. Remember when we took office? We kept every head of department. When our predecessors took office, they bulleted at least half a dozen of them. What we have sought to do, and I mean this, because I'm a former public servant myself, is to restore the integrity, the independence of the Australian public service and so they can provide advice fearlessly and without favour. Obviously, obviously, well I have never been able to answer for the Senate, can I just say  - 
JOURNALIST: Well why did (inaudible)
PM: I'd like to finish answering the question. I'd like to finish answering the question, and therefore, from time to time, to answer your question, public servants are always going to say, you know, what they think, and it may cause problems for the government of the day, well, that's just stuff, you've got to deal with that, okay? You understand that. That's just as it should be. The key thing is how you respond to it. These matters have been raised and to be fair to the public servant in question, he's actually cast doubt about the possible accuracy of his testimony in that question and as I said, had we any other advice in our possession, we would have put it out to you, it's as simple as that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, why did the government (inaudible).
PM: I'm sorry, I didn't actually watch it. I wasn't here and I can't actually respond to the actual nature of the testimony or the examination.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) behaviour (inaudible)
PM: I'm unaware of the details of the conduct of it. I was actually off at the quack, so there you go.
JOURNALIST: Why did Wayne Swan say to Parliament that he wasn't aware of the outcome of the, this process when the emails went to his house.
PM: Say it again  -  how did he?
JOURNALIST: How can Mr Swan tell Parliament that he wasn't aware of the outcomes of this process when the emails went to his  - 
PM: Well, I'll just go back to the foundational point, which is that the special purpose vehicle does not exist as of now. Secondly, no decisions vis a vis outcome in terms of you know, which particular financial allocation will be made to which particular car company, by definition therefore have not been made. I presume that's what the Treasurer was referring to.
JOURNALIST: Will the Auditor-General also look at whether the Treasurer's office gave favourable treatment  - 
PM: Sorry  - 
QUESTION: Will the Auditor-General also  - 
PM: Look, let me read it to you again mate. What he said, what the terms of reference are which have been the subject of recommendation to me from the Secretary of PM&amp;C and as I said the Auditor-General has indicated that he's agreeable to conduct such an investigation, that is the manner in which such representations, if any, were handled in relation to applicable standards and procedures. That goes to that very question.
JOURNALIST: On that point, Mr Rudd, will you offer to appear before the Auditor-General's inquiry?
PM: You know something  -  the Auditor-General is an independent office, as you well know Glenn, and under those circumstances, whatever the Auditor-General requests, in terms of the proper conduct of inquiry, the government, in the spirit of transparency, will comply. That's as it should be.
As I said before, we believe in the independence of these public institutions as it should be. And I'll just conclude by saying this  -  to all of you, who I've known for a period of time, if something like this had been drawn to our attention as being a problem, that is that something like this had been done, let me tell you the first instinct of me, as Prime Minister of the country, but also who I am as a person, is go out and tell you all, and say ‘oh, by the way we stuffed up'.
We'll just let you know. But you know something? I can't stand in front of you and say we haven't actually tried on this to actually pull out every search system in the system to make sure that we have gone back to the core allegation here which is what Steve's on about tonight, to establish its veracity and thus far, as I said using those systems, we have achieved no results.
PM: Can I add one more thing on a different matter, by the way, which is in relation to the, what I'm advised tonight is the first death from Swine Flu, and can I simply say that any person's death is terrible and our thoughts go out to this man's family and of course to his friends and to his community.
We said from the start that H1N1 influenza 09 would spread through the community as is the experience in other countries. It was unfortunately inevitable that some cases would experience more severe outcomes and that deaths would occur. While tragic that this death has occurred it's important to remember that this influenza remains mild in the vast majority of cases. Most people make a rapid and full recovery. We will continue as a government to act on the advice of medical experts and I would urge the community to do the same.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull today said that you must explain or resign  -  what's your demand of him now?
PM: Well, if the Opposition is the source of the email which Steve's referring to, then I would simply ask him to reconcile his claim, if that is his claim with the advice we have from two professional, independent public service agencies, and I would just say it's time to confirm the facts here, and if he's got the facts wrong, to accept that and to amend his own comments on the public record accordingly.
JOURNALIST: What's your reaction to him talking to your staff?
PM: You know something, I'm employed as Prime Minister to go out there and get knocked around the head by folks like you all the time, that's good. That's as it should be. That's part of our system of government, including the hurly-burly in there. We should draw a line, a very fundamental line at someone threatening a member of staff, let alone a member of staff from the opposing political party.
And that is how Dr Charlton felt  -  he was shaken by it and you, I think, understand what then transpired and the subsequent conversation. I think you've got to be very careful in this place about drawing lines about those that stick their hand up to go into the front line and take the biff and give a bit back but I don't believe that our staff should be subjected to that particularly what I take to be the implied threat concerning Mr Charlton's future out there in the commercial world.
Mr Charlton came to this position as a person with first class academic qualifications, an author and also with commercial experience. He's a young man, he's just turned 30, he has a life ahead of him and frankly, I reckon it's a bit off, doing that sort of thing, and having said all of that, I've got to zip.
JOURNALIST: You said you'd been to the quack  -  are you okay?
PM: Here we go. In the spirit of full disclosure, I went to the quack this afternoon  -  I've had a cyst removed from my back. It'll be subject to biopsy, I'm told it's just a lump of fatty tissue, but it'll be known in a few days. I'm also on pain killers from having this thing taken out of my back, but yeah, off you go.
JOURNALIST: Swine flu in a remote indigenous community has the government  - 
PM: It's about this big apparently.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is a disturbing development. I think the health Minister has been completely upfront with the Australian people about what we face here, upfront about the fact also, as the CMO, about the challenges of influenza in a normal season, where regrettably, a number of people lose their lives.
This is a much more virulent strain of influenza, each day that we receive new or further or additional advice from the CMO, we will take it, in response to it. I believe it is really important when you are dealing with public health matters like this, to be completely open with the public, about the risks, about what has been done, and the practical measures to be taken.
But as you could see from the data emerging in various counties around the world, there is a long way to go with this and the precautionary statements and the personal advisory's which have been issued both by the CMO and by the Health Minister, should be properly adhered to.


PM: What is at stake in this entire debate is the integrity of Mr Turnbull and his core claim that at my request, my office made representations to the Treasury on behalf of Mr John Grant.
Today Mr Turnbull is in full retreat on this claim.
Mr Turnbull's allegation is based on the existence of an alleged email between a staff member of mine and a Treasury official on the 19th of February.
Mr Turnbull claimed he was in possession of this documentary evidence when he threatened a member of my staff at the Press Gallery Ball on Wednesday night.
Furthermore Mr Turnbull's Senate representatives purported to quote from this documentary evidence in the Senate Inquiry on Friday.
In addition, both the Sydney Morning Herald and The Australian newspapers today have reported, the Federal Opposition has claimed to them they are in possession of the email or have read the email.
Yet this morning Mr Turnbull, remarkably, states as follows, and I quote him:
‘Well the email itself, the existence of the email, I don't have a copy of the email, I hasten to add, I do not have a copy of the email. So the email is presumably in the possession of those people between whom it passed. Mr Lewis has an account of it and that was not provided to him by us,' unqote.
Who is telling the truth here? The Sydney Morning Herald and the Australian newspaper who state clearly that the Opposition claims that it has the email in their possession, or Mr Turnbull today who claims that he does not.
Let me reiterate, for the record, what the Government has done since these allegations were first made.
My office has conducted extensive searches on Dr Charlton's emails and computer system  -  and has found nothing.
Following yesterday's Senate Committee hearing and following an allegation last night by Steve Lewis, who I am advised claims he is in possession of an email from Dr Charlton to the public servant in question, dated 19 February, we requested both the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Department of Treasury search both Dr Charlton's computer system and the computer system of the public servant.
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet's IT department has advised us that no such correspondence can be found on Dr Charlton's computer system  -  either for that date or the dates preceding and following it.
The Department has provided the following advice, and I quote it:
‘The Department has this evening', referring to last night, ‘undertaken a search of all of the emails in the Prime Minister and Cabinet's email system for the period 16 February ‘09 to 22 February ‘09. This search includes all emails from and to Mr Charlton. The search would include any material deleted from the system.' Any material deleted from the system.
‘PM and C captures a copy of all emails in and out of the Department's system.'
Furthermore, it goes on, ‘the Department has not found any record of an email from Mr Charlton to Treasury which relates to motor vehicle dealerships or any related matters.'
The Department of Treasury's IT department has advised us that they also can find no correspondence between Dr Charlton, or anyone in my office, and the public servant on that date.
As I said last night, tracing through the independent public service, the alleged originator of the communication, through the PM &amp; C system, and the alleged recipient of the communication, namely, the public servant within Treasury, through two different systems.
Furthermore, on top of these, as a senior Treasury official made it clear in the Senate Inquiry yesterday, the Department of Treasury has conducted an extensive search of its computer systems to locate any such correspondence from my office more generally, or Dr Charlton in particular to Treasury on the John Grant matter  -  and it has found none.
Therefore, given that I have made no request for such recommendations to be made; and my staff have advised me they have made no such recommendations; and the public service has independently confirmed that there is no record of any such communications  -  our only conclusion is that this alleged email is false and a fake.
Therefore, it is time for some honesty from Mr Turnbull on this matter. Mr Turnbull must now detail all dealings the Federal Opposition and the Liberal Party have had in relation to this fake email. And they must explain the following:
Who supplied the contents of this fake email to the opposition?
Who in the Liberal Party has read this fake email?
What did they do with it after they read it?
Has anyone in the Liberal Party described the contents of the email to any other journalists other than to Mr Lewis?
If Mr Turnbull claims he is not in possession of this email then he must release the other documentary evidence he claims to have in relation to this matter.
Of course these matters are not just matters for political debate. Impersonating a public official in the performance of their public functions is an extremely serious offence.
Which is why the Secretary of the Attorney General's Department has today referred the matter of this alleged fake email to the Australian Federal Police.
The Attorney General has today released the following statement:
‘The Attorney-General's Department has today provided me with advice in relation to a very serious allegation that a false email, which purports to relate to the performance of functions by a Commonwealth public official, may have been created and distributed.
‘The Department has advised that if substantiated, a range of offences may have been committed against the Commonwealth Criminal Code 1995. These offences are indictable and are very serious in character.'
‘The integrity of information and identity relating to public officials is crucial to the proper performance of Government.
‘Accordingly, these are very serious allegations that warrant full investigation.
‘The Secretary of the Attorney-General's Department has written to the Australian Federal Police Commissioner requesting that this matter be investigated.
‘I am advised that the Australian Federal Police Commissioner has agreed to commence an investigation.'
As the Australian Federal Police investigation relates to possible criminal offences, that investigation can operate concurrently and without duplicating the inquiry currently being conducted by the Auditor-General.
I would urge Mr Turnbull to commit today to cooperate fully with this Australian Federal Police Investigation.
I am happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well can I just say, I can only act on the basis of the advice that I have received and the information that I have provided. As I said to you all gathered here yesterday, that had we been in possession of any conflicting advice or information since these matters were first raised, we would have simply gone out and spoken to you all and said, ‘well there has been a mistake here, sorry about that'.
But we have been as comprehensive as is humanly possible, I believe that we have done everything that we can within the resources of an independent audit within our own office, but critically, relying upon two independent agencies of Government to conduct their own independent IT audit, including, not just emails which still exist, but deleted items.
And I have been advised, that the systems which are used to track these things are fully capable of tracking any deleted items.
JOURNALIST: But Mr Rudd, you do have some conflicting information which you haven't given us a theory about. The issue here surely is not Mr Turnbull, which is just a smokescreen, but the public servant who gave evidence, claiming that he thought, probably, he remembers such communication. Now what is your theory on why he did think he remembered it (inaudible)
PM: Michelle, it is not my business to speculate on theories, I can deal with the facts as they present themselves.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say I can deal with the facts as presented with me, and what you have omitted from your remarks now is the other statements made by the public servant on the day in question, when he indicated quite clearly that his recollection may not be correct.
That is what he said. I do not have his precise testimony before me but I did read it to you last night.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, if this email is never found, is it tenable for Mr Turnbull to remain Opposition leader?
PM: You know something, integrity is a difficult quality to attain in public life and I am surprised that Mr Turnbull, having raised these matters so volubly in recent weeks, concerning this matter, could then run so rapidly from his core charge today.
Mr Turnbull has some grave questions to answer in relation to his own credibility and integrity on this matter and I await for his answer to the questions I have just raised. It is easy in this business with people such as Mr Turnbull, to throw mud.
It is easy for people in the business of politics to smear other politicians. What I can do as Prime Minister of the country is deal with the facts as they are presented with me. And as I said, for Mr Turnbull, only two nights ago in this place, to confront, to threaten, and to intimidate, a member of my staff, by saying that he had documentary evidence concerning this matter, implication my staff member, and only two days later saying he has no such email in his possession, I believe speaks for itself.
These are questions which he must answer for himself.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is it reasonable for an opposition to rely on the reports by a senior press gallery journalist, and indeed, didn't you often do that yourself in relation to the AWB scandal?
PM: Glen, at the end of the day we are all judged on the basis of the authenticity of our action and also, our preparedness to stand by the claims that we make. Mr Turnbull has made some fundamental claims in relation to my integrity and in relation to the integrity of others. What I have said, very clearly, is, he has gone out there and said, quite directly that, to my staff member, whose singed record of conversation was released yesterday I think, that he possessed this documentary evidence.
And today, when confronted with that proposition, says, ‘well the email itself, the existence of the email, I don't have a copy of it, I hasten to add, I do not have a copy of the email. The email is presumably in the possession of those, between, people between whom it passed'.
You cannot simply make an allegation like that, to a senior member of my staff and to reflect that allegation in the purported representation of documentary evidence in the Senate, through one of his Senators, and then the next day when the heat comes on, run away from it at a million miles an hour.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Lindsay Tanner said it was likely that the Liberal Party had made up this fake email (inaudible)
PM: I haven't seen the text of what Lindsay has said today. Can I say that my conclusion is as I described it before, I have made no such a request for recommendations to be made, my staff advised me they have made no such recommendations.
The public service has independently audited all communications for this period between my office and the Treasury and found nothing. Therefore, I can only conclude that this alleged email is fake and false.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the question of impersonation (inaudible)
PM: That is where I read from the statement of the Attorney General.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I believe Glenn, the right course of action is for the AFP investigation to proceed unimpeded. My call today, very bluntly and directly, to Mr Turnbull, is to commit today, to fully cooperate with this police investigation.
The Commonwealth Criminal Code does not exist for a bit of fun of a Sunday afternoon. It is there for fundamental and serious purposes, one of which goes to the provisions that I just referred to you before, under the relevant sections, concerning indictable offences in this category.
Therefore I would strongly urge Mr Turnbull to commit today to 100 per cent cooperation. I would also say that in terms of the political debate in which we are legitimately engaged at present, it would also advance our general knowledge of these matters, as to who supplied the contents of this email to the opposition, who in the Liberal Party read this email, what did they do with it after they read it, and has anyone in the Liberal Party described its contents to any other journalist other than Mr Lewis.
This would add to the public debate on these matters and to a source of public information. Michelle.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, no. What have we had over the years? We have had a few cars, but no no I don't think so.
JOURNALIST: There are suggestions today, members of your family might have used cars provided by Mr Grant?
PM: Where have they come from Glenn, those suggestions? Could you elaborate where they have come from Glenn? The answer is, no. Can I just say it is very easy to be smeared in politics. The answer to that question is no, absolutely no.
TREASURER: (inaudible) treasurer
PM: The Treasurer has done a first class job, not just in terms of his discharge of the portfolio, in the most difficult circumstances of the time but as I indicated yesterday, has acted entirely appropriately in this matter,
And I said, I got back to what I said before in relation to Mr Turnbull, and how easy it is in the business of national politics, simply to throw mud at people, and then having thrown the mud, to run away.
Mr Turnbull has done that today. He said all this stuff exists, he said he is in possession of it, and then when put on the spot today in an interview, when asked repeatedly by your colleagues as ladies and gentlemen of the press, says, ‘email, what email? I don't have such an email'. Come on now, I mean  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I notice when Dr Charlton's note was produced yesterday, there was no statement to the contrary from Mr Turnbull, this is something which he is now disputing as of today, is that right?
Well it is, I find that remarkable if this goes directly to the accuracy of Mr Turnbull engaging in a threatening and  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well Dr Charlton as you know, from his signed statement, was quite shaken by the exchange with Mr Turnbull, and as a staff member I could understand how that could be the case, then went out, as he said, and discussed the matter with another member of staff who happened to be outside. And then, of course committed his note to file some time later.
I find it remarkable that if Mr Turnbull is disputing the content of his threatening behaviour towards a member of staff, that he would not have done so in complete detail yesterday, in terms of what he agrees with and what he doesn't.
Can I just say also that, it comes on the day, yesterday, when we have also this extraordinary set of statements about Mr Turnbull's relationship with the big end of town and this is on the front page of the Australian yesterday.
And I have found that rather remarkable in terms of how you would conduct business with people in general, let alone on the serious matters which we are discussing in this matter. Having said that folks, got to zip.


CURTIS: Mr Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
CURTIS: At a meeting in February Godwin Grech held with Ford Credit to discuss giving that company half a billion dollars of Government help to continue its business, was the name of any car dealer other than John Grant's raised?
PM: I'm unfamiliar with those discussions. I am sure those things will come out in the course of the Auditor-General's enquiry, which we've established.
CURTIS: But these-
PM: Can I just go to the core of the proposition which Mr Hockey and others, including various people commenting on this program have put, and that is that I as Prime Minister sought to make representations on behalf of Mr Grant to the Treasury, and that as a consequence the Treasurer took special actions in order to make those representations to the Treasury himself.
And all that hinges on Mr Turnbull's claim and other claims that there is an email between myself, and, between my office and the Treasury. The problem is, no such email exists. It is false, it is fake, it is a forgery, notwithstanding the fact that that is the single piece of evidence which Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Party have advanced on this matter.
CURTIS: We'll come to the email in a moment, but the case against -
PM: It's very -
CURTIS: - the Treasurer hangs on whether Mr Grant was given special treatment. If Mr Grant's name was the only one raised in what was a very important meeting for Ford Credit; a meeting to decide if they could get Government help to continue their business, doesn't that show Mr Grant received special treatment?
PM: As you would have just heard in your report on your own program, the Motor Trades Association was referred to a whole range of cases which were being dealt with over time.
CURTIS: Have they (inaudible) emails involved in those cases-
PM: Secondly, can I just say this, Mr Swan, the Treasurer's office, dealt with representations I believe from about half a dozen different members of Parliament. I further understand that there are lots of emails concerning other transactions other than this one concerning Mr Grant.
You ask the question about what is core and foundational - in the case concerning the Treasurer Mr Swan it is this: the Opposition - Mr Turnbull's allegation is this; that I as Prime Minister made representations through my office to the Treasury, on behalf of Mr Grant, and secondly, caused therefore the Treasurer to make particular efforts in relation to this man.
That rests on Mr Turnbull's assertion that I have had communications with the Treasury, and in substantiating that, the Opposition in the Senate put forward what they purported to be the contents of an email between myself and the Treasury, the contents of which need to be read, so that people know what we're up against here.
This is what Senator Abetz read from, on behalf of the Liberal Party in the Senate. This is the purported email:
“Hi Godwin" that's Mr Grech, "the PM has asked if a car dealer financing vehicle is available to assist a Queensland dealership, John Grant Motors who seems to be having trouble getting finance. If you can follow on this asap that would be very useful. Happy to discuss,” Andrew Charlton, in my office.
Here is the problem - this purported email is fake, it is false, it is a forgery. Notwithstanding that, the Daily Telegraph on Saturday chose to produce a mocked-up version of it. Can I just say this as well, when Mr Turnbull today, Monday, was asked about the Opposition's awareness of this particular email, and why Senator Abetz on behalf of the Liberal Party used it in the Senate enquiry last Friday, he said, "Oh, it had already been used - it had already been published in the Daily Telegraph."
Problem, Mr Turnbull: it was not published in the Daily Telegraph until Saturday. The Senate enquiry was on Friday. What is at stake here is Mr Turnbull's knowledge of the contents of this fault, false, fake and forged email; his staff's knowledge of it; the extent to which they sought to disseminate it to others in the media, and to build up this 'smoking gun' case against myself and the Treasurer, which is based on a forged document.
This is the same Liberal Party that gave us children overboard. Mr Turnbull today has a responsibility to enter the Parliament, and to provide a copy of this document and details concerning his use of the contents of it. If he fails to do so, given he has called for my resignation and that of the Treasurer, he has no alternative than to stand up, to apologise, and to resign.
CURTIS: But Mr Rudd in emails that were tabled in the Senate Inquiry that no-one has disputed it shows that Ford Credit said they were prepared to look at Mr Grant's case at a time they were trying to get independent dealers off their books. Doesn't that show Mr Grant was receiving special, receiving other than normal treatment?
PM: There are multiple cases being dealt with here, concerning a whole range of different car dealers, as I just said -
CURTIS: None of them were raised in a meeting that was also -
PM: Well can I just say the purpose, the purpose we have an Auditor-General's inquiry is to go through each of these individual cases. Remember this whole vehicle, this special purpose vehicle to assist car dealerships, as of today has not provided a single dollar of finance to anybody. That's why it's still before the Senate.
What we're talking about is representations here. And furthermore, it is a special purpose vehicle to be made available to the entire car dealership industry - not to any particular individual.
And so representations were made on behalf of a number of car dealerships, half a dozen members of Parliament - half of them in turn being from non-Government electorates  -  as well as the Motor Trades Association as you indicated before, considering a whole range of these as well.
But I go back to the core, rock foundation upon which Mr Turnbull has sought to smear my reputation as Prime Minister, and that of the Treasurer, which is his argument backgrounding editors across the country - and you know this to be true - over the last couple of weeks, saying that they have a smoking gun against the Government, that it is this email which drops me directly in it.
The email is the one I've just referred to you. It is false, fake and a forgery; there can be no graver offence in public political life than to be in the business of communicating a document which is false out there through the media in order to bring your political opponent down.
Mr Turnbull must now apply these standards to himself, stand in the Parliament, provide a copy of his evidence - this document, this purported email - and if he doesn't, to apologise and resign.
Mr Hockey today, I notice, has repeated allegations that I have misled the Parliament on this matter. Mr Hockey, similarly, is now in the same position.
CURTIS: Mr Swan told the Parliament he had no idea what the outcome of the referral of Mr Grant's case was (inaudible) to Treasury was, yet the emails tabled on Friday show he was aware of some outcomes of the actions taken by Mr Grech to assist Mr Grant. Doesn't that prove the Treasurer's parliamentary statement false?
PM: Well, I presume by outcomes we're talking about the delivery of financial conclusions from the special purpose vehicle. I simply go to your, the point that I made to you before, that the special purpose vehicle, called OzCar, doesn't as yet exist. It is still in the Senate. Not a dollar has been provided from it. That is the point.
In terms of what has happened as far as the financial arrangements of each of these car dealerships - the half dozen or so representations which were made by many members of Parliament - I wouldn't have a clue what the outcomes were. Nor, in relation to all those referred to by Mr Delaney and the Motor Trades Association.
But the core point is this: you are inferring or assuming that there is something inherently wrong in the Treasurer's actions when the core argument against him is that has acted in a particular way in support of Mr Grant, because I as Prime Minister have made improper representations on behalf of Mr Grant to the Treasury.
That is the rock, the foundation upon which this entire attack on my credibility and the Treasurer's is based. That rock has disintegrated into sand. Mr Turnbull is running a million miles away today from this email, this alleged communication, about which he has asked questions in Parliament in terms of any representations having been made by me.
He has run this as a backgrounding exercise with the media, and I've got to say - for the Saturday Daily Telegraph of this week, just weekend just past, to run this email in a mocked-up version, having had from me the previous night a comprehensive response in terms of its inaccuracy, leaves fundamental questions as well in terms of standards of professional behaviour.
CURTIS: Mr Swan though knew that meetings were happening; he knew the outcome of some of those meetings. He knew Mr Grant's case was being taken up with Ford Credit and with Capital Finance.
How is that not knowing at least some outcomes? And isn't it parsing words into infinity to say that he was talking about the final outcome? Wasn't the clear impression he left the Parliament with that he handed the case over to Treasury, and that was it?
PM: Can I just say that as Treasurer of the Commonwealth in the midst of the worst recession in three-quarters of a century, the Treasurer has a few things going on. 
CURTIS: But he made (inaudible)
PM: (Inaudible) I'm saying to you, I've noticed there's been a lot of commentary, for example, about various materials being faxed to his home. Every evening I would receive hundreds of pages of documents from the Government departments about any range of matters, some of which I may read, others of which I may not get round to. That is the nature of busy life as a senior minister in the Government.
Mr Swan has been into his work in dealing with the whole challenge of the global economic recession. Of course you're going to get a whole lot of stuff sent to your fax.
But I keep coming back to this whole point: What is the core proposition on which this allegation against him is based, about the impropriety, it is that I, as Prime Minister, have made representations on behalf of this particular car dealer in Queensland to cause the Treasurer to make special efforts on his behalf.
That is the falsehood in this. The core, absolute falsehood. Because the document on which this is based - a document which Mr Turnbull, the contents of which has seemed to hawk around News Limited editors for the last few weeks.
A document around which he then sought to threaten a member of my staff last Wednesday night at a press gallery ball in Canberra, in saying this documentary evidence exists; a document which he says was only raised by Senator Abetz in the Senate because it appeared in the Daily Telegraph.
But here's the problem for Mr Turnbull again: when you try and wriggle out from under, from allegations you've being made, he can't even get his story straight. Because the day this is raised in the Senate is in fact one day prior to this document appearing in the public domain in the Daily Telegraph.
Mr Turnbull is digging himself into more and more trouble. He has one option today: stand in the Parliament - that's why we're here in Canberra - produce this email as a basis for his authentication. If he fails to do so, he has no alternative but to apologise and to resign.
CURTIS: Mr Rudd, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you. 


HOST: The Prime Minister joins us now and Mr Rudd you say that email has Malcolm Turnbull's fingerprints all over it. He says no-one in the Opposition has had anything to do with it. Are you calling Malcolm Turnbull a liar?
PM: Let me just say this, it's not every day that the Leader of the Opposition stands up and says about the Prime Minister of the day, myself, that the Prime Minister is corrupt. Let's just nail it for what it is. That's what he's said over the course of this weekend, and said that his evidence for this was an alleged email between my office and the Treasury, only to have it confirmed that the entire basis for his allegation - this email - is a fraud, it is a fake, it is a fabrication.
And therefore, my own judgment is that Mr Turnbull's got no option, having made this extraordinary claim: do the honourable thing - apologise, and resign.
HOST: So my question was, are you saying Mr Turnbull is a liar?
PM: What I'd say about Mr Turnbull is, this sort of negativity in Australian politics when all your viewers want us to be getting on with the business of fighting the recession, building jobs, helping families. That's what they want, rather than engaging in the politics of negative smear. That's what Malcolm Turnbull has done but what we have discovered today is on the basis of a forged document. That goes to a judgment of his character.
HOST: Briefly, to your Treasurer Wayne Swan and the claim that he misled Parliament, are you certain that nothing further will emerge that will embarrass him or the Government?
PM: I have absolute confidence in the Treasurer because he has been doing a fantastic job on the economy for the reasons that I've outlined before. We are one of the few advanced economies in the world not to have gone into a recession.
And secondly, on this financial arrangement with car dealerships across the country, it is because of the recession there we have brought this in, to help dealerships, and he's been helping many many many  -  the Motor Trades Association came out in the last 24 hours and said that all of these car dealers were dealt with in the same way.
Can I just say, this has to be seen for what it is: I would call upon the senior people of the Liberal Party, the experienced hands of the Liberal Party, Mr Costello, Brendan Nelson, Senator Minchin, to tap Mr Turnbull on the shoulder and say it is time to go. He does not have the character to occupy the highest office in the land.


HOST: Let's ask the Prime Minister, good evening to Mr Rudd. It has been an extraordinary day of accusations, of threats and mud-slinging on both sides. What do you think today has achieved? 
PM: Well can I just say Matt, there has been one set of accusations here and that is by Mr Turnbull, against myself. Last Friday, he accused the Prime Minister of Australia, myself and the Treasurer, of being corrupt. There can be no more serious allegation against the head of Government of a country. What we discovered today and confirmed today, as I indicated over the weekend, was that this entire allegation by Mr Turnbull is based on an email which is a fake, a fraud, a fabrication, in fact, a forgery.
Yet, on the basis of that forgery, and Mr Turnbull, seeking to put it around the Australian community, he went out into the public debate, and sought to bring down a Government. He sought to not just accuse me of corruption, but call upon me to resign. For such a grave error of judgement to occur from someone who will put themself up as the alternative leader of the country, it is quite clear to all fair minded people, that he has no option now himself but to stand up, apologise and to resign.
He does not have the quality of leadership about him.
HOST: You were being asked today to justify your actions or resign, justify the Treasurer's actions or make him resign, have you justified those actions?
PM: Well the entire argument put by Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Party against myself, was that I had acted corruptly in relation to a car dealer in Queensland. And Mr Turnbull said that the evidence was an email between my office and a public servant in the Treasury, asking for representations to be made for this car dealer. The problem is, this email is a complete fraud, a phoney, a hoax, a fabrication.
Yet Mr Turnbull is prepared to go out there, and simply forget any due diligence, go out there and simply make the accusation and call for my resignation. It reflects on his character, not just arrogance, not just the fact that you have got someone who is plainly an opportunist, but a person who will stop at nothing in order to try and become Prime Minister of the country. It is very easy  - 
HOST: But Prime Minister, what about your Treasurer  - 
PM: It is very easy, let me finish this point, it is very easy in public life to throw mud at somebody and to hope that some of it sticks which is what Mr Turnbull has done all over the weekend. All these newspapers covering his accusations against me and against the Treasurer  - 
HOST: Ok well they have been dealt with today. Let's deal with the Treasurer  - 
PM: Well can I just say to you Sir, that they have not been fully dealt with in the context of your program because this is a most serious accusation. It is a bit like saying that the chief executive of Channel Seven is corrupt. I would have thought that the chief executive of Channel Seven would want to come out and say, ‘actually that has been proven to be completely the reverse'.
I am the chief executive of the country as Prime Minister. This accusation has been made against me, three days in the media on this. And now, the entire basis of the argument has been destroyed. Mr Turnbull has no alternative but to resign.
HOST: What about the accusations against your Treasurer, do you think that there is still mud sticking against Wayne Swan, what else has he got to explain?
PM: Can I just say, at this time of the global economic recession, the Treasurer of Australia is out there with myself, working on how do we keep the Australian economy afloat, when so many economies are sliding into recession. He is working full time on these challenges. And that is why Australia, almost uniquely amongst the major economies managed to avoid a recession so far.
That is what we spend our time doing. His actions in relation to this matter have been entirely appropriate, in contrast to the inappropriate behaviour of Mr Turnbull. Can I say this, the time has come for the wise heads in the Liberal Party, the older persons, Brendan Nelson, Nick Minchin, Peter Costello, to tap Mr Turnbull on the shoulder and say, ‘it is time to go'. This lack of character, evidenced in his behaviour on this entire sordid accusations against myself and the Treasurer, means that he has disqualified himself from putting himself forward as an alternative Prime Minister of Australia.
HOST: So do you categorically say that you can stand by your Treasurer?
PM: The Treasurer has acted entirely appropriately. You see, this particular special purpose vehicle for the motor industry was created by the Government to assist the motor vehicle industry car dealerships right across the country. So many of them, being in the absolute forefront of the impact of a global recession.
And that is why the Government has been active there, active on so many fronts. And the Treasurer has been working really hard across the country to try and support Australia's motor vehicle industry and the car dealership industry at a time when these industries are in devastation in so many countries around the world.
He is a first class Treasurer and can I say this, that when it comes to the future of our nation, I know that we have a plan to deal with the challenges facing working families, your viewers watching this tonight. But you know something, you need to have a positive constructive Opposition, not one that is constantly seeking to tear you down personally and to talk the economy down at the same time.
Australians want us to get on with the business of providing this strategy for the future to support our jobs and our families in these really tough times around the world.
HOST: Mr Rudd we appreciate your time tonight.
PM: Thank you for having me on the program.


O'BRIEN: A short time ago, I spoke with the Prime Minister. He was in his Parliament House office.
Kevin Rudd, on radio this morning and in the Parliament today you were very keen to argue that the entire Opposition case against you and the Treasurer rested on the contents of an email that you branded as a forgery. But you know that that's not the only basis for concern about your Treasurer's assistance for the Queensland car dealer John Grant, who is an acquaintance or friend of yours. You know that that's not the only basis, don't you?
PM: I fundamentally disagree with you, Kerry. Let me go to the heart of the proposition. Mr Turnbull, the Liberal Party's out there accusing myself as Prime Minister and the Treasurer of corruption. What's his basis for saying that? He has said that I have made a communication on behalf of Mr Grant to the Australian Treasury, and as a consequence have caused the Treasurer to act in a way to support Mr Grant's interests which would not otherwise normally occur. That's the essence of it.
So therefore the core of this entire argument rests on the alleged communication between myself, or my office, and the Treasury on Mr Grant's behalf.
And here are the facts: one, Mr Grant has said he's never discussed the matter with me nor asked me for representations - that's true. Secondly, I have not had any dealings with Mr Grant on this matter to make representations for him. Three, neither have my staff. But four, what Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Opposition have said: there's this smoking gun, this email which exists between myself, my office and the Treasury asking for representations to be made. That was exploded today and in terms of the statements I've made over the course of the weekend, because the document in question, the email, is a fake, it's a forgery, it is fraudulent. And we have - we have ...
O'BRIEN: But as you know, Mr Rudd ...
PM: We have the alternative Prime Minister of Australia making an accusation against the serving Prime Minister of corruption, based on this document which is a forgery, and him and his staff using the opportunity to convey the contents of that document around to various media outlets.
O'BRIEN: But as you know, Mr Turnbull also based his charges against you on the verbal evidence given by the public servant Mr Grech in the Senate on Friday where he said - and he acknowledged his memory might be faulty - but he said he had a recollection that an email had come to him from your office about Mr Grant. So that was part of the reason for Mr - on which Malcolm Turnbull based his claims. Another part was a series of faxes involving Mr Swan's office and Mr Grech.
PM: Let me go to the point that you've just raised in terms of what Mr Grech, the public servant, had to say last Friday. You're correct to say that in his evidence he said that his recollection might be false or faulty. Can I also say that after he delivered that evidence, both the Prime Minister's department and the Treasury department conducted independent IT audits to establish whether or not an email had been exchanged between Mr Grech in the Treasury and my senior economic advisor Dr Charlton. Both those searches by independent public service departments found zero.
On the basis of that, I then went out late on Friday, after the news bulletins had gone to bed, and said, "Based on this search I can only conclude that this document is false." But despite that, despite that, you had Mr Turnbull go out there and call for my resignation as Prime Minister of Australia, alleging corruption in my case. And he did so as we now all know on the basis of a forged document, and beyond that, for some weeks had been seeking to convey the contents of this document to news outlets in order to excite their interest. I believe, therefore ...
O'BRIEN: How credible are the sources who have told you that? Has it been other journalists who've told you that Mr Turnbull's been going around?
PM: Um, Kerry, you should know that here in Canberra, the corridors of power and the media talk a lot, and they talk a lot off the record, and this has been one the worst kept secrets in Canberra over the last couple of weeks, this is precisely what's been going on. And for Mr Turnbull as the alternative Prime Minister, and as a person trained as a lawyer, not to administer any basic due diligence to this document, this forged email, and to mount a capital case against the Prime Minister of the day, calling for him to resign, accusing him of being corrupt, shows such a lack of judgment on his part that he is no longer fit to occupy the office of Leader of the Opposition.
O'BRIEN: The Opposition has challenged Mr Swan today on several fronts to test whether he gave John Grant assistance, more assistance than he gave to other car dealers in similar trouble. He was asked directly in the Parliament whether he had personally rung other car dealers to talk about their problems as he had rung Mr Grant. Mr Swan ignored that question. Yet wouldn't you agree that the Parliament deserves that answer? And have you asked Mr Swan why he wasn't prepared to give that answer?
PM: Well, you know, Kerry, we have an Opposition today whose credibility is in absolute tatters because they have made things up. And not just your ordinary garden variety making of things up. Making up an allegation based on a made-up email which goes to an allegation of corruption about the Prime Minister and about the Treasurer. These are no small trifling matters. Their credibility's in absolute tatters.
And you go to this question about individual car dealerships. Can I just quote to you from the Motor Trades Association of Australia. Let me just lay this on the line for your viewers. This is quoting from them, Mr Michael Delaney, the Executive Director. He says, "... the treatment that Mr Grant, a member of mine, got was no different from the treatment of all of my other members on my intervention on their behalf to Mr Grech. They were all treated in the same way and for the same good reason. There was no other way to do these things." He goes on to say -
O'BRIEN: With respect, Mr Rudd, Mr Delaney isn't expected to know everything that passes in private involving bureaucrats in Treasury, or Mr Swan - phone calls, emails or whatever. And can I draw your attention -
PM: Let me go on to a second point on that, Kerry, which is the number of other representations Mr Swan made as Treasurer. He was acting on behalf of representations from a number of members of Parliament. There was some 130, I think Mr Swan said today, emails from Mr Grech to his office concerning these matters over time, a handful of which dealt with the matter of Mr Grant, and there are at least two other car dealerships which involved a greater volume of email correspondence.
Now this seems to be of no relevance to the continued campaign of personal smear which Mr Turnbull and the Liberals are engaged in against the Treasurer. It's time - they had the opportunity today to put up or shut up when it came to providing their documentary evidence in terms of this email. They failed, and in fact the email proved to be an absolute forgery.
O'BRIEN: Well, when the Opposition says that Wayne Swan rang Mr Grant personally and then asked him were there any other car dealers who he was treating equally that he also rang, Mr Swan ignored the answer. He didn't say yes or no, he ignored it.
PM: Kerry, Kerry, you could pluck 1,000 questions out of the air on any day about multiple transactions between the Government, the Treasurer's office and the entire car dealership industry which this Special Purpose Vehicle has been created to support. Remember, why does this vehicle exist, this financing vehicle? Because the industry was in diabolical trouble at the end of last year because of the global financial crisis, and it was intended to support the impending withdrawal of 40 per cent of car dealership finance from the market through the return back overseas of two major car dealership finance companies. It was established as an industry-wide measure.
That is why the evidence I've just referred to then by the head of the Motor Trades Association is highly relevant. It's designed for the entire industry. So you can have Malcolm Turnbull cherrypick one argument or one aspect of this after another as he seeks desperately to cover up for the fact that his credibility is in tatters because of this forged email upon which he's based his attack on me.
O'BRIEN: But Mr Rudd, with respect, it wasn't just the forged email, there was - the imagery that came out of that Senate committee last Friday was absolutely graphic. There was a senior public servant under pressure who was saying things like, "I think, I can recall an email from the Prime Minister's office asking for assistance for Mr Grant." He also said that he had the clear impression that Mr Grant was a special case. And the Opposition is alleging that Mr Swan has essentially got Treasury via Mr Godwin Grech to intercede with Ford Credit on behalf of John Grant as a personal favour to your mate, even to the point of providing Ford Credit's chief executive with Mr Grant's mobile phone number. Now, was that kind of assistance afforded to other car dealers?
PM: Well, what you seem to have neglected in your question, Kerry, was that the same Mr Grech in the same testimony said that his recollection could've been entirely false or faulty. That's what he said himself. It seems to be missing from the general commentary here. The second point I'd make back to you is that in terms of these other car dealerships who are dealing from time to time with the Treasurer's office, there are at least two sets of cases which involved a larger volume of transactions or email communications in order to obtain results. One of - another case related to a car dealership in the electorate, I think, of Kay Hull, the National Party Member for Riverina, who was exceptionally satisfied, I understand, by the service and support she got from Mr Swan's office.
O'BRIEN: But just on that very case, Mr Rudd, I've had a look at the emails that were tabled in the Senate.
PM: Let me go to the question of Mr Swan's character here. That's what you're seeking to go after. And what I'm saying - I know Mr Swan very well. He is a diligent and exceptionally upstanding Treasurer who is seeking to work across the industry here to provide appropriate support in a time of great economic crisis.
And can I say on a day when the Leader of the Opposition's credibility has gone up in a huge explosion, it is remarkable that the Liberal Party can continue to mount a campaign against Mr Swan when, frankly, the senior members of that party, the elder statesmen, Senator Minchin and others, Mr Costello, Mr Nelson, should be tapping Mr Turnbull on the shoulder and saying, "Frankly, you don't have the quality of temperament to occupy this office of leadership of the Opposition."
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Pleasure to be with you.


STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, good morning to you. 
PM: Good morning Karl.
STFANOVIC: We have a Ute-gate scandal, right? 
PM: I think by the end of the week Karl, this will be called "Mr Turnbull's fake email scandal". Let me just go to it. Just to the core of it. The charge against myself and the Treasurer is this, that I as Prime Minister communicated through my staff to an officer in the Treasury that representation should be made on behalf of this car dealer in Queensland and that because of that, the Treasurer was caused to make special representations on that individual's behalf. 
Mr Turnbull goes out there and says, "Here is the evidence. Here is the smoking gun." This email, which he alleges exists between my office and this public servant. And in fact, the Daily Telegraph last Saturday purported to run this email in its news pages. And I will just read to you the text of it, this is what they say. Here is the proposed, the purported text of this email:
"Hi, Godwin”  -  that is the public servant in the Treasury - “the PM has asked if the car dealer financing vehicle is available to assist a Queensland dealership, John Grant Motors who seems to be having trouble getting finance. If you can follow this, follow up on this asap that would be very useful. Happy to discuss. Andrew Charlton,” - a person in my office. 
Here is the point Karl. This entire email is false, it is fake, it is a forgery. This has been run by Mr Turnbull on the basis of calling for my resignation and for the Treasurer's resignation and it has been run extensively by News Limited newspapers right across the country as the basis of the allegation against myself as well. The problem is it is false, it is fake, it is a forgery and it will be shown to be in the same light of Liberal Party deception as we have seen with children overboard.
Therefore, today Parliament resumes in Canberra, Mr Turnbull who has made these charges and called for my resignation must stand up in Parliament and produce this document, which he alleges exists. I know it doesn't exist because we have made a total search through the public service of all documents in this period of time. It simply does not exist. It is a fake, it is false, it is a forgery. 
STEFANOVIC: Alright. He says that he's not going to produce that email and probably doesn't know whether it exists definitively or not but it is now part of a police inquiry. Can I ask you this, have you made-
PM: Karl that is the entire, that is the entire rock upon which his allegation is made. These are the questions that he's asked me in Parliament about my representations as Prime Minister through my Office, to the Department of the Treasury to get this work done for this individual Queensland car dealer.
STEFANOVIC: Yeah.
PM: That's the foundation upon which he makes his entire allegation. That rock has just crumbled into sand because the document is a fake, it is a forgery, it is false. Now there is no graver question for someone like the Leader of the Opposition to face than to put forward what role has he and his office had in communicating the contents of this fake and false document across the Government and across the media. 
STEFANOVIC: So when Godwin Grech says that he recalled that John Grant Motors was originally referred to him by your office, was he mistaken? Was he confused?
PM: Well can I say Karl in the same testimony by that public servant, he says that his own recollection could be false and faulty. That's what he says. 
STEFANOVIC: Are you saying instead that it was wrong? That he is mistaken?
PM: I can say that any person can make an honest mistake. What I know for a fact is that, that allegation having been made by the public servant, built on by Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey, going out there calling for my resignation, what did we as the Government do? We asked the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, an independent agency of the public service and the Treasury to conduct an independent IT audit of all emails in the system, both from my office and as received by this person in the Treasury. And guess what the result of that was? In writing the advice of these two independent public service agencies which looks at whether emails have been deleted as well, it concluded absolutely that no such email existed. 
STEFANOVIC: Okay so Godwin Grech was-
PM: Let me say it again. No such email existed. Therefore Mr Turnbull cannot have it both ways. He can't go out there and be saying and boasting to editors of News Limited newspapers for weeks now, he's got this smoking gun against the Prime Minister and the Treasurer and then turn around and say as he did on Saturday when the heat was turned up, "Oh, what email?" You cannot simply throw mud in this business and seek to completely besmirch a politician or a Prime Minister's or Treasurer's reputation and then say, "Oh by the way, this email doesn't exist." That is why he has one option; stand in the Parliament, produce this email or apologise and resign. There is no other way here.
STEFANOVIC: Let's get on to, you mention the Treasurer - let's get on to him. He has said that Mr Grant contacted his office and he referred the matter to his department and from there he said  -  quote, "I have no idea what the outcome was." You would be very much aware though that he was given very extensive briefings about all of this. He was given updates about the case and they were sent to his home fax. Is that usual?
PM: Well Karl, can I just say that Ministers of the Government all go to various parts of Australia for the weekend and they often are receiving large quantities of information to their home communication system. 
STEFANOVIC: This is pretty specific, though.
PM: But Karl, this is the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia. He receives hundreds of pages of information, documents from his department and his office each day. I do as well. That's part of the reason we're in these jobs. Therefore, it doesn't surprise me at all that he would have in the midst of all of that, documents concerning this as well.
But the other point is this; Mr Turnbull again seems to seek to emphasise that this was a uniquely significant set of representations as far as this individual in Queensland was concerned. Mr Swan was making representations on behalf of at least a half a dozen members of parliament, half of them Government members. There are lots and lots and lots of pages of communications with and between the Treasury concerning other car dealers as well.
But let us go back to the core point. Why has this attack been made on Mr Swan? Because Mr Turnbull has alleged that I as Prime Minister had a particular relationship with this car dealer in Queensland and I caused the Treasurer to act in this way to make special representations. And what I am saying to you is the premise on which this is based, that I made those representations, is false, it is untrue and it is based on a forgery.
And News Limited newspapers, the Daily Telegraph last Saturday ran a mocked-up version of this email I referred to before, allegedly between me, my office and this public servant. The problem for the Daily Telegraph as well and the News Limited papers who have based so much of their reportage on this is the document in question is a false, fake and a forgery. We've seen this before with the Liberals, it is called children overboard.
STEFANOVIC: No matter what happens here in terms of the investigation, in terms of what the AFP uncovers, you have, will give Wayne Swan the Treasurer your full and unqualified support?
PM: Absolutely. He has done a first-class job as Treasurer of Australia in the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century and secondly Australia is one of the few countries, advanced economies in the world to have so far have avoided a recession. That is because himself, myself and other economic ministers have been getting on with the main job of the day. Australians out there, your viewers today are concerned about jobs, their priorities, the future of the economy, their small businesses. That's what we spend the vast bulk of our time on.
What Mr Turnbull has done is instead engage in the very easy busy of throwing political mud in the hope that some of it would stick but at the end of the day you've got to be accountable for your actions and if he can't produce this smoking gun, this silver bullet, this supposed email which establishes the link between me asking the Treasury to act in a particular way, he has no alternative course of action but to stand in the Parliament, to apologise and to resign. His credibility has gone.
STEFANOIVIC: One final, one final question for you, Prime Minister. We are running a photo and it has been run in several outlets of you and Mr Grant. Have you ever made any representation on behalf of Mr Grant, either verbally or in writing? 
PM: I have not made representations in relation to Mr Grant's request for access to this car dealership in writing, verbally. Let me just go back to one or two facts. One, Mr Grant has said he never made any such request of me. Two, I know for a fact that he didn't. Three, my staff have sworn on a stack of Bibles he made no representations to them. And four, if you don't believe them and you go to the core allegation of the alleged email between my staff and the Treasury, the email has to exist and two independent departments of state, the Prime Minister's Department and the Treasury Department have searched through their independent IT audit to establish whether this email exists and it does not exist. That is why this entire allegation, this entire mud throwing exercise, this exercise in political smear undertaken by Mr Turnbull against my reputation and that of the Treasurer, is based on a document which is false, fake and a forgery. And he must present it today in Parliament or resign.
STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister it will be an interesting day in Parliament. We appreciate your time today, thank you.


Majestades
Es un gran placer para mi darles la bienvenida en nombre del pueblo de Australia - sobre todo en el dia de San Juan Bauttista.
Las relaciónes entre Australia y España son mas de cuatro cientos años. 
Con vuestra visita, podemos mirar adelante al rediscubrimiento de Australia de los españoles.
Your Majesties
It is a great pleasure to welcome you on behalf of the Australian people - especially on the day of St John the Baptist.
The relationship between Australia and Spain is over 400 years old.
With your visit, we can look ahead to the rediscovery of Australia by the Spanish.
Both our nations are ancient yet modern.
Yours has a rich history stretching back across the millennia of Europe.
Through our Indigenous people, ours is a history of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And we share some important history too.
Just over 400 years ago two Spanish explorers  -  Fernando de Quiros and Vaez de Torres  -  sailed to the Pacific Ocean near Australia.
The stretch of water between Australia and Papua New Guinea is now called Torres Strait in honour of the Spanish navigator.
Nearly 200 years ago (in 1821) the first Spanish settlers came to what was then a relatively new British colony called New South Wales.
And before the first Spanish settlers, there were those most famous of Spanish Australians, the merino sheep.
My forebears arrived in Botany Bay on the Second Fleet in 1790.
They beat the merino sheep  -  Spanish by origin, but who came to Australia by way of South Africa  -  by less than 10 years!
So our shared history is long.
It entered a new phase in the 1960s when a new group of Spanish migrants came to Australia.
Like others from nearly every nation on earth, the Spanish migrants made Australia their home.
They brought with them the famous Spanish zest for life.
And they have added enormously to our nation  -  to our sporting, cultural, culinary and business life.
The Spanish community is an integral part of modern Australia  -  a part of that we, and I think Your Majesties, can be proud of.
Australia and Spain share more than history though.
Both of our nations also bring together a modern story of democracy and development; and of contribution to international affairs.
Your Majesties are renowned patrons of democracy, having overseen, for more than three decades, Spain's enduring transformation into one of the world's great democracies.
As modern democracies and market economies, Australia and Spain share a common commitment to advancing human rights, to promoting strong and effective global institutions, and supporting a prosperous, peaceful, secure future.
Our countries have worked together for many years to promote these goals in multilateral institutions, particularly within the United Nations. I have met Prime Minister Zapatero on many occasions and worked with him closely on international challenges.
Australia looks forward to this continuing collaboration with Spain as we live up to our responsibilities as nations committed to fostering new, higher levels of international commitment to tackle the intractable challenges of our times: the global economic downturn, climate change and poverty alleviation.
Australia and Spain also have a shared strategic outlook on international issues.
We are committed to working towards common security goals, including international stabilisation efforts in Afghanistan.
Australia has recently increased our military and civilian commitment to Afghanistan from 1100 to around 1550.
Australia welcomes Spain's recently announced increased troop commitment to Afghanistan through NATO's International Security Assistance Force.
We also welcome Spain's decision to send additional troops to provide security during the presidential elections in Afghanistan.
Just as merino sheep once served as a link between Australia and Spain, it is now our common values and our commitment to making a global contribution that serve as the platform for a strengthened relationship between our two countries.
I'm confident the strong interest Australians have in Spain will continue to grow, particularly following tomorrow's official opening, by Your Majesties, of the Cervantes Institute in Sydney.
Named after the great Spanish author, Miguel de Cervantes (1547-1616)  -  one of giants of world literature, famous, of course, for his literary masterpiece, Don Quixote  -  the Institute will be a great boost for the study and appreciation of Spanish culture and language in Australia.
We are also pleased that so many of your students each year choose to study in Australia  -  they are welcome guests in our country.
The bilateral relationship between our two countries is strong, cooperative and increasingly ambitious.
We welcome that these common aspirations are now reflected in the Joint Action Plan signed earlier today.
Australia is particularly keen to work closely with Spain in the lead-up to your country's EU presidency in the first half of 2010.
Your Majesties, today you are very welcome guests.
Can I conclude by thanking you for your visit, and conveying to you, on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, the warmest regards of our nation.



PM: It's great to be out here at Trinity Christian School in Wanniassa because this is what Building the Education Revolution is all about. This is great work. What I have been to see this morning with the Principal is the construction of this new classroom block behind me which will contain within it five new learning areas for grades three and four. It will be built, I am told by the Principal, by about the middle of next year.
And also I've just been down to the library and part of our funding is also going to the extension of that library that we just visited by about a third to make it more possible to have more classes in there at the same time.
And I notice also that in this new learning centre which will be built behind me that they are also as a school going to make sure that it's fully wired for information technology and to make sure that our kids are wired into the economy of the 21st century. Just on the details, this school has enrolment of 1,139, Principal? 536 primary, 603 secondary. Under the National School Pride program for shade structures, windows and guttering - $200,000. $3 million under round one of the Primary Schools for the 21st Century program for the construction of classrooms and the refurbishment of the school library. Also 80 computers in round one of the Computers for Schools program.
This is the sort of work we're doing right across the primary schools of Australia, that's seven and a half thousand of them, to make a difference to each one of these little tots' lives and also to make a difference for the national economy.
When we look at what has been done so far with our Nation Building for Recovery plan, this Building the Education Revolution component as you know involves nearly $15 billion.
I'd like to confirm today that we've allocated around 70 per cent of the total of the $14.7 billion Building the Education Revolution funding to 20,159 projects spread across a total of 9,490 schools. To date, an estimated 99.3 per cent of schools have received National School Pride funding program funding. And 64.3 per cent of schools have received Primary Schools for the 21st Century project allocations.
In the 96 per cent of allocated National School Pride funding, it's been approved for refurbishment projects such as shade cloths, classroom refurbishments, school storage facilities, upgrades of sporting facilities, painting and carpets upgrades.
Primary Schools for the 21st Century round one and two will see the construction of - these are very important figures  -  2,161 libraries, 2,061 multi-purpose halls, 1,774 classrooms, 490 covered outdoor learning areas and 139 early learning centres.
It is estimated based on application data, compliance and environmental best practice that the following will be the case as well: 91 per cent of approved Primary Schools for the 21 projects or P21 projects are planning to utilise building insulation, 80 per cent using energy efficient lighting, 49 per cent installing energy efficient glazing, 24 per cent installing solar panels, 62 per cent using shading, 60 per cent installing water tanks and seven per cent implementing recycled grey water measures. So we're actually trying to make sure that the investment in these school programs is using the best forms of technology available as well.
Can I also say that the levels of support that we've had from the Independent Education Union of Australia, from the National Catholic Education Commission of Australia, from the Independent Schools Council of Australia, the Australian Primary Schools Association, all backing in strongly this program across the country. What's it all about? This is nation building for recovery, supporting jobs, small business, apprenticeships for today by building the infrastructure our nation and our kids need for tomorrow. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has Wayne Swan dodged a bullet?
PM: Can I just say that what Australia wants is for a Government to be positively engaged in building the economic recovery rather than a permanent negative debate run by negative scare campaigns on the economy on the one hand and negative personal smear campaigns on the other. We're in the, we're in the building business, we're in the positive business, that's what we're here to do, to make a difference for young people's lives and for, for young people's lives as well as, as well as for the economy overall. Daniel.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull says he has nothing to apologise for because you've accused him of being involved with this fake email.
PM: Well can I say I think most of the country would conclude today that Mr Turnbull has some very serious questions to answer. Firstly, he must outline all his dealings that he and the Opposition have had with this fake email. Secondly, he must outline all the dealings the Opposition have had with this particular public servant and thirdly, he should commit himself, all Opposition members, Opposition staff and their computer systems to full access to the Australian Federal police investigators.
One other thing as well and that is, given the extraordinary events of the last few days, can I say that what the nation wants us to do is to focus on building the economy for the future, creating jobs, and supporting business and on top of that  -  I'll take further questions, that's fine  -  and on top of that Mr Turnbull frankly has become a road block to recovery because he only has two strategies. Seriously, two strategies. Mr Turnbull has two strategies, both of which are roadblocks to recovery. One is, it seems always to use a negative scare campaign on debt and deficit to talk the economy down and at the same time a negative smear campaign attempting to bring the Government down.
Can I just say, that's the strategy which is why it's time for Mr Turnbull to get out of the road as a roadblock to economic recovery. Mr Turnbull's integrity I believe has been fundamentally undermined and it is important therefore that Mr Turnbull at least today do the right thing and resign. Over to you Mark.
JOURNALIST: If this email has been faked (inaudible) which seems likely, then a crime has been committed here. Do you think that Malcolm Turnbull or somebody in the Opposition has been complicit in the commission of a crime to try and bring you and your Government down?
PM: Mark, I think that's why the Australian Federal Police have been commissioned to get to the bottom of all the facts surrounding this. But one thing would stand in the road of that. And that is if the Opposition refuse to make themselves, their staff, their Opposition members and their computer systems fully available, fully access - I'm just saying - fully accessible to the AFP investigation.
JOURNALIST: But do you believe that Mr Turnbull was involved in the circulation of the fake email?
PM: What I have said repeatedly is if you look at what Senator Abetz said in the Senate, on the Senate inquiry conducted last Friday, that Senator Abetz on behalf of the Liberal Party was clearly conveying the contents of this information.
So therefore, as I said extensively in my censure motion in the parliament yesterday, it follows that Mr Turnbull has some very fundamental questions to answer. I believe there are three sets of those questions, I have outlined them already.
JOURNALIST: If someone is charged over the fake email, what penalties apply and what do you think should happen to that person?
PM: We have an independent judiciary. We have an independent criminal justice system, that is why the Australian Federal Police should be allowed to go and do their job. As I said, going back to when I spoke to all last Friday, last Friday, I said to you all having gone through the searches that we had gone through, that I could only conclude based on that that this document was false.
I believe that is now established.
JOURNALIST: Since the revelations that the email is fake, Mr Turnbull has now turned it around and said it really is your problem because someone within your ranks, within Treasury, has made up an email. Do you believe someone within your ranks is plotting against you? What do you make of those comments?
PM: Can I say, it is far better that Mr Turnbull have a long, cold, hard look at himself, do the honourable thing today and to resign, and furthermore, and furthermore, to answer these most basic questions, these most basic questions which most of the country would like to know the answers to.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Mr Turnbull this morning suggested that he had spoken to Godwin Grech and that there's nothing wrong with that, and of course many people have spoken to him. And he also wouldn't say whether he had sighted this email or knew of its existence before the Senate hearings on Friday, suggesting that that may in some ways compromise the police investigation. Do you believe that he is under any obligation to publicly disclose the nature of his conversations with Mr Grech and the nature of his knowledge or lack of knowledge or lack of knowledge of this email and what it said before Friday or is he right to say that that might compromise the police investigation?
PM: Can I just say out there in the public debate, and I think there has been a fair bit of public debate about this in the last several days, a fair bit, quite a lot actually, that there a few questions people in the public debate would like some answers to, and I ran through those questions before. Let me just be very clear about them.
One, Mr Turnbull to the nation has an obligation to outline all dealings that the Opposition has had with this fake email. Two, outline all dealings that the Opposition has had with this public servant, and three, to confirm publicly in the parliament that they would make available, themselves, their staff, their computer systems, to the investigation.
JOURNALIST: Godwin Grech, is he still employed by Treasury and should be be suspended?
PM: The great thing about Australia is we have a thing called an independent public service. It's governed by its own code of conduct and all appropriate decisions about the public service should properly be made by secretaries of departments informed by the Public Service Act and the Code, and that is as it should be. And I have got to  - 
JOURNALISTS: (inaudible)
PM: Okay, let's have a schools question.
JOURNALIST: It's no secret that there have been some problems, some principals and P&amp;Cs have complained that they didn't get what they wanted, or there was no consultation. You have said it is inevitable that there would be bumps in the road. Have you been keeping an eye on how many bumps there are and are you satisfied that the net benefit of getting these projects rolled out very quickly, and the job creation associated with that outweighs the negatives of bungling which there has been some of?
PM: Can I say Matthew, that when you look at the fact that the Government's economic strategy is based on nation building for recovery and that nation building for recovery means phase one, cash payments to families to support consumption, phase two, Building the Education Revolution, social housing as well as energy insulation, and three, long term economic infrastructure including national high speed broadband - with each of these there will be controversy.
I understand that, I accept that. That is a normal thing in public life. My job as Prime Minister is to make a difference when it comes to dealing with the worse economic downturn in three quarters of a century. Our strategy as reflected in the first quarter's economic data underpins the fact that we have the fastest growth in Australia of all the major advanced economies because we acted early, we acted decisively.
Phase two is here, inevitably there are going to be bumps in the road, but my job is one of macroeconomic management to make sure that the economy keeps working. And we are throwing everything we have at this, and I would draw your attention to still the appalling global economic data and that which we saw from the World Bank, as early as yesterday, with a further revision downwards of global growth. We are not out of woods yet.


The Australian Government has delivered $8 million for the new Australian Centre of Excellence for Local Government  -  the first of its kind in Australia  -  to promote best practice, innovation and professionalism in local government.
The Centre will be based at the University of Technology, Sydney (UTS), as part of a consortium that includes the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZSOG), University of Canberra, Local Government Managers Australia and the Institute of Public Works Engineering Australia.
The announcement was made to mayors at the second meeting of the Australian Council for Local Government (ACLG) at Parliament House today.
The Centre will work with stakeholders to:
     * showcase outstanding examples of innovation and best practice;
     * deliver training and development including leadership programs; and
     * stimulate debate on critical issues facing local government.
The Government first announced funding for the new Centre at the inaugural meeting of the ACLG in November last year.
Today's announcement concludes a rigorous competitive process conducted by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government as well as an evaluation committee of independent experts.
Australia's universities and the local government sector showed strong interest in hosting and supporting the Centre.
Six bids were submitted, which together involved 21 of Australia's 38 publicly funded universities, as well as the vocational education and training sector and professional organisations.
The successful consortium is well positioned to contribute to national debates on current and emerging challenges facing local government.
These include the impacts of the global economic recession, climate change and its consequences, management of local government infrastructure, and building and improving the capacity of local government to serve their communities.
Its courses and services will be available across urban, rural and remote Australia, using on-line delivery and physical presence.
The $8 million funding is a one-off payment which the Centre will supplement with contributions from UTS and its consortium partners.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history. 
I am delighted to welcome you back this morning for the second Australian Council of Local Government meeting.
Last year's meeting, the inaugural meeting of the ACLG on November 18 2008, saw the birth of an historic, new partnership between the Australian Government and each of the councils and shires across Australia.
I said at that meeting that you cannot have a strong Australian economy without a healthy global economy.
And you can't have a strong national economy if you don't have strong local economies.
Local governments have key roles in strengthening and stimulating local economies, local businesses and local jobs.
Since last November, the global economy has turned sharply for the worse.
And the impact of the global recession is being felt across each of the 565 councils and shires across the nation.
But in response to the global crisis, the Government has delivered on our commitment to building a new partnership with local government that is supporting local communities buffeted by the global downturn.
Because we understand that the impact of the global recession is ultimately local  -  on local families, local businesses and local communities.
That is why we have acted locally  -  as well as responding nationally and globally, to this enormous challenge.
And it is why our partnership with local government plays an important role in the Australian Government's strategy to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
As a nation we can make our way through these tough times if we work together, and support each other  -  the Commonwealth, State governments, local governments, big business, small business, unions and community organisations.
The OECD report out today shows that Australia has the strongest performing economy in the major advanced economies.
The report also shows that alongside these major advanced economies, we also have among the lowest debt and lowest deficits of any nation.
This report is a big tick for the Government's stimulus packages, and the Government's plan for nation-building for recovery.
Since I last addressed you in November, many of your communities have been through very testing times.
Not only with the global recession, but also through fires, floods and the continuing impact of drought.
For many communities, these disasters are on a scale never experienced in living memory.
Local councils in fire-ravaged Victoria and flood-stricken north Queensland and northern NSW have faced the very toughest of challenges -  - to rebuild communities whilst keeping basic services rolling out through the darkest of days.
In the tragic Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria, 173 people lost their lives and 2,029 homes were destroyed across 24 local government areas.
The impact of such loss and destruction has profound consequences for communities trying to rebuild.
Following these natural disasters, Minister Albanese invited affected councils to reconsider their proposals for funding through the Community Infrastructure Program, to ensure the funding was most appropriate to the needs of the communities.
Against this backdrop, local councils have worked together to come up with innovative solutions  -  like the 134-kilometre trail across Victoria's bushfire-affected communities developed by the Murrindindi, Mitchell and Mansfield Shire Councils.
The ‘Goulburn River High Country Rail Trail' is a trail that will be used by recreational walkers, cyclists, horse riders  -  supporting jobs in local tourism, as well as creating access roads for emergency and maintenance vehicles.
In the Gulf region of north-west Queensland, six local councils have come together to help upgrade the flood-damaged Einasleigh River bridge.
This is a great example of working together and I thank the mayors here today from four of those communities  -  -  Etheridge, Burke, Croydon, and Mornington.
The project to upgrade the bridge will support local construction jobs, while delivering lasting benefits for the community.
The Government's investments in major community infrastructure in disaster-affected communities is both generating jobs and local economic activity, and helping communities get back to on their feet.
This morning I want to speak about the economic challenges facing communities around Australia, and how the Australian Government is tackling these challenges in partnership with local and State governments.
Since we met last November, the global economic outlook has deteriorated dramatically.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
Global growth is contracting for the first time since the IMF began keeping records.
Global trade flows have collapsed.
Global investment has collapsed.
And global unemployment is rising fast.
And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trade partners.
8 out of our top ten trading partners are in recession.
And growth in the remaining two countries, India and China has fallen dramatically over the last year.
Last night, we were provided with yet another sobering reminder on the state of the global economy.
The OECD released its latest economic assessment, showing that economic activity in the OECD area is projected to contract by 4.1 per cent this year.
But the news is not all bad.
For the first time in two years, the OECD has revised its growth projections marginally upwards  -  from negative 4.3 to negative 4.1 per cent for 2009.
In fact, the OECD notes that the severity of the downturn is moderating.
There are signs that the slump in OECD economies could be nearing a bottom, following the deepest decline in activity in the post-war era.
The report also notes that recovery is already underway in major non-OECD countries such as China.
But the OECD has warned that “the ensuing recovery is likely to be both weak and fragile for some time”, and that the “negative economic and social consequences of the crisis will be long-lasting.”
Despite the severe slump in global economic growth, Australia is weathering the storm better than nearly all of our global competitors.
As last night's OECD Economic Outlook has confirmed, right now Australia has the strongest performing economy in the OECD, with lower debt and lower deficits than any of the major advanced economies.
Across the developed world, only 3 of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter of this year.
Our economic growth is higher than all the major advanced economies in the world.
In addition, our budget deficit is amongst the lowest of all major advanced economies in the world.
Our level of net debt is the lowest of all major advanced economies in the world.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession.
We know that there will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow, and unemployment continuing to rise. 
Australia has fared better than most  -  in part because we took early and decisive action to step in while the private sector was in retreat.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated a comprehensive strategy to support the economy and reduce the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
As interbank lending virtually froze, Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
In September Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
As the chart indicates - in October there were no raisings at all.
Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - Australian banks raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds, and a further $20 billion in January.
The guarantee helped restore confidence and underpin the continued provision of credit, which is crucial for local businesses across the nation.
In addition to stabilising the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area:
The key components of Gross Domestic Product are:
     * Consumption  -  about 54 per cent of GDP
     * Dwelling construction  -  about 6 per cent of GDP
     * Private Business Investment  -  17 per cent of GDP
     * Public Final Demand  -  22 per cent of GDP
In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy  -  from immediate support, to the medium-term, right through to the long-term.
And this approach has had results.
Last night, in addition to the release of the OECD Economic Outlook, the International Monetary Fund also released an updated assessment of the Australian economy.
That assessment noted that Australia's downturn: “has been milder than in most other advanced economies.” And specifically, it remarked that: “This is because of...a timely and significant macro policy response.”
Our first measures were designed to provide immediate support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector, which employs more than 1.5 million Australians.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth.
There is no doubt that without the economic stimulus, we would not have seen these positive numbers in the first three months of the year.
Of course there are other factors at play, but without the stimulus measures we would clearly have fallen into a technical recession.
We also took direct action to support the housing sector with a trebling in the First Home Buyers assistance, delivering a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
The impact of those measures - supported by a record 4 percentage point cut in interest rates - has been reflected in the rebound in housing construction activity this year.
Housing finance commitments have increased substantially.
Loans for the construction of new houses have increased by 42.6 per cent since the Boost was introduced in October 2008.
And while building approvals are down by 16 per cent in Australia compared to a year ago, the fall was more than twice as great in Canada, and more than three times as great in the US and New Zealand.
Overall, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments boosting the retail and construction sectors, Treasury estimates that Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession.
And that would have meant many more jobs lost in the local communities that each of you represent, without that early and decisive action.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term.
We took decisive action to strengthen incentives for businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 30 per cent Business Tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for Small Business.
As the chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent  -  and much stronger than business investment in our peer countries.
In addition the Government raised public investment by investing in the medium term in shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including:
     * our $800 million investment in the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure program with local councils and shires;
     * the largest school modernisation project in Australia's history;
     * the construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes, and repairing almost 50,000 homes, and
     * providing free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
     * We are investing $32 billion in highways, railways, local roads and ports projects.
     * We are investing $4.5 billion in clean energy infrastructure, including the largest solar power plant on earth.
     * We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership with the private sector to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to link local communities across our nation to the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term.
This is nation building for recovery  -  providing jobs for today, and productive infrastructure for tomorrow.
As the IMF noted last night: “The increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls.”
And by the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
As the chart indicates, public final demand is set to grow strongly, driven by a record 25 per cent increase in public investment in 2009-10.
The Australian Government is making up a large part of the increase, stepping in to use our strong balance sheet to support investment.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
Overall the government's stimulus will have a significant impact on growth.
Treasury has estimated that the overall impact of our measures without our nation building plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent  -  the same level as is expected across the OECD by the end of 2010, according to the forecasts the OECD released last night.
No-one likes to see unemployment rise as a result of a global recession.
But Australia's unemployment rate at 5.7 per cent is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
While there is a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world.
Nevertheless, many communities are already being hard hit by rising unemployment.
It is for this reason we've identified Priority Areas as ones that will receive additional immediate assistance through the appointment of a Local Employment Coordinator.
These people will be working in some of your council regions to ensure that communities in their priority areas fully benefit from the significant investment the government is making through the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan.
The Government is looking to you to work with other councils and the Local Employment Coordinators to ensure that jobs are generated for local people in these communities.
And we want to say thank you to those councils who have already offered to host Local Employment Coordinators.
I will expect them to be active across all council regions in their priority area.
But let me make an important point - and this is an issue raised with me yesterday by one our interim employment coordinators.
The effort we collectively need to put in to this massive task is extraordinary.
We cannot go on as if this is business as usual.
For the greater good of our communities, the different arms of government  -  including local governments - need to put aside traditional rivalries and put their collective shoulders to the wheel.
After all, we're all in this together  -  and if we're to be effective in supporting the people in our communities most vulnerable to the global recession, then we must work together in new and innovative ways.
One of the most positive developments in recent weeks is the bounce-back in business and consumer confidence in Australia, reflecting a positive response to the stimulus package and greater confidence in the future.
Business confidence is on the rise, with the month of May recording the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989.
Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
Consumer sentiment also rose 12 per cent this month - the largest increase in 22 years.
Consumer sentiment is now up 20 per cent since the announcement of the Government's first economic stimulus package in October, to its highest level since January 2008.
There is a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses and consumers can see some light at the end of the tunnel.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, since the release of the Budget in May we have seen confirmation of Australia's AAA credit rating.
And Australia's net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies, as the graph shows.
Last night the IMF was unequivocal in its statement that Australia's Budget deficit is appropriate in current circumstances.
It also noted that Government debt is projected to remain low compared with other advanced economies, while also commending the Government's medium term fiscal commitment to return the budget to surplus, pointing out that: “Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment.”
Further, Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is among the lowest in the advanced economies  -  in contrast to the 2009 Budget deficits of 13.6 per cent of GDP in the US, 9.9 per cent of GDP in Japan, and 9.8 per cent of GDP in the UK.
In focusing the Government's stimulus package on nation-building investment, the Australian Government is investing in building a more productive economy for the future.
The greatest long-term economic challenge for Australia is to turn around the prolonged decline in productivity that we have experienced since the mid-1990s  -  which has taken average productivity growth in each productivity cycle since the mid-1990s down from 3.3 per cent, to 2.1 per cent, and to 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
Productivity is ultimately what creates greater competitiveness and higher living standards for a nation.
And that's why around the nation we are investing in advanced infrastructure, and in training Australians with the skills and know-how for the jobs of tomorrow.
Our $800 million investment in the Community Infrastructure Program is an important part of our commitment to nation-building infrastructure.
It has been an excellent example of the new partnership between the Commonwealth and each one of our nation's 565 local government bodies.
Last year I asked the Australian Council of Local Government to work with us to get this program off the ground quickly.
The Australian Government identified local governments as important partners in our strategy to fight the impact of the global recession in communities across Australia.
Because local councils can be effective in getting local community infrastructure projects moving quickly, and getting local jobs flowing quickly.
So today I want to thank you for your efforts to date.
Of more than 3,300 local infrastructure projects announced around the country, the majority will be completed by September.
That's an outstanding response.
Importantly, the local governments that you represent have been able to choose the community projects, because the Government believes that it's you who know what's best for your community  -  not Canberra.
I know this has involved enormous efforts, from those in the council and shire chambers, to council staff, right through to the skilled workers delivering those projects on the ground.
But it is making a difference.
As the Australian Government has this year raised Commonwealth funding for local government to its highest level in history, this has flowed through to local communities around the nation.
Town halls, community centres, sports grounds, swimming pools and libraries are all being built, expanded or upgraded.
There are many projects I could highlight today.
Projects which are creating jobs and which are making a real difference in communities.
Projects such as the building of a new grandstand in Renmark, in South Australia's Riverland region.
The local Mayor of Renmark Paringa Council, Neil Martinson, who is here today, says it's a project that's been great for both the local economy and the community  -  a community that has been battling with drought and water restrictions which have resulted in a downturn in construction activity.
Projects like this don't only meet the longer term needs of communities - they also strengthen the capacity of local communities to weather the global recession.
This is why in addition to the $800 million for the Community Infrastructure Program, today I announce a further investment of $220 million in local community infrastructure.
All councils and shires will benefit from this funding.
Of this funding, $100 million will be allocated between all councils and shires.
A minimum of $30,000 will be given to each council.
Additional amounts will be paid to larger communities that qualify for a further growth component.
The remaining $120 million will be available to fund larger Strategic Projects, through a competitive process.
The previous Strategic Projects program attracted almost four times as many applications as we were able to fund, with many high quality proposals put forward.
The process for delivering this $220 million boost to local community infrastructure, which was provided for in the 2009-10 Budget, will commence towards the end of this year.
This additional funding will further assist local government as further waves of the global recession break upon our shores.
In addition to this infrastructure funding, the Government understands the cash-flow challenges councils face with revenue streams hit by the global recession.
And it is for this reason that we have brought forward nearly $480 million in Financial Assistance Grants from the first quarter of the 2009-10 financial year to June.
Finally, today I announce the creation of a $25 million Local Government Reform Fund.
This Fund will assist local councils and shires in implementing nationally agreed frameworks for asset management and financial planning  -  matters that I spoke about last November.
The Fund will also support reforms to council operations through greater cooperation and collaboration. 
All up, this new funding I have announced today brings the Australian Government's total investment in local community infrastructure to just over $1 billion.
The $1 billion partnership between the Commonwealth and local governments is playing an important role in cushioning local communities from the full impact of the worst global recession in 75 years.
More than that, we are embarking on a fundamental reform of our Federation  -  proving that we can end the blame game and bring the resources and expertise of each level of government to work together more effectively than in our nation's past.
That's why we're here today for the Australian Council of Local Government, and why this historic partnership is so important.
We face many challenges with many fiscal, economic, social and environmental dimensions.
But in facing these challenges, we are all in this together.
And together, we can build a stronger and fairer nation, more capable of tackling the great challenges that lie ahead for Australia.


The Australian Government today announced an additional $220 million nation-building investment in community infrastructure, such as libraries, community centres, and sports grounds and environmental infrastructure.
This brings the Government's record investment in community infrastructure to more than $1 billion since last November.
The Rudd Government is partnering with local government to invest in nation-building infrastructure to support jobs during the global economic recession.
The Government will also establish a $25 million Local Government Reform Fund to 
fast-track improvements to the sector's infrastructure asset and financial management systems, and encourage cooperation between councils in the delivery of their services.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd made the announcement today at the second meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government.
The $220 million injection into the Community Infrastructure Program will be delivered through two streams:
     * $100 million shared between all of the nation's councils and shires; and
     * $120 million for larger Strategic Projects, provided on a competitive basis.
This investment has already been allocated in the 2009-10 Budget.
It builds on the $800 million currently being delivered through the Community Infrastructure Program, the largest federal investment in local community infrastructure.
Already, more than 3,300 small- and large-scale projects are being supported in communities around Australia, supporting local jobs today by building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
The Government will commence the next round of Community Infrastructure Program funding at the end of 2009, in order to make sure that councils have completed existing smaller scale projects in a timely manner.
The Government will also work with councils and shires to improve long term financial sustainability and resilience.
Over two years, the $25 million Local Government Reform Fund will:
     * Assist councils implement new asset management and planning consistent with a national framework;
     * Fund the collection and analysis of robust data about councils' infrastructure assets; and
     * Support collaboration between councils on a regional basis for service delivery and planning.
The Rudd Government is investing in world class national infrastructure and local infrastructure to drive sustainable economic development and growth, lift levels of productivity and boost jobs.


Professor Ian Webster is this year's winner of the Prime Minister's Award for Excellence and Outstanding Contribution to Drug and Alcohol Endeavours. 
The award recognises Professor Webster's significant commitment and contribution to reducing the impact and negative effects of drug and alcohol use.
The award was presented on behalf of the Prime Minister by the Minister for Health and Ageing, Nicola Roxon, at the Drug Action Week 2009  -  Drug and Alcohol Awards Gala Dinner, held in the Great Hall, Parliament House, Canberra, tonight.
Professor Webster is a physician and Emeritus Professor of Public Health and Community Medicine of the University of New South Wales. He is Patron of the Alcohol and other Drugs Council of Australia, Chair of the National Advisory Council on Suicide Prevention, Chair of the NSW Expert Advisory Committee on Alcohol and Drugs, President of the Governing Council of The Ted Noffs Foundation and a former member of the Australian National Council on Drugs.
Now in its sixth year, the National Drug and Alcohol Awards honour the tireless work of the many Australians striving to prevent and reduce the harm caused by the abuse and misuse of drugs and alcohol.
Rewarding excellence across all fields  -  prevention, treatment, research, education, law enforcement, media and youth service, the awards are a chance to recognise the contribution of the many people across Australia who devote their lives to helping those with drug and alcohol problems.
The Australian Government is also committed to combating the harm caused by alcohol and drug problems. Through an investment of more than $850 million in a range of programs including the National Binge Drinking Strategy, the Government is striving to address the health and social problems caused by misuse of these substances in our communities.
Further strategies are also being developed through the Preventative Health Taskforce and the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy.


PREMIER: Okay well delighted to, delighted to greet the Prime Minister at Minto Public here today and along with Andy and Megan and Jason Clare, the local member, the State Minister for Education and of course Grahame West the Member for Campbelltown at the state level. Delighted to be here today as we literally see work on the ground as part of the education revolution and the stimulus package that the Prime Minister announced earlier this year to protect Australians, to protect Australian families from the worst effects of the global recession.
And this money is going into hardware in schools right across Australia but here in NSW some $642 million in the first round, some 206 schools being managed by (inaudible) the local managing contractor here in South Western Sydney; so delighted to see on the ground work. Back in February when Kevin asked us to come down to Canberra and he briefed us on the stimulus package, he said he wanted work happening in schools by June this year, so we've seen it here this morning. Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks mate. It's great to be back at Minto and this is the second time I've been here in a reasonably short period of time, because this is where the work is happening to support jobs and business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That is what our Nation Building for Recovery plan is all about, that is what Building the Education Revolution is all about as well.
This Nation Building for Recovery plan will involve an investment of nearly $15 billion in every primary school in the country, and a large number of secondary schools as well, because we want our kids to have the best facilities to learn, to become everything that they can become, to shape their own futures, with the best environment for our teachers and for our local parents to work in and to get together in. And at the same time creating jobs on the way through. Our Nation Building for Recovery plan as I said before is about supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
The Treasury has calculated that if we did not have this investment then we would have more than 200,000 more Australians out of work because of the global economic recession, each year for the next two years. So we're on about making a difference with jobs and we're on about making a difference to kids' futures as well.
The Premier has just mentioned of course the figures here for NSW. What we've done today is participate in a ground-breaking ceremony for what I understand is the first Government school in NSW as part of the Building the Education Revolution building program. Across NSW we have some 2,389 Primary Schools for the 21st Century projects, 1,764 schools across NSW. This represents around $2.9 billion of approved projects in NSW under the program. And also on top of that we have an investment of $414 million in NSW as part of the National School Pride program and that includes projects like shade cloths, classroom refurbishments, school storage facilities, upgrades for sporting facilities, painting and carpet upgrades.
Which of course brings us back to what's happening here at Minto. We have a national program, nearly $15 billion, a huge slice of it being invested across the state of NSW because this is the biggest state in the country, government schools and non government schools. But where the rubber hits the road is here at the local primary school level here at Minto.
Look at the smiles on the faces of the littlies here as they think in a year's time of them having for the first time in the history of this school a multi-purpose hall where they can gather together as a community, have performances, do all sorts of other things which supplement the school day and the life of study and work and community participation here in this school environment.
On the jobs front, I was very interested to hear from the local building company this morning, who is a 90-year-old Australian company, I am advised. But in this region of Sydney already putting on more than 100 additional staff into their company itself before you get onto the large number of sub-contractors that they will engage in these projects right across Sydney's south-west. And Sydney's south-west is just one part of the national story. These are jobs for subbies, these are jobs for chippies, these are jobs for sparkies, these are jobs for people who do the painting, these are jobs for people who do the earth works.
When I was last talking to a building company in Sydney, they told me in a project that they were bidding for on the Central Coast of NSW, on any given site they were looking at up to 20 or 25 different trades being deployed on a given building site for a multi-purpose hall and on any given day anywhere between 50 and 60 and more people on site doing one part of the work or another.
This is about making a difference to jobs, to local jobs, to local business. And for the business people who come, for the workers who come here to work and the tradies, they go off and they buy lunch, they go off and they get some business cards printed, they go off and do a whole lot of other things which flow on from the work which comes from these projects.
So I just conclude in these terms: this is a really good day for Australia. A good day for NSW, a good day for NSW government schools because it's making a difference for the future, building the facilities we need in the future and supporting the jobs that we need for today.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you on a related matter? Are you concerned -
PM: Depends how related it is.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned at all Prime Minister about the Auditor General's report that says that the cost of doing things so quickly in fact is higher than if you take a more considered approach to infrastructure spending?
PM: You know, we are in the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century. That is, the worst global economic circumstances since the Great Depression. And when the Australian Government took decisions firstly last October, again in December and again in February to invest activity in the economy to step into the gap left by the private sector in retreat, we said this had to happen quickly to have effect.
One of the problems in many other countries around the world is this - that infrastructure plans had been laid out which don't have effect for a year, two, three, four years time when the activity has to be injected into our economy now. There will always be controversies on the way through. There will always be debates and disagreements about should it be here, should it be there, should've been built in this way, should've been built in that way. But you know something, that's been part and parcel of most debates about community infrastructure building throughout history.
But we're determined to make a difference now in the economy and to make sure that we get these facilities built for our kids as quickly as possible.
One final thing on that, look at the international economic data, the worst global recession in three quarters of a century, but Australia doing better than most of the other economies. We are the fastest growing economy in the OECD. We are the fastest growing economy across the major advanced economies. We're the only major advanced economy not to have gone into technical recession so far. We had the second lowest unemployment and we had the lowest debt and lowest deficit of the major advanced economies.
And the question is asked, can things always be done better? I'm sure they can be. But we are determined to make a difference through what we have done and I believe the data speaks for itself that we are having an effect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given today's polls, are you expecting that Malcolm Turnbull will be going up against you after the winter break?
PM: The Government's getting on with the business of jobs and supporting business in the midst of the worst recession in 75 years and I think the Australian people are just tired of the politics of fear and smear.
JOURNALIST: Who would you prefer to face at the next election, Mr Hockey or Mr Turnbull?
PM: I believe that the Australian people want government to do as we are doing - getting on with the business of supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships and traineeships now and they are fed up and tired of the politics of fear and smear.
JOURNALIST: On another matter can I ask you about the GroceryChoice website  - 
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: Any more reaction on that? I mean the Choice people are saying it's like the retailers being in charge of their own website is like Dracula being in charge of the blood bank.
PM: Let me just say a few things about the whole question about how we support better our consumer protection in this sector. A few things that the Government has engaged in so far.
First of all, what the Government has done is boosted ACCC powers, that's the Australian Consumer Competition Commission powers by criminalising cartel conduct like price fixing. 
Secondly, introducing a national consumer law bill to increase ACCC powers in general. Thirdly, we've also strengthened the predatory pricing provisions of the Trade Practices Act. Fourthly, we've released a discussion paper out for comment on creeping acquisitions law which will allow the ACCC to be able to scrutinise smaller acquisitions by larger companies who have a lot of market power.
And finally, we've implemented the Review's recommendations on national unit pricing code which commence on the 1st of July. The Government has been very active on this whole question. There'll be a continued discussion of course with retailers in the supermarket industry on the matter that you raised and I am confident the Minister will work a proposal through with the industry over time, it'll just take time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, were you disappointed last night that Bruno didn't ask you to dress in one of those wool bodysuits too?
PM: No (laughter). It takes either courage or foolhardiness to appear on any television program with that guy. And as I said prior to going on to that program, I would have really appreciated it had my staff told me before I went on, that when I went on it was not just with Rove, but with Bruno. Anyway, I'm just happy to have survived. Okay folks, thanks very much.


The Australian Government will seek a commitment from States and Territories to deliver newborn Hearing Screening for all Australian babies from 1 January 2011. 
Presently, only 75 per cent of newborns are screened. This varies from over 95 per cent in some States and Territories to less than 40 per cent in others.
Our children deserve better than this.
About 500 children every year are born with a moderate to profound permanent hearing impairment. However, many of these children are not identified until months or even years after birth.
Hearing screening involves a simple, non-invasive test that is relatively quick and easy to perform.
Early detection and treatment of a hearing impairment can be vitally important in a child's ability to develop language skills, in their later education and their employment prospects.
Children whose hearing impairment is detected in the first days of life can be fitted with a hearing device from as early as three months.
The Prime Minister will call on Premiers and Chief Ministers at the forthcoming Council of Australian Governments meeting to fast-track the introduction of universal and standardised newborn hearing screening.
This Government is committed to improving the health of our future generations, and ensuring that every child has the opportunity to reach their full potential.
With the Government's $60 billion in public hospital funding to begin flowing to States and Territories from 1 July 2009, this is one of the improvements that Australians can expect to receive.


Work is underway on the Primary Schools for the 21st Century (P21) projects in New South Wales, signalling the beginning of a raft of construction work across the state which will help modernise schools and support local jobs.
P21 is the largest component of the Australian Government's historic $14.7 billion Building the Education Revolution (BER) program.
The $12.4 billion P21 program will deliver much needed funding to every primary school for major infrastructure projects, including libraries, multipurpose halls and classrooms.
The first sod was turned today on the first of the public school projects. A new hall and covered outdoor learning area are being built at Minto Public School. This $2 million project is due for completion in December 2010.
Across NSW, a total of 1,764 schools have received $2.9 billion for 2,389 major infrastructure projects under Rounds 1 and 2 of the P21 program.
This is on top of $414 million for 3,069 NSW primary and secondary schools under the National School Pride Program for minor infrastructure and maintenance projects.
Successful projects for the third component of the BER, Science and Language Centres for 21st Century Secondary Schools, are currently being finalised.
The $14.7 billion Building the Education Revolution complements the existing and planned investments by the NSW Government.
Building the Education Revolution is a key element of the Rudd Government's $42 billion Nation Building  -  Economic Stimulus Plan to support jobs, stimulate local economies and invest in important infrastructure for the long-term.
A full list of successful schools and their planned projects are available at buildingtheeducationrevolution.gov.au or at www.economicstimulusplan.gov.au.


PM: Well firstly it's great to be here at this Shepherd Centre and to learn something about how the good folk here have been dealing with the challenges of hearing impairment for such a long period of time. I'd like to acknowledge Brendan Nelson, former Leader of the Opposition, former head of the AMA. He's been talking to me privately about these challenges for some time now. Tanya Plibersek of course my Ministerial colleague and local member and of course Mr Michael Shepherd who has got a particular association with this centre, and to staff and families.
Let me just make a few remarks about why we're here. Some time ago Brendan Nelson began speaking to me about the particular challenges of when we conduct diagnostic tests with littlies as soon as they're born to see if there is a problem with hearing. As I am advised, about 500 children every year are born in Australia with a profound, permanent hearing impairment. However, still too many of these children are not identified until months or even years after birth, usually when they undergo developmental testing at eight months of age or having been identified with a hearing impairment by the time they go to school.
Children whose hearing impairment is detected in the first days of life can be fitted for a hearing device as early as three months, I am advised. But between 2003 and 2006 the average reported age for children fitted with an initial hearing device in their early years was 15 months. We know from medical research undertaken by the National Health and Medical Research Council that early detection treatment is vitally important in a child's ability to develop language skills, in their later education, personal development and future employment prospects. And so these are the sorts of arguments which Dr Nelson, Brendan, has been putting to me.
In addition to the fact that currently across Australia despite some improvements and some great work here in the State of NSW, I am advised that we only have 75 per cent of newborns nationwide who are being properly screened for hearing impairment. And this varies from State to State, from 97 per cent in some States down to as low as 50 and a little lower than that in other states.
So my proposal is that we as a nation we can do better than this and we need to do better in terms of the lives of the little ones with whose welfare we are charged for the future. And so today I want to confirm publicly that we intend to turn this around, so that in 18 months every newborn will be able to benefit from a universal hearing screening in Australia.
I will be seeking a commitment from the Premiers at the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments meeting in Darwin on Wednesday for universal coverage of newborn screening for all states and territories by the end of 2010. I will also ask Premiers to fast track work being done amongst jurisdictions to develop national standards for screening and post screening follow up and a national quality and reporting framework.
I think we can do this. After all we've just engaged the States and Territories on a new $60 billion Health Care Agreement and I am sure we'll obtain a positive and cooperative response from the States and Territories to what will be a positive proposal from us. I think we can do much better as a nation.
I understand more will need to be done. Getting the diagnostics right is one thing, making sure that we also can work through the challenges of making sure that littlies have a cochlear implant at the right time, as early as possible and any replacement or follow up implant at the right time is what we now need to attend to and we'll be discussing that with State and Territory colleagues. But this is one important step forward, that is how do we best help little ones in Australia, born with a hearing impairment, to be diagnosed early and to be treated properly and that is what the national Government intends to do.
Brendan? You might want to say a few things.
NELSON: Thank you. Well, Prime Minister, Michael Shepherd, Tanya Plibersek, I want to thank the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd for getting this. We are now on the cusp of living in a country where every child that is born in this nation will have his or her hearing screening tested at the time of birth where we should be able to get them into an appropriate program by three months of age with a cochlear implant before the year of one and by the age of five have them in the absence of other disabilities put into an entirely normal schooling environment.
I want to thank Kevin Rudd. When I spoke, first spoke to him about this he understood it, he, no pun intended but he heard it. He decided that this would be done. I also thank his Parliamentary Secretary Bill Shorten who also understood the importance of this. This will make Australia a leading nation when it comes to the care of its newborn infants. It means as I say that we will live in a country where every baby will screened at birth and will have the opportunity to live in a hearing and speaking world.
And I'd also like to pay tribute to Doctor Bruce Shepherd. Bruce Shepherd nearly 40 years ago decided that deaf children should be able to have the opportunity to go into a hearing and speaking world and now thousands of young Australian children can hear and speak because Bruce Shepherd wouldn't listen to those who said that they never would be able to do it. So I want to thank the Prime Minister for this significant initiative. It will transform the lives of many Australian children that are yet to be born and enhance the meaning of family life for their parents who will have them and I thank, I thank you very much.
PM: Well done Brendan.
NELSON: Very nice.
SHEPHERD: Thank you Prime Minister. Thank you Prime Minister, thank you Brendan. Look, all I can add is to what the Prime Minister and Dr Nelson have said. This is so important. It means that these children, rather than becoming drawdowns on the community and welfare, will become productive members of the community and go on to lead productive lives and happy lives, able to communicate with the entire community and not just those few who might be able to sign. So I thank you very much Prime Minister for your initiative and thank you Brendan for all your work. Thank you very much
PM: And just to conclude before we zip, are you okay, do you want to say anything? I think this is really good work because you've had folk like Bruce Shepherd and others who have, ahead of their time and ahead the curve, have said here is a social need for the nation and particular need for parents and for littlies. And so all of this has been going in times when there hasn't been an enormously supportive let's call it public policy environment. In many respects we in government are often catching up with what the community sector has been doing for some time.
So I'd like to acknowledge the work of the Shepherd Centre, acknowledge Brendan's personal interest in this being a medico himself by background, former head of the AMA and a former Leader of the Opposition in Canberra with whom I've had several good conversations about this. And the challenge for us all now is to make this happen and make it happen we will.
JOURNALIST: Mr Nelson, before you go, I've got a quick question. Are you happy to be standing in the position you are now considering the turmoil that your former party has been going through?
NELSON: Well, we're here to talk about deafness and hearing and I appreciate your question, I've got no comments to make on anything else. Thank you.


The French Government has bestowed the prestigious Order of Arts and Letters to Arts Minister Peter Garrett overnight in Paris.
This is a great honour for the Minister that recognises his significant contribution to arts and culture through music, and as Minister for the Arts.
Minister Garrett is the first Australian Minister to be awarded this Order. He joins a small group of other Australians who have been honoured by the French Government in this way.
The award highlights the extraordinary contribution Minister Garrett has made to Australian life. He is a passionate performer and songwriter whose work with Midnight Oil has defined a special era of Australian contemporary music.
His experiences as an artist are invaluable to his position as Minister for the Arts.
Established in 1957, L'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres recognises a person's significant contribution to arts and literature or to the propagation of these fields.
Minister Garrett is in Paris to accept the Order on his return from the International Whaling Commission in Portugal.
Other Australians who have been awarded an Order include Robyn Archer, Alan R Dodge, Doug Hall, Kylie Minogue, Leo Schofield, David Stratton and Andrea Stretton.


PM: Well it's great to be here at Marsden High and with Julia Gillard the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education, Brett Raguse the local member, as well as the principal and school captains from this great state high school here in Queensland.
As I travel around the country, people say to me that it is great to see the Australian Government now investing big time in our schools. It's great to see the Australian Government now investing big time in our schools because the needs are great and that's why our building program and general investment program in our schools is so large and so significant.
The Government's overall strategy, given this global economic recession, we call Nation Building for Recovery. Supporting jobs, supporting small business, supporting apprenticeships today by investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow, including the school infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And that's what Building the Education Revolution is all about.
On the jobs front, on the small business front, this Nation Building for Recovery plan of ours will support more than 200,000 jobs a year, each year for the next two years according to Treasury, that would otherwise be lost because of the global economic recession.
And those jobs are supported directly or through the encouragement we're also providing for small business and also to provide support for apprenticeships and traineeships as well. Important stuff, given what is happening around the world with the global recession and the impact which the recession globally is happening on economies everywhere, where unemployment is going through the roof. And Australia because of the policies we've taken is doing better than most of the other economies around the world.
That's on the jobs front. The other front is what we're actually doing in schools themselves and as I said it's supporting jobs today by investing in the school infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And that's why this program, Building the Education Revolution, is so important, building the school infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Already the Deputy Prime Minister has been out there announcing projects for the National School Pride Program. Individual investments which support a whole series of improvements which are needed within schools today and that affects 10,000 schools across the country - primary, secondary, government, non-government.
Secondly, we have our Primary Schools for the 21st Century program. Yesterday in south-western Sydney I launched the first project for Government primary schools in NSW out at Minto. And that school is building a new multi-purpose hall for a school population of about 170 kids, first time in that school's history they're going to have a multi-purpose hall. And the kids, the P&amp;C, they are just really positive, really excited about the things they'll be able to do there. Projects like that, multi-purpose halls, new state-of-the-art libraries, 21st century libraries, classroom modernisation is happening across 7,500 primary schools across our nation.
But thirdly for secondary schools and why we are here at Marsden High today is that the Deputy Prime Minister, together with myself, is announcing today the decision by the Government concerning 537 new science centres or language training centres or integrated centres combining both for secondary schools right across the country. This involves an investment of some $810 million.
Now where it becomes very practical in school communities like the one we're in here today at Marsden is the building of a new science centre, 21st century science centre, which will accommodate a whole new approach to chemistry labs, physics laboratories, biology experiments; the whole box and dice to create the best possible learning environment for science. And so too for language centres as well.
You see, it's part of our broader strategy also to encourage science in schools; making it really attractive for our young people to be studying sciences at secondary school, and maths. And also when they get to university, programs we've already put in place provide extra HECS encouragement for those students who choose to go on to study science and maths at secondary school level.
So that's what we're on about. Nation building for recovery, jobs today by investing in school infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Doing it at these three levels, for schools in general, for refurbishment, Primary Schools for the 21st Century, but today the announcement of 537 locations across the country for the building of these language centres and science centres for the 21st century as well. Supporting 210,000 jobs, making sure that these young people here, these young school captains behind me from Marsden High and those that come after them have the best possible facilities to pursue their careers in sciences and languages for the future. Over to you Julia.
DPM: Thank you Prime Minister. Can I say this is a very exciting announcement today of 537 new science or language centres. It's part of an integrated approach, it's another brick in building our education revolution. And if we look at that from a perspective of a school, from this school, for Marsden State School the education revolution is going to mean this new science facility. The education revolution has already promised for this school a new trades training facility, $1.3 million worth of new trades training equipment and facility for students who want a vocational pathway. The education revolution has already provided for this school $200,000 in National School Pride money and it has also provided more than 330 computers as part of the digital education revolution and more than 220 of them are already installed.
So looked at from the school view, this is a transformation: a transformation in its ability to teach science, a transformation in its ability to offer trades training pathways, a transformation in its ability to enable students to learn on the learning tools of the 21st century. And there are many schools around the country just like this, benefiting from the education revolution in a way that is transforming school education.
Now the Government deliberately decided in these difficult economic days of the global recession when we needed to support jobs, we deliberately decided that science laboratories and language centres were a priority. And that's because if you look at Australian education you'd say that there are two things to be concerned about. One is not enough kids studying maths and science. Consequently not enough teachers who are able to teach maths and science because if people don't study maths and science at secondary school then they can't go on to be a maths and science teacher later. And another problem with Australian education is not enough kids studying languages.
So we've decided through this program to invest in the capital schools need to enable them to better offer maths and science and languages. And this capital integrates with two important other education revolution programs. The HECS relief program the Prime Minister referred to, where if you go on at university to study maths and science you will have your HECS halved and if you go on to be a maths or science teacher in an area of need you'll have it halved again. And the language centres fit with our priority on the study of Asian languages to which we've devoted more than $62 million.
So the education revolution is an integrated package of policies of which today's announcement is a new and exciting part.
PM: Over to you folks. No questions? Right.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Say that again sorry I missed it.
JOURNALIST: Do we risk us falling behind in (inaudible) science in the Asia-Pacific region if we don't (inaudible)?
PM: I think what Julia the Deputy Prime Minister has been working through, and the rest of the Government is where we do fit into international league tables and where we want to be in the future. Because this actually goes to the heart of our future economic competitiveness as well as the best life opportunities and career opportunities for young people who are with us today.
And if you're going to stay ahead of the pack, be ahead of the curve, you've got to make sure that we're producing the absolute best in maths and science. These are what is often referred to as the great enabling disciplines, particularly in terms of the competitiveness of economies. That is one thing.
The other is because we are in the Asia Pacific region we want to have maximum investment in our ability as a country and as an economy to communicate with our markets of the future. And that means doing much, much better in how we teach Chinese, Japanese, how we teach Indonesian, how we teach other languages including Korean, as well as some of the European languages because we now live in a global economy.
So this makes sense for the long term. But what we're also saying is it makes sense for the economy in the here and now as well because with this building out here which will be worth what?
DPM: About $2 million.
PM: About $2 million. You're going to have probably 20 to 25 sets of tradies operating on site, representing sparkies and chippies and people to do the painting and the cleaning and the landscaping and everything else. Together with other indirect jobs generated which makes a difference here in this part of South East Queensland where we need to support jobs and small business in the here and now.
So what I am saying is for us it makes sense for the future as a country and I think parents that I've run into around the country are really excited about having these new facilities added to these schools, work which has often been needed to be done for a long time.
But secondly to make sure also that we're providing practical and immediate support for jobs and small business when there is so much pressure in the reverse direction in other economies around the world.
JOURNALIST: When are you going to bring in the halving of the HECs fees for maths students and science students.
PM: (inaudible)
DPM: That was a measure that was introduced in our first Budget and came into effect for this academic year.
PM: So we're trying to integrate this which is making facilities as attractive as possible and supportive as possible in the schools for our young people to pursue science and maths, and then to encourage them further through the halving of their HECS fees once they head off to university.
And a further policy as well, down the track  -  I am saying this to the kids by the way  -  if you do maths and science at university and you continue to work in those areas later on, then we halve it again. So halve the HECS fees again. So the whole purpose of our policy in this area is to provide a continuing stream of encouragement for our young people to take these careers seriously. And I am sure our Director of Science down here would understand some of the other pressures which young people are under and how these sort of measures can, I think, help to encourage people along the way.
JOURNALIST: One a slightly different topic if I may -
PM: Sounds like a change (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: - the health, a health snapshot that's out today, what do you think about that report?
PM: Well look this is the last major national report card on the hospital system off the back of the Howard Government's last Australian Health Care Agreement. It covers the period 07-08, we took over the beginning of 08 but the health care agreement from the federal Government carried on to that period.
So this is a report card which clearly underpins the problems that we must face in the system. The Government has already invested now $64 billion in a new Australian Health Care Agreement, a 50 per cent increase on the past. And we now have a big challenge of reform for the future and we intend to roll up our sleeves and get on with implementing long term reform.
JOURNALIST: Does that reform include the Commonwealth taking over the hospitals?
PM: Well we've been delivered, I think today, the report from the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission which we indicated prior to the election we would ask to do work for us on the future, the long term future of the health and hospital system for Australia. What we intend to do, roll up our sleeves, work through the recommendations of that report, work through it with the States and Territories and arrive at the necessary conclusions and policy decisions we must make as a national Government for the long term future of our health and hospital system. That'll take a bit of time.
We need to be methodical, careful, working our way through these recommendations, in a report I haven't seen yet by the way, it's on its way, and then work it through with the States and Territories and then take decisions.
We are dead set determined to get on with the business of long term reform in the health and hospital system. We've made a down payment in the $64 billion we've invested in the Australian Health Care Agreement so far - a 50 per cent increase on the previous agreement under the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: If the health systems haven't improved, will the Commonwealth take over?
PM: Well as you know I was absolutely clear cut about that possibility prior to the last election. And that is why we have said the platform must be this report from the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. That is being provided to the Government about now, we'll work our way through it and once we've worked our way through it in partnership with the States and Territories, we the Australian Government will make our decisions on the future. The platform for that policy debate is the report which will be handed over to the Government today.
JOURNALIST: Can we get an estimate on how long it will take to work through that report?
PM: I think it is very important to be careful, methodical about the long term future for health and hospital system which affects everybody in this room and everybody in the country. We've got to get it right.
But as I've said, this is not going from doing nothing to changing the future without what we've already done which is a $64 billion investment in the new Australian Health Care Agreement, which became applicable as of the beginning of this year. A 50 per cent increase on investment in the health and hospital system, compared with the previous health care agreement under the Howard Government.
And as you've seen today, that report card on the hospital system points to many, many problems. And that represents the concluding chapter of the Howard Government's health care agreement with the states which saw a billion dollars ripped out of the system, out of the public hospital system by the previous Government.
JOURNALIST: You said in August last year that midyear, that the States had until midyear to pick their game up on health. Are you still waiting for that report?
PM: Well I've just said to you, the report is just being handed over to the Government today. And I think we have been quite careful in making sure we had a properly constituted reform commission, with expertise across the medical profession and health professionals, chaired by Dr Bennett. That is being handed over to the Government today.
We will now work our way through the recommendations. We need to work our way through those recommendations with the States and Territories and we the Australian Government will then make our conclusions for what long term future our system needs.
Those reforms are necessary, absolutely necessary. And we need to get on with the business of long term reform. But a $64 billion investment in a health care agreement in the interim, 50 per cent increase on the past is our way of bridging from the previous system - and you saw the numbers produced on that - and where we need to be going for the future.
JOURNALIST: On another different subject, there are reports out of Indonesia that there are 10,000 illegal asylum seekers waiting to come here. Are we in charge of that in terms of border patrol etc, are we going to be able to stop that happening?
PM: This Government will continue to implement a hard line when it comes to border protection. Our navy has performed a first class job in interdicting these vessels at sea and taking them to Christmas Island for processing; that's the first point. Secondly we understand that this is a global problem affecting countries right around the region and right around the world.
Thirdly can I just say this in absolute clarity - that with anyone arriving by boat, intercepted by our navy and taken to Christmas Island for processing, if people are not found to be bona fide refugees they will be sent home. That is the bottom line here.
We have a process, a proper process for assessing this and that is the one that we apply. But we need to be also working with our friends and partners in the region and in the Budget we indicated some $650 million worth of measures involving enhanced border protection arrangements in the region and beyond.
JOURNALIST: Just from a practical sense with those sorts of numbers being talked about, are the facilities on Christmas Island big enough (inaudible)?
PM: The Department of Immigration has indicated that they have sufficient capacity to deal with these challenges in the future. Let's look at it in a multi-layered level. One is dealing with the problem in source countries. For example, without going to the specifics of individual nationalities, the instability recently in Sri Lanka is a factor, a very big factor on the Jaffna Peninsula.
So dealing with problems in source countries is critical, which is why again we've been clear about enhancing our police and related security representation in so many countries around the region including Sri Lanka. That's one, dealing with the problem in source countries.
Two, making sure that our cop on the beat - that is, the navy on the high seas and border protection and customs  -  are working effectively to interdict vessels as they move towards Australia and they have been remarkably successful given the technical difficulty of this task. That's the second point.
And the third is then making sure that you've got proper systems, processing systems in place so that if folk are arriving who are not bona fide refugees, then subsequent to processing they get sent home.
So you're dealing with this at all three levels and I believe the Government's strategy is well thought through, it's tough. But can I just say every Head of Government I speak to in the region and more broadly in the world is going to a similar set of challenges as we speak.
JOURNALIST: Is there capacity for Christmas Island to take in refugees? How many is that capacity?
PM: Oh look these are best questions put to the Immigration Minister.
JOURNALIST: You must be overjoyed about the polls.
PM: Can I just say the task of I think what mums and dads and Australians are saying to us loud and clear across the country is get on with the job as the Government has been doing of supporting jobs, small business, education and hospitals at a very difficult time in the global economy. And it's time for the end of the politics of fear and smear. And having said that I am about to zip.
[Ends]


The Australian Government today announced funding of $810 million to bring Australian secondary schools into the 21st century.
A total of 537 science laboratories and language learning centres will be built or refurbished under the first stage of the Science and Language Centres for the 21st Century Secondary Schools (SLC) element of the Building the Education Revolution (BER).
This important program will deliver much-needed funding to secondary schools that have demonstrated through a competitive process their school's disadvantage and need.
This is part of the Rudd Government's nation building for recovery plan to help drive Australia out of the global recession  -  building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow while supporting jobs and businesses today.
SLC projects will give schools access to modern facilities with leading edge technologies. Construction will commence quickly, providing immediate support for jobs.
This round of funding will see 280 science centres, 179 language centres and 78 dual facilities either constructed or refurbished.
The Rudd Government is undertaking the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history to support local jobs, stimulate every local economy and invest in important long-term infrastructure.
Successful projects include deserving schools such as Tennant Creek High School in the Northern Territory which will receive $1.97 million for a new science centre, Tagai State College on Thursday Island in Queensland which will receive $1.4 million for a new language centre, and Bourke High School in NSW which will receive $1.97 million for a new science centre.
Under SLC, up to $574 million (71 per cent) of funding will go to Government schools, $150 million (18 per cent) to Catholic schools and $90 million (11 per cent) to Independent schools.
The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR) is working with education authorities in relation to a number of other suitable applications from schools to finalise the costings for their projects. A further announcement will be made when this process has been completed.
Building the Education Revolution is a key element of the Rudd Government's $42 billion Nation Building  -  Economic Stimulus Plan to support jobs, stimulate local economies and invest in important infrastructure for the long-term.
The Government sincerely thanks school principals and school communities around Australia for their enthusiasm for, and commitment to, Building the Education Revolution.
A full list of successful schools and their planned projects are available at: www.buildingtheeducationrevolution.gov.au or at: www.economicstimulusplan.gov.au


Amber Callaghan: I read in the local paper that he was going to be in Logan and I said to my husband ‘we should see if he wants to come to the bakery' and the only way that I thought I could directly message him was on Twitter, which I just joined.
So I messaged him and it's hard to ask someone, especially the Prime Minister, to come to your bakery with 160 characters [Laughter].
So I had to send two and it all, all eventuated so, yeah, so it was quite surprising that I could do that... he reads it too, I think that's a nice thing to that he actually is in touch with like, you know, the normal people not just have to go through different avenues to get to him so yeah, it's good.


KING: Good morning.
PM: Good morning Madonna.
KING: How much of today is a PR exercise and how much is about genuinely finding out what's needed in the community?
PM: Madonna, prior to the last election we said that we would take for the first time the Australian cabinet around the country. And from memory this is either number 12 or number 13 that we have done over the last 18 months that we've been in office in every state of Australia. And it is the first opportunity that all these communities have had to sit down with the Australian cabinet, ask any question they like about any subject they like. And if you are a person with a particular concern or a community organisation, then we've had literally hundreds and hundreds of individual meetings between these organisations and individual Ministers -
KING: Well today-
PM: And we undertake to get back to each person either to say yes we can do this, no we can't and to give the reasons why or what else we are doing.
KING: Well today at my listeners' request we're focusing on solutions in three big areas - crime, health and ageing and unemployed. Does that accord, those areas accord with what you're hearing of the concerns elsewhere in Australia?
PM: On the question, you mentioned unemployment. Let me just go to that in particular. Because of the global economic recession, this is huge and big in terms of the problems for jobs and small business right around the country, south east Queensland, particular challenges as well, so that resonates exactly with number one priorities for the Government and you know our strategy for responding to that, our nation building plan.
You mentioned also health and we understand the huge challenges which lie in that area and therefore the need to increase the Australian Government's investment in the public hospital system. We've done that through the most recent Australian Healthcare Agreement which increased total investment by the Australian Government by 50 per cent nationwide.
On the crime question that you raise, this of course in terms of detailed community policing is primarily a state responsibility. At the federal level through the Australian Federal Police we are particularly engaged in the whole problem of narcotics and drugs where we work very closely with the state police services. And one of the reasons we've increased the number of Australian Federal Police in our recent budgets by, an intention to increase the force by 500, is to give our federal police greater capacity to work in this area with their state counterparts.
KING: One issue that didn't make our final three but was in our final five was the behaviour of politicians. Do you ever look at a replay of Question Time and think that was really bad?
PM: I think people in recent times Madonna are legitimately concerned about what I described I think yesterday as rolling politics of fear and smear -
KING: But on your own side too, it's not just one side.
PM: Can I just complete my answer to your question? Which is what I think the Australian people want is, is for their elected representatives, Government of the day including the Opposition, to get in with the core challenges, core priorities of the nation which right now are jobs, small business, apprenticeships, how do we improve the overall state of the hospital system, how do we improve the education system, how do we deal with the long term challenges of climate change, as well as these big things which are affecting people's daily lives and the wellbeing of their communities. That's what we're focused on and I think the Australian community legitimately expects that of all politicians.
KING: Have you ever thought of having a really independent speaker to improve that parliamentary process?
PM: I think the responsibility there, Madonna, lies with the behaviour of any individual member of parliament. It goes to state parliaments, federal parliaments.
The key thing is one of priorities - there is always going to be robust debate - the key thing though is whether you've actually got your sleeves rolled up and dealing with how do you make a difference for example with the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century to reduce the number of unemployed? That's number one.
And number two is how do you get out there, roll up your sleeves and help small business who are doing it tough, how do you actually make a difference there. And how do you make a practical difference to schools like the one we're visiting later this morning at Marsden? And our practical response there is investment in a new science centre and we're doing that with science centres in secondary schools right across the country.
KING: One of the issues that we're discussing today is unemployed. We've just spoken about that. But a couple of years ago you asked your MPs to visit a homeless shelter to find out about how some people were doing it. Did you ever follow up on that? Do you know how many of your MPs have actually gone and sat down with the homeless?
PM: I couldn't give you an exact number but a large number.
You ask about follow-up. The first thing that I did when I became Prime Minister in terms of commissioning a Government White Paper was to do one on homelessness. That was commissioned in early 2008. They've reported at the end of last year and it was called A Place Called Home.
Since then the Australian Government has done two things - committed to the fundamental reform of the delivery of homelessness service right across the country in the country's history. Secondly, what we have done in the most recent response to the global economic recession is increase the national investment in units of social housing by 20,000 and engaged in the repair of some 50,000 units of social housing.
We have made probably more progress in dealing with the challenge of homelessness than any other previous Australian Government. I think you would find that validated by most people who are active in this sector as well.
So you ask, are we fair dinkum about it? I believe we are.
KING: We all self-assess at some point and see how we are going in our job, how would you rate they job you're doing as Prime Minister of the country?
PM: That's for other people to judge and that's for your viewers to make judgments of.
KING: Well, let me ask you this question, a wider question in relation to the Labor Party I guess. The polls have been going in your favour, but not that of your state colleague Anna Bligh. One recent poll showed that a third of your party, the Labor Party, believes she lied about the scrapping of the fuel subsidy and asset sales. Do you support the privatisation plans of your party in Queensland?
PM: In terms of Anna and can I say this to you Madonna that every Australian government, state or federal, has got to make tough decisions. Anna Bligh had to make tough decisions. And she's had to do so in the most recent Budget. At the national level and at the state level, what we're all wrestling with is the impact of this global economic recession. It's tough, it's hard, it's difficult and people are deluding themselves if they don't think it has an effect on taxation receipts.
In the case of the Federal Government, we've taken a $210 billion hit in terms of lost tax revenues to the Australian Government because of the impact of the global recession. That is massive. That's the equivalent of abolishing all Federal funding for the hospital system nationwide if we were not to for example engage in temporary deficit and temporary borrowing which we've had to do.
So we are simply not conducting a debate in its proper context if we simply take it out of the global reality which every government in the world is wrestling. On that score, can I just say this, notwithstanding all the challenges and given the actions we've taken, Australia right now according to the reports of the IMF and the OECD most recently has the fastest economic growth of the 30 economies in the OECD.
We have the fastest growth certainly among the major advanced economies. We're the only of the major advanced economies, among the major advanced economies not to be in technical recession. We have the second lowest unemployment and the lowest debt and the lowest deficit  - 
KING: Alright I think you've answered the question  - 
PM: All I'm just saying these are, Madonna, these may be facts which others may not wish to have properly put into the context of the debate. But I'm saying it's tough times, globally it's difficult. We're doing better than most economies and all governments around the world are having to make very tough decisions.
KING: A very quick answer to this, I think my listeners want to talk about this probably even less than you, but on this Utegate affair, one question that my listeners have been asking is why would someone of your means, in your position even put yourself in that position and accept a car. Will you give it back? Are you sorry you ever borrowed it?
PM: Can I say Madonna that on this matter that when you have this entire affair resting on the existence of a forged and fake email and that the various people in politics have prosecuted a campaign alleging that the Prime Minister and the Treasurer of the day are engaged in corrupt behaviour and that that in turn has been reflected in the content and tone of reporting by various newspapers around the country including in Brisbane, I think these matters have been canvassed in recent times and I think  - 
KING: But you haven't answered that question. The question is -
PM: I think the Australian people would like Madonna is for us all to get on with the job of dealing with how we handle the recession, how we handle the problem of jobs, how we handle the small business challenges today. And also for people to scratch their heads and ask, how can newspapers today for example run stories based on forged emails and assume that they are simply accurate as The Courier-Mail has done in Brisbane.
KING: But are you going to give the car back? Are you sorry you borrowed it?
PM: Madonna, can I say that when this ute was lent to us, it was fully declared on the pecuniary interest register -
KING: I understand that, no one's saying you did anything wrong. The simple question is, are you sorry it's caused so much trouble? Are you going to give it back?
PM: Madonna, if the vehicle is declared on the pecuniary interest register of the Parliament and as you've just said that involves no particular error on my part and I think that speaks for itself, I think what all your listeners would expect, as they would expect of proper objective, balanced and honest reporting from local papers like The Courier-Mail and rather than base their reporting on forged and fake emails, that we all get back to the priority of dealing with the challenges of jobs, small business, schools -
KING: I'll let me listeners decide whether that was answered yes or no. But can I ask you a simple yes or no here  - 
PM: It's a question of priorities for your listeners as well.
KING: Alright, lottery $90 million tonight, have you taken out a ticket?
PM: I beg your pardon?
KING: Have you taken out a ticket?
PM: I think others could engage in the lotto as they see most appropriate.
KING: But you haven't taken one for the $90 million prize tonight?
PM: I don't think so Madonna, no.
KING: Alright Kevin Rudd, thanks for your time.
PM: Good morning.


A new optical fibre broadband link to Darwin will be one of the first priority steps in the roll out of the National Broadband Network.
The Australian Government today called a competitive tender to construct, operate and maintain the backbone link  -  with construction expected to begin by September, and better broadband services available in Darwin next year.
The $43 billion National Broadband Network is the single largest infrastructure project in Australia since the Snowy Hydro scheme, and is critical to building the recovery from the global economic recession.
Darwin is one of the first six priority locations for new broadband infrastructure under the $250 million Regional Broadband Blackspots Program.
A new optical fibre broadband link to Darwin will:
     * Increase access to broadband services  -  which Darwin needs more than other capital cities because of its distance from other commercial centres
     * Put downward pressure on prices by increasing competition  -  according to the Northern Territory Government, backbone prices are three to five times higher than the costs of similar routes elsewhere
     * Increase the reliability of services  -  three months ago, Territorians waited 11 hours for a communications system fault to be fixed because Darwin is the only capital city with no competitive backbone link.
Retail providers of broadband services must have access to competitive backbone infrastructure on an open access, equivalent basis  -  that is why the new optical fibre broadband link to Darwin is important.
This project will also kickstart the first of 25,000 local jobs that will be supported by the eight-year National Broadband Network.
Other priority locations for which a competitive tender has been called are:
     * Emerald and Longreach, Queensland
     * Geraldton, Western Australia
     * Broken Hill, New South Wales
     * Victor Harbor, South Australia
     * South West Gippsland, Victoria.
Submissions from a wide range of stakeholders have helped the Government identify the first six priority locations for these initial backbone infrastructure investments  -  and subject to the outcome of Round 1, more locations and routes will be identified later in the year.
Further information on the National Broadband Network is also available online: www.dbcde.gov.au/nationalbroadbandnetwork


Work on the $110 million Tiger Brennan Drive Extension entered a new phase today with about 120,000 cubic metres of land “blasted” at Berrimah Farm in Darwin to make way for the new 7.5km four-lane dual highway extension.
This is one of the single largest projects in Darwin, supporting up to 200 jobs and building the vital road infrastructure for the future.
The project will reduce travel delays and improve safety for about 34,000 vehicles per day and transform the corridor between the rural area, Palmerston and Darwin.
The project is progressing well with much of the land corridor having already been cleared and the culvert construction underway as part of the early works.
Today's blasting symbolises the start of a critical new stage.
Road sealing as part of Stage Two is set to begin towards the end of this year with work on the much anticipated overpasses set to begin in next month.
The project is scheduled for completion in 2010.
The Australian Government has committed $74 million to this vital project with the Northern Territory Government contributing $36 million.


CHIEF MINISTER: Welcome Prime Minister to Darwin again and welcome to one of the great projects which is a sign of the cooperation between the Northern Territory Government and the Australian Government. This is stage two of the Tiger Brennan Drive project which is an important project to better connect the cities of Palmerston and the City of Darwin and this is about improving the linkage for 34,000 people a day who commute between Darwin and Palmerston, to make that commuting time shorter, safer and really improving the link between two of the fastest growing cities in Australia. 
This is a very important project, it's a project which the Australian Government has committed $74 million to, $36 million by my Government and certainly a project that is nation building in its scope. It's going to be employing 200 people during the terms of Stage 2 and certainly at a time of the global financial crisis it's important that governments continue to commit capital works to employ Australians and employ Territorians. It's great to see Damian here as well, Damian as the Member for Solomon and I work really closely together to make sure that the Northern Territory gets our share from the Commonwealth and we really do. The Prime Minister really is supporting the growing Northern Territory, an expanding Northern Territory economy and it's great to have you here today PM.
PM: Thanks Paul and Chief Minister and Damian Hale the local member who has been a tireless advocate of making sure this work gets done. This is going to be great for the Territory, great for Darwin, great for Palmerston, it's practical stuff. It makes a difference in terms of people who live in this part of Australia, safer commuting and quicker commuting but also it's about jobs. This is a big investment. As the Chief Minister just said, this is $110 million worth of investment, 74 from the Australian Government, 36 from the Territory Government. And also I am advised that this project is supporting up to 200 jobs in this part of our country.
So this is part and parcel of our overall strategy of supporting jobs, and business and apprenticeships today by investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's what it's all about. And this road is part and parcel of what we're going to do across the nation. It is also part and parcel of our wider strategy of nation building for recovery. Part of our national economic stimulus strategy, $702 million, is being invested by the Australian Government here in the Territory in order to make a difference.
As the global economy is under threat because of the global financial crisis, and you see recession in so many parts of the world, what we are doing through nation building for recovery is stepping into the breach as Government to make a difference. And that $701 million, $702 million which would otherwise not be here, but it is because we the Government have decided to partner the State and Territory governments to make that difference.
If I look at other branches of infrastructure, I'll just leave you with a few of these figures. Compared with the last couple of years of the previous Government, we have seen a 203 per cent increase in road and rail funding by the current Australian Government. In the last four years of the previous Government compared with the first four years of this Government and the agreements which we've signed, nearly an 80 per cent increase in education funding.
In terms of health, compared with the last four years of the previous Government, a 21 per cent increase in health funding for the Northern Territory.
And that is because we want to end the blame game. We want to actually be partners with State and Territory Governments around the country to make a difference to people's lives in the local area.
Last couple of points I'd make before taking your questions is this, we are in the business of implementing our commitments to the people of the Territory and the people of Darwin. It is not just this investment in Tiger Brennan but I also draw your attention to the $50 million investment in the Port of Darwin expansion, also draw your attention to the $36 million investment in the expansion of Charles Darwin University. Elsewhere in education the fact that we've invested some $7 million in the National School Pride program across 48 schools in Solomon. Under the Primary Schools for the 21st Century program, nearly $30 million to create multipurpose halls, and to build also state-of-the-art 21st century libraries.
In health, if you look also at the investments we're making at Royal Darwin Hospital, $19 million to build the Radiation Oncology Unit at Royal Darwin, $18.6 million for short term patient accommodation at the hospital, $27.8 million to construct medical education facilities at the hospital as well. And for our friends in the defence force we are also in the business of building 185 new defence homes.
Why do I go through these things? To underline the fact that the Australian Government is not just sitting back and waiting for Territory governments and State governments around the country to wrestle with the global financial crisis, the global economic recession on their own. We're stepping up to the plate but doing so in practical ways which make a difference. In health, in education and defence housing and these other things which are so critical for the future of this part of Australia's part in our federation. And that is why roads like this linking Darwin and Palmerston are so important. So we want to be partners with the Territory in its future. Over to you folks for some questions.
JOURNALIST: Is Darwin Airport a gateway to Asia with (inaudible) double in size but it's not going to be able to now-
PM: That's a nice positive question to start the proceedings with.
JOURNALIST: You know me, well.
PM: No I don't actually. Where are you from?
JOURNALIST: I used to work in Canberra but anyway.
PM: We've all got our problems haven't we? Okay but on the airport stuff as I'm advised it's a bit like this. First of all there are commercial agreements between the airport of course and various of the airline providers and I understand those haven't been resolved in an entirely successful matter, manner. Secondly I understand that there are therefore fundamental commercial considerations which underpin the future direction of Darwin airport and then on top of that again can I say  -  you okay there?
JOURNALIST: Sorry.
PM: And on the, on top of that we provided investments across the country in response to the advice given to use independently by the board of Infrastructure Australia. So that's the relevant considerations as far as this particular project is concerned.
JOURNALIST: At tomorrow's COAG meeting, will you be discussing the possibility of a federal takeover of public hospitals?
PM: Well only yesterday the Australian Government received a report from the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. We commissioned this body under Dr Bennett probably about a year or so ago. The Australian Government hasn't worked its way through that report yet, it'll take some time and once we've done so we will make it public by the time parliament resumes and furthermore we'll then engage in a process of discussion with the States on how we improve the health and hospital system for the future.
This is an important area of national reform. Remember that since we've been elected, we've increased our total investment in health and hospitals across the country to $64 billion. That represents a 50 per cent increase on the past. But that is stage one.
Stage two is the long term reform process, that's why we've got this report. This affects so many people's lives. Everyone here has a legitimate concern in the future of our hospitals and our health system because you never know when your families or you yourself are going to need it. That is why we're going to be very careful, methodical, work our way through this report, look at its recommendations carefully, work it through with the States and Territories and then we'll make our own decisions once we've been through that process. It'll take some time but we want to be properly informed in the way in which we shape those decisions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, building approvals were down in April and May. Is that an indication that the stimulus is wearing off the building sector and something else needs to be done?
PM: I notice your question didn't include the fact that retail sales were up  -  is there a reason for that? Alright, okay. Well look, as I've said repeatedly, we're not out of the woods yet. You're going to see some positive economic data, you'll see some troubling economic data. Retail sales are up one per cent when retail sales have been collapsing around the rest of the world.
The building data is down after being up for a number of months  -  things across the economy will be patchy for a while. We're not out of the woods yet.
That underpins the absolute necessity of our strategy of nation building for recovery. Phase one  -  cash payments in the final quarter of last year and through to this year. That's why we see our retail sales almost unique among the advanced economies around the world going up, whereas others are going down.
Secondly, had we not invested in the trebling of the first homeowners boost, where do you think our building figures would be?
The first homeowners boost has contributed to tens of thousands of Australians taking out their first loans on their first homes and that has contributed significantly to construction activity as well.
Our second phase of course is the Building the Education Revolution program which I mentioned some figures before about the investment here in Darwin and the Territory.
Phase three  -  large scale infrastructure projects  -  road, rail, port, high speed broadband, and earlier today I indicated to the media at the event I've just come from, that we'll be incorporating in our National Broadband Network a new special cable linking Darwin in order to roll out the broadband services we need in this part of the world as early as possible.
No strategy is perfect, but you know, if I look at the rest of the world, Australia, among the major advanced economies, is the fastest growing compared with the major advanced economies. We have the second lowest unemployment, we are the only of the major advanced economies to have avoided a recession so far and we have the lowest debt and lowest deficit.
So, that's what we've done. We're trying to make a difference and we're still going to have some troubling data from time to time, that's true, and we're not out of the woods yet.
JOURNALIST: Internal Labor Party polling in New South Wales showed that  - 
PM: How do you know about that?
JOURNALIST: A 10 per cent  - 
PM: Where did you get that from?
CHIEF MINISTER: I haven't heard that.
JOURNALIST: Our friends in New South Wales. Are they a lost cause?
PM: Do you have friends in New South Wales?
JOURNALIST: Yes, I do.
PM: Who are they, to give you that internal ALP folder?
JOURNALIST: Do you?
PM: I don't know where the polling comes from. I haven't seen the story, I haven't seen the report so I couldn't comment on its authenticity. But can I just say that every government  -  State and Territory  -  around Australia is wrestling with the challenge of the global economic recession.
The impact on State revenues in NSW, the Territory and elsewhere, is significant. As the national Government, we've lost $210 billion in tax revenue because of the global recession. That affects what governments can do, and therefore it means that all governments are going to be under the pump in terms of the expectations of their communities, their electorates, their voters in terms of what they can do.
But I also see in New South Wales is a strong investment strategy in infrastructure and the government there seeking to make a difference as well.
JOURNALIST: Say the report is authentic  - 
PM: That sounds like a hypothetical, that's what  - 
JOURNALIST: Is their performance hurting the government?
PM: Can I just say on hypotheticals like that I just don't engage. I haven't seen the report, I don't know whether it's accurate or not, but can I say all governments, Federal and State and local, are experiencing tough times because of the collapse in taxation revenues, or in the case of local government, rates revenues, because of the global economic recession.
And therefore hard decisions are having to be made around the country, and many of these are unpopular, but I do see in NSW the government investing in infrastructure and I think that's a welcome development.
JOURNALIST: Do you have full confidence in the leadership of Nathan Rees?
PM: Absolutely.
JOURNALIST: Today 5,000 Indigenous Australians start the process of going from CDEP jobs onto welfare  -  why have you decided to do that, particularly in this economic times?
PM: Because we believe in reform. We believe that previous systems of payment didn't work and we're on with the business of making a difference. We want to reduce long term welfare dependency, we want to make sure that our Indigenous Australians have every opportunity that other Australians have.
Tomorrow at COAG the Chief Minister and myself and the other Premiers are focussing a large amount of our time on our national partnership on closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. That means making a difference in areas like welfare, in education, in health outcomes and employment, and that's what we're on about.
But you know, turning the whole ship around is going to take some time. But the Premiers and Chief Ministers have made some good progress and we'll be talking further about that tomorrow.
Okay, I think I've got to go and do some demolition work up here guys, so thanks very much and keep your hard hats on.
(ends)


CARY: We're joined by our Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Good morning.
PM: Good morning Greg, thanks for having me on the program.
CARY: Good to see you. Beautiful morning in the river city, right across Queensland if you have a call for our Prime Minister give us a buzz  -  13 13 32. Now we just promoted an idea, I was thinking about it coming in this morning with the beautiful sunrise, what a great place to live, 1,200 people coming across the border every week, have been for-
PM: You're sounding like Joh.
CARY: Well it was Joh's idea.
PM: Are you channelling Joh?
CARY: Well I just had this thought, you know, all this burden on all of us, extra rego for the roads, extra money for the schools, extra money for hospitals. Just thinking about a surcharge for newcomers-
PM: On southerners?
CARY: Southerners? Oh anybody coming here, they can be Westerners.
PM: An SS - a surcharge on Southerners.
CARY: What do you think?
PM: Ah no.
CARY: I don't have the Prime Minister's approval. I guess that is out.
PM: What it goes to is look, Queensland is a huge growth state. One of the challenges Anna Bligh has been wrestling with is how do you invest in the infrastructure to support such a burgeoning population? What we're trying to do as a national Government, it's not perfect but for the first time really the Australian Government, partnering with the states and territories in big infrastructure investment.
What we did in the budget, that $35 billion investment in road, rail, ports, national high speed broadband, university infrastructure, hospital infrastructure, school infrastructure. You see right around the country, not just here, it's starting to creak a bit because the population is growing in so many parts of the country including in the West by the way. And so you need the Australian Government to partner with States and Territories to try and lift some of this burden, there's still a long way to go.
CARY: Just on that point though, in view of the damning reports and there are now three of them on how our money is being spent here in Queensland, and it is similar in NSW and I imagine other States - as the Prime Minister, are you happy with the way the States are spending federal money, our money?
PM: Across the board there's always going to be problems, and let's just be frank about it, I don't pretend to gild the lily on this stuff, there is always going to be problems.
One of the reforms that we've brought in, in the health area and the education area in the last 12 months of negotiations with the States, is to make our payments, let's call them outcomes based. That is, it's not just here are a series of financial inputs into what you do, it's going to be part of an agreement where we measure how many elective surgery procedures actually occur. How many people are attended within minimum specified times at accident and emergencies departments and hospitals.
This is new and we're only just introducing this and but I think it's a step in the right direction to make sure the dollar is driven further.
CARY: Just on that question then because we're now reading that 20,000 more Queenslanders are waiting to see a specialist than this time last year, 20,000. 62 per cent of patients classed as urgent are receiving treatment within 30 minutes, now the national benchmark I understand is 75 per cent. So in those two key areas, Queensland continues to lag badly. You said you'd be looking at the possibility of taking over the responsibility for health from the States if they couldn't get their act together. Where are you, where is your thinking on that now?
PM: Well let me answer it in three quick parts. The first is, the hospitals report that we, the State of the Hospitals report that we released yesterday or the day before, I can't remember the day now, is us putting out a transparent report saying there are problems across the hospital system nationwide, not just here in Queensland, also some good things being done. So let's just be frank about it and you've just pointed to a couple of the statistics and I don't have it in front of me but I won't dispute the statistics you've just rendered.
Secondly what have we done in our 18 months in office? A new Australian Health Care Agreement which is a new investment of $64 billion, a 50 per cent increase on where it was before. You see that hospitals report that we've just been referring to, refers I think to the 07-08 year, that's if you like the end of Mr Howard's last health care agreement, where they actually took  -  the Australian Government  -  a billion dollars out of the public hospital system across the country. We're now reinvesting in the public hospital system in the country with a new agreement we agreed last year and has come into play this year.
Now the third part of my answer is what about the future? Well, what we've said is a National Health and Hospital Reform Commission to look at the long term future of the hospital system and who should do what within it; the Federal Government and the State Government. And we just received that report yesterday.
Now we're going to take our time with this to work our way through it about what the best system is for the future. But let me tell you I know there are problems, there are real problems.
I also know that there are strengths in the system when you compare it with other systems around the world and we're determined to get this absolutely right. But because it's so important to each of your listeners, we're going to be careful, methodical, work our way through it, talk to the States and Territories about it through the course of the months ahead and then reach our decision on what should be the shape for the system for the future.
But you know, turning the ship of state around on hospitals in 18 months is tough. But we've made a solid start with as I said a 50 per cent increase in the Australian Government's investment in hospitals.
CARY: Prime Minister do you put a timeline on it then when you'll make that definitive decision as to whether the federal Government would take over the state responsibility?
PM : I think what we'll do with this report, the one that we got yesterday and they've been at work for more than a year - these are health experts from across the country  -  is we will release it by the time parliament goes back, we'll work our way through it internally.
Then subsequent to that we'll work our way through it with the States and Territories because they actually deliver the system. But we'd be looking towards reaching conclusions on this you know in the not too far distant future beyond that.
On a precise timeline  -  no, but you've got to be clear about what the analysis is, discuss it with the States and Territories about what they are prepared to do and what they are not prepared to do and reach a decision.
And I've got to say that the Health Minister Nicola Roxon has been vigorous in her leadership from this right from the beginning and we are determined to get it right.
CARY: Our guest is the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, a new financial year begins today, many will be happily waving goodbye to the past one. Reports published today say more people are confident about life after the financial crisis than was the case a few months ago. And I am just wondering if you share that confidence and in asking that, your thoughts on the year ahead?
PM: We're not out of the woods yet, I think that is the most important thing to say Greg, it's still a long way to go. But here is a couple of good points for Australia. Global financial crisis, worst economic recession globally in three quarters of a century and just so that people understand this is the first time this year that the global economy is projected to shrink since World War II, actually shrink in size.
Secondly, Australia is doing better than most of the other countries. We have the fastest growing economy of the major advanced economies, the second lowest unemployment. We also uniquely among them have avoided recession so far and we have the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. What you see also coming through in the last two confidence surveys, which does directly to your question, business confidence and consumer confidence in part I think because our policies have helped so far avoid the recession which the rest of the world by and large has fallen into, is confidence has increased. But there is still a hang of a long way to go.
My real worry is, my real worry is that we've still got a big problem on our hands with rising unemployment and I, the measures we've taken for which we've been criticised a lot are designed to keep another 200,000 plus people in work who would otherwise be losing their jobs. But we're I fear we're still going to see rising unemployment for a while ahead.
CARY: Alright just on that issue then because I think it relates totally to it. We read on the front page of The Australian today that the Australian Manufacturers Working Union is pushing for pay rises of four per cent across 1,300 different agreements and up to six per cent on companies that can afford that six per cent. Now the implication surely there is at a time when unemployment is rising that they want that four per cent even if companies can't afford it. Is that responsible?
PM: I haven't seen the detail of that report, I honestly haven't read it, but what can I say about that is what I've said more generally. It is important for unions and for business at this stage to exercise restraint. This is a very difficult global economic circumstances.
Let me say something really positive about what I have seen from so many employers across the country. In very difficult times, employers running businesses decided to shrink their profit margin and to keep staff, often doing quite creative things within their workplaces to reduce working hours but just to keep staff through very hard times and I commend them for that.
And there has also been restraint by many unions across the country. I could point to what for example General Motors Holden have done at the Elizabeth plant in South Australia. Huge example of management working together with unions to put the whole business and everyone's jobs number one. But you're always going to have people being irresponsible and I can't comment on the details of this one but I think restraint is the order of the day.
CARY: Okay just on the detail though, if those figures are correct doesn't it just logically follow in light of what you've just said that it would be totally irresponsible to be asking companies who can't afford a pay rise to pay you even more in this environment?
PM: I think what I would say again, not having read the report, is that all unions and employers need to be exercising restraint at this difficult time because everyone who has been clear-sighted about the extent, the continuing extent of the global economic challenge we've got should be exercising restraint.
I mean there's a long way to go. The reason the Australian government has gone out there with this economic stimulus strategy for which we've been criticised; cash payments to families, biggest school modernisation program in the country's history, long term infrastructure projects, is because we have stepped into the breach while the private sector is in retreat in order to lessen the economic and employment impact, that's what we've done.
And as soon as the natural economy or the private economy recovers let me tell you, we'll be drawing back what Government does, as we've already indicated in our budget strategy. But on the way through it is really important that people exercise restraint. We're doing our part as Government, we need everyone else to be part and parcel of this response to the global economic crisis because the truth is we're all this together.
CARY: Absolutely. Notwithstanding then that we all think teachers should be paid more and notwithstanding that they deserve more, not only money but respect etc - is this the right economic climate for them to be asking for a pay rise and now to have strike action, more strike action if they don't get it?
PM: Well I suppose Greg we could go through every industrial negotiation in the country from A to Z -
CARY: This is the one affecting us now.
PM: - no no, state by state and territory by territory and I would not have a clue what the detail of the industrial ask is of the Queensland Teachers Union against Education Queensland and for what reasons and what's justified and what is not. All I can say is this, in terms of national economic management, restraint is necessary, absolutely necessary. State budgets are under huge pressure, the Australian national budget is under huge pressure.
In our case we have lost $210 billion in tax revenue because of the global economic recession. To give your listeners an idea of how much that is, that would equal the amount that we spend every year for the states and territories on health and hospitals  -  that is how much we've lost in tax revenue.
So all Governments are feeling this strain and therefore when you're looking at public sector employees like teachers, we need restraint as well. But I don't know the details of their ask and I am very reluctant to get into the argy bargy. For example what is the union here, the Media and Entertainment Alliance, what are they saying on behalf of you? I wouldn't have a clue.
CARY: Well I don't think anybody in the media right now would be putting up their hand for a pay rise.
PM: Well I've got no idea where unions on individual negotiations are or enterprise negotiations. I've got no idea, they're going to vary across the country. Although I can say nationally, restraint is necessary.
CARY: Okay just on areas where some are doing better than others, the banks would seem to be doing very well. You gave them the guarantee which at the time I think most people agree was a good thing, a very smart thing to do. But many are now asking-
PM: (inaudible) necessary.
CARY: A necessary thing to do.
PM: We were, the global financial system was on the edge back in October.
CARY: Alright but let's see where we've gone. Many are now asking whether you've made life too good for them. That's been an unintended consequence. Before the financial crisis, the big four had 57 per cent of the residential mortgage market, they now have 72 per cent. Before the crisis the big four had 69 per cent of bank deposits, they now have 77 per cent. So they're doing okay. So I guess the question is, with smaller banks struggling, the big four are only going to get stronger, does that worry you long term in terms of competition?
PM: Greg, the challenge we faced last October was, let's call it the stability of the system and you're right to have said that most people said these were a necessary set of actions, that is to underpin the stability of the financial system. Two guarantees. Every one of your listeners' deposits in their banks, building societies, credit unions for the first time in the history of the Australian federation guaranteed by the Government  -  first time.
Now the second thing we did was to guarantee the banks inter-bank lending, not just the big four banks, all banks  -  okay? Because all banks frankly, were in shall I say challenging circumstances last October because of what was happening in global financial markets. So that's what we did, the stability of the system was really important.
Second point that you raised is about competition. I fully get that, we need to constantly have under review other measures to enhance competition in the finance industry generally and I know the Treasurer and others continue to work those options through in our discussions with the banking industry. We want to make sure that the system is stable but we also want to make sure that customers also get the best deal possible.
CARY: Our guest the Prime Minister for a few more minutes, there is evidence Prime Minister of an alarming rise in illegal boat arrivals. I am just wondering if you're totally satisfied that the policies you have in place are adequate? And if the problems continue to grow, are you prepared to perhaps admit you've underestimated the extent of the problem and readdress those policies?
PM: No we've had a very sober understanding of the global, let's call them push factors at work not just for Australia but countries right around the world in terms of the number of people, illegal people movements right around the world. Affecting countries in South East Asia, countries in Europe, now this is just the reality.
Since then the Government has introduced hundreds of millions of dollars worth of new measures to work at country of origin, to work at our cop on the beat, the navy on the high seas and remember these vessels are being interdicted and they are being taken to Christmas Island for processing. And also a hardline system which says, if this is not a bona fide asylum seeker then they go back, go back to the country concerned.
Now we're working our way through all of those things methodically, hardline approach. But you know every head of Government I talk to in the region or the world is faced with exactly the same challenge because of, if you look at south Asia the enormous civil strife in Sri Lanka recently, people are just taking you know points of exit from the country.
Still also, in countries like Iraq and Afghanistan, push factors out of those countries and the rests of us in the world have to deal with that. One of the ways you deal with it is to bring greater stability in the countries of origin so that the push factors are not as huge.
CARY: Are they paying attention though? Those countries of origin.
PM: Well I have been on the phone in most recent times for example to the Head of Government in Sri Lanka and elsewhere and also discussions soon with the Prime Minister of Malaysia as I have done recently on the telephone with the President of Indonesia, we work through these things all the time. And most critically our immigration, security and intelligence officials and our defence officials are working these things through too.
A lot of what occurs is so pardon the pun, below the radar that you know they're not ever in the public debate because so much work is being done. But can I say I am not going to underestimate the problem, it's there, it's real, it's growing around the world, but we intend to be hardline and sensible in the way in which we handle it.
CARY: Let's take a call. Erwin has rung in from Yeppoon for the Prime Minister. Go right ahead.
PM: G'day Ewen how are you?
EWEN: Good Kev. Look without being rude-
PM: Sounds like you're going to be but off you go.
EWEN: No I'm not going to be. Just talking about, Greg asked a question about the state that Queensland is in and you sort of (inaudible) with the global recession. But the problems we've got in Queensland have been happening for the last five to 10 years when boom time has been on. We've had massive resources boom, money everywhere but it's all gone, it's disappeared and all of a sudden it's because of the global recession which happened what 18 months ago?
PM: Well can I just say look I can't, your question is a very general one but let me just go to one specific response. As I look around Brisbane and the rest of Queensland, what I see before my eyes is a massive investment in the public hospital system and that is a change which has occurred frankly in recent times.
If I look at the Royal Brisbane, I look at the Mater, I look at the PA and various regional hospitals around Queensland I see there is a huge investment going on. None of that happens for free.
But there was a huge underinvestment in the capital stock of our hospitals going back decades and decades. There is a lot of catch up football here and therefore it costs and therefore that obviously has an impact on budget.
Nothing is perfect, we're not perfect either mate but can I say when I look at sort of physical evidence of things changing, investments like that, also what I see in some of the road systems in south-east Queensland you know just keeping pace with the Cary idea of a surcharge on southerners -
CARY: It's looking better by the minute isn't it, really?
PM: It is. Mind you people in north Queensland would have a different view as well, southerners could mean anyone south of Rockhampton so there you go.
CARY: (inaudible) that's alright but we're nearly out of time. A couple of questions out of left field. You've had a little bet I think on the future of Peter Costello. I think you might have put up $20?
PM: Oh yeah I lost that with Julia.
CARY: Well it showed you're a betting man. If you had that same $20 on who you'd back to be your opponent at the next federal election-
PM: Oh here were go, here we go. I haven't had that bet with Julia yet, she's already one up on me so I am a bit nervous about putting money on with Julia. I've got no idea. It's a matter for the Libs, they'll sort these things out, I think look I was at a community cabinet last night down in Beenleigh -
CARY: Good turnout.
PM: Yeah there was a huge turnout and taking questions. What people want from all of us, both sides of politics is to get on with job. You know get on with the job of helping families who are struggling with keeping their jobs, small business under real pressure, paying the mortgage, making sure that kids' education is affordable and the hospital system is in a reasonable state. That is the basic stuff people want us to get on with.
By the way - one other point. Today 1 July, tax cuts come through, education tax refund comes through, also it's the end of Work Choices as of today.
So for working families these are important changes. For the education tax refund, I'll just say this to your listeners, it is very important that people keep their receipts for education expenses, $750 for primary schools kids, $1500 for secondary school kids, you can claim up to half that back in a given year and go to the tax office website for your information.
One final point as well, Mr Hockey and the Liberal Party today have said that they probably would oppose these tax cuts being introduced. I don't understand that. I thought they were saying that they were the party of lower taxation.
CARY: Yeah I haven't seen that so I can't really respond to that but maybe there is a wider context. Final question and I know -
PM: And there usually is.
CARY: I know you're -
PM: May have to do with your earlier question.
CARY: I know you love your sport, I know you love your cricket, admire Ricky Ponting. Lleyton Hewitt, one of our great battlers, goes into the quarter finals of Wimbledon -
PM: A friend of mine texted me about him, he's over at Wimbledon at the moment.
CARY: I was going to ask you. Your favourite athlete and why?
PM: Oh look. You mean over time?
CARY: Whenever.
PM: I've got to say in cricket I can't go past Gary Sobers. There you go.
CARY: Why?
PM: Just a stupendous batsman. I will always remember him as a kid knocking up I think 256 not out and I think this guy - I also remember watching on television once the proverbial six sixes in an over, a six ball over and I thought this guy has got the gift, the gift of the gods about him. So there you go, he's not an Australian. Gary Sobers.
CARY: Kevin Rudd. Prime Minister of Australia, thanks for your time.
[ends].


The Australian Government has agreed with State and Territory governments to establish a Compact with Retrenched Workers.
This is part of the Government's ongoing commitment to provide assistance to people who have lost their job as a result of the global recession.
From 1 July 2009, retrenched workers aged over 25 years will be entitled to a training place for a government-subsidised Vocational Education and Training qualification.
The Compact with Retrenched Workers complements the Compact with Young Australians agreed by COAG on 30 April 2009, under which under 20 year olds are guaranteed an education or training place and 20-24 years olds are guaranteed a place to upskill.
The Government anticipates that the Compact with Retrenched Workers will provide up to 124,000 people who have lost their jobs with the opportunity to gain access to training to obtain a higher qualification.
As part of the Compact:
     * Job Services Australia providers will assist retrenched workers to identify their skills and training needs and will then work with States and Territories to implement the training entitlement;
     * States and Territories will prioritise training places to support the Compact.
Today's announcement builds on the Australian Government's investment of almost $300 million to provide retrenched workers with immediate access to intensive employment support.
The Government cannot stop the global recession from bearing down on communities across Australia, but it can reduce the impact by taking local action to support training and jobs.
The Compact with Retrenched Workers will help to create a highly skilled workforce which provides individuals with greater job opportunities in the future


The Australian Government today agreed with State and Territory governments to develop a national International Student Strategy which will enhance the experience of international students in Australia. 
In agreeing this Strategy, all Australian governments acknowledge the importance to Australia of international education and the enormous contribution that these students make to our multicultural diversity, the academic life of our institutions and ongoing people-to-people linkages across the world. 
The development of a national International Student Strategy will promote a broader vision of international education to encompass the broader benefits to Australia and the home nation and place Australia's international education on a more sustainable basis. 
It will also:
     * improve the international student experience through improved pre and post-arrival information and engagement with the ethnic and broader Australian community; and
     * enhance general educational offerings that develop cultural understanding, tolerance and language skills.
Helping international students engage with the community in which they live benefits students and their communities.
The Prime Minister announced today $50,000 for Darebin City Council in north Melbourne, to engage international students with the community of Darebin through social and sporting events.
The Commonwealth will also publish a guide, based on successful activities and programs run by education institutions, so that all institutions with international students can enhance social interaction between communities and international students.
It is important to extend Australian hospitality to international students.
All government, education and training providers and student unions should support greater levels of interaction between international students and local communities.
Australia will also send a delegation to India. It will be led by a senior Australian Government official and comprise officials from Australian, Victorian and New South Wales governments, Victorian Police and representatives of the vocational and higher education sectors.
The delegation will meet with Indian Government Ministers and key officials in Delhi on 5th July 2009. It will also travel to major Indian cities to meet with state governments and others to hear about their concerns and reassure them that Australia is a safe destination for Indian students.
In addition, the International Student Roundtable will be held in Canberra on 14-15 September 2009. International students will be able to directly discuss issues affecting their study experience  -  such as accommodation, welfare and safety  -  and propose ideas for their resolution at the International Student Roundtable.
These ideas will then be considered by Ministers at the inaugural Ministerial Council on Tertiary Education in November 2009. Nominations will open at the end of July.
Australia is proud of the fact that thousands of students choose to study in Australia every year.
Recent attacks on Indian students in Australia have highlighted a number of issues of concern to these and other student communities, not only with safety but with a range of issues related to living and studying in Australia.
The Council of Australian Governments held in Darwin today strongly supported high profile, visible police initiatives where required to respond to attacks on international students, targeting metropolitan transit hubs and other priority areas to ensure the general safety of students and the travelling public, and will maintain this commitment for as long as it is required.
Victoria and NSW have recently implemented a range of additional initiatives to improve student safety including a crackdown on crime around metropolitan transport hubs and heightened community engagement by police. COAG agreed such initiatives should be maintained.
A new national strategy will put Australia's international education sector on a strong footing for the future.


Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia: Well Anna, The Queensland Premier, and I have been at the Council of Australian Governments meeting here in Darwin and we've been getting together with all the other Premiers and Chief Ministers, talking about indigenous disadvantage, talking about what we do for workers who been retrenched because of the global recession, but also how we boost the economy long-term as well and I think we've reached some reasonable agreements today. What do you think Anna?
Anna Bligh, Premier of Queensland:I think the COAG meeting here in Darwin's been a really important meeting for the nation. Getting all of the Premiers, the First Ministers, the Prime Minister together really concentrates our mind on the big issues: dealing with unemployment, building skills and the biggest challenge for us today was talking about new ways of dealing with the disadvantages faced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. We've got a big job ahead of us to close the gap, but we're absolutely committed to doing it and there's a lot of good ideas today that I think will take that forward so I think a success, hard work, but we got there.
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia:The other thing we've been working on is what we can provide by way of support for workers who have been retrenched because of the global recession and so what we agreed today is a new compact with Australians who have been retrenched and what that means is that if people are retrenched because of the global recession then together with the states and territories providing each of those Australians with a new training opportunity to pick up a new set of skills for once the global recovery comes for them to be better able to be employed again  -  that's a good step forward as well, matches what we're doing for young people as well, earn or learn,  and also our compact with local communities to make a difference in areas of high-unemployment at the local level.
Anna Bligh, Premier of Queensland: We also looked at some much longer-term issues: energy efficiency, every state and the Commonwealth agreeing that we will have national standards to use electricity more carefully and that's really about the other big global challenge of our time of climate change.
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia: And we also talked a little bit about our State of Origin win over New South Wales, two-nil so far, but we're not actually gloating about that.
Anna Bligh, Premier of Queensland: Nathan Rees wasn't as happy about that conversation as Kevin and I were [Laughter].


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has today agreed to historic microeconomic reforms that will streamline the regulations applying to the nation's $46 billion transport sector.
These long overdue reforms have the potential to boost national income by as much as $2.4 billion a year.
COAG has endorsed:
     * The establishment of a single national heavy vehicle regulator with responsibility for regulating all vehicles over 4.5 gross tonnes, including inspection standards, safe driving hours, mass limits and registration;
     * The Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) becoming the national regulator of all commercial vessels operating in Australian waters. At the moment ASMA only regulates interstate operations; and
     * The creation of a national rail safety regulatory system and the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) becoming the preferred investigator of rail accidents. Currently Australia has seven rail safety regulators, three rail safety investigators and different rules in every state.
The governments of Australia are working together to put in place a seamless national economy  -  an outcome that will lift national productivity and allow transport operators to get products onto supermarkets shelves and our exports to market at the lowest cost.
For example, at the moment an interstate truck driver must comply with all the regulations that apply in each of the jurisdictions they drive through. Even small differences can create extra costs, red tape and confusion for the trucking industry, particularly for the many ‘mum and dad' operators.
Agreement on these reforms followed the finalisation of Regulatory Impact Statements and a recommendation from the nation's transport ministers.
It is proposed that all reforms will be fully implemented by 2013. Transitional arrangements will come into effect in 2011 for heavy vehicles, maritime, and rail.


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today agreed on further concrete steps to help close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
COAG agreed to: 
     * Move towards national licensing arrangements for stores in remote Indigenous communities
     * Strict reporting requirements and timelines for States and Territories, to measure progress towards closing the gap
     * Target investments in educational funding towards improving educational outcomes for Indigenous Australians
A regulatory scheme for licensing remote community stores
Indigenous Australians often struggle to access nutritious food.
In some Indigenous communities, the only available fresh food is both expensive and of poor quality.
This is a major cause of the continuing life expectancy gap, contributing to high levels of chronic disease including diabetes.
COAG has reached an in principle agreement to a nationally consistent licensing scheme for remote community stores. This would mean that stores in remote communities will have to meet certain standards to gain a licence.
Licensing will help deliver food security to Indigenous people living in remote areas  -  regular, reliable access to affordable, high quality food.
The experience of the Northern Territory Emergency Response has been that stores licensing has led to substantial benefits.
Community members have access to a wider range of nutritious food, and families are choosing to purchase this food and take responsibility for their own health.
This policy agreement will be developed by the COAG Working Group on Indigenous Reform, chaired by Minister Jenny Macklin, and will report to COAG with a proposed strategy on food security by the end of the year.
Strict reporting on closing the gap
The Commonwealth, States and Territories have agreed to additional reporting  -  every six months  -  on progress in implementing the Closing the Gap reforms. The first of these reports will come to COAG later this year.
States and Territories will report on progress in implementing the Indigenous specific and mainstream National Partnerships agreed in each of the following areas:
     * Early childhood
     * Schooling
     * Health
     * Housing
For example, they will report on success in reducing smoking and risky drinking; provision of antenatal services for young women; and the provision of early learning services.
These National Partnerships will see the delivery of:
     * Universal access to preschool for 15 hours a week, 40 weeks per year for Indigenous children;
     * Reduced housing overcrowding in remote areas; 
     * Pre-school meals programs; 
     * Early intervention and specialist teachers for low achievers;
     * Increased provision of maternal and child health services for Indigenous children and their mothers;
     * A minimum of 35 Children and Family Centres in urban, regional and remote areas with high Indigenous populations.
By agreeing on clear priorities, specific targets and trajectories, and stringent reporting mechanisms, States and Territories will be better placed to work together to close the gap.
$46.4 million will be provided to facilitate the collection and collation of data on progress towards closing the gap.
Indigenous Education Statement
Towards the Development of an Indigenous Education Action Plan will progress better educational outcomes for Indigenous children in terms of enrolment, attendance and retention, literacy and numeracy.
COAG has agreed to target the significant existing investments in education to closing the gap in educational outcomes for young Indigenous Australians.
While these funds will deliver benefits across the broader community, today's agreement means there is no chance they will bypass many of the members of our community that need them most.
Under the existing education agreements between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories to achieve better education outcomes, the States and Territories are required to address and measure Indigenous educational outcomes at the regional and local level.
States and Territories will be required to develop specific strategies at the regional and local school level to improve enrolment, attendance and retention rates, literacy and numeracy attainment and parental and community engagement.
Recent research commissioned by the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs and the Department of Health suggests that the two greatest contributors to improving Indigenous life expectancy are employment status and education.
The new Indigenous Education Action Plan will ensure that the resources that are already being spent on education in the wider community are used effectively to halve the gaps in literacy and numeracy in year 12 attainment between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Mr Brian Gleeson, the new Coordinator-General of Remote Indigenous Service Delivery, will start his work in July. He has the authority to cut through blockages and drive the implementation of COAG reforms in housing, infrastructure and employment in remote Indigenous communities.
COAG is determined to close the appalling life expectancy gaps between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Today's agreements are important milestones in meeting this challenge. 


Today marks the start of a new era of cooperation between the Australian and Queensland governments to protect the internationally significant Great Barrier Reef.
The Great Barrier Reef Intergovernmental Agreement, signed by Prime Minister Rudd and Premier Bligh, will underpin efforts by the two governments to protect the Reef from threats such as climate change and declining water quality in the Reef catchment.
The agreement replaces the 1979 “Emerald Agreement” signed by then Prime Minister Fraser and Premier Bjelke-Petersen.
The agreement provides a framework for the governments to work together to confront challenges never even contemplated in 1979. Nowhere is this more true than in relation to climate change - now the single most significant threat to the future of the Reef.
The agreement is the latest chapter in a long history of cooperation between Queensland and the Commonwealth on protection of the Reef.
The imperatives for the governments to work together to protect the Reef are only becoming stronger with challenges such as the impacts of climate change and catchment water quality and development.
Neither government can address these issues acting on their own.
The agreement provides a framework for cooperative action by the governments to protect and manage the Reef from both local and external pressures.
Implementation of the Agreement will be driven by the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council.
The Council will meet on 3 July 2009 for the first time under the new Agreement to discuss the challenges facing the Reef and set in motion joint action by the Australian and Queensland governments.
On the agenda for the Council is the new Reef Water Quality Protection Plan, a new agreement between the two Governments on how water quality going into the Great Barrier Reef Lagoon will be improved, and the actions they will take to protect this internationally significant icon.


Today the Council of Australian Governments signed up to an ambitious roadmap to accelerate action on energy efficiency and assist Australia's transition to a low carbon economy. 
The National Strategy on Energy Efficiency will help Australian households and businesses cut their energy and fuel bills while reducing their carbon footprint.
For example, measures to improve the energy efficiency of appliances, such as refrigerators and air conditioners, are expected to reduce carbon pollution by 19.5 million tonnes per year by 2020, the equivalent of removing over 4.8 million cars from our roads permanently.
For too long energy efficiency policy in Australia has been fragmented and ad-hoc, resulting in a failure to harness clear opportunities for cost-effective energy efficiency gains at home and in the workplace.
The National Strategy on Energy Efficiency will turn around this legacy, putting in place a nationally consistent approach to reduce red tape and help households and businesses invest in the latest cost-cutting technologies.
The agreement locks in a comprehensive ten-year work-plan to co-ordinate action nationally and maximise cost-effective energy efficiency gains, including:
     * A concentrated national effort to phase out inefficient electric hot water systems beginning in 2010, expected to reduce emissions by over 30 million tonnes in total between 2010 and 2020;
     * National legislation for appliance energy ratings and labels;
     * Mandating all new homes achieve ambitious new energy rating standards from 2011 and commercial buildings from 2010, and setting in place a process for continuous improvement; and
     * Accelerating the phase out of inefficient lighting, starting with the ban on incandescent light globes from November 2009, expected to reduce emissions by around 800,000 tonnes per year;
There was also agreement to undertake a detailed regulatory assessment of introducing CO2 emissions standards for new light vehicles, which has the potential to reduce fuel consumption by around 30 per cent, based on overseas studies.
The regulatory assessment will include consideration of both voluntary and mandatory options and the complementarity of measures against the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. It will involve industry and consumer consultation.
The path agreed to today will position energy efficiency alongside the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as a key plank in Australia's efforts to combat climate change.
Energy efficiency is the low-hanging fruit of greenhouse gas abatement, with analysis from the International Energy Agency indicating cost-effective energy efficiency improvements could provide savings equivalent to one-fifth of projected global energy-related emissions in 2030.
Through the combination of incentives, consumer and business education and carefully targeted regulation, the National Strategy on Energy Efficiency will fundamentally change the policy settings for energy efficiency across Australia.
The agreement is supported by the investment of $88 million for energy efficiency measures across jurisdictions.


Faster approvals of major infrastructure projects and housing developments will help boost construction activity and create jobs under a microeconomic reform package agreed by the Council of Australian Governments today.
Australia cannot afford to have major infrastructure projects and housing developments delayed because of fragmented approvals processes, a lack of clarity about assessment requirements or uncertainty about the status of a project.
Major infrastructure projects with Commonwealth and State funding will benefit from having:
     * one integrated assessment process encompassing all statutory assessments and approvals required by the three levels of Government; and
     * one coordinator responsible for the timely delivery of each major infrastructure project under the nation building programs.
At the moment, approval processes are not integrated and can include zoning amendments, development planning assessment, environment impact assessment, requirements for other permits and licenses, land acquisition and access issues, and Commonwealth Government assessments of Native Title and environmental impacts as well.
Reforms agreed by COAG will speed up approvals, which currently take on average over 2 years (27 months).
Housing development assessments will be streamlined by:
     * Increasing the use of code-based assessment, with a target for increase to be set later this year, by making and harmonising codes for houses, units and commercial developments; and
     * Measuring performance according to the number, type and length of DA, with publication of a report in June 2010.
Code-based assessment allows small-scale, low-impact proposals to be certified by a qualified person. These development applications are processed more efficiently allowing local and State government planning resources to focus on more major developments with greater impact.
Increased code based assessment will cut development assessment time and in turn cut the cost of homes by reducing holding costs faced by developers.
According to the Housing Industry Association, code based assessment can save an average of $6,500 on the cost of building a new home in Sydney and nearly $2,500 in regional NSW.
Reforms to infrastructure and housing developments will accelerate construction and encourage private sector activity as Australia builds its economic recovery.


The Council of Australian Governments today endorsed the National Early Childhood Development Strategy (NECD) - Investing in the Early Years - the first nationally agreed approach to early childhood development in Australia. 
The Strategy will provide a roadmap for action to ensure Australian parents and their children have access to quality, nationally consistent education and care.
The NECD is central to COAG's shared vision for Australia's children - that by 2020 all children can have the best possible start in life to create a better future for themselves and for the nation.
COAG also released a consultation Regulation Impact Statement (RIS) on achieving quality reform across early education and child care settings.
The Statement represents a significant down payment on the early childhood development strategy and its goal of delivering high quality care for children.
The RIS for the National Quality Agenda proposes:
     * improved quality standards for early childhood education and child care services 
     * a new rating system designed to give parents more information about the quality of their child's early education and care service 
     * lower staff to child ratios and higher staff qualification requirements
     * new national governance arrangements which reflect the shared responsibilities of all Australian Governments for early childhood
     * enhanced regulatory arrangements so that the 10,000 individual providers will need to deal with only one organisation for quality assessment to ensure an ongoing commitment to quality while reducing the administrative burden on providers.
The RIS will be open to broad community consultation, including from the sector and parents.
The National Quality RIS will build on the work of the Early Years Learning Framework (EYLF), which was also released today and will be implemented from this month.
The EYLF is the first national guide to help early childhood educators develop quality early childhood programs and to let parents know how best to support their children's early learning.
Adopting the Framework means children will receive a nationally consistent and quality early childhood education, with learning tailored to their individual needs so that they start school as happy and confident learners.
COAG's decision shows that all Australian governments are serious about delivering high quality education and care for our children.
For more information about the outcomes of the latest COAG meeting, please visit the COAG website  -  www.coag.gov.au.
For more information about the Australian Government's early childhood education and child care initiatives, please visit www.deewr.gov.au/earlychildhood


PM: First of all if I could thank the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory for hosting this COAG in Darwin. This is the eighth time that COAG has met since I have been Prime Minister and it is part of our effort to turn COAG into a genuine workhorse of the Federation.
And I believe if you look back on the sorts of achievements that have been delivered in the last 18 months or so, these have been of a significant order of magnitude. Whether it's the new Australian Health Care Agreement that we have signed, whether it's the national Education Agreement that we have signed, whether it is in the area of renewable energy or in the overall area of microeconomic reform, there have been significant achievements registered by this body. But we have still a lot more work to do for the nation through the Federation.
Today we have been at work on a range of challenges as well, covering of course critical areas such as the impact of the global recession on retrenched workers, also the implementation arrangements for the Nation Building for Recovery plan.
Secondly we've been focusing here in Darwin in particular on closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And thirdly we've also been at work still in continuing agenda of microeconomic reform, also on energy efficiency and on other matters.
Let me just deal briefly with a number of those items. The rest of the agreements that we've reached will be detailed in the communiqué which will be circulated to you soon.
Firstly on the question of the agreement that we have reached on a Compact with Retrenched Workers. As you know, the global recession is having a significant impact on working Australians everywhere as it is around the world in the worst recession in three quarters of a century.
What we've agreed today is that retrenched workers aged over 25 years will be entitled to a training place for a Government-subsidised vocational education and training qualification. The Compact with Retrenched Workers complements the compact we already have with young Australians agreed at the COAG of the 30th of April, under which 20 year olds, under which those under 20 are guaranteed an education or training place and 20 to 24 year olds are guaranteed a place to up-skill their existing qualifications.
The Government anticipated that the Compact with Retrenched Workers will provide up to 124,000 people who have lost their jobs with the opportunity to gain access to training to obtain a higher qualification. Job Services Australia will be providing of course assistance to retrenched workers to identify skills and training needs and the states and territories have agreed to prioritise their training places to support this compact.
This is important. Workers who have been retrenched as a consequence of this global recession have lost their jobs through no fault of their own, they have lost as a consequence of global financial markets and the ensuing developments in the global economy. And acting to support them, acting to support young Australians who are finding it hard to enter the labour market, as well as acting to support local communities through our Compact with Local Communities represents an important intervention by governments to assist those who have been affected this way by the global recession.
Secondly, we in Darwin have focused particularly also on closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage. Today what the Council of Australian Governments has done is agree on moving towards a national licensing arrangement for all community food stores in Indigenous communities. We've also undertaken a number of other agreements between us which I'll go to in a minute.
On licensing community food stores, one of the important things that we discussed today was the impact of nutritional standards on maternal and child health. And we have looked carefully at some of the lessons learned from our friends in the Northern Territory on the licensing of food stores in Indigenous communities here in the Northern Territory, and the impact that has in turn had on nutritional standards that apply within those communities.
We are therefore looking more widely as to how this approach could be adopted elsewhere in Australia. Therefore we have agreed to move towards a system of national licensing for community food stores in order to ensure that we have food of the highest quality, food at a reasonable price available to Indigenous communities. This we think is one part of dealing with chronic health problems, and maternal and child health I've already referred to, but also in other categories of public health concern including diabetes and other chronic diseases.
More broadly, we the Commonwealth and the States have also agreed on strict reporting requirements and timelines in the measures that we've agreed between us on closing the gap.
A large number of intergovernmental agreements have been signed which go to our common national resolve to act to close the gap as it occurs in the critical areas of disadvantage for Indigenous Australians. Areas such as infant mortality to which I have just referred, educational attainment, health outcomes, as well as employment outcomes.
The national partnerships that we have signed and agreed with our colleagues in the states and territories today go to most of these areas but most critically we have agreed that in terms of reporting requirements and timetables for measuring how Indigenous disadvantage is being dealt with, we've agreed to keep this under continued examination by this body. In other words, reaching agreement is one thing, the implementation of these arrangements is another and having strict reporting requirements and data attached to the outcomes is equally important as well.
We also this morning had a good presentation from Gary Banks from the Productivity Commission on his most recent report on Indigenous disadvantage, which paints a very stark picture of the challenge which lies ahead for all of us in closing the gap. One of the problems which the Productivity Commission has encountered is in so many data areas there are real gaps in the data. That is, we're not collecting enough across the country.
If I can remember his presentation carefully, he said that in about 20 per cent of the indicators that he was looking at there had been some improvement, 20 per cent of the indicators he was looking at there had been a static performance, in 10 per cent of the areas that he looked at there had been declining performance and in 50 per cent of the indicators you're looking at, there is insufficient data to reach a conclusion.
Now I may have got the order of some of those numbers wrong so I stand to be corrected on some of them but I know the 50 per cent which he referred to in terms of the absence of effective data was an important part of his presentation.
Therefore if we're serious about closing the gap, we need the data, we need the information, we've got to measure what we do. There is a huge national effort underway here in terms of closing the gap. All these governments represented here at this table, both conservative and Labor, are united in their resolve to close the gap.
This is a good thing for the country to be doing and it should be an effort therefore which we inject every effort into properly measuring and monitoring for the future to make sure it is actually happening in communities in remote parts of Australia but also in regional and urban Australia as well. And to that end the Commonwealth and states have committed additional funds to provide better collection of data, to measure progress on the ground.
Thirdly, I would touch on the question of microeconomic reform. This causes most people in the fourth estate to visibly have their eyes glaze over when we speak of it in any depth and length. But can I say this is an important part of the Federation's continued reform program.
As we emerge through a period of global economic recovery, one of our big challenges will be to ensure that the productivity agenda for Australia is alive and well. Investing in skills, education skills and training on the one hand, investing in infrastructure on the other, but the third grade arm of productivity growth is to make sure we have the most efficient regulatory system possible in the national economy.
That's why coming out of the 2020 Summit last year we committed ourselves as an Australian Government to developing a seamless national economy. Easy to say, hard to do. So what we have commissioned since then is a large number of areas of common regulatory engagement between the Commonwealth and the State governments in order to produce a single regulatory environment in so many different areas.
Today what I'd like to report to you is in two specific areas we have made further progress.
Today COAG agreed to develop national performance measures for development assessments by the end of 2009. That will contain information on the number, type and length of assessments of DAs. The first national performance report will be publically released by June 2010 and cover the 2008-9 financial year.
COAG also agreed to work towards harmonising code based development assessment standards between jurisdictions, increasing the proportion of code-assessed DAs. Furthermore COAG also agreed that funding agreements between the Commonwealth and State government for major infrastructure projects will require an integrated assessment and approval process encompassing all statutory assessments and approvals by the three levels of government within targeted timeframes.
One of the constant refrains we have from the business community are the difficulties in the development, the development assessment process. What you see before you today in the COAG Communique are significant steps forward in reforming that and making it much more user friendly for those who propose developments to the various levels of government.
Secondly in the area of the regulatory system which affects the transport sector, what we agreed to today as governments is that the Australian Maritime Safety Authority will become the national safety regulator for all commercial shipping in Australian waters. Our officials will work out the detail of those arrangements for the period ahead.
Secondly, we've also agreed that there be a single national heavy vehicle regulator which will also be established to regulate all vehicles over 4.5 tonnes, ending the separate and at times conflicting regulatory imposts on the heavy vehicle industry in Australia.
These are two important steps forward in the commercial shipping sector and of course the long haul road transport sector as well. The rest of the regulatory reform agenda continues and we will continue to make steady progress on it.
Finally before turning to the Queensland Premier as Chairman of CAF to make her own remarks, can I also indicate the agreement we reached today on energy efficiency. The National Partnership Agreement on Energy Efficiency is designed to held Australian households and businesses cut their energy and fuel bills while reducing their carbon footprint.
The national energy and efficiency strategy that we've agreed to today in this new partnership has a number of elements to it including one, accelerating the phase of inefficient lighting starting with the ban on incandescent light bulbs from November 2010, expected to reduce emissions by around 800,000 tonnes per year. Two a concentrated national effort to phase out inefficient electric hot water systems from 2010, expected to reduce emissions by over 30 million tonnes in total between 2010 and 2020. Thirdly, national legislation for appliance energy ratings and labels and fourthly mandating all new homes achieve, mandating that all new homes achieve ambitious new energy rating standards from 2011 and commercial buildings from 2010 on. And again I would thank the States and Territories for their cooperation in these efforts.
So in these and in other areas we believe that we have achieved significant progress today. A Compact with Retrenched Workers, given the impact of the global economic recession; new agreements between the Commonwealth and the States on closing the gap in Indigenous disadvantage in Australia, including critically the licensing of community food stores. Thirdly further progress with the microeconomic reform agenda to boost long term economic efficiency, and in the energy efficiency space a new national partnership on energy efficiency which will act to reduce greenhouse gas emissions for the future. Premier.
BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister. A major focus for the COAG in Darwin has been appropriately the challenge of improving the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
State Premiers and First Ministers along with the Commonwealth understand that closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage require strong leadership and each of us has committed ourselves to making this a priority of our positions. Leadership of course requires practical, on-the-ground, hands-on ideas to tackle some of the oldest problems in new ways.
In addition to the formal agreements that we signed today as outlined by the Prime Minister we took some time in COAG to talk to each other about some of the practical ideas that are working in our jurisdictions. I believe out of that session this morning we will see some of those ideas spread further and with the leadership of First Ministers and Premiers, take hold where they're appropriate in some of those other states and territories.
By way of one example, Queensland has agreed this morning with the Northern Territory to cooperate across borders in a tele-health, e-health record initiative for people who are moving across borders in the Top End of both of our states. I believe that will be a very practical outcome of the COAG in Darwin for Queensland Indigenous people in those parts of our state.
The state and territories also welcome the partnership with the federal Government in tackling unemployment in some very tough economic times. The Compact with Retrenched Workers from the states and territories' perspective is an opportunity to not only help people through a period of unemployment but importantly to build skills for the recovery.
We know only too well how quickly this country can find itself in a situation of serious skill shortage and as we look forward with optimism to an economic recovery, we want to come out of this period with people with higher skills, not lower skills. The retrenched workers compact provides an opportunity for us through the state and federal funding places in our government-run institutions to improve the skills base of the respective states and territories and obviously the nation as a whole.
We also welcome the opportunity to sign I think it was a total of eight agreements today between the federal Government and the states and territories of Australia that went to a number of areas where we are harmonising the regulatory framework, thereby taking some of the burden off citizens and businesses who are working across borders in areas as diverse as consumer law, energy efficiency, national regulation of transport as well as some of the indigenous partnerships.
Today was a very productive meeting of COAG. I believe that the agreements we've made in relation to national data collection will go a long way to making it more transparent between states and territories  -  what's working, what's not and how we can do better to improve the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians.
PM: Before we take questions I might ask our host Paul Henderson the Chief Minister of the NT to add his remarks and then we'll open up to you guys.
HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and I'd like to thank you and all first ministers for coming to Darwin for what I believe has been a very good COAG. COAG is all about tackling the tough issues and there's no tougher issue in public policy than closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage. It's something that we live in the Territory every day with, it's an issue that is front and centre in terms of delivering services, developing policy and working with Indigenous people to improve opportunities and outcomes for Indigenous people right across the Territory.
Thirty per cent of our population is Indigenous compared to other states, one maybe two per cent. 65,000 people, 35,000 of those Indigenous people live in very isolated and remote communities and today as the Chief Minister I am very proud to have signed a comprehensive and accountable national integrated strategy for closing the gap on indigenous disadvantage.
This is the first time in the history of the Commonwealth that the Northern Territory and the Commonwealth of Australia, all of the States have actually signed up to accountable targets to actually close that gap on Indigenous disadvantage and not only have the targets but actually have the strategy in place that we will put in place right across the Northern Territory to reach those targets over the timeframes. It's been a very important meeting.
Indigenous issues are tough. Decisions that need to be taken are tough and I think today we've really demonstrated and I really appreciate the commitment of the Prime Minister to work with me as Chief Minister and all of the Premiers to actually close that gap on Indigenous disadvantage and once again thanks to the PM and all the first premiers for coming to the Territory.
PM: And one final point is we also agreed as governments in an area which often doesn't receive a whole lot of national attention, which I referred to the other day in a press conference in Sydney, and that is dealing with the proper screening of newborn babies for hearing impediments.
Can I just thank the states and territories today for agreeing to ensure that by the end of 2010 every child born in Australia will have access to screening for congenital hearing impairments. And the reason for that is the earlier the diagnosis, the earlier the use of cochlear technologies, the earlier the implanting of them, the greater the trajectory for normal speech patterns and adjustment for future educational and life employment opportunities. So I thank the states and territories for that. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, after delivering your landmark apology last year you said that you wanted to be a Prime Minister who would be judged on measurable improvements in indigenous living standards. Based on the report we've seen today and your decision today that reporting mechanisms don't demonstrate any change, is it the case that you can't at this stage  -  I know it's early - demonstrate any progress, if that is the case what is your feeling (inaudible)?
PM: Yeah, this is a really good question about measurement and you're right. The discussion I had around the table this morning with Indigenous leaders from the Northern Territory as well as with my colleagues here from the states and territories invariably came back to the question of how do we measure whether progress has been achieved.
When we through parliament apologised to the Stolen Generations I said the next step was closing the gap. I said we would be seeking to close the gap in six specific areas. I set six specific sets of targets. We as leaders don't back away from any of them. We intend to get on with this business.
One of the revealing things through the Productivity Commission report today is just how difficult this task is going to be, and secondly how flawed the data is in so many areas. That is, there's simply not enough statistical analysis to give us clear indications as to what's happening on the ground.
And you ask in terms of an overall impression as to how things are going. What I am really impressed about is the fact that these Premiers and Chief Ministers in the discussion we had which ran for more than two hours this morning among ourselves, each of us giving a presentation on programs which we believed across our jurisdictions were showing signs of success, is that there are clear indications, whether it's on the Cape, whether it's the actions taken by the West Australian Premier in the Kimberley, whether it's the action taken in urban centres like Sydney and Melbourne, whether it is some of the work which is done in the APY lands on health interventions for infant mortality, that there are some modest signs  -  modest signs - of improvement, quite apart from what is happening here in the Territory. And I pointed earlier to modest signs of improvement in terms of some of the nutritional outcomes now being better achieved through the proper licensing of stores.
But you know Andrew I regard this as barely half a step in what is going to be a long journey for us all.
But what is important is: one, the objectives are clear in terms of closing the gap; two, the timeframes in which we seek to do that are clearly articulated; and three, through these intergovernmental agreements we now have a coordinated national strategy between the Australian Government and the states and territories to move in that direction. And the final thing is measurement over time.
If you ask me, are we are better placed than we were 18 months ago to get to that point, I think we are. But you know something, we are barely half a step along the road and turning this ship of state around let me tell you has been difficult but the states and territories between them I've got to say have shown uniform political resolve, whatever their political affiliation, in getting this job done.
JOURNALIST: Is there an actual timeline set out or just an agreement to set up a timeline?
PM: No, no. When the closing the gap targets were set, timelines were established around all six of those and we're moving toward those. As I said at the time these will be phenomenally difficult to meet and when we fail in one or other of them by the specified timelines I am sure you'll whack us all around the head for not having got there. Well that's right.
But you know something? I know for a fact that unless governments set objectives and timeframes and have clearly agreed strategies to get there and measurement systems, you just go round in circles, nothing really happens, it's just a bunch of speeches and stuff.
JOURNALIST: Are you disheartened by the Productivity Commission report? It's (inaudible) stuff.
PM: It is, it is but you know the data goes back as you know some years. And there are some indications that in certain categories there has been an improvement but in others, and I look particularly at the data on literacy and numeracy, that is quite discouraging.
But that is why we have new agreements between us and the whole education area to do things differently because plainly so many things that we've been doing in the past haven't worked. You know what is good about this discussion is that no one is engaged in the blame game between states and territories in this debate about getting on with the business of making a difference.
If one thing has been achieved post-Apology I think it is this: it's a common recognition across us all that we've just got to get on with the business of turning this around and to be as focused about this as possible and that's why you have I think a high degree of unininity across the states in the agreements that we've signed here today.
REES: Can I just add to that, a NSW perspective. If the PM hadn't provided the national leadership to outline those target areas in closing the gap, we wouldn't have achieved what I believe are two fundamental and significant elements that were addressed today.
The first is we've got around a third of Australia's Indigenous population lives in NSW and 90 per cent of them are in an urban setting. So unlike other jurisdictions where much of the disadvantage is characterised by extraordinary isolation, in NSW and to a similar extent in Victoria, an entirely different set of service delivery challenges. That is now recognised and there are explicit strategies to deal with the urban service delivery challenges we face in closing the gap.
The second element is for the first time in my memory, today there was agreement - and Gary Banks' research has demonstrated this - that those programs that do work have four fundamental elements that are common to them. They have an engagement with the local community on the ground, they have a partnership approach which brings together local, state and federal and any other non-Government organisations, service deliverers, it brings them to the party, has explicit support from each of the jurisdictions and finally has an appropriate governance model. Now those four elements have been, all things being equal, common to every successful program and it's important that we identify that in dealing with ongoing measures to close the gap.
RANN: Can I just say something on in terms of South Australia's Aboriginal people but also just to underline the point the Prime Minister made. For generations there have been blame games between state and territories, we've seen that in recent years. There was not one single hint of that today and that is the difference and I have been going to COAG meetings for some years.
What we saw this morning was each of us highlight to each other things that work; things that work practically on the ground. And on each of those occasions where things did work, there was a specific engagement not only with local people but also a partnership between the federal Government and the states and territories and therein lies the big difference.
I mean on virtually every single social and economic indicator, the first Australians are still the last Australians, whether it is on educational outcomes or health outcomes. But what we saw this morning was practical examples of what does work. And we have already agreed that some of those things we're going to immediately adapt, work with, partner with across our boundaries because these problems are across borders.
So I think that this morning was a very important discussion because each of us made sure that the rest of us, I mean in my case we've got a, in terms of our own intervention in the APY lands, we've seen a huge drop in petrol sniffing, we've seen an idea borrowed from other jurisdictions about you know, “no score, no pour” produce enormously positive outcomes. But also we've got an Aboriginal sports academy that is channelling enthusiasm for sport to keep young people in education and training. By working together on what works, we will see better indicators in the future.
JOURNALIST: But Mr Rann, you've also got an increase as does NSW (inaudible) infant mortality (inaudible)?
RANN: Again we point out that no one, no one who has been around Aboriginal affairs believes that these are easy. We often see cases where you see two steps forward and one and three quarter steps back but we're still making progress if you have a commitment of a partnership to do so.
PM: I think also Matthew just to add to that in terms of, I'll come to your question now, not just on infant mortality but one of the things we discussed this morning with the Productivity Commissioner was this. As we all engage in this and try and collect better data and as through for example law enforcement efforts in various communities seek to extract you know better information about problems of violence and related crimes in particular Aboriginal communities, we're also likely to see a tip up in the data from that itself through greater reporting.
Now that doesn't excuse on any of our behalf overall outcomes but you know something? What we want to achieve through the data is as realistic a picture as possible as to what is actually our baseline across the ground there. This Productivity Commission report helps, there is more to be done.
And just one further footnote on what has been said about programs that work. There was a great presentation by Paul Henderson, the Chief Minister of the NT, on his e-health initiative across the Territory for Indigenous Australians. Because the Indigenous community here is mobile and moving from place to place over many times of the year, actually tracking the health records and data is very important.
And if you can link up effectively a person's record from one part of the Territory to another, if they are presenting in different hospitals with a particular complaint, it means that you can either deliver (a) more cost effective treatment because you don't have to re-test for everything and (b) often what is clinically urgent in terms of particular treatments which may be urgent now. And he gave us an example before I think of advanced diabetes  -  is that right? And the need for urgent eye surgery which was picked up immediately by a health worker who quickly traced electronically the data of this particular patient across the system and was able to reach a very quick conclusion as to what needed to be done.
And Premier Bligh has just mentioned that she intends to now cooperate with the NT on making that more possible across that slice of Northern Australia.
JOURNALIST: Doesn't the report from the Productivity Commission suggest that particularly the intervention approach and now your emergency response on tackling child abuse isn't working?
PM: No. I think we're committed to this because everything we've tried in the past hasn't work. Let's be very practical about it. We're on this bus because we think it is the right way to go. And there is always going to be a whole lot of argy bargy around the side of it, well that's life.
But I'm supporting the Chief Minister in his efforts and what Premier Bligh is doing in a different context in Cape York, what Premier Barnett is doing in the Kimberley, these are all different forms of intervention as to what has occurred in the past. Do you know why? Because the data we have been presented with in the past has been so, from the past, has been so bad. And what we see in early signs, very early signs in the Cape and in parts of the Territory, are some positive signals.
To go back to Matthew's point before, do we have comprehensive sets of data which say this is all some crashing success? No. Early intimations however are better than what was the case before.
JOURNALIST: Would you have expected even a small improvement (inaudible) intervention and emergency response measures to be reflected in that report?
PM: Well can I just say, these things take time and we're changing things around which have been around for a long, long time. You're right to ask this question about measurability, you're absolutely right and if we're not producing you know good data in years to come in terms of changes then obviously we're going to have to reappraise again.
But I think the collective resolve of the Premiers and Chief Ministers here is so much of what's been done in the past hasn't worked, a few things have, we're trying to learn from those but we're adopting a new approach.
BARNETT: Can I give one practical example? Just, I mean the data is obviously important but if I just give an example from the Kimberley region. Because of far more intensive policing and police working with child protection, the level of child abuse is probably greater than anyone anticipated - for example in two years over 500 charges being laid for sexual abuse of children.
One particular example, in one community, a 10-year-old girl came forward and told her story. That resulted in some 60 charges being laid against 14 men. So the data is going to show an upward swing in terms of sexual assaults and charges laid. Why? Because the policing now is actually showing the true extent of the problem. So what you're seeing at the moment is data at the very early stages of getting a real handle on what is actually happening in some of these communities.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) terrific that all you guys were talking (inaudible) but the real test will come when you actually talk to individual communities and there's a growing level of frustration amongst (inaudible) Social Justice Commissioner that there's no coordinated plans in many of these targets, there's not enough communication with indigenous communities. How do you respond to that?
PM: Well I'll ask Paul to add on this one but the number of times I've heard the general complaint of not enough consultation, cooperation and coordination as a general ,shall I say, precondition for inaction, we can consult ourselves till we're blue in the face but we actually need to get on and do things. And that's what these governments are doing.
Secondly, as a response directly to your question, I sat down for an hour and a half with Indigenous leaders from Darwin this morning myself, one by one going through what they thought was working and what they thought was not working. And I am sure my colleagues do this from time to time with Indigenous leaders in their various jurisdictions.
Furthermore when it comes to remote communities, the Commonwealth in terms of coordinating its efforts on the ground, as you probably know, has appointed a Coordinator General for the delivery of services to Indigenous Australians in remote communities. That's so that we at the Australian Government level make sure that all of the arms of federal Government, Commonwealth Government, Australian Government, are being properly integrated on a community by community basis. Why? So that we can obtain local community ownership of that which we are doing. Because it is only then that you actually achieve the longer term outcomes that you want.
JOURNALIST: Is it time to review the Gold Card scheme for retired MPs and maybe include another level of scrutiny?
PM: I think the accessibility to Gold Card - we can ask every Premier to respond to theirs - the eligibility of a Gold Card has I think long been determined by the Remuneration Tribunal, it's been around I think under successive governments.
JOURNALIST: I was just going to ask about the data. How exactly is this data going to improve? Is there going to be any more money thrown in to data collection?
PM: Let me give you a number. How much?
BLIGH: (Whispers)
PM: Thank you Anna. Anna was always the better swot than I was back in the Queensland government, she always knew the answers to these things. She says 46, I thought it was 43, but it's 40 something million.
BLIGH: Over four years.
PM: Over four years, and it's actually a sizeable investment because we are all collectively investing a lot in this area.
We as heads of our respective governments want to have confidence that the measures that we're embracing and the new directions that we've spoken of before are delivering results. And then some of the data we may get back will prove to be very uncomfortable.
And I say to you all in advance, by the way, to emphasise again what I said to Matthew Franklin before, that you're going to have also a tip up in various reporting because we'll now be reporting things which for the first time have been collected, all through greater interventions like the one Colin just referred to in the Kimberley, where you've got effective policing producing new data on the level of sexual assault in particular communities  -  that data's going to go up the more effective we get.
But I'd much rather have as a realistic set of measures as to what's happening out there so we can in turn measure where we go for the future.
This is a long term process but since the Apology I believe the mood of the nation is to point us in one direction which is closing the gap. And it's going to be hard, it's going to be rough, there'll be setbacks but our direction is clear.
JOURNALIST: How can the data be improved?
PM: How can it be improved? I wish I had the head of the Productivity Commission here to tell you precisely that but any good statistician will tell you  -  I'll come to you in a sec  -  can all be improved.
There are, as I'm advised, real problems in certain collections at the community level and remember our focus here, given we have such a large number of communities across the country and Colin, what was your number across West Australia?
BARNETT: 286 in Western Australia.
PM: 286 in WA. How many have you got mate?
HENDERSON: Oh, about 112 in the Northern Territory.
PM: Okay, and just, if you were trying to get specific data on what are often quite remote and isolated communities, often with populations as small as 50, you actually have to have a way of measuring whether the programs we're putting in place are working in a disparate set of communities across a region.
Now, how we do that in a practical sense, I'll leave that to the technicians, but I'm saying there is gaps in terms of measuring what we're doing. So it's that local level we've got particular gaps.
Also, as I'm advised we still have real challenges in terms of some of the health related areas getting all that properly measured as well. Question here.
JOURNALIST: The Indigenous Affairs Minister this morning talked about (inaudible) communities and trying to generate economic development to try and address some of these underlying issues. How much support will the Commonwealth provide to the Northern Territory Government negotiations (inaudible)?
PM: By the way, which 20 communities are we referring to here?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Alright. Okay. Look, I'll ask Paul to add to this but we had a good discussion this morning with some Aboriginal leaders about economic development, business development and the role of Indigenous enterprise and just getting all that right. And can I say from our perspective as an Australian government, we want to be full bottle in getting behind people on this. It's really important.
One of the suggestions this morning from the Aboriginal leaders concerned how to get business-related projects going. Obviously they've got to be subject to local development approval processes like anything else in any other jurisdiction of government, but the sooner communities are able to develop, have access to revenue streams which come from projects which they've got on the ground, I think the better.
The other great proposal which someone came up with this morning, Paul, was we need, up here, a properly operating Indigenous Chamber of Commerce, chambers of commerce. So what we'd like to do with the Aboriginal business leadership and I've dealt with Aboriginal business organisations elsewhere in Australia, is do everything we can to encourage Indigenous business leadership as well, because this is part and parcel of an overall strategy of long term reducing welfare dependency and long term increasing self-reliance.
JOURNALIST: I understand that the Gold Card system's been around for a while. How appropriate is it that former MPs are using it to go on holidays and what sort of message do you think that sends (inaudible)?
PM: Ahh, don't know the specific details you're referring to. It has been around for a long time, but can I say the eligibility for it has, so far as I'm aware, long been determined by the Remuneration Tribunal, independent Remuneration Tribunal.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just on another matter, if I may. The other day you did an interview in Brisbane where you were asked about the ute  - 
PM: Ahh, we're back on the ute.
JOURNALIST: And for some reason you didn't want to answer the simple question of why does a man like you need this ute  - 
PM: On the  - 
JOURNALIST: - and instead, you had criticisms of the media, which is fine. But may I ask you again, why does a man like you need a ute as a donation? Doesn't the system provide enough resources for politicians to do their jobs (inaudible) campaign?
PM: I think Matthew what the system provides is for something called a pecuniary interest register, which is when someone provides you with something like that that the requirement in our nation is for transparency and what  - 
JOURNALIST: That doesn't answer the question.
PM: I think it does, because it goes to whether you're transparent about any support that you've received, so on the pecuniary interest register at that time  -  two and a half years ago, you have this fully declared.
In terms of the utilisation to which it's put then I think you as a former resident of Brisbane would know full well, the utilisation to which it's put, which is my conduct of mobile offices in my own community.
But on the  -  by the way I've received an invitation to attend the Deniliquin Ute Muster, and so anyone who'd like to come along, Swanny and I are thinking of taking the drive down to Deni for the Ute Muster, come and join us.
You mentioned also the other parts of that as well, which is the question of media reporting. I think, what a number of people have said to me, Matthew, around the place is where have we kind of got to, when you have major papers like the Daily Telegraph, the Courier-Mail and the Adelaide Advertiser running on their front page that the Prime Minister of the country is corrupt, and then secondly the editors it seems not having sighted any original document in terms of this email, and thirdly, it turns out that that email is a forgery, I would have thought a few people would want to know how all that happened, what sort of journalistic checks were put in place for that to be the case, or is it simply being sort of airbrushed from history?
I think the other thing which sort of comes up is, I mean the usual accusations when political leaders respond to factually inaccurate reporting in the media, in this case in those papers that I referred to, is to accuse the political leaders in question of having some sort of glass jaw.
It may simply be that what people want is just some basic answers as to how that might have happened, that's a pretty basic thing.
The other thing I saw the Chief Executive of your own news organisation do yesterday was, in responding to this, indicate that somehow the Deputy Prime Minister was raising these matters because she'd felt set upon by your newspaper over the coverage of the Building the Education Revolution stuff. Well, all's fair in love and war, I mean, you guys will take whatever editorial position you want on the Building the Education Revolution and that's been the case.
I noticed when the Deputy Prime Minister in Parliament a week or so ago raised systematically questions of the accuracy of your newspaper's reporting on various of the case studies it sought to advance in the implementation of the school modernisation program on the ground and said that they were wrong, that the response from your branch of News Ltd was to the, shall I say, up the ante for several days following that and engage in what I can only describe as a good old exercise in journalistic retaliation.
So when I saw yesterday the Deputy Prime Minister's motives being brought into account on this and saying that she might be retaliating against News Ltd because of the coverage that week, it may simply be that her interest, like a whole bunch of people out in the public, would be, how is it that the Murdoch press got something so fundamentally wrong and what were the journalistic standards which applied? These are just basic questions which we  -  I haven't heard anything from the three editors in question, I haven't seen any statement from them, but I did see that the Chief Executive of News Ltd organisation said yesterday that it was all fine and dandy.
I think on these sort of things, and given your question is about transparency, I think it's good that we have a general discussion about these things. I think it's important because of the role of your particular newspapers in the overall fabric of the Australian democracy, and I'd hate to see a stage where we got to in national political life whereby we as political leaders couldn't say that X, Y and Z has been wrongly reported and ask why, and then for the standard response to be ‘you can't answer that because  -  you can't ask that question because you've got a glass jaw'.
Or on top of that, to fear that in asking that, you're going to invite retaliation from the newspapers in question. Now I don't think that'd be very healthy in anyone's democracy, least of all ours.
Thanks folks.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask the Chief Minister, can you just give us your response to this report? The facts are that the abuse figures have widened between Indigenous and non-Indigenous, particularly (inaudible)?
HENDERSON: Look Sarah, I haven't read the report, it was just released this morning and obviously we've been in meetings. But in terms of child abuse, as the Prime Minister and Premier Barnett are saying, if you put more police resources to uncovering a problem that has existed for many, many years in the Northern Territory, you are going to see an increasing number of cases.
Now we now have two child abuse taskforces  -  one in the top end, one in the centre, dedicated police resources, dedicated family and children's services workers who for the last 14 months have been specifically focussed on dealing with reports of child abuse, have been systemically investigating those in a combined way, with police and FACS workers and charges have been laid. So, as the Prime Minister has said, if you actually start reporting on issues systemically that have not been reported for many, many years in terms of undercounting, of course you're going to see a spike. But what we are doing now is focussing on the problem, dedicating those resources and saying it's unacceptable.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) says that in Budget estimates the Government actually admitted that resources for child protection haven't actually been increased?
HENDERSON: Oh look, can I say child protection resources have increased threefold in the last five years. There's been a significant expansion of child protection dollars into the system, the budget has expanded significantly  -  there is a challenge in recruiting people to those positions, a very big challenge.
People who work in those areas deal with trauma on a day to day basis, there's high burnout so it's not a lack of funding into this area, it's increased significantly, but there are challenges in terms of recruiting people to these positions.
PM: And, last question.
JOURNALIST: How concerned are all of you about the skyrocketing Indigenous imprisonment rate?
PM: You know, we had a discussion about that this morning as well in my own meeting with Aboriginal leaders here from the Northern Territory and the incarceration rates, you're right, are huge.
Part of the reason, and here I'm always reluctant to venture into areas in which I do not have direct expertise, but I would draw your attention in part to the example given before by the Premier of WA, which is if you have a more vigorous law enforcement effort, and particular categories in crime, then it follows that you're going to have also a number of additional people being incarcerated. That's at one end of the spectrum.
The other end of the spectrum, of course, is what we need to be doing with young Aboriginal men, in particular, though that's not the totality of the picture, but the dominant prison population from the Indigenous community are male, is to provide better opportunities in those critical years of 15 to 25 in terms of life opportunities, employment opportunities, training opportunities and education opportunities.
One of the things that I spoke about to the group this morning and with my colleagues just now, is the great example of the Clontarf Academy  -  they operate here in Darwin, they operate in WA and there are similar initiatives I understand from the Premier of South Australia in his state as well, and that is better linking, following sort of, training opportunities in AFL and football and sport with on the one hand mandatory school attendance. And it's been remarkably successful, I'm advised, in the 22 locations which the Clontarf Academy now operates across WA and the Territory. That's why we as an Australian government are also now increasing our funding.
So you ask this question ‘what can you do to bring down the incarceration rate?' One of the practical things we can do is to make sure generally through the education system but can I say specifically in terms of young Aboriginal men in this category to better target what we do as far as their training and employment opportunities go. This is a critical area of concern for all of us. Having said that  - 
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you -
PM: Not really, I think I'm about  -  okay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Premier Brumby, following (inaudible) Jim Stynes (inaudible)?
BRUMBY: I haven't seen all of the details of his statement as I was in the meeting all this morning, but as I said this morning, Jim Stynes is a favourite son of Melbourne, an adopted son in a sense, but a magnificent footballer, a magnificent leader, and as I said this morning, he's been I think an inspiration too, in the way in which he's focused on assisting disadvantaged youth, and youth at risk. So we wish him well, we wish him our full support as he works through this illness, but he is a person of immense discipline and focus and I think if anyone was to pull through this, he would.
PM: And to add to what the Premier has said, we've seen too many of our very fine Australians afflicted by terrible diseases in recent times. I recently attended the State Funeral of Chris O'Brien in Sydney.
When you've got great Australians like Jim Stynes, I think it's really important that a country gets behind them, provides them with very positive support and encouragement. Because these are people who've given back so much to the community, given back so much to the community, so I join the Premier in wishing him all the very best in what will be a tough fight ahead, but I think one which a person of his stamina and quality is uniquely qualified to engage in and to succeed in. Thank you very much.
The COAG Communique is available on the Council of Australian Governments website.


Teachers, can I just at the very outset salute the work that you do in these communities, it's appreciated by the nation. To you the mums and dads who support school communities like this as well and to you the Australians of today and the Australians of tomorrow, boys and girls, students here at these great schools.
You may have seen the Premier and I arrive by helicopter. It's one of those great privileges that you have as Prime Minister of Australia, an opportunity to look at some of the great achievements that have been made in the past in our country. And as Prime Minister to think about how we can build on those achievements for the future. And that's what we've been doing this morning.
This morning I saw firsthand the spectacular majesty of the landscape of the Kimberleys. This is truly a unique part of God's creation. It inspires the soul. It is truly, truly a part of our Australian national soul. And as I travelled up The Ord to the dam I also reflected upon the equal antiquity of the Aboriginal people who have been custodians of these lands since the Dreamtime and how honoured we are to share these lands with them.
I also saw firsthand the achievements of those who have gone before us, those who had the imagination, the courage, the fortitude to say we can take this part of the land and turn it into a great, great agricultural development for the future. And going back many years to previous Premiers and previous Prime Ministers of all sides of politics, back to the 40s, through the 50s, into the 60s and the construction of the dam in 1972, what has happened with Ord River Stage One and what will now happen with Ord River Stage Two, you have here us building on the achievements of those who have gone before us.
It was for me an inspiring morning. Seeing the landscape, reflecting on the antiquity of our Indigenous Australians and reflecting also on the great achievements of those who have built this district into what it has become; a major food basket for the country.
As the Premier indicated before we are here today to sign a historic agreement. The Australian Government's vision for the East Kimberley is to help build strong and sustainable communities. It's about providing the social infrastructure that underpins vibrant community life, it's about a partnership between governments and the local community. It's about a partnership with Indigenous communities as we work to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians in health, in education, in employment and in life opportunities.
In this respect, I note that the Ord project, and the investments that come with it, have only been possible because of the consent of the Miriuwung and Gajerrong traditional owners. And I thank them for that. I would like to acknowledge here former Minister Eric Ripper and the traditional owners for the extensive work they have done.
I now turn to the specific details of the East Kimberley Development package that we are announcing today.
Firstly in the area of health, the Australian Government will invest $50 million in health services in the region. This includes $20 million for the expansion of the Kununurra Hospital, which serves the whole region. $3.4 million for the Wyndham health facilities, $7 million for remote clinics and aged care facilities and $4 million for short stay patient accommodation.
We will also commit to $6.8 million for environmental health measures  -  including improvements to dust control, incinerators and the fencing of sewerage ponds and rubbish tips. This is in addition to the 8.6 million of funding announced in the Commonwealth Budget for renal dialysis services in the Kimberley as well.
Each of these health measures I have announced today will complement the National Partnership on Indigenous Health, a $1.6 billion investment over four years, that commenced this week. And that aims to reduce the biggest risk factors for disease, to improve chronic disease management and to expand the capacity of the health workforce.
Education. The quality of education training is of fundamental importance to this region's future. If we are to retain families and retain the young people in this region, they must have quality educational opportunities from pre-school right through to Year 12 and to TAFE. And I know this is a priority for this community. And that is why the Australian Government will now be investing $64 million in education and training in the East Kimberley.
This will include $25 million for a new primary school in Kununurra, $15 million for the Kununurra District High School where we stand today, $5 million for the Kununurra School Community Library and $10 million for trades training and classrooms at the Kimberley TAFE.
We are also providing funding for teacher training and for early learning centres in Wyndham, Warmun and Mandangala.
The measures I have announced here will complement the work by the Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, that she's now undertaking for a Kimberley-wide regional education strategy in partnership with the State Government. That strategy will address the need for improved early childhood education, better outcomes as well as helping particularly the needs of our local Indigenous people.
Housing. We need improved housing, also essential for the region's future. Affordable housing is a challenge for the whole East Kimberley region, especially in attracting and retaining workers in hospitals and schools. Housing problems are especially acute in Indigenous communities in this region, where there's an average of 6.3 residents in each house. This compares to 3.9 residents per house in Indigenous communities overall across the State.
That's why the Government is committed to taking action with a $50 million investment in social and transitional housing in the region. In addition, we will invest a further $5 million in the region specifically to provide housing for health service providers.
In transport, the Development Package we announce today also embraces an investment of more than $15 million in transport infrastructure, including $10 million investment in the Wyndham Port, to expand future trade opportunities.
And finally community facilities; the Government will also invest in community facilities that contribute to stronger community life. $3 million for the hostel oval in Kununurra, $950,000 for the Wyndham pool and funding for a community jetty, also at Wyndham.
Ladies and gentlemen boys and girls, these are the details of what we're about to agree to with the state government of Western Australia here today. These are our investments long term for your community. It's health facilities, it's education facilities, it's training facilities. The things that are important for community life as well as housing, as well as transport.
The State Government and the Australian Government have worked very closely on this project together. The State Government is also investing a comparable amount of money. Altogether we are investing together some $400 million in order to make Ord Stage Two possible, not just as an economic development but also underpinning the social investments which are necessary to make it all work. I believe our two governments have worked well together on this and I think we have also worked speedily.
I first came here six months ago and I sat down with the Premier then and we started nutting through the detail. And since then on my part, Gary Gray the Parliamentary Secretary for Western and Northern Australia and on his part Brendon Grylls the Minister for Regional Development sat down and resolved the detail. And after six months you know something? Having worked in Government for a little while, that's not bad and what we're starting today, the finality of that agreement.
One of the challenges that lies with you as the community is to make it work. We as governments are putting our best step forward in order to ensure that we have a strong economy here for the future and the best investments possible in our schools and in our hospitals. But we need you the community to also take ownership of this with us.
I think in this part, this wonderful part of Australia, we have an enormous opportunity to demonstrate the Australia of which we sang just before in our National Anthem. Its opening line is ‘Australians all let us rejoice', ‘Australians all let us rejoice'. This provides further and great and new opportunities for all Australians, Indigenous and non-Indigenous, in this wonderful part of Australia to carve out a new future. There will be problems, there will be challenges, there will be difficulties, I understand that, no-one waves magic wands. But can I say with Government in partnership with the community and with you the community in partnership with us, I believe we can make a real difference for the future.
To conclude where the Premier concluded, to each of the young people out here today from the littlies to the biggies. Those of you who are thinking about what you might do in the future, look back on this day in 25, in 50 years time and reflect on the fact that you were here for this important new turning point for this region's future. For your district's future.
This wonderful community which you share now will become bigger, greater and even better in the years ahead. Many of you will shape its future as you grow up and choose careers in this part of Australia. So look back in a few years time, in five years time, in 10 years time that you were here at this important milestone because I think it is a milestone of which you'll all be proud.
To teachers, to parents and to those who sustain community life here can I also say this. You are the lifeblood that makes all this work, you actually make communities tick, you actually are the fabric which holds it all together, the glue during the hard times, the difficult times. The economy might be down and markets are bad but you make it work. And to each of you who have committed yourselves to making this a truly great Australian community for the future, I commend you.
So let's celebrate together this new milestone for the future, one of partnership between the Australian Government, the State Government of Western Australia and this great community in the East Kimberley. I thank you.
[Ends]


PM: It's good to be here in Kununurra with the Premier. As you know today we have signed this new national partnership agreement for the next stage in the economic development of the Kimberleys. This is an important agreement for the nation, it's an important agreement for Western Australia and I would thank the Premier for his cooperation in arriving at this conclusion. 
For the Commonwealth part this is a significant investment, some 195 million dollars in five priority areas towards health infrastructure, education and training infrastructure, social housing, transport and general community infrastructure. That partners with a parallel investment from the state government which goes to the next phase in the Ord, Ord Stage Two.
I think we're both animated by the thought that we are embarking upon an agreement of historic significance in providing the foundations for the next stage of the Kimberley's economic development. Importantly also with new opportunities not just for agriculture but new economic and employment opportunities for Indigenous Australia as well. And what has been heartening here on the ground is to see the level of optimism and the level of wanting to get on with the business of cooperating better to provide economic opportunities and employment opportunities for all. So congratulations Premier.
BARNETT: Thank you. It's been nearly 40 years since the main dam on the Ord River was constructed at the first stage of the Ord River irrigation scheme. There's been a lot of work done by a lot of people including the local Indigenous community and I am absolutely delighted today that we were able to sign between the Commonwealth and the State this development agreement that will see an expansion of more than doubling of the irrigation land of the Ord River scheme. Some early site works will start during this dry season, the major construction will be during 2010 so not far away, probably starting about April 2010.
In the meantime the Federal Government's involvement with a very generous support for education, health, a whole range of community services and including some transport infrastructure will add to it. And a collective commitment between the Commonwealth and the State of 400 million dollars into this area is an absolutely extraordinary event.
And I think the Prime Minister would agree with me, all of Australia is looking at this. Not only because of the significance of a major new and expanded irrigation area but because of the relationship that has been developed between the wider community and the local Mirriuwung Gajerong people and this is an economic development but also an extraordinarily important social development. Peoples of Australia, the first Australians, and new Australians working together to achieve this and as you can see the flags are flying for Kununurra.
And I'd just like to personally thank the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister came here to look at the Ord River scheme with me just before Christmas, not that long ago, only six months ago. And in that short period of time he and his respective Ministers, particularly Gary Gray and on the Western Australian side Brendon Grylls have negotiated not only the expansion of the irrigation scheme but a very wide ranging series of social and community improvements. And I think, thank you Prime Minister, I think that is a remarkable example of cooperation between the Commonwealth Government and the State Government and an amazing effort by the various agencies involved to actually get this project on the ground, the money is in the bank and work will now start.
PM: Okay over to you folks, or folk.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the car figures out today. Pretty good and due to the tax break is what the commentary said, do you have any response to that?
PM: The, what the, it is important at a time of global economic recession for us to be taking every effort to make a difference in the global economy. I'd note also on the challenging front that US employment figures are out today and that I am advised the US lost nearly half a million jobs last month, renders the US unemployment rate to 9.5 per cent which I am also advised is the worst unemployment rate in the United States in 75 years. Underlining the facts that we're not out of the woods yet as a global economy or as an Australian economy.
Secondly I also note as a fact that the insolvency figures are up for Australia. There has been an 11.1 per cent increase in insolvency numbers, indicating again that we have a continued problem on our hands that we must work our way through. Obviously the motor vehicle sales are encouraging and I note what the Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries Chief Executive Andrew McKellar has said today, the surge in business sales is directly attributed to the federal Government's business tax break and these figures provide clear evidence that this has been a very effective policy measure.
All I'd say is what we're trying to do is acting nationally through tax breaks for business and locally through initiatives like this in the Kimberleys to make a difference to the economy now when the recession globally is so big.
JOURNALIST: Are figures like this an indication that we will avoid the doom and gloom that America has seen?
PM: So far Australia has avoided a technical recession but we are not out of the woods yet. As I have said before, I can't make those projections for the future. All I know is that we are very much focused on the implementation of our national economic stimulus strategy to make a difference in the economy. Phase one in cash payments, phase two in the measures we've taken, the school modernisation program nationally, phase three long term infrastructure including what we're doing here with the Ord - these sorts of investments and elsewhere in Western Australia with the prospect of Oakajee and what we've done already in the commitments to Northbridge in Perth.
These things together make a difference, together with the measures that we have taken to improve the taxation treatment of business investments. This 30 per cent tax deductibility which has been provided up until 30 June to support businesses bringing forward some of their capital investments and capital acquisitions and for small business for the next six months increasing that to 50 per cent through to the end of the year.
But you know? These measures have not yet seen us out of the woods. They are making a difference. It's good that we're the fastest growing economy in the OECD, the only one of the major advanced economies not to be in recession but can I just say there is a lot of work to be done yet.
JOURNALIST: How concerned are you over the missile tests in North Korea?
PM: I think the regime in North Korea needs to have applied to it maximum global political pressure and the reason is this destabilising behaviour of engaging in missile firings off their own coast and the waters between themselves and Japan do nothing to contribute to regional stability, do everything to head in the reverse direction.
These tests are condemned by the Australian Government and I would ask again the North Korean regime to pay attention to the position taken by President Obama and to return to the negotiating table in the six party talks aimed at the denuclearisation of the Peninsula.
JOURNALIST: What can the Australian Government do (inaudible)?
PM: Our representations to the regime in Pyongyang will be robust and strong. Other actions that we have taken in concert with other members of the United Nations have already been detailed by the Foreign Minister. But when you're dealing with a regime like North Korea it's very hard, but we intend to remain in close cooperation and solidarity with the United States as we try to bring some semblance of sense to the North Korean regime. Frankly it's going to be tough but it is very important that everyone continues to apply maximum political and economic pressure on the regime in Pyongyang.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the $3 billion Square Kilometre Array radio telescope project. Is your Government committed to doing everything possible to make that come to Western Australia including an upgrade to the broadband, fast tracking that?
PM: Well the Premier and I have discussed this before and this is a major project for the nation and the Australian Government and the WA Government are working very closely on it. The competition is stiff, I think we're all aware of that but this for us is a major project in which we're going to inject every level of national effort.
Details on the broadband application question I think would best be directed to the Minister responsible for broadband. But can I say we will be leaving no stone unturned to make sure that we put our every best effort into what from memory is a $2 billion plus investment in important scientific infrastructure which would help lift our overall research effort and lift our economic performance in the future.
JOURNALIST: And in The Australian newspaper today it appears that you may be at war with The Australian newspaper? Is that a smart thing to be at war with an organisation that buys ink by the barrel load?
PM: I think, I think what I said yesterday is simply it's important for us to have a free and open national discussion about responsible reporting by newspapers like the Sydney Daily Telegraph, like the Brisbane Courier-Mail, like The Adelaide Advertiser. And like I said, if you're going to put on the front page of your newspapers a statement in the papers' names that the Prime Minister of Australia is corrupt and for that to be based on an email which apparently the editors of those papers never saw and an email which we now know to be false, fake and a forgery, I think people I run into the streets would just like to know what journalistic tests were applied to that.
I think that's a reasonable discussion to have. And you should be able to have that discussion - taking out the essence of your question - without political leaders around the country being accused of having a glass jaw, without political leaders in any way fearing retaliation for what should be just a normal discussion. “How did this happen? What sort of journalistic checks were applied?” I am sure you folk in the profession would be equally interested in this as I am.
And having said that, I've got to zip.
[Ends]


Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia:This is a genuine Australian of the Year; I'm not [Laughter].
Catherine Freeman OAM:This is a genuine Australian PM; I'm not [Laughter].
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia: But, the bottom line is, Cathy's come here today to Darwin to promote nominations for Australian of the Year and she's given me the first nomination or given Adam Gilchrist, who's Chairman of the Australia Day Council, the first nomination and we want tens-of-thousands more.
Catherine Freeman OAM: Yes, please. Please come out and support your fellow Australians.
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia:That's right, so support Australia Day, Australian of the Year and thank you Cathy for sky-diving into our event today.
Catherine Freeman OAM: Thank you.
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia:You silly girl [Laughter]
Catherine Freeman OAM:[Laughter] I know! [Laughter]


The Australian Government and the West Australian Government today signed the National Partnership Agreement for the East Kimberley Development Package.
The Agreement is a further example of the Commonwealth and the States working together to tackle the economic down-turn and stimulate the economy.
Under the Agreement, the Commonwealth will invest $195 million in five priority areas:
     * $50 million towards health infrastructure;
     * $64 million towards education and training;
     * $50 million in social housing;
     * $15 million in transport infrastructure; and
     * $16 million towards community infrastructure.
This investment in social and common use infrastructure in the East Kimberley region is part of the Australian Government's $4.7 billion Nation Building plan to support jobs and apprenticeships today while building the infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
The East Kimberley Development Package complements the WA Government's $220 million investment in expansion of the Ord irrigation area to ensure the balanced development of the East Kimberley region.
It has been developed jointly by the Commonwealth and West Australian governments in consultation with the local community, to support the economic and social development of the region.
This investment promotes sustainable regional development, providing social infrastructure in the areas of health, education, community facilities, housing and transport. It will also provide training and productive employment opportunities for Indigenous communities in the region.
The Australian Government is committed to building a stronger future for people in the East Kimberley.
The Package will deliver real on-the-ground infrastructure for the people living and working in the East Kimberley, fostering growth and sustainability of this high-productivity region.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Amici.
Vi ringrazio per l'invitazione gentile stasera.
L'Australia non sarebbe il paese che è senza italiani!
Lunedì vado in Italia: dove dirò io, che l'Australia sta unita con l'Italia, unita per l'Abruzzo!
TRANSLATION:
Friends.
Thank you for the kind invitation this evening.
Australia wouldn't be the country it is without Italians!
On Monday I am going to Italy: where I will say that Australia stands together with Italy, united for Abruzzo!
I am delighted to be here tonight, especially so close to my departure for Italy.
Melbourne is one of the great cities of the world and I have no doubt part of the secret lies in the sophisticated cultural imprint your community has made here.
Italian culture has permeated so much through our kitchens, restaurants, clubs, and sports grounds that it is sometimes hard to know where Australia ends and Italy begins.
When you travel around the world it seems there are only two counties that can produce a decent coffee  -  -  and they are Australia and Italy!
It's difficult to picture now, so deep is Melbourne's love affair with coffee, but the first café to boast an espresso machine in the 1950s had crowds of tea-drinking locals queuing on the footpath to watch the quirky, steaming contraption in action.
Now in 2009, we are so at home with Italian food that we have taken a few liberties with some Italian culinary staples.
I am informed by the highest sources in the land that on the hit cooking show Master Chef the beloved Italian dessert Tiramisu was given a good Aussie make-over and turned into “Beeramisu” using chocolate stout.
It was a travesty for some, but a true cultural hybrid for others!
Perhaps no event has given Australians a better understanding of Italian culture than the 2006 World Cup ... as much as we claim it was a daylight robbery.
Apart from Cathy Freeman's final in the 2000 Olympics, no other event united Australians more than our team's win to qualify for the 2006 World Cup, and our subsequent games in Germany.
Now we understand why phones are left off the hook, why cafes shut, and why people take leave from work during the World Cup.
It's because Australians now love the world game too  -  almost as much as Italians do.
And we enjoy winning too.
I am probably getting into sensitive territory here with those of you who support Italy over Australia in the World Cup.
Perhaps I shouldn't mention that Socceroos Coach Pim Verbeek's target at next year's World Cup is to take Australia to the quarter-finals and improve on their performance in Germany three years ago.
Perhaps I won't quote late Australian legend Johnny Warren who famously once said that his country should stop wondering whether they would qualify for World Cups and instead should ask when they would start winning them.
Whoever we support in next year's World Cup, we all love the game, and we all agree that the World Cup should come to Australia.
Before I visit Italy, I will drop in on the President of FIFA, Sepp Blatter, in Zurich and explain to him what a fabulous venue Australia would be for the World Cup in 2018 or 2022.
And we all agree that when the World Cup is in Australia the Italian team  -  the Azzurri  -  will have a rapturous welcome here.
Football aside, it is clear that Italy and Australia are great friends.
Australia is rightly proud of its Italian heritage.
Nearly one million Australians claim Italian ancestry.
Nearly 200,000 Australians were born in Italy, while some 30,000 Australians live in Italy.
Italians have built a vibrant community  -  a community that continues its strong tradition of contributing to all aspects of our national life.
Your community here tonight helps to maintain the strong and vibrant link between Australia and Italy.
Now our two nations are looking to further develop our relationship.
That is one of the reasons I am travelling to Italy next week.
I will be attending international climate change meetings that coincide with Italy's hosting of the Group of Eight  -  the G8  -  meetings in L'Aquila; the very region where the earthquake struck in April.
And I look forward to meeting again with Prime Minister Berlusconi and working on the common challenges we face.
Australia and Italy have many common aspirations and we can work together  -  be it bilaterally, regionally and globally  -  to achieve our shared goals.
Australia and Italy have strong historic ties and frequent high level contact. 
I have spoken to Prime Minister Berlusconi on the phone a number of times this year and we worked closely together at the G20 Summit in London in April.
The Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, is also in frequent contact with his counterpart, Franco Frattini.
We have close ties between Italy and Australia in trade and investment.
Our cultural and educational links continue to grow.
And we work together on many international challenges.
Certainly we are both working to promote stability and security in Afghanistan
We have shared views on the big question of nuclear disarmament.
Italy's Former Foreign and Defence Minister Mr Antonio Martino is on the Advisory Board of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament we established.
Italy is an important partner for Australia in engaging with Europe through our Australia-EU Partnership Framework.
We also have a strong history of Science and Research collaboration.
And during my visit next week we will take the next step in that collaboration when Australia and Italy sign an agreement to provide for cooperation on the international Square Kilometre Array project  -  a cutting edge global project to build a group of radio telescopes to help us look into the deepest history of the universe.
For us, having the home of Galileo Galilei on our side would be very important!
And we are working together on the great challenge of climate change.
I am delighted that Italy is a founding member of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute that Australia has established.
Together we will work with other international partners on commercialising and deploying this critical technology to reduce carbon emissions.
All these links are important and bode well for the future.
But what makes two countries true friends are the personal connections between people.
Connections between friends and families.
That is the bedrock of modern Australia-Italy relations.
And when one of our countries has been dealt a terrible blow, the other is there to help.
It's what friends do.
It's why we are here tonight.
Australia was shocked by the horrific earthquake that hit the Abruzzo region and devastated L'Aquila on 6 April.
For many in Australia, this was not a natural disaster affecting nameless people in a far off land.
This was something far closer to home.
This disaster affected friends and family.
Because a significant number of Italo-Australians come from the Abruzzo region.
This disaster was as keenly felt, the losses as deeply mourned as a natural calamity on our own shores.
I called Prime Minister Berlusconi at the time to pass on the condolences of the people of Australia.
He warmly received Australia's offer to assist with the effort to rebuild L'Aquila.
You should be rightly proud of the efforts by the community here in Melbourne to support the people of Abruzzo.
It is a testament to the strength and generosity of our community.
It shows our strong commitment to maintaining vibrant people-to-people links between Australia and Italy.
I am delighted to be Patron of the Australia-Abruzzo Earthquake Appeal Fund.
I am especially appreciative of the National and State Committees' efforts to mobilise community support and raise funds to help the people of the region.
Just three weeks after the earthquake struck, Nicoletta and Ubaldo and others in the National Committee organised a radio-a-thon on Rete Italia, the national Italian radio station, and raised $300,000 in one weekend.
That was an outstanding effort!
The state community organisations have been working non-stop to raise money and fundraising events are still taking place as I speak.
I know many of you are listening on Rete Italia tonight to the live broadcast of this event.
I thank you sincerely for your efforts.
And I want to say that you are not alone in wanting to help the people of Abruzzo.
Where you make such an effort, the Government should also pitch in.
That is why I have decided that we will match the Italian community's fundraising efforts dollar-for-dollar up to a level of $1.5 million.
Next week I will have the privilege of visiting L'Aquila to see first-hand the consequences of the devastation of 6 April.
I will carry with me, on your behalf, a message of solidarity, support and goodwill  -  to the Abruzzesi and to their future.
I congratulate Nicoletta and the other organisers of this event, and thank all those attending for their generosity and commitment to helping with the reconstruction in Abruzzo and wish you all an enjoyable evening.


PM: Well it's good to be here at Greenacre to talk about social housing and to be with the State Housing Minister David Borger and Mark Arbib, the Minister for Employment, because this is about practical action to deal with the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century. You see to deal with the global economic recession we need local action, national action and global action because all these factors are at play in the impact on employment and on jobs around the world and here in Australia.
Local action - projects like this one. This project is one of about 10,000 which are being rolled out across NSW - 6,500 funded by our Government and about 3,000 or so funded by the NSW Government in partnership. And already we've got more than 500 houses under construction, we have something like 2,700 houses already approved and the rest of the 6,500 funded by the federal Government to be rolled out between now and - most of them - by the end of 2010.
That's important practical local action creating local jobs and on this site alone I am advised, if you put together the direct and indirect jobs, we're looking at something like a total of 63 jobs involving brick layers, carpenters, builders, sparkies, chippies and New Image steel fixing  -  well done mate, and companies like that. That's local action, it's practical action in areas like this.
Secondly, national action. This is all made possible because we have a Nation Building for Recovery plan being rolled out across the nation. Social housing, it might be 6,500 units here in NSW, it's 20,000 nationwide. That's a big investment in the national economy.
We're also investing some $4 billion in energy efficiency measures to make sure that every owner-occupied dwelling has the possibility of becoming insulated in their ceilings to increase energy efficiency and to reduce greenhouse gases. And then the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. That's national action, nation building for recovery.
Global action is also necessary and we've been active on this front through our work in the G20, but that is why I am also leaving today for the major economies meeting to be held in Italy at the invitation of President Obama.
This is a continuation of the Government's global economic action which we have been prosecuting through the G20. The focus of this major economies meeting in Italy is: firstly, dealing still with the impact of the worst global economic recession in 75 years; secondly, how do we restart global trade which has taken a battering because of the global recession; and thirdly, how do we prepare effectively to get the best outcome possible at the end of this year on climate change, balancing our economic and our environmental interests.
That's so much the focus of what will occur in Italy this week. We have to use this week's meeting to build momentum towards the next G20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September and for the Copenhagen Conference on Climate Change in December.
In addition to attending the major economies meeting in Italy, I will also en route visit the Prime Minister of Malaysia later today. Malaysia is an important economic partner of Australia, an important security partner and important for us also in combating the real problem of people smuggling.
Secondly en route to Italy I will spend a day and a bit in Berlin at the invitation of the German Chancellor. Germany is a major economic partner of Australia, it's a critical player in the G20 and I look forward to those discussions with Chancellor Merkel in Berlin.
Also in Italy, apart from the major economies meeting, I will have bilateral discussions with Prime Minister Berlusconi. Italy also being an important partner of Australia's in the G20.
These measures, these actions of course are all part of our campaign, our work to ensure that we exercise as much influence as possible in bringing about as rapid as possible global economic recovery. But it all comes back to what we do on the ground here as well.
These houses being built here, 17 or 20 or so  -  24 houses being built here are also going to provide real opportunities for decent housing for a bunch of folk who don't have those possibilities now. Overall, David Borger was telling me just before that the combined impact of the measures we're taking and the NSW Government is taking will provide some 17,000 people with a place to call home. That is really important and when you roll that out across the country that's making an important contribution.
What are we on about with Nation Building for Recovery? Supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today while investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Including that machine down the back there as well, that's what we're on about. And David, do you want to add?
BORGER: Sure. I just wanted to say that the investment that the Commonwealth's making is probably the biggest thing that has happened in housing since Ben Chifley signed the Commonwealth/State Housing Agreement. We're going to start 40 homes under construction next week and that will continue to increase until it reaches 200 homes under construction early next year. And this is providing opportunities for people who are very disadvantaged who actually wouldn't otherwise be able to afford a roof over their heads in NSW.
So I just wanted to thank the Prime Minister for this investment. Many years ago I worked for a Housing Minister and in our wildest dreams we wouldn't have thought that this level of investment in social housing was possible.
PM: Good. And the Employment Minister Mark Arbib is here as well and Mark was telling me before that nationwide some 10,000 is that right?
ARBIB: Yeah, 10,000 construction jobs have been added to the economy in the last three and half months. So the work that we're doing in terms of the stimulus, the 35,000 projects that we're rolling out over the next 12 months are having an effect on the construction sector.
And the important thing is not just the direct effect in terms of jobs but also the multiplier effects. So on this site alone you're talking about something like 63 extra workers, all of those workers are going to go use the local grocery stores, they're going to use the takeaway stores and that's going to support jobs and small business there. They're going to go fill their cars up at the local service station - that will support jobs there, use the local department stores. So it's about not just keeping people employed but it's also stimulating small business so they keep people employed. That's what the stimulus package is about.
PM: So the practicalities, in conclusion, are as the two Ministers have said. It's about adding all this extra opportunity for people who need a place to call home and through that also providing a large number, thousands of extra jobs in construction when the economy needs it now. 33,000  -  is that right, projects?
ARBIB: 35.
PM: 35,000 projects across the country and thousands of extra construction jobs being added. We're not far from Roselands here are we?
ARBIB: 10 minutes.
PM: Having started my working life, working for Grace Brothers in Roselands for six months, it's good to also see that local department stores and, as the Minister was just saying, local retail outlets also benefit from workers on site going off to buy their lunch, going off to buy a few other things on the way through. It's the direct jobs and the indirect jobs that make a difference in the worst global economic recession we've seen in three quarters of a century. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister how can the Malaysian Government help you to crack down on people smuggling? [Drill starts up nearby]
PM: I'll take that in one sec.
JOURNALIST: They can't let a minute go by.
PM: No, it's good. I appreciate it. I just had a traumatic memory of a dentist, that's all. Anyway, over to you.
JOURNALIST: I'll ask again. Prime Minister, what real discussions can you have with the Malaysian Government that might make an impact on people smuggling?
PM: Well Malaysia now has a new Prime Minister, Prime Minister Najib. I am looking forward to those discussions with him. Secondly what we see worldwide is a large increase in the number of illegal people movements right around Asia and beyond.
Therefore the active cooperation between ourselves and regional governments on security, on intelligence, on border control is really important. We are seeking to enhance that with our friends in Malaysia, enhance it with our friends in Indonesia, enhance it with our friends elsewhere in the region.
Each one of these things is a practical building block towards tighter cooperation in the immigration sphere, the security sphere, as well as in the intelligence sphere. That is what's necessary and what we're doing with this new Prime Minister Najib in Kuala Lumpur is taking our existing cooperative framework and elevating it to a new level.
JOURNALIST: Does it all come down to the problem of passport control in Malaysia?
PM: Well you see, right across the region, you have large of numbers of people coming into the region out of central and south Asia. And the push factors at work here in terms of insecurity and instability in Afghanistan, in Pakistan, in Sri Lanka and in other parts of the region mean that our effective coordination on border control systems and monitoring vessels moving across the wider archipelago and our interdiction arrangements means that we have to work hand in glove with our partners. It's been working well so far, always room for improvement and we'll do that with the Malaysians as well.
JOURNALIST: What would you like to see out of this meeting, an ongoing plan to crack down on the problem?
PM: Well, we already have a range of bilateral protocols in place with the Government in Kuala Lumpur. They are always capable of improvement at our end and I'm sure at the Malaysian end as well. And the practicalities of that I will be discussing with Prime Minister Najib on the ground.
This is a good relationship, goes back a long period of time and this will be my first opportunity to visit the new Prime Minister in Kuala Lumpur. I'll only be on the ground for a few hours but it struck me as a great opportunity to spend a few hours on some practical questions given that people smuggling is a real challenge for us, the Indonesians, the Malaysians and all countries within the region.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that we're short-changing the memory of our Diggers in Fromelles?
PM: I have seen those reports, I am advised by the relevant government officials that all the necessary precautions are being taken to ensure that our Diggers are treated with respect and that the reinterment process is being properly handled.
We will now make doubly certain of that, in the case of this particular and sensitive matter, and the Minister for Veterans' Affairs I am sure will be highly attentive to any representations from veterans' bodies on this questions, veterans' organisations on this question. Every Australian who has lost their life in service of our country must be treated, should be treated with absolute respect and that is the determination of this Government as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you think they'd then be proud if they knew what was happening on certain Navy vessels in the country?
PM: I've seen those reports and I've seen also the statements by the Chief of Navy and can I say I am sure the Chief of Navy has all those matters under active investigation and that appropriate action will be taken.
JOURNALIST: What was your response though when you heard the reports and what -
PM: Well these, these alleged behaviours are disturbing but it's important also to get to the facts of it all and we will await the investigations by the Chief of Navy to establish all those facts.
[Ends]. 


The Prime Minister and the NSW Minister for Housing today announced that 564 homes have commenced construction since February and a further 2,669 dwellings have been approved  -  placing NSW ahead of schedule in implementing the Nation Building  -  Economic Stimulus Plan.
The announcement was made at the Greenacre construction site of 24 new social housing dwellings  -  a project that is supporting 63 direct and indirect jobs, including bricklayers, concreters, carpenters, excavation workers and apprentices who will be the skilled workers of the future.
Progress in NSW is faster than expected:
     * Construction has commenced on 564 of the 851 dwellings as part of Stage 1 of the plan, which will be complete by June next year, with the Commonwealth investing $225 million. This is more housing commencements than any other jurisdiction.
     * Approval has been granted by the Federal Minister for 2,669 dwellings under early Stage 2 proposals, for which the Commonwealth will invest $688 million. These approvals were not due until the end of August.
In total, the Commonwealth is investing almost $2 billion to build 6,500 new social homes in NSW  -  75 per cent of which must be completed by the end of 2010.
The NSW Government also is investing $1 billion to deliver an extra 3,000 homes on top of the Federal Government's commitment.
The investment supports jobs in the short term and creates affordable housing for the long term.
The $7 million project inspected today is contracted to Boronia Estates.
The project includes 12 affordable housing units for families and 12 seniors' units especially designed with easy access and bathrooms modified for the needs of people who may find it difficult to get around as they grow older.
The units have environmentally sustainable features such as water tanks, triple A rated water saving devices, and insulation.
By working together to fast-track housing developments, the Australian and NSW Governments are supporting jobs and businesses, and creating affordable and sustainable housing for Australia's future.


PM NAJIB:Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Honourable Ministers. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and I and members of his delegation, we had a very productive and very useful meeting in which we discussed a number of important areas of common concern.
First and foremost, we touched on how Malaysia can cooperate in terms of combating human trafficking to Australia. And I gave a categorical assurance to Prime Minister Kevin Rudd that we will do all that we can to prevent the flow of illegal immigrants to Australia. And certainly we do not want Malaysia to be known as a transit point for human trafficking.
Both our security agencies will be working very closely together as they are today and in the future, and we stressed the importance of preemptive intelligence, more effective surveillance and more regular exchanges of information between our security agencies.
I informed Prime Minister Kevin Rudd that Malaysia is very keen on the development of Green Technology. A new Ministry of Green Technology has been established, and in this regard next year we will have an exhibition to showcase green technologies worldwide here in Malaysia.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd informed me that Australia has done a lot of work in terms of carbon emission reduction, and in view of the fact that Malaysia is in the process of establishing a coal-fired station on the east coast of Sabah, we would be very keen to know more about the technology that Australia has developed in this regard.
Similarly, in terms of alternative renewable energy, Australia has developed quite significant R&amp;D and technology in terms of solar energy and that is something that we would be very interested to know more about.
We exchanged our views on the current situation, both our economies of Australia and Malaysia, and I briefed Prime Minister Kevin Rudd on the current situation in Malaysia. We touched on some of the other developments, the forthcoming G20 meeting and the role that Australia can play.
And we've also agreed that we should broaden and strengthen our bilateral cooperation, taking into account the goodwill and the many, many years of outstanding collaboration, in fact since the days of the Second World War, the time when we fought against the communists, and so forth, relations between Australia has always been on a strong footing in the fundamental areas.
Another feature of our discussion was on education. We took note of the excellent progress of the three tertiary level institutions that have been established in Malaysia, namely Monash, Curtin and Swinburne, and also the fact that there are something like 20,000 Malaysian students studying in Australia.
So all in all, it's been a very useful discussion and I hope that I would have the opportunity to meet again with Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in the near future so that we can continue the good start that we have established between both of us. Thank you.
PM RUDD: Thank you Prime Minister and it's good to be back in Malaysia and thank you for the warm and friendly reception myself and my delegation have received here.
It's also today that I'm here with the Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith who's had bilateral discussions with his Malaysian counterpart. And from our point of view this underpins and underlines the importance which we in Australia attach to this relationship.
As the Prime Minister has just indicated, we are long-standing partners in areas of security and economic cooperation. We're among each other's top 10 trading partners in both directions and therefore for us at all levels this is an important relationship.
I would like to publicly take the opportunity on this as our first meeting as Prime Ministers to congratulate the Prime Minister on his appointment to this high office within his country. I would also publicly acknowledge and congratulate him for the economic reform program which he is outlining for the Malaysian economy. This is an important and strategic decision for this great country.
Also I congratulate the Prime Minister on his decision to establish a Ministry responsible tor Green Technology. This is an important area for the future. One of the matters we will discuss soon at the G8+ meeting in Italy will be the progress to be made between now and the Copenhagen conference at the end of the year on climate change. The importance of green technologies within that is fundamental.
The Prime Minister in particular made reference to plans in Malaysia to establish a new coal-fired power station and because Australia is an active proponent of carbon capture and storage technologies through our proposed Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, which began operations on the first of July, and also through our own local efforts within Australia through the measures we announced in our recent Budget, we look forward to working with our friends in Malaysia on how we can assist with CCS technologies here.
Given the importance of coal-fired power generation now and into the future, as an energy source and as an impact on greenhouse gas emissions, carbon capture and storage technologies are critical for the future of greenhouse gas emissions but also our long term energy security.
Bilaterally, the areas of cooperation between us are increasing in scope and the Prime Minister has already referred to a number of spheres. In education for example, the three Australian universities which operate here are operating here because of wise decisions taken by the Prime Minister in his earlier life as education minister. Some 15,500 Malaysians at home here in Malaysia are studying at those institutions and we are grateful for their participation in the work of our education institutions. And the 20,000 or so Malaysians who are students in Australia itself are genuinely welcome guests in our country and we welcome their continued presence among us. They are great contributors to our Australian way of life.
Clean technology we have just referred to as well is a new area of bilateral cooperation.
The Foreign Ministers today also I believe spent time with the first group of Afghan teachers who are being trained here in Malaysia through an Australian Development Assistance Cooperation Program, working three ways - Australia, Malaysia, assisting with the future education development of Afghanistan. This is good. It reflects further on the ways in which we can partner together on projects beyond our immediate bilateral relationship.
And further underlining that point, we've agreed also to hold for the first time in our history as a relationship, regular foreign ministerial meetings, the first of which occurred today between our two colleagues.
Regionally, Malaysia and Australia cooperate closely through APEC, we also cooperate closely with the emerging EAS and we also discussed today continued future discussion on the possibilities in the long term of an Asia Pacific community.
The Prime Minister and I also discussed the great challenges we now confront with the global economic recession, buffeting the Malaysian economy, buffeting the Australian economy, buffeting all the economies around the world, underlining the absolute importance of continued work together to reduce the impact of this global economic recession on our peoples, on our economies, and on our futures. Hence underlining the importance of global collaboration through mechanisms such as the G20 and also through the G8+ meeting, which I'll be attending soon in Italy.
One of the items on the agenda of the G8+ meeting will deal with how we restart and conclude the Doha Round of free trade negotiations. This is important given the critical significance of trade to the long term health of our respective economies.
The Prime Minister also in his remarks made particular emphasis of our common challenge with the evil trade of people smuggling. This is an evil trade, people smuggling. It is bad for the individuals concerned, it is bad for the countries concerned. And I would like to publicly thank the Malaysian government and the Prime Minister for their active energetic cooperation with Australia in dealing with this challenge. I know for a fact that several or a number of groups have been prevented from travelling further through the active intervention of the Malaysian authorities and I would publicly place on record our appreciation for the strong efforts taken here in Malaysia on that.
We look forward to working even more closely with our Malaysian counterparts through bilateral, security, migration, border control measures as well as our wider regional cooperation through the Bali process. So Prime Minister I thank you strongly for the efforts you have taken in this particular respect.
Finally, I indicated today that I look forward to receiving the Prime Minister on an official visit to Australia at his earliest opportunity and his earliest convenience. I said to the Prime Minister, who I've met in other capacities over the years, that he would be a welcome guest in our country. And as soon as his commitments here enable him to do so, then we would look forward to the opportunity of receiving him in Australia as one of Australia's close friends in our region together. I thank you.
JOURNALIST: Paul Gates, ABC Australia, for Mr Rudd, getting back to people smuggling if we can very quickly. What practical effects will flow on [inaudible]?
PM RUDD: Already the fabric of police, intelligence, security, border control, migration cooperation is strong. The lines of communication are operating effectively. I believe if we look to the future, one of the areas where we wish to expand our cooperation further is through greater mutual sharing of all relevant areas of intelligence concerning these movements across our wider region, and we intend to do that.
Our agencies cooperate well together. As the Prime Minister indicated before, our security agencies have been working well with each other for many, many decades and the Prime Minister, having previously worked in the area of defence, knows this better than I. We are perfectly relaxed working with each other and I would commend him and his agencies for the excellent cooperation we have received so far. I think we both agree that we can always do more in the future and we look forward to doing that.
PM NAJIB: We've also agreed that our defence chiefs should sit down and discuss if there are other ways in which we can step up our operational effectiveness in combating human trafficking.
PM RUDD: This, as the Prime Minister and I have both indicated, this is an evil trade. It requires all of our common efforts to reduce it and, if we can, stamp it out. And I am pleased that we have seen such high level political resolve here in Malaysia to work with us on that.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Asia-Pacific community [inaudible]. May I know what is the Malaysia viewpoint?
PM NAJIB: We talked about it and we've agreed that we should spend a bit of time to further understand the whole concept. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has said this is a long-term initiative. There is no great urgency in terms of datelines. It's important that we build this understanding and consensus before we move on. So we are quite pleased with that kind of position and Malaysia will engage in understanding the whole concept that he has propounded.
PM RUDD: As I said also in the Shangri-La speech, Australia will later this year or early next, host a one-and-a-half track conference on this question. We think this is the right way to take the proposal forward, tease it out further and build a regional consensus over time. As I said at the very beginning of this, we set ourselves targets of 2020 and that is a ways away, but it is important that the region begins discussing among itself where we wish to be in our long term future.
JOURNALIST: Tom Allard from The Sydney Morning Herald newspaper for the Australian Prime Minister. [inaudible] Can you give an assurance to the Australian people, or any type of guarantee to the Australian people -
PM RUDD: Probably not to you Tom, but go on.
JOURNALIST: - that the number of unauthorised arrivals in Australia will ease in the next 12 months. Is there any prospect of that at all?
PM RUDD: Tom, every country in the region is facing excessive push factors from elsewhere in the wider region, you know that as well as I. Look at the recent civil strife in Sri Lanka, look at continued instability in Afghanistan, look at still some of the exit factors operating elsewhere within the wider Middle East. These are pressures being felt right across our wider region. These pressures exist, therefore our challenge as heads of government is to work together to deal with these pressures at source where we can, in transit where we can, and upon arrival when we can.
That is the challenges we face. Can I say, our Navy is doing an excellent job in the interdictions it has undertaken, our cooperation with our Malaysian friends has been first class as well. But this is going to be a challenge which will be around for quite a while to come because the push factors are derived from security and economic forces which lie beyond the individual control of national governments.
In my recent discussions with the President of Indonesia, President Yudhoyono was quite emphatic about the point that the security factors which I've just referred to, combined with the economic factors which are now alive through the global economic recession, combine to create more push factors in terms of people moving illegally and unlawfully across our wider region. Then you have the added overlay of people smugglers at work.
This will be a challenge around for a long time yet. We the Australian government will take every practical hard-line measure to deal with this. And we are dealing with it with our friends and partners in the region, including Malaysia.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM RUDD: You are getting a double bunger mate. That's Australian slang for two goes, by the way.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] contingencies for where we are going to put [inaudible] Christmas Island [inaudible]
PM RUDD: All these matters, all these matters will be dealt with appropriately, based on cases as they present themselves. The Immigration Minister has all these matters well in hand and will respond to challenges as they arise.
Can I say that the methodical, calm, effective way in which our respective authorities are dealing with this challenge is good, both in Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia. We can always do more, we've all agreed that. The fabric for that cooperation to make a difference to this evil trade is already a strong fabric and we intend to make it stronger.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM NAJIB: New initiative? Well I think we stress on the importance of pre-emptive intelligence report. So we will step up exchange of intelligence information. And as I have alluded earlier that the defence chiefs will be sitting down and looking at ways and means in which we can strengthen our operational capabilities.


Today Prime Minister Rudd of Australia and Chancellor Merkel of Germany reaffirmed the strength of relations between Australia and Germany and committed to continued close cooperation for global action in response to the economic crisis and to working together on other international challenges.
The leaders agreed that the meetings of G20 Leaders in Washington last November and in London this April demonstrated what could be achieved when the world's major developed and emerging markets work together.
They underlined the important role these summits had played in bolstering confidence, helping to arrest the decline in the global economy and laying the foundations for the restoration of growth through a new financial markets' architecture, better regulation, immediate measures to stabilise financial systems and restore credit flows, fiscal stimulus measures, a strong commitment to anti-protectionism, the strengthening of International Financial Institutions which includes significant new support to emerging markets and developing countries.
The leaders agreed that continued global leadership by the G20 was required for a clear and coordinated strategy for sustainable economic growth as the world emerges from the crisis - including discussions of an exit-strategy, i.e. unwinding temporary stimulus and other measures, and addressing global imbalances.
In this context, Prime Minister Rudd expressed his support for Germany's proposed Charter for Sustainable Economic Activity as a significant framework for a global partnership for balanced economic development where sound economic policies generate strong employment growth while preserving the environment and ensuring social protection for vulnerable communities.
Both leaders agreed to work closely together in the lead up to the G20 summit in Pittsburgh on 24-25 September where an issues paper on the Charter approach will be discussed.
The leaders noted that many of the world's poorest citizens have been particularly hard hit by the global economic crisis and reaffirmed their commitment to providing development assistance targeted at the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and improving aid effectiveness, including through increased bilateral cooperation.
They agreed to extend joint efforts beyond existing activities in the Asia-Pacific region to include cooperation in Africa, with a particular focus on water sanitation and to work for a greater focus in the G20 on support to developing countries.
- 2 -
The two leaders called for an ambitious and early conclusion of the WTO Doha Development Round based on the progress achieved last year noting it would be an important contribution to a sustained global economic recovery.
The two leaders underlined the increasing urgency of finding a global solution to the threat of climate change. To this end they committed to closer cooperation in shaping an agreement at the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen in December. They undertook to use the opportunity of the forthcoming meeting of the Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate in L'Aquila, Italy to increase momentum towards a successful outcome at Copenhagen.
They noted the importance of technology and alternative energy solutions in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Chancellor Merkel welcomed Australia's initiative in establishing the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, of which Germany is a founding member.
The two leaders also welcomed the intention to sign a new agreement on the part of the Australia Solar Institute and the Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems to establish a framework for collaboration on solar energy research.
The two leaders emphasised Australia and Germany's common interest in contributing to global stability and security. In this respect, they noted the importance of sustained international efforts to combat the threat of terrorism emanating from Afghanistan.
They reaffirmed strong support for Afghanistan's efforts towards development, peace and stability. They committed to continue their efforts in Afghanistan following a comprehensive approach.
They agreed to extend, in consultation with the Government of Afghanistan, the areas where Australia and Germany work together to achieve effective development. In the immediate term, Australia and Germany agreed to work together to assist in strengthening civil air traffic control in Afghanistan.
They discussed the threat to international security posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Prime Minister Rudd thanked Chancellor Merkel for Germany's support of, and participation in, the International Commission for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament which is being co-chaired by Australia and Japan. They expressed deep concern about North Korea's recent provocative and destabilising behaviour and called for full implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1874.
They welcomed the signature by Presidents Obama and Medvedev of the Joint Understanding for a START follow-on Treaty which commits the United States and Russia to reduce their nuclear arsenals and delivery systems.
The two leaders called on Iran to comply with the demands of the international community as expressed in UN Security Council resolutions. They urged the Iranian government to halt the violence and repressions used against Iranian citizens who are exercising their universal rights to free expression, opinion and peaceful assembly.


Berlin is a truly global city.
It symbolises both Germany's critical role in Europe.
And Germany's stature as a global economic power.
Germany is the world's largest exporting nation.
Germany is the world's fourth-largest economy.
Germany's economic development since the devastation of the war has been a remarkable national achievement.
It has been accompanied by strong German engagement on the international challenges we face.
Germany is a strong and active participant in the councils of the United Nations.
A driver of European integration.
And a critical global partner in the fight against international terrorism.
Modern Berlin symbolises the modern world we all share  -  a truly globalised world  -  a globalised world full of challenges and opportunities.
And to manage these challenges and to maximise these opportunities, we need global policies and governance structures that reflect the realities and the complexities of the modern world.
The global economy is currently in the midst of the fourth great global economic crisis of the last 100 years. 
Two of these global crises occurred in the context of world wars.
And two occurred in peacetime  -  the Great Depression and, three quarters of a century later, the global economic crisis that confronts us all today. 
Both peacetime crises had their roots in an asset price boom caused by loose monetary policy, regulatory failures, and excessive leverage. 
It is worth comparing some of the metrics arising from both crises to fully comprehend the dimensions of the challenge we face today.
Take for example a comparison of the twelve months since the recent peak of world output in April 2008 with the twelve months following the 1920's peak in June 1929.
In the twelve months since April 2008, global stock markets have fallen by more than 40 per cent. 
In the twelve months of the Great Depression, global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent. 
Global trade fell by 17 per cent in the first twelve months of the current global recession, compared to a 10 per cent fall in the first twelve months of the Great Depression. 
Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first twelve months of the current global recession  -  almost identical to the fall experienced in the first twelve months of the Great Depression. 
On these metrics at least, the current economic crisis has in some critical respects been of a comparable magnitude to the challenge faced three quarters of a century ago. 
But there is one difference between now and 1929, and that is the aggressive and coordinated policy response of global governments led by the G20. 
Decisive action by the world's major economies, coordinated by the G20, has prevented this crisis resulting in the prolonged and deep decline in economic activity that the world experienced in the 1930s: 
Unlike the experience of the 1930s, where economic policy settings were initially tightened in many countries, G20 members have rapidly implemented unprecedented macroeconomic stimulus to restore global economic growth. 
In the first twelve months of the current crisis, many of the world's central banks reduced official interest rates to less than one per cent. By comparison, in the Great Depression it took 24 months for official interest rates to reach their lowest point. 
Fiscal stimulus measures alone by G20 members since the crisis began are expected to amount to $US5 trillion by the end of 2010  -  nearly 8 per cent of global GDP. And IMF research indicates that this stimulus has been 50 per cent more effective because it has been coordinated across countries. In the 1930s, governments contracted rather than expanded their economic activity, thereby compounding the collapse in the private economy.
Further, cooperation in the G20 has helped the world resist beggar thy neighbour policies in trade and finance. In Washington G20 leaders committed to a tariff standstill. While the WTO has identified some slippage, overall it reports that the international community is holding to this, thereby saving the world from a repeat of the tit-for-tat protectionism that choked off recovery in the 1930s. 
G20 Leaders also agreed on measures to stabilise their financial systems and restore credit flows, taking decisive steps to restore the health of their financial systems by dealing with impaired assets, recapitalising their banks, and ensuring that financial institutions could support the lending required to sustain the economic recovery. Reinforcing this is a globally coordinated series of specific regulatory reforms that will underpin stronger and more integrated systems in the future  -  also critical to restore global confidence given the carnage wrought by free-market mayhem in financial markets in the lead up to the catastrophic events of 2007/8.
A further outcome from the London Summit was the agreement to support developing countries by strengthening the resources of the International Financial Institutions. Leaders committed to make an additional $US500 billion available to the IMF and to support a $US250 billion allocation of Special Drawing Rights which will boost the foreign exchange reserves of all countries. No comparable global institution existed or was deployed in the 1930s.
These coordinated and substantial policy responses have contributed to the recent rise in global consumer and business confidence.
They have also supported the first tentative signs of global economic recovery.
Financial markets have stabilised, with financial stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Index increasing 35 percent during the second quarter - the index's biggest quarterly advance since 1989.
The IMF has indicated that it will revise up its forecast for the global recovery, from 1.9 per cent to 2.4 per cent in 2010.
Likewise, just last month, the OECD upgraded its growth forecast for the OECD area, its first upward revision in two years. 
These so-called “green shoots” are a welcome respite from the relentless months of bad news that preceded them. 
But they are not a reason for complacency.
We are by no means out of the woods yet.
A global crisis of the magnitude of the current global economic crisis presents two great challenges. 
First, the immediate challenge has been to put a floor under the downward trajectory of both confidence and real economic activity. 
For the last nine months the world has been focussed on this immediate challenge.
So far, this has been successfully prosecuted by national governments and underpinned by the active coordination of the G20.
However, the second great challenge of an economic crisis  -  potentially even more complex than the efforts to address the fall  -  is the challenge to build a sustainable path back to recovery. 
In the late 1930s, the trajectory of global recovery was long, painful and prone to setbacks. 
Global industrial output did not bottom out until 36 months after the crisis began. 
And global industrial output did not return to its 1929 levels until nearly nine years later. 
The scale of wealth destruction and credit market dislocation retarded the recovery and led to nearly a decade of below trend growth. 
Arguably, the recovery period, marked as it was by high unemployment and unstable growth, was more damaging than the initial years of the crisis. 
Today, as we gradually move from the first phase of the financial crisis into the second, we must remember that the challenge of recovery could be at least as great as the challenge of the crisis itself at its absolute height at the end of 2008. 
Furthermore, the challenge of the recovery is now even more complex than it was in the past due to the exponential globalisation of economic activity, turbocharged by the growth in financial flows, financial assets and the new technologies underpinning the intricate interdependencies of global financial markets. 
The rapid globalisation of financial assets has been remarkable.
The value of global financial assets grew from less than 100 per cent of GDP in 1990 to nearly 400 per cent in 2007. 
Foreign investors own one in three government bonds around the world, up from just one in nine in 1990. 
One in four equities and one in five private debt securities is now held by a foreign investor, triple the level in 1990.
These statistics highlight both the interdependence of the global economy and the absolute necessity that we act cooperatively as we move to address the emerging financial and economic challenges of the future.
There is no alternative.
Uncoordinated national responses are no longer adequate.
Everything literally is now connected to everything else  -  as graphically reflected in the rapid and synchronised nature of the current global economic downturn arising from the sub-prime crisis in the United States in 2007.
The world still faces at least seven complex economic challenges associated with the recovery. 
First, while confidence has improved, downside risks remain and recent indications suggest that more bad news is still to come.
Recent unemployment data indicate that jobs are being lost faster than expected. 
In the last week, both the European and US unemployment rates have reached 9.5 per cent, with leaders in both regions indicating that they expect unemployment to rise even further. 
These facts make clear that, as the financial sector crisis thaws, the trajectory of the real economy is still uncertain. 
That is why, for example, Bob Zoellick, President of the World Bank, warned only yesterday that the uncertainty of the current global recovery 
meant that we should be cautious about any premature withdrawal of current fiscal effort.
Second, credit markets continue to be impaired in many countries. 
The IMF has again revised up its estimate of total write-downs on financial assets to $4 trillion across the advanced economies  -  a staggering amount equal to about six per cent of global GDP. 
Several countries have not acted as decisively as others to address the toxic assets on the balance sheets of their major banks  -  creating continued uncertainty in global credit markets. 
Overall credit to the private sector in advanced economies is still forecast by the IMF to decline during both 2009 and 2010. 
Third, we face the challenges of lifting long-term growth. 
After the recession has passed, the global economy may continue to experience below trend economic growth for some time as the world adjusts to lower leverage and lower consumption in many of the major economies. 
We are already seeing more conservative borrowing and lending practices, which will constrain consumption and investment for some time. 
In the United States, business investment has now fallen by more than 16 per cent over the last year  -  this is the largest fall since quarterly records began (in the 1950's).
Fourth, we face the overarching challenge to address global imbalances. 
Rebalancing savings and investment in key countries  -  particularly in Asia  -  to maximise sustainable global economic growth will be a key challenge. 
This involves complex and sensitive policy matters, primarily focused on structural change and greater exchange rate flexibility in various major economies. 
However unless we address these challenges as part of a collective global growth renewal strategy, we will remain vulnerable to further shocks. 
Fifth, several major countries face significant fiscal challenges. 
Rising fiscal deficits in the United States are beginning to increase the yields of long-term government bonds. 
And there are concerns that this will lead to higher inflation in the future.
Medium term fiscal exit strategies to return budgets to balance will be critical for a long-term recovery.
Sixth, many economies will face the broader challenge of gradually exiting from the extraordinary policies they have put in place. 
The last 12 months have seen the implementation of extraordinary global policy measures including unprecedented fiscal, monetary and financial market interventions. 
As we move towards recovery, all governments will reach a point where these policies are neither sustainable nor desirable. 
But their withdrawal presents a series of risks to global recovery, including potentially negative impacts on demand, risks to price stability, and continued threats to the recovery of global financial markets.
The withdrawal of these interventions must be timely and maximally coordinated to avoid unnecessary economic and financial market dislocations.
Seventh, developing countries entered this crisis later than many advanced economies, but the consequences of the crisis for them will continue to be severe. 
Developing countries face a sharp reversal of capital flows and declining commodity export revenues. 
Emerging markets as a whole are expected to experience net capital outflows in 2009 of more than 1 per cent of their GDP and will likely face a refinancing funding gap of $1.8 trillion in 2009.
Again, this was the burden of Bob Zoellick's intervention yesterday.
These seven challenges represent potential roadblocks to recovery.
Unless we deal with these challenges as part of an effective coordinated strategy.
While collectively we may have responded effectively to the worst period of the immediate financial crisis, we will not be out of the woods until together we have built a credible path back to sustainable economic growth for the long term. 
As we turn from crisis to recovery, we must therefore consider the great global governance questions of our time.
Are our existing institutional structures adequate to deal with the challenges we face? 
Are our existing global policy and regulatory frameworks adequate to deal with these challenges?
Indeed, are our existing conceptual frameworks adequate to deal with the great challenges we face that now transcend much of the traditional ideological divide?
Taking the question of institutional structures first, the recent emergence of the G20 leaders' process from the existing G20 finance ministers' process has been a welcome development. 
The G20 is an emerging global institution that balances the twin but often competing demands of efficiency and legitimacy. 
The G20 is a broadly representative group  -  five European members; five from the Americas; five from Asia; and five from elsewhere (including Australia).
Its legitimacy is drawn from its representativeness.
It incorporates two-thirds of global population.
85 per cent of world GDP.
And it encompasses the world's major faith traditions, including the largest Muslim nation in the world Indonesia.
Yet the G20 has remained small enough to work nimbly, rapidly and effectively in the face of the current crisis.
The Group of 20  -  the G20  -  had its origin in the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997.
The Asian Financial Crisis showed how quickly financial contagion could spread.
It also demonstrated the importance of coordinated responses.
In the immediate aftermath of the Asian Financial crisis, G7 Finance Ministers met in Birmingham. 
They realised that action by the G7 was not enough  -  there were a range of systemically important countries outside the G7 whose collaboration was required  -  both developed and developing. 
In many respects, this was the genesis of the Group of 20.
Its formal inception was here in Germany two years after the Asian Financial Crisis.
In December 1999, with the German and Canadian Finance Ministers as hosts, the first G20 ministerial meeting was held right here in Berlin. 
In a perhaps prophetic statement, the inaugural chair of the G20 and then Canadian Finance Minister stated, "There is virtually no major aspect of the global economy or international financial system that will be outside of the group's purview".
So it is perhaps both symbolic  -  and significant  -  that almost exactly a decade later, and once again in Berlin, we are discussing the next phase in the G20's evolution.
Since 1999 the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors have been meeting annually.
The G20 has promoted open and constructive discussion between industrial and emerging market economies on key policy questions related to global economic stability. 
Much of its work has been low-key but critically important to garnering the political support needed to progress major international economic policy initiatives.
The G20 was the circuit breaker in securing global agreement on limiting tax havens in 2005  -  breaking a deadlock in the OECD.
It provided momentum and technical solutions that were critical in the IMF's agreement on quota and voice reform in 2006 and 2007  -  where the G7 was unable to do so.
And in 2004, the G20 adopted its own Accord  -  a valuable guiding document for the G20's annual discussions of countries' planned policy reforms, as set out in the G20 Reform Agenda. 
The G20 therefore has a wealth of institutional expertise on the questions of financial crises and wider financial reform  -  an institutional expertise not easy to replicate elsewhere and, most critically, one which has been shaped by long institutional engagement between the major developed and emerging economies.
In the current crisis, it has shown its capacity to play a crucial role providing political will, policy coordination and institutional momentum to address the global challenges we face.
No institution is perfect.
And the G20 certainly is not.
But, to paraphrase Churchill, the G20 is the least imperfect of the various institutional alternatives on offer.
And we should build on it.
The G20 is an organisation that was born in crises. 
The Finance Ministers process was born out of the Asian Financial Crisis. 
And the G20 Leaders' process was born out of the current global financial crisis. 
In both settings, the G20 has shown that it can be a forum for action. 
But as the G20 turns its focus to the post crisis challenges, it is appropriate to consider what tools the G20 will need to turn itself from a ‘fire fighting' organisation into the kind of global institution that can address some of our longer term global economic challenges. 
Beyond institutional change, however, we also need to consider the conceptual framework within which we discuss and develop policy responses to the future global economic challenges we face.
The current crisis has fundamentally discredited the notion of self-regulating global financial markets.
What we have witnessed in the current crisis is a conspicuous example of market failure on a grand scale.
A failure of regulation.
A failure of transparency.
A corruption of incentives within private institutions.
But the crisis must not be allowed to result in over-correction and to strangle the natural dynamism of properly regulated free markets.
In fact, the crisis has underlined the importance of rejecting free market fundamentalism on the one hand and “over regulation” on the other, which can choke off the vitality of the market economy and erect barriers to global trade and investment. 
There is value in charting a global course between these extremes. 
To identify a set of common principles which can guide our coordinated global response to the crisis and frame our efforts to restore positive economic growth.
This is why Australia welcomes global consideration of Germany's proposal for a Charter for Sustainable Economic Activity. 
We welcome the charter's aim: to establish a framework to balance stability, growth and sustainability. 
And we welcome the inclusive multilateral approach that Germany proposes in developing this charter. 
The Charter aims to give the G20 a set of core values that can offer an overarching framework to address the range of future challenges that we are likely to face in the global economy.
If this Charter is to reach its potential, the voices of developing and non-G20 countries must be captured in these early stages.
It will need to be a living document open to all.
A non-binding framework that is responsive and adaptive to our developing understanding of what is needed to achieve sustainable growth.
In other words, a normative rather than statutory framework.
But with such a framework in place, collectively we are stronger to respond to the challenges that lie ahead.
Rather than constantly debating global economic policy from first principles, we would have an agreed conceptual framework that is anchored in the core principle of a properly and transparently regulated global market economy  -  one that maximises individual opportunity while minimising systemic risk.
Such a framework can help in:
Supporting macroeconomic stability and prevent crises from re-emerging, contain inflation, deliver sustainable economic and employment growth, and ameliorate inherently destabilising global financial imbalances between surplus and deficit economies.
Supporting sustainable public finance by providing a framework for returning budget deficits to balance across the economic cycle and to contain net debt within globally reasonable parameters.
Supporting properly regulated private financial markets which combine efficiency with transparency, strong oversight and global regulatory cooperation. 
Supporting social sustainability, valuing employment, opportunity and fairness  -  also helping to sustain the necessary political constituency support for the inevitable vicissitudes that arise from open markets.
Supporting environmental sustainability as the global economy adjusts to a more carbon-constrained reality.
Supporting open trade and investment regimes that eschew protectionism. 
Supporting developing countries and protect the poorest global citizens by providing greater access to global markets, better private capital flows and more effective development assistance. 
In all these areas, it is the sustainability of global economic recovery that is key.
And sustainability is demonstrably an integrated concept across a range of policy domains.
Germany has a proud history in leading global accords.
Australia remembers the instrumental role Germany played in bringing together the historic 2004 G20 Accord. 
We believe this new Charter concept can grow through careful nurturing both through the G20 process and beyond.
If achieved, such a Charter could reflect an historic convergence of developing, emerging and advanced economies' views about what sustainable economic activity really means and how we go about achieving this common aim through properly coordinated national policy actions.
Such a public declaration would also help focus the future work of the G20 at summit level.
The task now presented to Leaders in the lead up to Pittsburgh is to secure as widespread support as possible for such a Charter  -  to help guide global policy decisions as economies emerge from the immediate crisis in the period ahead.
In this respect, with both an over-arching policy charter and a revitalised, more representative institutional structure in the form of the G20, we will arguably be better placed to deal with the many practical challenges that lie ahead.
The world needs a political clearing house to deal nimbly, quickly and effectively with the challenges that arise and break the negotiating stalemates that otherwise occur in technical negotiating forums.
The G20, galvanised by a new global charter on sustainable economic growth, offers the best mechanism to achieve this.
This morning I met Chancellor Merkel.
We discussed how our respective economies were weathering the global economic storm.
In Australia we have taken strong, early decisive action in financial markets, in fiscal and monetary policy and in labour market programs to deal with rising unemployment.
Australia has so far weathered the global economic crisis better than most countries. 
According to the most recent OECD economic outlook:
Australia has the fastest growth in the OECD. 
Australia has a lower budget deficit than any of the major advanced economies. 
We have the lowest public net debt of any of the major advanced economies. 
We have the second lowest unemployment of any of the major advanced economies. 
And we are one of the few countries in the OECD to have so far avoided falling into a technical recession. 
The Government's early and decisive action to address the economy has helped to cushion Australia from the worst aspects of the global crisis. 
Australia has achieved this through coordinated policy action at home involving: 
First, stabilisation of domestic financial markets by providing guarantees for deposit holders and for banks' wholesale funding. (In fact, of the world's 11 remaining AA rated banks, four are Australian). 
Second, a rapid reduction in interest rates by the Reserve Bank of Australia in the last 9 months by a total of 425 basis points. 
Third, a three stage fiscal stimulus strategy involving 2 per cent of GDP in short term stimulus, just over 3 per cent of GDP in medium term stimulus and a further 1.2 per cent of GDP in long term nation building infrastructure. 
Fourth, a rapid expansion of labour market programs focussed on retrenched workers, young Australians and particular high unemployment regions in what we call a Jobs and Training Compact. 
The overall result of these measures is that:
Our economy grew in the March quarter at 0.4 per cent. 
Unemployment has risen to 5.7 per cent. 
Our budget deficit peaks at 4.9 per cent of GDP. 
And our net debt will peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP. 
However, 2009 remains a very stormy year ahead and none of our economies are out of the woods yet. 
Chancellor Merkel and I also discussed Germany's proposal for a global charter and the way Australia and Germany could work together and shape its future.
We also agreed that what we have been able to achieve in the G20 is a great example of how much both countries benefit when we work together.
This is for the simple reason that despite our different geographies, our different regions and our different histories, Australia and Germany have much in common.
We are both robust democracies and open economics.
We are both committed to making a real and positive difference to the global order.
We are both active participants in the institutions of our respective regions in Europe and Asia.
We both recognise that nations benefit more from cooperation than from a race to the bottom in politics and policies.
Last week Chancellor Merkel made a speech in Washington when she was honoured with an award for her contribution to trans-Atlantic relations.
In that speech, the Chancellor said that human dignity was the fundamental shared value on both sides of the Atlantic.
I'd like to think that even goes a bit further than that - the values Chancellor Merkel spoke of are very much shared in the Pacific as well.
And as Chancellor Merkel pointed out, this respect for human dignity influences our policy choices.
It influences the way we approach public policy at home.
It has a profound influence on our foreign policies abroad.
It shapes the way we craft economic policies  -  in particular in these times of crisis.
And it shapes how we approach critical long-term challenges like climate change.
It is fair to say that Australia and Germany don't always turn to each other first when we think in terms of international relations.
Germany, naturally, has a significant focus on Europe and its environs.
Australia has been more focused on the dynamic and rapidly changing Asia Pacific region.
But there is no reason that geography should constrain our engagement.
And today Chancellor Merkel and I made that clear with agreement to work together more closely on the great global challenges that confront us all  -  challenges that increasingly are no longer constrained by geography.
We agreed today to strengthen our security engagement in Afghanistan and on counter-terrorism.
We agreed to strengthen our cooperation on seeking a global solution to the pressing threat of climate change and to closer collaboration on renewable energy, including solar research.
And we agreed that working together more closely on development assistance will help us to build a better and fairer world.
These are all global challenges where, by strengthening our cooperation, we can both deliver better results for the world.
Tomorrow I go to Italy to join other leaders in the Major Economies Forum.
This forum will focus on trade, on climate change and on food security.
I look forward to working with Chancellor Merkel at those meetings.
It is another example of the shared interests Australia and Germany have.
And another example of how our two great nations can work together in new ways in a new and expanding global partnership for the future.


E&amp;OE
PM: Well I have just had the opportunity for a good discussion with the Holy Father and we covered a range of areas of interest to himself and of course of interest to the Australian people. The Holy Father remembers well, his visit to Australia and to World Youth Day and indicated how much he had enjoyed his time in Australia.
Beyond that, we also discussed the whole challenge of interfaith dialogue. I emphasised to the Holy Father the work that we would be doing ourselves in our region with interfaith dialogue, building on agreements we have already reached with President Yudhoyono of Indonesia.
I also mentioned to the Holy Father that I had spoken to President Yudhoyono this morning, in relation to the outcomes of the Indonesian election. And I look forward to interfaith dialogue work with President Yudhoyono in the period ahead.
Also late this year in Australia we will be convening the World Parliament of Religions and this will be an important step forward in overall understanding and tolerance between different religious traditions.
We also spoke about the whole challenge of religious freedom as well. We spent some time also speaking about climate change. In fact the Holy Father was following closely events in L'Aquila and the importance of climate change for the future.
We exchanged our views on that, as I did subsequently with the Cardinal's Secretary of State on climate change as well. I think it is the view of the Holy See, though the Holy See should speak for itself that all leaders of the world right now carry a great responsibility to forge an agreement on this critical area of climate change, given that we have such a short period of time to go between now and Copenhagen. The discussions on climate change went for some time.
Of course, we also discussed the Blessed Mary MacKillop and the Holy Father remembers well his visit to Mary MacKillop's tomb in Sydney. I mentioned to the Holy Father that of course the process of canonisation was one entirely internal to the catholic church, but in Australia, from the Catholic community and beyond the Catholic community, there was a great deal of affection and respect for May MacKillop as a strong woman, a strong leader, a strong worker for the poor, a pioneer in education and in fact, some of her education models were adopted subsequently by various state education systems around the country.
It was, and I indicated further that the good sisters of St Josephs were very excited about the process which is currently under way and asked me to convey that to him. I think I will leave it there and of course Ambassador Fisher was with me for the discussion that we had with the Cardinal Secretary of State. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: I believe you may have also discussed the (inaudible) the Pope's Encyclical. How do you  - 
PM: We discussed a few other things as well I just didn't want to give you a complete sort of menu.
JOURNALIST: How do you enmesh his views of a kinder more balanced world with the sort of political realignment that you say must happen particularly in the financial (inaudible)
PM: My own personal view, having read the summary of the Pope's Encyclical is that it is a very good document and it is worthy of serious consideration by leaders around the world. My own view, is that what we need to do with the future regulation of financial markets, and more broadly the regulation of markets at large, is to make sure we always have this balance between the efficiency of markets on the one hand, and the impact of the operation of markets on human beings on the other.
That I think, (inaudible) essence of what the Pope's encyclical was saying, although the Encyclical and the Holy Father of course speak for themselves.
So the challenge I think as we craft new rules for the global financial system is to get this, and the global economic system, is to get this balance right - so markets are inherently efficient and dynamic and creating great wealth, but at the same time we must have systems which properly protect people. And remember the end point of all of our work in politics is to build better lives for human beings, not simply a materialist endpoint in itself.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the Pontiff's reaction when you raised the issue of (inaudible)
PM: I think the best characterisation, but I would much rather the Holy See spoke for itself on these questions, was, the Holy Father's great interest in this extraordinary woman's life. And we did discuss her life for some time and it is obviously a visit to the tomb in Sydney has left a big impression on the Holy Father.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday, Sepp Blatter asked you to pass on his regards, I wonder whether the Pontiff put his blessings on our world cup bid?
PM: That is a very very, shall I say, acute question. And it would be wrong of me to answer in the affirmative.
I did indicate however that the President of FIFA had passed on regards to the Holy Father.
JOURNALIST: The Pope didn't say either way whether he was supportive of our bid or not?
PM: We then spoke about the important role of sport and the world game, as a propagation of healthy pursuits of young people around the world. That is where the conversation went but I did take the occasion to mention Mr Blatter and FIFA's keen interest in the game and what could be done to support young people around the world.
Better run, got to go to L'Aquila.


Two writers have been jointly awarded the Prime Minister's Prize for Australian History 2008.
The Prize is awarded for outstanding publications which contribute significantly to the understanding of our nation's history.
Tom Griffiths has been awarded joint first place for Slicing the Silence: Voyaging to Antarctica, along with Robert Kenny for The Lamb Enters the Dreaming: Nathanael Pepper and the Ruptured World.
The winners were chosen from 62 nominations, demonstrating the exceptional strength of Australian historical research and the extent to which Australian history continues to inspire many of our talented writers, researchers and producers.
In addition to the joint winners, a further three nominations were shortlisted: 
• John Fitzgerald for Big White Lie: Chinese Australians in White Australia; 
• Philip Jones for Ochre and Rust: Artefacts and Encounters on Australian Frontiers; and
• Paul Rudd, Stephen Amezdroz, Tony Wright, Wain Fimeri and Matthew Thomason for Captain Cook: Obsession and Discovery.
The joint winners and the short-listed nominees have each made a major contribution to the study of Australian history.
The Prize is Australia's pre-eminent award for excellence in the field. The winners each receive an embossed gold medallion and will share a tax free grant of $100,000.
The Prime Minister's Prize for Australian History will continue in 2009.
Advisory Committee Judging Comments
Slicing the Silence: Voyaging to Antarctica by Tom Griffiths, University of New South Wales Press, 2007
Slicing the Silence is a highly original and beautifully crafted book, which is a model for communicating complex historical research in engaging and widely accessible ways. Griffiths blends his own experiences of journeying to Antarctica with those of the explorers and scientists who went before him - so producing a multi-layered history of human interactions with the polar environment of the South. Slicing the Silence offers a broader, international view of Australian engagement with the wider world, and addresses the new global era of trans-national histories which span disciplines and continents within Australian spheres of human engagement. Griffiths strikingly manages to convey the embodied experience of the place, to make the reader wonder how they themselves might cope with the snow, the cold and the silence. It is an eminently readable and highly enjoyable book which will meet the test of scholars and general readers  -  a rare combination. The book opens up a new dimension of the Australian past and present; and which also, combined with its sheer literary merit, already has claims to become a ‘classic' in the body of modern Australian historical writing.
The Lamb Enters the Dreaming: Nathanael Pepper and the Ruptured World by Robert Kenny, Scribe Publications, 2007
The Lamb Enters the Dreaming is a creatively conceived and evocatively written book which offers a genuinely original way of exploring the hidden chapters (or invisible world) of cultural encounters on the Australian frontier. It explores the history of ideas behind each culture's ‘belief systems' and challenges much orthodoxy through a profound reconsideration of how Indigenous people and Europeans thought about each other; and of the continuities which actually existed between aspects of their metaphysical systems of religious belief. By tracing such a subtle and yet huge issue through the life of one individual  -  an Aboriginal man, Nathanael Pepper, who converted to Christianity in 1860 - the author takes great risks and yet triumphs in writing an account which elevates the local and the specific to the universal. The Lamb Enters the Dreaming is a scholarly yet accessible book, elegantly written and powerfully argued. Kenny is meticulous in his use of existing sources: but he also goes beyond that and shows how historical imagination is not the enemy of accuracy. The Lamb Enters the Dreaming provides a new way of looking at a crucial aspect of Australian colonial history in a way that is truly original, surprising and profound.
Ochre and Rust: Artefacts and Encounters on Australian Frontiers by Philip Jones, Wakefield Press, 2007
Ochre and Rust is an elegantly written and illustrated book which tells a history of frontier encounters through material objects, mainly those now housed in the South Australian Museum. Drawing on the multiple disciplines of anthropology, linguistics, archaeology and the humanities, and their interaction with Indigenous records, the book provides new insights by dealing with perceptions and stories from both sides of the frontier. The novelty is not so much in any particular discovery but in its mode of narrative: working out widely from a particular artefact and providing a deep reflection on cross cultural encounters. It is acutely perceptive, balanced and informative. The book unfolds like a museum on the page, guiding readers into an exploration of complex ideas about cultural adaptation, exchange and the history of collecting. While not denying that the frontier was a place of violence and dispossession, Jones also recognises that it produced cultural exchange and adaptation in both Indigenous and European cultures. Ochre and Rust is a highly accessible and exciting approach to Australian history.
Big White Lie: Chinese Australians in White Australia by John Fitzgerald, University of New South Wales Press, 2007
Big White Lie is an important study of the experiences of Chinese Australians under the White Australia Policy. Of particular importance is the way that it foregrounds Chinese Australian experiences, rather than white experiences or perceptions of the Chinese in Australia. Fitzgerald chronicles the story of Chinese Australian communities on their own terms, working closely with archival documents produced by (rather than about) the Chinese Australian community. It traces the lineage of families across countries and centuries and their connections to business, religious and social networks that would be unknown to most Australians. Fitzgerald convincingly debunks the claim that Chinese Australians did not embrace supposedly unique ‘Australian values'. The experiences of Chinese Australians have been examined by a range of previous studies, but have never been analysed using such a diversity of sources and approaches. Big White Lie is a genuinely fresh ‘take' on this aspect of the Australian story, and is extremely valuable for this reason. It should stimulate further research in the field and explode stereotypes.
Captain Cook: Obsession and Discovery, Paul Rudd, Stephen Amezdroz, Tony Wright, Wain Fimeri, Matthew Thomason, Film Australia, 2007
Captain Cook: Obsession and Discovery is a remarkably impressive, four part, documentary television series that tells the story of the life and voyages of Captain James Cook for a broad audience. The series combines a high-quality visual style with a gripping narrative and historical rigour. The producers of this series have succeeded in making a highly engaging, sophisticated, and extremely accessible historical documentary. The writers have come to grips with the latest Cook scholarship, and they use archival materials (such as maps and journals) with power. A particular strength is the judiciously chosen interviews with all the leading current international Cook scholars, together with interactions with indigenous community leaders who draw out the ‘conquest' side of the voyages with poignant power. Adept use of the “Endeavour” replica gives the viewer a special sense of actually travelling with the great mariner. Captain Cook shows that it is possible to take on a large and difficult topic and present it in a way that never ‘talks down' to the audience. Indeed, Captain Cook shows how well a visual medium can be used to convey historical research and materials. High-quality historical documentaries, such as this major work, strongly point to new ways of presenting history in the community through the latest advances in the visual arts and technologies.


The Global Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) Institute was launched internationally today by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd at an event jointly hosted by the President of the United States, Barack Obama and Italy's Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi in L'Aquila, Italy.
The launch followed a meeting of the Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate.
The Global CCS Institute is an international initiative, led by Australia, to speed up the development of carbon capture and storage technology, and reduce the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere.
Carbon capture and storage is a process that captures carbon dioxide (C02) and transports it to a site where it is injected deep underground for long-term safe and secure storage.
The Institute will play a significant role in delivering the G8's goal of developing at least 20 fully integrated industrial-scale CCS demonstration projects around the world by 2020.
Despite the growth of renewable energy, fossil fuels, especially coal, will continue to be a major source of energy for some time to come. 
Without global action like CCS, fossil fuel emissions are forecast to increase by 130 percent by 2050.
That is why Australia believes that CCS technology is so important.
Since the creation of the Global CCS Institute in September 2008, 131 entities have become Foundation Members, including 23 national governments and over 100 major companies and organisations.
All members of the G8 are Foundation Members of the Institute.
The Prime Minister today also announced further appointments to the Institute's International Advisory Panel which will be chaired by the former President of the World Bank, Mr James Wolfensohn.
The new appointments are Lord Nicholas Stern from the UK, former Executive Director of the International Energy Agency, Mr Claude Mandil and the Executive Director of the Indian Energy and Resources Institute, Dr Leena Srivastava.
The Australian-led initiative will drive the deployment of CCS projects and is a practical demonstration of what can be achieved when global objectives are aligned.
The Australian Government has committed A$100 million a year to support this work and a further A$2 billion to support the construction of CCS demonstration projects in Australia.
Further information is available at www.globalccsinstitute.com.



MITCHELL: Prime Minister thank you very much for speaking with us.
PM: Pleasure to be with you Neil.
MITCHELL: An Australian man is in custody in China accused of spying, the Rio Tinto executive Stern Hu. Now several analysts here have said it is ludicrous what has happened to him. Do you agree?
PM: Well we're still establishing all the facts Neil and our first responsibility is to get consular access to Mr Hu and I understand from discussions with the Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith that access has now been given. I think that access will occur fairly soon. We'll just proceed through this step by step. Our objective is of course to secure Mr Hu's release and that is going to take all of our combined efforts and we'll move through it methodically.
MITCHELL: If you're determined to secure his release, this is a tough question but maybe you don't want to answer it, but do you believe he was spying for Australia?
PM: Look the Foreign Minister is handling this in Australia and I am just reluctant to go into any sorts of detail on this because this is a subject of continued discussions with the Chinese authorities. I think the best thing to do is simply regard this as a consular case as the Foreign Minister has indicated. And we will continue to deal with the authorities in Beijing, in Shanghai, and of course as you know the Foreign Minister has called in the Chinese acting ambassador to insist that we obtain consular access consistent with our consular agreement with the Chinese and I understand that is now being granted.
This is a difficult case. I fully accept that. It's going to be tough, we have tough consular cases around the world from time to time but we're going to work our way through this one systematically.
MITCHELL: Why at a consular level, why not a higher level, there seems to be massive implications for relations between the two countries and for trade?
PM: Well we're dealing with it as a consular case because we have Australians who are charged with various offences around the world from time to time and we have to deal with it with the law enforcement authorities to begin with.
Once that occurs and as is appropriate, we then raise things at the political level but we do it in a systematic staged way once we've established all the facts. And that's what we're doing in this case as well. I also emphasise that the Government through the Foreign Minister and the Department is in close contact with Rio Tinto and in close contact with Mr Hu's family and we are working through this with all of our resources deployed. As I said, we will make other representations to the Chinese Government at other levels as is appropriate and when it's appropriate.
MITCHELL: But the allegation here is spying. I mean it's not a drug offence or something like that, it is something that involves the national interest of this country.
PM: Well you know from your previous discussions with Mr Howard over many years, Neil, that any Prime Minister or the Foreign Minister doesn't discuss intelligence matters and I don't propose to break that convention. As the Foreign Minister Mr Smith has already indicated, this case is best treated as a consular matter and that is the way we're approaching it and as I said all necessary actions and representations will be taken by us once we've established all the facts.
MITCHELL: Do you know where Mr Hu is? Do you know what his condition is, because his family doesn't?
PM: Well, as I said, my advice from Australia - and I stand to be corrected on this because I am on the other side of the world and it's midnight here - is that consular access is about to be granted by the Chinese.
And as I said when I indicated before we've got to move through this matter step by step. First thing is to get access to Mr Hu, secondly establish his condition and thirdly the facts surrounding the grounds under which the Chinese authorities have taken him into custody and I've got to say the three other Chinese nationals with him.
MITCHELL: The Chinese say they have sufficient evidence, the reports here are that in China that's code for we've got him locked up and he's not getting out, we've got the case. You know China better than anybody, better than most people in this country. What are they saying when they say they've got sufficient evidence?
PM: Well first of all I haven't seen the transcript of those remarks from the Chinese Government or whichever Chinese authority is supposed to have said that. Secondly I know from my conversations with the Foreign Minister Stephen Smith that it's just a case of step by step establishing the facts, his health, his condition and then moving on from there in terms of whatever other actions we need to take.
We take this case very seriously, we take Mr Hu's condition very seriously, we take the plight of any Australian around the world who finds themself in consular difficulty seriously.
There are many, many cases Neil which don't even make it to public attention that we're dealing with which involve high levels of sensitivity. This one is going to be hard, it will be difficult but we'll work our way through it.
MITCHELL: Well do I assume Australia is standing by this man?
PM: Absolutely. We stand by every Australian citizen who finds themselves in difficulty abroad. At any time around the world we've got about a million Australians offshore. Many of those Australians will find themselves in difficult from time to time, some will find themselves arrested by local authorities on various charges in some of the strangest parts of the world.
The good thing about our diplomats and our consular officials abroad is that they do everything possible to intervene in these cases and often it takes some time to resolve them but we're going to work our way through this. And as I said beyond the consular level in raising things as appropriate at the political level, we'll do that step by step.
MITCHELL: So you will the Chinese Premier at some stage if it's not sorted out?
PM: As I said we'll take it step by step. We'll just work our way through it and then the Foreign Minister and the advice he gets from his officials on the ground, we'll make judgments about what political representations are then appropriate, if they are appropriate. Our objectives of course are to support Mr Hu in these circumstances as we would any other Australian citizen. That's the responsibility of all Australian Governments.
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister we have here a man who is accused of spying for this country against another country. That  -  does that jeopardise relations and trade between Australia and China?
PM: Well to repeat what I said before Neil, I don't comment on any matters concerning intelligence and that's the longstanding practice of previous Australian Governments.
On the second question you raised, which is about our relationship with China  -  look, if you back over the last 30 years there have been ebbs and flows and bumps along the road, that is part and parcel of managing any bilateral relationship. I am confident we can get through this. This is a relationship which is very broad but we take the interests of any single Australian national very seriously and we'll be deploying all efforts in support of this Australian citizen as well.
MITCHELL: It has been described that what is happening is a ludicrous tactic because of the Chinese being upset about the deal - Chinalco and Rio - falling through. If that is widely interpreted, any businessman operating in China would have to be very nervous at the moment, wouldn't they?
PM: Well we have, as I am advised by the Foreign Minister, no information to that effect but as I said our challenge in the immediate period ahead is to establish all the facts. I think you would know from dealing with any cases, even in Australia, that it takes a while to establish exactly what has occurred in each circumstance involving the local police. We're going through that with the Chinese now and it will take some time.
As for the security of other Australians within China, I think it's a challenge which faces all Australians either living or working abroad, working within the fabric of the laws of the land. Of course sometimes our Australians abroad are working in countries with a vastly different legal system to what we have in Australia and that presents real problems. And that's why we've got you know, the best people we have in our consular and diplomatic posts to try and look after Australians in these circumstances.
And to say what I have said before, we'll be in there doing everything that is necessary to support Mr Hu's case and we'll be making whatever level of representations are necessary when they become necessary in support of his case as well.
MITCHELL: You say Australia stands by him, Australia wants to get him out. Does that mean we believe he is not guilty?
PM: Well, we say this in relation to any individual who's been taken into custody by authorities around the world that our objective is to stand by the individual concerned, and to support them in a practical consular fashion. And having established the facts of the case, then we make appropriate efforts to make sure that the justice system works for them. This individual is an Australian citizen and we take his rights very seriously and we'll continue to do so.
MITCHELL: You know China very well, you know how it works, is it likely he will go to trial?
PM: Neil, if I knew all the facts concerning this particular case I'd be in a far better position to answer your question. I'm also hamstrung by the fact of being on the other side of the world at the moment.
The Foreign Minister is handling these matters on the ground and I have absolute confidence that he and his officials are raking over every detail of this as we speak, as they would have been over the last several days, and are in intimate connection with Rio Tinto the company, as well as doing everything possible to make sure that Mr Hu's family are kept briefed and with all information as is available flowing to them.
MITCHELL: Just a final point, I did understand from what you said earlier, I want to check it, that you would like to see him out of custody and perhaps out of the country as soon as possible?
PM: Well our objective with Australians abroad is to first of all stand by them when they find themselves in difficulty with local law enforcement authorities, establish the facts, and unless a demonstrable criminal offence has been committed, we of course stand by the individual and seek to obtain their release.
We do this constantly with Australians around the world, and we will do so in the case of Mr Hu. But I said before, our challenge in the first place is to establish all the facts, work through it calmly with the Chinese officials, and then take whatever subsequent action is necessary.
MITCHELL: I know it's late, if I may, another couple of things quickly, you've had the meeting with the Pope, did you get Mary MacKillop up?
PM: (laughter) Neil, that is a matter for the internal deliberations of the Catholic Church. But what the good Sisters of St Joseph said to me in Sydney, which is the home church or the home order of Mary MacKillop, they'd appreciate it if I simply indicated to the Pope that they were excited about the process that they are engaged in, that Mary MacKillop was a good person and was well respected across the Australian community. And the Pope and I had a good conversation about her life's work.
MITCHELL: Did you talk about other issues as well?
PM: Oh very much so. We spoke about climate change. We spoke about religious freedom. We spoke about interfaith dialogue. We spoke about his most recent Encyclical, which he's released on the question of morality and free markets.
It was a good conversation but on top of all that Neil, he indicated how much he'd enjoyed his time in Australia last year at World Youth Day. It was a good and friendly conversation. Tim Fischer by the way, our new Ambassador to the Holy See, is doing a fantastic job in Rome, is well connected, has intimately engaged and worked with the Holy See on these questions of interfaith dialogue, particularly with the Muslim world, because that is very relevant to, shall we say, broader and longer term security concerns we all have as well.
MITCHELL: I noticed you gave him a six-pack of De Bortoli, we do the same thing on this program!
PM: (laughter) Well I heard that - I'll let you in on a secret, I heard that when the Holy Father was travelling back to Rome, having been in Australia, he did sample a bit of the old De Bortoli and thought it wasn't bad. Now, I don't know whether that's absolutely true or not, but, if that did happen to be the case then we took a decision that we should well, make sure we had a decent bottle of the local drop to have with dinner there in the Holy See. He seemed to appreciate it.
MITCHELL: A couple of other very quick things, have you ever climbed Uluru?
PM: Ah no I haven't actually.
MITCHELL: What's your view on having it closed to climbers?
PM: I have just seen a report about all of this. It's some sort of report by a local authority as I understand it.
MITCHELL: Yeah, it's a management committee, yeah.
PM: Management committee, and it's a discussion paper?
MITCHELL: It is.
PM: I am on the other side of the world. As a matter of general principle my view has always been that people should be able to have, you know, appropriate access to Uluru.
Obviously it's a question I suppose of public safety and managing important natural parts of our landscape, it's a bit like managing the Great Barrier Reef in some respects. And there have to be appropriate management plans. I think it would be very sad if we got to a stage though where Australians and frankly our guests from abroad weren't able to enjoy that experience.
MITCHELL: What, to climb it?
PM: Yeah. To climb it.
MITCHELL: So you'd think it'd probably be a good thing if they could climb it. I've never done it myself but a lot of people say it's very impressive to climb.
PM: Yeah, I've not done it either but I've run into people from abroad who've climbed it and have had a great experience. I've also run into people from abroad who have fallen over and done themselves great damage. I've run into them all.
So management plans are necessary to both preserve sites like this and I suppose that's the basis of some of these studies which have been undertaken. But management studies are also necessary in terms of properly regulating access in terms of public safety as well. But it's a wonderful part of Australia out there, and I look forward to getting out there myself at some stage.
MITCHELL: A couple of quick things, the G8 and climate change, very small step, is it enough?
PM: It is a small step Neil, I think you're right to say that these steps taken here at the G8 Summit have been modest and there's still a long way to go before Copenhagen at the end of the year. One good thing to come out of it though is this  -  the G8 leaders have agreed that we need to have as our scientific aim doing everything we can to avoid a temperature increase in excess of two degrees Celsius.
That's important because that starts to frame a common scientific base around the targets we then need to embrace for the various major polluting countries around the world. That may sound like a small point of progress to your listeners, I understand that, there's a huge amount of work still to be done, we in Australia will be doing our bit as well.
One other thing by the way, the G8 came out and strongly supported the principle of emissions trading schemes as an effective, market-based way of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. That's what the G8 collectively have said - Governments both Conservative and shall I say Centre-Left from around the world.
Mr Turnbull and the Liberals don't seem to be able to make up their mind about whether they'll allow our emissions trading scheme through the Senate or not. I think Australian business would just like us to get on with the job, and we need to get on with the job of acting on climate change, we need also business certainty.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time, there's always last one question. It's gotten a lot of attention in this country.
PM: I always worry about your last questions but off you go.
MITCHELL: While you've, something you said a couple of days ago, what is programmatic specificity? (laughter)
PM: (laughter) It means specific programs. If you're travelling around a bit Neil, I'm sure we all get a bit tired with our language, so there you go. It's just one of those things. But specific programs is what I was talking about, I think it was in relation to the sorts of outcomes we could expect from this G8 Summit on climate change or it may have been a reference to other elements of the global charter on, as proposed by the Germans on the economy, I can't recall the specific reference, but it would have been about specific programs.
MITCHELL: And you'll also be pleased to know that Trivial Pursuit has added your name as an answer to one of the questions and that's considered you've made it on the international stage now.
PM: You mean I've made it to triviality? (laughter)
MITCHELL: (laughter) Thank you for your time.
PM: I don't know quite to take that one mate. Sounds good.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time.
PM: I appreciate it very much.
(Ends)


E&amp;OE
MITCHELL: Prime Minister thank you very much for speaking with us.
PM: Pleasure to be with you Neil.
MITCHELL: An Australian man is in custody in China accused of spying, the Rio Tinto executive Stern Hu. Now several analysts here have said it is ludicrous what has happened to him. Do you agree?
PM: Well we're still establishing all the facts Neil and our first responsibility is to get consular access to Mr Hu and I understand from discussions with the Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith that access has now been given. I think that access will occur fairly soon. We'll just proceed through this step by step. Our objective is of course to secure Mr Hu's release and that is going to take all of our combined efforts and we'll move through it methodically.
MITCHELL: If you're determined to secure his release, this is a tough question but maybe you don't want to answer it, but do you believe he was spying for Australia?
PM: Look the Foreign Minister is handling this in Australia and I am just reluctant to go into any sorts of detail on this because this is a subject of continued discussions with the Chinese authorities. I think the best thing to do is simply regard this as a consular case as the Foreign Minister has indicated. And we will continue to deal with the authorities in Beijing, in Shanghai, and of course as you know the Foreign Minister has called in the Chinese acting ambassador to insist that we obtain consular access consistent with our consular agreement with the Chinese and I understand that is now being granted.
This is a difficult case. I fully accept that. It's going to be tough, we have tough consular cases around the world from time to time but we're going to work our way through this one systematically.
MITCHELL: Why at a consular level, why not a higher level, there seems to be massive implications for relations between the two countries and for trade?
PM: Well we're dealing with it as a consular case because we have Australians who are charged with various offences around the world from time to time and we have to deal with it with the law enforcement authorities to begin with.
Once that occurs and as is appropriate, we then raise things at the political level but we do it in a systematic staged way once we've established all the facts. And that's what we're doing in this case as well. I also emphasise that the Government through the Foreign Minister and the Department is in close contact with Rio Tinto and in close contact with Mr Hu's family and we are working through this with all of our resources deployed. As I said, we will make other representations to the Chinese Government at other levels as is appropriate and when it's appropriate.
MITCHELL: But the allegation here is spying. I mean it's not a drug offence or something like that, it is something that involves the national interest of this country.
PM: Well you know from your previous discussions with Mr Howard over many years, Neil, that any Prime Minister or the Foreign Minister doesn't discuss intelligence matters and I don't propose to break that convention. As the Foreign Minister Mr Smith has already indicated, this case is best treated as a consular matter and that is the way we're approaching it and as I said all necessary actions and representations will be taken by us once we've established all the facts.
MITCHELL: Do you know where Mr Hu is? Do you know what his condition is, because his family doesn't?
PM: Well, as I said, my advice from Australia - and I stand to be corrected on this because I am on the other side of the world and it's midnight here - is that consular access is about to be granted by the Chinese.
And as I said when I indicated before we've got to move through this matter step by step. First thing is to get access to Mr Hu, secondly establish his condition and thirdly the facts surrounding the grounds under which the Chinese authorities have taken him into custody and I've got to say the three other Chinese nationals with him.
MITCHELL: The Chinese say they have sufficient evidence, the reports here are that in China that's code for we've got him locked up and he's not getting out, we've got the case. You know China better than anybody, better than most people in this country. What are they saying when they say they've got sufficient evidence?
PM: Well first of all I haven't seen the transcript of those remarks from the Chinese Government or whichever Chinese authority is supposed to have said that. Secondly I know from my conversations with the Foreign Minister Stephen Smith that it's just a case of step by step establishing the facts, his health, his condition and then moving on from there in terms of whatever other actions we need to take.
We take this case very seriously, we take Mr Hu's condition very seriously, we take the plight of any Australian around the world who finds themself in consular difficulty seriously.
There are many, many cases Neil which don't even make it to public attention that we're dealing with which involve high levels of sensitivity. This one is going to be hard, it will be difficult but we'll work our way through it.
MITCHELL: Well do I assume Australia is standing by this man?
PM: Absolutely. We stand by every Australian citizen who finds themselves in difficulty abroad. At any time around the world we've got about a million Australians offshore. Many of those Australians will find themselves in difficult from time to time, some will find themselves arrested by local authorities on various charges in some of the strangest parts of the world.
The good thing about our diplomats and our consular officials abroad is that they do everything possible to intervene in these cases and often it takes some time to resolve them but we're going to work our way through this. And as I said beyond the consular level in raising things as appropriate at the political level, we'll do that step by step.
MITCHELL: So you will the Chinese Premier at some stage if it's not sorted out?
PM: As I said we'll take it step by step. We'll just work our way through it and then the Foreign Minister and the advice he gets from his officials on the ground, we'll make judgments about what political representations are then appropriate, if they are appropriate. Our objectives of course are to support Mr Hu in these circumstances as we would any other Australian citizen. That's the responsibility of all Australian Governments.
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister we have here a man who is accused of spying for this country against another country. That  -  does that jeopardise relations and trade between Australia and China?
PM: Well to repeat what I said before Neil, I don't comment on any matters concerning intelligence and that's the longstanding practice of previous Australian Governments.
On the second question you raised, which is about our relationship with China  -  look, if you back over the last 30 years there have been ebbs and flows and bumps along the road, that is part and parcel of managing any bilateral relationship. I am confident we can get through this. This is a relationship which is very broad but we take the interests of any single Australian national very seriously and we'll be deploying all efforts in support of this Australian citizen as well.
MITCHELL: It has been described that what is happening is a ludicrous tactic because of the Chinese being upset about the deal - Chinalco and Rio - falling through. If that is widely interpreted, any businessman operating in China would have to be very nervous at the moment, wouldn't they?
PM: Well we have, as I am advised by the Foreign Minister, no information to that effect but as I said our challenge in the immediate period ahead is to establish all the facts. I think you would know from dealing with any cases, even in Australia, that it takes a while to establish exactly what has occurred in each circumstance involving the local police. We're going through that with the Chinese now and it will take some time.
As for the security of other Australians within China, I think it's a challenge which faces all Australians either living or working abroad, working within the fabric of the laws of the land. Of course sometimes our Australians abroad are working in countries with a vastly different legal system to what we have in Australia and that presents real problems. And that's why we've got you know, the best people we have in our consular and diplomatic posts to try and look after Australians in these circumstances.
And to say what I have said before, we'll be in there doing everything that is necessary to support Mr Hu's case and we'll be making whatever level of representations are necessary when they become necessary in support of his case as well.
MITCHELL: You say Australia stands by him, Australia wants to get him out. Does that mean we believe he is not guilty?
PM: Well, we say this in relation to any individual who's been taken into custody by authorities around the world that our objective is to stand by the individual concerned, and to support them in a practical consular fashion. And having established the facts of the case, then we make appropriate efforts to make sure that the justice system works for them. This individual is an Australian citizen and we take his rights very seriously and we'll continue to do so.
MITCHELL: You know China very well, you know how it works, is it likely he will go to trial?
PM: Neil, if I knew all the facts concerning this particular case I'd be in a far better position to answer your question. I'm also hamstrung by the fact of being on the other side of the world at the moment.
The Foreign Minister is handling these matters on the ground and I have absolute confidence that he and his officials are raking over every detail of this as we speak, as they would have been over the last several days, and are in intimate connection with Rio Tinto the company, as well as doing everything possible to make sure that Mr Hu's family are kept briefed and with all information as is available flowing to them.
MITCHELL: Just a final point, I did understand from what you said earlier, I want to check it, that you would like to see him out of custody and perhaps out of the country as soon as possible?
PM: Well our objective with Australians abroad is to first of all stand by them when they find themselves in difficulty with local law enforcement authorities, establish the facts, and unless a demonstrable criminal offence has been committed, we of course stand by the individual and seek to obtain their release.
We do this constantly with Australians around the world, and we will do so in the case of Mr Hu. But I said before, our challenge in the first place is to establish all the facts, work through it calmly with the Chinese officials, and then take whatever subsequent action is necessary.
MITCHELL: I know it's late, if I may, another couple of things quickly, you've had the meeting with the Pope, did you get Mary MacKillop up?
PM: (laughter) Neil, that is a matter for the internal deliberations of the Catholic Church. But what the good Sisters of St Joseph said to me in Sydney, which is the home church or the home order of Mary MacKillop, they'd appreciate it if I simply indicated to the Pope that they were excited about the process that they are engaged in, that Mary MacKillop was a good person and was well respected across the Australian community. And the Pope and I had a good conversation about her life's work.
MITCHELL: Did you talk about other issues as well?
PM: Oh very much so. We spoke about climate change. We spoke about religious freedom. We spoke about interfaith dialogue. We spoke about his most recent Encyclical, which he's released on the question of morality and free markets.
It was a good conversation but on top of all that Neil, he indicated how much he'd enjoyed his time in Australia last year at World Youth Day. It was a good and friendly conversation. Tim Fischer by the way, our new Ambassador to the Holy See, is doing a fantastic job in Rome, is well connected, has intimately engaged and worked with the Holy See on these questions of interfaith dialogue, particularly with the Muslim world, because that is very relevant to, shall we say, broader and longer term security concerns we all have as well.
MITCHELL: I noticed you gave him a six-pack of De Bortoli, we do the same thing on this program!
PM: (laughter) Well I heard that - I'll let you in on a secret, I heard that when the Holy Father was travelling back to Rome, having been in Australia, he did sample a bit of the old De Bortoli and thought it wasn't bad. Now, I don't know whether that's absolutely true or not, but, if that did happen to be the case then we took a decision that we should well, make sure we had a decent bottle of the local drop to have with dinner there in the Holy See. He seemed to appreciate it.
MITCHELL: A couple of other very quick things, have you ever climbed Uluru?
PM: Ah no I haven't actually.
MITCHELL: What's your view on having it closed to climbers?
PM: I have just seen a report about all of this. It's some sort of report by a local authority as I understand it.
MITCHELL: Yeah, it's a management committee, yeah.
PM: Management committee, and it's a discussion paper?
MITCHELL: It is.
PM: I am on the other side of the world. As a matter of general principle my view has always been that people should be able to have, you know, appropriate access to Uluru.
Obviously it's a question I suppose of public safety and managing important natural parts of our landscape, it's a bit like managing the Great Barrier Reef in some respects. And there have to be appropriate management plans. I think it would be very sad if we got to a stage though where Australians and frankly our guests from abroad weren't able to enjoy that experience.
MITCHELL: What, to climb it?
PM: Yeah. To climb it.
MITCHELL: So you'd think it'd probably be a good thing if they could climb it. I've never done it myself but a lot of people say it's very impressive to climb.
PM: Yeah, I've not done it either but I've run into people from abroad who've climbed it and have had a great experience. I've also run into people from abroad who have fallen over and done themselves great damage. I've run into them all.
So management plans are necessary to both preserve sites like this and I suppose that's the basis of some of these studies which have been undertaken. But management studies are also necessary in terms of properly regulating access in terms of public safety as well. But it's a wonderful part of Australia out there, and I look forward to getting out there myself at some stage.
MITCHELL: A couple of quick things, the G8 and climate change, very small step, is it enough?
PM: It is a small step Neil, I think you're right to say that these steps taken here at the G8 Summit have been modest and there's still a long way to go before Copenhagen at the end of the year. One good thing to come out of it though is this  -  the G8 leaders have agreed that we need to have as our scientific aim doing everything we can to avoid a temperature increase in excess of two degrees Celsius.
That's important because that starts to frame a common scientific base around the targets we then need to embrace for the various major polluting countries around the world. That may sound like a small point of progress to your listeners, I understand that, there's a huge amount of work still to be done, we in Australia will be doing our bit as well.
One other thing by the way, the G8 came out and strongly supported the principle of emissions trading schemes as an effective, market-based way of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. That's what the G8 collectively have said - Governments both Conservative and shall I say Centre-Left from around the world.
Mr Turnbull and the Liberals don't seem to be able to make up their mind about whether they'll allow our emissions trading scheme through the Senate or not. I think Australian business would just like us to get on with the job, and we need to get on with the job of acting on climate change, we need also business certainty.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time, there's always last one question. It's gotten a lot of attention in this country.
PM: I always worry about your last questions but off you go.
MITCHELL: While you've, something you said a couple of days ago, what is programmatic specificity? (laughter)
PM: (laughter) It means specific programs. If you're travelling around a bit Neil, I'm sure we all get a bit tired with our language, so there you go. It's just one of those things. But specific programs is what I was talking about, I think it was in relation to the sorts of outcomes we could expect from this G8 Summit on climate change or it may have been a reference to other elements of the global charter on, as proposed by the Germans on the economy, I can't recall the specific reference, but it would have been about specific programs.
MITCHELL: And you'll also be pleased to know that Trivial Pursuit has added your name as an answer to one of the questions and that's considered you've made it on the international stage now.
PM: You mean I've made it to triviality? (laughter)
MITCHELL: (laughter) Thank you for your time.
PM: I don't know quite to take that one mate. Sounds good.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time.
PM: I appreciate it very much.
(Ends)


E&amp;OE
JOURNALIST: Well Prime Minister, welcome to AM.
PM: It's good to be on AM.
JOURNALIST: Global warming targets set by the G8 mandate an 80 per cent cut by 2050. That sounds impressive, but the UN's Ban Ki-moon says it's simply not enough. Is he wrong?
PM: I think what the UN Secretary-General is saying is that member states of the United Nations and the major economies will need, of course, to deal with medium term targets, those closer to 2020.
Why is that necessary? Because if we simply talk about long term, very long term aspirational targets, that leaves action too late. Therefore, we need to have credible medium term targets, and secondly we need those in order to construct emissions trading schemes - or as we call them in Australia, Carbon Pollution Reduction Schemes - to actually price the carbon in the economy, and to have a real effect in changing economic behaviour.
JOURNALIST: Well if there aren't then mid-term levels set by the G8, has that in effect been a failure?
PM: The one good thing which has come out of this meeting including that of the major economies is that we set a target of seeking to ensure that we don't allow a temperature increase in excess of two degrees. That is actually a new consensus across the international community.
What's that mean in practical terms, that we should have as our overall scientific goal not allowing concentration in excess of 450 parts per million, because one relates to the other, of carbon dioxide equivalent in the atmosphere. That in turn should shape the sorts of reduction technologies, systems, and policy systems that we bring about in economies around the world.
JOURNALIST: Well given those ambitious targets that have been enunciated at the G8, is Australia's target of say 60 per cent by 2050 enough? Are you going to have to raise your bar?
PM: Well as you know, Australia has already indicated its own medium term targets, and there was a lot of commentary in the discussions I attended today about the paramount importance of that, consistent with the remarks I made just before.
Therefore our medium term targets of 5, 15 or 25 depending on the nature of the global outcome at Copenhagen are entirely appropriate, entirely consistent with the, let's call it the Global Mainstream. But we still have a number of economies who aren't committing to medium term targets effectively.
JOURNALIST: Well without the Chinese, without the Indians, does it mean much at all?
PM: Well the critical missing element in this equation is what commitments will be taken up by the major emerging economies, you've just named two of them. That's really important to the future.
If you look at the overall concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere so far, it's plain that the bulk of that historical contribution so far has come from the advanced economies. But if you were to roll the clock forward 50 years, the bulk of that contribution will come from the major emerging economies, including China and India with a heavy concentration on coal.
Therefore, one of the proposals we've put forward in terms of a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute is really important, because the overwhelming energy dependency of those economies will be coal-fired electricity. Therefore, sequestration is really important, that's one of the reasons we're getting behind it.
JOURNALIST: Now of course you stood on the stage with Barack Obama, Gordon Brown, other world leaders, who gave very explicit support for the Carbon Capture Institute. Now, you've launched that before in Australia, what was new about the launch here at the G8?
PM: What we've done in recent times is actually sign up every member of the G8 as Foundation members, that's what's new, including most recently Russia. And other major emerging economies beyond the G8 as well, in addition to the very large energy companies around the world.
Secondly, it was important to launch this Institute globally because it has to be global in its scope. We are funding it in Australia to the tune of up to $100 million a year, but if we're going to make a difference with coal-fired electricity generation and the greenhouse gases emitted from that generation process, CCS - carbon capture and storage - must occupy centre place.
JOURNALIST: The Chinese Premier's not here because of the ethnic violence in his country. Would you have raised the case of the arrested Rio Tinto executive Stern Hu if he had been here?
PM: This matter is being handled by the Foreign Minister in Australia, Stephen Smith. And with all complex consular cases, we have to proceed cautiously on the basis of the advice as it unfolds. What we've already done in Beijing, and Shanghai and Canberra is make strong representations for access to this Australian citizen.
JOURNALIST: I guess Malcolm Turnbull is challenging you to use your Chinese contacts to help an Australian citizen. Why wouldn't you get on the phone and make a call that may help that person?
PM: Can I say that Mr Turnbull in recent times has displayed a monumental lack of judgment. I would suggest he also reflects a general lack of judgment on many questions.
This is not the time for sensationalist domestic political point-scoring. It's the time for working calmly and methodically through this very difficult consular case, as we've done with many consular cases before.
Therefore, as and when it's appropriate, as I indicated already in remarks to the media, we'll make all representations at whatever levels are necessary. But we'll proceed through this methodically, liaising with the company, liaising with the family, consular access I'm advised has been granted for the individual, and then we will proceed accordingly. And we'll take whatever necessary action is appropriate, including representations at whatever level, step by step.
JOURNALIST: When you say whatever level, does that mean at some stage you could intervene?
PM: I'd just say we'd take necessary interventions at whatever level. I don't rule any particular intervention out of court, but can I say this, it's important to proceed calmly, methodically, and step by step, as we do with complex and challenging consular cases around the world all the time.
Obviously this has a particular difficulty attached to it, I understand that, but there are many other sensitive consular cases which I could also say to you don't make it into the public media.
JOURNALIST: Of course, implicit in what Malcolm Turnbull is saying is that basically you're soft on China.
PM: Well can I just say that, consistent with my remarks earlier in our interview, if I have seen a spectacular lack of judgment on a range of questions recently, it would be Mr Turnbull's judgment, I think that applies in this case as well. The business of dealing with difficult, complex diplomatic questions and particularly when human lives are involved, requires sensitivity and proper handling.
JOURNALIST: Are you saying he's risking the future of that court case, of that individual?
PM: No, that's what you just said. Can I just say that I believe that in handling this, it's appropriate for the Government to act in a methodical way, establish the facts, work our way through it with the Chinese authorities as we do with complex consular cases around the world.
As I said before, we'll make representations as appropriate, to whom it is appropriate, and at whatever level, based on the expert advice, and this is being appropriately handled by the Foreign Minister in Australia, as I'm abroad.
JOURNALIST: Now this has been one heck of a day, it's been a big day for you. Two world figures in one day, the Pope and Barack Obama. Are you exhausted by all that?
PM: No, I'm elected to do a job and I'll do that job. The meeting with His Holiness the Pope was a good meeting, it was about many things of concern to Australians at a general and more spiritual level, I suppose.
It's a different type of meeting of course to the discussions you'd have with the President of the United States. Mind you, the President of the United States is seeing the Pope tomorrow. So we exchanged some notes on that as well.
JOURNALIST: Now you were raised a Catholic, any thoughts of going back to that faith?
PM: Well I've always described myself, I tend not to talk about questions of personal religious faith in these sorts of interviews, but you've asked the question. I was raised as a Roman Catholic, I married an Anglican, I've gone to an Anglican Church for a long period of time. As I've said in a number of interviews before I suppose you'd categorise me as a Christian of no fixed denominational abode.
JOURNALIST: On that note, thank you very much.
PM: Thanks very much.
(Ends)


Narrator:Climate change is a problem that is confronting every citizen of our planet and it requires urgent action.In Australia, for example, this is changing rainfall patterns, reducing water availability and increasing the frequency of severe weather events such as bushfires and storms. Expert scientific evidence confirms the human activity is altering the earth's climate, reducing these emissions is crucial in mitigating climate change. The IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) has recommended that global CO2 emissions must be reduced by at least 50 per cent by 2050. The majority of the world's energy-related CO2 emissions come from electricity generation and industry. With global energy demand projected to double by 2050, it is clear that drastic measures must be taken to stabilise CO2 emissions. Fossil fuels, in particular coal, will continue to provide the bulk of the world's energy for the foreseeable future. Carbon Capture and Storage can reduce emissions from power plants and industry to almost zero.
Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia:For a major coal producer like Australia, finding ways to reduce carbon emissions from coal is a clear priority. That's why Australia is playing a leading role in the development of Carbon Capture and Storage technology, that's the purpose of the Global CCS Institute. The G8 countries have committed to the development of 20 large-scale CCS projects, to be in operation by 2020. The Global CCS Institute was set to help make this happen. It's our aim to see major CCS projects become a reality and for them to contribute to solving one of the greatest challenges that confronts our generations.
Narrator:Large amounts of CO2 are released when fossil fuels are burned at power plants or other industrial processes. This CO2 can be isolated and captured. Once separated, the CO2 is compressed, and transported to a suitable geological storage site. These include depleted oil and gas fields, or deep saline aquifers. The CO2 is injected into these formations. The cap rock prevents it from returning to the surface and it becomes trapped within the pores of the rock.These sites have securely contained fluids and gases for millions of years, and with careful selection, they offer confidence in the integrity of CO2 storage.
James Wolfensohn KBE, AO: The Global Carbon Capture and Storage Initiative, which is Australian led and which has multinational support, is the most promising example, that I know of, of trying to address this question head-on. And trying to evoke solutions that can make our world a better place for all peoples and, most particularly, for our children. It deserves our support and the Australian Government deserves congratulation and acclaim for taking this step.
Narrator:We must all rise to this challenge and work together to stabilise our planet's climate before it's too late.


E&amp;OE
CURTIS: Mr Rudd, welcome to PM.
PM: Thank you.
CURTIS: Have you picked up the phone to talk to anyone in China about the detention of Stern Hu?
PM: Can I say that the Australian Government, since this matter first broke, has made three sets of representations in Canberra by calling in the acting ambassador. Secondly, the embassy in Beijing and the Consulate-General in Shanghai has done the same with their Chinese counterparts there. On top of that, when the consular access was granted to Mr Hu, of course Australian officials did that -
CURTIS: But neither you nor the Foreign Affairs Minister have been willing to pick up the phone yourselves. Why not?
PM: Can I finish my answer to your question? When I was recently in Italy, I also raised this matter with the Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister, who was attending that conference. And I understand that the Foreign Minister is himself expecting to meet a Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister at the meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement, which he and the Chinese and others are attending at a conference in Egypt in the next 24 hours or so.
So on your proposition about not raising these matters, I don't think it holds particular water.
But the key question is this: while we're interested here in the individual concerned and how we deal with the complexities of this case, what it seems that Mr Turnbull, whose comments you've just relayed in your report just now, is interested in is simply in screaming headlines.
This is a complex case, we're working our way through it methodically. As I said recently, when I was abroad, we will take this up at whatever level of the Chinese Government is necessary, as facts in each level of this complex case come clear.
CURTIS: But what message do you take from the fact that despite all those representations you say are made, your Ministers, you, still can't get any more information than is available on public websites?
PM: Can I say, that is not the case. We are engaged with the Chinese on elements of this entire matter and there are further engagements with the Chinese to occur. This is a complex case. Cases like this in the past have also exhibited complexity as well. We work our way though each of these as we work our way though consular cases around the world.
In the last two days, since coming back from the G8+ summit in Italy, I've had rounds of discussion with officials here in Sydney yesterday, again today, working our way through these matters. They are complex, but again, our interest is the individual concerned - Mr Hu and his wellbeing. We're not interested in political grandstanding, which it seems to be what Mr Turnbull is about.
If I could add one point as well on that. The course of a responsible Opposition in these circumstances is to in fact request a briefing from the Australian Government on these delicate and sensitive matters. No such request has been forthcoming from Mr Turnbull, or, as I'm advised, by Mrs Bishop. I stand to be corrected on the latter if it's occurred.
What I'm saying loud and clear now is they should request such a briefing. We'll be providing such a briefing once the Foreign Minister returns to Australia. Then we would hope that the Opposition, full apprised of the complexities of this case, would rather than simply trying to score political points out of it would get on with the business of supporting the Government in our attempts to resolve this matter.
CURTIS: Have you been able to get any information from Chinese officials that is not publicly available about the reasons for Mr Hu's detention?
PM: I don't intend to go to the detail of those consular and diplomatic engagements at this stage. My interest is to advance the interests of the individual concerned and  - 
CURTIS: But even if you can't tell us publicly the details, can you get that information?
PM: Of course, we're working on a whole range of details on the case, and at multiple levels. That is what you do in these circumstances.
Mr Hu is like any other Australian citizen. We take his interests abroad when he finds himself in difficulty with governments abroad, and we are engaged in multiple consular chases around at any given time, many of which are very delicate, many of which are very complex, but our interest is the wellbeing of the Australian citizen concerned.
At the same time, can I just note this point  -  that the Premier of Western Australia has requested briefing from the Australian Government. As I understand, that's been provided. His comments on this matter have been entirely balanced.
Can I say also we've been in direct contact with the company, Mr Hu's employer, Rio, in this matter, and they've sought to engage this matter in a responsible way as well.
It's a difficult, complex case. We're working our way through it. And the sort of political grandstanding we're seeing on this matter, frankly, goes to the lack of judgment that we've seen from Mr Turnbull demonstrated on so many other events in recent times.
CURTIS: Does any concern about affecting the important economic relationship with China rate in your handling of this issue? Are you worried about antagonising the Chinese at all?
PM: Absolutely not. I mean let's just go to the essence of this: can I just say that this is a Government that in recent times has been criticised for, quote, ‘being anti-Chinese' when it released its Defence White Paper. Can I simply draw people's attention to the debate which surrounded that?
We took robust decisions in the national interest in terms of the Defence White Paper because we judged them to be right for this country's national security for the next 20 years. Nonetheless, that's the criticism which was levelled.
On a second matter, concerning the handling of the Chinalco-Rio matter, can I just say this as well: the Government, always, in that matter will be acting in the national interest. In the end, what you saw happen was the resolution of that particular matter on commercial grounds.
Can I just add one other point here? Mr Turnbull, as you know, was repeatedly, publicly in the Chinalco-China matter constantly saying that this particular takeover should not proceed.
Yet we have Mrs Bishop out there in the media today saying that the Hu matter has resulted from the fact that this particular acquisition did not proceed. You cannot have this both ways.
Again, what you have is a political Opposition, rather than being interested in the wellbeing of the individual, simply interested in political headlines.
We, the Government, have been hard at work the last two days up in Sydney, Kirribilli, working our way through these matters with officials in great complexity, in great detail, because we take the interest of any Australian citizen seriously.
And in your question of balancing the Chinese relationship, I would say this  -  Australia's national interest always and under every circumstance comes first. That means the wellbeing of any Australian citizen. They come first. We will handle each of the other elements of our relationship in our terms  - 
CURTIS: When then  - 
PM: - and that has been very clear about its preparedness to articulate clearly Australia's national interests in all of its relationships abroad, including that with China.
CURTIS: When, then, will you judge it to be the right time to raise it the matter directly with the Chinese President?
PM: We will work our way through this systematically and thoroughly, and once all relevant facts are established - as I have been seeking to do in recent meetings in the last 48 hours since getting off the plane yesterday morning from Italy - once we work our way through this, as I said in Italy when I was at the G8 summit, that we will raise it with whatever level of the Chinese leadership is appropriate.
We do, however, need to establish all relevant facts. If you are dealing with a case as complex as this, then it's important to have all relevant facts at your disposal in terms of what representations are made at any particular level.
Therefore, in terms of representations with whoever in the future, myself, the Foreign Minister and others will of course make those representations as appropriate at the right time because our interests are governed by one thing  -  that is the wellbeing of this Australian citizen.
That is what we are seeking to support, and again I would say to all concerned with this debate, that should be everyone's number one concern, not scoring cheap political headlines displaying a fundamental and continuing lack of judgment on sensitive matters, which we've come to associate with Mr Turnbull.
CURTIS: Is there a broader problem in this, though, that China appears to be willing to use the apparatus of the state to get its own way in business negotiations?
PM: Well, it's a continued concern for all of us engaged with the China economic relationship to make sure that the economic relationship is pursued in its own terms.
My view is that in the case of the Australian economic relationship, we need to conduct that within its own terms. At the same time, we will not shy away from making representations on behalf of individual Australian companies, on behalf of individual Australian citizens, or on the broader question of human rights concerns  - 
CURTIS: Are you concerned in this case, though, that China does  - 
PM: - Some people raised their eyebrows a year ago when I was in China in an address to Peking University raised the question of human rights in Tibet in a lecture to that university.
All these things should be addressed and articulated clearly in their own terms, whether it's the Defence White Paper, humans rights abuses in China, standing up for consular interests in China, advancing our commercial interest. We'll prosecute this relationship in a balanced and appropriate way, and that means standing up for the interests of Australian citizens who have been taken into custody in China for whatever grounds. We take each of those cases seriously, as we are with this one.
CURTIS: But if China is willing to, as it does seem to be in this case, willing to change the rules mid-negotiation, doesn't that make something like a Free Trade Agreement futile because trade is only as free as China is willing to tolerate?
PM: Well, you've raised the question of free trade negotiations. They were first launched by the Howard Government some years ago. There have been twists and turns in those negotiations over a long period of time, as there has been in the 18 months that this Government has been in office as well. All these negotiations are complex, as is the negotiation of the free trade agreements with other countries as well.
All I'm saying is that our responsibility as a Government is to prosecute a relationship as broad and as complex and as important with China in an appropriate and balanced way. But let me say this in absolute terms  -  when it comes to the wellbeing of any individual Australian citizen, we take those interests of that individual, as seriously as we take the interests of any Australian around the world. They are forefront in our mind and we will underpin those interests in the representations we make and the actions we do take with the Chinese authorities, and that will continue into the future.
CURTIS: Mr Rudd, Peter Garrett, your Environment Minister, has today approved the Four Mile uranium mine in South Australia. Is the Labor Party now the party of uranium mines?
PM: Now, can I say it was quite clear what we did, transparently and democratically at the Australian Labor Party National Conference in 2007, where in full view of the nation's audience and full view of the Australian Labor Party national conference we changed our policy. We couldn't be more transparent than that.
Furthermore, can I just simply say that this decision and the conditions which come with it demonstrate the Australian Government's commitment to world's best practice environmental standards for uranium mines. We think that's an appropriate way forward, but in terms of transparency in the matter which you seem to think is newsworthy, that was in fact a decision we took way back in 2007, in full view of everybody.
CURTIS: If you're willing to sanction uranium mining, why not go the next step and sanction the use of that uranium in Australia to run nuclear power plants as part of the strategy to reduce carbon emissions?
PM: Well, I think the whole question of climate change and what you do with greenhouse gas emissions is first and foremost best addressed by the Parliament passing a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme which establishes a price for carbon.
CURTIS: But why not consider uranium mining as part of your overall strategy, consider nuclear power as part of the strategy?
PM: Well, a price for carbon, again, answering your first question, goes to the relative pricing therefore of a range of alternative energy options.
That's why it's important for the Parliament to pass this matter - 30 days to go before Mr Turnbull is committed, for this matter to be voted on in the Australian Parliament. If we're serious about reducing greenhouse gas emissions, that must be where this debate is first and foremost resolved.
Secondly, as far as alternative energy sources are concerned, what we have done is proceeded on multiple fronts  -  a huge investment in energy renewables, solar energy. We've committed funds to build what will become the single largest solar power plant anywhere in the world, 1,000 megawatts equivalent. Secondly, a large, half-billion dollar investment in other renewable energy sources.
Thirdly, the announcement which I made globally most recently at the G8 summit in Italy for a Carbon Capture and Storage Institute which in Australia will see a further $2.5 billion invested in carbon capture and storage.
On the question of nuclear power generation, as we have said many times before, in Australia, we believe the other energy options available to us in the clean and green renewable energy space, together with the actions we're taking on CCS, are sufficient for the future.
CURTIS: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
(Ends)


G'Day, my name's Kevin, and welcome to this new website.
This website has a dual purpose: to keep you up-to-date with government announcements and activities, enabling you to hear directly from the source, and the other purpose is to create more opportunities for you to interact directly with the government.
I'm committed to leading an open government that's accountable for its actions and its decisions and, as you may have already heard me say many, many times, I'm a real believer that the best ideas for Australia's future don't all come from Canberra.
My government has benefited enormously from talking directly with communities.
To date, we've held 12 Community Cabinets right across the country; nearly 6,000 people have participated in Q and A sessions, where they've asked me questions, or asked Ministers questions, from one topic to another.
Over 800 Australians have had the opportunity also to have 10-minute sessions with Ministers to talk about things of concern to them.
Over the last couple of months I've also been holding jobs forums across Australia. 
We've held these forums in areas likely to be hardest hit by the economic downturn.
It's been highly motivating to hear so many good ideas and see so much enthusiasm from employers and trainers and non-profit organisations - all focused on keeping their communities working, particularly at this time of global economic recession.
Through this website you'll be able to have a direct dialogue with me and other government Ministers via online discussions that I'll be hosting every couple of weeks or so and you'll be able to post comments on my blog in the future as well.
A good government is one that listens to the community and works in tandem with the community to develop solutions to the challenges that we all share.This is the sort of government that I strive to lead.
I look forward to talking with you and getting your feedback direct.
Thanks for listening.


PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: Al, welcome back to Australia, tell us what happening with the preparations for Copenhagen, what's happening around the world?
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: Well, a lot of nations are moving forward and I congratulate you on the initiatives you've taken here. As I've said in my own country, I think every nation needs to do more, but I'm very grateful to you for listening and for taking the time to really delve deeply into the solutions for the climate crisis and the kind of leadership that you proposed to the other leaders at the G8 to breakthrough this paralysis in the international political community to really confront the climate crisis head-on is very welcome and I hope that the leaders around the world will take the advice that you've given to engage at the leadership level and really breakthrough this impasse.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: Well it's going to be really tough, as I said to the counterparts in this summit in Italy just recently, the negotiators, without a fresh political mandate, are going to find it very, very tough. They need a fresh political mandate and it's going to require leaders to get directly involved both in the developed economies, for as you know we still don't have a consensus, but most particularly engaging the emerging economies where there is something of a standoff about what they are prepared to do. Unless we get commitments from them you can see what's going to happen in Copenhagen and everyone's going to say ‘well everyone else is not doing enough' so this is going to require some significant political intervention to try and push it ahead and I think, in the room at L'Aquila, there was a sense that some ‘business as usual' approach to these negotiations through the year's end is not going to be sufficient.
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: No
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: So it'll be all hands to the pump. Now in America the legislation's through the house, how about the senate?
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: Well it's going to be a tough fight, but one of the outcomes in the House of Representatives was the building of a broader coalition of support so the odds that people would have given for passage in the senate at the beginning of the year were very long, but they're much shorter now because this new coalition gives us a much better chance of passing it in the senate. And there's a parallel between, many parallels between, the United States and Australia: we both have leaders, thank you very much, who are engaged and want to move forward but in both countries the political obstacles are still formidable. One thing that impresses me here in Australia is the extraordinary level of public support for doing something to solve this crisis. I think my impression, as a non-Australian  -  forgive me for presuming this opinion, is that Australians are really aware of the extent to which this great nation is vulnerable to the climate crisis and increasingly aware of the tremendous resources you have available in solar and geothermal and wind and ocean energy and I think there's a general public feeling that we should get on with it.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: I think that's right, that's certainly the impression we get from the Australian community at two levels is that, one, people know this is the driest continent on earth if you leave off Antarctica and, two, we are therefore likely to cop the impact of climate change earliest and hardest and you see the evidence of that.
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: Yeah, hard to miss.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: Yeah, and the other part of it is this, this country does not lack the sunshine so on basic things like solar and some of the initiatives we've taken through the budget our plan to build the biggest solar-generating plant in the world is to become world leaders rather than world followers on the renewable energies sector. There's a few other similarities between us and the United States though, it's called the Senate...
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: [Laughter]
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: ... because our Senate, led by our conservatives is, is putting up a roadblock at the moment to passing our emissions trading scheme and our carbon reduction scheme and we don't know what they are going to do on our renewable energy target so it's going to be an interesting political season, but I think a critically important political season both in Washington and in Canberra to get this done, we must get it done, business certainly also demands it.
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: Yeah, I hear from my friends in Australia that increasingly there's public awareness of who are the ones who are holding it up and blocking it and with public opinion as strong as it is here in Australia I have to believe that democracy will work its will on this crisis, I certainly hope so, but it's time-limited, we don't have the luxury of a lot of time to organise a massive response.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: Well good to have you, again, in Australia.
FORMER US VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE: Well I'm very grateful for the courtesy that you've shown me in meeting with me and talking in great-depth about this issue. I really appreciate your personal commitment of time and energy to try to really get to the heart of this and anything that I can do to help you, I'm really eager to be available.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: Well thanks, Al and thanks for your work, globally, on this. I think, as you and I have discussed already, the challenge we face is to sort of puncture through a degree, still, of global complacency on this at a political level. I think the people, peoples, of the world to an increasing degree actually get this, it's actually the hard political choices.


The Hon Peter Garrett, AM, MP:One of the prime aspects of green precincts is to provide iconic locations where green technologies are in place in a publicly visible environment and provide that educative and inspirational direction towards the way in which we need to live in the future.
Cate Blanchett, Artistic Director Sydney Theatre Company:Us, as a cultural institution, we think we're perfectly placed given the iconic nature of being on a finger wharf and the fact that Barangaroo is being developed and the hope that we would develop a cultural ribbon spanning all the way from the Opera House through us and the company, the wharf that we're on, not only houses us, but that it also houses many other institutions such as Bangarra, Sydney Dance, ATYP, so that we feel that the movements that we're making to green out practices could have an impact on developing a whole green precinct down here.
Senator the Hon Penny Wong: well look, this is a really good project and it's great for two reasons: first, you the sustainability that it involves, which is, reducing green house gas emissions and as well as that reducing the take on the mains water supply, by reusing and recycling water. But the second reason it's important is that it will inspire people. This is about showing people the way that we can change. It's about providing leadership and encouragement to the community. Because we know that climate change will require such a wide response across the Australian society in the years to come, we need everybody: political leaders, community leaders, governments and individuals; working to reduce our carbon pollution so that we can reduce the risk for our children and we can stop accelerating climate change.
Andrew Upton, Artistic Director Sydney Theatre Company: It is entirely appropriate that this iconic arts hub, because it is the home to many arts companies, is back at the cutting edge of Sydney, now incorporating what will no doubt in the future become more common  -  cutting-edge, sustainable, water and energy savings technology. As an arts company we are committed to the belief that we should explore the new and pave the way, our greening initiative represents an important manifestation of this belief.


PM: I'm advised that this morning at around 7:45am Jakarta time, that's 10:45am Australian Eastern Standard Time, bombs exploded at the Marriott and the Ritz-Carlton Hotels in Jakarta.
Early this afternoon I convened a meeting of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet and of our various security agencies, to establish the facts concerning these events and what actions are being taken in response to them.
Let me state at the outset the following - any terrorist attack anywhere is an attack on us all. Any terrorist attack on our friends in Indonesia is an attack on our neighbours. Any terrorist attack is an act of cowardice, it is an act of murder, it is a barbaric act that violates the fundamental principles of human decency.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I extend our sympathy and condolences to the families and loved ones of those who've lost their lives in this terrorist attack, and our deep concern for those who have been injured. The Australian Government utterly condemns this terrorist attack, an attack that warrants condemnation from all governments around the world and our common resolve that we should work together to bring the perpetrators of this attack to justice.
Let me now go to the facts of this matter as best we know them in relation to the two hotel bombings, which have only occurred in Jakarta three or four hours ago. I'm advised that at 7:45am, a bomb was detonated at the Marriott Hotel in Jakarta, at the Mutiara Restaurant within that hotel, and that the restaurant was significantly damaged. I'm also advised that at around 7:49am, a bomb was detonated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel, at the Airllanga Restaurant within that hotel, and that it too was significantly damaged.
I'm advised that as of 1:30pm this afternoon AEST, that there are some four to six dead and some 18 injured. Just prior to coming to speak to here, Australia's ambassador to Indonesia has told us that the Indonesian national police are now reporting that the number of dead has increased to nine, and around 40 injuries. These figures, of course, will be subject to revision. I'm also advised that as of now, there is one confirmed Australian who is injured, and we have a report of a second Australian injured.
The Department of Foreign Affairs has established a consular crisis centre, with a hotline of 1300 555 135  -  1300 555 135.
The hotline is to answer as best we can the questions of concerned members of the Australian public with family, friends and loved ones in Jakarta. It has been staffed as of 2pm this afternoon AEST and will have its staffing progressively enhanced as events unfold in response to need.
Let me go to the question of the numbers of registered Australians in Indonesia. Currently, there are some 1,053 Australians registered in Jakarta, and a total of some 4,745 Australians registered in Indonesia. As you would be aware, many Australians, both in Indonesia and in other countries abroad, choose not to register. Therefore, the total number of Australians registered in Jakarta and in Indonesia more broadly would be significantly higher than the figures that I have just read.
I have authorised, through the National Security Committee, all agencies of the Australian Government to offer all forms of assistance to the Government of Indonesia in their response to these attacks. The Deputy Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police has been in contact with his counterpart in the Indonesian national police, offering all forms of assistance in forensics, in victim identification, and also in counter-terrorism.
We have also offered all relevant assistance through our health authorities in attending to the needs of any burns victims.
I've spoken, as I indicated before, in the last half hour, to Australia's Ambassador to Indonesia, who advises me that Australian consular staff have been posted to all relevant hospitals in Jakarta to monitor the arrival of Australians or others for whom we have consular responsibility in Indonesia. I have also asked the Ambassador to convey to the Australian community in Jakarta the Government's willingness to provide all forms of practicable support as appropriate.
I've also asked the Ambassador to convey to the Indonesian Foreign Ministry and to the President the offers of Australian Government assistance in response to these attacks. I hope to speak to President Yudhoyono as soon as it is practicable for him to do so, given the many tasks for which he is responsible now on the ground in his country.
An emergency taskforce has been located within the Department of Foreign Affairs in Canberra, as has been the practice in previous terrorist attacks involving Australians abroad. This taskforce brings together all government agencies involved in counter-terrorism relevant to these attacks. That emergency taskforce is now at work.
As I've said repeatedly in recent times, terrorism remains a continuing threat to us all. I'm advised that the travel advisory circulated by the Department of Foreign Affairs as of early this week read as follows, and I quote from it:
“We advise you to reconsider your need to travel to Indonesia, including Bali, at this time due to the very high threat of terrorist attack. We continue to receive credible information that terrorists could be planning attacks in Indonesia. If you decide to travel to Indonesia, you should exercise extreme caution. Previous terrorist attacks against Westerners in Bali and Jakarta indicate these areas are priority targets. You should take particular care to avoid places known to be terrorist targets.”
The travel advisory goes on to say “the possible targets for terrorist attacks in Indonesia include international hotels.”
The travel advisory, as of this afternoon, has been updated to include information concerning these most recent attacks. Australians again are advised to reconsider their need for travel to Indonesia, including Bali.
These appalling attacks remind us afresh of the fact that terrorism remains a continuing threat to us all. The Government maintains absolute vigilance through its agencies at home and abroad on this threat. The Government will continue to respond to the advice of the National Security Advisor on any further resources and/or actions which may be necessary in the future.
I've been further advised of reports of other explosions in Jakarta this afternoon. We have been unable, as of now, to confirm the nature of these explosions, and we will advise you further on them as further details come to hand.
Let me conclude by saying that these attacks also bring back terrible memories to so many Australians whose lives were so tragically changed by earlier attacks in Bali, Indonesia and elsewhere around the world. Our thoughts are with these, our fellow Australians, at this time as well.
I'm happy to take your questions on this matter. 
JOURNALIST: Who do we suspect was responsible for this attack?
PM: The advice that I have from the National Security Committee and the agencies which service it is that this is a terrorist attack. In terms of the terrorist organisation and/or individuals responsible for it, that is currently the subject of work between the agencies. As of when that becomes clearer, then either myself or other ministers of the Government will make a further statement on that.
JOURNALIST: Would it be fair to say that JI is the top suspect?
PM: I can only respond to the advice of the expert agencies who have been analysing this matter. Plainly, terrorist organisations remain a threat to Australians around the world. Plainly, JI remains a threat as well, together with al-Qaeda. That is why over many, many months, and in the period that I've been in office, myself and other ministers have continued to reiterate the continuing threat of terrorism against all Australians.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned before that you had advice there were possible other threats imminent. Are you getting intelligence that this is part of a renewed campaign or a resurgent JI or other terrorist groups in the region?
PM: Is your question in relation to further bombs in Jakarta? On the question of the explosions in Jakarta, later and subsequent to the two bombings which I've referred to in some detail, I'll just reiterate that we are not in the position to confirm any further details about whether they are terrorist attacks or not. It is better that we simply proceed cautiously on that at this stage and in a measured way. As of when we have further information to hand as to whether these explosions are innocuous or not, we'll advise you further.
JOURNALIST: On the broader question of these suspected terrorist attacks this morning, are you getting intelligence that there is a bigger campaign perhaps underway?
PM: Our concern, consistent with the public statements made by the Government over a long period of time, is that the terrorist threat has been a continuing threat for some time. That remains valid as of now, as demonstrated graphically and horrifically by the events in Jakarta this morning, and therefore our vigilance must be maintained.
As I said in my remarks before, the Government will be responding to any further advice from the National Security Advisor about any further actions or resources in response to any further evolution of the threat against Australians at home or abroad.
JOURNALIST: Apart from JI, are you aware of any other organisations within Indonesia capable of an attack like this?
PM: I'd rather not go to the detail of the organisations concerned. I would rather wait for the considered advice of the intelligence community and of our security agencies on this. It is important to be measured in our response to this in terms of the information that we have at hand.
As I think you would all appreciate here, making sure that we make clear everything that can be made clear in the immediate aftermath of an attack which only occurred some four hours or so ago, is a difficult business. Our agencies are currently hard at work and hard at work with their Indonesian counterparts.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) taken responsibility?
PM: To my current information, I am unaware of that. If that changes in any way then of course we will make a further statement concerning that.
JOURNALIST: Both of these hotels are popular with Western business people and in fact we understand that some embassy staff live at the hotels. So does it concern you that it seems to be an attack that's targeting Westerners again?
PM: Well again I would go to the content of our travel advisories and the importance that we attach to those warnings about targets and known targets for terrorists against Westerners in Jakarta and elsewhere.
If you go to the detail of the pre-existing travel advice, it does list a large and long number of potential locations.
You may be familiar with the long and rolling debate about the nature of our travel advisory which, I indicated before, calls upon people to reconsider travel to Indonesia. The fact that that advice has remained constant for such a long period of time reflects the seriousness with which we regard the continuing terrorist threat within Indonesia. 
It's been a matter, as you know, of some controversy and public debate and that is why I think our agencies have acted appropriately in providing that continuing advice to the government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did the intelligence agencies provide any specific warnings in relation to this attack? I appreciate there has been ongoing chatter but was there any specific warning about this particular attack?
PM: On the, as this has only just occurred I would rather not go to the matters concerning our most immediate intelligence. I would simply go back to what the travel advisories have said. I don't say that for any particular reason other than that it has only been a few hours and I would much rather thoroughly go through everything.
But I draw your attention to the fact again that the language contained within the travel advisory about threats against Australians, Westerners, in Jakarta and in international hotels is not there for idle purpose.
It is there because of what we have deduced over a period of time. And therefore, that is important to bear in mind when people read those travel advisories.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, only a number of days ago there was defence experts making some commentary about Indonesia's success in tackling JI and dismantling some of the cells in Indonesia and they were being lauded for doing so. Is this a wake-up call (inaudible)?
PM: I am unaware of the comments which you have just referred to.
But let me just say more broadly my own continuing view and why I have repeatedly made this point over a long period of time, and that is that the terrorist threat remains alive and well, across the world.
We have been reminded of this in most recent times in terms of actions for example in Mumbai. What we have learned over a period of time is that terrorism is an international phenomenon. It can strike anywhere at any time. And that is why all of our agencies nationally and internationally must be working in the closest possible coordination.
JOURNALIST: Has the Indonesian Government specifically asked for anything in particular from the Australian Government?
PM: I understand that a detailed conversation has occurred between the deputy commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and the Indonesian national police and his counterpart there. In terms of the content, the detailed content of that conversation, I am not apprised.
You will be aware of the fact that there is a long-standing and deep fabric of cooperation between the two police services on forensics, on victim identification and more broadly on counter terrorism, going right back to the appalling events in Bali.
That cooperation continues. We'll have greater clarity on what take-up the Indonesians wish to make of further offers of assistance as the day wears on and into tomorrow. But we on the Australian side are making all levels of physical preparation to make sure that any assets which our friends in Jakarta may want from us are there and are there quick smart.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) the facts of this matter - you have been briefed extensively by the various agencies this morning. You must be getting some preliminary indications about what has happened, and the circumstances surrounding it. Is the preliminary view that this is JI?
PM: I've just come from a long meeting which I convened and with all relevant agencies in attendance, as you would expect. And what we, what I have been advised demonstrably is this is a terrorist attack. You would understand that in the immediate hours following, we are concerned principally and primarily about the security and wellbeing of Australians and those for whom we have consular responsibility.
And as you would see from my remarks before about injured Australians and reports of injuries towards Australians, that has occupied the bulk of our attention, together with what needs to be put immediately in place in terms of identifying through forensics and other key elements of investigatory work who is responsible.
That investigatory work involving forensics is of critical importance, based on my own recollection for example, following the bombing of the Australian Embassy in Jakarta and certainly in the context of Bali. So it is important that we don't get ahead of ourselves. It is important that we establish the facts, and forensic work is critical.
As more comes to light on this we will not be backward in coming forward in providing you, the ladies and gentlemen of the press, and the wider Australian community with our conclusions on this.
But I think it is important to proceed cautiously.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you describe for us your immediate thoughts, your reaction to this (inaudible)? What was the first thing that went through your mind?
PM: I was telephoned this morning by my foreign policy adviser, I suppose about three quarters of an hour after this event occurred, and I was sick in the stomach. And I think all Australians would feel sick in the stomach.
This is an assault on all of us and we are dealing with some very ugly people. Very, very ugly people and dangerous.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one final question on an unrelated matter -
PM: I said I would take questions on this and I would rather just leave it to that today.
Thank you very much.
(Ends)


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd:Every now and then, in Australia, we do some genuinely good things together. Often in our national debate, it focuses on the things that are going wrong. Often in our national debate, it focuses on the things about which we disagree. However, I think there is a big room in our national debate to focus on those things we are doing well, and doing together. And tonight is one such occasion. When we come together, as the Minister has just said, as different Governments, one Australian, one West Australian, but most critically, in partnership with this local community of Indigenous Australians and non-Indigenous Australians. Can I say also to local Indigenous people how much, together with the Premier, I respect the contribution you continue to make to the betterment of your people here. I know something of the challenges you face, but not all of them. At the end of the day, I'm from over East, and I'm from Canberra. And I've only been here twice now. But I do understand something of the challenges you face. And that's why we'd like to see ourselves together with you as long-term partners as you carve out a future for your people.


PM:                 Good evening.
I've convened the National Security Committee of Cabinet for a second time today, this evening at 6pm, for a further update on the appalling bombings that occurred in Jakarta earlier today. I'll now advise you of some additional facts as I've been apprised. However, I would emphasise to all of you that there are many facts concerning the attacks in Jakarta today which remain unclear.
On the basis of the reports to me from officials of the National Security Committee, I have grave concerns for three Australians following the terrorist bombings in Jakarta earlier today. One of these Australians is an Australian Embassy official. These figures may be the subject of further change.
According to the Indonesian coordinating minister for security, there are now in total nine recorded dead from this attack. The minister also reports a further 42 to be injured, 13 of whom are said to be foreigners. Again these figures may be subject to some revision.
The Australian Federal Police in Jakarta are liaising with their Indonesian counterparts and are now providing assistance to Indonesian counterparts, and discussing additional forms of assistance that the AFP forensic and other elements of the force could provide.
At 4:30pm today, the National Crisis Committee was convened to ensure that States and Territories in Australia were fully briefed by federal authorities on developments in Jakarta. This is a normal procedure.
At 5:30pm today, the Government convened the Australian Health Protection Committee, which comprises senior health officials from both the Commonwealth, State and Territory governments, and they have been asked to reserve capabilities within their respective hospital systems in case of need arising from the Jakarta bombings.
There is no further advice available concerning any claim of responsibility for the attack, nor is there a further indication from Australian agencies about who might be responsible.
Beyond the matters that I have addressed in these remarks tonight, and in my statement earlier today, I would not  propose to speculate further, as given this case is so sensitive and so serious, I do not believe it would responsible to do so in the absence of further direct advice and information from officials.
I have also received a communication from the President of Indonesia today, welcoming Australia's message of sympathy and support as a result of these horrific bombings, as well as a message from the President expressing his appreciation for our offers of Australian Government support.
Could I conclude my remarks this evening by saying this is a very, very difficult time for many Australian families tonight, and for many Indonesian families tonight, and our hearts and our thoughts and our prayers go out to each of them at this most trying of times.
I am happy to take a couple of questions.
JOURNALIST:          (inaudible)
PM:                             I would rather not go to the detail of that. As I indicated in my earlier remarks today, a principal location of damage in the hotel, at the Marriott was the restaurant that I referred to. But beyond that I would rather not speculate as I have not been provided with further information on that score.
JOURNALIST:          Prime Minister, there are reports of one Australian dead (inaudible) is that part of the three that you hold grave concerns for?
PM:                             When I say, and have said before, explicitly on the advice of our officials, who have been in contact with our embassy staff on the ground in Jakarta and our consular staff, and they in turn have been in contact with Indonesian national police and the other Indonesian national authorities - that I base my remarks carefully on what information has been provided to me.
I do not use those words lightly when I say that I have grave concerns for three Australians and I await further information from them, and confirmation from them before making any further information public. I believe that is the responsible course of action in these difficult circumstances.
JOURNALIST:          Are you able to shed any more light on their identities, if not their names, perhaps (inaudible)
PM:                             Again, because this is such a difficult time for so many Australian families, I don't believe that would be responsible until all proper processes have been gone through between Australian and Indonesian officials.
I spoke again with Australia's Ambassador to Indonesia this evening just prior to attending this press conference and that is the course of action which I have agreed with him as well. I thank you very much.


PM:Today is a really sad time for all Australians. I can confirm the death of Mr Garth McEvoy in the terrorist bombings in Jakarta on Friday and that two other Australians, Craig Senger and Nathan Verity are also presumed dead. 
The Foreign Minister, as you know, is in Jakarta and I spoke to him last night and he had just spoken with Craig Senger's wife. And I understand the Foreign Minister has also spoken with family members of Nathan Verity. I spoke myself last night to Craig Senger's mum, who lives here in Canberra. Mrs Senger senior, Joan, lost her husband only a month or so ago. He was buried in this church, and Craig Senger delivered the eulogy here. This is a very sad time for that family. 
The Department of Foreign Affairs advises me that, to the best of their knowledge, apart from military officers and police officers, this is the first Australian Government official to be killed by a terrorist attack in the line of duty. It's therefore a sad day for the Australian official community, given the loss which has been suffered. 
I think I speak on behalf of all Australians when I say our thoughts and our prayers and our hearts go out to so many grieving families across Australia today. 
It's also a sad day for the Australian Defence community. Australia has lost another soldier in Afghanistan. He was killed yesterday. This fine Australian soldier was a 22-year-old from the 1st Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment based in Townsville. He previously served in East Timor in 2007, and was in the early stages of his deployment to Operation Slipper with the Mentoring and Reconstruction Taskforce 2. 
This brave Australian soldier has paid the ultimate sacrifice for his country. He was the 11th Australian soldier to lose his life in Afghanistan. The family of this soldier have asked that no further details be released at this time and I'd ask the media to respect the wishes of the family. Our thoughts and our prayers are with his partner, family, friends, and of course his comrades  -  those here at home and those still in the field in Afghanistan. 
Another Australian soldier has been seriously wounded and we wish him God speed for a full recovery, and of course our thoughts and our prayers are with him and his family as well. 
I'm also advised that three Afghan civilians were injured in the events of yesterday, including an eight-year-old boy. 
In the light of these terrible events in Afghanistan yesterday, it's important for us all to remember here in Australia that Afghanistan has been a training ground for terrorists worldwide, a training ground also for terrorists in South-East Asia, reminding us of the reasons that we are in that field of combat and reaffirming our resolve to remain committed to that cause. It is in our long-term interest that we remain absolutely rock-solid in our commitment there. 
Over to you, if you've got anything you'd like to ask. 
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd, just with regard to Jakarta, yesterday you convened for the third time the National Security Committee. What was the outcome of that? 
PM: We went through a series of operational matters concerning our best continuing analysis of those responsible for this appalling attack. Can I also say that the Australian Government will leave no stone unturned in bringing to justice the perpetrators of this violent, barbaric act of murder. That's what it is - a violent, barbaric act of murder. Three Australians have lost their lives, and others as well. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on the Afghanistan soldier, what can you say to Australians who may be doubting the progress that's being made? 
PM: Today is a time to remember the courage and sacrifice of the soldier who has fallen and to remind ourselves afresh of the reasons why our men and women in uniform are putting themselves on the front line in the field of battle. That reason, again, is that Afghanistan has been an open training ground in the past for terrorists worldwide, and the reason we are there with our friends and allies is to prevent that from becoming the case again in the future. 
Thank you. 
[ends]


United States President Barack Obama: Let me turn it over to Kevin Rudd, who I think has a significant announcement that fits in with the issues I raised earlier about technology challenges and our capacity to move forward and leapfrog over some of the old technologies that make this problem so difficult to deal with; Kevin.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd: Thank you very much, Barack. And can I say, on behalf of so many of us, how welcome it is to see the return of US global leadership on climate change under your Presidency. In many respects the eyes of the world are on L'Aquila...
United States President Barack Obama: You've got back up here [laughter].
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd: ... It's good that we all hunt in packs; in many respects the eyes of the world are on us, all of us, here in L'Aquila. The next generation's eyes as well on us here in L'Aquila. Because we are doing with the great moral and economic challenge of our age, climate change.
As many of us said today, Copenhagen is only 150 days away. And it will all be about targets, it'll be about timetables, it will also be about technology and the funding of that technology. And as President Obama just said, so many good proposals put forward today on those questions. Within this, one of the great challenges we will always face is how do we put a price on carbon? How do we reduce the carbon intensity of energy production? How do we increase energy efficiency? How do we increase the global use of clean energy? How do we deal with the challenge of coal-fired electricity production into the future? Here are three figures which should seize all of our imagination and global attention. 70 per cent of Co2 emissions are energy-related. As of 2005, the International Energy Agency tells us that 40 per cent of global energy production comes from coal. The third figure is this: by 2050, the IEA tells us that 56 per cent of global production is likely to come from coal. So the practical challenge we face, if we are serious about the challenge of climate change, is what we do also about the problem of coal, the challenge of coal.
At the last G8 MEF meeting in Hokkaido in Japan, I listened at my first meeting to presentations from my colleagues. The G8 set a target for 20 industrial-scale carbon capture and storage projects by 2020. That is, between 500 and 1000 megawatts each. This is not a huge target if you consider that each year around the world some 100-1000 megawatt power stations are being built. But based on our own global analysis conducted over the past twelve months, there are practically no large-scale carbon capture and storage projects under construction now. Although storage itself is being done, five million tonnes of Co2 being fully stored each year, and that's been the case for some years past, indicating that the technology in this respect, can be effective. So that is why Australia in the last twelve months has decided to work with other major economies and all the major energy companies on the establishment of a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, the GCCSI. That is what we are here launching today. What will this GCCSI do which is not already being done? Its mission is clear: It's to get large-scale carbon capture and storage projects done around the world, not just discussed. Unless we do these projects, we will not have an effect in bringing down those huge numbers of energy production I referred to before coming from coal and their greenhouse gas emission impact. And deploying the three available CCS technologies that we know of: pre-combustion, post-combustion, and oxy-fuel combustion. And there may be more which will be developed as well. This Global Institute will have three functions. To become the global clearing house for all state the art CCS knowledge, as our view is that this should be a public good this knowledge, given that the challenge that we face is a global public challenge. Secondly, it should also become a rolling global clearing house for potential CCS projects around the world. Detailed project descriptions, so that would-be investors both public and private know where to go. And also, an institute possibly assisting critically with the raising of project finance, given that, in their initial stages, inevitably these large-scale projects will involve public subsidy. And its third function, to become the global clearing house also for the legislation and regulation knowledge which is necessary to underpin these new technologies, in practice. Australia for example most recently has brought in the first legislation in the world to govern the offshore sequestration of carbon. We must act with speed. We in Australia have funded this institute, up to $100 million a year, because we see the great urgency of dealing with this great challenge.
I would like to thank all of my colleagues here for becoming foundation members of the GCCSI. 22 Governments in all, all G8 economies, and practically all major economies, and 100 plus of the major energy companies around the world. And today I also wish to announce that the GCCSI will commence, and has commenced operation this July, under its CEO, Nick Otter. An international advisory panel chaired by Jim Wolfensohn, former President of the World Bank, and panel members including Lord Nicholas Stern, Mr Claude Mandel, former Executive Director of the International Energy Agency, and Dr Leena Srivastava from the Indian Energy and Resources Institute. Other members from China and other countries to be announced soon. So Barack, and my colleagues who are here with me today, it is with great pleasure, at this forum, that at L'Aquila, that we launch officially the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute to make one practical contribution to the great challenge we all face, of dealing effectively with climate change [applause].


PM: We're here to do two things, and they both concern the Australian Carbon Trust.
The first I'd like to confirm that the Australian Carbon Trust, which is an important climate change initiative of the Australian Government will be headquartered in Brisbane.
The second is this  -  that the Chair of the Australian Carbon Trust will be Robert Hill. The Carbon Trust is an important measure for the Government and for the country. The Australian Government will be investing some $75.8 million in the Carbon Trust over the next five years, and it has two main functions.
The first is to provide practical support to Australian households and small businesses to reduce their and the nation's overall carbon footprint, and there are practical means by which that's to be done.
The second is this: by a revolving fund, a $50 million revolving fund, assisting the Australian business community with ensuring that the commercial buildings we build for the future are as energy efficient as possible.
WONG: A very important aspect of this will be the work of the Carbon Trust. It will be to promote energy efficiency in Australian businesses through the mechanisms the Prime Minister announced. It will also be to build on the willingness of Australian households to do the right thing, to become more energy efficient, to play their part in tackling climate change, because tackling climate change requires action from all of us across the Australian community.
HILL: So support of the Government, with the private sector, in ensuring that all future refurbishments are done in the carbon-effective way. It seems to me to be sensible public policy, and opportunities also to give the public the opportunity to directly contribute to carbon saving is obviously important also.


The Australian Government today announced two major developments in the establishment of the Australian Carbon Trust  -  the innovative new body which will help Australian households contribute directly to reducing carbon pollution.
Professor Robert Hill will be appointed chair of the Board to be established for the Australian Carbon Trust. 
The Trust's headquarters will be established in Brisbane. This will complement the location of the National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility at Griffith University, helping make Brisbane a hub of activity to tackle climate change in Australia. 
The Australian Government has committed $75.8 million to establish the Australian Carbon Trust which will promote energy efficiency measures to households and businesses to help all Australians do their bit on climate change. 
As chair, Professor Hill will work with the board to manage and implement the Trust's two key initiatives; the Energy Efficiency Savings Pledge Fund and the Energy Efficiency Trust. 
The Energy Efficiency Savings Pledge Fund will provide a web-based calculator so that households can calculate their energy use and the dollar savings that result from energy efficiency activities.  
Individuals will be able to pledge the resulting savings, or any other amount, to the Pledge Fund to buy and cancel carbon pollution permits. This will enable individuals to directly contribute to achieving Australia's emissions reduction targets. The Pledge Fund will be entirely voluntary and contributions will be tax deductible. 
The Energy Efficiency Trust will bring together public and private seed funding, business skills and culture and technical knowledge to leverage investment in energy efficiency activities in commercial buildings and other business operations. 
The Government expects the Australian Carbon Trust will be incorporated as a public company within the next six months, and a board of directors appointed. 
Professor Hill has a distinguished record of public service. He was Senator for South Australia from 1981 to 2006 and is a former Minister for the Environment (1996-2001) and Minister for Defence (2001-2006). Professor Hill was Australia's ambassador to the United Nations and is currently Adjunct Professor in Sustainability at the University of Sydney's US Studies Centre. 
The Australian Carbon Trust will be developed in collaboration with the Carbon Trust in the United Kingdom, which is a leader in working with business to cut carbon and develop commercial low carbon technologies. 
Information relating to the Australian Carbon Trust and the establishment of the Board will be available on the Department of Climate Change website shortly.


PM:Good to be back in Brisbane, and I'm here with Robert Hill and with Penny Wong, the Minister for Climate Change. We're here to do two things, and they both concern the Australian Carbon Trust.
The first is I'd like to confirm that the Australian Carbon Trust, which is an important climate change initiative of the Australian Government, will be headquartered in Brisbane.
The second is this - that the Chair of the Australian Carbon Trust will be Robert Hill. Robert Hill has an extensive experience in public policy in Australia. As you know, he was a Senator for South Australia between 1981 and 2006; he's a former minister for the environment and a former minister for defence. Also, most recently he's been Australia's Permanent Representative to the United Nations and is currently Adjunct Professor in Sustainability at University of Sydney's US Studies Centre.
The Carbon Trust is an important measure for the Government and for the country. The Australian Government will be investing some $75.8 million in the Carbon Trust over the next five years and it has two main functions.
The first is to provide practical support to Australian households and small businesses to reduce their and the nation's overall carbon footprint, and there are practical means by which that's to be done.
The second is this  -  by a revolving fund, a $50 million revolving fund, assisting the Australian business community with ensuring that the commercial buildings we build for the future are as energy efficient as possible. The way that works is effectively for the fund to provide grants for the building of commercial buildings. And as the savings from energy efficiency come in from those deployed technologies, those grants are then repaid. It becomes, therefore, a revolving fund over time.
These are two practical measures by which families, households and commercial buildings can reduce Australia's overall greenhouse gas emissions, and that's what it's all about. The Australian Carbon Trust is designed to ensure that we as a nation, government, business, households, are out there doing our bit to bring down greenhouse gas emissions. Action on climate change is critical for the economy long term and for the environment long term.
That's why we're committed globally, through our work in the negotiations leading up to Copenhagen. That's why we're committed nationally, through the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and through a Renewable Energy Target. And that's why we're also taking initiatives like the Australian Carbon Trust to ensure that households, mums and dads and households, can do their bit also to bring down greenhouse gas emissions. Enough from me, do you want to add, Penny?
WONG: Can I say I'm pleased to be here in Brisbane for this announcement with the Prime Minister, and with Professor Hill, as he now is.
Taking action on climate change is going to require a whole range of measures, a whole range of policies. We know that the centrepiece of our policy is the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, but we also know we need to harness the willingness of Australian households and Australian business to reduce their carbon pollution. So a very important aspect of this will be the work of the Carbon Trust. It will be to promote to promote energy efficiency in Australian businesses through the mechanisms the Prime Minister announced.
It will also be to build on the willingness of Australian households to do the right thing, to become more energy efficient, play their part in tackling climate change, because tackling climate change requires action from all of us across the Australian community.
Can I say on a personal note, and as Minister, how delighted I am that Robert Hill has agreed to chair the Carbon Trust? He brings to this position a wealth of experience. He also brings an understanding of the opportunities which exist, from his work internationally, the opportunities which exist for Australia to become a world leader in energy efficiency and when it comes to action on climate change. So I'll hand over now to Robert.
HILL: Well, I remember, not long ago, President Obama saying he thought there were huge opportunities to save carbon through energy efficiency, and I think it's as with the United States when you think of, particularly in the refurbishing of buildings in the commercial sector, it's just obvious with the knowledge we now have you can construct in a way that would be significantly carbon less intense than what they were originally.
So support of the Government, with the private sector, in ensuring that all future refurbishments are done in the most carbon-effective way seems to me to be sensible public policy, and opportunities also to give the public the opportunity to directly contribute to carbon saving is, obviously, important also.
When Penny asked me whether I'd do this, I had a look at the experience of the UK Carbon Trust, which started in 2001, so it's been going for about eight years. And all reports have been that it's been very successful. So I look forward to doing my best to help ensure this initiative works effectively. I think it'll be good for the country, and think it'll get widespread Australian support.
PM: Okay, thanks very much. Now, what we might do is take a few questions on that, and then we might liberate Robert before the usual spray starts on anything else that you want to ask about. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how will this, is this going to require, say, working with local government? What I'm thinking of, in particular, is if you're talking things like building, isn't that going to be building codes and that sort of area?
PM: I'll ask the Minister to supplement my comments. This is primarily about the financing of ensuring that you have the maximum energy efficiency ratings in buildings, commercial buildings, when they are built.
Often there is a financing problem, hence the idea of a rotating fund, so if the Government by putting, am I right, $50 million into this part of the Fund, and we're putting in more than $75 million for the overall operations of the Carbon Trust, $50 million in this particular Fund, that is to assist by way of grants for commercial buildings installing the most energy efficient technologies at the time of construction. But through the savings which then come in, the repayment back into the revolving fund, so it works like that over time.
This is a model which has been explored elsewhere in the world. It's a model which we think has got application in Australia. Did you want to add to that?
WONG: Just very briefly, regulation, those sorts of measures, are obviously important, but what we also want is to give people the incentive, to give businesses the incentive which, through demonstrating that they can in fact save money by doing the sorts of things that the Carbon Trust can assist them with.
So it's about ensuring not only that we do the right thing in terms of policy frameworks, it's also about ensuring you give business an example of how this can work for them, how this can be a savings measure for businesses. We do that by demonstration and by, as the Prime Minister outlined, a revolving Fund.
JOURNALIST: If there's a financial benefit from undertaking these energy efficiency measures which is then paid back, then why do you need a specific mechanism for it? Couldn't that be done through the regular, free market?
WONG: Well, look I think in the long term, yes you'd like to see a position where businesses, all Australian businesses did this off their own bat, but we've got to implement this change, we've got to get people more focussed on it and we've got to demonstrate the benefit to Australian business from this type of activity, that is, reducing your energy through retrofitting, through improving your energy efficiency, so these are measures which really increase the incentive for Australian business to reduce their carbon pollution.
JOURNALIST: New buildings, or retrofitting of old buildings? What you're talking seems largely to be applied to buildings of the future.
WONG: No, I think the Carbon Trust will be looking at existing buildings. Obviously, this will be a matter for Professor Hill and the Carbon Trust to work out exactly where they think the taxpayer can get best bang for their buck in terms of rolling this out. So that'll be a matter for them.
But this is designed to try and show Australian businesses the opportunities which exist to reduce their energy usage and to make energy savings.
JOURNALIST: What sort of powers will the Trust have to recoup?
WONG: Well, these are matters which will be sorted out as the Trust is established. As I said, this is obviously, the first announcement is the announcement of the Chair. The details of the program, that will be issues for Robert and his board.
JOURNALIST: Do you envisage them being able to borrow a portion of the budget, so to speak?
WONG: Well, as the Prime Minister said, there has been $50 million allocated to this, and that's available for the Carbon Trust to undertake this part of its activities in order to try and maximise its effect in rolling out energy efficiency measures through the business community.
JOURNALIST: We've got a whole swag of buildings over your shoulder, Prime Minister, Professor Hill. Do you want to point to the ones that work, that are energy efficient, and the ones that don't?
PM: Andrew, you live in Brisbane, you could give me a detailed description of each of those buildings behind you.
JOURNALIST: There's a really conspicuous one over there with the Queensland Government logo on the top which looks really - 
PM: I'd ask you to put that question at a different press conference, probably later in the day, to at a different level of Government.
JOURNALIST: Professor Hill, what does you joining this Carbon Trust say to your former Liberal colleagues in Canberra who are sort of squabbling over their position on climate change at the moment?
HILL: Well this is, this particular work of this Trust I don't think is politically partisan in any way. I'm told the money has been appropriated for it. Nobody's going to argue against giving the public the opportunity to contribute to better climate outcomes, or helping facilitate the refurbishing of buildings in a more energy efficient way. So I don't think it is really relevant to the domestic political debate at all.
JOURNALIST: Do you think your former colleagues though should jump on an ETS sooner rather than later?
HILL: Well I started work on a potential cap and trade for Australia almost a decade ago. And the political time wasn't right then. Perhaps it's getting closer. But basically, as with most Western nations, I think a cap and trade is the way to go.
You set your level and then you give business the opportunity to achieve the outcome at the least cost, and the way that is most business efficient. But there's clearly a domestic political debate on the detail and that'll work its way through.
JOURNALIST: Why has Brisbane been chosen for this head office?
HILL: Well, you've got to ask the person who announced it. But from my perspective, all capital cities in Australia can benefit from the Trust. And we might have the small group of staff located in Brisbane but we'll certainly be looking at its operations at the national perspective.
PM: Also I think the Queensland Government and various tertiary institutions here have done some considerable work, not to the exclusion of work done elsewhere in the nation, but there's a body of expertise which can be drawn upon. And also I think it's also good for Brisbane, good for Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Is that the Centre of Excellence for Climate Change that you're referring to?
PM: There's a range of expertises associated with various universities, you've just referred to one. And we've been mindful of that in the Minister's recommendation that the Carbon Trust be headquartered here.
But as Robert Hill has just indicated, we have expertise to draw upon across the country, and this is a national program designed to make, or aiming to make a difference with energy efficiency for households across the country, for commercial buildings across the country. The important thing is to just get the thing done and done effectively.
JOURNALIST: Access Economics - 
PM: Before we go onto that, I'm about to liberate Robert Hill from the political frame. And can I add to what Penny Wong said before and that is, personally to thank Robert Hill for stepping up to the plate, for chairing this important climate change initiative.
For the Government, this makes a difference on the ground in a practical way, and that's what we're all trying to do. So, thank you Robert, and if you've got any other really hard questions for him, tackle him under the tree over there. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: If I could ask you about the Access Economics report which is predicting that unemployment will peak at seven and a half, which is considerably lower than the eight and a half that's in the Government's Budget. Is it time for an updated economic and fiscal outlook?
PM: Can I say that the global economic recession is real. Secondly, that the global economy for the first time since the war will contract this year. And therefore, the measures that we put in place are necessary, because unemployment continues to rise. We, Australia is doing better than most other economies around the world, in part because of the measures the Government has taken. But we believe we're not out of the woods yet.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan said this morning that it looks to be the worst behind us, would you say the same thing?
PM: I think it's quite plain from the Treasurer's analysis and my analysis that there are some positive signs in the global economy, we're not out of the woods yet, and unemployment will continue to rise.
Let's stand back from it all. What we've had at work here is an ideology of unrestrained greed, unregulated markets, extreme capitalism producing a global economic recession and rising unemployment. And that's why Governments have had to step in to keep the economy going. That's what we've done, that's what we're continuing to do, and because unemployment continues to rise, we've got to continue to support the economy for the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: An expert this morning said soon Australian soldiers will be fighting the Afghan Army as opposed to fighting alongside them. Is it time to bump up the amount of troops?
PM: I haven't seen those reported remarks, nor do I know whom they're from. Can I say that each one of our deployments to Afghanistan has been taken seriously and soberly, based on the professional advice of the Australian Defence Force, and the Australian Department of Defence and the National Security Committee of the Cabinet.
We take each of these decisions in a considered and measured way. That's the right way to approach it.
And obviously, given the tragic loss of life again recently with an Australian soldier losing his life, we are very mindful of the continuing cost involved in fighting this fight against terrorism. And remember, terrorism and terrorists in Southeast Asia, in the past responsible for bombings which have killed Australians, have been trained in Afghanistan.
Let's always bear this in mind. Afghanistan used to be an unrestrained training ground for terrorists who operate worldwide, including in Southeast Asia. Our mission, together with our friends and allies around the world, is to prevent that from happening again.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of the bombings in Jakarta, Stephen Smith has been saying there was no prior warning. That seems to contradict DFAT warnings. Is that the case?
PM: I think it's, I haven't seen the remarks from the Foreign Minister, but it's quite clear there was no specific intelligence as it relates to the tragic attack that we saw most recently in Jakarta. However, if you look clearly at the travel advisories, as they existed for some time, they have been absolutely upfront about the continuing terrorist threat in Indonesia, in Jakarta and Bali, and making specific warnings about hotels, international hotels as being potential targets.
JOURNALIST: Do you think more needs to be done just to tackle the problem of alcohol-fuelled violence?
PM: Look, your question was alcohol-fuelled violence? Can I say one of the reasons why the Government has been so concerned about things like alcopops has been frankly, sitting down with the police authorities in major Australian cities saying ‘what's the problem here?'.
And one of them, just one of the problems, not all, one of the problems has been the availability of this relatively inexpensive alcoholic drink which has a particular takeup rate with young people.
But that's one part of it. There are many other aspects of policy which need to be brought to bear as well. Alcohol-driven violence on the streets of Australia's major cities is a problem for all of our police authorities, and the Government, in partnership with State and Territory Governments, is always open to proposals as to what practical additional measures can be taken to reduce this threat.
JOURNALIST: Martin Ferguson has said today that uranium mining in Queensland is now inevitable, and it's no different from coal and LNG resources. Would you agree with those sentiments?
PM: I haven't seen the reported remarks that you attribute to the Minister.
But can I just say that our policy when it comes to uranium mining was made absolutely clear at the National Conference of the Australian Labor Party a couple of years ago, which is when we had a big debate over what was then described as the three mines policy.
I put forward a proposal to change the policy. The policy changed. In fact, the vote was quite tight I seem to remember, a bit of nail biting there towards the end, but that's when it was changed. And I think that, frankly, shapes what has occurred since.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: There are two things really. One is that the centre, AEIOU, had recently participated in some charity auction and part of all that resulted in my visiting the centre. That's one part of it.
The second is, the challenge of autism, the Australian Government is entirely seized of how big this is for so many families across Australia. The figures I was presented with this morning are saying that each year we have about 2,000 kids born in Australia with one form of autism disorder or another across the autism spectrum.
So what's the practical challenge for us, is what can we do to make a difference for those families who have huge developmental challenges at stake?
What we're doing is two things so far. There is the Australian Government's autism program, some $190 million which we rolled out in a previous Budget to assist families. The second is, autism-specific early childhood centres which we're now constructing a half a dozen or so around the country. One of which is being constructed at Griffith University here, and we're discussing with AEIOU how we can expand those services in the future.
We haven't reached any conclusions on that, but the truth is, 2,000 kids a year, big impact on families. The gap is large. How do we intelligently close it? That's why we're talking to experts in the field. Got to run.
JOURNALIST: The Ashes, can you tell us -
PM: I just want to say something on The Ashes. Like all Australians, I watched telly last night with a sinking feeling in my stomach. But you know something, it's only two Tests down, and there's a few to go.
So I'm looking forward to the next Test, and we have a first class Australian team. And we should all be in there backing ‘em, each ball that's bowled, and each delivery which is struck to the boundary by Australian batsmen in the remaining Tests. Thanks folks.
(ends)



The Prime Minister and Acting Education Minister today congratulated outstanding students who have been awarded a 2008 Prime Minister's Award for Skills Excellence in School. 
The Award recognises Year 12 students who have demonstrated excellence and outstanding achievement in vocational education and training in schools. 
Award categories include the highest achieving student in each state and territory, the highest achieving Indigenous student, and the highest achieving students in each represented industry area.  Award recipients in each of these categories are listed below.
Winners of this prestigious award are selected from the highest achieving recipients of the Australian Vocational Student Prize.
Each winner receives a certificate from the Prime Minister and $2,000 in addition to their Australian Vocational Student Prize Award.
The Awards recognise the significant achievements of these students in gaining a better understanding of the world of work and developing industry-specific skills, while at the same time studying for their Senior Secondary Certificates.
The Award also promotes vocational education and training as a valuable and desirable pathway for students.    
The commitment of these students to learning exemplifies what the Council of Australian Governments' Compact with Young Australians aims to achieve.
The Compact encourages young Australians to realise their potential by entitling every Australian under the age of 25 to an education or training place. The Compact will ensure young Australians have the skills necessary to play a productive role in Australia's economic prosperity.
For more information about the Prime Minister's Award for Skills Excellence in School, the Australian Vocational Student Prize, and for the full list of 2008 winners, visit www.deewr.gov.au/avsp. 
Highest Achieving Students in Industry Groups
     * Joanne Stevens Mansfield Secondary College VIC (Agri-Food)
     * Sara Jane Janke Chinchilla State High School QLD (Community Services and Health)
     * James Monks-Corrigan Assumption College VIC (Construction and Property Services)
     * Jesse Passon Australian Technical College  -  Northern Adelaide SA (ElectroComms and Energy Utilities)
     * Heidi Henderson Sheldon College QLD (Innovation and Business)
     * Benjamin Wheeler Aldridge State High School QLD (Manufacturing)
     * Brianna Smith Birchip P-12 School VIC (Services)
     * Joseph Daw FCJ College, VIC (Transport and Logistics)
Highest Achieving Students in States and Territories
     * Luke Searle, St Francis Xavier College ACT
     * Jessica Baldwin Bradfield Senior College NSW 
     * Rebecca Tattingham O'Loughlin Catholic College NT 
     * Daniel Bunker John Paul College QLD 
     * Amy Michelle Fromm Bordertown High School SA 
     * Melanie McCoy St Brendan Shaw-College TAS 
     * Andrew Bennett Ballarat Secondary College VIC
     * Jerrah Menary Schools of Isolated &amp; Distance Education WA 
Highest Achieving Indigenous Student
     * Madilyn Yuke Australian Technical College North Brisbane QLD 


PM: I'll say a few things then ask for some questions. The Government's commited to a plan of Nation Building for Recovery. What does that mean? It means investing in jobs, small business and apprenticeships today, while at the same time investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
That's what this project here at Fraser Coast Anglican College is all about, and projects like it around the country. We're in the business of rolling out these sorts of projects in every one of Australia's 10,000 schools - whether it's state-of-the-art libraries, whether it's state-of-the-art language centres, state-of-the-art science centres, multipurpose halls or classroom modernisation, or something as basic as the sorts of shade cloth which the principal's talking to me about to enable the primary school kids to have a shaded place to be during the day.
And that need I've seen in so many schools right across the country.
But what it's all about is making a difference today for the jobs and the apprenticeships, the sorts of workers I've been talking to on the site here, in the here and now, when the economy is doing it tough, while still providing through our investments the schools, the state-of-the-art schools we need for our kids for tomorrow.
It's what we're trying to do. Two objectives at once, investing for tomorrow while supporting jobs and apprenticeships and small business today. And talking to a number of these businesses, these besser bricks I'm told, these bricks here, are coming from a works in Maryborough. That's providing local work. A couple of tradies I've spoken to have come down from Bundaberg. That's providing local work. The architects and others from this region as well, as I'm advised. That's providing local work as well. And this is what we're trying to do in communities right across the country, making a difference.
If you look at the global economy, there are huge challenges. You see unemployment going up right around the world, you see growth having collapsed right around the world. We in Australia have tried to make a difference by our Nation Building for Recovery plan. And here, on the ground at Fraser Coast Anglican College, we believe we're making a difference.
The other thing I would say more broadly about this wider region, is to indicate some of the investments the Government has engaged in more broadly. In education, or should I say in overall economic stimulus in this wider region, the federal Government has invested some $375 million, including $150 million in 2008-09.
The reason is to provide activity into the economy now while the private sector is in retreat because of the global financial crisis. This is to make a difference on the ground. But also in practical areas like education that I've been talking about. In the wider region, $78 million is being invested in the Primary Schools for the 21st Century program, 67 new building projects in 43 primary schools. $13 million for eight science and language centres across the various secondary schools in the region.
On top of that, $8 million under the National Schools Pride program for 126 refurbishment programs at 58 schools. And I've also just been talking to the principal about the Computers in Schools program, and some 2,000 computers have been provided in around 16 schools in this wider region. And I'm told here at this local school there has been a further addition of computers as well, as the school moves towards a ratio of 1:2, which is what we're seeking to achieve on the ground here.
On top of those education outlays, in health, the Government's providing up to $5 million for investment in a GP Superclinic in Bundaberg. Also, in social housing, nearly $3 million for the construction for eight new units of social housing. And $1.6 million for repairs and maintenance to 374 existing public houses. And then on top of that, a range of roads projects as well. Also, if I could just mention the 32,000 pensioners who work in this area, who benefit from the Government's increase of $32.50 per week for the full rate for single pensioners, and $14 a week for couple pensioners.
All these measures are designed to provide support for families and for jobs in the here and now, but also building, in so many respects, the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
It's good to be in this part of Queensland, this part of Australia again. I've been here over the years in various capacities. It's nice to be back as Prime Minister of Australia, and I'd like to thank the principal, the staff, and the students of Fraser Coast Anglican College for making me feel so welcome here today.
Okay, over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I've visited our troops in Afghanistan on a number of occasions now. And together with the advice of the Chief of the Defence Force and others, we have been very mindful of their mission, and very mindful of the resources which we're advised they need on the ground.
This is difficult and dangerous work. In the last day or so, I've spoken with the parents of the soldier who has recently lost his life. And this is a tragedy for his family, but the work that our troops are doing on the ground in Afghanistan is important. Because we cannot allow Afghanistan to once again become a safe haven for terrorists. Never, ever forget September 11. Those terrorists, in part, as part of the broader terrorist operation, were given succour and support out of al-Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan.
Remember also that terrorist attacks in Southeast Asia have in part involved terrorists who have been trained in Afghanistan. So, the mission is important. It's difficult and it's dangerous. But our troops on the ground are doing a first-class job.
JOURNALIST: Wilson Tuckey says Malcolm Turnbull is arrogant -
PM: Sorry, this one and then you.
JOURNALIST: On the note of what you've said today, obviously you've mentioned that a lot of people here, the students have a lot of opportunities, I'm just wondering your thoughts on the Senate Inquiry that's going on at the moment into independent Youth Allowance. A lot of these kids are actually going to have to move to Brisbane to study and continue their studies, they've indicated to me they want to. How realistic is it of you and the Government to expect those kids to work 30 hours instead of 15, and make in the vicinity of $20,000 while they study?
PM: Can I say that one of the big challenges the Government has faced is probably a decade plus of underinvestment in higher education. That's why the Government, through the Education Fund, has put such a huge investment into higher education. If you were to look at what's now being invested in tertiary campuses across the country, you are looking at one of the greatest single investments in our higher education capacity seen for quite some time.
Secondly, when it comes to particular things which affect a student's ability to work their way through university, one of the things which obviously affects them is HECS. 
One of the practical measures that we've taken is, for students studying maths and science at university, to halve their HECS, and if they go on to work in the field again, to halve it again. There are many other practical measures which are being advanced by the Education Minster, Julia Gillard.
I understand how difficult it is, in terms of students funding their way through university. It's tough, it really is tough. We want to make sure that there are education facilities and through other practical support we provide them are as best as we can, but the Education Minister, I know, is working hard on a range of measures.
JOURNALIST: Wilson Tuckey says Malcolm Turnbull is arrogant and inexperienced. Is he right?
PM: What I'd say, on climate change is, you know, the Liberals should stop tackling each other, and instead start tackling climate change. That would be the right way ahead, frankly.
This is serious stuff. I've just come from the G8+ Summit in L'Aquila in Italy, where we spent, as leaders of the major economies of the world, a long time on the question of how do we bring about a global agreement on climate change.
President Obama is dealing with this challenge, Prime Minister Brown, Prime Minister Berlusconi, President Sarkozy, Chancellor Merkel, the leaders of China and the leaders of India and Brazil and of Mexico  -  all working their way through this. These are difficult challenges.
But can I say, what's required is leadership. And instead what we have is, on climate change, I think, a divided rabble. My challenge, again, is this  -  the Liberals and the Nationals should stop tackling each other and start tackling, instead, climate change. Australia and the world need that to happen.
JOURNALIST: Is it difficult to negotiate with a divided Coalition?
PM: I was speaking with Senator Wong about this most recently. It's virtually impossible, because you don't know where they're coming from, and it changes all the time.
We've got a responsibility and a mandate from the Australian people from the last election to act on climate change. We said we would introduce an emissions trading scheme. We've got a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme which has passed the House of Representatives, it's been exhaustively negotiated with industry, which now lies road blocked in the Senate.
We've also, prior to the last election, said we'd increase the Renewable Energy Target  -  20 per cent by 2020. We've introduced that legislation as well. The Liberals still can't make up their mind which way they're going to go on that.
Can I just say - Australia deserves better than this, and because the challenge of climate change is so real, across the world, across our country, that frankly people have to start getting real about this.
The economic cost, the environmental cost, of not acting on climate change will be massive on this country. We are the driest continent on Earth. We, therefore, will feel the impact of climate change earliest and hardest of all continents in the world. That's why we must act.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, Prime Minister, can you tell me how important is the coal industry to the financial recovery?
PM: Coal is important, which is one of the reasons that L'Aquila and the G8 Summit that I've just attended in Italy, together with President Obama I launched the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. What's all that about? It's about how do we actually work on clean coal for the future.
Coal-fired electricity generation is projected to increase, I think, from something like 40 per cent of global electricity generation now to something like 53 or 56 per cent by mid-century. Therefore we must act on this. 
We must act in terms of making clean coal technologies feasible, establishing the technological feasibility, establishing the price impact. This is a huge investment from us, globally. That's why all leaders of the major economies have got behind us on this.
But nationally, can I also say this  -  we are investing something like $2.5 billion in seeking to bring to fruition large-scale carbon capture and storage coal-fired electricity projects in Australia, backed by this fund. Of all governments around the world, we're right out there in trying to make this happen. We've got a responsibility to do so because we're the largest coal exporting country in the world.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us any update on the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission? There are reports the Government's considering taking over the ancillary services.
PM: We'll put those reports out in due course, and it's a complex task, and we're working our way through it methodically.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a timeframe for when the public might be able to see the Commission's report?
PM: In the future. I said we'd release these reports before we go back to parliament.
JOURNALIST: One last question on the troops. How long will they stay, and what (inaudible)
PM: Well, on the first question, what I indicated most recently when we increased our training effort in Afghanistan was this  -  our mission is clear. How do you, in our province, Oruzgan, which we're responsible for, together with our Dutch allies, train and equip the Afghan national army and local police to take responsibility for the security of that province, so we can then go?
That's the mission, and the reason I have, with the support of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet, increased our training effort, is so that we have a greater capacity to raise an Afghan national army battalion and additional military capabilities and police capabilities so that security of that province can be handed over.
That is the mission statement, and that's what we're working to on the basis of the advice from the Chief of the Defence Force.
The second point you ask is what would happen if we were to exit? Can I say Australia is in Afghanistan because of our alliance with the United States in the first instance. When September 11 happened, it was an attack on our American ally. The ANZUS Treaty was invoked, because of an attack on the metropolitan territory of the United States. We take our alliance obligations seriously, that's why we're there.
But the underpinning reason in addition to that is what we need to do as a society of civilised countries in acting against the global threat of terrorism.
Having said that I'm already late for a civic reception at Hervey Bay, and I'd better zip. Thanks, folks.
(ends)


This blog was open for comment from 16-22 July 2009. The topic was Focus on Climate Change.
Kevin.Rudd says...
I decided to kick off my blogging career with a focus on climate change.
The latest scientific research on climate change confirms our worst fears.  Climate change is happening faster than we previously thought, creating a more serious threat to our economy, our environment and to future generations.
I recently returned from a meeting of leaders of the world's major developed and developing countries in Italy, where our discussions focused on our global efforts to tackle climate change. This meeting - the Major Economies Forum on Climate and Energy  -  made some important progress. In particular, it recognised the clear message from climate science that the increase in global average temperature must not exceed 2 degrees celsius. That means the international community is accepting the need for tough long-term targets on reducing carbon emissions.
But the hardest work is still ahead.
Much more needs to be done if we're to achieve a successful global agreement on climate change in Copenhagen in December.
Australia is determined to be on the front foot in global efforts to tackle climate change. We know that our nation is more exposed to the impact of climate change than perhaps any other developed economy. Without strong global and national action, climate change will permanently damage our natural environment and hit our jobs and our economy hard. The Great Barrier Reef  -  one of Australia's most iconic natural wonders which generates jobs for around 60,000 people and more than $4.9 billion in tourism revenue  -  is particularly vulnerable to climate change.
The next step for Australia is to take strong action at home through Parliament passing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in August. This scheme will for the first time put a limit on Australia's carbon pollution. By taking action at home in Australia, we can give businesses certainty and  give momentum to the international negotiations that are so crucial for our national interest.
It's our responsibility to act now on climate change. That is why I urge all Senators and Members of Parliament to support this vital legislation for our nation's future.
How do you think we can make Australians more aware that we need to act on climate change now?
Read the full blog transcript


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd: G'day folks, I'm in Brisbane today and it's been fantastic to see the level of response to my blog on climate change; we've had hundreds and hundreds of individual contributions.
What's really impressed me is the number of people who are concerned about one main thing, that is what can they do as individuals to make a difference on climate change. What can they do to bring down greenhouse gas emissions in their home, their small business and in those sorts of environments, which they directly control themselves.
One of the other big debates we are in engaged in is what do we do about energy efficiency right across the board? If you're engaged in the climate change debate, energy efficiency is often described as ‘the low-hanging fruit' - the things we can make a difference with now, rather than wait for the final impact of deals to be done in Copenhagen and elsewhere across the world.
So here are a couple of practical things that we've got on the boil. The first thing, when it comes to energy efficiency, is that we are looking at how do we help households with heating and insulation so that we bring down greenhouse gas emissions as a result. What we've done, as part of the national economic stimulus strategy for dealing with the global recession, is invest something like $4 billion into providing an opportunity for households to put in ceiling insulation. What's the objective here? To have all Australian owner-occupied dwellings with ceiling insulation over time and the equivalent which that means in terms of greenhouse gas emission reduction is bringing it down by about 50 millions tonnes equivalent, that's the first thing.
The second thing is, at a very practical level, is we're trying to make it possible for households to gain access to their own, sort of, household audit; we call it the ‘home sustainability assessment' through our Green Loans program and that enables you, on the home front, to work out what you can do additionally to help bring down greenhouse gas emissions, greater energy efficiency, et cetera.
There's a third thing and that is we have now launched the Australian Carbon Trust and in Brisbane I've just also announced Robert Hill, our former permanent representative to the United Nations, as the Chairman of this new Australian Carbon Trust, which will be based in Brisbane. But it's objective is as follows: to help individuals make their personal contribution to bringing down greenhouse gas emissions by looking at how much or how big their carbon footprint is at home and then what efficiency savings they can make on the home front and then choosing, voluntarily, to buy permits from the carbon pollution reduction scheme, which we hope to get through the senate during the course of 2009. The overall impact of that is, of course, to bring down the overall level of greenhouse gas emissions. The second thing, of course, is to help with commercial buildings to do the same. We think this is the right way to go because if you're acting as households, as small businesses, but also commercial buildings  -  put all those things together, it makes a big difference. And finally, on commercial buildings, within this Australian Carbon Trust we're going to have a $50 million rotating fund to help people with commercial buildings put in the best energy efficiency technologies, with the highest green-star ratings, with a grant upfront, but as they yield savings in terms of their power bills and their utilities bills, to use those savings to repay the grant and so the fund continues to be renewed and replenished overtime.
So, in summary, there are two or three measures that we are engaged in now: energy insulation for people's ceilings, number one; number two, helping families get a hold of their own household audit and how to boost their own energy efficiency through our green loans program and, three, to assist also through the Australia Carbon Trust with households, small businesses and commercial buildings and the objective overall is to make a big difference with climate change through individual action so that we're acting personally, acting locally, acting nationally and, through the Copenhagen process, also acting globally.


PM:It's good to be back in Mackay, I've been back here many times since the election. And it's also good to be here with the local Member, James Bidgood. In terms of local investments, I'd just emphasise what we've been doing in this community.  We have through the Building the Education Revolution now invested in 67 new building projects at 41 primary schools. That's a $78.6 million investment in the primary schools of this wider region. Nearly $7 million for five science and language centres at the secondary schools in this region, these are Government and non-Government. Also, we have made investments of course in Central Queensland University, and under the National Schools Pride Program, nearly $10 million for 176 refurbishment projects spread across 73 schools.   Can I say if you take those into account with what we're doing on roads, what we're doing by way of general infrastructure, what we're doing by way of investment in social housing, we believe that this is a significant investment in this region.  One number speaks for itself. Under the Government's national stimulus strategy, we have invested some $400 million into this region - $400 million. And around $160 million already in 08-09.   So when the global economy has been in retreat, we've stepped up to the plate to make a difference in this region. Unemployment is still a challenge for us all, we're not out of the woods yet, but through the projects that I've run through, we're seeking to make a difference in communities like this. Over to you, folks.   JOURNALIST:If I could just ask on the issue of uranium resources, we've now got four uranium mines, there's likely to be a couple more before too long. Is it time for Australia to revisit the debate on whether or not we should have nuclear power generation in Australia?   
PM:Can I say that our policy on this was made absolutely clear at the ALP National Conference a couple of years ago when I was Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, as I still am, although my other job has changed. And it was clear cut that we were getting rid of the three mines policy. So one thing flows from another.  But can I say this on the question of nuclear power, we have Ian Macfarlane out there saying that he wants to see nuclear power plants right across Australia. I assume that's Liberal Party policy; after all, he is a member of the Liberal Party frontbench. But we've got this extraordinary situation, where the only thing the Liberal Party seem to be united on is putting nuclear plants, power plants, across the country when they can't even have a unified position on climate change.   So, a Liberal Party divided down the middle on climate change, united about one thing, and that's putting a nuclear power plant in everyone's backyard. I think that speaks for itself. Anything else?   JOURNALIST:If I can just ask you briefly on the Brennan case, given he's still being held and given there's been a media blackout imposed, the family don't want that imposed any more, is it time for the Government to change tack on this issue?   PM:Our mission in relation to Mr Brennan is to try and secure his freedom from Somalia. And as I indicated in my comments earlier today in Bundaberg, this is a very difficult and delicate task, involving Governments around the world, involving various agencies of our own Government, in a most sensitive operation.   I don't propose to comment on the detail of it, because we have overriding consular responsibilities for the wellbeing of Australians in difficulty right across the world. I understand full well the deep concerns which the family have for his wellbeing. I understand those, and I sympathise with them. That is the natural response of a family, a mother, a father who have been separated from a loved one.   Our responsibility as a Government is to work with the family and we'll continue to do so. But our responsibility also is to exercise every possible effort in seeking this man's freedom, and that's going to involve sensitive and difficult negotiations in the period ahead.   JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, just in regards to the proposed stadium for Mackay. That was promised in the 2007 federal election, how do you think the progress is going in that department?   
PM:We're working our way through it. We are a Government which honours its pre-election commitments. Sometimes it takes a bit of time to sort out the detail, doesn't it Col?  MAYOR:And I think, Prime Minister, it's virtually sorted out. It's a matter of ready to start work.   
PM:Yeah, yeah. So we're pretty relaxed about all that.   JOURNALIST:So when do you think we'll be playing football on it?    
PM:You mean me personally? (laughter) Quite some time in my case.  We will have work commenced as soon as possible. But we're working well with the Mackay Regional Council on this project. We made a commitment, we intend to honour the commitment. The important thing is to get the project absolutely right. I think we've worked through those details, and we're going to get on with it, and make sure it happens.  In terms of the day and the hour, when the first ball is kicked off, I'll leave that in the court of those who know this project more intimately than I. And I won't be playing in the first game.   JOURNALIST:Can I ask you quickly  -     PM:Maybe.   JOURNALIST:Very quickly - 
PM:How about slowly?
  JOURNALIST:Alright, I'll ask you slowly and quickly. I represent GROW, I'm a rural reporter, and a lot of my listeners are growers. This has massive ecological benefits, and it benefits growers as well. Last month the State Government introduced legislation into Parliament which would impose regulations on the fertiliser use of growers. It's a big thing for growers here. Are you comfortable with that?
PM:Firstly, I'm not sufficiently briefed on what the State Parliament has passed, and who voted for what, and the passage of it vis-a-vis the use of fertilisers on farmlands.What I can say is that, together with the Mackay Regional Council and the State Government, this is a first class project with two direct benefits for growers. One is water. And the second is the by-product that we've been talking about before. These are two practical contributions from us. On the matter you've raised, I'd rather not enter the detail, for the simple reason I'm not sufficiently briefed.   Thanks, folks.


Measures to protect the Great Barrier Reef from nutrient discharges were further enhanced today with the opening of the Mackay Wastewater Recycling Project.
This project will recycle the majority of Mackay's wastewater and prevent 250 tonnes of nutrients from entering the ocean every year to better protect the World Heritage listed Great Barrier Reef.
As the largest regional wastewater reuse scheme of its type in Australia, this project will also provide benefits to local farmers and the environment by reducing demand on groundwater by up to 8,500 megalitres per year.
In addition, the groundwater system will be protected from seawater intrusion by substituting the groundwater used to irrigate sugar cane with recycled water.
The Australian Government provided $45.5 million towards the construction of the Mackay Wastewater Recycling Project under the Water Smart Australia program.
This includes an additional $2.2 million provided in response to the serious flood damage Mackay suffered in February 2008. 
Total project costs of more than $150 million were shared between the Australian Government, Queensland Government and Mackay Regional Council.
This project demonstrates how different levels of government can work together to achieve efficient water management and involve both urban and rural communities in the process.
The project involves the decommissioning of an existing wastewater treatment plant, redirection of wastewater to an upgraded plant and distribution of the treated effluent for irrigation on sugar cane farms.


The Australian Government is acting to conserve and maintain the graves and memorials of eminent Australians both here and overseas. Until now, there has been no significant Australian Government program to provide funds for the conservation of overseas graves or memorials of Australian citizens who have made significant contributions to the nation and the world. Up to $100,000 a year will be made available from the Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts for the conservation of overseas graves and memorials. This move has been prompted by the recent restoration of the grave of the acclaimed Queensland and Australian aviator Bert Hinkler in Florence, Italy. This grave was restored using funds raised by the Hinkler House Memorial Museum and Research Association, a volunteer body which does not have the capability to ensure the ongoing maintenance of the grave. The Australian Government thanks volunteer groups like the Hinkler House Memorial Museum for their dedication to conserving memorials to significant Australians. It is appropriate that the Australian Government has a formal avenue to consider funding requests for the conservation of graves and memorials of eminent Australian citizens buried here and overseas. The funding will come from existing resources within the Department.


PM:First of all, it's great to be in Bundaberg, and great to be back in Bundaberg. I've been here many times over the years, but this is the first occasion I've been here as Prime Minister. And I've spent some time today with local Member Paul Neville, and also of course the Mayor of the Bundaberg Regional Council. And I'd thank the Bundaberg Regional Council for their kind hospitality and the civic reception they've hosted today.
And to underline what I've said before, and that is, we, the Australian Government, are looking towards working in closer partnership with local Governments across the country, and that of course means with the Bundaberg Regional Council as well.
Of course, when Australia thinks of Bundaberg, one of the first things they think of is Bert Hinkler. And that's why we're at this great museum here today, honouring a great Queenslander, a great Australian, but a great son of Bundaberg.
As I said in my remarks earlier today, when people think of Hinkler, it's not just his feats as an aviator, they also think of just the courage of an Australian pioneer, who steps out, does something different, does something unusual, and as a result changes the world. Bert Hinkler was one such person.
And that's why we, together with other levels of Government, have been so pleased to support this Hinkler Hall of Aviation, and to properly honour Bert Hinkler's memory.
One of the things that Paul Neville the local Member has put to me over some time now is how do we deal with the practical challenge of honouring those Australians who have perished abroad and who are buried abroad? And Bert Hinkler is one of them. Bert Hinkler is buried in Italy, I understand in Florence, or thereabouts? And therefore there's a practical challenge about how do we honour the memorials for famous Australians around the world.
And in response to the representations from the local Member, what I'd like to announce today is that the Australian Government will be making an allocation of up to $100,000 a year through the Department of the Environment, Heritage and the Arts, from 2009 onwards, to provide proper funding to support the memorials of famous Australians abroad. That includes Bert Hinkler.
In the past, a lot of the work to support the maintenance of Bert Hinkler's grave has been done by the good local folk of this community, and Lex has already been introduced to me, and the work that he has done to make sure that Hinkler's grave is properly maintained in Florence is to be commended.
However, I think as a nation we've got a responsibility as well. And that is to make sure that we are properly looking after these memorials around the world, Bert Hinkler's of course being one of them.
So I'm pleased to confirm today that we've decided to allocate $100,000 a year through the Department of Environment, Heritage and the Arts, to properly maintain Bert Hinkler's grave, and graves of famous Australians like him around the world. And I'd like to thank again the federal Member for having brought this to my attention in recent times. Did you want to add to that Paul?
NEVILLE:I'd just like to thank the Prime Minister for his generosity of spirit. He was telling me on the day I was in his office, I think it was the grave of Andrew Fisher and George Reid, two other targets, they're two former Prime Ministers, and I think for a while Andrew Fisher even represented Bundaberg, they were very big electorates in those days. So, Lex Rowland and his association have been looking after that grave over the years, and it's becoming a bit of a burden. And if we could modify that grave perhaps with a sheet of Australian marble or something like that, we could cut the maintenance costs down considerably. So, Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM:Well done Paul, good on you (applause). Okay, enough from me folks, over to you.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, it's been 11 months since Nigel Brennan was captured in Somalia, what's since been done to bring him home?
PM:There are active and continuing contact between families and the Australian Government through the Department of Foreign Affairs. These are difficult, sensitive and complex negotiations. The Government, internally, meets regularly on this to review progress, and has engaged in a range of efforts to support this individual. This is difficult, and an ugly part of the world, but the Government is actively engaged in the support of this person. It will be, still, a very difficult process which lies ahead.
JOURNALIST:What progress has been made?
PM:On the question of the individual concerned, there are continued engagements between ourselves and various agencies, and various international agencies, in support of this individual. It's tough, it's difficult, it's complex, it's sensitive, but as with all of our consular cases abroad, we take this one seriously. 
If I was to look at the consular cases upon which I have spent the most time since I've been Prime Minister, it is this one. And similarly with the Foreign Minister and others. It is one which the Government takes seriously, but I do not underestimate the degree of difficulty involved in this. It is very hard.
JOURNALIST:The family has spoken to Mr Brennan, and they've said he's quite unwell. Clearly the government doesn't have time on its side to bring him home.
PM:Can I say this is an exceptionally complex matter, and I think if you were full apprised, confidentially, of the details of the case, which given security concerns is probably not possible, you'd be fully seized of how difficult and complex a matter this is, given the part of the world in which he is located.
JOURNALIST:Mrs Brennan has come here today to meet with you, will you talk with her?
PM:I imagine there's been some contact arranged through my staff. That'll be fine.
JOURNALIST:The family's been contacted by the Somalian President. Why haven't you contacted them prior to today?
PM:Can I say these matters have been dealt with through the Foreign Minister, as is entirely appropriate, over a long period of time. This is a difficult, ugly and dangerous part of the world into which these folk ventured a long time ago.
The Australian Government, through all of its agencies, is actively engaged in this and will continue to be so, doing everything which is reasonably and feasibly possible to obtain his release. This is very difficult, it's very complex, it's very challenging. I repeat what I said before: there is no singular consular case around Australia for any Australian abroad on which I and the Foreign Minister have spent more time than this case.
JOURNALIST:One of the bombers in Indonesia may have been 16 years old or younger. What are your thoughts on that?
PM:Well, I have seen those reports. If those reports are true, it is sickening that these evil terrorists would prey on children to do their dirty work.
All Australians legitimately condemn acts of terrorism wherever they occur in the world. This most recent act of terrorism has cost three innocent Australians their lives, another is injured, and it follows on terrorist attacks in the past.
The thought that terrorists engaged in their evil business would also prey upon children defies any standard of civilised behaviour.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:I think I would not even dignify the most recent comments by Abu Bakar Bashir with a response.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, unemployment here is soaring. Your Government ranks us in the top 20 regions for unemployment. I think it's by next year that they say 20 per cent, that the unemployment rate will be 20 per cent. Is there anything specific that you're doing for our region?
PM:Well, I don't know if you were at the reception that I just attended with the civic leaders. Were you there?
What I did there was run through the level of investment in this community, some 78 million dollars in the school system, and then if you aggregated the total stimulus which has been delivered to this wider region, based on numbers I saw yesterday that's in the vicinity of 3 to 350 million injected directly as a consequence of stimulus payments, both to families, to schools and to other forms of infrastructure.
If you therefore look at the multiplier effect which that has, in direct and indirect employment, it's significant.
Yesterday I was in Hervey Bay and visited the Fraser Coast Anglican College. I spoke there to those working on the building site. The bricks being used in that school are made in Maryborough, some of the tradies I spoke to come from Bundaberg. There are 67 of those projects being built in this wider region now.
So you ask what are we doing about employment? I would say 67 school-based projects, each of which involves 20-25 different trades on sites at different times, and an overall employment multiplier which is significant, as part of a total injection of three to 350 million dollars into the wider region, I'd say we're doing some things.
But you know, we're dealing with a global financial crisis, and that's affecting all regions across Australia.
The other thing I'd draw your attention to is this: you mentioned priority employment coordinators and priority employment regions right across Australia.
What we hope to do in this region as well is, through our priority employment coordinator, draw on effectively, a 650 million dollar Local Jobs Fund to assist with additional projects on the ground, and that's why we have appointed these coordinators across the country.
So you've got national stimulus projects at work, you've local projects being built like the schools I've just referred to, partnering also with the local regional council as I mentioned this morning here in Bundaberg, we have some 33,000 such projects being rolled out across the country in partnership with local authorities now, but as an additional level of assistance, being able to draw effectively on a local jobs fund.
That will be the mission statement of the priority employment coordinator once they're appointed.
JOURNALIST:What does the National Policy Commission on Indigenous Housing actually do?
PM:Well, when it comes to Indigenous housing, the Government has a priority, as far as closing the gap is concerned.
Last year, you may recall that I tendered an apology to Aboriginal people.
Secondly, I then said that we would commit ourselves as a Government to a strategy of closing the gap. One of those gaps exists as far as housing is concerned, and the adequate provision of housing across Australia.
What we've done recently, as all governments, Labor and conservative, in Darwin, is meet as the Council of Australian Governments to sign a whole series of new partnership agreements to deal with education, health, housing, as well as other areas where the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians is far too great. Housing is one such area, and of course, when it comes to this Commission, we're always attentive to their advice.
You had a question, I think, over there.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, before the last election you promised to fix the health system or move to take it over. Where are you in regards to that?
PM:Well, as I've indicated before in comments, the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission was asked by us to report, comprehensively, on long-term reform for the health and hospital system.
As you know, they delivered their reports to the Government at the end of June. You also know that I indicated we'll be releasing those reports by the time Parliament resumes in August.
We'll work our way through these matters systematically, calmly, methodically, because health and hospitals reform is of fundamental interest to all Australians.
Thanks, folks.


I am delighted to be here today to address you at these prestigious annual awards.
These are the Academy Awards of the housing industry.
Congratulations to the Housing Industry Association, whose Australian Home of the Year Award is now in its 20th year.
The Australian Government strongly values the relationship it has built with the HIA.
We have worked together in developing and implementing the First Home Owners' Grant for new houses, the Housing Affordability Fund and First Home Saver Accounts.
Our close working relationship is due in no small part to the leadership and vision of Ron Silberberg.
I salute Ron, who is retiring in November, and thank him for his dedication and enthusiasm over the past 30 years with the HIA.
And the Government looks forward to working with Shane Goodwin when he moves up from Deputy Managing Director role in November.
Ron's efforts have helped build the HIA's respect and influence in government and in the wider business community.
Ron has done a great deal to keep alive the vision for mass home ownership communicated by Randal Dossetor when he founded the Association.
The Government shares that vision.
In my D. R. Dossetor lecture last year, I said our ambition is for Australia to be a home-owning society.
To extend the opportunity of home ownership to as many people as possible, and to provide high-quality, secure, safe homes for those who aren't yet in a position to own their own home.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
It is important to note from the chart that the global outlook we currently face is significantly worse than in the previous two recessions in Australia:
     * During     the early 1990s recession, world growth fell to around 1.5 per cent in 1991.
     * During     the early 1980s recession, world growth fell to 0.9 per cent in 1982.
By contrast, the global economy is currently forecast to contract by 1.4 per cent in 2009.
This will be the first global contraction since IMF records began.
Growth rates in virtually every country have collapsed.
The average contraction in growth in the March quarter across the OECD economies was -2.1 per cent.
And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trade partners.
Eight out of our top 10 trading partners are in recession.
And growth in the remaining two countries, India and China has fallen dramatically over the last year.
Across the developed world, only three of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter.
In the March quarter Australia was the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession.
But Australia has fared better than most  -  in part because we took early and decisive action.
The Government acted early and decisively to support the economy  -  to step in while the private sector was in retreat.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated a comprehensive economic strategy to support the economy.
The government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed.
Builders and business people all around Australia know better than most that credit is the lifeblood of the economy.
Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - offshore markets had opened to Australian banks which raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month.
In January, banks raised more than $20 billion offshore.
With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much-needed funds to support lending in Australia.
In addition to help stabilise the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
Our plan was simple: nation building for recovery  -  supporting jobs, businesses and apprenticeships today by building the nation building infrastructure for tomorrow.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area:
The key components of Gross Domestic Product are:
     * Consumption  -  about 54 per cent of GDP
     * Dwelling construction  -  about 6 per cent of GDP
     * Private Business Investment  -  17 per cent of GDP
     * Public Final Demand  -  22 per cent of GDP
In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy.
And we looked for measures that would support the economy right through the global recession  -  from immediate support, to the medium-term, right through to the long-term.
As the chart indicates, the $77 billion nation-building for recovery plan includes a wide range of measures phased from today through to the long term:
     * immediate stimulus of $27 billion, including cash payments, the trebling     of the first home owners' boost     and small business tax break for investment;
     * medium-term stimulus of $35 billion, including local community infrastructure,     the largest school modernisation in Australia's     history, social housing and shovel-ready infrastructure projects;
     * long-term     stimulus including major rail, road, port, education, clean-energy, and broadband.
Our first measures were designed to provide immediate short term support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated rapidly.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand. 
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth.
There is no doubt that without the economic stimulus, we would not have seen the positive numbers in last quarter's National Accounts.
Of course there are other factors at play, but without the stimulus measures we would clearly have fallen into a technical recession.
Second, we introduced another measure to stimulate the housing sector.
The Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
The Government recognised that home building is critical to the Australian economy and must be supported.
Today I am pleased to announce that since its introduction, the First Home Owner's Boost has helped 118,150 first home buyers get into the market.
The month of June saw more than 20,000 grants delivered  -  this is the largest number since the Boost was introduced.
First Home Owners have come into the market like never before.
Loans to first home owners have doubled since the Boost was introduced.
This has been a significant boost to construction activity.
Housing finance commitments have increased substantially, particularly the number of loans for the construction of new houses, which has increased by 42.6 per cent since the FHOB was introduced in October 2008.
The recent trend in building approvals has also been upward, following the sharp falls in 2008.  Compared to the same time last year, before the onset of the global recession, building approvals are down by only 16 per cent in Australia.
That compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
In the March National Accounts, private dwelling construction contributed minus 0.3 to growth  -  a solid result for a cyclical industry in the context of a global recession that has seen construction grind to a halt in most advanced economies.
To support business investment we have taken decisive action to strengthen incentives for businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 30 per cent Business Tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for Small Business.  
This is a major new incentive for businesses that many HIA members will have already taken advantage of to increase their capital investment.  
As the chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent  -  and much stronger than business investment in our peer countries.  
In aggregate, the national accounts figures last week proved that these short term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.  
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession and many businesses would not be keeping their heads above water through this global economic storm.   
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term.
Again, a major component of our medium-term stimulus is housing  -  supporting jobs for sparkies, chippies and brickies.
We're investing $6.4 billion over the next three and a half years into the construction of 20,000 new social homes.
This is an unprecedented commitment to increasing the availability of affordable housing.
Our investment will also allow the repair of more than 45,000 dwellings, including around 10,000 dwellings that would have become uninhabitable without additional work.
In the past there has been a shortage of Defence personnel homes.
The Government's $252 million investment will be provided for the construction of more than 800 houses for our Defence personnel.
I can report that Defence Housing Australia is well ahead of schedule on its building program with contracts finalised for more than 502 of the planned houses.
18 of these defence are have already been completed.
We're sending HIA members into our schools as well.
Under the Building the Education Revolution Package, the Government is investing a total of $14.7 billion over three years to fund the building and rebuilding of primary and secondary school infrastructure as well as maintenance in Australia's schools.
The program will also provide funding to build around 537 new science laboratories and language centres in secondary schools.
Through our $4 billion Energy Efficient Homes package ceiling insulation will be installed in up to 2.9 million Australian homes.
And we are paying the installers directly.
It means tradespeople around the country are in work installing and manufacturing insulation while reducing household energy bills and carbon emissions.
The Insulation Council of Australia and New Zealand estimates that 4,000 jobs will be created directly from the insulation package.
The Housing Industry Association is a key partner in the delivery of many of the key elements of our medium term infrastructure projects  -  especially homes, schools, insulation, and community infrastructure. 
The Government is sponsoring HIA trade information nights that highlight the opportunities available under the Package.
All of these targeted support measures are vital, but it's just one facet of our economic recovery strategy that is making the difference for HIA members.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
     * We     are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
     * We'll     be investing in major clean energy projects, including what will become the     largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
     * We     will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership with the private     sector to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring     Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term. 
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
This strategy of short-term, medium-term and long-term stimulus is providing a critical boost to confidence.
As the chart indicates, Australia's stimulus is phased over time to ensure it is timely, temporary and targeted.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
Overall the government's stimulus will have a significant impact on growth.
In 2009-10, Treasury estimates that growth will be increased by 2.75 per cent as a result of the stimulus.
And in 2010-11 growth will be increased by 1.5 per cent.
In aggregate, Treasury has estimated that without our nation building plan around 200,000 more Australians would be out of work in each of the next two years.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
This month we saw an increase in unemployment to 5.8 per cent.
This data confirms the global recession is continuing to have a direct impact on the Australian economy and on Australian jobs.
No-one likes to see unemployment rise as a result of a global recession. 
But Australia's unemployment rate is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
While there is a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world.
While the nation building and jobs plan will support hundreds of thousands of jobs that would have been otherwise lost to the global recession, we cannot stop jobs being lost.
That is why the government is acting to support those people who lose their jobs and young people who cannot find jobs as a result of the global crisis.
The Government is deploying 712,000 productivity training places to support those who have lost their jobs or cannot enter the labour market on the other hand.
The Government has done so with what it describes as a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. A Compact with Young Australians so that anyone under the age of 25 must be earning or learning; a Compact with Retrenched Australians which provides training places for retrenched workers to gain new skills during the downtime in preparation for the recovery; and a Compact with Local Communities, driven in turn by a $650 million local jobs funds and priority employment coordinators in the twenty most acute unemployment regions in the country.
The aggregation of these measures is aimed at reducing job losses to an absolute minimum while at the same time doing everything possible to avoid the so-called ‘lost generation' of Australians who failed to re-enter the labour market after previous recessions by deploying a more comprehensive and aggressive training strategy for those affected by the current recession.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the budget.
And Australia's net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US, and 136 per cent in Japan.
By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
And Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is among the lowest in the advanced economies  -  lower than the average budget deficit of all the major advanced economies.
The Budget deficit in the US is 13.6 per cent of GDP, in Japan the deficit is 9.9 per cent of GDP, and in the UK the deficit is 9.8 per cent of GDP in 2009.
This rise in global public debt has been a necessary consequence of the responsible global response to the economic crisis.
The fiscal stimulus that has been put in place around the world  -  some $5 trillion or 8 per cent of global GDP  -  combined with monetary policy and financial sector interventions are an unprecedented global policy response.
While these policies have been necessary, they cannot be permanent and must be withdrawn when the time is right.
As I recently outlined in an address in Berlin, global coordination will be crucial to an orderly and successful exit from the fiscal and financial market interventions that governments have embraced.
There is therefore a strong rationale for the G20 to play a leading role. We must begin establishing a process to coordinate exit as the global recovery gains pace.
The second new challenge we face is to build the foundations of sustainable global growth and Australian growth for the future.
This challenge begins with the recognition that the source of our future growth cannot simply be the same as the source of our past growth.
We must build future growth from productivity gains rather than from a mining boom and an endless rise in consumer debt.
I am confident that Australians will pull together  -  workers, employers, unions, community organisations and governments to ensure that we pull through this crisis, and the tough recovery phase to emerge with a stronger more prosperous economy for the future.
(ends)


PM:It's great to be back in Mackay, and great to be at this great Queensland state school. It's pretty interesting when you look at the foundation stones here that this school was opened by Forgan Smith in 1933, and if you look carefully at the school, you have to form the conclusion that not a lot's been added to it since.
We are about to make additions, and we are about to make a difference through the Building the Education Revolution investment. And this school here, which has nearly 200 young Queenslanders here attending the primary school, will now have an additional $1 million investment which is going to create a state-of-the-art resources centre  -  over there  -  and on top of that build a multipurpose hall so that the children of the school can gather together for their school activities.
This is an important enhancement to what this school is able to do for these precious, young Australian minds.
So we're proud of the fact that the investments of the Australian Government are making it possible for these kids, at this state school, to have greater education opportunities for the future.
Of course, I've just spoken now about Mackay Central Primary School. If you look across the Mackay region itself, the Australian Government is investing nearly $100 million in school modernisation now. We're investing $78.6 million in 67 school projects under our Primary Schools for the 21st Century program. On top of that, some $10 million for 176 refurbishment projects in 73 Mackay schools under the National School Pride Program, and on top of that again, $7 million for investment in science and language centres at five schools under the Science and Language Centres Program.
Put that together, that's nearly $100 million worth of investment in schools in this region. And when we look back in the years to come, I hope we'll all be able to conclude that these have been investments which have enhanced the education opportunities of all the kids, all the young people, all the young Queenslanders, the young Australians, who are attending these schools.
The other good thing is this  -  having just spoken to the workers on site, most of those workers out there are from Mackay. We've got an economic downturn at present across the nation, caused by the global economic recession. And by us stepping up to the plate with this $100 million investment we're finding that local jobs are being created for local tradesmen and local companies to help them through this difficult time.
The company I've just spoken to out here has got some four school projects underway as part of the overall program in this region. That company, I think, has nearly $8 million or $9 million worth of projects. Look at the number of tradesmen working on each project. The number of tradies every day on this project, I'm advised there'll be about 15 different sets of trades, 50 sets of trades all up being deployed in one school project like this. Put them all together, $100 million worth of investment, it does help the economy on the way through at a difficult time.
The last thing I'd say for the benefit of our local friends here in Mackay is a comment that I made yesterday about the Mackay Stadium project. The Mayor and I have been discussing it. I simply affirm today what I have already said to the Mayor  -  this Government honours its election commitments. This stadium project will proceed, it will be completed, and the $8 million we committed to prior to the election will be delivered. We intend to be with the Mayor when we turn the sod on this project towards the end of the year.
Do you want to add to that, Col? 
MAYOR:No, I said - Prime Minister, thank-you very much, because it is great to know that this stadium is going - and we've talked last night  -  that it's full steam ahead. But MR Prime Minister, on behalf of all these young children over here, I'd like to thank you for visiting their school. Because the Year Sevens today, when you went into their room, that will be a treat that they'll never forget. And I think that it's special for them, it will be special for the rest of their lives. But on behalf of the Mackay region, thank-you very much for coming today. And on behalf of all your  -  this is probably the biggest press conference you've had for a while, Prime Minister, so thank-you very much for coming.
(Applause) 
PM:This is the first press conference I've been where people have applauded, by the way. (Laughter) You ladies and gentlemen of the press should pay attention to that. Over to you, folks. Ask away. 
JOURNALIST:Do you mind if I ask on some national issues? 
PM:Yeah, sure. 
JOURNALIST:When it comes to climate change (inaudible) in the opposition over what they want to do with the emissions trading scheme. Is it now inevitable that it won't get through the Senate come August? 
PM:The Australian national economic interest and environment interest is for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to pass the Senate. It's part of us preparing for a new era for the future, which is being dictated by climate change. It's part of us doing our bit for the planet, so that other countries, other bigger emitting countries do their bit. It's also part of our acting so that we don't cop environmental tariffs against us in the future. These are the reasons why we're acting. 
Secondly, the national interest dictates that all people of good will support the legislation which is in the Parliament. The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme has been negotiated intensively with industry groups, environmental groups, right across the country over a long period of time. 
The disappointing thing is this - we need national leadership to ensure that this legislation passes the Senate. Instead, what we have on the part of the Opposition is Senator Minchin speaking for Malcolm Turnbull. Today we have Tony Abbott speaking for Malcolm Turnbull. But we don't have Malcolm Turnbull speaking for Malcolm Turnbull. 
It's time that we actually got fair dinkum about this, and found out exactly what Mr Turnbull plans to do. 
Senator Minchin seems to be saying the “the Coalition will oppose this”. Mr Abbott today says “the Coalition will support this”. Mr Turnbull's position is, I don't really know. 
But you know, this is not just a political game. It's serious stuff about what will happen in the Senate with the passage of this legislation, and it lies within the hands of the Liberal and National parties, that's why it's so serious.
JOURNALIST:They seem petrified of a double dissolution, have you got them over a barrel? 
PM:Look the national interest, the national economic and environmental interest, requires national leadership on difficult and hard questions like this. Governments around the world are wrestling with this, it's not easy, it's hard. But the alternative to national leadership is this almost terminal position which we see in the ranks of the Liberal and National parties where they are splitting every which way on climate change. 
Australia deserves better than a fundamentally divided political party which can't make up its mind on climate change. 
The science is in, it's happening. Responsible Governments around the world are responding. Australia must respond. The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is part of that response, but regrettably, in the Senate, we have a Coalition split right down the middle. 
  JOURNALIST:Can I ask you on family law, have the arrangements for child custody, the emphasis on giving access to both parents as the highest priority, is that the wrong balance when it comes to child custody matters?
PM:Our responsibility as a Government is to do everything humanly and legally possible to protect children. To protect children. That's our first responsibility. Everything humanly, and physically, and legally possible to protect children from violence. We, therefore as a Government, will be taking every necessary decision to support that objective.
There's too much violence in our community. There's too much violence towards children. It's unacceptable. And therefore, the nation has to lift its game. The nation has to do better. 
And I support therefore the initiatives being put forward by the Attorney-General. We'll need to take this debate through the community, and in consultation with the States and Territories. But our overriding mission is this: how do we do better as a country to protect children, to protect our kids, from violence? 
JOURNALIST:Do you agree with the comments from Martin Ferguson that some Greens have been too focussed on unproven renewable technologies and there needs to be more support for resources such as liquid natural gas?
PM:As far as our energy policy for the future is concerned, Mr Ferguson is doing a great job, and particularly in developing an Energy White Paper for Australia, and a national energy security strategy for Australia. And that embraces a whole range of energy options.
The future of coal, we're acting in terms of carbon capture and storage. The future of the renewable energy sector, in solar, the Government will be supporting the single largest solar generation project in the world, 1000 megawatts, in the initiatives contained within the Budget, other renewable energy sources as well. 
We believe we've got to proceed on all these fronts at once, and that is precisely what the Minister, Martin Ferguson has advocated through multiple policy statements to the Parliament and elsewhere. Okay folks, I've got to zip, got to go to the airport, got to go to Brisbane, got to go give a speech.


PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: So I hear you went teaching yesterday at Padua.
TREASURER WAYNE SWAN: I certainly did. There's a couple of bright sparks there. They gave me a grilling.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: A hard time?
TREASURER WAYNE SWAN: Yeah, I think you'd call it that. They enjoyed it.
PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: What'd you get wrong, what'd you get right?
TREASURER WAYNE SWAN:  [laughs]
TREASURER WAYNE SWAN: It's good to be here this morning and it's good to be here to talk with you and perhaps to answer some of your questions about what's going on in the global economy and what's happening in the Australian economy.
STUDENT: Fair enough that we have got one of the smallest debts in the advanced, like advanced economies as a percentage of GDP, but  - 
TREASURER WAYNE SWAN: -at its peak, not now. At its peak - 13.8 per cent at its peak compared to 80 per cent in other advanced economies.
STUDENT: What about per capita, because, I mean, we've got such a small population for an advanced economy, and not only that, we have an aging population, so the tax revenue from those people is going to go down as well, and then they're going to be going on to, even with the super, still going to be a lot people on the pension.
TREASURER WAYNE SWAN: All advanced economies have aging populations, and all advanced economies are facing that problem, so there's not great, dramatic difference across the economies, but it's a really intelligent question that you've just asked, and a critical one, and it was a question that was very much at the core of our recent Budget.
You might recall there's been a debate about the aged pension in Australia, and in our recent Budget we increased the basic rate of the aged pension by $30 a week.
Now, why did we do that? We did it because justice had to be delivered to single aged pensioners who simply could no longer live on the amount of money they were being provided, so when we took that decision in the Budget we said ‘what we have to do is to make savings elsewhere in the Budget to pay for this over time.' Otherwise we are putting an unsustainable burden on our children, on our grandchildren, and their children, so what we did is we put savings in the Budget which go out 40 years. We made changes to the private health insurance rebate, which was becoming unsustainable. We made some changes in the tax system. We made changes across a variety of areas of expenditure in the Budget, structural changes which will provide the money for the next 40 years for that pension increase.


PM:Premier of Tasmania David Bartlett, the Minister for Broadband Stephen Conroy, Duncan Kerr, Julie Collins, Sid Sidebottom, Jodie Campbell, Dick Adams, our local members, and can I say all those here today enthusiastic about this project for the state and for the nation. This is a good day. It is about what we are going to do for Australia, what we are going to do for Tasmania and what we are going to do together.
It is a pleasure to be here today to announce critical milestones for the delivery of the National Broadband Network. On the 8th of April, the Premier and I announced that Tasmania would be the launch state for the National Broadband Network and today I announce that we are starting in rural and regional Tasmania, connecting the 5000 homes and businesses with fibre to the premises in the towns of Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point.
These communities will be the first to be able to receive broadband speeds of 100 megabits per second and over 50 times faster than that used by most people. To support this rollout we will build backbone fibre optic cables in five locations. Why are we starting in Tasmania? Because Tasmania has a longstanding disadvantage in accessing high speed broadband and is the logical test bed for this nation building project for the future.
The state has the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state and territory, 39 per cent compared with the Australian average of 52 per cent.
I also have great pleasure today of announcing Mr Mike Quigley as Executive Chair and CEO of the NBN Co. Mike is an Australian who has a distinguished career in the telecommunications industry and was most recently President and Chief Operating Officer of Alcatel. During the course of his career, he has lead the development and integration of large scale, fibre to the premise implementations for some of the largest US carriers.
So, can I just say to you Mike, welcome on board and we look forward to working with you in laying out this important project for the nation.
On the 16th of July, the Premier and Senator Conroy announced that the Tasmanian NBN Co., a subsidiary of NBN Co. would be established to roll out the National Broadband Network in this state and can I also say that I am pleased today that Doug Campbell will shortly commence as chair of the TNBN Co. Doug is also a fellow Australian who also has a wealth of telecommunications experience both in Australia and internationally, including being the primary force behind the creation of the very successful Telstra country wide.
So Doug, welcome aboard, and we look forward to being partners with you in Tasmania, partners in this great national project for our future together.
As Prime Minister I look forward to working with Doug and Mike to achieve our objectives of delivering super fast broadband in this state and nationally, and finally, it is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to open the Aurora Energy and National Broadband Network Data Centre. The Data Centre opened today, will house the critical operating and business support systems that will operate the National Broadband Network in Tasmania.
Today's announcement demonstrates that the Australian and Tasmanian Governments are getting on with the job of delivering super fast broadband to our communities.
It marks the start of 25,000 new local jobs that will be supported by the roll out of the National Broadband Network. At a time of global economic recession, this is important nation building work for Australia, it is important job creation work for local communities, it is important for productivity for the future of our national economy.
When we look to the future it is important to look to the milestones that we hope to achieve. We will start feeding the first fibre optic cable into the trench in August. We will start digging new trenches come October. We will be starting connecting the first home come the end of the year and our plan is to turn services on come July of next year.
These are important milestones for the future. It is therefore with great pleasure today that I am at this official launch. Today we are laying the first piece of optical fibre in our National Broadband Network, the first step towards pulling Australia out of the broadband dark ages and in to the digital economy of the future.
I said to the Premier before I felt a bit like our forebears did 100 and more years ago, driving in spikes for the beginning of a new railway network. It is like that today, railways served us in the 19th Century when they were laid out, electricity grids in the 20th Century as they were laid out and in the 21st century we are laying out this new infrastructure of the future, this new National Broadband Network.
This is a great day for the nation, a great day for Tasmania and I congratulate all those who have shown great leadership in bringing this project to fruition. I thank you.
[Short break]
PM:Now we are here to take some questions from our friends, the ladies and gentlemen of the press. The order of battle will be this, I will take all the easy questions, Stephen Conroy will take questions of medium difficultly and anything really tough goes to the Premier of Tasmania.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister, why these three towns, why are they the first ones chosen?
PM:Well these have been based on the advice that we have received as a Government and we are also keen as a (inaudible). We have taken advice in terms of where the roll out should begin. But we are also as a Government keen to demonstrate that people in regional centres in Tasmania, across the state, get the earliest possible access to these services. As I was just saying to one of the representatives of Aurora, what we want to see, for example, are small businesses in Scottsdale, in Smithton and Midway Point, being able to connect, as rapidly as possible to new business opportunities on the other side of the world, that is what it is all about.
It is making sure that we open up the possibilities of new inputs to your business which might be cheaper, new customers which you had never dreamt of before or new ways of doing your business which you hadn't thought of before. And that is as real and as relevant for small business in regional centres here in Tasmania as it is for the largest companies located in Sydney and Melbourne.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible) marginal seats.
PM:Can I just say where we have got small business and local communities who deserve to have the same level of connectivity as people in the middle of Sydney and the middle of Melbourne, I am about making a difference for them. I am about making a difference for them. I grew up in regional Queensland, a little town of 162 people. Those people in that little town of Eumundi deserve as much connectivity as anyone else across the country that we can possibly physically deliver. And that is why those communities are important in our plan.
This is about a digital revolution for the Australian economy for the 21st Century and the whole point is to lift our productivity growth as a nation, and that means lifting the productivity of businesses, small and large, in regional centres, in rural centres and in metropolitan centres.
That is how we make a difference, lifting Australia's global economic competitiveness as a result, that is the Government strategy for the future.
JOURNALIST:When do you say these three centres will be able to log on, and start accessing services?
PM:As I indicated before, the intention that we have is as follows, and I will go back carefully to what I said before, we will start feeding the first fibre optic cable into trenches in August. We will start digging new trenches come October, we will start connecting the first homes come the end of the year and our objective is to turn on these new services come July next year.
IN rolling out a National Broadband Network through NBN Co, can I say, these are important building blocks for Tasmania, important building blocks for the nation.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:You know something, what I would really like is to make sure that the businesses across Tasmania are connected to new opportunities for the future. Tasmania like many centres across the country has got real challenges because of the global economic recession. How can we make a difference? One, the physicality of the jobs that are going to be generated directly and indirectly for the roll out of that cable across this great state of Tasmania, number one.
Number two, as the business opportunities are turned on for local businesses, the take up in terms of the new employees which will be added to firms in the three centres I have just referred to. We are on about making those differences for people right across the state and that is what we intend to do.
JOURNALIST:What consolation will there be for people who live on the wrong side of the street or that bit further out of town (inaudible)
PM:You know something, we are on about the business of making a difference for all Australians and we are going to do everything possible to ensure we do have maximum band speed and band width across Australia and we have outlined that clearly in the ambitions we have established for this project nationwide.
And can I say, Australia will be fundamentally changed in the way in which we do business as a result. I think we should instead focus on the positive, we should focus on what this will do to turbo-charge business across Australia, on the way through and as a result of this new technology.
And on top of that, think also of the new connectivity which local communities have. Part of the story here is revolutionising the way in which businesses, sorry, in which the business of government is done as well: delivering education services; delivering health services; delivering other services from government.
This is a transformational technology and I believe that as we look ahead, the next building blocks for Australia's economic growth for the future, rest on productivity growth and a large part of productivity growth hinges on this new productivity enhancing technology.
JOURNALIST:How many jobs could be created through this initial roll out?
PM:A lot.
BARTLETT:I am happy to come in there and say, we expect hundreds of jobs, in this very short start up time, probably in the order of 40 or 50 but hundreds across the course of the roll out. But what is important here is not just the hundreds of jobs that will be created in the laying of cable and construction of this network, it is the thousands of jobs that will be created in Tasmania through new generation industries, a new generation set of jobs, in new industries that arrive here, but also in the traditional industries that as the Prime Minister says, will be turbo charged, will have new opportunities, new ways of being innovative to build jobs as well.
So hundreds of jobs in the roll out, thousands of jobs in the opportunity.
PM:Let me just draw an analogy for example with the building education revolution. As you know the Australian Government is investing massively in the largest school modernisation program Australia has ever seen.
And we have very large investment here in Tasmanian schools as well. One, direct jobs which are created through the construction, and they are large, trades people, 20, 30, 40, different trades on site for every school modernisation project.
Secondly, the indirect jobs. I just was in Mackay in North Queensland yesterday. It was warmer than this, but I am a Queenslander, I would say that wouldn't I? It is freezing, and we are going to take two more questions (inaudible) for reasons of hypothermia.
But talking to the people on the building site and Mackay Central Primary school, school built in 1933, we were adding I think about $1 million worth of investments for that school, about 190 students having their first ever state of the art library and resource centre which will also be, you know, wired for the future.
When I was talking to the workers on the site, they actually made a very simple point to me, all of them, employed there in a time of difficulty in the global economy, then go off, buy their lunch locally, they buy extra bits and pieces in terms of what they need for their tools and equipment locally  -  the indirect job creation as a result of what we are doing through these projects is also huge.
Then there is the third level of job creation, that the Premier just pointed to, which is what we have yet not fully seen conceptualised by the business involved, which is how they themselves will transform themselves, new markets, new opportunities.
If you are running for example, a bed and breakfast in Smithton or somewhere like that, then how do you actually access a new global set of customers to come, who will want a quick yes, no, from all parts of the world about whether you have got a vacancy on this night or that night and what else you can do in and around that region for tomorrow.
It is stuff like that, and we haven't really begun to tap that yet. Australia, Tasmania, we have suffered from one thing historically it is called the tyranny of distance.
This revolutionary technology has within its capacity to overcome the tyranny of distance, contracting time and space in business transactions around the world and reducing costs. That is what it is about. That is why Government is in the business of taking the lead to make sure that this technology is as broadly available as possible.
JOURNALIST:Premier (inaudible) would that be the fastest available internet in Australia?
BARTLETT:Well I believe it will be at that stage. And of course with this sort of technology we are future proofing for decades to come because essentially with the fibre laid, the glass (inaudible) there are opportunities as new technologies come along to hang off the end of that fibre to create even faster speeds in the decades ahead.
PM:So we are not just on about a static technology here, the way in which we have conceived of this is, the way in which it will be laid out will be to add speed and capacity as new technological additions are entering the marketplace.
JOURNALIST:Prime Minister you have had an essay published in Fairfax media today, you have previously said that Australia is weathering the global financial crisis better than the rest of the advanced economies, why (inaudible)
PM:Well the reason I have written this essay is to say upfront and direct that the road to recovery will be tough, but that in addition to that, it is time to lay out the building blocks for Australia's sustainable economic growth. One of those building blocks is what we are doing here today. Because our strategy for sustainable economic growth for the nation, for the future, hangs off productivity growth, to enhance Australia's global economic competitiveness, and one of the gaps in that competitiveness equation today is the absence of technologies like high speed broadband.
The road to recovery will be long, tough, hard, bumpy, but now is the time to lay in place the building blocks for sustainable growth for the future.
JOURNALIST:Why do you expect fuel and food and other cost of living things to increase so much  - 
PM:As I said the road to recovery will be tough, it will be hard, it will be bumpy and I would much rather be upfront with the Australian people about that, but equally upfront about how we lay the building blocks for the next generation of economic growth.
That is what today is about, that is what the Government's microeconomic reform agenda is about and that is why we intend to get on with the business of building for the recovery.
The Government has been engaged legitimately in managing the worst global economic crisis, the worst global economic recession three quarters of a century. But we must also equally manage the process of economic recovery. That is what the Government has committed to.
JOURNALIST:Mr Turnbull makes a specific criticism this morning of that essay on (inaudible) he says there is not one word in that essay mention small business, is that a problem?
PM:Can I just say, if I was Mr Turnbull I would probably sit down and read these essays before responding. Small business is referred to on a number of occasions, and you know why? Our Nation Building for Recovery plan, as I have said over and over again for the nation is this: supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
That is what this project is about. The number of small business which will be supported on the way through as we build this new, revolutionary technology and lay it out across the state of Tasmania will be huge. So small business lies at the centre of what this Government has done through its Nation Building for Recovery Plan.
Secondly, can I also say this, right now we have in place a special investment allowance for small business, 50 per cent on top of what currently exists in terms of the normal taxation treatment of this through to the end of the year for small business and medium enterprises investing in the plant and equipment they need for the future.
So I think as with all things, I think it is necessary to apply sober judgement, before rushing to conclusions, sober judgement about what an essay says, sober judgement about the content of Government policy, sober judgement about what the Government is actually doing for small business and sober judgement is something I have seen a deficit of with Mr Turnbull in recent times.
JOURNALIST:What is you sober judgement of emissions trading, is the time for negotiation over or is a double dissolution on the cards?
PM:Can I say that on the question of climate change, I also see that Mr Turnbull has now, with 19 days to go before the Senate votes on climate change, put out a shopping list. This legislation was first put out in March. We are now in August and with 19 days to go before the vote, we now have a shopping list put out, a shopping list which I think has more to do with trying to patch up some of the internal divisions within the Liberal Party and the National Party than it has about much else.
Can I say this: the challenge for Mr Turnbull is to present the Government with an agreed set of amendments, an agreed set of amendments with his party which we could then consider. Unfortunately up until now we have just seen a Coalition, under Mr Turnbull's leadership split right down the middle on climate change. The nation needs decisive leadership on climate change and it is time for the Liberals to get out of the road, so the nation to make its contribution to this great challenge of our generation and us to make our contribution through Copenhagen.
And folks by reasons of advanced hypothermia, I have got to zip.
Ends.


PM: This is a good day. It's about what we're going to do for Australia, what we're going to do for Tasmania, and what we're going to do together, and it's a pleasure to be here today to announce critical milestones for the delivery of the National Broadband Network.
On 8 April, the Premier and I announced that Tasmania would be the launch state of the National Broadband Network. Today I announce that we are starting in rural and regional Tasmania, connecting the 5,000 homes and businesses with fibre-to-the-premises in the towns of Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point.
Why are we starting in Tasmania? Because Tasmania has a long-standing disadvantage in accessing high-speed broadband and is the logical test-bed for this nation-building project for the future. The state has the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state and territory  -  39 percent, compared with the Australian average of 52%.
The data centre opened today will house the critical operating and business support systems that will operate the National Broadband Network in Tasmania. Today's announcements demonstrate that the Australian and Tasmanian Governments are getting on with the job of delivering superfast broadband to our communities.
It marks the start of 25,000 new local jobs that will be supported by the roll out of the National Broadband Network. At a time of global economic recession, this is important nation-building work for Australia. It's important job-creation work for local communities. It's important for productivity for the future of our national economy.


The Prime Minister today announced the communities of Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point will be the first to receive optical fibre broadband connections in the rollout of the National Broadband Network in Tasmania.  Nearly 5000 premises will have access to optical fibre broadband capable of delivering speeds of 100 megabits per second  -  the first of the $43 billion National Broadband Network.  To support the rollout, backbone fibre (fibre optic transmission links) will be built along the following five routes:  
 * Port Latta to Smithton
 * Cambridge to Midway Point
 * Midway  Point to Triabunna
 * George  Town to Scottsdale
 * Scottsdale to St Helens
 A new company, the Tasmanian NBN Company Limited (TNBN Co), will be established and jointly owned by the National Broadband Network Company and Aurora Energy to conduct the rollout and operate the network.  The first stage of the National Broadband Network rollout will deliver wholesale-only, open access broadband network services in the second quarter of 2010.  The Prime Minister also announced Mr Doug Campbell AM as Chair of the new Tasmanian company, and Mr Mike Quigley as the Executive Chair and CEO of the National company.  The Prime Minister made the announcement at the opening of the Aurora Energy and National Broadband Network Data Centre, a key piece of infrastructure that will support the National Broadband Network in Tasmania.  The Data Centre will be the location for operating support systems and business support systems which are critical for the efficient operation of the network.  The opening of the data centre coincided with a cable pull through, connecting the data centre with backbone infrastructure. This is the first piece of NBN cable to be installed in Australia and is a physical demonstration of work commencing on the ground in Tasmania.  The start of the National Broadband Network rollout in Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point highlights the Rudd Government's commitment to providing super-fast broadband for regional and rural communities.  The $43 billion National Broadband Network is the single largest infrastructure project in Australia's history, and is critical to building the recovery from the global economic recession.  This project marks the start of 25,000 local jobs that will be supported by the eight-year National Broadband Network project.  Further information on the National Broadband Network is also available online: www.dbcde.gov.au/nationalbroadbandnetwork



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I acknowledge this great branch of the Australian Labor Party  -  the rank and file members and supporters who do some of the hardest jobs in politics.
Those who do the hard work of keeping our party strong and healthy.
Those who are instrumental to us staying in touch with our local communities.
Those who attend the meetings, hand out the flyers and who serve their communities on local councils and in local community organisations.
And those whose efforts help change the course of the history of this state and our nation.
Just as the efforts of an earlier generation of Tasmanians made history one hundred years ago, when the first Labor Government took office in October 1909 under Premier John Earle.   
Of course that government didn't last long.
In fact, only one week,  -  just like the first Labor government in the world, formed in Queensland ten years beforehand.
And just as happened in Queensland, that minority Labor government fell when the conservatives patched up their differences, frightened of the party of working people being in power.
That's the thing about the conservatives: always more united in their hostility to Labor than in any common policy purpose they might share together.
How little they have changed.   
It would be another five years until Labor could form a majority government in Tasmania.
Our party had modest beginnings, from the hard toil of working people.
But from little things, big things grow.
And in Tasmania, Labor has done big things.
Think back to last century, when (with one exception) for a half a century from 1934, Labor won every state election.
And now, in the early 21st century, David Bartlett is renewing the Labor vision for Tasmania  -  a vision built on investing in education, investing in infrastructure, and investing in the industries and jobs of the future.
Federally, Labor also now has the honour of representing every single Tasmanian seat in the House of Representatives.
And with that honour comes great responsibility.
And it's a responsibility that I take seriously.  
This Australian Labor Government  -  now just over 18 months old  -  consistent with Labor tradition, is committed to building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia and an Australia ready for the challenges of the future.
This Government is facing the deepest global economic downturn in three quarters of a century.
It was a crisis born from the ideology and policies of the political right.
Neo-liberalism delivered us free market fundamentalism, unrestrained greed among finance executives, a boom in consumer and corporate debt, and a culture of weak regulation and a culture that said there was no place for government in the modern economy.
Neoliberal ideology and policy contributed to the creation of an unsustainable boom and bust global economy.
Around the world, governments of the responsible centre have been forced to step in to rescue the economy from global collapse.
As a Labor government we took the responsible course of action in response to the global crisis.
Early action.
Strong action.
Decisive action.
Action to make a difference.
And the bottom line is that we have made a difference.
We stepped in to the economy when the private sector was weak.
We acted to save the financial system from complete implosion: by providing sovereign guarantees to the banking system for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth.
We acted to cushion Australia from the worst aspects of the ensuring global recession by implementing a bold national strategy to support jobs, business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need tomorrow.
And we have acted to support those who through no fault of their own have lost their job or cannot find one by implementing a $1.5 billion Jobs and Training Compact with Australians, a compact with young Australians, a compact with retrenched Australians and a compact with local communities hardest hit.
In Tasmania, our strategy is no different.
2,808 Tasmanian first home buyers have taken advantage of the doubling of the First Home Owners Boost for existing homes and the trebling of the boost for newly constructed homes.  
This is leading to activity. 
In Tasmania, building approvals are up 7.1 per cent over the past year.
Already, under the National School Pride program, 273 projects have been approved for Tasmania, totalling $35.3 million and benefitting 80,695 students. Work begun on these schools last month.
Under Round 1 of the Primary Schools for the 21st Century program, Tasmania had 173 projects approved, totalling $228.3 million.
A total of thirty schools in Tasmania received funding for science and language centres.
Funding of $16.1 million for 65 social houses has already been approved for additional social housing in Tasmania.
A further $9.3 million has been approved for the repair of 516 social housing dwellings.
Additional Defence houses will be constructed in Tasmania at a cost of $2.8 million.
At the same time, the Australian Government has sought to use this stimulus strategy to invest in long-term, productivity-enhancing investments needed in skills and infrastructure for the future.
In Tasmania we are also investing in transport infrastructure projects  -  including the Kingston bypass, the Illawarra Road Link upgrade and the Brighton Bypasses.
And we are investing in the national broadband network  -  rolling out first across Tasmania.
Our total national stimulus in the state of Tasmania will total of around $1.4 billion.
70 per cent of which will be invested in the infrastructure we need for the future.
And we have done so on the basis of responsible, conservative economic management  -  expanding the role of government while the private economy is in retreat, while reducing that role as the private economy starts to recover.
Acting to intervene when it has been necessary.
Acting also to return the budget to surplus over time  -  and to maintain that budget discipline as we consider other important areas of national reform, including health.
And the result: as of today, Australia has the fastest growth, the second lowest unemployment and the lowest deficit and debt of all the Major Advanced Economies.
And as of today, the only one not to have gone into recession.
But when the rubber hits the road in all of this is jobs.
Because of the global recession, unemployment will continue to go up.
The action taken by the Government will support around 200,000 jobs that would otherwise be lost in each of the next two years.
This Labor Government has been a government of action  -  action to make a difference.
Today, you might have read an essay that I published in the national press that looks beyond the immediate response to the global recession towards the challenges of economic recovery.
I've noticed that some don't particularly appreciate it when I write long essays.
After the publication of my last essay in The Monthly 6 months ago, I'm informed that one national newspaper published more than fifty separate articles attacking it in one way or another.
I'm also informed that's about 60,000 words the newspaper in question devoted to my mediocre prose.
Nearly ten times the length of my original essay.
We should welcome a real debate about different ideas for the nation's future  -  including from newspapers that declare themselves unashamed defenders of the ideological right.
The Liberals weren't exactly big fans of the February essay either.
In large part because the Liberals don't like to admit the role of the neo-liberal ideology in bringing about the global financial crisis and the economic destruction this crisis has wrought.
Nor do the Liberals like to admit that it has been the interventionist policies of governments of the responsible centre around the world that have begun to arrest the decline in global growth.
In fact, in a stunning act of political hypocrisy, the Liberals instead seek to blame the centrist governments of the responsible centre for acting to clean up the global economic mess that is so much the product of their own ideological handiwork  -  unrestrained greed; unlimited credit and unregulated markets.
But the essay published today seeks to take the debate to a further stage.
It is more about the future than the past.
It is less about the crisis than it is about crafting the recovery.
It is about how we build a more sustainable economic growth strategy for Australia's future than we have seen in Australia's recent past.
It is about building a global competitiveness strategy for the future rather than just relying on the boom and bust of the mining sector, the real estate sector and the stock market that has so characterised so much of our past.
It is therefore about “the Building Decade” that lies ahead  -  building productivity growth, building a globally competitive Australia, putting in place each of the building blocks of this plan for the future.
As we pass through the worst part of the global recession, new challenges are emerging on the horizon.
The first of the new challenges relates to the transition period that lies ahead as we slowly move from crisis to recovery.
In the last 12 months of the crisis, governments around the world have implemented a range of extraordinary policies - fiscal, monetary and financial.
These policies including a massive injection of $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus; record low interest rates in many countries, and unprecedented bank guarantees and, in some countries, bail outs have been necessary to put a floor under a crisis.
But just as it was responsible to implement these policies during the crisis, it is also necessary to coordinate globally their gradual withdrawal once the recovery becomes clear.
That challenge  -  the challenge of creating a smooth and coordinated global exit strategy from the extraordinary policies that the economies of the world have had to put in place  -  is a challenge to which Australia and the world must direct their attention.
Coordinated exit will be one focus for discussion at the next meeting of the G20 in September when Australia once again plans to be actively engaged. 
The second of the emerging challenges facing Australia and the global economy is the challenge of building a sustainable growth model for the future. 
This challenge begins with the recognition that the source of Australia's future growth cannot simply be the same as for our past growth.
We cannot in the future rely exclusively on the windfall profits of a mining boom, a property boom, and a stock market boom  -  all fuelled by an exponential rise in private debt to drive sustainable economic growth for Australia's future.
Instead, we need to put in place a long-term economic reform strategy which will require patience and persistence to put in place  -  a strategy designed to lift Australia's declining productivity growth.
With the mining boom over and the prospect of a slower global recovery, Australia cannot rely alone on international fortune to carry us through the decade ahead. 
But just because the path to global economic recovery will be tough, does not mean that we must accept the inevitability of lower growth in Australia.
Instead, Australia must work smarter and harder to achieve better national growth in a weaker global economy  -  and without just depending primarily on the good fortune of an episodic mining boom.
As Opposition Leader, I often questioned where growth would come from when the mining boom was over.
The previous government ridiculed rather than ever responding to the question  -  the reason being that they had no substantive response at all.
Now, in Government, this Government has a responsibility to prepare for the long-term future.
In order to create sustainable growth for the decade ahead, we must lay the foundations today for a stronger and more productive economy for tomorrow.
In the long run, Australia's living standards are fundamentally determined by productivity growth.
Treasury data estimates that 80 per cent of the improvement in the living standards of Australians over our past 40 years has come from increased productivity.
The factors that make up productivity may not always be dramatic enough to make the front page of the newspaper.
But they are fundamentally important to Australia's future prosperity.
And as we have seen from the past, it is a continuing process of reform  -  and one where the results of reform often take upwards of a decade to become real drivers of our national economic performance.
Productivity, put simply, relates to how efficiently we produce goods and services.
In a single business, productivity is simply the amount of output the business produces for a given number of technologies and workers employed.
If that business manages to improve its production process such that it can produce more output with the same number of workers, then its productivity will increase.
And across the economy, productivity growth is simply an aggregation of all the productivity increases in all of our individual businesses.
In a single business, the productivity of its workers increases in three fundamental ways:
First, productivity increases when investment increases. With more technology, a single worker can produce more. That is why capital investment  -  both public and private - is critical to Australia's long term productivity performance.
Second, productivity increases when skills increase. When workers have more skills, they work more efficiently, and produce more output. That is why education, skills and training are an important driver of productivity.
Third, productivity increases when innovations are made. When research and development delivers a better production technique, a faster process or an innovative variation in the product or service being produced  -  then workers can produce more. That is why research, development and innovation are important for productivity.
The drivers of firm level productivity are fundamentally similar to the drivers of economy wide productivity. Investment, skills, innovation are key national drivers of our productivity, and hence of our long term living standards.
There is of course a fourth driver of productivity as well and that is the regulatory environment within which business operates. Where regulations are excessively complex or inconsistent across an economy, it impedes economic efficiency.  That is why regulatory reform and regulatory harmonisation to create a seamless Australian national economy is also a core driver of long-term productivity growth.
A fundamental economic challenge for Australia is the long-term decline in productivity that we have experienced over recent decades.
During the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, we averaged productivity growth of 3.3 per cent each year.
During the productivity cycle from 1998-99 to 2003-04, productivity growth fell to 2.1 per cent.
And in the current cycle since 2003-04, productivity growth has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent.
This productivity growth was the product of the fundamental microeconomic reforms implemented during the Hawke-Keating governments  -  tariff reform, competition reform, labour market reform in particular.
But over the last decade, the reform process ground to a halt.
As we look beyond the global recession our focus for the future must be on the revitalisation of the productivity agenda.
In my first major economic address as Federal Labor Leader, given to the BCA in February 2007, I set out my concerns about the long-term decline in productivity growth under the previous government.
As I said then, I believe we need a third wave of micro-economic reform to bolster Australia's flagging productivity growth, following those of the 1980s and then the 1990s.
As I said then, resources booms do not last forever.
And as I said then, it was just plain wrong that during the resources boom, that only 8 per cent of the revenue proceeds of the revenue windfall that came from the boom was being invested in education and innovation.
And just 6 per cent on infrastructure.
Both these statistics coming from Saul Eslake's analysis at the time.
These are critical investments for the nation's long-term productivity growth.
And in many respects, the last decade represents a lost decade for the long term future.
That is why the decade ahead must become a “Building Decade”.
Since coming to office 18 months ago, the Australian Government has adopted a new set of priorities, focused on building the nation's long-term productivity growth.
Turning around the productivity collapse of recent years is at the heart of our economic strategy.
We cannot build a strong, prosperous and competitive economy without turning around that productivity collapse.
That's why from day one we made productivity reforms the priority in our dealings with State governments.
That's why the Government has launched an education revolution  -  in early childhood education; in deep reforms in the new National Education Agreement with the states and schools; in the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history; in the implementation of the Bradley Review of higher education; the Cutler Review on Innovation, together with a radical expansion in capital expenditure in our TAFEs, universities and research institutions.
That's also why the Government set up the Building Australia Fund.  That is why we have invested some $35 billion in nation-building infrastructure projects in critical road, rail, port infrastructure, incorporating advice from Infrastructure Australia.
That is also why the Government is harmonising regulatory arrangements with the states and territories, including nationally uniform occupational health and safety laws.  This will reduce costs for business, thereby encouraging enterprise.
As the OECD noted the March 2009 report Going for Growth, investment in energy, water, transport and telecommunications networks can boost long-term economic output and productivity to a greater extent that other types of physical investment.
That's why 70 per cent of our national stimulus strategy is dedicated to investing in our national infrastructure.
The centrepiece of the Government's infrastructure investment for the future will be our National Broadband Network.
A critical driver of Australia's future economic prosperity will be broadband infrastructure and the services it delivers. 
Superfast broadband is likely to be one of the single biggest drivers of productivity growth in the decade ahead.
Just as railway tracks laid the future for the 19th century, and electricity grids and highways laid the future for the 20th century, so too broadband will become the core infrastructure of the 21st century.
Put simply, high-speed broadband contracts the time, space and cost of day to day business transactions  -  both for the private sector and the public sector.
That is why we are committed to, in partnership with the private sector, the construction of a $43 billion National Broadband Network.
Optical fibre to the home and business will deliver superfast speeds of 100 megabits per second  -  50 times faster than what most people use now.
Next generation wireless and satellite technologies will aim to provide every household with fast broadband.
Like the building of the Snowy River scheme, the Sydney Harbour Bridge, Tasmania's great hydroelectric schemes, and the national highway network  -  this is an historic act of nation building.
At the moment, Australia's broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch.
Slow broadband is holding our nation back.
Out of 30 leading economies, our broadband speeds are behind all but three countries.
We are in the bottom half of OECD countries for broadband take-up (16 out of 30 in 2008).
Years of failed policy have left Australia as a ‘broadband backwater'.
The former Government failed to deliver fast broadband for Australia.
In 12 years they had 18 failed plans.
They never understood the importance of high-speed broadband to our long-term future.
They failed to build for our nation's prosperity beyond the mining boom.
You would think with $334 billion of extra tax revenue delivered to the Commonwealth budget off the back of the mining boom, that the previous government could have found their way to invest in at least one major national infrastructure project.
But no.
And Australia has suffered in the productivity stakes as a result. 
Our Government is committed to superfast broadband because it has the potential to transform our economy.
Building a national high speed broadband network will create jobs.
     * 25,000 jobs every year, on average, over the life of the project.
     * At its peak, it will support 37,000 jobs.
High speed broadband will generate additional economic activity.
The National Broadband Network is expected to generate additional economic activity worth some $37 billion over the life of the project (an additional quarter per cent of GDP every year for the life of the project).
Critically, high speed broadband, once built, will also spur innovation and productivity in the long term.
It was estimated by the former Federal Department of Communications that innovation from information and communications technology is the single biggest driver of business productivity -  it drives 78 per cent of productivity gains in service businesses and 85 per cent in manufacturing businesses.
How does broadband increase productivity for businesses?
Broadband   allows the rapid transfer of information and saves business time and money. 
     * Online marketing and sales mean bigger markets without the traditional costs of  expansion.
     * Online  communication with suppliers, employees and customers saves time.
     * Online inventory management and other internal business functions save time, reduce paperwork and save money.
And it creates new opportunities for new businesses developing new broadband applications.
High speed broadband will help our regional towns grow and stay connected.
High   speed broadband will plug our nation into the global economy and help us overcome   the tyranny of distance. 
High speed broadband can help us act on climate   change.
     * A 2007 study found that broadband could help reduce Australia's annual emissions of greenhouse gases by 5 per cent.
     * Video conferencing can remove the need to travel for face - to - face  meetings. The Australian division of Cisco claims that it achieved a 16 per cent reduction in air travel in a single year after it adopted videoconferencing and other telepresence facilities.
High speed broadband will revolutionise teaching  -  bringing the knowledge and experiences of the world into every classroom.
High speed broadband will revolutionise health care in our medical centres and hospitals.
     * Access to specialist advice through the secure electronic transfer of diagnostic information and test results, such as x-rays, could enable early diagnosis and potentially reduce hospital stay times.
Across all key services  -  energy, water, health and transport  -  it is estimated by Access Economics in a 2009 report that the adoption of smart technologies and the roll - out of high - speed broadband could result in more than 70 000 jobs being added to the Australian economy and add 1.5 per cent to the level of Australia's Gross Domestic Product within a few years.
With so many economic and social benefits to flow from superfast broadband it is absolutely critical that we get on with the job  -  and that is what we intend to do.
Just this morning I was pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Mike Quigley as the Executive Chair and CEO of the National Broadband Network Company we have established to roll out the network.
Mike is an Australian who has had a distinguished career in the telecommunications industry, and was most recently President and Chief Operating Officer of Alcatel.
Mike has a big job ahead of him and we wish him well. 
And where will we start the roll-out of the National Broadband Network?
Right here in Tasmania.
Why Tasmania?
Because Tasmania has for too long been neglected and is behind the rest of the country for Broadband.
This state has the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state or territory (39% compared with the Australian average of 52%).
Just this morning I announced the next critical steps in the Tasmanian roll-out.
I opened the Aurora Energy and National Broadband Network Data Centre here in Hobart.
The Data Centre will house the critical operating and business support systems that will operate the National Broadband Network in Tasmania.
Today, I laid the first piece of optical fibre in our National Broadband Network  -  the first step towards pulling Australia out of broadband dark ages and into the digital economy of the future.
It is the first physical demonstration of work commencing on the ground, here in Tasmania.
Second, I announced the appointment of Doug Campbell as the Chair of the Tasmanian National Broadband Network company.
This company has been established to fast-track the rollout the NBN in this state.
Doug is an Australian who has a wealth of telecommunications experience, both in Australia and internationally, including being the primary force behind the creation of very successful Telstra Country Wide.
Third, I announced the first locations for the roll-out of optical fibre.
We will start in the towns of Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point.
Nearly 5000 homes and business in these towns will see fibre to the home and business rolled-out.
To support the roll-out to these towns and get ready for the next towns, we will build backbone fibre optic cable in five locations.
Broadband will accelerate development and support jobs in these regions and right across Tasmania.
That is why we are getting on the job.
We are not in government for the sake of being there.
That's what the Liberals do.
We're in government to make a difference.
To build a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia and an Australia prepared for the challenges of the future.
To build the jobs of the future.
To deliver for working families for the future.
To support those who are doing it tough now and in the future.
To build a stronger Australia for the future  -  while never allowing the fair-go to slide out the back door.
And to achieve this purpose, this government will move ahead with this major program of national reform.
This will be the Building Decade.
It will require consistency of purpose.
It will require persistence, patience and perseverance.
And it will require resolute political will.
But when the history is written, let us hope they will look back and say this was a Government that made a difference.


The Prime Minister today announced the completion of the first homes delivered under the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan in Victoria and handed over the keys to the new tenants in Tullamarine.
This multi-unit development by builder Greg Hinton from CGH Property Group received $650,000 in stimulus funds and has three homes that supported work for 11 apprentices.
The Social Housing Initiative will deliver 20,000 homes across the country - it is the biggest ever investment in affordable housing, which together with other stimulus initiatives will support 15,000 jobs nationally over the next two years.
Investment in social housing creates jobs for builders, plumbers, carpenters, electricians, brickies, carpet-layers, kitchen manufacturers and many more in the building and construction industry.
The Social Housing Initiative in Victoria is worth $1.6 billion and is on schedule to meet the objective of completing 75 per cent of properties by the end of 2010:
- Stage One involves 667 dwellings at a cost of $171.5 million in Victoria - all have been approved by the Federal Government and 83 have commenced construction.
- For Stage Two, 929 dwellings worth $218 million have already been approved - ahead of the August deadline. The rest of the proposals for this stage will be approved by August 30.
The stimulus plan also involves a $99.2 million investment in maintenance and repair work for 5600 homes in Victoria. Renovation and repainting jobs increase the quality of the housing stock and lengthen its life.
The Commonwealth and Victorian Government are investing in nation building to support jobs and provide more Australians with affordable housing.


PM: We're here at Tullamarine today to announce the completion of the first units of social housing delivered under the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan for Victoria.
This project itself involves some $650,000 through the stimulus plan, providing affordable housing for three tenants, and we've just seen that, and it's really good to see the difference it's making in people's lives.
I'm told, from Tanya just before, that we've had one hundred and...
PLIBERSEK: Oh, 110 people on site.
PM: 110 people on site.
PLIBERSEK: And 19 apprentices.
PM: And 19 apprentices and that is a good thing.
And these projects are now, with the Government's support, and the State Governments support, springing up right across Victoria and right across Australia.
When you put this together with the Building the Education Revolution Program, we are making difference to the economy, but we're also making a difference to people's lives and to the education of our kids as well.
The important thing is that with each of these constructions, there's a number of trades that are concentrated on site - tradies such as carpenters, electricians, brickies, carpet layers, painters, kitchen manufacturers and the lot, working hard, working together to build projects and supporting local jobs.
Here in Victoria, our social housing initiative is worth $1.6 billion, and is on schedule to meet the objective of completing 75% of properties by the end of 2010. Stage 1 involved 667 dwellings at a cost of $171 million, Stage 2 992 dwellings worth $218 million, and they've already been approved and are ahead of the August deadline.
We're also investing in the maintenance and repair work on a further 50,000 units of existing social housing. Tanya was advising me before that of that 50,000, 10,600 would be lost to the total stock of available social housing were it not for these repairs.
Put those numbers together, it actually makes a big difference in terms of overall demand for social housing in Australia.


PM: It is good to be here with Tanya Plibersek, our Housing Minister and the Victorian Housing Minister Richard Wynne and Parliamentary Secretary Bill Shorten, where are you Bill? And our local members as well. And we are here at Tulla', Tullamarine today to announce the completion of the first units of social housing delivered under the nation building economic stimulus plan for Victoria.
This project itself involved some $650,000 through the stimulus plan, providing affordable housing for three tenants and we have just seen that and it is really good to see the difference it is making in people's lives.
I am told from Tanya just before that we have had -
MINISTER PLIBERSEK: About 110 people on site and 19 apprentices.
PM: About 110 people on site and 19 apprentices and that is a good thing. And these projects are now, with the Government's support and the State Government's support, springing up right across Victoria and right across Australia. When you put this together with the Building the Education Revolution program, we are making a difference to the economy but we are also making a difference to people's lives and to the education of our kids as well.
Right across Australia now we are investing in 20,000 units of new social housing, 20,000 units of social housing. So apart from the ones you have seen here today, that is another 19,997 and Tanya will be going to each of them.
The important thing is that with the, each of these constructions, there is a number of trades that are concentrated on the site. Tradies such as carpenters, electricians, brickies, carpet layers, painters, kitchen manufacturers and the lot. That is, working hard, working together to build these projects and supporting local jobs.
Here in Victoria, our social housing initiative is worth $1.6 billion and is on schedule to meet the objective of completing 75 per cent of properties by the end of 2010. Stage one involved 667 dwellings at a cost $171 million. Stage two, 992 dwellings worth $218 million and they have already been approved and are ahead of the August deadline. The stimulus plan also involved some $99 million investment in the maintenance and repair of 5600 in Victoria. This is actually an important addition to what we have done. Let me restate it: we are investing in 20,000 units of social housing (inaudible)
Putting it in context, 20,000 new units of social housing, secondly we are also investing in the maintenance and repair work on a further 50,000 units of existing social housing. Tanya was advising me before that of that 50,000, 10,600 would be lost to the total stock of available social housing were it not for these repairs. Put those numbers together, it actually makes a big difference in terms of overall demand for social housing in Australia. So these are important investments for the future.
Can I say that for us as Government it is good to partnering with the Victorian Government on important national reforms like this. What is our strategy? Nation building for recovery, nation building for the future. That is investing in jobs, small business and apprenticeships today while investing also in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
That is making a difference and that is why we are here today. (inaudible)
MINISTER WYNNE: Just to say Prime Minister, that it is fantastic that you are here today with Tanya and our local members. This is an unprecedented investment and an unprecedented partnership by both levels of Government in public and social housing.
Just by way of scale this is the biggest build of public and social housing that has happened in Victoria since the 1956 Olympic Games. So this is a wonderful journey that we are on here. This is our, we are turning our first three units over to our residents here in Tullamarine and it is a great time to be the Minister for Housing in Victoria because we are going to achieve the goals that the Prime Minister has set for us. It is great challenge but to achieve both the economic stimulus that is evidenced from this investment and also the social outcome that we are getting here, these are wins on both counts.
PM: And just before taking your questions, this Nation Building for Recovery plan of ours is good for the economy. Remember, Australia at present, of the major advanced economies in the world is the fastest growing economy with the second lowest unemployment, with the lowest debt, the lowest deficit and the only economy so far not to have gone into recession.
Secondly, it is not only good for the national economy, it is good for the community and it is good for families and we have seen three families lives changed somewhat by the investment we have made here in these units of social housing. So I am very pleased today to be here in Melbourne launching the first three units of social housing commissioned under the Nation Building for Recovery Plan. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday you wrote that, you warned about a lag between the recovery and unemployment (inaudible)
PM: Did you read it all? (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Yeah, well I read the précis. Having said that, wouldn't the union movement push for a 20 per cent Australian made component in all Government purchasing orders go somewhere to helping the unemployment problem?
PM: The global economic recession is the worst global economic downturn in three quarters of a century. That is why we have a nation building for recovery plan, a nation building for the future plan.
In the essay I have written, what I have said is this: the road to recovery will be tough. It will be very tough and that is why we need to lay in place the building blocks for long term sustainable economic growth for Australia.
Where does that lie? Of course strong management of our public finances on the one hand but laying out the building blocks of long term productivity growth for the future as well. That is our strategy for the long term recovery. That is the direction we are going in: acting now, supporting the economy in the sorts of measures that we are launching here today, but putting in place the building blocks for the future as well. I believe that is where our concentration must lie. They are really important measures.
JOURNALIST: But wont a 20 per cent purchasing component of made in Australia support -
PM: Let me just say this, the important thing is this: so much of Australia's national wealth depends on the fact that we continue to be able to access export markets abroad. Secondly we need to avoid any form of protectionist measure which invites retaliatory protectionist measures from economies around the world. And that is what would happen. And as a result -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: (inaudible) and as a result what we are trying to do is to make sure we boost our economy at home, keep our export markets open abroad, that is what the Government is committed to. This Government, throughout its time in office and for the future, will be committed to open markets abroad. The mistake of the Great Depression in the early 1930s was this: economies believed that the way to get themselves through was to shut their economies down and close their borders to imports from abroad. What happens with that, the entire global economy shrinks.
What happened in the '30's - that depression resulted in a negligible economic growth throughout the 1930s. We are not about to repeat those mistakes here.
JOURNALIST: So is the Government rejecting the Buy Australia campaign that the unions have?
PM: We believe that there is a strong role for effective Government procurement policy. There is a strong role for industry policy. We are here in Victoria, let me talk about industry policy for a bit. The automotive industry, $6.2 billion plan which goes out for more than 12 years, it has been instrumental and fundamental in the decisions taken in Detroit about the continuation of the Australian automobile industry. That is because we have been active partners intervening through industry policy with key and critical industries such as automotive which employs more than 200,000 Australians in one form or another.
That is where our emphasis lies, that is where we are going to be going for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) interest rates (inaudible)
PM: I think the challenge which we all face is this: the road to recovery will be tough therefore we need to put in place the building blocks for the future. The road to recovery will not just be tough, it will be long, it will be hard and there will be bumps in the road. And I just think it is important to be upfront with people about those bumps in the road, because we are dealing with a global economic recession, the likes of which have not seen in three quarters of a century. And this Government, with policies such as we have here at the moment, are aimed at making a difference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) can never afford to buy a home (inaudible)
PM: On Friday I addressed the Housing Industry Association National Awards in Brisbane which brought together the entire housing industry from across Australia. It was a really good gathering because it enabled us to reflect on not just our work in social housing, though this is important - 20,000 units of new housing by way of support to those in need, 50,000 units of repair and 10,000 which are being prevented from falling out of the housing, the social housing stock nationwide.
But the Minister Tanya Plibersek has been actively engaged in all the other arms of housing policy as well, around housing affordability - the housing affordability fund, the first home owners deposit scheme. These are measures which we have implemented, in the 18 months we have been in office, with one objective, to make sure that we make, that we have in the future the living possibility of Australians owning their own homes. And secondly, where that is not possible, that we are out there with a decent strategy on social and public housing and action on homelessness which makes a difference for those in need.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Australian house prices are too high though and that it will only get worse?
PM: Well these things obviously follow a market but can I say our job as a government is to intervene through measures to help first home owners, not just through for example the trebling of the first home owners' boost which is what we have done. And if you look at the figures which have been produced about the assistance which has been provided to first home buyers in particular from that scheme, it has been significant.
Secondly, the First Home Savers Account scheme which the Government has introduced, thirdly the (inaudible) National Rental Affordability Scheme and fourthly our direct investment to social housing and fifthly our first white paper as a Government, ' A place to call home' on the great challenge of homelessness.
100,000 Australians who have no place to call home is, I believe, unacceptable. That is why the Minister and I and the Government took that challenge up with our first white paper commissioned not long after the Government took office. It was delivered at the end of last year. And we embraced that strategy and have funded it and supported it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) youth unemployment is rising in areas like this particularly, outer suburban areas. What is the Government doing about this, are you worried that it is going to get back to a situation (inaudible) where youth unemployment was one of the fastest rising sectors?
PM: Look this is a really tough time and I have been upfront and straightforward with the Australian people saying the road to recovery will be tough and unemployment will continue to rise. Look at what is happening around the world, at the global economic recession where unemployment has gone through the roof.
In Australia because of the measures we have taken, we are doing better than most other economies and we have the second lowest unemployment of the worlds' major advanced economies.
However, stimulus strategy and investment nationwide is one thing, and that, the Treasury advises will help keep more than 210,000 Australians employed who would otherwise lose their jobs were it not for the stimulus strategy of which these three houses are part.
Second point, in terms of local unemployment and youth unemployment in particular, that is why we have also implemented our Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. What is that? A compact with young Australians, a compact with retrenched Australians, a compact with local communities.
For young Australians under 25 it is a nationwide policy of earn or learn and therefore what we have done through the provision of productivity training places to make sure that any young person who cannot enter the labour market, has an opportunity to obtain skills which they can then deploy once the private economy recovers.
It is all these things taken together which make a difference and that is why we are active not just on direct stimulus, but supporting people who can't get a job or who have lost their job at the same time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Gen Y are a little bit too lazy to get out there and flip burgers and wash dishes is that a concern to you -
JOURNALIST: Is Mark Arbib right when he says Gen Y shouldn't be job snobs?
PM: Let me read you what Mr Arbib said on the record and then I will come in and completely support everything he has said. '12 months ago, employers were struggling to find workers but in a short time the job market has been turned on its head. In tough economic times, many people, especially new entrants to the job market with limited experience have to adjust their thinking to be more adaptive and flexible.'
That is what Mr Arbib has actually said as opposed to what has just been said. So let me just say this, Mark Arbib is absolutely right to say that the road to recovery is tough, that unemployment is going up and it is important for us all to be practical about that in terms of the jobs that are available in the economy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I say that, let's be very clear about one point and that is that we have said that when it comes to the report of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission that we would be releasing that report before Parliament resumes and we intend to do so. Secondly, this is a big challenge for the future and we intend to embrace that challenge.
Thirdly what we have said also is that the States and the Territories have a responsibility with us to work together on a national reform plan for health and hospitals and we would seek to do so cooperatively and if the States and Territories choose not to do that cooperatively, then we leave open the option of going to a referendum to seek a mandate from the people.
We stand by each of those undertakings, have to be very clear about that. That is what we said. We have also said, commissioned this report on the health reform commission which has reported to the Government at the end of June. We have said we would release it by the time Parliament resumes in August and we intend to roll up our sleeves and get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I say that the challenge in the midst of tough economic times brought about by the worst global recession in three quarters of a century is to work with the new opportunities that the Government's economic stimulus strategy is delivering, work with the support that is provided to young people through our compact with young Australians and to accept the practical challenges of an economy which has been buffeted by events around the world.
Government is out there extending a hand in partnership with communities and with young people and those who have been retrenched and by our investments in necessary infrastructure. But it is going to be tough and I see no point in gilding the lily about the fact it is going to be tough. The road to recovery will be tough, long, hard and bumpy.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull says he won't propose amendments to the emissions trading scheme but he says he wants to negotiate. Is the Government going to negotiate with him?
PM: I saw those remarks this morning and I am a little bit surprised by them. Firstly the Government produced its white paper on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme last December. Secondly, the Government released its legislation in March. Thirdly it is now 18 days to go before it is voted on in the Senate and now Mr Turnbull says there is not enough time to frame amendments for that legislation.
Let's just be you know, fair 'dinkum about this. Mr Turnbull is simply looking for an excuse to avoid taking a decision on climate change because his party is fundamentally divided on climate change.
There has been plenty of time since March of this year for Mr Turnbull to frame amendments which the Government has always said they would consider.
Mr Turnbull's problem is that he can't get any unity within his own party to frame agreed amendments to put to the Government for consideration. That is the bottom line here. The nation requires leadership on climate change. Mr Turnbull is only concerned about propping up his own leadership through to the end of the year, hence his most recent excuse today.
And having said that folks, I have got to run, I have got to get back to Canberra. Thanks.


Before the election, I made this commitment: that we would end the blame game which had gone on for too long, and that with the reform of our nation's health and hospital system, that the buck would stop with me.
I said we were determined to improve health and hospitals right across the nation, not just in a few marginal seats here and there.
I made the commitment that if elected to Government, the Commonwealth would take responsibility for major reforms of Australia's health and hospitals system. And I said that if the States and Territories were not willing to implement cooperatively, a comprehensive health and hospitals reform plan to end the blame game, the Commonwealth would take the matter to the Australian people for a mandate to take full funding responsibility for the system.
The Government stands by each of these commitments. The Government takes its election commitments on health reform seriously, as we have done in each of the other major policy reforms we have embraced.
Today, I will outline our broader approach to the recommendations contained in this health and hospitals reform report.
This, by any definition, is a major report with major implications for the nation, and I warn you in advance that my remarks today will be substantial in length, 40 minutes or more in duration  -  settle down, buckle up.
But I believe that it's necessary given that this one of the most complex areas of policy reform to be undertaken by Government.
Since coming to office just over 18 months ago, the Government has demonstrated a serious commitment to health care and health reform.
As you can see from the slide, we have made significant additional recurrent investments in the system  -  on top of the one-off injection of half a billion dollars into the system in 2008-09 to deal with the immediate crisis in hospital funding we confronted on coming to office.
Last November, we delivered a record $64 billion National Healthcare Agreement which meant:
$60 billion for health and public hospital services over the next five years.
A $1.1 billion investment in training more doctors, nurses and allied health workers  -  the single largest investment in the health system's biggest capacity constraint.
A $750 million investment in taking pressure off emergency departments - with an agreed performance benchmark that 80 per cent of emergency department presentations would be seen within clinically recommended triage times by 2012-13, as recommended by the Australian College of Emergency Medicine.
A further $500 million investment in sub-acute care beds.
A further $448 million investment in prevention, expanding the preventive health investment to $872 million  -  the single largest investment by an Australian Government in prevention, ever.
And this comes on top of the immediate $600 million investment we made on coming to office in slashing elective surgery waiting times  -  just in its first stage, delivering 41,000 extra elective procedures, well above our target of 25,000.
In addition to the measures contained in the National Health Care Agreement, we are also investing more than a quarter of a billion dollars in primary health care services in local communities - with 32 new GP Super Clinics, and increased GP training places.
Alongside these funding increases, we have developed robust accountability measures through the COAG Reform Council to measure clearly real improvements in areas like hospital waiting times; screening for breast, cervical and bowel cancer; and vaccination rates.
These investments are already being implemented because we regarded them as urgent, and because they are not contingent on the larger blueprint for health care reform I am discussing today.
We are also now undertaking historic investments in nation building health infrastructure.
We are investing $3.2 billion allocated to 36 major projects across our hospitals and medical research institutes.
And we have committed the single largest investment in cancer care infrastructure in Australia  -  with a $1.2 billion funding investment for two world-class comprehensive cancer centres at Parkville in Melbourne and the Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney, and a new national network of centres integrating cancer research, education and care.
All up, the Government has delivered substantive progress in health care reform, as reflected in the contents of this slide.
And these reforms have reflected our priorities.
A commitment to prevention, because prevention is better than cure.
A commitment to primary care, because our GPs represent the front line of care.
A commitment to invest in the critical problem areas of our hospitals  -  to reduce waiting times for elective surgery and to improve access for our emergency departments.
A commitment to sub-acute care to reduce preventable admissions to hospitals.
A commitment to investing in our health workforce and health infrastructure needs.
And a commitment to improve accountability for the health system overall, reflected in the new measurement systems incorporated for the first time in COAG reforms. 
But the time has now come to move to the next stage of comprehensive health and hospital reform for the nation.
Early last year we established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, the first comprehensive review of the nation's health system in nearly two decades.
Ten leading health experts were appointed to the Commission, bringing together a wealth of experience from past roles as clinicians, hospital and health system administrators, medical researchers; through roles in the community sector, remote area nursing, and in the most senior levels of government including a former Liberal Health Minister, Rob Knowles and a former Labor Premier Geoff Gallop.
The Commission is chaired by Dr Christine Bennett, who is former Chief Executive of Westmead Hospital and Community Health Services, Chief Medical Officer of BUP Australia, and CEO of Research Australia.
They were charged with the job of developing a long-term plan for health reform.
The Commission's initial task was to advise on the framework for the next Australian Health Care agreements, which were concluded last year.
It provided valuable advice, assisting with the development of new performance benchmarks designed to ensure substantial returns on the new investments that we were making in the health care system.
It is for this reason that the bulk of the Government's investments in the health and hospital system so far have in fact been targeted in the areas that the Commission has identified in the report released today as priorities for the long term.
Of course, the Commission's larger task was to report on a long-term health reform plan to provide sustainable improvements in the performance of the health system for the future.
The Commission undertook a substantial and extensive consultation process - receiving more than 800 submissions from governments, professional associations, think tanks, health experts and patients and consumers that rely on our health system.
It also held more than 100 consultations among health experts, health consumers and people in every part of the health system.
It also went out of its way to hear the voice of people in regional Australia  -  locations like Dubbo, Alice Springs and Cairns.
In February, the Commission provided the Government with an interim report.
That interim report focused on proposals with four key themes for reform:
     * taking responsibility
     * connecting care
     * facing inequities in the system and
     * and driving quality performance 
On June 30 the Government received the final report of the Commission, and after having the opportunity to assess that report over the last couple of weeks, we are releasing it today.
I would publicly thank Christine Bennett and the other Commissioners for their extraordinary dedication to this complex task.
In releasing the Commission's report today, I am also setting out the next steps forward for national health care reform.
As we embark on the reform of our health and hospital system, we are identifying seven guiding principles for reform:
One - Building a health system that is focused on people, not on systems  -  and which delivers genuinely ‘joined-up' services that are easier for an individual patient to navigate, rather than facing the frustration of not knowing where to go because finding your way through the system is just too hard.
Two - maximising our focus on prevention, because prevention is better than cure.
Three - delivering comprehensive primary care or frontline care that properly connects GPs and community care on the one hand and acute and sub-acute care on the other.
Four - most critically, minimising waiting times for acute care  -  for both our public hospital emergency departments and for planned elective surgery  -  and increasing the availability of hospital beds.
Five - improving the care provided after hospital  -  by doing a better job in delivering sub-acute care and community based care.
Six - providing better access to care, improving the quality and safety of our health care system and achieving better health care outcomes for all Australians.  
Finally, doing all this more efficiently with a clear-cut delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the States - cost-effectively for the health system and at minimum cost to individual patients.
The Health Reform Commission has provided critical reasons as to why system-wide health care reform is necessary now.
As a starting point, however, it is important to recognise the strengths of our health system.
In many respects, our health system compares well to other nations.
As you can see from the slide, by international benchmarks, we have one of the highest life expectancies in the world.
And we achieve relatively good health outcomes with an expenditure that is below the OECD average, at 8.7 per cent of GDP in 2006-07.
But things are changing.
Demographic changes such as population ageing will see the health cost curve rise in the years to come  -  with 1.6 million Australians aged over 85 by 2047, four times as many as there are today.
As the slide shows, these changing demographics will increase demand for health services  -  contributing 23 per cent of the total increase in health outlays by 2033.
Our unhealthy lifestyles are also catching up with us, with escalating rates of chronic disease.
Combined, these factors will result in rising costs to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, alongside the higher cost of medical technologies and skilled workers.
As indicated in the slide, if we continue to provide health services on the basis of business-as-usual, with no policy change, our health and aged care costs are forecast to rise sharply from around nine per cent of GDP, now, to 12.4 per cent of GDP a little over two decades from now.
By any standard this is a very large increase indeed. It goes from $96.5 billion in ‘07-08 to $246 billion in 2032-33.
These changes are also putting greater pressure on the universality of health care, the cornerstone of the Australian health system since Medicare.
Indeed already, we see faults and strains on the system that the Commission concludes are leading to the emergence of a two-tiered health system, with the best quality care becoming available only to those who can afford it  -  or those who are located in the right places.
As you can see from the slide, the more remote you go and as access to services dwindle, the lower the Medicare benefits returned per patient.
Meanwhile, the impact of the growing pressures on our health system are falling disproportionately on the most disadvantaged Australians  -  those with the least capacity to bear those strains.
Another reason for change is that we need a health system built around the needs of patients, not providers.
The health system of the past was built on a model of care where most treatment was provided within the walls of a hospital.
But times have changed, models of care have changed, and the needs of patients have changed as well. It's time we had a health system that caught up with these changes.
A health system that places the needs of the patient first and that helps the patient navigate what can be a completely confusing system for them.
But there are a few better pieces of evidence of that need for change than the fact that today we spend just two per cent of our health funding on prevention, and 70 per cent on providing acute care.  The pie chart on your screen shows this clearly.
In other words, our health system only starts caring about people's health when they get sick instead of investing to keep them fit and well as long as possible.
In principle we all know that prevention is better than cure - but there's a lot to be done to make that a guiding principle of our health system and the funding of that system.
Focusing on preventative health means re-thinking many aspects of our health system.
Furthermore, one of the most important is to build a strong, robust and efficient primary health care system -  that is, providing better access to front line care through our GPs and related community care services.
On this point, Australia is beginning to fall behind.
Our GPs in particular are under increasing pressure to provide services that are more appropriately provided by other health professionals, with the result that many patients either fall through the cracks or are forced into the hospital system.
As you can see from the graph, in recent years there has been a shift towards larger practices, but large practices still represent only about half of all practices.
An even smaller proportion of these larger practices provide genuine multidisciplinary care.
Another critical sector where there are significant inefficiencies are our public hospitals, arising from a patchwork of inconsistent and sometimes conflicting financial, clinical and jurisdictional responsibilities.
As the slide shows, one out of every three Australians who present to public hospital emergency departments are not seen within a clinically recommended time  -  and this has not changed for quite some time.
And as the next slide shows, one out of every six Australians on a waiting list for elective surgery are not seen within a clinically recommended time.
The Commission's Report estimates a productivity gap between current and optimal efficiency of our hospitals of somewhere in the order of 20 to 25 per cent  -  a potentially massive source of improved service delivery.
The Commission also notes that aged care services will need to respond to population ageing by at least doubling the number of aged care places from 223,000 places to 464,000 places by 2030.
Provisions will also need to be made for greater flexibility in the provision of aged care services.
And the Commission notes there is scope for greater efficiency in the provision of aged care as well, concluding that aged care providers could be 17 per cent more efficient if all operated at the level of the most efficient services, creating the capacity for an additional 23,100 clients in the aged care sector.
Dental health is identified as one of the major access and equity gaps plaguing our current health care system.
The Commission cites research from earlier this decade estimating that there were some 650,000 Australians on our public dental waiting lists  -  among them our pensioners and lowest income earners  -  with an average wait of two years for essential dental treatment.
As the slide indicates, these public patients experience significantly poorer oral health outcomes than the general population.
We also face a serious problem of rising mental illness in our community. Some 65 per cent of people who need mental health care go untreated. And as the slide shows, this starts with young Australians.
A lack of early identification services and intervention, forces people suffering from acute mental illness to turn to hospital-based services as their first and only option for help.
Further (inaudible) we have a major problem with adequacy of the health workforce  -  particularly in rural and remote Australia.
This is a problem today, but it will become a greater problem in the future, with the vast increase in the demand for health workers.
Finally, the Commission concludes better data is equally vital for monitoring the effectiveness of reforms to be undertaken so we can measure the outcomes of the changes to the inputs we may make.
These, then, are some of the major reasons canvassed by the Health Reform Commission to underpin what they describe as a system that has now reached a tipping point  -  where fundamental reforms are now needed, rather than just tinkering at the edges.
The Commission has outlined an extensive and graduated reform plan to address these major emerging challenges for the system.
Having reflected on the advice in the report, the Government faces three strategic options for the future.
Our first option is a partial takeover of the health system, with the Commonwealth taking responsibility for the following:
All preventative care; all primary care; all hospital outpatients; all dental care; all aged care; all non-acute mental health services; 40 per cent of the funding for all acute hospital patients, and  all sub-acute care delivered outside of our hospitals.
In itself, this would deliver the single most comprehensive health and hospital reforms since the introduction of Medicare.
Let me now go to some of the content of these individual recommended reforms.
First, the Commission recommends that we need to make preventiona focus of our health system.
This means national leadership through an independent National Health Promotion Agency and governments together committing to long-term targets for health outcomes.
Second, to deliver better connected care, the Commission recommends a series of reforms across the health system. 
Primary care services should be established as the cornerstone of a future person-centred health system, with the Commonwealth undertaking full funding responsibility.
This should be supplemented by investment in local health infrastructure, so Australians have access to ‘one-stop-shop' community health services and a broad range of services with extended opening hours at more convenient times for patients, as was reflected in one of the presentations from an Australian citizen about his concerns about what he needs from the health system today.
Third, the Commission recommends our hospitals of the future should deliver highly specialised, technical care  -  with improved access to care for patients and new funding arrangements to make that access possible, including:
New National Access Targets that are used to measure and report on whether people are accessing the services they need and when.
Second, a new way of funding hospitals with the Australian Government paying States and Territories a set amount for each episode of care and treatment that public hospitals provide, otherwise called activity based funding.
Third, improving accountability in our hospitals, with public and private hospitals required to report publicly on performance against a national set of indicators which measure access, efficiency and quality of care provided.
Fourth, reshaping our hospitals to separate elective and emergency services, to help prevent planned surgery and procedures being cancelled when emergency patients take priority in future planning.
Five, reforms to public hospital outpatient services to more closely meet patients needs, including providing more of these services in community settings.
Six, strengthening subacute care as a priority for health infrastructure investments  to help provide more help for people to recover and restore their health following acute intervention.
Furthermore, the Commission's proposals for aged care reform are significant. They include more choice for consumers by lifting the current restrictions on the number of aged care places on offer, and providing greater scope for people to choose for themselves between community or residential care.
Also, making the system work better by funding people, not places, supplemented by streamlined, consistent assessment and aged care staff that are trained to support consumers to complete advance care plans.
And, the use of better technology to improve the safety, efficiency and effectiveness of aged care.
In addition to making our health system work together more effectively, the Commission says we also need to target the major gaps in our system to deliver better access for patients across all categories of health need.
The Commission recommends a new National Aboriginal Health and Torres Strait Islander Health Authority to hold all health services to account for providing the appropriate services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
It also recommends mental health services should be best supported in the community with an increased investment in early intervention and social support services, stable housing and access to speciality mental health and dementia care services.
The area that represents one of the greatest challenges to achieve better health access is of course, dental health.
Dental health is among the starkest markers of inequality for Australians today. For dental care, the Commission has recommended:
‘Denticare Australia', a bold proposal for universal access to dental care that would provide preventative, diagnostic and restorative services including extractions and dentures. It is proposed that this would be funded by an estimated increase in the Medicare Levy of 0.75 per cent in addition to existing funding by governments.
Second, a nation-wide expansion of pre-school and school dental programs; and third, an expansion of the dental workforce through a one-year internship scheme prior to full registration  -  bringing dental practitioners into line with other medical practitioners.
The Commission also makes a range of recommendations to improve access to rural and regional health where current health outcomes are generally worse than for our major cities.
Fundamental to reform is to deliver clear-cut lines of accountability between Governments.  Australians are tired of waste and duplication and the blame game.
In its final report, the Commission calls for one health system with a national approach to improving quality, fairness and outcomes.
It proposes that the Commonwealth should take responsibility for preventative health through a new Health Promotion Agency.
The Commission also proposes the Commonwealth should take full responsibility for funding and policy of primary health care services.
The Commission recommends:
Outpatients services in our public hospitals being met by the Commonwealth at 100 per cent of the efficient cost per service, capped at that level.
It recommends acute care for patients admitted to a hospital, or attendances at public hospital emergency departments, being met by the Commonwealth at 40 per cent of the efficient cost per case, with States to pay the remaining 60 per cent.
It recommends expanding Commonwealth funding of sub-acute care.
It recommends the Commonwealth should drive a national approach to workforce planning, education and professional registration, through the new National Workforce Agency.
The Commission also argues that the Commonwealth should take leadership in delivering a patient-controlled electronic health record for all Australians to improve the clinical effectiveness and economic efficiency of overall health system.
The Commission estimates that this entire reform plan comes at an indicative cost  -  to both Commonwealth and State Governments - of between $2.8 billion and $5.7 billion in recurrent costs per year, net of the Denticare Australia proposal.
In addition, it recommends between $4.3 billion and $7.5 billion in one-off capital costs.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has also estimated that these reforms would reduce spending by $4 billion per year two decades from now when measured against a no-policy change scenario.
As you can see this reform which we describe as the partial take over option  -  is in fact comprehensive in its scope.
The second strategic option that grows from the report is to do all of the above as a first stage of reform, followed by the Commonwealth moving to a second stage of reform in the full takeover of the funding for our hospitals system.
Finally, there is a third strategic option available to the Government - one which the Commission explicitly recommends against  -  and that is undertaking both the above options simultaneously.
This would give the Commonwealth full funding responsibility for all aspects of our health system.
The Government will leave each of these three options on the table for the next six months or so, as we engage in a detailed, direct consultation with the health sector and with communities around the nation on their response to the recommendations of the Health Commission Report.
We believe that the nation now needs to debate all three of these strategic options on the basis of now having a concrete set of proposals on the table.
Having outlined the three strategic options and their constituent parts that now lie before the Government, some will now ask why the Government will not announce a decision today on which strategy it will embrace for the future.
There are a number of reasons for this.
First, the implementation of any of these options has massive implications for all Australians.  The Government is determined to get this right through a thorough, methodical approach.
The health care sector consumes almost one in every 10 dollars in Australia and employs one in every 14 workers.  It is used every day by millions of Australians.
The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme subsidises 171 million prescriptions every year.
Medicare funds more than 279 million medical services each year  -  in other words, 10 services for every Australian each year.  Public hospitals deliver over seven million accident and emergency services every year. 
There are also about five million actual hospital admissions and 41 million outpatient services. And in any one fortnight, almost one in four Australians visit a doctor in their community.
Therefore fundamental decisions about the entire system must not be taken lightly, and we do not intend to do so.
To this end, now that the Commission has provided its independent report, the Government will use the recommendations of this report as a basis for direct consultation with the health sector and the Australian public between now and the end of the year.
The Minister and I will now engage directly with the nation's major hospitals in each of our capital cities.
This will begin tomorrow when the Minister and I visit Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney, the first of a series of consultations with around 25 major metropolitan teaching hospitals around the country.
The Minister and I believe that we need to hear first-hand from those in the front-line of health and hospital care  -  warts and all.  I'm sure a lot of what we hear won't be pretty.
And I'm sure we'll also hear many of the good things our health and hospital systems are doing as well.  We want to hear directly their response to the various recommendations contained in this report.
In addition, the Government will be consulting directly with a representative group of rural, regional and private hospitals as well our health professionals, community health services and other critical parties to the debate.
Following the conclusion of this extensive direct engagement with the sector based on the concrete recommendations put to the Government by the Commission, the Government will then convene a special COAG meeting with the States and Territories in late 2009, explicitly on health and hospitals reform. 
This will be followed by a further COAG meeting in early 2010 where the Commonwealth will put to the States and Territories a reform plan that they would either agree with or disagree with as a future direction for health and hospitals reform.
Consistent with the Government's pre-election commitments, if there is no agreement to a comprehensive national reform plan, the Commonwealth will proceed to seek a mandate from the Australian people for the proper reform of our health system for the future.
That is our plan, that is our intention, that is our course of action.
There is a second important set of reasons for using this process to reach final decisions on the future of the system.
Future reform of the health and hospital system will obviously have profound implications for the public revenue and the Government is not scheduled to release the Henry Report until years' end.
Also, the Government is due to receive the next Intergenerational Report by years' end as well, which will contain new demographic data for the future as we seek to plan the system for the future.
It therefore makes sense to be armed with these two reports as we move to final decisions on the future of the system.
Finally, given the serious stakes involved, it is important that all parties now engage in a fully informed debate shaped by the facts as contained in the Commission's report.
It is not rational to engage immediately in the politics of a simplistic rule-in or rule-out of any of the recommendations contained in the Commission's report.
Inevitably we, the Government, will not accept all of their recommendations.
Nonetheless, it is time that a considered, mature, national debate occur on the critical decisions we as a nation need to make for the future.
It is now nearly two decades since a review of this significance has been undertaken on health and hospitals  -  and it is critical, it is absolutely critical that we get this right.
Whatever options we adopt, we will be adopting them within the context of fundamental fiscal disciplines.
As I made clear in my opening remarks, the challenge of implementing the Government's commitments has been complicated by the severity of the global economic recession  -  the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression.
While the Government has substantially increased the public investment in health care during the past 18 months, we face serious fiscal constraints in the years ahead.
As the economic recovery strengthens, the Government will be implementing its plan to return the budget to surplus, which will mean tough decisions, unpopular decisions and some budget cuts.
The Government has set out strict spending targets as part of its medium term fiscal strategy and plan for economic recovery.
This includes returning real spending growth to two per cent once the economy recovers and returns to above-trend growth, until the budget returns to surplus.
The Government's response to the Commission's strategy and its recommendations will be consistent with this fiscal discipline. 
I am mindful that the Commission has recommended the most substantial reform to the structure of our health and hospitals system since the establishment of Medicare.
To undertake reform that delivers better health outcomes to all Australians the Government has three main funding options  -  none of which are mutually exclusive.
The first involves a fundamental rethink of funding responsibilities for service delivery between the Federal and State Governments. 
Second is to drive efficiencies across the health system  -  so that we can do more with less. This has already been demonstrated by our health reforms in this year's Budget.
By targeting areas where a legislated review of the Medicare Safety Net found that a number of doctors were charging excessive fees, the Government was able to deliver a Maternity Services Reform Package to expand choice for expectant mothers and their children right across the country.
Our reforms to private health insurance sought to make arrangements fairer and more sustainable into the future, and ensuring that those with the greatest capacity to pay for their health costs, do so.
The Budget measures mean that no longer will 90 per cent of adult Australians subsidise 10 per cent of Australians on higher individual or household incomes. This will save $1.9 billion over the forward estimates, and $8.7 billion over the period to 2019 - 2020.
The third option involves an examination of the revenue.
As indicated above, the Henry Review of our tax system reports later this year and will allow us to plan our long-term health reforms in the context of our long-term fiscal outlook, to ensure the sustainability of the health care system into the future.
When it comes to health financing, the bottom line is this: we do not have infinite resources to finance health reform.
There will be no blank cheques to the States. And there will be difficult tradeoffs.
As we travel around the country there will be constant tensions between the two fundamental questions relating to health reform.
On one hand, how do we improve the health system, and on the other, how do we make the system sustainable in an environment of budget constraints.
There are no easy answers to these questions so let's not pretend there are. They are all hard, but we intend to get on with the business.
And they are not just questions just for government, but questions for the entire Australian community as well.
And that is why it is doubly important that as a community we engage with these questions and understand the tradeoffs and the challenges that lie ahead.
 To conclude, today I have spoken to you about the reasons for undertaking reform of our health and hospitals system; the Government's reforms to date; our objectives for reform; the case for change, as made by the Commission; the strategic options now being considered by Government; the reasons for our decision-making process for the period ahead; and the fiscal constraints within which we will operate.
But where does the rubber really hit the road in all of this? It is with individual Australians who deserve the best health care in the world, and that is our objective.
People who every day ask themselves pretty basic questions like this:
Why is it that my GP, cardiologist and pharmacist have each given me a different drug and how do I know whether I should be taking all of these?
Why is it that my partner and I have to take a day off work to take the kids to the doctor?
Why does my child need to wait for so long for help in the emergency department?
Why is my elective surgery so often postponed?
Why is it that mental health problems are so often picked up by our police and drug and alcohol workers, not by our health services?
Would things be better if we all did more to stop people from getting sick in the first place?
And how can Australians be confident that we'll still have the access to the new life-saving drugs and technologies when the health system is going to face such pressures in the future?
I know and the Government knows that health care reform won't be easy.
In fact, it will be one of the hardest areas of reform to be embraced by this Government.
No doubt we'll hear many voices advocating simplistic solutions to these complex problems  -  simplistic solutions that ignore the totality of the system.  
That will be of course, their democratic right, and I welcome such contributions.  The Government welcomes the debate.
But our job as the Government is to make the hard decisions that strike the balance of delivering a health care system that works for all Australians and a health care system that all Australians can afford.
I conclude where I began today. Our mission is to end the blame game - for a system where the Prime Minister can and should say that the buck stops with me.
And these principles define the course of action that we have now embarked upon with this report  -  and the decisions the nation must take to build the health and hospital system that Australia needs for the 21st century.
I thank you for your attention.


 PM:Okay folks, over to you. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: What we put forward is three strategic options for the future. We've said that we will frame a final proposal to the States and Territories by early 2010, and if the States and Territories don't like that, we'll take it to the people. That's our process.
The second reason for doing it that way is as follows. We have had twelve years of inaction on health policy reform. We received this report three weeks ago. For all Australians, this has big implications.  
Secondly, there are also profound revenue implications. Which is why we need to see the content and the Henry Commission, which is due by the end of this year.
Another reason is that we are waiting for new demographic data which will be obtained in the next version of the intergenerational report.
And the final thing is this:  it's more than 20, or about 20 years, since there was a root and branch look at the Australian health and hospital system. And therefore, all Australians have a huge stake in this.
Australians want to make sure that we get these decisions right. Therefore the ability of Australians to participate in this debate, based on concrete proposals for reform as outlined in the Commission's report, is the right way to go. That's why we're doing it in the way in which we're proposing.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) 
PM:  We keep both those options of a plebiscite or referendum available. And we would clarify that at that time, once we'd been through the process that I have just described.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:As we've indicated prior to the election, it would be by either of those two mechanisms.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:First of all, in the case of Denticare, you'll notice from my remarks today and the content of the Commission's report that it specifically flags one possible funding source for that, which is an increase in the Medicare levy by 0.75 per cent, that's one point. 
Second, more broadly, the Secretary of the Treasury is acutely aware of this process which is underway, and I'm sure will be entirely mindful of it, in the framing of the long term recommendations of his inquiry into the future of the Australian taxation system. 
I think that's a proper and sober way to go, because if you're serious about long term health reform, let's cut to the chase here - people want better, and better-funded services in the future, which help produce better health outcomes. They also want to know whether it's financially sustainable in the future as well. 
These are the two tensions that we're going to be working with, in the debate in the period ahead, we think it's the right way to go. 
Just one addition by the way to the earlier point about consultation ahead. Our major public hospitals are at the front line of so much of this debate and the actual delivery of the services. And as I said, the Minister and I will be engaging in direct consultation with these hospitals, starting with Royal North Shore in Sydney tomorrow. Testing their response as people in the front line, the recommendations contained in Christine Bennett's report is very important. We need to make sure from their perspective, quite apart from the rest of the health profession, quite apart from the general community, that these are the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
PM: Well let's just be absolutely bottom-line about this: every Australian depends on their hospitals. Every Australian depends on their GPs. And after twelve years of total policy neglect under the Liberals, we're getting on with the business of comprehensive national health and hospital reform. 
Secondly, can I just go to the assumption which underpins what you seem to be referring to today, if I go to the New Directions for Australian Health document of August 2007. We say: “if necessary, federal Labor will also consider the possibility of conducting a national plebiscite or referendum following the federal election on the question of any proposed Commonwealth takeover”. 
Earlier this year when asked about this on a radio program I said: “what I said before on the future of the hospital system was that we would get to about midterm and we would review the outcome of the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's Report”, that's what we're doing, “on the future allocation of responsibilities in health and hospitals between Canberra and the states. We'd look at the options they'd put forward and then we'd frame our decision on that. And if we decide based on that we need to move forward and take responsibility for the funding of the hospital system in the future, then as I said we would seek to get that support by way of going to the people directly.” That's what I've said. These are the stages that we've talked about. 
The report was, the Commission was established in the very early days of the Government. It reported about midterm. We've received their recommendations. We will now engage directly on the hospitals and the rest of the health sector and the community on that. Put a considered and final position to the states with which they will agree or disagree. And as I said, if they disagree for the program of national reform, then, we'd proceed to the option that I've just referred to in my answer to Michelle. 
And if I could just conclude on this question in this regard. On the timetable which was this, taking a question to the Australian people at the next election, that is completely on track. That's why we have outlined the process we've done so. But there are so many fundamental elements in these big decisions which are relevant to so many in the Australian community, we've got to get it right.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well after twelve years of absolute neglect on this front Mark, under the Liberals, we've commissions this report, the first fundamental root and branch look at the system for nearly 20 years, and we've said that as of when we get to early 2010, concrete plans to the state and territories. They accept it, fine, we'll do it cooperatively. If we don't and they reject it, we then go to the people. That's what we're talking about. That's the responsible course of action, and that's what we intend to do. 
Also, let's go back to the underpinnings, which I think is, your legitimate representation of.- 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:  - no, hang on, your question goes to the question of people's expectations of what they want in the hospitals. When can my access to elective surgery be improved? When will I have my waiting times for accident/emergency made better? When will I be sure that there enough aged care beds so that when a person is finished in a hospital that they have somewhere to go? These are the big ones. That lies at the absolute core of the three strategic options we are now working with the sector on, and will reach conclusion on, by early next year. 
Decisions will then be taken, either cooperatively or not, and if they're rejected by the states and territories at that time, we go to the people, and then implementation begins subsequent to that. And that is entirely consistent with the timetable we put prior to the last election.
Can I take this one here, this one, then I'll come back to yours.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM: We need to improve access targets fundamentally, and that I think underpins the wisdom of what is contained in the report's recommendations there. But can I also re-emphasise what I said in my prepared remarks before. That is, that we want to have a mature national debate about this report in its totality, rather than engage in rule in/rule out any one element of it prior to that debate concluding. And as I said, going to the coalface with 24 or 25 hospitals in the period ahead is part of that process. 
Sorry, you had a question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I draw your attention to what I said in my remarks about the brace of health policy reforms that the Government has implemented, notwithstanding the fact that we hadn't received this Commission's report by then.
Firstly, on preventative healthcare, you now have the single largest investment by the Commonwealth, some $872 million.
On primary healthcare, investment by the Commonwealth to establish some 35 plus GP Superclinics in order to extend the fabric of primary healthcare services across the country.
And thirdly, through the Australian Healthcare Agreement which was framed last year, that we now have specific agreements with the States and Territories on accident/emergency and/or elective surgery which will be measured in terms of clinically acceptable times against the inputs of the dollars which we delivered.
They are just three areas where the Government has already acted. As I said in my earlier remarks, we were mindful of earlier advice which was provided to us the Reform Commision about the likely future direction of their recommendations so we were very mindful of where we put the dollars in before they came up with their final report. So therefore to go to the crux of your question, we've been at this from day one. But we've also got to the second stage, which is this comprehensive, systemic reform. And the process we've outlined, we think, is the right way to go.
Sorry, this one here then I'll come to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
PM:Nice try. Can I just say that our intention, as I've always said, is to serve a full term. Secondly, the process that I've outlined is I think the right way to go, given the complexity of the decisions which have to be made, which are both of a policy nature and of a funding nature. And also, remember our pre-election commitment was to, with the states, either do it cooperatively, or, if the states didn't agree, to let it go to the people. For that to occur, the Government has to provide the states with a concluded, final position in terms of the pattern of reform we want for the future. That's why we've outlined the COAG process that we have.
My preference, as I've said right from the beginning, is to do these reforms cooperatively. But, if they're not accepted in the way in which we the Commonwealth judge to be appropriate to the long term health needs of the country, then we reserve the option of going to the people.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As I said in my remarks before, it is quite plain from the data, that health outcomes of regional and remote Australia are in many cases worse than for the metropolitan areas, the metropolitan areas of the country. And therefore, we are quite plain about the fact that additional resources, and new and better ways of doing things, are going to be important.
On Saturday, in Tasmania, together with the Premier, I help lay the first optical fibre cable for the National Broadband Network. That will be one of the mechanisms available to the system in the future for the better delivery of healthcare assistance to those in rural and regional areas. But, as I said in response to the question before about the question of the national access targets, we'll work our way through the debate with the health system over the next six months or so, and we'll reach conclusions come that COAG to which I've referred to.
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: Look, consistent with what we said prior to the election, on your second question first, consistent with what we said to the people prior to the last election, our plan in those circumstances would be for a plebiscite or a referendum.
Secondly, on the question of future funding sources, can I say the Commission has indicated its assessment of what the costs associated with these reforms would be. A further reason for the consideration of this over the second half of this year is as follows: we need to have all this tested of course by the Treasury, and gone through thoroughly. And on the possible sources of funding, we are entirely mindful, therefore, of where the Henry Commission lies. So we're not in the business of ruling in or ruling out particular forms of funding underpinning these reforms.
But what do Australians want? They want a better healthcare system. They want to make sure that waiting times for elective surgery are reduced. They want to make sure that when you front up with your kid whose had an accident or emergency they can be seen in a reasonable period of time. And that if you're discharged from hospital having had an acute piece of surgery that the post-hospital services help you get better as quickly as possible. These are the policy goals. The actual form of governance between Commonwealth and States is the next set of considerations under that. We've got to be confident that we get those results which matter to people, as I said in the speech before, that's where the rubber hits the road with real Australians in the real conditions, before we reach a final landing point in governance.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM: Well, your question before went to implementation. And consistent with what we said prior to the last election is that implementation for this full set of reforms would flow subsequent to the next election. That's broadly consistent with what we said before, and therefore that'll take some time to work through. 
As of when those policy decisions are taken, as they flow through to real funding commitments, and new changes on the ground, then of course I become responsible for the system. I accept that. And I've never tried to walk away from it. 
In my remarks today I began by reminding everybody what I had said. I don't walk away from one of those things, nor will I. 
Too many people have advised us politically in the past ‘don't go near this with a bargepole  -  it's too hard, it's too complex, it's too expensive.' But you know something? If you're serious about the time that you have allotted to you in Government, this is something that you've got to grasp with both hands, and get it done, and then people will judge whether you've done it effectively or not. We intend to do that. 
There will be bumps and twists in the road. There will be complaints and objections to the way in which it's done. That's inevitable. The alternative is to say ‘all too hard, blame the States and Territories; it's always worked as a political script in the past.' 
I don't buy that, and I don't think, if you look at the content of the report, when they describe a new tipping point in the system, that galvanises my mind. There's too many things that are backing up on us. 
Therefore, if you don't act now for the next 10 or 20 years, there's a great danger that the system will start to fall apart. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:  No, I'm just stating the facts for what they are. We've got a global economic recession which has delivered a $210 billion hit on the pocket revenue. That's just a fact and we can't wish that away. It's just there. 
Secondly, however, it should not get in the road of a considered implementation of the reform recommendations which have been put forward by Christine Bennett and her fellow commissioners, and to do so in a way which puts two things together. And that is, the best policy possible with the funding envelope which is deliverable over time. 
We've got to get this right. It's hard, it's complex, but when we look back on our time in Government, however long that might be, and it lies within the purchase of the Australian people, I want them to have concluded that we have had a go at this, rather than just turned to one side and say: ‘all too hard'. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BENNETT: Well, actually, action is starting tomorrow with the continuing of the conversation with the Australian people and taking our proposals to people working in the frontline for their response. So I consider the action as starting tomorrow.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BENNETT:This was always a long-term health reform plan, and it's going to take time to actually work out how it's going to be implemented and executed, because there can be great policy, but poor execution. We're interested in great policy being well executed, so that will take time. 
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM: No, I said that Ken Henry, consistent with the terms of reference of the future revenue structure of the Commonwealth, and also as part and parcel of that, that we be very mindful of the long-term funding needs of this system, which are big and huge. 
Remember, I said in my remarks, in terms of total national investment in health and hospital care, running at about 8.7 per cent of GDP now, running out to 12.4 per cent of GDP in the future. This is a big slice of the national income, it's a very big slice of the national budget. We've got to get it right. 
By the way, can I get back to your earlier question as well about so-called delay. I mean, we were very clear what we said beforehand  -  commission reports, we receive the report, Government then frames its policy decision, we then go to the States and Territories, States and Territories accept or reject, if they reject we go to the people. We have said that from the beginning. We're consistent with the process we originally outlined. 
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:What I think I'll draw to your attention is, we in the measures which have been introduced since the nation building for recovery plan included some $3.2 billion worth of investment in hospital and medical research related infrastructure, from memory, Nicola, across about 32 projects in the nation. 
The second largest killer in Australia today is cancer. What you've got by us is the single largest investment in cancer physical infrastructure ever undertaken by an Australian government, $1.2 billion. The Chris O'Brien Centre in Sydney, which you'd be familiar with, attached to RPA, the MacCallum Institute in Melbourne, together with a proposed network of integrated cancer centres across the country. 
That's just one category. 
Looks at the other categories of physical and medical research, and physical hospitals. For example, our investment in Nepean Hospital in Sydney which is for extreme depression. 
In answer to your question, Mark, there is $3.2 billion worth of investment there. 
Prior to that, there is a large investment also in the primary care sector with, from memory, Nicola (inaudible) $275 million for GP Superclinics. 
If you're looking at future directions of primary health care, what are we on about here? 
In the world described by the Commission, it's that when people go to a GP and need a GP-related service, whether it's for physio, whether it's occupational therapy, whether it's podiatry, all those outlying services, that they are more and more accessible to people in their localities so they can be accessed early and more cost-effectively as well. That's better for health and better for the health budget. Rather than people fronting with an accumulation of these problems (inaudible) in an emergency. 
So, mindful of where we needed to go with that long-term, it's why Nicola has been so strong on rolling out these GP Superclinics across the country. It's quite a large number, because the whole rationale there was so our investment in GPs around the country is to aggregate those services into these integrated community health care centres that are so much described in (inaudible) report.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:Both Nicola and I are big on teeth. 
That is, if you're from our tradition in politics, you meet so many working people across Australia who have real problems affording basic health care. This really sticks in your craw that we've not dealt with this effectively as a nation so far. 
What'll be our final landing point on the policy? I can't answer that at this stage. I've described the process by which we'll get there. 
But we've actually got to lift our game here. In the historical data quoted in the Commission's report, about 650,000 Australians, as of I think a couple of years ago the data comes from, waiting on public dental waiting lists, is unacceptable. 
Remember also the Minister has already introduced a dental care program through earlier policy announcements which the Government would (inaudible) 
ROXON: Yeah, I mean, the teen dental program has actually been very successful. Of course, remember that one of our election commitments has been repeatedly blocked in the Senate, not just by the Liberal Party but the Liberal Party and the minors. So this is an area where we want to act, we have been able to enact part of our program. Where the Senate has blocked further action. 
But of course Dr Bennett's report takes it further, recommending that we take over all of dental care with an increase in the Medicare Levy, and of course, that will be, I think, one of the very topical discussions as we kick off this process tomorrow, because we know that as the Prime Minister has said, dental health is becoming an indicator of wealth or poverty in Australia, something that the Labor Government, obviously, isn't happy about. 
JOURNALIST:(inaudible)
PM:Well, one part relates to the whole of this entire proposed reform of the hospital and health care system. 
You see, the problem is dental care has often been seen as existing to the side. The health professionals advise us that the incidence of broader infections arising from inadequate treatment of dental problems translate into the entire system, so we actually prefer to see this as an integrated (inaudible). 
Nicola's brought in some great stuff on this so far, against some opposition. There's a lot more to be done and the proposal for Denticare is a big one, and it actually costs a lot of money, too. So it's good to be out here today. 
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM:   Could I say that the previous Liberal government abolished the Commonwealth Dental Agreement. We have sought to act in response to that abolition. I go back to my response to the earlier question about it being integrated, not separated. 
The third point I'd make in response to your question is this: it's expensive, and we therefore will integrate this with the rest of the health policy proposals on the back of the receipt of the Henry Commission report as well. That, we think, is the right way to go. But also, it's cleaning up lines of responsibility in the system as well. 
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM:   Well, we believe that health and hospital reform has been waiting for a long, long time. We want to land results from this as early as possible. We've outlined the reasons for the process that we have embraced. But if there is a no-go from the states and territories on the decisions that we land as a Commonwealth Government, then we would not seek to waste a whole lot of time before we actually took it to the people, bearing in mind this is most efficiently done, of course, as I've said before, on the back of a general election. Just in terms of cost in the process. 
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM:  Well, you work with what you've got, Michelle, which is nothing done on health care reform for 12 years. We say not good enough, let's have a Commission to tell us what they're blueprint for the future is. We've got that. 
Secondly, we frame what decisions we think are appropriate for the nation in response to that, mindful of the funding dimensions of it as well. 
Thirdly, seek to do it cooperatively. 
Fourthly, if the States don't buy it, we've told you what we'll do about that. 
I think that constitutes sufficient forward planning. 
If the people were to say no under those circumstances, then of course you back to the drawing board, but our business, whether it's on climate change or anything else, is to get on with the business of making a difference. 
Just to conclude on that also. I think someone before, I think it was Daniel Street, was quoting some criticism from the Liberals on this. I don't know what the Liberals position on climate change is, waiting for that to become clear for quite some time. I certainly don't know what the Liberals' position is on this area of reform either. Having looked this morning at the statements from Peter Dutton - calling for a takeover. Joe Hockey  -  cannot back a takeover without seeing the detail. Nick Minchin  -  takeover won't fix anything. Peter Dutton, again  -  open to radical reform. Tony Abbott  -  wants local hospital boards. I have no idea where they stand in response. 
We are now working our way calmly, systematically, methodically through what I think is one of the hardest areas of public policy in our nation. We intend to get on with the business. 
We'll be criticised on the way for not getting it perfectly right. That doesn't bother us. We intend to do as best we can and have a real go at fixing this problem. 
And can I just conclude on this: the commissioners have warned us about a tipping point in the system. That is, the slow accumulation of aging of the population, the cost of medical interventions, the emergence of the two-tiered health system. 
You can either just push it off, or you can lay out a program and timetable of reform. We've done so, and I repeat again, we've done so consistent, absolutely consistently, with our pre-election commitments in terms of how we go about this. 
Thanks for your attention. 
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER KEVIN RUDD: G'day and welcome to pm.gov.au.
Today I want to speak with you about Australia's hospital and health care system and the challenges it faces in the 21st century.
Eighteen months ago the Government was elected with a mandate to provide new leadership for Australia to tackle these great challenges of the future. As this slide indicates we've already made a significant additional investment in health.
We also established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission  -  the first comprehensive review of the nation's health system in nearly two decades. It details the challenges of an ageing population, rising costs, population growth and Australia's disease rate.
To address these challenges the Commission has made a number of recommendations:
First, we need to make prevention a focus of our health system.
Second, to deliver better-connected care, the Commission recommends a series of reforms across the health system. That Primary care services should be established as the cornerstone of a future ‘person-centred' health system, with the Commonwealth undertaking full funding responsibility.
Third, our hospitals of the future should deliver highly specialised, technical care  -  with improved access to care for patients and new funding arrangements.
Fourth, on aged care the Commission's proposes: 
     * More choice for consumers;
     * Making the system work better by funding ‘people' not ‘places', and
     * The use of better technology to improve the safety, efficiency and effectiveness of care.
Fifth, that in addition to making our health system work together more effectively, we also need to target the major gaps in our system  -  to deliver better access for patients across all categories of health need.
Sixth, the Commission recommends a new National Aboriginal Health and Torres Strait Islander Health Authority to hold all health services to account for providing the appropriate services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
The Commission also recommends mental health services should be better supported in the community with increased investment in early intervention and social support services, stable housing and access to specialty mental health and dementia care services.
On dental care, the Commission has recommended: 
     * ‘Denticare Australia', a bold proposal for universal access to dental care that would provide preventative, diagnostic and restorative services, including extractions and dentures. It is proposed that this would be funded by an estimated increase in the Medicare Levy of 0.75 per cent in addition to existing funding by governments;
     * A nation-wide expansion of pre-school and school dental programs, and
     * An expansion of the dental workforce through a one-year internship scheme prior to full registration  -  bringing dental practitioners in line with other medical practitioners.
The Government will leave each of these options on the table for the next six months as we engage in detailed consultation.
Friends, the 21st Century has put our health system on notice. We have now reached the point of no return. That means action is no longer a matter of choice but a matter of necessity.
So please get involved, read the report, send me your suggestions, participate in the blog and together let's improve the Australian Health System and lets end the blame game once and for all!
I thank you.



Person 1: I think it's important in two ways: one for the community itself to actually see that there is really a government; I don't mean that in a ridiculous way, but see that there is a working government, a government for the people, see democracy at work and it's important from the other aspect as well. It means that you bring the politicians to the people as well and I think that's invaluable, especially in an area like our own.
Person 2: Well, it doesn't happen enough in other countries, but yeah I think it's pretty important for people to come along and have a chance to chat have a chance to have a chat with their Minister if they've got something pretty pressing that they want to have a chat about.
Person 3: I'm actually to see the Secretary of Disabilities, Bill Shorten. I'm a grandpa DSP being nearly 60 years of age and we we don't get it real easy, but hopefully I can help us get a seniors card before we're 60 and things like this.
Person 4: I've lived at in Elizabeth for about 33 years. I actually went to high school here, myself, and my daughter's now going here. The community has grown a lot and seen a lot of changes...
Person 5: They're putting new housing in there, knocking down old housing trust places right. I mean, people have got to live somewhere, but you still, you know, you want the area to be not just one little part, the whole area to be nice. If they got on top of that this area, this area will be booming, be booming, population will go [whistles] through the roof.
Person 4: ... there's not a lot of land left. There's, where we've just moved out to, it's more or less getting closer and closer to Gawler so I'm hoping that it will stay a nice area, because it is a nice place to live in and it's what you make of it.


PRIME MINISTER: G'day folks. I'm here today with Dr Christine Bennett, formerly a CEO of Westmead Hospital in Sydney, but more importantly for us, has just chaired the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission report on the future of the Australian healthcare system.
We've got the report today, and we're going to be debating it in the period ahead. So, Christine, thanks for all your work.
DR. CHRISTINE BENNETT: Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER: It's a big report and we're going to spend a fair bit of time going through the detail with the hospitals around the country, with the states and territories, before we get to a landing point.
What's the big stuff in it for you?
DR. CHRISTINE BENNETT: Well, we're just very excited to have delivered it for you, and I think very important for us was the fact that we had a chance to look at the long term, that we actually looked at the whole system and not just pieces of it, so for us it was a fantastic journey.
The 10 of us learnt from each other, learnt from the things we heard, to come up with the proposals we put forward and we're really thrilled that you're actually going to continue that conversation with people as well.
PRIME MINISTER: I think that's really important. I mean, it's complex. I thought climate change was complex, now healthcare is complex, everything's complex, but the parts always connect into the whole  -  what you do with GPs connects with what you do with preventative healthcare connects with what you do with hospitals, what you do with aged care, and it's the interconnection of all those things which is part of the complexity, but part of why we've got to fix it.
The thing I liked about the report was this whole concept of connected care, which is if you're an individual Australian, and you're crook, and you've got to navigate your own way through the system, it's really hard, so how do we make that easier for people to find their way through, or to be guided on their way through.
I think turning the whole system on its head so its focussed on the individual, rather than on the system is, I think, one of the core things, at least I've picked up my reading of your report.
DR. CHRISTINE BENNETT: Well, I'm pleased you have, because it really was very central to our thinking. If you put people and families at the centre of you're thinking and not the system and how it connects, but how it connects for the individual, whether that's in an episode of care, or whether people have got a chronic condition like a mental health condition and they've got lots of different people involved in their care, or whether it's through your life time, as you actually go through different life stages, we really want to actually give people themselves a greater say and a greater involvement in the decisions and have all that health care glued together for them.
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks for your work with us, but the work hasn't finished yet. We've got to go out there and consult the major hospitals in the country, the other health care providers, the professionals, the doctors, the nurses, and the community, and we'll do that through the second half of the year, so we'll probably need a bit of help as we work our way through some of the major teaching hospitals.
I imagine they're going to have some colourful things to say. It won't all be glowing, but we actually just want to produce solutions. We think that's the right way to go.
DR. CHRISTINE BENNETT: Yeah, well, we certainly enjoyed that consultation. The process was richer for it. You'll hear a lot of things, but I think this will be interesting because they'll now actually be responding to proposals as well, some actual solutions, so we'll see what they thought of our work after having listened to them earlier last year.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thanks again Christine, and back to you folks. We'd really like to see your contributions to what you'd like to see in the future of health and hospital reform for Australia. It's going to be a big six months, and we'll have to take some big decisions early next year.
Thanks for tuning in.


HOST:Now, before we get to health, you're looking pretty healthy in the polls this morning. Latest out show that you're in a 50-point lead over Malcolm Turnbull in the preferred Prime Minister stakes. Must be a nice way to start the day?
PM:Look, in the time I've been leader of the Labor Party, these things go up, they go down. The important thing is to keep your eyes focussed on the main game, and people expect us to deliver on our pre-election commitments. One of those is to reform the health and hospital system. So, just keep your nose to the grindstone, keep doing what you've been elected to do.
One thing, though, I just say. I notice there's some jockeying for leadership on the other side of the show and that Tony Abbott yesterday was on television saying that next election they'd be looking at bringing back further changes to industrial relations. WorkChoices, under Mr Abbott, on its way back. Have a look at what he said last night.
HOST: Well, his book launch is on today. I'm sure you'd be a very welcome guest there in the audience.
PM:I'm not so sure.
HOST:Let's have a look at that health shake up now. One of the things that the report calls for is for all Australians to automatically go to a government-operated health plan, and that would see the introduction of something called Medicare Select.
Can you explain to us exactly what that is?
PM: Look, this is one of the proposals put forward by the independent Health and Hospital Reform Commission. It's built on a foundation of Medicare, so Medicare would remain, but on top of that it's designed, according to the Commission, to provide an additional level of service to people to help them around the system.
HOST:Is that creating a two-tier health system?
PM:Well, one of the recommendations or conclusions of the independent Commission, the Health Reform Commission, is that we already moving in a direction of a two-tiered system. We don't want that to be the case. We don't want people who are living in, shall we say, poorer parts of Australia or in rural and regional Australia to have a second-rate health system. So that's why we've got these series of proposed reforms that are there.
As I said yesterday, we don't intend, as we have this big debate with the nation about what they want, and how they want to pay for these major reforms in the health system, we want to make sure we get that right, so we're not going to be in the business of ruling in or ruling out particular options which were put forward by the independent experts.
Let's work our way through that. That's one of the reasons I'm off to Royal North Shore Hospital here in Sydney later this morning, to speak to people at the coal face.
HOST: Another one of these suggestions are the introduction of new health care centres. Can you explain to us exactly what they would offer and what that would mean for the local GP? Will it spell the end of them?
PM:No, actually, it is designed entirely to build on the services operated by GPs. If you look at it in these terms  -  first of all, we need to be stronger on preventative health care. How do you keep people out of hospital, how do you keep them well? Two per cent of all we spend on health at the moment is spent on preventative health care. We need to lift that so that we maintain wellness, keep people out of the acute care system.
The second thing is this  -  what's called primary care, or front line care. And that is primarily through our GP-related services. How do we better resource them and provide additional services like physio, like OTs, like podiatrists, like all the allied services, in some sort of one-stop-shop, so that when people go to the doc, they actually find it easy to get all those allied services rather than having to front at a hospital later on.
So we've already started in this direction through Nicola Roxon's roll-out of GP Superclinics across the country, there are about 35 of them already funded. Can we extend that model more broadly so that when you're crook, you're sick, you go to the GP, and you've got three or four additional things you need to do and they are located within a common, almost community, health centre.
HOST: Despite all the talk of complete takeovers, at the moment most of the talk centres around a partial takeover of 40 per cent of the hospital funding. Could this simply be a whole new layer of bureaucracy that just clogs things up even more than is currently the case?
PM:Under no circumstances. I mean, the Australian people have the right to expect that we get to the bottom line of things like increasing access to hospitals for elective surgery, making sure you don't have unacceptably long waiting times in accident and emergency. You've had, I'm sure, all those stories on your program here.
How do we actually improve that?
Now, what we're on about is a series of reforms with the states and territories to see that we can make real changes there. How you then govern the system, your point about bureaucratic administration, is the secondary point. But what's on the table here is quite a radical set of changes. The Commonwealth Government taking full responsibility for preventative health care, full responsibility for primary health care, full responsibility for aged care. Also, when it comes to outpatient services in hospitals, full responsibility there. 40 per cent of the acute hospital treatments, as well as full responsibility for dental care through this new proposal for Denticare.
HOST: On the issue of Denticare, to fund that, that will need a Medicare Levy of 0.75 per cent. That works out to be $450 a year for people on a salary of $60,000. How can people afford another hike in the Medicare Levy?
PM:I full accept that's not cheap. I accept that. What I'm also trying to say to the Australian public is if we're going to fundamentally change our health and hospital system and prepare for the next 20 years, with an ageing of the population, with an increased cost in the provision of medical services, through the cost of drug going up, as well as a greater need for drugs as people get older, then we've got make sure it's properly funded as well.
HOST: How are you going to fund that?
PM:Dental care is a big gap in the current system, particularly less well off people constantly putting off dental care. The problem is, infections in your mouth actually spread to general infections and become a general health problem.
So on the question of cost, the proposals put forward range from additional cost to the system of somewhere between $2 billion and $5 billion and $6 billion per year, additional capital cost to build new facilities, as well as the amount that you just referred to for Denticare.
We're not going to the absolute detail of final costings yet. We're going to test all this with the Treasury. Which is why, during the next six months before we put a final proposal to the states and territory governments, that we will have all these things rounded off, but that doesn't -
HOST:But surely that means a tax hike?
PM: - come for free.
HOST: It must mean a tax hike. $5.7 billion is the number that is around this morning per year?
PM:Well, we said that explicitly in the report, and I should say the independent Commission did, and I said so in a speech yesterday. That's what their conclusions are.
I'm just being very blunt with people  -  if we want to reform and improve the system, it won't come inexpensively.
Three sources of how you do it.
One is if we the Commonwealth take responsibility from the states, that means a transfer of the funding back to the Commonwealth from the states.
Secondly, it means that if we've got one total health system for the country, it can become more efficient, and there are findings in the report about how you make your hospitals more efficient.
But thirdly, you want to point to revenue. And we've got a big revue coming up on the future of the Australian taxation system due by year's end called the Henry Commission Review.
Put these things together, we finalise a proposal, put it to the states by early next year, they'll accept it or reject it - and we've said what we'd do if they reject it.
HOST:Prime Minister, just quickly, at the last election you promised these sweeping health changes, the reforms would come in and take over the health care system if the states didn't get their act together. Yesterday you told us we'd have to vote you in again if we want to see any of these reforms come to fruition. Is that fair?
PM:No, what we said was that if the states didn't cooperatively come on board with us on a unified set of long-term reforms for the health and hospital system, and our preference is to do it cooperatively, what we said then is that we'd go the people, I said that prior to the last election, through a plebiscite or a referendum.
These are very big decisions. Millions of Australians, everyone watching your program today, has had some contact with the health system. You don't take these decisions likely, and the period ahead, between now and the year's end, the Health Minister and I are going to visit many of our major public hospitals right across the country, starting with Royal North Shore in Sydney today, and we're doing so in every capital city. We've got to get this decision right, it's very big for the future, and it won't be cheap.
[ends]


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd: Thank you to everyone who took the time to participate in my blog on climate change. 
I am delighted with the response and enjoyed watching the debate unfold.
The responses have included some valuable and useful ideas, ranging from food production concepts, water management, renewable energy, education requirements, jobs, skilling, economic impacts and incentives.
While some on this blog have raised their doubts about the science of climate change, that is not the view of this Government  -  we accept the science.
Addressing the impacts of climate change requires action globally, nationally and locally.
I was struck by a number of suggestions on the importance of education and information. 
In particular, the posting from ‘Mal07' on 22 July:
“We need increased awareness on the part of individual Australians, we need commitment from them to take personal action, we need behaviour change and a respect for the energy we consume and a reduction in energy waste and needless emissions...
Education must be the answer....
[we need] People teaching Australian's how to reduce energy consumption and emissions in simple everyday ways. People who can visit homes and assess and advise families how to maintain their standard of living whilst reducing their impact...”
I couldn't agree more.
Households are often overwhelmed by the amount of information available describing the best actions to save energy and water and to reduce their carbon footprints. It can be difficult to decide what action to take.
That is why the Government, through the Green Loans Program, is providing householders with access to free, comprehensive Home Sustainability Assessments to reduce their energy and water bills, increase the comfort of their home and help reduce carbon pollution.
These independent assessments will be conducted by a qualified expert assessor and provide advice from the smallest behaviour change to major investments such as a solar hot water system or solar panels. 
The Government is also developing a web portal which we will launch soon. 
This website will be the entry point for Australians to find out what they can do to reduce their individual impact on the environment and help them find out what Government programs are available to assist them  -  such as the free Home Sustainability Assessments.
I hope this website will provide Australians with the information and tools necessary to take action.
Once again, thank you to all of you who took the time to share your views on this incredibly important issue.


PM:What the Government is working on, based on the recommendations of the National Health Reform Commission is the biggest set of reforms to the health and hospital system since Medicare. This, therefore, requires the Government to work through the recommendations in a calm and methodical way, because we need to make sure that the decisions which are taken by Government on this are right.We are determined, because of the importance of the system to every working Australian, that we get these decisions right.That's why it's been important for us to be here today at Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney to hear first hand from those who work in the field, from specialists, from doctors, from general practitioners, from nurses and from others in the community care sector, about their experiences here, their initial response to the Commission's recommendations. And, I've got to say, I have learnt a number of things from being here this morning.This will be the first of many all around the country. You've seen on our list of scheduled visits, that the Government proposes to engage with 20 or 25 of the major public hospitals directly around the country. I'll be doing a lot of that myself, and we'll also be engaging other health professional associations as well as those in the community health sector.Big reform, the biggest set of health and hospital reforms since Medicare. That's why the Government's got to consult the community to get it absolutely right.Over to you, folks.JOURNALIST: How about regional and rural hospitals? Do you plan on having forums there as well?PM: Yeah, as you would have seen, or may not have seen, in the speech I gave yesterday, the major public hospitals, obviously, we will be consulting directly with them, a representative group of regional and rural hospitals, and private hospitals as well, together with the health professional associations. There are 750 public hospitals across the country. Therefore we have got to make sure we are engaging properly with the big ones, but also a representative group of the smaller ones, particularly given the findings of the Commission's report about the fact that health outcomes are often worse in regional and rural Australia than they are in the big cities.JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how much do you feel that Royal North Shore Hospital encapsulates what needs to be done in Australia's health system?PM: The beginning of wisdom is to know what you don't know. And the reason we are consulting across 20 or 25 of the large public hospitals across the country is to begin testing the report's recommendations with those who are practitioners in the field. A good and informed set of responses to us here at Royal North Shore today. Tomorrow I'll be in Adelaide and I'll be talking with a different group down there.Ask me that question at the end of the process and I'll probably give you a more considered response.JOURNALIST: (inaudible)PM: Well, I'm in Sydney, and I had to be in Sydney last night, so we thought it was useful to come here because obviously there are challenges right across the hospital system in the country, but we want to be upfront in tackling problems where they exist and where the public has concluded they exist, and then engage in a very practical way about how we can improve it in the future.We are not faintly interested in perpetuating the politics of the blame game. The country has had a gutful of that. What they want us to do is get on with the job of saying ‘how can we take this health system across the nation and improve it from here to here, and how much will that cost, and how can we go about implementing it rationally over time?'JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you don't see the hospital system as broken?PM: What the report of the National Health Reform Commission tells us is that the hospital system and the health system across Australia is reaching a tipping point. That's the term they use. You put together all the pressure factors: ageing population, the increase in the cost of medical interventions, the increasing cost of pharmaceuticals, the explosion in chronic diseases in all the categories. All that happening at one end of the spectrum.Challenges with workforce and proper national long-term planning for nurses, doctors and bringing people through the system and a proper geographical spread of them.And thirdly, using the taxpayer dollar better across prevention, primary care and acute care and post-acute care to make sure that it works.Now, what the Commission has concluded is: ‘look, the time for fiddling around the edges is rapidly drawing to a close. There is a tipping point being reached here.' That's why they put forward the largest set of proposed reforms for the health and hospital system since Medicare. So our job is to grab this with both hands and have a go, and we intend to.JOURNALIST: You wanted to engage Australians on this health conversation and discussion and go forward from here, but it seems that the cost and costings need to be more upfront than they are now. At the moment you're saying that the Henry Review of Taxation will give us all a better picture about where revenue is going to come from, but don't Australians, at this point in the conversation need to know more about what it will cost us in the future?PM: Well, actually the Commission's report itself has two to three sets of conclusions about cost to the additions to the system which are proposed.One is the additional annual recurrent cost which, depending on where you land, is between $2.8 billion and $5.4 billion, or thereabouts, recurrent per annum. Secondly, an additional set of one-up capital costs. And thirdly, specific costs in terms of Denticare, if the Government proceeds in that direction.They are outlined in the report.Secondly, what we've got to do, and I canvassed this, I think, yesterday in my remarks in Canberra, is now test all of those assumptions with Treasury data as well.Third thing we need to do is mesh that with the upcoming data we're going to get from the next version of the intergeneration report on the ageing of the population and where that is going in terms of long-term demand, particularly in terms of age care.It's not easy. It's complex. But let me tell you, I'll be seeking to emphasize throughout is here are the reforms which are being recommended to us, and for the country at large to know that none of these come for free. Way of funding them I referred to in my remarks earlier today. Transfers between the states and the Commonwealth, one. Two, efficiencies in the system, particularly off the back of the health reforms. And three, from the revenue.All these things related to each other.I just want to be frank about the fact that the system has reached a tipping point. We need some fundamental, long-term reforms, and it's going to cost.JOURNALIST: The American Chuck Feeney has made one of the biggest medical donations here in history in Queensland. How much do we need to rely on philanthropy from the corporate world to help fund our medical research and hospitals in the future?PM: Well, can I just publicly congratulate Chuck Feeney for his philanthropy, not just in Queensland but in other parts of Australia as well. One of the first things I did as Prime Minister was invite Chuck to lunch at Kirribilli, just down the road here, to thank him for his extraordinary acts of generosity to the Australian health system, and as I'm advised here, it's $102 million to be allocated across the following projects:
 * $50 million towards the $354 million Translational Research Institute at the PA Hospital in Brisbane;
 * $27.5 million towards QIMR; and
 * $25 million towards QUT's hub for Sustainable and Secure Infrastructure.
These are great acts of generosity on his part and his foundation's part, and we've sought, as the other state governments have done, to be co-investors with it.Your question goes to what is the proper role of government in laying out, let's call it health and medical research infrastructure for the future, as opposed to relying upon acts of private philanthropy. Can I say, what you've seen in the last Commonwealth budget with a $3.2 billion proposed investment from the Minister in 32 capital projects across the health and medical research system of Australia demonstrates where we are moving ourselves, putting our money where our mouth is.We welcome Chuck Feeney's philanthropy. The Australian Government is an active co-investor in the nation's health and medical research infrastructure as well.JOURNALIST: At the last state election, the State Government promised new hospital projects  -  Northern Beach Hospital, Wagga, Parkes, (inaudible) etc  -  and the Federal Government didn't fund them and therefore they're not going ahead for the time being. Does that call into question the Federal Government's ability to work with the states in terms of providing hospital projects?PM: Look, as I said before, we're not into the business of rolling out the blame game, and various levels of government will make their commitments in terms of various hospitals off their own bat. It's a matter for them. This Government has been meticulous in honouring our pre-election commitments to the Australian people, one of which was the establishment of this Commission, one of which was to then get on with the business of comprehensive health and hospital care reform. I've got to say, complicating and compounded by the fact that in our 18 months or so in office we've had the worst global economic crisis in three quarters of a century but we're still going to get on with the job. On the specifics of that, Nicola, did you want to add?ROXON: Thank you. Just to say, of course, that, to state the obvious, that the state governments, of course, do continue to be the primary funders of capital infrastructure in health. We made quite clear that we were very excited about our health and hospitals infrastructure fund being able to be used to drive reform, to enhance and provide additional funding for states and territories but also for research institutes and others, so there was no intention for that to replace state funding.Of course, the NSW people did receive benefits from that funding. A large number of projects in NSW, including the cancer care centre and the Nepean Hospital as two of the big projects but really, if the question is about the time line for infrastructure development of state hospitals, those questions need to be put to our state colleagues.JOURNALIST: So what you're saying is that if the people of NSW don't get their hospitals, blame the State Government, not the Federal Government.PM: No, what we're saying is  -  nice try. Can I say I think the Australian people are absolutely fed up with people playing the blame game. We want to get up, get on with the business of doing the best job possible of fixing the health and hospital system for the long term. It is not easy, it is one of the hardest areas for reform in government.Everyone, all of you here today as journalists, have had some direct contact with the health and hospital system, directly or through your family, and all the folk who'll be reading your newspaper or listening to your radio programs or watching your television news tonight. Therefore, every Australian has a huge interest in us getting these reforms right for the long term.We've put our money where our mouth is in two respects so far prior to any consideration of the implementation of the recommendations contained in this report: One, $3.2 billion capital injection from us at a federal level which historically has not existed from the Commonwealth Government, and the Minister just referred to two specific projects in this part of NSW. Second,the Australian health care agreement. This was framed last year, a $64 billion investment, co-investment with the states and territories, a 50% increase on the previous Australian Healthcare Agreement.The previous Liberal Government actually pulled money out of the system. They took $1 billion out of the public hospital system. We're in the business of putting investment back in to the public hospital system, and I'll just draw people's attention to the fact that when there are tensions in funding concerning various projects around Australia, bear in mind this is coming off an historical base of a Federal Government which said ‘let's blame the states and territories and let's pull money out of their bottom draw, which is what they did.One further point I'd just make on this as well is that, on the question of investments, Mr Dutton today, the health spokesman for the Liberal Party, is proposing a freeze on health funding. Look carefully at what he has said.I notice also, earlier Mr Turnbull has said that in his ideal world every Australian should take out private health insurance, and the Liberals in government ripped a billion out of the public hospital system of the states.Where is Liberal policy now standing? The Liberals, through their health spokesman today are saying that health funding should be frozen from the Australian Government. We don't think that's the right way to go. And their leader has said that in his ideal world, everyone should have private health insurance. There is a very clear difference here between the two approaches.There's another thing which has emerged on dental care as well.ROXON: Yeah, Mr Dutton seems to be having a spectacular day today, because he also has indicated opposition to a universal dental scheme, apparently on the basis that this idea would hurt pensioners. Quite an extraordinary allegation I think from the Liberal Party, when everyone in the community is acutely aware of the gaps in our dental services, and where the....PM: The national broadcasters fallen over. (laughter).... Read the Budget (laughter)ROXON: The Liberal Party is making clear that they oppose fixing problems in our dental system, yet we all know people who cannot afford or cannot access dental services. The Health Reform Commission has proposed a new, universal dental care system but in the interim, the Government has been trying to deliver extra resources to the Commonwealth Dental Health Program, particularly targeted at pensioners, that the Liberal Party has repeatedly blocked in the Senate. So I don't think we can take the Liberal Party seriously when they say that they are opposed to ideas when they would actually help pensioners, help those who are disadvantaged. And to suggest that we put a freeze on health spending until the system is fixed, when they have no ideas themselves of how to fix this system, I think is pretty extraordinary.JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Newspoll seem to be suggesting that people aren't listening to the (inaudible).PM: Look, I don't comment on opinion polls, I was asked about this morning. Whether for the Government they're up or down, our job is to get on with the job, and I've said that constantly in the period that I've been Prime Minister. A couple of things though emerge in terms of their implications for the Liberal Party. I notice that Tony Abbott's out of the blocks, and Tony Abbott is now saying that the Liberals, come the next election, will be bringing back WorkChoices. Pretty interesting.His comments last night along the lines that what he describes as workplace relations reform is not dead yet, we're back again come the next election, for the Liberals. So the Liberals can't give up their WorkChoices addiction. I think that's something the Australian public would pay attention to. But just to finish the Peter Dutton trifecta before, we mentioned what he'd had to say about freezing hospitals funding. Then there's this extraordinary position of opposition to Denticare as an idea. And then thirdly, what you need actually from the Liberal Party is some consistency of policy. Last month, the Liberal Party health spokesman called on the Government to take public hospitals over.Today, the same spokesman, Mr Dutton, says they're in the process of putting their policy together. Can I just say, you either have a policy or you don't. Last month there policy was ‘take over the hospitals'. This policy is, today's policy is they don't have a policy. So, whether it's on climate change, where the Liberals are divided right down the middle, on health policy we now have about five different positions from five different spokesmen on health policy, they are also divided. I think people would expect better of them, particularly given this debate is so important.JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Peter Dutton also said this morning that today is the second anniversary of the speech that you made about a two year deadline for the national reform of healthcare. What's your response to that? He says the delay....PM: I'd say twelve years of total inaction by the Liberal Party on health and hospital reform speaks for itself. Secondly, I would say that during those twelve years, not just inaction on reform, but the physical withdrawing of funding from the public hospital system, a billion dollars worth speaks for itself. Thirdly, we said the building block of our long term reform of the health and hospital system of Australia would be based on this report, which we've been here discussing today.And that is the report delivered by Christine Bennett's National Health Reform Commission. This affects so many Australians. They therefore expect us to get it right. It's important, therefore, that there is an informed national debate, now that there are concrete proposals out from the Commission. And that's what we're here to do today. And the second is, we also are obviously going to be mindful of the conclusions of the Henry commission on tax, an intergenerational report in terms of the future demand on the system for aged care and aged care related services. Thirdly though, I think what the people of Australia want is a mature and informed debate about the biggest set of reforms which have been put on the table since Medicare. That's what the Government intends to get on and do. And I've got to zip, because I've got to be on a plane to Adelaide. Bye bye.[ends]


This week the Prime Minister has started a blog focused on health and he's keen to hear your views and ideas for the future of our health system.
The Prime Minister's blog is an opportunity for the community to provide comments and engage with each other in relation to this important topic.
To participate or read what others have said, simply visit PM Connect.
Over 900 posts on climate change were published to the Prime Minister's first blog  -  you can read it online.
For more information visit the PM's Blog page at www.pm.gov.au/PM_Connect/PMs_Blog


 The Prime Minister today signed three funding agreements for the Noarlunga, Playford North and Modbury GP Super Clinics. 
The three GP Super Clinics represent a $57.5 million investment in better health care for South Australians. 
The Prime Minister signed the three contracts today while visiting Flinders Medical Centre with the Minister for Health and Ageing for a consultation on the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission Report. 
Both Noarlunga and Modbury GP Super Clinics will receive $25 million each, jointly funded by the Commonwealth and South Australian Governments.  These clinics will also be GP Plus Health Care Centres under South Australia's GP Plus Health Care Strategy. 
The Noarlunga GP Super Clinic will be built within the Noarlunga Hospital and Health Village precinct and allow for virtual integration with existing local health service providers. 
The Modbury GP Super Clinic will be built across two sites with a hub at Tea Tree Gully and a spoke at Gilles Plains Primary Health Care Service. 
Both the Modbury and Noarlunga GP Super Clinics will provide a range of services with a particular focus on patients with chronic and complex conditions.  Services will be available from privately practising GPs, practice nurses, specialists, dentists and allied health providers. 
The $7.5 million Playford North GP Super Clinic will be operated by Adelaide Unicare in partnership with the University of Adelaide and the University of South Australia.  
The clinic will operate from a new purpose-built facility within the ‘Playford Alive' precinct, which will incorporate learning design features.  
The clinic will provide education-led, one-stop primary health care to this growing suburb in Adelaide's north.  Allied health services will be provided in areas such as physiotherapy, psychology, exercise therapy, occupation therapy, drug and alcohol counselling, mental health and nutrition advice services. 
All three clinics will have a strong focus on education and training and will support inter-professional learning by undergraduate and postgraduate medical, nursing and allied health students. 
These GP Super Clinics deliver on an election commitment of the Rudd Government to provide primary health care services where they are most needed. $275 million has been allocated to establish 32 GP Super Clinics in communities right around the country.


FAINE: Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Jon. Thanks for having me on the program.
FAINE: 123 recommendations, I yesterday said this is a bit like a trade union with an ambit claim to an employer.
PM: (laughter)
FAINE: There's no explanation of priorities amidst the 123. Do you think you can do all of them, or are some more important than others?
PM: I think the reason why the report is first of all so long, the recommendations so comprehensive, is that the report is based on the assumption that if you're going to reform the health and hospital system, it needs to be an integrated set of reforms. That is, the part relates to the whole. What we do in preventative health care relates to what you do in primary health care, that is, with GP and GP-related services, which in turn affects how we manage the resources for our overstretched public hospital system in the number of admissions.
What do you do for outpatient services to take further pressure off acute hospital beds? Are you properly resourcing aged care beds so that people don't remain in acute hospital beds longer than they need and prevent other people from getting there? All these things, one relates to the other, together with, do we plan properly at present for our long-term needs for the workforce for our health and hospital system as well.
And the reason why, therefore, this report has been done in the way it's been done by this independent commission, is that it said overall, the system is reaching a tipping point because of the ageing of the population, the increasing cost of the provision of individual healthcare services, the fact that we have such a large number of people who are not seen within clinically acceptable times in accident and emergency, who are not getting elective surgery within clinically acceptable times.
FAINE: Yep.
PM: But the time has come for a root and branch look, and that's why this is the biggest set of proposed reforms since the introduction of Medicare, and we'll work our way through it as systematically as we can.
FAINE: But my question specifically was, do you think you can implement all of them, or are some more important than others?
PM: Well Jon, what I said when I launched this with the Health Minister two days ago is that the Government will not inevitably be implementing each and every one of these recommendations. The other thing I've said is that fundamental root and branch reform for the long term of the health and hospital system is expensive, it costs money.
Therefore there will be a question of prioritisation in terms of how we go about it. But also, it's time for Australia to have a mature debate about the state of our health and hospital system, where we want it to be over the next ten to twenty years, and therefore we don't intend to be in the business of an immediate rule in or rule out of individual recommendations.
The Health Minister and I are working our way around the country, and she and I, depending on which city we're in, will be working our way through the major public hospitals of the country, as well as other healthcare providers, as we were in Sydney at Royal North Shore yesterday, the Flinders Medical Centre here in Adelaide today, and we'll be in Melbourne before long.
FAINE: If I can prioritise, if I can paraphrase what the Victorian Premier John Brumby said yesterday, show us the money, and then we'll talk.
PM: Well, on the question of funding to the system, when we reached the Australian Healthcare Agreement with the States and Territories in November last year, it contained within it a 50% increase in the overall funding to the states, a record $64 billion. And for the first time, you have the Australian Government investing in emergency departments. That is, a $750 million program to take some of the pressure off emergency departments.
For the first time also, the Australian Government investing $600 million in seeking to slash elective surgery times.
So on the question of the Australian Government's action, I think Premier Brumby would recognise that there were significant advances in our resourcing to the states and territories in that agreement at the end of last year, together with what we've done on health infrastructure: the MacCallum Institute, for example, in Melbourne, a huge investment by the Australian Government on cancer, as well as what we've done on the rollout of GP Superclinics out there in the area of community health and medicine.
So we've begun this process last year, but we've commissioned at the same time this independent group of experts under Dr. Christine Bennett to look at a root and branch reform for the system for the very long term.
FAINE: Yes.
PM: And that's what we want to have a mature discussion and debate about now.
FAINE: Are you comfortable with physiotherapists or chiropractors making referrals to surgeons instead of a patient having to see a GP first?
PM: You know something Jon, fools rush in where angels fear to tread.
FAINE: Which one are you?
PM: (laughter) Well I'm not about to tell you what a chiropractor or a physio should do with an individual patient in an individual surgery. That ain't my field of expertise. Nice try.
But what I am concerned about is do we have, for example, GPs in the community in sufficient number and sufficiently co-located with other community health services like physiotherapists, like podiatrists, etcetera, so that we can provide the best integrated care for patients outside the hospital environment. Better for the hospitals, but also better in terms of the long-term health of patients themselves.
FAINE: But if you have a relationship with a GP, the GP has overall conduct or supervision of your health, ideally people do have relationships through GPs, and if you in fact start to fragment that by allowing a physio, for instance, or a chiropractor to send someone direct to a surgeon, obviously you're reducing the benefit of a relationship with a primary provider like a GP, a gatekeeper.
PM: Look, can I say our view about the importance of GPs is very much reflected in the way in which the report is constructed. If there is an overall strategic emphasis in this report's recommendations, it's this - one, boost preventative healthcare.
Apparently, two percent of the entire health budget is spent on preventative measures, whereas we know for the long term if you're going to act on chronic diseases, that has to be lifted.
Second, boost what is called a primary or frontline care, and that's primarily delivered by GPs, because we are having too many people presenting themselves to accident and emergency, who if we had a better-resourced system at the GP level, and with greater allied services associated with GPs, and with better possibilities for GPs to have more flexible hours, then you have a greater ability for people in fact to use that primary frontline care rather than having to go to accident and emergency.
That's why for example Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, has been rolling out a series of GP Superclinics to which we committed ourselves as a Government prior to the last election. This would build on that, but we've got to work our way through this together with all the other recommendations, in a systematic way, because they are all expensive, nothing comes cost-free.
FAINE: I could keep asking you questions about the detail of this scheme pretty much all morning Kevin Rudd, and it's of such breadth that there are people coming up, jumping up out of the woodwork from everywhere complaining or supporting particular aspects of it. Just pick one of them if we could please - you've managed to upset both dentists and also advocates for change in dental care by your proposal for a Denticare scheme. Are you going to take on the dentists?
PM: Well, if you look at dental care at present, here's a stunning fact for us all - that across the nation at present, we still have a system which is based on the last data that I've seen, which is admittedly a year or two ago, had 650,000 people on the public dental waiting list. Therefore, we must have a system whereby we attend to those things better.
Now, you talk about various groups being, reacting to this report, I emphasise this: we commissioned this independent commission of experts, under Dr. Christine Bennett, with 10 prominent Australians with expertise in the health field, with a set of terms of reference to look at how the system should be reformed for the long term. They've come up with their independent recommendations.
Inevitably, there are going to be people out there in the professions who will either love it or hate it or be lukewarm towards it, and the reason I want a mature national debate about this is that we tease all this out over the next six months or so, and rather than just having a, you know, an attitude as a nation which says rule in, rule out, yes, no, right, wrong, let's work it through.
And that's why we're going through each capital city, the Health Minister, myself in most circumstances, talking to major public hospitals and health providers as we did at Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney yesterday, which has been the subject of some controversy over the years.
FAINE: The timing though, it's no coincidence that you're building up to making announcements within the electoral cycle for next year's federal election. There is a certain amount of politics no matter which way you describe the consultation process, isn't there?
PM: Yeah but Jon, this is a massive set of reforms. This would be the biggest set of reforms since the introduction of Medicare. What we said prior to the last election was that if we were elected to Government we would commission a National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to undertake a root and branch review of the entire system.
One of these hasn't been done for a long, long, long time. That took 16 months. It reported as of the end of June and three weeks later we've put it out there, which if your listeners want to read the whole report is up on www.yourhealth.gov.au. And we invite the public to respond directly to it in terms of their attitude to individual recommendations.
And we have said that once we have worked our way through the report systematically, consulted directly the community, we'd then frame a final proposal for the states and territories, and put it to them in terms of whether they would embrace that cooperatively or not, and then we would take our course of action for the future - either to implement it cooperatively, or as I've said repeatedly, take it to the people for a mandate for the decisions which need to be taken for the future.
FAINE: Alright, last question on health before we move to other things. You can't do all this without increasing taxes, or introducing some levy to pay for it, can you?
PM: Well, you're right to absolutely say this, Jon, nothing in this report comes inexpensively.
It has all got a bottom-line figure attached to it, and as a result, if you look at the numbers which are contained within the report, for example, it would result in a recurrent set of expenditures of between $2.8 billion and $5.7 billion a year, and that's excluding the Denticare proposal.
Secondly, a capital addition to the entire system which is significant as well.
Thirdly, you have, also, the proposed additional cost for Denticare through the Medicare Levy increase of 0.75%.
How are these monies raised? Well, there are three sources of revenue for the future. If there is a transfer of any responsibilities from the states to the Commonwealth, then there will be a transfer of funding associated with that as well. Secondly, if you bring about, for the first time, an integrated health system for the nation, then efficiencies will be created.
One of which would come through creating, for the first time, a decent e-health system, whereby you have online, accessible, computerised data containing individual patient records. Thirdly, apart from those efficiencies, you're right, there are also implications for the revenue.
Let's work our way through it systematically, but I think you're absolutely correct to point out that nothing by way of fundamental reform comes cost-free, and it won't.
FAINE: Seven minutes to nine on 774 ABC Melbourne. Jon Faine with you through to twelve, and Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister, with me, speaking from Adelaide.
Tony Fitzgerald, corruption reformer, investigator in your home state of Queensland, broke a long silence last night in a speech at a university and said that he thinks there's still a culture of corruption in your home town and in your home state. Kevin Rudd?
PM: Well, I haven't seen Tony's speech. I have enormous respect for him. I have known him well over the years and I think he is a first-class Australian. I also am very familiar with the recommendations he made 20 years ago in the Fitzgerald report, so I'll wait ‘til I've actually worked my way through his speech, I haven't seen a copy of it.
FAINE: I can tell you that he blasts the ethics of current and former Labor Governments, which may include the one of Wayne Goss in which you served. He says secrecy was established by sham claims, through Freedom of Information documents being run through Cabinet for no reason other than to keep them secret, and quote: “access can now be purchased, patronage is dispensed, mates and supporters are appointed and retired politicians exploit their connections to obtain success fees for deals between business and Government.” He could also be talking about the federal level of Government, couldn't he, not just the states.
PM: Well, as I said before Jon, I've not read his speech and I intend to do so, because I've known him over the years I've known him to be a considered individual, I also know him to have exercised and reflected great courage in the recommendations he made back then to bring about some fundamental reforms in Queensland, one of which was a recommendation to establish what was then the Criminal Justice Commission, now called the Crime and Misconduct Commission, and it's that body which, of course, has made recent findings in relation to aspects of the Queensland Police Force.
Many of the institutional reforms which Tony Fitzgerald recommended back then, of course, continue to play a fundamental role in Queensland today. The Crime and Misconduct Commission is one of them, although there is legitimate debate about its current operations and powers.
More broadly on the question of, you referred there to donations reform and things like that, and the way in which political business is conducted. Can I just draw your attention to the fact that we have currently blocked in the Senate, political donation reforms of our own, which would reduce the threshold for declarable amounts of money from $10,000  -  which is where the Howard Government took it to  -  to $1,000, because we thought that was simply right out of the ballpark. That's been blocked by the Liberals in the Senate.
Prior to that, it used to be $1,500. Mr Howard increased it to $10,000, which would enable you to, I think, conduct fundraising activities which were largely unknown to the Australian public through the declarations process.
FAINE: Small beer, though, Prime Minister. The main issue here is that major developers, industrialists, investors, can buy access through sponsored lunches, $10,000 tables at dinners and all of these sorts of things in order to get around those rules just by signing a cheque.
PM: Can I just say one of the important reforms in response to that is to make sure that you have a threshold for campaign donations which become completely declarable to the Australian Electoral Commission. The previous Liberal Government increased that from $1,500 to $10,000, whereby you could have a fundraising function with 10 people paying $10,000 each, $100,000, and no-one would ever know about it.
We have legislation in the Senate currently blocked by the Liberals which reduces that down to $1,000.
The second thing we have is proposed ban on foreign political donations to Australian political parties. That's also been blocked by the Liberals in the Senate -
FAINE: So you don't think you need to do any more?
PM: The third thing we've introduced, which goes to the absolute core also of what you've just asked, is about the activities of, for example, people acting on behalf of companies, for the first time the Australian Government has introduced a lobbyist register, whereby a full list of all third-party lobbyists for Australian companies must be provided to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet  - 
FAINE: So you don't think you need to do any more?
PM: No, I'm about to go on to what else we have in mind here. And secondly, for the first time, the Australian Government has therefore required these lobbyists to list those companies for whom they are lobbying. That is the first time that has occurred at the level of the Australian Government.
On top of that, John Faulkner, as Special Minister for State, issued a Green Paper on further areas of reform in these areas concerning caps , further caps on donations, further caps on campaign expenses, etcetera.
These things are out there, but the reason I emphasise the matters which are currently blocked in the Senate, is that we've been determined at the Australian Government level to get on with the business of reform.
FAINE: Yes.
PM: I note, however, they are being blocked by the Liberals.
FAINE: Prime Minister, my time with you is up. I'm grateful to you for taking our call and fitting it in to your busy schedule from Adelaide this morning.
PM: Thanks Jon. Thanks for having me on the program.
(ends)


HOST: Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister, good morning to you, sir.
PM: Good morning. Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: Thank you for coming on the program. Prime Minister, you are going to Flinders Medical Centre today?
PM: That's right, and just to add to what you said in your introduction, what we sought to do yesterday at Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney was actually to listen, and we sat there and listened to the observations of 100 or so medical practitioners about the implications of the report, that is, on the future reform of the health and hospital system and how it would impact the delivery of services of that major hospital in Sydney.
We're doing the same here in Adelaide today because there's no point proceeding with long-term, fundamental reform to the system unless you hear directly from those who are at the coal face.
HOST: You promised during the election campaign that if the states hadn't signed up to a reform plan by the middle of this year, and that's now, you would have either a referendum or a plebiscite to seek the approval of the people to take over the nation's 750 hospitals. Your time is up. What are you going to do about that?
PM: Well, prior to the election we said that we'd set up this National Health and Hospital Reform Commission. It's now worked for 16 months, and this is the biggest set of proposed reforms to the health and hospital system, which is under stress throughout the country, since Medicare, the introduction of Medicare.
We think the right way to go is now to put this out there to the Australian community for a national debate. It's very important for the long term. Millions of Australians depend on this system each year. We're determined to get the decisions right.
Also, reform is very expensive, and that's one of the reasons why the Health Minister and I are working our way around the country, speaking to those at the front line of about 24 or 25 major public teaching hospitals right across the country, together with others. Then, then-
HOST: But you set the deadline, didn't you, during the election campaign? This was a popular message to send out there, of '09, the middle of '09. Is that now abandoned, along with the GroceryWatch deadline and action on petrol prices?
PM: What we said was we would then put a proposal to the states and territories with a view to have them cooperatively to come on board with a national reform program for the health and hospital system. My preference has always been to do that cooperatively. We also said that if the states, however, rejected that, that we would reserve the option of taking that to the Australian people by way of plebiscite or referendum. We said that, and that is precisely what we intend to do.
When we convene the Council of Australian Governments in December this year, we will convene it explicitly to discuss health and hospital reform, then at the COAG meeting of early next year we will then obtain the response from the states and territories about whether they would support or reject the proposals we put forward.
If they reject, then consistent with what we said prior to the election, we then take it to the people.
HOST: Do you concede there's been some slippage in the timetable that you announced before the election?
PM: Well, it's a very complex and difficult area of reform. It's really hard. We've received this report from the Health and Hospitals Reform Commission three weeks ago. We've now put it out three weeks later for the public to comment on, and for your listeners who are interested in providing their responses to it, it can be had on www.yourhealth.gov.au. 
We want to make sure that we do this calmly, methodically, comprehensively, because this is a very large set of reforms, and, taken in part or in whole, with significant implications for the future and for the cost to the system.
It will take time. I concede that, I understand that, but we're determined to get this right for the future.
HOST: Prime Minister, in your 6,000 word essay published in The Age - give or take a few words - I think the message is we've had a soft recession or no recession at all.
PM: Gee I hope you read it all.
HOST: I have. I thought you'd be proud of it.
PM: I asked that to a journalist the other day and they said after my third inquiry that they'd read a précis, so I thought that was good.
HOST: No, no, I downloaded the full thing, courtesy of the internet.
PM: You need to get a life a little.
HOST: You're not the first person to say that. But Prime Minister, I think, in a nutshell, we've had a soft recession, we're going to have a hard recovery. Why will the recovery be hard if we've almost avoided a technical recession?
PM: It's going to be tough, and I also note carefully the statements made by the Governor of the Reserve Bank yesterday because we're going to still face increasing unemployment because employment is what the economists describe as a lagging indicator. That is, even when sentiment ticks up in the economy, you still have the flow-through consequences of employment, or unemployment, some time later.
Secondly, also as I've indicated in the essay that you referred to, there will obviously be changes in interest rates policy in the future as well, so therefore there will be real challenges and stresses for the future.
And the last thing is this - is that the challenge of responsible, conservative economic management is this: to expand the role of government when the private economy is in retreat, which is what happened with the global financial crisis of the last quarter of last year, but equally, to return the Budget to surplus as the private economy recovers.
What does that mean? It means that in the future we'll be looking at pretty hard-line budget disciplines, which means some unpopular budget cuts, so therefore you ask the question 'why is going to be a tough recovery?' It's putting those things together for the future.
HOST: Having encouraged more young people into the housing market with generous first home owners grants, are you now worried those people are going to be hit with higher interest rates?
PM: Everyone, obviously, has to make their own decisions about whether they buy a house and for how much and where, and we deliberately, in consultation with the housing industry, trebled the first home owner's boost to enable more young people to get access, in particular, to their first home.
Secondly, you're right to point out that there will be pressures in the future because, inevitably in the future there will be changes in interest rates policy. We accept that fact.
But you know, the challenge is a difficult balancing act - how do you provide support and stimulus to the economy when right around the world we have faced worldwide the biggest single assault on global economic growth in three-quarters of a century, and a near implosion of the global financial system, so how do you stimulate the economy to avoid that complete implosion here, and then how do you begin to adjust policies into the future as the private economy recovers. It's a very difficult balancing act, I accept that, but that's what we are seeking to do, and as you referred earlier to that essay I wrote over the weekend, at some considerable length, I tried to explain how.
HOST: And this is going to happen just as unemployment start to rise and, as you say, you'll be looking to cut money from your budget. You haven't got any more money to send out by way of cheques. That's why the recovery could end up being tougher than the recession.
PM: Well, it will be a tough recovery for a number of reasons, as I said, unemployment continuing to rise for some time, that's just what the lessons of economic history tells us, and that's why we still have stimulus projects out there, for example, being unfolded in every primary school in South Australia at present, and language and science centres in a large number of secondary schools - projects like that across the country to make a difference now, also that we can look back on in a year or two's time as then adding to the overall educational opportunities that our kids have for the future.
But let's put it all into some context as well - across the major advanced economies of the world, where have we landed as a result of Australian economic policy? Our government economic policy, along with the support of the private sector, we have currently the fastest economic growth of the major advanced economies, the second lowest unemployment, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit, and we're the only ones at this stage not to have gone into technical recession.
So it's a very hard balancing act but we are doing better than most economies.
HOST: I know you must go shortly, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. The Labor Party State Conference and the question of gay marriage - Ian Hunter, former State Secretary of the Labor Party, very respected MP in our Parliament, is gay, and he has publicly asked the Labor Party and you as Prime Minister to allow him, and other gay people to marry their partners, to have their partners fully recognised as a man and a woman would be. Yet you have ruled that out, is that right, and if so, why so?
PM: Well, Ian Hunter is a fantastic bloke, I actually know him, and I fully respect his relationships, as I'm sure would everyone in this community. We went to the last election being very clear-cut about our position on marriage, under the Marriage Act, being between a man and a woman. We've also said that in terms of all legal discriminations against same-sex partners, that we would act to remove them, and the Attorney-General has been hard at work, and from recollection, repealing some 90 or 100 pieces of federal legislation, I should say amending 90 or 100 pieces of federal legislation, to make sure that those discriminations are removed.
HOST: Prime Minister, that's restating the policy. The question is, why?
PM: Well, as I said, we are consistent with the policy we took to the last election.
HOST: Yes, but why have that policy? Why say to two men in a committed, long-term relationship, 'you cannot be married'.
PM: Well, we have said from the beginning, that our attitude to marriage as prescribed under the Marriage Act, between a man and a woman. I fully respect the integrity of other same-sex relationships, and I have complete respect for Ian Hunter, to whom you've just referred, but in terms of the policy, it's a matter to which we have been committed for some time. I fully accept it's a matter of controversy, and there'll be debate, and there should be. This is an open society where we can debate and discuss these matters. We've simply reflected our view, and my view, as to what the proper arrangements are under the Marriage Act, but in terms of other discriminations, we have acted rapidly to remove those under various items of federal legislation, and I think the Attorney-General has done a great job of doing so.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks for talking to us here on 891 Mornings.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
(ends)


HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us on the program today. PM: Leon, that was a great introduction.  HOST: Well, these are the issues.
 PM: That was a fairly long intro. But yeah, let's go through them.  
HOST: Absolutely. Let's first of all talk about these changes. Now, one of the major recommendations of the report that you've embraced and put out for public consultation - and good on you for doing it - is the fact that there is a thought that we should be having hospitals specialise in elective surgery. Now, of course, Modbury, and other hospitals, used to do a lot of this, but they can't now, because the intensive care and high-dependency beds have been taken away.
  PM: Well, we've got to look at what the figures say to us nationwide Leon, and that's our responsibility as an Australian Government, is to respond to what the figures are saying. One out of every three Australians who present to public hospital emergency departments are not being seen within the clinically recommended time, and one out of every six Australians on a waiting list for elective surgery are not being seen within a clinically recommended time. Now, those figures have been around for a long time, let's not go over the fact that for 12 years our predecessors didn't do anything on this.
We've actually said, upon coming to Government, we'd establish this National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. We did that. It's spent the last 16 months going right across the entire system and looking in every state and territory. They gave us their recommendations about three weeks ago.  
You're right to say it's important that the public now debate it. For your listeners, if you go to www.yourhealth.gov.au, you will find that that report is fully online. We welcome comments from the public.  But you're right to point out that how we do better elective surgery in the future is a critical area of future reform. And we need to make sure that we get the best system possible for doing that. HOST: What do you feel about the reaction from Premiers like John Brumby who've almost raised the sickle at you and said ‘you're not taking over my hospitals.'  PM: Well can I say, I saw some reported comments attributed to various Premiers today, or yesterday, about funding. At the end of last year, the Australian Government, and I'll respond particularly to a reported comment of Premier Brumby, through the Australian Healthcare Agreement, brought about a 50% increase in Australian Government funding to the states and territories - a $64 billion deal - and for the first time, increased allocations, or allocations because there weren't any in the past, to improve the number of elective surgery transactions which happen in hospitals, and, also, special allocations to assist with what happens in accident and emergency as well.  So we actually began the reform process with that healthcare agreement last year: increased investment in preventative healthcare; extra support for primary healthcare, 35 GP Superclinics across the country. Also, the special payments for hospitals as it relates to surgery, and accident and emergency.  On top of that, reforms also to increase the number of GPs that we train each year as well. That was phase one.  Phase two, looking out for the next 20 years, is this report which has come down, as I said, two or three weeks ago, and we want to have a seasoned debate about it all and get the system right.  Before, I think, Leon you said in the introduction, that these recommendations may not go far enough. Let me just quickly go to that.  You see, strategic option one for the Government, as put to us by the reform commission, is for the Australian Government to take over all preventative healthcare, all primary or frontline healthcare, to take over responsibility for hospital outpatient care, to take over responsibility for all dental care, to take over responsibility for all non-acute mental health care, to also take responsibility for creating a person electronic data record for every patient in the country, as well as providing 40% of the funding for acute hospital care as well. That is a massive reform program in itself.  The second strategic option that we have before us from the commission's report, is over time to move to a full funding take over responsibility from the hospital system as well from 40% to 100%. So if you were suggesting before that the proposals before us were not ambitious, can I just say to your listeners, these are the most ambitious set of proposals, fundamental set of reforms, put to a Government since the introduction of Medicare.  HOST: Prime Minister, I think in the wish list sense, it is, but, it's how much of that's actually going to happen, because the states seem to be playing two bob each way on this. I don't think the states have delivered, but you've given them a lot of extra money, and we don't appear to be much better of. PM: Well, to be fair to the states and territories, at the end of last year, the healthcare agreement that I referred to before injected, as I said, a 50% increase in Australian Government funding for the states and territories for health and hospitals - $64 billion - but that only flows as of this year.  And secondly, the states and territories, again to be fair to them, were dealing with a previous Australian Government which not only did not increase its allocation to hospitals, it hacked $1 billion out of the public hospitals, and you saw, incrementally, a philosophy on the part of the previous Australian Government of moving more and more health care to the private sector.  We are determined to reform fundamentally the system for the future. It will cost, and you're absolutely right Leon to point to the fact that none of this is cost free. The costing implications contained within the report are there for all to see.  HOST: Does that mean higher taxes, or cutting somewhere else? Or, do you reckon you can get this through efficiency, which is very ambitious? PM: Three sets of possible sources of funding for this, Leon. One is, if the Australian Government takes responsibility for any functions from the states, then there would obviously be a transfer of funding back from the states to the Australian Government, that's the first point. HOST: I can imagine them liking that. PM: Yeah, sure, sure, but I've said to the states and territories repeatedly, there are no blank cheques in this business. This is hard, hard long term reform.  Secondly, I have also said is that, if you create for the first time a unified health system for the nation, particularly if you wire it properly - that is, you have transferable personal electronic data, controlled entirely by patients, of their patient records - you will avoid for example, multiple tests being conducted by different practitioners in different parts of the system, which lead to extraordinary cost blowouts. For example, take the report's conclusions that a number of our major hospitals are operating about 20-25% below optimal efficiency levels. If we were able to assist, by making sure that all of our data was put electronically rather than on paper and it was transferrable across the system, it'd be better clinical outcomes for patients, but also better cost implications for taxpayers.  But the third source of funding is of course the revenue of the Commonwealth. I accept that. But why we want to have a seasoned, mature, national debate about this, where everyone should have their say between now and the end of the year, because these are big decisions, we want to get them right. Millions of people, all your listeners, have some contact with the health system every year. We're not going to take any of these decisions lightly. HOST: Prime Minister, we've had a very unfortunate debate that's come around because of a court case that we really can't talk a lot about with regards to problems in the disability sector, where people, loved ones looking after those disabled, are having a terrible time and under such pressures they do things that often are unthinkable. And this has brought on, even Monsignor David Cappo, to say on this program last Friday, that this whole thing is a social disaster, massively underfunded, and no plan by the state. What would you like to contribute on this this morning, because I know you're very compassionate about disability issues, but it's been a big talking point for Adelaide in the last few days. PM: I'm not familiar with the case you refer to Leon, so I'm very reluctant to trample on what must be a process on foot. Let me say broadly though in terms of disability policy, our Parliamentary Secretary with responsibility for disabilities, Bill Shorten, is very, very active across the field on this. Last night at the Community Cabinet out in the City of Playford, in Elizabeth, for example, Bill received many, many direct questions about basic things such as the delivery of services to parents of children with autism or the spectrum of autism disorders.  This is a major, major problem in the community. What have we done about it? For example, one category of disability, which is autism services, for the first time the Australian Government has created a nationwide program of nearly $200 million to help parents with children with autism-related disorders. But, as was quite plain from the engagement with the community last night, which was a very good discussion, can I say, that doesn't go far enough.  There are a whole lot of problems, both kids under six, preschool age with autism, as well as those over six who are of school age. We need to do better in this. The Australian Government is investing more, but can I say with disabilities, I have this feeling we're only scratching the surface. HOST: Look, on another issue, there is a big story today that two major electricity generators are warning that if we were to put into place the carbon trading scheme that's currently being mooted, that we will have massive failure in the electricity grid. PM: Well can I say that all three of the national energy market regulators assessed the proposed Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme at the time the White Paper for the scheme was put out, and their conclusions are radically different to the ones which are carried in this morning's Advertiser. HOST: What if it's right though Kevin?  PM: Well, no, can I just go to the second part of what we're doing. We actually understand the implications of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, which is all about reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and therefore, it does have implications for coal-fired power stations.  We, through our system, are providing the allocation of free permits to the electricity system under this CPRS system in excess of $3 billion. We are not, shall I say, inattentive to the needs of the sector in adjusting to a new scheme.  And there's one other thing as well. What is the big problem that our coal-fired power stations face for the future? It is, how do we do better with the whole problem, the whole challenge of carbon sequestration, and this is what's called CCS technologies or clean coal technologies. This Australian Government is investing, with the industry, $2.5 billion  -  world-leading stuff - to bring on stream large-scale projects for the sequestration of Co2 coming out of coal fired power stations. HOST: Now just for those people who don't know what that is, it's the storing of carbon by other means, whether it be in the ground or somewhere else. Just quickly, so nuclear power is not going to be on your agenda in the near future? PM: If you look at Australia Leon, we have such a rich array of energy sources. We've just been speaking about coal and our strategy there, but on top of that, the renewable energy sector is huge.  We have barely begun to tap solar  -  again, why the Budget contains $1.5 billion for what would be the single largest solar generating plant in the world. HOST: But you need private investors though, as much as you are encouraging this technology, private investment doesn't seem to be there. PM: Well, I don't know if I agree with that, because, for example, prior to the last budget, and I think our first Budget as the Australian Government, we introduced a half billion dollar renewable energy fund. We put that out for expressions of interest to the private sector, and I reviewed only a month or so ago these submissions back from the private sector. 60 or 70 concrete projects involving solar, wind, geothermal, wave, as well as tidal power, across the entire renewable energy spectrum, but in particular solar. And we're quite encouraged by the preparedness of the renewable energy sector to take the challenge up, nd there are huge job generation potentialities in this sector.  HOST: When do you expect this to start to happen?  PM: South Australia in particular, enormously rich in geothermal resources. HOST: Well you see, the hot rock technology is there, but there doesn't seem to be a plethora of huge investment to bring it on ASAP.  PM: That's true, that's why we need to co-invest. What you need to do is first of all get a proper price for carbon in the system.  Secondly, help carbon-dependent industries to transition to a lower carbon economy.  And third, also co-invest during this transition period with the renewable energy sector to get them up to scale.  That's one of the reasons why we have legislation to increase the national renewable energy target to 20 percent of total electricity generation by 2020, making it possible for the renewable energy sector to occupy the gap. And then also, for the co-investment mechanisms that I was just describing before, and in the case of geothermal, that's one of them. One of the challenges there of course is to make sure that you can provide an electricity grid which connects with what is often the isolated location of these hot rock resources. These are the things all to be worked through at the technical level. HOST: Kevin, thanks for joining us. By the way, when you go to the Flinders Medical Centre, you might ask, I know you're one of those people who will take on dissent head-on. You might want to ask them when was the last time in the corridors they had many patients in barouches because they didn't have enough beds, because I bet you don't find that this morning. PM: Okay, well, the reason I'm going to hospitals with the Health Minister all around the country, Leon, is to see it all, warts and all. And I went to the burns unit for example at Royal North Shore in Sydney yesterday. We spent a lot of time talking to the physicians there and the nurses, asking the very basic question, ‘what do you currently need that you don't have?' That is what the sort of questions I'll be asking here at Flinders Medical Research Centre as well.  HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us today, and I wish you well. PM: Thanks very much Leon.  (ends)


The Rudd Government today announced 50,000 new green jobs and training opportunities to build a stronger and greener Australian economy.This $94 million investment in Australia's future and major reform of Australia's training system will help support jobs and communities being hit by the local consequence of a severe global recession.Today's announcements will ensure that during these tough times up to 50,000 young or disadvantaged Australians get the skills and training they will need for the green jobs of tomorrow.Reforming Australia's training system to produce high quality green skills is essential to meet the growing demand for energy efficient homes and buildings, and to power the industries of the future.The separate elements in today's green skills announcement are:
   * 10,000 member National Green Jobs Corps  -  long term unemployed youth will take part in 26 weeks of green job training and work experience.
   * 30,000 apprentices trained with new Green Skills  - tradies will complete their training with practical job ready green skills.
   * 4,000 training places for insulation installers  -  to help long term unemployed or disadvantaged people into the workforce through extra training and short term - stimulus funded - insulation installation jobs.
   *  6,000 new local green jobs - 6,000 new jobs contributing to environmental sustainability in priority local economies.
10,000 Member National Green Jobs Corps
The National Green Jobs Corps is a 26-week environmental training program that over two years will enable 10,000 18-24 year-olds gain job-ready skills.This will provide 10,000 out of work young Australians with the opportunity to gain work experience and green skills for future jobs.There are currently around 10,000 young Australians between school leaving age and age 24 who have been out of work for more than 12 months.These young Australians will be able to join the National Green Jobs Corps to meet their participation obligations for Youth Allowance or Newstart.The National Green Jobs Corps activities would include:
   * Bush regeneration and planting native trees
   * Wildlife and fish habitat protection
   * Walking and nature track construction/restoration; and
   * Training and hands on experience in the installation of energy efficiencies for buildings.
The Government's Compact with Young Australians requires that young people must be earning or learning to receive the support of the Government.The National Green Jobs Corps will compliment the Compact.30,000 apprentices trained with new Green Skills
To ensure all young tradies in Australia possess the green skills of the future, the Commonwealth will negotiate a new National Green Skills Agreement.This Agreement will make practical sustainability training a fundamental part of all vocational training programs.With the support of industry and State and Territory Governments this Agreement will ensure all our future tradies will possess practical job ready green skills.The Government expects that every new trade apprentice who commences their training after 1 January 2010 will graduate with a core set of green skills and knowledge as part of their training. 
This Agreement will lead to national sustainability standards in vocational training.It will speed up the re-writing of training packages to include these green skills.And it will require VET instructors and teachers to build on the skills they already have and acquire new skills to train the apprentices of the future.Over the next two years 30,000 apprentices in sectors such as building and construction; agriculture and forestry; mining and energy; water; transport; manufacturing and engineering will graduate with competencies in green skills.The practical green skills involved in this training could include:
   * Training electricians in smart heating and cooling technologies
   * Training plumbers in water recycling and water efficiency
   * Training mechanics in green car engines
The national Agreement will be supported by the Rudd Government's investment of close to $900 mil in TAFE and vocational education infrastructure in 2009-10 alone.4,000 training places for Insulation installersTo help long term and disadvantaged unemployed people transition into permanent jobs, 4,000 additional training places will be available to workers installing ceiling insulation, or job seekers wanting an insulation job.The ceiling insulation program is linked to the Energy Efficient Homes Initiative, which is a key element of the Government's economic stimulus measures. The Government has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Master Builders Association, the Housing Industry Association, the National Employment Services Association and with the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union to link disadvantaged job seekers with Energy Efficient Homes package jobs.To get unemployed people into these jobs, and also turn these short term jobs into long term careers, 2,000 additional Apprenticeship Access places and 2,000 extra pre-vocational training places in language, literacy and numeracy will be provided for low skilled and disadvantaged workers in the Initiative.The Government has also asked Job Services Australia providers to identify job seekers who can be part of the home insulation industry and refer them to registered training organisations so they can complete the basic training  -  paid for by Government  -  and start work quickly.6,000 new local green jobsThe Government's local jobs component of its Jobs Fund will also be used to fund an estimated 6,000 new local jobs contributing to environmental sustainability in priority local economies.These jobs could include:
   *  Revegetating bushland
   *  Constructing a boardwalk over vulnerable wetland
   *  Retrofitting energy efficient lighting and plumbing
The Jobs Fund has been set up to fund immediate jobs in local communities hardest hit by unemployment caused by the global recession. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Two years ago, I stood before you as Labor leader and said that Australia stood at the crossroads.
That Australia faced a choice between the past and the future.
Two years later, we gather here as a Federal Labor Government because Australia chose the future.
Throughout our history, we have always been the party of the future.
Always prepared to look beyond the horizon.
Always prepared to be bold and to imagine what Australia could be at its absolute best.
Always prepared to paint a broad and inclusive canvas on what our possibilities as a nation might be  -  rather than simply being content with the way things were.
Because ours is a message of hope; our opponents a message of fear. And as we all know, fear so often is a more potent emotion than hope.
Ours has been a mission to build up, rather than to tear down.
Ours has been a mission to include, rather than to exclude.
Ours has always been a message of fairness for all, rather than privilege for some.
Ours has been a message aimed at the better angels of our human nature, rather than the worst.
These, in all fundamental respects, continue as the dividing lines of our national political life  -  as real today as they were 100 years ago.
For more than one hundred years of our national political history, our challenge has been to obtain political office to translate these great values into policies that change the lives of working people.
And as you as delegates know, this is no easy task.
Conference after conference, we have assembled to pass resolution after resolution:
     * on reconciliation with Aboriginal people;
     * on Australia's refusal to ratify the Kyoto Protocol;
     * on the obscenity of the industrial relations regime from the waterfront dispute through to WorkChoices;
     * on the obscenity of the treatment of refugees under the Pacific Solution; and on Australia's involvement in the Iraq War.
These resolutions represented the consistency of our purpose and the conviction of our resolve.
They reflected the heart and the soul of so much of our party and our movement.
They reflected the most deeply held beliefs and aspirations of each and every one of you as delegates to this, our party's, conference.
They embodied what you, as the party of true believers, held to be positions of fundamental principle.
Yet, at the same time, year after year, conference after conference, our resolutions progressively became essays in political futility and frustration.
But in 2007, after twelve long years, our party and our movement prevailed.
We prevailed because of the consistency of our purpose.
We prevailed because of the essential decency of our message.
We prevailed because of the discipline of our politics.
And the result: in less than eighteen months in office:
     * an Australian Labor Government apologised to the stolen generations;
     * an Australian Labor Government ratified Kyoto; an Australian Labor Government threw out WorkChoices once and for all;
     * an Australian Labor Government abolished the Pacific Solution; and
     * an Australian Labor Government withdrew our remaining combat forces from Iraq.
All made possible through the party of true believers.
Keeping the faith  -  as you have done.
Fighting the fight  -  as you have done.
Securing political victory  -  as you have done.
Because you, the women and men of our branches and our unions, have never lost sight of the light on the hill  -  and for this, as your leader, and from the bottom of my heart, I thank you.
I have said before, we are a party both proud of our history and confident of our future.
Throughout our history, we have been driven by two great overriding purposes: the first, a fair go for working families; the second, nation-building for Australia's future.
These traditions are writ large across our history.
It was Andrew Fisher who, one hundred years ago, delivered the age pension, workers' compensation and industrial arbitration.
And it was Fisher as nation-builder who gave us a national bank, a national currency, a national coat-of-arms, a trans-continental railroad across the mighty Nullarbor, a national capital, and our own navy under our own national command.
A generation later, it was Curtin and Chifley who delivered social security for the unemployed, the pharmaceutical benefits scheme for subsidised medicine, the post-war immigration scheme that built the fabric of modern multicultural Australia.
And it was Curtin and Chifley as nation-builders who began the great Snowy hydro scheme, founded a national university for the nation's capital and forged Australia's independent standing in the councils of the world.
And so too with Whitlam, with Hawke and with Keating: opening our universities to all on the basis of merit, rather than to the few on the basis of privilege, the establishment of universal health care for all on the basis of need, rather than just some on the basis of those who could pay, together with universal superannuation for working families to underpin a decent retirement for all, not just for some.
And as nation-builders, these living greats of our party gave us national investment in infrastructure for our cities, the internationalisation of our economy and the revitalisation of our industry.
Delegates, this is the tradition of which we are so proud.
And this is the tradition which now shapes the future we would craft for Australia.
A fair go for working families.
Nation-building for Australia's future.
Neither  -  neither  -  being possible without the active agency of government.
It has often been Labor's lot to form government at times of national adversity.
And so too has it been with this Government.
The global financial crisis, which began in August 2007, has given rise to the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century.
In 2009, the global economy is projected to shrink for the first time since the war.
What began as a global financial crisis, has become a global economic crisis, which has in turn become a global employment crisis.
This crisis has been caused by a combination of unrestrained greed, unlimited credit and unregulated markets  -  all cornerstones of an ideology of free-market fundamentalism promulgated by the political right over the last decade and more.
Of course, the free-market fundamentalists accept no ideological responsibility for what has occurred.
Instead, governments of the responsible centre have had to step in to clean up the wreckage.
In Australia, we have taken strong, early and decisive action to cushion our economy from the worst impact of the global recession.
We have done so without apology.
We have done so without reservation.
We have done so with absolute conviction.
And that conviction proceeds from one fundamental premise: the paramount importance of jobs. Jobs are not about abstract principles of economics; jobs are about working families, the ability to make ends meet and about fundamental human dignity.
Our strategy has been straightforward: nation-building for recovery.
Supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today while investing in the infrastructure our nation needs for tomorrow.
Our strategy combines the two great traditions of our movement: fairness for working families and nation-building for the future.
The Government has acted to guarantee every working Australian's bank deposit  -  to stabilise the financial system.
The Government has acted to treble the first home owners boost  -  to help young Australians buy their first home.
The Government has acted to treble the tax break for business to invest in plant and equipment  -  to keep the economy going.
The Government has acted with a three stage economic stimulus strategy  -  to fill the gap left by a private sector in retreat.
The first stage  -  direct cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans, farmers in hardship and working families  -  to support the 1.5 million Australians working in retail.
The second stage  -  medium term infrastructure including the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, the single biggest investment in social housing in Australia's history, and the biggest investment in energy efficiency measures for all Australian homes.
And the third stage  -  long term infrastructure investments in rail, road, port, universities, TAFEs, hospitals and medical research facilities, urban water projects, clean energy and a national high-speed broadband network.
Seventy per cent of our total stimulus strategy is directed to infrastructure investment.
And the result: as of today, Australia has the fastest growth, the second lowest unemployment, and the lowest debt and deficit of any of the Major Advanced Economies. And while every Major Advanced Economy is in recession, Australia so far is not.
These results are not a random event. They are, in large part, the direct product of government policy intervention.
Notwithstanding what we have done, the road to recovery will be long, hard and uneven  -  with many twists and turns.
Unemployment will continue to rise for some time to come.
That's why the second arm for our strategy for dealing with the global economic recession is aimed explicitly at supporting those who cannot find work.
Our nation-building for recovery plan this year will support more than 200,000 people in work who would otherwise lose their jobs.
And the same for the year after.
But the tragic reality is that many Australians could still lose their jobs.
Our responsibility is not to repeat the mistakes of earlier recessions but instead to intervene early so that those directly affected are provided new skills for when the economy recovers.
Our Jobs and Training Compact includes a Compact with Local Communities  -  with local employment coordinators being appointed to twenty regions across our country where unemployment is rising most rapidly.
The second part of our Jobs Compact is our Compact with Australians who have been retrenched through no fault of their own.
Under this plan, the Government is guaranteeing training, supported by our productivity places program, so that during a period of extended unemployment, these retrenched Australians can pick up new skills to use as the economy recovers.
Finally, our Compact with Young Australians, where our policy is simple: young Australians under the age of 25 will be required to be earning or learning  -  either in full time employment or in full time education or training.
No ifs, no buts, no maybes.
Delegates, the Government I lead will not stand idly by while thousands of young Australians have their hopes crushed by a global recession not of their own making.
That's why we are determined to act.
Between June 2008 and June 2009, the number of unemployed 15 to 24 year olds has increased by 60,000 to 255,000  -  an increase of 30 per cent.
This rise is primarily the result of school leavers being unable to find work.
Today I announce a further measure to assist young Australians during this difficult time in our economy.
The Government will now create 50,000 new green jobs, traineeships and apprenticeships aimed chiefly at helping young Australians to obtain new skills during the downturn  -  new skills which will be become highly applicable in the low carbon economy of the future.
The climate change sceptics constantly scare-monger about the possible loss of jobs through the transition to a lower carbon economy.
But they constantly fail to talk about the new clean energy jobs of the future which will arise from the introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the renewable energy target and energy efficiency measures in the future.
Specifically, these fifty thousand positions will be made up of:
     * 4000 disadvantaged job seekers participating in the current insulation program;
     * 6000 local green jobs through the jobs fund;
     * 10,000 places in a new National Green Jobs Corps;
     * 30,000 trainees and apprentices in priority sectors of the building and construction sectors and other trades, where places will concentrate across the range of “green skills” competencies that will be needed in the future. These will be achieved through a new National Green Skills Agreement and will start building a new skill base in existing industries and cutting-edge industries, and create jobs and opportunities for generations to come.
The practical job-ready skills included in this training will include:
     * Training electricians in the installation of solar energy;
     * Training plumbers in the installation of water-recycling, plumbing systems; and
     * Training workers in the booming home insulation industry and the retro-fitting of buildings to reduce energy consumption
Taken together, our Nation-Building for Recovery plan and our Jobs Compact with Australia are designed to help working families see their way through the global economic crisis  -  rather than allow free market forces to throw them to the wolves.
Young peoples' lives who would otherwise be left with little hope.
Young people like 18- year old Matthew Jenkins.
Matthew finished school at the end of last year.
He tried his heart out with local companies to try and find an apprenticeship but there wasn't much around.
Then he saw a piece on the TV news one night about my visit to a company called CO-WYN Builders  -  a family company based in Bankstown, founded in 1954, and run by Kevin and Mark Cohen.
Kev said on the TV news that because of the government's stimulus strategy, he was looking to hire.
Matthew then set about hunting Kev down.
But he had no idea of the name of the company -  nor how he could find it.
Nonetheless he grabbed the yellow pages, made a stack of random calls and hunted them down.
Kev was so impressed with Matthew's attitude that he started work on 1 July as an apprentice carpenter.
I'm told he absolutely loves it. TAFE every Monday. Different jobs on site with Kev's company. And if all goes well, Matthew Jenkins becomes a fully qualified carpenter in just under 4 years.
Our charge as a government is to make thousands of these possibilities available for the young Matthew Jenkins of Australia.
This approach is part and parcel of the responsible, conservative economic management of the government which I lead.
Conservative economic management which expands the role of government when the private economy is in retreat  -  and gradually reduces it as the private economy recovers.
Conservative economic management which will return the Budget as the economy recover and increase Australia's international competitiveness.
It is the right strategy for the economy; it is the right strategy for working families; and it is the right strategy for nation-building for the future  -  the skills and the infrastructure that we will need to lift our global competitiveness once we are through the crisis.
It is also a strategy which only an Australian Labor Government can deliver because we believe unapologetically in the role of government.
Our opponents do not. They believe instead in the magic of the marketplace.
They believe that markets are self-correcting.
They refuse to accept the reality of comprehensive market failure.
As others have written, could it be that the reason that it is called the invisible hand is because it is often not there?
Delegates, notwithstanding these great global challenges, the Government has got on with the business of laying the foundations of our long-term reform agenda for the nation  -  building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the long-term future.
We have done so in a manner consistent with our pre-election commitments to the Australian people.
We are also doing so by harnessing our long-term reform agenda for the nation with the short-term measures being implemented under the nation-building for recovery plan.
This is where nation-building for recovery becomes nation-building for the future.
Prior to the election, the Government committed to a new productivity agenda for the economy by investing in an education revolution.
This Government's education revolution is well and truly underway.
We are implementing our commitment to universal early childhood education by 2013.
We are implementing our commitment to have 790,000 computers installed in schools by 2011 so that years 9 to 12 students have a 1:1 student to computer ratio by 2011.
We are implementing a $2.5 billion roll out of state-of-the-art trades training centres to support all of Australia's secondary schools.
We are implementing a $15 billion school building program for all of Australia's primary and secondary schools, including state-of-the-art libraries, language centres and science centres.
The Government is doubling the investment in Australian schools to achieve our national target of lifting year 12 or equivalent attainment from 75 per cent to 90 per cent by 2015.
We are investing in 712,000 productivity training places to help realise our goal of halving the proportion of 20 to 64 year olds without at least Certificate III level qualifications.
And we're undertaking the biggest long-term investment in higher education and research in Australia's history, including an additional 50,000 students attending university by 2013.
This, delegates, is an education revolution.
A revolution that, combined with our nation-building infrastructure investment, will drive long-term productivity growth.
We also committed to the Australian people that we would build a fairer Australia.
That is why the Government abolished WorkChoices and replaced it with the Fair Work Act to build a fair and balanced industrial relations system for all Australians.
That is why we have introduced the single largest reform to the aged pension.
That is why we are introducing Australia's first national paid parental leave scheme.
That is why we have committed $1.2 billion to a new national homelessness strategy  -  to halve the rate of homelessness by 2020.
And that is why we have made a national apology to indigenous Australians  -  backed by a $4.6 billion investment in a national strategy to close the gap in standards in health, housing, employment, education and life expectancy.
The Government is also honouring its commitments to the Australian people on climate change, water, health and hospital reform  -  embracing many of the great challenges of the future.
Conservative governments of the status quo simply hope that these problems will one day go away.
The truth is they won't.
That is why reformist governments of our tradition believe in tackling these challenges head on.
That is why we have honoured our commitment to ratify Kyoto, to introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme; to introduce a renewable energy target of 20 per cent of total electricity generation by 2020; a new $4.5 billion clean energy initiative, including ground-breaking clean coal technologies and a $1.6 billion investment in what will become the single largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
That's also why the Government is embracing the challenge of long-term health and hospital reform. Phase one of this reform was the Government's $64 billion Australian Health Care Agreement last November  -  a 50 per cent increase over the previous Agreement and including, for the first time, direct Australian Government investment in hospital emergency departments and elective surgery waiting lists.
Phase two goes to the long-term reform of the system over the next twenty years. The Government commissioned an independent health reform commission to provide recommendations for long-term reform to produce the best system possible in preventative health care, primary health care, our hospitals, our outpatient services, in dental health, mental health and aged care; and with least cost to the taxpayer and individual Australians.
This blueprint for reform is the largest reform agenda to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.
Delegates, as you can see, this Government has no intention of simply being in government for the sake of being there.
As both a party and a Government of reform, we should be clear-cut about our vision for the nation for the decade ahead.
An economy which is among the most globally competitive.
An economy turbo-charged by 21st century infrastructure  -  fully wired and fully connected, from every part of our vast continent to every part of our vast planet.
An economy with a workforce which is the best educated, best skilled, best trained of any workforce in the world.
A country which prides itself as being the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
A country which has become a decisive part of the global climate change solution  -  not just an irritating part of the climate change problem.
A country where we, in fact, halve homelessness.
Where we, in fact, close the gap with our indigenous brothers and sisters.
A country where we don't allow the fair go to slide out the back door.
A country where we can hold our head up high in the councils of the world with an independent voice making a difference in our region and in the world.
This, delegates, is the kind of Australia we can build together.
Delegates, this is the 45th national conference of the Australian Labor Party.
You may be surprised to know that only fourteen of those conferences have been held while we have been in government. Thirty-one when we have not.
Of the forty-two House of Representatives elections held since 1901, we have one thirteen and fallen short in twenty-nine.
And of the 108 years of our federated history, Labor has only been in government for 35 of those years  -  just on a third.
These figures should be the cause for sober reflection for us all.
Our resolve from this conference should be to apply every effort, every energy and every discipline to build a long term reformist government for the long-term future.
That is the resolve of the team that I now lead in government.
I say to you with great pride that they are a first-class team, made up of absolutely first-class ministers, including a first-class Deputy Prime Minister in Julia Gillard.
A woman of extraordinary strength, extraordinary energy and extraordinary conviction.
Delegates, this Labor Government has embarked on the road to reform.
Just as the nation, when confronted with Australia at the crossroads at the last election, voted to take the road to the future.
The nation took the right road.
Too many opportunities have been squandered in the past.
We can squander them no longer.
I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term future.
The threats are real, the challenges are great but so too are the opportunities extraordinary.
As a party, as a government and as a nation, let us seize those opportunities together  -  because, as a nation, we are all in this together.
Mr President, I formally move Chapter One: “Governing for Australia's long-term future”.


MITCHELL:  In the studio with me, the Prime Minister. Mr Rudd, good morning.  PM: Good morning Neil, thanks for having me on the program.  MITCHELL: Well thank you for coming in. Today is an historic day. We finish a 6-year commitment in Iraq. Were you aware the last soldiers were due back in Australia last night?  PM: I didn't have the precise timetable of that, but we did commit to withdrawing our combat forces from Iraq. Those decisions were taken. But I know from the military, operationalising that and making it happen on the ground always takes more time. It's complex, and you've got to work with your friends and allies too.  MITCHELL: Do you know were they greeted by Government, or will we make some sort of statement that our commitment has ended?  PM: In terms of the reception arrangements for those particular faces, no I'm not aware. But normally we're in close contact with the Chief of Defence force for appropriate reception arrangements for groups of soldiers as they come back, and I'm sure if you were to put that question to John Faulkner, the Defence Minister, appropriate arrangements would've been put in place.  MITCHELL: I've had approaches from a number of people in the military who are concerned, that there hasn't, as far as they're concerned, been any official, formal recognition of the fact we've been there six years. A lot of people, thousands of people have served there, some have been injured, and one died in those circumstances. But, they're a little concerned that there hasn't been a formal, official recognition. Do you intend to make one?  PM: I think it's appropriate that we do, I really do. You see, we all know the history of Australia's engagement in the Iraq War. It was a matter of huge debate in the country, and the two major parties in Australian politics took a different view.  But you know, what we said all the way through was that our men and women in uniform should never be the meat in the sandwich for that. The searing lesson from Vietnam: never put our troops in the middle of a political bunfight. They respond to the direction of the democratically elected Government of the day.  They did so in response to the direction of the then Howard Government, and my experience, having visited them in the field in Iraq, and based on everything I've heard from the allies, is that they have done a fantastic job. So on your key question about appropriate recognition, I'll work that through with CDF and the Defence Minister, but these are a fine body of soldiers, and should be recognised.  MITCHELL: Are you embarrassed by our involvement in Iraq?  PM: Well as you know, when the original decision was taken to militarily engage in Iraq, our objection was this: we didn't have a conclusive outcome from the United Nations inspectorate on weapons of mass destruction. We were concerned about the precedents in International Law, that is going into a country without being backed without a UN Security Council resolution, of precedents that that set up for the future.  So we had great concerns, but, having been elected, our forces were there, so our job was to work within the framework of that decision, and as I said, never ever cause them grief personally or professionally, because of the circumstances in which they found themselves, and they discharged their function well.  In the last stage in Al Muthanna province, in doing what I think is a template for the future, that is handing over security to a locally trained military force in Iraq, that of course is something we seek to apply to Afghanistan.   MITCHELL: So what have we achieved in Iraq? Have we, have you got democracy there?  PM: As far as- sorry, I was just taking a cup of tea when you asked me that question.  MITCHELL: I'll ask a longer question.  PM: That's alright, I'll sip more quickly.  Look, I've met the Prime Minister al-Maliki of Iraq on a number of occasions, and most recently in Australia. I think he has made extraordinary achievements, given how difficult the security environment is. I would say that, politically, he has achieved a remarkable democratisation of the country given the enormous constraints.  You know the three-way split within Iraq- Sunnis, Shias, Kurds, this is a very difficult confederation. If we look at the history of the last several hundred years, it's always been that way. So hats off to Prime Minister al-Maliki for what he's done, and we've, in response to his request to us, are in there, boots and all, working with him on his economic priorities.  I asked him when I was last in Baghdad, “what do you want from us?”, and he said “I really need help with trained agricultural workers”. So we have created, I think, from memory, 100 agricultural research scholarships for the people that they want trained in dry land farming. That's practical stuff, we're doing that with them now.  MITCHELL: Okay, I guess this is related. Two funerals in two days for you. One for one of the victims of that atrocious bombing in Jakarta, and the other, later today, for a soldier killed in Afghanistan. In a sense they're related, are they not?  PM: Terrorism is the enemy of us all, of all countries, of all peoples, in all places. And the linkage between the two, as you've rightly pointed Neil, is terrorists are trained in places, a lot of those terrorists who have been active in South East Asia were trained originally in Afghanistan, which is why we cannot back away from any strategy which aims to remove Afghanistan as this sort of free-range training base for terrorists, which it was in the events leading up to 2001.  The funeral yesterday in Canberra, which I attended for an Austrade official, based on our advice, the first civilian Australian official to be killed by a terrorist attack in the line of duty. This was an extraordinarily moving affair for the family, and for the official community. Two other Australians from the business community have been killed as well.  Let me say very clearly on that, we, the Australian Government, will spare absolutely no effort in working with Indonesia to track down these murderers. These are cold-blooded murderers, and I don't care how long it takes, they've murdered our people, we intend, with Indonesia, to track ‘em down, and help bring them to justice.  MITCHELL: Should they be executed, if caught?  PM: Well, I've said repeatedly that every country's judicial system is different. You know our universal position in terms of capital punishment, I've never backed away from that, but you also work with the reality of individual criminal justice systems around the world, including the United States and Indonesia, which do have capital punishment. I'm concerned here about bringing these murderers to justice.  MITCHELL: That probably means execution. You wouldn't weep for them.  PM: Our position is, as you well know, universal opposition to the death penalty, like the Liberal Party in Australia, but we work within the reality of the criminal justice system of the day. Cold-blooded murderers should be brought to justice, and I don't care how long it takes, Neil. We're going to deploy every effort, with our friends in Jakarta, to bring these murderers to justice.  MITCHELL: On the economy, Access Economics has been commissioned by the construction unions, which I believe were protesting at the Labor Party conference today, to do a report which-  
PM: That's unusual (laughter)
MITCHELL: Well normally they're on the inside, aren't they?  
PM: Oh no, usually they're on the outside, anyway.
MITCHELL: I thought they still had a vote.  
  PM: Oh well, that's never prevented them in the past. You and I were talking recently about ALP conferences in the past. It's always been a colourful affair.  
  MITCHELL: Quite a few of them catching up with sleep up there at the moment.  
  PM: Well, we're in the midst of a, you know, a global economic recession. Therefore, we're on the serious business of how you respond to it, rather than just conference hijinks about this, that, and the other.  
MITCHELL: The construction union report, or the Access report to construction unions, said 80,000 jobs could go in the next three years, do you think that's accurate - in construction alone?
PM: I haven't had the benefit of reading it, but I will now. Well, I think there a couple of things to be said. In responding to the crisis and long-term changes to the Australian economy, two things are necessary: stabilise the financial system, but secondly, then inject all this activity into the economy, which we have, and the huge beneficiary of that has been the construction sector.  
We've got this massive investment in the biggest school modernisation program the country has seen, the social housing additions, the largest ones by the Commonwealth ever, and thirdly, the energy insulation program in people's houses. These are huge additions.  But, look, I don't underestimate the challenges here, but we're working very closely with outfits like the Housing Industry Association and others to make sure that we have as robust a future for the sector and therefore employment within in it in the future as possible.  MITCHELL: So is 80,000 jobs out in three years in construction possible?  PM: I don't see a basis for those numbers. I stand to be corrected. That's why I'm going to read the report carefully.  But, have I been presented with numbers to that effect myself? Not that I can recall, but I take stuff by Access seriously. We'll work our way through it. The key things is, not just here's a piece of doom and gloom, the key thing is Neil, what are you doing about it?  MITCHELL: Well yesterday you announced 50,000 green jobs, many of them for young workers. When it was it decided to do that, when was that action decided?  PM: We have been working our way through what to do with youth unemployment in particular, over the last many, many months. Some time ago I announced, I think, in fact I think I did so here in Melbourne, a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia, with three parts to that: Compact with Young Australians; Compact with Australians who have been retrenched; and the Compact with Local Communities.  This is a logical build-on from the Compact with Young Australians, which I've said, with the Premiers and Chief Ministers, we need an arrangement where young people under the age of 25 should be earning or learning. What we're trying to do is to make that as possible within the schools system and within the training system, and the announcement yesterday was in part about that.  MITCHELL: So when was it decided? Because your Minister didn't seem to know anything about it, Mark Arbib.  PM: Well the elements of this have been developed over some time. I think it's fair to say, I think Mark would admit himself, he didn't have the best of days yesterday, but you know, that's not unique to him, that's not unique to politics.  MITCHELL: So how will it work? Will it be work for the dole? Will they get paid the dole? Will it just be another version of work for the dole?  PM: Well you've got 10,000 places in this national Green Jobs Corps. These deal with both a combination of training and work experience, and obviously, to benefit from this, which is 26 weeks worth of training, and as I'm advised, a minimum of 134 hours worth of training from an accredited training provider, at the same time as you are being supported by either Youth Allowance or New Start. But that's, what we're trying to do here -   MITCHELL: That is work for the dole.  PM: Well, we're trying to combine two realities. Young people are out there, obtaining these support benefits from the country. What we want to do is to make sure they're getting new skills. That's what this is about, so that when the recovery comes, they've got an additional set of skills.  Is it a silver bullet in itself? No, but if you add it to what we're proposing to do with new apprenticeships for the future, new local green jobs under the national jobs fund, another 6,000, 4,000 training places associated with the energy efficiency program in homes, then, taken together with other measures, it does make a difference.  MITCHELL: Well you mentioned also in your speech 30,000 trainees and apprentices in priority sectors of the building and constructions centres. Who pays for them?  PM: Well, when you're talking about apprenticeships, obviously these are young people in apprenticeships out there in the workforce, but what we're also doing is making sure, in partnership with industry, that we develop a new national skills agreement so that, for training as of - my recollection is 1 July next year, sorry, 1 January next year - that the training program, 30,000 folk, has added to it a whole new set of green skills which are related to that as well.  MITCHELL: So those new, those jobs, will be paid for by private industry?  PM: Well these are apprenticeships which are -   MITCHELL: So how do we know they'll be created?  PM: Well, hang on, what we said yesterday is that these 30,000 apprenticeships would have new sets of skills incorporated into the training.  MITCHELL: Well how many jobs are you actually creating? We've got 10,000 work for the dole, 6,000 local green jobs through the jobs fund, are they permanent jobs?  PM: Well, can I say to you, Neil, what we're creating as a Government overall through our support for the whole range of stimulus strategies is this  -  based on Treasury, but it's a fair answer to your question  -  is put all our stimulus together, that's 210,000 people.  MITCHELL: But the argument here is that this is a piece of spin, and that what you've done is put 10,000 people on work for the dole.  PM: Can I say that the fact that our combined stimulus measures are keeping more than 210,000 people in the country in work who would otherwise lose their job is attested to by Treasury advice.  Secondly, the other arm of our strategy is, when people are either out of the workforce or struggling to get into the workforce, how do you make best use of their time? These have been described yesterday as a combination of jobs, apprenticeships and traineeship programs. They are that.  For example, the 6,000 new local green jobs, out of the 50,000, come directly out of the national local jobs fund. That is directly as it should be. The training places for insulation installers are along these lines  -  we've got about a $4 billion investment out there nationwide to provide opportunity for many of your listeners to get ceiling insulation in, but here's the challenge  -  you can either have low-skilled workers go and do that but without picking up new skills on the way through, or, you can introduce training programs so that once they've done that work they've got new skills for the future. That's the 4,000, then the other elements.  MITCHELL: Fair enough, but you've announced 50,000 new jobs. How many of them are new?  PM: No, no, no, what I said yesterday was 50,000 jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships. That's exactly what I said, and it's a combination of the above.  MITCHELL: Your speech, I've got it in front of me, the quote: “The Government will now create 50,000 new green jobs.”  PM: The speech that I delivered at Conference yesterday referred to jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships.  MITCHELL: New. New green jobs, trainees and apprenticeships.  PM: Well, the apprenticeships deal with a whole new set of skills and the money, let go to  -   MITCHELL: But are they new jobs or not?  PM: Well, can I say that the money underpinning these things, Neil, is absolutely new. They were provided into the contingency reserve of the Government at budget time as we worked our way through these measures.  And secondly, it is a combination of jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships, as I said in my speech yesterday, and it's all about making a difference at a time of global economic recession.  What's the big lesson from the last recession? Don't allow people who can't enter the workforce now or who lose their job to become the next generation of unemployed. Instead, let's provide an opportunity for skills to be got during the period of the downturn so that when the recovery comes, a difference can be made.  MITCHELL: You have a sip of tea, we'll take a break. Back in a moment.
PM: Thanks Neil.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with me. We'll take a quick call. Sonia - please go ahead, Sonia.  
CALLER: Thank you Neil. Good morning, Mr Prime Minister.  PM: G'day Sonia. How are you?  CALLER: I'm fine, thank you. Mr Rudd, the emissions tax will cause increases in electricity, petrol, food prices, and here in Victoria it will also affect our water prices because of the desalination plant, and we have also been warned that council rates will also rise to cover it.  Given that workers do not have concession cards to help with any discounts, I'd like you to explain please how this is in line with your election promise that working families will not be any worse off under a Rudd Government.  PM: On the emissions trading question, which follows on from the introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, two things  -  what we've done when we introduced this to do our bit for Australia and for the planet to bring down greenhouse gas emissions, because if we don't do that, huge impact for the economy and jobs longer term, as well as a huge impact for the environment, but the second thing is this: we actually understand that there are adjustment costs which go to industry and to households on the way through.  If you go to the Government's legislation and the White Paper, which I'm sure is up on one of the Government websites, it goes to the detail of the adjustment payments to families which occur once this scheme is introduced.  We understand that in particular with lower income earners, and for middle income earners, and we've been very attentive to the representations from many of the welfare organisations in the country, it's going to be, obviously, a complex process to implement, but we're very seized of the impact on family budgets.  MITCHELL: Prime Minister, as we said, your conference is underway in Sydney. The conference has voted, unanimously, as I read, that there be no reduction in business taxes at all, no tax relief for businesses. Will you be bound by that?  PM: Well, we're always mindful of what the conference resolutions might be, but it is the prerogative of the democratically elected Government to take appropriate decisions in the national interest, and what I've said repeatedly is that we have the Henry commission of review underway - Ken Henry, the Secretary of the Treasury, looking at the totality of the tax system for the future, and we're not in the business of pre-empting the outcomes of that, but we have an open mind in terms of the future direction of tax reform in the country, as we should. We'll always be mindful of what Conference might say-  MITCHELL: But it's not binding?  PM: We'll be governing in the national interest.  MITCHELL: That might surprise or disappoint a few of them.  PM: Well, it's a conference resolution. We're mindful of that, but you know, we've always got to get the balance right when it comes to tax in the country  -  make sure that working families are not being over-taxed, make sure that our corporate are neither being under- or over-taxed. These are complex things.  What's the big problem with the tax system? It's frankly, it's become a complex mess. If you look at the size of the Tax Act twelve years ago and look at it now, it's like it's gone up, sort of, sixteen elevator flights. It's just huge and it's complex and you speak to any tax accountant, it's a mess.  How do we simplify that for the future as well as making sure that we've got that balance right between the resources which Government needs to get key services out and at the same time enough incentive in the private economy, all the tradies listening to your program this morning, making sure that they've still got enough incentive to build up their small businesses.  MITCHELL: Have you seen the report on the OzCar issue yet?  PM: Ah, no.  MITCHELL: It's finished, we read.  PM: Ah, don't know about that. So, no I don't.  MITCHELL: Okay. Kyle Sandilands, I've just heard a report from a number of childcare workers and psychologists urging you to ensure Kyle Sandilands is taken off air because of that awful incident with the 14-year-old child. Is that really a role for you?  PM: Well, it's a private radio station and a private company. It's ultimately a management decision for them, but can I say this is really off, it's wrong, shouldn't be done. This is a young girl and I am, as I think most Australians are, really distressed at the way in which a young person could be treated this way. I assume that all appropriate counselling support has been provided to the young person. I think it's quite wrong. It's entirely right for the program presenters to apologise, and it's right that they do so. What's happens beyond that is a matter for the company.  MITCHELL: Do you agree that generation Y is a bit too choosy about the jobs they take?  PM: I think what, this is a comment made by Mark Arbib, the Employment Minister the other day. Look, I read carefully what Mark had to say. He was just saying ‘there's a few realities out there.' There's a global recession underway, collapsing economies around the world, we in Australia have done a whole lot of stuff to try and keep things in support. Therefore, if you're a young person, it's a new reality. Therefore, let's just adjust to it flexibly, and that may mean that right now you don't take the job which is your heart's desire, maybe it's a stepping stone to something else.  MITCHELL: What's the worst job you've ever had?  PM: Well, when I left school I worked flipping hamburgers, I worked as a hospital wardsman, I worked in a pub pulling beers, I worked in a shopping centre doing some other stuff, I've worked as a hotel clerk. What was the most difficult one? I'll tell you what the most difficult one was  -  when I was at university, or was it before I went to university? Anyway, it was a job I once had as a cleaner in a sawmill, cleaning the loos.  MITCHELL: I would have thought it was an easy answer - cleaning Laurie Oakes' toilet. It'd have to be the worst job. How long were you his cleaner? (laughter)  PM: I was moving to that point. (laughter)  But these are, you know, it's all part of growing up, doing different things.  MITCHELL: Bob Hawke's going to be made a life member this week, which should liven the party up a bit. Will you be there?  PM: I certainly will be. I think that occurs tomorrow at conference. Bob's made a huge contribution throughout his life, and in very colourful ways, as you and I have discussed from time to time.  MITCHELL: And I read in an interview with your wife that you sleep three hours a night. Is that insomnia or is that lifestyle?  PM: I think, look, I haven't seen the exact sort of things that Therese said. I think the truth is, I can get by on a small amount of sleep if I need to. You know what it's like  -  some days it's just, you know, crushingly busy. You might have a late night commitment with a charity here in Melbourne, but you're up at, you know, the crack of dawn to be on this program, but you try and level it up so that other nights you get more sleep.  MITCHELL: So what's a big night's sleep for you?  PM: Oh, if I get, you know, six I'm ecstatic, and that's good, but I think people expect people in national and political life to be working hard. This Government works hard, we try our best.  MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.  PM: Thanks for having me on the program, Neil.  (ends)


 What a great day for the Australian labour movement, when we gather together to honour one of our heroes. It is a great day indeed. 
To Bob and to Blanche you are welcome, welcome friends among us here today. 
Bob is 79 years old. How is it that he does not change? 
I said to him yesterday, “How is it that you don't change?” And Jill, the second miracle, is how have you stayed with him for 26 years? But more of that later. 
Bob Hawke, the heart and soul of our movement, the heart and soul of our Party and I believe also, the heart and soul of our nation Australia. 
Today we come to honour him, not because he's some sort of living saint. I don't think Bob would aspire to that status. In fact Bob, none of us can, least of all me and I'm sure not you, as well, and sainthood is possibly best postponed to another life. 
No, we honour him because he dreamed big dreams for Australia, and then got on with the business of dedicating every fibre of his being to turning those dreams into the reality of modern Australia. 
To dream is one thing. To build and to begin the building is another. To stay the course through to when the building is done, well, that's a third, but with RJ Hawke, we get the trifecta  -  the dreamer, the builder, the bloke who stays with it through to the end. 
The achievements are vast. Just think about them for a moment. 
In politics: the biggest Labor election win since Curtin of 1943; four successive Labor governments; the longest serving Australian Labor Prime Minister. 
On the economy: tariff reform; the floating of the dollar; the internationalisation of the economy; taking Australia out of the economic dark ages and embarking upon our future in the world economy. 
On social and environmental reform: the introduction of Medicare; the near doubling of Year 12 retention rates in schools; the decision to save the Franklin; great advances in reconciliation with Aboriginal people. 
And on Australia's place in the world: there he was, with the idea to set up the first ever pan-regional body designed to bring cooperation in the wider Asia-Pacific region, APEC; the Cambodian peace settlement; the chemical weapons convention. 
This was not an idle government. They did a few things. They did a lot. This is the report card worthy of a great government, a great leader, a great Labor Prime Minister in Bob Hawke.
Bob Hawke was and remains a Labor moderniser, holding fast to our continued values, our continuing values of a fair go for all and nation building for all, while never fearful of applying those continuing values to the great challenges that we face for the future. 
To survive Labor must always be a dynamic movement, never a static movement. To survive Labor must always be broadening the tent, never narrowing it, broadening it to include business, large and small; broadening it to embrace all working people, unionised and not; broadening it to embrace all communities, rural and urban; broadening it to embrace all peoples, whatever their race, whatever their creed, whatever their gender - in this great single enterprise called Australia. 
And to survive Labor must always be looking to the future, never rooted in the past. Never locked in past battles, always ahead of the curve, looking for the next. Preparing Australia for the enormous challenges of the 21st Century, the complexity and the magnitude of which put into pale significance those we have seen in the century just passed. 
Bob Hawke, the great achiever, the great moderniser, but also, the great unifier. 
I'll let you into a little secret: Bob and I had a little tipple last night, and we talked a little bit about today, and I asked him to reflect on his career and what made him most proud. What were the things that were the most important? 
His answer, I believe, says everything about the man. The thing of which he's most proud was his role, the role he was able to play in bringing the nation together after nearly a decade of ugly division, and those of us with memories alive enough and active enough can remember how bad things got in the decade following the dismissal of 1975. 
Here we had, in this great Labor leader, this great Labor Prime Minister, a man who saw the challenge as being to unify the nation  -  and he did so. 
Remember the summits, summits that brought the nation together around a new reform agenda for the future. Summits that entrenched the ideas of reconciliation, of recovery, and of reconstruction, bringing the nation together as only RJ Hawke could. 
Himself a great bridge between all side of politics, between all parts of the economy and all parts of our nation, and only as Hawkey could. 
Hawkey the larrikin, the lovable larrikin. Hawkey, none of us will forget his marvellous advice to all employers on the morning after the Americas Cup win, summed up, I believe, succinctly for all times. Hawkey the mad keen punter, Hawkey the life and soul of the Party, and not just our Party, and Hawkey the great campaigner, the man who not only campaigned because he had to but because he loved to. The excitement, the drama of direct engagement with the Australian people whom he loved and who loved him, as they still today. 
You know, Hawkey has lost none of that old magic. As a new candidate, and as a new member of parliament, Hawkey did shopping centres with me. Picture it, there you stand, the new candidate or, the election later, the just-new member, and you might have hoped in your heart of hearts that you'd made some impression on your local community. But if you're standing with RJ Hawke, you're experience is as follows: to be totally ignored, to be knocked over in the rush, as the entire shopping centre positively swoons in his presence, a collective going weak at the knees. 
That's what happened when Hawkey would arrive at the shopping centre with you  -  a humbling experience for a candidate, and a member, particularly one who had tabs on himself like me. 
You laughed too loudly, Riordan. 
And, that was 10 years after he was last in office. It was nearly 20 years after he had first become Prime Minister, and that says so much of the man. There he was, at it again, aged 78, in the campaign of 2007, cutting a swathe through the shopping centres and RSLs and bowls clubs of Australia, and no more so than in a seat called Bennelong. 
I developed a fleeting impression that for Bob, Bennelong was personal - the passion, the commitment, the dedication as he personally introduced himself to all 87,000 voters. The victory in Bennelong, Bob, is in large part you. I thank you for that. 
But not just campaigning there  -  right across the nation. In one of his last articles, written before his tragic death in November 2007, the great journalist Matt Price wrote the following of Hawkey on the campaign trail in Perth: 
“Bob Hawke barely paused to draw breath during a rousing, passionate speech that didn't so much persuade his friendly audience to vote Labor as harangue them into submission... 
“Like a mysterious force of nature, his speech ploughed ever forward, uprooting those in its path.” 
And at the end of the speech, Matt reported the following exchange: 
‘“How does it feel to be feted like a rock star?” wondered a local TV reporter. “I've got used to it, boy,” snapped Hawke.” And then he went on to say “If it helps Labor, I can cope.”' 
Bob, you are loved by our Party, you are loved by our movement, and I believe you are loved by the nation. 
We salute you, Bob Hawke  -  great achiever, great moderniser, great unifier, and we today, as a Party and as a movement, extend to you the honour of Federal Life Membership of the great Australian Labor Party.


People living with chronic disease will soon have better access to a range of support programs designed to help them better manage their conditions.
The Rudd Government has approved the allocation of a total of $13.1 million to 82 organisations to deliver specific chronic disease self-management and lifestyle risk modification programs in communities and regions throughout Australia.
Already 2.5 million Australians suffer from a chronic disease, with this number predicted to rise to 3.5 million by 2016.
The recent National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission report found that around 70 per cent of our health care budget is consumed by chronic conditions that are potentially preventable (such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, mental disorders and diabetes), and that 10 per cent of hospital stays could have been avoided if better care had been provided earlier.
The Rudd Government is investing more than $872 million in preventative health  -  more than any other Australian government in history  -  to keep people healthier for longer. 
     * The 82 projects will concentrate on three areas:
     * The education of health professionals in chronic disease self-management
     * Embedding chronic disease self-management into the health professional curriculum and
     * Education to reduce the risks of people developing a chronic disease and to help those with chronic disease to better manage their condition.
Funding recipients include:
     * Queensland University of Technology  -  six grants to support a number of programs, including the evaluation of a new and flexible method for supporting exercise-based lifestyle changes in chronic disease, using wearable monitoring technology.
     * The Australian Rural Health Education Network for the implementation of a web-based teaching and learning resource.
     * The National Ageing Research Institute to develop and evaluate a ‘Positive Ageing' self-management program aimed at people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds at risk of developing chronic disease.
     * St George Hospital Cardiac Rehabilitation and Heart Failure Services to develop a multilingual audiovisual chronic disease self-management resource.
In selecting the projects the Government targeted specific groups that would reap significant benefits from expanded assistance and services. These included people from culturally and linguistically diverse populations, people experiencing socio-economic disadvantage, children and adolescents and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
A list of completed projects is available from the Prime Minister's Office.


This blog was open for comment from 27-31 July 2009. The topic was Australia's hospital and health care system.
Kevin.Rudd says...
G'day and welcome
Today I want to speak with you about Australia's hospital and health care system and the challenges it faces in the 21st century.
The sad reality is that the problems facing health care have sat at the bottom of the too hard basket for a very long time... for far too long.
Politicians have pointed fingers at everyone other than themselves.
State and federal Governments have beaten their chests with mock indignation.
All in the hope that bluff and bluster would pass for action.
You know it as I do that this approach has not served our country well.
Because amidst the game playing:
     * Our population grew older.
     * Health care costs escalated.
     * The shortages of doctors and nurses became more and more severe.
     * Many people were forced into crowded emergency wards because ‘out of hospital care' wasn't available.
     * And modern epidemics like obesity, diabetes and mental illness placed even more pressure on the system.
The truth is these pressures are growing by the day yielding these conclusions:
Without fundamental change Australia's health system will buckle under the pressure of demographic change, rising costs and modern diseases.
Under its current structure our health system cannot meet the challenges of the 21st century.
These are the reasons why we commenced and have now concluded the most detailed investigations into the health system since Federation.
Essentially they are a complete health check for Australia's health system.
You can access these reports on this website and also on www.yourhealth.gov.au.
I urge you to do this because the time has come for us all to develop the solutions.
To this end I will personally hold public community meetings across Australia in the months ahead.
We must consult the people with the greatest stake in the future of our health system... our local doctors, our local nurses,  health care workers, you and your families!
Your views will directly influence the changes we will make to improve the system.
We will afford ourselves six months to develop these plans.
Plans for changes in models of care, a greater emphasis on prevention, improved ‘out of hospital care' and end to the chronic shortages of doctors and nurses.
Friends, the 21st Century has put our health system on notice. We have now reached the point of no return. That means action is no longer a matter of choice but a matter of necessity.
Let us all be a part of the solution.
So get involved, send me your suggestions, participate in the blog and together let's improve the Australian Health System.
I thank you!
Read the full blog transcript


PM: We've got a big job ahead of us as far as National Health and Hospitals Reform is concerned. Prior to the last election we said there were real stresses in the system. And therefore, we commissioned the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission to look at it root and branch, and systemically. That is, if we are trying to prepare for the next generation of health challenges, how do we do it best? And they've provided us with their report and its conclusions and its recommendations about three weeks ago. We're now putting it out to the public, and wanting the public's response. In particular, we want the medical profession's response, we want the nursing profession's response, we want responses from acute hospitals like this, because you are so much of the front line of what the nation does.
PM: Now, your treatment here, is it all going okay?
PATIENT: Yeah, it's going great. The only problem is that it takes a while to get in because of a bed shortage.
PM: No, I understand.
PATIENT: And they've got guys out there parked somewhere that have got problems that they need to get in.
PM: Well that's one of the reasons we're out this morning to see what extra resources the hospital systems need. You've got a span of care from, you know, here to there, from the sort of initial treatment through to surgical intervention. How do we integrate that better so that it's best for you, in terms of the community as well. It's easier to say than it is to do.
PATIENT: Yeah sure.
PM: But we're setting out as a reform goal for the future, so it's more personal, patient-focussed.
PM: The process from here is a national conversation which is primarily about us listening to you about what you think about this. Both in forums like this, but online as well.


JOANNA: Hi, I'm Joanna. This is Madeleine, this is Brendan, and we have Eva.
Eva's severely disabled, physically and mentally. She's got congenital heart disease, lot's of problems. We're in the hospital a lot, so we're moving into this house. It's a stimulus house. It's going to change our life greatly by just having the basic needs met everyday like being able to bath her, being able to bring Eva into the lounge room, into the dining room, involve her in everyday activities, not having to carry her upstairs, we can take her outside, we can do anything.
She can be, like, a part of everyday activities. Everything that the kids do, she can join in now.
BUILDER: It's built for adaptability, so it can grow with the tenant that moves in there. It's set up for wheelchair accessibility. We've got special bathroom, special kitchen, which has got adaptable bench tops. The bathroom has toilets at the right height for a wheelchair. The shower screens are removable. Zero thresholds throughout the house, so a wheelchair can get in and out with great ease.
You'll notice there's ramps all around the house so it's all very easy for mobility, and yeah, it sort of grows with the needs of the client as they're progressively using the house, I guess.
JOANNA: Our life is really hard. We've got stairs we go up, I can't bath her in the bath, I have to hop in with her to bath her, so here I can actually walk into the walk-in shower and not step up.
Everything is going to change. Everything. It's life changing. Best thing that could ever happen to us.


PM: First of all it's great to back in Townsville, and great to be back in North Queensland, and to talk to this fine community who work in the Townsville Hospital.
Here in North Queensland and here in Townsville the Government has sought to be partners in the economic and social development of the region.
Just a few points - I'd like to reflect on what we've invested here so far.
In health, of course, we have already made an announcement of a $250 million investment in the future expansion of this hospital, including additional operating theatres and additional beds, as well as funding for a local GP Superclinic as well as funding, also, for additional sub-acute beds for rehabilitation purposes for this health region as well  -  some 30 of those.
Beyond health and into education, we have invested in providing some 2,200 additional computers for some 19 schools in the region. Some $73 million is being invested in 52 new building projects at 28 schools under the Building the Education Revolution program. Also, some $10.9 million for seven Science and Language Centres at various High Schools in the region, and $15.8 million for capital works nearby here and James Cook University.
Finally, on infrastructure, we are investing $95 million for the Townsville port access road, $55 million for the Bruce Highway arterial duplication, and also, in terms of what I understand has been a fantastic event here locally, we've supported some $10 million to stage the V8 Supercar event here in Townsville.
If you put together our various elements of economic stimulus, the Government has invested some $405 million in direct stimulus into this regional economy, and in '08-'09, $162 million of that came through. The reason for all these investments is that we wanted to make a difference in terms of the local infrastructure in Townsville, the education infrastructure, the best facilities for schools for the future, while also making a difference with jobs.
Our Nation Building for Recovery plan is about supporting jobs, apprenticeships and small business today while investing in the infrastructure, the nation building infrastructure, we need for tomorrow.
Which brings us to hospitals, and I've indicated already what investments we've committed to this hospitals future, and that allocation of a quarter of a billion dollars for Townsville Hospital represents the single largest slice of the allocation from our capital fund for Queensland, and we look forward to seeing that investment on the ground before too much longer.
But the purpose of being here today, in particular, has been to talk about the future of the health and hospitals reform program, and I would thank all those from Townsville Hospital and the wider health and hospitals community for their participation and their feedback today. The Minister and I and Warren Snowdon spent time with those who are working at the coal face in the neonatal part of the hospital, as well as the oncology part of the hospital, and we're hearing firsthand about some of the future needs, most particularly as reflected to us by those working in oncology.
But the purpose of these consultations is to here directly back from local practitioners about what they need from the system nationally for the future. Our health and hospitals system, nationwide, is at a tipping point. We need to provide more resources for it nationally, and we're going to need to reform the way in which we do our business.
That means that the primary care, the preventative health care level, and the hospital stage, as well as with aged care and dental care, and mental health services as well.
The feedback we got today in so many areas, I think, has been really important, particularly reflecting on some of the real achievements which should be made here in North Queensland in workforce planning in an integrated way for this reason. So much of that occurs, of course, here at JCU, and I congratulate all those who are involved.
The final thing is today by way of a further national investment in our health and hospital system I'm also announcing a $13.1 million investment in programs to help people with chronic disease to better manage their conditions.
One of the reform areas for the future is in preventative health care  -  what can you do to make the system better long term by changing lifestyle habits to reduce the incidence of chronic diseases in Australia, which is currently going through the roof. For those afflicted with chronic diseases, how do you help those with them to manage those diseases better?
That's what this investment is all about. It's part of our overall reform thrust for the future. This $13.1 million investment will provide funding for 82 health and university and community organisations to deliver programs focussed in three major areas:
     * Educating health professionals in chronic disease self-management;
     * Embedding chronic disease self-management into the health professional curriculum; and
     * Educating consumers in chronic disease self-management and lifestyle risk factor modification.
And in Queensland, there are investments at the Queensland University of Technology, the Australian Rural Health Network, as well as the National Aging Research Institute to develop and evaluate a positive aging self-management program.
This is one practical building block to the future, of which many others need to be put in place. Our challenge is to reform the health and hospital system for the needs of the 21st century. That means big regional hospitals like Townsville have to be part and parcel of that. That's why we're here, discussing these matters here today.
We began our consultation process last week. It's now one week since we released this report, put together by Dr Christine Bennett and her Commission. Our first port of call was the Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney, a very big hospital there. Second was the Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide. The third nationwide out of the 750 hospitals in Australia is Townsville Hospital.
We're glad to be here.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Taking everything into account that you've been speaking about today, is it good enough that the swine flu (inaudible) for a bed, only to get to Townsville and found there wasn't one here and then on to Mackay at a cost of $30,000 to the taxpayer.
PM: There's always going to be necessary improvements in the health system. That's why we're here. I mean, the report which has been released by the Commission points to challenges right across the health and hospital system. Until we deal with those challenges, we're going to continue to have problems of the type that you've just described.
Why are we here? We are here to work through, with this local community, how do we invest more positively and cooperatively and constructively with this group of professionals here in North Queensland to make this system better for the future.
There's always going to be problems  -  You've just pointed to one of them
JOURNALIST: Doesn't that point to more urgent action needed, though. When are we actually going to see something come from all these reforms?
PM: Well, can I say that, first of all, the Australian Government, last December invested $64 billion in our new Health and Hospital Agreement with all the states, including Queensland.
Secondly, that money is flowing. That represents a 50 percent increase on the previous healthcare agreement with the states and territories. That money is now flowing.
On top of that, we also have significant investments in the capital needs of the system as well, and that's why I made emphasis here that that money, that allocation of a quarter of a billion dollars for Townsville Hospital's future, has already been announced in the Budget in May.
These are things we have already done. What we're talking about is how do we reform the system better for the long term, and that's why we're here as well.
JOURNALIST: Talking about reports, have you seen the Audit Office report yet in regards to Utegate?
PM: No, I haven't seen that. I think, on this question of the forged email affair, Mr Turnbull has seen fit to ask many, many questions on the forged email affair. It's time for Mr Turnbull to start providing some answers.
I think it's important for Mr Turnbull to come out and describe in detail all of his dealings with Mr Grech, all meetings and all conversations. Mr Turnbull must also tell the Australian people if he or anyone else associated with the Liberal Party discussed the Senate inquiry with Mr Grech before Mr Grech appeared as a witness. These are some of the very basic questions which need to be answered in this forged email affair.
JOURNALIST: So you'll be watching Australian Story closely tonight?
PM: I'll be doing other things tonight. I've got some work to do.
JOURNALIST: Mr Turnbull comes out of Australian Story tonight apparently saying that often now speaks to his wife Lucy about policy matters and that she's somewhat of an adviser to him. Is that good behaviour for a politician?
PM: Look, I would not comment at all on Mr Turnbull's relationship with his wife. That's a matter for them.
JOURNALIST: Will you be looking at a federal level at what Ms Bligh has done here in regards to fundraisers and taking in that sort of line?
PM: If I could just draw your attention to what we, the Australian Government, have done in 18 months in office.
One - introduced legislation into the Australian parliament to radically reform the disclosure laws for campaign donations. Mr Howard lifted the threshold for donations to more than $10,000. In other words, you could have 10 people at a dinner, raise $100,000 and no-one would know. You could have 100 people at dinner and raise $1 million and nobody would know. We don't think that's right, we don't think that's transparent.
So what did we do not long after coming into office? Introduce legislation to bring the disclosure level back down to $1,000  -  lower than it was even before Mr Howard made the change  -  and we think that's right in terms of transparency. Guess who's blocking that in the Senate at the moment? The Liberal Party.
Secondly, what did we do? We introduced legislation to ban all foreign donations to Australian political parties. Guess what's happened to that legislation? It's blocked in the Senate.
Third thing we did was introduce for the first time at the Australian Government level a lobbyist register, a national register of lobbyists, so everyone's got to put their name down, everyone has to indicate the firms for which they are lobbying, and that is a transparency measure which is important.
And here's the last thing, which also goes to your question  -  last year we also circulated, under John Faulkner, the then Special Minister of State, a green paper for discussion in the community which goes to enhancing the disclosure of donations further, banning or capping political donations, placing limits on campaign expenditure by political parties, examining public funding rates for candidates and political parties, examining whether further regulation is required for third parties and others.
That's all out there in a green paper for public consultation now.
That's been done by us so far in our first 18 months in office. We'll be looking very carefully at the responses to the green paper in shaping our future legislative response.
OK folks, we better zip because I've got to go places.
Thanks.


 PM: Earlier today, a joint statement was issued by the Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and the Chief Commissioner of Victoria Police in relation to the police counter-terrorism operation that has occurred in Victoria.   On the evening of the 2nd of August, I received a briefing from the National Security Adviser, the Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and the Director-General of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, about the investigation into a number of individuals in Melbourne, who were allegedly planning a terrorist attack in Australia against an Australian military base and who were also allegedly involved in supporting Al-Shabaab in its fight against the Somali Government.  I am advised that coordinated police searches under 19 warrants were conducted in Victoria and that four people have been arrested as a result of the warrants.  Another person, already in custody in Victoria, will also be facing charges in relation to this matter.  I am advised that the charges laid relate to the preparation or planning of a terrorist act contrary to the Commonwealth Criminal Code 1995 as amended.  Theother charge relates to an offence under the Crimes Foreign Incursions and Recruitment Act, of 1978.  It would be inappropriate for me to comment further on the arrests that took place today as the matter is an ongoing investigation, aspects of which may need to be resolved by the court.  I would hasten to add that under Australia's justice system all persons are presumed innocent until found guilty in a court of law.  This operation is the result of extensive collaboration over many months between the Australian Federal Police, the Victoria Police, the New South Wales Police, the New South Wales Crime Commission, ASIO and the Commonwealth Department of Public Prosecutions covering Federal, Victorian and New South Wales jurisdictions.  I commend these agencies for their combined and coordinated work to this point that led to the arrests this morning.   As the Australian Government has said consistently, there is an enduring threat from terrorism at home here in Australia as well as overseas.  Only too recently we have been reminded of the consequences of this threat in the tragic Jakarta bombings, in which three Australians lost their lives.  However, I would like to make clear that I am advised that the Jakarta bombings are not connected to today's operation.  Australians will be concerned to hear about arrests of this nature in our midst.  Our assessment of the terrorist threat in Australia is that it comes from a small number of individuals, who should in no way be taken as a wider reflection of any group within Australian society.  Nationally, Australia has well-developed plans and procedures to deal with terrorist threats. I am advised that events today do not at this time warrant any change to our National Counter Terrorism Level, which remains at “Medium”, as it has been since the September 11 2001 attacks in the United States.   I want to reassure all Australians that our law enforcement agencies and our intelligence agencies are working hard to combat terrorism and other security threats to our community.  Australians should be confident about Australia's strong and coordinated efforts to combat terrorism. These efforts will continue, just as Australians should remain mindful of the fact that the threat of terrorism continues.  I'll take a few questions.  JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you able to say whether this, since 9/11, was the most advanced terror plot on Australian soil?  PM: I believe, David, it's important for the process involving the ongoing investigations by the police authorities to continue, for the court process to work its way through, before we reach any broader conclusions about where this may fit in terms of threats to this country over time.  As I said before, this is a sober reminder that the threat of terrorism to Australia continues.  I also have emphasized in my remarks, however, that in our system of criminal justice the presumption of innocence remains.  JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to Australians who now say this is strong evidence that we should not be in Afghanistan, that our fighting there is a warwhere we have no place and we inspire hatreds that could come back to haunt us?  PM: As I reflect most recently on terrorist attacks in Indonesia, and terrorist attacks elsewhere in world, as you know, in the history of events since 2001, many of those who have been responsible for terrorist attacks around the world have in fact been trained in Afghanistan. The Government of Australia's view and the Government of the United States, and our friends and allies is that Afghanistan cannot be surrendered as a training base of unlimited potential for terrorists as it was prior to 2001.  This is a difficult and ongoing fight in Afghanistan, I accept that. I accept also that it is unpopular. But if we are to deal with the threat of terrorism at its various levels, we must dealing with where terrorists are trained, we must be dealing with those who support them, as we must be dealing with the current, practical challenges which confront our law enforcement agencies here in Australia.  And I emphasize again what I said before  -  that is, the agencies have cooperated well on this matter, and I commend the professionalism which they have displayed.  JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Do you think it's acceptable that private security firms are guarding some of our military bases (inaudible)  PM: The security as it relates to each of our military installations is based on the best advice of the Defence authorities, and these are matters of ongoing review, calibrated to the nature of any threat against them. And I noted carefully the comments made by the representatives of the AFP and the Victorian Police this morning about their liaison with Defence on this matter over time. Of course, that liaison will continue.  The challenge for our security authorities and for government is to be responsive to the advice that we are provided about what is needed and where and in what form at any particular time.  The sobering element to emerge from today's development is the reminder to all Australians that the threat of terrorism is alive and well and this requires continued vigilance on the part of our security authorities, and we propose to maintain that vigilance into the future.  JOURNALIST: Is there a need to or has there been a review of security (inaudible)  PM: On the question of security as it relates to any public event in Australia, or any international event, that is subject to the normal security processes of the Commonwealth in partnership with the states. That has applied to this event as well.   As I said partly in response to the question just asked, these security arrangements are the subject of continuing review, and therefore that would be the case in relation to this and any other events in Australia as well.  JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your reaction to the Auditor-General's report and the comments made by Godwin Grech in The Australian?  PM: I would not propose to add to the comments that I made yesterday. I have nothing at this stage, further to add. You will appreciate that the Government and its national security ministers have been preoccupied with other matters in recent times. That includes me. Thank you very much.  (ends)


E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen. Today we've been discussing the big challenge of climate change, and in particular with our colleagues from the Pacific Island countries, the impact on them, and what needs to be done globally in order to deal with that impact in the future. That is why the Government today, of Australia, is of course launching this document, engaging our Pacific neighbours on climate change, and Australia's approach.
We in Australia see ourselves as having a particular responsibility to argue the case of Pacific Island countries in the major global fora on climate change. Most recently, at the G20, on top of that, the Major Economies Forum meeting in L'Aquila in Italy, and prospectively in other meetings around the world as well.
The document describes the potential impact of climate change on the Pacific Island countries, severe economic impacts, including reduced income from agricultural exports, from fisheries, and from tourism.
Secondly, storm surges - flooding and coastal erosion, threatening coastal settlements. Thirdly, exacerbation of the existing problems of water security. Fourthly, threats also to food security. And on top of that, changes to the distribution of disease bearing organisms like mosquitoes potentially making worse existing threats to human health.
These are the challenges which are the real practical challenges affecting our friends, our neighbours and partners in the island countries of the Pacific.
On the question of coastal inundation, let me just present you with one simple, stark fact. Fifty per cent of the population of the Pacific Island countries live within a kilometre and a half of the coastline. Fifty per cent of the population of the Pacific Island countries live within a kilometre and a half of the coastline.
Therefore, when we talk about inundation, when we talk about sea levels rising, this is not an abstract concept, it is real.
And today, the Minister for Climate Change, Penny Wong, was able to present delegates, also, with a graphic video representation of inundation at work in Kiribati. And the distinguished representatives from Kiribati will speak to that and other matters in a minute.
On the practical side, what do we then propose to do as Australia - As outlined in this document, we intend to provide support for practical measures to assist Pacific Island countries to adapt to the impact of climate change. Secondly also, to incorporate climate change into the national development strategies of the Pacific Island countries, in partnership with countries like Australia.
Thirdly, we in Australia ensuring that we take the Pacific experience of climate change to the councils of the world. In many parts of the world, this is seen as an exclusive problem of how the large developed economies adapt or how the largest developing economies may change.
One of the practical and immediate problems is what happens to our friends and neighbours and partners in the region as they deal with the living, graphic reality of a coastal village disappearing. That's what it's about. And also, to contribute to better coordination between ourselves and other donor countries for development assistance cooperation in the Pacific so that climate change is at the forefront of what we do.
These are the measures which are outlined in this document. These are some of the problems we identify in this problem, this area; and therefore, the challenge which Australia believes it has to rise to, in acting on behalf of this region, to the greatest extent we can in the councils of the world as we move towards the Conference in Copenhagen.
I'm pleased today to be joined by the Prime Minister of Vanuatu, and the distinguished representative from Kiribati. I might turn to the Prime Minister of Vanuatu to add some remarks and then to our colleague from Kiribati, and then Penny Wong will close before I take questions from you. Prime Minister.
PM NATAPEI: Thank you Prime Minister. I simply wish to add that Vanuatu is located on this, what they call the (inaudible) of fire, where we have cyclones, earthquakes, volcanic eruption, tsunami. We've got the lot. And indeed, about two years ago, we had to relocate an entire village, (inaudible) in the northern part of the country, from where it used to be, further inland - basically because the existing of the original site went underwater.
That's just demonstrating what Prime Minister Rudd has been talking about, the sea level rise. And even now, some of the plantations, as you drive along the roads along the coast, you'll see coconut trees in the water. So it's an indication of the sea level rise.
About a week and a half ago, I visited some of the islands up in the north, and there's evidence there of what's happening to the sea level rise that is affecting people in the country, and I assume that that also is affecting the rest of the Pacific Island countries.
PM RUDD: Thank you very much Prime Minister. And the representative from Kiribati.
LAMBOURNE: Thank you Prime Minister. Kiribati is one of the front line countries to the impact of climate change. We are made up of low-lying (inaudible) which rise no more than two metres above sea level in average. The islands themselves are narrow strip of lands, that when, some part of the islands, when you stand in the middle, you can see the ocean on one side, and the lagoon on the other side.
So the storm surges that we've experienced over the years have been more intense and more frequent and they've destroyed lots of our homes, our livelihood, in terms of our food crops; and infrastructure. Very critical infrastructure.
And since the release of the fourth assessment report of the IPCC, we've been very much concerned about the projections of sea level rise which some subsequent scientific findings have found very conservative. So the IPCC report, forward assessment report, states that the sea level will rise between 0.4 - 0.8 metres within this century.
Now for some that might seem insignificant. Before my country, Kiribati, and most of the low-lying nations in this region of the world, that is quite an alarming rate. Because before our islands are inundated by the rising seas, they will be unable to support life.
And so this is a very crucial and very critical issue for Kiribati, and the Government, my President, has been speaking on this, and to this, at every opportunity he gets. And I'd like to thank the, on his, on my President's behalf, thank the Government of Australia for its leadership in this area. Since the Rudd Government came into office, they ratified the Kyoto Protocol which all of us in the region, and of course, across the world, welcomed and acknowledged, and are very thankful for.
Australia has taken a leading role in our region, on climate change, and I think it is very fitting that this year's forum is chaired by Australia. It has done a lot since, in the very short period it has come into office. It has done a lot.
Lots of assistance has been extended to our region to adapt - help us adapt to the impact of climate change. The assistance of Australia adaptation program in the $350 million which will focus on the programs in the Pacific, are very much appreciated and welcomed by our governments in the region. The meetings, the international meetings that Australia has attended - it's also provided us, through Australia, the opportunity to be heard.
Australia has kindly taken our issues to these fora and advocated our positions at these international meetings where we do not participate. So we are very grateful to the Government of Australia and we look for the Government of Australia to take the lead in the climate change action for our region. And we are very confident that as chair of the Pacific Islands forum this year for the next 12 months Australia and particularly the Prime Minister of Australia and the Minister for Climate Change and their team will be helping us tell the world what is happening in our region and to our people.
And I think in Copenhagen we're looking for practical and concrete solutions to help our people who may not be able to continue to live on the lands that their ancestors have lived for a long long time. This is an emotional issue for us, but an issue that needs to be addressed very soon and without much delay. Thank you very much.
PM RUDD: Thank you very much. And if I could ask Senator Wong to conclude and then we'll take some questions.
MINISTER WONG: Thank you, Prime Minister. Well the Pacific Island nations represented here and Australia share many common concerns, many common issues but perhaps none more pressing than climate change. And you've heard the representative from Kiribati talk about the real life issues that are confronting her nation as a result of climate change. That is a view that has been expressed very much by Pacific Island nations including in this forum.
We do regard it as important that we engage closely with the Pacific region on an issue where we share a common concern because as you know and as we discussed today Australia too is vulnerable to climate change as has been demonstrated by Professor Garnaut's review and many other reports.
So this document is to guide our engagement with the region. It sets out a range of priorities that will guide our engagement with the region. It's consistent with the approach we said we would take to the last election, and of course the first amongst these priorities is an effective global solution to climate change.
We need an effective agreement at Copenhagen, that means we have to take action at home and it also means that the voice of these island nations who have such a compelling story to tell about their experience and the risks that they face in the future must also be heard in the international discussions. Thank you.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much, Minister and thank you colleagues. And questions, over to you.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister what have you learnt [inaudible]
PM RUDD: One cold hard statistic, and not from the report itself but from the presentations we had this morning, and that was the figure I referred to before - 50 per cent of the populations of the Pacific Island nations lying within 1.5 kilometres of the coast. I'd heard before about the challenges of Kiribati, the challenges of Tuvalu, the challenges of the low lying atolls, but to also hear, as the Prime Minister of Vanuatu has just indicated, but also from the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea this morning, reflections on communities now being inundated, and then to reflect on the physical dimensions of that - half the populations of these island countries lying in the pathway of coastal inundation.
That's in terms of what I've learnt. In terms of the course of action it underlines afresh, I believe, Australia's responsibility to argue as clearly and as cogently and as effectively as we can the interests of our friends and neighbours in the councils in the world on which we are active on climate change.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM RUDD: We believe that on the adaptation measures - well first thing, the key challenge now on the road to Copenhagen is to come up with a series of actions by governments in developed and developing countries to make a difference on climate change itself. That's the first thing. Rather than just saying it's all too hard, it's all too difficult.
That's the first responsibility, and when you look at the immediate impacts of inundation and the related problems I referred to before, it underlines the need to act.
Secondly there are other adaptation mechanisms as well. For example we heard a presentation this morning from one of our regional colleagues about the building of sea walls. This is an expensive business and in certain communities where there are larger populations that is already underway.
Thirdly the security of peoples is of course a wider concern for the entire international community, and we are members of the international community. Each of these needs to be considered in its sequence. Our first responsibility is to get a good outcome in Copenhagen because those in the front line of the impact of climate change are within our own region, and we have a responsibility to act.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister do you believe there should be a [inaudible]
PM RUDD: I would take advice on such questions. On the direct impact on peoples it's quite plain that, based on conversations I had with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, villages have had to be relocated. Now they've been relocated inland. Where do you stop and start in terms of internal refugees within countries whose normal livelihoods have been the same for generations and in many cases centuries, are now disrupted and required to move internally within a country. As you know internally displaced persons is a category in international humanitarian law. But more broadly than that I think we'd take advice.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM RUDD: I listened carefully to what the Premier of Niue had to say this morning. And, as I said in my remarks also, I believe he's been an excellent chairman of the Pacific Island Forum, and I draw your attention carefully to the content of his remarks.
Secondly what the Premier of Niue has said to us on many occasions now is that nobody in the region can afford to turn a blind eye to what is going on in Fiji - I'll come back to the immediacy of your question in one minute - underlined most recently by these extraordinary arrests of religious leaders in Fiji.
The fact that a leader of the Methodist church can have their door banged on in the middle of the night and be taken off by the authorities, whacked into jail, then charged with some trumped up offence under the emergency regulations put out by the military Government of Fiji is profoundly disturbing.
Across the island countries of the Pacific where religious communities, including the Methodist church who have been most recently affected by these events in Fiji, I believe this is leading to profound, even more profound disquiet.
I believe what the Premier of Niue was referring to was that the peoples of Fiji themselves ought also to be seized of the challenges which their democracy now faces as well as the challenges which the region at large faces.
We advocate and strongly advocate a peaceful solution to the challenges which lie ahead.
(inaudible) a peaceful solution in which the people's of the region and the people's of Fiji must equally engage.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM RUDD: I would emphasise in absolutely clear-cut terms the importance of a peaceful solution to the problems which exist within Fiji. They are real problems. I've described their most recent manifestation. And that is one of the reasons why the countries of the Pacific Island Forum met in Papua New Guinea earlier this year and agreed on a mechanism for the suspension of Fiji from the councils of the forum. Sorry, mate?
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM RUDD: I think I've already made my views clear about what this matter raises in terms of fundamental questions about Mr Turnbull's judgement, his integrity and his character, and his fitness to hold office. And I don't propose to add to those remarks here today. I now believe it's properly a matter for the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: [indistinct] 45 per cent cuts in global greenhouse gas emissions. That's a much stronger target than Australia and New Zealand are proposing. I wonder how you reconcile [indistinct]?
PM RUDD: Obviously our friends and partners in the region want maximum action across the world. If you stand back from all of this, what is necessary - and this was the subject for the discussion in the Major Economies Forum in L'Aquila early last month. Action by developed countries, action by developing countries, which together would make a difference for the future, and remember, the targets which was discussed in L'Aquila about two degrees centigrade.
Obviously we're going to need action from both. Obviously the small island states who are those who I just described before as the most vulnerable, want maximum action from all parties, and that's just been the subject of discussion we've had in there today.
We, in our calls to the international community as the Government of Australia, will be taking that strong message when we go to the next round of discussions at the Pittsburgh Summit, the G-20, the special session in the United Nations on the climate change convention, which is being convened by the Secretary-General of the UN at the same time, through to Copenhagen itself.
The minister also has, I think, three preparatory committee meetings to attend between now and Copenhagen (inaudible) next week? Very soon. And another couple, I think in Bangkok and Barcelona between now and the end of the year.
The message we take to all of them is maximum action. You've got to achieve a consensus in this business because you need a globally agreed set of outcomes.
But the good thing about having Mr Yvo de Boer here this morning, as Secretary of the UN Framework Convention Committee, is for him also to be able to brief firsthand colleagues about what the current state of play is within negotiations. It's fair to say it's tough and it's hard. But it's a challenge for all of our respective political wills. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the process [indistinct] relocation of large numbers of people, as you've indicated. Some can be relocated inside their own countries. I'd like to know whether the ministers here feel that [inaudible]
PM RUDD: As I said before, and my colleagues will answer in their own terms, but as I said before let's be blunt about the order of priorities here. One, a set of actions agreed to by the international community which minimise the impact of coastal inundation as we minimise the impact of climate change by taking the mitigation measures which are outlined in the possible contents of a new framework agreement, and the various national actions which have been undertaken including here in Australia.
Second thing, of course, is the other, shall I say, physical mitigation measures of the type we discussed, including internal relocation of what would then become environmentally internally displaced persons. And, thirdly, wider international responsibilities.
I believe we need to go through each of those stages, as it appropriate. Can I just turn to my colleagues if they wish to comment further on it.
PM NATAPEI: In Vanuatu's case, we have 83 islands. The islands are not low so we won't be looking to Australia to relocate our people. We would simply need assistance through our national adaptation program to relocate people within our country.
LAMBOURNE: For Kiribati, we are in a different situation because, as I've explained before, the geography of our islands may mean - based on that IPCC assessment report, may mean a relocation of our people. This is the worse case scenario under the projections of this report.
This is an option too that the government of my country is looking into. And it has come up with a solution  -  well, a strategy, not a solution. We hope it will be a solution in the end. But it is a strategy and an option - long-term option that it is providing to the people. And that is - we call it the merit based relocation.
And just to say at the outset that my country and I guess a lot of people in our region, we are very proud people. And certainly my government does not want the people of Kiribati to be relocated as refugees. We do not accept that. We do not want to be labelled as refugees.
But what the government has put in place is a strategy to up-skill the people and up-skill them so that they have international standard of qualifications that they can use overseas and maybe fill labour gaps that exist in countries. Maybe if Australia needs labour that we can provide, then that's the strategy that we're looking for, and we're looking at, not merely relocation as refugees.
PM RUDD: I think also - I'll come to you again, Tim in a sec. - to draw your attention to page 12 of the report that is being released at the moment, which deals with climate change and displacement.
And that's, there is no point pushes this to one side and pretending it's not a problem; it is, and needs to be dealt with. And various broad frameworks for action are canvassed there but it's a challenge for us all, and I note carefully what my colleagues have just had to say.
Also in terms of our national action, bear this in mind: it's not just reaching global targets, it's not just reaching global mechanisms and technology platforms to make all that possible, it's national actions as well, including the proper enforcement of emissions trading schemes within individual national governments.
And in Australia we know full well it's eight days before we've got to vote in the Senate on climate change and on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. That is one of the building blocks nationally, when added to other actions around the world, which make a difference. And that's why there are not just compelling national reasons in terms of business certainty in Australia but international reasons why we need to get on with the business of getting that thing through the Senate. Eight days' time the vote occurs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should military personnel or civilian personnel guard Australia's military bases?
PM RUDD: Tim, the first and foremost responsibility of government is national security. Secondly, within that, to make sure our defence forces themselves are also properly protected.
Yesterday I convened a meeting of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet following events which unfolded yesterday morning in Melbourne. I asked two questions of the Defence leadership, both civilian and military. One was the adequacy of our current protection of facilities now. And the second was whether, in the light of recent events, they needed to be further reviewed.
On the first of those questions, Defence's advice is that their current arrangements, in their judgement, are adequate but they will now undertake an immediate and comprehensive review of security needs for our Defence bases including the appropriateness or otherwise of continuing to use civilian contractors. That I think, is the responsible course of action, given the events of the last 24 hours. Last question.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM RUDD: Normally, in handling the matters of proscription or prospective proscription of an organisation, we deal with these matters confidentially within Government based on the expert advice available to us. And it is far better that we do not engage in extensive public commentary on that process while it is underway.
You would have heard what I have said in my remarks yesterday about the importance of the fact that for quite some months our security agencies have been engaged in a particular operation. And we have been very mindful of the need to preserve the integrity of that particular operation.
On the question of the proscription or otherwise of a particular organisation, including the one to which you just refer, we believe that has to be handled confidentially within the proper processes of government. And, having said that, folks, I've got to get back to chair the conference.


EASTLEY: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
EASTLEY: Is the security of our military bases at a level that you're comfortable with?
PM: Yesterday afternoon I convened a meeting of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet, and went to a number of these matters, one of which was the adequacy of current security arrangements at our military installations, and the advice I received was that, from the Chief of Defence Force, was that, based on our current knowledge that the security arrangements are adequate.
On top of that, however, I've requested that the CDF and the Defence Department undertake an immediate and comprehensive review of adequacy, given these new developments.
EASTLEY: But you're quite happy that they're manned, in some cases, by unarmed civilians?
PM: What I want to be confident of is that the security at each installation is right, and that it's calibrated to our security needs. Obviously, one of the terms of reference for this investigation will be the continued suitability of those sorts of security arrangements at our bases involving private security contractors, and I await the advice of the Defence professionals on this.
EASTLEY: Links have been drawn between the men arrested yesterday and the Al-Shabaab group, deemed to be a terrorist organisation by the US. Would you be tempted to move against it here and proscribe that organisation?
PM: This has been the subject of some internal deliberation within the Government between the Attorney-General's Department and the Department of Foreign Affairs for a period of time. We are very mindful, however, in our internal deliberations on that in recent times not to have in any way compromised the investigation and the operation which you saw unfold yesterday in Melbourne.
Therefore, we'll work our way through this, systematically. Various governments around the world have acted in terms of proscription of this particular organisation. We have also, however, been mindful of an operation which was ongoing, and therefore the need to proceed with appropriate caution.
EASTLEY: So you're saying you didn't want to tip these people off and proscribe it early?
PM: No, I'm saying exactly what I just said before, which is that we proceeded with due caution, and these matters are being worked through the Government. The key thing, and I congratulate our security and intelligence agencies for what they have done on this matter, which is in a very large-scale operation over many, many months worked diligently and effectively in terms of what we saw unfold yesterday. I say again today on this program what I said yesterday  -  we should also be very mindful in our discussion of these matters to maintain a presumption of innocence, and that of course, lies properly within the province of the courts.
EASTLEY: Setting that aside, though, would you be tempted to move against Al-Shabaab here and proscribe it?
PM: We base all of our decisions on proscription of any terrorist organisation on the advice of the security and intelligence agencies, and mindful also of any, as I said, operational matter which might be ongoing at the time. Therefore, we will take that advice and act on it appropriately. As I said, various governments around the world have acted in this respect. We will make our own decision in due season and we will of course do so based on the expert advice of the agencies.
EASTLEY: We've now, of course, heard from the senior public servant Godwin Grech, who's admitted he forged the document used by the Opposition Leader, Mr Turnbull. Should that be the end of the matter now and the Government can just get on with governing and writing policy?
PM: Well, I was asked about these matters yesterday here in Cairns, and because, together with national security ministers of the Government I've been completely pre-occupied with the events of the last 24 hours or so, and that is as it should be. I'm here in Cairns chairing the Pacific Islands Forum, which brings together all the island states of our region. That is my priority, given our extensive security engagement in countries like the Solomon Islands, and the other matters that we are engaged on in the economy and social policy and hospitals reform will continue.
I think what this other matter to which you've just referred goes to, however, is this  -  it does demonstrate, I think, very clearly to the Australian people that in Mr Turnbull's case he doesn't have the judgement, the integrity, or the character to continue to occupy the position of Leader of the Opposition.
EASTLEY: But isn't there a part of you that has some sympathy for Malcolm Turnbull? Why wouldn't, you know, someone like him not believe a very senior public servant?
PM: I believe what's been on display here is characteristics of impulsiveness, of rashness, and for someone who's trained as a lawyer, why no due diligence was applied to this matter all. None whatsoever.
Furthermore, on the broader question of character, I think Mr Turnbull, as I understand it, was asked a number of times yesterday whether he had any regrets in relation to this matter. I don't see any evidence that he has accepted any responsibility for what's occurred.
This goes back to a question of character, and that is whether he has the character to continue to occupy this most senior position in Australia, and I believe that his poor judgement, his appalling judgement, and I believe the integrity with which he has managed this matter casts a fundamental shadow over him continuing in that position.
EASTLEY: So I take it it's not the end of the matter as far as you're concerned?
PM: Well, from Mr Turnbull's point of view, here we are, one and a half months since the forged email exploded in Mr Turnbull's face, and one and a half months later we still do not have a comprehensive record of all contact, of all correspondence, of all contents of conversations between Mr Grech on the one hand and Mr Turnbull and his Chief of Staff, Mr Kenny-
EASTLEY: -Can the Privileges Committee get to the bottom of that?
PM: And Senator Abetz on this matter, and it's high time that that occurred.
I think the other thing to emerge is as follows: is that we now have confirmed from Mr Turnbull's statement yesterday, and, as I'm advised, Senator Abetz today, that in fact the questions which were put in an independent Senate inquiry on the OzCar matter were in large part orchestrated, pre-arranged. Therefore, when the Australian public look at independent inquiries of the Senate, in fact we had one which was in large part, as far as Opposition senators were concerned, one which was orchestrated and pre-arranged in terms of detailed questions and question sheets between the Opposition on the one hand and Mr Grech on the other. And furthermore, all that was undertaken on the basis of a forged email, into which the Opposition applied no due diligence.
EASTLEY: So with that in mind, Prime Minister, will you pursue charges against either Mr Grech or in fact, against Mr Turnbull or against some other member of the Coalition?
PM: The Government has no alternative but to next week in parliament in the Senate move a motion for this matter to be referred to the Senate Privileges Committee so that all relevant facts can be established once and for all on this matter. I would think that your listeners, when they are observing, and all journalists when they are observing, the Senate inquiries into this matter during the month of June would've been of the view that this was a fair dinkum, up front inquiry. Instead what we find out, confirmed by Mr Turnbull himself, and now Senator Abetz, is that so many of these questions were in fact completely orchestrated.
EASTLEY: What's your understanding of what the Privileges Committee might advise?
PM: That, of course, is a matter for the Privileges Committee, assuming that the Opposition, who have the numbers in the Senate, allow this matter to be referred to the Privileges Committee in the first place. You see, what's at stake here is the integrity of the operation of the parliament, the integrity of the operation of the Senate, and the integrity of the Leader of the Opposition.
EASTLEY: So you'd like to see charges against him and Mr Grech?
PM: I believe that what the Australian people would like through this sorry, sordid affair is for all facts, finally, to be put on the table  -  not in bits, not in pieces. As I said, this goes back to a fundamental question of character and of judgement and integrity, and in Mr Turnbull's case, they have been found to be sorely lacking.
EASTLEY: If it doesn't go to the Privileges Committee, is that the end of the matter, or where would you like it to go after that?
PM: The responsibility at this stage does lie fairly and squarely in Mr Turnbull's court. What was remarkable about his statement yesterday, I understand he was asked several times whether he had any regrets in relation to this matter, and not the beginnings of the recognition that he may bear some responsibility for the way in which this matter was handled, so to go to your question, Mr Turnbull's got a responsibility to front the parliament and to explain, comprehensively, from beginning to end, not just partially, but totally, his entire engagement, and Mr Kenny's engagement and Senator Abetz' engagement with Mr Grech  -  what was said, what was asked, what was agreed to be done, etcetera, because I think, given the enormous controversy which this matter has generated in the Australian public, it's important that all facts are on the table, and the Senate, of course, has a separate possibility which lies before it, subject to the decision of the Senate itself, on a motion to refer the matter to the Senate Privileges Committee.
EASTLEY: Just briefly, Prime Minister, and of Godwin Grech? What of him?
PM: Well, of course, Mr Grech has made certain statements. My concern from the beginning when this matter unfolded has been, and certainly in my discussions with senior public servants in the Prime Minister's Department and the Treasury Department is to do everything possible to ensure Mr Grech is being properly looked after, that his physical wellbeing is being attended to and those matters.
As for anything else, that lies within the province of the properly constituted authorities, and I'll not comment further on that.
EASTLEY: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, thanks for joining us this morning on AM.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program
(ends)


 E &amp; OE  -  PROOF ONLY  
If I could just echo those remarks about the wonderful young people from Cairns State High. Thank you for your song and your celebration with us today. 
And also, earlier, of course, that remarkable performance from Seaman Dan. Anyone who could begin his singing career at 70  and be rolling on the way in which he is, I presume, nearing 80, as my colleague said to me quietly over my shoulder as he was singing, “there is hope yet for us all.” 
Post-politics, new career options present themselves to us all. 
Forum Leaders; other delegation leaders; ministerial colleagues; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
Welcome to Australia. Welcome to Queensland.  Welcome to the great city of Cairns and welcome to this, the 40th Pacific Islands Forum Leaders meeting. 
I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history. For us in Australia, that is a matter of great pride - the fact that we now share this wonderful continent with our Indigenous Australians, our Indigenous brothers and sisters, who take us back to the dreamtime. 
I also acknowledge the traditional owners of this land, the Gimuy Walubara Yidinji People  -  and thank you for that Welcome to Country from Seith Fourmile. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is 15 years since Australia last hosted the Pacific Islands Forum. 
So it is with great personal pleasure, that on behalf of the Australian Government, that I am here this morning as the incoming chair of this year's Forum. 
It is entirely appropriate that we have this meeting here in Cairns  -  a great Australian city, a city that has very close links with the Pacific island nations; personal ties, business ties, cultural ties. 
This is a great city, it is a city with a great civic culture, and I am sure that the people of Cairns will continue to make you feel welcome you here during your time with us in Australia. They are renowned as people of great hospitality and friendship, and I know already that has been extended to my Forum colleagues so far. 
I would also like to thank the outgoing Chair of the Forum, Premier Toke Talagi of Niue, for his outstanding work as Chair of the Forum over the last and challenging 12 months. 
I would acknowledge my friendship with him, and the strong leadership he has shown for the people of Niue, but most critically at this difficult time, leadership also for the Pacific Island Forum. Toke  -  congratulations for your leadership on behalf of us all. 
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Neroni Slade for his comments, and for the excellent work he has done in preparation for this Forum, and for the excellent work of the Secretariat which he leads. 
And I would also most particularly like to thank you, the leaders of the Pacific, in advancing the work that we have done so far, and the work which still lies ahead of us in the days ahead, and in the years ahead. 
In 2008, not long after the Government which I lead was elected, I paid a visit to the Grand Chief in Port Moresby and to the Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands in Honiara. It was one of my first visits abroad as Prime Minister. 
And through those visits I wished to underline one core fact  -  that we, the Australian Government, wished to reinvigorate our engagement with our Pacific Island neighbours. 
At that time I issued the Port Moresby Declaration that set out our principles, Australian principles, that would guide our partnerships with the Pacific Island Nations  -  principles of mutual respect, principles of mutual responsibility. 
And we have sought to put those principles into action by setting up our Pacific Partnerships for Development  -  with the Millennium Development Goals at their core. 
We have also put those principles into action through a renewed focus on our engagement with the Pacific Islands Forum. 
This Forum has a long and successful history of bringing the nations and leaders of our region together to chart a shared course through our common challenges. 
It embodies the values and principles to which we all hold true  -  values of democracy, of mutual respect, and a desire to build a better future for all our nations and all our peoples, whether those nations be large or small. 
It embodies, as the Secretary-General said before, the ‘Pacific Way'. 
One of the wonderful things about our region is that we bring together so many countries, large and small. It is a great thing that in fact we have just been led as a Forum by the Premier of Niue, whose population is barely a thousand or two, and across our family of nations within this Forum, countries such as Niue, Nauru, Tuvalu, Palau, the Cook Islands, all countries, all peoples, with populations less than 20,000 people, but for us as friends and partners within the region, their aspirations and needs are as important as any other nation and any other country within our region. 
It does, I believe, reflect the nature of the Pacific Way that we as brothers and sisters within this region take deeply and take personally and take collectively the needs of us all. 
This year our Forum is being held at a time of major global economic crisis. 
Governments in the region and around the world, face an enormous challenge in responding to this crisis. Like all nations, the countries of the Pacific are feeling the impact of a crisis not of their own making. 
And until global economic confidence is fully restored, and until credit flows and financial markets return to normal, our countries will continue to face great economic challenges. 
I believe, however, that there are focused, practical actions that countries can take to reduce the impacts of this crisis. 
And I believe that this meeting of our Forum can set the course that we can take. 
We can agree to take specific actions. 
We can ensure that we deliver sustainable budgets. 
We can ensure that we maintain and improve the delivery of the core services, including health, education and vital infrastructure. 
We must seize the opportunity presented by this years' Forum to build a consensus on how best to respond to the crisis within this, our region.
Donors and recipients must to commit to measurable actions to strengthen development coordination and build our regions' economic resilience for the long term. 
More effective coordination mechanisms between Pacific island countries on the one hand and development partners on the other will help the region achieve real outcomes, including progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. 
We need to do this to make a real difference to the lives of the 2.7 million people living across the Pacific who still, today, live in poverty. 
That is a collective challenge for us all. It is a collective challenge which should focus our every program of action. 
Of course, alongside the global economic crisis, governments are responding to climate change  -  the great challenge of our time, the great challenge also for the island countries of the Pacific. 
We must lift our efforts to deliver the outcome the world and our region needs in Copenhagen. 
The nations of the Pacific are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and Pacific island nations are among the least responsible for the causes of climate change. 
But they will bear the brunt of its impact the most. We must all act together to meet this challenge. 
We need concerted action  -  domestically, internationally, locally, globally  -  to meet the challenge of climate change. 
Australia is already working with partners in this room to find ways we can adapt to the changes climate change will bring. 
We are working internationally and domestically to mitigate the effects of climate change. 
And we are playing our part in international gatherings  -  including by representing the interests of the Pacific island nations  -  in other international fora where Australia participates, including the G20. 
With only 123 days to go until Copenhagen, the world has a window of opportunity to deal with mitigation and adaptation and to deliver increased financial measures in order to act on climate change. 
We must use every opportunity to recommit ourselves as a region and as an international community to deliver a strong outcome in Copenhagen, necessary for the planet, necessary for the Pacific, necessary for all our peoples. 
I am particularly pleased today that, Mr Yvo de Boer, Executive Director of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change has been able to join us for our discussions as our special guest. 
Climate change is no respecter of persons. Climate change effects all countries, all peoples, from the strongest to the most vulnerable. We therefore, in Australia, take seriously our responsibility to argue forcefully in the forums of the world the interests of our region including some of the most vulnerable states in the world, dealing with the challenge of climate change. 
Climate change  -  a challenge for Australia, a challenge for the Pacific, a challenge for the world, a challenge which requires strong political leadership to bring about real change for future generations. 
Of course we also have other important policy questions ahead of us this week. 
The Forum has made its view clear on the situation in Fiji, and our dismay and the difficulties now confronting the people of Fiji. The fact that in recent times that we have seen the arrest of ministers of religion in Fiji is not the Pacific Way. The people of Fiji deserve better, and we look forward to their return to the family of democracies across our region. 
This week we will need to reflect on how we can urge Fiji to return promptly to democracy, particularly in the light of the deterioration which has occurred in recent months. 
Our trade ministers have recommended we begin negotiations on a new trade and economic agreement  -  something Australia strongly supports as good for the future of the region. 
This agreement will be a critical element of our work to drive closer economic integration and advance progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. 
We also have to consider the challenge of protecting our fisheries. 
Australia is committed to assisting Pacific island countries protect their fisheries  -  a vital resource for the region  -  combating transnational crime and strengthening their maritime security. 
As part of Australia's ongoing commitment, Australia will provide continued support for the Pacific Patrol Boat Program and in consultation with our Pacific partners work towards a new maritime security program to follow it. 
We should also commend the achievements of the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands, RAMSI, and I strongly endorse the remarks earlier by the Premier of Niue. We should welcome RAMSI's close partnership with the Solomon Islands Government, led by Prime Minister Sikua. 
And I acknowledge also again publicly the contribution of all regional governments in ensuring that this mission in the Solomons has been a success, while recognising the challenges which continue to lie ahead. 
My fellow leaders, other participants - you are indeed welcome guests in Australia.
You are welcome guests here in Cairns, and your wives and partners are welcome guests as well. And I'm sure Therese will be spending some time with you in the days ahead - and darling, it's nice to have you back from Kilimanjaro  -  in one piece. 
I look forward to working with my colleagues in the days ahead, as we work towards action on the critical challenges which confront us as a region. Action on economic cooperation, action on the better coordination of development assistance into the region, action on the critical challenge of climate change, and action on other practical areas of cooperation about which we spoke over dinner last night, particularly energy security and the future of renewable energy within our region as well. 
These are the practical matters which actually bind us together as a region, together with the underpinning values which we continue to hold dear. 
Distinguished guests, my fellow Forum leaders, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Cairns. It is great to be here with you in this great city of Australia's north, and with those remarks let us get on with the business of this, the 40th meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum. 
I thank you. 


 HOST: Prime Minister, Good morning.  PM: Morning John.  HOST: Right across Australia, of course, concern about the condition of your wife Therese. What's the latest?  PM: Well, I'm in Cairns at the moment and Therese was at dinner with me last night for the Pacific Island Forum. She just felt as if she had the symptoms of some sort of stomach virus and so we went off to hospital and she was admitted over night. She's has the usual battery of tests and she's being well treated by the good medical and nursing staff at Cairns Base Hospital.  HOST: So was she admitted to the cardiac unit?  PM: She was just admitted to the hospital. I think she just went to accident and emergency.  HOST: You're sounding very relaxed about it so that's obviously a good sign for business.  PM: Well, I think, John, you'd all appreciate something called patient confidentiality and patient privacy, so she's in fine spirits. I was with her a lot of the night and I saw her very early this morning and you may know that she's just climbed Mount Kilimanjaro, so she's probably made of stronger stuff than you or I, mate.  HOST: Sure. Sure. Kevin Rudd let's talk about the hospital situation. You would have picked up perhaps in the Cairns Post today another terrifying situation whereby its bursting at the seams.  Now we all acknowledge it is a State Government issue largely, but there's also a lot of interest in your position at the moment on the future on hospitals around Australia.  I had a another caller yesterday. Once again a terrifying detail. His, wife who was in the vulnerable category trying to get into the hospital, she was admitted, sorry, she arrived at 6:45pm. She left at around 1:30am after having been, according to her husband, abused by staff for having taken up space.  Her point was she was very, very ill. She was in the vulnerable group and she'd taken advice from a paramedic, the ambulance officer to actually presented at the hospital. She was told we have no room, we have no swabs, it's very expensive for the State Government, take a disprin and go home. She was very, very ill.  Talk to us about this. What can the people in North Queensland to about this dreadful situation?  PM: Let me just go to what we are seeking to do any why I'm engaged in public consultations with the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon today in Cairns base hospital.  This will be only the fourth of our public hospital consultations around the country - the first at Royal North Shore in Sydney, the second at Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide, the third at Townsville, and the fourths is here.  Now, the reason we're doing this is because right across Australia we have 750 hospitals and if you stand back from it all, and Cairns is an important one in the midst of all that, if you stand back from it all, our whole system, health and hospitals, is under stress.  Why? We've got a growing population, we've secondly got an ageing population ,we also have an explosion of chronic diseases, and on top of that the spiralling cost of individual medical treatments. So theses are challenges with which our medical system and that of many other advanced economies are now wrestling.  The key challenge is what are we going to do about it? At present, what we have done is commission, just after we came into office, a National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission report, led by an expert, Dr Christine Bennett, and a range of medical specialists and others, including from the nursing profession, nationwide.  They've consulted far and wide across the country. They've delivered a report of some 123 recommendations which your listeners should go to, it's up on the website  -  www.yourhealth.gov.au - and it goes across the whole spectrum:       * Who should have the responsibility for preventative health care?
      * Who should have responsibility for primary health care? That is, our GP and GP-related services.
      * Who should have responsibility for ensuring that our accident and emergencies are properly funded and properly staffed?
      * Similarly, with our elective surgery waiting lists, who's responsible for that and who can we bring it down?
      * Acute hospital beds, sub-acute services once surgery has occurred, together with aged care beds, dental health and mental health.
   It deals with the whole spectrum and the reason we need to deal with this as a whole spectrum is this represents a huge cost to the country every year and if we're going to fundamentally reform it, which we need to for the future for the reasons I outlined before, we've got to be very clear cut about how it's going to be done because we want to make sure we've got the best and most affordable health and hospital system for the future, both for the taxpayer and for the individual patient, and we need to sort out once and for all the best lines of responsibility between the Commonwealth and the State Governments.  That's what this is about and that's why I'm taking those recommendations to Cairns Base Hospital later today for a seminar with all the relevant representatives of the health sector here in this region - to hear their response to that report's recommendations.  HOST: By the way there is a report there in the Post today and a nurse called Sally, for the sake of this story, she says she's hoping you get the message from the nurses at the coalface.  PM: Well, I actually spoke to a few of nurses at the coalface overnight, because I was at the coalface with Therese, but on top that what we've done is we've invite all the nursing directors from throughout the region and the Cairns Base Hospital and, as I understand it, the overwhelming majority of Cairns Base unit mangers, and also the Queensland nurses union local organisers have been invited as attending.  We and to hear from nurses, we want to her from doctors, we want to hear from other health professionals, because a series of recommendations delivered by a National Reform Commission, which has taken into account the total needs of our national system, some 750 hospitals across the country, we want to road test those against major regional hospitals like this one. That's why we're here, that's why the Health Minster and I will be spending time, listening, primarily, to the response from those on the ground, as we did in Townsville several days ago and done in Adelaide and Sydney last week.  HOST: Prime Minister, just quickly to the jobless figures yesterday. Obviously it's been embraced by the nation as good news, although a very measured response from Julia Gillard. Our figure here in North Queensland, sadly though, is double that. We've had a response from the Federal Member talking about the so-called jobs tsar. Nobody knows how he's going to be creating jobs at all. What more can be done for our towering jobless figure here in Far North Queensland?  PM: John, you're right. Unemployment is too high up here and our job as a Federal Government is to do everything we can to bring that down, given that we're all being hit by the global economic recession.  Here's one thing that we have done, and then let me talk about one thing that we can do further. In terms of what we have done, what we have injected into this region through our national economic stimulus strategy is some $460 million - and that's not just through cash payments to pensioners, carers and veterans and to families, but that's been important to keep the retail and part of the tourism sector going. It's also the investment now being unfolded through this massive investment in the local schools.  We have some $100 million rolling out to our primary and secondary schools in this region. We've got 61 new building projects spread across 41 schools worth $79 million. Seven new language and science centres, and I'll go to Trinity Base High School yesterday looking at their proposed new language centre.  These are all creating jobs for local tradesmen and local small business people as well. It still doesn't solve the problem of the global economic crisis, but our job is to cushion it and our strategy is to support jobs and apprenticeships and small business today by investing in the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow. So that's what we're doing now, and if we weren't doing that, and injecting that, nearly half a billion dollars into this regional economy to counter the impact of the global economic recession, unemployment, regrettably, would be even higher.  Secondly tourism is something which, obviously, locals have spoken to me about since I've been here with the Pacific Island Forum. Tourism is a huge generator of employment up here and it's been whacked and hit by the impact of the global recession, in terms of what is turning into an overall decrease in international visitor numbers to Australia, down 4 percent this year, to the US they're down 10 percent, the UK 12 precent, Japan 27percent, but we've still got to lift our game.  We've already put in a $4 million recovery package, with $2 million for marketing measures, managed by Tourism Australia, and a further $2 million to assist the tourism industry more generally. Also, we have $8.3 million in grants that will be announced in October. This is across the national industry, but I am looking at ways in which we can further help the tourism industry here by way of further promotion in Far North Queensland as well. But you're right, unemployment is too high. We need to be as effective as we can supporting all those good people out there trying to turn the wheels of the local economy up here through the tourism sector.  HOST: Let me throw an idea at you. This came up in one of the national papers this week, the suggestion we could do some dual-marketing with New Zealand. They're celebrating 10 years of, well, a deliriously successful campaign. It's been pointed out on the program this week the synergies that would exist for somebody choosing to have a holiday from, for example, from Germany or anywhere in Europe coming firstly to a tropical experience here in Cairns and then moving on to that other magnificent experience in New Zealand nearby.  Is there a chance you could take the issue up with John Key? He's also, of course, the Tourism Minister of New Zealand, and perhaps we could look at some, a dual-marketing campaign.  PM: Yeah John, I've got a completely open mind on creative ideas for the future. We shouldn't be sort of locked into traditional ways of doing things, so we'll take that on board and throw it to the tourism experts and see what we can come up with.  By the way, you mentioned New Zealand - here's a fact for you. Visitation in the month of June showed that declines in Japanese visitation to New Zealand were 50 percent worse than they were to Australia, some 250 percent worse for Korean visitors to New Zealand vis-à-vis Australia, and for Chinese visitors also appreciably worse. So, look, everyone is doing it tough through this global economic recession. It's awful and it's affecting all economies everywhere in terms of global tourism numbers, so that means we've just got to re-double our efforts to provide a greater boost for effective tourism promotion for this wonderful region, which I've got to say, every time I come here I love even more and more and this is a stunning part of the world.  HOST: Well come back more and more. Just before you go, I know you're in a hell of a hurry.  PM: You know, John, how many times I've been here over the years? 20, 30, I've been here a lot so I actually know this place well, I love it well, I am not an occasional visitor.  HOST: Well, fundamentally you're a Queenslander and we're all happy about that. One final point, an election, we're into the second half of this term. Who would you rather contest the next election against  -  Turnbull, Hockey or Andrew Robb?  PM: You know something John? That's entirely a matter for the Liberal Party and I've already indicated what I believe the Liberal Party should do in response to their current leader, who's displayed an appalling lack of judgement on matters most recently and I think matters in general. Look, the key thing for the Government, though, is to get on with the business of governing. This is a massive, the problems you just pointed out to me before and the legitimate questions you raised in this interview - the state of the economy and the impact on local jobs, what are we going to do long term to try and deal with these great challenges facing our health and hospital system, quite apart from what we need to invest in education - this is what the Government spends 99% of its time on. It's what I spend 99% of my time on.  I think people are getting sick and tired of carping, negative politics all the time. They just want practical answers to the problems which we face in fantastic regions like this.  HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for your time this morning.  PM: And thank you to your listeners for their hospitality shown to the good people from the Pacific Islands Forum. We've brought hundreds of people to town for this forum. I think it's been a significant injection into the local economy, but my playback from all the heads of Government is how much they've appreciated the hospitality they're received from the people of Cairns.  HOST: Kevin Rudd, many thanks.


PM:Thank you ladies and gentlemen of the press. Can I begin by acknowledging the recent natural disaster which is - or tragic disaster which has just occurred in Tonga overnight, an inter-island ferry has sunk and there has been considerable loss of life.
And, as leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum, we have already extended to our colleague, the Prime Minister of Tonga, our deep condolences to the people of Tonga and of course our thoughts and our prayers are with the families of those who have been affected by this great tragedy.
Today in Cairns we have concluded the 40th Pacific Islands Forum; a 40th Pacific Islands Forum whose focus has been climate change and our response to the global economic recession.
On climate change, the leaders have issued a Pacific Leaders' call to action on climate change on the road to Copenhagen. On the response to the global economic crisis, we have issued a Cairns compact on strengthening development coordination in the Pacific.
Let me first go to climate change. On climate change, we - the leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum - have put out a call to action to other global leaders urgently seeking their support to deal with the threat of climate change.
For so many of my colleagues here on the platform before you, this is not just a matter of importance, it is not just a matter of urgency. For many of them, it is a matter of national survival.
The very viability of certain of the small island states is at stake on the question of how we deal or choose not to deal with climate change.
As I said to some of you yesterday here, it is a stark and sobering statistic that 50 per cent of the populations of the Pacific Island countries lie within 1.5 kilometres of their coastlines. Therefore the impact of coastal inundation is huge, potentially huge, if climate change is allowed to continue unabated.
With just 122 days to go between now and Copenhagen, we the leaders of the Pacific Island countries, and leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum, call on world leaders to increase their level of ambition and to seek an agreement that puts the world on a path to limit global average temperature increases to two degrees Celsius or less.
We call on all countries to agree to reduce global emissions by at least 50 per cent below 1990 levels by 2050. We call on all countries to agree that global emissions peak no later than 2020.
And we call also on developed economies to put in place domestic policies and legislation now to achieve emissions reductions targets.
The conversations we have had in these last few days have reinforced the absolute urgency of acting on climate change. We cannot simply afford to wait.
As we move towards Copenhagen in December, it is also critical that we continue to put together the necessary international support to get a first-class outcome in Copenhagen. That will be difficult to achieve. That requires a renewal of all of our political mandates.
But it becomes particularly important for the most vulnerable developing countries. And, again, I emphasise many of those most vulnerable developing countries, the small island countries stand here on this platform with me today.
On our response to the global economic recession and the global economic crisis, what we have done today is agree on a Cairns Compact on development coordination.
It is a sobering fact that across our region some 2.7 million people live in poverty. It is also a sobering fact that against the measure of the Millennium Development Goals, in many of the countries of the Pacific Islands Forum that a number of those Millennium Development Goals are not showing improvement but in fact showing regression. We must therefore act to counter this.
What we have done through this Cairns Compact on development coordination today is call on all donor countries to coordinate their efforts. There is a challenge for many of the small island countries here assembled today in dealing with a multiplicity of incoming donor representations, donor countries, donor organisations. It becomes a physical problem of coordination on the ground.
We therefore, through the Forum, must lift our efforts to new heights to effectively coordinate the inflow of development assistance from other countries.
The second aspect of the Cairns compact on development coordination is to call on donors and recipients to work together on the basis of agreed national plans of economic development to ensure that we are focusing on the key challenges for each nation. And in so many countries, independently, and so many countries already in partnership with Australia through our Pacific development plans, these national plans are being directed in towards the measures outlined in the Millennium Development Goals, and the timelines within which they need to be achieved.
A third matter that we touched on today was Fiji. The Pacific Islands Forum reaffirmed its decision to suspend Fiji's military regime from the councils of the Forum. Forum countries are deeply troubled by the continued deterioration in the situation in Fiji. Media freedom is being trampled upon. Church leaders are being arrested. The people of Fiji deserve better. They deserve a prompt and early return to democracy.
Therefore the Forum has resolved today, parallel to that of the Commonwealth of Nations meeting most recently in London, through the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, is to maintain a clear and absolute line when it comes to the unacceptability of the actions undertaken by the Fiji administration in most recent times.
Members of the Forum, however, wish and look forward to the day when Fiji returns properly to the democratic family of the Forum. That is the common aspiration of us all and we would look forward to any actions on the part of the Fiji administration which would cause us to have any confidence that that was occurring.
Finally, in terms of my own role as chairman, can I thank very much my colleagues here assembled. In particular I single out Toke Talagi, the Premier of Niue, who has acted as an excellent chairman of the Pacific Islands Forum these last 12 months. He has become a great colleague and, representing as he does, a country of 1200 or so people, he has shouldered an enormous burden on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum this last 12 months and I congratulate him for his efforts.
Could I also thank each and every one of my other colleagues here and those who have not been able to join us for this press conference, for their excellent contribution to deliberations today.
When the Pacific Forum meets - Pacific Islands Forum meets, it is not a normal meeting. We choose to do so in a relaxed and Pacific way. It means there is lots of conversation, it means there is lots discussion, it means there's lots of agreement. There's no shouting, there's no raising of voices. We work our way through the challenges and that has been effectively done here today with my colleagues. And I would thank each and every one of them for the excellent contributions that they have made.
Could I also mention one particular initiative, or two, that we've also discussed coming out of our deliberations on our dinner on the first evening. One relates to the challenge, not just of climate change more generally, but on renewable energy in particular, and how the Pacific Islands economies in the future deal with the challenges of climate change, the cost of fossil fuels, and the need for renewable energy.
What we have done, as Australia, is indicate that we will work in partnership with our friends in New Zealand on a new renewable energy initiative through the agency of the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat, which Australia will contribute some $25 million to.
In the first instance, a region-wide audit of existing renewable energy possibilities for each of the Forum countries, given the enormous costs which they currently bear for the importation of fossil fuels. And, secondly, what might be necessary and possible subsequent to that to enhance their use of solar, enhance their use of wind, enhance their use of wave, enhance their use of other forms of renewable energy.
What is heartening is listening to the reports of many of my colleagues is the extent to which they have already undertaken actions in this direction, including in a presentation this afternoon the Premier of Niue, within his country.
One further initiative goes to the absolute importance of the social fabric of the countries of the Pacific Islands Forum as well. We discussed at length - some considerable length - the role of sport in our communities; the role of football, the role of rugby union, rugby league, of soccer, of netball, and of cricket, in building and maintaining the social fabric across this vast community of nations, this vast community of societies across Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia.
And again, as Australia, we'll be increasing our own investment by $10 million to a total of $26 million, to a new Sports Compact with the island countries of the Pacific. Our objective is this: to invest at the grassroots, at community level sport right across the island countries. A really good opportunity to link sports participation on the part of young people - young men in particular but not exclusively young men - and to link that increasingly with education and training opportunities.
And, again, we had great presentations today from many of my colleagues about how this is working on the ground in a number of their countries. And I would draw particular attention to the contribution this afternoon by the Prime Minister of the Cook Islands.
In conclusion, can I say that this has been a good Forum. Our focus has been twofold: to deliver a strong call to action worldwide on climate change from the countries which stand to be most affected by climate change, the small island countries of the Pacific; and, secondly, on behalf of the small and in some cases vulnerable economies, to issue our compact for greater coordination of development assistance across the Pacific so that these countries may more robustly confront the challenges of the global economic recession and the task of sustainable economic growth ahead.
I will conclude my remarks there, unless you wish to add, Premier?
PREMIER OF NUIE: No, thank you.
PM: Then I and others are happy to take your questions. And if they are exceptionally difficult or complex I will turn to the senior statesman of the region, the Grand Chief, Sir Michael Somare, who will answer all hard questions that you might have.
JOURNALIST: Has there been any progress made (inaudible) free trade agreement. And if not, is that because of Fiji's (inaudible)?
PM: Not at all. In fact, our resolution today was to proceed with what is called, commonly PACER Plus. And we intend as governments, to head precisely in that direction and we've discussed specific official's level mechanisms to continue to keep the administration in Fiji informed of developments in - of those ministerial level negotiations which will occur between all other governments.
We believe that in terms of the future, not only are freer trading arrangements the best way to go for the future but also a greater and greater role for the private economy in each of our various member states. (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: At the - in the lead up to the forum there was a suggestion came out of the (inaudible) meeting that negotiations won't start straight up at the forum, have you confirmed when all negotiations might begin on this (inaudible).
PM: The answer to that question is a very robust ‘soon'. They will get underway fairly rapidly. And we have resolved the mechanisms in terms, as I said, of how to maintain coordination at a low official level with the Fiji administration.
We do not believe that should be an impediment to proceeding. We will proceed, but ministerial level negotiations will occur only between those countries which are represented here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It is a clear-cut reflection of the views of my colleagues, Pacific Island leaders, that, we, the developed economies, need to act and I know my colleague in New Zealand is facing these challenges as well.
We are facing these challenges in Australia and that is the importance of ensuring that the targets we nominate for ourselves as the developed economies are capable of being implemented through legislation and regulation and the various forms of cap and trade systems that have been embraced around the world.
So for Australia, as you know, we have with eight days to go to the vote in the Senate, our legislation ready and raring to go. One problem lies in the road and I think you know where that problem is.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, that international symbol of survival and fire fighter's compassion from the bushfires. Sam the koala has died today, can I ask do you have any (inaudible)?
PM: Yeah I just heard this before I came in and very interesting, when I travelled to London for the G20 summit in early April, the symbol of hope for so many people around the world was the great picture of that wonderful koala being fed water by one of our fire fighters. And I think that gave people of the world a great sense that this country Australia, could come through those fires as we have.
And Sam the koala was part of the symbolism of that and it's tragic that Sam the koala is no longer with us. Yes.
JOURNALIST:Could I direct a question to Prime Minister of Vanuatu?
PM: You may and if it's too difficult I'll (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Mr Natapei, I am just wondering about the (inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER OF VANUATU:Yes we had the opportunity to explain Fiji's situation and we, in fact, in the communiqué have got a paragraph of dealing with the possibility of dialogue coming up at some later stage and ensuring that we are able to continue to talk to other sectors of the communities in Fiji.
PM: I think, as the Prime Minister has just indicated, I think in the last paragraph of the section of the communiqué dealing with Fiji we maintain the preparedness on the part of the forum to engage with Fiji. That's consistent with previous forum communiqués.
We've also indicated our preparedness to continue to execute that engagement both through the ministerial contact group and through the particular working group which exists beneath that and that's reflected clearly in the communiqué.
As I said in my remarks before, we look forward to the day when Fiji returns to the family of democracy within our region. Regrettably, Commodore Bainimarama does not seem to have that attitude.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Natapei, did you raise the issue of West Papua (inaudible)?
PRIME MINISTER OF VANUATU: No, that issue was not raised (inaudible) of this latest summit.
JOURANLIST: (inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER OF VANUATU: We will do that and also we will be working with the leaders of the churches to try and establish contact with the churches in Fiji.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the security of Australian military installations is properly the province of Australia's first of all, defence establishments and if there is any breach of that or alleged breach of that then it properly lies in the province of Australia's law enforcement authorities.
I am not in the business of directing them on how they should or should not behave that's an independent matter for the security authorities on the base. Then for law enforcement authorities which are part of our normal justice system.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, as Prime Minister of the country I take the security of our military installations very seriously. And therefore these are not things to be trifled with. And therefore independent processes will proceed in terms of any violation which has occurred but that's entirely the province of others.
When we're dealing with the broader threat of terrorism, and the robustness of our defences against terrorism, as I indicated, I think, in my statements to you yesterday or the day before, we must remain vigilant as a nation, the threat of terrorism remains alive and well and as I indicated also in my statement to you that we, through the national security committee the cabinet, have commissioned a full and comprehensive review of every aspect of the current protective security arrangements surrounding our Defence facilities.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) leader spoke to Australia and the United Nations to investigate the Chinese crackdown on Uighurs. Will Australia be part of that investigation and will Stephen Smith (inaudible)?
PM: The first matter is I haven't seen that statement and I will study it in full. On the second matter and that's a question best directed to the Foreign Minister. Based on what I've seen most recently I understand not but check with the Foreign Minister, I've been preoccupied here.
And thirdly I thought your question went to, also went to the question of what actions United Nations should take.
I simply reiterate what I have said in the past and will continue to say in the future that, including in a lecture I gave and public comments I've delivered in China itself, and that is that there are human rights abuses in China and the international community must continue to acknowledge that fact as well as the fact that there have been improvements in other aspects of China's human rights situation as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's you, Rowan.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the underpinning logic of the second agreement that we had today which was that concerning our compact on the strengthening of development assistance coordination in the Pacific, reflects the combined frustrations of so many of the government's represented here with me, on what a spaghetti bowl it currently represents.
If you are, as one of my colleagues said, without naming him, sitting there with your officials to discover that at any given time half of them are off-shore, running around with various programmes being offered by dozens of competing and occasionally conflicting development assistance programmes, you've got a challenge on your hands.
Therefore, you can either just wait for that to get worse and worse, or you can specifically seek to improve it. And what we've sought to do, without reference to any particular country, and with as much reference to ourselves as to anyone else, is to improve the level of coordination, before it's actually, shall I say, presented to the Governments of the Pacific.
We would hope that in the future, China of course, would work with us, as would other countries across the donor assistance community - that includes the European Union and others. Because the common task of development is agreed to by all member states of the United Nations, which are those contained within the Millennium Development Goals.
Now there was someone over here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well first of all I don't know the particular statement to which you refer, so I will look at that in due season won't I, Mr Lester? Thank you. And so Mr Lester has engaged in conspicuous front row eye-rolling at this stage which he should do more subtly, when he disagrees with what I'm saying.
And the truth of it, Mr Lester is that I haven't seen the report that's just been referred to. I doubt that you have either. Am I correct? Thank you. And so it is a cautionary tale to say that you have not read the report which has just been referred to you and that's the case, as far as what you have just said.
Secondly, in terms of transparency which is the heart of your question, we need to have complete transparency about what we're doing as far as development assistance programmes are going.
Ours are declared through our budgets process and a whole series of ancillary documents in terms of what's available to our Forum countries. I know the same is true of my colleague from New Zealand and we work exceptionally closely together in the common challenges across the Pacific. More broadly, transparency should be the principle which applies to all, and all countries engaged in the common task of development within this region.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, can you say that again?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know something, I've been very in-this all day and I don't know anything about the Greenpeace protest in Mackay. And that's the truth.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just your reaction on today's unemployment figures and also the Opposition's called for you to slow down the (inaudible)
PM: Today's unemployment figures should give us all pause for concern about the state of unemployment in Australia. If you look at the numbers, it shows an increase in, it shows a fall in full-time employment and it shows, obviously, a larger increase in part-time employment.
Can I say though, that if you look at these figures over time and what's happening with full-time employment and part-time employment, that should give us cause for concern.
This region, in Far North Queensland for example, we have very high levels of unemployment. It is one of the 20 or so priority areas of unemployment across the country, where you see huge impacts being felt. So as I've said before and I mean it absolutely, we're not out of the woods yet when it comes to global economic recession.
Can I also say for those who are now talking about national and international stimulus strategies, if you were to try and trace back where we began to see some modest turning of the corner when it comes to global economic sentiment and the performance of the global economy, we go back to the actions taken by governments at the London Summit of the G20 in March/April, where governments collectively committed to $5 trillion worth of injection into the global economy, in order to make a difference.
Out of a $63 trillion global economy, that's a large investment. And those investments by those governments were spread over some time. If you want to know what helps to underpin confidence on the part of markets, it's looking at that common resolve of governments not just to announce that, but also to deploy it and to continue to implement it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well in my answer to an earlier question which asked for a specific date, I just said soon, because I don't wish to mislead you about a date, like a date and a month. But in our discussions today there was no raising of any reservation about when these negotiations should get underway.
The one technical matter we had to resolve was the contingent line of, shall I say, low level official contact with Fiji during the process of these negotiations. We resolved that. Impediments in terms of the unfolding of those negotiations have been removed. PACER Plus will get underway and that is our common resolve.
Can I conclude ladies and gentlemen, by thanking you for your attendance at the 40th Pacific Island Forum and to conclude also, where I began, by thanking heartily my friends and colleagues from across the region and thanking also, on behalf of them, the great city of Cairns and the people of Cairns for making all of us feel so welcome in this great city - for what I believe has been a successful forum on climate change and the future of the regional economy. I thank you.
(Ends)


During National Homeless Persons Week, the Australian Government today announced the appointment of Mr Tony Nicholson, Executive Director, Brotherhood of St Laurence to chair the Prime Minister's Council on Homelessness.
The Council will provide independent strategic advice critical to the early years of implementing the Government's White Paper on Homelessness, The Road Home, and monitor its progress as we work towards the goal of halving homelessness by 2020.
Mr Nicolson will provide continuity from his role as chair of the White Paper Steering Group, and we are grateful to again have his leadership and experience guiding these important social reforms.
The Council members bring diverse experience and a broad depth of expertise across housing and homelessness issues throughout Australia.
     * Mr Ian Carter, Chief Executive Officer, Anglicare, WA
     * Mr Alan Kirkland, Chief Executive Officer, Legal Aid Commission, NSW
     * Ms Pat Brahim, Chief Executive Officer, Julalikari Council Aboriginal Corporation, NT
     * Ms Netty Horton, General Manager of Community Services, St Vincent de Paul Aged Care and Community Services, VIC
     * Prof. Margaret Hamilton, Member of the Australian National Council on Drugs and former Chair of Multiple and Complex Needs Panel, VIC
     * Ms Christine Edwards, Chief Executive Officer, The Myer Foundation and the Sidney Myer Fund, VIC
     * Mr David Cant, Chief Executive Officer, Brisbane Housing Company, QLD
National Homeless Persons' Week, from 2-9 August, is a time to think of the 105,000 Australians who don't have a home on any given night.
The Australian Government has a clear plan to reduce homelessness and has committed over $7 billion since coming into office to address this appalling reality.
The Council will take a leadership role through independently monitoring the White Paper goals and targets, and providing advice to Government on progress, risks and emerging issues.
The first meeting of the Council will be held in August 2009 with members identifying critical issues and factors which will impact the White Paper goals.


E &amp; OE  -  PROOF ONLY 
JOURNALIST:Can I get your reaction to the developments in Indonesia (inaudible)
PMThe Government has been working throughout yesterday and today in close contact with the Indonesian authorities and following developments both in East Jakarta and in Central Java. There have, as we know from the public reporting, been incidents in both places and of course raids have been conducted by the Indonesian authorities.
It is still unclear as to who precisely has been killed and who has been apprehended. We are waiting for further confirmation on that from the Indonesian authorities. It is again a sober reminder that the threat of terrorism is alive and well. It is also a reminder that our friends in Indonesia are being vigilant and taking the fight up to terrorists within their country. And I hope to be speaking to President Yudhoyono later today about this.
JOURNALIST: The Indonesian police have suggested that the (inaudible) attack in Jakarta with the suicide bombers was in retaliation for the execution of the Bali Bombers. Does that concern you?
PM:I have seen some reporting of what the Indonesian authorities have said. I haven't seen full reporting of it yet. Obviously terrorists are going to be motivated by a range of factors. The key thing is that our cooperation with the Indonesians remains strong, robust, comprehensive and that every action is taken to crack down those responsible for terrorist acts so far, and those who are still engaged in terrorist activities today.
As I have said before, when it comes to the most recent incident at the Marriott in Jakarta, Australia's view and the Australian Government's view is that we should be sparing no resource, no resource whatsoever to track down those murderers responsible for this and other terrorist attacks. And I would thank the Indonesian authorities for the actions that they have taken so far.
[Break]
JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible)
PM:(Inaudible) It is the centenary I think of Mary MacKillop's death in 1909, I think this will be a cause for great reflection on the part of Australia's Catholic community. And she was an extraordinary Australian, an extraordinary worker for the poor and I think this a moment therefore not just for commemoration, reflection and celebration of her life by the Catholic community but by the entire Australian community.


I am pleased to welcome the announcement today by Alannah MacTiernan MLA of her intention to contest the Labor Party's candidacy for the West Australian seat of Canning at the next federal election. 
Alannah MacTiernan has been a Member of State Parliament for 16 years, including serving as Minister for Planning and Infrastructure for almost 8 years. She currently serves as Shadow Minister for Regional Development; Strategic Infrastructure; and Climate Change.
She brings with her a strong record of local representation, and an important contribution to the infrastructure planning and investment of the State. She has also been a strong advocate of the need to act on climate change.
During her time as Minister in the Gallop and Carpenter Governments, Alannah oversaw significant investments in State infrastructure, including:
     * The Mandurah Railway;
     * The Perth-Bunbury Highway;
     * The Tonkin Highway Extension; and
     * The Champion Lakes Development. 
The Australian Government is committed to investment in national infrastructure to support jobs during the global recession, and to build the infrastructure Australia needs for the future, and is taking strong and decisive action on climate change.
The Australian Government is delivering on this commitment in Western Australia through investment in major infrastructure such as the Mandurah Entrance Road, upgrades to the Great Northern Highway at Port Hedland, the duplication of the Dampier Highway between Karratha and Dampier and providing port access in Geraldton.
The Australian Government has also committed $330 million to the Kwinana Freeway Extension and Forrest Highway, and provided an additional $3.3 million to the City of Armadale for Stage 2 of the Champion Lakes Development in Canning.
Alannah MacTiernan brings experience, a strong record of delivering locally, and a reputation for innovation and for getting the job done, to her candidacy for preselection as Labor Candidate for Canning. I look forward to working with her in developing her strong vision for Western Australia.



Today we are going to discuss climate change: 
Admin: The Prime Minister has joined the chat.
Nedwin05: Good morning
r1nce: Good morning Prime Minister.
docjen: hello PM Kevin from docjen
FearlessKat: Good morning all
ric.hayman: good morning ..
liquidIce: Good Morning
Merridear: What steps could the federal government take to enhance the capacity of small or regional communities to become independently sustainable? I ask this in the light of the fact that state regulations often prohibit, or severely curtail, community level initiatives that are perceived to be in direct competition to state run entities that run counter to climate change initiatives.
r1nce: I have a list of prepared statements that I would dearly love to discuss.
Merridear: Given that the Borough of Woking, and now London, have established very high emission reduction targets, will clearly meet these targets and are saving relatively large amounts of money in the process, what do you see are the primary impediments to Australian cities/regions adopting the same types of programs?
michaelcrowe23: Good Morning
Luke33: Good morning
fishace: Good Morning
Merridear: Good morning all.
AllanL: Hello all
readfearn: Good morning Prime Minister. How should Australia be divorcing itself from coal?... if, that is, you think we need a divorce.
FearlessKat: Good morning Prime Minister - thank you for inviting us to come and chat to you today about climate change
LawyersRus: Good morning
MattyC: Good orning
DavidT: Good morning
Prime Minister:Hi PM here lets get going with this Nearly a thousand people contributed ton the climate change
Nedwin05: Thanks for the opportunity PM
Nedwin05: I'm working n that too Merridear
superperson: There has been a small but never the less strong reponse to
Nedwin05: I think renewable energy provides a great opportunity for local regional economies to diversify their incomes, stop money leaking from their community not just reducing our overall carbon footprint.
ric.hayman: There was an interesting set of comments to the blog post - is there a particular direction you want this discussion to take, Kevin?
Luke33: Perhaps to start - What will the proposed ETS legislation under consideration this week deliver to the average Australian?
Patty: Good morning everyone
r1nce: There are obviously a few of us with prepared statements and I do not imagine that you will be able to answer them all. So I would like to post a few of mine and will be happy if they are at least considered either during or after this chat has finished.
Merridear: Good morning all
(920676): Good morning Prime Minister and fellow Australians
Nedwin05: What do you think PM? How can you help communities have more ownership over the energy they consume?
MattyC: Hi PM, thanks for the opportunity, I am curious about Steven Fieldings questions and why there has been no attempt at answering what seems to be very reasonable queries.
fishace: PM - it would interesting to know the main topics, are we talking solutions today?
Prime Minister:Hi Merridear.Re local communities and self sufficiency, the govt has put out tenders for a half billion dollar renewable energy set of projects. this has already gone through round one and still with more to go this covers the range of renewable energy options. KR
DavidT: And are we talking politics or science
fishace: If it's solutions - Geosequestration is suitable for short term storage, but this should be integrated within large scale biosequestration i.e. extracting the carbon to be processed into added value products. As an example, algae capture liquid and atmospheric carbon and convert carbohydrates to lipids using sunlight with the extracted raw oil being processed into biofuels. Microalgae are ten times more efficient in sequestering carbon than trees with 1 Tonne of biomass requiring 1.6 T CO2 and exhausting 1.2 T of O2 (source: U.S. National Energy Renewable Laboratory). Research is being undertaken to capture power station emissions with the rich algal biomass being a suitable feedstock for the biochar industry. Exxon Mobil, BP and Shell have announced large scale commercialisation projects to produce algae biofuels worldwide to offset peak oil decline. By the way anyone who had listened in their geology class will know that the origin of crude oil is highly pressured, cooked algae. There are countless by-products from al
AllanL: Why did your Govt not amended the Renewable Energy(Electricity ) Act 2000 targets last year? Companies seemed to be happy to invest in renewable production with a mandated target.
ric.hayman: My thought is that the argument over the science is a red herring - while the science is important, and should continue the search for better knowledge, the discussion should be about the benefits in a number of areas of our lives of a lower-emission way of life ...
michaelcrowe23: Prime Minister, can we please talk about concessions that have been given to the largest polluters in the latest ETS proposal, I am deeply concerned that this will send a very wrong message to the AUstralian public
r1nce: I was very pleased to see the symbolic ratification of the Kyoto protocol. I felt this was an unnecessary sign of solidarity with the US by the previous government. I am also pleased that no-one has yet enabled the various climate change deniers by trying to engage with them in honest debate, as no honest edbate can be had with those who do not intend to be honest. However, a few things that you and your government have already done on this issue have disappointed me. Changing the rebate on household solar installations was one.
FearlessKat: Personally, I think renewable energy is the answer and agree with Nedwin. Especially solar and wind power in our sunny nation. The State and Commonwealth Governments need to work together to encourage communities and business at a local level and to embrace and invest in solar to create self sustaining households.
r1nce: Renewable energy targets are too low and too unambitious. We should be aiming to have Australia as the leader of the industrialised world with relation to energy gained from renwable energy. We have plenty of access to almost uninterrupted solar energy as we have literally thousands of square kilometres of open space with which to place solar farms. We are developing our wind energy resources at a terrific rate, but why are we doing so little to support this fledgling industry?
r1nce: (And thus, the floodgates open.) In the position of parliament, can you not mandate that all new homes be fitted with a solar array and vertical axis wind turbine? Cutting down requested demand from the residential area alone would dramatically reduce our requirement for coal fired energy, and the implementation of these technologies in the home sector would send a strong message to those on the other side of the debate, would reduce electricity bills for those in the new homes, if not eradicate them completely, and would bolster the image of Australia as a nation intent on leading the charge in the 21st century against the problem of man-made climate change.
LawyersRus: Thanks for the opportunity PM. I agree with fishace, it would be great to know what 'agenda' you have for this discussion, what you hope to get out of it?
docjen: Yes I would like to know what it is we are talking about since I just had an education suggestion rejected for this chat and I thought the PM was all for education on climate change!
r1nce: Let's be realistic; 20% in 2020 is a good start, but really sell it, Prime Minister. Set targets for an increasing 10% of energy needs to come from renewable sources every ten years up to 80% by 2080. Be bold, sir. There is no need to exclude traditional energy providers, instead, empower them by offering performance bonuses if they exceed the target, but there must be a stick for that carrot, so there should be extreme penalties if they are seen to be dragging their feet or not meeting their targets within an expected timeframe.
Nedwin05: Hello?
FearlessKat: I agree r1nce, households should be rewarded for choosing solar. We are penalised for staying with carbon through cost of electricity rising!
fishace: Innovation is being stifled by ‘out of touch' ultra conservative academics and weighted to suit heavyweight corporates; we need to promote and support our talented inventors and entrepreneurs, many who operate outside formal academia and in the majority of cases fund their own research. We need ‘new blood' in R&amp;D funding assessment committees and less red tape and time consuming paperwork that's incredibly difficult and off putting.
MattyC: Agreed. If this discussion is to be relevant then I think there needs to be some direction.
Prime Minister:Now to Luke 33. The CPRS leg in parlt this week is about three things. Giving effect to our national commitments.Giving business certainty now for the future re the rules And for households certainty also for assistance measures for the impact on the cost of energy. kr
Nedwin05: Regional economies suffer because they leak money. One of the biggest leaks is when they send the money they earn out of the community in the form of energy payments to centralised corporations who own retail power businesses. Renewable energy can plug this leak if local communities can own it and retail it back to themselves. Here in WA, only the Synergy monopoly can retail the energy a community produces. Can you believe it? A community that owns its own power plant would have to sell it wholesale to Synergy and then buy it back again at retail prices before it could use it! That's just crazy.
DavidT: Why are renewables all so expensive and installation takes so many years to amortize. Also thay are not reliable and we still depend on generated power
ric.hayman: PM - it seems most of the opposition, and often proponents of climate change mitigation, seem to concentrate on the COSTS of action .. there will be economic benefits from reducing our carbon emissions, should they not be given more airtime?
Luke33: What would you say to the average Australian when they ask how "climate per dollar" they will receive from implementation of the ETS I see two problems - (1) we're only 1.6% of world emissions (2) how do you convince voters to opt for austerity?
Prime Minister:r1nce talks aboutthe united states. The big thing about the change in the US administration is that they are now at the table. At the G8 in Italy recently Pres Obama was active in finding ways through. Not just blocking.KR
pilot2012: I think the Big question is how quickly, can you get the ball rolling, if you pass the Climate Change Bill on Thursday.
readfearn: Why do people talk about climate change in cost terms? If dirty energy costs more, then people will use less of it, which is surely what we want.
MattyC: Hi PM, all of this discussion is useful and relevant only if we accept that CO2 emmissions are in fact the cause of the warming that has been seen. In my opinion this has yet to be established fully, hense my comment about Steven Fieldings questions - one that seems to be ignored
Nedwin05: Targets can be reached if we make it easier for ordinary people to drive it. THe way the energy markets are set up the pwer is all in the hands of the corporate utilities.
AllanL: Don't forget the future increase of consumption of electricity as the economy transitions to electric transport from liquid fuel transport
ric.hayman: DavidT - economies of scale - the early adopters face a higher price until higher volumes allow price reductions ... this is where subudies of some description are useful
liquidIce: Per Capita Green House Gass Emissions The atmosphere is a limited global resource that no one person, nation or organisation can claim ownership of. It is a global commons. With this being the case the ethical response is that everyone has the same right to a clean atmosphere and the responsibility to maintain it for the common good. With a limited global resource everyone has the ethical duty not to take more than their fair share. Australia Ranked 5th globally in 2000 &amp; 2005 Australia Year 2000 25.6 tons per person World Average Year 2000 5.6tons per person Australia 4.57 Times world average What are you going to do Mr Prime Minister to ensure that Australia corrects it's behaviour and acts within it's ethical rights and responsibilities?
DavidT: and what if CO2 keeps rising anyway
fishace: NEDWIN05 - I am a Principal Environmental Engineer with many years of international experience and currently ‘tree-changing' from a comfortable city lifestyle, to the goal of self-sufficiency in a remote location  -  “to practice what I preach”. We are currently renovating and reusing materials on our old farmhouse in Darke Peak, SA and illustrating to others how to live a more sustainable lifestyle, with the intention of building a completely self sustainable home in this district. Our goal is zero emissions, promoting regionalism and producing biofuels locally in rural and remote service towns. Reducing carbon transport costs, lowering land owner footprints and recycling household energy and nutrients into an integrated ecologically engineered micro-nutrient system recovery system.
r1nce: FearlessKat, the new system actually rewards energy retailers more than the household at this stage. When they buy the "solar credits" those credits got towards THEIR renewable energy production results. Big energy is being rewarded while clean energy take-up growth is being slowed.
michaelcrowe23: It is great to see the USA change their attitude and join the discussion, do you feel Australia is letting a great opportunity to take international leadership fall by the wayside due to our currently poor reduction target (5%)?
Prime Minister:Re MattyC and his point. I would like to hear everyones ideas on what we can now do practically on the energy efficiency front. lets see the ideas roll please. KR
Nedwin05: DavidT. There are people I know who have developed renewable technology they will release as 'open source'. This should make it more affordable.
readfearn: PM - when Copenhagen comes around in December, what will you be doing to make sure Australia is part of a global solution to a global problem?
MattyC: That is not my point! My point is there are some reasonable quesitons that were put to the govt on the causes and they have not been addressed
Prime Minister: While we are waiting on the energy efficience question, a few people have asked about the cost of action. we asked the Treasury about a;
Nedwin05: Energy efficiency comes from having stronger localised economies PM. OUr neo-liberal approach is wasteful.
liquidIce: Energy efficiency
r1nce: Let's be practical then. Legislate that all federal buildings be run entirely on renewable energy, either via solar arrays on the buildings themselves, or by vertical axis wind turbines on/near those same buildings. Let's change the landscape so that whenever you see a massive array, you KNOW that it's a federal building.
Nedwin05: So, what I mean is, reduce the amount of food transported into a community...grow it locally again. Thats one example.
fishace: We're in a SA rural community trying to source funding to commercialise microalgae biosequestration (algae to biofuels) &amp; struggle to access the funds.
DavidT: True Ric, but solar power has been around for decades. Why no price reduction?
liquidIce: The current historical approach has been demand side, but the real benefits will come from controlling the supply side.
Luke33: Personally I feel pessimistic that Australian society will accept any major reductions in standards of living. So will the ALP overcome it's aversion to nuclear energy. Especially new technology modern reactors. Why is nuclear off the national debating list?
Patty: energy efficiency: advocate public transport
Prime Minister:we asked treasury about all that. Treasury say that countries that defer action will face costs long run that are around fifteen per cent higher.
readfearn: MattyC - they weren't reasonable questions. They were questions sponsored by the fossil-fuel industry - a point which seems lost on most people.
LawyersRus: I think the first step is public education. Most people don't know how CPRS works.
DavidT: Roll them on Nedwin. I've made enquiries for my business and in one instance it would take 23 years to amortize
FearlessKat: Communities, including houses should have solar panels on their rooves. Embed it in the building code. Support through funding. Allow houses to put energy back into the grid and reward them. Same with business.
fishace: Nedwin05 - that's exactly right, decentralisation of services
michaelcrowe23: Reiterating earlier points, bring back the solar power incentives, people will take more responsibility if using their own, locally produced resources
ric.hayman: DavidT - not enough adoption (prob because of high price :) ) - it's the production volume (or tech breakthrough) that will drop prices, not the length of time we've known about it (unfortunately)
MattyC: Good question Luke33 why no nuclear - seems like an ideological stand point more than anything else
Prime Minister: Re Nedwin 05. please elaborate re localised economies.
readfearn: OK - all agreed that inaction is going to cost us. So what is THE ACTION then. Energy efficiency will give us gains, but nothing like the gains we'd get with a rapid shift away from fossil fuels. Are we doing enough on this though?
liquidIce: Legislate minimum specifications on all appliances Legislate a minimum energy star rating of all new products to enter the market Publish a road map for the next 10 years that raises the minimum requirement year on year
Prime Minister: reliquidlce&gt;
AllanL: During senate committe hearing aspokesperson for the Renewable Industry was asked by a senator what would be the best thing that the Fed'Govt could do. Response was to build a high capcity transmission line to the Cameron's Crn area between NSW, SA, Qld.
r1nce: I feel your pain PM, you can't press [enter] without the comment being submitted. Try using notepad, then paste it into this box. To continue, if all federal buildings (with perhaps the exception of defence) were running solely on renewables, this would send a massive statement to the publis, the corporate interests in the energy lobby, and the world in what Australia intends to do on climate change. We nee do to empower the populace to see that going green is cheaper now and in the long run by use of subsidies and rebates. Subsidise a community's solar array and they can use the savings on energy to help pay for the cost of installation. Give rebates for those interested in using electric cars to reduce their carbon footprint and get off the teat of oil companies. Subsidise development in those same electric vehicles.
DavidT: Solar panels in China are relatively cheap compared with Oz.
Nedwin05: Here's a story to illustrate my point about wasteful neo-classical economic approach to the way we use energy...Grow Capsicums in Carnarvon, 1000km from perth, ship them to a large supermarket warehouse in perth and then ship them back to carnarvon to be sold in that supermarket chain's outlet there.
Merridear: I absolutely agree with Nedwin. The BOrough of Woking and now London are demonstrating that local communities can be very self contained and decrease need for decentralised energy systems.
fishace: Geosequestration is suitable for short term storage, but this should be integrated within large scale biosequestration i.e. extracting the carbon to be processed into added value products.
MattyC: What is not reasonable about Feilding's questions, I ride a bike to work and they seemed very straightforward and sensible. Anyone who wants to ask something that doesn't "Toe the line" ends up being labelled and that is unhealthy in a democracy
readfearn: We've got the most important meeting - arguable in modern history - and we're still talking about costs, dollars, lightbulbs and stand-by power. PM - what's Australia's role going to be at Copenhagen? part of the problem or part of the solution?
Nedwin05: DavidT if communities were able to retail, wholesale and claim energy credits then renewables become profitable much quicker. Ou market and regulations don't allow for it. PM That's something that really must change.
LawyersRus: And, as I said on the blog, I think you need to sell it to the 'younger' generations, because they have a mentality of 'what's in it for me?' (I can say that because I am one).
Prime Minister: re liqidlce. surely we have to tackle both the supply and the demand side. The conventional wisdom seems to be that if we get serious about energy efficiency measures across the board, we can cut ghgs by up to 30 pr cent. then there are the critical supply side measures. and giving a carbon price through the cprs is critical to both.
ric.hayman: DavidT - it's a problem, and one that will only be solved by more rapid adoption ... someone earlier had an idea about Govt buildings being solar-powered - an increase in usage will open up more opportunities for cost reduction and improvement in the tech involved
liquidIce: Nuclear power is irrelevant as it takes too long to get approval and build a single reactor, yet alone the number that will be needed. Add to that the problems with controlling proliferation of dangerous materials, storing waste and cleaning up the radioactive mess that is left behind when decommissioning a reactor.
superperson: Will you consult Indigenous Elders regarding land management of Australia?
r1nce: I like the cut of your jib there, liquidIce. We should be setting targets for the manufacturers. A consumer isn't completely responsible for the product they use. Without a viable product on the market, what option do they have? Recently, an electric vehicle start-up in Melbourne was basically forced offshore after no funding and/or interest from the state and federal governments.
Luke33: If we're serious about greenhouse miles - why don't we see much greater increase in teleconferencing in Australian business and government.
ric.hayman: Nedwin05 - that sounds like a model worth pursuing ...
michaelcrowe23: These are great points but the fact is that turning Australian households into 100% clean energy users will only drop our national emissions by 20%, the biggest moves must come from industry, IE. lower our dependence on coal
Nedwin05: PM. If communities produced more of what they needed locally instead of shipping it in then they would be much more energy efficient. They could make a business out of running their own power stations that the community purchased its own energy from. They would reduce the transport costs by growing food locally, they would have more local manufacturing etc. Its a simple concept taking off around the world and it makes small business stronger.
readfearn: I'm in danger of sounding like a broken record here (remember them?) but without a strong global deal at Copenhagen, much of this debate will seem a little pointless down the track. I'd love to know - PM - what Australia's ambitions will be.
ric.hayman: readfern - good question. WHile we need a practical discussion, I think showing leadership at Copenhagen will be (at this stge) as important as any of the proactical steps being discussed here
Prime Minister: On the building code that fearlessCAT raises, the National Strategy on Energy Efficience agreed with the states will see us mandation six star rations for homes and commercial buildings through the code. Also with thr states increasing standards for appliances.
R1nce: We can't possibly use nuclear as an energy source as we have a major water shortage problem in Australia. Why use the millions of litres of water on cooling uranium rods when we could use it to flush the river system? Nuclear is a massive red-herring that gets way too much airtime.
Merridear: Regulations, especially at state level, are hampering or prohibiting local community self sufficiiencies. What can we do to encourage states to change their attitiudes to protecting their financial interests over greater sustainability issues.
liquidIce: A lot has been done world wide by Energy Utilities to influence demand side, but, the have not seen much results in the last 20 years. In a free society if energy inefficient options are given to customers inevitably some customers are going to choose them. The way to get around this is to legislate minimum efficiency standards across the board. Don't give the customer the possibility of a bad choice.
readfearn: michaelcrowe23 - absolutely on the money.
MattyC: Is anybody here concerned that we have the basics wrong in the whole debate? in which case this is all just noise - at a huge cost in real dollars for everyone.
AllanL: My business buy's 30k kWh of electricity a year yet I still don't know if I can claim the CO2 sequestration that occurs on the 42 hectares of land I live on. I would seqester a lot more CO2 that I emit. Do I get credits for that or not.
Nedwin05: Plugging these economic leaks in local economies alone would save the government hundreds of millions in propping up some of these local economies when the commodity they rely on for income drops in price or when climate change reduces their incomes. What's the point in giving communities hand-outs if the money leaks straight out of the local economy again?
r1nce: And why, sir, are the renewable energy targets being linked to the ETS? Surely the two can be independent of each other.
fishace: Working from home reduces any 'office' resource consumption and our focus on the youth is a strong suggestion as they are the ones most impacted by long term climate issues.
Nedwin05: I agree Merridear.
DavidT: Unfortunately the states won't get out of the way
ric.hayman: readfern - I don't think unilateral action by Australia is wasted, but agree that the rest of the world needs to be there as well. Copenhagen is important perhaps more symbolically, but important nonetheless. Kevin R has an opportunity on demonstrate OUR leadership on this issue ...
Patty: I'm having technical trouble here, but is there anything the fed govt does to jolt the states into building more public transport?
Nedwin05: michaelcrowe...the answer lies in more localised economies. Centralisation only works with cheap fossil fuel energy.
readfearn: liquidIce - but with leaner energy from the start, the need for mass regulation on energy efficiency drops down the priority list.
LiquidIce: Eminent climate researchers such as James Hansen of NASA and Hans Joachim Schellnhuber of the Potsdam Institute suggest that greenhouse gas levels in the range 280-325ppm CO2 are likely to be consistent with a safe climate, the achievement of which would require zero or near-zero anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and the sequestration of a significant amount of existing atmospheric carbon.
How do we get to the 'safe zone'?
Luke33: PM - it's heartening to see so many people here willing to put up new solutions and new futures. However I think sceptics have made big inroads into insecurity in the last year. Building on the current statis in global temperatures and other factors. I reckon 50% of Australians aren't convinced. Why doesn't the government more formally deal with scepticism. A Dept of Climate Change "sceptics unit" . That's real scepticism - not faux sceptics and purely political activists? Recent media shows sceptic questions are not well answered. Personally you should let CSIRO and BoM take the gloves off.
Prime Minister:readfern asks about Copenhagen. Sill waiting for more thoughts on efficency. This will hopfully come to a head beforehand at the Pittsburgh G20 summit next month and the UN Special Session. We will be active behind the scenes at both trying to get a consensus. Penny Wong is also working the phones. It will be tough though.
michaelcrowe23: Prime Minister, is Australia going to be a leader on the world stage and push higher reduction targets or is your target of 5% going to be the sort of example Australia will portray to the conference? the Australian public will support a government that is strong and progressive on the world stage.
ric.hayman: Nedwin05 local co-generation also reduces the need for increased infrastructure to carry power
readfearn: MattyC - after spending several years reading the science, the short answer. No.
r1nce: MattyC, I'd pay a 20% GST if it meant that all federal buildings and vehicles were run on renewables. If every cent of the additional 10% went to the implementation of huge solar and wind farms that generated free electricity for the electorate, I'd pay it and not blink an eye.
AllanL: Greatest efficencies would arise from decentralisation.
Merridear: At Serpentine Jarrahdale Shire they have a vision for being a food bowl, reducung food miles and self sufficiency for energy needs, total water recycling, but they are hampered by state regulation particularly with regard to water re-use and energy production.
Ric.hayman: MattyC which basics? While the science is not as conclusive as some would like, and I think the argument over who or what might be causing any climate change is a waste of time, the benefits of reducing carbon emissions are manifold, and not all related to climate
readfearn: PM - you sound as though you are setting us up for failure. let's have a bit of positivity. :)
Fishace: Third world countries look to large scale pond culture of algal biomass, (also a health food), as a cheap source of protein and Omega3.  Bioenergy Australia are championing the â€˜algae to biofuelsâ€™ sector.
Nedwin05: Yes Patty, public transport...we may not like it but are we allowed to mention peak oil here. It does have relevance for the climate change discussion.
DavidT: Maybe other countries don't see the problem in the same light as Oz does because they don't see a problem. Perhaps they are too busy looking after their own citizens.
pilot2012: Why has the Government stopped promoting LPG usage, in motor vehicles, that has a 10th the emissions of other fossil fuels, I would have thought this would be a big plus in the CO2 trading scheme.
Bayrunner: "Prime Minister, climate sceptics (and the indifferent) dominate opinion polls both here and abroad. Obviously the message is not getting through.
It is pointless trying to convince Australians that global warming is man made while the contrary science is so strong, the environmental movement so loud and the media so biased.
I have long maintained we should not rely exclusively on the recommendations of the IPCC. It is a political body and does no science of its own. 
I believe the responsible course of action is to establish a royal commission into the science of climate change. Emphasis should be placed on scientific method and real world observations.
Unproven mathematical models (and opinions based on them) should relegated to the ranks of hypotheses (guesses) where they rightly belong.
Of course this would be a forum for expert scientists to have it out. Lobbyists should be excluded and, to limit ideological bias, evidence should be given under oath.
This issue is far too important to be rushed but,"
LawyersRus: I agree with Patty. The public transport system is terrible, unreliable and expensive (in Adelaide anyway). Why would people give up their cars for that?
AllanL: New towns built to latest standards, less travel time to work,cogeneration possibilites
DavidT: I think the science still has to be sorted out
Nedwin05: Exactly ric. The engineers for network operators I have talked to in my business have told me they want to move away from centralisation but the neo-classical approach from above doesn't allow them to.
readfearn: We need some BIG clear messages from a leader with a chance to be a hero for the planet - to go down in history. How's that grab you PM?????
MattyC: Luke33 is correct there is not much public debate and the avoidance of sensible questions just erodes public confidence. R1nce - would you still pay that if it made no difference?
Prime Minister: ric.hayman talks about the ec benefits of renewables. Spot on. Climate Institute report says that 26000 jobs can be created from projects planned or underway following the intro of the renewable energy target regime. This excludes those created by the energy efficient homes package noe underway as part of the economic stimulus package.
r1nce: Given we've only got 5 minutes left of the allocated time, I want to thank you again, Prime Minster, for the effort of holding on of these chats. I kif now it will be some time before I get the opportunity to directly engage with you again. I would like to think that any of the points raised that are not directly answered will be followed up either by email, or by another blog post that explicitly goes in to detail and responds to those raised points.
michaelcrowe23: In terms of energy efficiency, we can continue the solar energy rebate, continue to subsidise household insulation, invest in making cars and trucks more efficient from manufacture. In short incentivise peoples' move to make their households efficient.
fishace: Is there a possibility of furthering these discussions as low carbon solutions and local economies are the key.
Nedwin05: I've experienced the same Merridear. Same state.
ric.hayman: Luke33 - agree. PM, Australia is NOT convinced about climate change, and it is a topic on which it is easy to scare people (republic model, anyone?) - we need to move the argument away from scientific disagreements and proofs (because science will never be definitive) and towards the benefits (inc those not directly related to climate) of a lower-carbon lifestyle
Nedwin05: PM. Could you imagine how many jobs would be produced in struggling local economies if we decentralised?
ric.hayman: PM - YES! that's the sort of numbers that will ease people's concerns ...
superperson: Re efficiency; localised knowledge both Indigenous and non-Indigenous. Localised action community groups engaging young people, schools etc. Incentives beyond loan schemes for sustainable living; growing produce etc such as GST cuts or 'in kind' trading. Consultation with Indigenous groups about housing that WORKS so that resources are not continually wasted, including money.
Prime Minister: By the way,point taken re govt buildings. Let me come back on all that in a later online once we have our package done. w
michaelcrowe23: David T, would you not agree that regardless of the science (which is currently very strong) any move to protect and ensure the security of our natural resources for future generations to be an inherently positive move?
readfearn: DavidT. Sorted out? You can't "sort out" science - you get to a point where the risk of inaction outweighs the risk of action. We were there 20 years ago.
r1nce: (I also love the idea of an education campaign to raise awareness of those pushing the "climate change is a myth" agenda. I'm sure that people were made aware that the majority of those institutes raising counter arguments to climate change were funded by oil companies, they'd change their tune.)
Bayrunner: Previous post continues: This issue is far too important to be rushed but, thankfully, we have plenty of time.
Over the past ten years CO2 levels have continued to rise while global temperatures were at first steady then fell sharply. The Barrier Reef is in great shape, arctic ice cover is back to long term averages and polar bear numbers have increased fivefold since global climate scares became fashionable.
Incidentally, how many years of cooling must we endure before the loudest amongst us admit the earth not warming?
Science is not a popularity contest. Scientific consensus is a nonsense. In science it only takes one person to be right to smash a consensus, especially one deeply rooted in ideology. (Just ask Charles Darwin!)
Concerns about the climate consensus and the ETS are aired by a raft of people far more qualified and capable than I at quadrant.com.au/blogs/doomed planet.
Prime Minister, climate science needs to be cleaned up and a royal commission initiated by you would be an excellent start. 
liquidIce: If you want to achieve consensus at Copenhagen then you need to have a strong morally and ethically defensible argument about how to constructively go forward.
Any action without getting the US, China, India, Brazil, Russia and the European Union on board will be of little value. The problem is that each of these have different demands and vested interests.
One way forward is to work on Per Capita emissions targets. If everyone on the planet is given the same per capita quota, then it is dividing the global common resource that is our climate equally and ethically defensibly. This is likely to get the developing nations on side, while the developed countries have the most potential to reduce their emissions due to their greater ability to finance and co-ordinate their efforts.
Nedwin05: So not only would we save on fuel (peak oil + climate change) but we would employ more locals again. perhaps the elderly (aged 67+) could become the food growers of their community increasing their status in the community once again.
LawyersRus: Further on public transport: One thing that could be done is to increase the public car parking facilities on train routes. A huge problem is where to securely park your car (if you don't live walking distance from the station).
AllanL: World demand for electricty will be going through the roof with pop growth. CO 2 levels will still be rising for some time to come
MattyC: Well said r1nce - look forward to some follow up following the conclusion of todays chat. Thanks for the opportunity PM.
Nedwin05: PM. I think one reason why Obama has captured the worlds attention is he does what readfearn mentioned.
superperson: Responsibility for management of resources increased to the local community; allowing people to manage and develop their own micro economies from self sufficiency
readfearn: As an exercise in open and accessible leadership, I'm all in favour of this sort of thing. Thanks PM for the opportunity. Good luck in Copenhagen... don't stuff it up.
Prime Minister: By the way, becasue I am chatting myself and my typing skills are a toal embarassment to my kids, lets extend this session another twenty minutes. OK?
MattyC: Most people that have questions do not in fact say "Climate Change is a myth" but in fact agree warming has occured. The question is what is driving it.
Merridear: PM There is a need for funding program for regional areas to develop policy frameworks for coliamate change that address the impacts on biodiversity and emergancy management particualrly fire and flood.
Nedwin05: sounds good!
ric.hayman: PM - good idea ...
r1nce: well said ric.hayman. As DavidT kindly demonstrates, people will never think that the science is final. We need to change the focus to "what's the realistic benefit of changing to renewables" over "why change anything, we can't hear you, lalalala".
DavidT: If this group of 20 has so many different views then how many views must there be in the general community.  There is still a lot of education to do.
DavidT: Fine by me PM
MattyC: And if what is driving it is not in fact man made CO2 then we are barking up the wrong tree. A lot of the more recent research now calls into question that basic tennant
Nedwin05: Yes MC23. The economic argument for business as usual falls over when you take into account scenarios like peak oil, chinese and indian demand for energy resources etc.
DavidT: MC23 - why is there still scientific debate
ric.hayman: readfern - good point. We can't expect certainty from the science, but if we reduce our carbon emission and find out later that that it wasn't casuing climate change, I don't think it will have done us any harm ... the reverse isn't true
liquidIce: The greenhouse gas emissions in Australia from 2008 to 2012 was projected to be at 109% of the level in 1990, including the effects of land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). The figure is slightly above the Kyoto Protocol limitation of 108%. In 2007, the UNFCCC reported that the greenhouse gas emissions in Australia in 2004 were at 125.6% of the level in 1990, without the LULUCF correction. Under the Kyoto Protocol If the enforcement branch determines that a country is not in compliance with its emissions limitation, then that country is required to make up the difference plus an additional 30%. In addition, that country will be suspended from making transfers under an emissions trading program How are you going to ensure Australia is not penalised?
DavidT: Science can be sorted out to get consensus. Look how long it took Gallileo
Prime Minister: michaelcrowe23 asks about our targets. Please have a look at www.climatechange.gov.au re our three sets of targets : five,fiteen and twety five with the latter two conditional on the nature of the Copenhagen outcome.
AllanL: Your right MattyC
fishace: Locally produced biofuels and LPG would drastically reduce the carbon footprint whilst generating local jobs.
Nedwin05: I think there is much recognition for stronger localised economies here PM. I'm suprised. Its good!
ric.hayman: MattyC - I think the blame game is a red herring - it matter less what causes it than it matters about taking some action to mitigate it
DavidT: Good on you Matty
michaelcrowe23: THanks PM, and will you be pushing our 25% target (too low according to Garnaut)
readfearn: All typos forgiven. I know people like to say that what Australia does won't matter on a world scale. But what would the impact be if the globe saw one of the world's biggest exporters of coal turn its back on what we all know is a poisoned pill on the planet? Now there's a story.
fishace: The climate change argument isn't whether or not it's cyclic but rather how much impact we as humans have on speeding the process up.
R1nce: davidt; do yourself a favour and check sourcewatch.org the next time you see someone talking about the science not being in. You'll find that their money generally comes from big oil, big pharma, big tobacco and others.
Nedwin05: Sorry Matty C. The even if co2 wasn't the problem we still need to change away from fossil fuels. the science is an academic argument as far as I'm concerned.
Prime Minister: Back on energy efficiency, ideas re working from home and less business and govt commuting. One of the reasons we are laying out a nationa high speed braodband network is to make all that more possible. and with the states, we have agreed a Telepresence system which means we can stay in our capitals and meet via videolink. One small step for mankind etc....
ric.hayman: DavidT, MC23 - I thnk the scientific debate is worthwhile - it always helps to get a better understanding of what's going on around us. I just think that the scientific debate has given us enough idea to take some action, and waiting for scientific certainty now costs more than taking action on an educated guess :)
AllanL: I would love to see our transport sector go to electricity just to have energy indepedence from oil.How much of the $172m of the green car initiative will go to produce a local electric car?
r1nce: totally and unreservedly agre, readfearn.
MattyC: Despite what many are lead to believe the concensus is not there. There are in fact many discenting voices and there is a shift in the science recently that supports some of the discenting voices from what has been painted as a consensus.
Nedwin05: The broadband network will really help local economies PM
Merridear: PM Is it possible that in the near future that their will be further funding for local/regional governments to progress innovative and significant climate change initiatives.
liquidIce: PM, why haven't you incorporated the recommendations from the IPCC, CSIRO and our leading experts from Australian universities directly into your targets and policies?
readfearn: So imagine if we stepped away from the world's inevitable plan to trade on carbon. We'd be left out in the cold of one of the biggest economic drivers there is. That would be a serious "ball drop" - science or otherwise.
fishace: “Biofuel production using algae can be concentrated in terms of land use. It's essential requirement is energy from sunshine. Algae can absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and thrive on concentrations of the gas from combustion wastes. They do particularly well in saline environments, which are abundant in Australia and have no alternative commercial uses." Garnaut - Chapter 22 p.552
r1nce: While we're on it, and just briefly, how about expanding the national rail network to remove more trucks from interstate highways? Some of our rail lines don't even accommodate two trains passing each other without having to use a siding. Placing the burden of interstate transport on the rail network instead of the road network would reduce emissions just on fuel alone.
readfearn: PM - I'm in agreement that getting the workforce (and my boss) used to the idea that we don't really need to travel on dirty fuel all the time would prepare us well for a time when oil isn't the cheap liquid fuel it is now.
Nedwin05: I don't think the government needs to do much else for local economies in terms of infrastructure PM. its more about regulatory changes to the electricity market, giving communities more say in what they do locally in terms of food, energy, water, waste etc.
Prime Minister: Again on energy efficiency, you may not be aware of nour national green car plan which isbuilt on a 1.3 billion dollar green car innovati0on fund. One of the aims is to produce an Australian made hybrid.Much more to do.
LawyersRus: I agree with Nedwin05 - science aside, we'll run out of fossil fuels! Then what?
MattyC: Maybe so Nedwin05 but surely to change our entire economy around should not be based on "so we might be wrong, but it will be good anyway" - i dont accept that at all. There are many enviornmental issues that are worthy of funding - the whole world has been consumed and hijacked by a single issue.
liquidIce: PM, and what about the switches, routers, fibre optics etc that all need to be powered. Are you going to ensure that they are the most energy efficient in the world and that they are all powered by renewable (zero emissions) energy?
readfearn: PM - yes, much more to do. I found it difficult to see the building of a four-cyclinder petrol engine as "green".
DavidT: AllanL - Melbourne trams &amp; trains have been electric for yonks.
ric.hayman: I don't think we can shy away from the potential for a painful economic transition from a carbon-high to carbon-neutral or -low lifestyle - but delaying action will only increase the pain, and there is sufficient economic upside to counter it (and perhaps government assistance will be required too - but that's not new, nor would it be any more than required if we persist with eg fossil fuels for much longer)
LawyersRus: Broadband and green cars are great; a better public transport infrastructure would also go a long way.
Nedwin05: Keys to energy efficiency lies in the structure of our economy PM. So far the economy has been allowed to build 'efficiency' for big business profits.
Luke33: There's quiet some complexity in the science. Natural effects like the Pacific Decadal Oscillation can stall global temperature growth for a decade or longer. Communicating the science complexities is difficult to those wanting instant answers. But is a question of risk management. Ongoing drought conditions along the Murray an example of possibilities. PM we need a quality climate science documentary series. Complexity and uncertainty is what sceptics exploit. Anything to stall action is their tactic.
readfearn: MattyC - that should be "paid dissenting voices".
michaelcrowe23: PM, this will only be of use if we are all using green energy to power those vehicles as you are no doubt aware, however this process is extremely time consuming and time in this instance is not on our side. We need to stop tearing coal out of the ground, regardless of how strong certain lobbies are
r1nce: PM,  please don't bother with a hybrid. Or if you do, make sure that there is a 100% electric vehicle also on offer. 90% of people would have their everyday transport needs be served by an all electric vehicle, why not develop the Beetle of the 21st century? (Minus all the nationalistic socialism that accompanied that particular innovation.)
Patty: green cars still rely on electricity. What are the intiatives to encourage people to use transport efficiently?
Nedwin05: Big business profits based on cheap fossil fuel energy.
fishace: PM - your recent success for getting money to local people via local councils should be repeated for local climate change programs.
liquidIce: PM, a true "Green Car" does not have the reduced emissions of a hybrid, but zero emissions.
AllanL: I am a refugee from Sydney already. I live on a bush block and run a manufacuring business on the block. Internet is great but still does not move physical product from A to B
readfearn: PM - will the emissions trading legislation go through? can't you just muscle 'em?
r1nce: LawyersRus is right. Improved public infrastructure in all cities and towns would even further reduce the need for a personal vehicle as the only viable transport option.
fishace: Has anyone undertaken local v's city carbon transport modelling?
Nedwin05: I agree ric. But I'm not sure it will be that painful. I think we have been exaggerating that 'pain'.
Luke33: liquidice - why not power them with new generation nuclear? If you balance nuclear risk vs climate risk??
Prime Minister: Re readfearn on climate change leadership. One of the reasons we made climate change the absolute focus of the Pacific Islands Forum last week was to send a "Call to Action" to the rest of the world from those most vulnerable now. They asked me to take theri message to Pittsburgh and beyond for an ambitious Copenhagen outcome. And we must give it all we have got. Which is also why we cannot just be words. We also have to pass the carbon pollution reduction scheme here on ordher to give our commitments domestic effect.
superperson: Can I please ask, how will the water supply in Alic Springs be protected against contamination with proposed plans for uranium dump sites?
MattyC: Sorry I don't buy that readfearn - a cheap shot but it still doesnt answer the qeustions
AllanL: DavidT I beleive Melbourne still has cars.Transport was 14% of CO2 emissions 2006 in Australia
Patty: DavidT I agree. I'd like to see more focus on reducing reliance on single-car transport. Sorry if I'm sounding like a broken record, but it's easy to do (and I'm having loads of trouble with this site)
Nedwin05: back on to efficieny. A community of 1200 people that grows none of its own food imports about $1.4million worth every year. That saving could go some large way to putting solar panels n every home in that community over a few short years.
readfern: PM - with clear strong words like that, you're on a winner. But after the words will come the actions. But granted - it starts with ambition. Just ask JFK... well you can't... but you get my drift.
Merridear: I think there is plenty of evidence form cities that have already become totally self sufficient in energy production that this does not have to be a painful economic experience but rather a community re-awakening around local economies.
liquidIce: Electric powered vehicles should become the main part of the fleet, running on ultra capacitors, batteries or fuel cells. Open national standards should enable a nation wide "swap n go" system for car batteries and hydrogen storage. Bio Fuel powered cars, tractors and equipment in agricultural areas and niche markets do not impact food security or prices. The CSIRO research into next generation bio-fuels should be aggressively commercialised.
Prime Minister:r1nce has raised transport. We are starting to invest in urban rail for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth Govt. Long way to go. But also part of the solution.
ric.hayman: PM I think any scheme which prices carbon emission more equitably compared to "greener" alternatives is necessary to shift investment away from say, fossil fuels to solar. With the existing price advantage for eg coal, there is no incentive to invest in other technologies, and the relative price to the consumer inhibits adoption.
DavidT: If the general population wanted more public transport surely there would be more usage of what is already there.
Nedwin05: Not something for the fed gov maybe PM but the design of our cities doen't make public transport easy.
Luke33: Only the government can bring about the major transformations in energy use required. I think we need to seriously think big if we are going to make nay difference at all and bring most of the Australian population with us. I doubt people will vote for austerity.
liquidIce: Stop handing out concessions to major polluters, this does not solve the problem, nor does it motivate them or others to change. Instead invest in the solutions that will help us meet or do better than our targets.
AllanL: If everything is so urgent, split the bill, ammend the RET 200 Act
michaelcrowe23: Well said r1nce, There are many ways we can increase our efficiency in terms of transport, every foot on public transport or a pushbike is one less on the accelerator
Nedwin05: My food example is about this: energy efficiency isn't just about better light globes.
Readfern: You say cheap. I say reality.
ric.hayman: Also agree with several others here who suggest that public transport needs to be improved - more and cheaper. Patty - as much as I would like to see it, car pooling hasn't been a success here ... telecommuting may have a better chance (bring on the NBN!)
Patty: PM - urban rail? More details? Interesting
AllanL: and you have 50% of what you want this week
DavidT: Melb has cars because public transport is so unreliable
Nedwin05: Its about the structure and motives of our current economy.
ric.hayman: DavidT - not enough of it (here in Adelaide) and more expensive than parking your car in the city ... the profit motive where it is in private hands also militates against its use
readfearn: Nedwin05 - You are right. We've got to transition to a point where - when the energy crunches are coming two-by-two - we're the ones who have communities which can handle it.
Nedwin05: DavidT, its about how we have allowed are cities to be designed.
r1nce: This is also affecting our water supply. We have a serious problem in this country regarding our water needs. Put simply, we are consuming more than we are harvesting. Our rivers are dying, yet we continue to allow the use of open channel irrigation. We also continue to subsidise the farming of water intensive crops like cotton and rice. A move in textiles towards hemp (not for smoking) would see a decrease in operating costs for textile farmers by having less need for water, being naturally pest-resistant, and producing a better quality product. Using a desalination plant to flush the Murray-Darling system would be more productive than pumping it to the major cities. Legislating that all new homes have a water tank fitted, even just for flsuhing the toilets, would drmatically reduce household water consumption. Coupled with a retro-fitting program for older homes, having people have their own water source would reduce the strain on our dams.
LawyersRus: I don't agree DavidT - I would use the public transport in Adelaide if it was reliable.
Luke33: I see Land &amp; Water Australia has a report out on a methanol economy based on biofuel production from wood distillation based on massive revegetation of cleared semi-arid inland areas - a win-win one might think for biodiversity, salinity mitigation, regional economies and renewable liquid transport fuel. But only government could catalyse this sort of initiative.
michaelcrowe23: Thankyou PM for this great opportunity, we ask that you stand up and lead Australia to an agreement that ensures the ability of future generations to the same freedom and lifestyle that Australians have for decades enjoyed.
readfearn: liquidIce - the "swap n go" idea is already being developed. Search for BetterPlace on Google - or Gavoz if you want your search to be offset!
liquidIce: IMHO solar panels are not the best way to go. They require expensive fabrication plants, decay in efficiency over time and can not be repaired. A better way to go could be Concentrated Solar Power focused on a Stirling Engine. Performance does not degrade over time. Stirling Engines can be manufactured in a High School metal work shop. Commercial SE manufacturing can utilise many of the same processes etc as the auto industry. A SE can be repaired and maintained with minimal training and tools.
DavidT: Production of bio-fuels raise the price of agricultural inputs enormously and thereby add to the cost of food to consumers
Nedwin05: I understand the politics behind keeping the coal industry happy but in the meantime, demonstrable examples of how we could be living in the future could be set up in regional communities. Examples of success will show everyone that a low carbon economy isn't so scary.
readfearn: PM - new research just hitting the news wires from Oxford Economics says damage to the Great Barrier Reef will cost $37 billion over the next century.
Nedwin05: What did Bill Clinton say? "Its the economy...stupid". I think we should be thinking the same when it comes to solutions for climate change. Its the way we think about it. Its our whole economic rationale.
liquidIce: On the agricultural front the science is compelling and the solutions are relatively simple, but may not be popular.
LawyersRus: Not only reliable, but affordable. There also needs to be more regular/direct services. It takes too long most of the time (even if the bus is on time) because the bus route goes via everywhere to get from A to B.
AllanL: If public transport was so good there would be more of it.Face it people like the ability to "go" when they want to. No standing around for a bus train or tram. So individual transport is what you have to deal with.
Nedwin05: This needs to change of course. PM, you lambasted neo-liberalism. Are you open to new ways of thinking?
ric.hayman: Wow - has everybody just accelerated because we're short of time? Finding it hard to keep up here :)
DavidT: LawyerRus - I used to ride a bike when I worked in Melb CBD.
fishace: The production of algal biofuels has NO effect on agricultural input rather increases output using unproductive land.
liquidIce: Australia should not have any water intensive crops, the Govt should enact a strategy to migrate all existing farmers from water intensive crops to more sustainable crops. This should happen within the next 10 years.
ric.hayman: liquidIce - good point re solar panels, but given the amount of sunshine we get, solar power should be a monty here, so the more incentive there is to explore alternatives to panels the better
readfearn: On that economic rationale - seeing as the environment IS the economy, I'd say you're on the button. But shiny plastic and supermarket aisles guard us from the scars those products leave on our world.
DavidT: Public transport in Paris and Hong Kong &amp; elsewhere is fantastic, but the roads are still clogged
r1nce: AllanL; that's the problem. Public transport isn't good enough to allow people the flexibility to do what they want. So they use private transport. The solution is to improve public transport to a point where it is reliable, flexible and affordable for everyone. Decrying it as "not useful" isn't a solution.
LawyersRus: I don't agree Nedwin05 - yes, I like to 'go' when I want to. However, I have lived in cities in the USA where you can 'go' when you want to, and people use the public transport all of the time. In DC you can park your car at a safe car park and jump on a train into the city, then you can get the metro anywhere, with basically no delay. No one even looks at timetables!
readfearn: PM - what have you thought of the chat?
DavidT: LiquidIce - where would you get your milk from?
Nedwin05: Paris and HK were designed before the car.
ric.hayman: LawyersRus - there's a HUGE discussion to have about city design and infrastructure, "local" employment and initiatives (which reduce the need for travel), telecommuting ... all of which impact on our use of fuel, climate change and economic and ecological viability
LawyersRus: Sorry, not Nedwin05 - AllanL.
AllanL: Electricty is the best energy source for transport.You can generate it in the "best" and most economical manner. Just think how many electric motors are around you at this moment. And all it takes to transport an electron is a wire.
michaelcrowe23: PM, are you still with us?
liquidIce: PM an emissions trading scheme seems like a bit of a neo-liberal concept. How are you going to keep speculators and profiteers out of the system. Instead of profits going to the people reducing their footprint they go to the middle man. Further more, what is going to be done when trading goes global to prevent the equivalent of the "creative economics" that caused the Global Financial Crisis from happening in the global carbon market?
LawyersRus: David T- that may be true about clogged cities, however the population in those places in massive compared to any Australian cities.
MattyC: There are some good ideas here: More public transport, more energy efficient things (good for all sorts of reasons). But am I the only person here who is questioning the one thing that underpins the entire ETS. It is this: what if manmade CO2 is not causing the warming. I think it is telling that nobody wants to answer this question
readfearn: PM - you're typing so fast in the picture that I can't see your fingers moving.
Nedwin05: the solution to Public transport use is the design of our cities.
DavidT: So was Sydney
Patty: DavidT compare the per capita % travelled on public transport, and by private car for those cities and Aus, and you'll see the difference
fishace: Making the panels in Australia is important to our vast 'Sunshine' resource. The idea is to use our natural resources, not create further issues adding further carbon impacts.
PMConnect-Admin: Hi all. Thankyou to everyone for participating today. We are just awaiting the PM's final comments before we wrap up.
Nedwin05: As mentioned before. part of the government's big problem is how to sell the idea of a low carbon economy to the voters. The only solution to that is by havng demonstrable examples. Create highly efficient local economies in the regions and people will see how everything, food, power, transport etc can work without high co2 output.
ric.hayman: I think this has been a great idea, which would be made even better if we see some wide publication of this discussion (eg - can I link to the transcript from my blog, please? Will it be at here?) AND some action from PM based on this input.
Nedwin05: liquidice. the ETS was designed by a neo-classical economist so you're spot on.
Merridear: Given that we know how to build really sustainable houses how can the federal government influence building codes to eliminate heat absorbing infrastructures such as black roads, black roofs and lack space for shade trees.
r1nce: Well, so much for the final 5 minutes. Another thank you to the prime Minister for sharing his time with us all. I would still very much to have responses for the majority of these posts written in to a blog entry, or email responses.
readfearn: CO2 is a greenhouse gas. If you put more of it up there, it stands to reason that you create an underlying warming trend.
DavidT: as I said earlier Matty, I totally agree
Nedwin05: But he does make an argument for decentralisation of the grid. I only believe we need to give the ownership back to local people...via co-ops, small floats etc.
LawyersRus: MattyC: I don't think it matters if man made Co2 isn't the cause of warming. All of these things will create a society that is ultimately a better, healthier place to live.
Ric.hayman: MattyC who cares what causes it? If we can formulate a "man-made solution" it doesn't matter what's to blame for where we are - what is important is where we go from here
fishace: Good luck PM and thankyou for this opportunity, we are avidly watching all of your initiatives and schemes and look forward to seeing the outcomes.
liquidIce: I suggest a shake up of the auto industry and the current paradigm of owning a vehicle.
At the moment, there is no incentive to upgrade the current vehicle fleet with more energy efficient engines etc.
If cars were provided as a network service similar to mobile phones:
- Service stations are the equivalent of mobile towers
- KMs driven are the equivalent of air time minutes (refueling is included in this)
- If a car is a leased service then the service provider has an incentive to upgrade your car to ensure it is more efficient because it will improve their profit margin as it would require less maintenance and less fuel or equivalent energy source.
readfearn: Make it a good one Kevin. No pressure.
ric.hayman: thanks to all for the discussion ... will have to go back and read it all now :)
Prime Minister:Thanks folks we have now had an hour online. Sorry i type like an extra in Thunderbirds. I will record my thoughts on your posts this afternoon and put'em on my website. Lets do this again soon. KR
Nedwin05: thanks for the opportunity. A great initiative.
LawyersRus: Thanks PM!
ric.hayman: Admin - can we found out the URL of the transcript so that we can reference it later?
Nedwin05: A shame we can't connect in person. I loved some of the thinking here and would like a chance to catch up...oh well!
DavidT: Thanks for the opportunity
MattyC: Thanks all, a bit fractured but well worth while
LawyersRus: Thanks all, have a great day.
LiquidIce: Thank you for this opportunity it has been a pleasure :)
MattyC: Not necessarily the case readfern and if you have been reading the science as much as you claim you would understand this. There has been periods in ice age where the co2 is much higher
R1nce: Thank you everybody, At least I know that I'm not alone in some of the things I'm thinking. Take it easy.
MattyC: Anyway - you all have a great day. See you all again one day - maybe?
Merridear: Thanks for the opportunity.  This has been fun and encouraging to hear kindred spirits with some REAL ideas for sustainability and future growth of local economies.  Let's stay in touch via the PM's website.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd: Hi Folks and thanks for all those who contributed to the Prime Minister's blog, that's my blog, on climate change. We had nearly a thousand posts, a few people got in there and contributed more than one and, thanks for all those ideas, some of which we can take on board and others of which simply prod us in the right direction and others of which obviously we can't travel with. But the whole point of having this blog and having an online discussion is that we actually get the best ideas for the country and for the future.
Then of course, for the online discussion, we had some 20 or 30 participating in the last 24 hours and that's been good. Range of topics that were raised included what we do on energy efficiency, what we do also on Biosequestration as a means of reducing our carbon emissions. Domestic emissions targets, the role of land transport, in particular urban transport and urban rail as a way of bringing emissions down; also the use of home conferencing or the use of video technology to reduce the overall need for people to travel interstate or internationally for conferences and certainly a greater prospect of working from home and, finally, the importance - the paramount importance - of getting a first class outcome from Copenhagen.
Now one of the big topics raised, of course, was energy efficiency and I just thought I'd run through a few of the things that the Government's doing at present, but I'm up for ideas about what more things we do. The Energy Efficient Homes Package, we're providing insulation to be installed in up to 2.9 million homes, basically ceiling insulation, which as you know, will bring down your electricity costs for the house itself, but more importantly reduce the amount of greenhouse gases emitted to provide for people's home-heating. 
The other thing we're doing is solar hot water heaters being installed in over 300,000 homes  -  this is a big, big package. It's part of the Government's economic stimulus strategy and it runs to some $4 billion, but we thought this is a practical way of generating jobs now, while also bringing down greenhouse gas emissions at the same time. I'm told here that we've got 150,000 homes have installed insulation already and 57,000 solar hot water systems as well; so progress being made and progress underway as far as all that work is concerned. Insulation can save households up to 40 per cent in heating and cooling costs while installing a solar hot water scheme can save up to $700 a year on running costs; so practical for the budget but most critically, given our discussion on climate change, critical for bringing down greenhouse gas emissions.
There's another thing as well: the Green Loans Program, which will provide home sustainability assessments for up to 360,000 households across the country and up to 75,000 interest-free loans for identified energy efficiency improvements. The idea of the audit is to help people know what they can do at home and if we can do that with 360,000 households that's one big step in the right direction.
The expanded and accelerated appliance energy efficiency program is also expected to deliver a greenhouse gas abatement of around 19.5 million tons per year  -  that's the equivalent of taking about 5 million cars off the road, so we think that's a useful way forward as well.
Finally, the Government's $100 million National Energy Efficiency Initiative  -Smart Grid, Smart City also to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy by encouraging innovative, smart grid technology.
So here are some very practical measures on the energy efficiency front when it comes to homes, the use of appliances, the use of solar hot water systems, the use of energy insulation and also audits to help people know what they can do better themselves.
Renewable energy was also raised by a number of people in the online discussion. In the area of renewable energy we're providing $4.5 billion of investment in a range of clean-energy technologies, including $2 billion plus for carbon capture and storage flagship programs across the country and, critically, a $1.4 billion investment when it comes to solar flagships that will include what we hope to be the single largest solar-generating project anywhere in the world, up to a thousand megawatts and the biggest one around the planet at the moment is in California with only about 300 megawatts. As you know, Australia has loads of sunshine, the key thing is working out at what cost we can generate this solar energy and doing it at scale so that we can work out how we can expand this into the future.
Finally on Copenhagen, this of course is a big one for everyone and it's a big one for governments to show leadership across the world. I was recently with President Obama and others at the G8 Plus Summit in L'Aquila in Italy. This is, frankly, the challenge which now presents itself for us to wrestle with right through until December. There are a couple of staging points in between, including next month at the UN in New York and the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh, but we've got to narrow the gap between the major emerging economies on the one hand and the developed economies in the other. This is critical; otherwise this great, historical opportunity will pass us by and as the Australian Prime Minister and many people asked me about this in the online discussion today: we are exerting every effort, diplomatically, to try and bridge the gap between all these participating countries. It will be very hard, but I've got to say that it will be a task made even harder if we can't go to the world and say that we're using our own Emissions Trading Scheme, our own Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, to bring down our own greenhouse gas emissions in order to give effect in a practical way to the targets we talk about embracing internationally as well.
So energy efficiency, also on the question of renewable energy, also our international diplomatic strategy around Copenhagen, the Government's active. But I'd really encourage you, if you've got further ideas about what we can be doing: get them in; contribute again to what the Government's saying and we would like to hear from you as soon as possible.
In the meantime, thanks for participating in the blog and thanks for participating in the online discussion as well, I really appreciate it.


PM:  G'day, I'm here talking to Chris Judd in my office here in Canberra, about what we're going to do to promote climate change among footy fans across the country. And one of the practical things that we're on about is what can you do within your club, and what you can do at home to bring down greenhouse gas emissions, carbon pollution, to do our bit for the planet. So Chris, thanks for extending us a helping hand. You're now our Ambassador for this Green Challenge with the AFL.
JUDD: That's right.
PM: So, tell us a few things that people can do.
JUDD: Yeah look, I think it's just about asking people to make some simple changes to their daily behaviours. Things like turning off your appliances at the switch, catching public transport or riding your bike to the games, or if you do take rubbish, making all your disposals effective- that's a term we have in football, but, you know, putting them in the recycling bin at the ground or taking them home and recycling them there.
PM: Well that's good. So if you're in a club, one of the things that people might be able to think of is how can you bring down your electricity consumption, it saves the bills as well. But putting in some ceiling insulation maybe if there's enough funds around. Maybe thinking about some solar panels. Maybe even thinking about some solar hot water systems for showers and stuff.
JUDD: Yeah, we're just building a new facility. We've received some money from the Federal Government, so thanks for that. But yeah look, we've got solar panels on the roof, we've got rain tanks- I think they're actually aiming to have the centre water neutral, if you like, from the rain we collect. So the club's very aware of the need to make our building as energy efficient as possible, and leave our carbon footprint as small as it possibly can be.
PM: Okay, well listen, thanks for being with us in this. The big challenge for us is making a difference as a Government, and making a difference as a community. Which means that football is such a big part of the community, that all those fans out there,to try and do their bit to make a difference for climate change.
JUDD: Thank you very much, thanks for having me. The Ruddster and the Juddster.
PM: Well, he's the Juddster, he's seriously talented. I'm the Ruddster, and when it comes to football, I am not. But can I say, please get behind this, because it makes a difference. Every single tonne of carbon we can take out of the atmosphere, frankly makes a difference for Australia, and for the planet. Thanks very much folks.


PM:              Well, the weather Gods have conspired today so that we're inside rather than outside, which you know, Penny and I are very pleased about because we would have been able to display our full range of football skills outside, which you've all been spared, and Chris, you could have showed us something genuinely serious about the skills necessary in the game.
What are we here to do today? It's a great initiative of the AFL which we're supporting as the Government to ensure that this weekend's Green Round in the AFL is about how do we encourage mums and dads, fans, supporters, clubs, players - right across the country on doing their bit to bring down greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, to do their bit on climate change.
Governments do their bit on climate change, and we're having that debate here in Canberra at the moment. But it's important the community does its bit on climate change, and a huge slice of our national community is what happens in footy. I'm told that we've got, on any given weekend, 250,000-300,000 people going to games right across the country. Viewing audiences this weekend, I'm told, is about one million people.
So we have a very simple message as a Government, which is: how do we, as Australians all, do our bit on climate change  -  Government doing its bit, the community doing its bit, and footy fans doing their bit as well. So we're pleased to partner with the AFL on this one.
People ask ‘well, what are the practical things that can be done to bring down carbon pollution?'  Well if you're in a football club, practical stuff like have you got insulation in your ceiling to bring down your overall cost of energy  -  good for the club's electricity bills over time, as well. On top of that, what can you do to bring in a solar hot water system for the showers and the other needs that you've got within the club itself? What can you do with solar panels on the roof? What can you do, also, in terms of encouraging your fans and your supporters to use public transport where that's available? These are the practical things, together with energy efficient light bulbs which all go towards making a difference.
Each club, each player, each footy family making their difference on climate change in Australia because together we can make a difference worldwide. The Government's agreed to contribute up to $200,000 to our new climate change partnership with the AFL. We believe this is a good investment for the future, and we look forward to the AFL being our partners in this so that Australia can make a difference on climate change.
Enough from me, and now I'm turning to Penny  -  over to you.


On the eve of the first ever ‘Green Round', the Rudd Government is teaming up with the Australian Football League (AFL) to help footy fans take action on climate change.
A new partnership between the Government and the AFL will promote action that fans and players can take on climate change, and help grass roots football clubs become more climate friendly.
Australians want to do their bit to tackle climate change, and this partnership will help AFL fans and footy clubs achieve that.
Activities under the partnership could include:
•                an interactive climate change awareness program for families and children involved in junior football programs;
•                a targeted carbon pollution reduction program across the AFL and grass roots footy clubs; and
•                the introduction of a new program to support local clubs taking action on climate change to reduce their carbon pollution and save money on energy bills.
There are simple things that football fans can do to be a part of the climate change solution, even while watching or playing their favourite game.
The AFL will be encouraging footy fans to use public transport, cycle or car pool to get to games this week for the Green Round.
When fans leave home for the Green Round this week, they can turn lights and heating off and make sure appliances are switched off at the wall.
The Government welcomes the AFL's decision to actively and publicly be a part of the climate change solution and looks forward to building on the partnership announced today.
Australians have made it clear they want the Government to take action on climate change and we know that the time to act is now.


I am deeply dismayed by the verdict delivered today on the trial of Aung San Suu Kyi.  She is the symbol of liberty in Burma, and her continued detention represents a new low for the Burmese regime.  The Australian Government is convinced that Aung San Suu Kyi was tried on spurious charges and not granted a fair hearing.
Her conviction removes any prospect that she could participate in Burma's elections, scheduled for 2010.
I join the international community in condemning the conviction and ongoing detention of Aung San Suu Kyi and in calling for her immediate and unconditional release.  It is also critical that the Burmese regime release the more than 2,000 other political prisoners in Burma.
It is time for change in Burma  -  time for the military regime to deliver to the people of Burma the basic right of freedom of political association.  The Australian Government is deeply concerned by the Burmese regime's disregard for the democratic aspirations of its people and its disrespect for their human rights.  We will continue our strong efforts with other members of the international community, including the United Nations, to deliver the change which the Burmese so much deserve.
Australia has strong sanctions against Burma, which it will continue to apply until we see genuine political change.
Aung San Suu Kyi has previously asked that the Radio Australia service to Burma be re-established.  As a gesture of our solidarity with her, and to open a new channel of international contact for the people of Burma, the Australian Government and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation have together agreed to re-establish the Radio Australia service to Burma.


PM: This weekend's Green Round in the AFL is about how do we encourage mums and dads, fans, supporters, clubs, players, right across the country on doing their bit to bring down greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, to do their bit on climate change.
People ask, ‘well, what are the practical things that can be done to bring down carbon pollution?' Well, if you're in a football club, practical stuff like have you got insulation in your ceiling to bring down your overall cost of energy? Good for the club's electricity bills over time as well.
On top of that, what can you do to bring in a solar hot water system for the showers and the other needs that you've got within the club itself? What can you do with solar panels on the roof? What can you do, also, in terms of encouraging your fans and supporters to use public transport where that's available?
These are the practical things, together with energy-efficient light bulbs, which all go towards making a difference.
The Government's agreed to contribute up to $200,000 to our new climate change partnership with the AFL. We believe this is a good investment for the future, and we look forward to the AFL being our partners in this, so that Australia can make a difference on climate change.


CURTIS: Well there are meetings that have gone on this morning between Government ministers and the Prime Minister and Defence Force officials. The Prime Minister has also spoken to the Australian High Commissioner in Papua New Guinea, they've sent a number of Defence Force assets - planes, helicopters are on the way, there's also a helicopter already there that was on board HMAS Success.
They, as I've said, have arrived or will be arriving to help with the search effort. But as we've heard, the fate of the plane is unknown, and that's a point the Prime Minister made when I spoke to him a short time ago.
PM: There are of course a number of leads from villagers as to where things may or may not be, but we have no confirmed reports which is why this morning we are deploying all possible Australian assets to try and locate this aircraft.
We are particularly concerned about the nine Australians who are reported to be on board, of course we are concerned about all those on this aircraft. This is a time when I think the hearts of all Australians go out to the families of these fellow Australians who are going through extraordinary anxiety this morning waiting for news.
CURTIS: You spoke last night to Papua New Guinea's Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare, have you spoken again either to the Papua New Guinean Government or to the Australian High Commission?
PM: I spoke to the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea Sir Michael Somare last night to, frankly just to get it all clear that we'd be deploying all these Australian Defence assets immediately to make sure there was no bureaucratic problem and he was very, very good about it.
This morning at 6.30am we met with, or I met with the Chief of Defence Force, the national security advisor, the consular officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade together with the Defence and Foreign Ministers to go through exactly what is being done and what more can be done. And I've just got off the phone 7am from the Australian High Commissioner in Port Moresby.
At six o'clock this morning the Papua New Guinea search and rescue authority met, as a result of that I'm advised two helicopters now moving towards or at the site. As of 8.30 this morning the Australian sea king helicopter from HMAS Success, which we diverted to Port Moresby last night, will be on the ground in Port Moresby ready to be deployed to the site as well.
Together with the Australian Caribou aircraft which is on the ground in Moresby ready for deployment in a coordinated fashion by the authorities. We've also got other assets arriving, but we are absolutely determined to use this opportunity of light this morning to exert every effort to find this aircraft.
CURTIS: And how long are you prepared to leave them for? As long as it takes?
PM: As long as it takes. These are our fellow Australians; this is a horrible, horrible experience for families waiting for news. Therefore our responsibility as the Australian Government is to throw every possibly asset at this.
On top of those I've just mentioned, we also have a C-130 aircraft on the way from Richmond which has an aero-medical team on board and also later today from Richmond a C-17 with two black hawk helicopters as well.
Our responsibility is to do everything we can, and we're talking about Kokoda, I think there's so many tens of thousands of Australians who have walked this track, whose family have walked it, and for Australians this is sacred ground.
And so I think the nation's thoughts and prayers and our sense of being Australian is actually with us this morning as we work with the families. Consular officials have also been working with the families last night, and will be again this morning.
CURTIS: You've walked the Kokoda track, you have some idea of how difficult the terrain is. Do you think Australians who want to go there understand the dangers?
PM: It is a very difficult and potentially dangerous part of the world, it's one of the most difficult flying environments in the world. I was talking to the Chief of Defence Force about this this morning, pouring over maps myself because I know most of those towns along the track and where you have this coincidence of extremely rugged mountain terrain and on the other hand at the same time you've got these extraordinary changing weather patterns, it's a very, very difficult flying environment.
But for Australians Kokoda has a unique significance which is why people flock there each year, and having been there myself I understand why.


WILKINSON:   Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, thanks for your time this morning.
PM:   Good to be with you Lisa.
WILKINSON:   Now, can you tell us where the situation stands this morning?
PM:   Yes Lisa, I met with Foreign Affairs and Defence officials about 6:30 this morning. And then about a quarter of an hour or so ago I spoke with the High Commissioner, Chris Moraitis, in Port Moresby. There was a meeting of the PNG search and rescue authorities this morning at 6 am.
I am advised that the weather this morning is relatively clear, though there are concerns about this clouding in and coming in by about the middle of the day. As a result of that meeting there are further, there are two PNG choppers aloft now, heading in the direction, if not already, at the actual area of concern. We also have Australian assets on standby, ready to be deployed, subject to co-ordinated direction.
That includes a Royal Australian Air Force Caribou on the ground in Port Moresby, and we have a Sea King helicopter, which will be on the ground at 8:30, after we diverted HMAS Success to Port Moresby last night. It'll be on the ground at 8:30 ready for use as well. So we are throwing all assets at this and we have further assets on the way from Australia as well.
WILKINSON:   Prime Minister, is there any hope of finding survivors?
PM:   We have, the reason we are deploying all these assets Lisa, is because we believe we've got to throw everything at this because we do not have any confirmed reports in terms of fatalities. Therefore, we have to throw everything at this, because these are members of our Australian family.
It would be the nightmare of every Australian watching your program this morning who have got friends and love ones abroad, whether they are parents, brothers, sisters, or children, to have them missing in a foreign country, and particularly in such a rugged environment as Papua New Guinea.
So therefore our attitude is, we throw everything at this, we do whatever we can to try and find this aircraft. And also onboard a C-130 on its way from Richmond to Papua New Guinea at the moment, we have an aero-medical evacuation team also on board, together with the despatch of two Black Hawk helicopters through a C-17 aircraft later today.
So we intend to do everything physically possible in coordination with the PNG authorities. I spoke with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea last night to confirm all of those arrangements.
WILKINSON:    Prime Minister, I'm sure this is particularly close to your heart, you have walked the Kokoda track, you know how tough that terrain is. Do you have any further information on exactly what went wrong on the flight?
PM:   No, nothing confirmed Lisa, and that's why we're being very, very careful about this, in terms of all assets being deployed for the search and rescue effort. Also our consular officials are in close contact with the families of the nine Australians who are on the flight manifest, and therefore we are making sure we maintain the closest possible contact with them, and we'll continue to do this throughout the course of the day.
You are right, Kokoda has a huge significance, for I think all Australians. Tens of thousands of Australians have walked the track, and I believe everyone would be drawing breath this morning and feeling deeply, this sense of empathy for all those families who are going through the absolute anxiety and the sheer hell this morning of waiting for news.
And our job as their fellow Australians and our job as the Government, is to do whatever we physically can to support them at this very, very difficult time.
WILKINSON:   It sure is Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there. We do thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM:   Thank you Lisa.


Nine young Australians have today been named winners of the Think Climate, Think Change Schools Competition, following an outstanding response from schoolchildren across the nation.
The winners of the competition are:
     * Category Grades 3-4: Isabella Compton, Our Lady of the Rosary Primary School, NSW.
     * Category Grades 5-7: Young Environment Protectors, Manchester Primary School, VIC (comprising Krystal Vanschoonhoven, Rhiannon Warner, Ashleigh Basham, Tani Watts, Thomas Stevens, Jessica Gilbee, and Isabelle Pope).
     * Category Grades 8-9: Michelle Aitken, John Curtin College of the Arts, WA.
The winners were able to show their artwork to Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard and the Minister for Climate Change and Water, Senator Penny Wong, at Parliament House. They were able to raise their ideas about what climate change means to them.
Senator Wong said the widespread interest in the competition showed just how much young people cared about climate change.
“It is our future generations that will feel the strongest impacts of climate change and the tremendous response to this competition shows just how concerned our youth are about climate change,'' she said.
“Young Australians understand that we need to take action now.''
The competition was inspired by letters received from school children across Australia asking about climate change and sharing their ideas for solutions to the issue of climate change.
“I am greatly encouraged by the enthusiasm Australian students and teachers have shown for the competition  -  we received 7666 entries, which is a tremendous response,” Senator Wong said.
“I congratulate the winners and finalists and thank every student who took the time to enter the competition and share creatively what climate change means to them.”
The Government received entries in all forms, including paintings, short stories, cartoons and drawings. Students raised their concerns about what the environment may look like in the future if we do not act now and also explained ways people could help, such as using energy wisely. Entries came from as far away as Thursday Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands.
The finalists' entries can be viewed at www.climatechange.gov.au


KOCH:  Prime Minister, thanks for your time. Has the crash been confirmed, have you got any more details for us?
PM:  David I spoke this morning with Australian Government officials and Australian defence officials at about 6:30 and about a quarter of an hour ago spoke to our High Commissioner in Port Moresby Chris Moraitis.
The situation is along these lines; that the weather this morning, I am advised in PNG is relatively clear. They are still concerned that the weather may close in towards the middle of the day. There was a meeting at 6.00 am this morning of the PNG air safety, the air search and rescue authorities.  As a result of that, two helicopters are now aloft and are moving towards the area of concern.
On top of that, we have also an Australian Caribou ready to go aloft from Port Moresby itself. An Australian Sea King will be on the ground at 8:30 from HMAS Success, and it'll be ready to go aloft as well, as soon as it refuels. On the specifics though, however, we do not have any confirmed reports and we are therefore deploying all possible assets to try and identify the location of this aircraft.
KOCH:   It is such a sad story isn't it. The Kokoda Track means so much to Australians. It is, well, you know, you've done it, eldest son Nick has done the track, Therese has done the track, it has become almost like a rite of passage for so many Australians.
Do we need to work a bit closer with the PNG Government to ensure the safety of the region? It's wild and woolly, isn't it?
PM:   David it is very difficult and dangerous terrain, and it's got a particularly difficult set of climatic conditions as well, very rugged mountain terrain, very difficult climate, and very uncertain weather.
I think every Australian feels this morning the extraordinary anxiety of the families of these nine Australians who are missing. This is every family's worst nightmare to have members of your family, your parents, your brothers, your sisters, your children go missing in a foreign country.
That's why our responsibility as a Government is to deploy every asset possible to try and find these missing Australians. And I think everyone who has walked the track, everyone who has had family who have walked the track, and everyone whose got family abroad right at the moment would feel deeply and acutely the extraordinary anxiety of these Australian families.
KOCH:   Absolutely. Is anything being done for the families as they await the news there. Have they been kept informed?
PM:   I've spoken again with our consular officials this morning. I am advised that they have been in contact with the families and will be again in families during the course of the early part of this morning to keep them abreast of the search and rescue efforts.
Also on the search and rescue front, I should inform you that we have a C-130 travelling from Richmond to Papua New Guinea now, which has onboard our own rescue team for medical purposes, etcetera. And on top of that, later today we'll be despatching from Australia a C-17 with a couple of Black Hawk helicopters on board as well.
So we are going to throw every asset at this, we have been throwing every asset at this, but the anxiety of parents and family is understood, and that's why our consular officials are working with them as closely as possible.
KOCH:   Okay, well it sounds as though we really are helping, which is a terrific thing. Mate, good to catch up, thanks for your time.
PM:   Thanks very much David.


I am pleased to announce new arrangements for departmental secretaries and senior statutory office-holders which will take effect in the near future.
Ms Helen Williams AO, Secretary of the Department of Human Services, has indicated to me that she intends to retire from the Australian Public Service (APS).  Ms Williams was the first woman appointed as Secretary of an Australian Government department.  While she has held her current position since May 2007, she has been a Secretary or Secretary equivalent for over 20 years in such diverse portfolios as Communications and the Arts, Immigration, Prime Minister and Cabinet, Tourism, Transport and Education.  She was Public Service Commissioner from 1998 to early 2002.  Ms Williams rightly has a reputation as a highly committed and professional public servant who has made a significant contribution to public service in Australia.  I am pleased that Ms Williams has indicated her willingness to accept part-time Government positions in the future.  I pay tribute to her dedicated service and wish her well.
The position of Secretary of the Department of Human Services will be filled by Mr Finn Pratt PSM.  Mr Pratt is currently the Chief Executive Officer of Centrelink and before that was an Associate Secretary in the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.  He has spent much of his career in labour market related activity and has a strong understanding of the link between policy and delivery.  This experience, coupled with his expertise in leading a major service delivery agency, will be invaluable in his new role.  Centrelink's Deputy Chief Executive Officer, Customer Service, Ms Carolyn Hogg, will act as Chief Executive Officer pending the appointment of Mr Pratt's successor.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Hon Stephen Smith MP, will recommend to the Governor-General the appointment of Mr Nick Warner PSM as Director-General of the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS).  Mr Warner will leave his current position as Secretary of the Department of Defence.  Mr Warner's accomplishments during his time at Defence are significant and include the production of the recent Defence White Paper and accompanying force structure, a $20 billion savings program and a wide-ranging reform program.  Prior to being appointed as Secretary of Defence, Mr Warner held a number of senior positions in Australia and overseas, including Special Coordinator of the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.  He brings a wealth of knowledge to the position of Director-General at a time when the Government is faced with a growing need for timely and accurate intelligence.  I am confident that Mr Warner's depth of experience will serve the Government well, not only in his role as Director-General of ASIS, but in other international roles as required by the Government from time to time. 
Dr Ian Watt AO, currently the Secretary of the Department of Finance and Deregulation, will become the Secretary of the Department of Defence.  Dr Watt was first appointed as a Secretary in 2001 in the Communications portfolio and moved to the Finance Department early in 2002.  Since that time he has overseen a significant strengthening of the department's capacity to support government, particularly in the preparation of the Budget.  Dr Watt's experience and achievements will see him well placed to tackle the challenges of his new role.
Mr David Tune PSM will become the Secretary of the Department of Finance and Deregulation.  Mr Tune has worked in the APS for around 30 years and is currently an Associate Secretary in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet with responsibility for the Domestic Policy Group.  Mr Tune has previously held a number of senior positions in both central and line agencies with a social policy focus and brings extensive public sector experience and expertise to his new position.
The Treasurer, the Hon Wayne Swan MP, will recommend to the Governor-General the appointment of Ms Patricia Scott as a full time Commissioner in the Productivity Commission.  Ms Scott will bring extensive experience in human services to the Commission, and her appointment will enhance the Commission's capacity to advise the Government on ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of human services provision.  In addition to her extensive policy experience in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, she was instrumental in the successful establishment of the Department of Human Services following her appointment as the first Secretary of that department in October 2004.  Ms Scott has also acquired services related experience in her more recent role as Secretary of the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy.
The new program of Productivity Commission work on human services will draw on COAG initiated research by the Productivity Commission demonstrating the significant potential benefits to the community of investment in education, health and related human services, while acknowledging the heightened need for cost-effective spending by all governments in the years ahead.  It is envisaged that a series of projects spanning the life cycle of human services will be developed.  With the imperatives of an ageing population, particular attention will focus on human services that promote participation and productivity of the labour force.  The Government will also shortly provide a reference to the Productivity Commission to hold a public inquiry into aged care in Australia.  This inquiry will examine the needs of Australia's aged persons for the next 20 years and look at appropriate standards and funding arrangements to secure the best outcomes from aged care services.  The Commission's report will help the Government assess options for further advancing the long term agenda in human service areas vital to community wellbeing.
Mr Peter Harris will become the Secretary of the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy.  Mr Harris is currently the Secretary of the Victorian Department of Sustainability and the Environment where he is responsible for Victoria's largest current public infrastructure project.  He has extensive public policy experience, having held several executive Commonwealth roles including Deputy Secretary of the Commonwealth Department of Transport and Regional Services.  Mr Harris has the requisite experience and skills to lead his new department in its dealings with complex policy issues, such as telecommunications reform, vital to Australia's long-term national interest.
Mr Michael L'Estrange AO will be leaving the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade after more than four and a half years as Secretary of the Department.  During this period Mr L'Estrange has led the department with distinction under successive Governments.  His leadership has guided the department through a period of significant complexity across Australia's trade and foreign policy agenda, including in the areas of regional and global engagement, trade negotiations and consular crisis response.  The Government wishes to retain Mr L'Estrange in another senior position.  Discussions with Mr L'Estrange about this senior position in government to which he may wish to accept appointment are proceeding.
Mr Dennis Richardson AO will become the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.  Currently Australia's Ambassador to the United States, he has a public service career spanning forty years.  Prior to his appointment as Ambassador he held the position of Director-General of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation for almost nine years.  He has served in various senior public service roles in the Departments of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Foreign Affairs and Trade and Immigration.  His depth of foreign policy experience, and understanding of international relations, will serve him well in his new appointment. The Government will announce in due course the appointment of a new Ambassador to the United States.
Mr Andrew Metcalfe has been reappointed as Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.  I appreciate Mr Metcalfe's continuing contribution in this important role.
The Public Service Commissioner, Ms Lynelle Briggs, will be appointed as the Chief Executive Officer of Medicare Australia.  Ms Briggs, who was a Deputy Secretary in the then Department of Transport and Regional Services prior to her appointment as Commissioner, has been a passionate advocate for the public service and has championed the role of the APS in a modern democracy.  I am grateful for her contribution.  I am considering who will be appointed as Public Service Commissioner.  In the meantime, the Deputy Public Service Commissioner, Ms Carmel McGregor, will act as Public Service Commissioner.
Ms Philippa Godwin will take up the position of Head of the Child Support Agency at the Department of Human Services, as Deputy Secretary, Child Support and Planning.  Ms Godwin brings significant service delivery and policy experience to her new role.  She has been Acting Chief Executive Officer at Medicare Australia since November 2008, having joined that agency as Deputy Chief Executive Officer in August 2005.  Prior to taking up her appointment at Medicare Australia, Ms Godwin was a Deputy Secretary at the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs from 2002 to 2005, having commenced with that department in 1989.  She also has extensive experience at the regional and State office level in Commonwealth and State Government departments.
In line with our election commitment, all appointments will be for a period of five years.


Three new GP Super Clinics will be built in Victoria to deliver better health services, take pressure off our hospitals, and make sure families can get the health care they need.
$15.2 million will be provided to fund three GP Super Clinics to be located at Portland, Wodonga and South Morang.
The $4.9 million Portland GP Super Clinic will focus on reducing avoidable hospital admissions, with an emphasis on diabetes-related allied health services (dietetics, diabetes education, podiatry) and drug and alcohol services. The Clinic will also provide family planning, dental health services and a telehealth room to deliver virtual services to outreach centres in western Victoria.
The $6.65 million Wodonga GP Super Clinic will focus on chronic disease self management and a strong emphasis on training and education to provide clinical training places to medical, allied health, pharmacy and nursing students from a number of universities. As well as GPs there will be pathology services, audiology and podiatry services and a pharmacy.
The $3.7 million South Morang GP Super Clinic will be a newly constructed facility to meet the needs of the rapidly expanding community in the City of Whittlesea.  The Clinic will employ 12 GPs and bring together existing community health services for early childhood (speech, neuropsychology, parenting), youth counselling, drug and alcohol counselling, chronic disease management, dental and mental health services.
GP Super Clinics are a Rudd Government initiative to improve access to quality health care in our community.
They are a significant investment in taking pressure off our hospitals.
The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's final report has recommended that the Government improve access to comprehensive and multidisciplinary primary health care services in a single community location - which the Rudd Government's GP Super Clinics deliver.
This investment will help address the lack of critical infrastructure across the health system after twelve years of neglect by the Howard Government.
The Government has now signed contracts for 24 GP Super Clinics and construction is underway at eight sites. $275 million has been allocated to establish GP Super Clinics in communities around the nation.
The new GP Super Clinics announced today bring the total number of clinics funded by the Rudd Government to 34.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERYI acknowledge the first Australians on whose lands we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.I'm delighted to be here tonight to support the work of the St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research.The work of the talented medical researchers is part of the Australian Government's vision to create the best skilled, best trained and most highly educated workforce in the world.A vision that we are delivering on with the major national investments we are making as we deliver an education revolution, and undertake reform to our health and hospitals system.St Vincent's is a place that undertakes and delivers first class medical research.A place where there have been major medical breakthroughs on diabetes, arthritis, foetal development and breast cancer  -  to name just a few.It's sometimes said in the research world that you have to rely on your hunches.So it seems fitting, in a city synonymous with horse racing, that this Institute was founded on the prize money that the great racehorse trainer Jack Holt won from his Melbourne Cup and Caulfield Cup winners.Jack's £200,000 bequest  -  quite a fortune in 1951 when he died  -  is what got St Vincent's School of Medical Research underway.Imagine what he'd think of the returns on the £200,000 if he could see what St Vincent's has achieved today.There's an old punters' saying that “any price for a winner is a good price”.The same could be said of medical research.It's a tough, painstaking and resource-intensive business.But it's the business of saving lives, making breakthroughs, reducing suffering and making peoples' lives better.And it's worth all the investment of time and resources that we make.Because medical research has played a large role in giving us longer, healthier and happier lives than those of past generations.That is why we're gathered here tonight as St Vincent's launches a new fundraising appeal.Over its history this Institute has been home to a series of world-class, ground-breaking researchers:
 * Pehr Edman, the pioneering inaugural research director of the Institute;
 * Professor Bruce Kemp, whose work has led to a new era in metabolism research, and
 * Michael Parker and the team working on the awful Alzheimer's disease, which robs us of our loved ones while they are still with us.
The excellence achieved as St Vincent's was underscored by last year's round of NHMRC grants.The Institute's success rate for funding was 42 per cent - well above the national average of 27 per cent.One of those successful projects is the work of Dr Louise Purton and Dr Carl Walkley.In 2007 and 2008 they won over $1.5 million in NHRMC funding for their stem cell research.Together, they're making major contributions towards the prevention and treatment of diseases of the blood and bone.We applaud their work, and the work of the whole team at St Vincent's.Tonight I'd like to discuss the Government's plans for health reform and the role of medical research in our reform plans.In the months before the November 2007, one of my clear commitments to the Australian people was to pursue reform of our health and hospitals system.I said we had to stop the blame game.I said that Australians need a health system that is easier to access and navigate.A system with improved quality, greater fairness and better health outcomes.A system that focuses on prevention rather than cure.Early last year we established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to give us advice on how to realise this vision.And last month, we released its final report - the first comprehensive review of the nation's health system in nearly two decades.To put the challenge into perspective, consider the following:We achieve relatively good health outcomes with an expenditure that's below the OECD average, at 9.0 per cent of GDP in 2006-07.Demographic changes will see 1.6 million Australians aged over 85 by 2047, four times as many as there are today.With no policy change, our health and aged care costs are forecast to rise sharply from around 9 per cent of GDP now to 12.4 per cent of GDP a little over two decades from now - from $96.5 billion in 2007-08 to $246.1 billion in 2032-33.We spend just 2 per cent of our health funding on prevention, and 70 per cent on providing acute care.1 out of every 3 Australians who present to public hospital emergency departments and 1 out of every 6 Australians on a waiting list for elective surgery are not seen within a clinically recommended time  -  and this has not changed for some time.650,000 adults are on our public dental waiting lists  -  amongst them, pensioners and lowest income earners  -  with an average wait of two years for essential dental treatment.Some 65 per cent of people who need mental health care go untreated  -  particularly amongst younger Australians where we know early detection and support is most effective.These statistics help paint the Commission's picture of a health system that is at a ‘tipping point'.And they make a strong case for long-term reform.Not just to fix the system for today  -  but also to prepare it for the future.  Having received the Commission's report, the Government has identified seven guiding principles for reform:  * Building a health system with an emphasis on people.
 * A focus on prevention rather than cure.
 * Delivering comprehensive primary care.
 * Minimising waiting times for acute care  -  particularly in our emergency departments and for elective services.
 * Improving the care provided after hospital.
 * Providing better access to care, improving the quality and safety of our health care system and achieving better health care outcomes for all Australians.
 * Finally, doing all this more efficiently and cost effectively with a clear delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the States.
Having reflected on the advice in the Commission's report, the Government has set out three strategic options for the future.Our first strategic option is a partial takeover of the health system, with the Commonwealth taking responsibility for:
 * all preventative and primary care;
 * all hospital outpatients, dental care and aged care;
 * all non-acute mental health services;
 * 40 per cent of the funding for all acute hospital patients; and
 * and all sub-acute care  -  such as post discharge, rehabilitation and palliative care - delivered outside our hospitals.
This would deliver the most comprehensive health and hospital reforms since the introduction of Medicare.Each of these major changes to responsibilities are underpinned by a series of major reforms across the spectrum of prevention, primary, acute and post-acute care.In prevention and primary care the Commission has recommended:The establishment of an independent National Health Promotion Agency. And the Commonwealth Government undertake full funding responsibility for primary care services.To build hospitals that deliver highly specialised, technical care with improved access to care for patients:
 * National Access Targets to measure whether people are accessing the services they need;
 * ‘activity based funding' of hospitals;
 * Public reporting on performance against national indicators which measure access, efficiency and quality of care;
 * separating elective and emergency services; and
 * strengthening sub-acute health infrastructure to provide more help for people to recover and restore their health following acute intervention.
The Commission also recommends targeting major gaps in our system through:
 * a new National Aboriginal Health and Torres Strait Islander Health Authority.
 * Early investment in mental health services aimed at early intervention.
 * Flexible arrangements and top-up funding for our rural and regional areas.
 * And in the area that today has become a marker of inequality in Australia - dental health  -  a proposal for universal access to dental care along with a nationwide expansion of pre-school and school dental programs.
Central to these reforms is to improve the efficiency and performance of our health system through the implementation of a patient-controlled electronic health record for all Australians.The Commission estimates that this entire reform plan comes at an indicative cost  -  to both Commonwealth and State governments - of between $2.8 billion and $5.7 billion in recurrent costs per year.In addition, the Commission's report recommends between $4.3 billion and $7.5 billion in one-off capital costs.The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has estimated that these reforms would reduce spending by $4 billion per year two decades from now.The second strategic option that arises from the report is to do all I have just mentioned as the first stage of reform.Followed by a second stage of reform with the Commonwealth moving to increase its share of funding for acute hospital patients to 100 per cent. The third strategic option is to undertake strategic options one and two simultaneously  -  which the Commission explicitly recommends against. The Government has begun a detailed, direct consultation with the health sector and communities around the nation that will continue through to the end of the year.At the end of the year, the Government will convene a special COAG meeting with the States and Territories, explicitly on health and hospitals reform.This will be followed by a further COAG meeting in early 2010 where the Commonwealth will put to States and Territories a reform plan that they would either agree or disagree as a future direction for health and hospitals reform.Consistent with the Government's pre-election commitments, if there is no agreement to a comprehensive national reform plan, the Commonwealth will proceed to seek a mandate from the Australian people for the proper reform of our health system.Since coming to office, the Government has been confronted with the worst global economic downturn since the Depression of the 1930s.Whatever option we adopt, we will be doing so in the context of serious fiscal constraints.This will mean difficult tradeoffs.And there will be no blank cheque to the States.The implementation of any of these options will obviously have major implications for all Australians. And that is why we have begun a comprehensive process of consultation through health forums in communities across the nation  -  as we did just this morning in the northeastern Melbourne suburb of Epping.These forums have highlighted important points for future health reform. Some of these include:The critical importance of linking up health services better  -  between hospitals, GP and community care; between the Commonwealth and the States; and between different health professionals. Insights into specific areas of care - in the forum at the Flinders Medical Centre in South Australia two weeks ago, a child psychiatrist made the point that delivering more child and women's health services in primary health care centres rather than hospitals makes it easier to focus on preventative services.A manager of cancer services in a regional South Australia highlighted the need for innovative approaches to cancer care in regional areas.At Royal North Shore, a psychiatrist made the case for reduce hospital admissions by doing a better job of providing acute mental health services near community hubs.These points demonstrate that the Government has much to gain from listening to the voices of health experts, health practitioners and health consumers through health forums.The medical research community also has a vital role to play in future health reform.Australia's medical research sector is well equipped to contribute to the challenges of future health reform, as it continues contributing to international medical and scientific research efforts.Today, Australia has a total of around 18,000 health and medical researchers.From 2004 through to 2009, the NHMRC provided more than $3 billion for health and medical research  -  with 20,356 new and ongoing awards.In the 2009-10 financial year, Commonwealth funding through the NHMRC increased to a record $769 million.To put this into perspective, when the NHMRC began in 1937, the Australian Government provided an appropriation of only 30,000 Pounds  -  the equivalent of around $2 million in today's terms.And in this year's Budget, we allocated more than $430 million for translational medical research facilities and clinical training infrastructure.Cancer research forms an integral part of our $1.2 billion investment in cancer care infrastructure, the largest investment of its kind in our history.Overall, the Commonwealth's investment in medical research, through the NHRMC, directly supports around 8,000 researchers and directly or indirectly supports 88 institutes.This includes around $14 million in funding for the St Vincent's Research Institute for 2008 and 2009 from the NHMRC.The fruits of these investments can be seen in the output from our medical researchers.By global standards, medical research in Australia punches above its weight.Amongst the most commonly cited 1 per cent of research papers in the world, one in forty papers comes from Australia.That makes our contribution more than twice our population share.And it also underlines the extent to which our research sector can play a role in health reform.The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission report spoke of the need for an ‘agile and self improving health system'.If we're to build such a system, medical research will play a critical role.We will be turning to research to play a key role in informing and driving best practice across the entire spectrum of preventative, primary and acute sectors.Firstly, we will be turning to medical research provide the evidence base for preventative care interventions.For example, medical research played a critical role in establishing the critical link between smoking and lung cancer in the 1950s.That led to extensive policy interventions by governments to lift consumer awareness of the health impacts of smoking, to create disincentives to smoking and to help smokers quit.In the decades since, the decline in tobacco use in Australia has been profound, with current adult male cigarette smoking rates down to just one-third of what they were in the late 1950s.Similarly, research conducted over the past decade has identified that a healthy lifestyle and physical and mental activity may help delay the onset of dementia.Secondly, we will be turning to medical research to translate insights into clinical practice.A recent success story is the development of the world's first cervical cancer vaccine by Professor Ian Frazer in 2006.This vaccine is now being used across the world.It will protect generations of women now and into the future from developing cervical cancer.And now we have a new frontier that is the subject of today's capital appeal  -  stem cell transplantation to replace damaged pancreatic cells, which holds the promise of preventing or curing Type I diabetes.Lastly, we will be turning to medical research to help Government make its health dollar go further  -  and reduce growth in health costs into the future.Patients need treatments, technologies, and procedures for which there is evidence from research that these are safe and effective.This is what patients expect.And it is what taxpayers also expect.Australia has mechanisms in place to make sure that this applies to the introduction and funding of new pharmaceuticals. But no similar mechanism applies to procedures and treatments already in place.As a result, procedures and treatments that lack evidence of their effectiveness, or have been shown by research to be ineffective, continue to be used.For example, the New England Journal of Medicine recently published research of an Australian team led by Rachelle Buchbinder, a NHMRC Clinical Research Fellow from Monash University. This research, funded by the NHMRC, found that a commonly available treatment for fractures of the bones of the spinal cord was in fact no better than doing nothing at all.Meanwhile, the government, insurers and the patient will have spent considerable sums on such treatments.  The NHMRC has suggested that research could be undertaken where there is a lack of evidence around currently used procedures and technologies. Primary research could be commissioned to assess treatments, therapies and devices that are currently paid for by Government, insurance companies and individuals.The NHMRC, by drawing on our world class medical research expertise and undertaking independent quality clinical trials, could demonstrate whether the procedure or technology continues to be effective.This is a concept that the Government is keen to explore in conjunction with private health insurers and our research community.The Government has already demonstrated our commitment to evidence based analysis of health expenditure through the Health Technology Assessment and the Medicare Benefits Schedule Review.We are committed to ensuring that research plays a critical role in informing the Government's health policy reforms.In launching St Vincent's fundraising appeal tonight, I especially want to thank the St Vincent's team for their excellent work.As one of the researchers here at St Vincent's, Louise Purton, remarked in the Institute's most recent annual report, medical research is a “never-ending challenge.”But it is also, as others noted in the report, also “the chance to make a difference” with work that “will aid mankind”.I notice there are some other less-recognised benefits to a life in medical research. Matthew Chung, the Structural Biology researcher at St Vincents, cites part of his motivation for working at the Institute as “getting to play with large expensive equipment”.I hope that only happens when he's under supervision.Medical research isn't always seen as the most prestigious side of medicine.But the progress achieved at St Vincent's and other institutes of medical research makes a difference in the lives of thousands of Australians every day.And that's why the contributions that are made tonight can help make such a positive difference to the work of the St Vincent's Institute for Medical Research and to health outcomes for all Australians. 


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: This letter in the Herald Sun, it's a very powerful letter from an emergency doctor. He says the system's overworked and crumbling. Is he right?
PM: I can't reach that judgment nationwide, but I take seriously considered letters by someone who's obviously an expert in the field. Certainly, in the four to five hospitals across the country that the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon and I have been to so far - Royal North Shore in Sydney, Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide, and then Townsville Hospital and Cairns Hospital last week - the stress and pressure on Accident and Emergency is huge across the country. So, that's part of the problems of the system. Of course, part of the answer to it is not just the additional investment which the doctor legitimately points to in his letter, it's also how do you take some pressure off the A&amp;E by better investing in what's called primary healthcare. That's why we're rolling out GP super clinics across the country as well.
MITCHELL: Yeah, I wanted to get this, there's an announcement on that today as I understand. Would you like to talk to this doctor and people like him?
PM: Yeah, I got up this morning and read my Herald Sun, as you do in Melbourne. Mind you, as I do in Canberra. I thought that we could have a conversation with him. So we'll try and track him down through the Herald Sun and we'll have a conversation.
MITCHELL: Okay, Julie, go ahead please Julie.
CALLER: Oh good morning everybody. I work in an emergency department as a ward clerk, and I find it most difficult to find that the nurses are so underpaid. There's not enough nursing staff in the hospitals, if there is more nurses you could open more beds. And I think everybody should need to pay for this service, and that would stop a lot of these people with sore toes and sore throats using emergency departments for what it's not, instead of an emergency department.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister.
PM: Julie, thanks for your comments. Two parts of what you just said. One is people who present at Accident and Emergency who probably don't need to if they have access to GP-related services, particularly after hours, that's the first point. And the second is, making sure we've got enough nursing staff across the system generally, but also in A&amp;E overnight as well. On the first point, part of the reason why we want to see an expansion of GP-related services across the country is that people have somewhere else to go after hours to get shall I say, non-urgent medical attention. Otherwise they form the queue at Accident and Emergency.
One statistic for you. I was in Adelaide recently, it's part of the virtue of going round the state, around the country - you actually find out what's working and what's not working. Over in Adelaide, where you've got a GP super clinic operating now near a hospital, I think it's Noarlunga hospital, I was told over there that since it's been operating there's been a 16% decrease in the number of presentations at the A&amp;E.
Secondly on the nursing stuff, you're absolutely right. There hasn't been adequate, nationwide workforce planning on the number of nurses we need long term and that's one of the matters which are dealt with in this report, produced by Dr Christine Bennett. Have a look at it, it's on yourhealth.gov.au, and all those recommendations deal with the future challenges that we need to deal with on nursing staff.
MITCHELL: The other point that's raised in this letter, and he mentions a shortage of nurses, shortage of doctors, how do you keep specialists like emergency specialists, emergency physicians, how do you keep them in the public system?
PM: Fantastic question. Some of these things are raised in the Bennett Health Reform Commission report. And we have to deal with, frankly, the fact that so many of our specialists are stressed out completely because of over work. You read this carefully, this letter in the Herald Sun, and I've not met this doctor, I can only assume he's a reputable representative of his profession.
MITCHELL: I recognise some of the language. I suspect I know who it is.
PM: Okay, you can fess up off air. But, what I find across the country is extraordinary dedication by medicos, specialists, and those attending A&amp;E who are working huge hours. What we've got to do is take some of the pressure off them by upping the number of doctors we train. Now one of the problems in the system in the past has been we actually had frozen for such a long period of time the number of GP training places for example in the system. What Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister has done is boost that now by 200. We're going to have to do more on that score, as well as deal with the nursing shortage as well.
MITCHELL: Hello Linda, go ahead Linda.
CALLER: Oh look, thanks Neil, I actually wrote you an email a couple of weeks ago, I work in the health system. Can I just congratulate Mr Rudd, because the health problem is so multi-layered. We've got a global ageing population, there's chronic disease out there, so the primary health care is where the money needs to go. It's not just the hospital system.
PM: Well Linda, thanks very much. Can I again draw your attention to this report online, yourhealth.gov.au, the Health Reform Commission recommendations for the future, there are 123 of them. It tries to look at the whole system. That's why we've taken 16 months doing it. Preventative healthcare investment - you know we only spend 2 per cent of our health budget, 2 per cent of our health investment on preventative action. And if we don't boost that for example, the explosion in chronic diseases will actually completely throttle the system longer term. And primary care, GP-related services we've just been speaking about.
MITCHELL: Steven, go ahead please.
CALLER: Ah, good morning all. Just wanted to say, look I work in, I'm a surgical registrar at a major public hospital in Victoria, and ah -
MITCHELL: Sorry, did say a surgical registrar?
CALLER: Yep.
MITCHELL: Yep, okay.
CALLER: And, so what I'm finding is that beds are being closed in the hospital at the expense of, for administrative departments and so what's happening now is that at the moment, we're actually working at 110% capacity. And in terms of the emergency department, I'm seeing 12 patients a shift, which is untenable. Really untenable.
MITCHELL: Twelve a shift, how many hours is that?
CALLER: Ten.
MITCHELL: Ten hours, okay.
PM: Well ah, Steven thank you very much for your call. The pressure on Accident and Emergency as you rightly point out across the nation is huge. Part of it we've sought to respond to in stuff I've said this morning about taking some of the pressure off by more flexible opening hours for GP super clinics, we're opening three more of those in Victoria, which is part of what we're announcing today with the Health Minister.
But the other part of it is, frankly, a greater investment in capacity in Accident and Emergency itself. One step that we have taken in our 18 months in office is this - for the first time the Federal Government has invested some $750 million in Accident and Emergency direct to State Governments across the country because we need to increase capacity now, in order to make it easier for them to cope, like we've done for elective surgery for the first time as well.
MITCHELL: Steven, if you're seeing 12 patients in a 10 hour shift as a surgical registrar, I mean that's, not just you, but that'd be potentially dangerous, that sort of workload wouldn't it?
CALLER: Well, we're rushing people out and the problem is that these patients come into emergency and they have to go somewhere. They have to be sent to another department. And the beds aren't there. It's all about beds. It's not about Accident and Emergency, Prime Minister, it's about beds. The beds aren't on the floor, the beds aren't in the building, where are we going to put these people?
PM: Steven, I take your point. Frankly, some hospital it's beds and A&amp;E, and then on admission, it's beds in the hospital proper. You're right, and you're right on both points. And this is an emerging theme across the country. So, again, you know, have a look at this report online. We're road-testing its recommendations around the country between now and the end of the year, and please give us your considered thoughts in a note to us, I'd appreciate it.
MITCHELL: Okay Steven, hold on, we'll give you our address, you can send it through us if you like. We won't open it. Mark, hello Mark.
CALLER: Yes, good morning Prime Minister Rudd. I just wanted to explain what happened to us last week. I think I spoke to you last week Neil, where my wife was taking my four week old baby to the Western Hospital in Sunshine.
MITCHELL: Yeah.
CALLER: And rolled up at 9:50, was told she'd be admitted at 10:20am, and was left in a cubicle with a plastic chair and the baby in the pram 'til 11:40pm that night.
MITCHELL: 13 hours? What was wrong with the child, the four week old?
CALLER: He had bronchitis, he had to be put on air, had difficulty breathing and infection in the lungs.
MITCHELL: Is he okay now?
CALLER: Yep, yep, he's got through it now.
MITCHELL: Good. Prime Minister?
PM: Well that's good news in terms of your little one, Mark, but it's bad news in terms of what's actually been your experience and that's no criticism at all of the health professionals working at the coalface. What you're basically saying to us is that we need greater investment across the system to make it, I've got to say, better for people like you presenting for what I assume from what you said before was a pre-booked presentation at the hospital.
MITCHELL: It was an emergency presentation as I recall.
PM: Oh was it an emergency presentation?
MITCHELL: Yeah.
CALLER: I think the worst part about it was, like, every two hours they came up and said "you'll be admitted in half an hour, you'll be admitted in half an hour".
MITCHELL: And it was an emergency, that's why you took him, wasn't it?
CALLER: That's it, of course.
PM: Well, that's the recurring theme in so much of what Neil's said on air this morning, which is the pressure on Accident and Emergency, and frankly the professionals working there all deserve medals.
MITCHELL: I guess it's been happening for so long, I remember I was on the panel for the debate between John Howard and Mark Latham and it was an issue I raised then and we got massive response to it. Can you really fix it this time?
PM: You know, I think however long we are in Government, and that's a matter for your listeners and a matter for the country at large, I don't want to look back and say we didn't have a damn good go at this. Because, step back from what all your listeners have said to us this morning in their calls, what actually is happening to the system nationwide and frankly across most developed countries - population growth, ageing of the population, as well as the increased cost of medical treatments, plus real pressures on medical workforces, that's all pushing us into a higher cost medical environment.
And the problem is, so many of the solutions, and many of them are undertaken admirably by State Governments, have dealt with part of the system, not all of it, and part of that goes back to the fact we've got these divided responsibilities between Federal and State. And we call it cost-shift blame-shift. What are the Feds currently responsible for? Basically GP-related services. States primarily responsible for hospitals.
And so, let's go down to this Accident and Emergency thing that we've just been talking about. Why is it historically such a problem? Because the increased investment in, let's call it GP-related services in the community, is a federal cost. The States historically have been responsible for Accident and Emergency within hospitals. So, both sides have this perverse self-interest in preserving their, you know, budgetary integrity, and that's wrong. We've got to actually deal with that.
MITCHELL: And the three clinics being opened today?
PM: Ah, the three of them are at South Morang, and at Wodonga, and at Portland, totally an investment of about $14 to $15 million. But the whole idea with these things is to provide GP Super Clinics with a range of GP and other allied medicine services, you know like podiatry, and to be open flexibly, in terms of hours. This is one small investment, and we're rolling out about 25 of these across the country at the moment, 25 contracts being signed. But if we can replicate that example I gave you before, in Adelaide, whereby opening a clinic in a community of a catchment of 100,000 people which is the example given to me in Adelaide, and it can bring down the presentations at the local A&amp;E, that's one part of the solution. The other part lies in response to the doctor who rang in before, Steven, who is actually, the actual physical availability of beds.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister's with me, we'll get back to calls a little later in the program. There's several issues I need to touch on. We haven't got long. Prime Minister, Kokoda - what's the latest you've heard from the recovery?
PM: Neil, before coming on your program this morning I spoke with Chris Moratis, who's our High Commissioner in Port Moresby.
Firstly, on the question of the recovery of loved ones, which is very, very difficult, the weather, and we understand fully the frustration of families. This is taking a long time. The weather has been impossible yesterday.
Nonetheless, we have a second recovery team which as of about three quarters of an hour ago was winched into the site from a Black Hawk helicopter of ours. It's now on the ground. They are all applying what is a standard Interpol protocol for how you deal with crash sites of this nature.
It does take time, but we are exerting every possible effort to get this done in as quickly and as dignified a manner as possible. One other matter which I saw coverage of this morning which is the problem being encountered by some trekkers in terms of how they physically get out, particularly if they are walking from Owen's Corner, arriving at Kokoda and needing to get back to Moresby, given that the airline in question, or one of the airlines in question, Airlines PNG, has suspended services until September.
I spoke again to the High Commissioner on that this morning. At Kokoda village itself, and this might be relevant to any families listening, there will be a High Commission staff person there during the course of today to help coordinate physical exit for anyone who's been, as it were, disrupted by the withdrawal of this airline service.
Also, we've got RAAF Caribou aircraft dropping supplies in to Kokoda village, including food supplies, if there's any problem there in terms of people coming off the track, and subject to availability, then we'll also assist in getting people back to Moresby as well.
The alternative route is to travel via road another four hours to Popandeda. There's another airline service which operates out of there, so we're seeking to coordinate that in the ground.
MITCHELL: OK, now, the emission trading legislation - will you, are you prepared to use it as an election trigger?
PM: You know, Neil, I have not the slightest intention of going to an early poll. I don't think people like that. I think they want you to serve the term that you've been elected for. So I would just really like this thing to get through.
MITCHELL: So you'll negotiate it?
PM: We've said repeatedly, give us some amendments. Remember, this thing, which was voted down by the Liberals in the Senate yesterday, not one single amendment was put forward by the Liberals in terms of, 'OK, you say you want some changes. What are they?' And not one was put forward, so there's been a lot of politics in this in terms of internal divisions within the Liberal Party. We just want to get on with the job, because, partly, business certainty. The business community wants certainty for the future and they want us to finish the business.
MITCHELL: Well, are you prepared to separate it off the Renewable Energy Targets?
PM: The reason why we've had these two things together goes back to the business argument again, which is, you've got two systems here. One is called the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, goes across the entire economy, it's got a series of adjustment mechanisms in it for businesses. The second is the renewable energy target, which is designed to boost the renewable energy sector. What's the mission there? To increase Australia's renewable energy generation to 20 percent of electricity supply by 2020.
Two separate systems, but we've got parallel adjustment mechanisms in them for business, which have been linked to reduced business complexity. Now, we would therefore want that to be the case for the future so that there is just absolute simplicity. The renewable energy target's not due to come into operation until January of next year. This thing is now, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is up for vote in the Senate the next time around about November. They've said, the Liberals have said, they'll then be providing a decisive vote on the future of the CPRS. We hope there's time, therefore, to still marry the two schemes.
MITCHELL: If not, though, will you negotiate that? Are you open to negotiating it?
PM: Well, I've said to the Liberals all along that if you got an amendment, bring it forward. I mean, this is a pretty basic point - if the Liberals are saying we don't like x, y or z, then we say put on the table you proposed drafting amendment. Nothing's come forward, so in the case of the renewable energy target, for example, that piece of legislation, if there is an alternative set of interim adjustment mechanisms for business, why haven't they been put on the table.
This is part of our, frankly, legitimate frustration in dealing with opposition for opposition's sake.
MITCHELL: But there's a suspicion, as you know, that you're playing politics, you're keeping the possibility of a double dissolution trigger in the back pocket.
PM: You know something, Neil? People will always say that because we're in the business of politics.
MITCHELL: So it's untrue?
PM: Absolutely. You know the reason? Because we want to just get on with the business of getting this thing through. You know, every country in the world, including the United States, is struggling with this challenge right now. It's one of the hardest the policy challenges for any Government.
It goes across 1,000 major businesses in the country, roll-on implications for households and businesses in terms of cost. This has taken a huge amount of effort to get done. Instead, because the Liberal Party leadership is crumbling, we can't get a coherent position from them, like 'here's the alternative. Here's, on black and white, on a piece of paper, what we want by way of an amendment.'
MITCHELL: The economy - the Europeans are making optimistic noises overnight, Barack Obama's made some optimistic noises. Interest rates have already moved up at the Commonwealth Bank, as you'd know. Are we know heading into an environment where interest rate increases are more likely?
PM: As I wrote, I think, in the press a few weekends ago, Neil, and I'm sure you committed to memory that 6,000-word essay I wrote in the Fairfax newspapers - why are you smiling like that?
MITCHELL: Every word.
PM: Is that the road to recovery is going to be very bumpy and on that road to recovery there's going to be two or three factors, let's just be up front about them.
One - unemployment's going to continue to go up, because economists will tell you employment is a lagging factor in the economy.
The second is, sooner or later interest rates are going to go up, and you can see that clear from the statements from the Reserve Bank Governor in recent times, because they've come off 425 basis points, four and a quarter percent in the last short period of time as a anti-recessionary measure.
And thirdly, we're going to have to return the budget to surplus. We've mapped out a strategy to do that, and that, in time, will mean budget cuts.
So these things are going to make things hard for the future, but we must embark on this road to recovery, but for anyone to assume it's all going to be a bed of roses - it won't be.
MITCHELL: I read there's still 30 percent of your stimulus package, $6.3 billion, still sitting in the bank. Do you ant people to spend it?
PM: Every Australian out there will make their own wise decisions, Neil, about whether they're going to buy an extra copy of the Herald Sun.
MITCHELL: Have you spent yours?
PM: From memory, Neil, I don't think I fit within the Family Tax Benefit A category in order to pick up the payment.
But you know something? Quickly, on the economy, the fact that this economy, still, as of now, of the major advanced economies as of the first quarter this year, was the only one to not be in recession. Secondly, was the fastest growing. Thirdly, second-lowest unemployment. Fourthly, with the lowest debt and deficit. You know, we're some things right, but let me tell you, we're not out of the woods yet.
MITCHELL: Couple of very quick things. Can you every see a situation where we have computers tracking cars and you pay for use of the roads, as proposed?
PM: Proposed by?
MITCHELL: The academics with the Henry Committee.
PM: Ah, right, okay. Look, I think that would be a matter of massive political controversy, but if the academics are putting that forward in the context of Henry, then let the debate ensue.
But like this exercise we are engaged with at the moment in terms of health and hospitals reform, if you read that report they are quite radical, many of the recommendations, but I don't believe you should just cut off the debate because it's controversial.
MITCHELL: What's your view on women's boxing? It's been admitted to the Olympics.
PM: How do I say this carefully and judiciously, Neil? I think my sentiments are a bit like yours.
MITCHELL: That is of concern to both of us Prime Minister.
PM: Now look, I don't wish to sound sexist and this sort of stuff, but anyway, I'm a bit on the conservative side of the ledger when it comes to that.
MITCHELL: And $2 million for your broadband man, Mike Quigley. That's, what, five times your salary? More!
PM: Ah, yeah, probably. But if you look across the telecommunications industry, when you've got people being paid $3 million, $5 million, $9 million, this is way below what the market demands. This guy is a very experienced man, run a very large, he's an Australian, he's run a very large American corporation, and we're pleased to have him on board.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having us in the studio.
(ends)


JENKINS: Just from the outset as the local member I'd like to indicate the importance of having a Prime Minister in his first term to come to an area like Epping, in the middle of the electorate of Scullin.
The fact is that throughout the term of this Government, it has not been delivering services on the base of perceived political need but on the basis of real need, and in a number of the things that have happened at this hospital have only occurred by the fact that the Government has had that in mind. The involvement in the research and teaching facility at this hospital came as a response to what was not only a good proposal, but the fact here, in the north of Melbourne, four federal members, in what I'd describe as safe Labor seat, joined together to do the lobbying, and I welcome the further interest of both the Prime Minister and Minister Roxon in things that are happening here in the northern suburbs, and acknowledging the growth here, acknowledging the needs, and acknowledging there is a good story here that can be shared and can be involved in the way in which we develop a health system for Australia over the next 20 or 30 years.
So I invite the Prime Minister to say his bit.
PM: Thanks very much, Harry. I'm just going to move the Lego blocks here.
The Health Minister and I are pleased to be here at the Northern Hospital today to continue our road testing of the reform agenda which has been laid out by the Health Reform Commission which delivered its report to the Government not all that long ago. Part of our responsibility is not just to road test this with major inner-city hospitals across the country. We'll be doing that.  Part of our responsibility is to road-test this also with major points of delivery of health services in outer metropolitan Australia, where you have such an explosion of population growth, and also regional hospitals as we've done recently in Townsville and Cairns in north and far north Queensland.
So today, listening carefully to what the health care professionals working at the Northern Hospital had to say to us and the questions that they have raised help refine our views in terms of what position we ultimately bring to the States and Territories for long-term reform. Part of the consultation that we're engaged in, and part of the discussion today here at the Northern Hospital, about how we do primary health care better, and how we enhance GP-related services more into the future.
The reasons for that are pretty obvious. One is people actually like to be able to access their GP-related services more flexibly than is currently the case, and secondly it takes the pressure off Accident and Emergencies if it's more flexibly provided around the country as well.
That's why the Government committed, prior to the last election, to rolling out some 34 GP Super Clinics across Australia, and we've now contracted for 24 of those and we now have some 8 under construction. What we've announced today is that three of those GP Super Clinics for Victoria  -  $4.9 million investment at the Portland GP Super Clinic, which will focus on reducing avoidable hospital admissions, with an emphasis on diabetes-related allied health services, dietetics, diabetes education, podiatry and drug and alcohol services.
$6.65 million for the Wodonga GP Super Clinic, which will focus on chronic disease self-management, with a strong emphasis on training and education, to provide clinical training places to medical and allied health, pharmacy and nursing students from a number of universities, and $3.7 million for South Morang GP Super Clinic will be a newly constructed facility to meet the needs of the rapidly expanding community in the City of Whittlesea.
These are practical building blocks to the future, and need to be integrated with wider, comprehensive health and hospitals reform across the nation for the future.
As has been mentioned before by Harry, the local member, also the investment of $14 million from the Commonwealth Government into the proper facilities necessary for the training of local health professionals in this area is another building block for the future. We need better planning for our workforce, health workforce, for the future  -  doctors, nurses, allied health professionals  -  and that needs to be done not just in the largest, inner-city campuses across the country but also in areas where that need is acute itself.
So, we're here to listen to this community. We've had a good hour and a half or so listening to questions from those who are at the coalface here. Quite apart from listening personally to the stories of oncology patients here at the Northern Hospital, and we're pleased to have indicated a further building block for long-term reform in terms of the announcement of these GP Super Clinics for the future, but this is one step on a long-term process of reform, and that's going to take some time, as I've said around the country, but the nation wants and needs long-term health and hospital reform.
It will not come for free. It will cost and it's important that we're upfront about that as we work our way around the country.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've done a few of these in various states as you've mentioned. What is the one thing that is standing out?
PM: One thing that hits us, I think, between the eyeballs wherever we go, is the fact that there is almost a universal chorus for better planning for the training of doctors and nurses and allied health professionals, because you step back from it all, whether it's pressures in the emergency department, pressures in oncology or pressures in the primary care areas, it's all about the proper training and the proper distribution of our health workforce.
And you know something? It's one of the areas of huge failure in the past, and we've got to lift our game on this, hugely.
So in all the disparate circumstances, in far north Queensland, in north Queensland, Adelaide, Royal North Shore in Sydney and here, if there's one continuing theme it's ‘let's plan for our health workforce needs better for the future' and that's why the Minister has already embarked in part upon that with the establishment of this health workforce training agency for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think Victoria, together with other states, have all had to deal with one huge set of external challenges, and that is, for times past, a decade or so past, they've had to wrestle with burgeoning demand for hospital and health services on the one hand and a shrinking federal health dollar at the same time. That's a real problem, and they've wrestled really well with that, given the circumstances that they've been faced.
Since we have been elected, we've tried to step up to the plate and form a new partnership with them. We've done that through the Australian Health Care Agreement which the Minister negotiated with her counterparts at the end of last year, which represents some $60 billion plus, a 50 percent real increase on the previous healthcare agreement.
On the specific delivery systems and management systems for the healthcare system in Victoria, we are quite open to working with our Victorian friends on the shape of that for the future, depending on the type and content of the long-term reform agenda that we take to the states and territories in the first part of next year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a lot of the  -  almost all of the questions here today were from the heads lobby groups that are pushing a well-established line. Did you hear anything here today that was actually new or actually interesting to you?
PM: I did, and very much so, but let me just highlight one of them, and that was the very illustration I referred to in my opening remarks about the need, in oncology services, for a patient care coordinator who can help shepherd people through a very complex and challenging system.
And part of the reason for coming is that you always learn something new. If you don't learn anything new when you come to a new hospital, you're not trying and you're mind is closed and your eyes are closed, but a very practical illustration here of two things  -  how do you enable our medical staff and nursing staff dealing with people in obviously very challenging circumstances in oncology to dedicate the most of their time to the needs of patients on the one hand while supporting those patients in their navigation of the system at the same time.
So what was their particular recommendation? Give us a patient care coordinator. That is a practical illustration of a wider principle outlined in the Health Reform Commission's report about the need for us as a nation to have a patient-centred system, as opposed to a system which answers first and foremostly to itself.
So you ask me what I've learnt today? That struck me as something pretty practical, and it's always good to have those practical examples in mind.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Here and there. We'll go on to other stuff after we've done a bit more on hospitals, if that's OK. Are you on hospitals, mate?
JOURNALIST: Premier John Brumby's obviously not keen on the partial takeover, particularly not keen on a full takeover of the  - 
PM: A quarter takeover?
JOURNALIST: So how are you going to get the states, particularly Victoria, across the line on this?
PM: Well, you know something, we, the Australian Government, haven't landed on a final position ourselves. That why we're, we try to methodical and systematic about long-term health care reform. One, as those in this room I think confirmed today in their engagement with us, this is the first time since, effectively the introduction of Medicare, a long time ago, that we, as the Government, have embarked upon a system-wide analysis of what we need in the health and hospital system for Australia for the next quarter of a century, with a real future focus. Two, the reason we are road testing it in communities like this is to fine-tune which of those recommendations we can fly with and which we can't, and what amendments may be necessary.
That's why the timetable we've put out places those final propositions to be put to the states into the first part of next year.
We'll be refining our thinking during the way through. I'm sure states and territories will be at the same time, and as always, we will have a productive and friendly exchange with our counterparts at the state and territory level and arrive at a good solution in the national interest.
But, I always say, at the end of the day, if we form a view that a particular direction of national reform is necessary, and we can't get there cooperatively, as I said prior to the election, then we reserve the right to seek a mandate from the people on that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can we read anything into it that the Premier's not here today and his Health Minister is not here today. Is there anything in that end? Should we be reading anything into it?
PM: No, not at all. I think when we've addressed forums in north Queensland we've had no Health Minister or, so, we're out here consulting in our own right. The key thing for us is to make sure that the representatives of the local health region and health community are here, because the experiences, of let's call it this wider region in northern Melbourne, are going to be qualitatively different to those that we find in other parts of the country.
ROXON: (inaudible)
PM: Yeah, and I'm sure they'll attend other consultations that we have, as is appropriate and I think in South Australia the Premier wasn't with us, was he? No, so, I mean, it's just, everyone's busy.
JOURNALIST: Minister, can I ask you some specifics about the South Morang Super Clinic.
ROXON: Sure.
JOURNALIST: Where it's going to be, how many doctors, why South Morang?
ROXON: Yeah, thank you. Look, this is a really important announcement for South Morang, and the location and other details have been agreed, unlike the other Super Clinics where we've been going through a consultation process and a tender process, because these were not announced pre-election, we've had communities across the country coming forward and saying ‘we've got a great idea  -  these are our partners, this is where we'd like to do it, and would you support us?' and this was one of the very convincing proposals.
It's going to be located near the municipal precinct on McDonald's Road. It's a new construction. It's a mix of GP services, community health services, particularly for early childhood, speech, parenting and neuropsychology, drug and alcohol services, chronic disease management and dental and mental health services.
It's going to be run by a consortium led by the Northern Division of GPs, but it includes in the consortium, of course, Northern Hospital, where we are now, Whittlesea Council and Plenty Valley Community Health, so this is a really important facility.
We were convinced by the argument put forward about the need in this community, but also the very professional proposal with those consortium members, and we believe it meets some of our reform targets by having those partners integrated with the hospital, with the primary care services, and we're pleased to be able to announce those three extra facilities today.
JOURNALIST: How many extra doctors and given what the Prime Minister has just said, where are you going to get the doctors from?
ROXON: As I'm advised, it's going to employ about 12 GPs, that's part of the proposal. We do have a new number of doctors coming on line in this next, actually currently but also in the next two years.
Part of our challenge is to make sure that we have good settings where they can be trained and facilities where doctors can move in and out. What we've heard constantly from young doctors is they don't necessarily, as in the past, want to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to set up a GP practice, which in the past they might have then worked in for 50 or 60 years before they retired. They want to come, they want to work in multidisciplinary teams, they might want to do it for five years and then move out, and need to be owned, therefore, by other organisations, and this is something, because of the council's involvement, that will stay in community ownership through the consortium, and I think actually is a way of ensuring that you've almost got a honey pot in South Morang where GPs who want to be in general practice can say ‘that is exactly the type of best-practice facility I want to work in' and I don't foresee that there'll be a challenge finding those doctors.
JOURNALIST: What happens with doctors with their own practice now? Will they move into the new Super Clinics?
PM: Well, as is the case across the country with the Super Clinics, of course existing GPs can be part of those proposals as they are in some cases. Some will want to move in. We've had elderly GPs saying they're really ready to retire but they'd like to do sessions to train new doctors. There is a mix across the country. I couldn't hope to give you an exact answer for each one of them, but the Government's role is in saying ‘we think primary care is important, we think general practice is a specialty, we think communities where there are high needs need to have the best practice options available to them' and this investment from the Commonwealth enables that to happen in South Morang.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The reason why we have linked the Renewable Energy Target with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is because we don't want an additional compliance burden for Australian business.
What do we need to do on climate change? We need to have a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme so that we know the price of carbon in the future. We also need to boost renewable energy generation in the future as well.
These are two things we committed to prior to the last election, these are the two pieces of legislation we introduced in the Parliament, and the reason why they are linked is because we don't want business having to deal with both these pieces of legislation, to have different industry schemes attached to them. It just adds to the compliance burden.
Second point I'd make is this  -  I notice Mr Turnbull seems to be saying that they'll actually vote definitively on the future of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in November. That is, with, for the first time - hold the phone  -  substantive amendments. Well, I look forward to that. The operation of the Renewable Energy Target is not scheduled to occur anyway until the beginning of next year.
I therefore look forward to the way in which the Liberals and the Nationals decide to vote, finally, in an informed way, with considered amendments on the table, on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme come November, because that might shed some light on the future for the Renewable Energy Target as well.
As I said also, as I also said in my interview with Neil Mitchell this morning, we'll continue to keep open to negotiations with the Liberals and Nationals, but it would be very useful if, for the first time in the history of this debate in the 20 months that we've been in Government, that we had a substantive position a) on what amendments they are proposing for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and whether they are acceptable to us or not, it's all a mystery so far, and b) in terms of Renewable Energy Target, what specific separate industry scheme within it that they are proposing. We do not know the content of either of those positions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We believe that given the scheduled introduction time for the Renewable Energy Target, which is January next year, that we are very mindful of the fact that the Liberals now seem to be saying that they might actually bring themselves to a considered position on the CPRS come November. As I said more broadly than that, we remain open to discussion with the Liberals on the basis of reasoned and considered amendments, not simply huffing and puffing into the atmosphere, and producing no definitive position on paper.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We, the Australian Government, are pleased today to confirm the appointment of Tony Negus as the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police. Tony Negus is a first-class Australian police officer. He has been with the Australian Federal Police most recently as the Deputy Commissioner responsible for operations. We are therefore pleased and delighted with his appointment. He brings to this position a vast experience, and in recent times has been Acting Commissioner. We therefore as a Government have worked with him closely.
I'll come back to your immediate question in one tick, after I've just made one other point about the person he replaces, which is Mick Keelty.
Mick Keelty has been a first-class Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police. He has served the nation with absolute distinction. His role in response to the Bali bombing, the Jakarta Embassy bombings, the tsunami, his rolling engagement which he has overseen with the Indonesian national police in very complex counter-terrorism operations in Indonesia, frankly, the country owes him a debt of gratitude. And just as Mick Keelty has served Australia with distinction as Australian Federal Police Commissioner and with honour, we are fully confident the same will be the case with Tony Negus.
In terms of the recent public controversy about the raids here in Melbourne a little while ago, I think it's first and foremost important that we establish all the facts concerning that, and we will deal with those as appropriate, but let me say, unequivocally, the Government has absolute confidence in Tony Negus. He is a first-class police officer. He has discharged his responsibilities in relation to those raids impeccably, and in close coordination with the Victorian police, and I acknowledge publicly again my appreciation for their efforts, and we as a Government look forward to working with him closely in the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I read it.
JOURNALIST: But what was your response to it, your reaction to it?
PM: I got up, I had a cup of tea, opened my Herald Sun and saw the letter, and I thought it was a useful contribution to the debate. That particular letter, as I recall it, dealt specifically with the challenges in Accident and Emergency, particularly with the problems of having sufficient staff and sufficient beds. In answer to, I think, an earlier question about common themes which emerge across all our consultations, I referred before to the training, systematically, of our health workforce over time, because that affects everything, but specifically, in many, many parts of the country, we're also getting a clear representation about the stressed nature of Accident and Emergency.
Part of the response, part of the response, I say, lies in how do we actually boost primary health care, take some of the pressure off A&amp;E presentations. Part of the response lies, of course, in the sorts of investments the Minister has already initiated with State governments through the $750 million special purpose payment, for the first time, the Commonwealth engaging in with the States and Territories to enhance A&amp;E services across the country.
So, in answer to your question - good letter, don't know the bloke, if it is a bloke, from a bar of soap, but all this I regard as just a useful contribution to the debate and particularly when it comes to the challenges which confront most Australians most when it comes to the health and hospital system, with ‘what happens when I go the emergency department if my kid's sick? How's it going? How can I get access to treatment quickly?' That's the legitimate anxiety of parents and again, I'd publicly commend the professionalism of all of our doctors and nurses and others who staff emergency departments across the country at a time of burgeoning demand for the healthcare system, at a time when the Federal Government, at least in the past, has not been actually doing its bit.
Having said that, I've got to zip. 


PRICE: Thanks for your time, PM.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program, Steve.
PRICE: The pressure really is now on the Opposition and Malcolm Turnbull, because as you pointed out in Question Time over and over again yesterday, they don't have a policy on this.
PM: It's a big problem. We believe that the country as a whole just wants to get on with the business of acting on climate change. A big part of that is the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Very complex, we've worked on this for a year and a half, taken it through all stages very methodically, got to the stage where we got supportive statements from the BCA, from the Australian Industry Group, and then on the conservation side, with the major conservation groups as well.
It's about as balanced as we're going to get. But here we are, at 18 months into this Government's term, and we still have an Opposition which can't put forward its policy. And why is that relevant? Because they have the numbers in the Senate, they've blocked our legislation yesterday, without putting forward a single amendment. And that, in my view, is just bloody-minded.
PRICE: As you know, this program's on air through a lot of rural NSW. I get a lot of calls from farmers who feel that they are going to be the end line victims of your Emissions Trading Scheme. How are you going to carry the nation, when you say you've got a mandate to do this, how are you going to convince the rural sector that this is in their best interest?
PM: Well I fully accept Steve that this will be tough and controversial in many sectors of the economy. But let me just stand back from it all and say to all of our friends in rural and regional areas, if Australia stays out of global action on climate change, two things are going to happen. One, it lessens the likelihood of us being able to be a force for change globally, and if we don't get China, India, the United States and the big emitting economies and Europe to act, then frankly, the impact of climate change in rural and regional Australia, with soaring temperatures, reduced rainfall and the rest over time, has a huge impact on agricultural production.
The second thing is this. A number of economies are already beginning to talk around the world about taking punitive action against any other economy which refuses to act on climate change. That is, if in Australia we just said “all too hard, all too difficult, we're not going to do this”, then, what you can already see rolling down the railroad tracks towards us is a series of punitive tariffs against exports from countries like Australia if we refuse to act.
There are two solid reasons for doing it, but I don't underestimate the degree of difficulty in explaining the detail of what we're doing to regional and rural communities. It's hard and it's complex, but we believe that it's absolutely in the national interest.
PRICE: We all want to leave a better world for our children, but the pain that we're going to have go through it is a really hard political sell for you, because your critics are saying, ‘well, you're going to have to charge more for electricity', you've started getting questions from the Opposition about the price of a bottle of milk, how are you going to convince Australians that yet again you're going to have to dip in to their pocket for a long-term benefit?
PM: Well let's put it in these terms. Unfortunately, the Liberals and Nationals have resorted to a fear campaign, rather than showing policy leadership where we need to go for the future. Secondly, go to the actual price impacts themselves - the Government's White Paper on climate change put out at the end of last year went through these price impacts for electricity, gas, for food, over a couple of years. Take, for example, electricity. It projects that when the scheme starts in 2011/12, that the increase in electricity prices would be about 7%, that is about $1.50 in nominal dollars per week. Now that's not inexpensive, that's real, and that's going to happen and will flow through into the cost of goods and services in the economy, I grant you. But what we're doing also is providing household assistance to help low and middle income earners deal with those additional costs.
When it comes to low-income earners, 2.8 million households, either pensioners and others like that, will be eligible to assistance equal to 120% or more of any cost of living increase over the first two years of the scheme. And for middle income earners, they will also receive some direct cash assistance in order to help as well. So we're trying to soften the blow. We're trying to adjust the economy and households to what this scheme means, but we're not Robinson Crusoe, this is happening in economies right around the world.
PRICE: That's the question I keep getting from people, from listeners. What is Kevin Rudd going to do with the money he raises from this scheme?
PM: Well we've already committed, Steve, every dollar raised through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to go back into the scheme itself to either provide assistance directly to low and middle income families for adjustment, or any costs which flow from electricity, gas, and/or food, and secondly, also to provide assistance to industries we need to adjust as well - what's called, in the jargon, emissions-intensive, trade-exposed sectors of the economy, or industries in the economy. Because we don't want to suddenly place our businesses and industries at a huge competitive disadvantage relative to the rest of the world. So, in answer to your question, the money raised from the auctioning of pollution permits within this scheme called the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, gets funnelled back, either into households or into industry adjustment schemes.
PRICE: Your challenge is to keep Australians in work. You've identified that as your biggest challenge in this term and the next term of Government. Won't the ETS cost jobs?
PM: We've actually had the overall employment impact of this scheme modelled by the Australian Treasury, and what you will see right out to 2030 and beyond is an overall growth in employment in Australia and one of the generators of this new employment in Australia will be in the renewable energy sector. That's why we're so keen to see through the Parliament the increase to the Renewable Energy Target for Australia, whereby 20% of our electricity generation by 2020 will come from renewable energy sources. It will generate some 30,000-36,000 jobs I'm advised.
PRICE: But what about the blokes in their cars on their way to work this morning in the Hunter Valley?
PM: Well, can I say the overall economy impact of this is that it will be increases in employment in certain areas, there'll be some negative effects in other areas. I don't wish to mislead people about that, that is true. But economies around the world are constantly in a process of adjustment. I can go back however just to the Treasury, which has modelled this across the whole economy - employment will continue to grow in Australia, and one of the big growth generators will be in the renewable energy sector.
PRICE: Frontier Economics handed Malcolm Turnbull a document that says it would be cheaper, cleaner, greener - you called that a magic pudding. Is it not worth looking at that Frontier Economics report?
PM: I think what I'd say in response to that Steve is, if it was so seriously contemplated by the Liberal Party, why couldn't Mr Turnbull say in response to a simple question, “is this Liberal Party policy?” And he said no. Why couldn't they simply say, clearly, well we're putting this to the public debate, we've owned it as policy. Goes back to my point before - so much of the politics of the Liberal Party at the moment have been consumed by their internal divisions, and the reason they haven't voted for this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the Senate yesterday is to paper over the terminal divisions which are currently racking their party, and that other reason as well.
On the magic pudding argument, can I just say this - what the Liberals, or the proponents of this Frontier Economics model are saying, effectively, is that they can reduce greenhouse gas emissions more by asking the electricity industry to do less, and by providing greater assistance than we currently foreshadow to other sectors of the economy, it magically would also cost the overall scheme less. That's what magic puddings are all about and this is, frankly, the biggest Liberal Party magic pudding we've seen in some time. No wonder they haven't got the courage to actually own it as policy.
PRICE: I know you've got to go and inspect a hospital, but just two quick ones - do you think some of your Ministers' language has been too divisive on this? Penny Wong saying “we will get this through no matter what it takes”? I mean, given how important it is, shouldn't the nation be working together if we all believe that this is so important?
PM: I think what I'd say on that Steve is Penny, the Minister, has done a fantastic job, together with Greg Combet, her Minister Assisting, in negotiating through this massively complex piece of legislation, which all countries around the world are having to deal with right now, as far as the developed economies are concerned. And secondly, as of May this year, we've got to a point where we had substantial agreement from major industry groups on the one hand, and major conservation groups on the other. We've got to a stage where, the Greens in the Senate think our position isn't radical enough. The Opposition in the Senate, well, who knows what they think at the moment.
We think we've got the balance right, and what Penny is trying to do is unite the country around this, and with the major groups, she's achieved enormous success, as has Greg Combet. But again, rather than having a serious, considered position by the Liberals and the Nationals whereby they'll say ‘we'll accept this subject to change a, b and c, and here's our amendment', they didn't even put forward a single amendment, and that's why I just described it as political bloody mindedness.
And if we're looking around at our kids, and the sort of Australia they want to live in in 20, 30, and 50 years' time, the sort of things kids will be discussing in schools across the country in the weeks ahead is ‘what sort of future am I inheriting?' This was a day, yesterday, for Australia to embrace the future. Instead, Mr Turnbull and the Liberals and the Nationals decided to leave Australia well anchored in the past. Frankly, their attitude on climate change is a bit like that of the dinosaurs, and the dinosaurs became extinct.
PRICE: Happy to fight an election on it?
PM: Well, as I said earlier today in Melbourne, Steve, bottom line is this - I believe I am elected to serve a full term. My intention is to run a full term. I just want to get this thing through. We've got a major- for two reasons. The business community wants certainty of rules for the future, and that is a fair ask. I was talking to senior executives from the resources sector this week. They want certainty and predictability, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 years out, because these are the lengths of some of the major investment decisions that they have to make. The other reason is we've got this major global opportunity in Copenhagen in December to reach global agreements on the future of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, and what Mr Turnbull seems to be saying is, he doesn't want for Australia to be at that table, being able to clearly say, ‘this is how we intend to meet our targets'. That, I think, is a complete abandonment of leadership.
PRICE: I appreciate your time. Is there any update you can give us out of Papua New Guinea from this morning? Have you heard anymore?
PM: Steve, I spoke this morning to Australia's High Commissioner in Port Moresby, Chris Moraitis, on the very, very difficult question of the recovery exercise which is currently underway up there. The weather in the crash site was appalling yesterday, he advises me. Nonetheless, as of about an hour or so ago, one of the Australian Defence Force's Black Hawk helicopters was able to winch in a second recovery team. They are now hard at work. They are applying the standard Interpol protocols which go to handling very difficult and delicate situations like this, in terms of proper identification and recovery procedures. This is going to be a matter of great delicacy and difficulty for the families concerned. We understand that, and we're seeking to do this with as great a speed and with all the dignity that is necessary in these tragic circumstances.
PRICE: It's a very tough rescue operation as you say. Appreciate your time Prime Minister, thanks a lot.
PM: Thanks Steve.


The Australian Government is pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Tony Negus APM, as Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police (AFP).
Mr Negus' appointment will formally commence on 7 September 2009.
Mr Negus has had a distinguished 27 year career with the AFP, working in community policing, federal investigations, human resources, training and protection.
Currently, Mr Negus serves as Deputy Commissioner Operations, a position he has held since October 2007, with responsibility for high tech crime operations, border activities, international liaison networks, economic and special operations, forensics and the International Deployment Group.
Mr Negus holds a Masters Degree in Public Policy and Administration and a Graduate Diploma in Executive Leadership.  He has also completed the Executive Leadership Program at Harvard University and is a member of the Australian Institute of Company Directors (AICD).
In June 2005, Mr Negus was named in the Queen's Birthday honours list and awarded the Australian Police Medal (APM).
The Government is confident that Mr Negus' leadership skills and experience equip him for the many challenges of his new role.
The Government would like to acknowledge the contribution of Commissioner Mick Keelty APM in leading the AFP since 2001.
Mr Keelty has demonstrated outstanding leadership during a period of significant growth in the size and complexity of the AFP's operations in Australia and abroad. He has also led the AFP through a challenging period, including events such as the 2001 September 11 terrorist attacks, the Bali bombings, the Jakarta Embassy bombing, the Indian Ocean Tsunami disaster and the 2003 Canberra bushfires.
He has played a key role in driving greater cooperation and coordination in law enforcement operations with a number of Commonwealth and State authorities, and has forged important relationships with law enforcement partners throughout the region.
Mr Keelty leaves a lasting legacy at the AFP and in law enforcement generally, both in Australia and the region.


Thank you, Phil, for that remarkable innovation in Australian political etiquette. I've never been at a function yet where they've suspended table cuisine for an address by any politician, Government or opposition. Ladies and gentlemen, could you please put your hands together again for the Qantas Australian Boys Choir.
And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge Premier John Brumby, former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard, my ministerial colleagues too many to name - in fact, why aren't you all at work this evening?  -  parliamentary colleagues, both federal and state, friends of America, friends of Australia, friends and supporters one and all of this great alliance between our two great democracies.
Thank you, Premier John Brumby, for agreeing to host this important national dialogue. For the benefit of our American friends, Melbourne was in fact the capital of Australia between 1901 and 1927, and from the point of view of our Victorian friends, nothing should have changed. In fact, from the point of view of our Victorian friends, nothing has changed.
This is a truly extraordinarily and remarkably Australian of cities, rich in its architecture, rich in its cultural and intellectual life, rich in its culture of innovation and enterprise, and a city which can turn out 100,000 people at the MCG to watch two flies race up a wall - and even more for other, more-elevated sporting events.
I understand that our American friends last night were treated to a game of AFL at the MCG between Hawthorn and Adelaide. I was a told a story that after the game last night, former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, Hawkey to Australians, was waiting with others for the bus to take him back to the hotel with other members of the Dialogue. The bus was late. A car went by.  A bunch of young people rolled down the window and said ‘Bob Hawke, Hawkey, you are a legend', to which Hawkey replied, ‘yes, I know that, and will you give me a lift back to the hotel?'
In the remarkable culture that is Australia, that's exactly what happened, and Hawkey got back to the hotel first. Bob, we love you for who you are, and the attributes of Australian culture you continue to demonstrate.
Hawkey would also in large measure see himself as a product of this great city.
My own connection, of course, is that I'm married to a woman who lived and was educated here in Melbourne, and who mysteriously still insists that it was she, uniquely, who brought culture to our marital union.
As a loyal son of Queensland, I take exception to that  -  albeit ineffectively.
Can I also acknowledge Phil Scanlan  -  the Great Helmsman of our dialogue these last 17 years. Thank you, Phil, for your leadership for all these years. Thank you for your continued leadership as Australia's Consul General in New York, where the Scanlan School of effective Australian diplomacy is about to be metered out to the unsuspecting burghers of New York.
Can I also acknowledge Australia's Ambassador to the United States, Dennis Richardson. Dennis was appointed by my predecessor and has served both governments and the relationship between both our countries with the highest degree of professionalism, and I would like to congratulate Dennis publicly on his appointment, announced two days ago, as Secretary of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade - just as I congratulate Michael L'Estrange for his nearly five years at the helm of the Australian foreign service, also having served governments of both political persuasions with loyalty and with distinction.
Now, Dennis finds himself as Australia's most senior diplomat, though having known Dennis for almost the last 30 years, there are those who doubt that the words Dennis and diplomacy belong in the same sentence.
I disagree, and disagree fundamentally. It's just that Dennis's diplomacy has always belonged to that fully robust and fully Australian tradition of diplomacy.
Dennis, in fact, as some of you may know this already, was my first boss in government. He was a branch head, I was a new recruit to the then Australian Foreign Service. He taught me way back then the essential skills of the Australian Prime Ministership:
     * First, know how to photocopy
     * Second, know how to collate. It comes in handy for policy coordination
     * And third, the most important principle of all, always do what Dennis tells you to do.
Dennis, nothing has changed.
Could I also acknowledge again all those gathered here tonight to honour the ties that bind our two great democracies - our friends from America, who have come again to honour this relationship, and friends also of our alliance all these years.
To our American friends, could I say this - you know you are welcome guests in Australia. It's now close to 20 years since we first met in Georgetown, and as I remarked to Bruce Reed earlier today, none of us have changed one bit since.
This Dialogue has become an important informal network of ideas and of individuals who have helped to build the broader fabric of our relationship, and for Therese and I, to our American friends tonight we would simply say this  -  you have become part of our wider family, and tonight at the first Dialogue that I have attended as Prime Minister of Australia, together with Therese, I would like to thank you personally for the friendship you have shown us over so many, many years.
There is one who is not with us tonight, a person so instrumental in our beginnings, a person so fundamental in our continuity, a person so full of unbridled optimism about our future - and I speak, of course, of Anne Wexler.
I speak for all of us in honour of Anne. Not for her politics, for we all know her to have been the proudest of Democrats, but for Anne the person, Anne the human being, Anne the proudest of Americans.
When I was last in Washington in March, we honoured Anne at the Australian Ambassador's residence with a presentation on behalf of all her Australian friends.
When I rang her a week or so before she died, she was full of reflection but equally full of the future.
She recalled sitting between Kim Beazley and I at the first Dialogue Dinner, held in Georgetown in 1993 as we  -  that's Kim and I - proceeded to have a characteristically robust Australian exchange, I think on the rise of China.
Ever the diplomat, Anne said to me, this week or so before she died, she couldn't recall who prevailed in that particular discussion.
But what she did recall was that she figured these Aussies could be a feisty lot  -  and aided with a little bit of vino veritas  -  also a helluva lot of fun.
And so began her nearly 20-year love affair with Australia.
Her last words to me were about the future.
‘Kevin, what are we going to do about healthcare?
‘Kevin, how will we get it through the Congress?
‘How can we get proper healthcare for all Americans?'
With only a few days to live, this, for me, was vintage Anne.
Last Tuesday, as Phil has just mentioned, I spoke in her honour in the Australian Parliament, as did the Leader of the Opposition.
She has left a mark on us all.
And to honour her for the future, I am pleased to announce tonight that the Australian Government will henceforth fund the Anne Wexler Scholarship Program.
These scholarships will begin next year. They will be postgraduate scholarships. They will be small in number. They will be high in prestige. They will be available to Australians and Americans undertaking studies in each other's countries. They will be more generous than the Fulbright.
They will embrace the breadth of the common interest and common values that will bind our two democracies for the century ahead.
And I'm pleased to have announced this without any reference to my own bureaucracy, so my apologies to public servants here present, but before making any further announcement on the details, we will finalise all details with her lifelong partner Joe.
So Phil, when we the Dialogue next meets in DC, could I boldly suggest that we have our first address from our first Anne Wexler scholars.
Anne Wexler, Honorary Member of the Order of Australia, your spirit will be with us for the future in the lives and the minds and the values of the next generation of Australian and American leaders.
Friends, it is customary for each generation to say that the generation of which they happen to be part is confronted with challenges of unprecedented complexity.
There can be a certain arrogance of the present, insufficiently mindful of the forces faced by those who have come before us, and insufficiently mindful of the challenges and forces that will confront our successors.
We are, when we reflect on the span of history, barely seven generations removed from the existential challenges of the American Revolution, followed barely two generations later by the existential challenge that was the Civil War.
Then the killing fields of Flanders, where our two great nations discovered the unspeakable, the unspeakable horrors of global war.
Then the near equal horror of global recession. The rise and the fall of fascism. The unspeakable obscenity that was the holocaust. A generation of Cold War. The collapse of global communism.
And so to our present age with the rise of global terrorism, the rise of China, the rise of India, the emerging economies as new forces in global politics, security and the global economy, and now the potentially existential threats of climate change, energy security, food security and water - matters which have been deliberated upon during the dialogue both today and yesterday - compounded by the rapid global spread of communicable infectious diseases.
In fact, as the planet has shrunk, it seems our problems have expanded  -  or at least compounded. Or, put another way, as the world has globalised, so too have our challenges globalised, and so too has the scope of the solutions become globalised as well.
But my central message tonight is that as vital democracies and as vital economies we should be daunted by none of this  -  by none of this.
While the challenges are great, they are not beyond our collective wisdom, nor are they beyond our common resolve to act, to act decisively and to act effectively for the future.
Just as those who came before us, so too can our generation prevail against the fresh challenges that history and circumstances have thrown at us.
The challenges may be different, but the choices, in essential respects, are constant:
     * Choices between war and peace;
     * Choices between cooperation and conflict;
     * Choices between transparency versus secrecy;
     * And yes, choices ultimately between the strength of democracies and those who would seek to bring democracies down.
Of course there is discouragement, there are setbacks, there are defeats, but if we are to be clear-headed about the future, we should be equally clear-headed and clear-minded about the progress we have made, the successes we have had, and the successes we can still have if we act together: progress in our response to the global financial crisis; the possibility of progress on climate change; the possibility, too, of progress in crafting a truly Asia-Pacific century.
Let me say something about the global financial crisis.
It may be a passing strange to a number in this room how close the world came to the edge in September of 2008, barely 12 months ago. Global financial flows ground to a virtual halt. We poised ourselves at the abyss.
The response to that could have been as it was by our predecessors in the Great London Conference of the early 1930s, where in confronting the challenge which was posed then by the unfolding global depression, they failed to rise to that challenge.
The consequence? Political disagreement, blaming one of another, no coordinated action, fiscal contraction, an outbreak of trade protection, and the rest, as they say, is history.
The Depression unfolded to the tawdry tale of the 1930s  -  sustained recessionary economic performance, resulting in turn in sustained high levels of unemployment, fanning the fires of political extremism, the rise of fascism, and so too to war and its consequences.
On this occasion, the world has chosen a different course  -  informed by history, informed in part by the deliberations on the Great Depression by John Maynard Keynes, informed also by US global leadership.
What did we do differently this time? We, as countries of the world decided to coordinate our response through monetary policy to provide that necessary stimulus across the world to bring real economic activity back from the brink.
We decided as the countries and communities of the world to convene the G20, the 20 largest economies in the world, to act with coordinated action on fiscal policy to bring life to the real economy.
We decided also to act together, to begin to engineer a reform, fundamentally, of the rules of the financial system, work which has now been devolved to the Financial Stability Board, in order to restore confidence, in time, to financial markets.
We resolved together as the countries of the world to properly resource the IMF. Why was that necessary? To ensure that our international, our global financial policeman would have the resources at its disposal to act, and act decisively, should we see a further round of implosions in toxic assets in banks in Europe, most particularly in central and Eastern Europe.
And finally, as the countries and the economies of the world, we resolve that there should be no outbreak of global trade protectionism, learning, fundamentally, from the lessons of the early 1930s.
The good news is that the Washington Summit, convened by former President Bush, commissioned this work. Though much criticised at the time, it led, less than six months later, to the London Summit, under a different US President, President Obama, a London Summit which executed the work commissioned for it by the Washington Summit.
For those present in this room, and particularly those of you from Australia and elsewhere from the business community, the impact of the London Summit in early April of this year on global confidence and the trajectory towards global recovery has been fundamental. Do not take my word for it. Do not take the word of politicians from across the world. Study the technical deliberations of the International Monetary Fund themselves as they reflected on the core events of March and April this year when, still, the world teetered at the edge.
What happened in the time since April, since the global economies convened in London, was that confidence, both business and consumer has begun to recover, that because of a decision by governments, collectively, across the developed and developing economies, to inject $5 trillion plus into the real economy through fiscal stimulus, on top of the measures that we commissioned for reform of the financial system, we began to see the slow, slow recovery of our world economy.
This was a signal achievement, in vast contrast to that which occurred in the 1930s, and it was made possible on the back of US global economic leadership. That should be a fundamental message for us all.
Leadership displayed under the previous Republican administration, leadership executed under its succeeding Democrat administration, leadership demonstrated in both cases by the United States of America.
The challenge, of course, is by no means past us. We face challenges still. We are not out of the woods yet. There is a long way to go, and the challenges which lie before us at the upcoming Pittsburgh Summit of the G20 next month are equally formidable, and they are broadly threefold:
     * To ensure implementation of that which we agreed to execute in London;
     * To ensure, further, that we have a mechanism available to us in time, and at the appropriate time, to exit the extraordinary interventions that we have engaged in, both fiscal and monetary, as well as the provision of bank guarantees, in a coordinated fashion which enables the recovery to be sustained and not interrupted; and
     * Furthermore, and most importantly for the long term, to begin among the comity of nations to develop and to agree a new global strategy for economic growth. This is critical.
The global ‘growth gap' is a consequence of the wealth destruction which has occurred as a consequence of the global financial crisis. By some estimates, US households and their wealth fell by some $12 trillion over the last two years as a consequence of the falls in the housing and stock markets.
As household wealth has fallen, consumers have naturally responded by increasing their domestic savings rates, and we are already seeing US savings rates on the rise, reaching as high as nine per cent this year after falling below zero in 2007.
The slowdown in US consumer demand alone could leave a $500 billion hole in the US economy.
This ‘growth gap' amounts to nearly 4 per cent of US GDP, and in other countries, similar wealth destruction is having a similar effect. To fill this ‘growth gap' for the future, we must begin to build the foundations of a new growth strategy for the global economy for the future, to place our global economy in the future on a more stable footing, not simply contingent on the boom and bust cycles of the past, not simply contingent on US consumption driven by US debt, consumer and corporate, funded by capital transfers out of North-East Asia and the Middle East.
This is likely to prove to be an unsustainable model for the future, and thus we, as the community of nations must begin to develop an alternative strategy for the future, and that will and must be part of our deliberations in Pittsburgh next month.
The government of Germany under Angela Merkel has already advanced what she describes as a new Global Economic Charter for the future. The rest of us must continue to work with that framework and involve, in fact, a new strategy for the future, one which is capable of producing sustainable economic growth for the long term.
For Australia, we've been embarked on a similar program at home. Our fiscal strategy in response to the global economic crisis has been vigorous. We've also acted, through the Reserve Bank, on monetary policy. We've also, through our interventions in providing guarantees to our banks for their deposits and for their interbank lending, arrived at a situation where of the 11 remaining AA+ rated banks in the world, 4 of those 11 are Australia.
We arrive, therefore, as a consequence of these collective measures, at a position today whereby Australia;
     * among the OECD economies, is the fastest-growing economy in the world,
     * that among the major advanced economies we have the second-lowest unemployment in the world;
     * that we have the lowest net debt and the lowest deficit among the major advanced economies in the world, and
     * beyond that, we are the only advanced economy not to have so far gone into technical recession.
But we are not out of the woods yet, nor is the global economy. Nationally, we will have to prosecute, consistent with our colleagues around the world, an exit strategy from the extraordinary interventions that we've undertaken, and we'll have to develop here, as I've outlined recently in my comments publically, a sustainable, long-term economic development strategy, parallel to that which we must develop globally as well.
But in all these things, national action alone will not count. Global action is that which will count, and the leadership of the Obama administration will be critical in Pittsburgh and beyond.
The spirit that I saw alive in London is a spirit which must characterise our future as well. Sitting around the table with heads of government from the G20 countries, President Obama sitting there, President Hu Jintao across the table from him, together with the President of France, the Prime Minister of Britain, and others, as everyone spoke to a common purpose, which transcended whatever divisions may exist between us politically or in other areas  -  how do we bring the global economy back from the brink, how do we implement a global strategy in order to ensure that our people are not thrown into the mass unemployment that so plagued our planet in the 1930s.
It is that spirit which I saw alive in the dining room at Number 10 in April this year, which must continue to characterise our global deliberations for the future.
I said before that we must be mindful of our successes and the challenges for possible future success as well. I've spoken of the global financial crisis, the global economic recession, and the challenges which lie ahead and what we've achieved so far. So too do those challenges present themselves to us in climate change.
For climate change, Copenhagen looms close.
L'Aquila, the conference of the major economies forum and the G8 achieved some success, some success in defining a two degrees Centigrade limit at beyond which global temperatures should not rise. But the challenges between Pittsburgh and Copenhagen are real, challenges which go to how do we in fact ensure that developed countries rise to the challenge of having verifiable targets, midterm and long term, that developing countries and emerging economies also share their burden for the future by having verifiable actions through to 2020 and 2050, and that we can develop among us agreed international financing mechanisms to underpin the challenges which emerging economies face in order to bring about fundamental transformations in their energy postures for the future.
The G20 again looms as the vehicle, through Pittsburgh, to give credence, to give coherence, and to give the possibility of outcome at Copenhagen and beyond, and that is a challenge which lies with us for the future.
I conclude on a challenge closer to home, here in our own region, the Asia-Pacific region.
Our world needs, at the continuation and the enhancement, of a global rules-based order, so too does our region, the Asia Pacific region.
Here in our region we've had some success over the years. The Association of South-East Asian Nations has formed an entity called ASEAN, which has turned former combatants into partners. If we reflect back as to where the South-East Asian nations lay 40 years ago as to where they are today, it is a testimony to the effectiveness of that act in regionalism to bring together people into a common purpose for the future.
For our wider region, the Asia-Pacific region, the challenge is parallel  -  how do we craft a future among ourselves which is both peaceful and prosperous. APEC has brought together the economies of our region. The East Asian Summit has brought together many of the polities of our region, but regrettably to date excluding the United States.
Our region is still plagued by unresolved and significant territorial disputes, whether it's in the Taiwan Straits, on the Korean Peninsula, in the South China Sea, or in Kashmir.
The challenge for the future is how do we form among us with creativity and with an entrepreneurial spirit, a new Asia-Pacific Community which is capable of bringing about a common sense of security and political purpose for this, the Pacific Century, in the century as it unfolds.
On questions of security, to inculcate a culture of transparency rather than secrecy. How do we fashion and build confidence and security building measures, beginning with such modest areas as common responses to national disasters in our region, whereby our armed forces and our emergency services work together and in an instant to respond to this, one of the most natural disaster prone regions in the world.
These are the challenges which lie ahead. These are the challenges to which we can rise.
I believe, friends, that we can rise to all of these challenges, if our political resolve and our political will is up to it. All of these, in critical respects, will depend on the continuation of US global and regional leadership. It is leadership which we, in this country, Australia, are proud to support, and we intend to be your partners for the future.
We should therefore among us have absolute confidence that we can have the collective resolve, the collective political will, and the collective political imagination to rise to each of the challenges I've referred to this evening.
We can do so.
There is one thing that can defeat us, and that is to allow our domestic political divides to so swamp our ability to see the greater global challenges which lie ahead of us.
I believe also we can rise beyond that challenge as well.
That's where the bipartisan and the truly international nature of this Dialogue embodies the spirit our region and the spirit of the world that we will need to draw upon to deal with these great challenges of the future.
I salute this dialogue. I salute each and every one of you who have been participants in it, as we must harness again the great energies and vitalities of our democracies and our economies to deal with these great challenges of our common future.
I thank you. 


The Australian and Western Australian Governments have agreed to jointly accept any long term liability arising from the storage of CO2 in geological formations under Barrow Island as part of the Gorgon LNG project.
This decision clears a major hurdle for the Gorgon joint venture partners  -  Chevron, ExxonMobil and Shell  -  as they move towards a final investment decision before the end of the year. It is a great example of governments working in partnership with the private sector to secure Australian jobs, investment, revenue and exports  -  and grow the wealth of the nation. The Gorgon Carbon Capture and Storage operation will be a major part of the global portfolio of CCS projects supported by the Australian-led Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
It will also be the world's largest demonstration of CCS technology for many years to come and receive $60 million in funding from the Australian Government.
The Commonwealth's decision to accept a share of the long term liability for CO2 storage acknowledges the Gorgon LNG project's scale and significance to the Australian economy, the opportunity it provides to demonstrate CCS technology at industrial scale, and the environmental significance of Barrow Island.
The $50 billion Gorgon LNG project will be the biggest single investment ever made in Australia, breaking the record set only a few years ago by the $12 billion Pluto LNG project now under construction in Western Australia.
Gorgon will provide jobs for about 6,000 Australian workers at the peak of construction and buy about $33 billion worth of Australian goods and services over the next few years. The project will also guarantee a significant boost to Australia's export income with contracts to sell around $300 billion worth of LNG to customers in the Asia-Pacific over the next 20 years.
Here at home, Gorgon will deliver at least 150 terajoules/day of domestic gas into the Western Australian market no later than 2015, increasing competition and easing supply side issues for Western Australian industry and households.
It will also generate about $40 billion in government revenue that will fund schools, hospitals, roads and infrastructure for the state and the nation for decades to come.
Twenty-five per cent of expected Petroleum Resource Rent Tax revenue from the Gorgon project, worth up to $100 million a year, will be spent on Western Australian infrastructure projects alone, fulfilling a 2007 election commitment of the Rudd Labor Government.
The Commonwealth will now commence early discussions with the WA Government on the timing of payments to Western Australia to deliver this commitment.



The Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Hon John Key, will visit Australia from 18-23 August, accompanied by seven ministers from the New Zealand Cabinet.
Australia and New Zealand have a close partnership founded on common values and strong community links.  The countries share a similar foreign and trade policy outlook, founded on close cooperation in the Pacific, strong advocacy for open and liberal trade policy settings, and support for effective multilateral institutions.
Mr Key's visit will provide the opportunity to review invigorated work to build the trans-Tasman Single Economic Market and remove barriers to closer ties. 
The Prime Ministers will also discuss the implementation of the outcomes agreed by leaders at the Cairns Pacific Islands Forum, with Australia, as Chair of the Forum, and New Zealand committed to closer engagement with our Pacific neighbours. 
During Mr Key's visit, the inaugural joint Cabinet meeting between Australia and New Zealand will be held, recognising the two countries' special political and economic bonds and our shared future.


Today we gather to recognise courage.
Today we gather to recognise sacrifice.
Today we gather to recognise mateship.
We honour the service of all 60,000 Australians who served in the Vietnam War.
We remember the sacrifice of the 521 Australians who lost their lives in this conflict.
We remember, too, those who were wounded in battle.
And we remember those who today still bear the scars of war.
When you talk to these veterans about what they did for their country, most of them in my experience, shrug their shoulders and say simply: “I was just doing my job.”
Today, I would say to each and every one of them, and each and every one of you gathered here today, that the Australian Government and the Australian people thank you for a job well done.
Today we also remember Private David Fisher, whose remains were brought home from the dense jungle of Vietnam last September.
And we remember Flying Officer Michael Herbert and Pilot Officer Robert Carver, the final two Australians missing in action in Vietnam.
It is right that as a people we never give up in the search for those we have lost in battle fields abroad.
For they and their earthly remains are a part of us. They are part of our soil - the soil from which they have sprung, the soil from which we have sprung, the soil that is Australia.
And their spirit remains with us still and will be so forever more.
A spirit which speaks to us down the ages and down this great avenue of heroes - an avenue which honours our heroes from the trenches of ANZAC, an avenue which honours those who still fight in the mountain passes of Afghanistan.
A spirit which says to us today a simple thing, but a profound thing - that service and sacrifice for others are the heart and soul of any nation that lays claim to greatness.
Thank you to the dedicated and selfless work of so many Australians in having our last Australians missing in action returned home. It is because of their work that we are able to complete this unfinished work of the nation, and I thank you most sincerely.
With their homecoming later this month, there will no doubt be much sadness, mingled with some measure of comfort for those who have waited so very long for their return.
We thank the families of all veterans for their bravery and compassion in supporting their loved ones down the years, because much support was needed for those who made it home.
For too long, their fears that their health problems connected to their service in Vietnam were ignored or flatly denied. These were their fears, and fears which continue still today.
Last year, the Australian Government launched the Vietnam Veterans' Family Study.
This $11.5 million study aims to help identify health problems that may have occurred as a result of service in Vietnam, along with protective factors and characteristics that help build resilience on the part of the families of veterans as well.
We asked Vietnam veterans, other servicemen and women, their children, their step-children, nieces and nephews, partners and ex-partners to take part.
I am pleased to be able to confirm today that we have now attained the minimum required numbers of volunteers to ensure that the key parts of this broad survey, this broad study, can now proceed.
This has been long and arduous work, and I thank all of our friends and partners in the Vietnam veterans' community for assisting us in it.
This family study, this family survey, will allow the scientific evaluation of the impacts on the children and other family members of your service in Vietnam.
This is the right thing to do for Australia, because you the soldiers of Australia, were sent abroad in all our names - sent abroad in all our names
Our single, our great, and our important purpose today is to honour you, to honour those who did not return, and to honour those who continue today to bear the scars of war in Australia's name.


Thanks very much, Don, and thank you for that wholehearted acceptance of the principle of compulsory arbitration.
And Julia, where are you? Note it down, we'll get it to the files down at the ACTU headquarters by about nine this evening and everything will be on.
The thing about the job that I have, is that, and I'm sure you've had this experience as well, is that you sometimes find it hard to call people, and I'm sure this won't come as a big shock, but I don't often or always get around to calling people back when I know that I should.
Heather is one of those people whose call you always return. You would not dare not to.
What's sort of frustrating about that fact, though, is that Heather is so busy, often she doesn't return my call.
I'm not smiling, Heather.
But to be fair, it's mainly my fault. If you looked at the number of jobs we've given Heather in recent times, we just keep appointing her to things. She's a member of the Business Advisory Group, she's on Skills Australia, she took part in the 2020 Summit, she's working on the Henry Review of Taxation, a few things on industrial relations as well, I think.
By the way Heather, who's paying for all this? Is it -
Can I say your contribution is exceptionally welcome.
I was going to appoint Heather to some other bodies recently, but she said she really valued that 15 minutes she still had time to check her emails, and I said to her, “Heather, based on recent experience here, it's always very important to check your emails”.
I am delighted to be here tonight at the Australian Industry Group dinner, and to be part of your National Forum.
Heather has mentioned to me that tonight is a special evening, celebrating the addition of the South Australian members, the Engineering Employers Association of South Australia  -  and we welcome you warmly.
What brings the members of the AiGroup together is a shared commitment to our country's prosperity, to building businesses, expanding industries, generating jobs and laying the foundations for future growth.
That is why the Australian Government enjoys such a strong partnership with the AiGroup, and I want to acknowledge tonight the ongoing contribution the Group makes to the Government's reform agenda.
Through the outstanding leadership of Heather Ridout, the AiGroup has contributed to our reform agenda for national infrastructure, skills development, industrial relations, business deregulation, climate change and taxation, and don't worry, she's not to blame for all the outcomes, but she has been actively engaged with us on all of those.
In corridors of the Ministerial Wing, the carpets are worn down with the constant flow of AiGroup members in and out of ministerial offices, advocating for the interests of Australian businesses  -  and that is as it should be.
In the past 12 months the AiGroup has played an important role across many complex policy initiatives, including:
     * Australia's response to the global recession, which has involved the largest Commonwealth infrastructure program in our nation's history;
     * The design of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme;
     * The drafting and implementation of the Fair Work Act and the reforms to the Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act;
     * The harmonisation of national occupational health and safety laws, where your support will be crucial in encouraging all Australian jurisdictions  -  all Australian jurisdictions - to implement the model OHS Act and regulations by 2011;
     * The revival of our manufacturing industry so that we can still be a country that makes things in the future  -  a passion of Kim Carr, a passion of mine;
     * The strengthening of the national innovation system, including the re-casting of the Research and Development tax incentive;
     * The investment allowance for smaller businesses, and
     * The additional funding for the Export Market Development Grants program.
Of course sometimes the AiGroup and the Government agree and sometimes we do not, and that is one of the great things about our democracy, but we enjoy a strong, constructive and positive relationship, and one that is to the benefit of our nation and I believe to the benefit of good policy outcomes for us all.
In my remarks tonight I'd like to provide something of a report card on our response to the global economic crisis in the short term and to begin to outline our strategy for sustainable economic reform for the long term. But first I want to touch briefly on the critical policy challenge of the moment - climate change. Because whether we like it or not, this is as fundamental a challenge to our economy for the future as it is also for the environment.
We need concerted action. We need action domestically, internationally, we need action locally, we need action globally, to meet this challenge effectively.
With only a short time to go before Copenhagen, the Australian Government is working hard, through Penny Wong, to ensure that the world takes this window of opportunity in order to act on climate change.
Unfortunately, last Thursday in the Senate, our emissions trading laws were voted down. The result of that decision of the Senate is renewed uncertainty at a time when businesses need to be able to move forward with confidence and certainty for future.
I cannot emphasise strongly enough the importance of the CPRS legislation proceeding, and I acknowledge the AiGroup's support for passing the legislation this year for business certainty.
I know there is concern about the challenges involved in the implementation of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, but can I say, across the world this is a challenge confronting all developed economies, and none of it is easy. It's all hard because of the fundamental nature of the reform in which we are engaged.
This is a historic economic policy reform that will play a central role in engineering Australia's transition to a lower-carbon economy in the future. It will require change and adjustments in many parts of our economy, but it will also create many opportunities, some of which we have not dreamed of yet, especially for our manufacturing industries that will provide the green products, and also our other industries that will provide the green services of the future  -  more fuel efficient cars, the water and energy-saving devices and technologies for our homes and for our offices.
I spoke yesterday in Sydney with Larry Smar, who I understand was with you here today, as he explained to me over lunch in Sydney the absolute importance of what we're doing with the national broadband network and its impact in terms of energy saving, energy efficiency and a whole series of initiatives which will contribute fundamentally to our ability to bring greenhouse gas emissions down. One part, I believe, of an exciting set of innovations for the future, and business opportunities coming off the back of the national high-speed broadband network, which again we have not yet fully conceived of.
It is essential that Australia begins this transition to a lower-carbon economy if we are to compete successfully for all the business opportunities that will be generated by the global transition to low-carbon energy sources in the years ahead.
It's time we got on with the implementation of this scheme  and with working with Australian business so they can be fully prepared for implementation come 2011, because if we somehow as a nation conclude that this all too hard for us, all too difficult, and that somehow we could remain outside the global network of cap-and-trade systems across the developed economies of the world, let me say this  -  we'll be denying Australia of a whole new set of economic opportunities for the future.
Secondly, we'll be also inviting the possibility of punitive tariffs being imposed on this economy being imposed on this economy in the future by other economies which  join the cap-and-trade system of the future. 
Thirdly, we will have done nothing, absolutely nothing, to have contributed to a positive global outcome at Copenhagen - critical for Australia hottest and driest continent, where the impact of climate change is being felt first and hardest.
Therefore, the challenge for us all, whatever our side of politics, is to lift our vision beyond the partisan divide and to seize this opportunity for Australia, not see it simply as a threat, but to see it as an opportunity, and to embark upon this bold new set of reforms for the future.
Previous generations of Australian leaders have confronted challenges of complexity as well. They have, by and large, risen to the occasion. That is our challenge for the future.
Our most pressing challenge right now  -  -  to echo the Forum theme  -  is negotiating the downturn to emerge stronger than before.
Our most pressing challenge right now is to ensure that our strategy for economic reform continues for the future, and that we can continue to negotiate our strategy for recovery from the global economic recession.
Australia has a remarkably powerful story to tell, right now, in terms of how we have so far withstood all that the world thrown at us through the global financial crisis and the global economic recession.
We have suffered damage, that is true, but compared with most other economies, we've weathered this storm arguably the best of many.
But as we continue through the powerful headwinds of the months ahead, we will also face new challenges, so tonight I'd like to run through two or three things which I think are important to underline as we embark upon the challenges of the second half of this year and into 2010:
     * Firstly, our Nation Building for Recovery plan;
     * Secondly the impact of what we have achieved so far,
     * Third, the uneven, the very uneven road of recovery that lies ahead, where unemployment will continue to rise, where interest rates, as the Reserve Bank Governor has indicated already, and I have in earlier speeches as well, will also rise, and on top of that the fact that we'll also, on the back of commodity price improvements around the world, also see increases in the cost of living. These are the challenges of what I describe as an uneven recovery;
     * And the fourth thing I'd like to touch on tonight is, most importantly, how do we lay the foundation stones for long-term, sustainable economic growth in Australia, the building blocks for a long-term productivity revolution of the Australian economy.
You have heard us say before that this global recession is the worst in 75 years. I would simply draw your attention to what is seen on the screen before you.
Many of you in this room, in fact most of you, have an active memory of the recession in 1991, an active memory in some cases of the recession of 1982. With those two earlier recessions, remember well this point: that the growth numbers in 1982 were still, for global growth, 0.9, and for 1991 they were 1.5, positive. However, for 2009, the global growth number is projected to be negative 1.4.
Whatever the experiences were, therefore, of '82 and '91, remember that the global economy continued to grow. This, remarkably, since when economic data has been collected in the post-war period, since '51, is the first time that the global economy is projected to shrink.
Notwithstanding the above, partly because of the measures undertaken by the Australian Government, partly because of where we are in terms of our international trade and our access, still, to export markets in this part of the world, and partly because of the decisions taken by so many of you in this room, our performance against the other OECD economies has been strong. Australia, as of the conclusion of the first quarter this year, is the fastest growing economy in the OECD. This should be something in which we take some pride as a nation.
The measures that we took as a government to underpin this performance are broadly in three categories. The first of them, on the slide before your at the moment, goes to the use of Government guarantees for the banking system. For those of you familiar with your discussions with your banks in October last year, you'll recall how difficult things became.
You'll recall that we had a virtual drying up of global credit flows. You'll recall that people were becoming anxious about the security of their deposits.
That's why in October last year, the Government, meeting in Cabinet in this building here, took two fundamental decisions. One, for the first time in Australia's history, to guarantee everyone's savings deposits, deposits in their building societies and credit union, and second, again the first time in this country's history, to guarantee the inter-bank lending of Australia's banks, both at home and abroad.
The reason that was necessary, if you look at the slide, and look at what was happening in September, October, November of last year, the total raisings by Australian banks, both onshore and offshore ground to zero. What you see in the right hand side of the graph is in fact the emergence of the impact of the guarantees provided by the Australian Government. That shaded in grey, obviously, offshore raisings, which are guaranteed by the Australian Government, that in black domestic raisings guaranteed by the Australian Government.
It is only as we've got closer to the middle of this year, 2009, in May and in June, did we begin to see the rising again of those raisings by some of our banks not using the Australian Government guarantee.
Why do I labour this point? Credit - the artery of the economy. The non-availability of credit, the time span is short between when the tap is turned off and when the real economy begins to fundamentally fall in a heap.
The decisions taken by this Government in this building in October last year were fundamental to ensuring that the lines of credit opened up again by year's end and early 2009, and you begin to see here the slow trajectory towards recovery.
The second part of our response to this global recession has been what we would do in terms of providing stimulus to the Australian economy.
When we sat in the Cabinet room on that room, and the Treasurer's with us tonight, as is the Finance Minister, and the Deputy Prime Minister, and it was a long and hard series of meetings, we asked the Secretary of the Treasury, who's also with us tonight, to explain to us what had happened in previous recessions, and how we could actually make a material difference.
We began with a presentation in terms of something basic and elementary, which is what were the final drivers of total final demand in the Australian economy  -  household consumption, dwelling construction, private business investment, public final demand, and you'll see their relative statistical significance in the middle column  -  54, 6, 17 and 22.
Net exports, of course, adding up at the end, and contributing to the overall equation.
Therefore, this led to a very clear set of conclusions  -  if you're looking at this, beginning of October last year, what could you do there and then to make a material difference there and then in the weeks following the Lehman's implosion as the global economy was teetering on the edge, to make a material difference in the real economy?
And the answers we came up with were: cash stimulus. Ken's advice to us: go hard, go households, go early.
Secondly, dwelling construction, hence the trebling of the First Home Owners' boost, and thirdly, private business investment, hence the temporary investment allowance which we've employed as well.
Australia's strong economic position is in large part due to strong, decisive Government action to cushion the impact of the recession. 
Those were the three measures that we embraced at around about that time in order to provide an injection then into the real economy. Had we waited for the simple delivery of infrastructure, medium-term or longer-term infrastructure, as many economies around the world have done, the flow-through time would indeed have been long, we would have seen a complete collapse in real activity and real employment in the economy in the last quarter last year, the first quarter this year and the second quarter this year, and once you've got employment falling through the floor, as has happened in so many economies around the world, the roll-on consequences for asset prices, and then to the financial system, particularly off the back of real estate, becomes a negative cycle, and in turn compounding the spiralling down of growth.
In our stimulus strategy, we phased it in three stages. What you see before you, of course, is short, medium and long.
The short-term measures are those I've just run through  -  cash payments to families, and secondly the trebling of the First Home Owners boost and thirdly, the provisions we've made by way of support for the temporary investment allowance, all adding up to some $26.9 billion.
That has made, collectively, the critical difference. Final quarter last year, first quarter this year, and we see, still, with the effect it has in second quarter this year as the numbers have not been produced.
However, the second phase, medium term, which is this large school build, this large public housing build and this large range of energy efficiency measures, as well investment in local government infrastructure, to collectively representing some $34.9 billion. Of course, the flagship for this is the largest school building program that you've seen anywhere in the country, spread across all 10,000 of Australia's schools, primary and secondary, Government and non-government. That is underway now, and the objective again is for it to fold in at the time at which the shorter-term measures, particularly the cash payments, were fading out. That is the phase which we are currently in, and have been in since around about June.
And then the third phase, of course, is long term, and there you would have seen that outlined in great detail in the Treasurer's budget speech, in terms of our investment in long-term transport projects, the National Broadband Network, as well as a range of other education research projects, clean energy, health and hospitals infrastructure.
Three stages to the overall stimulus strategy, critical, fundamentally critical, to provide a rolling series of stimulus into the economy in order to cushion us in the real economy from the full impact of what was happening abroad.
Some have questioned the real impact in terms of cash payments. I simply draw that to you attention as a fundamental difference between what happened here and other economies, such as in Europe, Canada, Japan, the US and New Zealand, in terms of the retail sector.
1.5 million Australians work in retail. That's 15% of our workforce. It's a lot of Australians. Ensuring that we could generate growth numbers like that at a time when around the rest of the world it was falling through the floor, was of critical importance.
Of course, loans to first home buyers based on the First Home Owners boost had a similar effect in terms of what we saw in the overall number of loans, and again the housing data, while still down, has been better than in most other comparable economies.
Business investment, remarkably, has remained just positive  -  one of the contributing factors in this data has been in fact the temporary investment allowance. As you know, 30 percent announced at the end of last year, and then from the middle of this year up to 50 percent for small businesses through until year's end, again with the idea of providing businesses with encouragement to bring forward their capital investments, and most critically, to continue to contribute to positive growth.
These short-term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment has come online. As the chart shows, without the cash stimulus, growth would have been -0.2 in the March quarter, pushing Australia into a technical recession.
The simple fact is that without the Australian Government's early and decisive action, through targeted stimulus, Australia would already be in recession.
Treasury's advice is clear: Without the cash stimulus to low income earners, Australia would have experienced a second consecutive negative quarter in March  -  pushing Australian into technical recession.
Therefore, we thought this was the wrong way to go.
We did not accept the advice of our political opponents. We thought this was the right way to go in terms of ensuring we could at least cushion Australia from the impact of the global economic recession.
A technical recession would have had a further negative impact on economic confidence, both business and for consumers. Therefore, we believed the right thing to do was to support growth, to support employment, and to avoid a crushing blow to confidence. That's why we believe we've embarked upon the right strategy.
Just as no stimulus would have plunged Australia into recession earlier this year, reducing the stimulus now would pull the rug out from under thousands of small- and medium- sized Australian businesses dependent on stimulus-related work to keep their heads above water. We are not out of the woods yet.
It's important to emphasise that 70 per cent of our total stimulus investment is in medium- and long-term infrastructure. 
As I said before, the Education Revolution, energy efficiency and social housing, the longer-term infrastructure investments as well  -  the uniting theme with so many of these infrastructure investments is also to have a weather-eye on our strategy to build long-term productivity growth.
Mention was made before of the deficit, historically, in infrastructure investment in Australia. For the first time, the Commonwealth's now taking a lead in national infrastructure planning through the good work and the strong leadership of the Minister for Infrastructure, Anthony Albanese, but we have just begun this process.
The consequence of all these measures has flowed through to confidence.
The consumer confidence numbers have rallied, as you can see on the screen, just as have the business confidence figures rallied as well, and therefore they have returned almost  -  almost  -  to pre-crisis levels.
As you know, what we do objectively in the economy by way of policy and programs and investment is critical. What the economy itself concludes subjectively, both as consumers and as business leaders, is equally critical. What the Australian community, I believe, concluded, having seen the strategy that we're putting in place, was that in fact this strategy was of substance and formed a basis upon which they could have confidence in making business and consumer decisions for the future.
That has been as important as have been the real decisions in the real economy by business leaders such as yourself.
Without the stimulus, unemployment would be higher. Without stimulus, Treasury estimates that unemployment would have reached some 10 per cent. As you know, we are tracking somewhat under that, and we believe this is a direct consequence of the stimulus investments that we have made.
Treasury's advice to us was that in the two years of this year and next year, had we not invested in this stimulus, there would be something in excess of 200,000 Australians each of those two years who would be further out of work.
Australia's unemployment rate is lower than the other major advanced economies, only second lowest compared against Japan. Again, the impact of our measures on the labour market have been significant.
One final measure in which we've engaged in is this  -  I mentioned before our activity to stabilise financial markets, I've mentioned our investment in stimulus, short, medium and long  -  but the other thing we've sought to invest in, of course, is the work undertaken by the Deputy Prime Minister in her responsibility for education and training, assisted by the Employment Minister, Mark Arbib, and that is a jobs and 
training compact supporting those who have lost their jobs.
A Compact with Young Australians, a $277 million investment, where young Australians must be earning or learning, a Compact with Retrenched Workers, some $438 million, providing immediate employment assistance, reduced waiting times for income support, as well as what we've negotiated with major banks  -  a capacity to postpone mortgage payments for 12 months - and a Compact with Local Communities. Across Australia, we know from the historical data where in fact we have seen the highest spikes of unemployment in the past, and that's where we have deployed this local jobs fund through the assistance of local priority employment coordinators to take the edge off the highest levels of unemployment in the most unemployment affected regions.
That, therefore, is our strategy, but as a consequence of implementing it, what we're able to say to the world at large is that Australia has lower debt than the major advanced economies in the world  -  that's us on the bottom left. Australia has lower deficits than the major advanced economies, and you can see, again, us on the bottom left. Those are, of course, percentages of deficit as a percentage of GDP.
The overall impact of these measures, then, before I go on to productivity growth, is as follows  -  that what we have been able to do through these measures, supported by the decisions in business, and often hard decisions to retain employees when it's been most difficult, has been to bring about a situation where in Australia as of now, we have the fastest growing economy in the OECD, the second-lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies, and we have done so, so far, with this economy being the only one of the major advanced economies not to have gone into technical recession.
That is what we have been dealing with up until now. How do you build for the building blocks of future? As our president said before, the big challenge for the future lies in building productivity growth. Those are the figures to which he referred just before  -  sliding productivity growth since we began reflecting these data series from the early ‘90s. This has to be turned around, just as we need to embrace a global challenge about how we in fact close the global growth gap in the future, without simply assuming that we're going to have a return to business as usual in the years ahead.
US household wealth is estimated to have fallen by $12 trillion over the past two years due to falls in housing and stock markets, and as household wealth has fallen, consumers have naturally responded by increasing their savings rates.
US savings rates are already on the rise  -  reaching as high as 9 per cent this year after falling below zero in 2007.
The slowdown in consumer demand alone could leave a $500 billion a year hole in the US economy  -  a growth gap of some 4 per cent of GDP. To fill the growth gap we must build the foundations for future growth and put the global economy on a more stable footing.
For us simply to assume here in Australia that the formula which has generated growth in the past, led by US consumption fuelled from US debt, which has been underpinned by global capital transfers out of North-East Asia and Middle East, is not a sustainable proposition for the future.
One of the deliberations we will have on the table at the Pittsburgh summit of the G20 next month will be how do we being to craft a different global growth strategy which is sustainable for the future, and one which necessarily embraces the reconciliation of the financial imbalances between the United States and North-East Asia for the rest of the decade ahead.
That is for the world, but also for Australia it means how do we actually carve more out of global growth which may be more sluggish than it's been for decades past, for which there is only one answer  -  and that is a productivity growth agenda.
That's why we are embracing and targeting these five key areas:
     * Regulatory and competition reform through the COAG process;
     * Infrastructure investment, brought about through the leadership of the Building Australia Fund and Infrastructure Australia;
     * Investment in innovation, in particular through the national high-speed broadband network;
     * Skills investment, which have been championed by the Deputy Prime Minister in the Education Revolution; and
     * Tax reform, as we await the deliberations of the Henry Commission of review into the Australian taxation system.
To conclude on what the private economy is up to, and I mention this to you as a word of encouragement about what is going on out there in the resources sector at the moment. Today, the Australian Government, together with the Government of Western Australia, made an important decision, and that decision was to jointly accept any long-term liability resulting from the storing of CO2 in geological formations part of the Gorgon project in WA. This is an extraordinarily large project - $50 billion.
Let me put that into context. The stimulus strategy I've just run through from the Government, spread over a number of years, cumulatively represents some 6.1 percent or thereabouts of GDP. This one resource project in Western Australia is worth $50 billion, or about 5 percent of GDP. This is critical for Australia's future.
That is why ourselves and the Liberal Government in Western Australia have worked hard to conjointly take on this responsibility. The project has not been formally concluded yet. Some remaining approvals remain to be delivered, but it is one in which we should, as a country, take confidence, assuming we can get over the final regulatory hurdles, generating some 6,000 jobs alone in the construction phase.'
To conclude, what we've done so far is embrace upon, embark upon, this strategy of nation building for recovery. We've done so by investing in stimulus, by supporting financial stability through the bank guarantees we've provided, and through our strategy for jobs and training intervention as well. The results, as I've run through before, for Australia, I think, are a good story for us to tell, but we're not out of the woods yet, and the road ahead will be long and tough, but what must unite our efforts as AiG and as the Australian Government going forward, is how do we embark now upon a building decade for productivity growth for the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's where AiG comes in. The work we've done so far is but the beginning. We have to not just recover from this global economic recession, we have to put in place the foundation stones, the building blocks for long-term, sustainable economic growth. That's our report card so far. The real report card is whether we can engender that productivity growth for the future, and that will only come if we the Government remain in close and strong partnership with you, the leaders of Australian business.
I thank you for your time.


NZ PM John Key: Well, here we are in Cairns. It's the end of the Pacific Forum Leader's Meeting, the actually dialogue today. It's been a very productive couple of days.
Tomorrow we've got a post-Dialogue forum. We'll be talking to some other parties that come from around the world, like the United States.
Today at the Forum we had an extensive discussion  -  everything from climate change right through to economic development in the region, talking about ways that we can roll out renewable energy for the Pacific leaders, looking at how sports can play a role in the development of countries, so it was a very good-humoured meeting. We had 15 partners around the room talking about the fortunes of the Pacific region.
It's been hosted in Cairns. This is the 40th meeting, and Australia is in the Chair for this particular year - took the baton from Niue, where it was held last year.
Cairns is a great place, actually. I've been here a few times before for social reasons, but not actually for work, so it was great to be up here. I've been hosted in a fantastic facility here at the convention centre. It's pretty hot outside, been about 28 degrees, and that's been extremely nice.
Tonight we're off to, I think it's the national park, or some sort of, at least, outdoor facility where we're going to have a big dinner, a lot dignitaries coming into town for that, and then tomorrow we'll be having the post-Dialogue forum and back to New Zealand. So it's been a very interesting two or three days, a lot of issues to be debated.
Bit sad that Fiji's not with us. They've been suspended from the Forum for reasons that everybody's aware, but maybe one day they'll set their country on the pathway to democracy and they can be restored back to the Forum.


Prime Ministers Kevin Rudd and John Key held their fourth bilateral meeting in Canberra on 20 August 2009 during Prime Minister Key's official visit to Australia.
The Prime Ministers agreed on the imperative for continued strong and coordinated international action to restore confidence and global economic growth.  They recognised that strengthened trans-Tasman economic integration, including through the Single Economic Market work program, would be vital for both countries.  They recognised it would enhance the ability of Australia and New Zealand to weather the current global recession, increase national productivity, maintain and drive job creation, foster international competitiveness and improve the environment for doing business on both sides of the Tasman.
The Prime Ministers agreed to a joint statement of intent to give new intensity and a renewed focus to delivering the practical benefits and outcomes from the Single Economic Market.  This work will be guided by key principles designed to deliver more quickly and effectively the benefits of seamless trans-Tasman economy to consumers and businesses in both countries.  The joint statement also lists practical concrete outcomes on economic regulatory matters, including business law and competition policy, that they would like to achieve.  A copy of the Joint Statement of Intent is attached.
The Prime Ministers also agreed to a joint plan to streamline trans-Tasman travel, with improvements to be seen as early as next year.  The plan includes roll out of the automated SmartGate passenger clearance system in New Zealand, and improvements to screening and processing for low risk passengers on both sides of the Tasman.  They also agreed to trials of direct exit paths for passengers and the transfer between Australia and New Zealand of x-ray images for more efficient biosecurity screening.   To foster long-term improvements, Australia and New Zealand will explore further streamlining passenger processing through studies on pre-clearing passengers at point of departure and through expanding and integrating SmartGate systems.
The Prime Ministers also endorsed a new Development Coordination Partnership, which takes an important first step towards implementing the Cairns Compact for Strengthened Development Coordination in the Pacific, agreed at the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders' Meeting in Cairns on 6 August.  The Partnership pledges new efforts by Australia and New Zealand to integrate development assistance activities in order to lift the effectiveness of aid programs and make improved progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in the Pacific.   The Partnership builds on the recommendations of the joint report, released at the Cairns Pacific Islands Forum, about the impact of the global recession on the Pacific.  The Prime Ministers also welcomed the launch by Pacific leaders of PACER Plus negotiations. A copy of the major themes is attached.
Recalling the commitment that they had made in March to strengthen economic integration and cooperation, the two Prime Ministers welcomed the considerable progress made in the preceding five months including:
     * substantial progress in concluding a CER Investment Protocol aimed at promoting further cross-Tasman investment, and reaffirmed their commitment to concluding this agreement by the end of 2009, including today agreement on the screening thresholds, which will be AUD$953 million for New Zealand investments in Australia and NZD$477 million for Australian investments in New Zealand, half of the Australian threshold;
     * an amended Australia-New Zealand Joint Food Standards Treaty on which stakeholders will be consulted in September;
     * updated economic agreements to facilitate closer business links including a revised Double Taxation Agreement and the conclusion of a new scheme enabling Australian and New Zealand workers to move pension funds across the Tasman;
     * continued close collaboration on international and regional trade policy, including with a view to the swift conclusion of the Doha Development round of negotiations at the WTO;
     * new joint trade promotion activities to increase global market shares for the Trans-Tasman economy, particularly in the Asian region, including through AANZFTA;
     * Australian  -  New Zealand collaboration in flagship initiatives including agreement to a joint bid to host the Square Kilometre Array Radio Telescope Project;
     * collaboration on other science/innovation initiatives including the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, and new research to reduce agriculture emissions; and
     * New Zealand's participation in the Business Regulation and Competition Working Group of the Council of Australian Governments, in order to share ideas on economic and regulatory reform.
The Prime Ministers agreed that in addition to the implementation of the Single Economic Market and Development Coordination Partnership, both governments would bring sustained focus to making new progress in:
     * further streamlining of trans-Tasman travel, working towards full implementation of a new trans-Tasman passenger clearance model; and work on streamlining trans-Tasman goods trade;
     * exploring whether the Trans-Tasman Outcomes Framework could be applied to other areas of the SEM;
     * cooperation between the Australian Productivity Commission and any future New Zealand Productivity Commission;
     * exploring implications for the trans-Tasman economy from changes to tax regimes in Australia and/or New Zealand, noting New Zealand's strong interest in the mutual recognition of imputation credits;
     * continuing collaboration on the design, implementation and linking of emissions trading schemes and ensuring harmonisation where it would be of benefit, and working together to contribute to the development of the global carbon market.  Both countries will continue working together towards an ambitious post-2012 international climate change framework that sets the world on a path to limit the increase on global average temperature to 2 degrees Celsius or less.  Prime Ministers noted that emissions from agriculture are a significant issue for both countries and agreed on the value of continued collaboration on mitigation approaches; and
     * ongoing close defence relations to promote common regional security objectives, including exploring possible opportunities to enhance our joint operational capabilities reinvigorating the ANZAC spirit.
The Prime Ministers agreed on the need for substantial progress on all of these areas for the remainder of the year.  They agreed to take stock when next they met early in 2010.  The two Prime Ministers also noted that they will meet with Ministerial colleagues the following day in the inaugural joint Cabinet meeting between the two countries.
Documents
    Joint Statement of Intent: Single Economic Market Outcomes Framework - RTF 321KB | PDF 44KB 
    Australia-New Zealand Partnership for Development Cooperation in the Pacific - RTF 321KB | PDF 47KB 


PM:     It's good to welcome to my good friend, John Key, back to Canberra and back to Australia on this, a state visit. And the reason that this relationship is so important to Australia is because it is our closest relationship. It's forged not just in history in terms of our common defeats at ANZAC; it is also forged in the strengths of our economic ties, the commonality of so much of our foreign purpose, most particularly but not exclusively in the Pacific; and of course the extraordinary people to people links which exist between our two countries.
When we gather together tomorrow in Sydney for the first time in the history of our relationship, we will be meeting as a joint cabinet, Australia and New Zealand ministers together. And we'll use that opportunity not just to deal with the challenges we face right now, but to scope also where we'd like to take our relationship, our economies and our future dealings with each other, five, ten, fifteen, twenty years hence. And I think that's the good thing about this relationship is that we feel sufficiently comfortable in each other's presence, other than on a rugby field, to do that with a degree of comfort. I'll return to matters concerning rugby union in a minute.
Can I say that one of the decisions we're pleased to announce today is that we've agreed to increase the screening thresholds for trans-Tasman investment as part of a new investment protocol between our two countries.This has been battered around across the Tasman for quite a while, I think, John, and we've come to an agreement. And in the case of New Zealand, that will be NZ$477 million and in the case of Australia, $953 million.And this is important because of the depth and intensity of the investment relationship between our two economies. And the more seamless we can make that over time, we believe it's in the common interests of both our peoples and both our business communities and both of our economies.
This is actually an important breakthrough to agree on this investment protocol; it will be finalised later this year but the threshold for screening purposes has been an obstacle and we've now overcome that obstacle. I'm also pleased to announce that we have an outcomes agreement to lift the single economic market agenda to a more ambitious level, and we will therefore be accelerating our work on harmonising accounting standards and business reporting requirements. The idea of a single economic market is one to which we're both committed and we think it's in the interests of our combined business communities to work that way; achieving regulatory harmony across the Tasman is in our collective interest.
And as we've both discovered as Prime Ministers, it's easier to say than to do but we are moving in one direction because we believe that is right. As you know, within Australia, we have taken steps with the states and territories to move to what we describe here as a seamless national economy, given the conflicting regulation which exists between the various states and territories of Australia. And we believe this is a logical extension of that in terms of our economic engagement with New Zealand. A third area of agreement is the Australia-New Zealand Partnership for Development Cooperation in the Pacific. This is really important for both of us because we are both members of the Pacific Island Forum, and I would express publicly my appreciation for the New Zealand Prime Minister's support during our recent hosting of the Pacific Island Forum meeting in Cairns.
In Cairns we agreed on a new development called a Development Coordination Compact, a Cairns Compact, on development coordination for the South Pacific involving our forum partners right across the world. The logical extension of that is we, Australia and New Zealand, coordinate effectively our own aid delivery, and that's where this agreement is today very important. One further area of agreement has been of course the practical measures that we are taking to streamline border processes for airline travel between Australia and New Zealand. This will include SmartGate in New Zealand, improvements in processing low risk passengers, trials of direct exit paths and the transfer of checked baggage x-ray images.
This is complex security and immigration related work; we've achieved a large slab of progress, there's more to be done yet. The objective is to make it easier for both people on - both peoples on both sides of the Tasman to travel to each other's countries, and that is of particular benefit to our business communities as well. We also discussed future security cooperation. Australia and New Zealand, we both agreed to explore the possibility of forming over time an ANZAC contingent. This is something which I think is near and dear to the Prime Minister's heart and mine, which is how do we, over time, form an ANZAC contingent which we might be able to commonly deploy to various security environments in the future.
Our respective chiefs of defence force will be now working on the detail of that and to work out what the possibilities may be for the long term future. But we believe, given the enormous bonds which already exist between our two armed forces, their common training, doctrines and their compatibility of so much of their equipment, that this is actually a useful thing for us to do together. And I look forward to exploring that finally through our chiefs of defence force and seeing what final agreements we can reach on that. To conclude where I began, which is the field of mortal combat which looms again on Saturday night at the next Bledisloe Cup match, can I say that the Prime Minister, as a further reflection of our abiding affection for one another, we'll sit together with gritted teeth during that match on Saturday, night and may the best team win.
But we have a bet; we've decided on a wager. And that is, depending on who wins, the Prime Minister of the losing team, I suggest, John, wears the tie, official tie of the winning team the following Monday. So evidence A is the Wallabies official tie and I'm not quite sure what that is? Oh, is that an All Black tie is it? And so, I think it would look, it would actually do very nicely about there.
PM KEY: I like blue and black as a colour for mourning. (laughter) And that may well be the position come Monday.
PM: Just in preparation, and with no assumption as to who may win on Saturday, I look forward to the Wallabies doing very well indeed. John, if I invite you to make some remarks then we'll take three questions aside, I think that's the understanding we've reached with the media.
PM KEY: Kevin, thanks very much. Let me just make a few comments, firstly in relation to - well firstly it's great to be back in Australia and this is the fifth bilateral meeting we've had since I've been Prime Minister. I think that's a great reflection of the strength of the relationship that both countries enjoy. In terms of the extension of the investment threshold, I think that's a very important step in terms of progress for the single economic market from a New Zealand company's perspective. We now face a threshold of investing in Australia of $953 million; it's a significant increase from the $100 million that it is today. So for New Zealand companies that's a big step forward. And I think for Australian companies investing in New Zealand, that's also a very important step of $477 million. 
I think it's worth reflecting that both countries have a two way capital investment of just under $100 billion only, so they're big, important capital markets on both sides of the Tasman. Certainly in terms of the border processing agreements that we've reached, I just want to make a few comments there. Firstly, Australia's a very important market to New Zealand. Over a million tourists a year now come to New Zealand, so whatever we can do to make that process less painful, to make it more like a domestic experience and to streamline it, I think is very important.
The use of SmartGate which is on our side costing us around $40 million as an investment, will allow people essentially electronically go through customs. Effectively we see the airlines going to electronic check-in, so there'll be electronic check-in, electronic use of passport and then straight through potentially out the other side. We are making changes on our biosecurity rules in New Zealand which will mean that we won't 100 per cent screen passengers when they transit through our borders. We'll be profiling individuals as they get off the plane and making an assessment. 
From New Zealand's perspective that's actually a very positive step because our intention is to redeploy those assets that would have been used tying up risk assessment which is of extremely low risk, and we'll have them prioritising areas where we think there's greater risk. So from that perspective, I think it'll be very efficient.
And the advice I've had from Auckland Airport is that an Australian tourist coming through to New Zealand may be able to transit through the entire process within eight minutes. It's worth putting in perspective Changi is about 12 minutes in Singapore at the moment, so it's potentially a very efficient operation. In terms of the joint cabinet tomorrow, on our side we're looking forward to a wide ranging debate. There's a work program that's being established but I think this is an opportunity to actually reflect on where New Zealand and Australia can go. In terms of the ANZAC contingent, I think that's an exciting opportunity for the two CDFs to work on. Whether that's possible is something that will be determined in the future, but there could be a long term relationship and one that really builds up great camaraderie between the two defence forces which already exists. We train together a lot.
New Zealand's undertaking a Defence review at the moment and one of the things we're looking at is to build greater interoperability with Australia, so I think it makes sense potentially for that ANZAC contingent. And finally, in terms of the rugby, we look forward to Saturday night and the return of Dan Carter and an All Black team that will be fired up for a victory on Saturday night.
PM:     Thanks very much, John, and we'll turn to questions. We might take a New Zealand question first and then ...
JOURNALIST:          Was passport-free travel ever considered between two countries? And if not, or if so, can you see a day when it may get to that point between the two countries given our closeness?
PM:     Can I just back what the Prime Minister said before. We're trying to bring about arrangements in both countries which make it as easy as physically possible for our peoples to travel to each other's countries. It's very good for tourism in both directions. It's also good for our business communities. This will be a steady process over time. The progress which has already made between officials at the immigration level I think is good. In terms of end points, and you go to the question of passports, I think it's important for us all first to just cross each hurdle one at a time and if we can get to a stage whereby, as John's explained to you before, you'll whip your existing passport through and use the checking systems which come off the back of that. It's pretty quick and pretty efficient. So let's just take this one step at a time.
JOURNALIST:          Mr Rudd, I've just got a question about your friend, the Ipswich car dealer, John Grant. He recently obtained the right to sell motor cars out of his Ipswich car yard from Great Wall Motors in China. And I would like to know whether you or your department made any representations on his behalf using your contacts in China to enable him to get that.
PM:     First of all I'm not familiar with the points that you make in terms of what may or may not be his business operations in China. Secondly, I've got no recollection of having made any such representations myself more broadly across the public service and, of course, we'll make checks through the normal Austrade officials.
PM KEY:        Can I just make one comment in relation to the passports. One of the reasons why that's - it's not possible easily to get rid of passports immediately is because on any one given trans-Tasman flight around about 30 per cent of people are not Australian or New Zealand passport holders so they will need to show their passports. So there'd have to be some way of effectively customs being able to understand who's from New Zealand and Australia, who's not.The advantage of SmartGate, because it's biometrics, is it's a very fast process so effectively you would have to hold up a passport anyway and this system allows both countries to understand exactly who's going across their borders.
The other important point is that we've agreed to work together and to invest together in I think ground breaking technology for biosecurity where we'll be examining bags. We'll send the x-ray images of those bags across the Tasman. So instead of again biosecurity having one minute to look at a bag as it goes through an X-ray, in fact they'll have three hours to look at those bags from a biosecurity risk perspective. And given New Zealand and Australia share often very much joint concerns in that area, I think it's quite important.
PM:     Now I think we're back to a New Zealand journalist.
JOURNALIST:          Prime Minister Rudd, does Australia have any concerns about the robustness of New Zealand's immigration system? And, if so, was that part of any of these discussions over a common boarder? And is it an impediment to passport-free travel?
PM:     No, we don't have any concerns that I've been apprised of concerning the robustness of the New Zealand immigration system. I think it's fair to say that all of our immigration systems are under pressure. And that's because there are a large and growing number of international people movements. And the range of challenges we are now dealing with from public health challenges through to those more immediately connected with physical security are vast, and therefore it puts a lot of pressure on our respective services and the technologies which support them, and the international co-operation fabric which makes it all possible.In terms of our work together in making it easier to travel between our two countries, we just regard this as a technical challenge that we've got to work through. 
We've made actually good progress so far. The officials have advised us this morning that there's another slab of work to be done. We'll work out way through that, but the end point is, as John's just described, to make it as physically easy as possible to travel in both directions.But we have no concerns about the integrity of the New Zealand immigration system. An Australian journalist now. 
JOURNALIST:          Did the two of you discuss carbon trading? And do you see a position where the two carbon emissions schemes will come together and there'll be a unified system? And do you think there's a case, given that both countries rely on livestock so much, that there's a case to exempt farmers from carbon trading systems?
PM:     On the question of carbon trading, we did discuss our respective emissions trading schemes. This is difficult and hard work in both of our economies and we understand that and are trying to get the balance right. Secondly, on the linkage of schemes, I think both the Prime Minister and I agreed that the importance that we attach to cap and trade schemes because of a range of factors, one of which is the possibility of international linkage. When the Australian carbon pollution reduction scheme was first canvassed, we indicated that subsequent to its implementation would be open to its linkage with other cap and trade schemes around the world. And that, of course, in time would include New Zealand as well. And so that's a process which our respective officials could work its way through.
Finally, on the question of agriculture, the Australian position is at this stage agriculture is not within our scheme. There are complexities which our friends in New Zealand are wrestling with as well. And we are therefore undertaking a further review in 2013 on the inclusion of agriculture with a view to the possibility of agriculture's inclusion in 2015. And that's where we stand on that. Did you want to add to that, John?
PM KEY:        No, I think that summarises it well. I mean, look, one overarching comment I'd make is that New Zealand has and Australia have, through CER, the most comprehensive trade agreement between two countries. We're making dramatic progress in terms of single economic market and it's never made sense to me for the two countries to have climate change policy that was divergent. I don't think that would make sense. And I think we've got to work as hard as we practically can to have schemes which are complimentary. Now, we need to work through those and we're in the process of redesigning our emissions trading scheme at the moment. It's still early days for us to comment on that over here.
PM:     I think we're back on the other side of the ditch.
JOURNALIST:          Just interested in the ANZAC contingent idea. Could you outline at all what you think that might actually physically look like and perhaps any theatres or areas where...
PM:     Tall guys, uniforms, a hat like that, a slouch hat, and like the fellas you had out the front here this morning and good looking New Zealand fellas as well, is that right? Yeah. Look, I think what we're talking about is this. There are going to be defence and security scenarios in the future where it's going to make a lot of sense for both of us to quickly and jointly deploy and, therefore, why not look through the possibility as to how we can institutionalise this between us.As the Prime Minister has rightly said, we haven't reached a landing point on this; we've agreed to explore it. But I think it makes sense in terms of what is a good, strong and robust tradition within the New Zealand armed forces, and certainly within the Australian armed forces as well, so that we can quickly and rapidly deploy to areas where we may be needed in the future.
The precise operational scope of any such agreement would be properly crafted by our respective defence force chiefs. But I think it's a reflection of the fact that we can comfortably discuss these things in public in a way which probably we wouldn't discuss with practically any other countries around the world. But we're relaxed about this but we see there may be some genuine operational potential for this in the future.
JOURNALIST:     ...[Inaudible] these couple of days and what do you make of the sort of the difference in economic and the diplomatic relationship and how would you describe the state of the diplomatic relationship at the moment?
PM:     I think the China-Australia relationship is always full of challenges, and - and can I say it always has been thus and it will be thus for quite a long time to come. And that is because we share enormous common interests with our friends in China and we have continuing differences. They are differences of values and from time to time differences of interests. And therefore it's important for us to have a calm, measured, proper framework for handling and balancing all of the above.
Therefore, as the Foreign Minister indicated in parliament just the other day, there could well be further bumps in the road ahead. Our challenge in managing these relationships is simply to negotiate those bumps in the road as they occur. I'd also say that China has significant interests in Australia. China's interests in Australia go to its long term needs for resource security. China's needs and interests in Australia go to the role which we have in the wider deliberations of the Asia Pacific region. And therefore we approach - we approach this relationship mindful of our interests in China, mindful of China's interests in Australia. On the question of Ambassador Raby, then I don't think it's scheduled at present but I'll see if we can sort something out.
Our ambassadors are quite regularly returning from abroad for leave and consultations. I think the Foreign Minister was saying to me yesterday we've got half a dozen or so due back in Canberra from various posts around the world in the course of the next month. And I think in Geoff Raby's case he's back here about every year as well. But obviously it's a good time to take stock of the relationship and how we move forward, and assuming it all works out time-wise then I would hope to spend some time with him as well. I think we're just about done on that score, so thanks very much folks and let's take our ties.


Today, Professor Chris O'Brien was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia.
It is a great regret of mine that he was not here to receive it.
There can be few people so deserving of this recognition.
Chris was an inspiration.
His contribution to the community was massive, his work unceasing, his dedication to others without limit.
This honour has been bestowed on Chris for his “continued service to medicine and to the community through advocacy and fundraising roles for the development of integrated care and clinical research facilities for people with cancer, particularly the establishment of the Lifehouse Centre at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.”
Following Chris' death earlier this year, Lifehouse at RPA has now fittingly been renamed The Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre.
Chris O'Brien was an exceptional Australian, and it was a privilege to be able to commemorate his life and achievements at today's ceremony.


GARRETT: Here we are in the Prime Minister's office, and as you can imagine it's a pretty intense working environment, and I think we'll go and see where the Prime Minister is and perhaps go and visit one or two of these rooms.
PM: Here are some of my advisers in their office. So, I'll take the baton, you tell me what they're doing right and wrong.
GARRETT: The big question in here, Prime Minister, is whether or not people are recycling their paper. I think that they are, because I can see recycled paper down there.
But more importantly, television screens, computer screens - these are things that chew energy. Do we turn them off when we leave at night?
PM: Tarah, do you turn yours off?
TARAH: Ah, no. (laughs)
PM: What about Adam?
ADAM: I don't think I have for some time. We should, shouldn't we?
PM: Give me hope over there.
DAMIAN: I've logged off.
(All laugh)
GARRETT: Alright, well, that's a start.
PM: Are we going to fail, three out of three? This is not looking good, guys.
TARAH: No.
GARRETT: And you know, look at the television. Sometimes the flat screen televisions can use a lot of power. This one won't use a hell of a lot, but just before you leave at night, maybe just want to click it off.
That saves power for everybody - when we turn our appliances off at the end of the day, even in an office like this, we save energy.
PM: OK, well, these guys are going to get assessed, daily, from here on in, starting with you, Tarah Barzanji.
Now, recycling, what have you got down there, guys?
TARAH: Ah, we've got a rubbish bin and a recycling bin.
ADAM: Couple of recycling bins. They're in there.
PM: OK.
DAMIAN: But also there, that's the main one.
GARRETT: Final check for us would be lighting. Do we have energy efficient lighting in there? Because even when it's a bit more expensive, it is much cheaper in the long run and of course produces less greenhouse gas emissions.
I look up and what do I see? Flouros, which is good, and, yeah, energy efficient lighting up there, which is also good.
PM: OK, so, when you guys go out of here, who turns the light off?
ADAM: We always turn the light off.
TARAH: Always TV off.
PM: So they got two out of three. They turn the TV off, they turn the light off, but they leave computer screens on  -  bad, bad, bad  -  and they're doing pretty good on recycling.
GARRETT: I think so.
PM: OK, alright. OK guys  -  two out of three. Not bad, but there will be improvement.
So, what have we got in here?
GARRETT: Kitchens are, this is a clean kitchen, which is fantastic, but you know the key here-
PM: - Do you know why? Because they knew you were coming.
GARRETT: That's right, and I think they knew you were coming, too, Kevin.
The thing that you're sort of asking is ‘do people use this kind of hot water system all time?' They don't need to if they're just making a cup of tea or coffee. They can just boil the jug.
PM: So boiling the jug is more energy efficient than using the zap?
GARRETT: Absolutely, that's right.
PM: OK, I've learnt something.
GARRETT: And look at the freezer. If we take food in the freezer, if we want to take something out, just take your stuff that's defrosted out of the freezer, you can stick it in the sink for 20 minutes, half an hour, an hour, and that saves you hitting that ‘ding' button on the microwave.
We've got the recycling list, which we have here, which is all our co-mingle waste, which happens in the parliament, which as a really good thing to do.
PM: Uh-huh.
GARRETT: And the stuff that you just can't recycle goes in there, and that should be a smaller pile than that one in there.
And you know, all the good information about what you can do in your home will be on the living greener website.
PM: OK. And make sure you use the website, because it's full of all practical sorts of information.
And I'm getting ready for the Ashes Test.
GARRETT: Good luck.
PM: Thank you.


The first ever Australia-New Zealand joint Cabinet meeting was held in Sydney yesterday. This historic meeting involved fourteen Cabinet ministers and was co-chaired by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Prime Minister John Key.  
The joint Cabinet meeting comes at the end of Mr Key's first official visit to Australia. The joint Cabinet meeting is the first time that such a large contingent of Ministers from both sides of the Tasman have met as a group to discuss the challenges and opportunities for both governments.
The two Prime Ministers briefed the joint Cabinet meeting of the outcomes of their discussions the previous day, including accelerating progress on the Single Economic Market, and instructed their Ministers to consider how the partnership could work more effectively going forward. 
Ministers discussed domestic, strategic, and international matters of concern to both governments, with a strong focus on the implications of the global economic crisis.  Ministers agreed on the vital importance of a successful and ambitious conclusion to the Doha Round and implementation of G20 commitments to revitalise global confidence and growth.  Ministers agreed to continue close collaboration to develop more open trade and investment arrangements in the Asia Pacific region, building both trans-Tasman economies.
Ministers exchanged views on the challenges of integrating infrastructure, transport, and town planning in growing cities on both sides of the Tasman, as well as broadband delivery.  They discussed the importance of harnessing information technology to drive productivity and raise living standards in their respective countries. 
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to cooperation on emission trading schemes and noted the opportunities and challenges presented by climate change, including in creating new jobs and investment.  The importance of an ambitious outcome from Copenhagen was affirmed by both sides.  Ministers discussed the high priority of energy sectors, and new research through bodies such as the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, in shaping national policy settings over the next ten years.
Ministers focused on the economic and social development challenges in the Pacific, pledging continued close cooperation  -  as underscored by the Development Cooperation Partnership endorsed by Prime Ministers on 20 August - to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in the region and build closer economic integration under PACER Plus. 
Ministers discussed the importance of maintaining close foreign policy settings in the region, and discussed the long term significance of building an Asia Pacific community.  They committed themselves to ongoing close collaboration on counter-terrorism in South East Asia and closer defence cooperation.
The meeting proved valuable in discussing the joint challenges faced by Australia and New Zealand, and Ministers from both sides endorsed a proposal to convene a further joint Cabinet meeting in 2010.
The Ministers who attended the joint cabinet meeting with the Prime Ministers were for New Zealand: Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Bill English; Economic Development Minister Gerry Brownlee; Commerce Minister Simon Power; Foreign Affairs Minister Murray McCully; Trade Minister Tim Groser; Defence Minister Wayne Mapp; and Communications and Information Technology Minister Steven Joyce; and for Australia: Treasurer Wayne Swan; Defence Minister John Faulkner; Trade Minister Simon Crean; Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government Minister Anthony Albanese; Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy Minister Stephen Conroy; Climate Change and Water Minister Penny Wong; and Tourism, Resources and Energy Minister Martin Ferguson.


PM:   Well it's good to be back in Lismore, and it's good to be here with Janelle Saffin, our local Member, as well as of course with Justine Elliott, the Minister for Aged Care. We're here to talk about the future of health reform, health and hospitals reform, FOR this important and growing part of Australia. It's been good to sit down together with the local health community in all of its branches and talk about their response to the recommendations which have been put forward by the Health Reform Commission. Recommendations which go to the future of preventative healthcare, primary healthcare, acute hospital care, sub-acute care, and of course we've also had discussions concerning aged cares services, mental health services, and dental care.
Here, of course, at Lismore Base Hospital, we have also been seeking to invest over a period of time since we've been in office. Today I'd like to announce that we're investing $8.3 million to fund the establishment of an eight bed medical assessment unit here at the hospital.
These eight extra medical assessment beds will take pressure off the emergency department by moving patients to a dedicated area to receive medical diagnosis and treatment. I am advised through my consultations elsewhere in the health and hospital system that this is a very useful way of taking pressure off the emergency departments. I was only last week at Nepean Hospital in Sydney, where they introduced me to the impact this has on the overall efficiency of the emergency department. And there, their particular service was calibrated particularly around the needs of older Australians, and we're adding to that service here.
So here in Lismore, and here in this part of Australia, adding to this ability to support the emergency department at Lismore Base is one step forward, we've still got many steps to take for the future. This funding also is in addition to the over $600,000 recently provided to the hospital for new surgical equipment under stage two of the Government's elective surgery program. The funding comes from the Government's $750 million commitment to take pressure off our emergency departments, some $248 million of which is going to various hospitals in New South Wales.
On top of that, we have also been making earlier investments here at Lismore Base. I'd like to emphasise in particular the investment we are making over two years, the establishment of the University of Western Sydney's new rural clinical school both in Lismore and at Bathurst. And we've had discussions with representatives of that school this morning.
Furthermore, we have also our investment in Lismore's integrated cancer centre. This is a $15 million investment which Janelle and I had a look at this morning. I think they said to us they hope to have it up and running next year? And with a throughput of patients not long after that.
This is going to be an important addition to the proper provision of cancer care in communities like this, in important and growing regional centres across Australia. In the Budget we indicated a very large investment in integrated cancer care nationwide, $1.3 billion, Sydney, Melbourne, the large centres, but most critically, also having a network of integrated cancer care centres across Australia's regions as well. And this is part and parcel of that process. So adding that ability to receive proper oncology services in major centres like this, is again one step forward.
Finally, making sure we get it right for the long term on health and hospitals is really important, which means getting it right also for regions like this. This will be a tough process, hard decisions to be taken, and none of these decisions for the long term future are going to be cheap, or inexpensive. Therefore, as a community and as a country, we're going to have to engage in a debate which is realistic about the direction we're going to go, the reforms which need to be undertaken, but also about the cost implications which flow and how they are to be funded. Enough from me folks, and over to you.
JOURNALIST:  Mr Rudd we had a case here last week I believe it was, of a doctor who has just set up practice in Byron Bay. He moved here from New Zealand when he was fourteen. He didn't become an Australian citizen until after he'd studied. He's now been told that he has to go to the outback for up to a decade before he can practice back here on the coast. Are you aware of that situation, and is it a loophole in the provision of Medicare provider numbers that you'd like to see perhaps addressed, because doctor numbers here on the north coast aren't that flash either?
PM:   Ah, no. And I'm advised that we've got challenges in this region and in other regions in terms of overall numbers of medicos. I, in a presentation before indicated where that trend line is going for the future, unless we intervene nationwide. On the individual circumstances surrounding this case, you won't be surprised to know that I'm not aware of them. However, I'm sure the Health Minister can now look at the circumstances surrounding that case and see if there is any problem in the system which has caused that to occur, and we'll take that up with her.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) I know there's a general perception though on the far north coast that, being a regional area, often it gets quite overlooked in terms of funding. (inaudible)
PM:   One of the reasons I'm here today is because Janelle Saffin has said loud and clear that I needed to get here to look on the ground at the needs of this fast-growing region. I'm from Queensland, and I understand the growth pressures which are on South East Queensland, and this part of New South Wales. They are huge. It's not just a growing population in New South Wales, but it's also, over time, the ageing of the population as well. And getting these two things right for the future, as our colleague just reminded us also, the challenges for providing workforce for the future, medicos, nurses, specialists, surgeons, across the categories.
So, in the presentation to the health community representatives here today I made a particular point of saying that we need to get right the better access to healthcare services across the nation. Not just the large cities, across the nation. And that means there are important regions as well. But I get back to what I said before - none of this will be for free. Whatever reforms we embrace will cost, and as a nation we've got to have that debate as well.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) should have tax free charity status to attract sponsorship to build a memorial on the Sari club site?
PM:   I believe that when it comes to the future of that site, we shouldn't have anything which allows people to trample on the memories of those who tragically lost their lives in Bali, tragically lost their lives through that terrorist attack. Secondly, you refer particularly to the tax status of that particular facility. I am advised that the Treasurer will be obtaining a response from the Treasury in the course of the next week or two ahead. And this will have gone through the normal processes. The Treasurer will be receiving advice soon.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)
PM:   Look, I think one of the big challenges with the proper (inaudible) of, let's call it health funding across the board, is making sure that you've got state and territory governments working together in partnership with the Australian Government.
In the past, for the last Australian Healthcare Agreement, you saw the Australian Government pull out a billion dollars from public hospital funding across the nation. That has implications for regions like this, and that's despite the fact that the population is going up, you're having increased ageing of the population, yet under the Howard Government you actually had the overall allocations for public hospitals go down by a billion in real terms. That's a real problem.
Therefore, the alternative for the future is us partnering with state and territory governments to make a difference. It's what the Health Minister has done in Phase One through the new Australian Healthcare Agreement. My presentation here today indicated that compared with the last Healthcare Agreement, that represents a 50 per cent increase in funding. And that's not just for the acute hospital system. It's across all the categories as well.
Phase two is getting the response right to this thing, that is, the long-term Health Reform Commission recommendations for the long-term future. And getting also the balance of responsibilities right with state and territory governments. This is going to be a very tough reform process, hard decision to be taken, tough funding decisions to be taken, but I believe the mood of the country is that we have this debate rather than just avoid it.
JOURNALIST:    (inaudible) describe the mood as people have had a gutful of the responsibility shifting. And it sounded like, perhaps you had as well?
PM:   No, I've been consistent on this, ever since I became Leader of Opposition. My colleagues may remember that when I stood up on the first day in the House of Representatives I think, having been elected as leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, I held up a report on aged care, which was entitled, it was a bipartisan report of the parliament, entitled ‘The Blame Game'. And I said Australians are fed up with this. They actually want us to get past this sort of mindless game of it's his fault or her fault because they are from a different level of government. I mean, people just want a real debate about the problems in the system, how to fix them, and how much it will cost. And that's what I'm trying to do.
I don't underestimate the complexity of this debate. It's going to be very hard. And everywhere I go, the needs are infinite and the resources are finite. But unless we have this debate, we're simply going to allow what the Commission has described as a system at tipping point to fall over, and I don't intend to be around and simply say ‘well, that's a problem, isn't it?' I want to at least have a go, and we intend to have a go.
JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, there's a new report apparently released saying that women's pay lags behind men's pay. Is there anything that you can do to address this imbalance between men and women's pay, and are you worried that women are feeling and bearing the brunt of the economic crisis?
PM:  I think we do need to see the income gap between men and women close over time in Australia because of the critical contribution which women in the workforce make to the economy overall, across the whole range of professions and occupations.
The second thing though, can I just draw your attention to the impact of the repeal of WorkChoices. WorkChoices and Australian Workplace Agreements, the biggest impact, or at least a really big impact, was with women in particular categories of employment. The data I saw a year or so ago about the impact on women employed under AWAs, Australian Workplace Agreements, on the one hand, and those not employed under AWAs was huge. Not just tens of dollars, but in fact high tens of dollars.
Therefore, we've changed the industrial relations system, therefore, for women in those categories of employment, the new arrangements put in place by Julia Gillard I believe will have some effect, but we're going to have to always lift our game on that.
But I just made mention of WorkChoices and I notice there's a debate about the Liberals and Liberal policy for the future and leadership alternatives as well. Can I say that it's really important that we are absolutely clearly focussed on not just leadership alternatives for the Liberal Party, but policy alternatives as well.
One thing about the Liberals is that they seem to have this deep addiction for WorkChoices and this deep addiction for nuclear power.  It doesn't matter where you turn. So I think one of the challenges we'd like to see an answer to is for any candidate for the leadership of the Liberal Party to stick their hand up and say they are not either a supporter of WorkChoices or not a supporter of nuclear power. It seems to be part and parcel of the Liberal National Party DNA.
JOURNALIST:  (inaudible) Surfers Paradise (inaudible)
PM:   Well, first of all, in terms of what the Premier has done in terms of bans on particular categories of products, I am not fully briefed. Can I say that the Gold Coast in general, Surfers Paradise in particular, has got its own challenges in terms of the health and hospital system, and health policy generally. That's why the Health Minister is there in the latter part of the day, and I'm sure she'll listen long and hard to what the local community has to say.
You see, more broadly, as a nation also we need to, this is no particular reference to Surfers or to the Gold Coast, but the nation at large, we do have a challenge to deal with when it comes to teenage binge drinking. It's just real. If you speak to the coppers, as I do quite often, Sydney, Melbourne and elsewhere, this is a real problem. And dealing with this effectively means that the whole community has to get engaged, because the roll-on consequences for our men and women in police uniform, the roll-on consequences for the health and hospital system is huge unless we're dealing with this, but I'm sure that will be part and parcel of the Minister's consultations up there today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:   You know something, I've been to the Gold Coast many, many, many times over the years, and I like it a lot. And even though I grew up on the Sunshine Coast, which if you know anything about South-East Queensland, they, sort of, have views of each other. My views are somewhat beyond that. Both have their great strengths. I love the Gold Coast and I'm sure I'll be back there again.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) my business colleagues in Canberra want to know did you consider joining the Liberal Party as a youngster?
PM:   Um, no. And can I say-
JOURNALIST: What about the Nationals?
PM: No. No to either possibility. But I've got to say the challenge for the Liberals and Nationals is to find a single leadership alternative for the future who doesn't have a deep addiction to WorkChoices or a deep addiction to nuclear power. It seems to come up all the time. Got to run, folks.
(ends)


The Prime Minister's next blog will focus on the remote and rural health care system. It will start 9am Wednesday 26 August and close 5pm Wednesday 2 September. He's keen to get your feedback  -  especially if you live in rural and remote areas  -  on how we can reform the health system to ensure it serves all Australians equally, so register to join the blog at www.pm.gov.au


MATT: Hi, I'm Matt.
AMY: I'm Amy.
SOPHIE: I'm Sophie
RYAN: And I'm Ryan.
MATT: And this is Westport High School.
AMY: Located in Port Macquarie, on the coast.
SOPHIE: About five hours away from Sydney.
MATT: And about six hours away from Brisbane.
MATT: Port Macquarie is a wonderful town. We have a lot of beaches and great weather.
AMY: Retirement destination.
SOPHIE: Yeah, there's lots of fun things to do.
MATT: A lot of social venues, like the town green and Westport Park and the stadium out near the airport.
MATT: Our school's very sporting and academic.
AMY: Yeah, very academic. Order of Australia and high results.
SOPHIE: Westport's one of the two high school public schools in Port Macquarie itself, and everyone's pretty proud of the school and we try our best to impress.
MATT: Westport High is home to WASCALS, the group that raises money for people suffering with cancer in the local area.
AMY: About 600 people from the local area will come in and talk with Ministers.
SOPHIE: It's good to see that they're considering the local schools and just not the big private ones.
MATT: It's great o see how many people actually turn out for such an event like this at our great school at Westport. Personally, I'm actually glad that it's here in Westport. There was a number of schools, you could say, processed, to have the Cabinet at their school, and we're just so lucky to have it here as Westport.
SOPHIE: I think it's good because it shows that the Government is attempting to care about, like, local schools and stuff, and, like, they care, but it shows that they care about public schools as well. It's not, it's compared to going to a private school, it's, like, it shows that they believe in our community and their, like, upcoming students.


PM: This is a major regional hospital in Australia and the Government is currently engaged in consultations nation-wide on the recommendations of the Health Reform Commission about how we build the health and hospital system Australia needs for the 21st Century. This is full of challenges - goes to what we're going to do for the future of preventative care, to deal with the challenge of the explosion in chronic diseases, how we enhance primary care or GP-related services in communities such as this around Australia, because that's so important to keep some of the pressure off the emergency departments of hospitals like this as well.
The Government, as I explained to those here, will be spending the rest of this year consulting around the nation - major metropolitan hospitals, major regional hospitals, and some rural hospitals to test the recommendations which have been put forward by the Health and Hospital Reform Commission against local, community and regional reactions from the health professionals here.
So I'd thank each of those who spent time with us here this morning on their particular representations. We, as a national community, have got to get on with the business of integrated, long-term reform of the health and hospital system, and that means the future of important regional hospitals like this.
The truth is, in regions like this, population's going through the roof. The truth is that in regions like this you see an aging of the population as well, a lot of people making the sea change move from Sydney and elsewhere to have their retirement in communities like this. And also, there are young people, like the ones I've just mentioned over there, with the usual range of health challenges as well.
Therefore, our challenge is not just to focus on how do we fix this bit and that bit of the system - how do we take an overall view about proper funding, investment and allocation of responsibilities between the state and the Australian governments for the long-term reform of this system for the 21st Century.
That's why we're here in Port Macquarie today and I'd thank Rob Oakeshott for organising the visit here to the hospital. It's been, for me, a very useful exchange.


PM:   Firstly, thanks to, it's good to be here with Rob Oakeshott, and of course, Justine Elliott. Rob's the local Member and Justine's the Federal Minister for Aged Care. And what we've been doing is talking to the health professionals here at Port Macquarie Base Hospital.
The reason I'm doing that is that the local Member has asked me, in fact, he asked me in Parliament to do that. And so I thought I'd better say yes.
But the second reason is this is a major regional hospital in Australia, and the Government is currently engaged in consultations nation-wide on the recommendations of the Health Reform Commission, on how we build the health and hospital system Australia needs for the 21st century.
This is full of challenges. It goes to what we're going to do for the future of preventative care to deal with the challenge in the explosion of chronic diseases. How we enhance primary care, or GP related services, in communities such as this around Australia. Because that's so important to keep some of the pressure off the emergency departments of hospitals like this as well.
What do we do to boost the overall capacity of acute hospitals, and their ability to conduct surgery, and acute hospital interventions? And certainly one of the representations here at Port is that they've got some real challenges when it comes to surgery.
Then beyond that, the need for greater investment in sub-acute services, of course, the range of other services as well, which goes to elective surgery, which goes to aged care, as well as mental health services and dental care as well.
I'd like to thank all the health professionals who spent some time with Rob and myself this morning, together with the State Member as well, who is with us.
We had a good discussion. Many points of view were put to me about the particular needs here at this hospital, particularly in the area of surgery. Particularly in terms of areas of cardiology, integrated cancer care, as well as needs in the primary health care department as well. Namely, better GP related services as well.
The Government, as I explained to those here, will be spending the rest of this year consulting around the nation major metropolitan hospitals, major regional hospitals and some rural hospitals to test the recommendations which have been put forward by the Health and Hospital Reform Commission against local community and regional reactions from the health professionals here.
So I'd thank each of those who spent time with us here this morning on their particular representations.
Obviously in this region, there is a desire to see expanded services at this hospital. Obviously in this region there is a desire to see greater emphasis on integrated cancer care. The Government has made an allocation of some $500 million plus for a regional network of integrated cancer care services, and the Government therefore will be considering in due course the application which will be received from this health region, and this particular area.
Now also, the future of primary care out there in the community is important, and Rob Oakeshott has been keen to obtain support in time for expanded GP services in this area as well.
So we will work our way through all of those. But the primary point today has been here to test the reaction from the locals to the recommendations contained in the Commission's report.
One of the things that we have done in the interim, as of the end of last year, was increase the Australian Healthcare Agreement between the Australian Government and the State and Territory Governments by 50 per cent.
This is a $64 billion investment nationwide, and of course it goes through State Government systems, through area health services such as the one which services this region as well. Part of that has been an investment that we have made for elective surgery. Part of that has also been an investment that we've made also to assist with emergency departments. $750 million in investment nationwide for the first time by the Australian Government for emergency departments, $600 million for elective surgery waiting lists.
Part of that latter amount, we've also confirmed today an allocation of some additional $217,000 here at Port Macquarie Base Hospital, to enable the hospital to purchase much needed additional surgical equipment, to help reduce waiting times for elective surgery.
This comes on top of some recent changes we've made also to the Government's rural and remote workforce package in the '09/10 Budget, which we discussed this morning, which has seen previously ineligible communities such as Port Macquarie, Camden Haven and Taree, become eligible for a number of workforce incentives to help tackle workforce shortages in the region as well. Also, the medical specialist outreach assistance program supports ten specialist services at Port Macquarie.
These however, are very much interim forms of assistance. We as a national community have got to get on with the business of integrated long-term reform for the health and hospital system, and that means the future of important regional hospitals like this. The truth is in regions like this the population is going through the roof. The truth is in regions like this you see an ageing of the population as well. You see a lot of people making the sea change move from Sydney and elsewhere to have their retirement, in communities like this. And also, there are young people, like the ones I've just mentioned veer there, with the usual range of health challenges as well.
Therefore, our challenge is not just to focus on 'how do we fix this bit and that bit of the system', it is how do we take an overall view about proper funding, investment and allocation of responsibilities between the State and the Australian Governments for the long-term reform of this system for the 21st century. That's why we're here in Port Macquarie today, and I'd thank Rob Oakeshott for organising the visit here to the hospital, it's been for me a very useful exchange.
And then, before we take questions, do you want to say something? Over to you Rob.
OAKESHOTT:  Firstly, it is to say a very big thank you to the Prime Minister, coming to Port Macquarie and the mid North Coast generally, and in particular, coming to Port Macquarie Hospital to look at growth pressures of a particular nature here in Port Macquarie. But also, hopefully, some food for thought in regard to growth regions and the pressures on infrastructure that growth regions are under, right around Australia.
It was a fruitful discussion, and it was a genuine discussion. For anyone who is in any doubt that this is some sort of just process of consultation for consultation's sake, can I confirm what was a meeting that was supposed to go for forty five minutes I think nearly went for two hours, at the Prime Minister's request. And it was an open discussion on the full range of issues faced by the clinical staff at the hospital, the nursing staff, and also the primary care and the division of GPs for example, throughout our community.
So it is greatly appreciated that the Prime Minister has taken the time to come to Port Macquarie, to look at the hospital in particular, to look at health services generally and in the region, and also to hold Community Cabinet here.
There would be 1000, at least, postcodes throughout Australia, and the Prime Minister could choose to go to any one of those throughout this country. To choose this area, and to genuinely take the time to listen and consult, to meet with patients and to meet with community members, is certainly greatly appreciated.
From the discussion we had, I do believe it was fruitful, and hopefully left Government with some food for thought.
We tried to leave a message that was shaped around two Es. One is about efficiency. I think the Port Macquarie Hospital and the Mid North Coast generally delivers efficient health services. Governments don't recognise that within existing funding formulas.  And so we tried to get a message across about supporting the principle of efficiency within the health service.
Also, the issue of equity. For too long now, this region has, due to the high growth, and the demographics in the region, has been under equity. About at least two to five per cent on the State Government's own funding formulas. Whilst it doesn't sound like much as percentage, that equates to anywhere between $20 and $50 million every year that the North Coast region is missing out on.
So if we only got our own fairness and equity within the funding formulas of the health system generally, we would be doing a lot better, and would be able to do a lot better, and would be able to deliver a lot more efficiency and better healthcare generally for the community.
So we tried to leave those messages, I think the Prime Minister heard them, and Hopefully they are food for thought in considerations about the overhaul health and hospitals reform package.
We are supportive, I think generally, of the reform agenda. We do in this region live and breathe the need for reform within the health system, and certainly hope from this round of consultations that good decisions are made. Either the Commonwealth playing a greater role, or the Commonwealth forcing and demanding better outcomes through the State and area health service funding formulas.
So, thank you Prime Minister, thank you for visiting our community, and hopefully the rest of the day is as fruitful as the last two hours.
PM:    Thanks for that. Over to you folks for any questions.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible). I know that the local Member there has left you with no doubt how the community feels with (inaudible)
PM:    Can I just say, our blueprint for the future has been in two parts. First, through the Australian Healthcare Agreement which we signed at the end of last year, a 50 per cent increase in Australian Government funding for the States and Territories for health and hospitals.
Secondly, the internal distribution of that, which has been the subject of some of Rob's comments just now, has come through the various State and Territory Governments. So that is what has happened so far.
Secondly, the second phase of our reform process is the one we're here to consult on today. And that is long-term reform. And that also goes to the proper resourcing of hospitals in regional Australia as well, including Port Macquarie.
What's our timeframe for making those decisions? They're outlined in the Health Commission's report, sorry, not in the Health Commission's report, but in our response to it. We'll convene a meeting of the States and Territories come the end of this year, and one early part of next year for putting a final proposal to the States and Territories.
So, obviously there are high degrees of local frustration about elements of delivery here. I understand that. All I can say though is that our blueprint for handling the future has been absolutely clear, absolutely upfront. We've honoured every element of what we said we would do. And furthermore, we have also provided a 50 per cent increase in funding to all States and Territories as of the end of last year.
JOURNALIST:  There's double the number patients here (inaudible).
PM:    I heard that this morning too. 14,030, have I got it right?
JOURNALIST:  Perfect.
PM:    I do listen.
JOURNALIST:  As you've probably also heard, there's a number of staff cuts that are happening across this area health service. How do the needs here, from other hospitals that you've seen around the country, how do our needs really compare here?
PM:    Yeah, that's actually a really good question, because you may be surprised to know that everywhere I go in Australia, nobody tells me their population is shrinking. And nobody tells me their population isn't ageing, either. So, just in the last few weeks I've been to far North Queensland, I've been to North Queensland, I've been to the northern suburbs of Melbourne, I was at Nepean Hospital in Western Sydney the other day, Lismore yesterday, and here today.
The stories have some common themes, but also some important differences as well.
What are the big drivers? Population is increasing, which means that we, by the time we get to the mid century, are going to have between 25 and 30 million Australians.
Secondly, the population is ageing. The proportion of people who are going to be above 85, or between 65 and 84, is increasing rapidly.
Thirdly, we've also got this real challenge in terms of properly planning for our health workforces, there have been some great changes which have occurred here, but there are still challenges in getting enough people to GPs, specialists, cardiologists, as well as surgeons in regional areas.
So in regional Australia there is a common theme that they need to receive more support than they have in the past, and that's often in areas like this and other parts of Australia where you have a real sea change phenomenon occurring as well. Three patients I saw this morning all told me they came to live here 21 years ago. I presume it wasn't coordinated. And Fred from Wauchope, and two from elsewhere - what was that town?
OAKESHOTT:  Laurieton.
PM:    And, these three really good folk, one of whom had a particularly strong view on the future direction of the reforms, symptomatic of what's happening nationwide. That is a lot of people are reaching the retirement age and going to sea change centres like this. That, therefore, is something we can either stick our head under the blanket and hope it goes away, or we can address as a nation.
But I say this to every community. If we're going to embark upon long term reform here, including better resourcing for major regional hospitals like this one, then it will cost, and people need to know that. It's not just a question of shaking some money tree and hoping that money will fall down.  It doesn't. And therefore we've got to reform the healthcare system, provide better healthcare services in critical regions like this where you've got such a boost in population. We're also going to have to find, be very upfront and frank with the Australian people, about the funding of that long term as well.
PM:   And, these three really good folk, one of whom had a particularly strong view on the future direction of the reforms, symptomatic of what's happening nationwide. That is a lot of people are reaching the retirement age and going to sea change centres like this. That, therefore, is something we can either stick our head under the blanket and hope it goes away, or we can address as a nation. But I say this to every community.
If we're going to embark upon long term reform here, including better resourcing for major regional hospitals like this one, then it will cost, and people need to know that. It's not just a question of shaking some money tree and hoping that money will fall down- it doesn't. Therefore we've got to reform the healthcare system, provide better healthcare services in critical regions like this where you've got such a boost in population, we're also going to have to find, be very upfront and frank with the Australian people, about the funding of that long term as well.
JOURNALIST:    (inaudible). Do see that by joining with Taree and Kempsey we're going to have a better chance of getting a federal (inaudible)?
PM:   Fools rush in where angels fear to tread -
JOURNALIST:   They fly in.
PM:   And the particular relationship between Port Macquarie, Taree and Kempsey I will leave to the locals to resolve. What I do know however, in terms of patient transport, and the way in which that's coordinated within an area health service or coordinated more generally is one of the areas of recommendation in this national report.
People in regional and rural areas obviously do not have the same concentration of medical services as those in the larger cities in the country. Therefore, one of the ways in which you try and offset that is to have a properly funded patient transport system. The Health Reform Commission is very upfront about the fact that this needs to change for the future, because it's really stretched and people are finding it very, very difficult.
Of course, the other part of that, and this is part of the recommendations put to me this morning by many of the health professionals at this hospital, is that the more of the, shall I say, do-able specialisation which can be done and performed here in major regional hospitals reduces the overall patient transport needs to capital cities. But it's an area of reform, but on the specific application between those three centres, I'll leave that to be sorted out among the locals.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) regional airport strategy, I know that Rob Oakeshott is keen to raise that with you. Is that a good idea (inaudible)
PM:   My understanding is, this evening when we have Community Cabinet, Albo is here, the Minister for Infrastructure and Transport, and my discussions with him, I think last week in Canberra, was that he intended to meet with all the relevant local authorities on that while he was here for that. So I'll defer that one to the Transport Minister, but certainly the more rational use we can make of regional airport services the better, but I'll defer to his judgement. I am sure Rob, as ever, will be in his ear big time.
JOURNALIST:   Do you see a solution to the long-term health care needs of the country in the Federal Government taking over health care?
PM:   As you know, we've outlined three strategic options, or should I say, the Health Reform Commission has. One is what is called a partial take-over of the system by the Australian Government - all preventative health care going to the Federal Government, all primary health care going to Federal Government, 40 per cent of acute hospital funding going to the Federal Government, 60 per cent to the states, Federal Government will responsible for sub-acute services, Federal Government being responsible for all mental health services, all dental health services and all aged care, as well as person-controlled electronic health records.
Second strategic option is all of the above, plus, over time, in a two-step process, the Australian Government taking responsibility also for the remaining 60 percent of the funding.
Third option, which we described as the Full Monty, is doing everything upfront at once, and that is - you've obviously seen the Full Monty, have you?
JOURNALIST:   Just hoping I'm not going to see one now.
PM:   So am I. I've lost my train of thought.
JOURNALIST:   The third option.
PM:   Is not recommended, neither that nor the one in the Health Commission's Report by the actual Commissioners themselves, because they believe that if we were to move in that direction, we should do it in a staged way.
The Government has an open mind on which of these strategic options to embrace, and we have deliberately decided to embark upon a process of consulting major regional and metro hospitals like this and other health communities and health professionals to road test these recommendations right across the country. Then, to being to reach conclusions and recommendations that we put to the states and territories in the early part of next year.
That's our decision-making framework, so that's why we want to, as I said, road test as much as possible with major regional centres like this.
JOURNALIST:   You made the point earlier about ageing and health care going to cost so much over the future - does it concern you about going into so much debt now, at this stage, when it is going to cost us a hell of a lot to deal out ageing population and our health care issues going into the future?
PM:   Well, thing I'd say to you right now that as of the end of the first quarter 2009, Australia had the fastest growing economy in the OECD with the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies with the lowest net debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies, and also the only not to have gone into recession. So, that's my partial answer to your first point.
The second is, in terms of the long-term needs of the health and hospital system. We're very clear in our presentations to communities here and elsewhere there are three potential sources of funding for this. One is if the Australian Government tales over responsibility of funding for particular services from the states, then we'd also take that revenue stream to the states.
Second is, efficiencies in the system. What's one of the big gaps in system right now? It's the absence of a person or patient controlled electronic health record, so the systems can't effectively talk to each other. I was just talking to Kevin the cardiologist a little bit before - not Kevin the Prime Minister, Kevin the cardiologist.
JOURNALIST:   Do you earn more than him?
PM:   Ask Kevin the cardiologist, mine's on the public record. But he's a really good bloke who knows what he's talking about. But, for example, if you've got folk who are making the sea change move from Sydney to here who may have had an emerging cardiac condition, it's far better to be able to quickly, through electronic data records, immediately transfer all their diagnostics in the flick of a hand than re-diagnose him, because it's, A hugely expensive, B it wastes time, particularly if something acute is unfolding.
You multiply that across the entire nation. So, one of the efficiencies in the system to be delivered in terms of cost is getting that in place.
The third source of funding is, of course, the Commonwealth's revenue, and that is why we have decided that we should also ensure that our decision on the future of health and hospital reform is informed by the conclusions and the options put forward by the Henry Commission of inquiry into the future of the taxation system in Australia, which is due by year's end.
So, we are taking a balanced approach as to how we would, A design the best policy for the health and hospital system for the future and, B how you would best fund it. But we'll do so always on the basis of a prudent and conservative and cautious approach to the long-term management of the nation's public finances.
JOURNALIST:   Can you tell me, Prime Minister, if you think there's any benefit in the long-term of actually getting rid of the states all together and going to a two-tier government (inaudible)
PM:   That's a good, provocative question for five to twelve on a Tuesday here in Port Macquarie. First response to that is - by instinct I'm a federalist and I want to make sure the federation works cooperatively. That is why, whether it's in education, through the Australian School Agreement, Australian Education Agreement which we concluded at the end of last year - large increase in investment in our schools, matched by a whole new set of reporting responsibilities by states for schools, transparent reporting on the performance of individual schools, plus quality reporting on other aspects of, shall I say, outcomes measures of the education system.
Similarly, with the Australian Healthcare Agreement. Also, we're doing the same thing in Indigenous policy. We're also seeking to do the same in areas of climate change and environment policy. So that's the cooperative framework which we've evolved so far. We've got this huge program of microeconomic reform and regulatory harmonisation - 27 different areas between the states and Commonwealth at the moment in business regulation large and small. We're doing all of that cooperatively, so that's my instinct.
However, if you can't get there cooperatively in critical areas like health and hospitals long-term, then, as I've said constantly, the Commonwealth reserves its right to seek a mandate from the Australian people to move ahead with its reforms, and that has always been my position, but is very much, having gone through a process of consultation first before resorting to that option second. And I'd much rather solve problems in a practical way along these lines than go more broadly than that in the direction that your question suggested.
JOURNALIST:   (inaudible) independent state MP and an independent federal MP. First time we've had that. A lot of talk from other major parties that independents aren't effective. Rob Oakeshott somehow managed to get you here. Do you believe that they do have a role to play in parliament (inaudible)
PM:   Oh, I think at various, across Australia, it's always horses for courses, and my experience of Rob so far is he's always up front in getting into the ear of federal ministers on x, y and z, a, b and c, and delivering as best he can for his community.  And we try and respond on the merits of the argument, and we won't always agree with everything Rob wants, but we'll try and deal with him as constrictively as we can and do what we can.
I think I've said on a number of occasions before when he's asked question in the parliament that I take it as a given that he is acting in the best interests of his local community and putting forward proposal x, y and z, a, b and c.  So when has asked the other day whether I'd come up, 'yep, fine, we'll do that.'
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM:   We'll work our way through all of those things. So I think, in terms of the role of independents, it always depends on how independent MPs, and any member of parliament, conduct themselves to try and work things out in a practical way. If the policy and the needs of the community comes first and the politics comes last, then we will always work well with individual members.
JOURNALIST:   Bringing it back to just to why you are here today, you spent a considerable amount of time chatting to the doctors, more than was on the agenda. Was that-
PM:   Oh, I needed a consultation actually (inaudible)
JOURNALIST:   Was that because of the huge amount of needs that you've seen here or is it because the doctors here are smarter than the average doctor (inaudible) why so long chatting to doctors here in Port Macquarie?
PM:   Each of those is a loaded question, which you were all trained to ask in journalism school. No, when I go to a community, I think I stayed longer than I was scheduled to in Lismore yesterday as well. I actually just prefer to let people have a say. I mean the truth is, I will not get back here for another consultation with this hospital or this community before we reach our decision for the long-term, so I'd much rather let people have a yak.
And if you are, I think you're not doing your job as Prime Minister if you go through a day and don't learn something new, and therefore it's important to listen carefully to what people have got to say and we had a long, long discussion about how things are operating on the ground here in quite a detailed way, so I benefitted from that.
OK, any other questions?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) domestic violence? (inaudible)
PM:   You're referring to our Member in Tasmania?
This is about Jodie Campbell. Jodie Campbell is a very, very hard-working Member for Bass. She is a very, very good person. I've got to know her very well in the period that she's been in Parliament, and prior to that as well.
The reports obviously, in today's media are deeply disturbing, and deeply troubling. I spoke to her last night and had a long chat with her. She is in good spirits, despite the great trauma that she's been through. And I was keen to say to her very clearly that not just myself but all members of the Parliamentary Labor Party were in complete and absolute support of her at this very, very difficult time.
As you know, this matter is now the subject of a police investigation, so I'm reluctant to comment further on any details concerning it.
I will say this more broadly, though, about domestic violence. Acts of violence against women, in my view, are cowardly acts by men. Acts of violence against women are cowardly acts by men and have no place - no place - in modern Australia.
That's why I have said, time and time and time and time again, that the only attitude that we can have to this sort of violence is a policy of zero tolerance. And as a nation we need to embrace that.
Okay folks, having said all that, I might zip. Thanks very much.


PM:                 It's good to be here with Rob Oakeshott, the Federal Member for Lyne and of course Peter Besseling, the State Member for Port Macquarie. And I am pleased to be here to participate in what is obviously, having a look at the final works here on Ocean Drive, the Ocean Drive Bridge that we open to motorists as I understand, next week. Have I got that right? The project is part of a $550 million duplication of the 33 kilometre section of the Pacific Highway between Coopernook and Herons Creek. When this bridge opens it will allow earthworks for the construction of the Kew Bypass.
This duplication of the Pacific Highway will reduce, obviously, the travelling time. It will improve safety in this section. And one of the key things that we constantly hear about the Pacific Highway, the challenges of safety, I am advised that in this section we've seen 130 crashes resulting in nine fatalities and 50 injuries in the five years to the end of 2005.  That's a challenge. This will help in that. Of course, any road fatality is one too many.
The second point though is, apart from improving speed of travelling from destination to destination, secondly, improving road safety, the third thing is what I've been talking to all these blokes about today, and that is the impact on jobs, and the fact that this project has been able to generate such a large number of jobs in this area. There are 589 direct jobs, 1,300 indirect jobs, according to the New South Wales RTA.
And at a time when the global economy is being whacked around by the global economic recession, these critical infrastructure projects such as this bridge, such as this important duplication of the Pacific Highway, provides jobs, provides support for business, provides apprenticeships today, while investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. It's what we call nation building for recovery, nation building for the future.
The project I understand is intended to be completed in the first half of 2010, weather permitting. I understand you've had a few weather problems of late.  Once the upgrade is done, this will lead to a continuous four lane duplication of 163km of the Pacific Highway between Bulahdelah and Port Macquarie. And I understand that once the Bulahdelah section is done, and that's to be done by about 2012, I'm looking for guidance here, the Federal Member advises me and if he's wrong, it's his problem, that from Port to Sydney we then have the completion of the duplication of the Pacific. That will be an important day to celebrate.
That's, however, part one. Part two, of course is what lies north. And there's a huge amount of work to be done between here and the Queensland border.
The Government, Federal Government, is investing $3.1 billion in the Pacific Highway duplication project. It's going to take time to complete. There's much more work to be done, but having discussed just now with the RTA the jobs impact of the next investment we are making, the $600 million investment up the road in and around Kempsey, that in turn will generate 500 or 600 direct jobs, and a large number of indirect jobs as well.
So all this is about improving the ability of local people to commute, and to commute also to the larger centres, including Sydney. Secondly, improving road safety, because we've had some horrific crashes here over the years and thirdly, critically at this time of global economic recession, doing what we can to support jobs, business and apprenticeships today while investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Let me just conclude on that point. There's always a continuing debate in Australia about the Government's stimulus strategy. Can I just say, when I look at projects which are linked to infrastructure, when I look at communities like I have been in Port Macquarie, when I look at the communities more broadly across northern New South Wales, these are communities which have benefited directly from an investment of a significant amount of infrastructure, a significant amount of stimulus in recent times.
All told, in northern New South Wales, the Government has invested some $1.58 billion in stimulus. A large slice of that is in infrastructure projects, like the ones we've just been discussing. But if the Government was not in the business of investing, through stimulus, then let me tell you, the unemployment rate would be much higher, businesses would be taking even more of a battering, and, therefore, we would have far deeper challenges than we currently have.
That's why we believe it's important to remain committed to our stimulus strategy, despite what criticism may come down the road towards us, because if you look at Australia's economic performance, relative to other economies around the world, Australia has generated the fastest growth in the OECD, Australia has the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, the lowest net debt, the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies, and on top of that, we're the only one to have avoided so far to have gone into a technical recession.
And that's because the Government has seen it necessary to step up to the plate, and make a difference. And we've done that through a stimulus strategy, we've done that through nation building for recovery, not just with great road projects like this, but also, across northern New South Wales, the fact that we're investing, for example, $203 million in 193 separate major building projects, across 162 schools.  All that makes a difference.
Again, supporting jobs, small business, and apprenticeships today, by building the infrastructure, whether it's in schools or in roads, that our country and our community needs tomorrow. Enough from me, did you want to add to anything on the road here, Rob?
OAKESHOTT:                       Sure. Just very quickly, it's probably the last time I'll get to thank the Prime Minister for his visit over the last day and a half. In the words of one of the fellas behind us, he said it's ‘absolutely awesome' that the Prime Minister takes the time to come to talk to someone like me. I think that sums up the visit of the last two days. The Prime Minister could've flown in and flown out. He could've done a paid fundraiser for political purposes. He hasn't, he has met with real people about real issues on the mid-north coast. So thank you for spending two days in the region, and exploring some of the issues that local members, State and Federal deal with on a daily basis.
In regards to the Pacific Highway and this project in particular, there is a lot of local anticipation about the opening. It is going to change life in this region significantly and it's rare to say that about one project, that it can be life changing. So this is going to bring 500,000 people within the region, the towns of Taree, Port Macquarie, and Kempsey, much closer together. And we will see better business, safer roads as a consequence. So the money spent is greatly appreciated, from both the State and the Federal Government on the ongoing Pacific Highway works.
As well, I'd like to make the point about integrated transport. For too long, Governments have looked at silos in regards to transport. I'm really pleased to see language starting to come out of Government about integrated transport solutions. We met last night about a regional aviation plan, with the Prime Minister and the three councils. The Pacific Highway, once this is complete, will bring three airports within an hour and fifteen minutes of each other. That's going to have significant broader benefits for our community.
So it's not just about the Pacific Highway project, it's about integrated transport solutions for the Mid-North Coast, and I think there is lessons in that for other areas of New South Wales, and Australia, in regards to what we're doing on the Mid-North Coast.
Finally, the national point about the Pacific Highway for the whole north coast, and the connection between Sydney and Brisbane. We've already had the conversation about the Clybucca and the Grafton bus crashes which was largely the trigger for a lot of this. And there is still Coroner Kevin Waller in his ageing days, living in Sydney, commenting about that first recommendation he made in his coronial reports in the early ‘90s that we should have dual carriageway from Hexham to the Queensland border. We're 60 per cent of the way there. The work done is absolutely fantastic. It makes better roads. It makes better business, it saves lives.
We still have a huge challenge and so there is a message, not only for the Prime Minister, but also for the State Government, that we need the job done, because half a job is almost complete, is almost more dangerous than none at all because we are seeing increased traffic flows as a consequence. So the remaining goat track is even more dangerous than it was before.
The Prime Minister knows that, that's why he's here. It is greatly appreciated that he's taken the time to meet some of the 700 workers on this particular job, and the projects such as the $600 million committed to the Kempsey Bypass in this year's budget is also greatly appreciated, and I think will be picked up by a lot of the guys behind us as far as important work within the region. So as a wrap, greatly appreciate the visit here to the Pacific Highway, but more generally, to the Mid-North Coast. Thank you once again.
PM:                 Thanks Rob. The last thing I'd say before taking your questions is, I listened very carefully to what Rob had to say about integrated transport solutions and communications more broadly. There are some things which Government can really help with and one of them is to make sure we have decent infrastructure. And it doesn't happen overnight. You've got to plan it. And you've got to plan it in a coordinated way.
One of the big gaps nationally for a long period of time is that we have had no effective national infrastructure plan. Our state governments have worked hard in the field, often constrained by finance. It's time for the Australian Government to step in, as we have been through Infrastructure Australia and the Building Australia Fund. And a lot of the investments in the Pacific Highway have been made possible through the application of Australian Government resources.
This, for us as a Government, is the building decade. Building our schools, building our hospitals, building our roads, laying out our high-speed broadband network. And it's not just necessary for the nation's economic development, it's also necessary for the region's economic development. If we have 100 megabits per second rolling around this region, the mid-north coast, through broadband, if we have integrated transport networks, including dual carriageway to Sydney, and in time, through to Brisvegas, where I come from - it makes a big difference. It makes a big difference to how local economies function. It makes a big difference to tourism flows, it makes a big difference to the way in which businesses deal with each other.
Getting the infrastructure right in this building decade for Australia is important, so our motto as a Government is not just nation building for recovery, it's nation building for the future to get the infrastructure right for the 21st century.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST:                      You're obviously a big fan of the stimulus package, and please don't take this the wrong way, but how are you going to stimulate us in the future-
OAKESHOTT:                       That was the Full Monty yesterday!
PM: Look, our national stimulus strategy has been rolled out in three phases. The first, starting last October, when the global financial crisis hit and you saw banks falling down around the world, economies grinding to a halt, unemployment going through the roof in North America and in Europe and in other parts of the world, we stepped up to the plate with phase one, which unapologetically was cash payments to pensioners, veterans, carers and lower-income families.
The reason was to provide a push of activity into the economy when the private sector was in complete retreat. If you recall how grim things were around the world last part of last year, early part of this year, it was a necessary thing to do. Also, if you look at how Australia has performed, late last year, early this year, relative to the rest of the world it has represented a huge part of the difference.
Of course, the other difference has been made by businesses who have gone out there and taken often courageous decisions to remain active, retaining their workforces and having confidence in the future.
Phase Two is medium-term infrastructure, and that's why I referred just now to 160-odd school building projects around northern New South Wales alone. That's investing in this region a couple of hundred million dollars, and it's to look back and say ‘here are the 21st century libraries, here are the language centres, here are the science centres, here are the multipurpose halls, that are lasting, not just legacies, but improvements to our kids' education for the needs of the future, and all these blokes behind me have got kids, and they'd be very mindful of where their kids get to go to school and whether the schools are going to have a properly wired library.
Third phase infrastructure is long-term infrastructure.  For example, the long-term completion of the duplication of the Pacific Highway, the roll out of the national broadband network, port improvements as well as rail freight improvements. These are all part of our infrastructure strategy.
Short, medium, long  -  that's way we've structured it, and it's all been about nation building for recovery, making sure we make a difference when the global economy is contracting but also with some 70 percent of our total stimulus investment going into infrastructure which is there for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about regions like Port Macquarie and the electorate of Lyne more generally, which to some extent is seen as a microcosm of what Australia in the future will look like, with high numbers of elderly people. Is it necessary to look at supporting these regions beyond the stimulus?
PM: If you look at the way in which we have structured stimulus, it has gone where the people are. If you have high concentrations of pensioners, frankly, you get a large delivery of the Federal Government's stimulus dollar, but also, if you've got larger concentrations of schools, as I said, in this northern NSW area, some 162 primary schools, each of them being invested in, and therefore that is also providing activity to the local economy.
As we discussed yesterday at Port Macquarie Base Hospital, obviously where you've got a large aged cohort in your overall population growth, it actually presents additional needs for your local health and hospital community. That's not unique to here, but it's strong here, OK, and therefore when I and the Government will be looking at long-term decisions on health and hospitals reform, we've got to be mindful of whether the distributional formula for the future for the Australian health dollar is fully mindful of where the population is growing, and where let's call it the aging of the population is most acute as well.
So, this region's got enormous potential, enormous opportunities. We're here to support that to the greatest extent that we can. Just to add to one point Rob mentioned before  -  if you've now a three and a half hour commute, once this duplication is finished between Port Macquarie and Sydney, you're also going to open a whole new corridor for weekend tourism, which I don't think would have been as easily available as it was in the past.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM:- There, and there.
JOURNALIST: Just on another note, can you confirm that Labor won't be running a candidate in Brendan Nelson's seat?
PM: Well, my understanding from the, well, first thing I'd say is that last time I looked in the seat of Bradfield, I don't think we have ever won it. I think even after the last election, the margin there was about 20 percent, so I don't know, what's your advice, mate?
OAKESHOTT: Run an independent.
PM: Can I just say I'm sure there's going to be a truckload of people trying to run for the Liberal Party, there'll be a truckload of people running as independents, and I think from our perspective our priorities will lie elsewhere, and I imagine that will be the conclusions reached by the Party organisation.
Can I also say about Brendan Nelson, as I said yesterday, I think he's made a great contribution to public life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you obviously heard Rob mention, as you've probably heard it before, but at Claybucca, it will be 20 years this December where 35 people died in a massive bus smash. How do you go about prioritising infrastructure projects when there are just so many needs across the country?
PM: Well, the Federal Member, Rob Oakeshott, is absolutely right to refer to that coroner's report. It sits there and it is a stern injunction to us all not to forget the past but to learn from it. What we have done, based on the advice of the transport authorities is move our way through to the duplication of that entire network of, that entire part of the road over time.
Phase one, which is this $600 million plus investment takes us, I believe, as I'm now advised, 25-30 km south of that particular site. Phase two, once full planning is complete, will then be open for decisions to be made on its long-term funding as well. It's one block at a time, but we're absolutely determined to complete the task, which is to get this duplication through to the Queensland border. It's been  -  what's the polite word?  -  it's been stuffed around on, and we actually just need to get it done, but we've also got to do it in a way where our traffic and transport authorities, each step of the way, have got the planning right, the design right, step by step, and I've got to say, this $600 million investment that we made was very mindful of a large slice of the road which is directly relevant to the challenges of road safety as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're well known for your lengthy, erudite essays in the Monthly.
PM: What have I done now?
JOURNALIST: Thought of your brother's lengthy, erudite essay on Australia's relationship with China in yesterday's Australian?
PM: First of all, I haven't spoken to him about it. Secondly, I haven't read it either, so, my apologies, can't really answer that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've spent a couple of days here in this beautiful the earth and you've seen some wonderful people, the great climate, and fantastic natural beauty. Now you can go and brand Australia. You've seen the best of it. Is that going to help you on this new campaign to brand Australia?
PM: Oh, look, I think it's important that all these things are done as professionally as they can. The great thing about your region here is that in some respects it speaks for itself. Every time I come to Port Macquarie it just hits me again between the eyes what a beautiful part of the world you have here. It's not just Port Macquarie itself, it's the surrounding region, including Wauchope and communities like that.
So, it speaks for itself. Part of it also lies in making sure your transport links are right, hence the discussion earlier about the road connection to Sydney, and also in time, the road connection north. It's also germane to the conversations we had last night with Rob about regional air transport links into the future. We make no commitments on that, but it's a continuing discussion between the local authorities and the Transport Minister.
The key thing is making sure your local product is right. Can I just say the product speaks for itself. Making sure people can get to the product is the next part of the equation, and this is important. Weekenders from Sydney will be very important, and then there are other, of course, infrastructure additions to be done well.
That's what we've got to get the building blocks right on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've obviously spoken to a large amount of people. What would you see as the key major challenges facing this local community, and where are the areas where you think we could be better utilising federal support?
PM: Well, fools rush in where angels fear to tread. Look, the meaning of wisdom is to know that which you don't know, and I have travelled to Port Macquarie quite a number of times over the years, but I am not a local, I'm from the great state of Queensland, somewhere to the north of here, so  -  did someone scoff at that?
PM: Okay, thank you. What part of Queensland are you from?
JOURNALIST: Sunshine Coast  -  Maroochy high.
PM: Oh really? I'm Nambour high.
JOURNALIST: We beat Nambour High in-
PM: We'll settle that later on.
But, we are very mindful of the representations from local Members in terms of priorities, and also part of the reason we had community cabinet here last night was to hear from the local community, and also to hear directly from local authorities about their priorities. Obviously, if I stood back from it all, as a person who has been here for the last couple of days, it's very hard not to have a conversation with somebody which doesn't involve local health and hospital needs in the future.
All of us around here, we've got families, ourselves, accidents or illnesses or kids that crook in the middle of the night, making sure we've the decent health and hospital set of services, I think, is obviously looming up there as a major priority.
Getting the transport challenges dealt with  -  this is part of it, but I'm being frank about the fact that we have a lot of work to go to the north, still. I think that's another part of it.
Making sure that in communities like this we're also rolling out broadband, because businesses in this community are going to discover a whole series of new opportunities for themselves once they've got 100Mb/s with the world-competitive bandwidth and bandspeed which has been denied them up until now. That, I think, while people may not be talking about it in the streets, will have a fundamental effect on the way in which small businesses and others operate in communities like this.
Lastly, on the education front, really important to make sure that any kid growing up in the mid-north coast, northern New South Wales, has the best access to the education opportunities of future. That's why we're on about rolling out the education revolution.
So, we'll be listening to what Rob's got to say in the future, agreeing with some things, disagreeing with others, and getting on with the business of proper government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the bodies of the Australians killed in the Kokoda plane crash are on their way back to Australia today, obviously. (inaudible)
PM: It's a really sad time for the families. This has taken a while to sort out. This is a very difficult and sensitive time as we work through the proper procedures, but the Royal Australian Air Force is providing support, as I'm advised, through Hercules transport. Those arrangements are, the details of those arrangements remain between us and the families, and it's very important for families to have the opportunity, quietly and with dignity, to lay their loved ones to rest. It's a really sad time for them, for their communities, and I say what I think all Australians would say as their remains return home, that our thoughts and our prayers are with them all.
Thank you very much.


The Prime Minister's next blog will focus on the remote and rural health care system. It is now open for comments and will close 5pm Wednesday 2 September.
He's keen to get your feedback  -  especially if you live in rural and remote areas  -  on how we can reform the health system to ensure it serves all Australians equally, so register to join the blog at www.pm.gov.au


JOURNALIST: Can we get your reactions to Ted Kennedy's passing?
PM: Ted Kennedy was a great American, a great Democrat, but also a great friend of Australia. He has made an extraordinary contribution to American politics, an extraordinary contribution to America's role in world.
When you look at Ted Kennedy's legislative career  -  more than 40 years. When you look at the content of that legislative career spanning the whole breadth of public policy, health policy, social policy, foreign policy, this has been a unique career.
Ted Kennedy will be sadly missed in America. He will be sadly missed around the world, including in Australia.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned he was not only a friend of the world, but also Australia?
PM: Ted Kennedy was, in the Congress, a robust and continuing supporter of the alliance between the United States and Australia. Whatever the colour of the US administration, at any time, whatever the colour politically of the Australian Government at any time, Ted Kennedy was always a friend of Australia and the alliance and sought to use the opportunities available to him to build in the Congress an even broader constituency of support for that.
Also, on elements of our negotiations in other sensitive areas including elements of the trade negotiations, Ted Kennedy was also there to be consulted, to be supportive of Australia's overall interests.
(ends)


Thank you for the Honorary Fellowship and for that welcome.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
As we all know, this college is named after Ernest Henry Burgmann, the Anglican Bishop of Canberra and Goulburn for almost a quarter of a century from 1934 to 1960 - “Burgie”, as he was known to most.
He had a couple of other nicknames, too.
The tabloids dubbed him Australia's “Red Bishop” in the 1930s and 40s.
Almost every newspaper in the country called him a “meddlesome beast” in 1954.
But that was only because a young wire journalist misheard the government Whip in the House when he described Burgmann as “a most meddlesome priest” during a rowdy parliamentary exchange.
Burgmann believed there was a role for Christian engagement in the political and public and intellectual debate. He was part pastor, part prophet, part political activist, 100 per cent stirrer - and a man of religion who was passionate about education, about social justice, and about politics.
Throughout the Great Depression, Burgmann was a constant burr in the side of government, prodding them to help the masses of unemployed, who had lost their jobs through global forces beyond their control and through no fault of their own. Agitating governments to supply people in rural and regional Australia with basic services like water and electricity. And urging all Australians to realise that their destiny no longer lay with the British empire but with the Asia-Pacific region of which they were part.
In the 1950s, he was named in parliament after publicly advocating a “no” vote against Menzies' referendum to outlaw the Communist Party.
His partial autobiography, “The Education of An Australian”, was in the top 10 bestsellers in 1944.
Yet it still came as a surprise to the Anglican members of the inter-church committee which founded this college when “Burgmann” easily won the vote for the name of this College.
Burgmann was a man of great passions, but education was among his greatest passions - a passion shared by the Government that I lead.
The Government recognises education's leading role in laying the foundations for long-term recovery from the global economic recession.
We are currently dealing with the worst set of global economic conditions since the Great Depression, and we have been wrestling with enormous macro-economic changes thrown up by the global financial crisis.
The good news is that Australia has so far weathered this crisis better than most countries. Of all the major advanced economies, we have had the strongest growth, lower unemployment than all but one of those economies, the lowest deficit, the lowest debt levels, and we are the only major advanced economy to avoid a technical recession.
That's because the Government took strong, early, decisive action in financial markets, in stimulus plans and in nation-building for recovery to cushion Australia from the worst of the global downturn and support Australian jobs.
Maintaining macro-economic growth against the rest of the world is one thing. Continuing to move ahead with micro-economic reform is another.
In my recent essay, I wrote about our productivity growth agenda to drive Australia's future global competitiveness. We are targeting five key priorities to lift long-term productivity growth:
     * Ending the blame game with the States and Territories  - with a process of regulatory and competition reform through the COAG process;
     * Reforming the process for development of productive national infrastructure and lifting the national investment in the infrastructure of the 21st century;
     * Investing in innovation, particularly through the national high-speed broadband network;
     * Tax reform, beginning with the most comprehensive review of the tax system in more than three decades; and
     * Investing in an education revolution, to build the most highly skilled, best trained and best educated workforce in the world.
These are all ways to drive long-term productivity growth. Education builds a more productive workforce and empowers individuals to reach their full potential. 
It begins in early childhood where the foundations for future skills are formed.
The American Nobel Prize winning economist and Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago, James Heckman, has long been an advocate of early childhood education. Heckman's research has shown that early childhood education has positive outcomes in areas ranging from crime rates and teenage pregnancy to health and salary levels.
As Heckman notes, the evaluation and cost-benefit analysis of the Perry Preschool Project in Michigan showed that low-income children who were receiving quality child care and early education services experienced substantially better life outcomes than those who did not have the benefit of early learning opportunities.
The study found that through to age 40, and this is in US dollars, there was a return of $17 for every $1 spent. That is an extraordinary return on investment, and it shows the extraordinary importance of education.
Education investment is where good economic policy meets good social policy, offering better lives and better opportunities for a generation of young kids.
As Professor Heckman recently said, investment in early education during times of economic adversity is “the best type of stimulus package”. That's because it provides both an immediate boost to jobs, and long-term benefits to the economy. And that's the thinking that has underpinned the Government's investment in the education revolution, an increased investment in education of around 50 per cent more in real terms over the current five year period compared to the previous five years.
Analysis by the Dutch economist Erik Canton suggests that an increase by one year of the average education level of the labour force would increase productivity by 7 to 10 per cent in the short term and by 11 to 15 per cent in the long term, and research by the OECD shows that if average education levels of the working-age populations were increased by just one year, the economy would be 3 to 6 per cent larger.
Education is also critically important to address the risk of social disadvantage. We know that the most vulnerable workers in an economic downturn are those who are the least skilled, who face the longest period of unemployment and the greatest difficulty in finding secure full-time work.
Creating the best-educated, best-skilled, best-trained workforce in the world is the core vision of the Australian Government's productivity agenda.  The Government's vision for the education revolution starts with early childhood education and progresses through primary to secondary.
Since the 2007 election, the Government has:
     * Doubled the investment in Australian schools to $62.1 billion;
     * Undertaken the biggest school modernisation project in Australia's history;
     * Invested almost $1 billion to enable universal pre-school for all children by 2013;
     * Committed $2 billion to guarantee a 1:1 student to computer ratio for students in Year 9 to 12 in every school in the nation;
     * Begun rolling out state-of-the-art Trades Training Centres across the country;
     * Invested $550 million to attract and keep the best and brightest teachers;
     * Responded to the Bradley Review of higher education with additional funding of $2.2 billion and uncapping the number of university places.
One of the proudest reforms of past Labor Governments is the way they have opened up educational pathways for successive generations of working people who otherwise would never have had those opportunities - from basic schools and skills training in the early 20th century, to the major training programs for soldiers returning from war in the 1940s, and of course to the Whitlam Government's decision to open up universities to all Australians, regardless of their background or income.
As a result of that decision, a generation of working class kids got the opportunity to have a university education, many of them, the first kid in the family to have that chance. Even today, I meet people who are now in charge of industries, departments and public institutions who tell me that they have got to where they are because Gough Whitlam unlocked the university gates and let them in.  And I often say to them  -  me too.
But the challenge of making university accessible to every young Australian didn't end in the 1970s. Significant challenges still exist today.
There can be no education revolution without a matching revolution in equality of educational opportunity for all Australians, whatever their background, wherever they come from. Central to the Government's education revolution is a determination to make opportunities available to all Australians.
From early childhood to schools to higher education, our reforms have focused on providing all young people, but particularly those with lesser means, with access to the opportunities high quality learning offers.
In this financial year alone, we are spending $3.6 billion on early childhood education and child care. This will support some 800,000 working families across our nation.
We have made child care more affordable for all families by increasing the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent of parents' out-of-pocket expenses. We know this has made a huge difference to parents. 
A recent ABS survey found that child care costs have fallen by almost 20 per cent over the last year. Compare that to a 13 per cent increase in child care costs the previous year.
The education revolution includes significant funds to enable students from disadvantaged backgrounds have access to high quality education:
     * $1.1 billion to provide additional resources to our poorest schools for extra teaching support, homework classes and other learning resources;
     * $540 million to provide extra tuition to students who are struggling to meet literacy and numeracy benchmarks;
     * $2 billion to put computers on the desks of every student in years 9-12  - knowing that many young people come from families without the resources to purchase technology to support their children's learning; and
     * $2.5 billion to construct trades training centres to help those young people at risk of leaving school early to complete their education and gain a trade qualification.
We know that students from poorer families are more likely to leave school early - transferring their parents' poverty to a new generation. That is why we are determined to see school retention rates rise to 90 per cent by 2015.
Our reforms to higher education are similarly aimed at opening up our universities to the thousands of young people from low socioeconomic backgrounds.
Today just one in three Australian 25 to 34 year olds has a bachelor's qualification. Too few young people from low socioeconomic backgrounds reach university or gain a degree.
The Bradley Review found a number of groups of young Australians are significantly under-represented in higher education in Australia. Whether it is participation of Australians from remote areas, Indigenous Australians, or those from low socio-economic backgrounds, there is a constant pattern of under-representation in Australian higher education. That is why we are investing $491 million over the next four years to uncap the number of public university places from 2012, allowing universities to offer enrolment to all eligible students.
We want to open our universities to an additional 80,000 student places over the four years from 2010 to 2013, allowing about 50,000 additional students to participate in higher education. That is why we are also investing $437 million over four years to lift the enrolments of students from low income families by 55,000 by 2020. We will do this by funding our universities to build robust partnerships with disadvantaged schools and by rewarding them for attracting and retaining low SES students.
We came to office determined to provide young people who did not want to attend university with the opportunity to learn a trade.
We have delivered with 711,000 training places for school leavers, the unemployed and those in jobs who may be at risk of redundancy from technological and economic change.
Our Jobs and Training Compact also targets Australians most at risk from unemployment in 20 targeted local areas across Australia.
Specifically, our Compact with Young Australians requires young Australians under the age of 25 to be earning or learning  -  either in full time employment or in full time education or training.
All these measures are intended to guarantee that as the education revolution rolls out across Australia, we put in the maximum effort to make the benefits of that revolution available to every young Australian, because we believe passionately in the power of education to transform a person's life opportunities.
It was a similar vision for the power of education that inspired the establishment of the Australian National University by the Chifley Government in 1946.
The ANU is the only Australian university to be established by a federal Act of Parliament. What you may not know  -  as we battle the challenges thrown at us by the current global financial crisis  -  is that the ANU could have been established decades earlier had it not been for an earlier global meltdown.
The idea first started kicking around in the late 1920s, with calls for “Australia's Oxford”  -  a great national research and residential university, where students from all around the nation would come to study honours degrees or pursue postgraduate research.
The Cabinet of the time went as far as setting up a committee to investigate the idea. The committee agreed in principle that the university was needed, but they could not agree on whether it should be a teaching university for the Canberra community, or a post-graduate research institute working closely with the then Council for Scientific and Industrial Research - the CSIR.
Discussions were heated, battlelines were drawn, and those advocating a teaching institute  -  to be called The Canberra University  -  had the numbers, but before the final vote could be taken, Wall Street crashed. The world plunged into the Great Depression. And the CSIR decided that there was not much point in spending the 50 pounds needed to bring the committee together for its last meeting.
So the idea languished through the Depression and most of World War Two, but in 1943, the Curtin Government  -  at the prompting of HC “Nugget” Coombs  -  took up the vision for a national centre of higher learning, and on August 1, 1946, under Prime Minister Chifley, the federal parliament passed The Australian National University Act 1946-47.
But the vote was far from unanimous. John Leckie, an Opposition Senator from Victoria, described the vision for the ANU as a “synthetic, provincial university”. Adair Blain, the member for the Northern Territory, feared that “ratbag” views would infest the University through the inclusion of the Research School of Social Sciences. And the then Leader of Her Majesty's Opposition, one Robert Menzies, confessed “to a mild feeling of horror” at the university's name.
According to Mr Menzies, as he was at the time, it should have been called The Canberra University. He told the House:
“I cannot imagine anybody becoming extraordinarily enthusiastic about the proposed title. If institutions of this kind are to be real, and not merely scientific shops, they must develop some esprit de corps, their own character and colour, and make their own mark upon those who pass through them.”
Six decades down the track, there's no doubt that this university is a national treasure, and has made its mark on those fortunate enough to have passed through it.
And there is a pattern here. The Fisher Government  -  the first national Labor government to win a parliamentary majority anywhere in the world  -  decided that Canberra would be our national capital. Four decades later, the Curtin and Chifley Labor Governments decided that our national capital needed a national university.
The wording of the Act which established this University was pedestrian at best. It described the functions of the ANU as:
(a) To encourage, and provide facilities for, post-graduate research and study, both generally and in relation to subjects of national importance to Australia;
(b) To provide facilities for university education for persons who elect to avail themselves of those facilities and are eligible to do so;
(c) Subject to the Statutes, to award and confer degrees and diplomas.
But the vision behind it was grand.
In his second reading speech, the Minister for Post-War Reconstruction, John Dedman, spoke of an institution that would:
“bring credit to Australia, advance the cause of learning and research in general, and take its rightful place amongst the great universities of the world.”
And as Nugget Coombs wrote in his autobiography, “Trial Balance”:
“The university was therefore to be the most bountiful of the sources from which would flow the intellectual energy which was to power the peaceful revolution, ushering in the ‘century of the common man', which leaders of all political persuasions here and abroad had promised.”
And 60 years on, the ANU has an important role in a new education revolution. It already ranks as Australia's leading university by global university ranking systems, and the research achievements of the ANU speak for themselves  -  including two Nobel Prizes in medical research.
The time has now come  -  60 years on  -  to discuss where the ANU should be in another 40 years, when this great institution celebrates its centenary. Consistent with its Charter, how do we in the 21st Century imagine a future vision for Australia's national university?
Earlier this year I announced that the Australian Government will be developing compacts with each of the nation's universities. Among other things, these compacts will set out the arrangements for distributing performance-based funding for teaching and research activity.
The ANU's Vice-Chancellor Ian Chubb has been a strong advocate for these compacts because of their potential to foster specialisation, diversity and excellence. These reforms will herald a new era for the operation and funding of Australian higher education.
Compacts will play a key role in implementing our reforms and ensuring improved outcomes from increased Commonwealth investment. Our compact with the ANU will be especially important given the ANU's special place as a strategic endowment for our nation. 
The Australian Government's vision for the ANU is to build on this great national endowment. The Compact that we sign with the ANU will reflect the status of the ANU as a university of national significance.
The Compact will help ensure that Australia retains and builds capacity in academic areas and disciplines of national importance. It will be their intrinsic importance, consistent with its legislative charter, that drives the future profile of ANU, not just the ebb and flow of undergraduate demand or popularity.
ANU is a research-rich university of high quality. It is a University with a high proportion of graduate students, particularly PhD students. And it is a University where the richness of its research and the quality of its performance creates a unique educational environment in Australia.
Over and above this Compact, it is my vision that a new re-invigorated strategic relationship is established between the ANU and the Australian Government. A relationship that puts education and research at the centre of building robust public policy. A relationship that grows excellence in policy analysis, policy advice and public sector strategic leadership.
A strategic relationship would be based around an agreement between the Australian Government and the ANU that sets out the overarching arrangements to govern and guide the relationship. This agreement would provide the foundation to undertake joint initiatives in key areas such as public service training, the study of Asia and national security.
In the 1930s, Ernest Burgmann wrote that Canberra:
“... long remained an offence to vast numbers of Australians who heard of it with their ears but who had never seen it and strangely enough did not want to see it with their own eyes.”
But, he also added  -  perhaps with a premature sense of confidence:
“This phase is passing.”
Canberra is known  -  sometimes disparagingly  -  as a public service town. Indeed, 37 per cent of the 160,000 members of the Australian Public Service live here. So it makes sense to harness the resources of our national university to enhance the administration of the Commonwealth.
There is good work being done through the collaborative Australia New Zealand School of Government, which is dedicated to promoting public sector leadership and policy.
The next challenge is how do we take that to the next level? How do we meet the future professional needs of our official community?
The public service is at present discussing its future challenges: improving the quality of public sector management, leadership, information technology systems, and budgeting and finance.
And these debates are of critical importance to the nation, because of the great burden of responsibility that rests on our public service.
What we need in Canberra is a much more robust and integrated exchange of ideas between our academics, our politicians and our public service, and more intensive professional preparation for senior roles in government. Imagine if this country engaged its academics in thinking about the way ahead for the public service with initiatives which, in their totality, would be like the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
Our bureaucrats and our politicians need to be challenged by the larger world of ideas and the best research and policy work being undertaken across the world. They need to be grappling with the great long term challenges to public policy:
     * How do we balance the roles of the market and the state, given the financial market implosions we have just witnessed?
     * What should our health system look like in 10, 20, 30 years time?
     * How do we deal with climate change and revolutionise the energy sources of the global economy?
     * How can we close the gap of Indigenous disadvantage?
     * How do we best prepare for the Asia-Pacific Century?
These are critical public policy challenges  -  but the answers do not necessarily lie only within the public service and elected politicians.
So what does this mean for an institution like the ANU?
At the moment, there are thick walls between academia and public administration. Between intellectuals and public policy practitioners. Between those with the deepest analytical understanding of the science of government and those who day to day practise that science here in Canberra and in state capitals and regional centres around Australia.
These thick walls prevent the flow of knowledge and experience between public policy practitioners and academic experts.
Academia should not be a life sentence.
This is not the case in the United States, for example, where these are much more merged communities. Where the independence of the academic community is respected, but its expertise is regularly called upon by governments for the greater public good.
Breaking down those barriers would enhance the quality of both government and centres of academic endeavour.
This is doubly necessary in a smaller country like Australia, where it is vital that we engage all elements of the national talent pool for the national good.
Our vision should also extend beyond our shores, to making Australia the global go-to place for the study of the vast and challenging continent of Asia, which is now challenging our future. The ANU already excels in the study of Asia  -  not just languages but history, culture, religion, politics, policy, international relations, and strategic and defence studies.
I have often said that my vision is for Australia to be the most Asia-literate country in the collective West. Given that this is the now century of the Asia Pacific, how do we make sure that this becomes a reality?
Recently, Michael Wesley, formerly of the Asia Institute at Griffith University and now the head of the Lowy Institute, published a report into the study of Asian languages in Australia. His conclusion was simple  -  we need to do much more.
As he noted:
“Over three-quarters of Australians speak English only  -  making Australia the third most monolingual developed nation in the world.”
This means that in a globalised world, Australia faces a skills shortfall: “the ability to understand and operate in languages and cultures other than our own.”
And in a globalised world if we do not fix this shortfall, we run the risk of falling behind.
Wesley noted that this is about more than just studying languages:
“A comprehensive Asia literacy program must simultaneously teach the culture which the language articulates.”
That means studying the history and modern culture; it means understanding the society in which the language is spoken.
The great institutions of the United States have strong Asian studies program, including Harvard, Yale and Berkeley. The ANU's Asian studies course was inspired in part by the vision of creating an Antipodean version of the London School of Oriental and African Studies.
Our question today is how do we take these models into the 21st century to create an unparalleled resource for both the nation  -  and the nation's official community in Canberra as well? How does the ANU  -  possibly in partnership with other universities and in partnership with the Australian Government  -  rise to this future challenge?
Because here in Canberra  -  the home to this nation's diplomatic officials, defence officials, trade officials and to the international diplomatic community  -  there is a practical need for this expertise to be harnessed in full.
I spoke before about the new strategic relationship between the Australian Government and the ANU. To spearhead this new relationship, I want to explore the establishment of a National Security College. 
National security is now a very complex policy environment and senior officials need new sets of knowledge and skills to operate effectively and strategically within this new environment. Last December in my National Security Statement I announced the establishment of a national Security Executive Development Program. 
The development of this program is underway, however I envisage that this be developed into a suite of world-leading courses that will be undertaken by senior officials working in the national security community. 
I want the Program to develop a generation of senior executive officials who will have a shared understanding of the national security strategic environment, architecture and collaborative culture - and a shared understanding of the capabilities, priorities and challenges that exist across the national security community. Such a college would help develop the next generation of national security leaders and more broadly enhance strategic leadership in our community.
To give this program a “home” and recognised brand of excellence, some preliminary discussions have commenced with the ANU about the establishment of a National Security College as a joint venture established under our strategic relationship with the ANU. These initiatives, incorporating national security and public service excellence, would not only help generate the future leaders of the Australian public service.
The strategic relationship would also build the capabilities for university-based experts to support the Government and contribute to policy making. Preliminary discussions will explore models for how such a venture could be progressed.
As long ago as the 1930s, Ernest Burgmann was arguing for a national university in Canberra, and he was arguing for a wider role for Australia in the world, and particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. He told his readers in the “Southern Churchman” that Australia lived off the main trade routes of the world but did not feel the tremendous stimulus to thought and action under which other continents live. Australia, he said, was in danger of becoming a backwater and passing her days in a fool's paradise.
Burgmann said:
“She has no schools for the sustained, careful study of international relations.
The problems of the Pacific, which are a matter of life and death for her, are left to the few who happen to be interested, and to the officials who may or may not have had special training for their tasks.
We need to have students studying in Oriental universities.
We should welcome students from the East to our own universities.”
Since Burgmann's death, these things have come to pass, in his own backyard. As we gather here tonight in a place named after Burgmann, it falls to us to build upon the foundations laid by those great advocates and architects of this world-class university  -  Curtin, Chifley, Coombs, Dedman, Burgmann, and men like the great champion of higher education, Kim Beazley senior, father of the Chancellor of the ANU today.
We share pride in their magnificent achievements, so many decades on. We share their vision for the role of this great national university. And we resolve to renew that vision for the ANU and our institutions of higher education, to play an even greater role in enabling Australia to meet the great challenges of the century that lies ahead.
[ends]


I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's a pleasure to join you here at the National Library today to launch Tom Keneally's latest book, Australians: Origins to Eureka.
Tom is of course one of our nation's living national treasures.
Australians love him.
Despite him being a passionate Manly supporter  -  underlining the fact that we are all capable of human error.
Earlier this year, I asked Tom for a signed copy of his biography of Abraham Lincoln.
I presented it as an official gift to President Obama when I visited the White House in March of this year.
A bold move to give an Abe Lincoln bio to a man sometimes described as Abe Lincoln's successor.
A doubly bold move when that particular biography (which is less than hagiography) reflects the particular insights of an instinctively rebellious Irish Australian.
There aren't many people who'd be game to take on the challenge Tom's set himself with this history.
To write three volumes that span Australia's entire history.
A history that speaks to all Australians.
And a history that covers old ground, yet breaks new ground as well.
As Australians, we belong to an ancient land with a sprawling, complex and rollicking story.
A story that begins with the most ancient of continuing cultures in human history.
Ours is a story of an extraordinary national achievement:
Forging a united, prosperous, democratic nation drawn from the dregs of Empire, from successive generations of people liberated from penal servitude; from Irish famine; from persecution and poverty from practically every land.
And despite this extraordinary admixture, we prevailed.
It's a story that's been picked over by some of the world's finest poets, authors and filmmakers.
A story both of glory and of shame; of courage and sometimes absurdity.
A story that from time to time has ignited great controversy.
A story of things improbable becoming possible, and ultimately through Australian ingenuity, becoming not merely possible but then a reality which is indeed tangible.
So the task of compressing Australia's national history into three volumes calls for a man of extraordinary talent.
And Tom certainly fits that bill.
Tom is that rare combination  -  -  storyteller, historian, and proud son of Australia.
The kind of a man who gets the dirt under his fingernails as he excavates through the archives and sedimentary layers of our national story.
And who then knocks out the sort of prose that wins you a Booker prize.
And he speaks in a voice that every Australian recognises, because it's the voice of our country - from a man whose love of this country leaps off every page.
Tom's great insight is that Australians love a good yarn, especially when it's about people we can relate to.
So he hasn't given us a landscape study of our country's history.
He's given us a portrait gallery.
A very well-stocked gallery, I might add, and not just the usual suspects.
Yes, there are the ones we all know - like James Cook.
But I don't remember my history teacher ever mentioning his chronic bowel problems.
Although discretion may have been the better part of valour there, on the part of our history teachers at school.
With teenagers, the mere mention of the word bowel can disrupt an entire afternoon's work.
But Tom doesn't hold back.
He makes us visualise James Cook suffering “behind screens of acacia and melaleuca” all the way up the Australian coast.
Tom also gives us sketches of the ordinary people who coped, as we still do today, with the tragedies and triumphs of Australian life.
Tom has this extraordinary eye for the little details that turn a biographical note into a living, breathing life-size character.
Tom's insight springs from his compassion, his humanity, and his own rich life experience.
Tom is indeed, a deeply caring bloke.
His compassion shines through in his moving accounts of the tough, tragic and very human characters who two hundred years ago lived, loved and died  -  and helped build our nation.
People like Christopher Magee, an early arrival, who sat in his doorway with a bottle of rum in his hand.
He'd drink one glass, then pour another on to his wife's freshly dug grave.
Because he said she'd loved it during her life.
Or Sarah Davenport, who came to Australia on the same boat that brought Henry Parkes.
Fourteen days into the voyage she lost her infant son, Albert.
He'd been splashed with boiling gruel through the clumsiness of a fellow passenger.
In her grief, Sarah suffered a miscarriage.
But she rallied, and she survived.
What's more, she devoted herself to the service of others, acting as the ship's midwife and caring for her three surviving children.
As Tom says, although most immigrants had better luck, few could exceed Sarah Davenport in ruggedness of soul.
And it was men and women like this  -  and like my forebears, the cast-offs of imperial Britain and Ireland  -  who laid the foundations for a nation that in time would become a laboratory of social experimentation, a cohesive society and ultimately one of the world's most stable and prosperous democracies.
Tom of course has a quintessentially Australian sense of modesty.
He calls himself a ‘cheap drunk' when it comes to history.
A bloke intoxicated with Australia's great stories.
A bloke who grasps just how extraordinary our national story is.
Who convincingly shows a great national story doesn't need wars, revolutions and bloodshed.
To anyone who might think our national story is a dreary one, I'd just say this:
Read this book.
This isn't dead history.
This is history with a pulse.
History that comes alive, page after page.
History that reflects Tom's passion to leave for future generations an account of our national story that is both accurate and inspirational.
The book is also a reminder of just how much history matters.
I'm reminded of the insights of John Keane, the Australian author of the definitive biography of the great American revolutionary Thomas Paine, and yes, I'm wading my way through that biography at present.
As Keane says, historical biography is itself, in essence, a form of democracy.
As he says, and I quote him:
“Democracy among the living requires democracy among the dead, in that votes must be extended to the most disenfranchised of all constituencies - our silenced ancestors”.
It's a remarkable insight that deserves attention.
At its highest, biography writing isn't “wielding the pen to protect an idol”.
It isn't muck-raking.
And it's not just ripping yarns.
In fact, it does have a higher purpose.
Biography is the fulfilment of a duty owed by every generation to those who have gone before us, and able to be claimed against those yet to be born.
A duty to capture, to preserve and to transmit the stories - the legacy of each generation.
Because a human voice - a human life - retains its validity, its power and its relevance beyond its physical demise.
As we build on the work done in our name and on our behalf by our forebears, we honour them best by listening to their voices from the past. Tom's book does that.
As Keane reminds us, it's not easy to untangle the complex threads of a human life far removed from the biographer's lived reality  -  as he says, “a biography is never straightforward”.
But the great challenge of the biographer is to offer readers the opportunity to ponder the subject themselves, “thereby encouraging them to tinker with their own sense of reality”.
It is two hundred years since the death of Thomas Paine - yet in Keane's world, Paine today “strikes our times like a trumpet blast from an ancient world”.
His ideas are still debated, and his words are still quoted, by the decision-makers of the present day.
And we are cautioned not to consign him to the shelf of those who are described as “dead white European males”.
Instead, he suggests, Paine can prove to us still that “the dead are sometimes more alive than the living.”
Of course few individuals achieve Tom Paine's place in history.
But Tom Keneally's book certainly reminds there is a rich array of lives that have together shaped the character this nation, Australia, just as Paine did for his adopted nation, America.
And as a biographer, I suspect that Tom's background in literary fiction gives him better insights than most into the workings of the human heart, as he has reflected in these pages on those attributes that together make up our national character.
The love for history is, I believe, the hand-maiden of country.
Not a blind, unthinking love - a love that refuses to accept that mistakes were made and opportunities lost.
But a history that unapologetically celebrates the good.
A history that equally unapologetically exposes the bad.
And a history that draws upon both to inform our current age.
That I believe is the best approach to the great stories that make up our national story.
It's not hagiography.
Nor is it futile brow-beating.
Instead, it's a willingness to embrace the past, warts and all.
To recognise there are competing strands in any nation's history  -  of inclusion and exclusion; of hope and of fear; of progress and of stagnation.
And, informed by a genuine engagement with our history, to move forward with absolute optimism and determination for the future.
In my address to Parliament last year on the national apology, I expressed my belief that a people “must become fully reconciled to their past if they are to go forward with confidence to embrace their future”.
On that occasion, I was dealing with the unfinished business of our reconciliation with the First Australians.
More broadly, I believe the time has now come to move beyond the arid intellectual debates of the history wars and the culture wars of recent years.
Time to leave behind us the polarisation that began to infect every discussion of our nation's past.
To go beyond the so-called “black armband” view that refused to confront some hard truths about our past, as if our forebears were all men and women of absolute nobility, without spot or blemish.
But time, too, to go beyond the view that we should only celebrate the reformers, the renegades and revolutionaries, thus neglecting or even deriding the great stories of our explorers,  of our pioneers, and of our entrepreneurs.
Any truthful reflection of our nation's past is that these are all part of the rich fabric of our remarkable national story.
Too often we underestimate the importance of history in the modern world.
Our history gives us a legitimate sense of being part of a story much bigger than ourselves.
A story that goes beyond our own place and time.
A story when told at its best is capable of liberating us from the arrogance of the present, to recognise with some humility the enormity of the challenges we have faced in the past, and with sober responsibility, the great choices we face for the future.
History is the memory of a nation or a civilisation.
It has been said that a nation without history is like an individual without memory.
Just as it is hard to imagine personality without memory, so too is it hard to imagine national identity without history.
For individuals, memory also informs and shapes behaviour.
And so it does with nations.
The histories they choose to embrace as their collective memory of the past become the foundations upon which they build their futures  -  sometimes consciously, other times not.
For young nations, this is far more important, as our shared memories (with the exception of the First Australians) are recent and often diffuse.
Some say this is why we need a single, official, received narrative of Australian history.
But as a nation and people, we are far too freedom-loving to believe in any singular account of our history.
I do believe, however, that a core chronology of events is essential for understanding our nation's history.
We should all agree that a sequence of events took place  -  and that critical events, people and movements that have shaped our national story.
History can never be only a matter of interpretation.
But it's time we called a truce to the history wars between a straight narrative history that brooks no contradictions, and an extreme relativism that is only about interpretation and not about events, is in fact unsustainable. 
In a liberal democratic society, we can agree that events happened while we agree to differ in how we interpret them.
On this basis, we can all engage in the debates about the complexities of the good, the bad, the ugly and the vast ocean that lies between where most of us all reside.
That's a healthy and democratic approach to our nation's story.
Within this framework, it is also worthwhile confronting the view we sometimes hear that Australian history lacks sufficient colour, movement and drama to command the attention of current generations, let alone to inspire those of the future.
Again, I commend everyone to the pages of this new history by Tom Keneally.
That argument assumes that there are no great histories without revolution, without civil war and rivers of blood shed in pursuit of contested wars for our nation's future.
And that without such traumatic events, history is somehow of a second order.
Like any other Australian nationalist, of course, I'd strongly disagree.
Not just because we've never shirked our international responsibilities to engage in the great conflicts that have shaped so much of the history of the world over the last hundred years.
But also because not every great history is a story of revolution and destruction.
Just as not every great film is necessarily an action movie.
We should never underestimate just how far from ordinary and in fact extraordinary our own national story, Australia's story, is.
Because somehow we  -  this motley collectivity of souls, drawn from all corners of the earth - could in the space of a few generations cause such an extraordinary national experiment to work.
Building a stable and successful democracy, where matters of great contention are resolved at the ballot box and not through the barrel of a gun, making us one of the oldest continuing democracies in the world.
A people that uniquely has crafted a nation for a continent, and a continent for a nation.
A nation that has carved an economy from an inhospitable earth to build one of the most prosperous on earth  -  rich in innovation, rich in enterprise.
A nation that has so often led the world in social progress like rights for women and rights for working people, and building one of the most open, most progressive, least class-based societies in the world.
A nation that from its beginnings has etched within its soul, in fact within its DNA, an almost inalienable sense of fairness - what we call in our own vernacular the ‘fair go'.
A nation that time and again has shown itself open to extraordinary adaptation and change  -  moving in less than a generation from a White Australia Policy to embracing the diversity of the cultures that now contribute to our national identity.
A country and community confident of its place in the region and in the world  -  straddling uniquely the challenges and complexities of our Indigenous antiquity, our European history and our Asian geography.
Our national story is still very much a work in progress.
We're a nation still wrestling with our reconciliation with the First Australians whom we seek to embrace afresh today, as brothers and sisters in our common search for a common future.
The challenges of poverty remain with us.
The challenges of intolerance.
The challenges of the devastation being wrought on our environment.
But by any reasonable measure, the achievements of this Australian nation are of an extraordinary, rather than ordinary nature.
As with so many things, the deepest insights into our own condition are often provided by those outside it.
And from those who come from abroad to make their home with us.
Time and again, they remind us just how remarkably successful this Australian experiment has been.
It is something we should embrace and celebrate more ourselves.
To think that in this couple of centuries, the convicts of England, the cast-offs of Empire, the exiled children of Erin's shore - those whom Churchill reportedly said were of ‘bad stock'  -  coupled with successive generations escaping the hell of holocaust, genocide, famine and war throughout the century past - could build a culture and a nation in an inhospitable land the equal of any in the world.
A democratic, prosperous and compassionate nation, blessed with that winsome wisdom of knowing never to take ourselves too seriously.
So for us today, perhaps it's time also to turn the page.
To embrace a balanced, reflective but positive view of our past that both informs and inspires our future.
I believe we can do this here with a great love of country but without contempt, derision or fear of others.
One does not have to follow from the other.
One is not automatically the obverse of the other.
Perhaps here too we have something unique to offer  -  given the sorry history of xenophobic nationalisms elsewhere.
Instead, with quiet reflection, reasoned celebration, and the respectful engagement of cultures more ancient than our own, ours can be an unrestrained optimism for our Australian future.
A challenging century lies ahead of us.
A century that for the first time in our settled history may not be dominated by one part of the Anglosphere or another.
One which as the century evolves will take us into genuinely uncharted waters in geopolitics, the global economy and technological change.
And one where the existential threat of climate change could change forever the land that gives us life.
These are the great challenges that lie ahead.
But the task of tackling them is made easier if as a people, a culture and a country, we are fortified afresh by the values and stories of our nation from its earliest times.
So Tom, let's hope you can inspire more Australians to indulge with you in what you poetically describe as your historical ‘drinking benders'.
At more than five hundred pages, this is something for binge historians.
For my part, so far I've only had the time for tipple or two.
But before I close and launch this great book, let me quote a little bit of it to you. And that's Tom reflections on the Second Fleet, which I found extraordinarily moving. And those who came out on that Second Fleet, and what was the good ship Neptune, but in fact became the bad ship Neptune.
Tom writes of “two young men aboard the Neptune, who would have a large pace in the story of New South Wales.
“One was a young man with a new rank, and a touch bumptious about it. John Macarthur...a little over twenty years of age, and a Lieutenant in the 1023nd Regiment, the newly created New South Wales Corps, a man of handsome features that must have satisfied the broad streak of narcissism in him. He was a devour duellist, because he was a man of edgy honour”. I like that expression.
The other was: “The other fascinating passenger on board Neptune was a young Irishman, D'Arcy Wentworth, aged about 27, a highwayman-cum-surgeon: a voluntary passenger in one sense; a virtual convict in another.”
...
“Neptune's Captain Trail, a 44-year-old Orkney Island Scot, at one time master of the Captain Bligh, took over command of the vessel from the dismissed Captain Gilbert. The Neptune now held over five hundred people....of the thousand convicts to be shipped. Most of them were housed on the orlop deck, the third deck down, with standing room below the beams of the ceiling only 5 feet 7 inches.”
...
“The convicts slept in four rows of sleeping trays, one row on either side of the ship, and two down the middle.”
...
“In port and for much of the journey, each convict was chained by the wrist or by the ankles, in many cases on Neptune two and two together, and indefinitely so. Trail must have known the impact this would have on cleanliness and health”.
...
“The sanitary arrangements were very primitive- on the orlop deck large tubs were provided to ‘ease nature'. These would be knocked over by accident or carelessness or rough seas. Below decks was thus a damp, under-aired overcrowded misery.”
“Among those who came on board the huge Neptune from the hulk Dunkirk was a lusty young man in his mid twenties, Robert Towers...his health had gone down a little on the damp lower decks of Dunkirk, but on the crowded prison deck of Neptune, where he wore slaver shackles around his ankles and wrists, received short-weighted rations and got insufficient air and exercise, he began to feel really poorly. The Neptune, at anchor and at sea, would ultimately finish him, though it would take seven months until they brought his corpse up to deck and committed him to a distant ocean”. 
As one contemporary account said, “the slave trade is merciful, compared with what I have seen in this fleet; in that it is in the interest of the slave master to preserve the healths and lives of their captives, they having a joint benefit, with the owners. In this fleet, this second fleet, the more they can withhold from the unhappy wretches, the more provisions they have to dispose of in a foreign market; and the earlier in the voyage they die, the longer they the masters can draw the deceased's allowance for themselves...if therefore highly concerns the Government, to lodge in future, a controlling power in each ship over these low-life barbarous masters, to keep them honest”.
That's something of what occurred when people travelled here. My forbear, Thomas Rudd, was on that vessel. And when I reflect upon this extraordinary convict history, and the extraordinary privations they suffered, this tome brings alive this great Australian story, to us all.
So Tom, with those remarks, can I say that we are indeed honoured to be here today to celebrate the launch of this great book. It could be a great contribution to the telling of Australia's national story.
I'm looking forward to the chance to get a really decent read of a lot of it.
And in that spirit, it's my great pleasure to officially launch ‘Australians: Origins to Eureka'.


PM: The last couple of days I've been in Lismore, and in Port Macquarie, up in the northern reaches of New South Wales. These are great centres, with growing communities, and of course, with lots of needs. In Lismore, I spoke at length with the local hospital, Lismore Base Hospital, about their needs for the future.
At Port Macquarie, also, a long session with their doctors, their nurses, their specialists, about where they want to be over the next ten to twenty five years as well. Big growth areas, big population growth, lots of demands, got to sort out some solutions for the long term future. It's also great to be back in Port Macquarie, the first time here as Prime Minister, but I've been here many, many times over the years in one capacity or another. Starting way back when we were through here on a caravan holiday as kids, back in the late 1960's.
Thing have changed a bit since then. It's also the first time that we'll be having a Community Cabinet meeting in Port Macquarie. Looking forward to that, and we're going to have a big rollup from the locals, and lots of time to speak with community organisations about their needs for the future as well.
We are here tonight for one core reason, and that is to listen to what you've got to say to us, and to answer as best the questions you put to us, but also to take on notice things that we can't answer here and there, and  to get back to you within a reasonable timeframe.


The Australian Government today announced that 2010 will be designated ‘Year of the Girl Guide'.
For 100 years the Guiding movement has supported Australian girls to grow into confident and inspiring young women.
The Government acknowledges the invaluable contribution of Girl Guides Australia and will support the centenary through a range of initiatives.  
The Royal Australian Mint will produce a circulating one dollar coin to commemorate the Guides and their centenary year. The Reserve Bank of Australia will determine when the coin enters circulation.
Australia Post will issue three stamps, one domestic and two international, in September 2010.
The Government will provide $600,000 to help Girl Guides Australia celebrate the centenary year. This funding will support:
     * Girl Guides Centenary Launch, Brisbane, 4-6 September 2009.
     * Helping girls and young women from disadvantaged backgrounds participate in the launch.
     * Go Girl, a series of workshops about obesity. 
     * World Environment Day activities that will help Guides work out their “Carbon Footprint” along with how to reduce carbon emissions.
     * Australian Service Challenge, a disability focused service-wide project to help Guides understand what it means to have a disability. 
The Government's announcements will not only benefit the Guiding movement but Australia as a whole.
The Guiding movement reaches out to thousands of Australian girls and young women each year and encourages them to actively involve themselves in matters of national and global concern. 
From humble beginnings 100 years ago, the Girl Guides have grown into the largest worldwide voluntary organisation for girls and young women with an estimated 10 million members worldwide.
Over one million Australian women have been or are still Guides.
The motto for the centenary year is "Let's celebrate our past, live the present and power into the future”. 
The program of activities planned by Girl Guides Australia will put this motto into practice and the Government is proud to be able to help.
The Centenary of Guiding will be celebrated around the world and celebrations in Australia will begin with the official launch from 4 to 6 September 2009 at Kindilan, Redland Bay, Queensland.



PM:                 It's good to be back in Perth, since I've been Prime Minister I've been here many, many times. This is the first time I've been here for a detailed consultation on the future of the health and hospital system. And this is important for us because we're in the business of road testing the recommendations of the health reform commission conclusions on the future direction of our system nationwide.
The Minister and I and other have conducted a number of consultations in many other States around Australia. It's time that we actually heard from what is one of the busiest hospitals in the country, Sir Charles Gairdner, but also more broadly from the health care community across Perth.
Secondly we are also today releasing this document, Building a 21st Century Primary Health Care System and I would thank all those who have been associated with the construction of this document because this is one of the key building blocks for the future - making sure that we are properly supporting GPs and GP related services to take pressure off our hospitals and make health services more accessible for working families and the community.
Of course this document has been long in the preparation and it deals with the challenges of our ageing population, rising rates of chronic diseases and the need to deal with the particular health needs in rural, remote and Indigenous communities as well and the Minister will go, in a minute, to some of these specific recommendations.
The other point I would make is today, I note also we have here the Member for Fremantle, is the absolute importance of making sure that we are, right now, still rolling out extended and expanded GP services for local communities that's why we are pleased to announce today $6.65 million funding to deliver a new GP super clinic at Cockburn. 
Cockburn's a growing area and the services to be provided at the new Cockburn GP Super Clinic will focus on young families including childhood and adolescence community health and pre-natal care, post/ past midwifery and shared care services.
The clinic will also offer extended hours of service, a pharmacy and integrated chronic disease management. This is important not just for the community represented by Melissa but as we roll out 35 of these nationwide, for similar communities around the country to make sure that mums and dads with kids who get crook in the middle of the night, the have somewhere they can go, other than having to present at accident and emergency where, as you all know, the wait list can be very long and can often be very distressing. And can also create other problems for those in need of acute care at accident and emergency.
Could I also make a point on another matter, the election today, or over the course of the weekend of the new government in Japan and I'd like to very much pass on my congratulations to Mr Hatoyama, the Prime Minster-elect of Japan. Australia and Japan have a strong and close relationship which goes back a long, long time.
Japan remains Australia's largest export market. We have had close relations with Japan in foreign policy terms, in trade terms, in investment terms and also in people to people links going back many, many decades. And on behalf of the Australian Government I wish Mr Hatoyama and the Democratic Party of Japan well for the future.
I look forward to expanding our relationship with Japan in what is a most significant development in Japanese domestic politics. (Inaudible) Later today I will be telephoning Mr Hatoyama to discuss with him our relationship, to pass on my personal congratulations to him over his party's victory and to explore new areas of cooperation between ourselves and Japan in the period ahead. Over to you folks, oh no, first of all to Nicola on the primary health care report.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you, look I would just like to add a couple of comments and of course our particular thanks for Doctor Tony (inaudible) today who chaired the external reference group, our expert group in the development in this primary care strategy. Its five weeks today since we released the Dr. Bennett's health reform commission report and that report makes very clear that primary health care is indeed the foundation stone of the health system and makes some detailed recommendations about how we might support and enhance the role of primary care in our health system.
The report we're releasing today now goes into more detail about how we might be able to do that from providing better access to families, e-health investments, making sure we have our infrastructure strategy right and supporting the workforce particularly new roles for the health workforce in enhancing the relationship between GPs, allied health professionals and nurses. So this is a very important further addition to our health reform discussion.
The release of the report today means that when people visit the yourhealth.gov.au website that they'll also be able to download this next level of detail on our primary care strategy and we very much invite contributions and thoughts from the community, from health professionals and from doctors about whether they think these recommendations meet their needs, how they might be able to be enhanced and to ensure that when we continue, as the Prime Minister and I and Minister Snowdon will do to consult across the country, that this level of detail is also available for people to give us their ideas on it.
PM:                 And just as I take your questions, getting the health and hospital system right for the 21st century is important for West Australia, it's important for Australia and I was elected to be Prime Minister for the whole country, getting health and hospitals right for the future is fundamental to that. That's why we're here in Perth today, to do as much as we can to get those policy settings right for the future. Over to you folks:
JOURNALIST:           How many GPs will there be? Where will they come from and will they bulk bill?
|
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much. The proposal that's been supported was put forward by the Fremantle division of GPs. They've identified this as a particular need. They have put forward a proposal which will have a number of GPs, they're not required to give us the specific number and of course we would expect that over that time it will grow. As with all our other GP super clinics we are trying to ensure that we are funding infrastructure to develop a best practice GP super clinic so that they become a place of choice for new young graduates. 
In the coming two years Western Australia will have its number of medical graduates double, and of course we need to make sure there are training settings for them, not just in our hospitals, but also in the community. And I am very confident that this and the other two GP super clinics will in fact have a bit of a honey pot effect. That young graduating doctors who want to be in general practice can choose to go and work at these clinics. I'm not sure if Melissa wants to add anything more about the local divisions but we are very comfortable that this is an area of workforce shortage.
We're supporting super clinics in areas where we need to be able to attract new doctors and the division of GPs is very comfortable that they are going to be able to source these new GPs and of course train up the next generation of GPs so that we have a health and medical community in a new community like Cockburn where there is going to be growing need. So it's about getting in when there's a right window of opportunity to do that.
JOURNALIST:           What about bulk billing?
MINISTER ROXON: They have not committed to bulk billing for all services but they have, as I understand it committed that they will bulk bill the majority of their services. I'll have to separately give you, chase up the details for you on that. It's been different in each application and we've been satisfied that an emphasis on bulk billing will deliver better access to the local community.
JOURNALIST:            (inaudible).
PM:                 Look, State Governments, whatever their political persuasion have been under pressure for many, many years because the previous Federal Government actually pulled out a billion dollars worth of funding from the public hospital system. Who had to pay for that? The States, whatever their political complexion. So many of the States, Liberal or Labor are struggling to with making ends meet. What we have sought to do is put our best step forward with the Australian health care agreement which the Minister negotiated with the States and Territories at the end of last year, and that is a 50 percent increase in funding for the future and this of course is about other long term reforms. So I won't make a specific comment about the challenges which they are currently experiencing in funding the State health care budget. 
What I can say more generally is that part of the reason for being here in the West is just to road test these recommendations about where people in the health and hospital community here want the system to go for the long term. Should we have the Australian Government assume full funding responsibility for out of hospital services? Should we move to a second stage reform whereby, over a period of time the Commonwealth assumes full funding responsibility for health and hospital services, including hospitals. These are what we're road testing here at the moment. I think the mood of the Australian public is, they want to have a debate, they want to have a discussion, they want us to, in a systematic way, land at the right decision for the future and we'll try and work these thing through as collaboratively as we can with the State and Territory Governments.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, given the leaking of the Henry documents on the stimulus package (inaudible)?
PM:                 Can I say on the economy, stand back from it all. This Australian economy, as of the end of the first quarter this year, was the fastest growing economy in the OECD, the fastest therefore, the Australian economy is the fastest growing developed economy in the world. It's the second-lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies. The lowest debt, the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies, and the only one so far not to have entered into technical recession. That's where we've got so far.
Secondly, we're not out of the woods yet, which is why the Australian Government is committed to the implementation of the national stimulus strategy that we embarked upon, in all of its, three phases. And that is, make sure that those cash payments were out to families and for the roll out of infrastructure, medium and long term, is occurring. Here in the West, we're currently supporting a very large-scale investment in the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen.
Primary Schools right across Western Australia are becoming building sites as we make sure that we're making a difference. So the question is to implement that, because it's so much, it's been so important to underpin growth. And if you're underpinning growth, you're underpinning jobs. Now, I notice Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey are out today saying that we have to rollback the stimulus. What Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey are saying is, rollback the stimulus and increase unemployment. That's what happens.
Our attitude is, implement the stimulus, particularly for infrastructure to make sure that we're building for the future, and providing jobs for today. That's the Government's strategy. Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey are saying, rollback the stimulus, increase unemployment and pull the rug from underneath the economic recovery. That's the wrong way to go.
JOURNALIST:           Will there be another one Mr Rudd? Will there be another one?
PM:                 We believe we've got our policy settings right based on the information that we have to hand. And that is to implement the clear, three-stage stimulus strategy that we articulated quite some time ago. The difference between acting on stimulus as we have done and not acting is huge in terms of growth, the economy, and jobs. Had Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey had their way, and depending on which day's statements you happen to believe, what would've happened is that you would've had the Australian economy go into recession. And you would've had large-scale, additional unemployment.
This Government was not about to do that. And we believe that we've got the balance of our strategy right for the future. All the international agencies, including the International Monetary Fund, are very clear on the fact that the global economy, and the Australian economy, are not out of the woods yet. If you look at some of the difficulties which still exist within the US economy, some of the difficulties which still exist within the European economies, which together represent such a huge slice of global growth. What the international economic agencies are saying is that all G20 economies to continue to implement the stimulus strategies to which all of them have committed.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to release Treasury minutes in the future?
PM:                 Look, on the question of the impact of the stimulus strategy-
JOURNALIST:           (inaudible) the release of the minutes.
PM:                 On the question of the stimulus strategy and its effect on the real economy, I can tell you that there will be a rolling debate in the community of the type that we've just encountered with Mr Hockey and Mr Turnbull's comment today about whether it's good, bad, or indifferent.
The Government's been absolutely clear-cut about our strategy, three stages of stimulus to underpin growth and jobs, we own responsibility for that, we're the only economy so far of the major advanced economies not to have gone into recession. We believe we're on the right approach. Will there be a rolling debate about whether this is good, bad, or indifferent? Of course there will. But given the information that we've had to hand, including from our Treasury advisers, this was the responsible course of action to embrace, as Australia confronted (interruption)
This was the responsible course of action to embrace, given the fact that Australia was looking at, as other economies have been looking at, the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression of the 1920s and 30s.
JOURNALIST:            (inaudible)
PM:                 I can just say that the Government's strategy is absolutely clear-cut. And based on the debate today, what I can say to you is that the Opposition is not, other than to argue that we should rollback the stimulus strategy, pull the rug from under the recovery, and increase unemployment. That is not the Government's approach.
JOURNALIST:           Who authorised the release of the minutes?
PM:                 In terms of the Treasury documents and the extent to which they had been released or not released, that's a question that's more appropriately addressed to the Treasurer.
JOURNALIST:           Mr Rudd, you've labelled the oil spill as appalling, do you think the Federal Government's response was adequate?
PM:                 Well as I said on radio on Perth here today, it is an appalling incident. What are the three sets of things that you can do? Use dispersants as effectively as you can. Based on the advice that I've received in terms of the deployment of aircraft, as well as of other assets, it has been a significant effort. On the second part, which is how do you ensure that an additional well is provided at the earliest opportunity, this is a complex technical debate, whether technicians will rage in one direction or another.
The Australian Government is acting on the advice, acting on the basis of the advice that it's received. And thirdly, on the question of making sure that all the facts are put on the table on this, the relevant Federal Government authority has an investigation underway. This is an appalling incident, we've got to get to the absolute bottom of how it happened, but the immediate challenge is to deal with the practical consequences.
JOURNALIST:                       (inaudible)
PM:                 On the details of all that, I haven't looked at the specific travel arrangements which have been put in place. But can I say, the Minister for Resources, Martin Ferguson, based on my advice was flying, flew over the site last Friday, he in turn has provided further briefings to Government officials, and this is something that we will continue to need to monitor. And as I said, here on Perth radio this morning, any further action that is necessary based on technical advice to the Government that needs to be taken, then we, the Government, will take. And we'll work closely in coordination with all the relevant agencies.
You're from a local paper, you wanted to ask something before, you've been badgering a couple of times now, and I've said come to the press conference, you're here at the press conference, so if I can't answer your local question, understand why I can't. But go on.
JOURNALIST:           (inaudible) how can you  make a multi storey car park more sexy than a cancer centre?
PM:                 Well, that's a question I haven't been confronted with yet, but it's actually a real question that goes to how you provide maximum access to a very important hospital. For staff, for patients, and with maximum amenity of the local suburbs as well. We are not in the business of dictating local planning decisions by individual hospitals or local authorities about what is permissible or impermissible in terms of parking arrangements.
What we can, however, as a Federal Government do, is become larger partners with the health and hospital communities around the country in their long-term planning and funding needs. If there is one strategic message I have in terms of what we're trying to do here in Perth, and through this visit to Sir Charles Gairdner, is here is the diagnosis of the problems with the system, but when it comes to landing the solutions, they will have a price tag attached.
If our hospital and health care system is to be properly funded in the future, it has to address the breadth of needs within the health and hospital system, then local decisions including planning decisions have to be made. To conclude where I began in the presentation earlier today, none of the reforms outlined by the Australian Government of the future and the health and hospital don't come for free. They were all expensive. I gave you some indicative figures in the presentation before. These are multi-billion dollar reforms. And therefore that goes to the question of the extent to which the Australian community, and the WA community, which is made up of taxpayers, just as much as any other state in the country, would be willing to pay for those reforms long-term as well.  Money doesn't simply grow on trees. And having said that, I've got to zip.


The Rudd Government today announced $6.65 million funding to deliver a new GP Super Clinic at Cockburn.
The new GP Super Clinic will deliver better health services, take pressure off local hospitals, and make sure families can get the health care they need.
Cockburn is a growing area, and services provided at the new Cockburn GP Super Clinic will focus on young families, including:
     * childhood and adolescent community health
     * antenatal care
     * post-partum midwifery and shared care services
The clinic will also offer extended hours of service, a pharmacy, and integrated chronic disease management.
In addition, the GP Super Clinic will provide training and education for medical, nursing and allied health students, as well as connections to universities for primary care research. 
GP Super Clinics are a Rudd Government initiative to improve access to quality health care in our community.   
They are a significant investment in taking pressure off our hospitals. 
The National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's final report recommended that the Government improve access to comprehensive and multidisciplinary primary health care services in a single community location  -  which the Government's GP Super Clinics deliver. 
The Government has now signed contracts for 25 GP Super Clinics and construction is underway at eight sites. 
$275 million has been allocated to establish GP Super Clinics in communities around the nation, and the new GP Super Clinic announced today brings the total number of clinics funded by the Government to 35. 


The Rudd Government today released the draft of Australia's first National Primary Health Care Strategy. 
The Primary Care Strategy focuses on what Government can do to improve the frontline health care that Australians depend on, including the care delivered by GPs and other frontline health professionals like physiotherapists, psychologists and pharmacists. 
Australia's health system is facing a number of key challenges including: 
     * an ageing population
     * rising rates of chronic disease
     * the need to address the health needs of rural, remote and Indigenous communities.
The Strategy has a strong focus on meeting these key challenges of the future. 
The strategy reinforces and builds on the work of the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission - providing the next level of detail that sits below the Commission's broad priorities. 
It provides us with a draft roadmap to guide future policy and practice in primary care in Australia, ensuring we are building a system that cares for the most vulnerable in our community and a system that is connected with the patient at the centre. 
The Government is determined to get health reform right.
Stakeholder input has been crucial in developing the draft strategy, with more than 260 submissions received in response to the discussion paper. 
Following the recent release of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's landmark report the Government has begun a national conversation on health reform with the Australian people. 
Today's consultation at Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital in Perth is the tenth consultation held by the Government. Over 20,000 hits have been received on the Government's yourhealth.gov.au website  -  around 600 per day since the site was launched. 
The three most popular topics explored on the site to date are hospitals and emergency departments, e-health, and primary care/general practice. 
The release of the draft strategy today will further inform that discussion. 
Development of the draft strategy has been assisted by an External Reference Group (ERG) with membership comprising primary health care experts from around Australia, including a pharmacist, a midwife, a physiotherapist, a psychologist, a general practice nurse, a consumer representative, primary care academics and strong representation from general practice, including those with Indigenous, rural and remote experience. 
The Government thanks Dr Tony Hobbs, who chaired the ERG, and all members of the group who gave so generously of their time, experience and knowledge to inform the development of the draft strategy and its supporting report. 


HOST: Kevin Rudd is in Perth for the next three days. He joins us on the program this morning. Mr Rudd, thanks for your time.
PM: Good morning, Simon. Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST:Mr Rudd, I wanted to ask you about this gas and oil condensate slick off our Northern coast. The stories running around this morning are that it's now 3,000 square kilometres in size, in area. Can the Federal Government do more to assist with the clean up, or to assist with trying to get the gas leak turned off?
PM: The Federal Resources Minister, Martin Ferguson, in fact as I'm advised, flew over the site last Friday. There are a number of things under way. First, of course, your listeners will be aware of the use of dispersants, both from the air and from the sea, targeted at the oil patches concerned. Secondly, the company, of course, is making various arrangements to drill a relief well. Thirdly, in terms of the investigation and causes, there is of course a National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority investigation underway.
In terms of the location, as I understand it the nearest point to the Australian coast is in excess of about 148km off the coast, and as I'm advised, the area is some 25 nautical miles by 70 nautical miles, and within that area there's about 25 percent oil coverage. The Government is following this exceptionally closely. It's appalling that this has occurred, but we are working to deal with the situation as it unfolds.
HOST: Are you concerned that it could be six weeks before the leak is even stopped? That's an optimistic estimate. It may be sometime longer than that. Is it worthwhile deploying some extra resources or taking extra measures?
PM: We will take whatever additional measures are necessary based on the technical advice to deal with this appalling incident, and we are therefore waiting for any further recommendations from the Minister and his Department, working, of course, with other relevant authorities, but I would say that anything additional that can be done, both in terms of dealing with the slick that has occurred, dealing with the relief well and associated matters, we will take any further measures as are necessary.
HOST: I guess the problem with it, Mr Rudd, is that the company has to provide a lot of the information on this, and they are the cause of the spill. They are hardly likely to 'fess up to Mr Ferguson or to you or to the Department. We need some help here, because it doesn't reflect well on them.
PM: No, I therefore draw your attention to the fact that we do have the National Offshore Petroleum Safety Authority investigating the matter now. Therefore, absolute transparency will be required on the part of the company to the regulators. Otherwise, the company would not be being consistent with Australian legal and regulatory requirements.
We will therefore be taking every necessary measure in response to appropriate and considered technical advice to deal with what I agree with you is an appalling incident.
HOST: Mr Rudd, did you see the story on Channel Seven with regard to Schapelle Corby's state of mind? Did you see the story from the psychiatrist that she may be insane, and if you did see it, would you consider that she should be brought back to Australia for treatment?
PM: First of all, no, I did not, but secondly, when it comes to Schapelle Corby or any one of the other hundreds of Australians who are currently imprisoned abroad, either in Indonesia or in other countries, the responsibility of the Australian Government to look after each and every one of their well being to greatest extent that we can, and that means provision of consular support where we can provide it, other forms of support where we can do so, and where it's practically or physically possible, interstate or international prisoner transfer.
The practical problem on the latter score is, firstly, no prisoner transfer agreement exists between Australia and Indonesia, and I'm advised that none exist between Indonesia and any other country. Negotiations are underway.
And, of course, the second question is if and when we succeed in concluding those negotiations, which would be a world first for Indonesia, whether Schapelle Corby would be consistent with Indonesian Government determinations.
HOST: Is she getting the best possible care in Indonesia, Mr Rudd, in terms of mental health?
PM: Well, in terms of the conditions within prison systems around the world, and again I draw your listeners' attention to the fact that hundreds of Australians are currently in prisons which are of different standards to Australian prisons right around the world, we take our consular responsibilities seriously, which, in this case, through the Consulate-General in Bali, to provide her with every possible level of consular support. Obviously this is a very difficult time, as it is for any other Australian who is put in prisons abroad.
HOST: Her sentence is long, though. Hers is a special case, wouldn't we agree, 20 years, and a celebrated case, a case that most Australians would be aware of. Did anybody from the Federal Government at least ask the question, after the interview was aired, as to whether some additional support could be forthcoming for her?
PM:With or without any press attention, I just again emphasize the fact that despite the fact that the cases of hundreds of other Australians who are imprisoned abroad may not make it into the Australian media, our job is to provide maximum support for all of them, whether they make it into the Australian media or not.
Secondly, in the case of not just Ms Corby, but other Australians who are currently incarcerated in Indonesia, our job also is to look at the practicalities of such things as an international prisoner transfer agreement between Australia and Indonesia that has not existed in the past and therefore, on the practicalities of the application of such an agreement to Ms Corby, we've got to get all that right first.
In terms of support within the prison where she is, as I've said, I have every confidence that our Consulate-General is doing everything physically possible to support her and other prisoners in what is obviously a very, very difficult time.
HOST: OK, but after the interview was aired, from someone who's been described as a leading psychiatrists in Australia, no questions were asked as to her welfare and the treatment she was receiving?
PM: Simon, I do not have the formal detail or the chronology of when Australian officials spoke with Indonesian officials  or those of the prison in Bali, and when they may have occurred and what the content of it may have been. What I can say is that we take her wellbeing and the wellbeing of every one of the other Australians in prison overseas in Indonesia and other countries seriously, and we provide whatever level of support we can, and can I say on any given day our officials around the world are engaged in similar visits, similar support exercises, similar representations to authorities, in countries right around the world.
HOST: Mr Rudd, next time I go to vote in a federal election, down at my local school, there could be a plaque or a sign on the ground that says 'new extensions provided by Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard and the Labor Party'. You wouldn't be the first political party to do that, let's be clear about that, but there's some concerns that this new signage may breach electoral laws.
PM: Well, first of all, no signage, under those circumstances, should under any circumstances, should refer to people like myself or the Deputy Prime Minister by name, that's the first thing. The second is, your right to point out that long-standing previous practice, including under the previous Coalition Government, has been to display appropriate signs which underpin the origin of the funding for the particular project.
But on the question you raised specifically about Australia's electoral laws, the Government will always act in response to the provisions of the Australian Electoral Act and the Australian Electoral Commission, and will do so in the future as well.
HOST: So you'll wait for a ruling on that?
PM: That's the right thing to do, but remember, as you rightly point out, the Government's not Robinson Crusoe on this one, and that is, taxpayers have a legitimate expectation to know how their taxes are being used, for which particular project, but that also has to be done in a manner which is absolutely compatible with Australian electoral law and the advice of the Australian Electoral Commission, and we will be entirely attentive to whatever that advice may be.
HOST: Mr Rudd, prior to the last election, and I think since, it's well known that you were pretty gung-ho on carbon emissions. You'd like to see Australia lead the way or set an example in terms of reducing carbon emissions. Are you satisfied that the Gorgon project off our North-West coast will safely store carbon dioxide?
PM: Well, as you know, one of the conditions that we've attached to the Gorgon Project, which as you point out is of massive economic consequence for Western Australia, and massive economic significance for the whole of Australia - $50 billion over the next 20 years - one of the conditions we've attached is carbon sequestration.
And therefore, the technical advice is that given the geography and the geomorphology of the area, the most appropriate place to sequester this, or put it under ground, is in and around Barrow Island. And therefore, what the Western Australian Government and the Australian Government have done together is provide an appropriate underpinning indemnification for that process.
Carbon capture and storage more generally, you'll be familiar with this Simon, is of general importance to the Australian economy because we are the world's largest coal exporting country. We are rich, of course, in natural gas. Therefore, the success of this technology worldwide is of fundamental importance to the future of the Australian resources sector.
That's one of the reasons why the Australian Government has launched a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, which I launched jointly with President Obama in Italy last month, in July, but also why the Australian Government itself is investing $2.5 billion with industry to make sure these projects work, because the future, long-term future, of major resource projects in the coal and the LNG sector are fundamentally dependent on how the technology is rolled out, not just here, but worldwide.
HOST: Mr Rudd, I know that your credentials in this area, your push on carbon capture and reducing carbon emissions are well publicised and published, but why wasn't this carbon storage, this carbon capture, covered as part of the environmental planning process? I spoke to Mr Garrett when he signed off on the deal last week. He freely admitted that it's a deal between the State and the Federal Government in terms of indemnification as you just said, but it wasn't covered off during the environmental approval process. Why not?
PM:Well the provisions of the EPBC Act, the Environmental Protection of Biodiversity Act, the requirement under Australian law has been dealt with appropriately by the Environment Minister, Peter Garrett. And there's a whole series of internal, shall I say cooperative arrangements which occur within that Act between the WA and Australian governments for environmental protection.
I'm confident that the Minister has, and his State counterpart, properly discharged their responsibilities. When it comes to CCS, let's be frank about the fact - we are at the edge worldwide, at least of at-scale projects, of rolling these out.
They are challenging, new technologies. We'll be up front about that. They've been done for some time, as I'm advised, in various parts of the North Sea. I've had discussions about that with the Norwegian Prime Minister, Jens Stoltenberg. They've been done in one or two other projects at-scale around the world when it comes to gas.
But we have to move forward in this new area. As I said, the future viability and employment and economic and jobs consequences of large-scale resource projects, where states like Queensland, Western Australia, and prospectively South Australia have such key interests, we've got to get this right.
So the Ministers have done the right thing within the purview of their current Acts. I believe the two Governments, the Australian and WA governments, have done the right thing, in terms of the indemnification necessary concerning this new technology as well.
HOST: PM, when was the last time you purchased a book in Australia, and how much did you pay for it?
PM: You know something, Simon? I buy books about every weekend. What would be my last purchase price? I've got no idea, probably $29 or $39 - the usual sort of $9.95 at the end of it. What was it? I'm currently reading a book which was authored by a guy called John Keane, it's a biography of a fellow called Thomas Paine. I think I bought it in Abbey's bookstore in Sydney, but I stand to be corrected. I could have bought it in Canberra.
HOST: Do we pay too much for them in Australia? This business of the lifting of the importation duties on them, do we pay too much for books in Australia? What's your personal view?
PM: Nice try, Simon. I'm going to work my way through this one systematically. We've thrown this out to the Productivity Commission to provide us with a report on it. It's come back with its report. I have not had a chance to go through it yet. There have been a lot of other things on the Government's agenda.
We'll take this in our normal, measured way, work through the arguments for and against and come up with the right decision. But I've got to say to you, I have not put my mind across all the arguments on this one yet, and it's entirely normal that people in the Australian community are going to have different views, conflicting views, some overlapping views on this, but we'll get it as right as we can.
HOST: Alright. They do seem expensive on occasion, but there's always second-hand bookshops and borrowing one, I suppose.
PM: Well, there's interests here to work out, which is the cost to individuals buying books on the one hand, and the future of the Australian publishing industry on the other, Australia's long-term cultural interests. These are all factors which go into the mix. We've got to be mature enough to say that all these factors are involved, and not sort of turn a blind eye to any part of them when we work our way through a decision. So I actually welcome the debate, I think it's the right thing to do.
HOST: Mr Rudd, does Malcolm Turnbull have narcissistic personality disorder, as described by one of your colleagues?
PM: You know, Simon, I'm in Western Australia. I'm here for my 11th time as Prime Minister. I've got a lot on my plate. I'm going out to announce a new GP super clinic for the City of Cockburn today. I'm conducting a public consultation with Charles Gairdner Hospital today, and that's on the future of the health and hospital reform plan for the nation. Talking to the resources industry tomorrow. I've got plenty on my plate. I'll let the Liberal Party, shall I say, provide appropriate commentary on themselves by themselves. I don't think they need any assistance from me.
HOST: Alright, I'm not actually sure what it is. I might have it myself. I don't know. PM, finally-
PM: It's a horse at Randwick, isn't it?
HOST: Yeah. The AFL, the footy finals are upon us. Who are you getting on - not necessarily betting on, but who does your heart say we will the AFL Grand Final?
PM: Well, as you know I'm a Brisbane Lions man - and could there be any other possible outcome? - but going into how things are currently shaping up, I've been looking at the Saints' form. Of course, they've had a few challenges of late. But in terms of who's going to make it to the Grand Final - anyone's pick just at this stage. But I think it's going to be exciting for everybody, exciting for everybody. It's a wonderful thing.
My big problem, by the way, is that the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh hosted by President Obama, which Australia is a member of, is convened up until late Friday, and with the best will in the world, I won't be flying back and being in Melbourne, here in Australia, for it.
HOST: That is un-Australian isn't it? Holding the G20 the day before, up until the Grand Final?
PM: Well, I did mention this to the White House. You know - had they heard of the AFL Grand Final? Couldn't they shift it, as an element of the global timetable to meet the AFL. It met with a fairly, sort of, stunned silence.
HOST: Mr Obama doesn't care about the Brisbane Lions either, I suspect?
PM: Well I think if you were to put the Superbowl on that day, maybe they'd have a different view.
HOST: Yeah, I think they would. Mr Rudd, thanks for talking to us today, and thanks for talking to the listeners. We do appreciate your time.
PM: Simon, it's good to be back in Perth. Thank you.


PM: Well, we're out here on Barrow Island, which is off the WA coast, about 70 or 80 kilometres off, and with some of the workers here who are going to be putting together a $50 billion project for Australia. It'll be done by next Thursday, won't it fellas
May taker a little longer than that, but it's been to chat with some of the folk who are benefitting from Chevron's big investment here, and the other companies as well.
More importantly for Australia, huge addition to jobs nation wide - 10,000 direct and indirect jobs, good stuff for the future, and they don't serve a bad lunch either.


The Prime Minister announced on Barrow Island today that the Joint Authority has offered a total of five production licences to the Gorgon Joint Venture Partners for the Gorgon and Io/Jansz gas fields.
The Joint Authority  -  Federal Minister for Resources, Energy and Tourism, Martin Ferguson, and Western Australian Minister for Mines and Petroleum, Norman Moore  -  has also offered to renew seven retention leases over other gas fields in the Greater Gorgon area.
These fields will be developed sequentially to maintain production and extend the economic life of the project.
They will also be used to increase the supply of domestic gas into the Western Australian market, providing greater competition.
The Joint Authority has placed conditions on some of the retention leases to ensure that timely development is forthcoming.
In particular, the Joint Authority will require a mid-term commerciality review of the West Tryal Rocks gas field in two years time.
The offer of the five production licences and seven retention leases is a further critical milestone in enabling the Gorgon Joint Venture to reach a final investment decision for the entire project.
These titles provide security of tenure over Greater Gorgon gas resources to provide the property rights Chevron, ExxonMobil and Shell need to sign off on Australia's biggest single investment  -  the $50 billion Gorgon LNG project.
The Greater Gorgon area has about 40 trillion cubic feet of gas  -  enough to underpin the project for more than 30 years.
With last week's final environmental approvals, the joint acceptance with the Western Australian Government of any long-term liability associated with CO2 storage, and this week's offer of titles, both the Australian Government and the Western Australian Government have now cleared the way for the final investment decision to be made.
This project will generate enormous wealth for Australia through LNG exports worth around $300 billion over the next 20 years.
It will provide jobs for 6,000 workers at the peak of construction and inject $33 billion into the economy over the next few years through the purchase of Australian goods and services.
The project will also generate about $40 billion in revenue that will fund schools, hospitals, roads and infrastructure for the state and the nation for decades to come.
Gorgon will also deliver at least 150 TJ/day of domestic gas into the Western Australian market by no later than 2015, increasing competition and easing supply side issues for Western Australian industry and households.  


PM: I'll begin by saying just how delighted I am that we now have reports that Tim Holding has been found alive and well. This is fantastic news. Our hearts have been in our mouths as we've waited for news this last couple of days. It's been an extraordinary toll on his family, and his friends, his partner, and this is just wonderful news.
I don't have the full details yet as to how he's been found or who has contributed to this, but can I just say on behalf of all of us how thankful we are to the rescuers who've been out there for the last two days finding Tim. And I am so pleased that he's going to be returned to us. So congratulations to the rescuers, and it's going to be fantastic to see Tim back in harness very soon.
We're happy today to be out here on Barrow Island, Mark Arbib, the Employment Minister and myself, and of course Roy here from Chevron, and also with the other joint venture partners as well. This is a huge project for Australia. This is a huge project for Western Australia. Gorgon represents a massive injection out into the Australian economy, which means jobs, which means growth, which means new opportunities for Australia.
When it comes to the Australian Government's involvement in this, there've been three sets of measures that we've had to be associated with in particular. One was our decision, with the West Australian Government, to commit to the joint indemnification for the CO2 sequestration process. Second has been the finalisation of the necessary environmental assessments by the Environment Minister. And the third has been the issuing of the necessary production licences and other leases which are necessary for the project to proceed.
As you know, some time ago, the WA Government and the Australian Government reached agreement on indemnification of the project. That part is done. The second, which goes to the environmental assessments, Minister Garrett has already made his determination. The third, which is the issuing of the relevant production licences and other leases has been the remaining piece of work for us to do.
I'm pleased to announce today that Governments have decided to offer to the Gorgon joint venture partners both retention leases and licences for this project to proceed. So today, confirming our decision as Governments to offer to the joint venture partners these critical leases for this project to become a reality.
This is, therefore, an important milestone in bringing this project into reality. As I've been taken around the site today by our friends from Chevron, and also in discussions with the other joint venture partners, Exxon and Shell, it's quite plain that this is a massive project. It's not just the offshore drilling, it's the piping onshore, it's the CO2 sequestration, it's the LNG plant, and of course it's the export facility as well - a massive, $50 billion project, and one with the potential to realise for Australia, over time, some $300 billion worth of exports. This is huge, by any measure, and therefore, this is a good day. This is another good day for the Australian economy, for the building of jobs, and for the long-term development of Australia's resource and energy sector.
The second thing I'd like to say, and I'll ask the Employment Minister Mark Arbib to add to this in a minute, is that, not only today are we offering licences for this project to proceed, this $50 billion project to proceed, we're also indicating a course of action we intend to embark on to plan properly the needs for employment and skilled employment on this and related resource projects. If you add them together, the resource projects across Australia which have currently been approved or are in the pipeline add up to a massive demand for skilled labour in the period ahead. It's critical that Australia learns from the experience of the last decade or so, when a failure to plan for infrastructure and skills in fact contributed to inflationary pressures in the economy.
The Reserve Bank, for example, issued some 20 separate warnings on the need to take action in this critical area. Therefore, what the Australian Government has decided to do is to create a Major Project Employment Coordinator, and also, what we'll be doing, is creating a National Resource Sector Employment Taskforce. This will not just be relevant to the needs as they emerge for this massive project at Gorgon, but for related resource projects across WA, across Queensland, and across the rest of the country.
We have to learn from some of the mistakes made in the past, we have to work together to productively plan for the skilled workforce that will be needed for this project, and for those like it. Here at Gorgon alone, I'm advised that the total number of construction jobs will be something in the order of 6,000 - am I right? 6-10,000. It grows by the day. Therefore, add that together with other massive resource projects, we have a huge challenge on our hands.
So in summary, this is a good day for the Australian economy, it's a good day for the Western Australian economy, as we offer the joint venture partners these leases to get this $50 billion project going for Australia.
I might ask the Employment Minister now to add to how these entities will operate.
MINISTER ARBIB: Thanks Prime Minister, and thank you to Ron and Chevron for the opportunity to be here, because it's hard to fully understand how big a project this is and the effect it's going to have on employment and unemployment until you actually come out here. So for me, it's been eye-opening. The Prime Minister has talked about establishing a National Resource Taskforce, which is definitely needed. When you look across the country, there is something like 80 projects, 80 major projects in the natural resource sector which we need to plan for for the future - up to something like 70,000 jobs across the country. 60% of those jobs right here in Western Australia.
That is going to take a great deal of time, a great deal of preparation, and we're going to need a plan to deal with it, and that's what this Taskforce will do - help coordinate between the providers, between industry, between training, between the State Government, the Federal Government, to ensure that we're meeting the skills requirement, and also the labour requirements of projects like this at Gorgon. Also, because there's a great deal of detailed preparation work, we're also putting in place a Major Projects Coordinator, someone who can get on the ground, work with the company, work with companies across the country, and ensure that the Government, industry, plus training providers are meeting the needs of the projects.
It's extremely useful, it's extremely necessary, and it's going to allow us to deal with capacity shortages that may come our way in the next couple of years. So it's a good day, as the Prime Minister said, and I'm happy to be here.
PM: Roy, would you like to add?
KRZYWOSINSKI: Yes, thank you. I think the first thing I'd like to do is just express my appreciation to Prime Minister Rudd, and to Minister Arbib, for taking time out of their busy schedule to come visit us on Barrow Island, and see first-hand what we have to offer here at Barrow-
PM: And to wear colourful shirts.
KRZYWOSINSKI: And to wear colourful shirts. Not only in terms of what Barrow Island has to offer, but in terms of learning a little bit more about the Gorgon project. And one of the things that we're quite proud of here at Chevron, as well as our partners, is the fact that we've been on Barrow Island for 40 years, and you had a chance today to see how an oilfield actually operates. It's been operating for over 40 years, and I think this just demonstrates, Barrow Island just demonstrates the fact that we, as an oilfield operator, oil and gas producer, can operate consistent, coherently with high environmental standards and environmental conditions, and that industry and the environment can co-exist. I think Barrow Island is a shining example of that.
So we appreciate, once again, your time for coming out. And also, I'd like to just welcome the announcement, the Prime Minister's announcement today in terms of extending the production licence and the retention licence offers for the Gorgon project. We believe this just takes us one more step closer to project sanction, and the next steps, as everybody was wondering, we need to get our internal approvals, and then we need to finalise the development proposals which are currently being worked very, very hard, and we think it's just a matter of weeks in which we're actually going to be in a position to take project sanction and final investment decisions.
So, we really appreciate the support of Government at all levels. You guys have been very supportive, and the coordinations, and we'd just like to thank you.
PM: Good, well done Roy, thank you. Just as I take your questions, in summary, a $50 billion project. Over time, some $40 billion to revenues, both Commonwealth and state. $300 billion worth of potential export income. 6 to 10,000 jobs for this project in construction, and also the roll on consequences for the rest of the economy, including the purchasing of so much of the kit and equipment that will be used in the construction of this project and in its operation.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: What's the duration of the licences?
PM: Sorry about that?
JOURNALIST: What's the duration of licences?
PM: Well, these are all specified in the individual contractual arrangements with the joint venture partners. We'll hear a further, detailed statement on all of that, and the responses which Roy has referred to from the JV partners, we hope within weeks. All of this will be made absolute clear and transparent at the time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is gas the new coal for Australia?
PM: Well, I'm from the great state of Queensland, where we do have a bit of coal, so let me say we believe that there is room for both these arms of Australian energy exports in the future. Of course, a couple of things are necessary for that. One is that we're doing the right thing in terms of climate change, hence why sequestration is so important here, and also why we've pioneered this Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute- coal-fired electricity generation, as well. That's the first thing.
The second thing is to have good joint venture partners as we have here with Exxon, with Shell, with Chevron, to get these huge projects going. Can I say, therefore, for the future and energy-hungry world, this will be important. Renewable energies will be important, energy efficiency will be important - all three arms actually underpin a good, sustainable energy and climate change strategy for the future.
JOURNALIST:  Were you impressed with what you (inaudible) geo-sequestration methods?
PM: It was good to have a technical briefing on how it would operate here. I appreciate very much the efforts which have been described to me by Chevron about how it will actually be done, in terms of seismic measurements prior to sequestration of the proposed reservoir, seismic measurements during the process of sequestration, and seismic measurements subsequent to the completion of the task as well.
I think the thoroughness which has been evidenced in the approach to this and the degree of science which has gone to the identification of the sequestration site reflects well on the companies. We, of course, in Government, have been taking the advice of our technical officials.
Of course, sequestration of this type is not absolutely new in world. Roy and I have been talking about a parallel exercise in the Slackner field in the North Sea, which is run by Norwegian Statoil. This will be very large, but there are some precedents, albeit at a different scale, elsewhere in the world.
JOURNALIST: Has the economic value of the project been put ahead of the environmental needs?
PM: The key thing with this project, and the way in which the Australian Government does business, is to get the balance between the economy and the environment right. We believe that through the thorough investigations undertaken by the Environment Minister, Peter Garrett, and more broadly, with the State Government of Western Australia that we've got the balance right.
We are passionate about the future of the economy, the resource sector, because it provides for jobs for working families across our country. Similarly, we're equally passionate about our national and global responsibilities on climate change. Such a large-scale sequestration project here is one important part of the overall global response to climate change as well.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask a question about (inaudible)
PM: Only if we approve of them. Off you go.
JOURNALIST: John Della Bosca has resigned over a sex scandal, do you have a message for the New South Wales Government?
PM: Look, I've seen those reports, and they really are a matter for Mr Della Bosca and his family. I don't propose to make any comment at all on his and their private life.
JOURNALIST: It seems though, that the New South Wales Government is just rocked by another scandal, though. Do you agree?
PM: Well, these are difficult matters, but in terms of the detail of it, I would respect very much the privacy of Mr Della Bosca and his family in what is obviously a sensitive time.
JOURNALIST: You're not concerned at all about the ALP's image in NSW dropping to new lows as a result?
PM: As I said, this is a delicate and sensitive matter, but because of its intense family nature, I wouldn't propose to comment on the details of it, and this should be a private matter for Mr Della Bosca, his wife and his family.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: These are private matters for Mr Della Bosca and his family, and I don't see any point in providing lectures to anybody in these very difficult personal circumstances and it's a matter for Mr Della Bosca.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, the NATO Chief is calling for a bigger troop presence in Afghanistan. Could you rule out sending more troops?
PM: Well, our approach to Afghanistan has always been that we want to ensure that our mission in Oruzgan province is concluded. What's our mission in Oruzgan province? To train up an Afghan national army brigade made up of six battalions so that we can in turn hand security responsibilities over to the Afghan Government. That's the task and the mission we've set for ourselves in Oruzgan. We think it's a taxing and difficult task. We believe we've got our deployments right, and that's the strategy that we'll be pursuing. We continue to be in dialogue with our American partners and our NATO partners about the future, but we believe our mission and our deployment there is about right.
JOURNALIST: Okay just finally, there's been a recommendation in the health reform paper, apparently, about alcohol subsidies and (inaudible)
PM: Look, these matters concerning tax will be considered in the fullness of the review of the Henry Review of Taxation arrangements of the Commonwealth and the States, and it's not due to report until later on, and the secondly, of course, we have a response to the Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, which is due in the first part of next year.
You raise, more broadly, the question of tax and the economy. Can I again say this, in support of the importance of projects like this, but also in support of the partnership between the private sector and the Government - it's fundamentally important that we continue to drive the economic recovery in Australia, and that means continuing to implement the stimulus strategy which we've put in place, which is staged over time in order to support work for small businesses and jobs for tradies.
I see there's some alternative commentary around still from Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey. Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey seem determined to want to pull the rug from under the recovery and create real problems for tradies looking for work and for small businesses looking for work and activity.
The Government's strategy is clear - a three-stage stimulus strategy, which has been described in great detail, reaching its peak when the economy is at its weakest and then tailoring down as the economy recovers. That's the right approach to support tradies, to support small business and the economy in general. Our strategy is clear. The alternative would pull the rug from under recovery, pull the rug from under small business, and pull the rug from under tradies who have been finding it tough to find work.
Thanks very much.



The Australian Government will establish a National Resource Sector Employment Taskforce to help secure up to 70,000 skilled workers required to build and operate major resource sector projects over the next decade.
A Major Project Employment Coordinator will also be appointed to work with the Gorgon joint venture partners and the Western Australian Government to help match demand for skilled labour with a supply of workers for the Gorgon LNG Project.
The Gorgon Project is the largest resource project ever proposed in Australia and at its peak will create around 6,000 jobs.   
Meeting the human capital requirements for this project will require both sourcing available skilled labour and up skilling education leavers and job seekers to ensure that there is a pipeline of workers for the Project.
It will also require training and assistance for the local Indigenous population so they can take full advantage of these opportunities.
National Resource Sector Employment Taskforce
The Federal Government will establish a National Resource Sector Employment Taskforce to undertake the planning required to deliver the large number of skilled workers needed to build and operate these major resource sector projects.
The Taskforce will examine the current pipeline of skilled construction workers such as engineers, boilermakers, welders, concreters, riggers, drillers and divers that will be needed and the areas where additional skills focus will be required. 
It will also examine what strategies need to be pursued to create jobs in supporting industries such as logistics, transport maintenance and hospitality.
The Taskforce will include representation from state and territory governments, the resource sector, Skills Australia, and representatives from university, vocational education and the group training sector.
The secretariat for the Taskforce will be provided by the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.
The Gorgon Project is just one of around 80 planned or approved projects nationally that are likely to see demand for skilled resource sector labour increase by 70 per cent over the next decade.
If all these projects proceed there could be an additional 70,000 peak construction jobs and 16,000 ongoing positions generated by 2020.
To maximise participation in these projects and to avoid the skills shortages of the past, the Taskforce will work with the resources industry, state and territory governments and education and training providers to develop a workforce plan that delivers skilled labour to meet project construction and timetables.
A national approach will aim to get training underway as early as possible so that the skills required by the Gorgon Project and other major resource projects are available when and where they are needed. 
This approach will also aim to maximise the benefits for regional businesses and jobs, including for Indigenous Australians.
Major Project Employment Coordinator
The Australian Government will appoint a Major Project Employment Coordinator to work with the Western Australian Government and the Gorgon Joint Venture Partners to identify opportunities for targeted training to ensure the labour needs of the project are met. 
This will include opportunities for up skilling job seekers, providing support to engage and train Indigenous employees and businesses and supporting regional employment in the Pilbara and surrounding areas. 
The Major Project Employment Coordinator will work with the Gorgon Joint Venture Partners to maximise Indigenous participation in the project.
The Federal Government estimates that current training partnerships with the Western Australian Government will deliver 23,470 places for job seekers and 52,009 places for existing workers over the next five years.
However we are determined to ensure these training resources are used flexibly to avoid skills bottlenecks and to provide local people, including Indigenous people with the maximum opportunity to participate.
This model of supporting major projects will be considered for other regions where a number of resource projects are likely to approved.


This blog was open for comment from 26 August to 2 September 2009.
Kevin.Rudd says...
Over the last two days I have been in Lismore and Port Macquarie talking to health professionals and community representatives about long term reform of our health and hospitals system.
For the 7 million or so Australians living in rural and regional areas, universal entitlement under Medicare does not always translate into equal access to services.
Already the Rudd Government is tackling the critical issue of workforce shortages out bush as part of a broader package of more than $134 million in the last budget for targeted rural health programs, in addition to significant funding provided to rural communities through the MBS, PBS, the National Healthcare Agreements and infrastructure commitments for regional hospitals and cancer centres.
But clearly more needs to be done.
The Health Reform Commission makes a range of recommendations. Some of the questions they ask include: Should under-served remote and rural communities be provided with 'top up ' funding? Do we need a greater emphasis on telehealth services? What role do networks of primary health care services play in new and innovative models of rural and remote care? Do we need, as well as the Rural Health Workforce Agency, a Clinical Education and Training Agency to take the lead in unifying strategies such as university fee relief, study leave and locum support?
I am keen to get your feedback - especially if you live in rural and remote areas - on how we can reform the health system to ensure it serves all Australians, equally.
Read the full blog transcript.


PM: It's good to be in Perth today and good to be here at WACOSS and to be here with Senator Siewert from the Australian Greens, and of course Senator Mark Arbib, the Minister for Employment. What we're here today to talk about it is practical measures that you can take to reduce the impact of the global economic recession on jobs in local communities. That's what Government action is all about. Nationally, how do we implement measures which cushion the impact of the global economic recession on Australian working families and those doing it tough.
Just now we've met those in the community sector, for example, who are out there at the front line, assisting families who are in need of emergency relief payments, and you would have heard the reports from some of those community organisations about how difficult it is. The Government has increased our payments for emergency relief to the community sector. Plainly, however, there is more work to be done. I've listened very carefully to what was said before by one of the representatives from Uniting Care about the number of families now being turned away in terms of emergency relief payments.
This is the absolute human face of a global economic recession which has been no respecter of countries, no respecter of communities, and no respecter of families. Damage, both personally for families and for communities, has been widespread.
The role of responsible governments is to cushion this impact. What we have done through the Nation Building for Recovery Plan is to do so through our stimulus strategy. Short-term stimulus through payments to families, medium-term infrastructure investment - the largest school modernisation program in the country's history, as well as unprecedented investments in social housing, and long-term investment in infrastructure as well - road, rail, ports, as well as high-speed broadband, education infrastructure as well as medical research infrastructure and hospitals.
But the other arm of what we are seeking to do as Government is to assist at the community level as well, and that's where the local jobs fund has come into play, and that's why the work that we have done, together with the Australian Greens, and together with Senator Fielding, in the rolling out of the local jobs fund has been so important.
What we're here to do today is to announce those successful projects from round one of the local jobs fund here in WA, and from this initial allocation of $4.5 million here in the West we'll be providing support for six projects that will in turn support some 190 jobs and 60 work experience positions, as well as three traineeships.
Of course, what we've seen today is a very practical illustration of the sort of work that that can involve, and that is through this WACOSS-supported initiative, to support those who are conducting energy audits out there in the community, energy audits of community organisations themselves, so that they can reduce their electricity bills, their gas bills and their water bills - doing something positive for the environment and at the same time something positive in terms of the bills that they've got to pay.
This is one practical set of initiatives, one practical set of local jobs initiatives of the large number that we're supporting across the country, and I'm pleased today to be able to confirm those announcements here in Perth.
I might turn now to Senator Siewert to make some remarks, and again I place on record my appreciation for the support of the Australian Greens in securing passage for the Nation Building for Recovery Plan in the Senate, and their particular involvement in this fund, and then I'll turn to Senator Arbib.
SIEWERT: Thank you, Prime Minister. I must say it's a pleasure to be in this room. I've sat in this room for hours and hours of meetings, so it's a pleasure to come back to help make this announcement.
The Greens, as people would be aware, supported the stimulus package through the Senate after we negotiated a number of elements of the stimulus package, but in particular the local jobs fund. We were particularly keen to ensure that the stimulus package had an element of funding that provided for local communities, jobs in local communities, and worked with non-Government organisations to provide jobs for the community and local jobs.
So I'm particularly pleased that WACOSS and West Swan are the two projects, but the projects in particular that we've seen today I think are particularly innovative projects. It combines those essential elements of training, local training, and of course energy sustainability and working with non-Government organisations, so I think that's, I'm particularly pleased with that announcement.
We were also very pleased to be able to work with the Government. I think that the Greens demonstrated that we can work with Government for positive outcomes. This is a positive announcement. We decided that we wanted to work positively with Government to achieve an outcome, and we have. We can see today that we have achieved an outcome. There are going to be real jobs provided in this community, and I'm particularly pleased, of course, that it's in my home state of Western Australia.
We have such innovative projects, not only this project but the project working with West Swan TAFE, that's particularly training people to work with community on drug and alcohol related issues I think is also a very positive demonstration of what we can achieve through this economic stimulus package.
So, again, I'm pleased with my colleagues here in Parliament because I think it's a very good demonstration about the way the Parliament can work when we all it to reach a common goal, and that is to help the community.
Thank you very much, and I'm very pleased, as I said, that we're in here in Lotteries House working with such a great group of people. Thank you.
PM: Thanks, Senator. Minister.
MINISTER ARBIB: Thank you, Prime Minister, thank you Rachel, and I also place on record my appreciation with the Australian Greens and also to Senator Fielding for the work they did in terms of the jobs fund arriving out of the stimulus package.
We've got some wonderful projects that we're announcing today. As the Prime Minister said, six projects in Western Australia, the majority in Perth, $4.5 million, which is going to support 190 jobs and support 60 work experience positions plus three traineeships.
Some of the projects, as we've seen, WACOSS' climate change readiness for community project, and that's $1.89 million. They've also got a second project, which is $1 million, which is to establish a labour pool of 38 retrenched workers in the Kwinana-Rockingham area, and they're going to be working with local community organisations, using the skills that they have from their workplace to assist community groups in that community.
Swan TAFE, as Senator Siewert said, is receiving $780,000 and that will be to support 52 apprentices that they have, and also to create or retain 50 work experience positions, and they will be working, as Senator Siewert has said, in terms of the construction of residential training facilities for Palmerston Farm, which is a not-for-profit organisation.
There's also two Indigenous organisations that have received funding. The Martu people have got a media project which will support 12 jobs and 10 work experience jobs with Goolarri Media Enterprises, which is receiving $356,000.
And again, the jobs fund is part of the stimulus package, but it's only one part of the stimulus package. At the same time, we are rolling out the construction of primary school halls, libraries and classrooms across Western Australia. Currently, there's 934 schools that have been approved. That's going to be $1.5 billion worth of funding, every school in Western Australia, primary school, high school, public school, private school, is receiving between $50,000 and $200,000 for school maintenance.
Of course, we're doing something like 2,200 new community houses in Western Australia, and in transport, I'm sure you know we've got the Kalgoorlie to Adelaide railway, on which work which work will soon commence, and also the Mandurah entrance road construction which will also soon commence. So we are doing everything we can to support jobs in Western Australia because we are in a global recession. Unemployment is rising, and we can't afford to take any job for granted.
Thank you.
PM: And having said that, over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just talking about the schools program. There's been criticism in the way that the Federal Government (inaudible) to some of the most needy schools around the country, all of them, it seems, in regional and rural areas. How do you respond to that criticism?
PM: What I'd say is we have the largest school modernisation program currently underway in Australia's history. Secondly, it's a total investment nationwide of some $14.8 billion. Thirdly, when we announced the stimulus package we said we'd be investing, as far as secondary schools were concerned, in some 500 secondary schools. Funding has been committed, I'm advised, to about 537 secondary schools. That's before we go to the investment in all primary schools
I've travelled to most regions in the country. The universal feedback I have got from local P&amp;Cs, P&amp;Fs, that's parent bodies in Government schools and non-Government schools, as well as principals, has been to say ‘at last, we've got the ability to invest in a multi-purpose hall, at last we have a 21st century library, at last we can have investment in a state-of-the-art science centre or a state-of-the-art language centre'.
This is what we're doing, this is as we've committed that we would do it, at the time that we announced this package, and the Government believes this is all part of Nation Building for Recovery, which is, investing in jobs, business, and apprenticeships today, while also investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. School infrastructure is an important part of that.
JOURNALIST: You've just referred to-
PM: Hang on, this one here, and then I'll come to you.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel that you've let down some of those schools though, for instance (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say how many schools there are in Australia - nearly 10,000. Do you know how many primary schools there are in Australia? About 7,500. We've got about 2,300-2,400 secondary schools, government, non-government, Catholic, independent.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: What we have done, what we have done in all of those schools, is to seek to invest to improve their school infrastructure, and can I say, I believe that the overall investment in school modernisation has been appropriate for the future. It has been in support of communities right across the country, and it has also been to provide much-needed education infrastructure in communities which have sat around for decades and not had one dollar of additional capital investment made in them.
Wherever I have gone, the Fraser Island Coast in Queensland, Far North Queensland, regional New South Wales, parts of Victoria and elsewhere, the responses I've got is, ‘at last, we have these investments'. There will always be concerns and complaints raised about elements of the program. I understand that. I accept that. As I said, this is the single largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, and the Government is proud of it.
JOURNALIST: The Yakanarra Community School asked for 500 grand for its state-of-the-art language centre and didn't get it, but PLC Pymble got $3 million for a multi-purpose hall and library. Shouldn't money have been allocated according to need, and I'm referring specifically to the outcomes in a place like the Kimberley, where Indigenous kids aren't doing as well as the kids in Pymble.
PM: Well can I suggest that when it goes to the overall investment in Indigenous Australia, I'll draw your attention very carefully to the unprecedented agreement between the Australian Government and the states and territories, which I signed off on in Darwin in July this year, which brings together a very large-scale, for the first time, national partnership agreement with all states and territories across the whole spread of investments in Indigenous Australia.
For anyone to suggest that the Australian Government is not investing significantly in the needs of Indigenous Australia, given what we are now advancing in schools, in hospitals, more broadly in healthcare, in employment, in housing, and as well as a whole range of other programs, including here in the West, our support for great institutions like the Clontarf Academy, I don't believe that's correctly reading the statistics.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We have a long, long way to go yet when it comes to the economy, and to the extent that we are doing better than other economies around the world is because business, workers and Government have been working together here in Australia.
The bottom line, I think, is this, the core point, I think, is this; without the stimulus, through the Government's Nation Building for Recovery plan, the Treasury advises that the Australian economy would, right now, have been in the deepest of recessions and unemployment would have been going through the roof.
With the stimulus, under the Government's Nation Building plan, Australia is now the only advanced economy in the world to have produced positive growth over the last 12 months, which is why, generally, our unemployment rate is better than most other economies. But if you look at the internal numbers in the national accounts data, both for the national economy, and, by extension, the global economy, when you look at the trade figures, we still have a very long way to go, and there'll still very many serious bumps in the road.
I think the other point is this: to suggest, as Mr Turnbull has suggested originally, not to have provided Government stimulus for the economy would mean that the Australian economy would right now be in the depths of recession, and with unemployment going through the roof. Furthermore, for Mr Turnbull and the Liberals to be suggesting now that it's time to withdraw the stimulus, would be to pull the rug from underneath the recovery in the Australian economy, and pull the rug therefore under jobs for tradies and work for small business. This Government doesn't intend to do that.
JOURNALIST: The GDP increase is above expectations, though.
PM: As I said, the figures that have been produced today indicate still that we've got a long, long way to go when it comes to the economic recovery, but the fact that we are doing better than most other economies in the world is because business and workers and Government are pulling together, we're working together. But there's still a long, long way to go.
JOURNALIST: How concerned are you about the indicators from Wall Street overnight, (inaudible)
PM: Can I say the global economy is not out of the woods yet, by a long stretch and this economy, Australia's, is an integral part of the global economy. That's why we have implemented this Nation Building for Recovery Plan - to provide stimulus today, for jobs, for small business, and for apprenticeships, while investing in infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
It's very important that we maintain a calm, sober approach going forward, because the global economy ain't out of the woods yet. We're part of the global economy, and we believe, therefore, we should continue to implement cautiously and thoroughly the Nation Building for Recovery plan that we outlined some time ago.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you seem to be making history today as probably the first Labor Prime Minister to make a joint announcement with the Greens. Is this a signpost for the future?
PM: I'm not sure whether we have or whether we haven't before. Look, my attitude in Government is, we will work with other constructive forces. You know, I think you should just be upfront about all of this. The Greens and Senator Fielding were very supportive of what we sought to do in getting through the Nation Building for Recovery Plan. Today, we've been talking about some of the impact which that plan has had as far as the performance of the Australian economy is concerned relative to other economies around the world, so I'm more than pleased to acknowledge support, constructive support, where it's been delivered.
It would be good if we saw more evidence of constructive and positive engagement in the national political process than we've seen so far from various other parties in the Australian Parliament.
JOURNALIST: Does it make you at all uncomfortable, on behalf of your Labor colleagues in Western Australia, when the Liberal Premier constantly refers to you in Parliament as ‘my good friend Kevin Rudd' (inaudible)
PM: You know something, I read many things. One of them is not the WA Hansard. I have no idea in what regard or non-regard I am held in the debates in the WA Parliament.
JOURNALIST: It's regard.
PM: Yeah, right, I take your word for it. Can I just stay on that score though, my job as Prime Minister of Australia is to work constructively and positively with State Premiers and Chief Ministers across the country - Liberal, Labor, Calathumpian - and that's what I intend to do, because my job is to work as hard as I can to support long-term growth for our economy, through what is the most extraordinary set of economic challenges the global economy has been presented with since the Great Depression.
And having said that folks, I've got to zip. I've got to catch a plane.


The Rudd Government today announced the first funding to be provided in Western Australia under the Government's $650 million Jobs Fund, to support jobs in communities hardest hit by the global economic recession.
In Western Australia, $4.5 million will be provided for 6 projects that will support over 190 jobs and 60 work experience positions, as well as three traineeships.
Nearly $4 million of that will be invested in projects in South West Perth, which will support more than 160 jobs and 50 work experience positions.
The projects will be across a range of industries, including retail, construction and environmental management.
The Jobs Fund is a nationwide, $650 million investment in supporting jobs, delivering traineeships and creating work experience opportunities for job seekers.
It will deliver these jobs through innovative projects that build community infrastructure and increase social capital in local communities.
The Jobs Fund is part of the Government's Jobs and Training Compact to support families and communities hardest hit by the global economic recession.
The Prime Minister, the Hon Kevin Rudd MP, the Minister for Employment Participation, Senator Mark Arbib, and Senator Rachel Siewert made the announcement while visiting a successful project at the Western Australia Council of Social Services in South West Perth today.
The Government is doing everything possible to keep Australia working.
These projects will support jobs and training opportunities for local workers, and build infrastructure that will deliver benefits long into the future.
While a significant number of projects are in regions identified as priority areas, projects which address specific local issues in other areas are also being supported.  These include projects that focus on job creation for disadvantaged groups including migrants, people with a disability and Indigenous job seekers.
Greens senators and Senator Fielding actively supported the development and passage of the Jobs Fund through the Senate, and have assisted in the subsequent roll out of the program. They have made an important and constructive contribution to helping Australian families through this initiative.
Further information on the Jobs Fund is available at: www.deewr.gov.au.


E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Thanks very much to Matt Finnis, CEO of the AFL players Association. Kate Ellis the Minister for Sport, Sam Mitchell the Captain of Hawthorn, Jason McCartney, Johno Chase from Step Back Think, Daniel Jackson from Richmond- and friends one and all of the AFL, for what is an important cause for the country, which is how do we deal with this problem on our streets, because it affects too many people we know and love.
One in five Australians are under 25, and make a huge contribution to Australia, our economy, our culture, our sport and our nation. Growing up has always had its challenges. It's a time when young people are asked to take on more responsibility for themselves, for their relationships, for their communities, for their families, and to make choices that will be important in what they do with the rest of their lives.
Growing up today has some new challenges as well- in fact, some unprecedented challenges. Our society is undergoing major changes, as family structures change, and family networks weaken. Young Australians today are the first generation likely to spend more time with friends than with their family. Employers are demanding more adaptable skills than ever before. And at the same time, young people tell us that a lack of transport and youth-friendly public spaces are leaving them even more isolated.
These are some of the challenges out there, and we need to be frank in the way in which we deal with them. As a nation we need to do better in supporting young people negotiate these challenges, and to support them to grow up safe, healthy and with the skills, confidence and resilience, resilience to participate fully in every part of our national life. One in four young Australians aged between 16 and 24 has a mental health disorder, yet three quarters of them do not receive professional help.
Negative perceptions of body image, particularly for young women, are of growing concern.
Young people who have grown up during a period of unprecedented prosperity are now feeling the effects of the global economic recession.  Youth unemployment is now sitting at 12 per cent, compared with 9 per cent before the downturn. New communications technologies create enormous opportunities for young people to access information, develop friendships and communicate with others around the world but they can also lead to young people being the victims of crime, or becoming the targets of cyber-bullying.
And a lack of physical exercise is a concern too, a decline in some respects of community participation in sport. Obesity is on the rise.  The most recent figures suggest that 28 per cent of young men and 20 per cent of young women are overweight or obese. 
We also have potential long-term health risks from the culture of binge drinking that affects so many Australians, particularly our young people. About one in five men and one in six women aged between 18 and 24 drink alcohol to dangerous levels at least once a week, it's due to reflect on that again, about one in five men and one in six women aged between 18 and 24 drink alcohol to dangerous levels at least once a week.
Australians have so far been spared the horror of the tragic school gun massacres that have occurred in the United States. We do not have the culture of knife crime that has developed in the United Kingdom in recent years. But we were all shocked by the death of Jai Morcom in a schoolyard fight last week.
And we have unacceptably high levels of alcohol-related violence outside our pubs and clubs. That's why the Government is developing a national strategy for young Australians, with young Australians and in large part to be delivered by young Australians. And also, as part of our national health reform agenda for the future. We'll be working our way through this in the time ahead, it will embrace seven core priorities.
One- empowering young Australians in their schools, their TAFEs and their Universities to shape their own futures. Two- supporting young Australians within their families. Three-  mobilising young Australians within their communities. Four- enabling young Australians to participate safely and confidently online. Five- equipping young Australians with the skills and personal networks they need for employment. Six- strengthening early intervention with young Australians to help prevent any problems getting worse and to help young people get their lives back on track. And finally, establishing clear cut legal consequences for behaviours that endanger the safety of others.
Our aim is to build the healthiest Australia possible.  Our actions for young Australians will form part of the national health reform agenda that the government is currently developing in response to the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission that we received in July. Today's announcements are an important step in young people, community leaders and Government pulling together to make a difference in young people's lives. This Just Think campaign brings the community leadership of the AFL Player's Association and the AFL captains to engage the whole community in talking about city violence and to encourage those who are out enjoying a drink, including young people, to take responsibility for their actions.
I have had the opportunity to talk to young people who have been affected by alcohol related violence and the consequences can be devastating. A group of young people in Melbourne called Step Back, Think and Jono Chase is here with us today together with others, they got together to combat alcohol related violence after their friend James Macready-Bryan was bashed almost three years ago, on the night of his 20th birthday, leaving him brain-damaged and wheelchair-bound.
One of their aims was for the AFL to take the lead on combating violence  -  and I'm sure that they will be delighted about the launch of this campaign today. Another remarkable person that has campaigned on anti-violence is Jonty Bush, the 2009 Young Australian of the Year. After losing her younger sister and her dad, Jonty went on to become the Chief Executive of the Queensland Homicide Victims Support Group at age 27 and developed the One Punch Can Kill campaign.
These young people, Step Back, Think and One Punch Can Kill and others are not willing to sit on their hands while accidents like this occur, incidents like this occur, acts of violence like this occur around the country, neither should the rest of the community be indifferent as well. I am delighted to announce that the Australian Government will be contributing $132,000 to the AFL as part of the $2 million Club Champions Program  -  which utilises the power of sport to tackle irresponsible drinking in our community.
And the “Just Think” campaign, led by the AFL Player's Association, is the type of initiative of which this Government is proud. Can I also say it's fantastic that you as professional footballers are getting behind this. So many young people look up to you, you know that. Therefore establishing an Australian view that it's fine to go out and have fun, it's great to go out and have a party with your friends, it's fine to go out and have a drink, so long as you know where to draw the line, and so long as you know what the consequences are when you don't draw the line and that's what this campaign, Just Think, is all about.
If I could say something else positive about what the AFL players association are doing, I've been introduced to their work with youth homelessness. I've spoken quite recently with the Melbourne City Mission and about the work they are doing about the city and the State for homelessness. I think it's fantastic that the players through their association have got together to build a homelessness refuge for young people. I think that it shows a whole lot of positive contribution and it shows Australia at its best.
So again, young people are looking up to professional players and they see good stuff being done, good stuff for youth homelessness, good stuff when it comes to responsible drinking. This is the sort of stuff which the Australian government is so proud to get behind and I commend you for your efforts.
By the way, as a Lions man, I look forward to the finals series kicking off this weekend with a home final in Brissie and the inevitability of a Brisbane win. The Just Think campaign is a fantastic way to launch this final series. Footy is so loved by so many Australians. It's great that footy will be a vehicle through which we promote this attitude of responsible drinking for the future. Congratulations to all of you for being in this with your heart and your soul and your mind and your chequebook.
Thank you.


EASTLEY: The Labor Government campaigned on the line that no worker would be worse off after it introduced its workplace reforms but that's something that's been questioned in the past 24 hours. In an embarrassment for the Federal Government the Australian Industrial Relations Commissions says Government's award modernisation process will work to the disadvantage of some workers. While the Federal Government is basking in the glow of a growing economy not all workers may benefit. In the meantime the Opposition is on the Prime Minister's case to pull back on its billions of dollars in stimulus spending. To discuss the issues the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joined AM a short time ago, and chief political correspondent Lyndal Curtis began by asking the Prime Minister about what intelligence he was hearing about the Indonesian earthquake.
PM: We have been in contact of course with the Indonesian Government and of course our own embassy in Jakarta. Our understanding is that we have had some 100 or so houses badly damaged, some 15 fatalities and a number of those through a landslide. At this stage I am not aware of requests for assistance from the Indonesian authorities but because of the friendship of our relationship with Indonesia of course we stand ready to provide that assistance and I have already indicated that to the Indonesian Government.
CURTIS: It's been nearly 12 months since Lehmann Brothers collapsed. Did you think in the midst of that crisis which you said was possibly the worst since the Great Depression - you likened it to a rolling national security crisis - did you think that a year later that Australia's economy would be growing at 0.6 per cent?
PM: The first point to say is that the universal view of the governments of the G20, the largest economies in the world, are what we have faced in the events since the beginning of the global financial crisis is the worst challenge to the global economy since the Great Depression. If you look at the projection still for growth globally in 2009 it's for a contraction in global economic growth. This would be the first time that the global economy would have shrunk since the IMF began collecting data in the early 1950s. But what we have done in Australia, consistent with actions of governments around the world is say: how can we best cushion the impact of that global recession on Australia? That's why we have unapologetically taken early, strong, decisive action through our Nation Building for Recovery plan. And so far that has had an effect in reducing the impact of the global recession in Australia. But as I have said repeatedly, we have still got a long, long way to go and there are many, many challenges still out there in the global economy.
CURTIS: Is there a prospect though that the final unemployment number might have a seven in front of it rather than an eight?
PM: Well we will see what Treasury advises in terms of future unemployment numbers but we are still deeply concerned about the softness of the global economic recovery. In recent times I have been travelling to a number of Australia's regions - Far North Queensland comes to mind but many others as well, where the impact of the global economic recession for example in the downturn of global tourism numbers has been felt hard and sharp. Therefore it underlines the importance of not simply standing back and doing nothing but actually stepping up to the plate which is what we have done through the nation building for recovery plan - stepping in to occupy a space temporarily while the private sector is in retreat. That is what we have sought to do.
CURTIS: What then, if there is softness still in the economy, do you say to people who are facing the real prospect of higher interest rates before the end of this year?
PM: Well first of all the reason for the stimulus strategy through national building for recovery is of course to reduce the impact on unemployment. The worst people can face in terms of challenges to their living standards is to lose their jobs-
CURTIS: But they also face additional pressures on their household budgets if interest rates go up.
PM: Absolutely, and therefore the first responsibility we face is cushioning the impact of this recession on unemployment, and that's why the fact that we have been able to be the only economy of the advanced economies over the last 12 months to have generated positive economic growth means that the unemployment impact here has been less. But secondly going to interest rates, as I have said and the Reserve Bank governor has said in recent times, obviously there will be changes in the future from the emergency level reductions in interest rates which have occurred in recent times. These are the lowest rates we have had in nearly 50 years and obviously in the future they will go up. But can I say, ultimately the decision on interest rates will be the matter for the Reserve Bank acting independently.
CURTIS: But do you think the prospect is that they will go up before the end of this year?
PM: Well, you know Lyndal that it's not profitable for any Prime Minister to, or Treasurer to speculate on what the independent decisions of the Reserve Bank and its board might be in any given month. But as I wrote recently in an article on the long term economic strategy of the Government it follows that if interest rates have been reduced to what the governor describes as emergency levels  -  3%- in terms of the actions taken in recent times, that as we begin to see evidence of global economic recovery and national economic recovery that interest rates will go up. But the individual decisions month-by-month are of course those of the bank. Our job through our national building for recovery plan is to cushion the impact of this global recession on jobs. And if you look at how our economy is performing on growth and unemployment, thanks to the efforts of so many businesses around the country it is better than most other economies around the world.
CURTIS: On another issue that will affect business, do you concede that your Government's guarantee that under the award modernisation process no worker would be worse off and no employer would face increased cost, its costs, is no longer able to be met?
PM: Well you are referring there of course to the determination yesterday by the Australian Industrial Relations Commission. Can I just say that the AIRC and its work and its determination yesterday is entirely welcomed by the Government because what we have said in the reform program that the Industrial Relations Minister Julia Gillard has embarked upon to modernise our exceptionally complex awards system, what the AIRC has done is provide for an orderly and measured transition to a new, modern and simple awards system.
CURTIS: But it also casts significant doubt over that promise that was made, doesn't it?
PM: No it what it in fact said is it goes precisely to how in fact transition arrangements are to be put in place. It has responded positively to the Government submission to utilise a full five-year transition period provided in the Government's legislation; to phase in key award changes in simple and in equal instalments. And secondly it's also indicated that it will use transition provisions to allow Fair Work Australia to deal with any reductions in take home pay that might occur as a consequence. That's entirely consistent with the overall, with the overall reform agenda laid out by the Employment Relations Minister Julia Gillard. And let's always remember what is at stake here - 4,000 complex awards across the Australian economy, a reform process which the Howard Government never had the stomach for. This government has got the stomach for. It is a difficult, complex, arduous process but we intend to embark upon it, do it because it's in the long term interests of the economy.
CURTIS: But doesn't the commission also believe that even during that transition period there's the prospect that employers and employees, some may be worse off?
PM: Well the purpose of transitional provisions is actually to deal with these challenges. Furthermore what the AIRC has indicated is that when it comes to what's called model commencement and transitional clauses, that they will also contain a term that allows Fair Work Australia to review the transitional arrangements and each modern award either on its own initiative or by application-
CURTIS: So does your promise still stand?
PM: So you see if in the determination in large part responsive but made independently of government submissions to the AIRC, firstly a long term transition process because we are acutely conscious of the impact of the global economic recession both on employers and employees; but secondly the specific provisions also to assist with any ups or downs in the process; and thirdly a capacity to review those on the way through. In terms of transitional arrangements the minister has done an excellent job and can I say on top of that the AIRC's determination on this I believe is also a first class piece of work.
CURTIS: So do you believe it's still possible for this process to leave no-one worse off over time?
PM: What we have said consistently is that the Government's objective is to ensure that we deal with these particular challenges of transition and furthermore that this is done with a clear sighted concern for the 20 per cent of the Australian workforce who are reliant on awards and these are among the lowest paid. That's why we put in place these particular protections on the way through. 
The alternative of course, as you know, our opponents were and remain long term disciples of WorkChoices. That is simply throwing people to the wolves. We intend to have a properly protected and properly transitioned industrial relations system. That is what the minister is in the process of implementing.
CURTIS: That will leave no-one worse off?
PM: Well our objective remains as we have always said and that is that we will work always to ensure that in the implementation of this overall scheme that we can have a system whereby employers and employees can deal with any costs associated with this over that period of time. As I said the transition period that we were referring to, the objective that modern awards are not intended to disadvantage employees or increase costs for employers stands. That is the objective which the minister articulated at the beginning of the process. That's what we are committed to now and the AIRC in reaching its determination has made it clear that's the way we are going to implement this in practice.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is an honour to be delivering the third John Paterson Oration  -  following on from the previous addresses by former Prime Ministers John Howard and Helen Clark.
While the Australia New Zealand School of Government is still in its early years, it is already building a tradition of helping to shape the next generation of public service leaders on both sides of the Tasman.
One of the important traditions it is creating is this oration  -  an excellent occasion to advance public debate about future directions for public administration and the public service.
The oration is named after John Paterson, a great leader and a greater reformer, a man who in particular led the way in reform of community services, health and infrastructure in both NSW and Victoria.
John was no Sir Humphrey Appleby.
He earnt a reputation as a restless intellect, a person of great compassion and yet a tough-minded reformer.
He once said that more could be learned about organisational change from the literature on revolutionary war than from the teaching of business schools.
Paterson said that in the battle to change institutions  -  and I quote:
“...peace only becomes possible when you have captured all the territory, re-educated all the prisoners who are willing to become loyal citizens, and put to the sword those who remain unreconstructed.”
John displayed what could be described as a firm approach to public sector management.
He clearly encountered some obstacles in reforming the regional water board of the Hunter Valley in New South Wales - but he also showed a capacity to see the challenges he faced in a much wider context.
The task of public service reform confronting leaders like John Paterson in the 1980s was to modernise large, powerful and sclerotic public sector organisations.
In the simplest terms, the task was to make the public service genuinely serve the interests of the wider economy and society, after decades in which many government agencies had become increasingly managed for the purposes of serving themselves.
Today's challenges are not the same as those John Paterson faced.
But they are equally important  -  broad in scope; deep in complexity, and confronting us a time when new global, national and local forces of change are blowing across the shores of Australian public administration.
These are challenges that will require a new generation of public service leadership, a new standard of public service excellence and therefore a new era of public service reform.
The Government I lead came to office pledging to reinvigorate the Westminster tradition of a merit-based, independent public service committed to the highest-quality policy making.
We chose the word reinvigorate carefully.
We did not say “reinvent”, because the APS is a strong, professional public service that has served successive governments very well.
The professionalism of the public service has been evident since the first day after the 2007 election, when I received the first handover briefings from Dr Peter Shergold and other senior departmental secretaries.
The quality of that briefing, and the work of public servants to ensure a seamless transition to government in the following weeks and months, was testimony not only to the competence of the public service but to the value it placed on continuity. 
And I note that my predecessor, Mr Howard, made the same point when delivering the Garran Oration in 1997, and I quote: 
“That power can be transferred in this calm, understated way is a supreme asset.''
This is truly one of the most remarkable features of the Westminster tradition, and it is one we should not merely take it for granted.
Its success is in part the result of the sweeping reforms to the public service a century and a half ago, in another era and in another place  -  through the Northcote-Trevelyan report in Britain in 1854.
That report not only created the modern British civil service but laid the foundations of the ethos of the APS almost half a century later.
At the time, Britain was undergoing major economic changes in the wake of industrialisation.
The Empire was expanding, people were on the move and Europe was alive with revolutionary foment.
And the British civil service was riven with patronage, incompetence and corruption.
The recommendations of the Northcote-Trevelyan report  -  a response to crisis in its time  -  helped create a civil service that was independent, impartial, recruited by competitive examination and promoted on merit.
In time, its impact stretched to the Australian colonies, where both Victoria and Queensland sought to limit political patronage by introducing competitive entry exams into their public services.
And it profoundly shaped the culture of the APS after its formation in 1901.
But Australia never simply copied the British model.
The APS never recreated the class structure in the way the British civil service did, with Sir Humphrey's Oxbridge-educated administrator class unfailingly at the top.
Instead, some of Australia's leading public servants have been the children of builders, boot makers, railway station masters and refugees, or they left school at 15 to be telegraph messengers and bank clerks.
What counted was not their modest beginnings but their fitness for the job.
Take Sir Roland Wilson, our longest serving Treasury Secretary and the son of a west coast Tasmanian builder.
Or another former Treasury chief, Sir Richard Randall, who worked for eight years as a wool classer.
Or another, Ted Evans, who worked for 10 years of his early life as a PMG linesman.
And given that his replacement, current Treasury Secretary Ken Henry, is the son of a New South Wales timber worker, it is clear that the APS principle of promoting merit over privilege is alive and well.
And there is a second lesson from history that particularly resonates today.
As I said before, the periods of most active public service reform have been periods of rapid change and even upheaval in the wider society, times when change has forced the public service to develop new structures and skills, and find talented new people.
In the 1940s, the all-out war effort, followed by the huge post-war nation-building program, created a generational change in the APS.  For the first time there was an influx of brilliant outsiders to manage great wartime enterprises, to staff the departments of Treasury and Postwar Reconstruction and to establish the new foreign service.
At the time, the public service was a closed shop  -  the idea of outsiders joining was intensely controversial. So much so that when the economist, Roland Wilson - with doctorates from Oxford and Chicago - was recruited to the Bureau of Census and Statistics as the first government economics adviser in 1932, the staff of the Bureau went on strike!
The new public servants laid the foundations for decades of post-war prosperity and better living standards for Australians. They were among the first in the world to see and seize the opportunities of Keynesian economics and an active economic and social role for the post-war democratic state.
They managed the government's commitment to full employment and the development of a modern social security system, to a large immigration program, to enormous infrastructure projects such as the Snowy Mountains scheme, and to the beginnings of our national university system.
In other words, they were nation-builders  -  with their own professional public service tradition  -  with a sense that the words “prosper the Commonwealth” were etched deep in their intellect, their imagination and their sense of duty to the nation.
Nugget Coombs, a railway station master's son, is perhaps the best known of them  -  a man who earnt his place in any catalogue of the greatest Australians in our nation's history.
In his appointment to head the Department of Postwar Reconstruction, he was given an explicit brief to promote a much more activist role for the state.
And it was Nugget Coombs who, a generation later, chaired the famous Royal Commission into Australian Government Administration in 1974.
Nugget's broad vision for the role of the public service was reflected in his remark after releasing his report, that in the modern world the bureaucracy:
“...is not ‘an island entire unto itself' but a living part of Australian society, reflecting the strengths and weaknesses of the society.”
The Coombs Royal Commission came at another turning point for Australian society and Australian history.
The long post-war boom  -  in large part made possible by the reforms of the 1940s  -  created huge national wealth but also in time a culture of self-satisfaction, complacency and rigidity in the public service, in the broader economy and to some extent in society at large.
Public service structures created 30 years earlier struggled to cope with a time of profound economic and social change.
The Coombs Commission identified themes that have shaped the development of the APS ever since.
It argued that the public service had to become more responsive to the democratically elected government of the day, more efficient in its operations, and more diverse in the composition of its workforce - reflecting the growing diversity of the wider society.
Critically, it concluded that government administration was excessively centralised and excessively hierarchical.
It recommended greater devolution of management authority and of service delivery  -  including the idea of one-stop shops for citizens to access a range of services in the one place.
It found that  -  and I quote:
"better decisions will be made and better service given to people if authority and responsibility are devolved to officials close to where the action occurs.”
In that idea lies the foundation of our modern, decentralised public service.
The great themes of the Coombs Report were reflected in a decade and a half of reform from the early 1980s onwards. The public servants of that era - John Paterson among them - undertook a fundamental rethink of what government should do and how it should do it.
In difficult economic times, they helped to internationalise the Australian economy and to move beyond the policy complacency of previous decades. They were partners in a long-term reform agenda, whose central organisational principle was the enhancement of Australia's global competitiveness.
Within the ranks of the public service, they forced their colleagues to focus on efficiency, transparency and accountability to government, because taxpayer dollars were scarce and economic reform also meant the reform of government itself. 
They were modernisers. They had to be. There was no turning back.
In those years, all the major legislation governing the public service, some of it dating back to the early years of Federation, was completely rewritten. 
The budgetary, structural and other public service reforms of the 1980s and 1990s were as large in their time as those of the post-war reconstruction generation. They helped to produce Australia's long period of economic growth and they positioned us well for the challenge of the global economic crisis.
These were also the years when Coombs' vision of a more diverse public service, more representative of the Australian population, began to be realised. For example, in 1999, women outnumbered men for the first time and today account for nearly 58 per cent of the APS. More than one in three members of the Senior Executive Service is female, and while we have further to go, the proportion is rising.
That is just one example of how the APS has continued to change and evolve to meet the needs of its time.
Today, the APS again confronts a changing world, and the need to prepare for these future challenges.  I do not believe the changes required involve a revolution. Instead, the APS requires continuing reform.
As the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran, said in a recent speech, “the APS is not broken - it is not a renovator's opportunity”.
Cast your eyes across the governments of the world, and consider the quality of public administration that has been achieved in Australia across the 108 year history of the Australian Public Service. It is not completely without its faults or failings, but any fair-minded person would agree that Australia has been remarkably well served by the APS, and it has been remarkably stable, impartial and free from corruption.
It is no surprise that a British report last year reported that 87 per cent of Australian citizens expressed satisfaction with Federal government services. Or that the same report listed our public service third in a long list of similar countries - ahead of Canada, New Zealand, the USA and the UK - for its independence from political interference and in its capacity to give impartial advice.
Likewise, an assessment of the quality of e-government services and products of 192 UN member states in 2008 ranked Australia eighth in the world.
These are impressive results for a comparatively lean public service of just 160,000 employees  -  or just 1.5 per cent of the Australian workforce. But in the face of the challenges facing us in the decade ahead, it is not enough for us to say that the APS is doing a good job and therefore the status quo is fine.
In my address to the Senior Executive Service in April 2008, I spoke of the need to develop a culture of policy innovation and enhance the strategic policy capability of the APS. This means becoming more creative, and not just reactive.
It means the APS being bolder in its thinking, and doing more to consider the big picture  -  transformational policy change, not just piecemeal reform.
It means strengthening the APS's ability to deliver high-quality services and linking policy creation more closely to program implementation so that lessons learnt on the front line of service delivery feed back into the agencies that formulate policy.
Public servants, from portfolio Secretaries in Canberra to front-line workers at Centrelink, work tirelessly to put the citizen at the heart of everything they do. And critically, that the APS does more to attract, train and retain the very best people.
The APS must have its proper share of the nation's most talented people, because as I said last year to the SES, the challenges facing government are as tough, intellectually demanding and important for our nation's future, as the challenges facing any of our businesses or non-profit organisations. It is the view of the Government and the heads of the APS that only by hiring and promoting the best people can we solve the great challenges of our time.
From health reform to the education revolution; from our climate change strategy to dealing with national security threats; from tackling Indigenous disadvantage to building a globally competitive 21st century economy.
We are facing challenges so complex in their causes, so shifting in their natures, so contentious in the arguments they provoke and so radical in the solutions they demand that they cannot be addressed with business-as-usual thinking. 
Some social scientists have coined the term “wicked problems” to describe these challenges. However, as a former member of the APS, I know that public servants don't believe in wickedness. Instead, I suspect they are more comfortable with what we might call “systemic challenges”.
Challenges that might even call for courageous policies.
Whatever the label, these challenges often have these dimensions:
     * First, they emerge from external factors that are often global in scope.
     * Second, they require not just policy change from government and the public service but often behavioural change from the economy, society and individuals.
     * Third, these policies must be implemented comprehensively in complex and changing circumstances  -  so that policy implementation is seen as important as policy innovation.
     * Fourth, these challenges must be tackled under the full media spotlight.
     * Fifth, given the present economic crisis and the need for sustained fiscal discipline, they must be tackled in a context of constrained resources.
And to restate the theme of this conference, they require governments and public services to govern, manage and reform in times of crisis - what Allan Fels has called “high velocity environments.”
Such problems defy conventional approaches. They require new, collaborative approaches to policy making across departments, across Commonwealth, State, Territory and local governments. They often require partnerships with the private and community sectors. Increasingly, they also require us to work with governments abroad. Above all, they require innovative, urgent and practical policy thinking - great ideas, but also ideas grounded in the real world.
These are the profound challenges that face the Australian Public Service, but I believe the APS has the capacity to meet them. Based on what I have seen as Prime Minister and on what I know of Australian history, I have every confidence in the ability of the APS to address them.
Consider the challenges we have confronted since the global financial crisis escalated so dramatically one year ago this month.
Australia has weathered the global recession better than most other countries. Australia - unlike every other major advanced economy -  to date, has not fallen into a technical recession. In fact, Australia is the only advanced economy to have reported positive growth over the past year.
Part of Australia's resilience is due to the success of our policy response. We acted early and decisively across a range of policy levers to strengthen the banking system and support economic activity.  Australia was one of the first countries in the world to announce a bank guarantee. Australia rapidly implemented a comprehensive stimulus package that will save over 200,000 jobs over the next two years.
Overall the Government's response to the global economic crisis has so far been positive:
     * In terms of early problem diagnosis and management.
     * In terms of rapid and creative policy response.
     * And in the context of the enormous complexity of policy implementation, in a very short time frame.
On all three fronts, many challenges still lie ahead but so far the APS has performed well.
The Australian and many overseas governments worked together through the G20. Federal and State governments worked together; public sector agencies worked together; staff put in long hours; multiple challenges were managed simultaneously.
The threat of global financial institutions collapsing; credit markets failing; the private economy grinding to a halt - this has been a test of crisis management, and so far the APS has performed extraordinarily well.
When we needed to make decisions swiftly, the APS was able to deliver first-class advice within very short time frames, and when we needed to create a new structure of Commonwealth and State coordinators for the implementation of the Nation Building for Recovery programs, the APS delivered, although the rollout will continue to be challenging given its scope and urgency.
Their task was to work swiftly, work across boundaries, work together and make sure the job got done - and they are getting the job done. More than 30,000 infrastructure projects worth more than $20 billion have been approved. Construction work has begun at more than 5,000 schools, and we expect every Australian primary school to have new infrastructure by early 2011. Construction has begun on nearly 1,000 new community and defence homes, and we expect at least 15,000 homes to be built by the end of next year.
Through the work on the Nation Building plan, I have seen a public service filled with capable and committed individuals, able to perform under intense pressures.
The government I lead came to office committed to renewing the movement for reform while at the same time maintaining the continuity that is among the great strengths of the APS. We removed no department heads. There was no night of the long knives.
But we believed that over the preceding decade the critical lines between politics on the one hand, and the public service on the other, had become blurred, so we set out to restore them.
We made merit-based selection mandatory for most agency heads and statutory office holders. In conjunction with senior public servants, we held induction sessions for incoming ministerial staff on the roles and responsibilities of the public service.
We introduced a code of conduct for Ministerial staff that sets out standards of professionalism, integrity and behaviour, including in their relationships with public servants. We introduced tight guidelines for government advertising campaigns, so that no advertising campaign worth more than $250,000 can proceed without a report from the Auditor-General.
We have introduced legislation abolishing conclusive certificates under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 and the Archives Act 1983. We introduced a Register of Lobbyists to regulate contact between third party lobbyists and government representatives including ministers, staff, public servants and defence personnel.
Our Government 2.0 Taskforce is also looking at ways to use information technology to build a pro-disclosure culture within the Public Service.
These were the first steps in our plan to reinvigorate the Westminster tradition in an Australian setting, but the larger challenges still lies ahead, and that is to move forward with a vision to make the APS the best public service anywhere in the world.
I believe that is an entirely reasonable and achievable aspiration for the APS  -  if we take the right actions now.
To achieve that goal, I believe the APS must perform five tasks:
     * Provide high-quality, forward-looking and creative policy advice;
     * Deliver high-quality programs and services that put the citizen first;
     * Maintain a culture of honesty, impartiality and fairness, with a focus on retaining public trust;
     * Provide flexible, agile responses to changing realities and government priorities; and
     * Be effective and efficient in all its operations.
We have a strong APS, but much needs to be done to achieve these objectives.
Firstly, while the APS ranks highly in global terms for providing independent and impartial advice, we must ensure that this advice is also creative, innovative and outward looking. Public servants should not shy away from big ideas or be afraid to be bold. As I have said before, we cannot afford a culture where the public service only tells the government what it wants to hear.  
Over time, the APS has begun to create policy through taskforces and teams that are formed not from single divisions or departments but include policymakers from across government and from the private sector. In my Department, the new Strategy and Delivery Division is breaking new ground in creating teams of diverse policy officers to produce high-quality, collaborative, evidence-based work.
Nevertheless, the 2007-08 State of the Service Report showed that the APS is still far from having a culture of innovation. More than half of APS employees surveyed were ambivalent about whether new ideas were encouraged in their workplace. The vast majority said they were keen to try out new ideas but many felt they had limited support to take them forward. 
A second area in which the APS must renew its efforts is in the delivery of citizen-centred services. The relative success of Centrelink and Medicare in delivering frontline services focussed on the customer is testimony to how far the APS has come in this field, compared to 30 years ago, but we need to go further.
We need to create more customer-friendly services and make more services available through single locations, and not only does the APS need to know more about what  customers of public services want but it has to do more to feed that knowledge back to policymakers.
In 2007-08, only 54 per cent of APS employees thought their agency had good feedback mechanisms in place between the service delivery and policy development areas. 
Thirdly, there is a clear need for a stronger collective identity within the APS. In 2007-08 only 40 per cent of Senior Executive Service employees -- the leadership group  -  saw themselves as part of an APS leadership group rather than as leaders of their agency. What is more, if public servants are to see themselves as part of one APS, and if the APS is to be more flexible and agile, mobility rates across agencies must improve.
Only three per cent of APS employees moved between agencies in 2007-08, according to the State of the Service report. Movement between the APS and external employers is higher, but is still too low. There are still too many impediments and disincentives for employees moving between agencies, or between jurisdictions.
This kind of mobility must be encouraged to enrich the ability of individual public servants to provide cross-cutting advice, including on matters that transcend Commonwealth, State and Territory boundaries.
Finally, and critically, the APS must renew itself through investment in its greatest asset  -  its people. This is particularly urgent when the proportion of the APS workforce aged over 55 has doubled over the last 12 years, when more than 70 per cent of SES employees will be eligible for retirement over the next 10 years.
And when, as the Audit Office has pointed out, the APS faces a big challenge to attract and retain talented staff.
To overcome that challenge, the APS needs to invest more in developing the right people. Last year three-quarters of agencies that were able to estimate their expenditure on learning and development said they invested less than two per cent of their budgets in their people.
Of those, 39 per cent of agencies reported that they spent less than one per cent of their budget on learning and development, and in 2007-08, fewer than one in three APS employees rated the effectiveness of their learning and development as high or very high in terms of helping them to improve performance.
These figures are just not good enough for a professional public service.
I believe the next stage of renewal of the APS requires more than just piecemeal change. We need a more sweeping reform driven by a long-range blueprint for a world class, 21st century public service. That is why I am pleased to announce today that the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran, will be establishing and leading an Advisory Group to develop a blueprint for reform of the public service.
The work of the Advisory Group will proceed in two parts.
First, the Group will oversee the completion of an international benchmarking exercise to compare Australian performance with leading bureaucracies around the world. That is because the APS needs to know and be honest about its current performance, so that it can understand how it can improve.
Second, the Advisory Group will use the benchmarking study, along with other inputs, to develop the blueprint for reform. As part of the development of the blueprint, the Advisory Group will seek the input of the APS, and the broader community, about the APS's future and possible reforms.
Before the end of this month Mr Moran will convene the Advisory Group and release a discussion paper seeking public and APS input.  When that happens I encourage you all to let the Advisory Group know what you think about the future of the APS.
By early next year the Group will advise the Cabinet Secretary and me on the further steps we need to take to rejuvenate the APS. The Group will consider reform of the internal structures of the APS to ensure it provides the best policy advice to government.
And importantly, it will assess the core challenge of how to strengthen service delivery and measurement, how to foster a greater sense of cohesion and esprit de corps across the APS, how to attract the best people from outside the public service, and how to make the most of the great talent inside the service.
A specific priority will be a renewed and major investment in education and development of staff, in order to build strategic leadership across the APS.
To enhance the capabilities of the APS and its future leaders, we will need a renewed focus on learning and development in the public service, and on building close relationships with experts across the community. This may mean forming new relationships with universities, industry or other non-government groups.
It may mean government working closely with existing institutions, or creating new institutions, to build public service capabilities.
As I said in my address to Burgmann College at the Australian National University last week, for too long in Australia, thick walls have existed between places of research and learning, and places of policy making and implementation. Those thick walls do not enhance either the quality of public administration or the quality of academia.
They are in stark contrast with the United States, where the flow of experts between government and academia sharpens expertise in both. The Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University exemplifies this approach. 
Formed in the 1930s on the back of the Great Depression, the Kennedy School is now a collection of eminent social science research institutions, comprised of 15 institutes and research centres and over 30 executive education and degree programs. Together, these institutions draw on the resources of the entire University to make the School a centre for training enlightened public leaders that attracts some of the best students from across the world. At its core, this approach is the aspiration of both the Crawford School here at the ANU, and ANZSOG across Australia and New Zealand.
That said, I believe it is time for us to think about how we can strengthen our approach here. We should aspire to building a uniquely local version of the Kennedy School's impact.
I am in the market for ways we can improve how public institutions relate here, so we make the most of the great talent we have in Australia, wherever that talent exists.
Like the approach of the Kennedy School, our arrangements must equip the future public service to excel at policy analysis and advice, as well as public sector leadership. They must also increase the depth of public policy knowledge on which we can draw to tackle the most challenging issues we face.
Any new relationships or institutions in Australia would need to recognise and build on the strengths of what already exists. The Crawford School of Economics and Government at ANU has already built an enviable reputation as a centre of public policy research excellence.
I'm proud that the Secretary of my Department, Terry Moran, is on the Advisory Council  -  this demonstrates the Australian Government's commitment to this endeavour.  It is clear that we have one of the foundation stones for an Australian version of the Kennedy approach in the Crawford School, and its network of research institutes such as the Australia-Japan Research Centre.
Importantly, Crawford has built extensive international networks and linkages that bring students from other parts of the world to Australia, and encourage greater Asia literacy and global understanding in the Australian public policy community  -  and we need to strengthen this role.
Another foundation stone for an Australian version of the Kennedy approach is ANZSOG. Through ANZSOG, Australia has built a unique public policy and public sector management institution with relevant and useful international linkages.
It recognises our close relationship with New Zealand, and it is a model uniquely adapted to the Australian federal system, bringing together a consortium of Governments and universities from around the country and across the Tasman. As a result, Australia finally has high quality public sector executive leadership training and development of a standard superior to most places in the world.
ANZSOG is showing that it is capable of delivering first rate training for future leaders on a sufficient scale to underpin an improvement of overall public sector capability.
The Australian National University is a critical part of the ANZSOG undertaking, and also a critical part of the life of our national capital. The ANU holds a special place as a strategic endowment for our nation.
The Australian Government's vision for the ANU is to build on this national endowment.
The ANU is a university of national and international significance in terms of its contribution to both policy development and analysis, and in terms of training future leaders. For this reason, I believe it is time to reinvigorate the Commonwealth's relationship with the ANU and create a new partnership between the public service, ANZSOG and the ANU. 
That relationship is, in my view, crucial to fostering the development of the next generation of public service leaders, and ensuring government draws on the wealth of expertise that exists across the ANU and ANZSOG networks.
Part of this could potentially entail the ANU hosting a much enhanced and upgraded ANZSOG presence through a new National Centre of Public Policy and Public Sector Management. This Centre would focus on professional development.
Public service executives could either access programs at the ANU, or at one of the other university members of ANZSOG closest to where they work. As part of this, the ANZSOG Executive Master of Public Administration would become a key preparation for a role at the level of Senior Executive Service Band One. Other ANZSOG programs could be tailored for those in more senior roles.
For the ANU itself, this would mean a renewed emphasis on tapping the broader academic base for contributions to public policy through a new internal think tank or by other means.
The Government's program of public service reform above all else is about our people, fostering a public service culture where there is a passion for public policy, people who recognise that there are few more important and rewarding professions that an Australian can follow than to forge public policy that will change and better the lives of all Australians.
Like all contemporary institutions, the Australian Public Service is challenged by the sometimes bewildering pace of complex change, but the challenge of change has been a continuing feature of life for successive generations stretching back to the Industrial Revolution.
A generation ago in 1976, the Coombs Commission noted - and I quote - that:
“changing social attitudes in our time and the increasing tempo of technological change are widening the range and intensifying the complexity of the functions performed by governments and presenting them with a different pattern of characteristic problems.''
Many generations before, in 1854, the Northcote-Trevelyan report had warned of:
“...the great and increasing accumulation of public business and the consequent pressure upon the Government...''
It added that without a professional public service, the business of the government of the day could not be carried on.
Today's public service values many of the features of the public service ethos established as a result of reforms more than 150 years ago, but it also embraces change. Indeed, what marks the history of the public service is the productive tension between continuity and change.
It is precisely those organisations with a strong sense of their stability and continuity  -  of the strength of their culture and their values  -  that are best placed to change. 
That, more than anything else, lies at the heart of my confidence that the Australian Public Service can aspire to be - and can be - the best public service in the world.


FAINE: Kevin Rudd, good morning.PM: Good morning Jon.FAINE: What was on at the MCG?PM: We were launching with the AFL Players' Association a campaign called 'Just Think'. Essentially, it's about how we deal with the problem of alcohol-fuelled violence. Not just on the streets of Melbourne but more broadly across the country as well. This'll be a television advertising campaign and featuring some of the most famous AFL team Captains, and it's all about causing young people in particular, not to say to them 'don't drink', but to cause them to 'just think', about where do you draw the line?No one is out there being, you know, the complete wowser from central casting saying you shouldn't have a drink with your friends, go out and have a party, but causing people to conclude when you draw the line because the data on violence on the streets is alarming, and this has to be part, just part, of the response.FAINE: Do you think we've got a morals crisis, or some sort of values crisis in Australia?PM: Look, I think that if you sit back from it all, what's actually happening underneath these problems that we've just been talking about, I don't think anyone's got the definitive answer here, but look, you've got huge changes in family structures, you're seeing relationship breakdowns within families over a long period of time, you're seeing the fact that young people are now spending, according to the data, more time with their friends than their families.They're spending more time online with their friends, and often then with their families. What's happening out there? Big question mark. I don't think it's a sort of neat, yes or no in terms of old values, new values, but I think we are in a period of social transition, and the young people of Australia, the under 25s, are very much in the vanguard of this, and I think, as a nation, we've got to do better to support them. Which is why Kate Ellis and I, the Youth Minister, and the Health Minister Nicola Roxon, are working our way through a new youth strategy for Australia as part of our response to the National Health Reform agenda as well.FAINE: But is there some spiritual vacuum? We've got everything, we've got all the gadgets. But people seem to be yearning for something that those gadgets don't provide them.PM: I think every person is a better person if they are engaged in a belief and a set of actions which is bigger than themselves. Whether you choose to put a religious definition around that or not is a separate matter. Therefore I think one of the constructive things, positive things, happening in many schools here in Melbourne and in Sydney as well, is where you've got community organisations encouraging our young people to get right in behind big, long-term projects.There is for example an NGO program called, I think, High Resolutions, run by a bunch of Sydney and Melbourne philanthropists, now involving thousands of school kids, whereby- I don't know quite how you measure the High School System here- but year eight, in a kids' education, through to year 12, they'll actually take on as a group of students a big project, whether it's something international, something domestic, an indigenous community, and they'll work with it over a period of time. What's that about? Not just encouraging teamwork and those sorts of things, but also to believe that causing the construction of a value which says 'I am a better and more fulfilled human being, if I'm engaged in an external project which is about the betterment of other people's lives'.FAINE: Can we talk about the economy? The warnings this morning are that the stimulus package that you've initiated, that has left Australia unlike any other country in the world, avoiding a recession, could in fact be triggering a rise of a round of inflation and a rise in interest rates? In fact there are rumours circulating that interest rate rises could be coming sooner, rather than later. Have you gone too far?PM: This global economic recession has been described around the world, legitimately, as the most serious economic crisis in the last three quarters of a century. Remember that in 2009 still, we're projected to have for the first time since the War the global economy contracting, not growing. And that's part of the challenge we've had here. What have we done about it? Our Government stimulus strategy, through Nation Building for Recovery, is to cushion the blow. You're right to say that as a result of that, through our cash payments to families, the 70 per cent of our stimulus which now goes into medium and long-term infrastructure, it's having an effect.FAINE: Did you overshoot? Have you over-reached?PM: No, I was about to go on to that very point, is that we are by no means out of the woods yet. There's so much that can still go wrong in the global economy that can actually reverberate back. Our Treasury advisors, the international advisors through the IMF and elsewhere, are saying that Governments should continue to implement the stimulus strategies to which they have committed. It's not just us, by the way. What we did at that London meeting of the G20 in March/April was as a group of the 20 largest economies in the world, commit to some $5 trillion worth of global stimulus, in a $63 trillion global economy. Everything's related to everything else.But the other thing I'd say about our stimulus is this - it's been targeted to be temporary, and so that, what you do have is our stimulus peaking in the current financial year and then coming off and coming off again. It's entirely designed to step up to the plate while the private sector has been in retreat, and to pull it back. That's the way it's been designed.FAINE: Does it need to be more nimble, though, in its operations? For instance, your industrial relations changes, the Industrial Relations Commission is saying, some people will be worse off. Employers will be worse off, or employees may be worse off, but either way you can't possibly have a system where everybody is better off.PM: Well, just on the question of being nimble, on the impact of the global economy, I sometimes think people don't know how close we all got to the abyss last September and October. This was dire straits time. You had financial institutions falling over like nine pins around the world, the rest of the global economy plummeting into recession, huge unemployment. Our job was to step in, nimbly, effectively, to say we need to cushion the impact here, because we didn't want to throw, unnecessarily, hundreds of thousands of other Australians out of work.When it goes through to your question for example, about the ability of people to fund mortgages, if you lose your job, let me tell you, that is a really fundamental impact.On the question of IR, industrial relations-FAINE: Award modernisation, how can you say no one will be worse off?PM: Well what we've said all along is that our objective is to ensure that with award modernisation, which is a necessary part of the reform of a pretty antiquated industrial relations system, that we would have as our objective, that for employers and for employees, a system whereby we could ensure that the additional costs, the additional burdens, could be handled over time. I mean, we were very clear about, very clear about the objectives.The objectives have been reflected also in what was said in the Industrial Relations Commission determination most recently. It is said that on the implementation of the proposed changes to the Awards, where we bring something like 4,000 Awards to a much smaller number, that that is done over a five year period, a staged implementation. If there are transition interventions which are necessary, if for example there are extra burdens placed on particular categories of workers, that those transition arrangements can kick in, and furthermore -FAINE: So no one will go backwards?PM: Our stated objective. Clearly stated, our stated objective is that we would work to ensure that employers and employees are not disadvantaged under the system.FAINE: How do you then implement that stated objective to make sure no one's worse off?PM: Well that's where I was going in my answer to you before, three ways. One is, to stage the implementation of the change and that's what the AIRC has taken up yesterday. It's a five year transition period. The second is, if you do have a problem with individual categories of workers, that transitional payments can also, or transitional adjustments can also be made to offset those difficulties in adjustment. And thirdly, Fair Work Australia has a further capacity, flexibly to review even those transition arrangements if we run into a problem.Three ways of implementing, all outlined there in the underpinning Government legislation, reflected in what the AIRC ran on with, was articulating most recently, and consistent with the Government's stated objective.FAINE: So if anyone says, under your proposals I would be worse off, you are saying, you can fix that, and here's how we'll fix it. Do you guarantee to fix it?PM: Jon, that's about the third or fourth time you've asked this question. I'm saying our objective, as we have always stated, is for employers and employees, is for there to be no disadvantage. The implementation of that lies through the three measures I've just outlined. We are talking about 20 per cent, probably of the Australian workforce, involving some of the lowest paid categories of employment in Australia, and it's going to be a long and complicated process. But there are the three arms of policy to make sure that people are properly supported through this, and similarly with businesses as well, because they are recovering from some of the impacts we just talked about before, through the global economic recession.FAINE: How do you stop the scandals enveloping the New South Wales ALP?PM: Well, there have been some problems of late. I think that's fair to say.FAINE: That is an understatement, Prime Minister.PM: There have been some problems of late. I think that's fair to say and people will make their judgements about my Government and other governments come election time.FAINE: Are you going to have their problems visited upon you at the next election?PM: You know something Jon, I'm pretty relaxed about people making a judgement about whether the Government which I lead has done a good job or a half-reasonable job or where we might have succeeded or failed. I think the Australian public make their judgements on the merits.The thing I'd say in that context though, is I notice with the upcoming Bradfield by-election that Mr Turnbull's saying today that we've got this upcoming federal by-election, it's a seat which the Liberal Party has held for 60 years, and his great statement of confidence in the Federal Liberal's prospects at present is to say 'register a protest vote against state Labor'.Well, if you don't have any national polices on the economy, on employment, on climate change, on health, on education, I suppose that's all Mr Turnbull is left with.FAINE: Does the John Della Bosca marital infidelity scandal cost you support with women voters in New South Wales at the next federal election? Is that what your strategists are concerned about?PM: You know something Jon, I don't get into the business of political analysis and commentary. My job is to go out there and take the best decisions I can for the country, for the economy, for the health system, for the education system. People will make their own judgements about us, about whether they think we're doing a good job, a bad job or an indifferent job.All these other factors will come through in the wash in one form or another. But my job is to be accountable for those undertakings I've made to the Australian people.FAINE: I'd like to get a couple of callers to air before we get to the news. Seven minutes to eleven, Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister, taking your calls: 1300-222-774.Just before we take one more caller, you've made promises about homelessness, standards of living in remote Indigenous communities, school rebuilds, emissions trading, climate change -PM: ABC funding.FAINE: ABC funding. It's harder to do in office than it always seems and the risk is that you in fact over promise you head towards another election.PM: Look, can I just answer that in two respects - our commitments to the Australian people prior to the last election, and you've run through a few, we believe have to be implemented. We issued, a month or two ago a mid-term report on what progress we have made and the areas that we've still got to act, whether it's on climate change, whether it's in education, whether it's in health and we take each of those commitments seriously.Secondly, we've also had to deal with this (inaudible) called the global economic crisis, which, frankly, has been huge for us all.Thirdly, you point to the future. Our responsibility is also to ensure the continuation of conservative financial management into the future which means implementing the budget strategy outlined in the budget to return the budget to surplus. That means that we'll be taking a very, very keen eye to anything on the expenditure side in the future.FAINE: Graham from Frankston has a question for Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister. Good morning to you, Graham.CALLER: Good morning, Jon. Good morning, Prime Minister.PM: Good morning, Graham from Frankston.CALLER: Do you think we've brought a lot of this violence on ourselves with you know, the licensing laws now encouraging people to go and drink until four o'clock in the morning. I know it's not directly your responsibility, but when you get all the premiers in Canberra, could you encourage them to say well, let's cut it back till a reasonable midnight hour and probably cut out Sundays.PM: You know Jon I think there's a whole lot of factors at work here. Licensing laws is one of them. And I think what we need is a better national approach. I'm certainly up for the possibility of discussing with the premiers and the chief ministers how this can be done better. It is complex, it differs from state to state, and often the implementation's a little different from city to city as well. But here in Melbourne I know there are real challenges. We need to work through those, but there are other parts to the violence equation as well which we've been referring to earlier in our conversation today as well.FAINE: Do you see any reason why there should be liquor for sale 'til all hours of the morning? Five, six, seven in the morning?PM: You know something, you want my personal view on that Jon, is I think we need to be drawing a harder line with that. Look, I'm no wowser. I think people should be able to go out and have a party and have a drink and have some good times with their friends. We've got to draw a line somewhere. When you're dealing with, you know, youth organisations like I've just been talking with again this morning like Step Back, Think. And dealing with young people who are knocked over, knocked out and reduced to a wheelchair on their 20th birthday, as a society we've actually got to take a death breath and say 'what's going wrong here? What can we do to fix it?', and I think licensing laws is one part of it. I don't have a prescription in terms of when and where, but I believe it's a national discussion we need to have across all the premiers.FAINE: It brings out your inner wowser, in fact, when you talk to people like that, I've found. It something that makes you think maybe wowserism was a better alternative.PM: Well, you know, wowserism - and probably people under 25 don't even what the word means, you and I, being slightly over 25, perhaps do - would say, you know, 'don't drink at all', but, for example, what we've just been doing with the AFL Players Association today very explicitly saying 'we're not saying don't drink. What we're saying is, just think', and that actually is quite important in people setting up mental, shall I say, limit in your mind when you're going out for some drinks with friends about when you stop.FAINE: Ron in Box Hill - morning, Ron.CALLER: Hi, how are you? I think the violence in the city is caused by the schools being incompetent and training our youth in civil behaviour. They should be going to school to be educated in civil behaviour, but they're not. But the issue I'm ringing up about is 200,000 homeless. We've got 200,000 homeless in Australia, and Kevin Rudd is wasting $30 billion on a broadband thing we don't need, on pink bats and building halls we don't need. We should be balancing the budget, cancelling the pink bats, computers in schools, broadband and the schools program and build 500,000 houses to accommodate the homeless and we immediately stop immigration.FAINE: And stop immigration as well, while we're at it. All right, Ron, thank you, there's a lot there for the Prime Minister.PM: Firstly, the Government makes no apology whatsoever having acted strongly, early and decisively to combat the global economic recession.FAINE: Broadband - waste of money?PM: We have a conspicuous market failure with high-speed broadband in this country for 12 years, where the previous government sat on its hands and did nothing on infrastructure. This rollout will be necessary to turbo-charge the next level of productivity growth in the Australian economy. We're proud of it, and we're going to get on with it.FAINE: Stop immigration?PM: You know something, I thought we had a bit of bipartisan consensus on this going back to, let me say World War Two, that this country, a nation of immigrants, will continue to be a nation of immigrants into the future.FAINE: Prime Minister, if some of the major banks put up interest rates in the next week, are they jumping the gun?PM: Well, we've said to the banks repeatedly that they need to be very, very, very mindful of not stepping outside the framework of official interest rates.FAINE: The Reserve Bank doesn't meet for another month.PM: That's true.FAINE: So if rates go up before then?PM: I've also been very mindful of the banks' recent profitability levels, very, very mindful of how that's been registered. I'm very mindful of the fact that the banks have been aided by the guarantees that the Government has provided in terms of their wholesale funding deposits, as well as to their depositors.I would be very, very cautious about this if I were the banks. Ultimately, it's a market system. But you know something? Key to making sure that we're doing the right thing by people who are using banks is to do whatever we can to support employment, hence the Nation Building for Recovery Plan.FAINE: Thank you for your time today.


MITCHELL: You're today helping to launch a campaign around youth violence in the city involving the AFL. What's being done about it? What else are you doing about it?
PM: Well, just on the 'Just Think' campaign, which the AFL Players association have got behind, it's basically a public campaign - TV, radio, and print - on this alcohol-fuelled violence, and to cause young people in particular, but people in general, to literally just think before you drink too much or before you get that crazy idea in your head maybe to have a go at somebody, because we know how tragic the consequences could be, and why there are organisations like Step Back Think, which I think you're associated with as well, Neil. I've strongly supported this initiative. Your question is 'what else are we doing?'
As a Government, we are working our way through, as part of our national health reform strategy, what are the particular health-related challenges occurring with young people today? Mental illness - how do we effectively identify mental illness conditions with young people. Some of the stats we see have said 65 percent of people go undiagnosed, and a lot of that's occurring at younger stages in people's lives. How can we equip our teachers with the skills necessary to spot it, to intervene early and to turn people around? This is one of the practical things, but there's a whole range which the Youth Minister and the Health Minister are working on at the moment.
MITCHELL: You're obviously concerned about it, as is the Premier here, but what's happened? Why is this sudden, kids have always got drunk, and there've been brawls, but there seems to be a new level of violence, like the one I described. What's happened? What's changed? Do we know?
PM: An honest answer is, Neil, I don't think we do. Part of the reason why I'm into the business of trying to find out is because we can deal with the external side of this, the manifestations of it, which is alcohol-fuelled violence, people being decked, it seems on a regular basis in brawls outside pubs, the terrible, terrible incident we saw recently with that young boy being killed-
MITCHELL: At school.
PM: At school. I think that just causes the nation to draw in its breath. So what's happening beneath all of that? Are we seeing - some serious questions in my own head - the ultimate, sort of, working out of breakdowns in family relationships over a long period of time? Are we looking at the manifestation, for example, of kids increasingly spending more time with their friends rather than their parents because their parents and families are too busy? Are we looking at the manifestation of kids spending more and more time online in a more anonymous social environment?  Are we looking at an epidemic of, I wouldn't say an epidemic, it's probably the wrong term, but untreated mental illnesses or mental health challenges for kids, then at schools not being given the skills necessary to negotiate their way through their emotional lives? Is it a cocktail of all the above?
And also, we're in a state of great transition in terms of what once would be described as the traditional values of our society, into a new set of values being negotiated out there. All these things link together, but what can you do about it? The practical thing the AFL's doing I think is great. Other initiatives now, about encouraging and empowering our young people to become positively, constructively engaged in a whole bunch of projects out there, and a lot of good stuff going on out there in the non-government sector right now with schools.
MITCHELL: Is sentencing an issue, do you think we're tough enough in punishment?
PM: I think part of what we need to be on about as a nation, Neil, is, if you like, making sure we're providing support and empowerment of young people to build their own positive and constructive lives. The other part of it's the hard message of taking responsibility. I mean real responsibility, so that if you are endangering the safety of others and the community at large, that you know, up front, what the consequences are and those consequences are delivered by the law enforcement system. It's both these things, making sure young people have got the skills and showing where the line is as well.
MITCHELL: Are you a supporter of mandatory sentencing on certain offences?
PM: The criminal justice system, as you know, is largely run by the states and territories. I've always had a view, despite all its failures and all the controversy, that the combination of trial by jury and the discretionary determinations of the bench is the best way to go. Each set of circumstances is always going to be a bit different, and as you know, the criminal code actually deals with that, sets out a band of possible sentencing parameters, but I have been around long enough to see how variable some of the facts can be in individual cases.
MITCHELL: That said, are you surprised, we've got it here, a committed jihadist, a judge says, has got no remorse and is still violent, convicted yesterday. He's done three years waiting trial, but he's only going to do nine months.
PM: I'm happy to talk about this, probably in a later interview, once I've actually read what's been determined here, and I'm not equivocating on this, I'd rather actually read the judgment, know precisely whether or not there are any other elements to the legal process, and then I'll comment further, but in one of our later discussions on air I'm quite happy to come back to this.
MITCHELL: But you do intend to read the judgment? It has got your attention?
PM: It has, because of some of the matters you've just referred to.
MITCHELL: Now, you made a promise before the election no worker would be worse off under your system. The Industrial Relations Commission says you've got it wrong, and that Australian workers could be worse off and in fact bosses could be worse off. What would you do? Are you still saying no Australian worker will be worse off?
PM: We'll step back for a bit, and I'll come straight to your question, what we're trying to do with award modernisation? Basically modernise the industrial relations system - 4,000 plus industrial awards out there in the workplace at the moment, employers, unions, saying for decades and decades 'this thing's grown like topsy and it actually needs to be reformed, streamlined and modernized', and that's what Julia Gillard has been doing, and been doing a good job of it. And our objective all the way through has been that modern awards under the new system would not be intended to disadvantage employees or increase costs for employers, so what's the AIRC, the Industrial Relations Commission come out and said? There are two or three ways in which this can be achieved.
One is to phase in any changes over a five-year period. Second is, have transitional arrangements which can apply in individual award cases where this is an effect in terms of various individuals. Remember, we're often dealing with the least-paid members of our community. 20 percent of the Australian workforce are on awards, often the lowest paid. And the third thing is, under this system, how we've also got a capacity for Fair Work Australia to review these transitional arrangements in each case, so that if the problem arises midstream, there's a further opportunity, on application, to intervene as well, but the objective remains.
MITCHELL: So does the guarantee remain - no Australian worker will be worse off?
PM: What Julia has said, and I have said, throughout this, is that our objective is to have a system where employees and employers are not disadvantaged by this system.
MITCHELL: So it can't be guaranteed?
PM: Well can I say to you, that's always been our objective. We've set up a set of arrangements under the law through the Industrial Relations Commission with Fair Work Australia to provide three sets of mechanisms to bring it into effect. That's what our intention is, that's what our objective is. We've got five years to roll it out.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, in Opposition you insisted that John Howard guarantee that nobody be worse off. Are you prepared to offer that guarantee?
PM: Well, I think what Mr Howard did, Neil, as you would quite well remember, was go out and say in a definitive sense that no Australian, that Australian working families had never been better off.
MITCHELL: You insisted that he guarantee that no worker would be worse off under his system. Can you make the same guarantee?
PM: We're consistent, absolutely, with what we said prior to the election, which is our objective as described.
MITCHELL: It's a big difference.
PM: Well, prior to the election, did we provide the language that you just described? We said we had this as an objective. We're conscious of the fact that we're dealing with hundreds of thousands of workers under, currently, 4,000 separate awards. We therefore have set up the best mechanism through Fair Work Australia, the AIRC and the Fair Work Act to bring that into being, where all these individual circumstances will be worked out through the system over time.
MITCHELL: Is it also your objective that no Australian employer be worse off?
PM: Well, the objective was twofold, because of the impact in particular of the global economic recession. That is, what do you do with employers, who are obviously facing a whole series of extra challenges given the downturn in economy and the global economy, is for them to be able to have a set of transitional arrangements for their costs as well, hence why these proposed changes to the awards are designed to be implemented over a five-year period.
MITCHELL: Sorry, you've lost me. Will no employer be worse off?
PM: The objective for both, Neil, for employers and employees, consistent with what we always said, is that when we introduce this modern awards system that it's not intended that there be a disadvantage for employees or employers in terms of increased cost.
MITCHELL: So we're talking about objectives and intentions.
PM: Exactly.
MITCHELL: Not guarantees.
PM: Well, we've been consistent about that. We've created one of the best institutional mechanisms to bring that to pass, and remember, the alternative is WorkChoices, and WorkChoices means stripping away people's basic protections in the workplace.
MITCHELL: Do you have any updated information on the Indonesian earthquake? Information will be emerging now as daylight breaks.
PM: The most recent information I got was first light this morning, which was 100 or so homes destroyed, I think 15 or so people who have lost their lives. As to whether that changes during the course of the day, we'll hear more. We've said to the Indonesian authorities we'll work with them in terms of any assistance that we can provide. We've had no request yet.
MITCHELL: Any suggestions of Australians involved, Prime Minister?
PM: Not yet, based on the brief I got at first light this morning, there are no Australian nationals involved.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break, come back with more from the Prime Minister. 9690 0693, 13 13 32.
[ADVERTISEMENTS]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with you. One out of left field Prime Minister - is Kim Beazley going to be the next ambassador to the United States?
PM: Well, we haven't decided who's going to be the next ambassador to the United States.
MITCHELL: Is he in the running?
PM: Well, can I say that when it comes to Kim and to any other former politician of standing who's got something to contribute, I believe they should all be considered for greater use in public life, and of course, you'd be considering Kim and a range of other people for diplomatic appointments. Specifically on Washington, Stephen and I, that's Stephen Smith and I, haven't actually sat down to work it through. Our current Ambassador, Dennis Richardson, is due to be there until about November - we've just appointed him to be the head of the Department of Foreign Affairs - so we've got some time.
MITCHELL: And a great help he was to us when we were in Washington, too.
PM: He's a good Ambassador, he's very effective. He was my first section head in the Department of Foreign Affairs, 25 years ago. I used to do his photocopying.
MITCHELL: So he can ring, he can offer you free and fearless advice, can he?
PM: He used to bore it up me all the time.
MITCHELL: I bet he still does.
PM: He's actually good. The one thing with Dennis is you know where you stand.
MITCHELL: Hello Bill, go ahead please Bill.
CALLER: Yeah, I'm staggered as to why we keep avoiding the drug problem in relation to alcohol-fuelled violence that we keep hearing about. There's far more amphetamine-based drugs around in the community these days. All you have to do is speak to the young people and they'll tell you it's everywhere in the clubs and all over the place. And I've witnessed some of these young people out there, a young fella head butting a glass door. In their sixteens, three of them, way off their heads. Now they had a bit of alcohol in them, but there was something else making them extremely violent.
MITCHELL: Yeah. Are drugs part of it, Prime Minister?
PM: Absolutely, Bill's right. When it comes to amphetamines, and let's call it a whole range of other drugs beyond, of course, the challenges of alcohol, it's real, it's big, it's growing. You would've seen television campaigns dealing with 'ice' at present. This is huge out there, and Bill's right. We're going to deal with this problem systematically. Our earlier conversation today Neil, drugs are part of the equation, hard drugs are part of the equation as well.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, are you changing your strategy on asylum seekers? The reports are that 10 asylum seekers have now been landed in Australia without visas, which is quite different to the Howard Government strategy of assessing them on Christmas Island.
PM: My advice, Neil, is that these are 10 unaccompanied minors, and therefore what's happened is that they've been transferred from Christmas Island to the mainland on 2 September because unaccompanied minors are given priority in processing. That's what's happening in the case of these minors. That's why they're treated separately.
MITCHELL: So there's no intention to change the policy?
PM: Absolutely not.
MITCHELL: Labor powerbroker John Della Bosca's resigned after admitting an affair with a young woman. Now I don't know anything about your Cabinet, but if a member of your Cabinet was exposed as having an affair, would you sack them?
PM: What a wonderful hypothetical question. My attitude to all that sort of thing is that people's private lives should be private lives.
MITCHELL: So you don't think it should've been reported?
PM: Oh no, you think I'm going to tell the media what to do? That's a matter for the media. But can I just say, people's private lives are their private lives. The difficult debate is always where they intersect with the discharging of public duties, public responsibilities, and that's always going to be a case for judgement in individual cases.
MITCHELL: What's your view on the Della Bosca case? Did he breach his public duties?
PM: You know something Neil, I actually don't know all the facts concerning this one. I've known John Della Bosca for a long, long time. I don't know all the facts concerning this case, but look, this is a really hard, sensitive, difficult thing for his family, his kids, his wife, and I think he's made his own decision, and it has been well canvassed.
MITCHELL: Could you see him coming back one day?
PM: That's a matter for Mr Della Bosca and the New South Wales Government.
MITCHELL: Another matter that has been private but publicly reported is one of your Members of Parliament, Jodie Campbell, allegedly assaulted by her partner. Will she be back soon? Is she okay?
PM: I spoke with- first of all, as you'd be aware Neil, I won't comment on the details of any case which may be the subject of any possible proceedings. Secondly, I did speak to Jodie within 24 hours of this incident occurring. She was in fine spirits. We're hoping to have her back very soon. Parliament resumes next week, but I've basically said to her, 'take some time'. She's a very good local Member, Bass in north-eastern Tasmania around Launceston, and she, I'm sure, will be back into the thick of it really soon.
MITCHELL: The economy - some are pessimistic about the future, even, I think, Paul Keating seems to be saying there could be a double dip here. Could there be a double dip?
PM: You know, when I say the economy's not of the woods yet, there are two things I've got in mind. And that's when I look at the US economy, and the wider, let's call it Western economy, including Europe.
One is what's still happening in the US and into the wash-through of personal credit card debt. The second is the wash-through in terms of what's happening with the commercial property market in the United States. Both these are huge. There are still factors at play there which haven't fully come through the system. Therefore, it's important to be vigilant.
There's one other fact which people should bear in mind as well, is that we still haven't seen the full and complete resolution of toxic assets within the European banking system - the European banking system represents at least one third of the global banking system, and that is impaired assets or damaged financial assets on the balance sheets of these big banks.
You put all those things together, it means uncertainty for the future. So when people like Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey and the Liberals say, you know, 'end stimulus', can I just say, that's pulling the rug from under the recovery, which is by far from being certain-
MITCHELL:But the stimulus can't continue forever. Is there still a possibility we could face recession in Australia?
PM: Well, as I said, we're not out of the woods yet. The reason we have structured the stimulus this way is that it is at its strongest in '08/'09-'09/'10, and deliberately then comes down. That's the way it's structured, in three phases. Strong, medium and light in terms of its effect on the economy, so that as the private economy recovers, you draw down the level of Government engagement.
But on the question of the pathway to our own economic recovery, it's still going to be very, very rough. But bear in mind Neil, we've managed so far to produce through the combined efforts of business and Government working together, the only economy of the OECD, that's 30 advanced economies around the world, to have produced positive growth in the last year, second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit.
MITCHELL:  Do you accept pressure's now on interest rates to go up?
PM: Well I wrote, pretty up-front and frank about this, in a-
MITCHELL: A 7,000-word essay.
PM: Which I'm sure you've memorised - the essay on the future directions of the Australian economy, a month or so ago. Which is, as you begin to see some evidence of recovery, it follows that interest rates, which are now at 50-year lows, what the Reserve Bank Governor describes as emergency lows, will begin to go up. I think it's important to be frank about that.
But you know something? What's governed my thinking in all of this is how do you actually maintain strength in the Australian economy, providing work for tradies, work for small business, and that means a stimulus strategy which is targeted to cushion us from the worst impact of the global recession.
MITCHELL: Speaking of stimulus, how does a one-child school in the outback get $250,000? That kid must be partying.
PM: Well on the details of individual schools, I'll defer to both the Minister responsible and the Education Minister, because you know how many schools we've got in the country? About 10,000.
MITCHELL: Sounds a mistake though, doesn't it? $250,000 at a one-kid school.
PM: You know something Neil, there's always going to be problems in the implementation. 10,000 schools in the country, 7,500 primary schools, but when I go to primary schools right across the country, and their P&amp;Cs, their P&amp;Fs, their parent bodies, the principals, the kids - these are schools which have often not had a decent library ever, and what they're saying is now we've got a decent chance for our kids to have a new library, a new multi-purpose hall, a new language centre, a new science centre, this is great for education for the future.
MITCHELL: I may have read your 7,000 word essay, but I imagine you haven't had time yet to read the Preventative Health Taskforce report, which is 350 pages.
PM: Well spotted.
MITCHELL: If you adopt half of this, you'll be the Supernanny. It really is, what's your reaction to what you know of it? It really is paternalistic in some ways.
PM: Well, these are health professionals who are going to come up with their own conclusions about where we should go for the future. I have never shirked a public debate about these things. There's a whole lot of quite radical recommendations out there at the moment for the future of the health and hospital system. That's out there. This is out there on preventative health.
MITCHELL: Would you use tax as a measure in this?
PM: I'll just go to one point - you said, 'what are they on about?' Currently, on preventative health, the nation spends, I think, two percent of our total expenditure on health and hospitals on preventative healthcare. Big problem - we've got an explosion of chronic diseases, which have, frankly, the capacity to cripple our health system, and health costs out for the decades ahead, so we've got to act.
Now, how do you do that most effectively, in terms of changing people's lifestyles? You know, the problems in terms of the obesity explosion in Australia, what's that going to do in terms of Type 2 Diabetes? There's a whole range of measures which they've put to us. We don't know what the best landing point is, but you can't just push this problem off-
MITCHELL: But you wouldn't rule out tax as a weapon?
PM: Well, we've said that we're going to have a mature debate about this in the context of what Henry does, Ken Henry does, in the future of the tax system, and secondly, where we land finally on the future of the health and hospital system, and that'll be in the first part of next year.
MITCHELL: Now also on health and hospitals, last time you were here, there was an emergency doctor, I think, at one of the Melbourne hospitals, who'd written anonymously a letter about his concerns in accident and emergency. You've now met him?
PM: Yeah, I had a chat with him yesterday and one of his colleagues and we ran through the particular challenges of accident and emergency at a number of hospitals here in Melbourne. And the story is as we would find in many other parts of the country, and that is so many of our accident and emergency specialists under huge pressure, and that is often not enough beds in which to admit people, too many people coming to accident and emergency who could possibly go elsewhere if you had flexible hours for GPs outside the system, and a lot of challenges, too, in terms of enough, shall I say specialist accident and emergency doctors being deployed to the range of hospitals beyond the metro area as well.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time. You haven't had a quick word to Tiny Tim Holding have you?
PM: No, but I tell you what, we're all delighted that he's back, safe and sound in one piece. I hear John Brumby wants him back in Parliament today. John, give the guy a day off.
MITCHELL: Thanks very much for your time. The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, thank you for coming in.


The Australian Government today announced $132,000 for the Australian Football League (AFL) to support their work in tackling alcohol fuelled street violence, particularly amongst young Australians.
The Prime Minister made the announcement at the launch of ‘Just Think', an initiative that will bring together 8 AFL Captains in a powerful advertising campaign aimed at discouraging senseless acts of violence.
The Campaign, to be run throughout the AFL 2009 Final Series, sends a strong message that alcohol abuse and reckless violence is not a part of footy and is not supported by some of Australia's most respected sporting heroes.
The Australian Government has committed the $132,000 to the AFL through the $2 million Club Champions program which utilises the power of sport to tackle irresponsible and damaging drinking in our community.
The AFL have confirmed to the Government and the AFL Players Association that the “Just Think” campaign is one of the programs they will fund from the $132,000 contribution.
Club Champions is built on the recognition that in partnership with the Government sport has the ability to produce role models that can reach out to community, especially our young people.
While often seen as the perpetrators of public violence, the reality is that young people are overwhelmingly the victims.
Nationally incidents of assault have almost doubled since 1995 with young males and females aged between 15 and 24 having the highest rate of being victims of assault.
Young Australians have clearly identified violence as one of the top issues that is impacting their daily lives, not only worried about their own personal safety, but also about the impact that violence is having on their friends, families and their communities.
The Government commends the AFL and the AFL Players Association for showing leadership and taking this tough stand against alcohol abuse and violence.
The Australian Government is determined to work with the community, sport and young Australians to combat the scourge of violence in our community. 


PM: G'day. I'm here with Mitch from Hawthorn. The Hawks did pretty well last season mate.
MITCHELL: Yeah, last year. Seems like a long time ago, unfortunately.
PM: Well politics is like that. Sometimes up, sometimes down. But more importantly, Mitch is here supporting a campaign with the AFL Players Association called Just Think. What's it about? It's about the challenge we all face with alcohol-fuelled violence. We're not saying to people ‘don't drink', we're just asking people to just think. And that means drinking responsibly. So mate, thanks for getting behind it.
MITCHELL: No worries, it's good to be here, we think it's pretty important. We're getting onto it early, it's probably not got to a stage where it's gone too far, but you know, we need to try and stamp it out as early as we can, and make our streets nice and safe to walk around.
PM: That's right, so no one here believes that we shouldn't be able to have a good time and have a party, that's great- but there is a line, which we shouldn't go beyond, and that's what all this is about. So just think, get behind the campaign. And thanks to the AFL players for backing this as well.


The General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, HE Nong Duc Manh, will visit Australia from 6 to 9 September, accompanied by a high-level delegation. 
This visit by Vietnam's senior leader will be an opportunity to discuss how this important relationship can be taken forward.
Vietnam is a highly valued partner for Australia in the Asia-Pacific region. We enjoy a strong bilateral relationship and cooperate closely on the regional and international challenges we face, including counter-narcotics and combating people smuggling and trafficking in persons.
Australia and Vietnam work closely in regional forums, including the East Asia Summit and APEC, and have a shared interest in building a stable and prosperous region.
Vietnam is one of Australia's most dynamic trading partners in South East Asia, with bilateral trade growing an average of 20 per cent per year over the last five years to reach $8 billion in 2008. Australian investment in Vietnam was worth more than $500 million in 2008.


Thanks very much, and thank you very much, Mike, for those kind remarks before. Tony Kelly, the President of Brisbane Lions Football Club, Steve Kernighan, President of Carlton, Jeanne Pratt - where you, Jeanne? Just wonderful to have you here with us, and I share all those sentiments which have been expressed earlier this evening about Dick's contribution to the game, his great and continuing support for the Carlton Football Club, and we are all the poorer for his passing.And to you, the sponsors and friends and football fans one and all, welcome to my electorate. That's where you are, each and every one of you, you're in the Federal Division of Griffith and I'm greeting you as your Federal Member. And those of you who have come from interstate, those of you who have the unfortunate habit of being Carlton supporters, there is a local bylaw which is that if, perchance, you were to lose this evening, we intend to lock the place down. You will not escape.It's great to be back at the Gabba, it's great to be back home. One of the great delights in being the local member here is that I live about 15 minutes' walk that way, so in the last decade or so that I've been backing the Lions, it has been a great advantage to be able to walk to this ground, and to walk home, and it's been less of an advantage, however, to go out in the middle at the end of the game and try and kick a football around with my sons. That's led to general commentary from all those other dads who have been out on a ground with me doing that saying that I should stick to my day job, and they were absolutely right.What is terrific is to be back here tonight to see the Lions back where they belong, and that's playing football in the month of September. It's a fantastic thing to say. Five long years, not that any of us have been counting, since 2004. '01, '02, '03 weren't bad, '04 was pretty good, and it's great to be back.But it's also great to be back against a team such as Carlton, which has such an extraordinary history. You think of the history of the AFL, what would its history be without the likes of Carlton and Collingwood? They are so steeped in the game's past and so vital in the game's future.My (inaudible) in saying a few things here tonight is to do with the campaign which Mike referred to before, which we launched at the MCG only a couple of days ago, and I did so with Sam Mitchell from Hawthorne.Just think - here are three facts which I'd just like you to reflect on. The first is this: 70 percent of 15- to 17-year-olds have been exposed to alcohol-related violence - that's 70 percent. The second is this: three out of four assaults in our country are alcohol-related. The third one is this: three out of four street offences in our country are alcohol-related as well.This should all give us national pause for thought, and whether you're from Melbourne, whether you're from Sydney, whether you're from Bris like I am, or the other metropolitan centres of our country, there is a real problem out there which we've got to deal with, and it's alcohol-fuelled violence.Those of us who are parents, those of us who have got kids who are out on a Friday night and a Saturday night, your heart goes into your mouth these days in terms of what's going on out there. We've actually got to do better as a community in our response to it, and at multiple levels.One of those levels has been, I think, the extraordinary support given to us by the heroes and the leaders of the AFL, and that's why I was so proud to be there recently at the MCG, launching this 'Just Think' campaign. Very simply, it's this: no-one out there, including the captains of the teams, is saying to the young people of Australia 'don't drink.' What they are saying is 'just think.'What they are saying is it's fine to go out there when there's a big game on and to have a party and to celebrate with your mates and your friends. That's good, that's natural, that's an Australian thing to do, and all of us have been young and all of us have been out there and all of us have celebrated. But it also comes with a responsibility, which is to understand when you've got to draw the line, when you've got to stop, when you've got to just think.And that's what this campaign is all about, and when you see the ad which you'll see across our nation's television screens and in our papers and on radio, it's our eight AFL captains, including the Juddster, including Brownie, including a whole bunch of others, simply saying to the young people of Australia, young men in particular, that it's fine to go out there, it's fine to go out there and have a drink with your mates, but think about, just think about what happens if the next morning you're permanently confined to a wheelchair. Think about it if the next morning your mate is, frankly, impeded from ever speaking again. Think about it again if as a consequence of that big night out which just went too far, and too long, too hard, that they lose a limb through alcohol-related violence.And that's why it's such a great campaign, so I'd ask each and every one of you as supporters of this great code, in your own way, in your own part of Australia, in your own profession, get behind the campaign. See the ad, talk about it, talk about it to your friends and your colleagues, in particular your kids, because this is part and parcel of the challenge, getting inside the heads of our young people who we all know, because we've all been young once, they all believe, as we all did, that we are invincible and invulnerable - and we're not.That's what the campaign's all about.One final thing for me, and it goes to how much of my continued appreciation for what the AFL Players Association is doing, not just what goes on on the field, but what they are engaged in off the field. This thing here, which many of you are wearing on your lapels, causes us to remind ourselves of some of the excellent work that they are doing.A few nights ago in Melbourne, I spent some time with the Melbourne City Mission, and this is a group which looks after anywhere between 200 and 300 requests every week to find somewhere to stay for Melbourne's young homeless. 200-300 requests a week, trying to find somewhere for people to stay for a whole range of different reasons.One of the great things that the Players Association has done is dug deep and contributed to the building, construction and now the operation of a homeless centre for young people in Carlton, the suburb of Carlton in Melbourne. I think it's the suburb of Melbourne, thereabouts anyway.That, I think, is a very practical way in which the players of this great code stick their hands in their pocket and do something practical, and that sort of project should be commended.So from me, two big thank yous tonight, and both to the Players Association. One for getting behind this fantastic campaign, important campaign 'Just Think', and the second is to say thank you also for their practical work for young people who are doing it tough out there, and on any night of the week can't find a place to stay.So thank you to Carlton for being with us tonight. Don't go too well, and as your local member I can shut this suburb down.Enjoy the game, everyone.


What a momentous day it is for the Australian Federal Police, and the Australian community as a whole, to welcome a new Commissioner.
It is a big year for the AFP given that October 2009 also marks the 30th Anniversary of the organisation.
What is sometimes forgotten is that the catalyst for the incorporation of the ACT and the Commonwealth Police in 1979 was an act of terrorism here on Australian soil.
The bomb that exploded at the Sydney Hilton Hotel during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in February 1978 killed three people and injured eight.
It led to a review of Australia's ability to deal with terrorism at a national level.
A former head of Scotland Yard, Sir Robert Mark, chaired the inquiry and found our Commonwealth and State police system 'hopelessly outmoded'.
Tony Negus takes the reins of an organisation that I doubt Robert Mark would recognise but I'm sure would approve of.
I am advised that a police officer on the beat today carries between 8 and 10 kilos of gear on their accoutrement belt, and that mirrors the AFP's development over the past 30 years.
As the challenges that the organisation faces have changed, so have the tools needed to fight them.
The AFP that Tony Negus takes over is a highly skilled, highly professional and highly strategic outfit that recognises the importance of its role nationally and globally.
It is an organisation that works hand in hand with government to secure the future of Australia.
I know the Attorney-General and Minister for Home Affairs both greatly appreciate the strong partnership they have forged with the AFP. They are both thankful for the strategic and considered advice that they receive from their AFP colleagues.
The AFP has been in existence for 30 years - and Tony Negus has been with it for 27 of them. I'm sure the AFP you joined in 1982, Tony, is unrecognisable from the one that you are part of today.
Back then the AFP was only just coming to grips with its first mainframe computer, and I'm guessing when Tony was with Traffic Operations he wrote one or two accident reports on an old Olivetti - carbon paper and Tippex at the ready, and if there are children in the room you may have to explain all that to them.
But today's AFP leads the way in hi-tech crime fighting, which I know is an area Tony has a particular interest in.
The AFP also partners with the private sector to prevent crimes that were not even imagined in 1982.
Crimes that threaten us as individuals, as institutions and as a nation.
This is not Robert Peel's 1829 era of the newly established London constabulary, where the bobbies were responsible for not only preventing crime but for lighting lamps and telling the community that it's 'two o'clock and all is well'.
When Mick Palmer was about to pass the Commissioner's mantle to Mick Keelty in 2001, he said:
'Law enforcement, as is the case with other professions, is in a constant state of change. New commissioners and governments redefine the role they see for their police service in an endeavour to provide best practice to the communities they serve. No one aspires to be a police commissioner simply to maintain the status quo.'
Tony's challenge as Commissioner will be to keep the AFP moving forward while maintaining Australia's status quo as a peaceful and secure nation in rapidly changing times.
We only have to look at the past eight years of Mick Keelty's time in the role to see that 'standing still' was not an option - September 1, the Bali, Madrid and London bombings, the South-East Asian tsunami.
Mick leaves the AFP a great legacy, and the tributes to his leadership have been well documented since his decision to step down, but I will just say that not only has his leadership impacted on the domestic policing scene - his contribution to law enforcement in the region should be a source of great pride.
The AFP, under Mick's leadership, has also become not only a national but a world leader in drug investigation.
I'll just give you an idea of the magnitude of the change that Mick has overseen in that aspect of the job.
In his first year as Commissioner, Mick led an operation that saw the biggest ecstasy haul in Australia's history to that date. Operation Affcott netted 150 kilos of pills.
Last year, the AFP's Operation Inca netted 4.4 tonnes of pills.
It was the world's largest seizure of ecstasy and signalled the sophistication and sheer size of the international drug trade - another challenge for Tony's AFP.
21st century policing is part Neighbourhood Watch, part national security and part international peacekeeping. We live in a complex, interconnected world that sometimes moves at a frightening pace.
I said in my first National Security Statement last December that terrorism and serious and organised crime are key matters for consideration in our national security planning.
The AFP works hand-in-hand with the Commonwealth and State and Territory governments through the National Counter-Terrorism Committee, which coordinates a nationwide response to the threat and consequence of terrorism.
The AFP is working with its national and international security and law enforcement partners to share intelligence and invest in measures to prevent terrorism at the grassroots level - tasks made even more difficult when you consider that the Internet with its reach and ease of access is one of the greatest propaganda tools of terrorist organisations as they seek out the marginalised in western societies.
But it is naive to believe that terrorism is the only threat to our national security.
Identity theft, pandemics, cyber crime, people trafficking, man-made and natural threats to our critical infrastructure, and the emerging problems associated with climate change are just some of the diverse tasks facing Tony Negus and his organisation.
Policing is a central component of national security. Effective future policing will increasingly require whole of government and cross -jurisdictional strategies to respond to crime.
The AFP will have to further its capacity to act together domestically through cross-agency and cross-jurisdictional task forces.
The organisation will need to continue to strengthen its partnerships with the private sector.
It will have to continue to enhance its effective bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation with international law enforcement agencies.
And high quality and networked intelligence must continue to be shared between investigative agencies - internationally and domestically.
But the key to the AFP responding to the challenges of the emerging environment is the professionalism and flexibility of its people. Those attributes that have been a trademark of this organisation will hold it in good stead as it builds its organisational resilience to withstand the domestic and international winds of change.
Tony Negus knows this organisation inside and out. He has already proved his commitment to recruiting the best officers and personnel available.
Tony wants more sworn officers back in frontline investigations. He believes investigation is the core of this police force and regardless of future challenges he wants that core to remain strong. He has recognised the way the world is heading and is passionate about further developing the AFP's hi-tech crime capability.
Tony Negus is a man for the time.
The role of Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police is both a privilege and a burden, but it is a burden that Tony Negus and his predecessors accept with pride, because it brings with it the satisfaction of knowing they lead an organisation that can make a real difference to the quality of the life of Australians.
Australia has great confidence Tony, that you have the experience, the wisdom, the integrity and the insight to lead the Australian Federal Police and meet the challenges of policing in the 21st Century.
Congratulations and on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people I wish you the very best as you assume the role of Commissioner.
I would now like to invite Tony and Acting Chief Justice Spender to the stage for the official swearing in of the new Commissioner.


Mr Tony Negus APM, was today officially sworn in as the new Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police.
Commissioner Negus was sworn in by Acting Chief Justice of the Federal Court, Jeffrey Spender, in a ceremony at Parliament House.
Commissioner Negus has enjoyed a distinguished 27 year career with the AFP, working in community policing, federal investigations, human resources, training and protection.
Prior to his appointment, he served as Deputy Commissioner Operations, a position he held since October 2007, with responsibility for high tech crime operations, border activities, international liaison networks, economic and special operations, forensics and the International Deployment Group.
Commissioner Negus holds a Masters Degree in Public Policy and Administration and a Graduate Diploma in Executive Leadership. He has also completed the Executive Leadership Program at Harvard University and is a member of the Australian Institute of Company Directors (AICD).
In June 2005, Commissioner Negus was named in the Queen's Birthday honours list and awarded the Australian Police Medal (APM).
The Government is confident that Mr Negus' experience and expertise equip him well for the many challenges of his new role.
The Government looks forward to working closely with Commissioner Negus and the Australian Federal Police into the future.


McGUIRE: Thank you Prime Minister for joining us this morning.
PM: Good morning Eddie, thanks for having us on the program. It's grey and raining in Canberra. There you go, Melbourne outdoes us with the weather, for once.
McGUIRE: Melbourne's doing very well. Luke Darcy with a question for you, Prime Minister.
DARCY: Prime Minister, saw you at the footy on Saturday night, a very happy Brisbane Lions supporter, you had the scarf around, you were up and about out of your chair-
PM: Who are you backing this Friday, Luke?
DARCY: Well, of course, we're backing the Dogs. We've already spoken to your Deputy, Julia Gillard, who said there's a rift in the Labor Government. This is an exclusive. She's going to be at Friday night footy sitting there with her Bulldogs scarf on. Will we see you alongside of her, Friday night?
PM: Absolutely. It's not a rift, it's a fundamental split. I reckon it's irretrievable myself, when it comes to matters of deep belief like this. Yeah, so Julia and I will be there together, but I don't think I've told her that, could you just keep it quiet until I let her know. No one's listening to this at the moment, are they?
McGUIRE: I hope there are. I hope there's a few people, Prime Minister.
PM: And, here's the bet. We win - which I think it's a reasonable prospect, the Lions - and she gets to wear a Lions scarf in Parliament the following Monday. And in the unlikely event that the Doggies get across the line, I'll wear the tie, there you go.
McGUIRE: Alright there, well there we go, we'll see how that goes. Nice little bit of maroon with the red hair of the Deputy Prime Minister, and of course, the Western Bulldogs tie for the Prime Minister. Prime Minister, on more serious topics, not that there's anything more serious than the finals in Melbourne at this time of year, the economic stimulus is going to be debated long and hard in the next couple of days in Parliament.
Can you just tell us your take on where we are at the moment? We seem to be defying the world, a lot of things have conspired to give Australia a wonderful opportunity, and the stimulus package just looks to have worked beautifully.
PM: Well, the first challenge is this: we have faced as a world the biggest global economic downturn in three quarters of a century, since the Great Depression. For the first time this year, since the War, the global economy is actually going to shrink, not grow. So that is the challenge we face, quite apart from the implosion of financial markets we saw at the end of last year.
So, secondly, what do we do about it? Go and sit down on your hands and do nothing and just watch the wreckage unfold with unemployment going through the roof, or you could act. We chose to act through our national stimulus strategy, through which we funded our Nation Building for Recovery plan, and 70 percent of that is invested in infrastructure. And so what have we been trying to do? And that is invest in jobs, in small business, and in apprenticeships today, while investing in building in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
The results so far, we've had some success. Across the major advanced economies, we are the fastest-growing economy. We are the one with the second lowest unemployment, with the lowest debt, and the lowest deficit, and the only one not to have gone into recession so far. But let me tell you, there's a long way to go. And Wayne Swan, the Treasurer's been in a meeting of the G20 Finance Ministers this weekend in London, which brings together the 20 largest economies in the world, and they have all resolved that we're not out of this yet, and we've got to continue to implement not just our stimulus here, but around the rest of the world as well. It's still very uncertain out there.
McGUIRE: Prime Minister, small business, they're the ones that are gonna keep unemployment down by keeping people in jobs. We've had a wonderful situation with the stimulus going through, and people continuing to spend. There is a chance, of course, of interest rates going up, and of course that'll have the opposite effect as we head towards Christmas, but people keeping their jobs will keep people spending. Have you thought about cutting back on things like payroll tax or auxiliary taxes on businesses to try and give them an incentive to keep people in the jobs?
PM: Eddie, you're absolutely right about small business being key, and it employs such a huge number of Australians. One of the reasons we've been out there helping small business is to make it easier for them, a little easier for them under these difficult circumstances, to keep going. What we've done is brought in what's called a temporary investment allowance, and that started at the beginning of this year rolled through all of this year, beginning at 30 percent, rising to 50 percent, which means that if you're a small business out there wanting to invest in plant and equipment to expand your business in the future or to replace the stuff that you've got at the moment, then you get a huge, additional effective tax deduction.
On the future of tax treatment of small business and the general economy, we've got Ken Henry, the Secretary of the Treasury, working through all the options at present, and he should be in a position to deliver his report by year's end.
McGUIRE: So, Prime Minister, could we say that you're confident at the moment that the worst is behind us, as you said, with the caveat that the G20 aren't going as well as Australia. But with the uptake in mining and the other things going on at the moment, are you confident that we can look towards Christmas with maybe the worst behind us at the moment in Australia?
PM: Eddie, I'm confident that we've taken the measures that we can to reduce the impact of this thing, which is creating havoc around the world, and literally throwing millions of people out of work. But look, I've just got to be realistic with people. We are one member of a global economic community, we're doing better than most, but we are still affected hugely by what happens around the world. I've just got to say, we're not out of the woods yet. Some of the indicators are pointing in the right direction - business confidence, consumer confidence - but I've got to say, some parts of the economy are still very soft, so we've still got a long way to go, which is why we've got to not pull the rug from under the recovery by pulling the rug from under the investment in our national stimulus strategy.
McGUIRE: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us on day one of the Hot Breakfast on Triple M. We look forward to seeing you at the MCG. We know you're going to miss the Grand Final, you are unfortunately out of the country on - I don't know what's more important than the Grand Final, but doing something to save the world, I presume?
Well it's the G20 summit we've just been talking about, which is hosted by President Obama in the United States. I said to the President, 'look, have you heard of the AFL Grand Final. This is going to be a bit of a conflict." I had to explain to him for a little bit what the AFL Grand Final is, but I said 'Look, can you imagine having a summit on the day that you've got the Superbowl over there?' And he said 'Kevin, I'm not moving the date'. So there you go.
McGUIRE: Well, next time we might have to have it over here. That might the big thing, as part of half-time entertainment, the AFL looking always for something a bit different. Prime Minister, we really appreciate you taking some time out on a very busy week. Good luck with the G20 summit coming up in the next few weeks, we appreciate you being here on Triple M.
PM: And I presume, Luke, you'll be there on Friday night?
DARCY: I certainly will, and commiserations to your Brisbane Lions ahead of Friday night. No chance for them.
PM: Well, it's going to be an interesting evening. I'm looking forward to it.
McGUIRE: Good on you Prime Minister. Thanks very much.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history, and as he is the subject of much of this book, let me also wish Mr Howard well for a full recovery after his recent time in hospital.
A couple of weeks ago I had the honour of launching the first volume of Tom Keneally's new history of Australia.  It covers a period stretching from the beginning of time through the origins of European settlement to Eureka  -  now that's about 40,000 years in 700 pages.
Now, Paul has also clocked up nearly 700 pages in this mighty tome, but managed to cover a mere 10 years - albeit 10 years of our more recent history.
So were we to apply the Kelly principle to the Keneally task, and were Paul to embark on a comprehensive national history, we would be anticipating a canon of some 22 volumes covering the period of European settlement alone, which in turn would make Manning Clark a mere writer of short stories.
Of course, one of the more frightening features of Paul's 22 volumes is that Paul would also have been present for most of the key events.
Paul has been writing defining political histories since before any of my staff were born.
From The Unmaking of Gough in the 1970s, to The Hawke Ascendancy in the early '80s and The End of Certainty in the early '90s, and that was after a career in the Prime Minister's Department in Canberra that began in the late '60s.
His achievement has of course been recognised by his peers, by the industry and in academic circles  -  his double Walkley in 2001; the Graham Perkin Journalist of the Year in 1990; the honorary doctorates from the University of Sydney, the University of NSW, and of course, he is also a Brownlow Medal winner and has been inducted into both the Australian Football Hall of Fame and the Australian Recording Industry Association Hall of Fame, although Lockie did say something about that being a different Paul Kelly.
Let me first congratulate Melbourne University Press, and the University of Melbourne, for this significant publishing achievement.
This is a stupendous piece of work.
Since The End of Certainty in 1994, there's been a sense of expectation about the next volume from Paul's pen.
End of Certainty, of course, is known for that one big idea - that the great structural reforms of Hawke and Keating in the 1980s had brought to an end an essentially bipartisan consensus which Paul described as 'the Australian Settlement':
     * industry protection;
     * state paternalism;
     * wage arbitration;
     * imperial benevolence, and
     * the White Australia Policy.
That concept of the Australian Settlement has become the reference point for capturing the breadth of the sweeping changes achieved by the reformist Labor administration of Hawke and Keating.
It's a tribute to Paul Kelly that this book was re-published last year, 14 years after its release.
Today, the long wait for the sequel to End of Certainty is over, and can I say, the news isn't all good  -  a conservative government gets elected and stays in office for a long time.
But don't let me spoil the book for you, except to say it has a good ending, though it takes a while to get there.
In this book, Paul argues in support of what he describes as an essentially bipartisan 'Australian Exceptionalism':
'a transformation from the pre-1983 protected economy of the old Australia settlement... faithful to Australian values of economic pragmatism, social egalitarianism and practical utility. It avoided the laissez-faire laxity of the American system and the stifling controls of the European system.' (p267)
This, I suspect, is where debate around March of Patriots will focus, and I expect the debate will be robust, and perhaps some of the participants in the Keating and Howard eras themselves might even be keen to chip in to that debate  -  particularly Mr Howard and probably a fair bet Paul Keating as well.  
I suspect Tony Jones and Leigh Sales have the next month of Lateline interviews already lined up. I'm actually looking forward to it.
If we break down Paul's core argument in March of Patriots into two parts, I think we find one element that is compelling, and one that is more contentious.
When Paul speaks of an Australian exceptionalism, he is touching on a much larger story that reaches back to Federation and further back into Australia's early foundations since the beginning of European settlement. As I said in launching Tom Keneally's new book, we often do not appreciate just how remarkable Australia's national story truly is.
For all our faults, the Australian story is indeed exceptional.
A nation that has carved an economy from an inhospitable earth to build one of the most prosperous on earth.
A nation that has so often led the world in social progress like rights for women and rights for working people - building one of the most open, most progressive, least class-based societies in the world.
A nation that from its beginnings has etched within its soul, in fact within its DNA, an almost inalienable sense of fairness - what we call in our own vernacular the 'fair go'.
A nation that time and again has shown itself open to extraordinary adaptation and change  -  moving in less than a generation from a White Australia Policy to embracing the diversity of the cultures that now contribute to our national identity.
A country and community confident of its place in the region and in the world  -  straddling uniquely the challenges and complexities of our Indigenous antiquity, our European history and our Asian geography.
Within that context, Paul rightly highlights the extraordinary achievement of economic modernisation in the '80s and '90s alongside our commitment to the fair go - 'an Australian-made synthesis of a decent society and a strong economy' (p2).
And the reform debate in this nation has often been more far reaching across the full span of economic and social policy, than in the UK where it has focused primarily on public services, and the US on individual policy areas like health reform. Our has been a broader canvas for debate and the breadth of the canvas itself is something exceptional.
The second part of Paul's core argument is how this achievement comes about during the past quarter century.  Paul attributes it to what is essentially a bipartisan consensus.
Within that argument, Paul notes that:
'The origins of the economic model that defined Australia's long expansion from 1991 to 2008 belong with Hawke and Keating. John Howard did not create the model; he adapted the model. 
Its creation lay with Hawke and Keating in the post-1983 reform era and this creation is one of Labor's epic monuments. The Labor foundations were the float, financial deregulation and tariff reductions.  Upon this, Labor built a central bank that started to target inflation, competition policy and privatisation, enterprise bargaining and a long-run fiscal trajectory to return to surplus.' (p266)
'...Labor's policy contribution over 1983-96 was distinctly more dynamic and substantial but the Liberal contribution over 1996-2007 was important and path-breaking in changing conservative ideology.' (p267)
As Paul goes on to note:
'In its last term the Howard Government was tired, short on ideas and beguiled into soft options by the post-2003 China boom and the income surge it delivered Australia... Howard's most serious economic failure [was] his refusal to maximise the boom year revenues in the cause of long-run reform and productivity gains.' (p268, 276)
This is not a minor critique. Productivity is, more than anything else, the basis of a nation's prosperity. As Paul Krugman says, and as I've often quoted  -  productivity is not everything, but in the long run it's almost everything.
The Liberals' failure to advance a framework for increasing national productivity is not a minor blemish on their economic record. It reflects a fundamental failure of long-term economic reform and casts legitimate doubt over the extent to which the Liberal Party can be regarded as partners with Labor in the great project of economic modernisation for Australia.
And indeed, Paul alludes to specific aspects of this failure:
'Howard had failed to value sufficiently investment in education and in human capital; he had been too slow in responding to global warming and too reluctant to better coordinate infrastructure investment.' (p4)
Again, these were not matters of minor oversight.
Further, Paul's narrative confirms that the economic policy outcomes of the earlier Howard years were largely in place already in the final term of the Keating Government  -  such as with the transition to inflation targeting and the independence of the Reserve Bank from 1993 (p109), which was formalised in the Accord in 1995 (p120).
Mr Howard did not even agree with major elements of the micro reform agenda from which he subsequently reaped great benefits  -  like the National Competition Policy reforms that came into effect from 1995  -  as is revealed in Arthur Sinodinis's remark to Graeme Samuel in 2003 (p124).
As Paul says, Mr Howard chose a 'golden moment to ascend' to Government in 1996, with the economy set up for a long period of growth with low inflation locked in, and the economy in the middle of the greatest period of productivity growth on record.
By contrast, when Labor came to office in 2007, we inherited rising inflation and productivity levels that had been in decline for a decade.
This was to be followed by the worst global recession in three quarters of a century, existential threats to financial systems around the world; rising unemployment and severe fiscal constraints for all governments ahead.
To this should be added climate change which had been left unaddressed over the previous decade, and the need to effect a fundamental transformation to a low carbon economy.
But governments are judged, and will be judged, not on the circumstances they inherit, nor the adversity they confront, but on the decisions they make, and that will be true of this Government as well.
We would argue that Labor has always approached economic and social reform differently to our opponents.
Labor has consistently understood that prosecuting an economic reform agenda without a social reform agenda dooms both to failure.
Fundamentally, Labor has always rejected the view that President Obama described in his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention last year, a view that people should somehow:
'Pull yourself up by your own bootstraps, even if you don't have boots. You are on your own.'
By contrast, the nation-building Labor reforms of the '80s and '90s reflect a deep understanding of the social contract between governments and citizens, in which a government undertakes difficult structural changes while doing whatever is possible to look after working people while those changes are underway.
That has meant specifically targeting assistance to those Australians most disadvantaged from the reform process, such as when Labor phased out of tariff protection in the 1990s, when Labor implemented the structural adjustment programs specifically targeted to help those who would lose jobs in manufacturing through payouts, re-skilling and transition to other work opportunities.
It is true that there are many social reforms that have endured through long periods of Liberal rule, but this is not because our opponents believed in them. This is because these reforms had become so widely accepted as part of the Australian way of life that it became too difficult to uproot them - but try they did.
Consider, for example: Medicare; universal superannuation; the HECS system to provide equitable access while making the expansion of tertiary education sustainable; and the provision of fairness in the workplace through a decent safety net.
These are reforms that have defined Australia as a fairer society than other western democracies like the United States.
The Liberals sought to undermine each of those reforms  -  with cuts to public hospital funding, opposition to the Superannuation Guarantee; the creation of full-fee student places, and of course, with Work Choices.
The fact that these reforms proved resilient to their attacks is a Labor achievement, not a matter of bipartisan consensus. Further, many fundamental social and economic reforms that are now regarded as part of what might be called the 'Australian contract' have been achieved not because of bipartisan support, but despite conservative opposition.
The Liberal Party opposed Medicare.
It opposed targeted welfare reforms, like the assets test that helped make our age pension system sustainable.
It opposed the crackdown on tax loopholes in the 1980s.
It opposed the 1993 reforms to establish a workplace relations system based on enterprise bargaining.
The great social reforms of the Hawke and Keating era were critically important to sustaining public support for the difficult work of modernising our economy to make it more competitive in a rapidly globalising world. 
This in fact was (and remains) the great Australian contract.
It is the only way to bring the country and community with us if we are going to be able to deliver the continuing program of economic reform that is necessary for Australia to carve out its future in a harsh and forbidding world.
This is what Paul has described in the past as hard heads and soft hearts  -  a phrase I have often borrowed to describe our course for the future, whether in microeconomic reform, Indigenous policy in the Territory, or a mandatory transparent public reporting agenda for our nation's schools.
But Paul, I fear we may part company on the question of whether this contract is actually shared between the two dominant traditions of Australian politics, for on the economic reform agenda, we would describe our opponents as indolent  -  perhaps not always opposing the great transformational reforms engineered by Labor during its 13 years in office, but barely adding to that reform agenda during their 12 years office.
Opportunity squandered, rather than opportunity seized when public revenue was awash with the proceeds of a global resources boom.
And on social reform, again we find it hard to construct an argument for consensus following a decade riven with the orchestrated politics of asylum seekers, Hansonism and a refusal to embrace the term 'multiculturalism' for most of our opponents' time in office.
Which brings me to one final point for debate in a book which is obviously designed to provoke a bucket load of debate. Paul says 'neo-liberalism' died in the Liberal Party in 1993 with the death of Fightback!.
He argues this on the basis of his definition of neo-liberalism as 'big bang reform'.
Neo-liberalism is more than the dimensions of a political project  -  it is the ideological content of that project, and for neo-liberals, that project is clear-cut: it is the theory of self-regulating or self-correcting markets and of an ideal role for government which is shackled in its role as market regulator, as well as restricted in the provision of public goods.
For our political opponents, that ideology did not die with Fightback. We see it as alive and well more than 15 years later.
We have seen it in workplace relations where Work Choices effectively saw labour as no different to any other commodity to be traded on a free, barely regulated market at the lowest market price.
We have seen it in climate change  -  described as the greatest market failure in economic history  -  where the Liberal Party refused to act, because its majority believed that somehow the problem would solve itself absent the state intervening to regulate for a market to set a carbon price.
We have seen it not only on global financial markets in the lead-up to the global financial crisis, but also nationally when despite multiple recommendations, our predecessors refused to implement a deposit insurance scheme because they were captive to the banking industry's argument that statutory protections for consumers in our financial system were unnecessary.
And in the fiscal response to the crisis, we see the same ideology at play which argues against fiscal stimulus to cushion the impact of the global recession  -  presumably because of a belief that the macroeconomy is best left to correct itself.
Of course, technically it may be able to correct itself  -  so long as you are prepared to accept hundreds of thousands of Australians as collateral damage as a consequence of a 'market correction'.
This, of course, is not the Australian Government's view, nor is it the view of the 20 largest economies around the world wrestling with the current crisis through the G20.
There is, therefore, in our view, on the Labor side of politics, a continuing ideological common denominator to much of the policy behaviour of our opponents: a form of free market fundamentalism which has little in common with the philosophy and policy of the reforming centre of Australian politics to which we belong.
Of course the challenge for us now is to apply the tradition of the reforming centre that has served us so well in the past, to the great challenges that lie in the future.
On the economy, Australia has so far emerged better than most through the global economic recession, with stronger growth, the second strongest employment, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies, and the only one to have thus far avoided technical recession.
But the challenge now is not to yield to complacency but to seize the great global opportunity that now presents itself to the nation, to build on the global competitive advantages of the Australian economy and to consolidate with an all-embracing program of microeconomic reform to boost productivity growth for the long term:
     * A quality and quantity education revolution.
     * Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors.
     * A communications revolution by breaking the power of monopoly and rolling out one of the greatest productivity enhancing investments possible through a national broadband network.
     * The creation of a seamless national economy, collapsing 27 sets of conflicting regulations into a streamlined set of uniform rules.
     * Maximising our global competitiveness through targeted tax reform.
All measures designed to make Australia the best economy to trade with, invest in and do business with.
And all throughout, making the necessary long-term social reforms in such areas such as health, aged care, retirement incomes policy and the environment to continue bringing the broader Australian community with us on the great national reform program that lies ahead, a program that is necessary to secure our nation's future in a tough, competitive and unsentimental world.
History will be the judge on whether we succeed or fail, but our ambition from the start is to make a fundamental difference - not to be here for the sake of being here, but indeed to be a government of hard heads and soft hearts.
So with those reflections on Paul's considerable achievement, and my wide extrapolations from them, let me again congratulate Louise Adler and the team at MUP, and congratulate Paul once again for this historically important contribution to Australian political debate.
This is a monumental account that will become a benchmark for future research on this period of Australian history, and it provides perspective that could only come about through Paul's proximity to those in power through this period.
Whatever perspective people take, this book will no doubt help shape that debate for a long time to come.
It is an honour to launch March of Patriots.
Let the debate begin.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This is very much our welcome to country. And to our friends from Vietnam, I say the following: [In Vietnamese: welcome, General Secretary Manh, to Australia].
This is my attempt to welcome our guests in Vietnamese to Australia.
General Secretary, you are a welcome guest in our country.
Your nation too is one of ancient cultures. Vietnam has a proud and distinct history that stretches back across the millennia.
Your history has had its times of challenge.
But the people of Vietnam have triumphed over the centuries.
And they have established the modern, independent nation that you represent today.
On behalf of the Government of Australia, I want to say that we recognise the achievements of your nation and your people.
It is now more than 36 years since Australia and Vietnam established diplomatic relations.
Under our former Prime Minister Gough Whitlam, the then Australian Government took the lead among Western nations in establishing our official relationship.
It was a wise move.
It was a welcome move.
And history has shown that it was the right move.
Over the past 36 years the ties between our two nations have grown remarkably.
Our two nations and the world have changed a lot in those intervening years.
The Cold War has finished.
Globalisation has reached never before seen heights.
In our own region, the Asia-Pacific region, we have seen stability and great prosperity.
Throughout the region, hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty as each nation has developed and, in doing so, spurred the development of other nations in the region.
Vietnam's own economic development has been one of the great success stories of the past decade.
The percentage of people living in poverty has fallen from nearly 60 per cent to less than 15 per cent in only 15 years.
With a greater embrace of the international market place, Vietnam's economy has been transformed.
I recognise Mr General Secretary your role in helping to drive these reforms.
I am also pleased that Australia has been able to play a part in Vietnam's economic development.
Through our overseas development assistance, we partner with the government and the people of Vietnam to help build a better future.
Our assistance is targeted towards supporting Vietnam's engagement with the global economy, building infrastructure, improving water and sanitation, building capacity in the public and private sectors, and working together on the response to climate change.
These are all long-term challenges.
But they are challenges that are critical to the future Vietnam, and critical, also, to the future of Australia. We are pleased that we are partnering with you in these critical challenges of the future.
I would also like to acknowledge the important role played by the Vietnamese community in Australia, in its contribution to Australia's economy and the richness of our multicultural society, and in its contribution to the relationship between our two nations.
Today, our meeting has, I believe, set the course for the relationship between our countries for the period ahead.
We have issued a Joint Statement and we have witnessed the signing of the Comprehensive Partnership.
These documents provide a clear framework for the future development of this important relationship.
They outline the shared challenges we will face.
And they commit us to working even more closely together in our response to these challenges.
Our discussions today, General Secretary, covered areas from political visits to cooperation in security and defence. Also, furthering and deepening our economic relationship, trade, investment, and of course, expanding our education ties.
I believe we have a rich agenda ahead of us, for the future.
In the years ahead, I look forward to working with you and the government and people of Vietnam to realise the aspirations in those documents, and to realise the full potential of our relationship.
The relationship between Australia and Vietnam is not just a bilateral matter.
We are both important countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
We are both committed to making a strong contribution to the stability and prosperity of our region.
I look forward to continuing our discussions on the future of our region.
How we shape the future of our region in 2020 and beyond is a question that we have to begin to address now.
I thank Vietnam for its support for the ongoing discussions about an Asia-Pacific community.
Your support is a clear reflection of the shared interests we have in making the 21st century - the century of the Asia Pacific - a truly Pacific, or peaceful, century.
There is also history to our relationship that pre-dates the establishment of formal diplomatic ties.
We acknowledge the impact of Vietnam War had on Vietnam; we acknowledge the impact of that war on the people of Vietnam, and on the landscape of Vietnam.
Australia is a committed partner in helping heal those wounds.
Just as we are committed to healing the wounds of those from Australia who served.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I want to thank the government and the people of Vietnam for the support that we have received in locating and repatriating the last two Australians who were unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
Flying Officer Michael Herbert and Pilot Officer Robert Carver were repatriated just last week - the last two Australians to return home.
Australia is committed to assisting Vietnam with its search for its own officers missing in action. This is a humane thing to do, and I express my appreciation to the government in Hanoi to the great assistance they've given us in this most sensitive of tasks.
Our relationship now is about the future.
And to build that shared future, I am a strong believer in the importance of education.
I am pleased that Australia is a leading education destination for Vietnamese students.
So far this year there have been more than 20,000 enrolments in Australian courses, and around 17,000 students studying in Australia.
Vietnamese students are welcome guests in our nation.
And we are committed to ensuring that they have a positive and rewarding experience on every level - educational, social and cultural.
The Australian Government is supporting this with concrete action.
Australia is also the leading provider of scholarships to Vietnamese students.
I am very pleased that we can make this contribution to equipping students with the skills and knowledge to drive the change that Vietnam needs for its future.
So far, the number of scholarships offered by the Australian Government to Vietnam has been increased to 175, up 25 since this Government assumed office. I was pleased to inform the General Secretary today that we'll increase that by a further 50 scholarships, from next year. In other words, since our Government assumed office, there has been an increase in the number of scholarships offered to Vietnam by 50%.
I regard this as a practical and positive measure to underline this operation between our two countries. And to underline the absolute importance of education.
General Secretary Manh, yours is the first visit by a General Secretary since Prime Minister Paul Keating welcomed General Secretary Doc Moi in 1995.
Both our nations have changed a great deal in those nearly 15 years.
And one of the great changes has been the growing strength and the real sense of shared interests between our two nations.
With your visit, we can begin a new phase in the relationship.
We can bring new depth and focus to our relationship.
Your visit is providing us with the catalyst to do that.
And I share your commitment to building on the strength of what we already have.
Mr General Secretary, you are a genuine friend, a genuine welcome guest in our country.
I wish you all the best for your visit here in Australia. I look forward very much to seeing you in Vietnam, at a time which suits both of our calendars, for the future.
I celebrate the relationship between us. I look forward to it attaining new heights in the future.
I thank you.


At the invitation of the Honourable Kevin Rudd MP, Prime Minister of Australia, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Viet Nam His Excellency Mr Nong Duc Manh paid an official visit to Australia from the 6-9 of September 2009.
2. On 7 September, General Secretary Nong Duc Manh held talks with Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and with other Cabinet Ministers. The Prime Minister and the General Secretary had frank and open talks on all aspects of the bilateral relationship as well as regional and international issues of mutual concern. They reaffirmed the importance of the bilateral relationship and the broad range of cooperation between Viet Nam and Australia on global and regional issues. The two sides agreed to establish the Viet Nam - Australia Comprehensive Partnership. The Partnership lays out a clear framework to strengthen the bilateral relationship through: building multi-faceted cooperation; ongoing development assistance; and technical cooperation to combat people smuggling and counter terrorism. The Prime Minister and the General Secretary agreed that officials from both countries would discuss and develop an Action Plan to take forward these interests.
3. Prime Minister Rudd congratulated General Secretary Manh on Viet Nam's important achievements in economic reform and welcomed Viet Nam's initiatives for further development. General Secretary Manh welcomed Australia's role as one of the long-term donors and partners in Viet Nam's development. Both sides noted that Australia was one of the top ten donors to Viet Nam, contributing development assistance estimated at $106 million in 2009-2010. The Prime Minister reiterated Australia's commitment to assist during the design phase, and looked forward to further positive consideration, of the Cao Lanh Bridge in the Mekong Delta, subject to the outcomes of the Asian Development Bank feasibility study currently underway.
4. Both sides noted the substantial contribution education links make to the bilateral relationship, including by building close ties between people of both countries. The two leaders also recognised the support extended by the Australian government to Viet Nam in training and exchange of experience on administrative reforms and anti-corruption. The Prime Minister noted that Australia was a leading destination for Vietnamese students, with more than 20,000 Vietnamese enrolments in Australian courses. Australian education providers had also enjoyed great success in Viet Nam, with more than 14,000 students studying in Viet Nam for Australian qualifications.
5. The Prime Minister and the General Secretary acknowledged the dynamic bilateral trade and investment relationship between Australia and Viet Nam, noting that it was Australia's fastest-growing trade relationship in ASEAN. The two leaders agreed that the Vietnamese economy offered favourable opportunities for Australian business and committed to continued cooperation in developing these opportunities.
6. The two leaders discussed the impact of the global economic and financial crisis and the international response to the crisis. There has been unprecedented international cooperation to stabilise the global economy and restore confidence, with a range of global and regional institutions playing an important role such as the UN, G20, APEC and ASEAN. The Prime Minister welcomed Viet Nam's important efforts and successes in mitigating the impact of the crisis and achieving a growth target of around 5 per cent in 2009. The General Secretary congratulated Australia on its impressive economic performance among OECD countries. 
7. The Prime Minister and the General Secretary agreed on the importance of trade to continued growth and the need for an ambitious and balanced outcome to the WTO Doha Development Round of world trade negotiations as soon as possible. The Prime Minister welcomed Viet Nam's early ratification of the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, a key platform for further growth in bilateral trade and investment. The Prime Minister also welcomed Viet Nam's participation in negotiations to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and looked forward to working constructively and cooperatively with Viet Nam during the negotiations.
8. The two sides agreed to negotiate an agreement on science and research cooperation in order to enhance collaborative research between Australian and Vietnamese scientists, building on existing cooperation in health and agricultural research.
9. In recalling the agreement between Prime Minister Rudd and Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung to deepen their strategic engagement, both sides welcomed the regional security dialogue held at senior officials' level in Hanoi on 20-21 August 2009. They also highly valued the effectiveness of other cooperation dialogues between the two countries, including the Australia - Viet Nam Human Rights Dialogue.
10. The Prime Minister and the General Secretary welcomed growing practical cooperation between Australian and Vietnamese government agencies, particularly in border security and combating transnational crime. The two leaders welcomed the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding on the Exchange of Immigration Information earlier this year and looked forward to the signing of an agreement to establish the Transnational Crime Centre in Ho Chi Minh City later in 2009.
11. Prime Minister Rudd and General Secretary Nong Duc Manh expressed satisfaction with the excellent cooperation between Australia and Viet Nam in the Asia-Pacific region and on global issues. The Prime Minister welcomed Viet Nam's upcoming chairing of ASEAN and the East Asia Summit (EAS) in 2010 and looked forward to working closely with Viet Nam during its period as Chair. The two sides highly valued and agreed to continue promoting cooperation between the two countries in regional and international fora such as the ASEAN Regional Forum, EAS, APEC, WTO and the United Nations. The General Secretary affirmed that Viet Nam would continue to support and promote cooperation between Australia and ASEAN. Vietnam took note of and supported continued discussion of Australia's initiative for an Asia Pacific community and will positively consider Australia's candidature for a non-permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council for the term 2013-2014.
12. General Secretary Nong Duc Manh expressed his deep gratitude to the Government and the people of Australia for the warm hospitality extended to him and the high level delegation of Viet Nam. General Secretary Nong Duc Manh extended his invitation to Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to make an official visit to Vietnam at a mutually convenient time. The Prime Minister accepted the invitation with pleasure.
AUSTRALIA - VIET NAM COMPREHENSIVE PARTNERSHIP
Since establishment of diplomatic relations in February 1973, Australia and Viet Nam have developed a positive economic, political and security relationship, reinforced by warm and expanding people-to-people links.
On this basis, on the occasion of the visit to Australia of the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Viet Nam His Excellency Mr Nong Duc Manh from 6-9 September 2009, the two countries have decided to establish a Comprehensive Partnership between Australia and Viet Nam according to the understandings set out in this document.
This Comprehensive Partnership has been developed to reinforce the strong relations between Australia and Viet Nam, and to provide a framework around which to focus, and measure bilateral effort. This Comprehensive Partnership also represents a strong mutual commitment to the future of Australia-Viet Nam relations. More specifically it provides a framework for strengthening and deepening cooperation across these key areas:
Expanding political ties and public policy exchanges
Australia and Viet Nam will further expand exchanges of high-level visits and contacts.
Encouraged by Viet Nam's ambition to become an industrialised country by 2020, Australia and Viet Nam resolve to deepen and expand cooperation on public policy planning and development through a range of activities including information exchanges, exchanges of personnel, training and human resource development.
Australia and Viet Nam will strive to improve dialogue and enhance engagement at officials' level across all sectors of the relationship as mutually agreed. Sharing of experiences on public sector management, social policy, and legislative and regulatory processes will contribute to mutual understanding and development of best practice. Exchanges on economic planning including public finance, budget management, economic reform and taxation, investment policy, competition policy and infrastructure, as well as policy dialogue in areas of HIV/AIDs, education, science and technology management, gender equality, social welfare and services, especially for women and children, will assist closer cooperation and will help contribute to strengthening growth in key sectors. Australia will assist Viet Nam in formulating an appropriate policy on the management of foreign workers in Viet Nam and the management of foreign workers migration to Viet Nam.
Acknowledging the importance of the vocational education sector for Viet Nam's future economic development needs, Australia and Viet Nam will examine options for a policy dialogue aimed at addressing educational management and vocational and technical training needs and capacity.
Noting the role of the Communist Party of Viet Nam in policy planning, including its commitment to economic development and to anti-corruption efforts, Australia and Viet Nam will facilitate development of closer links between agencies of the Communist Party of Viet Nam and Australian Government agencies and academic and strategic policy institutions.
In the context of a shared commitment to multilateral forums and the rule of law, and building on recent visits by delegations from the Australian Parliament to Viet Nam and from the National Assembly of Viet Nam to Australia, closer and more frequent contacts and linkages between all agencies of the two institutions will be encouraged on the basis of the Agreement of Partnership between the National Assembly of Viet Nam and the House of Representatives of the Parliament of Australia.
Australia and Viet Nam reaffirm their shared interest in maintaining the annual Human Rights Dialogue and associated program of technical cooperation as providing an opportunity for frank and constructive discussion.
Promoting economic growth and trade development
Acknowledging that unpredictable and profound changes in the global economy pose both challenges and opportunities, Australia and Viet Nam commit to support international cooperation and coordination efforts in responding to the global economic crisis. Australia and Viet Nam both believe that concerted global and regional efforts are needed to re-establish confidence and build platforms for sustainable development. Both countries share a resolve to work for the reform of the global financial and monetary system, especially institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, and will work towards deeper regional economic integration.
Australia and Viet Nam have shared interests in promoting trade liberalisation through the establishment of the global trade framework, by combating protectionism and concluding the WTO Doha Round. Australia and Viet Nam will increase their efforts to accelerate trade cooperation in the region through prompt and effective implementation of the Agreement Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area. Both sides will work to strengthen regional forums such as APEC and the East Asia Summit, and enhance cooperation and coordination within the framework of agreements such as the Trans Pacific Partnership.
The Viet Nam Australia Joint Trade and Economic Cooperation Committee will continue to provide a forum for regular bilateral engagement focused on delivering increased trade and investment. Australia will continue its support for the Beyond WTO program of technical assistance to help Viet Nam meet its commitments, strengthen the institutions of the market economy and its ongoing integration into the international economy. Both Australia and Viet Nam will explore prospects to enhance and diversify commercial engagement through more cooperative ventures and by facilitating business and industry contacts.
Both sides will maximise opportunities for investors from both countries, including by ensuring transparency and competitiveness of their respective markets. Australia and Viet Nam will continue to develop and promote bilateral trade and investment in such key sectors as infrastructure and urban development, mining and energy, manufacturing, agriculture, and financial, education and other services.
Conscious of the vast potential of the Mekong Sub-region, Viet Nam values the support and partnership of Australia in its development objectives for the region, including the Mekong River Commission Programs, the Viet Nam Rural Energy Distribution Program, the Cross Border Transport Agreement, the GMS Southern Coastal Corridor and the Central Mekong Region Connectivity Project to create economic and social infrastructure for investment, growth, sustainable development and environmental protection.
Ongoing development assistance and technical cooperation
Australia recognises Viet Nam's achievements in poverty reduction and aid effectiveness and reaffirms its continuing support for Viet Nam's development aspirations. By boosting growth and employment and supporting the delivery of basic services, notably in water and sanitation, and natural resources management, Australia is committed to ensuring its official development assistance will continue to support Viet Nam's progress towards achieving its development goals, including those set out in the Millennium Development Goals.
Australia and Viet Nam recognise the valuable contribution made by Australia's scholarships and education programs for Vietnamese students. Australia will continue to place a high priority on providing these scholarships as a means of helping Viet Nam to build the human resource foundation it needs for its future prosperity.
Australia remains committed to sustainable and inclusive economic growth in Viet Nam and will continue to assist Viet Nam to make the most of opportunities from integration into the world economy. Through new and ongoing infrastructure initiatives, including cooperation on the Cao Lanh bridge project as part of the wider Central Mekong Region Connectivity Project, Australia will support major transport projects and regional road building to connect poor rural areas to key regional transport and economic corridors.
Facing the global challenge of climate change, Australia and Viet Nam affirm their support for the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate and express a commitment to explore prospects for cooperation in the use of clean and renewable energy. A new bilateral treaty-level agreement is intended to be concluded in 2010 to lay the foundation for collaboration in science and technology research.
Development of Viet Nam's energy sector will be crucial to its economic growth and prosperity. As Viet Nam considers its options, including proposals to develop a nuclear energy program, Australia will provide opportunities for increased dialogue and cooperation activities in the field of radiation and nuclear safety between the Viet Nam Agency for Radiation and Nuclear Safety and the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation and the Australian Safeguards and Non-Proliferation Office.
As major agricultural producers, Australia and Viet Nam commit to contributing to the world's food security and to increasing cooperation on agricultural, forestry and fisheries research and productivity improvement and food safety.
Building defence and security ties
Australia and Viet Nam recognise that the security and prosperity of both countries is linked to a secure future for the Asia-Pacific region. Reaffirming their respect for national independence and sovereignty, Australia and Viet Nam will work together in regional forums to develop credible security architecture and promote regional confidence-building measures to minimise the risk of conflict in the region.
Australia and Viet Nam will foster greater openness and cooperation in the defence relationship by continued personnel exchanges and human resources training, ships visits and by strengthening the exchange of views on regional and security issues of mutual concern through an annual dialogue between officials from the foreign and defence ministries.
Australia and Viet Nam are committed to fighting transnational crime and countering terrorism. Enhanced cooperation to combat human trafficking, narcotics and money laundering and to counter terrorism and other forms of cooperation will be supported by increased information exchange and intelligence sharing, training and capacity building, and practical cooperation, as appropriate, between police forces, customs, immigration, border control and security officials. A Joint Transnational Crime Centre in Ho Chi Minh City and the Memoranda of Understanding between Vietnamese relevant agencies and the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Department of Immigration and Citizenship will form the basis for ongoing consultation and cooperation.
Australia and Viet Nam welcome conclusion of negotiations on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons Agreement and agree to finalise bilateral treaties on extradition and mutual assistance. Australia will maintain its community outreach efforts in Australia aimed at reducing the number of people caught up in the narcotics trade.
Australia and Viet Nam have a common interest in maritime and aviation security, and in ensuring our borders as well as national sovereignty and territorial integrity are protected. We signal our commitment to tackling these concerns, including in combating people smuggling and piracy, by building practical cooperation including through coordinated activities and support for the Bali Process and the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships in Asia.
Australia and Viet Nam recognise the need for collective effort to prevent the development and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Affirming their common purpose in working to achieve a successful outcome of the 2010 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference, Viet Nam welcomes Australia's contribution to the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
Australia and Viet Nam will continue their close cooperation in dealing with MIA cases.
Supporting people-to-people links
Australia and Viet Nam welcome the fact that strong and growing people-to-people links already exist between our countries. These links exist across all levels of society and across a broad spread of business, academic, media, cultural, non-government agencies, friendly and sporting organisations. We commit to work to strengthen these links including through further cooperation in the fields of culture, sports and tourism.
Australia already provides significant opportunity to Vietnamese people to work in Australia under the temporary skilled migration program. Australia and Viet Nam will finalise a work and holiday arrangement to provide the opportunity for some young people of both countries to have short term work experience in the other.
Australia and Viet Nam will also seek to enhance their consular services. Australia welcomes the prospect of Vietnamese consular posts being established in Perth and Melbourne and looks to the early agreement of Viet Nam to the expansion of the consular district of the Australian Consulate-General in Ho Chi Minh City.
Australia and Viet Nam value the contribution of the Vietnamese community in Australia to the social and economic development of Australia and Viet Nam, and in promoting friendship and cooperation between the two countries.
Australia will continue to support and strengthen the Australia Network television service to Viet Nam including the delivery of selected programming with sub-titling in the Vietnamese language and the provision of on-line English language education materials. Australia and Viet Nam will both look to increase exchanges of media representatives with a view to encouraging high quality reporting and greater public interest and mutual understanding of each country. The growing alumni network reinforces such public interest and mutual understanding.
Advancing the global and regional agenda
Australia and Viet Nam recognise there remain significant challenges to achievement of a stable, peaceful and prosperous international environment. We share the objective of reinforcing, and developing international and regional institutions able to promote our shared political, economic and security interests. In particular, we recognise the value of working in partnership to shape the future of our shared regional and global environment.
Australia and Viet Nam declare that collective action is needed to respond to the global economic crisis, climate change and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well as to strengthen the protections and put in place the frameworks for dealing with natural disasters, pandemics, poverty and food security.
Australia and Viet Nam commit to cooperating closely in the United Nations to advance issues of mutual concern and to promote the effectiveness of the UN institution. We reaffirm our support for reform of the UN Security Council. Australia congratulates Viet Nam on its successful first term as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council and welcomes Viet Nam's positive consideration of Australia's candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council in 2013-14.
Australia and Viet Nam affirm the importance of working together and with other countries through inter-regional forums such as ASEM and regional forums such as APEC, the East Asia Summit (EAS) and the ASEAN Regional Forum to achieve a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific region. Australia and Viet Nam recognise the need to be ambitious for the future, and the importance of suitable regional architecture and practical cooperation to address issues affecting the region. Viet Nam welcomes further discussion on Australia's initiative for an Asia Pacific community. Viet Nam's role in 2010 as chair of ASEAN and the EAS provides an opportunity to strengthen cooperation in these forums. Australia commits to support Viet Nam in its role as chair of ASEAN and looks with Viet Nam to find opportunities for greater consultation and cooperation between Australia and Viet Nam in coming years.
Signed in Canberra on the Seventh day of September of the year two thousand and nine in duplicate, in English and Vietnamese, all texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of Australia:
The Hon Julia Gillard - Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Education, Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and Minister for Social Inclusion
For the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam:
H.E. Dr Pham Gia Khiem  - Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs 


The Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, the Hon Duncan Kerr SC MP has announced that he will not recontest the next federal election.
During his 22 years of public service as a Federal Member of Parliament, Mr Kerr has made an outstanding contribution both as a Minister and as the representative of his electorate of Denison in Tasmania.
As Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs, Mr Kerr has played a key role in strengthening Australia's presence in the Pacific, best demonstrated during the 40th Pacific Islands Forum, which I hosted in Cairns last month.
Mr Kerr was formidable during the 11 years in Opposition from 1996, where he held several shadow portfolios including Immigration, Environment, Justice and the Arts.
He also made a significant contribution to reforming Australia's legal system in areas such as criminal and evidence law while serving as Justice Minister and Attorney-General in the Keating Government.
Prior to entering politics, Mr Kerr was a distinguished figure in the legal profession. He has appeared before the High Court on a number of landmark constitutional cases and was appointed Senior Counsel in 2004.
I applaud Mr Kerr's commitment to the Australian Labor Party. The Australian Government today holds all five federal seats in Tasmania due to the tireless effort of people like Mr Kerr.
Mr Kerr will step down from his role as Parliamentary Secretary at the end of October.
I wish Mr Kerr and his family well in his future career and thank him for his invaluable work for the Australian Government.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is truly moving to see so many people here tonight to support the White Ribbon Foundation, to support its message of zero tolerance for violence against women, to support the need for men to take responsibility for ending violence against women, And to support the actions of this Foundation and the Australian Government as we work together to stop violence against women.
Tonight is far from a celebration.
A cause for celebration would be if this was the very last White Tie dinner, If domestic violence or sexual assault were a thing of the past and the White Ribbon Foundation was no longer needed.
Sadly, that is not the case.
Every day, 1,000 women are violently assaulted across Australia on average.
That is 1,000 today, 1,000 tomorrow, and another 1,000 on Saturday.
Nearly half a million women in any one year.
That is a truly horrific statistic.
Over their lifetimes, almost one in five Australian women will be sexually assaulted. Almost one in three will be physically assaulted. Almost one in four children in Australia will witness violence against their mother or stepmother. Less than one-third of the victims will report it.
As I said at this dinner a year ago, this violence prefers the darkness. It prefers the silence. If we take no action, if we continue to let the darkness and the silence flourish, an estimated 750,000 Australian women will report being a victim of violence in 2021-22.
The cost of violence against women and their children to the Australian economy was estimated to be $13.6 billion last financial year, and if we take no action to shine a light on this violence, that cost will hit an estimated $15.6 billion by 2021-22.
Violence against women is always wrong.
It is never right.
And all men, deep in their hearts, know this.
All women, deep in their hearts, know this too.
Yet to stop violence from happening, we need men to acknowledge publicly what they know privately - that there is never any excuse for domestic violence or sexual assault.
There is no easy solution to this.
It will require change over a generation, possibly more - a cultural shift in the attitude of every Australian which starts with taking responsibility.
A 'head-in-the-sand' attitude towards domestic violence is an insult to every woman or child who has ever known the pain and fear of domestic violence.
Silence is tantamount to tacit approval.
This is the powerful statement of the White Ribbon Foundation, and of White Ribbon Day - that we cannot afford to be silent.
That we have a responsibility to speak up and say:
I swear never to commit violence against a woman.
I swear never to excuse violence against women.
And I swear never to remain silent about violence against women.
This is my oath.
We have to take responsibility, and together, we have to take action.
Responsibility and action - this is the basis of this Australian Government's approach to addressing the scourge of violence against women in our communities.
Previous Governments have taken important steps - increased reporting, law reform and greater community awareness build a platform for further action.
The fact that we are all here tonight demonstrates, though, that we must continue to act, and there is still much to be done.
Domestic violence and sexual assault can and does affect all of us.
Many people mistakenly believe that domestic violence is confined to certain socio-economic, cultural or age groups. It is not. It is happening to our neighbours, our sisters, our mothers, our friends, to our work colleagues.
Violence against women is unacceptable. We must have a zero tolerance attitude.
But an attitude is not enough - we have to take responsibility, as community leaders, as members of our community and as Australian men, and we have to take action.
The Australian Government has begun to take steps which I introduced last year, and I am pleased to report we are now well underway.
This won't happen overnight, it won't solve the whole problem, but it is one that is right, and one that takes both responsibility and action very seriously.
Violence against women is an old problem, but that doesn't mean it's an insoluble problem.
Take smoking. In the 1940s, more than half of all Australian men smoked, but with sustained Quit campaigns and education, increased taxes, and other measures like banning smoking in workplaces and restaurants, we've cut the smoking rate to less than 20 per cent.
That's the third-lowest in the world, and we've saved an estimated 750,000 lives in the process.
The Government's National Plan will be designed to have a radical, long-term effect on the rates of violence against women.
We need to discover what works.
We do not want to just raise awareness. We want to change behaviour, and we have to change that behaviour in every lounge room and kitchen, in every school and workplace, in every pub and sporting club - wherever violence occurs and wherever it is condoned.
The Australian Government is developing a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women. We began by seeking expert advice from the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and Their Children, in the form of their National Plan, the Time for Action Report.
We took immediate action in response to this report, in the form of a $42 million investment in the urgent actions identified by the Council, and we have taken the Time for Action report to COAG, to ensure that all levels of Government - State, Territory, Local and Federal - are working together to achieve real results.
Governments of both persuasions, at State and Federal levels, have taken important actions in the past, but they have not been able to solve the problem.
We are developing a national plan - involving all governments, involving the community, involving Australian men, and we are determined to get the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women right the first time.
Time for Action recommends that:
     * Communities are safe and free from violence;
     * Relationships are respectful;
     * Services meet the needs of women and their children;
     * Responses are just;
     * Perpetrators stop their violence; and
     * Systems work together effectively.
This means that our community leaders, education systems, emergency housing, health, police, justice and family support services will all need to be involved.
We launched Time for Action at Narrabundah College, a senior school in Canberra where the students are participating in the Respectful Relationships program. This program works with young people - like the 16 and 17 year olds at Narrabundah College - to:
     * raise their personal awareness of ethical behaviour;
     * to develop protective behaviours; and
     * to develop their skills in building and sustaining respectful non-violent relationships.
The program involves secondary school students at four Canberra schools, as well as training for their teachers, with a $750,000 investment from the Australian Government, the Royal Women's Hospital's Centre against Sexual Assault in Melbourne will work with a local partner, the Canberra Rape Crisis Centre, to build a customised program.
Around 700 students (from years 10 through to 12) and 50 teachers will be involved in the program in Canberra over the three years. That is 700 students who have an opportunity to begin to change our attitudes, to change our society, in relation to violence in personal relationships, 700 young people who will be equipped with the skills to build into their relationships, their families and their communities, values of respect, with an understanding of ethical ways to treat others, especially those who you love, those who you choose to spend your lives with as friends, partners, husbands or wives.
I want to take the opportunity tonight to again thank the Council for their dedicated work in preparing the Time for Action report. Chair Libby Lloyd and Council Member Andrew O'Keefe are with us here tonight.
Their report has given us a firm evidence base from which to build a solid framework, and a vision to aspire to.
A vision for Australia where 'women and their children live free from violence, within respectful relationships, and in safe communities.'
It directs Government to solutions - not easy ones, but sustainable ones, and now the Council passes the baton to Government to take responsibility and to take action.
The Council's report, however, makes clear that in planning our next steps, in taking action, we can't presume that there is a one-size fits all approach. We know there isn't.
Time for Action says:
"... Action on multiple levels - individual, relationship, community, and societal - is more likely to be successful in tackling ... violence against women and their children, than ad-hoc, generalised solutions."
I couldn't agree more. I said before the election that it's time to end the blame game between the Commonwealth and the States.
I said when I launched the Council's report that:
"... It's hard to get a coordinated government effort that could help to make real progress."
And I said that:
"That's about to change. As Prime Minister, I'm determined to lead that change."
The Australian Government will take responsibility and will take action, by developing through COAG and for launch in 2010, an approach that's different.
Never before has violence against women been responded to with all of our systems and services working together. The National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women will set out a plan of action, so we can get on with the job - the very difficult job - of making a difference.
As I've said on everything from health reform to education to national security, we have to stop the blame game between governments in this country. If you have a national problem then you need a truly national solution.
That is why the Council of Australian Governments is instrumental in getting the Commonwealth, State and Territory governments on the same page with this, and just as this is not the sole responsibility of one government, or of one portfolio.
This is not just a women's matter. This is not a just a legal matter. This is not just a policing matter. This is a complex whole-of-government mission.
To this end, COAG has pulled all the threads together in a special Ministerial forum chaired by Tanya Plibersek. The forum includes Attorneys-General as well as a cross section of Ministers drawn from State and Territory government women's, health, justice, policing, and community service sectors.
This is the group that has been tasked with putting together the framework for our National Plan, and getting it right.
The Ministerial forum will examine all the evidence. The forum will consider what can be done immediately and what will take time to get right. It will look at how to build on current successes and create new ones. And it will develop a series of action plans for the short term, the medium term and the long term.
The Ministerial forum will release the National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women in 2010, and this will be a long-term strategy to 2021.
We are also immediately investing $9.1 million over five years to test and evaluate Respectful Relationships programs, like the one running at Narrabundah College.
Six programs are being implemented in 50 sites across Australia in Round 1 of this initiative.
One of those initiatives is the Sex and Ethics program. It will target under-16 and under-18 rugby league squads in Queensland to start a grass roots attitudinal change in the sport.
I know that White Ribbon Ambassador and NRL CEO David Gallop will join me in applauding this initiative - one that helps to get rugby league off the front page and back to the sports page where it belongs.
Another initiative, the Keeping Safe program, is being implemented in more than 50 schools in the Northern Territory. That program aims to increase young people's capacity to negotiate ethical relationships, identify dangerous behaviour and put in place protective strategies.
I am pleased to announce that the Government has now opened Round 2 applications for the Respectful Relationships Program, at a total cost of $1.1 million. Ads for those applications will appear in papers nationally this Saturday.
This means an additional 2,000 young people are expected to be educated through this round - bringing the total to 8,000 throughout the duration of the program.
We will continue to work with the States and Territories, through COAG, to introduce respectful relationships education in more high schools across Australia.
We are also progressing the Council's immediate action recommendation in relation to an improved telephone helpline service.
The Government is investing $12.5 million in the 24 hour, 7 day a week telephone and online crisis service which is being developed in consultation with the States and Territories. It will be run by professional staff who can make referrals to follow up services, and it will also provide support for counsellors in remote and rural areas.
Last month the Minister, Tanya Plibersek, called for eligible organisations to submit an Expression of Interest to establish the new domestic violence and sexual assault Helpline. The Helpline will be up and running from 1 December this year.
And we are continuing to engage, to seek advice, in the development of this National Plan, through the adoption of another Immediate Action: to create the Violence Against Women Advisory Group.
It gives me great pleasure tonight to announce that the membership of the Advisory Group has been finalised. The group incorporates a wealth of expertise - from each State and Territory - in the disability, cross-cultural, education, policing, media and legal/judicial sectors.
I am also very pleased to see that three members of the National Council have agreed to continue to work with the Group. Libby Lloyd, Heather Nancarrow and Vanessa Swan will share the knowledge they gained over their 12 months with the National Council and I thank them for their vital support.
And Libby and Heather have agreed to continue their important roles as Chair and Deputy Chair of the new Advisory Group.
This will provide the continuity, leadership and direction to drive development of the National Plan. Continuity in thinking, in research is critical to continuing to build our evidence base and develop a plan to take forward.
Libby, Heather and Vanessa will be joined on the new Advisory Council by:
     * Annie Parkinson from New South Wales, the current President and a longstanding member of Women with Disabilities Australia,
     * Bess Price from the NT, who brings with her a wealth of experience in cross cultural awareness training, as a community liaison and in Warlpiri language services.
     * Mick van Heythuysen OAM, also from the NT, a former Superintendent in the NT Police Service who has worked in the remote communities and is a former winner of the Police Officer of Year award.
     * Dr Rae Kaspiew from Victoria, who specialises in research and legal policy analysis in the areas of family law and family violence.
     * Victoria Hovane from Broome in the Kimberley region of WA who holds a First Class Honours degree in Psychology and is part way through PhD in Forensic Psychology examining child sexual abuse in Aboriginal communities.
     * Georgie Gardiner from New South Wales, works with Channel Nine's TODAY show and is a strong advocate for a wide range social issues, particularly those affecting young people and women.
     * Norman Raeburn from Tasmania is the current Director of the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania since January 2000, having previously served in the Commonwealth Attorney General's Department and at the Universities of Monash, Tasmania and New South Wales.
     * Dr Leigh Gassner from Victoria was until recently an Assistant Commissioner for Victoria Police.
This group brings with them to a wealth of experience. I thank them for agreeing to work with us on this most important to this task, and look forward to our collaboration.
The Australian Government is also working outside of our immediate response to the Council's Plan to address the challenges and consequences of violence against women.
For example, violence against women - and in particular domestic violence - remains the main reason for homelessness among women and children.
The Minister, Tanya Plibersek, recently responded to a letter from a single mum in Victoria. Jennifer left an abusive partner and wanted to tell Tanya of her plight. She had no car, no job and no money. Her temporary solution was to take her two sons and move in with her mother until she found a place of her own. She explained to Tanya that, even though she is working hard to get back on her feet, rental prices are high and the housing waiting list is long.
Tanya was able to help Jennifer get in touch with an accommodation and support service in her local area, and also gave her the 1800 number for the Australian Government's National Rental Affordability Scheme Hotline - a scheme which gives investors the incentive to build affordable rental homes which they rent out at 20 per cent below market rates.
The Australian Government is investing more than $1 billion in this scheme over the next four years.
Last December the Government released its White Paper on Homelessness which is supported by a $1.5 billion funding package - the most significant attempt to tackle this national shame in a generation. With this funding, states and territories are implementing a range of strategies to assist families to stay at home safely.
Strategies include improving security in the family home, removing and re-housing the perpetrators where appropriate and working with perpetrators to address the cause of their violence.
On top of this, we've invested $5.6 billion to repair and build the social housing we need for Australians who are homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless.
Government initiatives can make a real impact on reducing violence against women, but members of the community have a critical part to play.
Giving our young men good role models is essential.
I'd like to share with you the story of a project based in Murray Bridge/Coorong, South Australia that shows how important community leadership is in addressing domestic violence.
The Spirited Men's Project is run by the Kalparrin Community organisation and funded by the Australian Government. This is a male perpetrators program that encourages positive parenting and educates Indigenous men about the detrimental effects of family violence.
The program is culturally-based and its focus is on the importance of men in the family unit and as leaders in the broader community. Those running the program report a real change in the participants' personal commitment to the concept of "safer family, safer community".
I spoke earlier of the students at Narrabundah College. We are supporting these young people by giving them the opportunity to gain the skills to change their lives, and to change the lives of those around them.
Like the Spirited Men's Program, they are making change, one person, one school, one community at a time.
I said before this isn't easy. I said before it wouldn't happen overnight. And I said we need action on multiple levels - individual, community, government, societal.
But what White Ribbon shows us is that where there is a will there is a way, and when it comes to taking action, taking responsibility, to stop violence against women there is a will.
I cannot stress enough that we can make a difference for generations to come if we work together to reduce domestic violence.
Lastly, let me now officially launch this year's White Ribbon campaign.
I've already taken the oath. I applaud those men in this room and all Ambassadors of White Ribbon around Australia who have taken the oath. I believe that every Aussie male should.
I'm going to encourage every honourable gentleman in the Australian parliament to take the oath. And in the bureaucracy. And in every electorate in the country.
To end men's violence against women, every Aussie male needs to say: "This is My Oath."
Every man, in every walk of life, all of the 10 million males in Australia, should swear on November 25.
Let's make White Ribbon Day an Australian first, a world first.
Thank you. Good night.


The Australian Government today announced the members of the new Violence against Women Advisory Group. 
The Prime Minister announced at the White Tie Dinner in Sydney that the new Advisory Group will be chaired by Libby Lloyd AM.
The other ten members of the Council are: Georgie Gardner, Annie Parkinson, Bess Price, Mick van Heythuysen OAM, Heather Nancarrow, Vanessa Swan, Norman Raeburn, Dr Leigh Gassner, Dr Rae Kaspiew and Victoria Hovane.
The Government is providing national leadership in reducing domestic violence and sexual assault through the development of a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
The Plan is being developed through the Council of Australian Governments and will be released in 2010.
The role of the Advisory Group will be to provide the Australian Government with expert advice on the implementation of National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women initiatives.
The Advisory Group will also provide advice on issues and recommendations raised in Time for Action: the National Council's Plan for Australia to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2009-2021, including immediate actions the Government is already implementing.
Advisory Group members have been drawn from diverse professional and personal backgrounds, which will enable them to provide expert advice and direction to assist the Government.
The Violence against Women Advisory Group has been appointed for a period of two years.
Upcoming priorities include:
     * Establishing a new high quality national domestic violence and sexual assault telephone and online crisis and support service.
     * Implementing Respectful Relationships programs into school and non school settings to change attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence.
     * Working with the States and Territories to establish a National Centre of Excellence in the Prevention of Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault.
The Prime Minister also announced the opening of the second round of applications for the Respectful Relationships Program, to introduce respectful relationships education into high schools across Australia.
$1.1 million will be invested in this round, as part of a total $9.1 million investment in this program.
An additional 2,000 young people are expected to be educated through this round - bringing the total to 8,000 throughout the duration of the program.
Respectful Relationships is a primary prevention strategy that seeks to prevent sexual assault and domestic and family violence through education.
Round 1 of the Respectful Relationships Program is currently being implemented in 56 school and non-school sites across Australia this year.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ADVISORY GROUP MEMBERS
Libby Lloyd AM, ACT (Chair) 
Ms Libby Lloyd served as the Chair of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children in 2008-2009 and is a former President of UNIFEM Australia. She was actively involved in re-establishing the White Ribbon Campaign in Australia in 2003, a national campaign led by men to speak out against violence against women and is a founding Board Member of the White Ribbon Foundation. Ms Lloyd is the principal of a management consultancy, focusing on cross cultural awareness, program and service review. She is also involved in a wide range of community support activities.
Georgie Gardner, NSW
Ms Georgie Gardner is the news presenter and fill-in co-host on Nine's TODAY show. Ms Gardner worked at Sydney's top-rating radio station 2DAY FM in 1994 spending three years as the drive-time newsreader before joining the Ten Network as a television news reporter and fill-in presenter in 1997. In 1998, Ms Gardner moved to the Seven Network to read the Late News. She went on to co-host the network's early morning Sunrise program for two years. Ms Gardner joined the Nine Network in July 2002 to present various news bulletins. She is a strong advocate for a wide range of social issues, particularly those affecting young people and women. Ms Gardner is an active supporter of Oasis and Red Kite. She lives in Sydney with her husband, Tim, and their two young children.
Annie Parkinson, NSW 
Ms Annie Parkinson is the current President and a longstanding member of Women With Disabilities Australia (WWDA). She has over 30 years experience in activism beginning with her involvement in the early days of the Sydney Rape Crisis Centre. She was involved in the groundbreaking publication 'I Always Wanted to be a Tapdancer', a book of stories from women with disabilities published in the late eighties. She has worked as a research assistant in the disability field and in the 1990s co-founded an organisation called Access Plus, a group that addressed issues which particularly affected gay, lesbian and transgender people with disabilities. Ms Parkinson has been actively involved in the establishment and management of several organisations. Annie is now a member of the reference group for the Australian Family and Domestic Violence Clearinghouse. She is also on the management committee of a small SAAP funded housing organisation that offers short-to-medium term housing for women who have experienced child sexual assault.
Bess Price, NT 
Bess Nungarrayi Price was born at Yuendumu in Central Australia. Her first language is Warlpiri. She also knows Luritja, Western Arrernte and Anmatyerre. Mrs Price has a Batchelor of Applied Science in Aboriginal Community Management and Development from Curtain University and has worked in education and training, public administration, the media, community development, interpreting, translating and language teaching and has experience in small business management. She has represented Central Australia at conferences in Quebec, Beijing, Vancouver and Deerfield Massachusetts. Mrs Price is a partner, with her husband Dave, with Jajirdi Consultants working in cross cultural awareness training, community liaison and Warlpiri language services. In recent times she has built up a reputation as an artist through Warlukurlangu Arts Centre developing a uniquely personal interpretation of traditional themes. At present she chairs the NT Indigenous Affairs Advisory Council and is a member of the NT's Hospital Services Planning Project Committee, the Wild Harvest Advisory Committee with the Desert Knowledge CRC in Alice Springs and the management board of Indigenous Community TV.
Mick van Heythuysen OAM, NT 
Mr Mick Van Heythuysen is a security consultant and adviser on cross-cultural and multi-cultural awareness. Before moving into private work, he was a Superintendent in the Northern Territory Police Service and in charge of the NT Police and Aboriginal and Ethic Services Unit. He has worked in the communities of Lajamanu, Borroloola and Yulara before moving to Alice Springs and Darwin. He is a former winner of the Police Officer of Year award for his work with Timorese refugees and was a member of the Council for Multicultural Australia from 1999 to 2004.
Heather Nancarrow, Qld (Deputy-Chair) 
Ms Heather Nancarrow served as the Deputy Chair of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children and is the immediate past Chair of Queensland's Ministerial Advisory Council on Domestic and Family Violence. In June 2009 Ms Nancarrow was the recipient of the Queenslander of the Year Community Spirit Award for her 27-year struggle against domestic and family violence. Her work has included 11 years in community-based women's services and approximately 10 years in Government policy. This included management of Queensland's Domestic Violence Prevention Unit, with responsibility for domestic violence legislation, cross-government policy coordination and community education. Ms Nancarrow is the Director of the Queensland Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research, Central Queensland University. Her primary research interests include justice responses to domestic and family violence, and responses that meet the needs of Indigenous, and rural and remote communities.
Vanessa Swan, SA 
Ms Vanessa Swan served as a member of the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children and is the Director of Yarrow Place, the lead public health agency responding to adult rape and sexual assault in South Australia. Ms Swan is a former Chairperson of the National Association of Services Against Sexual Violence (NASASV), the peak body for organisations who work with victim/survivors of sexual violence and who work to prevent sexual violence. Ms Swan is on the Parole Board of South Australia and is a current member of the Australian Centre for the Study of Sexual Assault (ACSSA) Reference Group. She is of Lebanese origin and has a women's health and therapy background.
Mr Norman Raeburn, Tas
Mr Norman Raeburn has been Director of the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania since January 2000, returning to Tasmania after seventeen years at the Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department, eleven of them as Deputy Secretary. He is currently the Chair of National Legal Aid and was also previously Chair from August 2002 until April 2004. Before his appointment to the Attorney-General's Department, he was a legal academic for nineteen years at the Universities of Monash, Tasmania and New South Wales. He is a barrister of the Supreme Courts of New South Wales and Tasmania.
Dr Leigh Gassner, Vic 
Dr Leigh Gassner was until recently an Assistant Commissioner for Victoria Police. He is now a consultant working with private and public sector organisations advising on organisational performance and cultural change, strategy development and organisational re-positioning, and providing executive coaching and development programs. Dr Gassner's experience has also included bringing together multiple and diverse stakeholders, across organisations and sectors to achieve common outcomes and in particular complex social and community systems. Because of his experience and study Dr Gassner brings both a practical and theoretical mix to his work. He has worked with the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission in north-western China delivering workshops on family violence as part of human rights. Dr Gassner is a Member of the White Ribbon Day Foundation, the Australian Community Support Organisation and the Minister's Advisory Council for the Victorian Mental Health Reform Strategy 2009 - 2019. Dr Gassner holds a Doctorate in Business Administration and a Master of Public Policy and Administration.
Dr Rae Kaspiew, Vic 
Dr Rae Kaspiew is a socio-legal researcher who currently specialises in research and legal policy analysis in the areas of family law and family violence. She has published material in range of areas including sexual violence and has a particular interest in the needs of CALD groups. She joined the Australian Institute of Family Studies in April 2007 to work on the Institute's Family Law Research Program. She is the manager of the Legislation and Courts Project in the Evaluation of the family law reforms that is being conducted by AIFS. She is also admitted to practice as an Australian lawyer in the Supreme Court of Victoria.
Victoria Hovane, WA 
Ms Victoria Hovane is an Aboriginal woman from Broome in the Kimberley region of WA with family links to the Injibarndi group from the Pilbara as well as the Gooniyandi and Kitja groups from the Kimberley. She holds a First Class Honours degree in Psychology and is part way through PhD in Forensic Psychology examining child sexual abuse in Aboriginal communities. Her current work focuses on the area of the fall-out from violence - specifically sexual assault, child sexual abuse, child abuse and neglect, family violence and generalised violence. She has worked for both the Victim Support &amp; Child Witness Service, and the Community Justice Services Intensive Intervention Centre for convicted perpetrators where she was the Aboriginal &amp; Regional Programs Consultant. She also has expertise in policy and program development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. Over the past 27 years, Ms Hovane has advocated and promoted Indigenous social justice in legal services, social welfare, counselling, community based offender rehabilitation programs and victims' services.


One in five Australians are under 25 and make an enormous contribution to Australia's economy, our culture and our nation.
The Government is developing a plan for young Australians - with young Australians - so that all young Australians are safe, healthy, confident and resilient, with the skills and supports they need to build their own futures.
I want to hear from you what matters most - at home, at school, online and out in the community.
Join the conversation at the PM's Youth Blog from Friday 11 September.


ALBANESE: Today we've launched The Good Gear Guide for motorcycle and scooter riders.
Today we've had Malcolm Farr from the Daily Telegraph here assisting us. He's here in his capacity as a bike rider, and he might want to say something about this guide.
FARR: Minister, it's a most worthy project, given, as you would know possibly more than most, the sad statistics of the number of people who, when they fall off bikes, end up in hospital for a long, long time - or worse - and there are some basic protections that bike riders can take in the clothing they wear, and I think it's admirable that the Government, on a very bipartisan fashion, I might say, is supporting the promotion of the wearing of safety clothes.
ALBANESE: Thanks, Mal. Happy riding.
FARR: Thank you.


MOORE: I spoke with the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd a short time ago.
Prime Minister, no change in the unemployment rate, which is good news, but if you look behind these numbers, is the picture a little less pretty?
PM: I think if you look objectively at the numbers, which is what I was saying in the house today, there are areas of concern.
You see full-time employment coming down, being offset by part-time employment coming up. You see a slight drop in the participation rate, and you see a fairly significant increase in the number of Australians registering their interest in working more hours than they currently are working. In fact, I think that latter figure is something like a 31-year high.
Put all those things together - we are doing better than other economies around the world when it comes to unemployment, in part because of the nation building for recovery plan we've implemented, in part because of the strong actions by business. But there are still signs out there which cause us to be concerned, which is why I continue to say we are not out of the woods yet.
MOORE: After today's numbers though, and looking, I guess, at the trend of the last couple of months, where do you think unemployment is going to peak now?
PM: Well, of course, the Government, advised by the Treasury, will put out our estimates come the time for the mid-year financial and economic outlook.
MOORE: But do you think 8.5 is still realistic?
PM: Ali, I have been around long enough to know that you don't pluck a number from space. We have had some encouragement in terms of these most recent numbers. Remember the unemployment rate in the United States at present is tipping 10 per cent.
And also bear in mind Treasury's advice that had we not engaged in our stimulus strategy, our nation building for recovery plan, that we, too, would have been headed in the direction of 10 per cent and right now we'd be in the depths of recession, but we still have a long way to go.
MOORE: Do you still rate as a chance, a double-dip recovery, a W-shaped recession?
PM: Ali, we have to be very mindful of the global economy. One of the reasons we are so active in the G20 is because we know that our national actions are important, but they pale into insignificance against global actions.
If I'm looking across the global economy, both in terms of what's happening in Europe and the United States, there's a long, long way to go. In the United States where you still have unemployment going through the roof; there are still concerns about the wash-through effect of credit-card debt and the impact on commercial property, and it's a huge slice of global economy.
Some parallel concerns with the European banking system. That's why we have got to implement the measures agreed upon at the London summit of the G20 back in April, and we are looking forward, of course, to Pittsburgh in the weeks to come.
MOORE: You've made the point that unemployment, of course, is a lagging indicator. What risk do you think that we'll see interest rates rise before unemployment has peaked?
PM: Well, I said some weeks ago when I wrote that longish essay on where to now for the Australian economy that our nation building for recovery plan is under way to cushion the impact of the global recession on Australia, the worst event in 35 years.
But, secondly, it follows that once these emergency measures in monetary policy, and interest rate policy put in by the Reserve Bank, that there will be some withdrawal of those measures in the period ahead.
MOORE: Could that happen, though, before we see unemployment peak?
PM: What I said in that essay is that you are likely to see interest rates rising, you are likely to see unemployment continuing to rise as well, and I think it's far better to be frank about these things than to try and gild the lily with people.
We've been in this extraordinary challenge - the worst set of global economic circumstances in three quarters of a century, emergency measures through Budget policy and through monetary policy and through financial market interventions and, therefore, when we unfold a recovery phase there'll be a lot of bumps in the road, and that's just two of them.
MOORE: That will be difficult though, won't it, with interest rates still going up and unemployment going up at the same time?
PM: Well, assuming that's the way in which it unfolds.
MOORE: But that's what you're assuming will happen.
PM: My essay indicated that's a likelihood, that you'll see interest rates going up, and I think the Reserve Bank Governor has indicated these emergency measures that he's put in place with a 425 basis-point cut in official interest rates since the end of last year are emergency measures, and they won't be sustainable.
And similarly, of course, our fiscal interventions, that is our stimulus strategy is tailored to peak in '08/'09, '09/'10, and then to drop off quite quickly. So the whole idea being through official policy to step in to keep the economy going while the private sector is in retreat and then to step back as the private economy is recovering.
MOORE: Last night the Senate knocked back the legislation which would apply a means test to the private health insurance rebate. Will that legislation go back to the Senate in three months time unchanged?
PM: That is our absolute intention, and the reason is that part of our economic strategy is, of course, once we have dealt with the emergency circumstances of this global economic recession, we have also said in the Budget we have a medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy to return the Budget to surplus. Part of doing that means, for example, in the case of that one measure, PHI, that you mentioned, that's worth some $9 billion in the decade ahead.
Yet the Liberals and Nationals who on the one-hand say, 'well debt and deficit is a problem', notwithstanding it's frankly the lowest of the major advanced economies, yet on the other-hand say, 'Oh, by the way, we are not going to allow you to actually obtain support for this in the Senate', which means that's $10 billion more nearly onto bottom line.
MOORE: But it also means, of course, it would give you another trigger for a double dissolution election, and I wonder how palatable a trigger that is because of course that legislation is a broken election promise in itself. Is it palatable as a double dissolution trigger?
PM: Ali, the challenge we have as a Government is, first of all, my own instincts have always been for a government to serve out its full term. I don't believe the Australian people like government going to elections early.
I also have responsibility for the proper, prudent financial management of Australia. Conservative economic management means you expand the activity of the official economy when the private economy is in retreat, and then the reverse - as the private economy recovers, so you contract what Budget and other things do and you return the Budget to surplus.
That means you've got to be serious about your fiscal consolidation strategy and serious about large measures like this-
MOORE: - So you are leaving your options open as to whether you'd use it?
PM: Which add up to billions of dollars. That's part and parcel of our strategy of returning the Budget to surplus. Therefore these are serious matters. I do not take them lightly. Let me say again - this legislation will be back in the Senate by year's end.
MOORE: Another issue Prime Minister, the decision by the Federal Police to open on investigation into the death of the Balibo Five. Given the Indonesians say they have no intention of reopening that case, what can that inquiry achieve?
PM: Well this is an independent decision by the AFP itself, and the way in which our system of justice works is that they make their own decisions. Secondly, you'll recall the coronial inquiry which was held some years ago into the tragic events of Balibo a long, long time ago. But the AFP, having deliberated upon that coronial inquiry over a long period of time now have concluded this is it the way forward, and it is not for us to interfere with that process.
MOORE: Are you concerned, though, about any potential impact on relations or indeed giving families false hope?
PM: Well again I'm very mindful of the independence of the AFP process here in Australia. Secondly, in terms our relationship with Indonesia, obviously our friends in Jakarta have been surprised by this because it's been quite a long time, but I believe we can manage these challenges.
There are bumps in the road with most relationships around the world, and I think we'll have to manage this one as well. I know the Foreign Minister has been dealing with the Indonesian officials on this and I believe we can see our way through this effectively.
MOORE: Finally, very briefly, we are almost out of time, but a less weighty matter. You like to Twitter. What do you think of Joe Hockey tweeting during Question Time? Is that appropriate behaviour for politicians?
PM: Well, you are right, I mean I don't mind the odd tweet or twitter or two, and I probably send out a message each day or two myself.
MOORE: But during Question Time?
PM: Question Time, and I don't necessarily cast the first stone at Joe - who knows what people on our side of the house have been doing? - but I actually think Question Time we should be focusing on what's going on.
And I think it would be good if all Members, whatever side of the House they are, left the phones outside for those purposes. Maybe you need your mobile phone communication to get stuff to be sent in to you, that's a different thing, but to provide a rolling commentary on Question Time, I find that a bit bizarre. I thought that was your job, actually.
MOORE: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


Thank you Bruce, and thank you Bruce, Karen, Rev. Bruce Banton, Professor Nico, Dr Bruce Robinson, John Murphy, my friend and parliamentary colleague from Canberra, representatives of local government, representatives from the state parliament and Matt Peacock, author of Killer Company.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And we also remember today September 11, remember those who perished, we remember the tragedy of that day, the suffering still with their families, and resolve which must remain with all to continue the fight against the forces of global terrorism.
Thank Bruce and thank you Nico for the tremendous work your teams are doing to find a cure for the disease that took Bernie from us, and that has taken so many other husbands, brothers, dads and other loved ones from family members and friends.
I like what Bruce just said about shooting at the moon, sometimes shooting at the stars, but shooting for the moon because we've got to have in ourselves, in our heart and our minds, and the way in which we approach these things, the belief that we can get there. That's what it's all about.
I'm essentially a medical illiterate. I've only been on the receiving end of jabs and scalpels. I've never been on the administrative end. But can I say how much I admire the extraordinary collection of talent and ability we have in the medical research community in this country. I'm constantly stunned by the sheer brilliance of what we in this country are capable of in partnership with our colleagues from around the world.
And yes, let's aim for the moon, let's believe that we can get there, and why not make it Australian? And having a concentration of talents and abilities gathered together with a common purpose which causes us to look beyond the horizon is in part what it's all about.
Nico said that Bernie's last words to him were "We need to join forces." Those of us engaged in public policy research and intense engagement with the medical fraternity describe this as translational research, collaborative endeavour, in the case of cancer, integrated cancer care - all those things. What's it all mean? Whether you're a layman like Bernie, or someone who seriously knows what he's doing like Bruce, and the other Bruce is in communion with the divine on our collective behalves, it's all about working together with support from Government, support from the community, and harnessing the best talents and brains that we have here and across the world. To defeat this insidious disease should be our goal.
I wanted to be here today to launch this very special Foundation, one which salutes a truly great Australian.
Bernie was a man who took on one of the Goliaths of corporate Australia, and like a courageous modern day David, he won that fight.
Bernie epitomised the Australian belief in a fair go. He had the nation's respect for his integrity - he has the nation's respect for his integrity - our amazement remains for his tenacity, our reverence remains for his heroism, and we continue to be inspired by the fact that as this disease dealt with him so unfairly as it deals with so many others, his first instinct was always to have an eye out for others. Others who were suffering, others who he could help with research.
That's why the Bernie Banton Foundation so important, because it was one of his last projects that he discussed with Karen in his final months on earth.
Bernie wasn't content to have fought for justice for himself, and it wasn't enough for him that he'd fought in the years that followed for justice for other victims of asbestos, but he was determined to do more - establishing a Foundation that would do greater work still in the years after he had gone from us.
As many of you know and many of you will be aware, earlier this week another great Australian fighter, Greg Combet - now the Minister for Defence Personnel, Material and Science - launched the book Killer Company by Matt Peacock, a book that chronicles the abhorrent behaviour of James Hardie executives - the abhorrent behaviour of James Hardie executives.
But there are inspirational moments in the book as well, like the account of Bernie and Karen.
We learn how Karen is made of the very much the same stuff as Bernie. As Matt Peacock says, Karen was "superhuman in her stoicism", and with typical Banton energy and determination, she is now turning her energies to helping other families carrying the terrible burden of terrible asbestos-related diseases. And the Reverend Bruce Banton, Bernie's brother, will also be doubling that Banton family effort. With two Banton's against you, how could you possibly prevail?
Here's a man who has lost two of his brothers, Bernie and Ted, to asbestos; and with another brother, Albert, having developed asbestosis. It's good to know that Albert is still in good health, but we know it's a tough road ahead for every person and every family touched by asbestos-related diseases.
The poisoning of Australians by asbestos is a modern day industrial catastrophe. The toll of human suffering and loss from asbestos far exceeds any natural disaster in our nation's history, and its worst impact has fallen on working people and their families in suburbs and towns right across Australia.
Australians working in insulation factories, like Bernie, or in mines. Young men sweating it out in darkened shipping containers on the wharves, heaving bags that leeched asbestos. Aboriginal children in communities like those near Grafton, where a large mound of asbestos served as a sandpit for local schoolchildren in the late 1970s. Wives and mums shaking out the work clothes of their husbands or sons before throwing them in the washing machine. Queensland banana farmers thinking they had struck gold with the hessian asbestos bags so useful for protecting their fruit from birds and bats. Recycled asbestos bags were under our carpets, in driveways, and asbestos was sprayed across the nations' ceilings as a wonder fire retardant in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Over a period of several years, this deadly industrial poison seeped into the pores of our nation - in our homes, our factories, our offices, and finding its way into the lungs of tens of thousands of Australians, where it was latent for many years before its toxic effect became known.
The Bernie Banton Foundation estimates that in just over 10 years, some 40,000 Australians will have contracted asbestos-related cancer.
It's an astonishing toll - equivalent to 25 years of deaths on our roads.
And mesothelioma, which ultimately took Bernie's life, is one of the worst of diseases, for which as yet there's no solution.
It is not a nice disease, as Bruce has reminded us. There are, as Bernie testified, and as his face showed, many days of suffering, anguish and sheer agony as the body slowly shuts down.
Professor Bruce Robinson has said that because of the epidemic of cases of mesothelioma means that across the world, several million people will die as a result of asbestos exposure, as he indicated already today, the costs worldwide are estimated at over $300 billion This is, as I say, one of the great industrial catastrophes of modern time.
And Matt Peacock's book has shed considerable light on the story behind asbestos in Australia - a story that begins for Matt in 1977 when as a young ABC journalist he got an unlikely lead, all because a PR company for James Hardie Asbestos was suspiciously enthusiastic about getting an audio grab of a throwaway line in a 45-minute science program that asserted that the asbestos industry in Australia was no longer a problem.
That began Matt on a quest to reveal the great violation of the trust of Australians by executives of James Hardie and other senior figures in Australian public life. Matt depicts it as a story of gross neglect - he is absolutely right - disgraceful omissions of facts and an arrogant lack of concern for the welfare of Australian workers and their families.
I'm told the full account is jaw-dropping, a damning indictment of what happens when corporations put profits before people. Karen says it should be read by every Australian school child.
It is remarkable that the first recorded case of asbestosis was in 1900 and the first asbestos compensation claim in Australia was in 1939.
James Hardie's management was not ignorant of the risks. They kept files on their state of their employees' health, and thousands of x-rays of their lungs, yet they often kept that information secret.
Like Bernie's medical record - which showed that as early as 1973, when he was working at Hardie's insulation factory, according to specialist opinion, an x-ray showed an ominous thickening of the pleura which indicated "definite early signs" of asbestos disease. It was decades later that Bernie found out about that medical record, hidden by years of absolute deceit.
It leaves a lump in your throat to read the stories of the workers in that factory, most of whom have now succumbed to asbestos diseases.
Matt writes of how the workers at the Camellia insulation factory would work with asbestos dust up to four inches thick under their feet. To quote his book:
"The company had issued a free bottle of milk daily to each worker to ease the irritation it caused to their throats. Sheppard used to pack his bottle in the asbestos to keep it cold: occasionally the men would have 'snow fights' with the dust. Like Banton, Sheppard was adamant the company had said nothing to him about the danger of asbestos cancers."
By 2004, Bernie would tell Matt that only 9 out of his 137 former workmates were still alive, and while James Hardie has moved offshore and jettisoned its asbestos arm, the consequences of those years of exposure to asbestos are still emerging.
Children who helped their dads in the garden, or in a house renovation, are now adults and now contracting asbestos diseases. Kids like Anthony Cini, who was one of many children to fall victim to poisonous asbestos landfill.
Anthony grew up in Sydney's Pendle Hill, not far from the Camellia Plant where his father worked, where Bernie worked. Matt recounts, and I quote again.
"Part of a large Maltese family, he (Anthony) remembered helping his dad load up his truck with asbestos waste which they spread on a driveway around their house and on pathways through the market garden his parents established. 'My father, brothers, and I used shovels and rakes to level out the asbestos tailings on the ground', he told his lawyer. 'My brothers and I played with the asbestos ... we rolled up balls of asbestos dust and fibre and threw it at each other." (p.295)
Anthony contracted mesothelioma when he was 46. He too lost his battle against asbestos.
This is a sad chapter in our nation's story, and it is a terrible chapter in the nation's corporate history, and it should never be forgotten. Every corporate management course in this country, every MBA course, every corporate management course, every place where business professionals are trained should have this book as essential reading about your responsibility to workers.
As Greg Combet made it clear this week, the Australian Government believes that James Hardie has an obligation to asbestos victims and that it must honour the commitments it made to those victims.
The Australian Government recognises the terrible impact of asbestos-related disease on the lives of so many innocent and hard-working Australians. That is why we are establishing the new $2.5 million Centre of Research Excellence into Asbestos Related Disease from 2010.
We have also committed a further $2 million to support the Centre's coordination of research into asbestos-related diseases, funded through the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). A $1 million Bernie Banton Asbestos Research Fellowship is also available through the NHMRC.
On 21 January this year I opened The Bernie Banton Centre, also known as the Asbestos Disease Research Institute. The Australian Government has committed $5 million towards the final fit-out costs of the Centre.
The work Nico is doing at the Centre is a major NSW focus for research into these diseases. Nico, it was good to speak to some of your researchers this morning as they sought, patiently, to explain to me what on earth they were doing. It has good prospects of doing quality research and is well supported in NSW, especially by the Dust Diseases Board of NSW.
Nico's team is working with the National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases. This is an Australian co-operative initiative that embraces all States in the country, with the aim of bringing together the work in each state in order to achieve critical mass and try to cure mesothelioma.
We have some of the best brains in the nation now working together for a cure to mesothelioma, and as Bruce has reminded us, this best brains in the country represent some of the best brains in the world.
This research will benefit future generations here and abroad, but right now there are many families who are suffering, for whom those medical discoveries may come too late.
Like the families Matt mentions in his book, who call up the staff in the Perth-based Asbestos Diseases Society of Australia to say they've just been told they have mesothelioma, "the fatal disease with the unpronounceable name". Those families need immediate support, comfort and access to information and help.
Karen knows all about that. She has a well-grounded understanding of the rollercoaster of emotions - fears anguish, anger, turmoil and despair - which asbestos disease sufferers and their families experience.
She believes there's a desperate need for the support that the Foundation aims to provide: an organisation that reflects his struggle for justice and for hope; that helps those in urgent need whilst also keeping a high-profile focus on critical long-term solutions.
The Foundation will be working with existing asbestos disease support organisations, and its first aim is to raise $400,000. That effort is starting with a major dinner on Friday 27th of November. This marks the third anniversary of Bernie's death, or 'Bernie Banton Day' as Karen would call it - as perhaps we should all call it as well, because Bernie is a bloke who has inspired the nation and touched the nation's heart in a way that we see on only a few occasions in our lifetimes.
I share Karen's vision that out of this initiative we might have a flock of volunteers and professional helpers alike who will go into homes and help newly diagnosed asbestos disease sufferers. 'Bernie's Angels', as Karen calls them - people who can help families navigate the difficult path forward from diagnosis.
In the first year, Karen is aiming to help a minimum of 20 asbestos disease sufferers and their families, and many more in years that follow. Karen, we share your vision and we intend to support you all the way, and though it's not in my notes, and I have no authorisation to say it, we will be contributing to your foundation.
And while it's also not in my notes, I think I've agreed to go to that dinner as well - barring global catastrophe and I'm not offshore. So there's two departures from the script entirely, so my staff will scold me afterwards.
Today I want to urge Australians to support the Bernie Banton Foundation.
To go back to where Bruce left us before, to have ballast, a confidence and a hope and a mission that we can beat this thing, and with a team of researchers and a team of people out there, 'Bernie's Angels', doing the work on the way through. That should be our goal, because that's what Australia's all about.
I thank the team of caring, committed volunteers and individuals who have been touched by the suffering and loss caused by asbestos disease and who are ready to make this Foundation the success it deserves to be.
I know Bernie would be proud of you all. I know Bernie would be proud of you, Karen.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the Bernie Banton Foundation.


PM: So Kate, we're going to launch this blog for young Australians and the reason we're doing it is we're in the process of developing a national strategy for young Australians; but i think you and I agree that that's only going to work if we actually bring young Australians with us and are fully armed with their views, their opinions, what they think we're doing right, what they think we're doing wrong.
ELLIS: Absolutely, are you ready to be inundated with the views of Australia's young people?
PM: I'm sure they're all going to be terribly respectful.
ELLIS: Always, always.
PM: My experience of young people is usually they are not and that's what's great about Australia.
ELLIS: They'll be honest.
PM: Yeah, but seriously, we're trying to deal with, obviously, things like binge drinking, but we're also trying to deal with the challenges young Australians are facing on the home front, the family front, what's going on in their communities, what's going on in terms of their schools, problems of bullying; also, the opportunities they have for the future to make a difference to get out there in the world, the skills they need to get a decent job as well as some of the the harder questions about when they run into trouble with the law enforcement authorities.
ELLIS: Well and as you know we've been doing so much work in trying to engage with young people through the Australian Youth Forum, through the website, through our 'You Think' events, but this will be a really great way that they can communicate their views directly to you and I'm really looking forward to seeing some of the great ideas that come in, but also the great insights on some of those problems as well. But the other thing that sometimes this generation of young people are accused of being apathetic and I don't know if you find the same thing, but I find that anytime you do a school visit you'll get the toughest questions you'll get anywhere and you'll find that young people are amazingly engaged and have strong opinions and have some great ideas and we we need to recognise that as well and that's why it's fantastic, as part of this process, that we'll get to see directly some of those ideas, some of those views coming through and in response to your blog.
PM: Well the good thing about blogging is that a lot of stuff may repeat things that are known to everybody, but every now and then, through these sorts of exercises and engaging the community directly, you find out stuff that's new and which really has a big impact on the way in which policy is done. So let's hop into this blog, hop into the subsequent online conversation and you can be there to rescue me in terms of my communication skills.
ELLIS: (laughter) Well, I'll do what I can, can't wait to see the responses that we get though.
PM: Thank you Kate Ellis, Minister for Youth, Minister for Sport.
ELLIS: Thank you Prime Minister.


PM: I'm honoured to be here today to launch this very special foundation, one which salutes a truly great Australian. Bernie was a man who took on one of the goliaths of corporate Australia. And like a courageous modern day David, he won that fight. He epitomised the Australian belief in a fair go. He had the nation's respect for his integrity. He has the nation's respect for his integrity. Our amazement remains for his tenacity. Our reverence remains for his heroism. And we continue to be inspired by the fact that, as this disease dealt with him so unfairly as it deals with so many others, his first instinct was always to have an eye out for others.
Others who were suffering, others who he could help with research. And that's why the Bernie Banton Foundation is so important. Because it was one of his last projects he discussed with Karen in his final months on earth. Bernie wasn't content to have fought for justice for himself, and it wasn't enough for him that he'd fought in the years that followed for justice for other victims of asbestos. But he was determined to do more, establishing a foundation that would do greater work still in the years after he'd gone from us. Today, I want to urge Australians to support the Bernie Banton Foundation.
To go back to where Bruce left us before- they have about us a confidence, a hope, and a mission that we could beat this thing. And with a team of researchers, and a team of people out there, Bernie's Angels, doing work on the way through. That should be our goal. Of course, that's what Australia's all about. I thank the team of caring, committed volunteers and individuals who have been touched by the suffering and loss caused by asbestos disease, and who are ready to make this foundation a success it deserves to be. I know Bernie would be proud of you all. I know Bernie would be proud of you, Karen. It gives me great pleasure to launch the Bernie Banton Foundation.


The Government warmly welcomes President Obama's decision to nominate Mr Jeff Bleich for the position of United States Ambassador to Australia. Mr Bleich's nomination is subject to the normal process of consideration and confirmation by the United States Senate.
Mr Bleich has a strong background in law, foreign policy and support for social justice and, if his nomination is confirmed, the Government would look forward to working closely with him.
The relationship with the United States is Australia's most important bilateral relationship. Built around the foundation of the Alliance, the relationship is deep, warm and mutually productive. The United States Ambassador to Australia performs a vital role in this key relationship. 


PM: We're up here at Woori Yallock for the Grand Final of the Second Division of the Yarra Valley Mountain League. Kinglake are playing, and they're playing Olinda. Kinglake, as you might remember, was one of the towns really badly affected by the Victorian Bushfires.??
In fact, most of the towns in this league were affected in one way or another. The fact that Kinglake actually pulled themselves together, and decided as a community that come hell or high water they were going to have a team in this year's comp was fantastic. Secondly, the fact that they've actually got through to the Grand Final is extraordinary. Thirdly, the fact that here we are in the third quarter and it's more or less even stevens is beyond fantastic. ??
The community's really pulled together for this, and I'm the patron of the team, that's why I'm here.


The Australian Government welcomes the jobs, export earnings, and global greenhouse gas abatement which will flow from today's Final Investment Decision of the Gorgon Joint Venture Partners.
The Minister for Resources and Energy, Martin Ferguson AM MP, today represented the Australian Government at a ceremony in Perth to mark the decision to proceed with the project.
The Gorgon Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project off Australia's north-west coast is being undertaken by a joint venture partnership consisting of Chevron (50% and operator), ExxonMobil (25%) and Shell (25%).
The Gorgon investment will be Australia's largest-ever resources development and is expected to generate $300 billion in Australian export earnings.
The project is expected to support 10,000 direct and indirect jobs in the peak construction phase and 3,500 direct and indirect jobs throughout the life of the project. $33 billion in goods and services is expected to be purchased in Australia for the project and Government revenue of $40 billion is anticipated.
Importantly, the Gorgon project will also be the world's biggest CO2 geological storage project. The Australian Government last month announced its decision to jointly accept - with the Western Australian Government - long-term liability arising from the storage, clearing the way for today's Final Investment Decision.
The environmental benefits of the Gorgon project will however be more far-reaching. Every ton of CO2 generated producing LNG in Australia reduces four tons of CO2 in Japan, and nine tons of CO2 in China, when used in place of coal for electricity generation.
Gorgon will help to stimulate Australia's economic growth and provide energy security for many decades. According to ACIL Tasman, over the first 30 years the project is expected to boost Australia's GDP by A$65 billion (NPV).


Distinguished guests, one and all.
If I could also begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
What do Thomas Jefferson, Jim Wallis, and the Poverty and Justice Bible have in common? They've liked defacing this great book. Let me explain how.
Thomas Jefferson, as we've studied the history of the American Revolution, was a great 18th century deist. One of his great accomplishments, of course, was to ensure that the Constitution of the newly founded American Republic did not entrench any single religion.
As an 18th century deist however, Jefferson was sceptical about the bible's supernatural claims. It takes a particular mind, however, to do what Jefferson then did, which was to then physically cut out of the bible any reference to the supernatural.
The Jefferson bible, if you've ever seen it, is distinguished literally, waved in the breeze, full of holes. Jefferson, by the end of that exercise, was content with the document he had produced. I thought this reflected a particular obsession, until I met Jim Wallis, from Sojourners.
Many of you in this room would know of Jim, the author of many books on politics and Christianity in the United States. He's a good friend of Tim, he's a good friend of mine, and his most recent, one of his more recent books, God's Politics, the thesis of which is that God, in the American political context, if not more broadly globally, is not owned by any particular political position, either of the left or of the right.
The story goes that when Jim Wallis began his work with Sojourners, a magazine which I still read, he and his colleagues then sat down in Washington D.C., and again took out the bible and decided to ensure that they would cut out all the reference to God's injunction to social justice. And so they began, as it were, the reverse Jefferson exercise - cut, cut, cut, cut, cut - and again you have this Bible swinging in the breeze.
Of course, the point of Jim Wallis and his colleagues was to demonstrate to the American Christian community at large that this was an incomplete document. If you excise what I understand to be thousands of references in both the prophetic literature of the Old Testament, and of course in the Gospel, the Acts, and the Letters, in fact you have a somewhat decimated document.
But again, it takes a mind of a particular quality to actually sit down - think about it - with your own bible at home, physically cut out- what do you do on the reverse side of the page? Hopefully you and I would think about that. So there you have a commonality of, shall I score, intellectual discipline on the part of Thomas Jefferson, up there with Jim Wallace - and then these people, those who put together the Poverty and Justice Bible.
Because they actually have come up with the world's best compromise - don't cut out, just colour in, and I think that reflects a marvellous history and pre-school training. I don't know about you, but I was always much better at colouring in than cutting out. I've never managed to stay within the lines. Every time I'd go to pre-school with kids who were four or five, they always managed to stay within the lines unlike myself. I always used to just go over the edge.
But this actually overcomes the Jefferson and Wallis challenge, because you don't have the problem of cutting out and then creating a problem for yourself on the reverse side of the page. It's just coloured in.
But when you actually flip through this, as I did last night at The Lodge, and see the extraordinary shadings of orange all the way though, it catches your eye, and I'm sure that's what those who have put together this particular edition of the Bible have had in mind.
Malcolm Turnbull and I have been asked to do many things in our life. Launching a Bible has not been one of them. I know those in the political class are often assumed to be arrogant, and have a view of themselves as being something extraordinary. I have to say to you that neither of us wrote this one.
That's one of those odd things you get asked to do.
If I could reflect for a moment on the organisations who are here with us this morning, and who are party to this great enterprise. Firstly, of course, to World Vision itself. World Vision, founded in 1950, now in 90 countries across the world, providing assistance to 100 million people across the world, including 2.4 million children, employing 22,500 staff. A budget of $1.7 billion. Nearly 400,000 Australians support World Vision each year through child sponsorship and the Forty Hour Famine.
I asked Tim just before I came up what was its Biblical inspiration, which parts of the Bible. And he referred me to John 10:10, and John 10:10 is not the one you said it was Tim! He told me it was about the fullness of life - let me read to you what John 10:10 actually says: 'a thief comes only to rob, kill, and destroy'. Oh, I'm sorry, it's the next part. That's alright, I was just taking the Mickey out of you mate.
"I came so that everyone would have life, and have it fully." Never challenge a Baptist when it comes to the Scriptures. "That they might have life, and might have it more fully", which of course leads to the injunction of World Vision that the world's children might have life, and have it more fully.
This therefore is its inspiration, and this therefore, is its execution - faith, without work, is dead.
The other organisation we honour here today, are of course, the Micah Challenge. I won't challenge what's in the sixth chapter of Micah in the eighth verse, I'm assuming that you've got that right, Tim? Do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with your God. And Micah's prophetic challenge, of course, is echoed down the ages, of course in the ancient time from which it was written, and the conditions of the time, but also the decades through the centuries. And so it does today.
And the work of Micah Challenge is also significant in Australia in the five years in which it's been operating. Launched in 2004, now campaigns in 40 countries, Micah Challenge has formed a coalition of more than 30 Christian aid and development aid agencies in Australia, embracing Catholic, Protestant and Pentecostal traditions of the Christian faith. More than 101,000 Australians have signed the Micah call in Australia, a personal statement of commitment to work to the ending of global poverty. And the Micah Challenge is of course running the Voices for Justice campaign that's brought to Canberra 270 people from every state and territory, representing churches and schools in cities, regional and country areas.
Of course, the work of World Vision and the work of Micah Challenge, in so many respects would not be possible were it not for the work of a third organisation, which we honour here this morning, which is more ancient than either of them - the Bible Society of Australia.
Of course, the Bible Society of Australia was founded in 1817, back in the days of Lachlan Macquarie, and will soon celebrate its 200 years in this country, and began producing Bibles in the Indigenous languages of Australia and New Zealand from as early as 1827, when it produced the Bible, a New Testament, in Maori.
And this is where the three great institutions come together. One, of course, is the propagation of the Bible itself. And the second, organisations like Micah Challenge, and of course World Vision, which take their inspiration from the saying 'faith without works is dead'.
Of course, for those of us engaged in national political life, our work on policy is incomplete unless we are working arm-in-arm with the great organisations of the Church and charitable sector.
All of you in this room know full well that there is a limit to what Government can do. All of you know full well that, when it comes to dealing with poverty, at home and abroad, this is often done best when you have a creative and effective partnership between the resources of Government and the compassion of Church and charitable organisations.
And that's what we see writ large across the world, and that's what we see writ large for the work of these two great institutions. In Australia, what we have sought to do in recent times is to put our shoulder to the wheel by lifting Australia's contribution to ODA around the developing world.
This is the right and necessary thing to do, and I'm pleased that in doing it we've had the support of the Opposition in Australian politics, because, when we confront the challenges we have with poverty at home - they are great, and they must be attended to: problems of homelessness, problems of simple destitution, problems of absolute isolation, and alienation.
Problems abroad however, cannot be ignored. Remember, it was Wesley who said 'the world is my parish'. And so it is for us as well.
Therefore, by lifting what we seek to do around the world, and by also putting our shoulder to the wheels of other countries in pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals, our objective is to make a real and quantifiable difference.
The Christian traditions from which you all come are many and varied. But I think all of you in this room would agree with one thing: it is not simply and exclusively some individual, pietistic retreat into yourself in pursuit of some microscopic spirituality. No, it's not that. It is a tradition alive in the fact that faith without works is dead, and that the Christian doctrine to which you all aspire, and which you all believe, is one that is both about individual spirituality and a parallel commitment to social justice.
Which brings me in full circle back to this tome which we launch today, the Poverty and Justice Bible.
I congratulate those who have put together this extraordinary work. I congratulate those who have seen fit to assemble a version of the Bible which draws starkly to people's attention the challenge of Micah, the challenge of John, the challenge facing us all as an informed community of faith.
May it be an inspiration for many more Australians to contribute to the worldwide fight against poverty and injustice, and a better and fairer future for people of all nations, all colours and all creeds.
And it's therefore a great honour for me to join with all of you here in Canberra today, for the launch of this Poverty and Justice Bible.


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, Minister for Health and Ageing, Nicola Roxon and ACT Minister for Health, Katy Gallagher today officially opened two new operating theatres at the Canberra Hospital.
$4.68 million was provided by the Rudd Government to build the two new operating theatres, two anaesthetic rooms, a pump room, a sterile room and a scrub area.
The funding is part of Stage 2 of the Rudd Government's Elective Surgery Waiting List Reduction Plan, investing $600 million to improve hospital services and reduce surgery waiting times.
This Enhanced Operating Theatre Complex will complement the ten existing theatres to reduce elective surgery waiting times.
One theatre will accommodate general surgeries such as vascular and orthopaedic procedures, whilst the other will support cardiac-thoracic surgeries such as thoracic cancer surgery, coronary artery grafts, chest trauma and valve replacements.
The Rudd Government is taking concrete steps to improve Australia's health and hospital system after twelve years of neglect by the previous Liberal Government.
These investments highlight the Government's strategy of targeting key pressure points in our health system, such as elective surgery and emergency care. These investments will continue to flow while further consultations are conducted on long term reform options.
The announcement was made at the latest consultation in the Rudd Government's round of meetings to discuss improving the health care system.
The Canberra Hospital consultation is the second ACT consultation and the 24th across the country to road-test the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's proposed reforms.
The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission report made recommendations for system-wide changes to Australian health care. 
At today's Canberra Hospital consultation the Prime Minister and Minister Roxon outlined the Commission's recommendations and met with medical deans, the AMA and the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners - discussing their priorities to improve health services around the country. 
All Australians are also able to contribute to the national debate on our health system via the yourHealth.gov.au website - and full copies of the reports can be found there. 


PM: Today it's my intention to appoint two greatly respected Australians to two important positions for Australia abroad.
These two men have represented Australia at the highest level. Both have been Defence Ministers in the Cabinet, both have led their parties and both have earned the respect and the trust of the Australian people.
Today, both men have reaffirmed their commitment to public service and national leadership by agreeing to represent Australia at the highest levels abroad.
Today, I'll be asking the Governor-General to approve the appointment of Kim Beazley as Australia's next Ambassador to United States of America.
Today, I'll also be asking the Governor-General to approve the appointment of Brendan Nelson as Australia's next Ambassador to the European Communities, as Australia's representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, as Australia's Special Representative to the World Health Organisation and as Australia's Ambassador to Belgium and Luxembourg.
These two appointments will ensure two respected and proud Australians continue to serve their country in the highest capacity.
Our relationship with the United States is Australia's most important relationship. Our interests with the United States are broad and they are deep and they extend back many, many decades, a relationship which has earned the support of both sides of Australian politics, in times of war and in times of peace.
And therefore I am delighted that Kim Beazley, given his distinguished career, has accepted this appointment.
To our friends in the United States I believe it confirms the seriousness with which - the seriousness we attach to this relationship and I believe that Kim will discharge the functions of ambassador there with great distinction.
Last year as Prime Minister I paid a visit also to Brussels. I indicated there, in my discussions with President Barroso, that Australia would be enhancing its relationship with the European Communities of the European Union.
Also, as you know, together with the ISAF forces and through NATO we have common interests in Afghanistan and therefore it has been a decision reinforced by the advice of the Foreign Minister that we needed a person of distinction and with great experience to discharge this function as well.
I'm delighted that Brendan Nelson has accepted this appointment. I believe to our friends in Brussels, again, it will underpin the importance which we attach to our relationship at the economic, the foreign policy level and in terms of NATO, the security policy level, in terms of that relationship with Australia and for the future.
I've said to you many times before that I do believe in a government of - which harvests the talents of the nation. I'm serious about that. These two men represent distinguished Australians with great capacity who I believe will serve Australia's national interests well.
Whatever their political backgrounds may have been, they have now entered into the public service of the Australian nation and I commend them for it. Foreign Minister.
SMITH: Well thanks very much, Prime Minister. I'm very pleased to add to your remarks. We are, of course, very pleased to this afternoon, to formally recommend to the Governor and the Executive Council the appointment of Mr Beazley as Ambassador to the United States and the appointment of Mr Nelson as Ambassador to Belgium, Luxembourg, the European Union and, of course, Australia's representative to NATO.
The Australia-United States alliance is, of course, the continuing bedrock of our strategic security and defence arrangements. It's one of our most - one of our most important posts and Mr Beazley is, of course, eminently suitable and suited to discharge those serious responsibilities and we welcome very much the fact that Kim has accepted the Government's request to serve the nation again.
So far as our Ambassador-Designate to Belgium and the European Union and Special Representative or representative to NATO is concerned, as the Prime Minister has indicated, we have taken considerable steps since coming to office to enhance our engagement with the European Union.
Last year I signed with Foreign Minister Kouchner when France was the chair of the European Union, the Australia-European Union Partnership Framework which sets the basis for the modern day relationship between Australia and the European Union.
Mr Nelson, of course, is eminently suited and suitable to that appointment , not just because of his general capacities, but because in Brussels we also have our relationship with NATO. And as a former well-respected and well-regarded Defence Minister he brings the additional attribute and qualification of that experience and we're also very pleased that Brendan was happy to consider the appointment and very pleased to be able to make it.
Thank you.
PM: If I might ask now the Ambassador-Designate to the United States of America, Mr Beazley, to make some remarks.
BEAZLEY: Thank you. Well firstly, Prime Minister, can I thank you and your Foreign Minister for the enormous honour that you've done me in presenting me with this challenge in public life to be Ambassador to the United States. I can't think of anything that I would rather do at this point of time and it's an expression of confidence which I profoundly appreciate.
The United States is a country for which I have very great affection and I have had dealings with the United States as a Minister, as an Opposition Leader, as a politician, as an academic, for a very lengthy period of time.
There is always an immense and complex agenda on the table between Australia and the United States. We are one of the strongest allies of the United States and we speak to the United States with the authority of a friend.
I thoroughly recognise that I'm there to represent the Australian national interest and represent that through the instructions that come to me from the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister. I therefore recede from endless expressions of opinion to being in the foreign policy equivalent of what Speaker Lenthall was in the House of Commons: I have neither eyes to see, nor mouth to speak, nor ears to hear except as the Commons directs me. In my case that applies to the Australian Government.
PM: Thank you, Kim. If I could ask now, the Australian Ambassador-Designate to the European Union, Brendan Nelson, to speak.
NELSON: Thank you very much, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister. It's also an honour for me to accept this appointment as Australia's Ambassador to the European Union, Belgium and Luxembourg, to NATO, of course predominantly prosecuting the war in Afghanistan in which we're heavily involved, and I also feel privileged to be able to play a role as Australia Special Representative to the World Health Organisation.
I said last night in my valedictory speech that it's always been the case for me to do whatever I can in terms of public service and I didn't expect this offer to be made, it's one that I accept with a great sense of honour and I will do my utmost to represent Australia's best interests in the European Union and in particular, being familiar with many of the key figures in NATO that are prosecuting the war and the conflict in Afghanistan, to be able to do my very best on behalf of the Australian people, the Australian Government and the Australian Defence Force personnel who have their lives on the line every day for us, on our behalf in the war against terrorism and support of the Afghanistan people.
It is an immense honour and one that I accept very willingly and, as with Mr Beazley, I also - I also congratulate Kim Beazley very much on his appointment. I think that it is one that will be very well received by the Australian people and I would say right across the political spectrum. Thank you.
PM: Thank you, Brendan. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when did you first raise, discuss these appointments with the two gentlemen, in particular with Brendan Nelson? Was it before he announced his intention to leave Parliament?
PM: The discussions with Kim have occurred recently, and similarly with Brendan. Brendan indicated some time ago that he was going to leave the Parliament before the next election and subsequent to that we spoke to him about this possibility.
The Foreign Minister was very strong on this point. Given our expanded relationship with the European Union, underpinned by the Framework Agreement to which he's just alluded, given in particular the challenges that lie ahead for us all in Afghanistan and our partners in NATO, having a representative in Brussels who is a former Defence Minister and who knows the political and policy terrain on Afghanistan well, commended him for that position and I'm delighted that Brendan has accepted that invitation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that you want to harvest the talent, you said. Do you think people will be cynical about politicians being appointed, ex-politicians being appointed to these roles? And how important is it to you that when you try to bring former politicians in, they are, as most people would agree with these two, qualified, particularly for that particular post rather than it just being some kind of reward?
PM: When I've said previously that I believe in a government of the national talents, it's actually what I mean. Whether it's in the civil service, public service, or whether it's in beyond that, whether it's in business or whether it's in political life, on either sides of political life, what the Foreign Minister and I have an eye for is talent, applied to particular positions. No one could suggest that the gentleman standing to my right would anyway fail to discharge Australia's interest well in the United States.
There are very few people in this country who know the US better than Kim Beazley. There are very few people in this country who are more respected in the United States than Kim Beazley. And this is not a matter of the last several years but of the last several decades. In the case of Brendan, I mentioned before, his qualifications as far as the defence portfolio is concerned, and our current challenges with Afghanistan. Secondly, I believe that in dealing with the complexity of politics in the European Union, it is also helpful having someone who has experience both in policy and in politics to negotiate those often very complex shoals to secure the best outcomes for the Australian national interest.
Of course the third point is this, we know that we have challenges also in terms of global pandemics, therefore the decision to appoint Brendan as a special representative from Brussels to the WHO which is of course based in Geneva, enhances our representation of the WHO because we do not know what pandemic challenges lie ahead.
This is both a technical challenge, in terms of the work which we collaborate on around the world, as far as our health authorities are concerned in dealing with pandemics, but secondly, to have also someone with his background as head of the AMA, I think, adds something considerable to that as well.
So the answer to your question is, these two appointments, and I believe Tim Fischer's early on for the Holy See, demonstrate it's a question of applying the talents that are available to the nation wherever they come from to the tasks which the nation needs discharged.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what have you got in mind for Peter Costello?
PM: A cup of tea, a Bex, and a quick lie down. Well, as I think Peter indicated earlier and I have as well, a question of being a government for the national talents applies to a number of bows currently in political life, business life as well as our public service. But there is still, of course, the question of what might be most appropriate depending on his decisions concerning his future. But I am firmly of the view that you can't simply rule people out on the basis of where they happened to have served in politics before.
There is something called the national interest which, though we are tribal beasts at one level, in terms of where we come from politically, in our more sober moments, realise, we realise that these national interest transcend our engagement in the trench warfare of national politics.
PM: Take one here for Kim and then I'll (inaudible).
JOURNALIST: Mr Beazley, when we raised this with you recently, the prospect of you taking this job, you said something like 'Oh, don't wish that upon me, mate'.
PM: (Inaudible) calling you mate, oh, sorry, (inaudible) point you were making.
BEAZLEY: We're close.
SMITH: I think it was a different response when I spoke to him.
JOURNALIST: But has your plan all along been to ensure that your daughter gets through Year 12 before even considering such a role?
BEAZLEY: Right, well, of course Rachel is enormously important to me as all three of my daughters, the other two of course are married. And we're always mindful of how Rachel responds to these things and she said she'd be very cheerful of that outcome. That's the first point I'd make. The second point I'd make is if I did say that to you - and I am sure I did, you wouldn't report that inaccurately - it was to keep - it was partly motivated by a desire to keep you off my back. And the second thing I'd say is it is daunting.
This is a very tough ambassadorial job. I had not realised until this morning that Brendan was about to join me and I do congratulate him. He has got a multiplicity of jobs, I have one. This is just about the toughest ambassadorial job that we have, China, I suppose, is up there with it. And it is a complex one, you're addressing a multiplicity of constituencies in the United States and they don't all agree. And to filter the Australian national interest in, through that process and to keep your bosses happy is a very difficult task indeed, but I look forward to it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) priority Mr Beazley, what do you see, obviously the relationship is in - obviously the relationship is in good hands and good standing. What do you see as the priority and do you think that Afghanistan, particularly with Dr Nelson's appointment to NATO is - how far up is that priority?
BEAZLEY: The priority is what the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister tell me are the priorities. Obviously, Afghanistan will be a matter of considerable interest to the President and I will conform to my instructions as to what I should A, prioritise and B, how I should.
JOURNALIST: I was going to ask that question, but when will the appointments be effective, is it still November for the US and Dr Nelson (inaudible)?
SMITH: The current Ambassador to the United States, Dennis Richardson, is of course the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade designate. Ambassador Richardson will return to Australia in November to start his duties as secretary of the department. Mr Beazley will commence early next year in February.
And in Dr Nelson's case, the current ambassador to the European Union finishes his term in January, Dr Nelson will commence in February. Can I just add to the remarks, you will see in the paper, in the formal press release, I've also asked Dr Nelson to pay special attention to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is advancing our relationship with a security organisation in Europe and that will be in addition to the responsibilities that we previously outlined, that's also in the press release. But Dr Nelson will also start in February when the current ambassador returns.
PM: So no time for Brendan to ride his Harley across Europe.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson, will you be toeing the Australian Government's line on climate change in your new post and, in particular, the need for an emissions trading scheme?
NELSON: Well, my job, obviously, will be to represent Australia's interests and the priorities of the Australian Government and to prosecute the position of the Australian Government on all issues in relation to the European Union, to NATO and the World Health Organization. I'll do that to the very best of my ability and as you can also see fro the number of jobs that I'll be undertaking I'll be working extremely hard.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at the meeting of NATO in Bucharest last year, you laid down a series of markers for what you saw as progress. Has Afghanistan gone forwards or backwards since that time last year and how long should Australia stay engaged before you draw a line under it?
PM: I think the best answer to that question- I did an interview with a German newspaper a couple of days ago about the debate in Germany about NATO at the moment. The best that, about the engagement in Afghanistan at the moment, the best we can say about Afghanistan at the moment is that it is a work in progress. It is a very difficult work in progress. Now we all understand the complexities which have just become clear through the Afghan electoral process; they are still working their way through. That's the first point.
Secondly, I have said and said consistently we are in Afghanistan for the long haul. None of us, least of all so close to the anniversary of September 11, should ever forget the reasons we are there. This is an important and foundational reason for being there and it has to do with terrorism and the training of terrorists as well as our obligations to the United States.
I think the other things to say about our mission in Afghanistan, however is that it is not a blank check. The mission statement which concerns the training of an Afghan national army brigade to, in time, resume responsibility for the security of Oruzgan Province is our mission to then effect a transfer of security responsibility in that province. That will take some time. But when I say we are there for the long haul, I mean it. Sorry, there was one over here and then to you, Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson, just to clarify the Prime Minister's response to the very first question, did this job officer influence the timing of your departure from Parliament?
NELSON: No, it certainly didn't. In fact, earlier in the year when I announced that I wouldn't recontest the next election, I had a cup of tea and a conversation with the Prime Minister about a range of things in his office and he asked me when I do leave would I be interested in, our prepared in some way, to serve Australia and I said, well, yes I would but it depends on what it would be. And then the Prime Minister contacted me on the initiative of the Foreign Minister last week to specifically talk about this issue.
JOURNALIST: And to Mr Beazley, I guess, dinner's off tonight is that right, at the ANU?
BEAZLEY: No, mate, not at all, I am looking forward to seeing you.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson, did you give Mr Turnbull any warning of this announcement?
NELSON: I informed Mr Turnbull this morning that I had been offered this position, that I have agreed this morning to accept that position and that we would be announcing it. And I should also correct something that the Prime Minister has said. I have a Triumph Speedmaster, not a Harley.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) remembered the title?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what national leadership can you provide on the issue of how Governments and society in general deals with the issue of paedophiles being released back into society after serving their time? And what's your message to people who might take the law into their own hands?
PM: Firstly, people should not. This is a law-abiding country. We are a country of laws, and even when the laws are uncomfortable for the nation, the laws are there for a purpose, and that is for all citizens to adhere to them. Secondly, when it comes to the case that you referred to in particular, this of course is a matter for the New South Wales authorities. I fully understand the sensitivities involved; this is a very difficult issue. It is a however a matter for the New South Wales authorities.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, changing views somewhat, given this new era of bipartisanship on foreign appointments, can you think of somewhere suitable that perhaps Barnaby Joyce could be sent as an Australian envoy?
PM: Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you-
PM : My home state, yeah.
JOURNALIST: I'm not sure if you read Mark Latham's piece this morning in which he suggested-
PM: Can I just say that for the period that I have occupied this position I have not read any of them. And the-
JOURNALIST: He suggested-
PM: And that is not an exaggeration, I just haven't. But-
JOURNALIST: Well, he suggested Julia Gillard, back in 2004, thought you were leaking to the then government the details of what would come up in tactics, what you were going to address in question time. Did you do that at all?
PM: A) I haven't read that, and B) that is not true.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been criticism of the behaviour of politicians in question time, particularly criticism of yourself for speaking too long, giving too long answers. Why do you give such long answers? And to what do you put down the unruliness of recent days? Is it because of the Opposition, or is there some structural problem?
PM: Well firstly, I think it's important that in posing a question like that you take an historical view, which is how this institution has evolved over a long, long period of time. And depending on the question which is asked, so it will shape to the nature and the content and the length of an answer. That's the first point. Secondly, I've been in this place even myself long enough to know that there are times when it gets heated and tense in there, and sometimes, as we saw yesterday in the Parliament, when Brendan gave his final address to the Parliament, where you see the Parliament at its absolute best. That has been the case for a long, long time.
Is there always room for Parliament to lift its collective game? Of course it is. But this is a pretty, you know, tough and robust environment. It's got significant imperfections - you're absolutely right. Can we all lift our game? Yes. But there's always going to be a tough exchange there. And I certainly remember in the long period that we were in opposition, being on the receiving end of, shall I say, lengthy, lengthy addresses about the state of affairs of the nation, the state of the Australian Labour Party, and various other states as well, from those who then occupied the Treasury benches.
So let's just stand back a bit and see this thing in historical perspective. Your general point's right, we all need to lift the game.
JOURNALIST: Brendan Nelson, you started out in the Labor Party and then-
PM: Dennis, then there, then we gotta zip, yeah.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Australian forces have boarded another suspected refugee ship this morning. Should they turn this ship back, or should the people be taken to Christmas Island?
PM: I have not been briefed on the logistical details, is the first point in response to your question, Dennis. The second is the normal processes of Australian law and procedure will apply, depending on where the vessel has been identified. Thirdly, can I say again, our approach to border security is that we will take a tough approach, a tough approach, because border security is a fundamental interest to the Australian people. We'll continue to do so in the future. Last one here.
JOURNALIST: Dr Nelson, you started out in the Labor Party, of course, and then did a period of time as a Liberal politician. Have you come home now?
NELSON: That's pretty rough. The - I thought you guys'd start to lay off.
PM: I think they're just warming up.
NELSON: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I am working for Australia, for Australians, in the best interest of our country. Nothing more, nothing less.
PM: Thanks very much, folks. Gotta run.


CURTIS: Prime Minister, welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning.
CURTIS: Your reaction, first, to the death of the terrorist Noordin Mohammad Top. How much does this dent the capability and leadership of terrorism in Australia's region?
PM: Our advice is that it does so significantly. This is welcome news and I congratulate the Indonesian security authorities for their success. This has been a very difficult operation over a long period of time and the credit goes to the Indonesians, through their security agencies, for doing this.
However it doesn't leave us in a position where we can feel complacent about the future. Jemaah Islamiah is still alive and well; Al Qaeda is still alive and well.
But this is a very significant result. This man has been a mass murderer, he's been responsible for the murder of Australians and I congratulate the Indonesians on their success.
CURTIS: Will you be pushing them, though, to reinforce their success and keep up the fight against terrorism?
PM: Absolutely. Our relationship with the Indonesian Government on counter-terrorism is very strong. This relationship began to be built under the previous Australian government. We have sought to build on that and expand it further. We cannot afford to be complacent and I believe the Indonesians fully understand and accept that themselves, given their own, again, recent experiences.
And again on Noordin Top, the fact that we have had this individual responsible for the most recent Bali bombing, the two Marriott bombings, the bombing on the Australian embassy in Jakarta and potentially others as well, this has been a very significant result.
CURTIS: You've had a win of an entirely different sort with windfall profits from the Reserve Bank contributing about $5 billion to your coffers last month. Does that money need to go straight to the budget bottom line to pay off the deficit?
PM: We'll work our way through all of these things through the normal Budget processes. We have undertaken what I would describe, strongly, as conservative economic management which is to expand the role of government in the economy through fiscal stimulus when the private economy is weak and to roll that stimulus back over time as the private economy recovers.
That's the responsible thing to do and we'll be working our way through all of these matters on the expenditure and the revenue side as we prepare for the next Budget.
CURTIS: You do though have a Budget under considerable pressure and as the Treasurer will outline today you've got a growing and ageing population. Can you any longer afford to tolerate the sort of inefficiencies and wasteful spending we've seen outlined in Parliament over the last two weeks in the schools program?
PM: Well, firstly I would note very carefully that in the Deputy Prime Minister's response to many of the questions raised by those from the Opposition in the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, that many of the questions they raised have proven to be unfounded at all. Secondly-
CURTIS:- But not all of them-
PM: Secondly, if you're rolling out a school modernisation program involving all of Australia's 10,000 schools, it follows logically that on the way through there are going to be bumps in the road, and what the Deputy Prime Minister has put in place is means by which each of those can be dealt with as they arise, and she's been doing so.
Secondly, were we not engaged in that sort of infrastructure stimulus for the country, the results that we've seen underpinned by the recent reports by the OECD and others which has the Australian economy, uniquely worldwide, generating positive growth over the last year with the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, with the lowest debt and with the lowest deficit of the major economies, and the only one not to have gone into recession, one is part of the other.
So what we're doing through nation building for recovery is supporting jobs for tradies, supporting work for small business today by investing in this nation-building infrastructure for tomorrow.
CURTIS: But Julia Gillard put or suggested during the week that the problems occurred at the state level because they were implementing your program. Isn't that a reverse blame game? Aren't you ultimately responsible for how federal money is spent?
PM: The Deputy Prime Minister is making a simple statement of fact and that is the agencies we deal with in the implementation of the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history - 10,000 schools, government and non-government right across the country - is either through state and territory governments on the one hand, or what is called the block grant authorities or the non-government school authorities, including the Catholic school authorities, on the other.
CURTIS: We haven't seen any problems raised in the non-government sector. Are the state governments simply not up to the job?
PM: No, what I'd say is that as you're rolling something out in order to achieve two objectives - which is to support jobs for tradies now and work for small business now, and building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow - it's going to be challenging.
Let's look at this in overall perspective: 10,000 schools and you mentioned before the population growth for Australia for the future, a population which we project will rise to 35 million by mid century. The school buildings we're laying out today - new libraries, state of the art libraries, new science centres, new language centres - these are there to serve the needs of the next 40 years to make sure that our kids have the best education opportunities possible.
It's a good program, it's the right program, but inevitably when problems arise you have mechanisms for solving them on the way through. That's exactly what the Deputy Prime Minister is doing.
CURTIS: You're heading off to the United States for the G20. You'll also be talking climate change. You had the surprise appointment yesterday of Brendan Nelson as ambassador to the EU where no doubt he'll be dealing with climate change issues as well.
Will you be expecting him to tow your line on emissions trading, a policy he doesn't agree with?
PM: Well let me take those two points in sequence.
Climate change is not nearly a done deal globally. This is a huge and complex negotiation we're involved in right now, and when we go to the United Nations in New York and the Pittsburgh summit at the G20 next week, let me tell you it's going to be very hard to generate real progress on the way through to Copenhagen, which is only about 80 days away.
Secondly on the case of the appointment of Brendan Nelson, obviously we welcome his appointment. I welcome the fact he's accepted this appointment. As Brendan said yesterday, as an Australian diplomat he will act consistent with the decisions of the democratically elected government of the day. That is simply normal.
CURTIS: Did you talk about the issue of emissions trading?
PM: I think we've, Brendan and I have had a few conversations. I'm not quite sure whether we canvassed that one in particular.
But Brendan's an enormously experienced person in Australian public and political life. He understands that when you transition, as he will when he leaves Parliament, from being a member of Parliament in the political process to being an Australian diplomat, your role changes, and as it should.
CURTIS: There are many Liberals who do agree with his position on emissions trading. Is it looking increasingly likely that the only way you're going to get an emissions trading scheme is through a joint sitting of Parliament after a double dissolution election?
PM: Part of our challenge in dealing with the Liberals and the Nationals on climate change now is there is no unity on their side on it.
I noticed the other day Senator Minchin, for example, said that he's waiting for the Government to draft the Oppositions amendments. Well, that is a remarkable abandonment of responsibility.
The problem we have with the Liberals is that under Mr Turnbull's leadership they are split right down the middle on climate change, right down the middle on WorkChoices, right down the middle on most things that you can advance in the public policy debate.
CURTIS: Doesn't that make it more likely that you won't be able to get your scheme through the Senate, as it's currently compromised?
PM: My job as Prime Minister of Australia is to try and make things work. That will be the attitude I bring to bear.
Climate change is important for this, the driest continent on Earth, where the effects of climate change will be felt earliest and hardest, and therefore I've got a responsibility to make everything possible work in order to bring about an agreement in the Australian Parliament.
That's the attitude we bring to bear. But my call to those opposite is: how is it possible for us to negotiate with the Liberal and National Party which cannot agree on a common position on climate change? My challenge to them during the one month of recess is form a common position. That is the least expectation which a government or the Australian community can have as we march towards this important decision for the future - Copenhagen and beyond.
Because as temperatures rise, droughts become more intense, water problems in countries like Australia get worse, the impact in tropical Australia through tropical storms gets worse, the economic cost for Australia gets much greater. It's time to act.
CURTIS: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you for having me on the program.


Australia is today joining a group of nations, led by President Obama, in announcing a commitment to support the rollout of H1N1 vaccine to needy groups in developing countries. 
As part of this effort the Australian Government is prepared to commit up to 10 per cent of its 2009 H1N1 pandemic vaccine to the World Health Organization (WHO) for use among priority groups in developing countries in our region.
This commitment follows today's TGA decision to register the vaccine and is subject to the finalisation of arrangements for supply of the vaccine to Australians.
Australia is making this commitment recognising the challenges developing countries face in accessing vaccines for the pandemic response.
Australia's commitment of vaccines will support health systems and priority groups in Pacific Island countries, Papua New Guinea, East Timor and possibly Southeast Asian countries.
In making this commitment, Australia is acting in concert with the United States, the United Kingdom, Brazil, France, Italy, New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland.
Additionally, Australia has provided funds to the WHO to help distribute the vaccines to Papua New Guinea, the Pacific Islands and East Timor, our near neighbours most at risk. This will help ensure that the vaccines get to the people who need them the most.


FORDHAM: Kevin Rudd, good afternoon.
PM: Good afternoon, Ben. Thanks for having me on your program.
FORDHAM: My pleasure. When do you take off?
PM: Heading off first thing tomorrow morning, and it's to New York, special session on climate change leading up to the big conference in Copenhagen and then straight away to Pittsburgh for the G20 on the future of the global economy. So it's going to be a fairly four or five days.
FORDHAM: Truthful answer - do you get sick of the travel?
PM: Absolutely. Mate, I am a homebody. I'd actually prefer to be in my house, on the veranda in Brisbane, having a cup of tea with the cat and dog around and the kids.
FORDHAM: Your style of communication has been discussed a lot lately. Are your answers getting longer?
PM: Someone raised this the other day. I think, it depends, really, on the question that you're asked.
FORDHAM: Ok.
PM: If you're asked a question, as I was earlier this week, about where we're going on the future of the global economy one year after the Lehman Brothers collapse, then you're going to give a fairly considered response to that about what's happened in the last 12 months across all the major economic indicators, which way you're going to go forward. But if it's a simpler thing, then you deal with it more expeditiously. It really depends, its horses for courses.
FORDHAM: Can I hit you with a couple of short and sharp ones?
PM: Yes, sure. Here we go, it feels like a set up, mate.
FORDHAM: No, not all. The terror mastermind Noordin Top is dead. He was behind the mass murder of 95 Aussie's in Bali. Good riddance?
PM: Absolutely.
FORDHAM: OK, that was a short one. What about this one: the Australian -
PM: He's a mass murderer. He's a mass murderer, absolutely.
FORDHAM: The Australian Christian Lobby believes there's too much sex and violence on prime time TV. Do you agree?
PM: Matter for regulation by the commercial television networks, and that'll be, obviously, in response to what viewers want.
FORDHAM: You sit down and watch the TV, though. Do you think there's too much sex and violence on TV?
PM: You know, the truth is I don't. I just don't have time. Look, I was a kid growing up the '70s, where you had Number 96 and The Box. Do you remember those programs?
FORDHAM: No.
PM: OK, that's predates you, mate. I mean, these were not exactly what I'd describe as necessarily quality family viewing. There's been a fair bit of explicit stuff on television over the years. The question is to get the balance right, and this is a matter for the commercial regulators in contact with the appropriate authorities.
I don't think it is the right thing to do to have politicians sticking their nose into it and saying 'this program should be on, that should be off'. There are ways in which these standards should be determined by professional bodies and by the commercial outlets themselves.
FORDHAM: Our population is tipped to rise to 35 million by 2049. Can we cope, considering that vital services like health are already stretched?
PM: First of all, I think it's great that our population's growing because so many countries around the rest of the world are shrinking, and that poses a real problem in terms of having a strong tax base for the future and a strong economy and strong nation for the future.
Secondly, however, big problem - how do you actually invest in the infrastructure necessary to support a growing population. That costs. That's why 70 percent of our stimulus package is invested in infrastructure, like rail, road, ports, schools, hospitals, research institutions, etcetera, because you've got to lay that stuff out for the future.
FORDHAM: On the subject of health, you said before the last election that the Commonwealth would seize control if the states didn't fix it. Just, do you remember this? Have a listen to this:
AUDIO CLIP: We have put forward a national plan to end the buck passing between Canberra and the states. I have a long-term plan to fix our nation's hospitals. I will be responsible for implementing my plan, and I state this with absolute clarity - the buck will stop with me.
FORDHAM: So what happened?
PM: Absolutely, it does. What I've done since becoming Prime Minister is we've commissioned a National Health Reform document. It was released about a month or so ago. It gives us three strategic options for the future. I'm spending the next, through to the end of this year, discussing that with the medical profession and with the states. We'll put a final proposal to the state and territory governments on the future in the first part of next year. If they cop that voluntarily, well, then good. If they don't, as I said also prior to the last election, I'll go to the people for a mandate. We'll get on with the job. The buck stops with me.
FORDHAM: Yes or no - has anyone pulled you aside, any of your colleagues, and said 'look, health is a basket case, you know, don't get involved, don't have your fingerprints on it'?
PM: Yes.
FORDHAM: OK, I appreciate your honesty.
The big story in Sydney this week is Dennis Ferguson, the -
PM: - But you've actually got to bite the bullet with this stuff. You can't just let, you asked before, Ben, about population going to 35 million by mid-century - a large part of that story is the aging of the population. You know, the number of people over 65 will increase from 13 percent of our population to 22 percent of our population - nearly one in four Australians will be over 65. That means bigger health costs for the country, which means you've got to have long-term reforms. Otherwise, it's just going to become unaffordable for the nation.
FORDHAM: OK. The convicted paedophile Dennis Ferguson - Tony Abbott says that people need to remember that he is a human being. Do you agree?
PM: I am disgusted by paedophilia. I am disgusted by paedophiles. It makes me sick in the stomach. I said yesterday that these involve sensitive questions involving the law and I believe we should uphold the law, and in the case of the law here, it's administered by the state government of New South Wales.
FORDHAM: You've appointed another political rival to a top job overseas. When was it first raised, this idea of giving Brendan Nelson a gig?
PM: The honest answer is I can't quite recall when exactly it was.
FORDHAM: Roughly.
PM: Well when Brendan would have indicated that he was going to go early and get out of politics before the next election, and then we came back to him and said 'here's a proposal for you to consider', so -
FORDHAM: Has he been your guest at Kirribilli House recently?
PM: I think I've seen, well I've chatted to Brendan at Kirribilli House, probably once, I think, and that would have been quite a while ago, but I can't quite remember to be quite honest. I see a lot of people.
FORDHAM: OK, look, I'll move right along. Your public spray at the economic record of Howard-Costello, was that a bit unkind? Is it hypocritical to sledge them, considering that many businesses, like the one run by your lovely wife, benefitted greatly during their reforms?
PM: Well, can I say what I said in that speech, which was launching Paul Kelly's book on the last decade or so in Australian politics and economics was just to make a number of factual points. One was, in terms of the reform of the Australian economy, that the Howard Government effectively went to sleep.
Much of the productivity growth in the Australian economy - this is a matter of record from the nation's leading economists - much of the productivity growth that we saw in the late '90's, the early part of this decade, came from the deep reforms to the economy undertaken during the Hawke and Keating governments. That's just a fact.
What Paul Kelly was saying in his book was that that was largely true, but that the Howard government continued this reform effort. That's where I disagreed, because the only change that I could point to in the Howard government period of any fundamental nature was WorkChoices, and WorkChoices of course had the impact of ripping out a whole lot of basic protections for working families. That's why we undertook to get rid of it.
But on the broader attack on their failure to bring about long-term economic reforms to boost long-term productivity growth, the neglect in the investment in infrastructure, the neglect in the investment in skills, subject of multiple critiques by the Reserve Bank and others over a long period of time, I stand by everything I said.
FORDHAM: OK. There are more boats arriving in Australian waters carrying asylum seekers, five in the past fortnight. Prior to the last election, you said you would turn them back. How many have you turned back?
PM: Well, these boats have been intercepted by Australian Navy vessels, and consistent with our procedures they have been taken to Christmas Island, that's occurred in the most recent one.
Stand back from all this - on the question of comparison, which is relevant to your question, in the period of the Howard government, we had about 13,500 people arrive here by boat. In the period that this Government has been in office, nearly two years now, we've had about 1,100 arrive by boat. As I said, when boats are intercepted, they are taken to Christmas Island. If they are not proven to be bona fide refugees, we send them back home. That's how we do things.
FORDHAM: I know you've got to rush off to a meeting. Just a quick one - Mark Latham says that Julia Gillard told him that she believed that you were spying on Labor back in 2005 and leaking to the Coalition. Is that awkward?
PM: No. I think it what it really is, it's sad, because so many people in the Australian labour movement, Labor Party, stood by Mark Latham when he was going through a hard time. Julia Gillard was one of them. And now it seems he treats his friends and people who were his friends in a very, very strange way.
FORDHAM: So you're off to the States. Do you have a one-on-one locked in with President Obama?
PM: You know something, I haven't even looked at the agenda yet in terms of who I'm meeting. I'm seeing a whole bunch of people. The way in which these summits work, by the way, is if you're in the room for you know, effectively two days, you actually spend a lot of time talking with one another at what's called 'at the margins' of the conference. That is, over a cup of coffee, having a long chat. That's how I had a chat with him in L'Aquila at some length, that meeting we had in Italy in July, about a whole range of things.
There are stacks of informal opportunities to have a conversation over dinner, or over coffee at the table. Whether we are having a formal meeting or not, I actually don't know at this stage.
FORDHAM: I can't believe that you'll be flying out when the footy finals are on.
PM: I did say to President Obama 'when you are deciding to convene this G20, Barack, have you heard of the AFL Grand Final?', to which he said 'What's the AFL Grand Final, Kevin?'. I explained it to him and I said 'It's almost as sacrilegious as doing something like this when you're having a Superbowl.' He said 'I'm sorry, the AFL, whatever it is, will have to wait.'
FORDHAM: Do you have to pretend to be a sports nut to be the PM?
PM: Oh no, there's sport that I really like. I really like cricket, I really like rugby, because I used to play a bit of cricket, I played a little bit of rugby, and I'm no good at either but I really enjoy-
FORDHAM: Ok, give us a tip for the NRL - the Broncos playing the Dragons.
PM: Well mate, I'm the patron of the Broncos. What do you expect? But you know, on the rest of it, like the AFL and stuff, I actually like going to the games. Am I any expert on the rules and stuff? No. Do I have, sort of, 30 years of track record on all this stuff? No. 
Is it a lot fun to go and see a really well played game of AFL? Absolutely. And as or the NRL, Broncs' all the way, mate.
FORDHAM: Do you want to give us a quick scoop - rule out an early election?
PM: My intention is to serve the term for which I've been elected. And that's why want to be able to do. We've got a stack of stuff still to get through.
FORDHAM: I know you've got to get to a meeting, so I'm going to say goodbye. Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program, Ben.


PM: It's great to be back in the United States, and I'm looking forward to the next several days here in New York, and of course at Pittsburgh for the G20. The purpose of my travel to the United States is twofold. And that is to meet with with world leaders on our continued response to the global economic recession. And for us collectively to try and take further action on climate change in the lead-up to Copenhagen. These are both difficult tasks. Here in the United States, when we speak of the global economic recession, it's worth remembering that one in ten people in this country are unemployed.
When I'm meeting with world leaders this week, there'll be many discussions about the impact of the recession, unemployment, small businesses around the world shutting their doors. Australia is doing better than most other countries in our response to the global recession, on unemployment, on growth. But we're not out of the woods yet.
The other thing I'll be doing here in New York is of course speaking with representatives of the US business community, and the Australian business community. I'll be seeking to use this as an opportunity to promote Australia as a destination for investment, for now and for the long term. We have a good story to tell given the performance of the rest of the international economy, in what has been a very difficult time.
The fact that Australia, of the 33 members of the OECD this last twelve months has been the only economy generating positive growth- the fact that we have the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit, as well as the only one not to have gone into recession.
I think another point to emphasise with our friends and partners in the US business community and investment community here in New York, is the fact that of the nine remaining AA+ rated banks worldwide, four of those banks are Australian. So we have a strong economy, one that's doing better than most other countries around the world. The lowest debt, the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies, and our banks doing better than most other banks around the world.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: PM, there's been some commentary that this week the developed nations need to find money for developing nations to help transition to a low carbon economy (inaudible)
PM: We're not at that stage yet, but what must be discussed sooner rather than later, is what are the options for what is called within the debate, climate change financing arrangements, for the poorest economies. In other words, how do you make the transition possible to a lower carbon world for the poorest developing countries. This is a challenge. It has to be dealt with. This is a challenge which is not new.
You may recall from the major economies forum in L'Aquila that President Obama provided a specific reference to the G20 Finance Ministers to work on this. Not much progress has been made. A lot of work needs to be done on this, because it's part of the overall equation with Copenhagen. For Copenhagen to succeed on climate change, we need to see action on the question of targets in developed countries, and verifiable commitments from developing countries.
We of course need to see longer term climate change financing arrangements, both public and private capital, including that which comes from global carbon markets. Thirdly, we've also got to make sure that we are delivering the technology necessary, which make real transformations possible in realising those targets.
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to stump up the cash though to help that goal?
PM: We in Australia have always said that we would be part of a global solution. You know something, we're not even near the point yet of looking at, let's call it, overall funding strategies, from private and public sources. Remember, another source of finance is that which comes from the global private carbon markets.
So that's one source of funding, obviously ODA type sources is a different way of providing support, the key thing is putting all these ingredients together. Targets for the future on climate change to bring down greenhouse gas emissions for developed and developing countries. Making it possible for all to participate and to do their bit. And to make sure the technology, including clean coal, has a proper role in the future.
Dennis and then you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the issue of climate change and Pittsburgh, or New York and Pittsburgh, how vital do you think progress is at this meeting to set up for Copenhagen? And are you concerned at the amount of time the President had to spend on his Health Bill rather than the Energy Bill?
PM: Well, when it comes to the President of the United States, I would be the last person to provide advice, Dennis, on his schedule. And nor priorities he should attach at this stage to a given item in his in-tray. Having dealt with the White House a lot in the last six months or so on a range of questions, his administration is indeed well ordered in the way in which they attend to their priorities. However, to go to the first part of your question, which is preparation for Copenhagen, let me say this. There's a danger, speaking absolutely frankly, that options for final decision in Copenhagen are left too late, because we are now I think less than 80 days away from Copenhagen.
And there are big questions and big decisions to be made- on targets for developed countries, on verifiable commitments for developing countries, all about bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, and also how is all that made possible financially for the future as well, and the technologies. What concerns me is if not enough of that is distilled prior to Copenhagen, so that Heads of Government, and their Finance Ministers and Treasurers, can make the right decisions for the future.
That's why we do need to see another step along the work here at Pittsburgh, and the possibility of G20 Finance Ministers being deployed again between Pittsburgh and Copenhagen.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I'm in the realism game, which is getting real results as early as you can. I think the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who I am meeting tomorrow, or I am meeting soon, is committed to using the gathering of Heads of Government this week in New York to provide maximum political momentum towards Copenhagen. Each time Heads of Government are brought together and confronted with the stark realities of climate change, it helps build momentum.
That's why we're lending our support to that as well, to confront Heads of Government with the economic and environmental cost of inaction, as opposed to, of course, the economic cost of action. This is the choice which Heads of Government must make. Some of the points I'll be making as Chairman of the Pacific Islands Forum is the real and present danger which climate change and inundation from the sea presents to a number of our island nations in the South Pacific.
There's sometimes a view in international conferences on climate change that this is a challenge for the long term future. If you look at what's happening with water supplies in the Murray-Darling in Australia, it ain't, it's happening now. If you look at the impact on inundation from the sea for the Pacific Island countries, it ain't long term, it's happening now. Therefore, part of the challenge which I support from the Secretary-General is to make this real, immediate and graphic in terms of the costs now, therefore the need to accelerate action now.
Sorry, you had a question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talked about getting momentum at this (inaudible)
PM: Is your reference here-
JOURNALIST: Talking about the UN summit.
PM: The UN summit on Tuesday? When it comes to the matters that the Secretary-General has on the agenda for us, I believe his mission statement is to achieve building blocks on the road to Copenhagen. I think it's unrealistic to expect a concrete, immediate outcome on targets and commitments and the other elements of the package this week. These are building blocks along the road. Go back over what I've said to Dennis just before. We do need building blocks along the road, otherwise you get to that last point, Copenhagen, and the wall is too high to scale, and if the wall is too high to scale, we fear we may not be able to reach it.
JOURNALIST: Does this make any influence on your timetable in Australia on your legislation?
PM: Absolutely not. What drives my interest in Australia, and those of the Government with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, is business certainty. The business community, through the Australian Industry Group, the Business Council of Australia, are saying they want certainty for the long term. The rules need to be laid out, because as you know, investment decisions, particularly in the energy sector, are long term investments. We need to have the rules up, out, clear, so they can be factored into the long term calculations of the business community.
We cannot afford, as Mr Turnbull constantly does, to procrastinate, procrastinate, procrastinate. Hard decisions have to be made. Our position's clear. It would be very useful if the Liberal and National parties had a position on the CPRS which we could negotiate with. Business certainty demands that Mr Turnbull show some leadership and deliver an outcome in terms of their position. Then, we can have a discussion.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Shadow Minister for Emissions Trading, Andrew Robb, has announced he's going to take three months leave owing to a depressive illness, what I'm wondering what your response is his decision to take leave (inaudible)
PM: I think Andrew Robb's decision to talk about this medical condition shows great courage, and I commend him for that. I commend Jeff Kennett for his work on this in the past in terms of bringing depression out of the shadows of our public discourse, and put it centre stage, together with other medical conditions. So full marks to Andrew Robb for having the guts to this, and full marks for all those who are participating in this discussion about how we deal with the incidence of these sorts of illnesses in Australia.
It's very important that this is brought in from the cold and regarded as any other medical condition which requires treatment, and be dealt with, because it afflicts so many Australians. I commend, therefore, Andrew Robb for his leadership on this, the strength of his decision to go out and do this, and I wish him well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I imagine that, one of the virtues of being here in New York this week and the G20 Summit is there are lots and lots of opportunities to speak with Heads of Government about other items which we are working on together around the world. Obviously Afghanistan is one of them. This is a difficult and hard war. Lots of Governments around the world, particularly in Europe, are coming under political pressure, including here in the United States as well.
It's important that we work practically our way through the challenges at present, the most immediate of course is dealing with the determinations which arise from the Afghan election process. But beyond that, to forge a continued, coherent political and military strategy to succeed in Afghanistan. We are here in New York- every time I come to this city I cannot do other than think of the twin towers and them coming down. It's eight years ago, it could be as if it was yesterday. The reason we are in Afghanistan is because terrorists murdered 3,000 Americans. We are an ally of the United States. Those terrorists were in large part given training, sanction in Afghanistan. We cannot allow Afghanistan to become an open training field again for terrorists in the future.
JOURNALIST: PM, there's a story back in Australia about you dropping the f bomb?
PM: Well, I haven't seen that one, what am I supposed to have done?
JOURNALIST: Ask Glenn Milne.
PM: Liberal Party journalist of choice.
JOURNALIST: Apparently two weeks ago there was a meeting attended by David Feeney and a few others, when you dropped the f bomb, and it's various-
PM: Sorry, I'm a bit vague on this. I think it's fair to say that in the consistent tradition of the Australian Labor Party we're given to robust conversations. I made my point of view absolutely clear, and that is that these entitlements needed to be cut back, and I make no apology for either the content of my conversation, or the robustness with which I expressed my views.
Thank you very much.


HOST: Prime Minister Rudd, thank you so much for speaking to CNN.
PM: Good to be on the program.
HOST: I will start by asking you about climate change negotiations. It's been widely reported that talks have stalled, effectively, ahead of Copenhagen and that big conference, and now, President Obama, the US President, will be giving what's widely regarded as an important speech here in New York on Tuesday. What are your hopes for that speech? What are you looking to hear from him?
PM: Well, the first thing is that - and it's a good thing for the world - is that the United States has re-engaged with the global climate change agenda. America's been missing for too long, but under President Obama's leadership, they're back, so therefore, we have America at the table.
Secondly, what are we wrestling with as the countries of the G20 at the moment, or the wider United Nations family? Targets and commitments from developed and developing countries respectively. How do we finance all this long-term, from carbon markets and from public finance? And on top of that, what technologies do we deploy to make the bringing down of greenhouse gas emissions possible?
The American President has a unique opportunity, and I know President Obama will be stepping up to the plate to push the agenda forward both at the UN, and at Pittsburgh at the G20 summit, and we still only have 80 days to go to Copenhagen, so I'm confident he'll provide additional momentum.
HOST: The question though, many see the US as being weakened because climate change legislation is effectively stalled in the Senate, and some are questioning, basically, how much legitimacy they now have to drive negotiations ahead of Copenhagen. Do you feel they've been weakened, that, you know, their legitimacy hangs in the balance now, because they can't even get the legislation passed at home?
PM: Well, let me give you a parallel. Australia is very active in climate change. The Government that I lead was only elected 18 months or so ago. We ratified the Kyoto Protocol immediately, and we are into these negotiations big time. But you know something? Our domestic Emissions Trading Scheme was also voted down by our Senate a very short time ago. That doesn't impede me from being active in these negotiations, and my observation of President Obama is that it doesn't impede him, either.
I was discussing this this morning with one of President Obama's illustrious predecessors, Bill Clinton, about the momentum we need globally for climate change. The great thing is that America is back in the game. You cannot conceive of the possibility of a Copenhagen outcome if America was outside the game.
What we need, of course, is American leadership, and we've seen that through President Obama. But we also need to see the emerging economies, including China, step up to the plate as well. That's where the critical nature of an agreement will lie.
HOST: The bottom line is China says the developed world has a historical responsibility to basically step up and take a greater share of the cuts, of the carbon emissions cuts. You know, the argument, the industrial revolution, they've been burning fossil fuels for as long as they have - where do you see Copenhagen going? Is it time to basically re-align our expectations of that conference? Because the bottom line is, it's hard to see how all parties are going to meet.
PM: Well, it is 80 days or so to go. The clock is ticking. There's not much time left. But this is a time for political leadership, and for global political leadership, and not just from America, but from all of us. At the G8 and Major Economies Forum meeting in L'Aquila in Italy in July, what I said to my colleagues in the G20 was our technical negotiators need a fresh mandate from us at the political level.
That's what needs to be communicated to the larger economies around the world, developed and developing, to make it happen. Our technical negotiators can only go so far, and that's where the G8 - the G20, I should say - meeting in Pittsburgh also has a role to play. Time is running out, but I believe if we see action from the developed and the developing, we can get there.
My position has also been we can't allow this to degenerate into a debate between history and the future. Historical responsibility for the developed world - yes, tick the box, that's true. The future, absent any policy change, and the largest contribution to future greenhouse gas emissions will come out of China and India. We have both a historical and a future set of responsibilities. It's time for political leadership to come over the top of that and just forge an outcome.
I believe we can get there, but it's going to take every bit of effort to get there, and right now it's looking troubled, but I've got to say, when there's hope, we should all keep trying, and try we will.
HOST: Okay, we'll be off in a sec. Next we want to talk about Afghanistan - recent elections held in that country, elections mired in allegations of electoral fraud, all sorts of things. They've thrown out some of the ballots. You know the situation. Where does that leave the legitimacy of the vote and, ultimately, the result, in your view?
PM: Well there are two things we should be a given here, and perhaps a third. Let's always remember why we are in Afghanistan in the first place. We're doing this interview in New York City. The reason we are all in Afghanistan is because of the murderous attacks which occurred here eight years ago.
That is as real today as it was back then, because why was that possible? Terrorists were enabled to train without interference in Afghanistan, which became like a free-range training farm for terrorists from all over the world. Let's never forget that point.
But going to the present, of course we're dealing with this challenge from the electoral process, which has been fraught. And secondly, but also, an underpinning political and military strategy for the long term to assist the Afghan Government and armed forces to take control, fully, of the security and political destiny of their own country.
HOST: But if they have no legitimacy in the eyes of the domestic electorate, then what?
PM: Let's wait for this electoral process to reach its proper conclusion. Of course, we are not in the business of establishing a perfect Jeffersonian democracy in Afghanistan. Anyone who is objective in their analysis of where Afghanistan has been for the last several decades, let alone the last several centuries, will understand you can't go from here to here in one simple step.
So this is not going to be a perfect outcome, let's just all accept that for reality, rather than pretend that it's something other than it could ever have been. But on top of that, whoever emerges as the legitimate government of Afghanistan through this process, we need to work with our friends in Kabul, and our friends and partners in Europe and the United States, and in Australia, to ensure that we are prosecuting the same military strategy, and political strategy, and development strategy, which enables us to ensure that the Afghans can take responsibility for their own destiny.
We're not there yet. It's going to take a while yet. But we must remain committed.
HOST: The expectation is that President Obama will make a positive address to the General Assembly, he will make a plea to world leaders to support the mission in Afghanistan. Is Australia prepared to increase its troop presence there, in Afghanistan?
PM: Well since President Obama came to office, I think we are one of the few Governments of the world who have increased our troop presence-
HOST: -Will you go beyond that?
PM: By almost 50 percent. We already are among the top 10 military contributors to Afghanistan. We are, I think, after the United States, the largest contributors to the Afghan National Army training trust fund, which provides additional financial assistance to raise the Afghan National Army. What's our principal mission? In the province we have shared responsibility, Oruzgan province, in the south of the country, and it's a violent part of the country, is to raise up sufficient Afghan National Army battalions to transfer responsibility to them.
It's a difficult training task. We've begun it. We intend to complete it. That's our contribution to this overall effort.
HOST: So you will not increase troops?
PM: We believe that our current commitment's about right, and I note again for the record that in the six or nine months since President Obama has been in office, we've already increased our contribution by about 50 percent. It is important that all countries put their shoulder to the wheel. 
Let's be honest about this, this is a difficult, hard, and bloody war. No one should pretend that it's not. And it's going to get harder. But that should not weaken our resolve or dim our vision as to why we are there in the first place.
Let us never return to a day when we think that, somehow, the natural state of things is for a country like Afghanistan to be an open training ground for the terrorists of the future.
HOST: What is your vision of success in Afghanistan?
PM: Well, can I say this: my vision of success in Afghanistan is not the creation of a Jeffersonian democracy. Let us be clear about that. I think there's been a bit of misty-eyedness about this from time to time. Remember, this country has essentially come from a feudal past, and having been there a number of times myself, I understand something, at least, of the conditions on the ground.
So what we need is political stability, what we need is an effective set of security forces, both police and army, and what we also need on top of that is the prospect for development through reasonable government at the provincial level. And again, our province where we share responsibility, Oruzgan, that is what we're seeking to do, at those three levels.
HOST: My understanding of it is that the Netherlands will be pulling out their troops from that province sometime next year. What will that mean for the Australian mission there?
PM: Well, as I said, we believe we have our current commitment about right. Of course, we'll be looking to our friends and partners in the United States to assist us with other burdens which may arise should the Netherlands proceed to withdraw their forces, as they've indicated they will. I think, however, this is a time for all countries of good will, all countries of strong resolve, to keep their shoulder to the wheel. It's tough, it's hard, it's difficult, but you know, the hardest decisions in global politics always are.
HOST: Australian troops are in there for the long haul, is that what you're saying?
PM: Absolutely. I've said this before. I said that before I became Prime Minister of Australia, I've said it repeatedly since I have become Prime Minister of Australia - our commitment, in partnership with our American allies, is to be there for the long haul. Our mission, within the province where we share responsibility, is as I've already described.
HOST: Let's talk about the G20, because you have a very busy week, so many subjects to get through. Let's talk about Pittsburgh. One of the things that has emerged and is being reported is that the French President, Nicolas Sarkozy, has said if there isn't an agreement on strict limits for all financial executive compensation, he will walk out of the gathering, and we already know that this is certainly a move that the US and the UK is against. What is your view on executive compensation and putting caps on that?
PM: Well, let me step back for one minute, and then come specifically to executive remuneration. The G20, this gathering of economies, the largest economies in the world, by and large, has achieved significant success in its meetings in Washington and London, if you remember back to April, the global economy seemed to be in freefall.
The IMF, through its own studies, concluded that through our collective actions as economies through stimulus and through the review of financial regulation, the re-resourcing if the International Monetary Fund, we have seen a turnaround in the global confidence indicators.
Of course, we're not out of the woods yet, and there's much to be done, and one of those regulatory matters to be done, of course, is the one you raised, about executive remuneration. I'm confident that at Pittsburgh we can find the right way through, of course to make sure there is a proper calibration of risk and reward within the financial services industry.
In Australia we currently have this matter a subject of immediate and intense review through a body which we call the Productivity Commission. That is, how should it be framed for the future to get the balance right between flexibility and incentives which we need in a market economy, which we all support, on the one hand, but with appropriate national, international corporate and community responsibility interspersed as well.
I think we can get that balance right, and I believe the mood of the G20 is to get it right as well.
HOST: Australia has been praised by the OECD for the steps taken by your Government to counter the economic crisis. What lessons do you think the rest of the world could take from the way you handled the global economic downturn? What are the lessons, in your view?
PM: I'm never in the business of preaching to anybody. I'd much rather attend to what I need to do at home. If people wish to observe how we've done things and reach their own conclusions, that's a matter for them.
To emphasise what I said before, national actions go so far, but the global actions that we've achieved through the G20 - $5 trillion worth of stimulus injected into the economy when it was falling through the floor, $1 trillion worth of resourcing for the International Monetary Fund so that any other implosions in banks in Europe or wider implosions in the financial sectors of Eastern Europe wouldn't have a ricochet effect across the global economy, a moratorium on major outbreaks of protectionism, reforms of financial regulations of the kind we've just been speaking of - these things are necessary to restore global economic stability and global growth and recovery.
Nationally, what we have sought to do in Australia, is take early, decisive action in support of jobs and real economic growth, economic stimulus as we've done with other countries as well, but as a result of that, and our heavy emphasis also on infrastructure investment through that stimulus, we've managed to be the only economy across the OECD in the last 12 months to have generated positive growth, of the major advanced economies, the only one to stay out of recession so far, the second-lowest unemployment, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit.
HOST: But unemployment is rising.
PM: I'll go on to unemployment. Unemployment, for us all, is, because it's a, as the economists would describe, a lagging indicator, will continue to rise. Ours currently sits at 5.8%. It's been that way for a while. We are injecting large amounts of stimulus because we believe the maintenance of jobs and employment is critical, not just to human decency, but critical also in terms of the path to economic recovery.
You've got to have these two things foremost in mind. I think premature calls for the withdrawal stimulus, which you hear elsewhere around the world, I think are misplaced in terms of the challenges which still lie ahead.
But for Pittsburgh, I think there are two other challenges on this as well - to begin among us all to discuss, and to deliberate on, and to agree on, a framework for coordinated withdrawal of these emergency measures, these emergency interventions over time, and secondly, how do we craft the long-term economic growth strategy which is sustainable for the world, no longer dependant on these massive financial imbalances; huge, debt-driven consumption on the one hand out of surplus economies on the other.
We need a new, sustainable growth model for the future. Otherwise we may be looking at the prospect of flat global growth for a while to come.
HOST: How close are we getting to a global deal that all parties can buy into and stick to?
PM: Well, can I say our officials work very closely on this together as the G20. One of the advantages of the G20 is that it's sufficiently small, a group of 20, for efficiency to be possible in decision making, but sufficiently large to have representative legitimacy. We represent 85 percent of global GDP, 80 percent of global trade, I think 90 percent of global stock market capitalisation, and across those economies, the major emerging economies, like China and India, as well as, of course, the United States and economies like ourselves, there is a robust spirit of cooperation.
So on these two questions - a framework for exit in the medium term from these emergency measures, beginning to develop a framework for sustainable, long-term economic growth for the world - I believe we see a positive approach from the Governments of the world, but Pittsburgh is going to be a challenging meeting.
But then again, so was London, and in London we managed to defy expectations. Pittsburgh will be tough, but Pittsburgh will be one further step, together with G20 summits next year, in the direction of global economic recovery.
HOST: I think a lot people are looking at distinctive diplomacy, international diplomacy, multilateral diplomacy, and whether it's just coincided with the arrival of President Barack Obama on the scene. The feel as if there's a renewed interest or a renewed vigour, more buy-in, from all parties around the world.
My question to you, if you look at this big week that you have ahead, will anything concrete really emerge that will change the lives of people, because that's what, you know, people say 'great, world leaders come to New York, they have all these bi-lats and side meetings and receptions and dinners and they speak at the General Assembly, but what concrete do they have to show for it?' What would you say to them?
PM: Let me give you just two examples. And I again I refer to a G20 outcome, but that represents a large slice of the global economy. If you go to the key question of jobs. Take, for example, the possibility that the G20 economies did not agree to put $5 trillion worth of injection into the global economy in the critical events of March and April this year.
Unemployment around the world, and I believe there's something like 12 million jobs that have been lost in developed economies already, would in fact be much, much worse, were it not for the stimulus actions taken.
Where would the global banking system be had governments not acted through the coordinated actions at an executive Government level, but also through central banks? So I can understand people's cynicism about what Governments do, but if you were to ask yourself this question: is my deposit safe in my bank? Do I still have the prospect of a job, or more of a prospect of a job than would otherwise be case?
These critical decisions by Government had a very practical effect when it comes to working families across the world.
I think our challenge for global Governments, always, is to translate these large problems, these large decisions, into things which count for people. Jobs, of course, is immediate, and climate change, energy efficiency, how do we generate through the carbon transformation of our economies? How do we reduce people's power bills by improving energy efficiency in the home? These are as much practical challenges as they are for large policy debates which we are engaged in. We need to do both.
HOST: So what is your message throughout this week in all the meetings you're having, and in your address to the General Assembly?
PM: The core message from the Australian Government's perspective is this- our job is to rebuild jobs in the global economy, and through that in our national economy. It is fundamental to people's wellbeing and fundamental to economic recovery. Our second message is this- the time for procrastinating on climate change has come, and it's gone.
We need political leadership to push the momentum towards Copenhagen to get a positive outcome. No-one else is going to make those decisions for us. But the good news is US global leadership is back, and it's back working through the institutions of the world, not simply standing outside them.
HOST: Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia, many thanks for speaking to us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


PM: We can no longer afford to wait for action on climate change; the time for action is now. Let's never forget the basic fact on climate change. Australia is the hottest and the driest inhabited continent on the planet. Climate change will hit Australia hardest, and will hit Australia earliest.
Therefore, we need national and global action now. That's why we are in New York, that's why we need action in New York, that's why we need action in Pittsburgh, that's why we need action also in Copenhagen- in order to conclude this deal.
Every time a nation delays, every time a nation puts up its hand and say, "it's all too hard," is a further, further excuse to put off the measures we need to take to deal with the challenges for climate change for Australia. Therefore, we cannot simply use those excuses anymore. We must embark upon a considered course of national action and a considered course of global action.
Today, in New York, we have seen fresh developments, positive momentum in the direction of global action on climate change. The new Japanese Prime Minister has indicated here at the United Nations General Assembly that Japan, firstly, will move towards an emissions trading scheme for Japan, and secondly, with a target of 25 percent. Japan is the second-largest economy in the world: this is a significant statement by Japan.
On top of that, we've also had a statement from the Chinese President Hu Jintao, which speaks in terms of there being a shared set of responsibilities between developed and developing economies and countries. He uses the expression, "a win-win solution for the future." That means, of course, that developing economies must act as well.
Of course, that's what happens, that's what's necessary for the world to take action, and as I said, we've had that positive statement in particular from the Japanese Prime Minister today.
We also heard from the President of France. The President of France, President Sarkozy indicated what might be in the mind of certain Europeans to do if action is not taken by other parts of the world. President Sarkozy of France today referred specifically to the possibility of a carbon tax across Europe against parts of the world which were not doing their bit on climate change.
Therefore, we've seen what needs to be done on climate change for Australia's interest, the driest and the hottest continent on the planet; we've seen positive statements, of course, from the Japanese Prime Minister today; we've also seen a warning sign in terms of the statement by the French about the possibility of a European carbon tax in the future as well.
The last thing I'd say is, having just co-chaired a session of some 20 or so Member States of the United Nations - at Head of Government level, at Foreign Minister level, and at Ministerial level - it is clear that there is strong support from developed and developing countries to conclude this deal.
In the session that I have just co-chaired with the Korean President, I used the term that the world needs a "grand bargain" between developed economies and developing economies. It's time to end the blame game between the developed world and the developing world.
We need to get past that and arrive at a conclusion about where our respective responsibilities lie. The accumulation of greenhouse gas emissions that exist in the atmosphere now are overwhelmingly the responsibility of the advanced economies. Looking to the future, it is a shared responsibility.
And if there is no change on the part of the developing economies, then in time, they will represent the largest slice of new and additional greenhouse gas emissions into the future. What the world needs is a grand bargain between the developed world and the developing world in order to reach an outcome for the planet as a whole. Those remarks of mine obtained support from all those Governments represented in the room.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I noticed that in the list of the countries you mentioned as progressing the debate today, you didn't mention the United States. Were you disappointed that President Obama didn't have any specifics to put on the table today?
PM: No, because the United States is engaged, of course, in the Pittsburgh process as well, and is engaged at multiple additional levels as well. Remember, the fundamental change occurred with the change in the US Administration: the United States has now said for the first time it's going to move towards an emissions trading scheme, that was not the case before.
The United States has reengaged in the negotiating game, that was not the case before; and there is still some ways yet to go between now and Copenhagen. What I was talking about today were new additions to the global debate. That is, of course, reflected primarily in the statements by Japan, and I congratulate the Japanese Prime Minister for his leadership on this.
Also, some indications, as I said, of shared responsibility in the future, through the statements of President Hu Jintao. But also, as I said, warning signs, warning bells, being rung by President Sarkozy of France.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, President Obama also used the phrase that, "perfection should not be the enemy of progress," reflecting Tony Blair's comments yesterday that "perfection should not be the enemy of the good." Is this-
PM: Affection or perfection?
JOURNALIST: Perfection.
PM: That's what I thought you said, right. Thought there was something I'd missed somewhere.
JOURNALIST: Is this suggesting that at Copenhagen, there should be a result but not necessarily the perfect result?
PM: Look, the position of the Australian Government is that we want to see a deal concluded at Copenhagen, and every fibre of our being is directed in that direction now to get on with other Member States. Can I say that, having sat down to dinner last night with the UN Secretary-General and a dozen or so Heads of Government - primarily European but also from the developing world as well - there is, I believe, a strong sense that action can be achieved, that an outcome can be delivered; to use the UN Secretary-General's term, to "seal the deal."
The obstacles are massive, that's just the truth. But the task of leadership is actually to identify the obstacles and find a way through. That's what we're trying to do, and I that mood by predisposition on the part of other Governments as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that a definitive statement of some sort from the United States that targets, real targets, are needed before Copenhagen; if not can it deal with this (inaudible)
PM: The key thing when we get to Copenhagen is consistent with the Bali Road Map, going back two years now: is for developed economies to have defined, ambitious targets, mid-term, long-term. And for developing economies to have verifiable commitments. That's the ingredients of what I referred to before as the "grand bargain," that's needed. And that means all economies which fall into either of those groups.
There is still some time yet to go between now and Copenhagen, and obviously, there are processes to be worked through, both within the Administration here in the United States and, of course, in the Congress. We have some familiarity with these Congressional processes in their Australian equivalents. 
JOURNALIST: You would see that then as essential for a deal, for target-specific commitment by the United States?
PM: Well, I'd just go back to the Bali Road Map, which said that we in the developed world need to come forward with commitments. That's what the Government of Japan has done, that's what the Government of Australia has done, that's what Governments around the world have done. But equally, it also goes for our partners among the emerging economies. A grand bargain is necessary for the planet so that developed and developing countries realise that our mission is the same.
There and then over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given what you've just said about the need to get to some kind of deal, how to you reconcile that with the sorts of pleas we heard from the President of the Maldives who, naturally, wants the bar to be very high from the beginning? Are those two irreconcilable? Do they need to they need to accept a harsh reality?
PM: No, I listened very carefully to what the Head of Government from the Maldives said, and in the session that I've just co-chaired. We had representatives also from Trinidad and Tobago and from Grenada, and we've also, of course, had representations from the island states of the Pacific Island Forum, which I chair at present.
And the island states of the world, of course, want to see as ambitious an outcome as possible because, for them, challenges like coastal inundation are not theoretical-they are real. And I drew the attention of the colleagues that I just addressed in the session that I co-chaired, the example of Kiribati and Tuvalu, where this is not a distant prospect; it is a current reality of coastal inundation.
The scientists, through the IPCC have told us that two degree centigrade should be the target. Hence, why our position of 450 parts per million is anchored in the science. There's no point being engaged in this business of climate change mitigation, adaptation, unless what you are doing has a scientific basis in fact, and therefore, a prospect of altering sufficiently those conditions over time through real actions which count. That's why we're doing what we're doing. Obviously, the small island countries want as an ambitious an outcome as possible.
JOURNALIST: On the Australian proposal. Last night I asked Indian Minister Ramesh Chaudhary what he thought about it. The Indian Minister said it was too binding. Minister Chaudhary said it had little chance of success. I want to know if you've heard that and what you think of it, and just if you could while you're here at the UN do you envision-
PM: We're permanent optimists in Australia, but anyway, go on.
JOURNALIST: Do you envision raising two issues. One is Fiji and the continuing use of peacekeepers by the UN, and also Sri Lanka, and the impending expulsion of Australian James Alba issue.
PM: Anything else. Can you answer on the first one Penny.
MINISTER WONG: Well, obviously we put forward a proposal in these negotiations, an idea that we think helps to find common ground. I wouldn't anticipate anybody would be signing up for it within days of us putting it up. This is a negotiation, but it seeks to deal with an essential issue, that all countries that are serious about this, and I think the countries of the world are, all countries have to deal with, which is we have to find a way of encouraging action from the broadest group of nations possible.
This is not an issue that can be resolved by one subgroup, or another subgroup, this is an issue that must be resolved by the nations of the world.
PM: On the question of Australian proposal in relation to schedules, we have taken soundings from across the community of nations on that. It's all a work in progress. In fact, I don't dispute the responses that you just referred to. It's what I would describe as part of the negotiating process.
I spoke with a dozen or so Heads of Government last night who were positively disposed in a different direction. It's a process. What the Minister has quite correctly done is seek to find a way through.
On the question of UN Peacekeepers and Fiji. Our position with the United Nations is clear. I've raised this consistently with the UN Secretary General in the past. Our Mission in the United Nations does the same, and we've achieved a high degree of understanding with our friends in the UN about the future on that score.
As for Sri Lanka, we continue to monitor human rights developments closely and we'll take all necessary actions in relation to any individuals.
A couple here and I'll come back to.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you just mentioned President Hu Jintao's presentation about climate change, (inaudible). Have you seen any positive signs since then, and also what do you expect to talk to President Hu Jintao about given the G20 later this week.
PM: I think the Australia China relationship, is like China's relationship with the rest of the world, it's a strong and positive relationship, and from time to time what we say in Australia the "odd bump in the road". That's the first point.
The second is the great thing about the G20 summit is, together with the other Heads of Government, we spend a lot of time with each other, having cups of coffee, having cups of tea and running around the room talking to each other. That's how it's worked in the past, I imagine it will work that way this time as well.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned President Hu's speech, and you know, if I understand the previous [inaudible] correctly, it was the large under developed countries, developing countries, particularly India and China, who were most opposed to regulations, especially high bar regulations, such as you described, that should not apply to them. Do you think that President Hu's statement this morning is sufficient, or where do you think we could go from here in order to get these countries on board?
PM: I have just said in the session I've attended that China's statement today in the UN General Assembly is a positive statement. President Hu was indicating the desirability of reaching a deal, a concluded deal at Copenhagen. His remarks were couched in terms of taking the actions necessary to reach that agreement.
Secondly, his reference on a number of occasions to win-win outcomes between developed and developing countries, I also believe to be a statement in the right direction. All of us have to do more, developed and developing countries, between now and Copenhagen to make a success. But I believe the Chinese negotiators are seriously engaged with their counterparts from around the world, as in fact we find with our colleagues in India as well.
JOURNALIST: Just in relation to Senator Wong's proposal and offer to Malcolm Turnbull. How likely is it that Mr Turnbull gets Liberal Party support for amendments, and what will you do if he fails to do so?
PM: Well I was going to ask Penny to respond to that, until you added the second point. But I will ask Penny to respond in a tick anyway. The bottom line is this. Time's running out. We're either going to be serious about legislation on climate change or not. Why do we need this in Australia? Business certainty, the Australian Industry Group say so, the Business Council of Australia say so, businesses want to know what the rules are for the future. That's point one.
Point two, it's important for Australian to go to Copenhagen with an agreed national position about how we translate our targets into reality. That's both the national and global reality that we are dealing with. Therefore, it's entirely reasonable of us, through the Minister, to say to the Opposition who are blocking this in the Senate, "tell us what your agreed amendments are to this legislation in sufficient time for this to work when this goes through the Senate the next time".
That's why the Minister has done what she's done, and I fully support her action. Penny, do you want to add?
SENATOR WONG: Yes, just very briefly Prime Minister. I think the point is this. What we have said to Mr Turnbull is what I've been saying for some time, put your amendments forward, and put forward amendments that have the support of your party room and the Government will be prepared to consider them. But it is very important that we have those amendments in sufficient time to properly consider them. I mean this is a big reform. Everyone knows this is a big reform, and we need appropriate time to consider them in detail, and prudently. So what we have said to the Opposition is this. We want to see your amendments, bring them forward after the date you've identified after the date you want to take them into the party room.
And what I would say is this- if Mr Turnbull fails to do that, if he fails on October 19 to get the agreement of his party room to put forward amendments for discussion with the Government, then Australians are entitled to question whether or not he really is intending to negotiate on this issue in good faith.
JOURNALIST: In Senator Wong's letter there's a couple of mentions about national interest. Would it be in the national interest to take the-
PM: I sense an enormous segue coming here mate, but go on.
JOURNALIST: Would it be in the national interest for you to take the ETS to a double dissolution election, when that legislation has not got the support from any other party aside from Labor?
PM: First of all, my intention, as I have stated repeatedly, is for this Government to serve full term. I have said repeatedly that my instincts on these things are quite conservative. I'm elected to do a job, I'm given a term in which to do it, that's my intention. Equally, I have said that we believe this important to get through for business certainty on the one hand, and also to make sure that when we go to Copenhagen that we can actually clearly articulate how we intend to realise our targets for the future. I think that's the responsible course of action, we haven't deviated from it.
To reinforce also what the Minister has just said about her letter to Mr Turnbull: why do we need an indication from the Opposition on about 19 October on this? This isn't just a piece of, you know, political slap and tickle here. This is a serious piece of legislation. It's a serious piece of legislation. And you're blushing Dennis. But, you can say on the day before something is considered in the Senate we'll hear the opposition amendment.
When you're dealing with something as profound and as complicated as an Emissions Trading Scheme, you can't at thirty seconds to midnight say here are 16 technical amendments, it doesn't work that way. And quite soberly and responsibly the Minister has said if there are agreed Opposition amendments to be put, agree them, provide them to the Government in sufficient time, therefore, for them to be properly deliberated in terms of their consequences for the overall machinery of the scheme. That's the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there seems to be conflicting messages coming from the United States military and the US Administration on the need for more troops in Afghanistan. Have you sought any clarification from the US Administration on its position and what is your view about the need for more troops?
PM: Well, firstly, we have now received the McChrystal report. Secondly, we've not evaluated it fully. Thirdly, in due course, we will make statements about it once we've worked it through with our friends and allies including, of course, with the Americans themselves. But as the Foreign Minister has already indicated, we see no grounds to increase our own ground troop commitment to Afghanistan.
As you know, having followed these things in Australia, we increased our commitment in recent times, in order to underpin our training effort for the Afghan National Army, we think that's about right. We don't imagine that it will be further requested as well.
JOURNALIST: Are we starting to see a divergence between the people who are on the ground in Afghanistan and the political leadership of the forces?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Are we starting to see a differing views from the people who are actually on the ground in Afghanistan, the military representatives, and the political leadership of the forces?
PM: You mean here in the United States?
JOURNALIST: Well, generally. Are we starting to see a divergence from the people who are actually fighting the fight on the ground?
PM: Look, I can't comment on the detail of each individual military's relationship with their political leadership. There are many, many States involved in the operation in Afghanistan. What I can say is this. The way for us to succeed in Afghanistan requires an integrated military, political and economic strategy.
We've articulated our path in that strategy in the province of Oruzgan, and that is to provide sufficient training over time to raise an Afghan Army Brigade in order to transfer responsibility for the security of that province to the Afghan National Army. That is our mission. It is quite clear what we are doing, and we are set about that task, and we are at one with the advice provided to us by the Chief of the Australian Defence Force.
Can I say, again here in New York, let us all remind ourselves why we are in Afghanistan. In this city, eight years ago, three thousand people were murdered. They were murdered by terrorists, who in large part were trained or given support and succour out of Afghanistan, at that stage run by a supportive Taliban regime. We will not participate in strategies which simply deliver back open training grounds for terrorist for the future. That's why we're there, fully accepting that this is not a popular engagement.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your view on reconciliation with the Taliban, or at least some elements, softer elements of the Taliban?
PM: I think all these questions are to be worked through with the response to the McChrystal report over time. That is, as I said before, an integrated military, political and economic strategy, and that is, how do you actually effect a proper transition over time. We're very mindful, of course, of what happened in Iraq, in terms of some of the negotiations which occurred there at the political level between various groups in the Iraqi body politik.
Iraq is not Afghanistan, it's different. But if we are going to succeed with an integrated strategy, then the politics of the country are part of it. I mean let's not delude ourselves.
Sorry, you're looking very patient there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'm conscious of the fact that you're standing in front of the Security Council (inaudible), have you been getting a high level of support in your bilateral meetings for Australia's run and tilt?
PM: This is a long, long-term process. We're talking about 2013, 2014 and a vote I think to be taken, from memory, at the end of 2012. There is absolutely no guarantee that Australia will win this. Absolutely no guarantee whatsoever. It's just like other things we're engaged in as the Government of Australia, which is, you have to get in there and have a go.
You either take the Council of the United Nations, including the Security Council, seriously or you don't. If you take it seriously, the opportunity rises, you put yourself forward for a candidature. It's a competitive process. It's like our engagement with the G20. You can either say it's there, I wonder what sort of role we should play. Our approach is get in, have a go, try and make a big difference.
We've sought to do that as hard as we can for the future. That's why, for example, we're having a go at shaping the long-term architecture for the Asia Pacific region. The proposal for an Asia Pacific Community. The goal is 2020, long-term process- is there a guarantee of success? None whatsoever. But do I think it's a reasonable thing for us to be behind, support an active regional discussion on, yes.
So with all these three things, if the precondition for beginning an initiative which aims to support peace and security, and economic development and prosperity is a guarantee of success in every case, then you never start. We're in the business of having a go.
And having said that, I've got to zip.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Mr President
Secretary-General
Distinguished delegates to the 64th General Assembly of the United Nations.
I come to this Assembly as Australia has each year since the first General Assembly in 1946, and I come in the same spirit: to seek solutions to the great challenges of our age, and together help give them effect.
These challenges are not new.
They are reflected in the preamble to the Charter which we as an international community crafted together:
     * to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
     * to advance economic growth and social progress for all
     * to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights
         * in the equal rights of men and women
         * and the rights of nations large and small
     * and for all of these great undertakings to be reflected in a new body of international law
Two-thirds of a century later, these great international values remain constant while the challenges to which we apply them are subject to continuing change.
And it is on the current challenges facing the global order that I wish to speak to this 64th General Assembly today - the global financial crisis, the unfinished business of the Doha Round, the unfolding crisis of the planet itself, the unresolved question of nuclear weapons 20 years after the end of the Cold War - and of the future of global governance itself.
Just on a year ago, just down the road from here, a destructive chain of events triggered the worst global financial crisis in three quarters of a century.
And it was just on a year ago that I addressed this Assembly for the first time, 10 days after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, to reflect on the challenges which lay ahead for the proper regulation of global financial markets.
That reform program is now underway through the G20, the Financial Stability Board and the IMF.
But there remains much to be done to prevent the unrestrained greed of unregulated financial markets that has wrought such economic carnage across the world these last 12 months from sowing the seeds of future financial crises.
Mr President, the global financial crisis has been a wake-up call to the international community to reform the institutions of global economic governance.
And a wake-up call that our system of global governance today is in radical need of reform.
Because the truth is that the failure of these institutions is not just a matter of concern for governments, for diplomats, and for economists.
The price of failure of these institutions has been paid by working people and their families right across the world. 
The events on Wall Street spread rapidly and indiscriminately to every corner of the globe.
From London to Lima; from Beijing to Barcelona; from Melbourne to Mumbai.
Developed and developing economies.
This global financial crisis and its ensuing economic and employment crisis has been no respecter of national boundaries - and no respecter of people.
Australia has been no exception.
The global financial crisis saw the Australian stock market fall by 55 per cent; wiped around $150 billion from the retirement savings of Australian workers; and has led to tens of thousands of Australians losing their jobs. And we expect more job losses to follow.
Behind each of these statistics lies the face of working Australians who have seen their savings diminish, their financial security eroded and their job security threatened.
Like Liverpool in Sydney, where the decline in its light-manufacturing base has led to an increase in unemployment of 4.5 per cent over the past year - and now 19,000 people are out of work in that area.
Like the tourist destination of Cairns in Far North Queensland, where unemployment has risen 3.7 per cent over the past year, meaning 13,300 people are now out of work in that area.
And like the south-eastern suburbs of Perth, where unemployment has risen 3.3 per cent in the past year, leaving 12,800 people in that community without a job.
In communities like these across Australia, the global recession is hurting in very real ways.
Just as in communities like these across the world, the global recession is hurting in very real ways.
Mr President, we can never forget these men, these women and their families as we seek to find a path out of this global recession.
While our global economic system failed comprehensively to prevent this crisis, the G20 governments have rallied to reduce the damage and prevent systemic collapse.
Through the agency of the G20, for the first time involving heads of government from the major developed and developing economies, governments acted in concert:
     * to provide around $13.6 trillion worth of support to directly stabilise the global financial system;
     * to inject $5.5 trillion worth of fiscal stimulus into the global economy;
     * to provide $1.1 trillion in resources to the International Financial Institutions to give markets confidence that any subsequent collapses could be dealt with;
     * to develop an integrated framework of toxic asset management to repair the balance sheets of many major banks; and
     * to initiate a comprehensive financial markets reform program through the Financial Stability Board.
The IMF has assessed that these extraordinary interventions succeeded in breaking the fall in what was an economic crisis spiralling out of control.
But the truth is our global economic recovery is far from certain and many twists and turns lie ahead.
Furthermore, the institutions of global economic governance are facing new challenges.
First, the financial market reform program must be completed and implemented to prevent a future crisis.
Second, in anticipation of global economic recovery, we must agree on a framework for the coordinated withdrawal of our emergency interventions.
And third, and most critically, we must articulate a new framework for sustainable future economic growth.
A framework that doesn't simply return to business-as-usual - based on unsustainable financial imbalances; excessive consumption fuelled by consumer and corporate debt; and irresponsible risk-taking in systemically significant financial institutions.
One of the failures of the old growth model of the last decade was the lack of effective global economic coordination. 
This allowed imbalances to grow unchecked and financial institutions to remain inadequately supervised.
As we move towards recovery, we must build a framework to foster both growth and balance in the global economy.
The IMF estimates that effectively implemented coordination between major economies could add significantly to global growth - an additional 10 percent to global output or around $6 trillion over a five year period.
To achieve this "coordination dividend", the G20 will need to build on the structures of cooperation that have been established during the crisis and apply them to the new challenges of the global recovery.
In Pittsburgh we have an historic opportunity to agree on a framework to deliver effective coordination of our national economic policies.
This framework should have four key elements:
     * First, G20 members should agree on a common objective to achieve balanced and sustainable growth.
     * Second, G20 members should outline their own national economic strategy and identify how it contributes to our common objectives.
     * Third, the IMF should analyse the individual national economic plans to determine whether they are consistent and collectively adequate to achieve sustainable and balanced global growth.
     * Fourth, these reports should be submitted to the G20 to form the basis of a peer review process which would identify specific risks and vulnerabilities.
This framework should be consistent with, and an important input to, the development of a set of global principles such as the current proposal from Germany for a charter for sustainable economic activity.
Mr President, the other great global challenge of our age is climate change.
With only 74 days remaining until the Copenhagen Conference, the governments of the world are far from agreement.
Enough has been said on the need for action on climate change.
But as of today not enough action has been taken.
Our collective political will to date has not been adequate to meet the task.
For too long, discussions between developed and developing countries have degenerated into mutual recriminations.
Developing countries accusing developed countries of failing to meet their obligations, given their undeniable responsibility for the bulk of greenhouse gas emissions already in the atmosphere.
Developed countries warning the major emerging economies that unless they take action, global warming will increase to unacceptable levels based on emerging economy emissions alone.
The trouble is both arguments are right.
What is required globally is the leadership to embrace this truth and respond to it accordingly.
The truth is all governments need to reach beyond their self interests and instead fashion a "Grand Bargain" between the developed and developing countries of the world.
A "Grand Bargain" which embraces both historical and future responsibility.
A "Grand Bargain" which is anchored in the science of climate change and the need to keep temperature rises within two degrees Celsius to avoid catastrophic climate change.
A "Grand Bargain" which embraces the three great challenges of climate change which we are yet to resolve:
     * What binding targets and commitments developed and developing countries must adopt to keep temperature rises within two degrees Celsius;
     * What public and private climate change financing arrangements are necessary to support the mitigation and adaptation measures we need to implement in the future; and
     * What technology transfer we need to undertake in renewable energy, carbon capture and storage, energy efficiency and the avoidance of deforestation and forest degradation to bring about real reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
In the period ahead, the "grand bargain" we must strike needs to resolve all three of these challenges as each is inextricably dependent on the other.
We must make use of all available mechanisms for international co-operation, including the MEF and the G20, to achieve success in these negotiations.
For us all, this will be a test of leadership.
Leadership which seeks to lift our collective vision beyond today and instead focus on the needs of tomorrow. 
But time is short.
As Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum, I know that time is already running out for the island states of the Pacific. 
Coastal inundation is not a prospect but a fact.
50 per cent of the population of these island states reside within 1.5 kilometres of the coast.
The South Pacific is part of the human face of climate change.
And that's why Australia nationally, regionally and globally stands ready to play its part in acting on this great moral, environmental and economic challenge of our age.
Mr. President
This organisation was born in the shadow of nuclear weapons and that shadow remains today. 
One truth remains absolutely clear: the proliferation of nuclear weapons can never make any country more secure.
The nuclear test by North Korea this year was rightly condemned across the international community.
It reiterates that the only path to safety is through the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
Australia is encouraged by the commitment of the US and Russia to further reduce their nuclear arsenals.
But the international community must also progress the broader disarmament and non-proliferation agenda.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty has played a crucial role in limiting the spread of nuclear weapons - but the Treaty today is under challenge.
We must work to ensure the Treaty's global security benefits are reinforced by a successful Review Conference in 2010.
To reinvigorate global consensus and activism ahead of that Conference and beyond, Australia and Japan last year established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
In the next few months, the Commission will produce its final report.
Its aim is to chart a practical and realistic course to achieve a strengthened non-proliferation and disarmament regime, leading to the ultimate elimination of nuclear arsenals.
Tomorrow's Security Council summit on non-proliferation and disarmament is important for us all.
We must not lose the opportunity it offers to summon the political resolve to move towards a nuclear weapons-free world.
Mr President, the challenges of global governance extend beyond the global financial crisis, climate change and the threat of nuclear weapons.
The realisation of the Millennium Development Goals is fundamental to the elimination of extreme poverty. 
It remains an obscenity that in 2009, after an age of unprecedented global prosperity, 1.5 billion of our fellow human beings are living in extreme poverty.
This is a core reason why the Australian Government has committed to increasing official development assistance to 0.5 per cent of GNI - to help close the development gap which has been widening in many Pacific Island countries while also helping, where possible, to deal with poverty elsewhere in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean. Mr President, parallel to the MDGs, the Doha Development Round has now been going for eight years.
This is too long.
The negotiating gap between us all is not wide - but the deficit in political will to conclude the Round seems vast. 
As the world searches for a new growth formula to sustain long term economic recovery, surely Doha represents one critical element. Australia, as one of the lead negotiators within the Doha Round, remains ready to help bridge the negotiating gap.
Mr President - Let the Assembly also not forget the continuing critical work of the UN across the full spectrum of global governance: international peace-keeping operations; humanitarian operations; food security; women; health; children and refugees - all hallmarks of a civilised global order.
The United Nations is not a place. It is not an institution. It is us.
"We, the people of the United Nations", as the Charter begins.
It is we who must find solutions to the problems we face; build consensus around those solutions; and implement those solutions.
This Organization had its beginnings not in an act of will - though will was certainly needed - but in an act of imagination.
An idea of what the world should and could be.
This is the challenge of leadership - to imagine a future worth having and then craft that vision into a practical and present reality.
Mr President - That was the challenge to which our forebears rose in 1945. That is the challenge to which our generation must now rise for the future. I thank the Assembly.


It is a privilege to be introduced by Theodore Roosevelt IV. 
Teddy Roosevelt was President of the United States in the year the Commonwealth of Australia came into being. 
He dispatched the Great White Fleet in 1907 to symbolise the emergence of the US as a global superpower with global interests. 
To the great annoyance of the mother country and without any reference to London whatsoever, Australia extended an invitation to President Roosevelt for the Fleet to visit Australia. 
And with that single act of Australian insubordination against both our and your former colonial masters, a good time has been had by all for the hundred years since in this great Australian-American relationship. 
So much so that a hundred years later, to commemorate the visit of the Great White Fleet, we finally decided to 
return the favour when, earlier this year, ships of the Royal Australian Navy visited New York.
I'm reliably informed that in both 1908, when the Fleet arrived in Australia, and 2009, the sailors of both our navies had a pretty good time - and relations between our two countries were enhanced both bilaterally and, of course, personally. 
It's worth reflecting on what President Roosevelt wrote in his autobiography about that first naval visit and his views on the future of the Australian-US relationship way back in the days of the Great White Fleet. 
"I have, as every American ought to have, a hearty admiration for, and fellow feeling with, Australia, and I believe that America should be ready to stand back of Australia in any serious emergency. The reception accorded the fleet in Australia was wonderful, and it showed the fundamental community of feeling between ourselves and the great commonwealth of the South Seas."
And while, over the past 100 years, the world has changed fundamentally, the ties that bind our two great democracies have not. 
Ties that remain deep and wide and broad. 
I have entitled my remarks today 'American leadership and the emerging global order'.
The challenges of global governance are not new to our intensively globalised age. 
Sixty-five years ago, not far from where we gather today, John Maynard Keynes reflected on the challenges of global governance during his remarks to the concluding plenary session of the Bretton Woods conference in July of 1944.
Keynes said: "...we have perhaps accomplished here at Bretton Woods something more significant than what is embodied in this Final Act. We have shown that a concourse of forty-four nations are actually able to work together at a constructive task in amity and unbroken concord. 
Few believed it possible. If we can continue in a larger task as we have begun in this limited task, there is hope for the world". 
This "larger task" was of governance which lay beyond the scope and powers of the Bretton Woods machinery which he and his colleagues had so painstakingly crafted. 
Sixty-five years later, I doubt that Keynes would say we have risen to this task. 
Sixty-five years on, we are still, by and large, seeking to make do with the global institutions, both political and economic, crafted in San Francisco and at Bretton Woods. 
Our global institutions have largely remained static while the world they were designed to serve has been dynamic beyond anyone's imagining.
First, there has been a proliferation in the number of global actors - whereas only 50 states gathered in San Francisco, that number has since quadrupled to 192, leaving aside the parallel proliferation in the number of non-state actors. 
Furthermore, the global economy of today has become a truly global economy - unimaginable to the relatively autonomous economies of the immediate post-war period. 
In short, the global institutions have not kept pace with the rapidly changing global reality. 
This is not an argument for their wholesale replacement. 
It is, however, an argument for their comprehensive renewal. 
The reality in this modern, dynamic world is that renewal can only occur, as with Bretton Woods and as with San Francisco, through the creative agency of US global leadership. 
Some say that in this age of political multi-polarity and economic globalisation, the US is no longer capable of such leadership. 
Some say the US may be unwilling to provide such leadership. 
And others, both at home and abroad, who say the United States should not provide such leadership. 
I argue that all three propositions are fundamentally wrong. 
America remains an overwhelming force for good in the world. 
America, virtually unique in the history of great powers, has sought to exercise its global power in a manner mindful of a wider interest that is greater than its narrowly calculated national interest. 
Just as today, America remains uniquely qualified - through the combination of its hard power and its soft power - through the narrative of its history and the consistency of its purpose - to shoulder the great responsibilities of our time. 
Importantly for us all, these are also the virtues and values that we see at work once again in the policy and purpose of the US Administration today. 
The United States is not unfamiliar with the burden of leadership.
Nor is the United States unfamiliar with the criticism that comes from the exercise of leadership. 
And while the US will from time to time make misjudgements in its foreign policies like other nations, it is important to recognise that it is America that invariably has answered the call when others mysteriously have fled the field. 
It was American leadership that won the War. 
It was American leadership that also won the Peace - ultimately with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War. 
But neither winning the war nor winning the peace meant the end of history. 
History is shaped by human hands, collective decisions and the agency of political leadership. 
And political leadership is required today to shape the vast array of forces now at work in this new age of globalisation - forces that have been unleashed since the fall of the Berlin Wall. 
Globalisation of security, globalisation of the economy, globalisation of the environment, and to some extent of the globalisation of cultures themselves. 
With all these challenges, the need for global leadership becomes greater, not lesser. 
No longer hot war. No longer Cold War. But instead an extraordinarily complex peace. 
My argument today is straightforward:
First, by any rational measurement, US global power will remain unchallenged for the first quarter of the current century and arguably, for much of the second. 
Second, US global leadership must nonetheless be deployed in a policy environment that is more interconnected, complex and contested than at any time since 1945. 
Third, notwithstanding this complexity, US leadership remains uniquely capable of shaping the global outcomes that will enhance our common security, our common prosperity and our common interest in the sustainability of the planet. 
Finally, rather than a return to US unilateralism, or its radical alternative, the wholesale redesign of the global order, there is instead a further alternative before us of US global leadership for the future. 
One which seeks to renew the existing institutions of global governance from within. 
To render them effective for the current age. 
To do so by acting as the pivotal power within the system rather than simply railing at the system from without. 
Recognising throughout that while the United States can lead, and while the United States should lead, the lessons of recent years remind us that the United States cannot be expected to do so alone. 
American leadership must also be supported in this new endeavour by a new "driving centre" of global politics and the global economy - a group of nations, both developed and developing, sharing a broad commitment to make the existing institutions of global governance solve the problems existing faced by the global order - rather than simply avoid them. 
This, I believe, is the current direction of the Obama Administration. 
There is a degree of faddishness, both in the academic literature and in some of the political commentary, about the inevitable decline and demise of US global power. 
People have been predicting the decline of US power since the "missile gap" debate of 1960; the oil crises of 1970s; the rise of Japan in the 1980s; the rise of China since the late 1990s; and, most recently, the implosions arising from the global financial crisis. 
In fact, there is an almost soothing regularity to these episodic predictions of American decline and despair. 
To paraphrase the immortal Mark Twain, reports of America's death are greatly exaggerated. 
- US global strategic reach remains unparalleled with its total military spending representing almost half of total global military spending and more than seven times that of China's;
- US naval strength is again unparalleled - with its total naval tonnage exceeding the world's next 13 fleets combined; 
- The US economy has been the world's largest economy for the more than 120 years, and for much of the last 100 years has represented about one-quarter of global GDP - as it does today; 
- The US economy is three times the size of the world's second largest economy, Japan, in market exchange rate terms;
- More than one-third of the world's twenty largest companies are American;
- America is the world's leading producer of scientific papers, performs as much research and development as the rest of the OECD combined and has an unrivalled capacity for innovation; 
- Furthermore, unlike many other major economies, the US has and will continue to have a large, growing and young population - a key driver of long term economic growth; 
- Finally, as demonstrated by the most recent findings of the Pew Research Center, America is rated overwhelmingly positively in most global public opinion surveys on its image in the world - a remarkable feat for any superpower given the precedent of superpowers in ages past.[i] 
The objective barometers of US global power are therefore in reasonable working order. 
Notwithstanding these great strategic strengths, America and its friends, partners and allies are also wrestling with the new challenges of globalisation. 
This is underlined in the most recent "Global Trends: 2025" report produced by the US National Intelligence Council. 
In mapping trends for the first quarter of the current century, the NIC reaches a number of important conclusions:
First, that "the United States will remain the single most powerful country but will be less dominant". 
Second, "the unprecedented shift in relative wealth and economic power, roughly from west to east, now on the way, will continue".
Third, "a global multi-polar system is emerging, with the rise of China, India and others. The relevant power of non-state actors - businesses, tribes, religious organisations and even criminal networks will also continue". 
And fourth, listed by the NIC as a key uncertainty for the future, is "whether global powers work with multilateral institutions to adapt their structure and performance to the transformed geopolitical landscape". 
This latter finding by the NIC goes to the absolute core of the dilemma we confront today: as we wrestle with an increasingly complex and contested global order but with a global architecture that has not fundamentally changed in two-thirds of a century. 
The new and pressing functional demands of a rapidly unfolding global order are now rubbing up against the increasingly dysfunctional nature of global institutions that are either out of their depth; insufficiently empowered; or reduced to a negotiating stalemate by the politics of the lowest common denominator. 
We have seen this in a number of global institutions. 
We have seen this in the UN Security Council. 
We have seen it on nuclear disarmament.
We have seen it in the Doha Round. 
We have seen it on the Millennium Development Goals.
We have seen it on climate change. 
And most critically, we have seen it recently with the IMF - impeded by its limited and now almost ancient mandate, and by the limited resources made available to it - to deal with a financial and economic crisis of the type we have had forced upon us these last 12 months. 
In many respects, the global financial crisis has demonstrated one core point: that the formal institutional architecture established to deal with a potential systemic collapse failed when put to the test - and had to be rapidly superseded by the emergency actions of central banks and executive governments acting through the agency of the G20. 
In other words, the pre-existing global financial architecture had reached a tipping point. 
And as a result, the global financial system came scarily close to collapse.
The world cannot afford a crisis of this magnitude in relation to security, trade, or climate change.
But whether it is nuclear disarmament, global economic management or the environment, I argue we now have an unprecedented responsibility to make the global system work. 
We will be failing in our duties as leaders at this point in history if we do not revitalise, reform and re-build the international system.
If we do not, we will have failed our generation.
And if we do not, the historians of the future will legitimately look back at this period in history and conclude that we failed as leaders to lead when our nations needed it most. 
I do not therefore believe we can simply allow these deep global challenges simply to languish in the global 'too hard' basket.
And, to return to my theme, this can only be achieved by a combination of the national power and the reforming passion of the United States - reinforced by the reforming passion of a core group of states also prepared to help broker the political compromises necessary to make the existing system deliver results.
America's efforts to renew the existing global architecture are already under way.
We see it in the UN Security Council through the President's decision to occupy himself the Chair of the Security Council while the US occupies the presidency. 
We see it on nuclear arms control and disarmament.
We see it in relation to the Doha round. 
We see it on climate change.
We see it in the UN Millennium Development Goals.
And, most critically, we have seen it through the use of the G20 to frame and implement a global policy response to the gravest global economic crisis we have confronted since the Great Depression. 
I note particularly President Obama's statement last week here in New York, that beyond the current crisis he saw an important role for the future of the G20. 
I referred earlier to a future US role in global governance as the pivotal power supported by what I have also described as the "driving centre" of the world's major economies. 
I believe the G20 provides the best available vehicle for doing that for the future. 
The debate about global governance is invariably a debate about the often conflicting objectives of legitimacy and efficiency. 
While the UN General Assembly may have absolute legitimacy as a democracy of states, its efficiency as a delivery agent for real global outcomes is limited. 
The challenge, therefore, is to develop a body which is sufficiently representative in its membership to have 
legitimacy while being sufficiently small in its numbers and efficient in its actions to be able to produce results. 
In terms of legitimacy, the G20 brings together economies representing around 90% of global market cap, 85% of global GDP, 80% of global trade - and more than two-thirds of the world's population.
The G20 also draws together five countries from the Americas, five from Asia, five from Europe and five from elsewhere, including South Africa and Australia.
The G20 critically includes China and India which between them will shape the pattern of history in the 21st century - (and it should be noted that both these countries have already played the role of constructive, responsible stakeholders in the G20's deliberations.)
The G20 also, for the first time, brings together three countries from the Muslim world, including the largest Muslim country in the world, Indonesia. 
But because it is only 20 in number, the G20 is also capable of making effective decisions, as I believe we demonstrated at the London Summit in April. 
In particular, decisions taken on global fiscal stimulus; a global framework for toxic asset management within banks; the resourcing of the IMF to deal with any future institutional collapses; the implementation of seven critical areas of financial regulatory reform to reduce the risks of future crisis; and a moratorium on further protectionist measures.
The IMF has estimated that the London G20 Summit actually broke the fall in the global economy which, between September and March, had been engaged in virtual freefall. 
We also look forward to working further with President Obama further on the G20 challenges which lie ahead.
Both in Pittsburgh.
And at the Summits that will come after Pittsburgh as we wrestle with the challenges of the future. 
Australia supports American global leadership in these great global challenges that lie ahead. 
As two robust democracies, we will not always agree. 
But these will always be disagreements among friends rather than foes.
Always as allies, never as adversaries. 
And always in partnership for the common good. 
And the reason is simple: there is no more important relationship for Australia than our relationship with the United States of America. 
We share common interests. 
More importantly, we share common values. 
And, for much of the last century, we shared a common history. 
We are one of the world's oldest continuing democracies. 
We are one of the United States' oldest continuing allies. 
We have fought alongside the United States in every major war since US entry into the First World War in 1917. 
We are also a country with our own assets to bring to the table. 
Of the nearly 200 independent states in the world today, Australia is the 14th largest economy, in market exchange rate terms.
By market exchange rates, Australia is the fourth largest economy in Asia - after Japan, China and India. 
Ours is a modern, well managed economy:
- We have been the only one of thirty-three IMF advanced economies to have generated positive growth over the past year;
- Unlike every Major Advanced Economy, we have so far avoided recession; 
- We have the second lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies;
- We are using part of our infrastructure stimulus strategy to begin rolling out a high speed National Broadband Network for 90% of the country at 100 megabits per second;
- And of the world's 9 remaining AA plus rated banks, 4 are Australian.
On security, of the 192 UN member states, Australia's is the twelfth largest military budget worldwide. 
We have released a Defence White Paper which, over the next 20 years, will significantly expand our naval forces given the fact that we have responsibility for the third largest maritime jurisdiction in the world. 
In Afghanistan, we are among the top ten military contributors and the largest non-NATO contributor. 
Second to the United States, we are the largest contributor to the Afghan National Army Trust Fund, dedicated to training the Afghan National Army.
And, as of next year, after the United States, we will be the largest foreign training destination for staff officers of the Pakistan armed forces in counter-insurgency training. 
Both globally and within the Asia-Pacific, we pursue an active diplomacy - deploying what we describe as creative middle-power diplomacy. 
Australia has established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament in conjunction with Japan. 
We are committed to implementing the Millennium Development Goals - with a particular focus on the Pacific. 
Australia is also working with our regional friends and partners in shaping the long term institutional architecture of the Asia-Pacific region - a region that will increasingly become the centre of geo-economic, geo-strategic and geo-political activity in the century ahead. 
It is for these reasons that Australia has advocated a regional dialogue for the long term development of what we have described as an Asia-Pacific Community - for the first time creating a pan-regional body capable of addressing the political, security and economic challenges of our wider region. 
We have put a long-term timetable on this - 2020. 
Our mission is simple but the task is complex - to craft the habits, the culture and the institutions of cooperation across the Asia Pacific Community - building the confidence and security-building measures and sense of common security which will help the century of the Asia Pacific to be a truly pacific century.
On all these challenges, the Australian Government looks forward to continuing to work closely with the US Administration. 
I have recently appointed as our new Ambassador to the United States, Kim Beazley - former Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister of Australia - to underpin the importance we attach to this relationship. Kim's distinguished career, his depth of understanding and his love for this country will no doubt serve us well in expanding our great relationship. 
Earlier this year, Bob Zoellick, the President of the World Bank, posed a question for us all through the pages of the Financial Times on how we might choose to shape our global destiny for the century ahead.
An "age of reversal and decline" in which we make excuses for inertia?
Or an "age of responsibility" in which we decide to tackle the problems of the future together? 
Zoellick's definition of an "age of reversal" is stark: an age in which "countries retreat into national solutions behind national borders, taking their memories of prosperity with them" and where immigrants and foreigners are met with intolerance and blamed for rising unemployment.
Conversely, an "age of responsibility" would herald an era of responsible global stakeholders where "inclusivity and sustainability take precedence over the enrichment of a few". 
In this "age of responsibility", there would be common responsibility for the stewardship of the planet; common responsibility for the elimination of extreme poverty; common responsibility for the liberalisation of trade; common responsibility for the management of the global financial system. 
There are two core concepts alive in Zoellick's "age of responsible stakeholders".
Each of us having sufficient skin in the game to want to make the international system work. 
As well as an international system driven by "an expanded steering group grounded in current economic realities".
This is very much the framework within which Australia sees the future of the G20 - what I have already described as a "driving centre" of the existing institutions of global governance. 
A "driving centre" in which political agreements can be forged at the highest levels between heads of government in order to drive technical negotiations, otherwise stalemated, towards timely conclusion. 
Whether we are debating the global architecture of the future.
Or the regional architecture of the future.
Or the detailed global policy agendas that now lie before us - on security, the economy, climate change or development.
Together we must seize the day.
That is why Australia looks forward with energy and enthusiasm to working with the United States on these great challenges that lie ahead. 
Developing the global institutions for the future, and through them, delivering the global policies that might become our future. 
To borrow Dean Acheson's phrase of a half a century ago, the United States was "present at the creation" of the world's global governance architecture. 
So too was Australia. 
Together with you at San Francisco. 
Together with you at Bretton Woods. 
Present with you at the creation. 
Now present with you again, two-thirds of a century later, and this time for the regeneration. 
To build together the functioning global institutions that we now need to negotiate the formidable shoals that lie ahead in the 21st Century.
________________________________________


The Australian Government announced today an increase in Australian support for Pakistan's efforts to promote stability and counter extremism.
The announcement was made following the Friends of Democratic Pakistan Summit in New York.
The increased assistance includes:
     * Strengthening Pakistan's security and stability by doubling military training to the Pakistan Army to 140 places, which will make Australia the largest provider of overseas military training to Pakistan after the United States;
     * Establishing defence post graduate scholarships;
     * Expanding strategic dialogue;
     * Establishing an Australia-Pakistan Development Partnership, focusing on health reform, reconstruction of the Malakand region, democratic governance and economic reform, as well as providing 100 agricultural scholarships; and
     * Holding regular meetings of the Australia-Pakistan Joint Trade Committee to support closer business links.
The Australian Government has significantly increased its engagement with Pakistan over the past twenty months, including through increased defence and law enforcement cooperation; doubling development assistance to $120 million over the next two years; contributing $23 million in humanitarian assistance since August 2008; and working actively to expand bilateral trade and investment.
The Friends of Democratic Pakistan Summit was a clear demonstration of the international community's commitment to Pakistan. Pakistan is one of the world's most strategically important countries.
Leaders reinforced their support for Pakistan's efforts against violent and militant extremism and endorsed plans for the reconstruction of the Malakand region. The Summit endorsed the establishment of a multi-donor trust fund for Pakistan's border areas, to be administered by the World Bank.


PM: We're here in Pittsburgh for the G20 Summit, to continue working on our combined response to the worst global recession in three quarters of a century. The challenges before us are clear. The global economy remains fragile, significant economic risks remain and there still remain risks of global economic set back.
The full impact of this global economic recession will be felt for some time through rising unemployment in Australia, and around the world. Australia, of course, is doing much better than most other economies in the world in the face of this recession, but it would be absolutely foolish at this point to make the mistake of thinking that the global economic crisis is over.
What have we achieved so far through the G20? The G20 has played a critical role in breaking the fall of the global economy, which set in after the Lehmans collapse about one year ago. The G20 has delivered unprecedented coordinated action to deal with the ensuing global recession, including a $5 trillion injection in stimulus into the global economy, more than $1 trillion injected into the international financial institutions to restore confidence and guard against future financial difficulties within particular jurisdictions.
Thirdly, agreements to reform and reshape the nature of the global financial regulatory system. And fourthly, an historic agreement to resist protectionist measures to avoid a tariff war, something which has broken out in times past when great times of economic difficulty have prevailed.
The G20 has emerged as a key body for economic cooperation. I have long argued that the G20 must remain an important body for strengthening the global economy into the future. The G20 provides Australia with a voice in the decisions of the management of the global economy, which directly affects us - a seat at the top table for the first time, which we have not had before at Head of Government level, and a table where the decisions on the future of the global economy are taken.
For the week ahead, and for the next 24 hours, there are challenges which of course we need to wrestle with at this meeting in Pittsburgh. Firstly, we've got to confirm the implementation of our existing commitments made in London on fiscal stimulus, on the reform of the international financial institutions, including the IMF, on continued stabilisation of financial markets, progress on the reform of financial regulations, as well as maintaining our commitments on trade.
Secondly, we must also embrace medium-term strategies for coordinated exit across the major economies of the world from the emergency financial market interventions, fiscal interventions, and other interventions which have occurred in order to deal with the immediacy of the crisis of the last 12 months.
Thirdly, we need to craft together a more sustainable economic growth model for the future, because we can no longer simply rely upon a debt-driven consumption model for the future, given that the imbalances inherent within in it, underpinned by imbalances globally, have created so many of the conditions which caused or led to the crisis that we experienced over the last 12 months.
Finally, the spirit of cooperation among G20 head of government has been very good so far. Great work has been done between officials. We work with each other a lot on the telephone at heads of government level. We still have much, much work to be done. I believe the mood and the attitude of my colleagues from around the world is serious and seriously engaged in the fact that we are not out of the woods yet, there is a long way to go, and that we must therefore continue to work together on the critical decisions of future global economic governance.
Before I take some questions I might ask the Treasurer to add some remarks, and then we'll open it to you.
TREASURER: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. I too have been talking to fellow finance ministers and other economic decision makers in the short time that I've been here, and there's a theme that runs through those discussions as well - now is not a time for complacency, now is not a time to let our guard down. There are big challenges facing the global economy. The G20 has done a very important job over the past nine months, but there is so much more to do, which is why the agenda through tomorrow is so important, as the Prime Minister has outlined.
I'll leave it at that.
PM: Okay, over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said that you want a coordinated approach from nations on exit strategies (inaudible). At what point do you think we can start to see that sort of approach being adopted?
PM: The first thing, Paul, is to get an agreement on a framework. That is, what are the elements of a framework for what is virtually unprecedented - global macroeconomic coordination. That is, a framework whereby individual governments, from time to time or on a regular basis, would bring forth their own national economic plans, development strategies for a period ahead, provide them to one another for appropriate examination, and to take any necessary actions if there was a macroeconomic problem emerging from that.
This work has been underway among officials for some time, and it hasn't reached finality yet among officials and our discussions at Head of Government level. Step number one is getting a framework for such macroeconomic coordination globally to occur. Once it does exist, then a working program or a program of action to give it effect would be the next step.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you that that framework is likely to be decided on at this G20 meeting?
PM: I think there's a large degree of consensus that we need to have an alternative framework to the non-existing framework which existed in the past. There is still some disagreement about the actual nature of the framework for the future, but our officials have been working hard on this. Each paragraph is tightly and carefully negotiated, but there's still some way to go yet.
JOURNALIST: Is there any timeframe, though? Obviously, you're working towards consensus, but you must be thinking in terms of the exit strategy, 12 months, 18 months, two years?
PM: Well, on the question of, let's call it exit strategy from the emergency measures that all governments have had to take given the depths of economic crisis which unfolded after Lehmans, there is, first of all, a general view, as reflected in my earlier remarks and Wayne's just now, that we're not out of the woods yet. Secondly, therefore, what's necessary to do is again to begin to elaborate a framework within which coordinated exit strategies could be considered.
It is far better to have that framework in place so that when you need to begin to make it operational, you are not simply doing so on a casual basis. So it's work on such a framework which has engaged the minds of officials, and again a lot of good work has gone in, but I'd much rather be cautious about how far we will get on this occasion because there are 20 heads of government, each with firm views on the future, and we are dealing with a democracy of States here.
Perhaps the Treasurer could add?
TREASURER: I just want to add to that, when it comes to financial regulation and supervision, there's been an enormous amount of work done through the FSB and the BIS. And that work is continuing, and there'll be milestones in terms of the various subjects they are dealing with - widespread agreement, for example, on the need to increase both the quality and quantity of capital in the banking system, but a whole lot of other matter that are associated with that. They won't all be completed in one meeting, or in one year, so those discussions continue, and I certainly hope it is the case that as we go through the period ahead that those are further refined and reported back to finance ministers and to leaders.
PM: Over here and then over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's been some differences between Europeans on executive salaries and (inaudible), and the approach of the US (inaudible). Where does Australia on that issue, and will there be an agreement at this meeting on how to approach it?
PM: I'll ask the Treasurer to respond.
TREASURER: Well, we stand with the position that we have put at the last finance ministers' meeting back in March, which is the framework put together by APRA, which has been through the processes of the FSB and the discussions they have had, and at our finance ministers meeting only two weeks in London the ministers asked the FSB to have a look at a number of other matters, and that report will come back to the meeting tomorrow.
I don't want to pre-empt that, but I think that there will be a rigorous framework outlined, which is very important because some of the packages have encouraged very risky behaviour, which goes to the very core of some of the issues in the financial system that we've lived with the consequences of over the past six to nine months, so it's an important part of regulation and supervision. It's not the only part, however, but an important part, and we're looking forward to a discussion on the report back from the FSB this evening and in the morning.
PM: Before I go to this one- some have said that the whole question of executive remuneration should not be dealt with by the G20 or the FSB. The Government's view is completely the reverse. We are dealing with the global economy, global financial markets, the remuneration structures and how they're calibrated in various financial markets around the world have a profound impact on Australia.
But large banks operating globally, if you're going to have a proper calibration of risk and reward, then if those decisions are being regulated outside Australia and using a set of standard vastly different to what we would accept within Australia then we have a problem. We're working our way through this. The Treasurer and his officials have been doing excellent work as well, and I know Governor Draghi, who heads the FSB, is regarding this as a top priority.
JOURNALIST:PM, I understand that Australia's bid to host the World Cup in 2018 or 2022 has received a good reception in recent weeks, including this week. Are you confident that Australia can host an event that's bigger than the Olympics, and I'd also like to ask the you on your views on the cost and benefits and so on.
PM: What good news do you have?
JOURNALIST: That you've received good reception this week, and the Treasurer has in fact spoken to some nations this week who are on the executive council of FIFA.
PM: Name them.
JOURNALIST: Trinidad and Tobago, Cyprus, Japan, US.
PM: Well, I'm not so sure about all that, actually. I think it might have been more in passing with a couple of them. Look, this is a long campaign, and it's going to be tough, really tough. I mean, when I went to FIFA headquarters recently in Switzerland and had explained to me how difficult a race this is going to be for Australia. Securing this event for Australia - fantastic for the game, fantastic for Australia.
On the other part of your question, which is can we host an event bigger than the Olympics? Of course we can. We're Australia. We do things well when we put our mind to it. We did it for the Olympics, and did it with a degree of professionalism which is now widely regarded right around the world nearly a decade after the Sydney Olympics. If we succeed with the World Cup bid, then we would apply the same disciplines and the same national effort to produce a fantastic World Cup in Australia as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've talked about the need (inaudible) the Doha trade talks. How confident are you that you're going to get some sort of breakthrough (inaudible)
PM: Watching the trade talks as I have for a large part of my political career is still watching grass grow and paint dry. In fact, I was talking to Hillary Clinton about this earlier today and I won't paraphrase what Secretary Clinton had to say about the negotiations because this is a very detailed process. Therefore, there are still areas of technical disagreement. Our challenge is to fix them and to achieve, across our numbers, the political will to put the ball over the try line. Australia strongly supports the earliest possible conclusion of the Doha round.
If you go to the whole question of future growth in the global economy, we need to find large new sources of economic growth. In the speech I've just made here at Carnegie Mellon I made a point of saying that one of those areas for growth is to conclude the round. The Peterson Institute in Washington's done their study: there's nearly $1 trillion worth of additional activity in the global economy if we free up markets - great for developing countries, great for developed countries, great for the global economy at a time when it actually needs a shot in the arm. But I don't want to create the impression that this will mysteriously pop out tomorrow afternoon at five past five.
Here, then there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on climate change, you've spoken about your need (inaudible). Is this meeting the sort of place where we should start to hear more detail on numbers coming from these leaders? Where do we get firm progress if we've only got (inaudible) and then APEC before Copenhagen?
PM: This is an excellent question, because time's running out - 76 days, I think, now to Copenhagen, and one of the questions we've been discussing among each other as leaders is what are the staging points between now and then, because the rubber's got to hit the road on targets, commitments, and on financing, public and private, as well as the other elements of an integrated agreement, what I called a grand bargain between developed and developing countries.
I think, having sat through a dinner the other night with the UN Secretary General where we had present the Chinese President, the President of the United States, and of course the President of the European Union, the President of France and others, there is obviously a grasping of the fact that all these three things are linked and we need to achieve progress in the financing part of the equation if we're to unlock commitments from emerging economies, if we're then to unlock binding targets from developed economies.
The other thing is that for the first time so far, largely through the agency of the Europeans, numbers have been kicked around the table, for the first time. You would have seen some of those reflected in the public comments by the European Union and by the British and others. For the first time that I have been participating in these discussions, people are now bandying numbers around.
What will need to happen, I would hope through the agency of finance ministers between now and Copenhagen, those to be shaped into concrete options for decision. The problem we have is, that frankly, the technical mechanisms to reduce that to bite-sized chunks for decision between now and then. You don't get that one right, the other two bits of the jigsaw don't fit together, and that's why it's such a complex piece of work.
JOURNALIST: MPs have been given a pay rise (inaudible)
PM: Barnaby said all of that?
JOURNALIST: Yes he did (inaudible)
PM: On the first one, it's of course a recommendation of an independent tribunal, and as you know that system has been around for a long time. On the question of Barnaby's observation, can I just say, look, as Prime Minister of the country, you know what all the conditions of employment are when you stick your hand up for this job: a) the working hours, b) the extended privilege of spending so much time with you guys, and c) remuneration, etcetera. I think that's all just fine, and that's as it should be for the future.
If you'll all excuse us, we've actually got to get on to-
JOURNALIST: Footy tips?
PM: Oh, footy tips. Well, I was asked this yesterday by one of your number, and I have an appallingly bad record recently, so I'm very reluctant to put the mockers on people. Having said that, let me put mockers on someone. No, I have a deep affection for the good people of Geelong, so that's where I'll be lending my support.
Thanks folks, got to run.


PM: This is an historic day for Australia, because for the first time ever Australia has secured a permanent place at the top table of global economic decision making. Today's also an important day for the world as we bring into a new global body - the G20 - to help deal with the global economic problems of the present and of the future.
It's important for Australia that our voice be heard in the councils of the world. It's important for Australia that our voice is heard directly - not indirectly through the agency of others - on the major economic decisions of our time, and I would thank the President of the United States and others, including the Prime Minister of India, President Hu Jintao of China, Prime Minister Hatoyama of Japan, President Lee of Korea, President Yodhoyono of Indonesia, President Zuma of South Africa and others for their strong support for the establishment of this new institution as a permanent part of the global governance system of the future.
Decisions often made in distant capitals have a direct effect on jobs and livelihoods for the working people of Australia and working people elsewhere. The first G20 leaders' summit, barely 10 months ago, was when we decided to gather together as a community of the world's major economies to respond to the worst global financial since the Great Depression 75 years before.
At that time, the global financial system, the global economy more broadly, seemed to be at the brink. The G20 stepped up to the plate as the global financial crisis morphed into a global economic recession, and we saw the actions taken in London. Those actions included stimulus strategies, stimulus strategies which we also replicated in Australia, stimulus strategies together with interventions in financial markets, together with other actions including a moratorium on protectionist measures worldwide, all of which had the combined effect of arresting the fall, arresting the collapse in the global economy.
Today's G20 summit here in Pittsburgh is focussed on building our collective response to the global recession. Our goal, as these major economies, is to deliver sustainable, long-term growth now and into the future, not to return simply to the fundamental instability of the boom and bust cycles of the global economy in the past.
That's why leaders today have agreed on a new framework for strong, sustainable, balanced growth. This framework is a comprehensive mechanism to deliver unprecedented global coordination of national economic policies. This is a new approach. In the past, often what happen was that having been through one recession, globally or regionally, what we all did was buckle up and get ready for the next one, whenever it was going to come around in greater or smaller measure.
What leaders have reflected on and resolved on this occasion is that it's time to turn the page and embark upon a new approach to global economic management, one which says that the ingredients for removing this excessive volatility in the global economy lie in an unprecedented new experiment in global macroeconomic coordination. This framework is aimed at helping to avoid the mistakes of the past when inadequate economic cooperation led to massive global financial imbalances.
The framework outlines the need for: first, continued implementation of the stimulus measures of the type which we in Australia have implemented and which have been embraced nationally and internationally; second, planning for globally coordinated withdrawal from extraordinary fiscal and monetary measures taken in response to the crisis, but only when the recovery is secure, and; thirdly, embarking on a new era of global cooperation to re-balance growth, moving away from excessive reliance on debt-driven consumption, avoiding destabilising booms and busts, and boosting productivity to secure higher, more stable growth in the future.
The implementation of this framework will involve three steps: firstly, nations will circulate to each other their national economic plans for stable growth by the end of 2009 - this is unprecedented; secondly, the collective consistency of these national plans for balanced growth and development will be analysed by the IMF and the World Bank and peer review will then occur also by G20 finance ministers and central bank governors; third, leaders will agree on actions to achieve this common objective of sustainable and balanced growth at their meetings in 2010 and beyond.
This is a significant advance in global economic cooperation and a key element in slowly paving the way for global and sustainable economic recovery. Furthermore, leaders today embarked upon decisions concerning the regulation of financial institutions. Millions of ordinary people have suffered, not through any fault of their own, but through gross excesses in terms of financial markets and various financial institutions. While Australian institutions have remained strong, the failure adequately to regulate financial institutions around the world is a genuinely global problem, because we are part of a global financial system requiring a global solution.
We have today agreed to strengthen regulation of financial institutions, including measured to address appropriately executive remuneration, ensure appropriate capital requirements for banks to help manage risk, improve derivatives markets and to begin the work on strengthening regulation of systemically important financial institutions.
On climate change, leaders agreed that we had to push for a positive outcome at Copenhagen. We also agreed the G20 finance ministers would be commissioned between now and Copenhagen to provide for leaders climate change financing options for subsequent consideration in the lead up to Copenhagen. On top of that, leaders today embarked upon a decision concerning the elimination of fossil fuel subsidies around the world, subsidies which of themselves are calculated to represent some 10 percent of the overall climate change problem.
Finally, on the reform of global institutions, important measures have been taken in relation to the IMF in particular, but also the World Bank. Australia has made the point in many, many fora over a long period of time now about the need to ensure that our international financial institutions - the IMF, the World Bank - properly reflect the underlying economic strength and contribution of national economies to the global economy. Up until now, we have had a considerable under-representation from the new, emerging economies, and Australia has been a long and consistent advocate, together with various other economies, including the United States, of increasing the representation of emerging economies on the decision-making frameworks through voice and quota allocations within the IMF in particular.
The decision today results in substantial improvements to IMF quota arrangements, with dynamic emerging markets in developing countries of at least five percent from over-represented countries. We've also tasked our finance ministers to continue to work on the implementation of this and arrangements concerning the World Bank.
To conclude, today's summit represents another important chapter in the response to the global recession, the worst in 75 years, but it would be an absolute mistake to believe that our work finishes here. In fact, our work just begins here. So much of the task still remains in the implementation of the commitments we have made in London, in the commitments made newly here today, and this will roll out over the weeks, months and years ahead.
The road to global economic recovery will be tough, it'll be bumpy, it'll be long, but today is a landmark for global economic cooperation and for Australia's roll in the global economy.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) What happens when somebody says no (inaudible)? Have you got a mechanism for (inaudible)
PM: The ultimate mechanism will be, of course, the summit itself, and its, if you like, its implementation agency becomes the regular meetings of G20 finance ministers. That's why the core decision makers, involving central bank governors, finance ministers, informed by peer review, IMF analysis and other analyses, is the best way forward. This framework begins its implementation now.
As I said in my remarks to the gathering today, for us all this will be an unprecedented voyage of discovery, as we engage in an unprecedented exercise in global, shall we say, economic transparency, self-declaration, and parallel review, but it's necessary to begin this process because we cannot afford to return to the magnitude of the global financial imbalances we had before because of the direct consequences which that had in relation to unsustainable lending practices in various national jurisdictions which brought on this financial crisis, which in turn caused the global economic recession which we are now dealing with in its full dimensions.
Dennis, then Paul.
JOURNALIST: So you don't feel that you're giving up sovereignty in regards to economic management and there don't appear to be any sanctions apart from persuasion at the summit?
PM: This is the first time that leaders have agreed, as it were, to mutual peer review. If you're coming from the perspective of the People's Republic of China, this would be a new experience, and therefore this is a welcome, welcome development for us all, but obviously when you engage in an exercise of mutual transparency and mutual self-declaration of your forthcoming economic plans, it means that you open yourself up to the potentiality of being, I won't say admonished, but at least commented on, and that, of itself, creates an element not just of moral suasion but also of policy suasion as well. We believe that's important for the future.
This is one big step in a direction which, frankly, national governments have been quite anxious about in the past, but given where we have come from, with the extraordinary global financial imbalances which occurred before, and notwithstanding the warning bells which were rung by the Bank of International Settlements on the eve of the full onset of the last financial crisis - but where nothing was done by national governments in response to that warning - we need to do better. This is one solid step in this direction, and President Obama's recommendation for this new framework for cooperation, this new framework for global macroeconomic coordination, is, I believe, a very positive step in the right direction.
Paul.
JOURNALIST: What's your (inaudible) like, Prime Minister, essentially was (inaudible) peer review process involving the G20 and the IMF. Does it set you out a little bit on what's likely to be the result of this process? To what extent is the aim here to get into a bit of exchange rate management, in terms of sorting out the financial imbalances between China and the United States? To what extent are we looking here at coordination in terms of changes to savings and consumption policies? In terms of the substance, what sort of direction are we heading?
PM: Well in our deliberations so far we have not explicitly discussed questions of exchange rates. What we have, of course, been very mindful of are the extraordinary global financial imbalances between surplus and let's call them deficit economies, and where that has led in terms of a particular growth model, which everyone has collectively agreed is no longer globally sustainable, which is excessive imbalances creating excessive liquidity resulting in imprudent lending practices, but all driven by excessive and unsustainable debt-driven consumption. That's been an entire model for economic growth, and guess where it ended up? Taking the rest of us all across a cliff.
So, as we have sought to do in the response to the immediacy of the recession, which is not to repeat the mistakes of the 1930s but to get out there with solid fiscal stimulus and make a difference, and I believe that has had real global effect, as have the other heads of government. We've also, looking forward to the medium- to long-term future, have said to ourselves 'how else can we learn from history?' And the two strategic options are: return, bit by bit, to business-as-usual models of the past and therefore resulting in the re-emergence of an unsustainable model, or move to the future.
Now, part of that future, Paul, obviously lies in countries which have high savings rates being encouraged to spend more domestically, to consume more domestically. This will not occur overnight, it doesn't happen as a consequence of government guarantee, but it can occur if, for example, in the adjustment to growth models the automatic access to debt-driven consumption and its impact on the import of consumer goods, for example, is no longer as readily available as a growth model. It means that you therefore resort to other strategies, including increasing your own domestic consumption in countries which are less prone to that in terms of their history.
Of course, the discussion today also focussed on other growth models for the future as well - the clear link between climate change and low-carbon transformation of the economy to generate growth in the future, and of course, the final liberalisation of trade.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you that China can make this economic adjustment?
PM: Well, I'm an enormous supporter of China's economic transformation these last 30 years. I was in China as a diplomat when they undertook the first major set of transformations, around about 1984, when they moved their reforms from agriculture and the countryside to a more systemic, market-based reform across the entire Chinese economy. So, what we've seen with that great transformation, of course, is China's growth this last 30 years go through the roof, and a large part of it underpinned by, of course, the classic export model of the newly industrialised countries of East Asia.
The problem is when we've looked at a country as large China having emerged such as that, we are in a different league to that which we were in in the '70s and '80s when the so-called NICs at the time went through the same model. It follows, therefore, that the Chinese are faced with new alternatives themselves. This, therefore, presents China, but so many other economies as well, including Japan, which has had low levels of domestic consumption for different reasons, to embrace new possibilities for the future.
But that is just one. Of course, other areas of turbo charging growth in the future and reducing the growth deficit for the future, equally are there to be chosen, liberalisation of trade and the conclusion of Doha being critical, but also looking upon the climate change transformation as a new generator of jobs for the global economy, not just as some would describe it as a loss of jobs.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us an idea of the lobbying that went on behind the scenes in terms of the (inaudible)
PM: No.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to lock that in?
PM: This was a consensus decision.
JOURNALIST: Just on the climate change funding, there's been a recommendation to end subsidies for fossil-based fuels. Will that affect Australia in any way, perhaps in the coal industry? And secondly, are you disappointed you didn't get anything more broadly up at this meeting, given that we're running out of time on the way to Copenhagen?
PM: Firstly, I made some reference to the change to the fossil fuel subsidies in my opening remarks before, and they stand and we believe that these can be handled appropriately within Australia's existing administrative arrangements. Frankly, the problem with fossil fuel subsidies, particularly in developing economies, is of an entirely different order of magnitude. Mention was made, for example, in our session just now, the important decisions taken by the President of Indonesia in recent times. If you aggregate the impact of fossil fuel subsidies in emerging economies, the aggregate impact which that has on total carbon emissions is huge, so that's where, of course, the primary emphasis lies.
Secondly, on the question of climate change, the fact that we have given such a clear direction to our finance ministers to, and I'll go to the relevant section of the communiqué, if I can find it in sufficient time, 30-something or other, 33, I think, or thereabouts - we welcome the work of finance ministers and direct them to report back at their next meeting with a range of possible options for climate change financing, provided as a resource to be considered in the UNFCCC negotiations in Copenhagen.
You've heard me say in recent days how all these parts relate to one another. No financing options, public or private, then less likelihood of a commitment from emerging economies to their own greenhouse gas reductions over time, which in turn means that developed economies are less likely to embrace verifiable targets. So this is very much the engine room of the work.
This is no guarantee of success. Copenhagen is going to be hard and very hard to do, but this is an important part of the stepping stone to Copenhagen and deals with the core, unresolved part of the agenda.
JOURNALIST: Just as Barack Obama was saying the stimulus should continue until we started going back to (inaudible), your policy is that we continue the stimulus until we reach trend growth, or get back to trend growth. Which is it, because they're not necessarily the same thing?
PM: That's an interesting observation that you have made. First of all, let me just give you some context on the discussion in our gathering today. The overwhelming statement from economies around the world, frankly doing a lot less well than we've been doing in Australia, is not only are we not out of the woods yet, we're still well within the woods, frankly. That's the overwhelming centre of gravity of the room, from emerging and from developed economies - presentation after presentation from heads of government. So, that's to underpin the key observation in the communiqué and the public statements associated with it, that the stimulus measures that we've agreed upon must continue to be implemented.
Two, we also indicated that through the agency of finance ministers, we'll be evolving the implementation of the framework that I've just referred to before. Part of that framework is what we describe in Australia as medium-term exit arrangements, and the characteristics which will define that, obviously, include the measurements of recovery, but all the relevant factors of all relevant governments will be taken into account. The key thing is not to exit too early; the key thing is not to exit too late. Is there an ultimate point of mathematical science to this? Probably not, but can you actually aggregate enough measures to arrive at a reasonable agreement on where exit may become appropriate? I believe so.
The alternative is simply to leave it out there as a random set of actions by individual governments over time when the data may be incomplete.
By the way, I should add that the head of the IMF said that he didn't think a double dip was necessarily probable. He described it as possible, and so we just need to be very mindful of where we are.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you would appear to have had a pretty good week: praised by Bill Clinton; things have gone your way; your body language; the tone in your voice - you're obviously pretty happy?
PM: This has been a good day for Australia.
JOURNALIST: The whole week has been very good for Kevin Rudd, though.
PM: This has been a very good day for Australia because this is an historic day for Australia because it is the first time ever that our country has had a place at the top economic table of global economic decision making, and whoever is the subsequent Prime Minister of Australia at any time will hopefully be in a position to deploy this, not just for our sense of the national interest but also to be out there in the global interest.
By the way, in terms of the work which has gone underway in recent times, can I say our team of officials have worked spectacularly well, as has my sherpa, Dr Andrew Charlton. There's been a lot of work which goes on behind the scenes, and will remain behind the scenes.
One behind, then I'll come back to you Dennis.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the other day in your address to the General Assembly those workers that lost their jobs. They'll be watching this tonight, reading this tomorrow - they're still out of work. Can you speak to them for a moment about how much (inaudible) gone on here today they can expect to get new jobs, and also give a guarantee that they won't lose them again in the short term?
PM: One of the other good things about the decision to establish the G20 as a permanent institution of global economic governance is that it for the first time includes the International Labour Organisation as well. We have been working very hard on that this last year. Now, why has that been important? You will see for the first time in these communiqués long reflections of the importance of there being jobs - and quality jobs - in the recovery, and for there not to be, I'm paraphrasing here, a jobless recovery, which has sometimes occurred in the past. We had the strong voice of our friends from the ILO reflected in the deliberations here.
Now let me go to the immediate specifics of your question. Because this organisation has acted to break the fall, can I say to those around the world who have been in great fear of losing their jobs who haven't lost them already, that these actions by governments have reduced the effect for them. That is of no comfort to someone right now in Australia in the places I mentioned the other day, in Far North Queensland and Liverpool and elsewhere, who've lost their jobs, but it does mean that the track to recovery of the global economy and therefore ours, is closer than it would otherwise be - closer than it would otherwise be.
I don't believe in holding out illusions to people. This is a tough and ugly environment that we've been in, but because of the actions that we have taken, we have arrested the fall. We have therefore, as a result of that, hastened the recovery, but I don't want to go out there and create false hopes and false illusions.
But can I just say, back home, you know, the fact that we've had an economic stimulus strategy at work, in Liverpool, in Western Sydney, in Far North Queensland, with school being built and popping up in school playgrounds right around the country is part and parcel of our part of what governments around the world are doing - $5 trillion worth of stimulus being injected into the global economy. This is a $63 trillion economy. Were you to take that out, unemployment would be going through the roof, and in Australia, if we were generating the unemployment levels that we've seen in some economies which have started later with stimulus or injected less, if we were generating some of the unemployment levels that we've seen in various parts of Europe, you'd be looking at something close to nearly 400-500,000 more Australians out of work, and that's something which this Government, a Labor Government, was determined to do everything possible within its human powers to avoid.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) China a couple of times today. (inaudible) Can you tell us how you think (inaudible) Stern Hu and Rebiya Kadeer have affected the diplomatic relationship?
PM: Let me just back up a bit and just say the great thing about forums like the G20 is you talk to a whole lot of heads of Government. In the last 24 hours or so, I've had quite good conversations with President Obama, with the Prime Minister of India, the Prime Minister of Japan, President of China, I think I'm off to see SBY in a minute, unless you guys have kept me too late and we'll be on the phone - for those who don't know who SBY is, the President of Indonesia - and others as well, and I've just come now from Prime Minister Harper, where we were discussing a range of things as well.
You may be surprised to know that in each of those discussions we simply don't tell each other what a fine bunch of fellows we all are. In fact, we actually raise things which need to be worked on. That occurred in the Canadian discussion, it occurred in the Indian discussion and it also occurred, of course, in the Chinese discussion as well.
Of course, on the question of China, you asked in terms of recent bumps in the road, has this presented us with a real problem in the relationship? Our relationship with China is in good working order, and remember in my opening remarks the Chinese President was one of many head of government that I personally acknowledged for their strong support in the establishment of this important body where Australia has now a place at the top economic table, and that's with China's strong support. And remember, these organisations work on the basis of consensus.
On the question of consular cases, no specific consular cases were discussed, but it was agreed that consular matters of mutual interest would continue to be worked on through the foreign ministry of both countries.
JOURNALIST: In you discussion with world leaders over the last week, including Mr Netanyahu, to what extent have discussions about Iran take place? What is Australia's position on the disclosures today and further sanctions?
PM: Firstly, both with the Prime Minister of Israel, as well as with other world leaders, I have discussed Iran and discussed Iran at some length, because Iran is a matter of deep concern to Australia's long-term interests in the region, as well as our wider national security interests as well. For Australia it is profoundly disturbing that Iran has been building a covert uranium enrichment facility for several years, the report just being made public. This, in our view, represents a challenge to the core of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. It's troubling that Iran continues to be unwilling to meet its obligations under the IAEA requirements and the relevant UN Security Council resolutions.
President Obama has said that he remains committed to engagement with Iran on the nuclear question through the P5+1 negotiations. There is now a pressing need for Iran to engage meaningfully at the upcoming meeting with the P5+1 on 1 October. It is important that meeting proceed, and it's important that the whole question of Iran's nuclear program is dealt with substantively by the Iranian Government.
That has not been the case up until now. We are following these developments closely. They affect the interests of us all.
JOURNALIST: Back on climate change, have you arrived (inaudible) ahead of the Copenhagen summit. What's your feeling now after the UN and G20 talks? What exactly do you think we're going to see at Copenhagen? (inaudible)
PM: Well, we all want to see a substantive agreement between countries, developed and developing, at Copenhagen. That remains the Australian Government's objective.
Why? Because it's in Australia's national interest and it's in the global interest. I state again the obvious: we are the hottest continent and the driest continent on the planet, and as a consequence the continent which feels the impact of climate change first and worst.
So, in terms of progress, as I said in my remarks on climate change earlier today, this is really, really hard, because you are dealing with a whole lot of different interests by different governments at different points of the, let's call it, the development cycle, but at the UN Secretary General's summit in New York which I just attended, there was a strong level of political momentum coming from that.
As I said in my answer to the question before, a lot of the, shall I say, technical heart of this problem deals with the question of climate change finance, and that is now being referred to G20 finance ministers, but it is difficult to predict what sort of outcome we're going to get at Copenhagen. The attitude of the Australian Government will be to through every ounce of our diplomatic effort, every element of our personal energy at trying to bring about an outcome.
JOURNALIST: If I could ask a follow-up question about the (inaudible), was that process setting particular benchmarks or targets or standards (inaudible)?
PM: Look, I think it's a question of one step after another. I think these things will take time. Where we've got to 10 months after the first meeting of the G20 and 12 months after the full unfolding of the global financial crisis is a framework on global economic coordination. Now, you will see, I'm sure, other elements of practical policy consideration evolve out of this framework over time. Key thing is to agree on the overall principles of the framework and the fact that we now have reporting arrangements within it.
There was one other element to your question early on - you asked a question which dealt with exchange rates and then you asked?
JOURNALIST: Benchmarks?
PM: Oh, benchmarks and standards. Look, you'll see, I think, alive in the communiqué, references to strong growth. Strong growth in a range of economies has a range of different definitions and the precise numerics around that will come when you'll see finance ministers gather, but this is not intended to be some broad, unspecific exercise.
What are the two key concerns alive here? To prevent the re-emergence of large-scale, unsustainable global financial imbalances. That's in order to avoid the re-emergence of a crisis of the type that we've just had.
Challenge number two is, OK, crisis avoidance is one thing. How do you then go about growing the new global economy if you are saying on the way through that the old growth model is no longer sustainable? That's the hard bit as well.
It is in filling out both these boxes that we actually have the work ahead of us, but it's far better that we have agreed we need to do this work and the framework for doing it in and understand that's where the mandate lies.
This is the last question.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, can I, well, first of all, I mean, your question, obviously, is hypothetical. My job as a government decision-maker is 'what do we do now in response to the data that we have?' and we have done what can do, based on the data we have both nationally and through the global, coordinated fiscal and monetary effort and financial market intervention efforts which we've been describing here today.
As for the future, you talk about where does extra growth come from? I would draw your attention to the three quarters of a trillion dollars which, according to the Peterson Institute in Washington DC would be delivered to global growth if we concluded Doha. That is critical to be done. It must be done. We committed again to resolving it in 2010. 2010 is next year, it starts in about three months' time. That is one part of the equation.
The second growth driver for the future also should be looking at the opportunities which come from Copenhagen with the injection which will occur into the global economy as we undertake from private and public finance the carbon transformation globally - energy efficiency measures, as well as renewable energy sector, as well as carbon sequestration and storage, and other categories which come off the back of this transformation to a lower-carbon economy are all generators of employment and growth.
If you look at trade, you look at carbon transformation and other drivers, there is, I think, a reasonable menu to work from, and as I said, elaborating the future growth model if we are departing from the previous ones for the global economy now remains our critical piece of work - one step at a time.
Thank you very much.


This blog was open for comment from 11 to 25 September 2009.
Kevin Rudd says...
One in five Australians are under 25 and make an enormous contribution to Australia's economy, our culture and our nation.
From designers like RM Williams, who was 24 when he designed his famous elastic-sided boots for stockmen, to the artists and musicians who have challenged and entertained us, and athletes who lift our nation's pride. And every young person studying and working is vital to our economic recovery and future prosperity.
Growing up has its challenges.
As I've visited hospitals around the country to discuss health reform, medical staff have told me we need to do better for young people.
One in four young Australians aged between 16 and 24 have experienced mental health disorders in the previous 12 months, yet only a quarter of young people receive professional help.
Obesity is on the rise. The proportion of overweight and obese Australian children in the 5-17 age-group has increased from about 21% in 1995 to about 25% in 2007-08.
We're all concerned about street violence - often the result of one drink too many. Assaults have almost doubled since 1995 with young males and females aged between 15 and 24 having the highest rate of being victims of assault. About one in five men and one in six women aged between 18 and 24 drink alcohol to dangerous levels at least once a week.
Policies and programs for young Australians are spread across a whole lot of different government and community organisations, making it hard to get information and get involved. Health services and other youth programs are not always designed around young people's lives. It can be difficult to work out who to go to for help.
You have already told us some things that would make a difference. Making it easier to get information, creating public spaces designed by and for young people, and providing more help to those who need it before problems get worse are just a few of the themes coming out of the Australian Youth Forum and the 2020 Youth Summit last year.
The Government is developing a plan for young Australians - with young Australians - so that all young Australians are safe, healthy, confident and resilient, with the skills and supports they need to build their own futures.
To get us rolling, I want to hear from you what matters most - at home, at school, online and out in the community.
If you were Prime Minister for a day - what would you do to:
     * help our young people grow up safe, happy and resililient
     * give young people the skills they need to learn, work and fully engage in community life ?
     * reduce the physical and mental health risks facing young Australians, including negative body image, anxiety and depression, obesity and alcohol-fuelled violence?
     * enable young people to accept responsibility for their actions and their behaviours?
     * help young people to negotiate the challenges of today's society?
Read the full blog transcript



Today is National Police Remembrance Day - the day to honour the sacrifice of all police who have fallen in the line of duty.
Since 1803, 741 police officers have been killed on duty while protecting our communities.
These dedicated men and women gave their lives while serving us all.
On this day, it is important that we stop and remember the sacrifices they have made, as well as that of their families, friends, and workmates, who will forever live with their loss.
Now in its 21st year, National Police Remembrance Day provides an opportunity for Australians to express their gratitude to the brave police men and women who have died on duty, and to those who every day devote 


HOST: Kevin Rudd is in his Melbourne office tonight. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us. Is there any update from your consular staff?
PM: I've just spoken to our High Commissioner in Samoa, who has informed me that in terms of overall casualties in Samoa itself, of all people, some 60 plus deaths, some 140 injured. This is a tragic day for the people of Samoa. But also tragic for the Australian families affected as well. You've just yourself confirmed the death of a 50 year old Australian woman. And our hearts and our thoughts go out to her family.
I've also been informed that we have also had confirmed the death of a 6 year old girl, an Australian. And this is, this is an absolute tragedy. And our prayers go out to her family as well. The High Commissioner is seeking to provide comfort and support to her family as we speak.
HOST: Yes, it's a tragedy that's growing in scale almost by the minute. What ongoing help is Australia going to provide?
PM: Well we're dealing of course with the challenge of supporting the Australians, as well as the wider Samoan community. We still have grave fears for the whereabouts of three Australians. Grave fears.
We have 7 Australians currently in hospital. Our diplomatic staff in Apia, the capital, are now supporting about 20 Australians who have lost mostly everything. In terms of overall relief effort to Samoa itself, this evening we'll be dispatching charter aircraft with much-needed medical supplies, search and rescue teams, as well as disaster recovery equipment.
And we still have RAAF aircraft standing by to take further equipment as is necessary. I spoke earlier today with the Acting Prime Minister of Samoa, and we stand ready to provide every level of necessary assistance.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.


On behalf of the membership of the Pacific Islands Forum, I wish to formally convey our deepest condolences to Samoa, American Samoa and Tonga for the tragic loss of life as a consequence of the tsunami that struck on the morning of 29 September. Our prayers go out to all of those families who have lost loved ones and those injured or displaced by this tragic event.
I am confident that the Pacific family will do all it can to support the relief efforts in Samoa, American Samoa and Tonga.
As Chair of the Forum, I urge the broader international community to mobilise in support of the relief and recovery efforts and long term reconstruction of the villages and infrastructure devastated by the impacts of both the tsunami and the earthquake. 



The Australian Government will contribute $200,000 to developing the Zelman Cowen Gallery of Australian Jewish History at the Jewish Museum of Australia.
The contribution to this worthwhile cultural project marks the 90th birthday on 7 October of Sir Zelman Cowen, a remarkable Australian and former Governor-General.
The Jewish Museum of Australia, of which Sir Zelman has been patron since its inception in 1982, is planning to raise $1.5 million to bring this project to life.
The Australian Government hopes its contribution will encourage the Jewish community and the broader Australian community, the corporate, legal and philanthropic sectors and the State Government to also support the Gallery.
The Jewish Museum of Australia is a community museum established to explore and share the Jewish experience in Australia and benefit Australia's diverse society.
Sir Zelman Cowen has contributed immeasurably to Australia as a naval intelligence officer during World War 2, a Rhodes Scholar, Dean of Law at Melbourne University, Vice-Chancellor of the University of New England and University of Queensland, and Governor-General from 1977 until 1982.


PM: We have been disturbed today to hear about this appalling tsunami which has hit Samoa. I have today been in contact with the Acting Prime Minister of Samoa and with the Australian High Commissioner there as well, to pass on the condolences of the Australian Government and the Australian people for the loss of life.
There has been some loss of life. The Acting Prime Minister of Samoa is concerned about significant loss of life, given the populated area where this natural disaster has occurred. Also, for Australians, it is my sad duty to confirm that one Australian woman has lost of her life, as advised to me by the Australian High Commissioner, that there are three Australians with injuries so far, and some six Australians remaining, at this stage, unaccounted for.
And we of course will remain in contact with the Australian High Commission on further details. On top of that, the Australian Government has indicated to our friends in Samoa that we stand ready to provide all forms of practical assistance to them in dealing with the aftermath of this natural disaster.
We see our friends in Samoa as part of our Pacific family, and therefore when natural disaster strikes, Australia has always stood ready, shoulder-to-shoulder, to assist them in times of difficulty and need. Finally, as Chairman of the Pacific Islands Forum, and speaking on behalf, therefore, of the entire region, could I also say to our friend in Samoa that we are with you at a time of great natural disaster, and a time of great personal tragedy.
JOURNALIST: What sort of consular assistance is being offered (inaudible)
PM: When I spoke to the Australian High Commissioner today, he indicated that their entire staff has been deployed in support of Australians, including the family, tragically, of the woman who has lost her life, as well as those Australians who are currently receiving medical treatment. And of course our efforts are being directed towards those who are still unaccounted for.
On top of that, the Australian High Commission is working closely with the Government of Samoa on the overall natural disaster clean-up and recovery arrangements.
JOURNALIST: What sort of resources will Australia send to Samoa? Will we be sending (inaudible)
PM: When I spoke to the Acting High Commissioner only a couple of hours ago, he was about to attend a formal meeting of the natural disaster committee of the Samoan Government with the Acting Prime Minister. We're awaiting final confirmation as to what they need.
Australia already has two RAAF Hercules aircraft on stand-by at Richmond, ready to go. We've made arrangements as necessary with commercial aircraft, depending on the nature of the needs. We have all possible resources necessary and ready to assist, we simply need final confirmation of that which is needed.
JOURNALIST: It's a popular holiday destination for Australians, what should people do if concerned about loved ones (inaudible)
PM: I'd say to all Australians who are concerned about loved ones in Samoa following this tsunami, is to immediately contact the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and to seek necessary information from the consular assistance authorities through the Department. We take every Australian's life abroad seriously, and their wellbeing. Often when natural disasters hit, there'll be some chaos and confusion to start with, but we try and track down each person, and to provide as much physical and practical support as we can, in what are often very difficult and trying circumstances.
JOURNALIST: What's the extent of the damage of the disaster, do you know?
PM: Based on my conversations today with the Acting Prime Minister of Samoa, there has been significant damage in what he described to me as the South and South-East of the island. I am not familiar with this part of the country. He did indicate to me that some thousands of local people live there. They were concerned about significant casualties. But as yet, they don't have any other numbers, other than those which have been confirmed through the public sources.
JOURNALIST: Is there anything more than you can add about the woman that sadly lost her life in Samoa. Do you know from which state she came from, or whereabouts in Samoa she was at the time?
PM: The Australian High Commissioner has informed me that he is in active conversation with the deceased woman's family. And it's appropriate that once all next of kin are contacted, that an appropriate public statement is made. But we would be reluctant to make any statement of any type prior to that being confirmed though the family.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think I'd best leave that to the High Commissioner and to the family concerned, so that we do this right and respectfully in relation to the family.
JOURNALIST: There is some reports that there's difficulty knowing how many casualties there are at this point. What's slowing the process down?
PM: Well, I've spoken to the Acting Prime Minister of Samoa this morning. Part of the problem has been that the road network has been badly affected the tsunami, as he advised me. And therefore, physically deploying people to the area is proving to be a problem as well, as I understand it.
But as I've said, we are working, as Australia, very closely, not just with the Samoans, but with our friends in New Zealand, the Government of France, and others who are active in the region to provide all levels of practical support possible. But it may take some time before the full impact of this natural disaster is known.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is a natural disaster of a considerable order of magnitude which has only occurred today. It's therefore going to take some time to sort through the details. Remember, this is a part of the world which is remote from a lot of the defence and transport logistics that we take for granted in this country. It's going to take a while to pin these details down. So, I don't wish to be indicative of how long things will take, only to mislead.


The Prime Minister and the Minister for Climate Change and Water, Senator Penny Wong, today called for nominations for the inaugural Prime Minister's Water Wise Award.
The Prime Minister's Water Wise Award aims to encourage and recognise significant savings in water efficiency by the commercial and industrial sector.
Projects will need to demonstrate notable recent water savings, and a reduction of water use in comparison to other similar facilities.
Eligible water savings can be achieved through a variety of means including metering and monitoring; installing water efficient devices; and implementing innovative technologies that reduce water use.
Delivering on a 2007 election commitment, the award is open to all commercial and industrial water users and will recognise water efficiency excellence for large water users.
The Rudd Government is committed to helping all Australians prepare for a future with less water due to climate change.
In securing Australia's future water supplies, the commercial and industrial sector has an important role to play.
Typically this sector consumes about 15 to 20 per cent of Australia's potable water. Greater water efficiency in this sector helps relieve the pressure on fresh water supplies in urban and regional areas.
Additionally, there are productivity gains and net economic benefits to be made from using less water, as well as environmental benefits.
Applications close 5pm AEST on 30 November 2009 and the winner will be announced at the 2010 Australian Water Association Awards Dinner in March.
For more information on the award and to download the award guidelines and nomination forms visit: www.awa.asn.au/awards or www.environment.gov.au/water


Geraldton in Western Australia has become the first community in Australia to benefit from the Rudd Labor Government's $40 million investment in cycling infrastructure, a key element of the Economic Stimulus Plan.
The funding the Government is providing will support up to 21 local jobs during the current global recession as well as build the permanent facilities that will encourage healthier lifestyles amongst residents and a more sustainable community over the longer term.
Specifically, the City of Geraldton-Greenough will receive $272,000 for three projects:
- The manufacturing and installation of bike racks at nine locations around the City, including Bob Davies Park, Rundle Park, Spalding Park Tennis Club, Tarcoola Tennis Club, Recreation Ground, John Forrest Park, the Waterplay Playground and near the Visitors Centre.
- The construction of 10 new off-road concrete bike paths spanning four kilometres across Geraldton.
- The establishment of three bike lanes along Chapman Road from Phelps Street to Mabel Street, and along Durlacher Street from Highbury Street to Keane Drive and from Maitland Street to Hutchinson Street.
The Council as well as the WA Department of Planning and Infrastructure are also contributing funding to these projects.
The Government would also like to acknowledge and thank the Australian Greens senators for actively supporting the passage of the legislation that has made funding for these projects possible.


PM: This is our sixteenth Community Cabinet meeting around the country since our government was elected at the end of 2007.
The reason we do them is to keep in touch with the Australian community.
It's very easy for somewhere as remote as Canberra from this community of Geraldton and this region for governments, whatever their good intent, to simply become detached from the reality on the ground.
So our discipline from day one has been to go out every six weeks or so to a part of Australia and to bring the cabinet to town and it's the first time the Australian Government, the Commonwealth Government's done that and for us it's been a very important discipline.
And this discipline enables us to find out things we didn't know, find out things that are happening on the ground we didn't know about, programs that we thought we'd agreed to in Canberra are being implemented on the ground only to discover that it's happening in a different way to that which we planned to get that feedback and do things about it; so thank you for coming out in numbers tonight to provide us with that continued feedback to what this government is seeking to do nationwide.
When I was elected as Prime Minister of Australia, I said I wanted to be a Prime Minister for all Australians.
People from big cities and from small towns, from regions and from rural areas, people who work in the cities, people who work on farms, for Indigenous Australians, for non-Indigenous Australians and being here tonight is part and parcel of us reflecting our commitment to that principle. Whether people vote for us or whether they don't, we're elected democratically as the government of Australia and we're here to hear from you - the community - so we look forward to what you've got to say to us later this evening.


The Australian Government today announced financial assistance to help Australians affected by the Samoan tsunami on 30 September 2009 and Sumatra earthquakes on 30 September and 1 October 2009.
The assistance, through the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment and Funeral Assistance Payment, will support the Australian victims of these devastating events, and their families.
This assistance will provide $1,000 per adult and $400 per child to Australians who, as a result of the Samoan tsunami and Sumatra earthquakes:
     * were seriously injured; or
     * were eyewitnesses to the devastating disaster events; or
     * are immediate family members of Australians who have died, been declared missing or seriously injured.
In addition, a one-off payment of $5,000 will be available to one family member to assist with funeral costs and other related expenses.
The payments are available through Centrelink and claims can be lodged immediately and will be open for six months.
Centrelink social workers are also available to help Australians affected by these devastating events when they arrive back home.
Those affected will have access to crisis intervention, personal support, referral and practical assistance through Centrelink.
For information and support, please contact Centrelink on 1800 040 226 or visit your local Centrelink office.


The Rudd Government congratulates Australian-born and educated biologist, Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, who has been named the Nobel Prize winner for Physiology or Medicine.
Professor Blackburn's Nobel Prize has been awarded "for the discovery of how chromosomes are protected by telomeres and the enzyme telomerase".
Telomeres are the protective caps on the ends of our chromosomes. Research into telomeres and the enzyme telomerase has the potential to deepen our knowledge of ageing and disease.
Professor Blackburn is Australia's first female Nobel Laureate and our eleventh Nobel Prize winner.
This is a great day for Australian science.
Professor Blackburn's achievements are an inspiration for all Australian scientists and those considering a career in science, especially young women.
As a nation Australia has made frequent contributions to the world's great discoveries and Professor Blackburn's work continues that proud tradition.
She must also be acknowledged for her reputation as an Australian scientist who places as much weight on the ethics of research as on the practice of science.
Professor Blackburn now stands in great Australian company alongside the likes of Sir Howard Florey, Professor Peter Doherty, and the most recent winners Dr Robin Warren and Professor Barry Marshall.
The Australian Government recognised Professor Blackburn's extraordinary work with the awarding of the Australia Prize in 1998 - the predecessor to the Prime Minister's Prize for Science.
Professor Blackburn is joint winner with collaborators Professor Carol W. Greider and Professor Jack W. Szostak. 


Peter Costello has made an extraordinary contribution to Australian public life over the past two decades.
To have been a member of the Australian Parliament for 20 years is, of itself, a significant achievement. To have been Treasurer of the Commonwealth for almost 12 years is a further credit to Mr Costello's talents and abilities.
Of course, I have not always agreed with Mr Costello.
But nobody can deny the fact that he brought considerable intellectual skills and leadership to the public policy debate in Australia, and internationally.
As Australia's representative on the International Monetary Fund, Mr Costello played a significant role in the decision to establish the G20 finance ministers' meeting following the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98.
The G20 finance ministers' meeting provided the platform for the heads of government meeting, now known as the G20 summit.
The G20, with Australia part of the decision-making process, has played a major role in paving the way for sustainable global economic recovery since the onset of the global financial crisis.
Just a few weeks ago, world leaders agreed to establish the G20 as the leading international institution for global economic decision-making.
During the Asian financial crisis, Mr Costello was also instrumental in providing significant offers of financial assistance to our neighbours, particularly Indonesia, Malaysia and the Republic of Korea.
These were important decisions, taken in our national interest.
The fact that we have good relations with these countries today is in part due to those decisions.
The Australian Parliament will also be poorer for Mr Costello's absence.
He has long been one of the most colourful performers in the Parliament.
Such were his talents that, even for those of us on the receiving end of one of his barbs, it was hard not to laugh, even as you winced in pain.
On behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian Labor Party, I thank Mr Costello and his family, and particularly Tanya, for their contribution to public life, and wish them a happy and successful future.


JOURNALIST: So did you say any prayers for Malcolm Turnbull in there this morning Prime Minister?
PM: No no, we just rock along to church like we normally do. Look, climate change is big for Australia because we are the hottest and the driest continent. Because Australia is the hottest and the driest continent, we need a result for Australia and that is why we are prepared to negotiate in good faith with the Opposition. And for that to occur, for us to get a result for Australia this hottest and driest continent, we need to negotiate on the basis of amendments from the Opposition, in good faith and to get a credible climate change outcome for Australia.
This is serious stuff, this is really serious stuff. Governments around the world are wrestling with this. It is big, it is important, it is real. It is affecting our generation, the one after us and the one after that, big time. So it is actually time to get beyond the politics and get on to the solution.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the Opposition is having two bites of the cherry saying, 'we don't think there should be any deal or negotiation before Copenhagen but we are going to put our amendments forward anyway, because we are being pressured into it by the Government'?
PM: If you are going to be fair dinkum about climate change let's just be realistic about this. Our legislation has been out there since March this year, OK, since March this year. It doesn't take you that long to work out what your position should be. So we want the Liberals to be fair dinkum about this so that we can negotiate in good faith on climate change credible amendments, on financially responsible amendments, to make sure we get a deal for the future.
That is what we are on about, that is what I committed to the Australian people prior to the last election, and we have got to get on with it for this country's future as the hottest and driest continent on earth.
JOURNALIST: We haven't seen you out and about in front of the cameras this week, the Opposition has accused you of deliberately lying low so that they can, I guess, the media concentrates on them eating themselves into a frenzy. What is your response to that?
PM: Well the first thing I would say is, how the Liberals conduct themselves is a matter for the Liberals. Secondly, I have had a truckload of work to do this week, working my way through a whole series of policy matters for the Government and that is what I have been doing. And it has been for me, I have got to say, a fairly standard working week.
Thank you very much.



Health services in northern Tasmania will be boosted by the construction of a new Renal Satellite Service for the Launceston Community Health Centre. The $732,400 project was announced today by the Prime Minister, Parliamentary Secretary for Health Mark Butler and local MP Jodie Campbell during the Prime Minister's visit to Launceston.
The new facility will operate six days a week and have the capacity for 16 renal stations that can treat multiple patients per day.
The number of Australians being diagnosed with kidney disease is increasing at the rate of six per cent per annum and the burden of treating these patients is already keenly felt in Northern Tasmania.
This new facility will help relieve this pressure, and importantly, provide high quality health care in a community setting. This is particularly important when most renal patients require treatment several times a week on an ongoing basis.
The approval processes for the Renal Satellite Unit will be completed during this month (October 2009) and the centre will open in December 2009.
The delivery of this unit will provide an immediate boost in construction jobs, as well as providing long term health care to locals.
Maci Constructions has been appointed to build the Unit.
The funds come from the Rudd Government's $15 million commitment to build an Integrated Care Centre in the local area.


PM: Firstly it's great to be back here with Jodie, and with Lara, and obviously Mark Butler the Parliamentary Secretary for Health. It's great to be back in Tasmania, it's great to be back in Launceston, and it's great to be back for my third visit to Launceston General Hospital.
We the Australian Government have been investing strongly in this Hospital and partnership with the State Government of Tasmania, because this is an area of real health need. Expanding this hospital as we are doing in accident and emergency and in other areas is a critical investment for the future. Also in this area, I'd like to announce that we'll be investing $732,000 to be provided to construct a renal satellite service at the Launceston community health centre in Kingsmeadows.
These funds come from our $15 million commitment to build an integrated care centre in the area and the new facility will operate six days a week and will provide 16 dedicated renal stations. Having just spent some time prior our forum here today talking to patients on dialysis this is a welcome investment, and they are looking forward immensely to this facility coming on stream toward the end of this year. The logic of course is to provide those who need dialysis with access to treatment outside the precincts of the hospital for those who have less acute conditions right now. That makes better use of the hospital facilities but actually increases the overall throughput for those who are in need of this particular service.
What we are seeking to do here in Launceston today more broadly is continue our round of consultations with health communities and hospital communities right around Australia. As Prime Minister, this is my thirteenth consultation together with the Health Minister and others, there have been something like 55 around the country, and again our objective is to road-test the recommendations of the Health and Hospital Reform Commission for the future. We've got to get health and hospitals right for the long term and that means looking carefully not just at the next 12 months but the next 25 years. How do we best prepare for that? And that's we're engaged here with the local community on specific recommendations for the future.
Australian families want to make sure that Governments are not wasting money on health and hospitals in terms of blame games and cost shifts between two levels of Government. We've got to make sure we're getting on with the business of long term health and hospital reform, we have a growing population, we have an ageing population. We've got to get these reforms right for the long term.
If I could just make one other set of remarks prior to taking your questions. If I could say something today about the significance of today's date, the 7th anniversary of the Bali bombings in 2002. 202 people were killed on that day, October the 12th 2002. 88 of those victims were Australians. This is a day which Australians won't forget. It's a day when the families of those who lost their lives, and those who we're injured won't forget either. This has meant that so many lives in Australia, so many families, have been fundamentally changed because of that act of brutal terrorism back then in 2002. So I confidently say that the thoughts, the reflections and prayers of the entire nation are with those who suffered such terrible loss back in the Bali bombings of 2002.
Over to you folks.
JOUNALIST: (Inaudible) forum, the Federal takeover of the health care system will see power centralised in Canberra and it would be a (Inaudible) what would you say to reassure those communities about that (Inaudible)?
PM: Well first of all, we the Australian Government have no specific policy conclusion yet on what we'll be doing for the future, on funding for health and hospitals on one hand health and delivery for health hospital services on the other. We've got a lot of work yet to get though with our State and Territory colleagues on that front. Second point though I'd say is, any future shape of the health and hospital system for Australia must have maximum local, community, and regional input into the decisions that are taken, on how the resources are allocated and how services are delivered most effectively in communities, like Launceston, like this part of Tasmania. It's really important that we get that balance right. As I said we've got some ways to got yet before we reach final policy outcomes, from the Commonwealth point of view and for the States and Territories as well.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister, even though you say that there's quite some time before you'll reach a conclusion, it sounds as though you're fairly (inaudible) on what should happen-
PM: Tell me what they might be.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) is there a date on when we might have a conclusion, a decision?
PM: What I indicated in a presentation earlier today was that we will have focused discussion with the Sates and Territories on the recommendations of the Health and Hospital reform Commission by the end of the year. Our objective then is to road test those recommendations with Premiers and Chief Ministers. Then in the early part of 2010 we the Australian Government will form our conclusions for the future. Having consulted with the States and Territories and we would put that to the States and Territories. As I've said repeatedly around the country, our preference as the Australian Government is to cooperatively arrive at reform conclusions for the future for the health and hospital system for Tasmania and for Australia. 
What I've equally said is that if we can't arrive there cooperatively. As Prime Minister of Australia I've said to the Australian people prior to the election we would go to the people and then seek a mandate. That's our approach, that's the time frame within which we're operating. 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think that what's been important here in Launceston has been the strong theme coming across about the need for maximum local community input into health decisions which are made here on the allocation of resources and on how services are delivered. Many of the comments today came from people for example engaged in primary health care and preventative health care. And preventative health care providers out there saying that their programs are working, and they would want any future reform to compliment that which they were doing well as opposed to substituting or coming in over the top. This is a theme which I picked up in many regional centres around Australia. Whether it's in northern New South Wales, Far North Queensland, or most recently in Geraldton in WA, it is the right emphasis, because these local communities deserve maximum local input into local decision making.
We've got to get the provision of national resources right for the health and hospital system out for the next 25 years. At the same time we've got to maximise local and regional input as to how those resources are best deployed. So here in Launy we've got that message loud and clear about maximising local input and that is a message that we would respect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you also come today to give support to our local Member, Jodie, she's had troubles in the last little while (inaudible)
PM: I'd say two things, first is that I'm here in Launceston because it's time to come to Launceston General Hospital to conduct a forum with the health and hospital community on their response to the recommendations of the Bennett Commission on the future reforms of the system nationwide. This is an important community, it's an important centre in Tasmania. It's an important hospital, and it's important that I hear firsthand what the local community is saying about that.
Secondly, this local member, Jodie has my absolute and full support. She is a fantastic local member and through her interventions we have for example listened very carefully to the needs of this local community, including in the hospital in which we are standing. The fact that we are in a building now which has one of the largest ever capital makeovers which is about to occur in the hospitals history is of some significance. The local member has been in our ear, in our face about the needs of this hospital as an effective local member should do, and the fact there's a hundred million dollars worth of investment going on here, two thirds of which is from us, I think reflects on her strengths and qualities as a local member. Apart from that she's a fantastic person and I know her well. I regard her as a friend.
JOUNALIST: (Inaudible) $3bn black hole in the Coalitions modelling on the ETS why is it that Malcolm Turnbull is propping up (Inaudible)
PM: Let me just go back to the question of climate change. It's time for the Liberals and the Nationals to get serious about acting on climate change. We are living on the hottest and driest continent on earth, but we are not seeing fair dinkum leadership from the Liberals or the Nationals on dealing with the problem. We have this rolling set of excuses as to why they cannot act. Last time the debate was focused on this the Liberals and Nationals said that they hadn't had time to properly examine the government's legislation on climate change. Our legislation has been out there since March. By the time this legislation is voted on come years end it will have been around for nine months.
That is plenty of time for any serious political party with a serious commitment to climate change to have a considered set of amendments which are climate change credible, which are financially responsible to deliver the outcomes we need for Australia and for the planet. So, a month or two ago, in order to postpone the decisions which the Liberals had indicated then they would be making on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation, they said they were going to drop this report, Frontier Economics- well the frontier economics was put out there. 
It had holes all the way through it and as we've seen today with a very significant three billion dollar plus funding gap within it. 
The bottom line is this. The Australian people expect Governments and major political parties to be fair dinkum on acting on climate change at home and abroad. We, the Government, have put forward our carbon pollution reduction scheme. We, the Government, have put forward our renewable energy target. We, the Government, have massive investments currently underway in the renewable energy sector as well as carbon capture and storage, we the government have an active negotiating profile with the Copenhagen negotiations on climate change for global action. That's what we're doing. That's our strategy. We're elected to act on climate change.
It's fundamentally important for Australia's national interest as the the hottest and driest country and continent on earth. Let me say that again- it's fundamentally important for Australia as the hottest and driest continent on earth that we act nationally and globally but what we see instead from the Liberals and Nationals is one excuse after the other about why they can't take a position. Can I just conclude on this one by saying, we have always said we'll engage in good faith negotiations with credible amendments, climate change credible amendments from the Liberals and Nationals but they have to be fair dinkum negotiations and we haven't seen that so far.
JOURNALIST: The Greens are saying-
PM: I'll follow up there and then straight to you.
JOURNALIST: The Greens on that point are saying, well, forget about the Libs come on over and negotiate with us- we've got 32 amendments we want to show you next week. What room is there to do a deal on that front?
PM: Well we've always said that we would work our way through in good faith negotiations, credible, climate change credible amendments, financially responsible amendments on the condition that we can produce and outcome on climate change for Australia and an outcome that Australia can then take to the councils of the world. 
You see what we do nationally through the carbon pollution reduction scheme is really important. What we do internationally in helping to bring about and outcome for the planet or Government- each one is looking at each other waiting for who's going to move first on what. That's equally, and in fact, more important. What we need is national action on climate change. We need global action on climate change because we are on the hottest and driest continent on earth. We have a plan ourselves, but instead we have excuses for inaction from our opponents.
JOURNALIST: Just further on that, do you think there's any room for agreement on any of those amendments that the Greens are putting forward?
PM: To begin with I haven't seen them. And secondly, as I've said, and as the Minister Penny Wong has said she is open to good faith negotiations with all-comers, when it comes to climate change credible and financially responsible amendments which bring about action on climate change- not an excuse for inaction on climate change.
This is bearing down on Australia. This is a real problem for us and for our kid's future. We must act and we are prepared to negotiate in good faith, but they have to be fair dinkum negotiations. 
JOURNALIST: There's a report out this morning that 42 Afghan asylum seekers who's boat exploded off the West Coast are all about to be granted residency in Australia. (Inaudible) does the Australian Government still chose who comes to Australia and under what conditions?
PM: Well first of all, what I'd say in relation to that particular quotation that you referred to, I draw you collective attention as to what happened to all those folk who were on the Tampa at the time when I seem to recall the then Prime Minister saying that none of these individuals would ever set foot on Australia or words to that effect. I think that about half the Tampa caseload ended up in Australia by one means or another and the rest as they say is history. The second point I'd make is that under this Australian government decisions concerning asylum seeker status are of course made independently by the Department of Immigration accessing each applicant on their merits. And can I say further on top of that, that anyone who is not found to be a legitimate asylum seeker will be sent home. It's very simple. That's the system that we have in place. We have independent decision makers who operate within our decision-making framework on that, it's the way it will be for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just a question on a different topic, Tasmanian dairy farmers are worried that they're being left out in the cold, they're saying, India and some European countries are stepping in to protect their dairy industry, and after spending millions on an economic stimulus package they're just wondering if the Australian government will offer some money there as well.
PM: Well first of all I'm not familiar with the given measures that they are referring to in China and India. Secondly, I'll have the agriculture minister examine that and to make further comment to you. Thirdly, I am a big supporter of the dairy industry. I am the son of a dairy farmer. I know far too much about dairy cattle and have grown up in that sort of farm environment. It is tough and competitive out there. For our farm sector and our rural sector the Agriculture Minister Tony Burke has a range of support programs out there for the Australian industry, but on the particular needs here in Tasmania the new competitive pressures they might be under facing, I'll leave it to the Minister to speak further on that.
Thanks folks, got to run.


The Rudd Government will provide $21 million for the first ever nationwide Partnership for Better Health Grants. 
Partnerships for Better Health Grants will help researchers to work directly with health organisations so that research results can be better tailored to real world situations. 
These new types of grants will help ensure the outcomes of research can be applied immediately to health care practice and policy, helping governments and communities that are seeking to implement effective, innovative and proven strategies. 
Partners bring financial support to the projects as well as access to expertise in their own areas. 
The $21 million of grants will be provided through the National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia's peak funding body for health and medical research. 
The announcement comes as the Prime Minister and the Acting Minister for Health Justine Elliot visited Royal Hobart Hospital for a roundtable with local health professionals, to consult on the report of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. 
The 27 unique projects include: 
Improving health and wellbeing in the workplace - $856,250 - Associate Professor Alison Venn of the Menzies Research Institute will work with the Tasmanian State Service to investigate better ways of promoting good health, preventing chronic disease and improving productivity (via the Healthy@Work program).
Towards a national sports safety strategy - $796,990 - Professor Caroline Finch of the University of Ballarat will work with the Australian Football League, NSW Sporting Injuries Committee and others to develop and introduce a sports safety package into community football clubs to reduce injury and improve policy and practice. 
Reducing salt in the Australian diet - $799,242 - this project brings together government, industry and scientists, under the supervision of Professor Bruce Neal from the University of Sydney, with the goal of reducing Australians' salt intake. Prof Neal's team will do this by measuring salt in the diet, identifying the main foods it comes from and determining ways to reduce it. The Government funding will be supplemented by funding and in-kind support from partners including NSW Health and the Australian Food and Grocery Council.
Improving primary health care for Indigenous peoples - $1.569 million - this partnership of Indigenous health services, universities and the Qld, WA, SA and NT governments explores what leads to variation in Aboriginal health care services with the aim of strengthening the quality of health care to Indigenous Australians. Professor Ross Bailie of the Menzies School of Health Research in Darwin will carry out this important research.
Reducing impulsive behaviour in repeat violent offenders - $1.291 million - Associate Professor Tony Butler of the Curtin University of Technology in Western Australia, working with forensic health groups in NSW, has been funded to investigate whether using Selective Serotonin Uptake Inhibitors (SSRIs, generally used to treat depression) can reduce repeat violent offending by reducing impulsive aggression.
Linking place to metabolic syndrome - $290,000 - Professor Mark Daniel of the University of South Australia leads this collaboration involving the SA Health Department and community partners in identifying features of residential areas related to metabolic syndrome (a combination of medical problems including obesity that increase the risk of heart disease and diabetes). The project will use NHMRC funding to provide input to urban planning and public health policies.
Reducing hospital infections through better hand hygiene - $500,000 - , Associate Professor Nicholas Graves at the Queensland University of Technology will work with a number of state and territory health departments and other health organisations to evaluate the impact of the National Hand Hygiene Initiative on reducing healthcare-associated infections in hospitals.
Full details of all Partnerships for Better Health Grants can be found at www.nhmrc.gov.au


PM: It's good to be back in Tasmania. Yesterday I was in Launceston and attended a forum with the Launceston general hospital on their needs and today I have a roundtable with medical and other staff here at Hobart.
This is part and parcel of our nationwide consultations with the health and hospital sector about the Bennett commission's report on the long term reform of the health and hospital system of Australia. Therefore what we are doing is road testing its recommendations, all 123 of them, with the health and hospital communities of the nation.
So far I've addressed some 13, I think today 14, of these around the country I think in most states of the commonwealth and the health minister and her colleagues have spoken at a number of others altogether some 55 such direct consultations in the last few months. And the reason is to get the direct feedback from practitioners in the field about their needs but in particular their concrete responses to the recommendations that have been put forward in the Bennett reform commission report. That's why were here and I'm looking forward to those responses and discussion with the medical community here in Hobart today.
Secondly of course we're here in Hobart to conduct our cabinet meeting at Hobart town hall followed by Community Cabinet later on this evening. We're looking forward to that, it's part of our regular practice as an Australian Government to take the cabinet to the community every month or so. I think the last time we did this was only a few weeks ago in Geraldton in Western Australia and here we are in Hobart today. We have done this in the communities in Arnhem land with Indigenous leaders and the Indigenous community in the Northern Territory, also in North Queensland, in metropolitan Sydney, in parts of Melbourne, Adelaide, the suburbs of Perth, Geraldton again most recently and of course we have done one before in Launceston and we're here today in Hobart and again, what's the point?
The point is to bring Cabinet to the people and to hear the communities response to what the Australian government is doing - good, bad or indifferent. It is part of the business of the Australian government in Canberra keeping in touch with the community and for us that's really important here in Tasmania and finally can I say how great it is to be back in Tasmania itself. I enjoy coming back here. I went to the local gym here this morning and various people commented on my state of physical fitness and I've taken their names and addresses, over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you explain why you rang the Indonesian President in relation to a boatload of asylum seekers?
PM: First of all the assumption underpinning your question is wrong. I often talk to the President of Indonesia and I do so quite frequently, in fact if you were to ask me over the last six months how often I've spoken to President Yudhoyono, it would be on a large number of occasions. 
Secondly I make absolutely no apology whatsoever for taking a hard line on illegal immigration to Australia. Therefore because this is a global and regional problem and a lot of the challenges are faced in Malaysia, Indonesia and elsewhere, it follows that you must work in close cooperation with your friends and partners in the region.
Furthermore in terms of the specific conversation, as I said on Hobart radio this morning we spoke about two sets of things - one was of course the devastation of the recent earthquake in Sumatra and the level of assistance Australia is providing to a natural disaster which has literally seen more than a thousand people killed and huge devastation of property. HMAS Kanimbla will be arriving offshore from Padang before too much longer and we already have many Australian personnel on the ground. 
Secondly on the question of people smuggling, as I have done in the past and will do so in the future, elaborating further practical means of cooperation with the Indonesians on the challenge for Indonesia, the challenge for us, Australia, the challenge for Malaysia, as I've discussed recently with Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia, as I've also discussed in recent times with the Sri Lankan Government as well. It's the right thing to do; it's a global problem; it's a regional problem; it's an Indonesian problem; it's an Australian problem and I believe in taking a hard line, using all the resources available to Australia in dealing with this challenge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on (inaudible level of support for nuclear power. Is it time for Labor to rethink (Inaudible) to perhaps consider it more as an option instead of ruling it out?
PM: Our approach for Australia is that this is a country rich in its own energy options. Part of our response to the challenge of greenhouse gas emissions is to make a large scale investment in carbon sequestration storage, CCS technologies, you all see that through the creation of the GCCSI, the global institute on carbon capture and storage, plus the 2.5 billion dollar, there approximately, investment or co-investment with industry in CCS projects. 
That's really important, go to the quantums. If you look at what China and India are doing, go to mid-century - coal fired electricity generation is currently projected to go to from something around 40% of total electricity generation to something like 54% of electricity generation. That's what's happening, we have a huge challenge to deal with that. 
Secondly, on renewables we have passed through parliament in recent times the increase in renewable energy target to 20% by 2020. We're also directly co-investing with industry again in the largest single solar project in the country's history. Both in terms of what we're doing in partnership with industry but also in solar research and in other categories of renewables therefore, for us in Australia we do not see a nuclear power plant as part of our response to our energy future. Can I say to our opponents, it would be very useful if they 'fessed up about what exactly their policy is. In the past Mr Howard said he wanted to see nuclear power plants around Australia, what's Mr Turnbull's position? Mine is very clear.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister there is a push for more funding for aged care, is it (Inaudible)?
PM: Well when we look at the overall challenge of the health and hospital system you cannot simply chop aged care off and pretend that it's not part of the overall challenge. 
Let me give you a practical example. I don't what the numbers are here at Royal Hobart , I'm sure I'll find out fairly soon but in hospitals around the country it's not a particular Tassie problem, this is an Australian problem. There are a lot of folk who have been classified under the ACAT system, am I right in that Minister? As belonging in high intensity care in aged care facilities but for whom there is not an appropriate aged care bed available, so what happens? Those folk are therefore left in acute beds in hospitals. Problem. 
The cost of supporting people in acute care beds in hospitals is huge and as a result of that, it's a bad result for the taxpayer. It's also a bad result for the families and it's a bad result for people who need access to those acute care beds who are in need of normal surgery and the rest. 
Therefore if you look carefully at the Bennett Commissions report it does deal with the future challenges of aged care. This is a huge long term challenge for Australia, also because of the aging of the population. The Minister has been very active in this area. It is part of the integrated response to the long term shape of our health and hospital system.
JOURNALIST: Are you aware of the campaign that is being launched...
PM: I'm pretty sure I'm about to be.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Community services where they have Kevin87- they have a video of you being aged (inaudible) years and that's kind of their campaign too.
PM: That's a bit scary actually.
JOURNALIST: Are you aware of it?
PM: No I'm not aware of it at all but good luck to them. But you know something we welcome community debate on this. As I said yesterday in the forum in Launy, look, we have an increasing population, an ageing population based on the most recent data, by mid century an Australian population of the vicinity of 30 million.
Ageing population, the overall proportion of our population over 65 and the proportion of our population over 85. On top of that continual costs going through the roof, workforce costs in the health sector going through the roof, put all those things together and we have what the report describes as a health and hospital system at a tipping point.
Therefore you can't just get out a box of bandaids and say we'll stick one here, stick one there, a bit of sticking plaster over here and hope that it all holds together before tomorrow. What we actually need is a systemic examination of the problem and a systemic response of where you need to be for the next quarter of a century. That's what we're trying to do, it's hard, it's difficult and guess what it costs money too and therefore the parallel debate is how are we going to fund this health and hospital system for Australia's future as well.
JOURNALIST: Did you ask the Indonesians to use their navy to intercept the asylum seekers?
PM: We have a range of communications with the Indonesians at all sorts of levels. The business of diplomacy is not to go into the detail of the communications with the Indonesians or with any other foreign government. That is the right way to conduct diplomacy. I repeat what I said however, I make no apology whatsoever for working as closely as I need with our Indonesian friends and partners to get the results we all need in terms of illegal immigration.
JOUNRALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Yeah, yeah I will. I'm told I will anyway
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well look, do you know how many public hospitals there are in Australia? 750. And they are big, they are medium and they are small. My job as Prime Minister of the country is to look at system needs in the whole state of Tasmania and the whole country. And therefore where does this hospital for example, in servicing the good people of Hobart need to be in 25 years time. I don't have the magical answer to that in my head. 
What we have, however, is a response from the health reform commission which says long term investment for hospital funding needs to be put on a secure footing matched to population growth and matched to emerging health needs rather than, as I said, a bandaid for this week and a piece of sticking plaster for the next week. Also the health reform commission has some pretty stark recommendations. 
One of the recommendations is that the Australian government should move towards full funding responsibility for all the health system and the hospital system with exception of 60% of the costs for acute hospital services. It also has a second recommendation which is moving beyond that first recommendation longer term to assuming full funding responsibility for the hospital system as well. What we are looking at in today's consultations here in Hobart is the communities response to that longer term. As I said, it's important to get beyond what's needed for the next week, six weeks and three months and twelve months, for what we need for the next twenty five years. 
Can I just add though, the Australian health care agreement that the Health Minister negotiated with the state and territory health ministers in the end of 2008 - a $62 billion dollar agreement represents a 50% increase on the Australian governments allocation to the states and territories for health and hospitals, compared with the previous health care agreement for previous five years. 
That is a substantial new investment from the Australian government. And that's quite aside from capital investments like the $40-50 million dollar investment in the Menzies research institute just around the corner from here engaged in critical translational research initiatives concerning diabetes, concerning cardiovascular complaints and other complaints as well. So we have to look system wide.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of diplomacy, without going into the detail, given your recent discussions in the US with the Japanese Prime Minister were you led to any hope that Japan would either reduce or abandon its whaling season this summer?
PM: The discussions with our friends in Tokyo continue at a diplomatic level, our position is absolutely clear about what end point we wish to get to. I'm respectful of the fact that we have a new government in Japan. I had a very good far ranging discussion with Prime Minister Hatoyama. We have more such discussions to have in the future. Also, as you know the Environment Minister is directly engaged with his American and Japanese counter parts as well.
JOURNALIST: Back on the local front one of the big Tasmanian issues is always going to be the Midland highway. It's shaping as a big State election issue at the moment, you had the pleasure of driving on the road last month. What were your thoughts on the condition of the road and is there going to be any federal assistance for an upgrade?
PM: Well I think when it comes to the Midland highway, correct me if I'm wrong, but we are currently investing some $160 million dollars-
KERR: $190. 
PM: $190 million dollars, thank you. You always need to keep your local member next to you. And that's practical and immediate investment now to improve the quality of the road. I don't wish to buy into the state political debate on this, but let me do so. It's very easy for a State Opposition to go out there, mysteriously on the eve of a State election and say, 'wacko, we're going to invest a couple of million dollars into the dual carriageway or whatever it is of the Midland highway'. Very easy thing to say, very hard thing to do. 
I'm in the practical business which is the investment in this States' overall transport infrastructure needs. Our investment in transport infrastructure in the first two years of this Government, compared with the last two years of the Howard Government has increased by some 63%. That's practical stuff including this $190 million investment for the Midlands highway. That's what we're about - practical investments within the envelope of fiscal sustainability.
JOURNALIST: Mr Ruddock last week said (inaudible) asylum seekers (inaudible) for a while.
PM: Can I just say on that. It seems to be that Phillip Ruddock was also that Minister who said that asylum seekers had thrown their kids overboard. I therefore place zero credibility on anything that Phillip Ruddock says about anything since that time. Anything he says about that subject at any time. In one fell swoop he destroyed his credibility to make comments on this issue. Secondly as I said before we make no apology whatsoever in terms of the series of hardline measures we are taking in relation to people smuggling and in relation to illegal immigration.
In terms of the series of hardline measures that we are taking in relation to people smuggling, and in relation to illegal immigration, we have a significant new investment right across the nation in terms of police resources, security collaboration with our friends and partners in the region, including Indonesia- to deal with a region-wide problem. There has been recently a very large and brutally fought civil war in Sri Lanka. That is leading to a huge set of pressures, push pressures in the entire region. That's what's happening.
Therefore all regional countries are in the practical business of working against that particular challenge. One other thing- I seem to see also that Mr Ruddock is calling for the reintroduction of what's called Temporary Protection Visas. Can I just draw to your attention that after the Howard Government brought in Temporary Protection Visas which he now calls for the reintroduction of today, and the reintroduction of the Pacific Solution, that after that occurred in 1999, do you know how many additional illegal- how many additional asylum seekers came to Australia?
In the next two years, nearly 10,000, on nearly 100 boats. That's in the two years immediately following the introduction of TPVs. So I would say to those who want to bring back TPVs, who want to bring back the Pacific Solution, ask yourself this question- what is the record in the two years immediately following the introduction of these measures? And secondly, why did the Howard Government spend more on the Pacific Solution than it did in fact in the actions that were necessary on the high seas, and through our naval resources and others in dealing with the practical problem on the ground?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does the Government need to be flexible with stimulus spending if the economy keeps improving?
PM: On the question of stimulus, let me just make a few points. First is, the Government's economic infrastructure stimulus strategy is working. That is why Australia has the fastest growth of all the 33 advanced economies in the world. Why it has the lowest unemployment of all the major advanced economies in the world. Why we are the only major advanced economy not to have gone into recession. And we've had the lowest debt, and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies. Now they are matters of record.
Secondly, if you look at the structure of our stimulus strategy, it already has built into it an acceleration and a deceleration, that's the way in which its planned. What's stimulus supposed to be? Targeted, temporary, and timely, in order to make a difference on the real economy, and jobs, which has been front and centre for us. Of our first stimulus package, 93% of that has already been spent. Of the total stimulus strategy, by the end of the current financial year, some two thirds will have already been invested. That's what it means being targeted, temporary, and timely.
If you were to take the recommendation of certain people, and to bring about the total and immediate withdrawal of stimulus, think about what the implications would be. As the Secretary of the Treasury said only the other day, if you were to withdraw the scheduled stimulus investments for 2010/11, just overnight, the impact would be reduced growth of 1.5%. And a loss of an additional 100,000 jobs.
That is the consequences of this sort of call. As the Treasurer said yesterday, we will always, and have always, kept our fiscal policy settings under review, consistent with emerging economic circumstances and consistent also with global economic data, which at present is still very patchy. But I'd just conclude by saying this. Mr Turnbull, for the first six months of this year, said that there were three priorities for the Australian Government. Jobs, jobs, and jobs. And suddenly, jobs disappeared from his language in recent months. Jobs, jobs, jobs from Mr Turnbull has now turned into silence, silence, silence. Now I wonder why that is. Can I just go to the actual impact of what we have done through stimulus, and in turn, its impact on jobs.
My challenge to Mr Turnbull today is to come out and to repeat his statement of the first six months of the year, that the first three priorities of the Australian Government should be jobs, jobs, jobs. Why has he suddenly gone silent?
You see, if you were to take his plan, which is for the total and immediate withdrawal of all stimulus, the impact will be to throw a huge number of Australians into unemployment. And what you would have as a direct consequence of Mr Turnbull's call for the immediate withdrawal of all stimulus is unemployment queues snaking all around the suburbs, and outside every CES office. This Government stands for jobs. We are unapologetic about that.
And we'll continue with that strategy for the future.


HOST: Kevin Rudd, are you there?
PM: Your optimism was misplaced Tim, I got cut off.
HOST: I apologise for that and a very good morning to you it's great to have you with us.
PM: Are you in an echo chamber or something mate?
HOST: I'm in a planetarium if you don't mind, where are you?
PM: Well that's what you do of a Tuesday morning, you go to a planetarium. I'm in downtown Hobart. It's great to be back in Hobart.
HOST: Now let's get down to a couple of issues that are certainly going to be prominent today. First is this suggestion that Nielsen poll in the Age today says that Australians are warming to the idea or perhaps just less opposed to the idea of nuclear power as a way out of a climate change difficulty in the future 49% now support the use of nuclear power in Australia. Where does your government stand on that?
PM: Well we believe that whereas some counties around the world have no alternative but to use nuclear power, that is not the case in Australia. We do not support nuclear power plants in Australia and I would be interested to hear where the liberals now stand on that. In the past they left open the possibility of nuclear power plants around Australia. We have a rich range of energy options in Australia, we are working on those, clean coal initiatives, renewable energy initiatives, solar initiatives, large scale solar initiatives. We believe we've got a rich array of energy options for the future that's what we are working on, that doesn't include nuclear power plants scattered around Australia.
HOST: Do you not think that there's any place for nuclear in Australia? Almost 50% of Australians now according to this poll think it might, you know, be a useful adjunct.
PM: My job as Prime Minister is to act in the national interest. The national interest for Australia lies in, first of all, acting on greenhouse gas emissions, passing a carbon pollution reduction scheme through the Australian Parliament and secondly, participating constructively and qualitatively in a global outcome on greenhouse gas emissions at Copenhagen at the end of this year. That's what's important now. 
For Australia what we also need to be doing is investing in renewable energy which is why the government put through the parliament an increase in the renewable energy target to 20% by 2020. That's 20% of Australia's electricity generation coming from renewable energy by then. That's what we're doing. That's where our policy priorities lie. That's what we believe is in the national interest.
HOST: The Lowy Institute poll says that climate change and global warming are slipping down the list of security concerns for Australia, is the government perhaps out of step then with the concerns of everyday Australians? The sort of Australians that you're talking about?
PM: Well again Tim our responsibility is to the long term national interest. We live on the hottest and driest continent on earth. We have a responsibility for our kids, for our grandkids, for the future of our environment, and for the future of our economy. That means acting on climate change whether it's popular or not. Therefore that's why the government has brought in the renewable energy target and increased to 20%. That's why we have sought now already on one occasion to have the parliament passed but the liberals have opposed it, the carbon pollution reduction scheme.
That's why Mr Turnbull seems to be using every device known to man to avoid a substantive debate and a substantive vote on the future of the carbon pollution reduction scheme before Copenhagen. And on top of that Copenhagen at the end of the year brings together all the economies around the world; what we need is a global outcome on climate change as well, with Australia playing its part, otherwise we put at risk this continent which is already the hottest and the driest on earth. 
HOST: Ross Garnaut was pretty critical about the way in which Australia is stepping up to the plate on climate change and global warming though, and in relation of course to that, the ETS etcetera. How do you respond to what Ross Garnaut said last night on 7:30?
PM: Well the carbon pollution reduction scheme, if you're seeking to put something as complex as that through, first of all a community consultation, secondly through a consultation with all the arms of Australian industry and their peak bodies and then thirdly try and herd into a single room all the factions which currently make up the divided rabble otherwise called the Federal coalition and the Federal Liberal party.
Let me tell you it's a very un-pretty process to watch. Had we had instead, I've got to say, a liberal party which can have a unified position on climate change over the last six to nine months, the period of time that the government's legislation has been out there, we would have had a better debate in the national interest, to work in the national interest.
HOST: It's a complicated matter Prime Minister, perhaps that's why it's taking this many months to get though. We're almost out of time and I appreciate yours of course. I must ask about a story in the West Australian today about the Indonesian navy swooping on a boatload of asylum seekers headed for Australia, 260 of them, and a conversation you have with President Yudhoyono from Indonesia. What did you talk to President Yudhoyono about and what role did the Australian and Indonesian navies play in the fate of these asylum seekers?
PM: Well first of all the Australian Government makes no apology whatsoever for deploying the most hardline measures necessary to deal with the problems of illegal immigration into Australia. No apology whatsoever. Secondly I'm in regular contact with President Yudhoyono. When we spoke over the weekend we spoke about two sets of matters. 
One of course dealt with the most recent and tragic earthquake in Sumatra and HMAS Kanimbla has been dispatched to offer assistance there and secondly of course we talked about our continued cooperation on people smuggling - as we've discussed in the past and as I'll continue to discuss with him in the future.
Working with our friends in the region it's important to deal with this because of the huge push factors coming from political disturbances in Sri Lanka and Afghanistan and the wider Middle East. This is a problem for all countries in the region - that's why we work closely with our friends in Jakarta.
HOST: Sorry Prime Minster we're out of time - I would have like to have pursed that with you a little further. But I thank you indeed for your time this morning. 
PM: Good to be back in Hobart. Thanks.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: Welcome to South Australia.
PM: Good to be back, I'm on my way to Murray Bridge at the moment.
HOST: And what are you going to do in Murray Bridge? We have very little information about that.
PM: At Murray Bridge, I'm speaking with a representative group of rural doctors. The Health Minister and myself around Australia at the moment consulting with health and hospital communities on long term reform of the system, and out for the next 25 years. So we're not just doing the major hospitals, so in the past I've kept up with a seminar of medicos at the Flinders Medical centre in Adelaide. Today it's actually going to talk to rural doctors who are dealing with a different set of challenges. That's what we're doing at Murray Bridge.
HOST: And will you be in South Australia for long?
PM: I'll be here today and tomorrow so I'm looking forward to catching up with a range of people while I'm here, and always good to be back in South Australia.
HOST: Prime Minister you've had to take what some people regard as an extraordinary measure of having a conversation with the Indonesian President to have a boat carrying 260 asylum seekers stopped by the Indonesian navy. How often will you be able to pull that card out of your hat?
PM: Well the thing I'd say is that as Prime Minister of the country I'm required to act in the national interest. What does that mean when it comes to illegal immigration? It means that because this is a global and regional problem- you've got violence in Afghanistan, violence in the Middle East. You've got recent civil war in Sri Lanka. 
All countries around our region are facing these challenges. Therefore you've got to act collaboratively. I speak to the President of Indonesia on a regular basis, and recently I spoke to him about not just the problems of the earthquake in Sumatra and what we're doing to assist there, but about our continued collaboration on people smuggling in regard to the challenge for Indonesia. I regard it as a challenge for Indonesia and Australia, and we therefore are working very closely together on how to continue to lift our cooperative efforts to deal with the scourge of people smugglers, as they represent the vilest form of people on the planet.
HOST: Are you prepared to make that kind of phone call again?
PM: Well, as I said I speak to President Yudhoyono on a regular basis, but as I've said cooperation on people smuggling and all the other bilateral interests we've got with the Indonesians, we have a very close collaborative relationship.
HOST: Is that a yes?
PM: Well I'm just saying, as I said before, I spoke on the weekend about people smuggling. I've done that before, in previous weeks and months, and over the two years that I've been Prime Minister, and I'll continue to do so in the future. It's the right thing to do in the national interest, because we have huge push factors out there affecting so many countries in the region. We maintain an unapologetic tough line on border security, and a humane approach in dealing with people but at the same time that requires also very practical levels on coordination with the regional partners.
HOST: Prime Minister would you consider reintroducing temporary protection visas? Would you consider opening the Baxter detention centre again if need be?
PM: Well, on the first question you raised which is about TPVs. When the Howard government introduced these in 1999 what we saw in the two years subsequent to that was arrivals, unauthorised arrivals in Australia, go through the roof. Any argument which the Liberals now advocate that this somehow represented a magic solution for dealing with the problem of unauthorised arrivals in Australia is fundamentally undermined by the facts. The second thing that I'd say is, when we moved to abolish TPVs, temporary protection visas, in the Parliament, the Liberals did not vote against it. 
They had every opportunity to do so. This is opportunistic politics, and as I said the measure itself does not stand up to scrutiny in terms of acting as a deterrent in terms of unauthorised arrivals. On the other point you raise, which is about where people should be appropriately processed we are using, obviously, Christmas Island, that has been constructed by the Howard Government after they introduced their measures back in 2001- obviously anticipating that there were going to be further arrivals down the track. It's a significant facility that's what we're primarily relying on dealing with our current challenges.
HOST: So would you consider reopening Baxter?
PM: We have no such plans whatsoever, and I was just speaking to the Immigration Minister about this at the community cabinet meeting in Hobart yesterday and we are dealing, as appropriate, through our reception facilities on Christmas Island and that's where our Navy is very active in interdicting vessels, bringing them to Christmas Island. Our Indonesian partners are very active as well, interdicting vessels. We've also succeeded in 81 separate disruptions in partnership with our Indonesian friends. We've also brought prosecutions relating to 48 individuals involved in the people smuggling business. This is the right way to go.
HOST: You were elected on an expectation of more humane treatment of asylum seekers. Where is the humanity in having Indonesia turn back a boat load of people?
PM: I said before that our approach to people smuggling, and our approach asylum seekers is tough, but humane. We maintain a hardline approach when it comes to people smuggling without apology.
HOST: So you think turning back a boat is humane?
PM: At the same time in dealing with those who need to be processed we will do so in a manner consistent with the provisions of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees and the procedures relevant to that. Furthermore, we've abolished the Pacific solution. We've abolished Temporary Protection visas and we have taken children from behind the razor wire. These are important measures that we said we would take prior to the last election and we've honoured each one of them.
HOST: Is it easier to do those things though when you haven't got a lot of people turning up on your shores? And there was a decline in the last few years leading up to the Federal election and there has been a decline in numbers. Now as the numbers start to grow again, will it be difficult for you to maintain that policy?
PM: We believe we've got the balance right. Tough measures on border security, investing significant additional resources as well coming out of the previous budget, but also a humane approach to processing. Can I say also, when you raised the question of numbers, let's just be very frank about this, we've had boats arriving in Australia each year for the last 20 years. In the period of the Howard government we had nearly 250 boats arrive with nearly 15,000 people.
In the two years I've been Prime Minister we've had about 38 boats arrive with about 1,800 people. Now, this has been a challenge for a long, long time. The key thing is to have a tough, hard-nosed approached to border security, dealing with the vile species who are represented by smugglers on the one hand, and a humane approach to our international obligations on the other. We believe we've got that balance right.
HOST: Prime Minster, safe travels in South Australia for the next day or so.
PM: I appreciate that very much.
HOST: And we appreciate you calling us.


The people of Murray Bridge will feel the benefit of increased financial incentives to attract doctors and then keep them, as a result of the Rudd Government's Rural Health Workforce Strategy.
Following the reclassification of Murray Bridge as 'inner regional' from 1 July 2010, doctors may be eligible to receive retention grants for the first time, starting at $2,500 after one year and growing to $12,000 after five years.
In addition, doctors who move to the Murray Bridge area from a major city may be eligible for a relocation grant of $15,000.
The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and the Minister for Indigenous Health, Rural and Regional Health and Regional Services Delivery, Warren Snowdon, were in Murray Bridge today to hear first hand from local health professionals on the ground.
The Prime Minister and Minister Snowdon toured the Bridge Clinic, outlined the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's recommendations, and listened to local health professionals as they outlined their priorities for the future of the health system.
The consultation with rural doctors and stakeholders at TAFE SA Murray Bridge is the 58th across the country to road-test the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's proposed reforms.
The NHHRC report made recommendations for system-wide changes to Australian health care.
All Australians are able to send in their comments and contribute to the national debate on our health system via the yourHealth.gov.au website.
Copies of the NHHRC report are on the website, along with the two other reports presented to the Australian Government - the draft of the National Primary Health Care Strategy and the report of the National Preventative Health Taskforce, which also made recommendations in their areas of expertise. 


PM: First of all, it's good to be back in South Australia, good to be here again at Murray Bridge. So I'm told it's the first time an Australian Prime Minister has visited Murray Bridge. At least, that's what the Mayor told me earlier today.
The reason we are is to continue our consultations nationwide on future directions in health and hospitals reform. This is fundamentally important for the nation, not just to tinker at the edges but to look at what reforms we need for the next quarter of a century. In fact, so far we've had too much tinkering at the edges, to many bandages applied, too many band-aids applied. What we need for the nation is root and branch reform.
That's why the Government commissioned the National Health Reform Commission report, and what we've been doing is road-testing its 123 recommendations around the nation. This is the 15th direct consultation around Australia that I've been engaged in myself, and Warren, the Minister, together with Nicola, the Health Minister, together with other Ministerial colleagues, have conducted between a total of 58 consultations around the country.
We're road-testing these recommendations with various health communities with different challenges around Australia, and of course when we come to a community like that of Murray Bridge, we are confronting the particular challenges of delivery of services to rural communities. The Rural Doctors Association have assisted us in these deliberations today, and plainly there are challenges to make sure that you've got a proper supply of medical staff and other health professionals coming to rural centres, rural and regional Australia as well.
That's one of the reasons why the Government has been forthright in its reforms through the rural and remote workforce package which was announced in this year's Budget which significantly increases the incentives available to GPs to relocate from metropolitan Australia to rural Australia, and depending on the degree of remoteness, so do the incentive packages vary.
So as a consequence of changes to the system, there is in the past, under the Howard Government, what GPs were entitled to by way of relocation was a $5,000 payment after six years of continuous service in a rural area. What we have brought about is a radical change to that which provides a $15,000 one-off relocation incentive and then subsequent to that annual incentive payments for retention ranging from $2,500 for one year up to $12,000 after five years and continuing into the future.
That represents, for someone out there in the field an incentive package worth somewhere north of $30,000, and potentially up to $50,000. We're determined to make a difference with this new set of incentive arrangements so that young medical graduates coming through metropolitan training have a real financial incentive to serve in rural areas as well.
However, that's just one part of reform for long-term health delivery in rural and regional Australia. Today, together with the health professionals here at the Bridge Clinic we've been talking about other support mechanisms which have been put to us a necessary for the future, including helping with the expansion of primary health care capital facilities as well. As you know, the Government's rolling out GP superclinics across the country and one of the discussions we've had today is how do we tailor a program like that to the expansion of existing GP superclinic-type facilities which already exist in rural and regional areas in particular.
The last thing I'd say about that is this new system that we have brought in now makes 40 different rural communities around South Australia eligible for this range of incentive payments that we have brought in. We are determined to improve the delivery of health and hospital care for rural and regional Australia. This is one practical step in that direction.
The last thing I'd say before taking your questions is the AMA has put out its report card on public hospitals across Australia, and its report card on the state of public hospitals is almost universally bleak. Can I say this about the AMA's report - I basically agree with them. There is a real problem out there, and therefore the Australian Government, rather than simply pushing this problem under the carpet, believes it's time we had a fully fledged national debate about how fix the system for the long term.
You can't do that by cutting here and cutting there or putting a band-aid here or putting a band-aid there - it is root-and-branch reform that is necessary. So therefore what this Government's determined to do is provide national leadership to bring focus to the long-term reforms that are necessary for our health and hospital system for the next quarter of a century.
Then - then - we will start to see a turnaround in the system because what we are dealing with now is the record of a decade of plus neglect, of the Australian dis-investing in the nation's public hospital system. We've turned that around with the Australian health care agreement of the end of 2008. That deals with the current five years, but beyond that there is a long-term reform program which is necessary. Health and hospitals, the delivery of health services to the Australian community, is one of the fundamental responsibilities of Government.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what went wrong, then, with the $600 million boost to elective surgery (inaudible)
PM: Well, that investment has provided for 41,000 elective surgeries which would otherwise not have occurred. We have said consistently that that, of itself, is not going to reduce waiting lists for elective surgeries. Do you know why? As soon as you move through the list of those currently registered on elective surgery waiting lists others who had not put their names onto the waiting list rapidly emerge onto it for the first time.
So this has been, for us, simply an interim measure - we've always said that, an interim measure - to assist state and territory governments on the way through, but if you were to say to those 41,000 Australians that have been the direct beneficiaries of those elective surgery procedures around the country, that is better than nothing, that is an improvement on what was, but it doesn't deal with the long-term, structural problem which underpins elective surgery waiting lists nation-wide.
The other thing I'd say is this: until you fix primary health care, until you've fixed aged care, and you've fixed the other pressures which are bearing down the system you are constantly going to have a problem with bed blocking within the system, and as a result you're constantly going to have surgical beds which are occupied by folk preventing those in need of elective surgery to obtain the surgery they need.
Furthermore, long-term, you'll see in the Health Reform Commission's report specific recommendations which go to the separation of elective surgery from emergency surgery in the way in which hospitals conduct their business in the future, and that's one of the recommendations we've been road testing with hospitals around the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you going to penalise the states for not meeting these targets?
PM: Well, we have a hardline approach to improving the health and hospital system nationwide. If you look at the detail of the statement we made at the end of 2008 when we negotiated a 50 percent increase in the Australian Healthcare Agreement with the states and territories, we at that time insisted on a range of performance benchmarks being met. This data is now being collected and will be published over a period of time.
We intend to hold the states and territories accountable against that data. That's why we're in the reform business. This is tough, and remember we are also dealing with a history of the previous Australian Government pulling a billion dollars out of the Australian public hospital system. We are re-investing back into a hospital system, but one which has suffered from a decade plus of neglect.
JOURNALIST: Should there be a single funding source for hospitals?
PM: One of the things we're obviously road-testing with the states and territories is how we structure roles and responsibilities for the future, funding responsibilities being one, and how that's delivered, and the actual delivery of services on the other, and how that is done. That's why we're seeking views from the various health regions and hospitals that we've spoken to so far. There are a range of different views. We haven't reached a landing point ourselves on that yet and won't do so for some time.
JOURNALIST: The AMA (inaudible) benchmarks which encourage hospitals to hide the people who are waiting for elective surgery by not putting them on the official waiting list. How do you respond?
PM: Well, we will take a very dim view indeed of any attempt by any state government, whatever their political persuasion, of somehow being cute with critical data on emergency surgery or on elective surgery or on emergency department presentations. We want real data. We want to know the absolute facts of what's happening out there.
We want to know what's working and what's not and how you can fix that. We're in the long-term reform business, but to inform that you need to have absolute confidence in the data. That's why we agreed on those performance benchmarks in the Australian Healthcare Agreement of December 2008. We intend to collect that data and to analyse it, and we'll take a very dim view indeed of any data that is cooked by anybody.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's news today that Defence and Immigration are in talks about possibly re-opening Baxter to house potential asylum seekers. Can you please clarify your view on whether Baxter should be re-opened?
PM: I've already answered that in a radio interview this morning, that we have no such plan.
JOURNALIST: Will there be any consideration of bringing anyone on to mainland Australia?
PM: The Government's current operation is to use Christmas Island. That's what it's there for. It has a large detention facility. And that's where the processing occurs. The Minister has already indicated that he has contingency plans for the expansion of the operation on Christmas Island, and beyond that, the Minister has already indicated also, further contingency arrangements in terms of facilities in and around Darwin. This is a challenge which all countries around the region are dealing with. Huge push factors coming out of political instability in Afghanistan. A civil war in Sri Lanka. Other instabilities across the Middle East. Countries around the world are dealing with the same challenge. Our job, and I make no apology for it, is to take a hard-line approach in dealing with the challenge of illegal immigration. That's why we've deployed our naval assets, our customs assets, and our other resources into the region, in partnership with the Indonesians and others, to deal with the challenge for us all.
JOURNALIST: What happens when Christmas Island fills up? You're putting tents and other accommodation there. What happens when you-
PM: I am absolutely confident that the Minister has in hand a range of contingency planning to deal with challenges across the region. Let me just go to, also, the successes which have been delivered by the Minister and his agency, and others so far in dealing with this challenge. There have been 81 successful interruptions or disruptions of illegal immigration movements to Australia.
There have been already, I think, some 44 charges or prosecutions. We are currently working on a range of others with the Indonesian and other authorities. This is what our men and women in uniform, out there on the high seas, out there in this difficult zone are doing at present. This is a challenge facing all of us. And it's going to be tough into the future. I accept that. Other Governments are finding this challenge tough as well.
JOURNALIST: Would you give Indonesia access to satellite imagery and surveillance to help them play a part in this?
PM: How we engage diplomatically with the Indonesians is a matter for the Indonesian Government and ourselves using confidential diplomatic communications. On the questions of security intelligence and information, the longstanding convention of Australian Governments is that we do not comment, and I don't intend to change that practice.
JOURNALIST: In dealing with Indonesia and boatpeople being turned around and sent back, your pledge has to been to treat them with dignity, care and fairness in the name of humanity. Number one, is that treating them with care? And number two, is that your idea of your own Pacific solution?
PM: I make no apology whatsoever for adopting a hardline approach when it comes to illegal immigration activity, and I make no apology whatsoever having a hardline and humane approach to dealing with asylum seekers. That's the balance the Australian community expects of us. You see, when it comes to dealing with this challenge, this is not a unique problem for this Government.
We've had vessels arriving in Australia with asylum seekers on for each year for the last 20 years. In the period of the Howard Government, there were nearly 250 vessels that arrived here in Australia, carrying nearly 15,000 asylum seekers. And I'm advised that some 90% of those ended up settling in Australia.
Let's just put all of this into some historical context. In the period this Government's been in, we've had something like, I think, 38 vessels arrive, probably with about 1800 people. It's a challenge. But it's consistent with the challenges we've faced in the past as well. We make no apology for hardline measures in dealing with the challenge of illegal immigration. No apologies whatsoever in dealing with, also, the vermin who are people smugglers.
We will take the harshest and hardest measures possible in dealing with that. And on top of that, ensuring that when we are processing asylum seekers, we do so humanely. If they are not bona fide asylum seekers, then we send them back. And guess what? We've already started sending some back, including to Sri Lanka.
I notice there's some criticism also on this question from Mr Turnbull and the Liberal party today. Well, can I just say this- Mr Turnbull's recommended course of action to deal with illegal immigration is to hold an inquiry. Can I say that if you're dealing with the challenge of illegal immigration, holding an inquiry doesn't help one bit. What is required is action.
Action of the type that we are taking out there in the zone at present. Secondly, it's very easy for someone like Mr Turnbull and the Liberals to shout from the sidelines, rather than coming up with practical courses of action as we have done in dealing with the problem at hand. The third thing is this- ask yourself this question- what is the unified position of the Liberal party on illegal immigration, on the future of TPVs, on the future of the Pacific solution? Mr Turnbull's Liberal party on this, as on other things, is split right down the middle. And frankly, I do not know where they stand on this.
Given that, when the Government abolished TPVs, the Liberal party did not oppose that in the Senate. When the Government abolished the Pacific solution, the now Shadow Immigration Minister fully supported the Government's action. This is a Government- this is a political party- the liberal party, which is playing politics with this.
JOURNALIST: With the change in international circumstances as you've described in the past 18 months, does that not require perhaps a rethink and change of policy?
PM: Well, we believe we've got the balance right in a hardline approach to illegal immigration, and treating the people who we are required to process in a humane fashion. You can do this if you intelligently deploy the assets of your Government. As I said, this is not a problem which is unique to this Government. Previous Australian Governments have had to deal with this.
Governments around the world are now dealing with the same sort of challenge, including in Malaysia and Indonesia, and those in Europe, particularly coming out of the political instability recently in Sri Lanka. We are deploying not just more Naval and Customs assets into the area than the previous Government did, but on top of that, courtesy of the last budget, an additional $625 million investment in additional security cooperation, in additional Police cooperation, in additional intelligence cooperation with our friends and partners in the region to make a difference.
We believe this is the right balance, and we will always, always, continue to fine-tune our response based on new and emerging challenges. That's what all Governments do around the world. We believe we've got the balance right. And I've got to zip because I'm due in Adelaide.
JOURNALIST: We have- some local media- would like to ask a couple of questions on the rural health issue.
PM: If you've got one question on that- I'm sorry, I should've asked you that.
JOURNALIST: Yes, yes.
PM: Can I get set one question for you please, locally, then I've got to zip.
JOURNALIST: We're just wondering if the Federal Government takes over the health system, how you plan to help the smaller rural hospitals that are faltering at the moment. They have a lack of doctors. Money's not always the issue. Are they going to become viable under your takeover, or will they become glorified aged care facilities?
PM: Look, can I just say this to you- the single biggest change when it comes to rural doctors and the incentives which apply to them have been taken by this Government in the package of measures I referred to about 10 or 15 minutes ago. In the past, if you wanted to be a GP relocating from metropolitan Adelaide to communities like this, at best you could hope for after 6 years continued service is an additional $5,000.
JOURNALIST: These are communities that-
PM: Can I just finish my answer to your question? And secondly, what we have now done is create a series of incentive payments, which as I said aggregate up to $30,000, as much as $50,000 over a period of time, to encourage GPs to come here, and to stay here. Furthermore, can I say in response to the last part of your question, the more remote you are from the capital city, the greater the set of incentives we offer. We are acutely mindful of small rural health practices and services which need extra support in terms of people coming there and staying there.
That's why we are here today speaking with the rural doctors and rural health association because this set of reforms is important. As I said in meeting with the community here at Murray Bridge earlier today, as Prime Minister of Australia I am responsible for the entire health system. That means big cities, small country towns. It means indigenous communities. It means the spectrum of services in between. And rural Australia is just as important as the rest of Australia. And having said that, I've got to zip.


BYNER: Now Mr Rudd, you're very proud to tell us, and it's true that we have weathered the economic storm better than any other nation on earth. By there are some very significant challenges for you right now.
PM: Well that's true Leon and it's a challenge which we're responsible for because we're the elected Government of the country. We have just been through and are still in the middle of the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago. And what we've done here as Australia is act early, decisively, effectively, with interest rates being brought down rapidly by the Reserve Bank, a lot of fiscal policy work done by the Government through the Economic Stimulus Strategy, and the result? What we've done so far in this economy is produce one which has had the fastest growth off all the major advance economies of the world, the second lowest unemployment, the only one not to go into recession, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. 
But you know something? The challenges out there in the global economy are still very real and it's a very uncertain track to global economic recovery.
BYNER: Prime Minister, let's look at some of these things in detail. First of all, the emissions trading scheme. Now both Nick Xenophon and the Opposition have asked, the Treasurer recently said there's a big, multi-billion dollar hole in the alternative proposal from Frontier Economics -
PM: Three billion.
BYNER: Yeah, ok. Now from the information that I've given to Nick Xenophon and back, he's told me as have the Opposition that your Government will not release the precise economic modelling with regards to your scheme. Because commentators are telling us and it's frightening to think that if your scheme goes through, we will be paying significantly more for everything we buy, no matter what it is.
PM: Well firstly on the question of transparency, you know something, I couldn't have come up with a more transparent process that the Government has engaged in with the Australian community for the last two years on our pre-election commitment to introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, an emissions trading scheme. 
And what we have done is we've gone to green papers, white papers, formal modelling by the Treasury, we've gone to draft legislation, full legislation. Our full legislation has been out there since March of this year yet still, because Mr Turnbull and the Liberals are split right down the middle, they have no position to bring to the table. 
And my challenge to them is as it's always been, is we will negotiate in good faith, but we want to see your amendments and it think that's a fair and reasonable question to ask. Amendments which are climate change credible - here we are in South Australia as part of a continent which the hottest and driest on planet, where the impacts of climate change will be felt first and hardest - so the amendments have to be climate change credible, they have to be financially responsible, and three billion dollars ain't financially responsible. But they also have to be prepared to bring this to a vote, not just filibuster, that is, hope that it will all go away because climate change isn't going away.
BYNER: OK, Prime Minister, we had David Chalk social researcher on here yesterday he's done a lot of polling on people's opinions and his research says two things. One, that they are prepared to pay no more than five dollars a week extra to general cost of living for a scheme that reduces our carbon emissions. But the commentators that have been out there and there are many, are saying it is going to cost us infinitely more than that. Can you guarantee that your scheme as it stands now will not cost more than five dollars a week?
PM: Can I say in response to what is a very widespread national fear campaign on this at the moment, two basic points - if we're going to introduce, if we're going to increase the cost of carbon in the economy - why, because we need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, that's why and boost renewable energies like solar - it follows that energy prices and other prices will go up.
I have never tried to disguise that fact that's nonsense, that's being completely dishonest. Mr Howard said when he committed to bringing in an emissions trading scheme prior to the last election, that of course electricity prices and other prices would go up.
But in the modelling that we have produced, take electricity prices, the estimation that we have been provided is that electricity prices are likely to rise by about $1.50 a week in the first year of the scheme and $2.80 in the second year.
The other thing that I'd draw your listeners' attention to - and they should go online and look at all the detailed information contained in the Government's response to the impact on prices for consumers - low income earners, fully compensated. Proper compensation also to support middle income earners. We understand that there are cost adjustments here. That's why we have designed a scheme which does three things, increases the price of carbon, because you've got to bring down greenhouse gas emissions that what it's all about. Otherwise you get unsustainable increases in global temperatures including in Australia, more drought, more intense weather events, less water, less water flowing into the Murray - 50 per cent less over the last 10 years natural rainfall into the Murray Darling river system induced by climate change effects as well.
You've got to bring down those things but at the same time, adjust the cost burden for families and adjust the process of gearing up to different forms of energy consumption for industries as well. Our scheme does all those three things. There's a big adjustment program costing billions of dollars in there to assist families adjust with any cost increases and secondly, responsibly also to assist industries in their adjustment as well.
BYNER: So are you guaranteeing that it won't cost more than five bucks a week?
PM: Well, you know something I don't have a full range of modelling in front of me for this interview. Had you suggested we were going to talk about this in some detail I would have brought all the Treasury modelling in with me on each element of it.
BYNER: We did actually tell your people, but look -
PM: I'm sorry, that didn't, wasn't conveyed to me and I'm just saying that I. You know, I deal fairly and squarely with people when they ask me questions. The key thing to the debate is the cost of electricity. Therefore on the cost of electricity because it is coal fire electricity generation by and large, is the prices that I just referred to there, which go to $2.80 in the second year.
BYNER: When I spoke to Penny Wong last week, she was unable to guarantee that there would be enough electricity in Australia to avoid blackouts and load shedding because there wasn't enough investment in the industry. Can you give a guarantee to the Australian people now that with your scheme, there will not be an electricity shortage in this country?
PM: What we rely upon here Leon is again Leon the advice from the experts and the relevant regulatory authority in Australia has examined this very closely and have concluded that there is no basis for this type of concern. They've looked at all these, at the investments by the electricity suppliers. They've looked also at the fear campaigns being run by the electricity generators. If you are an electricity generator at the moment, and you are facing the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme some of them may just try to get out there and try to arc up the fear campaign. You know, that's what's happening here.
BYNER: But you're going to compensate them.
PM: That's in part because we've said we will help industries adjust. That's why we've got a scheme called the supply adjustment scheme, that's why we've got a climate change adjustment fund, that's why have special provisions also for what's called energy intensive trade exposed industries and that's why we have compensation payments for families - because we need to adjust our way through to a low carbon economy because if you don't, guess what happens? We're going to have more drought, more intense drought, more intense weather events, huge economic costs down term.
And the cost of economic action now, is far less than the cost of economic inaction because we all pay for that and our kids and our grandkids will pay for it big time.
BYNER: Now Prime Minister, is one of the reasons you're here to do with an $800 million dollar road project from Regency Road to the Port? Can you tell us about this?
PM: The, one of the, we're also partners with the South Australian Government in road infrastructure development. One of the projects that we've been working on with the South Australian Government is the upgrade to what's known called South Road. That of course involves a substantial investment from us, about $500 million dollars, it also involved a substantial investment from the State Government which I understand is about $400 million dollars it's all part of relieving some of the traffic burdens and the freight burdens on Adelaide's road network.
It's together with the other big infrastructure investments we've made here, the desalination plant - $300 million dollars plus, investments in the Noarlunga to Seaford rail-line. Investments also in a whole range of other pieces of infrastructure as well, here in Adelaide.
BYNER: The other big issues that's been hot around Australia is the very large number of boats, overflowing, carrying asylum seekers into Australian waters. Some of the boats haven't reached here yet. Some are still in international waters. What are we going to do with our immigration policy where Christmas Island is brimming, we are told that we're shipping up huts to Darwin. Where are we going to go with this policy?
PM: Look lets first of all put it into context, we've had boats arriving here, every year for the last 20 years. Secondly, when Mr Howard was Prime Minister, put this all into context, nearly 250 boats came here carrying nearly 15,000 people and the Liberals talk about temporary protection visas, 90 per cent of those issued with temporary protection visas ended up staying in this country.
For the period I've been in office, for the past two years, we've had something like 30 odd vessels arrive and we have had something like 1,700 people -
BYNER: What's your -
PM: This is a continuing challenge for all governments but my challenge very simply is this, we have a clear cut policy for dealing with it, make no apologies for a tough approach to border protection, make no apologies for the retention of mandatory detention on Christmas Island, make no apologies for applying all these measures but we have a policy. The Liberals are split right down the middle and it's very easy to criticise but what's the alternative policy?
BYNER: What's your understanding of how many people are in the pipeline wanting to get into Australia, by these methods?
PM: Well, because we've got huge push factors working in the region for two reasons by the way, one is huge political instability in Afghanistan the second is this recent civil war in Sri Lanka. And it's not just us, its right across the world. Therefore, we're going to have a continuing challenge in monitoring illegal people movements right across South-East Asia, some coming here, some not coming here.
Things change they change rapidly. So we can't comment on individual events, but let me tell you our investment and our front line border security operations through the Navy, through Customs, through our intelligence officers, through our security officers, our police officers, right across the region. It is one of the most intense operations launched abroad by an Australian Government abroad, in peace time.
BYNER: Prime Minister we've talk about energy security, border security. I want to talk for a moment about food security and that is that our agricultural sector and our mining sector have been very responsible for the reason why we've avoided a technical recession.
The farmers are crying out, because they're at their wits end. There's a major issue where speculation in the water industry has forced the price up and it has frozen them out of the ability to actually grow things. What are we going to do to ensure that we are a viable food producer because for the first time recently, you would know this sir, that we are a net importer of food, we can't afford to go down that path. We have to be able to feed ourselves. Do you not agree?
PM: Well I grew up on a farm, I believe passionately in the future of Australian agriculture. My family are families of farmers, I actually understand a bit about this, though I myself have obviously grown up doing other things. Agriculture is a huge part of Australia's future but it is under stress for two reasons, one is water. And let me link that back to the set of questions you threw at me early on, and quite legitimately, about climate change and about the cost of adjusting.
If we don't act nationally and globally on climate change by bringing down global greenhouse gas emissions, one of the clear consequences is greater drought right across this vast and dry continent. And you can see that with the Murray Darling system, where we now have one half of the normal historical inflows into the Murray Darling System over the last ten years, than the historical norm.
BYNER: Will we compensate those farmers though, for increased input costs as a result of setting your scheme in place?
PM: We will work with agriculture through the Agriculture Minister Tony Burke as is appropriate in different circumstances. This is not simply, one even set of arrangements. Let me tell you there are adjustment arrangements also in place to deal with various fuel costs as well, for those who are obviously going to be affected by any impact on the cost of petrol.
But you know something, your questions about agriculture, the other big factor still affecting agriculture is the perversion in global trade. That's why we must, within the next twelve months bring the DOHA trade negotiations to a conclusion, to finally liberalise global trade in agriculture.
We have the best and most efficient agriculture producers in the world. We have a huge stress factor now which is called water and drought, which is climate change induced by and large. Therefore we have got to be acting in the long term on climate change, in the immediate term in taking the pressures off, for example, off the Murray Darling which we are seeking to do for the first time by seeking a basin wide cap in the history of this country, brought about by the Australian Government. And on the immediate term investing significantly in large buy-backs of water entitlements - some 660 gigalitres worth of water entitlements bought back from the Murray Darling system, the first in Australia's history.
BYNER: Prime Minister thank you very much for coming in this morning. Where do you go to from here? Everyone is saying 'why is he here'? We know you went to Murray Bridge yesterday and you talked about, the State wants you to fund hospitals, but you not run them. I don't know how you're going to wear that, I can see you smiling. But where do you go to from here?
PM: Well I am here in Adelaide today. I think I'm in Melbourne tonight but I was in Murray Bridge yesterday.
BYNER: Yeah.
PM: The hospital stuff is really important. When I was at Rural Doctors yesterday up there at Murray Bridge and they're a fine bunch of folk. But what they have to say, and I take my responsibility as Prime Minister for the whole country seriously, whether they vote for me or not, whether in rural areas or not, is making it possible for the best delivery of health services across the nation.
Our system right now is at tipping point nationwide the health and hospital system. It needs long term systemic reform. And you ask why I'm in Adelaide, I want to be at the coal face and talk to people who are running effective rural medicine services, as they were at Murray Bridge -
BYNER: (inaudible)
PM: - and sit down with them and hear from them first hand. I haven't had a particular pitch from Gawler yet. I'm sure it will be incoming. Do you know how many public hospitals there are in Australia?
BYNER: There's hundreds of them.
PM: 750.
BYNER: Yeah.
PM: In this consultation, myself and the Health Minister so far have spoken with 58 of them around the country. Not me, I've spoken to about 15. But you know, it's very important to hear straight from the horses' mouth about what's going right and wrong.
BYNER: Would you ever be prepared to pay for our hospitals but you not run them?
PM: You know something, that is a very important public policy question which you ask. The big debate right now is who funds the system long term. Because of the ageing population, the increasing population, the boost in pharmaceutical costs, wage costs. The cost of our health system is going through the roof.
The funding responsibility long term is what this reform process is about. There's a parallel question which you raise, how is it best delivered with maximum local flexibility. We're working our way through that. This is really hard stuff. We've said we'd come up with our final landing point on policy in the early part of next year and we will.
BYNER: Prime Minister, thank you for joining us this morning.
PM: Good to be in the studio.
BYNER: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd on 1395, Adelaide's 5AA. With a whole lot of questions one after the other. And he did enjoy a steak, an Angus steak at the Hilton last night?
PM: That's right, I got through various calls around the world on climate change late last night, trying to get a decent outcome in Copenhagen, if we can. But then, at 10pm last night they served me a very nice steak down in the restaurant at the bottom of the Hilton there.
BYNER: Good stuff. You look well and please, regards to your significant other , partner, Therese.
PM: The Adelaidian, she is back here often.
BYNER: Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister.


PM: Great to be back in Adelaide and talking about this city and this State's need for infrastructure and our partnership between the Australian Government and the South Australian Government on building South Australian infrastructure.
Two reasons. One is, this is a platform for long-term economic growth. Secondly, it creates jobs in the here and now. That's what we're on about as an Australian Government, that's what the South Australian Government's on about as well.
Where the rubber literally hits the road today is of course, in this great project here, this South Road Superway which we're unveiling today. This is a big investment - a big investment - half a billion dollars from the Australian Government, some $400 million from the State Government and the economic benefit in terms of long-term transport infrastructure within Adelaide and the South Australian economy is large.
This investment will assist, of course, also in improving safety for up to 45,000 vehicles that use this section of the road each day. It's also about the efficiency of the Port, it's also about the separation of freight traffic from other forms of road traffic, it's also about how you therefore boost productivity growth for the long term.
Two big drivers of productivity growth of the Australian economy in the long term, one is infrastructure, road infrastructure, rail, port infrastructure, as well as our investments in high-speed broadband. And secondly, the investment in skills. This Government, this Australian Government, is active in both nation-wide, the education revolution and the infrastructure revolution, and on both these fronts we are proud to be partners with the South Australian Government in a close, cooperative partnership of building this State's future.
The last thing I'd say is about the immediate impact on jobs. This project is expected to support some 2,750 jobs. That is really important. We are not out of this global economic crisis. If you look at the international economic data, it is still patchy, very patchy. Therefore, the importance of building the infrastructure for tomorrow while supporting the jobs for today, is so much about what this Australian Government and the South Australian Government is on about.
We're proud to be supporting this project. We're proud to be investing half a billion dollars worth of Australian Government finance into this project and also to support this 2,750 jobs that will come off the construction and furthermore, to support also this critical piece of South Australia's long-term infrastructure needs. Mike.
PREMIER RANN: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Well, we're just delighted to be here, once again celebrating a partnership for South Australia's future. Just think about what's happened over the past 18 months. We've had a commitment from the Prime Minister to work with us to build a desalination plant, now under construction, that guarantees Adelaide's water security for the future, guarantees up to 50 per cent of Adelaide's water supply.
We had the announcement of the stimulus package money which was again, a joint investment in public transport, in the electrification of our north-south train system, and also an extension by the Commonwealth to take it further south to Seaford. The commitment to (inaudible) the work that we're jointly doing down at Techport on Defence. We're putting in $400 million, and what the Prime Minister has done is guaranteed that the next submarine project, worth over $30 billion, will be built in Adelaide.
So this is really about rolling out the biggest infrastructure partnership since Federation. And in South Australia, you know, even before this announcement was made, six times more investment on infrastructure than seven years ago, and in transport, about a seven times - not six percent a year, just exceeding inflation. This is a 600 per cent increase infrastructure spend in this State.
And what we're doing today, you've seen the Northern Expressway, you've seen the Port Adelaide Expressway, this about linking it up because it's all about removing road blocks. It's about making sure that traffic flows quicker. It's about underpinning what we're doing at the Port in Defence, but also, of course, about the mining boom. It's about making sure that we free up traffic, invest in infrastructure for the future, but create, of course, in this one, 2,750 jobs.
Prime Minister, and also Minister Albanese, Patrick Conlon, there could not be a better working relationship that we have together on infrastructure, and this another celebration of that.
PM: Do our transport ministers wish to add? No corrections necessary? (inaudible) OK, over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Yes, Premier, just a quick question - can we afford this?
PREMIER RANN: Absolutely. It's $500 million from the Commonwealth. This is already factored into our forward estimates. It's already been through the Budget processes. It's in the Budget for, under our Auslink future strategy, so what we're doing is rolling out infrastructure for the future, creating jobs now, linking it up and keeping our AAA credit rating. So, we can afford it. It was in the Budget.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER RANN: This was in the Budget, in our last Budget. It was already announced in the last Budget about forward expenditure on road infrastructure and so what we said was that even though we were rolling out the biggest infrastructure project in the State's history, projects, that there were some things that we couldn't do, and part of that was the prison complex.
PM: I might ask Minister Albanese to add.
MINISTER ALBANESE: I think the real question with infrastructure is, can we afford not to do it? It's important to recognise that this is an investment, not just an expenditure. It's an investment that will lead to future productivity growth, particularly because this is connected with the Port, because South Australia have developed a coherent transport plan that involves road, rail and port infrastructure.
That's why the Commonwealth has budgeted for, as part of the nation-building program, some $2.5 billion contribution from the Commonwealth to the Government of South Australia in partnership, to invest in infrastructure that will lead to better economic growth in the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MINISTER CONLON: You have to understand what the process has been. We started out on our own, looking at intersection by intersection, cutting our cloth according to what we could afford.
The big change came when the election of the Federal Government, the commitment of a major funding partner. The first thing that we did with that, and the Commonwealth commitment $70 million to a planning study, because when you can do it in a big way, rather than in a small way, you can take a different approach.
Now, in that planning study one of the things that we found, and of course we saw very good growth in the economy and very good growth forecasts in the South Australian economy, one of the things we found was that this section of road was going to see something like a tripling of freight movement over the next 20 years and it's all about wealth creation.
I mean, we're an exporting State. When you move freight, you make money. You move it more efficiently, you make money, so the study identified that. There is money remaining that will be addressed towards Darlington in the next few years and we're looking for, we're now studying the solutions that we'll use in the very difficult residential area of South Road, but this is the biggest commitment to that north-south corridor there's ever been in this State.
And, you know, people say 'can we afford $800 million?' What we're talking about is the biggest movers of freight in the State up there in the North. Now, you move that freight, you make money. The more freight we move, the more efficiently we move it, the more money this State makes, and you know, as Minister Albanese said, we can't afford not to do it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MINISTER CONLON: Well, I think we've been talking about planning this for some time, but you've got to understand that planning road works isn't the sexiest thing in the world, so when you talk about it people don't necessarily listen, and big projects are sexy, but -
MINISTER ALBANESE: I disagree with that.
MINISTER CONLON: I've often fallen victim to (inaudible) myself. But we've been talking about planning the whole north-south corridor, we've announced the $70 million from the Commonwealth, and if you look at - sorry, I'll take this back a step. One of the things we've managed to do with the Commonwealth is we've committed ourselves to saying 'look, we're not going to bring you a project that doesn't have a really good cost-benefit analysis.'
That was our approach in Infrastructure Australia, it's our approach here. When you've got $70 million for study you can do very, very good work, and the cost-benefit analysis on these projects is very good.
You've got to remember, this connects up with the Northern Expressway which is under construction, going very well at present, Port River Expressway, the two new bridges over the Port to the Port that we deepened to panamax, to place panamax-sized vessels, so this make absolute sense when you look at a cost-benefit analysis of it.
Now, we have been talking about it. I'm just not sure that everyone gets terribly excited about freight roads.
JOURNALIST: Is this part of your Infrastructure Australia (inaudible)?
MINISTER CONLON: No, this is not Infrastructure Australia money. There is, the Federal Minister can tell you, the child of Auslink. There used to be the Auslink program for funding roads. This comes from that type of commitment, although I don't know what it's called these days. I should do.
MINISTER ALBANESE: This funding from the Commonwealth comes from the Nation Building program. The total expenditure on that is $36 billion. We have a memorandum of understanding with the South Australian Government of some $2.5 billion. And what that is, that goes out to 2013/14.
So what we've been able to do through Infrastructure Australia, have certainly assisted in the analysis of these projects. Jim Hallion of course, the Director-General is a member of the Infrastructure Australia advisory council. South Australia has been particularly good at having plans that lead to integrated transport as part of an integrated infrastructure strategy for Adelaide and for the state of South Australia, which is why the partnership has worked so well.
So it all fits together in terms of the Northern Expressway, and the investment that's going there. I was with the Premier, opening a bridge about a month ago. And we're continually- that's actually running ahead of schedule.
So it's all there over a period of time. The Commonwealth was able to bring forward, in our first budget, the first Rudd Budget, brought forward some expenditure in terms of our commitments to South Australia. That's what enabled us to, for example, put in place the $70 million for planning for this project, came from the Commonwealth. And then it's $430 million each from the Commonwealth and the State.
But it's getting that planning right which - I disagree with Patrick - I think it's very sexy, the planning for roads such as this. But it's getting that right as a precondition for making sure that every cent of taxpayer's dollars is a dollar well spent.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister - on another topic- what's your response to the very personal and very emotional plea from these Tamils aboard that boat in Indonesian waters at the moment? They're pleading with you to let them (inaudible)
PM: Firstly, I've not seen the immediate reports of that. Secondly, can I say what I have said all week - this Government makes no apology for a hard line approach to people smuggling and border security.
Secondly, what we have said consistently is that in processing any individual, if we have found- if we find that a person is not a legitimate asylum seeker, we send them home. We have already done that in the case of some people that have been sent back to Sri Lanka already. We will continue to do that in the future.
The other point, I would say is this. This challenge, arising from Sri Lanka and the civil war which unfolded in Sri Lanka over the last 12 months - which has been violent and bloody - is causing an outflow of people from Sri Lanka right across the world. Talk to the Europeans about this, you talk to South East Asians about this, you talk to other folk about this. This is a problem for everybody. Therefore, that's why we're dealing so closely with our friends in Indonesia on these challenges. And we will continue to do so without apology.
JOURNALIST: Are you planning an official deal with Indonesia to stop the flow of boats coming to Australia?
PM: You know I speak with the Indonesian President a lot, President Yudhoyono. And I have, since I've become Prime Minister of Australia, regularly spoken to him in the flesh, on the telephone, about the challenges of terrorism, the challenges of regional security, and the challenges of people smuggling. We have a very close, collaborative relationship with our friends in Indonesia. And I thank them for their cooperation, and we will continue to work closely with them in the future.
It's a challenge for them. It's a challenge for Malaysia. It's a challenge for Australia. It's a challenge for our entire region. What is good is, the fact that our Governments and our security forces, our Police officers, our armed forces, our intelligence officers are working so closely together. It's a challenge for everybody. We believe, unapologetically, in a tough, hardline approach to border security. But we'll always treat people fairly.
JOURNALIST: Is sending the demountable homes from Alice Springs (inaudible)
PM: Well first of all, on the detail of that, I can't comment. I've not seen that report. Secondly, we have always said that our approach to people smuggling, to illegal immigration, to asylum seekers, will be tough, hardline, but humane. Therefore, if you look at the facilities which are available on Christmas Island, we make no apology whatsoever for mandatory detention. We said we would maintain that, prior to the last election, and we have done so.
That's why we undertake our processing on Christmas Island as well. And the Immigration Minister for some time, has been quite plain about the fact that he would adjust the capacity of Christmas Island depending on future needs. And again putting all that into context, let's remember, we've had boats arriving in this country ever year for the last 20 years. That's the point.
Secondly, in the period of the Howard Government, to repeat what I said yesterday when I was at Murray Bridge. In the period of the Howard Government, some nearly 250 boats arrived, with nearly 15,000 people. And some 90 per cent of those put on Temporary Protection Visas ended up staying in Australia. In the period that I've been Prime Minister, we've had 30 odd boats arrive so far, with about 1700 people.
It's a challenge for the previous Government. It's a challenge for this Government. Our approach and policy is absolutely clear-cut. Hardline approach, but humane approach, to dealing with the challenge of asylum seekers. What is the Liberal's policy? They don't have one. Very easy to criticise and carp from the side. And the reason they criticise and carp from the side is that they are split right down the middle. Ask them today, what's their policy? They have no answer.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are reports of another six boats on their way to Australia. What are you going to do about those, and can you confirm those reports?
PM: Well look, on the question of movements in and around the archipelago, and in and around South East Asia at any given time, that will vary. And we are not in the business of providing you know, spot reports on what the intelligence may say on one day or another.
This has been a challenge each day, every day, 365 days a year. And in the whole period that I've been in office, and I presume for my predecessors as well, as reflected in those previous numbers. Secondly, we will continue to deploy a hardline policy on people smugglers. Remember also, our efforts on people smugglers have already resulted in 44 prosecutions. Our actions in Indonesia have already resulted in 51, sorry, 81 interruptions or disruptions. We'll continue to work in that direction.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gordon Brown has committed 500 more troops to (inaudible)
PM: First of all, I have not had a discussion with Prime Minister Brown on that. Secondly, nor have I been briefed by the CDF in terms of the particular characteristics of the British deployment. Thirdly, what I'd say to you is that the Australian deployment was increased by 40 per cent, only some months ago, not long following the election of President Obama.
Our mission in Oruzgan Province is clear-cut. That is, our mission statement is to train the Afghan National Army and Afghan security forces to take control of the security of that province. We're in the business of raising an Afghan National Army brigade. We are training Afghan Police. And we are also engaged in capacity building with the Oruzgan Provincial Authority. Once that mission is completed, and we hand over our responsibility to that Provincial Authority, then of course Australia's mission will be concluded and our troops would come home. But as I say, our increase occurred some time ago.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel pressured or obliged at all by that move by the British Prime Minister?
PM: None whatsoever. As I said, we made our position quite clear some months ago, in terms of the appropriate force for Australia, in order to achieve the mission which I have defined for Australia. If I could simply say this, the mission statement in the past for Afghanistan for Australia was somewhat unclear. I have defined in absolute clarity what we are seeking to do in Afghanistan.
The three functions I referred to before. That's where our effort is directed. That's the mission we are seeking to conclude in Oruzgan Province. I could say also, that this is a difficult and bloody operating environment. I have spoken to our troops on the ground there on several occasions, and I continue to be fearful for their safety and their security in the future. This is a very dangerous place to be.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I get you to clarify in relation to our current stances to people smugglers and the flow of boats coming to Australia. Are you satisfied with our current level of strategy or do you think we need something more official with Indonesia? (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say, in terms of our cooperative relationships with Indonesia - and they go back in part to arrangements which were put in place by the previous Government, I see no point about trying to gild the lily in any negative way on that, but we have built on those significantly - these arrangements are working really well. And I would commend our friends and partners in Indonesia for the solid work they have done.
Secondly, we will continue as two Governments to work closely into the future, as the challenges of the future unfold. This is, if you were to roll back the clock several years, and ask where the push factors were coming from around the world, they weren't coming from Sri Lanka. They were coming from political instability in Iraq and Afghanistan at that stage had actually stabilised.
Since then we have had, in 2008 we've had, according to a report of the UN Secretary-General, one of the most violent years in Afghanistan that there's been since 2001. So Afghanistan is now a push factor. We've had a civil war in Sri Lanka. That's now a push factor. It affects all countries.
So therefore, frankly, the challenges are constantly changing. The pattern of operations by people smugglers are constantly changing. And therefore the tactics that we'll deploy with our friends and partners across the region will be calibrated accordingly. But the strategic-level cooperation between ourselves, the Indonesians and Malaysians is working well, and I commend those Governments for their cooperative efforts with us.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is an honour tonight to be the first Prime Minister to deliver the Sambell Oration.
It is an honour because as Prime Minister I wish to publicly recognise the work of the Brotherhood of St Laurence in the pursuit of social justice in Australia for more than three quarters of a century.
I would like in particular to pay public tribute to the work of Gerard Kennedy Tucker, the founder of the Brotherhood of St Laurence and Community Aid Abroad - and Geoffrey Sambell, who led the Brotherhood in exemplary and visionary fashion from 1954 to 1969.
In Australia's pantheon of community leaders, we would be hard pressed to find a man of greater tenacity and commitment than Tucker. He was one of Australia's pre-eminent Christian social activists and his life was a living sermon of faith in action.
His compassion was forged on the battlefields of the First World War in France, where as a young chaplain he buried almost 1000 men, writing to the next of kin of each of them, sending the last messages and any personal belongings he had been able to salvage back home.
For an ordinary mortal, a task like that would leave you shattered, hard-bitten and cynical - but not Tucker.
In the years that followed, he led a crusade against poverty, joblessness and the hopelessness brought on by the Great Depression.
When he established the Brotherhood, with just four men in Adamstown NSW in December 1930, Australia was in the grip of Depression and the Brotherhood literally had nothing but a dilapidated second-hand Chevrolet.
He had a faith that in reaching out to help the destitute and the homeless, he was doing God's work. And so God would provide the resources he needed.
So with nothing more than three promotional films, he hit the road to raise support.
Not that he was too heavenly minded about it.
He recognised a sharp publicity angle when he found it.
So when Premier Thomas Hollway said he was too busy to view the films, Tucker began promoting them as "the films the Premier dare not see" - bringing many more people to see them, and raising more funds for the cause.
And so began one of the most respected and effective community organisations in this country.
Tucker made an outstanding contribution to Australian life but he never had much interest in the accolades he was given in recognition of his.
There's a great story of how, after he moved house in 1959, someone found an OBE in the rubbish he left behind - an OBE awarded three years before for his services to the community.
It wasn't out of disrespect he'd disregarded it - it just didn't matter to him.
Tucker was a man of self-sacrifice, not self-glorification, but his achievements by any measure merited the highest national honour.
Geoffrey Sambell built on this legacy in the years that followed.
Under his leadership, the BSL was the first voluntary organisation to employ a professional social worker.
He fostered integration between various disciplines - law, psychology, social studies and theology.
And he would be especially proud today of the Brotherhood's strong partnership with Melbourne University - which builds on the work done years ago to develop the Henderson poverty line, and which now brings together the research capacity of the University with the applied policy and service delivery experience of the Brotherhood.
Central to each of the initiatives the Government is taking to build a fairer Australia is our own partnership with the third sector and organisations like the Brotherhood of St Laurence.
These are organisations that so often carry the burden of caring for the people left on the margins of what can sometimes be a brutal and inhumane modern economy.
Here at the Brotherhood, Tony Nicholson has made an outstanding contribution to the work the Government has undertaken in the past two years.
We greatly value his work on homelessness - chairing the Australian Government's Steering Group for the development of the White Paper on Homelessness last year, and now chairing the inaugural Prime Minister's Council on Homelessness.
We value also his work on the Government's Social Inclusion Board.
And as well, his participation with Lindsay Fox and Bill Kelty in the Keep Australia Working forums - engaging local employers, unions and community groups around the nation to maximise jobs and training opportunities for communities most vulnerable to the global downturn.
Tony Nicholson is a great Australian, working for a great Australian institution.
He has strong views, but he doesn't just sit back and criticise. Nor does he throw up his hands when things are tough.
Instead, he rolls up his sleeves, looks at the evidence, and works out solutions that deliver results for people in desperate need - an approach that characterises the whole staff and volunteer team at the BSL.
On behalf of all Australians, thank you, and the BSL, for your outstanding work in the continuing cause of social justice for all Australians.
Of course, social justice is an almost impossible mission in the absence of a strong economy.
A strong economy generates the resources necessary to build equality of opportunity for all Australians, and to build a sufficient safety net to support with dignity those Australians who cannot support themselves.
The truth is the strength of our economy has in recent times been fundamentally threatened by the impact of the global financial crisis.
This crisis has generated the single greatest global economic downturn since the Great Depression. Not only a financial crisis, but also an employment crisis, and in many communities, a social crisis as well.
We gather tonight exactly one year to the day since I went before the Australian people on national television to outline the Government's emergency response to the global crisis.
12 months ago, the global financial system was on the precipice.
We were looking into the abyss of the total failure of the global financial system, the collapse of the global economy and the real possibility of a global Depression of indefinite severity and duration.
The inter-bank lending markets that turn the wheels of the global financial system had effectively shut down.
The world's largest insurance company, America's fourth-largest investment bank and the world's largest providers of housing finance were either bankrupted or bailed out.
More than 40 major banks around the world encountered the same fate. Entire banking systems needed to be rescued, recapitalised or nationalised.
The financial crisis was on a scale unseen since the 1930s.
One year later, as a result of the direct and decisive interventions by government, we have pulled back from the brink.
We have been through the sharpest contractions in global output in 75 years. An estimated 60 million people are still expected to lose their jobs in the developed world this year.
The global recession has reversed progress towards reducing poverty in developing nations around the world, and the global economy faces a long, difficult and uneven recovery.
But through the coordinated agency of governments around the world, steeled by the history of the Great Depression and the failure of governments then to rise to the challenge that was before them, today the governments of the world have managed to avoid global financial and economic collapse.
Through the collective agency of the G-20, governments throughout the world, central banks and regulatory agencies have worked together with unprecedented coordination to restore confidence and stability to global finance and the global economy.
In Australia, as the crisis unfolded fully one year ago, we brought together the nation's most senior economic officials around the Cabinet table.
We had just one clear goal: to do everything we could to cushion our economy from the full impact of a global economic cyclone by saving and supporting the jobs of working families around Australia.
Tonight, around the world there are tens of millions of families who have lost their jobs, lost their businesses, lost their homes and lost hope because of a crisis which was not of their own making, millions of working people around the world who, because of unrestrained and unregulated greed in financial markets, have been thrown out onto the streets.
If you want a definition of social injustice, this is it in living, brutal colour - millions of innocent workers losing their jobs because a few thousand financial executives around the world surrendered any pretence of social responsibility in their blind pursuit of absolute greed.
When this global financial crisis spread across the world, the Government knew Australia would not be immune. The Government knew we had a responsibility to protect working Australians and their families. The Government knew we had to act - and to act quickly.
So as the storms of the global financial crisis bore down upon Australia, the Government set out to build the strongest defences possible.
First, the Government guaranteed the savings in every Australian deposit account to underpin confidence and to prevent the run on the banks that we had seen around the world.
Second, the Government guaranteed inter-bank lending when credit flows ground to a complete halt, threatening to send good businesses to the wall.
Third, the Government provided three economic stimulus packages.
In the short term, the Government stimulated the economy with rapid cash stimulus to families, pensioners and low income earners, as well as a boost for first home buyers and an investment tax break for small businesses.
Over the medium term, the Government began investing in nation-building economic infrastructure - creating jobs today for people in every town and every suburb across the country while also creating the infrastructure our country needs for tomorrow.
This includes:
     * the biggest single investment in social housing in Australia's history;
     * the biggest single investment in domestic energy efficiency in Australian history;
     * the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, including:
         * state of the art libraries;
         * state of the art science centres;
         * state of the art language centres;
         * multi-purpose halls for schools and communities who at present may have no place to meet, and
         * state of the art classroom modernisation.
And over the longer term, nation-building infrastructure investments in rail, roads, ports, hospitals, universities, research institutes, clean energy projects and a national broadband network.
Finally, the Government has also invested in our Jobs and Training Compact - a detailed strategy to tackle unemployment in local communities launched with the Brotherhood five months ago in Narre Warren - to make a further difference to communities where unemployment was rising fastest.
These are the three core pillars of our economic intervention strategy: stabilising our financial system; supporting real jobs in the real economy through our infrastructure stimulus strategy; and further, a local skills, training and employment strategy to support those who have lost their jobs or who have been unable to enter the workforce.
This has been our strategy, and the strategy has been effective - effective so far in keeping Australia out of recession, the only advanced economy to do so.
Of course some said we were doing too much. Some said we were acting too fast. Some said we were doing the wrong things.
They said we should wait and see how bad things would get before taking action. They said we should keep our powder dry, and then presumably try to clean up the economic and social wreckage later, once the storm had ripped through the place.
The Government fundamentally disagreed with this do-nothing approach.
The Government decided to act immediately, decisively and without apology.
We weren't going to wait for a run on the banks as occurred in other countries when people panicked.
We weren't going to stand idly by while good businesses shut their doors because they were starved of credit.
We weren't going to wait until jobless numbers soared towards one million.
We weren't going to wait until the unemployment queues began snaking around the block outside every Centrelink Office.
Remember, this was the course of action advocated by our opponents.
Losing your job can be a crushing experience, personally, physically, psychologically and of course financially. Large scale unemployment also further undermines economic growth, prolongs the downturn, delays the recovery, and results in greater public borrowing as tax revenues collapse and unemployment benefits go through the roof.
That's why when this crisis hit, the Government was determined we would do all we could to protect Australian jobs from the global recession they did not cause.
And the result? Australia is doing better than other countries, with the strongest economic growth, the second lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies - and the only one not to go into recession.
We have achieved this through conservative economic management, expanding the role of government while the private sector is in retreat, and reducing the role of government as the private sector recovers.
And we have achieved this while maintaining strong Government finances - keeping our AAA Credit rating, our borrowings the lowest of the Major Advanced Economies and with a clear plan to return the budget to surplus as the economy recovers.
Neither I nor the Australian Government like debt. Nobody does.
But this was necessary to keep our economy going, necessary to prevent hundreds of thousands of Australians losing their jobs; and necessary to keep the economy from falling into recession.
And in their more honest moments, our political opponents have said they would have deployed 95 per cent of the Government's borrowings had they been in office.
With the economy starting to show signs of recovery, the Government's stimulus has already started to phase out - as it was designed to do. By the end of this financial year, two thirds of the total stimulus will have been spent.
The infrastructure stimulus which remains will continue to support jobs, tradies and small businesses until our economy fully recovers.
We must however keep a weather eye on the global economy where recovery is far from certain, and where economists still point to the possibility of a double dip recession. That is why, as the Treasurer has said repeatedly, we will continue to calibrate our fiscal settings, informed by changing economic circumstances, to ensure they are appropriate for emerging macroeconomic conditions.
That is why calls to end the stimulus are so irresponsible.
There are still uncertainties remaining in the global economy. Treasury has estimated that to entirely remove the fiscal support from the economy at once, would reduce growth by 2.5 per cent in 2010.
Australia has managed the crisis well, and the Government has done so in response to the best Treasury advice.
So, too, must Australia manage the recovery well, and once again the Government will do so in response to the best Treasury advice - managing the coordinated exit from the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy settings and financial market interventions that were demanded by the crisis, but doing so in a manner that does not pull the rug from under the recovery.
And furthermore, continuing to implement the most far-reaching microeconomic reform program in skills, infrastructure, tax, competition policy and regulation, to maximise Australia's long-term global economic competitiveness.
Many, many Australians have been doing it tough through this crisis, and while we've been fighting the global recession here in Australia, we've also been moving ahead with a long-term strategy to build both a stronger and a fairer Australia:
     * Introducing paid parental leave;
     * Tackling the challenges facing our health and hospitals system;
     * Tackling the scourge of homelessness;
     * Implementing the largest reform of our age pension in one hundred years;
     * Taking action to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
And in addition to these nationwide social reforms, also targeting pockets of entrenched disadvantage across our community.
A few weeks ago, in discussing recent Australian economic history at Paul Kelly's book launch, I said that I do not believe that in Australia you can successfully advance an economic reform agenda without a complementary agenda for social reform.
In the long term, the goals of building a stronger economy and a fairer society are not in conflict.
We should not have to choose between faster growth and a fairer society, because unless the economic reform that underpins growth delivers benefits to the whole society, it won't have society's support and the momentum for reform will fall away.
Equally, unless we make a priority of tackling entrenched social disadvantage, our economy will be weaker, not stronger, because inequality and disadvantage contribute to poorer educational results, lower productivity, worse health outcomes, shorter working lives and lower workforce participation.
That's why the Government's agenda for building a stronger economy goes hand in hand with building a fairer society.
Lifting the quality of education in our most disadvantaged schools, mandatory school testing, transparent reporting of school results, lifting teacher quality - all delivering the long-run payoff of higher school retention rates, leading to higher productivity and workforce participation in the long term.
Likewise, advancing the preventative health agenda and tackling chronic disease will build a healthier workforce that will stay actively participating in work for longer.
As many in this room know from first hand experience, it is not easy tackling the complex challenges of closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, halving homelessness, or supporting families and building more resilient communities where there's been years of multiple disadvantage.
These reforms are not a simple replication of classical Left demands for infinitely greater public spending. Nor are they about neo-liberal claims that the only good state is a non-existent state (except of course when the state is called upon to rescue capitalism from itself).
No, the challenge of the responsible reforming centre of Australian politics is to harness personal responsibility with the support of the enabling state. To equip disadvantaged Australians with the capacity over time to take responsibility for their own lives, and to do so with programs which harness the combined resources and commitment of governments working wherever possible in creative partnership with the community sector and the private sector.
None of this is easy. If it was, it would all have been done long before now. The truth is it's hard - very hard.
But that's why it's worth doing - because the results are worthwhile.
Not pretending, and not putting it all into the too hard basket, but instead, rolling our sleeves up and having a go.
This long-term agenda of economic and social reform lies at the heart of the Government's vision for a stronger and fairer Australia.
After the Government came to office almost two years ago, we outlined our agenda to tackle the long-term causes of social disadvantage in Australia. We outlined our goal for all Australians to be able to participate fully in our nation's economic, social and community life.
This means more than just providing income support. It means that in tackling entrenched disadvantage in communities, we must act on:
     * the skills people have;
     * their family relationships;
     * the amenities available in their communities;
     * their opportunity to participate in work;
     * their readiness for work or training; and
     * the need to allow people to take responsibility for their own choices.
Analysis of the recent Australian Bureau of Statistics General Social Survey suggests that around 5 per cent of Australians experience multiple disadvantages. Such disadvantage includes low income and assets, low skills, difficulty finding and keeping a job, housing stress, poor health and lack of services. It can also include substance misuse, mental illness, disability, family violence, discrimination and homelessness.
As a community, we all pay a price when people are excluded from the mainstream of economic and social life. Social disadvantage results in:
     * costs to the Budget through:
     * increased health expenditures on preventable chronic disease and mental illness;
     * increased provision of cash support to those who are unable to work;
     * increased costs for policing, the courts and corrective services;
     * costs to the economy through lost productivity and workforce participation, and
     * costs to communities where disadvantage becomes entrenched and social isolation ensues.
In their recent book The Spirit Level, Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett argue that those nations committed to greater fairness do better on almost every major indicator of social and economic life. In other words, it is to the benefit of all Australians, not just disadvantaged Australians, that we do the hard work of tackling entrenched disadvantage.
In confronting this challenge, the Government has adopted a set of guiding Social Inclusion Principles with the aim of:
     * increasing social, civic and economic participation;
     * giving individuals a greater voice, and
     * giving individuals greater responsibility.
These principles are now helping shape policy development and policy implementation across government.
The Government is working on a long-term blueprint for a more effective and integrated approach to tackling disadvantage, taking into account all the different ways that disadvantaged Australians interact with governments.
And with a long-term vision that an Australian child born today can hope for better health outcomes in the future; access to quality early learning; a better chance of success at school and beyond school; gaining better paid work, and contributing to their local community.
We all know that joblessness is at the heart of entrenched disadvantage.
That's why the Government has worked so hard to avoid a repeat of the early '90s, when a generation of young Australians was cast out to the fringes of the labour market through years of unemployment.
As Professor Tony Vinson found in his report Dropping Off the Edge, when you go to the 3 per cent of local communities where people are living with entrenched disadvantage, you find:
     * double the national unemployment rate;
     * more than double the rate of long-term unemployment;
     * almost double the rate of disability support and psychiatric admissions and criminal convictions;
     * almost three times the rate of imprisonment; and
     * more than three times the proportion of confirmed child maltreatment than other remaining localities.
That's why this year we appointed local employment coordinators in 20 priority regions across Australia - working with local businesses, unions, community organisations, schools, training providers and job services to maximise training and employment opportunities -- including through the Jobs Fund.
Those coordinators are on the ground, bringing local communities together and helping to link individual job seekers with employment opportunities.
Young people are particularly at risk during a period of rising joblessness. That is why we implemented the Compact with Young Australians, which guarantees young Australians a place at study or in work.
That's why we also implemented a Compact with Retrenched Workers to support those Australians who have lost their jobs in recent months - helping more than 28,000 retrenched workers to receive immediate advice and access to employment services. And that's why we implemented a Compact with Local Communities, supported by our network of Local Employment Coordinators.
All three make up our Jobs and Training Compact for all Australians in response to the global economic crisis.
Tonight I'd like to announce new measures the Australian Government will be taking to tackle social disadvantage - both aimed at enhancing personal responsibility, both to be delivered in partnership with the community sector and the private sector.
Both therefore bringing together the framework of social reform I have outlined this evening - one aimed at breaking welfare dependency, building personal responsibility and resilience, and delivered through the non-government sector, thereby liberating them from the often less flexible delivery systems of the state itself.
Through Jenny Macklin's portfolio we will be providing $33 million in support for two innovative partnership schemes.
The first of these, with the Brotherhood of St Laurence, involves the SaverPlus scheme that helps low income Australians save for an education-related goal.
BSL has developed this scheme in partnership with the ANZ Bank, which has provided matching savings and loan capital, and the use of its banking infrastructure and expertise.
It is a scheme with runs on the board. An evaluation of the SaverPlus scheme by RMIT has showed that two to three years after completing the scheme, 70 per cent of participants are still saving at the same rate.
To support and expand the coverage of the SaverPlus matched savings scheme, the Commonwealth will commit $14.5 million to employ SaverPlus project workers in 60 communities, reaching up to 7,600 people, with financial education as a compulsory component of the program. We will also be supporting a pilot of a market interest rate loan product for people who have otherwise been excluded from mainstream credit, called Progress Loans.
The second scheme the Government will be supporting is the No Interest Loan Scheme (NILS) conducted by Good Shepherd Youth and Family Services.
Through this scheme since 1980, Good Shepherd has provided thousands of vulnerable Australians with the opportunity to purchase essential household items, such as fridges and washing machines. At the same time, the scheme connects loan applicants with services to assist them, irrespective of whether they are awarded a loan.
The scheme's repayment rates of around 97 per cent speak volumes for the commitment of the participants to do the right thing and for the robustness of the scheme.
The Australian Government will be investing $18.5 million in this scheme, to support Good Shepherd conducting 22,000 financial consultations in up to 350 locations, and facilitating an additional 7,200 loans. In addition, Good Shepherd's Step Up and Adds Up programs will provide low interest and matched savings opportunities for people on low incomes.
I acknowledge the important contribution of the National Australia Bank (NAB) to Good Shepherd's work, providing loan and matching capital, as well as logistical support.
These initiatives are an important part of our response to the global recession and its impact on Australians who have been doing it tough, and they are good examples of two of our major banks fulfilling their social contract and supporting financial resilience in communities across Australia.
To tackle all of these challenges effectively, we must all work together.
This Government is dedicated to building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, and an Australia with its sleeves rolled up ready to tackle the challenges of the long-term future. That is why the Government's relationship with the community sector is so important.
In the relationship between the Government and the community sector, may the Government embody a new philosophy in which:
     * the era of partisanship is over, and
     * the age of partnership has arrived.
This Government is planning to reflect this partnership soon in a new national compact -- a compact between the Australian Government and the not for profit sector, outlining how we will work together to improve and strengthen our relationship, now and into the future.
In Australia we have a unique opportunity as we emerge from the global recession to develop a national vision for a stronger and fairer Australia.
We are just emerging from the worst global recession since the Great Depression. As a government, we believe we learnt something from the lessons of the Great Depression.
As an institution, the BSL was born out of the human scars of the Great Depression. We are therefore both steeled by our historical experience, informed by the appalling economic and social cost that comes with global crisis, and thus fortified in dealing with the challenges of the future, and now we both face the new challenges of a new century - modern challenges which nonetheless call forth ancient values. Ancient values grounded equally in individual freedom and compassion for all.
To paraphrase author Paul Kelly, beyond being a nation of 'hard heads' and 'soft hearts' - what we most need now is 'capable hands'.
To renew the great Australian commitment to the fair go.
A fair go for all.
A fair go for the 21st century.
A stronger and fairer Australia for the 21st century. 


Low income earners who have been affected by the global financial crisis will be given help to get back on their feet through a $33 million Australian Government investment.
The funding to provide nation-wide financial support services will include:
     * expanding the availability of no-interest loans to buy essential household items like fridges and washing machines.
     * extending matched-savings schemes to help more people develop and achieve long-term savings goals.
These services are expected to benefit over 30,000 low-income Australians.
NO INTEREST LOANS
Good Shepherd Youth and Family Service will receive $18.5 million to expand its No Interest Loans Scheme (NILS), StepUP and AddsUP programs.
This will enable Good Shepherd's loans and matched savings programs to be extended to around 25,000 more people in up to 350 locations across Australia.
In partnership with the National Australia Bank, Good Shepherd Youth and Family Service offers no interest loans of between $800 and $2000 for the purchase of essential household items.
In one case, a mother took out a NILS loan to pay for repairs to her car so she could drive her disabled daughter to school and medical appointments.
MATCHED SAVINGS SCHEMES
We are also providing $14.5 million to the Brotherhood of St Laurence, in partnership with ANZ, to expand Australia's largest matched savings scheme, Saver Plus.
This funding will more than double the program's reach to provide services for an additional 7,600 people in need, in 60 additional communities.
This scheme helps people on low incomes save for education and training purchases, with ANZ matching their savings, dollar-for-dollar, up to $1000.
For example, with the addition of the matched savings to her own savings, a mother was able to buy her children a computer to do their schoolwork. She now regularly saves the same amount every week.
An evaluation of the Saver Plus scheme by RMIT showed that two to three years after completing the scheme, 70 per cent of participants are still saving at the same rate.
Funding to the Brotherhood of St Laurence will also be used to pilot the new Progress Loans program which provides loans to people who would otherwise be excluded from mainstream credit.
These services are all crucial to helping low income households successfully manage their finances and develop financial capability.
Today's funding announcement supports community organisations to continue to deliver much needed services at a time when their capacity to raise funds has been affected by the global economic downturn.


PRIME MINISTER: Great to be back in Adelaide and talking about this city and this State's need for infrastructure and our partnership between the Australian Government and the South Australian Government on building South Australian infrastructure.
Two reasons: one is this is a platform for long-term economic growth. Secondly, it creates jobs in the here and now. That's what we're on about as an Australian Government, that's what the South Australian Government's on about as well.
Where the rubber literally hits the road today is, of course, in this great project here, this South Road Superway which we're unveiling today. This is a big investment - a big investment - half a billion dollars from the Australian Government, some $400 million from the State Government and the economic benefit in terms of long-term transport infrastructure within Adelaide and the South Australian economy is large. This investment will assist, of course, also in improving safety for up to 45,000 vehicles that use this section of the road each day. It's also about the efficiency of the port, it's also about the separation of freight traffic from other forms of road traffic, it's also about how you therefore boost productivity growth for the long term.
Two big drivers of productivity growth of the Australian economy in the long term: one is infrastructure, road infrastructure, rail, port infrastructure, as well as our investments in high-speed broadband, and secondly the investment in skills. This government, this Australian Government, is active in both nation-wide - the education revolution and the infrastructure revolution, and on both these fronts we are proud to be partners with the South Australian Government in a close, cooperative partnership of building this State's future.
We're proud to be supporting this project. We're proud to be investing half a billion dollars worth of Australian Government finance into this project and also to support this 2,750 jobs that will come off the construction and furthermore, to support also this critical piece of South Australia's long-term infrastructure needs.


Schools, sporting clubs, health and early childhood centres, community hubs, major tourist attractions and iconic natural sites destroyed or damaged in the tragic 2009 Victorian bushfires will be rebuilt and restored under a $193 million plan to drive recovery in communities across the state.
In Flowerdale, the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and the Premier John Brumby today announced a two-year package to rebuild and reconstruct towns and communities impacted by the worst natural disaster in Australia's history.
The Rebuilding Together Plan sets out the rebuilding priorities which have been driven by local communities, to rebuild their essential town buildings and services, to generate business growth and investment and to rehabilitate key local attractions central to their future prosperity.
It outlines the next steps the Australian and Victorian governments, the Victorian Bushfire Appeal Fund, Victorian Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority and corporate and philanthropic donors will take to deliver projects identified by the communities affected as vital to their recovery.
Highlights of Rebuilding Together include:
     * $93.4 million to support people and communities rebuild through ongoing accommodation support, counselling services and rebuilding key community assets including upgrading more than 20 community halls, building new community centres and restoring sports and recreation facilities, parks, gardens, walking and cycling trails;
     * $60.5 million to drive reconstruction including new co-located, multipurpose facilities that will improve education and recreation services in Kinglake, Flowerdale, Calignee and Marysville as well as a new primary school in Strathewen and Marysville Police Station;
     * $21.6 million to help stimulate economic recovery with support to assist small business to return to pre-fire operating levels, new tourism marketing campaigns, new National and State Park facilities to attract visitors and the restoration of the iconic Lake Mountain Alpine Resort as a major summer and winter tourism destination; and
     * $17.5 million to rehabilitate the environment and address environmental problems caused by the fires including urgent action to protect threatened species and habitats, to regenerate State forests, helping farmers and landholders restore their land and repairing critical waterways and catchments.
In the immediate aftermath of Black Saturday, the Australian and Victorian governments partnered to establish the Victorian Bushfire Appeal Fund to co-ordinate the distribution of money donated to the appeal and established the Victorian Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority to oversee the recovery and reconstruction effort.
The Rebuilding Together Plan commits a further $193 million to deliver hundreds of projects with $117 million from the Australian and Victorian governments, $56 million from the Victorian Bushfire Appeal Fund and $20 million in philanthropic and corporate donations.
Mr Rudd said the Australian Government had worked with the Victorian Government to support individuals, families, small businesses and primary producers get back on their feet.
"The terrible impact of the bushfires has been far reaching and the recovery and reconstruction effort is the largest Australia has ever faced," Mr Rudd said.
"We will continue to stand by these communities. Through this Plan we will rebuild schools, community facilities and other vital infrastructure lost in the fires. We will regenerate the natural environment, stimulate local economic recovery and continue to support individuals and families as they rebuild their homes and businesses.
"It sets out the next phase of recovery and rebuilding of bushfire-affected communities, delivering initiatives and projects to support people as they rebuild their homes, businesses, community infrastructure and local economies."
Mr Brumby said the Plan was a vital next step in the recovery and reconstruction effort and would focus on supporting and helping communities to achieve their goals.
"While the rebuilding of homes, businesses and towns devastated by the Black Saturday bushfires is an enormous task, supporting the survivors and helping them rebuild their lives is an even bigger one," Mr Brumby said.
"So far 3048 properties have been cleaned up, nearly 1000 building permits have been issued by bushfire-affected councils, 30 Community Recovery Committees have been established and temporary villages are up and running at Marysville, Kinglake, Flowerdale with temporary accommodation also opened at Whittlesea.
"But there is still much more to do. This Plan is the culmination of hours of careful thought and discussions across fire-devastated communities about what they need - not only to recover - but to secure stable, sustainable and bright futures."
VBRRA chair Christine Nixon, said communities had identified more than 900 priorities and projects in the 30 Community Recovery Plans submitted.
"The scale and number of projects identified has meant that priority had to be given to critical projects, and we will continue to work with communities to explore other funding options over the longer term, "Ms Nixon said.
Ms Nixon thanked the generosity of the corporate and philanthropic donors who together have contributed $20 million to affected communities, through the Plan.
"Hundreds of generous corporations and not-for-profit groups have made a significant difference to what we have been able to achieve through the plan and are keen to continue providing support to these communities," she said.
Victorian Bushfire Appeal Fund chair Pat McNamara said those who contributed to the Appeal should be proud of the difference it has made to individuals and communities.
"This overwhelming generosity has enabled us to not only provide significant support to individuals, but to set aside 25 per cent of the total funds raised towards important community generated projects, including those detailed in this plan," Mr McNamara said.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil.
MITCHELL: The asylum seekers, they are on a hunger strike, they're saying they'd rather die than go back to Sri Lanka. I notice you said you hadn't heard the plea from the little girl onboard the boat of asylum seekers, Brinda. I'd just like to play it to you and get your response.
CLIP: Please take us to your country. It's okay of it's not Australia. It's better if any other country takes us. We can't live in Sri Lanka.
MITCHELL: Tragic, isn't it?
PM: There are something like 40 million internally displaced or internationally displaced persons in the world today, 40 million right around the world. Each one of those plights is a tragic plight, that's the first thing.
The second is Australia proudly, since the early '50s, has been a signatory to the re-settlement provisions laid out by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees and the Refugees Convention. Since that time, this country, under governments of both persuasions, has taken in thousands and thousands of refugees from the world, as we should. The reason we did so was because of the horrors that came out of the last world war.
But we have an annual quota, and we work within that, as do the other 16 re-settlement countries. Our policy is tough, humane but fair. And for any asylum seekers, the normal processing arrangements undertaken by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees would occur in Indonesia or elsewhere for proper analysis of the case and for proper re-settlement if people are established as being bona fide refugees, and if not they're sent back home. That's why we have a Refugees Convention.
MITCHELL: Is this emotional blackmail?
PM: Well, look, I understand something of the plight of people around the world. There's been an awful civil war in Sri Lanka, and I understand what parents and children might say and might do, but we have a UN High Commission for Refugees. They have offices throughout Indonesia. They have re-settlement camps in Indonesia. They have processing, and we have a proper way of dealing with this.
It is quite dangerous for people to take to the seas. It's quite dangerous for people to fall into the hands of the people smugglers.
MITCHELL: But these people will be kept in camps for years, won't they? If they ever get to Australia it will be a long time off.
PM: Well, it depends on the case. It depends on the processing time by the UNHCR. As I said, put this into context: 40 million people around the world. We are visible to what's happening in this part of the region - 36,000 people last year arrived in Italy by boat from North Africa. This is happening around the world and the processing time depends on UNHCR staff, the details of the case, how quickly you can get through it, but we, together with those other 16 countries, then have re-settlement obligations.
MITCHELL: Australian's don't like being threatened. These people have threatened to blow up the boat, and now they're going on a hunger strike. Does that disqualify them from coming to this country, to engage in those type of threats?
PM: The provisions under the Refugees Convention just go to the individual cases concerned. That is, what's their background? Are these people in legitimate fear of death or the threat of human injury or persecution if they were to be returned to their homeland? And these are looked at in detail by UNHCR officials.
In terms of the tactics employed, you know, what really worries me, Neil, is sending out absolutely the wrong signal to people smugglers to throw people into boats which are often unseaworthy around the world, very bad for them, very bad for a proper processing of asylum seekers worldwide.
MITCHELL: But is there still a possibility these people could end up in Australia?
PM: Well, as with previous people who have arrived here, for example, as asylum seekers on boats under the Howard Government, 90 percent of those issued with so-called temporary protection visas ended up permanent residents of Australia. In the case of these, it would depend on which of the 16 re-settlement countries were allocated which group of people by the UNHCR. We're one of the 16, so I can't say yes or no to an individual, but we take responsibility whether it's in Africa, whether it's in Asia, right across the world.
MITCHELL: But given the threat to blow up the boat and now the hunger strike and other forms of pressure they're exerting, are these the sort of people you want in Australia?
PM: Well, I've said before, Neil, that I believe that it's right for the Government to have a tough, hard-line, but humane approach. The UNHCR processes, I believe, are fair. They've been around for a long time. These processes, nor the approach of the Australian Government, will be moved by any particular tactics deployed by any particular person.
MITCHELL: The hunger strike will make no difference?
PM: These individual cases should be processed on their merits, and that's what we have professional UNHCR staff to do.
MITCHELL: I interviewed another man yesterday, Alex, onboard the boat, who wanted to send a message to you, and I agreed to pass it on.
CLIP: Kevin Rudd, we are thankful of the fact that you have already taken many of our brothers and sisters into your country and given them a safe place and a haven for them to get away from the genocide back home. We are very thankful for that, and we are very thankful for everything that you have done for my Sri Lankan people, my Tamil people, so far. However, I just want to know that why was that the 260 passengers on this boat given the same opportunity that other passengers on other boats were given. Why are we being treated like we are not as humans and other people are humans? That's why we are concerned.
MITCHELL: Your response?
PM: Well, the United Nations High Commission for Refugees has processing arrangements right across the region, including in many countries of origin, so my second response is this: is that, it is irresponsible for any Prime Minister of Australia to send out a message of positive encouragement to people smugglers in the region. It creates an industry, which, as I've said before, one of the vilest on earth, and secondly, it is potentially very dangerous for people putting their lives into the hands of such people. So I'm not going to be in the business of sending out messages to people smugglers in the region and more broadly across the world that somehow this is a legitimate trade - it is not. It is obnoxious and vile.
MITCHELL: How is what is happening here any different to what happened with the Tampa?
PM: Well, in the case of this particular vessel, of course, it has been interdicted by the Indonesian navy and the Indonesian authorities-
MITCHELL: At our request. At your request.
PM: In Indonesian waters. Well, the Indonesians cooperate with us all the time, and they have done so for a long, long time. Can I just make this point - we have had some 82 separate disruptions engaged in in the region, including in partnership with Indonesian authorities, going back a long, long time, so in that respect there is nothing particularly unique about one disruption or another.
What you had, of course, since the last election, is that we did make changes to the immigration law, for which we make no apology. We abolished the Pacific solution.
MITCHELL: But the Federal Police say that's one of the reasons that more people are coming. It's a ten-time increase this year. Ten times!
PM: Well, let me put that into some context, Neil. We've had boats arrive here every year for the last 20 years. In the period of the Howard Government, nearly 250 boats came to this country with nearly 15,000 people. After the Howard Government introduced their so-called silver bullet solution, temporary protection visas, arrivals went through the roof for the subsequent two years-
MITCHELL: So you deny it anything to do with your new policies?
PM: Well, we believe that our processes and policies out there on border protection are tough and they are humane-
MITCHELL: But are they leading to an increase in the number of people trying to get here. The Federal Police say they are.
PM: Well, let's look at how this actually works around the world - push factors. What has changed? Why have we just listened to, for example, two folk from Sri Lanka? There's been a civil war in Sri Lanka in the last 12 months. That didn't happen two years ago, three years ago, five years ago, seven years ago. Sri Lanka is where it is, off the Indian coast, in the Indian Ocean-
MITCHELL: Are you saying circumstances in Sri Lanka have worsened to the point that more people are trying to get here? It's nothing to do with your policies?
PM: What I'm saying Neil is that, and if you speak to our counterparts in the region they will say exactly the same thing - what are the big change factors? There's been a civil war in Sri Lanka, the extraordinarily violent military operation on the Jaffna peninsula, and the resultant displacement of a whole lot of people from that part of Sri Lanka. And the second thing is this: the United Nations Secretary-General, I think, said that 2008 or 2009 was the most violent year in Afghanistan, that there has been since 2001-02, so as a result, you've got new push factors. People exiting, but can I say, not just to this part of the world, but right across the world, and that's what we're dealing with.
MITCHELL: Does that mean you need to ramp up border protection further?
PM: Well, in the last budget we allocated an additional $650 million, which involves extra police resources in the region, police resources working in liaison with our counterparts in Sri Lanka, in South-East Asia and in various ports, similarly with immigration officials, similarly with our Defence cooperation, and similarly with customs officials. These are practical measures that you take, and we believe that these are stronger in terms of the way in which you handle things out there in what is a very difficult operating environment than what's been the case in the past.
MITCHELL: Will you look at a new visa class that could perhaps get these people off the boat and into the country more quickly while they're assessed? A new class of visa.
PM: Well, this, as I notice, has been put up the flagpole by our political opponents, and it seems to be a temporary protection visa by another name. I simply go back to the point this was introduced by the Howard Government as their silver-bullet solution in '99 but in the next two years we got nearly 10,000 people arrive in this country on nearly 100 boats. Now, can I just say, against any measure, there is not any evidence that that had any effect whatsoever.
MITCHELL: Well, ok, but I just make the point that it's increased ten times in the last year and the Federal Police are saying that's in part response to your policies.
PM: Well, can I just say, Neil, if you look at the period that I've been in Government, nearly two years, we've had something like 38 boats arrive with about 1,700-1,800 individuals. In the period of the Howard Government, nearly 250 boats, nearly 15,000 individuals. That's probably, on average, about 20 per year, and you know something? The push factors vary every year, in terms what's happening in the region and in the world. The key thing is to have a continued, consistent policy- tough, hardline, humane, fair. We believe we've got the balance right.
MITCHELL: It's just we've got a boatload of people sitting there, including kids and pregnant women, threatening hunger strikes, pleas, they're in a dreadful situation. Is this humane?
PM: The business of Government is tough. You always-
MITCHELL: You say it's humane. Is it humane?
PM: What is humane is us being fully party to the provisions of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees and the Convention and honouring our obligations, and you know something? The UNHCR has said that we are working quietly and consistent with the provisions which were signed up to by the Menzies Government in the '50s. That was not the case under my predecessor. So your question is about humane treatment - we do so in a manner fully consistent with the provisions of our international obligations. But you know something? These are tough decisions. No-one like to see anyone in pain, no-one likes to see anyone in difficulty, but my job as Prime Minister of Australia is to make tough decisions which are balanced, tough, fair.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister's with me. Judy, go ahead, please.
CALLER: Good morning, Neil, Prime Minister.
PM: G'day, Judy.
CALLER: I would like to ask you to place pressure on that naval ship hanging off to remove the pregnant women and the children. They should not be forced to starve. That is inhumane.
MITCHELL: Well they're not part of the hunger strike. In fairness, the children, nobody under 21 or the pregnant women are part of the hunger strike.
CALLER: Okay, well that is fine then.
MITCHELL: Now, (inaudible), but they have been offered it. What do you think the Australian people want here? Do they want to let these people into the country or not?
PM: I believe that the people of Australia elected their Government to maintain a consistent policy which is tough but fair. The tough lies in what we're doing out there with our law enforcement authorities right across the region and in the air-sea gap between South-East Asia and Australia and the fair lies in us complying with our requirements under the UN High Commission for Refugees Convention.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break, come back with more from the Prime Minister, other issues, in a moment.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with me. We'll talk one more call, then we're going to move on to other matters. Joseph, go ahead please.
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister. Good morning, Neil.
PM: Good morning, Joseph.
CALLER: I just want to ask from you, please help these people because you very well know what has happened in Sri Lanka for last six months. The people are dying there. I don't want to say how they are dying. They are dying and they are desperate to go to another country. It doesn't matter whether it is Australia or any other country. These people are not like, you know, people in Indonesia that are queue jumpers. They are not queue jumpers. They are the people, these people are desperate to come to this land, or to any other land. You can see the risks that they have taken. No mother, father will take that risk with this, you know, children that I have seen in the television, to come to this country. I am a refugee too. I ask you this on behalf of these people, to do something. The political situation is different. Please.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister.
PM: Well, thank you, Joseph, for your opinion, as put, obviously, with a whole lot of passion. Can I say two things? One is I'm acutely conscious of what's happened in the Jaffna peninsula in Sri Lanka in recent times. There has been a bloody civil war. That's why we, at a diplomatic and political level, including myself to the Sri Lankan President, actively engage with other countries to seek to assist the Sri Lankans in stabilising the domestic political situation to make it safe for the Tamils to remain in Sri Lanka. That's the first point.
The second is, however, in terms of helping people who feel or who are legitimately the subject of persecution, that is, they have a legitimate fear of persecution within Sri Lanka, to help them through the processes of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees. We don't want to encourage people smugglers. It's dangerous, and it's wrong.
MITCHELL: Joseph, you said you're a refugee. When did you come here, and how?
CALLER: In 1996.
MITCHELL: Legally?
CALLER: Yeah.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for calling. A couple of very quick issues if I may, Prime Minister - National Australia Bank's made significant cuts to fees. I assume you'd like the others to follow?
PM: We would encourage competitive arrangements across the banks to help working families out there to the greatest extent possible. The NAB's led the way. I'd encourage the others to do the same, and you know something? There would be some modest cheering in the streets were it to occur.
MITCHELL: Ah, your bank guarantee gives you a bit of moral power there. Is that about time that came off?
PM: One of things we discussed at the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh was this: how do you coordinate the withdrawal of guarantees provided to banks across all the major banks worldwide? The problem is, if it's done in a haphazard way, you have the possibility of capital flight from one country to another. We therefore have to do this very sensitively and carefully. We don't want to pull the rug from under confidence. We don't want to pull the rug from under recovery.
MITCHELL: Would you agree an interest rate rise looks inevitable on Cup Day?
PM: Can I say, Neil, nice try. The function of the Prime Minister of Australia is not to speculate on future interest rate changes. That is the province of the Reserve Bank and the Reserve Bank board. But I've said consistently, interest rates will go up because they've been brought to emergency lows. I don't see any point whatsoever in trying to be cute with people about that. I've said this for months, because they've been reduced by nearly four percentage points, because of the impact of the global financial crisis, and as the Governor has said in his most recent statement, they are likely to be heading up.
MITCHELL: So if you're borrowing money, take care?
PM: Well, I think anyone who takes out a significant loan for a house, you've just got to do your sums, and you've got to understand where, to use the Reserve Bank Governor's term, historical norms of interest rates might be, and therefore make the calculation for the future.
MITCHELL: What about the dollar? We're getting close to parity with the US. What does that say about our economy?
PM: It says that the international financial markets and currency markets globally, we regard it as a strong economic performer. I mean, let's go to a couple of quick points. This is the fastest growing economy of all the developed economies. Secondly, it's the only one to have avoided recession. Thirdly, at the second-lowest unemployment amongst the major advanced economies, we're the lowest debt, the lowest deficit. People look at that, they look at our export potential with the major economies of East Asia, including China. They say 'this is a strong place to be'. The problem is, the dollar goes up, makes it harder for our other exporters.
MITCHELL: So is it time to wind back the stimulus?
PM: Well, you know something about the infrastructure stimulus strategy that we've put in is that it's targeted and temporary. It goes up, it comes down. It was designed that way when we put it in.
MITCHELL: But is it time to come down?
PM: Well, the way in which it was designed is that by the time we reach the end of this financial year, two thirds of it will have been invested. And that's the way in which it's been staged, to put maximum injection up front, and to tail down.
MITCHELL: Are you looking at winding it back?
PM: No, we have said that the in-built, shall I say increase and decrease of it, is appropriately tailored to what is still a very uncertain global economic environment. As the Treasurer has said, continue to review our fiscal policy settings depending on global economic conditions.
MITCHELL: Australia Post is putting up the price of stamps. How do they justify that when there's a $260 million profit? You're the boss.
PM: Good question. I don't know.
MITCHELL: Looking at it?
PM: Yeah, I will.
MITCHELL: Ever smack your children?
PM: I think I would be absolutely misleading your listeners to suggest that I had not. I have. And the rule that's been applied in our family ever since they were tots is that if they're doing something dangerous they'll get a, you know, whack across the knuckles.
MITCHELL: Did it work?
PM: Well-
MITCHELL: They're still with us.
PM: They're still with us. But you know something, it's all things in moderation. I don't think, I think the key thing parents have got to remind is just be very mindful, if you're a parent, and you're sometimes feeling very angry, that is the time not to think about that. The key thing is a gentle tap on the wrists which is usually, if you know anything about two- and three-year-olds, the cause of the quivering bottom lip and the general collapse into tears. It usually registers the message that sticking your finger into that power socket is generally a bad idea, don't do it.
MITCHELL: Got a job for Peter Costello?
PM: Peter Costello, as I've said before, he's made a distinguished contribution to Australia and I'm sure we'll have a further discussion about what might be appropriate for him in the future.
MITCHELL: Hasn't happened yet?
PM: We've had some discussions, as he and I have said, after he announced his initial intention to step down. We've had further discussions, so I'm not misleading you on that. And, but, we've still got further discussions to go. I think, as I've said, in terms of certain international contributions he's made in the past, and other contributions, he's got something further to add to Australia. Not every good person is a member of the Labor party. Not ever bad person is a member of the Liberal party. Let's just get beyond, I think, that sort of simplistic way of looking at people's ability to contribute to our national life.
MITCHELL: And will you contest his seat of Higgins?
PM: Ah, the state organisation here in Victoria hasn't given me any advice on that.
MITCHELL: OK. And just quickly on the matter of health, I read that infections are 50% less in private hospitals - 50% less. Now, that's being used as argument to continue your rebate, but surely that says that in Australia there's two systems of healthcare. You've got money, you get better care.
PM: One of the reasons why we're determined to do everything we can for long-term reform of the health and hospital system nationally is we don't want that to unfold. We don't want there to be a first- and second-class health system in Australia.
I'm a big supporter of private health care system. I've always had private health insurance. I don't have any problems with all that.
Secondly, however, you've got to make sure that those depending on the public system have a continued world-class system and that's why, together with the Health Minister, we've been out conducting 58, I think, now, direct consultations with health, with hospital communities around Australia, including yesterday or the day before at Murray Bridge out in South Australia.
MITCHELL: And the buck is about to stop?
PM: As I said to you before, the buck stops with me on all this. I said before the election - dead serious about it - that we would bring down a report recommending options for the future of the reform of the health and hospital system. That's out there. We're road testing its 123 recommendations. We'll sit down with the Premiers and Chief Ministers end of year and I said we'll determine our policy position early next year.
MITCHELL: And speaking of health - how's the gut?
PM: Well, it was in a pain.
MITCHELL: Have you recovered?
PM: Yeah, I've been okay. I came back from the United States - I think the docs would confirm this - with a very acute stomach bug, as I gather a number of our travelling party, and that was not pleasant. Then, when I went off to have it tested, they discovered all these gallstones. So, what is the cause of my malady? Who knows, Neil? But I'm fine, fighting fit.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


The Prime Minister will be hosting a web chat from 9am to 10am, Thursday 22 October 2009 on topics including mental health, internet filtering, climate change, alcohol-fuelled violence and how young people can be empowered to shape the decisions that affect their lives.
These online events are a dynamic and important mechanism to enable the Australian people to engage with the Government and get involved in strengthening the democratic process in Australia. For more information visit the PM's Web Chat page.


Prime Minister: We, the Australian Government, have been proud partners with the Victorian Government in this difficult task of rebuilding. So far, as the Australian Government, we've invested some $400 million in one form of reconstruction or recovery effort after another. But we're here today, of course, to go to the next stage, which is together to launch this document, Rebuilding Together: a state-wide plan for bushfire reconstruction and recovery.
As part of this plan- this one here- which Christine appropriately thrust in my direction- this one here - is launching this plan, which reflects, of course, a state-wide plan for bushfire reconstruction recovery. And what you see reflected in it is a contribution between the two Governments, the Australian Government and the Victorian Government, of $117 million toward the cost of further reconstruction and recovery. This is important work. And it goes to many, many practical areas which will assist the reconstruction process. We have of course some $90 million to support people in communities as they rebuild. Some $60 million to actively support and drive the reconstruction task. Some $20 million to help stimulate local economic activity. Some $17 million to help rehabilitate the local environment. What we said at the time, John and myself, is brick by brick, house by house, school by school, community by community, we would be there from the beginning to the end, to make sure that these communities are rebuilt. And today represents another step, an important step in that recovery process.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


Seven new regional, urban and outer urban locations across Tasmania will receive superfast optical fibre broadband connections with speeds of 100 megabits per second under Stage 2 of the National Broadband Network rollout in Tasmania.
The seven locations are:
- Sorell
- Deloraine
- George Town
- St Helens
- Triabunna
- Kingston Beach
- South Hobart
The Stage 2 rollout will also include the completion of important backbone optic fibre transmission links on the East Coast, to Kingston and to the new industrial hub being developed at Westbury.
Work will begin immediately on detailed planning for Stage 2 of the National Broadband Network rollout in Tasmania, including timeframes, number of premises, and technical and procurement details.
The stage 2 rollout will connect communities who are mostly underserviced relative to major metropolitan areas and stand most to gain from high speed broadband services including health, education and e-commerce services.
In partnership, the State and Federal Governments are connecting the homes, businesses and schools of the island state to the digital economy and the world, which will foster the creation of new industries and clever jobs.
In July 2009, the communities of Smithton, Midway Point and Scottsdale were announced for Stage 1 NBN rollout in Tasmania. Construction works for Stage 1 are underway and the first services are expected to be available mid 2010.
The NBN in Tasmania will connect 200,000 Tasmanian premises to speeds of 100 megabits per second. The remainder of the state will be served by next generation wireless and satellite networks offering minimum speeds of 12 megabits per second.


The Australian Government welcomes the announcement that there will be a second round of voting in Afghanistan's Presidential Election on 7 November.
The Government commends the Afghan people and the candidates for the patience they have shown in support of Afghanistan's legal and constitutional processes.
Australia provided support during the first round election and we are already prepared to assist the Afghan election authorities with the second round election, including through the 120 combat troops on the ground in Oruzgan province who provided security for the first round of voting.



O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, Malcolm Turnbull accused you today of an outburst of contrived indignation in response to Wilson Tuckey to distract attention from the comprehensive failure of your border protection policies. If you regard your border protection policies as a success, what is your measure of success?
PM: Well the first thing Kerry is to ensure that we've got the effective interdiction of vessels that are seeking to bring asylum seekers from various parts of the world- that they are properly processed through our mandatory detention centre on Christmas Island. And those who are not valid asylum seekers sent straight back home, and those who are determined to be asylum seekers with legitimate refugee claims are then appropriately resettled through the resettlement processes. But can I just add one point. It then becomes a question of standing back and looking at how we're progressing this against some historical benchmarks as well. And I just say this - the period of the Howard government, nearly 250 boats arrived on our shores bringing about 15,000 or almost 15,000 asylum seekers.
The two years that we've been in Government we've had 37 or 39 boats arrive with about 1700 or 1800 people. This has been a problem in the past, it's a problem today - it'll be a problem in the future. The key is to have a balanced policy, one which is both tough but humane. That's our approach and we'll stick to it.
O'BRIEN: Ok, so success for you is keeping those asylum seekers off Australian shores? It's not so much about keeping them away from Christmas Island; it's about keeping them off Australia's shores.
PM: It's called an orderly migration program and when you're dealing with questions of asylum seekers, having an orderly process there which deals with humanitarian considerations, and our obligations under the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. If you extend it out, it's having effective arrangements with so-called transit countries, like Malaysia and Indonesia. Effective also engagement with sources countries, in this case Iraq, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.You see, if you are dealing with this effectively, it is the entire, shall I say, spectrum form source country, transit country, people on the high seas, as well as then, proper processing arrangements and dealing with asylum seekers if they had established to have that status. And if they're not, they are illegal immigrants seeking to come here for economic reasons and they are sent back home. So you ask what success is, it's having effective measures at each stage along the way.
O'BRIEN: You might not like the way he said it, but do you have to accept that Wilson Tuckey has a point, that there is a risk from time to time that a terrorist organisation may well be tempted to use the asylum seeker process to put a terrorist or terrorists into Australia?
PM: Kerry, the reason why this Government and its predecessor has insisted on mandatory health checks, mandatory security checks and mandatory identity checks on people coming to the country as asylum seekers is precisely to obtain confidence about their ultimate security status. In the past that's been the case, the last two years that's been the case and it will be the case into the future. You know as well as I do that what Mr Tuckey - backed by Mr Turnbull - was up to today was throwing out an entirely new scare campaign. A scare campaign not just about asylum seekers, which the Liberals are again hauling up to flagpole, but a specific scare campaign linking asylum seekers to an influx of terrorists into the country.Our policy is clear-cut. It's balanced. It is about ensuring that we have a tough, hardline approach to people smuggling, but a fair and humane approach when it comes to the processing of asylum seekers. We believe we've got that balance right.
O'BRIEN: Mr Turnbull quoted Julia Gillard back at you today, from her days as shadow immigration minister with her catchcry: "Another boat, another failure." Why doesn't that apply to you right now? Two boats in two days - Ashmore Island, Christmas Island, and the asylum seekers on the Oceanic Viking still trying to land in an Indonesian port and possibly still having to stay on the boat for another two days.
PM: On the latter point first, our discussions with the Indonesians of course have enabled Indonesians to make their own conclusions about which is the appropriate port for that particular vessel to arrive at. That's a matter for them. And you know as well as I do that the circumstances surrounding it have been to do with the particular humanitarian concerns associated with that vessel. More broadly on your point about numbers, can I just say this: let's put this into a global and historical context for Australia. First of all, worldwide we have had in the early part of the 2000s, we've had a reduction, significantly, massively, in the number of Iraqi, Afghan and Sri Lankans seeking asylum seekers all around the world. Falls by 50, 60, 70 per cent, as conditions in those countries, in part and in some cases temporarily, stabilised.
Then what you've had in the period since 2005, '06, '07, '08 is, in fact, a reversal of those security circumstances. We've seen the war break out for example in Sri Lanka, the end of the peace process there. You've seen of course the security situation deteriorate in Afghanistan, and also continuing concerns in various parts of Iraq. So what have we seen in that period of time? All the outflow of asylum seekers from those countries again go up by 50, 100, 150 per cent in the last several years. These are global factors. Our national challenge is to deal with this systematically, and we have done so in a coherent policy, which again maintains the balance between hardline on people smugglers, and at the same time humane and fair ,in the processing of asylum seekers, without using a fear campaign based on asylum seekers which the Liberal Party led, I say, by a failing leader, is seeking to deploy in the Australian political debate.
O'BRIEN: You talked this week of a new level of cooperation now needed with Indonesia over this issue. If your border protection policies are working, why do you need a new level of cooperation with Indonesia- unless it's because you fear that your own attempts to deal with the flow of asylum seekers is breaking down?
PM: Well, what you need to do of course, Kerry, is tailor your overall approach to emerging threats and challenges, and, therefore, the relationship we have got with the Indonesians, which is working well, in a whole range of security fields, needs of course to be extended and broadened and that's why President Yudhoyono and I have agreed to develop a new framework, but a framework which exists in a manner consistent with the Lombok Treaty which was negotiated some time ago, which governs the overall security relationship between our two countries.
O'BRIEN: But if I could just break in, if I could just break in there-
PM: President Yudhoyono has said to me, Kerry, that he is facing a large new inflow himself, therefore he's looking to us to help with his problems as well. The Malaysian Prime Minister, Prime Minister Najib is saying the same, because Malaysia is often the first point of call for Sri Lankans coming out of Colombo. You see, everyone is facing a parallel challenge, it makes sense to work together.
O'BRIEN: But if it's true that you are preparing to offer more money to Indonesia, and we are told that this, that part of this deal will be on the basis of each boat of asylum seekers that they intercept, where asylum seekers who end up in Indonesia, you will pay them money for that, that screams does it not, that you are essentially trying to get the Indonesians to take care of your problem for you? That, in fact, asylum seekers will be processed much more slowly there than they might be in Australia, that the conditions in Indonesia won't be as reasonable as they are in Australia for all sorts of reasons, where is the humanity in your approach there?
PM: Humanity consists in ensuring that all of our processes in Australia, on Christmas Island, and in the Indonesian archipelago and Malaysia and elsewhere are consistent with UNHCR processes. That's why we have our approach. The previous government chose to flout that, and brought in instead the Pacific Solution. They had kids behind razor wire, they had a range of different interventions which were designed for a domestic political audience, not in dealing in a manner which got the balance right between tough and hardline on people smugglers on the one hand and being balanced and humane and fair in dealing with asylum seekers on the other.
And can I just say this, across the entire region, all countries are wrestling with this challenge, it just makes sense to cooperate. You ask what will be the content of our new framework agreement with the Indonesians - our officials will work that through over the months ahead, as it should be. But can I say also, with the Indonesians, it's not going to be possible for them to deploy their navy on every single occasion that a boat may emerge in or through their archipelago. This is vast archipelago, thousands of islands spread over thousands of kilometres, as is the case with the extended maritime zone of Australia. These are complex challenges for us all, but frankly if you look at the Mediterranean, where you have got tens of thousands of asylum seekers streaming into Europe from North Africa. You have people from Colombo currently arriving by boat into Canada. It's a global problem, requiring both global, regional and national solutions. We believe we've got this balance right.
O'BRIEN: Not a totally unrelated issue Mr Rudd- your Treasury head Ken Henry in a major speech in Brisbane today projected startling new figures for Australia's population growth, substantially boosted by immigration as well as a rise in the birth rate. A 60 per cent increase in Australia's population over the next four decades, which is a significant jump again on the projections that Treasury made only two years ago. In other words, moving upward rapidly, and in a way that is not easy to predict. Does that suggest to you, when you think of all of the associated problems about trying to plan for that, in terms of urban- he talks about Sydney with a population of seven million, Melbourne a population of seven million, Brisbane four million. Is this going to be a time for national leadership to come well and truly to the fore, across the whole spectrum of problems thrown up by that?
PM: Well first of all Kerry, let me just say: I actually believe in a big Australia. I make no apology for that. I actually think it's good news that our population is growing. Contrast that with many countries in Europe where in fact it's heading in the reverse direction. I think it's good for us, it's good for our national security long term, it's good in terms of what we can sustain as a nation. Secondly, on the specific national leadership questions that you point to, I agree with you 110 per cent. Why do you think that we are now, for the first time in this country's history taking national leadership for the roll-out of national infrastructure, and new national broadband network. For the first time the Australian Government investing directly in urban rail projects across Australia, for the first time the Australian Government taking a direct engagement with the planning of our cities, and also with, for example, the housing approval processes and land supply arrangements of the states and territories and local government. Why? National leadership is necessary to plan for the future of our population, a challenge which has left languished before.
O'BRIEN: But this is about- I'm suggesting, national leadership, which takes a lot of responsibility from the states, many of whom have failed demonstrably in a number of these key areas. And secondly, Ken Henry today expressed personal pessimism about Australia's capacity on its past record, to be able to deal with environmental sustainability, while housing and essentially absorbing this big population.
PM: Well, we have a complex set of future challenges to deal with. This Government was elected not just to deal with the challenges which none of us predicted, namely wrestling the global financial crisis and the global economic recession, and coming through that as the only economy in the advanced world to have generated positive growth in the last year. But on top of that, to actually plan for the future. Why are we engaged in a national debate now over the future shape of our hospital system for the next 25 years? Why are we building the education revolution, why are we laying out a national infrastructure plan - not just in telecommunications but elsewhere - because we need to prepare for the significant increase in population, and boost long-term productivity growth.
O'BRIEN: But Dr Henry's message today, very briefly because we are out of time, Dr Henry's message today is that the population growth is going to be substantially more even than what you are planning your policies on today. In other words, it's going to be, the demand will be much greater again.
PM: It's going to be significant. And to take your earlier point about environmental impacts, you are right, it's massive. That is why we are taking such a leading position on climate change, but also the long-term sustainability of the Murray Darling and the proper provision of water supplies for the future. Hence again, our first-time investment in urban water projects right across the country. This Government is building for the future; we call it nation-building for the future. But let's be optimistic about the fact that this country is growing, so many around the world are heading the other way.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd we're out of time, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Good to be with you.


PM: I've seen some comments from Mr Tuckey this morning. The first point I'd make is that in Australia, for a long, long time, we have applied health checks and security checks to asylum seekers wherever they come from around the world. And these are prudent approaches, it's the right approach, to ensure that folk who come to our country have met basic physical standards, but also met basic security standards as well. And this has been the case for a long, long time and it is the case today as well.
But when I look at these remarks today, they are of an entirely different character. You know, since World War II we've had nearly three quarters of a million refugees make their home in Australia. We've had about 150,000 come to make their home in Australia in the period of the Howard Government, 15,000 or so arrived by boat in the period of the Howard Government.
So what is Mr Tuckey actually saying about all those people? I think these are deeply divisive, disgusting remarks and they do not belong in any mainstream Australian political party. I think Mr Turnbull should show some leadership, and withdraw his support for Mr Tuckey's preselection as a Liberal candidate for the next election.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that there are no terrorists onboard these boats that are coming to Australia?
PM: Can I say that, throughout the period that I've been Prime Minister, and I'm sure the case before as well, when it comes to asylum seekers, whether by boat or by other means, necessary security checks are made to ensure that people pass security muster. That's what they're there for. Always have been, and will be into the future. Therefore, that's the way in which you handle these things. 
But to go out there and to smear asylum seekers in the way in which Mr Tuckey has done, I say again, is divisive, I think is disgusting, and I don't believe belongs in a mainstream political party today.
JOURNALIST: Do you apologise for calling asylum seekers illegal immigrants?
PM: I stand by everything that I have said, because we are dealing with a combination of asylum seekers, illegal immigration - we've already tossed back to various countries around the world, people who did not pass basic refugee tests. So we are dealing with both those challenges. These remarks by Mr Tuckey are of an entirely different order, and it's time Mr Turnbull showed some leadership, some character, some backbone, and withdrew publicly and formally his support for Mr Tuckey's preselection as a Liberal candidate for the next election.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Do you think it's time everyone, including yourself, approached this issue with a little more compassion?
PM: Our approach to asylum seekers has been consistent with everything we said to the Australian people prior to the last election. We said what we would do by way of policy changes. We've done that. We've changed Temporary Protection visas. We've done what we said we'd do in relation to the Pacific Solution. We've taken children away from behind the razor wire.
These are consistent with what we said prior to the election. I notice that on each of those measures, our political opponents did not object at the time when we made those changes. Our approach is clear-cut. We believe in a tough but humane approach to asylum seekers. It's consistent with what we said to the Australian people before the election.
This is hard for all Governments around the world. But you know, if you're being serious about this, we are dealing with challenges in source countries, dealing with challenges in transit countries, dealing with challenges of course in interdicting vessels at sea, and dealing of course with the processes of mandatory detention of proper processing to ensure that you're dealing with the physical and security questions which are part and parcel of the proper processes of Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Oh what SBY and I have talked about is a new framework. We have talked about this on the phone. We have talked about it in our meeting the other day. A new framework for cooperation between the two Governments on people smuggling. The Lombok Treaty makes clear that people smuggling is a focus for bilateral cooperation. Bali Process does that multilaterally across the countries of the region. And what the Indonesian President and I are talking about is a fresh framework for how we take that level of cooperation to a new level.
Obviously, as I said I think in the Parliament yesterday, we'll be looking at how we can better resource our friends in Indonesia and elsewhere to assist with some of these challenges, and we'll continue to work our way through the detail in the months ahead.
Any proper approach, any proper approach to dealing with the problem of people smuggling means that you must be dealing in source countries, as we are seeking to do in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka and elsewhere, in transit countries, the challenges that we're dealing with our friends in South East Asia, as well as our own policies here at home. Matthew, you had a question.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the last election result showed that the man in the street is uncomfortable with the kind of rhetoric that we are hearing again from the Opposition on this issue? And in other words, do you believe that the Opposition is consciously, purposely politicising this and in the process defying public expectation?
PM: I'll leave it for the Australian people to make up their own mind on these matters. But what I'd say is that we were very clear-cut about what we would do prior to the last election. And we've honoured those commitments. We believe we've got a balanced policy, which is tough when it comes to people smuggling, which is humane when it comes to dealing with asylum seekers.
That's the sort of balance I believe the Australian people want to see. As my last though is this, it's almost as if any time a Liberal leader gets into serious trouble out comes old faithful, which is how to whack the asylum seekers card. And can I say, I think as a country we're better than that. It's time to move on to a mature approach. Can I say more broadly, the challenge for people smuggling and boat arrivals will be with us into the future, as well. It's been with us since Vietnamese boat people started arriving here in the late 1970's.
As I've said in recent interviews, we've had boats arriving in this country I think, every year for the last, you know, 20 years or so. And they surge and they fall, they surge and they fall, as I said in the Parliament yesterday. Look what's happened with the figures on Iraq, on Afghanistan and also on other parts of the region as well, like Sri Lanka.
What we've seen in this country is a surge in activity, when we've seen a global surge in activity. What you've seen is a contraction in activity, when you've seen those numbers fall around the world. So our challenge as civilised countries is to work with partner countries around the world and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to work out the best solution to what is a huge problem for everybody.
We believe we've got the best and most balanced approach, the pressures will continue in the future. We're going to have these sorts of challenges in the future as well, but we'll maintain an approach which we believe to be balanced, one which is tough, but humane in dealing with the challenges of people smuggling. Laurie?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'd like to ask you the question that's dominating talkback radio today. We've got the case of a bloke who has been charged with sending harassing (inaudible) letters to the families of diggers who've died. Should we have a provision whereby someone like that if they're convicted can have their citizenship withdrawn (inaudible)
PM: First thing I'd say Laurie is that I'm very mindful that there is a criminal investigation on foot, and I therefore have to be very careful about what I say. So I make that very clear statement upfront. The second is, when you think of the families involved here, and I have met many of them at the funerals of their sons, every decent-minded Australian should be giving those families not just a thought but a prayer and their support, in any practical way when these horrible things are brought back to their memory, and brought back in a way which is lacking all humanity. On the question you ask about the law, as this matter proceeds and subsequent to its conclusion and investigation, and I make no comments in terms of the content of the investigation which is underway, or the individual - it's important to reflect upon the strength of our laws generally in dealing with cases in the future where some of the assumptions underpinning immigration conditions have not been honoured. I do not have a specific response to that. I want to reflect on this, and look carefully at what emerges from this and related cases.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) but you will consider changing the law so that you can-
PM: No, I'll be very specific about what I say Laurie, I want to reflect on it. I'm very careful about what I say in terms of the specifics of this case. There is a criminal investigation underway. But my recollection of the provisions of Australian immigration law is that certain undertakings are made when people come to this country.
It may or may not be possible to adjust those laws. I'd like to reflect however, on their application in individual cases and whether any change in the future may be necessary. I don't wish to create an expectation in that respect. I simply want to examine afresh. You know, when you pick up the front page of the Tele today, I think people, I think their stomachs turn.
Thank you.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Youth Kate Ellis today announced $10 million to set up five new youth community centres across Australia.
This idea was one of the top ten ideas at the 2020 Youth Summit in April 2008, in which 100 young Australians came together in an historic meeting to help shape our national agenda.
The Rudd Government is committed to listening to young people and working with them to deliver their innovative ideas to help shape the nation's future.
The combined arts, business and community centres will be established in Priority Employment Areas and will provide opportunities for young people to take part in community activities.
The centres will offer a safe place for young people to make friends and develop new skills to support their education, training and employment
The youth community centres may be existing buildings that are refurbished or newly built premises. Young people will also get training and employment opportunities during the design and construction phase.
The centre locations will be decided based on their ongoing sustainability, existing local facilities and the level of youth disadvantage in the community.
The five youth centres are part of the $300 million Local Jobs funding secured by the Greens as part of the Government's economic stimulus package.
The announcement coincides with the launch of a nationwide youth consultation - the National Conversation - which is part of the National Strategy for Young Australians.
For more information visit www.youth.gov.au


PM: I've seen some comments from Mr Tuckey this morning. The first point I'd make is that in Australia, for a long, long time, we have applied health checks and security checks to asylum seekers wherever they come from around the world. And these are prudent approaches, it's the right approach, to ensure that folk who come to our country have met basic physical standards, but also met basic security standards as well. And this has been the case for a long, long time and it is the case today as well.
But when I look at these remarks today, they are of an entirely different character. You know, since World War II we've had nearly three quarters of a million refugees make their home in Australia. We've had about 150,000 come to make their home in Australia in the period of the Howard Government, 15,000 or so arrived by boat in the period of the Howard Government.
So what is Mr Tuckey actually saying about all those people? I think these are deeply divisive, disgusting remarks and they do not belong in any mainstream Australian political party. I think Mr Turnbull should show some leadership, and withdraw his support for Mr Tuckey's preselection as a Liberal candidate for the next election.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you confident that there are no terrorists onboard these boats that are coming to Australia?
PM: Can I say that, throughout the period that I've been Prime Minister, and I'm sure the case before as well, when it comes to asylum seekers, whether by boat or by other means, necessary security checks are made to ensure that people pass security muster. That's what they're there for. Always have been, and will be into the future. Therefore, that's the way in which you handle these things. 
But to go out there and to smear asylum seekers in the way in which Mr Tuckey has done, I say again, is divisive, I think is disgusting, and I don't believe belongs in a mainstream political party today.
JOURNALIST: Do you apologise for calling asylum seekers illegal immigrants?
PM: I stand by everything that I have said, because we are dealing with a combination of asylum seekers, illegal immigration - we've already tossed back to various countries around the world, people who did not pass basic refugee tests. So we are dealing with both those challenges. These remarks by Mr Tuckey are of an entirely different order, and it's time Mr Turnbull showed some leadership, some character, some backbone, and withdrew publicly and formally his support for Mr Tuckey's preselection as a Liberal candidate for the next election.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Do you think it's time everyone, including yourself, approached this issue with a little more compassion?
PM: Our approach to asylum seekers has been consistent with everything we said to the Australian people prior to the last election. We said what we would do by way of policy changes. We've done that. We've changed Temporary Protection visas. We've done what we said we'd do in relation to the Pacific Solution. We've taken children away from behind the razor wire.
These are consistent with what we said prior to the election. I notice that on each of those measures, our political opponents did not object at the time when we made those changes. Our approach is clear-cut. We believe in a tough but humane approach to asylum seekers. It's consistent with what we said to the Australian people before the election.
This is hard for all Governments around the world. But you know, if you're being serious about this, we are dealing with challenges in source countries, dealing with challenges in transit countries, dealing with challenges of course in interdicting vessels at sea, and dealing of course with the processes of mandatory detention of proper processing to ensure that you're dealing with the physical and security questions which are part and parcel of the proper processes of Government.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Oh what SBY and I have talked about is a new framework. We have talked about this on the phone. We have talked about it in our meeting the other day. A new framework for cooperation between the two Governments on people smuggling. The Lombok Treaty makes clear that people smuggling is a focus for bilateral cooperation. Bali Process does that multilaterally across the countries of the region. And what the Indonesian President and I are talking about is a fresh framework for how we take that level of cooperation to a new level.
Obviously, as I said I think in the Parliament yesterday, we'll be looking at how we can better resource our friends in Indonesia and elsewhere to assist with some of these challenges, and we'll continue to work our way through the detail in the months ahead.
Any proper approach, any proper approach to dealing with the problem of people smuggling means that you must be dealing in source countries, as we are seeking to do in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka and elsewhere, in transit countries, the challenges that we're dealing with our friends in South East Asia, as well as our own policies here at home. Matthew, you had a question.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the last election result showed that the man in the street is uncomfortable with the kind of rhetoric that we are hearing again from the Opposition on this issue? And in other words, do you believe that the Opposition is consciously, purposely politicising this and in the process defying public expectation?
PM: I'll leave it for the Australian people to make up their own mind on these matters. But what I'd say is that we were very clear-cut about what we would do prior to the last election. And we've honoured those commitments. We believe we've got a balanced policy, which is tough when it comes to people smuggling, which is humane when it comes to dealing with asylum seekers.
That's the sort of balance I believe the Australian people want to see. As my last though is this, it's almost as if any time a Liberal leader gets into serious trouble out comes old faithful, which is how to whack the asylum seekers card. And can I say, I think as a country we're better than that. It's time to move on to a mature approach. Can I say more broadly, the challenge for people smuggling and boat arrivals will be with us into the future, as well. It's been with us since Vietnamese boat people started arriving here in the late 1970's.
As I've said in recent interviews, we've had boats arriving in this country I think, every year for the last, you know, 20 years or so. And they surge and they fall, they surge and they fall, as I said in the Parliament yesterday. Look what's happened with the figures on Iraq, on Afghanistan and also on other parts of the region as well, like Sri Lanka.
What we've seen in this country is a surge in activity, when we've seen a global surge in activity. What you've seen is a contraction in activity, when you've seen those numbers fall around the world. So our challenge as civilised countries is to work with partner countries around the world and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to work out the best solution to what is a huge problem for everybody.
We believe we've got the best and most balanced approach, the pressures will continue in the future. We're going to have these sorts of challenges in the future as well, but we'll maintain an approach which we believe to be balanced, one which is tough, but humane in dealing with the challenges of people smuggling. Laurie?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'd like to ask you the question that's dominating talkback radio today. We've got the case of a bloke who has been charged with sending harassing (inaudible) letters to the families of diggers who've died. Should we have a provision whereby someone like that if they're convicted can have their citizenship withdrawn (inaudible)
PM: First thing I'd say Laurie is that I'm very mindful that there is a criminal investigation on foot, and I therefore have to be very careful about what I say. So I make that very clear statement upfront. The second is, when you think of the families involved here, and I have met many of them at the funerals of their sons, every decent-minded Australian should be giving those families not just a thought but a prayer and their support, in any practical way when these horrible things are brought back to their memory, and brought back in a way which is lacking all humanity. On the question you ask about the law, as this matter proceeds and subsequent to its conclusion and investigation, and I make no comments in terms of the content of the investigation which is underway, or the individual - it's important to reflect upon the strength of our laws generally in dealing with cases in the future where some of the assumptions underpinning immigration conditions have not been honoured. I do not have a specific response to that. I want to reflect on this, and look carefully at what emerges from this and related cases.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) but you will consider changing the law so that you can-
PM: No, I'll be very specific about what I say Laurie, I want to reflect on it. I'm very careful about what I say in terms of the specifics of this case. There is a criminal investigation underway. But my recollection of the provisions of Australian immigration law is that certain undertakings are made when people come to this country.
It may or may not be possible to adjust those laws. I'd like to reflect however, on their application in individual cases and whether any change in the future may be necessary. I don't wish to create an expectation in that respect. I simply want to examine afresh. You know, when you pick up the front page of the Tele today, I think people, I think their stomachs turn.
Thank you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I'm delighted to launch Professor Garnaut's book today.
Not just because it's an important early assessment of the causes of the global financial crisis, but also because Ross has been spilling red ink on my own work for a quarter century - since the days in the Embassy in Beijing when he was Ambassador to the People's Republic of China, and I was First Secretary and tasked with the critical responsibility of doing the embassy photocopying.
So today I've finally got the chance to mark his homework - or at least respectfully to reflect upon it.
It's chance also to even up the score from some of my less than spectacular days when the Australian Embassy would play cricket against other assorted embassy teams - most especially the Poms.
Ross, correctly, has reflected on the fact that while I exhibited great enthusiasm for the game, I rarely troubled the scorers.
The Peking Cricket Club wasn't exactly like the Gabba - instead of bowling from the Stanley Street end or the Vulture Street end, we'd be bowling from either the Temple of Heaven end, or the Long Live Marxism Leninism Mao Zedong Thought end.
My preference was the latter - but I say that by way of self-disclosure in case a journalist from The Australian happens upon it in a further expose of my Chinese communist connections.
I was however made wicketkeeper on the robust assumption that there was a limit to the amount of damage I could cause there.
Alas, this assumption was again misplaced, as I soon became (affectionately, I hope) known as "iron gloves".
Ross, by contrast, had a confidence in his stroke play that marked him as a natural - and as a sandgroper extraordinaire, this perversely was expected of him.
But after Ross's successes on the pitch, today I relish the chance to even up the score.
Ross Garnaut is of course one of the architects of the modern Australian economy. Ross is also one of Australia's foremost public economists, and his early work on the Australia-China economic relationship was a decade ahead of its time.
As economic adviser to Prime Minister Bob Hawke from 1983 to 1985, he helped build the framework for the opening up of the Australian economy.
As Ambassador to China, nearly a quarter of a century ago he pioneered China's first significant foreign equity investment in a resource project anywhere in the world - the Channar mine in Western Australia - with the prescient assumption that it would be good for both economies if we began integrating our energy and resource industries with China's long-term energy and resource needs.
He then sought to expand this concept into the future of our two steel industries, and then to wool and textiles.
Ross then added to this already significant national contribution through his important work on climate change - the Garnaut Report - which has been an integral part of the Government's decision making process on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Ross has served successive governments of all persuasions. He's always maintained his academic rigour, a strong independent voice and an overriding sense of public service, and as The Great Crash of 2008 demonstrates, Ross has a masterful capacity to synthesise matters of great complexity into a clear and compelling narrative.
It is of course only just a year since the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the largest bankruptcy in history. The events of that weekend of September 13-14 2008 took us the edge of the abyss.
Two fundamental factual points have characterised this crisis - points which should continue to frame all our analysis.
The first is that this crisis was no ordinary crisis. In fact, it has been the most severe global economic event in our lifetime. On both financial and economic metrics, early stages of the current global crisis rivaled the severity of the Great Depression.
Consider these comparisons:
Global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. In the first 12 months of this recession, global stock markets fell by nearly twice that - more than 40 per cent off their peak.
Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression - almost identical to the fall experienced from in this recession from the peak in April 2008.
Global trade fell by 10 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. This time it fell by 17 per cent.
There is still considerable uncertainty about how the global recession will unfold and how quickly the global recovery will occur, but on these metrics at least, it began with the same force and violence as the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago.
As Ben Bernanke and others have indicated, the incoming economic data in the first months of 2009 forecast the potential for an extraordinarily deep and protracted global downturn.
The second factual characteristic is that the magnitude of the crisis has also dictated the magnitude of the response that has been necessary on the part of governments.
It required unprecedented interventions in financial markets and in the real economy, amounting to over 16 trillion US dollars in fiscal, monetary and financial policy support from G20 economies, the equivalent to 24 per cent of global GDP. Collectively, these government policy actions - fiscal, monetary and financial - amount to the largest and most coordinated government stimulus strategy in modern economic history, and the crisis demanded such measures, as the chapter on 'Depression Economics' makes clear.
Again, the size of these interventions was matched only by the scale of the threat.
So are there any early conclusions we can draw from the crisis in terms of its causes, and how to avoid such crises in the future, and how to deal most effectively with such crises in the future should they re-occur?
For his part, Ross has got his own analysis in early, weaving together four strands of causation:
     * the cycle of boom and bust in economies;
     * the impact of global imbalances;
     * the excessive complexity of financial derivatives and financial markets (the clever money thesis), and
     * the greed of the corporate sector, especially of financial markets.
Of course there have been some earlier and more modest contributions to the debate - including my own - and as Ross will attest, those contributions aren't the first time that I've exceeded a word limit.
I have argued that unfettered markets, particularly financial markets, are inherently unstable. This is not a novel insight, but it is one that has been ignored at various times in modern history, often with devastating consequences.
In recent decades, economists began to believe in what some called the "Great Moderation" - a remarkable period of sustained growth in output, trade and living standards around the world which coexisted with low inflation and reduced volatility in asset prices. Some economists declared that the business cycle had been conquered and that financial markets were inherently efficient.
This crisis has exposed the efficient markets hypothesis and contrasted it with the essential Keynesian insight that markets, especially financial markets, are inherently unstable and subject to the whims of sentiment.
Keynes was prudently sceptical of unfettered financial markets and warned that "when the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done."
A second conclusion from the current crisis is that the global recession would have been much worse without global government intervention.
In short, the lesson is that global Government intervention can work. Governments can make a significant difference if they coordinate to act rapidly, decisively and effectively.
History offers us many examples of where government responses to economic crises have been too slow and too weak.
In the 1930s governments responded to the financial crisis by retreating from the global economy. Government budgets were cut - withdrawing stimulus from the economy and compounding the weakness in the private sector. Tariff walls were raised, choking off international trade. Monetary stimulus was too passive.
The experience of the Great Depression allowed Keynes to deliver his core insight that market economies cannot function without governments playing a balancing role - to step in when the private sector is in retreat.
At various times, Keynes' insight has been lost. Culminating in President Ronald Reagan's pronouncement that "Government is the problem", opponents of the Keynesian tradition have argued that free markets are the lesser of two evils, where the alternative is onerous government regulations that suffocate enterprise and stifle innovation.
The crisis has taught us that this is a false choice. Effective regulation makes markets stronger. Indeed, effective regulation is essential to ensure that our markets operate fairly and freely.
As Ross says, we need to avoid a future crash by finding the right balance of economic management, financial regulation and free markets.
A third conclusion from this crisis is that the global economy is increasingly interconnected.
Global economic shocks reverberate around the world as weaknesses in one part of the world spread rapidly across the globe. As Ross says in his book, one of the primary mechanisms of this interconnection is the internationalisation of financial markets.
Over the last decade the value of financial derivative products issued around the world has reached one quadrillion dollars - that is one thousand million million.
Ross quotes former New York Federal Reserve President Gerald Corrigan who said in 2007 of the burgeoning financial derivative products:
"Anyone who thinks they understand this stuff is living in la la land."
The growing interconnectedness of the global economy underlines the importance of globally coordinated responses to economic events. That is why the emergence of the G20 leaders process as the primary global economic forum is important - a forum where Australia now has a permanent seat at the table.
In re-examining the global financial crisis, Ross also underscores the remarkable strength of Australia's economic performance compared to the Major Advanced Economies:
     * the only economy not to go into recession;
     * the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies, and
     * the lowest debt and lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies.
And we have achieved this while maintaining strong public finances - keeping our AAA credit rating, keeping our borrowings lower than any of the major advanced economies and laying out a clear plan to return the budget to surplus as the economy recovers.
These outcomes are the result of many factors, but government policy settings have played a critical but not exclusive role.
Our economic intervention strategy reflected three core pillars.
First, stabilising our financial system, in particular through the timely provision of the guarantees for bank deposits and wholesale bank borrowings. Our banks weren't without their problems, and the book shows that decisive action in providing guarantees for wholesale funding made the difference.
Second, supporting real jobs in the real economy through our stimulus strategy with its focus on investing in productive infrastructure.
Third, a local skills, training and employment strategy to support those who have lost their jobs or who have been unable to enter the workforce.
This intervention strategy has served us well during the past 12 months. It has helped cushion the economy from the severe global downturn, saving hundreds of thousands of Australians from losing their jobs.
It is worth noting that in devising the Government's stimulus strategy, we were guided by Treasury advice on what worked and what did not when Australia wrestled with the recessions of the early '90s.
Mindful of these painful lessons, and through economic history of the more searing pain of the Great Depression half a century before, we were steeled by the experiences of the past, and the economic and human costs of high and sustained levels of unemployment. But as Ross makes clear, there are many challenges ahead.
Those challenges include the prospect of a long and slow recovery in the developed countries, while also dealing with the long-term slide in productivity growth, the decline in Australia's terms of trade, and what Ross describes as the "substantial structural deficit" inherited from the previous Government, after the squandering of the revenue gains from the mining boom.
An important feature of The Great Crash of 2008 is that it doesn't just look to the events of the past. It also looks to the future.
Ross cites many reasons why the road ahead won't be smooth.
Overcoming the large imbalances in the global economy will be an enormous challenge as we move into recovery. This point was reinforced by Chairman Bernanke in his remarks last weekend - and I quote:
As the global economy recovers and trade volumes rebound, however, global imbalances may reassert themselves... policymakers around the world must guard against such an outcome. We understand, at least in principle, how to do this... [but] just as increasing private saving in the United States is challenging, promoting consumption in a high-saving country is not necessarily straightforward."
US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, 
"Asia and the Global Financial Crisis", 19 October 2009
Adjusting from these profound global imbalances from the past will not be easy. As Ross notes, major structural changes in the global economy will be inevitable. And inevitably, they will be hard.
Another challenge is the risk of a return to protectionism around the world as domestic industries struggle under the weight of tighter credit conditions, constrained consumption and consequently weaker growth. Protection is always the cheap card to play at time of economic difficulty - cheap politics, disastrous economics and with appalling consequences for trade, growth and employment.
As someone who helped drive trade liberalisation in past decades, Ross understands the importance of free trade to sustainable global growth and long-term prosperity.
As I have argued in many forums both here and abroad, it is fundamental that the global downturn does not lead nations to raise their barriers to trade, as happened in the 1930s.
Another challenge arises from governments around the world exiting from their current large ownership stakes in their financial systems. This process will not be easy, given the importance of sustaining confidence in the stability of financial institutions.
As Ross notes, Australia has been spared the need to rescue our banking institutions by direct budgetary provisions. Indeed, of the nine 'AA' rated banks in the world at the moment, four of them are Australian.
Australia has nonetheless been active within the G20 in developing coordinated policy positions to harmonise the exit over time from the extraordinary financial market interventions including sovereign guarantees of term funding.
Related to the challenge of withdrawal from extraordinary financial market interventions is the parallel global challenge for governments to exit over time from the extraordinary fiscal stimulus that has been necessary to keep the global economy going during a recession, and to reduce global public debt.
Large fiscal deficits around the world (averaging nearly 10 per cent of GDP across the OECD) are a significant part of the global imbalances which must be addressed if the global economy is to move towards a path of long-term sustainable growth.
Again, Australia is better placed than most other nations, with the lowest debt and deficit of the Major Advanced Economies. We nevertheless face a challenging period of adjustment in the years ahead, with lower terms of trade than in recent years, and the prospects of a weak global recovery.
The Australian Government has established a clear set of fiscal rules that will see Australia return to budget surplus - by holding real growth in spending to 2 per cent per annum once recovery has been confirmed and allowing tax revenues to recover.
This fiscal consolidation strategy was outlined in the Budget. We intend to adhere to it.
It will be tough. And it is unlikely to be popular.
It means no return to the lazy days of the mining boom, when the Liberals spent almost all of the additional revenue from the commodity boom, some $314 billion of the $334 billion windfall revenue.
$314 billion dollars, with almost none of it on investment to drive future productivity growth, all about unsustainable short-term consumption, not productive long-term investment. The great opportunities of the boom years were squandered, while the nation's need for investment in education and infrastructure to turbo-charge the next generation of productivity growth were ignored.
Ross has referred to this period as the "Great Australian Complacency of the Early 21st Century".[1] The four years from 2004-05 to 2007-08 witnessed the largest expansion in Commonwealth government spending since the recession of the early 1990s.
What is remarkable is that this spending increase occurred when economic growth was strong and the economy was not in need of stimulus.
Reversing the unsustainable spending of the boom years will require many difficult choices, as opposed to sustaining the pro-cyclical fiscal policy settings of our predecessors from 2003 to 2007, when the public revenue was awash from the proceeds of the global mining boom.
The Government's objective is to entrench Australia's current globally competitive position for the future, with world-class skills, world-class infrastructure, world-class knowledge industries, world-class resource and energy sectors and world-leading macroeconomic management credentials.
Professor Garnaut's book also adds to the important debate on the future role of government in the market economy. As I have noted in my earlier remarks, I believe the crisis has fundamentally discredited the neo-liberal ideology that said markets would always be self-correcting.
Ross questions some of the different labels applied to various schools of economic thought in this debate. As I have said since my first speech in this place more than a decade ago, open markets at home and abroad are the most powerful and efficient generators of long-term economic growth, employment and prosperity.
But as I also said in both my maiden speech and a decade later in The Monthly, markets also fail.
The best model for government in our time is that of the enabling state:
     * maximising the opportunities for enterprise and initiative;
     * maximising productive growth by investing in the great productivity drivers of education and infrastructure;
     * reducing the tax and regulatory impediments to business;
     * enhancing competition policy at home and open markets abroad;
     * and all the while, acting decisively on market failure when it occurs rather than indulging in the ideological self-delusion that it has not.
Ross has been a core player in the open market tradition of the Hawke and Keating governments: on exchange rate policy; on interest rate policy; on dismantling the walls of protectionism.
This is a tradition that has simultaneously advanced both economic and social reform, a tradition that helped workers to re-train and up-skill when their industries were affected by the phasing out of tariffs, and that delivered the social wage, universal health care and the expansion of our university system, while building a sophisticated, internationalised and globally competitive economy.
The Hawke and Keating governments understood that prosecuting an economic reform agenda without a social reform agenda dooms both to failure. They showed that you could build a strong economy while also building a decent society, that in managing our economy, we do not need to make a choice between extremes - the invisible hand of market forces, or the dead hand of state socialism.
Or as I have said before, there are more options than just choosing between Friedrich Hayek and Leonid Brezhnev.
The challenge now is to get the lessons of the crisis right - neither to ignore the need for effective market regulation, nor lurch back to heavy-handed state paternalism.
The new reforming centre of politics must bring together the power of market forces to unleash incentive and innovation, provide a fair go for all and address market failures through the agency of the state.
The Government that I lead stands proudly in this reform tradition of past Labor governments. As I've said before, still borrowing from Paul Kelly, a government and a nation of hard heads, soft hearts - and most critically, one of enabling hands.
Congratulations to Professor Garnaut and to David Llewellyn-Smith for an authoritative and accessible account of what history might ultimately judge as the single most significant economic event of our lifetimes. It's also a great read.
Congratulations also to Louise Adler and Melbourne University Publishing. Your imprint is an increasingly familiar item on the bookshelves of discerning readers.
I am delighted today to launch The Great Crash of 2008.
On balance, Ross, I give it a Distinction. For the government at large, I'd be happy if we were to be awarded a Credit.
Ross - well done on a timely and important volume. I hope your sales in Australia and throughout the world contribute to the nation's economic recovery and export revenues in the months ahead.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Youth Kate Ellis today launched a new national competition to stimulate fresh ideas about how young people can connect with their communities.
The annual Prime Minister's Australian Youth Forum Challenge will start next year.
Young Australians will be asked to propose projects that get young people engaged in their community and actively addressing local needs. The ideas will need to be sustainable and to link in with wider support, organisations and local businesses.
A panel of young people, youth workers and industry experts will shortlist the best ideas, with the Prime Minster and Minister Ellis choosing the ultimate winners.
Winners will be eligible for up to $15 000 to put their ideas into action.
The Prime Minister's Challenge supports the Government's vision for all young people to grow up safe, healthy, happy and resilient.
Entrants will be encouraged to put forward ideas that give young people the skills and experience they need to learn, work, engage in community life and be a part of decision-making that affects them.
This announcement comes as Prime Minister Rudd and Minister Ellis today launched the National Conversation - a nationwide discussion with young people as part of the creation of the National Strategy for Young Australians.
The Office for Youth will call for proposals for the Prime Minister's AYF Challenge in early 2010.
More information can be found at www.youth.gov.au/ayf


Today we are going to discuss how young people can be empowered to shape the decisions that affect their lives. 
Admin: The Prime Minister has joined the chat.
PM: It's great to be here online with you all today. Firstly, I want to say 'hello' from Kate Ellis, the Minister for Youth, who is holding the first of a series of national consultations at Lyneham High in Canberra this morning. As I said in my blog - I didn't want the conversation through the blog to be a one-off. That's why I'm proud to launch the National Conversation with Young Australians. Over the next six weeks, the National Conversation will involve events with young people right across
nathaniel: good morning mr rudd
Marguerite: Good Morning Mr Rudd, I am interested to know why you are not planning on going to Copenhagen for the UN cliamte talks? I was so proud when you went to Bali and demonstrated to the world that Australia was serious about tackling climate change
PM: including forums that people can go to, either in person or online, and opportunities to send your thoughts via emails or posting videos. The National Conversation gives us an opportunity to debate the matters that are foremost in young people's minds - right across the country. So let's get into it.
BradB: Good morning Prime Minister
Monica: Hi Kevin, thanks for allowing us to talk to you about how young people can be empowered to shape the decisions that affect their lives. It is actually very important to me that I feel that as a young person my opnion counts.
Alastair: I'm an environmentalist, but I'd love to talk about mental health for youth
mkanderson: Will these thoughts be read by you?
Monica: I would love to talk about mental health for youth too!
PM: Actually Marguerite, I've said to Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark that I would be happy to go. And we are working furiously behind the scenes to try and make Copenhagen a success.
canberrastudent: Yes and I think we're all impressed that instead of the blog being a one-off we've been invited for further dialogue with the leaders of our country. Thank you
Marguerite: For me its climate change and environmental sustainability - I would be most interested to discuss that please
Alastair: Australia is pretty backward thinking and underfunded when it comes to mental health. My mum is a mental health nurse and trained in the UK. She couldn't believe it when she came here that there was little community support and how people with mental problems were stigmatised. Also friends and relatives don't offer much support in Australia compared to other countries.
Miscellaneous: Kevin, please confirm or deny this, do you think we should concentrate less on climate change and more on other issues in this conversation because there was already another web chat specifically for climate change?
Monica: I am a youth leader/mentor for a youth group in Sydney and almost 50% of the youth i lead have depression of some sort
Marguerite: Thats fantasic to hear- I had read that you weren't planning on going. I am so pleased you are!
PM: Thanks Monica, the whole point of this webchat is to begin a national conversation with young Australians. We want to hear from young people what you want government to do for the future, after all it is your future.
canberrastudent: I'm actually on an excursion looking at the dual diagnosis of mental health disorders and substance abuse as we speak
Ijtro: good morning mr rudd
Alastair: The average GP appt for depression lasts 7 mins, for back pain it's 11 mins. There must be an alternative.
jamincanberra: Good morning Prime Minister. I would love to talk about anything, but especially internet filtering and youth alcohol problems
Alastair: There needs to be more community support with some really good effective programs using the latest methods from around the world. In Australia, only 15% of people seeking treatment for mental problems get proper treatment.
BradB: Prime Minister, can I ask what your thoughts are on the recent National Human Rights Consultation repert? I think that the most important part human rights legislation can play in Australia is to enhance rights consideration in policy and legislative development...
PM: Alastair, you are dead right. We have a problem with funding and delivery of mental health services across Australia. It's one of the reasons we are now debating with the health and hospital community across the country long term reform of the system. I'm told that at present, 2/3rds of all Australian mental illness conditions go untreated. This is bad for people and bad for the country. And the best way of dealing with mental health challenges is with early adolescents.
Monica: I agree with Alastair in the point that he made about how people with mental health are stigmatised. I deal with youth between the ages of 12-17 on a regular basis as I mentor them. SOO many of them get bullied at school for no reason at all. To add to this most of them have divorced parents which significantly affects their self esteem and self worth
canberrastudent: Also there isn't enough information for youth about how drugs can affect the onset of mental health problems, particularly if you have a pre-disposition.
Alastair: I think it would be scary for a young person to go to a psychiatrist or into hospital but going along to a medical practice would be OK because that's normal anyhow and doesn't have any stigma with it. Why don't we have specialist nurses in medical practices that can give the right time and treatment to people...young or old.
Monica: If these kids are to be empowered in the near future to change decision that affect their lives, they need to believe from a young age that the govt/ law making process is on their side
Alastair: Huge amounts of people in prisons have a mental illness so surely if we took mental illness seriously and gave loads of specialist community support we would also reduce crime!
PM: Re canberrastudent is looking at these problems as we speak. What I'm interested in is what new type of services or better delivered services are likely to be most effective for young people with mental health challenges.Any ideas folks?
canberrastudent: Have yout hought about putting funding in to schools SRCs and using some of that to give peer leadership groups information about detecting and treatment for youth? Not all students are comfortable seeing the psychologist
Marguerite: It seems to me that the biggest problem is a lack of trained professionals especially in rural areas. My father is a Doctor in a rural area and he is over worked as are all the other health professionals in the area. Many leave because they get burned out.
Alastair: Yes...we need specialist nurses in medical centres and schools who can run effective programs.
Monica: Yeah i agree, it should probably start at schools!
PM: Monica, there is a big challenge for us all to destigmatise mental health. We have to get to the stage soon of having the community understand that a mental health problem should be seen like any other physical complaint - and capable of being treated. Otherwise we are allowing people to simply live in misery when useful treatments are at hand. Any ideas about destigmatisation please?
Miscellaneous: We could educate high school students in the symptoms of various mental health disorders and show them where to get help
Monica: that is when they are "young adolescents" and their mindsets, attitudes and thoughts are being shaped
Alastair: I think mental health programs should be run by professionals rather than students. I think it'd be too scary to have to deal with other kids issues at that stage.
Alastair: ..and not very responsible.
canberrastudent: What about mental health particularly in Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander youth? IS it significantly worse and if so , should we look at it differently?
Monica: Education from a very young age about tolerance
Hayleyg: I don't know much about mental health but it always seems there is an emphasis on treatment and not prevention. How much do we know about what causes mental health problems? There has to be something to do with our affluent lifestyles, eg if you go to a developing nation the level of depression is much lower
Alastair: Black Dog and Beyond Blue have done great work with removing stigma through media exposure. Just need to do the same with schizophrenia, bipolar and whatever else.
Miscellaneous: Show them statistics and how prevalent they are in society, I think it would make conditions seem more normal
Ijtro: Many people that are mentally damaged or challenged just need a bit of TLC. People need to learn that they are just like us - they just want to be your average 'John Smith' (or your above-average John Smith, which is fine too), but they really just need a bit of help to find their feet and stand up in the community.
Monica: Stigmatisation is so cultural isn't it?
canberrastudent: Also, our psychology class is breaking down stigmas and discussing how people with mental health issues are pretty much like everyone else. We can do a lot of work on this issue thorugh schools- distributing information, detecting issues
Alastair: I think that's because they have tighter knit communities. We don't here in Australia. Sydney is the pits for this!
PM: The SRC possibility should be explored. And at two levels. One is to encourage positive mental health by engaging the nation's young people in projects they stick with throughout their school years. By which I mean local community projects. Indigenous community projects, where a school might link in to support. Or an international aid project in the developing world. That's the sort of stuff a program called High Resolves is on about at present. The other part of the challenge is to help sch
Monica: canberrastudent, I know that there are some alarming stats on ABTSI mental health
Marguerite: Destigmatisation is difficult- I think the word depression is thrown around a lot, too much. I agree that early intervention in schools is best. Foster a culture of understanding and sympathy towards people with mental illness- maybe get school children to visit a local centre talk to the staff, volunteer with patients.
jamincanberra: Yes should start at schools! From my experience schools dont teach about drug use honestly. I have learnt more about drug use from music festival voluteers than all my years of schooling!
canberrastudent: Look alistair students are dealing with these issues whether its the best thing or not... friends, siblings, parents.
Alastair: Nice idea, but SRC's are not exactly influential in schools - in fact a lot of kids will work against SRC initiatives because they don't like those elected onto it.
Ijtro: I know a bit about those with mental health problems because my sister has Down Syndrome, and through her I have met many other similar people. All they need is to be accepted and not labelled, not judged because of their differences.
Monica: Yes! I really like the idea of "By which I mean local community projects. Indigenous community projects, where a school might link in to support. Or an international aid project in the developing world. "
Monica: I think communication and a sense of connection to the rest of the world is so important for school children
PM: Ijtro, that's a good idea. We can't underestimate the importance of simple, positive reinforcement for everybody. I don't know if any of you have read a book Seligman (apologies for spelling) which is about both learned helplessness and learned optimism. It's based on neuroscience. About which I know nothing. But I think there are some lessons in that for us all. And encouraging habits of thinking early on, in what can otherwise be a pretty despairing world for a number of young people.
mkanderson: Prime Minister, can I ask about what the government is doing about making it easier for GLBTQ youth to come out when all they see through media and first hand experience, is that the government doesn't see them as equal as they can't get married? And it is great that some laws have changed to bring equality, but can you see it makes it harder for society to fully accept this group when it seems the government doesn't to a full extent?
Hayleyg: why do you think the world is despairing for young people?
Alastair: Drop in centres would be cool. A place with kids with problems could meet with others and know they're not alone.
Monica: i was in high school less than 2 years ago and its amazing how many of us were so ignorant of mental health issues, our connection to the aboriginal people (not to mention our responsibility to them)and just in general empathy towards someone
Miscellaneous: agreed - adolescents need to feel connected to the rest of the world
PM: Monica raises the question of school bullying. This is a deep, deep problem across Australia. All of us need to adopt an absolute zero tolerance approach to any form of school bullying. And that includes all forms of cyber-bullying as well. This stuff really stinks. A whole lot of young people are being traumatised by it as we speak. And the only way through this is to bring about deep attitudinal change. Any ideas guys?
canberrastudent: We have them- youth centres.
Marguerite: I think education is the answer. I gained an emormous amount of empathy for people with schitzophrenia when a psychology lecturer of mine made us do a simple exercise. He got two of us to pretend we were having a job interview and then he acted as the voice in the persons head and demonstrated how damaging this issue is. Exposing young people to others with mentail illness is the best way to destigmatise
Alastair: I don't think families get enough support either when they have a kid who gets sick. There's such a stigma about it - I've seen kids 'disappear' from school and no one is allowed to talk about it. If we were all more open about it and could see it as just another illness then maybe they'd get more support.
canberrastudent: sorry about the delay... i have to keep refreshing the page. \
Monica: It is definitely a DEEP attitude change, its another result of stigmatisation. When you label someone straightaway by the way they act/look/dress
Marguerite: I think too many young people spend way too much time online. Its like a virtual world for them. Encourage sports and extra curricula activities - you can't bully someone online if you are outside playing with friends. THis might also help decrease childhood obesity
Alastair: ...I'm sure throwing some serious funding into the hospital and community health service would help too.
PM: Hayleyg asks about despair. I can't pretend to have all the answers on that. But the Seligman book I referred to before is worth a read. I also think part of the answer lies in encouraging all young people from their earliest days in schools, to be engaged in projects helping other people - that is engaged in projects much bigger than themselves. But on mental health challenges for young people in general, Health Minister Nicola Roxon will be hosting a blog on this in the next few weeks. We'l
Alastair: One of the problems is that nurse training now isn't like in my mum's time. She trained especially for mental health. Now, you have to do a degree which covers all types of nursing and spends only a tiny amount of time on mental health and yet each year 1/5th of Australian pop. have a mental illness. We need to get older people into mental health nursing as they've got more life experience. If I got sick I wouldn't like some other kid straight out of uni telling me how to run my life.
canberrastudent: I agree with marguerite. This excursion will be a real eye-opener for all of us
BradB: Depression and mental health issues are sometimes purely biochemical, in which case we need effective treatment and readily available help; however, for those who say sink into depression due to bullying, trauma etc. friends family, schoolmates and community involvement becomes much more important...I think a lot of it comes down to values taught in schools, at home and amongst friends
Ijtro: bullying is very difficult to combat, mainly because it can be so invisible, and there are so many different forms - it is almost impossible to monitor them all, especially in a school environment
Hayleyg: you talk a lot about working through schools, that would assume there is a level of ability amongst teachers to be able to educate on these topics. Do you have any thoughts about trainer the trainers?
Alastair: It's also about providing opportunities for families with teens to socialise together. I don't think Australia does this well. I've been over to the UK a few times, and other countries in Europe and they do it REALLY well.
Monica: Mr. Rudd, can I encourage you on the project you were talking about where school link with each other, especially to schools with high aborignal poplulation. Kids need to be exposed to how the other kids their age are and it also promotes exposure to the 'real world'
nathaniel: if i may PM but it is not just in schools bullying goes on just as much in the wider comunity even question time has its fair share of it i think we need our leaders to show leadership in the area of bullying and show us that it is not acceplable
canberrastudent: Maybe the training at uni just needs to be better. I think it's unreasonable to try to get older people involved. we're under staffed for nurses as it is. And its not about someone telling you how to live your life... if you want that, try a psychologist.
Alastair: With the talk of increasing the alcohol age to 21, where on earth would 18-21 year olds go to socialise and be part of a group?
Monica: I think through projects that school children need to undertake, the kids involved naturally tend to rely on each other, it might encourage them to see the kids who get bullied in a different light
PM: marguerite talks about child obesity. The child obesity rates in Australia have doubled in the last twenty years. The last data I saw had 24 per cent of young people classified this way. So somehow we need to combine what I've talked about already today - which is getting young people totally absorbed and engaged on projets bigger than themselves. As well as making physical activity either part of those projects or something equally fun to do - without young people believing they have to be th
jamincanberra: I think its values parents need to teach...that this is not a "virtual world" this is someone on the other side! I think more should be done on things like improving peoples internet security and identity.
Ijtro: BradB - on the right track, I think, but it's also about attitude. If you have someone with just a really bad attitude, sometimes it doesn't matter how good or how many values you try to teach them, it just doesn't get through
canberrastudent: Unfortunatley most of the seminars about bullying don't seem to be really connecting with kids. we tune off, because we think we're being talked down to.
Alastair: My school told us it was the gov't who'd just reduced the amount of sports we had to do in senior years.
Monica: Its funny because obesity challenges the mental health of a child as much as or even more so than physical health
Ijtro: PM. I think you may be falling foul of the character limit...some of your comments seem to be cut off near the end. It's annoying, but you might need to perhaps shorten some of your comments.
Marguerite: I agree we need to get young people out and about. Maybe money for schools to run extracurricual activities outside and inside school hours? I went to a stiener school and we were always going on excursions and camps and doing meaningful things like volunteering with the local old peoples home. I think schools are too focused on testing generic atributes and are not engaged in creating the kinds fo human beings we want in this world. Also bright energetic children are often falsly labelled as A.
PM: Marguerite was talking earlier about Copenhagen and climate change. Recently Youth Decide 09 Australia conducted Australia's first ever youth vote on climate change. It was done over a week in mid September. Nearly 14,000 young Austrlaia's between 12 and 29 voted on what they wanted to inherit. 97.5 per cent voted for stronger emissions target than we are currently proposing.
canberrastudent: Again i think that putting funding into peer leadership groups is one of the key issues. You can use it as a platform for looking at new, inovative programs to tackle bullying, mental health and issues like obesity. It can give community within the school, and it could be applied on more a case by case basis.
Alastair: Should parents be held accountable for raising fat kids...just to be provocative!
nathaniel: i was bulled at school and the problem is that it isnt like just someone bumps u into a wall although that does happen its people saying things belittleing u over a period of days and weeks that gets u down.
Hayleyg: Yes I voted in Youth Decide and agree with stronger emissions targets
Alastair: Absolutely! Businesses should be made accountable for ensuring their building complies with gov't legislation on sustainable practice. ie, energy efficient lighting, reduction of water, recycling, energy use etc
Monica: Yes, I voted on that Youth Decide 09 survey and its such a great way for you (Mr.Rudd) to see what issues really are bothering us young people of aus
Marguerite: What impact has the results of youth decide had on the governments climate change policy? Are you going to increase targets?
Ijtro: Yes, Youth Decide 09 was a good opportunity - the question, of course, is whether a higher emissions target is feasible, or economically viable.
Miscellaneous: usually parents are more overweight than their kids, its hard to make a lifestyle choice you're taught all your life
PM: By the way guys, speaking of the environment this place (parliament house, Canberra, including my office) has just been invaded by 2000 squadrons of Bougon moths. They are all over the place! Anyone got climate change friendly Bougon moth management techniques out there? Right now they are too close for comfort!
jamincanberra: Targets too low...in the very new future our generation in going to have to implement 80, 90, 100% cuts to dirty energy and you guys are looking at 5%???? and debating 5%???? My god thanks for the token effort....why dont we just save the money for an end of the world party if thats how ambitious we are!
PM: Back to canberrastudent briefly on bullying, any ideas on what does connect with young people on this?
Ijtro: er...moth-traps?
BradB: PM - I understand that somewhere in Canberra they make bougon moth pies...perhaps a solution to the defecit - sell, sell, sell;)
Alastair: I think that we need a legislation to be brought into place that enforces regulations against large profile corporations and their environmental footprint, such as offsetting the impact their factories/offices have on the environment. I think it's ludicrous that Australia isn't utilising natural energy sources. Jobs Infrastructure etc. What about a legislation that stops manafacturers from using excess packaging? This raises both cost and impact on the environment. A while ago i bou
Monica: As I said, combined school projects will be a great way to allown young people to connect to 'the real world'
nathaniel: alister there is a point to that. who feeds the kids who organiset their activity's there is an element of parents causation
jasononeil: I'm with canberrastudent for setting up peer leadership groups to face a whole bunch of issues. Bullying definately included. I've been part of (extra-curriculur) programs like this and found them really helpful...
Monica: and see their co-students in a different light
PM: Aliastair talks about building standards. We're now working with the States and Territories on this. I'm advised that if we get things like building standards right, and energy efficiency measures more generally right, we could bring down our greenhouse gas emissions by up to 30 per cent.
Marguerite: I agree they are way too low. All it means that in our lives we are going to have to implement radical changes which are going to have far greater impacts on our society economy and environment than they will if it happens now
nathaniel: those moths are very good eating a low carbon alternative anyone?
Alastair: Did you know there's not a degree for this in Australia but is elsewhere. Its what I want to study, so I know.
Hayleyg: so how are you going to response to Youth Decide?
Ijtro: jamincanberra - 5% is still a lot of energy, and means a big cut for many businesses. Many people would just flat out refuse even thinking about some of the targets you are talking about, as it would completely destroy most of the economy.
Miscellaneous: I agree that global warming is a major issue, but it was given an entirely separate webchat, surely the issue would be covered more in that longer time period
Alastair: On sustainability...I've been trying to get a national CFL recycling and collection system in place for years. My sisters and I run one locally - no reason it couldn't go national!
PM: On targets, the scientists tell us through the international panel on climate change (about 4,000 of them) that we need to stabilise greenhouse gas emissions at 450 parts per million if we are to keep global temperature rises within the 2 degrees celcius band. At the Major Economies Forum I intended with President Obama in Italy in July, the 20 largest economies in the world for the first time agreed that this science and those targets should guide our policy. But right now we're still engaged
jasononeil: Alastair - wow, where would you have to travel to study?
BradB: I was bullied for many years as a high school student...my involvement in the WA State Emergency Service as a volunteer helped me get past it, see my own value and be the confident person I am today...the communit has much to offer to youth
Alastair: What are we doing about our Murray Darling Basin. This gives me the most concern.
PM: Thanks Alastair for the information. I'll have Peter Garrett and Julia Gillard's offices email you direct on why this is not the case and what we can now do about it.
Monica: Agreed! with Miscellaneous
PM: By the way, thanks for the advice on the bogon moth pies. yum yum!
Marguerite: A lot of these emissions exposed industries have had a lot of time to prepare for this. CLliamte change talks started in 1992 in Rio and the Kyoto protocol was developed in 1995 - any industry that screams that they can 't adapt or this is un fair have just been digging their heels in. Increasing targets also makes Australia a good place to invest in renewable energy and creates jobs. Did you know that China is ranked a lot higher ( 7 places) than Australia when it comes to renewable energy inve
jamincanberra: Maybe the platform where schools have there own interactive website (like facebook) where kids in the school can connect and organise out of school sports etc. Obviouslly monitored to stop bullying!
jasononeil: BradB - very similar story for me, was bullied throughout primary school, found my stability in who I am by volunteering in community projects. It helps alot :)
Alastair: UK, Germany and the US run degrees in sustainable building engineering and management. The specialists currently employed in Sydney are all imported from the UK but run into brick walls because there isn't the legislation to force businesses into making their buildings more efficient. Water and energy are way too cheap here.
Monica: BradB, I agree with you. It is only when you see the world outside of the bubble you are in as a child, do you appreciate the world and people for who they are!
Ijtro: good protein in those moths. very healthy.
nathaniel: u do realise pm that the climat change argument has more holes in it than a screen door cant we have a proper debate like public debate so we can all make informed decisions on if co2 is the problem
Alastair: Yes, a lot of talk here at high levels about sustainability, but not much action at business and State govt level
Monica: lol! I want a pie now
PM: We need to integrate the climate challenge with the green jobs challenge. That's what we're doing in part, at present, with the home energy insulation program - creating jobs today by investing in the energy efficiency measures we need for tomorrow. if we manage to succeed in having all owner-occupied dwellings in the country with ceiling insulation, I'm told we can through that measure alone reduce green house gas emissions by 50 million tonnes. Jobs also generated through recycling projects -
mkanderson: Prime Minister, can I ask about what the government is doing about making it easier for GLBTQ youth to come out when all they see through media and first hand experience, is that the government doesn't see them as equal as they can't get married? And it is great that some laws have changed to bring equality, but can you see it makes it harder for society to fully accept this group when it seems the government doesn't to a full extent?
PM: As for the Murray Darling - you are right to be worried. Natural inflows into the system over the last decade are more than 50 per cent lower than their historical average. That
Miscellaneous: Prime Minister, what do you think about the censoring of Australia's internet. On wikileaks they have an article that shows how it can be abused by a wikileaks article being put on the blacklist. Also Thailand appears to have a similar censoring system with 1200 sites being blocked specifically because they criticized the royal family. Do you have any reasons why the Australian system could not be corrupted in the same way?
nathaniel: funny how nobody is willing to debate the science
Alastair: I think this is good, particularly the solar panels, but farming it out to private business leads to problems. For something as important as this, why isn't the gov't organising it's own contractors to give advice and installation. People are being misinformed.
Ijtro: nathaniel - yes, there are issues with the climate change argument (both of them, in fact) but many of the things that they propose are good ideas whether we greatly effect the climate or not
Marguerite: Nathaniel- there is a public debate - its been going on for over 15 years. If you don't believe the science start by reading some of it - not the propaganda which is funded by the coal and oil industry and others who have an interest in our current situation. Start with the intergovernmental panel on climate change reports-
PM: That's why for the first time we have created a single Murray Darling Basin Authority, which for the first time in 2011 will produce a Basin-wide cap on the water that can be taken from the system. We are also doing two other things: investing in a massive buy-back of water entitlements (already about 600 gigalitres of the total 11,500 ggs available in the system); and a $4.5 billion invetment in improving the efficiency of the system's irrigatn infrastructure so that less water is needed.
jamincanberra: There are many reason why i am against internet filtering 1. Its anti - democratic in my view. The internet is probably the greatest democratic body to arise in our time! China realisis this, thats why they attempt in vein to censor billions of pages 2. Doesnt cover peer to peer networking...like censoring the papers but not the magazines! 3. Will not work! There are billions of pages which grows exponentially every day! 4. I think we have already spent something like $40million or something on
Ijtro: nathaniel - i am willing to debate the science, and i know the science, but not right now
jamincanberra: 5. Internet filtering should be done from the home and office. People and parents have to take responsability! Censorship is not the answer! 7. Whats happens when we get a govt 10 years down the track who decides it wants to censor abortion or euthanasia or something? U are developing a framework to enable this! 8. It will slow down our internet speeds! We are already behind many other countries!
PM: By the way, on Youth Decide, I'm told my office met with their representatives yesterday and were incredibly impressed by the broad range of action that young people have taken on climate change. Much more for us all to do.
jamincanberra: 9. In my view internet cencorship at that level should probably be made illegal! Definatly not endorsed and funded by the govt...give the millions$ to the salvation army and get people of the streets or something. Money should be spent on improving our online security, not on cencorship!
Miscellaneous: Is it possible to move on from climate change. I too am very emphatic about the subject but there has already been a web chat specifically for climate change. We can not possibly cover more issues than they did when they have more time
Alastair: Every home in Australia should be fitted with solar panel linked to a grid to supply their State in excess times. Useage is highest in summer when the solar could be used to drive the aircons of homes instead of being a drain on the power supply.
Monica: Kevin, seeing as the last webchat was totally climate change oriented and so is this one, I think its pretty obvious what the people in Australia really want you to hear.
Alastair: Take a look at our planet patrol website and you'll see plenty of action done by Australian youth.
Ijtro: PM - some good initiatives with the Murray Darling Basin. What is happening concerning some of the vast amounts of below-ground water?
PM: Back to jamincanberra on school bullying. What do people think about the idea of schools with interactive websites to get young people up and out and fully engaged in school and community life.
mkanderson: It is also because certain topics are avoided. No suprise there.
Marguerite: I think we need an extra forum - maybe in person - to discuss youth and climate change. I would be happy to come to Canberra to do this if it can be organised
Ijtro: good idea with the interactive website, though it still won't work for everybody. Some people are just really lazy.
PM: By the way, on related problems facing young people. We're now directly working with states and territories to develop a best practice policing model to tackle alcohol-fuelled youth violence. I'd really appreciate any ideas young people have on this front too. Big problem in our biggest cities right now.
nathaniel: yes i resaerch the ipcc and in the report that gave us the Kyoto protocol the scientists woh where working on the science said that they did not have evidence supporting a co2 temperature link and that paragraph was removed by the policy makers in the ipcc
Alastair: I don't think bullying is a problem that's going to go away. In my experience, the best way I've seen it handled is when a school takes it very seriously, calls in parents, discussions etc, etc. If kids know they can't get away with it, they avoid bullying behaviour.
Monica: from my experience, the internet claims to connect people but it really doesn't, it only disengages them from the reality they need to face. Face-to-face volunteering and community interaction is key to tolerance, education and true discovery of themselves.
Miscellaneous: Prime Minister, would you be able to discuss how the government would keep the internet censorship purely on child pornography sites and not censor political views?
Marguerite: I think extra websites are not the answer - we are already too much of an online society. Schools need to instigate community engagement - children are not meant to sit in class rooms all day and be lectured - we shouldbe out there learning. I learn trig by going outside and measuring angles of buildings and trees and calculating their hight from that. This has stayed with me
Alastair: Bigger fines for those who sell/provide alcohol to kids underage. Bigger fines for those who sell alcohol to those already drunk.
jamincanberra: One reason there is alcohol-fuelled violence in canberra (and i know elsewhere) is the unavailability of public transport to get home. The only option is a taxi line at times over half an hour long...costing for people living in the south or north anywhere between $50 to $100! There are 100's of people standing in the sidewalks, pissed, with very few options to get home! It often results in violence. And due to the cost of taxis often results in people driving home pissed. Basically all the majo
PM: Guys, I've got to start winding up soon, because I've got to go and launch a book on the global financial crisis. But as I said earlier on, part of the point today is to launch our national conversation with young Australians. This continues. The Minister for Youth and Sport, Kate Ellis is going to be running out a whole lot of online and in the flesh consultations with young people in the weeks ahead. Please go to www.youth.gov.au/ayf to check out how you can get involved.
jasononeil: I happen to also be a webdesigner, and in high school my friends and I set up a private forum for organising social events etc. outside of school. It helped alot with getting out among others, but it was limited to just our group of friends. A more open system could be beneficial, but the costs of operating / moderating it would be significant.
jamincanberra: Basically all the major cities need reliable public transport that runs 24 hours a day (This would also greatly decrease our carbon emissions...u cant expect people to use the car less when u dont offer any real alternative) I honestly believe if u helped people get home at the time of their choosing, instead of having to wait til the end of the night to split a cab, drinking more and more alcohol along the way, would reduce violence along with dozens of other problems everyone has!
Ijtro: re alcohol fuelled youth violence - very difficult to combat. Many young people don't realise that it will probably happen to them sometime - they think they can beat the odds, or they're not 'that sort of drunk'. In some cases, that may be part of the issue, but everyone has their breaking point - and alcohol just lowers it.
Alastair: Transport....what's that? I live in the suburbs!
PM: I hear the ideas from Lyneham High in Canberra, where Minister Ellis is this morning, are coming in thick and fast. I'm sure Kate will keep me in the loop about what she's heard this morning.
jasononeil: Can I bring us back to a theme that's been running throughout the discussion: that mental health issues can be a big issue stopping young people effectively making decisions. Given how important it is, I find it surprising that there is very little 'formal' education on emotional intelligence in schools. It's like our Maths and English teachers are supposed to teach it...
Marguerite: Some of the policies introduced in NSW to tackle aclohol fueled violence have been rediculous and innefective. Some bars in Sydney which have done the right thing and reported incidents are being targeted and made to serve everything in plastic cups ( what a waste!) this stops responsbile people from going as who wants to drink out of a plastic cup and does nothing to reduce violence
Monica: Kevin, I just hope you take something from this discussion. We are not here to criticise you on the work you are doing (no doubt, its hard). We just want to work together with you to find a solution
Alastair: Marketing anti-ads to combat the glamourisation of alcohol.
nathaniel: the problem is people still think it is cool tho go out and get blind drunk
PM: By the way before we wrap up, weI don't want to ignore the debate on internet filtering. Look i know this is really controversial. But we are trying to get the balance right, between maximising individual freedom on the one hand, while protecting young people in particular from the real nasties out there. This aint easy. But if you've got views, please put them direct to Kate on the national conversation website.
jackwebster: There needs to be some sort of Grants program for Local Council for Public Transport. The Transport around the Nambour area is horrific - especially when there are major issues regarding the uptake of business in this Region.
jasononeil: Throwing an idea out there, would it be possible to have an "emotional intelligence" or "healthy relating" class as a core subject. I think it's hugely important to success in life, and to set young people up to make good decisions for the whole community.
Alastair: Thanks very much for this opportunity today. Do take a look at the planet patrol website for what we're doing with youth motivation on climate issues.
Marguerite: Thanks for this opportunity, I will certainly stay involved in this chat. Clearly there are numerous issues that need to be discussed - too many for one web chat
PM: By the way - gots lots of feedback last time about how rotten my typing was. That's why I'm job-sharing today with one of my staff - who remarkably has increased both my typing speed and accuracy!
jackwebster: PM, Is this chat ending at 10am AEST - I was aware that it was ending at 10am Eastern Standard Time
jamincanberra: With the website i was thinking something which enabled sports coaches and other groups to interact with students...showing them whats out there where and when! A place where results and achievments of sports teams are posted. Links to mental health etc.
jasononeil: Alastair-like the quite smoking campaign?
Ijtro: internet filtering - they can all just be hacked, that's one of the big problems. A different sort of internet filter is needed (though i don't know exactly what i mean when i say that) because some stuff does need to be filtered.
Miscellaneous: I agree, they seem to need more structure
nathaniel: thanks for the oportunity to express our views PM
Mikis: with alcohol-fuelled violence, I think the problem is that it's so normal in society today. All the news focusses on bad things (murders, wars etc) and movies are action-packed with fighting. It's almost idiolised now, even though people know violence is bad. I agree with public transport - a lot of problems I've seen is when we're all out waiting for taxis and people get into fights because everyone is just waiting around.
Miscellaneous: the web chats need more structure*
nathaniel: yes like the quit smoking campaign
Monica: I like that - emotional intelligence. So much of us lack that. qualities like empathy and consideration and tolerance are needed to change the bullying patterns and stigmatisation in our society
Monica: THANKS K-RUDD!
Marguerite: Those quit smoking ads are sooooo effective I know people who have stopped smoking after seeing them
BradB: I think education on human rights could teach youth about being more considerate and combating bullying...
PM: Last comment from me and in response to Monica's comment about working together. Thanks for all that. You're right. Government is at its best when you guys are giving us fresh sets of ideas. Also at its best when you tell us what's working on the ground, and what's not. Like that point earlier on in the discussion about school bullying seminars being a turn-off. So let's keep it up guys and bombard Minister Kate with all your best ideas and what you think we're getting right and what we're getti
Alastair: Right, back to school for me. Thanks everyone...been great hearing your views. A pity we can't all keep this going.
Mikis: I completely forgot that QLD is not on the same time as Canberra...that's unlucky. I only just signed in, expecting it to start now!
Ijtro: Thanks for this, PM - another web chat will need to be done soon, I think, and perhaps a longer one. Something in the flesh would also be a good idea.
jackwebster: PM, (I've just signed on from Nambour, thinking the Chat has just started) What are you planning to do about Youth-Adult Autism issues? I've got a brother with Asperger's Syndrome, and I'm worried about his continuation into Adult Life.
Mikis: Thanks Mr Rudd!
Ijtro: mikis - woops...
Marguerite: Thanks PM and thanks to everyone else for a lively conversation - I am keen to keep this going if possible?
BradB: Thanks PM, look forward to seeing more of these chats in the future.
jackwebster: Mikis, same here :( - There was not a clear indication of whether Daylight Savings was applied to the chat times.
PM: Feel free to check out the Government's new website about our National Conversation with Young Australians (www.youth.gov.au/ayf) and watch the video of Kate Ellis and the PM outlining what it's all about.
Ijtro: oh well, looks likes its back to studying for me. Thanks for the discussion guys!
Miscellaneous: Thank you for this opportunity. It makes youths feel more empowered, having someone important listen to our opinions
jasononeil: Thanks also:)
jamincanberra: Thanks for the opprtunity PM, good luck this arvo....remember being tough on refugees is like being tough on your little sister.... its actually one of the weekest things u can do!
Monica: I have applied to try and be a part of the Steering Committe organised by Hon Kate Ellis. Its a great way to hear young people and what they are passionate about. I hope our voices are heard through that.
jasononeil: I also missed out on the first 35 minutes due to a misunderstanding with time zones. The email clearly said "Eastern Standard Time", which I assumed meant daylight savings wasn't applied.
Alastair: BTW..great book on sustainability written for youth is Green Stuff for kids by Tanya Ha. It's really brilliant and makes sense!
Mikis: jack and jason - so disappointing hey!! Obviously QLD needs to get daylight savings here too :P
Monica: Yeah, "being tough" is such a harsh word to be used on a 5 year old girl who is in a life or death situation
nathaniel: well goodbye all been nice chatting with ya.
Monica: I hope you show some sympathy, not only to that boat of refugees, but to all those who are struggling to keep their basic human rights
jackwebster: Is there a feedback system for this 'Web Chat' process?
jackwebster: Mikis, Yes, It really should be made so - causes so much confusion.
Miscellaneous: Just a thought, would it be possible for you (Kevin) to video stream yourself so you can answer the questions as quick as possible. You could have someone type your responses for people who read the transcript.
PMConnect-Admin: Hi folks. The PM has left the chat - thanks for being involved. Apologies to Queenslanders for the time mix-up - as the PM said in his post, the conversation will continue at www.youth.gov.au/ayf over the coming weeks.
jasononeil: WA voted against it last year :(
Miscellaneous: For the next web chat
Ijtro: a transcript will probably be put up on the website at some point.
Addendum
Confusion with time zones caused a number of participants to come into the chat late.
Our apologies for this mix-up.
Participants who were affected by the time zone differences were invited to send comments directly via email for inclusion in the transcript.
From MikiS:
"I wanted to address the topics of empowering youth and alcohol-fuelled violence:
Empowering youth: My generation (I'm 18) has been encouraged our whole lives to achieve things for ourselves. In order to empower youth the focus has to change from ourselves to the community that we live in. This has to start in primary school, where children are first taught to be competitive and be better than their peers. Group and community values need to be fostered in young children, rather than this idea that we should do things just to benefit ourselves, regardless of people around us. If young children can learn that their actions are important not just for themselves then they will be more accountable amongst their peers to make good decisions. You could even try starting a campaign for youth now, to show them that their actions affect their community and their friend. This way, youth will encourage each other to make better decisions, because they will know that their friends' decisions can affect them personally. This could be quite successful, given that a lot of young people these days value friendship so much, even over family values.
Alcohol-fuelled violence: I agree with what other participants were saying about this, and linking it to the lack of public transport. I live in Brisbane, and from my experience, many fights occur when people are outside of the nightclubs, walking past taxi lines and becoming impatient waiting for taxis. Sometimes people wait up to an hour just catch a taxi to get home. When you consider that most of the people hanging around the nightclubs are drunk or have at least been drinking a little alcohol, and filled with energy, it's no wonder that fights start. If public transport were available all night then the number of drunken youth waiting around in the streets would be significantly reduced. There's no doubt that this would reduce violence."


PM: I'm here to attend the fourth East Asian Summit which, of course, begins here in Thailand this evening. This provides a good opportunity for Australia to engage with our friends and partners from across the region, bringing, of course, together the 10 nations of the Association of South East Asian Nations and, of course, our three partners in north-east Asia, together with, of course, our friends in India and New Zealand.
This is an important gathering of economies and an important gathering of countries. Here at this gathering we have heads of government representing nearly half the world's population. We have here leaders representing economies which represent more than one-third of global GDP. That's why our discussions tomorrow will focus on such critical international questions as economic cooperation, particularly given the impact of the global economic crisis on both developed and developing economies, climate change in the lead up to Copenhagen, response to natural disasters, and of course the future of the region's architecture.
On economic cooperation, we will be engaged in detailed discussions about the future prognosis of global economic recovery and how uneven that is likely to be in various parts of the world and as we seek to enhance our regional cooperation, to ensure that that path to recovery is as smooth as possible. Challenges, however, are large. Asia represents a significant part of the global economic recovery story. What happens here in Asia is of critical relevance not just to those of us within the region, but of course the world at large, and therefore this will be an important area for discussion in the next 24 hours because so much of Australia's future economic growth and jobs growth depends on the future health of these economies of the region.
On climate change, we have less than six weeks or so to go before Copenhagen. 
It is clear that we need to achieve the strongest possible outcome in Copenhagen. Australia is one of the world's hottest and driest continents. Therefore, the economic consequences and environmental consequences for Australia will be felt hardest and earliest compared with most other countries around the world.
That is why today I welcome the comments today by Prime Minister of Denmark, Prime Minister Rasmussen. As host of the Copenhagen Conference, Prime Minister Rasmussen has called on leaders to increase their engagement in the negotiations directly over the next six weeks.
He called for leaders' engagement at a direct and political level in order to increase political momentum towards Copenhagen. Our view is that this is important to capture commitments already made in an ambitious political statement at Copenhagen and to guide ongoing negotiations towards a rapid completion of a comprehensive global treaty.
As I have said on many occasions back in Australia, the road to Copenhagen is steep and it is difficult.
That is why it is important here, when we have so many critical economies represented - the economies of China and India, the economies of Japan and Indonesia, and of course ourselves, to discuss the obstacles which remain in the way on the road to Copenhagen and how we can respond to the challenge which has been laid before us by the Prime Minister of Denmark to achieve greater political momentum for negotiators in the period ahead.
Thirdly, on natural disasters, I will be speaking with leaders directly about how we can better respond to natural disasters within our region.
We have been reminded of the impact of these in recent times. The Philippines, Vietnam and Laos have been hit by typhoons that have left more than 1,000 people dead. We know the impact which has now occurred in Indonesia, where we've had this tragic earthquake at Padang, with some 1,100 people dead and many more, of course, injured.
On top of this there is, of course, economic cost as well. In recent years the average annual economic loss from cyclones has been some USD5.8 billion in the region, and floods from some USD4.9 billion and earthquakes some USD3.2 billion
These are large sums. Therefore it's important that we, as the leaders of regional governments, enhance our coordination to a new level to respond more effectively to regional disasters, national disasters, when they occur.
Finally, on the question of the regional architecture itself, it is good that Australia is a member of the East Asia Summit. For the future, Australia also will continue to speak in direct support of our proposal for an Asia Pacific community. I thank the Prime Minister of Thailand, Prime Minister Abhasit, for his kind invitation to address leaders on our proposal when we meet together for lunch tomorrow. This will provide an opportunity for us to outline further our proposal, the reasons for it and the processes associated with it, including the one-and-a-half-track conference we are proposing to host in Sydney on this in December.
On a bilateral level, I will also be meeting with the leaders of Korea, of Japan, of New Zealand, and of the Philippines, and I've just now concluded a very useful discussion with Premier Wen Jiabao of China which covered the full breadth of our bilateral relationship, together with the important areas of regional and global cooperation we currently are engaged in, as well as climate change.
Also, we have agreed with our friends in China that the vice-Premier of China, senior vice-Premier Li Keqiang will visit Australia soon. The timing for that will be determined in the period ahead.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Yes, in the discussion that I had with Premier Wen I indicated that we had continuing consular matters which need to be resolved between our foreign ministries and this included representatives of the Australian company Rio Tinto.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) any indications of how quickly his case might be resolved?
PM: That's under continued and close discussion between the two foreign ministries. We confirmed that that process was ongoing.
JOURNALIST: Consular matters, what does that mean? Hu's not getting the kind of access he needs, or-
PM: Consular matters refers to any individual Australian who finds themselves in difficulty with the laws of a foreign country, and of course that is the case with Mr Hu. As a consequence, when I use that term it refers to the totality of the case and the totality of the processing of it, which is the subject of intense and continuing discussion between our two foreign ministries.
JOURNALIST: Did you express (inaudible)
PM: The details of the case are being prosecuted between the foreign ministries and the foreign ministers. That is appropriately where those details are handled. My purpose in raising these matters today was simply to highlight the fact this was a continuing matter of concern to Australia and I will continue to do so in the future.
JOURNALIST: Will you be talking to Malaysia and Indonesia about the asylum seeker issue?
PM: When I was most recently in Jakarta I had extensive formal bilateral meetings with both the Indonesian and Malaysian heads of Government, the President of Indonesia, the Prime Minister of Malaysia. We discussed, extensively, people smuggling cooperation there, and as we meet during the course of this East Asia Summit I'm sure that, together with the other forms of cooperation in transnational crime, including counter-terrorism, as well as the whole breadth of our economic and broader political relationship, will be the subject of normal discussion, but as I said, these were already the subject of formal bilaterals only several days ago in Jakarta.
JOURNALIST: There have been reports in the Australian media today of asylum seekers being beaten in an Australian-funded detention centre in (inaudible) Is this a good outcome for asylum seekers seeking refuge in Australia, being sent to a country that's not a signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees?
PM: Well, first of all, I've not seen those reports. Secondly, in terms of facilities with Indonesia, my advice is they are subject to regular visitation by the IOM, the International Organisation for Migration, including the provision of a range of services by the IOM, including medical advice, but I'm unaware of the report to which you refer.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It's never been my practice in these sorts of discussions to reflect on the response by other Governments. That's a matter, of course, to put to the other side. My responsibility is to reflect the concerns on the part of the Australian Government. The discussion with Premier Wen Jiabao covered the full, as I said, breadth of our bilateral relationship, which is strong and in good shape. It covered also our continued work on a free-trade agreement with China. It covered also our extensive and complex negotiations with China globally on climate change, as well as, of course, the future of the East Asian architecture, including our proposal for an Asia Pacific community, as well as the consular matters I've just referred to.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) could you be more specific about what exactly you will discuss given that the Indonesian President (inaudible) next month, what exactly-
PM: Firstly, as I said, we had extensive discussions in Jakarta only several days ago. Our officials are in constant contact across the whole spectrum of people smuggling matters and a whole spectrum of counter-terrorism matters and border security cooperation, and that's before you go to the rest of the fabric of our bilateral relationship. On the question of the President's prospective or possible visit to Australia, can I just say this - after President Yudhoyono won the election back in July, as I indicated before, I telephoned him to congratulate him. On that occasion I also extended to him an invitation to visit Australia. That was way back in July, and since then our officials, I'm sure, engaged in identifying an appropriate, mutually convenient time for that visit to occur. So far as I know we haven't reached finality on that.
OK folks, I've really got to go and put on my shirt.


The Australian Government will provide $52 million to enable the rapid deployment of Australian civilians into overseas disaster or conflict zones.
This will enable the Government to send civilians with expert knowledge and abilities into disaster-struck regions or conflict zones with the urgency required in these terrible situations.
This new initiative is expected to have an interim capability by mid-2010, and is expected to be fully operational by early 2011.
The civilian specialists will be deployed across a wide range of roles. For example, they could be used to help:
     * restore the delivery of essential services like health services infrastructure;
     * restore essential infrastructure like utilities services, for example electricity and water; and
     * rebuild core government institutions to deliver good governance in order to support economic and social stability.
The civilian specialists will be deployed to assist in early recovery and reconstruction efforts after initial emergency response operations have concluded.
The Government will create a register of up to 500 Australian specialists who can be deployed overseas at short notice.
These specialists will be chosen for their technical expertise and their ability to work in challenging environments overseas.
They will be drawn from both the public and private sectors.
These civilian specialists will complement rather than replace existing humanitarian response mechanisms and longer-term development assistance.
Deployed civilians may work alongside the Australian military and police where present or in a stand-alone capability. They may work alongside foreign military, United Nations peacekeepers, police and civilian experts from other countries.
Assignments will range from immediate stabilisation and recovery work to longer-term capacity building roles, recognising that the consequences of disasters can be felt for many years after their immediate impact.
A new Office of the Deployable Civilian Capability will be established within the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) to implement the initiative. The Office of the Deployable Civilian Capability will also build strategic partnerships with equivalent civilian organisations overseas, including the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada.
Deployed specialists will undertake advisory and capacity building roles at the national, provincial and district levels in countries which require assistance across six key stabilisation and reconstruction sectors:
     * Security, justice &amp; reconciliation;
     * Machinery of Government;
     * Essential Services;
     * Economic Stability;
     * Community and Social Capacity Building; and
     * Operational management.
As we have seen in recent weeks with the disasters in Samoa and Tonga, and in East Asia Summit member nations including Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines, countries affected by crises require significant assistance to alleviate human suffering and to begin the process of recovery.
Often this assistance is needed urgently, and requires specialised knowledge and skills. By providing skilled professionals through the DCC, Australia can play a greater role in this process.
For those who would like further information or to register their interest in this initiative, AusAID will provide more details in the near future.


The largest Free Trade Agreement Australia has ever concluded will come into force on 1 January 2010, following discussion between ASEAN leaders today. 
The Agreement establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA) spans 12 economies, with over 600 million people and a combined GDP of $3.1 trillion. 
The Agreement will cover a massive 20% of Australia's two-way trade, worth $112 billion. 
The deal will eliminate tariffs on 96 per cent of our current exports to ASEAN nations by 2020. 
Currently, only 67 per cent of our exports to the region are tariff-free. 
This will support Australian industry by promoting exports, and will play an important role in supporting Australian jobs. 
This will be the most comprehensive Free Trade Agreement to enter into force for ASEAN, covering a range of areas including:
     * Goods
     * Services
     * Investment
     * Intellectual property
     * e-commerce
The nations covered by the AANZFTA are the 10 ASEAN Member States: Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Burma, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam; and Australia and New Zealand. 
When the global financial crisis began at the end of last year, one of the greatest threats to economic recovery was the potential for an outbreak of national protectionism. 
The initial signing of the AANZFTA in February was an important sign of the determination of nations to work together to build economic recovery, and today's announcement cements that cooperation. 
The entry into force of AANZFTA is also another important step towards greater cooperation and economic integration in the region.


PM: Here in Thailand at the East Asia Summit one of the matters which will be subject to discussion today will be the challenge of counter-disaster management. This is a core challenge for the people of the region, core challenge for countries like Australia where we've dealt with extraordinary bushfires in Victoria, core challenge for our friends in Indonesia who've been through the extraordinary tragedy of earthquakes and, of course, core challenges for countries in the region including the Philippines and others who are suffering from intense and repeated typhoons resulting in a great loss of life, resulting in a great loss of property.
Our friends and partners in the region have been engaged in discussions on this and we will have a further deliberation on how to do this better as a region during the course of today.
Australia has in the past invested in the aftermath of the Indonesian tsunami. At the initiative of this government a major centre in Jakarta can begin to unfold the research and the underpinnings of long-term counter-disaster management with Indonesia and then ultimately more broadly in the region. I discussed this the other day in Jakarta at length with president Yudhoyono and we went through, in particular, the sort of work which is now about to be underway within that centre. This is the largest centre of this type, in Indonesia, and it is an investment on the part of the Australian Government because natural disasters will be with us in greater intensity over a longer period of time, regrettably, with greater loss of life into the future for a range of reasons.
The big challenge is this - how do we best prepare? How do we best deploy our capabilities across the region? And again, that'll be the subject of deliberations in this EAS meeting again here in Thailand.
For Australia's part, we are providing $52 million to enable the rapid deployment of Australian civilians into overseas disasters or conflict zones. This new civilian corps to assist in disaster and conflict zones is going to be an important part of our contribution to the region in the future.
What's this mean in practice? It means the Government being able to deploy rapidly civilians with expert knowledge and abilities to disaster-struck regions or conflict zones with the urgency required in these often terrible and traumatic circumstances. This new initiative is expected to have interim capability by mid-2010 and is expected to be fully operational by early 2011.
Civilian specialists will be deployed across a wide range of roles. For example, they could be used to help restore the delivery of essential service like health services infrastructure where these disasters have hit, restore essential infrastructure like utility services - for example, electricity and water - and rebuild core government institutions to deliver good governance to support economic and social stability.
The Government will create a register of up to 500 Australian specialists who will be able to be deployed overseas at rapid notice. This will be drawn from both the public and private sectors. They may work alongside, for example, foreign military, UN peace keepers, as well as police and civilian experts from the country concerned. Once again this is about Australia providing a practical form of direct engagement into the region when disasters hit, in a practical and effective way. Of course, Australia will continue to work with our friends and partners on how to better coordinate overall cross-regional counter-disaster preparedness and response when natural disasters hit.
Second point I'd raise with you this morning concerns the Australian free trade agreement with the ASEAN countries to begin in 2010. Let's put all this into its context. This will be largest free trade agreement Australia has ever concluded, which will come into force on 1 January 2010, following discussion between ASEAN leaders in this East Asian Summit.
The agreement establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement will span 12 economies, over 600 million people, and a combined GDP of $3.1 trillion. The agreement will cover a massive 20 percent of Australia's two-way trade, worth $112 billion.
The deal will eliminate tariffs on 96 percent of our current exports to ASEAN nations by 2020. Currently, only 67 percent of our exports in the region are tariff free. This will be the most comprehensive free trade agreement to enter into force for ASEAN, covering a range of areas including goods, services, investment, intellectual property and e-commerce.
The entry into force of this massive new free trade agreement for Australia as of 2010 is a big step forward for Australia, it is good for the Australian economy, it is good for jobs, and that is why this Government is pleased to have been part of this negotiation, pleased to have brought this negotiation to a successful conclusion, but most critically in terms of today's events, confirmation that this agreement will enter into force as of 1 January next year - a good economic story for Australia.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: PM (inaudible) is it an indication our military commitments in the region are stretched to capacity (inaudible)
PM: Our military capacity is first class. In my experience as Prime Minister, when we need to act, and act quickly, and if I speak to the Chief of Defence Force, staff, and the Defence Minister, we have kit and equipment quickly and able to be delivered, but that often needs to be complemented with civilian capabilities as well.
Whether it's in the medical field, whether it's in the civil reconstruction field or whatever, what we're seeking to do is in fact integrate both. This idea for a new civilian corps for Australians to help with counter-disaster relief in our region came directly out of the 2020 Summit last year. It was an idea from the floor, from the Australian community, saying 'we're a bunch of medicos, we're a bunch of specialists who know how to repair broken bridges, how to quickly plug in a power system which has fallen down or how to get the water system going again, but what we need is prearrangements, preparedness and rapidity of deployment to be effective.' So, that just doesn't happen by clicking your fingers when you see on the morning news that something has happened. It means having all this prepared, as we prepare for contingencies with our military capabilities as well. This is a good news story, I think, for Australia's contribution in the region.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Absolutely.
JOUNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Will they travel with them or not is a separate question, but an integrated Australian response will deploy all the capabilities we've got within the ADF which are first class and, quite frankly, are without parallel in most of the region and secondly, also making sure that our civilian capability and that whole list of skills that I ran through before are able to be deployed with a similar urgency.
As you know, the first few days after a disaster hits are the most crucial. The first few weeks are the most crucial, for example, in preventing or reducing the outbreak of pandemic diseases through, often, the collapse of the water flow, of the water supply, or the pollution of local water services.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister is it appropriate that an Australian vessel is about to deliver (inaudible) to an Australian-funded facility in Indonesia where there are allegations of wide spread abuse?
PM: On the question of Australia's engagement with Indonesia and other countries in terms of processing facilities, for example, we have been providing, as a nation, assistance to the Indonesians for reprocessing centres or processing centres going back four or five years now. That's the first point.
The second is as far as Indonesia itself is concerned, we provide funding through the UNHCR and through the IOM. Australia has provided approximately $34.7 million in funding to the regional cooperation arrangement since 1999. The Government recently increased its core funding to the UHNCR by $4.4 million to $14.3 million and provide another $2 million over two years specifically to support UNHCR's delivery of protection assessments and outreach activities in Indonesia - that's UNHCR.
In the 09/10 budget we provided the IOM with $5 million over two years to provide additional accommodation, food and medical care for intercepted irregular migrants in Indonesia. IOM will continue to provide care and maintenance and counselling services to the residing irregular migrants in these community accommodation arrangements. In 2007, the Australian Government provided $7.7 million to IOM to improve the management and care of irregular migrants in Indonesia as well.
My overall point is here are the agencies which are best equipped and best charged with ensuring the proper delivery of these services to these centres in Indonesia and elsewhere. The Australian Government for some time has been providing support for these international organisations. These organisations are effective, and therefore we believe that the best way for us to continue to support these arrangements in the future is to continue to work in partnership with the Indonesian Government but in partnership with these two critical international organisations.
JOURNALIST: ASEAN is wanting to hear more about your Asia-Pacific community. You'll be discussing that today. ASEAN wants to have a central role in that. Are they going to hear what they want from you on that?
PM: Well, I've put this forward, this proposal for an Asia-Pacific community, sometime last year. I'm here in Thailand with my special envoy, Dick Woolcott, who has travelled all the capitals of the region to discuss this at some length with regional heads of government over the last year or so, and you know we have a one-and-a-half-track conference coming up in Sydney in December, and what I detect across the region is an openness to a discussion about how we evolve our regional architecture into the future, and, as you know from my own proposal, I do not set an urgent time line on this. I've in fact suggested a time line of 2020 so that everyone has an opportunity to canvass a range of options for the future.
Our good friends in Japan, for example, have put forward an idea for an East Asia community. This is a good part, a good contribution to the overall regional conversation as well. What does all this symbolise? It reflects the fact that in this dynamic region which is so much the centre of global economic activity for the 21st century, but still with genuine and continuing security challenges into the 21st century, so we must always work to improve our regional coordination and cooperation systems and institutions into the future.
Now, I think that's a very healthy and live conversation for all countries in the region to have. Everyone is going to have a different view on what shape it should be and over what period of time. That's good - I'm perfectly relaxed about it. It's important that we are in a conscious discussion and a conscious process to evolve options for regional institutions for the future rather than just sitting back and waiting for big problems to emerge, and I think what is healthy within this group of leaders gathered here in Thailand at the East Asia Summit is preparedness to engage, still, in this open conversation about the future and I welcome the discussion.
JOURNALIST: A common currency, Prime Minister? Would that ever be considered by Australia?
PM: I think it's important to take things one step at a time. What I'm concerned about is to ensure that over time, to the greatest extent we can, we evolve institutions within our region which have it within their mandate to deal with the common security challenges of the future, the common political challenges of the future, the common economic challenges of the future across the spectrum and to do so in a way where our sense of common community becomes the driving force, rather than the things which may separate and divide us.
Having said that, I've got to zip.


It of course has been a great pleasure to welcome Prime Minister Gruevski to Canberra today.
We have just signed documents to conclude a social security agreement that will make retirement easier for up to 4,000 residents of both countries. From 2011, when the agreement is expected to commence, people who have spent part of their adult lives in Australia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will have access to pensions from both countries.
This agreement reflects the close people-to-people links that we have between our countries, and it is the first formal agreement concluded between our two countries since the establishment of diplomatic relations 14 years ago, in October of 1995.
Today, the Prime Minister and I have just had a working lunch, where we discussed the impact of the global economic crisis and our shared commitments to assisting Afghanistan at this difficult time. Both our nations are democracies and both our nations are committed to making a strong contribution to international affairs.
The Prime Minister is a welcome guest in our country and I am pleased that we have been able to conclude this agreement here today in honour of his visit, and I would ask the Prime Minister to make some remarks.
Thank you.


A new Social Security Agreement between Australia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will make retirement easier for up to 4,000 residents of both countries.
From 2011, when the Agreement is expected to commence, people who have spent part of their adult lives in Australia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will have access to pensions from both countries.
Under the Agreement, former Australian residents living in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will have access to the Age Pension, while those who have come to Australia from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia now living in Australia will have access to their old age, disability and survivors' benefits.
The Agreement was concluded today by the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and the Prime Minister of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, HE Mr Nikola Gruevski.
This Agreement gives people more freedom to move between both countries, knowing that their pension rights will be recognised and protected.
It recognises the reality that many people live and work in more than one country and this requires arrangements which safeguard their retirement income.
As well as improving access to pensions, the Agreement will also encourage further business ties between both countries.
It will remove the requirement for compulsory contributions to be paid into both countries' superannuation and pension insurance systems for temporarily seconded workers.
Australia currently has 23 social security agreements with Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Malta, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland and the USA.
Australia has recently signed agreements with Poland and the Czech Republic, which are expected to commence in mid-2010 and early 2011 respectively.
As part of the 2009-10 Budget, the Australian Government also agreed to finalise social security agreements with the Slovak Republic and Latvia.
More information on the Agreement is available at http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/international



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Tonight I want to discuss a core element of our nation's long term infrastructure reform.
One that has been part of our national economic policy debate for many decades.
One that is critical to achieving our goals of lifting productivity, tackling climate change and improving the lives of millions of Australians.
I refer to the future planning of our major cities.
The Government in the months ahead will release a new Intergenerational Report.
One of its key conclusions is that by 2049, Australia's population will rise by 60 per cent to reach a total of 35 million people.
This will have enormous implications for our major cities.
Most of these 35 million people will live in our cities.
By 2049, Sydney and Melbourne will each hold almost seven million people - adding around three million to their current populations.
Brisbane will more than double in size to reach four million.
Perth will reach almost three and a half million.
Adelaide will grow to over one and a half million.
Hobart, Darwin, and Canberra will also continue to expand.
Australia's rapid population growth will have profound implications for our destiny as a nation.
The century ahead stands to be the greatest century of economic growth and nation-building in Australian history.
I have said before that I believe in a big Australia.
This is good for our national security.
Good for our long-term prosperity.
Good in enhancing our role in the region and the world.
The time to prepare for this big Australia is now.
But managing that population growth will be challenging.
The Intergenerational Report will lay out the challenges posed by this growth.
These challenges underscore the need for national leadership in planning the future of our cities.
Tonight, here in the nation's largest city, I will set out the first steps in the Australian Government's vision for national leadership in the growth and development of our major cities.
First, I would like to make some general remarks on Australia's economic outlook.
As you know, it is now just over 12 months since the Australian Government took action in response to the global financial crisis and the worldwide collapse in economic growth.
On both financial and economic metrics, early stages of the current global crisis rival the severity of the Great Depression.
- Global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. In the first 12 months of this recession, global stock markets fell by nearly twice that - more than 40 per cent off their peak.
- Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression - almost identical to the fall experienced in this recession from the peak in April 2008.
- Global trade fell by 10 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. This time it fell by 17 per cent.
There is still considerable uncertainty about how the global recession will unfold and how quickly the global recovery will occur.
But a comparison of these two periods shows the current global crisis began with the same force as the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago.
Direct and decisive government action around the world during the past year has pulled financial markets and the global economy back from the abyss.
Global financial markets are recovering.
The spread on the LIBOR rate - the interest that banks charge when lending to each other compared to the risk free rate - has come down from around 365 basis points at the peak of the crisis to around 13 basis points today.
Global stockmarkets have recovered strongly since their lowest point in March this year.
The Dow Jones Index in the US has since risen by 54 percent, and the Australian All Ordinaries index is now up 56 per cent.
The real economy is also showing some signs of improvement.
Due to the combined efforts of the G20 to stimulate the global economy, the global recession is now expected to be shallower than previously expected.
Recovery is still a long way off, but the IMF is now projecting a contraction of 1.1 per cent in the global economy this year - while just three months ago in July it had forecast a contraction of 1.4 per cent.
Remember, however, this year will be the first year since the IMF began keeping records that the global economy will actually contract.
Likewise, the IMF has lifted its global growth forecast for 2010 from 2.5 per cent to 3.1 per cent.
Australia has acted strongly and decisively at home to complement this global action on financial markets and stimulus to support the real economy.
Australia has shown remarkable strength compared to the Major Advanced Economies:
- We are the only advanced economy to have registered positive economic growth in the past year.
- Second, we have the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies.
- Third, we have the lowest budget deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies, at 4.9 per cent of GDP, compared to a forecast average deficit in the Major Advanced Economies of 10.1 per cent of GDP in 2009.
- Fourth, we have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies. Government net debt as a share of GDP for the major advanced economies is projected to increase to 93.4 per cent. By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
- Fifth, we are the only advanced economy not to go into recession.
These are the cold hard statistical facts which are unlikely to feature in the Liberals' campaign advertisements next year on the evils of debt and deficits.
The alternative to the Government's stimulus strategy would have been to plunge the economy into recession - with more than one million unemployed and with crippling consequences for business and consumer confidence.
Furthermore, consistent with the principles of conservative economic management, the Government has expanded its role as the private economy has contracted, and will contract the role of government as and when the private economy recovers.
The most fashionable recent contribution to this debate by some in the commentariat is that the Government should now abandon its fiscal stimulus - an argument that often comes from those who argued that the Government's stimulus strategy would be ineffective in the first place.
This represents the triumph of ideology over reason.
It ignores three fundamental facts.
- First, the path to global recovery is still far from certain - as confirmed recently by my counterparts at both the G20 in Pittsburgh last month and at the East Asia Summit on the weekend in Thailand.
- Second, the pattern of the Australian economic recovery is itself less than even.
- Third, the Government's stimulus strategy, 70 per cent of which is being invested in economic and social infrastructure, is precisely what stimulus strategies are intended to be - timely, targeted and temporary.
By the end of the current financial year, two thirds of this stimulus will have been invested.
In fact, the intensity of our intervention peaked in the second quarter of 2009.
By early 2010, the inbuilt contraction within our strategy, as designed from the start, will already be making a negative contribution to GDP growth.
Nevertheless, the Government remains mindful of the need to make any future adjustments depending on further global and national economic data.
Our economy is expected to operate below capacity for some time, and unemployment is still expected to rise.
Australia has managed the crisis well.
Our next challenge is to manage the recovery.
That means making a careful, coordinated exit from the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy settings and financial market interventions that the crisis demanded.
That is what we intend to do - and in a manner that does not weaken the prospects for recovery.
The Reserve Bank has begun to move interest rates from their emergency 50 year lows.
As for fiscal consolidation, this will unfold in two parts.
The automatic drawdown of our stimulus strategy combined with the fiscal rules outlined in May, to return the budget to surplus - by keeping real expenditure growth to 2 per cent once trend growth has returned to the economy, and by allowing tax revenues to recover.
But beyond disciplined macroeconomic policy, central to our agenda for recovery and future prosperity is the Government's commitment to drive future productivity growth.
In addressing the Business Council almost three years ago, in my first major address as the Federal Labor Leader, Building Long Term Prosperity, I said that, "the new battleground for economic policy must now focus on the microeconomic debate and specifically, how we raise flagging productivity growth".[1]
We have been advancing this agenda since coming to office, through:
- The creation of a seamless national economy, collapsing 27 sets of conflicting regulations into a streamlined set of uniform rules. Four of these 27 reform areas will be substantially complete by the end of the year, and almost all of the remainder are on track to meet agreed milestones. 
- A qualitative and quantitative education revolution. 
- Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors. 
- A communications revolution through a National Broadband Network. 
- And maximising our global competitiveness through targeted tax reform.
Tonight I want to focus on the role of our cities in our agenda to build long-term productivity growth.
The previous government vacated the field on future planning for our major cities.
More broadly, the previous government vacated the field on infrastructure per se - as this was passed off as the responsibility of the states, despite their financial and in many cases planning constraints.
There was a failure of planning, a failure of coordination, a failure of investment and a failure in service delivery.
The BCA is well aware of the shortcomings in our nation's infrastructure planning and development, and this was a focus of the 2005 Infrastructure Action Plan for Future Prosperity.
The Government that I lead was elected to tackle the challenge of providing national leadership for long-term infrastructure planning and investment.
It is my intention to get on with the job.
As Minister Albanese said in August, "the Commonwealth's recent exile from the urban policy arena has ended".
That is why we are taking the next step in setting out the Australian Government's reform agenda for our nation's cities.
An agenda that does not supplant the essential roles of the States, Territories and local authorities, but which builds a new national partnership for better planning and productivity, and a better quality of city and suburban life.
Around the world, nations are grappling with the challenge of planning for the cities of the future.
The forces of the global economy are driving rapid urban growth and requiring governments to re-think their approach to the planning and development of cities.
Last year, with very little comment, the world passed a remarkably significant milestone.
For the first time in world history, a majority of humans now live in cities and towns rather than rural areas.
In other words, we have tipped the scales and become an urban planet.
Or as the United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon says, we have entered the Urban Century.
Cities today are essential to the prosperity of our national economy.
They produce a large share of the goods, services, ideas and people that shape our world.
In many ways the competition for investment, skilled workers, international events and for business now occurs between cities, rather than countries.
Because cities are now so vital to economic success and to citizens' well-being, national governments are now playing a much greater role in planning and delivering growth.
That's why when the Government took office, we moved quickly to establish Infrastructure Australia and within it a Major Cities Unit.
Just this month, the British Government launched the Infrastructure Planning Commission to make sure the UK has strong power, water and transport systems in its cities.
And in February, weeks after taking office, President Obama established a White House Office of Urban Affairs to oversee what he described as a "reinvention of all America's cities and metropolitan areas''.
As the OECD's 2006 Report on Competitive Cities in the Global Economy argues, national economic strategy can no longer ignore the characteristics of cities that shape economic performance, social cohesion and environmental conditions.
The report adds, and I quote:
"National urban policies in the past have been reactive and remedial, not pro-active and dynamic. Urban issues (must) be given greater visibility and higher priority in national policy...''
Since coming to office, the Government has established a framework for national leadership on the infrastructure of the future.
We have made unprecedented investments in infrastructure, water, housing, education and energy.
We made a historic $35.8 billion investment in transport infrastructure.
We are the first national government to invest significantly in urban passenger rail infrastructure -- with more than $4.6 billion of funds.
We have invested substantial funds in our nation's capital cities:
- an upgrade of the rail freight route north of Sydney; upgrading the F5 from Campbelltown; and undertaking pre-construction works on a 25 kilometre metro rail line from Parramatta to the CBD;
- an upgrade of the Ipswich Motorway to relieve congestion to and from Brisbane's industrial hub;
- Melbourne's Regional Rail Express, the first major new rail line for the city in 80 years;
- Adelaide's busy Gawler rail line; extending the Noarlunga line to Seaford and extending the innovative guided busway, the O-Bahn;
- Perth's Northbridge rail project that will sink a section of the Perth-to-Fremantle line, freeing up 50,000 square metres of land in the heart of Perth; and
- a major expansion and upgrade of the Port of Darwin and upgrading Tiger Brennan Drive.
This is a substantial increase in investment in transport infrastructure compared with the previous Government.
All up, our Government is investing more than double the previous government on road infrastructure.
Quadruple the amount in rail infrastructure.
And for the first time, the Commonwealth is making an investment in the nation's port infrastructure.
In total, these and other investments represent a massive commitment to Australian cities, and to the regional economies that support them.
The reason why we are making these investments is simple.
The future of our cities will substantially shape the future of our nation.
Australia, famously, is one of the most urbanised nations on earth.
The nation that once rode on the sheep's back now rides on the M2, M4 and M5 into Sydney and on the Epping, Lilydale and Werribee lines into Melbourne.
- Nearly two-thirds of Australians live in our capital cities.
- Nearly 85 per cent of Australians live in an urban area.
- And nearly half of all Australians - or nearly 11 million people - live in Sydney, Melbourne or the great city of Brisbane.
- In 2006 our capital cities produced at least 65 per cent of national GDP.
- And more than two-thirds of new jobs are created in capital cities.
Capital cities are the hubs of our innovation economy, gateways to the global economy and the centres of our road, rail and broadband networks. 
Nearly two-thirds of the value of international sea freight is handled through a major city port.
And more than 80 per cent of international passenger movements take place through Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane airports.
Cities connect our farms, mines and rural areas to world markets.
They often hold the corporate headquarters of regionally-based companies.
One of the mistakes in debates about infrastructure and planning is thinking that cities and regional areas are in competition and governments must choose to favour either cities or the regions.
Having spent most of my early years growing up in country Australia, and most of the past three decades in different cities, I'm convinced this is a myth.
The prosperity of urban, suburban and regional Australia are strongly interlinked.
The prosperity of both our cities and regions depend on each other, so that planning for the separate needs of regional Australia and metropolitan Australia is in the interests of the whole nation.
Transport bottlenecks in our cities can undermine the competitiveness of exports from our regions.
Just as poor regional water infrastructure can raise prices for the fresh food consumed in our cities.
That is why tackling the future challenges of our major cities is so important to our nation's long-term prosperity.
The investments we have made represent only the first steps in meeting the challenges of the future for our major cities.
We must now move forward to tackle the three key challenges of the future for our major cities:
- Building productive cities - with efficient transport and communications networks;
- Building affordable, liveable city communities; and 
- Building sustainable cities.
The first of these areas - building productive cities - describes how cities link people to jobs, goods to transport and to ports, and businesses to research and development clusters, supply chains and customers.
Better transport connections bring people and firms together. They concentrate knowledge, skills and inventiveness to create new economic opportunities.
In other words, they enhance connectivity.
To quote Sir Rod Eddington, chair of the United Kingdom's 2006 Eddington Transport Study and now chair of Infrastructure Australia:
"Good transport systems support the productivity of urban areas, supporting deep and productive labour markets... Transport corridors are the arteries of domestic and international trade.''
Sir Rod's study is supported by leading British economist Professor Tony Venables, who found that cutting travel time in Britain by just 10 per cent could raise national productivity by as much as 1.2 per cent.
But cutting congestion and travel time is about more than just trying to increase national productivity and GDP.
It is also about giving people the chance to spend more time with their friends and families, helping the kids with homework or playing sport - rather than sitting in a traffic jam on congested roads.
These things are not necessarily reflected in GDP numbers, but they are of great importance to our quality of life.
In Australian cities, bottlenecks in our rail and port systems are also imposing huge financial costs on our exporters and on businesses in general.
It is estimated that road congestion by 2005 was contributing an avoidable cost of $9.4 billion.
And if we fail to act, that cost will double in the next decade.
One of the factors driving the increased reliance on road usage is the long-term underinvestment in public transport networks.
In many places, those networks are under great pressure.
And in some of our suburbs, especially on the fringe, they're simply missing.
Despite all that, public transport use in our cities is growing at a faster rate than car use.
Our second great urban challenge is to build affordable, liveable cities.
For many Australians, the problem of housing affordability has become acute in recent years.
Of course there has been some relief recently with lower interest rates and the First Home Owners Boost.
We established the Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce the costs of new homes by tackling the barriers developers face in supplying affordable housing.
Through COAG, we are developing national performance measures for Development Assessment to improve transparency and accountability for planning systems.
Nevertheless, we still face the challenge of not enough new housing being built and affordability remaining a significant problem.
That is why we are increasing the housing supply through our investment in social housing and the National Rental Affordability Scheme.
In making cities more liveable, as well as more affordable, we must ensure that communities are not separated from jobs and services. 
Isolated communities breed social exclusion and entrenched disadvantage.
Urban planning is therefore an important part of the long term agenda to build a fairer Australia.
Increasing density in cities is part of the solution to urban growth, alongside greenfield development.
Both forms of development need to be fully integrated with current and future transport networks and other infrastructure and services.
The third great urban challenge is to build sustainable cities.
I have said before that climate change requires a whole of government response - including both adaptation and mitigation.
Climate change is another reason why the national government must be engaged in cities policies.
Directly and indirectly, cities make up an estimated 70 per cent of Australia's greenhouse gas output.
Cities face major challenges from the impact of climate change, as do our regions.
We must make long-term investments in transport networks that minimise carbon emissions.
We must prepare for fresh water supplies coming under increasing pressure.
Building practices and regulations will need to change so our homes and workplaces are energy efficient and environmentally sustainable.
And cities will need to prepare for the impacts of climate change - including the risk of coastal inundation, highlighted by a report of a House of Representatives Inquiry released last night.
Our nation has 80 per cent of the population on the coast.
We have to manage the impact of rising sea levels and increased risk of flooding on our cities and coastal areas.
A national approach is needed - that is why we will work closely on the problem with State and Territory governments, coastal councils, natural resource management bodies and experts in developing a response to the Inquiry.
To address this complex, connected set of challenges, and to lift our urban productivity, we must establish new frameworks for how the different levels of government, along with businesses and the community, work together to build better cities and suburbs.
Governments across the nation are now working to integrate long term urban planning and infrastructure investment.
Most have in place or are preparing metropolitan plans to address the challenges of growing populations, land supply, infrastructure rollout, housing and the management of growth corridors.
However, while some capital city planning frameworks are good, implementing them has proved far more difficult.
As President Eisenhower said, the plan is nothing, the planning is everything.
With Australia facing rapid growth in the decades ahead, the time has now come for the Australian Government to take a much greater national responsibility for improving the long-term planning of our major cities.
History shows that when the Commonwealth steps into the urban arena, working in partnership with the states and territories, it has played a strong and positive role.
From the Chifley Government's great post-war urban plan through the first Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement.
To the Whitlam Government's huge investments in sewerage and community infrastructure for our outer suburbs.
To the Hawke-Keating Government's Building Better Cities program that built new infrastructure and affordable housing, sparking renewal in our major cities.
Once again, as we enter the second decade of the 21st century, the time has come for national leadership in our long-term city planning.
Clearly, the Commonwealth should not take over state responsibilities for land planning or have a direct role in the day-to-day decisions of state and local governments.
As Minister Albanese has said, no Commonwealth Minister wants to decide development applications or where to lay sewerage pipes.
But we must recognise the economic reality of the 21st century.
The national government has a clear responsibility to provide national leadership in the development of strategic planning frameworks for our largest cities.
That is why, working with State and Territory governments, we established the Council of Australian Governments Cities Taskforce.
We created the Major Cities Unit within Infrastructure Australia to identify opportunities where national leadership can enhance the prosperity of our cities and the well-being of their citizens.
We have also created the Australian Council of Local Government so that we can hear from, and talk to, all levels of government involved in economic development.
And in August I met for the second time with the Council of Capital City Lord Mayors and we agreed to work in partnership to address climate change in capital cities.
Tonight I announce the next step to integrate these initiatives into a new, national strategy.
In partnership with the States and Territories we will now propose the development of national criteria for the future strategic planning of our major cities.
The first in our country's history.
And, the Commonwealth will now consider linking all future infrastructure funding to compliance with these criteria.
If the Commonwealth is to foot any significant part of the urban infrastructure bill - the Commonwealth will legitimately expect to have confidence in the integrity of the strategic planning system in our major cities.
The goal is that our cities have strong, transparent and long-term plans for growth and high-quality urban development.
That our cities are productive, liveable and sustainable.
Specifically, the new criteria for the strategic planning systems in our major cities should focus on:
- Providing for planned, sequenced and evidence-based land release that meets the housing needs of a growing population and keeps homes affordable.
- Balancing in-fill and greenfield development.
- Implementing credible plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions - through initiatives such as energy efficiency measures, changes to town planning, practical improvements in public transport infrastructure and reform of building codes and regulations.
- Adapting to the risks of climate change such as coastal inundation and more extreme weather events.
- Emphasising world-class design and associated architectural integrity.
- Providing for building and upgrading nationally significant infrastructure, such as transport corridors, intermodal connections and communications and utilities networks.
- Providing for governments to take into account independent, expert advice on the objectives and implementation of their planning system.
- Providing an effective framework for private sector investment and innovation in the urban infrastructure given that with the fiscal constraints on governments, the nation will need to harness private capital.
We will also need new Commonwealth-State arrangements to jointly assess performance against these criteria and to advise on how performance can be improved.
These arrangements will build the spirit of mutual co-operation, determination and goodwill that characterises the attitude of all Australian governments towards this challenging agenda.
Therefore in 2010 through COAG we propose to develop - in consultation with the states and territories and the Australian Local Government Association - the first ever national criteria for the future strategic planning of our major cities.
Since coming to office, the Australian Government has forged a new constructive working relationship with the States and Territories.
Tackling key challenges in health, education and water reform.
Helping create a seamless national economy.
Helping deliver a National Broadband Network.
Helping close the gap with Indigenous Australians.
Today the Australian Government proposes we begin building a new partnership.
A new commitment to long-term reform of city planning in the interests of national productivity and sustainability.
The new national engagement in our cities that I have signalled tonight is designed to survive the test of future years.
I know the BCA will provide important input to this agenda and I look forward to working with you.
I urge all Australian governments, companies, community organisations and citizens to work with us to build the productive, liveable and sustainable Australian cities of the future.
________________________________________


The 2009 Prime Minister's Prize for Science has been awarded to Dr John O'Sullivan.
The award and $300,000 grant recognises Dr O'Sullivan's contributions to astronomy and to the invention which made wireless computing practical.
While looking for exploding black holes Dr O'Sullivan created a technology that cleaned up intergalactic radio waves.
Then in 1992, he and his colleagues at CSIRO realised that the same technology was the key to fast reliable wireless networking in the office and home.
Their patented invention is now built into international standards and into computers, printers, smart phones and other devices used by hundreds of millions of people every day.
It's one of the most significant achievements in CSIRO's 83 year history and illustrates how blue sky research can have very practical outcomes.
Professor O'Sullivan is now working on the design of the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder telescope - a step towards the giant Square Kilometre Array which will be able to look back 13 billion years, almost to the Big Bang.
The $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Primary Schools has been awarded to Western Australian teacher Mr Allan Whittome.
Mr Whittome believes that primary science should be all about the experience. He ensures that the science program at Badgingarra Primary School is integrated into the whole curriculum and is not seen as a subject in isolation. Consequently the children see science as a part of life and not just something that is done at school. It's a philosophy he is also introducing to other primary teachers in his region.
The $50,000 Prime Minister's Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools has been awarded to Mr Len Altman, a science and geoscience teacher at Marden Senior College in Adelaide.
Mr Altman is leading a resurgence in geoscience teaching in South Australia. It's a science needed not just for the mining and minerals industries but also offers an understanding of the challenges of water security and climate change. His classes include mature age students and recent migrants who, with his help, are finding new careers in geoscience.
Science has a vital role in helping Australia develop a sustainable future. These awards recognise and celebrate these quiet achievers who are both changing the world, and creating the next generation of curious minds.
Congratulation to all recipients of this year's prizes.


PM: Well thanks Sarah. Sarah and I and Mia have been talking about this report which they have just presented the Government, Proposed National Strategy on Body Image. And this is really big, it's important it's all about how our young people in particular feel about themselves. And how we deal with it better in our schools, in our families, in our community, and what industry have to do about it as well, in terms of promoting healthy body image. So thanks for your work, tell us a little bit about what it involves.
MURDOCH: Thank you very much. Yeah, we've had a fantastic group on the body advisory board. It's really about self-esteem in our youth. A Mission Australia survey over the last three year has shown that this is the number one cause in our youth today is self esteem and body image. Which I just find astounding. So something needs to be done, and it needs to be done now. So we are looking at an education program. We would love to have an education program in schools, in our community, and rewarding media and the industry who start to show more diversity in their photos, in their stories about body image. You know, we think that the media are on a roll at the moment. We think it's the perfect time to do this. I think that the community and the people out there are saying enough is enough. You know, we need to see different body types and different types of people in our media.
PM: Two quick questions. One is about just the impact of what can happen, say, with cyber bullying, on a young person's self image. Give me your sense having been out there consulting with people, actually happens in a young person's headspace when this goes wrong.
MURDOCH: Well I mean a lot of bullying is around image. It's about looking right. What is that perfect high school girl? Should she be tall, skinny, blonde wearing makeup, who knows, but it seems to be a lot about the image and that this is how bullying can begin. And you're talking about 12, 13 year old girls in years 7 and 8. But unfortunately research has shown that it is also starting as young as 5, 6, 7 years of age which is just-
PM: 5, 6, and 7?
MURDOCH: And we're talking about our little kids here who are starting to be influenced at such a young age about how they look, and whether that affects their self-esteem, and then goes on to depression and anxiety and that obviously takes them through to the rest of their lives.
PM: That is seriously tragic. If you are looking at littlies you should be enjoying being kids and not even faintly worrying about this. I think we have a bit of a social disease happening out there and we actually need to take some action. The other question I had for you is about industry's role. I see up the back here we've got a voluntary code of conduct for the industry, and that involves the media that involves the advertising industry and all those sort of folk. How's it going to go in terms of promoting, let's call it, a more, you know, representative spread of what the Australian family looks like?
MURDOCH: Well we're expecting it to be difficult, actually. We think the media are very set in their ways about what they think is what people want, but we're starting to prove as time goes on, this isn't what people actually want to see, people don't want to see one ideal image. It's not real. And the more that you start to see different campaigns out there, celebrating different body types, the more people are going to start buying those magazines, and watching those television shows, we really believe that. So we're encouraging media, we've kept it voluntary, but we want to reward them. So any media or industry that comes on board, we're talking about retailers as well, come onboard and celebrate diversity, we want to reward them in some way. So we are going to hopefully come up with some way that can say to them, you know, you can use this as a marketing tool, and we're going to celebrate the fact that you've shown diversity in your industry.
PM: That's good stuff. So family, community, what happens out in the industry as well. So if you want to give a report a read, it'll be here online, and this is something that'll only work if the entire community gets behind it. Thanks Sarah, thanks Mia, and thanks the rest of the team.
MURDOCH: Thank you.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I congratulate all of the nominees for this year's awards for your endeavours, your imagination and the leadership that you are showing to a new generation of budding young scientists in our schools and universities.
The Australian Government values your work as scientists and your contribution to the nation - to our economy and prosperity; to our health; to our environment, and to our quality of life.
For those of us who are a little more ignorant than most in this room, we can learn a great deal from our scientists.
Earlier this year I had the privilege of hosting the 20th anniversary meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC).
At that meeting, I learnt from the Chief Scientist Penny Sackett a technical expression used by scientists that I had never heard before - what they called "wicked problems".
I have of course heard men and women of the cloth talking about wickedness.
But I was less used to hearing about wickedness from those in white lab coats.
Penny explained that "wicked problems" - a scientific term, as she advises me - are distinct from the other category of problems, "tame problems".
- Tame problems are those where a problem can be objectively defined and solved through trial-and-error.
- Wicked problems are those problems which cannot be objectively defined and cannot be solved by trial-and-error, because attempting any solution can cause irreversible impacts on that system.
As I reflected on that discussion at PMSEIC, I realised that most of the serious problems facing government are wicked problems.
In other words, in my job, I deal with a lot of wickedness.
Water shortages in communities around Australia.
The reform of the health and hospitals system.
National security and the threat of terrorism.
These are complicated problems.
It can often be unclear exactly what the cause of the problem is; even less clear what the solution is.
But science plays a critical role in overcoming these challenges.
Perhaps the most "wicked" problem facing us as a nation and a world at the moment is climate change.
It is the one of the greatest scientific, economic, and moral challenges of our time.
And it is scientists who have been the town criers of the modern age - warning us, for decades, of the impending danger of global warming.
We cannot afford to wait and see how badly climate change might disrupt normal life on earth.
We cannot afford to get it wrong.
If we get our response to climate change wrong, we can't just try something else - future generations must live with the consequences of our decisions.
For climate change, there is no experiment, no controlled trial-and-error - our generation in history has got one shot to get it right.
That is why our response to climate change is so important to Australia's future.
Another wicked problem that has preoccupied the Government during the past 12 months is the global economic downturn.
It has been an enormously complex challenge.
In its speed and severity, the impact of the global financial crisis during the past year is comparable to the first twelve months of the Great Depression of the 1930s.
It has required extraordinarily complex interventions in financial markets and financial institutions by governments all around the world.
It has also required major coordinated fiscal stimulus.
In the context of the enormous challenges of the past 12 months, Australia has shown remarkable strength and resilience compared to the Major Advanced Economies.
This is a tribute to the hard work of Australian businesses, Australian workers and Australian policy makers.
- We are the only advanced economy to have registered positive economic growth in the past year.
- Second, we have the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies.
- Third, we have the lowest budget deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies.
- Fourth, we have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies.
- Fifth, we are the only advanced economy not to go into recession.
The stimulus strategy that the Government began to implement 12 months ago has been timely, targeted and temporary.
It involved immediate support for the economy, and in particular for the retail sector that employs more than one and a half million Australians.
And it involved substantial medium-term and long-term investment in nation-building infrastructure.
There are some people who have criticised the Government's stimulus strategy.
But the alternative to the Government's stimulus strategy would have been to allow the economy to plunge into recession - with more than one million unemployed and with crippling consequences for business and consumer confidence.
By acting decisively, we have so far avoided a technical recession in Australia.
We have so far managed the global recession well.
Now, we need to manage the economic recovery.
A key element of managing economic recovery is to build the foundations for long-term growth and prosperity, by lifting productivity growth.
In the long run it is productivity growth that improves living standards and that supports higher levels of growth.
Australia has experienced declining productivity growth since the 1990s, falling from 3.3 per cent during the 1990s to just 1.1 per cent in the current decade.
The Government's long-term challenge is to turbo-charge our productivity growth rate.
Since coming to government almost two years ago, we have been advancing an agenda for long-term productivity growth:
- The creation of a seamless national economy, collapsing 27 sets of conflicting regulations into a streamlined set of uniform rules.
- A quality and quantity education revolution. 
- Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors. 
- A communications revolution through a National Broadband Network. 
- Maximising our global competitiveness through targeted tax reform.
I have always said that we cannot rely on strong terms of trade and our resources sector alone to guarantee sustainable economic growth.
We must build the foundations of sustainable growth for the future through policy settings that support education and innovation, that encourage research and development, and foster investment in the commercialisation of new ideas.
Total Commonwealth support for research and innovation is expected to be around $8.6 billion this financial year - 25 per cent more than in 2008-09.
The Australian Government's productivity agenda aims to create a culture of innovation, increase innovative capabilities and raise our long term productivity growth.
As a blueprint for our nation's productivity future, the Government developed Powering Ideas: An Innovation Agenda for the 21st Century.
This is a long-term, 10 year agenda to support productivity growth through innovation.
And it provides new incentives to undertake more Research and Development in both the public and private sectors.
It supports our research capability, both in skills and infrastructure, through the $1.1 billion Super Science Initiative.
This initiative is designed to keep our best emerging scientists in Australia and nurture greater collaboration between our universities and public research agencies.
The initiative will further strengthen our space and astronomy sectors with a $160 million funding injection.
Projects include a new Australian National Centre of Square Kilometre Array Science in Perth and a Space Policy Unit to provide advice to the Government.
$504 million has been allocated for Future Industries - new facilities for cutting-edge biological discovery and biotechnology development.
And two other areas of strength - Marine and Climate - receive more than $387 million in the Super Science Initiative.
The initiative also provides for 100 Super Science Fellowships, and the Australian Postgraduate Awards to encourage further study in the field of science.
We also recognise the importance of universities as the backbone of our research effort.
That is why this year's budget commits an extra half a billion over four years to address the gap in funding for the indirect cost of research - the equipment and materials that are needed for world-class research.
The education system is fundamental to harnessing innovation and boosting productivity.
Because an innovation culture relies on a highly qualified and flexible labour force in all sectors of the economy and society.
And that is why lifting teacher quality is a priority for the Australian Government.
A good teacher can leave a positive impact on a student.
But a great teacher can leave a positive impact on the world.
As you all know a few weeks ago there was a major event in Australian scientific history.
Australian-born and educated biologist Professor Elizabeth Blackburn was awarded the Nobel Prize for medicine.
She is Australia's first female Nobel Laureate.
Professor Blackburn stands in great Australian company alongside the likes of Sir Howard Florey and Professor Peter Doherty.
The prize was awarded for "for the discovery of how chromosomes are protected by telomeres and the enzyme telomerase".
Winning a Nobel Prize in Medicine is an extraordinary achievement and one of which all Australians can be proud.
And Professor Blackburn credits a favourite teacher from the Broadland House Church of England Grammar School in Launceston in the early 1960s, Nancy Hughes, with igniting her passion for science.
And Professor Blackburn's achievement has inspired science students around Australia in recent months.
I note one comment from Jess Cox, a 12 year old student in Year 7 at University High in Melbourne, where Professor Blackburn finished her school studies.
Jess was reported earlier this month remarking:
"I like chemistry and science -- we all think it's cool -- but it (the Nobel prize) is really inspirational."
So just as Professor Blackburn was inspired by her teachers at school, she has now become an inspiration to another generation - and in particular, to girls studying science.
Quality teaching is the single greatest influence on student engagement and achievement.
The Australian Government wants to attract, retain and continue to develop quality teachers and leaders in schools.
Through the 'Smarter Schools - Improving Teacher Quality National Partnership Agreement', the Government has committed $550 million over five years to improving teacher quality.
And the Government is investing in a range of initiatives specifically targeted at invigorating science and maths education in schools and recruiting the best graduates into teaching.
We've reduced HECS contributions for new students in maths and science.
And maths and science graduates who go on to work in related occupations, including teaching, will also be eligible for a refund of about half of their HECS-HELP repayments for up to five years.
The Australian Government is also supporting science teachers though our Building the Education Revolution reforms.
We've allocated $1 billion for the Science and Language Centres for the 21st Century, to build or refurbish some 537 facilities in secondary schools across Australia.
The Government has also committed $2 million to an initiative to encourage students in years 9 and 10 to engage in science.
And Questacon will continue its work in bringing science to Australia with an $11.3m funding investment.
This landmark institution will continue its mission to share the wonder of science with Australian children and adults in remote and regional areas.
Elizabeth Blackburn is a powerful inspiration for a new generation of young scientists.
But we can draw inspiration from men and women of the past as well.
Consider Charles Babbage, the man often described as the father of computing.
It is almost two hundred years since Babbage was experimenting with building his 'Difference Engine No.1' and his 'Analytical Engine'.
When he began building the Difference Engine in 1822, it required some 25,000 separate brass components.
One self-contained part of the Engine, essentially a calculator, took 2,000 brass parts to build but worked perfectly - and extraordinarily, still works today.
Babbage's work was breathtaking in its scope and its ultimate impact, but at the time it was a hard slog.
He struggled to obtain government funding for his research, and a shortage of funds ultimately constrained him from achieving his ambitions.
Indeed it was not until 1991 that the Difference Machine No.2, which he designed in the 1840s, was built by the British Science Museum.
It took 4,000 brass cogs and weighed three tons - and it worked superbly, calculating to 31 decimal places.
An interesting footnote to Babbage's career is that he was deeply critical of the inadequacy of government funding for science and of the quality of science teaching in Britain.
Indeed in 1830 he wrote a treatise called 'Reflections on the Decline of Science in England' - a publication which, with the wisdom of hindsight 180 years later, now seems a little premature.
But Babbage's ultimate contribution to science and to human endeavour is the stuff of legend.
It is embodied in every computer, every mobile phone, indeed most of the gadgets that we each use every day of our lives.
It is a reminder to all those engaged in scientific research that you never know how your work might change the course of history and the lives of generations of people to come.
Indeed the scientists of today - including in this room - continue to build on the early foundations of Charles Babbage.
Science is vital to every community, every nation.
And it is especially important to our nation as we confront the complex challenges of the future - climate change, water shortages, an ageing population, and the broader challenge of competing in a ruthlessly competitive global economy.
Australia is in the very fortunate position of laying claim to some of the finest scientific minds in the world.
The Prime Minister's Prizes for Science go some way to recognising our best and raising the profile of science and science teaching in Australia.
They highlight just how much we have to be proud of and how much potential is yet to be fulfilled.
Over the past 10 years, these Awards have honoured scientists who have unlocked some of the mysteries of biology, medicine, robotics and genetics.
We have paid tribute to scientists such as Frank Fenner for his work in eradicating smallpox.
Graeme Clark, for his multi-channel cochlear ear implant.
And last year, Ian Frazer for his cervical cancer vaccines.
The fruits of their labours are gifts - not just to Australia, but to the world.
The depth and breadth of Australia's scientific firepower is to be marvelled at.
In recognising the important role of scientists I would also like to recognise the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, Kim Carr.
Kim has always been a passionate advocate for science and argued strongly for increased levels of support for the sector.
Australian industry and in particular the scientific community have had their interests well represented by the Minister during the global economic crisis.
He has been consistently ahead of the curve on key industry challenges.
Kim also believes - and I agree - that becoming a science teacher is a great career opportunity and wonderful life vocation.
Yet few people know Kim's passion for science teaching extends to his own offspring.
In fact, Kim's daughter has completed a science degree and master of education.
Just this year she started work as a high school science teacher in the western suburbs of Melbourne - Kim, we wish her the best.
Tonight, we celebrate science and science teaching.
If I had one message on the role of science to the nation, it is this.
Science is not about abstract work done in a lab and distant from the real world.
It is about solving real problems for real people in the real world.
It is about dealing with the challenges of the modern world, the global economy, the changing climate and the health and happiness of people all around the world.
And it is about making a difference.
Every individual and organisation represented in this room tonight has a shared responsibility to communicate a passion for scientific endeavour, and inspire a new generation of scientists.
Australia has an outstanding record of scientific achievement in our past.
We have great scientists doing excellent work today.
Our challenge now is to foster a new generation of scientists to confront the challenges of our future.
That is the purpose of the Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.


At the invitation of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, Vice Premier Li Keqiang of the State Council of the People's Republic of China made an official visit to Australia from 29 October to 1 November 2009. The Vice Premier met Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and held talks with Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
The two sides had an in-depth exchange of views on China-Australia relations and other issues of mutual interest and reached important agreement. During the visit, the government departments of the two sides signed cooperation documents on: prevention of illegal logging; protection of cultural relics; and education and training. The visit was constructive and fruitful.
1. The two sides shared the view that cooperation between Australia and China has great potential and prospects. Under the current global environment, stronger practical cooperation for mutually beneficial outcomes serves the fundamental interests of the two countries and two peoples and contributes to peace, stability and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region and the world at large. The two sides will sustain and enhance their dialogue, engagement and cooperation at all levels, including the senior leadership level, to advance the comprehensive relationship which is developing between the two countries. China and Australia will enhance cooperation in various fields, and promote the long-term, sound and steady growth of the comprehensive and cooperative relationship on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
2. The two sides noted their different national conditions could lead to differences of one type or another. The two sides should respect and take into full consideration the core interests and major concerns of each other, properly handle differences and sensitive issues in accordance with the principles of mutual respect, non-interference and equality, and take concrete measures to safeguard the overall interests of the sound and steady growth of China-Australia relations. The Australian side reiterated its one-China position on the Taiwan issue as contained in the Joint Communiqué of 21 December 1972 establishing diplomatic relations between the People's Republic of China and Australia. The Australian side confirmed the position of successive Australian Governments since 1972 that Australia respects China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, including in relation to Tibet and Xinjiang.
3. Recognising that the combined GDP of our two economies is greater than US$5 trillion, the two sides agreed that China and Australia enjoy strong economic complementarity, and it serves the common interests of both sides to advance economic, trade and investment cooperation on the basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit. Australia is a long-term stable supplier of mineral and energy resources to China. China is a competitive supplier of goods to Australia. The two sides will continue to conduct mutually beneficial trade in accordance with market principles. The two sides reaffirmed their commitment to open trade and investment policies, opposition to protectionism in all forms and support for the early conclusion of the WTO Doha Round. The two sides believe that the conclusion of a comprehensive, high quality, balanced and mutually beneficial bilateral free trade agreement through negotiations serves the long-term interests of both China and Australia. Given that it has been four years since negotiations started, both sides agreed to work together in a positive and a practical spirit to conclude negotiations and reflected their determination to conclude negotiations as rapidly as possible. The Australian side stated in clear terms that it welcomes investment from China, as China welcomes investment from Australia. Australia sees China's increased investment interest as a positive development that will further consolidate the Australia-China economic relationship. China also sees great scope for increased Australian investment in China. Both sides will adopt active measures to facilitate trade and investment cooperation between enterprises of the two countries. Both sides welcomed recent growth in two-way trade and investment.
4. The two sides agreed that China and Australia share important common interests in promoting peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific region. The Chinese side welcomes the important role of Australia in regional and international affairs. The two sides will continue to strengthen communication and coordination in the United Nations, G20, APEC, the East Asia Summit, the Pacific Islands Forum and other multilateral mechanisms and institutions, and enhance consultation and cooperation in responding to the financial crisis, addressing climate change, controlling communicable diseases and preventing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and trans-national crime. The Chinese side welcomes Australia's Asia-Pacific community initiative and will send a senior Chinese delegation to the international one-and-a-half track conference convened by the Australian Prime Minister in Sydney in December for the purpose of exploring the Asia-Pacific community concept for the future. China also welcomes the membership of Australia in ASEM in 2010. Both sides acknowledged the importance of enhanced dialogue and coordination on matters concerning Pacific island countries and the key role of the Pacific Islands Forum.
5. The two sides agreed that mutual understanding and friendship between the people of both countries constitute an important basis for China-Australia relations. The two sides will work together to expand friendly exchanges and cooperation between local governments and promote people-to-people links in such fields as education, culture, sports, tourism and the media. Both sides looked forward to the success of the 2010 Shanghai World Expo. Both sides endorsed planning for the Year of Australian Culture in China in 2010-11 and the Year of Chinese Culture in Australia in 2011-12.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Welcome to The Lodge - Therese and I are delighted to see you here this afternoon in support of such a good cause.
And one that's very close to my heart - literally.
DonateLife is about exactly that - donating life.
It's about promoting the cause of organ donation.
About getting people to talk about organ donation.
About getting families to talk about organ donation.
About getting as many people as possible to talk openly about their views, and their wishes.
That's what DonateLife Family and the DonateLife Network are all about.
Last week in Sydney, we saw the tragic death of a young Irish tourist after a street scuffle in Coogee.
Gearoid Walsh was just 23 years old.
He'd been in Australia for only five weeks when this senseless tragedy happened.
His mother flew from Ireland to be by her son's side last Wednesday.
On Thursday, his family made the terrible decision to switch off his life support.
And they also made the brave, generous, compassionate decision - to donate his organs so that others might live.
As Mrs Walsh said on Friday:
"In his death, Gearoid has helped six other Australians by being an organ donor."
My heart, and the heart of all Australians, goes out to the Walsh family at this difficult time.
And I thank them for their great grace and dignity, in acting in such a generous and forgiving spirit, to donate Gearoid's organs.
It's all too easy to take life for granted.
Too easy to take our health for granted, if we are fortunate to live without chronic disease.
We don't know what it is like to be hooked up to a machine that keeps you alive.
We don't realise how the simple things - kicking the footy around, going to school or even a short walk to the shops - can be an Everest to those whose bodies are failing them.
Or the constant fear, sadness and pain of watching your child's health deteriorate.
We don't know what it is like to hope that every time the phone rings, it is the call that could save your life.
Today, there are 1,700 Australians on our transplant waiting list today, waiting for that phone call.
The phone call that tells them that their chance for a life-saving transplant has arrived.
Some of you here today know that feeling all too well.
People like Liz Fowler.
Liz Fowler is a mother of two.
And she has lived with kidney disease for 20 years.
Liz is waiting for the call.
And has been for more than six years.
And she has two absolutely essential reasons for needing that call:
Her son, who is severely autistic and has been diagnosed with cancer;
Her daughter has won a scholarship to the Australian Institute of Sport. Liz wants to see her row in London at the Olympics.
Liz is one of 1,700 Australians waiting for a call.
Then there is Lachy Wallis, from my home town of Brisbane.
Lachy and his dad David, mum Lisa and little brother Mitchell, are here with us this afternoon.
Looking at Lachy today it is hard to believe that this young bloke was so sick at the beginning of the year.
When he was put on the transplant waiting list, his health was deteriorating so rapidly that Lisa and David did not know if he would survive until a suitable donor was found.
So dad was tested for his suitability as a living donor.
And a week before David was due to have a third of his liver removed, the call came.
A liver had become available.
Lisa and David went into shock.
It was far from a celebration.
The reality of the situation hit home - that young Lachy, who was very ill at this stage, was about to undergo a very long and very risky operation.
But on top of that, Lisa said, was the knowledge that the liver was available because someone had died.
And a family somewhere was grieving for a lost loved one.
Lachy and his family know the power of a donor's gift.
And once Lachy came out the other side of the operation, the Wallis family silently thanked the donor and allowed themselves to enjoy the pure happiness of that gift.
Now when people ask Lachy how he's feeling he replies "I've never felt better".
And he is having swimming lessons three times a week and he is trying to gain enough strength and weight to get back on the footy field.
We wish you luck mate and hope to see you flying down the wing very soon.
On average, people on the transplant list wait between six months and four years.
Two people die each week waiting for a transplant.
So far this year 189 generous Australians became organ donors, resulting in a new chance at life for 608 Australians.
To those Australian families who said yes to donation, we thank you for making the decision to give others a special and deeply personal gift.
One of those families is with us today - the Kennetts from Adelaide.
Their wife and mother Julie passed away from cancer last year.
Rob, Perri and Jane - we offer our deepest condolences for your loss.
But Julie was very clear about her wish to be an organ donor and had discussed it with her family.
Julie donated both corneas enabling two people to have the gift of sight.
I'm sure, like the Wallis family, that the recipients of Julie's corneas thanked her.
And thank her every day they wake up and open their eyes and see the world around them.
It is people like Liz, Lachy and the Kennetts who have inspired the Government's $151.1 million Organ Donation Reform Package.
This national reform program is spearheaded by the Australian Organ and Tissue Authority and is gaining momentum in communities around the country.
Today, I am pleased to launch the cornerstone of our reform agenda - The DonateLife Network.
This is a newly formed national network of organ and tissue donation agencies and specialist clinical staff.
The 300-strong team behind the DonateLife Network includes 91 new hospital-based medical directors and senior nursing staff in 75 hospitals around Australia.
And DonateLife Agency staff are in every state and territory.
The DonateLife Network is central to our efforts to increase Australia's rate of organ donation for transplantation.
But improving our donation rate doesn't fall on the shoulders of these dedicated medical professionals alone.
We all have to do our part.
Although 90 per cent of Australians support organ donation, the family consent rate is just 56 per cent.
Forty per cent of Australians don't realise that their family makes the final decision regarding organ donation.
We can increase the family consent rates by ensuring that our family knows our wishes and that we know theirs.
Talking is the key.
This is why we are gathered here today.
Because it is in our homes that we can make a difference.
It is in our lounge rooms and at our dinner tables that we can start the conversations that may end in saving a life.
Memorable discussions that will allow us to confidently make the decision - should we ever be asked - to give consent for a loved one's organs and tissue to be donated.
Confidence that comes from knowing the wishes of our loved ones.
And there are three simple words that will help us gain that confidence.
Discover.
Decide.
And discuss.
Discover the facts about organ and tissue donation.
Make an informed choice and decide to become an organ donor.
Discuss with family and friends, so that you know each other's wishes.
Therese and the kids and I have had that chat as a family.
And today I can announce that we have decided to become a DonateLife Family.
As a DonateLife Family, we have committed to discussing and upholding each other's wishes.
And we want to invite every Australian to join us.
Deciding to become an organ donor is not a decision to be taken lightly.
That is why I encourage all Australians to discover the facts on the new DonateLife website.
At donatelife.gov.au, family and friends can find a range of materials, including a DonateLife Family pledge.
A simple tool that you can use to keep a record of each other's wishes.
The website also has Australian donor and recipient family stories, including those of the Kennett and Wallis families.
Their stories will encourage and inspire.
Australia is blessed to have highly skilled medical professionals.
We have a world class reputation for successful transplant outcomes.
Our surgeons know how precious donated organs are.
Anyone who has received a new organ knows how precious they are.
When you become a donor you don't just donate a kidney or a heart or a liver.
You donate a gift.
A second chance.
You donate life.
www.donatelife.gov.au


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, first, how do you reconcile your years of criticism of Mr Costello as Treasurer and his economic management of the time, with his now appointment under this Government?
PM: Well, I have always said that I believe that the national interest demands that when people retire from active political life we should draw on all the nation's talents, whatever political tradition they come from. That is still my view. We have done that already so far with, obviously, Kim Beazley, with Brendan Nelson, and with others. And guess what, we'll do it again in the future as well. Because when people have a whole wealth of experience, my view is we should harness that for the long-term national interest.
JOURNALIST: Mr Keating suggested today that this is a goodie two shows approach from you that shows a lack of respect for the men and women of Labor who've died and fought in the trenches against Mr Costello. What's your thoughts on that?
PM: Well it's true that Mr Costello and I have had many disagreements over the years. That does not mean that once he's retired from active political life we should not draw upon the experience he's that he's had as twelve years as Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia. That's my view. I think if you've got, you know, Paul Keating in one corner criticising this appointment, and Malcolm Turnbull in the other corner criticising this appointment, maybe we've just got something right here, in terms of the national interest long term.
JOURNALIST: But would it reflect the level of anger on the Labor backbench (inaudible) appointment?
PM: Oh look, my job as Prime Minister is to act in the long term national interest. And sometimes decisions will be a bit on the controversial side. I don't make an apology for that. We harnessed Kim Beazley's talents because he's a person of enormous experience, as previously Defence Minister of Australia, a person who's been routinely attacked by the conservative side of politics. Well, once they leave political life, my job is, look at a person and see what talents they have to apply to the nation's interest, not the political interest, the nation's interest long term. And I think with Kim, Brendan and also in the case of Peter Costello, and others, this is the way we should start to frame our country for the future.
JOURNALIST: Just in relation to Copenhagen, Angela Merkel (inaudible) a $100 billion fund for developing countries (inaudible)
PM: Is that $100 million or $100 billion?
JOURNALIST: $100 billion sorry.
PM: Thought it might have been something else. It's just, there's a few debates going on at the moment about that. Look, I have worked very closely with Chancellor Merkel in recent months on both climate change and a whole range of global financial challenges, and she is a strong and active contributor to trying to forge consensus for Copenhagen. Our negotiators, as of this weekend, and gathered together again at Barcelona in Spain. Penny Wong is there, and her team as well. But negotiations are really tough, that is absolutely right, and I've been completely up-front about that, and they'll continue to be tough.
But secondly, the Prime Minister of Denmark, as I've indicated in recent times, has also sought to open up a political dialogue, a political line of building momentum towards the best possible outcome that we can achieve at Copenhagen at the Heads of Government level.
That's why he's recruited Friends of the Chair, the UN Secretary General, the President of Mexico, myself - I'm sure he'll be recruiting others, to try and push Copenhagen towards as successful a conclusion as possible. My job as Prime Minister of Australia is to work my guts out, try and get a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme through the Australian Parliament, try and get the best outcome possible in Copenhagen because we live in one of the world's hottest and driest continents, and will therefore be climate change hardest and first.
JOURNALIST: Would Australia be contributing to a similar fund for the $100 billion (inaudible) how much money will we take from the ETS to put in to that sort of money for developing countries?
PM: What I believe the Climate Change has said in the past is Australia, once a global agreement is shaped, would always be prepared to put forward its fair share. At this stage there's no global agreement as to what long term financing arrangements should underpin a deal at Copenhagen for emerging and developing economies. Remember, stepping back from it all, the problem of greenhouse gases today is because of the accumulated gases coming off the industrial production primarily of the developed countries over the last 200 years.
Going out to the next hundred years, the bulk of those emissions will now come from those that are now categorised as developing countries, particularly the two big emerging economies of China and India. So often this turns into a brawl between the past and the future. We've got to get past that. That's why there's still an active debate about framing a climate change financing arrangement for the future to underpin the targets and commitments by developed and developing countries in order to bring about a long term deal. It's still hard, it's still tough, but this Government, this Australian Government, does not intend to give up trying.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, is it feasible for you to go on negotiating a CPRS with the Opposition when senior people in the Opposition like Senator Nick Minchin are saying, 'oh look, even if the Government were to accept our amendments holus bolus we still might not pass the legislation'?
PM: The comments from Senator Minchin were really disappointing. We have entered into good faith negotiations with Mr Turnbull and the Opposition because a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is in the national interest long-term. We've had good faith negotiations with his representative, Mr Macfarlane, and through the Climate Change Minister, Penny Wong. Senator Minchin's comments are deeply disappointing. We the Government will continue to try and negotiate this deal because it's in the national interest.
And I would appeal to all fair minded Liberals, all fair minded conservatives, that this is a national interest question which literally should transcend politics for the next 20, 30, and 50 years. We've got to get these decisions right. They're not easy, they're hard for everybody. So I'd appeal to those on Mr Turnbull's backbench, and some of his frontbench, to make sure that we have every possibility of delivering an agreement, and we can legislate this thing and be part of the global solution as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your response to reports that the Sri Lankan asylum seekers have actually been processed (inaudible) UNHCR in Indonesia?
PM: The UNHCR has got responsibility for processing the individuals on this particular vessel, and I'm unaware of what the outcome of any processing or initial processing or initial discussions may be, concerning their status. This is a matter for the UNHCR.
JOURNALIST: Have Australian officials interviewed those people on the boat?
PM: I'm unaware of where all that is up to. I really am unaware of what stage the detailed discussions have got up to. On the question concerning their status though, properly given the location of the vessel in Indonesia and properly given the role of the IOM and the UNHCR, they will be the agencies which will work through details concerning their status.
The Government's approach more generally on asylum seekers is clear cut. We believe that in the national interest what's required is a responsible policy on immigration, hard-line on people smugglers, humane on asylum seekers. That's our policy. Everyone knows the elements of it, and we are implementing that policy.
JOURNALIST: The UNHCR -
PM: I'll come back to the UNHCR question in a minute. What I found disappointing today was Mr Turnbull's statement that the Liberals do not intend to have a border protection policy until after the next election. So, I find this curious, that you could on the one hand attack the Government's immigration policy and border protection policy, and on the other hand, not have the courage to say what your own border protection policy will be, not just now, but at any time up until the next election.
You know something, if you don't have the courage and the determination to frame a policy on border protection, how could anyone expect you to have the courage and the determination to take the tough decisions on border protection which are expected of a Government on any particular day.
The last thing I'd just say on this before taking another question on the UNHCR- border protection policy involves difficult and hard decisions in the national interest, and I know for a fact that they are not popular. I know for a fact that they are not popular. But we are required to act in the national interest through a responsible policy which is hard-line on people smugglers, and humane with asylum seekers.
JOURNALIST: The UNHCR say they can't get into the Sri Lankan camps so there's no queue forming there because they can't actually get into there, and there's also been concerns raised that there's been children left in Indonesia for a lengthy period of time. Under the laws there, they can't go to school. What's humane about now allowing these kids to have an education?
PM: The UNHCR and the IOM have in place a full range of long-standing procedures for dealing humanely with individual asylum seekers and their families within Indonesia. As far as this particular vessel is concerned, as I said in response to the earlier question, the status of the individuals and their families has yet to be formally determined. The other part of your question went to -
JOURNALIST: Education in Indonesia.
PM: There was another part to your question too. You said schools, you said something else.
JOURNALIST: In relation to (inaudible)
PM: On the accessibility of people into camps, you're talking about Sri Lanka?
JOURNALIST: Yep.
PM: Okay, that's what I thought. On the question of Sri Lanka itself, you are right to point out that there's a problem at the source end of this equation, and that is the huge challenge which has arisen, from a quarter of a million Sri Lankans having been displaced from the Jaffna Peninsula and thereabouts as a result of the civil war. International agencies such as the IOM, and the UNHCR and others, are seeking to have as much access as possible. But it is still very difficult.
That is part of any responsible policy of immigration and border protection for Australia, working at that end with the Sri Lankan Government and with the international authorities. Dealing also with transit countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia, in the way in which we've described, and again in partnership with the UNHCR. And three, having an absolutely hard-line approach to people smugglers themselves, for which we have every physical resource available to the Government currently committed.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: The children that are left in Indonesia for years and years while they're part of the process (inaudible)
PM: Well the UNHCR as I said has processes and procedures in place, with the Indonesia authorities in relation to those who are either shorter term or longer term while cases are determined, resident within Indonesia. My advice is that those UNHCR processes and procedures, and the IOM processes and procedures, properly cater for the range of human needs of those families and children who are in Indonesia for a period of time. Obviously though, this discussion arises from the circumstances concerning this particular vessel. I go back to what I said before, the UNHCR is yet to determine the status of that vessel.
I've got to go and attend to my guests if that's okay.


The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today launched a new national program to help educate Australian families about organ and tissue donation, and their power to save lives.
The DonateLife Family public awareness program, backed up by a new workforce of medical specialists called the DonateLife Network, will encourage Australians to discover the facts about organ and tissue donation, make an informed decision and discuss their wishes with their family.
As many as 40% of Australians are not aware that even if they are registered as an organ donor, their family will be asked to give consent for organ donation to proceed.
Thirty five per cent of Australians don't discuss their wishes with their family.
The Prime Minister's family today became the first DonateLife Family. A DonateLife Family is a family that has had a discussion and knows each other's wishes about organ donation.
"We have made the decision to become a DonateLife Family because we know the importance of knowing each other's wishes about organ donation", the Prime Minister said.
"It is important for Australians to know that family consent is always sought before organ donation can proceed. Although there is widespread public support (90%) for organ donation, Australia's current family consent rate for donation is just 56%.
"We can save many more Australian lives if we make sure families talk about the decision to donate life through organ and tissue donation. That is why today I invite all Australians to discuss organ donation and become a DonateLife Family.
"If Australians know their loved one's wishes we would have a higher family consent rate because when families know each other's wishes, they are more likely to consent to donation", Prime Minister Rudd said.
Ms Karen Murphy, Chief Executive Officer of the new Australian Organ and Tissue Authority said that the need for Australian families to discuss organ donation is vital.
"Our organ donation rate has been static for the past decade at around 200 organ donors per year. In 2008 we saw a 30% increase in donation. Our aim is to lift the current family consent rate of 56% to 80%, thereby enabling more Australians to receive the most precious gift."
Dr O'Callaghan, National Medical Director of the Australian Organ and Tissue Authority said the Authority is determined to help as many people as possible.
"Increasing the number of organ donors will help make transplantation possible for more seriously ill Australians. This now requires a public commitment because transplantation is touching the lives of more and more Australians," he said.
To support Australians in having this important discussion, the new DonateLife website features a section that provides supporting materials for family discussion, including a downloadable DonateLife Family certificate.
www.donatelife.gov.au


HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to PM.
PM: Good evening.
HOST: What do you know of the rescue mission off the Cocos Islands?
PM: I can take you through what my most recent advice is, which is that as of 11.15 last night the Australian Maritime Safety Authority received a report that a vessel had sunk approximately 350 nautical miles North-West of Cocos island. Initial indications from a commercial vessel on sight were that 39 people were believed to be on board. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority issued a general alert requesting immediate assistance from any vessel or aircraft in the area. Two foreign flagged commercial vessels were on site and seeking to assist the people in the water.
There were no Australian vessels within the vicinity. The latest advice is that 19 people have been recovered and are on commercial vessels. An RAAF P3 surveillance aircraft is on the scene, assisting in the rescue operation.
I'm just now advised the RAAF has dropped a raft to two persons in the water and three additional people were seen on timber headed towards raft. Furthermore, a Customs and Border Protection Dash-8 aircraft out of Broome has also been tasked to assist.
You will appreciate that this is an unfolding rescue operation, and obviously there are great difficulties associated with the events at sea.
HOST: Do you know anything of the people who are on board that boat? Do we know if they are asylum seekers, if they were coming to Australia?
PM: Well, we don't have any of that information at hand that I have been advised of. You'll appreciate that the work of the Australian authorities so far has been entirely focused on a search and rescue operation and that is still on foot and as all other details come to hand we'll, of course, make that available to the public.
HOST: You still have 78 asylum seekers on board the customs ship the Oceanic Viking. They've told the ABC they've already been in Indonesia for years. Doesn't that mean that they haven't been influenced by the push factors you say are responsible for the increase in boat arrivals?
PM: We'll, firstly, in terms of their particular status, I've got no information available to me as to where they have been in recent times, so that will be established in the fullness of time.
You go to the broader question of push factors. Push factors have been operating in various period of instability in Sri Lanka over recent years. Of course, that reached a particular crescendo with the military operation in the North of Sri Lanka earlier this year, but if you look at what happened with movements from Sri Lanka, they've also been underway for some several years in recent times as military activity and conflict within that island has escalated at various times. It's just part of the reality - push factors operating from countries of origin, transit countries, Malaysia and Indonesia, and the difficulties arising from vessels leaving those countries, and, of course, our own assets on the high seas there to interdict vessels as they come through.
HOST: The stand-off will have to end sometime, though. How long are you prepared to be patient?
PM: Well, the Indonesian Foreign Minister has said last week, I think, that Indonesia had infinite patience in the handling of these matters, as does the Australian Government. We will work our way calmly and methodically through this challenge, as we will work our way through all other challenges.
This is a very difficult set of circumstances. Remember, there has been a bloody civil war in Sri Lanka. There have been something like 260,000 Sri Lankans displaced by that in recent times, living in camps. Some 130,000, I'm advised, have gone to live in Tamil Nadu on the Indian continent, and we therefore are facing outward pressures, not just to Australia but to other countries of interest to Sri Lankans under these circumstances - countries in Europe, Canada, the United States, Australia, and, of course, Malaysia and Indonesia as well.
HOST: Why not, though, heed the ACTU's call today for compassion and simply bring them to Christmas Island for processing?
PM: Well, our approach to border protection is a responsible policy based on Australia's national interests that is tough, hardline on people smugglers and at the same time humane in our approach to asylum seekers. That's the approach we took to the Australian people prior to the last election. That's what we've implemented since the last election.
It's very easy for people either on the far right or, from time to time on the left, criticising such an approach. I fully accept that this difficult set of circumstances and the implementation of our policy in the midst of these difficult circumstances will not be popular. I understand that, but my job as Prime Minister is to implement tough, responsible humane policy in the national interest. We've done so in the past and will continue to do so in the future.
HOST: You updated your budget figures today. They show better economic growth, but do you risk being a victim of your own success as people get caught between paying higher interest rates on more expensive homes but still face losing their jobs or working hours?
PM: Well, the core question here is the impact of the Government's stimulus strategy on the real economy and providing people with more jobs than would have otherwise be the case.
Let's be very blunt about this - had we not implemented the stimulus strategy we would have hundreds of thousands of more Australians who would end up out of work and what we've seen with these figures released today is the unemployment rate forecast now projected to peak at 6.75 percent as opposed to 8.5 percent at budget time.
HOST: But that still means that people are going to lose their jobs at a time when the monetary stimulus, interest rates, is being unwound, interest rates are going up.
PM: Well, the bottom line is this - as a consequence of the Government's stimulus strategy we had higher growth, lower unemployment, lower debt to the tune of $50 billion dollars and lower deficit, and had we not implemented the stimulus strategy you would have had hundreds of thousands of more Australians out of work. What this demonstrates, this data released in the mid-year economic and fiscal update today is the Government's economic policy is working.
Furthermore, extraordinary interventions in order to support the private economy when it has been in distress and retreat have been necessary, but as those stimulus measures take their full effect it follows, over time, that they will naturally scale down. That is why the Government's stimulus strategy was particularly designed to peak early and then to tail off. That is how it was implemented. That's how it's operating, and as we can see from these figures out today, is the stimulus strategy is having a real effect on the economy and on the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians
HOST: You've already, in the Treasury's words, recalibrated elements of the stimulus package today, adjusting spending on education building, amongst other things. Why not look more broadly at spending now to see if you can make further savings because the economy's so much better?
PM: Well, the important thing to note about our approach to budget discipline in the period ahead is that any new expenditure that the Government has embraced since Budget time has been offset by savings. That's the first discipline and that actually reflects the Government's overall disciplined approach to the fiscal rules that we have announced at budget time, that we'll continue to implement into the future.
Our task is to return the budget to surplus in the medium term. Of course, we've been dealing with extraordinary economic challenges because of the global recession, the worst in 75 years. The measures out today involve some re-phasing of the Building the Education Revolution program, some half a billion dollars being re-phased from 2010/11 to 2011/12, and the reason for that is to provide extra time for tendering and re-tendering and further consultations with local schools and community factors, any unforeseen circumstances, to maximise, of course, the value for money from those programs.
That's the right and sensible approach, but I go back to my overall point - had the Government followed the Opposition's advice and not introduced an economic stimulus strategy, Australia, like all the other advanced economies of the world, would now be in the midst of a very damaging and devastating recession, with hundreds of thousands more Australians out of work.
HOST: You've copped some criticism from the former prime minister, Paul Keating, about your appointment of Peter Costello to the Future Fund board. Mr Costello said in 2007 of your plans for the Fund that you couldn't be trusted with money, that you're like a bear with a honey pot trying to consume it for your own electoral purposes and that your plans were economic irresponsibility in the first order. How does that make him the best candidate for this job?
PM: Well, the first thing I'd say is that people in public political life over time will say a whole range of different things. My job as the Prime Minister of Australia is to stand back, look at the overall worth of an individual, the talents and abilities they have, and to harness those for the long-term national economic interest.
HOST: Do you know if he's changed his views?
PM: Well, frankly, I don't particularly mind what views Mr Costello would have on those matters. What I do know is that after 12 years as Treasurer of Australia he's accumulated some experience. That experience should be harnessed for the national good.
I have said repeatedly in the past, whether it's with Kim Beasley, whether it's Brendan Nelson or with others, and I will do this again in the future, but we will harness the talents that are available, whether they are from Liberal or Labor politicians, to the best use of the long-term national interest.
That's the right thing to do, and as I said yesterday, I'm getting criticised on the one hand by Paul Keating, by Malcolm Turnbull on the other hand, for Mr Costello's appointment. Just maybe, just maybe, we're getting something right here.
HOST: Finally, Mr Rudd have you established a global advocacy unit in your department to push your agenda to in areas like the G20 and the Asia Pacific community. If so, why can't the Foreign Affairs Department do that work?
PM: Well, the Prime Minister's Department, since time immemorial, has had an international division. It goes back to the previous prime minister and the one before that and the one before that, and in fact is goes back to the days when I was a cadet diplomat in the Department of Foreign Affairs. It has always provided international policy advice to the prime minister of the day.
Secondly, because Australia now has a seat at the top table, that is the G20, the Government has established a new global and regional architecture section within PM&amp;C. That is entirely right because this series of meetings is at summit, head of government, that is, prime-ministerial or presidential level. That's exactly what we're doing. It's the right thing to do because we've also got to engage these governments in terms of head-of-government level policy coordination. We're doing this all the time on a rolling basis and we did so in recent times as well in the lead-up to the Pittsburgh summit, and it also involves public advocacy.
HOST: Does it involve pushing your case through the international media?
PM: It may be of some surprise to you already that I have had a number of articles printed in the international media up until now advocating Australia's case for global financial reform, for doing the right thing when it comes to long-term climate change finance, and for a whole other series of proposals we've had to continue to support the global economy during the great stresses of the last three quarters of the century. I've been doing this for the last year or so. I'll be doing it into the future and it'll be supported, now that the G20 is being institutionalised as the premier institution of global economic governance, we'll be doing more of it in the future.
It's in Australia's interest that we do so, for our voice to be heard in its own right in the principle capitals of the world, in the private halls of diplomacy and through public advocacy in the media of those countries as well. It's the sensible thing to do.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


The Rudd Government has appointed a Local Employment Coordinator to help create and support local jobs across the Townsville region.
Local Employment Coordinators are part of the Rudd Government's $77 billion Nation Building Recovery plan to keep Australia working, and help maximise the impact of the Rudd Government's stimulus strategy.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today appointed Marc Shannon as the Local Employment Coordinator to work with business and the community to develop a local plan for jobs for the future.
Mr Shannon has a wide range of contacts in the region, having worked as the Business Development Manager with the Research Innovation and Development office at James Cook University for five years.
He has a strong background in marketing, most recently working with the University of South Australia to build strong community partnerships across all levels of government.
As the Townsville region's Local Employment Coordinator he will work with regional businesses and the community to encourage apprenticeships, traineeships and use of government's productivity places to help job seekers build the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
Coordinators will be working to support and strengthen the local economies of 20 regions Australia-wide, including Cairns, Southern Wide Bay-Burnett and Ipswich-Logan.
Across the Townsville region, $397 million has been invested in projects to stimulate the economy, and the Rudd Government will keep working in partnership with the community to create and support jobs.


I am pleased to announce that His Royal Highness Prince William will visit Australia from 19 - 21 January 2010, travelling to Sydney and Melbourne.
Prince William is visiting Australia after travelling to New Zealand to officially open the new Supreme Court in Wellington. The visit originated from a request to the Government of Australia by Prince William to visit the country so as to begin to get to know Australia and its people.
During his visit, Prince William will focus on his core interests of supporting Servicemen and women, helping young people fulfil their potential, and sustainable development in the light of climate change. The Prince will also use the visit to learn more about local Indigenous issues and visit the bushfire-ravaged countryside in Victoria.
Prince William will have the opportunity to meet a cross-section of Australians involved in a variety of projects of interest in both Sydney and Melbourne.
His Royal Highness will travel to Australia from New Zealand and then return to the United Kingdom.
Further details of the visit will be released closer to the time.
This will be the Prince's first visit to Australia as an adult, having previously been to this country with The Prince and Princess of Wales a year after his birth in 1983.


PM: Well it's great to be back here in Townsville, and I'm here of course with the Federal Member for Dawson, James Bidgood and we're here at this important social housing project. I've just been speaking to the builders, and he has said to me that this project here, which is eight units of social housing just on this site, has been pretty important for his business in what's been a difficult year in the economy, and a particularly difficult year for the building industry.
On site, I think he said to me, there is about 30 people working, including four apprentices. This is therefore, a part of the wider Australian story at the moment as we roll out social housing across the country, as we roll out our stimulus strategy across the country, to make a difference to the economy. Our national stimulus strategy is about this - nation building, supporting jobs and apprenticeships today while building the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And that's what's happening here in Townsville as well.
Here in Townsville we are investing some $69 million in some 257 new social homes. This is an important addition to the overall housing needs of this city and this growing part of Australia. This will bring to the total investment in this area some $83 million, and for the region as whole, some 304 homes. That makes a difference in people's lives. There is a shortage of social housing, and this is also a huge injection to the economy, and jobs.
The building work funded under stage one of this project, is providing work for 30 roofers, electricians, carpenters and renderers, including 11 apprentices. If you look across the country, we estimate that the social housing component of our stimulus strategy is supporting more than 15,000 jobs. If you looked across the state as a whole, that's Queensland, the social housing initiative involves more than 4,000 new properties at a total investment of more than $1.08 billion.
So it's not just here in Townsville, it's not just here in North Queensland, it's right across the state of Queensland, and it's right across Australia. A very large-scale investment in what is the biggest addition to social housing by way of a national investment in the country's history.
But again I go back to what the overall needs are. That is, here we are, still in the midst of an unfolding global economic challenge, still uncertainty in the global economy, real impacts on the Australian economy at home. So you can either stand back and do nothing or you can step up to the plate and do something. This government, 12 months ago decided we'd step up to the plate and do something. It's called the national stimulus strategy and it's called nation building for recovery, nation building for the future, supporting jobs and apprenticeships and small business today while investing in infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
I just add one other thing before I take your questions. I've just been out to the RAAF base as well, and can I say I've been talking to them about their local housing needs. Construction has also begun on all 118 new Defence houses funded under the stimulus plan, supporting 82 direct and 205 indirect local jobs and 56 properties are already completed. So therefore, right across the housing needs of this community, the Australian government is investing. Investing in what we need for our Defence community and what we need for the general community as well as making a difference for jobs today while building the housing infrastructure Queenslanders and Australians need for tomorrow. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you have an update on the (inaudible)
PM: Yes, let me speak to that. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority is coordinating a search and rescue operation in Australia's search and rescue zone. As the search and rescue situation is ongoing, limited details are available at this stage. The priority is seeking to ensure the safety of life at sea for all involved.
I'm advised that on Sunday 1 November, yesterday, a distress call was received by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority from a vessel North-North-West of Cocos Island. The location of this rescue is some 2,706km from the nearest point of the Australian mainland and some 700km from Cocos Island. The location is in Australia's search and rescue zone and this zone is some 53 million square kilometres.
The vessel was inside Australia's search and rescue zone. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority issued a general alert requesting immediate assistance from vessels near to the reported distress location. Responding to this request, a fishing vessel made contact with the vessel and reported to AMSA that it was not sinking but was taking on water. Initial indications are that approximately 40 people were believed to have been on board. The Taiwanese fishing vessel advised that it did not have capacity to take all the people on board. At the request of AMSA, the nearest available vessel, the LNG Pioneer, proceeded to the location. The LNG Pioneer is believed to be a Bahamas-flagged vessel.
Last night AMSA received reports that a vessel had sunk approximately 350 nautical miles North-West of Cocos Island. The latest advice is that 17 people had been recovered and are on commercial vessels. The search for other survivors is continuing. An RAAF P3 surveillance aircraft is on its way to the scene to assist in the rescue operation. No further information is available at this stage.
Therefore, the priority here is to rescue life at sea. Our assets have been deployed. We've coordinated with other vessels in the area but this is a very difficult search environment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) clear that they're willing to put themselves in danger to get to Australia?
PM: I think it's too early to speculate on circumstances surrounding a vessel like this until all the facts are established. Our first priority must be to attend to lives at risk on the high seas. That's why we have international arrangements for search and rescue operations. This vessel was identified within the Australian search and rescue area.
As far as the proximity of Australian vessels are concerned, at the time at which this was issued, the nearest Australian Government vessel was over one and a half days steaming time away, hence the normal arrangements were put in place to identify vessels under other flags who could assist and that is exactly the procedure we have followed. So our priority right now has to be, as you would expect of any government, to deploy necessary resources to attend to lives at risk on the high seas.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I do not have that information available to me.
JOURNALIST: Do you know where they'll be taken to now?
PM: I do not have that information available to me now either, because all of the efforts right now are legitimately dedicated to attending to lives at risk at sea.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) so far in Indonesia regarding asylum seekers is continuing. Is there anything the Government can do to help resolve that?
PM: As the Indonesian Government said recently, they, Indonesia, has infinite patience in handling this matter. We have patience in handling this matter. It's a difficult matter. Patience is what's required to deal with these complex matters and we intend to work it through, however long it takes. And that's what we're in the process of doing.
JOURNALIST: Will you be taking much notice of the ACTU's call for a more humanitarian approach to this case?
PM: Can I say that we believe that our policy, in dealing with asylums seekers and immigration policy and border protection, our policy, the Government's policy, is a responsible policy in the national interest. We'll get criticised from people on the far right and from, sometimes from the left, but can I say our job is to act in the national interest through this responsible policy which we have implemented consistently since this Government was elected and will continue to implement into the future.
No-one should pretend that any decisions concerning border security will ever be popular. They will not. This is a very hard area for government, but our job is to implement a responsible policy in the national interest, one which is hardline on people smugglers, humane in dealing with asylum seekers. A responsible policy in the national interest - that's what we've implemented since the Government came to office, that's what we'll be implementing into the future.
JOURNALIST: On another matter, when do think your position might be (inaudible) on Traveston Dam, or do you have any thoughts on it?
PM: The question properly lies within the province of the Environment Minister, Peter Garrett. Under the statute, which is the Biodiversity Act, the Environment Minister is required to make his own, independent decisions concerning environmental matters which are put before him. How long he takes to make that decision and when those decisions will be made properly lie within his independent purchase, and I'm confident the Minister has these matters well in hand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the economic data comes out today, later today. What's your argument to the Opposition, who will inevitably call for the stimulus to be wound back, and what's your tip for the Cup?
PM: Let me try and take those in sequence. Here we are in Townsville. We are in the midst of one of nearly 20,000 units of social housing nationwide and we're aiming to make a difference. Making a difference to people's lives, who come and live here; making a difference to the subbies and the small businessmen who get work out of projects like this and the apprentices who get trained and making a difference to the overall local economy. That's our action plan, that's our strategy, that's our stimulus strategy, that's our nation building for recovery. It's the right and responsible course of action for Australia.
The alternative will be sit back, sit on your hands and do nothing. Remember, because of the Government's stimulus strategy and the strong work by Australian business, Australia, of the major advanced economies, is the fastest-growing economy in the world, the only one of the major advanced economies not to have gone into recession, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment.
None of that happened by magic. It happened because we as a government decided to step in and make a difference when it comes to employment opportunities here.
I'm sure Treasurer will speak when the latest economic data is released, but this Government has pursued a responsible, mainstream strategy dealing with the challenges of the worst economic crisis, globally, in three-quarters of a century, and there are clear-cut results in terms of this economy, unique among the major advanced economies, having avoided going into a recession.
You ask about the Melbourne Cup. I'm tipping Shocking, and you might say 'why am I tipping Shocking?' That's a very good question. Shocking has done recently, in various Queensland starts- I'm from Queensland, you're from Queensland, I'm encouraging you all to get behind Shocking. The odds, I'm told, are 10:1, barrier 22, four years old, and has done very well recently in the Lexus Quality and I believe is the horse to watch come the big race tomorrow in Melbourne.
Thanks for your time.


The Prime Minister today announced that Townsville has received approval for 257 new homes worth nearly $69 million under the Stage Two of the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan Social Housing Initiative.
This brings the total of new social housing in the Townsville region to 304 homes worth $83 million following the announcement of Stage One projects earlier this year.
The Prime Minister made the announcement with Federal Member for Dawson James Bidgood and Senator for Queensland Jan McLucas at the site of a $2.9 million project in West End that will deliver eight two-bedroom units.
The building work - funded under Stage One - is providing work for 30 roofers, electricians, carpenters and renderers, including 11 apprentices, and is expected to be completed by the end of 2009.
Across the country, the Government estimates that the social housing component of the stimulus plan is supporting more than 15,000 jobs.
This new investment is one part of the Rudd Government's program to increase the stock of affordable homes in Australia by 80,000 by mid-2012.
For Queensland, the Social Housing Initiative involves 4,038 new properties at a cost of $1.085 billion.
The stimulus plan also sees an $80.1 million investment in maintenance and repair work for 9,458 homes in Queensland. Renovation and repainting jobs increase the quality of the housing stock and lengthen its life.
Locations, numbers of dwellings and funding under the social housing initiative are current and are subject to variations during the tender process.
Construction has also begun on all 118 new Defence houses funded under the Stimulus Plan, supporting 82 direct and 205 indirect local jobs. 56 properties are complete.


Prime Minister: Now we're here at the Lodge today and I'd like to welcome members of the Wallace family, the Kennett family, the Fowler family, and family and friends of donors and donor recipients.
On average, people on the transplant list wait between six months and four years. Two people die each week waiting for a transplant. So far this year 189 generous Australians became organ donors resulting in a new chance at life for 608 Australians.
To those Australian families who said yes to donation, we thank you for making the decision to give others a special and deeply personal gift.
It's people like Liz, people like Lachie and people like the Kennetts who have inspired the Government's $151 million organ donation reform package. This national reform program is spearheaded by the Australian Organ and Tissue Authority.
Now when people ask Lachie how's he feeling he replies "I've never felt better" and he's having swimming lessons three times a week, and he's trying to gain enough strength and weight to get back on the footy field. We wish you luck mate and hope to see you flying down the wing very, very soon.
The Donate Life network is central to our efforts to increase Australia's rate of organ donation for transplantation. But improving our donation rate doesn't fall on the shoulders of these dedicated medical professionals alone. The burden also falls on us - each and every Australian family.
Discover the facts about organ and tissue donation, make an informed choice and decide to become an organ donor, and discuss with family and friends so that each of you know the other's wishes.
We can increase the family consent rates by ensuring that our family know our wishes and we know theirs. Talking is the key to this, that's why we're gathered here today. Therese and the kids and I have had that chat as a family and we've decided to become a Donate Life family.
As a Donate Life family we've committed to discussing and upholding each other's wishes. And our invitation today to all families in Australia is come and join us. This is good for your neighbours, it's good for your friends, it's good for all Australians.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


I congratulate Hamid Karzai on his re-election as President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. 
This election has taken place in difficult circumstances. The outcome has been determined by the Afghan authorities and is consistent with Afghanistan's constitution and laws.
The challenges facing the next Afghan Government are substantial, and they must be confronted without delay.
The task before President Karzai is now to form a government that can win the trust of the Afghan people by strengthening Afghanistan's security, fighting corruption and delivering effective governance and basic services.
The Australian Government will continue to work with the international community and the United Nations in supporting the Afghan Government's efforts to combat terrorism and to deliver development to its people, primarily through Australia's commitment in Oruzgan province. 


The people of Hervey Bay will feel the benefit of increased financial incentives to attract doctors and then keep them, thanks to the Rudd Government's Rural Health Workforce Strategy.
Following the reclassification of Hervey Bay as 'inner regional' from 1 July 2010 doctors may be eligible to receive retention grants for the first time, starting at $2,500 after one year and growing to $12,000 after five years.
In addition, doctors who move to the Hervey Bay area from a major city may be eligible for a relocation grant of $15,000.
The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and the Minister for Indigenous Health, Rural And Regional Health And Regional Services Delivery, Warren Snowdon, were in Hervey Bay today to hear first hand from local health professionals.
The Prime Minister and Minister Snowdon toured the Hervey Bay Hospital, outlined the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's recommendations, and listened to local health professionals as they outlined their priorities for the future of the health system.
The consultation with doctors and stakeholders in Hervey Bay is the 67th across the country to road-test the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's proposed reforms.
The NHHRC report made recommendations for system-wide changes to Australian health care.
All Australians are able to send in their comments and contribute to the national debate on our health system via the yourHealth.gov.au website.
Copies of the NHHRC report are on the website, along with the two other reports presented to the Australian Government - the draft of the National Primary Health Care Strategy and the report of the National Preventative Health Taskforce, which also made recommendations in their areas of expertise.


PM: It's good to be back in Hervey Bay. I was here about three months ago and spent some time in this community and became somewhat familiar with some of the local needs, but it's good to be back today to talk specifically about the needs in this particular health region, and particularly to hear the responses here at the Hervey Bay Hospital.
The people of Hervey Bay will also be able to benefit from the increased financial incentives to attract doctors and to keep them in this region as a result of the incentive payments contained as part of the Rural Health Workforce Strategy. Following the classification of Hervey Bay as inner regional from 1 July, 2010, doctors may be eligible to receive retention grants, for the time, starting at $2,500 after one year and growing to $12,000 after five years. In addition, doctors who move to the Hervey bay area from a major city may be eligible for a relocation grant of $15,000. This, we believe, provides a necessary and additional support for medical practitioners coming here to work; to stay; to live; to become part and parcel of this community.
Today we've also spent some time, as part of our 67th consultation as a government with health and hospital communities across the country, as we've road tested long-reform recommendations for our system for the next quarter of a century. The health reform commission has made many recommendations for system-wide changes for Australian health care, but it's important that we do so in response to the particular feedback of important regions like this.
I'd like to thank all those who attended today's consultation. They have taken time out of their busy schedules to spend time with both the minister and myself, to hear from the coal face; from the specialists; from the GPs; from the director of nursing and from others, about the particular needs of this community, and also the contribution from local council representatives, and also from local members of parliament.
The things is, this challenge for national health and hospital reform should actually be beyond Party politics. It should be something we set our minds on for the next quarter of a century - how do we better plan; how do we better resource; how do we better structure a health and hospital system for the future which meets the expanding needs of the Australian population. Part of that is huge growth areas like this one on the Fraser coast, very much an important part of Australia, and it's important therefore that our proposed reforms are relevant here in a very practical way.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Has the Fraser coast health system tipped over?
PM: Well, the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission says that, nationally, the system, the health and hospital system, is at tipping point. Tipping points occur before something tips over, but the right way to look at it is there are deep, structural challenges facing the system nationwide, and that if we don't deal with them structurally for the long term, then there is a danger that the system begins to tip over.
Therefore, rather than just apply a band-aid here, a bit of sticking plaster there, let's actually look at some root-and-branch reform. That's what we've done.
Health professionals across the country have described the Health Reform Commission's report as the most systematic, comprehensive examination and review of the Australian healthcare system since the introduction of Medicare. We therefore should use it and its recommendations to road test with communities like this and go forward, but this is an important community- so many people live here, so many people are moving here - you can understand why, it's such a beautiful part of Australia, but planning for their long-term health needs is as important as it is for the other 750 health communities which make up Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: -I'll just take one here, and then over there.
JOURNALIST: On the Traveston Dam, what sort of impact do you think it's going to have for our region, and would you intervene?
PM: Well, the way in which these things are organised nationally is that the Environment Minister, Peter Garrett, under the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Act, is require to make an independent, unfettered decision on environmental merits of the case put to him concerning this particular proposal. I know Peter Garrett very well. I know he'll attend to that diligently, professionally, independently, and that's as it should be.
I, of course, am familiar with the sensitivities in this region. I grew up not a long way from here, a few hours south, and as a kid used to go swimming in the Mary River, so I know something of how this is felt in the local community, but the processes for decision making are as I've just described, and they are proscribed in Australian law.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned the GP superclinic. Has anyone tendered for the superclinic in Bundaberg, and how close are we to having that facility?
PM: Firstly, I understand there has been some response to the tender. How many, I can't point to, and that lies properly within the Health Minister's purchase. Secondly, in terms of timelines, I would not wish to be specific, because I don't want to create a false expectation about a delivery which is not honoured. I'd much rather be completely frank with people about when things can be done and when they can be delivered by, but as this gets closer to decision point, then the Minister will of course visit the local community and make it very plain there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: There and there.
JOURNALIST: One of the biggest concerns we hear a lot is that there is so much over-bureaucracy (inaudible), people say that there's such a long way between the decision makers on George Street, for example, where it actually-
PM: I'm told it's Charlotte Street.
JOURNALIST: The funds hands down and actually hits into the areas that they need it. Ideas of local hospital boards have been brought up again. Exactly, is it something that Canberra seems to, like, are looking at actually taking it over some time soon, or is that going to be a bypass, or will it just be purely more funding from Canberra?
PM: Bypass surgery? What do you reckon?
SNOWDON: We could do it.
PM: The debate about bureaucracy is a real one. The debate about maximising resources going to the service delivery point is a real one. It's not an invented debate, it's a real debate, and it should be. There are key things which health policy planners should be doing across an entire system. I referred to some of those in my remarks to the group before. But what we also want to see is within that planning framework is the maximum resources delivered to doctors; to nurses; to allied health professionals; to the provision of hospital beds; to the provision of proper surgical capacity; to provision of proper aged care facilities; etcetera.
This region, as I'm advised, and I stand happy to be corrected, I think has been through a few experiments in recent years about how you might be able to do this. I'm not going to opine from up on high as to which might have been successful and which might have been less successful, but I did say directly in response to one of the local council representatives that we're all ears in terms of how you think this could be done better at a regional or sub-regional level because our experience so far is that many regions are saying to us, across Australia, that they believe with greater clinical decision making and control at the local hospital and local regional level that they can drive the health dollar further.
Now, I'm very interested to hear what the submissions are from here on this, and rather than me just coming over the top say 'this is terrific and that's rotten', I'd much rather get the responses.
Sorry, I interrupted you.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbot this morning said that the (inaudible). Do you have asylum seekers' blood on your hands?
PM: These remarks reflect, I believe, the fact that neither Mr Turnbull nor the Liberals, despite criticising Government border protection policy, actually have a policy on border protection. If you can't summon the courage to pull together a policy on border protection, then how can anyone expect such a person to have the courage to make the tough and hard decisions on border protection in office.
JOURNALIST: Are they getting out of control, the Opposition? I mean, Mr Abbott's comments come after (inaudible)
PM: I think the remarks reflect, underneath them, a complete absence of border protection policy on the part of Mr Turnbull and the Liberals and the Nationals. It's very easy to criticise. It's much harder to come up with an alternative way of handling this challenge.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, support for Labor has collapsed after (inaudible) the asylum seeker issue. Will the Government revisit its protection policy?
PM: My job as Prime Minister of Australia is not to act as a commentator. My job as Prime Minister of Australia is to act in the Australian national interest, and I'll continue to do so. The decisions we take on border protection policy are taken in the national interest and I know for a fact that they won't be popular, but my job is to take the hard decisions and the tough decisions in the national interest whether they are popular or not.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Our job, as I said, is to act in the national interest and to take tough decisions in the national interest in a very difficult area, and we will take those decisions whether they are popular or not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Minister, both of you, (inaudible) have both or either of you singled out any issues that think should be acted on ASAP?
PM: Well, our timetable for decision making is, first of all, not hugely removed from now. Remember we've said that we would indicate what the Government's long-term reform decisions would be in the early part of next year, and it's November now.
Secondly, these decisions have brewed and brewed and brewed, for decades and decades and decades under governments of all political persuasions, and our predecessors did not actually rise to the challenge of presenting any blueprint for national health and hospital reform - ever.
The other thing I'd say is this: it's not as if this Government, on health and hospitals, has been sitting on its hands. The fact that we have increased by 50 percent the Australian Government's investment in health and hospital funding to the States in the most recent Australian Healthcare Agreement reflects the direction we're going - that is, increasing the overall allocation from some $40 billion to $60 billion over a five-year period. That amount of money is then available to State governments for deployment across the health and hospital system of the State, including here in the Fraser coast. So our bona fides, if you like, are there, they are upfront, and an extra $20 billion, frankly, is not just a piece of loose change.
JOURNALIST: But you haven't singled out any issues so far that you (inaudible)
PM: Ah, always be wary of hypotheticals.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Our job here, as I said today, said very clearly about what I said at the beginning of our consultation here, here are 132 national recommendations. This is an important hospital, one of the 750 across Australia which will be subject to one or another of these reforms, and why we've come here. And myself as Prime Minister, this is one of 17 consultations that I'm participating in nationwide, which means this community I take personally seriously, and the Australian Government takes all such communities seriously, is to road test those recommendations with these highly qualified health professionals here.
I've listened carefully to what they've said about preventative health care, GP network here and its need for support, listened very carefully in terms of the attitudes which have been reflected in terms of post-acute care, listened vary carefully to the presentations from the representative from the aged care sector as well, as well as the person who spoke on dental care. But you know something? Our job as the Australian Government is to look at long-term, national reforms, how that's funded, how it's structured, and therefore how's that best delivered to communities like this, minimising the bureaucracy, maximising the dollar through to the service delivery point. That, I think, is what the people want from us.
JOURNALIST: Last night, Seven News ran a story (inaudible) Australian-based mining company rorting a village in the Philippines. What's the Government's (inaudible)
PM: I'll need to familiarise myself with the report. The Australian Government would expect all Australian-registered companies to behave responsibly in their national and international behaviour. On the details of this one, I don't have it to hand. Once we get it to hand, then the relevant Minister, I'm sure, will make an appropriate statement.
Australian companies, when they are operating around the world, have to be mindful of, and respectful of, all local laws, all local regulations, including environmental regulations. I would expect and hope that any such Australian company was doing the same, but I do need to familiarise myself with this report.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: First of all, the Reserve Bank, as I'm advised, has not yet made a determination on what it will do on monetary policy today. Second point I would make is that interest rates were reduced by the Reserve Bank to 50-year lows in the extraordinary measures that the Reserve Bank took to help Australia through the global economic crisis. It's a matter, of course, independently, for Reserve Bank, what they do in the future.
For the Australian Government, what have we done in relation to the housing sector? We trebled the first home owners boost. We actually have assisted a large number of first home buyers to enter the market.
Of course, the other thing that we've done, through the Government's stimulus strategy, is to keep hundreds of thousands of Australians in jobs who would otherwise now be unemployed. Look at our unemployment rate and what it's projected to be comparable to any other developed country in the world. I can tell you if you don't have a job it's very difficult when it comes to making other payments, so helping on the overall economic growth front; supporting hundreds of thousands of Australians in jobs, including those who are working as tradies here on the Fraser coast on the carious school projects I have seen, including the one I visited last time, which is the building of a new library out at the Fraser Coast Anglican College - that's important. Also, providing direct support for first home buyers through the grants system we've got.
But the Reserve Bank has brought rates down by four percentage points, rapidly over the course of the last 12 months to 50-year record lows and managing the economic crisis has been a challenge for Australia, for the Government, for the Reserve Bank. Managing Australia's longer-term economic recovery is also a challenge as well.
Got to go.
(ENDS)


PRICE: On the line from Queensland, morning PM.
PM: Good morning Steve, how are you?
PRICE: I'm well, did you take offence to that comment from Tony Abbott?
PM: I think what the comment demonstrates Steve, is that neither Mr Turnbull or Mr Abbott or the Liberals have an alternative policy on border protection. That's what it demonstrates.
PRICE: Well, they won't, they won't will they say - will they - what they will do?
PM: Well that's a very good point, it's very easy to criticise in this business. Border protection has always been a difficult challenge for any government of Australia. We've had boats coming to this country for the last 30 years. In the period Mr Howard was Prime Minister there was something like 250 boats that came to Australia carrying nearly 15,000 people.
The period that I've been Prime Minister, we've had 40 or so have come with nearly 1,900 to 2,000 people. This is a challenge for governments past and present. It's a difficult challenge but we're elected to implement a tough, responsible, fair policy on border protection, one which is hard-line on people smugglers, humane when it deals with asylum seekers. People from the far right will attack it because they want to put kids back behind razor wire, I presume. People from the far left will attack it because they think we shouldn't have any border protection at all. This we believe is the right policy and we'll continue to implement it.
PRICE: The Pacific solution did, for a period, stop the boats coming though, you'd have to concede that they, that we slowed them up. Now I know you suggest that there's this push and pull theory. You'd have to admit though the 78 people aboard that vessel that is still currently in Indonesia, it would appear through the investigations that many of them on board that vessel have been in Indonesia for up to five years. That's not push and pull is it?
PM: I'll just go to your point first about the Pacific solution. When we abolished the pacific solution, first of all we said to the Australian people prior to the last election, that's what we would do.
Secondly, when we proceeded to do that in government the Liberal and National Party through their spokesman supported that, let's just be very clear about that. Second thing is you say it had an effect. It was enormously costly for the Australian taxpayer but what actually happened in the period from 2001 to 2004 was the outflow of refugees from Afghanistan and Iraq and other countries. Right around the world the outflow went down and the reason why it went down dramatically was because the security situation in those countries at that stage stabilised.
What's happened since 2005 and 2006, in particular, is the security situation in many of these countries has now got worse again. In the case of Sri Lanka only three or four months ago, a civil war which has seen 260,000 people forced to different parts of the island. 130,000 going over to India, tens of thousands going to other countries in Europe and in North America and we've had, you know, one or two thousand come to Australian waters. It's a challenge for all countries and it will be a challenge into the future as well.
PRICE: It seems there is, this is stating the bleeding obvious, but there are hundreds of thousands of people on the waiting list and what is being created here that they sit in detention camps like places in Indonesia. It's no surprise, is it, that they want to try and get to Australia because life here as a recently arrived asylum seeker has got to be better than where they are.
PM: Well, right around the world you've got, Steve, right as we speak 41 million people who are displaced persons or asylum seekers in various countries in the world. And I've mentioned before the figures from Sri Lanka which is, only over the last several months, 260,000 displaced on that island alone.
So therefore what happens is that you have these push factors out from Sri Lanka, which go right across the world. Thousands going to France, thousands going to Germany, thousands also going to North America and you've also got others who are coming though South-East Asia and seeking to come to Australia and some seeking to come direct.
PRICE: But have we, sorry to interrupt, have we inadvertently now forced people to try and make a more perilous journey direct from Sri Lanka to Australia by what's happened in Indonesia?
PM: Well people smugglers themselves, Steve, are a vile trade and they will say anything in order to drum up business for themselves. That's why we are unapologetic in being hardline on people smugglers themselves. Last 12 months we have 15 people smugglers convicted in Australia, 43 smugglers, organisers and crew are currently being prosecuted before the Australian courts. We intend to, as we have been, throwing the full force of the law at people smugglers. But let me tell you, it's a challenge, people ask why you're cooperating with Indonesia and Malaysia, because we want to deal with those who trade in human misery, people smugglers, and that's why we're dealing with the Sri Lankan government on this question as well.
PRICE: I just conducted a small experiment waiting for you to come on, knowing you I was going to speak to you. I just asked two or three callers about how they feel your government is going two years in and how your leadership is and the asylum seeker issue obviously comes up strongly, 7 points down in Newspoll yesterday. Those couple of callers said we're asking for strong leadership on this issue and Kevin Rudd's not showing it.
PM: Well can I say that my job as Prime Minister of the country is to take hard decisions in the national interest. A responsible border protection policy which is hardline on people smugglers and which is human when it comes to asylum seekers.
I fully appreciate, Steve, that what you're going to have from various people in the community is a conclusion that these decisions are not popular. I understand that. I accept that, but my job as Prime Minister is not to take popular decisions. My job as Prime Minister is to take decisions in the national interest. And when you put this into its broader context of us being one of many, many countries including Indonesia, Malaysia, the countries in Europe, the countries in North America dealing with a very large outflow from Sri Lanka right now, then what we are doing is consistent with a proper approach to a problem which is genuinely global. And as I say, what we've done out there in Indonesia so far is, we've conducted some 80, I mention Indonesia but in other countries as well, 86 successful interruptions of boats seeking to come to Australia.
PRICE: But is it strong leadership to leave those 78 on an Australian boat who are basically blackmailing us into wanting to come here?
PM: On the circumstances surrounding this boat, that arose because of a search and rescue operation which occurred because of a distress call issued in Indonesia's own search and rescue area. They asked Australia for assistance, they did not have a vessel nearby. We then took that vessel to the nearest port which is an Indonesian port with Indonesia's concurrence.
Now on the ground, obviously you're going to be faced with real challenges in terms of successfully working your way through the processing of these individuals but as I've said and the Indonesians (inaudible) we have infinite patience in dealing with this particular matter. Put it into its broader context, what we've been dealing with is many, many vessels- 86 successful interruptions of vessels coming to Australia. Also we have as I've said some 15 people smugglers already convicted, 43 currently before the courts, these are the sorts of actions which we are taking on the ground but I fully accept, Steve, that whatever actions are taken by the Australian government they will not necessarily be popular, but my job as Prime Minister is to act in the national interest whether it's popular or not. I contrast that with Mr Turnbull who doesn't even have the courage to put forward and alternative border protection policy.
PRICE: I want-
PM: It's easy to conduct a fear campaign, it's much harder to come up with solutions.
PRICE: Sorry, I want to talk about a couple of other issues but your Minister Brendan O'Conner has, it's been reported online in The Australian website this morning raising hopes of an end to that standoff. Do have any news on that for us?
PM: I have said consistently over the last week or so that we, together with the Indonesians have great, great patience working our way though this and we will continue to do so. As I said, Indonesia's said it has great patience in handling this and so do we, Australia. We'll work our way through it, but again to put it into its context, this is one vessel with 78, we've been processing a whole range of vessels (inaudible) separate interruptions of vessels or attempted travel to Australia by people smugglers, we'll continue to take those sorts of hardline measures but as I've said it's a problem for countries right around the world when it comes to Sri Lanka because of the extraordinary violence in that country, which is why global and regional solutions are the best way of handling this in the long term.
PRICE: I want to play for you just a comment that you made during the 2007 Labor Party launch for the election in regard to health. I'll just play this for you if you don't mind.
RECORDING: On hospitals, we have put forward a national plan to end the buck passing between Canberra and the states. I have a long term plan to fix our nation's hospitals. I'll be responsible for implementing my plan and I state this with absolute clarity, the buck will stop with me.
PRICE: I've taken to playing that a bit lately. When's the buck stop with you on health?
PM: First of all Steve, I stand by everything I said and what you have just played. Secondly what I am doing is now road testing the recommendations for long-term reform of the health and hospital system around the country with the Health Minister. I'm in Brisbane doing that again tomorrow at the Mater Hospital. Yesterday, I was doing the same at the Hervey Bay hospital.
What we'll be doing, after discussions with the premiers and chief ministers on our reform plan at the end of this year is putting our final recommendations for the health and hospital system to them. In the first part of next year I hope we are going to reach cooperative agreement on it. If we don't, and as I've said consistently, we'll seek a mandate from the Australian people. I stand by everything I have said.
PRICE: It's been two years, what's long term, what's the definition of long term?
PM: You know Steve, no-one has actually taken a systematic, fundamental look at the future needs of the Australian hospital system since we introduced Medicare.
What we've got to stop doing is having a bit of bandaid here and a bit of sticking plaster over there. What we need is a plan for the future of our health and hospital system which goes out to the next quarter of a century. That's what we appointed an independent reform commission to do. It reported in July, we've released that report with 123 separate recommendations. Myself and the Health Minister have now been around together some 67 different hospitals around the country. Myself some 17, she's doing the rest. We're road testing the recommendations. When you're talking about the next 25 years you've got to make sure you get it right when something as basic as the health system is at stake here, but also can I just say this. After we were elected, and in the first two years in office, the Australian government increased its funding for hospitals around the country by 50 percent in the Australian health care agreement with the states and territories-
PRICE: -but your premiers are letting you down aren't they?
PM: Well there are problems in the health and hospital system. The recommendations in the report that I just referred to before, say that the whole system, nationwide is at tipping point. Let's not guild the lily here, there are real problems out there and I believe what we need is a long term solution to fix it. I've indicated to you what the time frame for doing it is and it's entirely consistent with what I said to the people before the election. The contrast is this. Mr Howard, never once in 12 years came up with a long term reform plan for hospitals, and instead took 1 billion dollars out of the public hospital system of Australia. That's not been our approach. We intend to reform both now and for the long term.
PRICE: But the voters are saying to you, we heard you say that two years ago we want to know when the buck will stop.
PM: Well as I said, the commitment that I gave, and the one that you played before just prior to the last election, I stand by absolutely. When we take this reform plan to the States and Territories in the first part of next year we will either reach agreement cooperatively or, if there is objection to it, we will seek a mandate from the people. The responsibility, the buck stops with me. There will be no ifs, buts or maybes about it. I meant what I said and we intend to get on with it. But you've got to be systematic in the way you analyse the problem.
Systematic in the recommendations that you come up with. When you're looking at people's lives, their health, their livelihoods. And across the 750 public hospitals in Australia you don't just come up with an idea late one Friday afternoon and decide to get on with it. You've got to do it systematically, carefully, put it out very explicitly to the states and territories, then get on with the business of implementing it. That's what we intent to do.
PRICE: Two more quick questions, I know you've got to go. Do you think the banks are two hasty in lifting their home loan interest rates given that all four jumped in immediately yesterday after the Reserve lifted the cash rate?
PM: I do note a contrast Steve between, shall I say, the speed with which interest rates are brought down on the part of the commercial banks and the speed with which they are put up on the part of the commercial banks. What I would be very, very concerned about is if any of the commercial banks then proceeded to increase interest rates by anything in excess of the 25 basis point adjustment by the reserve bank yesterday.
PRICE: Just finally, before you go. How did you ever pick Shocking out of that field of 24 or 5?
PM: Oh, It's easy to explain Steve. It was just a complete fluke.
PRICE: (laughs)
PM: If you know as much about the nags as I do mate, frankly, I reckon the principle for the Melbourne Cup is the less you know the better your going to go.
PRICE: Well you might have won a few people some money yesterday. Just as you go I notice Sky News and I know you're mobile in your car I can hear that. They're reporting that, that search off Australia, off the Cocos Islands has now been suspended. Can you give me an update on that? Do you know what the latest is?
PM: The most recent advice I have is that they are drawing the operation to a close and the details still are that we have managed to secure the rescue, I'm advised of 29 individuals, 27 survivors I'm sorry-
PRICE: -Yep.
PM: Including one 15-year-old. It's believed that two youths both aged 14 are among the missing. One body of one deceased person is also on the LNG Pioneer and two others were sighted but not yet recovered. And that is the most recent information I have. It's been some time since the vessel sunk which is of course a great tragedy. And when we're dealing with people smugglers it is, just an awful set of circumstances.
PRICE: And the pioneer will go to Christmas Island, yes?
PM: We'll the arrangements we have. It's like the ones I described before in relation to Indonesia. When there is a vessel in distress, which is in the Australian search and rescue area, the normal approach under international maritime safety law is that individuals having been rescued are taken to the nearest location, in that case Christmas Island. Just as in the case of the Indonesian search and rescue area intervention over the last week or two where the Australian vessel, having intervened at the Indonesians request took it to the nearest port which was an Indonesian port. That's the convention that applies worldwide. That's what we're applying here.
PRICE: PM, thanks.
PM: Thanks very much Steve.
(ENDS)


CURTIS: Mr Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning.
CURTIS: How are you going to respond to Fiji's decision?
PM: Well, first of all I'll be speaking with the Australian Foreign Minister this morning about an appropriate response to developments by the Fijian regime, but let's put this into its context. The Fijian regime, led by Commodore Bainimarama has conducted the military coup, he has violated the constitution, he has refused to hold elections, and he's suspended the judiciary, and so therefore we have taken a deliberately hardline approach to this regime because we do not want this coup culture to spread elsewhere in the Pacific. That's our position. We will continue to maintain that position, and we'll consider an appropriate response to these actions taken by Bainimarama in the last 24 hours.
CURTIS: But that hardline response hasn't moved Fiji any closer to a return to democracy. Do you need to toughen your stance even further?
PM: Well, do you there are something like 15 island states in the Pacific Islands Forum? My concern, fundamentally, as Prime Minister of Australia and as chairman of the Pacific Island Forum, is to ensure that we do not see a spread of coup culture to the rest of the Pacific. That's the bottom line here.
Secondly, how do we actually succeed in ultimately obtaining a return to democracy in Fiji? That is very difficult when you have the attitude taken by Bainimarama, who constantly puts off the possibility of holding elections. That does not mean, however, that you should therefore soften your approach.
We belong to a family of democracies in the South Pacific. We, the Australian Government, are engaged in active development programs with our partners in the South Pacific. We want to see stability in the South Pacific, and we're not about to simply allow a coup culture to spread. That's why we'll maintain a hard line in relation to this regime.
CURTIS: What then, are your options? What things could you consider?
PM: Well, we will discuss that appropriately, calmly, methodically today, as the Australian Government does in response to one challenge or another. This is another one. Obviously, there is a menu of possibilities, but I should emphasis the nature of the sanctions regime we already have imposed, which has, of course, caused the Fijian regime to react with some anger towards Australian actions. We have travel sanctions that apply to the coup leader himself, his supporters, his family, to interim government ministers and their families, ranking members of the Fijian military, and interim government appointees, including judicial appointees - because we are not about to legitimise what is a regime which has obtained power through military force, and we do not want that culture to spread anywhere else in the South Pacific.
CURTIS: On the issue of asylum seekers, the survivors of the Cocos Islands boat sinking are being taken to Christmas Island, and the Western Australian Premier says you should take the asylum seekers onboard the Oceanic Viking there too. Why is that not an option?
PM: Well, first of all, can I say in relation to Cocos Island, this particular vessel in distress was identified as being in distress in the Australian search and rescue area. We had no vessels available in the area at the time, foreign vessels assisted, that is normal procedure. What is equally normal procedure and consistent with our international obligations is then to take a distressed vessel or its passengers to the nearest location, and that, in this case, is going to be Christmas Island. That's consistent with international obligations and practice.
You ask the question about the other vessel, the Oceanic Viking, and those who were rescued at sea from the vessel which was located in Indonesia's search and rescue area. Once those individuals had been transferred to an Australian vessel at Indonesia's request because there was no Indonesian vessel nearby, again the normal procedure is to head to the nearest available port, in this case, an Indonesian port, and the Indonesian search and rescue authority invited the Australian vessel to go ashore. That is why these circumstances are different.
I've just got to say, we adhere to normal processes and procedures when it comes to such matters. It's the right and consistent approach to act in accordance with the principles of international maritime law and international maritime safety law.
CURTIS: You said before the Newspoll yesterday that your stance on border protection and asylum seekers wouldn't be popular, and that seems to have been borne out, but what were you trying to say about the Australian people through that, that they don't want asylum seekers brought to Australia, or that they do and don't believe you're doing the right thing?
PM: As Prime Minister of Australia, my responsibility is not to act as a commentator. I'm engaged as Prime Minister of Australia by the Australian people to take decisions in the national interest, and I-
CURTIS: But they were your comments, saying that your stance wouldn't be popular.
PM: I was about to go on to that point, is that, as I said, my responsibility is to take decisions in the national interest, whether they are popular or not, because if you are taking difficult decisions, hard decisions, on questions of asylum seekers, it follows that there are going to be reactions against those decisions from people from the Right of Australian politics, people to the Left of Australian politics. My job is to get on with the business of implementing a tough, responsible, fair policy on border protection - the one we took to the last election, the one we've implemented since then, hardline on people smugglers, humane in dealing with asylum seekers.
CURTIS: Is there a prospect, though, that people are responding to confusion in your message, to a failure of the tough but humane message, to really explain what you're doing. Perhaps the sight of a leader who's portrayed himself as decisive not acting as they might expect.
PM: The challenges of dealing with border protection are common challenges faced by so many governments around the world. If you were to speak to my counterparts, for example, in Europe, who are dealing with challenges across the Mediterranean, people who are dealing with challenges of people smuggling in various parts of Asia, these are common, difficult challenges for those in government.
Bear in mind what we are dealing with here: around the world, 42 million people displaced. 250,000 Sri Lankans displaced in the final stages of a conflict only several months ago. Tens of thousands of people moving into Europe and in to North America, and so far we've had something like 1,800 or so arrive in Australian waters. These are global challenges, they are regional challenges. Our response, again, is to implement, and to continue to implement, a hardline policy against people smugglers and a humane approach to asylum seekers.
That's what we were elected to do. That's the policy we took to the Australian people. My job is to act in the national interest, whether it happens to be popular or not.
CURTIS: You rejected calls to revise your economic stimulus package in the wake of a stronger economic outlook, but the way the package withdraws was designed at a time when you expected the economy to be far worse. Given the Reserve Bank said yesterday that the economy will grow close to trend over the next year, isn't there a case for speeding up that withdrawal?
PM: The Australian Government has intervened with early decisive action to deal with the worst global economic crisis in three quarters of a century. Let's go to the RBA. The RBA's policy and its monetary policy is still expansionary. The RBA's policy was to bring down interest rates by 425 basis points to what the Governor has rightly called extraordinary and emergency measures and emergency levels.
What has occurred since then is a change back by 50 basis points, which means that against the pre-existing rate, we are still three and three quarters of a percent lower. That is still an expansionary monetary policy.
CURTIS: But the outlook for the economy is getting better and better, isn't it?
PM: Can I say that the view on the part of Treasury advisers is that we continue to have uncertainties in the global economy. That is why we believe the prudent approach is to adhere to the in-built drawdown of the stimulus strategy which the Government implemented, starting from October last year. That is, an effective stimulus strategy is timely, targeted, and temporary. Ours was that. It peaked in the second quarter of 2009. It is already coming off.
That is the way we designed it, but the impact is this - Australia is doing better than practically every other advanced economy in the world. We are the only economy to grown positively in the last 12 months, of the advanced economies. We are the second-lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit, and the only one not to have gone into recession.
I think our economic policy settings have been right so far, but managing the recovery will be a challenging task for policy makers in Australia. Managing the crisis has been a challenging task as well.
CURTIS: Prime Minister, thank you very much.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


CARY: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Greg. Thanks for having me on the program. How did you go in the Cup?
CARY: Not nearly as well as you. I could say shocking, but so could you.
PM: Exactly. All I can say is the moral of that story is that the less you know about horse racing, the better.
CARY: There's a moral there.
PM: Because frankly, I do know the front end of a horse from the back because I grew up on a farm, but I actually know nothing about horse racing, so my thanks to those mad punters in my office who two out of the three last Melbourne Cups have actually tipped the winner - and I'm the beneficiary.
CARY: So no giving up the day job?
PM: No, mate, no, no.
CARY: Too many serious issues to address. We don't have a huge amount of time, so let's do that. Maybe, first of all, to the Cocos Islands and the unfolding tragedy there. What's the latest you're hearing?
PM: In Cocos, the latest advice is that 27 survivors have been recovered and they are on the LNG Pioneer, including one 15-year-old. It's believed that two youths, aged 14 and 14, are among the missing. The body of one deceased person is also on the LNG Pioneer and two others were sighted but not recovered, and that is as it stands at the moment, and of course this has been a very difficult search-and-rescue operation.
CARY: The whole thing is very difficult and our, this is obviously tragic. Tony Abbott, yesterday, getting close to obscenity, blamed you, personally, for what had happened. He retracted, in fairness, later in the day. However, in your quieter moments, are you totally convinced you've got this right?
PM: We went to the last election telling the Australian people absolutely upfront about the responsible, fair, tough border protection policy we'd be implementing if we won office. That's the one we've been implementing for the last two years. It is hardline on people smugglers. It is humane in dealing with asylum seekers.
You're always going to get attacked from the Right and from the Left. People on the Right, on the far Right, saying that you should put children back behind razor wire, people on the far Left saying you should have no border protection whatsoever. I believe this is the right policy in the national interest. These require tough decisions and they won't necessarily be popular decisions.
CARY: None of us pretend that this is easy, but now we have the Oceanic Viking with 78 onboard in Indonesia waiting some kind of resolution there. There is at least one theory that says those who have now tried to come direct from Sri Lanka are bypassing Indonesia because they know they're not going to get here by via there, so maybe they're now going to start to come here, so the tragedy can be the unintended consequence of the original policy.
PM: Well, the first point to say is that the operational practices of people smugglers are known to them, and on people smugglers themselves, our hardline policy has been to crack down, and we now have a large number of convictions, a large number of people in Australia currently before the courts for people smuggling offences, and we'll continue to do that.
At the same time, our job is to deal with the problem, which is not unique to Australia, but which has been shared by countries around the world. There has been a civil war in Sri Lanka only three or four months ago. I spoke to the President of that country only a couple of nights ago. 260,000 people displaced, 130,000 have gone across to India. We've had some tens of thousands go to various parts of the world, and so far, in Australia, we've had some 1,000 to 2,000, in that vicinity, head towards Australian waters or come to Australian waters.
It's a challenge for all countries, so to deal with it systematically it means dealing in the source country, Sri Lanka. We've appointed a special envoy to deal directly with the Sri Lankans on how you stabilise the country, provide proper housing for people in that country to reduce the push factors out. We're dealing with the Malaysians, the Indonesians, on further security and border control cooperation, but up in the seas themselves, we have a record investment in the assets, sea and air assets, we have conducting maritime surveillance, and so far, in the period that I've been Prime Minister, we've had about 98 percent of vessels not reach the mainland. We've interdicted them and taken them to Christmas Island.
CARY: You obviously thought, though, that you'd cut a deal with the Indonesian President. Are you satisfied that they're doing enough?
PM: Well, when you speak about recent developments with the Indonesians, take this other boat currently in the Indonesian port, this arose because of a rescue operation in Indonesia's own search-and-rescue area. A distress signal went out. It was in the Indonesian search-and-rescue area. They had no vessels nearby - we did. We intercepted the vessel, took people onboard, and then the Indonesian's coast and surveillance authority then approved the Australian vessel to come to port.
Now, obviously, dealing with these things on the ground is tough, it's protracted, it's detailed discussions, but, you know, this is one boat of the many that we've had to deal with in recent times, and remember, in the period that Mr Howard was in office, well, over 12 years, I think nearly 250 boats, nearly 15,000 people arriving here by boat-
CARY: -They seemed to have it sorted by the end, though, didn't they.
PM: Well, you know what happened in the period 2005-2008, and the period 2001-2004. What happened here in Australia, both in decreases and increases of arrivals, was happening in every other country in the world. So between 2001-2004, if you look at the decrease in exits from Iraq, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and elsewhere, they were mirrored right across the world. Similarly, with an upsurge from 2005-06-07, you see, again, that occurring across all countries in the world.
Why? Because what happens with the outflow of asylum seekers or the reduction in the outflow is entirely contingent on whether there is war at home, and whether that war is out of control or not, and that's what we are wrestling with. It's a practical problem for government's past, and it will be for the future, but we intend to pursue a responsible, fair, tough policy in the national interest and as Prime Minister of the country I'll make those decisions whether they are popular or not.
CARY: OK, I want to get to interest rates and what's happening in Fiji and other matters in just a moment. Just finally on that, though, I understand that the survivors from what's happening off Cocos will go to Christmas Island. What then? There seems to me a sad irony about all of that.
PM: Here are the arrangements under search-and-rescue operations. I described to you before what happened with the vessel off Indonesia. It was in Indonesian search-and-rescue authority. Under international maritime safety law, they issued the call for assistance. Whoever's got the vessel closest goes - in this case, us. Then you take that vessel to the nearest port, in this case, an Indonesian port with their approval.
In the case of this vessel, out there some 700km north-west of Cocos Islands, it's in the Australian search-and-rescue area. We had no vessels available. A couple of foreign-flagged vessels came to assistance but again, consistent with normal procedure, you then go to the nearest port of call, which in this case is Christmas Island, where these individuals will be processed in the normal way.
CARY: So they'll be processed from Christmas Island, which the initial folks had designed-
PM: Well, remember we dealing with, we don't even know what the status of these individuals is, but we are dealing in a consistent manner with the provisions of international maritime safety law. Put it this way: if you're an Australian - have you ever done any sailing?
CARY: A little.
PM: If you're out there, you've got thousands of Australians out there at the moment, and a vessel gets into strife, you are dependent on all other countries in the region and beyond honouring their obligations for search-and-rescue if a distress beacon goes up. It works both ways, and it's difficult, and we know there are other factors at work with people smugglers in this case, but we've got to deal with the obligations of maritime law because it affects Australia.
CARY: Our Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, our guest. It's 9.15. We don't have a lot of time, but a couple of other weighty matters to get through.
Another interest rate rise yesterday. Looking at some figures this morning, it suggests the changes will force a household with a $300,000 standard variable mortgage to pay $92 more a month than before the first rise last month. A household with a $500,000 mortgage will pay an extra $154. Mortgage holders will pay about an extra $120 million a year to their banks as a result of yesterday's increase. These ongoing rises will push the standard variable mortgage rate to about 7.75percent a little way down the road, eventually adding $287 a month to the cost of repaying that $300,000 mortgage.
This is the question-
PM: I'll come to your figures in a minute.
CARY: OK, but we're trying to stimulate the economy and the stimulus package is still out there, and at a time when times are still fragile for small business and for many consumers, we're taking away the capacity of people to spend at the same time as we're trying to stimulate the economy. I'm not understanding the logic of that.
PM: Well, the interest rate changes by the Reserve Bank over the last 12 months have been overwhelmingly stimulatory, and still are. Interest rates came down 4.25 percentage points to 50-year, emergency level lows. What's happened in the last two months is they've gone up half a percentage point, so now we have interest rates 3.75 percent lower than what they were a year ago.
CARY: Historically low.
PM: But hang on - therefore, the job of stimulus is still being done by interest rates, the likes of which have not been seen for a long, long time. And on your point about the dollars paid on a $300,000 mortgage, as a result of yesterday's increase of 25 basis points, or a quarter of a percentage point, you're right. Obviously, increased payments of an extra $46 a month, but this is still $662 lower than in August last year, so if you want to know what the impact on stimulus is, you've still got this impact of a massive cut in interest rates over the last 12 months which is still out there, in relative terms, stimulating the economy.
It is exactly in harness with the Government's stimulus strategy through the Budget, which peaked in the second quarter in 2009 and is itself now coming down in the way in which we designed it.
CARY: I understand that, but if it is that we're trying to stimulate the economy, I don't see how making people pay more, and not just mortgage holders, but small business and all other interest rate levels, by reducing their capacity to spend must be impacting the impact of any stimulus.
PM: The challenge here is to manage the crisis well and to manage the recovery well. These are two different challenges and they are both very complicated. On the crisis, remember, through the combined efforts of what we've done through direct government stimulus into the economy, the largest school modernisation program the country's ever seen and other forms of investment, Australia, as of today, the only advanced economy to have grown positively in the last 12 months, the only major advanced economy not to have gone into a recession, with the second-lowest unemployment and with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit.
Now, against what has been the worst global crisis in 75 years, that is a reasonable achievement so far. Now we're moving into 'how do you manage the recovery?', and you've got to be very careful there about making sure that you are doing that in an effective, measured and smooth way over time. Remember what the Reserve Bank Governor has said - emergency level interest rate reductions where necessary when the bottom was falling out of the global economy, and what he has said in his statement yesterday is that any return to what he has described as normal interest rates would occur gradually.
But you know, we've got be very mindful of what's in the global economy at the same time.
CARY: Now, just on the Reserve Bank, it's anticipated they're heading towards what they call this 'neutral cash rate', which is around about 5 percent. At the moment we're, what, 3.5 percent, so that would, logically, presume 1.5 percent in the foreseeable future? How do you see that?
PM: Well, Greg, nice try. I don't predict what the Reserve Bank Governor will do, because monetary policy and interest rates policy is determined independently by the Governor, but your question before is how do these two arms of policy work together? They work extraordinarily strongly together in preventing hundreds of thousands of Australians, including your listeners, losing their jobs. Had we not intervened, and the Bank not intervened, over the course of the last 12 months, unemployment would be through the roof. If we had the same unemployment rates now as they've got in Europe and the United States, then we'd be looking at more than a million Australian unemployed.
Now, our job as a Government was to step in and to intervene. We took early and decisive action and did so, our job now is not just managing the crisis, it is managing the recovery. That has its own particular complications as well.
CARY: OK, we'll try and cover a couple of other bases before you need to go in a little while. Talking of crises, Fiji, their Prime Minister, self appointed, Frank Bainimarama has expelled our High Commissioner, the New Zealand High Commissioner, what are we going to do in return?
PM: Well the first thing that we have done with the Fijian military regime is say to them in loud and clear terms, 'that their military coup is unacceptable to every country in the region. That is why they are unhappy with us. This man, Bainimarama has undertaken a military coup, suspended the constitution, refused to hold fresh elections and sacked the judiciary and appointed his own.
We don't intend as the Government of Australia, and Australia now as chairman of the Pacific Island forum, to allow that to become some sort of norm for the pacific at large. That is why we have a hardline approach, that is why they don't like it, that is why they have announced the action that they are proposing to take against our high commissioner. If they proceed with that action during the course of the day, then the foreign minister and I will be in close discussion about an appropriate commensurate response to what the Fijians would do.
CARY: What kind of thing does that mean though, appropriate commensurate response?
PM: Well we will sort that out during the course of the day in a calm and measured way. But let's just put it into context, why have they, why are they angry with us? Because we have drawn a very hard line, not just as Australia, not just as New Zealand but through the pacific Island forum, with every other Island democracy. We belong to a family of democracies in the south pacific with the exception of Bainimarama's military rule.
CARY: Does Bainimarama care though? Is he getting help from other major powers around the place?
PM: We believe that the process of diplomatically isolating the Fijian regime is effective. Of course, he will seek to go elsewhere for assistance and he does get some assistance beyond, probably. But you know the last thing we can do is produce a situation in the south Pacific where anyone concludes that it is normal and an appropriate way to conduct your politics to walk in one day and conduct a military coup.
Imagine the implications of that if it spread across the region. So we will take an appropriate response to this. I will be discussing it with the foreign Minister during the course of the day. As of when I came into your studio this morning, my advice was our acting High Commissioner in Suva had not been called in to the Fijian foreign Ministry at this stage. So we will be monitoring developments closely on the ground.
CARY: OK, been looking at some polls around the world and some from Australia as well, suggesting that there is less emphasis on the issue of global warming amongst the public. 
With that in mind and more scientists even casting doubt on the modelling being used for these various systems, why the rush to legislate in Australia, our response before we know what the rest of the world plans to do in Copenhagen - and are you having second thoughts about that?
PM: Firstly you go to the science, the international panel of climate change scientists is made up of 4,000 scientists from around the world, all humourless guys and girls in white coats, who just sit around and measure stuff. Ok they are not politicians, they are just scientists. This crowd have reached conclusions over the last decade or so, that global warming is happening and is caused by human activity.
Therefore, we have a responsibility to act for the planet and for your kids and for our grandkids. And can I just say it is nearer-term than that as well. The second point about Australia. 
This is one of the hottest and driest continents on earth. The impact of climate change will be felt here fastest and hardest. Look at the Murray Darling, for the last 10 years, we have had less than 50 per cent of the normal rain inflow, normal inflow into the Murray Darling system, compared with, you know, any historical norm. 
The impact on Australian agriculture, the impact on Australian jobs, the impact on jobs on the barrier reef through coral bleaching, the impact of coastal inundation, in terms of beachfront property right around the country - the economic cost of not acting on climate change is phenomenal. Therefore, our judgement is we must act as Australia, at home, and globally - to produce an agreement which can bring greenhouse gas emissions down and to deal with it in a responsible way.
CARY: You raised so many points there. We don't have a huge amount of time. So when you say, do it in a responsible way, what is responsible with respect, about doing it when our emissions are so small, even if you believe the scientists running around in the white coats, before the major-
PM: -You mean those 4,000 guys don't know what they are talking about?
CARY: Well, I could find you 4,000 who disagree with them, or who are sceptical about the modelling, or disagree-
PM: -Governments from around the world, let's go back to this. You can always find someone out there, who, like there's bloke in the Liberal Party who reckons the way to solve this is whack up a shade cloth in space.
Someone else suggested in the Liberal Party we should stick a shade cloth over the Barrier Reef. I mean, there are a lot of wacky ideas out there, but Governments around the world, all of them, have appointed 4,000 scientists, and these are governments which range from the sceptical end of the spectrum through to the climate change supporting end of the spectrum. And their consensus is the one I have described. Therefore, if you are Prime Minister of Australia, what would you say? 'Oh I am just going to ignore all of that'.
Instead I have got to look at the economic cost to Australia of not acting, impact on agriculture, impact on tourism, impact on jobs, as opposed to the economic cost of acting, and the overwhelming advice to this government is to get in there and act.
When you say, 'why should we act when we represent less than two per cent of global emissions?', well, just imagine you are sitting around the global conference table and saying, 'OK guys, we're only small, it is all over to you'. Can you imagine what the response is, it is either one in - all in, and that is the attitude right around the developed economies of the world.
We have an agreement whereby we will bring the developing countries in, particularly China and India, all these negotiations however will be very tough and hard. It is called common but differentiated responsibilities between the richest economies and the poorest.
But the alternative is to sit on your hands and do nothing. Responsibly, you can't look your kids in the eye, or your potential grandkids in the eye and say, 'we failed this test for our generation'.
CARY: It is nearly an argument for another day, or a discussion for another day, you would like to think as a nation, we could have the discussion though.
You mention the IP-
PM: -We've been having it for the last two years mate.
CARY: I know on that but not on nuclear power, which is where I am going. IPCC, who you place so much weight in, all the other leaders say the IPCC (inaudible) Well the IPCC and leaders such as President Sarkozy, Gordon Brown a colleague of yours in the UK of course, they are saying that any part of future energy needs must include nuclear power. We are sitting on the last percentage of the uranium that we are happily exporting to other nuclear players. How do you reconcile us not at least having that discussion?
PM: Well firstly in Australia we have a whole range of energy options which the countries you just mentioned don't have. Seriously, this is the largest coal exporting country in the world. We have a vast array of renewable energy possibilities here in Australia. Because of the vast possibilities of sunlight, why are we investing so significantly in solar, and wind and tidal and the vast array of LNG possibilities including bringing that on shore.
That is what Australia has. If I was to put that question to the President of France, the Chancellor of Germany or the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, they couldn't answer like that. So why do we sell uranium to them? It's because they don't have the same range of energy options that we do. That is why these two approaches are entirely consistent and therefore, that's the approach we will be adopting into the future as well.
CARY: So no discussion at all?
PM: Well, we've just got all these other energy options.
CARY: This is the cleanest, demonstrably the cleanest.
PM: If you want to go into the economics, in this country of the nuclear option, I would draw a series of reports to your attention about one, how much it would cost, leaving aside all the environmental consequences in terms of Australia and how you store waste, and all the rest of it. The cost of nuclear power, the fact that is has to be proximate to water, which means put close to the coast, or near to water outlets or river outlets.
And thirdly of course, the challenge which also lies in terms of how much therefore, of our total energy generation could actually come from it. And even the modelling done by the previous Government when they were banging the nuclear drum suggested it would be very modest indeed.
Our challenge is investing in clean coal. We have a clean coal initiative as a Government. We have been doing this globally through the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, we are investing in renewable energy, we have increased the renewable energy target by 20 per cent. We are investing also in the largest solar project the world will see in terms of generation - something up to around 1000 megawatts. This is the future for Australia. Other countries will reach their own decisions.
CARY: You nearly need to go, just before you do, well done on the initiatives related to organ donation - Donate Life, doing great work, great to see your support of that. You would say about organ donation?
PM: Donate Life, you know, if you are listening to the program this morning, it is really important to sit down with your wife, your husband, your partner, your kids, and decide what you would do if one of your family was in a tragic accident and the decision came about organ donation.
In Australia something like only 54 per cent of the people who sign up for organ donation, the actual retrieval actually occurs because families object. It should be taken as a family decision. Please go to the website, Donate Life, look at what you can do. Therese and I have signed up, I think as the first family to do so in the country, did so at the Lodge last weekend.
And I would just recommend it to all Australians. 1,700 people in Australia today are on organ waiting lists for transplant and we are losing several of those each week because there are not enough donations.
CARY: Well, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, with whom we will speak the day before the Melbourne Cup next year.
PM: Thanks very much Greg, and it has been a 'Shocking' day.
(ENDS)


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, today signed a funding agreement with the University of Queensland that will see the people of the Brisbane Southside region benefit from a $7.5 million GP Super Clinic.
The University of Queensland in collaboration with Mater Health Services and Medihealth Meadowbrook will establish the GP Super Clinic under a hub and spoke model.
Two Super Clinic hubs will be established at Annerley and Logan with two complementary satellite sites still being negotiated for the broader Brisbane Southside region.
The Brisbane Southside GP Super Clinic will provide integrated, team-based health care tailored to the needs of the local community. Both Super Clinic hubs will provide three distinct streams:
     * A chronic disease management service;
     * A mental health service; and
     * A musculoskeletal pain and palliative care service.
Services will be bulk billed for concession card holders, children under 16 and those over 65.
The GP Super Clinic will have a strong focus on supporting the future primary care workforce. It is anticipated that student clinics will be incorporated as the GP Super Clinic develops, as part of educating future health professionals.
The signing of the funding agreement occurred at the Mater Hospital in Brisbane, where the Prime Minister and the Minister for Health and Aging Nicola Roxon met with local medical practitioners to hear their local priorities to improve the health system and discuss the recommendations of the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission.
The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission report made recommendations for system-wide changes to Australian health care.
As part of the Government's health reforms to date, $275 million has been allocated over five years, from 2007-08, to establish 36 GP Super Clinics around the nation.
The first operational GP Super Clinic commenced at Ballan, Victoria, in mid-September and early services have commenced at five locations (Southern Lake Macquarie-Morisset, Palmerston, Devonport, Blue Mountains and Warnervale).
All Australians are also invited to contribute to the national debate on our health system via the yourHealth.gov.au website - and full copies of the reports can be found there. 


FAINE: Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Jon. I'm talking to people on the airwaves because I'll be overseas next week and I won't be talking to people on the airwaves. There you go.
FAINE: The opinion polls though, and your sudden availability for the media. Surely the two are linked. 8 percent drop in the polls. What do you think has happened?
PM: Well on the first point Jon. I talk to the media as of when my timetable permits and I've certainly been talking to the media a lot prior to the publication you referred to earlier this week. On the second point is that, in my job as Prime Minister, is to govern in the national interest. That means making difficult decisions. Whether that's in relation to the economy or whether it's in relation to border protection, I'll continue to do so in the national interest. As far as decisions taken in recent times, I fully accept the fact that some of these are not going to be terribly popular with people but my job is not to be in the popularity stakes, it's simply to get on and make the right decisions and we will continue to do so.
FAINE: On the Oceanic Viking and the standoff off the coast of Indonesia. The costs are soaring and you said we have infinite patience. Will these people still be there in a week? A month? A year? for how long?
PM: I've always said we have infinite patience, as the Indonesians have said. Each of these vessels is dealt with in terms of its own individual circumstances. Some are more complex than others. You simply deal with each challenge as it arises. Remember also that in the last 12 months we've had something like, I think, 81 interruptions of vessels coming to Australia. We've had, of course we're dealing with the consequences which flow from the civil war in Sri Lanka 260,000 people displaced. Tens of thousands going to Europe and to North America and on top of that, you also have of course a number, more than a thousand or so, who've made their way into Australian waters as well-
FAINE: -Is there no deadline-
PM: (inaudible) challenges on their merits as well
FAINE: Is there no deadline to this standoff Prime Minister? Surely you can't-
PM: Well we'll continue to work through each of the details with this as you would expect as we do with every vessel. We've dealt with-
FAINE: -it doesn't seem to be working.
PM: We've dealt with different circumstances recently arising from the tragic sinking of a vessel off Cocos Island. That's required a different response. This vessel requires a different response. That is actually part and parcel of the daily business of government in dealing with the difficult challenges of border protection. Remember in the past these have confronted Australian governments for the last 30 years and they will be around into the future as well and there is no neat, easy, one-size-fits-all response to each individual vessel. We just take it on its merits and the circumstances which pertain to this and, this of course, the vessel that you're talking about, came about as a result of a search and rescue operation conducted in Indonesia's search and rescue zone and at Indonesia's request.
FAINE: But you're not appealing to anybody if you had taken these people onto Christmas Island, you would at least have satisfied those who think we should have a more open compassionate approach. If you simply refused to have anything to do with them you would have satisfied those who say we should shut the borders. This way you're not pleasing anyone.
PM: My job, can I say Jon, is to act in the national interest and you're going to have people who attack government decisions when it relates to border protection from the far Right, who presumably are arguing that we should return children to behind razor wire and people from the far Left who presumably argue that we shouldn't have an orderly migration program at all, or no border protection regime at all.
Our job is to conduct a tough, responsible, fair policy. Hardline on people smugglers, humane on asylum seekers. That's what we've been doing since we formed government. That was the policy we took to the previous election. We've implemented each of the elements of that policy since the election. We've done so in relation to each of the challenges of border protection which have arisen over the last couple of years and we'll continue to do so into the future.
FAINE: Can you call in more favours from the Indonesians? The way you did at the beginning of this standoff.
PM: Well, can I say, Jon, the right thing to do, because this is a global and regional problem, is to continue to obtain the cooperation of the Malaysians, the Indonesians, where possible the Sri Lankans and other regional governments. That's why for some years now, in fact four or five years, we've had a process underway called the Bali process which provides for a region wide cooperation. Specifically with Indonesia, cooperation on people smuggling is outlined in the terms of the Lombok treaty. These are perfectly normal sets of consultations which go on between governments on the difficult challenge of people smuggling and as far as people smugglers themselves are concerned, what we've had in the last 12 months is some 15 people smugglers convicted in Australian courts. Since last September some 43 people charged with these offenses currently being prosecuted.
FAINE: And that's all good, but there's nothing normal about one of our biggest ships, the Oceanic Viking, full of asylum seekers literally marooned offshore from Indonesia in a standoff. That's not normal.
PM: Can I just say, in times past and times in the future there will be, as I said, unique sets of challenges and we will continue to work our way through each of these as they present themselves. Any government of this country, acting in the national interest, taking difficult decisions on border protection will be doing this on a continuing basis. We are wrestling with challenges here which governments around the world are wrestling with as well. If you've got a quarter of a million people in Sri Lanka displaced from a violent civil war, tens of thousands heading out to, as I said, Germany, France, Canada, the United States and South-East Asia and we're wrestling with one thousand or so plus who've made it to Australian waters. Our challenge is to deal with each on its merits and each according to its circumstances and the boat that you talk about, of course arose, because of the circumstances of a search and rescue operation in the Indonesian search and rescue zone. So our, we're working very closely with the Indonesians as you would expect and the international office of migration and the UNHCR officials are working with the individuals on the vessel.
FAINE: All right-
PM: As I've said we will work though it patiently and calmly as people would expect of any Australian Government.
FAINE: Well we will all wait to see if there is any breakthrough. To turn to Fiji Prime Minister. How does it help the situation to kick out the Fijian representative in Canberra in retaliation for our representative being kicked out of Suva?
PM: The bottom line is, Jon, you cannot send anything less than a clear cut message to the people of Fiji, the Fijian regime and more widely the people of the South Pacific that the Governments of Australia and New Zealand will not simply stand idly by while this Fijian regime fundamentally breaches its democratic principles. This is a military coup which occurred in Fiji, you have the suspension, in effect, of a constitution. A refusal on the part of Bainimarama to hold fresh elections. You have the wholesale sacking of the judiciary at one point in this process. You also have extraordinary bans on press freedom. Anyone who thinks you can deal with such a regime on a normal basis is, I don't think, in touch with basic democratic principles. What's out broader concern here? To make sure that what's occurred in Fiji, with this military regime, is not in any way seen as normal across the many other island states of the South Pacific and as chairman of the Pacific Island forum I take that responsibility seriously.
FAINE: And what do you do next in the event that sending this message seems to have no effect?
PM: Well, at the end of the day, Jon, the question about the future political shape of Fiji is a matter for the Fijian people themselves. But we simply are not going to stand idly by and convey a sense of normality about a regime which is on the slippery slope towards the incremental abolition of all forms of press freedom for example. The attacks which have occurred in terms of the basic freedoms of journalists and the press in Fiji. What's happened most recently with this ANU professor who apparently has been given his marching orders from Fiji. You cannot simply assume that you can normalise relations with such a regime because it is important and, fundamentally important, that as a family of democracies in the South Pacific we stand up for these basic principles. This regime does not. Therefore there are not normal dealings with it.
FAINE: Kevin Rudd, you've appointed Peter Costello to be a trustee of the future fund and within 24 hours he and some long standing friends have announced the creation of a new merchant bank called BKK partners that's come out of Goldman Sachs JBWere. It seems you've resurrected his corporate prospects by appointing him to the future fund.
PM: Well I'm sure Mr Costello would have been proceeding and prosecuting his own commercial negotiations with colleagues in the private sector for some time. That's a matter for him.
FAINE: But as soon as you appoint him to the Fund he's useful again in corporate life. Is that the way it works? You do favours for people in parliament-
PM: Can I just say, Jon, first of all, as far as terms of appointments of the future fund are concerned, I'm advised that the various members of the future fund board of guardians, quite a large number of them from times past, have also had other direct commercial involvement in the financial sector. There's nothing unusual about that, in fact it's the sort of expertise that you harness.
FAINE: But you've been critical in the past about politicians immediately upon leaving parliament using their connections, their networks and their knowledge of their own portfolio to further their own post-parliamentary career and now you're pretty much assisting Mr Costello to do the same thing.
PM: With respect Jon I think that's drawing a very long bow. We have been the government for two years, it's been two years since Mr Costello was Treasurer. Far be it for me to go out there and defend each and every one of his individual commercial decisions from this point but I think, you know, it's been two years since he occupied the Treasury benches and every individual has a right to pursue their own career.
FAINE: You vigorously criticised his management of the economy when he was Treasurer. Now you're saying he's one of the ideal people to look after the biggest taxpayer-owned fund in the country.
PM: Well Jon, the bottom line is this: the view in Australian politics that we are permanently divided between two irreconcilable tribes, I think, results in us losing a whole lot of talent particularly in post-political life to the overall long-term needs of the nation.
People put on their political boxing gloves throughout their active political career and they do as we're expected to do which is to engage in the hard fight for political ideas for the nation's future. When they choose to retire from that, whether it's Kim Beazley, whether it's Brendan Nelson, whether it's Peter Costello, the judgement I take as Prime Minister is that we should be harnessing all the talents that are available for the nation in terms of our nations long term needs. I've done it in the past, will continue to do so in the future, and I think it's time we actually got over the period where we thought everyone on the other side of politics and post political life are sons and daughters of the antichrist. I mean life's a bit more complex than that. Let's get beyond it.
FAINE: There are people in the Labor party though who think, in fact, that what you're doing is rewarding your enemies in a way they would never reward you or anyone else in the Labor movement.
PM: We'll there will always be criticism of these sorts of appointments. I go back to the response to an earlier question in this interviewer today, Jon, which is my job is to, as Prime Minister, is to govern in the national interest and if there attacks on decisions which come from the ranks of the Left of Australian politics, well so be it. But my job is to take decisions in the long term national interest and as far as Mr Costello's concerned, he's had some considerable experience obviously when he was Treasurer over 12 years. Obviously there were great disagreements between us and him and his management of the economy but you cannot therefore, as a result of that, conclude that he has no talents or ability to provide - and what we're talking about is people being able to act in national, in service of the nation, in their post political life.
I don't intent to, as Prime Minister, return to the days of 1996 to 2008 or 2007 when it seemed a rule of thumb on the part of my predecessor Mr Howard, that anyone who had previously worked with the Australian Labor Government should somehow be permanently persona non grata for work on behalf of the Australian nation. As I said I think we have to get beyond all that.
FAINE: Well we'll see if they return the favour when next they are in office. Just finally-
PM: (laughs) that's entirely a matter for them. My job is to act as Prime Minister now for however long that happens to be.
FAINE: Understood. Understood. Finally, Kevin Rudd, tomorrow is the 10th anniversary of the defeat of the referendum for Australia to become a republic. Do you intend to go to the people at the next election with a promise of reviving the process?
PM: Well first of all I think with the challenges of the global economic crisis, and we are not out of the woods yet at all on that score, and you would have seen yesterday's retail data for Australia indicating that we still have a long, long way to go. First priority which people expect me to attach my energies to is to manage the crisis and to manage Australia's longer term recovery.
Then there are a whole range of other priorities some of which we've been speaking of this morning. I said prior to the last election that on the question of the republic it would not be a priority for any first term that we occupied in office. It would be something that we attended to later if the government is re-elected and that's very much the position I still have.
FAINE: I'm grateful to you for your time which we've used to its full extent. Thank you this morning.
PM: Thanks very much Jon.
(ENDS)


KELLY: Prime Minister, welcome to breakfast.
PM: Good morning.
KELLY: Prime Minister, the standoff onboard the Oceanic Viking has dragged into the 19th day now. Beyond, patience, what's your policy?
PM: Can I say, firstly, in terms of the introduction you just played, the bottom line is our policy, when it comes to challenge of border protection, is hardline when it comes to people smugglers and humane in dealing with asylum seekers. That is the responsible approach that we took to the last election, including how we would reform border protection policy and immigration policy. That is the policy we have implemented since that time, and we've not changed.
KELLY: Some say a humane response to the Oceanic Viking, then, would just be to bring the people to Christmas Island.
PM: Can I say what we have done in relation to that particular vessel is respond to a distressed vessel at sea, and as a consequence of that, it was in the Indonesian search-and-rescue area. Secondly, the Indonesians had no vessel to send to it. Thirdly, they therefore requested Australia, which had a vessel nearby.
Having intervened, consistent with our international maritime safety obligations, we then took the vessel to the nearest port in Indonesia at the invitation of Indonesian authorities. What we are now engaged in of course, as we are often engaged in, in terms of the complex matters with asylum seekers, is a continued discussion with the Indonesian authorities and others about the proper processing of these individuals.
None of these matters are simple. They are always complex, but we intend to work our way calmly and methodically through this over time, and dealing also with the fact that we have the outflow across the world and to the region from a civil war in Sri Lanka which occurred only three to six months ago which has seen 260,000 people displaced in that island, and tens of thousands of people seeking refuge in other parts of the world - in India, in Europe, in North America, and, of course, in South-East Asia and Australia.
It's important, to see the challenge that we face in its proper context.
KELLY: Back to the Oceanic Viking, what exactly is the holdup? Specifically.
PM: Well, when you're dealing complex individual discussions involving the International Office of Migration and the UNHCR and the Indonesian authorities, each of these things take time. And of course we have somewhat unique circumstances here because of the search-and-rescue operation which preceded it. Now, these things are complicated, but I could say while there is legitimate and understandable debate concerning this particular vessel, at the same time, we are dealing with challenges right across the board, including a significant, increased outflow from Sri Lanka because of the civil war.
KELLY: Sure, but the Oceanic Viking is your policy in action, your policy about heading off asylum seekers and processing them in Indonesia or Malaysia. If you can't get these people off the boat, your policy is a failure.
PM: Our policy in action, Fran, deals with one - the 81 interruptions of vessels which have sought to leave either Malaysia or Indonesia or Sri Lanka in recent times. Our policy in action lies in the 43 people smuggling organisations who are currently being prosecuted before the Australian courts and the 15 people who have been convicted.
Our policy in action lies in the fact that we have a 25 percent increase in the maritime and air surveillance assets we have, and the fact that virtually all vessels heading towards Australian waters have been interdicted at sea and taken to Christmas Island for proper processing, consistent with UNHCR principles.
That's what we've been dealing with when it comes to the implementation of a policy since this Government has been elected, the policy we took, in detail, to the last election and one we have implemented consistently since then.
KELLY: As it stands now, the policy seems to have resulted in two boatloads of people who won't get off their boats. Have you spoken again to the Indonesian President, about the deal you had over the Oceanic Viking in particular?
PM: The concern, in terms of this individual vessel was the particular humanitarian circumstances of a vessel in distress within the Indonesian maritime safety and search-and-rescue authority. That is the circumstances which pertain to this vessel.
More recently we've been dealing with another vessel, with tragic circumstances, some 700km north-west of Cocos Island, and therefore each of these vessels must be dealt with on its merits and the individual circumstances concerning it. We will continue to implement a responsible, balanced policy when it comes to dealing with the challenge of people smugglers, which has long existed.
Let us not forget, Fran, in the period of the previous Government we had nearly 250 vessels arrive in this country with some nearly 15,000 asylum seekers. We also had the failed Pacific Solution, which this Government has abolished. We had children behind razor wire, which this Government has abolished. We also had the failed temporary protection visas, which this Government has abolished - and all those changes done with the complete support of the now-Opposition, then Government, after the last election.
And I just add to this, that when it comes to a criticism of the implementation of a responsible border protection policy, which will always be attacked from the far Right, who presumably want children back behind razor wire, or from people on the Left, who presumably argue that there should be no orderly migration or border protection arrangements at all, that we will always, therefore, come under attack. That is fair and proper in a democracy. That will be the case into the future. My job is to take these difficult decisions in the national interest and that's what we intend to do into the future as well.
KELLY: Prime Minister, can I just ask you simply, are there any circumstances under which these 78 people could be brought to Christmas Island?
PM: These individuals are being properly processed using the IOM and the UNHCR officials who are currently in Indonesia because, I simply go back to the point, the Indonesian search-and-rescue authorities approved the Australian vessel coming ashore once the Australian vessel had intervened at their request to deal with the vessel on the high seas. The challenge here-
KELLY: Sure, but we seem to have reached an impasse. Are there any circumstances under which -
PM: The challenge here is to work your way calmly and methodically through each individual case. We will continue to do so with this and every other challenge which lies down the track.
And I'll just say this to you, Fran, we have had these vessels arriving in this country for the last 30 years. It will continue to be a challenge into the future. Each one has to be dealt with calmly and methodically, but this Government will continue to make these sorts of decisions in the national interest. We have confidence in our officials working on these matters, as we do with the professionalism of our Customs staff, our Navy officers, and all our professional men and women, in dealing with very complex circumstances, and therefore this one will be handled properly, calmly and methodically, and as I've said and have said before, the Indonesian Foreign Minister rightly said a week or so ago they have great patience in dealing with each of these matters. So does the Australian Government. That's what we intend to do for the period ahead, as well.
KELLY: The Indonesian Foreign Minister also says this is Australia's problem, they're on an Australian boat. Are you ruling out these could people could ultimately be brought to Christmas Island?
PM: These individuals are being processed in the Indonesian port. That is at the request of the Indonesians and that is how it's going to continue into the future until these matters are properly dealt with. Therefore, can I just say to you that with each individual vessel, depending on the circumstance which surround the way in which that vessel is interdicted, the cooperation with the relevant government, whether it's the Malaysian Government, the Indonesian Government or the Sri Lankan Government, we will deal with each practical set of circumstances based on the challenges which arise from that vessel.
That's what we've done with each of the vessels which have sought to come here and I emphasise the fact that we have had 81 successful interruptions, and part of the reason for that is the deep concern which the Government has had throughout - prior to there being any public debate on these matters - about people smugglers putting people onto vessels and then placing those people's lives at risk, which, tragically, we've seen recently in the Indian Ocean. That is why we are engaged actively with the law enforcement authorities and the security authorities of Indonesia, Malaysia and Sri Lanka, seeking to deal with this problem.
But again, to put it in its context, if you've got 250,000 Sri Lankans displaced within the final stages of a conflict in Sri Lanka and you've had tens of thousands of those individuals from Sri Lanka already seeking a refuge in Germany, in France, in Canada, in the United States, in various parts of South-East Asia, and in Australia some 1,000 - 2,000 have headed in this direction.
This is part of the global reality that we face, and this has been the case for so many countries around the world. We will continue to honour out international obligations and maintain a strong border protection policy, while I recognise fully this will be a continued matter for public debate. And for people criticising it from either the Right or the Left, my job is to act in the national interest -
KELLY: (inaudible) Prime Minister, a couple of quick questions on another issue. The ETS - how are the negotiations going with the opposition on the emissions trading scheme? Is an agreement within reach?
PM: On the question of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the Government as you know, entered good faith negotiations with the Opposition some weeks ago. Those negotiations continue. The most disappointing thing during that debate was the statement only some days ago by Senator Minchin, the Leader of Opposition in the Senate. He seemed to infer that whatever agreement might be reached by the Opposition and the Government, that as far as Senator Minchin is concerned, they would vote it down. I find that confusing.
Nonetheless, I don't think we the Government, will be backing away from good faith negotiations with the Opposition. The reason is, we need to get an outcome on the Carbon 
Pollution Reduction Scheme for Australia, for business certainty, as well as doing our bit as far as the global effort is concerned on green house gas emissions. And also to provide a necessary platform for Australia to continue to take action at home and, at the same time, work towards a successful conclusion at Copenhagen. These are all hard and difficult challenges -
KELLY: Will you be going to Copenhagen next month? You yourself?
PM: I said to the Danish Prime Minister, I am prepared to travel to Copenhagen. I am happy to travel to Copenhagen. At the end of the day it will depend on the judgement of the Danish Prime Minister, as chairman of the conference, as to whether he regards it as productive, and positive and useful for heads of government to attend.
KELLY: OK
PM: On that matter, on that matter, in the course of the last week, myself and various other heads of government, as friends of the chair, have participated in several video conference links with the Danish Prime Minister, again late last night here in Australia, working our way through, a very complex set of negotiations.
We need to see progress at Copenhagen. These are tough and hard negotiations. But in terms of Australia being, in this country, one of the hottest and driest continents on earth, where the impacts of climate change will be felt first and hardest. We the Australian Government intend to exert every effort at home through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme negotiations and in Copenhagen to bring about the best and most effective agreement possible.
KELLY: And just very briefly Prime Minister. You've appointed Peter Costello to the board of the Future Fund. He's taken a job now in the corporate sector. Is this a conflict of interest? Are you worried about this at all?
PM: We believe that all those matters concerning employment and any associated conflict are properly handled by our relevant public service authorities. I've said before about Peter Costello's appointment, we need to get to a stage in Australian politics that when people decide to hang up the boxing gloves and to make another contribution to Australian public life they should be given the opportunity to do so with their talents matched to the needs that the nation has.
So I welcome Peter Costello's appointment in this area, on the Future Fund. Similarly with Kim Beazley in the United States and with Brendan Nelson in Brussels and we'll continue to make appropriate appointments into the future. We need to be a Government and a nation which harvests all of our talents, given the future challenges we have.
KELLY: Prime Minister it's nice to have you on breakfast. Thanks very much for joining us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


The Prime Minister today announced that the Gold Coast has received approval for 543 new homes worth $144 million under Stage Two of the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan Social Housing Initiative.
This brings the total number of new social housing dwellings on the Gold Coast to 571 homes, worth $152 million, following the announcement of Stage One projects earlier this year.
The 28 new homes under Stage One have started construction and are expected to be completed by the end of 2009.
The Prime Minister made the announcement during his address to the Master Builders' Australia annual national conference at the Gold Coast.
Across the country, the Government estimates that the social housing component of the stimulus plan is supporting more than 15,000 jobs.
This new investment is one part of the Rudd Government's program to increase the stock of affordable homes in Australia by 80,000 by mid-2012.
For Queensland, the Social Housing Initiative involves 4,038 new properties at a cost of $1.085 billion.
The stimulus plan also includes a $5 million investment in maintenance and repair work for 1,217 homes on the Gold Coast. Renovation and repainting jobs increase the quality of the housing stock and lengthen its life.
Locations, numbers of dwellings and funding under the Social Housing Initiative are current and are subject to variations during the tender process.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you Michael and thanks to all the supporters of the Lowy Institute for joining us today.
As you know, I attended the Major Economies Forum in L'Aquila in July; I was recently at the G20 Leaders meeting in Pittsburgh; and next week I will travel to the APEC Leaders meeting in Singapore.
At each of these meetings, and in constant bilateral conversations being conducted by national leaders around the world, the common thematic is: What does our nation, what does our region and what does the world do to respond to climate change, the greatest long term threat to us all?
As APEC leaders gather in Singapore next week, this is a critical question.
The Asia Pacific region will play the key role in leading the world into economic recovery. Similarly, our region must play a central role if we are to forge a global consensus on tackling climate change.
This afternoon I want to set out the views that I will be reflecting to other world leaders in the days and weeks ahead, in bilateral conversations and in forums such as APEC, leading up to the Copenhagen summit.
Australia and the world today stand at critical junctures in our national and global strategies to tackle climate change.
It is around 20 days until the Senate votes on the Australian Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
20 days until the most important vote on our national strategy to tackle climate change.
20 days away from the vote on the Government's cap and trade emissions trading system which both sides of politics have recognised as the lowest cost way to tackle climate change.
And we are just 31 days away from the Copenhagen Conference of Parties - an historic moment to forge a global deal to put a global price on carbon.
Today we are approaching the crossroads. Both these policies are reaching crunch time.
When you strip away all the political rhetoric, all the political excuses, there are two stark choices - action or inaction. The resolve of the Australian Government is clear - we choose action, and we do so because Australia's fundamental economic and environmental interests lie in action.
Action now. Not action delayed.
As one of the hottest and driest continents on earth, Australia's environment and economy will be among the hardest and fastest hit by climate change if we do not act now. The scientific evidence from the CSIRO and other expert bodies have outlined the implications for Australia, in the absence of national and global action on climate change:
     * Temperatures in Australia rising by around five degrees by the end of the century.
     * By 2070, up to 40 per cent more drought months are projected in eastern Australia and up to 80 per cent more in south-western Australia.
     * A fall in irrigated agricultural production in the Murray Darling Basin of over 90 per cent by 2100.
     * Storm surges and rising sea levels - putting at risk over 700,000 homes and businesses around our coastlines, with insurance companies warning that preliminary estimates of the value of property in Australia exposed to the risk of land being inundated or eroded by rising sea levels range from $50 billion to $150 billion.
     * Our Gross National Product dropping by nearly two and a half per cent through the course of this century from the devastation climate change would wreak on our infrastructure alone.
The Government took a plan to tackle climate change to the last election, to tackle the risks climate change poses to our planet, and especially to the health, lifestyle and livelihoods of our children.
That plan included two fundamental parts:
     * First, a domestic plan of action to reduce Australia's carbon pollution, including:
         * Expanding the Renewable Energy Target to 20 per cent by 2020 (and subsequently directly investing over $2 billion in renewable energy, including investment in large scale solar generating capacity that will be three times larger than the world's current largest project).
         * A national energy efficiency strategy to reduce the energy that we can consume, and undertaking the largest investment in energy efficiency ever seen in this country.
         * A Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme that will increase the cost of carbon over time and facilitate a transition to a low carbon pollution economy.
     * The second part of our strategy is participation in global action to tackle climate change, including:
         * ratifying the Kyoto Protocol;
         * participating in global technology transfers - including Australian leadership in a global coalition to develop carbon capture and storage through the Australia-initiated Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute; and
         * strong engagement towards a new post-Kyoto global agreement .
This was the platform we took to the Australian people at the election. This is the program of action we have been prosecuting over the past two years. Yet the cornerstone of this program of action, the CPRS, still lies stymied in the Senate.
Australia has certainly not been alone in our endeavours to tackle global climate change. At the same time, around the world we have seen nations of every political stripe take concrete action to work towards legislation in this critical area - actions which have been slowly building towards coordinated international action to tackle climate change. And most nations have been engaged in the multilateral process - through the Bali Roadmap two years ago, through the 14th Conference of the Parties in Poznan, Poland last year, and the intensifying global negotiations leading up to the 15th Conference of Parties in Copenhagen this year.
Today, the culmination of this domestic and global action is in sight. Much progress has been made, but, the truth is that there is still a long way to go. In fact, the hardest part of our journey is ahead of us over the next 31 days.
This is a profoundly important time for our nation, for our world and for our planet.
In Australia, we must pass our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme - to deliver certainty for business at home and to play our part abroad in any global agreement to bring greenhouse gases down.
President Obama in the United States is also working hard so that he can take strong commitments to Copenhagen. And let us never forget that in the US, as in Australia, under both our respective previous governments, zero action was taken on bringing in cap and trade schemes meaning that the governments that replaced them began with a zero start.
Other countries are striving to build domestic political momentum in their own countries to take strong commitments into the global deal.
The challenge we face, and others around the world face, is to build momentum and overcome domestic political constraints.
The truth is this is hard, because the climate change skeptics, the climate change deniers, the opponents of climate change action are active in every country.
They are a minority. They are powerful. And invariably they are driven by vested interests.
Powerful enough to so far block domestic legislation in Australia, powerful enough to so far slow down the passage of legislation through the US Congress. And ultimately - by limiting the ambition of national climate change commitments - they are powerful enough to threaten a deal on global climate change both in Copenhagen and beyond.
The opponents of action on climate change fall into one of three categories.
     * First, the climate science deniers.
     * Second, those that pay lip service to the science and the need to act on climate change but oppose every practicable mechanism being proposed to bring about that action.
     * Third, those in each country that believe their country should wait for others to act first.
Together, these groups, alive in every major country including Australia, constitute a powerful global force for inaction, and they are particularly entrenched in a range of conservative parties around the world.
As we approach Copenhagen, these three groups of climate skeptics are quite literally holding the world to ransom, provoking fear campaigns in every country they can, blocking or delaying domestic legislation in every country they can, with the objective of slowing and if possible destroying the momentum towards a global deal on climate change.
As we approach the Copenhagen conference these groups of climate change deniers face a moment of truth, and the truth is this: we will need to work much harder to reach an agreement in Copenhagen because these advocates of inaction are holding back domestic commitments, and are in turn holding back global commitments on climate change.
It is time to be totally blunt about the agenda of the climate change skeptics in all their colours - some more sophisticated than others.
It is to destroy the CPRS at home, and it is to destroy agreed global action on climate change abroad, and our children's fate - and our grandchildren's fate - will lie entirely with them.
It's time to remove any polite veneer from this debate. The stakes are that high. 
The first category of those opposed to action is the vocal group of conservatives who do not accept the scientific consensus. This group believes the science is inconclusive and does not provide an evidentiary basis for anthropogenic climate change.
In Australia, before the 2007 election, this group was thought to be relatively small. There appeared - for a time - to be bipartisan consensus on the need for action on climate change. In recent times, this bipartisan support has frayed.
As one Liberal Member of Parliament said to Phil Coorey of the Sydney Morning Herald last year:
"[at the last election we supported an ETS because] we were staring at an electoral abyss. We had to pretend we cared."
(SMH, 28 JULY 2008)
More recently that pretence has been increasingly cast aside. Would-be Liberal leader Tony Abbott said in July this year that "the science ... is contentious to say the least". (27 July 2009)
Liberal Senator Cory Bernardi said:
"I remain unconvinced about the need for an ETS given that carbon dioxide is vital for life on earth".
Liberal Senator Alan Eggleston said: 
"Levels of carbon dioxide have risen in the world, but whether or not this is the sole cause or just a contributor to climate change is, I think, unanswered." 
(11 AUGUST 2009)
Liberal Senate leader Nick Minchin said this year: 
"CO2 is not by any stretch of the imagination a pollutant... This whole extraordinary scheme is based on the as yet unproven assertion that anthropogenic emissions of CO2 are the main driver of global warming." 
(11 AUGUST 2009)
Alternative Liberal leader Joe Hockey - who knows better - has been drawn into the same sort of doublespeak, remarking on the Today Show in August:
"Look, climate change is real Karl, you know whether it is made by human beings or not that is open to dispute." 
(12 AUGUST 2009)
Even the leader of the Opposition, once Minister for the Environment, Malcolm Turnbull, has flirted with this doublespeak, telling Alan Jones on 2GB:
"I think most people have at least some doubts about the science." 
(19 JUNE 2009)
The tentacles of the climate change skeptics reach deep into the ranks of the Liberal Party, and once you add the National Party it's plan the skeptics and the deniers are a major force.
Climate sceptics are also a powerful political lobby in the United States.
Republican National Committee Chairman Michael Steel said on 6 March 2009:
"We are cooling. We are not warming. The warming you see out there, the supposed warming, and I am using my finger quotation marks here, is part of the cooling process."
House Minority Leader John Boehner said on April 19 2009:
"The idea that carbon dioxide is a carcinogen that is harmful to our environment is almost comical. Every time we exhale, we exhale carbon dioxide."
Republican Congressman John Shimkus said on 25 March 2009:
"If we decrease the use of carbon dioxide, are we not taking away plant food from the atmosphere?"
The legion of climate change skeptics are active across the world, and they happily play with our children's future.
The clock is ticking for the planet, but the climate change skeptics simply do not care. The vested interests at work are simply too great.
It's been more than 30 years since the first World Climate Conference called on governments to guard against potential climate hazards.
It's been 20 years since the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was formed and produced its first report.
17 years ago, in 1992, the international community acknowledged the importance of tackling climate change at the Rio Earth Summit and created the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
And the most recent IPCC scientific conclusion in 2007 was that "warming of the climate system is unequivocal" and the "increase in global average temperatures since the mid 20th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations."
This is the conclusion of 4,000 scientists appointed by governments from virtually every country in the world, and the term "very likely" is defined in the scientific conclusion of this report as being 90 per cent probable.
Attempts by politicians in this country and others to present what is an overwhelming global scientific consensus as little more than an unfolding debate, with two sides evenly represented in a legitimate scientific argument, are nothing short of intellectually dishonest. They are a political attempt to subvert what is now a longstanding scientific consensus, an attempt to twist the agreed science in the direction of a predetermined political agenda to kill climate change action.
It reminds me of the efforts of the smoking lobby decades ago as they tried for years to politically subvert by so-called scientific means that there was any link between smoking and lung cancer.
Put more simply: these climate change sceptics around the world would be laughable if they were not so politically powerful - particularly in the ranks of conservative parties.
The second group of do-nothing climate change skeptics are those who purport to accept the scientific consensus, but in the next breath are unwilling to support any of the practicable plans of action that would actually do something about climate change. This group plays lip service to the climate change science but when push comes to shove refuse to support climate change action. In Australia, these naysayers have successfully blocked the development of an emissions trading scheme for more than a decade.
After 12 years of inaction under the previous government, this government has worked to build a national consensus around our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We took the concept to the people at the 2007 election, and since then we have methodically, clearly and comprehensively worked towards passage of our scheme.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper was released on 16 June 2008.
The Garnaut Climate Change Review was released on 30 September 2008.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme White Paper was released on 15 December 2008.
The Draft Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation was released in March.
There have been numerous Senate Inquiries.
There have also been numerous industry consultations.
As of May 2009, the Government had built wide support for action on climate through a carbon pollution reduction scheme.
There was broad business, environmental and community support from:
     * The Business Council of Australia
     * The Australian Industry group
     * The Climate Institute
     * The Australian Conservation Foundation
     * The World Wildlife Fund
     * The Australian Council of Social Services representing lower income Australians.
Today, after so many reports, reviews, consultations, not to mention the small matter of an election - the overwhelming need for Australia to tackle the great challenge of our generation is being frustrated by the do-nothing climate change skeptics.
As recently as last year, the Leader of the Opposition was emphatic in his support for an emissions trading scheme. He said it was the "central mechanism" in the fight against climate change.
Speaking at the National Press Club in May last year, he stated:
"The Emissions Trading Scheme is the central mechanism to decarbonise our economy." 
(21 May 2008)
A few days later, he said: 
"The biggest element in the fight against climate change has to be the emissions-trading scheme." 
(HANSARD - 26 MAY 2008)
But still today, after so many reports and consultations, the Liberal Party, the National Party and other opponents of action raise objections to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Their objections fall into three categories:
     * Some argue that the cost is too high in terms of its impact on our economy.
     * Others argue that the cost is too high in terms of its impact on households.
     * And others object to the system of global emissions trading because they believe it will unjustifiably transfer money and power from rich countries to poor countries.
Let us take each of these in turn.
First is the cost to our economy and jobs.
This has been a constant theme of the Liberal and National Parties' attacks on the CPRS. Mr Turnbull said the CPRS "is guaranteed to slow our economic recovery, cost us jobs."
And the de facto leader of the National Party, Barnaby Joyce, refers to the emissions trading scheme as the "employment termination scheme" - whereas I thought any self-respecting National Party leader would be out there standing up for farmers facing 40 to 80 per cent more drought in the future, rather than betraying them.
The facts about the impact of unmitigated climate change on the one hand and the CPRS on the other tell a very different story, but that eternal motto of the Liberal and National Parties is never let the facts stand in the road of a good fear campaign - whether it's debt, border security or climate change.
Here are the facts.
Treasury modelling done in 2008 demonstrates Australia can continue to achieve strong trend economic growth while making significant cuts in emissions through the CPRS. Treasury modelling also demonstrates that all major employment sectors grow over the years to 2020 - substantially increasing employment from today's levels. Treasury modelling also projects that clean industries will create sustainable jobs of the future - in fact by 2050 the renewable electricity sector will be 30 times larger than it is today.
Another element of the Liberal and National fear campaign about the design of the CPRS is that it will impose unmanageable cost on households.
Again, Senator Joyce - fearmonger in chief on climate change, he who therefore betrays the real interests of Australian farmers - puts the position of the Liberal and National parties as follows:
"If you live in a cave with a candle you would probably be OK, but if your house is wired up for power then every electrical appliance will be attached to a power generator which in all likelihood will pay a tax and that tax will be passed on to you, the consumer." 
(Joyce - 27 JULY 2009)
Again, the facts on the true household costs and impacts of the CPRS tell a different story. Treasury modelling again demonstrates that the price impact of the CPRS is modest. The CPRS is expected to raise household prices by 0.4 per cent in 2011-12 and 0.8 per cent in 2012-13, and the government has provided household compensation to help assist with these modest cost rises.
Pensioners, seniors, carers and people with disability and low-income households will receive additional support to fully meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme. Middle-income households will also receive additional support to help meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme.
A third argument from those who quibble with the design of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is that the international design aspects of the scheme are flawed.
Lord Christopher Monckton - a former adviser to Margaret Thatcher - was quoted this week in the Australian press by Janet Albrechtsen. Lord Monckton describes the potential Copenhagen agreement as a plan to set up a transnational "government" on a scale the world has never before seen. Enter the "world government" conspiracy theorists.
Lord Monckton also publicly warned Americans that "in the next few weeks, unless you stop it, your president will sign your freedom, your democracy and your prosperity away forever."
Janet Albrechtsen, in her understated neo-conservative way, refers to the potential Copenhagen agreement as a UN "power grab". This gaggle of world government conspiracy theorists are so far out there on the far right, that they rub up next to the global anarchists of the far left.
Those who argue that any multilateral action is by definition evil.
Those who argue that climate change does not represent a global market failure.
Those who argue that somehow the market will magically solve the problem.
And that uncoordinated national actions will fix the problem.
Without answering the basic logical question of how can we deal with an existential challenge for the whole planet which lies beyond the capacity of any individual national action to address.
The climate change deniers now form the comfortable bedfellows of the global conspiracy theorists - in total bald-faced denial of global scientific, economic and environmental reality. These arguments - thinly veiled attempts to create a new climate change global conspiracy theory - are now being used in Australia.
Like the arguments from climate change deniers, these arguments have zero basis in evidence.
Where is their equivalent evidence basis to Treasury modelling published by the Government of the industry and employment impacts of climate change?
Where is their equivalent evidence basis to Treasury modelling published by the Government on the cost impacts for households from the CPRS - and on the adequacy of the compensation arrangements put in place by the Government in our White Paper?
The answer once again is there is none.
Where is the evidence basis offered by the new league of world government conspiracy theorists that climate change can be effectively dealt with by market means or by uncoordinated national means?
Answer - there is none.
The truth is that the do-nothing climate change skeptics offer no alternative official body of evidence from any credible government in the world.
Absolutely none. The truth is they offer zero evidence.
Instead they offer maximum fear, the universal conservative stock in trade.
And by doing so, these do-nothing climate change skeptics are prepared to destroy our children's future.
The third group of climate deniers are those who pretend to accept the science but then urge delay because they don't want their country to be the first to act.
In Australia there was once a political consensus resisting this parochial view.
The Shergold Report commissioned by John Howard and written by the head of the Prime Minister's department recommended that Australia should not wait for the rest of the world to act:
"... waiting until a truly global response emerges before imposing an emissions cap will place costs on Australia by increasing business uncertainty and delaying or losing investment."
(Report of the Prime Ministerial Task Group on Emissions Trading, June 2007, p.6)
The current Leader of the Opposition also stated that a domestic ETS would help in international negotiations too: 
"... our first hand experience in implementing ... an emissions trading system would be of considerable assistance in our international discussions and negotiation aimed at achieving an effective global agreement."
(Turnbull - SMH Opinion Piece - 9 July 2008)
Then the Leader of the Opposition stated he no longer supported domestic action before Copenhagen:
"I would not find, I would not support finalising the design this year. Even the best designed scheme in theory needs to have the input of the knowledge of what happens at Copenhagen and what the Americans will do." 
(AM - 16 MARCH 2009)
Seven times the Liberals and Nationals have promised to make a decision on their policy on climate change - and seven times they have delayed.
     * In December 2007 they said wait for Garnaut.
     * In September 2008 they said wait for Treasury modelling.
     * In September 2008 they said wait for the White Paper.
     * In December 2008 they said wait until the Pearce Report.
     * In April 2009 they said wait for the Senate Inquiry.
     * In May 2009 they said wait for the Productivity Commission - forgetting that the Productivity Commission already made a submission on emissions trading to the Howard Government's Shergold Report.
     * Now the Liberals and National have said wait for Copenhagen and for President Obama's scheme.
It is an endless cycle of delay - and I am sure that with December almost upon us, the eighth excuse cannot be far away - which will be to wait until the next year or the year after until all the rest of the world has acted at which time Australia will act.
What absolute political cowardice.
What an absolute failure of leadership.
What an absolute failure of logic.
The inescapable logic of this approach is that if every nation makes the decision not to act until others have done so, then no nation will ever act.
The immediate and inevitable consequence of this logic - if echoed in other countries - is that there will be no global deal as each nation says to its domestic constituencies that they cannot act because others have not acted.
The result is a negotiating stalemate. A permanent standoff.
And this of course is the consistent ambition of all three groups of do-nothing climate change deniers.
As we approach Copenhagen, it becomes clearer that the domestic political pressure produced by the climate change skeptics now has profound global consequences by reducing the momentum towards an ambitious global deal. The argument that we must not act until others do is an argument that has been used by political cowards since time immemorial - both of the left and the right.
To take just one example, it has been used as an argument to retain protectionism, stifling economic growth and global competition, and preventing the spread of global prosperity.
As many have noted, it is the international political version of the prisoner's dilemma. If we allow our actions to be dictated by what we falsely conclude to be in our narrow self-interest, then we harm not just others but ourselves as well because climate change inaction harms us as well.
Climate change deniers are small in number, but they are too dangerous to be ignored. They are well resourced and well represented by political conservatives in many, many countries.
And the danger they pose is this - by collapsing political momentum towards national and global action on climate change, they collapse global political will to act at all. They are the stick that gets stuck in the wheel, that despite its size may yet bring the train to a complete stop.
And that is what they want, because they are driven by a narrowly defined self interest of the present and are utterly contemptuous towards our children's interest in the future.
This brigade of do-nothing climate change skeptics are dangerous because if they succeed, then it is all of us who will suffer.
Our children.
And our grandchildren.
If we fail, then it will be a failure that will echo through future generations.
The consequences for Australia of failing to act domestically and internationally on climate change are severe. We know from formal global and national economic modelling that the costs of inaction are greater than the costs of acting. Treasury modelling from October 2008 shows that economies that defer action on climate change face long-term costs around 15 per cent higher than those that take action now.
The sooner we act, the better placed our companies will be to benefit from new emerging global markets, and to benefit from the economic gains from improved efficiency. Moving to a low pollution economy will require significant investment in renewable energy, carbon capture and storage, energy efficiency and other low emissions technologies.
We need to start giving the signal to investors that they need to factor the price of carbon into their decisions to make the investments we need. Importantly, business needs certainty to make these investments.
As Greig Gailey, former President of the Business Council of Australia said:
"Only business can make the many investments needed to transition Australia to a low carbon economy. To do this business needs certainty."
Without passage of the CPRS there will be no certainty for business. That is why business groups like the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Industry Group want to see the major parties come together and vote on the CPRS this year.
Heather Ridout, Chief Executive of the Australian Industry Group said:
"... many of our members are telling us that they are holding off making investments until there is a greater degree of clarity around domestic climate change legislation."
(ADECCO Group Australia Breakfast - 15 October 2009)
Russell Caplan, Chairman of Shell Australia, said:
"... we believe a far greater risk is that Australia misses the opportunity to put a policy framework in place to deal with this issue. This would create a climate of continuing uncertainty for industry and potentially delay the massive investments required." 
(BRW - 6 August 2009)
These are the implications for Australia. These are the political challenges we now face both at home and abroad.
But my unequivocal message to the nation today is that this nation Australia will not be deterred.
Our course is clear.
That is why this government will press forward with our plan to tackle climate change domestically and globally.
Domestically we will press forward with the passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
It will be voted on in the House in the week beginning Monday November 16.
It will be introduced into the Senate immediately after the vote in the House.
It will then be voted on in the Senate in the week beginning 23 November.
We welcome the Opposition's recent cooperation and I'm pleased to hear from Minister Wong that negotiations are proceeding in good faith. I'd like to personally commend the Member for Groome for his genuine efforts to engage with the Government in good faith to reach a reasonable outcome with the Government that will finally deliver action on Climate Change.
We are of course concerned by the comments of the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate that "even if the government accepts all our amendments, we may well still vote against the bill." 
(NICK MINCHIN- 2UE- 30 OCTOBER 2009)
The do-nothing climate change skeptics are still alive and well in the Coalition. After 12 years of inaction, and after two years of preparation, the nation demands a genuine timetable and good faith negotiations to give business the certainty they need with climate change.
The Australian Government is also committed to intensively engaging to support an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen.
At Copenhagen we need an ambitious agreement on mitigation, adaptation, finance and technology.
As UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said yesterday, the formal UN negotiations are moving slowly.
The UN Secretary-General has said we must maximise the agreement we can reach in Copenhagen. They can resolve some issues, but not others.
Now is time for strenuous efforts by all leaders and ministers.
Denmark's Prime Minister Rasmussen is engaging a growing number of leaders - in the Copenhagen Commitment Circle - to accelerate engagement by leaders.
Australia is committed to playing a leadership role and has joined Mexico and the UN Secretary-General in the initial group of 'friends of the Chair' to help build consensus and draw out concrete commitments from across the world.
In July this year at the G8 meetings in L'Aquila, Australia helped form a 2 degree Celsius 450 ppm ambition for global action on climate change, and it was at this meeting that Australia launched the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, a concrete initiative to make CCS technology a reality.
Australia is currently chair of the Pacific Island Forum which this year delivered the Pacific Leaders' Climate Change Call to Action demanding urgent action on a real threat to the viability of some Pacific communities.
In September, Australia at the request of the UN Secretary-General co-chaired a roundtable at the UN Special Session on Climate Change - with a view to driving a sense of political urgency with other leaders, and representing the views of the Pacific.
Australia has launched the Forest Carbon Partnerships with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea - an initiative providing policy and technical support to protect the great forests in our neighbourhood.
And Australia has established a $150 million Climate Change Adaptation Fund - supporting vulnerable nations dealing with the real impact of climate change, with a strong focus on the Pacific.
For years - and then, with increasing intensity, in recent months - do-nothing climate change skeptics have been mounting a systematic campaign against action on climate change.
Their aim is not to convince every person on earth of the follies of acting on climate change. Their aim is to erode just enough of the political will that action becomes impossible.
By slowing the actions of each individual country, they aim to slowly drag global negotiations on climate change to a standstill. By hampering decisive action at a national level, they aim to make it impossible at an international level.
If Copenhagen does not deliver the outcome we so urgently need, no individual climate change skeptic will be responsible, but each of them will have played their part.
The corrosive effect of climate skeptics eroding the political will to act may be the disintegration of any possibility of meaningful action on climate change.
In this debate the climate change skeptics have erected an intellectual house of cards based on one simple premise: that the cost of not acting is nothing.
When you boil down their arguments, their world government conspiracy theories and their back of the envelope calculations - that in its starkest simplicity and entirety is what is left: that the cost of not acting is nothing.
That is the simplest premise upon which the scepticism of Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Alan, Janet and even Lord Monckton is based. They cling to that single premise like a polar bear clings to a melting iceberg.
Without that premise, their scepticism is sunk. Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Janet and the Thatcherite Lord Monckton are betting the house on that simple premise that the cost of not acting is nothing.
For people who claim to hold the conservative torch, their scepticism is in fact radical in its riskiness and recklessness. By deliberately undermining and eroding the capacity to achieve both domestic and international action on climate change the skeptics are attempting to force the world to take the single most reckless bet in our long history.
They are betting our future, the future of our children and our grandchildren, and they are doing so based on their own personal intuitions, their personal prejudices and their deeply ingrained political prejudices.
And they are doing so in the total absence of any genuine body of evidence.
Climate change skeptics in all their guises and disguises are not conservatives. They are radicals.
They are reckless gamblers who are betting all our futures on their arrogant assumption that their intuitions should triumph over the evidence.
The logic of these skeptics belongs in a casino, not a science lab, and not in the ranks of any responsible government.
Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Janet, even Lord Monckton shouldn't even bother with the pretence of science and just admit the currency of their prescription for inaction has all the legitimacy of a roulette wheel.
Basically, let's just sit back, do nothing and see what happens.
The alternative - our alternative - is to base policy on the evidence.
No responsible government confronted with the evidence delivered by the 4,000 scientists associated with the international panel could then in conscience choose not to act. In any public company, it would represent a gross contempt of the most basic fiduciary duty.
Malcolm and Barnaby might like to bet the future of Australia on the off chance of winning an election, but this Government will not.
A fairly well-known bloke once said that when gambling:
You've got to know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em.
Know when to walk away, know when to run.
My message to the climate change skeptics, to the big betters and the big risk takers is this:
You are betting our children's future and the future of our grandchildren.
You are betting our jobs, our houses, our farms, our reefs, our economy and our future on an intuition - on a gut feeling; on a political prejudice you have about science.
That is too big a risk, too radical a departure from the basic conservative principles of public policy.
Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Janet - stop gambling with our future.
You've got to know when to fold 'em - and for the skeptics, that time has come.
The Government I lead will act.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I am delighted to be here this morning to open the Master Builders Australia National Conference, and to be here on the Gold Coast, a city which celebrated its 50th birthday this year.
On May 15, 1959, the name South Coast was dropped in preference for the Gold Coast. As Mayor Ron Clarke has said, it was a flash of inspiration.
Ron also claims that it's made this region "more famous than Brisbane". That's one I'll leave for others to debate.
For my part, I've known and loved this region since I was a kid. I've seen its extraordinary growth and development.
In our nation, we know a city has really come of age when it can make its way into one of the national footy codes, so the Gold Coast has really made it - with three major codes queuing up to sign up a Gold Coast team in recent years, and after just three years in the NRL competition, the Gold Coast Titans fought their way to third place this year. Gold Coast United joined the A-League football competition this year, and now also sits third on the ladder, and in 2011 the Gold Coast Football Club will join the AFL, and it's significant that Karmichael Hunt could have played any code, in any city, in any country - but he has chosen to be part of the new Gold Coast AFL franchise.
So the Gold Coast is ground zero for the tussle between three of our great football codes, each vying for the loyalty of this important and fast growing region.
In focusing this conference on 'Building A Sustainable Industry', you are tackling some of the most important long-term concerns for our nation's future growth.
Just last week, I announced a new plan for national leadership in the development of strategic planning frameworks for our largest cities. It involves a new commitment to long-term reform of city planning in the interests of national productivity and sustainability. The Australian Government values the role of the building and construction industry in nation building for Australia's future.
We have a vast nation building challenge ahead of us. The Intergenerational Report that will soon be released forecasts that by 2049, Australia's population will rise by 60 per cent to reach a total of 35 million people. Most of these 35 million people will live in our cities. Nearby, Brisbane will more than double in size to reach four million.
Here on the Gold Coast the local population is predicted to double by 2050 to 1.2 million, thanks to natural population increase and what the Gold Coast Bulletin describes as "hordes of interstate migrants".
The century ahead stands to be the greatest century of economic growth and nation building in our nation's history.
As I've said in recent days, I believe in a big Australia, but I recognise that growth will generate its own challenges, including the need for much better planning and delivery of infrastructure. This is a challenge we need to prepare for today.
That's why we need a strong, competitive, high-skilled building and construction industry.
The Australian Government has made an important start through our Nation Building -- Economic Stimulus Plan. Today I want to thank the members of the MBA and the building industry who have worked hard to deliver on projects across Australia.
This morning I can report we have made major progress in the delivery of the Nation Building plan. Almost 50,000 building, construction and renovation plans have now been approved. Over 23,000 have been commenced. This is an extraordinary achievement - the largest Commonwealth infrastructure plan in our nation's history.
It is transforming schools, universities, community facilities and neighbourhoods across the nation and leaving a great legacy for the future.
One year ago, Australia was facing the full impact of the global economic crisis. In the midst of that crisis, we recognised the important role the building and construction industry could play in sustaining economic activity. The sector generates around $80 billion in economic activity each year. It provides jobs for around one million Australians, and it has an important role to play in the economy of every city and every region across the nation.
Last week we have had some promising news from the US -- with its economy posting growth of 0.9 per cent in the third quarter, the best showing in two years.
It has provided the strongest signal yet that the global economy has entered a new - though fragile - phase of recovery after the worst recession since the 1930s. But Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has warned that the early recovery won't be robust enough to prevent the unemployment rate  -  now at a 26-year high of 9.8 per cent  -  continuing to rise in the months ahead.
Just 12 months ago, economists around the world were wondering if we would even be talking about recovery at all this year.
The early days of the global recession mirrored the severity of the Great Depression. Back in the 1930s, global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. In the 12 months to April this year, global stock markets fell by nearly twice that - more than 40 per cent off their peak.
Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression - almost identical to the fall experienced in this recession from the peak in April 2008. Global trade fell by 10 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. This time it fell by 17 per cent.
But strong action to stabilise financial markets and unprecedented coordinated economic stimulus have helped to rebuild confidence and lay foundations for recovery.
Global stock markets have recovered strongly since their lowest point in March this year. The Dow Jones Index in the US has since risen by 49 per cent, and the Australian All Ordinaries index is now up 46 per cent.
While recovery is still a long way off, the IMF is now projecting a contraction of 1.1 per cent in the global economy this year, while just three months ago in July it had forecast a contraction of 1.4 per cent. Likewise, the IMF has lifted its global growth forecast for 2010 from 2.5 per cent to 3.1 per cent.
Australia has shown remarkable strength compared to the Major Advanced Economies:
     * Australia was the only advanced economy to record positive growth over the year to the June quarter -- growing at 0.6 per cent.
     * We have the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies.
     * According to the OECD, Australia has a lower projected deficit in 2010 than any of the major advanced economies.
     * We have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies. Government net debt as a share of GDP for the major advanced economies is projected to increase to 93 per cent. By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 10.0 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
The Government responded to the crisis 12 months ago with a guarantee for wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions. This was an essential step - without it, credit for major projects would have largely seized up and construction projects across the nation would have been stopped in their tracks.
The guarantee enabled the banks to raise much-needed funds to support lending in Australia. Indeed, almost all the offshore and domestic funds raised by Australian banks in the months following the crisis were covered by the guarantee. Only in very recent months are normal lines of offshore borrowings without the guarantee again opening up.
Next we put in place a targeted package of measures, in order to provide stimulus to the economy at a time when the private sector was in retreat. This was designed to specifically target key drivers of growth in the Australian economy, in order to encourage continuing economic activity from households, dwelling construction and private business investment. These measures were supplemented by direct Government investment in infrastructure.
Furthermore, consistent with the principles of conservative economic management, the Government has expanded its role as the private economy has contracted, and will contract the role of government as and when the private economy recovers.
To this end, a total fiscal stimulus program of $77 billion was announced, to provide support to the Australian economy during critical phases of recovery, before being phased out in a controlled manner as the recovery becomes self sustaining.
The immediate stimulus targets of the program included cash payments, support for first home owners and tax breaks to encourage investment by small business.
The medium targets have been local community infrastructure, household energy efficiency, social housing, shovel-ready infrastructure projects, and the largest school modernisation in Australia's history.
Finally, over the long term, the culmination of the program will result in major projects in rail, road, ports, education, research, clean energy, and broadband - all of them nation building projects.
The short-term measures were designed to provide an immediate and substantial boost to the Australian retail and wholesale sectors, thereby compensating for the long lead times associated with major infrastructure investment. This has resulted in retail sales in Australia being 5.2 per cent higher than their levels in November last year, prior to the rollout of the stimulus. In comparison, the retail sales of other advanced economies fell by 1.4 per cent over the same period.
The First Home Owners Boost, combined with lower interest rates, has helped thousands of Australians realise their dream of home ownership. It is also creating jobs and economic activity for you, our builders and tradespeople, at a time when you were facing a major downturn. New figures out last week have shown that the First Home Owners Boost has helped 171,000 first home buyers to enter the housing market -- more than 34,000 of them here in Queensland.
Private house approvals have been increasing strongly since the end of last year and are at their highest level since February 2008. Public approvals have also surged and remain 91 per cent higher than a year ago. Indeed, I know that feedback from MBA members has indicated that stimulus infrastructure construction projects - including first homes - filled the void created by the decline in private building and construction activity.
We also have provided support for business investment by offering a tax break of up to 50 per cent for the purchasing of business equipment - a measure that has supported investment at a time when it faced a severe downturn.
These measures cushioned Australia from the worst effects of the global recession. Without them Australia would have plunged into recession - with close to one million unemployed and with crippling consequences for business and consumer confidence, and without these immediate targeted stimulus measures, Australia's growth would have been minus 1.3 per cent over the year to the June quarter.
Yet there are those who still call for the Government to abandon its fiscal stimulus. This ignores three fundamental facts.
First, the path to global recovery is still far from certain - as confirmed recently by my counterparts at both the G20 in Pittsburgh in September and at the East Asia Summit late last month in Thailand.
Third, the Government's stimulus strategy, 70 per cent of which is being invested in economic and social infrastructure, is precisely what stimulus strategies are intended to be - timely, targeted and temporary.
By the end of the current financial year, two thirds of this stimulus will have been invested. Indeed, the impact of the fiscal stimulus on economic growth has already peaked in the second quarter of 2009. By early 2010, the inbuilt contraction within our strategy, as designed from the start, will already be making a negative contribution to GDP growth.
This will coincide with the ability of the economic recovery to become self-sustaining.
The stimulus has helped build the foundations for sustainable recovery through lifting confidence in the economy. In October, our consumer sentiment index reached its highest point since June 2007. A similar effect is being seen with the surge in business confidence to levels higher than before the global financial crisis.
Nevertheless, the Government remains mindful of the need to make any future adjustments depending on further global and national economic data.
Indeed, Australia's labour market has remained resilient in the face of the global financial crisis, recording positive growth in employment during the past 12 months. This contrasts with falling employment levels across the advanced economies. Even though the level of unemployment is rising, Australia's unemployment rate is 5.7 per cent. With the exception of Japan, this represents the lowest level of unemployment amongst the major advanced economies.
Our economy is expected to operate below capacity for some time, and unemployment is still expected to rise further. However, action taken by the Government has meant that around 200,000 more Australians are in work than would otherwise be the case. Treasury estimates state that in the absence of the stimulus program, unemployment levels would have reached 8¼ per cent.
The global recession has resulted in a collapse of $170 billion in tax revenues. This is the largest such revenue collapse in Australia's history, and it has imposed on us the necessity of a budget deficit until the economy recovers.
However, Australia still remains well placed to recover from the financial crisis. This is due to the fact that Australia has amongst the lowest fiscal deficits of the advanced economies. In addition, Australia's net debt as a percentage of GDP is lower than that of any of the major advanced economies. This fact is underlined by Australia's AAA credit rating, which has been reaffirmed since the budget.
That means making a careful, coordinated exit from the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy settings and financial market interventions that the crisis demanded. That is what we intend to do - and in a manner that does not weaken the prospects for recovery.
The Reserve Bank has begun to move interest rates from their emergency 50 year lows.
As for fiscal consolidation, this will unfold in two parts: by keeping real expenditure growth to two per cent once trend growth has returned to the economy, and by allowing tax revenues to recover.
Beyond the immediate exit strategy our focus is also on long-term, sustainable productivity growth, growth that is not hostage to the vagaries of the resources boom and bust cycle.
Overall, the Government has provided an additional $77 billion in economic stimulus. Medium-term infrastructure investment represents just over $30 billion of that.
Our nation building projects are supporting:
     * A quality and quantity education revolution;
     * A historic investment in social housing;
     * The largest ever investment in energy efficiency in Australian homes; and
     * Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors.
Commonwealth, State and Territory Coordinators-General have been overseeing the development, approval, construction and completion of more than 49,000 major construction projects across Australia, construction projects which have, as the MBA noted in its recent quarterly survey, supported a continued rebound in sentiment within the building industry.
The Coordinator General has reported to me that:
     * 49,315 projects have now been approved;
     * 25,596 major projects have commenced; and
     * 1,909 have been completed.
Let me outline developments in each component of the stimulus plan.
First, the Building the Education Revolution component.
There are now 10,498 National School Pride projects underway. There are 349 Science and Language Centres underway. Under Primary Schools for the 21st Century program we have three rounds worth $14.1 billion. Of these:
     * 10,697 projects have been approved
     * 8,003 projects are underway
     * 29 projects are complete
We have also recently introduced new flexibility into the timing for building projects to help all schools achieve the best value for money.
Delivery of the Social Housing Initiative is on track. Work has been completed on 35,935 of the 60,680 dwellings approved for repairs and maintenance work. Some 19,321 dwellings have been approved for construction, with 2,659 houses underway and 118 houses completed. Further, the average cost per dwelling is now expected to be about $270,000, well under the $300,000 initial estimates.
Our investment in social housing is critical to supporting businesses here on the Gold Coast. It is providing jobs for the hundreds of workers involved - the builders, plumbers, carpenters, electricians, brickies, carpet-layers, kitchen manufacturers and many more in the building and construction industry.
On the Gold Coast alone, we have already invested $5 million in 1,217 repair and maintenance jobs and $8.5 million in 28 new homes under Stage 1 one that have started construction and are expected to be completed by the end of 2009. 
To build on this investment, today I am pleased to announce that under Stage 2 of the Social Housing Initiative, a further 543 dwellings will be built, pumping an extra $144 million into the Gold Coast's building and construction sector.
This investment will support the sector in the medium term and provide long term secure housing for hundreds of families in need.
Defence Housing Australia, which has been allocated $246 million to construct 802 homes, is well ahead of schedule against its planned project milestones. Major site works have commenced on 570 houses and 142 houses have been completed.
All 14 major road projects under the plan are approved and are scheduled to be completed by 30 June 2014. Black spots projects are under construction and are on track to be completed by 30 June 2010. Of the 17 major ARTC rail projects, 14 projects are underway and three are completed.
Of the 292 Boom Gate projects, which include a range of safety measures at rail level crossings around the nation, 93 are underway and 54 projects have already been completed. All projects are on track to be completed by 30 June 2010.
Under our Regional and Local Community Infrastructure program, we are providing new and upgraded facilities to address the different needs of communities across the nation. In some places, this means something as simple as upgrading footpaths.
Here on the Gold Coast, it means a major $36 million Commonwealth investment in the redevelopment of the Gold Coast Stadium sports complex - a new 25,000 seat AFL and sports stadium at Carrara. The project, which is now underway, will support up to 950 full-time jobs during construction. The AFL expects it to generate $415 million of economic activity over a ten year period. This is one of 137 large community infrastructure projects, of which 58 are already underway.
In addition, more than 85 per cent of the 3,220 smaller community infrastructure projects are completed. These have provided work for building and construction businesses during the downturn, and they will leave a lasting benefit for communities across the nation.
The Energy Efficient Homes package focuses on straight-forward, cost-effective measures that households can take to reduce their power bills and greenhouse gas emissions. Over 90,000 homes have now claimed Solar Hot Water Rebates. The Homeowner Insulation Program has been very successful with more than 500,000 homes insulated, with over $700 million paid. We have also recently announced improvements to the insulation program to improve consumer protection, strengthen safety measures and improve value for money.
This program has supported jobs with around 8,000 registered businesses employing over 12,000 individual installers. In addition, manufacturing plants have added shifts to operate around the clock, generating further employment.
I appreciate the way that Master Builders Australia and your members have risen to the challenge of the most ambitious nation-building recovery plan in Australian history. When you consider the scale of what has been undertaken, the industry's achievement has been exceptional. I also thank the Commonwealth Coordinator General who has done an excellent job under great pressure.
Every day, Australians around the nation are reaping benefits from the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan: Jobs and economic activity in their communities; new school facilities; new infrastructure for communities to share over summer; and in the months ahead, improved energy efficiency, clean and safe homes, and quicker trips in the car.
Implementing the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan has been an enormous undertaking, but it has only begun to address the infrastructure gaps confronting Australia, so our partnership must continue to strengthen in the years ahead, as we build a stronger economy for a bigger Australia.
It gives me great pleasure to declare this conference open. 


Bathurst Base Hospital has benefited from $156,000 from the Rudd Government to purchase new surgical equipment.
The funding is part of Stage Two of the Rudd Government's $600 million Elective Surgery Waiting List Plan.
Stage Two of the Plan is providing $50.6 million to NSW hospitals, and $150 million across Australia, to support the construction of new operating theatres, upgrade existing elective surgery facilities and purchase new surgical equipment to improve elective surgery performance.
In addition, Bathurst will share in $10 million for construction and ongoing costs for a Rural Clinical School, under the auspices of the University of Western Sydney.
Women diagnosed with breast cancer, their families and carers in the Bathurst district are also benefitting from a Rudd Government funded McGrath Breast Care nurse, located at Daffodil Cottage.
During the 2007 election, the Rudd Government committed $12 million to assist the McGrath Foundation to recruit, train and place 44 breast care nurses in communities across Australia. Rachel Gorrell is one of those 44, all of whom are now providing vital information, care and practical and emotional support to women throughout the country diagnosed with breast cancer.
The Prime Minister, the Minister for Health and Ageing and the Member for Macquarie, Bob Debus, were in Bathurst today for Community Cabinet and to hear first hand from health professionals on the future of the health system.
The Bathurst health consultation is the 70th across the country to road-test the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's proposed reforms. This evening will also be the 18th Community Cabinet.
Copies of the NHHRC report are on the website, along with the two other reports presented to the Australian Government - the draft of the National Primary Health Care Strategy and the report of the National Preventative Health Taskforce, which also made recommendations in their areas of expertise. 


PM: Let me just start by making some remarks about the floods in New South Wales on the mid-north coast. 
Hundreds of households in northern New South Wales have been affected by heavy rain and flooding that began on the 5th of November. The New South Wales Government has declared four regions natural disaster zones on 7 November - Coffs, Bellingen, Kempsey and Nambucca. The Federal Minister for Families, Jenny Macklin, has announced that the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be provided to eligible people adversely affected by the 5 November floods on the mid-North Coast and the Northern Rivers district of New South Wales. 
The Commonwealth also, through Emergency Management Australia, remains in close and constant contact with the New South Wales authorities and we stand ready to assist in whatever way we can.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment will be provided to eligible people adversely affected by these floods in the mid-North Coast and Northern Rivers district, and, of course, we'll be thinking of all of our fellow Australians in those difficult circumstances as a result of that flooding activity. 
It's good to be here in Bathurst today with the local member, Bob Debus, but also with the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, because we're here to talk about the future of health and hospitals nationwide. We're here also to talk about what that means for local communities like this one, and this morning we spent time at the Bathurst Base Hospital. We were able to talk to quite a number of the local staff there, as well as some patients, about the delivery of health services in this part of Australia. 
These health and hospital consultations are important for us nationwide. It's the 19th I've participated in myself personally since we began this process back in July, and of course the Health Minister has been party to a lot more than that - in fact, a total combined number among us all of some 70 nationwide out of the 750 public hospitals across Australia.
This is an important hospital for this region, and of course that's why we are also seeking to support it by investing, for example, an additional $156,000 from the Government to purchase new surgical equipment as part of the Stage 2 of the Government's $600 million nationwide plan to assist with elective surgery waiting lists. That also forms part of a $50.6 million investment into New South Wales hospitals more broadly to assist with elective surgery. 
In addition, here in Bathurst the city will share in $10 million for construction and ongoing cost for a rural clinical school under the auspices of the University of Western Sydney, and furthermore, women diagnosed with breast cancer and their families will now have support through a nurse provided through the Australian Government-funded McGrath Breastcare Nurses Program here at Daffodil Cottage.
These are just practical illustrations of the sort of investment that we have sought to make as an Australian Government in to local healthcare needs, but on top of that it's not just what is necessary in the here and now to support the needs of this health and hospital community, it's what's necessary over the next quarter of a century, and I would like to thank all those who participated in the forum here in Bathurst today on their views, road-testing the recommendations of the National Hospital Reform Commission's report on the future of the overall system. 
The contributions from the floor, from GPs, from the specialists, from other health professionals, was first class and it was good to get their direct feedback on the impact of those recommendations on rural and regional communities and this community in particular. All those contributions to the discussion and the debate, will be fed into our national decision-making process.
Finally, of course, the other reason for being in Bathurst today, and I think this is my third visit in recent years, is to participate in Community Cabinet here this evening in order to hear first hand from the wider community about their needs and priorities for the future as well. Both Bob and Nicola and other Ministers will be keen to hear first-hand what the local community has to say about jobs and the economy, about the delivery of education services, the delivery of health services, as well the whole range of activities where the Federal Government is engaged here in this important community.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, on the Oceanic Viking (inaudible) does it involve guarantees of resettlement, possibly in Australia, and also possibly community housing rather than an Indonesian detention centre?
PM: Well, you know, as Indonesia said recently, they have infinite patience on this matter. Australia has infinite patience on this matter. Also, when it comes to Australia's border protection policy, let me be absolutely clear that that policy of ours, in the Australian national interest, will not be changed in response to any protests, any threats, any threats of harm, any threats of self harm. We will take as long as it takes to resolve this matter and any other matters into the future. 
JOURNALIST: PM, how much of the (inaudible) was this morning's Neilson Poll, don't you feel that you now have more patience to deal with the Viking situation and people in detention in Indonesia?
PM: The job of being Prime Minister is to take decisions in the national interest, some of which may be popular, others of which are not, and in the case of border protection policy, there will be those who criticise what we do from the far Right, saying that we should throw kids back behind razor wire. We'll we're not going to be doing that. There'll be those who criticise what we're doing from the far Left, who say there should be no border protection policy at all. Guess what? We're not going to be doing that.
Our job is to take responsible decisions in the national interest, popular or otherwise, and that's what we will continue to do.
Our policy is clear cut. Can I say there is no alternative Coalition policy on border protection -a lot of criticism, no policy. Therefore, I find it interesting that even on the handling of this individual vessel, the Coalition today appears to be split right up the middle.
JOURNALIST: Does the infinite patience of the Oceanic Viking situation run out if the Oceanic Viking is needed back where it normally is, in the Southern Ocean?
PM: We, as I said, together with Indonesia, have great patience in dealing with this matter, but I want to be absolutely clear, absolutely clear, that our border protection policy will not change in response to any threats from anybody, any protests, any threats of harm or self-harm, into the future, and that's because this policy is in the national interest. It won't be changed. It will be implemented into the future and we will take as long as is necessary to resolve this matter and other matters, each of which has its own complexity.
JOURNALIST: You say you've got infinite patience, though, but doesn't (inaudible) the boat's licence to be there run out later this week? Will this thing go on further, past Friday?
PM: Every matter concerning border protection is complex, but our policy will not change. We will continue to implement it, and let me be absolutely clear: the policy will not be changed as a consequence of any threat or any protest from anybody at any time. It's the right policy and responsible policy in the national interest, whether it's popular or not, and we will therefore be implementing it into the future, and resolve this matter in whatever timeframe it takes, as we'll resolve any other matter in whatever timeframe it takes. Border protection policy is a complex business. We have currently engaged, for example, in a whole range of matters concerning border protection policy right across the waters to our north, the archipelago to our North, across the Indian Ocean, each of which is intrinsically complex.
We will work our way through each of these. That's what people expect of their elected government. We're implementing a responsible policy, border protection policy, in the national interest, and we'll continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Do you think today's Nielsen poll shows that you over-reacted or panicked in response to last week's Newspoll?
PM: The business of government, the business of being Prime Minister, is to make hard decisions in the national interest based on the merits of each case, and we have done so in relation to this matter and other matters and will continue to do so in the future. As I said, this policy is a responsible course of action. I contrast it with those who flee - the Coalition - when asked this simple question: What is their alternative policy? I note on even this matter, concerning this particular vessel, they are split right down the middle about how it should be handled. 
Our policy is clear cut. We'll continue to implement it. It's the right policy for Australia, and it will be complex and difficult in the future, but let me tell you, and be absolutely clear, we will not change this Australian Government border protection policy in response to any threats, any protests, any threats of harm or self-harm or anything like that because we intend to act in the national interest.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Stephen Smith telling Sri Lanka? Are you going to offer the Government there money to stop the boats?
PM: We have been cooperating with the Government of Sri Lanka for a long, long period of time, and therefore we'll be working with them on the humanitarian challenges within that country.
Let us also put this debate in Australia within its proper context. What has happened worldwide in the last three years? You have seen a global upsurge in the outflow of asylum seekers from Sri Lanka, from Afghanistan and from Iraq because the security circumstances in all those countries has got worse and progressively worse. That's what's happened around the world.
You've had, in the case of Sri Lanka, some 260,000 people who have been relocated within Sri Lanka. We already had 130,000 go across the waters to India. We've had tens of thousands move their way to other parts of the world, in Europe and in North America, and we've had something like 1,000 plus arrive in our own waters here - a global problem requiring a global solution.
In the case of Sri Lanka, then, of course we will work with the World Bank and other international institutions on dealing with the immediate humanitarian challenge. If you're dealing effectively with the humanitarian challenge at home and helping those 260,000 people to be effectively resettled, you're dealing also with a large part of the push factors which are operating worldwide, and that's what we're doing: responsible policy dealing with the global factors, with the push factors; responsible policy on regional cooperation, dealing with Indonesia and Malaysia; responsible policy in terms of the large-scale additional investment we've had running for the better part of the year now, a 25 percent increase in our aerial and sea surveillance in the waters and air space to our north.
This is the integrated approach to a responsible border protection policy which we are implementing. That's our policy. We took it to the last election. That is what we've been implementing since the last election, and I contrast it to our opponents, who first of all, after the Government was elected, backed each and every change that the Government made. Secondly, today when asked 'what would they do different?', run a million miles an hour.
JOURNALIST: PM, can you bring down grocery prices as you promised before the election?
PM: On the question of grocery prices, we have a very simple principle at work, which is if you maximise competition in the grocery industry, you therefore put downward pressures on prices. We came into Government with absolutely no Australian Government policy before seeking to boost competition in the grocery sector, and therefore this virtual duopoly was left unchallenged.
What have we done since then? In September, the Government's competition watchdog has ended restrictive agreements in leases between shopping centres and Coles and Woolworths which restricted rivals from setting up in those shopping centres. This, of course, now opens shopping centres for space for competitors like Aldi, like Franklins, like Foodworks and like IGA.
Also, we're working with State and Territory governments to ensure that planning laws do not unjustifiably restrict competition in grocery retailing, and furthermore, we changed the foreign investment rules and the timeframe for the development of vacant commercial space to allow foreign-owned supermarkets like Aldi and CostCo to open more stores in Australia.
The bottom line is this: together with the introduction of unit pricing, which becomes operational as of December, these are all concrete, practical measures that boost competition in the grocery sector when we've had too much control of the market from Coles and Woolies. These are measures which we have taken. Under the previous government, no measures were taken at all.
JOURNALIST: But you need to do more, because it's not flowing through.
PM: The decision by the competition watchdog was taken in September this year. The flow-through of that in terms of the ability for other food retailers to have better access to leases in supermarkets will flow from that. Unit pricing we've already introduced and takes effect as of December.
I contrast all these measures with those who might talk about prices for groceries out there in the community, like the Coalition, as opposed to the Government, which has acted in these competition-enhancing measures. That's our plan, that's what we've done. We believe that is better than the alternative which was, frankly, sit on your hands and doing nothing.
JOURNALIST: Are Community Cabinets working, and if so, can you point to scenarios in policy (inaudible) in places that show they are feeding through (inaudible)?
PM: First of all, in the response we have to 18 Community Cabinets so far, and 19 including this one in Bathurst, the community, in our experience, want the opportunity to directly engage those who are elected to govern Australia and to do so face-to-face, and therefore it is a good opportunity to hear from them and for our public servants to hear from them what is working and what is not within a given local area.
Secondly, and I will turn to Nicola for one example in a minute about, you know, how you respond and translate into policy.
I still remember full well a Community Cabinet in Western Sydney, I think it was at Penrith, where a lady stood up and asked me at some length about what we were going to do about supported accommodation for adult children with significant disabilities, and as a consequence of that we discussed it at length internally within Government and in the budget of 2008, I believe, it may have been the 2009 budget, we provided investment for that precise category of accommodation.
It was a very graphic presentation. It had an affect on the policy makers. We analysed it afterwards and then we took the decisions we took.
Do you want to add to that?
MINISTER: I was just going to add two other examples. I think very early on, at one of our consultations in Longman, a young boy asked a question. He had diabetes, I think he might have even been asking for his sibling. He stood up on a chair and said 'Prime Minister, you know, can you do something to help? We want an insulin pump but we can't afford it and can you support more research?'
We put in the budget last year funding for insulin pumps for children under 18 and there is a scale for, you know, incomes that they are on, but that was an issue raised directly by a young child to the Prime Minster that has been acted on.
And another one that we have been able to fund since: a number of women at different consultations have raised PCOS, a syndrome that is affecting a growing number of women and limits their fertility. They were asking for clinical guidelines to be put in place and some research money and we have just funded nearly a million dollars to the Jean Hales Foundation, directly following from that. 
So they go from the quite large, feeding in to our deliberations on health reform or other things, to the very small and specific but important to people, important enough that they come and again to put their hand up and ask a question to the Prime Minister, so I think that gives you a good indication that it is working.
DEBUS: Can I just say that I have watched while the Prime Minister and the Minister for Health spent nearly two hours speaking to 100 or so health professionals and citizens from the Central West about the future needs of the health system, and they can hardly believe that two people of such eminence should have spent so long speaking so intelligently about that matter. I think their impact has been enormous.
JOURNALIST: So, Prime Minster, there will be some sort of action from issues raised tonight like water security for the wider region and an expressway to Sydney, which are probably the two major issues that you're going to hear about (inaudible)?
PM: I think the virtue of all these gatherings is that it is not just, frankly, open forum where people put the concerns of their community, but also in the separate sessions we have with individuals here and they represent community organisations or Chambers of Commerce, who then, frankly, go out and see every Minister under the sun.
On the specifics in terms of water security or the road links to Sydney, and I am relatively familiar with both of those challenges in this region, we will continue to work our way through those things and we will see what the community and the organisations have to say about it tonight and we are working closely with Bob on those challenges as well.
But the purpose of forums like tonight is to hear directly what it is on the communities' mind, to say what we can do, to say what we can't do, to say what we can continue to work on. I believe it is very important just to be frank with people.
The other thing is, we are talking here today and I think right now we must have a dozen or so Ministers working their way around this region in one form or another, including the Infrastructure Minister, and I am sure he has been engaged on matters such as that, matters such as Mount Panorama and others, and that is the right thing to do and that is how we seek to do it.
JOURNALIST: Doctors are protesting in Sydney today, I think they've got concerns about the GP super clinics, the lack of concentrated care and possibly loss of the family doctor. Are their concerns valid?
PM: Well, we've got doctors protesting in Sydney today about us expanding GP services around the country. I understand we have protests in Brisbane today from midwives about our reforms to the delivery of midwifery services which the Minister has been working on and I'll ask her to speak to it in a minute.
Look, if you're going to be in the business of bringing about significant national reforms it follows that not all of them are going to be universally popular at a particular time. What are we concerned about? How do you expand the range of midwifery services available out there in the community by providing a better funded role for midwives and that hinges off a significant addition to funding which the Minister has committed through the budget for those purposes.
Secondly on GPs, we went to the people last election and said that we're going to go out there and roll out thirty six GP super clinics across the country. People in most communities across the country say, that's terrific, you're bringing together GPs and a whole series of related services. You tailor it to the particular GP needs of a particular locality but obviously it won't always be completely smooth sailing, but, our job is to govern in the national interest. That means implementing what we've said before the election in these critical reform areas. Getting on with it, and obviously listening to people when they protest and raise concerns. But we intend to implement that which we said we would do. On the protests in Brisbane you might wish to add, and the other one.
ROXON: Look the family doctor is alive and well, and the proposals that the government has been implementing and others that are on the table as part of Health Reform Commission's work are actually to further support and enhance and strengthen the role of GPs in our community. And you don't have to just take my word for this, because it has been a policy that people have had issues with but now we see the AMA, the divisions of general practice, the College of GPs, the doctors in training, all putting a proposal to us about how we expand this exact type of infrastructure funding to more practices so that they can turn their own practices into GP super clinics. So this is an idea that we took to the last election, those 31 communities have welcomed the commitments to the super clinics. We've announced five since the election, and we now have GP organisations knocking on the door, asking us to expand the program, so that their existing practices can take up this opportunity of working in multidisciplinary teams, of offering extended hours, of providing more comprehensive care in partnership with other health professionals. So not everyone's going to agree with it. But that's a pretty good measure, those organisations don't always agree with any type of Government health reforms, and they're all now knocking on our door for this sort of infrastructure support.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's an inquest (inaudible) into the death of a young man who (inaudible). The inquest's findings found that there was a lack of mental health beds in that (inaudible) region contributed to his death. What's the Commonwealth going to do reverse that, and increase the number of beds available (inaudible)
PM: On the details of the findings, obviously I have not read the report and I'm not in a position to comment. I'll ask Nicola to respond more broadly to the delivery of mental health services on behalf of the Australian Government. Can I say this, however, more broadly on the question of mental health and gaps in the currently delivery nationwide. The figures that I was presented with this morning and delivered as part of my presentation had the effect of something like, two thirds of the 2.8 million Australians who are diagnosed with one mental health condition or another, go untreated. Two thirds. I'm right on that number?
ROXON: For adolescents.
PM: Yes, we're talking about adolescents here. Young people. So this is a real, real problem, and it's a problem across the country. So when we embrace the challenge of national health and hospital reform, what we are determined to do, is not simply allow the mental health challenge to fall off the edge and not to be part of how we deliver long term integrated health reform to the nation.
Primary health care is really important, through our GPs and GP-related services. Improved services in our acute hospitals is important. Preventative health is important. Aged care is important. But within that, dealing effectively and in an integrated way with the mental health challenges of young people and for the community at large is, frankly, an area of much unmet demand and we need, as a nation, to lift our game.
JOUNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm just going to ask Nicola to add to that.
ROXON: Thank you, well, similar to the Prime Minister, with this report just being release we haven't had been able to look at all of the details but I also want to pass on our condolences to the family and the region because, I've think, two years on, the release of these coroners reports still open up a lot of, still fresh, wounds for people.
We are very conscious that this report has just come down. It's been handed to the New South Wales Government and of course the recommendations about extra acute beds I am sure and would expect will be considered closely, but we as a Government have been investing more in our public hospital services. That extra 50 percent increase in funding that we negotiated last year, started flowing from the first of July. We know that the Commonwealth, the previous Commonwealth Government pulled money out of public hospitals and that put a lot of pressure on the system.
We've turned that around. But we've also had very clearly, from our 70 consultations, the view put to us that mental health services, both in the community and in hospitals and the way that they are integrated needs to be part of what we're considering for the health reform process. We are doing that and I think getting the mix of the acute services that are needed for patients, but also early intervention for young people, for example, in Wagga the headspace service has been operating very well, the division of GPs runs that service. That will be appropriate for many young people, but we still need intensive services to be available in our hospitals and they're the sorts of ideas that have been put forward by the commission that we're considering carefully.
PM: Having said that folks we've got to zip. Thank you.


The Governments of India and Australia have committed to a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation that will strengthen cooperation in a wide range of security and related areas including counter-terrorism, defence, disarmament and non-proliferation and maritime security
The Prime Ministers of India and Australia,
Affirming that the strategic partnership between India and Australia is based on a shared desire to promote, regional and global security, as well as their common commitment to democracy, freedom, human rights and the rule of law;
Affirming their deep respect for each other's contribution to promoting peace, stability and development in Asia and beyond;
Affirming their common purpose in working together, and with other countries including through such regional fora as the East Asia Summit and ASEAN Regional Forum to achieve the objective of a prosperous, open and secure Asia, and recognising that strengthened bilateral security cooperation will make a significant contribution in this context;
Recognising that India and Australia are partners with a mutual stake in each other's progress and prosperity;
Recognising that India and Australia share a common interest in maritime security;
Affirming their common commitment to fight terrorism and recognising that counter-terrorism efforts by India and Australia constitute an important part of the international community's effort to eradicate terrorism;
Affirming their common commitment to fight transnational and organised crime;
Reiterating their common commitment to global, complete and universal disarmament and non-proliferation and seeking a peaceful world free of nuclear weapons;
Have decided to create a comprehensive framework for the enhancement of security cooperation between the two countries.
Elements of Cooperation
Security cooperation between India and Australia will include the following elements:
     * Information exchange and policy coordination on regional affairs in the Asia region and on long-term strategic and global issues;
     * Bilateral cooperation within multilateral frameworks in Asia, in particular the East Asia Summit and the ASEAN Regional Forum;
     * Defence dialogue and cooperation within the framework of the Memorandum of Understanding on Defence Cooperation signed in March 2006;
     * Efforts to combat terrorism;
     * Cooperation to combat transnational organised crime;
     * Disaster management;
     * Maritime and aviation security; and
     * Police and law enforcement cooperation.
Mechanisms of Cooperation
The following mechanisms will carry forward the above mentioned cooperation between the two countries:
1. Exchange of visits at high levels, including by foreign ministers;
2. Defence cooperation, which includes:
a. Defence policy talks (Senior Officials level);
b. Staff talks and service-to-service exchanges, including participation in exercises as agreed.
3. Consultations between the National Security Advisors of Australia and India. 
4. Bilateral consultation to promote counter-terrorism cooperation through such means as the Joint Working Group on Counter-terrorism.
5. Sharing knowledge and experience in disaster prevention and preparedness and relevant capacity building.
Implementation
Australia and India will work towards developing an action plan with specific measures to advance security cooperation.


I am delighted to be here today in New Delhi.
I would have been equally delighted to have been in Mumbai last night at the DY Patel Stadium. 
But alas the weather gods intervened. 
India shares many passions with Australia, one of them being our collective celebration of cricket.
We share a passion for the game. 
But in my case, there has never been a correlation between passion on the one hand and ability on the other. 
You will be surprised to learn however that I have played against India before. 
At least as a member of the Australian embassy team in Peking against the Indian embassy team. 
My highest score was 11 not out. 
We Australians always feared the Indian quicks and we feared that the reason India regularly beat us at the Temple of Heaven Ground was out belief that on the eve of each of the games, Indian MEA would fly in its best talent from Delhi. 
At least that's my excuse for failure on the field - 11 not out. 
But, as someone who can recognise great talent when I see it, I congratulate Sachin Tendulkar on achieving the outstanding milestone of 17,000 One-Day International runs. 
From one cricket mad nation to another, we salute the 'Little Master'.
I'm advised his young teammate Yuvraj Singh has started calling the 36 year old 'grandfather' (where that places 52 year old like me, I'm not sure).
And may I say on behalf of all Australian cricket fans that if Sachin does decide it is time to retire, we would support him wholeheartedly.
Of course there is more to life than cricket.
Another of our shared passions is exploring new opportunities for business collaboration.
Looking out to this diverse audience - business leaders, senior officials and commentators from all corners of the private and public sectors - I am struck by the extent of common Australian and Indian commercial interests. 
I am also reminded of the central role business will play in elevating our countries' bilateral partnership. 
Our venue today - The Taj Mahal Hotel - is a testament to this.
I am told this hotel is owned by the renowned Tata Group. 
It takes shrewd leadership to preserve and build a business group from one generation to the next. 
But it takes remarkable ability to sustain such a business over not one but five generations. 
This is exactly what the Tata family has achieved over the past 140 years, making it a pillar of the Indian business community - and also 32 years older than the Australian constitution!
It is a great compliment to Australian business that the Tata Group has decided to partner with Australian companies in fields as diverse as coated steel production, long-haul logistics and retail electronics. 
These partnerships demonstrate the power of entrepreneurialism: when we join commercial vision with complementary capacity, the possibilities are endless.
The same is true of the Australian-Indian economic relationship as a whole.
In the past 18 months, business men and women around the world have together faced the worst financial collapse in three quarters of a century. 
We all know the figures - the global economy is forecast to contract by 1.1 per cent in 2009 - the first contraction since IMF records began. 
This is the deepest global recession in three-quarters of a century and very few countries have escaped the downturn.
From this crisis, one startling fact has become apparent: our economies are more interconnected and interdependent now than ever before. 
The economic crisis is, at its core, a crisis of globally interconnected credit markets. 
While it started in the US, UK and Europe, the financial and trade impacts quickly spread to the rest of the world. 
No nation was immune to the downturn.
But while our interdependence exposes us to great risk, it also creates great potential.
Our coordinated response to the global economic crisis - driven by the G20 in which Australia and India are active- has highlighted the benefits of cooperation. 
It reminds us that global solutions to crises are through collective determination and action rather than insular policies.
It has provided the strongest signal yet that the global economy has entered a new - though fragile - phase of recovery.
But Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has warned that the early recovery won't be robust enough to prevent the unemployment rate  -  now at a 26-year high of 10.2 per cent  -  continuing to rise in the months ahead.
So while there is tentative talk of recovery, it is still a long way off.
The recovery will be slow and complex. 
IMF Chief Economist Olivier Blanchard, writing in the IMF's magazine, warned that this recession is not normal.
Sustaining any recovery will require delicate rebalancing acts, both within and across countries.
As he rightly observes, and I quote:
".... the world is not in a run-of-the mill recession. The turnaround will not be simple. The crisis has left deep scars, which will affect both supply and demand for many years to come."
Global economic activity, driven by the strong performance of Asian economies such as India and China, still remains below pre-crisis levels. 
Private consumption and investment are needed to sustain this recovery. 
This requires a smooth transition from government-supported demand to private-led demand. 
We also need to unwind the global imbalances that led us into this crisis. 
And this is why forums such as this are critical for progressing the conversation between governments and with businesses on how we can build long-term, sustainable growth for the future. 
My message to the global community is simple: we're all in this together, and we're all in this for the long haul. 
So what does Australia have to bring to the table?
     * Strong fundamentals;
     * A stable, prosperous economy; and
     * An ongoing economic policy reform agenda.
Like India, the Australian economy has weathered the global recession better than most:
     * our economy grew in the June quarter at 0.6 per cent, making it the fastest-growing advanced economy in the past year and the only advanced economy to have reported positive through-the-year growth to June 2009; and
     * while every Major Advanced Economy has fallen into recession, Australia so far has not.
     * But still, as the slight rise in our unemployment rate to 5.8 per cent today underlines, Australia is by no means out of the woods, yet - as we still face such a fundamentally uncertain global economic outlook.
Australia is a significant economy. 
We are the 14th largest economy in the world. 
By market exchange rates, Australia is the fourth largest economy in Asia - after Japan, China and India, and the fourteenth largest in the world. 
We have the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
Our public finances are sound, with Standard and Poor's reaffirming our AAA sovereign rating. 
According to the OECD, Australia is projected to have a lower deficit in 2010 than any of the Major Advanced Economies.
We also have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies, with government net debt projected to peak at 10 per cent of GDP in 2013. 
Australia is globally acknowledged for our resilient banking system and strong prudential and regulatory regimes:
     * Of the world's nine remaining AA plus rated banks, four are Australian; and
     * The percentage of nonperforming bank-to-bank loans in Australia is among the lowest in the world.
The strength of our banking system reflects a strong set of regulatory arrangements and a smart industry model. 
Most significantly, Australia prides itself as a good place to do business. 
In its 2009 survey, IMD rated Australia as one of the four most resilient economies globally, and the strongest in our region.
The World Bank ranked Australia as one of the most business-friendly economies in the world, offering a business environment that is both stable and flexible. 
And our corporate governance environment has also been ranked first by - based on measures like:
     * The transparency of our business and regulatory culture;
     * The power and rights our shareholders enjoy; and
     * The interaction between Government and business.
When coupled with a deep, mature financial sector, Australian Government reforms to drive productivity growth and low debt and deficit levels by any global standards, Australia offers a safe and rewarding environment to conduct 21st century business.
Economic reform has set Australia on a path of sustainable growth, as have the reforms set in train in India back in 1991. 
The impacts of these reforms are palpable. 
India's strategic weight and the structure of its economy have seen it withstand the impacts of the global economic crisis better than most. 
India has managed an impressive six per cent growth at a time when few other economies have managed any growth at all. 
India has truly emerged as a central pillar of regional and global economic strength and significance. 
In 2010 almost 90 per cent of global growth will come from emerging economies; and 
By 2014 the IMF projects that emerging Asian economies will contribute to half of world GDP growth, of which 10 per cent will come from India. 
But the great upswing in India's growth does not end there. 
By 2030, India will have the world's largest population and be the third largest economy.
When combined with advances in technology, education, services, resources and security, all of this equates to one thing - opportunity. 
Opportunities for Indian citizens domestically and abroad. 
Opportunities for stronger regional growth and cooperation. 
And opportunities for stronger commercial links between Australia and India. 
When it comes to encouraging greater commercial cooperation with India, the Australian Government means business. 
India is already Australia's fastest growing major two-way trading partner - trade in goods was worth nearly $18 billion in 2008-09.
Our services exports to India are growing - $2.9 billion in 2008.
As is our foreign direct investment relationship, albeit off a low base. 
One important part of our relationship is of course the large number of Indian students who come to Australia - nearly one-fifth of the half a million students who come to our country.
These students represent the future of Indian and Australian business - and those who study together, stick together. 
And the Australian Government is committed to doing all that is physically responsible to ensure all international students in Australia have a safe and rewarding experience during their time as welcome guests in our nation.
Indian students are welcome guests in our country and we have an obligation to extend the hand of friendship and support to all our Indian visitors.
When we look at the wider economic relationship between our two countries, I am firmly of the view that we can do more. 
India is a dynamic and diversified economy with an acknowledged infrastructure deficit and challenges in meeting the growing food and energy needs of its burgeoning population. 
Australia is a resource-rich country with a relatively small domestic market but a number of compelling comparative advantages, particularly in energy and resources. 
India is itself richly endowed with many mineral and energy resources. 
And so there is significant potential for reciprocal investment in our resource sectors.
Mining exports are already the largest component of our bilateral trade. 
Some of Australia's biggest companies - Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton - have strong and enduring bonds with India. 
Meanwhile, Indian investors in Australia such as NRE Coke are helping Australian resources reach Indian markets. 
In August this year, India's Petronet LNG signed a 20-year agreement with Exxon Mobil Australia, securing the supply of 1.5 million tonnes of LNG per annum from Australia's Gorgon field. 
This is the first of what I hope will be many strategic energy deals. 
Likewise in the agricultural sector, Australia and India have much to gain from each other. 
Australia can meet domestic shortfalls in Indian production. 
And there are opportunities for two-way trade in seasonal items on a counter-seasonal basis. 
One area of cooperation that I am particularly excited about is the prospect of new technologies to support green growth. 
New and renewable energy is critical to our broader efforts to address climate change. 
India is a founding member of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute established by Australia to advance commercialisation of important climate technologies. 
The Australia-India Strategic Research Fund - Australia's largest bilateral science fund - has also strengthened the ties between our best and brightest scientists. 
Together, we can work to develop and trial commercially viable sources of renewable energy and low-carbon growth.
Of course, the commercial opportunities I have outlined today would be greatly strengthened through an Australia-India Free Trade Agreement. 
An FTA which is truly liberalising across all sectors, and consistent with our multilateral trading objectives, would enhance our trading relationship. 
Experience has shown us that greater ambition in an FTA means greater rewards. 
I firmly believe that a comprehensive, commercially-meaningful FTA between Australia and India could deliver substantial new market access for exporters and investors, and open up job opportunities in both countries. 
And this is good news for us all. 
The feasibility study into an FTA between our two countries is nearly complete, and I expect it to recommend in favour of commencing FTA negotiations soon - something I strongly support.
Our growing commercial links are already being reinforced through greater cooperation between Australia and India on the world stage. 
The designation of the G20 as the premier forum for global economic cooperation was an historic occasion for India and Australia. 
It also endorses the success of G20 in coordinating a global response to the economic crisis. 
And it reaffirms the central role of key emerging economies - particularly India - as the engine of global growth. 
But complacency is not an option. 
The ultimate success of the G20 forum rests in implementation of its important agenda. 
G20 leaders recognised that a strong, stable and balanced global economy relies on:
     * strengthened financial regulation;
     * representative, legitimate and well-resourced international financial institutions;
     * an open trading system;
     * strong labour markets; and
     * support for those most in need.
And I am pleased to say that Australia and India are working together to address these five key challenges. 
I firmly believe the G20 is the right forum for the future. 
We know what the global economic challenges are. 
And these impact on our countries and our region. 
The challenge going forward is how we ensure our region is playing its part in the global economic agenda.
I welcome the recognition by EAS Leaders at their October Summit of the need to initiate an EAS Finance Ministers' process. 
This is an important step towards greater economic cooperation in the region.
We must learn from the past.
As Bob Zoellick, President of the World Bank Group, said in September, and I quote:
"Today's upheaval did not occur from nowhere. The seeds were planted earlier."
And we must look to the future.
We have the economic potential and commercial creativity to build on our existing commercial links. 
Governments have a responsibility in unlocking this economic potential, and this is one of the key challenges I will be discussing with Prime Minister Singh. 
But that's only part of the story. 
Business leaders have an important role in recognising commercial opportunities and pursuing them - whether they are in Mumbai or Melbourne. 
That's why I'm delighted that our Trade and Commerce Ministers have agreed to establish a CEO forum to bring together the business elites of our two countries to discuss opportunities and impediments to greater economic cooperation. 
And I look forward to reading their recommendations in 2010 on what governments can do. 
After all, enhancing commercial cooperation between our two countries is a central pillar of the Australia-India strategic partnership and an opportunity to bring our countries closer together. 
This is an opportunity we just can't pass up.


India and Australia are two countries with shared interests and shared values. We are both pluralist democracies. We are both global in our outlook, but also closely integrated into the Asian region. Our economic relationship is expanding rapidly. We have a shared desire to enhance and maintain peace, stability and prosperity in Asia. We both value multilateral institutions and recognise the need to reform and renovate them. Our people-to-people links are broad-based and growing.
To give expression to the expansion and dynamism of our bilateral ties, we have agreed to take the relationship to the level of a strategic partnership.
Bilateral cooperation
In line with this strategic partnership, the two Prime Ministers affirmed their desire to intensify their contacts with each other. Dr Singh said he looked forward to visiting Australia at a mutually convenient date.
As two countries committed to political pluralism and parliamentary democracy, the Prime Ministers emphasised the need to reinvigorate bilateral parliamentary exchanges. Aware of the critical role that the young people of today will play in meeting the challenges and taking forward the initiatives of the 21st century, the two leaders welcomed the proposal to establish a new young political leaders program. A familiarisation visit of Australian young political leaders to India is likely to take place in 2010 to work out the modalities.
International and Regional Cooperation
Dr Singh and Mr Rudd reaffirmed the strong security and defence ties between India and Australia and welcomed a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation that will see the two countries intensify their efforts to maintain peace, stability and prosperity.
Regional and multilateral cooperation is an important strand of the India - Australia relationship. The two leaders reaffirmed the key role being played in the Asian region by bodies such as the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the Asia Europe Meeting. The Prime Ministers welcomed the outcomes of the Fourth East Asia Summit (EAS) held in Hua Hin on 25 October, and agreed that the agenda of the EAS should continue to be strengthened. In particular, they welcomed the agreement reached by EAS leaders to convene an EAS Finance Ministers' meeting and to have officials consider a Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia. Mr Rudd reaffirmed Australia's firm support for India's membership of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation grouping when the membership moratorium ends next year.
The Prime Ministers welcomed ongoing discussion about how the institutional architecture of the region could evolve over time. Dr Singh welcomed Mr Rudd's intention to convene a 1.5 track conference in Sydney in December 2009 to consider further Australia's Asia Pacific community initiative.
The Prime Ministers reconfirmed their support for reform of the United Nations to ensure it reflects the realities of the 21st century, including by modernising the United Nations Security Council (UNSC). In this context, Mr Rudd reiterated Australia's support for a permanent seat for India on the UNSC.
Mr Rudd and Dr Singh welcomed the decision to make the G20 the premier forum for international economic cooperation. Both countries stressed the need to increase agency-level cooperation in areas of mutual interest such as terrorism. Dr Singh and Mr Rudd reaffirmed their shared vision of a world free of nuclear weapons and agreed to work together in a spirit of partnership on global disarmament and non-proliferation.
Expanding Economic Links
The bilateral economic relationship continues to expand rapidly to mutual benefit and there is significant untapped potential for even stronger trade and investment links. The Prime Ministers noted that the Joint Study Group Report on the feasibility of Free Trade Agreement between the two countries will be submitted shortly and agreed to consider its recommendations expeditiously with a view to taking further action.
The Prime Ministers agreed to constitute an India-Australia CEOs Forum which would involve prominent companies from each country across the spectrum of key economic sectors.
Energy, climate change and water cooperation
Energy security and climate change are serious challenges facing the international community. The Prime Ministers reiterated that Australia and India believe that a comprehensive outcome at the Copenhagen Conference, in accordance with the principles and provisions of the UNFCCC and the Bali Action Plan, is critical to meeting the challenge of climate change. Mr. Rudd noted India's plans to meet its future energy requirements by exploring and developing all sources of energy, including nuclear, renewable and non-conventional resources.
Both sides recognized the benefits of enhancing bilateral commercial exchanges of renewable and non-renewable energy resources. The two Prime Ministers agreed that energy security concerns are best met by reconciling the long-term interests of both energy producing and energy consuming countries through a truly open and competitive energy market. Both sides also expressed their willingness to join efforts which promote a cooperative response to any global energy crisis, noting the important role of open and transparent energy trade and investment markets.
The Prime Ministers agreed that meaningful progress in the areas of energy security and climate change should be made through national, bilateral and multilateral efforts in a manner that does not limit the possibilities of accelerated economic and social development. The leaders agreed to work to address these global challenges.
Both leaders stressed the determination of Australia and India to work together to achieve a comprehensive, fair and effective outcome at Copenhagen, with the involvement of all countries in line with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.
In developing a global response to climate change, the leaders agreed to engage constructively with each other, and with other countries, including under the UNFCCC and in other multilateral fora such as the East Asia Summit (EAS) and the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP).
Practical collaboration by Indian and Australian agencies is continuing to meet the challenge of climate change, including under the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate. The Australian Government will provide A$1 million (4.315 crore rupees) to support a joint solar cooling and mini-grids project being undertaken by India's The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) and Australia's Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). The Prime Ministers noted the positive contribution being made by the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute (GCCSI). An International Advisory Panel, which includes a TERI representative, will play a key role in guiding the work of the GCCSI.
India and Australia are faced by the imperative of managing scarce water resources. Dr Singh and Mr Rudd welcomed the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding in the Field of Water Resource Management. Mr Rudd also announced Australia would devote A$20 million in funding over five years under the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research for joint research in dry-land agriculture in India.
A knowledge partnership
India and Australia are building a broad knowledge partnership, ranging from developing collaborative projects in education from primary school up to university, to conducting joint research in many fields. Science and technology cooperation is a critical part of this partnership.
Both Prime Ministers acknowledged the important role science plays in the bilateral relationship and the potential to work more closely in this area of shared strength. Building on the success of the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund, Australia will increase its commitment to bilateral research efforts to A$10 million per year for the next five years, which will be matched by India.
The expanded fund will introduce a new 'grand challenge' component, which will support large-scale research projects designed to deliver practical solutions to some of the major challenges shared by both countries. The areas of focus will be "energy", "food and water security", "health" and "the environment". The expanded fund will also introduce a substantial new fellowship program, comprising exchanges for early-career researchers from both countries and short-term visits by senior scientists. Both governments will continue to support leading-edge research in areas, including in information and communication technology, micro-electronic devices and materials, earth sciences, nanotechnology, astronomy and biotechnology.
The two Prime Ministers welcomed the recent agreement that India and Australia would hold an annual ministerial dialogue on education, which would include representatives from education institutions and industry. Mr Rudd welcomed India's proposal to revive Nalanda University.
Dr. Singh conveyed the high priority that the Government of India attaches to the safety, security and well-being of the Indian community in Australia. Mr Rudd reiterated that Australia had a zero tolerance approach to violence and was committed to taking all possible measures to protect the safety and welfare of all international students including Indian students. He provided Dr Singh with an update on the efforts of the Australian Government and its state government counterparts to enhance law enforcement, extend student welfare measures, re-register all education providers, audit vocational education and training institutions, and strengthen the integrity of the visa system.
Culture and Sport
Cultural ties between Australia and India are vibrant and expanding. The Prime Ministers agreed that strengthening these enduring people-to-people links to enhance mutual understanding is vital to the future of the relationship. In 2010, India will host a 'Days of India' cultural event in seven Australian cities. The Australia International Cultural Council has selected India as the focus country for a major year-long cultural program in 2012. The two Prime Ministers welcomed the decision to launch negotiations on a film co-production agreement covering a wide range of audio visual formats.
Sport has long occupied an important place in the India-Australia relationship. Australia is looking forward to participating in the Delhi 2010 Commonwealth Games and is supporting the preparations. The Australian Sports Outreach Program will be boosted to deliver more grass-roots sports-based activities to India's youth, women and people with a disability, in collaboration with Indian partners.


PM: Good morning everybody, I will make few remarks about Afghanistan and India then throw open to you if that is ok. Yesterday I visited Afghanistan. This was my third visit to Afghanistan as Prime Minister. It was both a privilege and an honour to spend time with the Australia troops on the ground and to spend some with time with them overnight as well. I thanked them on behalf of the Government and the Australian people for their service to the country, in what is a very difficult and dangerous operating environment.
Australia owes all our troops on the ground a debt of gratitude. Every day they are fighting to ensure that Afghanistan has a future, a future based on stability, a future based on that county's ability to provide security to its people and also to fight to ensure that that country does not become again a safe haven for terrorists such as those who undertook terrorist attacks in September 2001.
I was also in Afghanistan for Remembrance Day. Remembrance Day is a solemn day for all Australians. It is a solemn day in many countries around the world. It is particularly solemn when you are participating in Remembrance Day ceremonies in a theatre of war in which Australia is engaged. It takes on a special significance, particularly given the number of Australians who have lost their lives in Australia's service in that country.
While I was in Tarin Kowt, I also had the opportunity of spending several hours with General McChrystal, who is the commander of all ICAT forces in Afghanistan.
General McChrystal was able to brief me on the overall strategic situation in Afghanistan, the challenges of providing security, building governance as well as delivering development assistance in the face of what is a growing insurgency threat, particularly in the south of the country.
General McChrystal and I discussed with the Australian Defence minister, Senator Faulkner the particular importance of Oruzgan Province in that context. General McChrystal had nothing but praise for the performance of Australian troops in the field. He particularly had praise also for our embedded officers working in his command headquarters in Kabul, and for our Australians working in command headquarters of General Rodriguez, the joint operational command in Kabul, as well as those who are within the command operations in Kandahar in the south.
General McChrystal and others commented to me, that the training function being performed by Australian troops on the ground for the Afghan National Army is absolutely first class, and represents the way in which this training should be done. That is, training with the ANA, Afghan National Army, in the field, on active operations. This is a model for the way in which training, well broadly, needs to be undertaken for the Afghan National Army in the future.
I also received briefings from Major General Mark Kelly on the specific activities of our mentoring program of the Afghan National Army, in country, the reconstruction efforts being undertaken by the reconstruction task force as well as the particular operation with our special forces.
I also met with representatives of the civilian component of our commitment led by our Ambassador in Kabul and the governor of Oruzgan Province and the Minister for (inaudible) and rehabilitation and development. I also had the opportunity to speak directly on the telephone with President Karzai concerning our future cooperation with his government on the development task and the security task within his country.
Our forces on the ground have achieved real success since the last time I visited there at the end of last year. Specifically our forces have significantly disrupted insurgent networks in Oruzgan. The perimeter within which they operate has now expanded compared with where we were twelve months ago and this of course has not been achieved without sacrifice.
Also, the increased training now being provided by Afghan battalions as part of the raising of the fourth brigade of the Afghan National Army is proceeding and training has began of the third Afghan kandak, that is, an Afghan battalion as part of the fourth brigade.
On the infrastructure front, we have completed important infrastructure projects including the rebuilding of schools, of medical centres, of roads, of bridges as well as barracks for Afghan troops. Also through the activity of the trades training centre at the base at Tarin Kowt, we are also providing active training for hundreds of trades people who are now out there working on projects which have been delivered by Australia and other forms of national development assistance. In other words, those who are trained with skills are now out there working as contractors, obtaining work to build projects. So it is not just the construction of projects it's also the employment opportunities which have arisen as a result.
Our mission in Afghanistan remains difficult and it remains very dangerous. I would not wish to underestimate the challenges which lie ahead particularly given the challenges arising from the deepening and growing insurgency threat on the part of the Taliban in the southern part of the country.
I've made it clear on many occasions that Australia is in Afghanistan for the long haul. I reiterated that statement when I was in Afghanistan. I reiterated that statement also in my discussions with General McChrystal.
Turning to India, today in India I'll be meeting with President Patil, Vice President Ansari, the Minister for the Environment, the President of the Congress Party, Sonia Gandhi as well as spending discussions this evening, and dinner this evening, with Prime Minister Singh and other Indian Government Ministers.
India is a fundamentally important relationship for Australia. It is so strategically, it is so economically. India already is Australia's fourth largest trading partner. Our exports here, grew 65 per cent in 2008 -09 over the previous year. India is also expected to be the world's third largest economy by 2030. Therefore we are dealing with a major regional and global economic powerhouse of the future. Our challenge is to deepen and broaden our relationship and engagement with India for the long term.
This visit of mine to India comes on top of recent visits by the Deputy Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, the Immigration Minister and the Trade Minister. There have been, in the period that the Government has been in office, some ten Indian ministerial visits to Australia. There have been nine from Australia to India, this marks the tenth in our direction. This represents a deepening intensity of the two-way relationship.
Australia's and India's interests are converging. Our economies are increasingly complimentary. This country also represents a model in terms of how democracies operate in the developing world. Representing, as it does, the world's largest democracy. We also work with India, not just bi-laterally, but regionally and globally. Regionally of course, with the East-Asian summit, globally through the G20 and through the United Nations.
We're also working closely with India both through the United Nations and the G20 deliberations on climate change. We're also working actively of course, with the Indians on the whole challenge of global economic response to the global financial crisis. This has been an important and growing general relationship at the global and regional level.
Finally, we have also, together with our friends in India, indicated that we'll be expanding in particular, overall cooperation when it comes to science and technology. We the Australian Government will be investing some $50 million over five years of increased funding for the Australia/ India strategic research fund. India will be replicating that funding from its own direction as well.
These research projects will concentrate on a range of priority areas including renewable energy, agricultural research and vaccines. In addition Australia is investing in $1 million in a joint solar cooling project and increasing our existing investment to $20 million over five years for research in to dry-land farming through the Australian centre for international agriculture research. In so many areas India and Australia are natural partners.
I conclude by saying this - in many respects the Australia/ India relationship in previous decades has been something of stop-start. There has been something in the Australia/ India relationship of on-again, off-again. This is of no particular responsibility to any Australian government that preceded the one that I lead or is it the responsibility of the previous Indian government. It's a reflection of the facts. Therefore our challenge for the future, given we are engaging such a strategically important country as India and an economy of such regional and global weight as India. To turn this stop-start relationship in the past into one which is on a deeper, broader, comprehensive, strategic basis for the future.
In my private discussions with Mr Singh, that has been our common resolve and we have reflected on this in many discussions in G20 and other meetings around the world over the last year or two. The purpose of this visit to India today is to consolidate that and take the relationship forward on a comprehensive, sustainable and strategic level for the future across all fields.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it is now our eighth year in Afghanistan, you talk of a (inaudible) for the long haul (inaudible) twice as long as the Second World War. You've just written another blank cheque haven't you?
PM: No. I've simply reiterated what I've said already to the Australian public at home. Which is we are in Afghanistan for the long haul. Secondly, I've reiterated to General McChrystal and of course our partners in Afghanistan, our mission statement. What's our mission statement? To help train the Afghan National Army and specifically the battalion constituent parts of the fourth brigade of the Afghan National Army so in time we can transfer security for the province of Oruzgan to the Afghan National Army.
Secondly, supplementing that, with intense training efforts now being undertaken by the Australian Federal Police and others in Tarin Kowt at the Afghan national police force. Already our training officers from the AFP have graduated more than 450 Afghan national police trainers from the police training college located within our base there.
The third element is of course, providing a viable economic future for the province itself and in my discussions yesterday with the Governor of the province, the Governor of Oruzgan. We will be deepening our development assistance relationship with Afghanistan and province in terms of building that third leg of our engagement.
What is our mission? Our mission is to transfer responsibility for the security, for the policing and the civilian administration of that province to the Afghan people, at the conclusion of our mission. That will take time. I've been upfront with the Australian people at home about this and said it will require us being there for the long haul and what I said yesterday reiterated that.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) in light of the imminent withdrawal of the Dutch (inaudible) And seeing we are in India, do you think it's time that these emerging regional powerhouses like India and China stepped up to the plate and started to contribute to the major security concerns in the region and put some boots on the ground in Afghanistan?
PM: Let me take the first part of your question which concerns the future of, sorry I got distracted, what's the first part of your question about security?
JOURNALIST: The Dutch.
PM: The Dutch. That's right. There is a complex debate underway in The Hague at the moment, concerning the Dutch parliament and concerning the Dutch coalition government. I last night spoke with Prime Minister Balkenende of the Netherlands about that. This is a difficult debate in his country and of course we in Australia and our American allies would want to see the Netherlands have a longer term role.
Secondly, we appreciate the fact that we have worked closely with the Dutch up until now and they have been great partners. In fact the last time I travelled to Afghanistan, because of weather conditions, Dutch apache helicopters transported us from Kandahar into Tarin Kowt and their support with so many of our operations has been very good.
Thirdly, obviously there are real problems with the rising Taliban insurgency in the south of the country. What does the south of the country mean? Provinces like Kandahar, provinces (inaudible) provinces like also the northern periphery of those provinces, Oruzgan. I wish to be very frank about the depth of the challenge which lies ahead, but equally frank about the importance of reflecting a common resolve on the part of the allies of the United States and the partners of the Afghanistan government that we will not leave that country in the lurch. That we will be with that country for the long haul.
It is in Australia's national interest that we don't not surrender it again to be a training ground for terrorists. Let us reflect on the fact that it has not been one since the Afghanistan war of 2001-02.
On the second part which is about China and India. My understanding from previous discussions with the Afghanistan government is that China is now running a development assistance program with the Afghanistan government. India, I understand is also enhancing its diplomatic and development assistance profile in that country.
On the question of which countries contribute what by way of military effort, of course that's a call for those individual countries. My concern, as Prime Minister of Australia, is to work effectively with the assets we have on the ground with our allies and partners in that country and very closely of course with the United States.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you (inaudible) the warmest spirit of the Hawke and Keating governments economic reforms. What does it say about your stomach for reform, that you've been unable to cut through the vested interests of the publishing industry to deliver cheaper books for Australia?
PM: It means that the 27 of areas of micro-economic reform which we've agreed through the Council Australian of Governments proceed apace. Including for the first time, reforms such as, a common approach to occupational health and safety across all governments. A reform which all previous Australian governments have regarded as too hard, too difficult to even touch. We're embracing that and we've made significant progress on it and in other areas.
On the question of the book industry, obviously it's a controversial debate in Australia and once which actually also goes to the heart of Australian culture as well. Difficult decision, I fully support the decision of the Australian Cabinet. Furthermore can I say, when it comes to our micro-economic reform agenda, it is vast, it is comprehensive. It's across the entire regulatory agenda of the Commonwealth and the states. It is proceeding at pace.
If you speak to those who follow these debates closely, including the Business Council of Australia, they cannot point to a previous time in Australian economic history when there has not been a more intensive effort across so many regulatory reform measures between the Australian and state governments.
Remember, the call us at the 2020 Summit by the Australian business community was to create a seamless national economy, to undertake fundamental review and reform of the Australian taxation system, the first in a quarter of a century, in order to produce a tax system which is suits our designs in the 21st century. Our reform agenda proceeds apace.
(inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you think the issue of uranium (inaudible) Prime Minister Singh (inaudible)
PM: On this question, remember that Australia worked very closely with the Government of India and the Government of the United States in obtaining the support of the nuclear suppliers group so that India could obtain, shall I say, the supply of inputs to its own nuclear program from around the world. We worked actively and constructively with New Delhi on that. We did so, I've got say, in close concert with the then Bush administration. We also worked in close concert with other countries around the world, some of whom had reservations about that action.
On the question of bilateral uranium sales, can I say that our policy remains governed by the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. That has been the case in the past. The Non-Proliferation Treaty and our policy in relation to it, as underpinning our attitude to uranium sales is not targeted at any individual country. It has been long-standing Australian Government policy.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The relationship which we have with the Indonesian Government is a very, very good relationship, and together with President Yudhoyono and others, we work through a range of difficult security challenges every day of the week, most of which never make it to the front pages of any newspaper in the world, or in Australia. And these go to the whole breadth of counter-terrorism and go to the whole breadth of people smuggling, the whole breadth of all the other international criminal activities in which we're engaged, quite apart from our expanding border security cooperation.
In relation to this specific vessel, can I just say this, consistent with what I've said in Australia, no protests, no threats of protest, no threats of hunger strikes, no hunger strikes, will cause the Australian Government to change its policy on border protection. Can I say in addition to that that we, therefore, will work through this, as we have done with other challenges in the past and will do so in the future - calmly, methodically, and we're doing so in close cooperation with our Indonesian partners.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say you want (inaudible) Isn't that saying that NATO (inaudible) south of the country, and following on from that, your meeting with General McChrystal, do you share not only his view that (inaudible) more troops, but without naming a number (inaudible)?
PM: Firstly, given the density of the security challenge in Afghanistan, including the mounting Taliban insurgency in the south of the country, it follows that General McChrystal has made certain recommendations about enhancing the global military effort in Afghanistan, including recommendations to his own Government. How President Obama responds to the McChrystal report is a matter for the Government of the United States of America. I think it is important for all countries around the world to reflect on their contributions to Afghanistan.
Remember, what this Government did in March of this year was increase our own troop commitment by some 40 percent. We are now actively taking on broad training responsibilities for raising an Afghan army brigade. That is necessary to fulfil our mission. It's a necessary precondition also for Australia exiting that country.
Secondly, you ask the question about the intensity of the insurgency threat in the south.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say this: I want to be blunt with the Australian people about the depth of the challenge we face. I see no point at all about gilding the lily and just saying that this is going to be some walkover. It will not be. However, the task of all countries, including ours, is to not leave our friends and partners in the lurch. It is to stay for the long haul.
Plainly, there has been a mounting insurgency in the south of the country. That is true. We simply however, have two alternatives in response to that fact. One is to turn tail and run. The second is to confront the challenge. Australia is on the side of those who confront the challenge.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can you elaborate on the conversation with your Dutch counterpart. Did you actually put a request in for the Dutch to stay (inaudible) The Traveston Dam decision, is that a rebuff to Anna Bligh?
PM: I can't see the connection between your two questions, but I'll work one up (inaudible). I flew over some dams recently in Afghanistan. Extraordinary landscape, that country.
Can I just add one, sort of, end to that question which you've raised before I go to the two that you had put. You know, there's a lot of hard things happening out there in Afghanistan, really hard things, but each time you speak to our troops coming back from operations, it's pretty inspiring, what they are actually achieving on the ground. I mean, genuinely inspiring stuff. Lots of basic courage, lots of real heroism, and making real changes on the ground.
Our achievements in Oruzgan Province have been, frankly, against Afghan national standards, quite outstanding. And there are bits of good news which emerge as well. I mean, to be able to sit down yesterday and with General McChrystal have an active conversation with Sabi the dog, this is Trooper Donaldson's dog, who is, I don't know if you're across this story, but it's just quite remarkable.
This dog has been missing for 14 months, since the incident in which Trooper Donaldson was subsequently awarded his Victoria Cross, and then Sabi, as I'm advised, then was taken by the other side, and then Americans subsequently found Sabi and Sabi has been returned to Tarin Kowt. And now it'll be working with AQIS and others to ensure Sabi's eventual return to Australia. I fear AQIS may be the greatest challenge.
Can I just say, things like that, they may seem small, but in fact the symbolism is quite strong. The symbolism of it is us, out there, doing a job. We haven't awarded any Australian a Victoria Cross for 40 years. Trooper Donaldson stands out there as an Australian hero, and now his dog, Sabi, back home in one piece. A genuinely nice pooch as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: (inaudible) interpretation for General McChrystal. Now, back to your points about the Dutch, well, I'd better conclude soon, and Traveston.
Look, I had a good conversation with Jan Peter Balkenende last night. We know each other well, we're good friends. But as you would expect, in any diplomatic conversation, I don't go to its content. We have stated in the past that we would our friends in the Netherlands to remain with us in some form or another for the long term, with us in Afghanistan. There's nothing new in that, but I won't go to the detail of the conversation with Prime Minister Balkenende last night.
On the question of Traveston, I have said consistently, for a long, long time, that Minister Garrett, as he's required under the EPBC Act, would make an independent, unfettered decision based on the environmental merits of the matter put before him. He's already provided as I'm advised, in his statement an indication of his decision. I understand that there's a formal requirement of the Act that there be a further process which ensues. Therefore I don't wish to comment on the substance of his decision, other than I have every confidence, as I've said in the past, that the Minister is properly discharging his functions under the Act.
I'm actually late for something, so can I just take one here, and one there, but it's got to be quick, OK?
JOURNALIST: The ABC (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say on that I would really prefer to be further briefed. I've been actively engaged on a few other matters in recent times, so I'd actually rather get fully briefed before answering that one, if that's OK.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) back to the Oceanic Viking issue, and (inaudible) offering settlement processing in a month. Now, that's actually much better than people who get on Christmas Island. Why would (inaudible)
PM: Can I say firstly, on the contents of the document you refer to, I am not fully briefed. I got in here late last night. Secondly, normal resettlement processes, consistent with the UNHCR would apply. In terms of timeframes, my understanding, in various circumstances around the world, those timeframes vary between shorter and longer. The specifics concerning this particular exchange with those on board I am not familiar with. I'm confident they'd be consistent with overall UNHCR processes.
Folks, having said that, I've really got to zip (inaudible)


It is indeed a great honour to be here in Delhi and to have the opportunity to address such a distinguished audience on the future of Australia's relationship with India.
It is also an honour that I speak to you today as a guest of the Indian Council of World Affairs which has such a rich tradition of nurturing international relations since its inception in 1943.
And further to speak to you in this building whose foundation stone was laid by India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in 1950.
Walking into Sapru House you feel immediately immersed in the sense of purpose of this great institution.
An institution that over the decades has hosted so many critical meetings that have demonstrated India's long-standing desire for international understanding, engagement and the development of a peaceful and prosperous international order.
I am delighted that today the annual Australia India Roundtable, co-hosted by the Lowy Institute and the Indian Council of World Affairs, is taking place in the room next door.
There is much to be had in the exchange of ideas because ideas have so much power to shape how we see the world, how we act in the world - and how we shape our world's future together.
30 years ago, as a student at the Australian National University, I became fascinated by the study of Asia.
I became fascinated by the conceptualisations of Asia from the continent itself.
I became fascinated by the vision of Asia's future as captured 30 years earlier by Prime Minister Nehru and the newly emerging modern India.
With the benefit of the hindsight of more than 60 years, Nehru's vision expressed at the Asia Relations Conference he convened in Delhi in April 1947 on the eve of India's independence is remarkable.
As Nehru observed:
"We stand at the end of an era and on the threshold of a new period of history. Standing on this watershed which divides two epochs of human history and endeavour, we can look back on our long past and look forward to the future that is taking shape before our eyes. Asia ... has suddenly become important again in world affairs. If we view the millennia of history, this continent of Asia ... has played a mighty role in the evolution of humanity. It was there that civilisation began and man started on his unending adventure of life. Here the mind of man searched unceasingly for truth and the spirit of man shone out like a beacon which lightened up the whole world."
Reflecting on the international conference which he audaciously convened some months before India's independence, Nehru continued:
"Today this isolation (of Asia) is breaking down because of many reasons, political and other. The imperialisms are fading away.... This Conference itself is significant as an expression of that deeper urge to the mind and spirit of Asia which has persisted in spite of the isolationism which grew up during the years of European domination. As that domination goes, the walls that surrounded us fall down and we look at each other again and meet as old friends long parted. In this Conference and in this work there are no leaders and no followers. All countries of Asia have to meet together on an equal basis in a common task and endeavour."
Speaking a decade before I was even born, Nehru saw already what we have now witnessed: the rise of Asia following centuries of European colonialism to become the centre of global strategic and economic gravity that beckons for the century ahead.
I am a graduate in Asian Studies at the Australian National University.
A great university that brought together the systematic study of the high civilisations of East Asia (my own specialisation), South Asia, Central Asia and South-East Asia.
It was during my undergraduate days that I had the great privilege studying from time to time at the feet of the great professor Arthur Basham.
His enduring masterpiece The Wonder That Was India became required reading.
When I say required, it was not that we were forced to read it.
It was that Basham's passion for Indian civilisation was infectious.
This seminal book was recently re-issued here in India - suggesting that Basham's judgments have stood the test of time.
Basham sitting in his study patiently introduced me to the impact of India on China through the arrival of waves of Indian Buddhist missionaries from the Han to the Tang - bringing with them entirely different notions of the role of the state to that which had already become entrenched through China's Confucianism.
Basham, in my memory of him, was a great scholar, a patient teacher, and an extraordinary Anglo-Australian exponent of Indian civilisation and her great influence around the world over the centuries - whether in religion, philosophy, culture, science, commerce or politics.
Including through the 13th century centre of Buddhist learning, Nalanda University, that helped to spread Indian thought across Asia.
And can I say that Australia is pleased to support Prime Minister Singh's intention to revive this great regional centre of learning.
Of course, India's contribution to the world is both ancient and modern.
Ancient through the power of its civilisation.
Modern through its great example as the world's biggest democracy.
Modern through the impact of its economy, its science and its technology.
Modern also in India's engagement in the institutions of global and regional governance and the great challenges of our time.
It is here where India and Australia have a common history and a common future.
Our bilateral and broader regional engagement extends back to the first days of independence.
I referred earlier to Nehru's 1947 initiative in convening the first pan-Asian conference in New Delhi.
What is important to note here is that Australia also attended that conference as an observer - at Nehru's invitation.
As Nehru observed in his opening remarks:
"We welcome also observers from Australia and New Zealand because we have many problems in common, especially in the Pacific and in the Southeast region of Asia, and we have to co-operate together to find solutions."
Nehru's insights on Australia's common destiny with India and our wider region were shared on the Australian side, under Australia's Labor Government of Prime Minister Chifley.
As Chifley's foreign minister Herbert Vere ("Doc") Evatt said on the occasion of India's independence in 1947:
"Our geographical proximity and our common interest in the affairs of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia naturally throw our lots closely together." 
Australia has therefore long recognised that India's strategic importance to us extends well beyond the Indian Ocean.
In a publication by the Indian Council of World Affairs on regional security in 1948, Foreign Minister Evatt also wrote:
"In any approach to the problem of organising security in the Pacific, Australia naturally recognises the special position of India." 
For his part, Nehru not only recognised Australia's role in Asia, he welcomed it.
Speaking at the Asian-African Conference in Bandung, Indonesia in 1955, Nehru sent his greetings to us, saying, and I quote:
"Australia and New Zealand are almost in our region. They certainly do not belong to Europe, much less to America. They are next to us and I should like Australia and New Zealand to come nearer to Asia."
Since Nehru spoke those words, Australia over the decades has become an integral part of the region.
My central message to you today is that the Australian Government sees the strengthening of the Australia-India relationship as a natural extension of Nehru's original vision.
Furthermore, it is time we simply both got on with it.
And here I would like to become a blunt Australian, if you will forgive me.
For too long there has been a waxing and a waning interest between our two countries.
We keep rediscovering each other, only to then lose our way.
When Australian Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, addressed the Indian Council of World Affairs in September last year, he described our relationship like this, and I quote:
"Australia's past approach to India has been like a 20/20 cricket match: short bursts of enthusiasm followed by lengthy periods of inactivity."
But as the Foreign Minister also said, that 'period of fits and starts is over'.
This relationship is bigger, much bigger, than the classical "three c's" of cricket, the Commonwealth and a common language.
And the time has well and truly come to lift our vision.
To broaden our engagement.
And more than half a century later, to realise the ambitions of our political forebears.
Because together, there is much we can do for each other - and for the peace and prosperity of the region and the world.
As Prime Minister of Australia, my objective is to build a comprehensive, enduring strategic partnership between Australia and India that will not result in yet another false dawn.
The important economic and strategic links between Australia and India that our predecessors identified over half a century ago only continue to grow, making it never more opportune than now to cement a significant and lasting partnership for the 21st century.
It is on this that I would like to focus the remainder of my remarks:
     * First, I would like to give you a brief sense of how I see Australia's place in the world in the context of India's changing place in the world;
     * Second, I will summarise the scope I see for strengthening the bilateral relationship; and
     * Third, I will outline where changing global and regional dynamics present even further scope for Australia and India to work together for mutual benefit.
Australia and India are no longer the countries of the 1940s.
We have both changed.
And with this change, our interests have come ever closer together.
I describe Australia as a middle power committed to the principles of creative middle-power diplomacy.
Meaning that we both have global and regional interests, and the resources, capabilities and outlook to prosecute these interests and to protect them.
Australia is the 14th largest economy in the world.
And the fourth largest in Asia after Japan, China and India.
We have the fourth largest pool of funds under management globally.
Our stock exchange is the second-largest in the region after Japan.
And we have a dynamic and resilient economy.
Australia was the only member of the 33-member OECD so far not to go into recession - but in fact grew - in the face of the Global Economic Crisis.
Of the world's nine remaining AA+ rated banks, four are Australian.
We have the lowest debt of all major advanced economies, and the second-lowest unemployment rate.
Australia has the 13th largest military budget worldwide, the fifth largest in Asia.
We are among the top 10 military contributors in Afghanistan, and the largest non-NATO contributor.
We have forces serving in 13 countries around the world.
Australia is now fundamentally enmeshed in Asia.
Seven of our top 10 export markets are in Asia.
Over 60 per cent of our exports go to Asian markets.
And last year close to 300,000 students from Asia came to study in Australia.
Australia is spearheading efforts in the Pacific region to secure stability and security for small island states, including our leading role in supporting the establishment of newly independent East Timor, stabilising the Solomon Islands and pressing for an early return to democracy in Fiji.
We are also a recognised and active player in confronting global challenges:
     * first, through our membership - along with India - of the G20, we are members of the premier institution of global economic governance;
     * second, through Australia playing a leading role in addressing the pressing global challenge of climate change, and
     * third, through Australia's establishment - with Japan - of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament - which will deliver its seminal report in the months ahead.
Australia's society is also changing as our engagement with our region deepens.
Over the past few decades, Australia has transformed from a predominantly Anglo-Celtic society to a vibrant, multicultural community.
Our people speak more than 300 languages, with nearly one-third of our people having migrated to Australia since 1945.
Today close to half - 43 percent - of the Australian population was born overseas or have a parent who was born overseas.
So in summary, the Australia of the 21st Century is a modern, democratic, diverse and prosperous nation with both global and regional interests and pursuing an activist policy of international engagement in the prosecution of those interests.
For India's future, this audience is more familiar with the complexity of this narrative than any visiting Australian Prime Minister, but please allow me to present an Australian perspective.
India is emerging as a significant global power.
India is also a critical country in the region to which the centre of global strategic and economic weight for the century ahead is now shifting.
By 2030, India is projected to overtake China as having the world's largest population.
Economically, India looks set for steady, robust growth - with India's economy last year exceeding US$1 trillion.
Some forecast India will be the world's third-largest economy by 2025.
This comes from sustained economic reform, sound macro-economic management and rapidly growing international trade and investment - policies pioneered by your prime minister in the early 90s, which have dramatically lowered rates of poverty in India over the last 15 years.
India is also expanding its strategic reach and capabilities.
It is forging closer links with the United States and leaving a larger footprint across the Indian Ocean. 
The Indian Navy is the fifth-largest in the world.
Globally, India is increasingly engaging in and exerting influence through the multilateral system - whether in the UN, G20, the East Asia Summit or beyond.
India is a confident, outward-looking power intent on securing its rightful place in the world through an active foreign policy firmly anchored in her national interests.
In short, India is going to play a more prominent role in shaping global and regional security and prosperity.
India is a democracy.
India's priority is economic growth.
India has deep and abiding commitment to regional peace.
As the balance of power in Asia shifts and evolves, these attributes will become even more important.
Australia seeks a region where the peace and prosperity of the last several decades continues into the future.
It is crucial that the shifts in economic power from west to east do not open the door to instability and conflict.
History teaches us that times of change in the distribution of global power can be potentially dangerous.
And this is why an India which is economically strong, an India anchored in the principles of pluralism and political democracy, an India deeply committed to the building of the global and regional institutions of cooperation is so important.
I strongly believe that Australia and India, as never before, are in a place where we have a great deal to offer each other.
And that it is in our mutual interests to maximise the opportunities this presents for our mutual advantage.
I envisage a strategic partnership with India where we can build a long-term comprehensive and integrated relationship that covers the economic, political, security and cultural spectrum.
I believe both our governments now recognise this potential.
If senior level visits are any guide, we have had a record 10 Indian Ministers visit Australia since early 2008.
Nine Australian Ministers have visited India in the same period.
I make up the 10 to equal the score.
So both our teams on the field of play are well deployed.
On the economic front, India is now Australia's fifth largest export market for goods and services, and is rapidly moving to become our third largest export market.
It is our fastest growing major merchandise export market.
This is built on a strong foundation of mineral and petroleum resources and energy.
But India is also now the sixth largest market for Australia's services, such as information and communications technology, education, tourism, finance, mining, construction and software development.
From India's point of view - as the world's fifth largest energy consumer - there is a real and growing interest in Australia as a reliable, cost-competitive and long-term supplier of energy.
I would like to see us forge a strong energy partnership.
We have made a strong start.
We are working together under five Action Plans in the areas of mines, coal, new and renewable energy, petroleum and natural gas and power.
Indian companies are also making significant investments in Australia.
In August, India's Petronet LNG signed a US$20 billion deal with Exxon-Mobil for the new Gorgon project in Western Australia.
This was the first long-term gas contract between our two nations.
I appreciate that there is one aspect of the energy relationship which remains unresolved: Australia's long-standing position on the export of uranium to countries that are not party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
This is not a policy directed at India.
It applies globally and it has since 1978 under different Australian Governments.
We have not sought to isolate India on critical nuclear policy concerns.
In fact the reverse is true.
Australia was an active supporter in the Nuclear Suppliers Group of lifting the nuclear moratorium against India following the US-India nuclear deal.
This reflected Australia's appreciation of India's non-proliferation record.
The government understands that India looks to the day when its ambitious civil nuclear energy program can include Australian uranium.
The strength of the India-Australia relationship is reflected in the capacity of both governments to work beyond this different policy approach.
And it still leaves plenty of room to build an enduring energy partnership at a time when growing competition for energy and energy resources places a premium on such a partnership.
On the broader trade and investment relationship, I welcome the imminent conclusion of the joint feasibility study on a prospective Free Trade Agreement between Australia and India.
I expect the study to recommend in favour of a bilateral FTA and look forward to launching negotiations soon after.
I look forward to building an open trade and investment relationship with India - as we pursue similar FTAs with the other major economies of the region including Japan, China and Korea.
This includes intensification of our collaboration in science and technology.
Today Australia and India will launch a $100 million collaboration project on science and technology.
Both our countries have strong traditions in the physical and life sciences and related technologies and I believe the potential in these fields is vast.
Whether related to strategic change in East Asia; combating terrorism (including in Afghanistan); ensuring maritime security; acting on transnational crimes including people smuggling; or working together on new security challenges such as natural disasters - there is great scope for security cooperation between our two countries to broaden further.
Our defence forces are intensifying cooperation, with over 50 activities last year including joint exercises, and in particular maritime exercises.
This year we also inaugurated regular defence talks between the chiefs of our defence forces, and strengthened intelligence and counter-terrorism cooperation.
I am committed to seeing this security cooperation strengthen between our two countries.
I believe this is in both our interests and the interest of long-term regional stability.
Another area of increasingly tapped potential is our people-to-people links.
Around 250,000 people of Indian heritage live in Australia, and we value the contribution they bring to our society, our economy, our nation.
Last year 115,000 Indian citizens visited Australia.
We also have close to 100,000 Indian students studying in our country, with India recently overtaking China to become the largest source of overseas students in Australia.
On current estimates, there is a shortfall of 1.6 million university places in India and this gap is increasing, making our partnership in this area increasingly important to meet the education needs of Indian students.
As you all probably know, there has been recent controversy over a series of attacks on Indian students in Australia.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I am deeply disturbed and disgusted by attacks of violence against any foreign students studying in our country as our guests.
They have been criminal attacks targeting Indian students for the little money they earn to support their studies.
These attacks will not be tolerated.
They will be dealt with by the full force of the Australian law enforcement and criminal justice systems.
The Australian Government is working with all our state governments to make sure everything is done to protect overseas students and make their experience in Australia a positive one.
The Australian Government is committed to doing its utmost to guarantee that the sons and daughters Indian parents entrust to the care of the Australian community remain safe and come home with a valuable education and wonderful memories.
No government can guarantee that no acts of violence will occur.
But let us calmly work together to deal with future challenges as they arise.
I would like to end today by focusing on what I see as the growing scope for Australia and India to work together on global and regional challenges.
We are now less than 30 days away from the 15th Conference of the Parties in Copenhagen.
This meeting is an historic opportunity to tackle perhaps the greatest environmental challenge of our time.
This is not a challenge that any country can meet alone.
Leadership from major emerging countries - especially India - will be essential if we are to see a global deal on climate change in Copenhagen in December.
Already India has made significant domestic commitments through its National Action Plan on Climate Change.
The plan is an ambitious set of actions across energy efficiency, solar power and forestry.
The world was encouraged and inspired by Prime Minister Singh's statement made at the New York UN Summit that India is willing to quantify its emission reductions and contribute to the global goal of reducing emissions.
And today I am looking forward to building on our bilateral climate change cooperation between, including through the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP).
The global economy of today is more inter-connected, complex and interdependent than ever before.
There is no better illustration of this fact than the way in which the recent financial crisis in the US quickly spread to the UK, Europe and then the rest of the world, causing the global economic crisis and the first contraction in the global economy since IMF records began.
The lesson of this crisis has been that in our inter-connected world, cooperation is vital.
One of the most important challenges for Australia this year has been working with India and others in the G20 to frame and implement a global policy response to the gravest economic crisis we have confronted since the great depression.
The G20 brings together economies representing:
     * around 90 per cent of global market capitalisation;
     * around 85 per cent of global GDP;
     * around 80 per cent of global trade; and
     * more than two-thirds of the world's population.
The G20 also draws together:
     * five countries from the Americas;
     * five from Asia;
     * five from Europe; and
     * five from elsewhere, including South Africa, Russia and Australia.
Critically it includes India and China which, between them, will shape the pattern of history in the 21st century.
In this, you are seeing a rebalancing of global architecture to reflect new global economic and strategic realities.
This is something that Australia strongly supports, and we played a key role in pressing for this rebalancing, including through leading G20 work on IMF reform, to better reflect the growing economic weight of emerging economies such as India.
Throughout this year, we in the G20 have taken decisions on:
     * global financial stimulus;
     * a global framework for toxic asset management within banks;
     * the resourcing of the IMF to deal with any future institutional collapses;
     * the implementation of extensive financial sector reforms; and
     * measures against trade protectionism.
The IMF has estimated that actions stemming from the London G20 Summit in March this year actually cushioned the global economy which had been in virtual freefall since the preceding September.
At the G20 Pittsburgh Summit in September, we agreed on a series of measures to shore up sustained and balanced global economic growth into the future, and to entrench the G20 as the world's premier economic forum.
In all this, Australia and India are working together as never before on matters that affect the wellbeing of literally everyone on this planet.
I look forward to working with India on this great global endeavour.
Finally, Australia and India should be natural partners in the Asia-Pacific.
We both have long-established, significant and growing interests in this region.
We have a shared vision in seeing habits of cooperation - and not conflict - develop, as the centre of economic and strategic gravity shifts to this region over coming decades.
This is why we so strongly support Indian participation in all the key regional forums.
Such as the East Asia Summit.
Such as the ASEAN Regional Forum.
And that is why we support India's membership of APEC.
It is also why I see India as central to Australia's proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community by 2020.
In proposing this initiative I am guided by a simple but deep conviction.
That we can act to shape a future that we want to have.
Or be passive as the future shapes us in ways we wish it never had.
The challenge of the Asia-Pacific is to manage the inevitable stresses and strains of shifting economic and strategic contours.
The Asia Pacific is where the big power relationships most closely intersect.
It is the crucible where the relationships among the US, India, China, Japan and Russia are forged.
It is here also that the template for the US-China relationship will emerge and where the complementary and competitive interests of the major powers will need to be managed, harmonised and reconciled.
We need strong regional engagement and a strong regional mechanism to ensure that strategic cooperation rather than friction - or worse, strategic polarisation - prevails.
Nobody wants a strategic fault line through Asia.
Nor should anybody see such a fault line as inevitable.
We also need a strong mechanism to deal with the host of other pressures that will come to bear in the Asia-Pacific such as:
     * increasing potential for regional strategic and territorial competition;
     * competition for scarce resources;
     * the challenges of pollution, energy security, counter-terrorism, people smuggling and climate change; and
     * the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
There is also the continued challenge of strengthening regional economic integration in increasingly interdependent regional economies.
I would like to see an Asia Pacific Community evolve with the ability to address this spectrum of economic, political and security challenges.
At present, none of the current regional institutions do this.
There is growing regional recognition of this fact.
And there is growing interest in discussing the creation of the right mechanism to help manage what will be an increasingly crowded strategic landscape.
This discussion will continue at a conference Australia is hosting in early December in Sydney, and I look forward to strong Indian participation.
Australia and India are heavily engaged on many levels across the economic, political, security and other spheres. 
We are both pluralist democracies.
We are both significant economies.
We are both globally engaged.
We both seek to forge our national wealth through open economies.
And we both want to see the stability of Asia underpinned by principles of open regionalism, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and the creation of multilateral institutions that engender strategic confidence and transparency.
Ours is a relationship growing fast but with much room to grow further.
We should seize the opportunities that our converging interests create.
Now is the time to broaden and deepen this relationship.
To develop the structural linkages across our economies which will serve us well in the long term.
To build our shared strategic interests in Asia and the Indian Ocean.
To reinvigorate the way we work together in multilateral forums.
And to use the ties of migration, education, cultural exchange and tourism to broaden the engagement between our two societies.
This is why I want to see us be ambitious in the relationship.
To forge a genuine strategic partnership underpinned by strong economic, energy and security frameworks that deliver lasting mutual benefits for our peoples and for the peoples of this great region of the 21st century - Asia.
To conclude, where I began, with Prime Minister Nehru who concluded his remarks at that 1947 conference on Asia's future as follows:
"We meet here not to discuss our past history and contacts but to forge links for the future.
...
"There is a new vitality and powerful creative impulse in all the peoples of Asia...Strong winds are blowing all over Asia. Let us not be afraid of them but rather welcome them for only with their help can we build the new Asia of our dreams."
Somewhat less profoundly perhaps, Prime Minister Nehru reflected elsewhere his view that:
"Life is like a game of cards. The hand you are dealt is determinism; the way you play it is free will".
This perhaps has a particular resonance for our two great nations as together we seek to shape our region's future.
Australia and India have been dealt highly complementary hands.
And now we have the choice to make the best of them.
And I believe we shall.


PRIME MINISTER: As you know, I have just been meeting with Prime Minister Singh. We have had a most productive set of discussions over our bilateral relationship and over our regional and global cooperation and we continued those discussions just now over dinner and I would like to thank the Indian Prime Minister and his wife for the hospitality they have extended to Therese and myself on this visit to India.
Australia and India are natural partners. We are both pluralist democracies, we are both significant economies and we are both globally engaged. We both seek to forge our national wealth through open economies, and we both want to see the stability of Asia underpinned by the principles of open regionalism, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the creation of multilateral institutions that engender strategic confidence and transparency.
In the past, the Australia-India relationship has been stop-start. It has proceeded in fits and bursts. Tonight, Prime Minister Singh and myself, as Prime Minister of Australia, agreed to end this era and move towards a stronger strategic partnership for the future. We, the Prime Ministers of these two great democracies, have decided to embrace a strategic partnership for the future to elevate our relationship from where it was, to a new level. Now, it is, therefore, the time to broaden and deepen our relationship in multiple respects.
We have made reference in our comments earlier this evening about the work which is under way on the FTA and we have made reference also to the strengthening of our security and defence ties through a new Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation. We have agreed to commit 50 million dollars each over the next five years for the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund and to work closely together in the Asia-Pacific and to work together to achieve also a strong outcome at the Copenhagen Conference on Climate Change.
I can also, tonight, confirm that in order to ensure Australia's ability to prosecute its growing interests in India and to maximize the opportunities arising from India's emerging economic and strategic weight, as well as to strengthen this important relationship, the Australian Government has committed to a significant upgrade of its representation in India. This will include significantly expanding representation of the Australian High Commission in New Delhi by six additional Australia-based staff including new positions from the Australian Treasury, the Australian Department of Energy and Resources, the Department of Tourism, the Australian Federal Police, the Department of Immigration and the Australian Customs Service. Australia will also be expanding Austrade's network of Indian national trade (inaudible) staff across a large number of regional cities.
We will also be expanding Australia's official presence in Mumbai by three Australia-based staff and in Chennai by four Australia-based staff. We will also be seeing the establishment of an Australian Investment Commissioner in Mumbai. This represents the largest single expansion of Australia's diplomatic and consular representation in India ever and, therefore, we regard this as an important step forward in putting flesh on the bones of this new strategic partnership with the Government in New Delhi.
I would also like to make some remarks about Indian students studying in Australia and the attacks which, I know, have been reported here in India. Let me be very clear about this. As Prime Minister of Australia, I am deeply disturbed and disgusted by attacks of violence against any foreign students studying in our country and who are in our country as our guests. Such attacks will not be tolerated. They will be dealt with, with the full force of Australia's law enforcement and criminal justice systems. Indian students and all foreign students are welcome guests in our country and they will be so for the future.
Before taking your questions, let me make some remarks also about the upcoming Conference on Climate Change in Copenhagen. Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark has invited myself and other Heads of Government to attend the Copenhagen UN Climate Change Conference on the 17th and 18th December this year. I wish to confirm tonight that I will be accepting the invitation of Prime Minister Rasmussen and I will be attending the Leaders Segment of the Copenhagen Conference.
The Copenhagen Meeting represents a critical moment in international efforts to reach a robust agreement on global action to tackle climate change. Climate change is one of the most severe challenges facing all countries across the world, developed and developing. It is incumbent upon all nations to do what we can now to tackle this challenge of climate change.
In Australia, that means all shoulders to the wheel and bringing down carbon pollution and that means passing the Australian Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Abroad, it means bringing about a robust agreement at Copenhagen. In Copenhagen in December, we will be working together to deliver the action needed to tackle climate change.
With only weeks to go, time is running out, time is running out for us all, time is also running out for the planet. We need action. For business certainty we need action, for the sake of our children we need action, for the sake of our grand children we need action and we must all get behind an ambitious outcome at Copenhagen in getting the work done at home and abroad to bring carbon pollution down. For current and future generations, it is important that all nations work together towards a global solution to this global challenge.
Therefore, all Heads of Government around the world have been extended invitation by Prime Minister Rasmussen. It is important that as many Heads of Government as physically possible attend this Conference in order to lend momentum to the outcome that will be necessary.
Happy to take your questions now. I begin with one of our colleagues from India and then rotate with colleagues from Australia.
JOURNALIST: I am Parul Malhotra from CNN IBN. We have noted that you said that Indian students are welcome in Australia. We have also noted that the colleges that the private colleges which many of them study are actually shutting down in your country and there is a tightening of migration norms as well. Should we then understand that a certain type of Indian student is not welcome in Australia?
In your discussions with the Prime Minister, did you ask the Indian Government for any help in tackling this issue, (inaudible) maybe about cracking down on migration agents in this country?
PRIME MINISTER: Let me answer both those questions.
Firstly, all qualified Indian students, who are wishing to attend an Australian registered academic institution, are welcome consistent with the normal requirements of Australian Visa and Immigration Law. When I referred earlier to action in relation to certain private training organizations in Australia, I was referring to the actions taken within Australia to tighten the regulatory control of those institutions. We want to make sure that all institutions, be they public or private in Australia, are delivering quality education and training programs to all foreign students when they come to Australia to study. It is important for our friends in India and for their families, who support them, when they come to Australia to study that those private training organizations are delivering an appropriate quality of training program for them.
Secondly, the other part of your question dealt with the assistance with the Indian Government. Certainly I discussed this matter with various representatives of the Indian Government today. The primary responsibility, of course, lies with Australia. We are the host country, we are receiving Indian students to Australia as our guests, we are receiving all foreign students to Australia as our guests, we have something like half a million foreign students in our country each year, one-fifth of whom come from India. Of course, we will seek to work with our friends in New Delhi on any aspect which is relevant to a tightening of quality control arrangements that may extend to the operation of certain migration agents, it may extend also to the way in which business representatives generally of any private training organizations in Australia operate in India within the fabric of Indian law. But I conclude where I began. This is principally an Australian responsibility and it is a responsibility which we, the Australian Government accepts.
JOURNALIST: PM, are you aware of the some of the people on the Oceanic Viking coming ashore either tomorrow or quite soon anyway to processing (inaudible) in Indonesia?
PRIME MINISTER: I am unaware of any such report Malcolm. I have been pre-occupied with various things today. But I am unaware of that report. As I have said on previous occasions, our intention is to work methodically through each of the individual cases concerned. We will continue to do so. In terms of when these processes reach conclusion, that really does depend on how circumstances unfold.
JOURNALIST: I am Sanket Upadhyay from Times Now. My question is in two parts.
First of all, you talked about cooperation between India and Australia. Would there be something in store as far as climate change is concerned? What is Australia looking from India as far as climate change is concerned? How would you coordinate with this country? The second question pertains to the students. It seems that your Government is quite concerned as far as Indian students are concerned in Australia. You have taken a number of steps on the ground also. But it seems that those steps are not really working on the ground. There are these incidents that keep re-occurring. What does your Government intend to do to make sure that these incidents are reduced?
PRIME MINISTER: Firstly, on the question of climate change which is the first question you asked, can I say that we already, through Prime Minister Singh, work closely through the framework of the G-20 where Australia and India are both members in coordinating our response to climate change, most recently, for example, the G-20 Finance Ministers met in St Andrews in Scotland to examine at our direction, as leaders, climate change financing options which may prove part and parcel of a solution either at Copenhagen or in associated negotiations. That is one area where we are working and if you are looking at the whole fabric of climate change cooperation, getting a deal on finance is very important to getting an overall deal in terms emissions reductions.
Another part of the response goes to the coordination which we hope to achieve with India in areas of relevant technology, that is, technology which has the ability to bring down greenhouse gas emissions. For example, in various discussions I have today, I have spoken with my Indian colleagues about the work Australia has initiated through a Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. This is all about clean coal technologies, carbon capture and storage. This is an Australia Global Initiative. We have Indian representation on our Global Advisory Board.
What is the purpose of this? It is to prove up the applicability of using carbon capture and storage technologies at scale for coal-fired power stations in the future. We have some 26 of the largest economies around the world who have become members of this Institute. The largest energy companies in the world have also become members of this institute.
How is that relevant to India? Projecting ahead to India's future electricity generation, a huge proportion of that will continue to come from coal-fired emissions. As it will from China and from other emerging economies, we, in Australia, are the largest coal exporting country in the world. Therefore, this is a highly potentially applicable technology for bringing down the real greenhouse gas emission levels. That is an area where India and Australia are also actively collaborating.
The other part of your question went to the challenge of students in Australia, the challenge of all foreign students in Australia, whether they are from India or from elsewhere. You are right to say that the Australian Government, in partnership with the relevant State Governments of Australia, has taken a range of measures, both on the regulation of private training organizations on the one hand, together with greater activity on the part of our law enforcement agencies and their cooperation and coordination with local education and training venues within the major cities of Australia. This action is unfolding and it will take some time to have full effect.
I cannot say to you that because we are dealing with such large numbers, half a million foreign students in Australia at any one time, that you can rule out the possibility of future incidents. I cannot say that, that would be dishonest in my response to your question. What I can say is that the Australian Government that I lead has a zero tolerance approach to any violence against any foreign student who is a guest in our country, We will, therefore, be deploying all the possible resources available to Government to reduce any such levels of violence in the future, because we regard such students as welcome guests in our country.
You are right to say that the Australian Government, in partnership with the relevant State Governments of Australia, has taken a range of measures, both on the regulation of private training organisations on the one hand, together with greater activity on the part of our law enforcement agencies and their cooperation and coordination with local education and training venues within the major cities of Australia. This action is unfolding and it will take some time to have full effect.
I cannot say to you that because we are dealing with such large numbers, half a million foreign students in Australia at any one time that you can rule out the possibility of future incidents. I cannot say that, that would be dishonest in my response to your question. What I can say is that the Australian Government that I lead has a zero tolerance approach to any violence against any foreign student who is a guest in our country. We will, therefore, be deploying all the possible resources available to government to reduce any such levels of violence in the future, because we regard such students as welcome guests in our country.
JOURNALIST: Mr. Rudd, today, in your speech, you seem to suggest that these attacks are racially motivated. Is this different to the line that the Government was taking -
PRIME MINISTER: Where did I say that in my speech?
JOURNALIST: Well, you said that there were attacks targeted at Indian students (inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER: I stand to be corrected on the exact text that I used. But my own view is (inaudible) am disputing the premise of your question.
JOURNALIST: That is the first part. You can dispute that, if you like.
PRIME MINISTER: I will read you the text of the speech (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Secondly, some of the Indian media has suggested that you owe Indian students an apology. Is that something you are willing to give them?
PRIME MINISTER: What I would say as Prime Minister of Australia, is I accept responsibility for the proper enforcement of Australian laws within our country. I do so conjointly with the State Governments of Australia, who run the criminal justice system of our country by and large. We are responsible for law and order in our country. As Prime Minister of Australia, I am responsible to the international community, I accept responsibility for the good things and the bad things that happen in our country.
But I have just said, in response to a question from our Indian colleagues, that I cannot provide any iron-clad guarantee that there wouldn't be any such incidents in the future. That is not responsible, that is not being honest. What I can say is that in terms of overall levels of criminal violence in Australia, the rates of criminal violence, whether it is of assaults or murders, these are, in fact, by any comparable Western standards, against most other Western standards, very low, very low indeed. And of course, what we are dealing with in the case of foreign students with such a large number of them, half a million, is a group which is large in our community and, therefore, the general rates of shall I say, criminal activity across the Australian community would be felt in a foreign student population as well.
So I believe that the right thing to do is simply to be upfront, accept responsibility for what has gone right, what has gone wrong and to indicate clearly how we will do things better in the future.
JOURNALIST: And no apology?
PRIME MINISTER: As I said, I accept responsibility for the Australian criminal justice system in partnership with the States and Territories who give it proper effect.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER: You are not criticizing the Indian media are you (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: No, I am not at all criticizing the Indian media. I am saying that your message hasn't been heard in India. Do you accept responsibility for that?
PRIME MINISTER: Accept responsibility for the fact that it hasn't been heard in India? What I am accepting responsibility for this week?
JOURNALIST: We have heard you, but the audience in India hasn't heard it. Basically that is my point.
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, you raise very fair point, which is the extent to which what we have been saying domestically in Australia about these matters have been adequately reflected here in the coverage here in India.
Obviously I cannot comment, as I am not a regular viewer of Indian television. Perhaps, everyone here in the room from Indian television could send me their footage for the last three months and I will form my judgment about all that. Can I say just say though, within Australia, I have consistently said that what has gone on in Australia on these matters has been unacceptable. And therefore, we have a responsibility within Australia to reduce this problem and I have outlined the two means by which we propose to do that. 
This is consistent with what I have been saying domestically in Australia for a long, long time.
JOURNALIST: Mr. Rudd, do you accept the premise that some people have that there is a growing or there is a level of racism in Australia, particularly among young people that may be linked with this? (Inaudible) Do you accept that? And if you do, you say that you are doing everything you can to address this. What will you do about that?
PRIME MINISTER: Well firstly, I don't accept your premise. I don't accept that there is, to use your term, a growing racism in the Australian society. Australia is a proud multicultural society. Australia is the home to some 300 languages, Australia is the home to something like 43 per cent of our population either being born abroad or one of whose parents were born abroad.
We have become a complete cultural melting pot and that is a good thing. And what I sense in the Australia of which I am the leader is a great culture of tolerance and acceptance across our broad society. You cannot, you cannot rule out the possibility of criminal action and criminal activity in any country. You cannot rule that out because these are facts which confront any society around the world.
The premise of your question that there is a growing racism in Australian society, I think, is wrong. I disagree with it and what instead we must do is deal with the practical questions and the responses I have given to them as posed in the earlier discussion with the journalists from India.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, to follow up on that question, (inaudible) criminal gangs were targeting Indian students. Is that racially motivated or not?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, in terms of criminal gang activity, I cannot comment specifically on each individual incident. The reference that we had in mind with a speech like that was that foreign students, including Indian students, from time to time would be targeted by individual criminal gangs. I can't give you the precise citation and list of the event by event, in terms what the investigations from the police have established.
What I can say is that we have an active responsibility in the criminal justice system to deal effectively with violations of law when they occur and we will continue to do so. The States and Territories responsible for the police and the criminal justice system have said that they will lift their effort. They will do so in conjunction with both the educational institutions, private and public, and that will be the case into the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was the issue of uranium sales to India raised specifically in your talks with Prime Minister Singh or in any other talks today and regardless of whether it was, is your message to the Indian Government, never ever?
PRIME MINISTER: The question of India's long-term energy needs in the decade to two decades to three decades ahead was, of course, a subject of discussion between ourselves and the Indian Government and within that framework, of course, we did discuss India's long-term energy needs, including those of uranium. That is, as you would expect in discussions between our two Governments.
Our response to that has simply been to reiterate to our friends in India, first of all, our active cooperation in assisting India through the Nuclear Suppliers Group to gain access to nuclear materials to support India's Civil Nuclear Program and we did that in concert with the United States, the Government of India and with other countries.
Secondly, on the question of uranium exports from Australia, I reiterated the fact that Australia's policy has operated since 1978 on essentially bi-partisan basis that it was not targeted on any individual country, that it was, in fact, a generic policy which arose from our belief in the importance of maintaining the integrity of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. That has been our policy, that remains our policy.
JOURNALIST: Sir, the Indian Government has been saying again and again that even one attack is an attack too many. Did Prime Minister Manmohan Singh bring up this issue (inaudible)?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I think I indicated before in response to a question from our colleagues, this has been the subject of discussions here in New Delhi today, as you would expect. This is a consular matter. These are citizens of India, they are visiting the Commonwealth of Australia, I am the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia. It is natural that we would discuss these matters.
As I said to you before however, it would be absolutely wrong of me to indicate there would be no such problem of violence against any student, any foreign student in the future. I couldn't provide that guarantee, any more than you could provide a guarantee that any Australian citizen or a citizen of another country would not encounter any act of criminal violence if they happen to be visiting India.
It would be not responsible for me to seek to make such a claim to you. What I can say to you though, as I have said in response to earlier questions, is that we will deploy every effort on behalf of Government to underpin the security of all foreign students in Australia.
Secondly, the problem which has arisen in times past, not with our universities, not with our public institutions, not with our public training institutions, but with the regulation of some of our private training organizations, is that that has to be improved for the future and those steps are under way.
These are the two practical measures that we have embraced and these are the ones which have been discussed amply today with the Government of India.
I thank you for your time.


The Australian Government will make a major new investment in building scientific links with India, with support for research efforts targeted at the challenges both countries face in energy, food and water, health and the environment.
The Government will invest:
     * $50 million for the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund
     * $1 million for an innovative Australia-India solar cooling research project
     * $20 million for research into dryland farming in India.
The additional $50 million over five years for the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund will commence financial year 2009-10.
The Indian Government has agreed to match Australia's increased investment.
The expanded fund will:
     * continue the successful competitive grants program which supports 'bottom-up' investigator-initiated research;
     * introduce new projects demonstrating both excellence in science and a clear path to end use for either commercial or public good;
     * introduce a fellowship program to support exchanges for Australian and Indian researchers.
Through the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund, Australia's largest bilateral research fund, the Australian Government has already invested $20 million since 2006 to enable Australian scientists to engage in leading edge collaborative research with Indian scientists.
The Fund, a joint initiative of the Australian and Indian governments, is already supporting fifty projects across the spectrum of scientific disciplines including astronomy, climate change and evolution, malaria vaccines, the impact of global warming on agriculture, water management, computing and biotechnology.
In addition, the Prime Minister announced a further $1 million for an innovative Australia-India solar cooling research project.
The project between CSIRO and The Energy and Resources Institute aims to develop a zero emissions solar cooling system for use in remote rural communities in un-electrified areas.
An estimated 400 million Indians do not have access to electricity, in many cases because they live too far from the main grid infrastructure, while the lack of cold storage leads to the spoilage of an estimated 20 million tonnes of fruit and vegetables annually.
Research into dryland farming in India is also being supported with $20 million over 5 years through the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research.
The Rudd Government is committed to engaging with India on a long-term, strategic basis and recognises the central role science and technology collaboration plays in the broader relationship.
The increased investment in the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund will, in particular, seek to support more applied research and engagement of industry partners in order to produce outcomes that help address some of the pressing challenges that both countries face.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
It is indeed an honour to be back in Singapore, and to be at your National University.
A university with its own virtual university - creating a student co-designed, co-built and co-owned campus in the virtual world.
I'm told you can create your own avatar and make your way around the virtual campus.
I'm not sure if you can get a virtual degree - but if it were my university student son, he would be equally keen on the idea of virtual exams, and virtual assignments as well.
It's great to be here today with so many young people from the university and the schools.
You are the future of this extraordinary island Republic.
And I know that you share many aspirations with the young people of Australia.
To feel confident about the quality of the educational opportunities on offer.
To feel confident about the future you can craft for yourselves because of that education.
To be confident of the future contribution you can make also to your community, your country and the wider world.
Today, we are able deploy the new powers available to us in this modern world - the power of new ideas, the power of new technologies, and the unprecedented power of an information revolution now capable of disseminating innovation around the world in an instant.
To re-shape things that are old.
And, in the great spirit of innovation that characterises our age, to shape things that are entirely new.
As the students of today and as the leaders of tomorrow, you are pioneers in one of the most challenging, innovating and exciting periods in history.
The rewards are great.
But so too are the responsibilities that will fall on your shoulders.
To rise to the challenge of this first truly global age.
The ties between our two nations, Singapore and Australia, go back many years.
We have a shared past, forged through the enduring legacy of war.
A time etched in both our nations' memory and so poignantly remembered at Kranji War Cemetery, which I visited last year.
Singapore and Australia share a long-standing desire for peace and economic development.
A desire that we can achieve through dialogue, through cooperation and through education.
Education has the power to transform the lives of individuals , of communities, of cities and of nations.
This great university counts among its alumni one of Asia's preeminent statesmen, Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew.
And each year welcomes over 30,000 students from all over the world to its campuses.
It is a University of remarkable quality, with outstanding international links and a great reputation for cooperation and entrepreneurial drive.
We see this quality in your international student exchange programs, which you extend to eight Australian universities.
And the joint degree programs that you deliver with some of the world's top institutions, including my alma mater, the Australian National University.
Your hosting of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities also demonstrates your very real commitment to cooperative research and teaching, to the benefit of all.
My message to you today is simple: Education will be the driving force of the 21st Century.
The most educated, the most skilled, the best trained societies will also be the strongest societies in the 21st century.
They will also be the most resilient economies in the 21st century.
Education that is illuminating, that is innovative, that is outward looking, that draws on the widest canon of ideas and that brings together young people across the continents and across the disciplines - the education we will need to negotiate the complex century that lies ahead.
The power of education has long been understood.
As the English essayist and poet Joseph Addison said:
"Education is a companion which no misfortune can depress, no crime can destroy, no enemy can alienate, no despotism can enslave. 
At home, a friend; abroad, an introduction; in solitude, a solace; and in society, an ornament. ......
....It gives at once grace and government to genius." 
Education is the engine room of ideas, of economies and of nations.
Education builds the fabric of societies.
Education revolutionises opportunity.
Education promotes understanding as its intrinsic disciplines require us to look beyond the narrow shores of prejudice, to look widely at the world through the eyes of others.
Education therefore fosters tolerance.
And through tolerance, harmony.
Education also satisfies our basic aspiration to bequeath a better world to those who follow.
Better equity.
Better opportunity.
Better productivity.
Higher levels of workforce participation.
Better health.
Better environmental sustainability.
Education is therefore the single most important ingredient for success in the economies of the 21st century - and here I use the term success in its narrowest and broadest measures - economic and social; personal and national.
The OECD has previously reported that tripling the time spent in school in developing countries was accompanied by a tripling of gross domestic product in those countries.
Access to secondary and tertiary education is the key to building a knowledge-based workforce.
And the benefits of higher education are multiplied when students attend overseas schools and universities.
According to the OECD, the number of students studying overseas doubled over 20 years to the early part of this decade.
These students not only gain and transfer knowledge but also create the people-to-people links that help investment, cultural understanding and official diplomacy.
As Singapore's own Prime Minister Lee said recently, education 'bridges the gaps between dissimilar cultures and promotes understanding among people'.
Australia is working to promote regional cooperation in education in practical ways.
Within APEC, we promote cooperation on governance of education systems.
We also promote open and transparent regulatory systems, so that students and education providers can move freely between member economies.
Australia is also a strong supporter of the efforts within the East Asia Summit (EAS) to increase education cooperation.
We have funded research on regional competitiveness and community building.
We have also offered to work with the ASEAN Secretariat to convene two EAS Education Workshops in 2010.
Workshops that we hope will help member countries to identify further areas for education cooperation.
One of the most exciting EAS education initiatives, which the Australian Government supports, is the proposal to revive the ancient Nalanda University in India.
This is a University with a 700 year history as a centre of cultural exchange across Asia.
The initiative will help promote tolerance, understanding, and harmony and contribute to building a community of learning across the Asia-Pacific.
Initiatives such as this, and efforts to promote and share in education more generally, demonstrate that we have far more to gain by standing together, than standing alone.
The Australian Government recognises the power of education.
In Australia, we are promoting what we describe as an Education Revolution.
A radical new quantitative and qualitative investment in the Australian education system - from early childhood education, through school education, vocational training, universities and post-graduate research.
Our mission is clear - to build over time the best educated, the best trained, the best skilled workforce in the world.
And also, through our comprehensive Asian language education program in our schools - under which aroun three-quarters of a million students in our schools are studying the principal languages of Asia - to help make the coming generation create the most Asia literate country in the collective west; a country and a people for whom the languages and cultures of Asia are no longer foreign but familiar.
Australia also recognises that getting access to education, especially higher education, is an acute challenge in developing countries.
A lack of educational opportunity is not without precedent.
It was especially evident after World War Two.
The fear then was that the lack of opportunity would lead to sustained poverty and lead in turn towards ideological radicalism.
So in the midst of those troubled times, many nations  -  developed and developing  -  came together to create the Colombo Plan.
The Colombo Plan - in which Australia was proud to be active from the start - has become a byword for successful cooperation, personal opportunity and economic development.
The scheme ran in its full form for over 30 years and benefited more than 40,000 young people from across Asia.
The Colombo Plan boasts a number of prominent current Asian leaders.
Here in Singapore we are proud to count among Australia's Colombo Plan alumni three Cabinet-level Ministers - Minister for National Development, Mah Bow Tan; Minister for Health, Khaw Boon Wan; and my good friend Minister for Transport, Raymond Lim.
I am delighted that another distinguished Australian Colombo Plan alumnus is with us here today.
Currently Chairman of Keppel Corporation, Dr Lee Boon Yang has a list of past ministerial appointments too long for me to mention.
We can't claim credit for all his achievements... but I note his alma mater is the University of Queensland from my home state.
We see Dr Lee as not only an honorary Australian but equally an honorary Queenslander.
Other Australian alumni in the region include Dr Boediono, Indonesia's recently-elected Vice President.
Also, Dato' Mustapa Mohamed, the Trade Minister of Malaysia.
And Dr Sirikorn Maneerin, a former deputy education minister and first president of Thailand's Knowledge Park is also an Australian Colombo scholar.
Clearly, the Colombo Plan was an enormous success.
But the tradition of educational cooperation between Australia and Singapore has continued beyond the Colombo Plan.
Indeed, more than 100,000 Singaporeans have studied in Australia over the years and many have gone on to make substantial contributions to Singapore, Australia and the broader Asian region.
These alumni include people like former Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Tony Tan Keng Yam, who undertook his doctorate in Australia.
We also like to count Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew, as one of our honorary alumni.
The Australian National University - my alma mater - awarded him the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws for his service to the development of Singapore, his international statesmanship, and his friendship with Australia.
In short, education has long been the lifeblood of the Australia-Singapore relationship and more broadly across the region.
With alumni of this calibre, and the high priority that Australia places on education at home and abroad as well as our comprehensive engagement across the Asia-Pacific region, it should not be surprising that the Australian Government sees great benefit in building further the education bonds between our country and our region.
Today I am announcing the creation of a new Australian international scholarship program.
This program will be entitled "The Australia Awards".
Awards inspired by the original Colombo Plan.
Awards that will become for Australia the Colombo Plan of the 21st Century.
Awards which will over time extend the long-standing Australian scholarship program that has shared the benefits of our world-class education sector with many.
Our existing scholarship program is already extensive.
But we intend to make it even better.
And we intend to bring these many programs under one single roof - bringing together as many as 5000 Australia Awards offered each year to students abroad to study in Australia and for Australians also to study abroad.
The first phase of this new program will be launched in 2010, under the name the "Australia Asia Awards" - or the "Triple A" awards.
These awards will also include, in the initial four years, scholarships for high-achieving individuals across Asia to study in Australia, and for Australians to study in Asia from 2010.
Furthermore, a highly prestigious alumni program will be developed to deepen the experience for the AAA awardees to help maintain their connection to Australia over the long term.
The Government has committed $8 million for the first phase of the Australia Asia Awards that will be devoted to supporting the new Australia Awards brand, alumni and support services.
Some of these AAA awards will be earmarked as 'Achievement Awards'.
So individuals who have already demonstrated their potential to be leaders within their own countries are fostered and given every opportunity to fulfil their potential.
These scholarships will be open to applicants from all over Asia, including Singapore.
And I encourage everyone here today to think about applying - and become our first AAA scholars from 2010.
A second group of awards will be called 'Development Awards' for high-performing students from developing countries.
$10 million will be devoted to providing up to 170 additional scholarships for students from developing countries in Asia.
Asia is the first stage for these new Australia Awards.
In coming years, the program will expand to provide scholarships for the Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, the Americas and Europe.
To ensure a high quality global program, the Australian Government will appoint a highly experienced Board to help oversee the program.
Board members will be drawn from the government, corporate and academic sectors, and from home and abroad (including some of our existing illustrious Australian alumni) to advise the Australian Government on how the Australia Awards program can best achieve its objectives.
These objectives include developing the leadership potential of each participant.
I also intend to ask the Board to explore opportunities for Award winners to work with Australian industries during their stay.
The program will also provide opportunities for young Australians to undertake study and work in our region and to study with students from around the region at home in Australia.
The scholarships will enable Australia to showcase its cutting-edge capabilities in the education sector, which already includes eight of the world's top 100 universities.
They will build on the significant numbers of international students who already benefit from studying in Australia - currently over 500,000.
And they demonstrate Australia's ongoing commitment to building closer and enduring ties with the region, including at the personal level.
I'd like to conclude by reflecting John F. Kennedy's remark, half a century ago that:
"Our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in education."
We can take his idea one step further today: our progress as a regional community and our progress as a global community can be no swifter than our progress in education.
In this rapidly changing world, we can no longer afford to see ourselves as existing in isolation.
In order to progress, we need to understand more about our neighbours.
To do that, we must give something of ourselves.
We must also learn more about the way the world works, about the ways people think, about the way cultures shape the way people think, and about ways to communicate ideas and respectfully deploy the new technologies of our age across the old divides of language and culture.
This is a task that we can all tackle together.
As a regional community that works towards shared goals, for the benefit of all our peoples.
In the 21st Century, the world's centre of strategic and economic gravity will move to the Asia Pacific region.
As the leaders of tomorrow, your responsibility will be great.
Because not only is it important for Asia how we conduct our affairs to guarantee our future peace and prosperity.
It is also important for the world - because the future of the Asian century will now for the first time shape the future of the world.
The Australian Government believes, consistent with our proposal for an Asia Pacific community, that the countries of the region should work together.
To develop, together, an architecture to meet the challenges associated with this shift.
To shape our collective future.
Not simply to respond to events.
Not to allow strategic drift to occur in the hope that regional peace and prosperity are somehow deterministically assured.
History informs us that it is not always the case.
We must constantly shape our future.
Rather than simply allowing the future to shape us.
We must drive forward regional financial and economic integration, nurture a culture of dialogue and collaboration, and build over time a genuine sense - and in time institutional structures - that foster a sense of economic and security community.
Building high level engagement through education will make an important contribution to these objectives.
And through the Australia Asia Awards we will play our part by bringing the next generation of Asian leaders together in whatever fields of political, economic, scientific, academic or professional endeavour they choose to pursue.
The Australia Asia Awards will help nurture this next generation and assist to give full expression to their talents.
I am an optimist about our region's future.
The challenges are vast.
The threats are real.
But the opportunities, too, are great.
And I am confident you, the young people of Singapore, together with the young people of Australia and the region at large, will rise to the challenge of turning this century of the Pacific into a truly pacific century.


It is indeed an honour to be back in Singapore, and to be at your National University.
A university with its own virtual university - creating a student co-designed, co-built and co-owned campus in the virtual world.
I'm told you can create your own avatar and make your way around the virtual campus.
I'm not sure if you can get a virtual degree - but if it were my university student son, he would be equally keen on the idea of virtual exams, and virtual assignments as well.
It's great to be here today with so many young people from the university and the schools.
You are the future of this extraordinary island Republic.
And I know that you share many aspirations with the young people of Australia.
To feel confident about the quality of the educational opportunities on offer.
To feel confident about the future you can craft for yourselves because of that education.
To be confident of the future contribution you can make also to your community, your country and the wider world.
Today, we are able deploy the new powers available to us in this modern world - the power of new ideas, the power of new technologies, and the unprecedented power of an information revolution now capable of disseminating innovation around the world in an instant.
To re-shape things that are old.
And, in the great spirit of innovation that characterises our age, to shape things that are entirely new.
As the students of today and as the leaders of tomorrow, you are pioneers in one of the most challenging, innovating and exciting periods in history.
The rewards are great.
But so too are the responsibilities that will fall on your shoulders.
To rise to the challenge of this first truly global age.
The ties between our two nations, Singapore and Australia, go back many years.
We have a shared past, forged through the enduring legacy of war.
A time etched in both our nations' memory and so poignantly remembered at Kranji War Cemetery, which I visited last year.
Singapore and Australia share a long-standing desire for peace and economic development.
A desire that we can achieve through dialogue, through cooperation and through education.
Education has the power to transform the lives of individuals , of communities, of cities and of nations.
This great university counts among its alumni one of Asia's preeminent statesmen, Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew.
And each year welcomes over 30,000 students from all over the world to its campuses.
It is a University of remarkable quality, with outstanding international links and a great reputation for cooperation and entrepreneurial drive.
We see this quality in your international student exchange programs, which you extend to eight Australian universities.
And the joint degree programs that you deliver with some of the world's top institutions, including my alma mater, the Australian National University.
Your hosting of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities also demonstrates your very real commitment to cooperative research and teaching, to the benefit of all.
My message to you today is simple: Education will be the driving force of the 21st Century.
The most educated, the most skilled, the best trained societies will also be the strongest societies in the 21st century.
They will also be the most resilient economies in the 21st century.
Education that is illuminating, that is innovative, that is outward looking, that draws on the widest canon of ideas and that brings together young people across the continents and across the disciplines - the education we will need to negotiate the complex century that lies ahead.
The power of education has long been understood.
As the English essayist and poet Joseph Addison said:
"Education is a companion which no misfortune can depress, no crime can destroy, no enemy can alienate, no despotism can enslave.
At home, a friend; abroad, an introduction; in solitude, a solace; and in society, an ornament. ......
....It gives at once grace and government to genius."
Education is the engine room of ideas, of economies and of nations.
Education builds the fabric of societies.
Education revolutionises opportunity.
Education promotes understanding as its intrinsic disciplines require us to look beyond the narrow shores of prejudice, to look widely at the world through the eyes of others.
Education therefore fosters tolerance.
And through tolerance, harmony.
Education also satisfies our basic aspiration to bequeath a better world to those who follow.
Better equity.
Better opportunity.
Better productivity.
Higher levels of workforce participation.
Better health.
Better environmental sustainability.
Education is therefore the single most important ingredient for success in the economies of the 21st century - and here I use the term success in its narrowest and broadest measures - economic and social; personal and national.
The OECD has previously reported that tripling the time spent in school in developing countries was accompanied by a tripling of gross domestic product in those countries.[1]
Access to secondary and tertiary education is the key to building a knowledge-based workforce.
And the benefits of higher education are multiplied when students attend overseas schools and universities.
According to the OECD, the number of students studying overseas doubled over 20 years to the early part of this decade.[2]
These students not only gain and transfer knowledge but also create the people-to-people links that help investment, cultural understanding and official diplomacy.
As Singapore's own Prime Minister Lee said recently, education 'bridges the gaps between dissimilar cultures and promotes understanding among people'.
Australia is working to promote regional cooperation in education in practical ways.
Within APEC, we promote cooperation on governance of education systems.
We also promote open and transparent regulatory systems, so that students and education providers can move freely between member economies.
Australia is also a strong supporter of the efforts within the East Asia Summit (EAS) to increase education cooperation.
We have funded research on regional competitiveness and community building.
We have also offered to work with the ASEAN Secretariat to convene two EAS Education Workshops in 2010.
Workshops that we hope will help member countries to identify further areas for education cooperation.
One of the most exciting EAS education initiatives, which the Australian Government supports, is the proposal to revive the ancient Nalanda University in India.
This is a University with a 700 year history as a centre of cultural exchange across Asia.
The initiative will help promote tolerance, understanding, and harmony and contribute to building a community of learning across the Asia-Pacific.
Initiatives such as this, and efforts to promote and share in education more generally, demonstrate that we have far more to gain by standing together, than standing alone.
The Australian Government recognises the power of education.
In Australia, we are promoting what we describe as an Education Revolution.
A radical new quantitative and qualitative investment in the Australian education system - from early childhood education, through school education, vocational training, universities and post-graduate research.
Our mission is clear - to build over time the best educated, the best trained, the best skilled workforce in the world.
And also, through our comprehensive Asian language education program in our schools - under which aroun three-quarters of a million students in our schools are studying the principal languages of Asia - to help make the coming generation create the most Asia literate country in the collective west; a country and a people for whom the languages and cultures of Asia are no longer foreign but familiar.
Australia also recognises that getting access to education, especially higher education, is an acute challenge in developing countries.
A lack of educational opportunity is not without precedent.
It was especially evident after World War Two.
The fear then was that the lack of opportunity would lead to sustained poverty and lead in turn towards ideological radicalism.
So in the midst of those troubled times, many nations  -  developed and developing  -  came together to create the Colombo Plan.
The Colombo Plan - in which Australia was proud to be active from the start - has become a byword for successful cooperation, personal opportunity and economic development.
The scheme ran in its full form for over 30 years and benefited more than 40,000 young people from across Asia.
The Colombo Plan boasts a number of prominent current Asian leaders.
Here in Singapore we are proud to count among Australia's Colombo Plan alumni three Cabinet-level Ministers - Minister for National Development, Mah Bow Tan; Minister for Health, Khaw Boon Wan; and my good friend Minister for Transport, Raymond Lim.
I am delighted that another distinguished Australian Colombo Plan alumnus is with us here today.
Currently Chairman of Keppel Corporation, Dr Lee Boon Yang has a list of past ministerial appointments too long for me to mention.
We can't claim credit for all his achievements... but I note his alma mater is the University of Queensland from my home state.
We see Dr Lee as not only an honorary Australian but equally an honorary Queenslander.
Other Australian alumni in the region include Dr Boediono, Indonesia's recently-elected Vice President.
Also, Dato' Mustapa Mohamed, the Trade Minister of Malaysia.
And Dr Sirikorn Maneerin, a former deputy education minister and first president of Thailand's Knowledge Park is also an Australian Colombo scholar.
Clearly, the Colombo Plan was an enormous success.
But the tradition of educational cooperation between Australia and Singapore has continued beyond the Colombo Plan.
Indeed, more than 100,000 Singaporeans have studied in Australia over the years and many have gone on to make substantial contributions to Singapore, Australia and the broader Asian region.
These alumni include people like former Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Tony Tan Keng Yam, who undertook his doctorate in Australia.
We also like to count Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew, as one of our honorary alumni.
The Australian National University - my alma mater - awarded him the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws for his service to the development of Singapore, his international statesmanship, and his friendship with Australia.
In short, education has long been the lifeblood of the Australia-Singapore relationship and more broadly across the region.
With alumni of this calibre, and the high priority that Australia places on education at home and abroad as well as our comprehensive engagement across the Asia-Pacific region, it should not be surprising that the Australian Government sees great benefit in building further the education bonds between our country and our region.
Today I am announcing the creation of a new Australian international scholarship program.
This program will be entitled "The Australia Awards".
Awards inspired by the original Colombo Plan.
Awards that will become for Australia the Colombo Plan of the 21st Century.
Awards which will over time extend the long-standing Australian scholarship program that has shared the benefits of our world-class education sector with many.
Our existing scholarship program is already extensive.
But we intend to make it even better.
And we intend to bring these many programs under one single roof - bringing together as many as 5000 Australia Awards offered each year to students abroad to study in Australia and for Australians also to study abroad.
The first phase of this new program will be launched in 2010, under the name the "Australia Asia Awards" - or the "Triple A" awards.
These awards will also include, in the initial four years, scholarships for high-achieving individuals across Asia to study in Australia, and for Australians to study in Asia from 2010.
Furthermore, a highly prestigious alumni program will be developed to deepen the experience for the AAA awardees to help maintain their connection to Australia over the long term.
The Government has committed $8 million for the first phase of the Australia Asia Awards that will be devoted to supporting the new Australia Awards brand, alumni and support services.
Some of these AAA awards will be earmarked as 'Achievement Awards'.
So individuals who have already demonstrated their potential to be leaders within their own countries are fostered and given every opportunity to fulfil their potential.
These scholarships will be open to applicants from all over Asia, including Singapore.
And I encourage everyone here today to think about applying - and become our first AAA scholars from 2010.
A second group of awards will be called 'Development Awards' for high-performing students from developing countries.
$10 million will be devoted to providing up to 170 additional scholarships for students from developing countries in Asia.
Asia is the first stage for these new Australia Awards.
In coming years, the program will expand to provide scholarships for the Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, the Americas and Europe.
To ensure a high quality global program, the Australian Government will appoint a highly experienced Board to help oversee the program.
Board members will be drawn from the government, corporate and academic sectors, and from home and abroad (including some of our existing illustrious Australian alumni) to advise the Australian Government on how the Australia Awards program can best achieve its objectives.
These objectives include developing the leadership potential of each participant.
I also intend to ask the Board to explore opportunities for Award winners to work with Australian industries during their stay.
The program will also provide opportunities for young Australians to undertake study and work in our region and to study with students from around the region at home in Australia.
The scholarships will enable Australia to showcase its cutting-edge capabilities in the education sector, which already includes eight of the world's top 100 universities.
They will build on the significant numbers of international students who already benefit from studying in Australia - currently over 500,000.
And they demonstrate Australia's ongoing commitment to building closer and enduring ties with the region, including at the personal level.
I'd like to conclude by reflecting John F. Kennedy's remark, half a century ago that:
"Our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in education."
We can take his idea one step further today: our progress as a regional community and our progress as a global community can be no swifter than our progress in education.
In this rapidly changing world, we can no longer afford to see ourselves as existing in isolation.
In order to progress, we need to understand more about our neighbours.
To do that, we must give something of ourselves.
We must also learn more about the way the world works, about the ways people think, about the way cultures shape the way people think, and about ways to communicate ideas and respectfully deploy the new technologies of our age across the old divides of language and culture.
This is a task that we can all tackle together.
As a regional community that works towards shared goals, for the benefit of all our peoples.
In the 21st Century, the world's centre of strategic and economic gravity will move to the Asia Pacific region.
As the leaders of tomorrow, your responsibility will be great.
Because not only is it important for Asia how we conduct our affairs to guarantee our future peace and prosperity.
It is also important for the world - because the future of the Asian century will now for the first time shape the future of the world.
The Australian Government believes, consistent with our proposal for an Asia Pacific community, that the countries of the region should work together.
To develop, together, an architecture to meet the challenges associated with this shift.
To shape our collective future.
Not simply to respond to events.
Not to allow strategic drift to occur in the hope that regional peace and prosperity are somehow deterministically assured.
History informs us that it is not always the case.
We must constantly shape our future.
Rather than simply allowing the future to shape us.
We must drive forward regional financial and economic integration, nurture a culture of dialogue and collaboration, and build over time a genuine sense - and in time institutional structures - that foster a sense of economic and security community.
Building high level engagement through education will make an important contribution to these objectives.
And through the Australia Asia Awards we will play our part by bringing the next generation of Asian leaders together in whatever fields of political, economic, scientific, academic or professional endeavour they choose to pursue.
The Australia Asia Awards will help nurture this next generation and assist to give full expression to their talents.
I am an optimist about our region's future.
The challenges are vast.
The threats are real.
But the opportunities, too, are great.
And I am confident you, the young people of Singapore, together with the young people of Australia and the region at large, will rise to the challenge of turning this century of the Pacific into a truly pacific century.


MITCHELL: Prime Minister, Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil. I'd go for Clint Eastwood.
MITCHELL: Would you?
PM: Yeah, I'm just an old fan.
MITCHELL: You a Clint Eastwood fan, are you?
PM: I've watched most of the dreadful Westerns that Clint Eastwood's been in, so, no, I think he'd pull a crowd.
MITCHELL: What was your favourite?
PM: Oh, don't ask me. I just think he's been a lot of fun out there in Western land for a long period of time. He's come to be the cowboy from central casting.
MITCHELL: Now, serious business - in Delhi, I know you've been raising the question of the attacks on Indian students in Australia. The local media in Delhi has been critical that you haven't apologised. I mean, do you apologise for the attacks on those students?
PM: Well, what I said here, bluntly, Neil, last night, is that as Prime Minister of the country I accept responsibility for the enforcement of our law enforcement system, but frankly I don't think these debates about apology take you anywhere, one way or the other, and so I'm concerned about practical action on the ground.
Remember, we've got acts of violence which occur every day, regrettably, on our streets across Australia. Foreigners and Australians become the targets of those attacks, so foreign students in Australia, unfortunately, become also part and parcel of the, you know, criminal statistics of Australia in terms of what's going on in our streets. I don't think it actually aids the debate or, more practically, aids the action, if we end up in a fairly arid debate about apologies or non-apologies.
The bottom line is I take responsibility for the system, and we're bringing in some practical changes, and I've discussed that of course with various of the State governments.
MITCHELL: Some of the Indian commentators do seem to believe that they're broadly racial attacks. Do you believe they are, or are they opportunistic street crimes?
PM: No, my view, and I've put it here, consistently again yesterday is that I do not believe that racism is at work in Australia on these matters at all. I believe that what you're looking at is the fact that is if you've half a million foreign students in Australia in any given year, and this has been growing over many years now, 100,000 of whom come from India, that's one fifth, then simply if you look at the criminal statistics, that is, the number of homicides in a given day in Australia, the number of assaults in Australia in a given day as a proportion of the population, if you've got half a million students it follows that they are going to end up as part of those statistics. It's unfortunate - it's really unfortunate - that that is the case.
So, I think what you have with foreign students is opportunistic attacks, you have people carrying a little bit of money they earn late at night, back home on the train, and opportunistic attacks could be launched against a foreign student, an Indian student, a Chinese student, or an Australian student, particularly if you're on the trains late at night.
MITCHELL: There was an Indian student who fled this country after pleading guilty to a particularly horrendous case of culpable driving, drunk and speeding and unlicensed. Julie Gillard did say she would raise this when she was in the country. I don't know that she did. Is that an issue you have raised with the Indian officials?
PM: It's something I spoke directly with our High Commissioner about here, and they are directly engaged with the Indian Home Office that is effectively the Indian ministry responsible for tracking people down within their law enforcement system. That is on track at the moment. It's being worked on. I got assurances on that when I arrived here, and so therefore we expect that the Indian Government will be responding in due course to our request. The details concerning this case, as you know, from the Gold Coast, I believe, are quite horrendous.
MITCHELL: Yeah, the victim of the Gold Coast, happened in Melbourne. So you don't raise-
PM: No, the person from the Gold Coast.
MITCHELL: Person, that's right. You don't raise it directly with the Indian officials. It's done through the High Commission.
PM: It is, it's done through the High Commission, and I actually sought assurances that all the proper processes had been enforced at that level, but let me tell you, if there is continued delay on this then we will be raising it at further levels, but the assurances I've received from the High Commission is that this is being dealt with through all the proper channels now and with the level of importance which we in Australia attach to the resolution of this case.
MITCHELL: Just before we leave the students, I read some confused reports that you were launching a 'home for dinner' - Australian families taking Indian students home to dinner. Is that right?
PM: Rotary in Australia, who I think are a fantastic organisation, have put together this proposal. We're just backing them in. It's the right thing for them to do. I think sometime today in Australia, Rotary International will be launching this. We just want to back them in.
What's the bottom line? We've got a whole lot of students in Australia, foreign students. I think it's great that you've got organisations like Rotary working at community level to make these folk feel welcome at home and welcome while they are in Australia, so full marks to Rotary. As I understand it they are going to be putting all that out later today.
MITCHELL: OK, Prime Minister, on the asylum seekers, we're told there could be 20 people, as many as 20 people from the Oceanic Viking who agree to go ashore today following the offer from the Australian Government. However, that offer's pretty generous. Alexander Downer has said this looks like giving people incentive to try to come to Australia. Why is that offer, which is housing, jobs, English lessons, resettled within a month, isn't that giving in to what is effectively blackmail from these people?
PM: Well, first of all, can I just say about Mr Downer, who's provided the commentary, that in his period in office we had some 250 boats come to this country, bringing about 15,000 individuals. They issued something in excess of 10,000 temporary protection visas, 90 percent of whom ended up permanently resettled in Australia, so let's put all that into context.
Secondly, on the details concerning this individual vessel and those who are on board it, the key thing is to make it absolutely plain, absolutely clear cut, that the Australian Government will not be responding to any protest activity on their part or any threats on their part in terms of any change to our border protection policy.
MITCHELL: But they've got exactly what they wanted.
PM: Hang on, well, let me go to that. What you refer to there is the engagements between Australian and international officials and the individuals who are on board this vessel concerning the processing of whether or not they have refugee status. Secondly, what it indicates is that when it comes to anyone who is successfully processed, it goes then to the sorts of conditions which would apply, but it does not go to the question of where the resettlement country in question would be. There are 16 resettlement countries around the world. Australia is one of them. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, working with us and working with the other resettlement countries, could send these individuals to any particular country, and we do not know where that would occur at this stage. So when you talk about what conditions would apply, they could be applying to individuals on this vessel who end up in Canada, or end up in Scandinavia, or end up elsewhere, but that's yet to be determined because the status of each individual hasn't been determined yet.
MITCHELL: So they haven't been promised a position in Australia? They haven't been promised settlement in Australia within a month?
PM: What we've said here, let me just go to the document concerned. It says that procedures will differ slightly depending on your circumstances. If UNHCR has found you to be a refugee, Australian officials will assist you to be resettled within four to six weeks from the time you disembark the vessel, and that refers to UNHCR processing and resettlement wherever in the world.
It goes on to say if you have already registered with the UNHCR, Australian officials will assist with your UNHCR processing. If you are found to be a refugee you will be resettled within 12 weeks from the time you disembark from the vessel. Again, resettled wherever that happens to occur around the world.
MITCHELL: But we're also offering English lessons and welfare payments. How can we offer that on behalf of other countries?
PM: Well, what we do with the International Organisation of Migration, and also with UNHCR, is that we provide a whole range of services, as we have done in years past, to asylum seekers in detention centres in Indonesia. That's been done for a long, long time in the past, including when Mr Downer was foreign minister. It is normal operating procedure, and it will be the case in the future.
The key thing is to send an absolutely clear cut message that these are the processes to go through, this is the way in which individual cases are handled, and any view on the part of any of those on this vessel that if you engage in protest activity, threats of violence, threats of self harm, that that is going to change our policy on border protection, then they are dead set wrong.
MITCHELL: But they've been offered resettlement within four to six weeks. That's much faster than otherwise would be available.
PM: Well, the amount of time it takes to process individuals really does vary. For example, in Christmas Island, if you are taken to Christmas Island then the overall timeframe would vary depending on the individual concerned. It really does depend on the availability of UNHCR staff, it depends on the overall complexity of the individual case, but as I said, if there is a view on the part of any on this vessel that this is the way to ensure that our border protection policy will be changed, that is wrong, and furthermore, the processes outlined here go to resettlement around the world, but let me go on.
If they are found not to be refugees, then none of these processes apply. The problem is at this stage of the process the individual status of those concerned has not been determined.
MITCHELL: Are you denying that these people are getting special treatment?
PM: When I look at what's been provided here, it is consistent with UNHCR processing, both in Indonesia and elsewhere around the world. The time for processing, on average, will just vary with each individual case, depending on its complexity.
I go back to the point here, Neil, that is any assumption that any individual so processed will automatically end up in Australia, is wrong. The resettlement processes apply here to all sixteen resettlement countries around the world. Who does the sorting of all this? The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
MITCHELL: But the bottom line, are these people on the Oceanic Viking getting special treatment?
PM: Absolutely not. This is consistent with the overall approach we adopt to processing of individuals at any centre around the world. But what we're doing is using the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and then in partnership with resettlement countries around the world, and this goes on all the time, individuals will be sent where you know, opportunities or where possibilities or where vacancies exist around the world.
We have done this, including under the previous Australian Government for many, many years. That's how it works with resettlement countries. But I'll just again reiterate the bottom line here, that anyone who thinks that by engaging in rolling protest activity, rolling threats of violence, rolling threats of self harm, that that's going to in any way advance their individual case, they are dead wrong. Our border protection policy won't be changed.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister I know it's very early, just quickly, the Opposition Leader released his policy today and said he would return to a temporary visa situation for three years. After three years people would be returned to their country, if it was safe, if not they could stay in Australia. What's your response to that?
PM: I've just been handed this press statement from Mr Turnbull. What stuns me is after two years we don't get a policy, we get four dot points of principle. I'm all for a policy debate on what to do with border protection policy but this is a press release with four dot points of principle. What does he say in it? One, we will once again secure our borders. Well that's the policy which had 250 boats arrived under them with nearly 15,000 people. Two, he says all processing offshore. Well they didn't do that when they were in government either. We had about ten per cent of those boats coming to Australia who reached the mainland. In the case of this Government we have had, it think, out of 44 vessels, one which has so far reached the mainland. So that's the second point.
Another point he says is that they'll adopt a compassionate and fair refugee and humanitarian program. Well, hold the phone, that's what governments around Australia have been committed to in one form or another for a long, long time. Then fourthly, the point he's actually been saying through his spokesman for months, and there's nothing new in this at all, is describe a new non-permanent visa for unauthorised arrivals which he describes as a 'safe-haven visa'.
Well this, depending on the release and subsequent detailed policy statement, represents the return to a Howard government temporary protection visa. That's the one which saw, after it was introduced in 1999, some 9,000 irregular arrivals come to Australia on nearly 100 boats.
Secondly, by the time we got to mid-2007 nearly 10,000 had been granted temporary protection visas. But here's the clincher, nearly 90 per cent of those people granted temporary protection visas under the Howard government were subsequently granted a permanent visa to stay in Australia. So let's just be very clear about all this.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, just quickly on another issue, you were in Afghanistan for Remembrance Day which is very important. The Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard didn't go to any Remembrance Day service. I would have thought she'd go to the War Memorial. Isn't that perhaps an oversight?
PM: I haven't seen what Julia's program was that day. The critical thing, I believe, for Australia and attending this important Remembrance Day event is that representing Australia, I was with our troops in the field demonstrating the Government's, the nation's absolute support for what our brave men and women are doing in uniform, on the battle front. And secondly, on that occasion, with our American ally reflecting our honour of all those who have put their lives on the line for Australia.
MITCHELL: You'd be a bit surprised Julia Gillard wasn't at the War Memorial wouldn't you?
PM: Well, my understanding is that around that particular day that Julia was already committed to a nation conference with 161 principals from schools, also the Assistant Defence Minister Greg Combet represented both myself and Julia.
The key thing is, there's an event in Australia or around the world which is attended by the Prime Minister of Australia. That event in this case, was attended by myself in Afghanistan at Tarin Kowt with hundreds of our men and women in uniform in attendance. That reflected on behalf of the Government and the nation, our commitment to them and all those who have preceded them, wearing proudly the uniform of Australia.
MITCHELL: I got the impression from what you said that we're not actually winning in Afghanistan are we?
PM: Neil, I just believe in being blunt. That is, the insurgency led by the Taliban in the southern parts of the country is intensifying. That this is a real problem in provinces like Kandahar and Helmand which lie to the south of Oruzgan where the Australian troops are.
So it means that we need a national strategy in Afghanistan which is adjusted to the new realities. That's what General McChrystal, who is the supreme commander of the international assistance force in Afghanistan, discussed with me when we were in Tarin Kowt. We spent several hours discussing it. The Obama Administration will provide their response to that in due course. Plainly, nationally, a new strategy is needed. What we are doing within our province is to give effect to the training mission we established, which is to raise up a fourth Afghan National Army Brigade to take on security functions in the province.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time, I know it's early morning. You'll be please to know Sabi the wonder dog will, I've spoken to the head of quarantine, she could be back in Australia within six months and then in quarantine for 30 days.
PM: Well actually Neil , you've given me news. Thank you for that because my next level of anxiety was what's going to happen with AQIS in getting Sabi back.
MITCHELL: Well Sabi apparently can go and live in the Australian base in Kuwait for six months while they monitor her. If she's OK and doesn't show anything she goes into quarantine here for 30 days and then she moves into The Lodge.
PM: I've got to talk to Abbey about that but anything's possible. Sabi the wonder dog, I think, it's just such a great story and, you know, there's a lot of hard things happening in Afghanistan but these are important symbols of getting our way through and I know all of our blokes and our women in uniform think it's just a fantastic outcome so, thank you, for that good news that AQIS is properly processing this matter.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.


The Government today announced a new initiative - the Australia Awards - to maximise the benefit to Australia of its extensive scholarship programs, and to support enduring ties between Australia and our neighbours.
The Government currently invests $200 million each year in scholarship programs which, at any time, support around 5,000 international students to study in Australia.
The Australia Awards will bring together these Australian scholarship programs under a single recognisable brand. Rather than dilute Australia's scholarship effort through a group of uncoordinated programs, the Australia Awards initiative will ensure that Australian scholarships are consolidated, better branded, and delivered to support Australia's long term interests.
Just as the Colombo Plan delivered Australian education to the region as a coordinated and recognised brand a generation ago, the Australia Awards initiative will enhance the awareness and value placed on Australia's contemporary scholarship programs.
The Australia Awards initiative will, over time, build a new generation of leadership with strong links to Australia.
The Australia Awards will comprise two streams: a leadership stream that will target the best and brightest scholars to come to Australia; and a development stream that will build capacity in developing countries.
The Australia Awards initiative will:
     * encourage Australia Award recipients to maintain their links to Australia through a strong alumni plan
     * consolidate Australian Government scholarships programs together under a single powerful brand
     * support the Australia Awards brand through a robust marketing strategy
     * ensure that the beneficiaries of Australian scholarships have a better experience of Australia during their period of study though enhanced student services
     * establish a high profile board that will provide expert advice and strategic direction on how the scholarship program can meet Australia's long-term interests, and can compete with other world class scholarship programs. Board members will be drawn from the government, corporate and academic sectors.
Speaking in Singapore, the Prime Minister announced the first phase of the initiative - the Australia Asia Awards.
The first Australia Asia Awards scholars will take up their awards in 2010. Comparable programs for other regions will be rolled out in subsequent years.
Addressing an audience at the National University of Singapore, the Prime Minister announced that the Australia Asia Awards will be supported by new funding of $18 million.
The Australia Awards will also showcase Australia's cutting-edge capabilities in the education sector, which includes eight of the world's top 100 universities, and demonstrate Australia's ongoing commitment to building closer and enduring ties with our region and beyond.


Thank you very much, and thank you for that kind introduction, and it's great to be back here in Singapore, and can I congratulate each of you as representatives of the business communities of this great and dynamic region for attending this conference.
This has been a very difficult year for business around the world. You've had to wrestle with the challenges of the global financial crisis, which has become has become an economic crisis, which has become an employment crisis in many countries, and it has sapped a lot of confidence in the global economy. But the fact that you as leaders of business around the world and around our region, which represents 56 percent of the global economy is a testament to your strong resolve, because together governments and business have made a difference in the last 12 months.
One of the global institutions which has helped makes a difference is the G20, and together with my colleague from Mexico and elsewhere around the region and the world, and the fact that we have nine member states of APEC who are members of the G20 underlines the significance of that institution in underpinning the seeds for economic recovery.
In fact, if you look at the fact that we are now in a part of the economy which sees growth in the world in 2009, for the first time since 1951 being negative, the global economy contracting, this has placed very large challenges indeed on the shoulders of global economic governance and on regional institutional cooperation. This is where governments have a role to play.
Secondly, when we are asked, as Tommy has, to address the question of the adequacy of regional institutions, let us assess what is going right before we assess then how we can do it better in the future. Take this great institution, APEC, which this year celebrates its 20th anniversary. Prime Minister Hawke of Australia, was an initiator of this great institution in 1989, and when you looked at the challenges back then about drawing down the boundaries of protectionism within this great region, people looked then very sceptically about what we could achieve.
But the figures now demonstrate success. Back then the general protection level of nearly 20 percent centre across this region - now, over that period time, have been brought down closer to 5 (percent). And when you look at the fact that as a region we generate $6.2 trillion of trade, and we have managed to take out such a large amount of protectionism, in terms of the economic activity across borders, this is a significant achievement. And moves to liberalise the economy do not happen automatically. They happen as a consequence of governments getting together and deciding to make things work, to make it easier for business to do what business does best.
So on the positive report card, APEC, in my judgement, has been an extraordinary success story.
Secondly, when APEC translated in the 1990s to a summit-level operation, it presented new opportunities as well. Those opportunities where for Heads of Government to gather each year in non-crisis mode across our region, to discuss the wider challenges facing the Asia-Pacific region. Challenges of security, challenges of broader global collaboration, including most recently, challenges concerning climate change.
This should not be underestimated as an additional value which we've obtained from APEC. The ability for leaders from the United States, from China, from Japan, and from elsewhere in the region, from Mexico, from Australia, and in Southeast Asia, to gather each year to spend time with each other on the common challenges of our region, beyond the specific agenda of trade liberalisation. That has been the second great achievement of APEC. The task we are left with to answer here, however, is how can we take these institutions of existing regional governance and improve them in the future? And that is why Australia has initiated a debate concerning an Asia-Pacific community by 2020.
Let me outline briefly the proposition and the case. Right now, we have a vast array of institutions. Each of them performing a critical and valuable role. We have APEC, I've just referred to. We have the emergence, also, of the East Asia Summit, which brings together the dynamic economies of South-East Asia and ASEAN, with the three powerhouses of North East Asia, China, Korea, as well as Japan. As well as, now, India, Australia and New Zealand. This is a good gathering. It is achieving good momentum. We also have, in our region, ASEAN itself, the oldest success story in terms of regional institutionalism.
And when people reflect on why institutions matter, think about this - when ASEAN was created in 1967, the thought of it forty years later, having within it the traditional warring parties of Communist IndoChina and non-Communist Southeast-Asia was inconceivable. What it's achieved in forty years is actually to bring together a sense of common, regional community, soft security community, as well as enhanced economic cooperation across all these countries of Southeast Asia. It is an outstanding success story. For the region at large, how do we take the success of ASEAN and generalise it for the future challenges of the Asia-Pacific region at large?
How do we avoid the re-emergence of fundamental strategic rifts in our region in the future, when we're still required to deal with some of the deep, underlying challenges concerning territorial claims. Unresolved territorial claims in the Korean Peninsula and the Taiwan Straits, in the South China Sea and elsewhere. How do you avoid any future conflict which would underpin the trajectory of growth that we've had so successfully in this region now for many decades? And how do we enhance further our cooperation to create over time a single market in these vast economies which we represent here?
Our proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community seeks to do this - it seeks to bring together in a single institution over time the economies and countries of our region, with an agenda which covers the entire space, not just part of it.
Political cooperation, security cooperation, as well as economic cooperation- as well as many other areas, including climate change. At present, APEC has no political or security agenda explicitly. It is a gathering of economies. The East Asian Summit has its strengths, but it (inaudible) our great friends and partners the United States, from its gatherings so far. And ASEAN of course is legitimately concentrated on Southeast Asia. So our vision for the future is how do we create an institution which draws all these (inaudible) economies, and, most importantly, together with an agenda which covers the political, security, and economic space, to encourage the habits of cooperation, the habits which underpin security cooperation, the habits which underpin a common sense of community in our region.
I conclude by saying this. Often, we assume that somehow peace and security are delivered by some deterministic means. That they are inevitable. That is not the case. Peace and cooperation across our region have been hard fought through the institutions of existing cooperation over recent decades, because the history prior to that is not a happy history at all.
Therefore, we have to encourage through direct institution-building these habits of cooperation to become entrenched and normal in the future. Think of this with Europe. Europe fought disastrous wars from the 17th century to the 18th century to the 19th century, and finally, the cataclysm of two world wars in the 20th century, before finally realising that they had to fashion an institution which would put conflict to one side, and fashion instead the habits of cooperation. And that is the European Union.
I do not advocate a European Union model for the countries of the Asia Pacific region, but I believe we can learn from that example, and learn from the example fashioned within our own neighbourhood through ASEAN itself, an extraordinary successful organisation.
So let us have an ambition to move our region in this direction. We in Australia are entirely relaxed and patient about how long this may take. We have set ourselves the goal of 2020. We have a one and a half track conference convened on our concept of an Asia Pacific community to be held in Sydney next month. And I'm pleased to say that Governments and countries across the region have sent a high level set of delegations to attend that conference. But we will move patiently, and consistently, with the expressions of views from across the region, and they will be many and varied.
But my concluding point is this. It is far better that we seek to shape the future by encouraging, institutionally, the habits of cooperation across the wider region, than simply to take a passive approach and allow the future to shape us.
Thank you for your attention.


PM: I'm in Singapore for the annual APEC Leaders' Meeting. As you know, APEC was established 20 years ago, back in 1989, and Australia, under the Hawke government, was deeply instrumental in the establishment of this institution. And APEC has come a long way in the intervening 20 years. It's helped build a strong regional consensus for open markets and economic integration and also has helped to build economic resilience in the region, as well.
It also is globally economically significant, it brings together 21 economies, nine of these economies are G20 economies, and together represent 55 per cent of the global economy. Also when you talk about the sheer volume of trade itself, total trade among the APEC economies being worth something like 6.2 trillion dollars. And also what we have seen in the history and the evolution of APEC is the fact that average tariff rates across APEC have come down significantly in the period since its establishment. 
This has represented a huge saving to business, but importantly, a huge support and direct encouragement of growth and therefore of jobs. One of the other areas in which APEC has been at work has of course been to reduce red tape around intra-regional trade and also through the harmonisation of regulatory requirements right across the region. APEC's first trade facilitation action plan delivered a five per cent reduction in trade transaction costs in APEC between 2002 and 2006 and recent economic modelling shows that APEC's second trade action plan is currently being implemented and will deliver a further five per cent reduction by 2010. This is important direct action concerning a large part of the global economy, a large part of global trade, bringing down protectionism among these dynamic economies, a lot of whom represent major trading partners for Australia. 
Also over the next several days here in Singapore, there will be an opportunity for me to meet directly with a range of leaders, and I am looking forward to the opportunity to have discussions of course with our host, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore, also to catch up with President Obama of the United States, President Hu Jintao of China, President Lee of Korea, Prime Minister Hatoyama of Japan, as well as of course President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and other regional leaders.
Also, we'll have the opportunity at APEC to discuss climate change, and I look forward very much to the discussions with leaders on that important subject as the clock is ticking to Copenhagen. 
This is an important, I won't say last, opportunity, to build further momentum in a direction of a strong outcome for Copenhagen, but when you have gathered in Singapore economies which represent a large part of any final negotiated outcome for Copenhagen, this is an opportunity which we cannot afford to miss. 
JOURNALIST: 22 asylum seekers have come off the Oceanic Viking. When do you expect the other 58 to disembark? And how would they disembark?
PM: On the question of individual negotiations, with individuals still on the vessel, as I said before, we'll just work our way calmly and methodically through all of them. Each represents its own complexity, each vessel represents its own complexity, therefore we'll simply work our way through this calmly and methodically as we have done so far. Remember, these are always complex situations, they have been in the past, and they will be in the future. 
On the second part of your question which goes to the method of disembarkation, I am simply unaware of how that is being organised. I simply leave the methods of those arrangements to those who are charged with this on the ground. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the headlines being discussed today at APEC are (inaudible)
PM: President Obama of course is coming- my understanding is from the United States today, we have the Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. On the question of today's agenda, one of the matters upon which we'll be speaking today will be the future opportunities for open regionalism, here in APEC, and how we take the overall economic agenda further. A lot of people have their eyes glazed over when they look at the detail of what APEC does. Can I simply say the trade facilitation business, bringing down regulatory barriers for trade, is of actual vital economic significance because it simply opens up the arteries of the global economy.
It's painstaking work but it's real work. On the question of Doha, the opportunity again presents itself here with so many significant global leaders gathered provides us with a fresh opportunity to work towards a successful conclusion of the Doha round. if we do not, then frankly we're denying ourselves globally an additional trillion dollars in economic activity. Doha has a potential to unleash a further increment of global growth.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in terms of the 22 asylum seekers, what has been promised in terms of resettlement and can you comment on the response from the Indonesian Foreign Ministry spokesman that it's, quote, up to Australia (inaudible)
PM: We have been quite clear about the fact that the resettlement responsibility for the individuals concerned, first of all, lies with the UNHCR in terms of processing, and secondly us working with the UNHCR and the other 15 or 16 resettlement countries in terms of where any bona fide refugees then go. That is what I have said consistently, that is what's applying on the ground. Furthermore, in terms of the arrangements for all of these individuals, they are consistent with what our spokesmen have said in Australia, consistent with the document which I believe was referred to in recent days in discussions with you here and therefore we'll work our way through each of those and apply those principles in partnership with UNHCR to each individual.
My understanding is there is no difference between those who are currently on the vessel and those who have disembarked the vessel. As I said before in response to an earlier question, we must calmly and methodically work our way through each one. Tim, and then Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: Would you be seeking to reconfirm with President Yudhoyono that boat people that are rescued or found in waters are the responsibility of Indonesia? 
PM: What I have consistently said to our Indonesian friends is that when we have a search and rescue operation which occurs within Indonesia's search and rescue area and when such vessels having been interdicted by an Australian vessel that those vessels would normally proceed to an Indonesian port, as the nearest port.
Remember, those are the circumstances that which underpin this individual vessel, secondly when it goes to any other vessels can I say each of those vessels in terms of where it's interdicted, how it's dealt with, depends on the circumstances of the vessel. You cannot simply make a blanket projection into the future about where a vessel is interdicted, the circumstances under which it's interdicted, and therefore how it will be handled. Each of these is different, remember that as we speak there are interruptions to people smuggling to Australia.
That is occurring all the time. 86 interruptions have occurred in the last year. Tim.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it true that (inaudible)
PM: The underpinning assumption of the question is that there is a special arrangement here, my advice is that there is not, this applies to the general processing of cases as they would present themselves through the UNHCR and we have applied those processes in this case as well. In terms of time for each individual case, it will vary, but our assumption is, that given that where these cases earlier have gone with earlier UNHCR processing, that in some cases it might be easier to process rapidly. But I go back to the underlying point- where do individual cases who are successfully processed end up, that is entirely a matter for a broader discussion for resettlement countries, and as I said anyone who is not established as a bona fide refugee, that person is not resettled. They have a different set of circumstance to contend with. I have said consistently that if you are not a bona fide refugee, and this applies to any one who is currently on Christmas Island or considering coming to Australia or any other country, you will not be entertained in Australia, you will not be entertained in terms of any other resettlement process. You will be sent back home. That is the bottom line.
If you are bona a fide refugee, the processing times will be tailored to each individual circumstance. On average some work has been done with some of these cases before as we were advised by the UNHCR. They may be quicker. That's entirely consistent with work which has been done on shore, before these individuals took to the boat. Therefore, those are the processes which will apply in these cases. Phil.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the details of the SBY meeting I do not know whether it is today or tomorrow. In terms of meeting all these leaders, you are probably familiar with these processes. It often occurs when you are having a plenary meeting that you disappear to the side, have a discussion, that is how I have done it for many leaders in the past. 
Can I say with the President of the United States, with President Hu Jintao of China- the way in which these things work, you will have a series of formal, semi-formal, informal, bilateral, that is how it has worked in the past, that is how it will work in this conference as well. With 21 economies around the place it is often fairly fluid.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well let's step back one point. The Indonesian Government has worked very closely with us for the past two years in successful interruptions of a large number of people smuggling ventures. Let's be very clear about that. The 86 that I refer to includes the countries, but a lot of those are in Indonesia, that's the first point that everyone needs to understand. This is an ongoing operation in Indonesia and with our friends elsewhere, with our friends and partners in the region.
Secondly, as I indicated in earlier statements in Jakarta, what we are working through with the Indonesians, is a long term framework for how we better handle people smuggling within the region. As we are doing currently with Malaysia, as we are currently doing with Sri Lanka. This is normal that is what we are working through.
Thirdly, and I go back to Malcolm's question about the circumstances concerning this individual vessel. They have arisen in part, in large part because there was a vessel in distress in the Indonesian search and rescue area, no Indonesian vessel available to undertake the rescue. The Australian vessel therefore being asked by the Indonesians to intervene, the Australian vessel being authorised by the Indonesians to dock that vessel in an Indonesian port, and the associated arrangements which we are currently discussing about how those individuals come off. These sorts of circumstances have arisen because of the particularity of this vessel, the search and rescue operation that occurred and who did it.
JOURNALIST: The Indonesians say that the asylum seekers who have left the boat have been guaranteed that they would end up in Australia. Can you confirm that?
PM: That is not correct. The undertaking that Australia has provided the UNHCR is that we will assist UNHCR in their proper processing. As I said anyone subsequently determined to have refugee status would see them be subject to resettlement across the range of resettlement countries, of which Australia is one.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: As for the status of each individual, in terms of those currently on the vessel and those not on the vessel, it has yet to be finally determined. You asked me specifically about the status of the various individuals, my advice is that their status in terms of their UNHCR status has yet to be resolved in all cases. I am not going to go into a detailed analysis of each of the individual's 78 cases.
They are at various stages of development. As I said before in response to an earlier question, on the processing time, in part there is a variation in the processing time, because in some cases there has been earlier stages of processing which has occurred within Indonesia by the UNHCR. But I cannot give you a comprehensive breakdown on each of the individual cases, and say where does each stand in their UNHCR processing status right now.
JOURNALIST: 30 are refugees according to-
PM: Well as I said, my final point- my point is the final status of those who are on the vessel, those who have disembarked is still to be determined and therefore that is the first step, that is the logical first step, the second is that once you have got to a point of determining the status through UNHCR then that is when resettlement to resettlement countries occurs. Those arrangements have not been in any way concluded.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this morning on the ABC, the former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser has suggested that you know too much detail, too far into detail particularly, on the asylum seeker question and that you need to leave this to your Minister (inaudible)
PM: If I was to respond to that particular observation, assuming it has been accurately reflected, then I'd be responding to none of the questions which any of you have legitimately posed to me this morning. Quite rightly, as members of the media asking of the detail of the processing of these cases, and I have answered to the best ability of my knowledge given that the processing arrangements are fluid. Let me step back one step further, I think the Australian people legitimately expect of their Australian Prime Minister to be across on going operations. Obviously the execution of individual operations lies with the range of Ministers and official back in Australia and some in Indonesia, but I think you here would also expect me to be briefed on what is happening on the individual circumstances concerning this vessel, hence why I have been able to answer some of the questions this morning. Someone here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the question of Temporary Protection Visas, let me make it very, very plain about why they didn't work in terms of what John Howard had in place. One is, the Liberals have often claimed that this represented the singular or one of the substantial deterrents against boat people coming to Australia. That is absolutely false. The figures demonstrate that it is false. When Temporary Protection Visas were introduced to Australia in 1999 what followed then was nearly 100 vessels containing something close to 10,000 people, let's be very plain about that.
Let's be very plain about a second point of all those individuals that were issued temporary protection visas nearly more than 90% were then resettled in Australia as P\permanent residents. Third point, only three percent of those ever issued with temporary protection visas will return back home.
Let's us anchor this discussion in some facts. Your point about the reintroduction of Howard Government temporary protection visas, we have made our position absolutely clear on that, our border protection policy is the one we took to the last election. It included the elimination of Howard Government Temporary Protection Visas, that is the policy we are implementing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: What the Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith has already indicated is that we will use APEC as an opportunity to review progress- I think Stephen said this some weeks ago, maybe he even said it in the Parliament- but this is a much longer term negotiation of a new framework for enhancing our cooperation on transnational crime and people smuggling. I'll reiterate what I said before, it is parallel to the arrangements we have in place with other countries like Malaysia and Sri Lanka and how do we enhance our current frameworks for cooperation on people smuggling with them.
I simply emphasise what I have said before, it is legitimate for you to focus on this individual vessel but with all these other countries we are actively engaged in large scale operations on a continuing basis to disturb people smuggling ventures, 86 of which have occurred in the last 12 months- this I would ask you to bear in mind against also the 44 vessels which in the last two years have so far arrived in Australian waters.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well let me go to the provisions of the Lombok Treaty. The provisions of the Lombok Treaty in between Indonesia and Australia go to our broad cooperation on counter terrorism, on security, on transnational crime, including people smuggling. Secondly, what I have said in Jakarta is that we will work towards a framework which enhances our cooperation under the terms of the Lombok treaty in the security area, one for which, is a new framework to handle the challenge which we all face on people smuggling, that is what is underway.
It is complex work. It involves a range of agencies both here and in Indonesia and will take some time. But I can say again, the current cooperation between Australia and Indonesia on the disruption of people smuggling ventures- this is very, very good as it is with Malaysia, as it is with Sri Lanka, as it is with a range of countries.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I've got to speak to a business breakfast. 
JOURNALIST: This is an APEC question. It is coming to 20 years old. Do you think APEC is coming to its use-by date as a summit, as a forum?
PM: For 20 years, it's important to reflect on how far APEC's come. When APEC was created, people engaged in a collective regional yawn about what it was going to achieve. That was Prime Minister Hawke's initiative, to get this whole thing going. The reduction of trade protectionism that I was referred to moments before, involving, which has an impact on now 6.3 trillion dollars of trade in the region, is significant.
It is very significant and measureable. It is practical work, detailed work, not often headline-grabbing. The second thing is, when Prime Minister Keating succeeded, among others, in elevating APEC to a Summit level meeting, what it provided is an opportunity for a whole range of other discussions to occur at Head of Government level, across the range of relationships. And we've been speaking about one of those this morning. 
That's frankly, been one of the huge advantages of this level of summitry. Let me give you an example of how it's worked in the past. In 1999, when we were in the midst of the huge challenges concerning East Timor, a lot of the effective, shall I say, inter-governmental negotatiations on what was a very difficult situation involving Australia and Indonesia and others at that time occurred at the APEC meeting at summit level in New Zealand.
Going to the future, I believe APEC has a strong continuing role. I believe the East Asian Summit has a strong, continuing role. As you know, I have consistently argued for more than a year now, that we need also to debate the future possibility, in the Asia Pacific region, of an institution which covers political cooperation, security cooperation, and economic cooperation that is where our argument for an Asia Pacific community comes in. And it is encouraging today, that again as Leaders we'll have an opportunity to discuss, the adequacy of our existing regional institutions, where we wish to take them in the future, but we should not diminish the scorecard of APEC so far.
It has been real and tangible in most areas I've referred to, and I am supposed to be in the middle of a PowerPoint presentation with a bunch of business leaders and those of you who have not seen this PowerPoint presentation before are welcome to come in and critique it against others, and sadly, you may be otherwise detained.


JOURNALIST: You chaired a session on climate change at the APEC summit. There is a sense that the momentum may be starting to get bogged down at the official level. The leaders are having to step in. How crucial are the talks next week - President Obama and Hu Jintao of China - going to be towards securing more hope at Copenhagen and a new deal?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, the climate change outcome is critical for the planet. The clock literally is ticking, not just for the planet but for Copenhagen itself - three weeks to go. So what we've done here in Singapore today at the APEC conference is we invited Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark as President of the Conference of the Parties to brief leaders here in Singapore at APEC on the problems that are being encountered and the ways through.
The good news is we had a strong resolve from leaders including the President of the United States and the President of China, the Prime Minister of Japan and others, including the President of Indonesia, who is author of the Bali Road Map two years ago on climate change, a strong indication of the highest level of political support for the Danish Prime Minister to fashion a draft agreement.
That's what we are working towards. It may not be perfect in the eyes of some but I've got to say it's critical to achieve a breakthrough, and as for the meetings which will be held in Beijing in the next few days between President Obama and President Hu Jintao, they're really important. These are two huge economies, but I've got to say both spoke very well and very positively in the breakfast which I helped chair this morning.
JOURNALIST: Critical at this junction that these talks next week- let me ask you bluntly, how hopeful are you there will be a breakthrough and there will be a new deal in Copenhagen?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm trained in the great craft of Australian political realism, which is, 'it's tough but you never give up until the end', and I believe there is a way through here. We do have the scope to bring about an ambitious agreement at Copenhagen. Of course, it all hangs on political will. The officials' process, as you've rightly indicated in your earlier question, has bogged down. Leaders are stepping in to try and pull this thing out of the fire. Many obstacles lie in the way, but speaking as Prime Minister of Australia, and I believe on behalf of so many of my colleagues, we intend to give this thing a darn good go.
JOURNALIST: At home, your own plan for the carbon tax has failed once, I think it was in August in the Senate. It's coming up again. In the last 24 hours we've had, I guess, a concession from the Government to take out the agricultural sector, which has been a key demand of the Opposition. Is that going to be enough to get this through so that you can take it and present it at Copenhagen? You need seven votes in the Senate.
PRIME MINISTER: Well these are tough negotiations at home and abroad. Let's look at both America and Australia. We've both taken over governments, President Obama and myself, from our predecessors who were not party to Kyoto, not substantively party to the global negotiations on climate change. We have to start from a zero start, and so both of us are obviously having to put together cap and trade systems, negotiate them with industry, and craft them through our respective parliaments or legislatures - our Parliament, his Congress. It's tough going.
For us, we will of course engage in good faith negotiations with the political Opposition in Australia. We'll know in the course of the next fortnight whether we get it through or not, but we're out there trying to make it work. We think it's important for Australia. We think it's important to be able to go to Copenhagen with the possibility of a resolution of this in Australia as well.
JOURNALIST: Let's talk about APEC, the final communiqué, the language on climate change halving the amount of carbon emissions by 2050. That was watered down to have the emissions cut down by 'a significant amount'. How disappointed are you by that?
PRIME MINISTER: Look I wouldn't get too obsessed with all of that. The reason is that we are three weeks out from Copenhagen. Everyone is engaged in a negotiation at present. Negotiations are kind of like negotiations anywhere - there's horse trading, there's deals cut and it's going to be a while before we get to the precise landing point.
I'm much more focussed on the meeting that I was privileged to co-chair this morning with, as I said, 17 or so world leaders around the table representing 56 per cent of the global economy, all saying 'the officials process is running into trouble. We need a political leaders-level process to get an outcome for Copenhagen', and a resolve to head in that direction. President Obama and President Hu Jintao are strongly on the bus for doing that.
JOURNALIST: Very quickly, the summit, APEC, the 20th we have had so far. When this whole thing first started, it was, if I'm not mistaken, very much, partly at least a Bob Hawke initiative. You are calling for the backing for an Asia Pacific community, more security based. What's wrong with APEC or the other regional for, and for that matter why on earth do we need another one?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you're right. One of my Australian predecessors, Bob Hawke, a great Australian Prime Minister, about to celebrate his 80th birthday back home in Australia - happy birthday, Bob. He was instrumental in getting this thing going 20 years ago, and it's been very successful - rolling out a free trade agenda across the Asia Pacific, underpinning so much of the growth which has occurred here. At the same time, providing a forum for leaders to gather on other questions, as we have just done on climate change. But here's the problem: APEC has no security policy mandate.
If you look for those with a potential security policy mandate, the ASEAN Regional Forum for example, it hasn't really taken off. Australia was involved in the establishment of it as well, 15 years or so ago. And we have the emergence of the East Asia Summit, but it excludes the United States and APEC excludes India, a major economy for the Asia-Pacific region for the 21st Century.
So what have we put forward? Let's begin with a discussion about how we evolve over time an Asia-Pacific community which has a broad mandate: political; economic; security; climate change - in other words, the whole scope of our future engagements and one which critically includes America and India as well.
JOURNALIST: Let's talk about your relations with India. 'Strategic partnership' is the way that you're describing it now. Australia is, of course, a very significant supplier of raw materials to China. India though, obviously you have your eye on possibly supplying uranium for their nuclear program. What about the fact, though, that India is not a part of the NPT and you've said before 'no NPT, we're not buying, we're not exporting'?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, as far as our energy relationship with India is concerned, it's going ahead in leaps and bounds. Take, for example, LNG. Most recently, one of the Indian power companies signed a $20 billion contract for a huge new Australian resource development off the North-West Shelf of Western Australia called the Gorgon development. So that's happening, and it's happening across the board.
You raise the question particularly of uranium. What I've said to our Indian colleagues and friends, Prime Minister Singh, is that we have no particular problem with India's good and strong record on non-proliferation in the past. However, our policy has been, since 1978, to provide uranium to those countries which are signatories to the NPT, the Non-Proliferation Treaty. I understand that causes some concern in New Delhi but we have so many other things on the energy front in that relationship that I believe we have a strong future overall.
JOURNALIST: If you could, in just a few seconds, because we don't have that much time left, describe if you could, how would you describe Australia-China relations at this point in time, after, I think, you went through Stern Hu, the Rio Tinto deal collapsing, etcetera?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, obviously there are always challenges in any relationship. International relations are not all that different really from personal relations. They go through a few ups and a few downs, but you know something? Strategically, the Australia-China relationship is in first-class working order. In the last month I think I've spent a considerable amount of time with President Hu Jintao, Premier Wen Jiabao, Vice-Premier Li Keqiang, who came to Australia, General Chen Bingde, the head of the PLA - they've all been down.
This relationship is in good working order. From time to time there will be bumps on the road, but you know something? This is a big economic relationship for both of us. It's big for the long term. We both get that, and therefore it's just a question of managing the hiccups when they arise and I think we're doing that okay.


PM: This morning I've just come from a meeting with international leaders focussed on the Copenhagen conference on climate change in December. The President of Mexico and myself some time ago were asked by the Prime Minister of Denmark to become friends of the chair, that is, to assist in delivering the best possible outcome at Copenhagen. Consistent with that, President Calderon and I invited Prime Minister Rasmussen here to Singapore to meet with APEC leaders. Prime Minister Rasmussen flew overnight from Copenhagen and arrived at 6 o'clock this morning and we've just had breakfast with him and other leaders explicitly on the Copenhagen agenda.
This was a positive meeting. The Prime Minister of Denmark was able to outline his processes as president of the conference of parties to try and bring about a robust agreement at Copenhagen. Leaders, in their interventions around the table, were clear in their view that the current officials-led process is running into all sorts of difficulties, and therefore it is time for leaders, politically, to step in. That was the purpose of our gathering this morning.
The tone and content of the meeting was strongly positive - strongly positive about the sort of agreement we could achieve at Copenhagen, and positive also about the fact that we needed to provide maximum support for the Danish Prime Minister's leaders-led process to achieve that outcome at Copenhagen.
The other positive outcome from the meeting this morning was the growing number of states whose leaders have indicated that they will be attending the Copenhagen conference themselves. We've had statements to that effect today from Prime Minister Hatoyama of Japan, from President Yudhoyono of Indonesia. Also, I understand the President of Korea, President Lee Myung-bak, the President of Chile, and others, of course, as you know, I've already indicated that I'll be attending as well.
The other point I'd like to emphasise is this - as Copenhagen draws closer, we must remember the devastating consequences of climate change. As the clock ticks down, the need for action in fact become more urgent.
There are only two choices here: action or inaction. There's no middle path, and it's our responsibility as leaders to act.
One further set of remarks before taking your questions concerns the APEC agenda today.
Today our deliberations at APEC focus on trade and economic liberalisation, which has already helped to lift hundreds of millions of people in the Asia-Pacific region, over time, out of poverty. Supporting the G20's approach to delivering sustainable economic growth will also be crucial as we work to deliver a better growth model for the coming decades.
Trade liberalisation is the core business of the APEC agenda. Remember this: it began as process when Bob Hawke helped set up APEC in 1989, and when we go back to the Bogor Declaration under Prime Minister Keating in 1994, general protection levels back then were something in the order of about 17 per cent and over that period of time have been reduced to something like 5 percent.
This has been an extraordinary set of achievements, but there is much more work to go, and therefore the statements of support which we've already received from the President of the United States in a speech he gave yesterday in Tokyo about the TPP - the Trans-Pacific Partnership - as a long-term stepping stone to where we might all go in terms of a free trade agreement for Asia and the Pacific is a step in the right direction.
Finally, our deliberations here must also return to what we have failed to do so far as leaders. That is, bring about a successful conclusion to Doha in 2010. That's where significant new lifting in the overall level of activity in the global economy must come from. If we achieve a Doha outcome the estimates are that it would provide an additional increment to global growth of something approaching $1 trillion. Bear in mind this financial and economic crisis has holed out $6 trillion from the global economy. It is now more urgent than ever to get progress multilaterally through Doha, as well as through regional and bilateral arrangements on trade to open up the arteries of international commerce.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if the APEC leaders at the urging of China can't agree on a 50 per cent reduction in emission by 2050, what hope is there for Copenhagen?
PM: I believe there is a common resolve to get a robust agreement in Copenhagen. There is always argy-bargy on the way through, and that applies to climate change as well.
It's very important that President Obama leaves from Singapore and travels to Beijing. It's very important to hear both the positive contributions to the discussion this morning from President Obama and from President Hu Jintao about where we can go to in terms of getting an agreement at Copenhagen.
But let's not underestimate the degrees of difficulty. Here at APEC it's one step along the road. Copenhagen is where we're aiming, and can I draw your attention to the absolute importance of the discussions which will occur in the days ahead between the Americans and the Chinese.
JOURNALIST: So those other leaders you've referred to who are committed to go to Copenhagen include Hu and Obama?
PM: Those that I referred to have made indications either in the immediate lead up to our meeting this morning with the Prime Minister of Denmark or reflected at the table, but there wasn't a general invitation around the table for people to stick their hands up. All I'm saying is that they're the leaders who've so far indicated that I'm aware of. There may be others as well.
Here, there, and then over there.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said in your speech yesterday that you saw, you outlined your hope that the countries of APEC would ultimately enable an Asia-Pacific community concept. Can you just clarify, do you think that ultimately APEC morphs into such an arrangement, or that it continues, and what I mean is, do you see that APEC as an organisation is, you know, on borrowed time, and that you see going broader architecture?
PM: These are all valid questions about where we go to for the future, and these are parts of the discussion among us all as APEC leaders. That's why a lot of the internal discussion is where do we take APEC after its 20th anniversary, into the future?
There is now an open discussion, which you saw something of yesterday at the Business Leaders Forum, on the future of how we shape our region and what institutions should do it. APEC's performed a fantastic job in terms of the trade liberalisation function as well as providing this regular forum for leaders who can actually engage in a whole lot of other business as well, and beforehand, that didn't exist.
Over here you've got the East Asian Summit, and it's an evolving institution, effectively ASEAN plus six, but it does exclude the United States. You also have something called the ASEAN regional forum, which was established again, largely at Australia's initiation some decades or decade and a half ago. It has a, let's call it, a broad security mandate, but can I say we don't have an institution yet which draws all the threads together. That is, a membership which includes America in the region on the one hand, and a body which is capable of handling the full scope of the agenda - political, economic and security - on the other.
That's the core logic, if you like, of the Asia-Pacific community concept. How it may grow if it's embraced by leaders across the region, that's very much an open question, is yet to be determined. As I said in my remarks yesterday, there's great achievements already on the board for APEC, great achievements on the board for ASEAN, great achievements on the board for a range of other institutions, but we shouldn't just sit back passively and hope that it all sorts itself out for the long term. I always believe in trying to be ahead of the curve.
Over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you have a successful agreement at Copenhagen without presidents Hu and Obama turning up and have you asked, in your talks with President Obama, have you tried to persuade him to turn up at all?
PM: Well, I've had a few chats with President Obama last night and this morning. I was sitting next to him at the breakfast session which I was co-chairing with President Calderon. We discussed the substance of his contribution to the discussion this morning which, I've got to say, was first-class - strong, positive contribution. We didn't get down to the nitty-gritty of whether he was going to Copenhagen or not, to be quite honest, I was focussed on the substance of how we actually craft the content of an agreement, as was President Hu Jintao's contribution - substantive and positive.
We should draw some confidence from this.
There is a lot of pessimism in the international community at the moment about our ability to craft an outcome at Copenhagen. It's going to be tough as all hell, but let me tell you I believe everyone is seeking, right now, to put their best foot forward, and that was reflected in what transpired around a small table of 20 world leaders this morning, but who represented between them 56 per cent of the global economy, and it was good for Australia to be co-chairing that event.
Sorry, Tim.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could you just qualify for us, or be explicit for us, on the question of agriculture in CPRS - how much ground is your Government willing to give on this question, and how close do you believe you are now to an agreement with the Opposition such that the CPRS can be passed?
PM: In answer to your question on agriculture, quite a lot. Answer to your second question, don't know. We still don't have the full reply from those opposite.
The reason we've done what we've done on agriculture is to underline what we're on about here, which is good faith negotiations. We listen carefully to what the Liberal Party and the National Party have said. They've said, for them, that agriculture's exclusion is a red line issue. Therefore, for the reasons I've just gone through on the global agenda, in trying to do what is possible to get a global deal on climate change, it's a negotiation. Getting our CPRS through in the Australian Senate, that's a negotiation as well. It's a good faith negotiation all round at this stage. Agriculture is out there from us, and that's desired to be part of an overall negotiated outcome with the Coalition.
I want to get the CPRS through. I've said this consistently over a long period of time.
Just there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you clarify - have you met, have you had a specific discussion with the Indonesian President about people smuggling, and can you give us an idea of the tenor of those discussions, and can you clarify if it was a full bilateral or was it a pull-aside, and if it wasn't a formal bilateral, can you explain why?
PM: I think as I said to you the other day, what happens in this business is that we are constantly running into each other and having longer and shorter conversations. I've probably been chatting to SBY now, 3, 4, 5 times about this, that and the other. We've covered, in those conversations, both the substantive agenda of APEC plus our bilateral relationship, including within it cooperation also on people smuggling, including cooperation on the handling of this individual vessel as well. That's what he expected me to do. That's what I've done.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us a little bit about the substance of the discussions-
PM: -Diplomatic negotiations and discussions are what they are. I'm just saying that's the scope of it, and as you'd expect, and I'm sure I'll probably catch up with SBY again later today. That's just the way in which things work. There's a few things going on.
JOURNALIST: Any indications that he was going to step up to do more as per your request?
PM: No, what we agreed to, frankly, in Jakarta- some weeks ago now- was to work on a new framework, an additional framework for cooperation on people smuggling. And that work, as I indicated to you the other day, is ongoing. We've still got some ways to go. I can't give you a conclusion point for that, but that's rolling its way through, I'm sure we'll be chatting about it later today, depending on how the rolling agenda of APEC unfolds.
JOURNALIST: What's your information, Prime Minister, about the boat of Afghan asylum seekers that's been intercepted by Indonesia, having two people shot by Indonesia?
PM: Yeah Mark, I've seen those reports this morning. I don't have any further information, other than the reports. We're seeking, of course, clarification as to what's happened. This lies within the purview of Indonesian National Police, but we'll be seeking to get details concerning what has occurred. But I've seen the reports, but I have nothing further to add.
JOURNALIST: Doesn't that say something about the relationship Prime Minister, that it gets into the paper and you know nothing about it from Indonesia?
PM: No, what it does say Mark is that when you've got in the last 12 months 86 interruptions conducted between ourselves, the Indonesians, the Malaysians and others, when it comes to people smuggling, there's a lot of activity underway at any given time. As I said, I've seen those reports, I don't have further information on it. But I'll be seeking that in due course.
On the Malaysians, by the way, can I make this clear to those who are here at this press conference this morning. We've been discussing for some time now in a range of gatherings with Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia, the desirability from our point of view of the explicit criminalising of people smuggling activity within Malaysia. And I would like to thank the Malaysian Government for their indication of support that they're now moving in this direction.
And I would congratulate Prime Minister Najib for his Government's decision on this, his action means that the Malaysian Police will soon be able to arrest and prosecute people involved in people smuggling activities. And every decision like the one that Malaysia has made makes it more difficult for people smugglers to engage in their ugly trade. This is something I raised some weeks or months ago I think on the first occasion with Prime Minister Najib, I'd just like to thank him, publicly, for the way in which he has handled this, and for the substance of their cooperation with us in dealing with people smuggling.
JOURNALIST: The incident with the shooting asylum seekers sends a brutal but strong signal that the Indonesians are (inaudible)
PM: Look, I can't comment more than what I just said in response to Mark's question. And that is, I've seen the reports, I don't wish to elaborate on them until I actually know further about what's occurred-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well can I just say this, when it comes to people smuggling, we have said consistently, we support and are engaged with our friends and partners in the region in a hardline response. I can't comment on the details of this particular event other than the reports that I have seen. But, people smugglers are ugly individuals. They are acting in violation of a whole series of basic legal precepts, and law enforcement authorities across the region will be taking harsh measures. I say that without reference to the details of this particular incident.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Stephen Smith has said in Parliament a few weeks that there was hope that at this weekend you would sign an agreement with President Yudhoyono. At what stage did it become clear that the signing (inaudible)
PM: Just on that first point though Andrew, I think what Stephen said in Parliament- because I was there on the day- he said that we'd get a progress report on this new framework agreement with the Indonesians, and I think that's pretty explicitly what he did say, and he didn't say we'd be signing it, am I right?
JOURNALIST: Ah, I think that-
PM: I think I am right. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Secondly, can you confirm that the sticking point remains Indonesia's concern about taking responsibility for the housing, processing of asylum seekers who are intercepted in their search and rescue waters by another country?
PM: Not that I'm aware of, in fact the scope of what we're talking about here with the new framework on people smuggling covers a whole series of different boxes. One of which of course goes to the law enforcement machinery and the legal framework within Indonesia itself. But this'll take some time to work through. It actually occurs on all sorts of different categories, from physical interdiction through to the law enforcement machinery, through to the action and network for intelligence collaboration with us, and with regional partners.
Remember, the Malaysians are just across the water from the Indonesians and a lot of this activity involves them directly. It's at all these can I say, segmented levels and based on my last conversations with the National Security Adviser, it's kicking along. But it's going to take some time. And remember, the cooperation right now, though not visible to the public, and I understand why people would not be aware of it, is extensive and vast. I go back to the point in the last 12 months, 86 individual disruptions of people smuggling activities, this is substantial work which our agencies are involved in every day of the week, with the Indonesian agencies, with the Malaysian agencies, and with others.
Sorry- Phil, and then to you Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) On climate change, you talked about good faith and that (inaudible) with agriculture, how do you reconcile that with the speech you gave to the Lowy Institute when you basically called Malcolm Turnbull a coward and lumped him in the same category as Andrew Bolt.
PM: The- I was making some robust remarks about climate change sceptics, as they operate globally- at home and abroad, I should say. And I don't resile from my concern about the activities of climate change sceptics, wherever they may manifest themselves. You know why? Because they are, frankly, not helping when it comes to deliver the outcome which the science says we must deliver.
What was again encouraging about this morning's meeting was, I think, leaders around the table had a sense of the burden now on their shoulders to try and pull this thing together. And it's very difficult. You can imagine, you've got not just the 180 plus nation states who are involved in the conference of the parties, but you have such wide and diverse interests as the ones I spoke with Prime Minister Singh about recently in Delhi, President Hu Jintao representing what will become the largest economy in the world with a vast population, and of course, President Obama in the United States, who wrestles with the Congress on the one hand, and secondly, like myself, replaces an administration which was not actually acting at all in this area. It's hard, it's difficult- but frankly, there is a resolve among the leaders that the science is in, and that we need to move ahead.
Sorry- Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: On to perhaps a greater disaster, the New South Wales Government- they've had their conference. Premier Rees has said that he will select his Cabinet. He'll bypass the factions and select his Cabinet. A) do you see that as part of the rehabilitation of the Government in New South Wales, and b) do you think it's possible?
PM: Well firstly, I've seen that statement from Premier Nathan Rees, and I fully back it. Fully back it.
The reason I back it is because frankly, in the 21st century, we in the Labor Party need to have a system whereby whoever is elected as leader should have the ability to select their Ministry, their Cabinet. And as I said to our own crew way back at the beginning of our own Government, this is part and parcel of the modern age and leaders are charged to make a balanced selection based on the availability of talents and abilities to get the best team. And frankly, the days when, you know, someone was a factional powerbroker behind the scenes should dictate the show, I think, should be stuck in the past. It's time we actually got with the program, and the program of modernity is you elect a leader, it's a leader's job to select the best executive. Nathan Rees has made that call. I back him 100 per cent.
And guys, I've actually got to get to-
JOURNALIST: Can you give us any indication on what India and China will be willing to sign up to at Copenhagen, given that you mentioned President Hu's contribution this morning as being substantive, but given also that the Indian and Chinese have been in part behind the decision on the APEC final statement (inaudible)
PM: Again, I wouldn't read a whole lot into that latter point, and where the final communiqué negotiation is on that, I'll find out during the course of the morning, I mean these things ebb and flow during the course of the day, as is normal. But secondly, regard this as a stepping stone to Copenhagen itself. It's a negotiation. And I draw your attention strongly again to the importance of the meeting between President Obama and President Hu Jintao in Beijing in the days ahead. It's a pretty important meeting for the world. Not only is it the President's first visit to China, but, I've got to say on top of that, with climate change looming so sharp, fast, and hard, it's a really important set of discussions.
But I go back to the tenor of the contribution. People around the table this morning, in the conference that the Mexican President and myself chaired, were positive, they were seeking to deploy their political leadership, their authority to bring about the best outcome possible. And that is how I saw President Hu Jintao's contribution as well.
Last one Matthew, and then I've really got to go, I'll be late up the hill.
JOURNALIST: You said it was very important that India be brought into (inaudible). Has that been discussed here (inaudible)
PM: As I understand the APEC processes, there's a question which comes due before too much longer about further questions of membership of the body. As you know, the membership of APEC, I think, was frozen some years ago.
It has been my longstanding position with a vast economy, such a politically significant country as India, and that India is part and parcel of the Asia Pacific region. And it is an incomplete entity in India's absence.
And having said that folks, I've got to zip. 


Today, the Government of Australia will move the following motion of apology in the Parliament of Australia.
We come together today to deal with an ugly chapter in our nation's history.
And we come together today to offer our nation's apology.
To say to you, the Forgotten Australians, and those who were sent to our shores as children without your consent, that we are sorry.
Sorry - that as children you were taken from your families and placed in institutions where so often you were abused.
Sorry - for the physical suffering, the emotional starvation and the cold absence of love, of tenderness, of care.
Sorry - for the tragedy, the absolute tragedy, of childhoods lost,- childhoods spent instead in austere and authoritarian places, where names were replaced by numbers, spontaneous play by regimented routine, the joy of learning by the repetitive drudgery of menial work.
Sorry - for all these injustices to you, as children, who were placed in our care.
As a nation, we must now reflect on those who did not receive proper care.
We look back with shame that many of you were left cold, hungry and alone and with nowhere to hide and nobody to whom to turn.
We look back with shame that so many of you were left cold, hungry and alone and with nowhere to hide and with nobody, absolutely nobody, to whom to turn.
We look back with shame that many these little ones who were entrusted to institutions and foster homes instead, were abused physically, humiliated cruelly, violated sexually.
And we look back with shame at how those with power were allowed to abuse those who had none.
And how then, as if this was not injury enough, you were left ill-prepared for life outside - left to fend for yourselves; often unable to read or write; to struggle alone with no friends and no family.
For these failures to offer proper care to the powerless, the voiceless and the most vulnerable, we say sorry.
We reflect too today on the families who were ripped apart simply because they had fallen on hard times.
Hard times brought about by illness, by death and by poverty.
Some simply left destitute when fathers damaged by war could no longer cope.
Again, we say sorry for the extended families you never knew.
We acknowledge the particular pain of children shipped to Australia as child migrants - robbed of your families, robbed of your homeland, regarded not as innocent children but regarded instead as a source of child labour.
To those of you who were told you were orphans, brought here without your parents' knowledge or consent, we acknowledge the lies you were told, the lies told to your mothers and fathers, and the pain these lies have caused for a lifetime.
To those of you separated on the dockside from your brothers and sisters; taken alone and unprotected to the most remote parts of a foreign land - we acknowledge today that the laws of our nation failed you.
And for this we are deeply sorry.
We think also today of all the families of these Forgotten Australians and former child migrants who are still grieving, families who were never reunited, families who were never reconciled, families who were lost to one another forever.
We reflect too on the burden that is still carried by our own children, your own children, your grandchildren, your husbands, your wives, your partners and your friends - and we thank them for the faith, the love and the depth of commitment that has helped see you through the valley of tears that was not of your own making.
And we reflect with you as well, in sad remembrance, on those who simply could not cope and who took their own lives in absolute despair.
We recognise the pain you have suffered.
Pain is so very, very personal.
Pain is so profoundly disabling.
So, let us together, as a nation, allow this apology to begin to heal this pain.
Healing the pain felt by so many of the half a million of our fellow Australians who were children in care - children in our care.
And let us also resolve this day that this national apology becomes a turning point in our nation's story.
A turning point for shattered lives.
A turning point for governments at all levels and of every political hue and colour to do all in our power to never let this happen again.
For the protection of children is the sacred duty of us all.
This is the motion that later this day this Government will commend to the Parliament of Australia.
Care leavers from around Australia and abroad;
Representatives of the Care Leavers of Australia Network;
the Child Migrants Trust;
the Alliance for Forgotten Australians;
the Leader of the Opposition;
my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues;
representatives of the state governments of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria;
Her Excellency the High Commissioner for the United Kingdom;
His Excellency the Ambassador of Ireland;
His Excellency High Commissioner for Malta;
ladies and gentlemen;
friends, one and all;
Our purpose today in this Great Hall of this great Australian Parliament is to begin to put right a very great wrong.
To acknowledge the great wrong that has been done to so many of our children.
And as a nation, to apologise for this great wrong.
And, as a nation, to resolve that such systematic abuse should never happen again.
The truth is this is an ugly story.
And its ugliness must be told without fear or favour if we are to confront fully the demons of our past.
And in so doing, animate, once again, the better angels of our human nature.
I believe we do a disservice to those who have been the victims of abuse if in any way we seek to gloss things over. 
Because the truth is great evil has been done.
And therefore hard things must be said about how this was all possible in this country of the fair go.
Unless we are now transparent about what has been done in our nation's name, our apology can never be complete.
Because let us be clear - these children, both from home and abroad, were placed in care under the auspices of the state, validated by the laws of the land.
It is estimated that more than 500,000 children were placed in care under various arrangements over the course of the last century.
This is no small number.
Let us imagine that more than half of the city of Adelaide was drawn from children who had been placed in institutional or foster care.
This is no small number.
In recent weeks, it has been my privilege to meet some of these children, most of them now middle-aged. 
And some perhaps a little older again.
And I take the intervention from the floor - some younger than that again.
Here is something of their stories as told to me.
Last week I sat down with Garry for a cup of tea at his home here in Canberra.
Garry told me he had five brothers and sisters.
His father was an ex-serviceman who, in Gary's words, drank himself to death.
When Garry was four or five, he remembers being taken to the steps of the local police station with his brothers and sisters and told to wait until his mum returned, who had promised ice creams for all.
She never returned.
As Garry recalls, "I never got my ice-cream".
A fortnight later, he was committed as a ward of the state.
He told me his twin brothers had been fostered to a good family in Wollongong.
But he was taken to an institution and separated from his sisters, who were placed elsewhere.
All this, at the age of four or five.
Alone, absolutely alone, devastatingly alone in the world.
He told me that, at the age of six or seven, he tried to hang himself from the swings because he wanted to be with his brothers.
He was later placed in a rural home for older boys where he remained until the age of 13.
He remembers being picked up from the train station on a freezing night in a big red truck with a row of numbered seats. He was told to sit in seat number 3.
He was given, a number.
As Garry said, "my number was always three, it sticks in your head".
The culture of this home, as Garry described it, was one of institutional violence as boys were made to beat each other, to beat other boys to the ground, in front of their peers.
At 13, he was transferred to an institution where he remembers a kindly cook taking him under her wing.
But it was during this time Garry says, he suffered sexual abuse from other men.
Garry later got into drugs to help escape the psychological torture he suffered through years of what was so-called institutional care.
Garry has led a tough life.
But Garry is a survivor.
He proudly introduced me to his seven beautiful children - all doing well at school and the older ones already planning for their future.
And showed me with pride the carpenter's trade certificate he earned through study in 2005.
When asked by CLAN (a community organisation established to help survivors of institutional abuse, and known to so many of you here today) when asked by CLAN to write down his story Garry said, "what am I going to write down, you can't put tears on paper".
It has also been my privilege to sit down with twins Robyn and Judy last Monday when I was in Bathurst.
They told me too, that their mother left home when they too were barely five years old. They were then placed in a church home.
Judy remembers the day they were first taken to the home and her sister Robyn bolted from the gate and ran away.
They later found her and dragged her back.
Robyn and Judy remember that they kept waiting and waiting for just someone, someone to come and pick them up - but no-one, no-one ever came.
They recall being hit with belt buckles and bamboo.
They said the place they grew up in was utterly, utterly loveless.
They said it always made them feel like second-class citizens.
At the local school, they were described as "Home Girls".
They looked with envy as other children were picked up by their parents after school.
Robyn told me that, 40 years later, "it stays with you, I still dream about it".
But you know something? Both Robyn and Judy too are fighters.
While emotionally scarred by their experience, they too have beautiful children and partners who care for them. But the wounds run deep. They run very deep.
And then there was Gus.
I spoke to Gus on the phone, he is from Queensland.
Brought out to Australia from Ireland, again at the age of four or five, in the 1950s - as a child apparently born out of wedlock, having earlier spent time in a Catholic institution in Ireland.
Gus' story was truly horrific. His was a tale of physical and sexual abuse over more than a decade. In Gus' words, "that did me terrible mental damage".
He finally tracked down his mum, 10 years ago.
She had gone to the United States. But he then discovered she had passed away.
Gus had limited educational opportunities and has been in and out of gaol a number of times during his life. 
Gus, reflecting back across the years, and in the great tradition of Australian understatement, said he had led a 'colourful life'.
Gus too, is a fighter and survivor.
Whether it is Garry or Gus or Robyn or Judy, there is an eerie similarity to so many of the stories. Stories of physical, emotional or sexual abuse.
Stories of the lack of love. Experiences which stay with them to this day.
Each told me that such was the trauma they experienced in institutional care that they suffered such things as bed-wetting for many, many years - while in care.
This, of course, is deeply personal. Deeply, deeply personal.
But each wanted me to share this part of their story too because it underlined the trauma they had gone through.
But trauma with an ugly double-twist because each time this happened, they were publicly humiliated and publicly punished by those supposedly responsible for their care.
In the conversations I was privileged to have with these great Australian survivors, for each of them this apology today was important.
And for countless thousands and tens of thousands besides, this apology is important.
Important because it does not seek to hide that which they experienced.
An apology that acknowledges the very personal pain that has been caused.
An apology which, it is hoped, will bring some healing balm to wounded souls.
And not just to the handful that I have been so honoured to meet.
But to all those whose cases are reflected in the Senate reports over many, many years. And to those also whose stories will remain forever untold.
There are tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands of these stories, each as important as the other, each with its own hurts, its own humiliations its own traumas - and each united by the experience of a childhood without love, of childhood alone.
For some, this has become a very public journey of healing. For others, it remains intensely private - not even to be discussed with closest family and friends even today.
And such privacy must of course, be respected.
Whatever your journey today, and whether you are here in Parliament House in Canberra with us or watching or listening across the country or across the world, my hope today is to reach out to you all on behalf of this nation, Australia, and to speak what has so often been unspoken.
And to offer you this profound apology.
To apologise for the pain that has been caused.
To apologise for the failure to offer proper care.
To apologise for those who have gone before us and ignored your cries for help.
Because children, it seems, were not to be believed.
Only those in authority, it seems, were the ones to be believed.
To apologise for denying you basic life opportunities; including so often a decent education.
To apologise also, for just how long it has taken for the Australian Government to say sorry - so many Senate reports, nearly a decade of deliberation, and a unanimous recommendation that the Commonwealth apologise.
And finally we do so today.
Today is also a day for all those who have refused to remain silent.
The champions of this day.
Those driven by sheer tenacity.
By an unswerving sense of justice.
Those who kept the flame of hope alight.
People like Margaret Humphreys, people like Harold Haig, people like Leonie Sheedy and Joanna Penglase, people like Bonnie Djuric, and People like Walter Tusyn who campaigned tirelessly for this day as Tasmanian representative of the Alliance for Forgotten Australians, only to pass away on the 30th of last month.
And people like former Senator Andrew Murray, because Andrew Murray's work has simply been extraordinary. 
I rang Andrew recently and asked him about the importance of this apology.
His response was succinct when he wrote in reply:
"the Senate (and others) have carefully examined these matters and rightly and unanimously recommended an official Commonwealth apology. As a result, the states and the main churches, charities and agencies have apologised (although some are better apologies than others...),
Andrew Murray continued "it is time for the Commonwealth to complete the circle."
It is also important today to honour the advocacy groups who have stood by you through thick and thin - advocacy groups such as: Care Leavers of Australia Network (CLAN); groups like The Child Migrants Trust, advocacy groups such as the Alliance for Forgotten Australians - and many, many others.
But beyond these individuals and organisations stand an army of people who have quietly gone about their business over the last decade or more to take this story of sustained institutional and personal abuse from the margins of government deliberation to the very centre of Government consideration.
For all victims of abuse, today, you are all owed a profound debt of gratitude for having stood by them with such solidarity and strength.
So what then is to be done?
The Australian Government has assembled a comprehensive response to recommendations contained in the two Senate reports - "Lost Innocence" and "Forgotten Australians revisited".
This response will be tabled in the Parliament in the coming days.
The overwhelming message I have received and Minister Macklin has been receiving has been the need to be heard, the need to be acknowledged and the need for the nation to apologise.
It is important however, that this not be regarded as a single point in history. Our view is that it would be helpful for the nation, however painful, to properly record your experiences, where you deem that to be appropriate.
This can assist the nation to learn from your experiences.
As a result, the Australian Government is supporting projects with both the National Library and the National Museum which will provide future generations with a solemn reminder of the past.
To ensure not only that your experiences are heard, but also that they will never ever be forgotten.
And in doing so we must always remember the advice of the sages - that a nation that forgets its past is condemned to relive it.
Second, we also know that you are deeply concerned about practical support to help survivors and their families negotiate what can still so often be damaged lives.
For example, I know many of you are concerned about living in aged care facilities as you grow older and the need for access to proper aged care.
The Government will identify care leavers as a special-needs group for aged-case purposes, to ensure that providers are assisted to provide care that is appropriate and responsive, and provide a range of further counselling and support services.
Third, many Forgotten Australians and child migrants continue to need help in tracing their families. That is why we'll be providing a National Find and Connect Service that will provide Australia-wide coordinated family tracing and support services for care leavers to locate personal and family history files and the reunite with members of their families, where that is possible.
The service will provide a national database that will collate and index existing state identified records into a national searchable data base, accessible to state and other care leaver services and also directly to care leavers themselves.
Fourth, to make sure you are well represented, we have provided and continue to provide funding to advocacy groups such as the Child Migrant Trust, the Alliance for Forgotten Australians and Care Leavers of Australia Network, as these organisations continue to work hard to put your concerns front and centre.
Finally, governments must continue to commit to the systematic auditing, inspection and quality assurance of the child protection services they administer today.
Some 28,000 - 30,000 children are currently in the care of State and Territory Governments around Australia. Governments must put in place every protection possible to reduce the risk of mistreatment in the future.
And, as Andrew Murray reminded me recently,"if you hurt a child, a harmed adult will often result...aggregate those adults who were harmed in care and the social, the economic, the personal cost is huge".
In Andrew's words, we must do everything possible to break the cycle.
I recognise this is a difficult, complex and sensitive area of policy. But the nation must continue to lift its game in doing whatever practicably can be done to provide for the proper protection of little ones, of children.
Let us, therefore today in this Great Hall of this great Australian Parliament, seize this day and see this national apology to our Forgotten Australians and our Child Migrants as a turning point for the future.
For child migrants, for many of you, your mothers and fathers were alive and were made to relinquish their right to be your parents and to watch you grow into adulthood.
Some of you have said you would like to place the apology on the graves of your mothers and fathers back in England and on their graves here in this country as well. Today we dedicate this apology to them as well.
For the Australian-born care leavers, or 'Homies' or 'State Wards' or the 'Foster kids', the Senate named you the 'Forgotten Australians'.
Today, and from this day forward, it is my hope that you will be called the 'Remembered Australians'.
However, whatever I might say today, the truth is, I cannot give you back your childhood. I cannot rewind the clock on your suffering. Nor can I erase the past.
But what I can do with you is celebrate the spirit that has lived within you over the decades. A spirit that has stubbornly refused to be beaten.
A spirit that has turned you into the survivors that you are. The spirit that has enabled you to serve your country in times of war, even if you had been deserted by your country.
The spirit that enabled you to bring up families, despite the broken families from which you came. The spirit that enabled you to work and to make your own contribution to this, our land Australia.
And the spirit that caused you to hold fast that one day you would be heard, one day you would be believed, one day you would be acknowledged.
And that, one day, Australia's sense of a fair-go would finally prevail. That our fair go would be extended to you, and that the nation would offer you the public apology that you deserve.
My message to you today is that that day has finally come.
Let me also say this.
You were in no way to blame for what happened to you because it was the nation who failed you.
The institutions the nation created for your care, failed you.
To all of you here today in this Great Hall. To all of you watching around the nation.
Today is your day. Today is your special day. Today is your achievement.
This morning, I spoke to a 98 year old lady in my electorate in Brisbane.
Her name is Vera. If Vera is watching, 'hi Vera'.
I'm sorry that Vera can't be with us in Canberra today.
She said that the pain that she suffered having spent five years in a Queensland orphanage was pain suffered a lifetime ago.
But her hope that today, as a 98-year-old lady is that finally this day could herald a closing of the book on the past. 
Today is for people just like Vera.
And today let us now go forward together, go forward with confidence, go forward with confidence into the future - as equal, as valued and as precious members of this one great family that we call Australia.


PM: It's great to be here on this occasion of launching this extraordinary new addition to Australia's renewable energy technology.
Right now, as I said in my remarks before, Australia is engaged in action at home and action abroad.
In a further video conference link last night with the Prime Minister of Denmark and others, we are working towards, as hard as we can, a Copenhagen agreement, and it is encouraging what we have heard out of Beijing in the last 24 hours from President Obama and President Hu Jintao.
This will be a Copenhagen agreement built brick by brick. It's going to be very hard, very difficult, but our ambition must still be to realise a strong Copenhagen agreement on climate change.
Global action and local action is what will make the difference. Talking about local action, what we need to see, of course, is the passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme through the Senate. We are engaged in good faith negotiations with the Liberals. They've been going on for some time now and we are confident we can reach an agreement with the Liberals.
However, there have been some disturbing signs. The fact that we had a delay to the commencement of debate in the Senate, the fact that extended hours were not provided to the Senate for supporting a debate last evening, and there are only six sitting days remaining. Still, that is sufficient time for all Senators to have their say, and I'm advised today that the debate has begun in the Australian Senate.
We need to make sure, however, that good faith negotiations are translated into good faith action on climate change, and I would ask today Mr Turnbull and Mr McFarlane to come out and rule out the possibility of further delaying tactics on a vote on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation.
Good faith talk is one thing. Good faith action is another. On climate change we need both, and we need it now. Therefore, these are very important days for Australia, they are very important days for the future of industries like this, and globally they are a very important three weeks remaining until Copenhagen.
I'll ask Premier Nathan Rees to add to my remarks, and then happy to take your questions.
PREMIER REES: Thank you, Prime Minister, and look, can I just support, 100 per cent, the remarks that the Prime Minister has just made. Prevarication by Malcolm Turnbull and others over what they do with CPRS means that investments like this, that are fundamental to the sustainable energy future of Australia and our energy landscape, will remain under a cloud. 
Investors need certainty to make these investments. These wind farms; this is the single biggest shot in the arm for the renewable sector in New South Wales history, and it simply won't happen on the same scale whilst there's a question mark over what the Liberals might do with CPRS. That's why this is important.
The Prime Minister's talked about the green jobs that are attached to this. We've spoken with some of the apprentices which have specialised green skills. That is also the way of the future, the workforce of Australia's future in which sustainability is embedded into the electrician apprenticeships, into the plumbing apprenticeships and so on. That's why these investments are important - not just the energy content and the energy output, but the development of those green skills for Australia's future.
All of these investments need to have 'go' pressed on them. All of these investments need to be backed solidly by governments that provide the clear direction on these issues.
The Prime Minister and Minister Wong have been providing that leadership for an extended period now, and the other side need to get onboard with that.
The cost of getting this wrong is too great.
We have to act, and we have to act now, and I applaud Infigen for their investment on this site, but also the Commonwealth's clear and decisive action on this matter of global significance.
PM: OK, folks. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what do you say to the residents that object to this wind farm - the noise, the impact on landscape, the impact on the birds?
PM: I understand that there will always be community concerns at the local of any venture, any business venture, and particularly one which is associated with the energy sector, and that's why it's important that projects like this go through all the relevant local approvals, and they've done so. It's also why we at the national level are developing national guidelines for the location of wind farms around the country - to get the balance right.
Everyone supports the need to preserve at maximum local environmental amenity, but at the same time we've got to rise to the challenge of how do we deal with the renewable energy future as well, and all the renewable energy options have an environmental impact, whether it's a solar plant, whether it's a wind farm such as this, or whether it's some of the new and innovative technologies I've seen in wind and wave, in wave and tidal, I should say. But we've got to get the balance right, and I believe the project proponents here have got the balance right.
JOURNALIST: Is it a concern to you that the price of renewable energy certificates has collapsed to $28 and there are no new major renewable energy infrastructure projects in the pipeline right now?
PM: Well, my advice is that there are quite a number of renewable energy projects which are in the pipeline. I referred before to the extra megawattage which is currently being planned when it comes to wind power alone across Australia, some 538 megawatts. Obviously, if you've just introduced renewable energy target legislation and we're moving into a new regime, there are always going to be teething problems as the new regime gets underway. That's natural.
What's the alternative?
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Hang on, hang on. The RET, after 12 years of inaction by the previous government, has only just been introduced. We are embracing a whole generational change, out to 2020, so to ask a question about success or failure after a two to three month point, I think that's going a little far. Can I say that there is a long way to go.
What were we required to do? Give business certainty so they know the operating environment within which they'll be operating out to 2020.
Furthermore, on top of that, we must provide certainty also in terms of the definition of a carbon price in the market. These are the two arms of certainty. What's going to get a price of carbon? That's why you need a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme; that's why people have cap-and-trade schemes evolving all around the world. On the other hand, what specific incentives are you going to provide to the renewable energy sector?
Two arms of our approach - we've got one bedded down, and it's being implemented now after 12 years of inertia, and on the other hand we've got another piece which is currently before the Australian Senate, and the debate starts today.
Sorry, mate - here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your expectation after (inaudible) last night about what will come out of Copenhagen? Will there be a binding global agreement or a statement (inaudible)
PM: The language that we are discussing with the Danish Prime Minister is along these lines: that we will have a Copenhagen agreement which will be an operational framework agreement on climate change.
I looked carefully at what President Obama said at our roundtable conference in Singapore only three mornings ago, and also at the language that came out of Beijing late last night. The President of the United States, on both occasions, has spoken of an agreement with immediate operational effect. That is different from a statement of political principles. So let's get very clear here about what we're talking about.
We want to ensure that we get a Copenhagen agreement which is an operational framework agreement on climate change which goes to specifics on targets, on commitments, on the scientific threshold 2 degrees Celsius, on climate change finance, and on the question of technology transfer.
Then there's the question of the translation of such an agreement, such a framework agreement, into a legally binding treaty, which is a highly dense and technical exercise.
I think there is a danger that some assume that first exercise we are talking about, this Copenhagen agreement, should somehow drift off into a statement of anodyne political principles.
Let me tell you the direction in which we are pushing hard, which the Danes are pushing hard, and which I believe the Americans are pushing hard, is for a operational framework agreement capable of giving real guidance to technical negotiators to translate into a legally binding global treaty.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let us be very clear about this, that when the Danish Prime Minister talks about one agreement, two steps, that's precisely what he means. He means that we should move toward a Copenhagen agreement in Copenhagen in a few weeks time, which a lot of us are burning the midnight oil on at the moment. Which goes to, what's the science target here? Two degrees Celsius. What targets in terms of emissions reductions can developed countries commit to? What actions can developing countries can also commit to? What climate change finance is therefore necessary to underpin such a set of arrangements, and what technology transfer globally is possible as well.
If you can, at Copenhagen, get a Copenhagen agreement which gets some sort of landing point on those key elements, then you are capable of providing the guidance for the next step, which is a very complex, legal drafting process to produce a legally binding global agreement. One agreement, two steps- that's precisely what the Prime Minister of Denmark is on about, and I think it's important that the international community understands with absolute clarity that is the direction in which we, as leaders of those countries which are seeking action on climate change, are seeking to drive this process now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of Nick Xenophon's comments that there should be an investigation into the Church of Scientology?
PM: I've seen something of what Senator Xenophon has said, this morning. These are grave allegations which he is making. Many people in Australia have real concerns about Scientology. I share some of those concerns. But let us proceed carefully, and look carefully at the material which he has provided, before we make a decision on further Parliamentary action. And we intend to provide appropriate examination of the material which he has put forward.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there should be an overhaul of the tax concessions that are given to charities and churches?
PM: This matter concerning the tax exempt status of the Church of Scientology, I'm advised, was dealt with by the High Court of Australia back in the eighties, I'm so advised, I stand to be corrected. Therefore, the true question I suppose is, the actual nature of the operations of Scientology now, against the determinations provided in law at that stage. But I don't rush into any judgement on this, other than to say he's raised concerns, he's made some serious allegations, let's examine them, and then we'll decide what, if further, Parliamentary action is necessary.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your message (inaudible) New South Wales Labor Party (inaudible)
PM: Well as I said from Singapore the other day, I strongly support Nathan's gutsy call to pull it on, and to say the rules are changing. And he did. And that is a necessary set of changes to the rules, whereby the Premier or the Prime Minister of the day decides who should be in the Ministry or the Cabinet. It's a necessary reform nationally, which we undertook at the beginning of last year, and it's a necessary reform in New South Wales as well. So that was an absolute right call, and required strong, decisive action.
Secondly, I think it's important for everyone to give this bloke a go. And that includes anyone who may be a little upset by some of the decisions taken. It's supposed to be a team effort. There are big challenges in New South Wales. He's giving a darn good go, and his colleagues, and all those in the Parliamentary party and beyond, should get behind him.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rees, are you planning on dumping anyone else from your front bench?
REES: No. We have a very solid team in place now- John Hatzistergos as Attorney-General, an encyclopaedic knowledge of statute in New South Wales, and a key reformer; Carmel Tebbutt, extraordinarily experienced and at the helm of the biggest agency, which is Health; Verity Firth, groundbreaking firms with regard to the school leaving age, for example; Ian Macdonald- sorry, Freudian slip- John Roberston, as Environment Minister, about to save the river red gum, but also has recently introduced a growth spurt in solar tariffs; so they're the sorts of reforms that we're getting on with, and that also includes of course a complete overhaul of donations law in New South Wales which we foreshadowed at the weekend.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Joe Tripodi to undermine your leadership in the background?
REES: Look, that's a matter you can address to him. I'm not going to speculate on that, I simply focus on getting the job done. I made my decision at the weekend. Everyone I've spoken to in my caucus and in my Cabinet supports that decision 100 per cent and it's time for us to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: Has Joe Tripodi given you his undertaking that he supports you?
REES: He's said it publicly.
JOURNALIST: Premier, are you concerned there could be a series of by-elections with all these sacked Ministers?
REES: No.
JOURNALIST: Surely, surely you are concerned?
REES: I've just said no.
JOURNALIST: About by-elections, there could be a big swing against Labor.
PM: Give it another go.
REES: I've just said no.
PM: Roll your arm over one more time.
JOURNALIST: I have two questions for you, sir. Before the Copenhagen summit is going to happen, what about global measures taken for the developing countries?
PM: This is a very good question, and I discussed these recently in Delhi with Prime Minister Singh of India, and also most recently with representatives of other developing countries at the APEC Summit in Singapore.
Clearly, what is needed is for an effective Copenhagen agreement is an agreement which also deals with effective technology transfer to developing countries. Secondly, what we must also concern ourselves with is adaptation of the most vulnerable small island countries around the world. In the Indian Ocean, look at countries like the Maldives, in the Pacific Ocean, look at countries like Tuvalu and Kiribati, and elsewhere, where low-lying countries face huge challenges in terms of coastal inundation. So therefore, specific action to assist small island countries is part and parcel of our deliberations, as well as more broadly, effective technology transfer when it comes to climate change and mitigation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
WONG: Well I think you've asked me this before Chris, and I think I've indicated that we anticipate that to be around 2012. But, this will only happen, we will only have Australia's emissions start to fall if we pass the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in this fortnight of Parliament.
Let's be clear, without legislation in place that for the first time sets a limit on how much carbon pollution Australia produces and puts into the atmosphere, what we will continue to see is continued growth over the years in Australia's contribution to climate change, that's what we have to turn around.
PM: Let me just add as I go- we've actually got to get back to Canberra- just on what Penny's just said and in response to what I think is a very valid question about when we actually start to come down.
These are big days for the nation. They are big days for the world. I mean, sometimes, you've heard the word climate change bandied around for years and years and years, we're actually going to some crunch times. Crunch time for the nation is the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We've got to set a price on carbon. If we're able to achieve a draw-down over time of our increase in carbon emissions. It's crunch time for the world as well. That's why Copenhagen's important. And you know something, as I deal with all my colleagues around the world, each of them faces huge domestic political pressures on this. No one's Robinson Crusoe. Therefore, what's required is a bit of political courage for everyone collectively to step up to the plate, put behind the familiar, put behind the fears and concerns of the past, embrace instead the opportunities of the future, dealing with climate change, and understanding it also creates a whole new employment and industry future for the countries.
We're at one of those crossover points in the world, one of those crossover points in Australia. Let's rise to the challenge, rather than simply succumb, here at home, and abroad, to the politics of fear.
Thank you


To Gaile and to Juliette, to Adam and to James, to friends and family of Chris O'Brien, and to you, friends of Chris O'Brien one and all.
I've just come from Canberra tonight and we've been engaged in the bear pit of Australian parliamentary democracy otherwise known as the House of Representaitves.
Just last night I was on a video conference, a link at midnight with the Danish Prime Minister and the Secretary-General of the United Nations and others about the future of climate change.
The day before that I'd just come back from Singapore, and we had a meeting of APEC with President Obama and President Hu Jintao, again on climate change and on the economic recovery.
Just before that, in India, looking at the challenges of students being safe in Australia, and prior to that I'd just come from Afghanistan and our troops in the field.
None of these challenges, however, compare with obtaining a contract approval from the New South Wales health authority to get the Chris O'Brien Centre going.
But I bring hope.
I bring genuine hope, because today I had the great privilege of spending the morning with Nathan Rees, the Premier, and good on him for having a whack and a go at recent events here in New South Wales. Good on him. I've said to others, the bloke deserves to have a go, to be given a go.
I also used the opportunity of mentioning a certain matter, a matter dear to all your hearts, and the undertaking I have from the Premier is that by the time he and I roll the bulldozers in mid-December it will be done.
Of course, that was based on two profound human fears; one temporal, one spiritual.
The temporal fear of this - the thought of me behind a bulldozer, given that I am singly unqualified to do anything mechanical or practical.
But the greater fear was this - you may recall that when I gave the undertaking to drive that bulldozer by year's end to make sure this Chris O'Brien Centre was begun, I did so at St Mary's Cathedral in the presence of Cardinal Pell. The thought, therefore, of even a further addition to eternal damnation for not honouring that undertaking given in St Mary's, otherwise known in the Australian Labor Party as 'headquarters' - Father Kevin, stop laughing so loudly - it would be frankly, too much for my conscience or my eternal soul to bear.
Of course, as you know, Chris O'Brien and I had many things in common; we were both rugby union stars.
Those of you who knew Chris O'Brien would say that, like myself, his talent somewhat underperformed in relation to his enthusiasm. Speaking for myself, I went to a Marist school in Brisbane, I was categorised as being the ideal star performer for the under 14 Es. It was a big Catholic school - there was an F team, and I always lived in fear of that F team, for one day I could also be relegated, because they seriously were F Troop on the field. We, by contrast, were stallions of the ball. Well, sort of.
The other thing that Chris O'Brien and I had in common was, of course, our significant medical careers.
Chris had achieved some success as a senior surgeon at RPA. I had become the deputy chief wardsman at Canterbury Hospital when I was heading off towards university, so he and I were able to speak the same language. Well, sort of, and I always gave a more basic view.
I do remember in our discussion about integrated cancer care that it only took me an hour or an hour and a half or so to understand what the hell he was on about, and then finally, in the great tradition of effective politicians, the penny dropped with an audible clang and then I understood what he was about.
Tonight it is a truly great occasion to honour a truly great man. Tonight we gather in this great Gothic hall. As Gaile reminded me as we came in this was the hall in which they were married. This is an extraordinary part of Sydney. It's an extraordinary part of this union.
But it also an extraordinary venue to hear afresh the words of the immortal bard, Bill Shakespeare, and to hear again tonight the extraordinary oration of St Crispin's day. Those of you who knew Chris O'Brien well, knew that he was a huge, huge fan of Shakespeare, and I think he would have been honoured to have had the oration from St Crispin's day in Henry V read here this evening, because so much of that oration was about him, about how you in a field of human battle actually go about making a difference.
All of us have to deal with human enemies.
All of us have to deal with human adversaries.
All of us have to deal with very human challenges. Some of them, from time to time, as they were in St Crispin's day, existential challenges, as they proved to be in the life of Chris, existential challenges as well.
But the spirit of St Crispin's Day as reflected in the oration from Henry V was about how the human spirit prevails when the odds are so large, and so huge and potentially so overpowering - and that was Chris O'Brien writ large, five centuries after the Bard.
So what I'd like to do tonight is reflect briefly on this Chris O'Brien; this man of St Crispin's Day; the man prepared to step into breach, once more into the breach, and what he'd done in his life and what he now calls us to do.
If he were here with us tonight, and I sense, in my own small-t theological way, he is, I think he would have some things to say.
But let me talk about him first, and his passion which you've seen on the screen now tonight, about how you make a difference in people's lives when they're confronted with the extraordinarily visceral news that you are with cancer. And in him you have this extraordinary combination of human talents - a person who is gifted and trained in the greatest of medical and scientific traditions on the one hand, and on the other, a person of human heart and compassion and succour and comfort.
Rarely is this admixture of human talents alive in a single human being - in Chris O'Brien they were. He was not perfect; nobody is. But in bringing those great aspects and impulses of his humanity to bear in his professional choice, he was, in my estimation, a human saint.
So how did he translate that into reality? What he did was to say I, as a physician, will make a difference in as many lives as possible; I'll perform the miracles of surgery which I can perform; I'll perform the counselling which is necessarily associated with that surgery; and I'll bring people through in the best way that I can.
And for all of you in the room this evening who are trained in the medical sciences, I salute you. Your talents are great, your studies formidable, and your excellence is beyond comparison compared with those of us who occupy lesser professions.
But Chris then goes the extra mile. Some time ago he discovers that these talents he deploys one after one in the field can actually be taken to a different level. What is this concept of integrated cancer care, about which we've spoken this evening? How do you actually take the proper, shall we say, integrated healing of the person? How do we actually integrate the diagnostics, with the therapeutics, with the palliatives? How do actually bring all dimensions of, let's call it, the human healing experience and the scientific disciplines associated with it, and the compassion which is necessary to make it possible, how do you bring that together into institutional form and being?
And so was born the concept of integrated cancer care.
And his great talent was the great patience in explaining that to the likes of me when I was merely the leader of Her Majesty's occasionally loyal Opposition.
And so what is the product of this man stepping into the breach, making his difference on his St Crispin's Day?
The Budget this year in May, following three months after I saw him in Canberra, this was May of 2008, just on the very day of the Apology to Aboriginal Australians, we began a process of unfolding what we would do with cancer care, and so we did - $1.3 billion worth of investment in integrated cancer care across the country.
Once such centre will bear his name - the Chris O'Brien Centre. There will be another in Melbourne. But critically across the whole vast continent that is Australia, it'll be also reflected in a half-billion dollars worth of investment in cancer care centres across the country, in rural and regional areas as well. And this friends is just the beginning, because we are dealing with the nation's largest killer.
So that's what Chris O'Brien, in his determination to make a difference, did. Directly, with people in the RPA, in his consulting rooms and in the theatre, but more broadly with the likes of yours truly and trying to make a difference to the country at large.
Now, I think there's a second message from the spirit of Chris O'Brien this evening, and I think he'd also be saying to us this, because what I have said just now he probably would not say at all, because he would regard that as immodest. I think what he would say to us all in our own respective spheres is how too can you rise to your own St Cripin's Day? How can you also be the one that steps into the breach once more? How can you make a difference where you are, in whatever field you are active and where your talents are deployed?
Whether it's in the field of commerce; the field of politics; whether it's the field of community service; whether it's the field of medicine or the other caring professions; whether it's in the sciences; whether it's in the arts or across all disciplines, how can you make a difference? Because his great message to all of us is, you can live a journeyman's life or you can step outside that and make a vast difference with the talents with which you've been divinely appointed.
And that, I think, in his own quiet and effective way, would be his message to us this evening, because I believe in Chris O'Brien you have the combination of two great spirits of history. You have Henry V, once more into the breach, a great and stirring command to human courage, to go beyond that which is physically possible, or seen to be even physically necessary.
That is one strand, but it's animated by something else, and that's the spirit of St Francis. The spirit of St Francis, very simply, is that in giving, you receive.
I was sharing this thought with the Governor before I came up to speak. I said, 'Governor, the happiest people I ever meet in life are those who give the most, and the most miserable are those who give the least.' It is an eternal principle of life in whichever civilisation or culture or community in which you grow up. And I think, therefore, in Chris O'Brien we see this great swirling mixture of St Francis and his healing balm, and Henry V, with his wielding sword, and that's the Chris O'Brien we know and love.
I asked Gaile this evening what she would have me say about this great man, but importantly for her, a dear, dear husband and life partner, and she said, reflect a bit on your own experience of this guy.
We met at a hotel in Sydney called the Radisson. He came because I had heard he was interested in cancer, and at about that time my mother had recently died of cancer. Most of our stories, at the end of the day, are very personal.
As we sat and talked about anything from literature to history to a bit of medical science where I gave him the benefit of my knowledge - well, I was the deputy chief wardsman at Canterbury, and I'd seen it from the ground up - he explained to me with great patience what his concept was about.
He was an extraordinarily good conversationalist. He had an extraordinary capacity to engage you as a person, and to be interested, genuinely, in the ideas of the person whom he was engaging. He said to me, 'I have a brain tumour. You have just become the leader of the Australian Labor Party. I think I've got it tough?', he said. 'You've got it much worse, mate.' And that was Chris to a T.
And for now many, many conversations since then, including in Canberra; including here in Sydney; including at the Governor's residence; including at their home not long before he died; many conversations on the phone; many text messages between us, often in Question Time, where occasionally I was distracted more by his messages than by questions from those opposite - they also made more sense, but that's a different and more partisan story for a different occasion, and I said to Gaile I would not be partisan, and I won't be.
But here was a guy who actually knew how to engage any person, man or woman, high or low as they may be defined in this society's order, as a fellow human being, as a fellow traveller seeking to make our difference in the world in which we survive.
We spoke a lot. We laughed a lot. And I cried a lot when he died.
So to Gaile, and to Juliette and to Adam and to James, what we experience in this great hall at this great university tonight is one small part of what you have felt and known throughout your lives - that we are all privileged to have shared the life of this truly great Australian, Chris O'Brien.


The largest wind farm in NSW - Capital Wind Farm - has been officially launched by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, NSW Premier Nathan Rees and Minister for Climate Change, Senator Penny Wong today.
The Capital Wind Farm, owned by Infigen Energy, will boost the nation's wind power capacity by more than 10 per cent.
The Farm comprises 67 wind turbines capable of supplying electricity to around 60,000 homes and is almost five times the size of any other wind farm in NSW.
Around 50 wind farms are currently in operation around the nation.
Renewable energy is a critical component of the Rudd Government's commitment to take concrete, practical steps to tackle the threat of climate change.
Under the Government's Renewable Energy Target, 20 per cent of Australia's electricity will come from renewable sources by 2020.
This means that in ten years' time, the amount of electricity coming from sources like wind, wave, solar and geothermal energy will be about equal to Australia's current household electricity use.
The project demonstrates the importance of clean energy industries in creating the high-skilled apprenticeships and jobs of the future - providing employment and economic growth for regional communities.
For example, Australia's first wind farm apprentices are employed at Capital Wind Farm, learning the work of electro technology and wind turbines.
Australian companies, including Victoria's Keppel Prince Engineering and Queensland's RPG, contributed key components to the Capital Wind Farm in partnership with Suzlon Energy Australia, part of the global Suzlon Energy group.
The project provided employment opportunities for over 120 people during the construction phase and will provide ongoing employment in the local community.
The Government is supporting Australia's clean energy industries through the Renewable Energy Target, the Clean Energy Initiative and the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
As business leaders have said in recent days, the passage of the CPRS through the Senate is critically important to driving investment in the industries that will lead Australia's transformation to a low carbon, clean energy future.


The Prime Minister and the Assistant Treasurer, Senator Nick Sherry, today announced that the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) has been approved to conduct the 16th national Census on 9 August 2011.
Census 2011 will be the largest data collection ever undertaken by the ABS which has been allocated a total of $440 million over seven years to conduct the survey.
With the first national Census having taken place in 1911, Census 2011 will also mark 100 years of national census-taking in Australia.
Involving every household in the nation, the conduct of the Census is logistically the single largest peacetime operation conducted by the Australian Government.
Importantly, the national Census will also have a positive impact on jobs and the economy. A temporary workforce of 40,000 will be employed at its peak, across Australia in a range of roles including Census field operations. For example, the processing of Census forms in Melbourne will involve about 900 temporary staff from August 2011.
Recruitment of field staff will commence from early 2011 and positions will run until the completion of data processing late in 2012.
The Census provides a statistical snapshot of the nation and in doing so delivers a comprehensive picture of the society in which we live. Census information is used by all sections of the community, from the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments to local governments, town planners, community groups, students and business.
The Census provides a wealth of information for informed decision-making throughout the community. Information from the Census is critical in developing policy and in planning the delivery of services to the community, such as health and human services, and facilitates a better understanding of vulnerable sections of the population.
Census data are used to:
     * estimate the population of each State, Territory and local government area;
     * determine electoral boundaries and calculate the number of members to be elected to the House of Representatives from each State and Territory;
     * determine the distribution of Federal Government funds to the States;
     * show characteristics of Australia's people and their housing within small geographic areas and for small population groups;
     * help plan basic services such as housing, social security, transport, education, industry, shops and hospitals;
     * give governments and others information they can use to support planning, administration, policy development and evaluation activities;
     * assist the private sector in key business planning decisions.
Census 2011 will build on the successful deployment of internet technologies to assist in the completion of Census forms with householders able to complete their Census form easily and securely online via the use of eCensus, in addition to the traditional paper Census form.
The ABS has also developed a wide range of strategies to considerably improve the engagement and involvement of remote, rural, regional and Indigenous communities in the Census. Importantly this will assist in ensuring all such communities are properly counted, which will in turn ensure accurate resourcing and funding decisions are made into the future.
Primary and secondary students will also have the opportunity to boost their understanding of the Census process and to prepare for Census 2011 by taking part in the innovative CensusAtSchool, a world-leading student and teacher engagement, data collection, numerical literacy and statistics analysis project also run by the ABS.
A detailed Information Paper on Census 2011, including topics to be included in the Census, will also be tabled in Parliament today and will be available at www.abs.gov.au.


More than 300 current and former ADF personnel and Defence civilians who served on Operation CATALYST will tomorrow participate in a parade marking the end of the operation at the Australian War Memorial.
The Minister for Defence, Senator John Faulkner and I will attend the parade, along with Her Excellency the Governor-General.
Operation CATALYST was the Australian Defence Force (ADF) contribution to the US-led Multinational Force effort to develop a secure and stable environment in Iraq and to assist national recovery programs.
Around 20,000 ADF personnel served on Operation CATALYST, which commenced on 16 July 2003 and concluded on 31 July 2009.
Over that time, the conduct of our servicemen and women upheld the great traditions of the ADF.
Every one of the men and women who served can be proud of what they contributed in Iraq.
Servicemen and women from all three Services were deployed in a range of combat, combat support, security and training roles to enable the people of Iraq to take responsibility for their own security.
The Australian Federation Guard will lead the parade from Anzac Parade onto the Australian War Memorial Parade Ground.
The parade commences at 2pm.


The 2009 Prime Minister's Australian Exporter of the Year has been awarded to NOJA Power Switchgear.
This Award recognises and honours outstanding achievement by an Australian enterprise in international business. The winner is selected from the 12 Australian Export Awards winners. NOJA Power also won the Large Advanced Manufacturer Award.
NOJA Power designs and manufactures leading-edge switchgear products that help increase the reliability of electricity supply. The company's commitment to research and development has resulted in outstanding environmental benefits: its products eliminate the need for harmful electrical insulants such as oil or greenhouse gases.
In just seven years, NOJA Power has grown its export market to 70 countries and is rightly proud of the high level of repeat business that it generates - a testimony to the quality and reliability of its products.
The company employs 80 people and has just completed a new $7 million purpose-built facility in Brisbane, in order to provide the necessary production capacity its export growth requires.
The Australian Export Awards recognises and honours Australian companies who have achieved sustainable export growth through innovation and commitment. The Awards are co-hosted by Austrade and the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Congratulations to all the National Finalists and Winners in the 47th Australian Export Awards.
More details are available at www.exportawards.gov.au 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I thank the Institute of Public Administration for inviting me to deliver the 50th Sir Robert Garran Oration.
The life and work of the first Commonwealth public servant is one of the most remarkable stories in the history of the Australian Public Service.
And profoundly relevant to my subject - the reform of Australian government administration in a time of changing public expectations, changing technology and changing demands.
I am pleased to address this topic at a national conference of the Institute of Public Administration.
For years, the Institute has been a tireless advocate for professional excellence and public sector reform.
I would also like to acknowledge the many state public servants here today - especially those from Queensland.
Although I will focus my remarks on the Australian Public Service, your work in Queensland and other states in partnership with the Commonwealth is a vital part of our COAG reform agenda.
But before I engage in a more detailed discussion of our reform challenges, let me say this.
The Australian public is on the whole well served by honest, capable and highly committed public servants in our government departments and agencies.
You are doing nation-building work, you are doing it well, and I thank you for it.
In September, I announced that the Government would undertake a process of reform of Australian government administration.
I asked the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran, to establish an Advisory Group to develop a blueprint that would position our public service to meet the immense challenges of the 21st century.
The Advisory Group will deliver its blueprint early next year.
But ahead of the release of that document I want to talk today about why the Australian Government is undertaking this process of review and reform of the APS.
And I will discuss the main findings of an important report released today that measures the performance of the APS against eight of the best public services in the world.
We are not undertaking this reform process because the APS is serving the government poorly.
On the contrary, many parts of the APS are distinguished by excellence in policy advice and program and service delivery.
Nevertheless, the APS also has some gaps that will constrain its capacity to help the Government meet some of the nation's most difficult challenges in the years ahead.
In particular, the APS needs to do more to ensure that it provides the highest-quality service delivery to Australians.
That it delivers the highest-quality policy advice across the public service.
And that it strengthens the quality of its workforce by attracting and retaining the best employees.
When we think of the highest qualities of public service, we can do no better than to think of Sir Robert Garran.
Sir Robert, we might say, is one of Australia's lesser-known founding fathers.
Yet he deserves a place in our national history as prominent as many of our political leaders at both state and federal level.
His influence on our legal, political and administrative system is incalculable.
As the first Secretary of the Attorney-General's Department, he drafted the legislation that shaped the first Departments and the first administrative arrangements of the Commonwealth.
Bear in mind that the High Court hadn't been established at the time - giving Sir Robert the first crack at interpreting the words of the new Constitution.
He was well qualified to do so, having been the secretary of the committee that drafted the Constitution and the joint author of the only annotated guide to it.
In the early days of the nation in 1901, Sir Robert didn't exactly have legions of public servants at his command.
He not only wrote out with his own hand Commonwealth Gazette No. 1 that proclaimed the establishment of the nation - he took it down to the Government Printer himself.
Truly, Sir Robert gave a whole new meaning to the term, whole-of-government.
For a few days, he was effectively the whole of our government - as Australia's only public servant.
And he held the Secretary's post for 31 years, earning the respect and trust of the 16 governments under which he served.
According to legend, Prime Minister Billy Hughes claimed that the best way to govern Australia was to have Robert Garran at his elbow, with a fountain pen and a blank sheet of paper.
It has even been said that whenever a crisis arose, Hughes could be heard yelling, "Where's Garran?"
Much has been written about Sir Robert's brilliant legal mind, his passion for the Commonwealth, and what former Crown Solicitor Fred Whitlam -- father of Gough -- described as his "serene wholeness". 
But it is also striking to see how ahead of his time he was in the causes he championed.
To give one example, decades before the Australian National University came into being, he saw the need to develop top-class education institutions and link them with the public service.
He proposed the establishment of a National University at Canberra that would have expertise in - and I quote:
"Oriental matters, Pacific relations, international relations generally, public administration, and economics''.
It is remarkable how closely the final shape of the ANU reflects Sir Robert's early proposal.
Like other ANU graduates, I consider myself a beneficiary of a vision that ultimately became a reality in the post-war era.
And Sir Robert's ideal of an outward-looking, engaged public service committed to the Westminster traditions of impartiality and integrity remains absolutely relevant today.
The task of the contemporary public service is to protect those enduring values, while transforming itself to meet the great challenges of our time.
That sounds as if I am asking the public service to change dramatically - and to stay the same.
And in a way I am.
But it is precisely those institutions that are most confident in their culture and traditions that are most able to embrace change.
I believe the Australian Public Service is such institution.
My confidence in the APS is based on many experiences during the past two years in government, as well as my own previous career experiences in the Federal and state public service.
A year ago, Australia was facing the greatest global economic crisis since the Great Depression.
In the early days of the crisis, advice from the Departments of Treasury and Finance was vital in developing the Nation Building Economic Stimulus plan that helped Australia to avoid recession and keep hundreds of thousands of Australians in work.
That advice was provided quickly, under intense pressure.
It was backed by clear reasoning and empirical analysis.
And once decided, it was implemented without delay.
In just 12 weeks, with the help of the tax agent industry, the Australian Tax Office processed stimulus payments to more than 8.4 million Australians.
Payments delivered on time and on an unprecedented scale. 
In the nine months since February, Commonwealth, state and territory public servants have approved nearly 50,000 major construction projects.
Half of them have begun and 2,000 are already complete.
Again, work on an unprecedented scale, executed at great speed and with great success.
The contribution of the APS has also gone beyond Australian domestic policy - a senior official in my Department has been instrumental in developing measures now adopted by the G20 on global financial standards.
The performance of the APS during the global financial crisis has been outstanding.
But while this shows that the APS performs well under pressure, crisis is not the everyday experience of government.
Just as important and more common is the day-to-day work of service delivery and the long-term challenge of providing top-quality policy advice.
How well the APS is performing those tasks is what the Advisory Group on APS reform has set out to test.
From its establishment in September, the Advisory Group was clear that the APS should aspire to be the best public service in the world.
This is an entirely appropriate aspiration.
After all, Australians aspire to being the world's best on the sporting field, in the marketplace, in the science and medical laboratory, and on stage and screen.
So too we should aspire to being a world leader in the quality of government - both in delivering government services and developing government policy.
If the public service wants to be the world's best, it must measure itself against the world's best.
This way, it can learn from the best, and become the best that it can be.
That is why the Advisory Group has commissioned a report from KPMG measuring the performance of the APS against eight of the world's best public services.
The report is being released today on the website of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
It compares the APS to the public services of eight other nations: the United States, Britain, France, Denmark, Canada, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Singapore.
These are public services that consistently score highly in comparative international studies.
All have gone through significant reform in the past decade.
And all are explicitly looking to achieve excellence.
The report uses a variety of international studies, research tools and qualitative data to rate the nine administrations on the basis of six criteria essential to a top-performing public service.
They are:
     * a values-driven culture that retains public trust;
     * the ability to provide high-quality, forward-looking and creative advice;
     * delivery of high-quality programs and services that put the citizen first;
     * flexible and agile responses to changing realities and government priorities;
     * efficiency and effectiveness in all operations, and
     * ability to recruit, develop and retain the best employees.
Of course there are difficulties in making comparisons of such complex concepts, given the different contexts in which each service operates.
Even so, the report provides a valuable perspective on conditions in the Australian Public Service today.
First, there is no doubt that the APS measures up well against the world's leading public services.
Across the nine administrations, the ranking of the APS on different indicators ranged from near the top, to comparable, and to below average.
For example, the APS ranked highly for its independence and values - reflecting such factors as the level of political involvement in public sector appointments and the existence of legislation that clarified the roles of the public service compared to Ministers and advisers.
This supports the findings in the 2008 Institute for Management Development's World Competitiveness Yearbook which ranked Australia behind only Denmark and the Netherlands for its independence and culture of strong professional and ethical values.
The report also ranks the APS as a world leader - behind only Singapore and Denmark -- for its longstanding role in shaping government policies that have responded quickly and skilfully to changes in the economy.
Areas where the performance of the APS is on par with the overall performance of the group of eight public services include:
     * its efficiency in delivering outcomes for its size;
     * its ability to develop the skills and leadership capabilities of its workforce, and
     * its provision of online access to government information.
But there are also some measures where the APS does not perform so strongly.
One such area - as the Advisory Group suspected when it commissioned the report -- is the capacity of the APS to produce informed and forward-looking policy advice.
On one international measure of policy capability in OECD countries - the Sustainable Governance Indicators index, which measures organisational reform capacity of governments - only France ranked lower than Australia among the nine countries in the report.
However, we should note that the data on which Australia was ranked related to the years 2005 to 2007, during the previous Government's time in office.
As the report explains, the creators of the index judged that Australia's ranking was affected by the lack of a Government strategic plan to guide decision-making and insufficient consultation outside government to inform policy formation.
Since that time, there has been a change of government and the Government that I lead has adopted a cross-government strategic planning framework. 
The report also found Australia's public service to be less adept than other nations at incorporating non-government expertise and the views of citizens into its policy development and service design process.
This is something that the Government has been addressing since we came to office through measures such as community cabinets, reforms to Freedom of Information laws, the 2020 Summit and the development of a Web 2.0 plan.
The report also finds that more needs to be done to develop an overarching identity and mission to help the APS implement government priorities - in other words, to become a unified public service.
In short, we can take encouragement from this report.
By the highest global standards, the Australian Public Service is independent, professional, ethical and efficient.
But at the same time, its challenge now is to become more strategic and forward-looking, more outward-looking, and more citizen-centred.
To quote the report, the APS has "some way to go if it is to realise its ambition to be best in the world.''
The report largely confirmed the initial assessments of the Advisory Group and the Government of the strengths and gaps in the performance of the APS.
The APS needs to improve in three key areas:
     * service delivery;
     * the development of excellent policy advice, and
     * planning to ensure it has the highest-quality workforce to meet the challenges ahead.
As the report notes concerning the APS:
"It must manage high expectations from the public and Government, accommodate a greater role for citizens and users in the design and delivery of services, and adjust its operations to accommodate an ageing workforce and tight fiscal environment.''
I think this goes to the heart of what APS reform is all about.
It is about nothing less than the APS responding to fundamental changes in the economic, social, technological and cultural environments in which it operates - fundamental changes that require a redrawing of the relationship between citizens, governments and markets.
David Miliband, the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary, recently predicted that this century will see three great power shifts - the shift of power from the national to the global level; the shift of power from the West to the East, and the shift of power away from governments towards individual citizens.
The last of these has profound implications for the future of the public service.
It is driven above all by the increased availability, reach and power of information - all of which is putting more power and choice in the hands of individuals.
When computerisation first reached governments in the 1970s and 1980s, there were fears it would create an all-seeing, all-powerful Big Brother state.
There still are risks that government agencies can misuse or mishandle the vast amount of personal information that they now process - a matter that the Government is addressing through the first comprehensive overall of the Privacy Act in more than twenty years.
But the lesson we have all learnt since Internet access became widespread in the 1990s is that information technology is changing the relationship between individuals and the state, in favour of individuals.
Individuals can access information in ways many of us could never have imagined at the beginning of our professional lives.
Consumers can compare prices of hotels in different cities, measure the on-time performance of competing airlines, track the progress of a parcel around the world.
Patients no longer just accept what their doctor tells them - they now go online to learn about their condition and treatment alternatives.
And over time, the Internet is changing the way citizens think about their rights, their responsibilities and their expectations of government.
It is a profoundly democratic force, whether you are in Ireland, India or Iran.
And it is a profoundly democratic force in Australia too, one with major consequences for the operation of government.
The first impact of changing technology and changing expectations is in day to day service delivery - which is the starting point for improving the average Australian family's encounter with government.
The hospital that treats our sick parent.
The school that teaches our child to read.
The education and training system that helps us to make the most of our natural gifts.
The welfare payments that assist us in times of ill fortune or old age.
These services are at the core of what governments do.
Ensuring that they are of the highest quality is essential to achieving this Government's ambition to forge a stronger, fairer nation, equipped to meet the challenges of the future.
After all, we have a lot of skin in the game.
We not only provide substantial funds toward the delivery of state and territory public services, we also directly deliver more than $4 billion in services every year through a range of agencies.
And we need to know more about how well these services are delivered.
Unlike Canada - which holds a three-yearly national survey of public satisfaction levels with services across three levels of government - we have no measurement across the whole of government of the quality of service delivery.
We know some things, and they are heartening.
In 2007, the Australian Public Service Commission collated the results of client surveys for 18 government agencies, and found that on average 80 per cent of clients were satisfied with the services the agencies provided.
And in a 2008 British study of citizen satisfaction with service delivery across a range of countries, Australia rated highly.
This is a good start.
But there is still a widespread view in the community that government agencies are bureaucratic and unresponsive to individual needs.
And those views reflect real life experiences that many people can remember.
Too many Australians experience dealing with government as cumbersome and time-consuming.
Too many public services are duplicated or otherwise not efficiently delivered.
Too many citizens in remote and regional Australia - and too many citizens with the highest needs - are not getting the services they require.
A poor interaction with a government agency is one of the most frustrating experiences anyone can have.
Because while public sector agencies often describe citizens as "customers", the truth is that they can't just wander down the street and choose to deal with a different government.
And when people are dealing with the government, they are normally dealing with matters that are of great importance to them - like obtaining an age pension, renewing a passport or paying their tax.
At a federal level, Centrelink has shown itself to be a model of a modern, more client-focused arm of government service delivery.
Its network of more than three hundred customer service centres and more than one thousand service delivery points provides a range of services - usually at the one counter.
Similarly, its Mobile Office, formerly known as the Drought Bus, offers access to a range of services to people affected by natural disasters such as drought, flood and fire.
Those services range from financial support to advice on tax, health and even depression and counselling services.
Many people affected by Victoria's devastating Black Saturday bushfires earlier this year have praised Centrelink for its exceptional response to the crisis.
Centrelink worked with the Victorian Government to run ten Community Service Hubs that offered victims rapid access to government services.
When people came in looking for help, they weren't directed to five offices or five different counters.
Instead, public servants sat down with them to find out what they needed.
Only later did the officials sort out how, and through which department, the service would be delivered.
That kind of service makes a real difference in a time of crisis.
To illustrate the importance of what Centrelink did, consider the remarks of one resident of Kinglake, Steve Fleming, on ABC radio earlier this year.
He noted that he'd only ever heard bad things about Centrelink before the fires. But, and I quote:
"The experience we have had here with the Centrelink people has been just marvellous. All the bad experiences I have heard of people having with government institutions has just gone out the window.''
Centrelink's response to the bushfires is the sort of integrated approach to service delivery that we need to spread across all government agencies.
The Internet provides a great opportunity to make this happen - but as the Advisory Group report shows, a number of overseas countries are ahead of us.
In the Netherlands the Internet has become so important to service provision that the Government has established an e-Citizen Charter setting out citizens' rights and government responsibilities in online service delivery.
And Denmark has created a citizen web portal that provides a gateway to government services, while also offering e-voting and online discussion forums about government policy.
Citizens find information about services by modelling their personal circumstances against 12 different online "personas" that reflect different life stages and situations.
They can then find and store their personal data relating to government services through a My Page function.
They no longer have to navigate through information on a raft of services administered by a range of different agencies.
And during the portal's first year of operation in 2007, it attracted an average of 80,000 unique users every day - among a population of only 5.5 million people.
The Australian Government has begun to use information as a way to strengthen our relationship with citizens, and to be accountable for the services we provide or support.
Our healthcare reform process is looking at introducing individual e-health records to give patients access to their own medical data and allow them to take charge of their own health management.
Next year, for the first time, we plan to give parents access to information about the literacy and numeracy performance of their childrens' schools through our My School Website.
Such information will expose strengths and weaknesses in the system, improve parent choice, and drive our policy response.
Transparency will not always be comfortable - but it is essential for accountability and improved outcomes.
In addition, by the end of this year, our Government 2.0 Taskforce will report on how we can use information technology to strengthen the relationship between government and citizen.
That includes ways to give citizens greater access to government information, and to hear their ideas for how government programs and services can be better delivered.
Improved service delivery is just the start of our ambition for APS reform.
The second great challenge is to ensure that the APS produces the innovative and strategic policy advice for the long-term good of the nation.
Since coming to power two years ago, the Government - in partnership with states and territories - has embarked on a highly ambitious national reform agenda.
We have made substantial investments in education and training in order to lift national productivity and give more Australians the chance to make the most of their human potential.
We are introducing reforms in 27 priority areas to lift unnecessary regulation and create a seamless national economy.
We have for the first time provided national leadership in water reform to secure water supplies in both rural and urban areas, in the face of an extended drought and a changing climate.
We are reforming the health and hospital system to give more choice to patients and to meet the needs of an ageing population.
We are establishing a framework through which we will shape our cities so that they remain economically dynamic, environmentally sustainable and socially equitable as our national population grows by 13 million in the next 40 years.
These challenges are highly complex, involving many stakeholders and much disagreement about the best means to address them.
They require partnerships among all tiers of government, and between the public sector, the private sector and community organisations.
They require rigorous analysis of the evidence and careful measurement of outcomes over time.
Australia's future challenges require neither old, bureaucratic, state-centred solutions, on the one hand.
Nor hands-off risk management and contracting out of core government responsibilities on the other.
Instead, they require the highest quality strategic policy advice.
This requires innovation and openness to the best thinking from around the world.
It requires over-the-horizon thinking, so that governments are making responsible policy decisions mindful of their impacts on future generations.
And it requires work on how we design markets in ways that address market failures and address long-term challenges.
For example, our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will for the first time create a carbon price and a carbon market as the centrepiece of Australia's response to climate change.
The Government does not tell businesses and individuals how they should reduce their carbon use through the CPRS.
But it sets the framework of the market - the rules of the game - in which companies and citizens can make their own decisions.
This approach will deliver the lowest cost pathway to reduced carbon pollution.
Similarly, by establishing a price for water, the emerging water market is helping to improve the efficiency of water use in rural Australia, while enabling farmers to cope with a future with less water.
These frameworks are based on social values - that Australia must act to use water more efficiently and cut its carbon emissions over time.
We are a Government that believes in markets - but markets that function in the long-term interests of Australians.
Markets that they create opportunities and choice but also reduce inequality and ensure fairness.
If we help design these markets well, we will strengthen the new relationship between the citizen and the state.
Just as the best service delivery unfailingly puts people first, innovative market design will not only safeguard citizens' rights, it will give them informed choices over how they live their lives.
To embrace such over-the-horizon thinking we need a highly skilled public service.
In essence, we need public servants who possess the finest public service traditions of impartiality and honesty, but who are also open to good ideas about public policy, wherever they come from.
As the benchmarking report shows, the best public services are exploring how to encourage smart, bold thinking - from their own employees and from citizens.
In Denmark, the Mindlab unit brings businesses and citizens together with public servants to find fresh ideas to tackle policy challenges such as integration of immigrants and climate change.
In Singapore, the Enterprise Challenge even provides financial incentives to citizens who come up with innovative ideas for service delivery.
Here, the Advisory Group is considering a similar model in the creation of Strategic Policy Centres.
These centres would free public servants from their daily duties so they could collaborate on ideas with a range of outsiders - including academics, business people and overseas researchers.
Parts of the APS are already collaborating with outside expertise in this way - sometimes by bringing them in on specific projects and inviting them to share their skills.
But the APS will never abandon its mission to invest its own people.
And where we bring in outside expertise, we should always do so with the goal of transferring lasting skills to our own people.
Building the capability of the APS is central to the Government's vision for public service reform.
That is why the Advisory Group has already identified a major investment in education and development of staff as one of its key recommendations for reform.
To put it simply, we want the best people for what I think are some of the best jobs in the country.
And they are designing policies and delivering programs that change the lives of Australians, for the better and for the long-term.
This is the third great challenge the Advisory Group and the benchmarking report have identified.
I have already spoken at greater length about the Government's priorities for the future of the APS workforce, both in my address to the Senior Executive Service last year and the Paterson Oration at the Australian National University in September.
For all that we say about institutions and processes, the public service is no more and no less than its people.
That is why we need the best possible workforce - we need to attract them; we need to invest in them; and we need to retain them.
Over the next 40 years, the ageing of the population will change the APS, as it will change Australia at large.
Even today, nearly a quarter of APS employees are older than 50.
In the next 10 years, nearly three-quarters of Senior Executive Service employees will be eligible for retirement.
Over the coming decade, just as the APS is losing some of its best older staff, it will have to compete within a shrinking pool of younger recruits, relative to the population at large. 
An analysis by the OECD in 2007 suggests there is scope to improve the way we respond to the ageing of the public sector workforce across all levels of government - in particular by improving future workforce planning and providing incentives for older employees to stay in work.
The task ahead for the APS is to attract and retain a large share of talented younger employees, while also encouraging its finest older employees to stay on the job.
Addressing these reform challenges will be the job of the Advisory Group.
And I look forward to receiving the Group's recommendations early next year.
The challenges ahead for the Australian Public Service are substantial.
But I have every confidence that the APS has the capacity to meet those future challenges, through the reform process we are now undertaking.
If we still had Sir Robert Garran with us, I think he would understand the fundamental challenge that lies ahead:
To sustain, strengthen and renew the values of impartiality, honesty, candid advice and commitment to excellence that mark the Westminister tradition of public service.
And at the same time, to undertake the changes necessary to be meet the challenges of the future.
The APS has managed such processes of change and reform in the past.
In 1996 a review of the Public Service Act led, among other things, to the replacement of much outdated and cumbersome regulation.
13 years before in 1983, the Hawke Government's White Paper, Reforming the Australian Public Service, unleashed a decade of change that profoundly enhanced the efficiency and professionalism of the APS.
In 1976, the Coombs Commission set in train reforms that over time led to a more devolved public service, a more diverse workforce and a stronger focus on service delivery. 
In the 1960s, Sir Frederick Wheeler, as head of the Public Service Board, introduced the reforms that led to the hiring of more graduates, women and Indigenous Australians, and in other ways laid the groundwork for the professional public service of today.
All of these changes built on the foundation that Sir Robert had laid in 1901 - in writing out Commonwealth Gazette Number One.
In 2009, we continue building on those strong foundations - with the sure confidence that the Australian Public Service has every chance to become what it rightly aspires to be - the best public service in the world.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I thank Jim Wallace for his invitation today and I am pleased today to be the first serving Prime Minister to address the Australian Christian Lobby's national conference.
In speaking to you today, I also acknowledge the enormous contribution of Australia's churches and church communities throughout our nation's history.
The history books often recount the great moments of conflict and change in our nation's story - war, depression and political strife.
But they can miss out on the quiet years that also shape a nation's character and destiny.
The years when people are going about their normal lives - working hard, raising a family, building communities and building the institutions that sustain a nation through the good times and the bad.
If we studied those quiet years more closely, I believe we'd all better appreciate the profoundly important role of our churches and religious institutions in our national life.
The work of sustaining community life in times of celebration and times of grief and loss.
The work of caring for those at life's extremities, those in need of care in our hospitals, our aged care homes and our refuges.
The work of improving opportunity for all through our schools.
The work of helping shape the values that are essential for a healthy society - values of compassion, of tolerance, of sacrifice for others, of hard work, of responsibility, of self-respect, - and of the equal dignity of every human being.
And the work of helping people to wrestle with deeper questions of meaning.
This isn't noisy work - it's quiet work.
Yet it's the work that builds a nation.
Work that builds families.
Work that builds communities.
Work that strengthens the social fabric - or the social capital - of the nation.
And we must all be attentive to how stressed our social fabric - and with that our families - have become with the challenges of 21st century life.
Of course like governments and other organisations, churches and church institutions have sometimes failed to live up to those values.
The apology to the Forgotten Australians and Child Migrants in the past week was a sharp reminder of that.
Among the stories of those men and women raised in orphanages and institutions run by the state, by churches and by charities, there are many heart-wrenching stories of neglect and outright abuse - physical, psychological and sexual.
The truth is, the church and the state failed badly to provide the love and protection that a child needs as he or she grows up.
And for these grave offences we must both be sorry.
Churches now have an important role to play now in making those Forgotten Australians into the Remembered Australians.
For this is the only way to go about healing broken lives.
This coming Tuesday will mark the second anniversary of the Government's 2007 election win.
We have faced enormous challenges over the past two years.
Challenges that were barely on the radar in November 2007.
By September 2008, the worst global economic downturn in three-quarters of a century was threatening to slam into Australia.
As the crisis unfolded fully, we had just one clear goal.
To do everything we could to cushion our economy, our communities and our families from the full impact of a global economic cyclone by supporting jobs right around Australia.
To keep as many Australians as possible in work.
So as many families as possible continue to have at least one breadwinner, and children do not have to face the insecurity and instability common in jobless families.
We know the toll that unemployment can take on even the strongest families.
We have seen in the post-war period the destructive cycle of successive generations of unemployment, welfare dependency and the destruction of the human spirit.
So we were determined to do all we could to keep as many families as possible out of that cycle.
To learn from history.
Not to repeat it.
That's why we took strong, early and decisive action to build a stronger Australia.
And our actions have been effective.
Australia is the only advanced economy to so far stay out of recession.
Australia has the second lowest unemployment rate of all the major advanced economies - so that today, hundreds of thousands of children have been saved from the trauma of seeing mums and dads losing their jobs.
And we have done so with the lowest debt and deficit of any of the Major Advanced Economies.
Nevertheless, many, many Australian families have been doing it tough through this crisis.
Economic downturns invariably hit the most vulnerable people in our community the hardest.
That reality has underscored the strength of the Government's commitment to building a fairer Australia - a nation where it is possible for everyone to enjoy a decent family life.
We have honoured our commitment to abolish Work Choices, replacing it with a fair and modern industrial relations system that gets the balance right.
We have built a decent safety net of conditions that removes the incentive for employers to make employees work unsociable hours, by ending Australian Workplace Agreements that stripped away penalty rates and overtime pay.
We are introducing into all awards and enterprise agreements a provision for individual flexibility that makes it easier for employees to negotiate family-friendly work arrangements.
We have decided to introduce Australia's first system of paid parental leave, and we have extended rights to parental leave to make it easier for parents to choose to stay at home during the earliest years of a child's life.
We have initiated the greatest ever Commonwealth investment in social housing and in tackling the scourge of homelessness - because we know that without a place to live, it is difficult for people to find work, for kids to study and for people to make a fresh start to get their lives back together.
Our first White Paper was entitled A Place to Call Home - with the aim of halving homeless for the more than 105,000 Australians who currently are without a place to call home.
And as part of the Nation Building Economic Stimulus plan, we are building almost 20,000 units of social housing for the neediest Australians.
We have implemented the largest reform of our age pension since it was introduced one hundred years ago - raising the single age pension by $32 per week to help the most vulnerable Australians to make ends meet.
We are investing in the quality of education in our most disadvantaged schools.
We have made the apology to the Stolen Generations, and we are taking action to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
As I have said before, I do not believe that in Australia you can successfully advance an economic reform agenda without a complementary agenda to help strengthen our social fabric by providing maximum support for families under pressure.
We should not have to choose between faster growth and a fairer society.
It is not easy tackling the complex challenges of closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, halving homelessness, or supporting families and building more resilient communities where there's been decades of multiple disadvantage.
In working to build a fairer Australia, we recognise that we cannot be effective if governments merely act alone.
Governments must work in partnership with local people and with community-based organisations to deliver lasting results.
As we work to build a stronger and fairer Australia, the Australian Government is strongly committed to continuing to strengthen our partnerships with organisations in the 'third sector' - many of which are church or faith-based organisations.
That is why we have been working with many community organisations this year towards establishing a Compact with the Third Sector.
As we continue to build a stronger Australia and fairer Australia, the Government is also determined to prepare our nation for the challenges of the future.
We are taking action on climate change.
We are tackling the challenge of long-term health and hospital reform.
We are seeking to build the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce of any in the world.
A country where we halve homelessness.
Where we close the gap with our Indigenous brothers and sisters.
Where we don't allow the fair go to slide out the back door.
This is the kind of Australia we can build together.
The focus of the ACL's conference this weekend is how we as a society care for the best interests of our children.
Governments have fundamental obligations relating to the safety and protection of children, as well as ensuring that every child has the opportunity to achieve their potential through the opportunity of a world class education.
That is why the Government that I lead is committed to an education revolution in Australia.
I spoke about the need for an education revolution in my maiden speech in 1998, shortly after being elected to Parliament.
After I was elected as Leader of the Opposition, the first policy paper that I released was entitled The Australian Economy Needs an Education Revolution.
And since coming to office, the Australian Government has got that education revolution underway.
We have set out goals to achieve:
     * universal access to preschool for four year olds by 2013;
     * a 90 per cent year twelve retention rate by 2015;
     * halving the number of 20 to 64 year olds without a minimum certificate III level qualification by 2020, and
     * providing a university place to an additional 50,000 students by 2013.
To achieve these goals the Government has increased investment in education by around 50 per cent in real terms over the current five year period compared with the previous 5 years.
This includes investments in computers for schools, in the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, building trades training centres in schools across the nation, establishing a national school curriculum and steps to increase teacher quality.
In short, the Government is delivering on our commitment to an education revolution.
Beyond these measures, the Government recognises that we have a wider responsibility for the care and nurture children in our schools.
If a child is struggling, or there are problems at home, it's the school environment where this is most likely to be seen.
And it is within the school environment where we can make a real difference in supporting children and supporting parents when they need help.
That is why I have always been a strong supporter of the role of chaplains in our schools - because they make a difference.
Just three months ago on the Sunshine Coast, where I grew up, we saw a remarkable demonstration of the positive impact that school chaplains can have on their community.
A couple in their 50s, Allan and Kari Taylor, were killed in the most tragic circumstances in a road accident on the Sunshine Motorway.
In the days that followed, we saw a snapshot of just how important school chaplains can be in the life of a community, as hundreds of kids, parents and members of the community told moving stories of how Allan and Kari had made a difference in their lives.
For those who don't know the story, let me give you a bit of their history.
Kari and I went to school together at Nambour High.
In fact, we once debated against each other on the question of: "Does God exist?"
I'm a little reluctant to admit it to this audience - but I was on the negative side.
Kari argued the affirmative - and won.
I still contend the room was stacked.
Kari was one of the first students from Nambour to be accepted into the Queensland Conservatorium of Music, where she graduated with a Diploma of Performing Arts.
She could easily have used her talents to pursue a career in opera.
But instead, she chose to use her voice and her gifts in her community, serving alongside Allan.
She met Allan when he became the SunCoast Christian College's first high school teacher.
Allan went on to become principal.
But nine years ago, he gave up that role.
Because he felt he could make a greater difference as a school chaplain.
That was a remarkable step - after all, being a chaplain doesn't carry much social status, while being a principal does.
But Allan was interested not in status, but in service.
He wanted to make a difference in the lives of the kids and the families in his community - and he saw the best way of doing that was by being a chaplain.
Allan led the way as the first primary school chaplain on the Sunshine Coast.
He was always there to help and support kids in the community as a chaplain and a mentor.
After that tragic accident, more than 3,000 people attended their funeral.
Many of them carried personal stories of the ways that Allan or Kari had helped, supported and inspired them, often through difficult times in their lives - stories that may never be told.
But what we saw in the lives and the tragic deaths of Allan and Kari was a strong testimony to the work of school chaplains - the quiet work that is making a difference in the lives of thousands of families every day.
I have been a supporter of school chaplaincies since my time in the Queensland Government almost twenty years ago, as chief of staff to Premier Wayne Goss and then as the Director General of the Cabinet Office.
It was during this period that we formalised arrangements through the state education department for school chaplains to operate in our schools.
The Queensland Department of Education formally approved the Scripture Union of Queensland as the employing authority for state school chaplains.
And the first chaplain was employed at Kelvin Grove State High School, followed by chaplains at the Mitchelton and Craigslea State High Schools.
The development of these formal arrangements for school chaplaincy acted as a catalyst for the education department to develop chaplaincy guidelines, which were first published in 1993.
When these guidelines came into effect, Scripture Union Queensland was the only employer to seek employer accreditation Queensland-wide, and as a result became the predominant chaplaincy employer in the state.
And it is still the most significant group coordinating chaplaincy services, with the strong support of local communities across the state.
We supported the role of chaplains and other student welfare staff such as counsellors and pastoral care workers because we recognised that schools are key institutions in the lives of kids and their families.
School chaplains and counsellors are in a unique position to help young people navigate the often choppy waters of adolescence.
And for many kids, the emotional challenges of those years can affect their capacity to study, to learn and sometimes even to survive - which is why it is appropriate for governments to support chaplaincy programs.
Chaplains do great work.
They provide a listening ear for individual students - who are often more comfortable talking to a chaplain or a counsellor than a teacher, because they see them as being independent of the school authorities.
They provide an additional adult role model in the school.
They help connect the school community, including parents and teachers as well as children themselves.
They organise informal school activities where students can make new friendships and develop new interests.
They can arrange expert help with specific challenges, such as dealing with family breakdown, bullying, self-esteem, drugs, grief and behavioural management problems.
And when critical incidents affect a school - such as the bushfires earlier this year in Victoria - they can play a very important active role in helping the community cope with those hard times.
Like the story of Jeff Lampard, one of two part-time chaplains at Kinglake West Primary School.
After the Black Saturday bushfires, a Year Six student at the school burrowed himself into bags of clothes and toys in the corner of his classroom.
He wouldn't talk, and he wouldn't come out.
It took Jeff two and a half hours to coax the boy out of his burrow.
And it turned out that this boy had survived the bushfires by wrapping himself in a wet sheet and running for his life as his house burnt, as cars and gas cylinders exploded around him.
He lost friends, and all of his possessions.
But in those hours that Jeff spent gently and patiently talking to him, they established a connection that became so important to that boy in the weeks and months following the fires.
Not all students express their distress and pain as openly as the little boy from Kinglake West.
Some mask their feelings.
Last month, a young lady named Alex told her story to at Rockhampton's School Chaplaincy fundraising dinner.
Alex is 22 now.
But when she was 15 and in Year 10, she wanted to end her life.
And she told that dinner that she probably would have, had her school chaplain not intervened and helped her talk to a counsellor.
As Alex said, and I quote:
"School chaplains are friends amongst the students. Students are more comfortable talking to a chaplain as a friend..."
The National School Chaplaincy Program was commenced in 2007 as a three-year program providing funding for up to $20,000 per annum for schools for a maximum of three years, to fund chaplains.
Since its inception, around 2,700 schools have received funding under the program.
It is not always understood that when the previous Government established this program, they only funded it for a three year period. This means that no future allocation of funding was made for the program beyond three years.
In other words, the funding then dropped dead.
It had not been included in the Budget as a permanent program for the future.
These are the facts - whatever some people might be claiming about that today.
The clear feedback I have received from schools, parents and communities around the nation is that this has been a successful program.
It has enhanced the well-being of students and school communities.
As Michael Lamb, of the Baxter Primary School Council on the Mornington Peninsula, wrote to me last month:
"Our School Chaplain provides advice, counselling, wisdom, and a warm welcome for any member of the school community who may have an issue or need support. She is not perceived by families to be part of the official 'system' within the school, and is seen to be accessible by some parents and children who may hesitate to approach the Principal or other staff member with an issue."
And I know that many teachers value the extra resource that a chaplain provides in their busy day.
As Sharon Williamson, a trained teacher who works as a chaplain at a school here in the ACT, wrote to me:
"I often look around at classrooms and watch the children who need that extra support, that extra bit of care and that extra bit of communication and trust for others. As a teacher, we are so consumed with an overwhelming curriculum that - as much as we would like to - it is hard to offer that extra portion to our students who can use support. Bring in the school Chaplain and the need is filled."
Or as this principal told researchers studying the effectiveness of the program:
"As a young male in an all female staff, the chaplain has provided a good male role model for our boys in particular."
Wherever they operate, there is strong support for chaplaincies for school principals, teachers, parents and kids themselves.
School chaplains make a difference.
That is why today I can confirm today that the Government will be continuing the school chaplaincy program.
We will guarantee funding for the next two years until December 2011 for schools currently funded under the National School Chaplaincy Program.
This will involve a total additional investment of $42 million over the 2010 and 2011 school years.
This does two things.
It provides certainty for our schools and chaplains.
And it provides the Government with further time to consult with the community and evaluate the best long-term shape of the program.
During the course of 2010, the Government will be consulting widely over the future shape of chaplaincy and pastoral care programs beyond 2011.
We are doing this because we want to hear your views about ways the long-term program can be improved.
While there is no denying the success of the National School Chaplaincy Program, it could be improved to better accommodate schools in rural and regional areas, small schools and schools in disadvantaged communities.
As one principal told researchers:
"Our school has a chaplain because of deep need. We employed the chaplain prior to the Government funding. We thus did not fit the criteria for Chaplaincy funding."
That's why we will be seeking to engage with you, with representatives of churches, parents, school communities, state education departments, and other interested parties around the nation as we examine the best way to support pastoral care initiatives in the future.
School chaplaincies are only one important way in which the Government is taking action to protect and support children and young Australians.
The Government is developing a National Strategy for Young Australians to tackle many of the greatest challenges facing the three and a half million young Australians aged 12 to 24 - including binge drinking, youth violence, drug usage, mental health problems and body image.
We are implementing a $126 million Cyber Safety Plan to improve cyber-safety for children and young Australians - funding almost 100 extra police officers in child protection work, and undertaking a pilot trial of filtering technologies to identify the best way forward to make the internet safer.
We are implementing a National Binge Drinking Strategy, including community level initiatives, early intervention strategies and a national advertising campaign that confronts young people with the potential consequences of binge drinking.
I have also asked the Minister for Home Affairs, Brendan O'Connor to work with State and Territory Police Commissioners on how we face up to the problem of alcohol-fuelled violence on our streets - including establishing clear cut legal consequences for breaking the law.
And I intend to take this matter to discussions with State and Territory leaders at the COAG meeting next month.
In each of these areas, there is great potential for the Government to work in partnership with church and community organisations - to support children and young Australians, and to support the families and communities who nurture and support them.
Such partnerships are important.
In the complex world of the 21st century, governments must work together with the whole community to tackle the difficult social problems that we confront.
Churches and faith-based organisations are among our most important partners in that challenge.
You have been doing this quiet work since the first days of European settlement in this nation.
And your work will continue to be of great importance as we confront the challenges that lie ahead.
The Australian Government greatly values the contribution of the nation's churches and faith-based organisations, and we look forward to continuing to build stronger partnerships in the years to come. 


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you keep saying the clock is ticking on climate change. Why, then, wait until Tuesday to present the Opposition with a deal on emissions trading and make it harder to get a vote by end of next week?
PM: Well we're, in Australia, as you know, one of the hottest and driest continent on Earth and therefore the clock is ticking for Australia and for the world. That's why we need to act and we will make sure that the Opposition has everything they need in time for the proper consideration of this in the Parliament this week, because we're engaged in good faith negotiations with them.
JOURNALIST: But you could get it to them on Monday, couldn't you?
PM: We're engaged in good faith negotiations and Senator Wong and Mr MacFarlane, they have all these things in hand and we're engaged in good faith negotiations. I assume the Opposition is as well and we're working our way though it because we are in a difficult time for the planet, a difficult time for Australia. Everyone in Australia thinking about this this weekend would work it out that we are among the hottest and driest continents on Earth. We will feel the effects of climate change fastest and hardest, and therefore we must act this week and the Government will be doing everything possible to make sure that that can occur.
JOURNALIST: Jim Wallace has warned that tens of thousands of Christians could desert Labor if your government doesn't strike out the same-sex marriage laws that were just passed here in the ACT. Are you concerned about that?
PM: We'll work our way through all of that once we receive the legal advice from the Attorney General's Department and our position is that we will stick with the Marriage Act, but we'll just see what the legal advice says in terms of what can be done here in the ACT. I don't know the outcome of that just yet.
JOURNALIST: Penny Wong's described Mike Rann as a first-class Premier. Is it appropriate that someone who's described as a first-class Premier to have sexual relations with a married woman inside parliament house?
PM: Well, these are personal matters and my experience of Mike Rann over many, many years is that he is a first-class Premier and I know of nobody who sticks up for his State more than Mike Rann.
This is a bloke who goes out there and argues the case for South Australia day-in, day-out, never off the telephone to me wanting something better for his State. He's a first-class Premier. I've known him for a long time and these are personal.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Premier Anna Bligh today announced the deep-sea search equipment to be used in the hunt for the Centaur off Queensland's coast is on its way to Australia.
The project team is now in the final stages of planning for the search, which is expected to begin in mid December.
Premier Bligh said this was a big step forward in the attempt to resolve the mystery of the Centaur.
"268 people lost their lives when the World War 2 Hospital ship was sunk by a Japanese submarine off the South-East Queensland coast in May 1943," Ms Bligh said.
"The discovery of this vessel would allow us to honour those people who were killed, and hopefully better understand what happened on that very sad day."
Prime Minister Rudd said the Centaur is an important part of the history of Queensland, and the history of the nation, and finding it would offer peace to the families and loved ones of those who were lost.
"The loss of a clearly marked hospital ship during World War 2 struck deeply at the heart of our nation, and became a symbol of our determination to fight on against a brutal enemy," said Mr Rudd.
"I hope the search is successful, that all Australians may finally know and commemorate the resting place of the brave nurses and crew who died on that terrible day."
Ms Bligh said the key platform for the search will be a Defence Maritime Services' vessel, the Seahorse Spirit.
"This is an Australian owned and crewed vessel. The company has previous experience in similar operations, including the search for an Australian Black Hawk helicopter in 2007, on the seabed off the coast of Fiji," Ms Bligh said.
"The other key search equipment includes deep-sea side-scan sonar equipment and a remotely operated submersible vessel capable of being operated at depths below 3,000 metres.
"This is highly specialised equipment operated by only a handful of companies world-wide, with the majority based in the USA.
"As the search is expected to be very challenging, with initial indications that the sub-sea terrain in the search area is steep and rugged, we need the best equipment and best people available to help us achieve success on this mission."
Following an open market tender process, two experienced US-based firms have been selected as the preferred tenderers to provide this equipment, and it's now on its way.
Williamson and Associates is a company specialising in the provision of deep-tow side-scan sonar. This company was previously involved in the successful search for HMAS Sydney II off the coast of Western Australia in 2008.
Their highly specialised detection equipment will be towed behind the search support vessel, scanning the ocean floor to determine the most likely position of the Centaur.
Phoenix International, a company with extensive international experience in the identification of shipwrecks at extreme depths, will then provide a remotely operated submersible vessel capable of operating at depths up to 6,000 metres.
This submersible vessel will be involved in the second phase of the project once the likely location of the Centaur is identified. This phase will seek to confirm the final resting place of the Centaur using high resolution video equipment.
Project Manager and Search Director, David Mearns, has indicated that subject to weather and any other significant operational issues, the search is expected to commence mid December 2009 using the sonar at first.
In the event that the sonar search discloses the likely location of the Centaur, the remotely operated submersible vessel will be used to film the wreck in early January 2010.


The Productivity Commission will investigate the feasibility of new approaches for funding and delivering long-term disability care and support.
The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, announced the inquiry at the National Disability Awards ceremony in Parliament House.
The inquiry forms part of the Australian Government's ten year National Disability Strategy being developed with State and Territory Governments and in consultation with the National People with Disabilities and Carer Council.
The Productivity Commission inquiry will examine the feasibility, costs and benefits of replacing the current system of disability services with a new approach which provides long-term essential care and support for people with severe or profound disabilities however acquired.
The inquiry will examine a range of options for long-term care and support including consideration of whether a no-fault social insurance approach to disability is appropriate in Australia. It will also examine if a scheme would fit with Australia's health, aged care, income support and injury insurance systems.
These are complex issues that require rigorous analysis, design and costing. The feasibility study will assess whether a long-term care and support scheme would be appropriate, practical and economically responsible in the Australian context.
The Productivity Commission will consult widely and will be assisted by an associate commissioner with specialist disability expertise. An independent panel of experts will also be established to advise the Productivity Commission and Government during the Inquiry. The Australian Government will appoint the associate commissioner and the independent panel of experts shortly.
The Productivity Commission will report to Government in July 2011.
Figures released last week by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare showed that around 2.3 million Australians will have a high level of disability by 2030.
This inquiry is an opportunity to rethink how we support people with disabilities so that they can engage with their community, get a job where possible, and live a happy and meaningful life.
The Commonwealth and State and Territory Governments have adopted a bold vision for the National Disability Strategy - an inclusive Australian society that enables people with disability to fulfil their potential as equal citizens.
We need to harness support across all levels of government to make a difference.
That's why the Commonwealth is also proposing that the strategy be developed through the Council of Australian Governments.
This long-term agenda comes on top of an historic increase to Disability Support Pension and Carer Payment recipients of $70.83 per fortnight for single pensioners on the maximum rate and $29.93 per fortnight for couple pensioners combined on the maximum rate.
The Government has also allocated substantial new funding under the new National Disability Agreement, with more than $5 billion in funding over five years to the states for specialist disability services, including supported accommodation, respite and in-home care.
This includes the highest ever level of indexation and means that in 2013 the Australian Government's contribution will exceed $1.2 billion, compared to $620 million in 2007 under the previous government.


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, thanks for joining us on the BBC.
PM: Pleasure.
JOURNALIST: We've heard many differing assessments of what will come out of the Copenhagen climate change conference, some optimistic, most pessimistic. We're in the final countdown to Copenhagen. I wonder what's your judgement on what will come from it?
PM: Well, we're working towards a Copenhagen agreement. This is a very tough process. You know the number of negotiating countries as well as I do, and forging an agreement across so many different countries is a very difficult process. But having discussed this at length with Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark, President of the United States and some discussion's with the Chinese President, Hu Jintao, was have a capacity to land an agreement, a Copenhagen agreement, one which deals with the core policy challenges for the future - namely, what temperature increase are we prepared to sustain for the future, 2 degrees Centigrade; what targets to we need from the major developed economies around the world; what commitments to action to we need from the major emerging economies like China and India; as well as how do we fund this agreement, what climate change finance arrangement do we put in place for the developing economies.
If we can land an outcome in those principle areas of policy disagreement, then we will have made a very large step forward.
Then, of course, translating that into legalese will take a little longer.
JOURNALIST: So we're talking here about a non-binding, political agreement. There's no possibility of a legally binding treaty?
PM: I believe what we're talking about with the Copenhagen agreement is what I would describe as an operational framework agreement; if you listen carefully to what President Obama said the other day, one which would take immediate effect. However, there is a separation between what is said in a policy agreement on the one hand and, let me say, the difficulty and the complexity of translating that into a 4,000-page binding legal document, but you cannot get to the second stage unless you've done the first.
Heads of policy agreement are essential in order to allow the legal drafters to go to work.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us a sense of a timeframe on how long it will take to codify this political agreement into a legally binding treaty?
PM: I can only speak for myself, as Prime Minister of Australia. I would expect that if we could get the heads of a policy agreement in the key areas I was referring to just before then in the course of 2010 I believe we can deliver a legally binding treaty document. One inevitable flows from the other.
Unless you've got a core agreement on the policy matters which are still on the table, you can't set the legal drafters to work. In part, that's what's presented itself as a difficulty so far. The legal drafters can't actually invent agreement where there is none. Therefore, it comes back to heads of government to craft the content of a policy agreement.
JOURNALIST: I wonder where your confidence comes from on this front. You've had two years since the Bali climate change conference. You've had two years of negotiation. You've had two years to figure out the details of this agreement. Why haven't you been able to reach agreement now, and what's a couple of months going to make different? It seems to be there are very, still, big differences between, particularly, the developed nations and the developing nations.
PM: One word - pressure. You know what a negotiation's like.
JOURNALIST: But you've had that pressure.
PM: Well, come on. You know what a negotiation's like. You've got two years, people, sort of, go from here to there, we'll have a conference over here, we'll send the negotiators there, but as the clock slowly ticks to midnight, then people become very engaged, and my overall argument on climate change is that time's running out; not just for the planet - also for the future of our economies, we don't get this right for our kids, our grandkids, and there is enormous moral and political obligation on this generation of world leaders.
So, the pressure has now mounted. I said before we are capable of delivering agreement, doesn't mean that it's inevitable we'll get there. We're capable of it, and I believe that there is a strong and high degree of political resolve on many of the leaders around the world to land a Copenhagen agreement.
It will be very tough.
JOURNALIST: Well, let's talk about some of the stumbling blocks. You've been asked by Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark to be a friend of the chair. You're gonna play a key negotiating role in Copenhagen. One of the things that Australia has is to propose a compromise. You're saying that developing nations shouldn't necessarily be bound by binding targets. You've suggest what are called non-binding national schedules. Just flesh out for us, if would, briefly, what you mean by that.
PM: Well, this is still subject to negotiations between us, but, for example, there is a way in which developing economies, in particular, could advance the verifiable, measurable actions which they intend to take as part of an overall policy agreement between countries, and that could be expressed in their own national terms, so long as we, the rest of the world, can also measure what that means, ultimately, in terms of its impact of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions.
Similarly, you're going to have to have clearly stated targets, medium-term and long-term, for developed countries for such an agreement to be achieved, as well as, of course, I said before, finance.
JOURNALIST: The aim, I think, of your proposal is to make the framework less intimidating for new players, for developing countries coming into this kind of schedule and protocol, but the problem is, and if you speak to climate change policy experts around the world, the problem with your proposal, they say, is it can't be policed.
PM: Well, when I said before 'verifiable and measurable', I mean it.
JOURNALIST: What mechanism are you going to set up to verify?
PM: Oh, yet to be determined through the conclusion of negotiations, but measurement and verification is essential. For example, if we're going to provide funding as developed economies to the machinery to make this happen, climate change finance, mitigation and adaptation, we're going to have to have a means by which to establish that this is where it's actually going, and if it's having a measurable effect.
There are multiple proposals on the table about how that could be done, but the core principle is this - measurement and verification.
And that also applies, of course, to those of us in developed economies. It's all very good to go an international conference, put your hand on your heart and say 'we're going to do x' - we have to be held to account as well. Remember, the historical problem here has arisen because of what developed economies have done. The future responsibility is a shared one.
JOURNALIST: You've developed a very close relationship with the Us President, Barack Obama since he came to power. In fact, one senior administration official has said publically that there's no world leader that Barack Obama feels more comfortable with than you. To use an Australianism, you're his best mate on the international stage. Does it sadden you, therefore, that as yet Barack Obama has not given firm commitment that he'll even attend Copenhagen?
PM: When I sat down with a large number of world leaders at a round table which myself and President Calderon of Mexico convened in Singapore the weekend before last, we had President Obama sitting here. We had President Hu Jintao just over there. Small table. We forgot to serve the Weeties for breakfast, so as a result it was all work and nothing to eat, but it was a very intense hour and a half. Let me say it was very encouraging for all of us to hear how definitive the President of the United States was prepared to be about where he could take America. Obviously, he is constrained by what is occurring in the United States Congress. There are parliamentary and congressional realities facing a number of governments around the world, including my own, but his clear cut statement that we can deliver an operational agreement, a framework agreement, at Copenhagen if there is sufficient political will to get there across all of us, I think is highly encouraging.
JOURNALIST: He hasn't even set out an emissions target for the United States yet.
PM: But I think what you'll see from the United States is a clear indication they are prepared to move towards targets, and also prepared to commit to an international agreement concerning funding. These are very important steps forward. Remember, this process, which has been chaired by the Prime Minister of Denmark, Prime Minister Rasmussen, is a leaders-driven process. It involves us all, including those of us who are friends of the chair. I'll be linking up again by videoconference at some terrible time of the night here in Australia with counterparts from around the world during the course of this week. This will be our fourth of fifth videoconference to try and deal with each of these practical challenges on the way through.
There are a thousand reasons that people can come up with as to why we could fail. Our job as political leaders is to find the way through, to succeed.
JOURNALIST: Since becoming Prime Minister two years ago, you've developed something of an international reputation for your green diplomacy. One of your first acts as Prime Minister was to begin the process by which Australia ratified the Kyoto Protocol. You went straight to the Bali climate change convention and got a standing ovation from delegates there, but at the same time you're the leader of a country with the highest per capita emissions in the world, and the country which exports more coal than anywhere else in the world. You have to admit you're in an anomalous position.
PM: Well, I've been absolutely upfront about both those points. Wherever I've gone in the world, I have said, quite frankly, to my colleagues from the rest of the developed world and the developing countries that I stand before you as the Prime Minister of a country which is the largest per capita emitter in the world, and it's far better we simply accept facts for what they and then seek to change them, rather than engage in some bogus diplomacy and pretend that we're somehow holier than thou.
Bear in mind I've had to come from a zero start. The previous Australian Government was still disputing the science on these questions, let alone prepared to act either globally or nationally through an emissions trading scheme.
JOURNALIST: Well, let's talk about your emissions trading scheme. You're hoping to push it through parliament this week. You want it done and dusted before Copenhagen. You had to compromise because the opposition Party isn't as green-friendly as perhaps your government is, but at the same time you initially set a very low target on cutting emissions - an unconditional pledge to just 5 percent by 2020, the possibility of 15 percent later, but at the moment it's just 5 percent, and a lot of international observers have said that's paltry.
PM: Well, first of all, understand where we come from, which was the condition that we just described before, which is a very, very, shall I say, poor start, given where we'd been historically. Now, I don't intend to hide from that fact. That's just the reality.
The challenge for us, as in the United States and elsewhere, is how do you transition our economy into a lower-carbon emitting future. That's what we intend to do.
What we have done, and it's consistent with what a number of countries have done around the world, is put out a spread of targets - 5 unconditionally, 15 conditionally, 25 with other conditions further attached. The virtue of our position around 15 and 25 percent cuts is that it is conditional on actions in the rest of the world, both developed and developing, and therefore, if we've got that approach and we are all actually singing from the same hymn sheet in Copenhagen and beyond there is an opportunity, therefore, to deliver a more robust outcome. That conditional approach is not unique to Australia, as I think you know.
JOURNALIST: Lord Stern, who's the author of the Stern Report, obviously, has said that one of the obstacles in the way of an international agreement is rich countries not setting stringent enough emissions targets. He's talking about Australia, isn't he?
PM: Well, I know Nick Stern very well. He's a very good man and he's contributed enormously to the global debate on bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. The key thing is to make sure that everyone steps up to the plate. What we are seeking to do through our emissions trading scheme, what we call in this country a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, is to set up a transition from a high-carbon density economy to a lower one over time, with appropriate adjustments for industry, for families, on the way through.
But I go back to my point - On the targets question, we are being entirely robust. 5% conditional. 5% unconditional. 15% unconditional, 25%- sorry, 5% unconditional.
JOURNALIST: Unconditional.
PM: 15% conditional, depending on what's happening elsewhere in the world, and 25% with a further set of conditionalities attached. That is entirely calibrated to what then happens in global agreements around the world. And that I think is a reasonable and responsible approach. It is one also based in the science.
JOURNALIST: Well you like to quote the scientists, and let me quote them. The UN Panel of climate change experts, they're calling for 25-40% cuts by 2020. The European Union Ministers last week were going for 30%. Again, why as a developing country should I listen to Kevin Rudd on this issue, when you're only proposing a 5% cut yourself, and you're actually promoting the expert of coal.
PM: Well let me go on to the second part of your question, which I haven't dealt with yet, which is the question of coal. You're right to point to the fact that, around the world, coal-fired electricity generation, based on the trajectories that you see in China and India, will probably by the time we get to 2030 represent something in excess of 50% of total electricity generation around the world. It is a reality we have to deal with. So how do we as a globe, as a global community, respond to this challenge? One, of course, is to deal with the big challenge of energy efficiency. That's huge. Some of the estimates are that we can actually bring about a 30% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by effective and comprehensive efficiency measures. And our calculation at home, here in Australia, is that we can do a lot on that score as well. What's the second thing? Renewable energies. That's why we in this country are currently investing in what we believe will become the single largest solar generating plant anywhere in the world, up to 1000 megawatts. Thirdly, what do you do about coal?
That's why we have initiated the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute as a global initiative from Australia. We fund it to the tune of $100 million a year, with one objective- to bring the four available clean coal technologies, carbon sequestration and storage technologies to commercial application at scale. We need to establish how much it costs with these technologies to bring about the effective sequestration of carbon coming out of coal-fired electricity generation. So you ask what we're doing about it? That's our strategy.
JOURNALIST: The British Government has said that there will be no new coal-fired stations in 2020 unless 100% of the carbon can be captured and stored. If you're really serious about it, why don't you make a similar pledge?
PM: Well what we've adhered to, or shall I say what we're responding to, is a call by the G8 at the Hokkaido conference in 2008, which said that by 2020, we should have up established and proven 20 at scale coal-fired electricity stations around the world deploying CCS technologies. The reason why the Australian institute came into being, our Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, is because when we looked around the world after Hokkaido, and that meeting of the G8, we did not find any action underway to bring that to realisation. That's what we're doing through the institute, working on the regulations and the legislation, working on the project identification, disseminating the technology to the greatest extent possible as a public good, and assisting with finances as well. We intend to bring forward a number of these projects ourselves. So, that's where we're up to, we intend to work this and work it really hard. And our objective is that 2020 objective.
JOURNALIST: But the Kevin Rudd that says that is also the Kevin Rudd that is putting in millions of federal funding to expand coal export facilities in Queensland and New South Wales. There's a contradiction there, isn't there?
PM: Well coal- can I just say when it comes to all forms of, shall I say carbon-based electricity generation or carbon-based generation of energy worldwide, whether it's through oil, whether it's through LNG, whether it's through coal. We have a challenge on our hands. The key thing is though, can we use the available technologies to prove at scale that these things can work, can work to deliver a sequestration outcome for coal which is commercially applicable across the world. That's what we are in the business of doing. Of course, the challenge particularly is relevant to China and India. But the Chinese and Indian energy plans for the future, whoever they might be importing coal from in the future, these are huge domestic coal using countries as far as the two major emerging economies of the 21st century.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I believe I've got a moral obligation to establish to the greatest extent that I can, the workability of these technologies, and at scale. But there's one thing we might be able to look back and say we did is to say that two of these four technologies actually work at scale, and the Chinese and the Indians are now using them. And if we're not able to get there, it's far better we have that public information available to people, rather than CCS technologies being regarded as pie in the sky.
JOURNALIST: But as the Prime Minister of Australia, another one of your responsibilities is to preserve the great prosperity that this country has enjoyed. And much of that prosperity is based on your success as a resources exporter, and particularly a coal exporter. You export 30% of the world's coal. That doesn't sit happily with the Kevin Rudd with these polished green credentials, does it?
PM: Well you know something, you could take a sledgehammer to anyone's international diplomatic credentials on any question at any time. You know that, and you're experienced as a reporter for the beeb. You've interviewed lots of folk around the world before. The key thing is, can you make a difference? What we're seeking to do is to make a difference. None of the measures I've outlined before either in terms of energy efficiency nationally and worldwide, secondly, renewable energies, solar, the activities that we're investing in there, and thirdly through carbon sequestration storage technologies for coal-fired electricity generation, all these things are also made possible by establishing a carbon price.
And the carbon price that you establish, driven by the science, driven by where you need to land ultimately, in terms of an acceptable temperature increase worldwide, the two degrees Celsius target that we agreed at the Major Economies Forum meeting in L'Aquila earlier this year- unless we get to an agreement nationally and in as many other countries around the world as possible about a real carbon price, then we won't have properly shaped and formed this range of energy possibilities for the future as well. So I intend to be as effective in the leadership of that debate as possible. None of us come to this debate on climate change with clean hands. None of us. So let's sort of put to one side this idea that any particular national idea comes as some sort of moral puritan to the equation.
JOURNALIST: But they might say your hands are dirtier than most.
PM: Well that could be an uncomfortable comment from the beeb, but I'll leave that to you guys.
JOURNALIST: A couple of final questions Prime Minister. There's a lot of climate change scepticism in this country, which strikes a lot of international observers as slightly odd, given Australia's the world's driest continent. You're already seeing the effects of climate change in the view of many scientists here. I wonder whether you take any responsibility for that, because you haven't done that much to elucidate this issue. You gave a big speech a couple of weeks ago, and that was interpreted by many in Australia as an attempt to shift the focus away from the boat people issue which has been causing you political problems. Before that, you hadn't devoted a speech to climate change for six months.
PM: I think if you looked at what I've been saying on climate change for years and years and years, I've said this whole debate begins and ends with the science. That is, the measurement of what is occurring in terms of human-based or human caused temperature changes in the world, and therefore what can be done about it in terms of keeping those temperature rises within sustainable levels. I have said this uphill, down dale, in as many Parliamentary debates as I can remember. I wouldn't wish to bore you by asking you to read each of those debates over the last two to three years, I'm sure you'll find plenty of references. As for the recent speech on the science, it is simply to drive home a single point at home and abroad.
The climate change sceptics, the climate change deniers, and the industry they have running around the world at the moment, in trying to undermine the political authority of leaders seeking to act on climate change, has to be exposed. When I look at the debate in the United States and you see all these guys emerging from the woodwork, it reminds me so much of the debates about smoking and lung cancer thirty or forty years ago. You've got all these people coming out and saying 'there's no link between smoking and lung cancer', despite the fact that all the scientific data's been on the table for so long. I believe we actually need to expose this for what it is. Absolute scientific fraudulence when it comes to the attack on the authenticity of the climate change science as it exists, and the fact that we have 4000 plus scientists on the international panel of climate change scientists providing us with definitive reports on the need to act, and what is occurring in the absence of action leaves us in a position as global leaders whereby I believe we cannot afford to fail.
JOURNALIST: One of the main criticisms of your Prime Ministership is often you don't leverage your personal popularity enough. You've got an extraordinarily high approval rating historically in Australia, and you haven't been willing to leverage that popularity on unpopular issues. And this is one of them, your critics would say. You haven't been prepared to deliver unpalatable truths to the Australian people about what tackling climate change will mean. And it's this, that it could damage their prosperity.
PM: We've been absolutely frank about the fact that when you introduce, for example, a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, our version of an Emissions Trading Scheme, that it will have effect therefore on the carbon price, and that will affect how businesses operate, and it will affect also the income for families. We've been equally upfront about how we propose to provide compensation for the lowest income families in Australia. I think we've been entirely frank about that.
And if you think coming from the world's carbon-intensive economy and from a very flat start on this question, in two years to be in the position we are today where we're trying with all the powers available to us to get through the Australian Parliament an Emissions Trading Scheme despite formidable political and other opposition, and internationally work as hard as we can through the global process presided over by the UN Secretary-General on the one hand and Prime Minister Rasmussen on the other to get a global deal, this has required a fair bit of effort on our part as well. So many leaders around the world are doing exactly the same. So we'll just continue plugging away, doing what we can, we're from Australia, we're here to help.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd, thank you very much.
PM: Good to be with you.



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge the excellent work of everyone involved with tonight's awards in raising the profile of the concerns of people with disabilities across the nation.
And I'd particularly like to thank the Minister, Jenny Macklin, and the Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities, Bill Shorten, who are both extremely dedicated to real improvements for people with disabilities and those who care for them.
There are many statistics that inform us about the condition of people living with disability across Australia.
But they only tell one part of the story.
The personal tragedies behind the statistics tell a damning tale.
The kids left in respite because their parents are just too exhausted to cope.
People left without the basic services and equipment they need to get out of bed in the morning.
People denied the chance to work and study or take advantage of opportunities for a better life.
Discriminated against, shut out and isolated because of the attitudes of others and the inadequacy of support available.
For far too long, people with disability in this country have had to battle for the right to live their life to its full potential.
For far too long, people with disability have had to battle a service system that simply isn't up to meeting their complex needs. 
The Australian Government is determined to work with you to make sure people with disability have the opportunity to be involved in their communities, to where possible have a job and to have a life that is meaningful and worthwhile.
After years of neglect, there is a lot of catching up to do.
And again I'd like to pay tribute to the hard work that Jenny and Bill have been doing.
Thanks to their efforts, we've made a start by:
     * Doubling the funding to the States and Territories under the National Disability Agreement, including the highest ever level of indexation;
     * Increasing the Disability Support Pension for around 720,000 Australians, and giving extra payments to carers; and
     * Ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - with Australia becoming one of the first Western countries to do so.
But we know there is much more to be done.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare figures released last week show that there will be around 1.5 million people with severe disability by next year, and almost 2.3 million by 2030. 
Recent trends indicate that demand for specialist disability services will grow by around 7 per cent a year in real terms - this would indicate a doubling of cost by 2020.
How we care for people with a disability is a fundamental matter that goes to our values and our character as a nation.
But it is also a matter of responsible economic management.
Australian governments spend approximately $20 billion a year in total on the disability welfare system:
     * Around $8 billion on payments to community care and support providers Nearly $3 billion on payments to family and other informal carers; and
     * Almost $9 billion in income support through the Disability Support Pension for over 700,000 Australians.
This is a substantial investment of public resources.
But while significant assistance is provided to people with disabilities, there are many weaknesses in the support systems that governments provide.
National long-term care and support scheme for people with disability.
The Australian Government believes that we need to rethink how we support people with disability and identify what new approaches are needed.
We need a system that provides greater incentives for early intervention and incentives to help people with disability participate in work and the community. 
A system that provides some certainty for people with a disability and their families, no matter where they live, and how they acquired their disability.
A system that is not based on rationed services, and is not crisis-driven.
We know this is what people with disability want and it's also the most cost-effective and efficient solution. 
One idea that has united disability consumer and advocacy groups, the disability service sector and carer organisations, is a national long-term care and support scheme for people with disability. 
This was one of the ideas to emerge from the Australia 2020 Summit.
It has come up again and again in consultations all across the country for the National Disability Strategy. And in the Who Cares? - Report on The Inquiry into Better Support for Carers conducted by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Family, Community, Housing and Youth earlier this year.
A long-term care and support scheme would look at an individual's needs, across their whole lifetime, and determine what support is needed and when.
My colleague, Bill Shorten, has called it a big idea. That's somewhat of an understatement. 
It would be a historic social reform.
It would require transformative change to the disability service system - how it is delivered, funded and administered. 
But it could help us achieve a clear, overriding objective of the Australian Government - building a fairer Australia, with the goal that all Australians can reach their full potential in life.
It requires detailed and considered examination to see if it the outcomes it promises can be delivered.
But we believe now is the time to examine this option in detail.
That's why I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government will engage the Productivity Commission to carry out an Inquiry into a National Long-term Care and Support Scheme. 
Starting early next year, the Commission will look into the costs, benefits and feasibility of approaches which provide essential care and support - on an entitlement basis - for eligible people with a severe or profound disability. 
It will look at a no-fault social insurance model reflecting the shared risk of disability across the population - strongly supported by many of you here tonight - as well as other options for long-term care and support, building on international best practice. 
It will also consider the complex but critical interactions with other schemes and systems - income support, aged care, and state based compensation schemes. 
An Associate Commissioner with specialist disability expertise will also be appointed to support the review.
Reform in this area is not something that can be undertaken lightly.
Some people live with disability from birth.
Others have their lives forever changed in an instant as a result of a traumatic event.
Sitting in the House of Representatives tonight are two people who know that only too well.
Paul Anicich and Tony Purkiss were among the Australians targeted in the 2005 Bali bombings.
This feasibility study will look at how long-term care and support can be provided to all people with a disability, including those who acquire it as a result of a traumatic event.
The study will consider coverage and entitlements, and implications for health services.
The very personal consequences for many thousands of Australians with disabilities, their carers and their families demand a well thought-out study. 
We need to do the work. 
And we need to get it right. 
That is why the inquiry will be assisted by an Independent Panel.
This panel will guarantee that the inquiry hears the views of the disability sector.
We will be announcing the Panel appointments shortly. 
The Inquiry will report to Minister Macklin and Bill Shorten in July 2011 and is a key plank of the National Disability Strategy - a 10 year blueprint for improving the participation of people with disability in all areas of life. 
Thousands of people across Australia responded to our consultations on the National Disability Strategy.
At these consultations, people with disabilities, their families, friends and carers gave us a clear message.
They want Australia to change. 
They want an inclusive Australia.
An enabling Australia.
An Australia that treats them equally and gives them opportunities to fulfil their potential. 
The Strategy will drive improvements in performance across Commonwealth, and state and territory governments.
Not only in disability systems but, importantly, mainstream systems where it is vital that we improve our responses in areas such as education, transport, housing, health, communications and human rights.
To this end I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government is now moving to include the National Disability Strategy within our COAG reform agenda.
That means we will be seeking the support of all states and territories in implementing the national strategy.
And next year, we will be releasing a robust and integrated approach to the National Disability Strategy.
But tonight we are here to present The National Disability Awards.
In presenting these awards, I want to acknowledge the strong support that my wife Therese has given as patron of the International Day of People with Disability and the National Disability Awards.
These awards are a true celebration.
They celebrate not only the recipients and the nominees, but also every person who chooses to devote their time to people with disability.
We need to break down the barriers in this country.
We need to educate Australians to stop the discrimination against people with disability.
Discrimination that is generally the result of ignorance rather than malice. 
You only have to look at Paralympic gold medallist Kurt Fearnley, who is here with us tonight, for proof of ability far exceeding disability.
Kurt is an Ambassador for these awards.
And what an Ambassador he is.
About seven weeks ago Kurt won the Boston Marathon.
Four weeks ago he won his fourth New York Marathon.
And less than a week ago Kurt conquered the Kokoda track.
He crawled the entire 96 kilometres.
I know from personal experience how difficult the Kokoda Track is.
It almost did me in.
So Kurt's achievement is nothing short of extraordinary - and Kurt, we salute you.
As finalists for the National Disability Awards, you have all played your part in educating Australians and you have done it with great commitment and passion.
I thank you all for the work you do in addressing the inadequacies in the Australian disability system.
To all the National Disability Awards finalists and nominees - I applaud you.
And to those who receive awards today - congratulations and keep up the fine work that is being recognised here today.


COREN: Prime Minister, earlier this year you were concerned that Copenhagen could fail. Is that still the case?
PM: Well, I don't believe we can allow the possibility of failure if we're serious about the planet's future. On the mechanics, though, of this negotiation, it's tough, it's hard, but I think in recent times, because of Prime Minister Rasmussen's leadership as the President of the Conference of Parties there is now a real possibility that we can craft an operational framework agreement, a Copenhagen agreement, which has got substance on all the key challenges - temperature, targets, commitments, finance, technology. That's what we're working towards, but the going will be tough.
COREN: So you're talking about an agreement, but what about a legal, binding agreement?
PM: Well, let's look carefully at the words used by Prime Minister Rasmussen himself. What he's talking about is one agreement in two steps. First step is, let's call it a heads of agreement about the core policy agreements across targets for bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, for verifiable actions by developing countries and concrete proposals agreed on finance, as well as technology.
Step two is translating all those into legal documents, and I know enough about the process, and other like processes, to know that's a really tough, techo task which takes a little bit of time.
The hard bit, though, the hardest bit, is getting the core policy agreements right. That's what we're striving towards at Copenhagen. I'm very encouraged by recent statements by President Obama, both in Singapore the other day when I was with him there, subsequently in Beijing with President Hu Jintao. The Chinese are also open to this process as well.
So I believe we've got a chance of landing a reasonable outcome.
COREN: How many leaders are on board?
PM: Well, that's building, but my most recent understanding is that we will have at least 50 leaders from around the world attending, and I understand the number is growing. You see, we don't want to allow a bureaucratic or negotiators impasse at the technical level to get in the road of what I'd describe as a leaders-driven, political leaders-driven, core agreement on the core policy questions of how we actually bring down greenhouse gas emissions for the future and save the planet.
COREN: And what sort of targets are you talking about, because the goal posts just continue to keep on moving?
PM: Well, the science tells us this: we have to aim to stabilise greenhouse gas emissions at something like 450 parts per million in order to prevent temperature rises exceeding two degrees Celsius. That's where the science points us. Therefore, everything should after that occur within the science.
What actions are needed to be taken then by the world's developing economies to bring that about? Targets by 2020, targets by 2050 and actions, also, verifiable actions, by the major emerging economies as well, including China and India. Put that together, together with the money to make it work, climate change finance to make it work for the developing economies, particularly those least able to fend for themselves, I think you have the architecture of a possible deal.
COREN: So you will come out of Copenhagen, you're quite sure of, with some sort of agreement?
PM: Well, can I say that I cannot make a final prediction on behalf of all my colleagues. There's likely to be a few of them there. Therefore, I can only speak as Prime Minister of Australia, one of the friends of the chair. The Danish Prime Minister appointed three of us to begin with, including the UN Secretary General and President Calderon of Mexico, but our view is that we have a strong possibility of bringing this about. If that was not the case then I wouldn't be exerting the effort I am currently exerting and other leaders are now exerting to try and break the impasse and produce the deal.
COREN: But there was so much expectation as far as Copenhagen is concerned. I mean, there still is a lot of expectation, but if you don't walk away with a legal, binding agreement, what have you achieved?
PM: Well, I think what you're doing is almost setting up a straw man there, which is, what's critically important here? The absolute core of a policy agreement between all the principle economies of the world which represent the vast bulk of greenhouse gas emissions, which is then translatable into a legally binding agreement, or saying that we have to produce a legally binding agreement upfront. All I know is policy precedes treaty. You've got to get the policy right, everyone agrees with that, then you translate it into a treaty document.
So I'd caution you and your colleagues in the international media for using this, I think, straw man, I think an artificial benchmark, really, of saying success or failure hinges entirely upon whether there is a 7,000-page long legally binding treaty with nice leather folders around the outside as the only benchmark of success. I would see a core, tight agreement on the central policy differences now on the science, if you like, on the question of temperature increases which are acceptable, two degree Celsius; on the targets for those us in the developed world; on the verifiable actions necessary for the big economies like China and India and others; as well, critically, as the climate change finance necessary to make this deal happen.
If get that right, part two is, frankly, doable. You don't get part one right, part two is never doable, so I simply that as clearly as I can to change your framework for analysis.
COREN: Well, as far as framework or timeframe goes, how long will it be before we do have a legal, binding agreement and everybody's signature is on that document?
PM: My expectation would be, my hope would be, that if we can get to a core operational framework agreement at Copenhagen, a Copenhagen agreement, that would be, therefore, able, in the course of 2010, to produce the legally binding treaty document. That is the logical sequence which would be embraced. Of course, this would be finally resolved by leaders once they gather in Copenhagen itself, but that's the logical, two-step process.
COREN: Domestically, are you concerned about how these targets will affect people, your voters, here in Australia? I mean, you have an election coming up next year.
PM: Well, I'm concerned about many things. This forms part of a very long list, but can I say, when it comes to climate change, one - I was elected by the Australian people to act on climate change. This country, Australia, is one of the hottest and driest continents on Earth, where the impact of climate change will be felt first and hardest. We have a national interest to act here, as do all the other economies and countries of the world, for different sets of reasons.
Secondly, therefore, we must act nationally and globally to be effective. Nationally, through the passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, our own cap-and-trade system in Australia, which is currently before the Australian parliament, and we're working like fury to negotiate a possible deal with the Opposition parties who control the Senate in the Australian parliamentary process, but the other part is global action. That's where the Copenhagen agreement is also essential. We have been charged by the Australian people to act in both these directions. You know something? It's tough, it's hard, it's politically controversial, but can I say this about the climate change sceptics and deniers around the world: how can they possibly look at their kids, in their eyeballs, and say that we should not act.
It is grossly irresponsible to simply have this evidence in front of you and to believe that we have some moral option available to us simply to remain inactive and hope that somehow it sorts itself out in the fullness of time. It won't. We are required to act, and I am almost as disgusted with those who run this sort of campaign, that the science is somehow in doubt, as I have been in earlier times with those who ran the same sort of campaign on the linkages between smoking and lung cancer.
The science is clear. The moral imperative lies in action.
COREN: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Good to be with you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We gather again today to along this avenue of heroes.
Today we gather to recognise courage.
Today we gather to render thanks.
Today we gather to remember those we have lost.
Those who have been wounded.
Those who bear the scars of war - scars visible and scars unseen.
We gather here at a place inscribed with all the chapters of Australia's proud military history and to mark the end of another of those chapters.
A chapter in which around 20,000 brave Australian men and women followed in the footsteps of millions of brave Australians before them.
In the footsteps of those who carved out the Anzac legend on the beaches of Gallipoli.
Of those who were slaughtered in the killing fields of Flanders.
Of the million Australians who fought in Europe, North Africa and the Pacific in the battle to defend Australia.
Of those who fought in Korea, in the Malaya emergency and in Konfrontasi.
Of the 60,000 who served in Vietnam.
Of those who served in the first Gulf War.
And those who as we meet here today at this great memorial are now writing the next chapters in Afghanistan, in the Solomon Islands, and in East Timor.
Today we mark the end of Operation CATALYST.
We pay tribute to the thousands of brave men and women in uniform who answered the call of the democratically elected government of Australia.
We pay tribute to the hundreds of Australian civilians who provided critical communications, training, intelligence, logistical and policy support to this operation.
We pay tribute to our diplomats in the field.
In a fully professional response to a decision of the government of Australia, you, the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces, discharged your mission in Iraq with distinction and with success.
We recognise the contribution of all those who participated.
We remember, too, those we lost.
We remember Warrant Officer David Nary.
We remember Private Jake Kovco.
We remember Flight Lieutenant Paul Pardoel
For their spirit remains with us still in this avenue of heroes.
We thank their families and their loved ones for their courage and their sacrifice.
There are also those of you who have returned wounded from your service. 
Your service will not be forgotten.
Your needs will be met consistent with conditions of service of all our veterans past, our veterans now, and our veterans of the future.
This is the solemn responsibility of all governments of Australia whatever their colour or hue, and however old our last remaining veteran may be.
Operation CATALYST ran from July 2003 until July 2009.
Our Army personnel trained approximately 36,000 Iraqi Army soldiers, including specialist training in logistics support and counter-insurgency operations.
Our Navy personnel contributed a Major Fleet Unit as an enduring presence in the Gulf and to protect the Khawr Al Amayah and Al Basrah oil terminals.
The RAN also provided a training team to work with Iraqi Coastal Defence.
Our Air Force personnel provided intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance and other support to both Coalition maritime and ground forces as well as providing air traffic control and air-lift support.
The constant refrain from other commanders in the field, from political leaders around the world and from General Petraeus as Supreme Allied Commander is that your service was exemplary.
Wherever you serve, my experience is that they always want more of you.
Whether in headquarters functions.
Or in the field.
The refrain is universal.
You are professional.
You are superbly trained.
You know your craft.
You are practical.
You are adaptable.
You are approachable.
You are sensitive to the cultures of the local people.
You are, in short, great ambassadors for Australia.
Trooper Mark Donaldson, our first Victoria Cross for Australia recipient since Vietnam, represented our country at Remembrance Day ceremonies in London last week.
And expressed his great wish for this generation of the Australian Defence Force - that Australians acknowledge their service and sacrifice with the same degree of reverence as we do those who fought in the two World Wars.
There is reason to think that many Australians agree with Trooper Donaldson.
The numbers who continue to attend ANZAC Day Dawn Services and parades...
Those who observe a minute's silence at the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month.
Those who learn with pride in our schools the great feats of courage rendered by the ADF from the first day of its formation.
You, numbered among the 18,000 veterans of this campaign, are the ANZACs of today.
As we salute the contribution of the troops here today, and around Australia, brought safely back to our shores, we are mindful that more than 100 ADF and many civilians remain in Iraq to provide protection and expertise to our Embassy and the United Nations Mission.
These troops and civilian Defence Staff are providing the ongoing assistance to our continuing civilian mission.
To continue our work to build a stable Iraq.
Let none of us assume they are out of danger's way - for they are not.
To the troops of Operation CATALYST - Australia welcomes you home with a great sense of relief and a great sense of pride.
On behalf of the nation, I thank you.
To your parents, I say thank you.
To your wives, husbands, partners and children, I say thank you.
This grateful nation, Australia, salutes you.


PM: Two years ago today the Government was elected to act on climate change, for this is one of the hottest and driest continents on Earth and the impact of climate change will be felt here hardest and first.
Two years ago we said we would move to ratify Kyoto. We've done so.
Two years ago we said we'd act to increase the Mandatory Renewable Energy Target. We've done so.
Two years ago we said we would introduce an emissions trading scheme.
Today we stand ready to take that next step for Australia, to move beyond our Kyoto commitments and to deliver a scheme that will deliver Australia a low carbon pollution future.
The Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is a cap-and-trade emissions scheme.
It will place a hard limit on carbon pollution and make those that produce carbon pollution pay for it.
It is founded on the following core principles:
     * First, to have maximal effective coverage to ensure the greatest cost-effectiveness and fairness in spreading the burden of reducing emissions;
     * Second, to allow international linking to the opportunities emerging in a global carbon market;
     * Third, to support industries to make the transition to a lower-pollution future, in particular the emissions-intensive electricity generation sector to a smooth transition to a lower-pollution future.
     * Fourth, to avoid what's called carbon leakage from emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries; and
     * Five, to assist households, especially pensioners and low-income Australians, adjust to the price of carbon.
Last month, the Government entered into good faith negotiations with the aim of securing passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme through the Senate this week.
The deal the Government has developed is consistent with our belief that a global agreement to stabilise levels of CO2 equivalent at 450 parts per million or lower would be squarely in Australia's national interest.
The deal will ensure that Australia can achieve its ambitious unconditional target of 5 per cent, conditional target of up to 15 per cent, and a top-end target of up to 25 per cent off 2000 levels by 2020 if a global 450 parts per million global agreement is reached.
In crafting the deal, the Government continued to listen carefully to business, as well as international and environmental stakeholders, committed to realising the best possible outcome at Copenhagen
The Government's deal complies with the standards we set at the beginning of these negotiations. It is both environmentally credible and it is fiscally responsible.
As Mr Turnbull, Mr Hockey and the Liberal Party consider their position on this Bill I would ask them to consider two simple facts.
     * Fact 1 - Australia is one of the hottest and driest continents on Earth.
     * Fact 2 - Australia will be hit hardest and fastest by climate change.
Those two facts mean that the only responsible course of action open to parliamentarians today is to vote for action on climate change.
Failing to act today is the riskiest course of action available to the parliament.
Failing to act today is to roll the dice on our children's future.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I will not take that risk with the future.
I will not risk our future, I will not risk our children's future or that of our grandchildren by betting against the climate change science.
The responsible course of action for us to take is a vote for action on climate change.
Today, the Government is asking the Australian Parliament to take action in the national interest.
Today we are asking the Australian Parliament to take action for the future, to take action for our children and for our grandchildren's future.
Today we are asking the Australian Parliament to take action to begin to protect Australia from dangerous climate change; to take action to protect the Australian economy for the future; to take action to protect Australian jobs for the future.
This day has been more than 10 long years in coming. 10 long years where the tough decision have been ducked; where the challenges of today were buck passed to the leaders of tomorrow.
My request to all members of parliament today is simple: Act in the national interest, not in your Party's interest.
Act for the future, not for the past.
Act for your children. Act for your grandchildren.
Act to begin tackling dangerous climate change by supporting the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
I'll now ask the Minister for Climate Change, Penny, Wong, to elaborate on the contents of the deal.
WONG: Thank you, Prime Minister.
Well, this has been a Government deal some time in the making, as you know. We've been working on this scheme over some nearly two years now, and in the final discussions in days gone past we have now landed what we believe is a Government deal that is worthy of support.
I'll just take you through a few of the key elements of this Government's deal.
The first is in relation to the emissions-intensive trade-exposed sector. We have permanently incorporated the global recession buffer into the base rate but we have maintained the decay rate.
We've increased the assistance to the coal sector.
We have listened to the community about their desire to have their action count, and we will ensure that voluntary action - that is, the action of individuals in our community, the action of Australian households - does matter, will matter, and will be counted under the Scheme.
We have provided additional assistance for the electricity sector, reflecting the advice that the Government has been considering.
As has been previously announced, we are excluding agriculture, but we have a program of work and offsets to ensure that farmers can continue to contribute to being part of the solution on climate change, and we have provided some additional assistance for electricity prices.
This is a comprehensive Government deal, a comprehensive deal that deals with the many issues which have been the subject of discussions.
Can I say this: it is important to remember the Government set out with a number of objectives in mind. The first was to preserve the environmental integrity of the scheme. We have done so.
The second was to be fiscally and economically responsible, and we have done so.
This is a deal, a Government deal, for this week. This is a deal to get this vote this week in the parliament. As the Prime Minister said, action in the national interest, action for the first time in this nation's history to choose to reduce our contribution to climate change.
Thank you.
PM: Just as I take your questions, can I also just thank the Minister, Penny Wong, for extraordinary work on this project over a long period of time, and the Minister Assisting, Greg Combet, for his work as well.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've repeatedly said you've got the balance right. Doesn't this show you were wrong?
PM: It means that when you're in a negotiation it involves some give and take, but the essential environmental and fiscal integrity of the Scheme remains. That's the way we crafted it, they are the principles which govern the operation and the content of the scheme and that's the deal that we have landed.
There and there.
JOURNALIST: So Prime Minister has the Coalition improved this bill?
PM: Well, we're engaged in a negotiation - give and take. You'll see that there are extra provisions here concerning environmental actions, in particular, by households. Obviously, there is some additional assistance for industry in transition. I refer particularly to the measures which were outlined there for coal, for LNG and for the electricity supply industry.
We believe we've got the balance right, and this is a deal which is fiscally responsible.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's more money for the electricity sector, more money for coal. It seems in this negotiation that every whinger is a winner? What about families, they get less money, how do you justify that?
PM: Well, in fact, the families receive exactly the undertakings we provided in the White Paper, which is, on average, 120 percent assistance for low-income earners. I'll have the Minister elaborate on this further in a minute if you wish.
What, of course, has changed since we last met on this is the underlying assumption of the future carbon price which was reflected, of course, when MYEFO was put out.
Our commitment's robust for families. When it comes to low-income families, that average assistance of 120 percent remains. We don't intend to allow families, in particular low-income families, to shoulder the pain of the adjustment. This has to be done equitably across the entire economy, and, of course, we are seeking to do that. Obviously, we've taken a decision in relation to agriculture which you'll all be familiar with, but the adjustments are necessary to get people across the hump into this new scheme, and we believe we've got that balance right.
Did you want to add on that question?
There, and then over there.
JOURNALIST: No-one would doubt your sincerity on the issue of climate change, but how do you keep a straight face as you stand there and urge the Opposition not to play politics on this when you've been doing it from day one?
PM: Well, we went to the people prior to the last election and said this is what we would do. We obtained the people's mandate to do this. We have done so. It is entirely consistent with what we said prior to the last election.
Therefore, in executing the people's mandate, we believe that we've taken a rational course of action. Firstly, put out a Green Paper. Secondly, had the Garnaut Review. Thirdly, put out a White Paper. Nine months ago, put out draft legislation. Fourthly, what we've confronted is a Government with a unified position on these matters, and an Opposition which has been less than unified.
That's the reality we've had to contend with, and my appeal, as I've said in the parliament in recent days, is for men and women of good will within the Liberal Party to back this legislation, because it is in the national interest, and when I say this is a day to put the national interest first and your Party's interest last, I mean it.
Climate change and our action on it will go way beyond any of our lives here as assembled - goes to our kids and our grandkids. It is a fundamental, existential question for the future. It's time the country got real about it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Prime Minister given all the commitments that have been made around the world, is this the scheme do you think that's going to have to drive our emissions cuts by 5 per cent or 15 per cent and given all the concessions that you've made, is it still possible for us to cut by 25 per cent at the upper end of the range?
PM: Well, firstly, as you would know, both the Opposition and the Government have a common position when it comes to the targets which are contained within the Scheme, both the unconditional target of 5 percent and the conditional targets of 15 and 25.
Why are the latter two targets conditional? Because we do not know yet the outcome which will be delivered through Copenhagen or whatever globally binding agreement will come following Copenhagen.
We think that's the right and responsible course of action.
In terms of the Scheme's capacity to yield the carbon pollution reductions necessary for the future, we believe it's got that capacity within it. It's designed as such, and, of course, the key thing is to get it implemented so that businesses can begin to plan, investors can begin to plan, and the necessary decisions which then kick in the medium to long-term are reflected in the day-to-day decisions on energy efficiency, on what sort of electricity you're going to generate in the future, those sorts of things for which business need the rules to be outlined in the here and now.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: How confident are you that Opposition will accept this deal and you will get the Scheme this week and secondly what's your latest information from your discussions overseas and on the Copenhagen progress.
PM: On the first point, we believe we've crafted a good, balanced deal for the national interest and that's what been delivered unanimously through our Cabinet this morning, unanimously through our Party room this morning and delivered by the Minister to the Leader of the Opposition later this morning. What happens in their Party room is a matter for them, but I return to the appeal I've made in recent days, and that is for people of goodwill within the Liberal party to get behind this path forward.
On the second part of your question, which is about the preparations for Copenhagen itself, this is still a very tough and hard process. I noticed a confirmation the other day that we now have something like 65 world leaders attending the Copenhagen conference. This is a good step forward. The more leaders you have there, frankly, the harder it is simply to deliver a non-outcome. It doesn't make it beyond the realms of possibility, but it's always good to have a large number of leaders there. It helps increase the incentives for delivering a substantive outcome.
In terms of where things head to from here, the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting which comes up over the course of this weekend, I understand from discussions with the Prime Minister of Denmark and the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, that the UN Secretary-General will be attending the CHOGM meeting. I also understand that Prime Minister Rasmussen will be as well, possibly other leaders. Remember, the Commonwealth brings together some 53 States, developed and developing, including a lot of the microstates who are very strong within the G77 caucus. I believe, therefore, the next step to Copenhagen will be the deliberations which occur this weekend at CHOGM. India will be there; the United Kingdom will be there; the UN Secretary-General will be there; we'll be there, and we see that as one further step forward. But it is a long, hard process.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) your answer on whether or not this is an improvement, but you have stressed, the Government's stressed, that this is a deal for this week. What happens going forward? If the Opposition doesn't get a deal done this week, are these things simply stripped out of the scheme, and the original bill re-put?
PM: It is a deal for this week, because we need to get this thing through.
The world's also watching what happens here. You're sometimes surprised by that, but people are taking, playing close attention to what happens in the Australian Parliament. And partly in answer to Michelle's question before, global momentum towards an outcome on climate change, we're all part of that.
Getting something through the Australian Parliament here is part of that as well. Look at the difficulties which are currently being experienced in the United States on that score. I believe that we have a deal given the circumstances which present themselves to us this week. As I said, any negotiation involves give and take. These have been good faith negotiations. The Minister and Macca have been working furiously in recent days and weeks and we believe we've got a good, balanced outcome for the national interest.
JOURNALIST: Because we haven't had time to scrutinise this before the press conference- does the extra money given to the electricity generators mean the initial price rise of power will be less than forecast under the original scheme?
PM: I'll let you come to this.
WONG: Can I make a couple of comments, I just want to pick up one question from Lenore about the environmental integrity of the scheme.
This is a scheme that has retained its environmental integrity. If you are interested in this issue, you could compare what was put forward by the Opposition and what the Government deal comprises, and you will see that we have ensured that everyone will continue to contribute, all parts of the Australian economy will continue to contribute, to a reduction in emissions; that is a very important aspect of what is being put before the Parliament.
In terms of electricity, it's important to remember that the assistance to the electricity generators which has been, or additional assistance which has been sought, has never, it's never been suggested by them or be it by anybody else that that would reduce the impact on electricity prices. Which is why we have retained, as the Prime Minister said, our White Paper commitments, which are retained in terms of the level of assistance for low-income and middle-income Australia.
The focus in terms of electricity has to be, as the Government, on security of supply. And we believe we've put forward a package, a deal, which delivers security, energy security, for Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the fundamental existential question for the future- the fundamental existential question for the future- and then you said this is a deal for this week. Does the fundamental existential question for the future end on Friday?
PM: No, what it means, Mark, is this- if you want to land a scheme for Australia's long term future, you deal with the political realities of the day to get it through the Parliament so that certainty can be created for business, that certainty can be created for families, and we have some certainty as we approach our global negotiations. That's what it means. And it means, also, that as we approach the challenges of Copenhagen, that the world knows where Australia stands. That's why we are immediately concerned about the negotiation of this through the Parliament this week. We think it's right. Dealing with climate change for the long-term means putting in place all the building blocks.
We said prior to the last election what those building blocks were. We've honoured the implementation of those building blocks. Whether it's across energy efficiency, whether it's across carbon sequestration and storage, whether it's across renewable energy, direct investments, as well as a change to the target, as well as the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We have honoured these, and, in dealing with the substance of the long-term existential challenge, building blocks, each one of them, practically speaking in the here and now, is important.
JOURNALIST: There's an amendment in this package that will be done next year. Doesn't that show that these changes could be done next year, and they could wait until after Copenhagen?
WONG: That is a technical- this is the fuel tax issue is it? Is that what you're referring to?
JOURNALIST: I've had brief time to have a look (inaudible)
WONG: I'm happy to have a discussion with you. It's a fuel tax amendment which we think would be better done next year. It's a technical issue.
JOURNALIST: You've adjusted the household assistance package to recognise the lower projected carbon price. You expect that will save you $5.76 billion by the end of the decade. That lower predicted carbon price was in MYEFO. Why wasn't that package, that household assistance package, adjusted then to reflect it? Wasn't that then an accountancy trick before these negotiations began?
WONG: Well we did not adjust the dollar figure, that is correct, before MYEFO-
JOURNALIST: Why?
WONG: Well, that was the decision of the Government, not to adjust the dollar figure. What we did, we-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
WONG: We did decide as you will recall in MYEFO also to extend well beyond the forward estimates, out to a ten year profile, to give the Opposition a very clear indication of the fiscal impact on the revenue of the adjustment. And what we are doing today is calibrating the household assistance scheme to reflect the different carbon price which we now anticipate.
JOURNALIST: Being done in MYEFO- you put out figures that were incorrect in MYEFO.
WONG: I'll leave that commentary to you Chris, about what you think should and should not have been in the Treasury figures. We are being very clear, we adjusted the revenue, and we have now adjusted, very clearly, the household assistance to reflect what the real impact will be.
JOURNALIST: You've also made a decision on the coal mining compensation, the extra compensation, some time ago. Why haven't we had a discussion of these figures, and the additional compensation for mining, before now? And why are we now only discussing this with hours to go?
WONG: Well I'm not sure why you're saying the decision was made some time ago, Dennis. Is this another one of your articles?
JOURNALIST: Well, was it not $750 million extra?
WONG: This was settled this week- this was settled this week- and if you have further questions on that I'm happy to ask the Minister Assisting who has (inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Is that a concession that there would have been problems with electricity supply under what you proposed last time? And also, why do manufacturers deserve to get half of their electricity bills back in the first year?
WONG: Well I think both of those questions, Lenore, go to the nature of what we've been going through, which is, when you're in a negotiation, there's necessarily give and take. You would know from what the Opposition put forward that they placed a lot of emphasis on assistance to industry. The Government has been very clear and held true to its objectives, that we articulated before these discussions started, and we have also sought to put in place changes which deliver, which ensure and improve environmental outcomes.
JOURNALIST: You're about to enter another round of negotiations-
PM: On Dennis' point before- I did call Annabel before and it all went in different directions- but just to add to the point made by Dennis before.
All the elements contained in the deal which we've put to you today have been signed and sealed in very recent times. There are moving parts in all of this Dennis. As far as the coal elements are concerned, we've been looking at permutations of combinations on that until very, very recently. Obviously, once again, Dennis' sources are better than ours, but can I just say, that's as its been, and that's been, frankly, as of where it was in very, very recent days. Why are you laughing like that, Franklin? Annabel.
JOURNALIST: You've just concluded a negotiation, but you're about to start another one overseas. If the Coalition accepts this package and it becomes law, can you guarantee that there won't be any retrospective, further adjustments to it in light of any commitments you might make in Copenhagen?
PM: Well, what we've always said is that, and I think I'll ask for Penny to add to this, is that, intrinsic to our position on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, when this goes to, I think, the question asked before by Lenore about the conditional targets of 15 and 25. Obviously, the nature of the outcome at Copenhagen shapes elements of the deal, and you will see that reflected in the document which is before you. But we are consolidating an Australian position to give our business community certainty for the future. National action's one thing, but frankly, global action is fundamental to our long term survival as a country, as a community.
Let me say this as we wind this up, I'm always taken by where the Nats are up to on this one, I really am. How can you just stand there, as the National party, with your heads in the sand, betraying the interests of the next generation of Australian farmers and their kids. I can't understand that. I cannot reconcile it. If you look at what the CSIRO is saying about the impact of drought and droughtedness into the future, drought intensity, drought duration, look at the problems of water supply already across rural Australia, I can't even fathom how the National party thinks they can get away with some cute piece of retail politics on this, when the fundamental interests of rural Australia for this century are at stake, our future as a food supplier for ourselves and the world, in landing this deal and landing one globally as well. I cannot understand, I really don't get it, how they can in any sense look in the shaving mirror of a morning and say that this is the right and responsible thing, the right and responsible thing, for them to do for rural Australia. I just do not get it, I think it's just dead wrong.
Thanks folks.


Australia has today moved a step closer to action on climate change, after the Rudd Government this morning delivered a deal to the Opposition aimed at securing the passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme this week.
The package is the culmination of over a month of detailed negotiations between the Government and the Opposition, and over a decade of policy development.
Under the package, industry will receive significant new assistance to help make the transition to a low carbon future, reflecting the Opposition's demands.
The Government has also ensured the package delivers for the environment and households.
This final package on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is in the national interest: it is both environmentally credible and economically responsible.
Key elements of the package include:
     * Emissions-Intensive Trade-Exposed Industries: permanently incorporating the Global Recession Buffer - which provides industries eligible for 60 per cent assistance with a 10 per cent buffer, and industries eligible for 90 per cent assistance with a 5 per cent buffer - into assistance rates. The 1.3 per cent Carbon Productivity Contribution has been retained to ensure all industries reduce their emissions.
     * Coal Sector: A total of $1.5 billion in transitional assistance will be provided to the coal sector over five years. This is an increase from $750 million previously. The Government will commit $270 million to the Coal Mine Abatement Fund through the Climate Change Action Fund to assist gassy coal mines reduce emissions. In addition, the current COAG Renewable Energy Target (RET) review process will consider whether new waste coal mine gas projects should be eligible.
     * Voluntary Action: The Government will ensure the CPRS takes into account voluntary action by households. Voluntary action by households will now allow Australia to go beyond our 2020 emissions reduction target. In addition, the CPRS will be amended to ensure that all existing and future purchases of GreenPower will be counted, and allow Australia to go beyond our 2020 national targets.
     * Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme: An increase of $4 billion in assistance under the ESAS, increasing the total value of permits under the ESAS from $3.3 billion to $7.3 billion. A further three new measures - a Low Emissions Transition Incentive, an Energy Security Assurance Mechanism and deferred payment arrangements - will be introduced to maintain energy security and drive the transition to a low pollution future.
     * Electricity Prices: A Transitional Electricity Cost Assistance Program of $1.1 billion to assist medium and large manufacturing and mining businesses with CPRS-related increases in electricity prices in the early years of the Scheme.
     * Agriculture: As previously announced by the Government, agricultural emissions will be excluded from the CPRS and offsets for agricultural emissions abatement will be included.
The deal will ensure that Australia can achieve its ambitious unconditional target of 5 per cent; conditional target of up to 15 per cent and top-end target of 25 per cent off 2000 levels by 2020 if a global 450 parts per million outcome is achieved.
The deal put to the Opposition is fiscally responsible. The Government's commitment to ensure that around 90 per cent of low-income households receive assistance equivalent to 120 per cent or more of their cost of living increase has been maintained. Although the level of assistance has been modified to reflect the new carbon price estimated in the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is a major economic and environmental reform that will take Australia to a low carbon future.
It will place a limit on the carbon pollution we produce and make those that produce carbon pollution pay for it.
In early 2008, the Government made clear that it intended to fulfil its election commitment by passing the CPRS in mid 2009.
The Government first released this legislation in draft form in March.
This package has been presented to the Opposition on the basis that a vote on the Bill must be held before Parliament rises this week - six months after the Government's intended passage.
Passing the CPRS this week will give Australian businesses the certainty they need to make investments.
It will also mean Australia goes to Copenhagen with a means to deliver its targets and provide a much-needed boost to negotiations on a global deal.
We have delayed action on climate change too long.
It is now time to act.
We call on the Opposition to support this negotiated package and ensure a vote on this package before Parliament rises this week


The Rudd Government was elected to tackle climate change.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will be the central mechanism by which Australia tackles climate change and is the biggest environmental reform in the nation's history.
The deal will ensure that Australia can achieve its ambitious unconditional target of 5 per cent; conditional target of up to 15 per cent and top-end target of 25 per cent off 2000 levels by 2020 if a global 450 parts per million outcome is achieved.
Over time it will ensure the Australian economy makes the transformation to a low pollution future.
The final package being offered by the Government includes new measures which will improve the environmental effectiveness of the CPRS.
Voluntary action
1. The Government will ensure the CPRS takes into account voluntary action by households.
Voluntary action by households will now allow Australia to go beyond our 2020 emissions reduction target.
The Government will develop a method for ensuring that the collective voluntary action by households - beyond that projected by the CPRS - will be taken into account in setting future caps.
2. GreenPower
In addition, the CPRS will be amended to ensure that all existing and future purchases of GreenPower will be counted, and allow Australia to go beyond our 2020 national targets.
3. The Government will establish the National Carbon Offset Standard to provide clarity to consumers and businesses on what constitutes a credible voluntary carbon claim or offset.
Individuals and organisations will be able to be certified as 'carbon neutral' under the National Carbon Offset Standard.
The National Carbon Offset Standard will be released today and come into effect from 1 July 2010.
Reviews
4. Automatic statutory review of the CPRS legislation will occur when Australia signs a new multilateral agreement
The Government will require an automatic statutory review of the CPRS legislation, including EITE policy, as soon as practicable after Australia signs a new multilateral agreement on climate change which imposes obligations to take action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The review will examine the implications of that agreement for the CPRS. In line with existing policy, five years' notice will be given to any modifications to the EITE assistance program, unless modifications were required for compliance with Australia's international trade obligations.
5. Recognising Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 2014 Review
The CPRS will take into account developments in the consensus science.
The Minister will direct the Independent Expert Advisory Committee to take into account the findings of Working Group III of the IPCC when considering appropriate caps and gateways in the first statutory review of the CPRS in 2014.
6. Productivity Commission Review of Agriculture
The Government commits to conducting a Productivity Commission review in 2015 of whether the agricultural sector is at world's best practice mitigation and examine potential measures to achieve this.
Energy Efficiency
7. Development of a new Energy Efficiency Mechanism in 2010 with input from a new Prime Minister's Task Group on Energy Efficiency.
The Government will establish a new Prime Minister's Task Group on Energy Efficiency.
The Task Group will report to the Government by mid-2010 on options for introducing a new Energy Efficiency Mechanism.
The Task Group will consider and advise on the most economically and environmentally effective Energy Efficiency Mechanisms that could be considered by the Federal Government to complement the CPRS and the RET.
Green Carbon Fund
8. The Government will establish a $40 million Green Carbon Fund to build the resilience of natural ecosystems that are under threat from climate change.
The first stream of the fund will provide support to monitor and plan for the impact of climate change on biodiversity and land and water resources. The second stream will support initiatives to encourage environmental stewardship and biodiversity where there are carbon co-benefits.
Technology
9. Low Emissions Transition Incentive
This incentive within the new Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme will encourage individual electricity generators to invest in new low emissions capacity.
Electricity generators will be able to retain their payments under the Scheme if they replace their current best practice coal fired capacity with equivalent low emissions electricity generation capacity.
10. Coal Mine Abatement Fund
The Government will commit $270m to the Coal Mine Abatement Fund through the Climate Change Action Fund to assist gassy coal mines to invest in emissions reduction activities.


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, today announced that 50 of the best and brightest university students from Australia and Asia have received the Prime Minister's Australia Asia Endeavour Award.
The Prime Minister's Australia Asia Endeavour Award provides 20 postgraduate students and 20 undergraduates from across Australia with up to $63,500 to undertake an international research, study and internship experience in either China; India; Indonesia; Japan; Malaysia; Singapore; Republic of Korea; Taiwan; Thailand; or Vietnam. Ten international postgraduate students will also be funded to study in Australia.
The Government has committed $14.9 million over four years to establish this prestigious scholarship program, which was announced as part of the Government's response to the 2020 Summit.
From next year, the awards will form part of the Australia Awards initiative, announced by the Prime Minister in Singapore on the 13th November 2009. The Australia Awards will better co-ordinate and promote the more than $200 million of existing Australian scholarships, and over time build a new generation of leaders with strong ties to Australia and to our region.
In addition, a further $18 million will be spent on the Australia Asia Awards for individuals who have already demonstrated their potential to be leaders within their own countries, and for students from developing Asian countries.
The Australian Government strongly encourages high-achieving students to immerse themselves in the academic and social cultures of other countries by undertaking international study and work experience.
For further information including the list of the 2009 Prime Minister's Australia Asia Endeavour Award Holders, visit www.endeavour.deewr.gov.au.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge the excellent work of everyone involved with White Ribbon Day, particularly the White Ribbon Ambassadors here today, in raising the profile of the battle to end violence against women and children.
It's not often that a Prime Minister is asked to swear - in public.
But when it's for White Ribbon Day, I want to hear every man in this building swear out loud today, because we are swearing an oath; a commitment to end violence against women; to never excuse violence against women.
We must have zero tolerance when it comes to violence against women.
All Australian men must take responsibility for ending violence against women.
The statistics are horrific.
Over their lifetimes, almost one in five Australian women will be sexually assaulted.
Almost one in three will be physically assaulted.
Almost one in four children in Australia will witness violence against their mother or stepmother.
Less than one-third of victims will report it.
And the cost of this violence to the Australian economy has been estimated as $13.6 billion last financial year.
From impacts on health, on working life and other costs - in addition to the incalculable emotional and psychological harm.
That is why the Australian Government is emphatically committed to reducing violence against women.
In April, we received the Time for Action report from the National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and Their Children.
And as an immediate response, the Australian Government has invested $42 million in initiatives to reduce this violence, including $26 million in measures such as Respectful Relationships programs for young people across the country.
And a social marketing campaign which is focused on changing the attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence against women.
We have referred the Time for Action report to the Council of Australian Governments (COAG).
And my colleagues - the Attorney-General Robert McClelland and the Minister for Women, Tanya Plibersek - have been working hard with a cross-section of State and Territory Ministers on the next step of a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
A draft of the Plan will come to COAG next month.
And it will be finalised next year.
Our Violence Against Women Advisory Group has held its first meeting.
We are assessing applications to run a second round of Respectful Relationship programs for young people.
And we have gone out to tender for the establishment of a 24 hour, 7 day a week national telephone and online crisis services for victims of violence.
We have also commissioned a survey on attitudes to violence against women - the first since 1995.
And today I can release the results of that survey.
The National Community Attitudes Towards Violence against Women Survey 2009 was conducted by VicHealth, in partnership with the Australian Institute of Criminology and the Social Research Centre.
10,000 Australians were surveyed: women and men in equal numbers.
I'm pleased to report that there has been a significant shift in the attitudes and beliefs Australians hold about violence against women.
This survey confirms that respect for all people is a fundamental Australian value, that the vast majority of Australians agree that relationships must be respectful and free of violence, and that Australians want to live in a community where all women can live free of violence.
98 per cent of respondents to this survey acknowledged that domestic violence is a crime, an increase from 93 per cent in 1995.
Very few people - in fact, only one in 20 - now believe that victims of sexual assault 'ask for it'. That's down from one in seven people in 1995.
But disappointingly, the survey shows that some Australians still hold attitudes which excuse or trivialise violence against women.
One quarter of people surveyed disagree with the statement that 'women rarely make false claims of being raped'.
One in five thinks that violence can be excused if the violent person later genuinely regrets what they have done.
And disturbingly, the proportion of people who think that women are as likely as men to commit domestic violence has more than doubled.
The statistics simply do not bear this out.
Data from the most recent Australian Bureau of Statistics Personal Safety Survey shows that for those women who had experienced physical assault in the past 12 months:
     * 31 per cent were attacked by a current or former male partner;
     * 28 per cent by a male family member or friend; and
     * 15 per cent by a male stranger.
For those men who had been physically assaulted in the same period, only four per cent were attacked by a current or former female partner.
65 per cent were attacked by male strangers.
Men are victims of violence but the violence they experience is much more likely to be at the hands of a male stranger than a female partner.
No violence is acceptable - not domestic violence, not sexual assault, not elder abuse, child abuse or neglect.
Teaching kids from day one about respectful relationships should reduce a range of violent behaviours.
We must do more to change attitudes and, even more importantly, change behaviour.
Our next steps will include our $17 million social marketing campaign which we will launch early next year.
We've come a long way in changing attitudes but - for the 1,000 women each day who are still victims of violence - this is no time for complacency.
At the launch of this year's White Ribbon Day I said I would encourage every honourable gentleman in the Australian Parliament to take this oath.
That night I swore the oath.
I applaud all the White Ribbon Day Ambassadors across Australia who swore this oath.
And I applaud the men who have come here today to swear the oath - every Aussie man should.


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, today called on all of the 10 million men in Australia to swear never to commit, excuse, or stay silent about violence against women.
With nearly one in three Australian women experiencing physical violence, the Prime Minister said White Ribbon Day remained an important part of educating the community on violence against women.
Mr Rudd congratulated White Ribbon and other community campaigns for the important role they play in changing community attitudes.
The National Community Attitudes Towards Violence against Women Survey 2009 - released today - found that despite a significant shift in Australians' attitudes and beliefs towards violence against women, there is still more work to be done.
Results show that since 1995, when the last survey was conducted, understanding of domestic and sexual violence and its impacts has broadened amongst the Australian community. Fewer Australians condone violence.
The survey incorporated the views of more than 10,000 Australians, with roughly equal numbers of men and women participating in the survey.
It provides a strong evidence base for developing the Government's social marketing campaign and our National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women.
The Australian Government has a zero tolerance approach when it comes to violence against women.
Australians agree that they want to live in a community where all women can live free of violence.
Attitude change does not necessarily lead to behaviour change. The Government's challenge is to try to ensure that it does.
That's why we're developing a National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women, with a focus on early intervention and respectful relationships.
On 29 April 2009, the Government welcomed the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children report Time for Action.
The Australian Government has referred Time for Action to the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) and is working with State and Territory Governments to develop the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women for release in 2010.
The Government is already investing $26 million for primary prevention and respectful relationships programs for young people, while the $17 million social marketing campaign will focus on changing the social norms, attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence.
In addition, the Government has lifted funding for homelessness by 55 per cent and is building 19,200 new social housing homes under the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan - measures which will help women escaping violence.
For a copy of the report, please visit: http://www.fahcsia.gov.au/sa/women/news


PM: Well it's good to be here in Trinidad to attend this meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government. This marks the 60th anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth, of course, continues to do good work around the world. In the Commonwealth Heads of Government session today, we have spoken exclusively about the challenge of climate change, and how Commonwealth countries, through this meeting, can accelerate momentum towards a good outcome at Copenhagen.
We were briefed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the progress in the Copenhagen negotiations. We were also briefed separately by Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark. I also met with Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark over lunch to discuss specific details of progress in the Copenhagen agenda as well. There has been following that, an extensive discussion involving many contributions from around the table, both from developing and developed countries on the need to get a solid outcome in Copenhagen.
One of the proposals which has been advanced by the British Government, and by others, has been for a fast-start fund to assist in overall climate change financing, underpinning an agreement at Copenhagen. Australia today has said that should such a fast-start fund come into being, then it should be governed by the following principles. Firstly, fast-start assistance should represent a substantial increase on existing climate change funding allocations, and use existing distribution channels to ensure fast-start finance is not delayed. Second, focus on the most vulnerable, least developed countries. A large number of these are small island states.
Third, ensure adaptation activities are adequately and transparently funded, separately from mitigation activities. Fourth, to focus mitigation finance on time-critical activities, including reducing deforestation and forest degradation, otherwise called RED. And fifth, increase the capacity of developing countries to absorb significantly scaled-up climate finance in the post-2012 funding arrangements, including through leveraging private investment flows. This set of five principles we have circulated to delegations today. I spoke to them in the plenary session of the Commonwealth as well.
Australia is of the view that such a fast-start fund can assist in bringing about a good outcome at Copenhagen, but most critically, assist those most vulnerable states dealing with adaptation challenges now. Which brings me to the second proposal which Australia spoke to in the deliberations of the Commonwealth today. And that deals with the particular vulnerabilities of the small island states. The Association of Small Island States worldwide includes some forty plus States, twenty of whom are here represented at this Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.
Small Island states in the Pacific and the Indian Ocean and of course here in the Caribbean as well. The particular vulnerabilities facing small island states from climate change is acute. In our own region in the South Pacific, we are particularly mindful of the challenges in Kiribati and Tuvalu, but elsewhere as well, where coastal inundation is not simply a problem, it becomes an existential threat.
For these reasons, what Australia has proposed today is that if the United Nations agrees to establish a fast-start fund to assist with adaptation tasks for the most vulnerable states, then five to ten percent of that fast-start funding should be dedicated to small island states.
This is of particular relevance in our own region, where we have states already being directly affected by inundation and other consequences. It is also relevant in the Indian Ocean with states such as the Maldives, whose Head of Government spoke eloquently about the challenges which he faces, as well. This has, these proposals from Australia, and proposals by other countries, have led to extensive discussion among Commonwealth Heads of Government today, and will be deliberated on further overnight, before we continue our deliberations tomorrow.
Can I just conclude my remarks by saying I've also used the opportunity today to have a number of bilateral discussions - informal bilateral discussions with the Prime Minister of India, with the Prime Minister of Canada, with the Prime Minister of New Zealand, and also with the President of South Africa. And together with a range of other countries, of course including Prime Minister Brown of the United Kingdom, not just on the climate change agenda but on a range of other bilateral challenges as well.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if you received an early election trigger would you use it?
PM: Our strong and continuing resolve as a Government is to serve our full elected term. I have said repeatedly in the past, I have deeply conservative views about these questions. Those views have not changed. I've been elected to serve a full term, and that is my intention.
Furthermore, can I say this. My expectation is that the negotiated, bipartisan deal on climate change in Australia passes the Australian Senate, and passes the Australian Parliament. Remember, the Government and the Liberal party under Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey, worked constructively to reach this bipartisan deal on climate change to pass the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
And Mr Hockey himself said on Thursday that voting for this bipartisan agreement on the CPRS - on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme - was in the national interest. Mr Hockey argued on Thursday that such a vote was in the bipartisan - such a vote was in the national interest, a vote in support of this bipartisan agreement on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. That was Mr Hockey's position last Thursday. I expect that would be his continuing position now. Furthermore, it is a view which I continue to support as well. We want and need this legislation to be passed by the Australian Parliament.
JOURNALIST: So you'd be quite happy if Joe Hockey took over as Leader from Malcolm Turnbull?
PM: The internal deliberations of the Liberal party are a matter for them. What I'm concerned with is acting in the national interest to get the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme passed through the Australian Parliament, so that our action at home on climate change can be implemented, and so that we can also be fully active abroad in the international negotiations on climate change as well.
JOURNALIST: Aren't the issues at home weakening Australia's positions when talking about climate change at a global forum like CHOGM?
PM: Australia has a national obligation to act. We represent 1.5% of global emissions. We are a developed economy. And therefore have responsibility, together with other Annex 1 countries under the Kyoto Protocol to undertake particular actions. That's up until 2012. Subsequent to 2012, we're talking about the next set of actions, which arise in terms of the responsibility of developed countries. We must act. A cap and trade scheme has been argued across the United Nations family as the most effective means by which you can achieve targeted reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
We have spent two years now developing a cap and trade scheme for Australia. It's called the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We released legislation for it nine months ago. It's been before the Australian Parliament since then. The Australian Opposition have said that this bipartisan agreement that we have with them on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is in the national interest. That is my view. That is the Leader of the Opposition's view. That has been Mr Hockey's view. I expect that view to prevail, and for this legislation to be passed. In the meantime, we'll continue to act abroad in our negotiations both in the Commonwealth, but also, of course, in the lead up to Copenhagen itself.
JOURNALIST: After today's meetings, how would you characterise Canada's position on climate change?
PM: Well Canada and all nation states have to deal with their own domestic challenges and their own international obligations. I've had many discussions with Prime Minister Harper on climate change over an extended period of time. Canada deals with domestic challenges concerning carbon intensity - so does Australia. And we, as Australians, have come to this table with our own particular historical responsibilities.
As I said in the general session, all developed economies come to these negotiations bearing an historical responsibility. Australia does. Canada does. All developed economies do. It's a matter of course for individual national Governments how they respond to that domestically. Our plan is clear, and how Canada participates in the international negotiations is a matter for its Government. As we move towards Copenhagen, my discussions with Prime Minister Harper on these matters have been productive and fruitful to date.
JOURNALIST: Mr Ramussen asked today that industrialised nations put a firm commitment on the table on funding at Copenhagen. Is Australia going to be able to do that, and on your fast action fund, what are we - in dollar terms - what is Australia prepared to give?
PM: On the question of the magnitude of a fast action fund that's still a matter for discussion among the Member states. What we, in Australia have a view of is that there is a need for such as fast action fund. Furthermore, we've argued that there is a need, within it, to identify a specific funding stream for small island states who are particularly vulnerable, because of the consequences of climate change. And our position on that hasn't changed. In terms of the overall dimensions of climate change finance, there are still multiple proposals on the negotiating table in the lead up to Copenhagen.
In fact, around the world at the moment, there are ten sets of proposals rolling around at various negotiating tables. Our job is to try and condense those down to a manageable number, it's one of the things Prime Minister Rasmussen and I are talking about and have been speaking about in recent days. It's one of the things I'll also be discussing with President Obama when I travel to Washington on Monday. As for Australia's participation, we've always said that we will play our role, we'll pay our fair share, but the quantums, in both respects, are yet to be determined.
JOURNALIST: You've mentioned that environmental issues exclusively dominated the talks today. This notwithstanding the fact that this CHOGM meeting has come amidst a lot of human rights issues being raised - with the Ugandan homosexuality bill and so on and so forth - I mean, what scope is there for those issues arising over the next few hours of talks?
PM: Well as you know, CHOGM occurs over a number of days. We have explicitly as Heads of Government agreed to dedicate today exclusively to climate change. It's a global priority. It is a global absolute priority. The clock is ticking to Copenhagen. And we, representing two billion people on earth, representing 53 nation states, something like more than one third or about one third of the Member states who will attend the conference of the parties, representing the richest and the poorest states on earth, representing the most populous to the least populous, we believe this is a forum which can have something credible to say to the global community about the action which needs to be taken at Copenhagen.
Which is why we've decided to dedicate such an extended period of time. Also the fact that we, uniquely, have invited the United Nations Secretary-General to attend CHOGM, the Prime Minister of Denmark to attend CHOGM, and in a world first, the President of the French Republic to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, indicates that we think this is not a business-as-usual CHOGM, that there are some big global challenges out there requiring flexible global, flexible use of global institutions to rise to the challenge.
As for the rest of the agenda, can I say there is ample time in the period ahead to discuss a whole range of political and security matters which also affect the Commonwealth together with the impact of the global financial crisis and the global economic recession on many states for whom the task of development has been made that much harder because of the impact of the crisis.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Prime Minister Harper has said that there's no point in negotiating a global climate change deal that doesn't involve firm commitments from the emerging economies. How does that limit negotiations (inaudible) that we don't have, China, Russia, at the table?
PM: Well the only table at which you have all the economies gathered is of course the one which gathers in Copenhagen itself. Recently, together with the President of Mexico I convened a roundtable in Singapore at APEC, exclusively on climate change, which brought together the President of the United States, the President of China Hu Jintao, the Prime Minister of Japan, and together we represented some 50-60% of global GDP.
We did not have India at the table, we didn't have the European Union at the table, but can I say that gathering was useful in creating political momentum and support for the process being led by the Danish Prime Minister, which is a leaders' level process, because the official level process has run into so many obstacles. Secondly, it was important in terms of obtaining for the first time US public indication that they would be indicating a target for the future, one which President Obama subsequently articulated publicly. And for China itself at that meeting to indicate that it was happy to work with the process led by the Danish Prime Minister. And furthermore we've seen further statements from China about its own national actions.
The Commonwealth meeting is one further step in the process of building political momentum behind what would then unfold at Copenhagen itself. It is however unique given its size, given its spread across Africa, Asia, the Pacific and the Caribbean. Its spread across developed and developing countries, and the fact that we have here large economies from Europe, we have India, and of course we have major economies like Canada and ourselves, it is in fact a useful forum to begin to shape the final consensus that will be necessary to underpin a Copenhagen agreement of the type that Prime Minister Rasmussen's been describing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well I think the critical challenge in dealing with climate change is always bear two big priorities in mind. One is mitigation, how do you bring down greenhouse gas emissions, both for developed and developing countries, and building on the earlier question, actions both by developed economies and developing economies to actually bring down greenhouse gas emissions, hence the target we have for ourselves of 450 parts per million, in order to stabilise temperature increases around 2 degrees centigrade.
But the other half of the action lies in adaptation. And that deals with the immediate physical problem of people living in low-lying areas, whether they're in small island states, or in the world's other vulnerable states, and I've just been speaking at length with the Government of Bangladesh about their particular challenges there.
Therefore, when we talk about the need for a fast-start fund for adaptation purposes, as well as mitigation purposes, it's to provide the immediate resources necessary for a number of those states to deal with the real challenges that their populations face in the here and now, starting in 2010, 2011, 2012, before in fact the post-Kyoto agreement would kick in. So you ask what practical measures can be taken to deal with the impact on human security? Frankly, getting this fund rolling quickly, getting it distributed quickly, and getting it distributed quickly and effectively to the most vulnerable states, that's practical. Second, what's practical and necessary is to have the deployment of that fund also measured in terms of its effectiveness.
JOURNALIST: At this point Prime Minister, how would you rate the prospects of a meaningful agreement at Copenhagen?
PM: That's a really good question. I wake up in the morning and scratch my head sometimes and wonder how it's all going to turn out. But I'm in the business of acting to make a difference. And can I say the resolve of Heads of Government here is of a similar nature, which is how do we make a difference. Prime Minister Rasmussen has in the last week or two flown from Copenhagen to Singapore, now Copenhagen to Trinidad, in order to make a difference. And underpinning that is his determination to make a difference, because the officials level process through the UNFCCC negotiations has basically ground into a whole range of technical difficulties.
And so what he's trying to do is to craft an operational framework agreement for Copenhagen, a Copenhagen agreement across the top of that. One which is capable of providing effective policy guidance to treaty negotiators to produce a binding legal treaty during the course of 2010. So, I'm with him in that, putting Australia's shoulder to the wheel, together with various other Governments as friends of the Chair, and we will be with him all the way through.
I can't predict the outcome, but can I say there are, there are available to us the resources, the political will and the policy instruments to craft an effective Copenhagen agreement. It's there. We can do it.
But the question between now and December 17 and 18 is one of political will. And Prime Minister Rasmussen's process, backed by the UN Secretary-General and backed by myself and other Prime Ministers and Heads of Government is to try and craft that. There's a lot of opposition around the world, there's a lot of indifference around the world. The international legion of climate change sceptics is still at work around the world. But we intend to give it our absolute best.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the domestic question, do you believe the Senate is behaving responsibly? And if not, why wouldn't you call an early election? Because you seem to be almost ruling that option out.
PM: No, what I've said is that the Australian Government has achieved a bipartisan agreement with the Australian Opposition to pass the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme through the Australian Parliament. Mr Turnbull and Mr Hockey have said that that bipartisan agreement is in the national interest, and it should be legislated. I agree with them. My expectation is that that is what they will do, because they have said that is their commitment.
JOURNALIST: But they can't control the Senate.
PM: Furthermore, can I say it is in the national interest that they do so. And to go back to what I said earlier on, I've been elected by the Australian people to govern. I've been elected by the Australian people to implement our mandate, including the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We intend to get on with the business of doing that, and we will continue to exercise the mandate given to us by the Australian people. I have said consistently, going back a long, long time that my belief is the Australian people expect us to serve a full term. My view on that has not changed. And we intend to get on with the job of governing.
Thank you very much.



PM: Now this has been a very successful weekend at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting at Port of Spain. We have built real momentum towards a better outcome at the Copenhagen conference on climate change, and hopefully, a robust outcome in a Copenhagen agreement itself. The weekend has been a significant reminder about the relevance of the Commonwealth, as an important global council. It is therefore with a high degree of honour that Australia has accepted the role of hosting the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Australia in 2011.
Whether it's the climate change challenge, or whether it's the global financial crisis, this is an important institution in fashioning global consensus on critical global challenges. On climate change, the fact that we're able here, through the Port of Spain consensus on climate change, the Commonwealth declaration on climate change, to achieve a common view on climate change finance, a common view on the particular needs of small island states, a common view in support of the leaders-driven process by the Prime Minister of Denmark, indicates the relevance of the Commonwealth to these deliberations.
Turning to the future, the relevance also of a strong Commonwealth voice on the range of other global challenges which we face, and applying the unique consensus which the Commonwealth can bring- small countries, large countries, developed countries, developing countries, but together representing one third of the world's population.
And future global agenda challenges, including the global economy, financial sector reform, trade, as well as development. On top of that, the great global political challenges as well, including those of security. The voice, therefore, of the Commonwealth in fashioning a global consensus, and shaping a global consensus, and shaping, therefore, global action, should not be underestimated, as I believe the events of this week and weekend have demonstrated on climate change itself.
Also, it has been my privilege over the course of the last several days to meet extensively, formally and informally, with a range of Heads of Government. In particular, I valued the discussions that I've had with the AOSIS Heads of Government, representing the small island states of the Pacific, Indian Oceans as well as in the Caribbean itself. This morning I met with the Heads of Government from CARICOM, the regional organisation of the Caribbean, and we spoke at length about how we intend to enhance our relationship with these states of the region.
Overall, on climate change, a good outcome for the Commonwealth. Also, we believe, momentum for a strong outcome in Copenhagen itself, although there is still much work to be done. And secondly, Australia is proud to have the opportunity to host the next Commonwealth Heads of Government conference, and to provide an opportunity to lend the authority of this institution to the other great global challenges which lie ahead.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Just where in Australia will it be held, and secondly, how much work did it take you to convince Sri Lanka to pull out, and what were the reasons behind that lobbying?
PM: Firstly, on the venue within Australia, I understand the Foreign Minister will make statements on that over the course of the next day or so. Secondly, on the fact of Australia hosting itself, can I say this is a consensus across the Commonwealth itself. The hosting arrangements for 2011, 2013, 2015, involving Australia, Sri Lanka and Mauritius in that order, was put to the Heads of Government summit by Prime Minister Brown of the United Kingdom.
It was seconded by President Zuma of South Africa. It was supported by the Prime Minister of Malaysia. It had the further support from the floor of a range of other Heads of Government, including President Kikwete of Tanzania, and the Prime Minister of New Zealand, and was also embraced unanimously, including by the Heads of Government from Sri Lanka, and from Mauritius. Therefore, this was very much a consensus outcome for the Commonwealth, and reflected a unified position on the question of the hosting of the subsequent meetings of the body.
JOURNALIST: You've had some success here on climate change, how confident are you on success at home with the CPRS in the Senate this week?
PM: Well, when it comes to the future of climate change in Australia, further delay on climate change equals denial on climate change. I understand Mr Turnbull, the Leader of the Opposition, has said something similar in the last 24 hours. Our view is very simple. The time for delay on climate change action has well and truly passed. In Australia, we've had more than ten years of delay on climate change action, and after ten years of delay on climate change action, continued delay is nothing less than climate change denial.
JOURNALIST: Has the Opposition already reneged on a bipartisan agreement to pass it by Friday?
PM: The Opposition has stated clearly, under the Leader of the Opposition, that the Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is in the national interest, and should be voted on to support it through the Parliament. That remains the position of the Opposition. And it's the Government's expectation that that is what the Opposition will continue to do.
JOURNALIST: Can you talk about Fiji, Fijian athletes at the Commonwealth games?
PM: The Commonwealth has been quite clear in its conclusion, in its communiqué on this, and I don't wish to go to the detail of the communiqué across the board, because Prime Minister Manning, as Chairman of the Commonwealth, will be delivering a press conference then which goes to the details. But you will find that the whole question of Fiji, including the matter you've just canvassed, will be dealt with in the communiqué.
JOURNALIST: Has Prime Minister Gordon Brown raised with you his proposals to change the rules governing the line of succession for the Crown, both in terms of (inaudible) Roman Catholic (inaudible). What's your position on these issues?
PM: Firstly, the British Prime Minister has not raised those matters with me here in Trinidad. And furthermore, I believe there are, from an Australian Government point of view, there are other priorities to be attended to at this time.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect the US President to ask for more troops? And also, what would your response be? Is it a flat-out no to him?
PM: Well the first thing I'd say about my upcoming visit to Washington, and as soon as I've finished with you good folks here, I'm on a plane headed to Washington, D.C. The first thing I'd say about my visit to Washington is that I'm looking forward very much to sitting down with President Obama and working our way through the climate change agenda. Also, to discuss our respective commitments to Afghanistan, as well as other global challenges as well. I look forward very much to that meeting. Obviously, a primary preoccupation of both the President's and myself is the Copenhagen conference, and our respective efforts to deliver a strong, robust Copenhagen agreement.
On the question of Afghanistan, as I've said consistently, earlier this year, around about April, following the President's election, Australia increased its troop commitment to Afghanistan by about 40%. As I've said consistently in Australia since then, we would believe our troop commitment is about right. And my view on that hasn't changed.
JOURNALIST: Back on the ETS, you used to be pretty good friends with Joe Hockey. How would you describe your relationship with him these days?
PM: Well, I don't intend to get into the internals of the Liberal party right now. There seems to be a debate within the Liberal party on a range of questions right now. I don't intend to get into the internals of that debate, my job as Prime Minister of Australia is to act in the national interest. It is in the national interest that the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme be passed. That is a view reflected in recent days by Mr Hockey himself, when he said that it was in the national interest, and should be passed by the Parliament, and passed by the Parliament now. That is the position of the Opposition corporately, that's why the Government expects the Opposition to honour its commitment, honour its word.
As I said in response to an earlier question, after ten years of delay on climate change, further delay again on climate change is simply climate change denial.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: How Prime Minister Key handles the question of attendance at Copenhagen is of course a matter for him and his priorities, his domestic priorities, and his international priorities. I would simply say that for myself as Prime Minister of Australia- and I have for quite some time now sought to inject myself into the global negotiations to the greatest extent possible- through the Pacific Islands Forum, through the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting, through the East Asia Summit, through APEC and through other global gatherings, and as now a friend of the Chair- that it is fundamental that I should be attending in order to be consistent with the priority I've attached to this from Australia's national interest point of view.
And also, I believe, consistent with the efforts which I and others have been injecting into the negotiating process so far. I understand from the Prime Minister of Denmark, who I spent some time with again last night, that the numbers of attendees are now up to nearly 90 world leaders. This is a good figure. And let's hope it grows further. But New Zealand's priorities are a matter for New Zealand.
JOURNALIST: If the CPRS does pass the Senate in Australia, can businesses have any certainty that it will last, knowing that there's such a large proportion of Australian Senators who are so vehemently against it?
PM: Well, our job as the Government of Australia is to enact legislation to deal with business uncertainty. Right around the world, the business community is not dumb, it's smart. It's worked out that the rules globally are changing. Now when it comes to a carbon constrained world, we've had cap and trade schemes now operating in Europe for some time. The United States Congress is in the process of deliberating on a cap and trade scheme there. We went to the last election undertaking to introduce one into Australia. We have done so. Our legislation was released in detail nine months ago.
What is important is that, as recently as last week, the peak business bodies in Australia, led by the Business Council of Australia, were endorsing this Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme for the future, because the business community needs certainty as well. We need action on the planet, we need action to bring down greenhouse gas emissions, but we also need action so that business has certainty about the business and regulatory environment in which it's operating. That's why we say again, on climate change, further delay is nothing more, nothing less, than simple denial on climate change.
JOURNALIST: Can you talk about Sri Lankan refugees, and your discussions here at CHOGM?
PM: Of the range of various bilateral meetings I've had formally and informally, of course I met with the Sri Lankan Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, and we raised our continued cooperation on the difficult challenges of people smuggling. We have a special representative on Sri Lankan humanitarian affairs, our former High Commissioner to New Delhi, John McCarthy. He's active in his engagement with both the Sri Lankan Government and with the international institutions, including the World Bank and other potential donor countries, to assist with the great humanitarian challenges which exist within Sri Lanka at present.
I understand that the number of individuals now awaiting resettlement from camps within Sri Lanka is about 130,000, that's my most recent advice from the Sri Lankans themselves. There was a huge problem in terms of the adequate provision of housing to accommodate the basic life needs of internally displaced persons, and that's where Australia will continue to provide support. We've discussed that in some detail with the Sri Lankans as well.
Having said that, I've a plane to catch to Washington, D.C. Thank you very much.


Australia and the 15 member countries of the Caribbean community (CARICOM) signed a new Memorandum of Understanding today in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago.
This agreement will begin a new phase in Australia's relations with the countries of the Caribbean, with an emphasis on building regional economic resilience and integration and supporting small island states address the threat of climate change.
The centrepiece of the new relationship will be a $60 million development partnership over four years.
Many Caribbean states are vulnerable to the impact of climate change and natural disasters. The new partnership will provide a framework for cooperation on climate change adaptation, renewable energy, disaster risk reduction, natural disaster management, food security and agriculture.
The partnership will provide support to the CARICOM Climate Change Centre located in Belize and the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency in Barbados to build capacity and draw on Australian expertise. It will also support the CARICOM Development Fund's activities in the region.
The partnership will also expand the new Australia Awards international scholarship program to the Caribbean. Eighty students from CARICOM countries will benefit from postgraduate scholarships for study in Australia over the next four years. The first Awards scholars will take up their awards in 2011. Education links will also be expanded through building ties between the Australian National University, the University of the South Pacific and the University of the West Indies
The partnership will help to build Australia's links with the people of the Caribbean through an expanded sport for development program and the placement of Australian volunteers and technical experts in selected countries.
Under the new agreement, Australia and the countries of the Caribbean will maintain close contact on responding to international challenges such as climate change and the global financial crisis, including through the G20 of which Australia is a member. A key focus of Australia's support will be strengthening business opportunities through improving access to micro-finance measures to promote capacity and governance drawing on Australia's experience in the Pacific.
Australia's High Commissioner to Trinidad and Tobago, Philip Kentwell, will be accredited as non-resident Ambassador to CARICOM.
Australia and the Caribbean have long enjoyed friendly relations based on shared historical, sporting, social and political ties and membership of the Commonwealth.
CARICOM's 15 members are: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.


BROWN: I'm speaking to you from a meeting of Commonwealth leaders in Trinidad and Tobago. This conference, opened by her majesty the Queen, has been discussing some of the great challenges the world now faces. And the Commonwealth is particularly important because it brings rich and poor nations together to find common purpose.
During this summit, we debated in detail the issue of climate change ahead of next month's crucial conference in Copenhagen. We're only a few minutes before midnight on climate change, we need to move quickly. Indeed we need a climate change agreement that prevents climate change refugees and climate change evacuees around the world. As the summit concluded I caught up with my friend, the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd. 
I think the great thing about the Commonwealth conference is that we could find nations that were rich and poor, nations that were facing directly now climate change and nations who were debating it but hadn't felt the full impact of it, all coming together to agree something that, you know, if a third of the world can agree at the Commonwealth conference, then perhaps the whole of the world can agree at Copenhagen.
PM: I think a lot of people, Gordon, in the past underestimate the unique nature of the Commonwealth voice, which is unlike most other organisations which are either geographic or functional in nature. This one represents a huge slice of the world's population, but from the whole development spectrum.
So we have a third of the world's population, we have the richest and the poorest, the largest and the smallest, and this is actually quite a remarkable declaration on climate change from this group of quite different nations, all desperate for action. And I think that's what's good about what's come out of this particular meeting of the Commonwealth.
BROWN: Well, I think the next stage is to find a financial agreement that everybody can accept, because we've got to recognise that if we're asking poor countries to take action against climate change, and they want to take action, we've got to provide some financial help for them to do so.
And I think we've got to make an offer that makes sense to their own experience and what they've got to do. But equally, we've got to get tougher action prepared to be taken by a number of countries who've still got to make announcements.
PM: That's true, and the clock is ticking on all that. But one positive step forward, I think, is your proposal, Britain's proposal, for the fast start finance. That obtained quite strong support here in Trinidad. It's reflected robustly in the language that we've adopted here today, also a slice of it - ten percent - for the small island states who are very vulnerable. That's one step along the way. The second step, of course, is climate change finance through to 2020 and, of course, real action in terms of targets and commitments from a number of countries who haven't stepped up to the plate yet.
BROWN: Well, I must say, Australia's done a great job because you've turned round Australian opinion from where it was, at a governmental level, and now Australia's leading the way. And I think if Copenhagen is going to be a success, as I believe it's got to be, then Australia deserves a great deal of credit for what you have done, and how you've persuaded other countries to act on the basis of you being prepared to act.
PM: Well, I think everyone's tried to put their shoulder to the wheel and there's still a whole lot to do. What's been very useful, I think, most recently we had a meeting in Singapore, the APEC meeting, and very quickly being able to bring together the Danish Prime Minister Rasmussen, the Chinese President Hu Jintao, President Obama and others, representing about 55% of the global economy, saying: 'Yes, we as political leaders have a responsibility to try and get this deal, this Copenhagen agreement.'
Add to that your own involvement as a friend of the Chair and the work you've been doing for a long time on long-term finance to underpin a Copenhagen agreement - look, I think the ingredients are there for us to get there.
BROWN: So it's crucial that we send a bold, cross-Commonwealth message on what needs to be done ahead of the talks in Copenhagen. But that's just part of the work we've done here. We've also talked about the global economy, about healthcare in the developing world, and Afghanistan. And I believe that the decisions we have made this weekend will influence what happens at the United Nations, the G20 and in every world summit.
The rest of the world should know that the Commonwealth stands together and is ready to act in a united way. So I can say to you, sixty years after its birth, this historic family of nations, which is the Commonwealth, is proving its worth. 



PM: It's good to be back here in the United States- it's good to be back here in Washington. I've just spent time this morning with President Obama, with Secretary of State Clinton, and also the Secretary of the Treasury, Tim Geithner, and other officials who I've been able to exchange views with today. Firstly on climate change- with eighteen days left to go to Copenhagen, it is fundamentally important that we get a good, robust outcome on climate change for the planet, for the economy, for jobs, for our kids, and for our grandkids.
What the President and I discussed today was the challenges which lie ahead in these remaining 18 days. I took the opportunity to brief him on the outcome of the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting just recently concluded in Trinidad. The resolve of the communiqué from the Commonwealth Heads of Government to support the leaders-driven process of Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark, and further, the support of the small island states and others for the proposed special start fund, the fast-start fund, for developing countries, in particular, the funding stream for small island states.
The challenges, however, between now and Copenhagen remain formidable. The President, of course, has indicated he'll be visiting Copenhagen himself on the 9th of December, in order to lend his personal support to the momentum that is still necessary to reach a robust agreement in Copenhagen. Australia fully supports the President in undertaking that visit, and fully supports the United States' continued full engagement in this Copenhagen process.
This is a job for all countries- not just the largest, but also, other countries around the world as well. Whether it's Commonwealth countries, the United States, China, India, our friends in Europe, as well as across the developing world. Climate change does not respect national boundaries. It is a challenge for the planet. It is a challenge for the global economy. It is a challenge for all our peoples. And we'll be working very closely with the United States between now and Copenhagen to produce a robust Copenhagen agreement for the future.
Secondly, the President and I also spent a considerable amount of time discussing Afghanistan, and the challenges of the future which lie there. The President has consulted me closely, other allies closely, on the McChrystal Report. I believe that what President Obama has developed is a credible strategy designed to achieve success in Afghanistan. A key element, which Australia fully supports, is an integrated civilian-military approach, designed to deliver security to the Afghan population, as well as better governance for the Afghan people.
It also places an emphasis on training and transferring responsibility over time to Afghan security forces, and to civilian authorities. This approach, outlined by President Obama, is one which Australia fully, I repeat, fully, supports for the future.
Also today I had an opportunity to meet with Secretary of the Treasury Tim Geithner. Of course, we discussed the current state of the global economy. We discussed also the future operation of the G20, and the proposed two summits to be held in 2010, in advancing the work already agreed upon at Pittsburgh and London on financial sector reform, as well as the other outstanding items from the Pittsburgh agenda, including the global framework for sustainable economic growth for the future.
With the Secretary of State, we again spent time running through the climate change agenda. We also spent time running through a range of other regional security policy challenges as well. I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did the President ask for (inaudible)
PM: The President fully accepts that following our last meeting here in Washington, Australia has been in the process of increasing its troop and training commitment to Afghanistan by forty percent. That process is nearly complete. And that will result in Australia having something like 1550 troops in Afghanistan. We also have engaged in an enhanced training effort. We have also become, I think, the single largest contributor to the Afghan Army trust fund. In the future, we'll be increasing our police training effort in Oruzgan province, and also at national command level in Kabul. We'll also be increasing our civilian aid effort in Oruzgan province as well.
Our overall mission is to reflect, within Oruzgan, the province for which we have joint responsibility, a properly integrated military, civilian and police effort. And this is a process which is underway now. And I'd say this- the enhanced troop commitment that we agreed with the administration following my previous meeting with President Obama, will make Australia one of the top ten military contributors to Afghanistan, and I believe all US allies should fully support the approach being outlined by the United States.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify that, because you didn't actually say (inaudible)
PM: I just said, in direct response to your question, that the President fully accepts the fact that following our last meeting, that we have increased our troop and training commitment by some forty percent. That process of enhancement to that number is almost complete. And that places Australia within the top ten military contributors. We believe that is the right approach. It is also consistent with the strategic direction the President is taking, a strategic direction to develop an integrated military, civilian and police strategy for the future, and this has also been the subject of discussions I've had in the field recently with General McChrystal, in Oruzgan province.
JOURNALIST: Can I just clarify with you, you said an increased police and civilian effort in Oruzgan- is that included, is that already covered by the 1500, or are we talking more?
PM: No, the 1550 commitment is a military commitment. What I am talking about is an additional effort on the police front, what I am talking about is a further additional effort on the civilian aid front in Oruzgan, and also nationally in Kabul.
JOURNALIST: Are you in agreement with the President that this is a war of necessity, and not a war of choice? If you are in agreement with him that this is indeed a war of necessity, why wouldn't Australia increase its commitment of combat troops beyond the 1550 already committed?
PM: Well Australia fully agrees with the President of the United States that this is a war, a military campaign, a military fight, which we need to engage in- because it arose over an attack, here in the United States, including in this city, Washington, on our American ally, on the metropolitan territory of the United States. And the cause in which we are engaged is never to allow Afghanistan again to be a training base, a safe haven for the operation of global terrorists. That is why we have been engaged with the Americans for a long time past. That is why we will be with America in Afghanistan for the long haul, into the future.
As to the second part of your question, following my last visit here to Washington, and subsequent to that, we agreed with the administration that we would engage in a process of increasing our military commitment by some 40%. That process continues. It is nearly complete. And what I'm also foreshadowing is that we will be increasing, in addition to that, our police training effort in Afghanistan, which is a core second pillar of the future strategy to stabilise Afghanistan and to transfer responsibility to the Afghan administration. And the third pillar of that is an enhanced civilian effort, by which we mean the overall task of economic construction.
JOURNALIST: Could you put numbers on the police and civilian contribution?
PM: No, we're working through that at the moment, through the National Security Committee of the Cabinet. And we have requested work to be done by our agencies on that. It comes directly out of discussions I've had in the field recently with General McChrystal in Tarin Kowt. More needs to be done here. If you look at the overall needs of the Afghan people, and the need to stabilise Afghanistan, as a country, as a whole, we have to lift our collective game on the training of police. It is a core part of the overall security equation.
And people talk about the Afghan security forces, they mean two component parts. The formal military, the Afghan National Army, and remember, we are in the process of raising a brigade, the fourth brigade, comprised of six battalions. But we also need to be raising appropriately numbered and trained police units to provide the furtherance of security for the local people. And the third pillar is to increase our civilian economic reconstruction effort. It's part of what President Obama has outlined, nationally, as the need for a new, integrated civilian-military strategy for the country as a whole. It's a strategy which Australia fully supports.
JOURNALIST: How soon would you be able to increase that police training contingent, and that civilian reconstruction contingent?
PM: When I return to Australia, we'll be taking submissions from our respective agencies. We want to make sure that it is properly prepared on the ground, properly executed on the ground, and properly therefore implemented on the ground. Therefore, it will be done as rapidly as possible, but we've requested detailed work to be done by our agencies on this, given that we have been consulting with the Americans on this for some time, a lot of that work is being developed as we speak. I hope to bring that to conclusion as soon as possible.
JOURNALIST: I'd just like to ask a follow-up question to Kevin's. There's a danger here that it might be seen as a process of mission creep in Afghanistan.
PM: The core mission for Australia in Afghanistan is very clear. It is to create, in the province of Oruzgan, the capacity to transfer security responsibility to the Afghan security forces. That's why we are- one, raising a fourth brigade of the Afghan National Army, comprised of six battalions. The security assessment is that a force of that size is needed to stabilise the province for the long term. And secondly, to raise an appropriate number of police as well, to provide security, particularly in the larger metropolitan centres of Oruzgan.
Thirdly, to do what we can to enhance the civilian capacity and the construction capability of the Oruzgan provincial Government, so that we reach a point where we can therefore transfer responsibility back to the Afghans on both fronts. That's our mission. It's clear-cut. We're therefore in Afghanistan and in Oruzgan for the long haul, to execute that mission, and that is what is necessary for us then to see our troops back home.
JOURNALIST: Did the President indicate when he might visit Australia?
PM: We had a chat at the end of our conversation about his desire to visit Down Under. I told him he'd be always welcome. And we're looking at the possibility of him visiting Australia during the course of 2010. That'd be terrific. I'm sure all Australians would make the President and Michelle and the family if they happen to be with them, really welcome. We tend to be good at that. We're a welcoming mob down there.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give us a rough idea (inaudible) how many people are going to be involved in police training?
PM: Well we're working our way through that.
JOURNALIST: Rough idea?
PM: We're working our way through it, because there are, at present, shared police training responsibilities within Oruzgan province between Australia, and from memory, two other countries. We need to ensure that that is properly integrated with the work of the police training academy, which is currently based within the perimeter of our operating base in Tarin Kowt. The coordination therefore with the other countries is really necessary to get everything in proper sequence before that deployment. On the civilian aid front, that means of course that we will have additional civilian aid officials working both in Tarin Kowt, and I imagine in Kabul as well, to make sure that we are properly ensuring a proper direction of central Government assistance from Kabul to the province itself- obviously recognising the sovereignty of the Afghan Government.
But secondly, ensuring that this is being rolled out effectively on the ground, so the people of Oruzgan province, the people of its major population centres and the rural areas, when areas have been cleared and secured in terms of the military operation, reinforced by a police presence, then se the benefits of a civilian Government at work. At a provincial level, by rolling out schools, by rolling out health facilities, by rolling out transport infrastructure. These should be seamless parts of an overall strategy. And that's why we're taking a little further time to conclude the elements of that.
As I said, we'll be in Oruzgan, we'll be in Afghanistan, for the long haul, and we'll be doing so on all fronts- military, police, and civilian.
JOURNALIST: The people who are being trained to, will be called upon to be trainers and civilian assistants, will they be called upon from the Australian military, police agencies for example, the Federal Police?
PM: Well obviously the vehicle through which we deliver police assistance is through the Australian Federal Police. When I was in Afghanistan recently, and from memory we have a number, currently in Tarin Kowt themselves, and they are a fine bunch of men and women. Also, we have a number in Kabul. That number needs to be enhanced, but also, properly coordinated with the other police training countries within Oruzgan, and properly coordinated with what will be a new, national police training effort across the entire nation of Afghanistan.
On the civilian aid effort, obviously we would draw such civilians from the Australian development assistance agency, AusAID. They are the two major agencies. Our men and women in uniform, the proud men and women of the Australian Defence Force, are first-class professionals, and their hands are full. We need to step up our efforts in these other two areas to ensure that we're delivering a comprehensive effort, and a comprehensive strategy, which is comprehensively implemented on the ground in Oruzgan, and do so in close partnership with our friend and ally, the United States.
And having said that, I've got to zip.
JOURNALIST: Who would make a good leader of the Liberal party?
PM: The internal deliberations of the Liberal party should be left to the Liberal party themselves. I have-
JOURNALIST: Would Joe Hockey be a formidable opponent?
PM: The internal deliberations of the Liberal party should be left to the Liberal party themselves. The only thing I would say is, that the bipartisan agreement that we have reached on climate change is a bipartisan agreement in the national interest, which should be passed through the Parliament in the national interest. I would urge all Parliamentarians today in Australia- whatever their political party- to vote in the national interest, and to vote for action on climate change. Let's just be very blunt about it.
After ten years of delay on climate change, further delay equals denial on climate change. Delay on climate change equals denial on climate change. And it's time, instead, we voted in support of this bipartisan Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, because to do so votes to act. A failure to vote, or shall I say a vote to delay on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, is a vote to deny the climate change science. A vote to delay this bipartisan Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is also to deny Australia's ability to act on climate change.
Got to run.


CLINTON: Well, it is wonderful to welcome such a good friend to the State Department back to Washington. Prime Minister Rudd just had an excellent comprehensive meeting with President Obama in the Oval Office where we discussed a wide range of issues from climate change to Afghanistan. 
And it is always a personal delight for me to have the chance to engage with the Prime Minister, who's one of the real creative thinkers about so many of the issues that we are confronting. And we want to thank you, Prime Minister, and especially to thank the people of Australia for our years of friendship and alliance on so many important matters.
PM: Thank you, Secretary of State. And it's great to be back in Washington, and we did have a good discussion with the President this morning, covering our common challenges in Afghanistan for the future. Australia takes its alliance with the United States very seriously. That's why we have been with America for a long time in Afghanistan, and why we will be with America for the long haul.
When it comes to climate change, the clock's ticking for us all when it comes to Copenhagen. And we're working closely with our American friends to secure the best possible outcome for an important deal for the planet, for our economies, for jobs, for the environment.
But Secretary of State, thank you for having me as your guest here in this marvelous building, the State Department, where I've been many times before, but always look forward to the opportunity of coming back.
CLINTON: Thank you. Thank you, Kevin.
PM: Thank you.
CLINTON: Thank you very much. Thank you.


The Australian Government welcomes President Obama's announcement of a new strategy for Afghanistan as the best way forward to provide security for the Afghan people and to train sufficient Afghan security forces over time to transfer responsibility to the Afghans themselves.
The President has consulted closely with Australia and other allies on the review into Afghanistan strategy conducted by the Commander of the International Security Assistance Force, General Stanley McChrystal.
In responding to the review, the President has developed a credible strategy designed to achieve success, a key element of which will be an integrated civilian-military approach designed to deliver security to the population and better governance to the people of Afghanistan.
The strategy includes an emphasis on training and transferring responsibility to Afghan security forces and civilian authorities.
The President's strategy is entirely consistent with the approach that Australia is taking in Afghanistan where we are working to train the Afghan security forces so that responsibility for security can be transferred to them.
At the same time we will increase our Police training and civilian development assistance. Australia, like the United States, is committed to a transition to Afghan responsibility as soon as conditions allow.
Australia expects the Government of Afghanistan to play its part in doing what is necessary to improve security and the delivery of Government services to its people.
The Australian Government announced in April that we would increase our military commitment to Afghanistan by around 40 per cent to around 1550 troops. This increase is now almost complete.



Well it's great to be out here at Fadden Primary with the kids, their worm farm and their veggie patch, and it's good to see kids being taught all about how you grow food, the importance of water, the importance of worms and what worms do and roosters and what roosters do, as well how all those things go together to make up sustainability and sustainability of food production as well.
One of the big factors which affects sustainability worldwide is of course, climate change. The decisions before Australia on climate change are pretty basic. Do we act on climate change for our families, for our kids or for our grandkids, or do we deny that climate change is real. Do we act on climate change for business certainty and for creating jobs in the future, or do we deny and continue to deny that climate change is real.
So when it is all boiled down, the choice is pretty stark between action on climate change and denying that climate change is real.
The decision by the Liberal Party in the Senate yesterday to vote against the bipartisan agreement on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme was a vote for climate change denial. The decision by the Liberal Party in the Senate yesterday to vote against the bipartisan agreement on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme was bad for Australia.
Denying climate change is bad for our kids, it is bad for our grandkids. Denying that climate change is real is bad for the economy and it is bad for jobs.
Acting on climate change is the only responsible course of action for Australia. That's the mainstream view of the Australian business community. That's the mainstream view of the Australian community at large Refusing to act on climate change is economically irresponsible. It's also risky for our kids and for their future.
What Australia needs is a calm, considered, responsible course of action on climate change. That is what the Government is resolved to do.
Talking about the impact on families of climate change, let me say one other thing about the impact on families, and that is that what has been said by the Liberal Party today on the re-introduction of AWAs and WorkChoices.
I was very surprised today to hear that the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition have confirmed that they would re-introduce AWAs. The Australian people rejected WorkChoices and WorkChoices-style AWAs at the 2007 election. They rejected it comprehensively.
I would suggest that the Liberal Party today should calmly reconsider what the Australian people had to say at the 2007 election on AWAS and on WorkChoices, because the reality is, bringing back AWAs means bringing back WorkChoices. And if you're bringing back AWAs and bringing back WorkChoices it means stripping away such basic protections as penalty rates, over time and holiday pay.
It's time I think, some cooler heads prevailed within the Liberal Party, both on this and on climate change. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: They didn't say they were going to bring back AWAs. They said that they believed that there should be flexibility in individual contracts (inaudible)
PM: Let me just quote to you what Julie Bishop had to say this morning:
[JOURNALIST] "Finally, Tony Abbott is quoted in the papers this morning as saying he still wants individual work contracts. Did you give too much away when you abandoned WorkChoices after the last election?
Bishop, "Well, I believe that Australians should have the right to negotiate an employment contract with their employer."
Then you go to what Tony Abbott had to say in the Sydney Morning Herald, referring to those AWAs which the Government continued on an interim basis because they existed under contract law following the election of the current Government. Mr Abbott says "I don't see why it can't continue."
It's quite plain from what both the Leader and the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party have said today, is that they intend to bring back AWAs. If they did not want that to be the case, they would have used different language. Very plain that what we have here is a clear statement from the Liberal Party they intend to bring back AWAs, bring back WorkChoices, which strip away penalty rates, over time and holiday pay.
JOURNALIST: You say we need action on climate change (inaudible) a double dissolution election.
PM: What I have said all along is that I believe that governments should serve their full term. That's always been our intention. That is why the Government, on the first day that Parliament resumes next year, will re-introduce the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation, and the reason for it is this: that over this long summer that cooler heads, calmer heads, more responsible heads within the Liberal Party may prevail.
I've seen some statements in the last few hours that I've been back in the country that is seems that the Liberal Party are now saying they don't want an emissions trading scheme at all, which would put them into a more extreme position than Mr Howard. I think this summer provides a great opportunity for, let's say, the calmer, wiser heads of the Liberal Party to prevail.
I'd also say it is good also, for the sage council of business to register their voice with the Liberal Party as well about what is needed for the future.
Sorry, I said yes here first, and then over to you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, I've been back in the country since quite early this morning and what we believe is that we have the balance absolutely right when it comes to this approach, which is acting on climate change and providing adjustment supports for business and for families, low-income families, middle-income families. That's been out there in black and white for a long period of time. Again, as I said, it's time, I think, for the calmer heads, the more reasonable and responsible heads within the Liberal Party to reflect long and hard over the summer ahead and hope that there is a change of view, which is why the Government will be reintroducing this legislation on the first day we resume.
Malcolm, and then over here.
JOURNALIST: Do you think, in acknowledging your obligations to CHOGM and Washington, didn't you essentially abandon the field here at a time when Parliament was considering what you give to be the most important economic change, certainly, in post-war Australia.
PM: I think the first thing I would say, Malcolm, is that our friends in the Liberal Party had indicated through their bipartisan agreement that the legislation would be passed come the end of that week, come Thursday. They obviously changed their mind.
Secondly, consistent with my predecessor, Mr Howard, it is important for the Prime Minister of Australia to honour our international obligations. We take seriously our membership of the Commonwealth, and on the question of climate change, what we do nationally is really important. What happens internationally is really important, and I would draw your attention to what the 53 member states of the Commonwealth had to say, developed and developing, about the future course of action on climate change. 
They came in and backed the process which is being led by the Danish Prime Minister. Some of us have been working with him on that for quite some time, and these are countries across southern Africa, India, the small island states of the Pacific, the small island states of the Caribbean. Secondly, backed an approach which deals with some of the unresolved questions on climate change finance.
So, what's my responsibility as Prime Minister? To do everything you can to get our legislation through the Australian Parliament. The Liberals then turned around and abandoned a bipartisan agreement with the Government which we had worked our way through painstakingly over weeks and months. That of course is a matter for internal Liberal party dynamics. My job as Prime Minister of Australia, consistent with what Mr Howard had done over many, many years, is to act consistently with our international obligations.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Mr Abbott-
PM: Over here, and then you.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by (inaudible) New South Wales Government, and the second question, a bit different - Tony Abbott, he's seen as a plain speaker, he gets around in the budgie smugglers, maybe more of a normal bloke, are you worried about his political appeal (inaudible)?
PM: Let me take the first, first. And that is, you know something about New South Wales? There are just too many days I find myself being asked questions about this. And I would frankly say to all those folk in the New South Wales Government, get your act together. Get your act together, the people of New South Wales expect good Government. It's time to end the games.
On the second question, you know something, if there was a referendum tomorrow between budgie smugglers and boardies, I think I'll be voting for boardies. I think all of you would too. I think there are certain things the Australian people should be protected from -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: And hang on, there should be certain things the Australian people are protected from and one of those things is national political leaders, so attired.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Tony Abbott -
PM: By the way, what is it about the Libs and swimming gear, I mean it's actually a bit of a pattern there.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott's now talking about accepting the same targets for reductions of emission as you are, but he believes that you can do that without a carbon tax or an ETS. Is he kidding himself, do you believe that it is possible to tackle this issue without a market-based mechanism?
PM: Well, on the question of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions and doing it in a responsible, considered way, our plan's been out there for nine months, in all its detail. And that's the basis upon which we have actually had what we thought were good faith negotiations with the Liberal party on how to secure its passage through the Senate.
Around the world, there is a virtual consensus in developed countries that the best, most responsible way of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions is through an emissions trading scheme, what we call a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Not just the consensus here, it's the view in the United States, it's the view throughout Europe as well, and elsewhere, including in Japan. And there are very basic reasons for that. For the Liberals now to say that there is a magic pudding solution on climate change, that somehow if you throw a bit of fairy dust at it and say that bang, it all happens, without any adjustment challenges, I don't think that's being fair dinkum.
And you know something, Mr Howard said that quite plainly when he was Prime Minister, about his commitment to an emissions trading scheme, and that fact that if you had it, it would also affect prices. That's what he said.
And therefore, you've got to be fair 'dinkum about this, and this is a tough debate. We've been in it for quite some time. But look at kids, look in their eyeballs. Think of your own kids, think of your own grandkids. Think of how we'll all feel and be in 20, 25 years time if we had this historical opportunity to nationally and internationally act, and we walked away because it was all too hard, and decided instead to just play political games, as I said, playing magic pudding politics with it. I don't think it adds up.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think a protracted debate and the failure of a sort of strong outcome possibly at Copenhagen is going to dull support amongst voters at the next election here?
PM: You know, all I can do as Prime Minister is try and put your best foot forward and give it a go. It's what I've tried to do domestically, in the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we've already got through the Renewable Energy Target legislation, we're acting on energy efficiency, we're investing in clean coal technology, we're investing also in what we hope will become the largest solar power generating plant in the world. We're doing those things.
We're also putting our best foot forward internationally. Because the only way which this works for the next generation, our kids, our grandkids, the economy and the jobs of the future, saving the Barrier Reef, and the great, wonderful assets which we regard as part of the Australian soul, is to act internationally, and so all I can do as Prime Minister of Australia is have a go.
That's what I've been doing at the Pacific Island Forum, what I've been doing at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, what I've been doing most recently with President Obama. Having got back from the States this morning I went straight to a video conference with other world leaders on this subject again. This time involving countries as diverse as the Prime Minister of Vietnam, the Prime Minister of Algeria, the UN Secretary General, Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark and a bunch of others as we again try and use every effort, every bit of energy we've got, to shape as strong an outcome as possible for Copenhagen.
Nothing's guaranteed. The obstacles are formidable. Climate change sceptics are at home and abroad and they're both active, and the political resistances are great. Over here, and then there.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept that the Government hasn't done enough to sell the scheme to the general public, explained what it's going to do, and a second question, does Nathan Rees have your full support or does he need to get his act together too?
PM: On the first question, the Government has used about a two year process. Remember, a Green Paper on climate change, the Garnaut report on climate change, a White Paper on climate, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, then draft legislation out there for circulation nine months ago. There was always going to be a challenge - hang on, you've asked your question, I'm just responding to that - and therefore there's always a challenge in communicating the detail to it. I understand that. That's the job of Government and it will be a continuing challenge for Government.
But you know, our plan's clear. It's pretty easy just to whip up a fear campaign in reverse. That's one of the easiest things to do in politics. Our plan is clear. Every national leader I know around the world finds this a tough challenge, a really tough challenge, because it's always hard and the detail's always hard, but the plan is clear. That's why we spent so long on it.
It's always going to be a continuing responsibility to communicate its contents clearly. I accept that. But know something? Having a plan which is based on the science, which is market-based and provides the best adjustment mechanism for businesses and for families, and provides all the support mechanisms necessary for families and for businesses in adjustment, that's the right step forward.
The alternative cocktail of a fear campaign and some magic pudding economics, I just don't think is the right way to go.
The answer to your second question is yes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Tony Abbott's said that your refusal to sell uranium to India is damaging relations between Australia and India. Is that the case? And secondly, could you not time that nuclear be thrown into the policy mix as a way of reducing carbon emissions?
PM: I notice the Liberal Party has now thrown nuclear power back onto the debate, and it's quite plain that they see this as a real energy option for Australia's future. Well, if that is the case, as I have always said in debating various Liberal leaders in the past, is 'OK, you want to be fair dinkum about that and not just play a bit of fast and loose politics, what are your plans for reactors?' If you can't go down to location-specific questions, where, broadly, should they go? If you're going to be fair dinkum about this, tell us where your reactors are going to be. Our plan, our policy on this, has been as I have always stated it.
On the question of India and in response to the interjection from my good friend from The Oz over here, our policy on India has not changed one bit, as he full well knows.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I congratulate him on his election to the leadership, but seriously, the questions of the Liberal Party and their internal arrangements are just a matter for them, and a matter for continued debate. They've had a lot of heat in their internal discussions in recent times.
Going back to the debate about both climate change and WorkChoices, I think over this summer, it'll be very important for cooler, calmer heads to prevail.
Having said that, I've got to zip. I've got to go to Sydney and give a speech.


Today is the 4th of December 2009.
Exactly 18 months ago, on the 4th of June 2008, just across the other side of Sydney Harbour, I delivered a speech and put forward the idea of an Asia Pacific community.
In that first speech I said I wanted to begin a conversation about where we wanted our regional institutions to be in 2020.
I said that we should share our thoughts, our hopes and our dreams on what sort of community we needed to secure a bright future for the nations of the Asia Pacific. 
I said that our region needed to have a conversation about how to maximise the benefits of its dynamism, and to manage the challenges that its dynamism would also bring. 
In the intervening 18 months, we have come a fair way in that conversation.
The conversation began in earnest when Dick Woolcott began his regional consultations.
Judging from the metrics around his consultations, it was quite an intense start to the conversation: 21 countries, 85 days, and discussions with more than 300 individuals, including more than 30 ministers and eight heads of state or heads of government.
The conversation continued with the keynote address I gave to the Shangri-la dialogue in Singapore, where I set out in more detail my case for why we needed this conversation and the direction we needed to head for by 2020. 
A new phase in the conversation was reached when I outlined my vision of an APc to the leaders of the East Asia Summit in October and then to APEC leaders in November. 
Those conversations signified the considerable interest in the APc at Leaders level, and enriched my own appreciation of what was wanted by other leaders. 
So, after 18 months, I am pleased that the countries of the region are increasingly comfortable about the fact that a conversation about the future of our regions is both useful and increasingly necessary.
Our region has been well served to date by the institutions we have all created in the past:
     * starting with the great work of ASEAN
     * through APEC
     * then the ARF
     * and now the EAS
     * even ASEM.
Each of these institutions has evolved to meet changing needs - of which ASEAN's evolution in terms of membership and mandate is the most outstanding example.
But the fact is that 35 years after the end of war in Indo-China, 30 years after the revolution in Chinese politics, economics and foreign policy, and 20 years since the end of the Cold War, our region, the Asia Pacific region, is still without a regional institution with wide membership and a wide mandate to deal with the breadth and depth of political, security, economic and environmental challenges we will face for in the 21st century - the century of the Asia Pacific.
Which is why an informed regional conversation about our regional future (in the absence of any particular crisis) is good in itself.
So today, you are about to embark on the next stage in the conversation. 
So can I first say to all of you that I am delighted you are here.
Your contributions, your individual engagement and your commitment will make this conference a success.
The fact that you come from so many different countries, and sectors - from government, from academia, from think tanks, from the media - with so many different interests in the APc will bring a new level of depth and vitality to the deliberations and the discussions.
And when it is all over, I look forward to reading the considered deliberations of this uniquely qualified group of individuals about where we are, where we need to go, and how we might consider getting there. 
For me, there are three key messages that emerge about our region and its future. 
First, it is dynamic. 
In terms of scale, the countries of the region represent over half of global production and close to half of world trade. 
They contain 60 per cent of the world's population.
They account for around 70 per cent of global carbon emissions. 
Even in a time of global downturn, the Asia Pacific region is growing fast.
Key economies like China, with expected growth of 8.5 per cent this year, and India, with expected growth this year of 5.4 per cent, are leading the way.
Its dynamism is such that our region is the driver of global growth. 
The Asia-Pacific region will account for 75 per cent of global economic growth next year.
But its dynamism is not just economic. 
As economies grow, defence spending rises - and our region already had many of the largest standing armies in the world.
Our region is rapidly becoming the centre of global economic and strategic weight - driven by a rising China, a rising India, and long-standing powerhouses such as Japan and the continuing superpower that it is the United States. 
In this context, great powers such as Russia also have an important role.
Second, our region is becoming infinitely more connected. 
Some of this increasing connectedness follows from the impact of globalisation, and the people flows, the financial flows and the information technology platforms that power the globalisation process. 
Some of it follows from our own deliberate actions to increase bilateral and multilateral interaction and to foster the inter-connectedness that now characterises our region. 
APEC, for example, has been very successful in promoting trade between our economies. 
On average, two-thirds of APEC member economies trade is now with other APEC members.
The key strategic implication of this compounding inter-connectedness is that what happens in one country in the 
Asia Pacific is more likely than ever before to affect other countries.
Both for good.
And for ill.
In fact in this Asia Pacific region we are experiencing, with perhaps even greater intensity, this double impact of the wider globalisation process.
Because of the growing density of regional enmeshment, we are all now profoundly impacted by the actions of each other.
If China's economic growth was to collapse tomorrow, the impact for all of us would be great indeed.
Conversely, China's continuing economic growth is a major plus for us all in the current global recession.
Similarly, China, India and the United States - all members of the wider region - will profoundly shape the future of climate change for all our countries and beyond.
Furthermore, if any one of us was to drop the ball on the proper management of internationally communicable diseases, we are all affected because of the density of our regional people flows.
So in order to enhance the positive dimensions of growing regional inter-connectedness, and to manage any negative impacts, robust pan-regional institutions become more important, not less.
Third, our region faces challenges, and is likely to face more of them in the future. 
I am an avowed optimist about our region - I believe it has the dynamism and trajectory to make the Asia-Pacific century truly pacific. 
But as a region, we face a number of emerging challenges.
First, we need to develop a more sustainable and balanced model for the region's growth that does not rely solely on exports and avoids creating a further round of destabilising economic imbalances.
Second, our region has large populations and limited resources - creating the potential for competition for scarce resources - oil and gas, water and food. 
Third, the region has unresolved border disputes, some of which traverse fields of substantial natural resources. 
It has large and growing militaries - and five countries with nuclear weapons.
Our region still has a number of regional flashpoints, such as the DPRK, and we face a substantial challenge in acting on the threat of WMD proliferation.
Fourth, our region also has its share of non-traditional security threats - from terrorism, to transnational crime including illegal people movements. 
Fifth, I have already referred to the pan-regional and pan-global threat of climate change, which if we fail to act will have devastating consequences for all our countries - economic, environmental, human security and ultimately strategic.
Finally, let us also acknowledge a fundamental strategic fact - our region lies at the confluence of the interests of five major powers - the United States, China, India, Russia and Japan.
These major powers live in harmony today.
But history should caution us, not to assume that peace, harmony and concord are somehow pre-determined and therefore inevitable for our region.
A cursory examination of the 19th and 20th century history of the European great powers suggests we should be cautious about any such assumption.
The truth is, common security has to be crafted by national states driven by a common purpose.
And here, once again, is where the role of regional institution building is so important.
For example, here in the Asia-Pacific is where the template for the US-China relationship will be forged, and where their interests - competitive and complementary - will need to be managed, harmonised and reconciled. 
So far, the United States and China have managed this well on a largely bilateral basis.
It may be that in the future this is supplemented by the emerging norms of regional institution building. 
If the range of challenges I have outlined were static, I would be supremely confident that we could manage them. 
But the truth is they are not static, they are profoundly dynamic and if not handled skilfully, potentially destabilising.
The enduring lesson of history is that the only constant in international relations is change. 
And in our region, with its inherent power, its internal diversity and its dynamism, the prospects for rapid change are great. 
In a region that is dynamic and increasingly inter-connected, and which already has its share of challenges, we need increasingly to manage our futures together. 
Globally, this is the lesson of the G20's response to the global financial crisis, as together we stared into the global abyss and decided to act in the global good.
Globally, this is also the lesson of climate change although it is still uncertain what will be produced at Copenhagen.
We need therefore, in our own region, to be alert to where our trajectories are leading us, to points of friction that may be ahead, and to ways that we can cooperate more closely for our shared interests. 
In short, we need to plan - we need to plan with each other, rather than against each other as has often been the custom in times past.
We cannot simply allow our region to drift in the face of the challenges ahead.
We need actively to shape our regional future.
We all have an interest in finding the best possible mechanism to avoid strategic friction, to maximise strategic stability and to enhance the depth and breadth of our political and economic engagement with each other - and the regional norms that underpin that engagement.
The key question for this conference, and behind my proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community, is how do we best manage our region's increasing dynamism, our increasing inter-dependency and the common challenges we face?
What is the best mechanism to address the full spectrum of challenges facing the region: economic, political and strategic?
How do we ensure that our current outward-looking regionalism continues as the bed-rock of Asia-Pacific integration?
How do we foster a deeper regional culture of cooperation and entrench the habits of consultation and so avoid any future conflict?
How do we craft integrated solutions to the complex and multi-faceted problems we face?
It cannot just be assumed this will occur naturally. 
Nor do I imagine that it will be easy or fast. 
But we are assisted by the fact that we have been collectively building our regional community for decades - whether through ASEAN and its off-shoots, APEC, the ARF and a whole host of connections that these great institutions have so effectively fostered.
But it is my view that we can do so much more together across our wider region as we seek to plan together for the century ahead. 
So what sort of Asia-Pacific community do we see as being required?
Quite deliberately, I have given no complete answer to this question in the eighteen months of our conversation. 
We believe that we have asked a good set of questions, but we do not claim to have all of the answers. 
We claim no monopoly of wisdom on these questions which is why I have valued the wise counsel of senior 
regional statesmen such as Lee Kuan Yew, Goh Chok Tong, Lee Hsien Loong, President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Najib.
Our ambition in Australia has been to open paths for dialogue rather than to close them off, to listen as much as to speak, to encourage conversation rather than seek to dominate it.
After all, if we are in the business of fashioning a new collaborative institution, the process of institution-building itself must be collaborative.
From our perspective, the conversation of the last 18 months has been a successful start that will become in time a more focused dialogue. 
There has been no shortage of commentary on our proposal.
Some critical.
Some supportive.
But all, in my view, welcome.
The regional discussion on institution building has also been enhanced by the very useful contribution of Prime Minister Hatoyama of Japan on the future of our region. 
This conference's deliberations are designed as a further demonstration of Australia's keenness to learn as much from you on your countries' aspirations for our region's future.
As well as offering some perspectives of our own.
First, an APc must engage all key countries that make up our region. 
It should include all the major powers - including the United States, which would need to be a member of any future Asia Pacific community, if it was to embrace the totality of our region's future.
It should also embrace the region's core grouping, ASEAN. 
As I have said before, ASEAN, given its positive history and its contribution for the future, should be very much at the core of any future Asia Pacific community.
Second, an Asia Pacific community must be able to traverse all of the major questions that affect our region - political, economic, and strategic. 
The challenges and opportunities that affect our futures are increasingly indivisible. 
If they ever existed, the days when problems or opportunities could be neatly compartmentalised as political, or economic or strategic, have gone. 
The world, and our region certainly, are much more complicated, connected and integrated than that. 
Take the regional economic crisis of the late 1990s, for example. 
What began as a banking crisis in one country quickly became an economic crisis in others. 
And from an economic crisis, it morphed into a social and employment crisis. 
For some, it developed into a political crisis. 
We need a mechanism that draws these threads together, and allows us to act on all fronts, in an integrated way, where possible anticipating developments rather than simply reacting to crises - and doing so with an increasing sense of regional community. 
We can no longer afford to have the interests of the region dealt with in separate silos.
It might have worked for the 20th century.
But it does not work in the joined up world of the 21st century.
Third, an Asia Pacific community must shape the habits of transparency, trust and foster the instinct of cooperation. 
The community we seek must, from its outset, embrace the values that will be essential for our region's strong future. 
It must operate as a vehicle for openness about our prospects, our intentions and our challenges. 
In doing so, we must be open with each other. 
Fourth, an Asia Pacific community must meet at leaders' level. 
Only leaders can traverse the breadth of fields across which our opportunities and challenges will be played out. 
Only leaders can fully connect the economic and strategic, the environmental and the political. 
Only leaders can bring the strategic dimension to thinking that will be needed to manage the challenges that are likely to confront us. 
As Dick Woolcott found during his consultations, there is widespread recognition that none of our existing regional bodies, as currently configured, meets all these criteria.. 
There is no institution that has either the membership or the mandate to address the full spectrum of challenges facing the region: economic, political, strategic and environmental.
We should also take this opportunity to consider what an APc should not be. 
Other regions can provide us with useful models, but our region is unique. 
It is clear to me that, unlike the EU, we do not need a supra-national decision making structure. 
It is equally clear to me that we do not need an additional institution to add to the many which already populate the region's architecture. 
We certainly cannot ask the leaders of the region to add a further meeting to their already heavy schedules. 
Instead, we need to begin to discuss how to evolve an Asia-Pacific region from our existing regional institutions - rather than try to start completely afresh - particularly given the excellent work already done by our wider pan-regional institutions and their in-built and demonstrated capacity to adapt to changing needs.
Let us therefore consider together where we could go from here for the future.
I would like to lay out some options for you to consider, in the current jargon, the 'glide paths' that we could use.
We can of course, do nothing - but that would expose us to the weaknesses that have been identified in our current architecture.
Another approach (as noted above) would be to build entirely new institutions from the ground up - in other words we could add a new body purpose-built to be able to manage the emerging challenges we have identified.
But there was a clear feeling during Dick Woolcott's consultations that adding to the number of meetings that leaders around the region have to attend, or adding to the already long list of regional meetings for officials is not the preferred way forward.
The alternative, or third way, would be to build an APc using some of the architecture that the region already has at hand - the key elements of which are APEC, EAS and the ARF.
Could APEC evolve, over time, to meet the needs of an APc?
To do so, it would need to take on a more defined security mandate.
And of course it would need to bring in India - a nation that will be a key player in the future of our region in the decades ahead.
Alternatively, is the East Asia Summit the natural building block for the architecture we seek?
Perhaps the East Asia Summit - a still evolving body - could expand and develop to take on a broader role.
Its membership would need to increase to include other key players.
President Obama's recent remarks that that America will look to deepen its engagement with the EAS could be part of a move in this direction.
Another alternative would be to look at somehow bringing the key existing bodies - APEC and EAS - together, which would bring with it the benefit of a single leaders meeting or cluster of meetings.
This could be extended - by merging the wider range of regional bodies to fuse together the political, economic and security agendas that confront our region.
The ASEAN Regional Forum was established specifically to deal with security challenges.
It filled an obvious void in the region.
But I would argue that its membership is too large to conceive of the ARF becoming established at leaders' level.
I recognise that there will be different views about these possible "glide paths" to a future regional architecture.
But I hope they offer a useful platform for your thinking. 
Let me explain what I hope the role of this conference will be. 
At the most fundamental level, this conference will continue the conversation that was begun eighteen months ago. 
The conference will hear contrasting, and probably opposing, points of view. 
That is a good thing. 
I welcome the debate that the diversity of the group participating here will bring. 
Without that debate, we cannot find the synthesis that we need. 
But I hope that you will be able to settle on some ideas, some principles that will guide our way forward. 
That is my challenge to you over the next day and a half.
You are the experts on foreign policy and regional organisations from around our region and beyond.
You have gathered here for a conference with a clear purpose.
Your mission - led by Dick Woolcott, Michael Wesley and Madame Ninh - is to answer some key questions.
First, what do we want?
Second, how might we get there?
I am not actually expecting the final answers by Saturday lunch time.
But I do expect to that at the end of this conference we will have some notion of what we want to do for the future of our region.
I also hope that you will find a mechanism to continue the conversation in a constructive way. 
It is a major task.
I believe it is an important and urgent task.
And look forward to receiving the chairpersons' report on your deliberations and on the most constructive way forward.
That is why we have gathered you - with all the experience and expertise that you bring - to discuss, debate and describe the future of our region, so that we might all work together to shape the future to deliver stability, security and prosperity for all our peoples and all our nations in what will become the century of the Asia Pacific.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is a great honour to be part of The Shepherd Centre's 2009 Graduation and I thank Anthea and Michael for this opportunity. I must also say a big thank you to Aleisha and Lewis for their help in presenting the certificates to everyone - and congratulations to you Lewis on being named Graduate of the Year.
And well done to all of you on that fantastic song. I might get some of my friends at Parliament House to learn that one !
Thanks too to young Christa for these beautiful self-portraits. I remember Christa served me 'tea' when I was here in June, and a little birdy tells me that there was a bit of coaching going on to try to get her to call me Prime Minister instead of Kevin. I assure you, she is only following instructions - I told her to call me Kevin.
According to Mum Tricia, every time Christa sees me on TV she yells "there's Kevin", and I'm also advised she is now multi-lingual - she mutters under her breath in both English and Greek.
But I know that Tricia sits here today the very proud mum of a Shepherd Centre graduate. When Tricia was asked what the Shepherd Centre has meant to her for the last five years she said, very simply - "everything." So I understand that today is a very happy day, but also a day when you have to say goodbye to some people who have been a major part of your lives.
To all the staff, the graduates and all the parents and carers I offer my sincere congratulations.
To see the sense of pride and achievement the children have today is quite overwhelming. It is days like this that make the teachers, and the sponsors and donors, feel that their hard work and generosity is all worthwhile.
And days like this that vindicate Bruce Shepherd's tenacity in fighting for hearing-impaired children to be part of the hearing world.
Much is owed to Bruce and his late wife Annette and their unswerving belief in the benefits of Auditory-Verbal Therapy. Bruce said of Annette, and I quote, "We complemented each other. She got the ideas and I guess I made them work."
Dr Michael Brydon, who shared Bruce's belief in early intervention, described Bruce as "a hurdler of hurdles".
Michael recalled a conversation where he told Bruce about the group from the Royal Hospital for Women working on a shoestring budget to set up a pilot program for newborn screening. Michael told Bruce their greatest obstacle was an inability to purchase the actual equipment to carry out the screening.
But Michael said that in typical Bruce fashion he just replied: "Leave it to me, I'll fix that."
And fix it he did, by personally funding the equipment that allowed the very first trials of screening newborns at the Royal Hospital for Women - an unproven concept that Bruce Shepherd made happen, and that pilot program led the NSW Health Minister at the time, Craig Knowles, to introduce newborn screening in NSW.
The benefits of early diagnosis are now accepted.
So since my last visit to The Shepherd Centre in June this year, I have asked all states and territories to fast-track the introduction of neonatal hearing screening for all Australian newborns.
COAG has agreed that by the end of 2010 every child born in Australia will have access to screening for congenital hearing impairments. Each state and territory will be responsible for the delivery of the individual program. And a Neonatal Hearing Screening Working Group across Governments is working to guarantee a nationally consistent and comprehensive quality screening pathway and system.
I'm advised the Working Group has circulated the new draft national standards to stakeholders, and the Department of Health and Ageing is arranging a workshop this month to discuss the document.
One of the challenges is how to stop children from being lost in the system once they've been identified as having a hearing difficulty, so a national register will be established as part of the approach to universal neonatal screening. The register will be a central point for collection and management of all data, and stakeholders will be consulted on how best to set this up.
The Working Group will also take into account the need for families to be able to make informed decisions about the options available, the need for evidence-based information about approaches to communication and early intervention
The Senate has also referred the Inquiry into Hearing Health in Australia to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee, to report in February 2010.
When I attended the Newborn Hearing Symposium in August this year, which was hosted by Bruce's good friend Brendan Nelson, I said to the delegates that the Government understands this clearly: that diagnosis is just the beginning, not the end.
Universal neonatal hearing screening will complement the Government's existing Hearing Services Program. This program provides free hearing services, like assessment, rehabilitation, the fitting of hearing aids and maintenance, and speech processor upgrades for children with cochlear implants.
Overall, we'll invest about $349 million in the program this financial year - including about $18.7 million to provide services to almost 26,400 children. Last financial year, Medicare paid $4.6 million for cochlear implant insertion surgery and another $33.9 million for programming implant speech processors.
In addition, Australian Hearing, the Government's statutory authority, provided about $4 million in 2008-09 to replace, repair, maintain and upgrade cochlear speech processors for children.
When you hear the stories of parents discovering that their child has a hearing impairment, the initial feeling is, commonly, one of despair, not for themselves, but for the child they love who will face challenges that at times may seem insurmountable.
Every parent wants the best for their child. That was what drove Bruce and Annette to set up the Shepherd Centre.
The Shepherd Centre gives parents and carers the full picture. It gives hope, hope that their children will be able to fully participate in the hearing world, and so today - graduation day - is the culmination of a true team effort: the staff, the children, and the parents and carers.
For the majority of parents with a baby diagnosed with a hearing impairment, teaching them to speak is the ultimate goal. Graduation means you have achieved that goal, and that means the closing of a chapter, a chapter that at times, I'm sure, was testing and overwhelming.
But it is now time for children and parents alike to embark on an exciting new chapter. Congratulations to you all as you begin that next chapter - in a hearing, speaking world.


PM: People of New South Wales are sick to death of fighting, infighting and divisions in the Government of New South Wales. I'm sick to death of fighting and infighting and divisions in the Government of New South Wales.
The time has come for the New South Wales Government to get its act together and to get on with governing for the people of New South Wales. I wish the new Premier well in meeting this formidable challenge.
The people of New South Wales are now expecting better government, and I would suggest that the new Premier of New South Wales get on with the job, and get on with the job as of today.
Thank you.


JOURNALIST: Tony Abbot would like to debate you on the ETS. Will you debate Mr Abbott?
PM: You know, here we are in Australia, one of the hottest and driest continents on Earth. Climate change is the great challenge of our generation.
Despite our differences, Mr Howard had a policy on climate change, as did Mr Turnbull. It was called an emissions trading scheme. I have a policy on climate change. It's called an emissions trading scheme.
Mr Abbott, the current leader of the Liberal Party, does not have any policy on climate change. I'd suggest that the current Leader of the Opposition calms down, puts in the hard yards and actually develops a policy on climate change.


State and Territories will have capital city strategic plans by 2012 that meet national criteria for transport, housing, urban development and sustainability.
State and Territory planning systems will be independently assessed by the COAG Reform Council in this major microeconomic reform agreed by Governments at today's COAG meeting.
Capital city strategic plans are needed to lift economic productivity, respond to climate change and ensure the nation is geared up for 35 million people by 2049.
The national criteria will deliver better integrated and longer term - 30 year - infrastructure and land use plans. The criteria require planned, evidence based land release to improve housing affordability, better transport planning to tackle urban congestion, and new urban development to be better linked to transport, jobs and services.
Work will begin in 2010, with an initial report on each jurisdiction's plan to be completed during 2011. A formal intergovernmental agreement will provide details of these arrangements.
From 1 January 2012, the Commonwealth will link future infrastructure funding to States and Territories meeting these criteria. The Commonwealth must have confidence in the integrity of a capital city's strategic planning system if it is to invest in that city.
The Commonwealth also has agreed to contribute to the reforms through its own property, assets, service delivery and approval processes.
The reforms adopted today will secure better outcomes from investments of all governments in Australia's cities and they will strengthen public confidence in planning systems.


Today the Prime Minister met with Premiers and Chief Ministers to discuss future directions for national health reform.
The Australian health system faces huge pressures, including:
     * An ageing population
     * A growing chronic disease burden
     * Health workforce shortages
     * Escalating costs of medicines and medical technology.
As a result of these combined pressures, the health system has reached a tipping point.
That is why the Australian Government is undertaking the most significant health reforms since the introduction of Medicare.
In developing the final shape of those reforms, the Government has undertaken comprehensive consultation with health professionals, industry representatives and members of the public.
Across Australia, there have been 76 health consultations.
Over 150,000 people have visited the www.yourhealth.gov.au website.
This feedback has been critical in shaping the Government's approach to health reform.
Today's Coalition of Australian Governments meeting was an opportunity for the Prime Minister, Premiers and Chief Ministers to frankly discuss what they see as the challenges facing our health system, and how health reform can best be achieved.
It was agreed that the Prime Minister will correspond with Premiers and Chief Ministers by the end of December 2009, recommending a decision-making process on long term health and hospital reform.
The Commonwealth's intention consistent with this process is to put specific proposals to the States and Territories in the first half of 2010.
The Rudd Government is committed to nationwide health reform and has already taken action to help relieve some of the pressure that has built up in the health system after nearly twelve years of neglect.
The initiatives already taken by the Rudd Government include:
     * increasing health and hospitals funding by 50% to a record $64 billion
     * $600 million injection to cut elective surgery waiting times
     * more funds to train much needed doctors and nurses
     * $3.2 billion for additional health infrastructure.
Every family in Australia depends on our health system. That is why we must get this right for the future.
Today's COAG meeting was an important step in the process of reforming Australia's health system, to make sure that families can get the health care they need, when they need it. 


People in every State and Territory waiting for elective surgery will benefit from a further $300 million in funding targeted to relieve pressure on waiting lists. This funding brings the total amount provided by the Rudd Government to reduce elective surgery waiting lists to $600 million.
Following today's Council of Australian Governments meeting, Premiers and Chief Ministers have agreed to implement Stage Three of the Rudd Government's Elective Surgery Waiting List Reduction Plan.
Under Stage Three, States and Territories will share in $300 million only upon meeting challenging performance targets within set time lines.
States and Territories will be required to meet individual targets for increasing the total number of surgeries performed and will receive further reward payments for exceeding these targets.
They will also be required to meet individual targets to reduce the number of patients who have waited longer than clinically recommended for their procedure.
States and Territories will only receive reward payments if they exceed their performance benchmarks. This approach marks a new way of funding health services by providing clear financial rewards for high performance.
The performance of State and Territories will continue to be reported and monitored quarterly through the Australian Health Ministers' Conference.
This will ensure that real improvements are made to the timeliness of elective surgery in Australia.
The first action under the Plan provided $150 million to States and Territories that cut their waiting lists by at least 25,000 procedures. This target was exceeded by 64 per cent, with 41,000 additional surgeries delivered.
Since the Rudd Government investment began in 2008, an additional 62,000 elective surgery procedures have been undertaken and the number of people waiting longer than clinically recommended has been reduced by 13,000.
In Stage Two, the Government provided a further $150 million to boost elective surgery capacity in the longer term through improvements to systems and infrastructure. This funding has seen additional operating theatres and new equipment delivered for hospitals right around Australia.
This $300 million in additional funding continues the Rudd Government's election commitment to achieve year on year reductions in waiting times for thousands of Australians waiting for surgery.


PM: Well welcome to the late Legislative Council Chamber of the Parliament of Queensland. I haven't been in this room for quite some time. In fact, I do recall coming here in 1990, at the end of that year when Bob Hawke was chairing the first conference, of the special premier's conference here, bringing together the states and territories on how we tried to frame a new federation for the future.
What was significant about that conference held in this room way back then was that, the then Prime Minister sought to outline how the Commonwealth and the States and Territories should open up a whole new chapter in cooperative arrangements which went beyond the simple provision of intergovernmental finance.
That is, how could the Commonwealth and States unfold a new agenda of microeconomic reform and other areas of national reform beyond narrowly defined financial policy. And while COAG itself didn't begin until 1992, this, in many respects this is where that process began.
Having said that, and COAG began a couple of years later, this is the first time that the Council of Australian Governments formally has met in Brisbane and I would like to thank Premier Anna Bligh for being such a good host for this particular meeting.
In fact, given how appealing the weather is here today Anna, I am sure COAGE will be back here on a more regular basis and it is good to be back home as well, as far as I am concerned personally.
On the agenda today, what we have been dealing with is very much a working agenda of continuing reform and we have done so in areas of health and hospital reform, childcare and early education, the need for better housing supply, the planning for our capital cities, some important microeconomic reforms in areas such as transport and of course, I was able to also briefed the Premiers and Chief Ministers on the recent developments on climate change in the lead up to Copenhagen.
I should also say this is the first council of Australian Governments meeting where we also have the attendance of the new Premier of NSW, Premier Kristina Keneally and it is good to have you with us Kristina and thank you for your contribution, in this, your first COAG.
Let me just go to some of the details that we have discussed today.
Firstly on health and hospitals reform - this was a good discussion which lasted a couple of hours. I on behalf of the Commonwealth ran through the core findings of the health reform commission chaired by Dr Bennett, and ran through the specific recommendations which she has made for the future. Recommendations which of course go to the heart of the future of our primary healthcare system, what we do for the future of our hospitals, what we do also for the future of aged care, particular challenges also for dental health and mental health, also what we do long term and the great challenges facing the proper provision of a health workforce for the future and proper training.
It was good that the Premiers and Chief Ministers were also able to contribute to the discussion on their priorities for reform, their views on the current strengths of the system, the current weaknesses of the system, and where changes needed to occur in the future.
There was a particularly good discussion about what practical measures could be embraced in the area of primary healthcare reform - how we could actually get those services out to the community better.
We also dealt with the specific recommendations from the Bennett Commission review on the reform of funding for hospitals, namely, activity based funding. We also dealt with the particular interrelationship with the aged care system and the fact that we still have a problem of the proper coordination between the acute hospital system and aged care.
One of the things which confronted us all though, was the real challenges with providing the best possible planning and better provision of the health workforce in the future.
The data we saw this morning, state by state, territory by territory and from a national perspective for us as well, on the future shortages of doctors, the future shortages of nurses, and other allied health professionals, is frankly very stark and very sobering.
Any long term reform of our health and hospital system for the future must get those challenges right. Consistent with what I have said before, the purpose of today's discussion with the Premiers and Chief Ministers was to outline the Commonwealth's, the National Hospital Reform Commission's recommendations and to seek their views in response to it.
The next stage goes down to the decision making in the first part of next year. We have agreed that we will confirm our processes for decision making between the Commonwealth and the States in the weeks ahead and then next year turn to the actual decision making process itself, as well as the future role for COAG in doing that.
Today, the first stage of that, it was a good all round discussion, issue by issue, right across the health portfolio, every jurisdiction contributing, and I thank my colleagues for the contributions that they have made.
Every Australian family depends on the strength of our healthcare system for the future. Our healthcare system is under great stress and pressure and therefore, we must get it absolutely right for the long term future.
We also today, through our communiqué have reached a new agreement on childcare.
As of today we have agreed on new compulsory national standards for childcare and early childhood education services, including lower staff-to-child ratios under the National Quality Standard; new qualifications requirements for all early childhood education workers under the National Quality Standard; and a transparent quality ratings system which will now allow parents to easily compare the quality on offer at different child care services.
The Australian Government will continue to help parents meet the costs of childcare. But I would thank my State and Territory colleagues for their agreement to these new compulsory national standards.
Another area of reform that we discussed today and reached some early decisions on, was the long term future planning of our capital cities.
Some may recall a speech I gave on this some weeks ago, in fact more than a month ago now, on a future role for the Commonwealth in partnership with the States and Territories, in how we guided the long term planning of our capital cities.
This goes down to, the adequacy of the planning guidelines which currently exist for our capital cities and to make sure that they are properly planning for population growth, for economic growth, the continued provision of infrastructure, and how they deal also with the great challenges of sustainability, as well as housing affordability and urban congestion.
And we today, through our deliberations, have established a mechanism through the COAG Reform Council, to advance that debate considerably. What we intend to do, in the future is to have a national system, across Australia whereby we have nationally consistent planning principles and procedures, for our capital cities nationwide.
From the Commonwealth's point of view, this is particularly important, because you have seen from the last Budget that the Commonwealth is prepared to invest in urban infrastructure in the future. To do so, we the Commonwealth must have continued confidence in the national consistency of the planning procedures across states and territories for our major cities.
If we are going to invest in transport infrastructure, we want to make sure that the planning framework which has been applied to those decisions is robust and consistent. That is one of the threshold problems we had to deal with in the lead up to decisions and recommendations from Infrastructure Australia prior to the last Budget.
Today's decision as reflected in the communiqué, therefore takes our national collaboration on this and our federal test further, and I would thank the state and territory colleagues for that.
Also, can I just conclude on our discussions today on the future of the World Cup bid for football. COAG today reaffirmed the commitment of all governments to work cooperatively with the Football Federation of Australia in support of its bid to host the 2018 or 2022 FIFA World Cup. And state and territory colleagues today endorsed correspondence which I will be sending officially to the Football Federation in support of their bid process.
This is one step in a multi step process. Next year we will be required to launch our formal bid document, what is called in the trade, the "bid book" or the "bidding book". That is to be worked through between a team of Commonwealth and State officials. Then of course that leads to the final stage which is a determination by the FIFA world body of who gets to host the '18 or '22 FIFA World Cup.
Lastly, I was able to brief state and territory colleagues on the current stage of climate change negotiations with the other Governments around the world in the lead up to the Copenhagen climate change conference next week.
I indicated that those negotiations are very tough and very difficult, the Climate Change Minister, Penny Wong will be leaving for Copenhagen herself in the next 24 to 48 hours. I will follow her to Copenhagen sometime next week. These negotiations will be very difficult, but we intend to put our shoulder to the wheel in seeking to deliver the best possible global agreement under these difficult circumstances for what is the great challenge of our generation. Now that is my summary of where we've got to today.
There are many other matters which we reached agreement on which are covered off in the communiqué, which I know is being completed and will be handed to you soon. But before I invite questions from the media, could I ask Anna Bligh to add to my remarks.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister. Well on behalf of Queensland, it's been a great pleasure to host the Council of the Australian Governments here today in Brisbane. This, as the Prime Minister outlined, is the first time that COAG has met in Queensland. So this meeting here today in our Parliament House has been an historic first meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Queensland. So I am particularly pleased that we took some very important steps in what I believe can be historic health reforms across the nation.
The discussions today from the point of view of the states were very constructive. They do set out the first steps towards some comprehensive changes to our healthcare system that we believe can and will be in the interests of all Australians. We understand that all Australians would want the best possible healthcare, and they want the best possible hospital system.
There was also a shared agreement that delivering good quality hospital care is as much about what happens outside of our hospitals as inside them. And what we mean by that is that we agree that reforms to the primary healthcare system in this country, reforms in the area of preventative health, reforms in the aged care system, and significantly, reforms in the workplace planning and training of the health professional workforce, together, will not only improve general health, but have a significant impact in relieving the pressure on our hospital systems, thereby delivering better services.
The States were all of the same mind in relation to the Commonwealth's bid for FIFA World Cup. The states of Australians all share a view that involving our nation in major global events is important to who we are, and we want to be part of that effort. So we've been very pleased to confirm our commitment to the Prime Minister, allowing him to take the bid forward to the next stage.
We also saw significant progress today in areas of important economic and social reform. We've continued to agree in the areas of important regulatory reform, we've also reached agreements in relation to new national planning criteria for each of our capital cities. This is important to our infrastructure effort here in Queensland. We have gone through very significant planning processes in our high growth area in the South East. But we understand from the Commonwealth's point of view that now that we've got a Commonwealth Government that wants to invest in infrastructure, we want to work with them to make sure they get good value for their investment, just as we do when we make State investments.
Importantly, the agreement today in relation to childcare sets new quality benchmarks and standards in relation to adult to child ratios in the care system, and minimum standards in relation to qualifications. This is an important step forward in the nation's childcare system, where we care for our youngest citizens and prepare them for their life at school and beyond. 
So these new national guidelines and requirements in relation to the childcare system from the State's perspective, are a very important step forward today.
All in all, the efforts of COAG this morning were a reminder to us that this is, as the Prime Minister has said in the past, the workforce of the federation, and real reform, whether it's on the economy, or whether it's in the social sphere of our activity, real reform requires hard work, there aren't any shortcuts. You just have to do the hard slog. And that often requires the sort of effort that we put in today in relation, particularly to health- and we believe these are important first steps that in 2010 are going to deliver major reform for the people of Australia and the people of our states.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Quite a few.
JOURNALIST: And the same sorts of comments that the Premier of Queensland just made about important first steps on the health, (inaudible) major change, structural change in the health system. I don't see it, what's the timeline, and what's the process (inaudible)
PM: Well the bottom line is this. Let me answer your question in two parts. You ask about differences in the Commonwealth's policy performance on health. I simply go to the Australian Healthcare Agreement which we negotiated last year for the four to five year period ahead. That delivered a 50 per cent increase in funding to the States and Territories from the Commonwealth. So you asked what's changed? There is a change.
JOURNALIST: Structural.
PM: Okay, can I go to structural reform then. Buried within the Commonwealth- the Australian Healthcare Agreement- are for the first time national partnership agreements with the States and Territories, which go to the key measurement of key health outcomes in response with particular payments. One of them goes to the whole question of the Commonwealth investment in elective surgery. Another one goes to the whole question of accident and emergency for the future as well.
So I'd simply draw your attention to the national partnership agreements which are contained within the Australian Healthcare Agreement last year. That was all within phase one of what we said we'd do. We haven't simply sat back for the two years that we've been in office and said well, didn't we inherit a huge problem from the previous Government, who took $1 billion out of the hospital system. We stepped up to the plate and said here's a new Healthcare Agreement, we negotiated during the course last year, delivered by the end of last year, and it has become operational this year and delivers a 50 per cent increase in funding. What's that in quantitative terms? The difference between a $42 billion base and a $64 billion base for the future.
So you ask what we've been doing. I would ask you to have a careful analysis of the content of that agreement, and to the funding streams which flow through of it. One of the other things which we've been doing for the first time is co-investing with the States and Territories in physical capital infrastructure of hospitals and medical research institutes across the country. We spoke about that in part today. One of which goes to delivery of integrated cancer care across the country.
The Commonwealth, for the first time, is now engaged in the single largest national investment in cancer care across the nation, $1.2 billion, including a co-investment with the Victorians of some $400 million in the new centre at Parkville, and secondly with our friends in New South Wales, two investments - one at Garvan, and the other one at the new Chris O'Brien centre at RPA.
Can I just add to that, across that, across regional Australia, an investment of several hundred million dollars in regional integrated cancer care centres right across the nation. So you ask what we've been doing - answer, Matthew? A lot.
Now, to go to the second phase, which is how do you reform the system long term. What I've said consistently is that once we'd delivered the report from Christine Bennett in the middle of this year, that what we'd do is two things. One, consult the actual health sector itself. And then secondly, consult with the States and Territories on the long term reform which is needed for the system out to 2030, not just the five years covered by the Healthcare Agreement which I just referred to before.
What have we done for the last five months since Bennett delivered her report? The Health Minister and I have consulted 76 different hospitals across the country. I've done 19 of those myself personally. She and her assistant Ministers have done the rest, in every State of the Commonwealth. That's what we've been doing.
Secondly, what I've said consistently is that once we've got to this COAG in Brisbane at the end of the year, we would have an initial discussion with the States and Territories on their response to Bennett. We've done that today, and they've given me some of their views on what Bennett has said, what they agree with, and what they disagree with. And thirdly what I've said consistently is, bearing that in mind, what we would then do is frame the Commonwealth's final position on Bennett, and long term health and hospitals reform in the early part of next year. That's exactly what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The first thing I'd say is that I don't resile from anything that I have said publically on that matter either prior to the last election or since the last election. That's the first point.
The second is, based on the deliberations today, we still have some way to go yet with the States and Territories on reaching what we would regard as the best long-term policy reform agenda for the future. But as I said, and partly in response to Matthew Franklin's question before, we will frame that decision in the early part of 2010, and you will be in absolutely no doubt as to where our position then stands.
But you know something? If you are dealing with the future of the health and hospital system, you've got to get it right. As my States and Territory colleagues have said quite clearly today not only is this a system which involves massive investments by the Australian taxpayer now, through State and Territory Governments, it is one on which literally millions of Australians depend each year. Therefore, if we're going to engineer a reform long-term, we intend to get it right. And we are adhering to the consultation process that I referred to.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER KENEALLY: Let me take the first question. In terms of the transport blueprint, that's a document that's undergoing its final (inaudible) and processes. It's not yet a finalised document. What we have discussed today with the Prime Minister and with my colleagues from the other States and Territories is how we develop a set of principles (inaudible) the planning for our major cities or our capital cities, and we look at the work that we've done in New South Wales (inaudible) and the Metropolitan Strategy in place since 2006, it lays out how we can develop and accommodate what's expected to be 1.7 million more people by 2031.
What we're now looking to do with that Metropolitan Strategy is to update that. It will start a five-year review, and that will be done alongside the Transport Blueprint, so those two documents have been moving together, basically moving side-by-side, making two halves with one whole.
Now, (inaudible) how Sydney will grow. It will grow (inaudible). It will encourage economic growth. It will create nearly 70,000 new homes, 50,000 new jobs (inaudible)
So that's, the focus of the work we're doing with the Transport Blueprint and I'm very pleased to say it's been a productive session today around the planning process for major cities. The work that we've done with the metropolitan strategy in New South Wales and the Transport Blueprint endorses and acknowledges the principles that the Prime Minister laid out in his speech just over a month ago.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Ministerial staff, Are you comfortable with that?
PREMIER KENEALLY: We've got now, I am finalising my Cabinet and I won't be providing any further commentary on that before that's finished.
JOURNALIST: Anna Bligh, have you spoken to your counterparts about (inaudible) Bundaberg Hospital (inaudible)?
PREMIER BLIGH: My counterparts and I did have a discussion today, as you heard, about capital city planning. We have all experienced the different levels of growth, and yes, Queensland's growth has been (inaudible) other States. We live in a free, democratic country and people have always moved across State borders and expect that they will continue to do that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: Well, I wouldn't (inaudible) her problems, but part of our growth comes from international migration, about just over 30 percent from interstate and just over 20 percent we grow our own.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER BLIGH: Today was an opportunity for us to talk about planning. Even in those large, metropolitan environments or for all purposes (inaudible) from overseas or interstate.
PM: I just draw your attention to the 22 objectives of the communiqué, and what it says about long-term capital city planning and the intense briefing (inaudible) - that the people want to move here. It's a wonderful part of Australia. The responsibility of national and state governments is to make sure we've got the best long-term planning procedures in place. So the national government can continue to invest in important long-term infrastructure across the nation. (inaudible) So if you want to know where the rubber hits the road on infrastructure, on the Australian Government engagement with the states on infrastructure planning and provision of infrastructure, that section of the communiqué deals with new arrangements on how we plan our key infrastructure into the future. In the past, the Australian Government has walked away at a rate of knots. Now it's not. That's where we change what has occurred.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the conversation actually wasn't (inaudible). I'm just being frank with you. I actually ran through, at some length, what the -
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I ran through at some length what the (inaudible) commission had recommended and drilled into that in some detail. The States, each of them, Premiers and Chief Ministers, then ran to their own submissions on what was right and wrong within their own jurisdictions and how we could work on a common route to reform.
What I tried to run through before was a list of some of the themes which emerged. One big example was national health workforce reform. If you look at the state-based data and national data for the undersupply of doctors and nurses (inaudible) in the next few years, we have a major problem on our hands. No level of government has dealt with this effectively in my judgement for a long, long time. We as a Commonwealth are responsible for the training of doctors and nurses which (inaudible).
I don't think the Australian Government has done enough on this in times past. Nicola Roxon has tried to make amends for that in the last 12 months or so, by upping the number of training places for each. But if you look at the numbers which are rolling down the railway tracks towards us over the next decade, it's huge.
If you want to know where we're headed over time, it is major problem areas such as that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the Prime Minister's press release says that the national government (inaudible) lots of states have already ticked, and what are some quite urgent problems with this COAG meeting. Clearly, not so far as we can see, that hasn't appeared. Have you asked for federal consideration of (inaudible)?
PREMIER KENEALLY: Can I say that I've very much appreciated the opportunity to speak the Prime Minister and my colleagues today at COAG about the challenges that we face in the health portfolio in New South Wales. We are fortunate in New South Wales because at the moment our emergency room departments are performing well. We are meeting our waiting times in the triage categories one and two. We also have very good elective surgery lists. Where the challenge is that we face in New South Wales sits is in costs. Currently, the health budget in New South Wales makes up 27 percent of the State budget, and if we continue on current trend, that will go to 50 percent by 2030 and it will eat up the entire State budget by 2046. Clearly that is unsustainable position for us. The challenge that we face, particularly comes from, and this is part of the information presented to my colleagues today comes from the fact that we simply as individuals are each consuming more health services than we have in the past.
Partly a consequence of the aging population, partly as a result of the fact that we are dealing with chronic disease. Chronic disease never (inaudible) any of the great challenges that faces the New South Wales health system. Now we have some initiatives underway which I'm going to highlight today, they could, perhaps be implemented as a national level we come to on chronic disease management when it comes to dealing with demand but for us and it's a challenge and it's been acknowledged by my colleagues in their discussions (inaudible) is the integration into hospital care, acute care, community care and aged care where we have an opportunity to reform, where we have an opportunity to create a better prevention and to keep people out of hospital beds.
JOURNALIST: Premier, your predecessor was going to come here and ask the Commonwealth to take over funding of the New South Wales (inaudible) at some stage. Did you put in that request? If not, why not?
PREMIER: No I didn't because the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth have engaged in a process, they engaged in a process first of all of the Bennett report. Secondly, undertaking significant consultation on that report and now engaging in very constructive dialogue with their State and Territory counterparts. I see the opportunity that I have here today is to seek a new partnership with the Prime Minister and the Commonwealth when it comes to taking, what is, one of the biggest challenges facing the New South Wales budget over the next thirty years.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The only thing I have to say in response to that last comment is, as the Premier has indicated, based on her projections, twenty seven percent of the State budget now on health rising to fifty, rising to one hundred in about 2046, and the fifty percent reached in about 2030. This is therefore a very large structural challenge for all State and Territory governments. You've asked the question, why have we taken some time to work our way through this for the long term? 
These are massive numbers that effect the totality of the health system and therefore they have to be got right and that's what we're working on. A bit of sticking plaster here and a bit of sticking plaster there, frankly, when you're looking at long term reform they just don't work and that is why we're doing this systematically. The second thing, in terms of the current nuts and bolts of if, if you like, and the things we are doing today are consistent with the Australian health care agreement, which today we signed a new inter-government agreement which deals with the next stage of elective surgery funding from the Australian government to the states and that includes the good state of New South Wales.
So if you want to say there's nuts and bolts that deal with elective surgery in the here and now in the New South Wales public hospitals, and the public hospitals right across the country, that's there. The longer term stuff (inaudible) we've got to get right.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that former Premier Rees is requesting that you (inaudible) New South Wales?
PM: I haven't looked at his proposal, which was put out publicly that day carefully. Obviously he has particular views about the future direction of the system. My responsibility as Prime Minister is to be attentive to the expressed views of all heads of government from each of the states including the new Premier of New South Wales.
I go back to the fundamental point. On the question of dealing with long term reform of the health system, these are very big numbers which go to such fundamentals as the sustainability of State health budgets and State budgets into the future. We've got to get these things right. You don't respond to such systemic questions on the basis of, you know, a public statement or a public speech given on a particular day. These are complex negotiations. We intend to get it right and we will get it right.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of childcare what are the details in terms of possible increases in cost and reduction in the ratios of children and carers?
PM: Well, over time, these standards will be implemented in individual centres. Some centres can already meet these criteria. Others will not. I think what the expectation is of all parents is that they know, frankly, who's compliant and who's not. That's why we believe, particularly given the extent of interstate migration, that people know through nationally transparent and available data who's meeting those standards and who's not. The individual billing arrangements will be determined by individual childcare centres but the Commonwealth's responsibility in terms of the various childcare rebates, which we offer, we'll continue in the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it was appropriate for Malcolm Turnbull to describe Tony Abbott's ETS proposal as bullshit?
PM: Well. That's an interesting question. With climate change and action on climate change, you're either fair dinkum or you're not. If you're fair dinkum about it you are saying, here is the government's system and here's an alternative system (inaudible). We, the government, have a clear policy on climate change it's called the carbon pollution reduction scheme. The legislation has been out there for nine months. 
All the funding that's associated with it has been out there for nine months and the one upon which we reached agreement with the federal Liberal party just prior to the change in leadership. That's what I call being fair dinkum about climate change. Very plain, this is what we're doing, why we're doing it, this is how much it costs, this is where the (inaudible) will flow.
To be not fair dinkum about it is to say, well I don't support any of that and here's a magic pudding and it will somehow be drawn upon to, somehow be a (inaudible), which they didn't explain to anyone whatsoever with the cost of adjusting to a lower carbon economy. I don't think that is fair dinkum. I suppose that a few people have drawn the conclusion that the leader of the opposition's straight talk in fact camouflages some pretty dodgy policy when it comes to climate change.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you consider federal intervention in the New South Wales branch of the Labor party?
PM: Matters of an administrative nature within the Australian Labor party lie within the party organisation. Now, federally, all questions of that nature should be put there.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) child care centres from the conference, did you opt for option three or option four? How much will it cost (inaudible).
PM: Option three or option four? All I know is that we did agree with, which is a system which, how did you know what the actions were?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Ok, I'm impressed. I tell you what we did agree upon which is an option which is lowest adult to child ratios under a national quality standard. New qualification requirements for all early childhood education workers under the national quality standard and a transparent quality ranking system which will now allow parents to reach for better quality on offer at different childcare centres. In terms of the categorisation of the number of the option you're talking about, I'm sorry, I can't assist you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
PM: Well, as I said in response to the earlier question, the actual flow through consequences of each centre will vary. You know that, as well as I do. Some will be properly staffed and entirely meet all the accreditation criteria which are laid out here, others will not. Accordingly the adjustments will be made per centre depending on their circumstances and whether or not they're going to meet accreditations standards or not. Which will now, for the first time, will be made available to parents, clearly, with a transparent quality rating system.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
PM: (inaudible) thought that they would be voluntary standards.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, no. They are mandatory national standards.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) better than what they are now?
PM: What I am saying is, mandatory national standards of the criteria I've just outlined (inaudible). Some of them already have sufficient staff in terms of the staff to teacher ratio, others may not. Some may already have the proper qualification prerequisites, others may not. I answer your question, it depends on the circumstances of the individual-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Premier, you're the third Premier of New South Wales to come to a COAG meeting with the Prime Minister. How does this (inaudible) important for you given (inaudible)?
PREMIER: Sure, I very much appreciated the opportunity to be here to be here today and in particular to have a good discussion with the Prime Minister over breakfast about some of the issues that can help the country, particularly in relation to health, but we also had an opportunity to discuss the FIFA world cup bid and I did make the point of suggesting to the Prime Minister, he have a look at how well Citi-link operated in Sydney this week with the V8 races under the conflict of sporting events and should Australia win the bid for the World Cup, we'd like to have the final in Sydney.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd (inaudible)
PREMIER: I thank my colleagues for that
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER RANN: Can I just say that since I was assaulted on October the 1st, I have been getting on with the job of doing my job as Premier. And as you would know, that there are matters currently before the criminal court, as well as defamation action which means that it would be totally inappropriate for me to be in contempt of the court by commenting.
But I will talk about the FIFA World Cup and the fact of the matter is that this morning we had a very quick briefing from Geoff Dickson who is playing a coordinating role. The world cup is much much bigger than the Olympic Games and it is national, (inaudible) push. So I was able to tell the Prime Minister and the other Premiers and Geoff Dickson this morning that South Australia and Adelaide is keen to be a host city for the World Cup Games and indeed we are committing $450 million to upgrade Adelaide Oval which will be great for football (inaudible), great for international cricket, but also will be FIFA compliant and capable of hosting a World Cup game.
This is very important for the nation, to get behind this bid, and I thought this morning there was a common resolution, that we not only want the bid to win, but we want to stage the world's best ever World Cup.
PM: Can I just conclude on that point, which is that, when you think about the challenges of hosting a bid like this for a world cup, they are formidable. The only work that we the Australian Government, by working really closely with colleagues in the States and Territories to make it work. But you know, if we were able to land this thing, this is three times bigger than the Olympics and an enormous global branding opportunity for Australia. And therefore I thank the state and territory colleagues for getting behind this.
And to conclude about the deliberations today. As Anna reminded me, we often describe COAG as the workhorse of the Federation. There is a lot of information there in the communiqué which may strike some of you as unremarkable and there is in that document, the product of a huge amount of work between officials and ministers and my colleagues here, over many months and in some cases, over many years.
Some of it goes right to the heart of the concerns of working families in the here and now. And you presumably ask questions about the application of the new childcare centres. And that is absolutely true. We have been working on it for a long time, they are now agreed, they are now mandatory. That is how it's going to operate. Agreements such as those we have just landed on the question of the future planning of our cities. That hasn't any precedent frankly in Australia, the fact that now the Australian Government and State Governments are working together on, how do you plan our cities long term, because we the Australian Government are going to be co-investors in the future in the infrastructure of our cities.
These are big areas of reform, quite apart from, shall I say, such as whether or not we can host the FIFA World Cup in 2018. Having said that, thank you very much, appreciate your attention and attendance.


Today's Council of Australian Governments meeting has taken a significant step towards a nationally consistent approach to tackling water theft with the adoption of a new National Framework on Water Compliance and Enforcement. 
With this agreement, each jurisdiction will now develop a plan to increase compliance and enforcement activities for COAG approval next year.
Australia needs a stronger compliance and enforcement regime, in the Murray-Darling Basin and elsewhere, because water theft means less water available for other water users, and less water for the environment.
The Australian Government has committed $60 million to improve water compliance and enforcement activities nationally.
Water theft is not a new phenomenon for Australia, but in the Murray Darling Basin in particular, over-allocation combined with the current drought has brought the problem and its consequences to the fore.
If just 1 per cent of the water resources in the Murray-Darling Basin were taken illegally each year, this would represent an entitlement value of over $200 million. 
Today COAG has also agreed to adopt a National Framework for Non-urban Water Metering to improve accuracy of metering of water extractions, and to complete water sharing plans for all significant water resources consistent with the National Water Initiative. 
COAG also adopted a National Water Skills Strategy. 
An earlier report to COAG highlighted the need for appropriately skilled people to meet the needs of the water industry. This strategy to address the current and emerging skills shortages has been developed in consultation with industry. 
National agreement on this package of measures will maintain the momentum of water reform, building on the Australian Government's $12.9 billion 'Water for the Future' initiative.


The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) today agreed to the renegotiation of the National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Housing.
The renegotiation will enable a more competitive process for allocation of funding by the Commonwealth for capital works and provide strong incentives for the States and the Northern Territory to progress the construction of new housing, repairs and maintenance in remote Indigenous communities over the remaining eight years of this National Partnership.
COAG agreed to the renegotiation following consideration of progress by the States and the Northern Territory on the implementation of the National Partnership.
The Commonwealth has committed $5.5 billion over ten years to address the shocking levels of overcrowding and poor housing conditions in remote communities.
Decent housing is essential for protecting children, improving health, education and employment and re-building positive community norms.
In response to concerns of slow progress on capital works, the Commonwealth has already established an Office of Remote Indigenous Housing in the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs and is deploying staff to key jurisdictions to help oversee the rollout of this National Partnership.
The Commonwealth has worked in good faith to agree implementation plans and capital works plans with each jurisdiction. Work that has already been agreed for this financial year will continue under current arrangements.
COAG noted that the Prime Minister has written to Premier's and the Chief Ministers outlining in detail the terms of the negotiation.
Negotiations on the revised agreement will begin as a matter of priority, with a view to the revised agreement coming into effect from 1 July 2010.


The Council of Australian Governments meeting has agreed on new compulsory national standards for child care and early childhood education services.
This reform will deliver a higher standard of care for children, and clearer and more comprehensive information for parents.
This new National Quality Framework will be phased in from 1 July 2010 and will ensure national consistency in early childhood education and child care services including outside school hours care.
The new framework will include requirements for:
     * lower staff-to-child ratios under the National Quality Standard
     * new qualifications requirements for all early childhood education workers under the National Quality Standard
     * a transparent quality ratings system, which will allow parents to easily compare the quality on offer at different child care services
     * streamlined regulatory arrangements, which will mean less paperwork for services, so they have more time to spend providing high quality care
     * a new jointly-governed national body between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories to oversee the new standards.
These reforms will improve children's educational, health and wellbeing outcomes, developing the capabilities of the next generation and contributing to Australia's future prosperity.
The Australian Government is providing approximately $61 million between 2010-11 and 2013-14 to the States and Territories to support the new framework. This is on top of the support the Australian Government provides to families through the Child Care Benefit and Child Care Rebate.
We want all Australian children to have a quality early childhood education and care experience and we want parents to be well informed and confident that they are making the right choices for their child.
From years of international research, we know that the first five years of a child's life shapes their future -their health, learning and social development - and we want to make sure that future is bright.
We also know that a quality early childhood education and care experience can help overcome a disadvantaged background and set children on the road to a prosperous and productive life.
Lower staff-to-child ratios will mean each staff member can give more care and attention to each child, and higher staff qualifications will enable staff to guide each child's individual learning.
The new framework was developed collaboratively between all governments and the community and will ensure all providers operate under clear and nationally consistent standards for care and early education.
The National Quality Framework incorporates feedback received on the Regulation Impact Statement, which was released by COAG in July 2009. About 1700 people attended public consultation sessions, 340 made written submissions and about 3000 people responded to an online survey.
The reforms will be implemented across all jurisdictions over 10 years and the Government will continue to help parents meet the costs of child care.
The National Quality Framework delivers on key Rudd Government child care election commitments.
The Government has already delivered on its election promise to pay half of parents' out-of-pocket child care costs - by increasing the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent. That's dramatically improved affordability, with ABS statistics showing child care costs to parents have fallen by over 20 per cent as a result.
In total, the Government is investing $16 billion in child care over the next four years - a billion more each year than under the Howard Government - including more than $13 billion to help families meet the cost of child care.
For more information about the Australian Government's early childhood education and child care initiatives, please visit deewr.gov.au/earlychildhood or www.mychild.gov.au.


The Council of Australian Governments today tasked Treasurers with accelerating and expanding on work underway through COAG, making housing a priority for microeconomic reform for 2010.
Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed that Treasurers would develop a reform agenda to tackle housing supply and affordability issues that build on important policies already in place. States and Territories also agreed to have capital city strategic plans by 2012, which will be independently assessed by the COAG Reform Council.
Every jurisdiction recognised that addressing housing supply is central to the challenge of ensuring housing remains affordable into the future.
Ensuring an adequate supply of housing as our population expands in coming decades is also a key economic challenge, impacting on the mobility of our labour force and our capacity for sustainable growth.
Key issues addressed by first ministers and Treasurers included:
     * utilising the land audits recently undertaken by the Commonwealth and state and territory governments to progress the release of surplus land;
     * implementing more efficient approaches to Development Assessment processes; and
     * developing a timetable for housing policy reform for consideration at the first COAG meeting in 2010.
The policy development process will build on a number of measures already in train aimed at increasing the housing supply:
     * the COAG Cities Infrastructure and Planning Taskforce has developed a national objective and criteria for capital city strategic planning systems;
     * Planning Ministers have developed national planning principles and code-based development approvals processes and intend to work with Housing Ministers to progress reforms; and
     * the Henry Tax Review is examining tax issues as they relate to housing.
This work is consistent with COAG's agreement to national criteria for planning transport, housing, urban development and sustainability.
Today's announcement will ensure that the Federal, State and Territory Treasurers are working with Housing and Planning Ministers to ensure we are doing all we can to address housing supply and affordability issues in the interests of Australians wherever they live.


The Council of Australian Governments today agreed to create a new, independent national regulator for the vocational education and training (VET) sector.
The regulator will be responsible for the registration and audit of registered training providers across Australia.
It is significant micro-economic reform for a $6.4 billion industry, with close to 5,000 providers charging students almost a billion dollars a year.
More than 1.7 million students and thousands of Australian businesses have a stake in improved quality and better outcomes from the VET sector. These reforms will help to deliver a mobile workforce with common skills standards.
It will mean employers can have confidence in the skills and qualifications of their employees, wherever they are trained in the country. It will also mean employees can invest in their education and training with an assurance about the quality and transferability of their qualifications.
This step will build a stronger national training system and bring Australia closer to an inter-connected tertiary education sector.
A framework for the new body will be agreed by the end of May 2010 with the regulator beginning operation from 2011.
The regulator will be a Commonwealth statutory authority and will have responsibility for VET providers in all states and territories, other than WA and Victoria, and nationally all providers wishing to operate in more than one jurisdiction or enrolling international students.
COAG has also agreed to modernise Australia's trade apprenticeship system following the recommendations of the Australian Apprentices Taskforce.
COAG has agreed to strengthen apprenticeship participation and support systems and reduce red tape for employers.
Pathways into an apprenticeship will be enhanced through a significant reform of pre-apprenticeships.
COAG also agreed to ensure that there is effective implementation of competency-based progression and completion for apprentices.
The Australian Apprentices Taskforce clearly articulated the role of governments and industry as partners in a streamlined and responsive apprenticeship system.
Its report highlighted the need to improve access, pathways and outcomes for the benefit of employers and apprentices alike.
The Taskforce also noted the importance of a high quality training and employment experience in achieving higher rates of apprenticeship completions.
In addition, COAG agreed to begin work on a Unique Student Identifier system.
This will help to ensure that current and prospective students will have a complete record of their educational achievements across jurisdictions during the course of their studies.
These reforms will help cement Australia's international reputation as a high quality provider of Vocational Education and Training - with a strong, national regulatory regime.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Premier Anna Bligh today announced the ship wreck hunter who found HMAS Sydney II had arrived in Australia to start the search for the Centaur.
David Mearns, principal of Bluewater Recoveries and the Director of the successful search for HMAS Sydney II, arrived in Brisbane yesterday to oversee final preparations for the search for the Australian Hospital Ship Centaur.
Premier Bligh said that mobilisation of the search equipment, including special sonar equipment, onto the Defence Maritime Services support vessel Seahorse Spirit would start on Wednesday, 9 December 2009.
Premier Bligh said finding the Centaur could be a welcome Christmas gift for the families of relatives that perished on the ship.
"It is also exciting news for local historians and anyone who has an interest in what happened all those years ago," she said.
The Prime Minister said that Queenslanders and all Australians would be following the search closely.
"I hope the search is successful and that all Australians may finally know and commemorate the resting place of the brave nurses and crew who died on that terrible day," he said.
Mr Mearns said he expected to be able to start the first stage of the search within days.
"If all goes well and weather permitting, the search should be underway by the weekend," Mr Mearns said. 
Representatives from the Centaur Association, Centaur Nurses Association, RSL and other family and friends of the men and women lost in AHS Centaur, have been invited to a briefing on the search plans on Tuesday, 8 December 2009.
"When I proposed this project to the Prime Minister it was to confirm finally the resting place of the Centaur to give some sense of closure to the friends and family and the many other people affected by this great wartime tragedy that happened so close to shore", Ms Bligh said.
The Prime Minister said that the Commonwealth Government was pleased to be able to support the search.
Mr Mearns who will direct the search from the Seahorse Spirit will set out the details of the search area, the equipment that will be used and how the search will be conducted at the stakeholders meeting.
The Queensland and Australian Governments have jointly committed $4 million for the project.
The search will be undertaken in December and January using specialised deep sea sonar equipment from the US based Williamson and Associates as well as a remote operated submersible from Phoenix International (also US based) capable of reaching depths below 3,000 metres.
Williamson and Associates were also involved, along with David Mearns, in the search for HMAS Sydney II.
Defence Maritime Services, which is supplying the search vessel Seahorse Spirit, has previously worked alongside Phoenix International in the project to locate the Australian Black Hawk helicopter in 3,000 metres of water off the coast of Fiji in 2007.


The Rudd Government today announced further measures to Keep Cairns Working and help combat the spike in the region's unemployment as a result of the global recession.
The Government will introduce measures to encourage more airlines to stopover at Cairns Airport, provide $19.5 million to build the Cairns Institute at James Cook University and bring forward $60 million in critical job-generating economic stimulus projects.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Employment Participation Minister Mark Arbib and the Minister for Resources and Energy and Minister for Tourism, Minister Martin Ferguson visited Cairns today, at the invitation of Leichhardt MP Jim Turnour, to announce these further measures.
The Rudd Government's response covers five key areas:
     * Supporting tourism in Cairns;
     * Providing tax help to small business;
     * Fast-tracking the Economic Stimulus projects;
     * Driving regional development; and
     * Supporting local jobs.
The Rudd Government recognises that the Cairns community has been harder hit than most other regions as a result of the global economic conditions.
The Government will offer foreign airlines greater access to our major gateways for flights that first stopover in Cairns and will offer foreign airlines the chance to provide flights from Cairns to nearby countries such as New Zealand and the Pacific islands.
Cairns will also benefit from $446,000 in a new tourism marketing campaign designed to promote Cairns as a Tropical Far North food tourism destination, with 20 new tourism operators to be supported by the campaign.
The Rudd Government's economic stimulus is rolling out more than 2,100 projects across Tropical North Queensland with $460 million being injected in the local economy, as recognised by the Queensland Government in their recent plan for jobs and the economy in Cairns.
But to ensure jobs are generated as quickly as possible the Government is fast-tracking the program to deliver $60 million in immediate investment to support jobs during the next 12 months.
The Cairns social housing stimulus will be fast-tracked with work now scheduled to start on many of the 218 social homes planned for in and around Cairns from between now and March 2010.
This will be a much-needed shot in the arm for the local construction industry, providing immediate jobs and stimulating economic activity in the region.
Cairns is Australia's gateway to Papua New Guinea, the Pacific Islands and the Tropical North. In order to drive the commercial development of the region, the Government will provide a $19.5 million grant to James Cook University to build the Cairns Institute.
The Cairns Institute will be a tropical innovation hub, linking research with commercial opportunities, driving economic development and providing critical infrastructure planning research for Australia's Far North.
The Institute will include 125 research staff and will support 200 jobs during construction.
The Cape York Institute will be also be involved in discussions around co-locating in the brand new building, potentially benefiting from purpose-designed research facilities and collaborating across a number of research agendas.
To assist Cairns small business, the Rudd Government will send a specialised Australian Tax Office taskforce to work one-on-one with businesses in the region to tailor individual payment arrangements for PAYG and GST to meet the specific circumstances of businesses that need help.
The Rudd Government will also bolster regional development in the region through Regional Development Australia working with the Office of Northern Australia, to draw together Commonwealth and State Government activity and ensure a targeted approach to regional development.
The Office of Northern Australia will provide a single point of contact for other Government agencies, such as Austrade, to bring their expertise and assistance to regional planning for the future.
Among other assistance, the Rudd Government is supporting 500 new training places through the Productivity Places Program in conjunction with the Queensland Government.
These places will be brokered with local job service providers in conjunction with the Local Employment Co-ordinator to match job-seekers with skills shortages and local jobs.
The Keep Cairns Working Centrelink Jobs Expo will also have over 300 jobs on offer with 100 employers and a host of training providers participating in the Expo.
The Rudd Government's Apprentice Kickstart program has also started, providing local employers committed to taking on school leavers looking to start a trade with a commencement of $4,850 in the first year of an apprenticeship.
18 Kickstart Apprentices have been signed up in Cairns since the measure commenced on 1 December 2009.


A retired Caribou aircraft will become a permanent static display at RAAF Base Townsville in recognition of the Caribou's 45 years of service to Australia and its long association with North Queensland.
Air Force Caribou were based at RAAF Townsville from 1976. During more than three decades, Townsville-based Caribou operated by Number 35 Squadron, and later, No. 38 Squadron, provided vital support to a range of military and humanitarian operations and exercises across northern Australia, Papua New Guinea and the South Pacific.
The establishment of a static display is a fitting tribute to the thousands of people who proudly flew and maintained the Caribou in North Queensland.
Australia received a total of 29 Caribou between 1964 and 1971. The light tactical transport aircraft were well known for their ability to operate from short and unprepared airstrips. Caribou conducted tasks across Australia, and in Vietnam, South East Asia, Kashmir and the South Pacific.
In recent years, the ageing Caribou became increasingly labour intensive and costly to operate. It was a tribute to the aircrew and maintenance personnel that the Caribou was able to operate as long as it did.
In the interim, the Caribou will be replaced by the King Air, which will provide a modern and efficient transport capability for the Australian Defence Force. A long term replacement for the Caribou will be selected in consultation with Defence.
The Caribou's lengthy and illustrious Air Force career has also been recognised with one aircraft being provided to the Australian War Memorial and another to the RAAF Museum at Point Cook, Victoria.
Disposal of the remaining Caribou aircraft is being managed by the Defence Materiel Organisation. 


PM: Great to be back in Cairns, and great to be back here with Jim Turnour, our Federal Member, but also with my ministerial colleagues, with Martin Ferguson and his responsibility for resources and tourism, Mark Arbib, his responsibility for employment, and also our Senator for North Queensland, Jan McLucas, and also our Parliamentary Secretary, who's responsible for employment services as well, Jason Clare.
We're here for one reason, and that is to keep Cairns working, that's what we're here for. And what I've done this morning since I've been back up here in Far North Queensland is spend time with the local business community, local representatives of Government, as well as the university and others about how we work effectively together in what has been a real challenge for this regional economy and for jobs because of the global economic recession, and the good and positive news for Far North Queensland is that we are all working together to keep Cairns working.
Let's not underestimate the challenge. It's big. Unemployment here is high. Let's not try and gild the lily here. It's a real problem. But you can either just sit around and moan about it and point fingers or you can get on and do something about it, which is what we're seeking to do here. And so what we've done today is gather with the representatives of the chamber of commerce, local government, as well as a range of other institutions here, including Advance Cairns, to make sure that we get this package as right as possible.
It has been really good to see the work which has been undertaken in this jobs forum out here today, in terms of the number of people who have come here in search of employment, with some 400 jobs on offer from the various employment agencies.
Let me go to detail of what we've worked through in a close, cooperative relationship between ourselves as the Australian Government, backed up by our local member Jim, as well as Advance Cairns and others. First and foremost, tourism is crucial up here. One of the asks which has been made of the Australian Government, I think for about the last 10 years, is to do something in terms of the rules that govern landing rights for foreign aircraft coming to Australia. So what the Australian Government will now offer is foreign airlines greater access to our major gateways for flights that first stop over in Cairns, and will offer foreign airlines the chance to provide flights from Cairns to nearby countries such as New Zealand and the Pacific Island countries.
This is an important breakthrough. This is what the local aviation industry and large parts of the tourism industry have been asking of the Australian Government for the better part of a decade, and I would thank my ministerial colleagues, including Anthony Albanese and the Tourism Minister, Martin Ferguson, backed by up by Jim Turnour, the local member, in getting this done. This will represent a big change for the future. We've got to make sure that we get more foreign airlines making use of Cairns. Changing the rules this way makes that easier, and that is why we have done it.
The second thing that we are doing is injecting greater effort into our stimulus strategy here on the ground. Right now, across Far North Queensland, the Australian Government is investing some $460 million in stimulus funding. For the year ahead, when so many businesses are doing it tough, what we are seeking to do is to bring forward as much of that activity as possible, and what the minister responsible, Mark Arbib has done, is reached agreement to bring $60 million worth of funding for social housing forward into the 12-month period starting December this year through to December next year.
The reason we have done that, and it involves more than 100 houses, 140 homes, spread across this Far North Queensland region, is to give our builders confidence about a line of projects, a series of projects for the next 12 months so they've got confidence to keep their workers on, their builders on, to keep their contractors engaged, and to retain their apprentices.
The second thing we're doing is this: on the building the Education Revolution front, we've so far already invested some $48 million up here in this region. What will happen in calendar year 2010 is that you'll see a further roll out of some $260 million worth of building projects in schools across this region. And the reason I am emphasising that today is that if you put that together with the bring forward of social housing, $60 million, knowing that you've got $260 million worth of school projects coming out in the 12 months ahead, it's to give our local builders confidence about the project pipeline which is unfolding.
Underpinning those two measures is an announcement I've confirmed recently of 500 productivity training places for this region as well. These have been designed flexibly to cater for the specific employment needs of this region, so if you've got those operating at one level, as well as apprenticeships, together with the actual work which flows through from the stimulus projects, both for schools and for social housing, we're looking at, frankly, something in the order of $320 million worth of stimulus investment in the construction sector here in this region over the next 12-month period.
Thirdly, with our partners at James Cook University, we've also been looking at how can we help build our university infrastructure, build JCU's university infrastructure, providing jobs for that construction while also providing the facilities which James Cook University needs for the future, to globally brand its expertise in tropical knowledge.
So what we are doing is investing nearly $20 million, $19.5 million, with James Cook University to build the Cairns Institute, which will be a tropical research hub. This is an important step forward for the future.
I am advised that will lead to some 200 jobs directly, as far as construction is concerned, and indirectly. On top of that we're also looking at the long-term reputational standing in Australia and around the world for this great university in the field of tropical research by globally branding James Cook University in this way, by providing them with first-class facilities to accommodate their researchers who, as the Vice-Chancellor said to me currently operate out of various broom closets, large and small. This is an important step forward, creating jobs today while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Fourthly, we're also very mindful from the submissions we've received from Advance Cairns on behalf of the business community, about the particular problems being encountered by businesses large and small and medium now in terms of their taxation obligations. To assist Cairns small business, the Government will send a specialised Australian Tax Office taskforce to work one-on-one with local businesses in relation to tailoring individual payment arrangements for PAYG, for GST, to deal with the specific circumstances of businesses in the here and now.
In other words, how can we tailor the tax plans of individual businesses who are doing it tough because off the downturn and making it possible for those businesses to deal better with the cash flow problems which they may have because of the crisis.
Finally, looking to the long term, what we are also on about, is how do we work together with the State government, with local government and with Advance Cairns and others on a long-term plan for the better diversification of the Far North Queensland economy? We've heard loud and clear the problems which have occurred through, shall we say, a very large dependence on international tourism. How do we learn from that for the future?
So through the Office of Northern Australia and bringing together expertise from all levels of government we are now working on a long-term plan for this region, properly integrated, properly coordinated, all levels of government, which has one central strategic objective: to diversify this economy for the future. That is what we're seeking to do. That diversification involves, obviously, branches of industry, what the university does in the future, what government does in the future. How do we promote this region's domestic and international tourism in the future, and the great asset that is the Barrier Reef.
To conclude, could I also thank our local priority employment coordinator for the work which he has put in with his team here in Far North Queensland. Keep Cairns Working Centrelink Jobs Expo, I'm told, is about 4,000 people over there at the moment rolling through that expo, 400 jobs currently on offer. Spoke to a lot of people there this morning, keen and busting to find themselves a job or a training program. We spoke to a number of them ourselves, a lot of the employment coordinators and providers out there saying what they have to offer.
This is a very practical application of what have sought to do in areas of higher unemployment across the nation, so the work of our local employment coordinator, I congratulate him, his staff, and the way he's been able to work closely with local industry. And of course he will have access to the local jobs fund in terms of subsequent rounds as well, other projects which become applicable to employment needs heading out into 2010.
So to conclude, this is all about Keeping Cairns Working. Nationally, it's about this: nation building for the future, investing in jobs, small business and apprenticeships today, while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, for the future. That's what we're on about, that's what we're doing nationally, that's what we're trying to do in partnership with our friends here in Cairns and Far North Queensland as well. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've seen some reporting in the British papers about a document, can I just say, between now and when the Copenhagen conference is held, there will be one leak after the other of one document after the other, on one draft of a document after the other, because you've got most of the world's media there, most of the world's politicians going there, and when you've got that cocktail, anything could happen.
The second point I'd say is this. The Danes, quite rightly, have been taking inputs from right across the world, from many different Governments, on landing an agreement at Copenhagen - and we think that's the right way to go for the future. As for the details of this particular document, I'm in no position to comment. But, what we do need is strong, levelled political commitment in order to land a Copenhagen deal. That's where the leaders of the world are trying to take climate change today. 
I contrast that with what's happening here in Australia. Not only have the Liberals voted down the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and voted against action on climate change, they are also a party which, frankly, has now become out of touch with mainstream Australia on climate change.
What we've seen for example from the decision on the Liberal party frontbench by the current Liberal Leader is the extremists taking over the Liberal party. And whether it's on WorkChoices and Senator Abetz and what he's had to say about WorkChoices, whether it's the Leader of the Liberal party himself on climate change- whether it's WorkChoices or climate change, what we have is a party out of touch with mainstream Australia, and what Australia needs to do on the international stage.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, I haven't seen the so-called ad. I was asked about it this morning. And my baseline response is this - the banks in Australia operate on the basis of a charter of trust with the Australian people. They had better honour that trust, and that charter of trust, into the future. That's what I'd say to the banks of Australia. And that means acting responsibly, not just as good community and corporate citizens, but acting responsibly in terms of their customers as well. And jacking up interest rates in excess of what the Reserve Bank has determined is, is in my view not acting responsibly in terms of your customers.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of Mr Abbott's reference to the Copenhagen agreement as being like the Munich agreement?
PM: Well can I say that with the Leader of the Liberal Party making statements like that and bringing about the frontbench changes which he has made, what we have is a clear demonstration of the climate change deniers now running the Liberal party. We're here in Far North Queensland today, the Great Barrier Reef is just out there. Can I just say, when I look at the Great Barrier Reef, and I see this wonderful natural asset for Australia's future, my first question as an Australian is, what can I do to make sure we have that asset for the future, the long term future, for our kids to enjoy, our grandkids to enjoy? And what the scientific reports say to us is unless we act, nationally and globally, to keep temperature increases within two degrees Celsius over time, we imperil that Reef.
We imperil it as a natural asset for Australia. We imperil it as an economic asset for Australia, which currently generates $5 billion in tourism revenue each year, and employs some 60,000 people. Now, my job as Prime Minister of Australia is to look at the evidence, and act. That, I think, is the responsible course of action. But when you've got people who are climate change deniers taking over the Liberal party and saying that the best way forward is simply to sit on our hands, I worry about what happens to our kids and our grandkids and our great natural assets.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say that what's required in the proper debate for Australia's future is a set of policies on climate change, and alternative policies on climate change. A set of policies on the proper laws for our workplaces, and alternative policies on that. A set of policies which are about how do we maintain activity in this economy through a national stimulus strategy, or an alternative set of policies. I'm up for a debate about our plans for Australia's future, as detailed, and our policies, for example, on climate change, and I would strongly urge the Leader of the Liberal Party just to take a deep breath, calm down, and actually put in the hard yards on developing a policy on climate change. That would be very useful.
JOURNALIST: He also (inaudible) 'Howard's Battlers' into 'Abbott's Army'. Wouldn't you prefer that they'd be 'Kevin's cobbers'?
PM: Can I say for the future what working families across Australia want is a decent set of workplace laws. What Mr Abbott, the current Leader of the Liberal Party has done, is unleash the most hardline, right-wing people in the country on the workplace laws for the future. Let's be very plain about it.
Working families want decent, fair laws for their workplace. Mr Abbott has just appointed Senator Abetz as Shadow Minister for Workplace Laws. This is what Senator Abetz has said. He said that penalty rates are excessive and irrelevant, he said that leave loading is outrageous, illogical, and economically debilitating. Now, what you have with the decision to appoint these individuals to the Liberal party frontbench is a bringing back of the workplace addicts on the one hand, and the climate change deniers on the other. That is what the Liberal party, under its current leader, has done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'd go back to my simple point, is that we have a policy on climate change, nationally and globally. We are out there prosecuting it. I think again what I'd say to the current Leader of the Liberal Party is, rather than all the colourful language, how about doing the hard yards, calming down a bit, and actually delivering a policy on climate change. I think Australia would be better for that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) reduction targets (inaudible)
PM: Well we've been very clear about our reduction targets and on that, that has been the position of the Liberal Party as well. Five, or 15, or 25, and the conditions have been clearly outlined in the Government's White Paper. We're confident that's the right framework for Australia to take to these negotiations, and the five is a unilateral commitment, the 15 and 25 highly conditional on what the rest of the world does.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Apart from someone's phone going off. Queensland is a fantastic state, it's the state in which I was born. And even these followers from interstate will appreciate the fact that this is an extraordinary place to live. A state of great dynamism, a state with a huge future. So I'd say on Queensland's 150th celebrations, when you look forward to the future, that Queensland is now a core part of Australia's national future, not a marginal part, a core part of Australia's national future. Whether it's on the economy, whether it's in politics, whether it's in social innovation, and it's a contribution of which the whole state should be proud.
Okay folks, anything else?
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you one more question about the secret deal in Copenhagen (inaudible)
PM: Can I say that when I was recently at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Trinidad, there were 54 countries assembled at that table. And as someone charged by the Chairman of the Commonwealth, the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, with chairing the drafting group for the communiqué, bringing together the President of South Africa, the Prime Minister of the Maldives, which is one of the world's lowest-lying countries, as well as engaging with the many, many other Commonwealth countries who were parties of that conference, there was a realisation around that table that we are seriously all in this together. Developed and developing countries. One of the outcomes of course for that particular conference was this, a recommendation that we bring forward what is called fast-start financing support for the world's poorest countries to assist them with the immediate task of adaptation to the impact of climate change. Whether it's in the Indian Ocean or the Caribbean or the Pacific, the small island states are highly vulnerable.
In the Pacific, about 50 per cent of the population of the Pacific Island states live within 1.5 kilometres of the coastline. They are highly exposed, and highly vulnerable. So when you've got practical measures like that which has been foreshadowed by the Commonwealth, and recently embraced in part, in a statement by President Obama, about the need for early financial assistance for the least-developed countries, I believe that's the right approach. But more broadly, the right approach is to get the right outcome for the developed and the developing world, because we live on one planet. We share one atmosphere. We share one environment. And all of our actions affect the others. The Americans affect the rest of the world. The Chinese affect the rest of the world. The Europeans do. The Indians prospectively as well. And all countries are looking to other countries for action, combined action, collective action.
If one country says, oh, by the way, just the world stop, I'm going to hop off for a minute and not do my part, what do you think the response will be from everyone else? They'll say, well just pause for a moment, I'll hop off as well, and wait for someone else to act. So the challenge here is for people to work together. And this is going to be a bumpy process. There'll be all sorts of predictions of success and catastrophe on the outcomes for Copenhagen between now and the conclusion of this conference. What I know for a fact, having been intimately involved in the discussions so far on aspects of the Copenhagen conference, is that it will be very hard. The outcome is highly uncertain. But what we must do as participating states, and in the name of Australia, is give it our every bit of energy to make an outcome, and produce a result for our kids, and for our grandkids.


Australia's first National Security College will be established, providing world class education and training in national security policy issues.
The College will be a joint venture between the Australian Government and the Australian National University.
The College will provide executive development programs for senior national security officials and provide access to ANU teaching and research programs, with the aim of better preparing national security personnel for the increasingly complex challenges they face.
The creation of the National Security College follows the success of a pilot executive development course, overseen this year by the National Security Adviser, Mr Duncan Lewis.
The Prime Minister also announced the appointment of Mr Michael L'Estrange AO as the founding Executive Director of the National Security College.
Mr L'Estrange has served governments of both sides of the political divide for many years with distinction.
His most recent appointments include Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, High Commissioner to London and Cabinet Secretary. Mr L'Estrange is a Rhodes scholar and has a distinguished academic record. He has over many years made a major contribution to public policy development, particularly in international policy and national security policy. The ANU has determined that Mr L'Estrange's position as Executive Director of the College will see him appointed as a professor of the University.
Mr L'Estrange's wide public service experience, linked with professorial standing, will place him and the University in a very good position to establish the College and deliver the high level of executive development essential for the national security community.
Mr L'Estrange's first tasks will include developing the detailed business model for the College, and building on the early course development work of the pilot executive development program conducted this year.
The College will have a board consisting of membership drawn equally from among senior government officials and University nominees.
The first chairman of the board will be the National Security Adviser, Duncan Lewis.
The College will be a critical element in preparing Australia's future national security leadership, and safeguarding our national security.
A safe and secure Australia is the Government's first priority, and the National Security College will play a key role in ensuring this.


I am delighted to be here today at this important forum, joining both those gathered here in person, and those online.
Thank you to Paul Twomey for his warm introduction, and my thanks to Stephen Conroy for organising this event and for all those who have assisted.
Stephen and others have brought together people with both vision and the capacity to turn vision into reality - dreamers and experts, pragmatists and digital warriors.
Earlier this year the Australian Government made a historic commitment to the future of broadband, jobs and the future of the Australian economy, the commitment to build the National Broadband Network.
We are committed to building the NBN because we believe broadband is essential to building a stronger Australia - to the jobs and the economy of the future.
As I said in launching our plan for the NBN, broadband is the infrastructure of the 21st century. Just as railway tracks laid the future for the 19th century, and electricity grids and highways laid the future in the 20th century, so broadband is the core infrastructure of the new century.
It is critical if Australia is to compete successfully in the global digital economy and create the jobs and industries of the future. It is also essential for many of the technologies that will help us reduce carbon emissions, improve health services, create a world class education system, and improve opportunities for all Australians no matter where they live.
High speed broadband is, in short, at the heart of building a stronger, fairer Australia ready for the challenges of the 21st century.
That is why the Government has taken the step of establishing the NBN Co.
The reality is that Australia's current broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch. Slow broadband is holding our nation back:
     * Average broadband speeds in Australia are 40 times slower than the world leader, Japan.
     * Out of 30 leading countries, we are behind all but three countries. We're behind Turkey. We're behind the Slovak Republic.
     * Australians want high-speed broadband, but we are in the bottom half of OECD countries for broadband take-up (16 out of 30 in 2008).
Before the Government came to office two years ago, we had seen a series of failed promises for better broadband. 18 plans in a period of 12 years, while Australia fell behind.
When the Government came to office, we began the work to assess how we can best deliver a national broadband network, and earlier this year, I announced that the Australian Government will be investing up to $43 billion over eight years to build and operate a National Broadband Network, delivering world leading super-fast broadband to all Australian homes and businesses.
As I said at the time, this is like the building of the Snowy River scheme, the Sydney Harbour Bridge, and the national highway network. It is an historic act of nation building, and it demonstrates our great confidence in Australia's future - future industries, future jobs and future prosperity.
Delivering the NBN is a massive national task, and we are delighted to have someone with Mike Quigley's experience leading the NBN. His work is critically important nation-building work, because delivering high speed broadband to all Australians requires national leadership from the government, and the best technical and commercial leadership from the business community.
History teaches us the need for national leadership on major nation-building infrastructure - and that is why the Government is delivering the NBN.
The work has already begun. We began laying down the first 'track' of the NBN in Tasmania in July this year. It marked an historic milestone in our nation building calendar.
As I said at the time, though it was a small beginning this has the potential to transform our economy, and the potential to transform many aspects of our lives.
If you are living in the bush and you need to see a doctor without leaving your house -- fast broadband is the answer.
If you live in Brisbane and you want to talk regularly face-to-face with a friend or loved one in London - fast broadband is the answer.
If you are running a business in Broome that needs to operate 24 hours, seven days a week - fast broadband is the answer.
If you are a teacher in Geelong wanting to bring the world to the classroom -- fast broadband is the answer.
And if you are a small business in Campbelltown wanting to tender for a government contract and meet the deadline - fast broadband is the answer.
Faster broadband through the NBN will see optical fibre to homes, schools and businesses deliver superfast speeds of 100 megabits per second - 50 times faster than what most people use now. In conjunction with next generation wireless and satellite technologies we will make sure every household, school and business has access to fast broadband.
This will revolutionise teaching in our classrooms, revolutionise health care in our medical centres and our hospitals and will plug our nation into the global economy. It will link together communities and people all across Australia, so that Australians in regional areas are not left out. Significantly it has the potential to help Australia address many of the key challenges of the future, challenges such as the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, dealing with the consequences of an ageing population and arresting the trend towards increased levels of congestion in our major cities.
In other words, our national broadband policy is not about communications policy. It is about health policy; education policy; transport policy; and the whole way that governments meet the needs of our people.
Consider the role of the NBN in tackling climate change: it has been estimated that broadband can help reduce Australia's annual emissions of greenhouse gases by five per cent.
For example, video conferencing can remove the need to travel for face-to-face meetings. The Australian division of Cisco claims that it achieved a 16 per cent reduction in air travel in a single year since adopting videoconferencing and other telepresence facilities.
In 2008 Microsoft Australia saved $18,000 on a single quarterly management meeting of 130 people using its videoconferencing products Live Meeting and Roundtable.
In February 2009, the Australian Government announced that telepresence technology would be deployed across 20 Australian Government and state government locations for use in intergovernmental meetings such as Ministerial Councils. This will lower government travel costs and associated greenhouse emissions by reducing the need for face-to-face meetings.
Another example of the benefits is smart meters. Widespread deployment of smart meters, combined with in-home displays has the potential to improve operational efficiency and significantly reduce the amount of energy used by Australian households. In addition, studies show that greater consumer awareness of energy consumption assists in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Smart meters demonstrate the benefits of having a price for energy and an ability for households to be able to manage their energy usage.
Finally, smart grids will see the electricity transmission and distribution network equipped with digital sensors and remote controls; integration of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind; and smart meters communicating information to and from the household. Such a self-aware energy network will enable greater energy efficiency, reduced emissions and better utilisation of renewable energy sources such as solar.
In all these examples it demonstrates the benefits of having both information networks and market signals to help the Australian economy adjust to lower levels of carbon emissions. It is why we need a National Broadband Network - to assist in communicating vast amounts of information.
And it is why we need a price on carbon - that's why we need a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Together, the NBN and CPRS are critical to Australia's efforts to address climate change.
The NBN will also have enormous long-term productivity benefits. Access Economics estimates that across all key services - energy, water, health and transport - the adoption of smart technologies and the roll-out of high-speed broadband could add 70,000 jobs to the Australian economy, and add 1.5 per cent to Australia's GDP within a few years.
This is why, as we emerge from the global financial crisis, it is absolutely critical that we get on with the job and build our critical infrastructure, and that is what we intend to do.
We recognise that long-term infrastructure investments are an essential part of driving productivity and securing prosperity in the years to come. Investments in education and innovation and infrastructure are critical for the nation's long-term productivity growth.
Investment in broadband infrastructure will boost short-term employment opportunities while creating a foundation for our future economy.
     * It will create a platform for future innovation.
     * It will drive new business efficiencies.
     * It will support new smart infrastructure.
     * It will open new trade opportunities.
     * It will contribute to productivity growth across the economy.
Building a national high speed broadband network will create jobs now, and into the future: 25,000 jobs every year, on average, during the rollout of the network. At its peak, the rollout will support 37,000 jobs.
High speed broadband will also generate additional economic activity. The NBN is expected to generate additional economic activity worth some $37 billion over the life of the project - an additional quarter per cent of GDP every year for the life of the project.
Most importantly, high speed broadband, once built, has the potential to underpin innovation and job creation across every part of our economy. The former Commonwealth Department of Communications estimated that innovation from information and communications technology is the single biggest driver of business productivity, driving 78 per cent of productivity gains in service businesses and 85 per cent in manufacturing businesses.
Broadband allows the rapid transfer of information and saves business time and money and reduces paperwork. Online marketing and sales means access to global markets of consumers without the traditional costs of expansion, and it creates new opportunities for new businesses developing new broadband applications.
The Australian business community increasingly recognises the importance of high speed broadband to our future. A survey by the Australian Industry Group last year reported overwhelming support from business for the National Broadband Network, with more than 85 per cent of CEOs saying that internet access was highly important to their business. More than 93 per cent said the internet was driving productivity and 70 per cent said high-speed broadband created a strategic advantage.
Broadband is also having a transformative effect on the delivery of services and interaction with government, with major benefits to communities across the country.
Australia's population is set to increase to 35 million people over the next 40 years. Ubiquitous broadband, through the NBN, will reduce the pressure on our current population centres by making regional communities both attractive and viable - even the most remote communities.
Consider the experience of the Yorke Peninsula - with a population of just over 11,000 people and a higher than average proportion of people aged over 50. 35 per cent of those employed are primarily in agriculture.
In 2005, broadband arrived on the Yorke Peninsula. In 2008, a report commissioned by the South Australian Government estimated total economic benefits of $21.4 million to the Yorke Peninsula region from the broadband rollout.
Local businesses are now collaborating and trading with partners in distant locations, while doctors are using broadband to transfer medical files and access records. That is why it can never be good enough just to roll out high-speed broadband to the suburbs of our major cities - we must adopt a national approach, as we have done with the plan for the NBN.
This year's Budget recognised the importance of keeping our regional communities connected. We established a $60 million Digital Regions Initiative for digital education, health and emergency services projects in regional, rural and remote communities.
Today I am pleased to announce the first seven successful Digital Regions Initiative projects - a $26.5 million investment that will benefit regional communities across Australia.
In South Australia, we will invest $2.3 million in Ambulance Mobile Connect. Under this scheme, South Australian Ambulance Service vehicles will be equipped with mobile computing terminals connected to a variety of emergency response and medical information systems via a high speed mobile broadband network.
This will give paramedics real-time access to details of an emergency incident and critical patient information. It will also provide a variety of information systems that will improve ambulance response times and support the delivery of clinical care by paramedics.
In the Northern Territory, we will invest $7 million for Health e-Towns to deliver improvements in health and education outcomes for 17 remote towns. This investment will support the development of local networks and ICT enabled health, education and training services.
The health services delivered under this proposal will extend clinical consulting and diagnostic services through new e-health solutions. This project is estimated to reach approximately 30,000 predominantly Indigenous users across the Northern Territory.
In North East Victoria, we will invest $500,000 in Bushfire Spotting and Response technologies. Using remote cameras, telemetry and video conferencing devices connected by a wireless network, this project will help reduce the risks posed by bushfires through enhanced fire detection, management and response capability. Importantly, this proposal is aligned with the priorities identified as a result of the Victorian Bushfires Royal Commission.
The Government will also partner with Hunter New England Health by investing $5 million in Chronic Disease Management systems to provide more effective and equitable health care for consumers in remote and regional areas. These systems will increase the coverage of facility based telehealth services and link chronic disease sufferers in their homes to monitoring, educational and support services. This project will also provide increased network capacity services to isolated sites and improve the reporting and delivery of medical imaging tests.
In Western Australia, we will invest $2.8 million in bushfire prediction technology. This will provide families, communities, organisations and emergency services agencies in rural, regional and remote Australia with bushfire alerts (via SMS and email), access to bushfire simulation maps, fire fighting technique testing, a bushfire planning tool, and the improvement of bushfire resilient infrastructure.
In Tasmania, we will invest $4.9 million in the Connected - Any Student, Any School project. This will enable Tasmanian schools to use technologies to offer exciting and innovative personalised learning opportunities - using practical, hands on and local, national and global e-learning programs and services. In the short term, the focus will be on services in the NBN pilot towns of Scottsdale and Smithton, while in the longer term services will be delivered across the whole of Tasmania as the NBN is deployed.
And finally, I am pleased to announce a $4 million investment to the CDM-Net health project, which stretches across different states. It will assist health practitioners, hospitals, and allied health workers to develop and manage a chronic disease care plan for patients. This project will be led by Barwon Health in Victoria and is very well supported nationally, including by the key partner of Queensland Health.
These are all worthy projects that will co-fund digitally enabled applications to improve services in the key sectors of health, education and emergency services in regional, rural and remote communities across Australia in partnership with state, territory and local governments.
I know some communities are already asking when the NBN will reach them. I am pleased today to be able to report important progress on the NBN.
The NBN Co has been established to build and operate the network.
We have begun a detailed implementation study by a consortium of McKinsey and KPMG to provide information on the optimal market structure and competition regime, access models, technology impacts on policy issues and funding arrangements.
In Tasmania construction on the rollout has begun and the first 10 Tasmanian communities to receive superfast broadband have been announced.
Activities are also beginning on the mainland.
Last week, the Government announced Nextgen Networks had been selected to roll out almost 6,000km of new fibre optic backbone links.
As part of its broader investment in the National Broadband Network, the Government will invest $250 million in this new infrastructure that will connect over 100 regional communities and ultimately benefit over 395,000 people across five states and the Northern Territory.
These links will encourage more competition and better broadband services across regional Australia, and serve as important building blocks to support the requirements of the National Broadband Network. We have also introduced legislation to deliver structural reform for the telecommunications industry so that it is more competitive and innovative, and has stronger protections for consumers.
The Government recognises that the digital future requires change in the way that government communicates with Australian citizens and delivers services across the country. That is why we established the Government 2.0 Taskforce to investigate and report on how we can use information technology to strengthen the relationship between government and the Australian public.
While the Internet is the citizen's most common point of contact with government, it is still largely passive contact - people seeking information or filling in forms. The taskforce has been examining the larger potential of the Internet to help departments and officials directly hear the views and ideas of citizens, to personalise public services, and to allow for ongoing review and improvement of public services.
A competition which the Government 2.0 Taskforce hosted last month invited exponents of "data mash-ups" to transform government information into data bases that could benefit citizens. From this government data, 80 mash-ups were created in just two weeks.
The competition winner, LobbyLens, combined a range of business and electoral data to produce visual representations of links between government organisations, lobbyists and businesses.
Another entry, In their Honour - Mapping Anzac Graves, will, once it is fully developed, help Australians find the burial places of relatives who died in overseas conflicts.
Another entry created a service to report damaged amenities and public facilities to local governments around Australia. The service is known - in a classic case of public service jargon - as It's Buggered Mate.
And it points to a future in which information not only keeps government accountable, it can be fed back to government to help it deliver better services.
Governments and the public service should not fear the digital revolution, but welcome it. That is why my own website is now providing the opportunity for Australians to post comments to my blog and participate virtually in real time discussion directly with me through the PM's Web Chat.
Since the website's relaunch on 15 July this year, we've run four online forums gathering over 1,500 comments, and through a variety of email and twitter updates.
I have also hosted two live web chats with around 45 members of the community. The first web chat on Climate Change was held on 10 August, the second web chat for Young Australians was held on 22 October. These events are the first time an Australian Prime Minister has hosted live, real-time online engagement, and they are just the start.
Like Community Cabinet, they are part of the Government's commitment to a more accessible, open and transparent way of governing.
Our Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan website which went live on 25 March this year set a new benchmark for transparency and interactivity by Government. The website provides information and regular updates on all components of the $42 billion Economic Stimulus Package.
The unique My Community interactive Google map allows visitors to track about 50,000 approved projects across the nation. Users can search by suburb, town or postcode to see what projects are underway in their community, across all elements of the Economic Stimulus Plan. As of 12 November, the website had attracted 279,405 unique visits and more than 1.1 million total page views.
The yourHealth website is another Australian Government innovation that provides a wide range of ways for the community to contribute to the national health reform conversation. Since its launch on 27 July this year, yourHealth.gov.au has attracted more than 150,000 visitors and has received more than 1,150 submissions from the community, and its video submission system is an Australian Government first. It provides an alternative to a written submission by allowing the community to film their views and submit them online as a movie.
To date, 78 videos have been published, featuring a wide range of personal reflections and experiences of the health system. This new website allows the Government to listen to the community and lets community members explore, review and respond to comments from other community members, a process which will be further improved with the NBN.
As part of our investment in the NBN, the Government has announced an $80 million Rural and Regional National Broadband Network Initiative. Australia has one of the lowest population densities on the planet and this initiative is designed to ensure digital inclusion across rural and remote areas through three measures:
     * expansion of the ABC's Local Regional Broadband Hubs;
     * boosting funding to the Digital Regions Initiative to encourage innovative projects in regional, rural and remote communities; and
     * establishing a network of Rural NBN Coordinators to help drive broadband take-up and use in regional Australia.
Beyond the NBN, we are continuing to build digital confidence through related government programs and initiatives. Let me mention just a few.
As part of the Super Science initiative, we are funding ICT infrastructure for research organisations.
To address global challenges, such as climate change, we are funding the development of Smart Grid, Smart City in partnership with the energy sector. This demonstration project will deliver a fully integrated, commercial-scale smart grid and will inform the business case for broader industry investment in smart grids in Australia.
As part of the Digital Education Revolution, we have created a National Secondary School Computer Fund to provide new or upgraded ICT for secondary students in Years 9 to 12.
In April this year, we announced funding for the Vocational Education Broadband Network to allow the Tertiary and Further Education sector to access a high quality broadband network tailored to their specific requirements.
The importance of e-Health is recognised around the world as an opportunity to fundamentally reshape and improve health service delivery. The National E-Health Transition Authority was established by the Australian Government and state and territory governments to progress e-Health in Australia.
As business analysts Deloitte reported in September this year, the NBN has the potential to rival the impact of other technology milestones such as the widespread adoption of personal computers in the 1980s and the mass market adoption of mobile phones during the 1990s and 2000s, and as Deloitte's report says, the wider business community should be starting now to plan for the impact of the NBN on 'traditional' operations - which brings me to the purpose of the NBN forum for today and tomorrow.
The challenge at this forum is to help map out the applications, services and business models which will thrive in this new high-speed broadband environment in Australia. It is to ask the question 'what is possible?', to identify the next steps to maximise the growth of Australia's digital economy, and specifically, to identify what measures need to be undertaken by governments, business and community participants, and how do we make sure that all Australians can benefit from the potential of high-speed broadband - so that we use this technology to build a fairer Australia
We need to hear ideas across all the Forum streams - Smart Infrastructure, e-Health, Digital Education, e-Business and e-Community. These are the content, service and application streams with the greatest need and immediate potential for productivity and social benefit.
With the National Broadband Network, we are literally building our nation's future.
The Government is working to deploy smart technologies, promote digital inclusion and review Australia's regulatory framework to support and exploit the opportunities born of the digital revolution and all that will follow.
With these commitments, it then turns to industry to take the lead to ensure that Australia realises the full potential of the digital economy. Your task at this forum is to identify the first level of applications, services and business models and the steps required to make them happen.
Today marks the beginning of a nation-wide conversation of how we turn the digital vision to reality.
We have never pretended this mammoth project is easy. We need your input, your support and your vision. This is important work and I look forward to the results of the time you spend together. 


The Prime Minister today announced a $26.5 million investment in the first seven Digital Regions projects that will deliver more connected health, education and emergency services in regional, rural and remote communities across Australia.
The Prime Minister made the announcement at the Realising our Broadband Future Forum held at the University of New South Wales in Sydney.
The Digital Regions Initiative is about making sure that regional, rural and remote communities benefit from broadband and digital technologies and are not left behind.
     * Ambulance Mobile Connect in South Australia will provide vehicles with mobile computing terminals connected via a high speed mobile network ($2.3 million).
     * Health e-Towns in the Northern Territory will deliver ICT enabled health, education and training services for 17 remote towns ($7 million).
     * Bushfire Spotting and Response technologies in North East Victoria will use remote cameras, telemetry and video conferencing to enhance fire detection, management and response capability ($500,000).
     * Chronic Disease Management systems in the Hunter New England region in NSW will increase coverage of facility based telehealth services ($5 million). Bushfire prediction technology project In Western Australia will provide communities with bushfire alerts and access to simulation maps.
     * ($2.8 million). Connected - Any Student, Any School project in Tasmania will deliver practical, hands on global e-learning programs to schools ($4.9 million).
     * The CDM-Net health project in Barwon, Victoria and Queensland, will assist in developing and managing a chronic disease care plan for patients ($4 million).
The $60 million Digital Regions Initiative co-funds projects in partnership with state, territory and local governments. It was announced in the 2009-10 Budget as part of the Government's response to the Regional Telecommunications Review (RTR), which was chaired by Dr Bill Glasson AO.
The two-day, Realising our Broadband Future Forum has been held to plan for Australia's digital future and identify ways to maximise the potential benefits from a high speed National Broadband Network.
The Forum brings together hundreds of broadband and digital experts, and business and community leaders. Forum participants and the general public can contribute to the discussion via twitter and collaboratively edit the map of our next steps. Plenary sessions of the forum will be webcast live, with audio streaming of other sessions.


The Prime Minister today announced that the Government would recommend to the Governor-General in Council, that Her Excellency appoint Stephen Sedgwick as the Australian Public Service Commissioner.
Mr Sedgwick has had a long and distinguished career in the public sector having served as the Secretary to the Commonwealth Departments of Finance and Education between 1992 and 2002. He was, most recently, Professor and Director of the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research at the University of Melbourne. He is a former Commissioner and Chairperson of the Industry Commission, a former senior officer of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and was the Senior Economic Adviser to Prime Minister Hawke from 1985 to 1988.
"Mr Sedgwick brings to the position a wealth of experience in public administration at senior levels," the Prime Minister said. "He will play a key role in the process of the review and reform of the Australian Public Service which the Government is undertaking to ensure that it is well placed to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century".
Mr Sedgwick graduated with Honours in Economics from the University of Sydney and holds a Master's Degree from the University of London ( LSE). He was a member of the Board of the Asian Development Bank between 2002 and 2007. He is currently a member of the Research and Policy Council of the Committee for the Economic Development of Australia.


Toyota Australia has launched the first ready-for-sale hybrid vehicle to be built in Australia.
The Hybrid Camry increases consumer choice by giving motorists the option of buying an Australian-made hybrid.
It expands Australia's manufacturing capacity today, and provides a platform for future growth.
It gives us a practical way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions - and to do it right now.
It is a clear sign of Toyota's commitment to this country, and to the renewal of the Australian car industry.
The Hybrid Camry will be around 30 per cent more fuel efficient and produce around 30 per cent fewer emissions than a standard Toyota Camry.
At least 10,000 vehicles will be produced each year, mostly for sale at home, with around 300 to be exported to New Zealand.
Production of the Hybrid Camry is expected to inject around $90 million into the Victorian and South Australian automotive parts industries and support jobs at Toyota's suppliers.
More than 50 hybrid-unique parts will be sourced from local suppliers.
The Altona plant is one of only five Toyota plants in the world manufacturing the Hybrid Camry.
The Australian Government is supporting the production of the vehicle with $35 million in funding from the $1.3 billion Green Car Innovation Fund, a key element of A New Car Plan for a Greener Future.
The Victorian Government also made a significant contribution.
The Government is working with other Australian car and component manufacturers on ways to build cleaner, greener cars that reduce carbon emissions and improve fuel efficiency.


Prime Minister Rudd will visit Japan on Tuesday 15 December on his way to Copenhagen to attend the Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
In Japan, the Prime Minister will meet Japanese Prime Minister Hatoyama and address a senior business audience on the Australian economy.
Japan is Australia's largest export market and a major investor in Australia.
The Australia-Japan economic relationship has brought great benefits to both countries over many decades.
The Prime Minister's visit will underline the Government's commitment to strengthening economic and trade ties between Australia and Japan.
The Prime Minister will use his meeting with Prime Minister Hatoyama to discuss approaches to the Copenhagen climate change meeting; to further develop our security cooperation; to discuss shared interests in nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament; and other matters of mutual interest.


MITCHELL: The Prime Minister, Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil. Thanks for having me on the program.
MITCHELL: Well, thanks for coming. It's reported you're taking 113 people to Copenhagen with you, including a personal photographer and nine media advisers. Is that right?
PM: No, it's not.
MITCHELL: How many?
PM: I think I'm taking a press secretary, I think I'm taking a media assistant. Penny's probably got one as well. So I'm not quite sure where all that came from.
And in terms of, you ask about official photographers, since day dot Neil, there's always been official photographers, Mr Howard's time and before, who go around just compiling the Australian documentary record.
In terms of delegation size, a large number of those folk are attached to the Australian delegation from various state and territory governments, that's one thing. In terms of our core, Australian Government delegation, it's probably in the order of about 50 or 60. A number of those are also accredited to our existing embassy in Copenhagen, they bring in extra staff from Europe to support what is a very big conference.
But let me just say this - this is a very big conference in terms of Australia's national interest, because climate change and the response to it globally affects the environment and the economy for a long time ahead, so you've got to have a team of legal officials, policy advisers to scrutinise a highly complex text, because the implications for Australia, long-term, are very significant.
MITCHELL: OK, I can understand the official photographer, of course, but there are not nine press secretaries. That would look like a publicity -
PM: Yeah, but it's not. That's just untrue. That is just absolutely untrue.
MITCHELL: Why do we have more people there than the British?
PM: As I said, last time I looked at the British Isles, they didn't have state and territory governments. A large slice of those folk are coming from other governments, and that again has been consistent with previous practice, with state and territory governments where there are matters under discussion which affect their long-term interests as well, we extend an invitation to them and they come. Frankly, who among them actually front at the end of the day, I'm not sure, but we're required to give an accredited list to the UN.
But I go back to my general point - this is a big, complex document. You need to have your legal and policy people scrutinising it. You don't want anything to happen by misadventure which affects Australia's national interest. And when we're talking about bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, acting on climate change and doing so in a way which has least impact on the Australian economy, it's important that we've got the best advice on hand.
MITCHELL: I'd like to get back to emissions trading later if I may, but Barnaby Joyce, the new frontbench spokesman for the Opposition, has said overnight, well he's predicted the possibility of economic Armageddon because the United States may renege on its debts, and he's said today, only a short while ago on AM, that the states, the Australian states, may not have the capacity to repay their debt, particularly in Queensland. What's the implication of that?
PM: I would suggest that the Liberal leader, Mr Abbott, and Mr Hockey, the Shadow Treasurer, come out today and confirm or repudiate what Senator Joyce has said. We are dealing with big, national economic interests here. If Mr Joyce or Senator Joyce, the Coalition spokesman on Finance, is now saying that's it's the Coalition's view that state governments in Australia could default on their debt, that is the most serious charge. He's got to produce of evidence of that, but just be mindful of the Australian economic interest here.
You want someone in a national position of responsibility broadcasting to the international financial markets a view that state and territory governments could default? I mean, there are basic interests for Australia at stake here, and responsible, calm, considered policy suggests that that sort of remark - erratic, ill-considered - should simply not be made. Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey have a responsibility to come out and clarify Liberal National Party policy on this today.
MITCHELL: Is he wrong?
PM: The Australian states and territories have among the strongest credit ratings anywhere in the world - a combination of AAA and AA. The sovereign credit rating of Australia is AAA. Around the world, when you go to international bond markets, the bonds most sought after around the world are those from Australia, from the Australian Government and from state and territory governments. We have built up a proud reputation and it has been absolutely rock-solid and robust on our public financial reputation. And to have the Finance spokesman of the alternative government of Australia saying that one of our states could default - this is gross economic irresponsibility, policy on the run, shooting from the lip.
MITCHELL: So what are the implications of him saying this? I mean, he only Opposition. He's not you or one of the premiers. What are the implications? What are the dangers for the states here?
PM: Well, can I just say this: in international financial markets, they are ultimately built on the basis of trust and confidence, and therefore if you have what will be seen in trading rooms across Europe and North America as a credible national spokesman, that is the alternative Finance Minister of Australia, saying that one of our states could default on their borrowings, there are national interests at stake here. You know what it's like, you're a very experienced news man, you know what it's like if you're in a foreign news bureau and you see this thing come in on the wires, it gets disseminated through Bloomberg and it sets off a whole series of concerns on the part of people who may not be familiar with the detail of Australia's finances.
I just think there is a reputational interest here for Australia, whatever side of politics you're on - Liberal, Labor, National - to defend the Australian economic interest. We have strong credit ratings. They have been reaffirmed over the last 12 months. These should be defended by all sides of politics, not undermined by someone shooting from the lip, policy on the run, policy made up.
MITCHELL: So what about his warning that there could be an economic Armageddon because the United States might default on its debts? Is there any truth in that?
PM: Again, there is a question of responsibility here. When you look at the global economy's response, and global governments' response to the financial crisis over the last 12 months, governments around the world have had to borrow, to step into the marketplace or step into the economy to prevent the whole show from falling into a heap, like happened in 1929-32 in the Great Depression. They have done so, we have done so in Australia, as well, and we've done so with the result being the only economy of the advanced economies not to have gone into recession.
In the United States they've had to borrow more. They also have very large global military operations as well, which are phenomenally expensive, but for someone as the alternative Finance Minister of Australia to run around the place saying 'America could default, Australian state governments could default', that's not responsible economic policy. That is shooting from the lip, making it up on the run, but I think being very, very irresponsible about basic Australian interests.
MITCHELL: Just back to emissions trading, you've got a lot of work to do here to convince the public. I would argue to you, and the by-election showed this, that the public is not generally with you on emissions trading. They possibly don't understand it and they don't support it. They're frightened of it. Do you agree with that?
PM: I think, Neil, there is a lot of complexity in this and it will take a lot of time to explain carefully to people.
MITCHELL: So why would you try to rush it through?
PM: Well, let me come to that in a minute. Remember, there are two things here. One is, why do we need to act? We are in the hottest and driest continent and we are hit by climate change fastest and hardest. That is a scientific fact. And, that's where we stand, among the hottest and driest continents in the world. Therefore, the impact on drought is an economic impact, the impact on agriculture, the economic impact, the destruction of the Great Barrier Reef is an economic and environmental impact.
These are real costs of inaction which flow through to the economy, and what we know from the analysis is that the cost of inaction is vastly in excess of the cost of action. That's the first point.
MITCHELL: But that's based on the premise that it is essentially man-made, that it's entirely man-made, it's not partly man-made. That's based on the premise that we can actually change it.
PM: Global warming is caused by this huge concentration of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere, and the reason it's gone through the roof since the Industrial Revolution is because man's been making more of it. And there are 4,000 scientists around the world assembled by all governments, historically some sceptical governments and other more persuaded, who've got together and produced a consensus scientific report for all the governments of the world which said 'this is produced by humans.'
Therefore, the solution lies with humans and the practical question is how you go about doing it, and why we've got an emissions trading scheme, a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, in three quick steps is this:
One, we in Australia have to bring down our level of carbon pollution consistent with countries across the world, and the most efficient and least-costly way of doing it is through what's called an emissions trading scheme. That was John Howard's solution as well.
Second point, how do we do it? We actually charge the big polluters, the 1,000 biggest polluters in Australia, for the act of polluting or putting out this carbon into the atmosphere, and that's to encourage them with direct incentives to therefore adopt clean energy practices in the future.
The third thing is this: that that the money that we raise through these permits to pollute that are issued to these biggest polluters is then used to provide payments directly to households who would then be affected by any increase in the cost of living. So, if you're a low income earner, under $60,000, you will get 100-120 per cent compensation for any adjustment to the cost of living, which we estimate to be about 1.5 per cent.
MITCHELL: And what if you're a high income earner, over 100-
PM: Secondly, if you're between $60,000-160,000, we will provide partial compensation, but for the first half of that group there'll be full compensation, around about 100 per cent, and then as you go higher on the income scheme, on a sliding scale, the compensation get less. And here's the third point-
MITCHELL: What about over $160,000?
PM: Mate, you and I are on our own, and the reason is we believe that people like you and I can afford the adjustment, but about, from my memory, about 90 per cent of Australia's 8.8 million families will receive either full or partial compensation for what Treasury modelling says will be a 1.5 per cent increase in the cost of living coming from this, so that's how the scheme works.
MITCHELL: And how long does that formula survive for?
PM: Continues into the future-
MITCHELL: What, beyond 2015?
PM: Whatever the target is for the future that we agree globally and Australia agrees, that formula for compensation for low-income earners and for middle-income earners continues into the future. Furthermore, it's all outlined in black and white in the Government's White Paper.
We've got a policy on climate change. It's called a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. It's early action to deal with carbon pollution and to help families on the way through in the way I've just suggested. All we have from the Liberal leader at the moment is, frankly, a lot of fear.
MITCHELL: You willing to fight an election on it?
PM: We were elected at the last election to introduce an emissions trading scheme, and guess what? So was John Howard. That's what he took to the last election. That's what Peter Costello supported. That's what Malcolm Turnbull supported. The only person who doesn't support it these days, it seems, is the current leader of the Liberal Party. Why did Mr Howard and I -
MITCHELL: Well, I'd suggest a lot of the Australian people don't.
PM: No, I understand that. Why did Mr Howard and I finally have a unity ticket on emissions trading? What do you think, Neil? The reason was all of our boffins got together, looked at all the options and concluded, as have 36 governments around the world, that this is the least costly way of adjusting to a low-carbon future. That's why John Howard, Kevin Rudd, arrived at the same conclusion on how to deal with climate change. It's just that it took him 12 years to get there.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break, come back with more from the Prime Minister, including some calls, if we have time.
[Commercial Break]
MITCHELL: We'll take a quick call. Thanks Len, go ahead Len
CALLER: Good morning Mr Prime Minister and Neil. I'm a Labor voter-
PM: G'day Len, how are you?
CALLER: Very well thank you, and I'm a scientist and I wouldn't vote for Tony Abbott if he was to guarantee my team was to win the flag for the next ten years. That aside, I am a sceptic and not a denier and there's a powerful difference between those words and it's not dignified to attack the man and not the ball and to have ad hominem attacks on people who are sceptical about climate change. As a scientist it's very difficult to see a direct causal link between human activity and climate change.
MITCHELL: Well fair enough, there's a fair point there. It's a bit like the new racism, if you question something once you get called racist; if you question this you're called a denier.
PM: What I would say in response to Len's question is, as a government, what's I've got to do is respond to the overwhelming advice of the four thousand scientists called the International Panel on Climate Change, which has been working now for ten for fifteen years on all the global data on the change in the worlds temperatures.
The fact that we've got in the last decade or so, nine of the ten hottest years on record, you can't just dismiss that as being an accident. Secondly, their consensus is that this is brought about by human activity and if you are the chief executive of a company, the chairman of a board and you are given that sort of advice, well frankly, you're going to be held to account by your shareholders in the future if you didn't act. 
Similarly as Prime Minister of Australia and presidents and prime ministers of other counties around the world, if you're given this advice by your established panel of scientific advisers and that's their conclusion, you have no alternative but to act for the future.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, a year ago, you promised, you're government promised to make it easier to switch banks. Now we've seen the experience of Westpac this week and you haven't yet done it. When will you?
PM: Bank switching, the provisions for it, are in. The extent to which they've been used by the public, at present, I don't have the figures in front of me-
MITCHELL: It cost's $750, $1,750 to move your mortgage at the moment.
PM: Well I'll tell you what I'll have the Treasurer on you program ... but this is your last day and I'll try and get him to call into your program later in the day with the facts and figures on that. The idea with bank switching was to make it easy, quick and inexpensive for people to shift in response to any predatory behaviour by banks-
MITCHELL: You think you've done that? You've done that?
PM: The bank switching arrangements have been put in some time ago. The actual take up of it, I can't give you the figures on that but I'll get someone from either the Treasurer's office or mine to give you the figures.
MITCHELL: Japan has announced today that they'll continue whaling, your reaction to that?
PM: Well our policy is absolutely clear cut and that is that we don't accept Japan's premise for those terms of so-called scientific whaling. We've indicated, through the international whaling commission that we're prepared to discuss this with the Japanese and resolve it diplomatically.
But let me be very clear Neil, if we cannot resolve this matter diplomatically, we will take international legal action. I've said that before, I'm serious about it. I would prefer to deal with it diplomatically but if we can't get there diplomatically, that's the alternative course of action that we'll pursue.
MITCHELL: Will you again send ships out if they come into our area?
PM: Last time we sent ships out, the purpose was to gather evidentiary material to support a future court case should that prove to be necessary. What we've done since then is try to work our way through this diplomatically with the Japanese government. That's run in some obvious obstacles; you've just mentioned one of them in your statement this morning. As I said, if we can't get there diplomatically, let me be absolutely clear cut that we will use the resources available to the Australian government to deploy international legal action through the appropriate international judicial forum.
MITCHELL: The 53rd boat load of asylum seekers to arrive this year has been seized, or has been taken. There are around 1,384 people at Christmas Island. We have had riots, we have had continuing trouble, do you expect this to continue into next year?
PM: Well what we've got this year, primarily Neil has come about because of a civil war in Sri Lanka in the middle of, June/ July to August, about the middle of the year. If you look at last year I think we had something like seven boasts arrive all together. There was no civil war in Sri Lanka last year. These things are directly the product of what happens with insecurity around the world. 
What happens next year? Look, this is just a challenge you've got to roll with, the key thing is to maintain our cop on the beat out there in the maritime patrol zone, interdicting people smuggling operations around the region. You know, with our friends and partners in the region, we've interdicted 89 people smuggling operations in the last year. These are huge, a whole lot of people have been charged, convicted, throw into jail. But you know, it's not a perfect world, so we've just got to deal with this as each practical step along the way.
MITCHELL: Are you aware Australia has frozen adoption of Ethiopian orphans?
PM: Ah, no, I'm not aware of that. 
MITCHELL: To be fair, it's the Attorney-General. I didn't expect it would be.
PM: I'm asked many questions. That one I was not expecting.
MITCHELL: It's causing some angst, but I'll get onto the Attorney-General about it. Now Bob's party, Bob Hawke' party, how was the stripper? It the second one you've seen -
PM: I was wondering if you would ask about that. I think the general view around the room for Bob's 80th birthday, he's a great Australian, been a hugely successful Australian Prime Minister, was one of surprise. There you go.
MITCHELL: Stripper though, was it tacky though? A stripper with John Howard's head?
PM: Well I'm not going to comment of the artistic merit or otherwise of what was provided by way of the entertainment. As I said, generally people were surprised by it. Bob's 80 years old, let's just celebrate his great achievements for Australia and he celebrates his birthday in his own unique way. There were 300 people there, former Prime Ministers, Paul Keating, others, there celebrating along with him. This added, shall I say, a further dimension to it.
MITCHELL: I get that one of your favourite commentators, Andrew Bolt, made the point in the Herald Sun today that uh-
PM: Andrew's a big fan of mine, always has been.
MITCHELL: Politicians tend to say footballers should behave better, but perhaps it wasn't the right message
PM: Look as I said he's 80 years old.
MITCHELL: Was it his fault? Who ordered the stripper?
PM: I've got no idea. Bob, Blanch, the organisers? but look, the arrangements for the day, as I said, were a little unusual but let's just celebrate Bob's life. He is an Australian larrikin from central casting and nobody out there should claim that they're purer than the driven snow, neither you nor I.
MITCHELL: If he's an Australian larrikin from central casting, what are you?
PM: That is for people like you to reach a conclusion on, not for people like me. I just get out there, work hard, do my job others can make a judgement about whether I'm having a good effect or not. That's a matter for them.
MITCHELL: Tough year?
PM: Yeah, it's been a huge year.
MITCHELL: What stands out in your mind this year?
PM: Just wrestling to the ground the economic crisis. I can't begin to describe to you how much physical energy and time that's taken the Cabinet and officials to try and handle this beast. The fact that we've come through, frankly, with the only, one of the major advanced economies not to go into recession, unemployment down yesterday, we've got the second-lowest unemployment when it's going through the roof still in Europe and America. And the fact we've still got the lowest debt and the lowest deficit, I think that has been a good set of achievements, but I tell you what, there were white-knuckle moments all the way through.
MITCHELL: Have you shed a tear this year?
PM: Yeah, I have.
MITCHELL: Why?
PM: I'm a human being.
MITCHELL: What about?
PM: Oh, I don't think I'll go into that. But I respond to tragedy when you see it and you experience it and you feel it. You know, people go through a lot of tragedy in life, and if you just turn yourself into some heart of stone on these questions then you cease being a human being, and if you cease being a human being I don't think you can be a decent Prime Minister.
MITCHELL: Are you having a holiday?
PM: Yeah, yeah, looking forward to it.
MITCHELL: Are going to write an 8,000 word essay during your holiday?
PM: Only if you particularly request, and I'll have you read it on 3AW, word for word.
MITCHELL: What will you read on holidays?
PM: What am I reading at the moment? I'm reading a bit of a biography of Churchill, the new one, a little one, which is written by Paul Johnson, who is the conservative columnist in the United Kingdom, which is quite a good little read. A few other things I'm reading. A history of music and getting into how various forms of music evolved over time, just to get your head out of, shall I say, the normal grind. But Therese, the three kids, our son-in-law, the cat and the dog, you know, that, for me, is perfection come Christmas time.
MITCHELL: Thank for your help during the year, and all the best for the holiday season.
PM: And, can I say this to all your listeners, I wish them a really good and restful Christmas.


PRICE: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's on the line, PM, good morning.
PM: How'd you go on that one Steve?
PRICE: Ah, you lost I think.
PM: Hey mate, how come you're hanging up the spurs? I mean, you're an institution in Sydney.
PRICE: Ah look, I just think it's time to go and do a couple of other things, I've got a few other things that have been offered to me, so I'm going to just have a look around, spend some time with the family, all those sort of things that people say when they don't know what they're going to do PM, I'll find something to do.
PM: Well, all the best, and wish you well for the future, and thank you for your contribution in the rolling, sometimes rollicking conversation of the Australian democracy, over the last several years.
PRICE: Yeah, I'll get a lot of calls this morning from people saying you're not tough enough on Kevin Rudd, you never ask him the tough questions, and I think we have to have respect very much for your office first and foremost, and a spirited exchange is something you and I have always had, I think.
PM: Well, that's kind of my reflection of it, and I don't think the universal view is that there should be respect for any particular person in Australian public life. But you know, the thing about our system of democracy is that people get out there and say what they think. One of the great things that we've tried to do as a Government is get around the country with Community Cabinet, standing there for hours in front of live community audiences, four to five hundred people, and copping it amidships from people just telling you what they think. But actually it is pretty good for you.
PRICE: You reckon they've worked?
PM: Yeah, I do- we've done nineteen of them round the country. Always are learning something new. And the best thing about it is that you get the Cabinet and you get all the public servants and advisers out of Canberra and into regional Australia, and I think that's been a terrific thing and we'll keep going in the future.
PRICE: You're a bit of a freak, you, and I say that in the very nicest way-
PM: (inaudible)
PRICE: Your poll ratings are sky high, and yet I just get a sense in the community that there's a lot of things that people are really worried about, particularly with this ETS. Do you think you've failed to communicate what it is properly?
PM: Look Steve, I'm the first one to say this is complex, it's hard. Every Government in the world finds it complex and hard. And we've got more to do in communicating what the change will be- but two or three quick points on that. Remember, Australia is the hottest and driest continent on earth, at least one of them. And therefore, the impact of climate change will be felt first and hardest here. And that's a huge economic impact, whether that's drought, the impact on agriculture, rising food prices, the impact on the Great Barrier Reef, Kakadu, all those things.
So the second question is, how do you act? And what John Howard concluded going into the 2007 election, and what we concluded at the same time, was that the only way of doing it was through what is called an Emissions Trading Scheme. It's complex, but all of our expert advisers, both to his Government and to mine, have said this is the least costly way of bringing down carbon pollution.
And the third point is this. How is that done? What we do is that we actually charge the thousand biggest polluters in Australia. And that's designed to do two or three things. Encourage them, with a direct incentive to use cleaner energy in the future, thereby reducing the amount of carbon pollution, thereby taking the pressure off temperature increases in the future. Secondly, the money we raise by charging them to do that, we then use to support families for what Treasury says will be about a 1.5 per cent increase in the cost of living. And we do that by making sure that it's possible for low income earners and middle income earners to get by- 100 per cent compensation for low income earners, and for middle income earners between 60 and 160 grand, there'll be partial compensation, more than half of them will get full compensation.
PRICE: Tony Abbott came out yesterday and claimed it'll cost $400 billion. Does he need to be careful to not just open his mouth and spout the first sentence that comes into his head?
PM: Look, there's just frankly too much policy on the run from the alternative Government of Australia. You've got to actually be calm, methodical, do the policy hard yards, and come up with alternative solutions for the future. If there was a better solution for example to emissions trading, or what we call a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, then I think Mr Howard would've come up with that alternative, or I would've come up with that alternative. But together with 36 Governments around the world, this is the least costly way of doing it. And that's why action now on a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the right action on climate change. It's the responsible action, like action in Copenhagen is necessary globally.
There's just too much shooting from the lip, policy on the run, erratic approaches, and I see for example this morning, the alternative Finance Minister for Australia going out there and saying that our State Governments in Australia could default on their debt. That is just grossly irresponsible, when international financial markets are listening carefully to what goes on in the Australian debate, and when our Australian State Governments have between them, the highest credit rating available in the world, either AAA or AA. That's just irresponsible, shooting from the lip.
PRICE: What are you hearing out of Copenhagen? I mean, we're hearing there is some disarray - was that to be expected?
PM: Oh, absolutely. I think between now and the end of next week Steve, you'll hear about 1000 predictions of total failure. You'll hear 1000 predictions of stunning success. And who's going to be responsible for delivering that success. As you know, defeat - sorry, success or victory, as you know, has a thousand fathers, victory none. Or should I say success or victory has a thousand fathers, defeat none. So you're going to have all this speculation. The key thing is just to get in there and do the hard yards and work with other Governments to try and produce a real global agreement which keeps temperature increases for the future down to two degrees Celsius, if we can do that. But make sure that everyone pulls their weight around the world. That's what we're trying to do.
There's no easy answers to this. It's hard stuff. Every Government in the world is finding this hard. But it's a challenge for us all, otherwise we're going to push all that work, all that responsibility onto our kids and grandkids, and by then, it may be too late.
PRICE: It's my last day so I'm not going to replay your buck stops with me health speech-
PM: I'm quite happy if you do, because I don't walk away from that.
PRICE: I know you don't, I notice the Telegraph today has had also a go at this. Are you going to actually do something to give people better treatment in hospitals?
PM: Absolutely, and can I just answer that in two ways. When we came into office, Mr Abbott, as Health Minister, had ripped a billion dollars out of the public hospitals of Australia. What we did last year, was to increase the Australian Government's allocation to the States and Territories for public hospital funding and health funding. It went up by 50 per cent for the next five years, from some $43 billion which is what we inherited as a base, up to some $64 billion. That's what we've done so far.
The second thing is this - what do we do now for the long term future? That's the hospital reform exercise we've got underway at the moment. They've produced their recommendations for the future, in July this year. 123 really complex recommendations for the future.
The Health Minister and I have spent the last four to five months visiting 76 hospitals around Australia- I've done 20 of them myself; road-testing each of those recommendations with local health experts. Then this week we road-tested the recommendations with the Premiers in a meeting of the Council of Australian Governments. And what I've said all along is that we will arrive at our policy conclusions for the future on health and hospitals in the early part of next year.
That's the proper, methodical, calm way of working our way through this. But we've already acted, increased our funding by 50 per cent already, and this is the way we're dealing with long-term reform for the future. We've got to get it right. So many Australians depend on health systems every day, you can't get it wrong.
PRICE: Just to help me on my way, can you tell me when the election might be next year?
PM: You know something? I have had about twelve requests from journalists in particular, about when the election should not be, because it'll interfere with their holiday plans, or various family arrangements or overseas travel that they've got planned. So if you want to stick yours in as well, that'll be fine.
PRICE: Have a good family Christmas. I suspect you won't be travelling given how much you have been travelling.
PM: Mate, I would happily never travel again. I mean, I would happily just sit on the verandah and do some reading, do some work, and spend some time with Therese and the kids, and the cat and the dog. I am over that. But in the current global age there is no alternative, whether it's on the global economy, or big global challenges like climate change. You've got to be in there arguing Australia's case as hard as you can. That means you've got to be there.
PRICE: Thanks for helping us over the last couple of years, appreciate it.
PM: And seriously, all the best mate, and have a really good Christmas yourself. And to all the listeners, can I also say a happy Christmas, and have a great break with your families as well.
PRICE: Thanks Prime Minister.


This is an historic day for the Australian automotive industry.
This first hybrid car produced in Australia, for Australians, and by Australians- you should be proud of what you're doing here, this day, for your country.
On top of that, this is an achievement of which all Australians should be proud. It's one of those days when we should be saying "Oh what a feeling, Australia!"
This is a great day for the country.
Just as the nation welcomed the first all-Australian Holden car in 1948 with Ben Chifley there for the first ride, sixty years later, all Australians should welcome the first Australian hybrid car as well. I place you on notice. I am down to drive this first car once it comes off the assembly line. My staff are nervous.
I have not been allowed to drive a car for two years - Occupational Health and Safety Standards should be made ready. Clear a path for the PM behind the wheel.
This is the beginning of a whole new era in Australian motoring.
Australia is one of only about 16 countries around the world to design, engineer and build a car from scratch. That's an important achievement for our nation.
And today Australia joins only four other countries that can produce a Toyota hybrid car.
The Toyota hybrid Camry will offer Australians the choice of a fuel-efficient, low emissions vehicle that is produced right here in Australia.
Compared with standard vehicles, it will use about 30% less petrol, and, critically, produce about 30% less carbon emissions.
The hybrid Camry is good for motorists, it's good for the economy, it's good for jobs, and it's good for action on climate change. Well done Toyota.
As we speak, the Governments of the world are gathering together in Copenhagen, in Denmark, to work towards an international agreement to tackle climate change - reducing carbon emissions is a huge challenge for us all. Every country, every industry, every person working together.
And the transport sector, which contributes 14% of Australia's total carbon emissions, must play its part if we are going to cool the planet in the future.
And today we see the automotive industry here in Australia playing its part, beginning the transition to a lower carbon economy.
And that transition means new jobs, new skills, new opportunities for this great Australian industry.
The Toyota hybrid Camry is an important step in Australia's ability to achieve our domestic emissions targets, and to reduce the impact of climate change.
It's an important practical step towards Australia's lower carbon future.
The Australian Government is pleased to support the production of the Toyota hybrid Camry in Australia in partnership with the Victorian Government.
It's good for the environment, critical for supporting jobs in the automotive sector- jobs which have disappeared around the world in the automotive sector because of the global economic recession and the global financial crisis.
But here in Australia we have worked together to keep these jobs, and I congratulate Toyota for their part in that vision.
Production of the hybrid Camry is expected to inject around $90 million into the Victorian and South Australian automotive parts industries, and will create new jobs at Toyota's suppliers.
More than 50 hybrid-unique parts have been sourced from local suppliers.
This great industry is worth $7 billion a year. 4,500 jobs at Toyota.
60,000 jobs directly in the automotive industry.
200,000 jobs indirectly, in related industries.
On the day I became leader of the Australian Labor Party, three years ago, I said this: "I don't want to be Prime Minister of a country that doesn't make things anymore".
My view has not changed.
This country will continue to make things in the future- and that includes making world-class motor vehicles.
That's why we put in place a 13 year, $6.2 billion New Car Plan for a Greener Future.
It's what we discussed with Toyota and their global leadership in Nagoya last year- how we could work together on projects like this one here that we are launching today.
It gives the industry the certainty that it needs and the incentives that it needs to innovate for the future.
The centrepiece of this plan is a $1.3 billion Green Car Innovation Fund.
The first grant from that $1.3 billion Australian Government Fund was awarded to this project that we are here to celebrate today, and I'm proud to be part of the success of Toyota with this project.
Can I also say, I congratulate the Industry Minister, Kim Carr.
Kim Carr, a passionate Victorian, a passionate believer in Australian manufacturing, and a passionate supporter of the automotive industry- congratulations Kim, were it not for your work, this would not have happened.
The other critical partner has of course been Toyota itself.
And the hard work of its management team, its world class engineering, which I have seen in Nagoya upfront, and also the work of unions and workers in making this deal effective on the ground.
I'd like specifically to acknowledge the unique contribution of Ian Jones, the Vehicle Division Secretary of the AMWU, for his hard work in supporting workers at Toyota and across the industry in recent times. Congratulations Ian, on a job well done.
It's been a tough time for the automotive industry globally, and here in Australia.
Car sales around the world have declined, and they've declined in Australia too.
It's easy to say that the industry's time is up, or that Australia's time as a car producer is up.
That is not my view.
That is not the unions' view.
That is not the workers' view.
That is not the Government's view.
And that is not Toyota's view.
We intend to have this industry for Australia's future.
Sure, there are new technological, competitive and environmental challenges.
There have been in the past- there will be in the future.
Each of these challenges represents a new opportunity.
With the right policy settings, as well as leadership from the industry itself, and from the workforce, the industry can adapt and become stronger than ever before.
And today's achievement is proof of that.
Today we see a win for motorists around the country.
A win also for action on climate change.
A win for jobs in here in Altona, and across Australia.
And by working together, the industry, the workers and Government, car making does have a future in this country.
This is all made possible too with a strong, effective economic partnership between the Australian Government, and the Government of Victoria.
And I congratulate the Premier on his leadership, and passionate support for the future of the vehicle industry here in Victoria- thank you John.
I conclude by saying this- you the workers here at Toyota are part of a great nation-building project.
When Australians look into their future, they want to know that we can be a nation that makes things that count for the future.
They want to know that we're building our economy, not just for the next twelve months, but for the next twenty years and beyond.
Nation building for recovery, nation building for the future, and this great plant - and you, the fantastic workers at this plant- are part of our nation building vision for this great country's future.
I salute each and every one of you on this great achievement today.
Thank you very much.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning. Welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: You're off to Copenhagen. You are one of the Friends of the chair. Have you been busy? You've had some late nights over the weekend phoning world leaders to try and increase the chances of a deal happening at Copenhagen?
PM: Well Australia has been active for many months and certainly since the UN special session on climate change in September. We've been active with leaders around the world including most recently and the reason is - Australia is among the hottest and driest continents on Earth. We are feeling the impact of climate change fastest and hardest, and we have an Australian national interest at stake in strong and decisive action on emissions reductions here in Australia and strong action through a global agreement where everyone is pulling their weight. That's why we're active, because it is in Australia's national interest that we get a strong deal.
HOST: Are you a betting man? Are you prepared to put money on the chances of there being a deal, even a political deal done at Copenhagen?
PM: Look, all I can say is that it's tough- it's very, very tough- and that, when you've got countries as diverse as the United States, China, India, the European Union, the least developed countries in Africa and Asia, the small island states in the Pacific and the Caribbean, each with different views- this is going to be a very tough and hard negotiation. So my job is to do what I can as Australia's Prime Minister to forge a- help forge a deal through the middle of this. It'll be very hard, but we have basic Australian national interest at stake, because the impacts of climate change here on drought, on fire, on extreme weather events, on coastal inundation, on the cost of insurance, on the devastation of agriculture, on the cost of food, quite apart from simply walking away from our responsibility to our kids and our grandkids, is not one I am prepared to take. I'm going to go there and give it my absolute best.
HOST: Is Tony Abbott right here that we can make huge cuts by adopting these green carbon measures, better land management practices, better tillage, less use of fertiliser, that we can, some have even suggested that we can achieve huge carbon cuts without having an emissions trading scheme?
PM: Can I just say two things in response to that. Emissions trading schemes have been backed by Mr Howard, Mr Costello, Mr Turnbull and until very recently the Liberal Party, and our Government as well- and that's because we worked it out to be the best scheme possible to put a cap on carbon pollution on the one hand and to provide compensation for families to deal with any additional carbon cost on the other. That's why the previous government, and that's why this Government reached that conclusion. Second point is Mr Abbott in his interview just now showing again policy on the run, a very erratic approach to policy.
He talks loosely about direct action - this is answering your question - direct action and he cites as his authority Professor Ross Garnaut. Let me read to you what Professor Ross Garnaut actually had to say about this. He said "it will be possible to get a strong reduction through regulation"- that's direct action as Mr Abbott recommends- "but the cost of doing it will be very much higher" and I quote Professor Garnaut."It will mean that Australians will have to have much lower standards of living, we would have to accept lower wages, lower health and education services, less defence commitment."
And he goes on to say he didn't know why Australians would choose a more expensive course of action to tackle climate change. He says "of course it is not impossible that you could use direct action. We would just be much poorer." So here you have the Leader of the Opposition, again policy on the run, citing Professor Garnaut as the authority, when in fact he is recommending the most expensive approach to doing this for the whole nation, the whole economy and for families. And by regulation what does he mean? Having some Commonwealth bureaucrat regulating every time you change a light bulb, regulating what sort of trucks you can drive. It is simply irresponsible, erratic policy - again made on the run.
HOST: So that's not on the table in Copenhagen? This isn't been discussed behind the scenes? Is this lead negotiator who supposedly let the cat out of the bag on this wrong?
PM: On the question of land use, in the Kyoto negotiations in 1997, and it has been so ever since, land use, deforestation has been part and parcel of the scheme not just available to Australia but worldwide, to all developed countries. And that obviously is the matter which is under discussion in Copenhagen again, as it should be. But let's put it into context. In terms of deforestation, land use, it represents globally 18 percent of emissions, but for the rest of the economy, you have the stationary energy sector, power generation 25 percent. You have industry, 20 percent. You have the transport sector, 15 percent.
Is there a serious suggestion that you can deliver global greenhouse gas emissions in order to get to your two degrees centigrade target that is not allowing temperatures to rise beyond two degrees purely by focussing on a sector which generates only 18 percent of emissions? Let's just get real about this and go to some basic facts.
HOST: Australia has been accused of cooking the books here and trying to have things both ways. Our land use emissions have soared 82 percent since 1990, but under the Kyoto Protocol, Australia opted out of reporting these emissions. But if we include these emissions in any new deal, and we include these better land management practices, of course our emissions are going to drop. Isn't this a sneaky way of doing it?
PM: What- as I said before- the spread of greenhouse gas emissions globally involves some 18 percent from deforestation around the world, some 25 percent from the energy sector, 15 percent from transport, 19 percent from industry. You've got to be acting on all these fronts. The 18 percent involved in deforestation is not irrelevant. It's central. The second point is this. These are rules which the world community agreed, not just for Australia but for every developed country back in 1997. So therefore it is entirely appropriate that Australia has reported annually to the UN on the achievement of its Kyoto targets. We committed to 108 percent against 1990 levels. 
We're currently tracking at 107 percent. This is a balanced approach. But you ask about Copenhagen - it's going to a tough, tough negotiation. We go there, I thought consistent with Mr Abbott's commitment that we should be aiming for a range of five, 15 and 25 percent targets. That is certainly the framework within which we are operating. That was his last stated position as well.
HOST: For any deal to be effective China has to be part of it. The sticking point from what I understand that it says that developed nations like Australia owe developing nations a carbon debt for the pollution that has already been put in the atmosphere. Is Australia prepared to make that concession?
PM: Well, the bottom line is this. For a deal to work for the future, Australia will do no more, and no less, than what the rest of the world does. We need concerted global action- but the rest of the world includes developed and developing countries. Developed countries have contributed the overwhelming amount of existing accumulated greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, that is true. Go to the future, if we the developed countries became carbon neutral tomorrow let me tell you the combined impact of China and India into the medium term future would be huge. 
That's why both developed and developing countries, including China, have to be part and parcel of this deal so whether it is a five per cent target reduction that we achieve in Copenhagen for a 15 percent, or a 25 percent, we are going to have to see action from developed countries, action from developing countries as well. But for Australia, we'll be doing no more or no less than the rest of the world.
HOST: Okay, Mr Rudd, Thanks for your time this morning.
PM: Good to be with you.


PM: Tonight I leave for Copenhagen for what will be a very tough set of negotiations for Australia and for the world on climate change. As one of the world's hottest and driest continents, the impact of climate change is being felt here in Australia first and hardest, which is why we have an Australian national interest at stake to get a strong outcome, as strong as possible, for the world in a global agreement in Copenhagen. That's why Australia, together with other countries, must play their role, their part, in bringing about such a global agreement.
We must have strong action at home, through a carbon pollution reduction scheme, and a strong action around the world through a strong agreement, a strong global agreement, at Copenhagen.
Some say 'why should Australia act?' My response is simple. If every country took the view that they won't act until someone else acts, then no-one will act at all, and if we are the hottest and driest continent, or among them, in the world, we have a deep national interest in making sure that there is a strong global agreement. It affects Australia first.
For Australia, we will do no less and no more than the rest of the world, whether that's a 5 percent target, a 15 percent target or a 25 percent target, because we have a strong interest in a strong global outcome for this nation of ours.
The alternative is simply to bury your head in the sand and to pretend that this problem will somehow just go away, and to push this problem off to our kids and to our grandkids, to simply stand back as we watch worse droughts emerge, more bushfires emerge, more extreme climate events unfold, coastal inundations, the devastation of Australian agriculture, and, of course, the destruction of great natural assets like the Barrier Reef. That's the course which happens through inaction, that's what actually unfolds.
Therefore, the responsible course of action is to bring about the strongest set of policies at home through a carbon pollution reduction scheme and the strongest possible agreement around the world, so that we can cool the planet.
That's our mission in Copenhagen. It will be a very tough set of negotiations. The outcome is far from certain, but we owe it to our kids and our grandkids to give this our every effort to bring about the best solution for Australia and for the world.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've obviously been hitting the phones in recent days with world leaders. What's the biggest roadblock, do you think, at this stage, to a strong agreement? Is it China?
PM: Well, there's a lot of disagreement around the world at present on three or four big questions, one of which is the level of ambition to bring down total greenhouse gas emissions, and that's where we need to see greater effort from both developed and developing countries. Second is how do we actually finance this new global agreement to make it possible for the least-developed countries to adapt to climate change in the here and now. And the third area which is contentious is what's called measurement, reporting and verification - that is, once we agree to things, how is it measured, how is it reported, how is it verified, so that we know the system is actually working to bring down greenhouse gas emissions over time.
They are three of the big ones. There are of course other areas of disagreement, and I've got to say the disagreements between now and this Friday are going to be intense. There'll be multiple predictions of total collapse, multiple predictions of emerging success. I wish I had a crystal ball and could tell you how it's going to turn out.
This is massively complex, but we intend to give it our best effort to try and forge an agreement at Copenhagen, because Australia's national interests are at stake.
JOURNALIST: The Coalition's also been trying to crank up this issue of how much money you'll be paying to developing nations. Is that going to be decided at Copenhagen and will you be able to tell voters how much Australia's going to contribute, and will that (inaudible) be raised under an emissions trading scheme?
PM: Can I, just on the question of Coalition policy, now that you've raised it, I've noticed that today the leader of the Liberal Party has said that he supports something that he calls direct action. We've seen a lot of erratic policy behaviour from the Liberals over the last week or so, not just on climate change but elsewhere as well, but let's look at this proposal of the Coalition, this direct action proposal.
What this is is effectively strangling the entire Australian economy in red tape, having Commonwealth bureaucrats dictate to small businesses right across Australia what they can and can't do. That's what it is. This strangling of the economy with red tape, this so-called direct action approach, is also the most expensive. It is also the least effective. It is also the most bureaucratic of the options which are available. It is the most expensive. Look at what Professor Garnaut has said about this so-called direct action. Professor Garnaut was invoked by the Leader of the Liberal Party today as his authority.
In other words, what Professor Garnaut says is that this is an excessively expensive option. It is more expensive, it is less effective, because it puts no cap on carbon pollution and then thirdly, it provides no compensation for families, so what have you got, in summary? You've got red tape strangling every level of the Australian economy through a system which is more expensive, which is less effective because there's no cap on carbon pollution, and for which there is no compensation for families.
This is simply policy on the run, it's erratic policy behaviour of the type we've seen now over a long period of time.
On the other part of your question, which goes to how climate change is financed, and I just said before this is one of the big outstanding areas - there is an emerging view in Copenhagen that at a minimum what we need to do is make sure that we support what is called fast-start finance, this is, in the first few years prior to a post-Kyoto regime happening, and then after 2012 there is an open discussion about what level of support is provided then.
We're still working our way through that with all the other countries of the world. There are vastly different views between the Americans, the developing world, the Europeans and ourselves, and that's one of the things to be resolved in Copenhagen.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the erratic approach, you're asking voters to accept that Tony Abbott's erratic. Tony Abbott is asking voters to accept that maybe (inaudible) non-authentic. Should he be believed as well?
PM: Can I just say that what we've seen in the last week and a half is a flood of ill-considered, dodgy policies on climate change, on foreign investment, on divesting the banks, on the United States defaulting, on the state governments of Australia defaulting on their debts, to name but a few. I'll let others make the judgement about whether they regard that as consistent and sober. I do not, and can I say what the Liberal Party needs to do is to take a calm, measured approach to developing mainstream policy for the future, including on climate change, rather than simply shooting from the hip, shooting from the lip, and policy development on the run, which is what we've seen a further example of this morning.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Others will make up their judgements about the performance of the Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, can I say that all our approaches to tax and retirement income policy are currently being considered by the relevant government policy reviews. Where they are in their current state of development and when they'll be landed upon, that's a matter for the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)-
PM: Can I just finish the answer, which is to say that, as you know, we have comprehensive reviews under way. One of the conclusions of the 2020 Summit last year was that we needed a root and branch review of the taxation system. That necessary involves consideration of the retirement income system, so we've always said, from the beginning, and the Treasurer's said this repeatedly, neither to rule in nor rule out any particular options, and that's the sensible way to approach it, and that's our approach going forward.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: National savings policy is very important. It's an important part of building for Australia's future. We're proud of previous Labor governments' inheritance on the question of retirement incomes policy. On the broader question of retirement income policy, we're proud of the fact that we've brought about the single greatest reform for the age pension in 100 years. Obviously, there is more work still to be done, but, as I said, for the future review of taxation, the review of retirement income policy, there are the proper mechanisms in place to consider all the options, so we're not in the business of ruling in or ruling out, as the Treasurer has said repeatedly.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, all that's a matter for the Roman Catholic Church. It's all a matter for the Catholic Church and its appropriate authorities. As I've said before, I think all Australians, whether they are Catholic or not, whether they are religious or not, have a high degree of admiration for the achievements of a very strong woman, Mary MacKillop, her great achievements in education, her great achievements in supporting the poor, but the processes of canonisation have nothing to do with any government. All a matter for the Roman Catholic Church, and those processes are still underway.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think you should put all such questions to the National Secretary and representatives of the national executive of the Party, in terms of individual preselections around the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back to Mr Abbott for a moment. He says that you're actually stealing his policies, which are that better land management is going to reduce carbon emissions (inaudible)
PM: Can I say this, that when it comes to the embrace of deforestation as a part of land use, that was achieved in the Kyoto Protocol negotiations of 1997. It's been the case since then. It's also a set of arrangements available to all developed countries as of now.
What's currently being discussed in Copenhagen is where we go to from here for the future, and the second point, when it comes to dealing with the future of greenhouse gas emissions, let's be very plain about it, deforestation and land use represent some 18 percent of global emissions. The energy sector, what's called the stationary energy sector, represents 25 percent of emissions. Industry represents nearly 20 percent of emissions. Transport sector represents 15 percent of emissions, agriculture some 15. Therefore, if you want a comprehensive approach to bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, it's got to apply as broadly across the economy as possible. You can do policy development on the run, as the Liberal Party has been doing on climate change, and not just on climate change, or you can do the hard yards and work up a considered policy for the future.
This is, once again, erratic policy behaviour, policy development on the run, like what we've seen again in the last 24 hours with Barnaby Joyce on the question of Australian state governments defaulting. I mean, there you have Senator Joyce, the alternative Finance Minister of Australia out there again confirming in the financial review today that he doesn't back away from his position that Australian state governments could default. The Liberal Treasurer of Western Australia has responded to that. The Shadow Treasurer, Mr Hockey, has said that that is not Coalition policy, yet there you have the alternative Finance Minister out there in the pages of the Financial Review today saying he backs away from nothing.
This is a further example of policy development on the run, erratic policy behaviour, rather than putting in the hard yards.
JOURNALIST: That 2011 deadline (inaudible) given the legislation's been rejected and there's not a great prospect of-
PM: -2011 deadline on?
JOURNALIST: On the emissions trading scheme. Is it still possible to get that up and running, and if it's not, do you need to look at some sort of practical measures to start Australian business reducing emissions if you can't get a trading scheme (inaudible)?
PM: Well, remember, we have already passed through the parliament the Renewable Energy Target, and that's to increase renewable energy generation to 20 percent by 2020. Secondly, as I said before, we'll be re-introducing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to the Australian parliament as soon as parliament resumes, as I said before, in the hope that wiser, more sober heads within the Liberal Party prevail.
See, there's a big difference here. We've actually got a very clear cut policy about emissions trading, a carbon pollution reduction scheme, which is as follows. One, you put a cap on carbon pollution. Two, you make Australia's biggest polluters pay for polluting. Three, because they pay, they then have an incentive to adopt clean energy for the future. And four, we use the money that they pay to compensate families who would otherwise cop an additional cost to themselves. That's our approach.
Mr Abbott's approach, by contrast, is policy development on the run, a magic pudding to pay for everything, and an approach today which is the most expensive, the least effective, and the most bureaucratic and with no compensation for families. I don't get it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible)
PM: Well, the states and territories, through their police agencies, are working hard on this question - some more effectively than others. At a national level, at the COAG meeting in Brisbane last week, we also looked at the wider implementation of a national strategy for young Australians which goes to reinforcing all the great things that young people are doing, but also looking at how we can actually have more consistent national policing standards as well.
So our job is to work with the states and territories through youth policy, but also through nationally consistent policing policy to underpin the efforts of states and territory police services on the ground. This is a big challenge, it's a difficult challenge, and going into the holiday season it's one which lots of mums and dads across the country are very concerned about.
Having said that, I'm going to zip.


PM: Thank you very much. First of all, if I could thank my good friend and colleague, the Prime Minister of Japan for receiving me here in Tokyo today. This is my third visit to Japan in the two years that I've been Prime Minster of Australia, and it's good to be here among friends.
Australia and Japan now confront major challenges globally, one of which is the great challenge of climate change, another of which is the great challenge of nuclear weapons in this world of the 21st century. On the great challenge of climate change, Australia and Japan are acting. The Prime Minister and I have just had significant discussions on the conference in Copenhagen. Australia and Japan are both committed to acting at home through an emissions trading scheme. We are both committed to acting globally through a strong agreement in Copenhagen.
On the question of nuclear weapons and the future, non-proliferation and disarmament, can I say how much I appreciate the excellent work done by former foreign ministers Kawaguchi and Evans in producing this report. This has required a lot of work, a lot of blood, sweat and tears, and I thank them both for their extreme efforts in doing so.
This report, I believe, represents an important framework for discussions and debate on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament in what will be a critical year in 2010. President Obama has called a nuclear security summit in Washington in April of next year. We have the NPT review conference due in May next year. I would therefore thank both the former foreign ministers for providing a report which provides such an important framework for those discussions to continue and to bring about practical results.
The Australian Government will, of course, frame it's response to the recommendations contained within this report during the course of 2010 in the lead up to those events, but speaking for Australia, we welcome the fact that a report of such substance has been produced to provide such an important framework for practical discussions on how to advance this great cause of non-proliferation disarmament in what will be a critical year for the world.
I conclude where I began, to congratulate these two eminent statesmen of our respective countries for doing the work that they have done, and their fellow commissioners, in producing such a report of quality, representing the findings of an independent commission on a critical challenge for us all in the century which lies before us. I thank you.


Prime Minister: Well, as we head to Copenhagen, the key thing is this- because we are among the hottest and driest continents on earth, we will be hit by climate change fast, and hardest- which means that we have a massive national interest at Copenhagen in getting a strong global agreement.
It's one o'clock in the morning, but we've just been doing a video conference with leaders from around the world on the Copenhagen conference on climate change. Still hard to tell how it's going to turn out. But this is the seventh meeting by videoconference this time of night- with the UN Secretary General, the Danes, other countries from the developing world. Still a long way to go- don't know what the outcome's going to be yet, but we've got to, basically, throw everything at it.
Penny Wong: I'm sure it's not going to be easy, but we need a good outcome, Australia needs a good outcome, the world needs a good outcome. Well I think it's one of those opportunities. So, one that, if we let it slips through our fingers, I think we'll regret it. I think sometimes in politics it's good to think about how will this look in one, two, five or ten years, it gives you a bit of sense of perspective. And I reckon if we don't make real progress and get the sort of political agreement the world needs, we'll look back on this and we'll regret it.
Prime Minister: But it's not just what Government does. Renewable energy target increased, direct investment into renewable and clean energy technologies, and a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to put a cap on the big polluters of carbon into our atmosphere- at a personal level, at an individual level, at a household level, at a schools level, there's an opportunity to voluntarily get into the scheme as well.
You see, the alternative is to do nothing, bury your head in the sand, and just hope it all goes away- guess what, it won't. So all of us, Government, corporations, individuals, we've all got a role to play. And if we fail to rise to that challenge, we're just passing it off to our kids and grandkids, by which stage it may well be too late.


PM: I've just arrived from Tokyo, where I had some significant discussions with the Japanese Prime Minister Hatoyama on Copenhagen, and on the prospects for reaching an agreement here, at this important global conference on climate change. Prime Minister Hatoyama and I discussed the detail of many of the outstanding challenges that lie before us at Copenhagen. I look forward to catching up with him when he arrives here later in the week.
Having just arrived in Copenhagen now, later this evening I'll be meeting with Prime Minister Rasmussen, the Chair of the conference. Also, Prime Minister Brown of the United Kingdom and various other leaders in order to be updated on the current state of negotiations as of today.
While there is absolutely no guarantee of success at getting a global agreement, my aim here in the days ahead is to work as hard as possible to secure the best possible agreement for Australia, in Australia's national interest. That means getting a genuine agreement between rich and poor countries to tackle climate change, for the first time in history. It also must be an agreement which is the cheapest, the most effective, most pro-jobs agreement possible. Just as the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the cheapest, most effective way to act on climate change locally, so too is an agreement here the cheapest and most effective way to act globally.
So, I'll be here in the days ahead working as hard as I absolutely can, throwing everything at it, trying to get the absolute best outcome for Australia's national interest. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) How does Australia fit into that process? When will we know the targets that Australia might commit to and the money that Australia might put up?
PM: Well having arrived about an hour ago, let me become fully apprised of where things are up to today. On the question of the deadlock within the conference itself, you're right, there's been a lot of sound and fury on the floor of the conference as I'm advised, certainly in the reports I received in Tokyo. And I think it's likely that we'll see further sound and fury in the period ahead. The key thing is that when you've got walkouts and threats of walkouts, lots of noise, lots of clatter- it's trying to find a consensus up the middle of that. And I'll be working very closely with the Danish Prime Minister later this evening on how we try and forge a consensus through this.
As I said, there's absolutely no guarantee of success. But my job, as Prime Minister of Australia- and Australia as a member of the international community- is to put our shoulder to the wheel, and try and get a good agreement for Australia's national interest, and for the world.
JOURNALIST: What agreement, Prime Minister, will serve Australia's interests? What do you think is reasonable (inaudible), and what's your expectation?
PM: For Australia's national interest to be served, we need a strong agreement- for the first time in history- between rich and poor countries. You see, in the past, this has primarily been a debate about what happens with the developed world. We know that the developed world is responsible for the largest slice of accumulated greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. But why is this now important? Because for the first time in history, there is the prospect of an agreement which brings in the developing countries, for the first time.
And why is that important? Because if we go to the future, the biggest contributors to greenhouse gas emissions in the future will be the major developing countries, led by China. China already- as of today- is the world's largest polluter. It's now bigger than the United States. So you ask, Mark, legitimately, what is a core benchmark for success in a conference like this? The absolute core benchmark for success is for the first time in history to have an agreement between the rich and poor countries, the developed and the developing countries, on this common challenge for us all.
If we don't do that, we're not dealing with the totality of the problem, and we'll not be serving the next generations of Australians, our environment, our economic interests, or our kids.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, this is very much a debate between the past and the future. In the past, we have had- the facts speak for themselves- developed countries have contributed the lion's share of accumulated greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. That's a fact. No one should run away from that fact. The parallel fact for the future is that the major developing countries, as I've just said before, will be contributing the lion's share of emissions for the future.
So, we can either degenerate into mutual recrimination, or we can get on with the task of actually working for an agreement. The easiest thing to do is to play the blame game. The hardest thing to do is to actually work, work, and work- to deliver a genuine agreement. That's what I'm here to try and do. Hugh?
JOURNALIST: Twice in your comments today you've said- stressed- that there is no guarantee of success. Is it important at this stage to start positioning Australians and everyone else to the very real problem (inaudible)?
PM: I actually just believe in telling it like it is. There's no guarantee of success. Let's just be straight up and down about this. You've got 190 countries who are participants in this conference. You've got more than 100 Heads of Government. You've got, as I said, the rolling sound and light show of what happens on the conference floor. There is no guarantee of success. My job, as Prime Minister of Australia- also as a friend of the Chair, of the Prime Minister of Denmark, together with other leaders, is to try and forge a consensus through this. Because it is in our Australian national interest that we do so. I just think it's important to be frank with people about the degree of difficulty of what we're trying to do, and it won't be through lack of effort on our part.
JOURNALIST: Are you at least optimistic then?
PM: I've always said this is going to be difficult. There are outstanding policy disagreements between developed and developing countries. There is a possible way through this, but it requires political will right across the spectrum. Both on the part of the developed countries, and the developing countries. There is a possible way through, but as I've said from the outset, there is absolutely no guarantee of success- but the Australian national interest demands that we put our shoulder to the wheel. To say what I've said repeatedly in Australia, we are among the hottest and driest continents on earth, where the impact of climate change is felt first and hardest.
Therefore we have an acute national interest at stake in Australia to bring about an agreement for the world on climate change. It is fundamental to the next generation of Australians and the next generation of kids around the world. Over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, at (inaudible)
PM: As are others. Go on.
JOURNALIST: I was just wondering-
PM: How long's your list?-
JOURNALIST: About a farmer being on a 22-day hunger strike over (inaudible) and not being compensated by the Government (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm just unfamiliar with that. I've just arrived here. As you know, we have particular measures concerning agriculture as far as our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is concerned, but I just don't know the details of that report.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) developing country targets have and their implication of them, the Indian Environment Minister would not go along with co-chairing the committee with Senator Wong. He made some remarks today talking about Australia as an Ayatollah of the one-track process, and (inaudible)?
PM: Look, conferences like this are just full of political rhetoric a lot of the time. As I said, it's always necessary to sift out the substance from the sound and light show to get to the core of what we've got to reach an agreement on here.
So, going to substance of your question, which is about verification and about commitments from developing countries, we have seen some significant steps, both by China and India in terms of their emissions intensity targets. I am advised that there has been a further significant statement from the Chinese today in relation to finance, and these are positive steps forward, but you know something?
Unless we have all the emerging economies stepping up to the plate as well, in addition to the developed economies playing their role, we won't get an effective global deal, to go back to Mark's earlier question. What is at stake here is for the first time in history reaching an agreement between both developed and developing countries, between the poor countries and the rich countries. That's what's at stake here.
On verification, everybody, I believe, has a stake in making sure that what is agreed to here in Copenhagen, if we reach an agreement, is capable of verification. That is, that we have a way of determining whether the undertakings made here are verified in terms of the actions taken on the ground, because at the end of the day this is not just a piece of treaty law that we're prospectively talking about. It's not just a conference document that we're talking about. It has to be given substance and flesh and form and effect on the ground. That's why verification is essential.
On the forms of verification, there are many, many, many proposals on the table. More, to use the great Australian term, than you could poke a stick at, but we're sifting our way through those, together with a range of other countries. It is one of the outstanding major policy problems at this conference. I believe there is a way through. It requires political will.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) change its target range or perhaps a target for 2025 (inaudible)
PM: Our position's been clear on this from the outset, in terms of the range of targets that we have on offer, between 5, 15 and 25, and the latter two are conditional on various forms of international action. We're clear cut about that. We actually believe that it does represent the spectrum of responsible action on the part of Australia, and as I've said back home repeatedly, Australia is prepared to do no less, but no more, than the rest of the world, and we have our role to play, both in terms of what we do at home.
We also have our role to play diplomatically here in Copenhagen to try and bring about a global agreement in Australia's national interest. So, it's going to be a very tough and hard few days ahead, and as I said, no guarantee of success, but we will be putting our shoulder to the wheel.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, along with the (inaudible) and China, tonight they could be disappointed, particularly in you, because he says you went to Bali and signed and ratified Kyoto, but you're trying to-
PM: Are you quoting the Chinese here, or someone else?
JOURNALIST: I beg your pardon?
PM: You say you're quoting the Chinese, or someone else?
JOURNALIST: Lumumba Di-Aping, who's the chief negotiator on behalf of the G77 plus China.
PM: Right, okay, sorry. I thought you were talking about a separate Chinese statement. Go on.
JOURNALIST: He specifically singled you out and said he's disappointed in your position because he says it's changed since Bali, you seem to be-
PM: Can I just say that in response to that that there was a question before about various comments about Penny Wong, these next few days are going to be full of political rhetoric, full of, you know, political accusations of one type or another. That's part and parcel of how these conferences operate. Key thing is to find a consensus which is capable of producing a global agreement between the developed countries and the developing countries.
That's what we intend to work at while we're here, and we've been part and parcel of these negotiations since our ratification of Kyoto. We have been one of the most active countries in the negotiating process, but it is standard fare that when you get to the crunch point in negotiations like this, the accusations fly hard and fast. That's just to be expected.
The key thing, as I said before, is to separate out the sound and light show, not to be distracted by it, and to get on with the central task of seeking to negotiate a genuine agreement which delivers on Australia's national interest, which delivers on the global interest, and which is the cheapest, most effective, most pro-jobs, most environmentally effective agreement possible, and that's what we intend to do.
JOURNALIST: Have you softened your stance on Kyoto. Is he right on that one?
PM: Australia ratified the Kyoto Protocol two years ago after the previous Australian Government refused to do so. Since then, we've been absolutely active in the negotiations since then and proposed to continue to be at this conference.
You know, our job as Australia is to argue for the Australian national interest, is to argue also as a responsible member of the international community, and these two interests are fundamentally linked. I go back to where I started.
If you're among the hottest and driest continents on Earth, where the impact of climate change is felt first and hardest, we have a fundamental Australian national interest in obtaining an agreement here in Copenhagen, and for the days ahead I'll be giving it my absolute best shot, working as hard as I can to try and support a consensus on the way through to get an agreement for Australia's national interests and for the next generation of kids around the world.
Thanks folks.


PM: Today has been a very difficult day of negotiations at this Copenhagen Conference on climate Change. Today very little progress has been made. Nonetheless an agreement is still possible here in Copenhagen. But for such an agreement to be reached we have to see every country pull its weight, developing countries and developed counties and if every country pulls it weight we can secure the agreement which we need in Australia's national interest and, of course which the world needs for the next generation of human kind.
We have, of course, two days remaining, and there are still a number of major policy areas still to be resolved. We still have areas of policy disagreement which lie in the area of mitigation, that is, how much we can as countries agree on the reduction in overall greenhouse gas emissions but both developing and developed countries.
Secondly we also have policy disagreement which remains in the area of climate change finance in particular of the adaptation needs of the most vulnerable states around the world.
Thirdly, we still have unresolved areas in, what is called areas of measurement reporting and verification, that is the verification of undertakings made at this Copenhagen conference, whether they actually occur on the ground.
Today I have spent a lot of the day in detailed discussions with delegations from around the world and from heads of delegation from heads of Government, from Foreign Ministers and Environment ministers, both from Small Island States, from developing countries in Africa, developing countries in Asia, as well as with the British Prime Minister the Danish Prime Minister, the UN Secretary General and others. This is very much a complex process of negotiation with still a lot of work to be done, a lot of work to be done. One area of agreement which has emerged today is in the area of deforestation and avoided degradation of forests.
This is an important area. Deforestation represents some 18% of global greenhouse gas emissions. What we've done today together with a range of other countries is agree on a new global initiative on, what is called, reduced emissions in deforestation and forest degradation as part of an overall fast-start funding program for 2010, '11 and '12. Globally this represents a $3.5 billion agreement. Australia's contribution to it will be $120 million.
The reason why this has been done is because this is a significant area of global greenhouse gas emissions. We need to make progress on all fronts. This is a practical front where in fact agreement has been possible early, cooperation between developed and developing countries in this area of deforestation has been strong so far, more work needs to be done. It also builds on existing Australian initiatives both in Papua New Guinea and Indonesia. Can I conclude my remarks by saying that Australia's national interest is fundamentally served by securing a strong agreement here in Copenhagen. Australia, as you know, is amongst the hottest and driest continents on earth, and therefore feels the impact of climate change first and hardest. Therefore for Australia, strong action at home through a carbon pollution reduction scheme which puts caps on carbon and compensates families is important. Strong action abroad, through strong action here in Copenhagen is equally important, equally important for the future of our economy, equally important for the future of our environment, equally important for the next generation of Australians. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, with two days to go don't you think it's time to name and shame some of these countries which may not be pulling their weight? Who would you single out as needing to step up to the plate?
PM: The business of diplomacy and trying to reach agreement suggests that these disagreements over the immediate season ahead need to be kept internal and the reason for that is that we want to produce a strong agreement. It doesn't actually yield results, just at this stage, to be throwing mud at particular countries. If you want an outcome the wiser course of action is to work internally, privately, diplomatically in order to try and reach agreement. That does not mean that the discussions which occur internally are necessarily, shall I say, couched in diplomatic language, that can be quite firm but that is a different matter to actually getting engaged in the business of public name calling.
You see what's required here is cooperation. I have a sense that as more heads of government arrive here in Copenhagen that we will make some more progress. But can I just say, as I said yesterday, success at this Copenhagen conference is by no means guaranteed, there is no guarantee of success. All we can do, and all I can do as Prime Minister of Australia is, frankly, work as hard as I can to try and find concessus through the major areas of policy disagreement that I mentioned just before.
JOURNALIST: Without throwing mud at particular countries then-
PM: Sounds like a leading question but off you go.
JOURNALIST: -is it that some issues are just too difficult or are some countries posturing for their own domestic politics rather than (inaudible)
PM: Part of the problem lies in where we've got to after two years, a document which having just read it carefully myself, is the current negotiating text, which has something like 91 square bracketed areas of disagreement. That actually represents something of a problem. Our task in the remaining two days is to get that down to a manageable list in the three to four critical areas of policy disagreement that I referred to before. That's the process that's underway. It's a difficult process but in order to focus the attention of leaders of government we're going to have to get this list down to core alternatives in critical areas of policy disagreement which can make or break the future of this potential Copenhagen accord.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was it possibly a mistake to introduce the Danish text this morning given the reaction from Brazil, India, China, (inaudible) counties and was it true that the ministers of the G77 boycotted the meeting again today to discuss the text (inaudible) or not?
PM: First of all. I won't go to the internal diplomatic processes that are underway. Secondly the Prime Minister of Denmark, assuming the chair of the conference was an entirely natural and inevitable development. He did so at the beginning of the high level session. What is a high level session, it's one that involves heads of government. This is entirely appropriate for Prime Minister Rasmussen to do and had been long anticipated. Secondly, on the second point that you make about the circulation of a Presidents text, that has not occurred. As of where we stand at this time, we are dealing with the extent of the remaining texts which were developed by the respective working groups of the UN process up until now. The one I've just referred to, as I've said, one of those two texts has something like 91 or 92 squared bracketed areas of disagreement. I think as an international community we need to do better than that.
JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, the $120 million Australia is putting (inaudible) is that per year?
PM: No that's over the three year period and as I said that's out of a global initiative of US$3.5 billion just to put this into context.
JOURNALIST: In the context, again, of pulling weight. There is talk from various people about the amount of money Australia will be pitching in once (inaudible) does come about and it will amount to billions of dollars a year by 2020 potentially. Can you clarify what, in your mind, is likely broader picture of Australians will be paying to pull our weight?
PM: First of all, there is no indication whatsoever from the conference as to what the overall climate change finance arrangement may or may not be. There still remain a whole range of possibilities on this score.
What we have always said, consistent with statements by the Climate Change Minister, Penny Wong, over a long period of time, is that Australia will contribute its fair share, but there are an elastic series of possibilities at present. The key thing is this: stand back from it all, what do we need to do? We need to land an agreement on mitigation, land an agreement that is on what we will, in overall terms, reduce greenhouse gas emissions by in order to prevent temperatures rising by more than two degrees Celsius. That's objective number one.
Objective number two is to provide appropriate levels of climate change finance for the most vulnerable economies and countries around the world to undertake in large measure the necessary adaptation to climate change impacts where there populations are, frankly, the most exposed.
And the third is to make sure we have a measurement, reporting and verification system in place which is capable of, shall we say, keeping the international system honest on these questions.
That's what we're on about. One of the elements of that total jigsaw is finance, but it is completely open to negotiation at this stage. Australia's position, as it's always been, is that once agreement is reached, then we, of course, will contribute our fair share.
JOURNALIST: Was there any progress today on the issues of finance. Why haven't (inaudible) Is that because of the furious reaction to the very suggestion that there might be (inaudible)
PM: Well, first of all, let's clarify this concept of a Danish text. Remember, it is not unique or remarkable for the President of the Conference at an appropriate time to seek to bring together the existing texts put forward through the United Nations process and to review those texts and to seek to consolidate them and to solicit further views from governments about where we can reach final agreement. That process of consultation between the various groups involved in this conference is underway as we speak and I've been in a number of meetings today with the Danish Prime Minister and others on all of that. It's still underway. As I said, not a lot of progress has been made today, and it may take some time yet. There is still a way in which an agreement can be forged. There is still a way in which consensus can be achieved in all of the three major policy areas of disagreement that I've referred to this evening, but we do need all countries to put their best foot forward and time is running out.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) happy with the United States (inaudible) so far on carbon emissions targets?
PM: Well, as I said before, I think yesterday and again today, on the question of overall greenhouse gas reductions, if we, as a planet, as a global community, we are serious about achieving greenhouse gas reductions over time, which can keep temperature increases within two degrees Celsius, it means that everybody has got to pull their weight.
The United States has made a significant contribution to this debate. The previous US administration refused to indicate any target whatsoever. The Obama administration has been forthcoming in terms of its 17 percent commitment. China has also been forthcoming in terms of its commitment to reduce its carbon intensity by some 45 percent over time. The Europeans have a range of targets, with an upper range of 30. Japan has a conditional target of 25.
So let me say in response to your question, if we are hoping to achieve a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in order to bring about temperature stabilisation within two degrees centigrade, we'll need to see somewhat more effort across the board. How that's distributed remains to be part and parcel of these very sticky negotiations in the couple of days ahead.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you've described it before as the political will. What you're saying is that the political will isn't being shown by some parties at the moment?
PM: What I'm saying is that large international conferences like this are full of more argy-bargy than your average national ALP conference on steroids, that's what I'm saying. And therefore - for any international folk here I'll provide simultaneous translation for that later on - but this involves, as I said yesterday, a very large sound and light show. Separating that from the substance of the negotiations is a separate matter and making sure you don't get distracted by either a) the name calling, b) the sound and light show or c) any of the other, sort of, frivolities going on is important.
But, underneath it all, you've got to have a core negotiation. That is underway. It is proceeding at a snail's pace right now. But the nature of these negotiations is that they either run into a brick wall or you get a breakthrough towards the end. As I said, the ingredients for securing an outcome are there. It requires political will to get there. More heads of Government will be arriving here tomorrow and that will be a necessary additive to getting the job done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) What do you say to allegations of you twisting on the subject of legally binding (inaudible)?
PM: Can I just say that particular discussion over the nature of the agreement was canvassed extensively in the Pacific Islands Forum in Cairns some months ago, canvassed extensively at the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Trinidad and Tobago. I draw your attention to the text of the unanimously adopted communiqué of the Commonwealth, involving 53 countries, most island states of the Pacific, which plainly referred to the support of the process which has been promoted by the Danish Prime Minister, and that is to produce a framework agreement here with the objective of them providing a basis for the further conclusion of a legally binding treaty as the next stage. One cannot occur without the other. So the suggestion that these matters have not been canvassed in recent months is simply not well founded, and I draw your attention to the communiqué.
And secondly, can I just say in a conference like this, you know, yesterday I was responding to whoever it was saying various things about Australia, and I'm sure they'll be saying it about today. That's just part of the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune which are associated with conferences like this. Key thing is not to get distracted by it, stick to the task and try as hard as you can to bring about an agreement.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what did you think of Ethiopia's proposal on finance and its suggestion that we create financial mechanisms. Did you discuss that with Ethiopia in your bilateral meeting ahead of the announcement, and also, on the REDD agreement, $120 million, what will that be used for? Will that be used to purchase REDD credits or will it be used for some other purpose.
PM: Let me go to those in sequence. I met extensively with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia last night into the wee hours. I can't remember when, now, but as you know, over here it all blurs. I'm sure you've not had that experience so far. But we had a good discussion and we've had previous discussions on the telephone and previous discussions elsewhere on the particular needs of the least-developed countries in Africa. Remember, Ethiopia itself is a country that faces a particular challenge associated with drought and the intensification of drought conditions of the back of climate change.
I discussed with Prime Minister Meles last night his proposed intervention today. He'd already discussed it in detail with his African colleagues. He was extending me the courtesy of briefing me on it, and I thank him for that.
Secondly, you ask in terms of my views on it. I believe it represents a constructive framework for further discussion. Doesn't necessarily mean that Australian Government would sign up to every element of it, but he was providing a way of opening the dialogue between developed and developing countries on the question of climate change finance, in particular for the states of Africa.
I note, in particular, he's recommended the establishment of an expert body to go to the range of possibilities of public finance, private finance. That is an appropriate way forward in terms of some of the specific recommendations contained, or possibilities that he's highlighted within that. In terms of Tobin taxes or aviation taxes, of course, that's not the view of the Australian Government, but he recommends a mechanism for looking at a range of private and public financing options. That, I think, is a constructive way forward. Trying to find a long-term financing option to sustain the adaptation needs of countries in Africa and the small island states is a constructive way forward, but as I said, these negotiations on finance have a long, long way to go.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said (inaudible)
PM: Well spotted.
JOURNALIST: What's going to happen if (inaudible)
PM: Ah, the old hypothetical.
JOURNALIST: There's only two days, so obviously there's a plan. Will you just give up and Australia goes on its own (inaudible)?
PM: Our job here in Copenhagen is to, frankly, work our guts out to try and get a good outcome for the Australian national interest and a good outcome for the next generation of Australians, the next generation of young people around the world. It doesn't - certain people may find political benefit out of predicting doom, gloom and failure. My job, as the Prime Minister of Australia, is to work as hard as possible for success. We worked as hard as possible for success at home for a carbon pollution reduction scheme to put a cap on carbon to compensate families. We're working as hard as possible abroad to bring about a global agreement in Australia's national interest here.
But I'm just being straight up and down with folk, as I was yesterday. These are very hard negotiations. They are very tough, 190 nations, something like 140 heads of government due here soon. This will probably be one of the largest concentrations of heads of government at any time in history, but the challenges we face are among the largest we've faced in history as well, given their long-term future consequences.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm sorry, I didn't answer the other part to someone else's question, asked about REDD. I'll come back to both of them, sorry.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, first of all, when it comes to action on, let's call it forest carbon, Australia's international forest carbon initiative has been running for some years. It operates with three arms at present, primarily one with Indonesia, one with Papua New Guinea, and one multilaterally through various World Bank programs. These are at various stages of development in the two countries that I've mentioned.
For example, in Indonesia we are looking, in particular, at how we can undertake the best protection to avoid forest fires. It's as basic as that at this stage. One of the other measures that we are advancing globally, and it's something on which I spoke at the UN special session on climate change in New York in September, was the use of satellite technologies to properly map whether or not deforestation was occurring or not occurring and whether undertakings made by individual farmers or localities were in fact being honoured, as opposed to other measurement systems which we may be a bit more sceptical about, and that's a robust discussion being held at the moment.
Can I just say that we are only a few steps along the road, and therefore, when it comes to building on the three sets of programs that we've got, this further investment that I referred to before will be important. The reason in overall terms why it's important is that 18 percent of global emissions are too big to ignore, and you've got to be serious about this if you're going to serious about the rest of global emissions. That's why we must not just do everything possible to reach a strong agreement here in Copenhagen for the Australian national interest, but also at home in Australia have a mechanism to deliver it as well. That's why, in Australia, like 36 other countries around the world, we've embraced an emissions trading scheme as the cheapest, most jobs friendly, most environmentally effective means of bringing down carbon pollution, and ultimately the ultimate goal being a globally linked set of cap-and-trade systems which enable you, of course, to operate internationally as well.
Having said that, folks, I think I've got to head back to the conference centre. All the best.
(ENDS)


When the history of this century is written, this conference, and the results of this conference, may constitute one of its defining chapters.
History will record it as a time when either the peoples of the world, mindful of a common threat to us all, decided to act in concert against that threat - and so turned the tide of history.
Or else history will record this conference as a time when once again, we became so consumed with the petty nationalisms of the past, that we turned instead against each other and failed to act on this great common challenge of the future.
This history of much of the last century is littered with the carnage and the wreckage of ideologies incapable of embracing the common needs of all our peoples.
Yet here at the dawn of this century, we are privileged to have been given by history this opportunity and this responsibility to write a different narrative of human cooperation:
     * to act for those who have no voice, but who depend on us to give them voice;
     * to act for our children and our grandchildren and those not yet born, but who depend on us to give them voice;
     * to act for the planet.
These are the deep choices which lie before us.
In the next two days, we will assemble together as the largest gathering of global leaders in history.
This is no accidental gathering.
We gather because the peoples of the world demand that we gather.
And the peoples of the world will judge us not just as nations.
Each and every one of us here will be judged as individuals.
For what we say.
For what we do.
And for what we fail to do.
On how we as individual women and men gathered at this great conference have responded to the scientific reality of climate change.
And whether we have responded in conscience to the indisputable facts that science has put before us.
And history will be a harsh judge of us all.
None of us comes to this conference with clean hands.
The inescapable truth is that we the developed world carry the overwhelming historical responsibility for the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Any developed nation, large or small, which seeks to absolve itself of past responsibility for the problem the planet now confronts, is being dishonest.
Yet we must also bring the same spirit of inquiry to the problems of the future.
But if the developed world became carbon neutral and the developing world continued to grow on current trends, then the truth is that the emerging economies alone would be responsible for more than half of total global emissions by 2050 - and this would create a temperature rise of between 3.2 degrees and 4 degrees Celsius and even possibly higher.
The truth is that unless we all act together - because we are all in this together - there will be limited prospects of development because the planet itself will no longer sustain it.
That is why history is calling on us all to frame a Grand Bargain on climate change:
     * a Grand Bargain between past responsibility and future responsibility;
     * a Grand Bargain between the developed world and the developing world;
     * a Grand Bargain between the strongest and the most vulnerable;
     * a Grand Bargain between ourselves as the current custodians of the planet and those who will come after;
     * a Grand Bargain on climate change.
So what then is to be done in the little time that is left?
Words without deeds are a dead letter.
There have been millions of words spoken here, but as one of our colleagues said, it is time to stop talking, and start working.
It is time to take up the pen to define precisely the finite number of major policy differences between us:
     * On mitigation, our collective national ambitions now make up about two thirds of what we need to get on a path to our common ambition of 450 parts per million - and the task we have is to find the remaining 5 gigatonnes reduction across the largest economies;
     * On climate change finance to deal with the adaptation and mitigation needs of the poorest countries, we already have substantial agreement on fast start funding for the next three years and the prospect of agreement for the remaining seven;
     * On verification, I believe we can achieve a consensus on international and national means of accounting whether we honour our carbon commitments or not;
     * And on the future of the Kyoto Protocol and its intersection with a new Copenhagen Accord, we can I believe accommodate a common and integrated future for both international instruments which embrace the legal responsibilities of all parties - developed and developing.
These are the four major disagreements between us all.
You would not know that if you examine, as I have done, the 102 square bracketed areas of disagreement that lie in the existing text before us.
Nor would you know that if you listened to the avalanche of procedural interventions in this conference which is seen to be guided by a single purpose - to prevent the conference from distilling down our areas of disagreement to a manageable list so that leaders can decide.
I fear a triumph of form over substance; I fear a triumph of inaction over action.
Let us instead resolve to decide for our future - not simply to defer.
Climate change is no respecter of persons.
No respecter of cultures.
No respecter of nations.
Its consequences are vast.
Whether it is the washing away of villages in Tuvalu, Kiribati or the Maldives.
Whether it is the melting of the glaciers of the Tibetan Plateau.
Whether it is the 30 million of the most vulnerable people in the low lying areas of Bangladesh.
Whether it is the Chinese peasants dealing with unprecedented drought on the North China Plain.
Or the destruction of arable farmland in sub-Saharan Africa.
Or, in our own country, the destruction of one of the wonders of the world - the Great Barrier Reef.
Australia is one of the hottest and driest continents on earth.
That is why we need decisive action globally here in Copenhagen.
That is why the Australian government is committed to acting nationally through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as the cheapest and most effective way to act at home.
It is global and national action together that makes a difference.
Before I left Australia, I was presented with a book of handwritten letters from a group of 6 year olds.
One of the letters is from Gracie.
Gracie is six - "Hi" she wrote. "My name is Gracie. How old are you?"
Gracie continues "I am writing to you because I want you all to be strong in Copenhagen... Please listen to us as it is our future."
I fear that at this conference, we are on the verge of letting little Gracie down.
And all of the little children across the world.
I would ask every Leader at this summit right now to ask themselves this simple question.
When I arrive home at the end of this week, will I be able to sit down, look my children in the eyes and tell them in clear conscience that I did absolutely everything I could to achieve action to avoid dangerous climate change.
Because if we cannot, then we will have failed in our basic duties as leaders of our nations, as fathers and mothers of our children and custodians of our nations' future.
The children of the world are watching.
They are listening.
And history will be the judge of each of us here today.


PM: Here in Copenhagen there is barely one day to go and my responsibility for the next 24 hours is to work, work and work. And I will work as long as is necessary to try and bring about a strong agreement here for Australia and for the world.
Every leader will be putting their shoulder to the wheel, I intend to be putting my shoulder to the wheel in order to bring about such an agreement. The task is difficult but there is still the possibility of an agreement. As I said today in my remarks to the conference at large - the kids of Australia and the kids of the world, are looking very carefully at what their leaders are doing in Copenhagen today.
They are looking, they are listening and they are hoping, and they are expecting that we can deliver a strong result. That is a difficult task but my job over the 24 hours is to do everything humanely possible to try and bring about such a strong agreement.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) China emissions. Where do you stand?
PM: Well there are ways in which we can deal with the verification challenge by a combination of international and national means. Whether or not that forms a basis for agreement between the Americans and the Chinese and therefore with the conference at large, remains to be seen. That is one area where we are actively engaged right now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well there were statements earlier today by a Chinese official unnamed as reported in Reuters, along the lines that you've just described. I also noticed that later in the day, one of the Chinese Ministers indicated that they were still involved in the negotiations in an attempt to bring about an outcome.
High level discussions continue with not just the Chinese but with other nations as well to try and bring about a strong agreement. As I said earlier today those comments from a Chinese official, albeit unnamed, were disappointing. And I would have hoped and I still hope that a great power like China would still be actively engaged in trying to bring about a strong agreement. As I said high level discussions and negotiations are underway as we speak and I am on my way back the Conference Centre.
Well, on the question of the AIOSS state, the organisation of small island states, some forty or so around the world. These were front and centre of our attention at the most recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting at Trinidad and Tobago. You may recall that at that Conference, we Australia, were asked by the Chair of that conference to chair the drafting of the communiqué, which dealt specifically with the need for a funding stream, a fast funding stream, that would also help the small island states with the immediate task of adaptation, of the type I have just now been discussing with my friend and colleague the President of the Maldives.
After that the United States through the White House, issued a statement in support of that fast funding stream, of up to $10 billion per year for the next 3 years, because these small island states need adaptation funding support now. Not just the Maldives, but Tuvalu and Kiribati and others. I have been working very closely with these governments now in order to try and secure that as part of this agreement, we are making real progress on this front - obviously there is still more to be done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We are still in the middle of a negotiation. Our policy is clear. We will do not less or no more than the rest of the world. What remains unclear at this stage is what the rest of the world will do. Therefore our policy remains as always stated, the range is as stated, the Europeans commitment remains conditional, as do a number of other countries as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well can I say the positive statement by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton today concerning long term finance to support adaptation mitigation by the most vulnerable economies in the world has had an effect on the negotiations. How it is ultimately translated remains to be seen. We have got 24 hours to go. Arguably a late night this evening, there is supposed to be a dinner on, I imagine there will be a lot of negotiation in and around the dinner table with Heads of Government who are still to reach final positions.
So I draw your attention to what has happened today, we ourselves and others have been working closely with the Americans on the question of climate change finance. It is significant that that statement was delivered here on the second last day of the conference by the Americans but we still have a long, long way to go and it is going to be very hard.
Karen?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: When you are talking about the States involved, the Prime Minister of Bangladesh, the PM of Ethiopia, the President of the Maldives, I have been working with these Heads of Government frankly all day, at various stages of the day. They obviously have been expressing their own views directly to the Chinese, I am aware of that, and as we have just participated in a debate on part of these matters, it is a question of making sure that our friends in China are aware fully of the impact of their actions on the developing world and the most vulnerable states as well. As we in the developed world must be conscious of frankly the historical impact we have had as well. Hence, the position that we and others have taken on the need to support through finance the adaptation needs of these economies. Mark?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Because this figure is still the subject of significant negotiation, and I draw your attention carefully to the language used by the US Secretary of State, which is America would be prepared to support the international community working towards a 2020 target of 100 billion. This has a long way to go and as far as the discussions this evening are concerned, my response as I have said in the past of these questions, Australia will always do its fair share. That remains our position and that is the position of all responsible developed countries, because at the end of the day we need to try and do what is responsible and reasonable to bring about an overall agreement.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Mister?
JOURNALIST: Sorry - Mr Abbott.
PM: Oh, sorry. I was not being funny, I just couldn't, it is just the noise.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott said he could make significant cuts in greenhouse gases from planting trees (inaudible)?
PM: Well, for example, let me just say this about the Government's policy on a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Under our policy, farmers will make money out of carbon (inaudible) under the CPRS by generating offset credits that they can then sell as part of the scheme. That is what we have laid out. That is our policy, it is clear cut, it is there in black and white.
Can I strongly suggest that the Leader of the Liberal Party spend some time, put in the hard yards and develop a detailed policy on climate change. We are seeing far too much policy on the run. Climate change is a serious challenge for Australia and the world. It requires well thought out policies at home.
We have a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, which puts a cap on carbon, which charges the biggest polluters, which compensates working families.
So far as I have seen the Liberal Party's approach - their policy, it doesn't put a cap on pollution, it doesn't charge the biggest polluters, it doesn't compensate families. And it is all funded supposedly by some huge rolling magic pudding. That is the difference.
On the question you just raised I'd suggest the hard yards be put in to develop a policy. I really do have to zip. Thanks.



MIDDLETON: And the Prime Minister joins me here now in Copenhagen. Prime Minister, thanks for being here, I know it's been an exhausting few days.
PM: A bit like that.
MIDDLETON: Given the difficulty you had in reaching an agreement here over the past couple of weeks, and particularly the last few days, was this just too ambitious a deal to try and strike in the nick of time?
PM: Look, action on climate change is tough at home, and it's tough internationally. There's always a lot of resistance. The key thing, though, is to pull together the consensus necessary in the international community to get climate change action. Remember, for Australia, it's critical. We are among the hottest and driest continents on earth, and the impact of climate change is therefore felt first and hardest. It's in our national interest that we get strong, global agreement. This is not perfect by any stretch of the imagination, but, with 190 nations around the table, this is a solid, strong step forward.
MIDDLETON: Well it's not legally binding either. What do we need to do to get a legally binding treaty, and how can you have any confidence that you will get there next year?
PM: Well let's go to the two elements of it. For the first time, this Copenhagen Accord on climate change causes the countries of the world to agree that we need to keep temperature increases within two degrees Centigrade. Secondly, for the first time, you have the developed and the developing countries both responsible for taking action that will bring about that cooling over time to adhere to the two degrees Centigrade target. And thirdly, for the first time, we've got a national and international measurement system. Now the action will happen when each nation submits its action plan to the Copenhagen Accord through the period of implementation. So it's one strong step in climate change action- but of course, more needs to be done.
MIDDLETON: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Good to be with you.


HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us live, from the summit. Mr Rudd, are you disappointed?
PM: Of course it would be great to get a perfect agreement straight away. You're dealing with 190 countries around the world with radically different views. What we have landed is a significant global Accord on climate change action. It's the first time that we have the world community agreeing to keep temperature increases within two degrees Celsius. It's the first time the world community agrees, rich and poor countries, to take action to do that-
HOST: But Prime Minister-
PM: And the first time we've had the world community agreeing to monitor the actions which are taken.
HOST: But Prime Minister, there are no targets. There is no binding agreement. How can Copenhagen be viewed as anything other than a failure?
PM: Sorry, I think your statement there is actually not right. You see, when Governments agree to keep temperature increases within 2 degrees Celsius, what they then put forward is their target in terms of keeping their greenhouse gas emissions to achieve that two degree objective. And that's what's going to happen over the next six weeks.
HOST: Prime Minister that all sounds great, but there is nothing in this which is legally binding.
PM: The countries which put together this agreement represent more than 90% of greenhouse gas emissions. The biggest economies in the world. The emerging economies. The developed economies. Put those together, and what you have, therefore, is a way forward. It's not perfect, but for Australia as the hottest and driest continent on the earth, and, therefore, feeling the effects of climate change fastest and earliest and hardest, we need, in our national interest, to get global action- for our country, for our kids, for the Great Barrier Reef. This is important for Australia. It's not perfect, but we've got to take the next step forward, and this is it.
HOST: Okay, thanks for your time Prime Minister.
PM: Good to be with you.


HOST: And we're now joined live by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, live from Copenhagen. Good evening Prime Minister, thanks for your time tonight.
PM: Good morning from Copenhagen.
HOST: Now Prime Minister, we're hearing this deal has been voted down on the conference floor. Can you clarify exactly what the situation is with this deal right now?
PM: This Copenhagen Accord on climate change has received the support from more than 90% of the national economies, the vast majority of the 190 states here- the fact that you'll have a few radical states out there arguing against it is not surprising. This is what normally happens at conferences of this type. But the bottom line is this. There is a significant global agreement on climate change, for the first time globally agreeing for temperature increases to be kept within two degrees Centigrade. Globally agreeing for the first time that both rich and poor countries will act to bring down their greenhouse gas emissions. And globally agreeing for the first time on national and international systems of measuring both these sets of greenhouse gas emissions.
It's not perfect, but given the possibility of total collapse, this represents a significant step forward.
HOST: Now Prime Minister, this agreement hasn't only been slammed by the radical nations- it's been slammed and criticised by a number of leading environmental groups right around the world. Even Greenpeace said that the deal was catastrophic, saying "this bad deal is as catastrophic as no deal on climate change". What are your thoughts about that?
PM: Well, ultimately, when you're seeking to obtain action on climate change globally, you're going to be attacked from organisations from all sides of the political spectrum. Action on climate change is hard. It's a hard business. It's hard internationally. It's hard nationally. But in Australia, where we live among the hottest and driest continents on earth, we have a national interest in Australia of national action and global action on climate change, because in Australia, we feel the effects of climate change first and hardest. This is not perfect, but against the alternative- total collapse of these global negotiations- we have, through this Copenhagen Accord, achieved a significant new global agreement on climate change action.
HOST: Prime Minister, we saw in that earlier package from Hugh that you admitted these were the toughest negotiations you've experienced in your life. You don't seem overwhelmed, I guess, with the outcome, but what are your thoughts with the policy for Australia? What will this mean for Australia?
PM: Well these have been enormously tough negotiations. 190 countries representing the richest and poorest countries around the world- framing an agreement through the middle of that has been really tough. And that's why 25 countries, including Australia, from this great grouping of 190, got together to push an agreement through. It's not perfect, but the alternative is complete collapse, and total climate change inaction. For Australia, we need climate change action internationally, but also backed up by national action through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme- because we have a deep national interest in Australia, as I said before, being among the hottest and driest continents on earth, where we feel the effects of climate change first and hardest, to make sure we get those greenhouse gas emissions down. It's hard work, but the alternative is simple continuation of inaction.
Bad for our kids, bad for our grandkids, bad for Australia.
HOST: Thanks for your time tonight, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joining us there live from Copenhagen.



PM: At about one o'clock this morning in Copenhagen, after seventeen hours straight of negotiation today, we agreed on a Copenhagen Accord on climate change. This was agreed in a negotiating group of about twenty five nations. Australia has been in that negotiating group from the beginning of these negotiations. This last round of negotiations with that group began at 11pm last night. It ran through to three this morning, with myself in attendance, and then Penny Wong remained through the night. I resumed at 8am this morning and we have just concluded at 1am the next day. It has been a long day.
This Copenhagen Accord will now be submitted to the conference of parties for approval. This Copenhagen Accord is a significant global agreement on climate change action. It is the first global agreement on climate change action between rich countries and poor countries. This is the first time that rich countries and poor countries have agreed that we should keep our temperature increases within two degrees Celsius. This is the first time that both rich countries and poor countries have both agreed on actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This is the first time that there is agreement between rich countries and poor countries on international verification mechanisms on actions taken.
And this is the first time that we have an agreement between rich countries and poor countries on the finance necessary to support mitigation efforts, the adaptation efforts of the most vulnerable countries of the world. Much more remains to be done. Much more work is still to be done, and we'll be putting our shoulder to the wheel to make sure that work is done. The next conference of the parties will be held in Mexico, and that'll be during the course of 2010 at a date to be determined. And there is much work to be done in taking this Copenhagen Accord through to its conclusion in a final treaty arrangement.
The truth is, as of twenty four hours ago, these negotiations stood at a point of complete collapse. The difference between the parties was huge, and huge on a number of significant policy disagreements. However, through the negotiating efforts of a large number of countries and their leaders and their representatives- and I've got to say in particular the overnight session led by Climate Change Minister Penny Wong- we were able to narrow those areas of disagreement, and as I said, at one o'clock this morning, we finally concluded these arrangements. Again, subject to the Copenhagen Accord being presented to the conference of parties, which I understand will occur later this morning in Copenhagen.
This has probably been the toughest set of negotiations that I've been involved in. Penny has been through this perhaps a little bit more intensely than I have in the past. To have been upfront and personal with such a range of deeply held policy views from different countries which threatened to collapse the entire show was a difficult time for us all, but we have worked our way through this. The final thing I'd say before taking your questions is this- this is an important agreement on climate change action for Australia. Australia is among the hottest and driest continents on earth, where the effects of climate change are felt first and hardest. Australia, therefore, has a fundamental national interest in obtaining a global agreement on climate change action.
When we look at the next generation of Australian kids, when we look at the challenge for Australian industry for the future, and when we look at the challenge facing our natural environment, including the Great Barrier Reef, for the future, there is no alternative course of action other than global climate change action. This represents a significant global agreement. A huge amount of work still remains to be done. But the alternative, which we confronted, staring into the abyss at midnight last night with these negotiations collapsing altogether and throwing back all progress that has been reached in recent times in global climate change action.
I'm happy now to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) What is Australia's national commitment in light of what has been agreed at Copenhagen?
PM: Consistent with a range of countries our commitments still remain within the conditional range of five to twenty five percent reductions. That figure will be finalised and formalised once we have aggregated all of the other conditional commitments when they are registered finally in a schedule attached to this Copenhagen Accord. That will take a period of time ahead. Once that is done what we'll then do is apply, of course, the conditions which we made public in May of this year as to which of the target range that we have put out and will apply in Australia's case. It is not physically possible to do that at this stage, until all the other commitments are translated into schedules and made available either bilaterally or through the multilateral arrangements of this Accord. At that time, we'll make our position absolutely plain on the basis for arriving at it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if that's the case, is Tony Abbott right in saying any deal concluded (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say, apart from the change of volume, what's required on climate change is action nationally, and action internationally. Let's just go to the national actions necessary. 34 of 36 of the developed economies represented here at this conference either have or are in the process of developing emissions trading schemes, to give effect to their national targets. Therefore in Australia's case, once our national target is determined, within the range that I've just mentioned, we're going to need a mechanism within Australia to make it work. That's what an Emissions Trading Scheme is. Therefore you ask, why is it necessary? It's absolutely necessary to give effect to the targets which are within the Australian target range, and which will be confirmed in detail once all other nations have reached their schedule attached to this Accord.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this Copenhagen Grand Bargain (inaudible)
PM: You're right. These negotiations have been exceptionally tough. The attitude taken by various countries in these negotiations has been particularly hardline. As I said, there was a grave risk that these negotiations could collapse altogether, and we would have had a triumph of inaction over action. Instead, we've had a result which underpins action in the four areas that I listed before. That represents substantive progress on where we were.
In terms of the difficulties going forward, you are absolutely right. This was really hard, really, really hard, and will remain that way for the period ahead. But can I say this- any action at home or abroad on climate change is a battle. Because you're dealing with a whole series of interest groups, some of whom don't want to act. And as a result you've got to push your way through. And you need to push your way through on climate change, sometimes step by step. Sometimes there's setbacks, sometimes there's significant steps forward like the type we've had this evening, because it's heading in the right direction, which is national and global action on climate change. And for Australia there is no alternative, as the hottest and driest continent, or among the hottest and driest continents on earth.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does this actually require the (inaudible)
PM: Well I cannot predict finally and formally what will happen in terms of the operations of COP. You yourself have had some observations of how the conference of parties works. But the reason why the Chair selected a group of twenty five nations, ranging from Sudan to the United States, and with most points in between, was in order to have sufficient capacity to bring constituent groups from within the United Nations family to a point of agreement. As I said, I've just been upfront with you. It's still got to go through the conference of parties, and that will occur in the hours ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I think we should simply take each step as it emerges. I have been involved in the business of negotiations long enough to know that it's best simply to take each step as it comes, and I'm simply being cautious in what I say. In terms of the expectations of emerging economies and the developing economies, the clear content of the document you have before me indicates that they themselves must undertake commitments in the future, and that these would be of a definitive nature, and would be registered in appropriate national schedules attached to this Accord as well. Do you want to add to that?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well can I just say, what we don't have yet is the aggregation of the full developed country list of targets and the full developing countries set of commitments, some of which have only been made as of today. Therefore it's important to put these together, hence my response to the question before asked by Hugh in terms of Australia's landing point on the targets, and that is once we've put together all developed and developing countries targets and commitments and put them together, and then we'll determine of course our own.
Remember our guiding principle- Australia will do no less, no more than the rest of the world. So, let us see what the final aggregation is. What's the big step forward here? For the first time in history, the global community, rich countries and poor countries, have agreed that we should keep temperature increases within two degrees Centigrade. That is the first time that we have agreed as a global community that that should be the case. In the past that's been the subject of resolutions on the part of certain developed economies, and certain large economies, but not across the entire global community through this Copenhagen Accord.
That then dictates the range of actions which flow from it. That's why it's so significant to get a global Accord on a scientific target, because policy actions then proceed. So on the question of the cumulative impact of the targets and commitments by developed and developing countries, we'll know their total effect once they are registered in the schedules attached to the Accord in the months ahead.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, given the official expectations for this conference- given your personal investment in it- are you personally disappointed that we now have agreement in (inaudible)
PM: This Copenhagen Accord will not meet everyone's expectations- that is absolutely true. There will be people who say it doesn't stand up to the test. The test I've applied to it is, what was before, and what was after. What was before was that we've had no global agreement on 2 degrees centigrade. Before, we had no global agreement which for the first time locked developing countries into actions for bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. For the first time what we have done also is have a global agreement between rich and poor countries on international verification systems to make sure that reductions actually occur. And for the first time, we have a global Accord which provides finance for the most vulnerable countries in the world, including in our own region- Tuvalu and Kiribati, those most exposed to inundation, to provide them with immediate access to adaptation finance. So some will say that's not far enough. Our job, as Australia's leaders, and as international leaders, is to yield the best deal possible in these circumstances. As I've said, this represents a significant global agreement on climate change action. The alternative would've been a failure, and as a result providing a triumph of global climate change inaction. We, as I said before, still have a lot of work to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
WONG: Well in relation to the last question I think self evidently in the last however many hours it was the Heads of State which enabled the breakthrough. Obviously, as the Prime Minister has said, there's been a restructure of the negotiations. And the arrival of Heads of State was the event which enabled the breakthrough to be made. On the text, which is, as I understand it, there will then be two decisions to be presented to the conference- as well as the Copenhagen Accord in the plenary for consideration, including the category.
PM: On the question of the participation of Heads of Government. Picture this. President Obama arrives. You're in a group of 25, some of which are represented by senior Ministers, and some even by senior officials. Most of us there are being represented by Heads of Government, Heads of State. At an impasse on key points in the agreement I've just described, the President of the United States walks in, rolls up his sleeve and says okay, let's have a go at this, and you make some progress. You don't produce magical results in the next hour and all things are fixed. But let me tell you, each time we had Heads of Government intervene, whether it was the French President or the British Prime Minister, other Heads of Government, including the United States, were able to push this thing forward.
There was a very strong parallel push to see this thing not produce anything, and to collapse the negotiations. We prevailed. Some will be disappointed by the amount of progress. The alternative was, frankly, catastrophic collapse of these negotiations. What we in fact did in part through the strong leadership of the President of the United States, in part through the active negotiations by Heads of Government round a table not much bigger than your average largeish dining room, knocking this thing together. You couldn't really move in that room. It was just full of people and full of paper. But, were they not there, I'd ask you to reflect on where the various conferences of this climate change set of negotiations would've got to since Bali.
When we arrived here we had a vast number of disagreements spread across a several hundred page document. Many, many areas which seemed impossible to resolve. On four key areas I mentioned before, we have achieved genuine progress and a genuine step forward. As I said before, I don't mean to mislead people, there's a huge amount of work still to do.
Over here.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) open up to international scrutiny (inaudible)
PM: We have had a long, long, long negotiation on this question. I'll turn over to Penny on the latest formulation of it. But in terms of the latest interplay of national and international mechanisms we have achieved significant, significant progress. Penny?
WONG: I think in terms of understanding where we got to on the question of reporting and replicating it might be useful for you to consider the final version of the text which is presented to the plenary this evening. It is the case that this was one of the intractable issues in the negotiations, and I think that's been seen from some of the public statements about that. Fundamentally, this comes down to transparency, and making sure we get some sense of what people's emissions add up to.
PM: You see, across the totality of these negotiations, there were many points at which they were on the verge of collapse. One of which was on this very question that you've raised. That's why it was of fundamental importance that President Obama and the Heads of Government of China and India and South Africa and Brazil absented for a period to nut through how that could be breached, how that gap could be closed. And if that didn't occur, that was one of many reasons why these negotiations could've collapsed. But I've got to say, in the last seventeen hours, three, four, five, six, seven times, the negotiations could've collapsed on a whole range of different questions, some of which we haven't fully touched on in these discussions here today.
And each time, as temperatures were raised in the room, we found a way through in order to land a Copenhagen Accord for significant agreements which did not exist prior to this.
Karen.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'm not sure that you have the current text of the document, for the simple reason of it only being concluded around 1am. And I think you will find that it does provide for a significant advance on what existed before, and I'll ask the Climate Change Minister to brief you on that one once the documents have been circulated.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the negotiations have been really tough, and there have been real obstacles on the way through, from time to time from a number of countries. I don't think it helps in terms of the future process for me to start to provide you with a public checklist of who was constructive and who was not. Can I say in terms of the President of the United States, he was, in my observation- I spoke to him many times during the day- and he worked with me on many of the negotiated outcomes contained within the document, that he was an overwhelmingly constructive and positive force.
Just picture this again. The President of the United States sitting down around the table, twenty five of us, some from countries not even represented at Ministerial level, sleeves rolled up, working on text and working on documents. That shows, I think, a high degree of commitment. That's constructive. That's good. That's trying to get a result. That's the sort of stuff that climate change needs, as opposed to people engaging in grand rhetorical flourishes. This is a tough business. Whether it's climate change action at home or abroad, it's a tough business, there's a lot of resistance. There's a lot of resistance to change. It is absolutely right for Australia's national interest that we get this work done. That's why we've been at it so long.
Over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you know (inaudible)
PM: I was working very closely with President Obama's advisers in the lead-up to that, during it, and subsequent to it. I don't intend to give you a blow-by-blow on each one of the problem areas during the course of the last twenty four hours. I can't remember now, frankly. There are a lot of them. But as I said, in terms of the particular outcome of transparency was a matter primarily between the Chinese and the Americans and one or two other countries, and other Heads of Government, including the French President, the British Prime Minister, myself, the German Chancellor- of course, allowing those countries to settle that matter between them.
As I said, in the lead-up to it, and during it, and subsequent to it, I was spending quite a lot of time, as with my advisers, with the President's advisers- and that is part of the practical action of getting things done.
Over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, over the last few days (inaudible) we must act now for our children, and our children's children. Do you believe that this document you have (inaudible) temperature rises of two degrees?
PM: As far as temperature rises go, this is the first time the global community has agreed in an international agreement that we should keep temperature rises within two degrees Centigrade. Up until now, this has not been universally entrenched. We couldn't make, if you like, really substantial progress until you've had the rich countries, the poor countries, through a document called the Copenhagen Accord which says this is our resolve. As I said, the actions that flow from that, for developed and developing countries, you'll see the colour of people's money when the individual targets and commitments are reflected in the schedule which will be attached to the Accord.
What has driven me and Penny and so many other Heads of Government Ministers at this conference is not to throw your hands up in horror, not to give up in despair, but to push ahead. And it's tough going. If you could wave a magic wand and just wave away the resistance of various countries for action, well that'd be terrific. It just doesn't happen that way. You've actually got to push through, you've got to push hard, you've got to use every bit of negotiating skill that you've got, every diplomatic skill, every bit of horse-trading that you've got, in order to make a difference.
And when it comes to the four key areas of difference which I referred to before in this Copenhagen Accord on climate change action, they represent a significant agreement, much, much work remains to be done.
Over here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the question of the future of Copenhagen or the future of the climate change negotiating process, the next conference of the parties will be hosted by Mexico. I've had a lot of discussions today with Felipe Calderon, the President of Mexico, as to how he would conduct those negotiations. Building on the my response to the earlier question, these have been tough as hell, and to Mark's earlier question, the next one will be as tough as hell as well as we try to produce a final outcome.
And President Calderon is yet to determine the precise timing of the next conference of the parties- whether it's going to be mid-year, or later in the year. And that's a matter which he, as host, will settle with the United Nations.
On the question of the global target, the resolve of the meeting on a consensus basis that once you had entrenched for the first time a 2 degree Centigrade agreed target for the world, that actions, that is, greenhouse gas reductions and the quantity of them flowed from that temperature target. As I said, you'll be able to aggregate the quantums of those once you've got the schedule of actions and commitments by developed and developing countries once they are included in the schedule.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The intention to deliver a legally binding treaty is alive within most of us engaged in this process. It is not excluded by the document that you have before you. And when it comes to the language contained in the document concerning the responsibilities, obligations and commitments by developing countries, they are expressed in the most definitive way. On the question of the particular language used on that score, obviously, there was a fair bit of push back from various developing countries about that particular matter. These negotiations proceed on the basis of consensus. 
What you have for the first time is definitive commitments on the part of developing countries. That is reflected in the body of the text. These will also be reflected in the schedules which will be used for developing countries. As to the final legal shape of the actual treaty arrangement itself, that will be unfolded during the course of negotiations between now and the next conference of the parties. You're right to say there was pushback on that, but I've got to say, in terms of the substance of the Copenhagen Accord, again, there is immeasurable progress on that score.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well there are two aspects to your question. One is, when will these schedules be completed by the developed and developing countries. That has been subject of some continuing discussion. The range of options tonight were by Christmas, except that it didn't leave a lot for the traditions of all concerned parties- we then moved to New Year, and then there was a discussion about the end of January. And I looked to the Minister for advice on that, and it's now the first of February. So that's where that stands.
On the second point about levels of ambition, our policy has been the same, all the way through. Australia will do no less and no more than the rest of the world, and that is our position. It always has been. It always will be. And that is why we'll wait 'til we see a pulling together of the aggregate commitments from the rest of the world. That is our policy, we think it's the right thing to do.
And I think having said that, and given the fact it's only quarter to two in the morning- which makes it what, quarter to eleven back home- might go out and have some lunch.
Thanks very much.


PM: For Australian families, for working families, nothing's more important than the health and hospital infrastructure and services of our country. Australians legitimately expect to have first-class health and hospital services for their kids, for their families. One of the deficiencies in the health and hospital system over many, many years of neglect from previous federal Governments in particular, has been that we've had inadequate investment in proper integrated cancer care. What we've done for the first time is invest $1.2 billion federally, not just for this Chris O'Brien centre here in Sydney, but also for another major centre in Melbourne, and for a network of regional integrated cancer care centres right across the country.
Cancer is such a huge killer in Australia that we must do everything that we can to lift the research effort, to lift what we can do to help those families who are in distress, those individuals who are in distress. What is really good about this Chris O'Brien centre here in Sydney, is not just the man after whom it's named, but the work which will go on here, integrating the best scientific research, the best therapeutic applications, the best bedside treatment for those who are suffering from various forms of cancer. Including alternative therapies, including the best form of palliative care. That's what Chris O'Brien was on about.
Chris O'Brien wanted us to treat the patient as a whole human being. From the best possible new innovations in science, through to the best form of palliative care for those who are really doing it tough. And that's what this Chris O'Brien centre is on about. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott today talks about a referendum (inaudible)
PM: Mr Abbott as Health Minister for five years ripped out a billion dollars from Australia's public hospital system. And this Government has put $5 billion extra back in. That's the basic difference between Mr Abbott and this Government.
JOURNALIST: Can you talk about a referendum though? Has that got bi-partisan support, would you support that?
PM: Well let's go to the question of what are the core policy differences here. Mr Abbott as Health Minister rips $1 billion out of hospitals, this Government puts $5 billion back in. Mr Abbott has five years as Health Minister to bring on a referendum, and does nothing about it - and this Government's long-standing commitment is if we can't get a co-operative outcome on long term health reform, that we'd seek a mandate from the people. I'd draw your attention to what Mr Dutton, the Shadow Health Minister, had to say this morning, when he confirmed that as of today they have no health policy. It's yet another exercise of policy on the run, and no clear content for the policy that they advocate.
JOURNALIST: Where are you up to with the idea of taking it away- health from the States (inaudible)?
PM: Our commitment to the Australian people is absolutely clear-cut. And that is that we said first we would bring down a Health Reform Commission report, which happened in July this year. It contains within it 123 recommendations for the long term reform of the health and hospital system. Secondly, we have spent the last six months consulting with nearly 100 public hospitals across the country- I've done 20 of those consultations myself. Thirdly, what we said to the States and Territories in the last Council of the Australian Governments meeting in Brisbane only a week or so ago, is that in the first part of 2010 we would bring forward our long term reform proposals for the health and hospital system for the future. Furthermore, what we said is that we will wish to do so cooperatively with the States and Territories, but I've reiterated to the States and Territories that if we can't get that cooperatively from the States and Territories we'd seek a mandate from the people.
So, in summary it's like this - Mr Abbott as Health Minister pulls a billion dollars out. We put $5 billion extra back in. Mr Abbott as Health Minister had ample opportunity to have a referendum with the people. He didn't do so. And we have said we prefer to work cooperatively with the States and Territories on long term reform, but if that fails, we'd seek a mandate from the people. You want to know what the differences are on health policy? That's it in a nutshell.
JOURNALIST: Just on Copenhagen, Gordon Brown says the Chinese hijacked the summit. What's your view?
PM: Well, the negotiations among many countries proceeded very effectively. And with various other countries, did not proceed effectively. There were many countries in the Copenhagen negotiations who wanted to land a deal on climate change which was comprehensive. We had some resistance from various developing countries against that. The important thing, however, is that the alternatives at the end of the day were this - the complete collapse of negotiations, and no deal whatsoever, or the deal that we were able to deliver, which provides three specific breakthroughs for the future.
For the first time we have a two degree Centigrade target. The first time that we have developed and developing countries agree to reduce their emissions to realise that target, and for the first time a system of national and international monitoring of what developed and developing countries do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Would you consider a target of more than 25%?
PM: Absolutely not. And the reason is, as I have said consistently, that Australia will do no more and no less than the rest of the world.
JOURNALIST: How does the outcome of Copenhagen affect your ETS?
PM: Well, the Minister, Penny Wong, has been very clear-cut about the Government's position, which has not changed. And that is, our targets - 5, 15, 25, are identical with the Liberal party. What is different between us and the Liberal party, is that we've put forward a concrete policy by which you get there. They have not. Our Emissions Trading Scheme, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, does three things- puts a cap on total carbon emissions, it charges the biggest polluters in Australia, and it uses that money to compensate working families, so that 90% of families receive full or partial compensation.
What does Mr Abbott's alternative do? He doesn't put a cap on carbon pollution. He doesn't charge the biggest polluters. He doesn't compensate families. And hopes that a combination of a magic wand and magic pudding will somehow produce a mechanism to deliver his range of targets, which are identical with the Government's, 5, 15, and 25. It's a bit like health and hospitals. We have a clear-cut policy. We know what our plan is, and we're going about the business of implementing it. The alternative is frankly policy on the run, and a lot of it, simply, thin air.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The undertakings that we made in the Government's statement in May of this year, in the range of 5, 15, 25, are entirely consistent with two degrees centigrade as a target. That is made absolutely explicit in the documents we released at the time. I draw attention to the fact of the commitments offered by other developed countries, consistent with that target as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the key thing is for the business community is certainty for the future. We offer the certainty of an Emissions Trading Scheme, a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, which has been consulted with business now for the better part of a year. The alternative, under Mr Abbott, is, as I said, policy on the run. Policy which contradicts each every other day. Policy which is somehow magically funded out of a magic pudding. That's the alternative. What business has said to us loud and clear is that they want the certainty of business rules for the future. And that's what we have sought to deliver. Business certainty is what is critical here. We have a plan forward, it's clear-cut. Some will oppose it, others will support it. But it's clear-cut. The alternative, I've got to say, is a policy shemozzle, and that's the difference.
JOURNALIST: What do you think of the postal strike a few days before Christmas?
PM: I think all Australian families have a legitimate expectation that they can get their Chrissy cards on time frankly. If you're like me, you often post them late, and you hope they get through on time. Mind you, most people don't post them as late as I do. Therefore, I really do think it's time for calm heads to prevail, both on the part of Australia Post on the one hand, and the unions on the other.
JOURNALIST: You've had a couple of opportunities now to meet with Kristina Kenneally now, what is your reaction to how she is going and over the last week (inaudible)
PM: Well I've been out of the country, but can I say, the fact that the Premier is here today on a very concrete, important health project such as this - ask the people of New South Wales whether they want better integrated cancer care services for the people of New South Wales, I'm sure that they'd say yes. And that brings us back to the broader question of health and hospital reform for the future. You see for us, it's pretty basic. One, public hospitals got twelve years worth of neglect out of the Government in which Mr Abbott was the Health Minister. They had a billion dollars ripped out of them. Our first step in our first twelve months was to put $5 billion back in, extra.
Now, secondly, Mr Abbott as Health Minister for five years, had every opportunity under the sun to say to the people we need a referendum, and he didn't do so. And what we have said is that the long term health reform, if we can't get there cooperatively with the States, then we are absolutely determined to seek a mandate from the Australian people. It's very simple. That's us. That's them. We have a plan - they have a bunch of rhetoric. And that's kind of the difference. Both on this, I've got to say, and on climate change, being the subject of discussion here this morning as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you get the sense that this is the Premier that's going to go the distance?
PM: The Premier is working hard. I have worked with her hard through my office and our health agency on this particular project here at RPA. RPA is a very big hospital for New South Wales. Cancer is probably the largest killer in New South Wales. Getting better integrated cancer care is important for the people of New South Wales. What we're building here in partnership with the New South Wales Government is a world class cancer facility. That's practical action on the ground. As Prime Minister of Australia, I'm interested in results, what actually delivers results for working families in their desire to get a reduction in waiting times in accident and emergency. I want practical results for working families, so that we have a better supply of doctors and nurses for the future, which we have had monstrous under-investment in for so many years.
I want practical results for the people of Australia when it comes to better investment in medical research, in clinical research, in cancer research, but also in our hospital infrastructure. These are the sorts of practical things that the people, that working families across Australia want to see done. With health and hospital reform, what's needed? More money for public hospitals. We've put $5 billion extra in, while they've taken a billion dollars out when Mr Abbott was Health Minister. We've said here's our plan for the future, and if we can't do it cooperatively, we'll seek a mandate from the Australian people.
What Mr Abbott has said, having had five years to get his referendum with the Australian people and did nothing, here's another thought bubble for this morning. So, I can say to you again, the contrast is very clear.
Having said that folks, I've got to go.


Happy Christmas to all Australians.
Christmas is a time for families, for friends, and for loved ones.
It's a time of magic and wonder for our kids. A time to reflect on the year that's passed, and on the challenges for the year ahead.
Christmas is also a time to think about those who cannot be with their families and loved ones.
We think first of our troops in the field- whether they be in the Middle East, Afghanistan, the Solomons, East Timor, the Sudan, or elsewhere.
We thank them for the sacrifices they make in Australia's name.
And we think of those who have made the ultimate sacrifice, and those they have left behind.
2010 will also be a hard and bloody year in Afghanistan. Let us make sure that our soldiers in the field know that they always have our support back at home.
We think too of the thousands of Australians in distant lands who are working to improve the health, education and other opportunities for peoples much less fortunate than ourselves.
Here at home, we thank those Australians working in Emergency Services- the Police, the Fire fighters, the Ambulance workers, the doctors, the nurses, and everyone else who will be on duty and away from their families on Christmas Day, to help protect our community.
Christmas too is a sad time for those who have lost a loved one, suffered a family breakdown, or simply lost contact over the last year.
It's a time, therefore, to reach out to our friends, our neighbours, and people perhaps we may barely know, to extend the hand of friendship.
2009 has been a very difficult year for so many in our community.
For the thousands of people who lost loved ones, homes, and livelihoods in the Victorian bushfires, this Christmas will be particularly tough. And the thoughts and prayers of this great Australian family will be with you.
And while Australia has been spared the worst impact of the global financial crisis, many people have lost their job, or had their working hours cut back.
For many people, this Christmas will be a real battle just to make ends meet.
But what is great about Australia is that we continue to work together to help out our mates, and to help out complete strangers.
That is the essential spirit of this great nation, Australia- the nation that still believes in a fair go for all.
In February, when North Queensland was hit by floods, local communities not only helped each other out, they also donated money to help Victorians in the aftermath of the Black Saturday bushfires- and the help kept rolling in all year.
That's the Australian spirit at work.
Therese and I, and the kids, hope that your holiday will be relaxing. That you get the opportunity to recharge your batteries. And that you spend time with family, friends, and loved ones.
And for those of you travelling over the holiday period- please, please, please drive carefully. We all need to take extra care on our roads.
Wherever you are this Christmas- in our cities, in the 'burbs, in the bush, or on the beaches- on behalf of our family, I wish all Australians a restful Christmas, a happy Christmas, and a very happy New Year.


On behalf of the Government and people of Australia I extend to the President and people of the Republic of Indonesia our sincere condolences on the passing of former Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid.
Former President Wahid, more popularly known as Gus Dur, was President of Indonesia from 1999 until 2001, a crucial period in Indonesia's political transformation. Mr Wahid was responsible for a number of important reforms which assisted his country's path towards becoming a modern democracy.
Mr Wahid was also highly influential as a moderate Islamic leader in Indonesia and a strong advocate of ethnic and religious tolerance.
Former President Wahid's historic visit to Australia in June 2001, the first by an Indonesian President since 1975, was a significant recognition of the importance of the bilateral relationship and set a positive tone for relations between Australia and Indonesia in the years that followed.
Former President Wahid was much admired and respected not only within Indonesia, but also by many Australians and others throughout our region. Our thoughts go in particular to his family, including his widow and four daughters.


2009 has been an extraordinary year for the world.
2009 has also been an extraordinary year for Australia.
We saw the inauguration of the first African-American President of the United States, an historic moment that was unimaginable just a generation ago.
We saw the world grapple with its most serious financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression, three quarters of a century ago.
We saw Australia take its permanent place at the table of the G20, the world body now charged with steering the way through the current global economic crisis, and finding a better way to manage our economies in the future- to ensure such a meltdown never happens again. 
2009 also saw all the countries of the world grappling with climate change, this common threat to us all.
We saw more than 90% of world leaders supporting the Copenhagen Accord on climate change- by no means a perfect agreement, Australia wanted much more.
But an agreement nonetheless, where the alternative was complete collapse, and total inaction.
Globally, we've agreed for the first time that temperature increases must be kept within two degrees Centigrade.
Globally, we've agreed for the first time that both rich and poor countries will act to bring down their carbon emissions in order to contain increases in global temperatures.
As one of the hottest and driest continents on earth, Australia is experiencing the impact of climate change first, and hardest.
We therefore have a deep national interest in global and national action on climate change.
If we do not act at home and abroad, we betray both our children's future, and their ability to enjoy our natural wonders, including the Barrier Reef.
In 2009, the Government also honoured its commitment to bring our combat troops home from Iraq- but our troops remain in the field in Afghanistan, the Middle East, the Solomons, East Timor and elsewhere.
And we thank them for their service, their sacrifice, and their professionalism.
On the sporting field, we lost the Ashes.
But our opportunity for revenge against the old enemy starts at the end of next year, and with a vengeance.
And I'm sure all Australians will get behind our Olympians and Paralympians, this February and March in Vancouver.
For many Australians, 2009 was a very difficult year. 
The impacts of the devastating Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria are still being felt, as are the after effects of the floods in North Queensland and Northern New South Wales, and the cyclones which struck Western Australia.
The global financial crisis has put families and small businesses around Australia under great stress.
The Government took early and decisive action to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of this global meltdown.
And across the nation, the building of infrastructure projects that will continue to support jobs and small businesses, are taking shape.
Throughout 2010, new halls, new libraries, new language and science centres will be built at schools right across Australia, supporting the needs of the next generation of children- while providing work for local small businesses, and jobs for local tradies.
Solar panels are being installed in houses and schools.
Houses are being insulated.
Local community projects, from better parks, better stormwater and drainage systems, and better sporting facilities, are all under way.
Some are completed, many more are in progress.
Roads are being upgraded.
Railway crossings are being made safer.
Ports are being expanded.
And we are building a national high-speed broadband network for the future.
We are all now engaged in nation-building for recovery, nation-building for the future.
Supporting jobs, apprenticeships and small businesses today, while building the infrastructure we all need for tomorrow.
So far, in large part because of the early decisive actions we've all taken, Australia has escaped the worst impacts of the global meltdown.
We've outperformed other advanced economies during the global recession.
We are the only one of the thirty three advanced economies to have positive economic growth in the last year.
We have the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, and we have the lowest debt, and the lowest budget deficit.
And we are the only one not to have gone into recession.
We've all been encouraged by the determination of employers to keep as many of their staff on as possible.
And by the willingness of workers and unions to cooperate with employers, to find innovative ways around this crisis.
The Government is determined to do everything in its power to support Australian families, Australian jobs, and Australian small businesses, as we move slowly into the recovery phase.
The great message from 2009 is that because we've been all in this together, we've all worked together. And together we are seeing Australia through this crisis, which has devastated so much of the rest of the world.
And that, my fellow Australians, is the message that we must take into 2010.
Australians are a resilient lot, we're a tough lot.
And we are practical about what needs to be done.
And we come together to meet a common challenge.
And there'll be plenty of those in 2010.
So to all Australians, whether you're at the beach or in the bush, in our great cities, or in our country towns, in the suburbs or in the outback, I'd like to wish each and every one of you a safe, healthy, happy and prosperous new year.


The Australian Government today has continued its fight against breast cancer with the announcement that Australian women at risk of breast cancer will be able to be screened by the latest technology as early as next week.
The Prime Minister today wore pink and helped sizzle sausages at Day 3 of the Sydney Cricket Test between Australia and Pakistan as part of the fund raising efforts for the McGrath Foundation and its work to support women with breast cancer.
The Rudd Government has already delivered $12 million to the McGrath Foundation to recruit, train and employ an additional 44 breast care nurses. The nurses are now in place and working in predominately regional Australia to provide vital information, care and practical and emotional support to women diagnosed with breast cancer and their families and carers.
In addition, women in the Bathurst region will also have access from the 13th of January to state of the art equipment that means they are more likely to have their breast cancer detected and be able to seek early treatment.
Thirteen priority projects totalling $10 million will receive funding this financial year and it forms part of a $120 million national upgrade funded by the Rudd Government to enable BreastScreen services in all locations to move to the latest technology.
It is expected that women in the Illawarra region will be next to benefit, with the upgrade to the region's BreastScreen mobile van set to happen in February.
As well as providing new mammography equipment, the digital upgrade program will enable electronic transfer of mammography images between services. This will help reduce the time taken for images to be sent from remote locations to major cities for analysis. Radiologists will also be able for the first time to electronically manipulate and magnify the mammography images.
Women aged from 50 to 69 years are invited to have free two-yearly screens for breast cancer. The program has proven highly successful - since its inception, it has been responsible for a 21 to 28 per cent fall in the number of deaths due to breast cancer.
Nonetheless, more than 12,000 women and 100 men are diagnosed with breast cancer in Australia each year. 
The BreastScreen mammography equipment upgrade and the valuable work of the McGrath Foundation are only two areas where the Rudd Government is working to improve breast cancer prevention, treatment and support.
Other initiatives include:
     * $168 million for Herceptin®, for metastatic breast cancer,
     * $31 million over five years to reimburse external breast prostheses for women who have had a mastectomy as a result of breast cancer, providing up to $400 reimbursement to eligible women through Medicare Australia,
     * $2.5 million over five years from 2008-09 to the National Breast Cancer Foundation for a study involving more than 100,000 women, which aims to improve prevention and treatment of breast cancer.
In addition, the Rudd Government is investing $560 million in ten best-practice regional cancer centres. The regional cancer centres will aim to improve access and support for cancer patients in rural, regional and remote Australia, and help close the gap in cancer outcomes between the city and the country.
Applications close at 2 pm, Friday 8 January 2010. Organisations wishing to apply can get more information from www.health.gov.au/hhf
To donate to the McGrath Foundation, please visit https://www.mcgrathfoundation.com.au/donate/


PM: Before I say a few words about the book that we launched today, I've some sad news to report. We have today received confirmation from the British authorities on the ground in Haiti that a British Australian dual national has been killed in the terrible events that have occurred there. This is another sobering reminder of the vast human toll of the horrific events that we've seen in Haiti.
The man was working for the United Nations and was a resident of the United Kingdom. The Department of Foreign Affairs has spoken to the man's next of kin, who are in the United Kingdom, to pass on our condolences.
British authorities are providing consular assistance to the man's family in the UK, and of course, Australian authorities are standing by to provide any other assistance which may be necessary.
This is obviously a very, very sad day for this man's family, his loved ones, and his friends, and I'm sure I speak on behalf of all Australians when I say that our thoughts and our prayers go out to his family and his loved ones on this tragic occasion.
Haiti, of course, reminds us of the tragedy which is being felt by tens of thousands of families around that country, and, of course, more widely in the international community.
Let me talk about the book that we launched today and why we have done it.
Firstly, it's been good to have collaborated with Rhys and with Carla here on this publication. A lot of people have asked 'well, why did you do it?' The first answer is if you know Rhys Muldoon and he badgers you and badgers you and badgers you, it's very hard to say no. In fact, until you say yes he just keeps badgering you.
But actually, there are three reasons for this. One is, it's a very practical measure to encourage literacy with the youngest Australians, and whatever we can do to encourage little ones to read and whatever we can do to encourage Mums and Dads and Grandmums, Granddads and carers to read to little ones, frankly, that is a good thing for the country and a good thing for them. If we don't get the basics right when it comes to a little one's education then, frankly, the problems get bigger and bigger later on. Getting the basics right, getting reading right, is really important for these little Australians' future.
There's a second reason, of course, and that is that the proceeds of this book - can I have the book? - Jasper and Abby and the Great Australia Day Kerfuffle, the proceeds will go to the Centre for Community and Child Health here at this hospital. Work on children's health is a hard specialist discipline, it requires a lot of work and a lot of detailed brain power in that work, so if in a small way, we can contribute the proceeds of this book, to the excellent work undertaken by this Centre, dedicated explicitly to the health and wellbeing of the youngest Australians, then this, frankly is an effort worth engaging in.
Now, I had a third reason for engaging in this book as well, and that is I like animals and whatever we can do to encourage the love of pets, cats and dogs and other pets and other animals, I think that's a good thing as well, encouraging our young ones to have a responsible attitude to looking after furry creatures is, I think, a really good thing. Also, my experience is that little ones who've had experience at looking after pets, it actually encourages gentleness in those kids as well over time.
So, they are my three reasons, apart from just keeping Rhys happy at the end of the day. Could I thank Rhys for doing the bulk of the work, Carla for actually providing the serious side of this enterprise, which is the drawings and the illustrations here. Despite the strength of our prose, Rhys, frankly, it would be -
MULDOON: - A little but thin.
PM: It would be very, very thin if it were not for the excellent illustrations, so I think Carla for that and Allen and Unwin, of course, for assisting us with the publication. I have to break the news now to Jasper and Abby that they will not be receiving any royalties as a result of the release of this book and that they'll be getting extra rations this week as a special benefit.
Now, did you guys want to add anything on the book?
MULDOON: Well, obviously it's been very enjoyable doing it and all of the things that Kevin just said about the reasons, sort of, why we wrote the book, obviously Kevin and I were going to originally do an album of Nick Cave cover versions, it was going to be a record, but then we went 'no, let's actually make the book', and obviously Jasper and Abby are a couple of superstars and the stars just rose to the top and there they are on the cover.
PM: Carla, care to add something?
ZAPEL: No, that's great (inaudible)
PM: What I'd like to say particularly about Carla is the ability to draw animals is actually quite hard and she's put a lot of effort into capturing the essence of said Golden Retriever Abby, which she's got perfectly. Abby is a delightful, perfect neighbour - that is, always kind, friendly, welcoming and the worst guard dog ever known to man. Jasper, as you can see, is the brains of the operation and is clever, cunning and calculating and I think in your illustrations you've captured both their personalities really well. Well done, folks.
Now, over to you for any other questions that you've got to ask.
JOURNALIST: And how do you think you come off in this book, PM?
PM: I've got no idea, it's a book-
JOURNALIST: -Pictures of you in there?
PM: The stars of this story are Jasper and Abby and the little dog, as well as Lottie.
MULDOON: Indeed.
PM: So hopefully it just encourages kids to really look after their pets.
JOURNALIST: There's been a lot of talk recently about (inaudible)
MULDOON: Oh, great.
PM: This is called a segue. Did you work on your segue for me?
JOURNALIST: Yeah, they need work. Regulatory and financial structures for financial services industry. A lot of talk about whether that needs to be loosened and wondering how that-
MULDOON: -Do you want me to take this one, Kevin? I can.
PM: Yeah. Yeah, I have seen the report and this was commissioned by the Australian Government because we want to turn Australia into a financial services hub for the region. We have the fourth largest funds management industry in the world, but the total number of, shall we say, products and services for export is still a thin slice of the Australian industry as it exists primarily on the back of the very large compulsory superannuation scheme we've got in Australia, so you'll see in the report a whole series of recommendations to government about what we should and could do about it.
It's a report we commissioned. We'll now be working with the Minister for Financial Services, Chris Bowen, on our response to it but I have a very strong view that Australia, for its long-term economic future, has to broaden its economic base. We've got a fantastic resources sector, we've got a strong agricultural sector, we've got good manufacturing, but when it comes to the export of the services side of our economy and particularly the financial services side of the economy, we need to lift our national game.
That's what that report's all about, and we'll spend some time now responding to its detailed recommendations.
JOURNALIST: It's a lighter touch though, compared to (inaudible) about the GFC and your well-publicised views about what caused it.
PM: I think when it comes to each of the detailed recommendations we've got to be mindful of how you boost the financial services sector in Australia and promote Australia as a financial services hub to the wider region, but at the same time maintaining the strong regulatory controls we've got in Australia.
Why do we do well, in part, through the global financial crisis? Because of the individual quality of our regulators. They've been very good and very strong, so no-one's suggesting you throw out the baby with the bathwater with those, but what you can do, however, through a series of other measures, is promote the intrinsic strengths of the Australian financial services sector and export more of those services to the region at large, including the funds management industry and more widely across the financial services sector. This is a huge slice of the Australian economy.
However, if we're casting our minds forward for the next 20 or 30 years, we should be exporting more by way of financial services as well. How do you do that? That goes to the details of the recommendations contained in this report.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, some South Australian schools are charging parents for their students to take home computers that were provided to the school under your education revolution. Are you scared that those parents are essentially paying twice for these computers?
PM: I've seen those reports this morning and I haven't been able to verify them yet, but let me just make a comment about our views on the provision of computers services to kids and schools. We make no apology whatsoever for the Government's approach of maximising the provision of computers to schools. This is a $2 billion Australian Government initiative. Let me say this: when we're providing that level of support to schools for computers in schools I don't see any basis for any school then subsequently charging a parent for its use.
Let's look at the detail of what actually is occurring within these schools in particular. Remember we're talking about two and a half thousand secondary schools right across the country. We're talking about a $2 billion project. I'm sure if you were to select a school here and a school there then the odd thing may be happening. Let's get the details of that straight, but let me go back to three core points.
One, we're proud of this policy. It's the right thing to do because we want the next generation of Australians to be comprehensively computer literate. Two, that can only happen when you've got the widespread provision of computers in our secondary schools. That's why we're doing the program. And three, we believe that this is a policy worth preserving for the future.
I note that Mr Abbott and the Liberals, including their education spokesman, Mr Pyne, are committed to the abolition of the program altogether. I think it's a very clear contrast.
JOURNALIST: There's a study out today that has found that Australians don't believe high-income earners are paying enough tax. In light of that, do you expect the Henry Review to recommend a more equitable tax (inaudible)?
PM: On the independent tax review, I haven't read it yet. I'm back to work today. Probably tomorrow or by this evening I'll start wearing a tie and we'll work our way through it. There is, I'm sure there's going to be stacks of recommendations in the Henry Review, some of which I'm sure the Government will embrace, some of which I'm sure the Government will reject. That's just why you commission independent reviews, but on the detail of it I have nothing further to comment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) public schools are getting short changed under the current federal funding model. Is that correct, and is there (inaudible)
PM: I think what's important to say is that the Government, through the Australian Education Agreement, has lifted overall investment in education by 50 percent compared with our predecessors. This is a 50 percent increase in the Australian Government's investment in schools, both government and non-government. That's the first thing.
Secondly, whether it's through the digital education revolution, whether it's through the building of trades training centres in secondary schools, whether it's through the largest school modernisation program in the country's history, which is what we've got currently underway through the building the education revolution program, all of these programs are benefitting government and non-government schools, depending on their level of enrolment.
The other thing I'd say is that when it comes to the quality of our schools, whether it's improving teacher quality, literacy and numeracy programs and through our programs specifically targeting disadvantaged local schools, these again are going to children on the basis of enrolments in schools, targeted often on those with particular needs, but we make no ideological distinction between government schools and non-government schools.
The overall challenge for Australia is how do we have about ourselves a vision for the country's future, which is this: making Australia into the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world, and the reality is we've got a whole bunch of kids out there enrolled in government schools. I've been one of those. A whole bunch of kids out there enrolled at Catholic schools, at Christian schools, independent schools. That's terrific. Everyone's got choice. We're in the business of supporting both, and that's what I believe Australian parents want for the future as well.
JOURNALIST: When will the Government release the Henry Review? There's been a string of ad-hoc leaks at the moment. Is that a satisfactory way (inaudible)
PM: I think the first response, of course, was to have an independent tax review examine the totality of the Australian tax system for the first time in decades. Secondly, that was a call made to us by the Australian business community at the 2020 Summit in March of 2008. We then commissioned that study and it has now just provided its report to the Government. We'll work our way through its detail over time. In terms of the accuracy or inaccuracy of the leaks to which you refer, you and I will both be privy to that once we've both read it. I haven't read it yet. I'm sure you'll read it in due course. It'll take a little while.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be meeting Prince William during his visit this week?
PM: Yes, the Prince and I are attending are visiting a youth homeless centre together later this week. I look forward to having a conversation with him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, we had, you probably heard, five young people die in the northern suburbs of Melbourne. What can we do to prevent tragedies like this (inaudible)?
PM: This is an unspeakable tragedy for the families and for the community concerned, such a gut-wrenching loss of life in a single accident. Spare a thought for the families of the young people involved. This is just horrible, horrible beyond description.
On the question of what can be done for the future, the Transport Minister, Anthony Albanese, at the next meeting of the Australian Transport Ministers, will be open to any further practical recommendations from the state and territory governments as to how we improve road safety in general and road safety for young drivers in particular.
Can I just indicate two or three things that we have done so far as a Government?
The first thing that we have done is increase significantly our investment in fixing dangerous black spots on local roads, installing boom gates at high-risk level crossings and building additional rest stops for truck drivers.
We've also brought in new regulations requiring electronic stability control, ESC, be fitted to all new models of passenger vehicles from November 2011. The third thing is, what that technology, we're advised, has the potential to reduce motorists chances of being involved in a fatal accident by 25 percent. That technology comes in, in 2011 through Government regulation.
Also, launching 'Keys to Drive' a new, innovative road safety program which will provide more than 200,000 free driving lessons to learner drivers and their parents.
These are steps that we've taken. None of these steps have prevented the tragic loss of life we've seen most recently on Victorian roads, and that's why, as I said in the earlier response to your question, Transport Minister Albanese is open to any further practical recommendations from state and territory ministers on how we improve road safety in general.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, $10 million, the Australian Government announced $10 million for aid to Haiti. Are we being generous enough?
PM: We are continuing, through the Foreign Minister, to monitor all the requests from the individual agencies about the situation in Haiti, and it is one where we remain open to making further contributions as is necessary. When it comes to the contributions we've made so far, we've provided that through to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the World Food Program, the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency, Australian non-government organisations, and we remain open to providing further assistance as is necessary.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) would you contribute more, then?
PM: This is an unspeakable human tragedy, human disaster of an order of magnitude which I think leaves most of us speechless. Therefore, we are ready to act further as we are requested and as we are required. As you all know from the public reporting which has occurred out of Haiti, the current problem often consists of purely the logistical delivery of the aid effort on the ground. What I also know from other human disasters and tragedies is that a second challenge lies in the weeks and months and years which follow, in rebuilding.
If I could draw on the analogy of our contribution to the tsunami in Indonesia and elsewhere, a huge part of the challenge lay in standing shoulder to shoulder with our Indonesian friends over weeks, months and years to rebuild communities and that is where I'm sure Australia will have a further role to play.
Australians are a generous people. This Government will respond to any further requests from the international aid organisations as appropriate in dealing with what is an appalling human tragedy.
Having said that, folks, I really should zip. Thank you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I am delighted in the lead-up to Australia Day to join you in our nation's oldest and largest public gallery, a gallery that contains so much of our nation's artistic heritage.
Ours is not a history without blemishes, injustices or tragedies. You don't need to know very much about our early convict days and relations between Europeans and the First Australians to know our beginnings were far from glorious, but this makes the achievement of building the modern Australian nation all the more remarkable: a young nation, yet one of the world's oldest democracies; a stable, peaceful and prosperous nation yet with one of the most diverse populations of any country on earth; a nation for whom the spirit of the 'fair go' is part of our DNA; a nation for whom the spirit of the 'can-do' is also part of our DNA, and; and a nation that is the envy of the world. 
There is much to celebrate on Australia Day, and Melburnians this year will be doing it in style, though, as Premier Brumby always reminds me, Melburnians always do things with style.
I'm delighted that Victoria's finalist for the 2010 Australian of the Year Awards, Professor Patrick McGorry is also with us today. Professor McGorry is a leader in the medical profession who has invested 27 years in improving the treatment of young people suffering from mental illness.
He has done extraordinary work in building up Orygen Youth Health as a world-renowned mental health organisation which targets the needs of young people with emerging serious mental illness and has become a model for youth mental health services around the world.
Patrick, congratulations - and we wish you well for next week.
I ask you to cast your mind back 12 months ago to Australia Day 2009. None of us could have imagined the tragedy that was about to sweep across this state on Black Saturday, February 7: the worst bushfires in our nation's history; the worst natural disaster in our nation's history; a firestorm that took 173 lives; a firestorm that damaged many others; a firestorm that destroyed more than 2,000 homes.
The horrific images of those fires will remain forever with us, but so too will the memories of the extraordinary response to the fires, from across Victoria, from across Australia and from all across the world. In these our darkest days, the essential spirit of Australia shone like a beacon of hope, because when the big challenges come - and when our backs are against the wall - we respond as one nation. We respond as one people, because at times like these, our hearts beat as one and the colonial boundaries mapped by colonial surveyors nearly two centuries ago count for nothing.
All that ultimately matters is that we're Australian, that we're part of the Australian family, and to be Australian is to know that we're all in it together, that we look out for each other, that we work together for the good of all and for the good of the world. That is the essence of the Australian character.
We also saw this same national character on display last year as Australia confronted the worst global economic recession in 75 years. 12 months ago the global recession was bearing down upon us and around the world it was destroying all in its wake, but Australians came together to confront this common threat. Australians, in governments of all persuasions - state, territory and local - in businesses large and small; in unions and local communities right across the nation; worked hard with the Australian Government to confront this fundamental challenge to us all.
Together, we took strong, early and decisive action and the results speak for themselves. We are the only one of the Major Advanced Economies not to have gone into recession. Together, we have kept the economy strong and other nations look with envy at what we have achieved in Australia in responding to the challenge of the global recession.
That's why 12 months later, on Australia Day 2010, as we enter this second decade of the 21st century, we can be optimistic about our future. But we cannot be complacent about our future. As we enter this new decade, it's a good time to take stock, having charted a course thus far through the global economic crisis, to consider the long-term challenges that lie ahead for our nation - including:
     * the deep structural challenge of an ageing population and its implications for our future economy and society,
     * the enormous economic and environmental challenge of climate change, and
     * the challenge of building our future national and economic security in an increasingly competitive world - a world which does not owe us a living.
To help guide our nation's work, the Government has in recent months been preparing the Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges. The Australia to 2050 report, which the Treasurer will release in coming weeks, analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia for the first half of this new century because Australia must plan for the long term, not just the short term.
Central to our long-term challenges is the ageing of our population. To understand its implications, we need to ask three basic questions:
     * First, how much are we ageing by?
     * Second, how will this impact on family living standards and the economy?
     * Third, what can we do about it?
On the first question, the Intergenerational Report projects that our population will grow from 22 million today to 36 million by 2050. This is a big challenge in itself given its implications for services, infrastructure and our cities, but an equally large challenge will come from the fact that between now and 2050, the proportion of our population aged 65 and over will almost double from around 14 per cent to around 23 per cent. In other words, nearly one quarter of our population will be older than what we now refer to as the retirement age.
The second question is how the ageing of our population will impact our economy. At a national level, public finances will be burdened with the increased costs of looking after the needs of older Australians - in health, aged care and age pensions - but with a smaller proportion of Australians in the workforce, tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
The extent of that change is revealed by the dramatic change in the ratio of the number of people of working age (and paying taxes) to those aged 65 and over.
Forty years ago, in 1970, the ratio was 7.5 people of working age to every person 65 and over. In 2010, the ratio is 5 to 1, and in 40 years' time, in 2050, it is projected to fall so far that there will be just 2.7 people of working age for each person aged 65 and over.
Unless we make big changes, we will either generate large, unsustainable budget deficits into the second quarter of the century, or else we'll need to reduce government services - including health services - as the needs of an ageing population become greater.
This is not just a challenge for future governments. It will also become a challenge for working families, because with a smaller proportion of Australians in the workforce, the size of the national economic pie will grow more slowly, and as a result, average family incomes will grow at a slower rate than we've become accustomed to in recent years.
The third question is what can be done to strengthen economic growth in the face of the fundamental challenge we face from the ageing of the population. In the long-term, there are three sources of economic growth - the three Ps of population, workforce participation and productivity growth.
With lower fertility rates and stable migration ratios, population policy will on current trends at best make a marginal contribution to the challenge of an ageing population.
The truth is that the strong policy levers lie with policy measures to lift participation and productivity growth.
We must do all we can to lift workforce participation by reducing barriers to entry to the workforce. The Government has already acted on this front, to remove barriers to work for women and young people with greater investment in childcare, new measures to get young unemployed people into the workforce and the proposed introduction of Paid Parental Leave.
But the Treasury's analysis shows that even with all these measures, workforce participation will fall over the next 40 years - from its peak of around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2050. This will detract from economic growth and constrain future growth in family incomes.
This takes us to the last and most important of the three Ps - productivity growth. It is productivity growth that must play the central role in building Australia's future economic growth. The first decade of the 21st century saw not an increase, but a decline, in productivity growth. During the 1990s, productivity growth hit the two per cent mark following the reforms of the Hawke-Keating Governments, but it fell to just 1.4 per cent in the first decade of this century. If we let this trend of lower productivity growth continue, Australia will struggle to meet the major challenges facing our economy in the decades ahead.
The Third Intergenerational Report provides for the first time an assessment of just what would be the cost of continuing on a path of low productivity growth compared to returning to the strong productivity growth path of the previous decade. The Australia to 2050 report shows that without a concerted effort to increase productivity, average annual productivity growth will be just 1.6 per cent over the next 40 years, leading to average annual economic growth rate falling to 2.7 per cent, compared to the historical average of 3.3 per cent over the last 40 years.
But with a concerted effort to raise productivity, we can lift average productivity growth back towards 2 per cent per year, and achieve an average annual economic growth rate of just above 3 per cent. The high productivity path would result in our economy growing an extra 15 per cent by 2050, against what would otherwise be the case. By 2049-50, that would add around $570 billion to Australia's annual economic output in today's dollar terms and as a result it would increase living standards for all Australians.
The report concludes that if we return productivity growth to two per cent a year, average living standards for Australians, measured by real GDP per capita, would be $16,000 higher per year by 2050, so on average, if we boost productivity growth, by 2050 every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year. That is why raising productivity is so important to building Australia's future, and that's why working families trying to make ends meet have a special interest in growing Australia's productive capacity, and that's why higher productivity is crucial to building Australia's future.
Australia must take decisive action to drive productivity growth forward - to improve living standards, to deliver better services while keeping the Budget on a sustainable footing, and to improve Australia's international competitiveness. The Government has already begun investing in the key drivers of productivity in its first two years in office:
     * by investing in record levels of long-term nation-building economic infrastructure - more than $18 billion worth of investments, including in roads, rail and ports;
     * by implementing an education revolution, doubling the investment in Australian schools over the next five years, and increasing overall real investment in education by over 50 per cent;
     * by investing in business innovation, including innovative manufacturing and helping businesses use technology to work smarter and faster wherever they are, through the high-speed National Broadband Network, and
     * by implementing microeconomic reforms to cut red tape for business and build a seamless national economy.
This is the productivity growth agenda I outlined in a major essay in July last year, setting out the path to economic recovery and growth. It reflects the priorities I set out in January 2007 in my first major policy release as Leader of the Opposition and it is the agenda to which the Australian Government is committed as we enter a new decade, what I describe as Australia's Building Decade: a decade of building a stronger economy for the future; a decade of building a more productive economy for the future; beyond nation-building for recovery, now nation-building for the future.
Ahead of Australia Day next week, I will be visiting every state and territory and discussing in a series of addresses different dimensions of the long-term economic challenges we face as well as discussing our response to those challenges. We are determined to make decisions for the long term, even if the benefits of those decisions won't always be immediate.
In fact, the pipeline between implementing reforms and their positive impacts takes many years and goes beyond many election cycles. Building Australia's future must start now.
I am profoundly optimistic about Australia's future. While we face significant challenges, the extraordinary achievements of past generations show just how much Australians can do when they come together in the face of great challenges of the future.
In the first decade of the 20th century, we became a nation and laid the foundations for one of the fairest societies in the world through such achievements as the living wage, age pensions and the right for all women to vote and stand for Parliament.
In the 1940s, we fought a war that threatened our very survival and laid the foundations for the long post-war economic boom, expanding immigration, building our suburbs and expanding educational opportunities for a generation returning from war.
In the 1980s, we created a dynamic, modern economy that could compete with the rest of the world, laying the foundations for the strong performance of the past two decades.
In the 2010s, we have the opportunity again to build Australia's future and lay foundations for a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, one prepared to face the challenges of the future.
We must make this the decade of opportunities seized, not of opportunities squandered. We face formidable challenges, but Australians have the capacity, the resilience and the spirit to rise to each one and together to build Australia's future. 


The Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance, Bob McMullan, has announced that he will not recontest the next federal election.
During his 22 years of public service as a Federal Member of Parliament, Mr McMullan has made a significant contribution to the nation as a Minister and to the people of Fraser in the ACT.
As Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance, Mr McMullan has played a key role in ensuring Australia's international aid efforts genuinely reduce poverty, assist in creating regional and global security, provide vital aid during times of crisis, and deliver programs in developing countries that build local capacity.
Mr McMullan has had a distinguished career with the Australian Labor Party, beginning in 1975 when he became Secretary of the Western Australian Branch of the ALP, and then National Secretary in 1981, where he helped Labor achieve victory in the 1983, 1984 and 1987 federal elections.
As both a senator and a member of the House of Representatives, Mr McMullan has served the nation with distinction. One of his first acts in 1988 was advocating and ensuring the legislative passage of the ACT self-government legislation. In 1993 he became the first Minister for Arts in Cabinet, and in 1994 became Minister for Trade. He continued to work hard in the difficult years of Opposition in several key shadow portfolios including Treasury, and Finance and Small Business.
I am immensely grateful to Mr McMullan for his dedication and service to the Australian Labor Party both nationally and in the ACT. He leaves big shoes to fill in the electorate of Fraser.
Mr McMullan will remain in his role as Parliamentary Secretary. He will continue to serve the people of Fraser until the next Federal election.
I wish Mr McMullan and his wife Robin all the very best in his future career, confident that his contribution to the nation will not end with his political resignation, and I thank him for his invaluable work for the Australian Government.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
In the coming week, people around Tasmania - like Australians across our whole nation - will be joining in celebrations for Australia Day, some on the back verandah at home, some with friends and family at the beach, some at picnics and barbeques in parks and neighbourhoods across the state and some taking part in events organised by local communities across the state - events like the Australia Day Breakfast on the Bellerive Boardwalk, the Devonport Dance Fiesta, and what could be more Australian than the Gumboot Throwing Competition at Henley-on-Mersey?
There's also the Tassie event that really sparked my interest - the great Aussie Dummy Spit. I'd be glad to send down some politicians from Canberra to compete. I'm confident they'll provide strong competition. After all, they certainly get good practice.
Cast your mind back to the challenges our nation was facing 12 months ago. In the lead-up to Australia Day 2009, I came to this same historic building and spoke about the enormous challenge we faced with the worst global recession in 75 years. Since then, the global recession has taken unemployment into double digit figures in many countries across the world, but in Australia, we are weathering the global storm.
Tasmania's unemployment rate, while it has risen 0.4 percentage points in the last year to 5.2 per cent, is below the national average. Indeed, Tasmania is earning the name of Australia's Tiger economy, with the equal fastest growth rate among all states in the last financial year. As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
2009 was a tough year, but Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis and we showed what can be done when we all join together and work together, governments of all persuasions - state, territory and local - businesses large and small, unions and local communities right across the nation.
On Australia Day 2010, as we enter this second decade of the 21st century, Australians can be optimistic about our future. However, we cannot be complacent about the future.
This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges. We know that we have major long-term challenges to tackle if we are to keep our economy strong: the challenges of our ageing population; a fiercely competitive global economy; and the enormous environmental and economic challenge of climate change.
Building Australia's future and tackling these challenges will require much work. To help guide that work, the Commonwealth Treasury has been preparing the third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges. The Australia to 2050 report, which the Treasurer will release in coming weeks, analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years.
The ageing of our population is central to those challenges, and that is revealed by three key facts I discussed last night in Melbourne. The first fact concerns the extent of the ageing of our population. Today there are 22 million Australians, of whom 14 per cent are over the age of 65. By 2050, there will be 36 million Australians - but an equally momentous change is that the proportion of those over 65 will almost double to 23 per cent. That's nearly one in four Australians - compared to just one in seven Australians in 2010.
The second key fact is that this will significantly affect our economy and working families around the nation. It will simply cost more to look after the needs of older Australians in health, aged care and age pensions. t the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7, so we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth, and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
The third key fact is that we will need a sustained, strong and long-term national effort to respond to this challenge focused on raising productivity and removing barriers to people participating in the workforce. The Government has already acted to lift workforce participation by removing barriers to work for women and young people, but even with these measures, workforce participation will fall over the next 40 years from its peak of around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2050, so our long-term response to the ageing of our population must centre on a sustained effort to increase annual productivity growth.
We need to turn around the decline in productivity growth that occurred in the past decade, when it fell to an annual average of 1.4 per cent. Yesterday, I outlined that if we could lift average productivity growth back towards the 1990s mark of 2 per cent per year, it would produce enormous benefits for the nation and for Australian families. By 2049-50, the higher productivity path would add around $570 billion to Australia's annual economic output - and that is in today's dollar terms - and on average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year, and because of that we would be able to raise more tax revenue than would otherwise be the case to fund increased outlays on health, aged care and pensions.
These are three core reasons why raising productivity is so important, and it is why building Australia's long-term economic future must start now. The Government has already begun investing in the key drivers of productivity:
     * In long-term nation-building economic infrastructure;
     * In our education revolution;
     * In innovation, in particular through the high-speed National Broadband Network, and
     * By implementing microeconomic reforms to cut red tape for business and building a seamless national economy.
This is the agenda to which the Australian government is committed as we enter a new decade - a period that I describe as Australia's Building Decade.
This afternoon I want to make some specific remarks about what the ageing of the population means for the outlook for government finances. This is an important long-term challenge facing our nation, arising from an historic structural change in our population mix.
The Australian Government's early and decisive response to the global financial crisis during the past 18 months has limited the extent of permanent damage to the Australian economy. Australia, unique among the Major Advanced Economies, has avoided recession. We have generated the second lowest unemployment and the lowest debt and the lowest deficits.
Of course, these achievements have not come without cost. The reduction in forecast Government revenues by a staggering $170 billion because of the crisis, together with fiscal stimulus have put the Budget into temporary deficit.
Importantly, the Government has implemented a fiscal strategy that ensures a return from deficit as rapidly as possible. The latest Treasury budget figures released in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook show the Government is on track to return the Budget to surplus by 2015-16. Without this clear-cut fiscal strategy, net debt would be significantly higher in the future.
Our timely, targeted and temporary response to the crisis has helped minimise permanent damage to the economy, by minimising the loss of skills that occurs with unemployment, and the loss of capital investment that occurs with recession. This is the core of conservative economic management - expanding the role of government in the economy when the private sector is in retreat, and contracting that role as the private sector recovers.
The Government's medium-term fiscal strategy puts Australia in a stronger position to respond to long-term challenges, including our ageing population. Nevertheless, the ageing of the population of itself will create significant additional challenges for our public finances for the long term, challenges that must be addressed.
Tonight I am releasing new findings from the Third Intergenerational Report, Australia To 2050 on the ageing of our population and the long-term health of the Budget. These findings underscore the concerns that I expressed before coming to government about the budget spending that occurred throughout much of the past decade. The aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the late 1990s and in the 2000s makes it tougher to deal with the long-term budget impacts of ageing of the population.
While it is common for governments to increase spending growth during times of financial crisis, governments in boom times ought to exercise spending restraint, so as to avoid overheating the economy, crowding out private investment and embedding into the Budget long-term recurrent expenditure commitments that become more difficult to meet once boom time tax revenues cease to flow. The new Treasury modelling prepared for the Australia to 2050 report shows that this high level of government spending of the late 1990s and early 2000s has locked in a permanently higher spending base. This makes responding to the long-term structural challenges to fiscal policy caused by the ageing of the population even more difficult to meet.
The average annual real growth in government spending was 2.5 per cent in the growth period of the 1990s (from 1992-93 to 1999-00), but during the expansion of the 2000s decade (from 2001-02 to 2007-08), when the economy was benefiting from the mining boom, average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent. This is the fastest growth in government spending during any expansion period since the early 1970s under the Whitlam Government.
The Australia to 2050 report concludes that continuing fiscal restraint is essential once the constraints of the global financial crisis ease. The Government has adopted a strict fiscal strategy to support the economy during the global downturn and return the budget to surplus as the economy recovers:
     * As the economy recovers, and grows above trend, the fiscal strategy requires us to hold real spending growth to two per cent a year until the budget returns to surplus;
     * And to allow the level of tax receipts to recover naturally, but not exceed our existing commitment to keep tax as a share of GDP below the 2007-08 level on average.
In the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, we delivered on these fiscal rules, as well as fully offsetting all new spending with savings.
It is crucial that as a nation, we sustain fiscal discipline as we confront the long-term challenge of an ageing population. As our population ages, it will also require a different mix of government services and support - in particular, more provision for health care, aged care and age pensions.
We must also embrace new ways of delivering services to meet the changing needs of Australians in coming decades, as well as ensuring the cost-effectiveness of all publicly funded services. The Government has already had to take action to make sure older Australians can access a secure age pension system that is fiscally sustainable.
Some of the steps we must take to ensure fiscal sustainability will not be popular, but they will pay dividends over the longer term.
The Government's fiscal strategy addresses the ageing of the population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome will be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off - or $130 billion in today's dollar terms. In other words, the Government's commitment to responsible budget settings will put us in a significantly better long-term budget position.
Just as previous higher levels of spending have had a long term impact on the Budget, similarly the Government's commitment to medium-term fiscal restraint will deliver long-term fiscal benefits by undertaking structural repair to Australia's public finances.
Of course, the consequences of an ageing population do not only point to the need for fiscal sustainability. They also underscore the critical need to continue to invest in productivity growth, the subject I addressed in Melbourne yesterday.
A more productive economy will mean the economic pie grows larger and faster, and in terms of budget policy, this in turn means more revenue to fund quality services for Australians into the future. That is why a sustainable budget policy based on expenditure constraint, together with a comprehensive agenda for productivity that boosts economic growth and revenues, constitute the two core planks of a credible, long-term fiscal strategy for Australia that addresses the challenge of an ageing population.
The decisions we take in this new decade will shape Australia's future for decades to come. That's why I describe the decade ahead as the Building Decade: building stronger, more sustainable economic growth; building a sustainable budget strategy; building Australia's future.
Australia Day is not only a time when we can look to the challenges of the future. It is also a time to acknowledge the great achievements of individuals in building the modern Australia of today.
On each Australia Day, we recognise those individual contributions through the Australian of the Year Awards, which turn 50 years old this year. These awards are a great way for us all to say thanks and well done, to some of our nation's highest achievers - Australians who have achieved the highest in their field of endeavour; Australians who have served their community and made us all proud of our nation; Australians who are an inspiration to all of us; Australians who remind us why we have such good reason to be optimistic about our nation's future.
Tasmania's own 2010 Finalist for the Australian of the Year Award is a man who came for a visit from England and couldn't leave. As he tells the story, he fell in love not only with Australia and its people, but also with one of our great Australian icons: the Tasmanian Devil, and for years Bruce has dedicated himself to giving back to his adopted country, working day and night to find a way to save the Tassie Devil from the facial tumours that threaten to wipe out the species.
The Australian Government has supported this cause, with funding of $10 million for research into the transmission and treatment of the disease. This is nationally important work, so I'm sure you'll join me in wishing Bruce the very, very best for his work and for next week's Awards.
The strength of the finalists each year for the Australian of the Year Award reminds us that the Australian spirit is alive and well in 2010: the spirit of the pioneers, of the Gold Rush, of Eureka, of Barcaldine, of Gallipoli, of Kokoda, of the Boxing Kangaroo and the winged keel, and of the Sydney Olympics; the spirit of the "fair go", together with the spirit of the "can do"; the spirit of Australia.
And that spirit can be found in every corner and every community in Australia. That community spirit of looking after your mates, and compassion for those in need. The individual spirit that relishes a challenge and that simply says 'let's get on with it'. The courage and resilience that stands up to tough challenges without making a fuss. The no-nonsense informality that marks us out as Australians wherever we go across the world.
Those Aussie traits have been with us for as long as time remembers, so let's take pride in what our nation has achieved and let's roll up our sleeves and get on with our work in the building decade ahead. 


PM: First of all, happy birthday David. 42 years young today and I found out about this about four minutes before I landed.
PREMIER BARTLETT: I thought that's why you were here.
PM: No, I don't wish to tell a lie, so, anyway, happy birthday mate and many happy returns today. He tells me he got breakfast in bed from the kids.
BARTLETT: That's right.
PM: Is that right?
BARTLETT: Yep.
PM: I'm impressed. You should send a text to my kids about the need for similar treatment.
BARTLETT: They want the new kids book, though.
PM: Jasper and Abby. Now, we're here today to talk about health, health and hospitals, and the importance of a strong partnership between the Australian Government and the Tasmanian Government to serve the future health needs of this State.
Health and building Australia's future are critical priorities for the Australian Government. If we're going to build an Australia for the future which deals with the challenges of an aging population, it means that we have to invest in the future of our health and hospital system.
That's why the Australian Government, in the current Australian Health Agreement between Canberra and the States, has increased by 50 percent our total allocation to the States, including to Tasmania. Part of that increased allocation is the $750 million program that we have announced for specific Australian Government investment in the needs for the emergency departments of our major public hospitals right across the country, and that's why we're here today at Royal Hobart.
What the Premier and I are announcing today is a combined investment of some $21 million to improve the emergency departments of Tasmania's major hospitals. This includes $16.6 million from the Australian Government over four years and these investments will go into ambulance services, mental health services and the overall enhancement of emergency departments.
If I could go to the detail of what we're providing under this, together with our colleagues in the State Government, $3 million this year to address the Royal Hobart Hospital emergency department pressure points, and almost $3.5 million to improve patient flow and to ensure specialist mental health nursing over 24 hours a day, seven days a week. We've just spoken with a mental health nurse here who's indicated the real challenges which exist with presentations from patients in this category and this is one way to up the level of service available in Royal Hobart to deal with patients in that category.
Secondly, $2 million this year to address the Launceston General Hospital emergency department pressure points and $2.4 million to provide specialist mental health nursing coverage in ED 24 hours a day, seven days a week there, as well.
$3.8 million to re-develop the emergency department at the North-West Regional Hospital at Burnie, including eight new general treatment bays, a new secure psychiatric treatment area with 24/7 specialist mental health nursing staff.
There are other investments as well, including nearly $1 million for the Tasmanian Ambulance and Health Transport Service.
These are important investments as part of a partnership between the Australian Government and the Tasmanian Government on the future needs of our health and hospital system.
Before I ask the Premier to comment on that, can I just add one further set of remarks about Australian Government assistance to the earthquake victims in Haiti. The Foreign Minister earlier today has announced an increase of some 50 percent in our allocation of emergency assistance and humanitarian assistance to those who are suffering from the appalling tragedy which has occurred in Haiti. This brings our total Australian Government allocation to some $15 million dollars. The extra investment of $5 million in the immediate response phase will include $3 million to the World Food Program, a further $1 million to Australian NGOs and a further $1 million to the Office of the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
As I said yesterday in my remarks in Melbourne, the Government will be very attentive to further requests for assistance from the various UN agencies and other agencies who are assisting in dealing with the terrible human tragedy which is unfolding each day on our television screens as a consequence of the earthquake in Haiti.
And so, David, if I can ask you to add on the health announcements.
BARTLETT: Can I start by welcoming the Prime Minister back to Tasmania. As many of you know, he's spent a fair bit of time here recently and we're always pleased to have the Prime Minister here.
PM: Are you going to give me a passport?
BARTLETT: Well, I was saving that bit for the speech later on this evening, actually, but we are pleased to have you here and we are particularly pleased to be working so closely with the Rudd Labor Government in the key areas that affect Tasmanians lives - in education, where we're working very closely together and we are seeing real improvements from the investments that we've made together, now in health, and in health for some months, we are seeing joint investment, a partnership approach and an approach that is seeing real improvements.
But as we recognise also, particularly in emergency departments across the State, there have been real pressures. They are demand pressures, and they are demand pressures that require extra investment to alleviate. That's why we're very pleased with the extra some $16 million flowing from the Commonwealth coffers into emergency. The State Government also, due to improved revenues allocated in the mid-year financial report, a further $3 million for the Royal here and a further $2 million for the LGH. That's new State money out of improved revenues made available because of a strong economy and stronger returns than we anticipated in terms of revenues.
But of the third and fourth and very important elements, earlier today we met out here some patients who were full of praise for the work that the staff do here at the Royal, and I want to acknowledge that because they are challenging jobs and in a challenging environment and we want to do all we can to support people working in these environments and it was great to hear those patients say so many strongly positive things about the approach from staff and the service that they've been provided with.
With the new site nurse working within this area, that is an important part of this investment continuing on. We want to see skilled people, highly skilled nurses in those positions that can take the stress out of and strains away from the rest of the operations of the emergency department.
And lastly I want to point out that this package includes a $3.8 million investment in the emergency department in Burnie, the North-West Regional Hospital. Now, you'll note that this was a hospital that under a Liberal government was set up as a quasi-private/public but largely privatised building.
A Labor Government has bought that back and we've bought it back because we want to invest for the future and there was no other way of doing it. This is our first investment for the future and we'll see significant improvements in the investment we're making here at Hobart, in Launceston and also in Burnie, so right across the State, together with the Rudd Labor Government, we are making investments now that will have a real impact on emergency presentations in the very near future.
PM: Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the agreement between the Australian Government and the state and territory governments for the $750 million does go to improving the overall throughput of emergency departments nationwide. This is the first time the Australian Government has invested specifically in providing support for state and territory governments for emergency departments.
Secondly, it's also the first time the Australian Government's invested directly in the provision of specific support for elective surgery, each of which again has specific benchmarks attached to it, so none of these things are simply expressions of goodwill. They are conditional on improved throughput and improved performance.
In terms of that aspect of the deal, I don't know if the state health minister wished to comment further?
MINSTER GIDDINGS: I think you've covered it rather well, actually.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you see an inevitability to the takeover of public hospitals by the Federal Government?
PM: My attitude to the future of the health and hospital system is that we need to make proper preparations for the aging of our population. That is why going into the last federal election I said that we would develop a reform plan for the future of the country. I said we'd commission an independent commission of inquiry to provide us with such a blueprint. Doctor Bennett provided that draft blueprint around the middle of last year.
What we then said is that we would spend the last six months of last year and into early this year consulting with hospitals and health communities right across the nation. For those reasons, for example, I was here at Royal Hobart in October of last year, speaking at some length with the professionals here on their needs.
The final stage in the development of our long-term policy for hospitals is that we will now consult directly with the state and territory governments over the coming months to put our final proposal to them. We're in the midst of developing that proposal as we speak, and the reason we are being cautious and conservative in the development of that policy is that it affects each and every person that we've just seen outside there in the waiting room of accident and emergency here at Royal Hobart, those who've just had their limbs reconstructed in the orthopaedic section of the hospital, and each of those folk want to be absolutely confident we're going to get this right. Therefore, we're being thorough in our approach.
So in answer to the end point of your question, having gone through the process by which we get to it, we believe that the key thing is to get the outcome right for the Australian people, people of Tasmania. We will put a proposal to the states and territories. What we have said consistently is that if they accept that, well and good, and if they don't then we'd seek a mandate from the people in terms of the Commonwealth moving to take over the system.
That remains our position. The rubber will hit the road on all of that when we put our final proposal to the states and territories in the immediate months ahead.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister my new Premier standing to your left is in election mode at the moment, what do you think his chances are for re-election in March?
PM: Well, on the question of elections, those who judge us, as I've said on earlier occasions, are hard but fair and that's the good people of Tasmania and the good people of Australia. They look at what we have done and they look at our plans for the future and they'll make their own judgement, so I am perfectly comfortable and relaxed about the judgements which the people of Tasmania will apply here.
Can I say this about the cooperative relationship between ourselves and the Tasmanian government. The core to the wellbeing of working families is the state of the economy and whether you've got a job.
What we have here in Tasmania is a State economy which is performing as a tiger economy when measured against those of, the other States of Australia. When you look at the unemployment rate here, by national standards, this is one of the better unemployment rates, I think you're at 5.2 and the national rate is 5.5. Put that into a broader context. We have the second lowest unemployment rate of all the major advanced economies of the world who've been wrestling with the impact of the global financial crisis.
So when we look about, when we look at the question of the future of the State, the future of the nation, the number one priority is, what are we doing to support working families, what are we doing to support Australian families, what are we doing to support Tasmanian families? The number one priority within that is to do everything you can to make sure people have got a job. That's why we've acted strongly, early, decisively in our response to the global economic recession.
That's why we have the second lowest employment rates of all the major advanced economies world wide, because we did that and in partnership with the investments of the Tasmanian State Government, you have a State economy here which is powering ahead as one of the nation's tiger economies. That, I believe, is the underpinnings of so much else of what we can talk about when it comes to the record of achievement and our plans for the future, but the economy is first and fundamental to all, it's strong nationally, it's strong here within the State and that's because government policy has been heading in the right direction.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Haiti, why have you taken the decision to send money rather than Australian defence personnel and contribute in that way?
PM: The advice that we've received from the Foreign Ministry and the Foreign Minister is that on the ground in Haiti, there is considerable problems in the physical coordination of personnel on the ground. Therefore it would be unwise to compound those problems unless specifically invited to do so. Were the government there in Haiti to invite specific personnel assistance we, of course, consistent with our tradition world wide, would be willing and able to provide assistance. However, the immediate and urgent need from UN agencies and the other international agencies is for cash. That is why - it is quickly deliverable. It is quickly receivable and, hopefully, quickly dispersible in terms of food and water and shelter on the ground. That's why we've acted in the way in which we've done.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister we've had some serious instances of cyber crime lately. How concerned are you of those and what advice would you offer Australians after people have been hacking into Internet Explorer and such things?
PM: Well, cyber security is a big challenge for government's world wide. You would have seen recent debates internationally about this. You would have seen a recent initiative, also, by the Defence Minister, John Faulkner, in Canberra, launching our new National Centre for Cyber Security in the nation's capital, and beyond that, of course, there are challenges for cyber security as far as the commercial sector is concerned and individuals as well.
This is an emerging challenge for all Australians and therefore it's a space in to which the Australian Government is now moving decisively. There are a lot of people who wish to hack-in in an unauthorised way into the secure communications of individuals, of corporations and governments. Our job is to defend that to the greatest extent possible. That's why we've made a very significant investment in the Defence portfolio with the new centre for cyber security there. It will be the first of a number of steps you'll see unfolded in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister ,can I ask about the unions threats not to participate in the NAPLAN testing and your response to what possibilities you might (inaudible)?
PREMIER BARTLETT: I'll pick up if you want. I'll say this - just recently, the Deputy Prime Minister and I signed a landmark $168 million investment in Tasmanian schools. We were the first State to do so because I can inform you that the strategic directions and the approaches that we had, the Rudd Labor Government and the Bartlett Labor Government, to education are absolutely aligned. They are aligned on literacy and numeracy, they are aligned in early years, they are aligned in disadvantage. They are aligned in teacher quality and they are absolutely aligned when it comes to using data and evidence for improvement. We were, in fact, the first State to put online all of our school data and I note now, federally, all other States have signed up and this is happening.
Now, we've been doing that for two years and I say this to the AEU, guess what, the sky has not fallen in and, in fact, guess what also, parents are saying to me this isn't causing us to leave a school or choose a school so much as it's causing us to engage in our children's education. It gives them a tool to talk to the teacher, talk to the school principals, become engaged in the school community and asses where improvement needs to happen and how they can make a contribution. Anything we can do, as a government, that engages parents and the wider community in the classroom with teaching and learning and it is data and evidence led improvement is great for education.
I say to the AEU, be careful what you wish for. Is really what you are calling for the 12 years of a Howard government that allowed education, particularly public education, to drift, to lack investment, to see teacher salaries in real terms drop? These are the sorts of things that you don't want to go back to. We are moving forward but we must move forward based on data and improving outcomes for all Tasmanians and all Australian children.
PM: As Prime Minister of the country I believe that all parents, everywhere, deserve to have this sort of information available to them about their school's performance. It's pretty basic in my view, and the content of what's proposed here, it's not exactly really radical stuff. On the MySchool website which the Australian Government will be launching on the 28th of January, it will have a profile page which will include the number of students at the school - that's pretty radical. The number of teachers at the school - that's pretty radical. Attendance rates, year 12 retention rate, the school index of what's called the community-socio-economic educational advantage value and finally the school NAPLAN results compared with the national average and the average results for statistically similar schools. What's NAPLAN? It's a national assessment of literacy and numeracy of students in year three, year five, year seven and year nine, held in May of each year.
My question is simply this - why shouldn't the parents of Australia have access to that information on a website about the school that they choose to send their kids to? I think it's pretty basic, so that's our approach.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the threatened boycott both from teachers and the government (inaudible)?
PM: Well, as the Deputy Prime Minister said, I believe earlier today, we reserve to ourselves all options in how we would deal with any such contingency which arises from our good friends in the Australian Education Union. You know something? I think it's time we all got with the project. I think it's time we got serious about the future.
This Government, the Australian Government, is committed to building Australia's future, building a future for Australian families. The cornerstones of that are building our health and hospital system for the future, building our education and school system for the future through stronger investments and greater quality control, and on top of that building our economy and providing jobs for working families.
One of those cornerstones is the future of our schools and I think all the mums and dads in Australia would be saying, 'I deserve to have access to that information about the performance of my kid's school' and that's all we are saying.
JOURNALIST: Polls today, (inaudible) are you concerned about that and I guess you'd sort of start looking towards the next election and think it's going to be much tighter more likely?
PM: You know ,in the two years that I've been Prime Minister and three years that I've been leader of the parliamentary Labor party I've had one policy, which is not to comment on polls as they go up and as they go down because my focus is on the national interest.
The other thing I'd say is this - the Government's focus is taking decisions, hard decisions, in the national interest - on the economy, on climate change, on health, on hospitals, on schools and some of those decisions will not be popular. Taking decisions in the national interest on climate change may not be popular for some. Decisions for the national interest need to be taken for the future otherwise, let me tell you, we place the future at risk. Having said that folks I've really got to start moving. Got a last one?
JOURNALIST: On the ETS Prime Minister, can you give an outline as to what implications that might that have on grocery prices, concerned with, maybe, like, bread and milk?
PM: What we've always said is that if you go back to the Treasury modelling which we released at the time that we put out the Government's policy, that the overall impact on the consumer price index would be 1.1 percent, up to a top range of 1.9 percent. That is clear, it is based on Treasury modelling.
I notice that when those opposite talk about the price impact on families of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, when challenged as to what the basis of their numbers is they run and they hide because they have plucked it out of space - they plucked it out of space.
We have Treasury, the Commonwealth Treasury, produce modelling against our proposal to act on climate change, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. It has calculated what the impact on price would be for families. It has reached those conclusions I've just described and as a consequence of that the Government's policy has provided compensation arrangements for lower income families and for middle income families. That's clear, that's our policy.
The alternative is one) no policy, 2) plucking numbers out of space. I mean, the Opposition was challenged recently about their claims on certain numbers about the impact on price. They went running for cover because they have no independent modelling of their own.
Thanks folks, better run.
(ENDS)


The Prime Minister, Federal Minister for Health and the South Australian Minister for Health today announced the appointment of the construction firms who will build the $25 million Modbury GP Plus Super Clinic and Noarlunga GP Super Clinic. Work will soon commence, with the first stage of the Noarlunga clinic complete in September of this year, and the first stage of the Modbury clinic finished the following month.
Artist impressions were released today of the main Modbury clinic at Tea Tree Plaza which will have a floor space of 2,558 square metres and will also include a new four level car park.
GP Plus centres allow people to receive care close to home, with a range of services including specialist clinics, physiotherapy, chronic disease management and after-hours GP clinics.
The Modbury centre - which will be located on two sites on Smart Road and Gilles Crescent - will boost health services available to residents of Adelaide's north eastern suburbs. It will have five GP consulting rooms, two clinical treatment rooms, six specialist clinic rooms, nine allied health clinic rooms, fourteen dental chairs, plus meeting and training space.
Adelaide UniCare will provide GP services at the clinic with a focus on patients without a GP, patients with chronic health problems, older and disadvantaged people and indigenous, refugee and migrant groups.
The Noarlunga GP Plus Super Clinic will be built between the Noarlunga hospital and Health Village. It will have five GP consulting rooms, 5 minor procedure rooms and 25 specialists' consulting rooms for services including child health, chronic disease programs, mental health and sexual health. Dental services will also be available, along with an Aboriginal Health service with four consulting rooms.
The two $25 million centres are the result of a partnership between the Commonwealth and State Governments signed last year by the Prime Minister and SA Health Minister John Hill.
The Prime Minister said: "GP Super Clinics are essential to building a stronger, more effective primary health care system. Their focus on keeping people healthier for longer is an essential part of improving the health outcomes for all Australians."
Health Minister Nicola Roxon added, "These clinics are part of Government's strategy to help address the growing need in South Australia for access to affordable, high quality, comprehensive and integrated primary care services which are convenient and accessible.
"These new clinics will help ensure South Australians have access to the health care they need, where and when they need it," she said.
Minister Hill says "GP Plus centres are set to be a cornerstone of our primary health system.
"They're good for patients, who can get treatment at convenient, modern and family-friendly centres.
"They're also good for the whole health system as their focus on keeping people healthy and out of hospital also frees up capacity in our busy Emergency Departments."
Construction of the first stage at Tea Tree Gully begins this month and will be complete in October 2010, with the second stage to be complete by October 2011. The Gilles Plains site will be constructed from April 2010 to May 2011.
Following rigorous tendering processes, the contract to build the Modbury GP Plus Centre has been awarded to Badge Constructions SA Pty Ltd, while the contract to build the Noarlunga GP Plus Super Clinic has been awarded to Hansen Yuncken Pty Ltd.
The Australian Government is also partnering with Adelaide UniCare on a $7.5 million Super Clinic at Playford North.
GP Plus Health Care Centres have already been opened at Aldinga and Woodville, and two more are being built in Marion and Elizabeth.
GP Super Clinics deliver on an election commitment of the Rudd Government to provide primary health care services where they are most needed. $275 million has been allocated to establish 36 GP Super Clinics in communities right around the country.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is a great pleasure to be here in Adelaide to mark the celebration of Australia Day for 2010. Here in South Australia people will be celebrating Australia Day 2010 in many different ways: at home in the backyard; at the beach; in a local park; and perhaps some taking the opportunity to visit the zoo and meet the latest additions to the list of distinguished citizens of Adelaide - Wang Wang and Funi.
I understand Australia Day will see a strong gathering at West Terrace Cemetery, to remember the pioneers of South Australia and to engage in the customary rousing rendition of The Song of Australia, a song that came close to becoming our national anthem at the 1977 referendum.
I understand also that down in Glenelg, hundreds of South Australians will be participating in the Havaiana Australia Day Thong Challenge, an event that, I am advised, will see a large number of South Australians floating on massive, mutant versions of Australia's national footwear. The challenge, I understand, is to beat the record from Bondi Beach last year, where 908 people were afloat. It should be a memorable Australia Day in Glenelg.
Exactly one year ago, in the lead-up to Australia Day 2009, I came to Adelaide and spoke about the enormous challenge we faced with the worst global recession in 75 years. Since then, the global recession has taken unemployment into double digit figures in many countries across the world, but in Australia, we are weathering the global storm.
As a nation, Australia now has the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the major advanced economies. The strong consumer confidence index numbers released today, showing a 5.6 per cent increase in January, give us further reason to be optimistic about the year ahead.
South Australia's unemployment rate actually fell last year - from 5.7 per cent at the beginning of the year, to 5.3 per cent at the end. That's an extraordinary achievement.
2009 was a tough year, but Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis. It shows what can be done when we all join together and work together, governments of all persuasions - state, territory and local; businesses large and small; unions and local communities right across the nation.
On Australia Day 2010, as we enter this second decade of the 21st century, Australians can be optimistic about our future, but we cannot afford to mistake optimism for complacency.
This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges. Today, I want to discuss the role of investment in advanced 21st century infrastructure, in lifting productivity growth and responding to the challenge of an ageing population.
The Government will shortly release the third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges. The Australia to 2050 report analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years - three key facts.
The first key fact: our population will grow substantially over the next forty years. By 2050, the Australian population is expected to grow from 22 million to 36 million. That increase alone will put huge pressure on our towns and our cities. We will need more homes, more roads, more rail lines, more hospitals, more schools just to accommodate so many Australians.
Then take into account that the population is ageing. Today, the proportion of Australians who are aged 65 and over, and are therefore most likely out of the workforce, is 14 per cent. By 2050, that figure will almost double to 23 per cent.
That's almost one in four Australians, compared to just one in seven Australians in 2010.
The second key fact is that this will significantly affect our economy and working families around the nation. Building the infrastructure we will need for a population of 36 million will require significant investment. On top of that, it will simply cost more to look after older Australians in health, aged care and age pensions.
At the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs. In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7.
So we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth, and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
The third key fact is that we will need a sustained, strong and long-term national effort to respond to this challenge with a focus on raising productivity and removing barriers to people participating in the workforce. The Government has already acted to lift workforce participation by removing barriers to work for women and young people, but even with these measures, workforce participation will fall over the next 40 years from its peak of around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2050, so our long-term response to the ageing of our population must centre on a sustained effort to increase annual productivity growth.
We need to lift average productivity growth back towards the 1990s mark of 2 per cent per year, up from the 1.4 per cent that it declined to in the first decade of this century. Achieving that goal would produce enormous benefits for the nation and for Australian families. On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050 if productivity returns to the levels under the Hawke and Keating Governments.
But there is a long time lag between implementing the policies that can lift long-term productivity, and experiencing their payoffs. That is why building Australia's future must start now.
Yesterday in Hobart I discussed another dimension of the challenge posed by the ageing population, the challenge to the sustainability of government budgets. As I noted earlier, the ageing of our population will result in higher costs for health, aged care and the age pension. It will also result in a smaller proportion of the population being in work, thus slowing the rate of growth of government revenues.
The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has also been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the late 1990s and in the 2000s, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base. During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent, compared to 2.5 per cent during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome will be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off, or $130 billion in today's dollar terms. The Government's commitment to fiscal discipline builds sustainability into the Budget.
The ageing of our population demands two strategies: first, that we lift our workforce participation and our productivity in order to lift economic growth, and second, that we pursue a disciplined fiscal strategy to deal with the additional needs of our ageing population.
Building productivity is the key for Australia's long-term economic future. I describe the new decade that we have just begun as Australia's Building Decade, putting in place the building blocks of long-term productivity growth. It is our Building Decade because now is the time when we must implement the big policy changes to drive higher productivity growth.
Advanced infrastructure will play a central role in putting Australia back on track to higher productivity growth. Its productivity impact will be complemented by the productivity benefits of the education revolution and the comprehensive microeconomic reform agenda that the Government has underway.
The Australia to 2050 report highlights something that is well understood by South Australians, that infrastructure plays a key role in long-term economic expansion.
The key points I want to make this afternoon about the role of infrastructure in building Australia's future are these:
     * First, economic evidence, including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report, shows that infrastructure investment contributes directly to a more productive, growing economy.
     * Second, despite this fact, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline in our infrastructure investment. That has contributed to a growing backlog of infrastructure projects and an increasing number of choke points that have held back our economic growth.
     * Third, in response to the infrastructure backlog, the Australian Government has for the first time made infrastructure a national priority.
We are providing national leadership in infrastructure investment through Infrastructure Australia evaluating and for the first time prioritising nationally important infrastructure projects, and through increasing the Commonwealth's infrastructure investment.
We are also undertaking regulatory reforms to remove roadblocks to infrastructure investment.
This strategy is a key part of how we intend to make the decade ahead Australia's building decade.
The Australia to 2050 report cites the International Monetary Fund showing that there's a direct link between investing more in public infrastructure and increasing economic growth. According to the IMF research, in developed countries like Australia an increase in the public infrastructure stock by 1 per cent leads to an increase in output by around 0.2 per cent.
It also cites Productivity Commission research showing that improving the efficiency of Australia's energy and transport infrastructure could, after a period of adjustment, increase GDP by nearly 2 per cent.
This research is not surprising. What is surprising is Australia's track record in infrastructure investment.
The long-term trend for that investment is that it has not been increasing, but falling. A 2009 OECD report shows that Australia's investment in transport, storage and communications infrastructure as a percentage of GDP fell between the 1980s and 1990s, and fell again in the first decade of this century. In contrast, across the OECD group of developed nations, infrastructure investment for these sectors has been rising.
If this trend continues, Australia will fall further behind other nations on productivity and in the long term, on future growth and living standards. Australia's shortfall on infrastructure investment has generated a yawning gap between the infrastructure we've got and the infrastructure we need. We see this in ports, in freight, in rail, on our roads and in broadband.
A few years ago the Business Council of Australia estimated the infrastructure deficit at $90 billion. Addressing the infrastructure gap will involve large scale investment and take a long period of time. One measure of the scale of the task from Citigroup estimates that Australia is set to spend $770 billion on infrastructure in the decade to 2018 - underscoring the extent to which this must be the Building Decade.
Given the infrastructure backlog, it must be a national economic priority to facilitate and support investment in advanced infrastructure. The Government is committed to providing that leadership, and investing in the infrastructure of tomorrow, from transport and freight networks to the high-speed National Broadband Network.
First, we have established an overall policy framework for infrastructure investment. 
In 2008, shortly after coming to office, the Government established Infrastructure Australia. For the first time in our nation's history, with Infrastructure Australia we have a central body to advise on the long-term planning of our infrastructure needs.
Second, we have increased the national investment in infrastructure. That includes a record $36 billion national investment in transport infrastructure in roads, railways and ports.
Third, we are acting on the regulatory reforms needs to foster increased infrastructure investment. We are undertaking significant policy reforms including creating single national regulators for heavy vehicles, rail safety and maritime safety.
Finally today, I want to address just one part of the task ahead in the 'Building Decade' that is crucial to the productivity of Australian businesses, both large and small. That is freight transport - our ability to move commodities, food, all kinds of products from one place to another in markets across the nation and across the world.
According to work conducted by IBIS World for a 2009 report by Infrastructure Partnerships Australia, Australia's freight task will triple by 2050 - from 503 billion tonne kilometres to 1,540 billion tonne kilometres. Meeting this task will require a massive effort - companies will have to improve transport and logistics strategies and efficiencies, and governments will have to undertake substantial new investment and policy reform.
According to IBIS World, transport infrastructure investment should be increased by 2050 to $62.5 billion, almost four times the spending levels of 2008. A 2008 Interim Priority List compiled by Infrastructure Australia, identified as priorities 40 road projects worth $69 billion, eight freight rail projects worth $16 billion and six port and airport projects worth $6 billion.
The needs are truly staggering, but meeting the freight task isn't only about Commonwealth investment. It's also about policy coordination and reform to provide the right incentives for private sector investment as well. That's why in 2010, the transport priority for the Council of Australian Governments will be freight transport.
Infrastructure Australia is currently focusing its work on two new strategies: a National Ports Strategy and a Freight Network Plan. Initial work by Infrastructure Australia in these areas already suggests some important principles for these strategic plans:
     * coordination along the supply chain is a major field for productivity improvement for business;
     * the freight network is not simply about individual road and rail projects, but a set of 'nodes' that are interconnected by road, rail, sea and air 'links', and
     * the case for dedicated road and rail freight infrastructure has become stronger to minimise conflict with passenger transport and economic losses.
I look forward to considering this work in detail later in the year.
Building a better future for Australia requires leadership at the national level on key areas of economic policy, but equally, it relies on the efforts of individual Australians in every walk of life, Australians who demonstrate courage, persistence, ingenuity and compassion.
One of the ways we recognise such individual achievement at this time of year is through the Australian of the Year Awards. South Australia's finalist for 2010, Julian Burton, is a man who has shown great strength of character and dedication to helping others. Julian sustained life-threatening third degree burns in the 2002 Bali bombings, but he has turned that terrible experience to good in service of the community. Through the Julian Burton Burns Trust, he is working to improve the prevention of, care for and research into burn injury.
I know South Australians will be proud of him as he stands alongside his fellow finalists in Canberra next week when the Australian of the Year is announced.
So for each of you this afternoon, I wish you all a very happy Australia Day for next week and I hope you take a moment to enjoy the sense of pride in being part of a great state and a great country. So it's with great pleasure I ask you to raise your glasses filled with the finest South Australian wine as I propose a toast to Australia. 


Australian businesses have responded enthusiastically to the Federal Government's $100 million Apprentice Kickstart initiative, signing up more than 6,400 young traditional trades apprentices in just over six weeks.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Employment Participation Mark Arbib today urged businesses to continue to take advantage of the boost to employer incentives.
The Kickstart bonus has resulted in 4,400 trade apprentices being signed up in December 2009 - 1,500 more than December 2008 and 1,200 more than pre-global recession levels in December 2007.
Apprentice Kickstart is a practical measure to generate jobs for young people, tackling both youth unemployment and providing a down-payment on the vital skills Australia needs for the future.
In Western Australia alone employers have signed up 840 trades apprentices since Kickstart began on December 1, 2009.
Under Kickstart, the Rudd Government has more than tripled the commencement bonus for employers in the first year, from $1500 to $4850.
Employers receive $2350 when they employ a 15- to 19-year-old apprentice in an eligible trade and then receive a further $2500 after the apprentice completes nine months.
The Australian Government today also invites state and territory governments to submit proposals for a share of a $20 million funding to boost pre-apprenticeships.
Pre-apprenticeship training allows young people to gain a more realistic expectation of the work involved in their trade and to develop basic skills, which can reduce the period of time they will spend in their apprenticeship.
The Kickstart bonus is available to employers of apprentices in the fields that have been hardest hit by skills shortages - identified on the National Skills Needs List.
These include butchers, bakers, bricklayers, carpenters, plumbers, electrical trades and hairdressing.
The bonus is available until 28 February 2010 and aims to sign up 21,000 young apprentices.
The economic downturn particularly hurt apprenticeships, with commencements dropping by about 10,000 in the past year. This bonus will fast-forward hiring decisions - to bring apprentice numbers back up to the levels before the global recession.
Increased apprenticeship training is crucial to enhancing the productivity and innovation of Australian businesses.
This initiative will help develop a highly-skilled workforce and is a great foundation to support the recovery of the Australian economy.
Today's announcement was made at Westminster School in Perth. The school community is receiving $5 million under the Federal Government's education stimulus, including a library, classrooms, an art block and multipurpose room.
Casotti Plumbing and Gasfitting, which is contracted to complete some of the work at Westminster, has employed two new apprentices under the Kickstart Program.
The Government's Economic Stimulus plan has a target of 10 per cent of work on projects to be completed by apprentices.
The stimulus spending is supporting thousands of jobs and small businesses across the country and providing the vital infrastructure for Australia's future.
Our timely, targeted and temporary response to the global recession helped minimise the loss of skills that occurs with unemployment as well as boosting apprentice commencements.
Apprentice sign-ups by State (December 1 to January 14):
ACT 85
NSW 1932
NT 27
Qld 1114
SA 523
Tas 213
Vic 1687
WA 840
Total 6421
Funding for Apprentice Kickstart comes from the Government's $650 million Jobs Fund and was negotiated with the support of the Australian Greens and Senator Stephen Fielding.
It brings to about $250 million the level of additional support the Rudd Government is providing to apprentices.
More information on Apprentice Kickstart is available at: www.australianapprenticeships.gov.au


PM: This is an important day for Australia, for South Australia and for the Royal Australian Navy. There is no higher responsibility for the Australian Government than to ensure this nation's long-term national security. We have a vast coastline. We have a vast maritime space. We have a vast maritime trade. Therefore, it's of fundamental importance that we are investing in our long-term defence capabilities. That's what we're doing here today in partnership with the South Australian Government and with the ASC.
Secondly, we need to make sure that we are building the Defence Force we need for the long-term future. We've release the Defence White Paper. We have set in place the processes to build Defence Force 2030. We intend to get on with the business of building Force 2030 and a core part of that defence force, of course, is the construction of the Air Warfare Destroyers.
This will be an important part of our Navy's fighting kit and it is critical that it is done right, that it is done on budget and it is done on time. Of course, here in South Australia, this great facility is going to make this great defence project possible.
Also, we look to the long-term future or, the longer-term future, we look at the next generation of additions to the Royal Australian Navy, namely the next fleet of submarines. As Prime Minister of Australia I confirm, in absolutely clear-cut terms, that our next generation of subs will be built here in Adelaide. Therefore, it's not just the project that we are officiating at today, opening of the shipyard, the construction of the Air Warfare Destroyers - it's a long-term investment in the defence industry here in South Australia of which the next stage will be the construction of the next Australian submarine fleet.
We are determined to get this right for the future. Force 2030 needs it. Force 2030 includes within it a larger, more potent, more lethal, maritime capability for the Royal Australian Navy and South Australia and this facility is key to the construction of that force.
One final set of remarks. The other great thing about the State of South Australia, not just here but more broadly, is, of course, the importance of manufacturing and I said when I became Prime Minister of Australia that I didn't want to be a Prime Minister of a country that didn't make things anymore and I'm absolutely passionate about this. That's why we've been such strong investors in the new car industry for Australia.
The global economic recession has devastated the car industry across so many countries in the world. Here in Australia, our motor vehicle industry has emerged intact. It's taken some damage but it's emerged intact. What we've seen around the world is manufacturers falling over one after the other. Here in Australia we have been partners in that - strong, clear partners - through the Industry Ministers' $6.2 billion new car plan for the country.
I was disturbed to see reports this morning concerning the possible withdrawal of support for the car industry in the future. The Shadow Treasure's reported in the newspapers this morning along these lines. The journalist asked the Shadow Treasurer, "the Productivity Commission has given the Government some ideas as where to find big savings in the future by axing billions of dollars in subsidies to the car manufacturing industry and textile industry. Do you support that idea?" The Shadow Treasurer say, "This is now something that now needs to be looked at seriously if you're going to improve productivity in Australia."
Now, I think I know what everyone knows what that's code language for. That's code language for, a future Coalition Government removing support for the Australian motor vehicle industry.
There is a clear contrast here. We have said we are strong co-investors with the motor vehicle industry for the future. There are some 200,000 Australians employed in motor vehicle manufacturing and in the automotive parts industry. This is a lot of Australians, a lot of Australian jobs. Our position's clear.
What the Shadow Treasurer, Mr Hockey, has opened today is a clear area of policy difference with us. I think it's very important that we have a rapid clarification of the position of the Coalition on such a critical matter for the future of Australian jobs. Premier?
PREMIER RANN: Can I just say how much we appreciate this partnership with the Federal Government and, of course, in a few weeks' time we will be opening Techport. In this partnership we wanted to demonstrate that the South Australian Government would put its money where its mouth was in terms of defence and that's why we're committing and have committed more than $300 million to build Techport, which is a state-of-the-art facility - the best in the Southern Hemisphere.
Our commitment as a State Government, working with the Federal Government on defence, has meant we've now secured $44 billion worth of defence projects over the past six years. They are projects that are now gearing up, starting, have started and are coming. So it means that a sustainable industry over the next 20, 30, 40 years.
Now, we're already on target to reach our goal of 28,000 defence jobs by 2013, but this is critically important. This is about a whole range of jobs - skilled jobs, professional jobs, jobs for contractors. The reason that we invested in a common-user facility is that is not just for one company but for a series of companies capable of handling a series of defence projects simultaneously.
So we're very, very pleased that the Prime Minister has today reaffirmed the commitment that the next generation of submarines, 12 submarines, will be built here in Adelaide. That's, of course, been estimated as a $30 billion project and obviously it's about our intent in a partnership with the Commonwealth to make us the defence capital of Australia.
PM: OK folks, over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you receive advice from the Defence Department not to blame Japan for the 'Centaur' sinking and have you heeded that advice?
PM: Firstly, I can't recall receiving any such advice, but can I say, secondly, on the question of the Centaur itself, one) this was a hospital ship, clearly marked in 1943; two) the action to sink the Centaur by the Japanese Navy at the time was, in our view, a complete breach of international law. It was also a complete violation of the most basic international and humanitarian conventions. I'd also say that those were the actions of the war.
Secondly, can I say that the Japan of today is a vastly different Japan and I think it's important also that we continue to build our future relationship with Japan.
JOURNALIST: So you're not demanding an apology, that sort of thing?
PM: I think, if you look at the statements of the Menzies Government in the 1950s on the question of specific actions undertaken by Japan during the war, these matters were put to rest in the 1950s by the Menzies Government at the time. Therefore, our job is to get on with the future but let's be very clear cut about it - the decision to sink an unarmed hospital ship, clearly marked with Red Cross symbols, as it was, was a violation of international law and was therefore a complete violation of the most basic humanitarian principals. Let's be absolutely clear cut about that, as we should be equally clear cut about the fact that the Japan of today is a vastly different Japan to the one which went to war against Australia in the 1940s.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well, I see reports in the newspapers that some advice had been prepared within Defence or within various government agencies. I'm sure there's a thousand pieces of advice on any given subject at any particular time. All I'm saying is what our specific position as a government, is and that this action to sink the 'Centaur', an unarmed, clearly marked hospital ship by the Japanese, Imperial Japanese Navy at the time, was a violation of international law, a violation of the most basic humanitarian principals. End of story.
JOURNALIST: Overnight Yvo de Boer came out and said that the Copenhagen talks didn't achieve what was needed. Do you agree with him that they were a failure?
PM: I'm you look carefully at the statements of the President of the United States, the leaders of the European Union and various other countries, we have achieved some considerable progress as a consequence of the Copenhagen Conference and the Copenhagen Accord. It is not, as I said that the time, everything that the international community wanted. It is not everything that the Australian Government wanted. However, it does represent progress on where we were before.
Secondly, what's the key measure of that progress? For the first time the States of the world agree we should keep temperature increases across the planet at two degrees centigrade. That had not been the case before in any such international gathering. That, therefore, guides policy actions for the future. So, this was not a perfect outcome in Copenhagen at all but it represents progress on what was the case prior to Copenhagen and that progress is specifically measured in the two degree centigrade target which was embraced, for the first time, by the various governments of the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the national EFTPOS scam-
PM: -Sorry, say that again.
JOURNALIST: The EFTPOS scam that's been (inaudible) more than $50 million in New South Wales. The advice of the police there was for everyone holding a credit card to change their PIN. Do you have a view on how secure EFTPOS and credit card facilities are?
PM: We're taking advice from our own authorities on this question at present in close liaison with various State authorities as well. It's a disturbing report, it's a highly disturbing report but I'm sure the relevant Minister, the Acting Attorney General, has further to say about it in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) what's your response to that and will you be open to (inaudible)
PM: Well, firstly, let's just be very basic about it. Here we are in South Australia, where the challenges of water a real. Part of the reason why the challenges of water are real is because we have this unfolding impact of climate change.
Two core facts - I spoke to the community cabinet in Norwood about this last night, community cabinet meeting with the Norwood community about this last night. The last 10 years, water inflow into the Murray-Darling is about half of it historical average. The last four years, it's one quarter of its historical average. This is a huge problem.
Secondly, part of dealing with this problem, long term, lies in acting on climate change and acting effectively on climate change. You are either going to be serious about the action you take, or, you are going to take these extreme positions, such as we've seen from Mr Abbott, which effectively deny that climate change is a problem.
Mr Abbott has said climate change is crap. That's what he said. Our position is that it's real and we need to act on it. That's the clear difference.
Now, specifically, on the proposal from the Greens, it's only just been released. I have not had an opportunity to examine it. But what I would say is this - firstly, that consistent with what the Minister, Penny Wong, has said for a long period of time, we are open to discussions with all parties within the Australian parliament on the proper passage of necessary legislation to act on climate change.
Secondly, that extends also to Mr Abbott were he to move from his current extreme position of climate change denial. Remember what he's said on the past on this, that it's absolute nonsense. We have a different view and I think most Australians have a different view as well.
JOURNALIST: Just on the EFTPOS scam, will you be changing your own PIN number (inaudible)
PM: I want to see, first of all, what all the facts are, secondly, to be properly briefed through the relevant Minister or acting Minister in the Commonwealth Government, and then thirdly we'll take necessary actions or take necessary actions in concert with the State and Territory authorities for all Australians. In terms of my own interest I think they are, personal interest, I think they are fairly marginally relevant to what's necessary for all Australians.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) The dirty tricks campaign (inaudible) What's your views on that?
PREMIER RANN: I'm not involved in any dirty tricks campaign at all so I have no comment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Labor Party's been involved in-
PREMIER RANN: -I haven't seen one. I haven't seen the item that you're referring to.
JOURNALIST: Premier, there's a plan for a city stadium delivered to you by the SA Forum but you stopped it?
PREMIER RANN: What I have done is said to all elements, I've been very, very upfront about this right from the start. Every single group came into see me with different plans. There was a group from soccer came into see me which looked like the World Cup stadium from Germany.
What I said to all of them is this - 'you know, the Liberals might be reckless and unready enough to promise everything to everyone.' I said 'go away and come back to me when you've all got agreement.' So I said to all of the different groups what I want to see is people come into my office and I want the AFL, the SANFL, Crows and Port Power and the cricket to come in with a common position and then we'll look at backing it, and that's exactly what we've done and that involves the Adelaide Oval upgrade which that means we have an iconic stadium in world terms, an iconic sporting venue, but one that is capable of hosting football and cricket, as opposed to the Liberals, who are prepared to offer billions of dollars here and there.
I mean, these are the same Liberals who yesterday said that they would not take on Victoria in a High Court challenge, just as they wouldn't and didn't take on the Howard Government in terms of having a nuclear waste dump in South Australia. I guess the message from the Liberals, their slogan, is to run up the white flag on South Australia's future. That isn't my policy and that's why we fight to win contracts, that's why we fight to win water and that's why we are going to take on Victoria.
JOURNALIST: If the SANFL or the SACA come to you with a proposal for the stadium-
PREMIER RANN: I remember the SANFL talking about a range of different options. However, I wasn't interested what their different options were from every different group that wanted something silly enough to hand out a billion dollars to anyone who came in the room, which is what the Liberals were doing, which was to promise everything to everyone, totally un-costed. They still haven't costed their development.
What I've said to all the different sports bodies is when you can agree come and see me so that we can do something together and then we'll back you in and that's exactly what we've done. Thank you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PREMIER RANN: They had, I understand they came to me with three different options.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask, the Indian Foreign Minister has plugged the idea of a travel ban or a travel advisory for Indian students if there is any further violence involving Indians in Australia. What's your view on that?
PM: I was in New Delhi myself only a couple months ago and had extensive discussions with the Indian Prime Minister and the Indian Foreign Minister about these matters. Obviously, these are difficult matters in India. They are difficult matters in Australia. We are working our way through them in a practical and effective way over time. Decisions of the Indian Government are a matter for the Indian Government.
The truth is this: the vast majority, the vast majority, of Indian students in Australia are embraced entirely by the Australian community, get on with the business of studying hard, getting on with getting their qualifications and going off to do whatever they want to do with their lives. This has been going on for years.
Regrettably, there have been some incidents recently. Let's accept that, but let's put it into context. My last figures, I stand to be corrected on this, is that we had something like more than 100,000 Indian students in this country, and so we've had a number of incidents, but let's keep this into context and also in context of, let's call it the broader incidences of violence to students of other ethnic backgrounds, acts of violence against Australian students, acts of violence in particular parts of our large cities at any given time of day. I think it's important to keep all of this in its context, but what the Indian Government does is a matter for the Indian Government
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you read into reports that Malcolm Turnbull is back from holidays feeling refreshed and very likely to recontest the next election (inaudible)
PM: Well, that's a matter for Mr Turnbull entirely. What I could say, however, is this: Mr Turnbull, as leader, and with the majority of support of the Liberals and Nationals, supported the Government's decision to act on climate change through a carbon pollution reduction scheme. Then, a day or two later, they decided to get rid of Mr Turnbull. I think the Liberal party, on climate change, is split right down the middle.
This Governments' position on climate change is absolutely clear cut and the reason it is clear cut is because we know that climate change demands action.
Can I say this folks, I've got to fly off to Perth because I've got a reception I need to attend at a particular time so I'm going to have to zip. Thank you.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be in Perth to kick off celebrations for our national day.
And a real pleasure to stand in this magnificent Perth Town Hall.
A town hall with the historic distinction of being the only one in Australia that was built by convicts - rather reluctantly, one presumes - during the controversial period when John Stephen Hampton was Governor of the colony of Western Australia.
Hampton's vigorous public works program, combined with strict financial discipline, advanced Western Australia's development at a time when Australia was being transformed by its first mining boom.
And Hampton embodied the 'can-do' spirit that marks out Australians, and in particular, West Australians.
This is a 'can-do' city in a 'can-do' state.
A state that has outperformed the rest of the nation during the first decade of the 21st century, with a growth rate of 4.1 per cent per year during the past decade, compared to the annual national average of 3.2 per cent per year.
A state that has every reason for optimism as it enters a new decade, with the promise of continued strong growth.
And a state that has every reason to celebrate on January 26 as the nation observes Australia Day 2010.
I want to make special mention of the local celebrations in Toodyay next week.
People in Toodyay have been doing it tough after the fires in late December which destroyed 38 homes.
On Australia Day, local Australia Day celebrations will be honouring the members of the Fire and Emergency Services Authority volunteer bush fire service. The men and women who fought those fires are true Australian heroes - and we all salute them.
Australia Day provides an opportunity to reflect not only on the events of December but also on the past 12 months.
This time last year when I came to Perth, I spoke about the enormous challenge we faced with the worst global recession in 75 years.
The good news is that this state, like our national economy, has been weathering the global storm.
Despite 2009 being a tough year, Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis.
As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
Here in Western Australia, the unemployment rate has risen some 2 percentage points in the last year, reflecting the impact of the global recession.
Nevertheless, unemployment remains below the national average, at 5.1 per cent.
Our response to the economic maelstrom demonstrated what can be done when we all work together - across political and state lines - in local government; in businesses large and small; in unions and local communities right across the nation.
I am profoundly optimistic about Australia's future.
Not because Australia is guaranteed future success and prosperity.
There are no such guarantees in a fast-changing world like ours.
But I'm optimistic because I believe Australians have the determination and ability to seize the opportunities of the future, and tackle the significant long-term challenges we are now facing.
This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges.
Analysis of the long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years is contained in Australia's Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges, which will be released in coming weeks.
On Monday in Melbourne, I discussed how the ageing of the population over coming decades will result in slower economic growth unless we implement the long-term changes needed to move to a higher productivity growth path.
On Tuesday in Hobart, I discussed how the ageing of the population will also create additional long-term budget pressures for all governments unless we act to boost economic growth and therefore revenue growth, through boosting productivity on one hand, and on the other hand implementing our medium-term fiscal strategy to return to surplus.
Yesterday in Adelaide, I discussed why I believe the decade ahead must be a Building Decade - and how important advanced 21st century infrastructure is if we are to move to a higher productivity growth path.
Today in Perth I want to discuss why, with an ageing population, this Building Decade must include the aim of building the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world.
A workforce with the skills to work smarter and to be the engine room of the nation's long-term productivity growth.
The facts on the ageing of our population revealed in the report are stark. 
Today we are a nation of 22 million Australians, of whom 14 per cent - one in seven - are over the age of 65.
By 2050, we will be a nation of 36 million Australians, of whom 23 per cent - one in four - will be over 65.
That is a dramatic change, with dramatic economic impacts.
The economic impact is that it will simply cost more to look after the needs of older Australians - in health, aged care and age pensions.
At the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
In fact, workforce participation will fall - from its peak of around 65 per cent now, to around 60 per cent by 2050.
In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to pay tax and support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7.
So we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth - and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
We need to ask ourselves: how can we strengthen growth in the face of this challenge?
Treasury's intergenerational modelling tells us the number one answer is productivity growth.
The Treasury analysis undertaken for the Australia to 2050 report shows that if average productivity growth was lifted back towards the 1990s mark of 2 per cent per year - up from the 1.4 per cent to which it declined in the decade just passed - this would produce enormous benefits for the nation and for Australian families.
On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050.
We should not think such a change is simple. It will require a great deal of effort, and cannot happen overnight.
And we should remember that the pipeline between productivity-boosting investments and the productivity payoffs will often be several years and even several electoral cycles.
But it illustrates that even a small enhancement in long-term productivity growth will deliver large future benefits.
That is why the Government is already committed to building advanced infrastructure, advancing the education revolution, fostering innovation and creating a seamless national economy through our microeconomic reform agenda.
On Tuesday in Hobart I discussed a further dimension of the challenge posed by the ageing population - the challenge to the sustainability of government budgets.
The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the late 1990s and in the 2000s, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base.
During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent, compared to 2.5 per cent during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a medium-term fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome will be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off - or $130 billion in today's dollar terms.
The Government's commitment to fiscal discipline builds sustainability into the Budget and is an important element in preparing for the challenges of the future.
Yesterday in Adelaide I addressed the role of advanced infrastructure in enhancing long-term productivity growth.
In explaining why I describe this new decade we have just begun as Australia's Building Decade, I made three key points.
First, economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - clearly shows that infrastructure investment contributes directly to a more productive, growing economy.
Second, and despite this fact, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline in our infrastructure investment. That has contributed to a growing backlog of infrastructure projects, and an increasing number of choke points that have held back our economic growth.
Third, the Government has made infrastructure a national priority since coming to government:
     * by the national government taking a leading national role for the first time in national infrastructure policy;
     * by establishing Infrastructure Australia to advise on the long-term planning of our infrastructure needs;
     * increasing the national investment in productive infrastructure including a $36 billion investment in transport infrastructure including roads, railways and ports; and
     * by tackling regulatory reforms to remove the hurdles to increased infrastructure investment from the private sector.
This afternoon I want to make some specific remarks about the importance of having a highly skilled population if we are to move to a higher productivity growth path and respond to the challenge of an ageing population with a smaller proportion of Australians in the workforce.
It is important to understand that enhancing productivity is about giving workers and businesses the skills, infrastructure and positive business environment to work smarter.
The key points I want to make about the role of a highly-skilled workforce in building Australia's future are these:
First, economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - highlights that higher levels of education and skills not only increase earnings for individuals, they contribute to higher overall productivity for the nation in the longer term.
Second, despite this fact, Australia has not made adequate long-term investment in education in recent decades.
In addition, we know that during the global economic recession, the number of new apprenticeship commencements dropped dramatically.
This has the potential to worsen the long-standing skill shortages in key industries that will re-emerge as economic growth recovers.
Third, the Government is already taking steps under our long-term plan to advance the education revolution, with the goal of building the best-educated, best-trained, most highly skilled workforce in the world.
The education revolution extends from early childhood through schooling to vocational education, apprenticeships, university and research - today, I want to discuss specific measures we are taking to boost apprenticeships and counter the fall in industry training in response to the economic downturn.
Analysis in the Australia to 2050 report highlights the link between education and skills and higher overall national productivity.
The Australia to 2050 Report notes Productivity Commission research estimating that improvements related to education and training - early learning, higher education attainment and increases in numeracy and literacy - could raise aggregate labour productivity by up to 1.2 per cent.
If we could lift real GDP by 1.2% in 2049-50, it would mean a larger economy - around $45 billion in today's dollars - or the equivalent of around $1,200 for each Australian.
And OECD research shows that if the average level of education of the working-age population was increased by one year, the economy would be 3-6 per cent larger, and the growth rate of the economy would be up to 1 per cent higher. If the economy in 2049-50 was 3-6 per cent, or around $110 to $220 billion, larger, or the equivalent of around $3,000 to $6,000 for each Australian.
Increased skills and education does not just enhance productivity growth - it also boosts individuals' incomes.
At the individual level, the latest available ABS data shows that there is a benefit to individuals in full-time employment of approximately $100 per week for each extra year of education beyond compulsory schooling.
Those with post school qualifications are also able to work around 7 years longer than those without post school qualifications.
In other words, increased skills and education contribute to both higher productivity and higher workforce participation.
Despite this clear evidence at both a national and individual level, Australia has seen inadequate levels of investment in education and training in recent years.
When we came to Government, national investment in education had not kept pace with the rest of world. Public spending on education in Australia fell as a share of GDP - from 5 per cent of GDP in 1995 to a low of 4.3 per cent in 2004.
The most recent figures show Australia's public spending on education in Australia had risen slightly to 4.6 per cent of GDP in 2006, still well below the OECD average of 5.3 per cent.
The Government has already begun to turn around this gap.
In 2009-10, Australian Government investment on education is expected to be over $35 billion, an increase of around 0.5 per cent of GDP compared to 2006-07 levels.
This investment is critically important to addressing our long-term skills shortages.
In May 2008, the Australian Industry Group was warning that Australia faced a shortage of as many as 240,000 skilled workers by 2016.
Western Australia knows this problem well - before the global recession, several sectors of the economy and especially the mining industry were crying out for skilled workers.
The problem risks being made worse by the global economic downturn. 
In uncertain economic times, it's harder for tradies to take on apprentices - and to keep them on.
In 2008-09, as the global recession began to hit, the number of apprentices signed up in traditional trades dropped by around 10,000 over the previous year. By as much as 25 per cent in sectors like construction.
History tells us that it can take many years for training numbers to return to satisfactory levels after an economic downturn.
After the 1990 recession, it took almost a decade for apprentice commencements to bounce back.
Given the time lags involved in acquiring skills and training, the extent of Australia's skills shortages could worsen if, as expected, we experience substantial increased demand for skilled workers in the years ahead.
Supplying adequately trained and highly skilled employees for nation-building ventures like the Gorgon Project will be a major challenge in coming years.
The Gorgon Project is the largest resource project ever proposed in Australia and at its peak will create more than 10,000 direct and indirect jobs.
It is just one of around 80 planned or approved projects nationally.
And the West Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry estimates that the resources sector added 90,570 jobs across the WA economy from 2001 to 2008.
So we know that the demand for skilled labour is going to soar in the resource sector over the next decade.
And across the board, we know that the jobs of the future are going to require higher levels of skills and training than in the past.
Since coming to government two years ago, the Government has begun delivering a long-term education revolution to tackle skills shortages and prepare today's kids for the jobs and industries of tomorrow.
Despite the global recession, we have never taken our eyes off the ball for the long-term challenge of building the most highly skilled, highly trained, highly educated workforce for Australia's future.
We are committed to a revolution in the quantity of education investment and the quality of education outcomes.
The education revolution extends from an investment of nearly $1 billion in universal preschool by 2013 for children the year before they go to school, a time when investment produces enormous long-term returns - through to every level of education and training including vocational, university and research.
We have increased the Commonwealth's investment in all education sectors over a five year period by 50 per cent, compared to the previous five years.
The Government is increasing the Commonwealth's investment in school education alone to more than $62 billion in the current period from 2009 to 2012, compared to $33 billion in the period 2005 to 2008 - a nearly 100 per cent increase.
We are also undertaking major reform of the $6.4 billion vocational education and training sector in Australia.
VET is a major part of our education system, with close to 5,000 providers and 1.7 million students.
The Government is committed to an education revolution in the VET sector. Already we have provided $2 billion funding for 711,000 new training places over five years through the Productivity Places Program.
The Government will also soon introduce legislation to establish a national quality and standards regulator for the VET and higher education sectors.
Better national regulation will unlock key data about the performance of providers, the value of qualifications and the quality of teaching to give students the information they need to make the best choices.
We are also targeting our efforts where they can make the greatest impact. Here in Western Australia, we estimate that current training partnerships with the State Government will deliver 23,470 places for jobseekers and 52,009 places for existing workers over the next five years.
We are also tackling the specific problem of the fall in apprenticeships - and we are getting results.
Last year the Government committed to investing $145 million in our Securing Apprenticeships and Traineeships initiative to support out-of-trade apprentices and trainees, helping them to remain connected to the workforce and to maintain their investment in training.
To date more than $41 million has been paid to 22,600 employers supporting around 34,000 apprentices.
This investment supports the expansion of the national skills base by ensuring apprentices and trainees can complete their training.
We've also invested $20 million to support 4,000 pre-apprenticeship places - to give young people the experience they need to decide on a career in a trade.
And we have provided an immediate $80 million incentive for employers to take on a young apprentice.
Over summer this year, we are more than tripling the first year bonus to employers through the Apprentice Kickstart program.
This program increases the incentive for employers who take on traditional trades apprentices from $1,500 to $4,850 in areas on the National Skills Needs List - like carpenters, welders, cooks, electricians, joiners and hairdressers.
Apprentice Kickstart began on 1 December last year and will run until 28 February this year - or until 21,000 apprentices have commenced.
Today I can inform you that we are getting results.
Today I can confirm for the first time that most recent sign-ups for new apprenticeships, in December 2009, show an increase of more than 50 per cent compared to the same time last year - with 4,400 trade apprentices being signed up across Australia.
That is 1,500 more than in December 2008 and 1,200 more than in December 2007 - before the global downturn began.
And by last week, we had a total of 6,421 trade apprentices signed up. Apprentice Kickstart is a good choice for 2009 school leavers - it's a pathway for young Australians to a secure and exciting future. It's a good choice for employers - it's an investment in skills that will be vital during recovery.
This is government action at work, building Australia's future skills and future productivity.
This afternoon I have addressed a number of major national policy priorities that are important to building Australia's future.
Equally important is the work that Australians are doing every day to build Australia's future - from people working hard in their local communities, to those who serve Australia in uniform, to those who dedicate their professional life to medical research, relieving suffering and improving the lives of Australians.
Such contributions are not always well recognised - and that is why it is a good thing that 50 years ago this year, we established the Australian of the Year Awards - to recognise such contributions.
Western Australia's finalist for 2010 is a world leader of research into a disease that affects many older Australians and their families - Alzheimer's.
Professor Martin has made breakthrough discoveries in his research alongside Professor Colin Masters and a team of German scientists - the first significant breakthroughs since the disease was first diagnosed in 1906.
Professor Martin's work at the Sir James McCusker Unit for Alzheimer's Disease Research has helped make it possible to identify and treat Alzheimer's at an earlier stage, and he is currently working to develop an even earlier diagnostic blood test.
Professor Martin - we wish you the very, very best for your work and for next week's Awards.
Australians always embrace a challenge.
Whether it is medical researchers.
Or pioneers like Edward John Eyre who in 1841 arrived in Albany walking from the east across the Nullarbor Plain.
Or the men and women who have built this vast state into a powerhouse of the national economy.
We love a challenge.
And as a nation, we have some big challenges ahead.
But we can tackle them and in the decades to come, continue to be the envy of the world.
So with pride in what our nation has achieved, let's roll up our sleeves and get on with our work.
As we look with optimism towards the future, I ask you to raise your glasses as I propose a toast to Australia. 


PM: The Australian Government is committed to building Australia's future. Part of that is building WA's future as well. Part of the challenge of doing that is to responsdto the great challenge of the global financial crisis and global economic recession. That's why, as part of our nation building program, the Australian Government has invested $5.9 billion in Western Australia. That's supporting more than 5,775 projects and $1.75 billion in WA is going to school projects of the type that we are seeing here at the Westminster school and I'm glad to be here today with Dom and James and also Mark Arbib, the Minister, and also with Louise Durack, our candidate for Stirling.
Building schools like this and enhancing them for the future has done two things. It's provided jobs, it's provided opportunities for apprenticeships, and support for small business in the here and now, while building the school infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Here at this school I'm told that the $5 million investment that we're putting in here is supporting the early childhood education centre over there with three classrooms, the library which is being built over that way and, on top of that, a new classroom block of four classrooms with a specialist emphasis on art. This is a really good investment in this school.
Then you go down to what's happened in terms of employment and we're told there have been some 120 workers who have worked on this site since the building projects began and, of course, these projects still have a ways to run. The other thing that we are doing through the local jobs plan is making sure that we can use projects like this to build and support local apprentices and that's why we're particularly pleased to be here today with Dom and his new apprentice James to talk about how they've been able to make s success of this building project but also on a special apprenticeship program we're running, which is the apprentice kickstart initiative. This, again, has been designed by us to try and maintain a large number of people coming into apprenticeships despite the troubles of the economy last year.
Nationwide, this program, which Mark Arbib's responsible for, is a $100 million initiative and it's been signed up with the objective of bringing on stream 21,000 new apprentices by the end of February this year.
So far what we've done is in the month or so that it's been operating, or six seeks, it's been operating, we've already brought on stream 6,400 apprentices across the nation. This is a really good start. In the first month alone, 4,500 apprentices. This is actually larger than the number of apprentices brought into this particular scheme 12 months before and 12 months before that, and the reason is we have trebled the funding which goes to each apprentice taken on by a tradesman under this scheme. So it's been a huge success.
Not only have we made a difference in young people's lives like James, but for 6,500 like him right across the country, and here in WA nearly 1,000, in fact, 840 trades apprentices so far. These are in traditional trades like carpentry, and like bricklayers, plumbers, electrical trades, as well as bakers and butchers.
This is good practical stuff.
So, in summary, what have we got here? We've got us investing to make a difference with building the nation for the future; us making a difference with jobs and apprenticeships at a local level; us making that difference in the individual lives of Dom's company and James' apprenticeship, who started his first apprenticeship only one month ago under this program. So this is all about making a difference nationally for our whole economy, for the state of WA, as well as for companies such as the one run by Dom, small businesses, as well as apprenticeships for young folk like James who are just starting out. This is a really good step forward and it's a good news story for the locality and for the country
There's one other matter we'll talk about today which is a new element of our pre-apprenticeships program which I'll ask the Minister, Mark Arbib to speak to you about.
ARBIB: Thanks, Prime Minister.
One of the worst aspects of the global recession has been its effect on training. We've seen, in the past 12 months, a drop in apprentice commencements of about 25%. That means 10,000 less apprentices commenced over the past 12 months. Now, we have seen this in previous recessions and we saw it in the 1990s, and in the 1990s when apprentice levels dropped it took 10 years to recover.
That's why the Rudd Government acted early and decisively to ensure we meet the training demands of the future. We know on the horizon that there's something like 80 major project in LNG, in mining, across the country. 60% of those are going to be in WA. We are talking about the potential for 70,000 construction jobs alone. The government, the country, needs to train workers for these future jobs. That is what apprenticeship kickstart is about. That's why we acted early.
The Prime Minister has talked about the $80 million that was invested to support 21,000 apprenticeships. We've already announced that we're putting in $20million to pre-apprenticeship training programs. Today I'm asking States to start submitting projects and programs as part of that $20 million element, to ensure that we have an estimated 4,000 pre-apprentices.
Now, people may not know what pre-apprentices are, but James right here, he started as a pre-apprentice, that's how he started, in a pre-apprenticeship program. He left school, started with a group training organisation and now he's moved into an apprenticeship. And when we talk to employers they say if you can speed up the first year of an apprenticeship, if you can get those young apprentices a start, get them some training, then we're going to be more likely to take them on. That's what the pre-apprenticeship program is about. That's why we're asking States, like WA, to start putting in their bids for it, it's a totally competitive process.
The one other thing, Prime Minister, that I did want to say is that WA employers have responded extremely positively to apprenticeship kickstart and I want to set the challenge for them today to keep leading the country; keep taking on apprentices. Now is the time to invest. Take on an apprentice. It's going to be good for the future.
PM: Just before taking your questions, so what are we on about? Building Australia's future and building a future for working families. And part of building Australia's future is building the skills we need for the future as well and building the schools we need for the future. And part of that is what we're doing here today - making a difference for the nation, for the economy, for the State and for individual small businesses and for young apprentices like James, who begin their working life under this program.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: How concerned are you that were heading towards another skills shortage (inaudible)
PM: Well, if we learn from economic history and the last decade, the big lesson from the 2000s is not to sit on your hands and hope that it all sorts itself out in the end. Guess what - it didn't, and it doesn't.
The alternative is what we are doing - making a difference with key programs like this. The fact that we have in six short weeks been able to attract nearly 1,000 apprentices under this Kickstart program is a fantastic contribution and the reason is that these young workers are going to be introduced to the workforce, and be available for deployment elsewhere in the workforce depending on how their apprenticeship runs and what they do beyond that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The danger, the danger is, just to add that, is what Mark said before. What has happened earlier is that people have slid out the back door of the work force, not taken up apprentices, so that when the big surge for skills demand comes, frankly it's very hard to get them back in the door.
So we are making a difference through this program on apprenticeships; through the program the Minister just spoke about on pre-apprenticeships; and more broadly through our program of productivity training places across the whole economy, which is a program which runs over five years and involves more than 700,000 places. This is one part of what we're doing on the skills front
JOURNALIST: On the flipside what safeguards are in place to prevent employers (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'll turn to Mark for the detail of this but under the structure of our scheme we make a partial payment up front and we make a partial payment on completion of the apprenticeship. So we've provided the best split of incentives to get people in the door and additional incentive to ensure that the employer completes the apprenticeship program with the young apprentice. Ultimately it depends on this bloke doing his job well and this bloke being a decent boss, but we've provided the incentives, and I've got to say, I congratulate both of them on what they've done so far.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) strict rules (inaudible)
PM: Over to you mate.
ARBIB: Yeah, there are already strict guidelines in terms of apprenticeships and apprentices being indentured to businesses, so they're already in place. But there also other incentives at the back end of apprenticeships, so they're already there, for those companies who keep their apprentices on, so there's no doubt about it.
What we're finding though is that businesses have been at the tipping point, tradespeople have been at the tipping point for a long period of time in terms of taking on apprentices, and they've been telling us, 'we want to take on more workers, we want to take on more apprentices but we need some financial incentive, we're not too sure yet if the economy's going to turn around' and with this incentive we're seeing it - 6,400 apprentices in six weeks. I mean that is a very, very good start. We want to get to 21,000 so there's a bit of a way to go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) figures out today?
PM: I couldn't hear-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Why do you think they've gone up today?
PM: Are these the abuse figures nationally or for the West?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is a hugely vexed area of public policy. As someone who has been a white ribbon ambassador in terms of domestic violence for some years now, we have a, I have a reasonable degree of familiarity with all the complications out there in individual families' lives.
I wish I had a single line response as to why this has occurred. We know with domestic violence that the principal perpetrators are blokes. Abuse against children, there is a whole range of factors involved.
At its core, the challenge lies in turning attitudes around. It is simply unacceptable for anyone to whack a kid in anger, which causes that kid to have damage and injury and other forms of abuse. It's unacceptable to engage in any form of other abuse of children, just as it's unacceptable to abuse a partner or a wife because this is just not on in 21st century Australia.
I wish I had the magic answer to your question as to what's causing this; I wish I had the magic answer in terms of the total solution, but let me tell you there's a whole stack of stuff that we, in partnership with many community organisations across the country, are now actively engaged in to try and turn the corner on this large national problem. Over to you
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister in the context of (inaudible) - how important are WA marginals (inaudible)
PM: Well, how we perform at the next election is ultimately going to be the judgement of the good people of WA and the good people across Australia. They'll make a judgement, they'll be hard judges, and they'll be fair judges in terms of what we've done, whether we've honoured our commitments to the Australian people and whether our plans for the future are credible plans for the future.
The second point I'd make is we're also benefitted by having strong effective local candidates like Louise here in seats like this, but ultimately it depends on our performance as a government and our plans for the future.
Let me go to just one core point - right around the world, people are looking at the Australian economy with envy. Across all the world, all the major advanced economies, we are the only one not to have gone into recession. We are the only one in the last 12 months for our economy to have grown. We currently have the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, and we've done so on the basis of having the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. These are strong, fundamental, economic credentials for office. That's what we're about - building Australia's economic future by concrete steps, but ultimately it's a judgement for the Australian people and the good people of WA.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that the candidate (inaudible ) in Cowan was just days away from being endorsed when the spectre of Brian Burke (inaudible) will you ever get rid of that?
PM: You know something the question of candidates and their endorsement is entirely a matter for the party organisation so I'll leave endorsement questions and organisational questions to them.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Dullsville tag? (inaudible)
PM: Dullsville?
JOURNALIST: Yeah (inaudible) in the paper
PM: Gees!
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Since I've been PM I've been back here 12 or 13 times, we were just talking about it before. It's a terrific city and I've -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne
PM: Look, I bring to this debate all the impartiality of a Queenslander, which you should all have confidence in - stop smirking - and can I say I think this is a fantastic city.
The fact that you've just got Rottnest just offshore; the fact that you have a fantastic port city like Fremantle. I have been in the coffee shops in Fremantle, they are terrific; the city of Perth has lots on offer. Every time I come here with my staff we do the big walk around the two bridges and if I was to compare simply the city vista of that against the city vistas elsewhere in Australia, it's stupendous, and I'd also say Kings Park would have to be, of all inner city parks in Australia, right out there at the head of the pack, so whoever's mounting this criticism locally, frankly, I think they've got it radically wrong. I think this is a terrific city. It's got a huge amount going for it.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Australia Day.
PM: Yes, 26th of January.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It's a trick question to test you.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) enjoy a drink on the foreshore for the fireworks (inaudible)
PM: What danger are you trying to entice me into here that I'm unaware of? I suspect there's a big local debate (laughs)
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I say local police, right across the country, will be making very local decisions about local venues about what's good, bad, indifferent or in between. I am not a wowser but let me tell you I respect what the coppers decide in terms of what's a good place to have people together with alcohol and without alcohol. I respectfully decline to engage in that debate because I just don't know the local circumstances.
Last one and then I've got to go, sorry.
JOURNALIST: This morning, you said you hadn't seen the Greens (inaudible)
PM: Firstly can I say again, that I've just travelled from Adelaide to here and I've conducted two or three business meetings on the plane, I haven't read the Greens submission.
What I'd repeat is what I said this morning in Adelaide, which is that the Australian Government is open to positive, productive discussions with the Greens and other political parties in the Australian parliament on proper action on climate change.
I said there, and I'll say here again, that includes Mr Abbott if he would simply change his extremist view that climate change, to use his own words, is crap. That's what he said. Our view is that climate change is real and it requires practical action, that's our approach. But if he moves away from his extremist position and decides to get with the project, we're up for a discussion with him as well. But with the Greens - we'll go through what they've put down and enter into good faith discussions with them, as we have with all political parties so far. And can I say, having said that I've got to zip
JOURNALIST: Just want to ask you one more.
PM: Got to go, got to go. Thank you very much.


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The Australian Government is committed to building Australia's future, building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, a fairer Australia for working families, and an Australia capable of confronting the great challenges of our future. A core part of building Australia's future is building the industries of the future, building the jobs of the future, and based on those industries and jobs, building the Defence Force we need for the future as well.
That's why today is a good day for Australia. Today is a good day for South Australia. Today is a good day for the Royal Australian Navy.
This shipyard which we are opening today is going to be the biggest Defence project ever undertaken in Australia. This shipyard will provide jobs for Australians and help build Australia's future, and this shipyard had been delivered on time and on budget.
With a project the size of this, $120 million, this is a substantial undertaking, so I congratulate all those who have been involved in the successful completion of this project. I'm advised that more than 50 companies, sub-contractors and suppliers were involved in providing materials, equipment and services to the shipyard between February '08 and November '09. At its peak, 400 people were working on this project, both on and off site, keeping the South Australian economy strong and supporting the jobs of working families.
This shipyard forms part of the Techcorp precinct here at Osborne, a State and Federal Government investment in our national industrial security. Together with the $320 million South Australian-owned common-user facility, this is a world-class shipbuilding and ship making facility, and I wish to publically acknowledge and thank the South Australian Government and the South Australian Premier for their strong and critical support for this project.
Techport includes a wharf, a runway, a dry berth, transport system and the ASC crane, which I'm advised would be Australia's largest ship lift and crane. This crane has a lift capacity of some 900 tonnes, and when it's assembled its jib height will be 90 metres. There are only 12 cranes around the world of this size.
All this technology will allow the precinct to deliver the most advanced surface combat ship ever built in Australia, the Air Warfare Destroyer. This $8 billion project is the biggest Defence project developed in our nation's history. The AWD will be a vital component of not just our future naval capability, but of Australia's future itself.
To secure our future, Australia will need a strong Defence Force and strong defence industry. Last year, the Australian Government looked to the future with the release of the Defence White Paper. The Government has committed to providing the men and women of the Australian Defence Force with the best possible equipment.
As I announced in Sydney last year that the launch of the Defence White Paper, that means delivering new, more powerful sets of military capabilities. Together, these capabilities are known as Force 2030, a force that will strengthen the defence of Australia for the next generation.
We, Australia, have a vast coastline, one of the three longest coast lines in the world. We have a vast maritime zone, and we have the third-largest maritime jurisdiction in the world. We have a vast maritime trade. We are, by definition, therefore, a maritime power, and we must have a capability to articulate that power.
We've made it clear that a strong maritime force is the key element of Force 2030. We are committed to a larger, heavier and more potent maritime force. As one important element of that we need advanced, modern, capable surface combatants, including, of course, the Air Warfare Destroyers. We need these surface combatants for the range of roles to establish control of the seas and project force into the maritime environment, including in support of our land forces.
Air Warfare Destroyers will be delivered in this project in 2014, '16 and '17. The first of these to be completed will be the new HMAS Hobart, and the fleet will be called the Hobart Class destroyers.
This destroyer will be the third HMAS Hobart. The first was built in the UK in the 1930s. She was a Modified Leander Class and served the Royal Australian Navy with distinction throughout the Second World War.
The second HMAS Hobart was a guided-missile destroyer built in the United States. She served with distinction in the Vietnam War and was one of the first ships to provide support and assistance in the aftermath of Cyclone Tracey.
But unlike the previous HMAS Hobarts, this third HMAS Hobart will have the honour of bearing not only the name, this great name, but also the honour of being built right here in Australia for the first time, and that shows the strength of our Australian defence industry.
We've come a long way since the first all-steel military ship was built in Australia in 1914 for the fledging Royal Australian Navy. The HMAS Huon was a River Class torpedo boat destroyer. She served in World War One in what was then called the Far East, or our words, the Near North, and later, of course, the Mediterranean.
She reminds us that from our earliest stages of Federation Australia has relied on naval power for our security and to play our part in international security. That is just as true today, when our Navy is on operation around the world, working against piracy, supporting our efforts in Afghanistan, flying the flag while working closely with our allies and friends.
It also true that to maintain our naval capabilities we need a world-beating defence industry here in Australia. The future of the defence industry can be seen in the innovative model that's being used to build the Air Warfare Destroyers. This is the most significant and complex Defence project being delivered using an alliance business model. The AWD alliance brings together the Defence Department and its commercial partners into a single consortium showing what we can achieve when we decide to work together.
ASC, the AWD shipbuilder, the Defence Materiel Organisation, the DMO, and Raytheon are working in close partnership and I'd like to acknowledge also the support of our other AWD partners, Navantia, Lockheed-Martin, and the United States Navy.
It's great to hear that the project is progressing well and that the AWD alliance is working as a team.
Building these ships here in Australia is good for the Navy. It's good also for industry, and it's good news for jobs. Apart from the hundreds of involved in constructing this ship yard, there are at present more than 800 hundred people working on the AWD alliance right across Australia and about 650 of them right here in South Australia.
Therefore, this AWD is a massive undertaking for the nation and for the State and it is a truly Australia-wide project, helping develop our national skills and infrastructure base. Steel from Port Kembla will be bashed into the hull blocks in South Australia, in Newcastle by FORGAS Group Australia and in Melbourne by BAE Systems Australia and the final ships will be assembled here in South Australia.
In so doing, we will have enhanced our defence industry and build a stronger national economy.
This project is also a chance for Australia to demonstrate our technological and ship-building capabilities to the world. The project will use some of the world's most sophisticated defence systems and components and a project of this magnitude means that Government and industry must work together in innovative ways to ensure success.
What we've put together is a cutting-edge alliance-based contracting strategy. Let me make it clear the Government is watching progress in this project very closely.
I congratulate the AWD alliance for the work that they are doing in building our next generation of Air Warfare Destroyers, and I would also like to congratulate ASC in today's opening of this facility. As a Government business enterprise, we pay very close attention to the work ASC does in this terminal here. I'm pleased that ASC's (inaudible) is here today.
The challenge ahead for the alliance is to deliver the AWDs on time and on budget. Having this capability as and when required will be critical to our national security. It will also demonstrate to the world that ASC and Australia as a nation is capable of competing with the best in the world in shipbuilding, and we have very high expectations of ASC. We expect it to be internationally recognised as an innovative and world-leading in ship building and ship sustainment enterprise. In other words, it must be the kind of company that others benchmark against.
We expect it to deliver the best value for money to the taxpayer, and we expect to build our Air Warfare Destroyers to budget, on schedule and to meet this capability requirement.
This new shipyard represents a substantial national industrial opportunity and I expect that the Defence Materiel Organisation, ASC and other companies involved in this project will look for innovative ways to use the opportunities presented by this shipyard.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I congratulate those who've built this facility, the companies and the alliance partners involved in this very complex project to build the Air Warfare Destroyers and Defence Materiel Organisation for managing this project.
As we enter the 21st Century, this century of the Asia-Pacific region, we are moving into a century of great strategic uncertainty, globally and regionally. Together, we must build the defence that our country needs for the 21st Century. Together we must build the naval force the country needs for the 21st century. And together we must build a strong Australia, strong in its economy, strong in its national security, confident of our place in the region and world, and that's why we need this capability here in Adelaide.
It is therefore with great pleasure that together with others here present today that we declare open this new ASC shipyard for Australia and the Australian Navy.
I thank you.


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, today opened the new ASC shipbuilding facility at Osborne, South Australia.
ASC has invested $120 million in the state-of-the-art facility which will build hull blocks for Australia's new Air Warfare Destroyers.
The AWD is the most complex surface war ship ever built in this country and the $8 billion AWD program will deliver three ships to the Royal Australian Navy.
As the hub for the AWD Project, South Australia is getting access to the latest technologies, project management skills, design skills, contracting methodologies and production techniques.
The project has already created 650 jobs so far in South Australia alone. The ASC Shipyard is expected to employ a production workforce of about 500 during AWD construction. Contracts worth more than $40 million have already been let to local South Australian companies for the supply of equipment and services.
The collaboration between the State government and Defence Industry with the Federal government has been first class and has been critical to the success of the project so far.
HMAS Hobart is on schedule for delivery in December 2014. HMAS Brisbane is scheduled for delivery in March 2016 and HMAS Sydney in June 2017.
Construction of the facility commenced in February 2008 and was completed on schedule and within budget in November 2009. Over 50 companies provided equipment, materials and services during construction of the Production Outfit Hall, Combined Warehouse and Workshop Building, Administration Building and Wharf Support Building. At its peak, there were about 400 people working on the project.
The new ASC facility will construct nine hull blocks for each of the three AWDs.
Each block involves structural steel fabrication, painting and pre-outfitting with cabling, piping and equipment prior to transportation to the South Australian Government's Techport Common User Facility, adjacent to the ASC Shipyard, where the hull blocks will be welded together to form the complete ship.
ASC has purchased a crane with a 900-tonne lift capacity, the largest of its type in Australia and one of only 12 in the world of this size, to support the consolidation of blocks on the Common User Facility.


The Prime Minister today announced the sale of areas of land at the Fremantle Artillery Barracks in Western Australia commonly known as Cantonment Hill, to the City of Fremantle.
The Australian Government has approved the concessional sale of three areas of land which form part of the 3.87 hectare site to the City of Fremantle on the basis that it will redevelop the land for ongoing community use.
The City of Fremantle intends to incorporate the land into the existing Cantonment Hill Reserve to restore the land for public use, create a safe public park and regenerate the native bushland.
"This is a fantastic result for Fremantle and the wider Western Australian community," said Ms Parke, Federal Member for Fremantle. "It will return to our community the views and public open space of a vantage point that was always intended to be Fremantle's equivalent of Kings Park."
"I am pleased to be part of a Labor government that has resolved this long-running issue, which went nowhere for a decade under the previous government."
The concessional sale comprises of three areas of the Fremantle Artillery Barracks, known as:
     * Tuckfield Street Reserve;
     * The Signal Station and surrounds;
     * The former Royal Australian Navy Warehouse.
The site was formerly used by the Department of Defence, but was declared surplus to Defence requirements in 1999 under the previous government. Since that time the land has remained part of the Australian Government's property portfolio.
This sale is another example of the Rudd Government's new Commonwealth Property Disposals Policy in action, which was introduced last year to facilitate the release of surplus Commonwealth land to increase housing supply and improve community amenities.
The Cantonment Hill site has strong, historical, environmental, social and cultural significance not only for the local community but for all Australians.
The Rudd Government is pleased that the concessional sale to the City of Fremantle will ensure the preservation of this historic site for future generations.
The contractual terms of the sale are anticipated to be finalised between the Department of Defence and the City of Fremantle within the next 8 weeks.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, Minister for Health and Ageing Nicola Roxon and Minister for Indigenous Health Warren Snowdon today announced the establishment of RHDAustralia, an Australian Government-funded body to help combat a potentially fatal heart disease that affects young Indigenous Australians.
Rheumatic Heart Disease begins with strep throat, a common bacterial infection of the throat, but if left untreated can develop into Acute Rheumatic Fever and go on to damage the valves of the heart, and ultimately be fatal.
Delivering on an election promise under the New Directions: An equal start in life for Indigenous children policy, $2,593,800 will be provided over four years for RHDAustralia as part of the Rudd Government's Rheumatic Fever Strategy.
Mr Rudd said Rheumatic Heart Disease is almost unheard of in the non-Indigenous community, but is a major killer of young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and requires a national response and co-ordinating body like RHDAustralia.
"The development of a comprehensive strategy, and the creation of practical, simple measures to combat Rheumatic Heart Disease and Acute Rheumatic Fever, is vital in closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life expectancy," Mr Rudd said.
Mr Snowdon said "Rheumatic Heart Disease is a particular problem in remote Indigenous communities, where infection rates remain high. The initial infection, Acute Rheumatic Fever, is caused by a bacterium and occurs mainly in children aged 5-14. Repeat attacks of Acute Rheumatic Fever leave the heart valves so damaged that they can no longer function. Affected patients will die unless he or she receives life saving heart surgery."
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are up to eight times more likely than non-Indigenous Australians to be hospitalised for Acute Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease and 20 times more likely to die from it. On average, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people die from Rheumatic Heart Disease in their mid 30s, compared to non-Indigenous people with the same disease who can expect to live into their 60s.
Mr Snowdon added "RHDAustralia will use cost effective measures to help prevent the disease. It will establish a national database to support a register and control program, which will initially start in the NT, WA and Queensland. It will provide training of health staff to improve diagnosis, and help patients access regular antibiotics to prevent recurrence.
"RHDAustralia is also putting strategies in place to make the public more aware of the disease and hopes to help establish best practice guidelines," Mr Snowdon said.
RHDAustralia has been established under the Menzies School of Health Research to tackle rheumatic heart disease and acute rheumatic fever, in partnership with James Cook University, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute.
The Director of the Menzies School of Health Research, Professor Jonathan Carapetis, said these measures will help address what is an entirely preventable disease.
"It can be treated with monthly shots of penicillin, but these need to be administered regularly for at least 10 years. We need to ensure that in Australia we have systems that will improve diagnosis and put in place appropriate follow-through treatment."
He said RHDAustralia is part of an international push for better management of Rheumatic Heart Disease.
"Tens of millions of people around the world suffer from RHD, and similar programs are already running successfully in a number of other countries, but we are one of the first to take a truly national approach such as this," he said
RHDAustralia's National Manager, Brenda Green, agreed that doctors and health staff often miss the signs of Acute Rheumatic Fever, and said many of the diagnosed sufferers fail to follow through with treatment.
"RHDAustralia will help to overcome these problems," she said.
"Once we've established our national database, we can feed that information back to the jurisdictions, to help them identify problem areas. We can also feed that information to governments to ensure we are putting resources where they are needed."
In total, the Government will contribute $11.2m over five years toward the rheumatic fever component of the New Directions policy.
Ms Roxon said "In addition to the funds we have provided for RHDAustralia, we also provide support for research into Rheumatic Heart Disease through grants from the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC).
"The Menzies School of Health Research has received five rheumatic fever research grants from the NHMRC since 2000, of which three totaling $313,736 were awarded in 2009."


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be back in the Top End to join with you in celebrating our national day. In coming days, people around the Northern Territory will be joining the rest of the nation in celebrating Australia Day, and given a recent survey by the National Australia Day Council found that 90 per cent of those surveyed would like to see more of our Indigenous culture included in celebrations, the Northern Territory is showing us how to do it.
The Executive Director of the Australia Day Council, Warren Pearson, says the Northern Territory is, and I quote : "...quite sensational as a model for the rest of the nation".
From small Aboriginal communities holding their own events, to the larger celebrations in Darwin, Palmerston and the Alice, to the footy match of the year - the Island of Origin - up in the Tiwi Islands, Indigenous culture is very much a part of the NT's Australia Day celebrations. Of course, there are various celebrations that also help create that shared sense of this being 'our' day as Australians - as well as:
     * The Australia Day Ute Run in Darwin;
     * The family bike ride and cricket games on Groote Eylandt;
     * And an event that seems to be emerging as a significant event in many communities - the Thong Throwing competition.
Australia Day provides an opportunity to reflect not only on the events of December but also on the past 12 months. This time last year, Australia was facing an enormous challenge with the worst global recession in 75 years. The good news is that the Territory, like our national economy, has been weathering the global storm.
Despite 2009 being a tough year, Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis. As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies. The Northern Territory's unemployment rate is below the national average at 3.2 per cent - extraordinarily, 0.8 percentage points lower than a year before.
Our response to the economic maelstrom has demonstrated what can be achieved when we understand that we're all in it together: governments of all persuasions, across political and state lines; businesses large and small; unions and local communities right across the nation. When our backs were against the wall, we all joined together to keep Australia strong, and that has made all the difference.
I am profoundly optimistic about Australia's future, but optimism is not the same as complacency. We still have major long-term challenges to tackle if we are to keep our economy strong and build a stronger and fairer Australia.
We can be optimistic because Australians have the determination and ability to seize the opportunities of the future, and tackle these long-term challenges. This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges.
Analysis of the long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years is contained in Australia's Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges, which will be released in coming weeks.
On Monday in Melbourne, I discussed how the ageing of the population over coming decades will result in slower economic growth unless we implement the long-term changes needed to move to a higher productivity growth path.
On Tuesday in Hobart, I discussed how the ageing of the population will also create additional long-term budget pressures for all governments unless we act to boost economic growth and therefore revenue growth, through boosting productivity on one hand, and on the other hand implementing our medium-term fiscal strategy to return to surplus.
On Wednesday in Adelaide, I discussed why I believe the decade ahead must be a Building Decade - and the importance of our investments in advanced 21st century infrastructure for moving to a higher productivity growth path.
Yesterday in Perth I discussed why, with an ageing population, this Building Decade must include the aim of building the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world - a workforce with the skills to work smarter and to be the engine room of the nation's long-term productivity growth.
Today I will discuss our determination to remove the barriers to work - to help more Australians to participate in secure and fulfilling work, so that we can increase levels of workforce participation and counter the effect of the ageing of population.
The Australia to 2050 report sounds the alarm bells on a major demographic change resulting from the ageing of our population. Today we are a nation of 22 million Australians, of whom 14 per cent - one in seven - are over the age of 65. By 2050, we will be a nation of 36 million Australians, of whom 23 per cent - one in four - will be over 65.
This will have a major impact on our economy and on government. The economic impact is that it will simply cost more to look after the needs of older Australians in health, aged care and age pensions. At the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to pay tax and support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7. So we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth - and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
The Government is determined to act now on the long-term challenge of an ageing population. The clear message of Treasury's intergenerational modelling is that our response to the ageing of the population must centre on enhancing productivity growth, and I will discuss today, removing barriers to participation in the workforce.
The Treasury analysis undertaken for the Australia to 2050 report shows that if average productivity growth was lifted back towards the 1990s mark of an average 2 per cent per year - up from the 1.4 per cent to which it declined in the decade just passed - this would produce enormous benefits. On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050. Increasing productivity involves helping Australians work smarter, not harder - with the benefits of higher skills, advanced infrastructure, innovation and a seamless national economy - all key elements in the Government's commitment to building Australia's future and lifting productivity growth.
On Tuesday in Hobart I discussed a further dimension of the challenge posed by the ageing population - the challenge to the sustainability of government budgets. The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the past decade, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base. During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent, compared to 2.5 per cent during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a medium-term fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome is projected to be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off, or $130 billion in today's dollar terms. The Government's commitment to fiscal discipline builds sustainability into the Budget and is an important element in preparing for the challenges of the future.
On Wednesday in Adelaide I addressed the role of advanced infrastructure in enhancing long-term productivity growth. In explaining why I describe this new decade we have just begun as Australia's Building Decade, I made three key points.
First, economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - clearly shows that infrastructure investment contributes directly to a more productive, growing economy. Second, and despite this fact, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline in our infrastructure investment, contributing to choke points in infrastructure around the nation. Third, the Government has made infrastructure a national priority since coming to government, taking a leading national role for the first time in national infrastructure policy; establishing Infrastructure Australia to advise on the long-term planning of our infrastructure needs; investing a record $36 billion in transport infrastructure; and tackling regulatory reforms to remove the hurdles to increased infrastructure investment from the private sector.
Yesterday in Perth I discussed the importance of creating a more high-skilled, better trained workforce to move to a higher productivity growth path. Economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - highlights that higher levels of education and skills not only increase earnings for individuals, they contribute to higher overall productivity for the nation in the longer term.
If we could boost GDP in 2050 by 1.2% through improvements related to education and training, that would amount to around $45 billion in today's dollars, or the equivalent of around $1,200 for each Australian. But despite this fact, Australia has not made adequate long-term investment in education in recent decades - in 2006, for example, we had a level of public investment for education below the OECD average, investing only 4.6 per cent of GDP compared to an average of 5.3 per cent. The Government has begun to turn this around, investing around half a percentage point of GDP more in education in 2009-10 than the levels of the previous Government and a drive for a qualitative increase in education outcomes at each level of the education system. The Government's goal is an education revolution, to build the best-educated, best-trained, most highly skilled workforce in the world.
In the past two days in Adelaide and Perth, I have spoken about the importance of enhancing productivity through building advanced 21st century infrastructure and prosecuting a revolution at every level of education. Today I want to speak about the other aspect of the long-term challenge posed by the ageing of the population - the need to address the projected decline in workforce participation.
I want to make three key points today.
First, the ageing of the population revealed by the Australia to 2050 report will result in lower levels of workforce participation in Australia - despite the fact that we anticipate an increase in workforce participation among working age Australians.
Second, to counter the effect of the ageing of the population on workforce participation levels, we must support the participation of working age Australians in the workforce. That means we must address the barriers to workforce participation associated with groups in the community where there are lower levels of workforce participation - including women with younger children, people with low educational attainment and those who suffer from persistent disadvantage.
Third, since coming to office the Government has already implemented major long-term initiatives to remove barriers to participation in work and build a fairer Australia. Those initiatives include establishing Australia's first-ever system of Paid Parental Leave.
We have begun the education revolution, to give more Australians the skills and training that will help them find rewarding jobs and stay in the workforce and we are acting to help those Australians most likely to be excluded from the workforce, including unemployed youth, kids growing up in jobless families, people in disadvantaged communities, the homeless, people with mental illnesses, people with disabilities and Indigenous Australians.
The Australia to 2050 report to be released in coming weeks will highlight the core challenge posed by the ageing of the population. The ageing of the population is expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2049-50, resulting in slower economic growth and slower growth in family incomes.
The good news is that Australia is expected to make long-term progress in lifting participation among working age Australians. The participation rate among those aged 15 to 64 years is projected to increase from around 76 per cent now to almost 80 per cent by 2049-50. This reflects a range of factors, including higher levels of education outcomes in tomorrow's workforce.
However, such an increase in workforce participation will not be enough to offset the effect of the ageing of the population. A key lesson of the Australia to 2050 report for government policy is that we need to continue to take steps now to address the effect of the ageing of the population on workforce participation levels.
The steps we take now to expand opportunity for Australian children and youth today will yield benefits for participation, productivity and economic growth throughout their working lives over the next 40 years, to 2050 and beyond. After all, a child who is 5 years old today is likely to be in the workforce through to the 2070s. That is why expanding their opportunities now is so important to building Australia's future.
To address the challenges posed by lower levels of workforce participation in parts of our community, we must address the specific factors that contribute to exclusion from the workforce - factors that vary among different parts of our community.
In overall terms, Australia's participation rates are not low by international standards. However, parts of our community experience higher levels of exclusion from the workforce than is the norm for other developed nations, and it is clear that there is scope for lifting workforce participation among those groups, measures that will help counteract the effect of an ageing population over the decades ahead.
First, analyses of the causes of lower rates of participation among women have repeatedly highlighted the problem of accessing affordable childcare. While the working age female participation rate has increased from around 50 to 70 per cent over the past 30 years, Australian women's workforce participation during their peak child-bearing years reduces by a greater amount than for women in other leading industrialised countries.
For example, in 2008 labour participation rates for women aged 25- 44 years were more than 80 per cent in Sweden, Iceland, Denmark and Finland, compared with around 75 per cent in Australia.
Second, there is another set of barriers to work for older Australians who wish to remain in the workforce. Many suffer discrimination or find it difficult to access help to make the transition into different types of work that could improve their skills or prolong their participation in the workforce. The Government is committed to improving assistance for older workers who wish to continue working.
Third, low levels of educational attainment also contribute to lower levels of workforce participation, since the economic evidence demonstrates that those who do not achieve good education levels are far more likely to stay on the margins of the workforce, failing to find secure jobs. That is why the Government's is committed to improving access to education, quality health care and employment - because these measures can improve what the Treasury describes as our 'social sustainability, enhancing productivity and workforce participation.
Economic research shows that those who do not have a Year 12 education, or an equivalent non-school qualification, are 18 per cent less likely to be in the workforce than people that do.
Fourth, low levels of workforce participation are associated with multiple social disadvantage experienced in some parts of the community. This means that a substantial amount of the work we need to do to increase workforce participation is the same as the work we need to do to tackle social disadvantage in many parts of our community.
New analysis in the Australia to 2050 report shows that 2.6 per cent of Australians remained stuck in relative poverty, earning less than 50 per cent of median income levels, during the period from 2001 to 2006. That equates to more than 570,000 Australians excluded from the benefits of the mining boom years in Australia, despite the huge boost it provided to our national income, because the consequence of persistent disadvantage - and over time, a factor that contributes to the continued cycle of disadvantage - is that some Australians cannot find and keep a job.
If we can successfully increase the number of Australians in the workforce, we will also be a long way down the track in building a fairer Australia, and tackling the disadvantage that afflicts far too many Australians.
I note that today Patricia Faulkner, Chair of the Australian Social Inclusion Board, released the Board's first annual report on the extent, causes and impact of disadvantage in Australia. Echoing the findings of the Australia to 2050 report, the Board's report highlights the plight of Australians caught in cycles of persistent disadvantage.
The Government has identified six key groups in the community where there is entrenched disadvantage and where there is scope for increasing the level of workforce participation.
First are disadvantaged young Australians, such as those leaving school early and those unable to find secure employment.
Second are Australians who suffer from intergenerational disadvantage - the jobless families in which some 15 per cent of Australian children grow up. Research shows that children growing up in such environments are far more likely over the longer term to have lower levels of literacy and numeracy, weaker educational attainment, lower levels of workforce participation and ongoing exclusion from the mainstream of the economy and the wider community.
Third, in our cities and regions there are communities where there is a concentration of low incomes and disadvantage - a subject that the Treasurer wrote about in some detail in his book Postcode in 2006. For example, Canterbury Bankstown in New South Wales had a participation rate of 56 per cent in December 2009 and Wide-Bay Burnett in Queensland had a participation rate of 54.8 per cent - both more than 10 percentage points below the national average. Often, low income people living in these region have more difficulty participating in the workforce because of a lack of transport to places of work. Some 10 per cent of people with low incomes have difficulty accessing transport compared to only 1% of people with high incomes.
A fourth group of Australians who suffer social disadvantage are the homeless. More than 105,000 Australians are homeless on any one night in Australia, with more than 16,000 sleeping rough. Without secure accommodation, it is extremely difficult to sustain participation in the workforce.
A fifth contributor to lower participation levels is mental illness and disabilities. While mental illness is often episodic, and disabilities may only partial restrict a person's capacity for work, for many Australians these challenges can result in permanent exclusion from the workforce.
Indigenous Australians experience among the most acute social disadvantage of all Australians, and low workforce participation rates - especially those living in remote communities. This is a particular concern here in the Northern Territory. The unemployment rate among Indigenous Australians is around three times the rate of non-Indigenous Australia, with 16 per cent unemployment compared to around 5 per cent nationally on the most recent comparative figures, and just 26 per cent of Indigenous Australians have a non-school qualification, compared to 53 per cent of the rest of the community.
Just as we took decisive action to support families as we confronted the global recession, the Australian Government is committed to addressing the barriers to workforce participation experienced as a result of social disadvantage among each of these groups.
Some will argue that there is no need for governments to make active interventions to bring people into the workforce and that a government has no responsibility other than to allow people the freedom to choose how they live their lives. Such views ignore the reality for people who simply don't have the opportunities that so many Australians take for granted. They ignore the cycles of disadvantage associated with low incomes, low education, family dysfunction, concentration of social disadvantage in particular regions, mental illness, chronic health problems and insecure accommodation.
The reality is that Australians who are caught in cycles of disadvantage cannot make a simple decision to join the workforce and participate in economic and social life. Those who face multiple barriers to participation need additional skills, support and incentives to help them break out of the cycles of disadvantage and take responsibility for themselves and their families. These measures to tackle social exclusion target the group of around 5 per cent of Australians aged 15 years and over who experience three or more types of disadvantage, such as social exclusion, and by tackling these causes of exclusion, we can improve workforce participation and build a fairer Australia.
The Government recognises the challenge of acting now to implement the long-term measures that will reduce barriers to work and lift workforce participation.
The introduction of Australia's first-ever system of Paid Parental Leave from 2011 is a historic step that will significantly reduce barriers to workforce participation for hundreds of thousands of women. The Productivity Commission has estimated that the introduction of Paid Parental Leave could increase the average Australian woman's lifetime employment by around half a year - a significant positive impact. This measure will especially help lower-skilled and lower-income earners in industries where there are no paid parental leave schemes - women at far greater risk of dropping out of the workforce after the birth of children.
The provision of Paid Parental Leave will also help encourage their attachment to the workforce, since one of the conditions of receiving PPL is that prior to the birth of a child, parents must have been in employment for at least one day each week for 10 months.
PPL will operate in addition to the Government's increase to the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent, which has already removed a significant barrier to employment for hundreds of thousands of parents. This has dramatically improved affordability of childcare for working families, with ABS statistics showing child care costs of parents fell by over 20 per cent after its introduction. Combined with the existing Child Care Benefit, the Child Care Rebate means that support provided to low income parents can now cover around 90 per cent of their out of pocket child care costs. This is a big leg-up for parents who are low income earners to re-enter the workforce.
It is long overdue. Australia has been one of only two OECD countries without a comprehensive Paid Parental Leave scheme, and it will provide a long-term benefit because one of the clearest findings of labour market research into working age people who are not in the workforce is that disengagement from the workforce often begins because of a lack of access to affordable childcare.
By increasing levels of educational attainment, the Government's commitment to the education revolution will also contribute to higher levels of workforce participation. The Government's early childhood education strategy involves an investment of almost $1 billion to achieve our aim of universal access to pre-school for four year olds by 2013. Educational research shows that participation in quality early childhood education programs can significantly improve long-term education and employment prospects for children, especially those most at risk of intergenerational disadvantage.
The Government is almost doubling the Commonwealth investment in schools over the four year period of 2009-2012, to achieve a target of lifting Year 12 or equivalent attainment from 75 to 90 per cent by 2015. We are investing $1.5 billion over seven years in the Smarter Schools National Partnership on Low SES Schools, to attract the best teachers to schools in low socioeconomic status areas, where young Australians typically lag at least one school year behind the Australian average. The Government is investing more than $700 million in TAFE and vocational education infrastructure, to help attain the goal of halving the proportion of people with skill levels below Certificate III level.
Currently, 43 per cent of the working age population has educational attainment of less than Certificate III level. The Government has adopted the ambitious target of reducing that proportion to 22 per cent of 20-64 year olds by 2020.
The Government has also invested $2.2 billion in higher education to enable an additional 50,000 new students to attend by 2013, with 20 per cent of undergraduate enrolments from low socio-economic backgrounds by 2020. This will contribute to the goal of 40 per cent of all 25 to 34 year olds having a bachelor's degree equivalent by 2025.
The Government is committed to building a future in which, to the maximum extent possible, all Australians participate in Australia's economy and society - by tackling social disadvantage. To do that, we have to give Australians the opportunities, resources, capabilities and responsibilities to learn, work, connect with others and have a say in community life. We need to break down the barriers that stand between some Australians and a job. We need to have as many people who can work in work.
That's why we have targeted young Australians most at risk of exclusion from the workforce through the Jobs and Training Compact. This Compact guarantees an education or training place for every young person under 25 who does not have a Year 12 qualification, or needs to upgrade their skills. In addition, the Youth Guarantee provides an incentive for young Australians to stay in education by requiring that every young person under 17 must be in school or in training in order to receive Youth Allowance or Family Tax Benefits.
The Government has also acted to minimise the impact of the global recession on communities most at risk, applying the lesson of the 1990s recession, where hundreds of thousands of Australians entered a long-term cycle of disadvantage and exclusion from the workforce.
In 2009, the Government implemented a Compact with Local Communities to assist areas of highest unemployment. This Compact has been backed by a $650 million Local Jobs Fund, to support local community projects that maximise local training and job opportunities. This has helped the most vulnerable communities to weather the storm of the global recession, and minimise the extent to which the downturn reduces levels of workforce participation. Despite the economic downturn, the level of workforce participation remains above 65 per cent, near record levels.
The Government is also committed to tackling homelessness, a problem closely related to exclusion from the workforce. The Government has committed to the ambitious, but achievable, goal of halving the level of homelessness by 2020. We have provided an additional $1.1 billion over four years to fund prevention strategies, long-term housing and support services, including services directly focused on helping individuals to reconnect with the workforce.
The Government is tackling disadvantage and low workforce participation among Indigenous Australians through its $4.6 billion long-term commitment to Closing the Gap on Indigenous disadvantage - addressing chronic disease, housing conditions, employment, education and service delivery. One of the most successful models that the Government is supporting in this area is the Clontarf Academics, which help young Indigenous people to achieve better educational outcomes while also developing their sporting talents, and next month I will be giving the second of my annual reports to the Australian Parliament on Closing the Gap.
All of these initiatives - and many others that I have not had the time to discuss today - are intend to assist in giving people the skills, incentives and readiness for work - supporting Australian jobs and building Australia's future. The Government's long-term blueprint to tackle disadvantage will be set out in greater detail next week by Julia Gillard and Jenny Macklin, with the release of our report, A Stronger and Fairer Australia - embodying our vision to build a nation that truly embodies the spirit of the 'fair go' for all.
One Indigenous Australian who represents the Australian spirit to many of us is the filmmaker Warwick Thornton - this year's Northern Territory finalist in the Australian of the Year Awards. Warwick's debut feature film, Samson and Delilah, has won international acclaim and is set to go down in Australia's cinematic history as one of our greats, and I understand Samson and Delilah has been shortlisted for the Oscar nominations in the Best Foreign Film category.
Warwick's passion for documenting the stories of his people will give our nation a great legacy and we wish him well next week when the Australian of the Year is announced.
The depth and breadth of the pool we draw from to select the Australian of the Year finalists reminds us that the Australian spirit is alive and strong in 2010. We are a resilient people who believe in the spirit of the 'fair go', who believe in helping their mate and who have in their DNA the spirit of the 'can-do', where nothing is too hard.
As we enter a new decade, there are significant long-term challenges ahead, but the opportunities are even greater, so let's take pride in what our nation has achieve and pride in what our nation has the potential to achieve in the building decade ahead in this, the land of the fair go.
So it's with great pleasure I ask you to raise your glasses as I propose a toast to Australia.


PM: First of all, it's great to be back in Darwin and it's great to be here at the Royal Darwin Hospital. Over the last few hours we've been here in this room, consulting with members of this hospital community and we've been talking about the challenges we face for the future.
I've been particularly impressed by the contribution of local medical practitioners, those here at the hospital, about their ideas for the reform of the system. It's important we get these reforms right for the long term.
This Government's committed to building Australia's future. Part of building Australia's future is making sure we build the health and hospital system we need for the 21st century, not just for Sydney and for Melbourne and for Canberra, but for the major regional centres of Australia as well, and that includes here in the Territory.
Secondly, it's been good to be here to open the oncology unit here at Royal Darwin Hospital. This cancer care centre here, named after Alan Walker, is, I believe, a strong, strong message to this community that we're serious about implementing our commitments to this community.
We said before the last election it was a crying shame that a city like this didn't have a cancer care centre. We said with Damian Hale's election we're going to deliver on that, and we have, and I opened that centre this morning, and the fact that it will open its doors to begin putting in patient lists as of March and begin delivering services as of April is, I believe, a huge step forward for the Territory.
The fact that those suffering from cancer here in the Territory no longer have to make the trek to Adelaide for treatment, I believe, is a huge step forward, and I'd commend again Damian Hale for keeping us up to the implementation of that commitment which we gave to the people of the Territory prior to the last election.
The other point I would make about health and hospitals is this - on the future of our hospital system, let's be absolutely clear. On the one hand, what we, the Australian Government have done is increase our funding for the public hospital system run by the States and Territories by 50 percent over the five year period of the current health care agreement, compared with the previous five years. That's what we've done.
What did Mr Abbott do when he was Health Minister? He ripped $1 billion out of the public hospital system of Australia.
I cannot see a clearer contrast between our record in the two years that we have been in and Mr Abbott's record in the three years plus that he was Health Minister of Australia. I therefore welcome with open arms a debate on the future of the health and hospital system of Australia, our record versus the previous government's. Our record versus Mr Abbott's record as Health Minister, our plans for the future for the reform of the system as well.
One final remark before I open it to you for questions. Today, also, we announced the launch of a $2.5 million initiative associated with the Menzies Research Centre on Rheumatic Fever. Rheumatic Fever is a particular scourge in Indigenous communities in the Territory and elsewhere. This is an important initiative. If you look at the figures, Indigenous Australians are up to eight times more likely than non-Indigenous Australians to be hospitalised for acute Rheumatic Fever and rheumatic heart disease and 20 times more likely to die from it.
Rheumatic Fever has by and large disappeared in the non-Indigenous community in Australia. It's a condition from which I suffered as a kid, back in the 1960s, and from which I then subsequently had valve surgery, but the fact that here we are in 2010 and Indigenous communities are suffering this sort of incidence of rheumatic fever and its consequences is unacceptable. Therefore, this $2.5 million initiative associated with the Research Centre, I believe, is an important step forward. We've got much more work still to do.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just on (inaudible), six months ago Jenny Macklin promised to take over Indigenous housing (inaudible). Houses still haven't been built. What's your reaction to the Territory Government's handling of that (inaudible). When are you going to take over?
PM: The review that we undertook, together with the Territory Government, has been completed. Secondly, the recommendations of that review are now being implemented. My advice as of today is that we have nearly 50 of those houses which are currently under construction, so this is a step forward.
Remember, our overall commitment is very clear, and that is how do we change the housing circumstances for Indigenous people here in the Territory? If you look at the dimensions of the commitment that we have made, it is significant. The overall investment over time, over a 10-year period, is something in the order of $1.6 billion. The commitment for the immediate period ahead goes to some $600 million or $700 million and we are therefore strongly committed to the implementation of that program and adding the extra houses and refurbishment of houses which we've committed to.
Not one of those objectives has changed. Nearly 50 houses are currently underway and we intend to roll out the program.
JOURNALIST: When will they be built, though? We've heard that numerous times, lately.
PM: Well, there are nearly 50 underway now and we will continue to implement the program. Building houses in Indigenous and remote Australia is a difficult undertaking, as those who are honest and frank in their contribution to this debate would recognise. We intend to implement the program. The review recommendations have been made. We're implementing those recommendations. Nearly 50 houses are under construction as we speak.
JOURNALIST: One of the major focuses of your emergency response to protecting (inaudible) will you do more through the intervention or other measures to help the Territory to tackle this problem effectively?
PM: My attention has been drawn today to the report by the NT Coroner in relation to these two appalling deaths, one, I understand, of a 12-year-old girl and another of a 7-week-old baby boy. I think for any Australian parent seeing reports of the deaths, and the unnecessary deaths, of young children in these circumstances and babies in these circumstances, frankly, makes your stomach turn.
Secondly, in terms of the future, on the report that I have had of the recommendations of Greg Cavanagh, can I extend my full support to his recommendation for minimum standards for out of home care to be developed and basic measures like regular health checks and regular visits to check on children in care to ensure that lives are saved in the future.
Thirdly, can I make this point - that the Australian Government is in the business of implementing national standards which will provide a benchmark for the care of children, no matter where they live in Australia. These will not just be applicable to the Northern Territory. They will be applicable right across Australia, and yesterday we released the details of options for the national standards for consultation and these include some of the measures I referred to before - regular health checks for kids in care, best-practice standards for the assessment of foster carers, and appropriate training and support for foster carers.
But I conclude my remarks where I began them - can I conclude my remarks where I began? This is an awful, awful story. It just makes you sick as you read the details of it, and we as a nation have to lift our game. One step that we are taking towards lifting our game is to bring in uniform national standards, not just for the NT, but for elsewhere as well.
JOURNALIST: On tax, are people going to need to work pretty much until they drop and aren't (inaudible) tax breaks the only fair way to keep people working (inaudible)?
PM: I welcome the question, because what the Government has been saying all week at the various addresses that I've given in the lead up to Australia Day is to face the reality of an ageing population.
Fact one: between now and the year 2050 the number of Australians aged over 65 will increase from about 12 or 13 percent of our population to something closer to 25 percent of our population.
That's what we're wrestling with. It has huge implications for the future funding of health, huge implications, also, for how we must therefore boost the productivity of our economy in order to provide greater economic growth, greater taxation revenue to fund health services and other services into the future.
So what's the Australian Government's message? Because of the ageing population, we're not going to be asking people to work longer. We're simply in the business of providing the ability for people to work smarter, and that means through our investment in infrastructure, our investment in skills and education and training. That's the Government's strategy.
Can I say by way of contrast, and why I particularly welcome this debate led by Mr Abbott is that Mr Abbott has committed himself to a pension age of 70 years of age - 70 years of age. That is Mr Abbott's commitment. He is on the record as talking about that already, so he's out there saying that you shouldn't be able to get the age pension until you're 70. What we're saying is, here is a strategy to ensure that we enable Australians to work smarter in the future. If they want to work longer and to make it easier for them to work longer, but our policy is very clear cut - that is, we don't want Australians to work longer. We don't want them to work longer.
Our strategy is not to work longer but to enable them to work smarter. Mr Abbott's strategy is to raise the pension age to 70. Can I say I couldn't see a clearer contrast.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this is a three-prong question.
PM: Oh - let's take prong number one.
JOURNALIST: Prong number one: when can we expect a takeover, federally, of Australia's health system? Secondly, will it first be trialled in the Territory or with Indigenous health?
PM: Is that prong number two?
JOURNALIST: Prong number, and prong number three: is that partly why Nicola Roxon is meeting with Chief Minister Paul Henderson on Monday to discuss those options?
PM: Let me go through the first two and then I'll ask the Minister to speak for herself in case she has a dastardly plan she hasn't informed me of. The first is this, where's Nicola-
ROXON: Just here.
PM: Ok, good, the first is this. Our decision making process on the health and hospital system is along these lines. First, in our first two years in office we have delivered a 50 percent increase in the Australian Government's allocation of funding to the States and Territories for the public hospitals of Australia, compared with the Howard Government.
Secondly, we contrast that in particular with Mr Abbott as Health Minister ripping out one billion dollars from the public hospitals of Australia. That's the first point. Second, for the long term reform of the system we commissioned Bennett to undertake a health reform commission report. That was delivered to the Government in July last year. It contained 132 recommendations. The second stage of our decision making process is to consult with the States and Territories and the individual health and Hospital communities about their response to these recommendations to road test those recommendations. We've done 99 of those consultations so far this was the 99th in Darwin. We've got a few more to do and, in fact, Warren was telling me about his impending visit to Mount Isa and Cloncurry next week. Is that right Warren?
SNOWDON: Yes.
PM: Good, and so we'll crack the ton. There are 750 public hospitals in Australia we want to get a reasonable cross section of the public hospitals of the country and road testing those recommendations. The third stage in the decision making process is having road-tested the recommendations with the health and hospital communities of this country to then, with the States and Territories, in the immediate months ahead to engage in detailed negotiations about the future of the system.
Preference one, we have co-operative reform for the future, we agree on a long term reform strategy. Option number two is, if we can't get there through a cooperative approach, the Commonwealth has consistently said that we would then move to take other measures including the Australian Government taking over the system.
So, those, that's our approach. As for the NT we have no particular plans in terms of the NT other than to receive the good input from the NT Government about particular things which have been done right here. I was impressed this morning, by a briefing I got at Royal Darwin hospital about the operation of their Rapid-
ROXON: Admissions.
PM: - Admissions and Planning Unit, RAPU, and how that actually enhanced the efficiency of the emergency department of this hospital. I've seen one or two examples elsewhere in the country, it was good to get a briefing on that here this morning. Nicola do you want to answer for yourself? What evils have you got planned?
ROXON: (laughs) I don't have any evils planned. I'm meeting with Kon Vatskalis and Paul Henderson on Monday morning, I'm nearly half way though meeting with all of the Chief Ministers and Premiers across the country to provide more detail about plans for feedback we've got through the consultations to make sure that any feedback that the Territory government might want to give us is factored into our considerations as we get closer to putting forward a national reform package and I'm very much looking forward to it. We've always had a good relationship with our health service providers here and with Kon. I'm looking forward to talking with Chief Minister Henderson about the issues that he wants resolved and the way we hope he'll work with us to bring forward a national reform plan for the fairness of all Territorians.
PM: As with Mr Abbott's proposal to have a pension age at the age of 70, I welcome that debate. It's not our approach. As for Mr Abbott's decision to rip a billion dollars out of public hospitals of Australia when he was Health Minister for more than three years, I welcome a debate on the future of our public hospitals as well. These are debates which the country needs to hear.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
PM: Last one and then I've got to zip.
JOURNALIST: On the oncology unit-
PM: Yep.
JOURNALIST: It was, the facility was opened today but patients won't be seen until March-June (inaudible) why not wait until the facility is actually up and running before being opened?
PM: You know something, what I have learnt over the years is to listen carefully to the advice of the professionals who run these units. People's lives are at stake. The proper diagnosis through CAT scans of the particular condition or cancer condition in which patients have is really important, and as is then the proper provision of treatment. But you know something, these are first class professionals as I said this morning I commend, in particular, the co-operation which has been received from Adelaide, from the health professionals there in making sure this unit got up and running but it will be out there, operational as is safely clinically desirable and the figures that I used this morning were based on the advice we obtained from those professionals.
But again, if I can conclude on a contrast point, Mr Howard's government was in for 12 years, when did the Northern Territory get an oncology unit? Never.
I think, they sort of towards the end of the peace promised one - but it never happened. We've been in government for two years, we committed to doing it. Damien Hale gave that commitment to the people of Solomon and we delivered it.
It is there. It is an investment of $26-27million there for the benefit of Territorians, because Territorians should be able to have the same level of cancer treatment services as to other Australians in our major cities. Thanks folks. 


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, with Member for Solomon, Damian Hale, today urged Northern Territory businesses to take advantage of the great new incentives to hire apprentices.
In just over six weeks since the start of the Australian Government's $100 million Apprentice Kickstart initiative, 27 young people are now working in traditional trades in the Northern Territory.
Around Australia more than 6,400 apprentices have been employed since Kickstart began.
Apprentice Kickstart is a practical measure to generate jobs for young people, tackling both youth unemployment and providing a down-payment on the vital skills Australia needs for the future.
Under Kickstart, the Rudd Government has more than tripled the commencement bonus for employers in the first year, from $1500 to $4850.
Employers receive $2350 when they employ a 15- to 19-year-old apprentice in an eligible trade and then receive a further $2500 after the apprentice completes nine months.
The Kickstart bonus is available to employers of apprentices in the fields that have been hardest hit by skills shortages - identified on the National Skills Needs List. These include butchers, bakers, bricklayers, carpenters, plumbers, electrical trades and hairdressing.
The bonus is available until 28 February 2010 and aims to sign up 21,000 young apprentices.
Member for Solomon, Damian Hale said as an Australian apprentice of the year he learnt the value of applying himself to a trade.
"The Northern Territory economy needs young people and employers to meet the demand for a more skilled workforce and this Rudd Government initiative will assist them to do this," Mr Hale said.
"The economic downturn particularly hurt apprenticeships, with commencements dropping by about 10,000 in the past year, and this financial incentive for employers will help develop a highly-skilled workforce and is a great foundation to support the recovery of the Australian economy."
The Australian Government today also invites the NT Government to submit proposals for a share of $20 million in funding to boost pre-apprenticeships.
Pre-apprenticeship training allows young people to gain a more realistic expectation of the work involved in their trade and to develop basic skills, which can reduce the period of time they will spend in their apprenticeship. This bonus will fast-forward hiring decisions - to bring apprentice numbers back up to the levels before the global recession.
Increased apprenticeship training is crucial to enhancing the productivity and innovation of Australian businesses.
Funding for Apprentice Kickstart comes from the Government's $650 million Jobs Fund and was negotiated with the support of the Australian Greens and Senator Stephen Fielding.
It brings to about $250 million the level of additional support the Rudd Government is providing to apprentices.
More information on Apprentice Kickstart is available at www.australianapprenticeships.gov.au


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today officially opened the $27.8 million Darwin Radiation Oncology facility.
To be known as the Alan Walker Cancer Care Centre, the facility means cancer patients in the Northern Territory will no longer have to travel to Adelaide to undertake their radiation treatment.
Minister for Health Aging, Nicola Roxon said $19 million was provided by the Rudd Government for construction of the Radiation Oncology facility, with a further $8.8 million being provided for fit out and equipment.
The first of the two state of the art "linear accelerator" machines for the unit has been installed and is currently undergoing preparations for precision use. The facility is expected to start taking appointments in March, with the first patient to use the facility due in April.
The facility has capacity for two linear accelerator bunkers, a treatment area for patients, clinic facilities for patient consultation and examination, office and support facilities, and access to car parking.
NT Minister for Health Kon Vatskalis said the Territory Government was also pleased to provide some funding for a small chemotherapy ward at the same site.
An agreement with Royal Adelaide Hospital will ensure specialist radiation staff, including radiation oncologists and registrars are available to staff the facility.
Member for Solomon, Damian Hale said the previous Federal Government failed for 12 years to live up to the promise of a local Oncology facility.
"The Rudd Government is proud to deliver this vital service to Territorians," he said.
This project is one of a number of major investments the Rudd Government has made to improve health services in the Northern Territory, including:
     * $18.6 million for an accommodation complex of 50 units for people who need to travel and stay in Darwin when receiving treatment at RDH;
     * $27.8 million for Flinders University to run a full medical program in Darwin;
     * $4.3 million for Royal Darwin Hospital to reconfigure the Royal Darwin Hospital Emergency Department and for new paediatric staff;
     * $1.6 million for two new operating theatres and new surgical equipment at Royal Darwin Hospital;
     * $10 million for construction of a Super Clinic at Palmerston; and
     * Funding for a Cancer Breast Care Nurse at Royal Darwin Hospital.
As well as attending the official launch of the radiation oncology unit, the Prime Minister, with the Health Minister, Minister for Rural Health, Member for Solomon, and NT Health Minister, also met with territory doctors and health professionals at Royal Darwin Hospital to discuss ways to improve the nation's health system.
Almost 100 consultations have now been held around the nation to discuss the ideas in the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission's final report.
Today's meeting gave local health professionals an opportunity to give their perspective on the Commission's 123 recommendations, which would change health care at all levels.
All Australians are also able to contribute to the national debate on our health system via the yourHealth.gov.au website, which also has copies of the reform reports.


Today Annette Ellis, the dedicated and hard working Member for Canberra, has announced her decision not to contest the next federal election.
During almost 15 years of representing the people of southern Canberra, and almost 30 working with the Labor Party, Annette has been a tireless and passionate advocate for her community.
Annette has always taken very seriously her responsibilities to the people of Canberra, and has quietly and deliberately worked to deliver real outcomes on the ground.
The respect she has earned in her own community is reflected in her election to the Federal Parliament on five occasions.
Annette has been a passionate contributor to the Committee process throughout her time as a Member of the House of Representatives, including currently as the Chair of the Standing Committee on Family, Community, Housing and Youth, a member of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade and a member of the National Capital and External Territories Joint Standing Committee of the Federal Parliament.
Annette has expressed often to me her belief in the opportunities provided through the Committee process for learning, consideration and deliberation of the real policy challenges facing our national parliament.
Her work for her community and in the House of Representatives demonstrates this quiet, thoughtful and profoundly effective belief in the importance of good and considered government.
Annette has also been a strong campaigner on improved disability and aged care services throughout her time in Parliament, including as the Shadow Minister for Disabilities and Shadow Minister for Ageing and Seniors from 2001-2004.
An active, committed local member, it is with regret that I received the news of her decision to retire at the next election.
I would like to thank Annette for her invaluable service to the people of Canberra, and to the Australian Labor Party.
Ms Ellis will continue to serve the people of Canberra until the next Federal election.
I wish Annette all the very best for the future. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be back home in Queensland, and here in the Queensland Art Gallery -- an outstanding Brisbane venue.
Australia Day is a time when we can reflect on our nation and the year that is now behind us. In Queensland we remember those whose livelihoods were threatened by the devastating floods. You can throw anything at Queenslanders and they survive - indeed they thrive. There's an indomitable spirit, a 'can do' spirit, here that has seen this state, now entering the second half of its second century, go from strength to strength.
Since our last Australia Day, Queenslanders - like all Australians - have been confronted by the worst global recession in 75 years and together we are weathering the global storm. As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate, when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
We've shown how strength can be drawn from unity when governments at all levels; businesses small and large; local communities, unions and charity groups all work together, and I am optimistic that the decade ahead holds great things for Queensland, building on the achievements of the decade just passed.
In the past decade, Queensland outstripped national economic growth by a country mile, an average annual growth rate of 4.7 per cent compared to the national average of 3.2 per cent - the best performance anywhere in Australia, and Queensland promises to continue driving the national economy as we move into recovery from the global downturn.
On Australia Day 2010, we can be optimistic about our future, but can't afford to be complacent. We cannot ignore the very real challenges ahead.
This week I have travelled the nation ahead of Australia Day, speaking about our need to prepare for the long-term challenges of the four decades to 2050. To help guide that work, the Government has been preparing the Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges.
The Australia to 2050 report, which the Treasurer will release in coming weeks, analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years. The Australia to 2050 report sets out the massive demographic change resulting from the ageing of our population:
     * Today we are a nation of 22 million Australians.
     * By 2050, we will be a nation of 36 million Australians - reflecting natural population growth and a continuation of migration trends of the past forty years.
     * Today, some 14 per cent of Australians - one in seven - are over the age of 65.
     * By 2050, some 23 per cent of Australians - one in four - will be over 65.
     * The ageing of the population is expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2049-50.
The extent of that change is revealed by the dramatic change in the ratio of the number of people of working age (and paying taxes) to those aged 65 and over:
     * Forty years ago, in 1970, the ratio was 7.5 people of working age to every person 65 and over
     * In 2010, the ratio is 5 to 1.
     * And in 40 years' time, in 2050, it is projected to fall so far that there will be just 2.7 people of working age for each person aged 65 and over.
This creates a major long-term economic challenge, as Australia faces higher costs yet slower economic growth:
     * The Australia to 2050 report projects that average annual growth in real GDP per person is projected to fall to 1.5 per cent over the next 40 years.
     * This contrasts to an average increase in GDP per capita of 1.9 per cent per year over the past 40 years.
     * In other words, average family incomes will grow at a slower rate than in recent years. This defines Australia's long-term growth challenge: acting now, to counter the projected decline in economic growth in the years ahead; acting now, to enhance productivity growth and workforce participation - the clear message about what needs to be done in response to the ageing of the population set out in Treasury's intergenerational modelling.
By lifting productivity and participation, we can achieve a higher rate of economic growth and counter the effects of the ageing of the population:
     * The Treasury analysis undertaken for the Australia to 2050 report shows that if average productivity growth was lifted back towards the 1990s mark of an average 2 per cent per year - up from the 1.4 per cent to which it declined in the decade just passed - this would produce enormous benefits.
     * Our economy would be $570 billion bigger in 2050.
     * On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050.
It is productivity growth that must play the central role in building Australia's future economic growth. Productivity is about how we use labour, capital and technology across the economy. It's about working smarter - rather than working harder, or working longer.
Productivity depends on all of us - workers, businesses and the Government - but the Government plays a vital role in facilitating long-term productivity growth.
To lift productivity we need broad economic reforms.
First, we can increase productivity by building advanced 21st century infrastructure:
     * According to IMF research, in developed countries like Australia, an increase in the public infrastructure stock by 1 per cent leads to an increase in output by around 0.2 per cent.
     * According to the Productivity Commission, improving the efficiency of Australia's energy and transport infrastructure could, after a period of adjustment, increase GDP by nearly 2 per cent.
     * This is the equivalent of around $75 billion or $2,000 per person in today's dollars, based on the figures in the Australia to 2050 report.
Second, we can increase productivity by building a highly skilled, highly trained workforce:
     * The Productivity Commission has found that improvements related to education and training - early learning, higher education attainment and increases in numeracy and literacy - could raise aggregate labour productivity by up to 1.2 per cent.
     * If we could boost GDP in 2050 by 1.2 per cent, that would amount to around $45 billion in today's dollars - or the equivalent of around $1,200 for each Australian.
Third, we can increase productivity through microeconomic reforms - such as the reforms the Government is prosecuting to build a seamless national economy:
     * The Productivity Commission found in 2005 that the National Competition Policy and related reforms during the 1990s increased Australia's GDP by 2.5 per cent.
     * Further microeconomic reforms can build on this achievement and continue to lift GDP and productivity.
     * The Government's commitment to tackle social exclusion can also contribute to increasing workforce participation and productivity growth by removing barriers to work and improving skills among the most disadvantaged Australians, such as Indigenous Australians, unemployed youth and the homeless.These measures will also help the 2.6 per cent of Australians - or around 570,000 - who were left out while the nation reaped the benefits of the mining boom in the past decade.
The other side of the challenge of the ageing of our population is the challenge it poses to the sustainability of future budgets. Unless we can achieve higher levels of productivity growth and workforce participation, we face either generating large, unsustainable budget deficits into the second quarter of the century, or needing to reduce government services.
The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the past decade, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base:
     * During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent.
     * This compared to an average 2.5 per cent annual real growth in spending during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a medium-term fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome is projected to be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off - or $130 billion in today's dollar terms.
The Australian Government is acting on the challenges facing Australia. We took strong, early and decisive action in response to the global economic crisis to support jobs and working families here in Queensland and across the nation, but we always kept our eye on the ball, directing some 70 per cent of our economic stimulus towards nation-building infrastructure, infrastructure that will advance the long-term challenge of enhancing productivity and workforce participation.
Across Australia, our Nation-Building for Recovery Plan involves a $77 billion investment. The total stimulus to the Queensland economy amounts to $11.7 billion, through payments to support working families and investment in medium- and longer-term infrastructure.
Our first action was immediate stimulus of the economy through targeted bonus payments to families, pensioners and individuals. We did this to ease the pressure on households struggling with the global recession, while supporting economic growth.
In Queensland, this meant:
     * $1.3 billion in tax bonus payments to around 1.5 million individuals;
     * Around $700 million in stimulus payments to families, and $790 million to pensioners;
     * $511 million in Back to School bonus payments for more than 550,000 children;
     * $255 million in Single Income Family Payments for almost 290,000 families, covering more than 560,000 children; and in addition to these measures, some 560,000 pensioners in Queensland have received substantial permanent pension increases of up to $32 per week - helping make a big difference for those struggling with cost of living pressures.
We also helped 40,034 Queenslanders into their first homes by the end of November last year, through the First Home Owners Boost.
The Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan also invests in medium-term, shovel-ready infrastructure that supports jobs during the economic downturn.
The Building the Education Revolution Program is the biggest schools modernisation program in Australia's history:
     * We're investing $16.2 billion in 9,526 schools across the country.
     * Through the National School Pride component, we're investing $1.3 billion in over 13,000 small scale and minor refurbishment projects. This includes $241 million in 3,700 projects here in Queensland.
     * Through the Primary Schools for the 21st Century component, we're investing $14 billion in over 10,000 new libraries, multipurpose halls, and classrooms. This includes $2.7 billion for 2,235 projects here in Queensland.
     * And we're investing over $800 million in 537 new science and language centres for secondary schools, including $200 million for 127 science and language centres here in Queensland.
Second, we have the Social Housing Initiative - the biggest Commonwealth Government investment in social housing ever:
     * We're investing $5.2 billion in over 19,000 new social housing dwellings. This includes $1.1 billion for over 4,000 new dwellings here in Queensland.
     * We're investing $400 million in 70,000 repairs and maintenance jobs for social housing. This includes an $80 million investment in 22,000 projects here in Queensland.
     * And we're investing almost $250 million in 800 new defence housing dwellings. Almost half of these dwellings will be right here in Queensland because we recognise that defence housing needs in this state are particularly strong.
Third, we are transforming homes across the country with the Energy Efficient Homes Package:
We've already paid out over $1 billion towards almost 800,000 ceiling insulation jobs. $350 million of that investment has been for over a quarter million homes here in Queensland.
We've also paid out $134 million for over 84,000 solar hot water rebates, including $24 million for almost 15,000 here in Queensland.
And finally, the Nation-Building Economic Stimulus Plan includes almost $1 billion in transport and community infrastructure:
     * We're investing $150 million in 607 Black Spot projects to improve safety on our roads. This includes a $30 million investment in 93 projects here in Queensland.
     * We're investing another $150 million in almost 300 Boom Gates projects, to improve safety at rail crossings. This includes $43 million for 66 projects in Queensland.
     * And we're investing $550 million in 137 projects through the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program - including a $30 million investment in 19 projects here in Queensland.
     * We have also supported local communities through 37 Jobs Fund projects in Queensland, generating or retaining a total of 1,129 jobs, 908 traineeships and 765 work experience positions.
The Government is also committed to building long-term economic infrastructure that will support productivity growth in coming decades. This long-term infrastructure is the transport, communications and energy networks that will drive economic growth for future generations.
That is why we are investing $36 billion in transport infrastructure across the country over the next five years. It is an unprecedented transport infrastructure investment. We've doubled the roads budget. We've quadrupled the rail budget. We're investing in ports for the first time.
Here in Queensland, we're investing $8.6 billion, which includes:
     * $2.6 billion for duplication and safety works on the Bruce Highway - one of the longest and most important sections of the national road network
     * $2.5 billion for the upgrade of the Ipswich Motorway - one of Brisbane's most important arterial routes
     * And $365 million towards the Gold Coast Light Rail project that will transform one of the fastest growing regions in Australia.
Modern, efficient, and safe transport infrastructure is critical to making sure Queensland is one of the best places to live in the world.
We are also committed to the infrastructure of the 21st Century - high-speed, optical-fibre broadband. That is why we have established a company to invest $43 billion in a National Broadband Network with speeds of 100 megabits per second, taking us from the back of the pack among developed economies into the modern era.
It will plug Queensland into the global economy. It will transform the way we live and work. It will underpin our future prosperity.
Preparing for the future is also about preparing for the low-carbon economy of the future. That is why we have created the $4.5 billion Clean Energy Initiative to support new green infrastructure, including:
     * The $2.4 billion Carbon Capture and Storage Flagships Program to support construction and demonstration of large-scale projects.
     * The $1.6 billion Solar Flagships Program to support construction of large-scale solar power stations.
     * Together, these massive infrastructure investments in transport, communications and energy are about setting us up for growth for decades to come.
The Government is investing in an education revolution, to give Australians the skills, education and training that will help lift productivity growth and workforce participation in the long term. That starts with early childhood education for the youngest Australians:
Over the next four years, $16 billion will be invested in Early Childhood Education and Child Care - an increase of more than $1 billion. That is more than double the investment made over the previous four year period under the previous government, and $13.1 billion of this will directly assist parents with the cost of child care. In Queensland, we are providing:
     * More than $700 million each year to help parents with the cost of child care;
     * $11 million to create six early learning and care centres;
     * $75 million for 10 integrated Children and Family Centres in Queensland - targeted towards Indigenous families; and
     * $252 million to help all Queensland kids access 15 hours of kindergarten in the year before they start school.
I've already spoken about how we are investing in the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history. We are also investing record amounts in our schools, to give the new generations of Australians access to the best education possible. Nationally, we will invest more than $62 billion in school education from 2009-2012, compared to $33 billion in the previous four year period.
In Queensland, that means a 138 per cent increase in education funding:
     * We have already allocated $54.8 million for around 54,661 computers in 522 Queensland schools.
     * We've also provided around $73 million provided for 28 Trades Training Centres in schools to help address skill shortages in traditional trades and emerging industries.
This Government has increased investment in funding for vocational education and training by 64 per cent to $4.1 billion in 2009-10 - and providing a total $14.8 billion over 4 years to 2012-13.Nationally we have provided $2 billion for the Productivity Places Program to fund 711,000 places over five years. Already we have enrolled over 112,000 job seekers enrolled in the program, with over 60,000 having completed their training.
We've taken action to support apprenticeships, to avoid thousands of Australians missing out on training due to the economic downturn. Under the Apprentice Kickstart program launched last month, we have tripled the incentive for employers to take on a young apprentice. Since it began on 1 December, new sign-ups for apprentices have soared by more than 50 per cent compared to the same time last year, and by last week we had a total of 6,421 new trade apprentices signed up - of whom 1,114 were Queenslanders.
The Government has begun the process of reforming our health and hospitals system to meet the long-term challenges of the ageing of the population. We have made substantial new investments in health care here in Queensland and across the nation, delivering an increase of around 29 per cent in funding for Queensland over a four year period. As part of the National Healthcare agreement, the Australian Government will deliver $64 billion in health and hospitals funding over five years. This is an increase of more than $20 billion, or 50 per cent over the last agreement. Queensland will receive around $12.5 billion from this agreement.
Nationally, we have delivered $750 million to take pressure off our emergency departments. Queensland's share is $147 million, to deliver upgrades at Prince Charles, Logan, Redland, QEII, Ipswich, Caboolture, Bundaberg and Toowoomba Hospitals, and of the $600 million we are investing to reduce elective surgery waiting lists across the country, Queensland has so far received a total of $57 million.
That is made up of:
     * $28 million to conduct additional surgeries - with Queensland delivering 5,928 additional surgical procedures, well above its target of 4,000;
     * $29 million to expand elective surgery capacity and commission additional operating theatres.
As part of the $3.2 billion health infrastructure package in the 2009-10 Budget, Queensland will receive a total of $480 million towards hospitals and medical research infrastructure. This includes:
     * $250 million to expand Townsville Hospital;
     * $40 million for the Smart Therapies Institute;
     * $104 million for an Oral Health Centre in Brisbane; and
     * $76 million to extend Rockhampton Hospital.
     * These are important investments in the future of our health care system and the future health of our nation.
Australia Day is a time to reflect not only on the future, but also on past achievements. It is also a time to acknowledge the great achievements of individuals in building the modern Australia of today.
On each Australia Day, we recognise those individual contributions through the Australian of the Year Awards, which turn 50 years old this year, Australians who have served their community and made us all proud of our nation.
The 2010 Queensland finalist, Dr Chris Sarra, is a leader in Indigenous education. A world-class educator, Chris hails from Bundaberg and is the youngest of 10 children. In the late 1990s, Dr Sarra took on the challenges of Indigenous education as the Principal of Cherbourg State School in South East Queensland. His 'Strong and Smart' philosophy and his leadership led to dramatic improvements at the school. He now heads the Stronger Smarter Institute, which is transforming Indigenous education with its focus on high expectations, quality relationships and community engagement in schools.
This is nationally important work, so I'm sure you'll join me in wishing Chris the very best for his work and for next week's Awards.
The strength of the finalists each year for the Australian of the Year Award reminds us that the Australian spirit is alive and well here in Queensland in 2010: the 'can do' spirit; the spirit of a 'fair go';and a spirit of compassion, embodied in our nation's response to disasters at home and abroad - from last year's floods and bushfires here in Australia, to the tragic earthquake in recent days in Haiti.
That spirit is everywhere in this great land of ours, qualities that can make us all proud this Australia Day.
And so I raise the toast: To Australia.


I acknowledge the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's good to be back home. It's good to be back home on the Southside. It's good to be back home in Brisbane, good to be back home in Queensland. It's good to be back home for Australia Day and the lead up to it.
One of the things that we've done here in our local community over, more than a decade now, these last eleven years is honour our local volunteers and in the last week I have been in Melbourne, I've been in Hobart, in Perth, in Adelaide, last night in Darwin and arriving here. What stuns me, whichever part of Australia I go to, is the sheer magnitude of our national volunteering effort.
As we have had Australia Day receptions at each of the State and Territory capitals, to be able to spend time with those who give of their all, through their local community organisations, through their local churches, through their own charities, through their own sporting organisations, this is an extraordinary reminder of how much our nation is built on the shoulders of those who volunteer.
Had we no volunteers, I shudder to think what our country would be like. Our volunteers are the heart and the soul and the sinew of so much that Australia has become these last couple of hundred years.
You here on the Southside are part and parcel of that tradition.
I'm most familiar with this community more than any other community in Australia, and what I know from your work here in this community is how much people depend on it; how much they depend on whether the meals on wheels is going to deliver tomorrow; how much they depend on the physiotherapy services being delivered at Balmoral Uniting Community Care; how much they depend on whether, in fact, there's going to be a smiling face and a helping hand from their local church, their local parish council and their local parish communities; how much they depend on whether in fact the sporting gear is going to be there on Saturday morning, rolled out ready for those who are going to participate in their community sports; to know that someone is going to be there to set up the Guide's Hut for that morning, to make sure that the young girls who come there and to participate in the wonders of guiding are going to be properly supported and similarly for scouts.
None of this happens by magic. It all happens because you, the women and men of Australia, decide to put your shoulder to the wheel to make it happen and you make the wheels of our community turn around.
There's a huge difference between how we do things here and what I've seen in so many other countries around the world. Where either this level of community life just doesn't happen or there's an expectation that some abstract arm of government is going to try and make it happen. Here we have a remarkable, vibrancy to our community life and you are the heart and soul of that here on Brisbane's Southside.
So the reason I have done this proudly as your local member these last eleven years and as the last two or three years as your Prime Minister is because it is a fantastic thing to do, to be able to come together to honour those who volunteer to make our community work.
The values that are alive in volunteering are the values more broadly which makes Australia the great country that it is.
I was reflecting on this most recently in Perth and in Darwin. There are two things about Australian people - one is that we have this remarkable spirit of, so call it, the 'can do'. Here's a problem, rather than sitting around and moping about it, how do we fix it? How do we make it better? How do we solve the problem. What are the practical thing we can do to change this from here to there, to make a real difference.
The impressive thing about Australian's everywhere is that they don't sit around and mope about it. They say how about we roll our sleeves up. How do we fix this problem? Whether it's cleaning up from the devastation of the Victorian bushfires, more than a century ago dealing with Cyclone Tracey which I spoke of in Darwin yesterday or whether it's the very simple fact of dealing with the challenges which arise day-to-day.
Australians have a 'can do' spirit.
You see it in business; you see it in our universities; you see it in our community organisations; you see it when the challenges are great and we choose to bind together to harness the great individual and entrepreneurial spirit of Australia into a common national purpose.
There's another part of Australia's spirit also.
We have the spirit of the 'can do' but we also have the spirit of the 'fair go'.
The spirit of the 'fair go' is so much who we are, as Australians.
A fair go for all - it doesn't matter where you've come from; it doesn't matter whether you've grown up rich or poor; whether you've grown up in the country or the city; whether you've been to the finest private schools, or the humblest country small schools. Everyone should in this country, be given a fair go.
And the great thing about Australia is that that has been etched into our soul for more than a century - it is who we are.
And it is not just us attending to our own. It is also that sense of a 'fair go' that we have for others abroad.
We've seen it for example in our response to events such as the Boxing Day Tsunami - now more than 5 years ago.
This was an extraordinary tragedy on our doorstep, and Australians, one and all, in partnership with the Australian Government, in partnership with the international community, saw the devastation on our doorstep and decided to extend a helping hand as part of the fair go for our neighbours. Because when natural disasters hit, those folk need a helping hand.
And most recently we've seen it with the Australian response also to the extraordinary devastation in Haiti. This has challenged many Australians as they have seen the devastation on their television sets of an evening.
Already, the Australian Government has provided assistance in the form of funding, comprising $10 million to meet urgent and immediate humanitarian needs like shelter, food, water, sanitation and medical assistance, and $5 million for long-term reconstruction assistance following UN assessments of the requirements.
But we can and we will do more.
Today I can confirm that we have received a request from the Government of the United States to provide a specialist team of air traffic controllers from the Australian Defence Force.
Overcoming logistical obstacles is one of the keys to making sure the assistance that is being provided actually gets to the people of Haiti.
And making sure that their airports are operatively effectively is key to that again.
Making Haiti's airspace and airports effective, safe and useable is crucial to the overall humanitarian effort. And we, as Australia, will help make a difference through this part of our relief effort.
The US Government has made this request for our assistance in Haiti, and the Australian Government today, agreed to that request for assistance to help the people that have been affected by this appalling natural disaster.
The Australian Defence Force is now in the process of preparing a team that will be deployed of specialist air traffic controllers and they will be deployed to Haiti within the next week.
As ever, Australia stands ready to provide whatever further logistical and other humanitarian assistance is necessary for the reconstruction of that country that has seen such enormous devastation.
It is part and parcel of the 'fair go'.
A fair go for people who cop it from an event of nature, for which they are not responsible, who cop it and therefore need help. And Australians stand ready, as ever, to assist.
Over the past week I have been speaking also about the challenges which face our nation in the year ahead, and in the decade ahead.
If I reflect back on where we were a year ago - the nation and the world was staring down the barrel of the worst economic crisis the world has faced since the Great Depression.
I don't know if you've followed your newspapers over the last 12 months but what we've seen in countries and economies around the world is one falling over after the other like nine pins, unemployment reaching double digits in the United States and in countries in Europe, in Spain something like 15 to 20 per cent unemployment, as the entire global economy has been affected by the global financial crisis. What we have seen is economic growth collapse, what we've seen is unemployment rise, and what we've seen therefore is families and communities devastated around the world.
Here in Australia we decided to make a difference, we decided to make a difference together. We've drawn together those great spirits of the 'can do' and the 'fair go' to make a difference here in Australia.
So what we did in harnessing this tradition of the 'can do' and 'fair go' was how can we as government at all levels together with the business community, together with the trade union movement, together with the church and charitable sector make a difference as this economic tsunami was making its way across the world. It had no respect for national borders, no respect for countries, no respect for political ideologies, one country after another falling victim to its horrific effects.
What we did as the Australian Government was say the private sector is about to come under massive pressure, it's time for Government to step up to the plate. That's why we decided to invest through our national economic stimulus strategy. It's part and parcel of conservative economic management that when the private sector retreats, government should step up and fill the space, otherwise employment just falls through the floor. That's what we did.
And that's why we're in the process of building for example the largest school modernisation program this country has ever seen. Every primary school here on the Southside you will see buildings rising from the dust, and you see it not just across Southside, but right across Brisbane, right across Queensland, right across every state of Australia. Every suburb I visit, every town I see, we are seeing new classrooms being built, we are seeing new language centres being constructed, new science centres being built as well, and on top of that 21st century libraries, multi-purpose halls often for use by the wider community as well where halls may not be available.
The sum total of our effort has been this - a year on the report card for Australia is as follows - We have uniquely among the major advanced economies not fallen into recession.
Australia is the only economy of the major advanced economies not to go into recession. Australia in 2008-2009 is the only one of the 33 advanced economies in the world to generate positive economic growth. Australia only second in terms of the lowest level of unemployment across the major advanced economies, and doing all those things with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit.
But none of this could have been possible had the Australian Government not been able to work in partnership, together, in the Australian spirit with State Governments, Labor and Liberal right across the country, local governments, all 565 of them right across the country, to make a difference on the ground. And to make a difference on the ground also with local chambers of commerce, with local businesses, with local trade unions, with local church and charitable organisations, and what we've seen is the Australian spirit at work, recognising that we are all in this together and therefore making a difference together.
So the report card that we have generated for the nation a year on, with the rest of the economies around the world still in such diabolical trouble, has been a good one, but it's been a good one because the nation has pulled together in the face of the worst economic crisis the world has ever seen since the Great Depression.
We as Australians should draw great encouragement from that and great encouragement for the future.
Our challenges for the future cause us also not to be complacent about the future. What we have done in the year past, that is solid, but the year ahead will present its own challenges, the decade ahead presents its own challenges, the century ahead presents its own challenges. I am confident however that as Australians pulling together, as Australians acting as an Australian family, as an Australian national family, putting our differences to one side when it comes to the great challenges we face, we can make a difference.
Our history is full of examples of us making a difference, deploying the spirit of the 'can do', the spirit of the 'fair go', applying it to the practical challenges of the moment and making a difference at home and abroad, making a difference for our nation, and making a difference here in our local community.
None of that would be possible were it not for you, the volunteers of Australia. None of that would be possible were it not for each and every one of you as part of our Australian volunteering community here in Brisbane Southside.
So as Prime Minister of Australia I say thank you; as your member of Parliament I say thank you; and as a fellow Australian I say thank you as well.


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history. I thank you very much for that uniquely Sydney welcome to country.
We've just been reminded that a couple of hundred years ago a bunch of fellas arrived in eleven ships just across the way there. It is remarkable that we are here to celebrate this occasion today. The reports are that after the eleven ships of the first fleet landed here at Sydney cove, that there was, and they had discharged their human cargo, that the captain, General Arthur Phillip then proceeded to provide an address to the assembled throng.
This was then followed by less than ceremonious events. As I'm told from the historical record that large slabs of the male and female convicts then abandoned to the Rocks behind here and engaged in what could only be described as a Bacchanalian celebration. There is a moral to this story. If you're going to provide a public lecture, as the Captain Governor of New South Wales, make sure it inspires their attention. Had it been a more policy laden speech by Arthur Phillip, I'm sure that the convicts in question would have sat down for a robust seminar, on Benthamite penal reforms to the British penal system of the late 18th Century.
That was the first week, but those of you who followed your early Australian colonial history will know that the first fleet, Arthur Phillip having delivered his human charge here safely and intact, there was then a Royal Commission convened by the British Admiralty because the first fleet had cost too much. Ever heard that story before? It had cost too much. So the Royal Commission was held and its conclusions were, in fact, that indeed it did cost too much and that as a consequence, if there was to be a second fleet, it should be put out to, wait for it, private tender.
There was a normal conduct of a private tender bid, competitive neutrality was assured by British Admiralty at the time. Submissions were lodged and of course the one which came in, on time and under cost won the contract. It just happened that is was a West African Slaver. The history of the second fleet therefore unfolds because one of the curious elements of the contract, and all New South Wales and Federal public servants here present, pay attention to this, was what I described a perverse price incentive. The price incentive was this, whatever food you've got left over at the end you get to keep. Think about the incentive. So as a consequence, one third of the human charge of the second fleet died in passage.
My forebear Thomas Rudd was one of those who scrambled ashore, in 1790, or about there. He was a person of no particular repute and, at that stage at least, no particular ill-repute but I'll return to that in a minute. He was engaged in career development. He was a London dustman and had been accused by the parlourmaid of nicking the fair lady's shoes which had been stuck on the back porch for cleaning. The Old Bailey, at the time, that great and impartial system of justice which we all uphold to this day, sent him to transportation for seven years; two years on convict hulks at Portsmouth and then here for the nightlife at Sydney Cove in 1790. Well he served his time, was emancipated in 1795 and made his way back to England by China. This was a formidable voyage at the time, travelling back through Cantong and Southern China in the days of the mid-Ching court. Obviously chose not to take up Chinese. He arrived back in London and in 1799 reoffended. It takes a singular talent to be transported to New South Wales twice.
I challenge all those historians here from New South Wales to find me any convict in New South Wales who has been sentenced here twice, and so he came again.
I always like the transcript in the Old Bailey on his second trial where the constabulary was asked by the 'beak' of the old Bailey whether they knew Thomas Rudd and the immortal words then ensued, 'Ah yes, m'lord we know him well'. I think that may have prejudiced the outcome. Off he came for nicking a bag of sugar this time for another seven years. He was finally emancipated in 1806 and then decided to stay. He was then given an allocation of land out at Campbelltown. If you actually go to the cemeteries in Campbelltown they are literally, planted well with my antecedents. All this leads to, I think, the ultimate transition to respectability because I'm told by the historians and I can't quite confirm it myself, that in 1824 finally there was a letter to the editor of the Sydney Gazette, co-signed by Thomas Rudd, together with other citizens of Campbelltown asking for more capital works in Campbelltown.
All of which goes to prove that the pathway between criminality and respectability can be achieved within a generation. Therein lies the story of Australia at large and I'm sure, this convict colony as well. I'm from Moreton Bay settlement so, same up there.
My wife, of course, is of impeccable free-settlement stock. She brings balance to this union and she is of Scottish heritage and, not only can celebrate being of free-settler stock, but then having been born in the only free-settler colony or State of Australia, namely that of South Australia. So Therese brings respectability to what would otherwise have been entirely criminal enterprise.
There's one footnote to all of the above which is that I was told today, and again I stand to be corrected, that on the convict lists for the second fleet two names are listed in 1790 - one Thomas Rudd and one William Abbott. Now, I know not, if there is any connection between that said Abbott and this said Abbott. If there is I wonder how those two gentlemen got on onboard; eight months together on ship with not a lot to eat.
You know the great thing about Australia is the spirit of the country. Our times change, our challenges change but if you look across the continued history of this country of ours I see a spirit which unites us all; a spirit which has these characteristics - firstly the spirit of 'can do'; a spirit which says here's a bunch of challenges, here's a bunch of difficulties, here's a bunch of problems, what can we do about it to make better?
We are by instinct a very practical people; we are by instinct a mob who see a challenge and says well how can we get past it? We're not given by temperament or predisposition to sit around and moan about things. We much prefer to get on and see what can be done about things. That is a great spirit. We see it alive in our entrepreneurialism; we see it alive in the great individual achievements of our nation, the very practical things that are done and out there in business; in commerce; in science and innovation and in the rest of human and individual endeavour.
The other great spirit alive in our country is the spirit of the 'fair go'; this is written into our Australian DNA; it's part and parcel of what has been grafted into our soul and spirit of Australians, and that is a habit, or view of life, which says I cannot be indifferent to the condition of others. I must do something to help out my fellow Australians. I must do something to help out my neighbours when they're going through tough times. I must also do something to help out those elsewhere in the world who may now be the victim of unspeakable natural disasters. That spirit of the 'fair go' is there informing our history as well. That spirit of the 'fair go' and that spirit of the 'can do' I see alive in all those people whom Kristina and myself and Therese and Ben have shaken hands with this evening. Each of you representing great achievements in business; in science; in innovation and through our community and church and charitable sectors also those who have been out there extending the hand of human friendship to those in need.
So as Prime Minister of Australia could I say one simple thing to you all - those of you who have given of your own to make the lives of others better, thank you.
Without your contribution, Australia would be a radically different country.
The spirit of volunteering is what makes this country different. I said, in my own community yesterday in Brisbane, that if you were to think about what Australia would be like tomorrow if everyone ceased as of midnight tonight to volunteer, this country, literally I believe, would fall apart.
We rest on the shoulders of so many thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of volunteers who actually keep the fabric of our society and our community going. As the elected leader of this country, and when I travel abroad, it is the thing that gives me greatest pride in reflecting on the achievements of this nation, Australia.
In the last 12 months since I spoke in the lead up to Australia day last year we had been through an enormous set of challenges. It goes by many names. The global financial crisis; the global economic recession; the global meltdown, but across the world we have seen the greatest financial crisis, an economic crisis, metered out to the global economy since the Great Depression of '29 and '32.
If you look across the world you will see one economy after another falling like nine pins; unemployment going through the roof; economic growth collapsing and with tens of millions of people being added to the unemployment queues around the world, and each of those, not just a statistic, but a human being whose family's affected, whose life is affected, whose community is affected, whose company is affected, whose nation is affected.
The great story of 2009 is that as Australians we chose to make a difference. We chose to do it differently. We chose to come together as one in the face of this huge national and international challenge.
On the Government's part, we put our step forward with something called the National Economic Stimulus Strategy and we applied particular measures. We invested $77 billion into the economy; 70 per cent of which went into infrastructure; 29,000 infrastructure projects now underway across the country.
Jobs for today but building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Here in New South Wales $21 billion invested through the National Stimulus Strategy; $16.2 billion in our school modernisation program across the country; here in New South Wales, thousands of school projects rolling out. In social housing, $1.9 billion in New South Wales to build 6,300 new units of public housing; 31,000 repairs and maintenance to social housing; in energy efficiency investing in 333,000 homes for ceiling insulation, and 55,000 solar hot water.
But what's it all mean? These are the practical things that we did, practical things which are of use today in providing jobs and employment and engagement for small business and providing still for apprenticeships today, but critically building the economic and educational and social infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Jobs for today, helping small business today while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Again, my message to you is what Government does is one thing - doing it in partnership with the entire national community is something else; bringing together the innate sense of togetherness we have as a nation is what made the difference.
We could not have done what we did were we not in active partnership with every State Government, Labor and Liberal across the country; with every one of the 565 local authorities in Australia; Labor, Liberal, independent, Calathumpian all working together. We could not have achieved this if we were not working together with businesses who chose, often courageously, to keep people in work rather than to put them onto the unemployment queue. We couldn't have done this had the unions not adopted a policy of restraint during a year of great difficulty for everybody and we couldn't have done it were it not for the community sector, out there, aided by the churches, supporting those who still felt the rough end of unemployment and the impact on the family home and on the family budget.
So my simple message about where we've been this last year is this. By working together and coming together as a nation we made a radical difference.
The report card for Australia is outstanding.
One. One country unique among the major advanced economies worldwide did not go into recession; that country is Australia.
Two. Unique among the 33 countries who are the advanced economies of the world, only one country grew its economy in 2008-2009; that country is Australia.
Australia; the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies and with the lowest debt and lowest deficit.
None of the above achievable unless the country and the governments of the country worked together.
So much for the year past.
My second point to you today is about the challenges we face for the future. There is no point looking back on 2009 and being in any sense complacent - no point whatsoever.
The core challenge I've been speaking of around Australia this week as I've sought to host receptions such as this in every state capital and territory capital of the country is to point to our core economic problem for the future - not just this second decade of the 21st Century but for the 21st Century at large - and in a nutshell it is this; it is the ageing of our population
Consider this simple statistic.
The share of our population over the age of 65 will increase from 12 or 13 percent of our total population today to nearly 25 percent of our population in 2050 - from 1 in 7 of our number to 1 in 4 of our number. Our overall population will rise but the aging of the population will rise even faster.
The second statistic I want you to think about is this - we will have a smaller proportion of working Australians supporting those who are over the age of 65 who will need, of course, increasing support for health care, for aged care and for various forms of retirement income. 40 years ago, in 1970, there were 7.5 people in the workforce for every one person over the age of 65 - today that number is about 5.5 people in the workforce for every one person over the age of 65.
By 2050, that number will drop to 2.7 people in the workforce for every person over the age of 65. Here my fellow Australians is the core challenge
Two things flow from this - the first is that because we are going to have a much larger number of older Australians, it follows that those older Australians are going to command more services in health and hospitals and aged care and also in retirement income. On average, hospital expenditure on people aged 65 to 74 is currently double that of anyone aged 55 to 64. For our oldest Australians, those aged 85 and over, spending increases to almost five times that spent on people aged 55 to 65.
Treasury analysis which will be contained in the Government's upcoming Australia 2050 report points to the fact that over the next 40 years real health spending on those aged 65 and older is expected to increase around seven-fold. Real health spending on those aged 85 and over is expected to increase 12 fold.
This is a product of the increasing age of Australians overall and secondly the fact that within innovations in pharmaceuticals and medical technologies and the rest the cost of treating each individual aged Australian will rise as well. That is our first problem.
The second problem is, of course, the proportion of Australians in the workforce generating the tax revenue to support those services will become less.
So what does Australia, in response to this 2050 report that we will release soon, do about the challenges for the future when it comes to this aging of our population.
One further thought we should bear in mind is the impact on our budgets.
Forty years ago, Australian Government spending on health equated to 1.2 per cent of Gross Domestic Product.
In 2010, Australian Government health spending equates to 4 per cent of GDP, and the Intergenerational Report projects that it will rise to 7.1 per cent in 2050
In dollar terms, that's an increase of over $200 billion by 2050 - and equates to an increase in average Australian Government health spending per person in real terms from $2,290 today to $7,210 in 2050.
These are figures we should all reflect on.
Rising health and hospitals spending is already having an impact on state budgets.
States and territories have experienced growth in health spending of around 11 per cent per year over the past five years.
This contrasts with growth in state revenues of around 3 to 4 per cent a year.
Rapidly rising health costs create a real risk, absent major policy change, as state governments will be overwhelmed by their rising health spending obligations.
If current spending and revenue trends continue, Treasury projects that the total health spending of all states will exceed 100 per cent of their tax revenues, excluding the GST, by around 2045-46 - and possibly earlier in some states.
The NSW treasury has estimated that spending on health will almost double as a share of the NSW total Budget - from 30 per cent today to around 55 per cent in 2032-33.
These are challenging statistics, but it is important the nation becomes familiar with them, because we must do something about them.
Without reform - States ability to provide the services they currently provide will be significantly strained.
That is why 2010 must be and will be a year of major health reform.
What are the options which we are now therefore confronted with as a result of rising health costs on the one hand, and proportionally the number of Australians working declining on the other, in turn generating less economic activity and less taxation revenue.
Well, there are three strategic options for Australia.
One is to cut health costs; cut health spending; reduce aged care and reduce payments for people entering retirement income.
Those in favour of doing that, raise your right hand.
You'll be surprised to know that in Melbourne, in Hobart, in Adelaide, and Perth and Darwin and even in Bris-vegas yesterday, no one raised their hand at that particular option, so why don't we just park that one for the time being.
Option number two; long-term unsustainable budget deficits. In other words allow our health expenditure to increase; do nothing in terms of the economy; see the proportional delivery of tax revenue to the Commonwealth and State coffers remain constant and simply budget finance, budget-deficit finance it into the long-term future.
That's not sustainable either for the simple reason that ultimately you cannot sustain budget deficits indefinitely. You cannot do it. It doesn't add up.
Thirdly what you can do is this - you can increase health expenditure but on the condition you do something else to increase economic growth by increasing economic growth by two things which are available to us; increasing the workforce participation of our continuing workforce through things like improved childcare, paid parental leave and other such measures and helping those outside the workforce under the age of 65 enter the work force but secondly and most critically, by boosting the productivity of our workforce.
It is not to make people work longer that we speak of, it is to enable people to work smarter by drawing upon the most up-to-date technology and the most up-to-date skills - that's what makes the difference, in boosting our productivity growth.
Which brings me to my final point, what can we do about lifting productivity growth for the future?
Well there's no magic to this, but here again are a stat to think about from the Government's upcoming 2050 report.
It warns us about what happens if we don't lift our productivity growth from where it is at the moment, which is 1.4 per cent per year. Back in the 90's following the big economic reforms of the 80's and 90's we began to lift productivity growth to 2 per cent a year - in the noughties, that is the decade that's just unfolded, it has actually slipped back to 1.4.
You might think that's a small difference, but when you work it out across the entire scale of the economy, it is not. It makes a huge difference.
If we in the future can raise it back to 2 per cent, where it was, by 2050 our economy will be more than one half a trillion dollars bigger than it would otherwise be, in current dollar terms, on average every Australian man, woman and child, would be $16,000 better off, in current dollar terms, but most critically, our taxation revenues would also grow to fund the health outlays that we need to fund for the aging population.
So that's our practical challenge.
And therefore why all of our energies of the nation, when you strip away all the political song and dance show, has to be focussed on this core productivity agenda.
So what are the things that make that work?
Three measures - one is investing radically in the infrastructure of the 21st century, so our workforce can be more productive in how it works.
Secondly by investing in the education, skills and training of our workforce radically, what we call an education revolution, so that people can bring better and sharper skills to bear across the work force to be more productive at the things that they do. And thirdly to pull the arms of excessive regulatory intervention out of the road of small business and business to allow business to get on with the job of generating growth.
These ladies and gentlemen are the measures we're currently embracing through infrastructure investment we are working hard through organisations like Infrastructure Australia: the Building Australia Fund, for the first time providing national leadership in developing a national infrastructure plan, $36 billion of national investment.
In NSW, a 123 per cent increase in transport infrastructure; $1.5 billion for the Hunter Expressway; $600 million for the Kempsey Bypass; $1.8 billion upgrading the rail networks in the freight system of this state. Now on top of that when we roll out the National Broadband Network, an investment of up to $43 billion, this state representing a third of the Federation will receive the bulk of that investment - altogether with one objective, to increase the state-of-the -art of our infrastructure here and across the country to enable our workers to work more efficiently in the future.
Secondly on skills, what are we doing on that front?
Nationally we've doubled Australian Government investment in education; $33 billion we were investing in the four years prior to 2008, and we're now investing $62 billion; in NSW the 126 percent increase in education investment in this state; all necessary for the future right across the spectrum of early childhood education, through school education, through TAFES and training, all the way through to what we do with our universities and research.
That also goes not just to the quantity of what we invest in education but to the quality of what we do as well. This is a matter of some controversy, but our view is that fundamental to delivering the improvements in education is making our schools the best they can possibly be - that's the aim behind the MySchool website, which is being launched later this week by the Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Our view is that parents are hungry for more information about their kids' schools. Our view is that the parents deserve more information about their kids' schools, and we intend to give it to them, in partnership with the Government of NSW and partnership with governments elsewhere in the country.
And by giving parents information that they deserve, we can build a better education system and build a stronger economy for the future with greater productivity. Giving parents this information gives them the ability also to demand improvements in the quality of their kids' schools and indeed make decisions about which school will best meet their child's needs. For the first time this information will be consistent and robust across all schools and readily available to all parents - this will ultimately drive improvements across the whole system, or to put it differently, the rising tide of high performing schools will lift all boats as parents demand the best for their kids. And one thing we know for sure, school performance is critical to the development of our nation's human capital which is in turn the driver of productivity growth.
This then is what we're thinking to do on lifting productivity; investing radically in infrastructure; investing radically also in what we're doing in schools.
But can I say also to our friends here in NSW - we also recognise that improvements now need to be made in health as well. That's why it is critical that we partner with our friends in the states and territories to assist in shouldering that burden. We in Canberra have increased by 50 per cent health funding nationally over the first five years, including $20.5 billion in a new healthcare agreement here in NSW. And for the very first time can I say to each and every one of you, the Australian Government is now investing directly into the building of hospital infrastructure around the country. Beginning here also in NSW with nearly a $100 million investment in the Nepean Hospital redevelopment in Western Sydney; as well as investments in cancer research at the RPA Chris O'Brien Centre and at the Garvan St Vincent's Campus, a $70 million investment.
So there's nothing magical about this; it's doing what you can now to increase productivity growth with a long-term view about how you boost what we can generate by way of growth and tax revenue from the economy by investing in infrastructure, investing in skills, but certainly, not ignoring the needs of the health care system now but investing in those as well.
To conclude, each and every one of you here represent achievement in your respective fields; what we do on Australia Day in just two days time is also recognise the Australian of the Year, through the Australian of the Year Awards, which have been now running for 50 years.
Environmental campaigner Jon Dee has inspired millions of Australians to make positive environmental and social change.
He's this year's NSW finalist in the Australian of the Year Awards.
As co-founder of Planet Ark, Jon has successfully shown people and business how they can reduce their impact on the environment.
He's also been a driving force behind such initiatives as National Recycling Week, National Tree Day and campaigns to phase out plastic bags and incandescent light bulbs.
We wish Jon and all the finalists from around the nation the very best ahead of Monday night's announcement.
Ladies and gentlemen as we approach Australia Day let us reflect with pride upon what we have achieved here in this great nation Australia, and what those of you who have done to make a difference in your organisation. And as I said again in remarks in the last several days, think of your sporting organisation, think of those of you who are running the local Girl Guides Hut, think if tomorrow or next Saturday no one shows up to make sure the hut is open; think if no one is out there to roll out the cricket wicket, or nets; think if no one's there to make sure the basketball court is attended; think if you're from St Vincent de Paul if no one is there to serve meals at the Matthew Talbot centre; think if tomorrow there was no one there to assist in providing the support for a family with no meal to put on the table the next day; and each of your organisations, so many represented in this room today reflect that Australian spirit of the 'fair go', and the Australian spirit of the 'can do'.
Thank you for coming to this reception here this evening, you are welcome guests here on Australia Day. We decided to do something different now - in the past when Australia Day came we expected the nation to come to Canberra. I've taken the view that the nation of Australia is wider than the immediate perimeter of Lake Burley Griffin, as a consequence we are now taking Australia Day to each and every state and territory capital. It has been a wonderful privilege for myself and Therese to be able to spend time with each of our community leaders from across this great land of ours, Australia.
I thank you and I wish you all the best for Australia Day 2010.
I don't know about you but I'm pining for a drink. I have one further, formal, solemn task to perform and that is to ask you to raise your glasses in a simple toast to our great land, Australia


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians, on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This last week I've been travelling around Australia and the reason I did that was because I thought it was important that rather than expecting the nation to come to Canberra for Australia Day, instead we took Australia Day to the nation. So in each of the state capitals, where I've met many of you in the course of the last week, it has been a great experience to spend some time with some extraordinary Australian achievers.
And whether it's Melbourne or Hobart, the time I had in Adelaide and Perth and Darwin and Brissie and Sydney last night and now here in the nation's capital, it is not just you who are represented here today as finalists in the Australia of the Year, but literally tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of other volunteers right across the country.
It's an extraordinary Australian story. At each of these receptions, just sitting down quietly, even if only for a few moments, talking to someone from the local Meals on Wheels organisation, the local Girl Guides, the local St Vincent de Paul, the local entrepreneurs, the extraordinary stories of achievement and of voluntary effort.
What I've spoken about in part during the week is the spirit which animates us as Australians, and I've tried to summarise it in two ways. I've summarised it as the spirit of the 'can do'. That is, Australians who look at a problem and say to themselves 'I can fix that', and they go about fixing it.
And then there's equally the great Australian spirit of the 'fair go'. That is, when I see my brother or my sister in need, then they deserve a fair go and my job is to go out there and do what I can to give that to them.
And if you look across the great story of Australia, both as it's being written today and as it's been written for centuries past, these two great spirits, that of the 'can do' and that of the 'fair go', essentially hold together the narrative of our nation. The great stories of individual achievement; the great stories of entrepreneurial breakthrough; of scientific innovation; of sporting excellence - these are things which inspire us, which make us proud to be Australians, as we have among us a culture and a habit and an animating spirit which says 'we can break through this and make a difference.'
And at the same time, this great, I think, ennobling attitude of Australians, where we have the sense and the spirit of the 'fair go' etched deeply into the Australian soul, if someone tried to go surgically extract it from the Australian DNA it wouldn't work because it has been so deeply entrenched there, so that when any of us are confronted with our fellow human beings and fellow Australians in need, or people who are our neighbours in need, our first impulse as Australians is 'what can we do to help.'
If I reflect on the year that's passed, you see these great spirits that animate our nation at work in some of the extraordinary challenges we faced together in 2009. I think, particularly, of the Victorian bushfires barely a year ago, and I think of the unspeakable tragedy which we saw unfold in those fires and the unspeakable sorrow which descended on so many families, and so many shattered lives, and at the same time to see also, out of the ashes emerge immediately these two great Australian spirits - 'what can I do to fix this', and 'how can I help to give my fellow Australian a fair go.'
And so whether it was truckies jumping in their rig in Perth and saying 'I'm headed to Melbourne' - and they did - folk in Far North Queensland navigating their way around their houses in a boat as the floods unfolded there to make sure that they could get to the post office to make a donation to the Victorian Bushfire Appeal, or farmers across the country who leant their hand with the immediate tasks of stock management, of how you dealt with the very practicality of fences which had been burnt to a cider, and how could you rebuild, through to the Lions Clubs and the Rotary Clubs and the rest, and I have so many pictures of people's faces in my mind, as those there, sitting quietly, Australian sense of humour, handing out a sausage, handing out a hamburger, providing a well-catered evening meal, in the midst of utter, complete devastation, and that so much sums up who are as an Australian mob, and it's an empowering story, and it is something of which the nation at large should be proud.
The other story, an unfolding story, which comes to mind in the year just past, is the extraordinary work of our men and women in uniform, and it is not just in the battlefields of Afghanistan, though that is a deep and bloody conflict, it is the work being done on the ground in Timor; the work being done on the ground in the Solomons; the work being done on the ground in Sudan; the work being done on the ground in the Sinai; the work being done on the ground in Australia today wearing a uniform of Australia, confronting extraordinary difficulties; in the battlefields of Afghanistan, dealing with extraordinary threats to human life and therefore enormous achievements of courage and compassion in the field of battle.
This, too, is part of the Australian story, as it's been for so many generations before us.
And so, these two great spirits of Australia, what we can do together, spirit of the 'can do' and the spirit of the 'fair go', are also reflected in these extraordinary lives gathered here today.
Some of you may have been puzzled as you all came in the door why I knew a little bit about something of what each of you have been doing, and that's because I sat down and had a bit of a read on my way up from Sydney this morning, but when we have:
     * John Dee, co-founder of Planet Ark, showing people in business the ways they reduce the impact on the environment;
     * Patrick McGorry, leading international researcher, clinician, advocate of youth mental health reform and the executive director of Origin Youth Health;
     * Chris Sarra, extraordinary work at the Cherbourg school in my own state of Queensland and now heading the Stronger Smarter Institute to transform Indigenous education;
     * Ralph Martins, a world leader in Alzheimer's research, who, by the way, does endorse a couple of glasses of red wine as one of the best preventatives, in moderation, and I'll let him prescribe later in what degree of moderation for each of you - he'll be taking consultations in that corner;
     * Julian Burton, having suffered life-threatening third-degree burns to his body after the Bali bombings, since 2003 was driven to found the Julian Burton Burns Trust, solely committed to the prevention and care and research associated with burns injury;
     * Bruce Englefield, the contributor and one of the major voices for the future of the Tasmanian Devil, and saving the Devil;
     * Patricia Easteal, extraordinary work as a human rights advocate, as a legal reformer, and one passionately committed to the cause of eliminating domestic violence;
     * Warwick Thornton, who has told through film the extraordinary story of Samson and Delilah, a beautiful story, a tragic story, but a story which has not just been conveyed to Australians at home but been honoured abroad, and, as I'm advised today, one of the nine shortlisted films for best foreign film at this year's Oscars;
     * Pierre Johannessen, who informs me that he's not Danish but Norwegian in origin, as a young Australian, basketball being his passion, establish the Big Bang Ballers in Bangladesh and now Nepal, Afghanistan and the Philippines, catering for the needs for 8,500 kids and more, using basketball as a means to give hope and opportunity in young people's lives;
     * Liam Jurrah - what an extraordinary footballer, from the central Australian desert to being conscripted by the Australian Football League and acting as an inspiration for the game and for his people, and for young people in the Territory;
     * Danielle Catanzariti, the little one - Hi down there. Extraordinary emerging from Murray Bridge, South Australia, at the age of 10 in the Murray Bridge Players and Singers to have been invited by Cate Blanchett to perform in a play, most recently Blackbird, and in 2008 receiving the AFI young actor award;
     * Brad Smith, the irrepressible, ever-smiling entrepreneur and youth advocate from Tassie, named Australian Young Entrepreneur of the Year in 2008, but as he said to Therese and I as he came in this morning, his passion - using creative opportunities, business opportunities, to show kids a different path in life rather than resorting to drugs;
     * Jean Madden designed the street swag, out now to 13,000 folk to help those sleeping rough;
     * Trooper Mark Donaldson, a story writ large in our nation already, but if you read his military citation as I did the Christmas before last, before it was my honour to dispatch it to Her Majesty the Queen, it read like a page of military gallantry which we've associated with wars past, but one undertaken by him in a war present and in the great tradition of Australian comradeship in the field of battle, putting his mates' lives first and his own life last - Trooper Donaldson, Victoria Cross;
     * Jack Manning Bancroft, 24 years of age, CEO of the Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience, passionate about what he can do with young, Indigenous Australians in working out from Sydney and beyond;
     * Larissa Brown, who founded the Centre for Sustainability Leadership - important work;
     * John Buckingham, here in Canberra, passionate about what can be done surgically and in other fields to assist women suffering from breast cancer, and with 13,000 women diagnosed each year with breast cancer, important and extraordinary work;
     * Alan Langworthy, through Power Corp, delivering solar and renewable energy to many remote communities and saving both the cost and the carbon emissions impact of diesel-generated power;
     * Maggie Beer, the irrepressible culinary icon extraordinaire and her work in so many fields, including helping Australians in making informed food choices, author of many books, and now, critically working with Stephanie Alexander to promote the Kitchen Garden Foundation;
     * Bill Mollison, the father of permaculture, one of Australia's true icons;
     * Ron Rankin, a volunteer member of Surf Lifesaving Australia for over 46 years;
     * June Butcher, founder of the Kanyana Wildlife Rehabilitation Centre, which now has 140 volunteers caring for over 2,000 animals each year;
     * Lyn Thorpe, using her surgical theatre skills to help people in need of life-changing surgery, whether it's cataracts, cleft pallet or other disfigurements in developing countries;
     * Nigel Dick, instrumental in establishing Odyssey House in Victoria, a residential rehabilitation program for young people with drug and alcohol addiction, and having worked with it to help more than 8,000 clients over 30 years;
     * Paul Pisasale, the irrepressible mayor of Ipswich in my own state of Queensland, with a passion for helping young, local, unemployed people and behind the formation of Young Unemployed People of Ipswich, which I presume, Paul, goes by the acronym YUPI, is that right?
     * Rhonda Parker, from WA, Boyup Brook, a small, rural town where she is so much the driving force behind the community fabric and the community contributions which keep that community going, having put it on the map with the fourth largest country music festival in the country;
     * Mike Coddington; Murray Bridge Country Fire Service Brigade, eight years rising to become brigade captain and increasing the membership from a mere 8 to, he tells me, not 24 according my brief, but 30 as of today;
     * Delwyn Polden - she and her husband Rick have taken hundreds of children into their home on both and short and long-term care and used private coaching of music to help kids in difficulty;
     * Julie Grehan, here from Canberra, has set up Daryl's Den, a craft club for people with disabilities;
     * Norma Higgins from the Territory, from Katherine, who set up a market in the community of Katherine to help local producers have an opportunity of selling their product locally;
     * Ronni Kahn, founder of OzHarvest who has now briefed me personally and in detail on what OzHarvest does and silly me for confusing it with Food Bank, but I've been properly reprimanded and I won't get it wrong - but take seriously this core challenge: of all the food which is served in restaurants and through catering businesses around our country each day, how do you harvest that food immediately and within hours have leftover, surplus food delivered to those centres which can use that food for meals for people in need then and there. A terrific idea now servicing 163 charities;
     * Kevin &amp; Rhonda Butler, fencers extraordinaire - not in terms of the Olympic event, but the Australian event putting fences up and responsible for putting together a team of some 3,000-plus volunteers rolling up 700km of burnt fencing from the Victorian bushfires, and building with that team over 500km of fences for the farm properties which have been affected.
That's taken a little time, but I wanted to do it. I wanted to do it before the nation's media so that each of these stories could be summarised, albeit briefly, because the few words I've used to summarise each person's achievements are simply a short hand description of what has taken years, decades, and in many cases entire lifetimes to shape and form and to bring into being.
But the spirit that animates Australia, this spirit of the 'can do', this spirit of the 'fair go', is writ large in each and every one of these stories, of your lives, which I have read out just now, and that is why you are here, because Australia Day committees across our country, in our six states and our two territories, have reflected long and hard on literally hundreds and thousands of nominations from across the country and concluded that these achievements, your achievements, are worthy of our nation's recognition.
So as we approach Australia Day 2010, let's celebrate.
This sense of determination and resilience that we have as Australians is well captured in our national anthem. It's well symbolised in our Australian flag, our national flag which we celebrate under for Australia Day today and into the future.
This is a great day. Enjoy it. Enjoy being with us here at The Lodge in Canberra. Enjoy also the fact that your achievements inspire many others to follow in your path.
Therese and I honour each and every one of you as Australia's achievers of 2010.
I thank you.


Thank you, Aunty Agnes, for that wonderful and warm welcome to your country, and I also begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate across Australia today as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This Australia Day, the 222nd in our settled history, I'd to tell you the story of three young Australians. I'd like to do that because I think their stories speak directly to the great spirit that is Australia, the spirit that's animated so much of our nation's history, and the spirit that inspires us as together we build the nation's future, and that spirit is Australia.
Last night I spoke with Jessica Watson. It was morning in the pitching seas off South Georgia, somewhere in the South Atlantic. She had just rounded Cape Horn, as you do, her boat's main mast had hit the water four times the day before, and the day before that her parents told me they lived through the anxiety of being phoned by search and rescue because Jessica's emergency beacon had gone off.
Jessica Watson is no ordinary young Australian. She is an extraordinary young Australian, and some 5,000 nautical miles west of Cape Town she wanted me today to wish you all a very happy Australia Day.
I asked young Jess if there was any message she wanted to pass on to the nation. Her message was simple. Her message was live your dream - live your dream. But before we see a squadron of 16 year olds set sail around the world, let me also add what she also said was important for her - other practical ambitions, including finishing school, getting a driver's licence, very useful, I would have thought, in the Southern Atlantic, and - wait for it - getting a skipper's certificate, which I thought you might have needed before you went to the South Atlantic, but not for our young Jess. Jess Watson is a remarkable young Australian.
The second story I'd like to tell you about is a young Australian barely half Jessica's age. This is a story of little Bailey Lackas, 8 years old. I went and saw Bailey at his home just outside Wandong last week. Bailey lives there with his mum Sandra in a home they've made out of the back part of an industrial shed on their 20-acre farm on which they breed Welsh mountain ponies. Bailey showed me his cubby house, his guinea pig Dale - Hi, Dale - and his favourite horses and foals, including his own little pony, Silk.
Bailey, like Jess on the high seas, is a little battler. He refuses to be bowed by the violent forces of nature. One year ago, Bailey lost his dad, and Sandra her husband, on Black Saturday, as Steve tried valiantly to defend the family home.
One year later, little Bailey is a mile a minute about all the things he wants now to do with his life. Leaping on horses 10 times his size, his arm in a sling from a fall that he'd had the day before, this pint-sized little Australian hero, his passion is to ride like the wind and nothing will stand in his way. And for the record - Bailey also says that he'd like either to be a mad scientist or Prime Minister. One may be a precondition for the other, but I digress.
The third story is about a young Australian I met for the first time last year. He's with us today. This is the story of Trooper Mark Donaldson. A boy from country New South Wales, Mark new a lot of family tragedy in his early life, but supported by Legacy and by family and friends, Mark decided to make his career the Army, and what a career he has made. When I read his citation for gallantry the Christmas before last, I had to read it again and again, and then ask Therese to come in and read it to me for a third time. It was and is and remains and will forever be the stuff of legend.
Let me paraphrase: with total disregard for his own safety in a 2-hour long engagement between his own detachment and a significantly larger and well-armed Taliban force, he took the initiative, deliberately drawing fire from the enemy to enable his nine wounded mates to be taken to safety, and if that was not enough in a day's work, he then returned across 80m of exposed ground, again attracting the most intense and accurate of enemy fire in order to rescue the company's Afghan interpreter and carried him back to safety.
We have read of Simpson and his donkey at Anzac. This, too, is the stuff of modern legend, and so Trooper Donaldson became Australia's first winner of the Victoria Cross since Vietnam, and yesterday was named Young Australian of the Year.
Well done, mate.
You know something? These are great young Australian stories, when often our young people get an unfair rap. But what brings these stories together?
What brings these stories together is what they say about the spirit of Australia: a spirit of adventure; of imagination; of individual achievement; a spirit that acknowledges adversity; that wrestles with adversity; and that triumphs over adversity; a spirit that looks after your mates, your neighbours, and even those you do not know.
This is the Australian spirit, the spirit of the can-do country; the spirit of the country of the fair go; this great spirit that is Australia; the spirit of Australia that says there nothing irreconcilable in a country and a culture that celebrates equally the outstanding achievements of individuals and the extraordinary acts of selflessness from this land of the fair go. That is the magic that is Australia.
It is this great Australian spirit that enables us to build the great nation that is the envy of the world. This is not the luck country. It's not the lucky country. This is a country that has been built brick by brick, one generation building on the foundations of those who came before us, and being built through blood, sweat and tears; a country fashioned by clear vision; a country of steely pragmatism about what must be done next; and a country with the courage to take the big decisions, the big, the long-term decisions to break with the past when necessary to secure our future; the country that gave women the vote before practically any other country on Earth had given women the vote; the country - thank you - the country that in 1967, by an overwhelming majority, decided to eliminate the racial distinctions that had previously existed in our constitution; a country that had the courage and the imagination to embark on the great post-war migration to build our future; the country that had the imagination to build the great, nation-building projects of the post-war years, including the Snowy Mountains Scheme; a nation that half a century later abandoned the protectionism of the past and had the courage to build the modern economy of the future; a country which in just the last year alone has bonded together to confront the single greatest crisis faced by this economy since the global depression of 1929-32. That is the country of imagination, of courage, and of determination and of spirit.
And it is this attitude, this spirit, this preparedness to take the big decisions when big decisions are needed, it is this spirit which must shape our future as well, and the big challenges which lie ahead for us all, the huge challenges which lie ahead for us all, and the huge challenges which lie ahead for the planet itself.
This, my fellow Australians, is not the lucky country. This is the country which we have built together, which our forebears have built together, with imagination, with passion, with vision, and with compassion.
And you today join this family of Australians, and you today join this nation of Australians, those of you who become citizens today.
As Prime Minister of the country I welcome each and every one of you to our national fold, to our national family. You are a welcome addition to our number. You enliven us. You enrich us. You expand our imagination. You challenge our complacency. You add to our diversity. You are so much our future, building on the great traditions that have built this country over generations. You are part of our future.
And together with the 16,500 like you right across Australia today, as Prime Minister of Australia I welcome each and every one of you to become members of this Australian family.
When I think of 16,500 Australians, that's bigger than the town of Nambour. That's where I grew up in Queensland. So we're adding one whole new, big, Nambour-plus today, and can I say, long may it continue.
Today, as we celebrate this, our national day, let us be inspired by the great stories of inspiration of our young Australians - the stories of Jess Watson, of young Bailey Lackas, 8 years old, and of Trooper Mark Donaldson.
Long live this great country, Australia.


PM: G'day to all Australians as we celebrate Australia Day for 2010. Wherever we celebrate Australia Day, on the back veranda, at the beach, at a picnic in the park, or maybe volunteering with our emergency services, this is a chance to remember our past, to reflect on the present, and to look with confidence to our future.
The summer holiday gives us the opportunity to spend time with friends and families and enjoy more of Australia's natural environment. This year I had the chance to experience some of the sensational beauty of the Tasmanian wilderness with Therese and the kids, from Cradle Mountain to the magnificent coastline of the Freycinet Peninsula. It's a reminder to me of how stunningly beautiful our land, Australia, is.
Of course, sometimes our natural environment also presents our greatest challenges. This time last year all Australians were horrified by the deadly summer fires which tore through Victoria. We were inspired by the courage of those who endured unimaginable losses in these natural disasters.
We were inspired by the firefighters who came from right across Australia. We were lifted by the outpouring of support that came from across the nation.
A year ago, we were also facing huge challenges with the global financial crisis bearing down on us. I said then that Australia was better placed than almost every other nation to handle the global meltdown, and that if we all pulled together we could get through it - and 12 months later, we've come through that crisis in better shape than most countries in the world, and in large measure we did so because we've all worked together because we all knew we were in this together.
Our challenge in the new year ahead and the new decade ahead is not just to build for recovery, but also to build the foundations for our long-term economic future. In the coming weeks, we'll be releasing new information on some of the key long-term challenges facing Australia for the first half of this new century. We need to be planning for the long term. We can't simply be content with the short term and can't afford to be complacent.
We need to prepare now for these challenges: our ageing population; the importance of tackling climate change; and the need to build a strong economy for the future.
But big challenges also bring big opportunities. I am supremely optimistic about Australia's future, because we will tackle each of these challenges in the Australian way - with good humour, with strong spirit, with absolute determination, and with practical common sense, and an over-riding commitment to work together to build Australia's future together.
That's what's got us through in times past, and that's how we'll navigate the future as well - building a better Australia for all Australians.
I wish you a happy and a safe Australia Day 2010.


MULDOON: Hi, I'm Rhys.
PM: G'day, I'm Kevin, I'm from Queensland and I'm his co-author.
MULDOON: Indeed.
PM: The book is called Jasper &amp; Abby and the Great Australia Day Kerfuffle, so hopefully we encourage a little bit of interest on the part of our littlest Australians in our nation's big day.
Well, first of all, I thought it was stark, raving mad, but after a little while I came around because I thought writing a kids book for littlies could be a lot of fun.
So the money from the book goes to the Centre for Community Child Health, which is part of the Royal Children's Hospital in Melbourne, a fantastic centre with a big focus on language and literacy development for littlies, so there's a neat synergy. What we're trying to do is encourage, obviously, reading, but also to provide some funds through the proceeds of the sales to the great research work which is being done there.
MULDOON: So, can I ask you a question, just like an off-the-cuff one, while we're here?
PM: No.
MULDOON: I just think, because the way that I first got into reading as kid, my dad was, he would buy by the kilo with books, like just giant, giant piles of them, and I would probably read maybe three out of ten, but he just kept it up and that's how sort of I initially got into reading.
PM: My mother encouraged me to read as a kid. So I got the usual round of Enid Blyton books.
MULDOON: Oh yeah, absolutely. Magical Faraway Tree? Gold.
PM: All that sort of stuff. A bit of Noddy, a bit of Big Ears. I remember flying overseas years and years and years ago with Jessica, and she was about 18 months, 2 years old, and I read her a little story called Peepo!
MULDOON: Oh yeah! Love Peepo! That's gold.
PM: 'Here's the little baby, one, two three, sits on his father's knee, what does he see? Peepo!' And between, where we were living at the time, which was Beijing, and arriving wherever we were going, which I think was London, I think I read it 164 times.
MULDOON: Oh yeah.
PM: So most of the pictures, most of the images and most of the words are still with me. Each time you'd get to the end, she'd turn around to you with her big, brown eyes and say 'Again?'
MULDOON: Yes, exactly! I think I'm bringing up the same child with the same book, because we always go, there's always about, I have to read about five and seven books every night, you know, and she'll pick which one and they are always Peepo! is absolutely right up there. They're beautiful illustrations in that one, too, but obviously, now, our book's a bit of a hit with Lottie, just quietly.
PM: I'm getting a sense of the fun and the rhythm of the story, which might appeal, might appeal, to this audience of little ones who we hope enjoy stories about these two cute and cuddly animals.
Carla's done a fantastic job in capturing their appearance, but also their nature. I'd like to see, through this book, this encouraging littlies to read and to learn to love reading because if they get their literacy right early through a love of reading, frankly, so many of life's barriers come tumbling down.


BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, the day after Australia Day, Ray Martin says change the flag, Dick Smith says lower immigration levels, Professor McGorry says do away with long-term detention and Ernie Dingo over here says we need to study Indigenous history. Do we whinge too much on Australia Day?
PM: You know, the great thing about Australia is that everyone gets to have their own say - free country and everyone should be able to exercise freedom of speech, and we all have a different view on each of the ones that you've just been through. But do you know what I've discovered as I've gone around the country this last week and hosted Australia Day receptions in every state capital, including Perth, is frankly, what I discover is the spirit of the can do, which is 'here's a problem, how do we go and fix it?', rather than sitting around moping about it and whinging, and I just see that time and time again, right across the country, including in WA.
BEAUMONT: Do we see too much public drinking on Australia Day?
PM: Well, people are always going to make their individual choices on that one. I saw there were quite a number of arrests in Sydney. I haven't seen any figures from Perth.
Over the summer I got behind a campaign being run Channel Nine and the cricket which is simply entitled Know When to Declare, and that's not just about drinking at the cricket or drinking at sporting events, but I think it's drinking generally, just knowing when to draw the line. So I think if everyone gets behind that one, starts thinking it through, knowing when to put a line across the page and then just order a glass of water, I think that's going to be a big advance for the year ahead.
BEAUMONT: On matters international PM, this former Australian soldier Robert Langdon, he was working as a contractor, he'll be hanged in Afghanistan. The authorities have found him guilty of murder in May last year. Will you intervene?
PM: Yes, the Australian Government will intervene. First of all, can I say that in the case of this individual, my advice from the Department of Foreign Affairs is that an appeal will be lodged by his lawyers to the Supreme Court of Afghanistan, and while that appeal is underway I don't intend to get engaged in a rolling commentary on the content of the case, but can I say we are providing consular support to this individual in Afghanistan, also to his family in Australia. Furthermore, consistent with what we have done in the past and will do in the future, we as the Government always intervene in support of any Australian citizen who has been convicted of a capital offence.
BEAUMONT: How much currency does our intervention carry, Mr Rudd? We have a presence, a strong presence, in Afghanistan. We're helping to assist the locals and re-build as best we can. We obviously don't support execution in this country, but how much weight will your intervention carry?
PM: Well it's, I think, really important just to take this one step at a time. The first thing is the appeals process through the Afghan Supreme Court. That is necessary, it's important, and we need to adhere to Afghan due process.
Secondly, in terms of the political interventions with the Afghan Government, well we'll simply have to take that as it comes. I don't think it would be wise at this stage to predict or project the effectiveness of any particular intervention by me in the case of this individual. Let's take it step by step -
BEAUMONT: I understand that-
PM: (inaudible) closest advice of the Department of Foreign Affairs, who'll be following the case in Kabul.
BEAUMONT: I understand the legalities and the process needs to run, but how much weight does our intervention, how much currency does Australia have with Afghanistan authority?
PM: Well, let me just put it this way: if you're in the business of trying to help somebody who's in a situation like this, talking publically about how much influence you have with the Government in question may not help their case. That's why I'm answering your question in the way in which I'm doing it.
I think it's fair to say more generally that we have a good, operating relationship with the Government of Afghanistan. I spoke President Karzai at the end of last year when I was in Afghanistan visiting our troops. We've got a fully functioning embassy in Kabul. We have a team of diplomats there and they are the ones providing the consular support to this individual.
But as I said, the key thing here is to keep your eye focussed on the result, and we would do so in the case of any Australian convicted with a capital offence anywhere in the world, and that's why I don't want to in any way prejudice securing a result by talking too much about it in the meantime.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister, you have spent some time in the last fortnight talking about us becoming more productive as a country and I guess that carries to us as individuals. How can you possibly justify the time, effort and money expended on Copenhagen?
PM: Well, Australia faces huge challenges for the future, one that you've just referred to, and that is how we deal with the big challenge of an ageing population, and that flows through to the sustainability of our health budgets in the future; it goes through to how we best invest in health and hospitals in aged care in the future as well.
The second is, and you've touched on that, how do we boost the productivity of our economy? To which our response is, investing in infrastructure, investing in skills and making sure we don't have regulatory obstacles in the way of business.
But that doesn't mean that these are the only challenges. The other one, fundamentally, is how we deal with the future challenge of climate change to the planet itself. What's the economic cost of not acting? Well, you'll see from all the data produced by the CSIRO, the incidence and intensity of drought in South-Eastern and South-Western Australia getting higher and higher into the future, and for this to be dealt with, you not only need Australian national action, which we have through our proposed Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, but you need international action as well. Copenhagen was by no means a perfect result, but we did achieve some progress and the progress was to get the world community, for the first time, to agree -
BEAUMONT: But it was far from perfect. It was a disaster, wasn't it? The expectations were way too high going in, and we've had some United Nations climate change science largely denounced this week, and it seems like you as the PM and a great deal of taxpayer money, an inordinate amount of money, spent on this particular issue that seems to be yours and Penny Wong's primarily.
PM: Well can I say every government around the world is grappling with climate change. It's a global factor, it's a global reality. I notice Mr Abbott says that he regards climate change as absolute crap - that's his words, not mine. If you ask those who are working in the CSIRO for their independent assessment of the effect of climate change on our economy, on our agriculture, on our natural assets like the Barrier Reef, like Kakadu, these are real impacts in Australia because we are the hottest and driest continent on Earth and therefore the impacts of climate change will be felt here first and hardest. Therefore, the practical challenge for a government is what you're going to do about it.
You spoke before just then on Copenhagen. What are the three practical outcomes from Copenhagen? First of all, for the first time the global community agreed that we should aim to keep temperature increases within two degrees centigrade. That's never been agreed before.
The second is this: for the first time, developed and developing countries agreed to put out their targets and commitments for bringing about that temperature range in the future.
And thirdly, for the first time they agreed on an international measurement system for it.
I agree with you this was by no means a perfect outcome. The alternative would have been a zero outcome, and as Prime Minister of the country, let me tell you, I will be doing everything I can to bring about practical, reasonable, responsible actions in dealing with the scientific reality of climate change.
BEAUMONT: If the, Senator Wong has said that she'll take the new version of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to parliament next week, possibly next Tuesday, what if it's defeated? I mean, people will once again start talking about a double dissolution. I mean, I expect that you'll hose that down, but that's, if it's knocked back again, PM what will you do?
PM: Well, the key thing as the Government of Australia is to advance action on both fronts. One's international and one is national. If we are going to do our part and do no less, no more than the rest of the world in bringing down our greenhouse gas emissions into the future, then secondly you've got to have a means by which that's done. We've put one on the table. It's called a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme or an emissions trading scheme.
By the way, it's the same idea supported by John Howard, Peter Costello, Tony Abbott when he was in the Howard Cabinet, Malcolm Turnbull still today, and until the end of last year, more than half of the federal Coalition, and the reason they've reached that conclusion, as we have, is because it is the most effective means of dealing with climate change environmentally and it has the least cost associated with it. That's why 34 other countries around the world are doing it. So if they want to block it again, it's a matter for them, but can I say Mr Abbott still has not been upfront about how he would deal with this challenge and he's already onto his fifth different position on climate change, including an emissions trading scheme.
Before, he said we should have one. He then said we should whack it through and pass it through the parliament sight unseen. He then said we should amend it. Now he says we should oppose it. Our position's been consistent all the way through and we believe that it's necessary for the parliament to consider this integrated proposal that we agreed with Malcolm Turnbull and more than half the Coalition at the end of last year.
BEAUMONT: On your opposition, Tony Abbott, he drew fire in the media yesterday for advising his daughters in a women's magazine to save themselves for marriage. Would you agree with him? You're a committed Christian like Mr Abbott. Would you agree with that sentiment?
PM: You know something? My job as the Prime Minister of the country is to focus on the big challenges of health, the economy and the one we've just been talking about, climate change. I don't think my job as Prime Minister is to provide individual, personal, moral advice to the young people of Australia. That's something for them themselves to sort out with their friends, with their families, with their mums, with their dads, and that's not a role I see for myself.
BEAUMONT: But why, but Mr Abbott does talk about these things. Why does he commit himself to print, to publication, on these types of issues and you don't? Don't you like to talk about sex?
PM: Can I just say personal position is as I've just described it, which is it's your right, as a fellow Australian, and your listeners' rights as fellow Australians, to make their own, private, personal decisions on these moral matters. That's my position, and it's very consistent.
If Mr Abbott has a different view that's a matter for him, but my view is that these are decisions which are best made, and properly made, individually and personally by the folk concerned. Taking the advice of, as I said, friends, family, mums, dads - that's the way these things should be approached. That's my policy. That's my personal approach. That's the one I've applied in my own family as well.
BEAUMONT: We'll take a break on the morning program, Prime Minister. We'll come back after these commercials.
[COMMERCIAL BREAK]
BEAUMONT: Ten minutes to nine. The Prime Minister is with us on the morning program this morning. Access Economics is saying today, PM, that interest rates could rise 1.75 per cent over the next 18 months. They could be at 5.5 per cent in the next 18 months. That'll hurt a lot of working families, won't it?
PM: Well, there are two things that have come out through the IMF, the International Monetary Fund's report on the global economy today, and one is that the global economy this year, 2010, is showing further signs of recovery. That comes on the back of Australia, in 2009, being the only one of the advanced economies, major advanced economies in the world not to go into recession.
But secondly, once you see economies recover, as we have said consistently, and the Treasurer has said consistently, you'll also see upward adjustments in interest rates. Remember, interest rates in the middle of the global economic crisis were brought down to record lows, the lowest since 1967, and as a consequence of that, there will in the future, as there has been in recent times, some adjustment.
The alternative for Australia, against the measures taken by the Reserve Bank last year to bring down rates to record lows, and the measures taken by the Australian Government through the national economic stimulus strategy, would have been this economy in Australia, falling into recession like all those economies around world. Instead, we didn't. We uniquely, grew our economy last year, compared with the other advanced economies. We've currently got the second-lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit.
BEAUMONT: We're also facing a situation where we have declining revenues. You know that. That's why you've been talking about productivity. So that's the downside of the economic stimulus package, isn't it, trying to pay that money back faced with declining revenues?
PM: Not at all. The bottom line is this: because we decided to act, take early, decisive and effective action through the national economic stimulus strategy, we as Australia managed to keep this economy of ours, Australia, out of recession. The alternative would have been hundreds of thousands of Australians losing their jobs. That's what's happened in practically every other economy around the world.
Look in Europe. Look in the United States, where you have double-digit unemployment, whereas in Australia our unemployment level is currently at 5.5 percent. That's because we've stepped up to the plate.
But secondly, the other consequence which flows from that is because we've kept our economy ticking over, and because we're able to keep growth positive in the economy, in fact we've been able to generate more revenue for the economy, tax revenue for the economy, than would otherwise have been the case had we allowed it to fall through the floor.
We've done the right thing in terms of keeping the economy, jobs, small business afloat during this very difficult time through our intervention. It's also been the right thing in terms budget policy, because by keeping the economy positive, we've also kept our revenues flowing in as well.
BEAUMONT: Alright, PM, final question if I can - the shopping centre council of Australia say they are unhappy that politicians just rolling up to shopping centres and wandering through and I guess using their customers to campaign. Will we be seeing Kevin Rudd in a shopping centre this year during the election year?
PM: These questions are always decided by individual shopping centre managers and individual shopping centre chains. That's my best advice. When you say folk just roll up and roll through, I think my understanding is that only occurs with the consent and the approval of the individual manager.
The broader point is this - it's really important for anyone in elected office to stay connected with working families across the country. That means being outside the Canberra bubble. It means out there, talking to people in the streets, in the highways, in the byways, and wherever else that's possible. That's why I try and get over the Perth as much as possible, quite a number of times since I've been PM.
But apart from that, also why we've been in Perth in recent times conducting community cabinets, inviting whole communities to sit with the Cabinet for several hours of an evening and taking questions directly from them. It's our way of keeping in touch.
But you know, on shopping centres, matter for the folk who own 'em.
BEAUMONT: Right, so it's like a restaurant. Always ring ahead.
PM: Well, exactly, and you know, we've, so far as I know, always checked it out to see whether people are happy for us to come through, and if they're not, you don't. Simple as that.
BEAUMONT: PM, thanks for your time. Thanks for speaking to our listeners today. We appreciate it.
PM: And it's good to be talking to our friends in WA.
BEAUMONT: Thanks, Kevin. Good on you.


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians, on whose land we and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you, Janette, for that wonderful and moving welcome on behalf of the Ngunnawal people.
Well, welcome to our home, The Lodge here in Canberra. This being our home I can now extend an invitation to those of you who wish to get a little bit closer out there, outside, there's room for about 100 folk up here if you wanted to get in a bit closer. Don't feel compelled, but the police will soon move you in.
Listening to the great welcome to country before from the representative of the Ngunnawal people reminds me afresh of the extraordinary privilege we have in Australia in sharing this vast continent with the first Australians. Those who have had their life, their culture, their community, their being, their art, their dance continuously in this continent for 30,000, 40,000 and 50,000 years - that's a long time. So for those of you who come as members of the diplomatic corps and forever describe this as a young country, in one respect you are right. In another respect you are profoundly wrong because we are older than most of you.
It is for us an enormous privilege to share this continent with our Indigenous brothers and sisters because, as I have travelled around Australia this week, celebrating Australia in each of our state and territory capitals, I have been reminded afresh of the great linkages we have with antiquity through the dance, celebration, and the art, of the first Australians. If those of you among us have had the privilege of seeing the great caves at Lascaux in France and Altamira in Spain, and other great ancient civilizational and cultural sites across the world, here with have with our Indigenous brothers and sisters this living link and this continuing cultural link to the deepest of deep antiquity, and as Prime Minister of Australia, as Prime Minister of all Australians, it gives me enormous pride and enormous pleasure in being able to reflect the achievements of this deep and ancient culture to the peoples of the world.
Secondly, you are here as our guests this evening. So long as the people endure us, Therese and I live here at The Lodge in Canberra. This is the home of the Australian Prime Minister and has been so since the 1920s, with the odd interruption. That wasn't a partisan remark. Let me inform you of a point of history. When the Depression broke out in 1929, this Lodge having opened in 1927, one of my Labor predecessors, Jim Scullin, declined to live in The Lodge. He did so for ideological and political reasons in the ravages of the Depression and lost the subsequent election, so when I say it has been occupied almost consistently since then, my reflection was more on times past than times recent.
Those who share this house with us, we have our son Marcus, who attends local school, we also have our dog and our cat, Abby and Jasper, and for those of you who haven't followed this at all, and because it is my bounded duty to act as the publisher's publicist, today we release this contribution to world literature. It is called Jasper and Abby and the Great Australia Day Kerfuffle. There will be a simultaneous interpretation of the meaning of kerfuffle by our interpreter service out there later on. Basically, it means a shemozzle. You don't know what a shemozzle is either, do you? Basically - chaos, and to our representatives here from the Nobel committee, our representatives from Oslo and Stockholm if I can make an early suggestion that this be considered for the Nobel Prize for literature.
The plot is succinct, it's sharp, it only goes for 26 pages the characters are very interesting because they are not human although, I'm in it. Don't laugh. The good guys, the dog and the cat, prevail at the end of the day. They rescue the Australia Day celebrations from complete calamity but I don't want to wreck the story for you. There are 600 people here this evening. Go out and buy a copy, because all the proceeds go to the Centre for Community Child Health at the Royal Children's Hospital in Melbourne. And if you buy a copy, not that I wish to labour this point at all, Jasper and Abbey have agreed to assemble for autographed paw prints at the entrance to the Lodge at a later occasion. And to our representatives here from the RSPCA, come to see me later and I'd love to sign this over to you with Therese as a copy in honour of the work that you do with the animals here in Canberra.
That was the serious part of my speech.
Friends, thank you for joining us to celebrate our national day. We in Australia love a party and we don't look for many excuses to celebrate, but this is a particular and legitimate national excuse for a celebration.
When you think of Australia it is the most unlikely of countries in many respects. Here we occupy this vast continent we have, I think, the third largest coastline in the world. Our maritime zone, I think, is the third largest in the world. We, in addition to our indigenous brothers and sisters, arrived here as an unlikely band of criminals 222 years ago, and to the British High Commissioner who would then mutter under his breath that nothing has changed since - could I say that it has been a remarkably, successful, political experiment.
Because in this country Australia, in the centuries and the decades since then we have welcomed people from all countries from across the world. We have become a completely multicultural society. We have representatives from every culture and country in creation. It has been an enormous enrichment to our Australian life, our way of being, the food that we eat, the dance that we celebrate, the music that we hear, that all these countries and cultures have contributed to the shape and the texture of modern Australia.
We are among the oldest continuing democracies in the world and we hold our freedom dearly. It is a freedom that we have defended and continue to defend into the future. But in that freedom, we defend also the right to diversity but also we cherish our unity as a nation.
In the week just past I've been speaking a lot around Australia about the spirit that is Australia. If I was to summarise it in a couple of short phrases it would be along these lines. In Australia we see ourselves as animated by a spirit of the 'can do'. That is, to make things happen. We are a practical people. We want to see things change from what is good to something that is better, from something bad into something good. When we are confronted with a practical challenge our first instinct is not to simply complain about it. Our first instinct is, well what can we do about to improve it, to change it for the better.
We see ourselves as animated by this spirit of the 'can do' because we have had to craft a country for a continent, a continent for a county and we have done so with our bare hands.
Yet there is another spirit which animates Australians and it is this, it is the spirit of the fair go. The spirit of compassion, the spirit of reaching out to those who need a helping hand, whether they are our friends, whether they are our neighbours or whether they are people we have never met. Whether it is the good people of Sumatra who were devastated by Tsunami five years ago, or the good people of Haiti who have been devastated by an earthquake most recently. Our first instinct, as Australians, both home and abroad has been how can we help our friends and our neighbours in need.
We have, about us, a national culture and a spirit that is this nation which holds these truths to be one, that we can celebrate individual achievement, enterprise, success, and the triumph of the human spirit and human imagination on the one hand, and have that as comfortable partner with a spirit of compassion and care when looking after our fellow human beings.
So, in a sentence or two, that is the spirit of Australia.
What we have here today, gathered among us, the representatives of so many community and church and charitable organisations from the city of Canberra, are the living embodiment of that spirit of work here in our local community, and to the members of the diplomatic corps, your local community. Those who make difference to those who need a helping hand in our community; the church and charitable sector to assist those families who have difficulty paying the rent next week or put food on the table; the sporting organisations who make it possible for our phenomenal national achievements in community sporting participation to roll on week after week, year after year, involving families and kids in team sports and all of that means for a child's development.
So to each of you who are community leaders and representatives here, from our city of Canberra, our nation's capital, as Prime Minister of the country, as a resident of this city, can I say, thank you for the work that you do, you embody, here in our community, the spirit of Australia.
To our from friends abroad, can I also make some remarks. I've described Australia's spirit as a 'can do' spirit and the spirit of a fair go. That is, the spirit of enterprise, the spirit of achievement but the spirit, also, of compassionate engagement and deep engagement with the affairs of the region and the world.
For us, these values which make up Australia do not stop there at the continental shelf. We seek to reflect them with our engagement with the world. We will do so imperfectly. Occasionally we will irritate some of them. We do not do so intentionally. As Australians' our aspiration is this: to be the friend of all and the enemy of none and we would hope to be able to work in the closest cooperation with our friends and partners across the region and the world.
To the governments that you represent, here in our country Australia, could I extend, through you as their diplomatic representatives, my best and personal greetings on this our national day. We value our relationships with our oldest and continuing friends, partners and allies as we value our relationships and friendships and partnerships with our newest friends and partners and neighbours as well, because in this globalised world we are all on this planet, Mother Earth, together. As a consequence we share challenges and responsibilities for maintaining the good order and good governance of planet earth and the human family more broadly.
The challenges we face as an international community are vast. They are continuing and some are new - the challenges of the Millennium Development Goals and the elimination of poverty. They do not often fill the pages of the newspapers but for the 2 million of our fellow human beings who this evening are below $2 a day, for them this is a very real and daily and grinding experience. There is nothing ennobling about poverty at home or abroad.
So, our challenges, to deal with the global and continuing scourge of poverty; to deal also with the great and continuing challenge of nuclear disarmament in delivering a safer world community for us all; and the great planetary challenge we face of climate change. These are challenges enough for our community, our global community, to work together to make a difference. These are where our efforts, as representatives of countries of goodwill should focus themselves in the year and the decade ahead.
I conclude with this - as we embark upon this New Year and as we embark upon this new and second decade of the 21st century, let us as always, as all governments and all countries, have about us a very simple approach: a very simple sense of the possible; a very simple approach to alternative possibilities.
We are all human beings. We come from different cultural traditions, we come from many different religious traditions. Our experiences are vastly different. But we are united by the common bonds of the human family.
It is our choice, as human beings, whether we make a difference on climate change or not. It is our choice, as human beings, whether we make a difference and choose peace or war. It is our choice as human beings that we make a difference to those who suffer poverty this very day in so many counties and continents around the world.
Sometimes, when we are in the business of politics, including international politics, we conclude that it is the responsibility of some mysterious force out there to make a difference. I think on occasions like this it's important to remind us all that we are human beings - we elect our leaders and some of us are leaders and we therefore have a common responsibility to the human family.
How we think about these things affects, fundamentally, how we act on these things. If we think of peace; if we think of preserving our planet; if we think of an age in the future when we do not have nuclear weapons; and how we can make the necessary steps to achieve those goals - you know something? It brings those goals just one bit closer than they would have otherwise be.
Thank you, my friends, for spending time with Therese and I at our residence here in Canberra, the Lodge. You are welcome guests among us as representatives of this local community, as representatives of the diplomatic community. I wish you all a very, very happy Australia Day and I look forward to working with you all in meeting the great challenges of 2010.
This is the fun bit. I get to have a drink now and you've been here for an hour having a drink. I have a very simple and formal responsibility as the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia and it is at this stage to propose a very simple toast, in one word, to Australia.
Australia.
I thank you.


BYNER: Let's welcome the Prime Minister. Kevin, a belated happy Australia Day to you.
PM: A belated happy Australia Day to you and all of you listeners. It was good to be in Adelaide recently for Australia Day (inaudible).
BYNER: Yeah, now a couple of things that are pretty important. First of all there is an initiative by shopping centres and their managements to ban political campaigns during and before elections. What do you think about that? Is that going to cramp your style?
PM: Oh look Leon I actually think it's a question for individual shopping centre managers and if they decide they want different political parties through, that's fine. If they decide they don't, well, that's fine. My understanding of the past is that you don't front at any of these venues unless you've got prior approval and I think, though I stand to be corrected, that's always been our practice in times past. So, really a matter for the folk who own the centres.
BYNER: What of - yeah.
PM: The key thing though I reckon, is just to make sure those of us in Canberra get outside the Canberra bubble. That's one of the reasons I was around Australia to every State capital in the lead up to Australia Day. It was to talk to heads of community organisations right around the country. That's why we do community cabinets. We did one very recently in Adelaide. Where you've literally got, 400, 500, 600 people who come from the general community, talk to the Cabinet for hours on end. Otherwise you do end up in a bubble, (inaudible) sealed, otherwise called the Australian Capital Territory.
BYNER: Ok, so if you're people, let's say organise something for you in a shopping centre for you in Adelaide and they pre-warned them and they were told, look sorry we don't want this. You wouldn't at all be fussed by any of that?
PM: Not at all, matter for them.
BYNER: Ok.
PM: I've been to, I think, a few centres down there. I remember being at the Marion centre at some stage and a few others likes that. Look, free country they've got their own responsibilities to their shop owners. But our job as elected members of the parliament, Labor and Liberal is to communicate with the voting public, make sure they know what our plans are, make sure they know what our achievements are and make sure that we're engaging on the practical stuff that they're concerned about in their communities like jobs and the rest. And how that's done, where you meet people, in the streets in coffee shops, in shopping centres or in Community Cabinets, like the 21 we've held now right across the country, really, it's horse for courses mate.
BYNER: Prime Minister it looks as if interest rates could go up by another half a per cent, certainly in the very near future. Recently Wayne Sawn was very critical of financial institutions, banks particularly, of not only passing on interest rates increases but in fact adding to them, arguing that their borrowings were more expensive. And yet we are told, there have been news off the wire that we are considering giving banks tax breaks. Why would we do that?
PM: Well, firstly the news off the wire that you speak of, I am unaware of. Secondly the Treasurer has been absolutely right in putting a shot right across the bowers of the banks in terms of taking these unnecessary gouges in terms of putting up interest rates in excess of any official change. I think the other thing to say about rates though is just this: rates, interest rates were brought to record lows in the global economic crisis of last year and as a result of that, together with the national economic stimulus strategy that we put together as a Government, we were able to keep our economy going.
Remember, Australia was the only advanced economy in 2009, major advanced economy in 2009, not to go into recession. We were the only advanced economy to have grown in 2008/09, the second lowest unemployment. And that is off the back of strong action by ourselves through our national economic stimulus strategy, the school modernisation plan, and through the bank, for bringing down interest rates as radically and as quickly as they did. But obviously, there is going to be upward adjustments in -
BYNER: So are you ruling out any more tax incentives for banks?
PM: What we have done recently is have an independent review of taxation done over the last 12 months or so. That was handed to the Treasurer I think at the end of last year or very early this year. I haven't been through it yet, but let me tell you something, I am sure that there's a whole bunch of stuff in there which the Government might embrace and there is a whole bunch of stuff in there which the Government wouldn't touch with a barge pole.
We haven't been through it yet but I am unaware of any particular plans of the type that you have just described.
BYNER: Inflation figures, half a per cent to the three months to December, annual inflation rate at 2.1, still high?
PM: Well we've always got to keep a weather eye on these challenges, always got to keep a weather eye on the challenges of unemployment as well. As you know, national economic leadership is often getting the balance right. What we managed to do in the course of the last year through the combined actions of the Government and the Reserve Bank, through a policy of stimulus was to prevent hundreds of thousands of Australians from losing their jobs.
We supported the creation of 12,000 jobs in the Australian economy at a time when jobs were literally being culled by the million in so many economies around the world. That is one half of the equation, the other half of course is keeping a very careful weather eye on inflation and making sure that our economic policy is balanced.
BYNER: Can I just ask you one more question, mad cow disease, I am very concerned as are many Australians across this nation, that we as a nation are considering allowing meat in from countries that have had mad cow disease. What is your stand on this?
PM: Our stance is very clear, and that is that we will take the advice of the Australian quarantine authorities and those experts who examine this worldwide. We understand the seriousness of this disease, we understand it needs to be taken and dealt with effectively, at our borders with effective quarantine controls. Obviously, we however will not be simply making things up as you go along, you take the best and most considered advice as to how to deal with mad cow disease, as do other countries around the world.
BYNER: Well we have a clean green image, you wouldn't want to do anything to compromise that would you Prime Minister, surely?
PM: Absolutely not, absolutely not, which is why you look long and hard at the scientific advice which comes in to you, to make sure that it is absolutely right and it has been properly considered and you act on it. And we take a very conservative approach to these things.
BYNER: Alright Kevin, thank you for joining us. 


O'BRIEN: The population debate was sparked by a speech from Treasury Secretary Ken Henry last October, in which he warned that the expected growth represented a host of implications for Australian society and profound issues for economic policy. The Prime Minister has further emphasised some of those challenges as a prelude to Monday's expected release of the latest intergenerational report, and Mr Rudd joins me now.
Kevin Rudd, if we can just start with that figure of 35 million; that's a projection based on current rates of immigration and childbirth. I get the sense from everything you said about this that you support not just a big Australia, but an Australia with that rate of population growth. Is that the case?
PM: Well, on the 36 million, that is simply a projection of what is happening now with fertility on the one hand, and the average of migration actually for the last 40 years- if you project ahead, that's where it lands you. So the responsible course of Government policy is how you prepare for that, given that there is a bipartisan view that those two arms of policy are a fact- or the two arms of reality, the fertility rate and what's happening with migration over 40 years, are constants. You asked specifically whether this is my target or not. I don't have a view on that to be honest, this is simply the reality we are now dealing with.
O'BRIEN: But when you talk about a big Australia, that's what you're meaning. You're comfortable about a big Australia within 40 years of around that number of 35, 36 million.
PM: Where we have the consensus in a bipartisan nature, is that's where the population is going; Mr Abbott even said so the other day, the question is, are we capable of preparing for it? And that means the ageing of the population, the infrastructure, but also as others have indicated in the piece that you just had on your program now, on questions of social cohesion as well. This is a challenge of national preparedness, but let's also put the other side of this question as well. We have the third largest coastline, we have the third largest maritime zone in the world, the third largest coastline in the world. We are currently a population of 21 million, we are the fourteenth largest economy in a century of massive change in the Asia Pacific region. We also need to be mindful of our long-term national security and long-term national economic security. So if we prepare these things well, and as a nation we've got the intelligence to do so, I do believe this also fits within our long-term interests to do so.
O'BRIEN: Since tonight's report focussed on social cohesion we might as well start there; Australia has had a number of racial and cultural trigger points in its history, what is the basis for your confidence that we will be able to maintain a mature debate in this country, on the future shape of our race and culture as we evolve beyond what is still predominantly an Anglo-European culture.
PM: I think anyone who's mindful of Australia's immigration history knows that there are always times in our history when some of these frictions bubble to the surface, and then they are dealt with, often within our uniquely Australian way, often around a barbecue. The early days of settlement, the English were very suspicious of the Irish. Your mob came here, the O'Briens.
O'BRIEN: I think the O'Briens came voluntarily, but go on.
PM: Unlike our mob, who didn't. But the English were suspicious of the Irish, you roll on a century, you come to the post-war migration boom. The Anglo- Celtic bloc were concerned about those coming from southern Europe, the Greeks and the Italians, that all sorted itself out within a generation. Come the '70s, and '80s, the European bloc, were concerned about the arrival of those from South-East Asia and more recently from East Asia and South Asia, that is sorting itself through and by and large has sorted itself through. You see, this has happened at various points of our history, and in all settlement countries around the world, the United States, the great melting pot, Canada, New Zealand. We have it within our wit and wisdom and historical experience to do this well, and I believe we'll continue to do so in the future.
O'BRIEN: You're a strong Christian- would it bother you if the influence of Christianity, for instance, were to fade significantly in Australia over the coming decades?
PM: That's just a question of how- well first of all, questions of religious belief are entirely personal matters, whether I'm strong on that I'll let others make that judgment. But really, the question of religious belief is simply one which reflects the evolving views of the existing population, and of those who come on our shores, but the- any view that you should entrench a particular, you know, religious view and the orthodox political arrangements of Australia I think is not in the Australian tradition. Remember, we have-
O'BRIEN: But fear, fear can be associated with that kind of question, can't it? It might be unreasonable fear, but nonetheless it can be real.
PM: But a hundred years or more ago the founding fathers had this great debate about the question of religion in Australian life, and in a much more profoundly Christian society in the 1890s, resolved there should be never any establishment of an orthodox religion in this country. And I think Australians have always had a pretty healthy view about this, which is, here we have our civic personality called Australia, over here we'll have a private religious beliefs, and we try and keep, shall I say, a healthy distance between them. One informing the other from time to time. And I think we can maintain that effective discipline and distance as a culture and a country in the future as well.
O'BRIEN: Social cohesion's not just about ethnic harmony is it, it's about fundamental social equity, about where and how people will be able to afford to live, how far from home they'll be working, how they're going to get there, access to education and health - in all of these areas you would have to acknowledge the system is already deeply imperfect. What will the demands of another 13 million people do to that?
PM: A lot is the answer. And let's not pretend that it's not a challenge; it is. That's why I have been speaking in the week to ten days leading up to Australia Day about the challenges of this growing population, and the opportunities it presents, but what it also means with wrestling with the ageing of the population, wrestling with therefore, the increased cost of health care, wrestling also with the increased need to invest in infrastructure, the need to invest in skills, the need to invest in the future of our cities. Here is the difference though - I said at the beginning of the interview there's been largely a bipartisan view on the role of immigration in Australia, and the future shape of our population size, as discussed earlier - where there's a difference is that we believe there is an absolutely central role for the Australian Government in the long-term planning of our nation's infrastructure needs, our water infrastructure needs, our transport infrastructure needs, the needs of our cities, and the proper planning of them. This is very much our view, and these are the policy directions we are taking. Our predecessors did not have that view.
O'BRIEN: Okay, well I'll come to some of those issues in a moment in greater detail. But big business has always heavily influenced the case for strong immigration levels.
Do you buy that lock, stock and barrel and in that context, of course, this figure of 35 million is artificial to the degree that it will always depend on what immigration levels the Government sets. We featured a developer named Harry Triguboff, who is one of Australia's, if not Australia's biggest, apartment builders/developers, it's pretty clear to see where he's coming from. He wants 100 million people in this country, the more people are here, the more apartments he's going to sell. So I mean, there's a very crude basis to that argument when it really boils down, isn't there?
PM: Well I'm sure he's speaking to his own book, well good luck to him. But no, I mean, the business lobby, if you want a better- I don't - I use your term- doesn't have any particular monopoly on wisdom on this question. I think, though, we've just got to be realists about the fact that our fertility rate is 1.9, the historic migration levels of the last 40 years are likely to continue into the future. There'll be some shaping and reshaping from year to year, depending on skills demands and the economies, but by and large that will be it. Therefore, the fundamental practical challenge is how do you prepare for this growth/ How do you prepare and plan infrastructure? How do you prepare and plan for the ageing of the population?
O'BRIEN: Well let's try and, let's come to a few specifics.
PM: These are the core specific challenges, and I think getting that right for the next decade, and for the next half century, will determine whether our nation has a proper future or not.
O'BRIEN: You, in your urban planning speech last October you said, quote: "We must prepare for freshwater supplies coming under increasing pressure"- well that's something of an understatement. I mean, how are you going to find enough water for a Brisbane that's more than double its current size, which is what it's going to be under your projections, that is already facing critical water problems now?
PM: Well, for the first time in the nation's history, the Australian Government, the national Government, is investing in urban water. Mr Costello when he was Treasurer said that's a matter for states. We don't have the view, you have actually got to make sure this works. So what are the means available to you? One, in Brisbane you point to the example of water recycling- we have a huge investment as an Australian Government, partnership with State Government in the Western Corridor recycling plant. It is very large in its operations. Also, we are investing at a domestic level in assisting people with acquiring rainwater tanks, dealing with the treatment of grey water, dealing also with stormwater run-off. Each of these things adds up as we are, for example, in Adelaide, co-investing with the South Australian Government in a desalination plant.
O'BRIEN: But South Australia are absolutely paranoid, and they would say rightly so, about the future of their water supplies, because of the extent to which the Murray-Darling system is still a mess in that regard, and that the States are not pulling together on this despite the work you, and John Howard before you, have put into it.
PM: Well I think there are two responses to that as far as South Australia is concerned. One is you're absolutely right in terms of the state of the Murray-Darling. We addressed a Community Cabinet on this subject in Adelaide just last week. And it's under enormous stress, has been for the last decade plus, where rain inflow into the system is about half of its historical levels, and in the last four years down to an even lower proportion as well. Hence why part of our national long-term planning must include national and global action on climate change. Leaving that to one side. On the Murray-Darling itself in the immediate, for the first time now we have a Murray-Darling Basin Authority; for the first time imposing a cap on the overall use of water in the system; for the first time the Commonwealth Minister sets the cap; for the first time therefore we'll have the proper regulation of environmental flows into the system. None of that happened before. We have done that in the last two years, and on the urban water needs of Adelaide, the investment we've made with Mike Rann's Government increases I seem to recall, by 50% the water generation which will come out of the desalination plant under construction there, and be a huge contributor to Adelaide's overall water security supplies. It's the set of these things which makes a difference, rather than just saying 'not my problem'.
O'BRIEN: Okay. Has the Treasury modelling, for all of this, calculated how much water is going to be available over the next 40 years- how much arable land is available? Are you going force the States to factor in every time they want to build another desalination plant how much that's going to add to greenhouse gas emissions? Have you factored the implication of this population growth on your determination to reduce greenhouse emissions by 5% by 2020, because demographer Bob Birrell, for one, has calculated that to do so each individual Australian would need to drop their carbon footprint by 28%.
PM: Well I haven't seen Mr Birrell's work, but can I say this - in terms of our forward projections on our greenhouse gas reduction targets in the range of 5, 15 and 25 which the Climate Change Minister spoke of yesterday, of course we factor in population growth into all of that, it would be irresponsible not to. On the specific measures, however, to be employed in dealing with each of these challenges it requires detailed planning work.
The Murray-Darling, to go back to this as your example, if we don't act globally on climate change, the projections are that by century's end there'll be a 90% reduction in the agricultural production of Murray-Darling Basin. What does that mean in practical terms? Act on climate change and in the meantime make the irrigation efficiency of the system vastly improved on what was, what it is, because we lose 30% of water from the inefficiencies of the irrigation system now. We're about building Australia's future. And to do that it is brick by brick, it's block by block, piece of infrastructure by piece of infrastructure to make a difference rather than sitting over there and moaning about the States not doing it.
O'BRIEN: Well, you yourself have quoted from President Eisenhower in one of your speeches related to this- 'the plan is nothing, the planning is everything'. No matter what leadership you might feel you can show at the top, it will always be the State Governments and Local Governments implementing the plan. Based on the past record, do you really have confidence that our system of Government will be able to deliver what it's often failed to deliver in the past, no matter how good things might look on paper?
PM: What it takes- you see, there's often big debates in this country about how you fix our sort of political and constitutional arrangements. There's a debate over there about constitutional reform, well that might sort out some things in the by and by - I'm concerned with the immediate challenges of how you make the federation work; whether it's on the future of the management of the Murray-Darling; whether it's on the future of the management of our health infrastructure, and hospital infrastructure; or the rest of our infrastructure. And the only script available to me is to use the leverage of the Commonwealth dollar in a spirit of cooperative federalism to try and yield results.
O'BRIEN: The jury is still well and truly out on how well you are going be able to do that ultimately.
PM: Well, we've been in office-
O'BRIEN: There's a lot of talk, but not yet much action.
PM: Well let me engage that. Two examples, again, the Murray-Darling, and secondly health and hospitals. Firstly on the Murray-Darling-
O'BRIEN: Well sorry, if you could do, we've covered Murray-Darling to a fair- what about health and hospitals?
PM: But in two years, after twelve years of running around in circles by the previous mob, we actually brought the Murray-Darling Basin Authority into existence. Secondly, for the first time next year, there'll be a basin-wide plan for the nature in the entire history of the Murray-Darling. Thirdly, the Commonwealth Minister will be setting a cap. Fourthly we've already purchased back 750 gigalitres worth of water entitlements for the system, and fourthly investing $3-4 billion in increasing the efficiency of the irrigation infrastructure. If you don't think that is a record of achievement, well, mate, you know, I bow to other levels of activity on health and-
O'BRIEN: What I'm putting to you is that what you're talking about is going to have to happen across such a broad scale of areas...
PM: Sure.
O'BRIEN: The capacity of any federal Government to be able to properly coordinate, coerce, and ultimately force the States to deliver the goods in all of these areas is a reach that is enormous, I would suggest to you, compared to the level of confidence and trust the Australian people have in State Governments. That's the last question.
PM: You know something- we haven't been delivered a perfect system of Government, but by two years of effort, with investment intelligently of the national dollar, and by collaborating with the states we achieved those 4-5 outcomes already on the Murray-Darling, a long way to go.
Health and hospitals, we now have a whole series of outcome-based agreements with the States and Territories on elective surgery, on post-acute care, on Emergency Departments in hospitals, again for the first time in the country's history, because we have chosen to make this work.
O'BRIEN: But Ken Henry, your own Treasury Secretary, has already said that you're going to have to find new ways to fund the massive infrastructure demands ahead. That what is happening now is simply not going to be enough.
PM: Well, we have an independent review of taxation which has just delivered its report. And how we fund this for the future is a critical challenge as well. Hence why we need to grow the economy through greater investment in productivity, infrastructure, skills, what I have been speaking about for the last week to ten days, that's the economic equation to generate the economic growth and tax revenue to invest in the infrastructure we need.
None of this is easy, but you know, there are two scripts for Australia's future. You can either play the blame game and say it's all the States' problem, and then do a bit round the edges and run to an election on some campaign of fear and smear, or you can actually say, no, we are elected to lead the nation, and we intend to make a difference with a plan cooperatively engaged by the States and Territories if we can, and then yielding the results over time. That's our script, and that's how we intend to govern.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Thank you.


STANLEY: The Prime Minister joins us in the studio for the first time in 2010. Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning. Thanks for having me on the program.
ALOISI: Nice of you to come here. The My School website, it crashed several times yesterday. I notice the Deputy Prime Minister said it was because of the unprecedented demand. Do you think it's because have really been thirsting for this kind of knowledge?
PM: I think that's true, and Julia's absolutely right. I think they planned it for one million, 1.7 million, visitors. By mid-afternoon, Julia told me we had 4.5 million hits. Obviously, that's a bigger number than individual visitors because an individual visitor will go to the website a couple of times. That's fine, but it's huge. If you've a population of 21 million people, that is a lot of people looking at this, and that's because parents want to know how their school's performing. You only get once chance at the education of your kid, and therefore you want to make sure that you've got the best being provided in your school.
ALOISI: Parents are happy, but clearly teachers are not. What do you think about the fact they're probably going to take some sort of action to show the Government how unhappy they are?
PM: Well unions will do what unions will do. We think we've got this absolutely right. That is, that parents have a legitimate interest in knowing how they're school is performing on reading, on writing, on grammar, on spelling, this basic stuff. And we've been crying out, I think, as school communities, for this for years and years and years and years and now it's happening.
The point you raised before is, let's just say you find that from the My School website that you've got a problem with your school, that it's got a low score when it comes to literacy, a low score with numeracy - rather than just getting upset about it, what can you do about it? That's the key question here.
The good thing about the My School website - it gives you a tool for understanding what's going right and what's going wrong with your school community or with the performance of your school. But what we've done also is allocated $2 billion to assist disadvantaged schools right across the country with specific interventions possible for literacy and numeracy programs tailored on individual schools, so it's not just 'here's an identification of the problem' and there's nothing then to deal with the problem. What Julia will roll out during the course of this year is a response to the individual circumstances which are presented, and that's as it should be.
STANLEY: Have you looked at your school, your old schools?
PM: I've looked at Nambour High in Queensland.
STANLEY: How did it come up?
PM: There are a few challenges there at Nambour High. Mind you, there were a few challenges back when I went to school there, too. It's a school of about 1,300 or 1,400 kids in regional Queensland. I went to Eumundi Primary School. We had 100 kids there, it's got 300 kids now, it's got a few challenges as well. But if I was on the P&amp;C of either of those schools today, I would be grateful for the information, because it enables you to see how you are performing relative to schools like yours around the country and around the state, and secondly what then therefore need to do to lift your grade.
STANLEY: Yeah, because later in the website's going to changed so more of the information will be out. We'll know more about how much money is going in to private schools in particular. Isn't that going to add to the pressure, where some of these private schools charging huge fees, getting a lot of money from the Federal Government and not producing any better results than comprehensive schools down the road?
PM: And what a wonderful thing transparency is, when we have all this stuff out there. I mean, the test is common across Year 3, Year 5, Year 7, Year 9 across the country and we get to find out what's happening in individual schools of a similar socio-economic background on the one hand, and factoring in how much money is going to those school as well, from the Federal Government, from the State Government and then from private sources. So the next version of My School will add this new, additional piece of information - how much money is going to that school.
STANLEY: Won't that lead to the argument that too much money from the Federal Government is going into private schools, certainly the big private schools?
PM: I reckon where we're going to end up with this is, we're going to have a situation where every school community can wrestle with their own challenges, work out their own solutions and we the Government, will be creative partners with them in their individual circumstances. It's all about being locally accountable to parents, to your local school community. I think that's fantastic.
It's the first building block to what we've called now for some years the education revolution - investing in the quantity of money in improving our schools, like this huge school modernisation program we've got running across the country at the moment, $16 billion investment in new libraries, in new language centres, new science centres. That's one thing.
Improving the quality of our education is equally important. I notice though, the Liberal education spokesman has described the thing today as a complete failure, a white elephant, a failure, and does nothing that's useful. I assume therefore, the Liberals say that they would scrap this thing. I reckon this is a huge step forward. We are all about holding local schools accountable for their performance. I would have though that's the smart way to go for Australia's future.
ALOISI: Does it concern you that the Sydney Morning Herald has published comparative data today on the schools? It's had a look at the website, pulled out the schools that are doing well, pulled out the schools, perhaps, that are not doing as well. Does that worry you, that some schools might be pilloried if they're not performing as well as others?
PM: I'm all for transparency, and here in New South Wales there's been this extraordinary debate in the State Parliament over whether, in fact, media outlets should be able to produce this information. I can't, for the life of me, understand why the state Liberals would side with the Greens and the local teachers' union to block full transparency. You're putting less information out there for the public. I just don't get it.
From our point of view, the more publicity about schools performances, the better. We've got to be fair about it, because teachers in different parts of the state, different parts of the city, have got local challenges. But you know something? We've got to get with the future. One chance to educate your kids - and his is all about getting that transparency right, performance right, boosting the basics and then supporting those school communities with challenges, with real resources to make a difference.
STANLEY: Prime Minister, a lot of criticism of you in the last six weeks or so that since you came -
PM: How unusual.
STANLEY: Since you came back from Copenhagen you haven't said a lot about climate change and the ETS, so what is your position now? Are you sticking by the legislation you had in the parliament, or are you prepared to compromise with the Greens or others to get something happening on climate change?
PM: Our position's absolutely clear cut. I am partly surprised by the question. We haven't changed and we're not for changing. First of all, we accept the science of climate change. It's happening. Secondly, Australia is the hottest and driest continent, or one of them, on Earth - must act, because our fundamental interests are at stake.
And thirdly, our way of dealing with it is through an emissions trading scheme, a carbon pollution reduction scheme, and that legislation will be re-introduced to the parliament.
STANLEY: To deal with it you've got to get the numbers in the Senate.
PM: Sure
STANLEY: You'll never get 'em.
PM: But let's see, when we put this legislation into the parliament, let's see how the other mob respond. Mr Abbott has had five different positions on the emissions trading scheme. In his book that he wrote only a year ago, this is a book, he said he actually thought that the emissions trading scheme was the most cost-effective way to go. Now he's going to oppose it fully, he says. Then we have Mr Turnbull, who says he'll be crossing the floor, some Liberal senators may cross the floor. Let's see how this turns out. But our position is clear.
STANLEY: So Ross Garnaut's proposal, the proposal of the Greens, you're not prepared to look at that yet?
PM: Look, we have always said that with any political party we will have good faith discussions and negotiations about trying to get stuff through the Parliament, but we did that last year. We got Mr Turnbull on side, we got more than half the Coalition on side, and then what do they do? They roll the leader. So this is a pretty volatile old party. And remember, your question about us is what's our position on climate change? Very clear cut -
STANLEY: Oh, I know what your position is, but you've got to get the numbers, though, that's the thing.
PM: Well, I've just said we have a clear policy. We have legislation to put our emissions trading scheme through. Mr Howard, Mr Costello, Mr Turnbull, all backed it, and Mr Abbott, prior to becoming leader, backed it. And now we have Mr Abbott who says, to use his own language, that climate change is "absolute crap". There's a pretty clear distinction here.
ALOISI: Speaking of Mr Abbott, he's copped a fair bit of criticism this week over the interview he gave to the Woman's Weekly where he described what sort of advice he'd give to his daughters regarding sex before marriage. Do you agree with him?
PM: Absolutely not, my view is that these are entirely personal matters, and therefore young people should make their own informed choices. That's always been our view, and in young people making their own choices about their own, you know, sex lives, that's just a matter for them. They can seek counsel from their parents, seek counsel from their friends, the people they respect, but this is a choice. It is an important choice which people make in their lives, but it's a very personal choice.
STANLEY: Because my reading of the story was he simply said he'd tell his daughters not to undertake sex for the first time lightly. Well, isn't that the advice you'd give your daughters?
PM: You know something? When I say these are personal matters, it means I'm not in the business of providing public advice to anybody, including my kids - public advice, that is. So, Mr Abbott, he can answer for himself. I'm just saying I have a different approach. These are personal matters, and as Prime Minister of the country, my job is to provide leadership on climate change, leadership on the national economy, leadership on health and hospitals reform. That's where I think political leadership should be, rather than in the business of providing public positions on these personal, moral questions.
ALOISI: Just quickly, we had your partner in crime here last week, Rhys Muldoon, talking about how you collaborated on the new book together.
PM: I don't have any partners in crime.
ALOISI: What was that like? Was that fun?
PM: It was, actually. It was a lot of fun. It was Rhys' idea, so I can't claim any originality. And he said 'why don't we do a kids' book about the animals?', and so I asked Jasper and Abby how they felt about it and -
STANLEY: They responded?
PM: They responded.
ALOISI: Should we be worried that the Prime Minister is speaking to some animals and they're responding?
STANLEY: I'm worried?
PM: Well, I was going to give you the response.
ALOISI: Please
PM: Two taps yes, one tap no with the front paw. It's like Mr Ed. Remember Mr Ed?
ALOISI: I do remember Mr Ed.
STANELY: I do remember Mr Ed.
PM: It's been a lot of fun, but the money's all going to a children's centre for health research and I think it's good. It's been on sale. Go to your nearest bookstore - Jasper and Abby and the Great Australia Day Kerfuffle. 26 pages, illustrations are good, and I 'gotta say that Rhys is the creative inspiration for this. I'm just the also-ran.
ALOISI: I love that, the Prime Minister doing an ad.
STANLEY: Could you do some more for us? Actually, I want to hear you. You just said them over there, you've got lots of partners in crime. Are there any others you'd like to tell us about?
PM: Not on this particular interview, no.
STANLEY: Another time. Come in and take some calls.
PM: If you've got an investigative section, perhaps.
ALOISI: Any time, any time.
STANLEY: Thank you.
PM: It's been good to be on the program.
ALOISI: Thank you, Prime Minister. Look forward to speaking to you again.
PM: Thank you.


HOST: Kevin, welcome to the show.
PM: Good morning guys. I was a big fan of the Addams Family....in the Addams Family, which roles would you play?
HOST: I would be Lurch.
HOST: Yeah, he'd be Uncle Fester I think.
HOST: I would be Thing, probably.
HOST: So, our first question was, do you have a sense of humour? What did you think of 'The Rudds'?
PM: It was pretty good actually. I can't actually comment on anyone doing my voice, because I'm sure it doesn't sound quite that bad.
HOST: Now come on, he does the RACQ commercials as well.
PM: In the Addams Family, I was always a big fan of Lurch, by the way.
HOST: Yeah, well see yeah there, that's me. Welcome to the show. How'd you go on Sunrise this morning with Ask the PM? How'd you handle that?
PM: It was okay. The first question, the lady delivered something rising outside the off stump. I think I decided to let it go through to the keeper because I didn't know the answer.
HOST: Well that's honest.
HOST: Well we've got some tough ones.
PM: So I said 'I'll take that one on notice and come back next week'.
HOST: Well, we opened the lines this morning and got a few questions in as well. One of them from Iris was, 'why do you spend so much time in Australia, and less in Australia?' That's Iris speaking, not me.
PM: Well the first thing is my job is to get out there and defend the Australian national interest. Secondly, when Mr Howard was required to travel, he did so. In any given year, he would probably travel sometimes a little more than me, sometimes a little less-
HOST: Yeah, but he always went to George Bush's ranch.
PM: I'm just saying that's part and parcel of the job. The other thing though is that in the last twelve months we've had this thing called the global economic crisis. And there have been three major meetings of the Group of 20 Heads of Government which have been responsible for coordinating the response to the global recession. This is really fundamental stuff, otherwise the whole global economy goes down the chute. We've been into this big time, and putting our own proposals on the table.
So my job is to go out there and argue and defend Australia's national interests, whether it's there or other meetings where you've got other Heads of Government all representing their countries, whether that's the Commonwealth Heads of Government, whether it's the United Nations, whether that's the APEC economies, whether it's the East Asian Summit, all the other countries are represented by their Heads of Government. It'd be pretty odd if you weren't there yourself.
HOST: Can I ask you a personal sort of question?
PM: It depends on the question.
HOST: Now come on, I'm soft as. I'm so easy, it's amazing. I'm just going to ask you, you know, being Eumundi educated, Nambour educated- being Prime Minister, is it what you thought it would be? I mean, like, okay, you're the top man in the country, you've got there, you're the Leader. I would think, well, you tell me- is it what you thought it would be, or is it just such a massive demand on what you do? Like this morning, you've done Sunrise, you're with us, I'm assuming you're doing a whole wad of media - what's it like?
PM: To be honest, you're flat out all day, every day. That's why it was actually good to get away for ten days with the family over Christmas, just to recharge the batteries.
HOST: Ten days? We had six weeks. See what I mean?
PM: Half your luck mate. But the other thing is, it never stops. You know, it goes back to the question from Iris before. Half of what we're dealing with are challenges, let's call them onshore, you know, fixing up the health and hospital system; as Julia Gillard's been doing, I think brilliantly, with you know this MySchool webpage and reforms to education and to schools; all those things are challenges on the home front. But globally what we're dealing with, as I said in the last twelve months, is this massive challenge to whether or not we're going to continue to generate jobs in the Australian economy.
So in many respects, you're dealing with always two jobs at the same time. What's happening within the country, wrestling with the challenges offshore, because if you don't wrestle with those challenges offshore, they come careering onshore. So, you know-
HOST: Are you happy though, in your job? Are you happy in your job, do you think this is just massive, I can't deal with this today?
PM: It's a fantastic opportunity, and I really enjoy what I'm doing. And the reason I enjoy what I'm doing is that you can think about it for years and years and years about what you'd like to do to change the country. But to be given by the Australian people the opportunity to actually do something about it, like to do something about improving our schools, do something about fixing our hospitals, do something about investing in infrastructure, laying out a high-speed broadband network, that sort of stuff, it's great to be in a position to do something.
And as we were talking about last year and the huge challenges to the economy, to intervene through a national economic stimulus strategy and to be able to deliver a result where Australia was the only economy of all the major advanced economies not to go into recession. That's what's good about the position, not just being able to dream about it, not just to criticise stuff, but to be in a position to do something to make a real difference. You won't get it right all the time, but to make a practical difference, that's what I -
HOST: Well let me hand you over to a climate change sceptic to ask a couple- this is my partner Ian, and friend, might I add.
HOST: Were you disappointed in Copenhagen, that there was no agreement, and do you think that the tide is turning against the science about man-made global warming? Do you think now that the public has a right to be sceptical about the science given what's happened over the last few days and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change? Do you think we're right now to be questioning whether, you know, whether the science is right? Should there be more debate, whether we should even have this carbon pollution scheme introduced?
PM: Let me take both your questions in sequence. One was about Copenhagen, and two was about the science. On Copenhagen, look, any reasonable minded person would've wanted a better result out of Copenhagen. We didn't get a ten out of ten result. Maybe we got a five or six out of ten result. But it's better than a zero out of ten result. As for the five or six out of ten, we got three things done. For the first time we got the global community to agree that we shouldn't have temperature increases in the future beyond two degrees centigrade. We didn't have that agreement before.
The second thing, for the first time, we agreed that both developed and developing countries - that's the big countries like China and India - all have to put forward their own targets and commitments to contribute to the global outcome. Prior to that, it's just been the developed countries or the richer countries. And the third thing is, for the first time we agreed that there should be global monitoring of what everyone is doing to bring down greenhouse gas emissions. A whole lot more things to do, but they're three things which changed as a result of Copenhagen, that's why I give it five or six out of ten.
Now on the other question you ask about the science. Look, I think we need to put all this into context. The International Panel of climate change scientists is made up of four thousand scientists around the world, humourless guys and girls in white coats, okay. These are not politicians. These are scientists. They've concluded in their most recent report that climate change a) is happening, and b) it is ninety per cent certain that it is caused by human factors.
And when they say ninety per cent certain, that is of the highest probabilities that they can give based on the evidence available. Therefore, what they conclude is we'd be mad to countenance the risk of not acting, absolutely mad. And in Australia, you have the Chief Scientists, the CSIRO, the Bureau of Meteorology saying it's happening, and we must act. And because Australia is among the hottest and driest continents on earth, where the impacts of climate change are being felt first and hardest, we've got to therefore, act at home, and act internationally, and that's what the Government's doing.
HOST: Alright now, finally, have we gone a little nuts with the whole Abbott virginity issue, do you think?
PM: Mate, he can answer for himself on all that stuff. My view is pretty, in a nutshell, these are personal matters, and people should make their personal choices. But you ask him what his views are on that, a matter for him.
HOST: Well unfortunately, Ian and I both voted for the Opposition, and we regret that now. And also apologise for it, okay. Thank you very much for being on the show.
HOST: You didn't want to ask him his favourite colour?
PM: You can get me into the next edition of the Rudd family if you want to.
HOST: Alright, we have to ask you your favourite colour, because that was one of Jamie's questions, just before you go.
PM: My favourite colour? Whatever tie my wife puts out for me of a morning, Therese, that's my favourite colour.
HOST: Good, thank you.
HOST: Very diplomatic. And you are in the draw for the digital radio that we have every caller on for, so if you win it, I'll call you back. If you just leave your mobile with our producer.
HOST: Okay, shall do. Be good guys. Or in your case, just be better.
HOST: Thank you very much Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.


DOYLE: Let's talk to our Prime Minister this morning. Good morning to you. Thank for doing this. Are you nervous?
PM: Always anxious on a first day. You know that, Mel. I have been from the beginning.
DOYLE: It'll all be good. Alright, let's go to our first viewer. We've got Liz from South Australia. Liz, good morning to you. Now, what's your question for the PM?
CALLER: Good morning, Mel. Good morning, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Liz.
CALLER: In your budget last year you gave the pensioners a terrific increase, which was long overdue, but there was a group of people that were left out of it, and these are the people that are on allowances. Now, I'm talking about people like myself who are in their 60s who are too young for the age pension, can't get work because of their age and yet get put on this allowance and that's got to last them through to the old age pension. Any reason as to why the allowees weren't included in that increase?
PM: First of all, on the increase of the age pension, you're right, it was a big one, about $34 a week for the single age pension, I think $14 or $15 for couples. On the allowances you talk about, rather than just give a glib answer and say why someone in your category didn't fit in, can I basically take that one on notice and come back in our next segment?
I'd much rather get the details right and give you a straight answer as to where you fit, what you're entitled to and whether any other changes are planned for people in your situation.
DOYLE: Liz, will that be OK?
CALLER: Yes, that'd be fine, but it's not just me I'm talking about. There's got to be thousands of others out there who are like myself in this position and we are expected to stay on this until we reach the age pension. The only increases that we are going to get is the CPI, which is, really, is not that much.
PM: Yeah, I understand that. People who are on these fixed incomes and fixed allowances, it's tough. I fully accept that, but I just don't want to give you the wrong information. And you're absolutely right, you're not Robinson Crusoe. There's a whole bunch of people in your circumstances.
So I take this one on notice and I will give you a completely comprehensive answer on what allowances apply to people in your circumstances and whether any changes are coming down the track, but I'd much rather do it that way than give you some glib off-the-top, if that's OK.
DOYLE: Alright, Liz, we'll make sure that he does his homework. We'll give him a week and the Prime Minister will have those answers for you this time next week and make sure that we cover that for you, so thank you for that question, Liz.
Our next one for the Prime Minister is Nathan, Nathan Olaroberts from Sydney. Nathan, what's your question for our Prime Minister?
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: G'day Nathan.
CALLER: My question for you, good morning, my question for you is why is it taking your Government so long to fix the state of our hospitals and what do you plan to do about it? Because, after all, it was one of your major election promises and it seems like nothing has been done to fix it.
PM: Let me answer that one straight down the barrel, Nathan, because I've been working on this for a long, long time.
First, of all, since we were elected two years, ago, this is what we've done so far. We have increased the Australian Government's contribution to hospitals and health across the country to the states and to the territories who run them by 50 per cent - five zero. That was after a lot of money was pulled out of the system before then by the previous Australian Government. That's the first thing we've done.
The second thing we've done is increase, significantly, the number of GP training places and the number of nurse training places. From memory, about 1,000 extra nurse training places as well.
Here's the third thing we've done - this is so far - a $2 billion investment into cancer treatment and cancer research right across the country, the biggest investment in cancer-related services the country has seen.
Now, go to the future. What we've done in these last two years is not just sit on our hands and try and buy some time to plan for the future - as I said, a 50 per cent increase, some $60 billion flowing out to the hospitals now from the Australian Government - but we've also in the last two years been planning for the long-term future, driven by the aging of our population.
We commissioned a report, an independent report, on what we need to do right out for the next 20 years. We got that in the middle of last year. In the last six months the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, and I have been right around the country talking to, altogether, 101 hospitals of the 750 public hospitals that are in Australia. I've done 21 of them myself.
And thirdly, early this we'll be convening a meeting of the states and territories who actually run our hospitals to agree on a long-term reform plan for the future. That's what we've been doing for the last two years, and we'll be landing our reform plan for the next 20 years very soon.
DOYLE: I think, Nathan, am I right, though, your question, and it reflects a lot of our viewers that have emailed in, is that's all wonderful, but one of the election promises was if the states hadn't come up to scratch by June 2009 you were going to take over, the Federal Government would take over our hospitals right around the country. Nathan, am I right, that's sort of what you were asking?
CALLER: That's absolutely right.
PM: Sure Nathan, I don't walk away from this whatsoever, and I what I also said in the last election campaign is the buck stops with me. Don't walk away from that one bit.
The report we got in the middle of 2009 we've decided to road test with all those who actually do the work out there in the system, and that has taken the last six months. And the reason we're being very careful about it is this affects the lives of hundreds of thousands and millions of Australians each year. You don't want to get it wrong.
But, let me tell you, we'll be landing our response to this very soon. And secondly, we'll put this to the states and territories. If they agree to our long-term reform plan cooperatively, fine. If they don't, then I do not walk away one bit from our undertaking that we would then move to get a separate mandate from the people to take over the system.
That is our position. We've been very careful in finalising the detail of the plan, but my point to you, Nathan, is we haven't been sitting on our hands for two years. There's $60 billion flowing from us right now, a 50 per cent increase on what the hospitals got in the previous five years.
DOYLE: OK, Nathan, that's OK, that answer?
CALLER: Yes, that's fine, thank you very much.
DOYLE: Wonderful, thank you, Nathan, for your time
Our next viewer question for the Prime Minister, Jessica in Melbourne. Jessica, good morning. What's your question for our PM?
CALLER: Good morning, Mel. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Hi, Jess.
CALLER: I'm a mother of two young girls and I'd like to know what incentives there are for mothers to go back to work when all the money they're making on a weekly basis is simply being spent on childcare?
PM: Two things - one thing we've done and another thing that comes in next year, and I can't address your individual circumstances because I don't precisely know them.
The first thing is prior to the last election we said we'd increase the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. We have done that, and that has been in now for the last year or so. That's the first thing, because childcare costs have been going up, and we are not prepared simply to sit back there and allow working families to cop it in the neck, so that was a big undertaking, and we've done that.
The second thing is this - starting from next year, and this affects young mums or young parents out there in the workplace who've just had a littlie, for the first time in Australia's history, in 2011 we will bring in paid parental leave. This is 18 weeks a year, it's paid at the minimum wage level. It is not a huge amount of money but it is a big step in the right direction, the first time in the country's history.
Apart from that, on other detailed, shall I say, things that the Government's doing which might help in your individual circumstances, I'll have my office come back to you, because I'd rather nail down your individual circumstances quite apart from the two things that I've just mentioned.
DOYLE: Jessica, is that OK?
CALLER: For now, yes, that's fine.
DOYLE: OK, alright, we'll hold the Prime Minister to doing that homework, so two issues, so you'll get back to us next week for Liz's question, which was about the widow's allowance, and then Jessica's question about, sort of, help and assistance for families.
PM: I just like to be as specific as possible -
DOYLE: No no no, that's alright -
PM: I just don't want to fly over the top of these things and, sort of, leave people languishing who have very specific circumstances. I'd rather be very quick on that, so I'll come back with a quick summary on both of those.
DOYLE: That'd be great, and as we said earlier, I mean, you haven't been briefed on them, so obviously you don't know, you can't be across every single detail ever.
Before I let you go, really quickly, the other big question of the morning - ties for the boys. What do you think? Yes or no?
PM: Uh - [laughter]
DOYLE: We've stopped him! [laughter] Kochie and Beretts, we're voting this morning whether they keep the ties.
PM: Well, if it's Kochie's ties, I think they're generally revolting. Beretts - I'm always a big Beretts' tie backer. As for mine, you know something? I know I have no taste, so every morning I look and see what Therese has put out for me and that's what I wear, so that's the smart way to do it.
DOYLE: You're a wise man. That's obviously why you're still happily married.
PM: And new ties get bought for me by my daughter, Jessica.
DOYLE: Very good, always listen to the girls in your life.
PM: Yep.
DOYLE: Thank you for that. We really appreciate it. We'll see you next week and -
PM: I'll be back.
DOYLE: - and Jessica and Liz with some answers.
PM: I'll improve my score next week.
DOYLE: Pretty good. Have a good week.



The My School website provides more information about all of Australia's nearly 10,000 schools than has ever been available to the parents before.
It provides a report card for each school with rich information about the number of students, the number of teachers, attendance rates, literacy and numeracy outcomes from NAPLAN and the background of students going to the school.
My School also includes a statement from the school itself allowing parents to see what is unique about the school and what its mission is.
While this level of information is unprecedented we need to continue to build on the website and provide even deeper and more comprehensive information.
Work is already underway to report on school income so parents will be able to see the resources that are going into both government and non-government schools and the difference this makes.
We know that parents don't just want to know how a school is performing but whether their child will enjoy the school experience and how the school will engage with them as parents.
If re-elected the Rudd Government will work with the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority to further empower parents by surveying their satisfaction with schools with the survey results to be disclosed on My School.
The survey could ask parents what they think the strengths of the school are, as part of a balanced scorecard or comprehensive survey of experiences and their satisfaction.
It could canvass the ethos of the school and those issues that matter to parents and students such as the level of respect, quality of relationships, culture of the school and whether the school gives students a fair go.
The survey could:
- look at the issues of bullying and school safety - whether or not parents felt their child was safe at school, how teachers responded to concerns raised by parents and behaviour management strategies;
- look at how the school works with the community - the range of extra-curricular activities, P&amp;C activities, accessibility to school facilities after hours, administration, the availability of information to parents, opportunities for parent and teachers to communicate;
- look at how the school approaches teaching and learning - look at whether teachers are helpful and easy to talk to, whether parents understand and are involved in the here opportunities to innovate in classrooms and strategies to improve performance;
- look at how the school manages transitions - the availability of information for students about subject selection, post school options and career information, access to guidance officers, support for students transitioning to high school.
The My School website is already giving parents more information than they have ever had before and the Rudd Government is committed to building on this strong foundation and empowering parents to get involved in the education of their children.


OAKES: Prime Minister, welcome to the program.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
OAKES: This is an election year- you've got a new opponent in Tony Abbott. Various pundits are saying that you haven't quite got his measure yet. Is that how you see it?
PM: You know something, Laurie? Mr Abbott's the fourth leader of the Liberal Party I've faced in a couple of years. Each person is different, and each deserves to be treated with respect. And I do the same in the case of Mr Abbott. The Australian people will be the judge of this, and they are hard judges, but they are fair judges, and they'll look at our record and look at our plans for the future.
OAKES: What do you see as his weaknesses, though?
PM: Well, my question is not about Mr Abbott personally. I simply go to the question of policy. And if I were to go to two, just off the top- big one, climate change. You cannot take the risk with Australia's future, to have a leader- Mr Abbott- who goes out there and says, quote "that climate change is absolute crap", unquote. That's his position, that's his stated position. Our view's radically-
OAKES: His position is that climate change science is crap, he said.
PM: Oh well, his statement is that "it is absolute crap", quote, unquote. And he has a whole series of other conflicting statements attached to that. I don't believe we can place Australia at that sort of risk for the future. But you ask what is a second area of big policy difference - health and hospitals. This'll be a big year for health and hospitals reform. Mr Abbott was Health Minister for four years, ripped a billion dollars out of the public hospital system of Australia. We've increased hospitals investment by the Australian Government by fifty percent already, and that's before we get to the next stage of health and hospital investment. And a third area is WorkChoices. He said that WorkChoices may be dead in name, but not in substance under him. So you want to know what the policy battle terrain is already? I think they're three fairly big ones.
OAKES: What about education- you promised an education revolution, and we certainly haven't seen much that's revolutionary.
PM: Well, I beg to differ on that one, Laurie. The Education-
OAKES: We've seen a lot of school halls but-
PM: Oh well, hang on, hang on. Before you go to school halls, which is part of our national economic stimulus strategy, and state-of-the-art 21st century libraries, and modern science centres and language centres across seven to ten thousand schools right across the country - not a small achievement in itself - but underpinning that, what we have had is a one hundred percent increase in investment in education.
And this goes to a whole range of literacy and numeracy programs right across the country. It goes to our investment in our universities. These are big practical investments in what we legitimately call the Education Revolution, because we want to build long-term productivity growth, and you can't do that unless you are increasing the quantity of our investment in early childhood education, in schools, in TAFEs and training, and universities, rocket science, research, the whole spectrum, and boosting the quality as well, which is what we're doing, for example, with Julia's great efforts on the My Schools front.
OAKES: I was going to mention that. That seems to be very popular. But there is criticism that it is also limited; that it only gives you information about academic issues. The criticism is that doesn't give you an overall picture of what a school is like. Can you do something about that?
PM: Well, the Government if it's re-elected, will of course take My School to a further stage. But let me just recap on what we've done so far, and then I'll go to where we'll take it in the future. Firstly, a whole virtue of My Schools is to empower parents with basic information about the performance of their schools in such basic areas like literacy, numeracy, grammar, spelling. These are pretty basic things, and I think mums and dads across the country would like to know that.
Secondly, it's not just a business of saying, "here's a problem," or, "here's a success"- where problems emerge, what we have done, through Julia's leadership, is put forward a $2 billion investment plan for disadvantaged schools, so that we can identify precisely where we need to enhance literacy and numeracy investment in the education basics so we don't leave kids behind. That's what we're doing now. For the future, if the Government's re-elected -
OAKES: You started off by saying if you're re-elected - so is this your first election year election promise?
PM: Well, an election I think, Laurie, is due, so I'm advised, by April of 2011. I think on the balance of probabilities, it's probably due in 2010- and so this is, yes, a commitment that building on-
OAKES: An election promise?
PM: It is a commitment building on what we've done on My Schools, that if the Government's returned, that we would actually seek to expand the information available to parents as well. How would we do that in a practical way? To provide a more rounded view of what a school's performance is in overall terms. And so a practical way which we have decided upon for the future is to conduct a school quality survey among the parents of that school in question - in fact, of all schools.
And we'll put together the survey questions with the Australian Curriculum Reporting Authority and they would go to- let's call it the overall performance of the school in other critical areas- like bullying, how you're handling the whole challenge of schoolyard bullying, how you're dealing with classroom innovation, what's the engagement of your school community in the local community and its community efforts and charitable endeavour, in other words the rounded view of a school's overall culture. This is also important to parents to know. So if we are re-elected, that's where we'd take My School in 2011.
OAKES: We'll you mentioned health as a key issue this year. The first health debate of the election year I guess will come in the next fortnight, when you plan to reintroduce the bill to impose a means test on the health insurance rebate. Now how important is that, that's just about money isn't it?
PM: Well, health and hospitals reform is a fair bit about having money to invest in the needs of a system for the future. Tomorrow, the Treasurer will be realising the Intergenerational report. And it will go to one core challenge that we face for the future among many, and that core challenge is the aging of our population and the two practical things which come from that- and that is that we will have pressures on our future economic growth because the overall number of Australians in the work force relative to those over the age of 65 will decline.
That's one challenge. That's called the productivity challenge. The other half of the challenge coming from the aging of the population is the enormous impact which will flow from that aging on the cost of our health care system and our age care system. So these are the big ones for the years ahead, and the decades ahead.
OAKES: So how does that bear on the means test, on the rebate, which the Coalition knocked back the first time last October I think?
PM: Yes, they did knock it back, and in our view entirely without justification. What the Intergenerational report tomorrow will reveal for the first time is that the cumulative impact of knocking that major reform back is in the order of one hundred billion dollars over the next several decades. This is the time frame in which we are planning major reform for the health and hospital system. So Mr Abbot may have ripped a billion dollars out of the health system and the hospital system when he was Health Minister- that's bad enough- but to rip a further hundred billion dollars out of the future of the health and hospital system by ideologically blocking this major reform makes no sense at all.
OAKES: But this is- it's a thirty percent rebate, Mr Abbot has said they will rejected it in the Senate again. How do you go to an election arguing against a benefit that the people already have?
PM: Well we are talking about the means testing of this, and frankly people on the highest incomes in the country we believe are not as needing of this sort of support for private health insurance, as people at the lower end of the income spectrum. It is a very fair argument on our part. But the other fair argument is that we have to fund the future of a health and hospital system. If we don't have that extra hundred billion dollars for future investment that means less money to invest in the much needed extra hospital beds, much less money to invest, therefore, in improving waiting times and accident emergency less money to invest in elective surgery waiting times, less money to invest in dealing with the basic problems of an under- supplied health work force- doctors and nurses.
You can't just invent these reforms, you've got to fund them. And a hundred billion dollars is not just a piece of loose cash. It's part and parcel of long-term health reform. So my challenge to Mr Abbott is get real with the long term reform of our hospital and health system. Here is a huge available source of revenue to help with that reform rather than engage in just a piece of ideological bloody-mindedness.
OAKES: But if the Coalition knocks this back again, it will become a double dissolution trigger potentially. Will you pull the trigger?
PM: Well Laurie, our stated position for a long time in my view is that Governments should run their full term, that is a conservative view I have had for a long, long time. Mr Abbott seems to be in permanent blocking mode- whether it's action on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and action on climate change despite Mr Howard and others having the same view as us about that being the right way to go. He now is in blocking mode it seems again on this hundred billion dollar potential investment in our health and hospital reform system. If they block these things, then inevitably they will form part of an election campaign later in the year. What form the election campaign, or the election takes, is a separate matter.
OAKES: Now it seems to me that health reform is probably a better bet for you as a double dissolution trigger than climate change, which seems to have turned against you since the fiasco of Copenhagen.
PM: Climate change is absolutely fundamental to Australia's economic and environmental future. Anyone you who pretends it's not is frankly just deluding themselves. We, the Government, accept what the science tells us from the international panel of climate change scientists, from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, from the CSIRO, for the Australian Chief Government Scientist, and that is why we've concluded as a Government- as did Mr Howard, and Mr Costello, and Mr Turnbull before me, that we must act on this, and act on it through an emissions trading scheme.
OAKES: But don't you agree that this is turning against you politically? I mean, Tony Abbott's over turned the Turnbull stand, Mr Turnbull's now being sneered at by Liberals as having being the 21st member of you Cabinet. Tony Abbott's campaign that this will just mean a big new tax on everything does seem to be biting, doesn't it?
PM: There is a fundamental question in politics, and in policy, which is what do you stand for. This is pretty basic. Acting for the future economic and environmental needs of the planet, our country, our kids and our grandkids. That's pretty basic for me. And secondly, what is pretty basic for me is the advice that we have received, as did the previous Howard Government of which Mr Abbott was a member, that the most effective way of dealing with climate change is through an emissions trading scheme.
OAKES: But is it a big new tax on everything?
PM: This is simply a propaganda line, playing politics, by Mr Abbott and Senator Joyce running around the countryside. Let me just go to the absolute core of it. What's an emissions trading scheme? Puts a cap on the amount of carbon pollution, it charges the biggest carbon polluters, and then uses that money to compensate working families for a 1.1% percent increase in the cost of living, and enabling working families, therefore, to employ more energy efficient appliances for the future.
OAKES: So you don't see it as a tax rise?
PM: That's our approach- it's very simple. What's Mr Abbott's alternative? He says no cap on carbon pollution. Secondly, he says we're not going to place a charge on the nation's biggest polluters. Thirdly, we're not even going to compensate families. So where does all this come from? I tell you where it comes from - from the taxpayer. One huge megatax from Mr Abbott to fund his approach to climate change, but leaving working families in the lurch. If you want the clear difference between the two schemes or two approaches, that's it. But our position, Laurie, has been constant.
As Mr Turnbull rightly said about Mr Abbott, it depends on what day of the week it is for Tony. I mean he supported our scheme, he opposed it, he supported it, said we should amend itm and then in his defining position of political principle said to Mr Turnbull, "Oh, look, Malcolm, you know on these questions of climate change and the emissions trading scheme, I'm just a weathervane." Well, we stand for something here. It is a basic question of policy. We will be committed to it. We will pursue it. We will implement it.
OAKES: You say you stand for something. But what you're committed to is a five percent cut in emissions over ten years, which most people regard as pretty pathetic- and Tony Abbott says he can reach that with no emissions trading system.
PM: Well we've done, Laurie, in the other day, in the statement which the climate change minister, Penny Wong, released and my response to it occurred in Copenhagen, was put out a range of targets, 5, 15, 25, and we'll make a judgment in the course of 2011 where we finally land in terms of what the rest of the world does, and in terms of the enforceability of what the rest of the world does as well. So we have open to us the scope for further action. That's what we have done. Secondly, more importantly, through an emissions trading scheme- it's adjustable, depending on what target we do by doing no more and no less than the rest of the world.
OAKES: So you're not going to-
PM: Mr Abbott, Mr Abbott's scheme, frankly- as I've seen it described- will be struggling to get anywhere near five percent, first point. Secondly, getting beyond that- separate question, frankly, very, very, very difficult. But thirdly, the cost to taxpayers. What he's proposing is don't charge the polluters, don't compensate working families. Instead, through the taxpayer, impose what will effectively be a megatax to support this whole scheme. And it's all about the politics of the weathervane, as opposed to being consistent, as we are, Mr Howard was, Mr Turnbull was, Mr Costello was and, guess what? 35 other countries around the world have reached the same conclusion. Except this bloke.
OAKES: Well the United States hasn't reached it and looks as though it won't now- but let's move on to taxation. When are you going to release the Henry committee report on tax reform? And will you be going to the election on a tax reform program based on the Henry recommendations?
PM: On the release date, I haven't discussed that finally with Wayne Swan, the Treasurer, yet but it will be in the couple of months ahead. It's a very comprehensive document, and we've still got to work our way through it. That's the first point. Second is, on the recommendations, given that this is an independent review of taxation, Laurie, I'm sure there's going to be stuff in there which the Government can work with, and there's probably a whole lot of stuff in there which we can't work with. That's just the reality, but we actually said it was time to have an independent review of the total tax system, and we'll treat each of the recommendations on its merits.
OAKES: Isn't it possible this will be more useful to Mr Abbott than you, in that he'll be able to point to the nasties in the Henry report and say, "here's what the Government will do if you re-elect them"?
PM: The key thing - well, first of all, this is an independent review of taxation.
OAKES: Well it's headed by the Treasury Secretary. It's not that independent.
PM: Well, he has a panel of independents from the community. And it is their report. It's not Mr Swan's report. It's not mine. That's the first point. Second is though, we commissioned it without apology, because we want them to have an independent look about where the taxation system- in their view-could go in the years ahead. But I'm just being frank with you. There will be stuff in there that we can live with and other stuff that we will reject.
OAKES: And a scare campaign for the Opposition?
PM: One thing that I'm sure Mr Abbott- backed by his crack economic team comprised of Barnaby Joyce- will be adept at, is running a fear campaign on anything, and that's the problem with Coalition politics at present. It's based on a whole lot of fear and no alternative policy. We take our future challenges seriously. We take the challenges of tomorrow seriously. We take the challenges of dealing with the recession around the world last year seriously. And frankly, I think that's the guts of what people will make a judgment on us on, rather than the song and dance routine of fear and smear.
OAKES: We started off talking about Tony Abbott. Let's finish that way. You're being - the Government's being accused of playing the man, in that you sent out Julia Gillard, Craig Emerson and others to bucket Tony Abbott over his views on virginity. Are you going to keep engaging in that kind of personal politics?
PM: Well, can I just say Laurie, my engagement with the Leader of the Opposition and each of his predecessors, has been to engage them on policy -
OAKES: But you've send out other people to do the dirty work, don't you?
PM: You know- well, can I say in the whole debate about politics, you're going to have people who will be talking about, you know, the issue of the day. Mr Abbott made some recent remarks and there was some response to it. Fine. That's just the way in which it goes.
OAKES: But isn't the Government trying to sort of pin the Captain Catholic label firmly on Tony Abbott for political reasons?
PM: Well, let's go to the core of this, Laurie. On various questions - and I make no comment at all about Mr Abbott's religious views at all- I mean, I'm a person of faith, however flawed. The question is this- Mr Abbott has a whole range of pretty extreme views. Take WorkChoices. It's pretty extreme. Saying that climate change is, quote "absolute crap". That's pretty extreme- it's a very legitimate-
OAKES: That's not to do with religion, though.
PM: It's absolutely nothing to do with that. I mean I would not have any person, ever, attacked on the basis of their religious belief. But can I just say what we have, whether it's on WorkChoices, whether it's on the question of climate change, are some pretty extreme views there and it is entirely legitimate for us to say, this is our view, we believe it's pretty mainstream given the challenges which the nation faces. Mr Abbott, good luck to him. He's been elected by, you know, the Coalition. He's got a bunch of extreme views. WorkChoices. Climate change and a bunch of other things. There's your choice. But the Australian people will make up their minds about these things.
OAKES: Final question. When Mr Abbott was on this program at the end of last year, because of his attitude to climate change science and allegations about his religious views, I asked him if he believed in evolution. He said he did, but he said, "Why don't you put the same question to Kevin Rudd?" Do you believe in evolution?
PM: I'm surprised you put a question like that to me. Laurie, I have always believed in evolution. The reason is it's an empirical science. It's been established. It has been, therefore, fundamental to the great innovations in science and technology for the last two hundred years since Darwin was around. And that's my view- always has been.
OAKES: Prime Minister, we thank you- and Tony Abbott, I've asked your question.


CURTIS: Kevin Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
CURTIS: You have announced that President Obama will visit here in March. Does that rule out a March election?
PM: (Laughs) Well, the White House and my own office have been working on this visit for a while.
President Obama, Michelle, the kids, assuming they come with him, are welcome guests in Australia as is any president of the United States.
CURTIS: Do you have a firm date for it?
PM: It will be late March. We are sorting out the precise details at the moment in terms of the whens and wheres but it will be good for this visit to happen. This is the 70th anniversary of the establishment of formal diplomatic relations between Australia and the United States, framed first of all back in 1940, and it is nearly 60 years since we framed our military alliance with the United States under ANZUS, so there is lots to talk about on the defence and security front, on the terrorism front, but also in terms of the global economic challenges and the global economic recovery.
CURTIS: While we are talking about people coming to Australia - 181 asylum seekers arrived off Christmas Island last night. Does their arrival mean the detention centre in Christmas Island is full?
PM: My advice from officials is that there is still capacity there.
CURTIS: But there wouldn't be much, would there?
PM: Well, my advice from officials is there is still capacity there. As the Immigration Minister has said on many previous occasions, there are always contingency plans in terms of the use of the purpose-built facility in Darwin but at present capacity still remains on Christmas.
CURTIS: Do you have any advice on when Darwin might have to be used?
PM: No, I don't and at present our advice is that Christmas remains the best place to accommodate people and there is still capacity there. Remember boats have been coming to this country for 25 out of the last 33 years. Let's just be frank about that and each of these challenges you just meet in a very practical way.
CURTIS: So you are not considering, reconsidering your policy at this stage?
PM: We believe that we have got the balance of the policy right and therefore we simply need to deal with practical challenges as they arise, as do all governments around the world.
CURTIS: One of the challenges will be an election later this year. Both your ratings and the Government's have fallen in the latest opinion poll. You did warn Caucus yesterday that the next election will be tough and reminded them that electorate, that voters have tended to take a bit of skin off governments seeking a second term but only one first term government has ever lost in Australia.
While the polls are not great for you, is losing the next election even an outside possibility for you?
PM: Well, just being very honest about political history, There is no guarantee for any first term government to be re-elected. Look what happened to the Hawke government back in 1984 - very close run thing. The Howard government in 1998 - very close run thing for my predecessor.
CURTIS: But both of them won.
PM: Can I say those were highly contested elections, but there is no guarantees in this business, absolutely none, and remember this will be a hard fought election but our job is to govern in the national interest but the political realities are these - If two or three people in a hundred change their vote then Mr Abbott is prime minister. That is just a fact and it is very important we recognise this, so it will be a contested election. I think the Australian people want it to be a contested election and we are certainly prepared for that.
CURTIS: The poll is the first time the Coalition has been ahead on primary vote. They have a new leader, a new policy on climate change. Are both of those things a problem for you?
PM: Look, our job as the Government, my job as Prime Minister, is to take some tough decisions in the national interest. They may relate to the economy, what we had to do in the national economic stimulus strategy last year when every man and his dog was opposing our actions to seek to support the Australian economy when economies around the world were falling over like nine pins.
Secondly some tough decisions on climate change, many of which are unpopular, and tough decisions which lie ahead on health and hospital reform but the key thing is this - to take these decisions in the national interest.
The easiest thing in the world to do is to complain about everything and to offer practical solutions on nothing and so far, so far in Mr Abbott's tenure as leader of the Opposition that is what I see a lot of.
CURTIS: He will be offering a solution from the Coalition today on climate change. Has the climate for you, for the Government, soured on climate change since the failure of Copenhagen and the failure to get your emissions trading scheme through Parliament?
PM: Climate change involves hard decisions, tough decisions, complex decisions. Let's not pretend that this is easy stuff and it is not easy for any government around the world.
CURTIS: But you also have to take the public with you, don't you?
PM: That's true and I don't walk away from that one bit but it is not a popularity stakes, it is doing the right thing for the long term, and we are determined to act on climate change.
The key for Mr Abbott is a credible alternative policy in terms of what it does on reducing greenhouse gas emissions on the one hand but also how it is costed and, most critically, how it is funded. Money doesn't grow on trees. The money has to come from somewhere.
CURTIS: Many oppositions in the past, though, have left final costings of policies 'til closer to an election. When you were running for government it wasn't until fairly late in the piece that you put out where you would cut spending to save some money. Isn't Mr Abbott entitled to do the same thing?
PM: When you are looking at something as fundamental, with economy-wide reach as climate change, and the criticism against us is about the economic and financial impacts of what we are doing, frankly I think to be upfront about this you have got to say not just what it costs but how you are going to fund it.
This goes economy-wide, it goes society-wide. That's why we have been upfront with what we are doing. We have copped criticism for it. I accept that. These are tough decisions and hard decisions, but I go back to what I said before: it's very easy, it's very, very easy to complain about everything but to offer practical solutions on nothing and we are seeing a fair bit of that - and I say practical solutions.
CURTIS: The Treasury yesterday released the Intergenerational Report. You said on Sunday the report would reveal that the impact of knocking back the means testing of the private health insurance rate is in the order of $100 billion. That figure is not in the report. Did you get it wrong?
PM: All the underpinning data provided by the Treasury for the preparation of that report contains that number. It's very clear, and if you look at the actual report itself it's clear from the projection of the report that that's the case.
CURTIS: But the figure itself isn't in the report as you said it would be.
PM: The bottom line is that this is the cost to Australia of the Liberals continuing to block much-needed reform for private health insurance for the wealthiest Australians and secondly, this $100 billion, if it was available and it should be, is there to underpin the long-term investment in our hospital and health system reform.
Again, I go back to what I said before: money doesn't grow on trees. We are going to invest in the hospital system, increase hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, improve emergency departments, improve elective surgery, you've got to invest and that is $100 billion which we want to put to that. Mr Abbott, it seems, for ideological reasons like his predecessor, is simply into blocking mode.
CURTIS: Joe Hockey said yesterday that you sounded like Dr Evil plucking out the biggest number that you could think of. Do people have a right to question it when you said it would be in the report and it wasn't?
PM: It is absolutely clear that the number that we are speaking off comes directly from the analysis underpinning the Intergenerational Report. It is as clear as night follows day. That is a basic statistical fact. What they are seeking to run away from are the financial consequences of it - $100 billion which they believe should be spent on providing rebates for private health insurance for some of the wealthiest Australians on the one hand, as opposed to taking that $100 billion and investing it in our health and hospital system.
That is why they don't want to debate the substance of it. We intend to debate the substance of it. It's real, it's fundamental.
CURTIS: Finally, there may be pressure also on household budgets, too, after today. The Reserve Bank is considering its latest decision on interest rates. Why aren't the better economic times being reflected in household budgets?
PM: Well, when you look at the challenge of interest rates, which is your specific question, let's bear this in mind - that interest rates were brought down to record lows by the Reserve Bank because of the challenges of the global economic recession, and as of today you have got interest payments on an average mortgage about $600 or so less a month than they were, say, in the middle of 2008.
Let's bear that in mind - and the Reserve Bank has been very blunt about this for a long time - as the global economy recovers, so will there be changes in monetary policy, but sure, households, working families, are doing it tough in many parts of the country. We accept that, we acknowledge that, and the practical means of assistance lie in what we have done, for example, in increasing the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent; the education tax refund to help people with school expenses; and other practical measures like that and getting rid of WorkChoices.
CURTIS: Kevin Rudd, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


This time of year parents are rushing around packing pencil cases, backpacks and lunchboxes getting their kids ready for the first days of the school year.
The Government is working to achieve improvements in literacy and numeracy skills for Australian children by investing in our school infrastructure and providing the resources that teachers and parents need to improve literacy outcomes.
This is an important issue and your thoughts are valuable - join the conversation on the Prime Minister's Children's Literacy Blog from 12pm Tuesday 2 February.


PM: Welcome back to the ranch.
Let me say a few things. I'd like to officially take this opportunity to welcome President Obama's decision to travel to Australia. This is good news for Australia. It's good news for those who attach great importance to the Australia-US relationship. Of course, President Obama is not the first US President to visit Australia. But all of his predecessors, President Bush Jr., President Clinton, President Bush Sr., and way back before then- President Johnson- have been welcome guests in Australia. And that will be the case with President Obama as well.
So I'd say to our good friends in the United States that the President will be in welcome company here in Australia, it will be good to have him among us. As I said earlier today, this is the 70th anniversary this year of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and the United States. Way back in 1940 when life was looking pretty grim around the world is when we opened our first mission in Washington. Things have come a long way since then- formalised in the ANZUS Treaty in 1951. But this is still, by far above, our most important foreign relationship. Not just in security terms, where our common interests across the Asia-Pacific region and more broadly around the world are practically as one, but beyond that, the continued fundamental importance of the United States to the global economy, global economic recovery.
For the United States, and for Australia, therefore, it's a good opportunity to reaffirm the fundamentals of our relationship. We will of course be going through the details of our security relationship and our economic relationship as well. So the President- and Michelle, who I understand is coming as well, and the kids, don't hold me to that, I understand that's the case- we look forward to making them all feel welcome in Australia.
The further details concerning the President's visit, we will release those as they are confirmed between ourselves and the White House. So don't hold me to every single element to what I've just said, particularly where it concerns the travel by the President's family.
One other thing I'd say is this- today the Government will be re-introducing its legislation for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We're doing so because, like Mr Howard, like Mr Costello, like Mr Turnbull, and like 35 other countries around the world, the Government concluded that this was the most effective and least costly way in which to deal with the challenge of climate change. The Government's views haven't changed on that. The reason that we have concluded that this is the best market-based way of handling the challenge of climate change is because it responds to the entire economy flexibly.
The bottom line's this: if Mr Howard had won the last election, guess what? We would have had an emissions trading scheme passed through this Parliament. Had Mr Costello become Prime Minister, you'd have an emissions trading scheme passed through this Parliament. If Mr Turnbull had become Prime Minister, you would've had an emissions trading scheme passed through this Parliament. That's my view as well, and we're not alone- 35 other countries around the world. In fact, it's difficult to find many other countries at all which would have the same approach as that which has been outlined so far by Mr Abbott. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, President Obama does not have an emissions trading scheme. Is that an area- climate change- that you'll be pushing the President for stronger action on when he visits?
PM: Well, I actually worked quite a lot with the President on these matters in the lead up to the meeting at the end of last year. Of course, as you know, there's a cap and trade scheme currently before the Congress, and the United States will be embracing a range of measures in dealing with its proposed target of greenhouse gas reductions. Each country will make its own decisions. What is the welcome change in the United States is that the President of the United States, head of the largest economy in the world, and now the second largest emitter in the world, has decided to be part of the outcome- not standing to one side. And if you actually wish to work towards a global outcome in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, America's got to be part and parcel of the deal. And since the President's election, that's been the case- Michelle.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) as is expected-
PM: What do you know that I don't know, Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Will you put it a second time to the Parliament?
PM: We will see how it progresses through the House of Representatives. I'm modestly confident that it'll probably make its way through the House of Representatives. It'll be interesting to see what happens in terms of others who may support it from the other side of politics.
In terms of the Senate, we'll be watching that very carefully. We haven't yet spoken to the Greens about possible handling there, or whether there's been any change of view on the part of the Independents.
So I think we should just take this one step at a time.
As I said, the reason we have backed an emissions trading scheme, and there's no particular rocket science in this, it's because if any other Government around the world amongst the advanced economies had seriously concluded that there was a cheaper, more effective way of doing this than through an emissions trading scheme, I'm sure they would've been on to it a long, long time ago. And that's why Mr Howard, Mr Costello, Mr Turnbull, and myself reached the same conclusion.
JOURNALIST: Yesterday the Greens put up an interim compromise of a two year fixed price. That will buy you some time to work on getting the emissions trading scheme through Parliament. Does that compromise, does that interim measure holding any attraction for you?
PM: Well, the discussions between Minister Wong and the Greens are ongoing.
We've always said we'll conduct good faith negotiations with all political parties represented in the Senate. We did that at the end of last year too, except they then decided to change the leader of the political party in question. But those discussions continue and we'll see what fruit comes from them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in his State of the Union address, President Obama said that nuclear power will be part of the United States' solution to climate change. Why isn't it part of yours?
PM: Well, the United States has been running civil nuclear programs since year dot. Yeah, that's right, and they've been long-established in that country, they've been a long-established part of their total energy mix.
It hasn't been the case in Australia.
As I've said many times before, this is an energy-rich country. We have multiple sources of energy. The challenges for us are to make sure that we use those energy resources as effectively, as environmentally sensitively, and as cost effectively as possible. On the question of cost again, I'd just go back to part of the earlier discussion as well. Our approach, emissions trading, is for a system which is the most effective and least costly of all those on offer. And Mr Abbott to be credible on this question, not only must the approach he puts forward be effective environmentally, it must be costed and funded. I mean, this is a series of arrangements which affect the entire economy.
JOURNALIST: Do you think there's going to be a chance for Mr Abbott to meet President Obama, and do you think President Obama will get a better reception than President Bush did?
PM: Oh well, first of all, it would be entirely natural, normal and proper for the President of the United States to meet the Leader of the Opposition. Perhaps there's a little bit of irony in this, not so much in the case of Mr Abbott, I can't remember what Mr Abbott said about Mr Obama in years past, I certainly remember what Mr Howard had to say about Mr Obama- I seem to recall Mr Howard saying that the election of Mr Obama as President of the United States was going to be a victory for a well-known organisation somewhere in the world. Well, time's moved on. The President is a respected friend of Australia, and I'm sure there'd be an opportunity, consistent with our practices and conventions here, for him to spend some time with the Leader of the Opposition.
As for how he is welcomed in this country, I'm confident that the Australian people will be their normal, gracious, welcoming selves to a visiting President from our most important and one of our oldest allies.
JOURNALIST: Do you know where he's going to yet? Do you know what cities he's going to? Coming to Canberra? Sydney?
PM: I don't have an answer to that one Malcolm, and the reason is, it's subject to continued discussion between ourselves and the White House.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: One at a time, and I'll get on to that one.
We'll obviously be attentive to some of the priorities which are put forward by the White House. Haven't been through that in detail yet, but I was having a chat down at Church this morning with the US Ambassador about a bit of this. But things will be sorted out in the days ahead. I think the usual avalanche of US advancers will arrive here with the thundering of hooves before long.
But to go back to the question just asked before from our good friends from the Herald, on the question of an address to the Parliament, that would certainly be a good thing. What I am not certain on yet is what city is he going to work in terms of the program. Certainly, if it works out that way I think that'd be great. Remember, President Bush addressed the Parliament, and prior to him, President Clinton. This is the way in which we respect the leaders of our great democracies, of which the United States is one. Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, yesterday you warned your colleagues that it was possible you could lose the election this year. Will you be doing anything different in your efforts to try and make sure that doesn't happen?
PM: I think, Dennis, what I said was we should all be very mindful of what happens to first-term Governments, and that this will be a very, very tight election. It's always been my view.
Remember, the Government's majority is what, eight seats? Two or three percentage points? It doesn't take much to move that.
As I said this morning, I think on television, two or three people in a hundred change their votes, then Mr Abbott's the Prime Minister. That's the bottom line, that's the mathematics here.
So what I said to the colleagues, I think - either in the Caucus or the Ministry - was that, be very mindful of history. Be very mindful of how close the 1998 election was for Mr Howard. Be very, very mindful of how close the 1984 election was for Mr Hawke. Which means that have to be really on our game.
I think one of the things we also discussed yesterday is that the Government has been doing a lot.
We have done a lot on the economy, you're familiar with the umpteen debates we had last year on the stimulus strategy, and the elements of that, the controversy associated with that, the implementation of it, the controversy associated with the implementation of it- but in a whole bunch of other areas too, including education, including health, and including infrastructure. I think our challenge to go to the other part of your question Dennis, is to communicate more effectively that which we have done, to communicate our record of achievement more effectively than we have done. I think we all share some responsibility for that, including myself.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, is there any possibility of a reshuffle before an election, and on the issue of climate change, do you have any concerns when you look at what happened in Copenhagen, when you look at opinion polls, that the political climate is changing on that subject?
PM: On the first part of your question, I have a pretty conservative view about governments serving their allotted time, as I've said on many previous occasions. That's our intention. Also, a pretty conservative approach of reshuffles for the sake of reshuffles. The team's very good, performing very well. The ministers are very competent, both in Cabinet and beyond the Cabinet and the parliamentary secretaries. They're a strong team and I have great confidence in them.
The other part of your question was, again?
JOURNALIST: Any concerns that the political climate in the opinion polls is shifting on climate change?
PM: Look, let's be very blunt about it - climate change is not easy. It's very hard. It's really hard, and there are lots of hard decisions to be made, and we're not Robinson Crusoe there. They are hard decisions in any country around the world.
These decisions lie at the very top of the decision-making pile of most governments around the world at the moment because they affect not just the future - they also affect the economy in the here and now as well.
So, you've got two approaches which you can adopt to that. One is to say 'all too hard' and play the fear game, or you can get on with the business of taking a decision in the national interest to make a difference on climate change, both here and abroad. That's our approach.
It's one of the easiest scripts in politics to always criticise and never to propose an alternative or never to propose a credible alternative. Again, as I said somewhere this morning, I'm starting to see a fair bit of a pattern of that with Mr Abbott - always out there to criticise, but I notice that whenever you good folk in the media say 'and what would you do and what your policy is', within about a nanobyte Mr Abbott's onto a further litany of evils on the part of this Government. But, anyway, that's his go.
Bonge, then you, Steve.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you answer the Greens' charges that your five percent target is as good as nothing, even worse than nothing?
PM: Well, if you look carefully at the statement that the Climate Change Minister issued the other day, we, together with the Opposition, maintain a spectrum of greenhouse gas reductions, from 5 through 15 to 25. Furthermore, if you look carefully at what Minister Wong had to say, in 2011 any adjustment will be made based entirely on the commitments of the rest of the world, our judgement about the enforceability of those commitments around the rest of the world and our judgement about how they are effectively globally monitored. The virtue of an emissions trading scheme is that you can adjust the scheme over time to meet targets. That's why it's one of the flexible, market-based systems.
It's for those reasons that we think it's not just a good mechanism, that is, the most effective and the least costly, it's also market-flexible into the future as well, and it directly goes to the question you raised about being able to incorporate broader targets in the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there are a couple of thousand farmers gathering out the front to march today. Do you acknowledge their concerns about property rights, and do you think the Federal Government has some role to play in addressing those concerns?
PM: Well, I was talking to Burkie about this the other day, the Agriculture Minister, and I was scratching my head and he is scratching his head as to what have we done on climate change which affects the property rights of any farmer anywhere? Still scratching my head over that one.
It's a free country. Everyone can go and protest about whatever they like, whether they are people from various trade unions or farmers or both on the same day, but the concerns in relation to Mr Spencer go to an outstanding dispute with the New South Wales Government of some time ago under New South Wales statute. Now, that, I understand, has been taken through the courts. Everyone's got those rights - good. Everyone can rally in protest in support for those rights - that's good. But we see no connection between any action on our part on climate change and the operational freedom of farmers.
In fact, maybe you should ask that question in terms of any changes which occur or which are announced as a consequence of Mr Abbott's policy today.
JOURNALIST: On climate change, how will you achieve your five percent target if you cannot get your ETS through the parliament?
PM: Well, as I indicated, I think, in an interview yesterday, if our approach is rejected then obviously climate change is going to figure pretty prominently, together with health and hospital reform and the economy, in an election, whatever form that election may take. And so, that'll be, ultimately, then, for the people to decide. We accept that.
Remember, the end of the Kyoto commitment period is, I think, 2011. A new system has to start in 2012, so we have an intervening democratic opportunity to resolve these things.
Sorry, Steve, I answered you before.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the question of ETS, Abbott's been running a very robust scare campaign. Do you think that it is (inaudible) in the Government's fall in popularity, particularly with today's Newspoll?
PM: I think, on climate change, it's hard, and with Mr Abbott, on everything he criticises and on practically nothing does he propose anything practical, and that's why I'm pretty sceptical about what is in the reports so far at least, that a proposal is about to be put forward today which may have a costing attached to it but nothing in terms of how it might be funded.
Climate change is more complex than a magic pudding solution.
You can't just go out there and say 'hey, look, I'm Tony Abbott. I've just invented a solution to climate change, and guess what? It involves no cost to anybody.' That's a magic pudding approach.
Together with Mr Howard, Mr Costello and Mr Turnbull and 35 other governments around the world, we've been through this - up, down, sideways, through, in, out, through the wringer a hundred times, and guess what? The conclusion on all of us, all our parts, is there is no easy, cost-free solution to this. Therefore, if a proposal gets put out today and says 'here's the magical fix' with a bunch of regulations on this, that and the other - there's a cost attached, and the cost is either delivered through taxes or through increased prices or both. So let's just have a bit of reality in the debate.
But to go to the other part of your question, my job as Prime Minister is to take decisions in the national interest, and many of those will not be popular. I accept that, but on this question it's pretty important to get it right for the long term.
JOURNALIST: Have you given any further thought whether you want a population of 36 million, and as Prime Minister, shouldn't you actually have an opinion about whether that's a good thing or a bad thing, particularly if you want to cut carbon emissions? Do you think that you would take a population policy to the next election?
PM: I think it's good and healthy we're actually having a discussion about population. That's what the IGR is out there for. That's why Mr Costello released two previous reports, as well.
What we've done, or what the Treasury have done, I should say, in terms of that report, is just honestly project ahead, based on historical migration growth patterns and the fertility rate, where it all goes to, in terms of the overall number of our population and the aging of our population. So, that informs the debate.
What I've sought to do in the lead up to Australia Day is simply say 'what are the real policy implications for all of us here today and for the decades ahead, kids and grandkids arising from population growth, but in particular the aging population', and as I've said in a number of the statements recently, they're pretty clear cut.
We've got to compensate for the aging of the population by making our economy more productive and by boosting participation in the workforce. Those were the implications, pretty clear cut, coming out of the first Intergenerational Report and the second Intergenerational Report. We didn't see a lot done about those.
What I've sought to do is say that's implication number one, because you've got to boost economic growth in order to get more revenue growth, for then dealing with the second big implication - having enough tax revenues to then invest in the health, aged care and hospital services that all Australians, but in particular senior Australians, are going to need in the future.
These are the two big debates: how do you boost productivity and how do you therefore develop the health and hospital system for the future that you need, and we're into these big debates, up to our armpits, to be quite honest.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) think about what population-
PM: -You know, you can have a debate about that number or that number. We're just being realistic about what the projections are and what you therefore must do about it, and that's what's been missing in the national debate up until now. National policy action is absolutely critical, absolutely critical on this question, and all I've done is look at the data and said that's where it's going, that's what's happening with aging, that's what's happening with overall population growth. How do we work within that framework?'
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've talked about the need to explain the things that you are doing this year. Can you explain in simple terms what an emissions trading system is to the Australian people and what affect it will have in their daily lives?
PM: Sure.
An emissions trading scheme does three basic things. It puts a cap on carbon pollution. The second thing it does is that it charges Australia's biggest polluters for their pollution. And thirdly it uses that money to provide compensation to working families for the 1.1 percent increase in their cost of living which comes from that, which also gives them the opportunity to invest in energy-efficient appliances to make a difference to those costs in the future.
That's what we're on about.
What's the alternative? The alternative is, Mr Abbott's proposal is not to put a cap on carbon pollution, not to put a charge on Australia's biggest polluters - let them get off scot-free - not to provide a dollar's worth of compensation to working families, and somehow the magic pudding then kicks in and you still get five percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
I would suggest to you that's the alternative.
Thanks very much, folks. Better run.


STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Karl.
STEFANOVIC: Well, we wake to the news this morning that Tony Abbott has closed the gap as Parliament begins. Did you tell your colleagues yesterday you could lose the next election?
PM: What I said to the colleagues yesterday is that no first term Government is ever guaranteed of re-election. This'll be a very tight and hard-fought election. I think the Australian people expect that'll be the case. And it's just a reality that we're going to be into a tough struggle for an election year, because there are many tough decisions to be made by the Government, and not all of them will be popular- but our intention is to govern in the national interest.
STEFANOVIC: House figures today too with reports that 26,000 households could be placed under severe mortgage stress if interest rates are raised today. Does that add to your re-election burden?
PM: Well interest rates have a real effect on the family budget, that's a fact. And the other thing to bear in mind is that interest rates were reduced to near-record lows by the Reserve Bank over the last twelve months because of the global economic recession. And right now, I think you'll find that average mortgages are about $600 a month less than they were in the middle of 2008.
So there are some comparisons there, but let's face facts. Any increased interest rate has an effect, and hurts working families - that's the truth of it. I think the banks here have a responsibility Karl, I saw the National Australia Bank over the weekend saying they'd keep any interest rate adjustment on their part to within any official interest rate rise, that's if one comes. My call on the other commercial banks would be to follow the NAB's suit.
STEFANOVIC: There's nothing you can do about it though - they'll do what they want, what they'll please.
PM: Well we've seen that before, and I'm sure that at times in the future we'll see it again. Don't underestimate however, the impact of the public's attitude to these things because I think that's one of the things that the NAB had in mind when they took their decision over the weekend. I think it'd be the right thing to do for the other banks to follow suit.
STEFANOVIC: Okay, let's hope so. Now Tony Abbott releases his climate change plan today as you'd be fully aware - now you have done your costings, your pricing models for your ETS. How many Australians will be worse off if that is passed?
PM: What we have, through the modelling done by the Australian Treasury, Karl, is something as basic as this. All low income earners will be compensated by more than one hundred per cent for any cost of living increase which the Treasury calculates would be in the vicinity of 1.1 per cent. For middle income earners, there will be compensation as well, for the bottom half of middle income earners, about one hundred per cent, and then on a sliding scale for upper middle income earners. And then for the wealthiest Australians like you and me mate, we're on our own.
That's how it's done. Ninety two percent of working families will be provided with compensation. That's the bottom line. See, the contrast here though, can I just make one point - and that is that what Mr Abbott has said so far about his scheme, not a single dollar, has he suggested, would go in compensation to working families.
There's no magic pudding here. If you're going to act on climate change, it costs the economy, it costs businesses, and some of those costs flow through to consumers. We offer a compensation package for working families - ninety two percent of working families would receive compensation. Mr Abbott is offering none.
STEFANOVIC: Okay, see there seems to be some confusion here, a lot of confusion over just how much goods will increase. Can I use this as a basic example - can I ask you this question? How much for example will the price of bread increase under your ETS?
PM: Well, if you look at the way in which the Consumer Price Index is calculated Karl, it takes together the whole basket of goods. What's a loaf of bread at the moment - $2.40.
STEFANOVIC: $4.
PM: No, $2.40 at the no brand level, up to $4, $4.80 for some of the better brands. That's the range, approximately. So you apply the increase in the cost of living to that as part of an overall basket, you will see an increase.
STEFANOVIC: But do you know how much?
PM: Well Karl, I don't run every bread manufacturing outfit in the country. That's the bottom line. But let me tell you this -
STEFANOVIC: What about petrol? How much will petrol go up?
PM: Well petrol is currently $1.23-$1.27 a litre. So here's the bottom line on petrol - that under our scheme, there is a full adjustment for any increase in the petrol price. And therefore there would be no net impact on motorists. We have done that deliberately because we are very conscious of the role which the family car plays and the family vehicle plays often in the family small business. We have actually gone through this in a whole lot of detail.
STEFANOVIC: What about milk? How much will milk go up under your ETS?
PM: Well as I said, milk would form part of the same basket of goods. Two litres of milk - then you're looking at the impact of the price there, $2.80 or something like that, depending on the brand that you're looking at, and therefore, what would be the adjustment there? It would again be applying approximately the 1.1 per cent CPI increase that we're talking about. But this is a weighted basket of goods which includes bread, includes milk, includes the other essentials as well, that's how the Consumer Price Index is calculated. We've been very upfront about this, Treasury's calculated the price impact, 1.1 per cent increase overall.
And we've also been upfront about the fact that for ninety two percent of working families, there will be compensation provided. Mr Abbott says there will be -
STEFANOVIC: How can you base your compensation though Prime Minister, with all due respect, how can you base that compensation you're not absolutely sure about? How do you know how much it's going to be at the end of the day?
PM: Because Karl, we will adjust this on a regular basis based on the actual cost-
STEFANOVIC: So it might be never-ending?
PM: Well there is a one-off adjustment in the price because of what happens, but then you make sure that you are providing proper adjustments for families on the way through. This is why this scheme has been very carefully planned. We have spent a lot of time on it. The overall price increase to cost of living - 1.1 per cent. Ninety two percent of working families being provided with compensation, that's on the one hand.
Mr Abbott is offering a magic pudding, no compensation for families, and that's because he's going to transfer the burden it seems, for the cost of his scheme on to taxpayers. And they'll be paying it by different means.
STEFANOVIC: Alright, we'll see what he comes up with a little bit later. I know that you have to go to Church. Just quickly and finally, Barack Obama is coming to town. When will that be? And it'd be a good time to call an election after he's been here, won't it?
PM: Well, when you talk about having to go to Church, it's the first day of Parliament. The tradition in Canberra is that both sides of politics go to a commencement service. That's what we're doing this morning.
As far as President Obama's visit, he and if Michelle and the kids come as well, are all welcome guests in Australia, as would be any President of the United States. This is really important for our bilateral relationship, 70 years this year since we established diplomatic relations with the United States. And what we'll be spending our time doing is looking at the future of our security relationship, the challenges of terrorism but also, this is the biggest economy of the world, and the recovery of this US economy affects every working family who's watching your program this morning. They are the two things we'll be talking about.
STEFANOVIC: Alright Prime Minister, always good to talk to you. Thanks for your time, today shapes as a very interesting year. Appreciate it.
PM: Thanks Karl.



The Australian Government welcomes the announcement that President Obama will visit Australia in March.
President Obama will be a most welcome guest in Australia on his first official visit. Australia's relationship with the United States of America is our most important international partnership. We are allies, we are trading partners, and we cooperate on the international challenges confronting all nations.
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the establishment of formal diplomatic relations between Australia and the United States. Our formal military alliance, the ANZUS Treaty, has been in force for nearly sixty years.
The President's visit will underline the strength and breadth of the relationship.
Details of the President's visit are still being finalised.


PM: Well it's good to be here with the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Education, the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, the Minister for Employment, Mark Arbib. We also have with us the Coordinator-General.
Today marks 12 months, one year, since the Government announced its national economic stimulus strategy. We did that at a time when the world was facing the economic abyss. We saw, 12 months ago, where employment could have gone. We saw 12 months ago that small businesses could have been smashed across the country, and so 12 months ago we decided to take early, decisive action. That's what we did.
12 months later the results are, here, locally, but they are written right across the nation, and they have been observed across the world. 12 months later, of the major advanced economies, this is the only one not to have gone into recession. This one has the second lowest unemployment across the major advanced economies. It has the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies, and on top of all of the above, we uniquely among the advanced economies, generated positive economic growth in '08-'09.
That's the national report card and that is the product of early, decisive action and engagement also on the part of the Australian business community and the wider community as well.
This national economic stimulus strategy was our response to the global recession. The national economic stimulus strategy was opposed by the Liberal Party - lock, stock and barrel. 12 months ago Mr Abbott voted against the national economic stimulus plan. He was wrong then and he is wrong now.
The bottom line is this: if Mr Abbott is to take $20 billion out of stimulus spending across the economy, it means cancelling thousands of school modernisation projects like this, right across Australia.
Let's be very blunt about it. There are about 5,000 of these projects yet to go up. 5,000 projects in schools right across Australia which are now at risk because of what Mr Abbott has said.
I'm glad to see this report card on the part of the progress that the Government has achieved so far in the implementation of the national infrastructure stimulus plan. 49,179 projects have been approved right across Australia. 35,853 projects have commenced. 8,339 projects have been completed.
We see here in this school, two projects which have been completed and one which is on the way and we see that story right across the country.
Let me go to education itself and look at the impact of what is being achieved there. Altogether, some 24,000 projects in schools right across Australia. Let's look at the examples, for example, of the classroom modernisation and the conversion of this room into the school library - all under the umbrella of what's called the National School Pride Project.
Some 12,800 National School Pride Projects approved across Australia. 12,467 national School Pride Projects currently underway, of which 4,435 have been completed. That's happening right across Australia. There are about 10,000 schools in our country.
Go to the Building the Education Revolution projects. That is, like the one we've just seen out the back here - what will become this multipurpose hall, access for the local community, and used also for after-hours school care, so the principal tells me, wider use as well, as well as freeing up this space to become a purpose-built or purpose-used library. Building the Education Revolution projects: 10,600 have been approved across the country, 5,334 now we have onsite construction, 200 of those projects have been completed and 500 have yet to commence. This is a massive project across the country.
Also, let's go to our secondary schools - some 503 new language and science centres which have been approved and we have already three of those completed. This is building the education revolution. This is giving our kids the best possible education facilities for the 21st century. It's about supporting working families, it's about providing the best facilities for kids as possible, and it's also about providing the best quality education for kids that's possible.
I'd conclude by saying this - here at Garran, this primary school, is where the rubber hits the road. Here you see the practical results of work which has been done and still to be completed.
But you know something? We've just been talking to some of the tradies outside as well. One of them just said, come the middle of last year, things were starting to look a bit dark and he himself has had work around this part of the world at a number of school projects. This is the story not just here in this part of Canberra, it's the story that Wayne and Mark and Julia and myself have heard right across the country. I've heard it in Cairns, I've heard it in Townsville, I've heard it in Geraldton, I've heard it everywhere in the country.
As the economy was running into real strife last year and falling through the floor, where you had the real risk of small businesses collapsing, tradies losing their jobs, apprentices being laid off, as well as unemployment going through the roof, we instead decided to take action.
So, what we have done in overall terms is this: through our national economic infrastructure plan, we have kept the economy strong, we have protected Australian jobs and supported working families. That's the stuff of government when you face a national and global economic crisis.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) that was awarded funding in the first round of (inaudible) which was separate, of course, from the National School Pride program (inaudible). Are you happy with the progress of this and other projects when after eight months all I can see out there is a slab?
PM: Well I'll turn to Julia on the details of this particular school project, but can I say if you've 10,600 such projects being built right across the country, the Government is delighted with the progress which has been made right across the country, given this is the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history. Julia?
GILLARD: Well can I take this opportunity to thank everybody who's been so generous with their time today as we've had a look at the school, including the kids, who are just delightful. On the details of this school projects, the school hall that we toured is obviously under construction. It was funded out of round one of the Primary Schools for the 21st Century program. Round one projects are to be completed by the end of this year. The project here, the school set an internal deadline for completing it much earlier than that, and the project is actually running three weeks in front of the schedule that the school set.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're particularly proud of the stimulus package. Why hand out the report on its progress two minutes before this press conference (inaudible)?
PM: There'll be, I'm sure there'll be ample opportunity to debate this through the course of the day and I'm sure it'll be the subject of some considerable attention during the course of parliamentary debate as well today. If there are -
JOURNALIST: But there will be no opportunity for us to ask you questions?
PM: If you wish to ask further questions about it at some early juncture, I'm delighted to do so. Absolutely delighted to do so. You know why? The Government believes this is the right project, the right program for Australia in dire economic circumstances last year.
It's very easy in politics to criticise everything. Very easy in politics to complain about everything, but come up with solutions to nothing. We see that from Mr Abbott all the time. We see it on the economy. We see it on health and hospitals. We see it on education.
We are proud of this record. We'll defend it and argue it till the cows come home.
SWAN: And Matthew, I mean, if it wasn't for projects like this, for this economic stimulus project, the investment in the infrastructure, Australia would be in recession right now. If Mr Abbott and Mr Hockey had their way, Australia would be in recession.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SWAN: We're happy to talk about the stimulus any day of the week.
PM: Can I just say on this question of transparency to the correspondent from The Australian newspaper, we have a website. It's called the Nation Building website. Every day, each one and every one of you can check on progress around the country. So can I suggest in terms of transparency, which is the question that's just been posed by the correspondent from The Australian, that this Government is in the business of transparency. And furthermore -
JOURNALIST: Funny you should say that (inaudible) came here and visited myself and all I saw was a fence, after seeing it on the website.
PM: Well there has been a slab put down over the summer, and we are building the purpose built hall which has been described. Can I contrast this, by the way, with transparency on such capital projects nationwide, to the extent that they existed, on the part of the previous Government. Do any of you recall a website detailing capital projects under the Regional Partnerships program of the previous Government? I don't think so. Maybe I missed that. But you know something, we're upfront, it's out there, go to the website, here is a consolidation of the report.
As I said, it is very easy, very easy indeed, for people to criticise. Very easy indeed to complain about everything and to offer solutions to nothing, which is Mr Abbott's approach to everything.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your plan B if the emissions trading scheme is defeated again?
PM: Well, let's see what happens first of all in the Reps, and see who votes in the Reps, both in terms of our side of politics, the other side and the Independents. As I said yesterday in response to this question, if the Parliament votes it down then quite plainly, climate change, together with the economy, together with health and hospitals, together with schools, will be a strong part, a central part, of the next election campaign.
Let me go to also the alternatives which are on offer. What do we offer? Our scheme right now, as described, is- one, we put a cap on carbon pollution; two, we charge the biggest polluters; and three, we use that money to compensate working families for the 1.1 per cent increase in the cost of living which would flow from the scheme. That's ours, pure and simple.
What does Mr Abbott offer by contrast - and I'll come back to your second question- what's Mr Abbott offer by contrast? Firstly, he's not putting a cap on carbon pollution. Secondly, he is also not charging the polluters one brass razoo, and thirdly, what he is doing is passing all the costs therefore, onto families, who he doesn't give a single dollar of compensation on. And that's why we say Mr Abbott's plan is nothing more than a climate con-job, because it does less, it costs more, and is totally unfunded.
JOURNALIST: So you don't have a plan B?
PM: We will as I said, climate change, together with other matters, will be central to an election this year, whatever form that election may take. We were very clear about our approach to climate change prior to the last election. We've been consistent with that since the last election. And in the last six months, as Mr Turnbull reminded us recently, Mr Abbott has had about five different positions on this question. We've been constant, a) because we believe climate change is real. He says that climate change is absolute crap, to use his own words, not mine.
Secondly, we have a system which puts a cap on carbon, which charges the big polluters, and provides funding therefore, from that for compensation for families. For him, no cap, let the polluters off scot free, and transfer the tax burden which flows from that on to working families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister why is it then do you think, that business groups like the Farmers Federation and the Mineral Council are backing the Coalition plan?
PM: Well each group in the community is entitled to take whatever view that it likes. I notice particularly, though, in the case of the Minerals Council, if you're the Minerals Council and someone walked into your door and said guess what, we're not putting a charge for the pollution of any of your members, they'll go 'yippee'. Then they'd say 'whose going to pay the bill?' Oh, the good old taxpayers of Australia. Guess who the taxpayers of Australia are? Working families everywhere.
Let's be very blunt about this. Mr Abbott's climate con-job is totally unfunded and therefore can only be paid for by increasing taxes on working families, or cutting services in schools, in hospitals, and in defence. And all three he refused to rule out, when asked this morning. Let's be very clear. It's a totally unfunded climate con-job and can only be paid for by whacking new taxes onto working families, or by cutting health, schools, hospitals and defence, and he refused to rule those out when asked explicitly this morning.
JOURNALIST: Youth Allowance (inaudible) you seem to be running out of time before the new university years start. Are there going to be scholarships in place for regional kids come the first day of university this year?
GILLARD: We'll obviously be bringing the Youth Allowance legislation back to the Parliament. We'll be doing that as soon as we can. But the vital question here is that Mr Abbott as new leader of the Liberal party, reassesses this issue. What is stopping us paying scholarships to kids right around the country who want to go to university is that Mr Abbott and his Liberal party are blocking the bill.
We want to make sure we're in a position to pay those kids scholarships to deliver a better and fairer Youth Allowance system. In order to do that, we need the bill to get through the Senate. We want Mr Abbott to actually engage with this issue and to think about it, because there are going to be kids who need that money to go to university and it's Mr Abbott that's keeping that money out of their hands.
JOURNALIST: Would you look at paying those scholarships retrospectively?
GILLARD: We will do everything we can to deliver the system as quickly as possible after the legislation is passed. But there has been delay caused by the actions of the Liberal party. We can't pay scholarships, we can't have Centrelink engaging with the processes to pay scholarships until we've got the legislation through. That's why it's urgent. It was urgent at the end of last year and the Liberal party said no, they didn't want to give these scholarships to kids around the country.
We're asking Mr Abbott, as the new leader of the Liberal party, to look at this issue again. And if he cares about getting vitally needed dollars into the hands of the kids who need it to go to university, then we will reverse the Liberal party's current position.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said yesterday that you needed to improve your communication of the Government's scheme. Just wondering, now that there is a clear difference between the two sides on climate change, whether you feel, how you'd rate your performance so far in explaining to people your system and whether you're confident that now that there is at least there's a debate you'll be able to really press through and turn the tide on this?
PM: The first thing I'd say is climate change is hard. It's really hard. Let's not pretend it's not. As I said before, very easy to criticise, it's very easy complain. Very hard to solve, and to be practical about how you're solving it. That's the first point. Secondly, as I've said yesterday, it is quite plain that it's incumbent on the Government, including myself, to explain the challenge of climate change as clearly as possible to the Australian people, and the content of our response to it.
Thirdly you asked, now that there is something on the table from the other side, frankly, I welcome this debate. Because what's been put on the table is a climate con-job. It does less, it costs more and is totally unfunded. And let's go back to it. If it's totally unfunded it is going to be paid for by higher taxes on working families, or cutting services in schools, hospitals and defence. You don't actually have an alternative there. And the last thing I'd say on the cost, this cost is three times larger to the budget than the Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Let's just be very blunt about that.
Even on Mr Abbott's own figures, this costs more than $10 billion. The Government's Treasury costed proposal is something in the order of $3.3 billion. This costs more, Mr Abbott's climate con-job costs three times more than the Government's plan. And those taxpayer dollars on working families go to make up for Mr Abbott's plan. That's the bottom line here. On the last aspect of your question, in terms of the judgment of others about our communication of the message, I will leave that to others, rather than conduct a, you know some sort of other evaluation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: On the question of the National Apology, this is an important question. Last year we decided to deliver the update on the day closest to the anniversary of the apology itself, and we are doing so again this year, which means that the apology will be delivered next Thursday - sorry, the annual statement to the Parliament will be delivered next Thursday. Let me state it so everyone's clear about it, it will be the sitting day closest to the anniversary of the Apology to Indigenous Australians, and that will occur next Thursday in the House of Representatives.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well you know something, the Leader of the Opposition says that climate change is absolute crap. I'm sure Lord Monckton may use more elegant language than that, but they're running a unity ticket when it comes to climate change.
Thank you very much, got to go.


SPEERS: Prime Minister, welcome back to Sky News.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
SPEERS: Have you been rattled by Tony Abbott this week on climate change?
PM: You know something, climate change is a hard debate, it's a complex debate. It is necessary however, for Australia's national interest. What I welcome is the fact that Mr Abbott at last, has joined the debate. One of the easiest things you can do in politics is to be all complaint and no solutions. And I've seen that in the time that Mr Abbott has been in the position so often, but on this one, can I say they've put their proposal forward and against the most basic tests this turned up to be a climate con job, first class.
Our policy is internally consistent, it has been well developed and it adds up and is environmentally effective.
SPEERS: You've suggested that Tony Abbott's plan would increase emissions. He disputes that suggestion. How do you arrive at that finding?
PM: Well if you go to the core elements of his plan, and then come to the question you ask specifically. You see with Mr Abbott's plan, based on his statement in his own language, that climate change is, quote "absolute crap", what you have in fact, is this climate change con job which costs more, does less, and is totally unfunded.
Costs more - that's a debate we had during the course of this week so far. Our cost: about $3 billion. Theirs: more than $10 billion. So theirs is three times more expensive.
The second one is effective/less effective - that means environmentally effective. This is exactly the question you ask. You see the Liberals and us are committed to a five percentage point cut in greenhouse gas emissions. What does that equal? It equals pulling out 138 million tonnes of carbon pollution from the atmosphere. It's a basic question of mathematics, really.
So, what Mr Abbott has put forward is a policy which is nowhere near 138 million tonnes of carbon. What the Department of Climate Change and the expert analysis has concluded, in consultation with the Treasury as well, is that at best, it represents 40 million tonnes of carbon.
SPEERS: And you've released that advice?
PM: Yes, we'll produce that advice during the course of the day. But can I just say, where does that all add up to? Under our scheme, we reduce carbon pollution by five percent, because we cap carbon pollution. Under Mr Abbott's scheme, carbon pollution actually increases by 13 percent. So in summary, what you have therefore, is first of all, Mr Abbott's scheme costs three times as much and secondly, a scheme which actually increases greenhouse gas emissions by 13 percent.
It doesn't add up environmentally, it doesn't add up economically and that's quite apart from the fact it's totally unfunded.
SPEERS: You mentioned cost. Your scheme, the emissions trading scheme, would direct cost on business and there would be a cost to Australian families as well. On your own figures, electricity prices would rise 7 percent in the first year, 12 percent in the next year. There are going to be some families and businesses out of pocket, aren't there?
PM: Well as Mr Howard my predecessor always said, if you're going to act on climate change through an emissions trading scheme, it's not for free. Any action on climate change is not for free. That was Mr Howard's view, Mr Costello's view, Mr Turnbull's view. Mr Abbott seems to say that uniquely, worldwide, he's come up with a solution which has no pain attached to it.
SPEERS: When you attacked Tony Abbott's plan for costing more than yours, you're ignoring the cost that this is going to have to families, to business, and particularly to big industry.
PM: We make absolutely no apology for the fact that we are charging the big polluters which Mr Abbott chooses to let off scott-free. What he does is transfer the burden of climate change adjustment entirely to working families as taxpayers and not offer them a dollar of compensation.
What do we do? We charge the biggest polluters in order to get them using market principles to reduce their carbon pollution over time. Secondly, we use the money which is raised from that charge to provide direct compensation for working families so that 92 percent of working families receive compensation.
That's the bottom line. That is the difference. Under them, not a dollar of compensation. They let the big polluters off scot-free, and the taxpayer at the end of the day, foots the bill.
SPEERS: But it's not just the big polluters, as you call them. What about a local dry cleaning business? It's going to face much higher power bills.
PM: Well you just referred to, before, the increase in electricity prices which we have been completely explicit about. I believe in this debate you've got to be absolutely transparent, as we have been on electricity prices, gas prices and in terms of the overall impact on the cost of living.
But let's actually nail it for what it is - the Treasury's analysis, which is very clear cut, is that the impact on the cost of living will be 1.1 percent, and on the other side of the ledger, we unlike the Liberals are providing compensation for working families so that 92 percent of working families will receive compensation. That's the difference.
SPEERS: But getting back to the question about a small business that uses a lot of electricity, or indeed a single pensioner who might use a lot of energy if they live in a cold part of Australia - they could be worse off.
PM: Well can I just go to your example about the single pensioner. What we have done for pensioners and low-income families is provide a compensation scheme which in their case provides between 100 and 120 per cent compensation for any flow-on effects on the cost of living, and secondly, we have regular adjustment mechanisms for that into the future.
We understand precisely the impact on individuals in those circumstances.
SPEERS: So no pensioners will be worse off?
PM: Absolutely, because that is the way in which we have costed this and funded it. That is why the Australian Council of Social Services backs what we have done. Remember Mr Abbott, in validating his approach, said that he had a mob called Frontier Economics in there, in the engine room, doing it for him. That was his third-party validation.
What happened yesterday? Frontier Economics jump on the horse and ride away at a million miles an hour, so not only do you have a scheme which does less, costs more and is totally unfunded, you have one which his own, self-nominated independent expert is now galloping away from it at a million miles.
SPEERS: Prime Minister, after the failure of Copenhagen, why should Australia make industry pay more for emissions when the biggest economy, the United States, is not?
PM: Our principle, and it is absolute consistent with what we have said from the beginning, is that Australia will do no more and no less than the rest of the world.
SPEERS: But we are - with an emissions trading scheme where the US is not.
PM: Well an emissions trading scheme provides you with a vehicle to adjust your target over time, depending on what the rest of the world does. Look carefully at what the Climate Change Minister said the other day about the timeframe that we have set for ourselves for any final adjustment to the target for the simple reason is we want to make sure a) what the rest of the world is committed to, b) the enforceability of those commitments and by what mechanism, and c) the global monitoring and verification system in place to make sure it happens.
We go into this with our eyes wide open - no more, no less than the rest of the world.
But you know something David? What we have out here is Mr Abbott almost alone in the world, arguing that an emissions trading scheme is not the right way to do it. Mr Howard backed an emissions trading scheme. Mr Turnbull backed an emissions trading scheme, Mr Costello backed an emissions trading scheme. Mr Abbott himself has backed an emissions trading scheme -
SPEERS: The US Congress hasn't backed an emissions trading scheme.
PM: Well that's why we've put in place the reservations that I just referred to in terms of the future, but 35 countries around the world, the advanced economies, have either implemented or are in the process of implementing emissions trading schemes. You know why? Because they've concluded that it costs less, that it is the most effective, and of course, it funds itself. That is why they have done it. And that is why Mr Howard reached that conclusion.
What's Mr Abbott about? Providing complaint on everything and offering solution on nothing. A very easy script in the short term in politics. At the end of the day, people start to look for a bit of substance.
SPEERS: Prime Minister just quickly if we can, a few other issues around today.
The Auditor General says $17 million of taxpayers' money was wasted on the abandoned tender to National Broadband Network because of a lack of clarity, technical ignorance and a rushed timeframe. Does the Government accept blame for that wastage?
PM: Firstly, I haven't had the opportunity to read the Auditor General's report yet. The quick summary that I've got of its conclusions, however, is that the Auditor General makes no recommendations for the future. Secondly, says that what the Government did in implementation of this process was conform with Commonwealth procurement guidelines.
SPEERS: (inaudible) apparently were paid $600,000 each. That's more than you earn, PM.
PM: Well can I say, when you are looking at a $43 billion prospective or possible investment by Australia to build over time, a high-speed broadband network across Australia for 90 percent of homes, and to provide other forms of coverage for other households, this is a very big nation-building project. We're determined to get it right.
Let's go to the core of why we used that tender process - test the market in difficult circumstances in the middle of the financial crisis last year. Who was available? Telstra didn't put their best foot forward, as we all know. And as a consequence the advice from this expert panel was, none of the offered tenders represented value for the taxpayers' dollar, and instead they said the best way to go was not fibre optic to the node, but fibre optic to the home and to the premises, and that of course, informed the judgement which we took on the advice of not just the panel but the Treasury as well.
SPEERS: Iran, PM - you promised to take Ahmadinejad to the International Criminal court. You haven't done that but your Defence Minister now has apparently blocked three shipments of Australian materials to Iran. Can you tell us why, and are you increasingly concerned about Iran's weapon ambitions?
PM: With Iran, we have a very hardline approach. They are developing a nuclear weapons program which is against the security interests of Australia, against the security interests of our wider region, against the security interests of the world and the international community.
Secondly, they have thumbed their nose at, effectively, the International Atomic Energy Agency time and time again, and at the repeated diplomatic engagements by the Europeans and others.
As for Australia, given the powers which are available to the Defence Minister under the Weapons of Mass Destruction Act and its appropriate provisions, we have acted responsibly and entirely appropriately to interdict a number of proposed shipments to Iran because that was our international obligation. It was also right in Australia's national interest.
SPEERS: What were the shipments?
PM: I'm not prepared to comment on the detail of the shipments. That goes to far more detailed questions of national security which I'm not prepared to go into. But the bottom line is this - Australia has fundamental national interests at stake in terms of Iran's nuclear weapons program. We are a responsible member of the international community and we will not take a backward step when it comes to fulfilling our obligations.
SPEERS: And a final question, just closer to home. Belinda Neal, apparently her local branch members-
PM: That's a leap from Iran to (inaudible) but I'll let you make case for that.
SPEERS: It is quite a leap. Her local branch members are apparently demanding that she not run again in the very marginal Central Coast seat of Robertson. Where do you stand on this? She's caused you some grief in the last couple of years. Would you like to see her run again?
PM: Well of course, she had a bit of a rough start, I think that's fair to say. But she's been performing as a good local member, but in our processes of Party pre-selection, they are governed by the National Secretary, the National Executive, and that is where those processes (inaudible).
SPEERS: Your view's influential, though.
PM: I just expressed my views. I believe that she's been performing as an effective local member. She had a rough start.
SPEERS: Would be good to go around for another term?
PM: Belinda, as I'm sure she will, will stick her hand up, and as I said, I believe that she has done a good job as a local member. But the Party's pre-selection processes are a matter for the Party's organisation, the National Executive, the National Secretary. I've got enough on my plate David, and there's a few things going on at the moment, and that's where my mind is focussed.
SPEERS: We'll let you get back to them. Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program


DOYLE: Well, last week was the inaugural Ask the PM segment. Now, three viewers got to ask Kevin Rudd a question without notice. Hundred of you have since emailed us with your questions, so thank you very much. The response has just been fantastic.
KOCH: Now, let's recap what this segment is about. This is your opportunity to ask the Prime Minister directly about any issue, because he's ultimately the man who makes the decisions, he's the only bloke, he's the boss of the country. Mr Rudd has not been briefed on the nature of the questions, and this morning the PM joins us from our Melbourne studio. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, Kochie. Good morning, Mel.
KOCH: You've got a bit of homework to catch up on from last week. Let's quickly get that out of the way. Liz from South Australia wanted to know why aged pensioners were given an increase in the last Federal Budget, not the Widow's Allowance.
PM: She's right, the Widow's Allowance did not go up. The age pension went up because it's for people over 65, and many who are on Widow's Allowance are, of course, well widows are often under 65, but when they become 65 they begin to qualify for the aged pension.
But secondly, what we did in the budget was we increased the utilities allowances for widow's allowees - those who receive the widow's allowance - and that went up from something like $100 to about $500-plus, and secondly we made that payment quarterly to help with those big bills that come in.
The other thing she asked about was age discrimination in the workplace. She's right - there's too much of it, and therefore what we've done is begun to change the laws to make that sort of discrimination harder, and secondly change the Job Network so that mature people seeking to get a part time job can get it more easily.
DOYLE: OK, well, that was the answer for Liz. The other one that you were following up was Jessica in Victoria, and she was asking what incentives are there for mums to return to work given the cost of child care is so high?
PM: Well, Jessica faces the challenges so many young families have, which is juggling is it worthwhile going back into the workforce because I'm going to earn so much, but I've got all these childcare bills over here.
Three quick points - one is there is this thing called the childcare benefit, and it's means-tested, but if you're on a family income of up to about $130,000, you're still eligible.
The second thing is this - on top of that, for further out-of-pocket expenses there's another thing called the Childcare Rebate. That's what we've increased from 30 per cent to 50 per cent to an amount up to $7,700 per year per child.
And here's the last thing - this is really complicated for individual families, and that's why we've introduced a new service as of January this year. It's called the Childcare Estimator. If you go to the Centrelink website, it tries to make it clear - "here are the fees being offered by the childcare centre you're thinking of taking your children to on the one hand, here are the benefits that are available from the Government on the other" - and it enables you to do the sums about which decision you might want to make.
KOCH: That's a good idea. Alright, let's move on to today's questions from viewers. We've got the homework out of the way. The first one is from Rebecca Wade in Melbourne. Rebecca, good morning, welcome to the program. Now, you've got the Prime Minister's ear.
CALLER: Good morning, Kochie.
KOCH: What's your question?
PM: Morning, Rebecca.
CALLER: Morning, Prime Minister. My question relates to the changes to the Medicare rebates for IVF treatment, in particular the huge discrepancy in costs for people who require an egg donor. For example, in my case, the increase for this year from last year is huge. Last year I would have been out of pocket around $1,600 and this year it's over $7,500. And it just seems totally unfair that your ability to have a child is now dependent on your bank balance.
PM: Well, listen, thank-you so much for that question, and can I just say at the very beginning I understand something of the anguish folk are going through in terms of wanting to have a baby and the need to use IVF. I have many friends in these circumstances, so it's a real struggle.
Second point - on the question of the cost, look, there has been a huge debate over the cost of IVF services and the rebates available. Can I again, take the detail of this one on notice? I really want to get back to you on the precise amounts which we are making available here. I don't wish to mislead you and to make that sure that you are getting everything that you are entitled to. I am surprised by the quantity of the price increase you've just described, but I want to come back with the absolute detail next week.
CALLER: My case is, as many women, the increase to IVF per se has only gone up about $1,000 using your own eggs. But in my case where I would require an egg donor, that is where the huge increases come in. There seems such a big discrepancy between cycling with your own eggs to cycling with a donor, when the actual cost of treatment isn't that much different.
PM: Okay, I think I've got the point now. Basically, you're saying there are two sets of different charges which apply here.
CALLER: That's right, yeah.
PM: I'd really like to get the detail of this one right and come back to you with a direct answer about your circumstances, but can I just say - all power to your arm. This is a big challenge for so many families across Australia, many of whom are watching the program this morning.
KOCH: Okay, alright, we'll have the answer next week for you. Thanks for joining us.
DOYLE: That was Rebecca. Alright, let's go to Alex in Perth with a question for the Prime Minister. Alex, hi.
CALLER: Good morning, Mel.
PM: G'day, Alex.
CALLER: Yes, Prime Minister, my question is what are your views on same-sex marriage, and don't all Australians deserve equal rights?
PM: Well, first thing is that what we said prior to the last election - I'm just being upfront with you - is that marriage is between a man and a woman. That's what we said, and that's what we've committed to since the election.
The second point is this, though: what we are absolutely committed to is removing all forms of legal discrimination against same-sex couples from the law of Australia. What we've done, through the Attorney-General, is knock out more than 100 discriminatory provisions in various Commonwealth laws, like on social security and a whole range of other areas as well.
And the last thing is this: for same-sex couples, the big challenge that we're presented with is how do you have what is a fair, dignified, uniform arrangement for respectful relationship recognition across the country? We've been engaged in discussions with many State governments on this question, and that is what we are working towards at the moment.
I know that doesn't perfectly answer your question, but that is what we are doing on the discrimination question generally for same sex couples, secondly what we're seeking to do with respectful relationship recognition for same-sex couples, but our position on marriage is as I described before.
DOYLE: Alex, does that answer, sort of, satisfy?
CALLER: Yes, but, you know, some of those laws don't apply to the States. When it is going to be general across the board? Should not Federal law override State law?
PM: You raise a good question there. When I talked about removing discrimination from all of our statutes, that is, the Australian Government's statutes, the Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, has been very thorough on that. Took him more than a year, law by law, right across the statute book.
On the individual States, you are right - some have been quicker than others to do the same, and the progress in each individual State I cannot fully account for. But on that one I'll try and give you a quick, sort of, three-point update on the program next week about where the state of play is across the six States of Australia.
KOCH: Alright, Alex. More homework there. Let's go to Emily in New South Wales. Emily, what's your question for the PM?
CALLER: Good morning, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: Emily, is it?
KOCH: Yep.
CALLER: Yeah.
PM: Hi.
CALLER: My inquiry relates to the child support formula and its supporting legislation. There are two points: firstly, the legislative formula is quite complicated, so to summarise, it calculates the gross amount of child support payable but then this amount is payable from the parent's net income. How is that correct?
Secondly, the consideration given to a paying parent's relevant dependants is completely inaccurate. How can we get the Government to review this as a matter of urgency?
PM: Well, firstly, on the question of child support payments, you are absolutely right. This is a matter of huge controversy right across the country. A whole lot of families are going through a whole lot of angst on this, and as you know, there are many personal sensitivities associated with it, depending on which of the parents we are dealing with.
Secondly, on the question of the detailed formula that you described, can I say that the Minister is currently working through a whole series of long-term reform proposals on this. This is very complex. It's very hard, but once that's concluded I'd like to come back again - not next week - but once that process is concluded with any changes that we propose to make to the system.
On the individual calculations in your cases, I think it's far better, if you are willing for this to happen, for the Minister responsible to actually speak with you directly to make sure that your calculations are right.
KOCH: Oh, okay, so Emily, we'll put the Minister's, your details to the Minister, you'll get a call from him directly as part of that review process and certainly, when something's decided we'll have them all back on to explain, and get you back on, too. How's that?
CALLER: Yeah, that's perfect. Can I just ask, though, when do we expect, you know, a result? Is there an end date for this, that it will come to a conclusion?
KOCH: That's a good point. Prime Minister, have you got it, when this review is going to be up?
PM: Sure. This one, because it's so complex, and as Emily said, it affects so many families right across Australia, we've got to get it absolutely right, so our anticipation is any changes to the system would be made by year's end, so we're in February now. The Minister is working hard on this as we speak.
KOCH: Okay, we'll put it in our diary, Emily.
CALLER: But what happens, then, just one last thing, though, what happens then? Will it be applied in retrospect? Because some of these amounts are just grossly inflated and it really impacts your standard of living. So, you know, it's fine to take the time to calculate the amount, but will we be benefitted in the long run?
PM: Well, can I be very upfront and blunt with you, Emily? We are highly unlikely to do anything retrospectively. It would be for the future.
That's not saying that the Minister in question may not have further to say on the subject more generally, but retrospectivity is something we generally don't get engaged in. I know that's not the message you want to hear, but I just want to be upfront with you.
KOCH: Okay, alright, Emily, we'll keep you up to date with that. Prime Minister, just quickly, before you go, we did an interview with a new lawyer for Schapelle Corby a bit earlier this week. We promised everybody we would chase it up with you.
PM: Sure.
KOCH: What's the progress of trying - Schapelle Corby, apparently, is in a terrible physical and mental state. What's the progress in trying to help her get back to Australia to at least serve her time here? You've, sort of, expressed views of support in the past.
PM: As you can appreciate, Kochie, and I'll try to be very brief on this - complex discussions with the Indonesians about prisoner transfer agreements in general and any individual case in particular, I don't want to prejudice where that's all up to in terms of saying a whole lot of stuff on air. Nor do I want to give people false hope.
But can I just say, we are working on this and a whole series of other consular cases which are really hard ones with the Indonesians at present. The key to it, though, is to secure prisoner transfer arrangements in general, and we're working as hard as we can on that now.
And I am very mindful of the deep, traumatic, personal circumstances of individuals in prison in Indonesia and elsewhere at present. We have many people in similar circumstances around the world as well.
KOCH: So you haven't given up?
PM: No.
KOCH: Okay.
DOYLE: Okay, well, keep us up to date. Let us know when there's a moment that you can say something, and also, Rebecca and Alex's questions, we'll get some homework next week, so, thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.



FAINE: Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
FAINE: Thank you for joining us up here at Kinglake. There's an air of expectation and anxiety over what's to happen over the next few days. What message do you give to the people who are coming out the other end of a most anguished year?
PM: Take pride in your resilience. It's extraordinary resilience in those communities. I've been back up there probably half a dozen times or so since the tragic events of 12 months ago, and it just stuns me each time I go there, Jon. It's just the absolute guts, resilience, strength of the families, the individuals, the community leaders that I meet. So take pride in your resilience, because it's seen you through so far, and will continue to see you through.
FAINE: Has it brought out the best in people up here, and has it brought out the best in Governments, at Federal, State and Local Government level?
PM: Well, for the community as I've observed it on the ground up there, I've just seen the great Australian story at work, and in people looking after their neighbours rather than looking after themselves. And it's just been extraordinary to see.
And I've got example after example after example - whether it's rebuilding someone's fencing, whether it's putting up a shed down the back, temporary accommodation is shared before a house is rebuilt. Whether it's groceries, whether it's helping out with accommodation with the kids in Melbourne while things are done up on the house in fire-affected areas. So, for the community, it has brought out the absolute best in the community, and I think has done something for the spirit that is Australia.
As for Government, others can make those judgments. But at a cooperative level, I've got to say we've worked pretty seamlessly with John Brumby's Government, and with the local authorities in the area, and we've worked our way through a whole bunch of very practical, detailed and complex challenges. So, the individual public servants have been working on this - Christine Nixon and others - let me just say, I think they've done a sterling job, under a lot of pressure as well.
FAINE: Not wanting to focus on the negatives, but there are a few things on people's lists that have not been done, and we keep coming back to the idea of a national warning system for emergencies, whether it's cyclones in the north or bushfires in the southeast. And here we are, one year on, promises were made, and we don't have a national warning system, an emergency warning system, as expected.
PM: Well, what we've agreed with the States and Territories is three national plans of action.
One is the national catastrophic natural disaster plan, which outlines contingency arrangements for any area which is overwhelmed by catastrophic disaster. That's one. Second is the national work plan to reduce bushfire arson. And we're working our way through that. And the third is a national disaster resilience strategy, which goes to also the effectiveness of warning systems.
On the warning systems question, what we agreed with the States and Territories is to implement the emergency warning measures for this season. The Commonwealth has committed over $26 million to assist States and Territories in development of a telephone-based emergency warning capability, and this allows alerts to be sent by voice and text messages to landline and mobile phones based on an owner's billing address.
That's a practical step in the right direction. But I'll be the last to say, Jon, that this is the end of the story, we've got to continue to improve the system.
FAINE: Is there anything that Governments can do to make communities safer, that hasn't already been done?
PM: I would rather refer that question to the experts, Jon, rather than give any glib answer to that. All I can say is we, the States and Territories, through the Council of Australian Governments, looked long and hard at the catastrophes suffered by the people of Victoria.
And we tried to learn through those three national plans that I mentioned before, that you raised just before - how do we better do warning systems, you know, the actions we've taken in the last 12 months. But you know something, we have an ability to continue to respond to practical requests from the authorities to do more where that is necessary. Whether it's community hardening, whether it's the prevention or the reduction of the arson risk, whether it's the management of vegetation, all those things, very practical things. The job of Government's to respond to practical proposals that they put forward. 
FAINE: One of the things that the Opposition clearly are already preparing to do during this probably election year is to accuse you of over-promising and under-delivering. And as I look through their list of things that they say you've promised and not delivered on, of course, making extravagant promises to people whose communities are destroyed by bushfires could end up being one of those. What would happen if the bushfire recovery effort was dragged into the federal election?
PM: I'd be pretty sad, and pretty surprised by that. But, can I just reflect for a moment, you know, in a statement which both I made and the Leader of the Opposition made to the Parliament made to this week - [line drops out]
FAINE: Kevin Rudd, have we got you back?
PM: I'm back Jon, with you, loud and clear.
FAINE: We've just heard you saying that there was some discussion in the Parliament.
PM: Yes, you questioned whether in fact this had become a matter of political controversy. I certainly hope not.
One of the great things of the last 12 months was that Governments have worked together, and we've worked pretty closely with local Members of Parliament, you know, Liberal, Labor, Calathumpian.
But the other thing is, in Parliament this week, Mr Abbott was very plain in his statement that the Government responded to the bushfire emergency and reconstruction effort effectively, and made that very plain in his statement. So I think that's the spirit we need to capture for the future as well. 
The broader point you make, however, about the Government's performance - can I just say this on the basic action point, we've been through the worst global economic crisis in the last 75 years.
This country, through direct Government action and infrastructure stimulus strategy, has emerged as the only one of the major advanced economies not to go into recession. It's the only one of the advanced economies to grow last year. We've increased jobs by 112,000 when the rest of the world's putting millions into unemployment. So in terms of action, our action has been focussed about keeping the economy afloat when economies have been cut to ribbons around the world. And so far, the report card's okay.
FAINE: Well there are many people listening here up at the Kinglake (inaudible) Park where we've come in from the rain- now I hope it's not raining on Sunday when you come to Melbourne for the national memorial service at St. Paul's. And thank you for your words this morning.
PM: And, can I just say to you and your listeners how much we, the Australian Government, value the active engagement of all members of the Victorian community in the reconstruction effort.
Governments can do so much. But frankly - you mentioned Rotary before, who are doing the sausages out there - it's all those community organisations, community leaders who have made it work. So my heartfelt thanks to them, for making this recovery effort what it's been for the year, which has been a hard year for the good people of Victoria.
FAINE: Thank you for your time, and we'll hear you speaking on Sunday as well.


The Prime Minister's XI is a proud tradition. It was established by one of my predecessors, Robert Gordon Menzies, known affectionately as Ming to many politicians at the time. From the other side of politics to myself, can I say one this which unites all in the political sphere of our nation is a love and passion for cricket, so I honour Menzies for having invented this tradition, and his successors for having sustained it, and one of my predecessors, RJ Hawke, for having revitalised it not so many years ago.
Those of you who are familiar with Parliament House, Canberra - I understand that the PM's XI have been around the building today, is that right, Matt, talking to various people? - you'll see that great, green patch of turf across the top of the building is in fact an elongated wicket. We use it for those purposes. The Prime Minister's courtyard is made of concrete. We also use it for our own practice nets. I think, Matt, you've been out there with me on a previous occasion, and in fact was very gentle when he was batting and I was bowling, because he thought I needed to be treated with appropriate respect - and he just took me for six anyway.
Can I say also that none of us in the political process can claim any prominence in the game at all. All of us are, in fact, lousy, led by myself, but that doesn't diminish our passion for the game and our interest in it.
Chris, your team has proven all the pundits wrong. After a difficult start at the 'Gabba Test, can I just say the subsequent matches in Adelaide and Perth, that absolute nail biter in Perth was absolutely spectacular cricket to watch, and those of us who had the privilege to watch it, in our case on the television, and his stupendous six at the WACA, frankly, you are Captain Entertainment when it comes to cricket and it's great to have you among us.
Here at The Lodge, as I said, this tradition was begun by my predecessor Menzies quite a long time ago. Back in 1963, he had a team here, and as was the convention of the time, he had brought the team to The Lodge on the night before for a cocktail reception. He then decided to give all members of the Prime Minister's XI a solid talking to because many of them, the previous year's game, had got completely smashed at the reception. He then remonstrated and said there'd been poor form and bad behaviour.
However, an eyewitness to the occasion, Don Chipp, then in the Liberal Party, later the founder of the Democrats, recently gone on to meet his maker, however provided an eyewitness account because Chipp, on that occasion, was at the non-striker's end at what was to be the last appearance of the mighty Don himself at a Prime Minister's XI game.
The Don, I was told by someone who played in the game who is here today, got out on the second ball. Don Chipp was at the other end. Chipp in fact relayed this anecdote to everyone about what happened with Menzies' speech, and then said Menzies, having made everyone feel thoroughly ashamed of themselves for their behaviour last year, then began to mix one of what was called Menzies' favourite cocktails, a Menzies Martini, which could basically kickstart a jumbo jet on a bad day, and then, as a consequence of that, they all became entirely merry and out of control for the next day's game as well.
So, those of you from the - I'm fine, mate - those of you from the West Indies, when you are handed a drink this evening, be very relaxed and comfortable about the fact that in fact it is full of Kevin's Tequila Sunrises. It's basically just to put you in a right frame of mind for the game tomorrow.
In the Prime Minister's XI we have no less than eight players who are 25 years or younger, and I note that among those young players we've also got Mitch Marsh. Mitch is fresh back from the Under 19 World Cup, where he captained Australia to victory over the weekend against Pakistan, so well done Mitch.
I see tomorrow we also have Tasmanian George Bailey, who's back again playing on my side. George was the star of the show last year and he was man of the match. He tore the travelling New Zealanders apart with a match-winning 107 not out in 42 degrees heat at the Manuka Oval. So can I just say to you, young George, we expect better of you tomorrow - no pressure. Where are you, mate? He's disappeared! He's over there. No pressure mate. It's okay, just relax, but the benchmark is 107 and we expect some improvement.
I also welcome to The Lodge that mountain of a man who really needs no introduction, of course - our captain, Matt Hayden. Here we have a true legend of the modern game, an absolute legend, full of grit and pride and someone who has proudly worn the baggy green for a long, long time with his own partner in crime, Justin Langer. Justin Langer led the side to victory last year, and Matt - not to place any pressure on you as well - I expect a better performance than last year.
Matt's record both in the long and the short form of the game is as intimidating as the shadow he left on the wicket for bowlers fast and slow for over 15 years representing Australia. He has scored over 8,600 runs in 103 Tests with no less than 30 times making a century, and with an overall average of 50, the mark of absolute greatness, please honour the captain of the Prime Minister's XI, Matt Hayden.
We also attended briefly the same school in Brisbane, myself a little earlier than Matt. I had two years at Marist Brothers Ashgrove and the cricket coach of the team encouraged me to take on the game professionally and go international, but I declined and they made room for Matt instead.
Matt, actually, when you deal with any of the old boys of the school is actually known as an old boy of the school. I'm that other bloke on television.
And now to our tourists. I welcome you, also, to The Lodge. I mentioned to you, Big Bird Joel Garner, joining you tonight as your team manager. Joel, where are you? How could you be missed? I was convinced when we had the photographs before that he was in fact standing on the step behind me. In fact, he was standing down a step, and Joel, you are so much admired in this country. We love your work, we love your form, and you've provided such enormous entertainment to Australian cricket fans over such a long period of time. Welcome to The Lodge.
[Applause]
Chris Gayle, I've made some mention of already. This man is cool personified, and they call me a nerd, mate, so perhaps you and I could just exchange some notes later on, and you could nerd up and I could cool up. Some would regard that as a hopeless proposition. The latter, not the former, mate. His strokeplay is just absolutely extraordinary and it's a joy to watch. I mentioned before his six at the WACA, but can I just say also his 100 runs in 70 deliveries in Perth, and as we understand, the third fastest in Test history - a stunning innings. Congratulations on your extraordinary achievements.
[Applause]
Now, to conclude, can I simply say this - my record as Prime Minister so far in the Prime Minister's XI is one loss and one win. Tomorrow, not wishing to put pressure on anybody gathered in the room, could I simply say I wish to see the PM's XI improve somewhat on the averages, and again, Matt, no pressure.
Seriously, this is a great occasion, it's a great celebration of cricket. To our friends from ACT Cricket and local players younger and older - I saw some young blokes out there before, 12, 13, 14 years old, you too can play like Joel Garner, but we'll be checking your height records later on. Can I say to those who are already active in the local competition here in the ACT, good on you. You represent a great cricketing tradition here in our wider region.
To those from the corporate community who back this occasion, can I thank you for your participation as well.
Cricket's a great celebration of Australia. It's a great celebration of Australian sport. It's a great celebration of international sport. You know, whenever I travel, whether it's in India - I think I see the High Commissioner for India, who I failed to acknowledge before, lovely to have you, High Commissioner - whether it's in Pakistan, whether it's in the Windies, whether it's in the UK, whether it's in New Zealand, or whether it is in South Africa or elsewhere, the unity which comes from this game and our passion for it, I think, speaks for itself.
So here's to a celebration of cricket, here's to a celebration in anticipation of champagne cricket tomorrow, and may the best team win.
I thank you.
[ends]


MITCHELL: First, in the studio with me today, the Prime Minister. Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil. Thanks for having me on the program.
MITCHELL: Well, thank you for coming in. I wouldn't normally ask you about family matters, but this is getting into different territory. Your nephew, Van Thanh Rudd, seems to be using his relationship with you to promote ideas which seems to me to be damaging to Australia. He told the Indian news magazine that Australia's racist, he's insulted dead Australian soldiers with a photo of coffins and then superimposing a picture of Shane Warne on it, turned up as Klu Klux Klan at the tennis. Now, I know it's not your fault or responsibility, but have you had a word with him to settle him down?
PM: First thing, as you know, there's free speech in this country, and everyone's entitled to it. Secondly, do I agree in any way with what he's done? No, I don't. Absolutely.
MITCHELL: Have you told him that?
PM: No, I haven't had a chat with him for quite some months. Can I just put a bit of context in this as well. We all have very broad families. This bloke's got a couple of brothers, one of whom's a policeman, the other of whom is in the Australian Defence Force. I don't think anyone knows that.
MITCHELL: Well, they wouldn't be too happy, I don't imagine.
PM: Well, I don't intend to go there. Families are complex businesses, as I think everyone knows, but I just want to put a bit of context in this, that it's a wide and broad family. His dad's a Vietnam veteran, my brother, so you know, as I said, we all believe in free speech, but I don't agree with what he said.
MITCHELL: Look, I understand that, and as I said, we wouldn't normally talk about this area, but it just - do you agree your name is being used in this? I mean, in the Indian magazine it's the Prime Minister's nephew says Australia is racist.
PM: Well, first of all, I don't agree with the argument at all. I think you've asked me about this before. Just, it's absolutely wrong. This country's not like that. It's just not. You know, I've dealt with so many members of the Indian community over so many years, the Chinese community, the Vietnamese community. It's just, frankly, wrong. In terms of the use and mayhem to which a family name can be put, I'm probably not Robinson Crusoe there, mate.
MITCHELL: No, it's a bit frustrating, must be frustrating for you as Prime Minister.
PM: Oh, yeah.
MITCHELL: Does it concern you?
PM: I think you may said on air somewhere, I think I saw you recently saying we choose our friends. But look, it's a free country, but I disagree with his views and I disagree fundamentally.
MITCHELL: Okay, Fair Work Australia. Now, it seems to be turning out not to be fair. Yesterday we unearthed this case of some kids in western Victoria being sacked because they were casuals. They could only work an hour and a half after school each day and they have to work three hours under the new award and that is inflexible, can't be moved. Several of them have been sacked. Other cases are coming through to us. The whole principle here was that nobody would be worse off. Do you accept people are now worse off under this?
PM: Well, couple of points, and then I'll go to the action on the specific one. First is, no apologies whatsoever from us for getting rid of WorkChoices. Why? Because it provided employers with the ability to axe penalty rates and to axe overtime. That's why we got rid of it. We had a mandate to do so. No apologies for it.
Secondly, under the Fair Work Act, obviously, we have a view when it comes to minimum working hours, because one of our concerns is you can have an employer who says "come in for half an hour a day here and a half an hour a day there", very inflexible - sorry, very unsuitable for young workers often.
But on this one, because each circumstance is different, the Office of Fair Work will have their officers speak with the employer and the young people later today. We'll try and work it through, because each circumstance is different and I don't know all the details surrounding this one.
MITCHELL: But this seems to be part of the point - each circumstance is different, but there's no flexibility here.
PM: Well, I think if you look carefully at the Act, there are provisions for flexibility, but not which enable workers to have their fundamental conditions undermined.
MITCHELL: (inaudible) I mean, these kids are saying "we don't want three hours, we want an hour and half". You're saying "you can't have it".
PM: Well, we have this principle, and we took it to the election, that underpinning the whole system are what we call basic work standards. That's what we're on about. Why did we object to WorkChoices? Because it said you can pull all these things away. You can give an employer the right to axe your penalty rates, axe your overtime, and frankly, give you an hour's work there, a half an hour work there, and all over the place. That's why we changed the law.
But secondly, we also want to have a fair and balanced system which has got flexibility attached to it. That's why Julia's office, the Office of Fair Work, will have its officers deal with these folk, employer, employees, and see what we can work out.
MITCHELL: Well, you agree there's got to be flexibility. If those kids want to work and the boss wants 'em for an hour and half, that's fair enough, isn't it?
PM: You know something? We've got to be very careful about industrial relations systems which enables people, incrementally, to be exploited. This is the big debate we had back in 2007, and you know something-
MITCHELL: But I used to deliver papers, and it only took me an hour and 15 minutes. Was I being exploited?
PM: Well, you know something? When I was a kid I used to be the kid who did the packing at the local Nambour Cooperative Store of a Saturday morning, but I was 12, 13, 14 years old. What we're talking about here is the conditions which exist and the provisions which exist under the industrial relations system of Australia. We've got to protect our basic conditions.
If you open the door to employers being able to rip basic conditions out, then I think you've got a system which puts us on the same slippery slope as we had last time - and by the way, Tony Abbott says WorkChoices will be back in everything but name.
MITCHELL: But is this an unintended consequence? We've got people that want to employ kids who can only get there for an hour and a half after school. They can get there by four, the business closes at five-thirty, the boss is happy, the kids are happy and the system says "no, you can't do it". Is this an unintended consequence?
PM: Well, actually, the system has another provision within it, which we negotiated long and hard with our friends in the trade union movement. These are called individual flexibility arrangements. And they, however, will not be allowed to undermine the most basic conditions, which is why, in the circumstances of this firm and these kids, the Office of Fair Work will try to sort it out. That's what they're going out there to do later today. Whether we get there or not's a separate question.
But I'm saying the system does two things: one, puts an underpinning safety net in terms of basic conditions like penalty rates and overtime, which my political opponent would happily rip away; secondly, it says there should be a balanced system which contains within it individual flexibilities, but we're not going to allow anyone to get exploited.
MITCHELL: Do you agree it's a silly situation we've got here?
PM: Don't know the full facts of it, and that's why I'm not gonna make a judgement on that, because you know as well as I do, Neil, that each individual workplace is different. How do we know, for example, that these kids have been, for example, remunerated at the proper standards under the pre-existing award? Was it lawful under the pre-existing legal arrangements in this country? I don't know those answers, either. That's why I'm always slow to judgement on an individual case until all the facts are before us. That's why the Office is going there to try and sort it through.
MITCHELL: Well, what about the broader case? Fast food industry workers, most of them kids, are going to lose penalty rates.
PM: Well, when it comes to enterprise bargaining, and it depends which part of the fast food industry you're talking about, the bottom line is this - we want to make sure that the overall conditions for young workers don't lead to exploitation.
As far as the fast food industry is concerned, and the arrangements there and the award negotiations underway, frankly, I think it's far better that Julia give you a direct answer on the fast food industry. I don't want to mislead you by saying anything that's incorrect.
MITCHELL: Well, let's look at something general, then. Dean Mighell, secretary of the Electrical Trades Union, and I think you'll remember from the last election who you managed to drum out of the Labor Party.
PM: Big fan of mine.
MITCHELL: He is very angry about this. I talked to the ACT [sic] during the week, I noticed the New South Wales unions are saying low-paid workers there will lose wages and conditions under Fair Work Australia. This is what Dean Mighell said last week.
MIGHELL CLIP: What Gillard has done is said we're modernising all awards, which sounds fantastic, promised no worker would be worse off. Promise isn't right. We're fighting to keep our apprentice rates of pay. Apprentice, 44 per cent of a trade rate kid, earning bugger all, from getting his wages cut under this Gillard process. Office workers are having their casual loading cut because Gillard's modernising awards. Workers are losing conditions of employment. If the Liberals were in power, we would be absolutely-
HOST CLIP: -Oh, WorkChoices was a better deal than this. WorkChoices was a better deal than this.
MIGHELL CLIP: Well, I gotta tell ya, I can't defend this because we fought so hard for Your Rights At Work and now we're losing them. I just don't get it (inaudible)
MITCHELL: Okay, well, that's Dean Mighell. Forget the other voice. That was a Liberal commentator or Liberal member of parliament in the studio. Do you insist that no Australian worker will be worse off under this system?
PM: What we said from the beginning is we're going to have a fair and balanced system. I'm not going to be in a position now nor were we then to say that in each individual circumstance there won't be some variation. You can't do that.
MITCHELL: So people are worse off? Some people are worse off, and according Dean Mighell and other unions, a lot of people are worse off.
PM: Well, you raise Dean Mighell. I wouldn't trust anything Dean Mighell said in a month of Sundays. I wouldn't trust Dean Mighell as far as you could throw him.
MITCHELL: Why?
PM: Because we have had extensive dealings with this guy over a long period of time, probably longer than you, mate.
MITCHELL: No, I've known him a long time too, but he got up and swore at a union meeting. That seemed to be the essence of the problem, but that's neither-
PM: - Absolutely not. Frankly, our objections to him have got nothing to do with that.
MITCHELL: You objected to his language very strongly.
PM: I'm saying that the reason for, shall I say, us having a different view about him is that he represents a particular set of views within the trade union movement which are right out there at the extreme. Always has done, probably always will do, don't belong in mainstream debate within the Labor Party as far as I'm concerned. He's entitled to his point of view. We just radically disagree with him and he has, I've got to say, a lot of angst [inaudible] when it comes to Julia, as you could see from the tone of his comments.
MITCHELL: The Shop Union agrees. They say kids are going to suffer, penalty rates are to be taken away. Also, the retail industry agrees. It's not just Dean Mighell, he's making the point.
PM: This is the question about award modernisation?
MITCHELL: Yes, Fair Work Australia, people being worse off under Fair Work Australia.
PM: The award modernisation process is underway. It's complex, it goes to each set of awards. You've spoken before about fast food and you're now raising the question of the retail sector. Can I just say each of these is complex in itself. You want to me to provide one sweeping statement concerning every worker in every workplace -
MITCHELL: No, no, I don't. I want a principle here, and isn't the principle here that workers will not be worse off, because they patently are in several areas?
PM: Can I say to you Neil, you asked me this many times before the last election, and I said I can't provide that guarantee, and I don't. The simple reason is that we are dealing with the fundamentals of the system, a system which enabled 65 per cent of people on Australian Workplace Agreements, AWAs, to have things like penalty rates pulled off them, 50 per cent having overtime payments pulled off them. That's what we're concerned about.
So you're always going to have these debates about the detail of individual awards, but if you ask me to provide a blanket guarantee concerning all workers in any individual workplace you can't do that, because everyone's circumstances are different, and what happens in the workplace is affected by a whole bunch of other stuff beyond the industrial relations system, as you know.
MITCHELL: There was no pre-election pledge that no worker would be worse off?
PM: We said that we were going to have a fair and balanced system. I recall being asked this on many, many different occasions. My response was the same.
MITCHELL: You avoided it.
PM: No, I was just being honest about it. You had Mr Howard go out there and say, Neil, on many occasions, that interest rates would be kept record lows. What absolute codswallop, and when I was asked that question, because people wanted -
MITCHELL: - Well, you were changing the system which you said was damaging workers and you've introduced a system which is damaging workers.
PM: Neil, what you're saying, you're asking me a question about consistency of position before, and what I said, mate, prior to the election that's what we said. That's what I'm saying now.
Secondly, in terms of the system overall, what the Australian people voted for was a system which prevents penalty rates and overtime being ripped out of basic industrial conditions right across the country, which was happening in 65 per cent of cases with all those AWAs which were issued by Mr Howard, 50 per cent in the case of overtime payments.
These were happening at a large scale. That's why working people were getting very angst about it. The impact on woman workers was huge. You compared people on AWAs as opposed to those that were on awards, people on AWAs were actually copping it big time.
MITCHELL: Well, there's a lot of people copping it big time now and I think it will emerge, but we'll see.
PM: Well, Neil, we welcome the debate on this, but you know something -
MITCHELL: - The kids who have lost their jobs don't welcome the debate.
PM: It's very important that we go through each set of circumstances individually. We have a workforce of 10 million people. You are able, as a radio presenter, to find any case here and any case there -
MITCHELL: - And thank God for that, because they're getting screwed.
PM: That's absolutely as you should do it, mate, and that's your job. I accept that, but you know something? Our responsibility is for a total system, and what Mr Howard had was a total system which Mr Abbott says he wants to bring back, which says -
MITCHELL: - Mr Rudd, the whole basis of your advertising campaign against John Howard's WorkChoices was to pick out individual cases and highlight how people are being screwed. There are now people being screwed under your system. Let's highlight 'em.
PM: No, Neil, what we said was the basic conditions applied to Mr Howard's industrial relations system, which in the law said that you could pull out basic conditions like -
MITCHELL: - Well, in (inaudible) you're hurting people.
PM: In the law, what you could pull out overtime and penalty rates, and guess what? In that first big set of AWAs he brought in, that happened in 65 per cent of cases, 50 per cent of cases, huge, right across the country.
And what you're raising, legitimately, is individual cases here and there and we'll work on each of those individual circumstances.
MITCHELL: We'll move on. Don't argue. It goes beyond individual cases into entire industries, and that will emerge.
PM: Well, we will work our way through each of those. It's a complex process.
MITCHELL: We'll take a break, come back with more from the Prime Minister.
[BREAK]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister's with me. We need to be quick. There's a lot to get through. We'll take a quick call. Mark, go ahead, please, Mark.
CALLER: Good morning Mr Prime Minister.
PM: G'day, Mark .How are ya?
CALLER: My daughter works, Chloe, in a yoghurt store here in Melbourne and subsequently was sent home twice before the end of last year after working only for an hour of the proposed five-hour shift, and then with the Federal awards changing from February, oh, I mean, from the beginning of this year, now she has now lost her shifts because they can't give any casuals within that organisation any hours because they now are unable to send them home and there has to be a minimum of three hours, so she now, and a lot of other casuals within that organisation, have lost their jobs.
MITCHELL: How old is she?
CALLER: She's 15, Neil.
MITCHELL: And sacked.
CALLER: Yeah.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister?
PM: Okay, Mark, let's, through Julia's Office of Fair Work, we'll get the details of it. Can I say this, though, as I said to Neil earlier on air, in our industrial relations system we've got these things called individual flexibility arrangements. How they apply to this sector, let's work it out through the Office of Fair Work.
Young people wanting a job and getting out there, as Neil did when he was a kid and as I did as a kid, that's fair enough. We've got to make sure we don't allow practices and laws in this country, however, which enable kids to be exploited. But I want to get to the detail of young Chloe.
MITCHELL: Hang on, Mark, we'll get some details from you and a contact off-air. The Victorian Education Department has advised teachers to teach to the tests on the National Literacy and Numeracy tests. Surely that undermines the whole point of them?
PM: Yeah, I haven't seen the actual text of their communication out, so let's just leave that bit to one side until I read it. The second thing is, Neil, we fully support MySchool because of this huge emphasis on literacy, numeracy and the basics testing and the emphasis in schools. What we want the principals to do and the teachers and the education departments is to make sure the basics are right.
That's why the test is there and that's why the transparency of it's a concern - that's why the transparency of this for parents is so important. So this one I would be concerned if there is simply a focus on a test as opposed to getting into the whole system from the beginning in those critical areas of reading, writing and arithmetic so that people have got the basics.
MITCHELL: Richard, go ahead, please.
CALLER: Morning, Neil. Morning, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: G'day, Richard.
CALLER: How are you?
PM: I'm battling on, mate.
CALLER: Excellent. Um, I'm 60, aged 60. I've got rid of the kids and the mortgage and I'd like to salary sacrifice for my superannuation. Under the current laws that were introduced in parliament, I can only do a maximum of $50,000, which includes my employer's contribution, so therefore, basically, I can only do 41 at tops. I would like to be able to do a lot more just to try and make my life a lot easier. I'll be smashed with tax when I get to $50,000, not going to bother. Where do I go to from here? I'm trying hard to help this country but at the moment I almost don't care. I've paid my taxes forever and a day and I'm sick of it and that's it for super for me. You've lost me.
PM: Well, first of all-
CALLER: Excuse me, it's not a laughing matter, Mr Prime Minister.
PM: No, hang on, hang on, I'm just trying to get to grips with the absolute detail of your circumstances. On yours, as well, you've given me a whole series of facts and figures, I want to correlate it with what we've done by way of changes to the law, and if any of those affect you, I'll therefore have the Treasurer's office get onto you, if you're happy with that, directly through the people at the program.
MITCHELL: But that's the principle. You can't sacrifice more than $50,000.
PM: Secondly, in terms of proper savings encouragement for the country and proper super incentives for the country, one of the reasons why we have commissioned and received the independent review of tax is to deal with the whole future of the super system, which has become too complex for people and not enough incentives are there for people to save through the super system or beyond it.
MITCHELL: So there could be more changes to the superannuation system?
PM: Well, obviously, that's within the remit of the independent review of tax. That's been received by the Government. We're still working our way through it.
MITCHELL: I thought the Treasurer had said they wouldn't be touching superannuation? Do I misunderstand?
PM: Can I say, as far as the remit is concerned, that is, the terms of reference given to the independent review of taxation, obviously it affects savings policy. Savings policy includes many dimensions. As far as any wholesale changes to the superannuation scheme are concerned, we have nothing particular in mind, but I just don't want to set the horses running here, either, Neil. We are working our way through this systematically.
But to go back to the point that's made just before, I think by Richard - is that right? - let's get the details right. The office of the Treasurer will be on to you later in the day to see what your circumstances are and what's changed.
MITCHELL: Leave us your details, Richard. Didn't you promise before the election not to change super, though?
PM: We said prior to the election that we would keep existing superannuation arrangements -
MITCHELL: - Well, you've changed it.
PM: Hang on. If we make any changes - if - they'll be subject to what people said at the next election. They wouldn't come in before then.
MITCHELL: The $50,000 that you've already announced.
PM: Can I just say that if there are any substantive changes, and I'm talking about substantive changes -
MITCHELL: - So what's substantive and what's minor?
PM: Well, substantive goes to the entire system, as opposed to, let's call it, fine-tuning at the edges. These things affect people fundamentally. That's why, Neil, you've got to be absolutely straight up and down with people about what you're going to do, and then take it to the Australian people if you're going to make any substantive changes.
As I've said, I'm not prejudging what is in the independent review because I haven't worked my way through that yet, but if we make any decisions in that respect it'll be subject to full scrutiny and people make up their mind one way or the other.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, Wall Street down 220 points over night. This economic crisis isn't over, is it?
PM: I think I'd be as cautious as you are, Neil. That's been my attitude all along. If you look carefully at what the IMF said in its report the other day, it was, for example, saying to governments right across the world: "anyone thinks you're out of the woods yet and you can just pull out your stimulus strategies right across the world in 2010, think again. There's still a long way to go yet."
Obviously, they are projecting a recovery and growth, but, you know, there are so many bumps and twists and turns to go. So our view is having negotiated 2009 for Australia reasonably successfully, that is, we are the only economy of the major advanced economies not to go into recession, we protected hundreds of thousands of jobs, 112,000 jobs created in Australia last year as millions were lost in all the other advanced economies, but we are not through this yet.
MITCHELL: It is the anniversary of the Black Saturday bushfires. Will you be making any official visits while you're in Melbourne?
PM: No, I won't. I will be attending the commemorative service at St Paul's Cathedral here in Melbourne on Sunday. I will be having some private chats with people, but they are very private.
MITCHELL: What do you think, I was suggesting it was time to perhaps give them some space. Is that your feeling?
PM: Look, everyone will make their judgements about this, but I've been back to the communities there in the course of the last 12 months half a dozen or so times. I've spoken to a lot of people, including fairly recently. This is a very deep, bruising and hard time for people, and there's something about anniversaries which are very hard to get through.
MITCHELL: Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Good to be on the program.


The Australian Government today joined with Victoria in marking the first anniversary of the devastating Black Saturday bushfires.
The Black Saturday bushfires were Australia's worst natural disaster since Federation, claiming 173 lives, devastating entire towns and communities, destroying more than 2,000 homes and leaving thousands of residents homeless.
February 7 will be forever etched in the nation's memory as a day of mourning but also one of tremendous spirit and inspiration.
The tragedy brought out the best of the Australian character and inspired countless acts of bravery and generosity.
Our thoughts today are with the survivors of the bushfires as they remember the people they lost and work to rebuild their lives and towns.
Their quiet courage has inspired a nation.
The Australian Government has worked closely with the local communities, the Victorian and local governments, business and non-government organisations to provide more than $455 million to assist in the reconstruction and recovery of bushfire affected communities.
In August 2009, the Australian Government welcomed the interim report of the Victorian Bushfire Royal Commission and committed to implement all of the interim recommendations directed at the Commonwealth.
In cooperation with the States and Territories, the Australian Government has supported a range of measures to ensure that Australians are better prepared for bushfires.
This has included, for example, the provision of $26 million for the development of a national telephone-based emergency warning system, 'Emergency Alert' and convening the inaugural bushfire pre-season briefing for emergency management officials.
Today's anniversary represents an important opportunity to reflect on this terrible tragedy and to acknowledge the critically important work of our emergency services and the generous support of the Australian community in helping those in need.


JONES: Good evening and welcome to a new season of Q&amp;A and another year of lively and entertaining political debate. Tonight, something special - Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us at the Museum of Australian Democracy in Old Parliament House. Please welcome the Prime Minister.
We're standing in the old House of Representatives chamber, where past leaders, such as Curtin, Menzies, Whitlam and Fraser stood to address the nation and answer questions from the floor. Tonight the Prime Minister will face questions, without notice, from this audience of 200 young Australians all aged between 16 and 25.
Now, remember, Q&amp;A is live from 9.35 Eastern Time, so join the Twitter conversation. Send your questions by SMS to 197 55 222 or go to our website at abc.net.au/qanda. That's "qanda".
Our young audience have outdone themselves with hundreds of great questions. We won't get through all of them, but the Prime Minister has agreed to keep his answers short and concise - that's true, isn't it - and help us get through as many of them as possible.
PM: Thanks.
JONES: So let's get cracking with our very first question, which comes from Steven Lee.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. My question to you is in regard to the 2007 campaign win, which got you the Prime Minister role. In that campaign you had the slogan "Kevin '07" and I was wondering in the upcoming election if you could give us a sneak preview or some sort of insight into your new slogan.
PM: Right, thank you for that. No. Next question? I suppose if we had an election in 2011, which would cause the eyebrows to go up, it could be Kevin '11, but...
JONES: I thought about this a bit. If you campaigned heavily on the stimulus package you could call it "Manna From Kevin".
PM: No, we're still a ways away from an election, so we really haven't given any thought to that, so the key thing is to do what you committed to doing and people will make a judgment. They're hard judges, but they're fair.
JONES: Let's move along quickly, and we've got another question in the audience. It's from Matthew Laing.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, last week the newspapers ran a series of stories detailing a long list of promises that the ALP made the last election, which remain unfulfilled after more than two years in government. Given the amount of young people who got behind the Kevin '07 Campaign, on the basis of its reform and change agenda, is it any wonder why idealistic youth become cynical adults when it comes to politics?
PM: I think the key thing is to actually go through the list of what we undertook to do. There is, I think, about 600 or so undertakings we gave to the Australian people before the last election. I think you'll find the vast bulk of those have either been implemented or are being implemented.
Look, I'm not going to stand here and say to you we haven't changed our mind about a number, but it's a relatively small number overall. Key thing that we faced in year number one though, in answer to part of your question, was how do you deal with this global economic catastrophe and, frankly, for governments right around the world, this just was a missile coming from the right and the left at the same time.
So you had to deal with the crisis. What we managed to do with the crisis, however, when so many economies were tumbling all over around the world, was inject this national infrastructure stimulus strategy of ours and, guess what: we kept the economy afloat.
We're the only economy of the major advanced economies not to go in recession. We're the only economy, of the advanced economies, to have generated positive economic growth last year. So your question about the commitments, fair question, fair cop. I'm not going to stand here and pretend that we're purer than the driven snow, we're not. But if you go through the whole list, 600 odd, going to things like we said we'd pull our troops out of Iraq. We pulled our troops out of Iraq. We said we'd ratify Kyoto. We've ratified Kyoto. We said we'd bring in a carbon pollution reduction scheme - an emissions trading scheme. Well, we've tried. There's another mob up the road there that are preventing that from happening. Can I say, on so many of the big things that we undertook to do, including an education revolution, it's rolling out there. But keeping the economy strong in the midst of that crisis last year and protecting jobs and jobs for young people, frankly, was a huge task and we're not through it yet.
JONES: Very briefly, Matthew wasn't alone on this. We've got a lot of questions about unfulfilled or broken promises.
PM: Yeah.
JONES: Now, I'm wondering, you talked about problems with communicating.
PM: Yeah.
JONES: Have you failed to communicate this issue of promises? I mean, you saw the Daily Telegraph. A huge list of unfulfilled or broken promises they claim.
PM: Yeah, but as I said, you go back to our entire list of undertakings. As I said it's something in excess of 600, and they cover every field from the economy, through education, through health and the rest, and we're proud of our record. On the question of communication, it's always tough. You know what it's like out there. There's always a celebration of the things that go wrong, as opposed to the things that go right. That's kind of news. That's politics. That's reality. That's what we deal with. Have we been the perfect communicators of a message? Of course not, including myself. But you know something, the record is not a bad one, given what we've been up against with a global crisis, which has seen unemployment go into double digits in many of the other advanced economies around the world and we in this country have managed to keep unemployment so far at 5.8 per cent. That has been number one priority for us, because it's about protecting jobs and supporting working families.
JONES: Let's go to another question on this. I note someone's got their hand up. We'll come to you in a minute. We have another question on this subject. It's from Angela Samuels.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Mr Rudd, I'd like to know how you expect us to trust you - our generation, the ones that got behind you in the Kevin '07 - and now you expect us to trust you on everything you're saying and you broke promises like the laptops ones and the health ones and all the ones that were important to our generation?
PM: Well, let's go to the two that you've raised. Laptops, which is computers in schools, we said we would have a computer for every young person at secondary school from year nine and above by, I seem to recall, 2013 or thereabouts. We are on track to doing that. We have about 260,000 computers out there in schools now. Well, you're shaking your head. Can I just say that is a fact, and if you ring up principals from around the country it's happening. But our commitment was not to have it done by this year. It was to be done over a period of time and that has still a couple of years to elapse.
On the second point that you raise about health, as I said today in the parliament here, what's the record we inherited? Well, our predecessors took a billion dollars out of the public hospital system. In our two years in office, and our predecessors were there for 12, we've increased investment in hospitals by 50 per cent. That is a huge increase. We've increased the number of GP places for training. We've increased also the number of nurses for training. On the two examples you raise, that's not right, and on the future on health and hospitals, as I have said before, if the States and Territories do not accept the government's reform plan for the future of health and hospitals, then we will go to the people and seek a mandate to take over overall responsibility for the system. That's what we said we'd do. That's what we intend to do and, frankly, the record on both those things is okay.
But I go back to the answer to the person who began the question before. I'm not going to stand here before you and claim that we're purer than driven snow and did not have to change things. Bear in mind, we have had the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression and that was last year.
JONES: Okay. Angela, we've got to people with their hand up. One is the questioner. We'll take her first and then we'll come to you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I just wanted to know, though, you said about the health system. You said you were going to take it over. What happened to you taking it over in July last year? Now, you're saying you're going to take it over in the future. When is that going to be? How can we trust you if you keep giving us different dates?
PM: What we said was that we'd put a reform plan to the States and Territories and what we said, if the States and Territories didn't agree to that, we would then go to the people and get a mandate to take it over. We're not at the next election yet. That's due by the end of this year. That's what we said to do.
The place where we went last year was to commission an independent commission of inquiry, headed by a medical expert, Dr Christine Bennett, across - guess how many hospitals in this country? 750 public hospitals in Australia. If you're going to do health reform, you've got to get it right. You've got to get it absolutely right. So many people depend on it on a daily basis. That's what we intend to do. That's what we're adhering to. But I go back to what we've done in two years alone. My predecessor ripped a billion dollars out of the public hospital system. We have increased our funding to the public hospital system by 50 per cent in just two years. Can I just say, that's not a bad foundation, but there's a hang of a lot more to do.
JONES: All right, we've got another questioner down the front had his hand up.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Didn't you say when you were going to reform the health system that the buck would stop with you, yet you've made two references to the previous government's decisions, and I note you didn't reference the previous government's surplus they left you in terms of the economic crisis. But you said the buck would stop with you, so will it, or are we going to keep hearing that the previous government did this, the previous government did that?
PM: Well, you know, life just doesn't start afresh. Life - it's a fair point to ask in terms of taking responsibility for the future, but equally acknowledging where you've come from in the past.
You know there wasn't just a line drawn across reality at the end of 2007. You're dealing with a health system which, for a long period of time, had a whole lot of people in the previous government taking money out of it. That's just a reality. What we undertook to do was to take responsibility for the system and as far as the buck stops with me is concerned I don't back away from that one minute, but I go back to what I said in response to the earlier question and that is to make sure that you've got the detail right.
Therefore the plan we're putting for the long term reform of the system we are confident in. If the states and territories reject it, we will seek from the people a mandate for the Commonwealth, the Australian Government, to take overall responsibility for the system and the buck, therefore, stops with me. That's entirely consistent with what I said prior to the election and, frankly, it's the responsible way to go but you've got to get it right.
JONES: Okay, this is Q&amp;A, the live and interactive forum, as you can see, where you get to ask the questions and, as you may have noticed, Q&amp;A has moved to half past nine on Monday nights every week. Our next question comes from Fleur Cribb.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, Mr Rudd. My question is regarding P Plate drivers and the increasing road toll. Given the inconsistent rules across the country, I was just wondering if there is potentially a role for the Federal Government in the next decade to implement a national road rules scheme?
PM: There's been a lot of discussion between the transport ministers on this very subject. What we've tried to do, by the way, at a national government level, is to improve road safety by some other specific regulations, one of which goes to some of the systems used in motor vehicles themselves. Nationally consistent regulations for the quality control of cars. That's just one thing.
We've also invested in a new way of encouraging young people to learn how to drive in the first place. I don't have the numbers on me, but we have. But on the question of nationally consistent approaches, can I say the transport ministers are pretty seized of how bad it is out there in terms of road safety, young people, but I've got to say there's a fair bit of booze involved in this as well, and that's a real problem.
JONES: Here's a grim statistic from New South Wales. A P Plate driver dies in that state every six days. Sixty-six per cent of deaths amongst 17 to 20 year olds are from car crashes. A case for a national intervention?
PM: Well, you've got to get the car safety standards right. That's the basic step involved in this, and there have been a few problems with car safety standards around the country.
The second thing is new automatic systems to go into cars to help cars manoeuvre on the road better and more safely. That's the second thing we've done by regulation.
You talk about nationally consistent rules though. The means we do this through, which is the Australian Transport Ministers' Council is run by the Australian Government Transport Minister - in this case Anthony Albanese, and the key thing is to get agreement across the states to do it. Now, I can't tell you here and now how far that's got and when we're going to deliver that in terms of a final outcome, but that's our approach. I feel about this personally. My son has just turned 16. He's just got his learners here in Canberra. I think about this a lot. I think about it a hell of a lot and, I've got to say, if there's practical stuff still to be done we'll be in there.
JONES: Our questioner has her hand up. We'll go back to her.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah. I looked it up to try and have some background research for asking the question and it seems that since 1948 Australia has been trying to implement a national road rule scheme and in the 1990s the National Transport Commission - I think that's what it's called. Yeah, they implemented one, but the states just sort of adapted it to their own rules and so if you get pulled over in New South Wales and you're an ACT driver, it's very confusing about what's going to happen to you.
PM: I think...
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So I was just wondering...
PM: sorry.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yeah.
PM: Certainly I think the fines regime differs in all the states and there are certain aspects of the rules. Ever tried to drive in Melbourne recently with that funny turn left, turn right thing? I've never quite understood it but any Melburnians here will get offended. So there's some work to be done, but getting motor vehicle standards right and the maximal installation of the technologies in new vehicles which help the stable management of cars, particularly in difficult situations, that's important too. But there's still a whole lot of work to be done and I feel personally concerned about this, as any parent of a young person would, when you've got a young fella out there taking his first driving lessons.
JONES: Okay, you mentioned alcohol and we actually have a question on that subject. It's from Linna Wei.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, Mr Rudd. The Australian Medical Association in Queensland has said that 100 lives a year could be saved if we lifted the legal drinking age to 21, the same as it is in the US. Teenagers start driving when they're 18. Coincidentally, this is the same age as the legal drinking age in Australia. Mr Rudd, have you ever considered lifting the minimum legal drinking age in Australia?
PM: We've had a few discussions about that because, you're right, in certain places in the United States that's been considered and embraced.
The key thing is to work out what actually works. One of the things that we've had a few problems with, and it won't be popular, probably in an audience like this, is the ready accessibility of sweet alcohol intensive drinks, like alcopops. We took a pretty controversial decision, which is to increase the price of alcopops, which drove a whole lot of young people quite mad, because we're making it harder to get. But you know what happened? Just in this category of drinks, huge impact in drinking rates of young teenagers going through the roof, because it was sweet, highly alcoholic and hugely affecting their ability to, frankly, manoeuvre a car, if they were at that age as well.
JONES: But the tax hasn't stopped binge drinking.
PM: (Inaudible) but there are a series of practical measures that you can put in place to try and reduce the problem. You know, you can't wave a magic wand and say, "Tomorrow everyone will drive responsibly. Tomorrow a whole bunch of people will stop drinking." What you can do is put in place some practical things which make it more difficult. Since we've taken this measure on alcopops, the consumption of alcopops, I think, has gone down by about 33 per cent. Then people say, "Oh, they just go and drink other stuff." That's partly true, but the overall alcoholic consumption among young people, I am advised, has gone down by eight per cent (inaudible).
JONES: Right. Let's get an answer - a specific answer - to Linna Wei's question about raising the drinking age - the legal drinking age - to 21. Would you consider it?
PM: I don't have the evidence in front of me to say whether we can or whether we can't. I'd just rather be straight up with you and say...
JONES: Would you like to?
PM: Of course. I mean - you mean, would I like to?
JONES: Would you like to raise the drinking age to 21? Of course.
PM: I believe in something called evidence-based policy, which is if the evidence is there and it's capable of being proven that it works, then we look at these things and make a decision. But you're asking me for a personal impression. You don't run policy that way, Tony.
JONES: Sometimes.
PM: Well, you don't. You actually - if you're doing the serious thing, how many of you are in the category of 18 to 21 here? Okay. How many of you want the drinking age raised to 21. Okay. Well, I'm just saying there's got to be a debate about this and it would be an informed debate if we had evidence in front of us which said you do this in State X of the United States and the overall car accident rate and mortality on roads goes down. But I don't have that in front of me.
JONES: So it's an interesting experiment though, policy by popularity. That's - I actually haven't seen that done before.
PM: No what I mean is if you've got some evidence based policy, is it a uniform view in the community, point one. Point two, is it effective? So nice try, mate, but both are relevant.
JONES: No, I just keep remembering that when I first asked the question you said, "Of course," and then you changed. Anyway, you're watching Q&amp;A. You're watching Q&amp;A.
PM: What did I change to?
JONES: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is facing 200 young Australians. The next question comes from Georgia Lourandos.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I'm aware that the French Government is currently trying to ban the wearing of the burka in public buildings. Do you think that it is a core part of western and, indeed, Australian values, that women should show their faces in public, just like men?
PM: I don't, again, have any evidence in front of me which suggests that that helps one way or the other. People have different cultural and religious traditions and I think broadly they should be accepted.
Why the French Government is doing what it's doing, a matter for the French. But from our point of view, we don't see any reason for such measures to be brought in here. This is a pretty diverse country that we've got and, look, there's always going to be problems at the extremes of any society. That's the truth. But we've got to be respectful of diversity. People have different religious traditions. They come from different ethnic backgrounds. You're not going to just enforce some sort of, you know, one size fits all approach to, you know, public behaviour and public dress, otherwise you're going to have people marching on parade grounds at 6 o'clock in the morning, because the state says so and I don't believe that's the right way to go.
JONES: Yes, we've got hands up in the audience. We'll take this one first.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Do you believe that the state does have a right to intervene in cases where diversity clashes with repression, as in burkas and oppression of women, as they could be seen?
PM: Well, in the challenge of civil liberties on the one hand and your right to free choice, your right to express yourself in different ways and maintaining security, which is a common concern and a common right to everybody, you know something, there's no magical solution.
If I were to say to you in terms of people's right to protest peacefully, as opposed to violently, where and when is that line crossed and when, therefore, do the authorities step in? These are often difficult choices. So I wish there was a magical answer to that. But I'm giving you, in response to the earlier question, my overall preference, which is this is a free country. A lot of the folk who have participated in this parliament over a long period of time have taken big decisions to defend the freedom. John Curtin, back in the war, deciding to - the measures necessary to defend Australian liberty and democracy, and that was the freedom to choose. The big debates here in the 50s about whether to ban the Communist Party, and Australians voted that people should have the right to choose what their political persuasion was. But you know at the end of the day it's very hard to draw the precise line because if I was standing here today and there had been a terrorist attack yesterday in a part of Australia, and given our security warnings that's always possible - if you look at the security ratings in this country - then the tonality of this debate would change and people would say, "Well, are we doing everything we could?" The balance is hard to get but I'm saying my instincts are always on the side of preserving the liberty which we spent so many decades and centuries here building.
JONES: Do you want to continue your cross-examination?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: (Indistinct).
JONES: Okay, let's move onto our next question. It's on a very different subject. It's from Jeff Shen.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Policies regarding to permanent residence for international students are constantly changing and consequently many of the international students are overloading courses so that future policy changes doesn't affect their intentions to stay in Australia. So could you please explain why international students are being singled out? Why can't they be part of Australia's future or is international students studying here just a revenue raiser?
PM: No, it's not - look, this has been a challenge for governments over a long period of time and will be into the future. But, you know, there's a responsibility we have to many governments and many countries who send folk here or have folk come here to study in the first place, which is having obtained a bunch of skills, a lot of those countries actually want them back home from the place where they've come from. That's one thing you've got to bear in mind in setting your future immigration policy for students studying in Australia. The second thing is this: we are always going to make hard judgments in this country about what skills we need at a particular time in Australia. There's been a debate in the papers today about...
JONES: Well, your immigration minister has come out today and listed a new set of rules for what is acceptable in terms of the courses you study to get permanent residency here. I think that's partly being alluded to in that question.
PM: Yes, that's what I'm saying, is that we will make a hardline judgment each year, on a rolling basis, about the skills that you need for Australia for the future.
JONES: So there's no...
PM: And that will change -
JONES: - there seemed to be an undercurrent there that perhaps the government thought some international students were rorting the system to get an easy run to Australian residency.
PM: Well, Australian residency and ultimately Australian citizenship is a privilege, therefore you've got to be very careful about how you construct your immigration system. These are hard decisions. They're very practical decisions.
But the good thing is, frankly, basically since the war we have been a country which has encouraged people to come here from right across the world, including students, and it may be, to go back to the basis of your question, that having come here, picked up your qualification, the best thing that you decide to do and it may be in the interest of your country to spend a couple of years back home and then apply afresh to come here. In terms of the skills that are relevant to Australia, that will always be made independently by people looking at where our economy needs people for the next 5, 10, 15, 20 years and that skills profile changes from year to year. I know that's a tough message for many folk who, having studied here, want to stay here but I've got to say it's a balanced message if you're looking at our long-term immigration policy.
JONES: All right, we've got a few hands up in the audience. Let's take this young lady in the second row here first.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Despite the recent changes today made by Chris Evans regarding permanent residency, how can you ensure that Australian citizens such as myself, in their final year, can graduate knowing that there will be a job there for them, because it seems to be changing with your immigration law. You seem to be softening up than hardening up. How can you guarantee we will get a job in the Australian job market?
PM: You're an Australian citizen?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yes, I am.
PM: Okay, fine. There's two things to say in response - well, no, the question asked by this person over here was on the basis that they were not. I just wanted to be clear about the basis upon which that question was asked and you're asking about yourself.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I was born in Australia. I was born here.
PM: Yeah, sure.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: But my parents are from overseas and they have integrated just as much as other Australians who were born...
PM: Absolutely.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So I just want a guarantee that when I finish my degree I'm not going to be working odd jobs just to survive. I'd like to be guaranteed a job.
PM: That's why I asked the question back, which was it a question of how the employment market in this country is unfolding, or whether it was a more fundamental question about immigration policy. That's why I was seeking clarification. On the employment market, I just emphasis a point I made back here to the question asked by this fellow up the back here about pre-election commitments and the reality we had to face in the last 12 months.
Unemployment here - it's still too high. It's 5.8 per cent. It's also the second lowest of all the major advanced economies in the world. With youth unemployment, 16 to 24 year olds, which I think is the age bracket here. Is that right, Tony? The unemployment...
JONES: 25 year olds, but close.
PM: Yeah. The youth unemployment rate in Australia is, I think, about 11.5. Youth being defined as that bracket of people. In the United States and France at the moment, it's about 20 per cent. Can I just say what we have done in the last year - not perfect, this is the national infrastructure stimulus strategy - it to try and make a difference - a real difference. If you look back to the recessions of the early nineties and the early eighties, what happened there, when our unemployment for the whole community was in double digits, you can shell out an entire generation of people without opportunity. We didn't want that to happen again. So when people will criticise us, for example, how we went about funding the national infrastructure stimulus strategy by increasing the budget deficit and by temporary borrowings, we did it deliberately with the objective in mind of protecting jobs into the future.
That, for us, has been so fundamental and I'd really encourage you to compare the unemployment and the employment data of this economy with any other advanced economy in the world. We've managed to make it better - not perfect, better - in terms of entering the job market in the year ahead.
JONES: Very briefly I gather you are not going to guarantee all university graduates jobs, which is what you were asked.
PM: No, I don't think I was asked for providing a guarantee for everyone to get a job. That's never been the case. It wasn't case when I graduated from university either.
JONES: No, of course not. Okay.
PM: Nor you.
JONES: Indeed. We have another question from an international student. It's from Om Perkash Butra.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yes, Mr Prime Minister, Australian Universities are encouraging international student to study in Australia, where racism is increasing day by day, creating a big problem for international students. I have been victim myself. So what are your plans to overcome this issue?
PM: It's a really good question and it's really topical because of the problems particularly in and around Melbourne. When I speak-
JONES: Can I just interrupt you for one moment? Because he just said, I think, that he had been a victim himself. Could we just hear what you're talking about?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Oh actually I was on New Parliament House on Australian Day, where teenagers - drunk Australians came in and pushed me and actually asked me - said that 'curry munchers' and some of them misbehaved badly, which I can't explain even so that kind of problems are happening around and this was first of my experience, which probably changed my mind a bit of Australia, as well.
PM: How long have you been in Australia, if I can ask that?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I think seven months only.
PM: Okay. Well that's a really awful story and makes me sick. It really makes me sick that anyone would treat you, as a guest in our country, like that. It's wrong. It shouldn't happen. In terms of what we're doing about it, the work that we are currently - have underway with the Victorian Government is to deal with each of the teaching institutions, where so many of the students, for example, from India are coming, and to look at the practical questions concerning transport, work after hours and getting safely from where people are working off to where they are staying and then back to where they are studying.
Remember in big cities there is, right across the world - there are violence rates. They're unacceptable. They're not good and they often apply to all people, whatever their ethnic background. But I'm really concerned that this has happened to you just up the road. But at a practical level, your question is, "What are we doing about it?" With the Victorian Government and the Victorian teaching authorities now looking at those series of practical recommendations.
We commissioned a guy called Bruce Baird, former Member of Parliament from actually the conservative side of politics, who is just completing a report to us - completed a report to us on what we do specifically about the concerns which Indian students have. That's just (inaudible).
JONES: Very briefly, the police in Melbourne in particular keep saying these attacks or very few of them are actually to do with racism, but you've heard differently here. Do you fear there is an undercurrent of racism in this country?
PM: My experience of Australia over many, many years, that it's a very, very, very tolerant country. I'm really concerned when I hear these stories. My son-in-law is Chinese from Hong Kong. I hear stories from him from time to time, which make me really worried about what might be going on out there. But his overall story is that he is completely accepted and part of the Australian family. But we've just got to keep a weather eye on any of this stuff every taking hold, because this country Australia, is and shall be a tolerant country. And we have a combined responsibility - politicians of all sides, community leaders, young people, old people - to keep it that way. But it's tough and other countries around the world have failed miserably on this score.
JONES: All right, we've got a few hands up. Let's go to - there are two of you down there with your hands up. We'll hear from both of you, if that's okay. Start with the gentleman on the right.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: With the rate of racist acts going up every single day, would you ever consider, like, teaching in school for, like, societies to, you know, merge, kind of thing? Like back in one of my friends is in US, so their school runs a program where they give them diverse knowledge about different cultures, so that they become acceptable. So would you ever consider that in school level?
JONES: Okay just take that onboard and we'll hear from the other young man sitting beside you.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Actually I am from India, as well, and this is my third and a half year in Australia and I'm proud to say that I have never experience racism myself here and this is just a comment to say that you have bad people in every single country, but that doesn't mean that the entire country is racist. So I just want to put that point up to every international student, that Australia is not a racist country at all and I'm happy to be here and I would love to live over here.
PM: It's actually good and important to hear both these stories. It really is. That is the Australia I know and these are the stories I am from time to time hearing. Both of these are realities. So to go to your specific question, there is always room in our school curriculum for young people to understand more comprehensively the different cultures of the world. One of my big passions in life has been the study of foreign languages - Asian languages in particular. In part because it simply provides young people - people generally - with a vehicle to understand vastly different cultures around the world; see how realities are seen differently and for me that's really important. Whether it's Chinese, Japanese, Indonesian, Malay, whether it's Hindi, whether it's Urdu, this is important stuff.
But here is one note of encouragement: proportionally there are more Australian kids studying foreign languages in our schools - Asian languages - than you'll find in any other western country. This is a good thing but its yield will not be had for a long, long time because you may not turn out a whole generation of, you know, simultaneous interpreters but I'll tell you what you will do is cause people to understand reality from someone else's perspective and that builds respect.
JONES: Before we leave this question, let's go to someone with another perspective on the same issue, Moses Aduot.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, thank you. My question is, the United States of America has invested in its own black African Americans and President Barack Obama is a living example of real inclusion - real, practical reconciliation, real sorry to African Americans. My question is why is Australia more than happy to receive President Barack Obama, a black man, when Australia is ashamed of its own black, whether Indigenous or African Australians.
PM: I think my attitude with that would be a bit different and that is - you know something, here at the beginning of 2008 just up the road when we delivered the national apology to Indigenous Australians, this was one step towards achieving real reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. It's not perfect but, you know something, until we had crossed that bridge of mutual respect, given the centuries of abuse and exploitation of Indigenous Australians by non-Indigenous Australians, then you couldn't get to the next step, which is our policy of trying to close the gap between these two parts of the Australian family.
That's why we're dead set serious about this. I'll be delivering the second annual report on the closing the gap targets we set for ourselves with the apology. How do you narrow the gap in terms of infant mortality? We've committed to halving that over time. How do we narrow the gap in terms of year 12 equivalent achievement between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians? How do you make sure that employment opportunities are the same? These are the basic things. Closing the life expectancy gap which is currently obscene. So engaging in a way which acknowledges huge past errors is the first step. That's what the apology was all about. But it counts for nothing unless you do the practical stuff on the ground with the hundreds of thousands of Indigenous Australians whose lives still don't have the same opportunities as non-Indigenous Australians.
That's our policy. It will take a long time to work through. We've made a start. As for African Australians or other residents from other parts of the world who are not Indigenous, I am always disturbed, as I said to our friend from India before, to hear of any stories of racial prejudice. Racial prejudice has no place in modern Australia. Let us make sure that we all work together on that.
JONES: Okay. I appreciate there are a few people still with their hands up, but we're going to move on again. You're watching Q&amp;A, the show where you get to ask the questions. If you'd like to ask a question in person, go to our website and register to join the audience, just like these people have done. Our next question comes from Ceridwen Radcliffe.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, it's so easy to download music and movies on line and difficult to determine whether it's legitimate and I was just wondering what is your government's position on the balance between young people's desire to access affordable entertainment and artists' desire to protect their creative output?
PM: Well it's a hard one. It's almost like the question before about civil liberties. What is intellectual copyright? What is the rights of artists to own their property and what are the laws which prevent the sort of free dissemination of that? Look I can't, you know, divine or say from here, "Here is the dividing line up the middle." I really understand how important downloading is to your generation. My son does this himself, I hope lawfully and if not we're in deep trouble. So getting this balance right is important. Do we have any - I'm not aware that we have current changes to the laws in mind. I just wish to be frank about that.
JONES: Well I've got ask you that, because only last week there was a landmark case in the Federal Court. Iitnet, an internet service provider, won a case that the movie industry took against them. People were downloading pirated movies using their website - Iinet - and the Federal Court has effectively said you can't stop them doing that. They won that case. You're going to be lobbied heavily by the movie industry. What will you tell them?
PM: Well the first thing I'll say to them in the persistent - consistent with the tradition of evidence-based policy is I'll read the decision of the court and see what they actually had to say because it's usually not as black and white as is presented. But secondly, look, this is an open culture. It celebrates the fact that you can access different sources of culture and music from right around the world and from artists who you love and enjoy.
If the laws are through the courts, being interpreted in a particular way, if I take what Tony Jones has said accurately - and being from the ABC I'm sure he wouldn't be inaccurate - then we'll have a look at the decision and see what we can do, but I don't want to, frankly, make any pronouncement on area of policy, I just don't have the evidence in front of me. I'd just rather be careful about that.
JONES: All right. Let's change subjects again. The next question comes from Nicky Vreugdenhil.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, I'm from the UN Youth Association. President Obama appears to be abandoning his scheme to put a price on carbon in the United States, but you've committed to introducing an emissions trading scheme in Australia. When Obama comes to Australia in March, will you lobby him to fight for a similar cap and trade system in the United States?
PM: The key thing here is to action on climate change. You know what's great about America under President Obama, is they've suddenly entered into action. The previous US administration said that it wasn't anything for them. Now we have America at the table and it makes such a huge difference.
So when it comes to the targets that we have been discussing recently about bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, now you have America fully engaged in the global negotiations for the future. That's the first thing. The second is how do you go about realising those targets? Our conclusion, as the government of Australia, is that the most effective way and the least costly way of doing it is through an emissions trading scheme. That's been our approach.
We in Australia, like the Americans, face something called a political constraint and - I can't quite see you now, mate. There's someone in the road. There you go - and it's called the Senate - the US Senate and the Australian Senate - and they have both put this huge roadblock in the way. And so obviously President Obama is looking at the possibility of how you mix a response to the targets which America must realise, as the second biggest polluting country in the world after China, and how you mix that with the future possible introduction of an emissions trading scheme there. So he's got political realities to deal with.
JONES: Isn't it going to be a serious problem for your government if the United States rejects a global carbon trading scheme and, to go back to the question, will you be lobbying President Obama to actually make sure they do get a carbon trading scheme?
PM: Well I was speaking to the US ambassador about the President's upcoming visit just the other day and my best understanding is that the US is looking still at how it wrestles this cap and trade system to the ground. When they can do it and when they can deliver it is a separate question. I look forward to talking to him about it. The key thing is real action. You say-
JONES: That's what Tony Abbott says, direct action. In fact, he says, he now says that his plan is more similar to what the Americans are going to do than your plan is.
PM: No, what Tony Abbott says about - now that you've raised him - about climate change is, quote, "It's absolute crap", unquote. That's what Tony Abbott says about his view on climate change. That's not Barack Obama's view and it's not my view. There's a big difference, because that's the foundation stone. You either believe the science or you reject the science.
We the government, believe the science. The US government believes the science, under President Obama. The next question is what you do. And in terms of the different schemes, what do we do? We say we charge the biggest polluters. Secondly, we use that money to compensate working families for any costs which flow through to them and, thirdly, that gives them the money also to invest in energy efficiency measures themselves. That's what a cap and trade system is about, because you are ultimately also putting a cap on carbon pollution. His system doesn't do that.
JONES: No doubt you've seen all the hands going up in the audience. Before we come to some of those people with their hands up, we do have another question on this topic. You've alluded to it already to some degree. Let's go to Blaise Joseph.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, given the climate-gate email scandal, given the fact that the IPCC claims on Himalayan glaciers melting and Amazon rainforests disappearing both have been proven to be fabricated, and now given that the Dutch government is reviewing all claims of the IPCC, do you still have full confidence in the IPCC and is it still necessary to rush ahead with your ETS?
PM: The first thing I'd say is-
AUDIENCE MEMBER: (Indistinct)
PM: As you can see there is a bit of division on that in the room, like the chamber up the hill. The first thing I'd say is the IPCC, the International Panel on Climate Change - scientists has 4000 essentially humourless scientists in white coats who go around and measure things and have been doing so for about 20 years. They reached a conclusion about, first of all, climate change happening and second, the high likelihood, defined as 90 per cent plus, of it being caused by human activity sometime ago.
I'm saying, that's actually what the IPCC has concluded. The second thing is this: here in Australia the Government has been in receipt of advice from the CSIRO, the Bureau of Meteorology, the Chief Scientist, that that's what's happening here. So as the Prime Minister of Australia you stand back and you say, "Well, the 4000 scientists in white coats are all wrong, the CSIRO is all wrong, the Australian Chief Scientist is all wrong and also the Bureau of Meteorology is all wrong". Well, I'm not prepared to take that risk. I'm not prepared to take that risk for your future in 20 years time, 40 years time, 60 years time.
My view is this generation of political leaders has a responsibility to act - has a responsibility to act. And you can play the easy game of retail politics, which is to say this is all too hard, go round and use loose language, like you know, the climate change science is incapable of being trusted and take a massive risk with the future. The government I lead will not do that.
JONES: Okay. All right, a lot of people - hold on. We've got a lot of people with their hands up. What I intend to do here is go around and just get comments from a number of you, okay? We'll start with this gentleman in the - no, back there. Second row in the black shirt.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Mr Rudd, regarding climate change, can Copenhagen be deemed as anything but a failure?
PM: Am I answering these?
JONES: Well, I think you better answer that one.
PM: You've just changed your rules after one question. The-
JONES: Okay. No, we'll take a few questions.
PM: No. No. I'll answer-
JONES: All right. All right. Go ahead.
PM: So it's not forgotten, because you're going to have this whole pile of things. Firstly, four things were achieved at Copenhagen. One, first time the world community said, "We cannot allow temperature increases to go beyond two degrees centigrade." That was not part of global concord before. Second that they said was this - the second point they said was this: that developed and developing countries for the first time must contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. In the past the big emerging economies, like China and India, were not in the play. And the third thing is for the first time a global system of measurement - that is to make sure that the commitments and targets which are agreed to by governments actually happen on the ground. Did it achieve everything that we wanted to achieve? Absolutely not. But if it didn't achieve those three things, frankly we would be even further behind than we are now.
And I go back to what I said. This Government is committed to action on climate change nationally and globally because the future of the planet and your generation depends on it.
JONES: Okay we've actually got another question in the audience, before I go to the rest of you with your hands up, from Kane Wishart. Where's Kane? Wait for the microphone there, Kane.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hello, Prime Minister.
PM: G'day, Kane.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Given, as we've heard, there's a climate of denialism around and the opposition have been attacking your ETS as a great, big nasty spooky tax or whatever they're calling it, isn't it time your Government looked afresh at other measures that are evidence based, such as a consumption side carbon tax, which can be revenue neutral, which won't affect international competitiveness and can go to a scientifically credible outcome?
PM: Look, there are three broad categories for acting on climate change. One is the market-based system, which is called an emissions trading scheme. The great irony of current Australian politics is the Labor Party supports the market-based system and the conservatives are supporting the command and control system of handling this. But I'll leave others to wrestle with that little dilemma. You go to the third option, which is to use a carbon tax itself. We've looked at this and looked at it very hard. From our point of view it does not create the incentives necessary to change behaviour in the same manner that an emissions trading scheme does.
JONES: Can I just interrupt you because you did look at it and look at it very hard, and you hired Professor Garnaut to do that looking for you, to a large degree, and advise you and now he's advising you to go for a carbon tax for the next two years because he doesn't believe an emissions trading scheme is going to work in this country. It's not going to happen. It's not going to get through the Senate.
PM: Well his argument, yeah, is a political one and that goes to the question of the future of the emissions trading legislation in the parliament. Still a few hoops to go through up the hill on that, but his argument is not a substantive one. He says that by far and above, an emissions trading system is preferable because it does this: it puts a cap on carbon. It charges the polluters and as a result of that provides compensation from that charge to working families.
What we've got with the alternative scheme on offer is one which does less. In fact, the current scheme proposed by Mr Abbott increases greenhouse gas emissions by 13 per cent, costs more, tax payer pays three times as much and is totally unfunded. That is the basic difference.
JONES: Okay what about just very briefly on this Bob Brown - Tony Abbott says you don't have a plan B when that doesn't get through the Senate. Bob Brown is offering you a plan B of a two year interim carbon tax, $20 per tonne. That's what the Greens are offering to vote for and to help you get the extra votes in the Senate. You are actually talking to them, at least Penny Wong is. Are you seriously talking to them? Is this a potential plan B?
PM: If your question goes to the carbon tax question, which was raised over here before, the answer is no. Secondly, your point about the Greens goes headlong into mathematics. The Greens don't control with us the numbers in the Senate. You've got three independents there and some of you may have read the writings of Senator Fielding on the question of climate change. It's all - and you worry me if you applaud that, because let me tell you it's all one global communist conspiracy and watch out and lock up your friends. It's going to come and get you in the middle of the night.
We have a different approach, which is this is happening, it's real and sensible political leadership lies in how do you best deal with this in a way which works, which works environmentally, because the consequences of this country, which is among the hottest and driest continents on earth, would be one where the effects of climate change are felt first and hardest. That's why this Government is determined to act.
JONES: All right. Let's hear some quick comments from the audience. I stress this, comments, because we don't have time to answer a whole series of other questions and still get on to the other subjects. So if you want to comment, keep your hand up. The young lady down the front.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Well you keep saying that, you know, your Government keeps acting on climate change. Do you think that you know, it's feasible that because you also say that, you know, you're supporting a big Australia. How realistic do you think it is to have a big Australia and reduce your carbon emissions at the same time?
PM: The first thing is just to look at the reality and it goes back to questions which have been raised already about immigration and the fact that this country has been open to immigration since the war. The population projections for Australia which have been discussed recently, are there in the intergenerational report produced by the Treasury, as it was under Mr Costello on two occasions prior to us. And it's simply taking the natural fertility rate in the country, adding to it the historical levels of migration. And you go out to the projections for 2050, which has been talked about, and producing a population of 36 million.
Guess what? That assumes a population growth in Australia slower in the next 40 years than it was in the last 40 years. So let's just keep all this into perspective. The second point is, the big challenge with population is how do you plan effectively in terms of the infrastructure needs of the future, and that is one of the big future challenges facing Australia. Acting on climate change, planning our infrastructure needs, making sure that we're building the skills base for the Australian economy for the future because we want to be a world competitive economy, an open society, but it means grabbing these future challenges, not pushing them to one side.
JONES: Just a couple more, and I stress comments here, because we don't have time. Let's hear from this young lady at the back with her hand up.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: In the absence of international agreement, how confident are you-
JONES: Oh, that's a question.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Sorry, I'll try to rephrase it. But how confident are you in the effect-
JONES: That's all right, I'm sorry. Go ahead. Keep going.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: In the effectiveness of the implementation of an Australian ETS, both strategically and financially.
PM: Well, the virtue of an emissions trading scheme domestically within Australia is that it's a market-based scheme but which caps carbon pollution. One of the problems with the alternative scheme is that it doesn't. That's the big difference. You also talk about international measures. As I said before, in response to the question about Copenhagen, for the first time, Governments around the world agreed on a global monitoring and measurement system. Prior to that we had no such agreement. So you would be right to be skeptical about the future in the absence of a mechanism to measure what people are doing. None of this is easy. It is all really hard, but there are two big strategic options in the future: bury your head in the sand and hope it all goes away or act. We're in the business of acting.
JONES: Okay. You're watching Q&amp;A. Remember you can send your web or video questions to our website. The address is on the screen, or join the Twitter conversation. And in just a matter of interest tonight - we have a matter of interest here. Apparently tonight's program has peaked as the number one trending topic on Twitter worldwide. That's hard to believe, isn't it? Okay. But apparently it's true.
PM: I'd like to know how you knew that?
JONES: I didn't know that but someone has told me that, evidently. Our next question tonight comes from the floor of old parliament house. It's from Kate Campbell.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Prime Minister, the school performance measures cited on the My Schools website clearly show that those schools situated in lower socioeconomic areas generally achieve poorer results than their counterparts with a higher socioeconomic index. Rather than the current crude method of naming and shaming, what tangible efforts is the Rudd Government going to make to support the students, teachers and parents in these disadvantaged areas?
PM: Okay. Three quick points. One is we believe in transparency. That is that every school in the country and there are 10,000 of them - primary schools, secondary schools, government, non-government - should be answerable to the parents of Australia, how the school is performing against very basic skills tests - literacy, numeracy, spelling, grammar, stuff like that.
Secondly, the virtue of having the information also enables the Government, through Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister, to know where to intervene and provide support. If you simply are in the business of putting up a list and saying "Gee, there's a problem over there," and then walking away, it wouldn't make any sense. But if you're in the business of saying, "Here's a problem and here is an investment fund of $2 billion to be made available to disadvantaged schools", then you know where it's to go, what specific literacy and numeracy programs may be useful to overcome problems at year three, year five through year seven and provide the resources to it.
The last thing I'd say about the measure itself is, simply bear this in mind: this is the first time we've done this. On top of it we intend also in the year ahead, if the government is returned, to have tested the attitudes of parents about the overall performance of the school. What sort of culture is in the school? Are they community engaged schools? Are they schools which are really being innovative in the way in which they bring the best out of their children. In other words a rounder view of the school. This will go up on the website, as well.
JONES: How is that going to be tested? Are you going to bring them in to do their own little NAPLAN Tests in school halls? How are you going to do that?
PM: You mean the surveys? They'll be-
JONES: No, the parents.
PM: No, the parents will be surveyed by normal means by a survey company. If you've got a school community of 500 kids, you've got you know, a bunch of parents in that community and therefore you'll survey them. The details of this will be sorted out during the year, but the question goes to, how do you provide a balanced view of the school? One is the intrinsic performance on literacy, numeracy and the basics and the second is what sort of school is it in the eyes of those who entrust their kids to it? Nothing is perfect but we want to help create in this country what we describe as an education revolution and that means making sure that our young people have all the skills necessary to properly participate in the workforce of the future and to have the tools to do that as well.
JONES: Just a quick follow up on that. This fund you're talking about which will direct billions of dollars, I think you said, to the disadvantaged schools who are identified by these tests, how are we going to know it's as a result of the test? Is there going to be some sort of measure for that?
PM: Well, I've discussed this with Julia, as well. All these things will be measured, befores and afters, but do you know something? You couldn't get to first base until you've got an initial set of measures. There are going to be inaccuracies. Let's just accept that. But I'd much rather have a national education system where our 10,000 schools know how their schools are performing and if you've got for example, a real problem at a - consistently at a year five, seven and nine level but no such problems at a year three level, well, what's happening in that school?
If there are problems just emerging at the year nine level, which weren't evidenced in the earlier years, what's happening in that school? These are questions to be asked but frankly, the objective is about how you improve the quality of what we do but it adds up to nothing unless you are actually providing schools with extra resources to make it happen.
JONES: All right. We need to do this for two hours next time, because we are almost out of time. Let's go to our final question, which comes from John Casey.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Mr Prime Minister, tonight has mostly been about us giving our vision for the future of Australia. I think it's now your turn. Where do you see Australia in 20 years and what are your hopes, dreams and plans for the future of Australia?
PM: Thanks for the question. It's really important. Part of being where you guys are is to think about your futures and have your views to us about where you want the country to be. So in summary it's a bit like this. Number one is this: I want this country, Australia, in the future to have a strong economy, which enables us to provide the jobs of the future which have been described before. You don't have that, you don't have much.
Second, how do you build that? You make this country as productive as possible and there are two ways you can make that happen. Investing in what we've just been talking about: the education revolution. In preschools, in schools, in TAFEs, in universities, in research institutes - which is what we're doing right across the spectrum through a 100 per cent increase in the overall education budget.
The third thing is to make sure we've got modern, state of the art, 21st century infrastructure. It stinks that we've got a broadband system in this country which is probably the third slowest in the OECD and probably one of the most expensive. That's what we've got. That's why we're going to roll out a National Broadband Network, the information highway of the 21st century.
But the last thing is this: to make sure also that this future Australia, which is prosperous, which is strong, which is creating jobs of the future, is also one where we have made the right decisions to ensure that this is a sustainable country as well. Sustainable environmentally, but the questions of tolerance and harmony and shall I say, our unity are preserved in the future.
That's the sort of Australia I want for the future. Five broad objectives but none of them work unless you get in behind them with real, practical policies which make a difference. What we're doing is not perfect but that's the direction we're trying to take the country in.
JONES: I'm sorry to you who still have your hands up, because that is all we have time for tonight. Please thank our guest, the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd.


PM: We have some significant announcements to make in relation to aviation security. Since the Christmas Day attempted terrorist attack in the United States, the Government has conducted its own internal examination of the adequacy of our own arrangements to Australian airports. This investigation was directed by myself, to occur by the National Security Committee, and by the relevant agencies which service that committee. The National Security Committee has met on this on a number of occasions since then. The Government's priority is, of course, to maximise the safety and security of Australians and the Australian travelling public.
The measures that I will announce now, are designed to enhance and strengthen the aviation security regime in Australia, an aviation security regime which is already world class. Over four years, the Government will invest a further $200 million on new and improved security technologies, increased policing at airports, enhanced security procedures, as well as strengthened international cooperation.
I'll go through the measures. The first, the Government will invest $28.5 million to assist the industry to induce a new range of new screening technologies at passenger screening points. These technologies will include the latest body scanners, next generation multi-view X-ray machines, and bottle scanners capable of detecting liquid-based explosives. Body scanners will be introduced progressively, as an additional screening measure, at screening points servicing international departing passengers, by early 2011.
Secondly, the Government will also invest $32 million to bring forward screening at a number of additional regional airports that are currently served by large passenger turboprop aircraft. 
Third, the Government is also introducing more stringent training and performance standards for security screening staff, as part of the Government's aviation white paper.
Fourth, the Government will provide $17.7 million to increase the number of firearms and explosive detection dogs at major international airports by 50 per cent.
Fifth, in addition we'll provide $12.3 million to maintain the AFP presence at major airports, in line with the Beale review's recommendations on airport policing, to deliver more responsive and better coordinated policing at these vital gateways.
Sixth, the Government will provide $18.2 million to strengthen engagement and cooperation in the Asia Pacific region, and internationally, to improve security on international flights. This includes an enhanced presence by our officers at last ports of call to Australia.
Seventh, the Government will provide $24.9 million for new technology, as part of the Enhanced Passenger Assessment and Clearance program, to enable customs to assess a larger number of passengers earlier and faster, and critically, to share relevant data with intelligence border management and law enforcement agencies.
Eighth, the Government will provide $11.4 million for the Next Generation Border Security initiative, to use advanced data analysis and risk profiling, to better identify and refer visa applicants who may present national security risks to our intelligence agencies.
Nine, the Government will introduce a number of measures to help secure Australia's air cargo supply chain. We will provide $54.2 million to assist industry to install cargo X-ray screening, and explosive trace detection technology at appropriate locations.
These are the measures that we're announcing today. In total, they come to $200 million of additional investments in our airport security system.
No single measure can prevent a terrorist attack. But given the experience in the United States on the 25th of December, and given the prudent advice by the National Security Adviser, and the National Security Committee of the Cabinet, these are the recommendations which have come forward to the Government, these are the recommendations which the Government has accepted, and has agreed to the funding of. If I could turn to the minister to add to my remarks, and then take your questions.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thank you, Prime Minister. The Government was in a position to have a comprehensive approach because of the work that we'd put in, in developing the aviation white paper. Many of these recommendations come directly from the aviation white paper. In some cases, what we've been able to do, for example, with regard to screening at regional airports, we are providing funding for that, and we've brought forward the date of implementation to 2012, whereas the white paper recommended 2014.
All of these are comprehensive. This represents a comprehensive plan, based upon best advice and recommendations. It will require some patience, as we work through the implementation. But I think passengers, as well as the industry, understand that the first priority, as stated in the aviation white paper, of the Government, is the safety and security of the travelling public.
In addition to the measures outlined today, we will be asking the Opposition to agree to allow the regulations, which they disallowed last year in the Senate, requiring regulation of who goes into a cockpit, to be reintroduced into the Senate when the Senate next meets.
This is an important practical reform, it is the case that we can't simply allow self-regulation when it comes to this measure. And we'll be asking the Opposition to reconsider their opposition that they had at the end of last year. Thanks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, before Christmas you announced a relaxation for travellers, on knitting needles and nail clippers. Are you now going to retreat from that, and how much more difficult will it be for passengers getting on and off planes?
MINISTER ALBANESE: No, what we announced and implemented in December, was an enhancement of aviation security. What we need to do is make sure that we identify risks as they are. The risks that were identified by the experts indicated that some of the items that were on the prohibited items list, such as nail clippers, should be removed from that list so the aviation screeners could concentrate on preventing items getting on to planes that represented a real risk.
We took that advice, it was a good measure, and just is consistent with the approach that is represented today. Which is to take the advice of experts, with regard to risk, and to implement them. And we'll be having discussions, of course, with industry, about the rolling out of these changes and the timings.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] address the privacy concerns that people have with body scanning technology?
MINISTER ALBANESE: Well, with regard to the trial that we took - undertook in 2008, the Government has received the recommendations from that trial. It indicated, certainly, that body scanners are the best technology that is there, to identify an item getting on to an aircraft, such as that which occurred on 25 December.
So, we are also, though - it is the case, that since that trial was conducted, new technology has moved on and, indeed, there is now digital imaging technology, which is an improvement on that which was trialled. So, we'll be having full consultation and involvement with the Privacy Commissioner, with other organisations, as we did, indeed, for the trial, including looking at health issues, and making sure that all of those issues are dealt with.
But we have a responsibility to use the best technology available. The advice is that this is the best technology currently available. It will be introduced progressively, from the beginning of 2011, firstly in the form of secondary screening, but we will be involving the Privacy Commissioner and the relevant authorities in the rollout of this technology.
JOURNALIST: Did a review of the aviation security system, after 25 December, reveal whether the gentleman involved in that incident would have been able to get on a plane in Australia? And what's the status of Australia's do not fly register?
DUNCAN LEWIS: The results of the review showed that our current system of aviation settings, those security arrangements we have in place, are generally fine. They've been evolved over a period of time, as you know, and they're periodically updated, but it did show that there were a couple of areas where we needed to pay more attention.
One was in the area of information: the fusing and the analysis of information. The second was for - with regard to passenger screening. And with regard to the third it was to do with the application of the most recent technologies that are available.
So if they take those three things in aggregate, what we have done now is addressed some of those areas where we think improvement could be made. But I just want to stress that there is no single silver bullet in this business, but we have here a package of very, very appropriate and, I think what will be successful, measures in place.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a lot of people will be concerned -
PM: I'll come to your question. Just to add to Duncan's answer to the question just asked, I think it's fair to say, having been through many meetings of the National Security Committee on this, that there was a degree of uncertainty about the adequacy of measures, and therefore the recommendations came forward to enhance security.
It's very important when you have an incident like this somewhere in the world, like we saw in the United States on 25 December, to immediately learn from it; go through it from A to Z, parallel that to your own circumstances and work out where we could enhance in order to make a difference; that's what we sought to do.
And very soon after 25 December, that was the nature of the review that I asked the National Security Adviser to commission. Over here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a lot people are going to be concerned that these body scanners will allow them to be seen naked as they go in and out of airports. What guarantees can you give to people that these images aren't going to end up on the internet? That people aren't going to be perving at them? That they can feel that their privacy isn't being invaded while you're trying to, at the same time, protect them?
PM: On the privacy questions I'll go to Albo again.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Look, there are - there is new technology available. We'll be - as part of this announcement we've said we'll be looking at the form of the technology. But certainly in operation right now, since the trial occurred 18 months ago, there is technology for example that produces what's known in the industry as a stick figure. So it identifies on the screen something that has to be checked, without identifying things that demure people, such as yourself, might not want to be checked.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just on another issue, yesterday Tony Abbott...
PM: In other words we've been through that a fair bit and the minister's response is frankly the best way forward in what will be, you know, a difficult debate. There's going to be two impacts for the public: concerns about that on the one hand; concerns also on the other hand about the speed of getting through. We've got to make a judgement here. An incident has occurred in the United States; you learn practical things from it, you get the best advice, you respond. But let's be very blunt about the fact there will be impacts on the public. Matthew?
JOURNALIST: Yesterday Tony Abbott said that people would be (inaudible) for the good old days of health, in time since then you have said, 'well we have done lots on health'. You have stopped the cap on GPs, you have put, you have got more student nurses and you have put more money into public hospitals, but can you tell the public that that has actually made any difference to services today, to their ability to get to a GP, to their ability to get the services they want out of the hospital?
PM: Well can I give you one practical example, when this matter was raised yesterday on the health debate, the challenge was in relation to elective surgery. There are 60,000-plus additional elective surgery procedures which have been conducted on the basis of the national partnership agreements we have entered into between the Australian Government and the State Government since this Government formed office only two years ago. That is 60,000 procedures different and that was made possible as one part of the increase by 50 per cent in the overall funding by the Australian Government to the States and Territories under the Australian Healthcare Agreement.
As I said yesterday, I really welcome this debate on health and hospitals, particularly from the Leader of the Opposition, who as we know, gave the Australian public his rock solid, iron clad guarantee that the Medicare safety net would be preserved after the 2004 election. Well not just that, ripping a billion dollars out of the system.
This will be a good debate, I welcome it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back to aviation security for a moment. The aviation security identity cards allow people who work at airports to go behind into secure areas. At the moment there are only photographic IDs that are necessary. Your agencies have told you that you need some sort of biometric way of identifying these people. Why aren't you including that in this package?
PM: I'll turn to the Minister in a minute, but can I make one addition to my further remarks.
All that we have announced today is part of a continuing review of procedures. What we have before us are the recommendations for action which have been put forward to us by the agency as needing to be done now. We completely reserve our position in terms of further measures in this and related areas in the period ahead. Did you want to add to that?
MINISTER ALBANESE: Sure. Just as part of the aviation white paper was a tightening up, a widening, more about a doubling of the number of offences which would rule people out of being eligible for an ASIC card, we also hardened up the penalties for non-disclosure of information.
We believe, as the Prime Minister has said and as I've said, particularly in the wake of the 25th of December, that you have to be vigilant when it comes to aviation security. We take advice, we implement that advice. We did that through the aviation white paper, and that's why we tightened up the ASIC card regime.
JOURNALIST: But hundreds of these cards go missing every year.
MINISTER ALBANESE: We tightened up the ASIC card regime with regard to, as part of the recommendations of the aviation white paper. We think that these measures today represent a comprehensive plan, here and abroad, based upon the advice that we've received from the experts on the ground.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] your department recommended biometric identifiers, Minister, your department, did it not in its internal review of the ASIC system, recommended biometric identification, fingerprinting? Why haven't you picked up that recommendation?
MINISTER ALBANESE: Look, what I've picked up today, as we picked up in the aviation white paper that was developed in a comprehensive way; we had an aviation green paper at the end of 2008, we had a year of consultation with industry, we had a year of consultation with expert advice and we've followed that advice. And I think today represents the implementation of many of the recommendations that we were there in the aviation white paper. There were over 130 recommendations.
What you'll see, today you're seeing a roll-out on aviation safety and security. What you'll see progressively is a rolling-out of those other recommendations to make sure that we have, for the first time ever, a comprehensive plan when it comes to aviation.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Ill go to that one before I go to this one here, because you were next - oh he was, mate, I just gave him the nod before.
We are still working our way through other measures. And so the question that you raise goes to other measures, and we don't rule any other measures, sort of, in or out at this stage. We are acting on the basis of the advice that we've received and advice which we specifically sought following the incident in the United States on the 25th of December.
We must take every reasonable measure to underpin the security of the Australian travelling public using our airports. There is no silver bullet. It would be irresponsible of us, however, not to take these actions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you mentioned that one of the factors that you were considering was that this would cause greater delays. What's the advice that you've had about that, the extra delays that these security measures will create in - will have in airports?
PM: It will depend entirely on the nature of the primary and secondary screening decisions which are taken at individual airports, because one is more intensive and extensive than the other, but I'll turn to the Minister again.
MINISTER ALBANESE: The trial that was conducted showed that there would be essentially a six-minute delay if it was implemented across the board. Primary screening means everyone who goes through the international airport goes through a scanner. Secondary screening - screening is similar to which the ETDs, explosive trace devices - detectors are currently used. That is, you would all be familiar, some people get chosen.
What this also does in terms of the recommendations is a significant expansion of ETDs, a doubling, in effect, on the ground of the application of ETDs. There's a number of detail, when you drill down into the recommendations and the roll-out that we've provided you, you'll see that.
We've been in consultation with industry. We will be working with them, both the airlines and the airports to make sure that we minimise disruption to the travelling public. It's a matter of getting that balance right. But when there's a question of minimising disruption and safety of the travelling public, we err unapologetically, on the cautious side.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on another topic, are you satisfied or do you believe there was sufficient due process with the employment of Mike Kaiser to his NBN position?
PM: NBN Co has made its own independent decisions on that. As I am advised, they conducted I think two or three separate interviews before reaching their determination on that and the CEO of NBN Co has defended completely the integrity of the process.
And before the Opposition jump up and down too much about that, I mean the important thing here is just to bear in mind the fact that qualifications for positions in public institutions, public life or elsewhere, don't disappear at the point at which you exit a political life.
I mean we have quite plainly appointed people like Brendan Nelson, appointed people like Peter Costello, Tim Fischer. I think we gave something to Arthur Sidodinos, I am not sure. But the bottom line is, you know that is our approach. On the processes particular to NBN Co, as the CEO indicated yesterday, it was their independent decision and they as I understand it, undertook three sets of interviews before reaching that decision.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) security legislation, we were told today that some security legislation coming through parliament involving both ASIO and the Telecommunications Act. Now I understand this is to do with eavesdropping on boat people activities. Would be able to tell us what it's about and maybe, if you don't, refer it to your Minister?
PM: I'd prefer to have the relevant Minster speak to that later on. If you want that Minister to do a press conference later on, I'd prefer that was done for the simple reason I don't wish to mislead you on the content.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Green Loans Program and the Home Insulation Programs were central parts of your climate change policies. How have they been botched so badly?
PM: First of all on Green Loans, let's just go to the number of households which have already been booked for a sustainability assessment. Let's just go to the scope, that is how many people are interested. We provided funding for up to 360,000 Australian households to be assessed in terms of their energy assessments. 205,000 households have already been booked. 128,000 of these have already been completed. That's what's occurred so far.
I'm not saying there haven't been problems with this. Plainly, there are and they need to be dealt with, and you would have seen a statement from Minister Garrett today.
The other point that I would make in relation to the scheme overall is that the number of people who are being trained as assessors - which is another part of the current debate, legitimate debate to have - we've undertaken the training of a number of assessors to work within the program and also to work beyond the program more generally in, let's call it, the environment sector of the economy. The program that we put in had a time limit to it which expires at a particular time. We'll continue to work our way through this in terms of whether any changes need to be made to the future of the program as well.
But can I say, the criticisms, it's all fair cop. The Minister's set up an investigation, I think with Price Waterhouse Coopers. That's happening. But I want you to put into context the fact that right across Australia there is a very large roll out of this and it has been welcomed by households across the country. It's not perfect, there've been problems of implementation and that's why the Minister has established that inquiry.
JOURNALIST: Why would bureaucrats in remote Canberra be any better at running public hospitals financing than the state government?
PM: Well that assumes an outcome of the future directions on health and hospitals which the Government is yet to announce. But you know one of the key recommendations which, and one of the key comments that we've got from so many hospitals around the country, so many hospitals large and small, country and city, is they want to have a greater sense of being able to, frankly, control their own finances.
So how does that feed into the long-term structure of the health and hospital system reforms, we've not quite finally determined. We're still having a little while longer with some final consultations with the states, but the key thing here is, well, one part of it is of course, the source of finance. The second is the reliability in growth of finance. The third is the discretion and the local discretion available to people and how that is used on the ground.
Local clinicians have said to us right across the country that they, within their hospitals, have a whole lot of expertise about how to get throughput up, quality delivery improved, if they had in many cases, local discretion.
Now that's still part and parcel of our internal deliberations. I go back to what I said before, I think in the answer to Matthew's question, I really look forward to this debate on health and hospitals - very important for the nation long term, aging of the population, sustainability of the finance, getting it right and we intend to crack this nut within our first term in office. And can I say, after 12 years in office on the previous mob, and a current Leader of the Opposition who said when he became health minister that the Commonwealth should take over the system and welched on it four years after that, I welcome the debate at every level, politics and policy, very soon.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd were you or your office aware at the time that Senator Conroy was putting forward Mike Kaiser's name for that job?
PM: I became aware of Mr Kaiser's appointment, after it was publicly announced. Secondly my office were apprised by NBN Co and or the Minister's office, I can't recall which, between the decision being taken by NBN Co and the public announcement.
So there you go, that is the sequence of it. I go back to the point though, this is an independent decision by NBN Co. They had three sets of interviews, I think Mr Quigley has explained the general recruiting processes, in terms of their reliance upon various methods of appointing people. So we have full and complete confidence in NBN Co and the CEO is doing a great job.
JOURNALIST: Did you see any of Malcolm Turnbull's speech on climate change yesterday and what did you think of it? And with the maternity leave announcement this morning from the Coalition, are you afraid that the Coalition is trumping you on some of your big ticket items?
PM: First of all, I welcome a debate on policy because there has not been a lot of that from those opposite including on climate change, apart from the policy said, from the man who said that climate change was absolute crap, but he now believes in it.
Also, when it comes to paid parental leave, has anyone looked at Mr Abbott's historical record on this one - against it, for it, who should pay for it; the Government, business. There has been about five different positions on that one as well, but I am sure straight talking Tony will sort that one out for you as well. On the question of Mr Turnbull's presentation yesterday, I didn't see it.
I have read parts of it from the Hansard. The thing I would say about Mr Turnbull is he has a consistent and principled position about acting in a real way on climate change. That is why he described on his blog site just before Christmas, Mr Abbott's position as a fig leaf seeking to conceal the fact that they were not doing anything real at all.
On paid parental leave let me just say one other thing. You know, we went through a process: productivity commission, recommendation, here is our policy. 18 weeks is how much we think we can do. Fully costed, fully funded, based on the best policy advice.
As I said, Mr Abbott has had a dozen different positions, a half a dozen different positions on that, but once again we had a position put out by him which is uncosted and unfunded. Let me just add one final point on this. You know, today we have on the question of the economy, Senator Joyce going out to the Australian public and saying the following: we have got to ask the question, how in debt do you want to go, we are getting to a point where we can't repay it, we are getting to a point we can't repay it, unquote.
The alternative finance minister of Australia today, challenges the sovereign debt integrity of the Commonwealth of Australia. In the past he has done that in relation to the United States, in the past he has done that in relation to various state governments of Australia. Today, he brings into public doubt, the Commonwealth public debt repayment ability.
This is a most fundamentally irresponsible remark by someone who puts himself forward as the alternative finance minister of Australia, a man put in that position by a Leader of the Opposition who said he has no interest in economics whatsoever.
So you ask sometimes about risk for the future, risks for the economy, risk is here personified in the alternative finance minister who thinks that you can just play fast and loose with public language on Australia's sovereign debt.
And to conclude, on the question of economic credibility, Mr Abbott effectively says today, keeping Australia out of recession was a waste of money. Have a look at what he said, for goodness sake, for goodness sake. You know, looking at the jobs of Australians which have been saved by the Government's national stimulus strategy, and Mr Abbott today basically says, keeping Australia out of recession was a big waste of money.
Well I would like him to answer that question, directly to the working households of Australia, hundreds of thousands of them, when we met here in this room in October of 2008, the galvanising principle for us was how do you protect Australian jobs.
We went through what happened in the '90's, we went through what happened in the '80's and we weren't about to see it happen again. We were going to put every hand to the tiller to make a difference. So on the question of risk to the economy, you have got a Leader of the Opposition who says keeping Australia out of recession was a waste of money.
You have got an alternative finance minister who today publicly questions whether Australia's sovereign debt is repayable. I leave this question for you all as Mr Abbott goes through his little hoopla performance in the party room today, where he seems to be suggesting that the next election is in the bag, these are deep questions of risk for Australia.
And this is going to be a hard fought election. Two or three people change their vote, you get Senator Joyce as your finance Minister and Mr. Abbott as your Prime Minister. We think that is obviously a matter for the Australian people. For us this will be a very hard fought election. Thank you.


The Australian Government has today announced a comprehensive package of measures to strengthen Australia's international and domestic aviation security regime against emerging threats.
These measures are consistent with the security strategy set out in the Government's Aviation White Paper released in December last year, as well as the National Security Adviser's review of aviation security in light of the attempted terrorist attack on a United States-bound flight on Christmas Day.
The Christmas Day attempt showed that no nation can afford to be complacent when it comes to security.
The Government's highest priority is the safety and security of Australians.
Australia already has a world-class aviation security regime, which we will further strengthen through a range of strategic and practical measures.
Over four years, the Government will invest $200 million on new and improved security technologies, increased policing at airports, enhanced security procedures, as well as strengthened international cooperation.
Increasing passenger and baggage screening
There will be an immediate increase in the number of passengers who will be subject to explosive trace detection at our major international and domestic airports.
The Government will provide $28.5 million to assist the industry to introduce a range of new screening technologies at passenger screening points.
These technologies will include the latest body scanners, next generation multi-view X-ray machines and bottle scanners capable of detecting liquid-based explosives.
Body scanners will be introduced progressively as an additional screening measure at screening points servicing international departing passengers by early 2011.
The Government understands the privacy concerns some travellers may have with body scanning technologies and will implement appropriate privacy and facilitation measures to mitigate these concerns.
We will also provide $32 million to bring forward screening at a number of additional regional airports that are currently served by larger passenger turbo-prop aircraft.
We are also introducing more stringent training and performance requirements for security screening staff, as part of the Government's Aviation White Paper.
Policing at airports
The Government will provide $17.7 million to increase the number of Firearms and Explosive Detection Dogs at major international airports by 50 per cent.
When teamed with bomb appraisal officers and other uniformed Australian Federal Police officers, these highly-trained detection dogs and their handlers make a highly visible and effective contribution to aviation security and law enforcement.
In addition, we will provide $12.3 million to maintain the AFP presence at major airports, in line with the Beale review's recommendations on airport policing to deliver more responsive and better coordinated policing at these vital gateways.
Strengthening international cooperation
The Government will provide $18.2 million to strengthen engagement and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region and internationally and to improve security on international flights.
We will expand our international cooperation regime of visits, inspections and security assessments at last ports of call airports for flights coming to Australia.
We will also conduct a trial, in partnership with the United States and United Kingdom at an Australian airport on technology-based solutions to assist in further improvements to the detection of liquids-based explosives.
Passenger security processing measures
The Government will provide $24.9 million for new technology as part of the Enhanced Passenger Assessment and Clearance Program, to enable Customs to assess a larger number of passengers earlier and faster and share relevant data with intelligence, border management and law enforcement agencies.
This will bring together passenger travel history quicker to inform judgements at the border and to address one of the issues identified after the Christmas Day attempt.
The Government will also provide $11.4 million for the Next Generation Border Security Initiative to use advanced data analysis and risk profiling to better identify and refer visa applicants who may present national security risks to intelligence agencies.
Securing the air cargo supply chain
The Government will introduce a number of measures to help secure Australia's air cargo supply chain.
We will provide $54.2 million to assist industry to install cargo x-ray screening and explosive trace detection technology at selected locations.
This funding will also establish a regulated shipper scheme, which will allow for the identification of high-risk cargo for technical examination.
Recent events have shown that terrorists and terrorist organisations are trying new techniques and strategies in their efforts to target innocent people.
Although no single measure can prevent a terrorist attack, new technologies, better training and greater domestic and international cooperation can help us stay one step ahead of terrorist organisations.
As part of the process, we will work with the aviation industry and other stakeholders in order to improve the efficiency and quality of passenger screening and facilitation at domestic and international airports and ensure disruptions are minimised for travellers.
It is vital that we remain vigilant and take those steps that are necessary to protect Australian citizens and Australian interests.



The Australian Government is pleased to announce the appointment of the Honourable Patrick Keane as Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Australia.
Justice Keane will begin his appointment on Monday 22 March 2010. His Honour will be the third Chief Justice appointed to the Federal Court since its inception, and the first from Queensland.
Justice Keane is currently a Judge of the Court of Appeal, Supreme Court of Queensland, an office he has held with distinction since 2005. Prior to taking up judicial appointment, Justice Keane was Solicitor-General for Queensland. Between 1990 and 1992, Justice Keane was Deputy Chairman of the Queensland Law Reform Commission. He practised at the Queensland Bar between 1978 and 2005, principally in commercial and constitutional matters. Justice Keane was appointed Queen's Counsel in 1988 and in 2003 was awarded the Centenary Medal.
Consistent with a commitment to a more transparent and merit-based judicial appointments process the Government has undertaken extensive consultation to ensure the selection of the best possible candidate. The Government sought the views of a wide range of individuals and organisations, including State and Territory Attorneys-General, Chief Justices from across Australia, and the legal profession through the relevant professional associations.
The Government is grateful to all those who put forward nominations, which greatly assisted in the consideration of this appointment.
The Honourable Chief Justice Michael Black AC will retire on 21 March 2010, following 19 years of exemplary service to Australia as Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Australia.
The Government thanks the Chief Justice for the valued and enduring contribution he has made to Australia's justice system.


About 10,000 students will benefit from an expansion of the Australian Government's Sporting Chance Program to support Indigenous students' engagement with school.
Sporting Chance Program uses sport and recreation as a hook to better engage Indigenous boys and girls in their schooling to improve educational and employment outcomes.
There were 42 Sporting Chance projects in 2009 - 37 school-based sports academies and five engagement strategies, supporting about 9,000 students.
In 2010 an additional 17 sports academies will commence across Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Victoria, supporting about 1,000 students, which will bring the total supported under program to some 10,000.
Ten of these new academies will be for girls and are funded as part of the $10 million expansion jointly announced by the Minister for Education, Julia Gillard, and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, in the 2009-10 Budget.
The academies will operate in Broome, Fitzroy Crossing, Bunbury and North Albany, in Western Australia; West Arnhem, Palmerston, Katherine and Alice Springs in the Northern Territory; Mooroopna, Bendigo and Ballarat in Victoria; and Townsville in Queensland.
Seven new academies are funded under a $10 million expansion of the Clontarf Foundation announced in December 2008. The Foundation will operate its football academies in Jabiru and Gunbalanya in the Northern Territory; and in Bairnsdale, Warrnambool, Swan Hill, Robinvale and Mildura in Victoria.
The Sporting Chance Program is delivering strong results for Indigenous students, particularly in remote and rural areas. Attendance rates are starting to climb and are, on average, better than attendance rates for Indigenous students not involved in the program.
Data collected from projects in 2009 indicates that the average attendance rate for academy students was 79 per cent. The average rate for all Indigenous students in the schools the projects were in was 73 per cent.
More than half of the academy students were reported by the schools to be improving their school performance and many were also reported to have made significant gains in their self-esteem and behaviour.


A new Government Ambassador for Business Action has been appointed to encourage Australian business to play a part in the economic development of Indigenous communities.
During his Closing the Gap statement to Parliament today, the Prime Minister announced the appointment of Mr Colin Carter to this important role.
The Business Ambassador will be at the forefront of the Australian Government's efforts to encourage the private sector to play an active role in Indigenous employment.
Mr Carter will visit corporate leaders across the country and encourage the private sector to share their extensive experience with Indigenous communities to help set up and grow their own businesses.
Mr Carter brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to the position. He was a founding partner of Boston Consulting Group, is a current director of the Cape York Institute for Indigenous Policy and Leadership and a director of Indigenous Enterprise Partnerships.
He is a strong advocate for the role Australian business can play in helping Indigenous people overcome disadvantage.
He will work with the corporate sector to build relationships between Indigenous communities and leading Australian businesses through staff secondments. These staff will work within Indigenous community organisations and provide advice to help develop new business opportunities and strengthen corporate governance.
In his role as Director of Indigenous Enterprise Partnerships, Mr Carter was involved in an initiative where executives from a range of leading Australian corporations worked in Indigenous organisations in Cape York and the Goulburn-Murray region.
Through this initiative the business and the community sector worked together to establish tourism operations, provide scholarships for local school students and develop voluntary income management schemes for local families.
We are delighted Mr Carter has agreed to this new position and look forward to working with him to tackle the challenges of Indigenous economic development.
This new role will be established under the Rudd Government's Business Action Agenda. We have committed $3 million over four years towards the agenda, which was first announced in the 2009-10 Budget.


Indigenous babies will have a better chance of being born healthy and staying healthy following an announcement today of Australian Government funding of $9.1 million over three years for 10 new mothers and babies services.
The 10 new services are in addition to the 43 already funded under the New Directions program which give Indigenous babies and their mothers better access to:
     * Pre and post pregnancy care
     * Standard information about baby care
     * Practical advice and assistance with breastfeeding, nutrition and parenting
     * Monitoring of developmental milestones, immunisation status and infections
     * Health checks and referrals for treatment for Indigenous children before starting school
The Prime Minister made the announcement as part of the Closing the Gap statement in Parliament House this afternoon.
The 10 new services will be available in areas of need, including four new sites in the Northern Territory, two each in South Australia and Western Australia and one each in Tasmania and Queensland.
The new service providers are:
     * Laynhapuy Homelands Association Incorporation, Northern Territory
     * Pintubi Homelands Health Service, Northern Territory
     * Sunrise Health Service Aboriginal Corporation, Northern Territory
     * Western Arrente Health Aboriginal Corporation, Northern Territory
     * Country Health South Australia
     * Tullawon Health Service, South Australia
     * Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre
     * Ngunytju Tjitji Pirni Aboriginal Corporation, Western Australia
     * Wirraka Maya Health Service, Western Australia
     * Mookai Rosie Bi-Bayan, Queensland
Ms Roxon said the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has committed to halving the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade, and this increase in comprehensive mothers and babies services is another important step to fulfilling this goal.
"In total, the Commonwealth has committed $90.3 million for the New Directions Mothers and Babies Services program, with an additional $75 million contribution from states and territories," Ms Roxon said.
"This program gives Indigenous children a great start to life through ongoing home visits to ensure Indigenous children are healthy, happy and ready to learn."
Ms Macklin said expanding services supporting pregnant women and new mothers in Indigenous communities was critical to giving Indigenous children the best start in life.
"Other clinics already offering these services, which include care during pregnancy, advice on nutrition and health checks for children, have seen improvements in the health of women and their babies. This includes fewer premature and low birth weight babies," Ms Macklin said.
The New Directions mother and baby services provide increased access to pre pregnancy care, improving birth weights of Indigenous babies and continuing to provide support in the child's early years to give them the best possible start to life.
Mr Snowdon said this was part of a broad commitment by the Rudd Government to Close the Gap in Indigenous health outcomes. 
"Across the Health and Ageing portfolio, funding of almost $1 billion has been allocated in the 2009-10 Budget for health programs specific to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people."
"These recent investments equate to a 57 per cent increase in Indigenous health funding across the Portfolio since the 2007-08 Budget," Mr Snowdon said.


Secondary schools in remote Indigenous communities are set to benefit greatly over the next 10 years through new or upgraded trade training facilities provided by the Australian Government.
Under the Trade Training Centres in Schools Program, secondary schools can apply for funding of between $500,000 and $1.5 million, and through the National Partnership on Remote Service Delivery, the Australian Government is working with State and Territory counterparts to give intensive support and accelerate applications from schools in the 29 Remote Service Delivery communities
Seven schools in the 29 Remote Service Delivery priority locations have already had funding allocated for Trades Training Centres.
The Australian Government considers increased vocational training essential for improving school retention and important for the transition from school to employment in remote locations.
Several changes to the Trade Training Centres in Schools program are also being implemented to provide additional flexibility, including:
     * allowing schools in remote communities with large Indigenous student populations to deliver training targeted at the needs and education levels in these communities, including pre-vocational and Certificate I and II qualifications
     * allowing schools in remote communities to construct trade training facilities that contain a multi-purpose room to be used for temporary teacher accommodation to support a block-training delivery model
     * allowing schools in remote communities with enrolments to Year 9 or Year 10 to access the program more easily, especially where there are no nearby senior secondary schools.
This will help these schools develop high-quality and sustainable proposals that will deliver industry standard training to accelerate the roll out of Trades Training Centres to these priority locations.
This is consistent with the findings of the first report of the Coordinator General for Remote Indigenous Services.
The National Partnership on Remote Service Delivery was agreed by the Council of Australian Governments in November 2008.
Further information about the Trade Training Centres in Schools program is available at www.tradetrainingcentres.deewr.gov.au


The Australian Government will establish a three-year, $46 million fund to support high priority projects in 29 remote Indigenous communities.
Under the Remote Service Delivery Strategy, all Australian governments have signed up to a concentrated and accelerated approach to tackle deep-seated disadvantage.
We are overhauling the way governments deliver services and invest in our priority remote communities.
After decades of uncoordinated, ad hoc actions from governments at all levels, a comprehensive and sustained approach is vital to provide residents of remote Indigenous communities with the facilities and services you would expect in any Australian town of a similar size, location and need.
The sort of infrastructure and services that support and sustain healthy social norms so people can reach their potential and businesses can thrive.
In his first report, the Coordinator-General for Remote Indigenous Services identified red tape and the inability to tailor programs to local circumstances as hindering implementation of this new approach.
This $46 million fund will allow the Government to respond flexibly and quickly to projects that are identified as high priority by community members, reducing red tape and bureaucratic delays.
Local communities are now working with governments to develop implementation plans that will include tailored solutions to priority needs.
This announcement builds on the success of the Local Priorities Fund established under the Northern Territory Emergency Response.
One example of projects funded through this fund is a BMX track constructed at Ntaria (Hermannsberg) with the aim of reducing substance misuse and other at-risk behaviours in a number of Central Desert communities.
Local people helped build the track and the spectator stand and it is now regularly used by young people in the community.
The BMX program is also linked to closing the gap in educational outcomes. It actively encourages school attendance by integrating BMX into local schools' learning and sporting activities. Two Regional Education Coordinators work with local government schools to incorporate the BMX program into the school curriculum.
In another project in Western Arnhem, $230,000 was approved to construct new freezer and chiller room facilities and upgrade existing facilities to improve the range and availability of healthy food for the Warruwi community.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Mr Speaker, two years ago I made a formal Apology in this Parliament to the Indigenous peoples of Australia, and particularly to the Stolen Generations, on behalf of the Government, the Parliament and the people of Australia.
On that day in 2008, I also pledged to lead a new, national effort to close the gap in life expectancy and life opportunities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
On that day, we achieved for the first time a bi-partisan commitment to closing the gap:
     * together, we acknowledged the failure of successive governments to deliver to many Indigenous communities;
     * together, we demonstrated that closing the gap is a national priority that should be above partisan politics, and
     * together, we recognised that closing the gap would take not a parliamentary term, but a generation.
When we came to Government the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life expectancy at birth was estimated at 17 years.
Indigenous children in Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory were 3.6 times more likely to die before they reached the age of five than non-Indigenous children.
Almost one in 10 dwellings in remote and very remote Indigenous communities were in need of major repair or replacement.
In 2006, only 47.4 per cent of Indigenous young people had attained Year 12 or equivalent.
And the employment gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians aged 15 to 64 stood at around 21 percentage points in 2008.
In other areas, such as literacy and numeracy, comparable national data did not exist, though a large gap in achievement between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students was evident.
These failures presents us with a substantial challenge.
But in facing this challenge, I believe there has never before been the commitment to change that there is today.
We have seen a growing movement to take responsibility for change - among both Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
If we are to make a break from the failures of the past, we must all play our part.
     * Governments, first, must take responsibility for addressing their past failures in Indigenous affairs.
     * Second, Indigenous Australians must take greater responsibility for change - change begins in the lives of individuals and families, spreading across local communities.
     * Third, Australians across all walks of life must take responsibility for re-setting relations between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Mr Speaker, today I table my second annual statement on closing the gap. 
Since the Parliament made the Apology two years ago, the Australian Government has reached, for the first time, a national agreement with State and Territory governments on closing the gap - for the first time, rather than pulling in different directions, pulling together; for the first time, a national investment of $4.6 billion; and for the first time, setting common goals to transform the health, education and employment outcomes of Indigenous Australians.
For the first time, Governments agreed to six clear targets, which work together to close the gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a generation.
We set these targets knowing they were ambitious. We know meeting them won't be easy.
Generations of Indigenous disadvantage cannot be turned around overnight.
We know it will need unprecedented effort by all parts of the Australian community.
But there is no greater social challenge facing Australia than closing this yawning gap.
And today I can report to the House that on the ground, we are seeing the beginnings of change.
The report I table today outlines a slow path to change.
It demonstrates the challenges of accurate data - to track our progress to closing the gap - and thereby meet our targets.
But, it also demonstrates that while progress is slow, there is action in communities right across Australia - action by governments; action by Indigenous communities; and action by the wider Australian community.
Mr Speaker, I will now address each of the six targets we set in 2008.
The Government's first target is to halve the mortality gap between Indigenous children and other children under five years of age by 2018.
In 2008, the gap in child mortality meant that 205 out of any 100,000 Indigenous children died before the age of 5, compared to 100 non-Indigenous children - a difference of more than 100.
Indigenous children are twice as likely to die before the age of five than non-Indigenous kids.
This is a shameful statistic. For all parents, it is shocking and confronting.
While 2009 data to measure progress against this target is not yet available, other data sources can provide some measure of change.
We know that the gap in infant mortality rates in New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territory has been on the decline over the past decade.
This decline has been particularly evident over recent years and now stands at 5.3 percentage points.
We must continue to act to see this decline accelerated and our target reached by 2018.
Towards that goal, we have already rolled out 40 new services for mothers and babies.
Under the $90.3 million Mothers and Babies Services program, a total of 11,000 mothers and babies will be supported over five years with services including improved antenatal and postnatal care, advice on nutrition and health checks.
And today I can announce that nine new services will be funded, including at:
     * the Laynhapuy Homelands Association and the Pintubi Homelands Health Service in the Northern Territory;
     * at the Tullawon Health Service in South Australia, at the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre;
     * at the Wirraka Maya Health Service in Western Australia; and
     * at Mookai Rosie Bi-Bayan in Queensland.
In addition to these services,
     * The Australian Government is supporting pregnant women to improve their own health through establishing five sites under the $37.4 million Australian Nurse Family Partnership Program.
     * We have provided a total of 390 ear, nose and throat specialist services and a total of 1,990 dental services to 1,429 children who live in the Northern Territory Emergency Response communities in the six months from July to December last year alone.
     * And the Red Cross is working with Outback Stores to bring more fresh fruit to Indigenous kids in the Territory through breakfast clubs in 33 communities and 13 homeland centres.
Our second target is to provide access to early childhood education for all four-year olds in remote Indigenous communities within five years.
Getting the best start in life begins early.
Early childhood education is essential to getting the right start in learning and preparing for school.
But the best available data shows only around 60 per cent of Indigenous children are enrolled in an early childhood education program in the year before school, compared to around 70 per cent of all children.
The good news is that the trend is in the right direction - more Indigenous children are being enrolled.
And we are seeing the fastest pre-school enrolment growth in remote communities, increasing by 31 per cent between 2005 and 2008.
We are expanding early learning opportunities for Indigenous children through the establishment of 36 Children and Family Centres bringing together important services including child care, early learning and parent and family support programs.
21 of these 36 centres will be located in regional and remote areas, including in Kununurra in Western Australia; Mornington Island in Queensland; and Walgett in New South Wales.
Another will be located in Yuendumu in the Northern Territory, where the Yuendumu Early Childhood Centre is already held up as a model of successful early childhood education.
Every day between 40 and 60 children, along with their parents and extended family, go along to the centre to paint, read books, ride bikes and play. The children have breakfast and lunch there, the community nurse visits and they go on excursions to the pool and into the bush. The 14 local Aboriginal child care workers who look after them say the children are healthy and happy.
With more children benefitting from early childhood education, the flow-on effect will help us meet our third and fourth targets: to halve the gap in literacy and numeracy achievement between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students and other students within a decade and to halve the gap between Indigenous and non-indigenous students in rates of Year 12 attainment or an equivalent attainment by 2020.
These two targets are critical to closing the gap, because it is education, above all, that will improve the life chances and unlock the potential of Indigenous Australians.
The evidence is unambiguous.
Finishing Year 12 transforms students' future opportunities.
It builds pathways to more secure, better paid and more fulfilling jobs.
And the learning basics - literacy and numeracy - are fundamental to all Australian children.
And they are critical to healthier, happier and longer lives.
The evidence shows the gap in meeting literacy and numeracy standards between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students is large.
These gaps are evident from as early as year 3 - with the largest gap in 2008 being 29.4 percentage points for Year 5 reading.
Literacy and numeracy scores vary across grades; in 2009 there was an improvement in the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students' reading for Years 3, 5 and 7. For Year 9 students, the gap slightly increased.
The Government is taking action to expand opportunities for Indigenous children at school.
Around 78,000 Indigenous students - almost half of all Indigenous primary and secondary school students - will benefit from the Government's $1.5 billion investment in 1500 low socio-economic schools, as well as substantial investments in literacy and numeracy.
And we are seeing great results from the Stronger Smarter Leadership Program of Dr Chris Sarra whose "clear expectations, high expectations'' philosophy for educating Indigenous children is delivering remarkable results among the 44 schools signed up to it.
The Government provided Stronger Smarter Learning Communities in September 2009 to support an initial 12 'hub' schools in New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia.
We expect this to grow to 60 hub schools over the next four years, supporting between 180 and 240 affiliated schools.
One school that has already signed up is East Kalgoorlie Primary School in Western Australia.
Faced with what she described as significant challenges, Principal Donna Bridge used her experience of the Stronger Smarter Leadership Program to enlist the support of parents and the community to bring about change.
Five years later, attitudes have changed, school attendance is up and there have been significant improvements in literacy and numeracy.
In Cape York in far North Queensland, school attendance is also up, driven by the Cape York Welfare Reforms - created by Indigenous leader Noel Pearson and supported by the Commonwealth and state governments.
Under the reforms welfare payments are linked to parents taking responsibility to care for their kids and make sure they go to school.
In Aurukun, one community in the trial, school attendance rose from 44 to 66 per cent last year while in Coen it was 93 per cent - two points higher than the state average.
In 2006, only 47.4 per cent of Indigenous 20- to 24-year-olds had attained a Year 12 or equivalent qualification, almost half as many as non-Indigenous young people.
Indigenous school retention rates from the start of high school to Year 12 have risen from 30.7 per cent in 1995 to 46.5 per cent in 2008, a 6.4 percentage point increase.
With concerted government effort and the contribution of organisations like the Clontarf Academy we are working to close the gap.
Clontarf's school-based sport academies are tackling poor attendance and outcomes among Indigenous students through sport and recreation - with some great results, including school attendance rates of more than 80 per cent and improved academic performance.
By the end of February, 2,300 students in 36 schools across three states will be signed up.
Clontarf is one of the academies funded through the Australian Government's Sporting Chance Program, to support Indigenous students' engagement with school.
Overall, the programs have achieved an average attendance rate of 79 per cent - six percentage points above the average rate for all Indigenous students in the schools -so I'm pleased to announce today that in 2010 an additional 17 sports academies will commence across Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Victoria.
This will support about 1,000 students, and will bring the total number of students in the program to some 10,000.
10 of these new academies will be for girls.
The new academies will be established in Broome, Fitzroy Crossing, Bunbury and North Albany, in Western Australia; West Arnhem, Palmerston, Katherine and Alice Springs in the Northern Territory; Mooroopna, Bendigo and Ballarat in Victoria; and Townsville in Queensland.
As well, the Clontarf Foundation will operate seven new football academies in Jabiru and Gunbalanya in the Northern Territory; and in Bairnsdale, Warrnambool, Swan Hill, Robinvale and Mildura in Victoria.
Our fifth target is to halve within a decade the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and other Australians.
On this goal, there is a positive trend.
Between 2002 and 2008, the Indigenous employment rate rose from 48 per cent to 53.8 per cent.
This is still well below the non-Indigenous employment rate so that in 2008, the most recent available data indicates there was a 21 percentage point gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous employment.
Over the past year, we have replaced Community Development Employment Project jobs with more than 1,500 jobs delivering government services to Indigenous communities.
These, for the first time, are now sustainable, proper jobs.
The best way to accelerate growth in indigenous employment is to give people the skills to get and keep a job.
Seven schools in the 29 remote communities targeted under the National Partnership on Remote Service Delivery already have Trades Training Centres under our $2.5 billion national investment in Trade Training Centres to give school students early opportunities to develop skills for a profession in the trades, and to help them complete Year 12 or an equivalent qualification.
But others can still benefit.
In communities like Hermannsburg, dedicated teachers have lifted school attendance to better than 90 per cent in junior school.
To be successful, these young people need to be actively engaged beyond their primary school years.
The Government is acting today to improve access to first rate education facilities for students in school remote Indigenous communities.
I announce today that intensive support and assistance will be given to schools that from the 29 Remote Service Delivery priority locations that have not already had funding from the Trades Training Centres program.
Schools in remote communities with large Indigenous student populations will also be provided with extra flexibility to deliver training targeted at the needs and education levels in these communities, including pre-vocational and Certificate I and II qualifications.
We're also working with the private sector to create real business and employment opportunities.
The Government is also investing $3 million to support the new Australian Indigenous Minority Supplier Council, which helps certified Indigenous businesses to win new contracts in the private and government sectors.
After only five months, the Council has signed up 31 major corporations as backers.
Already, it has helped secure $3.3 million worth of contracts for 15 Indigenous businesses.
To encourage businesses across Australia to take action to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, we have appointed a Government Ambassador for Business Action.
This position has been filled by Colin Carter, a highly regarded Australian businessman who was a founding partner of Boston Consulting Group in Australia, and who has more recently served as the director of the Cape York Institute for Indigenous Policy and Leadership.
Mr Carter will work with Australian businesses to promote the employment of Indigenous people, and to encourage business people to share their skills with Indigenous communities to help set up and grow their own businesses.
These efforts will are in addition to the work of the Australian Employment Covenant, through which some 16,000 Indigenous jobs have been committed over the coming years from Australian business.
All these efforts culminate in our sixth and final target - to close the life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a generation.
As of today we are informed that the life expectancy gap is 11.5 years for men and 9.7 for women.
An Indigenous male born today is likely to die at just 67 years of age, and an Indigenous female at 73 years.
This is less than the 17-year gap that we thought existed a year ago.
This is good news - but it is the result of having more reliable data, rather than the result of any real improvement on the ground.
In the past, we haven't had reliable information on Indigenous life expectancy.
So we haven't reliably known the size of the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
There's evidence to suggest that some progress may have been made.
But the progress is clearly too slow.
Closing the life expectancy gap is a cumulative target, relying on our success in meeting each of the other targets for achievement.
Obviously, the health of Indigenous people is a major factor.
Tobacco, obesity and physical inactivity are the leading risk factors, accounting for around 45 per cent of the total health gap.
Since 2007-2008, Indigenous specific health spending has increased by 57 per cent.
This includes nearly $1.6 billion over four years to fight the treatable chronic diseases that account for two-thirds of premature Indigenous deaths.
And it includes the $14.5 million Indigenous Tobacco Control Initiative, a package of 20 innovative anti-smoking projects in urban, regional and remote Indigenous communities.
I spoke early about the legacy of decades of government failure still endured by Indigenous Australians.
This makes it all the more urgent to be vigilant about what is working and what is not.
That is why, when evidence emerged of unacceptable delays in our major Indigenous housing program in the Northern Territory last year, the Government took unprecedented action to get the program on track.
That action has delivered results.
As a result, we remain on target to build 750 new houses, and rebuild or refurbish another 2500 in remote Indigenous communities by 2013 - through the Australian Government working together with the government of the Northern Territory.
It is in that spirit, we have instructed the COAG Reform Council to produce an annual assessment of the performance of governments against the closing the gap targets.
We have also appointed a Co-ordinator General for Remote Indigenous Services, to oversee the roll-out of local plans in 29 remote communities and to cut through the red tape that slows delivery on the ground.
In the Coordinator General's first six-monthly report, released in December last year, he identified that 'business-as-usual' approaches are still too widespread.
He noted that fragmentation and siloing may act as a barrier to achieve improvements in service delivery necessary to close the gap.
And to that end, I can announce today a new Flexible Funding Pool to free up funds for remote service delivery and ensure that red tape doesn't get in the way of progress in these communities.
This funding pool will target high priority projects in the 29 Indigenous communities that are the initial priority of the National Partnership Agreement.
The $46 million for this funding pool over the next three years will allow the Government to respond flexibly and quickly to Indigenous community needs and act on Local Implementation Plans.
We are not just making unprecedented investments in Indigenous communities, we are doing things differently.
For example, central to our $5.5 billion investment in remote Indigenous housing is our target of 20 per cent Indigenous employment.
In the Northern Territory, Indigenous employment is currently running at 35 per cent, providing jobs for more than 100 Aboriginal people across the Territory.
One of them is 24 year-old Tiwi Islander Harry Munkara who's building houses in the community of Nguiu.
Harry's a carpenter and, with overtime, he's earning around $800 a week.
Harry told The Australian this week that for the first time he was managing to save money to put aside for his toddler son. And, Harry says, he wants to be a role model for his people.
Mr Speaker, after some early difficulties in the housing construction program, houses are now being built.
Over 50 new houses are now under construction in the Territory, with the keys to the first two houses handed over to tenants this week.
Refurbishments are being made to around 80 homes that were in poor repair.
And more than 70 have already been completed and handed back to the Northern Territory Government, for allocation to Indigenous families.
In total across Australia, under the Remote Indigenous Housing National Partnership, over 150 new houses are now under construction across the country.
15 of these have been completed.
Over 230 refurbishments are also underway and 120 of these have been completed.
To ensure that our investments in remote communities bear fruit on the ground, we are seeking a fundamental change in the way housing is delivered.
We are insisting that the states and the Northern Territory obtain secure tenure for housing so that the government has security over the land.
In the past, the communal nature of Aboriginal land made it unclear who was responsible for maintaining houses and other structures built on the land.
But we have matched an unprecedented investment with tenancy reform to ensure the residents pay rent and care for their homes.
Indigenous people in public housing, like other public housing tenants, will have standard tenancy arrangements in place and the state government will be responsible for maintaining the houses.
We are acquiring security over land so that housing and essential services can be built for the long term, so private companies can feel comfortable about investing, and so that home ownership can become possible.
Many Indigenous communities - including 14 in the Northern Territory - have shown a willingness to sign the new leases and obtain significant new investments.
With secure tenure obtained over all 18 Alice Springs town camps, we have put our $150 million Alice Springs Transformation Plan into action.
We are cleaning up the camps, controlling the number of dogs, introducing new alcohol counselling services, and this month we start building new houses.
The 60 to 100 residents of one town camp - Ilpeye Ilpeye - have made clear their aspirations to own their own homes, so the Australian Government has changed the tenure of this land from community lease to freehold title.
This means the land can be subdivided into individual housing blocks.
Over time, that means members of this community can own their own homes.
Communities with strong social norms that give families the incentives to take responsibility for their lives and build a better future.
No family can function in overcrowded, derelict houses in which stoves and taps don't work, children can't get a good night's sleep and adults can't be rested and ready for work.
Many Indigenous Australians aspire to home ownership, as other Australians do.
To illustrate that, I note the remarks of Alice Springs traditional owner Darryl Pearce reported in the media last month.
Mr Pearce said his people wanted the same rights to land ownership and economic development opportunities as other Australians. In his words:
"We want respect - and that's what the government has given us."
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government wants to help Indigenous people build healthy families and thriving communities.
That is why we have invested $1.2 billion in the Northern Territory Emergency Response measures since we were elected because we are there for the long haul.
Since coming to government, the number of people supported by income management has increased from around 1,400 to over 16,000.
We have now moved to put the Northern Territory Emergency Response on a long-term, sustainable footing.
We have introduced legislation to reinstate the Racial Discrimination Act - which the previous government had suspended in order to ensure the Emergency Response was immune from legal challenge.
And we have taken the decision to apply income management to all welfare recipients in specified categories across the Territory from July.
The number of people on income management in the NT is estimated to rise to around 20,000.
This is the first step in an extension of the scheme - once it has been carefully evaluated - to disadvantaged locations across Australia.
The Government's welfare reforms seek to help all disadvantaged Australians - not just those who are Indigenous - to take on more individual responsibility and move beyond welfare dependence.
In delivering these reforms, we are acting in the interests of the most vulnerable people - the elderly, women and children.
Governments are responsible for helping communities to develop the structures and leaders they need to restore social norms, recognising that change takes time.
However, individuals also have responsibilities: to provide safe and secure homes for their children; to go to school or to make sure their children go to school; to pay rent, look for work, avoid self-destructive behaviour, and give the people in their care every opportunity to thrive.
These are the foundations on which strong communities are built, and on which people can make the most of their natural abilities.
Mr Speaker, today I am asking Indigenous leaders - in families, in communities and across the nation - to step up and take responsibility for restoring strong social norms in their own communities.
Many are doing this now.
Just look at the Kimberley town of Fitzroy Crossing, where women such as June Oscar and Emily Carter led a community campaign for alcohol restrictions.
Two years after they won their battle, the incidence of domestic violence and alcohol-related injuries is down, baby birth weights are up, and police say the town is a much calmer place.
Now the community is working with police, business and three tiers of government on a plan to improve services and close the gap in Fitzroy Crossing.
In the nearby town of Halls Creek, the community's successful push for alcohol restrictions last year has brought a sharp drop in the incidence of arrests and domestic violence.
In Queensland, at Mornington Island and Aurukun - as alcohol restrictions have come in, violent crime has gone down.
There are many other Indigenous people around Australia who don't make the headlines but are quietly making a difference - and making fundamental changes in their own communities.
Mr Speaker, all Australians can play a part in building this better future and Australians from all across the nation are taking action.
Across the country, banks, football clubs, mining companies, local councils, hospitals, schools and even the Perth Zoo are hiring Indigenous workers, contracting with Indigenous businesses supporting Indigenous communities.
10 years ago Rio Tinto had 130 Indigenous employees; today it has 1400.
BHP Billiton has 10 contracts with Indigenous businesses worth $350 million through one of its subsidiaries, WA Iron Ore.
It employs 255 Aboriginal workers directly and another 465 indirectly through its contractors. 
The ANZ Bank had taken on 420 Indigenous employees by the end of last year, and is committed to filling 10 per cent of entry level positions with Aboriginal people by 2011.
Since 2006, 165 organisations have completed Reconciliation Action Plans through Reconciliation Australia, with 168 more to be launched this year.
By the end of this year 15 per cent of the Australian workforce - including employees at Australia's 11 largest companies - will work for an organisation that has a Reconciliation Action Plan.
Through these practical efforts to promote reconciliation, organisations have created 6,500 positions for Indigenous people, and filled 3,000 of them.
They have awarded $750 million in contracts to Indigenous businesses.
Sometimes they do it because it brings business benefits and because it creates a sustainable investment for the companies and the Indigenous employees they hire, but these organisations are also taking action because they share a vision of a fairer Australia.
Australians want to close the gap.
91 per cent of non-Indigenous Australians and 100 per cent of Indigenous Australians surveyed by Reconciliation Australia said that the relationship between the two peoples was important to this country.
10 years ago this May, 250,000 Australians walked across Sydney Harbour Bridge - and 750,000 people walked around the country - in support of reconciliation.
10 years on, there remains a long journey ahead of us to lift Indigenous outcomes in health, housing, schools and jobs, but as a government and as a people, we can now see a path ahead and we are determined to move forward.
Not like the past, where it was non-Indigenous Australians seeking to lead Indigenous Australians, but instead, walking together, First Australians alongside all Australians, towards a stronger and fairer Australian nation.


This blog was open for comment from 2 to 12 February 2010.
Kevin.Rudd says...
I know that this time of year parents are rushing around packing pencil cases, backpacks and lunchboxes getting their kids ready for the first days of the school year (make sure you keep your receipts to claim the Education Tax Refund). But I hope that the mums and dads out there can take a minute to participate in this blog on the important issue of improving children's literacy.
When launching Jasper and Abby and the Great Australia Day Kerfuffle I was surprised by the attitude of some people that children's books were not important or that children's literature was not serious. Let me say that teaching kids to read is deadly serious. That's why I wanted to run this blog to talk, seriously, with parents about how we can best help kids to read by taking action at home and by giving us your thoughts on what else the Government could be doing.
The Government has been doing a lot to support parents, teachers and schools to improve literacy in Australia:
     * We have put some $540 million in over four years on the Smarter Schools national partnership on literacy and numeracy with focus on key areas including improving how we teach literacy and numeracy, better identifying those 'at risk' kids who need help to improve their reading and writing and encouraging our best principals and teachers to support their colleagues.
     * We know that schools are great innovators and teachers and principals often have the best ideas about what will work for their students. That's why we have invested $41 million for 30 Literacy and Numeracy Pilot Initiatives across the country so we can gather an evidence base of what works and share it with other schools.
     * For the first time we can compare how all children in Australia are performing in the basics, this allows teachers and parents to direct support to students that need it most using data collected from the National Assessment Program - Literacy and Numeracy tests. It also means schools that aren't meeting the minimum standards get the support they need to improve.
     * Developing a National Curriculum so that every kid from every state or territory has the essential skills they need. The first phase comprising English, Mathematics, Science and History will be implemented from 2011.
This is only half the story - we know that what happens at school and in the formal education system is important, but what parents do at home is just as valuable. Last week Julia launched the My School website - to give parents the information they need to improve the education of their kids. We are also investing in home tutoring, books and other resources in partnership with the Brotherhood of St Laurence for children between three and five years old in disadvantaged communities.
So that's a bit about what we are doing, but I am interested in what are people doing at home, how you involve young ones in everyday reading tasks and how do you find the time?
Our kids are now grown up but Thérèse has been active as the patron of the Indigenous Literacy Project which aims to combat the crisis of illiteracy in remote indigenous communities.
There are also some great local projects being run by parents who are passionate about getting kids to read. At the Community Cabinet in South Australia a few weeks ago I met with parents who run the Little Big Book Club. They help parents choose age appropriate books and in some cases even provide free book packs for parents to read with their kids.
It can be really hard to find the time to read to your kids every night. But even if you set a goal of a couple of times a week then that is a great start.
I know there are lots of great ideas out there - over to you.
Read the full blog transcript


KOCH: Well, last week the Prime Minister had to tackle everything from IVF to gay marriage to Schapelle Corby, so what's on the agenda this week for our regular Ask the PM segment?
Let's get straight into it. The Prime Minister joins me in the studio. Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Kochie.
KOCH: First question is from Steve Foster, he's a truck driver who wants to know what's happening with the upgrade of the Pacific Highway. Steven, you have the ear of the Prime Minister - go for it.
CALLER: First all, g'day team, how are you? Mr Prime Minister, sir.
PM: Steve.
CALLER: The Pacific Highway, in the last 20 years I've been a truck driver and in the last 20 years a little bit has been done to it, not a hell of a lot, and I'd like to know when it's going to be repaired properly. It's, at this stage, a goat track. Not all of it, but a hell of a lot of it, is a goat track, and I'm going to make you an offer. In fact-
PM: I think I'm going trucking with you, is that right, Steve?
CALLER: - I would like to take you on a trip, pardon?
PM: It sounds like I'm going trucking with you, is that right, mate?
CALLER: Ah, yes, pretty much. I'd like to offer you a trip from Brisbane to Sydney with me so that you can see just how bad it is for yourself.
PM: Well, mate, I'm from Queensland, so if you made is Sydney to Brisbane you might be onto something there, so -
CALLER: Well, it doesn't matter which you go, if it's Sydney to Brisbane or Brisbane to Sydney, the roads still the same. It's a goat track.
PM: Okay, I understand that, mate, it's where I end up at the end -
CALLER: - Oh, please, sir, there's 12 -
PM: - Let's go to the substance of it.
KOCH: Let the Prime Minister answer, Steve.
PM: Let's go the guts of it. You're right, Steve. The Pacific has got huge gaps in it in terms of what's needed for a modern road system for the 21st century.
Second point is this. I spoke to the Transport Minister Anthony Albanese about this in the lead up to the last Budget. We have set a timeline for finishing the final duplication of the road, so that it's safer on the way through, particularly for truckers like yourself.
Two practical pieces of work we're now doing. One is up near Kempsey - finally, that duplication work up there. We saw that horrendous accident there many, many years ago. We've funded that. That's one further missing link in the chain.
One other thing we're doing at the other end of the highway which is not technically on the Pacific, but it's called the Hunter Expressway which actually assists with getting traffic onto the New England as well. That is another major piece of work.
Each of these costs hundreds of millions of dollars, but on the actual completion date for the duplication of the highway, I'll come back to you next week. I can't recall the exact date.
KOCH: Okay, let me help, because I think it's 2016 at the moment is the time for it. But Steve, I reckon you're narky and most of us are narky because the Pacific Highway is one of the busiest and most dangerous roads in the country.
Take a look at this. In the past 20 years, over 1,000 people have been killed, there have been 45,000 crashes, the NRMA says that only 50 per cent of the upgrade has been completed, and it seems, Prime Minister, that every time we have a Federal election or a state election, everyone promises to upgrade the Pacific Highway, but then nothing happens, money gets sucked out again. Like, when this promise was first made in 1996, it was planned that the whole dual carriageway would be finished by 2006. Now it's 2016. What happens? Do you give the money and the State steals it from you for other things, because it's their road, isn't it, the New South Wales Government.
PM: Look, what the New South Wales Government does with its funding, I can't answer for that, but what I do know is there are two major areas of work underway now which we're committed to. One is, as I said, around Kempsey, big piece of road up there. The second, and it's not technically on the Pacific but it does affect the traffic flow between -
KOCH: Oh, yeah, the Hunter one, yeah.
PM: That is huge, and that has been on and off -
KOCH: - But why can't we just get it completed, because everyone says 'yes, there's the money', then, all of a sudden, there's not the money?
PM: Well, our attitude is: put out a realistic timetable and do it block by block. I think we have been consistent with what we've said we'd fund. We are doing it. These are the two which we are going forward with. If you like, in terms of next week, as I give my response to Steve's question I'll give you our realistic timeline, what the next blocks are, and when we hope to have it done by.
But we, the Australian Government, don't physically go out and do the bitumen bit, but we do fund huge slabs of this because we know how much traffic goes onto that highway and we need to make it better for motorists, we need to make it better for truckers like Steve.
KOCH: We just want it finished. Alright, mate, there you go, the Prime Minister will work out whether he'll hitch a ride with you back home.
Two quick questions for you before our next viewer question. Pauline Hanson says she'll never run in an election again. What do you think about that?
PM: Matter for Pauline. I mean, she's had a very colourful political career. Obviously, I don't agree with her political standpoint but, you know, she's had a rough trot from time to time, but I think she's just decided to move on, and I think, frankly, the Australian body politic want to move on as well.
KOCH: Okay, alright, Peter Garrett has now admitted he was warned repeatedly about flaws in the home insulation program. You've got to move him on for this, don't you? You've got to sack him from that portfolio, it's just a schemozzle.
PM: The handling of this very big expansion of insulation has been a huge task. There's over a million homes in Australia which in the last 12 months have had insulation put in.
The second thing is that it's provided employment for about 6,000-7,000 businesses. This is a massive expansion of activity. You just referred in your intro to employment numbers in Australia in the last set of data. That's because we've been out there doing this.
The implementation of this has been done with the Minister, his Department, taking advice from industry, from the regulators, on the way through, and the key standards here have been those which apply to the quality of the product used, the occupational health and safety standards, and on top of that, what you do in terms of the proper training of workers. And what he did was introduce the first nationally accredited training system for workers in the installation industry.
KOCH: But it hasn't worked. We've had houses burning down, we've had people electrocuted, deaths of tradies, the whole lot - lots of people saying they weren't even trained, a lot of dodgy operators.
PM: What we've now got is a whole series of proper, properly constituted investigations by the coroner, by WorkCover, New South Wales WorkCover, Queensland, into each of these individual circumstances. And the question in each of them is how were the standards, the safety standards, applied?
KOCH: They knew months ago, he has been warned about this.
PM: The Minister, in response to representations from industry, from others, has taken a series of steps along the way to make sure that the delivery of this could be as absolutely safe as possible. Safety has been his number one priority.
Obviously, there have been tragic deaths in this, and no-one should try and pretend that this is in any way acceptable for the families concerned. It's not.
But let's also bear in mind that the product itself has been used in Australia for decades, secondly, that the safety standards associated with it are nationally established safety standards, and thirdly, when he became the Minister - you ask about action - there was no nationally accredited training program for workers in the insulation industry, and he actually had to bring one in and set up specific standards for that and appropriately accredited courses.
KOCH: So he's going to stay? You have full confidence in him?
PM: I have absolute confidence in the Minister. It has been a very hard program to implement. There have been tragedies for people's families, I understand that, but there are also tragedies with industrial accidents across the country in other areas. But this one we get to the bottom of properly through the investigations by the coroner and by others into each of the cases involved.
KOCH: Okay, moving on, a lot of attention on you and how you've been performing over the last couple of weeks. Front page of the Financial Review yesterday did a poll of talkback radio hosts about your personality, whether you've lost the ability to communicate. This is what Howard Sattler from 6PR had to say yesterday on the show.
PM: Big fan of mine, Howard.
SATTLER CLIP: Paper mache model spruiking the same sort of line all the time, and whether you like him or not Tony Abbott is more understandable than Kevin Rudd. Kevin's up there in the clouds with some of his comments and I think he's losing out as a result of that.
KOCH: What do you reckon about that, because in all honesty, we get lots of viewers saying "we preferred the Sunrise Kevin Rudd than the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd". Are you getting advisers that are telling you to act a particular way, rather than the way you are?
PM: Not at all, Kochie. I am who I am, and people will like it, they will loathe it, that's part of the political process. As I said recently when people asked me about this, I can always improve in the way in which I communicate what the Government's done. I understand that.
There's always going to be criticism, but the key thing is what you actually do. It's what you actually do out there. And on the doing front we've had our sleeves rolled up for the last 12 months keeping economy out of recession, and if I haven't had as much time as I should've to go out there and communicate what we've been doing or communicate it more effectively, that's my fault.
But frankly, my preoccupation, what I've been doing, is in there with the Ministers trying to keep this economy going so that we didn't fall into recession and hundreds of thousands of people lose their jobs.
But I can always lift my game as far as that's concerned, and fair cop with the criticism. I don't have a problem with that.
KOCH: Okay, well let's get you doing something for our viewers now. Debbie Williams is with us. Now, Debbie, what do you want to ask the Prime Minister?
CALLER: Hi Prime Minister.
PM: Hi Debbie.
CALLER: I'd like to know what your personal view is on euthanasia, and do you think that every individual person in Australia should have the legal right to have a choice if they are terminally ill?
PM: My personal view is that I don't support euthanasia, and let me tell you why - that is because I always worry about pressure being felt by older people, frailer people, in terms of how they feel about the responsibilities they are putting onto others, their family, their carers, et cetera, and does that put pressure on them in terms of taking a decision to lawfully, if you had euthanasia, take their own lives? And that's the reason I don't support that.
Of course, when this has been debated in the parliament in the past it's always been a conscience vote, and if we had such a vote in the future, I'm just telling you how I would vote in conscience and the reason for it.
KOCH: Okay.
CALLER: Could we get the ball rolling for a conscience vote instead of sweeping this issue under the carpet, because it seems to be put in the too hard basket every time it's brought up?
PM: Well, I can't remember the exact time when it was last dealt with in the parliament, but it's probably been within the last decade, Kochie, I think, and it was defeated fairly soundly.
I don't see a huge push to bring that for further consideration by the parliament, but individual members can raise these concerns if they wish. Individual members raise private members bills all the time, but I'm just saying where I would stand on this, and I know it's not universally popular, but that's my view and the reason for it.
KOCH: Okay. Alright, before we let you go, you had some homework from our viewer from last week, Rebecca. So many others have emailed us to this IVF question, has become more expensive for couples. Now, you've done the homework. What have you come back with?
PM: This is really interesting, and I really do fear what Rebecca is being charged in terms of the changes that we've brought in. This is all paid for through the Medicare Safety Net. The Medicare Safety Net enables out-of-pocket expenses to be reimbursed up to a certain level for people who use IVF and a whole lot of other things as well.
What we found was, when we looked at this, is that many specialists were using this to the hilt, and we found that, in fact, some 10 per cent of IVF specialists were taking $4.5 million each out of this system each year.
So we made some changes, but in fact, for a typical IVF treatment, what we have done through the changes we've made is make the rebate or the recompense for the $6,000 average treatment, raise that from $3,000 to $4,000. That's what we have done.
The second question Rebecca asked was the difference in treatment if eggs are your own eggs or whether they are donated by somebody else. There is nothing whatsoever the Government has done which would cause any change in charges for that. Okay? So I would strongly say -
KOCH: - So why are people paying more, then?
PM: That's what I -
KOCH: Are the specialists rorting the client?
PM: Well, I don't want to use the word rorting, but I would really like Rebecca to take this up directly with her specialist in terms of what is the justification for the charge that she has got. Because we have been through this in terms of the changes we made, the reasons for it. We've consulted closely with the peak body, which is called Access, which represent the IVF couples, and we brought in these changes.
My advice is they were happy with those changes because we'd increased the overall amount of money going back to folk, so I'm puzzled as to what's happening there.
KOCH: Maybe it's something Nicola Roxon as Health Minister can take up and find out what on earth is going on with these doctors.
PM: If Rebecca is watching this morning, I will have Nicola get onto it, because I'd really like to nail this one down because we've been through this and I can't see the justification for the case that she's referred to.
KOCH: Alright, we should give a plug for your better half. Tonight she's appearing on Better Homes and Gardens with Jo Griggs, showing us around the garden.
PM: There she is.
KOCH: Is that your work? Do you get out there with the secateurs and do a bit of pruning?
PM: Yeah, I planted that one and that one and that one and I killed that one and I killed that one. And Therese is the creative department in our family and I wouldn't have a clue. She's been trying to get me into the garden for a long time. She loves it.
KOCH: She could buy you gumboots for Valentine's Day. Prime Minister, good to see you.
PM: Thanks, Kochie. Appreciate it.
KOCH: See you next week.
[ends]


BONGIORNO: Let's welcome back to the Program, Kevin Rudd. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Paul.
BONGIORNO: Tony Abbott does not resile from his linking of the deaths of the four installation installers to the program that was put in place by Peter Garrett. He says Peter Garrett has to pay the price and lose the job.
PM: Well what Mr Abbott has said is that Mr Garrett is guilty of industrial manslaughter. Let just step back a bit.
You see, in Australia, every year, we have about 138,000 industrial accidents involving serious injury. Each of those is properly investigated in one way or another. We have more than 300 industrial deaths each year in Australia and each of those is properly investigated by the coronial authorities or the industrial safety authorities.
What Mr Abbott has done in this case is, go out there, step right across the line, accuse Peter of industrial manslaughter without any of these independent investigations having concluded. I think this shows extremely poor judgement. Not only is this extremely poor judgement, even Barnaby Joyce thinks it has gone one step too far.
The responsible course of action lies in waiting for the police-coronal inquiry to conclude. To wait for the ones in Queensland, Workcover and the workplace safety authority and electricity safety authority to conclude, and having gone through those, we work out how the standards are applied in each case and what actually happened-
BONGIORNO: So are you confident-
PM: - instead, Mr Abbott has rushed to judgement.
BONGIORNO: So are you confident that none of these inquiries will find that the program which set up this installation, scheme, that none, none of this will be lumped on Peter Garrett?
PM: Let's go to the two core elements of this. One is the standard which applies to insulation products. That standard has been around since 2002, governing the use of foil insulation.
Secondly, we also have in the case of the Training Standards which apply, when this program was introduced by Mr Garrett, there were no nationally consistent training standards for the insulation industry, he had to introduce them.
So, these are the two core elements of, let's call it, the regulatory standards which apply to this industry. But I simply go back to my point, for Mr Abbott to go out there and accuse someone of industrial manslaughter without any availability of the conclusions of the police inquiry, the industrial safety inquiry. I think it is simply going way too far. Even Barnaby Joyce thinks that. He is an exercise in rash judgement.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister if you had your time again, this insulation scheme, this massive scheme, does it look like a good idea at the time which has gone bad? Would you redesign it? Maybe take more time in the way you implement it?
PM: Well again, let's put all of this into context. In the height of the global economic recession, what the government was seeking to do, as we are doing with the building the education revolution program, is roll out the door a large-scale economic stimulus strategy to keep the Australian economy afloat. We know the economic results of that. This economy, almost uniquely, across the advanced economies has not gone into recession.
The second thing is this, in the last period of time, we have rolled out the door more than one million ceiling insulations. That means that you have had 7,500 businesses at work out there. It has been a huge program.
Now the relevant safety standards which you have rightly asked about, both about the product itself and the training standards of workers, they are really important and I responded to those earlier in our discussion. But I simply go back to my core point Paul. We've got to rely upon the coronial inquiry, the police investigations, the investigations by the electricity safety authority in Queensland, by Work Cover. These are the proper bodies to investigate the facts rather than Mr Abbott rushing to judgement and seeking to politicise this debate about culpability before the facts are known and I think that's what's critically relevant here.
BONGIORNO: On Wednesday, your ETS got through the lower house of Parliament, the House of Representatives. Nobody is expecting it to go through the Senate and Tony Abbott made this bold prediction about the future of the emissions trading scheme.
ABBOTT: I think the pressure is building on Mr Rudd to drop this whole crazy scheme and I frankly expect him to quietly slither away from this in the next few weeks.
BONGIORNO: Are you going to quietly slither away?
PM: You know something? The scheme that Mr Abbott has just described is the one which he fully supported two months ago and which the Liberal party under Mr Howard, under Mr Costello and under Mr Turnbull supported for years and years and years. So in terms of moving away from a consistent position of the past, I've got to say, Mr Abbott gets a gold medal for that.
Secondly, our position when it comes to emissions trading is absolutely clear cut. It is the most effective environmentally, least cost system available to dealing with the challenge of climate change which is why 30-35 countries around the world, the advanced economies, have done just that.
But here's one other point. A very significant development this week, Paul, was when we had Mr Abbott, Mr Hunt and Mr McFarlane concede, virtually for the first time, that within four years or so, they themselves, will be reviewing the need for an Emissions Trading Scheme. We are upfront about our position. We have been so from the beginning. Mr Abbott is saying here's my climate change con job on the one hand, but on the other, by the way, I might actually bring in an emissions trading scheme a little later on. We're talking about consistency.
(Commercial break)
BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press with Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. And welcome to the panel, Jennifer Hewett, The Australian, good morning Jennifer.
HEWETT: Good morning.
BONGIORNO: And Malcolm Farr, The Daily Telegraph, good morning Malcolm.
FARR: Morning Paul.
BONGIORNO: By now according to a pre-election promise, the States would have all agreed to Mr Rudd's National Health Reform Plan or we would be heading for a Federal takeover. The timetable has slipped about ten months while the Prime Minister regroups.
HEWETT: Prime Minister, whatever happened to that sense of urgency and decisive action? Will we even have a reform package on the table for COAG next month?
PM: Well can I say that our position on the reform of the health and hospital system has not changed. We believe the system requires urgent surgery, we need more hospital beds, we need the elimination of waste between the Commonwealth and the States and that is why a bold reform plan for the future is necessary.
The second thing I'd say is we make no apology for the fact that we have taken longer than was planned to finalise this strategy for the future and the reason is simple. You have millions of Australians out there each year who depend on the health and hospital system, they are depending on us to get this right. The reform plan or blueprint was put down in July last year by Christine Bennett in response to the government's request.
Secondly we've have had large consultation with hospitals, more than a hundred of them since then, and we are now in detailed discussions with the States and Territories. We will bring forward this reform plan and as I've said before, if the States and Territories do not accept it, then plainly, we will take that matter to the people. Our resolve to do so hasn't changed one bit-
HEWETT: Well what's-
PM: -because the needs of the system are fundamental, they are long-term and they need to be dealt with.
HEWETT: What is the timetable for doing this? Co-operative federalism seemed to be a popular idea but the States are as recalcitrant as ever.
PM: Well, we've achieved some progress through the first Australian hospitals agreement, the healthcare agreement. We have increased our funding to hospitals by some 50%. We have increased the number of GP places by 35%, the nursing places by about one thousand plus. We've provided, for the first time, Australian Government investment into elective surgery procedures resulting in tens of thousands of additional procedures which would not have occurred. We haven't exactly been sitting on our hands for the last two years.
But the key thing is to get long-term reform right. If you look at this one core fact for the future of the health system. Expenditure from the states and territories on health and hospitals has been going up annually between 9-11% in the last number of years. But their own source of revenue growth has been in the vicinity of 4%. Things ultimately are not squaring up. That's why we need to eliminate the waste in the system, reform the system and make sure we are delivering properly for the people of Australia for the future and we are determined to do so.
FARR: Prime Minister, on another issue, there has been 12 boats I believe that have gone to Christmas Island so far this year. 700 passengers. It is straining credulity to think that Christmas Island isn't straining itself. Aren't you ever much closer to having to reintroduce the mainland reception centres?
PM: Well Malcolm, as we have said all long, Christmas Island is where we take people when they are intercepted in Australian waters, that's where they go. Secondly, there is a purpose-built facility there for that purpose. As far as I know, and my recent advice is, there is still capacity there. But as the minister has made plain for a long, long time we of course have additional capacity in Darwin and other places, should that become necessary. What we have dealt with in the last year or so is the consequences of huge instability in our region, a civil war in Sri Lanka which hasn't just affected us, it's affected countries right around the world.
So our response has been consistent. It's been hard. It's been difficult but that's part of the day-to-day decision-making of government. But I've got to say, on Christmas Island, we still have capacity as of today.
FARR: It would seem though, that for political reasons, you are jamming them into Christmas Island just so you don't have to take that step of having a mainland processing centre, even in Darwin. Because originally 1,200 was the capacity of that Island. I don't care how many tents and camp stretchers you send in, when you're having an extra 700 in two months, that has got to be a big problem now, logistically.
PM: The thing with Christmas Island, Malcolm, is that you will find over a long period of time that the pressure on the capacity they will ebb and it will flow. It will change from time to time.
Remember, when Mr Howard had this thing built, we were told that the Pacific solution and other formulas adopted by him had solved the problem but at the same time they were building this institution to take people in on Christmas Island. To take, you know 800, 1,000, 1,000 plus people. That's why prudent planners back then under Mr Howard knew that you would have increases and decreases in the number of asylum seekers in a given year.
Boats have been coming to this country Malcolm, as you know, since the 1970s. I think for 24 out of the past 33 years they've been coming, but the key thing is to use the facilities you have got, to use them effectively but on the question of reserve capability in Darwin, Minister Evans has made it absolutely plain that that's part of his long-term contingency planning and he said that from the beginning.
HEWETT: Prime Minister, you have said this morning that the government was up front about emissions trading, you have described it as the great moral challenge of our generation. Do you have the courage to go to a double dissolution election on this?
PM: Well Jenny, can I say, the Senate's got a little way to run on this. We only just put it through the House of Representatives where Malcolm Turnbull had the consistency of conviction to cross the floor and vote with the Government on an emissions trading scheme. Which Tony Abbott, only two months ago, fully backed himself-
HEWETT: Prime Minister-
PM: -it goes now to the Senate. We are engaged in continued discussions with Senators from all parties including the Greens and what happens there. On the future Jenny, can I say this, whenever the next election is held and whatever form that election takes, both emissions trading and action on climate change will be front and centre in that election because this problem will not disappear. It is real for this generation of Australians and the next one.
(Commercial break)
BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press, with the Prime Minister. As we saw, ACOSS in its latest survey, says vulnerable people are increasingly at risk. It's a concern we picked up from some of the public queuing to get into Question Time. We gave them the chance to quiz the Prime Minister.
VOX: I've got a question for Mr Rudd. I just wanted to ask, in May 2008 you declared that homelessness was a national obscenity... but since then homelessness has actually increased. I was wondering, how do you intend to meet your target of reducing homelessness by 20% by 2013?
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister?
PM: Can I just say on the question of homelessness, we remain absolutely committed to our objective to reduce it by half. Secondly, through the impact of the global economic recession, of course you'd have a lot more people out there, presenting themselves to aid agencies, and to charities, for assistance. As people have gone into unemployment and as other pressures on the family budget have risen.
But can I just say in response to the question raised by your viewer, firstly, this Government has embarked upon the biggest expansion of social housing in the country's history. 20,000 new units of social housing being built. 7,000 or so underway as we speak. Secondly, we've undertaken repairs already, essential repairs to 59,000 units of social housing out there. And on top of that we've increased our investment in homelessness services by some 50%. This is the practical action underway. We have been in government for two years. We spent the first year delivering our first White Paper which was a report on homelessness-
BONGIORNO: You've done all that-
PM: -and one year later we are now implementing that.
BONGIORNO: You've done all that, do you need to ramp it up now to achieve your targets?
PM: Look, can I say, you cannot build additional houses overnight. We spent a year analysing the problem with the entire participation of the Church and welfare organisations including the Brotherhood of St Lawrence. One year later, we have some 7,000 houses under construction, 59,000 houses already in social housing which have been repaired and a program to roll out our total construction to 20,000. So, therefore, you cannot reduce homelessness unless have got extra capacity. That is what we are doing. Can I just say though, these numbers, nothing was done about them in the 12 years of our predecessors. We are turning the ship around and there is investment to do it and a program to do it and we're proud of our achievements.
BONGIORNO: The Opposition believes the electorate are increasingly dissatisfied with your broken promises. Joe Hockey-
HOCKEY (In house of Reps): How can they expect their Prime Minister to solemnly look the Australian people in the eye and honour commitments made in 2010 when as each day passes, Australians are suffering the impact of broken promises.
FARR: PM, don't you have a credibility problem?
PM: Well you know something Malcolm, I think it's pretty rich coming from Joe and the Liberals, the party that said never ever would there be a GST. Secondly that interest rates will be kept at record lows. Tony Abbott himself saying he would never change, or not change, the Medicare safety net. That rock solid-iron-clad-guarantee. I mean, let us put all this into context. Secondly, do you know what we have been doing for the last year or so? Wrestling with the biggest global economic crisis that the world has seen for three quarters of a century.
It follows that we are proud of our record of achievement. We said that we would get out there and lead the economy during this difficult time. We have produced low levels of unemployment, some 5.3% through government action. We've got some 34,000 projects of construction under way out there. We have acted in so many different areas of our pre-election commitments including those which affect the family budget. Increasing the childcare tax free rebate-
FARR: Yeah, but-
PM: - increase in pensions, but can I just say Malcolm, the easiest thing you can do as the Liberal Party is to throw around an accusation. I stand proud of this Government's achievement and I look forward to election day of matching our record in just two-years and two and a half, three years against the 12 years of the Howard government in each of these areas and I look forward to doing that.
FARR: But people are looking at what was said in 2007 and what has happened now. Rightly or wrongly, whether expectations were entitled to or not, they are saying you have not delivered everything you promised. Isn't that a problem coming into an election which will very largely be based on policy credibility?
PM: Can I say, Malcolm, that in dealing with the challenges of this global recession, obviously some changes had to be made because of the impact on government finances. I accept that and take full responsibility for it.
At the same time, the government, through its actions in the economy, kept this economy out of recession and had we not done that and, for example, followed the path of other countries around the world, hundreds of thousands of Australians would be without jobs right now. I said before we have unemployment gone down to 5.3% and on the broader question, however, on pre-election commitments, we said for example we'd ratify the Kyoto protocol. We ratified Kyoto. We said we'd increase the renewable energy target. We've done that. Troops out of Iraq, we've done that. Increasing the childcare tax rebate, we've done that. Boosting the pension, biggest rise in one hundred years, we've done that. Very easy to bandy around the charge from the party of core and non-core promises, that's the Liberal party.
HEWETT: Prime Minister-
PM: We are proud of our achievements and we'll stand by them.
HEWETT: Prime Minister, nevertheless, the opposition is gaining some traction with this all talk and no action idea. Some of your own colleagues, many of your own colleagues, in fact, say that some of the problem is the fact that everything gets log-jammed, some of the issues get log-jammed in your office. Do you actually think you need to change your style on that as well?
PM: Can I say Jenny, the implementation of pre-election commitments, complex business. You've got to roll it out. Make sure it happens in a proper way and that it actually hits the ground but can I just say, this is a core part of the business of government. You know, I think, if you put together the ledger of our pre-election commitments, right across the board, hundreds of them, against what is being implemented, what has been implemented, and our record on the economy, in terms of the big challenges of last year, we will stand proudly in defence of our record of achievement.
BONGIORNO: Prime Minister-
PM: Against those opposite, those opposite who actually have a completely different record over twelve years.
BONGIORNO: We are just about out of time, but there is news today of a major NATO offensive in southern Afghanistan in the Helmand province. Are you hoping, along with President Obama and the NATO governments, that this major offensive will be the beginning of the end of the Taliban or is it just an endless, ceaseless war?
PM: Well I can confirm today Paul, allied forces, British, American, Afghan, in the centre of Helmand Province, have launched a major offensive because Helmand is a particularly strong centre for the activity of the hardcore elements of the Taliban. But your broader question is, where does this go in terms of the long-term war in Afghanistan? Our approach is this. We, in our part of the country, have a responsibility to train up that Afghan national brigade. Transfer responsibility of security, to them and once we have achieved our mission in the province to bring our troops home but part of that also is to secure the perimeter, secure the country from these hardcore elements of the Taliban. That's why we're with there, with the Americans all the way.
BONGIORNO: Thank you very much for being with us today, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Thanks to our panel, Malcolm Farr and Jennifer Hewett.
[ENDS]


A modern forensics display, a science rock cabaret and a biodiversity study are among 38 innovative projects to share in $500,000 worth of Australian Government grants for National Science Week 2010.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research announced the projects at Questacon today during a reception for Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, the first Australian woman to receive a Nobel Prize.
"Australian scientists, such as Professor Blackburn, are among the best in the world, and these projects reflect the amazing depth of knowledge, talent and passion that Australia has for science communication," said Mr Rudd.
"It is this passion that we want to develop even further.
"Inspiring the next generation of young scientists and researchers is absolutely critical to Australia's future prosperity."
Senator Carr said organisations and volunteers right across Australia are coordinating hundreds of local events and projects during National Science Week that are sure to stimulate people's creativity and imagination.
"In Arnhem Land Nomad Art Production will gather together artists, scientists and academics to collaborate in producing art works for exhibition during the Darwin Festival.
"SCINEMA is again a winner with its plan to facilitate up to 400 national community based screenings of science films.
"The Australian Museum's biodiversity study will open our eyes to the important role local flora and fauna play in our lives which is particularly relevant in 2010, the International Year of Biodiversity.
"I encourage all Australians to get involved in National Science Week," Senator Carr said.
"National Science Week is an ideal opportunity for people of all ages to engage with science and recognise the positive contribution scientists make to our society."
National Science Week will be held between 14 and 22 August. It is Australia's largest science festival incorporating over 1,000 events and reaching over 1 million Australians.
It is part of this Government's increased commitment to bolstering science and research in Australia - a commitment that we are funding with a 25 per cent increase on last year in spending on science and innovation.
Visit https://grants.innovation.gov.au/SCOPE/Pages/Grants.aspx for more information.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
When I was your age, learning about science, I sometimes found it confusing - like learning about the law of gravity. I mean, it's really important, because if we didn't have gravity, when birds died, they'd just stay right up there; and if time didn't move forward, you could get stuck in the classroom at school forever and the holidays would never come; and if it wasn't for nuclear science, Homer Simpson would never have found a job.
You know, I might not have been the best science student in school, but I did learn one very valuable lesson after a year 8 chemistry experiment that I still remember to this day - never, ever lick the spoon!
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I'd like to say a big hello to the children who are here today, from:
     * St Bede's Primary School; and
     * Campbell Primary School.
And joining us through the wonders of science by video conference:
     * Windsor Public School
     * Biraban Public School
     * Gresford Public School
     * Peak Hill Central School;
     * Thornton Public School;
     * Shellharbour Public School;
     * Broken Hill School of the Air; and
     * Crawford Public School.
This is a very exciting day indeed - not only do we get to honour a very special guest but some of us got to hold some gigantic shoelaces. If the size of that shoelace is any indication, imagine how big those shoes must be!
Today we are here for a very important reason - to congratulate Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, who has been awarded the most prestigious science award in the world - the Nobel Prize for Medicine.
Professor Blackburn is the 11th Australian Nobel Prize winner and the first Australian woman to receive the award. I know I speak on behalf of all Australians, Professor Blackburn, when I say that we are very proud of you.
I think everyone should put their hands together and give Professor Blackburn a big round of applause.
We have just learnt a bit about Professor Blackburn's discoveries about telomeres. Telomeres might be small - and hard to pronounce - but they are very important for how our bodies work, and in the future, they are going to be very important as scientists like Professor Blackburn look for a cure for cancer.
Of course, Professor Blackburn has also won other awards for her work. On Australia Day this year, she was appointed a Companion of the Order of Australia, and back in 1998 she won what is now known as the Prime Minister's Prize for Science.
Coincidentally, nominations for the 2010 Prime Minister's Prize for Science open today. In addition to the prize for the best scientist, we also have prizes for the best physical scientist, the best life scientist, and the best teachers in primary and secondary schools.
Does anyone know how Professor Blackburn first got interested in science? Because of one of her teachers, Nancy Hughes, a teacher whom she credits with igniting the passion for science back in her days at school in Launceston in Tasmania.
Having a good science teacher is very important for making children interested in science - and making sure that Australia continues to produce great scientists.
Australians have been responsible for many discoveries and inventions that we benefit from today.
Who here likes the internet? One of the technologies of wireless internet called WiFi was invented by an Australian team, led by a man called Dr John O'Sullivan.
Who here likes money? Australian scientists worked out how to make bank notes from polymer - which not only makes them much harder to counterfeit, but much more likely to survive a trip through the washing machine when you leave a $5 note in your pocket.
If Australians are going to make important discoveries and inventions in the future, we are going to need more children like you to study science.
Who here would like to find out what dinosaurs ate by studying fossilised dinosaur vomit? Who here would like to make Mitchell Johnson bowl faster or make sure Matt Giteau doesn't pull his quad muscle again? Who here would like to invent a paint that repairs itself when it gets scratched? Who here would like to find a cure for homework?
I'm not sure about that last one, but these are the types of things scientists are working on right now.
One of the great ways that we promote science around the country is National Science Week. It is held each year in August and reaches over a million Australians through more than 1,000 events.
Today the Innovation Minister announced $500,000 in Australian Government grants for National Science Week 2010. This money will go to schools, community groups, scientific societies, research organisations and others who - like me - are passionate about science.
They will use the money to support projects in every state and territory that demonstrate not just how important science is, but also how much fun it can be.
The CSIRO will take its Great Big Science Gig rock-cabaret to regional and metropolitan centres around the country. It shows how developments in science are making a real difference to our everyday lives.
The SCINEMA Festival of Science Film will see a program of short films about science and natural history screened in 400 venues throughout Australia. Screenings will be introduced by local scientists, who will give their own take on where the world of science is heading.
These are the sort of practical things we can do to make science more fun.
Another important part of making science fun is where we are now - Questacon. I'd like to thank all the people at Questacon for the effort they put into science education and awareness. Last year, more than 400,000 children and their families visited this building, and Questacon took outreach programs to 1,367 schools in all Australian states and territories. We need to get out into those remote areas because our next Elizabeth Blackburn may be in outback Australia.
Australia's future prosperity is dependent upon the knowledge and skills developed and attitudes fostered in our young people. The curious young minds - that we can all play a part in nurturing - will lead us through the challenges of the 21st century, and those curious minds need look no further than Professor Elizabeth Blackburn for inspiration.
Professor Blackburn, may I once again congratulate you on your achievement and thank you for your unwavering commitment to your mission.


PM: This has been a good day to honour one of Australia's leading science heroes. As the Chief Scientist said before, what we have here in Australia is someone who has won Olympic Gold for her achievements in science, and Professor Elizabeth Blackburn is someone of whom all Australians should be proud. 
Of course, one of her stepping stones to achieving national and international recognition was that some time ago she was awarded the Prime Minister's Science Award. This is important annual recognition of the achievements in science right across our country. And today we are calling for nominations for this year's set of awards.
It's not just that we honour those who are at the absolute sharp end of scientific innovation, we're also honouring those who encourage young people in the teaching of science as well. The Prime Minister's Prize for Science is a prestigious award, it's worth $300,000. The Malcolm McIntosh prize for physical scientist of the year, $50,000. The Science Minister's Prize for Life Scientist of the year, $50,000. The Prime Minister's Prize for excellence in science teaching in secondary schools, $50,000, and the same for primary schools. And as we were reminded this morning, Dr John O'Sullivan, who received the Prime Minister's Prize for Science for his achievements in astronomy and wireless technologies, and we've heard also about his achievements in relation to Wi-fi. 
Nominations close on the 21st of May 2010. This Government is passionate about the future of science in Australia. We want to build a modern Australian economy for the 21st century. We want to grow the Australian economy of the future. We want to protect the Australian jobs of the future, and build new jobs for the future - science is a cornerstone. That's why the Government has taken a range of measures to encourage science teaching in schools. It's why we've provided particular incentives through the HECS system to encourage our best and brightest year 12 graduates to pursue science at university, but why we also encourage our best and brightest scientists through the awarding of these prestigious national awards.
One other thing before I just take your questions. 
There's been debate in recent days about homelessness. Can I just say this - I feel very deeply about this commitment. It's pretty fundamental. I believe it's a mark of any decent society, whether we tackle seriously the challenge of homelessness. 
When the Government was elected, the Census data had something in excess of 100,000 people who were classified as homeless. That's far too many for a country like ours. That's why the Government, through its first White Paper, committed itself to halving homelessness by 2020. The Government remains deeply committed to that objective, deeply committed to that goal, and we're making progress towards the realisation of that goal. I'd urge Mr Abbott to join us in that ambition for our nation, to halve homelessness by 2020. It's an achievable goal. It's a worthwhile goal. And I would urge both sides of Australian politics to get behind this important goal for the nation, to halve homelessness by 2020.
JOURNALIST: Is homelessness-
PM: Many- just one or two concluding points and then I'll go to your question. Many practical steps we've taken- social housing, repairs of social housing, the Common Ground facilities now going up in most of the major cities of Australia, the recurrent funding under the Homelessness White Paper to all those who are providing services to the homeless out there in the community and charitable sector. Each of these is building blocks towards making that objective work. And we are dead serious about this. It is fundamental. There are pressures now, the global economic recession obviously is going to make things more challenging in the near-term, as many people lose their jobs, and many of those who can't afford regular housing find themselves homeless. But that should not distract us from realising this ambition for the nation. And we are dead set determined to do so. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Is homelessness ever a choice?
PM: When you look at the number of people who are rough sleeping in the country, and the figures I last had on that were in the- well into the thousands and beyond, plainly, in the time that I've spent with many of the homelessness service providers, there are some folk that are very, very hard to help, okay, very, very hard to help. But overwhelmingly, the problem that all those service providers say to us, is there's not enough places to offer on a given evening. It's the lack of public housing which is available to those who are homeless, that's why we are building 20,000 new units of social housing under the national economic stimulus strategy.
That's why we've undertaken repairs to 39,000 or more units of public housing, major repairs, in order to make them habitable. But you know, in inner cities, where this problem often arises, it's having facilities like Common Ground facilities where people, the emergency service providers, have some place where they can put immediately. And I go to each of these centres around the country- and I've done it regularly over the last couple of years - they often say to me on a given evening, when they have 30 to 40 people present at 8pm that evening, they will then do the ring-around in their city to find there may be 20 places available at best. What's that mean? It means that there's a stack of people who want somewhere to stay, who can't have a place to stay. So we're wrestling with those practical challenges.
JOURNALIST: How much has homelessness come down since the Rudd Government took office, and what are the interim targets to 2020?
PM: Well, we spent our first year in office developing the homelessness White Paper. That's important, because we're determined to get the policy right. We just can't lurch at this and do a whole series of things which are not properly coordinated. 
In our second year in office, we've begun this massive building program for social housing, 20,000 units, a large slice of which we've made available to homeless people. Secondly, that huge maintenance and repair program, to make existing social housing stock more available. 
My understanding is that the first data on the current state of homelessness won't be out for a month or two. I fully expect that what we'll see- but I haven't seen any data myself- is that you will see an increased number of people seeking housing, and emergency housing, because of the impact of the global recession. 
But you know something, that's a product of what's happening in the economy now on the demand side. Our challenge is to add all this on the supply side. And it takes time to build 20,000 units of social housing. It takes time to undertake all those fundamental repairs. But we are determined to head in the right direction on this.
Last point on this one, this is something I am deeply committed to, personally. And I am determined that this objective, by 2020, be realised. I am determined that we put in place all the building blocks for it to happen. And I would urge Mr Abbott to get behind this important goal for the nation, to halve our homelessness by that time. I believe it's really the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, if Peter Garrett received a letter on October 16th calling for foil insulation to be banned, warning twice that it could cause more deaths, do you regret that your Government waited three more deaths- four more months- to act on that?
PM: My advice is that the Minister in response to various recommendations he's received, has sought continued improvements in the delivery of the program. Remember, first of all, the building standard relating to foil has been in existence since 2002, that's the national building standard. Secondly, the initial representations from the industry, that they needed to have people who were properly trained, the Minister's response to that as at the middle of the year was to bring in the first nationally consistent training standards for people to be employed in this industry. That is, in the insulation industry. 
In terms of the particular point that you raise, that those representations were made in relation to two matters, one I think was the use of metal fasteners in subsequent- and also the use of foil. As you know, the decision on metal fasteners was taken very soon after, in October/November, that on foil, later. And that was the product of a detailed, internal technical investigation.
JOURNALIST: But it's regrettable that it took three more deaths to act on that?
PM: Can I say, the Minister has sought to respond to the advice that he has received on the way through. Firstly, to make sure that the building standard which had been in existence in 2002 was applied, and, where possible, enhanced. Secondly, the other part is, the proper application of occupational health and safety standards to the industry, the third was, the training qualifications for those to be employed in the industry- none existed nationally before. He introduced that and defined what it should be. In the subsequent implementation of the program, further recommendations were obtained from industry. As I've said, these were acted upon in sequences, based on the technical advice which the Minister was receiving.
JOURNALIST: I've got a question about health and tax, but I don't want you to tell me- because you can't, yet- what is in your two reports, okay. However, you can- can you undertake that you will make structural change to the health system and that you will act to make whatever reforms you can plan to make to the tax system before the next election, or, are you going to campaign in the next election to deliver a promise that you made in 2007?
PM: Well let me take both those in sequence, because they're both major challenges for the nation going forward. 
On health and hospitals, we, from the middle of last year, received a report from Christine Bennett, 123 recommendations for the future of the health and hospital system. 
Stage two, we spent the subsequent six months road testing each of those recommendations with more than 100 hospitals across the country, the Minister, myself and others supporting us. Thirdly, since the beginning of the year, we've now been involved in detailed discussions and negotiations with State Governments on those recommendations which have been road tested. Let me say this very plainly. When it comes to the future of our health and hospital systems, this Government is dead set determined to implement fundamental reforms to the system. We intend to get those fundamental reforms underway.
JOURNALIST: Before the election?
PM: We'll get those reforms underway during the course of 2010, and we are dead set determined to have our sleeves rolled up, making sure that those reforms to the system occur. The Health and hospital system has been kicked around like a political football for decades and decades, as everyone sought to shirk responsibility. This Government won't be doing that, this Government will have its sleeves rolled up. We will have a concrete plan of action. As I said, if that's rejected by the States and Territories, we know what the consequences of that will be. But our intention is to bring about fundamental reform to the health and hospital system, and to get that work underway in 2010.
Just to answer the second part of what Matthew asked, which is about tax. On the question of the tax system, we are still working our way through the report by the independent review of the taxation system. In terms of where- what landing points we've reached on it and what implementation period for any of the recommendations contained within it, we haven't worked that through yet, I just wish to be completely transparent with you on that. Can I also emphasise what I said before, and that is, I'm sure there are recommendations in that report which we might be able to live with, and a whole bunch that we can't. That's why we commissioned an independent review of taxation. So on the second one, we're still working-
JOURNALIST: So it's probably that your reforms- your tax reforms- will be part of your election campaign, possibly.
PM: We are still working our way through the details of it, I don't wish to mislead you. But I have answered your first question, in the specific terms that I have.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Mr Abbott has said today that the money you gave to the television stations amounts to an election year bribe. Why did you give that money, and will radio- commercial radio stations- get the same deal?
PM: First of all, I haven't seen the text of what Mr Abbott has said on that. Can I simply go to a couple of points as far as the Minister's decisions on this matter are concerned. Firstly, the Minister's decision in relation to the future of television licences is designed to ensure the continuation of Australian content in the program-
JOURNALIST: There's no-
PM: Can I answer the question you've asked and go through that - is firstly to ensure the continuation of Australian content through the commercial free to airs. The second is that, within that, more than half I'm advised of the programs have to be Australian, and that these requirements extend to drama, documentaries and children's programs. The other measure that I would refer to is the fact that, as far as costs being imposed on the industry through digital switchover, this represents a considerable impact on the industry which is being imposed by regulatory change. I've already been asked in the Parliament about the impact on the long-term security of delivery of free to air services across Australia. 
We are determined to honour those commitments, but it's wrong to assume it can be done cost-free. That's the second reason. The third is, I'd draw your attention to the relative standing of Australian television licences for commercial televisions against the fee regimes or licensing fee regimes which apply right across the rest of the world, whether it's in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada or New Zealand. These are the three sets of factors, I'm advised, which informed the Minister's decision concerning the future of the television licensing regime. I also note from the Minister's decision that this will be subject to review after a period of implementation as well.
JOURNALIST: Can I get your reaction to the stabbing, this high school in Brisbane (inaudible)?
PM: Just horrified. Yeah, just horrified. I think Australia's not the sort of place where this should be happening in a schoolyard. Just horrified, completely horrified for the parents concerned, the unspeakable grief that they must be going through at a time like this. In answer to your direct question, horrified and left speechless.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition says that they're making ground in the polls because voters are finally seeing through Labor's spin. What's your reaction to that?
PM: I'd say this will be a very tight election, and the polls will continue to tighten. The second thing I'd say is that if- is that, this is a tight election, and if two or three Australians in a hundred change their vote, then Mr Abbott will be Prime Minister, and Work Choices will be back. If two or three Australians in a hundred change their vote, Mr Abbott will be Prime Minister and penalty rates will be cut. That's what follows from this. 
Very interesting statements on Work Choices given that you've mentioned the Leader of the Opposition, and what they have said. Remember, Mr Abbott has said that - just after he became Leader of the Opposition- he said, 'well, the phrase Work Choices is dead'. The phrase Work Choices is dead. What is really interesting is his speech of just last Friday, where he says, and I quote him "at four elections running, we (referring to the Liberal party) had a mandate to introduce statutory non-union contracts, and we will seek to renew that mandate". That is a clear-cut commitment to bring back AWAs, a clear-cut commitment to bring back AWAs.
Julie Bishop said this only yesterday: 'bringing back inflexible working conditions such as penalty rates regime is costing employers more, it's making workers worse off', and then goes on to say 'the fact is that there are workers now who are suffering under the new Awards system because it's bringing back penalty rates on weekends, and inflexible working conditions'. You want to know one of the things that are achieved by AWAs and Work Choices? It's complete open slather on cutting penalty rates for working Australians. So, can I just say this, that what we've had from Mr Abbott and from Julie Bishop, is a clear-cut commitment to bring back AWAs, and to scrap penalty rates. And also to scrap protection for unfair dismissal. The fact that Mr Abbott wants to bring back Work Choices, bring back AWAs, is a risk to the family budget. It is a risk to the family budget.
JOURNALIST: Is that surprising though, given how you- I mean, this is a vote-winner for you, you've proven it before. Does it surprise you that the ideology of the Liberal party takes them back there?
PM: It is, what this demonstrates is that Mr Abbott and the Liberal party are out of touch with working families. Out of touch with working families who depend on penalty rates to make the family budget add up. 
How out of touch can you be when you say penalty rates aren't important, when you say protection from unfair dismissal is not important, and that bringing back Work Choices and AWAs by another name is somehow unremarkable.
I'd go back to the core point, in response to your question. If two or three Australians change their vote at the next election, a tight election, Mr Abbott would be Prime Minister, and he would bring Work Choices back. And that is clear-cut in what he has now said.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, was the problem the Rudd Government had that it failed to manage expectations in what the public believed you could deliver by the end of this three year term (inaudible)?
PM: The challenge for health and hospital reform is to be fair dinkum about it. You know, we have 763 public hospitals in Australia. Millions of presentations at hospitals each year. Millions of Australians using General Practitioner services each year. We make no apology whatsoever for getting this fundamental reform right. Working families across Australia depend on us getting it right. I go back to what I said to Matthew before- we intend to make sure that these reforms are begun to be implemented during the course of 2010. That's our intention. That's what we intend to get on and do. Because there's just been far too much cost-shift, blame-shift over such a long period of time. And I've said before, before I go, and I've actually got to be somewhere, is I welcome this debate on health and hospitals.
We have Mr Abbott, whose ripped $1 billion out of the public hospital system, and already we've put a lot more than that back in before we get to the future of what we'll do for long-term reform. We've also had Mr Abbott saying that he has given the Australian people a rock-solid, iron-clad guarantee on the Medicare Safety net, something fundamental to the family budget, and he simply reneged on his deep, fundamental, iron-clad commitment - second point. 
Third point, GPs. He froze the number of GP training places at a time when the system was under massive pressure. We've increased the number of GP training places already by 35%. This is what we've done in two years in Government, after twelve years of our predecessor, four years of which Mr Abbott was Health Minister. I look forward very much to the debate on health and hospitals, fundamental to the country, and we're determined to get the detail right.
Got to go folks. 


The Australian Government today unveiled details of a $10 million boost to the Personal Helpers and Mentors (PHaMs) program, to give homeless Australians with a severe mental illness greater access to one-on-one support.
Six new services will be established in communities with significant homeless populations in New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia to help people with a mental illness who are homeless, or at risk of homelessness.
In addition, six new dedicated homelessness workers will be shared among four existing PHaMs sites in Victoria and Queensland to work solely with homeless clients in these areas.
In total, 36 additional personal mentors will be on the ground by mid 2010 to provide intensive assistance to homeless Australians with a severe mental illness.
PHaMs is designed to help people with a severe mental illness reconnect with the wider community and live more independent and satisfying lives.
Personal mentors work one-on-one with participants with practical help to achieve their personal goals - for example, finding stable housing, or improving relationships with family and friends.
These new personal mentors will also connect participants with essential clinical and social services, including housing services and health professionals.
The initiative forms part of the Australian Government's efforts to halve homelessness and offer accommodation to all rough sleepers who seek it by 2020.
The Australian Government is absolutely committed to reducing homelessness and has already:
- Made a 55 per cent increase in investment in homelessness and a substantial down payment on a twelve year reform agenda; 
- Purchased or built 107 additional homes for homeless families under A Place to Call Home, with 750 dwellings to be purchased or built by June 2013; 
- Completed 59,000 renovations to public housing dwellings through the Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan;
- Commenced construction on over 8,000 new social housing dwellings across the country through the National Economic Stimulus Plan, with more than 500 completed; and 
- Funded 40 new specialist homelessness projects across our housing programs.
New PHaMs services targeting the homeless or those at risk of homelessness:
Service location Funding 
(2009 to 2012)
Riverland, SA $1,463,100
Mildura, VIC $1,463,100
Greater Dandenong, VIC $1,321,400
Greater Hobart, TAS* $1,321,400
Bankstown, Canada Bay, Ashfield and Leichhardt, NSW* $1,321,400
Bunbury and Vasse, WA* $1,463,100
Total $8,353,500
* also targeting recent humanitarian entrants and Indigenous Australians
Existing PHaMs sites to receive additional funding for dedicated homelessness workers:
Site Additional funding
(2009 to 2012)
Melbourne Inner West, VIC $ 396,420
Mackay, QLD $ 438,930
Rockhampton, QLD $ 438,930
Inner Brisbane, QLD $ 396,420
Total $ 1,670,700


PM: The Australian Government today is announcing a $10 million boost to the Personal Helpers and Mentors program as part of our initiative to reduce homelessness in Australia. This particular program provides support for Australians with a severe mental illness and provides greater access to one-on-one support.
Six new services will be established in communities with significant homeless populations in New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia to help people with a mental illness who are homeless or who are at acute risk of homelessness. In addition, six new dedicated homelessness workers will be shared among the four existing sites in Victoria and Queensland to work solely with homeless clients in these areas.
In total, 36 additional personal mentors will be on the ground by mid-2010 to provide intensive assistance to homeless Australians with a severe mental illness. This program is designed to help people with a severe mental illness reconnect with the wider community and to live more independent and satisfying lives.
Personal mentors work one-on-one with participants with practical help to achieve their personal goals. These personal mentors will also connect participants with essential clinical and social services, including housing services and health professionals.
This initiative forms part of the Government's efforts to halve homelessness and to offer accommodation to all rough sleepers who seek it by 2020. Those of you familiar with the challenge of homelessness will know that the incidence of mental illness is a huge cause out there for people who are sleeping rough. You only have to talk to people who are sleeping rough on the streets to know for a fact yourself that many of our fellow Australians are suffering from a whole range of mental illnesses and that's how they end up on the streets.
Therefore, at a very practical level, this program aims to complement a series of other things were doing as a Government. The Common Ground projects are designed to provide emergency accommodation in inner-city areas. This service is particularly targeted on those with mental illness.
Could I add this on the question of homelessness - we are dead set determined to meet our target of halving homelessness by 2020. We are dead set determined to meet our target of ensuring that all those sleeping rough who want accommodation have accommodation provided to them. These are hard objectives to realise, but we are putting in place practical measures right across the country to give effect to it.
This for me is really important. It is something which any decent government should do, and we are determined to keep our sleeves rolled up and to do just that.
In that spirit, I would again appeal to Mr Abbott to back this on a bipartisan basis for the cause of homelessness in Australia. Mr Abbott's predecessor Mr Turnbull, did so. Mr Abbott so far, has refused to do so. This is really important stuff. It's about our decency as a community, our decency as a nation. For me this is core business. It is really important and I would urge Mr Abbott to come onside.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) today is one 25th of what you've given as freebies to the TV stations. How can this be considered as a serious down-payment on tackling homelessness?
PM: What I'd say to you Andrew, is that if you look at the investments we've made in building 20,000 units of social housing across Australia, the biggest, largest expansion to social housing in the country's history, with some 7,000 or so of those houses currently under way, a large slice of those will be going to people who are currently homeless.
If you look at the investment that we have made in the repairs to some 39,000-plus existing units of social housing, major repairs in order to much of that accommodation available again, these are very large investments.
If you look also at the investment we are making in purpose-built inner-city facilities, I've mentioned already Common Ground, so that when people front at many of the homeless charities which offer services in inner cities and physically there is no room at the inn, we want to be in a position where there is a room at the inn. That's why we're building it, and none of this is cheap.
If you look at the overall investment that we are making in the area of homelessness, it is some $1.2 billion over four years, a 55 per cent increase in investment in homelessness. These are necessary measures - helping the charities do their work, providing some places to go as emergency accommodation for people in inner cities, and also providing people with a place to call home by adding to the social housing stock of the nation.
So you ask 'what are we doing?' This is the biggest expansion of investment in the cause of homelessness in the country's history. We are proud of that. There's a long way to go. But I go back to the integrity of the commitment - it is really important. Mr Turnbull saw fit to back this on a bipartisan basis and my appeal to Mr Abbott is to do the same. It's one of those questions of decency in public life. We are talking about Australians who do not have a lot of defences themselves.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Mr Rudd, you haven't raised this issue in the few months and suddenly Mr Abbott has come under some criticism and you've suddenly made an announcement.
PM: The roll out of the Government's measures concerning homelessness has been going on for quite a period of time, and the reason it has been done in that way is, we spent our first year in Government concluding our first white paper on area of policy, and that was on homelessness. We spent a lot of time with the Brotherhood of St Lawrence getting it right. In our second year in Government we've been out there rolling out the biggest investment in homelessness and social housing services that the country has ever seen. So on the question of consistency of policy in this, we have been there from day one. This for me, is really important.
The other thing I'd say, though, is what has changed, and changed most recently, and the reason I am bringing this to national debate is that for the first time the Leader of the Opposition has not backed that as a bipartisan measure for the nation. I want that to be the case. I really want that to be the case.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd with regard to the home insulation program, you've made clear that Peter Garrett did everything he could at every point when things were raised with him about problems with this program. If we accept that then shouldn't we accept that the real error was yours in that you unleashed large amounts of money into an area which you knew, by your own comments recently, was not regulated properly? Did you have any advice from your departments not to roll it out so quickly because of their safety concerns?
PM: As you know, the decision to expand or to roll out the home insulation program was taken as one of a number of measures to support employment in the economy at a time of considerable stress. The advice that I have been provided by the Minister is that on the detailed implementation of that program that he worked his way through, first of all, the relevant product safety standards. The one for the use of this particular material had been in existence since 2002.
The Minister took further measures -
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Hang on, hang on. I'm talking about the measures which the Minister was having to deal with, and therefore for the implementation of the program.
Secondly, on the occupational health and safety standards which are relevant to this industry, and thirdly, the training standards which, nationally, did not exist, which the Minister sought to bring into effect.
The Minister was charged, as you would expect with any such program, with the implementation of the decision taken by the Cabinet to go in this direction, and the way in which it's been implemented has been done by the Minister based on the best advice available to him and the Government. That, of course, is a subject of continuing debate in the community, as it should be and as it will be, that's right, but I'm saying to you that's the sequence of events as I recall it.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Peter Garrett has described this program, the ceiling insulation program, as a success. Would you describe it as a success?
PM: Well remember that we have 1,055,000 homes out there in Australia who, a year or so after the introduction of this program now have ceiling insulation, and a lot of those households have said to us that they have benefitted greatly from the program. Secondly, there've been some 7,500 businesses engaged. In fact, I had a story from one of them just the other night when I was in Queensland, indirectly, about the fact that this program kept his small business afloat and his livelihood intact in that period.
No-one is suggesting that there have not been significant problems with the implementation of this. I have reflected that in some earlier comments that I have made, but I simply go back to the point that the Minister, in implementing the program, has sought to be responsive to the advice from his Department and his officials on the key elements of safety standards concerning the product itself, the 2002 national standard, occupational health and safety, and thirdly the proper training of those involved in the actual roll out itself.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on Monday (inaudible) rare gecko instead of attend an emergency meeting of unions, electricians, installers and department officials. Is that appropriate firstly, given that the unions and installers complain bitterly that the Minister couldn't be there and do you expect Mr Garrett should actually attend the meeting of electricians, installers and unions so they can actually express their views directly to him?
PM: What I'd say is that my advice is that the meeting that you refer to had been organised as a technical level meeting and that the relevant technical representatives of the Department and associated agencies of the Government were there. That's the advice that I have received. I have no basis not to accept that advice.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you, your office or your department receive any warnings or concerns or have them raised with you about levels of formaldehyde in the batts?
PM: On the question of formaldehyde, that's a question best directed to the Minister. I'm unaware of the details concerning that.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) yourself or your office?
PM: I'm unaware of anything concerning that matter. Can I suggest you direct that question to the Minister himself.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, like you Barack Obama's cap and trade legislation faces uncertain passage in the Senate, but unlike you he has said America must develop nuclear power. He says it is that simple. It is the only way to avoid climate change. Australia, obviously, we have multiple sources of energy, not necessarily clean sources of energy. Should we at least have a sensible debate about the issue?
PM: People in this country are free to have a debate on anything they want, but I think what they expect from this Government is for us just to be clear cut about our policy. Our policy is that Australia has multiple other energy sources and we will not be heading in the direction of civil nuclear power. The Coalition has a policy which I understand embraces that possibility. That's the difference between the two of us. But on the question of the debate in the community, people will happily debate this until the cows come home. Our views as I just described.
JOURNALIST: What's the latest information you have on the terror threat against Australian athletes in India, and also can you confirm that a senior Taliban bomb-making mastermind has been captured in Pakistan?
PM: On the question you raise in general, we are following these developments closely concerning any possible threats to Australian athletes in India. We are aware of a reported threat by Al Qaeda against international attendants at three upcoming sporting events in India - the Hockey World Cup, the Commonwealth Games and the Indian Premier League cricket competition. The Government security agencies are working closely with their Indian counterparts on this and are closely examining these threats and updating assessments accordingly.
At this stage we have no immediate plans to amend our travel advice for India, which currently advises that Australians exercise a high degree of caution in India due to the high threat of terrorism. Indian authorities have pledged to implement strong security procedures for all upcoming sporting events in India, including the three mentioned. We however, will be following this very, very closely.
We all know what has happened in Indian in recent times and the acts of terrorism which have occurred there. We are therefore in the closest possible liaison with the Indian authorities now.
JOURNALIST: On Mark's question, don't you think that your refusal to embrace or even sensibly debate nuclear energy for Australia is going to leave us behind?
PM: Well, in Australia we are currently leading the world in carbon capture and storage. You might say on the whole question of climate change and the future of energy and energy policy, what is the relative order of priority? That'll be subject to debate as well. But let me tell you, roll the clock out to 2020, 2050, in terms of the role of coal in total global energy production, it's huge. Therefore, when I sat down with leaders around the world and they have a discussion with me about how do we, in practical measures, bring down greenhouse gas emissions, first and foremost on the list is what can we do to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired electricity generation?
That goes straight onto a debate, then, about the effectiveness of carbon capture and storage. That goes on to a debate about how do we make it commercially applicable in large-scale projects. It may be a surprise to you here in Australia and in the press gallery but together with the Norwegians we are the two leading nations in the world on CCS. This is really important stuff. We have funded, through the budget, a very large initiative on this under Minister Ferguson - in excess, I believe, of $2.5 billion. Our objective is to realise two or three projects at scale by 2020. Detailed implementation work is underway.
So your question is about what's important for the future in terms of energy policy, energy security and bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. If you're looking at the role of coal, 2020, 2050, the reason why this Government is in there with its sleeves rolled up on CCS is because doing it properly is not just important for our country, but frankly, China and India - it's massive, and so that's where I see a core part of our responsibilities, which is why the Government, a year or so ago, launched the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. We have every major economy now as full members of that institute. We have every major energy company of the world now members of that institute. We are funding it significantly. We are rolling out technologies for possible use in various countries around the world, regulatory settings for who you actually go about doing sequestration, offshore and onshore, together with other measures associated with CCS.
So can I just say, in the global energy debate and how you actually bring things down at a practical level, leaving aside the debates about emissions trading schemes and the rest. 
This is core business for energy technology for the future.
JOURNALIST: On homelessness Prime Minister, just on a practical side as you say, can you give us an estimate of how many people have actually found homes since you started rolling out your program?
PM: The question Dennis will probably be best answered in the next month or so when the first set of data comes out. But what I expect, though I don't have anything concrete before me to back it up, because of the increase in unemployment since the global financial crisis is that numbers may well go up initially. That's my expectation. I don't have anything to back it up. But the key thing is to have the physical buildings for people to go to. You need to have a place at the inn. You need to have, you know, an inner city apartment block specially designed for homeless people. You've been to New York and seen Common Ground and seen what it does there.
Therese my wife, is patron of Common Ground in Australia. They're rolling these things out, adding all this capacity for homeless people in the inner cities. As well as then, a more permanent place to call home, which is why we are engaged in this huge expansion of the public housing stock of the nation. But on the numbers you'll see, I think, those produced in the next month or two. I wouldn't expect anything flash from them just now. Remember, we are one year into the implementation of the policies that we have set. It takes a while to build buildings and to key all the services, but that's what's underway now.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you think it's a good look for your Communications Minister to go skiing with a TV boss in Colorado, weeks before the networks are given a $250 million windfall? And secondly, can the radio industry expect similar licence fee cuts?
PM: Let me go to the heart of this matter, the absolute heart of it. Mr Abbott, in the last twenty four hours, has effectively accused the Australian Government of corruption, and of Channel Nine, Channel Seven, and Channel Ten, as being party to that corruption. Let's be very clear about the allegation that's been made. Let me quote what Mr Abbott has said: "it looks at this stage, unless the Government can justify much better than it has so far, you've got to say that it looks like an election year bribe". Asked if the Government was bribing the media so they'll be nice to the Labor party, Mr Abbott said: "absolutely right, that's what it looks like".
This is a serious, most serious allegation to make against the Government and a most serious allegation to make against the commercial television networks. Given that he has made this allegation, Mr Abbott has a responsibility now to produce his evidence. Mr Abbott has-
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I'll come back to that in a minute. I said the core of this goes to the allegation that has been made, and I'll return to the matters that have just been raised by the question. These are most serious allegations that have been made and if they are to be made by Mr Abbott, he has a responsibility to provide his evidence. That is a responsibility which he has today.
He has made these allegations without a skerrick of evidence, not one skerrick of evidence. And so based on a hunch, what we've had is Mr Abbott go out there and say that Laurie Oakes, Mark Riley, Paul Bongiorno can all be happily bought for their comment in some sort of grubby, cash for comment deal. That's what it's about. Can I just make some further comments on that and then I'll come to the elements of your question concerning radios and Senator Conroy.
So last week what we had was Mr Abbott make an allegation of manslaughter. This week we have Mr Abbott making an allegation of corruption- both without producing evidence. What does this say about the judgment of Mr Abbott?
More broadly, can I say, myself as Prime Minister, Senator Conroy, other Ministers, I am sure other Ministers as well, formally and informally would've met with the heads of commercial television networks on many times over the last couple of years concerning a whole raft of commercial interests relevant to them. That is entirely normal. As it's been entirely normal for me to meet with the head of News Limited, for Senator Conroy to meet with the head of News Limited, and for other Ministers to meet with News Limited representatives, to meet with Foxtel, to meet with Rupert Murdoch on commercial matters relevant to their businesses as well. Just as it's entirely normal for myself and other Ministers and Senator Conroy to deal with the management and the executive of the ABC. We meet thousands of businesses in a given year, representations are constantly made about the interests of particular commercial operations. That's what being in Government is all about, listening to what people have to say.
On the question of the decision on the licence fees for the networks, can I just say this- it partly, simply repeats what I said yesterday. One, the commercial television stations are faced with the challenge of digital switchover. This measure, together with other measures concerning the digital switchover package are designed to make that possible, so that viewers out there don't lose reception.
The previous Government made a policy decision on digital switchover. Nothing was done to make that work, in practice. I've been asked in the Parliament already, can I guarantee that X, Y, and Z, Auntie Nellie out there in the back lots of wherever, is going to have their TV reception interrupted. Well I don't want Auntie Nellie's television reception to be interrupted, so it takes practical and frankly expensive measures to make that work. That's the first point.
The second is to maintain Australian content. Now, I think Australians want to see Australian content maintained. They want to see the continuation of programs like Underbelly, programs like MasterChef, programs like Packed to the Rafters. They like these programs, they want them maintained. They want the Australian content standard maintained in the future.
The third thing I'd say is in terms of licences, if you were to compare the licence regime in this country for commercial televisions against that which pertains in other countries like the United Kingdom and elsewhere, they are vastly larger. To give you an example, against the UK, the licence fee arrangement here is something like nine per cent on revenue, in the United Kingdom it's about 1.45 per cent on revenue. These are the factors which shape the Government's decision on this, and we stand by those decisions.
To go to your two points before I just had over here, Senator Conroy has conducted himself in an entirely proper manner in dealing with representatives of the commercial television stations, representatives of News Limited, representatives of Foxtel, representatives of the whole range of other media interests, including the commercial radios. On the question of commercial radios, I suggest you refer that question to Senator Conroy himself.
JOURNALIST: So are we to take it then that you've been given guarantees by the networks that there will be Australian content continued at the same or a greater level? That there'll be no broadcast knockouts because of what's happening, and that you think that the taxation regime-
PM: (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: That there would be no dropouts in broadcasts, so you've got those two guarantees - and that you believe that the taxation regime now for them is too high, so this will be permanent, that you will- when you compare it across the world, it's too high, you're going to lower it forever?
PM: I got the thrust of the question, let me take them in sequence. On the first one in terms of the content standard, the Minister advised me that is the undertaking and therefore the guarantee the commercial networks, which is the maintenance of the Australian content standard. On the second point that you raise, which was concerning -
JOURNALIST: Whether or not there will be (inaudible)
PM: Look as far as we can make it work, every practical measure, and I'm very worried about Auntie Nellie out there at the back of some mountain somewhere, but every practical measure - and they are expensive, it's reflected in this package and the digital switchover package - to provide as best a guarantee as we can that people's reception is not affected. I'd draw your attention to the detail of the answer I gave in a question in Parliament on this from a National party Member, I can't remember who now, in the Parliament in the last week or so. On the third point that you raise, in terms of the future of the licensing fee regimes, as we made quite plain in the statement by the Minister, these will be subject to review at the two year point, and we intend to do that.
And having said that, I've really got to zip. Thanks folks.


The President of Indonesia, Dr Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, will visit Australia from 9 to 11 March.
Australia's relationship with Indonesia is multi-faceted, vibrant and growing. It is in the top rank of our bilateral partnerships. We share democratic values and are working together constructively to address regional and global challenges.
President Yudhoyono's visit to Australia early in his second term demonstrates our high-level shared commitment to strengthen this vital relationship further.
Prime Minister Rudd and President Yudhoyono will discuss ways to bolster our close cooperation across a number of security, economic, development and environmental challenges - both bilaterally and through forums such as the East Asia Summit, the G20 and the United Nations.
President Yudhoyono will visit Sydney and Canberra, where he will address the Australian Parliament. 


Australian businesses are taking advantage of the Rudd Government's $100 million Apprentice Kickstart bonus, with over 14,000 apprentices signed up before the initiative is set to end on 28 February 2010.
Apprentice commencements have taken off in February, with 4317 eligible Kickstart apprentices being signed up in the last two weeks alone.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Minister for Employment Participation Mark Arbib today encouraged businesses to make sure they don't miss out on the extra $3,350 on offer.
Under Kickstart, the Rudd Government has more than tripled the commencement bonus for employers in the first year, from $1500 to $4850.
Employers receive $2350 when they employ a 15 to 19 year-old apprentice in an eligible trade and then receive a further $2500 after the apprentice completes nine months.
The Kickstart bonus is available to employers of apprentices in the fields that have been hardest hit by skills shortages - identified on the National Skills Needs List.
These include butchers, bakers, bricklayers, carpenters, plumbers, electrical trades and hairdressing.
The bonus is available until 28 February 2010 and aims to sign up 21,000 young apprentices.
Member for Ballarat, Catherine King welcomed the figures, saying that Ballarat-based businesses had taken on over 100 Kickstart apprentices since the start of the initiative.
Apprentice Kickstart is providing a down-payment on the skills Australia needs as well as helping to tackle youth unemployment.
The economic downturn particularly hurt apprenticeships, with commencements dropping by about 10,000 in the past year. This bonus will fast-forward hiring decisions - to bring apprentice numbers back up to the levels before the global recession.


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, the Victorian Roads Minister, Tim Pallas, and Member for Ballarat, Catherine King, today announced the official start of major construction on the $200 million upgrade of the Western Highway at Anthony's Cutting that will straighten and duplicate 5 kilometres between Melton West and Bacchus Marsh.
As a result of the Australian Government's decision to bring forward funding as part of the Economic Stimulus Plan, this project will now be completed in early 2012, three months ahead of schedule.
The work will improve safety and reduce travel times for the 25,000 cars and 4,000 trucks that use this section of Highway every day, and delivery of the project will immediately support as many as 1,000 direct and indirect jobs.
Features of the project include:
     * Straightening and duplicating five kilometres of highway;
     * Six new bridges;
     * Two new Melbourne-bound access ramps at Hopetoun Park Road; and
     * A new link will be provided to and from Bacchus Marsh with Woolpack Road extended from Bacchus Marsh Road, with direct freeway connections in all directions via a new interchange.
Up until now, the Anthony's Cutting section of the Western Highway with its steep hills and tight curves has seen 21 serious crashes in just the last five years.
The upgrade at Anthony's Cutting is a jointly funded project, with the Australian Government contributing $160 million and the Victorian Government $40 million.
The project is part of the Australian Government's $36 billion investment in transport infrastructure and part of the $38 billion Victorian Government Transport Plan.


PM: Look, can I simply emphasise the absolute important of building infrastructure and protecting jobs? Neither of these two things happens by magic. It happens because governments decide to make it happen and businesses decide to make it happen with governments.
What's the benefit of projects like this? We build the infrastructure for tomorrow and we create the jobs of today. That's what we're here to do.
And this is part of a $36 billion investment by the Australian Government nationwide in our transport infrastructure. Building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow while creating the jobs, protecting the jobs, providing the apprenticeships, protecting the apprenticeships that we need for the young people of tomorrow.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Ah, Tony Abbott's near miss yesterday, what does that say about the safety of Australian roads?
PM: Look, all's I could say about the events yesterday is that I think everyone's relieved that there was no injuries to anybody.
And it's a reminder for all of us, myself included, about the absolute importance of road safety because so many Australians are involved in near misses every day.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, safety is obviously a major factor here. Can you see a need for greater safety review of the solar power units that are being installed under the rebate scheme?
PM: On the question of the solar program which has been running for some time, safety is the Government's number one priority.
The Department of the Environment, I'm advised, is in discussion with the industry groups who've raised these concerns. We will take the advice from experts in terms of any further action that needs to be taken.
Let's be very clear about the fact that the Solar Homes and Community Plan and the Renewable Remote Power Generation program were established also under the previous government. And I'm advised that the safety standards and installation guidelines under these programs have been put in place for a long, long time and put in place under the previous Liberal government, as well.
These standards, I'm advised, have not been changed since we formed government. My advice is that the standards and installation guidelines concerning these programs have been around for a long time.
Therefore, what we will do is listen carefully to what industry has to say, take the advice of the experts and respond accordingly.
JOURNALIST: Should Peter Garrett accept responsibility for this?
PM: On the question of the solar program, can I say we will listen carefully to what industry has to say, take the advice from the experts and act accordingly.
On the question of Peter, can I just say this program has been around for a long, long, long time, going back to the previous Liberal government of Mr Howard. But, you know, we want to make sure that it's absolutely right and therefore safety's number one priority. That's why we'll be acting on the basis of what the experts have to say.
JOURNALIST: You say there are standards in place, so is it a fact that people are not meeting the standards, then?
PM: Well let's see what the industry has said. Let us see what the experts advise in terms of any changes which need to be made.
Compliance is critical in terms of safety. We've got to make sure that proper compliance has occurred in this case as well. But I emphasise the fact that this program, and the safety guidelines which underpin it, go back a long, long, long time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) your office instruct Peter Garrett not to make his speech that he was planning to do this morning in Canberra?
PM: I'm unaware of him making - or plans to make a particular speech today. I think Mr Garrett has been responding to advice from his Department, as is appropriate. And I'm sure that as of when any further announcements are necessary by him, he will make them.
Furthermore, the responsibility of a Minister is to act on the basis of the advice that he gets. And my information is that's what Peter has done throughout this process, and that includes today as well.
JOURNALIST: Was he advised by you or the Department not to speak this morning?
PM: I'm unaware of any such communication. As far as Peter's concerned as Minister, he would act according to the advice that he gets and make any appropriate statement to the country at large and to media as of when he's required to do so, based on his Departmental advice. That's the right way to head.
JOURNALIST: Do you think Peter Garrett will still be there when you go to the next election?
PM: Peter has been very effective as Environment Minister over a long period of time. Let's just call a spade a spade, there are problems with the implementation of this program, we shouldn't run away from that, that's just a fact.
But the key thing is to make sure we get the safety right, we get the implementation right, and we do it right for the future. I believe this is a job where we've got to get on with the business of problem solving, and get it absolutely sorted out for the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you stand by Mr Garrett in his role as Minister?
PM: Yes, as I said so in the Parliament the other day.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, this afternoon the Landscape Guardians are going to expect to protest at your Community Cabinet. Now, wind power is a very big issue, lots of people are calling for -
PM: It's not unique for people to be protesting at a Community Cabinet - anywhere in the country, by the way. It's part and parcel of why we're out and about.
JOURNALIST: Anyway, groups are calling for state and national guidelines on wind farms. What is your, what is the Government's stance on this at the moment?
PM: I was recently at the launch of a major wind farm just outside of Canberra, not far from Lake George. It's a large one, and obviously these issues were relevant to that project as well, in and around the town of Bungendore. These are areas where we'll continue to work with both State Government and with the local planning authorities to try and get it right.
Wind power is a big part of our renewable energy future. That is a fact. It is also, depending on where you locate them and the wind geography of a country, a very efficient and effective way of generating renewable energy for the community.
The key thing is to get the balance right between what it yields in terms of clean, green energy on the one hand, and local environmental amenity on the other.
There is no magical solution to this, there's no magical solution. You're going to be out there providing a big injection of additional power through wind generators on the one hand, and some people are going to object to these wind turbines appearing on the landscape. That's just a fact.
How do we get the balance right? There's no magical solution, but we'll continue to work with State and Local Governments to try and get the balance right for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's an inquiry, a Senate inquiry, at the moment into the insulation scheme. Do you believe claims that 40 per cent of homes aren't properly insulated?
PM: Well, there was further information provided in that inquiry yesterday. We welcome the further provision of information by the industry.
I think it's quite clear from some of the information that's been provided to that inquiry that some operators have not met high safety standards established by the Government for the life of the scheme.
And we will continue to work our way through the information provided, and we will seek appropriate Departmental advice. Each of these - each of these presentations made by various parts of the industry will be tested by Departmental advice, and we will then act appropriately.
The important thing to do is to get the information from the industry. It may be of some surprise to you that industry has often many different views about how this program should be implemented, and the guidelines and the way in which they're enforced.
But our key objective is to get the views of industry, test that against the best Departmental advice and to act appropriately.
JOURNALIST: Is it a case of rolling out the scheme too quickly?
PM: The key thing is to make sure that we adhere to the absolute priority of safety. And this is a tough and difficult area. And there have been some, you know, tragic incidents and some deaths.
There are something in the order of 300-plus industrial deaths in this country each year, and there are about 138,000 or so major accidents which occur in workplaces across the country each year.
Each of these is important. Each of them should be properly investigated.
That's why, for example, in the case of a number of these accidents that we've had, coronial inquiries underway, Work Cover inquiries underway, the Electricity Safety Office in Queensland has an inquiry underway. That's the right thing to do, to establish the facts in each case. That is, I believe, the right course of action.
Secondly, it's to then take submissions from industry, and that's why we welcome the submissions which have been provided by industry through the Senate inquiry. Test that with other submissions from industry, and make sure you get the advice right on the future implementation of the scheme.
That is the right way to go, and that's what this Government's in the business of doing.
Folks, I've got to be in Ballarat, I can't keep the folks waiting there. See you.


DOYLE: Kevin Rudd, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
DOYLE: Thanks for coming in. I've got a couple of questions I want to throw at you from topics today before I get to Steve and Ray, they are waiting. The papers today, claiming that you're going to seek a double dissolution on health as a trigger for an early election - are they right?
PM: We've got an election due in 2010. Three years is up at the end of the year. Private health insurance rebate is before the Parliament again because it's a big budgetary measure. I think it adds up over time to about a $100 billion slug over time and we need to use that for other investments in the public hospital system, for example, for big reform. And this only affects the very highest bracket of income earners.
Now, as for election timing, what form an election takes, well let's wait and see. My intention, as I've said many, many times is for our Government to serve its full term. But let's just see how this one unfolds. My attitude overall, though, is people want governments to serve their full terms.
DOYLE: OK, but we know the Opposition's going to block it.
PM: Well let's just see what they do. I mean this is a huge budgetary measure, it's a lot of money and I would much rather have that to invest in the public hospital needs of our country. And as I said, this leaves the vast majority of those on private health insurance completely alone. It only affects a very, very small number of people at the upper end of the income range.
So let's just see what the Senate does, but this is an important part of overall health and hospital reform. You've got to use that money to deal with the challenges in our accident and emergency, our elective surgery, and all those things which people want.
DOYLE: Ok so will health be a major election issue and if so, have you done enough to impress. Just this morning for example, we're hearing stories 100,000 people in New South Wales alone last year waited up to an hour to be seen in hospitals, despite being rushed there by ambulances.
PM: Well my attitude to that is it's just not good enough. That's one of the reasons in just two years in office for the first time the Australian Government has put in three quarters of a billion dollars directly into accident and emergency. So right across Australia at the moment there's probably 37 or so hospitals where this investment's going in to expand the capacity of accident and emergencies. That's what we've just done in two years, but there's much, much, more to go. And on your broader question, health and hospitals, that is a huge challenge for our future - aging of the population, the pressure on state budgets to actually fund this stuff, and the numbers you've just referred to before, are just not good enough.
DOYLE: Ok but we know all of that. We've heard all of that for many, many years. You did promise to have hospitals -
PM: No, you haven't heard that for many, many years. The Australian Government -
DOYLE: OK, but we know there's pressure -
PM: Hang on, Mel, Mel, Mel - for the first time the Australian Government is funding, directly, hospitals to increase their accident and emergency capacity. Two years ago that didn't happen. So we have put in $750 million, 37 hospitals across the country, you ring up some of them and ask what's been added, I've been around the country and inspected - it is one big step in the right direction. But there are 750 hospitals in Australia. The total number with accident and emergency departments I don't have off the top of my head, but we will be making a big difference in this area as well.
DOYLE: OK, let's go to Steven Jaeger. He runs a small business that imports foil insulation. The use of foil insulation, of course, has now been suspended by your Government following the deaths of four people. So Steve, good morning to you. What is your question to the Prime Minister?
CALLER: Good morning Mr Rudd.
PM: G'day, Steve. How are you?
CALLER: Good, thank you. Our small business has spent a lot of money importing foil insulation and it passes all your Government's standards. We'd like to know what the Government will do to help our small business now that the foil insulation has been suspended and all the bad publicity about our products. Our installers have received several phone calls now to have our foil insulation removed and have batts put in, so we'd like to know what the Government is going to do about that?
PM: Thank you Steve, for your question. You're right, the standards concerning foil insulation being used in roofs goes back to 2002. That's how long that standard has been in for the quality of product to be used in roofs, and I understand from what officials have told me that this foil insulation material has been used right back from the 1950s. 
However, in response to advice to Peter Garrett's department, they've decided to, first of all suspend or ban the use of metal fasteners and subsequently of foil itself.
The reason we're doing that Steve, and I know it's really tough, is to put an absolute premium on safety. Now, on the specific circumstances concerning your business and the people that you're employing, can I make simply, this undertaking to you, that Minister Garrett's department will get onto you in the days ahead to see what practical arrangements can be put in place given your circumstances.
Our number one priority is safety and security. You're right to point to the fact that the standards have existed for a long, long time, but let's get to the bottom of the details in your business.
DOYLE: But can I interrupt on behalf of Steve and hopefully that will start. But you say practical measures, I mean, Steve is not alone, he's got half a million dollars' worth of product sitting there, he's got people calling up saying 'take it out of our roofs'. Would something like compensation work for businesses such as Steve's?
PM: Let's look through the individual details of each of these firms. Remember, through this program we have provided employment and business opportunities for 7,500 businesses across Australia, we've had more than a million homes have various forms of insulation put into the roofs and a proportion of that has been foil. Let's work through the detail of each individual business. I think that's the right and responsible thing to do. Steve, all I can say is that the Minister's department will be onto you direct and through the industry association as well.
I know this is a difficult and hard time. We're dealing with some implementation difficulties with the program. They are real. There are problems, but let's work through them and let's deal with the individual circumstances of your business.
DOYLE: Alright, so you'll get back to every individual one that's in the same situation. Let us know, too. Drop us an email and we'll obviously pass those details on to Peter Garrett's office. Now the other one, we've got a viewer question from Ray, Ray Dargavel in Queensland. Ray, good morning to you. You're up.
CALLER: Good morning, good morning, Prime Minister. How are you?
PM: Good, Ray.
CALLER: Thank you. Prior to the last election, one of your vote-grabbing promises was to take legal action against the Japanese for their illegal slaughter of our whales. Now, nearly three years on, you're still sitting on your hands. And the only thing you're doing is rolling out that very tired diplomatic excuse, which really is polly speak for doing nothing as far as most people are concerned. My question is when are you going to take an active approach, and when are you going to give us a timeline by which you will take legal action against the Japanese to stop this illegal slaughter?
PM: Well let me be absolutely blunt with you Ray, in terms of dealing with the challenge of getting rid of commercial whaling in the Southern Ocean, and particularly in the Australian Whale Sanctuary - we oppose it. What we've said we've done for the last two years is work diplomatically with the Japanese to try and get them to agree to an outcome. Specifically, what we're putting to the Japanese is to take where they are now, which is the slaughter of some hundreds of whales each year and reduce that to zero. If we don't get that as a diplomatic agreement, let me tell you, we'll be going to the International Court of Justice.
Secondly, on the timeline question which you asked about, can I say this to you Ray - if we don't reach a landing point with the Japanese diplomatically, that action will occur well before the commence of the next whaling season, which is this November, OK?
So, we have put ourselves onto a timeline, we're working it through with the Japanese, but if they don't come at this agreement to reduce to zero, we will initiate that action.
DOYLE: Alright well, can I jump in? Can I play for you a grab from you, the 20th May 2007.
PM CLIP: It's time that Australia got serious when it comes to the slaughter of whales, particularly the slaughter of whales in the Australian Whale Sanctuary. What we will do in Government is to take Japan and other countries as necessary to court in the International Court of Justice to bring a stop to this practice of whale slaughter.
DOYLE: So the Oceanic Viking went there in early '08. At the end of that year your Minister said that you'd gathered enough evidence to take it to court, so know you're still telling me we're still taking evidence, to take it to court?
PM: No, no, we've collected evidence through that. The reason we sent the vessel that year was to actually put together the pictures, the photographs and all the film evidence that you need to substantiate a court action. Then, secondly, with the Japanese - and there have been three Japanese Governments since then - is to work with the Japanese to reduce, through negotiation, their current catch to zero.
If that fails, and I'm saying this very bluntly and very clearly on your program today - if that fails, then we will initiate that court action before the commencement of the whaling season in November 2010.
Now, that is a direct honouring of the commitment I gave to the Australia people. And that is the right to handle it with a friend and partner which is Japan which is also a very significant, long-standing economic partner as well. But, that's the bottom line, and we're very clear to the Japanese that's what we intend to do.
DOYLE: Ok, and also, before I let you go, last week truckie Steven Foster, you might remember, was talking about the Pacific Highway, offered to take you on a bit of a road trip so you could have a look at it for yourself. Are you going off with him, going for a ride?
PM: Not sure I've got all that time available this time, Steve, but you asked about the upgrade of the Pacific - good question. We should have, based on the investments we've agreed to already, have 70 per cent of the Pacific Highway duplicated by '13-'14. That is based on the investments we currently have in the system.
When we came to office, only 50 per cent of the Pacific Highway was duplicated. We've trebled our investment in the Pacific Highway. And we're going to have to invest more to hit the 2016 target of full duplication.
But you something, there's 102km of road being worked on now. There is $3.1 billion of investment going into it. I mentioned last week I think Kempsey, but there's Bulahdelah, there's a whole series of other places as well, and Ballina bypass.
DOYLE: So, will you invest more?
PM: We put it through the Budget process, but we have that as our 2016 objective. 70 percent's not bad, it's a stepping stone there. I want to get it done Mel, but it's going to take some more money.
DOYLE: Alright, thank you for coming in this morning.
PM: It's good to be here. I'm still recovering from that cow that bobbed up just before.
DOYLE: Yes, well, you know, it'll keep you on your toes on a Friday morning. Thank you to our viewers, too, that sent in all those questions, and keep them coming.


Australians today can all welcome the decision by the Vatican to canonise Blessed Mary MacKillop, who will be Australia's first saint.
This is a deeply significant announcement for the five million Australians of Catholic faith, and for all Australians whether of Catholic faith or not.
Mary MacKillop is an extraordinary figure in Australian history; a pioneering woman who dedicated her life to the poor and to advancing the cause of social justice in Australia.
She gave many children the opportunity of an education and worked for the homeless, the destitute and the marginalised. In a time when many children grew up in poverty and had little chance of gaining access to a decent education, Mary MacKillop changed the course of many young Australians' lives.
Today, a century after her passing, the work that Mary MacKillop began continues through the Sisters of St Joseph, whom I have had the opportunity to visit at the Mary MacKillop Place in North Sydney.
Mary MacKillop's story is a great inspiration to all Australians, and all Australians can welcome today's announcement. 


In politics, words are very easy. Doing things is very hard. And what inspires me about your presence here this evening is that you are doing things. You are doing real things. You are providing opportunities to change people's lives and change them forever.
Sometimes, in the challenge of reconciliation, we lose heart. Sometimes we think it's all too hard. Sometimes we just think that for every success there are 10 failures, and why go on?
But what encourages me about your presence here this evening, and the 150 or so business leaders who were turned away from being here this evening, is the spirit of the nation is alive and well and wants to do things.
It doesn't want to emote about it, doesn't want to feel good about it - it wants to do things.
This is a very hard area. You all know that. That's why you have succeeded in the fields of endeavour which have brought you to this gathering this evening. It's a very hard area, and it therefore requires hard and determined people - hard and determined people whose heart is still tender and warm, and that again is the spirit I see present in this gathering this evening.
Whenever you feel discouraged, and I say this to my Indigenous brothers and sisters here this evening and to those of you from the non-Indigenous community, pause for a moment and reflect a bit on the journey on which we've come just over the last couple of years.
This is the place in which we apologised to the Stolen Generation, and we've had moving testimony this evening about the impact on just one of them. The thing that hit me in the heart from the Welcome to Country was the phrase "I grew up without knowing that Aboriginal people existed". How extraordinary. How frighteningly extraordinary.
But that is the reality from which we have come. It's a sad reality, it's a cruel reality, it's a heartless reality, and it's for that which we gathered as a nation on all sides of politics and from all parts of the country to simply say sorry - and we did.
But as I said on that occasion, words without deeds are but a clanging gong, a hollow symbol, and count for nothing. And that's where as a nation we embarked upon this journey called Closing the Gap.
I'll come to the practical parts of it in a minute. But when you lose heart, reflect on where we've come in just the last couple of years.
What really affected me just the other night was attending a football game on the Gold Coast in the great and incomparable State of Queensland. [Laughter] I had you all with me until that point. [More laughter]
So as I sat there with Jenny [Macklin] and with Twiggy [Forrest] and others, Linda Burney, Smiley [William Johnstone], folks from near and folks from far, I was absolutely stunned, the fact that we were there with a full stadium of people watching this game unfold. And the nation felt to me as if it was at one, wanting this enterprise to succeed, for which this game of football was an outward and visible sign of, to paraphrase the good nuns who taught Aunty [Ruth Bell] before, an inward and perhaps spiritual event.
Because there you had the world of rugby league, the NRL, the ARL, Smiley, the whole mob, out there on the field, Indig, non-Indig - it was great. Fantastic game of football, too, and the good guys won.
But you know something? The crowd loved it and the nation enjoyed it.
And so when you start to feel weighed down by it all, just step back every now and then and reflect that the spirit of getting this right is alive and well in the good people of Australia.
Now, to the practical business of what you are doing.
My first responsibility tonight is to each and every one of you, as Indigenous and non-Indigenous business leaders, is to say thank you. I mean it. I really do.
I'm married to a businesswoman. Creating a job doesn't happen like that. You operate under a bottom line. You operate with the disciplines of your banks; you operate with the disciplines of the marketplace; you operate with the disciplines of what your firm does best. And within all those constraints, what you have done as business leaders is to say 'we can make a difference'.
I just find that so encouraging, so inspiring.
Some may be just starting out on this particular journey. And I've met one or two this evening. Some are long seasoned in it and have seen the upsides and have seen the downsides and the waves on the way through. But you know, we are making a difference, because you are making a difference.
The huge firms we know something of - the BHPs and the Rios. Can I just say to large companies like that, and there are many of them here this evening and not just in the mining and resources sector, thank you for staying the course. It's good that you've done so.
I could say by reprimand that you started late, but I won't, because the nation started late. All of us started late.
But it is also the other businesses and the other firms in the financial services sector, in the manufacturing, retail, hospitality, tourism, right across the spectrum, people seeing where they are and realising what they can to transform a young Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person's life.
So, seriously, and from my heart and from my head, thank you for that which you have done, that which you are doing, and that which you have resolved so to do.
The second is this - that I really do get it when so many of you say to me: "Kevin, we just to help. Our challenge is not throwing the doors open. We've overcome those barriers. Our challenge is finding the people." I get it. Most of us get it around this gathering this evening.
Which is why I'm equally inspired by what so many people here are doing this evening in school education and what comes after it. The great work being done in Queensland, and that's not in reference to the State - it actually was a reference to the extraordinary work being done in pioneering approaches to retaining kids at school. The extraordinary work being done in the West and now much more broadly by Gerard Neesham and the Clontarf Academy; the great work being done by Andrew Penfold, getting kids from Indigenous communities into the boarding schools of our country, and he mentioned to me just before the great work, I think, under Mark's [Arbib] portfolio of having now hundreds and hundreds of kids, Indigenous kids, in school-based apprenticeships.
So, in having the pipeline of people come through, can I say to each one of you engaged in that work at the coal face of what comes before school, of what's happening in our schools, and what is needed to keep kids at school and provide those pathways beyond school and through university and into the financial institutions to work - thank you, because that is one huge part of the jigsaw.
If I have a third thing to say tonight, it's kind of how we fit in, the Government. I was talking earlier this evening to Gerard Neesham, and, as you know, we are backing Clontarf, we are backing what Andrew Penfold's doing, we're backing what Twiggy Forrest is doing, we're backing what so many of you are doing around the country. But I was taken, in particular, by part of my conversation with Gerard about why it is that we in Government actually prefer to work with you beyond Government.
And that is because if we can bring our resources to bear, with continuity, with strength and with vigour, and persistence and certainty, the magic really happens when we harness that of people beyond Government and their passion and commitment, professional expertise and zeal. In Clontarf, we see that. I discovered, to my horror, how much money we're spending with Clontarf this evening. Someone should have given me the brief. Gerard, you've done very well - and so it is across the spectrum.
Didn't stop Gerard from asking for more, by the way - a lot more.
But you know something? It actually works well if we, creatively, are working with each other. Our job in Government when it comes to these great challenges of Closing the Gap, is to hold fast to the targets we must reach, be clear about them and be accountable in the progress that we are making towards them, but to be flexible and open about what each situation and each community demands as the local response and how you as individual firms and schools and school-related enterprises can best fit in.
It is that creative and dynamic partnership for which there is no perfect template, which, I think, will realise for us our greatest strength.
It's a long way off. Let's be honest about it. The tasks ahead are huge, the challenges formidable, but we are exploring a new way. The classic view, the Government does all, doesn't work. The alternative view, which is that random acts of philanthropic endeavour by those of you who feel virtue in your soul, it's great, but it's not comprehensive.
The creativity lies in bringing these two worlds together, and that is what we seek, in our own way, to do.
To the ministers who work with me on this, can I say to Jenny and to Mark and to others who are here, thank you. These two ministers, in particular, have their hearts and their minds fully engaged in this great enterprise, and I really would say to both of them in front of this audience how much I appreciate that work.
It's hard, it's difficult, and it can be discouraging, but with these ministers, let me tell you, you have an open door and through the Government a willing response in terms of things that work practically at the local level - and we mean it.
We will be held to account each year in this place when we, in the House of Representatives, deliver a report on or about the anniversary of the Apology to Indigenous people. The focusing thing about that report is that it is our national bottom line. It is our national balance sheet. It is our national reconciliation of accounts each year.
The targets we have set, the investments we've made, and the changes we have wrought or the failures that we have encountered. It's a good discipline for the nation, but we'd never, ever get there were it not for you making it happen in the field.
Aunty said in conclusion that she dreamt of the day when an Indigenous Australian will be Prime Minister of this country. You know something? I was first introduced to Closing the Gap on the 40th anniversary of the '67 referendum, at an event held down the road here at the Old Parliament House.
I didn't know much about Closing the Gap, to be quite honest, until I sat down with some Indigenous leaders who explained to me that it really had some horsepower. I also remember on that occasion we sang together 'From Little Things Big Things Grow' , and I think that's what we're doing here, changing all those lives, tens, then hundreds, then thousands, then tens of thousands. And that means within our lifetime Indigenous leaders in the ranks of politics, including the highest offices of the land, as should be the case.
Australian business, this journey is long and the difficulties will be great. But it won't happen without each of you fully hitched to the cart of reconciliation and what we can do for the future of the Indigenous people of this ancient land.
I thank you.
[ends]



The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joined with Parliamentary Secretary for Health, Mark Butler, to launch Australian Organ and Tissue Donor Week 2010 at Parliament House today, and asked all Australian families to think about organ donation, and to talk about and know each other's wishes about donation.
The theme of this year's Australian Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week is family discussion in a bid to help lift the nation's family consent rate of just 56%.
While around 80% of Australians express widespread support for organ donation, currently 1 in 2 Australians don't know the wishes of their family members and 1 in 3 Australians don't know that their family's consent is required for donation to proceed.
To help get families talking, the Prime Minister launched a Family Discussion Kit, a new resource which provides facts about organ and tissue donation, dispels some of the more commonly-held myths and shares stories of donor and recipient families. The Family Discussion Kit is a practical guide to help families have a memorable conversation.
The kit is designed to help family members make a decision, with confidence, about the organ and tissue donation wishes of a family member. Taking the time to have a family discussion that everyone remembers could one day give another Australian a second chance at life.
It forms part of the DonateLife Family public awareness program, which is backed up by a workforce of medical specialists called the DonateLife Network. The Network consists of 76 major hospitals across Australia and over 160 staff, including State Medical Directors, Hospital Medical Directors and senior nurses and specialist organ donor coordinators who are dedicated to improving Australia's organ and tissue donation rates.
Last year 799 Australians and their families benefited from the generous act of donation from 247 organ donors. However, at the beginning of February, there were still 1,742 Australians on official waiting lists waiting for the phone call that could save their life.
The Prime Minister also thanked all the DonateLife clinicians and community organisations that play a vital role in helping Australians make informed decisions about becoming organ and tissue donors.
Community organisations provide essential awareness and education events as well as advocacy and support for donor families, transplant recipients and families awaiting transplantations.
For more information and to download a copy of the Family Discussion Kit please visit www.donatelife.gov.au/family. 


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, Attorney General, Robert McClelland and Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith today launched the 2010 Counter-Terrorism White Paper, Securing Australia, Protecting Our Community.
The first responsibility of government is the protection of Australia, Australians and Australia's interests.
Since 2001, over 100 Australians have been killed in terrorist attacks overseas.
The threat from terrorism is real, persistent and evolving.
This White Paper outlines the Government's assessment of the threat from terrorism and how we will deal with that threat. It is the first such White Paper to bring together both the international and domestic elements of Australia's counter-terrorism policy.
Security and intelligence agencies report that, while there have been counter-terrorism successes, they have been offset by the rise of groups affiliated with, or inspired by, al-Qa'ida's message and methods.
Another apparent shift has been the increase in the threat from people born or raised in Australia, who have become influenced by the divisive narrative espoused by al-Qa'ida.
The bombings in London on 7 July 2005 - which were carried out by British nationals - brought into stark relief the real threat of globally-inspired but locally generated attacks in Western democracies, including Australia. 
The hotel bombings in Jakarta in July 2009 remind us of the enduring international threat, and the attempted bombing of a United States airliner on 25 December 2009 reminds us that terrorist groups constantly develop new tactics. 
In response to this developing threat, the Government will continue to ensure that agencies are appropriately resourced and practical action is taken to protect Australia and Australians.
The Government has made a number of important changes to the way Australia responds to terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism White Paper sets out:
- the establishment of a Counter Terrorism Control Centre to increase coordination across government agencies;
- new investment of $69 million over four years to introduce biometric checks for visa applicants in around 10 countries;
- a strengthened approach to aviation security;
- a strategy to counter violent extremism in Australia; and
- how we will ensure that our counter-terrorism laws both fight terrorism and protect the rights of all Australians. 
No government can guarantee that Australians will be free from the threat of terrorist attack.
But this Government will take all necessary and practical measures to combat the threat.
This White Paper forms part of the Government's national security reform agenda.
It is a further step in delivering a safer, more secure Australia.
The Counter-Terrorism White Paper can be accessed at: www.pmc.gov.au/counter-terrorism


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I thank you all for your support in being here today to launch Organ Donor Awareness Week, and I can assure you that the Australian Government is absolutely committed to increasing the rate of organ and tissue donation in Australia and achieving world's best practice outcomes.
In July 2008 I announced the $150 million World's Best Practice Approach to Organ and Tissue Donation for Transplantation. 
The national reform plan has three core elements:
     * a coordinated, national approach to organ donation and transplantation;
     * dedicated clinical staff on the ground in all our major hospitals; and
     * increased community awareness about the importance of organ and tissue donation and the difference it can make.
I can tell you that the Australian Government is firmly committed to the full implementation of the Plan and increasing Australia's donation rates. We are working with governments in every state and territory, who are also committed to the plan through the Council of Australian Governments. Over the past 12 months we have laid the foundations of the new national system.
In order to spearhead the national reform process, we established the Organ and Tissue Authority on 1 January last year, and DonateLife agencies in each state and territory were formally established as a national network on 1 July last year. State medical directors are overseeing the clinical network in each jurisdiction and are linked back to the Organ and Tissue Authority.
The DonateLife network now has over 150 people on the ground, including new medical and nursing staff devoted to organ donation working in 76 local hospitals across the country.
Clinical triggers to underpin and improve the recognition of potential organ donors have been endorsed by:
     * the Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society
     * the Australian College of Emergency Medicine
     * the Australian College of Critical Care Nursing, and
     * the College of Intensive Care Medicine.
And these triggers are being implemented throughout the hospital system.
In addition, around 50 organisations have signed up to the National Communications Charter to enable consistent and coordinated community awareness and education activities.
The challenge of lifting Australia's organ donation and transplantation rates was never going to be an easy task, but the pieces of the jigsaw are now being carefully slotted into place and we can begin the work in earnest.
While we still have a long way to go before the levels of organ donation rise to where they need to be in this country, the early signs are encouraging. Many passionately committed and highly professional people are now working together to implement the national reform plan.
It is now time to ensure that the resources and systems which are being put in place equate to what matters most - more organ donors and more life-saving transplants. Now is the time for all elements of the new national system to pull together and focus on achieving world's best practice outcomes; to make sure that every potential donor is recognised within our hospital system and that their family is given the opportunity to have their loved one's intention to donate carried out; to promote the "discover, decide, discuss" message so that every family is clear about their loved one's wishes if a tragedy does occur.
Groups like Gift Of Life - who work tirelessly at the local level to raise awareness of organ donation within the community - have an important role to play, but each and every one of us also has a role: to lead our friends, our workmates or our families in a conversation about organ donation.
A conversation that encourages them to: Discover. Decide. Discuss, three simple words that can literally be the difference between life and death. While it is up to all of us to discover, decide and discuss, families also have a responsibility to respect each other's wishes, because the families of potential donors always make the final decision about whether organ donation can take place.
Glenys Cody had to make that decision, but luckily she had discussed organ donation with her family.
As a mum, she had that conversation with her boys Lachlan, Hayden and eldest son, Angus, and because of that conversation, there are at least three people out there who will be forever thankful to Angus, yet they never even met him, because when 14-year-old Angus died after an accident in 2008, Glenys was able to say with 100 per cent certainty that organ donation was what her young son wanted.
Glenys and her boys talked about how once you're gone, you don't need your organs anymore. The boys agreed wholeheartedly, so when Angus was on life support, Glenys did not hesitate for a second. She wanted to make sure that, despite the tragedy of Angus's death, it would not be a waste.
Donating Angus' organs helped with the grieving process because as, Glenys said:
"We didn't get the miracle we had hoped for...but somebody else and their family did."
Nobody wants to be in the situation of having a loved one die, and nobody wants the added pressure of 'guessing' their loved one's wishes about organ donation - and no doctor or nurse wants to add to that pressure.
Deputy Director of DonateLife ACT, Dr Greg Hollis, said, and I quote:
"Explaining and normalising the end-of-life process, with a focus on dignity and respect for the individual, is key to reassuring the family of the integrity of the process."
And Nicole Coleman, the Clinical Nurse Consultant for Organ and Tissue Donation for Hunter and New England Health, said that the new funding has reinvigorated performance and boosted morale, bringing new ideas and new enthusiasm. Ms Coleman said, and again I quote:
"That means the message getting further out into the community and that has already translated to more notifications of people willing to donate."
At this moment, there are more than 1,700 Australians on official waiting lists - people hoping and praying that someone out there had a conversation about organ donation with their family, just like Glenys and Angus did. People just like Dean Jobson who we saw with Chris in the session a little earlier today.
Dean is just your average knockabout bloke, but this average knockabout bloke has been waiting for a heart transplant for 19 months and while he waits he can't work. His dad has had to retire from his job to be Dean's carer and Dean can't get out and play the cricket and hockey that were such a big part of his sporting and social life.
Dean could wallow in self-pity, but he doesn't. He has this fantastic attitude. He said, and I quote:
"You'd go nuts if you thought about it too much. You've just got to live with the cards you've been dealt and I'd prefer to be alive and on a transplant waiting list than the alternative. I've still got a chance."
Dean and his family are registered donors because, in Dean's words "it's just the right thing to do."
It is the right thing to do.
Research consistently tells us that the vast majority of Australians support organ donation, but we need to make sure that this translates to people making their wishes known to their families. We need a cultural shift where discussion about organ donation becomes commonplace.
If someone makes an informed decision to not become a donor, they will not be condemned, but fear and a lack of knowledge of organ donation will condemn many of those on waiting lists to an uncertain future.
When we launched DonateLife last November, my family and I made the decision to become a DonateLife family: a family who discovers the facts about organ and tissue donation; a family who makes informed decisions about whether to become organ donors; a family who discusses each other's wishes.
I implore all Australian families to do the same.
One in two Australians don't know the wishes of their family members, and one in three Australians don't know that their family's consent is required for donation to proceed. The fact is that even if you are registered as a donor, your family will be asked to give consent for donation to take place. If all Australians knew their loved one's wishes, we would have a much higher family consent rate and we could save more lives.
Today I am pleased to launch a new resource to support families in having what can be a challenging conversation. The Family Discussion Kit is a practical guide to help families have that conversation. It:
     * provides facts about organ and tissue donation;
     * dispels some of the more commonly-held myths; and
     * shares stories of donor and recipient families.
The Family Discussion Kit is available as an online resource at www.donatelife.gov.au
If more Australian families discuss and accept each other's wishes about organ and tissue donation, we can achieve a higher family consent rate that our current rate of just 56 per cent. We can do better. 
I want to emphasise again that the Government is committed to delivering major improvements to organ donation rates across Australia. With the national reform plan well and truly underway, we look forward to realising the benefits of this united effort.
I know that will be a great achievement for everyone involved in this cause - community groups, such as Gift of Life, doctors, nurses and governments alike.
To all those here today who are travelling their own journey with organ donation or transplantation, I wish you well, and to those who wish to help raise awareness for organ donation, you can start by joining me on the Terry Connolly ORGANised walk tomorrow morning at 7am.
I thank Anne and Gift of Life for organising the walk tomorrow and this event today, and I thank all those with a passion for this cause for your year-round commitment to increasing awareness of organ donation.
It is now my pleasure to officially launch Australian Organ Donor Awareness Week.


PM: The Government is today releasing the Counter-Terrorism White Paper. The first responsibility of any Government is the protection of Australia and Australian interests. The National Security Statement of December 2008 for the first time presented a coherent strategy for the whole range of national security challenges we face, and how we intend to respond to those challenges. The Government has since then released the Defence White Paper, Force 2030, which is one core building block in enhancing our national security capabilities for the future. Furthermore, the Government is today releasing a further piece of the Government's national security reform agenda, the Counter-Terrorism White Paper.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat, a serious challenge to Australia's security interests. That threat is not diminishing. In fact, the Government's security and intelligence agencies assess that terrorism has become a persistent and permanent feature of Australia's security environment. These agencies warn that an attack could occur at any time. The key threat comes from people who are adherents to the distorted and militant interpretation of Islam, that is espoused by groups such as Al-Qaida. Prior to the rise of jihadist terrorism, Australia was not a specific target. Now Australia is such a target. More than 100 Australians have been killed in terrorist attacks since 2001. Australians have been murdered by terrorists in New York, in Bali, in Riyadh, in Jakarta, in London, and in Mumbai. The White Paper outlines two key shifts in the terrorist threat to Australia.
First, there has been some counter-terrorism successes, most notably in South-East Asia, and, also in exerting pressure on Al-Qaida in Afghanistan and in Pakistan. But this has been offset by newer areas of concern, such as Somalia and Yemen. Second, Australia now faces an increased terrorist threat from people born or raised in Australia who take inspiration from international jihadist narratives. The London attacks in July 2005 brought into stark relief the real threat of globally inspired but locally generated attacks in Western democracies. And in Australia since 2001, 38 people have been prosecuted as a result of counter-terrorism operations, and 20 have been convicted of terrorism offences under the criminal code. Over 40 Australians have had their passports revoked or denied for reasons relating to terrorism.
The Government is committed to concrete action to combat terrorism. No Government can guarantee that Australia will be free from the threat of terrorism. But the Government can guarantee that we will take all necessary and practical measures to combat that threat. The Government's intention is to provide our security, intelligence and law enforcement agencies with the resources to assist them identify terrorists and to protect attacks. There are four key elements of the Government's Counter-Terrorism strategy. Analysis, protection, response, and resilience.
Analysis - our need for analysis demands an intelligence-led response driven by properly connected and properly informed national security community.
Protection - the Government is committed to taking all necessary and practical action to protect Australians and Australian interests from terrorism at home and abroad.
In terms of response, the Government is committed to providing an immediate and focussed response to specific terrorist threats and to terrorist attacks should they occur.
And resilience, Australia's strong and resilient community has a key role to play in resisting the development of violent extremism and terrorism on the home front.
If I could make three specific points about the contents of this paper. The White Paper of course contains a range of specific announcements and a number of specific measures. The- one of them relates to the introduction of biometric checks for visa applications in around ten countries. Under the new system, people applying for new electronic visas in these countries will be required to present in person at a visa application centre to lodge their visa applications, and submit fingerprints and facial images.
Second, the Government is committed to providing coordinated operational counter-terrorism work through international efforts and with budget priorities so dedicated. A multi-agency counter-terrorism control centre within the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation will be established. This is about properly coordinating our intelligence efforts on the ground, in the field.
Beyond these measures, could I also draw your attention to the announcement recently that the Government made in the $200 million investment in airport security, including the introduction of full body scanners and enhanced explosive detection devices at major international gateway airports, as part of Australia's aviation security screening, as well as the enhanced security arrangements for air cargo, as well as at Australia's other domestic and regional airports.
Could I conclude with these remarks- the challenge of counter-terrorism is real. The threat that we face is continuing. And the agencies that advise us on these matters have concluded that this threat is now a permanent threat. Home grown terrorism is now a reality in Australia that we have to accept. The threat of terrorism is no longer just something that travels to Australia from overseas. The threat of home grown terrorism is now increasing. This White Paper is clear, some of the threat we now face comes from the Australian born, Australian educated, and Australian residents. Therefore, our response to this threat must be multi-layered across the measures that I have reflected in the contents of the Counter-Terrorism White Paper. Before taking your questions, I'd ask first the Attorney to add to my remarks, then the Foreign Minister, then it's open to you.
MCCLELLAND: Well thanks very much Prime Minister. Just on two things, the Counter-Terrorism Control Centre and also the issue of addressing the issue of home grown terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Control Centre will essentially draw together experts from the intelligence community to a centre within the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. It will look at increasing the capacity to gather intelligence, analyse intelligence to communicate it to those agencies that may require that intelligence, or indeed to simply cross-check the intelligence, and to ensure that the intelligence as joined together is available for operational purposes. So that will, we believe, be a significant enhancement through combining existing capabilities of our intelligence-gathering capability. In respect of the issue of home grown terrorism, it's instructive to note that there have been 38 prosecutions- some of those matters are still before the courts, it should be noted- but of those 38, 37 were born in Australia, or, sorry, are Australian citizens, and of that 37, 20 were born in Australia.
Again, there are matters to be resolved before the Courts, but that is an indication that we're not simply looking at the possibility of a terrorist event occurring from overseas, but the reality of home grown terrorism is something that the Government needs to address and is addressing through our counter-radicalisation strategies.
PM: Foreign Minister.
SMITH: Thanks Prime Minister. To add to the remarks of the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General, the Prime Minister has outlined the new threats that the White Paper identifies, firstly, the evolution of Al-Qaida and its associates with now threats coming from the Yemen and from Somalia, and also the home grown threats which both the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General have referred to.
As a consequence, what we see in this White Paper for the first occasion is an attempt to mesh much better our domestic and our international strategies. So far as our international strategies are concerned, you'll find detailed in the White Paper the fact that Australia now has 10 to 15, I think the precise number is 14, formal memorandums of understanding with other countries on counter-terrorism. And so the work we do internationally is very significant, and the formal MoUs go beyond what you would regard as Australia's traditional like-minded friends, partners and allies in this area. So our international effort is significant.
So far as the enhanced visa processing arrangements are concerned, we expect the rollout to be in about 10 countries. We're not of course identifying those countries until the actual rollout occurs, but in due course, individually, that will become public. And there may well be a diplomatic effort required in respect of some of those countries as you would expect. Finally, just by way of interest, I think in the Cabinet anteroom some of the visa processing arrangements, the new arrangements, are there for you to inspect. The fingerprinting and the biometrics, the facial imaging and screening for your interest.
Thank you.
PM: In fact, we would like to fingerprint and facially scan all of you afterwards, so if you could just line up-
SMITH: That's the ones we haven't already.
JOURNALIST: Just, as you were eluding before, you know, when it comes down to terrorism, we often think about the usual suspects. You know you mentioned Somalia, Afghanistan and Pakistan. But in your own statement it points out that the 2005 British bombings were done by British nationals. Why, then, would we restrict this rollout of biometric testing to just 10 countries when we're going to be piggybacking off the British system, and then under the British and American system, they test practically everyone?
PM: Can I say one of the reasons we have taken this decision is that we've been again hugely informed by the developments in recent years, but also the developments on December 25 in the United States. And that is, the need for our intelligence agencies to have full access to global databases at every level, on terrorists and terror suspects. The world is a big place. There are other agencies out there who our friends and partners and allies who we need to draw on. It makes sense, therefore, to have complementary systems operating across the world. When it comes to your word, I think, 'piggybacking', we call it cooperation. They draw on us, we draw on them. And we actually have to be part of the global network to make this work. This is a serious business. We've listened very carefully to the presentation by the officials on this. The time for delay on this is well and truly passed. It has to be done, and rolled out. We also do not draw a particular line around the 10 that have been referred to by the Minister. We reserve to ourselves the right to expand this network further. But we are doing so carefully on the advice of the officials in terms of those parts of the world where we believe we have the greatest potential vulnerability.
JOURNALIST: Just on two things, does the money you're using come out of existing budgets, because some of these Departments are already under strain. And secondly, you say that the threat is from Australian born as well as overseas nationals- well the aviation security identity card still doesn't have any kind of biometric data, and people can use, we know that there's identity theft going on there at the moment. So why isn't that being rolled out at our airports?
PM: On the first question concerning the funding of this program, this is a new investment. In relation to the airport security measures that we referred to the other day, these are new investments as well. And this has been a matter of considerable debate within the Government against fiscal pressures on the one hand, but also responding to some very sharp and focussed advice from our agencies, advice which I in part commissioned following the events of December 25 in the United States. There's a bit of a danger that we all get numbed to the terrorist threat. It's a word which is used, and people have become so used to it over the last near decade, that it no longer bites home. December 25 was a near-run thing in the United States. We have taken a lot of advice since then from our agencies, and this is the appropriate response.
As far as airport security is concerned, the measures that we detailed I think a week or so ago with the Transport Minister are robust. I'd draw your attention to his comments then in terms of the card in question, and of course we have further things to do in that respect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on another issue. In 2007 you promised to deliver 260 childcare centres on school grounds. You're actually delivering, I understand, 38 by 2012. What's the problem, and do you concede that that's a broken election promise?
PM: I think on this one I'll defer to the Deputy Prime Minister and the relevant Minister.
JOURNALIST: I asked her yesterday.
PM: I'd like to respond to your question. I think as far as the rollout of support for the childcare industry across the country is concerned, the Government has done a lot. On the specific progress and the implementation of that and how it is being done, and how it dovetails with the use which is being put in some schools for the multipurpose halls for the purpose of after school hours care etcetera, I'm not sure where the final detail of that has landed. But once we are clear on that, we'll certainly come back to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this White Paper's been a long time in the works. Does it tell you anything about the threat of terrorism that you didn't already know? Is there a classified version that hasn't been released?
PM: This is, of course, based on extensive classified discussions of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet. As I said, December 25 was a very focussing event. Yes, the Counter-Terrorism White Paper has been under preparation for a long time, but what December 25 required us to do was to bring it together rapidly against newly emerging data.
You see, two big things now confront us out there.
One is terrorists, al-Qa'ida-related terrorist organisations now have training effectively in other parts of the world. We have had some success in Afghanistan, we've had some success in Pakistan, but the references to Yemen and Somalia are there for a specific purpose. That is why our international efforts are so crucial here.
The second key element of this, which was confronting when we looked at the raw intelligence data, concerned the increasing home-grown threat. This is a statistical conclusion from our agencies based on their intelligence efforts. As I said, Australians have often seen terrorism as something as a risk which they confront when they travel abroad - maybe. Now we are confronted with the reality that home-grown terrorism in Australia is increasing. That is the sober conclusion from our agencies and it was starkly underlined by the heads of our agencies as we prepared this document.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Australians more at risk from dodgy home insulation than they are from a terror attack?
PM: I understand the Liberal Party today is now saying that the home insulation program is a bigger threat to Australia than terrorism and some have argued, in fact, that we should not have proceeded to release this Counter-Terrorism White Paper today. Can I explain to you why I fundamentally disagree with that proposition?
The first is, we now confront significant and continuing threats of terrorism and we have specifically taken advice from our agencies following the events of December 25, which isn't that long ago. Secondly, could I say that when it comes to the introduction of body scanners and the introduction of biometric checks, these have to be put into place as rapidly as possible. That is why we have made these announcements that we have made in the last week or so and again today.
On top of that, can I say that when a document is ready for release on something as fundamental as counter-terrorism, it should be released so the agencies can then be put in a position to give it effect on the ground.
And, finally, can I just say in relation to the comments by the Liberal Party that I seem to recall the Liberal Party's been calling upon us to release the counter-terrorism white paper for a long, long time, so here's the call to Mr Abbott: pull in his Liberal Party spokesman on this subject, let's have a real discussion about counter-terrorism and threats to Australia rather than just engaging in, let's call it a political scare campaign.
There.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why didn't you defend Peter Garrett in parliament yesterday? Why did you leave that to Anthony Albanese?
PM: The censure motion was directed to the Minister. If you've looked at the, I think, dozens of censure motions which have been lodged against the Government by this Opposition in the period that we've been in government, frankly, they've become a bit like a dime-a-dozen, if you want to really know.
I seem to recall when I was Leader of the Opposition you would think very carefully about the occasions upon which you would choose to launch a censure motion against the Government, and then do so. What I seem to encounter in the period that I've faced now four Liberal leaders, three leaders of the Opposition, is they seem to roll thick and fast, about every week or two. As I said, it must be Thursday, it's censure day, so as far as all that's concerned, you would have heard my remarks in complete support of the Minister in parliament last week - my position on that has not changed one bit.
JOURNALIST: Thanks, Prime Minister. Could you just elaborate now on your definition of ministerial responsibility? I mean, it's something that, obviously, vexes ministers, I don't think it's fair, but in the end someone's got to cop the blame when things are stuffed up and this has been stuffed up, but what is your definition now of ministerial responsibility?
PM: I think the proper definition of ministerial responsibility is as follows: one, that a minister, when charged by Cabinet with the implementation of a program has commissioned, through his department, appropriate risk assessment as to what measures should be put in place for the proper implementation of the program; secondly, that the minister then acts appropriately in response to the departmental advice that the minister receives in the implementation of that program.
Against those core measures, I stand by the minister, as I did last week, as I'll do next week.
Can I also say this - in the broader debate of ministerial responsibility, let us look at the daily responsibilities of those who have been minister for aging in the past and at present. The Australian Government funds, primarily, almost exclusively, the aged care system of Australia. On a day-to-day basis, what happens in an aged care institution in terms of the operation of it can produce some awful results, which we've seen over time.
Is the Minister directly responsible for each and every one of those events? Well, it goes back to the more fundamental systemic questions of what risk assessment was undertaken in the design of a policy, and has the minister in question acted responsibly in terms of the departmental advice that was put to him or her in laying out a program? Whether it's the aged care system, whether it's the transport system, whether it's the road system, whether it's the safety and security of our Defence forces at a particular time as well, let's put some context into this debate about what constitutes ministerial responsibility.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you have in your department a senior officer who coordinates and oversees the stimulus program generally. What role did that officer have in regards-
PM: -Sorry, can you just say that again?
JOURNALIST: What role did that officer have in regard to the insulation program, and did you get any reports from the officer on the way through?
PM: You're talking about the Office of the Coordinator General? The Office of the Coordinator General, I believe, was working with the Environment Department throughout the implementation of this process. As I understand it, once Cabinet took decisions to implement the home insulation program, the Department then commissioned its various risk assessment procedures and took its various risk assessment advices. The Coordinator General, from time to time, advised the Cabinet on the implementation of the program. I'm advised that in the Coordinator General's reports over that period of time no safety concerns were raised, I'm so advised.
JOURNALIST: The head of the Environment Department yesterday said the timeframes set by the Government for the roll out of this scheme was a very major ask. Minter Ellison warned that it should be delayed three months. Was the rush involved in getting this program rolling a contributing factor to the problems that we saw?
PM: I think, as I understand it, and I'm advised Minter Ellison recommended a management plan to deal with risk management, and there were, I think, four to five key elements of that, which involved: one, developing a detailed project delivery business model; two, engaging industry leaders in developing guidelines; three, simplifying the business model to reduce time constraints; four, closely monitoring the resourcing and project delivery targets, and; five, using external resources where necessary to reduce time constraints.
I'm advised that their recommendations in all of those areas were taken into account by the Minister.
Can I add to that, specifically, the recommendations which were contained within the Minter Ellison report concerning the safety of the program, and, as I'm advised, on page 5 and 17 of the report in particular, page 5 of the report identifies certain risks concerning the program. To mitigate this, Minter Ellison recommended the effective process for registration of installers. I'm advised this was done with the National Installer Provider Register.
I'm also advised that as a consequence of that, that further to that Minter Ellison recommended that installers be hooked into Australian Standard and that in response to that what the Department did was undertake that with program guidelines requiring adherence to the relevant Australian standard.
Page 17 of the report, the Minter Ellison report, identifies the risk that there would be inability to attract enough people to train to become installers. To mitigate this risk, Minter Ellison recommended to the Department that they develop a process of registration for installers. I'm advised that this was done through the National Installer Provider Register.
I understand that Minter Ellison recommended that they set up monitoring and reporting processes to identify emerging provider stress. I'm advised the Department established a project control group with representatives across government and external risk consultants.
I'm advised that Minter Ellison recommended that we should ensure contract structures provide capacity to monitor and take action on poor-performing providers. I'm advised the Department established a roof inspection program and a process to de-register non-compliant installers in result.
Furthermore, the Minter Ellison report identified the risk that the product does not meet safety standards and how to deal with that particular risk, and to mitigate that Minter Ellison recommended that the Department, quote, 'set product quality guidelines with industry'. In response to that I'm advised the Department conducted a series of roundtables with industry, including a 29 April industry compliance meeting with representation from the ACCC and state authorities.
And furthermore, Minter Ellison recommended setting up a third-party process for dealing with quality exceptions, including rectification by alternate providers as required and the Department, I'm advised, established a roof inspection program overseen by PriceWaterhouseCoopers and a process to de-register non-compliant installers.
The reason I've answered your question in those terms is because it goes to the manner of, well frankly, the implementation of the principles which Mark Riley's question went to, that is, what were the specific recommendations contained within the risk management assessment obtained by the Minister, and what reasonable action did he and his Department take in response to that, hence I've answered in the way in which I've done so.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, risks were identified and action was taken to mitigate them, but ultimately the program had to be abolished because of failure. Is there, where to do you eventually apportion blame?
PM: Look, as far as responsibility for any government program, I, as Prime Minister of the country, am responsible for the good news and the bad news, the implementation of programs effectively, the implementation of programs which have problems. As Prime Minister of the country I take full responsibility to that which goes well and that which doesn't go so well, and that does not exclude the debate concerning this program.
Up the back there. Sorry, I'll take this one up the back.
JOURNALIST: What does that responsibility that you take, ultimately, amount to in terms of-
PM: -It's my responsibility to the Australian people, and we undertook this program, as you know, in a concerted effort to deal with the challenges of the global recession. We implemented it together with a whole range of other stimulus measures against the economic objectives which we set for ourselves. The stimulus strategy has been exceptionally effective and the implementation of elements of this program, there have been real problems and I have said that for quite some days, that we simply need to call a spade a spade and deal with the practical problems which have arisen as a result.
Therefore, the key challenge the Minister has identified is dealing with outstanding problems which the program has encountered and those households which are uncertain, and secondly to get on with the business of designing a rebate scheme for the future which mitigates further against these risks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) quoted extensively a moment ago from the Minter Ellison report. They also gave the Department the so-called risk register which said one option here should be to hold off by three months the roll out. Why didn't the Government accept that independent advice, and given that the whole process, the whole scheme, is now being abolished, do you agree with the Opposition that it was a failure?
PM: On the question of the, I think the risk register that you're referring to, my advice is that from that register, on safety, Minter Ellison concluded that the risks were tolerable, that is there term, quote unquote. Safety concerns relate to installation quality and compliance are described in that relevant part of the report. In the report Minter Ellison describes the effectiveness of mitigation action as, quote, 'adequate', unquote, and indicate that the residual risk value, quote unquote, is 'tolerable', quote unquote. Therefore, I'd suggest that whole document be read carefully in its entirety.
To put my response, then, into the broader context again of Mark Riley's earlier question, did the Minister seek, through his Department, to obtain risk assessment in terms of the implementation of the program? He did so, and the Department did so. Did he and the Department also seek consultation with all other relevant representatives of industry and relevant safety authorities? You've heard the Minister's extensive answer to those questions so far. I believe he did so. Furthermore, in terms of his response to each of those actions, it is quite plain that the Minister and his Department, in response to the concerns which were raised to him about the risk assessment, adopted a reasonable course of action, and on top of that you'll also be aware that from the time the guidelines were introduced as of 1 July of last year they were strengthened on a number of occasions since then.
And I just say this in conclusion: remember, prior to this program coming into being there was no nationally consistent training program for anyone involved in the installation industry - period. There were, generally, a whole series of deficiencies concerning the regulation of this particular industry. What the Minister did was establish, in many cases, the first applicable standards and in the case of other standards improve them over the period of time.
That doesn't detract from the problems which have been encountered. They are real and the Government fully accepts that, but I think we also need to keep this debate in its proper context.
Thank you very much.


The Australian Government today announced further assistance for workers affected by the cancellation of the Home Insulation Program.
The Government's commitment is that each displaced worker will receive either:
- support to retain their current job until the new Renewable Energy Bonus program begins or
- assistance to find alternative jobs or 
- a relevant training place where appropriate employment opportunities are not available.
The $41.2 million Insulation Worker Adjustment package includes:
- A $10 million Insulation Workers Adjustment Fund to help workers and firms through the transition period. It will be allocated on the recommendation of a team of existing local employment coordinators and new dedicated Insulation Employment Coordinators. The Fund will support firms to retain their workforces in work or training activities or to support workers directly.
- $1.5 million for up to 25 dedicated Insulation Employment Coordinators, funded from the Jobs Fund. These new positions will assist displaced insulation workers to find alternative jobs with other employers and other industries. This assistance will complement and draw on existing support provided through local employment coordinators and the resources of the Job Services Australia network. The insulation employment coordinators will have access to the $10m Insulation Workers Adjustment Fund to assist workers transitioning to alternative jobs or training.
- $5 million for 1,000 Structural Adjustment Places to help retrain insulation workers in alternative industries announced today.
- $24.7 million for 6,000 training places already announced to assist insulation workers - 2,000 each from the Apprenticeship Access places; the Language Literacy and Numeracy Program; and the Structural Adjustment Places.
In relation to the 7,000 training places, insulation workers can access these opportunities by contacting their local Job Services Australia provider.
Job Services Australia providers will help retrenched workers identify local training opportunities through TAFE or other Registered Training Organisations based on a comprehensive individual skills assessment. The training under this package will be at no cost to the insulation worker.
Any worker who loses their job will also have immediate access to assistance under the Government's Compact for Retrenched Workers. This means, when a retrenched insulation worker registers with a Job Services Australia provider, they will get immediate access to high level support - through Stream 2 or above.
The package will be funded through an allocation of $11.5 million from the existing Jobs Fund and $29.7 million from the Productivity Places program and other existing training programs.
Retrenched workers should contact 132 850 for more information.


CURTIS:Mr Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
CURTIS: What do you know about these passports? Are they faked? Was it identity fraud?
PM: The Dubai authorities have informed Australian officials about the possible use of Australian passports or forged Australian passports in the recent assassination in Dubai.
Our intelligence and law enforcement agencies are now working through the absolute final detail of this and have been working through the night on this.
This is a matter of the deepest concern to Australia. The Foreign Minister and I spoke about this at length last night in the context of a National Security Committee meeting of the Cabinet.
Can I just say this: if Australian passports are being used or forged by any state - by any state - let alone for the purposes of assassination, this is of the deepest concern to the Australian Government - the deepest concern to the Australian Government - and we are getting to the bottom of this now.
CURTIS: Dubai investigators say it's 99 per cent sure Israel was involved in the assassination. The UK has ordered their Israeli ambassador in for a 'please explain'. Is Australia doing the same?
PM: The Foreign Minister is meeting with the Ambassador of Israel this morning in Canberra.
CURTIS: And what message will he have for him?
PM: We are ascertaining the facts. Can I say in addition to that, as a long standing friend of Israel, I repeat what I said before: any state, any state which uses or forges Australian passports, let alone uses or forges Australian passports for the purposes of assassination, is of the deepest concern to Australia - the deepest concern to Australia - and we will not let the matter rest.
CURTIS: Whether it's Israel or another country, if you say the matter is of the deepest concern, you won't let it rest, what action will you take?
PM: Let us establish the facts first. I am simply being absolutely clear cut that whichever state would use or forge Australian passports, this is not a trifling matter. It is not a minor matter. It is not something you just push to one side. It is of the deepest concern.
That is why the Foreign Minister has called in the Ambassador of Israel this morning. We will establish the facts. We'll be undertaking the same actions in Israel as well. But let us -
CURTIS: Two of the three Australians live in Israel. Does that increase your suspicions that Israel may have been involved?
PM: I think the important thing is that when you have the identities of Australian citizens being used for a purpose which has been the subject of the allegations from the Dubai authorities, this is not just a deep concern, therefore, for the Australian Government. It must therefore be of the deepest concern to any individuals associated with this as well.
Our job is to confirm the facts. There was a lengthy deliberation on this with colleagues in the context of the National Security Committee meeting of the Cabinet last night.
Got to get to the bottom of this, establish the facts, but we will not be silent on this matter. It is a matter of deep concern. It really goes to the integrity and fabric of the use of state documents, which passports are, for other purposes. That's why we will not leave a single stone unturned.
CURTIS: Has the Department of Foreign Affairs made contact with the three Australians, one of whom says he now is worried about it, fears flying again, because he thinks he'll be regarded as an international suspect?
PM: The Foreign Minister I spoke to at length last night and again this morning about this through the department and the other security agencies of the Government will be of course making all the appropriate contacts with the families.
I can't detail each of those conversations, it would be inappropriate, or how those conversations and when all of them will be conducted.
I understand the Foreign Minister will make a fuller statement on these matters a bit later in the morning following his meeting with the Ambassador of Israel.
CURTIS: What then, or what though, can Australia do to help these individuals?
PM: Again, let's establish the facts. When any individual has had their identity stolen, if that is what has occurred here, then we must look at all practical measures to restore the integrity of that person's identity and safe travel documents for the future.
That is why we are concerned not just in terms of the international name of Australia and how it is therefore regarded if there is some implication of Australian complicity in recent assassination attempts by the use or forgery of Australian travel documents - that's the national interest - but the personal interest is very acute and that is for members of the Australian travelling public.
I say again: the security agencies have been working through the night and in deepest liaison with authorities in Dubai to establish all these facts and, as I said, we go to the next stage of confirmation or otherwise this morning when we engage others, including the Israeli Ambassador.
CURTIS: Will the Government be looking at the security of the Australian passport document?
PM: Well, I think the Foreign Minister will go to this in terms of the age of the said documents concerned. I am not fully briefed on the detail of that.
Of course, there have been changes in recent years to the nature of Australian passports. All members of the travelling public will be aware of that.
Let us again establish the facts here. We have prided ourselves so far in having one of the most efficient, effective and secure passport systems in the world and Australian travel documents generally are held in the highest regard.
You see, that's what really worries me as well. It's not just the good name of Australia. It's not just our adherence to the principles of international law. It is also the safety of the Australian travelling public if in any way the credibility of their travel documents is brought into any question.
And to repeat what I said before: that's why, for the Government of Australia, this is a matter of the deepest concern. It is not just one of those little things that happens that you deal with today and it's fixed tomorrow. This is of the deepest concern.
CURTIS: If we can go quickly to domestic policies, you announced a package yesterday to help workers hurt by the axing of the insulation scheme. The Minister is trying to get the new scheme up and running quickly. Is there a danger that fast tracking the replacement home insulation scheme, that with doing that, that it will be botched again?
PM: That's why we have been very, very plain about the fact that we need to get the home renewable energy rebate system right and why the date that's been established for it is by 1 June.
The challenge, the practical challenge we have for Australian working families and the workers affected by this is to deal with this transition.
So, the challenges are two-fold. The change in Government's policy position when we cancelled the home insulation program has hurt workers and it has hurt a number of businesses in the community and the flow-on effects. Therefore our job is to deal with those workers and to support them; and secondly to also provide appropriate assistance to the businesses.
The second challenge is this: to then get on with the business of the design elements of a new rebate scheme which will have proposed operation from 1 June.
Can I say with all the representatives of workers that I have met yesterday and their businesses - they want this replacement scheme.
CURTIS: And will Peter Garrett be in charge of it?
PM: The implementation of the scheme must be done consistent with risk assessment. That is what we have done so far, and I know Minister Garrett has come in for a lot of criticism on this. I've reviewed the risk assessment procedures so far and the Minister, based on departmental advice, has taken appropriate actions.
We must get the design features of the replacement scheme right.
Can I just say this, though: for the workers involved, we, the Australian Government, stood by workers during the course of the global financial crisis to protect tens of thousands of them from losing their jobs. Therefore it is absolutely critical that we continue to stand by those workers and we will do so through the impact which this has had on 6,000 workers. That is our challenge.
But you know something? It's pretty bad when Mr Abbott goes out there and calls for the abolition of this scheme on the one hand, cries crocodile tears about the unemployment that results from it, and then refuses to come in and back a possible replacement scheme.
That is the challenge which I think he has to answer. Otherwise, frankly, it's crocodile tears.
We've stood by workers so far - 200,000-plus across Australia through the Government stimulus strategy. We'll stand by workers again through this. Problems have been created through the change in Government policy. Our job is now to get out there and fix it.
CURTIS: Mr Rudd, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thank you.


HADLEY: Prime Minister, good morning.PM: Good morning Ray.HADLEY: After our light-hearted exchange at the All Stars game-PM: I remember that one.HADLEY: I won't be suggesting, or I won't be- behaving myself, so I-PM: I think you took that as a joke, I certainly did.HADLEY: Yeah, I did, okay.PM: I think everyone around the table did, as well.HADLEY: That's good. The bungled home insulation scheme -PM: Yes mate.HADLEY: We've been talking about this since August of last year. And we finally had some action on Friday. Yesterday you met with some of the people who are in the industry, and you made a pledge to give them another $40 million on top of the $1.4 million we've already given the industry. Billion, that is.PM: Firstly, can I just say that in terms of coming on your program, part of the reason I've done so is that you raised this stuff pretty early on. So, I'm just acknowledging that as a fact. And my office tell me that you've been discussing this on air for quite some time. So it's important therefore that I respond to the concerns which you've been talking to your listeners about for quite a period of time.Your question goes to help for the industry itself.Let's just face some facts here- the overwhelming majority of the workers and the firms out there are good. They're doing the right thing. Therefore, how do we balance the two big challenges we've got now? One, which is safety for households, because of the limited number of shonks out there. And secondly, the implications for businesses who are good businesses and workers who are good workers.So what we've had to do is cancel this program, work on the design features of a replacement energy rebate scheme, renewable energy rebate scheme to start on 1 June, and in the meantime, help good firms, decent firms, honest workers, honest firms on the way through to the transition. That's what we're doing. It's not easy. I fully accept that. There've been a whole lot of problems with this. I recognise that. But we've just go to deal with them and take responsibility for them.HADLEY: Do you accept that what Lindsay Tanner, your Finance Minister said to David Speers on Sky News before you curtailed the scheme- that you didn't have time to dot the i's and cross the t's- may have been responsible for the shonks getting a rails run, so to speak?PM: You know something Ray, I reckon there are shonks in every business out there. And the real problem that we've got, as any Government has, and frankly, any business has, is looking after the honest suppliers, the honest businesses, the honest workers and trying to deal with this margin of fly-by-nighters at the edge. That's our concern. In terms of the risk management processes put in by the Minister, he acted on the basis of the advice his officials gave him.But that doesn't exonerate us, or me, from the problems which have occurred. Our job now is to roll up our sleeves and fix it - for workers, for businesses, and also for households who have real concerns. I understand that. But also, frankly, the full weight of the law to come down on those who have done the wrong thing out there as well.HADLEY: Given that Minter Ellison told the Department in April of last year that there were some rather significant flaws and problems with this, how does the system work that the Director General of the Department doesn't involve the Minister about some really prominent concerns about what's going to happen with this if it's implemented. Why doesn't she tell the Minister, "look, hang on a sec, you should read this"?PM: Well, let's go to the Minter Ellison report, given you've raised it. And you're right to say it raised concerns about how the scheme should be implemented. And that was in April of last year, the scheme didn't fully come into operation I think until July last year.So what do they actually have to say? Go to page five of the report, it says, by way of recommendation, effective process for the registration of installers, that's what you got to do. What was done was that a national installer provider register was launched on 29 June 2009. That didn't exist before.The second thing Minter said was installers should be hooked in to the Australian building standards. This was done by the Department when the program guidelines required adherence to the relevant Australian building standard for insulation of dwellings. That's the second thing they did. And I'll just finish two others and then, fire away.The other thing they said was there may be an inability to attract enough people to train to become installers, and what it recommended was this: develop a process for registering installers. I just talked about that. Set up the monitoring, reporting process to identify emerging provider stress, and what the Department then did was establish a project control group with representatives from right across Government, and external risk consultants to do that.And then on top of that, what they said was that there needed to be- that they had to deal with the risk of the product itself not meeting safety standards, and that's why the Department conducted a series of meetings with industry, including on 29 April last year, at a compliance meeting with the representation of all the relevant State authorities, and the Department established a roof inspection program overseen by PriceWaterhouseCoopers.So on each of the things raised by Minter Ellison, there is action taken by the Minister, based on the advice of his Department.But you know something Ray, problems have happened out there. And they are substantial. I don't walk away from that, my responsibility - my responsibility -HADLEY: Well there are four deaths Prime Minister. I mean, there are three young men that have been electrocuted and one that was baked in the roof in western Sydney.PM: On the deaths that are concerned, these are horrible tragedies for the families concerned. Absolutely horrible. As are any industrial deaths.In this industry, that's the insulation industry, what I'm told is that in any given year, say 2008, prior to this scheme of ours coming into operation in 2009, there are about 50-75,000 insulation refits done right across Australia.What happened in 2008 I'm told is that we had about 83 fire-related incidents related to insulation material. That's before this program came in. When our program was introduced, obviously the number of insulations increased rapidly. The number done in the last 12 months or so is over a million. And we've had something like 87 fire-related incidents.Now, it doesn't excuse any one of them. Okay, I'm not making excuses.HADLEY: Fire brigades are saying closer to 200 by the way, than what the Minister was saying.PM: Yeah sure, I'm just operating on the data that I've got. And I don't doubt what the fireys, the integrity of what the fireys say and conclude and we'll sort our way through the figures.But what I'm saying is, historically, there are problems here. There were deaths in this industry beforehand as well. It was a pretty unregulated industry. And as far as the individual tragic deaths that you've mentioned are concerned, we've got coronial inquiries underway by WorkCover, the relevant safety authorities in Queensland - let's establish all the facts in each case.HADLEY: Okay, you mentioned Minter Ellison and the more positive aspects of their report. You didn't mention the fact that they had a risk analysis looked at, and they asked the Department to put it on hold for three months because of what they called at the end of the report, 'extreme risks'.PM: Well I think - I don't actually have the draft report with me here Ray, but let - I think there are about four sections of it from memory.HADLEY: Yeah, this is the last one that the Minister didn't see until earlier this week -PM: Sure.HADLEY: Where they clearly said, Minter Ellison clearly said the home insulation scheme should be delayed for three months until about September, because we are concerned about the type of people in the industry, my words not theirs, and the possibility of the risk of harming installers and maybe even death.PM: Well, on the individual elements of that risk assessment document, there are about four sections which dealt with risk. The three that I'm familiar with in detail go to elements of identified risk, and then it goes on to how do you actually manage that risk, and Minter Ellison, also their assessment of the effectiveness of the proposed risk management strategy by the Department.And in each of those cases that I've seen, what they said was the proposed risk management strategy was effective. Now, that doesn't meant that this was done perfectly. It was not. I'm not pretending that it was.But I've had a close look at what the Minister has done in response to the advice from his Department, and what he sought to do each step of the way was: one, what's the risk assessment here; two, what's the Department's advice to meeting the risks in the industry, bearing in mind that historically this industry has had fires, has had deaths, has been unregulated.And for the first time the Minister in response to the advice tried to bring in first of all OH&amp;S standards right across the system, secondly the first nationally accredited training program when there wasn't one before. Doesn't exonerate us of stuff that's gone wrong, you're absolutely right Ray. But you asked me how did the Minister respond to these things, that's what happened.HADLEY: Okay, you had a conversation with representatives of the industry yesterday. If you bear with me, I just want to play you an interview I conducted with one of those people, do you remember meeting a girl named Jo Doran yesterday afternoon?PM: Yeah, I think she's from Grafton, am I right?HADLEY: She is. Just listen to what she had to say to me on Monday. We're talking to the Prime Minister.INSTALLER: I'm an installer. We've got a fairly large company on the northern New South Wales. We put off 160 guys on Friday afternoon.HADLEY: How long have you been going, Jo?INSTALLER: Mate, 17 years with my husband and myself.HADLEY: How many did you employ this time last year?INSTALLER: This time last year we put on 12 guys and built it up again from there.HADLEY: But hang on, let's go back two years ago, before the rebates. How many people did your company employ?INSTALLER: Just my husband and I.HADLEY: How many jobs have you done?INSTALLER: We've done just on 20,000 jobs.HADLEY: I'm only a broken down choirboy, not a mathematician- 20,000 times 1,000, put three noughts on that, one, two, three, that's $20 million. Times 400, that's $28 million.INSTALLER: That was a guestimation.HADLEY: Hang on a sec, Jo -INSTALLER: I've done -HADLEY: If you've done $28 million in 12 months you're travelling pretty well.INSTALLER: - made so far. I'm on to Mr Hadley.HADLEY: Jo, if you don't know, I'd much prefer you didn't say, because you've just made a complete and utter fiasco of our conversation.Prime Minister, see, my concern is, you met in good faith with that lady yesterday -PM: Yeah, yeah.HADLEY: - who's just off the top of her head on Monday told me her company had earned $28 million and went from two people- she doesn't own the company, the company's owned by a bloke in Grafton called Shane Cutting, we're broadcasting into the northern rivers at the moment -PM: Sure.HADLEY: - people are inundating me with emails saying that this is a telemarketing firm. They haven't been in business for 17 and a half years. They in fact are one of the reasons that you've pulled the pin on it. And there you are yesterday, inadvertently meeting with someone, who perhaps their company causes a lot of the problems. And now, they're getting their noses back in the trough, having - according to them - earned $28 million in 12 months from your system, and now they want compensation for workers, who aren't workers by the way, they're all subbies, who've got ABNs, their own trucks. I mean, see, this is where the rort gets perpetuated and keeps growing.PM: That's why we've got to deal with each business on a case by case basis, Ray.HADLEY: So they won't just be writing a letter and saying 'give us the money'?PM: Oh, for goodness sake, no. I mean the key thing is just to deal -HADLEY: Well, that's what's been happening Prime Minister -PM: No, no, no-HADLEY: Please don't be surprised, that's what's been happening for 12 months. They've been sending invoices in, some of them $48,000 a day. And we've been writing cheques and sending the money to them. Our money. My money. Your money. The Government's money. Borrowed money. We've been giving $1.4 billion away. We now know that 255,000 homes haven't been properly insulated. The poor buggers that don't have insulation now have to pay out of their own kit to get the insulation put in that Peter Garrett wanted put in in the first place to give them some sort of relief from the heat and the cold.PM: Well, my response to that Ray is simply to say again that I'm the bloke in charge, and I take responsibility for what's gone right and what's gone wrong here.The second thing I'd just say though is there's more than a million homes that have been insulated out there, the vast majority of them are fine. And also, the reason we did this was to get out there and support workers at the time - and the economy at a time when the place was going through the floor 12 months ago.And because of the Government's national economic stimulus strategy, we protected about 200,000-plus jobs in the economy. 6,000 jobs are now at risk because of the cancellation of this program. My job as Prime Minister is to get out there and fix the problems which have arisen, both for businesses, both for workers, and also for households. Now on businesses, you're right. There are shonks out there. I'm not pointing the finger at any particular firm -HADLEY: I just want to make sure they don't keep going back to the trough, that's all.PM: No, mate, you're absolutely right. That's why there's not simply a haul up the white flag here and here's a cheque. Each one of these has to be dealt with legitimately -HADLEY: Okay, I know you've -PM: I spoke with the heads, I think, four or five companies. Jo Doran was one of them. They in turn had a long session with Mark Arbib, the Minister, afterwards. My job -HADLEY: I hope Mark's listening to that tape today.PM: Yeah.HADLEY: And he understands that there will be people knocking on his door saying look, we're in all sorts of strife, when in fact they're not in strife, they've earned more money in a year than many other people have earned in their lifetime. Or 10 lifetimes.PM: Well our job, you know, Ray, is to sort it out case by case, firm by firm, and worker by worker. Look, throughout the global financial crisis, we stood up for workers and jobs across the economy, because if you look around the rest of the world, unemployment rates went through the roof. We kept it under control here. We implemented a huge stimulus strategy to do that. And problems have arisen with this particular program. I accept that. My job is to get out there and make sure that it's fixed.HADLEY: I know you're pressed for time, two other issues.PM: No, you keep going mate, that's fine.HADLEY: Okay, we had the 15th boat to arrive this year overnight. The 83rd boat full of illegal immigrants since August 2008. 83. Will you concede, in light of your White Paper on Terrorism, because some of these people are coming from areas where terrorism is rife - will you concede your border protection policy has failed, when you replaced the Pacific Solution with what you thought would work?PM: Can I just say in response to that Ray that, you know, in terms of boat arrivals in the last period that you've just talked about, we've had this civil war in Sri Lanka, which has just pushed a whole lot of people not just out to Australia, but all over the world. It's been a massive civil war.The second thing is, the numbers that you've just mentioned, you know, there were years in the period of the Howard Government when the numbers of people arriving here by boat and the numbers of boats were much, much larger. You know why? It comes and goes with what's happening in the security environment in our wider region.So Mr Howard had a whole set of measures put in place. Some of them worked. Others of them didn't. We have a series of measures in place, but you know something, the key thing is to make sure we've got all the resources out there for our people as cops on the beat, out there on the high seas each day trying to do a job.And the pressures come and go, depending on what's happening in the wider security environment.HADLEY: Now, Prime Minister, you've said this a number of times about the push factors. The figures from the United Nations show asylum applications rose globally by only five per cent in the nine months to September last year, while here, in Australia, applications from illegal immigrants rose by more than 25 per cent. We are over-represented compared to the rest of the world, so it's not a push factor across the world, it's a push factor here because John Howard had to deal with what you're currently dealing with and he came up with a thing that you find unpalatable, and many people do, called the Pacific Solution, but the problem for you is he stopped it. You started it again and now we've got the 83rd boat.Goodness knows what it's costing you and us for Christmas Island and many of the people coming here from Sri Lanka will obviously make a wonderful contribution, as others have made, but how do we know that some of the Tamil terrorists aren't among all those people, who've created havoc in their homeland?PM: Well, let me just answer the three bits of the question you've raised. One's about the Pacific Solution. Here's a fact for you - how many people on the Pacific Solution ended up in Australia anyway?HADLEY: Oh, probably-PM: - 60 per cent, that's under Mr Howard, 60 per cent of them.HADLEY: A majority of them.PM: Hang on, let's just get some facts here. 60 per cent of them ended up in Australia as Australian citizens. So the Pacific Solution may sound like a good term for those on that side of politics -HADLEY: - But it stopped them coming.PM: Hang on - 60 per cent of those who came under the Pacific Solution ended up here.HADLEY: 60 per cent of 100 is a lot less than 60 per cent of 1,000.PM: Well, you know something, the other part of our policy is that when we find that a person's not a bona fide refugee, they get sent packing back home.HADLEY: And how many have we sent back?PM: Hundreds and hundreds. I saw some figures on this the other day -HADLEY: - Hundreds? From where?PM: Absolutely, from Sri Lanka and from other countries. I'll send you the figures in terms of where.HADLEY: Hundreds?PM: Hundreds have been sent back home. You talk about -HADLEY: - Since when?PM: Hang on, you just talked about the cost of Christmas Island -HADLEY: - No, hang on, since when have hundreds been sent home?PM: In the period that the Government's been in.HADLEY: Hundreds? Are these people, not boat people, you're talking about people that arrived through normal ports and things like that?PM: I'll get you the breakdowns -HADLEY: - I think you're talking about people who arrive on commercial flights and things like that, but if you're talking about Christmas Island, I think the number is fewer than 10.PM: I think you'll find that we have sent, as I said, hundreds back home, but I'll get you the breakdown of the figures of where. I just don't have those in front of me and I don't want to mislead you.HADLEY: OK, that's fine, but in other words -PM: - But on Christmas Island, you asked a question before about the cost of Christmas Island. Mr Howard built Christmas Island, spent $400 million worth of taxpayer's money at the very time when he and others were saying the Pacific Solution was fine and dandy. Because Mr Howard and his advisers and the immigration department knew that in the future more pressures would arrive from around the world. It comes and it goes, so it brings me to your last point about figures.I really disagree with your figures. You know what happened in the early 2000s, after the so-called Tampa? You found, right around the world, that the overall applications for asylum from Afghanistan and from other countries like that and from Iraq and from Iran, they all went down because security circumstances stabilised for a while.Then, secondly, what happened, has happened in the last couple of years because of problems of security in Afghanistan, problems of security again in Iraq and problems of security because of the civil war in Sri Lanka, they've all gone up.So countries around the world have to deal with these surges which come and go. Our job is this: you sort out who are the bona fide asylum seekers. That's what the previous government sought to do. Secondly, those who are not, you send them back home. And thirdly, you make sure your border protection authorities and your security authorities have got all the resources they need to do their job, and we've been doing that as well.HADLEY: Okay, we'll talk about the figures a bit later when I get them off the website here. But to the other major election promise that you can up with in relation to health. Now, I'm a resident of New South Wales, you're a resident of Queensland in normal circumstances. I spent some time on the Gold Coast -PM: - I reside in all three these days, mate. Home in Queensland, sometimes in Sydney and sometimes here, so -HADLEY: - You're a proud Queenslander, which is what I'm trying to say.PM: Yes, mate, I back the Maroons.HADLEY: Exactly. Now, I don't know as much about your health care system in Queensland as I know about it here. It's a basket case. Your Labor Government that's been here for 15 years and fronts an election next year has single-handedly almost dismantled our health system in New South Wales. From what I hear from my colleagues in Queensland, they're not much better, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia.You said to the electorate, and to a certain extent I think a lot of people voted for your Government on the basis that they thought 'here's a bloke that's going to take this basket-case state-territory health system and put it under the federal umbrella. They fund it anyway, so let's get some action.' We're still waiting. We're still waiting for something to be done as the ambulance queues grow and grow and grow and grow.PM: You know something, Ray? Your analysis of the problems of the system right across the country, they're not far wide of the mark. And it's, the causes for that, they are manyfold, part of which is laid with what state governments have done. Part of it's been, frankly, the withdrawal of federal funding over many, many years as well. I'll come back to that in a minute.Secondly, you say about what I said to the people before the election, which is the buck stops with me. And you know something, Ray, I don't back away from that one moment.Why we have taken longer with this than I would have liked to actually get it right is because it's really big and complex. That is, we've got across Australia today, 115 million people, or 115 million visits to GPs each year, you've got something like 49 million hospital services being provided across our 748 public hospitals in our country. This is a huge system. I'm taking a bit of time to make sure that we get it as right as we can, and let me tell you we will not back away from this one for one minute.But can I just add one point, mate? Part of this is funding the system for the future. When you say we already fund most of it, well, actually, with the hospitals, we don't. The bottom line is this: you've got to make sure you've got secure funding for the future because you've got an ageing population. If you roll the clock out a couple of decades we're going to be spending seven times more on people over the age of 65 than we do today. It's because we're all getting older, and as the population grows as well.State governments and their financial resources, frankly, are stretched to the limit. When Mr Abbott was Health Minister for four years, what was his response? He ripped out $1 billion from the public hospital system, put a freeze on GP training places and did nothing about the shortfall of 6,000 nurses. That's what I've inherited.HADLEY: Prime Minister, he's long gone. You've been there for nearly three years. He's long gone.PM: But Ray, you can't just let him off the hook for that, mate. Four years as Health Minister -HADLEY: You were the one that said that you were going to solve the problem, not him. If you -PM: - But he's now offering an alternative solution, Ray. I think it's fair to -HADLEY: - But hang on, I'm not worried about him. You're the one who said, you say he buggered it up. I accept that. I'm not going to question that. I'm asking you, as the Prime Minister, who in opposition promised me and the rest of the country you'd fix it. We're still sitting here waiting for you to fix it, because it's still as bad now as it was when you said you'd fix it.PM: Well, let me answer that in two ways. First is this: I don't walk away from what I said before the election, which is the buck stops with me. I will not walk away from that. That's my responsibility, that's my job and I've just explained why we're taking a bit longer to try and get it right, because it is so complex.The second thing is this: when you say nothing's happened, can I just say that when it comes to the overall investment in the hospital system, I said before Mr Abbott had taken a billion dollars out, what we have done is increase investment in the public hospitals in our first two years in office alone by 50 per cent.For the first time the Australian Government is investing direct money, three quarters of a billion dollars, into elective surgery, or in accident and emergency, $600 million into elective surgery, and do you know what we're doing? Making it possible for 60,000 more people to have elective surgery procedures which would not otherwise be the case.We have increased the GP training places already by 35 per cent, we're increasing the number of nurses by a large factor as well, and we're investing for the first time in the capital needs, that's the building needs, of the hospital system itself, for example, out at the Nepean Hospital.Now, this is the beginning. That's what we've been doing in two years, and we will have -HADLEY: - When will you take over?PM: We've first of all got to finalise our plans, get it out there, we want to get it right, but we are making sure that we have it absolutely right and signed and sealed on the detail before we put it out there. But you're right to be frustrated about the time -HADLEY: - Will you do it before, if you're returned this year as Prime Minister, will your Government do it before the next election? Not this one, the after it? It's a bit like Kristina Keneally and railways at the moment. I'm asking what will happen in three years, I guess, or three and a half years, but can you give us some sort of guarantee that as we go into this election, before the one after this one, if you're still Prime Minister, that you will actually do something about what you said you'd do six years before you actually do it?PM: Let me be absolutely blunt about this, Ray. One, we're going to put our plan to the states and territories as we've said, within the period ahead, not too much longer. Secondly, they will accept it or reject it, and if they reject it -HADLEY: -I f they've got any brains they'll accept it, given what they've done to it.PM: Well, you know, sometimes, mate, I scratch my head, but we'll come back to that later.HADLEY: I'll bet you do about this state.PM: Well, I'll come back to that later.HADLEY: I can see your frustration from time to time. Anyway, by the way, just back to the immigration -PM: - No, no just to finish it, though, to answer your question, if they reject it, as I've said very clearly, we would then go to the people for a mandate in terms of what we would do with 100 per cent takeover of the funding responsibility of the system. I've been very plain about that. That's what we're doing, and people will know in absolute black and white what our future plan would be.I understand the frustration about the delay. We said we'd do this from the middle of last year on. That is, get a plan out to the states, get their response and then make the decisions on it.There's been a delay because we wanted to consult hospitals right across the country. The Health Minister and I have been out there visiting 101 hospitals ourselves over the last six months to test the recommendations of the Reform Commission's recommendations with them to make sure it works on the ground.So it's frustrating that we haven't been able to get this finished earlier. I accept that, take the criticism for it. I'm determined to get it as right as possible, mate, for the future, because it's not just next year, it's the year after, it's the rest of the decade and beyond, because if we do not fix the system, it will break.HADLEY: You better go back to Chris Evans, I've just checked the figures I have in front of me - 14, one four, people have been sent back to their place of origin from Christmas Island.PM: What I've got here, which has just been handed to me, 141 unauthorised boat arrivals sent home since election. There you go. That's what I've been given. That's what you've got. So there you go. We'll sort it out between us later on.HADLEY: There's a difference of 120-odd there, OK.PM: No, that's fine, but I'm saying, you know, we'll sort it out between us.HADLEY: OK, now, one final thing in relation to -PM: - What did you think of the game the other night, by the way?HADLEY: Allstars? Wonderful game, wonderful game, and a great celebration.PM: I thought it was terrific.HADLEY: And in the end won by the better team.Mad cow disease - sort of snuck up on us. We've been preoccupied with other things. Beef products from countries once affected by mad cow disease, people are writing to me and saying 'look, I was in the UK at the time of mad cow disease in '96, I can't give blood, so if I can't give blood, how come we're importing beef to be processed and maybe put in our meat pies that we don't know about because if it's baked here and made here with beef that's imported from one of those countries they don't need to say anything other than made in Australia.' Are you giving some sort of guarantee that beef will be safe to eat in every sense once it's started to be imported from Monday?PM: Let me go through the advice we got from the people who run the system here.The Chief Medical Officer, I'm just quoting him here: "People can now identify how to contain it and so it now brings Australia into line with countries such as the US, Canada and New Zealand, who assess each country on a case-by-case basis."Red Cross: "The recent Federal Government decision to allow meat to be imported from the UK is not expected to impact on the Australian blood supply."Food Standards Australia, they say, Food Standards chief executive Steve McCutcheon insisted: "Consumers could be 100 per cent certain that all imported beef would be BSE-free."Red Meat Advisory Council, from The Land newspaper, says: "What is clear regarding the new policy is the risk of Australia importing BSE-infected products remains negligible."Australian Lot Feeders Association said: "There is unequivocal science which supports a change to the current policy."The Cattle Council of Australia says: "The Cattle Council of Australia reassures consumers and cattle producers that change to BSE import rules will not affect the food safety status of beef in Australia."And, finally, because you're from the great state of New South Wales, the New South Wales Farmers Association chair, not normally a huge backer of Government policy, mate, out there, says: "As a nation, we have strongly supported international trading rules being science based, particularly when arguing for greater beef access into regions such as the EU and South East Asia and the previous, zero-risk policy made it difficult to justify our stance when BSE science has progressed significantly since the policy was implemented in 2001."HADLEY: I think the answer is yes, that we'll be safe. I think that's what you're saying.PM: That's, mate, my job as Prime Minister, as not an expert in the beef industry, even though I grew up on a farm where we had beef and dairy, is to look at the advice from the health experts, look at the advice from the food industry experts, the food safety experts, and for the Minister to act appropriately.That's the advice that I've just read to you.HADLEY: Okay, one final thing -PM: Mate, that was supposed to be the last one.HADLEY: No, controversy surrounding Belinda Neal, who has lied to parliament on one occasion when she made comments about Sophie Mirabella, then denied she made the comments. She should have been sacked then. Will you be endorsing her as the candidate for the central coast seat of Robertson in the forthcoming federal election?PM: Well, I think Belinda has worked hard in the local area, but ultimately, Ray, that's a decision for her local preselectors and what happens up there.HADLEY: So you won't be intervening?PM: Mate, there's a stack of preselections around the country. People should have their say and that's the case as far as this one's concerned as well.HADLEY: Prime Minister, thanks for your time.PM: Thanks, Ray. Let's talk again.


O'BRIEN: And I'm now joined by the Prime Minister, in our Sydney office. Kevin Rudd, you've just seen that story. Reputable business, seven laid off yesterday, seven laid off today, company facing bankruptcy. How quickly are you going to get this money out to a firm like that?
PM: Well we've taken action to establish this insulation workers' assistance fund. And, as of next week, we'll begin assessing those firms which will qualify for assistance in terms of their employees. You see, with companies like that, Kerry, based on the nature of the report just done then by Heather Ewart, obviously there are many, many in the vast majority of the installers are good companies doing an honest day's work.
O'BRIEN: But there's-
PM: What's our challenge? It's to sift out those who have evidence of a pattern of wrong insulation, thereby creating a security- a safety problem.
O'BRIEN: But right at this moment, seven workers- just in that one business- seven workers out of work yesterday, seven workers out of work today. As of now, what's their income while they wait for your bureaucracy, which now has to have a question mark over it to some degree after what's happened, gets this latest program rolling, starts to get this 41 million out?
PM: Well, what we announced yesterday, Kerry, was three sets of measures. The first, of course, dealt with providing support for employers, and employees, where they are still operating within the business. The second relates to the support we can give through the job services network to find alternative employment. And the third of course, lies in providing training places - interim or long-term - to assist people into longer term permanent jobs.
Can I just add one other point?
O'BRIEN: Hang on, hang on.
PM: No, I need to add one other point. Remember, the home insulate program was also a finite program. That is, it was designed as part of the stimulus strategy to conclude at a fixed point. The industry knows that-
O'BRIEN: Yeah, but that was another- that was another 14 months away. This has come to a very abrupt halt.
PM: That is correct, but I'm saying, even prior to this, the Employment Minster, for example, Mark Arbib, had in place a range of transitional training programs to take these workers from where they are now, into a new set of skills and on to long term unemployment.
O'BRIEN: That is a lot of collateral damage because of a botched Government scheme.
PM: Well, let's not try and sugar-coat this, Kerry, and I don't begin to for one minute. This program has created real problems on the ground. It has resulted in a lot of difficulty for a lot of people. As Prime Minister of the country I accept responsibility for that. My job now is to fix it up.
O'BRIEN: Okay. You said on Sydney radio this morning that the Environment Department hadn't implemented the program perfectly, something of an understatement I would have thought. Where exactly did the Department go wrong, in your view?
PM: Well, what we've had is a- well, let's put it into its context. What Minister Garrett did was establish standards for the industry which didn't exist before at all. This is the home insulation industry. And that is, one, for the training of workers, two, for the first time, the national application of occupational health and safety standards for the industry, and three, a quality standard, under the building code, for the use of this insulation product-
O'BRIEN: Now, I'm going to have to stop you there because-
PM: They are the standards.
O'BRIEN: I understand that, because Peter Garrett has been explaining this for two weeks now. You've been explaining it for several days. You went on Sydney radio today, it was all over the radio, it was in the newspapers this morning, it was in the Parliament today. We've heard that. What went wrong?
PM: Well plainly, what has gone wrong is that those who were rorting the system, those who were shonky operators, were not picked up by the compliance mechanisms which were established.
O'BRIEN: So-.
PM: That's the problem.
O'BRIEN: What went wrong that the Department's compliance mechanisms did not work?
PM: Well plainly, in the case of those installations where we've had a safety concern arise as a result, we see evidence plainly of the system not having worked as it needed to.
O'BRIEN: Yes.
PM: As I've said before-
O'BRIEN: But what went wrong, where did it go wrong?
PM: Well, compliance means that you have a compliance system within it which provides quality control and assessment of the installations which go into each home. The compliance-
O'BRIEN: Yes, I understand-I understand what the compliance is, I'm saying what went wrong with the compliance system? How did it fail?
PM: Well, it failed because it didn't pick up a pattern of, shall I say, wrong installation, or badly done installation, by a certain number of firms. That is what went wrong. The Minister had established a series of risk management strategies across the program, mindful of the advice which had come forward from the risk assessors originally, but plainly the point-
O'BRIEN: Okay, but it failed.
PM: Yeah but look, I'm just saying to you loud and clear, Kerry, this- there's no point sugar-coating it one bit- this program has produced real problems for people, both workers and the companies and for households. There's no point beating around the bush about it. Accept responsibility for it and get on and fix it.
O'BRIEN: Okay, there were very clear, and I'm- what I'm getting to, really, is- who will take responsibility? It's not enough, I suggest to you, to say the buck stops with you. That's a kind of Peter Beattie strategy- "something's wrong, I'm going to fix it, sorry about that". But who will take real responsibility for this failure? There were very clear early warning signs to your Environment Department from various authoritative resources very early. From industry, from various State and Territory agencies. Quite bleak warnings, months before your program was rolled out.
Despite all the steps your Department of Environment says it took and that Peter Garrett accepted as a result of those warnings, we now know that the very things warned against happened. There've been house fires, there've been deaths, there've been untold shoddy and unsafe installations. You've now been forced to collapse the scheme. Now, what is that, if it is not a fundamental corruption- incompetence, sorry, a fundamental incompetence by your Department?
PM: Well, as I said before, the compliance systems have not worked, and the Department of the Environment is responsible for ensuring that those compliance systems worked across the board. Now plainly there is a major problem there. You said before-
O'BRIEN: So is your Department incompetent in the way this has been done?
PM: Let me just answer the other part of your question and your premise, which I dispute.
You said that, quote, "taking responsibility as the Head of Government doesn't mean anything". I just completely disagree with that. I think- I think you're wrong.
O'BRIEN: Well, it doesn't mean anything if it's just a form of words.
PM: Well, it's not because what has happened in the period in which the problems alive in this program- and there are many that we've got to deal with- that means that I, as Prime Minister, have to step up to the plate, and put in place the systems and the personnel to make sure we deal with the problems for workers, and that's what we announced yesterday, the problems for businesses who are in transition to the scheme we proposed to bring on from 1 June, and thirdly for households as well. They are the three concrete areas of work. If you say that's a form of words, I actually just don't agree with you, because on the ground my job is to make sure that those practical problems which are now being experienced by people are met. And that's the responsibility.
O'BRIEN: But how do you get the message back to the people who were responsible for the implementation of this program, including your Minister, that this has been a massive failure. That this has been a fundamental collapse in public trust of your Government's policy in this regard? Another early warning came, as you now know, from a risk assessment report commissioned by the Department of Environment from Sydney law firm Minter Ellison. 
There's a powerful irony to be found in their risk register.
That is this five page chart, which on page two gives an assessment of political risks. They found that it was an extreme risk politically, quite apart from all the other risks they identified. It was an extreme risk politically, the said. In fact, they recommended, quote, "close engagement with Minister, Minister's office, Prime Minister and Cabinet, Coordinator General". Here's the irony- your Minister only saw this document for the first time this week. This week. Extreme political risk, apart from all the other risks. How do you feel about that?
PM: Why don't you hand me the document?
O'BRIEN: Yeah.
PM: Because I think it would be useful to look at what it has to say. Because one of the things that are contained within the document, in the period that I have looked at it, also goes to the question of how you deal with some of the safety concerns which have been raised. Installation quality and compliance is one. There are about two or three others which go to the safety of the program. And what the document demonstrates, as I have read it, is that the strategies put forward at that time were judged by Minter Ellison to be capable of managing the risk. That is-
O'BRIEN: And that was presented to the Government on April 9 and on April 29, your Environment Department had a phone hook-up, as you're well aware now, with all of the State and Territory agencies that would have been involved, in part at least, in oversight of how this program was to be implemented in terms of things like quality control and health and safety requirements.
The very clear message that came from those State and Territory agencies was, it doesn't matter how perfect your regulations are going to look on paper, we simply do not have the wherewithal, the manpower, the expertise to deliver on this. Because it is such a massive program, and you are trying to do this too quickly.
PM: What I would say in response to that, Kerry, is that the Minter Ellison report which you've just handed to me has about three specific sections which go to the question of safety and of quality control, and the proper training of workers. And in hose three sections of the report, which you've actually just skipped over in what you've just said- the conclusion by Minter Ellison was that the strategies put in place by the Minister were either effective or capable of tolerably managing the risk.
O'BRIEN: But Mr Rudd, you're ignoring the fact that this was on April 9, but on April 29, the people who would have been charged around this country via the States with the supervision of the regulations and the processes and the procedures, were yelling loud and clear that the risks were huge and that the regulations could not be enforced. That was after you got this reassurance.
PM: From the period when this report was delivered, which as you said was in April, and when the guidelines for the program were introduced at the end of June and early July, the Minister, I'm advised, received not just input from risk assessment documents, risk assessment meetings involving not just Minter Ellisons, but a whole range of other people, and the Department in response to that put together the guidelines for the program. Now-
O'BRIEN: But the bottom line Mr Rudd, is that those State agencies in that phone hook-up and the warnings they gave were right. That is what's happened.
PM: Well, let me-
O'BRIEN: Their warnings came true.
PM: Well let me- without going to the detail of that hook up, and you said I'm familiar with it- in terms of detail of it, I am not. What I am aware of, having gone through this particular document, is the contents of what was available if to the Department through the Minter Ellison report. But let me step back from it all. You said this has all been gone through too quickly. The bottom line is, what the Government was seeking to do was to respond to the global financial crisis. What we could do.-
O'BRIEN: We understand that.
PM: I know. Let me finish my sentence. Which is, we could use that as some sort of an excuse for having got things wrong. I don't intend to do so. I intend to accept responsibility for what's gone wrong her - and a fair bit has- and therefore, to take responsibility for fixing it up, for workers, for firms, and also for households who are concerned.
O'BRIEN: What have you learned from this? What has Peter Garrett learned from this?
PM: I think- I'm disappointed in myself for not asking more questions. In the pace of events last year, it's easy in hindsight to say we should have asked more questions, but we didn't have time. But I accept responsibility for that. I'd say on top of it, though, that the big challenge we've got now is to deal with the practical problems of the type just referred to in the program you mentioned. I take seriously the seven jobs just referred to.
O'BRIEN: Fourteen.
PM: The seven jobs that were referred just now as being dismissed today, and I think seven yesterday.
O'BRIEN: That's right.
PM: I don't seek to lighten the content of the program put together by Heather Ewart at all. I take each of that seriously. Why did we step up to the plate with our response to the global financial crisis with programs across the country? Because we didn't want the economy to collapse. Plainly, this particular program has been implemented ineffectively, and you've got problems. Our job now is to step up to the plate. With workers losing their jobs, our job, through the overall stimulus strategy, was to protect hundreds of thousands of jobs while their being lost worldwide.
O'BRIEN: But very-
PM: In this industry there are 6,000 jobs at stake and I take each one of those jobs really seriously, which is what we-
O'BRIEN: Okay, but-
PM: Why we are intending to step up to the plate to try and make a difference on the ground.
O'BRIEN: Very briefly, Mr Rudd. There are the people whose- the families who've lost children, who've died. There are the people who have been put out of business. There are the people who've lost their homes through fire. There are the people who are worried sick about whether their house is safe. There are all of these repercussions, ramifications. There would be many people who would be listening to this tonight and they'd be hearing you say sorry, but they would be saying, "who in your Government, and in your bureaucracy, is going to feel the pain they have felt and are feeling?"
PM: Well, in our system of Government, I am responsible for the lot of it. In terms of the accountability of that to the Australian people, they will make that plain when we next go to the election. I accept that. That is as it should be. Can I add one thing to what you have just said- which is, when it comes to this program nationwide, and the impact which it has on households, based on the survey done by Government of some 15,000 households, which is targeted in large part on those suppliers who have been judged to be unprofessional or incompetent or dodgy, the finding so far is that 92% of households have no safety risk.
Secondly, that means that we have a challenge to bring that as close as possible to 100%. And that is what we're resolved to do. That, however, is vastly different to someone saying there is a security problem or safety problem with all households. That defines the problem I must get on with. And that's the problem the Government must get on with to make a difference, to make amends for what has been, frankly, a program which has failed the people's expectations of the Government, and failed the high standards I have set for myself and the Government as well.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks very much for talking with us.


After careful consideration I have today decided to recommend to Her Excellency the Governor General a number of changes to Ministerial responsibilities and the establishment of a standalone Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency.
This move is designed to achieve stronger coordination and greater efficiency in the development and delivery of climate change policies and programs, especially in relation to energy efficiency and renewable energy.
The Honourable Senator Penny Wong will be appointed Minister for Climate Change, Energy Efficiency and Water. Senator Wong will take on additional portfolio responsibilities for the Government's energy-efficiency and renewable energy programs, particularly for households and the community.
The Honourable Greg Combet MP, as the Minister Assisting the Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, will be given direct responsibility for the oversight and implementation of the wind-up of the Household Insulation Program and of the roll-out of the new household Renewable Energy Bonus Scheme.
Minister Combet will retain his existing Defence responsibilities.
The Department of Climate Change will become the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency.
The Honourable Peter Garrett MP will be appointed Minister for Environment Protection, Heritage and the Arts.
I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that changes be made to the Administrative Arrangements Orders in due course.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today officially opened the $50 million National Centre of Indigenous Excellence (NCIE) in Redfern, Sydney.
Created with the support of the Indigenous Land Corporation, the facility will provide world-class facilities in sport, education and the arts for up to 5,000 young Indigenous people from around Australia each year.
The Centre has a fully equipped gymnasium and sports hall, outdoor 25-metre swimming pool, intensive literacy tutorial centre for 60 primary school students, arts/craft activity rooms, sporting field and campus accommodation for visiting groups of more than 100 people.
This is a world-class facility that symbolises a new era in Indigenous education, engagement and leadership.
Through its four development pathways of Sport, Learning and Innovation, Culture and Arts and Health and Wellbeing, the NCIE will create opportunities for young Indigenous people from across the country.
A number of existing programs will be accommodated at the new facility including the National Aboriginal Sporting Chance Academy and the Lloyd McDermott Rugby Development Team, which encourages healthy lifestyles through sport.
The Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience, also based at the facility, is working to match Indigenous high school students with mentors from universities to make sure they stay the course in school and progress to university.
Primary school children will have access to a six-month accelerated literacy program at the Centre's intensive literacy tutorial centre.
This program, run in partnership with Macquarie University and the Exodus Foundation has produced phenomenal results, with literacy levels for some kids rising 2 years in just 6 months.
The Centre will also provide new education and employment opportunities for local Indigenous youth including jobs in sport, recreation, youth and community programs, and hospitality when the Centre is fully operational.
As a facilities partner, the YMCA is helping to train NCIE staff to manage the health and fitness and camp facilities.
The Australian Government congratulates the Indigenous Land Corporation for backing the vision for this tremendous new development.


MITCHELL: On the line in our Canberra studio, the Prime Minister, Mr Rudd. Good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil.
MITCHELL: Does the Australian Government have any idea where these people are now?
PM: We are working on that as we speak, through ASIO. I don't want to go into the details of where they are or what contact's been made. Our challenge right now, Neil, is to establish the facts. That's what we're doing.
MITCHELL: But do we know that they're ok?
PM: On the basis of the advice from the Foreign Minister to me, yes, that is correct. But the Foreign Minister will be making a further statement this morning. The Foreign Minister is working through this with all the other security agencies and has been doing so overnight.
MITCHELL: So we're looking either at people involved in the plot or had their identities stolen. Do we know which it is?
PM: The Dubai authorities, Neil, said to us in the last 24 hours that they believe that Australian passports were used, or possibly forged, in the conduct of the assassination which recently occurred in Dubai. Secondly, we therefore are working with them and our own agencies to establish the facts, and in doing that, we are also speaking with the Ambassador of Israel this morning, here in Canberra.
MITCHELL: But am I right in assuming that we have had contact with these three people?
PM: You are right to assume contact has been had with various individuals. I don't want to go into the detail of that, because the security agencies are involved. And the two big issues for us here, I think for every member of your listening public Neil- one is the integrity of the Australian passport system, because we've got literally a million Australians each year or more using our passports, and if they- those passports come under any threat or any suspicion in the future, it's a problem for everybody. The second is Australia's international standing, and the way in which we are viewed around the rest of the world if our passports have been used or forged in the conduct of an assassination.
MITCHELL: Would it be fair to say- I mean, the Australian passport's been very well respected, as you say. Would it be fair to say if they have been misused in this way that it does, well, it poses a potential threat to Australians travelling on their passport?
PM: That's why we're taking this seriously, Neil. As I said earlier this morning, this isn't a trifling matter. It's not just one of those things that comes and goes as far as problems of national security are concerned. This goes not just to our national security interests, it goes also to the integrity of the passport system used by literally millions of Australians each year.
That's why we have to get to the bottom of the facts, we've got to see what the messages are arising from that in terms of the integrity of our passport system as well. But you know something, what we've got to establish first and foremost is, was there a State involved in the use or forgery of these passports in the conduct of an assassination- and as I have said earlier today, it doesn't matter which State it is, any State that chooses to do this in relation to Australian passports, frankly, is treating the Australian people, the Australian Government, and the Australian nation with contempt. We will not let the matter lie.
MITCHELL: So why is the Israeli Ambassador being called in? Do you accept these reports that Mossad's involved?
PM: It is important to establish the facts, at least as they will put them to us, and that is why we are going through that process. You will understand there is a limit to what I can say in terms of intelligence matters, and I'm constrained by that. But I think it's right to tell the Australian public that we are meeting with the Israeli Ambassador, and in Israeli with the Israeli Government simultaneously, to hear their version of these events.
MITCHELL: Is it fair to say that if Mossad is involved, then the Israeli Government would take responsibility for the use of the Australian passports?
PM: Let's get all of our facts established first, Neil. I don't wish to rush to conclusions. Establish the facts first, but let me say loud and clear, we do not see this as a minor matter. We do not see this as a trifling matter. And I say again, any State, any State that has been complicit in any such use or abuse of the Australian passport system, let alone for the conduct of an assassination, is treating Australia with contempt, and there will therefore be action by the Australian Government in response.
MITCHELL: What's open to the Australian Government if you identify any State as having done this?
PM: Well, let's take this one step at a time. But it is of fundamental importance that we simply do not sweep such matters under the carpet. You cannot do that. On specific measures which would arise, let's cross that bridge when we get to it. I'm waiting first for the report from the Foreign Minister from his meeting with the Israeli Ambassador here in Canberra later this morning. And, based on that, the Foreign Minister will be making a fuller statement here in Parliament House around the middle of the morning.
MITCHELL: Okay, well- how do you establish the facts though? I mean presumably you call in the Israeli Ambassador and say "was it Mossad", he's not going to answer you.
PM: There are intelligence channels which I cannot go into on your program, or any program for that matter, that's one element. The second element of course is diplomatic contact between Governments. And the third is, frankly, physical evidence, and that is what we are working through on all three fronts as we speak. That's why we've been in close contact with the authorities in Dubai. Australia has good relations with Dubai. We have good relations with the United Arab Emirates. We have good relations with their security authorities.
Let us always bear in mind that the UAE has always had a moderate attitude when it comes to the broader politics of the Middle East, and the Israel-Palestine dispute. We have therefore developed a very close and productive security relationship and intelligence relationship with the authorities in Dubai. We're using that as we speak. The Dubai authorities, I doubt would have raised this with us if they saw it as a trifling matter themselves, or simply a possibility. We therefore take this most seriously.
MITCHELL: Okay, is it going too far to say the misuse of Australian passports potentially endangers any person travelling on an Australian passport?
PM: Let's establish the facts. There is no point-
MITCHELL: Well something's happened with Australian passports here.
PM: Absolutely. That's why we take it seriously. That's why we've had, frankly, most of the security and intelligence community in Canberra up a lot of the night going through the facts as we know them on this, because this is not just a matter of national security interest, it is a matter of deep interest to all members of the Australian travelling public. And as I said, that affects millions of people. Therefore, as soon as we've established the facts and what it means from the passport system, which as you know, recent Governments have sought to improve as each new technology has become available, and people who travel would know how their passports would look today as opposed to how they looked ten years ago and ten years before that, you've got to make sure that there are lessons to be learned from this and that they are applied.
But the key thing is to establish the facts first, and that is what we are determined to do. I say all these remarks also, Neil, as a person who has been a life-long supporter of the State of Israel. I do not say this with any anti-Israeli bias whatsoever. But we do not take lightly the action by any State, any State, in relation to the use or forgery of Australian passports- however, let us establish the facts first.
MITCHELL: Okay, we're talking about here, two of the people named with the passports as being 18 and 19, and one 35. They're very young. Just to repeat, you're confident that they are all safe.
PM: Based on the advice from the Foreign Minister last night, contact has been established. As to precise whereabouts, and as to their precise wellbeing, I prefer to defer that to the statement made later this morning by the Foreign Minister. I do not wish to mislead your listeners on any element of this. I'd much rather we are certain in each case. We're also legitimately concerned about the wellbeing of each individual.
MITCHELL: Sorry, I think I've got their ages wrong there, I think they're 28 and 29, and 35. We will take a break Prime Minister if that's okay, and come back with some other matters.
PM: Sure.
[AD BREAK]
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, there are already estimates that the debacle over insulation is costing $100 million. What will the total amount be?
PM: We'll work our way through the implementation of the inspections, the rectification work which is necessary. Also, the support that's necessary for firms and for workers. We accept the responsibility for the problems which have arisen in the implementation of this. And, of course, by that I mean the problems which have arisen because of the discontinuation of the scheme for workers and firms as well.
MITCHELL: So it is $100 million at least, already?
PM: We're working our way through it. I mean, as far as the assistance to workers is concerned, you're probably aware that I announced a package yesterday-
MITCHELL: $41 million.
PM: $41 million. We'll have something further to say later today Neil, when it comes to assistance for firms. You see, I spoke to a number of workers and insulation firms yesterday here in Canberra. These strike me as good honest folk who have been caught up and are having to pay the consequences of the work of some shonky operators. So we've got to look after the good people out there and deal with the shonks, and make sure that workers are protected on the way through.
MITCHELL: And, can I say, some shonky administration by your Government?
PM: Well, can I say, I've said a couple of days ago Neil that as the Prime Minister of the country, I accept full responsibility for things that go right, and things that go wrong. There have been problems with the implementation of this. I accept that.
MITCHELL: Problems? We've got four people dead. We've got old ladies ringing in tears now, because they're frightened. We've got houses burning down. This is- Prime Minister, this is the biggest disaster to reach into people's homes from Government in a long time.
PM: Neil, I don't back away from what's happened on the ground. I think what people expect me to do is to take charge of fixing up the problems which have arisen.
MITCHELL: Okay, will you-
PM: Let's just say when it comes to the workers themselves- you know, there are about 6000 workers who are directly affected by the Government's decision to cancel this program. What do we have to do? Balance the advice coming into the Government on questions of safety, because of some small number of shonks out there on the one hand and on the other hand, the implication for honest workers. So what we're trying to do is help those workers on the way through, and help honest firms on the way through deal with any of the remaining safety concerns, but I'm the first one to admit Neil that we've got some real problems here we need to deal with.
MITCHELL: Will you pay compensation to the people whose houses have burnt or families have died?
PM: On the question of where you've had tragic loss of life- and there have been four reported deaths from this- I think it is really important that we establish the facts through the proper Coronial inquiries, the Police inquiries, and the inquiries by the relevant WorkCover, work safety authorities as well. There's about four, five or six of those I understand underway at present.
Secondly, when it comes to those who have problems in their roofs- and let's establish the numbers for that over time, through the audits which are underway- then what we have said is that inspections will occur, any rectification as a result of faulty implementation of course will be done. That is the right thing to do. I'm the first one to say to you Neil that there have been real problems here. I understand that. My job's to get in there and fix it up, and I don't walk away from that. It's going to take some time. I just don't walk away from it.
MITCHELL: Okay, so what do you say to people like this? This is Joan who called me, and I had several calls like this during the week.
CALLER: Mr Mitchell, I had my house insulated.
MITCHELL: Yeah.
CALLER: I'm shaking at the moment. And-
MITCHELL: That's okay.
CALLER: Three young boys came, they looked like they were still at school, and they took about 25-40 minutes to put it in. My daughter had hers done, and she said it took three hours to put it in. Now, I am really scared. I live by myself and I've got nobody to help me.
MITCHELL: What will the Government do for people like Joan?
PM: Firs thing I'd say to you and your program, Joan is- through your program to Joan, Neil- is let's get her number, and get it straight on to the insulation inspectors-
MITCHELL: She's done that. She's rung them. And they said, 'no no, nothing we can do, you've got to pay for it'. Is that fair?
PM: Well, let's establish the facts but
MITCHELL: Well that's the fact.
PM: Hang on-
MITCHELL: We've had an electrician go an do it for her. There's no point in the Government trying to fix it now. The point is, your system failed. There are a million houses around the country at this stage with people sitting there wondering if it's safe. A million, 1.1 million. What are you going to do about them?
PM: Well, you asked me a question about Joan. What I want to do from your program is to get her number. She's right to be upset and concerned. What I want to do is to make sure that she is not worse off in any way as a result of this program.
MITCHELL: We did it for nothing. We got an electrician- in fact, it was Dean Mighell- went and had a look in her roof and did it for nothing. Several electricians have come forward and done it for nothing. But we can't do every one of the 1.1 million houses.
PM: Of course you can't.
MITCHELL: When will you check all of them?
PM: Of course you can't, and the responsibility of Government and me as the Prime Minister is to step in and fix up problems which are of our making.
MITCHELL: Will you check every one of them?
PM: What we have said right now is that we will inspect all homes that are necessary to be inspected-
MITCHELL: How do you know which is necessary? People are sitting there, frightened to turn their lights on.
PM: Well let's go to the way in which we would hope to do it. Firstly, concerns with foil insulation. All of those homes will be inspected right across the country. Secondly, in terms of non-foil insulation. What we're now trying to do is to unfold and audit across the country of about 15% of insulations and concentrating on those areas where we have increasing evidence about the small number of dodgy firms which have not done the right thing. Remember, we should not blame the entire industry or firms, therefore, once we've done that-
MITCHELL: But Joan and people like here don't know whether they've had a dodgy job or not, so they are frightened. Now, you've put the people into their ceilings and created this climate of fear.
PM: The second thing that we've got to do, Neil, is this. When people like Joan contact us, we have a responsibility to get an inspector out there, properly accredited, straight away, to sort out what the problem is in her ceiling. And I accept what you have done in that case, and I thank you and-
MITCHELL: Well it's not happening Prime Minister, and there could be more than a million houses wanting it.
PM: Well you know something-
MITCHELL: Will you inspect the million houses if necessary?
PM: We will inspect all houses as are necessary. And we will continue to do that until the job is done.
MITCHELL: How long will that take?
PM: We will take as long as is necessary to get it done. We will concentrate first on the areas where you've got a pattern emerging of some shonky operators.
When I spoke to these folk, including Melbourne firms yesterday here in Canberra, they strike me as decent, well-trained folk, and I asked them specifically, had they had any complaints about their work? And the answer in all cases was barely none.
So our job in terms of doing the risk right across the country is with people like Joan, who - I understand her fear, I understand her concern- is that we take these one by one and we deal with each problem, and I don't care how long it takes, but we will do it both with the individual households, the individual companies, and the individual workers. That's our responsibility, I intend to discharge it.
MITCHELL: Okay, people have been told that they have to pay for their own electricians. Will they have to do that, or will you pay for it?
PM: When a person rings up to get a check done, if their installer has been re-registered, that is, there's no problems with their caseload or their work, then in the first instance, they are required to do it, that's the installer.
Secondly, if a person then conducts- if the household concerned doesn't like that, or is unsatisfied with that, we then will provide our own inspection. That's the two-stage process we've put in. But we will keep at this Neil until the problem is fixed, because we've got a responsibility to do so. Remember-
MITCHELL: It could be years, Prime Minister.
PM: Well, we'll deal with this in all of its three parts.
The 6000 workers who were employed, whose jobs are now at risk, that's the first thing.
The second is the firms themselves, the businesses themselves, the overwhelming majority of whom are decent people doing the right thing. And the overwhelming majority of installations, according to the data we have, are fine.
And thirdly, with the concerns of households.
With insulation workers, can I just say this Neil? We have backed insulation workers during the global recession. We intend to back them now. This is an important group of workers. We're out there supporting hundreds of thousands of jobs through the national economic stimulus strategy. 6000 jobs are now at risk- we're going to back them, we're going to do the right thing by householders, we're going to do the right thing by the firms. I'm the first, however, to say, that we've got a lot of things wrong, and I intend to fix them up.
MITCHELL: Quick call, Sean, go ahead Sean.
CALLER: Good morning Neil, Mr Rudd.
PM: G'day Sean.
CALLER: I'm a full electrical contractor in the South-eastern suburbs of Victoria. We had our first inspection of foil insulation last night at 4.30. And the foil came back as 244 volts on the insulation. Now-
MITCHELL: So the foil was live?
CALLER: The foil was live. So that's our first inspection, and it came back completely live. Now, my question is if there is a risk that the insulation is live, all tradesmen that have to get into the roof, why aren't they notified if the inspection isn't going to happen for a week, what happens if someone climbs into the roof in that week prior to the inspection.
MITCHELL: Good point. Prime Minister-
PM: For installer inquiries- and that goes to inspection as well- can I say to you Neil, the safety of workers doing this is of number one priority. Can I get you to ring this number? 1800 029 686.
Secondly, if you do not get a satisfactory answer on that, then can you please contact my office on 6277 7111 in Canberra, ask for my office and we will deal with the specifics that you have raised.
MITCHELL: Hold on Sean, we'll get your number off air and repeat that to you.
Prime Minister, Peter Garrett said that he hadn't read the consultant's- well, sorry, he hadn't read the consultant's report on the detail of these warnings in its totality. Now what the hell does that mean? Does that mean he got an executive summary? He hadn't read it in its totality. Now that is playing politics over dead bodies.
PM: On the risk assessment for the scheme, Neil, the- Minter Ellison did one in April of last year. What Minister Garrett did was get himself briefed on risk assessments coming out of that report, and a whole bunch of other meetings with the industry and the safety regulators and the rest, which is why, in response to that, he put in place three things which weren't there before. Firstly, the first national skills requirement for installation contractors in the industry, period.
Secondly, that registered training organisations had to put in place the first accredited training course for installers.
And thirdly, for the first time, a Commonwealth program brought in new occupational health and safety standards.
MITCHELL: Some of this kicked in on February, about two weeks ago.
Prime Minister, we've got something here that could cost hundreds of millions of dollars in public money, four people have died, house fires have increased, thousands of jobs lost, people are living in fear because a Minister didn't listen to warnings.
What does a Minister have to do in your Government to be sacked?
PM: I said yesterday, and probably the day before Neil, when it comes to the overall programs of the Government, including this one, I'm the bloke who's responsible. I'm the Prime Minister. I take the responsibility.
MITCHELL: That doesn't absolve him, though.
PM: Can I just say, in terms of the risk assessments which his Department received, and his actions in response to that to regulate what was an industry which had very little regulation before, the actions taken by him were consistent with the Department's advice to him.
But you know something, that doesn't absolve us of the responsibility to fix up the problems and there are problems out there, I don't walk away from it. People are entitled to be angry .Our job is to roll up our sleeves and get it done.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister, in Canberra.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the Gadigal of the Eora Nation on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This is a great project.
What the Indigenous Land Corporation has built here at the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence is a world-class facility and it symbolises the dawn of a new era in Indigenous education, engagement and leadership because the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence is a place that offers great hope, great opportunities, and great practical help for Indigenous Australians to reach their potential.
As the Centre's CEO, Jason Glanville has said, and I quote:
"We need to get away from the deficit language of disadvantage and have a real and meaningful conversation about excellence. This centre is about building hope for the next generations. We want profound outcomes."
Profound outcomes that have the power to change lives, now and in the future.
The Indigenous Land Corporation's $50 million investment in this centre is about more than just bricks and mortar. It represents a considerable social investment, too: an investment in the 5,000 or so Indigenous kids from communities across Australia who will come through this Centre every year; an investment in health and wellbeing, in sport, in the arts and culture; an investment in programs that will allow these kids to develop a sense of self-worth, a sense of self-respect, and a sense of self-reliance - the essential qualities of a productive, contributing member of the community.
Education will be the cornerstone of their success. We must improve the educational outcomes for Indigenous children.
As I said in my annual report on Closing the Gap to the federal Parliament earlier this month, the gap in meeting literacy and numeracy standards between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students is large - as much as 29.4 percentage points for Year 5 reading, which is why the intensive literacy tutorial centre that this Centre is running, in close partnership with Macquarie University and the Exodus Foundation, is so important.
The primary school kids who come through this program will get a real boost.
Over the course of the six month program, we're hopeful that their literacy levels will rise by up to two years.
That is a phenomenal outcome, and I can tell you that after speaking with the team here, they will not settle for anything less than phenomenal outcomes.
A couple of weeks ago, on the Gold Coast, I was lucky enough to see a magnificent game of football - the inaugural rugby league Indigenous All Stars match. This was a game of football which reminded us that winning is not just about the score line - even though the good guys won. It was a night reminded us of the power of sport to knock down barriers and inspire pride in Indigenous identity, and we know that some of the most effective programs for young Indigenous people are the ones linking sporting and education opportunities.
It's why we run the Sporting Chance Program, that program supports the excellent work of the Clontarf school-based sports academies, which are achieving school attendance rates of nearly 80 per cent and now have 2,300 students enrolled in 36 schools.
The Sporting Chance Program also supports the Former Origin Greats to establish school-based sports academies and their Achieving Results Through Indigenous Education (ARTIE) program, and the dedicated staff here are partnering with not-for-profit organisations to cultivate talent and create opportunities to develop brighter futures for our young people.
Organisations like:
     * the YMCA, which will operate the Eora Sports, Arts and Recreation Centre and Eora Campus;
     * the National Aboriginal Sporting Chance Academy will be on site here to deliver sport, wellbeing, learning and cultural programs; and
     * the Lloyd McDermott Rugby Development Team, which will run sports, wellbeing and personal development camps here at the Centre.
The Centre will also partner with the Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience, whose objective is to increase Year 10, Year 12 and university admission rates for all Indigenous Australian students, because success at the NCIE is not all about academic achievement.
This Centre may stand for excellence, but it also stands for inclusiveness, growth and integrity. It is already helping to create a deeper and richer understanding of Indigenous culture in the wider community and one of the unexpected catalysts for that is the fantastic state-of-the-art public gym here at the Centre. In its first month, 900 members have joined up and more than half are Aboriginal.
What the staff here are really pleased about is that many of these members are older Indigenous men and women, who we know are over-represented in poor health statistics - people who have never set foot in a gym before but now they are using the gym regularly because the fact that all the operational staff in the gym are Indigenous has broken down the barriers for them.
Jason said, and I quote:
"Having blackfellas and whitefellas - particularly older Aboriginal men and women - training alongside each other is a powerful experience for both. This is true grassroots reconciliation in action."
As we know, from little things, big things grow.
It is no wonder then that the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence marks what many are calling the Renaissance of Redfern.
There is a very real sense of rejuvenation and renewal around this iconic suburb, a renewal that the Redfern community has worked towards for many years but which now has a focus and tangible symbol in the form of this Centre.
The NCIE is built on the site of the old Redfern Primary School and it provides a safe environment for young people across this country to engage, to learn and to be inspired - while offering job opportunities for Indigenous people.
I'm advised that the target for Indigenous employment was exceeded during the construction phase, with 35 Indigenous employment positions over the course of the project. It is anticipated that more than 30 Indigenous people will be employed in sport, recreation, youth and community programs, and hospitality when the Centre is fully operational.
These jobs are important to the Australian Government's commitment to closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, including halving the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a decade.
This means we need an additional 100,000 Indigenous Australians to find and keep jobs over the next nine years. We have a vested interest in making this happen - and not just because it is critical for social justice.
There is an equally strong economic argument for lifting workforce participation. Over the next 10 years, 130,000 young Indigenous Australians will enter the population of working age Australians.
We need to guarantee that they have the education and skills needed to move from school, TAFE and university into the workforce, and that they get a fair go when they look for a job.
Just the other night I attended the Business Leaders Forum in Canberra. This initiative was about getting governments, community leaders and business leaders together to talk about how we improve employment outcomes for Indigenous Australians.
We talked about opening doors and removing obstacles to employment, about changing company cultures to encourage effective recruitment and retention of Indigenous employees.
As I said, the Australian Government is committed to Closing the Gap and I am confident that the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence can play a significant positive role in helping us achieve that.
It is now two years and two weeks since the Apology to the Stolen Generations. We know the apology was not the end of the healing process. It was only the beginning.
But since the Apology, we have seen a renewed focus on creating opportunities for Indigenous people in this country.
We have committed our support for the establishment of the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples and continue to engage with Indigenous communities across Australia in a range of Closing the Gap initiatives and priorities.
In backing up this commitment, governments around Australia have committed over $4.6 billion in funding across a range of reforms to address chronic disease, housing conditions, employment, education and service delivery.
However, funding alone is not enough to make sure these gaps are closed - we need unprecedented cooperation from all sectors of the Australian community.
With the focus often placed on remote Indigenous communities, we won't close the gap if we don't also focus on the 75 per cent of Australia's Indigenous people who live in urban and regional areas.
All governments, families and communities have a duty to make sure our kids get the education needed to lead full, productive and rewarding lives so that all Australian can enjoy the same choices.
There is a really important word in this Centre's name: excellence.
I hope that word is a constant reminder to all who pass through these doors of just what can be achieved through hard work, the guidance of good people and the grasping of opportunities.
I wish the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence - its staff and students - every success.
I congratulate you on the first class facility that you have built.
I congratulate you, in advance, for the heights you will reach, and I congratulate you for creating a place where the hopes and dreams of Indigenous Australia will be encouraged and nurtured.
It is now my pleasure to officially declare open the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence.


PM: As Prime Minister I have already stated that I have taken responsibility for problems in the Government's home insulation program. There is absolutely no use sugar coating the facts there have been some serious problems in the implementation of this program.
Problems, that as Prime Minister, I have taken responsibility for and problems that I am therefore responsible for taking action to fix. I have today recommended to her Excellency the Governor General to establish a standalone department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. This move is designed to achieve the best co-ordination possible in the development and delivery of climate change policies and programs especially in relation to energy efficiency and renewable energy. This is best done by separating these functions from the Department of the Environment where they have resided for some years, a department which is best targeted on direct environmental protection responsibilities.
Senator Wong will be appointed Minister for Climate Change, Energy Efficiency and Water. Greg Combet will be appointed as the Minister for Energy Efficiency. Greg Combet will have direct responsibility for the oversight and the implementation of the wind up of the household insulation program and of the roll out of the household renewable energy bonus scheme. Greg Combet has spent his whole life standing up for the interests of workers and for working families. He's a man of great passion and a leader of great skill and he will use all of these talents to address the problems that have already been identified in the home insulation program and work as hard as any one man can to get the replacement scheme up and running as soon as it can be.
Minister Garrett will occupy the position of Minister for Environment Protection, Heritage and the Arts. Minister Garrett will maintain his responsibility for environmental protection measures and maintain responsibility for Heritage and the Arts. Under these new arrangements the Minister will have responsibility for the protection of the Australian environment and the promotion of the Australian arts and the Australian arts community.
By creating a single standalone department, with a Minister focused on the roll out and implementation of energy efficiency programs, these arrangements will deliver better compliance management for the future. The Department of Environment will return, as I've just noted, to its core business of protecting the Australian environmental interest. The Department of Climate Change will become the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. The Department's additional program responsibilities will include the household renewable energy bonus schemes, green loans, green start, solar schools and housing, commercial building and appliance energy efficiency standards.
I said, in recent days, and I've said, for some time, that as Prime Minister I would take responsibility for fixing these problems. That is exactly what I intend to do. There is much more, however, to be done and we intend through Greg Combet to get on with the job. This will be a difficult task. I've appointed a highly competent Minister to undertake this task. A man with formidable experience, great passion, great intelligence and great organisational skills to deal with the practical responsibilities which lie ahead. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Belinda Neal is refusing to consult with an insulation company (inaudible) citing preselection issues. Are you going to (inaudible) word to her about that?
PM: If that report is accurate it is completely unacceptable for any Member of Parliament not to engage with local insulation firms who are having difficulties at this time because of the Government's decision on the program. It's impact on workers, it's impact on business. I haven't been able to establish the facts on that but I will seek to do so. As I said to all members of the parliamentary party, yesterday in Canberra, our responsibility is to go out there, work with individual firms within all the regions of Australia and to deal with the implications which now arise for workers for those firms and for households and that's what all members of parliament should be doing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) lost confidence in Peter Garrett to do his job?
PM: I believe it's now important for Minister Garrett to concentrate on core responsibilities of environmental protection and of course in heritage and the arts. There's no point sugar coating this. This does mean a different range, and reduced range, of responsibilities for Minister Garrett. Let us simply acknowledge that fact. As I said, the core responsibility for the Department of the Environment should focus on the protection of Australian endangered species and the wider remit of environmental protection and that of course is where the Minister's passions lie as well.
JOURNALIST: Is it fair to characterise this as a demotion Prime Minister?
PM: I believe it's, as I've said before, let's not try and sugar coat this. This represents a reduced range of responsibilities. That is a fact. My responsibility as Prime Minister is to put in place the best departmental systems possible to deal with energy efficiency programs in the future, for compliance arrangements associated with that and basically it fits. The Environment Department should be on about the protection of our natural environment, flora, fauna and the overall natural estate. We need different departmental arrangements in the future to deal with compliance when it comes to energy efficiency policies and regulatory regimes associated with that.
JOURNALIST: How did Mr Garrett take the news?
PM: Minister Garrett and I had a long conversation earlier this afternoon. I indicated to him the course of action I'd be taking. He accepted my decision.
JOURNALIST: Did you have to tell him or did he offer a simpler way?
PM: I indicated that's the decision that I had taken. The Minister accepted my decision
JOURNALIST: Mr Combet you've got a big job turning public confidence for (inaudible) insulation program. How will you do that?
COMBET: Well I've taken on difficult jobs before and this is certainly a difficult job that the Prime Minister has asked me to do. We'll clearly have obvious difficulties in this area and there's plenty of work to do. I've spent my whole working life representing working people. I actually started in the unions, in the area of occupational health and safety. Safety for working families and for workers and for businesses has long been part of my work and it's an important responsibility and I'm very proud that the Prime Minister has that confidence in me to ask me to do the job. It is a big difficult job and as of this afternoon, I'll just have to roll my sleeves up and get stuck into it.
PM: We have a responsibility to help households, we have a responsibility to help workers, have a responsibility to help businesses because of the decision to cancel this program. As I said in my remarks before, Greg Combet's a man of great experience, great practical ability and I believe a man of deep passion when it comes to the interests of working families and workers generally.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what happens if you (inaudible)?
PM: On the question of future departmental arrangements and administrative orders those will be determined in consultation with the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. You will see that reflected in due course in the administrative arrangements. In terms of the internal arrangements within the new department, that of course, lies entirely within the province of the Ministers
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the environment, what message is Australia sending to Japan and its leaders (inaudible)?
PM: We are saying, loud and clear, to our friends in Japan that Australia does not support the continuation of commercial or scientific whaling in the Southern Ocean. We have a very basic position. What we've further said in recent times, and this has been the source of some diplomatic difficulty between us, is that if Japan cannot come forward with a proposal which reduces its current catch to zero over a reasonable period of time then we have no alternative but to initiate appropriate international legal action. Furthermore, what we've said to our friends in Japan is that in the absence of Japan deciding that, we would begin that action before the next whaling season this year.
JOURNALIST: You have said this before (inaudible)?
PM: What I have said before is that we would try diplomacy I've signalled very clearly, in the last week or two, that diplomacy comes to an end this year. And absent an agreement along the lines I've described before that international legal action will commence this year.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Peter Garrett was a first class minister, what changed your mind, why now?
PM: The decision I have taken goes to the underpinning, departmental structures here. One focussed on environmental protection, and another dealing appropriately with regulatory arrangements concerning energy efficiency. Those energy efficiency arrangements have been in the Department of the Environment for some years, I have concluded that that is not an appropriate mix, that is why I have acted in the way in which I have acted.
Secondly, in the case of Mr Garrett, no one would doubt his passion for the protection of the environment itself and therefore this change in responsibilities better enables him to focus in those areas. Areas such as the Antarctic, areas such as the Great Barrier Reef, areas such as the wide remit of the environmental protection biodiversity act. These are areas that are important for the governance, good environmental governance of Australia, they are of a different nature however to the grants and regulatory and compliance regimes attached to households, or other energy efficiency programs.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept that the original program was rolled out too quickly (inaudible)?
PM: As I said last night when asked about the implementation of the program, there have been problems with compliance, that is plain. In terms of decisions taken on the way through, the advice that I have had before me, as each challenge arose, then appropriate adjustments were made to the regulations and to the compliance regime.
Overall however, as I said yesterday, there have been compliance problems with this scheme and that is what we must now deal with at a very practical level. And when it comes to the implementation of these arrangements for the future, can I say again, as I began my remarks today, Greg Combet has a big task ahead of him. It is a difficult job, it is a hard job, but I have given it to a man who has got very broad shoulders and a lot of experience.
Thank you very much.


KOCH: Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
KOCH: Two quick questions on this case. Would there ever have been an instance where Australian officials were present at the torture of an Australian citizen?
PM: I find that very difficult to believe. This occurred - according to the gentleman concerned - several years ago. Let's test the facts. But I find it very difficult to believe at face value.
KOCH: The courts have said he can claim compensation. Do you think they're right?
PM: Matter for the courts. And the great thing about Australia is that we've got an independent legal system. So he's perfectly entitled to pursue whatever legal rights he believes he has, and his lawyers advise him, test the facts. I go back to the first question though, Kochie- I find it very difficult to believe that our officials would have ever been involved in that. I'm talking about officials under the previous Australian Government as well.
KOCH: Will you look into that? Into those claims-
PM: Yep. I will, I will.
KOCH: And take it further?
PM: I will get into the detail of it. I'm surprised at face value. I don't think it's right. But I'll test the argument that's been put. I think that's what you've got to do to be fair dinkum in response to what people have said. But I go back to the legal question. That is, he is perfectly entitled to pursue his legal rights in the courts, and our independent legal system is one of the best in the world.
KOCH: Okay, alright, let's get into the questions. Last week was terrific, the question on the Japanese whaling certainly put it back on the agenda. What's in store for us this week? Let's find out. Dave Morgan from Sydney, you're up with the Prime Minister.
MORGAN: G'day Kevin.
PM: G'day Dave.
MORGAN: You're proposing Net Choices, mandatory filtering of Australian internet connections - has promoted huge debate within Australia, with comments such as "it's a flawed plan which cannot stop the spread or access to child pornography within Australia", "it's a tool that has the potential to restrict the free speech of Australian working families", "it's a policy designed to gain the religious vote and appease the record industry", and that "Labor has actually no mandate to implement a mandatory filter". Worse still, "it's a policy that will remove paedophiles from behind their computers, and return them to the playground". Working in a business that already filters traffic for child abuse and terrorism, I know that filtering significantly slows down our internet. Without the internet, we have no business. My questions to you are- will you guarantee that no Australian business will suffer any loss in productivity by the implementation of a mandatory internet filter, when filtering is already applied? And, why do you insist on implementing a policy that will simply fail in its objective to protect the children?
PM: Well, let's go to the sort of material that we're talking about. It's called refused classification material. What does it involve? Acts of child abuse, acts of sexual abuse against children, including material which also provides how to kits in terms of conducting terrorist attacks. We have a very hardline approach on this. Is any system perfect in dealing with it? No. But is our challenge to reduce it to the absolute extent possible? Yes. And remember, what we're doing here is the same treatment that you extend to any piece of material out there in movies, in videos, and now we're seeking to do the same when it comes to this awful material which I think, you know, mums and dads watching the program this morning would be really worried about. Now, on the question of internet speed which you legitimately raise. We've tested this with some nine internet service providers. And what we've found is that the impact on speed is the equivalent to 1/70th of the blink of an eye. This is backed by Optus. It is backed by Telstra. It's not perfect, but let me tell you I will not stand idly by and allow this sort of muck to be put online without making an effort to reduce it, given the enormous impact it has on the safety of children. And on the coppers thing, can I just say this? Police, we've actually increased the number of Police who are actually monitoring cyber crime every day. So we have literally 100 more coppers on the beat federally working also on this. I think this stuff is filthy. I can't stand it. I think these are the right measures. You're running a business, we're pro-internet, but we don't make apologies for this.
KOCH: ok. It also brings us to- that we've been running for some time- about introducing an Online Ombudsman. You see, 30,000 people have signed our petition for that. And in the past couple of weeks, we've seen Facebook sites hacked into following the deaths of Elliot Fletcher and Trinity Bates, and here's what Independent Senator Nick Xenophon had to say on Sunrise earlier this week.
[AUDIO] KOCH: And Prime Minister, we've got the Daniel Morcombe issue, a very similar thing we've been running in the news. And groups like Facebook, we've asked to come on and say why aren't you taking it down. They're not doing it, and if they are they're being very slow, they won't come on the program. Don't you think we need an Ombudsman here? It's an issue that's getting out of control.
PM: I think Nick Xenophon's idea is worth looking at. Because, you know, we just see the colliding of the two worlds here, abuse and graphic material online, and businesses legitimately concerned about using the internet properly, like your caller who was just on line before. So specifically on Nick's idea, let's look at it. We actually need to do everything we can to combat cyber crime. The role of cyber crime and internet bullying on children is, frankly, frightening, and we need to be deploying all practical measures. If I was a mum or a dad out there today with little kids, given some of the awful events we've seen in recent days, I'd be legitimately concerned. So there's some more stuff to do here.
KOCH: Okay, so Nick Xenophon's going to table our petition of Sunrise viewers, you're going to have a talk to him, hopefully we can get some movement-
PM: I will. I mean, to be frank, that's the first I've heard of it, but we-
KOCH: Well we sort of need someone to say to Facebook, take it down, you know, this is disgusting. The grubs that are putting these sorts of sites up can't be given any air, if you like.
PM: But you know Kochie, you're dead right. And this is where we get into this really stupid debate with what I'd describe as extreme civil libertarianism, which says any such move in that direction means the imposition of Soviet Communism a la 1980. Look, it's not like that. People out there, mums and dads, are sensible folks. They know where the balance lies. This stuff is off, like the stuff we were talking about before is off, and responsible Governments have to act. It's not perfect, but we need to reduce the problem.
KOCH: Okay, let's go to Sonia Harrison in good old Adelaide. Sonia, you've got the ear of the PM.
HARRISON Good morning Prime Minister. PM: Good morning Sonia.
HARRISON I believe- good morning- I believe that there should be a Government-funded superannuation fund set up for stay at home parents. Many of us, many, many of us for years and years are staying at home, raising children, and missing out on accruing superannuation contributions. During this time, we're keeping unemployment rates down because we're at home. We're also keeping the strain off the childcare system. And parents who are using this system receive a rebate while they're working, and of course, while they're working they are receiving superannuation benefits. And I believe that there should be something set in place for the work we're doing at home, so that when we're at retirement age we aren't penalised and behind the eight ball because of these years we spend at home. I was just wondering if the Governments has ever looked at- into this, or if, you know, there's something you can look into, and what your thoughts are on this?
PM: Thanks Sonia. Can I just ask how many kids you've got?
HARRISON Three. PM: And basically what their age spread is?
HARRISON I've got a nineteen year old, a six and a four year old.
PM: Okay, so you've got the full range of terror there. I can see that. Been there, done that. Not quite that fifteen years, but getting close. Stretches the mind, doesn't it?
HARRISON Yes, it does.
PM: Firstly, what we try to do with stay at home mums who are making an entirely valid choice in terms of looking after their kids, no one is better or worse whether mums go back to work or stay at home. That's just a choice for individual families. But in terms of stay at home mums, one of the reasons why we've got the family tax benefit system is to provide that extra support for children. Now that's one thing. Obviously, that applies more generally. I understand that. The second thing, of course, we have is the particular payment which helps with the baby bonus. But Sonia, rather than just sort of say everything's fine and dandy and that's all that we can do, I'd actually like to follow up on this one more and come back to you. There's a huge number of mums who make the legitimate choice that you've made, which is, you want to be there nurturing your kids, particularly with the big age spread like yours, and it does affect your working life-
HARRISON And dads-
PM: Sorry?
HARRISON And dads.
PM: It certainly affects dads, let me tell you about that.
KOCH: Alright Sonia, the Prime Minister will take that up on board as well. Because under superannuation you've got spouse contribution to, but that's for, I think, spouses working part time rather than stay at home mums, maybe an extension of that to include stay at home parents.
PM: What I've learnt Kochie is that when it comes to the word 'superannuation', choose your words very carefully, because there are a whole lot of unintended consequences with saying one thing. Therefore, what I'd like to do seriously is come back to Sonia on what is best and most relevant in her circumstances, but all the other mums, frankly, watching the program, who she represents. Mums who choose to stay at home looking after their kids make a huge contribution to the nation, because kids are nurtured in the home environment, and they become workers of the future as well.
KOCH: Excellent, alright, you'll take it up for us. Good to see you, have a good weekend.
PM: Will do.


The Prime Minister and the South Australian Premier today announced $18 million for a new intersection to be built at Victor Harbor Road and Main Road in McLaren Vale.
This is the next priority project on the Victor Harbor Road to improve safety and reduce congestion. This funding will see the T-junction become an overpass allowing traffic from McLaren Vale to merge safely with high speed traffic on the Victor Harbor Road.
Up until now, this intersection has seen 35 serious crashes in just the last seven years, of which one resulted in a fatality.
The work will improve safety and reduce travel times for the 18 000 cars that use the Victor Harbor Road every day.
Features of the project include:
- The elevation of Main Road over Victor Harbor Road; and 
- Dedicated on and off ramps to allow traffic from McLaren Vale to merge safely with high speed traffic on the Victor Harbor Road
The Australian and South Australian Governments are working together to improve the state's road infrastructure and create jobs for local communities, with this project expected to support up to 120 local jobs.
The new intersection at McLaren Vale is a jointly funded project, with the Australian Government contributing $14.4 million and the South Australian Government $3.6 million.
Construction is expected to commence in 2011 and take 18 months to complete.
The project is part of the Australian Government's $36 billion investment in transport infrastructure and part of the Strategic Infrastructure Plan for South Australia.


The concept designs for the South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute's home on North Terrace (SAHMRI) have been released by the Prime Minister, Premier Mike Rann and Health Minister John Hill.
The building will sit alongside the new $1.7 billion home for the Royal Adelaide Hospital, and will be the first completed building within the new City West health precinct.
Viewing the start of site preparation works for the new $200 million SAHMRI, Premier Rann said "This will be a modern and proud icon of South Australian science, promoting international research and providing 21st century facilities for the next generation of health and medical researchers.
"The Research Institute will attract highly skilled scientists from across Australia and around the world, offering them the chance to participate in major research using the latest technologies and with the brand new Royal Adelaide Hospital close by."
The $200 million funding is being provided from the Rudd Labor Government's Health and Hospital Fund.
This huge investment is a significant boost for medical research in South Australia.
Minister Hill said the building will comfortably house up to 675 researchers and will be the headquarters for the newly established South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute.
"This stunning piece of architecture will be built to world-class standard - encouraging research collaboration through its innovative and 'green' design.
"Up to 675 researchers will work here in state of the art laboratories, right next door to the patients, doctors and technicians in Australia's most modern hospital."
Chair of South Australia's Health and Medical Research Institute Board Raymond Spencer said the Board is very excited about the concept design.
"The flexible and adaptive design of the building will provide the perfect environment for our researchers to be able to deliver excellence in research in a vibrant building."
The design team, led by architecture firm Woods Bagot, consulted with the research community, health sector and universities, seeking their ideas and input into the building design.
Features of the concept design include:
- 25,000 square metres (gross floor area).
- Fully flexible laboratory space. 
- PC2 laboratory standard.
- Nine research modules, consisting of 1/3 dry and 2/3 wet laboratory space.
The launch of the concept plan also triggers a four week public engagement process, during which interested parties can comment on the concept design.
The release of the concept design today coincides with the start of the site preparation works.
"Work here to prepare the site is starting on schedule and the building will be completed by end of 2012." Minister Hill said.
"We'll continue to consult with the research community and we also want to hear the views of the wider South Australian community."
To view the concept design and to provide your comments, visit the web site www.health.sa.gov.au/SAHMRI or call 1800 643 854.


PM: Well it's great to be back in Adelaide, and great to be back here with Mike Rann. This is a relationship between the Australian Government and the South Australian Government based on partnership, and it's a partnership that is aimed at two things- keeping South Australia strong, and keeping South Australia moving ahead. 
In the partnership that we've developed in the period that I've been in Government, let me just leave you with one core fact. And that is, in terms of our investment in our national economic stimulus strategy, in South Australia, we've invested some $4.2 billion. $4.2 billion, to help keep the South Australian economy moving, to help keep the Australian economy moving.
Also, what we've been on about is, with the South Australian Government, building the basics. Let me just go to a few facts and figures before we turn to this project today. On infrastructure, that is, road and rail infrastructure, under this Government, the Australian Government, we have increased our investment here in South Australia by 264% compared with the Howard Government. Secondly, on education, we've increased our investment in South Australia by 118% compared with the Howard Government.
On health, we've increased our investment by 43% compared with the Howard Government. Let's go to some practical projects and our commitments prior to the election, the last Australian election. On infrastructure, our undertaking- $500 million on the South Road upgrade. Our undertaking on $80 million for the Dukes Highway safety upgrade package. On education, the investment that we've made in computers in schools- $20 million, 20,000 computers in 246 schools across South Australia.
Nearly $100 million in trades training centres servicing 100 secondary schools across South Australia. Again, our commitments in education. Our commitments in health, making sure that we're delivering on our GP super clinics, three of them- Modbury, Noarlunga, Playford North, an investment of $32.5 million. An investment of $61.7 million to help relieve hospital emergency departments. And on top of that, what we've done with an additional 3,200 additional elective surgery procedures, with a further investment of nearly $14 million.
And on desalination, co-investing in partnership with the South Australian Government $328 million for the construction of the Adelaide desal plant. That's in terms of our commitments. The other thing I'd say is, what have we done in addition to those commitments in South Australia. Let me just run through a few facts and figures again. Going to infrastructure, $291 million for the Noarlunga to Seaford rail extension. $36.9 million brought forward for the Northern Expressway. $18 million for 67 black spots on South Australian roads.
Go again to education, you have a huge investment of $1.4 billion in the biggest school modernisation program that this State has seen, part of the biggest one the nation has seen, spread across 789 schools in South Australia, with state of the art libraries, state of the art science centres, state of the art language centres, and multipurpose halls springing up right across the schools of this great State. In fact, 61 new science and language centre projects.
And the last thing I'd just talk about is health. On health, what we have done is bring about a record Australian investment, an Australian Government investment of $5.3 billion of health outlays here, and that is a 43% increase on what was delivered to South Australia under the previous Health Agreement with the Howard Government. These are big investments, quite apart from what we're doing in social housing, adding some 1,360 new units of social housing.
The reason I spend some time going through these is to underline one point. It's happened on the basis of partnership. Partnership in helping keep the South Australian economy going through the global economic recession last year. Partnership in getting on with the basics in education, in health, in road and rail and social housing, and the water security of this state and this city. But beyond that, delivering also on critical projects that mean a lot to mums and dads sitting around the kitchen table. Now, let me quickly turn to what we're here today to talk about.
One of those investments I spoke about before was the some $140 million that we're investing into South Australian universities in various forms of research. On top of that, we're of course doing single, large-scale projects such as the one we're here to discuss today. This is a great piece of new medical science research kit for the people of South Australia, and for the Australian people at large. 
You've seen the design behind you here. This is going to be a terrific, iconic building in the heart of Adelaide, which will bring together more than 600 of the best medical research scientists from around South Australia, around the country, and around the world, working together collaboratively. Working together on new innovations, to deal with the diseases which matter to working families across Australia. Cancer, the single biggest killer in our country. New pathways of research, new pathways of clinical application.
That's why this is going to be a fantastic new addition to South Australia's future. The fact that the South Australian Government decided to co-locate this with their plans to build the new Royal Adelaide Hospital even makes more sense. Having a brand new research centre, more than 600 of the brightest and best researchers in the country co-located over time with a very large tertiary hospital makes sense in terms of producing the best outcomes for the patients of the future, the mums and dads of the future.
The last thing I'd say is this. Is that, it's not just bringing together all these researchers. It's not just bringing together all the expertise which they represent. It's the collaboration between these three great universities here as well. The fact that they've decided to bring their researchers together, have them work together on the real solutions that mums and dads need across Australia for the diseases which affect working families, that makes all the difference. 25,000 square metres of gross floor area. Fully flexible laboratory space. At PC2 laboratory standard. Nine research modules, consisting of 1/3 dry and 2/3 wet laboratory spaces. This, I believe, is actually state of the art for South Australia for the future.
So, congratulations to the SA Government in being partners with us in this project, partners with us across health, partners with us across health, education, housing and helping working families. And partners with us in keeping the nation's economy going through a global economic recession which has knocked the stuffing out of every other economy around the world.
Over to you, Mike.
RANN: Thank you very much Prime Minister, and thank you for your partnership with this. As you know, we're building a $1.7 billion, brand new Royal Adelaide Hospital. And co-location with a world class health and medical research institute makes sense for patients. In this institute, 675 researchers will be working with the hospital on issues such as cancer research, on heart disease, the things that count in terms of our community. And again, it's about a partnership. Since we've been in Government, there are now 1100 more doctors in our public hospital system than there was when we were first elected. 3,600 more nurses. More beds per capita than the rest of the nation.
And as we've grown our economy and grown our State finances, it means that we can invest in better services, and there is nothing more important than the health of our people. But a productive and constructive partnership with Kevin Rudd's Government helps us to do much more. He mentioned the electrifying of the railways, taking it down to Seaford. The desalination plant, making it bigger so that it gives us an insurance policy for the future. But ultimately, it's also about jobs. It's about building careers for the future. And this stunning design, we want it to be the newest and best medical research centre in the nation, alongside the newest and best hospital in the nation, built for the 21st century.
And of course when people talk about jobs, let's remember that jobs growth in this state, full time jobs growth in this state, has run ten times stronger than it did under the Liberals during the same period of time. That's the difference, and that's what we can't risk for the future.
JOURNALIST: Are you riding on the coattails of the Federal Government to boost your re-election chances?
RANN: I think what we're doing is demonstrating partnership. One of the key jobs of a Premier is to negotiate to get the best deal for his or her State from the Federal Government. One of my key jobs is to negotiate with Kevin Rudd to get the best outcomes for South Australia. And that gets back to partnership, it gets back to having clout. Whether it's a medical research institute or a $30 billion submarine program- and there's a classic example of partnership. We're putting in nearly $400 million, we've now opened Techport, that's been the platform upon which we've been able to negotiate new defence projects for this State worth billions of dollars. It's about having clout in Canberra, it's about negotiating the best outcomes for our State.
PM: What the Australian Government needs to do is work in the closest partnership with State Governments. And that's as I've worked with Mike. He's made reference to this massive submarine project. We are in the process of moving towards the doubling of Australia's submarine fleet. Were it not for the investments made here by the South Australian Government leading the way in terms of our next generation submarines, frankly, it wouldn't be happening. And it wouldn't be happening here in South Australia. That's what partnership is about.
The fundamental transformation of the South Australian economy over the last, you know, decade, I've got to say, the key role in the political leadership of the State taking it up to the Australian Government and with us forming partnerships with them. Whether it's on submarines, road infrastructure, rail infrastructure, hospital research facilities like this, as well as what we're doing in our schools. Partnership is a real and practical thing around making it work for the mums and dads around the kitchen table and the things that they need, the basic things they need.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is this centre contingent upon Labor being returned to Government next month?
PM: The Australian Government will proceed with its investments on the basis of agreements with the elected democratic Government of any State of Australia. I've got to say, however, that this project would not exist were it not for the advocacy of this South Australian Premier. What the posture is on this particular project by the South Australian Opposition I would not know. They have not raised it for me, so, matter for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what about the plans to federalise state hospitals, state health systems- is that still going apace, has that been put on hold, on the backburner?
PM: What we have done over the last period of time is work very carefully through the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission to get our future reforms for the system and for the funding of the system as right as possible, and then, secondly, what we've done in the last six months, is road test its recommendations across the major hospitals of the country. I've been here in South Australia, I've spoken here at the Flinders Medical Centre, addressed a large forum of doctors there, I've been out to Murray Bridge, I've spoken to doctors there.
Nationwide, we've done this with 103 hospitals in the last six months. So therefore, in bringing it to conclusion, we will put before the Australian nation, the Australian people, a plan for the future. A funded plan for the future about how we're going to get there. And we look forward to working in partnership with the States and Territories to make it work. That's what we want to happen. But you know what the key things is for mums and dads? Making sure you've got the hospital beds for the future. Making sure you've got the doctors for the future. Making sure you've got the nurses for the future. And that's why you've got to work in partnership with Governments which take this seriously.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Australian victims of Mossad say they've had no contact with the Embassy or the Government. Have you abandoned them?
PM: The- my advice is that Australian officials have been in contact with a range of those associated with the most recent matters. Because these involve very complex security and intelligence matters, you have to proceed very carefully. I'm just weighing my words very carefully. The second thing I'd say is this- that when it comes to Australian passport fraud, or the use and abuse of Australian passports, this Government has an absolutely hard line on defending the integrity of our passport system, because millions of the travelling public depend upon that each year. That is why the Foreign Minister has called in the Israeli Ambassador and asked for an explanation. Thus far we are not satisfied with that explanation.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Australian woman involved in that says she hasn't been contacted by any (inaudible) official. What's your response to that?
PM: I said before I wish to tread very carefully with the security and intelligence matters which arise in relation to each of the individuals and families concerned with this matter. Therefore, I'm choosing my words very carefully, so as not to compromise any person- or so as not to compromise any continuing investigation. I am simply choosing my words very carefully.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you aware that ASIO was investigating at least three dual Australian-Israeli passport holders for using (inaudible)
PM: I have seen those reports today in the national press. Can I simply say this, that consistent with the long-standing practice of the Australian Government, we do not comment on the individual details of intelligence matters. That is a long standing convention of Governments both Labor and Liberal, over many, many decades. I will adhere to that convention. Let me add one thing. When it comes to national security and defending the national security of this country, Australia, we will take whatever measures are necessary to ensure that our security interests are not being compromised by any other State.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what difference do you think Greg Combet will make to this revamped insulation scheme? (inaudible) what will he bring that the previous incumbent didn't?
PM: Minister Combet is a vastly experienced Minister who as a previous head of the Australian Council of Trade Unions is a very practical bloke, who works very closely with industry, works very closely with workers, and is a person of vast experience. This will be a hard task. It will be a difficult job. I've entrusted to him and have confidence in his ability to get on with what is a difficult task.
JOURNALIST: The Opposition (inaudible)
PM: I think it's very plain for all who care to see and care to look that the decision in relation to Minister Garrett has resulted in a significant reduction of his responsibilities. I communicated that directly to him yesterday. I indicated that was the course of action that we'd be following. That is the course of action which has now being implemented. And Minister Combet is now responsible.
JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce is today taking flak this morning from members of his own party, does that give you some joy or-
PM: I think all-
JOURNALIST: What is your response?
PM: I'd say on that score is as follows, that- that it's now I think 87 days since Mr Abbott took the reckless decision, the risky decision of making Barnaby Joyce the alternative Finance Minister of Australia. In just 87 days he's said that America could default on its sovereign debt, he's said that the Australian States could or would default on their sovereign debt. He's said that the Australian Government could or would default on its sovereign debt. And that's just the beginning of what Senator Barnaby Joyce, who's the alternative Finance Minister of Australia, has said.
So, he's been in that position of authority on Australia's finances for now 87 days. He may make 100 days. I'd doubt very much whether he's going to make 200 days. Barnaby Joyce may make his century. I doubt very much whether it will be a century and a half, let alone a double ton. And the reason is Mr Abbott knows that he's made a fundamental error of judgment, a risky judgment, in appointing Barnaby Joyce to an important position. You can't play politics with the public finance of the nation. Mr Abbott, in making this risky decision, has played politics front and centre by appointing an individual who's not frankly up to it. But on top of that, in his statements, is capable of causing great damage, as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, on the question of the Liberal Opposition Leader, I have not had the opportunity to meet that leader. More importantly, I've not actually seen what their policy is on health, on hospitals, on the future of projects like this. Can I just say, I will make judgments based on clear statements of policy. And I seem to get the impression here that there's a bit of a strategy of trying to hide Liberal policies and the Liberal Leader under a carpet somewhere and hope that an election comes and goes and no one notices. 
You've got to have policies up there in order for other Governments to engage. I know where Mike Rann's coming from on this building. I know where Mike Rann's coming from precisely when it comes to the future of the Royal Adelaide Hospital. I know where he's coming from on education. I know where he's coming from on roads. I know where he's coming from on rail infrastructure. I know what his policies are. 
I just think- people in South Australia, of course, make up their own minds- it's a great democracy that we have in Australia. But in making up their minds, you've got to ask some pretty basic questions- who is this person, and what are their policies? So in answer to your question, to engage with a Government, you've actually got to know what their policies are. I know what Mike's are. I wouldn't have a clue what the alternative is, because their political strategy as I said, is to hide this Liberal leader and their policies under a carpet, somewhere, in the hope that nobody notices.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Laurie Oakes has written an article based on a chat that he's had with you. In that chat you were reasonably candid about criticisms of yourself and your Government's time in office so far. Is that a true reflection on your thoughts?
PM: I think it's a bit like this. In 2009, the Government focussed on getting Australia through the global economic recession. In 2010 we must focus on getting back to basics. Getting back to absolute basics. Absolute basics on the delivery of our projects on the ground. In health. In education. In housing. I think it's fair to say that as a Government we underestimated how difficult it would be to implement our commitments on the ground. It's easy to blame the global financial crisis for that, because of the impact it's had on the nation's finances. I don't think that's the sort of an excuse that a Prime Minister should offer.
So, when it comes to that, the Government has got to get back to basics, get back to the basics of delivery on health and education, hospitals, schools, housing, and make sure it's done. And that is our resolve for what would be the third year of this Government.
JOURNALIST: Have you been disappointed so far in your achievements to date given (inaudible)
PM: I think it's fair to say that I have disappointed a number of people around the country in how far we've got so far. I think it's also fair to say in terms of one of the other criticisms that's made of yours truly is that I'm probably not the world's best communicator. Take that on the chin. Someone said to me the other day, when it comes to communication, I think it's fair to say that as a communicator I make a first class policy wonk. I kind of get that. I understand the criticism. But you know something? I don't think in this business you get judged at the end on the basis of the quality of your one-liners. You get judged on the basis of whether you've delivered on the ground on the basics.
Can I add one other thing on the basics, by the way. There's a debate which is in Australia at the moment on the future of the national curriculum. It's really important. Our objective with the national curriculum is also, without apology, to get back to the absolute basics on spelling, on sounding out letters, on counting, on adding up, on taking away. The basics that I was taught when I was at Primary School a long time ago, and that's what our national curriculum is all about.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just one more on the SA election, are you worried that there are any trends, or can you see any trends or implications from the result?
PM: I believe that Mike Rann, who I've known for a long, long time, is in there fighting a really hard campaign. No one should underestimate how tight any election is. I don't, because I've been through a few myself over the years. What I do know, however, is that with Mike's leadership, it's about two things. Being a strong advocate, anywhere, and everywhere, for the State of South Australia. And secondly, committed to keeping this State economy strong, so that jobs are protected and taking South Australia forward to an even more positive future.
These are strong messages. But they're not just messages. Contrast the strength of this economy of South Australia with the one that I was familiar ten and twenty years ago. 
Can I just say, in the last decade, what we've seen is great strength developed. He's only been in Government for what? Two terms, is that right? Eight years? But I've got to say the transformation in this economy to being a strong economy, a really strong economy where jobs are growing, when it wasn't all that many years ago, that people were leaving this State in droves purely to find a job. I don't see that these days, because the economy is so strong. That doesn't happen by magic. That is because in States like this you've got strong leadership. But can I just say, it'll be a tough campaign, and as with any campaign, fought out on tough state issues. That's the case with state campaigns. But this bloke is a bloke I've dealt with for a long time, and he is a very strong leader.
Thanks folks, got to run.


The President of the Republic of Botswana, HE Seretse Khama Ian Khama, will visit Australia from 1 to 4 March.
Botswana is a long-standing democracy, which has benefited from liberal economic policies and openness to investment. Australia and Botswana share a warm and productive relationship, with growing linkages in trade, investment and education, and an expanding program of development assistance. 
President Khama's visit to Australia provides a valuable opportunity to increase collaboration on key international and regional matters, including climate change and Zimbabwe, and to discuss new opportunities for economic, political and development cooperation.
This is President Khama's first official visit to Australia. He will visit Canberra and Sydney. 


CASSIDY: The Prime Minister joins us from our Adelaide studios. Good morning, and welcome.
PM: Good morning Barrie.
CASSIDY: Now that you have stripped Peter Garrett of his responsibilities for energy efficiency, does that make him a second class Minister?
PM: What it means is that when it comes to the key task of environment protection, which is the core responsibility of the Department of the Environment, that's where he now focuses his energies. I think it's quite plain as day that the way in which functions have been added on to the Environment Department over quite a number of years, that it's actually taken it away from its core responsibilities- the implementation of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Act, key decisions like Traveston Dam in Queensland, key decisions like what's necessary for the pulp mill in Tasmania, and other major projects like that.
That's its core business, and I think the decision we took on Friday was to separate that out from grants-based programs with compliance regimes attached to them, which have now been placed under the control of Greg Combet.
CASSIDY: But if he was a first class Minister as you insisted all week, you wouldn't have had to do that.
PM: Well look, let's just call a spade a spade Barrie. I mean, there've been real problems with the implementation of this program. There've been real problems with compliance. And the Minister has had those responsibilities removed from him. That's just a fact. As far as the other responsibilities are concerned, which is those of environment protection, which are important for the nation, where Peter has been active for a long period of time, taking tough and hard decisions on Traveston Dam, on the pulp mill in Tasmania and other significant projects in Western Australia and elsewhere, these are areas where his impartiality has never been questioned. His diligence has never been in question. And his effectiveness has never been questioned. That is the separation that I've produced in the new arrangements announced on Friday.
CASSIDY: Yeah, and you ultimately accepted responsibility for the dismantling of the program and setting up a new one. But now you've given that job to Greg Combet. So who will be responsible if things continue to go wrong?
PM: Well as I said in my remarks in Canberra during the course of the week, I head the Government, I'm ultimately responsible. You see, you can have people go out there and say 'shoot this public servant, shoot that Minister or that politician', that's fine, but actually, the hard thing to do, the hard thing to do is to accept responsibility and get on with the business of fixing the problems. That's the job that I've given Greg Combet to do.
As you know, you've known him for many, many years, he's a highly experienced and competent individual, and I have confidence that he'll now get on with the job. That's what we've got to do. Accepting responsibility is not a word. Accepting responsibility means going out there and doing it. I run the Government. I'm the Prime Minister. I'm ultimately responsible for it.
CASSIDY: And you couldn't go out in any case and 'shoot a public servant' as you put it, because surely one of the lessons of this is that the Federal Government should not be running programs like this, that perhaps it would've been better to fund it, but give it to Local Government to administer?
PM: Well, we have commissioned of course Allan Hawke, a serious and experienced bureaucrat who has worked for Governments of both political traditions to examine these compliance challenges for the future. Let's also be aware of the fact that the Federal Government has administered a whole range of grants-based programs over many, many years. And Governments of both persuasions at various times have gotten into difficulties with them. The regional partnerships arrangements for example, administered directly by the previous Government. So let's look at what lessons are to be learned from this, and make sure we reflect that on how we run things in the future.
Remember, also, just add this Barrie- what we were wrestling with throughout 2009 was a global economic disaster, and therefore, the imperative of acting in the context of a collapsing economy. That is not an excuse for what has happened in relation to the home insulation program, I don't pretend that it is. I simply say to you that's the context in which it occurred.
CASSIDY: Yes, you said you should be looking at how you run things into the future. A couple of State Premiers, one of them from your own side, said this week that if you can't run- it's effectively what they said- if you can't run an insulation program, you certainly should not be thinking about running the hospitals. Do you agree with that?
PM: Well Barrie, can I say when it comes to the future of health and hospital reform, our challenge for the future is to make sure the system is properly funded, and properly planned. But it has always been my view that hospitals are best run locally. That has always been my view. I've had some experience of this over the years, working at various levels of Government, and that is still my view. The key question, however-
CASSIDY: Therefore you would very, very reluctantly pull the trigger, the threat that you've suggested that you might take over public hospitals, that would be something that you would do very reluctantly?
PM: Well, can I say Barrie, what we have been discussing for a long, long time is the national Government's responsibility for the funding and the planning of our national hospital system. The core problem here we've got is, frankly, not enough money in the system, and secondly, total waste and inefficiency with the way in which it's currently structured between Canberra and the States. You've got to pull out all that waste and inefficiency, because of the cost-shift, blame-shift, which has plagued the health and hospital system for decades- challenge number one. Challenge number two is to fund it properly in the future, and that means, what's the future responsibility of the national Government.
The actual operation of the health system, the actual operation of the hospital system, in my experience, is best done by local hospitals themselves. I've said this before. I will say it again, and I'll say it into the future. So the key challenge is to get the funding responsibility right. And that, precisely, is what I put to- the proposal to the States quite some time ago.
CASSIDY: So there's not much prospect of the Federal Government ever taking over the running of the hospitals?
PM: Well, the commitment that I made to the Australian people, Barrie, was this- that we'll put a reform plan, in due course, to the States on the future of the health and hospital system. Secondly, if they accept it cooperatively, fine, that's good. If not, we would then go to the people and seek a mandate to take over full funding responsibility for the system. That's exactly what I said, and I will not budge from that one bit.
CASSIDY: Well you said more than that, you set a deadline of July last year. Was that a ridiculous deadline to set, in retrospect?
PM: Look, I think it is quite plain that one of the problems that we have had as a Government, for which I accept responsibility, is that we didn't anticipate how hard it was going to be to deliver things. Particularly given the burdens imposed on us by the global financial crisis last year. But that's no excuse. The public expect you to honour the things that you have said. We're now about nine months late from implementing that commitment. I accept that.
But I'm determined, Barrie, to get it right, absolutely right, and I don't walk away from that. And when you're talking about a system which comprises 763 hospitals across Australia, some 115 million visits each year to GPs, 49 million hospital services delivered to the Australian people, you actually want to get it right. So, we need to lift our game, I need to lift my game in terms of delivering on these undertakings, that's fair criticism. The reason that we've had problems with this is we didn't properly, I think, estimate the complexity of what we are embarking on.
CASSIDY: And why was that? Why did you underestimate it? Was it political naïveté? Was it inexperience? What led to that lack of judgment?
PM: Well can I just say Barrie, a lot of things will happen in precisely the timetable that you specify, and sometimes there'll be a delay. If you walk away from your commitment altogether, that's a different thing. I accept that. For us, that's been a-
CASSIDY: But is part of the problem- I think it's your own estimate- you said you put 600 election promises out there. Is that just simply too many?
PM: Well, you'll find that the vast bulk of those have either been honoured or are in the process of being implemented. We of course have made changes in a number of other areas and that goes to the question that you raise about delivering on our commitments. You know, you were talking in your program earlier today about opinion polls. We are taking a whacking in the polls now. I'm sure we'll take an even bigger whacking in the period ahead. And the bottom line is, I think we deserve it, both not just in terms of recent events, but more broadly.
The key thing is for us to get on with the business of delivering to the Australian community, in critical areas of need, in health, in education, in real action on climate change as well. This is critical for the future, and we're taking a pounding because we haven't been up to the mark so far. We're proud of what we've done on the economy last year in the face of everything happening around the world, but we're now facing, I think, a different benchmark now, and we've got to lift our game to meet it.
CASSIDY: So you'll take a pounding in the polls for reasons that go way beyond the insulation program?
PM: Oh, I believe so. I think that's been happening for a period of time, Barrie. One is the problems in the program that we've just been discussing. And the other is, I think, people becoming disappointed at the pace of the delivery of the commitments that we have made. And you and I have just been talking over one, health and hospitals reform. Let me tell you something though, Barrie, we ain't walking away from it one bit. There's been a delay. I've been blamed for that, criticised for that, fair cop. I said July last year. I'm not going to walk away from that. But let me tell you, I intend to get on and do it.
CASSIDY: And by what you say, it sounds as though you don't intend to use the global financial crisis as political cover for failing to deliver on some of those promises.
PM: No, I mean, that's just a context, that's what's happened. We're proud of the fact that we kept Australia out of recession last year, 2009. The only advanced economy in the world, really, to do so. And as a result, hundreds of thousands of Australians were kept in jobs. You go to Europe today, you go to the United States, you've got unemployment numbers double that in Australia. Go back to previous recessions around the world, you'll find that the Australian unemployment rate was usually much higher than the unemployment rate in previous international recessions.
We're proud of what we've done on the economy. We've stepped up to the plate. We've keep the wheels of the economy going. Where we have to improve and lift our game, where I need to lift my game, is in delivering in the key outstanding areas of reform in health and hospitals, in education, and getting on with the business of action on climate change as well.
CASSIDY: And you've also said you need to improve your communication skills, and particularly, you talked about failing to properly or adequately explain the emissions trading scheme. Are you still just as committed to an ETS as you were before Copenhagen?
PM: You know something Barrie? All the advice we've received, and Mr Howard's Government received, it is the most effective, least costly way of dealing with climate change. I mean, if there was some, you know, magic bullet out there which was cost-free and pain-free to act on bringing down global greenhouse gas emissions, I'm sure John Howard and Kevin Rudd would've found it a long time ago.
Tony Abbott seems to say that he's found it. I just think that's absolute nonsense. And it's the product of someone who says that he is a climate change sceptic in effect, when he says that he thinks that climate change is absolute crap- his words, not mine. So on the ETS, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, that, we believe, is the most effective, most efficient, least costly way of handling the challenge of climate change, and our views on that haven't changed.
CASSIDY: So, no matter what happens, an ETS must remain the centrepiece of your response to climate change?
PM: There is no way, Barrie, that when you're dealing with big challenges in the future of really bringing down greenhouse gas emissions that you can walk away from emissions trading. If you look at Mr Abbott's so-called direct action, his climate change con job, I mean, you do the numbers on it, maybe at best it would produce, you know, a 1% impact, maybe. In fact the analysis that's been done suggests that, once it's implemented, the overall increase- the overall impact on greenhouse gas emissions would see greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase.
But you see, that's just not being fair dinkum. We believe that to be fair dinkum you've got to produce real action that adds up, that works, and if you're talking about significant reductions in the future, there is no way you can do that absent an emissions trading scheme.
CASSIDY: And if the only way that you can get to an emissions trading scheme is through a joint sitting of the Parliament, you would then prepared to go to a double dissolution election on this issue?
PM: Well Barrie, let me just restate what I've always said. I believe Governments are elected to serve their full term. John Howard and I are on a unity ticket on that, if not many other things, and that is that the Australian voters usually look pretty dimly on racing off to elections early. That's the first point. The second is-
CASSIDY: But that's not necessarily an early election, you can have a double dissolution as late as October, and that would not be regarded as early.
PM: Well I'll let you sort that one out with the constitutional lawyers, I constantly get conflicting advice on that one, mate. It goes round and round and round. Secondly, can I just say that-
CASSIDY: What advice are you getting?
PM: Well, more complex than you have just suggested. The second point I'd make, though, is this. This Bill of ours for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is in the Senate now. Penny Wong and others are working with the Greens to see what can be done. This is not over yet. And we will see what action emerges from the Senate.
To go back to your core question about serious action on climate change in the future, emissions trading has to be core, front and centre to that, because if you're going to bring about large-scale greenhouse gas emissions- that's why we took that view, John Howard took that view, Peter Costello took that view, Malcolm Turnbull took that view- 35 other Western countries around the world have taken that view, only Tony Abbott it seems has found the magical solution which says all that is frankly just nonsense.
CASSIDY: But I'd just make the point though, if that is your view on that and you regard this as the greatest moral threat facing the world, if it fails again in the Senate, surely you'd be duty-bound to take the only course available to you, and that is a double dissolution election so that you bring about a joint sitting?
PM: Barrie, we just take all these things one step at a time. It's in the Senate, and we'll make our judgments once the Senate has reached its conclusion on it. On the question of climate change, we are absolutely upfront about the fact that this is a profound economic and moral challenge for the country's future. And that, by the way, was my original statement- the greatest economic and moral challenge for the future. When our kids look back in 20 years time and ask the question of this generation, 'were they fair dinkum or did they walk away from it?', I'd rather say that I threw everything at it, threw absolutely everything at it, to try and make it work, and to try and deliver an outcome at home and abroad.
If we don't, 20 years time, those who succeed us on your program and in my position Barrie, will say 'what the hell did they do?' And there'll be a trillion dollars, a real trillion, not a Barnaby Joyce trillion, thrown out there to get a scientist to come up with a quick fix in twenty four hours, because by then it may be too late. We think we've got to act, and act appropriately. That's why we don't walk away from this one bit.
CASSIDY: Prime Minister, there was a curious piece in the Sydney Morning Herald recently. A young researcher from Sydney wrote that she had a conversation with you after a function, and when you were told that she was doing a PhD, you said this- this is the quote: "that is an excuse that all young women are using nowadays to avoid starting a family". Did you say that?
PM: Barrie, I have absolutely no recollection of saying anything like that, and you know something, they are not my views. If you were at an Australia Day reception with hundreds of people around- as I think that was the case as far as that discussion was concerned- there's, you know, conversations going on every way. I would never say anything like that. It's not my view. I have exactly the reverse views. I mean, I have been passionate about the role of women in the economy, in business, in society, pursuing their own individual careers. I think whoever this person is has simply got the wrong end of the stick, and-
CASSIDY: So is she setting you up? Because she went on to say that you used a terse voice, and you were not looking in any sense ironic.
PM: Well Barrie, I'm sure that on any given day the assessment of your capacity for irony and mine may vary depending on who's listening to you and who's watching you, and watching your facial expressions. All I'm saying to you is that is not my view of the world. I can't understand how someone could've taken that as being my view given that everything I've stood for in public life is exactly the reverse. Now, I've been criticised for my communications style. Take all that criticism-
CASSIDY: I think you've criticised yourself this week, Prime Minister, it was-
PM: Oh you think that's been unique Barrie, and no one else has ever raised that flag over the last 12-24 months? I think you might have kicked it off originally mate. Can I just say, look, fair cop. I mean, I accept that, that's right. As someone said to me the other day, when it comes to brevity, I make up for it in complexity. Well, okay, I'll do better. But you know something, whether it's climate change, or getting on with the business of making a difference for women in the workplace, I'm about making real things happen, real changes which are sustainable into the future.
The language may not be pretty from time to time. I may not be the King of the sound bite, accept that. I may be misunderstood. We all need to improve on that score. I intend to get on with the job.
CASSIDY: Well, we appreciate you communicating with us this morning.
PM: Appreciate it Barrie.



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's an honour to join you on this sacred ground for the Australian Labor Party.
The site of past election campaign launches by Don Dunstan.
The man who represented Norwood in Parliament for more than a quarter of a century.
The man recognised as among the greatest Labor leaders and the greatest Australian Premiers.
The man who transformed South Australia - building a modern, sophisticated, confident and outward-looking South Australia that became a beacon for the nation.
Today, the bloke who started political life working for Don Dunstan, returns to the Norwood Town Hall.
As your leader.
As your Premier.
And seeking a fresh mandate from the people of South Australia.
Mike is Australia's most experienced Premier.
Mike Rann is an unapologetic champion for South Australia.
Most importantly, Mike is a leader who has delivered for South Australia.
With new industries.
New businesses.
New jobs for a new generation of South Australians.
In short a new vision for South Australia's future.
Friends, eight years ago, before Mike Rann became Premier, it was a different story for this state.
South Australia's unemployment rate was above the nation's average, at 7.2 per cent.
Kids were leaving to find jobs elsewhere.
And South Australians were worrying about their future.
Eight years later, things have changed.
Unemployment is just 4.4 per cent - well below (and no longer above) the nation's average.
The number of jobs in South Australia has grown by almost 20 per cent - as young people now stay rather than giving up and leaving the state.
And major projects are now coming to South Australia - not leaving South Australia, as in the past.
Friends, South Australia has experienced one of the greatest transformations of any state in the Federation.
And this is not an accident.
It's the result of Mike Rann, his cabinet and his government, working, working, working.
Providing strong leadership.
Providing responsible economic management.
And Mike always leading from the front.
But all this could be put at risk if an untested, ill-prepared and risky Liberal Party is allowed to slide back into power on March 20.
Friends, in the two years since the new Australian Government came to office nationally, we have built a strong partnership with the Rann Government.
Partnership is not a word.
Partnership is a fact.
Partnership investing in nation-building infrastructure.
A partnership in bringing the jobs and industries of the future to this great state.
And partnership in helping secure the future of South Australia's water supply.
From the day we established Infrastructure Australia, to set national priorities for infrastructure investment, Mike was the first Premier beating down my door.
And from the beginning, one thing was clear.
When Mike comes with an idea or proposal - it's never sloppy or half-baked.
It's worked out, thought through and carefully costed.
That's why South Australia's plans were among the first projects in the nation to be endorsed by Infrastructure Australia.
Since we came to office nationally, the Australian Government's investment in road and rail infrastructure in South Australia has increased by 264 per cent, compared to the Howard Government.
Like the Australian Government's $500 million investment in the South Road upgrade.
Almost $300 million for the electrification of Gawler rail line north.
$291 million to extend the Noarlunga rail line south down to Seaford.
$61 million investment million to extend the Adelaide O-Bahn road right into the heart of the city.
Our investment through the Local Government Reform Fund in four projects here in Adelaide - to develop new, innovative approaches to long-term city planning.
And let's never forget about our partnership on water.
Our investment of $328 million to double the capacity of Adelaide's desalination plant - powered by renewable energy - a plant capable of securing half of Adelaide's future water needs.
Do you know, the previous Federal government never invested a dollar in urban rail or urban water.
Not a single dollar.
That has now changed.
And changed fundamentally.
And if you want evidence of what partnership is all about - it's about real projects on the ground that would make a real different to the lives of working families.
I said before the transformation of South Australia has been profound.
And nowhere is this more evident than in the transformation of the South Australian economy.
An economy now diversifying into high-value industries and high-skilled jobs.
Transforming the economy from traditional manufacturing into high-tech manufacturing, major defence projects, renewable energy and advanced industries to support mining and information technology.
Industries that are driving the future growth of this economy.
And industries that are generating high-skilled, rewarding jobs for our kids today and for future generations.
Of course, little of this would have been possible had we stood idly by last year as economies around the world fell like nine pins.
As millions of workers in Europe and America lost their jobs - and still remain out of work.
Together with Mike's government, we decided to make a difference.
The Australian Government has made a $4.2 billion investment in South Australia through our nation-building infrastructure stimulus plan.
The result for the nation (and for South Australia) - among the major advanced economies.
The highest growth.
The second lowest unemployment rate.
The lowest debt.
The lowest deficits.
And the only one not to go into recession.
Indeed, in the last financial year South Australia grew by 1.4 per cent.
The second highest growth rate in the nation.
And a country mile ahead of the rest of the world.
And while the auto industry was collapsing around the world, we did it differently in Australia.
We did it differently in South Australia.
The Australian Government's $6.2 billion New Green Car Plan is securing future jobs and future opportunities for local car manufacturing.
Just over twelve months ago, I visited the heart of Australia's $7 billion automotive industry in Elizabeth to launch an all-new, fuel-efficient, low-emission small car - the result of a $149 million co-investment with Holden.
This is a great win for South Australian manufacturing.
For Australian manufacturing.
For family budgets.
And for the environment. 
So you ask what partnership means.
It's not a slogan.
It's a reality.
And one that makes a real difference on the ground to the needs of working families.
We've increased our investment in health and hospitals here in South Australia by 43 per cent compared to the Howard Government.
We're investing in an education revolution, including $1.4 billion in the biggest school modernisation project ever seen in this state - spread across 789 schools.
And we're tackling the huge challenge of securing South Australia's future water supply.
For too long, this challenge was neglected both by the Commonwealth, the eastern states and previous governments of this state.
But now the challenge is being tackled head-on.
For the first time, the Australian Government has now committed over $1 billion to new water infrastructure projects in South Australia.
For the first time, we are also buying back water rights to restore our rivers to better health.
We have now secured the purchase of 797 gigalitres of water entitlements at a cost of $1.27 billion - despite strong opposition from the Liberals.
And for the first time, we have a Commonwealth Minister with national responsibility for the overall cap on the Murray Darling and a Basin-wide plan to give effect to that cap.
And that minister is a South Australian - Senator Penny Wong.
Nobody deserves more credit for the changes in national water policy than Mike Rann.
Mike has been unrelenting in demanding South Australia gets its fair share.
Just ask the Victorians.
Of course there's no quick fixes - we all know that.
South Australia's challenges with water shortages have been accumulating for well over a century.
But finally, there's real action underway.
So you ask what partnership means.
It means what we have done together in just two short years on the economy, on infrastructure, on schools, on hospitals and on water.
The absolute basics of what governments must be about.
Friends, Mike Rann is the bloke who's taken this state from being behind the pack.
And he's put South Australia out in front.
He's got plans for South Australia's future.
And deserves to be able to finish the job.
And as Prime Minister, I look forward to working with him to deliver for South Australia's future.
It's my pleasure to introduce to you my friend, the Premier of South Australia, Mike Rann. 


Thanks everyone for your great comments in this discussion.
It probably won't come as much of a surprise that, like Morris, the school library was also a big part of my education. I agree that the role librarians and teachers play in helping kids find the right books and learn to love books is vital.
Julia already has 3,061 new school libraries going up as part of the Building the Education Revolution.
And today Julia and I visited Amaroo School in Canberra to launch Australia's first National Curriculum for consultation. The Australian Curriculum has a strong focus on the basics, particularly rigorous literacy and numeracy learning.
It's been developed by curriculum experts with assistance from teachers and subject matter experts - and now we are releasing it for public comment prior to introduction into schools next year.
I have no doubt that the content will - and should - spark some fierce debate and feedback.
The comments from parents, teachers and librarians through this blog discussion have certainly stressed the responsibility which lies with all of us to encourage the love of reading in our young ones.
It has been great to hear that some parents are benefiting from Let's Read developed by the Centre for Community Child Health and other local programs, including in SA and WA.
Some really useful ideas that came through in the blog:
     * Reading to your kids is a great, free, way to enjoy time together,
     * Leave books all over the house - the kids will pick them up eventually,
     * Be a role model - make sure that your kids see you enjoying books, and
     * Get your kids involved in public library school holiday programs
And this comment from one of the posts says it all: "My eldest daughter's only complaint after Christmas was that Santa didn't give her a book."He must know I love to read".
It struck me after reading some of the comments just how important books are to kids. We do a lot to celebrate Australian authors who write for adults but I realised that there is room to celebrate and encourage authors who focus on providing exciting stories for young children and teenagers.
With this in mind I am pleased to let you know we have decided to create two new categories in the Prime Minister's Literary Awards - for children's and young adult fiction - to give due recognition to this important part of our literary landscape.
Thanks again for your contributions to this debate, I have really enjoyed reading them and following the discussion. We're going to keep working on how we can actively support parents, teachers and librarians to help our young ones learn to love reading - and keep reading to your kids!
Read the full blog transcript


The Prime Minister of Australia the Hon Kevin Rudd MP and the President of the Republic of Botswana LTGEN Seretse Khama Ian Khama met on 1 March 2010. They agreed that this visit to Australia by the President of Botswana symbolised the growing substance of the bilateral relationship, which is built on close cooperation in the Commonwealth, strong people to people links and increasing trade and investment collaboration.
The Prime Minister and President underlined the warm and genuine friendship between the two countries. They noted the successful visits to Botswana by the Foreign Minister of Australia, the Hon Stephen Smith, in January 2010, and to Australia by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Botswana, the Hon Phandu Skelemani, in June 2009.
The Prime Minister and the President agreed that, as two nations committed to democracy and increasing prosperity through trade and international economic engagement, Australia and Botswana had a shared interest in contributing to international affairs. The Prime Minister welcomed Botswana's support for Australia's bid for a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. The President noted that Australia's active involvement in international affairs meant it was well placed to make a strong contribution to the work of the Security Council.
The leaders noted the significance to both countries of their mining and resource sectors, and the opportunities that afforded for closer collaboration.
The Prime Minister and the President noted the interests Australia and Botswana share on many global challenges. They:
1. Underlined their concern regarding the impact of greenhouse gas emissions on global warming, and confirmed their shared commitment to the implementation of the Copenhagen Accord and working collaboratively in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change for a global agreement on climate change; and 
2. Noted that the coordinated policy responses by the G20 have supported the first signs of a global economic recovery and the G20 is committed to taking into account the views of African countries.
The two leaders expressed their ongoing concern about the challenges facing Zimbabwe. They:
1. Agreed that while there has been some progress since the formation of Zimbabwe's Inclusive Government in February 2009, there remained an urgent need for further reforms in governance, the rule of law and human rights;
2. Called on all parties to Zimbabwe's Global Political Agreement to adhere fully to their commitments and engage in genuine power-sharing; and 
3. Agreed to consider further opportunities to assist the people of Zimbabwe.
To build on the already strong foundation of the bilateral relationship, the Prime Minister and President committed to broaden cooperation across a wide spectrum of shared interests. To take forward this commitment, the Prime Minister and the President:
1. Underlined their shared commitment to strengthened high-level engagement;
2. Agreed to encourage expanded trade and investment links, including through education, tourism, and natural resources; 
3. Welcomed Australia's continued commitment to Botswana's development, including:
a. A new $1.1 million research program, implemented through the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research to assist Botswana's small scale cattle farmers; 
b. The expansion of the Australian Government volunteer program to include Botswana in 2010-11;
c. A two year $500,000 extension of support in bushfire prevention and management; 
d. A two year $250,000 extension of support in plant biosecurity and quarantine assistance; 
e. Continuation of Australia's Development Scholarships Program to Botswana, noting the 2010 allocation of ten scholarships in priority areas determined in consultation with the Government of Botswana; 
f. Continuation of Australia's extractive industries fellowship program to Botswana; 
g. Ongoing legal capacity building assistance through regional Africa programs implemented by the Australian Federal Police, the Attorney-General's Department and the Australian Transaction Report and Analysis Centre;
h. Strengthening Botswana's trade negotiation capacity, particularly within the context of the World Trade Organization Doha Round; and
i. Continuing cooperation in peace and security, including by offering positions for Batswana officers in short-term Australian Defence Force training courses in Australia.
The Prime Minister looked forward to working closely with Botswana in preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in 2011, and to welcoming the President to Perth for the meeting.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT FOR THE GOVERNMENT
OF AUSTRALIA 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA
The Hon Kevin Rudd MP 
Prime Minister
LTGEN Seretse Khama Ian Khama
President
Signed on 1 March 2010


The Prime Minister of Australia the Hon Kevin Rudd MP and the President of the Republic of Botswana LTGEN Seretse Khama Ian Khama met on 1 March 2010. They agreed that this visit to Australia by the President of Botswana symbolised the growing substance of the bilateral relationship, which is built on close cooperation in the Commonwealth, strong people to people links and increasing trade and investment collaboration.
The Prime Minister and President underlined the warm and genuine friendship between the two countries. They noted the successful visits to Botswana by the Foreign Minister of Australia, the Hon Stephen Smith, in January 2010, and to Australia by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Botswana, the Hon Phandu Skelemani, in June 2009.
The Prime Minister and the President agreed that, as two nations committed to democracy and increasing prosperity through trade and international economic engagement, Australia and Botswana had a shared interest in contributing to international affairs. The Prime Minister welcomed Botswana's support for Australia's bid for a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. The President noted that Australia's active involvement in international affairs meant it was well placed to make a strong contribution to the work of the Security Council.
The leaders noted the significance to both countries of their mining and resource sectors, and the opportunities that afforded for closer collaboration.
The Prime Minister and the President noted the interests Australia and Botswana share on many global challenges. They:
     * Underlined their concern regarding the impact of greenhouse gas emissions on global warming, and confirmed their shared commitment to the implementation of the Copenhagen Accord and working collaboratively in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change for a global agreement on climate change; and
     * Noted that the coordinated policy responses by the G20 have supported the first signs of a global economic recovery and the G20 is committed to taking into account the views of African countries.
The two leaders expressed their ongoing concern about the challenges facing Zimbabwe. They:
     * Agreed that while there has been some progress since the formation of Zimbabwe's Inclusive Government in February 2009, there remained an urgent need for further reforms in governance, the rule of law and human rights;
     * Called on all parties to Zimbabwe's Global Political Agreement to adhere fully to their commitments and engage in genuine power-sharing; and
     * Agreed to consider further opportunities to assist the people of Zimbabwe.
To build on the already strong foundation of the bilateral relationship, the Prime Minister and President committed to broaden cooperation across a wide spectrum of shared interests. To take forward this commitment, the Prime Minister and the President:
     * Underlined their shared commitment to strengthened high-level engagement;
     * Agreed to encourage expanded trade and investment links, including through education, tourism, and natural resources;
     * Welcomed Australia's continued commitment to Botswana's development, including:
a. A new $1.1 million research program, implemented through the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research to assist Botswana's small scale cattle farmers;
b. The expansion of the Australian Government volunteer program to include Botswana in 2010-11;
c. A two year $500,000 extension of support in bushfire prevention and management;
d. A two year $250,000 extension of support in plant biosecurity and quarantine assistance;
e. Continuation of Australia's Development Scholarships Program to Botswana, noting the 2010 allocation of ten scholarships in priority areas determined in consultation with the Government of Botswana;
f. Continuation of Australia's extractive industries fellowship program to Botswana;
g. Ongoing legal capacity building assistance through regional Africa programs implemented by the Australian Federal Police, the Attorney-General's Department and the Australian Transaction Report and Analysis Centre;
h. Strengthening Botswana's trade negotiation capacity, particularly within the context of the World Trade Organization Doha Round; and
i. Continuing cooperation in peace and security, including by offering positions for Batswana officers in short-term Australian Defence Force training courses in Australia.
The Prime Minister looked forward to working closely with Botswana in preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in 2011, and to welcoming the President to Perth for the meeting.


Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and Minister for Education, Julia Gillard, today released the first draft Australian Curriculum for students from Kindergarten to Year 10 in the subjects of English, maths, science and history.
Having an online curriculum means the curriculum will be dynamic, and easily updated, in contrast with the static, hard-copy format. The Australian Curriculum will be among the world's first curriculum delivered online.
From next year, students from all states and territories will be able to move schools, school systems and states and be taught the same knowledge, skills and understanding as part of a curriculum for the 21st Century.
For the first time, the 80 000 students who move interstate each year won't have to get to know a whole new curriculum at the same time as getting to know a new school.
The Prime Minister and Minister released the draft Australian Curriculum during a visit to Amaroo School in the ACT which has a large number of Australian Defence Force families. They met with parents and students who have moved often during their schooling, and who will be among those that will particularly benefit from the new, national approach.
The draft Australian Curriculum has been developed by the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA), in consultation with education authorities and curriculum experts. It has been shaped by the advice of teachers, principals and others with expertise in particular subject areas, stages of schooling and equity and diversity.
Building on the consultation process to date, from today all Australians interested in our children's education are invited to review and provide feedback on the curriculum taught in our schools during the public consultation period until 23 May 2010.
In addition, 150 schools across Australia will be trialling the new curriculum over the next 3 months. The names of these schools will be released shortly.
The Rudd Government strongly believes the curriculum should be developed by experts and not by politicians.
The new curriculum represents another significant step towards achieving a new era of transparency in Australian schools following on from the highly successful My School web site.
The new Australian Curriculum will be implemented by state and territory education authorities from 2011.
A draft English, mathematics, science and history curriculum for Years 11-12 will be released for consultation later this year.
The second phase of the Australian Curriculum will include languages, geography and the arts.
To view the draft Australian Curriculum, visit the consultation website www.australiancurriculum.edu.au.



PM: As I said yesterday, the Government needs to lift its performance, deliver more, and that's why are here today - to deliver on a key pre-election commitment for an Australian national curriculum.
After 110 years, next year, 2011, Australia will have its national curriculum for the first time. There has been so much squabbling over this, so much fighting, so much disagreement, but, in fact, it's time we got on with the business of doing it, and through the good work of Julia Gillard and all of the officials who have assisted her, we are about to deliver on that commitment today.
What I remember over the years is going around Australia talking to so many, many kids at schools around the country, particularly schools with large Defence communities, who would say this: why is it that when we change states that our kids are put at two disadvantages? One is, the inevitable change in school, but secondly, we find ourselves in a completely different curriculum environment.
We listened carefully to that, and that's why, prior to the last election, we undertook to the Australian people that we would deliver Australia's first national curriculum. This is in English, it's in maths, it's in science, it's in history, and what we're on about is making sure the absolute basics of knowledge, the absolute basics of education, are taught right across the country.
When it comes to teaching the basics, let me be very frank: what we need to make sure is our kids know how to sound out letters, that they know grammar, that they know punctuation, that they know adding up, taking away, counting - these essential elements must be part of the basic knowledge in the school education of all Australian kids, and that's why we are proud to launch this national curriculum document today.
This will be out for public consultation through until the end of May. We want feedback from across the Australian community. We want feedback from all those who have views on the content of what we're putting out there. We'll listen to those views carefully, shake any further gremlins out of the system, that's what it's all about, but what we'll have from 2011, for the first time in the history of the Australian federation, is a national curriculum, P-10, right across this country.
Over to you, Julia.
GILLARD: Thank you very much, and that's what happens when you're in schools.
Can I just briefly say the following, can I very much thank Barry McGaw and the team at the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority. They have moved a mountain to deliver My School. They have moved a mountain to deliver today the draft Australian curriculum in maths, English, science and history, and on and from today parents, teachers, interested Australians will be able to get on this website - www.australiancurriculum.edu.au - and comment themselves.
Curriculum has often been a mystery, a mystery for parents, for employers, they didn't know what was being taught in Australian classrooms. We're taking a very different approach. It's there on the web for all to see and for all to comment upon. The website won't be the only way of commenting. People will also be able to go to face-to-face consultations right around the country, but I would note this - this is a world-leading digital curriculum. The curriculum will always be available through this website. Gone will be the days of paper documents that needed to be refreshed and updated. The curriculum will be on this website not only for the purpose of consultation, but it will be there on the website for teachers to refer to and use, so they can go to this website, use it to help them plan their lessons as they teach the Australian curriculum.
This is a world first, to have a curriculum delivered in this format and in this format alone, to move from the world of paper to the digital world, and that's a very big achievement. That has happened because of Barry McGaw's leadership and the team at ACARA.
I would also note that we will shortly move to a situation where 155 schools around the country will be trialling this national curriculum, using it in their classrooms and providing feedback as they use the national curriculum.
This is an important day for Australian education. I think many Australians will be delighted to see that after 110 years we have a national curriculum in the first four core subjects. I'm looking forward to the comments of Australians on this curriculum. I'm looking forward to seeing it alive in Australian classrooms, firstly in our 155 trial schools, and then from next year on in classrooms right around the country.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, presumably we're changing the current situation because it's not what we want. How did we get, then, to the crazy position where we're not teaching children the most basic things that they need - literacy and numeracy? How did we get to it?
PM: I'll turn to Julia on that because she has been dealing with each of the state curriculum authorities but can I just say one basic principle first and that is getting the States and Territories to agree over a long period of time on a single national curriculum with basic standards in it has been really, really hard. There has been a lot of resistance, there's been a lot of bureaucracy, there's been a lot of people getting in the road; that's the first thing.
The second is over a long period of time I think what you've seen in different states across Australia is pretty patchy standards emerging, pretty patchy standards, let's just be frank about it. Various states have tried to fix up these holes on the way through whether it's on literacy or numeracy or in other areas, but over a period of time a whole lot of, shall I say, less than adequate standards and less than adequate content has crept in.
So what Julia has done, consistent with our pre-election commitment, is seize the bull by the horns and get on with the job. It's detailed work, it's hard work, it is back to basics and making sure that the 80,000 kids who change States every year have the same basic national curriculum.
GILLARD: Thank you Prime Minister.
What I would say to that question is this: first, national curriculum has been talked about for a long period of time and that reform has always ended up crashing and not delivered because of state based squabbling. We are now beyond the days of state based squabbling. Every Education Minister, State and Territory has agreed that they will teach the national curriculum, that it will become the curriculum of this nation.
On the question of quality and standards; there has obviously been a big debate in the teaching profession and amongst those who generate curriculum about the best way of teaching reading, about the best ways of approaching maths and science and history. I believe through this high quality and consultative work lead by Professor McGaw we have resolved those debates.
So this curriculum unashamedly has phonics, has the relationship between sounds and letters. It unashamedly has grammar taught at every level so that we can reassure ourselves that kids in school are learning grammar. It is there to take kids through everything we would remember in maths from counting and multiplying, addition, subtraction, division, through algebra, geometry, measurement, statistics, probability theory and the like.
It's a high quality curriculum where Barry has looked for the best around this nation, but also the best around the world and we have specifically looked at what is being done in those countries that are beating us in international testing.
JOURNALIST: Would this curriculum die if there was a change of government (inaudible)?
GILLARD: Well that's really a question that you'd need to put to Mr Abbott. What I would say is this; we were fought every step of the way in delivering the schools legislation that is making this curriculum a reality.
I had to fight, as some in this room would recall, in December 2008 to get the schools funding bill through as the Liberals argued with us about curriculum and they argued with us about transparency. That is they argued with us about this Australian curriculum and they argued with us about My School. Well when they brought that spirit of opposition against a track record of not having got anything substantial done in Government, I can imagine that Mr Abbott's going to look for a reason to oppose this national curriculum.
That's what Mr Abbott does, it's what the Liberal Party has done in education but to coin a phrase, when in Government you've been all talk and no action in education as the Liberal Party was I think we should be looking forward to something a bit better than just continued opposition as we deliver these big reforms in education.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: As Julia answers that, one addition to what she said. In the schools agreement that the Minister referred to just before, this would not be happening, we would not have a national curriculum today had not the Minister Julia Gillard insisted that it was a precondition for the extra funding to be delivered to the states through the schools agreement. That is bottom line stuff, you want to know how this has happened, that's how it happened.
A lot of opposition on the way through, some from the states but in terms of the hullabaloo from the Liberals and the Senate on this question it was tough passage.
GILLARD: Thanks for that question and it's an important one. This is the curriculum for all schools and all school systems. All schools and school systems at the moment invest in professional development for teachers. They invest in professional development to teach teachers about the curriculum. Obviously that effort will be moved from teaching about state based curriculums to teaching about the Australian curriculum.
Then of course your question raises the vital question of teacher quality. We need to be lifting teacher quality right around the country and we're doing that through the investment of more than half a billion dollars which is already leading to reforms like Teach for Australia, bringing the best graduates into teaching, into reforms like rewarding leading and accomplished teachers for going to disadvantaged schools and teaching in the classrooms that need them the most, investing in professional development to lift standards around the country.
This reform, the national curriculum, interlocks with My School, it interlocks with what we're doing on quality teaching, it interlocks with what we're doing in literacy and numeracy, it interlocks with what we're doing to support disadvantaged schools as well as of course our very big capital programs for schools.
The reforms all work together, better quality teaching, quality national curriculum, transparency through My School.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, some of your colleagues are concerned about the excessive criticism. Does this mean your mea culpa has gone too far or is your Government (inaudible)?
PM: I think it's just important to acknowledge the fact that we need to do better, deliver more, get back to the basics, that's why we're here today, to deliver on the basics of a national curriculum.
This is a key pre-election commitment of ours. It's taken a lot of work to get right. We've got a public consultation ahead now to shake any further gremlins out of the system but this is the back to basics stuff that the Government's on about and there'll be more of it.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you've finished your health blueprint. When are you going to roll that out?
PM: I like the presupposition to the question, Michelle. Let me tackle that first and I'll go to the second bit. The first is we are still having discussions with various states and territories on key elements on what we propose to do. In fact I was meeting only last week also with the heads of various medical organisations as well. And as far as the second point is concerned, Michelle, it'll be released in due season.
On the question of basics, getting the basics right for the future of the health and hospital system is hard work, it's detailed work and we will honour our pre-election commitments.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, you've introduced the curriculum, My School, other commitments you've honoured. Do you agree with the Prime Minister's assessment of the Government that it hasn't been up to the mark?
GILLARD: Look I do agree with the Prime Minister's assessment and what I believe the Prime Minister is challenging me and other ministers and the Government overall to do is to keep improving, keep rising to the challenge, keep delivering on the things that matter to working families. And here we are today talking about a big new reform that matters to Australian families. It matters vitally to those who look forward to moving school many times, as defence force families do, they know that when their child starts prep that that child will probably move four or five times during the course of his or her education. But it's also vital for every child in every school. I think every parent wants to know that their child is studying a high class, rigorous curriculum and that's what the Australian Curriculum is all about.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you say that want to do better. What's been the problem? Has it been taking on too much at once, is it too much process? Can you go a level deeper than you have in your examination on what you think has been the problem?
PM: No, not really. I think the bottom line is this. We need to do better, deliver more and get back to the basics. That's what we're here to do today.
On the question of basics, I listened carefully to the questions before about concerns about teacher quality. This hit me in the eyeballs quite some time ago when I was sitting down reading a story to a littlie and I began sounding out words and the littlie did not know what I was talking about. That worried me a lot because this was not a little one so little that the ability to spell out c-a-t was, should have been beyond them and when I went through the c-a-t and the d-o-g, it wasn't working.
That's part of the reason we were doing this. We both went to schools where we were taught years and years and years ago how to sound letters out, sound words out. We have got to have that as well as other basics out there so that the mums and dads of Australia, wherever they go across this country of ours, Australia, can be confident that this basic national curriculum is going to give their kids the basic skills for the future.
JOURNALIST: On bullying (inaudible), I know that there is an inquiry going on at the moment, but what can the Federal Government do?
GILLARD: There is a Parliamentary inquiry at the moment to look at the question of bullying but of course in the meantime, the Government is continuing to act.
With our state and territory colleagues, we have a National Safe Schools Framework and under that framework, schools right around the country engage in anti-bullying activities and as you move through schools like this one, you will often see the posters and the learning material that is helping teachers have the conservation with children about not engaging in bullying and what to do if they are bullied.
In addition to that, we're investing through the Alannah and Madeleine Foundation on dealing with the newer challenge of cyber bullying. Obviously bullying in the playground has always been with us. Now with new technology it's taking on new forms - facebook, mobile phones, chasing kids back into their homes so that they feel like there's no safe space for them. The Alannah and Madeleine Foundation is working directly on that.
And then my ministerial colleagues, both Minister Conroy and Minister O'Connor have also announced cyber safety investments because we do understand that there are dangers for children on the internet, dangers about who they might get talking to through websites and chatrooms, dangers like bullying and we need to make sure that we're working with kids, working with parents, working with families to understand these new dangers.
PM: There's a whole lot more to be done on this too. These are first steps. When we were all at school, bullying stopped and started once you got inside the school gate, that's the extent that it existed - in school. Now, as Julia rightly said, it follows you home. That's what's different here. And there's a whole lot of trauma out there amongst the kids and their mums and dads today and we've seen the most horrific examples of it most recently. But you know, underneath it all there's a whole lot of families way beyond that who are really concerned. We've taken these steps but technology is rolling this on and we need to take further steps as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll get Julia to answer in terms of the processes with all these school curriculum bodies. Let me just say this, there's always been a thousand debates about what's right and what's wrong about education. I think you've been through a few of those Barry over the last year or so. I think your hair is almost white since I last saw you.
But you know something, you've got to get on with it and I think all of us intuitively as parents know that if our littlies are capable of sounding out letters, it actually helps. It's not perfect, it's one part of what we describe as basic education in reading. It's these basic building blocks which taken together, all help.
GILLARD: I suspect I could carry on about this for a very long period of time but I'll try not to.
Obviously as the Prime Minister says, one of the foundations of reading is phonics, sounding out words, recognising a word c-a-t, cat.
Then of course you've got to recognise the meaning of the word, what is a cat. Then you've got to be able to put it in a sentence - the cat sat on the mat.
Then you've got to understand the punctuation, capital letter, full stop.
Then you've got to recognise that the order of words matters, the child sat on the dog means something different to the dog sat on the child.
And then of course we want people to get creative. Do they want to write a story about a cat or do they want to write a story about a dinosaur or an alien.
And of course, this is - I haven't started on apostrophes yet for the press gallery, I could certainly do apostrophes at length for the press gallery - so all of these things, these layers of complexity are built up through the curriculum.
We're not expecting kids in year 10 to be sitting around going c-a-t, cat. We're expecting them then by that stage of learning to be reading great works of literature and debating their meaning. But you build it up, layer by layer and that's what this curriculum's about.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Firstly as I said the other day Australia is not satisfied with the answer that we've received from the Israeli Government so far in relation to the use and abuse of Australian passports. Second point I'd make is this. The Australian Government always reviews UN General Assembly and Security Council resolutions on their merits and this one reviewed on its merits. This specific resolution does not explicitly endorse the so-called Goldstone report and therefore, we have taken our decision based on its merits. I go back to my original point however and that is that we still have a way to go yet with the Israeli Government on the other matter.
JOURNALIST: Minister, talking about getting back to basics- one of the criticisms of the Government at the moment is that money has been wasted on the Building the Education Revolution- that schools are (inaudible). Would you get back to basics and check whether (inaudible)?
GILLARD: Value for money in tenders for the Building the Education projects are checked continuously, as part of the program and part of the guidelines. There has been parts of the country where the tenders originally received were not seen to offer value for money, and so retendering has been engaged in. I would also note that sometimes we see in the media price comparisons which are not apples to apples. Obviously the cost in Building the Education Revolution are the costs of the building including fit out, so if we're looking at a classroom like this one, it's not just the per metre cost for putting up the walls and the ceiling, it's actually the cost of the things that make it usable like the interactive whiteboards, the carpeting that we're standing on now, and so on and so forth. So, I would say to people, value for money, we're checking it continuously. Obviously, if people are concerned about value for money questions, we're always happy to hear from them, but some of the comparisons done can be misleading, because they are comparing basic per metre costs with the full cost of a fitted out building.
JOURNALIST: What is the cost of the rollout of the curriculum going to be?
GILLARD: Well, the curriculum's being developed by ACARA, but professional development monies obviously are held by states and territories and school systems, and they will use their curriculum support systems to rollout the national curriculum. We are in a circumstance where as a Government we have almost doubled the amount of money going into school education. We have invested in an unprecedented way in school education. That means of course states and territory schools and school systems have got more resources than they ever have had before to roll out the Education Revolution, including rolling out the Australian curriculum.
PM: On buildings, by the way, before I go to Hugh's question- I was speaking to Anne, the Principal here, before. This school has grown from 150 kids six years ago to more than 1000 kids now, is that right Anne? And so the investment here is six new state of the art classrooms, and I think an associated learning centre. So our response, I've got to say, right across the nation is, from schools everywhere is basically one of 'thank God, you're helping us meet with the current pressures on our schools'. Hugh.
JOURNALIST: Some people are concerned (inaudible)?
GILLARD: Well I may turn to Barry at this point as well, but obviously in designing the Australian curriculum, Barry McGaw and others have led a consultative process. I believe if you properly look at this curriculum, to adopt Barry's phrase originally, it is neither black armband nor white blindfold. There have been some claims made about the contents of the curriculum in media in recent days that actually factually aren't right. I would ask people to do what we're here to invite them to do today, jump on the website and have a look themselves. This is the feedback period, the comment period for Australians, and I would invite them to do that.
JOURNALIST: Minister, how would you characterise the role of the Education Union in the debate over the national curriculum (inaudible)?
PM: Just as Julia answers that, can I just add one point as well. Some of the debate at the weekend was over the including of indigenous perspectives in part of the curriculum. I'd just draw your attention to what Mr Howard had to say about this back in '06/'07 and the inclusion of indigenous perspectives in the curriculum. I'd draw your attention to the current inclusion of indigenous matters in the WA State Government's curriculum. I mean, let's all keep this into some perspective. We're on about the basics. The basics in these four core subjects, which go to the three and a half million kids over time in the Australian school system, it doesn't matter which state they're in, they can benefit from it.
GILLARD: Well, we of course are laying out our Education Revolution reforms. We're laying out another big one today with the Australian curriculum. I expect that people will have different views. Obviously the Australian Education Union had a view about My School, it may well have a view about this Australian curriculum, and it will express its view. We, as a Government, we're determined to make a difference for Australian kids. So what drives me, what drives the Prime Minister, what drives the Government, is that we want to make a difference for every child in every school. Sometimes that requires us to overcome some opposition, but we've done it in the past and we'll continue to do it because that's our focus- have we made a difference for a child in a school. I believe this curriculum will. I believe My School does. I believe our new investments in teacher quality and literacy, numeracy in disadvantaged schools and school capitals are making a difference for those kids.
PM: As we go-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MCGAW: Well no, specifically in relation to history, we've been very careful to make sure that we've had balanced voices at the table. As we started the original draft of the shape of the curriculum in history- it was crafted by a team that included school-based history teachers and historians that might be characterised as left and right. We had John Hirst and Tony Taylor and Stuart Macintyre in that group. Now, that's a diverse group of eminent historians. And what they brought forward is a proposal that, for example, with respect to Aboriginal and Indigenous- or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander perspectives, that their history should be represented in the curriculum. Their history before the arrival of Europeans, and upon the arrival of Europeans, their perspectives, as well as those of the settlers. The settlers perspectives are part celebration. It's not black armband in that sense at all. It's people travelling enormous distances and setting up a whole new country in a hostile environment, on the one hand. But there are indigenous perspectives on that as well, and we're covering both.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd-
PM: Look, just as I go, because I've actually got to get back to work- as you go here can I just draw this- this is work to, but most of the work's been done prior to this. Draw your attention to the fact that here at the Amaroo school we have the Guinness Book of Records champions for the single largest number of air guitarist performers simultaneously? 1,177. Have I got that right Anne?
PRINCIPAL: No, 1,877.
PM: I'm sorry, 1,877. So could you- 88. So if I could ask you to note that appropriately for your bulletins this evening.
GILLARD: And can I invite those who are interested to join Professor McGaw and I, we will be in a classroom with the curriculum on computers, so particularly for our print journalist friends who might want to go through the website and learn its functionality whilst Barry's there to help them, that's available to them.


A national service to remember the 332 victims and survivors of the sinking of the Australian Hospital Ship Centaur was held in Brisbane today.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joined Premier Anna Bligh, Governor General Quentin Bryce, military officials, survivors, relatives of survivors and victims and members of the public at St John's Cathedral for the moving memorial service.
"Today we honour all those who lost their lives on the Australian Hospital Ship Centaur," Mr Rudd said.
"We also honour the families who then waited two-thirds of a century to discover the final resting place of their loved ones.
"Its wreck is now an eternal reminder of all those onboard and their commitment to this nation in a time of great need.
"This is an important day for all Australians to stop and remember those brave souls who lost their lives that day. They will never be forgotten."
"The AHS Centaur was sunk without warning by a torpedo from a Japanese submarine on 14 May 1943, about 50 miles east north-east of Brisbane," Ms Bligh said.
"The 66 year mystery surrounding its final resting place was solved late last year with the discovery of the ship's wreck off the Queensland coast on 20 December.
"That discovery and today's memorial service will hopefully offer some peace to those affected by the tragedy.
"It's important we honour and remember the 268 people who died in the service of their country and acknowledge the devastating effect this has had on their families," Ms Bligh said.
87-year-old Centaur survivor Martin Pash spoke at today's service and students from Centaur Primary School read out the names of the 268 men and women killed.
A commemorative plaque was placed on fore deck of the wreck of the Centaur on 12 January 2010.
Created by The Centaur Association, the plaque contains a CD with the names of everyone who served on the Centaur and personal notes from family members.
The AHS Centaur has been declared an historic shipwreck under the Act, meaning that the vessel should not be interfered with in any way.
The Australian and Queensland governments jointly committed $4 million to the search guided by David Mearns from Bluewater Recoveries.
Today's national memorial service was the first of two commemorations.
A further 'at sea' ceremony is also being organised for later in the year.
The wreck location is approximately 30 miles due east of the southern tip of Moreton Island (27 deg 16.98' South, 153 deg 59.22' East) at a depth of 2,059 metres.
More information about the AHS Centaur can be found online at: http://www.thepremier.qld.gov.au/initiatives/centaur-search/index.aspx 


PM: Well it's great to be here with Bernie Ripoll, the local Member, and here at Redbank State School. And we're here today to talk about the national curriculum. And the Australian Government is proud of the fact that after 110 years of waiting, we have now launched a national curriculum in preschools and kindergartens through to year 10, for right across Australia.
We've done this collaboratively with teachers and with curriculum specialists right across the country. We've got this document now out there for consultation with the public, through until the end of May. The big benefit is this - firstly, the emphasis in this new national curriculum is back to the basics. Back to the basics in spelling and sounding out letters. Back to the basics when it comes to adding up, taking away. Back to the basics when it comes to counting. That's the sort of basic education which the mums and dads of Australia want to make sure is happening. And it's good to see so much of that work being done here, at Redbank, already.
The second thing I'd say is this. This new national curriculum is also absolutely important for the nearly 100,000 Australian kids who change states every year. Think about it, if you're a young person, if you're in primary school or early high school and mum or dad because of work, has to move to another state. The sheer disruption this causes to a young person's education is massive. One of the feedbacks we've got from Australian Defence families is that the single biggest problem they face as families is changing schools, changing states every couple of years, which means their kids' education is being permanently disrupted.
So for 110 years, the nation has failed to deliver a national curriculum. We have now released this national curriculum. We think it's the right direction to go in.
One other thing I'd just say is this: this morning we've been looking at A, B, C's, and it's been great to see how that's been taught in the classroom. And we think this is really important for the future. I notice there's already been some criticism of the new national curriculum. Can I just say this - It seems that our political opponents are into their own A, B, C's. Mr Abbott's A, B, C's, his own political curriculum. What's Mr Abbott's A, B, C? It seems to be A is for Argue, B is for Block, and C is for Criticise. Argue against everything. Block practically everything. And criticise practically everything.
I think it's time we actually got on with the business of national reform, national curriculum reform. And I think it's high time as a nation, we got together to bring about a reform that we've been waiting for, for 110 years. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that you expected to cop a whacking in the polls, that hasn't happened. Is that still yet to come?
PM: Oh look, I believe the polls will continue to tighten for quite a time to come yet. But the bottom line is this, as I've said yesterday and the day before, the Government needs to do better, needs to deliver more, and get back to the basics. And that is what we're on about with this curriculum, and in schools like this at Redbank.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) the mea culpa?
PM: The key thing is to make sure that the Government is delivering on the ground. And what I want to make sure is happening during our third year in office is that we are delivering. Let me point to one example. One of the literacy programs that we've just seen in the classroom here is funded by the Australian Government. That is, how do you get back to the literacy basics with kids who may not have started so well.
That's part of the practical work that we are already doing on the ground. But through this national curriculum on literacy and numeracy, we're going to get on with it right across the nation as well. So in answer to your question, it's about getting back to the basics. Why I'm here in Redbank today is precisely that, to get back to the basics. What matters to me is what happens in this classrooms. What matters to me is what happens with each kid's ability to pick up how to spell, how to read, how to write, how to count, how to add up, how to take away.
JOURNALIST: When can we expect your health plan to be announced?
PM: Well, we're still working with states and territories on some final details. And that is underway through the Health Minister. Can I say on the question of health, we have needed fundamental health and hospital reform in Australia for more than a decade. We've had more than a decade of wasted time on this. And it's time to get on with the job.
I'd say again, in this wasted decade when we should've been reforming our health system, Mr Abbott was Health Minister for four years and failed to do it. We've been in office now for two years. We intend to get on with the job. We've still got a little more to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, I've always found that when it comes to dealing with the states, whether it's on a national curriculum, or whether it's on fundamental health and hospital reform, you're always going to cop a bit of stick on the way through. The key thing is to make sure you get it done. What I'm on about is getting it done. National curriculum on the one hand, national health and hospitals reform on the other.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) revenue from the States -
PM: Look there's been a thousand different speculations in there in recent times over what might or might not be in our proposal to reform the health and hospital system for the future. We'll release this in our own good time. We're still tying up some details with states and territories. Again I go back to the point, I notice already the Liberal Party is out there criticising our proposals for national health and hospital reform prior to them actually being released.
Talk about being trigger happy with criticism. Can I just suggest to Mr Abbott and the Liberal Party, take a deep breath and just wait for a policy to be released and then engage in your criticism if you so will. But my fundamental point is this: Mr Abbott was Health Minister for four years, ripped a billion dollars out of the public hospitals of Australia, and didn't reform the health system one bit. We've been in office two years. We intend to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: Would you be prepared to hold a referendum if needs be?
PM: Our position hasn't changed. What I've said all along is that we will put a reform proposal to the states and territories. And we would hope that they would accept it. If they do not accept it, then of course we stand by our position of then going to the people to seek a mandate for taking over the full funding responsibility of the system. That's what I said prior to the election. That's what I say now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, that's a little way still to go yet. When you're talking about something as big as the health and hospital system, a system where the taxpayer currently spends about $70 billion a year where we have something like 110 million visits to GPs each year by Australians. Where our hospitals deliver 49 million different hospital services to Australians each year. I think what the Australian public want is for us to get it right, absolutely right. I wish we could've done it a bit earlier, but you know something, it's important to get the detail absolutely right. That's what we've been doing.
And folks, having said that, having said that, I'm now due at the memorial service for the Centaur in town, and I've got to go. Thanks very much. 


PM: After 110 years, next year, 2011, Australia will have its national curriculum for the first time, and through the good work of Julia Gillard and all the officials who have assisted her we are about to deliver on that commitment today.
What I remember over the years is going around Australia talking to so many kids at schools around the country, particularly schools with large Defence communities, who would say this: 'why is it that when we change states that our kids are put at two disadvantages? One is the inevitable change in school, but secondly, we find ourselves in a completely different curriculum environment.'
We listened carefully to that, and that's why, prior to the last election, we undertook to the Australian people that we would deliver Australia's first national curriculum. This is in English, it's in math, it's in science, it's in history, and what we're on about is making sure that the absolute basics of knowledge, the absolute basics of education, are taught right across the country.
DPM: And on and from today, parents, teachers, interested Australians will be able to get on this website - www.australiancurriculum.edu.au - and comment themselves.
Curriculum has often been a mystery, a mystery for parents, for employers, they didn't know what was being taught in Australian classrooms. We're taking a very different approach. It's there on the web for all to see and for all to comment upon. The website won't be the only way of commenting. People will also be able to go to face-to-face consultations right around the country.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Today we honour courage.
Today we honour sacrifice.
Today we honour compassion.
These are the noblest human values. These are the noblest Australian values.
These are the values that shine like a winter star, for this is a story which must be told and told and told again, because in the story of the Centaur we see the worst and best of humanity at work.
Today we honour all those who lost their lives on the Australian Hospital Ship Centaur and we honour those who survived, floating on rafts clinging to wreckage, praying for rescue.
We honour the families whose lives were torn apart by this cold, brutal, inhuman act of sinking a hospital ship, the families who then waited two-thirds of a century to discover the final resting place of their loved ones.
The images from the ocean floor that we saw a few short months ago when the wreck of the Centaur was discovered were a voyage through time - and the voyages of time: the ship's bell; the sprung frames of hospital beds; a lone soldier's boot; the vivid red of the hospital cross on the ship's hull, this cross, the Red Cross; the Australia slouch hat that sits motionless on the ocean bed alongside the wreck standing almost as a silent sentinel to the atrocities of war.
All of these things of the deep are silent, eloquent, permanent reminders of the violence meted upon the men and women of the Centaur just before dawn on that autumn day 67 years ago.
Let us be clear: sinking an unarmed hospital ship, clearly marked with the internationally recognised symbol of the Red Cross, is a violation of international law.
No ifs. No buts. No maybes.
But more than that - it is a complete violation of the most basic principles of human decency.
No ifs. No buts. No maybes.
The Centaur was a vessel of mercy and it was suck without mercy by a vessel of war, and its wreck will forever be a sepulchre for those 268 souls who perished, a memorial to the 75 merchant navy personnel, 193 Australian service men and women, doctors, nurses, orderlies, cooks and stewards.
Designated now as a war grave. Now protected ever more from intrusion. Forever now a sacred place. Forever now a reminder that the preservation of your freedom was purchased with the blood, the sweat and the tears of those who came before us.
Forever also a reminder of how close the war came to our own shores, to Australian shores to Queensland shores, because Centaur, while perhaps less known elsewhere in the nation, has always occupied a special place in the hearts of Queenslanders.
We felt as if our own home, barely 70 miles from where we are today, had been violated.
Today's service reminds us too of that thread of time that links the past to the present, for though the Centaur was lost 67 years ago, not until today has our nation been able to pay its respects formally to those who were lost and to share in the searing memories of those who survived.
Some of those survivors are still with us - survivors like Martin Pash, who is here with us today, who I had the honour to meet before the service, and Bob Westwood and Matty Morris, who are marking today privately.
But most are no longer with us.
People like Second Mate Richard Gordon Rippon, whose navigational skills were vindicated years later when his original calculations - made 40 minutes before the torpedo attack - steered David Mearns' search team to within one nautical mile of the Centaur's resting place.
People like Captain Richard Salt, who was about to retire but was persuaded to make one more trip - with the Centaur.
People like Sister Nell Savage, who symbolised the ANZAC spirit of resilience in adversity, ignoring her own injuries to care for other survivors and to boost flagging morale as they waited and waited and waited in the water and awarded the George Medal - recognising a woman who signed on to be a healer, not a hero.
Nothing now can change what happened in those brief, fateful moments 67 years ago, and nothing can replace the years of loss and uncertainty for friends and families, but my hope, and the hope of the nation, is that the discovery of the Centaur can bring peace of mind and the possibility of healing of souls.
You know now the final resting place of your loved ones after so many, many decades. That is why we became involved in the search.
Many of you sitting in this Cathedral today are thinking of a loved one - a parent or grandparent, an uncle or aunt, a friend or a mate. This service is a chance to remember them, and to honour them, and to acknowledge their service to Australia.
This is a day for the nation to honour them just as we do today here in this great Cathedral, so too do others across the nation with us, to write one final chapter in the Centaur's history because in this great Australian family, Centaur is part of us now, just as we are part of Centaur.
Her story is our nation's story.
Lest we forget. 


JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Lyndal Curtis from ABC Radio Current Affairs. You set very high expectations for this reform before the last election. When are people going to see things getting better? And if people don't see things better or don't feel that this reform will fix the system, do you deserve to be voted out of office?
PM: Well, the Australian people will make their judgments on whether we're fair dinkum about reform or not. What you've got before you is, I think, the biggest single reform of the Australian health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare. We've got our sleeves rolled up in terms of when it begins. We intend to get on with the job now.
I began discussions with the premiers and chief ministers this morning. I spent an hour or so on the phone with them. The response was mixed. We'll see how we go when it gets to COAG.
But you know something, the time for delay is gone. Too many years, too many decades, have been wasted in people nipping around the edges of this one. This is fundamental. We've got to get it right for the health system for the future, and also for the economy for the future as well.
HOST: Mark Metherell.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Mark Metherell from The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. When do you expect to see declines in waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department operations?
PM: One of the key findings from the Health and Hospital Reform Commission was on this very point, and that is the unacceptable waiting times now for those on elective surgery waiting lists and those who can't get there, and those who arrive at accident and emergency. And I think the data was contained in my speech.
As I also indicated in my speech, beyond these fundamental reforms to the structure and funding of the system, we have further to say, again, on the question of accident and emergency needs. We will make statements on that in the near future.
Can I say, though, the whole point of our reform is to get this down to much more acceptable levels in terms of community expectations. One of the ways in which we intend to do that with local hospital networks is to negotiate with those hospital networks what is an acceptable, respectable waiting time at accident and emergency? That is one of the key conditions for future engagement with local hospital networks.
Obviously, circumstances will vary across the country, but the Australian people have a right to know what their local hospital network signs up to in terms of an acceptable waiting time at A&amp;E, and when it comes to elective surgery, when you can get your procedure done once you've been clinically assessed as needing that procedure.
HOST: The next question is from Malcolm Farr.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Malcolm Farr from The Daily Telegraph. New South Wales has the most inefficient hospital system in the Commonwealth - not by a little bit, by a lot. Won't demands for standards of efficiency penalise New South Wales in terms of funding? Won't it mean that, in fact, waiting lists might increase in New South Wales under your scheme?
PM: We intend that no existing state or territory health system will, first of all, be any worse off during the transition period to the new Australian health and hospital network, and, secondly, once our new proposed funding responsibility where we take on 60 per cent of the growth for the future kicks in, let me tell you those states will be better off.
Let's go to the core of it here - for the first time, the Australian Government is saying, loud and clear, to the nation at large and the good people of New South Wales, that we, the Australian Government, permanently, for the future, are taking on 60 per cent of the burden for your recurrent hospital costs, for your hospitals' capital needs, and for your hospitals' training and research needs as well.
That has never been the case before, so in terms of stepping up to the plate and making a difference, Malcolm, I can think of nothing more fundamental that will make a difference for the good people of New South Wales, and from time to time the very long suffering people of New South Wales when it comes to certain of their hospitals.
HOST: Paul Bongiorno.
JOURNALIST: Paul Bongiorno, Ten News, Prime Minister. Who will run the National Health Fund? Will it be run out of your department, out of Treasury or out of the Federal Health Department? And how do you answer the charge that if federal public servants can't run a national pink batt scheme, how are they going to run this?
PM: Well, can I just say to you in response to that, Paul, what I said at the very beginning is that this Australian health and hospital network will be funded nationally and will be run locally. That's what must occur here.
What has been the core gap in the system so far? Frankly, waste in the existing system through duplication and overlap between the Australian Government and the states. Secondly, inadequate certainty of future funding for the system's growth in the future. We step in to make that difference.
That's one half of the equation.
What's the other half? To make sure that your local hospital networks have the power and the scope to deliver those services on the ground in a manner which is best tailored to local health needs.
If I, for example, was to look at the good people of Port Macquarie, one of the places where I went for a local hospital consultation - let me give you a classic example. What they said to me, and this is no reflection on any individuals associated with the health networks of New South Wales, but they said: "Here we are in Port Macquarie, we've got a couple of adjoining smaller hospitals as well. We know that we would logically fit into a local hospital network. We know each other, we can work well with each other, but guess what? All the decisions are either taken in Sydney or at this massive region - Area North, I think it is in New South Wales - vastly removed from our community of interest."
So on your key question of who actually delivers the service, the service is delivered locally through the clinical leadership which will run the local hospital networks. That is the overwhelming playback from the clinicians that we have met right across the country - funded nationally, delivered locally. We believe that is exactly the right balance for the future.
HOST: Danielle Cronin.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Danielle Cronin from The Canberra Times. What do you say to the argument that this might just re-cast the blame game, where the local health authorities blame the Federal Government for failings in the system and vice versa?
PM: Well, I think the key element of this reform is two bits. First of all you have the Australian Government, for the first time in the history of the federation, taking the dominant funding responsibility for the future funding needs of the public hospital system - capital, recurrent, research, training - and into the future. That's the first thing.
Up until now that has not been the case. There has been a perverse incentive alive within the system whereby, given that the Australian Government did not have majority funding responsibility for the public hospital system, getting as low as 35 per cent, and that is only for the recurrent needs, that, frankly, why should we, the Australian Government, worry too much about the performance of the hospitals? You knock that right on the head by the Australian Government, for the first time, taking on the dominant funding responsibility, entrenching it for the future.
But the second part of it is this - by confirming that we will take 100 per cent of funding responsibility and policy responsibility for what's called the primary health care system, GP and GP-related services out there in the community, these two principal arms for the delivery of our national health system are therefore either fully controlled or predominantly controlled by one level of government - that's the Australian Government.
Therefore, the perverse incentives which have existed before for blame game between one direction and the other are effectively removed. Of course, the operation of the system is going to test everyone out. But I believe this knocks on the head the reason for blame game, cost shift and waste and duplication that we've seen in the system for decades and decades and decades.
And I believe, passionately, the Australian public want to see that put behind them so we can then get on with the business of investing in the growth of the system for the future - better health, better hospitals for working Australians.
HOST: Question from Laura Tingle.
JOURNALIST: Laura Tingle from the Financial Review, Prime Minister. I'm just taking up Danielle's point - if I've had a really bad time at a local hospital, who am I going to blame in the future? Am I going to blame you or am I going to blame the local hospital network? I mean, how do you see the politics of this actually operating? Are you essentially seeing a system where the states are no longer politically accountable?
And that leads to two more technical questions. Who in future will set the overall health budget? You've said that Commonwealth will just keep picking up the tab, but are you seeing a position where, over time, you could actually see the Commonwealth picking up, say, 90 per cent if costs continue to rise? And who would make the decisions about restructuring hospital services with population needs?
PM: Let me take those in order.
In terms of who ultimately is politically accountable for the system, in terms of the national funding for the system, it's quite clear from what I've said today that we, the Australian Government, have stepped up to the plate to take on this dominant funding responsibility. That has been the core of the, frankly, the cancer in the system so far. The number of meetings I've sat around where one side blames the other permanently for who is responsible for the overall funding underpinnings of what we need for the future - that is now put behind us.
On the second point, which is who sets the health budget, and should the 60 per cent rise into the future. Can I say we have spent long and hard working our way through this. We believe that 60 per cent gets the balance about right. We still want the states to have some skin in the game. That is why we're doing it this way. We're also very conscious of the fact that we want the system to still be operating tomorrow and the next day and the day after for all those things which are currently on foot within a system which millions of Australians will depend on in the days ahead during the period of transition.
On the question of setting of budgets, can I say this - a key element of this will also be shaped by determining what I said before in my remarks as the efficient price. We have said in the papers, and you will see it before you, that we will establish an independent pricing authority which will set the appropriate price for a given hospital service. That, through a system of activity-based funding, will be then translated into how we budget for the future, both the Australian Government and the states.
This is a new funding discipline. It is not just handing over the blank cheque as in days past: 'here you go, here's a blank cheque, x billion dollars, go away, don't tell us what happens'. This is quite different. It actually pays for each service as it's delivered by each unit of the nation's local hospital network, and that is what will shape the combined budgets of both the Australian Government and the states.
And I wrote very carefully the third question you asked and I can't read my own writing.
HOST: Restructuring services to population needs.
PM: Ah, yeah, restructuring services to population needs.
Within what's called the activity-based funding formula, it will be tailored to the local demographic circumstances, the local concentration of particular health conditions, and therefore will be tailored to population dynamics, gender balances, concentration of particular diseases, and as you would know from the data, this varies across the country.
So in terms of shaping, specifically, future population growth but also the composition of populations, the formula we've come up with, we believe flexibly deals with those local variations, and it's one of the matters I was discussing, for example, with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory this morning, who has particular challenges in his part of the country.
HOST: Sandra O'Malley.
JOURNALIST: Sandra O'Malley from Australian Associated Press. Prime Minister, you've committed to no net increase in the bureaucracy under your reforms. Given the drive for efficiency and the basic emasculation of the state health departments, couldn't there actually be the alternative problem where there could be eventual job losses or at the very least dislocation of workers as they have to move to where the jobs are, and in this regard, aren't states just an easy target given how unpopular they are?
PM: I think we've been working through this for a long time to work out where the problems are in the health and hospital system. I'm not going to stand up here today and engage in, sort of, a new form of the blame game, which is 'aren't the states a terrible bunch of people'. I just don't think that's productive.
People want to move on. They want solutions. They just don't want permanent criticism.
Secondly, in terms of the way in which we shape this for the future, it's going to be really important to have a system which is completely tailored to local needs. That's why we have this strong emphasis on local hospital networks. That's why we believe we can get the balance right in terms of what local communities want and demand, and we think we're heading in the right direction to do that.
On the question of job losses, can I say this: what are people saying around the country? They want more frontline services. They think our system is, frankly, bureaucrat-ed out, and they're probably right. We want more people in the frontline.
Whether it's state bureaucrats, Jane Halton is here with us today, federal bureaucrats, the Australian public want more people delivering frontline health services. The virtue of what we have put forward through these local hospital networks is that we anchor this very much in local communities.
And we believe that if it means shifting a position from the main street of Sydney to, frankly, a local hospital network in downtown Port Macquarie, I'll tell you where I'll be supporting - that's downtown local Port Macquarie, and the same right across the country.
We believe that is the right way to go. We think, frankly, we have sufficient bureaucrats in the system right now.
HOST: Phil Hudson.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Phillip Hudson from the Herald Sun. You've changed the GST equation a bit to have a dedicated share of the GST going -
PM: The Premiers said a lot, but go on.
JOURNALIST: - to health. What did they say?
PM: They said other things as well. Some of them were monosyllabic. 
JOURNALIST: Given you've changed the GST relating to health to have a dedicated part of it, why not change the GST to have a dedicated part of it going directly to education? Surely it's just as important.
And, a sort of a technical question, when does this reform actually start? When are you going to put this new funding in place?
PM: On the question of education v health, I think you would find, given what we've been doing of recent days with Julia on the future of the national school curriculum and more recently with the quality education agenda, and more recently again with the huge capital investment that's in our schools funded by this Government, the education revolution for us is front and centre. It's a core national priority.
But you know something? When it comes to health and hospitals, the figures are very confronting.
One: without change, the health and hospitals budgets of the states will overwhelm their state budgets by somewhere between 2035 and 2045. That's a pretty confronting piece of data.
The second is look at just the growth in the GST itself, averaging about 6 per cent each year. What's the average growth in states and territory health budgets at the moment? About 11 per cent per year.
There is a gap emerging, and the question arises, therefore, as to how we fill this gap. Which you brings you back, thirdly, to what the Intergenerational Report found for us all. With the increase in the Australian population and the ageing of the Australian population, the proportion of our people who will be over the age of 65 and the intensity of the health care services that they will need means that we've got to redesign the system and the way in which it's funded.
And the final part of it is this: to do it properly, it's not just making sure we've got the long-term funding of hospitals right - it is critical that we get the long-term funding and structure of primary health care right and preventative health care right and post-acute health care right, as well as aged care right. The part relates to the whole, because if we do get this right then we can reduce the overall hospitalisations that are occurring in this country.
There's some data, I think, contained in the Report, which you would have seen, about the hospitalisation rate in Australia relative to other countries around the world. We are right up there. Now, if we had a properly integrated system, primary care working well, the other arms of the system working well, preventative health care kicking in over time, you know something? You could make a big change there.
So, in answer to your question, get the design right, get the bits working together, and we can therefore handle these long-term funding challenges which face the system. But to do it now, frankly, there is no alternative but to take this part of the GST funding, dedicate it to the health and hospital system for the future and then get on with the deeps reforms I've outlined in my remarks.
JOURNALIST: And when will it start?
PM: Oh, on the timetable for implementation, '10-'11, the negotiations through COAG, of course, will occur in April. If we get agreement, of course, we would establish then an implementation arrangement with the states and territories to get on with the job from the get-go. In terms of '11-'12, the states would commence creation, under their statutes, of local hospital networks, payment of 60 per cent of recurrent expenditure and capital on public hospital services through the states would begin, and we would start to the progressive transition to the Commonwealth of state-funded general practice and primary healthcare. Then, from '12-'13, from 1 July 2012, shift to activity-based funding paid directly to local hospital networks.
That is the implementation schedule that we've outlined.
HOST: The next question is from Michelle Grattan.
JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan of The Age. Mr Rudd, can I ask you about your Plan B if you can't sweet-talk those premiers? Given the history -
PM: Were you listening in, were you?
JOURNALIST: Given the history of referenda in this country, and that no doubt you'd have Tony Abbott saying "No", and presumably some of the state premiers too, what would be the chances, do you think, of getting such a referendum through? And if you didn't, what is Plan C? 
And secondly, the hospital system is quite lumpy with some states doing well and other states doing badly. Do you therefore think that a uniform plan, the uniform plan that you're proposing, is more appropriate compared to one tailored to the particular state of the hospitals in various parts of Australia?
PM: I think - can I take your second question first and then come back to the earlier part. On the question of tailoring these reforms to local circumstances, and plainly this country is vast, and it's broad, and it's different in terms of the health needs in northern New South Wales as opposed to around Alice Springs. And it's different in downtown Melbourne to that which you find in rural South Australia.
The reason why we have decided upon local hospital networks is precisely that. We understand directly that the needs of this country differ vastly, and secondly, that some states are better than others in certain categories of existing health delivery. One of the reasons for example we want to move to what's called in the papers 'an efficient price' for delivery of services is that we want to test what one system is doing against another currently, for example, in the price of a hip replacement. It is a vast differentiation between one part of the country and another - why is that the case?
So therefore, there is a system which enables us to do that. But, more importantly, we have the flexibility built into local hospital networks to make it work flexibly in dealing with local communities. And that, I believe, together with taking local population changes and disease concentrations into account, is a flexible way of responding to local needs. Funded nationally, run locally, to deliver better health services and better hospitals for all Australians.
On the question of dealing with the states and territories, we've got a ways to go between now and the 11th of April or thereabouts, the 11th or the 10th or the 12th, it's ah - there's a bit of discussion this morning whether it's the 10th or the 12th because some of the Premiers have a problem with the 11th, but I think they're okay for the 11th. So don't hold me to the 11th, it'll be a day or two either side - is that we've got a way to go in working this through with them. And I believe we have a reasonable prospect of making progress with them.
But I go back to what I've always said, Michelle. If we can't get there cooperatively, there is one alternative. And that's exactly what I said prior to the election. I've reaffirmed that today. And that is the course of action that we would embark on under those circumstances.
But we've got a ways to talk through this yet. And if you were sitting in a state Treasury at the moment and trying to work out your long-term future, and you saw the Australian Government saying that through the rest of this decade that we'll take on the lion's share of the growth needs of the system, I think a rational analysis from a state's point of view may point you in the direction of working with us, rather than against us. But we'll see which way they jump.
HOST: Matthew Franklin.
JOURNALIST: Hi Prime Minister, Matthew Franklin from The Australian.
PM: Hi Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Just with regard to these local area networks. You're from Queensland -
PM: Local hospital networks.
JOURNALIST: Yeah. Being from Queensland, you'll understand this from your youth. Won't these just be - who will hire, appoint, fire, what will be their accountability? Will you just stack them with mates, Labor hacks and union bosses? And two - And two -
PM: And for the second unloaded part of your question?
JOURNALIST: And two, it leads from the question, your answer to that last question - surely you've got Buckley's chance of getting the states to hand over the GST? Aren't you just setting yourself up a nice populist election campaign where you can bag both Tony Abbott, the states, and big nasty bureaucrats who want to make everything bad for everybody?
PM: Two categories I've got here is hacks and Abbott, they are the two elements of that question.
Let me go to the first part, first. You know something, as is outlined I think, clearly, in the documents, the local health networks would be established under state statute. That is appropriate. Secondly, in terms of their governing councils, they'd be appointed also under state statute. We, the Australian Government, however, reserve to ourselves the right to take a very careful look at anything - repeat, anything - which may occur which does not reflect local community sentiment in terms of where, for example, you might want a local hospital network to have its boundaries. And secondly, who most appropriately should lead them.
What I find overwhelmingly across the nation, and having been with Christine Bennett, with Nicola, and so many hospital consultations around the country, is that, frankly, local clinical leaders, your local specialists, your local GPs, your local practice nurses, people who are passionate about their community, passionate about the healthcare system, they almost self-select in terms of who becomes members of these local governing councils.
We passionately want this system to work. So in terms of JV Aardvark III who might be the Secretary of the Miscellaneous Artichokes Union, I think you can rest easy on that score.
On the question about why we're doing this, can I just say I have been since a young fella passionate about getting the future reform of our hospitals right. I had a lot to do with hospitals as a kid, mainly inside them rather than out. And yeah, a lot of family connections with hospitals, not all of them pleasant. And so I want to get it right.
HOST: Karen Middleton.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Karen Middleton from SBS Television. There's been a little discussion publicly lately about the way you communicate, and you've engaged in some discourse on this yourself in recent days -
PM: What does discourse mean? Is that a conversation? A chat? Okay, right. Just want to simplify it a bit.
JOURNALIST: Yes, I should lead by example - fair enough. You do have a new plain-speaking opponent, much has been made of that. But some of your colleagues are suggesting that there are other things involved too. And I was just wondering why you think there is this new criticism resonating at the moment about you personally, your communication, and your leadership, it seems.
PM: Well look Karen, I don't pretend to be some sort of perfect leader, I never have been. So, everyone's got strengths, everyone's got weaknesses, I'm like everyone else out there.
The key thing, though, is just to acknowledge where problems have arisen, as I said the other day, to do better, deliver more, get on with the job, and deliver the basics. That's what we're doing today. That's why health and hospitals has been a core part of our priorities for a long time. You know something, this doesn't pop out, you know, overnight. This is something we have worked and worked and worked on over a period of two years, if I go back to when we appointed Christine.
Similarly, the work done by Julia recently in releasing the national school curriculum. That doesn't just pop out. It's the product of work and work and work over a long period of time. So on delivering the basics, we're getting on with the job. But the bottom line is this. You've simply got to acknowledge where problems have arisen, fix them, and then get on with the job, and that's what we're doing with health and hospitals today, I think that's what most people in Australia would expect me to do.
HOST: Question from Mark Riley.
JOURNALIST: Thank you, Mark Riley Prime Minister, Seven Network. On your example of the two individuals with hip problems, assuming they're both public patients, the local hospital board determines that they should go to private hospitals -
PM: Local hospital network.
JOURNALIST: Local hospital network, Prime Minister, the man with the orthopaedic shoe, I stand corrected.
PM: No, someone else is talking about boards, I'm just making a point.
JOURNALIST: None of us are bored, Prime Minister.
PM: No, no, I was talking about Mr Abbott and his boards, mate. You want to keep this going?
JOURNALIST: Sure. I want to get back to the dicky hip.
PM: Each time you throw one up, I'll belt it back. Off you go.
JOURNALIST: Assuming that they both are found beds in the private system, I'm just seeing some problems there. Can you assure those two individuals they won't face any additional out of pocket expenses for going into the private system -
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: How are the private - going to bring the private hospitals on board if those who are making so much money out of private practice now don't see that as being attractive in the future? And also, won't that be an active disincentive then, given that you're saying they won't be out of pocket - won't that be an active disincentive to people to take on private health insurance, especially hospital cover?
PM: On the question of the public system, let's call it buying given hospital services from the private system, this is not new as a concept. In fact, I think way back when in Queensland I remember us starting to do that back in the 90s. I recall, correct me if I'm wrong Matthew Franklin, doing something like this at the Prince Charles Hospital. But therefore it's not new as a concept, it's been around for some time, and frankly I think it's a great example of how these two parts of our hospital system work together.
What I find around the country is, frankly, a very productive, creative relationship between these two arms of the system at the coalface. And for us to have, if you like, the backstop, the insurance if you like of a further place to go helps us keep the wood on the public system, but also provides the necessary backstop for the patient.
In terms of the incentives, therefore, that it provides for people, look, my experience in terms of people taking out private health insurance is that these are intensely individual choices which people make, mindful of their own family histories, their family cultures if you like about whether you've always been privately insured or not, and I think people who have done that in the past will do so in the future.
My responsibility as Prime Minister is to make this public hospital system work as best as it can for all Australians. We're a party which began with a deep commitment to universal healthcare, and delivering, you know, universal guarantees. That's part of our DNA as a Labor Party, and as a Labor Government. We're proud of it. That's why we want to make this system work. We'll do so in partnership with the private system. No ideological hostility towards the private system at all. But Mark, on the ground, I really believe we can make this work, and there's examples right around the country of where it's working already.
HOST: Andrew Probyn.
JOURNALIST: Hi Prime Minister. Just, I'd like to explore this notion that you're going to put up 60 per cent towards the local hospital network. How do the states pay? Is it going to be through that network? And that could of course cause some more monosyllabic answers. But secondly, how much flexibility is in your efficient price mechanism to allow for the greater costs of delivering health outcomes in places like rural WA?
PM: Yeah sure. I think firstly, in answer to the first part of your question, we would expect both levels of Government to provide their funding streams into local hospital networks. Remember, what's the key underpinning reform here? It is that local hospital networks are able to deal with the flexible delivery of hospital services to their wider community. They'll be governed by national standards, as I said before, clinical standards, performance standards, standards which go to what happens at accident and emergency, elective surgery, as well as hospital readmissions, re-infection rates.
But so much flexibility will be actually placed in that local leadership to make it work, and for it to work effectively, our money, the Australian Government's money will go directly to them, and our expectation is that that's where the states will deliver their funding stream as well.
On the second point which is how do you make sure, again, you legitimately ask the question about rural WA. Vast differences, often small communities, and how are they assured that their needs are taken into account. I point to two things.
One is, we really get it, in terms of the work which Nicola has already done in relation to the incentives scheme supporting literally 2,500 doctors out there which in the past did not exist, in order to encourage those folk to stay delivering those services in the bush.
So we actually understand what it means to encourage and keep frontline medical service people out there in rural and regional Australia. But in terms of the formula itself, around activity-based funding, it can and will be tailored to all those factors of isolation, of population growth, and on the local concentration of diseases, which does differ from one part of the country to the other.
If you want to know for example, again, to answer as far as Port Macquarie hospital goes, again. When we went up there and the operation of, you know, a formula for giving money out to them, they said 'here we are at Port Macquarie, this hospital was built to cope with X population and now it has three times that population'.
But there was no formula, flexible formula available for them to enable them to grow according to the population. It becomes a series of one-off political decisions taken at head office.
We've actually got to get beyond that. Where the population moves, you've actually got to have a funding formula which can move with it. That's what we're on about with the proposals and the reforms that we've put before the Australian nation today.
HOST: Just two more questions. The first of them is from Mark Kenny.
JOURNALIST: Mark Kenny, Prime Minister, from The Advertiser. It's been reported that Tony Abbott went missing overnight in the desert, he was lost for some hours, unaccounted for. Just wondering - you look surprised - I' wondering, did you receive any reports about that, and just how worried would you have been, or were you?
PM: I'm sorry. Why I looked a little blank is no, I hadn't heard of that. But I've been talking to a whole bunch of people about health this morning.
Secondly, I assume Tony is all okay, and certainly I would wish him every bit of safety if you're out there in difficult parts of the country, and so, good on him for being out and about in the middle of Australia.
HOST: Our last question today is from Renee Viellaris.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Renee Viellaris from The Courier-Mail. There's a lot of money being pumped into preventative care. There's a lot of carrot, but where's the stick? Where - why should healthy taxpayers keep paying for the unhealthy lifestyles of people who smoke too much, eat badly, where is the personal responsibility?
And secondly, your taskforce recommended taking a class action against tobacco companies, and also raising the excise on cigarettes, which hasn't been done for 10 years. Where do you stand on those things?
PM: On the question of preventative health care, you are right, it is part of the total, you know, policy picture for the future. Unless you're acting on that, you can't deal with the rest of it over the long term.
I also said very carefully and deliberately in my speech that we have further to say on preventative health care in the future about how it's organised, and what we do within it.
The reason why I think governments often back away from preventative health care is simply this - the benefit to the nation and the benefit to the health budgets as you know is only ever yielded a decade plus, or sometimes half a decade plus if it's, you know, a real change in the way in which people manage themselves.
And that's why people say oh well, that doesn't deal with an immediate headline for tomorrow morning. We've actually got to get beyond that. Preventative health care is part of it. The dividends to the people themselves, the health of Australians, the productivity of the economy, workforce participation is real, if we get this right.
But it's longer term. So I simply say in response to an entirely valid question, we've got more to say on preventative health care, and that's why I indicated it together with mental health and a couple of other areas, we'd have something further to say in the period ahead.
As for today, what we have been on about is getting the fundamental reform of the structure, the funding, long-term for our Australian health and hospital system right. That is what we're on about.
People across Australia are fed up with the blame game. They're fed up with cost-shift, blame-shift. They are fed up with waste in the system. They want to see that fundamentally changed, so that we can get on with the business of delivering better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
Doing it in the way in which we've suggested, funding it nationally, running it locally, we think it's the right way to go. But beyond that, there are a series of other specific reforms which we've yet to come to, and you've identified one of them.
HOST: Thank you very much.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The Australian Government is delivering on the basics.
This morning's National Accounts confirmed once again that we have kept the Australian economy growing strongly - while other economies around the world remain devastated by the global recession.
Earlier this week, we delivered on our commitment to launch the first national curriculum for schools in our nation's history - a curriculum grounded in teaching the basics and one delivered after two years of effort after thirty years of failure.
Today, we turn our attention to health.
Today we are delivering on the most significant reform of Australia's health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare almost three decades ago.
Starting today, the Australian Government will build a new National Health and Hospital Network to deliver better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
The Government will deliver better hospitals by establishing a national network, that is funded nationally, and run locally.
For the first time in history the Australian Government will take on the dominant funding role for the entire public hospital system.
For the first time, eight state-run systems will become part of one national network.
And there will be one set of tough national standards to drive and deliver better hospital services.
The Australian Government's decision to take on the dominant funding role for the entire public hospital system is designed to:
End the blame game.
Eliminate waste.
And to shoulder the funding burden of the rapidly rising health costs of the future.
The hospital system will be run through Local Hospital Networks.
These Networks will bring together small groups of hospitals in a local area, where local professionals, with local knowledge, are given the necessary powers to deliver better hospital services to their local community.
To fund this Network, the Australian Government will take around one-third of the GST revenues and place it in a new National Hospital Fund to be spent only on health and hospitals.
The Australian Government will take on the dominant share of funding future demands on the system.
At the moment we pay around 35 cents in every dollar of public hospital growth funding. Under our reform plan, we will be funding around 60 cents in every dollar.
This is a comprehensive package that I will put to the States and Territories at COAG on April 11.
My message to them is simple: work with the Australian Government, work with the doctors, nurses and other health professionals of Australia who want reform, work with the clinical leadership of our local hospitals who also want reform - and together deliver better hospitals and better health care for all Australians.
If the states and territories do not sign up to fundamental reform, then my message is equally simple: we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - along with a referendum by or at that same election to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
The Australian Government's position is clear.
It also gives effect to my commitment to the Australian people at the last election.
Health and hospital reform cannot, must not, and will not be put off to some distant point in the future.
It must begin now.
The purpose of our plan is simply this: better hospitals, and better healthcare, for all Australians.
This is the single purpose of the new National Health and Hospitals Network (NHHN) we are announcing today.
We will deliver on this commitment by establishing a national network, that is funded nationally, and run locally.
Our plan deals with the reasons why so many Australians seem to fall through the cracks in our current health system.
I share the frustration of patients.
I share the frustration I have heard from our doctors and nurses.
I've heard the stories in hospital after hospital.
? There is too much blame and fragmentation, making it hard for patients to work out which level of Government is responsible for the care they need.
? Too many patients are receiving uncoordinated care because of the lack of integration between hospitals and out-of-hospital services.
? Too many mums and dads can't find proper health care for their kids if they happen to get sick out of normal business hours (which they normally do).
? Too many of our public hospitals are struggling as demand on the system is rapidly outweighing the supply - with one in three emergency department patients, and almost one in six elective surgery patients, waiting for longer than the recommended time for treatment.
? Too many of our local clinical leaders are not adequately involved in decisions about the delivery of health and hospital services in their local communities, when they invariably know best.
And underneath it all, because the current system is a total mess in the organisational relationship between the Commonwealth and the states, there is just too much duplication, overlap and waste.
Failure to fundamentally fix the system would mean that a large part of future investments in the system would be wasted.
Let's give the current problems a human face.
Let's imagine a 67 year old man who is retired and lives in the outer suburbs of one of our major cities.
He's just been placed on a waiting list to get a hip replacement at his local hospital but he's been told there's a wait of around 12 months.
That's 12 months of living with pain, poor mobility and having to rely on his wife to get around.
On the same day a 45 year old woman with a similar hip problem living in another major city, was told that her local hospital could give her a hip replacement in 5 weeks.
Two different people, both in capital cities - but very different standards of care.
The new National Health and Hospital Network aims to deliver a set of national standards, including access to elective surgery.
This means both would get their operations done within a similar timeframe.
If one of them can't get it at their local hospital then the Local Hospital Network will find that person a bed at another hospital within the Network - or with a private hospital if one can't easily be found.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will also recognise that patient needs are best served by empowering our dedicated health professionals.
Imagine the situation of two clinicians at a hospital in regional Australia.
They have pioneered the development of new services for elderly patients with multiple illnesses, based on their knowledge of local health needs.
Their work has reduced hospital admissions and improved the health outcomes of elderly patients who frequently visit their local hospital.
Both clinicians would like to take this pilot into a much larger program for their hospital.
They have been waiting for the bureaucrats in a capital city health department to give them the go-ahead on this program for more than two years.
Under the new National Health and Hospitals Network, the clinicians can approach their clinical representative directly.
Providing their new program meets national clinical standards, the Local Hospital Network - which is more likely to recognise the relevance of the program for the local community - can decide to expand the pilot and make it part of that hospital's day to day operations.
In other words, a new level of local control over the delivery of health services.
In both scenarios, the new National Health and Hospitals Network is designed to deliver better hospitals and better health care.
Doctors want this.
Nurses want this.
And so do the patients totally frustrated by waiting lists or not being able to get on to waiting lists in the first place.
Before the 2007 election, I made a commitment that if elected to government, we would tackle the challenge of reform of the health and hospital system.
That we would end the buck-passing and the blame game.
And that instead, on the reform and the future of the health and hospital system, the buck would stop with me.
Today, the Australian Government honours that commitment.
Today, I honour that commitment.
Each and every word.
Health reform, we know, is one of the greatest long-term challenges facing Australia.
Every day, hundreds of thousands of Australians rely on our health and hospital system to provide quality care for themselves and their families.
Every year, Australians make more than 115 million visits to the local doctor.
Every year, they make use of 54 million hospital services spread across the nation's 762 public hospitals.
Australia's health system employs around 740,000 workers, or one out of every 14 Australian employees - including 60,000 doctors and 230,000 nurses.
In building the new National Health and Hospitals Network for the future, the Australian Government is undertaking a massive reform.
But we do not shrink from that challenge one bit.
The time for fundamental reform is now.
But in rising to the challenge of reform, we are building on that which we have already delivered in our first two years in office:
? A 50 per cent increase in hospital funding over the next five years in the Australian Health Care Agreement - a $64 billion investment.
? An unprecedented $1.1 billion investment in training more doctors, nurses and health professionals, including a 35 per cent increase in GP training places.
? A rural doctors incentive scheme that now extends to 500 additional communities and 2,400 additional doctors to encourage them to stay in the bush.
? For the first time, the Australia Government is investing more than $1.8 billion directly in expanding emergency departments, post-acute care and elective surgery.
? Establishing 36 GP super clinics across the nation to provide flexible, integrated care in local communities.
? And, for the first time, the Australian Government is investing directly in the capital needs of local hospitals.
We have also taken action to put the health system on a more sustainable footing, including by rebalancing support for private health insurance for high income Australians - a fiscally responsible measure that the Opposition last week again blocked in the Senate, despite its potential to free up $100 billion for our health budget over the next 40 years.
The reforms we have delivered so far are helping tackle the immediate pressures in our health and hospitals system - our emergency departments, elective surgery waiting lists and workforce shortages.
But they are just the beginning.
There is much, much more to be done.
That's why two years ago, not long after coming to office, I commissioned the most comprehensive structural review of the operation of the health system in 20 years.
Today we are joined by Dr Christine Bennett who led that review and I take this opportunity to thank Christine and the members of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission for their work.
The Commission concluded in July last year that the health and hospital system is fragmented, is at a tipping point and is unable to cope with the challenges it faces in the years ahead.
In the words of the Commission, "now is the time to act".
Having received and absorbed the Commission's work, the Government over the last six months engaged in a comprehensive consultation process involving more than 100 forums around the nation - 21 of which I attended.
Today I want to thank the doctors, nurses, allied health professionals, health administrators and other passionate advocates who attended these consultations and shared freely their time and wisdom.
Our consultations underscored the need for reform - with the overriding theme of a stronger Australian Government role, coupled with higher national standards and increased funding for public hospitals.
In addition to the Commission's Report, the 2010 Intergenerational Report highlighted that our health and hospitals system is not adequately prepared for future challenges - with the combination of an ageing and growing population, the increased burden of chronic disease, ongoing workforce shortages and rising costs.
Based on the same data, Treasury has concluded that by 2045-46, spending on health and hospitals would consume the entire revenue raised by state governments.
This means that states would not be able to fund their health and hospital system, let alone meet their other responsibilities.
Once again, the time for action is now.
The clear message of both the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission and the Intergenerational Report is that the system needs reform that is fundamental - not just incremental.
Reform that for the first time enables eight state-run systems to become part of a single national network, using consistent national standards to drive and deliver better hospital services.
Funded nationally.
Run locally.
The National Health and Hospitals Network contains seven major reforms.
For the first time, the Australian Government will take on the dominant funding responsibility for all Australia's public hospitals from the states because the states simply cannot afford to fund the future growth of the system.
The Australian Government's funding share will almost double, from 35 per cent today to 60 per cent into the future - equating to an additional $11 billion per year from next year.
The Australian Government will take clear financial leadership in the hospital system, permanently funding 60 per cent of the efficient price of every public hospital service provided to public patients.
We will fund 60 per cent of recurrent expenditure on research and training functions undertaken in public hospitals.
We will fund 60 per cent of capital expenditure - both operating and planned new capital investment - to maintain and improve public hospital infrastructure.
No previous Australian Government has accepted any responsibility for the funding of hospital infrastructure - let alone 60 per cent.
Over time, we will also pay up to 100 per cent of the efficient price of 'primary care equivalent' outpatient services provided to public hospital patients.
These reforms will permanently reverse the decline in the Australian Government funding contribution for public hospital services over the last decade.
They will put an end to the tiresome cycle of the blame game between the Australian Government and the states over hospital funding.
In exchange for relieving pressures on State budgets, the Australian Government will require system-wide reforms to create a better integrated, unified national health and hospitals network, with national standards, national transparency and national accountability.
Right now, too many patients find themselves shunted from one part of the health system to another.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, for the first time, the Australian Government will take full funding responsibility for all GP and GP-related services delivered outside hospitals.
Because one level of government will be responsible for both the majority of hospitals costs and all of primary care, more people will be treated outside of hospitals - as they often should be.
With the Australian Government paying more of the hospital bills, it will have the incentive to make sure people are treated through less expensive and more appropriate primary care services.
This is instead of shunting patients into expensive hospital services predominantly paid for by another level of government - albeit paid by the same, long-suffering taxpayer.
That's what I mean by ending cost shift and the blame game.
With the Australian Government responsible for all primary health care services, we can finally deliver better integrated, better coordinated healthcare that is more responsive to the needs of patients.
This is what we have already begun to do through the creation of GP Super Clinics.
Once again, this is but the first step.
By taking full funding and policy responsibility for primary care we can also reduce the number of unnecessary hospital admissions that could be avoided through providing better care in the community - estimated at around 441,000 admissions, or 9.3 per cent of total hospital admissions every year.
Bad for patients.
Bad too for the taxpayer.
To help fund these reforms, we will rebalance financial responsibility in the Federation by dedicating around one-third of GST revenue directly to a new National Hospitals Fund.
The Australian Government will also take the dominant responsibility for funding the future growth of the system.
These funds - in the order of $90 billion over the first five years of the new arrangements - will be dedicated entirely to hospital investments.
We estimate this is likely to cost the Australian national budget a further $15 billion over the decade which would otherwise be borne by the states.
This reform will also significantly address the vertical fiscal imbalance in the federation.
If we fail to address this imbalance, the level of government with the least efficient tax base will continue to bear the burden of the fastest growing area of public expenditure (that is, hospitals) - with detrimental effects for the national economy.
The Australian Government is determined to end the blame game in hospitals and health.
And that's why the Australian Government is putting its own skin in the game.
But under this plan it is important that the States have some skin in the game too - to provide a strong incentive for States to better manage hospital systems and ensure they do not have any reason to start to withdraw money from their health budgets.
To strengthen accountability within the health system, the Australian Government will develop strong national standards for patient care and publish performance statistics for the nation's hospitals - leveraging its increased funding responsibility to deliver a better standard of care.
For the first time there will be nationally consistent performance standards for hospitals in critical areas such as emergency departments and elective surgery, to help reduce waiting times for the public.
For the first time, Australians will also have access to information about how hospitals and health providers are performing - including safety and quality measures, such as the level of adverse events and hospital acquired infections.
These standards will create a more transparent and accountable health system for the Australian taxpayer.
While health and hospital services will be funded nationally - they will be run locally.
For the first time, Local Hospitals Networks, run by local health, financial and managerial professionals, rather than state or, for that matter, federal bureaucrats, will be put in charge of running the hospital system.
The Australian Government will require the establishment of Local Hospital Networks across the country.
The Australian Government will, in time, also fund Local Hospital Networks directly.
Payments will therefore bypass state bureaucracies and empower local clinical leaders to flexibly tailor health services to local needs and local populations.
If local clinical leadership of a hospital can better deliver services locally and save money, they should be allowed to re-invest what they save in the further delivery of services.
This has been a strong and consistent call from clinical leaders across Australia.
Local Hospital Networks will bring together small groups of local hospitals within a geographic or functional connection, who will manage their own budget, deliver coordinated patient care and be held directly accountable for their performance.
Local Hospital Networks will have a professional Governing Council with clinical representatives, and a CEO who is empowered to make day to day operational decisions, and who is accountable for health outcomes.
A system based on Local Hospital Networks will encourage cooperation in delivering better health care coordination across a population area - particularly with local primary care and aged care providers.
In many states, existing regional health bodies are too remote from local decision making.
The creation of Local Hospital Networks will substitute these arrangements and will not be allowed to result in any net addition to bureaucracy - because as a condition of funding, any increase in the number of local staff working at Local Hospital Networks must be matched by a reduction in head office staff numbers in health departments and regional bureaucracies
And staff will be located in local hospitals themselves.
The Government will pay Local Hospital Networks directly for each service they provide, rather than simply providing block funding to the States.
Payments will be made directly, on the basis of an efficient price per hospital service, determined by an independent national umpire.
Currently, the Australian Government provides block hospital funding to states, who then determine how and where this money is spent.
This is like providing a blank cheque.
In the past, neither the Australian taxpayer nor the Australian Government had any idea where the money went.
Or even if it all went to hospitals.
This must stop.
Under the new arrangements, each Local Hospital Network will be funded for every service they provide to a patient.
Alongside our measures to improve transparency and accountability in service delivery, this reform will foster a culture of innovation and self-improvement
It will become easier to identify the best-run hospitals, who will be able to share their expertise and innovations with other hospitals.
This reform will drive hospitals to eliminate waste and will mean that patients will not be pushed out of the hospitals system - as hospitals are paid a fair price for every service delivered.
In addition to the fundamental structural reforms I have announced today, the Australian Government will also take on the dominant role for the future growth of the system beyond a simple linear projection of GST payments.
The gap between GST growth and projected hospital spending growth on a no-policy change basis must still be met. And that is where the Australian Government must step in.
Within this framework of fundamental reform, further initiatives must also be embraced in the future including:
? the inadequacy of hospital bed numbers now including specific problems in emergency departments, elective surgery and sub-acute care;
? further reforms in the expansion of primary care;
? the undersupply of doctors, nurses and other health professionals;
? the inadequacy of electronic health records across the system; and
? preventative health care, aged care, mental health and dental services.
These also formed part of the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's deliberations.
The Government is also signalling today that we will be acting in these areas in the future.
But further significant investment in these critical areas must be built on the basis of the fundamental reforms to the system that are part of the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Reform is essential.
You can paint a wall with the most expensive paint in the hardware store.
But before you pick up a paintbrush, you have to do the preparation. You have to strip off the old wallpaper and see what's underneath. You have to sand the walls and repair the cracks first.
Because if you don't, the wall might look alright for a couple of months, but the cracks and the flaws will reappear.
And you'll end up having to repaint that wall time after time.
Our health system has cracks and flaws. Some of them we can see, some of them are under the paint.
And those flaws have been repainted and papered over for too long.
We're doing the preparations now. With the structural reforms I am announcing today, we can go on to build and extend a health system for the 21st century.
We can do this together - with the doctors, nurses and other health professionals who want reform - and with the sign up of the states and territories.
And if the states and territories do not sign up, then we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - along with a referendum by or at that same election to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
What I have outlined today is also a landmark reform to one of the most important sectors of the Australian economy:
I think the Australian people have been waiting too long for health reform.
So today, Australia has a choice.
We can continue blaming others when things go wrong.
Or we can take the hard road of reform.
Building a new Health and Hospitals Network is fundamental to building a stronger and fairer Australia.
A stronger Australia because better health and better hospitals are critical for workforce participation, for productivity and for the efficient use of public finance.
A fairer Australia because if you don't have universal access to quality health care, the fair go has gone back out the door.
Just like it did with WorkChoices.
And we all know from history how ideologically hostile our political opponents have been towards universal health care in the past.
I know health and hospital reform won't be easy.
It never has been.
It'll be one of the hardest reforms that the Government will tackle.
But this Government is working hard to build Australia's future.
We are proud of our record of achievements in keeping the economy going.
We are proud of what we are achieving in education.
And we know what we must now achieve in health.
A National Health and Hospital Network, that is funded nationally and run locally, is about delivering the basics.
And this Government intends to get on with the job. 


Local Hospital Networks will be established across the country and paid directly by the Australian Government for each public hospital service they provide.
Local Hospital Networks will be made up of a small group of hospitals that will work together to provide a range of hospital services and manage their own budgets.
Local Hospital Networks will be:
- Run locally; 
- Funded nationally;
- Accountable for their performance against strong national standards.
The way in which public hospitals are operated and controlled today varies substantially across the country - some States devolve control to the local level, other States have highly centralised models managed by large area health services.
As part of the Government's reforms, Local Hospital Networks - comprised of between one and four hospitals, with regional networks potentially including more small hospitals - will be responsible for the running of public hospital services.
In capital cities, Local Hospital Networks will be built around large tertiary or specialist hospitals. In regional and remote areas, networks will be built around large regional hospitals.
Local Hospital Networks will avoid the fragmentation and duplication that comes from individual hospitals operating independently, as they will work together to coordinate and plan services - rather than compete for resources.
Paying for what you get
The Government will pay Local Hospital Networks directly for each public hospital service they provide, rather than just hand over block funding grants to the states.
An independent umpire will set the "efficient national price" for different hospital services - in other words, the amount a service should cost if it is being delivered efficiently, taking into account factors such as remoteness and the complexity of patients' needs.
This reform will provide an incentive for hospitals to minimise waste and deliver services as efficiently as possible.
Empowering local clinicians and local communities
Doctors and nurses will also have more of a say in hospital decision making through the establishment of clinical senates and representation in the Local Hospital Networks' management structures.
A key theme throughout the Government's health reform consultations was that many hospital staff and communities felt that they did not have the opportunity to drive change.
The Australian Government will work with States and Territories to determine the network structure that best meets the needs of communities and the challenges of managing multiple small hospitals.
There will be no net increase in bureaucracy under this reform - because as a condition of the funding any increase in the number of local staff working at Local Hospital Networks must be matched by a reduction in head office staff numbers in health departments and regional bureaucracies.
Changing the way hospitals are funded and run will make Australia's public hospital services more responsive to local communities, reduce waste and duplication, and ensure taxpayer health dollars are being used to deliver health services as effectively and efficiently as possible.


The Rudd Government's new National Health and Hospital Network will help ensure the long-term sustainability of Australia's finances and underpin high-quality health services into the future.
The Australian Government will take majority control of the hospital system - funding 60 per cent of all public hospital services - and take full financial and policy responsibility for GP and primary care services.
This plan is fully funded over the forward estimates and wholly consistent with the Government's fiscal strategy.
To fund this change, the Commonwealth will dedicate around one-third of GST revenue directly to health spending. This amounts to a $50 billion takeover of funding responsibility from the states and territories over the upcoming forward estimates.
Because the expected growth in health care costs outpaces the growth in GST revenues, the Australian Government will shoulder the burden of funding the rapidly rising health costs of the future.
This is a fundamental change to federal financial relations which will end the blame game and ensure the future funding of our national health and hospital system is sustainable.
The 2010 Intergenerational Report, Australia to 2050, warned of ballooning health costs hitting the Australian economy and underscored the need for financial reform of the health system to prevent it collapsing under its own weight.
If current trends continue, by 2045-46 spending on health and hospitals would consume the entire revenue raised by state governments. This means that states would not be able to fund their health and hospital system, let alone meet their other responsibilities.
The Rudd Government is responding now to this important national challenge - and in doing so, is also boosting the long-term productivity of the Australian economy.
These reforms mean the level of government in Australia with the most stable and efficient means of raising revenue will now be the majority funder of the fastest growing area of public expenditure.
To help meet rising health care costs, the Government's reforms are designed to deliver greater efficiencies in health and hospitals - particularly through activity based funding.
Under these reforms, no state or territory will be worse off over the forward estimates and all will be better off in the medium term.
These reforms are also wholly consistent with the Government's strict fiscal strategy. They will:
- be fully costed and funded over the forward estimates; 
- be consistent with the Government's commitment to keep taxation as a share of the economy on average below the level inherited from the previous government; and 
-not delay the return to surplus or increase peak net debt.
The Government will seek the advice of the Commonwealth Grants Commission in determining the technical details of dedicating a proportion of the GST to health and hospital funding.
The Rudd Government has already demonstrated its commitment to building a fairer and more sustainable health system through proposed changes to the Private Health Insurance Rebate.
The fundamental national reforms announced today will build a stronger health and hospital system for Australians while helping to ensure the long-term sustainability of Australia's finances.



The Australian Government will for the first time become the majority funder of the public hospital system.
To deliver these changes, the Commonwealth will fund:
- 60 per cent of the efficient price of every public hospital service;
- 60 per cent of public hospitals' recurrent expenditure on research and training functions;
- 60 per cent of the cost of maintaining and improving public hospitals infrastructure; and
- Up to 100 per cent of the efficient price of 'primary health care equivalent' outpatient services provided to public hospital patients over time.
These changes will end the blame game, eliminate waste, and shoulder the burden of funding to meet rapidly rising health costs.
This amounts to a $30.9 billion takeover of funding responsibility for hospitals from the states and territories over the upcoming forward estimates.
This action will permanently reverse the decline in Commonwealth funding for public hospitals.
The Commonwealth will also leverage its increased financial stake in the public hospital system to better integrate health and hospital services across the country through strong national standards and improved transparency and accountability.
The Government will also change the way it pays for hospital services by funding Local Hospital Networks directly on the basis of an efficient price for each service they provide, rather than through block grants to the states and territories.
An independent umpire, at arm's length from governments, will set the efficient national price - taking into account factors such as remoteness and complexity of patients' needs.
These sweeping changes will ensure that that there is minimum waste in our hospital system and that our scarce health dollars are being freed up to deliver services as effectively and efficiently as possible.
These reforms come on top of the significant investments in public hospitals the Rudd Government has made since coming to office including:
- $64 billion over 5 years in health and hospital funding - a 50% increase on funding provided by the previous Government;
- $750 million to take pressure off Emergency Departments; and
- $600 million for elective surgery waiting lists.
The Government will announce further complementary investments to take pressure off hospitals and increase the availability of hospital beds over the coming weeks and months.


The Australian Government will take full policy and funding responsibility for GP and primary health care services in Australia.
This major structural change will break down the barriers in Australia's health system, deliver better integrated care to patients, and take pressure off hospitals.
This change amounts to a $18.7 billion takeover of funding responsibility for primary health care and GP services from the states and territories over the upcoming forward estimates.
Australia has a significantly higher rate of hospitalisation than comparable countries - double that of Canada and significantly higher than the United States, the UK and New Zealand.
In addition, too many Australians find themselves being referred from one health service to another, without receiving effective, integrated care - and end up visiting a hospital.
It is estimated that last year, some 441,000 hospital admissions could have been avoided through providing better care in the community - nearly one in ten hospital admissions.
Making a single level of Government responsible for both the majority of the cost of a visit to the hospital, and all GP and primary care, will permanently entrench a financial incentive to take pressure off hospitals.
With its majority funding responsibility, the Commonwealth will now have a strong financial incentive to ensure that people are treated through less expensive primary care services, rather than being shunted into expensive hospital services.
This will reduce cost shifting and provide more convenient care for patients.
Moving all GP and related services under the umbrella of one government is also a critical part of making these services better coordinated and more responsive to the needs of patients.
For example, in practice this will mean being able to bring together State Government community services such as community health clinics with allied health services such as dietiians and psychologists, together with Commonwealth services such as GP services in the one setting.
The Australian Government taking full responsibility for primary care will also lay the foundation for further reforms to further improve the coordination of GP and primary care for people with chronic illness in the future.
These reforms build upon the Government's existing investments in strengthening primary care, including:
- Delivering 36 GP Super Clinics around the country
- Increasing the number of GP training places by 35 per cent.


The Rudd Government today announced major structural reforms to Australia's health and hospital system.
The Government will deliver better health services and better hospitals by establishing a National Health and Hospitals Network.
This new national network will be funded nationally and run locally.
These reforms represent the biggest changes to Australia's health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare, and one of the most significant reforms to the federation in its history.
- A National Network: to bring together eight disparate State run systems with one set of tough national standards to drive and deliver better hospital services.
- Funded nationally: by taking the dominant funding role in the entire public hospital system the Australian Government will end the blame game, eliminate waste and shoulder the burden of funding to meet rapidly rising health costs.
- Run locally: through Local Hospital Networks bringing together small groups of hospitals, where local professionals with local knowledge are given the necessary powers to deliver hospital services to their community.
The Commonwealth will achieve these changes through the following actions:
- Taking 60 per cent of funding responsibility for public hospitals by investing one third of GST revenue - currently paid to the states and territories - directly in health and hospitals;
- Taking over responsibility for all GP and primary health care services; 
- Establishing Local Hospital Networks run by health and financial professionals to be responsible for running their local hospitals, rather than central bureaucracies; 
- Paying Local Hospital Networks directly for each hospital service they deliver, rather than just handing over block funding grants to the states; and
- Bringing fragmented health and hospital services together under a single National Health and Hospitals Network, through strong transparent national reporting.
These reforms will be put to the states and territories at the COAG meeting to be held in Canberra on 11 April.
If the states and territories will not agree to these reforms, we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - along with a referendum by or at that same election to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
The new National Health and Hospitals Network will end blame shifting and cost shifting, and provide national leadership on health and hospitals with increased local control.
Sweeping changes to the way hospitals are funded and run will also lead to less waste and duplication and a health system which is sustainable into the future.
On the basis of these reforms, over the coming weeks and months, the Government will announce critical additional investments to:
- train more doctors and nurses;
- increase the availability of hospital beds;
- improve GP services; and 
- introduce personally-controlled electronic health records.
The establishment of the National Health and Hospitals Network builds on record investments in health and hospitals made by the Rudd Government over the last two years.


Today I announced the biggest changes to our health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.
These reforms will deliver better hospitals and better health across the nation. They will create a single national hospital and health care system which is more responsive to local health care needs.
Funded nationally, and run locally, the National Health and Hospitals Network will:
     * Create a single national network of hospitals, instead of eight separate systems
     * Be nationally funded, with the Australian Government shouldering the majority of the funding burden, which means more money will be available to meet rising health costs
     * Make sure local doctors and nurses with local expertise are making the important decisions for our local hospitals.
Visit my website at www.pm.gov.au and for more details on the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Yours sincerely
Kevin Rudd
Prime Minister


PM: It's great to be back at the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital in my hometown of Brisbane, it's good to be here with Arch Bevis, the local Member, as well as Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister.
This is an important reform for the nation's health and hospital system, and where the rubber hits the road is for hospitals like this one, the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital here in Queensland.
You see, a number of state governments will oppose this plan. A number of state health bureaucracies will oppose this plan. Mr Abbott opposes this plan. But Australia needs the future of our hospital system soundly funded for the future, and I intend to get on with the job.
Let's go to the example of the Royal Brisbane Hospital.
Royal Brisbane is a hospital which has, I'm advised, nearly 1,000 beds, and I've been speaking to a lot of folk this morning, and what they say is, they could deal with more. In the past, the Australian Government's relationship to the hospitals of Australia has been this. We've provided 35 per cent of the recurrent costs of hospitals. But you know something, we haven't provided anything, really, for the training and research function of hospitals, and we've not provided anything when it comes to the capital needs of hospitals, the equipment, the buildings.
How does this, therefore, change for the future? The Australian Government would take on the dominant share of the recurrent costs of hospitals like the Royal, the dominant share of the costs of the training and research function of these hospitals, and the dominant share of the capital needs of these hospitals - buildings and equipment. That makes a huge difference for the future for major hospitals like the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital.
Let me go to a practical example within the hospital. And I was speaking before to a number of people on the nursing staff and other members of staff who told me about the particular needs in day surgery. I said very simply, 'what do you need more?' And the answer for them was that they needed more space. Well what does this mean in terms of a practical difference on the ground? It means that under this plan of ours, the Australian Government would, for the first time, take on a dominant funding role for the expansion of day surgery here at the Royal Brisbane. That is the difference.
In the past, we didn't contribute a dollar. That is the key difference. So, this is going to be a tough debate. It'll be a hard debate. You're going to have, as I said before, a number of state governments opposing this, a number of state health bureaucracies opposing this, Mr Abbott opposing this. But Australians need better hospitals, and I am determined that we deliver them. Better hospitals, better health care, but also a national hospitals network which is funded nationally, but run locally.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Is there more money for health?
PM: There will be funding for health and hospitals by taking so much of the growth burden away from state governments for the future. Let me give you an example. Right now, state hospitals and the state health budgets are growing at about 11 per cent a year. Right now, the GST is growing at about 6 per cent a year. This huge funding gap is emerging and becoming bigger and bigger as the years roll by. So what therefore happens? The Australian Government is stepping up to the plate and taking on a new $15 billion funding burden that would otherwise be borne by the states, or not borne at all.
The second thing I'd say in answer to your question is this. We also indicated plainly at the National Press Club yesterday that when it comes to more hospital beds, when it comes to more doctors, more nurses, and the other things which make our hospital system work, the Government has further things to say in the period ahead. Getting this reform right on the structure and long-term funding, however, is fundamental, to eliminate waste, to get rid of the blame game, and set up the right structure for the future.
JOURNALIST: So what will the patients actually see on the ground?
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: What will patients actually see on the ground as a result of this plan?
PM: Let me just go to three quick things. One, every hospital in the nation, patients will therefore know that their hospitals are meeting tough new national standards, including identifying what is an appropriate waiting time for elective surgery and for emergency departments. At present, that doesn't exist. The second thing is this. Patients will, in the future, not have to be shunted from a Commonwealth Government-funded service to a State Government-funded service, because we, the Australian Government, will be the dominant funders of both.
And the third is this. And the third is this. That for patients, their doctors, their nurses, their health professionals will now have a bigger role in running local hospital networks. These are three big changes, and there's one fourth as well. Long-term funding needs of the system. The Australian Government has to step up to the plate, because if you look at the structure of state and territory health budgets, and their overall budgets for the next decade, they cannot support the future demands that'll be placed on the system.
JOURNALIST: Your Health Minister couldn't rule out increasing taxes to pay for this, this morning - can you?
PM: Very simply, it's this. What we have put forward with the national hospitals network is fully funded within our current budget. That's point one. Point two is, we've also - with the states and territories - provided a 50 per cent increase already in the funding to their health and hospital systems, which has already been budgeted for. The third thing I'd say in response to your question is this -
JOURNALIST: Can you categorically say (inaudible) no new taxes?
PM: The third thing I'd say is this. It is absolutely plain and clear as day that the future cost of delivery of health services will continue to go up, and up, and up. And we will continue to consider those in the budget context. On your question about tax, and let me just say this, very bluntly, this Government will continue to adhere to its commitment that we will not increase taxes as a proportion of Gross Domestic Product, consistent with our pre-election commitment. We've honoured that for the last two years. We'll honour that into the future, as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) to private healthcare for patients who are on waiting lists for too long. Won't that drive down that incentive for private health insurance?
PM: We believe that people who will want to privately insure will continue to do so. That has been part and parcel of Australia for a long period of time. But what we want to make sure is that these two systems work well together - the public system, the private system - and we've seen good evidence of that in recent times. But you know something? The public system is under huge pressure nationwide.
I've been speaking to doctors and nurses here at the Royal Brisbane today, they've told me the pressures they face. There are 764 public hospitals across Australia. And you know something, the story we get right across the nation is similar. We therefore have to lift the standards for the public hospital system for Australia, fund it properly for the future to provide better health care and better hospital services for all Australians, and we'll work in partnership with the private system as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will all the states have to agree to this plan? If there's one rogue state, does it mean it falls through? And secondly, does the 60/40 makeup- is there any room for adjustment there, are there any more sweeteners to offer or is that what's going to stand?
PM: We believe that for the first time in Australia's history, for the Australian Government to step up to the plate and say we will be the dominant funder of the health and hospital system for the future, that is a major reform which the states and territories should get behind. The second point is this. By doing that, we also potentially free up some of existing state government revenues to do other things which they often complain they can't do, like, for example, funding transport.
And the third thing is this. We believe that for the future, the states and territories need to put aside the petty bickering, the arguments about demarcation lines between what is state and what is federal, and just get on with delivering better hospitals and better health care for Australians. There's going to be a lot of argument in the weeks ahead. I accept that. But this is an argument we will not shrink from. We intend to deliver the reforms we put to the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: How much of the Queensland health budget (inaudible) $9.5 billion will the federal Government fund?
PM: Well, what we've said is that when it comes to the Queensland budget, that we, the Australian Government, will now step up from funding 35 per cent of the recurrent costs of the Queensland health budget to 60 per cent. And on top of that, 60 per cent of the training and the research functions which fall within the Queensland health budget, and 60 per cent of the capital costs of the system.
That's what we step in to do. We therefore adjust the GST payments from the Queensland Government and other governments accordingly, create a hospitals fund for the nation, and for future growth, we will then add to that in the future with more doctors, more nurses, and more hospital beds. On the precise numbers for each state breakdown, we can give you those later on.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Peter Dutton in an interview today said work practices of doctors need to be looked at and he suggested that they spend a lot of time on Facebook.
PM: I haven't see the full text of Mr Dutton's remark about doctors and nurses apparently spending too much time on Facebook. I suppose what I'd say to Mr Dutton is he should really spend a bit of time in hospitals talking to the staff, who frankly are working their fingers to the bone at the moment, trying to get a job done. It doesn't matter which hospitals Nicola and I have visited over the last six months or so, I've got to say the medical staff, the nursing staff, are working as hard as they can within the limits of their budgets, the limits of the beds available, and the limits of the equipment they have on hand.
I've seen no evidence of anyone slacking at all, and I'd hate to think that Mr Dutton was suggesting that they are.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a child up in Townsville who's in a hospital bed after being hit by a car, apparently for bullying. Is there anything that the Federal Government's considering to do to fix the problem of bullying in schools, and do you have any advice for his parents and other parents on how they might be able to deal with that sort of problem?
PM: Obviously, the individual circumstances of the case I can't comment on, because that'll be the subject of a proper investigation. But more broadly, I can say this. Bullying, including so-called cyber bullying, has become a huge problem across Australia. It doesn't matter which community I go into these days, here in Queensland, my home state, elsewhere in the country, this gets raised with me every other day by communities, concerned mums and dads, and by teachers as well.
The big difference is this - in the past, in the dim, distant past when people like Arch and I were at school, if there was bullying going on, it happened physically, within the playground, within the confines of the school. And that was bad enough, and it is bad enough.
What changes now is of course that, with online bullying, it follows a kid potentially 24 hours a day. You ask what we can do about it. One of the things that we are now doing is funding the Alannah and Madeleine Foundation to roll out a campaign across the country to change the way in which school communities and individual students themselves regard bullying itself. It's simply not on. It's no-go. There can be zero tolerance towards any form of bullying.
The damage it does to kids is huge. We'll have further to say about how we'd enhance our support for kids and families through Alannah and Madeleine Foundation and other areas in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: Why do politicians deserve an increase in travel and salary allowances?
PM: First of all, when this Government was elected, we put a freeze for a year or so on MPs' salaries. Secondly, that was adjusted in the second year. Then we have commissioned a review of MPs' entitlements. That review is underway. Various MPs have made submissions to it. I imagine the general public would make submissions to it, as well. The key thing in all of this is that decisions on MPs' salaries should be left in the hands of the independent Remuneration Tribunal, free from politicians' influence.
On the question -
JOURNALIST: But Labor MPs have made submissions to this independent commission -
PM: Well, they like Liberal MPs -
JOURNALIST: Why do you think you and your colleagues need a -
PM: They, like Liberal MPs, can make whatever submissions they like. Ultimately, this will be a decision on entitlements for Government to make. But can I say on the question of salaries, salaries should lie within the hands of the Remuneration Tribunal to make their own independent decisions, and they should do so free from any form of political pressure or influence whatsoever.
JOURNALIST: Is it appropriate that schoolyards be used to play skirmishing? That schoolyards be used for war games like skirmishing -
PM: I've seen some reports of this in recent days. Obviously, P&amp;Cs and P&amp;Fs will make their own local decisions. I would hate to think that those sorts of activities on school premises were being done to simply raise money for local schools, if their school budgets were so pressured. We, the Australian Government, have stepped up to the plate with a vast array of investments in local schools. I don't think anyone here would doubt that over the last year or two. I'd be concerned if schools were feeling pressured to use their premises for those sorts of activities just to raise money.
Thanks folks, got to run.
JOURNALIST: Would you eat a witchetty grub Prime Minister? Would you eat a witchetty grub?
PM: This sounds like a very leading question, and I have a funny feeling where it may be coming from. Only if it was properly put into a stew and with lots of savoury spices added. Maybe under those circumstances. But witchetties- it's been a while since I've tucked into a witchetty grub, so-
JOURNALIST: When was the last time you had one?
PM: I think the double dare back in primary school, it might've been way back then.
Got to go folks. 


PM: How are the kids?
KING: The kids are great, Prime Minister, how are you? This is what you call fill in time when we try to get organised. You were running a little bit late. Was that traffic on Coronation Drive?
PM: There was a few problems on Coro this morning, but we actually had to do the block, so my apologies.
KING: No, that's OK. Let's start with the health system. This is the biggest health overhaul since the introduction of Medicare, but you would have seen the headlines this morning. This health plan will see the Commonwealth money sent directly to regional areas and it might be heading for referendum already, with at least one state and the Opposition strongly opposed to it.
This morning you might have a view on it, too. If you have: 1300 222 612 is my number throughout the morning.
This, of course, comes as the Prime Minister tries to get back on the front foot after a weekend of apologies.
Welcome to Brisbane, welcome home, and welcome to 612 ABC Brisbane.
PM: Always good to be back home. Back home last night in Norman Park and the garden needs some work.
KING: It does. It's had a lot of rain, though, hasn't it, like the rest of the place.
PM: It has had a lot of rain. I was just talking to the mayor of Charleville, by the way, before I came on air, and they are managing as best they can out there, so I'm sure everyone's thinking of them and Roma and St George this morning.
KING: Let's start with health this morning. New South Wales is saying 100 hospitals will be financially unviable under this new system. Can you rule out country hospitals closing?
PM: There is absolutely nothing in the national hospital and health network plan that I announced yesterday that would result in the closure of any hospital anywhere. That's the first point.
The second is this - you mentioned New South Wales health bureaucrats briefing this story out. Can I just say we're going to have opposition from health bureaucrats, state health bureaucrats, state politicians across the country. I don't think anyone in the country believes that a business as usual approach to the current state of our health and hospital system is good enough .That's why we're bringing about change.
KING: But you need the support of the states and the Opposition to get this through so that it can become law. Otherwise, as you say, we're going to a referendum. Is that an empty threat or are you serious?
PM: I stand by every single word that I said on this matter prior to the election. I stand by every single word I said on this matter yesterday at the National Press Club when I announced this policy, and that's how we're going to do this.
But you know something? My appeal out there to right-minded, right-thinking premiers, state health ministers, state politicians and state health bureaucrats and others, is let's get on with the business of fixing this system for the future. We need better health, better hospitals, we need a system which is nationally funded and we need a system which is locally run. That's what we've put forward.
It's very easy to go out there and carp and complain and criticise. I believe the system's at a tipping point and we need to reform it for the future, fund it properly for the future. That's what we've put forward.
KING: Everyone would agree with that, but they want to know how. You put up a plan yesterday, but on first reaction Victoria is vehemently opposed to it, the Opposition say they vote against it. That means you will be forced into a situation of a referendum, a referendum which you will not win, given history.
PM: You know, how unusual, though, for a bunch of state politicians and state health ministers to get out there and to oppose a plan like this. How unusual for Mr Abbott, who seems to oppose everything, and criticise everything and support nothing?
The bottom line is this: I believe the overwhelming mood of the nation is to get on with the business of reform. We've put out a plan. It is designed to deal with the needs of local patients. If you're a patient you want to know, for example, that you're local hospital's going to meet tough national standards. Furthermore, that that will include acceptable limits on waiting times at accident and emergency and things like elective surgery.
To get this done we will take this argument to the people, as we are right now in this debate now-
KING: -Via a referendum?
PM: If the states and territories come on board, that's terrific. I repeated quite clearly yesterday what happens if they don't cop the reform, and that is that we would seek a mandate from the people. That's what we've said.
KING: Do you really think you could win a referendum without bipartisan support on this?
PM: You know something, Madonna? Let's take this step by step. I'm out there with a plan at the moment. It's important that your listeners get their understanding of what we propose by way of changes and what it means for them as patients of local doctors, patients of local hospitals, and then let's just see how this unfolds in terms of whether states and territories get behind it or oppose it.
Around Australia right now you've got some Premiers who seem to be supporting, some opposing, some waiting and seeing-
KING: -But that, your success in this is so much dependent on that. If we go to a referendum, will you ask for full control, not the 60 percent that you're currently proposing?
PM: If you, what I said yesterday at the National Press Club is that we would go to the people to seek a mandate for full powers that we would need to bring about these reforms to the system.
KING: Is that full control?
PM: That says full funding control, and that is what I've said prior to the election, subsequent to the election, and that is what we would do.
Our approach is to try and get right-thinking state governments and territory governments behind this because I think the public of Australia are fed up, sick and tired with the blame game, all the criticism, all the complaints, everyone looking for someone else to blame. Instead, they want people to get together and bring about a sustainable health and hospital system for the future.
We've decided to take a step forward on this. It is well costed, it is well considered, it is well planned. We have spent a lot of time doing it. We have consulted more than 100 hospitals around the country on it. We believe it's the right plan for the future, and I would suggest that those who are out there just whinging and moaning about it, they should basically get with the program.
KING: But if they don't get with the program, which is plan a, and you don't win a referendum, which is plan b, have you got a plan c?
PM: Well, you know something, Anna- ah, can I tell you, something, Madonna-
KING: -Every time you come on this show you call me the Premier of Queensland. I don't know if it's a promotion or a demotion.
PM: Well, I'll let you sort that out with the Premier of Queensland. Can I say that we're now engaged in the business of making sure that the people of Australia understand very plainly what we're on about.
Secondly, we have made it very plain what we'd do if the states and territories don't come on board. You know something? That is the right and rational approach because we want better health, better hospitals for all those people listening to your program this morning.
People I've spoken to this morning who say 'I've been waiting seven months to have my veins attended to', people I've heard ring in to other programs saying they went to accident and emergency yesterday and were shunted from one hospital to the next, they don't want a political brawl about who's responsible for what. What they want are solutions for the future.
So, if state health bureaucrats in New South Wales are out there opposing this, well, can I just say that's very predictable. If state health bureaucrats and other states are out there opposing it, that's very predictable. I'm on about solutions, not just blaming somebody.
KING: You talk about solutions. Are you able to give my listeners an indication of how much waiting lists will be cut by? Let's say, in five years, would you expect them to be half they are now?
PM: Can I say this: right now, no hospital in the nation is prepared to give a guarantee on how long you will wait for elective surgery or in an emergency department. Part of our funding deal with new local hospital networks will be to require local hospital networks to give those guarantees. Take elective surgery-
KING: -What will the guarantee be? Give an indication of how long you would have to wait to have your veins fixed?
PM: First thing you've got to do first is get the funding agreements right, then you get the guarantees made. Local circumstances will differ from hospital to hospital, and you've got to be credible in the guarantees you have.
But right now no-one gives any such undertaking. That's what has to change for the future, because on elective surgery, for example, as I said yesterday at the National Press Club, if a local hospital, a local public hospital, can't meet its guarantee for someone who needs elective surgery within the next three months, then what is our guarantee? That service will be purchased by the local hospital network from an adjoining private hospital if necessary, so you've got a built-in capacity to deliver.
KING: Can you rule out an increase in taxes to pay for these reforms?
PM: What we have put forward is a fully-costed plan for the future, so that in terms of the budget, in terms of the budget - this is your question - in terms of the budget, it is met entirely within our current budget. That's what we've put down.
Second point I'd say is if you're looking at the long-term future, guess what? Hospital costs are going to go up, and therefore let's just be frank with the Australian people that it's going to cost more into the long-term future.
KING: So you're saying that new taxes will be needed to fund health into the future.
PM: No, what you've just drawn is your own conclusion.
KING: Well, no, that's what your Health Minister seemed to be saying yesterday and again this morning.
PM: No, but, Madonna, let's just have a, your question to me was 'the plan you've put forward, is it met within the budget or does it cost more by way of taxes?' Answer to that question: it is met within the budget.
Secondly, I'm just being completely blunt with you about the long-term impact of health costs on Australia. Let's just be very blunt about it - it's going through the roof. Aging of the population, we're going to have double the number of people in this country over the age of 65, relative to the number of people in the workforce. The number of people over the age of 65 needing more and more hospital treatments, it will cost more and more.
One of the key elements of this reform is this - the Australian Government saying, for the first time, we will become, long-term, the dominant funders of the system. In the past- I'm going out to Royal Brisbane Hospital today. Royal Brisbane Hospital, in the past, the Australian Government did not give a zac for any capital building at that hospital. In the future, we will now become the dominant funders of the expansion of that hospital and others across Queensland because of the proposals that we've put forward.
KING: You're on 612 ABC Brisbane, I'm Madonna King. It's 8.43 and you're listening to the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd.
Speaking of tax, will Ken Henry's big review be out before the May budget?
PM: I haven't worked that through with Wayne, the Treasurer, yet, because guess what? I've been busy on this one, and we'll sort it through.
KING: But you're saying on the weekend you've disappointed voters a little bit in terms of timetable. You've had this big tax review for a fair amount of time. Obviously, you've read it. I mean, is it going to be tough on the taxpayer?
PM: Can I say, Madonna, I believe what the Australian people wanted me to do is get on with the business of delivering health and hospitals reform - number one priority. You ask people who are listening to your program this morning what they want fixed and fixed first and fixed most, it's the state of our hospitals right across the country.
Of course we're going to deal with long-term reform of the taxation system. Each thing in its season, we've got to do one thing at a time, and we're going to do this work and do it thoroughly, but in terms of specific timetables for doing it, no, I don't have anything particular in mind, and the Treasurer's working on it.
KING: But you've got it there. What are you waiting for? You've got it there. Why not release it?
PM: Well, Madonna, if you go through the content of the health and hospitals reform plan yesterday I think you would conclude that the Government has had a fair amount of its energies focussed on this for a long time. We've been criticised, for example, for being seven or so months late in delivering this reform plan. Well, fair cop.
I can say, though - the reform plan on health and hospitals' had been waiting for more than seven months. It had been waiting for more than seven years. I seem to remember seven years ago was when Mr Abbott became the Health Minister.
But, on the tax system, yep, got more work to do, but on the timetable for it, Wayne Swan and myself and others are still working our way through the details.
KING: Are you committed to the proposals in Ken Henry's review?
PM: You know something, Madonna, what we've always said is that this is an independent review of the tax system and what I have said on multiple occasions is I'm sure there's stuff in there that we can live with and there's stuff in there we can't live with, and you know something, that's why you ask independent experts to have a look at it.
KING: Just on letting people down, there's some-
PM: -Oh, by the way, just on that, the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, we asked them to go to work two years ago, just after the Government was elected, to look at the overall needs of the system. No-one had done that system-wide for 20 years, and then you get their independent recommendations and we've run with a fair number of them, but there are others that we've put to one side. That's the best way in which you make government decisions work.
KING: Just on letting people down, there's some who doubt your sincerity, so can we just clear this up - they say, and this is a comment I've been hearing, that if you were being genuine, why would call Peter Garrett a first-class minister one day and then sack him the next. How can it be so different?
PM: On the question of responsibilities for the implementation of the insulation plan, there were real problems with the compliance in the system. The second thing is this - if you look at the structure of the Environment Department itself it was seeking to do two sets of things. One, run programs to protect our environment, performing functions like decisions on the future of the Traveston Dam, decisions on the pulp mill in Tasmania, all those decisions which have been traditionally with the Environment Department, but over many years there were added these other functions which had to do with grants-based programs of the type that we had with the insulation program.
Therefore, we decided to separate those out. Therefore, those functions have been removed from Peter's responsibility, and that's why we've done it in the way in which we have-
KING: -Do you think he was a first-class minister?-
PM: -Those responsibilities have now gone with Greg Combet.
If you ask the people up in South-East Queensland whether they think the decision on Traveston Dam was a good decision, I think they'd say it was, because what we had with Peter Garrett was a bloke who puts all the evidence on the table, cops all the pressure coming in from both sides of the argument, and despite some great degree of political pain with the Queensland Government, took the decision that he took, so on that question, on the pulp mill in Tasmania, these other huge projects across the country, I don't think anyone would fault Peter Garrett's decision-making processes one bit, and in making those decisions I've got to say he's performed absolutely well.
KING: This morning politicians are demanding thousands more to do their job, plus they want a retraining allowance, severance pay and five months' salary when they're actually turfed out so they can be prepared for another job. Is there any rationale for that in your mind?
PM: Well, the first thing I'd say is that when we came into office we froze MP salaries. That was the first thing-
KING: -And then unfroze them.
PM: That was for the first year. When was the last time you saw that happen, Anna, ah, Madonna, I should say.
KING: I'm going to start making decisions across the state, shortly.
PM: I thought you were! There you go.
The second thing is on the question of the year following, where, of course, there were adjustments to salaries.
Thirdly, we then called for a review of overall entitlements. That's underway. People can submit to it and decisions will be taken after a period of time, but the bottom line is this: when it comes to the future determination of the salaries of MPs, that should be still left in the hands of an independent tribunal called the remuneration tribunal and politicians shouldn't have anything to do with it.
KING: So, will politicians, and I think Labor and Coalition politicians have got together to support this, do you support having five months' pay when you lose your job to retrain to do something else?
PM: Not really, but, you know, they'll all get together and put together a submission, and guess what? We'll look at the various submissions from the public and we'll work our way through it.
It's important that all these things are considered on their merits, but, as I said, on the question of salary entitlements, that should lie with the independent remuneration tribunal and politicians shouldn't have anything to do with it.
KING: Yesterday, on this program, the big issue was violence and teenage violence and what we do as parents about it. The Prime Minister's view on that next, but just to get you to work quickly:
[BREAK FOR TRAFFIC REPORT]
KING: It's 8.50 here on 612 ABC Brisbane. You're listening to the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd.
PM: And Madonna King.
KING: And Madonna King, as opposed to Anna.
PM: Her sister Anna King.
KING: That's right. Apart from insulation, Prime Minister, the other big issue here has been youth violence. This morning we hear that schools are renting out their grounds for war games. Kids as young as six are playing these war games of a weekend. The Government says it's up to P&amp;C associations and they just do it by company name. What kind of onus is on a school when, as a community we're trying to actually reduce the level of violence?
PM: This story is new to me, so fools rush in where angels fear to tread. Let me just try and find out what's happening here.
Look, the key thing is to make sure that P&amp;Cs and P&amp;Fs, for that matter, are properly supported by what governments are doing. I think no-one would argue that the Federal Government has been out there supporting local schools in recent times.
As to why people would find it necessary to run these as fundraisers, I'd have a few questions in my own mind, but I'd really like to know the local details.
KING: Well, on the same issue, yesterday, not only here, everywhere, everyone was talking about this 8-year-old boy and he's in Townsville, he's in an intensive care unit. His family say he's been the victim of bullying for a long time. They've gone to the school over and over again. They claim he was running away from kids who were bullying him when he was hit by a car and he's now in intensive care.
Irrespective of the facts of that case, because they are debated, parents by and large feel as though they are powerless to stop bullying. You may go to a school, but, as a parent, when do you step in and say, well, I'm not leaving this in the hands of the teacher. I need to confront the bully's parents.
We heard Angry Anderson talk to the parliamentary committee the other day and say parents need to take back control and start parenting their children. You've seen the violence that's happened in Queensland and New South Wales schools in the last month. What do you, as a parent and as the chief policy maker of the nation, think we should do?
PM: As a parent, I have exactly the same feeling as the mums and dads that you describe this morning. I am completely revolted and appalled by any kid who fears going to school for being thumped, for being threatened, for being intimidated in any way.
A school should be a place where a child feels safe and they should enjoy learning, and where you've got any other kid acting effectively as a local thug, that has to stop, and schools have to step in and they've got to have the power given to principles to step in and make a difference. We should have a national policy of zero tolerance towards any form of bullying towards a kid.
The problem these days is it's not just what you and I experienced as kids at school, which is the physicality of being bullied in the playground, and you saw that happen and it was always something really uncomfortable, I think, for those of us who were trying to be right-minded as kids, but now it follows them home through cyber-bullying, and so it's 24-hours-a-day bullying, and that's what, I think, is the new cancer out there facing the young people of Australia.
Second question is what are we doing about it? I've spoken at length with the Alannah and Madeline Foundation, which will be known to some of your listeners, not all of them. This is a campaign that we are working on with them right across Australia with a view to getting it into every school where we simply have a policy of say no to any form of bullying. And that we have powers given to teachers and principle to step in and make this a safe environment for our kids.
As for the role of parents, look, anyone, any parent out there who faintly gives a nod and a wink to one of their kids saying it's OK to use physical violence or threats against another kid, I'd just say to those parents - don't. Just don't.
KING: But as a parent, if your child was being bullied, you go to the school and each day your child doesn't want to go to class. At what point do you, as a father, say 'enough is enough. I'm going to contact the bully's parents', or 'I'm going to sort this out'?
PM: I think that's exactly the right thing to do, and I would not object to any parent doing that one bit. These things have to be sorted out, ideally in the classroom with a teacher, secondly or ideally between the kids, and that's what Alannah and Madeline's all about, to give kids the authority and the power to say 'no, that's just wrong.'
The second thing is, with the classroom teacher, the third with the principle, if it doesn't work there, then parents have to, you know, exercise their responsibilities as the carer of their kids, and therefore, that means if things are going wrong, things are going bad and your kid is terrified about going to school, that is unacceptable and you've got to do something about it. And therefore, if it comes to it and you've got to actually pick up the phone and talk to the parent of another kid, I would say there's nothing wrong with that at all.
KING: Kevin Rudd, I appreciate your time this morning. Thank you.
PM: Good to be back in Queensland Madonna.


HOST: Kevin Rudd, welcome to the show.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program. I think Madonna's right to be upset.
HOST: Absolutely. I mean, particularly the Queensland health system, but I watched you at the Press Club yesterday Kevin, and I truly believe that you want to fix the health system. But I'm just -
PM: Well I'm from Queensland mate, I know what's gone right here and what's been going wrong here. And let me tell you, we're not Robinson Crusoe. There are problems right across the country. We need better health, better hospitals for the future. That's what we're on about with this reform.
HOST: Well, I watched the whole thing yesterday and I honestly believe that this is what you want to achieve. But I'm a bit nervous- I don't mean to be susceptible to Tony Abbott's 'look out, they can't handle insulation', but I think I am, I think I'm a bit nervous that, you know, this is such a big thing that you've presented.
PM: Well what we're on about here is something pretty basic. A national health and hospitals network which is funded nationally, but is run locally. You can't have local hospitals run from, you know, bureaucrats in Canberra, or for that matter, bureaucrats in capital cities. When we say run locally, that's exactly what we mean.
You need local hospital networks so that your local doctors, your local specialists, your local nurses have a much bigger role in driving the delivery of hospital services in your community. So we're going to, as a Federal Government, be funding those local hospital networks direct. But the running of them will be in the hands of local professionals. That's as it should be.
HOST: Prime Minister, I've got a couple of questions from listeners.
PM: Sure.
HOST: Can you ask Kevin to concentrate on- no that's not the right question- ask Mr Rudd why he took the hospital boards away when he was in the Goss Government. This problem goes back 30 years. Is that true? I couldn't confirm or deny that.
PM: Well look, there's a difference between what you'd describe as a hospital board for an individual hospital as opposed to local hospital networks. Let me explain the difference. A local hospital network, as we plan it, would bring together between, say, one and five local hospitals into a local community of interest, where you've got the right spread of services across those hospitals, and secondly, they can then work with each other to deliver the best services for that local community.
That's what we want with the local hospital network. It's quite different to having every one of Australia's 768 public hospitals each with their own board, basically fighting against each other to compete for resources. We think this is the right balance. That is, we want to have a system which is run locally, funded nationally, but which is not, at the same time, run by bureaucrats, be they in Canberra or the nation's capital cities.
HOST: And Kevin, one of the biggest bugbears people have is waiting lists for elective, emergency surgeries. How can you guarantee that people are - will have a maximum time now to wait for these services?
PM: Because by bringing in a new funding agreement, whereby the Australian Government funds directly local hospital networks, one of the conditions will be this - national standards in terms of an acceptable waiting time for elective surgery, and an acceptable waiting time in accident and emergency as well. I listened very carefully to what Madonna had to say before. Frankly, that's not good enough, and the system needs to change.
I was talking this morning to a bloke whose wife has been trying to get her veins attended to for the last seven months. She's in a lot of discomfort, but her experience is much the same as was just now described by Madonna. Business as usual is not good enough. We need to change the system, change the way it's funded, that's what we're proposing. And we're going to have state health bureaucrats and politicians from right across the country argue against this. But I think the mood of the country is 'enough is enough, let's get on with it'.
HOST: Well Victoria have a pretty good health system already, and Perth, of course, Western Australia is a Liberal Government- so how do you think you're going to go convincing?
PM: You know something, we're going to have opposition from various state politicians, from various state health bureaucrats, and probably of course from Mr Abbott, as he tends to oppose most things we do. But the bottom line is this. I don't think any reasonable person out there listening who's concerned as a local patient believes that the current system is good enough. They don't think business as usual is acceptable.
They want the system improved. They want it properly funded for the future. And on top of all that, they want an end to the blame game between Canberra and the states, and just get on with delivering more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses to the system. And what we've put forward is a big national plan to do that. It's been well thought out. It's been well-costed. And we want to get on with it.
HOST: Just on the cost there, does that mean the funding would mean an increase in taxes? Are you contemplating a GST increase?
PM: Absolutely no increase in the GST. Second point I'd say is this. What we're also saying is that we will dedicate one-third of the current GST payments to the states to a new hospitals fund, only to be spent on hospitals. That's part of the change for the future. The second is this though. If you look at the future demands placed on our system, with the ageing of the population and folk over 65 needing more and more hospital services, and that's just as night follows day, that happens, you've got to put the long-term funding of our system on to a secure footing.
That's why the Australian Government for the first time will take on the dominant funding responsibility for the system for the future, and secondly, take on total funding responsibility for what happens with health services outside of hospitals. It's the best way, also, to end the blame game.
HOST: And if the states don't comply, will you cut their funding?
PM: Well, we want to try and get the states and territories to agree to this. And we've set out some discussions with them over the weeks ahead. But at the end of the day, they need to come with us.
HOST: I noticed yesterday that you said you'd had some monosyllabic answers from some of the premiers.
PM: Well what I'd say back to the Premiers, though, right across the country, Liberal, Labor, Calathumpian, is the people of Australia are tired of the current system. They want improvement. No one believes the current system is meeting demands at present. The Madonnas who rang into your program this morning are right across Australia. And they are saying that they want to know that when they get to their hospital, there's an acceptable waiting time. They want to know that their local hospital is meeting tough national standards.
They want to know that as a patient they won't be shunted from one service to another, just because the Commonwealth funds one and the states fund the other. They want to know that their local doctors and their local nurses are going to have a much bigger say in the running of their local hospital networks. That's what they want. And I'd just say to the state premiers and politicians and others, it's time to get with fundamental reform for the system. The business as usual approach of the last couple of decades, frankly, doesn't wash anymore.
HOST: Alright, Prime Minister Rudd, thank you very much for your time this morning. And the way Tony Abbott's going in this last couple of weeks, he's going to need the system. He's been missed by a truck and he's been lost in the desert.
PM: Well it seems that he likes to live on the edge a bit, but, you know, good luck to him.
HOST: Alright Kevin, thank you very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks a lot, thanks for having me on the program.


WILKINSON: And the Prime Minister joins me now from Brisbane. Good morning to you, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning.
WILKINSON: Thank you for your time. Now, it looks like the states are going to be the sticking point on this, Prime Minister. You're threatening a referendum at the next election, but this was a promise that you made at the last election. Why should Australians vote for you again?
PM: What we've spent the last two years doing, our two years in office, is getting the detail right on what must be the funding and structure of our national health and hospital network for the decade ahead. You've got to get that right to deliver better health and better hospitals for all the working families of Australia.
Now, we hope that the states and territories will get behind those who want to see change. I think we're seeing a lot of criticism come out from all sorts of interesting quarters in the last 24 hours, but I just ask your viewers to ask this question: if you out there are happy with the current state of your hospitals and you don't think they should be improved, well, I think you'd be in the minority.
People want to see big changes and big improvements for the future. That's what this national plan is about, which will be nationally funded and run locally. That's what I think the people of Australia want.
WILKINSON: I think a lot of people would agree with you, Prime Minister, but that was the promise, that you said at the last election you were going to take them over. What we've got now is you're only proposing a 60 per cent takeover. In reality, this isn't going to solve the problem of the blame game and the Commonwealth versus the state bickering. You'll still be able to point the finger at each other.
PM: Well, we think it's time to end the blame game. And what you'll have here, for the first time, is the Australian Government saying that we have the dominant funding responsibility for this nation's hospitals for the first time in Australian history, and secondly, the Australian Government taking total funding responsibility for health services delivered outside of hospitals.
That's why this overall reform is so important. Patients don't want to be shunted between one system run by the Commonwealth and another system run by the states. They're absolutely tired of the buck passing. They want to know that they have a properly funded system for the long-term future, and they are deeply concerned about the states' and territories' ability to fund this system for the long term.
WILKINSON: But it's 60 per cent. People still have concerns about duplication, how you're going to keep a hold on bureaucracy, how you're going to reduce waiting lists, and aren't jobs going to be lost through all of this?
PM: Well, let me go to the question of waiting lists, and I think many of your viewers will be worried about that right now. In fact, I was talking to someone just a little while ago whose wife has been waiting seven months to see a specialist about concerns about veins in her legs.
What we need, through new, tough, national standards, is for patients to have confidence that there will be maximum waiting times, there will be absolute maximum waiting times for elective surgery and for treatments at accident and emergency. We don't have those standards nationwide at present, and if you're a patient out there using our hospitals today, I think that's something you'd like to see changed for the future.
The other part of your question was about bureaucracy. We are bringing in local hospital networks to ensure that locals can run their hospital systems for the future. Local doctors, local nurses, so that if you're a patient you know that your local health professionals are in the driving seat.
So, our reform is about a system which is funded nationally, which is run locally, and is designed to lift the health services and the hospital services of this country.
WILKINSON: OK, Prime Minister, just quickly on another subject, the front page of The Courier Mail this morning says that federal MPs want to increase their living away from home allowance to $27,000, add their current electoral allowance of $32,000 to their base salary of $131,000 and be given five months' salary if they lose their seat. Do you think that's all appropriate?
PM: Well, first of all, can I say that one of the first things we did in coming into Government was, in our first year, was to freeze MPs' salaries. That was one of the first things we did.
Secondly, of course, there have been adjustments since then, but what you need to have is a system which is run by an independent body, the independent Remuneration Tribunal. No-one out there wants politicians controlling this. I don't want that either.
So, the independent umpire should get on with the business of deciding what's fair in these circumstances, and everyone will be having their say to this review. Members of the public should have their say as well.
WILKINSON: OK, Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there. Thank you very much for your time this morning. We appreciate it.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


DOYLE: Well, Mr Rudd is here with me in the studio this morning to answer everything health and more. Good morning to you.
PM: Good morning.
DOYLE: Now, let's get straight into it. We'll talk health this morning, predominantly. The first question comes from Robert Doyle. Of course, he's the chairman of the Royal Melbourne Hospital but also, as you know, Lord Mayor of Melbourne.
Mr Doyle, good morning. What's your question for the PM?
CALLER: Good morning, Mel. Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Rob. How are you?
CALLER: I'm well, thank you, Kevin. I just want to ask the Prime Minister why wait four years? Why asks us to re-elect the Prime Minister twice before a single dollar flows to Victoria, in my case? Why not get on with it right now?
PM: First thing I'd say to that, Rob, is that the Australian Healthcare Agreement which came into effect last year increases by 50 per cent our funding to your hospitals now. That's the first point I'd make.
Secondly, when it comes to the future of the health and hospital system I don't believe anyone in Victoria believes, currently, that their hospitals can't be improved. They need to be improved, but to do that properly over time we've got to fix the underpinnings of the system - too much cost shift, blame shift between one level of government and the other.
We intend to change that by the Australian Government, for the first time, taking the dominant role for the future funding of hospitals, hospital-related services and outside of hospital for all health services.
That's what we're going to do to get rid of this blame game once and for all and deliver better health, better hospitals, for the good people of Victoria and across the country.
DOYLE: Robert Doyle, is that satisfying or is your question mainly about the timing of it, why it's going to take so long?
CALLER: Well, it means, really, yes, we've got a health care agreement in place, but it means under these new reforms the Prime Minister is proposing, not an extra dollar will flow to Victoria, and, to be honest, over and above that health care agreement, we know what has to be done. We'd like that extra funding and we could get on with it right now.
PM: Well, Rob, it's very interesting that you're saying exactly what the Victorian Labor Premier is saying. You must have caucused on this one. Can I just say -
CALLER: - Oh dear. I may have to retract, Prime Minister.
PM: That's fine, mate, you're entitled to your point of view and it's good that you're putting it on the program this morning.
First thing I'd say though is that as of last year, as I said, there's a 50 per cent increase in the funding going to Victorian hospitals.
But the second point is this - if you look at health and hospitals and their costs going through the roof over the decade ahead, it will begin to swamp the Victorian state budget and other state budgets. In fact, what we've got from the experts is the conclusion that if we don't change the system what will happen is that the health budget alone will swamp state budgets by between 2035 and 2045 and they won't be able to do anything else.
Health costs are going through the roof. The Australian Government needs to step in.
By the way, you say that these reforms are not implemented for three or four years - that's just wrong. Implementation begins from 1 July next year, and on top of that, for the future it is the Australian Government which takes on the bulk of the responsibility for the funding growth needed for the system in the future. That's a huge change.
We need more doctors, more nurses, more hospital beds, and a level of government, the Australian Government, taking responsibility for that for the future.
DOYLE: Alright, Robert, thank you for your question. Thanks for doing that this morning.
Let's talk smaller hospitals, then, Prime Minister. Another big worry is that the smaller ones and the rural hospitals possibly could be closed. Clinicians estimate more than 100 hospitals are at risk of closure in New South Wales alone. Professor Bob Farnsworth runs an area health service covering south of Sydney, and this is his assessment of the reform.
CLIP: What the public health system desperately needs is more funding. They've got massive infrastructure problems, we've got hospitals that need to be rebuilt, and that's not going to happen if no more money comes in, so it's really, there's nothing to indicate that there's going to be an improvement in the quality of care, that patients are going to get a better deal out of it if there's no more money coming in.
DOYLE: So, can you guarantee smaller hospitals won't be closed under your reforms?
PM: There is absolutely nothing in any one of the reforms that we would put forward in this plan that would cause any hospital in the country to close.
Let me say one other thing: what you have at present is a campaign, not associated with the good doctor there, because I don't think that's what he's talking about. He's talking about money into the system and I'll come back to that in a minute. What you have at the moment is a campaign by various state governments in Victoria and in New South Wales against any change. Therefore, you have a deliberate fear campaign being put out there by various state health bureaucrats at the moment in New South Wales about hospital closures.
It is absolutely untrue.
What they are trying to do is use a fear campaign to stop fundamental reform in the system. Mel, ask your viewers watching this morning how do they feel about their local hospitals? Do they need more long-term support for the future, for more doctors, more nurses and more health services? I think, my response that I hear across the country is that they all do, and what we are doing for the first time in the history of the country is the Australian Government stepping up to the plate and taking national responsibility for that - a system funded nationally, run locally and on this question about extra money to the system which the doctor just spoke about then, we will have further funding flow because the national government takes that responsibility.
DOYLE: Will that funding flow from taxes to us? Your Health Minister's not ruling that out.
PM: First thing I'd say is the system that we put on the table now is done within our existing budget. That's the first point.
The second is no-one is going to sit around and say to your viewers on the program this morning that health care costs are going to go up and up and up in the future. If you're a politician out there pretending that's not the case you're just not being fair dinkum.
But the third thing I'll say is we will fund the future growth of the system within our overall budget discipline of this - we will not increase taxes as a proportion of the overall economy. That's what we have said before we were elected. That is what we've maintained since then. That's what we'll do in the future.
DOYLE: OK, that's what everyone wants to know, that you can rule that out. Let's get a viewer question. Naomi Grimshaw in WA this morning - Naomi, hi, good morning. Can you put your question to our Prime Minister.
CALLER: Okay, thank you, Mel. Hi, Mr Rudd.
PM: Hi, Naomi.
CALLER: My question to you is, hi, why does the Federal funding for the autism children finish at their seventh birthday?
PM: Well, thanks, Naomi. Can I just ask how old your child is, if he or she has autism?
CALLER: He's going to be seven in July this year.
PM: OK, right. So what we've done is through our autism package for children is this - for the first time, provide autism grants for children under the age of seven, I think up to about $10,000 if I'm right, so that they can have specialised health services, particularly in their early education, to enable them to deal with the challenges of the future, and we're, I believe, spending between $100 million and $200 million on that at present.
The second thing is this - we're also helping with the establishment of autism-specific pre-schools and the like across the country. I've visited one in Brisbane. I don't know if we've established on in Perth yet but I'll come back to you on that.
And the third thing is this - play groups as well so that littlies with this particular problem have an opportunity to be in a common play group and to be able to lean on each other a bit as well, and we're doing that.
On the specifics of your question, though, about after seven, you know something, Naomi? We've got some more work to do. One thing we've done is that for children up to the age of 13 we've brought in, I think it is, a new set of arrangements under the Medicare benefit schedule so that various things that you will need to help treat children between the ages of seven and 13 for the first time you're able to use Medicare for.
Now, this is just the beginning. Our helping children with autism package is big, but look, as I've gone to community cabinets across Australia, this is a huge challenge for mums and dads like you and full marks to you because I have some idea of how hard this can be.
CALLER: Thank you. I was just also wondering too, would that funding be able to be changed to, sort of, a later age, to cover, maybe just primary school?
PM: Okay, well, let's take that on board. It's between the age of seven and 13 that we're now looking at. The experts have told us to concentrate, first of all, for those under seven, and that's what we've focussed on in our first two years in office. Over sevens, let's do some more work. As I said, the one thing that we've done is enable this to be drawn upon from Medicare for certain things that you need to help kids in that age bracket, but let's look at how we can assist further, and we'll have some more to say on that.
DOYLE: Thank you, Naomi, for bringing that up. Yeah, one in 160 children has autism.
PM: A big problem.
DOYLE: Another child question this morning - bullying. You've made some comments saying that the parents of kids who are being bullied should probably contact the parents of the other children, of the bullies. Obviously, experts are now saying this is a bit of a simplistic approach, Prime Minister. What's your view? Do you think, maybe, that you gave the wrong advice?
I've actually got quite a few emails this morning saying it doesn't work. This lady, Catherine, she says: 'I was polite, spoke to the other parents, was very sensitive. She snapped. I only made things worse for both children. The idea was a bad one.'
PM: But, Mel, if you're the Prime Minister of the country, can you run around the place and say to parents 'don't take it up with other parents if there's a real problem'? I mean, I can't tell you what the individual circumstances are in each case for each mum or dad around the country.
What I did say yesterday is this, and I stand by it today - first thing is to equip our kids with the ability to sort these things out themselves, and that's what Alannah and Madeline and other interventions in the schools are trying to do.
The second thing is this - raise it with the classroom teacher. If that doesn't work, raise it with the school principal.
And then I said if all those things don't work, I'm not going to stand in the road, nor do I have the power to stand in the road of a parent picking up the phone to another parent.
Will any of these things necessarily work? I can't give a guarantee of that, but you know something? We're now having a big national conversation about what's an emerging problem, and not just within the school yard. Because of online bullying, it's now happening with some kids 24 hours a day. Big problem, we've got more to do here.
DOYLE: Massive problem, massive problem.
Thank you very much. We obviously ran out of time. We'll get a response next week. You had some homework for Sonia, who was going to talk about superannuation for stay at home mums.
PM: Yes, I'll come back on that.
DOYLE: We'll do that next week, if that's OK. Thanks for joining us.
PM: Good to be with you.


PM: It's great to be here at the Garvan, great to be back in Sydney, and great to be back at this extraordinary centre of excellence for research, but also work which is done for patients suffering from cancer.
We're here today to confirm what the Australian Government has decided to do more broadly across the nation, and that is to have a dominant funding role in the future of our hospitals, the future of our teaching and research facilities and the future of the running costs of them.
In the past, if we're looking at something like Garvan or looking at something like a major public hospital, the Australian Government would contribute not one dollar - not one dollar. In the future, under the reform plan that we have put forward, the Australian Government for the first time in history will take on the dominant funding role for the building of these great institutions and also for their teaching role, their research role, as well as their running costs.
That is a core difference.
In the past, the Australian Government saying 'we have nothing to do with the building of these great and important medical institutions'. In the future, we're saying 'we will take on the dominant funding role.'
Which brings us back to what's happening here today. Our contribution to this great centre, as it be and unfold, is some $70 million, and it represents of itself some 60-70 per cent of the construction costs of this great centre.
This is an important step forward. Cancer remains the number one killer across Australia. We have to make great steps forward, great leaps forward, when it comes to translational research, bringing together patients, researchers, the clinicians, those who are dealing with complementary medicine and palliative care on what is called the entire patient journey. That's what translational research is about, that's what translational medicine is about, that's what this centre is going to be about as well.
And, you know, it's the way of the future - it's the way of dealing with the challenges of cancer, it's the way of dealing with other disease challenges as well. So the Australian Government's proud to be part, and a big part, of this initiative in cancer care for Sydney, for New South Wales and beyond.
But it is the first step of what we, the Australian Government, will be doing nation-wide when it comes to the building of the hospitals and the research institutions of the future.
Nicola will add, and then I'll take your questions.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you. Look, I just want to add to the Prime Minister's comments and congratulate Bill and John, the chairman and CEO of the Garvan Institute and the large amount of staff that seem to have joined us. Congratulations on putting together such a good proposal. The Government was delighted to announce in the budget last year that we would fund a $70 million contribution to the new cancer centre, and the Prime Minister and I have just been at St Vincent's Hospital.
Thank you to the team there for showing us around, and we went to the ambulatory cancer ward, the chemotherapy treatments, and just as an example of what an investment from the Commonwealth can do, that very good facility will be increased in capacity by about 50 per cent when it's able to move into the new facility, moving, of course, clinicians and researchers closer together, providing better treatment for patients and having a significant contribution from the Commonwealth.
We see that our investments and our strategic plans can deliver that sort of outcome across the country, and we're very pleased to be able to be using this example to highlight the announcements not just about the 60 per cent dominant contribution from the Commonwealth for recurrent funding, but also for research training and capital, a key part of the announcement that we made earlier this week.
PM: Lastly, I look up at the faces of all these researchers and staff here at the Garvan, I think what they would want to see is the Australian Government putting a step forward and funding these sorts of institutes in the future. That's what we intend to do.
Okay folks, over to you.
JOURNALIST: There are reports today that more than 100 hospitals will have to close under your plan. What's your response to that?
PM: Those reports are absolutely untrue.
Secondly, there is nothing in the Australian Health and Hospital Network which would justify the closure of a single hospital or a single hospital bed.
Thirdly, I'd say this: if you have state health bureaucrats running around the country running a fear campaign about this reform plan for the future, I think it speaks for itself. Remember, these state health bureaucrats running a fear campaign, well, that's interesting. I think the thing the Australian people are really frightened of is the same state health bureaucrats being allowed to run the system in the future.
They've had plenty of time to fix it up until now. We're going to get on with fixing it for the future.
JOURNALIST: The New South Wales Government (inaudible)
PM: Look, why the New South Wales health bureaucrats are out there saying these sort of things - matter for them .You can sort that out. I know where the Australian Government's going, and that is to build the health and hospital system we need for the future, the network we need for the future, funded nationally, run locally, to deliver better health and better hospitals for the Australian people.
Too many state bureaucrats, too many state politicians, too many oppositionists all out there saying 'too hard, too complicated, push it off to one side', but time for that's over. We've got to get on, bite the bullet and bring about the changes we need for the future.
For the first time in the history of the Federation, the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding role for the future of our hospitals - their buildings, their operating theatres, their research and teaching, as well as their running costs.
That is a major reform for the future, and frankly, given the explosion in health costs for the future, it's the only way to go.
JOURNALIST: You've got to really win the states over with this plan. This is hardly the most conciliatory approach, is it?
PM: Well, you know something? We have spent a year and a half developing a blueprint through Christine Bennett and her reform commission. We then spent six months road-testing her recommendations with hospitals right across the country. There's 764 public hospitals in Australia, and the Health Minister and I have been to 101 of them. I've done 21, she's done most of the rest, but you know something? The feedback on the ground from local doctors, local nurses, local clinicians, wanting to have the authority and the certainty of a funding stream to do their best for their communities - it's huge.
And I'd say to state health bureaucrats and disgruntled state politicians and other opposition types, I think it's time just to get out of the way of fundamental reform. We intend to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: What do you think (inaudible)
PM: I understand the premier has sent a letter to the Government this morning. I haven't had an opportunity to see it yet. We are always happy to work through matters which need to be clarified further, but let me be very clear - that fundamental direction of our reform is absolutely clear cut. For the first time, a national health and hospital network, funded nationally, run locally, to deliver better health, better hospitals for the Australian people.
Too many people have said for far too long we need to change the system. Well, we've come up with a blueprint for change. We're going to have a tough fight on our hands, but we will not shrink from it for one minute.
JOURNALIST: What do you say to the people who say that this is really not the best approach that could be taken? They're criticising you for the way you (inaudible)
PM: Well, it's a democracy. People can express their point of view. That's fine.
I couldn't think of a more exhaustive means by which to come up with blueprint for the future - a health and hospital commission working for a year and a half, comprised of representatives from the entire medical profession working their way right across the country, dealing with the professional colleges, the nurses and others, dealing with the individual hospitals, coming up with their blueprint. The Minister and I then going out to 101 hospitals between us, road testing their 123 recommendations with groups of clinicians and specialists right across the country, and then us as a Cabinet deciding on the way ahead for reform. That's pretty comprehensive. That's the right way to do policy.
But, you know something? It's time to get on with it, and again I'd say to all those state health bureaucrats, these state health bureaucrats have had a long, long time to fix the system. They haven't done so.
It's time for a new approach. We put one on the table. This is it, and I'd say to all those who are moaning and groaning about it - it's time to get out of the way of real reform and deliver better health and better hospitals for the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: One of the inpatients that you spoke to this morning (inaudible) was receiving treatment for cancer and after you'd gone she said that she (inaudible) that she thought most people would be happy to pay more taxes in order to pay for better public health services. Are you counting on that sentiment for when the new taxes come in?
PM: Let me say in response to your question two or three things. The first is the national health and hospitals network that I released at the National Press Club a couple of days ago is fully funded within the existing budget. That's the first point.
The second is, any politician who goes out there and pretends that health care costs are not going to keep going through the roof in the future is not telling you the truth. I don't intend to be part of that.
Thirdly, when it comes to meeting the future costs of the system, we, the Australian Government, will do so within our fiscal discipline, which is not to increase taxes as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product. That's been our commitment prior to the election, it's our commitment now, and will be into the future.
Simon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) there needs to be some clarification, I suppose, on how the loadings could be set for regional and rural areas. It will be an independent umpire that determines those loadings. Can you guarantee, what's the guarantee that those loadings will be sufficient to keep some of those smaller (inaudible) hospitals viable?
PM: The guarantee from the Australian Government is absolute. And that is that the formula which will be developed on the pricing of hospital services will not lead to the closure of any regional, rural or small hospital in the great state of New South Wales or anywhere else in the country.
Simon, you know as well as I do this is a fantastic fear campaign being run by state health bureaucrats who don't want change to happen. Well, mate, it's a great story, keep running it, good on you, but you know something - and you're right to run it, because people are saying it to you, full marks to you - but guess what? It's not true, and those who are running it have one interest in mind, which is to block reform.
Guess what? I'm belling the cat on that. That's what they're trying to do. That's the tactics. Not just here, other parts of Australia as well. We intend to get on with the business of reform.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you need the support of the states. How are you going to get them on side?
PM: Well, we will speak directly with the states between now and when the Council of Australian Governments convenes in the first part of April. I have written to all the state Premiers and the Chief Ministers. I have telephoned each of them and there is going to be a huge amount, to use the technical term, of argy bargy between now and when the Council of Australian Governments meets. Some may agree. Some may disagree. Some may agree in part. Some may agree in whole. Some may tell us to jump in the lake. But you know something? That will not stand in our road.
I repeat what I have said before, that this is our proposal, this is our reform plan, we intend to get on with it. If the states and territories can't agree with that, I've also said what the alternative course of action would be.
JOURNALIST: On another issue, are you worried relations between India and Australia will be further strained (inaudible)
PM: This is a really horrible story. I've seen the reports this morning. I heard about this late last night. This is a really horrible story.
The death of any little child causes everyone in this country to stop, pause, think, reflect. If this was a case of murder, there is nothing worse - nothing worse - than the brutal murder of a little child. The authorities are investigating it. We have confidence the authorities will get to the bottom of it. Our thoughts and our prayers go out to the family of this little one.
JOURNALIST: Stephen Smith is in India at the moment. Have you spoken to him about this?
PM: The Government, through my own foreign policy advisor, has been in contact with Mr Smith while he's been away and of course in relation to this matter as well. We will handle this matter through the appropriate authorities, the appropriate police authorities. It will take the necessary time to get to the bottom of it but get to the bottom of it we will.
JOURNALIST: And are you aware of any reaction from the Indian Government to this?
PM: As of now, those matters lie with the Foreign Minister and I will, if there are any further matters to discuss on that, then I'll comment further.
JOURNALIST: I was just going to expand on that. Are you concerned there will be further damage -
PM: You know what I'm concerned about? This little boy, this little child. Three years old. That's just horrific.
Let's get the facts around this. If this is murder, it is unspeakable and unthinkable how a little child's life could be taken away like this. Unspeakable and unthinkable.
Let's sort out this case, this person, this human tragedy first, and as for foreign policy, let's deal with that in its due time.
Okay folks, got to run. See you guys.


PM: I know many people in Queensland are suffering right now. Many people in Queensland are suffering from these extraordinary floods. People are frightened for themselves, for their homes, for their families and are going through enormous anguish right now.
I think all Australians are with the good people of these towns across Queensland right now if they go through a very difficult time, and it's times like this when the Australian family always bonds together to help those who are under particular need and particular challenge because of natural disasters.
The Australian Government is providing to the Queensland Government, through the natural disaster relief and recovery arrangements, support and this currently applies to 57 local government areas in Queensland. All local government areas are eligible for funding assistance for the restoration of essential public assets and counter-disaster operations. Concessional loans of up to $250,000 for small businesses and primary producers and freight subsidies up to $5,000 for primary producers are now available in ten local government areas of Balonne, Barcoo, Blackall-Tambo, Bulloo, Diamantina, Maranoa, Murweh, Paroo, Quilpie and Western Downs.
Western Downs, Quilpie, Balonne, Murweh and Maranoa residents are now eligible for personal hardship and distress assistance including emergency assistance payments, $170 dollars person up to $780 per family; potential household contents grants of $1,660 per person and up to $4,980 per couple or family; an essential repairs to housing grant of up to $10,250 per person and up to $13,800 per couple or family.
Individuals who have experienced personal hardship should contact the Queensland Department of Communities Disaster Relief Assistance Scheme hotline on 1800 173 349.
This is in addition to the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) now being made available to eligible people adversely affected by severe flooding in the south-west Queensland.
Those who are eligible will receive a one-off payment of $1,000 for adults and $400 for each child.
People seeking information about the AGDRP can call the Australian Government's south-west Queensland floods hotline on 180 2122 or visit their local recovery centre.
I said before, I think all Australians are with the good people of South-West Queensland as they tackle these extraordinary floods. I spoke in the last day or two to the mayor of Charleville, I'll be speaking to local mayors myself again today on the phone to see what, if any, assistance further can be provided, and as with all these sorts of natural disasters and floods the Australian Army always stands ready to assist when called upon and that is the case now as well.
Let me speak now about the reason we're here at this great hospital at Sunshine here in Melbourne today.
The Australian Government has decided to launch a National Health and Hospitals Network which is to be funded nationally and run locally to deliver better health and hospital services for all Australians. As I'm here in her home town of Melbourne, I could publicly thank the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon for her extraordinary contribution to this important national reform.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will create a single network of national hospital services; a network of public hospitals across the country instead of eight separate systems which don't talk to each other.
Secondly, it's to be funded nationally which means that for the first time in Australian history the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding role for the future needs of the system.
Thirdly, the system will be run locally so that those with the clinical expertise at the local level will actually make the decisions about how the local hospital network works.
That is what I'm here to emphasise today.
A National Health and Hospitals Network which is funded nationally, but most critically, run locally. Run by local doctors, nurses, experts in local areas to make the critical decisions about how to lift hospital services in their community.
That's why what we see here at Sunshine is so important. What you have here is an existing local hospital network which works closely with its neighbouring hospitals, as I'm advised, Footscray and Williamstown, prospectively one other as well, in order to deliver the best possible services to those in these communities.
In the future where we see these reforms going is to, as an Australian Government, fund these local hospital networks directly in order that they will have secure, long term funding to deliver the best possible services to the people of these communities - that's why, the system again, a National Health and Hospital Network funded nationally, run locally though local hospital networks to make these decisions work on the ground.
We've also seen this morning how some of the practical measures that we've taken so far are beginning to take effect.
Outside we saw the evidence of the construction of the new teaching facility, which we are co-funders as the Australian Government. What does that mean? It means that for local hospital networks and local hospitals like this we can bring in the teaching services which are necessary here in this part of Melbourne relevant to the needs of this community. And so what you'll have there is the onsite clinical training of doctors, the onsite clinical training of nurses in much greater numbers than we've ever had before, and we're proud to be co-investors in that.
Under the new National Health and Hospitals Network the Australian Government will become the dominant funders of those sorts of facilities in the future.
We've got some runs on the board. We're co-investors in what you're doing now but in the future we'll become the dominant funders of those facilities for the future - training local doctors, training local nurses to work in local communities such as this.
Of course the other areas where we've got some runs on the board is the expansion of the operating theatres that we've seen here today as well at Sunshine.
The fact that we're able to invest already several million dollars in building a new operating theatre, enhancing the existing one to lift the overall throughput of this hospital.
I'm told that in terms of elective surgery, once these are up and running, it will increase the elective surgery throughput for this hospital by something in the vicinity of one third to one quarter of where it is at the moment; that is a great step forward, but we need more to be done.
Again, turning to the National Health and Hospitals Network for the future, we as the Australian Government would take on the dominant funding responsibility for the future expansion of operating theatres and the future expansion of hospitals themselves like the one here at Sunshine; that's why we need to get this reform done.
Remember we need to be planning, not just for next year, we need to be planning for the next decade and planning for the decade beyond. We believe the Australian Government must step up to the plate and take on this dominant funding responsibility. Nicola, do you wish to add to what I've just said?
MINISTER ROXON: Look, just very briefly, of course as a local Member and here will Bill Shorten the local Member, as we stand at Sunshine hospital we're very proud of the work that Sunshine hospital does, but also Western Health generally. We think it provides very good service to the community but we're always keen to see how it can be improved and the Prime Minister's outlined how getting sustainable funding into the future, getting the governance right, investing in the workforce is all part of our national plan. So I want to say thank you to Kath Cook and the team for having us here on a Saturday and keep up the good work.
PM: Bill, did you want to add?
SHORTEN: It's very good that the Prime Minister can visit Sunshine in the Western Suburbs. The Western Health region network does a great job for hundreds of thousands of people and it's very timely opportunity to have the Prime Minister visit because the Western Suburbs of Melbourne will benefit from national hospital reform as has been outline this week by the Prime Minister and the Minister for Health.
PM: Thanks very much. If I could just conclude my remarks by again thanking Nicola for her work as Health Minister and as someone who knows something of the health needs of this region and taking that knowledge and applying it across the nation. Over to you folks,
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what's been your response to (inaudible) what have the people here who work so hard said how they feel about it?
PM: Sure. Well some of those that we spoke to inside over a cup of tea were saying that what they need is to have proper funding for the system for the future so that they can get on with the job of delivering their local clinical services. I think that's a fair summary of the comments that we had around the morning tea table this morning.
If I could give you just an example of some of the figures that they gave me, here at Sunshine in terms of those procedures classified today as urgent procedures, they said they have booked in 67 hours worth of operating time covering 23 patients. This are classified as urgent. Currently they have available 27.5 hours worth of rostered staff.
This is a story which is not unique to Sunshine; this is a story right across the nation. That is why hospitals like this need to be given that helping hand by the Australian Government to be able to deliver these services in the future.
No hospital system and no health system's ever going to be perfect but we can, as a nation, do better and I think what the doctors and nurse here have said to me is that they want us in there providing funding certainty to the future so that they can get on with the job of delivering better health and better hospital services to this community.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Queensland (inaudible) New South Wales, (inaudible) states like Victoria could be made to pick up (inaudible)?
PM: Can I say here in Victoria there are great things happening within the health and hospital system and there are great things happing in many other States as well, but what I pick up is this - that every health and hospital system right across Australia can still improve further and that's what local communities are saying to us, that's what local doctors are saying to us, that's what local nurses are saying to us.
Can I say, any Premier who thinks that their system is working just fine and dandy and can't be improved further, that Premier is just kidding themselves. That goes for Victoria, that goes for every State across the country and what we're about, on about, is making those changes possible.
JOURNALIST: Do you think your visit here today will help you counter resistance? (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say, as we put together our policy over many, many months, both Nicola and myself visited many hospitals right across Melbourne and I remember visiting the Northern hospital here in Melbourne and I'm sure Nicola visited a number of others as well. The bottom line is this, our experience right across the board is that there are great things going on in the health and hospital services of Australia, and in Victoria as well, but people are looking to what we do to put this onto a secure funding base for the future so that we can lift health and hospital services for the future.
As I said, any Premier, I think is kidding themselves to think that local people are 100 per cent satisfied with how the health and hospital system is at present. They're not. What we're on about is how do we improve it further by a system which is funded nationally but, most importantly, run locally.
JOURNALIST: How will-
PM: Sorry. I'll take this one here and then you.
JOURNALIST: Despite your earlier (inaudible) heath reform a couple of years ago about ending the blame game. Do you think the States, who are opposing this, are standing in the way of that?
PM: I think all, I would call upon all Premiers and Chief Ministers to put the blame game to bed and get on with the business of properly reforming and funding the system for the future, one which is funded nationally and run locally.
We can continue to have rolling squabbles about this and get nowhere for the benefit of patients in this area or patients right across Australia. I think the Australian people want us to get on with it and we, the Australian Government, are determined to do so.
This reform it's, this, is an idea whose time has come. That is a nationally funded, locally run health and hospital system for Australia. If we simply left things as they were, the blame game would continue, waste would continue and on top of that, quite frankly the health budgets would crush most of the states budgets within the next 20 or 30 years completely, and they wouldn't be able to do anything else. That's why we're doing what we're doing, now.
Sorry you had another question.
JOURNALIST: When will we see the funding? John Brumby said (inaudible)
PM: Well let me just go to that point, which I know John has raised, and give you a few facts and figures.
Number one - from 2009 to 2014, the Australian Government has already decided to increase funding to the Victorian health system by 50 per cent; that is $5.1 billion additional investment by us compared with the previous health agreement with the previous Australian Government. That flows through in 2009, 2010, '11, '12, '13. That money, that extra $5.1 billion dollars from the Australian Government is flowing through into the Victorian health and hospital system now.
Second point is this - beyond that because the Australian Government will be taking on long-term responsibility for the overall funding of the scheme, and become the dominant funders of the future, we will therefore be taking on $3.8 billion dollars worth of funding burden from the Victorian Government which they would otherwise have to bear themselves.
So we've got $5 billion now flowing through over the next four years ahead, and beyond that the Australian Government taking $3.8 billion off the shoulders of the Victorian Government - I would have thought there were a few local transport priorities here in Victoria and Melbourne which may need to be attended to.
Third part of the answer is this - I've just pointed to areas where for the first time the Australian Government has stepped up to the plate and started investing in the actual physical buildings of hospitals and the equipment that they have here at the Sunshine Hospital, one or two operating theatres, a teaching facility attached to the hospital. If you're concerned about cancer care we have now agreed to build a new comprehensive cancer care centre for all of Melbourne, for wider Victoria, at Parkville. The Australian Government's investment in that is $426 million. We are 50 per cent co-funders in this major facility for cancer care with the Victorian Government for the future. Now that building hasn't commenced yet.
So you ask the question, or Mr Brumby asked the question, 'where's the money?', well $5.1 billion now for the next four years, secondly saving the State $3.8 billion dollars and thirdly, already investing in major cancer centres like the one I've just spoken of before.
The previous Australian Government did not invest one zack in the building of hospitals or those sorts of capital works for the health system - they left it all to the States.
JOURNALIST: Just on another matter Prime Minister, there are reports that (inaudible) Christmas Island (inaudible)
PM: My advice is that the - you're talking about the report in The Australian today?- my advice is the report in The Australian is incorrect.
My advice is that around 2,040 people can currently be accommodated on Christmas Island. Works underway, as we've already indicated, on a new 400 bed additional facility in the main detention centre, which will expand the capacity to about 2,300 people, and beyond that, no others plans exist.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Hobart (inaudible) at the request of the Japanese (inaudible)
PM: The first thing I'll say about whaling is this - the Australian Government made its position very clear; either the Government of Japan agrees to reduce its current catch, from where it is to zero, within a reasonable time, or the Australian Government will prosecute this matter in an international court of justice, and we would initiate that action prior to the next whaling season commencing, that's the first point.
The second is, in terms of whether or not the Sea Shepherd has in any way violated any relevant law where Australian authorities are involved, that properly lies within the decision making processes of the Australian Federal Police. No Australian Government is going to interfere with the independent processes of the Australian Federal Police. They will investigate this matter on its merits, and make their own decisions on its merits; that's as it should be. It's purely, as it should be, a law enforcement matter. As for the position of the Government of Japan, that's a matter for them to describe themselves.
And having said all that, oh, OK, local newspapers, no, no, that's fine, over to you.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd in a local publication a doctor from this hospital said there needs to be at least another 600 beds across Victoria, and this new form of funding will not create any extra hospital beds, would you (inaudible) more hospital beds in Victoria?
PM: First thing I'd say is this, in answer to the question that was asked of me before, there is currently $5.1 billion now flowing, by way of additional investment from the Australian Government to the Victorian health service, capable of creating a large number of additional hospital beds, that's the first point.
The second is this, the reason why we are bringing about a National Health and Hospitals Network is so that we can properly expand the number of hospital beds in the future, confident that waste, duplication and overlap has been eliminated.
Therefore on the question of future hospital beds there's already $5.1 billion of additional funding out there in the system; secondly we are also, in our Nationals Health and Hospitals Network, have established a system which can grow hospital beds, and the number of doctors, and the number of nurses, into the future.
Therefore we believe we've got the right policy approach, not just to get the funding and structure right for the future to eliminate waste, but to grow the system including growing the number of hospital beds, growing the number of doctors, and growing the number of nurses as well; that's what we intend to do, driven by local hospital networks which are very much in touch with the needs of their local communities, including the one you represent through the Star Newspaper.
I've got to head off now, thanks. I've really got to go.
[ENDS]


JOURNALIST: Two boats overnight, President Yudhoyono's coming this week, what will you be saying to him about people smuggling and do they need to shoulder more of their fair share of the load?
PM: As for the last many, many years under the Howard Government and ourselves, regional responses to the challenge of people smuggling are the only ones that work over time. The cooperation we have from Indonesia, from Malaysia and from other regional countries is really important.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, with regard to the health reform, you've made clear that you want to get the blue print out about structure and then later other things will come, um, and you said that you don't release those other things first 'cause you don't want to waste money, you want the structure to be right, (inaudible) expect the Premiers to accept your proposals, why don't you just tell them what these other things are? You don't have to give them any money, so they can understand the whole deal.
PM: Well I think if you look carefully at the speech I gave at the National Press Club it actually ran though the other areas where we have further statements to make. In terms of hospitals, of beds, of doctors, nurses, aged care, dental health, mental health let me just say this; we now have a once in a generation opportunity to get hospital reform right. Doctors want reform of our hospitals to happen, nurses want it to happen, working families who can't find a place for elective surgery want it to happen. It's time to get on with it. We've got about a month or six weeks to reach agreement on this and I would urge all parties to get behind this reform for the future.
JOURNALIST: What is your chance of holding Robertson now that Belinda Neal's been dumped and how pleased were you to see her go?
PM: First of all, the preselectors have had their say. Belinda of course has worked hard as a local Member but Debbie O'Neill is going to be a great candidate for us and the Central Coast in what will be a very tight contest and having said all that folks, we're heading home.
[ENDS]


International Women's Day celebrates progress towards gender equality and allows us to focus on the work still to be done to fully value the contribution of women to all areas of Australian life.
The Australian Government is determined to make real progress in advancing the status of women and providing supports so women can make the choices that are right for them.
Since being elected, the Government has taken practical action to help women juggle competing pressures on their time, particularly work and family.
This includes returning fairness and flexibility to Australian workplaces including for the first time a right for parents to request flexible and part time work. The Government has made it easier for women to afford to return to work by increasing the Child Care Rebate to 50 per cent of out of pocket expenses and making payments quarterly.
For the first time a Paid Parental Leave Scheme will commence in 2011 that will allow women to remain connected to the workforce while easing financial burdens so they can choose to spend more time with their new baby. The Government's scheme is a fully funded Scheme that particularly supports the financial security of low income women.
The Government is working with business to improve women's opportunities in employment. Today, the Treasurer and the Minister for the Status of Women awarded Employer of Choice citations to 95 businesses able to demonstrate that they have gone over and above minimum requirements to support women's career achievement.
The Government has taken a zero tolerance approach to violence against women, committing funds for urgent actions to prevent violence and support victims. The Government is also on track to releasing our National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women this year.
While Australians should be proud of our nation's record in advancing gender equity, there is further work to be done.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for the Status of Women marked International Women's Day by attending the UNIFEM annual International Women's Day breakfast in Sydney last Friday.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's an honour to join you today as the people of this great state prepare to make their choice for Tasmania's future and I'm delighted to be here to introduce my friend, the Premier of Tasmania, David Bartlett.
David has brought to the office of Premier a fresh vision for building a strong Tasmania: for the jobs and industries of the future; for supporting every Tasmanian child to achieve their full potential; for quality health care for all.
Friends, these are the right priorities for a stronger Tasmania, and that's why David Bartlett deserves to win on 20 March.
Friends, Tasmania today is a different state to what it was in the '80s and '90s.
There's a sense of self-assurance; a sense of direction; new job; new opportunities; a confidence that Tasmania's best days lie ahead.
Just think of the change Tasmania has achieved.
Before Labor came to office in 1998, Tasmania had the highest unemployment anywhere in Australia. The unemployment rate was 10.6 per cent, compared to an average of 7.8 per cent nationwide.
Today, things are different. Tasmania's unemployment rate is just 5.2 per cent and it's below the nation's average.
The number of jobs has grown by almost 20 per cent. The population has reached 500,000 - and growing.
Tasmania's economic growth rate in the last financial year was the second highest in the nation - and for the first time in history, a Tasmanian is captaining the Australian cricket team. And Ricky Ponting has led Australia to more test victories than any other skipper as well being one of the greatest batsmen in the history of the game.
Tasmanians are right to be proud of the achievements of the past 12 years, but this is no time to look backwards - and David is not looking backwards. He's looking ahead: to future challenges; to building a stronger Tasmania; a Tasmania ready for the future with new jobs, better services and greater opportunities for a new generation of Tasmanians.
Friends, I'm proud to have worked together with David since he became Premier almost two years ago: investing in Tasmania's education revolution; improving hospitals and health care for communities across the state; putting Tasmania first in the nation with the National Broadband Network.
Just look at our record, working together.
Together, we took early and decisive action to protect working families from the impact of the global economic recession. The Australian Government's Nation Building Economic Stimulus plan contained a $1.4 billion stimulus to the Tasmanian economy and we've worked hand-in-hand with David's government to deliver the stimulus plan.
Its results are palpable. As the Treasury and the Reserve Bank of Australia have said, it was the Australian Government's stimulus plan that kept our economy from falling into recession last year. Thousands of families across Tasmania have been saved from losing their jobs; saved from the distress of not meeting the mortgage payments; saved from the anxiety about being able to pay for essentials like school uniforms, car insurance and electricity bills; and saved from the uncertainty of searching for work in a climate where around the world, unemployment has been soaring.
We took action, we made a difference and we saved thousands of jobs. We did it because we're Labor. We stand up for working families. When times get tough, we're determined to do all we can to keep Tasmanians in work, just as we're determined to give every child the best opportunities for the future and to provide for those who cannot work - the sick, the elderly, those with disabilities - with quality care and support, and that includes the 85,000 Tasmanian pensioners who benefited from our $35 per week increase in the single age pension, and the $15 increase for couples.
Today, the government of Premier Bartlett and the government I lead are working closely together to build a stronger Tasmania.
Last week I announced the most significant reforms to our health and hospital system since Medicare almost three decades ago.
The Australian Government is committed to ending the blame-game, the cost-shifting and the inefficiencies that plague our health system. As I announced, we will build a National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally.
I welcome Premier Bartlett's positive response to our plans, and I look forward to working with him on the details of our reforms in the months ahead, but in the meantime, we're continuing to work together to build a stronger health and hospitals system today.
The Australian Government has increased our investment in health and hospitals here in Tasmania by 49 per cent compared to the Howard Government. Under our healthcare agreement, we've increased our investment from $930m to $1.4 billion:
     * Our investment in extra elective surgery procedures took 1606 people off the waiting lists in 2008.
     * We've put $3.1 million into new equipment for Royal Hobart, Launceston and North West Region hospitals.
     * And we're investing $15.5 million in four GP Super Clinics in Burnie, Devonport, Sorrell and Clarence.
We're investing in an education revolution, increasing the Australian Government's investment in Tasmania's schools and education system by 197 per cent compared to the last four years of the Howard Government:
     * That includes $439 million in the biggest ever school modernisation project in Tasmania, with 599 projects across 272 schools.
     * It includes funding for 6,300 computers in 103 schools.
     * And $37 million allocated for Trades Training Centres at 32 schools.
We're getting on with the job, supporting new infrastructure where it's most needed:
     * The national investment in Tasmanian transport infrastructure is up 63 per cent in our first two years in office, compared to the last two years of the previous government.
     * The Government's Nation Building Program has delivered almost $800 million for road and rail projects, including key Midland Highway investments such as the much-needed Brighton Bypass.
     * And we're investing in safer Tasmanian roads, with funding for road safety measures at 40 rail crossing and road accident black spots.
We're investing in local community infrastructure like the night lights at Bellerive Oval so that more Tasmanians can share one of life's great joys - watching a Ricky Ponting double century - as I did in January.
And last week we announced a $12.5 million boost to Tasmania's tourism industry through an upgrade of the Three Capes Track.
We're also investing in affordable housing for Tasmanians who most need it - building 514 new homes, at a cost of $125 million.
Friends, this is action that's delivering for Tasmania: better hospitals, new school halls and classrooms, new infrastructure and affordable housing, real investments that are building a stronger Tasmania and the results of a strong working relationship with David Bartlett and his team.
Friends, there is no greater example of us working together than the National Broadband Network because there's no Premier who better understands the potential of superfast broadband for his state.
Friends, we are living in a time of rapid economic change with many businesses and industries going through difficult transitions. At the same time, we see new opportunities emerging.
Superfast broadband is key to so many of those future opportunities. It's the single most important infrastructure investment we can make in the future of Tasmania. It's got the potential to transform the state's economy.
Friends, we're building a National Broadband Network across Australia - but it's all started here in Tasmania. We know that for too long this state was left behind. Rather than an information superhighway, for many Tasmanians it's been a goat track. Tasmania has had the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state or territory.
But that's not the only reason why we started the NBN here in Tasmania.
Tasmania is the pioneer state for the National Broadband Network and that's because of the vision of Premier David Bartlett.
When we went out to the market to see who could build a national broadband network, none of the proposals offered value for money, but the Tasmanian Government made the best submission.
It became the starting point for what is now the Tasmanian National Broadband Network, TNBN Co, and it's the vision of Premier Bartlett that has put this project in the fast lane in Tasmania.
Within months of our National Broadband Network announcement, we laid the first optical-fibre broadband cable in the project in July last year. We announced the first sites that would receive superfast broadband services by July this year - Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point. 
Last October we announced Stage 2 - another seven communities that would receive services and plans for the backbone links in the East Coast, south of Hobart and to the new industrial hub being developed at Westbury.
And just last week, we announced Stage 3 - another 90,000 homes and businesses  -  40,000 in Hobart, 30,000 in Launceston and 10,000 in each of Burnie and Devonport - as well as a $100 million equity injection into TNBN Co.
And we've set a goal to connect 200,000 premises over the next 5 years.
Friends, fast broadband will mean better jobs and business opportunities for Tasmanians. It will mean higher productivity, lower emissions, better health care and better education and Tasmania is pioneering superfast broadband because of Premier Bartlett's vision and energy for Tasmania.
Friends, broadband is only one example of how we're working together to build a strong Tasmania.
Another example is our response to the economic challenges in the state's northern regions. Last year, the north was particularly affected by business closures in the food processing and paper sectors.
I received strong representations from Premier Bartlett - alongside Sid Sidebottom, Jodie Campbell and Dick Adams. That's why we teamed up with David to create a $20 million package to respond to support new ventures to generate new jobs and businesses in the north.
The North West and Northern Tasmania Innovation and Investment Fund invited applications for funds - and it's received 126 applications, which are now under review.
In the meantime, we've already supported 53 small and medium size businesses to become stronger, more competitive businesses through the Enterprise Connect Manufacturing Centre in Burnie.
Friends, David Bartlett is a bloke who understands Tasmanian families. A bloke who rolls his sleeves up and works hard for the people of this state. A bloke who cares deeply for his kids, his community and his state.
He's got a vision for a stronger Tasmania. He's got the right priorities for Tasmanian families.
And as Prime Minister, I look forward to working with him to deliver for Tasmania's future.
I'm delighted to introduce to you the Premier of Tasmania, David Bartlett.


PM: It's great to be back in Tasmania, great to be back in Hobart and great to be back here at the Menzies Medical Research Institute. It's good to be here with Mark Butler and of course Julie Collins.
This is an important centre for medical research and for health, not just for Tasmanian families but for Australian families. There is great work done here and more work will be done here. We're here at this centre because we the Australian Government are funding a huge slice of the expansion of this Menzies Medical Research Centre for all Tasmanians.
Once completed, our funding of nearly $50 million will create a facility which will support some 450 researchers. This is fundamentally important for Tasmania, fundamentally important for the quality of medical research here and across the nation and I've seen this morning some of the great work that's being done here. Great work being done in neurological conditions, great work being done particularly in MS - there being a high incidence of MS in Tasmania - and therefore the importance of getting behind those researchers.
The broader point is this: for the future, under the Australian Government's health and hospitals plan for Australia, what we have is the Australian Government taking the dominant role in the future for the funding of teaching and research and building and the running costs of our hospitals and our research institutes nationwide.
In the past the Australian Government rarely put a dollar into the expansion of hospitals, rarely put a dollar into the expansion of medical research institutes and training. What we are doing under our national hospitals and health plan is exactly the reverse - the Australian Government, for the first time, committing to take a dominant funding role for the future running cost of our hospitals, a dominant funding role for the future construction and operation of our medical research and training institutes. The Australian Government, for the first time, taking a dominant role for the future building of hospitals and the expansion of hospitals as well. This is fundamental to what we are now proposing to do with our hospital and health plan for the country's future.
There's about a month to go before the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments on the future of health and hospitals in Australia. The Government's case is clear. We want better health and better hospital services for all Australians. That's why we're proposing a national health and hospitals network. Doctors, nurses, patients and all working families across Australia want to see our local hospital services improved in the future. Doctors, nurses, patients and working families across Australia want to see concrete action on improving the services of their local hospitals and that forms the basis of our plan.
In the month ahead I will be taking the case strongly for our health and hospitals network across every State and every Territory across Australia. The Health Minister Nicola Roxon, backed up by her team and her officials, will be engaging health ministers right across Australia, every state and every territory, explaining the need for concrete action now. The Treasurer will be doing the same with state and territory treasurers right across Australia, again explaining how we fund concrete action to improve health and hospital services right across Australia.
We look forward to these negotiations with the States and Territories. We don't underestimate how difficult it will be. We expect all these negotiations to be tough, to be robust but we are determined to bring about real action for the improvement of hospital services across Australia.
You see, I would encourage all the Premiers and Chief Ministers to get behind this. I would encourage also, all political parties to get behind this as well. The nation is crying out for these changes to happen. We've pushed it off for too long in the past. It's time to put our best foot forward as a country and get this right for the future and we intend to do so. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Sir, will you be rolling out the entire detail of that funding package (inaudible)
PM: As I said at the National Press Club the other day, national heath and hospital network, funded national, run locally, to deliver better health and hospitals across the nation. We need to get agreement from the States and Territories around that. On top of that we have also said that we intend, as an Australian Government to grow the system, grow the number of hospital beds, grow the number of nurses and grow the number of doctors.
But you know something? We need to get the States and Territories to accept the overall reform plan in itself, and then we get on with growing the system. Otherwise we are going to simply continue the waste, the duplication and the overlap we have seen in the past.
JOURNALIST: Will this hospital plan mean the loss of health bureaucracy jobs (inaudible)
PM: Well look, we've been very plain about the fact that we want to see the maximum delivery of front line services in local hospitals by doctors and nurses and an absolute minimum oh health bureaucracy. Now, the details in each state, including here in Tassie, I'm sure that will be sorted out over time. But we make no apology for the fact we want overall, less health bureaucrats and more front line services in local hospitals from doctors, from nurses and those who make the local hospital network, work on the ground.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, we have simply said that these changes that we'll bring about in establishing local hospital networks across Australia, should be achieved on the basis of no net addition to bureaucracy anywhere. If that means moving some health bureaucrats from capital cities to the point of delivery of services out there in the local communities and the regions of Australia, well that will be sorted out over time. But what we want is a maximum attention to people, delivering health and hospital services on the ground.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: We are absolutely confident that what will happen as a result of the national health and hospitals network is an expansion in frontline services right across the nation. More doctors, more nurses, more allied health professional, more hospital beds, delivering the critical, real concrete action that people want. No-one in Australia, no-one anywhere wants to see any expansion to health bureaucrats. What they do want to see is an expansion of frontline services and we intend to get that balance right.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: When I said before that the Health Minister and her officials will be providing briefings right across the country, that applies to any interested political party, including state oppositions. So we're completely relaxed about that. You know why? Because when you're dealing with such a big reform for the nation which affects hospital services everywhere, from the 764 public hospitals which exist across Australia, it's important that all the mainstream political parties are informed and all are prepared to look at the facts. And we'd encourage them to get on board as well.
I notice Mr Abbott on that score, attacked our plan before it was released. I'd just note that Mr Abbott seems to attack everything and support nothing. It's seems to be an emerging habit.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I simply say that the Australian Government doesn't need polls in the newspaper to tell us that working families across Australia and doctors and nurses want to improve the hospital services of our nation. It's absolutely clear cut. If you were to go down to any hospital in Australia today and ask patients whether they were happy about the time that they need to wait for elective surgery, and to be rescheduled. Ask any person who fronts at an accident and emergency whether they have all been seen within a reasonable period of time. Ask people in rural and regional areas whether they have got enough doctors to meet their needs. Ask them those questions, there is a huge underlying support across the Australian people to get health and hospital reform done.
You know something? There is always opposition on the way through to any big reform, whether it's from state premiers, from chief ministers, from health bureaucrats and from others, because we are changing the way things work. You know something? We intend to give this our absolute best shot and the reason is, the Australian people are calling out for this sort of change.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I say that prior to the last election, I said that we would undertake fundamental reform of the health and hospital system of the country. I said that we would commission a root and branch review. We've done that.
We've now road tested its recommendations with so many hospitals across Australia including here at the Royal Hobart, where as you know, as ladies and gentlemen of the press, I've been before, and at Launceston as well, to get their feedback on the recommendations put forward.
And now based on all of that we've placed our plan for a national heath and hospitals network, funded nationally, run locally for better health and better hospital services across the country. Now, whether, how people respond to that in terms of state and territory governments, let's see how the debate unfolds over the next critical month. But we've been consistent about the fact that this is a reform we would act on during our first term in office and we've done so.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the premiers and the chief ministers will raise a whole range of questions. I notice Premier Keneally already has sent me a letter as well raising questions as well. We'll get back to the Government of New South Wales on each and every one of these details.
But you know something? We cannot simply postpone real action, concrete action on improving our health and hospital services. We intend to get on with it but we'll answer all reasonable questions on the way through.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: What I've always said is that we, the Australian Government, would put this plan to the Australian states and territories. This is a bold plan, it is a big plan. We believe it is a plan whose time has come. I think working families are sick and tired of bits of sticky tape being applied to the system, a bandaid here and a bandaid there, to the health and hospital system. They want it fundamentally reformed and properly funded for the future.
Then I have said also, consistent with the past, that if the states and territories reject it then we would seek a further mandate from the Australian people. It's what I said prior to the election. It's what I've said since the election. It remains my position today.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) what's the strategy and the sensitivities around not talking about additional funding (inaudible) aged care (inaudible).
PM: Well, you know something? Under the current system which many state premiers and chief ministers seem to be defending, there is massive waste through duplication and overlap. Therefore the challenge is this: we must eliminate that waste and then grow the system.
Eliminating waste means, for the first time, having a single, dominant national funder for the health and hospital system. Let's go to the core of our reforms. Number one, for the first time in Australia's history, the Australian Government taking the dominant role for the funding of the recurrent or operating costs of our hospitals.
Second point - for the first time, the Australian Government taking the dominant funding role for funding teaching and research of the type we've been talking about here today in Hobart.
The third is for the first time the Australian Government taking the dominant role for the building of new hospitals and the expansion of existing hospitals. There are big reforms.
On top of that, the Australian Government taking total funding responsibility for health services delivered outside hospitals.
So why do we need to get those principals right first? Until you do that, you will continue to have a system which wastes somewhere between, in some calculations, 10 to 20 percent of the money invested in it. Once you've got a way through in getting rid of that waste then, comfortably, you can grow the system.
The Australian Government by the way, in terms of growing the system already for those who may argue that no additional funding is coming, can I just say this: right now, 2010, we are already into the second year of a five-year expansion of our hospitals budget for the states whereby we've increased that by 50 per cent. That is flowing through last year, this year, next year, the year after and the year after that.
On top of that, the growth we are now taking onto our shoulders for the future expansion of the system is taking $15 billion-worth of responsibility away from the states and putting it on our shoulders, which means more hospitals beds, more doctors, more nurses funded by the Australian Government. That's our response to, I think, a number of the bleeps about the system and I don't think they stand up to scrutiny.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you may take it further than that at the election (inaudible) are you saying you don't have a mandate for them at the moment?
PM: I'm saying that I have always been clear about the fact that we wanted to achieve these reforms with the states and territories cooperatively if we could. But I'm not prepared to simply to push it to one side if that cooperation is not forthcoming.
Then we would seek, as I said before, a further mandate from the people. That is what I said prior to the last election. That is what I have said since the last election. My position has not changed one bit. It's been absolutely consistent.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) polls (inaudible)
PM: Well, can I say that any election, state or federal, is a tight election. Secondly, what I'd say is that in Tasmania what you have with David Bartlett is a strong Premier who has delivered a Tasmanian tiger economy.
The people of Tasmania will form their own judgements, but I would just underline one fact: this economy has been fundamentally transformed. This is a growing economy. In the last year or so we've generated one of the fastest growth rates of any state in the country. This is a vastly different Tasmania to the one which existed in times past.
Therefore, I think when people go to make up their mind, they'll bear that in mind, but let's not underestimate the degree of challenge in this election and in other elections and I'm sure David Bartlett will demonstrate his strong leadership credentials, not just on this but on broadband and on health and hospitals as well.
[ENDS]


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Premier Anna Bligh today announced joint Commonwealth-State funded grants to help small businesses and primary producers affected by recent flooding in Queensland.
Today's announcement will see small businesses and primary producers receive grants for clean up and recovery. Tier 1 grants will be available for up to $5,000 and Tier 2 grants will be up to $20,000.
The Prime Minister said his thoughts were with the people of Queensland's south- west who were going through a very tough time.
"The Australian Government stands ready to assist the people of Queensland to recover from this very serious natural disaster," Mr Rudd said.
"This announcement today comes on top of the range of funding and assistance measures the Australian Government has already provided over the last week.
"This additional assistance is designed to minimise the economic impact on severely affected communities by providing short term targeted assistance, so businesses can continue trading as soon as possible."
Premier Bligh said small business owners and farmers would struggle to recover from this severe flooding event.
"Significant damage has occurred to small businesses in the majority of the communities in flood affected south west Queensland," Ms Bligh said.
"There will be extensive livestock and crop losses and damage to fencing, watering points, irrigation and other infrastructure on many rural properties.
"This grant funding is available to all eligible primary producers and small business owners who have suffered damage to their business."
The grants are being provided for the local government areas where the greatest impact has occurred. To date these areas include Balonne, Barcoo, Blackall-Tambo, Bulloo, Diamantina, Maranoa, Murweh, Paroo, Quilpie and Western Downs
The last time this grants program was activated in Queensland was during the 2009 monsoonal flooding and Tropical Cyclones Charlotte and Ellie.
These grants are in addition to concessional loans and freight subsidies for small businesses and primary producers which have already been activated for these local government areas.
The Australian and Queensland Governments are providing prompt and targeted assistance to help local communities recover from Queensland's biggest flooding event on record.
Last week the Premier announced the Premiers Flood Appeal and pledged $500,000 from the Queensland Government.
Joint State and Commonwealth Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) have been activated for 59 local government areas.
Under the NDRRA, councils will be able to access funding from the Australian and Queensland Governments to assist with the cost of restoring essential public assets as well as the cost of counter disaster operations.
Disaster relief funding arrangements have also been activated for people experiencing personal hardship in a number of local government areas.
These funding arrangements consist of:
     * Emergent Assistance Payment - up to $170 per person and $780 per family.
     * Means tested - Essential Household Contents Grant - up to $1,660 for individuals and $4,980 for couples or families.
     * Means tested - Repairs to Dwellings / Structural Assistance Grant - up to $10,250 for individuals and $13,800 for couples or families.
The Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs has also activated the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment in a number of local government areas in south-west Queensland where individuals and households where significantly impacted. 


The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and Parliamentary Secretary for Water, Dr Mike Kelly, today congratulated Inghams Enterprises on winning the inaugural Prime Minister's Water Wise Award.
Announced by Dr Kelly at the Australian Water Association Awards Dinner in Brisbane, the award was developed to recognise and reward businesses that excel in water use efficiency and management.
Through their innovative water saving initiatives, Inghams Enterprises has saved 545 million litres of water since March 2009 and reduced their reliance on mains water by 70 per cent
"Inghams Advanced Water Treatment Plant project is one of many impressive water saving initiatives that entered the award," Mr Rudd said.
"It is very encouraging to see that large water users are striving to achieve best practice in water efficiency and demonstrating their commitment to continual improvement."
Dr Kelly said the Australian Government recognises the immense challenge we face as a nation in preparing for a future with less water and the role government, industry, and individuals play in response to these challenges.
"I applaud Inghams Enterprises and the finalists for their leadership and excellence in water savings," Dr Kelly said.
Delivering on a 2007 Australian Government election commitment, the Prime Minister's Water Wise Award complements the Australian Government's Water for the Future key priorities which include: taking action on climate change, using water wisely and securing water supplies.
The winner and four finalists were selected on the basis of their significant water savings; innovation; excellence in project delivery; and high capacity for their approaches to be replicated at other facilities.
The four finalists for the Prime Minister's Water Wise Award were Amcor Australasia; Coca-Cola Amatil; Diageo Australia and Rossdale Golf Club.
For more information visit: www.environment.gov.au/water/policy-programs/weo/pm-awards/index.html 


The Australian Government congratulates Indonesia's President, His Excellency Dr Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, on his appointment as an Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia (AC).
The citation for the appointment was: "For strengthening Australia-Indonesia relations, and promoting democracy and development in Indonesia".
President Yudhoyono is a true friend of Australia. Under his leadership, the relationship between our two nations has grown stronger.
President Yudhoyono has also been a champion of democracy and of economic development for the people of Indonesia.
The Governor-General, Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce AC, presented the award to the President in a ceremony at Government House.


PM: This is an important reform for the nation's health and hospital system and where the rubber hits the road is for hospitals like this one, the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital here in Queensland.
The Royal Brisbane is a hospital which has, as I'm advised, nearly a thousand beds and I've been speaking to a lot of folk this morning and what they say is, they could do with more.
In the past, the Australian Government's relationship to the hospitals of Australia has been this. We provided 35 per cent of the recurrent costs of hospitals but you know something? We haven't provided anything, really, for the training and research function of hospitals and we've not provided anything when it comes to the capital needs of hospitals, the equipment, the buildings.
How does this therefore change? For the future, the Australian Government would take on the dominant share of the recurrent costs of hospitals like the Royal. The dominant share of the costs of the training and research function in these hospitals and the dominant share of the capital needs of these hospitals, buildings and equipment.
That makes a huge difference for the future for major hospitals like the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital.
Let me go to a practical example within the hospital and I was speaking before to a number of people on the nursing staff and other members of staff who told me about the particular needs in day surgery.
I said very simply, what do you need more? The answer for them was, they needed more space. Well, what does this mean in terms of a practical difference on the ground? It means that under this plan of ours, the Australian Government would, for the first time, take on a dominant funding role for the expansion of day surgery here at the Royal Brisbane.
That is the difference. In the past we didn't contribute a dollar. That is the key difference.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The Australian Government values the role of the Australian Medical Association in representing the interests of Australian doctors - in general practice and other specialties, medical students and doctors in training. We especially value the AMA's constructive engagement in the national debate on the future of our health and hospitals system.
In particular, tonight I want to acknowledge the hard work of Andrew Pesce as President of the AMA. I've appreciated Andrew's input and his engagement with the health reform agenda in the meetings that we have had together in recent weeks.
The Government and the AMA are both committed to tackling the long-term challenge of health reform, and we are both committed on the direction we need to take to tackle this challenge - in particular, on the need for stronger clinician leadership within our health system.
In July last year, the AMA told us about the sorts of things that they would like to see in health reform. In a speech to the National Press Club, Andrew said, and I quote:
"Services must be organised and administered as close as possible to the actual delivery of the service (to the bedside)."
He also said:
"Reform must enable more decision-making by health professionals at the local and institutional levels."
"Reform must encourage a move to national standards."
Andrew, we heard you.
What I am going to talk about tonight is what the National Health and Hospitals Network means to you, how you have helped shape this reform and the critical role that you have to play in the future.
In framing this reform, the Government conducted more than 100 consultations with clinicians, health professionals and patients across the country, from major tertiary hospitals through to small primary care centres providing the entire clinical support for several towns.
I have heard firsthand about:
     * the need to provide clinicians with leadership and flexibility to determine what works best for their patients;
     * the need to recognise that general practitioners are the backbone of our health system - and to properly support and train them;
     * the need to train more doctors and to ensure that our next generation of doctors are equipped with a world class education;
     * the shortage of health professionals in our rural and remote communities and the demands placed on our dedicated rural doctors, who are often the single practitioner servicing the full spectrum of needs of several small communities;
     * the future information technology needs to support our health system;
     * the major differences in quality and standards across the nation; and
     * the need to support training and research in both our hospitals and in health services in the community.
Again, we have heard you, and as a Government, we are determined to act, after so many years when health reform was considered just too hard to undertake.
The Australian Government believes that now is the time for action on health and hospitals. The health system we have today - though it has served us well - has come to a tipping point.
The current system is fragmented.
Its structure encourages cost shifting and blame shifting between different levels of government.
It wastes resources.
It leaves too many patients waiting at the end of long queues.
It is increasingly unable to cope with the strains under which it operates.
It often leaves key decisions in the hands of bureaucrats far too remote from the communities that health professionals serve.
And it is unprepared for the challenges of the future - an ageing population, rising chronic disease rates, workforce shortages and the rising cost of medical care.
The scale of the challenge is reflected in Treasury's conclusion that without action, State government budgets by 2045-46 will be completely overwhelmed, with health spending consuming their entire revenue.
In other words, as a nation we cannot afford to delay action any longer.
Within our first year in office, we signed a National Health Care Agreement that delivered $64 billion - a 50% increase in on the previous agreement, and last week we announced the most significant reforms to health and hospitals since the introduction of Medicare.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will be nationally funded and locally run.
The Australian Government will become the dominant funder of our public hospital system.
We will devolve responsibility for managing our public hospitals to Local Hospital Networks.
We will take over all funding and policy responsibility for GP and Primary Health Care services.
But we know that much more is needed - and we will have more to say over the coming weeks and months ahead.
We will be addressing the reform of primary care in greater detail because if we are to take pressure off our hospital system, that is going to happen through providing better primary care in the community.
General Practitioners will be very important to those changes.
We will also tackle the long-term shortage of doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, building on the record $1.1 billion investment in training more health professionals and the expansion of GP training places that are already being delivered.
We will take the National Health and Hospitals Network to the States at next month's meeting of the Council of Australian Governments and if the States and Territories do not sign up to fundamental reform, we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
What I want to talk about with you tonight is what these reforms mean for you as doctors.
First, what a nationally funded network means for you.
Second, what national standards mean for you.
And third, what Local Hospital Networks and clinical leadership mean for you.
Under our plan, for the first time, the Australian Government will permanently fund 60 per cent of the efficient price of all public hospital services. It will also shoulder the burden of rising hospitals costs into the future.
As the dominant funder of the hospital system, the Government will pay for hospital services differently. Instead of providing States with a blank cheque, the Government will pay hospitals directly for each service they provide.
It has not only been patients who have been short changed by jurisdictional buck-passing and system-wide inefficiencies. It has been medicos who have been left to turn patients away from hospital wards due to a lack of available beds. It has been doctors who have had to work in often rundown buildings, without state-of-the-art equipment, as the number of administrative and clerical staff has ballooned to more than 36,000.
Under a National Health and Hospitals Network, things will change - from service provision to the delivery of operating capital and large scale capital works, hospitals will be better resourced into the future.
The level of government with the strongest financial position will foot a dominant share of all hospital costs and it will do so on a permanent basis.
For the first time, we will provide clinicians with the certainty of knowing that when you admit a patient, the hospital is being paid a fair price for the services that you directly deliver. This fair price will be set by an independent national umpire. The umpire will be free from the clutches of either level of Government.
This means no more finger-pointing between governments about the rate of indexation for hospital funding and it means no more arbitrary cuts to the indexation rate - which undermine funding for public hospital services.
Instead, funding will reflect an independent assessment that takes into account clinical advice about what is needed to deliver services properly and efficiently. And, in line with the AMA's recommendations, the efficient price will reflect the varying cost of service delivery across different hospitals in rural and remote locations, and for patients with more complicated conditions.
As the majority funder of the health and hospitals system, the Australian Government will require strong national standards and transparent reporting in the health system. These national standards will reflect the high expectations that patients and clinicians should rightly have of health and hospital services. These national standards will apply across the health system, including:
     * Access to hospital care;
     * Access to GPs and other local health professionals;
     * Safety and quality in the health system; and
     * Financial performance.
Today, there is significant variation in waiting times for emergency departments and elective surgery across our eight state and territory health systems.
Last week I said that a national network would for the first time mean tough national standards. For the first time, patients - no matter which hospital they attend, no matter where it is - will know that their hospital is subject to the same strict standards as every other hospital.
This week, I can announce that we will put money on the line to drive those standards.
We must improve waiting times for emergency services. We must improve waiting times for elective surgery.
But consistent with the move to activity-based funding, we won't be handing over blank cheques.
Today I can reveal that we will make additional investments, based on reaching and exceeding those tough national standards. In other words - performance incentives for local hospitals.
This will not be the whole of our extra investments - not by a long shot - but we believe it is crucial to recognise concrete improvements in a concrete way.
This will give local hospitals more funds to deliver essential health services, and drive innovation and improvements across our hospitals.
National standards will also drive better health and hospital outcomes, but to achieve better outcomes, the pursuit of these standards needs to be informed by clinical practice, and that's where clinicians will play a critical role.
The national standards are our destination. It is clinicians, and their expertise, that will provide us with the quickest and surest route of reaching these standards.
Part of reaching the destination is ensuring clinicians have sufficient scope and authority to adapt best practices at the local level. I will return this important matter shortly.
But an equally important part is ensuring that clinicians have sufficient voice to tell decision makers what national best practices are.
The Government will support clinicians in ensuring we have ways of disseminating their experience and their research, and putting it into practice nationally. We will do so by supporting the development of national clinical guidelines, and we will do so by enhancing the role of the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care, to expand its range of functions to drive evidence based medicine.
And we will underpin our commitment with a new role as the dominant funder of teaching and research in our public hospitals.
Local Hospital Networks are another key element of our reform agenda. As I have made clear, these are not the hospital boards of old, which pitted hospitals against each other in a fight for funding.
Networks will be made up of small groups of public hospitals which will work together to deliver patient care, manage their budgets and answer for their performance.
I know how important this is for clinicians. Across the nation, clinicians tell me they feel locked out of decisions on the delivery of health services in their communities. Everyone in this room knows this damages staff morale, increases turnover and disrupts patient care.
Under our reforms, Local Hospital Networks will have Governing Councils made up of clinicians, and finance and management professionals, who are in touch with local needs. These Governing Councils will work with local clinicians to ensure their expertise - especially on quality and safety - is incorporated in the day to day operation of hospitals.
I know many of you in this room will be members of the various forms of clinical advisory councils that exist today, and I suspect that the same number of you will be frustrated at the constant talk and lack of action arising from these bodies that you devote your precious time and energy to.
Our reform plan will bring a fundamental change to the relationship between clinicians and the CEO of the local hospital. The strings will no longer be pulled by unseen bureaucrats.
Imagine the situation I outlined last week where two clinicians at a regional hospital pioneered the development of new services for elderly patients which decreased their admission rate and provided them with better care in the community.
Instead of spending time putting together business cases that end up in the bottom drawer of a bureaucrat hundreds of miles away, the clinicians will be able to deal directly with the Governing Council, and the Governing Council will have the authority to act.
Let me be clear - clinical leadership will be an integral part of Local Hospital Networks and will be built in at every layer across the National Health and Hospital Network.
The Australian Government will establish Lead Clinician Groups so doctors - who know patients best - will be able to improve service planning and the allocation of clinical services in their area.
Lead Clinician Groups will also be drawn upon to provide solutions to national clinical standards.
These groups will complement the corporate governance of Local Hospital networks - giving local clinicians a voice.
We will make sure that clinicians and representative bodies like the AMA are involved in the development and implementation of lead clinicians groups across the Network.
Reforming the Australian health system will be tough, but if we get the structural reforms in place now, we can build a health network that is sustainable, and fair and efficient; one able to navigate the challenges that lie ahead; and one that reflects the excellence of the medical professionals who serve the needs of patients in Australia every day.
We value the AMA's partnership and valuable contribution to building better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
I thank you.


To view the transcript of Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's welcoming address to President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and President Yudhoyono's address to a joint meeting of the Australian houses of parliament, see pages 2133-2142 of the Hansard report.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


The relationship between Indonesia and Australia has never been stronger. We have built an enduring partnership for the 21st Century, based on shared interests and common values. Though neighbours by circumstance, we are close friends and partners by choice.
We have a mutual stake in each other's progress and prosperity. We share a commitment to maintaining peace and advancing security and prosperity in our region. As pluralist democracies and open societies, we seek to promote the values of freedom, good governance, tolerance, human rights and the rule of law. We value regional and multilateral institutions and are committed to making them work more effectively.
From the foundation of our strengthened bilateral ties, Indonesia and Australia are working together to address regional and global challenges. Our partnership is a strategic asset, and we are committed to increasing our cooperation in regional and global forums to advance common interests.
We have agreed to upgrade our comprehensive partnership. We have resolved, as leaders, to meet annually in either Australia or Indonesia. We have also agreed that our respective foreign and defence ministers should meet jointly each year. We will continue to build on the contribution of the Australia Indonesia Ministerial Forum towards strengthening our relationship.
Between our two peoples, ties are growing. A record number of Australians travelled to Indonesia in 2009 and Australia is one of the most popular destinations for Indonesians studying abroad. We are committed to further strengthening these links in areas such as education, culture, media, business and sport. To this end, we will support the establishment of an Australia Indonesia Leadership Dialogue to bring together public figures, business people, academics, opinion-leaders and others for wide-ranging exchanges. We will consult regularly to promote increased and meaningful people-to-people exchanges. We are committed to strengthening our understanding of each others' cultures through increased cooperation on education (including through student and staff exchanges), joint research, dual and joint degrees, and professional development for teachers.
We are committed to realising the potential of the economic relationship between our economies. We have concluded the Australia-Indonesia Free Trade Agreement Joint Feasibility Study and are now considering next steps. We share the goal of increasing the volume of bilateral trade and investment.
Security cooperation under the framework of the Lombok Treaty is progressing, to our mutual benefit. Our defence forces worked closely together in responding to the Sumatra earthquake in September 2009. Our law enforcement agencies are cooperating to tackle the threat of terrorism. Indonesian successes in disrupting and dismantling terrorist networks and in the arrest of terrorist leaders have dealt a significant blow to the threat of terrorism in the region.
Australia and Indonesia are working with shared purpose to address the complex challenge of people smuggling, trafficking in persons and irregular migration. We are pursuing comprehensive regional responses, including through our co-chairing of the Bali Process. Complementing these regional efforts, we are working to enhance our bilateral cooperation, consistent with our Lombok Treaty and its Plan of Action. Our agreement on a new Implementation Framework for Cooperation to Combat People Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons will provide for enhanced cooperation on prevention and disruption of people smuggling ventures, border and immigration management, and legal processes. Australia welcomes Indonesia's plan to introduce a law to criminalise people smuggling this year.
We are committed, as mandated by the Lombok Treaty and its Plan of Action, to reinvigorate our joint efforts to prevent and combat transnational crimes, including through extradition and mutual legal assistance.
We have concluded a bilateral Arrangement on Consular Notification and Assistance to provide a framework for the provision of consular access and assistance to our nationals. We will conduct further consultations on issues involved in the transfer of sentenced prisoners between our two countries, including legal instruments and practical implementation.
We are working hand-in-hand to meet Indonesia's development priorities in a way that furthers both our interests. Australia will provide a further A$215 million over four years to support Indonesia's National Community Empowerment Program (PNPM). Building on the success of the Australia Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction, Australia will provide assistance towards the establishment of Indonesia's Disaster Management Rapid Response Force.
We welcome the G20's emergence as the premier forum for international economic cooperation and value our membership of the G20. Australia and Indonesia are committed to working together, and with other G20 countries, to drive an ambitious reform agenda to lay the foundations of a sustainable, stable and balanced global economic framework. We recognise the importance of our representation in the G20 and acknowledge our responsibilities accordingly.
Australia and Indonesia agree it is in our interests to examine the implications for regional architecture as economic and strategic weight shifts to the Asia-Pacific. We support the continued strengthening of the East Asia Summit (EAS) and remain committed to APEC as the pre-eminent forum for regional economic cooperation. We welcome ASEAN's contribution towards regional stability and acknowledge ASEAN's centrality in regional arrangements. We see value in continuing discussions on the institutional architecture of our region, with ASEAN at its foundation. Those discussions include Australia's Asia Pacific community initiative.
We will continue to work closely, through forums such as the Regional Interfaith Dialogue and the Bali Democracy Forum, to promote positive norms and values throughout the region, including good governance, democracy, tolerance and mutual respect amongst faiths.
Side-by-side, we are working to address climate change. We support the Copenhagen Accord and are committed to its implementation. We welcome the good progress made on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD) at Copenhagen. We are continuing to take practical action through the Indonesia - Australia Forest Carbon Partnership to support this outcome. We have established an A$30 million Sumatra Forest Carbon Partnership as the second joint practical activity on REDD, bringing the total contribution to our Partnership to A$70 million.
Indonesia welcomes Australia's further commitment to support the Coral Triangle Initiative as a partnership to safeguard the region's extraordinary marine and coastal biological resources.
The partnership between Indonesia and Australia is alive with opportunities. As leaders, we are committed to strengthening this vital relationship, expanding it into new areas, and promoting an enhanced comprehensive partnership that will benefit both countries and contribute to regional stability and prosperity.


PM: Today Australia and Indonesia took our strong relationship to a new level with annual meetings between leaders, foreign ministers and defence ministers, closer cooperation on people-smuggling and terrorism and closer economic and trade ties.
I would like to welcome the President of Indonesia to Australia, welcome him to Canberra, welcome him to Parliament House.
We have in President Yudhoyono a great leader of his country, also a great friend of Australia.
Australia's relationship with Indonesia forms a vital part of Australia's international engagement. Indonesia is our close neighbour. It is a country of 231 million people. It is the most populous Muslim country in the world. It is the world's third largest democracy. It is a key player in our region and a driving force behind ASEAN.
Indonesia's is a vibrant and growing economy. We share with Indonesia the common future of our own region, its stability and its prosperity and, together with Indonesia, Australia works now globally through the G20 and on global challenges like climate change.
Indonesia in recent times has gone through an historic transformation. Indonesia is now a vibrant democracy, living proof that Islam and democracy can live happily side by side.
For us in Australia, Indonesia is a major partner for our future in the region and the world at large.
Much of the credit for the transformation of Indonesia in recent times, I believe, should go to President Yudhoyono himself. His leadership in consolidating Indonesia's democracy has been strong. He has taken his country to higher levels of economic growth, notwithstanding the challenges of the global financial crisis.
He has also played a critical role in strengthening the bilateral relationship between our two countries, including the most difficult times from the Bali bombings on, his leadership in dealing with the impact of the tsunami on his own shores.
And in recognition of his role in the development of Indonesia's democracy, in recognition of his role also in cooperation with Australia in dealing with such tragedies as the Bali bombing, it was, of course, with great pleasure that Australia accorded him membership as an honorary member of the Order of Australia yesterday.
This historic visit symbolises the breadth and depth of our relationship. President Yudhoyono has brought with him some 12 ministers, six governors from the various provincial governments of Indonesia and three members of Parliament and, of course, representatives from a large number of Indonesian government agencies and boards.
Later today he will address the Australian Parliament and in so doing he will only be the fifth global leader to be invited to that podium, that podium of our Australian democracy.
The President and I have had excellent discussions this morning across a vast range of areas. We began these discussions informally last night at the Lodge, with the President, myself, with his wife and my wife Therese and with our foreign policy advisors, a long, detailed, intimate discussion about the challenges we face for the future.
We've continued that more formally this morning and then most recently with the various members of our cabinets.
We've agreed to upgrade our relationship to become one of a comprehensive strategic partnership. We've resolved, as I noted before, that we will meet annually, either in Australia, in Indonesia, at head of government level. We've also resolved that our foreign and defence ministers will meet each year on a two-plus-two basis, as we currently do with our closest partner, the United States.
We've agreed that we will establish and Australia-Indonesia leadership dialogue to promote greater people-to-people cooperation between our two countries, as we also currently have with the United States.
Furthermore, there have been a number of other significant steps that we have initiated today in our bilateral relationship. We've agreed to an arrangement on consular notification and assistance and we look forward to discussions on a possible transfer of sentenced prisoners framework.
Also, our officials yesterday signed an implementation framework on people-smuggling and trafficking in persons. This will enhance and intensify our cooperation on dealing with this complex regional and global challenge.
Also, we have enhanced our cooperation in the dismantling of terrorist networks and I would congratulate again the Indonesian authorities on their excellent work in the last 24 hours in dealing with terrorist networks within their own country. Terrorism is a challenge for both our countries, at home, in the region, and abroad more extensively.
Furthermore, as we've indicated today, we will work even more closely in our cooperation through the G20 to lay the foundations for a sustainable global economic framework for the future.
We've also decided to enhance our cooperation in the area of climate change, as we are doing bilaterally with each other at the moment through REDD demonstration projects but also more broadly through the ongoing international negotiations.
Finally, we spent a long time discussing the future of our region's architecture and how we build the future of the Asia-Pacific region in a stable and prosperous way - how do we make sure that our region remains stable and prosperous in the future and that we safeguard the security which has been so hard-won and hard-fought in decades past and build a prosperous and stable future for all our peoples.
And Australia and Indonesia will continue to work closely on the challenges of the future development of our region's architecture in the period ahead.
Mr President, you are indeed a welcome guest in Australia. We come together as friends, as neighbours, as partners, and I've got to say, at a personal level, a relationship which I enjoy, a relationship which I have placed enormous trust in in recent times and a relationship which I'm sure will continue into the future.
I invite you now, Mr President, to make some remarks of your own.
DR YUDHOYONO: Thank you, Mr Prime Minister. Allow me to speak in Bahasa Indonesia.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: Thank you very much. This is my second visit to Australia as President of Indonesia and I want to thank Prime Minister Rudd for his invitation and I want to thank him for the warm reception and also for the excellent program that has been arranged for me.
My purpose in visiting Australia is to continue the excellent cooperation that are already underway and to seek new opportunities to expand our relations.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: The partnership and cooperation between Indonesia and Australia are progressing very solidly. Some examples I can cite are that on bilateral and regional and international forums, we are constantly cooperating closely. For example, on the issue of climate change, we are cooperating closely and also on the issue of dealing with the global financial crisis, as well as efforts to evolve the regional architecture.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: During our talks today, we agreed to expand cooperation on four major areas, one is on political law and security. And under this area, we are committed to expand cooperation on law enforcement, on the fight against terrorism, on military-to-military cooperation and in fighting trans-national crimes, including people-to-people smuggling.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: In the economic area, we agree to expand cooperation in the areas of trade, investment, food and agriculture, energy and other economic activities.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: In terms of social cooperation, we agreed to also expand cooperation on education, on health, on tourism, on youth and sport and other things that would intensify people-to-people contacts which would be the basis of our solid partnership.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: A key part of our discussion was also on forest management and this is a good cooperation, bilateral, between us, including in addressing natural disasters where there is a framework of cooperation already between us.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: On this visit, I have taken a number of Ministers with me, but also six Governors from Indonesia's provinces and it is my hope that there will be increased cooperation between the provinces of Indonesia, in the eastern part of Indonesia, and the states of Australia for mutual benefit.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: The relationship between Indonesia and Australia is solid and strong but we need much more opportunities to expand and upgrade this relationship. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and I share the same commitment to maintain and improve this relationship while exploring new opportunities, while also managing the existing relationship.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: I want to express in this forum my deep appreciation to Prime Minister Kevin Rudd who has been my very close friend in addressing a number of issues in the G20 forums, in APEC and in the East Asian Summit and other international forums, to find common solutions to regional issues and international issues.
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: That is all I have to say and I wish to stress again that we now have an historic opportunity to improve and elevate relations between Indonesia and Australia, to seek new opportunities and to resolve issues of wider concern. Thank you very much.
PM: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
PM: Now, we're going to have some questions from the media, from the Australian media and from the Indonesian media. Baba President, some have asked what gift I've given you. I would just like to confirm that I have presented to the President an Australian-made acoustic guitar. The President sings well, he writes music and he writes his own lyrics. In all three departments, he's vastly superior to myself and I hope he enjoys this Australian acoustic guitar which has his initials now inscribed on the side.
Now, over to the Australian media, and then to the Indonesian media.
JOURNALIST: Mr President, Andrew Probyn from The West Australian newspaper, and welcome to Canberra. What is the extent of the new arrangements regarding the enhanced cooperation between Australia and Indonesia combating people smuggling?
Does it go to the processing and resettlement of asylum seekers in Indonesia as you wanted, and have you been asked to play a bigger role in intercepting boats?
And thirdly, does this necessarily mean that Indonesia needs more funds to handle its new responsibilities?
DR YUDHOYONO: [In Bahasa Indonesia]
INTERPRETER: The handling of the boat people issue is very complex issue. It relates to matters that are relating to the law, to security, and to humanitarian issues, and that is why we need to coordinate and cooperate very closely on handling this issue.
Australia as a destination country and Indonesia as a transit country cannot resolve this issue by ourselves. Every country must be on board on this - the origin country, the transit country, and destination country, and also international institutions. They all have to cooperate in dealing with this, and don't forget we already have a framework of cooperation, what is known as the Bali process, which Indonesia and Australia initiated.
And while we both promote this regional and international cooperation, we have also among ourselves bilaterally worked out a framework, a mechanism to deal with this issue in a practical way so that we can deal with it also in a more effective way, and this framework would include arrangements on temporary transit in Indonesia, and how they would be relocated in the process, and other issues.
Clearly, what we need to do is, we need to keep improving this mechanism. We need to make it more effective and we will always continue to discuss the technical aspects of how this cooperation is going to be pursued and improved.
PM: Thank you, Mr President. Now we have a representative from the Indonesian media.
JOURNALIST: OK. To Mr Prime Minister, Indonesian police yesterday again successfully, (inaudible) terrorists, and it proved that they are quite professional and expert (inaudible). In this context, can we Australia not to open (inaudible)
PM: First of all, can I say to the Indonesian authorities through the President, President Yudhoyono, how much we value their work on the ground in combating terrorism. This has been a very professional operation by the Indonesian security forces, and it comes on the top of other successful operations in recent times.
This is difficult work; it is hard work; it is dangerous work, and I would congratulate those Indonesian security agencies which have been engaged in it.
The breakthroughs which Indonesia has made in undermining various terrorist networks have been significant. Our own law enforcement agencies, our own security agencies, have worked in close partnership with our Indonesian friends on it. Therefore we must also be mindful of the fact that the challenge of terrorism continues into the future.
As for the current status of Australian travel warnings, these are assessed independently by agencies of the Australian Government. They have been done so in the past. They'll continue to be executed in that way in the future, and they will always be mindful of changes in the security circumstances in the future.
The Australian Government at a political level does not interfere with those independent assessments undertaken by our professional agencies.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I wonder if I may go to a domestic matter. Shortly before this press conference we saw the quite extraordinary spectacle of five of your senior cabinet ministers detailing areas where key pieces of legislation are being blocked in the Senate, which raises, I think, the question, is your Government now paralysed, and if you, assuming you cannot break the deadlock in the Senate, don't you have a responsibility, really, to go to the people and seek a fresh mandate?
PM: Can I say this - that if Mr Abbott blocks the Government's paid parental leave scheme in the Senate he'll be punishing young families just to make a political point. Can I say more broadly if Mr Abbott continues to block key measures of the government to help young families and families more broadly just to make a political point, then this may be part of a negative political strategy on his own part, but does nothing to help families, does nothing to help solve real problems on the ground.
I would urge Mr Abbott to take a more constructive approach, but again, as I said before, if Mr Abbott blocks this critical measure of paid parental leave in the Senate just to make a political point, the people who will suffer from this are working families - and they will suffer from it straight away.
Now, from Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: My question is for the Prime Minister. In our effort to combat corruption in our country, sometimes, the challenge is extradition issues. I was wondering if the extradition is something that is discussed with the Indonesian leaders here, and then how far do you see the kind of assistance will be provided by the Australian Government to deal with this for Indonesian domestic process?
PM: Thank you for the question. My understanding is that our foreign ministers have spent a long time working through a range of extradition matters over a period of time. I cannot update you on the specific detail of any individual matter. I'm sure the foreign ministers would be able to do so if you put the question to them.
Can I say, secondly, that when it comes to helping our friends in Indonesia deal with their own law enforcement responsibilities, we always seek to take a positive and constructive approach. These are challenges which Indonesia faces from time to time. These are challenges which Australia faces, and, therefore, relying upon appropriate international legal arrangements to assist our law enforcement agencies is something all of our countries need.
On the details, though, that you may have in mind in terms of any particular cases, I suggest you address those questions to our respective foreign ministers.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for attending this press conference. I conclude where I began by saying to the President off Indonesia and to all of our friends visiting from Indonesian that you are truly welcome guests here in Australia.
Thank you. 


PM: It's good to be back at this hospital, where we see again the work which is going in to making real changes happen on the ground. This morning, Nicola and I spoke to a number of nurses and a number of patients. And a number of those nurses are dealing with the implementation of the change we're making here - that is, $10 million investment from us for a walk-in clinic.
The walk-in clinic is designed to take pressure off accident and emergency. Right around Australia, accident and emergency departments are under massive pressure. People are having to wait too long.
This is one practical example of the sorts of changes we are already bringing into the country.
The second point is this: again, talking to those who were here today, it's quite plain that hospitals such as this are full to overflowing - full to overflowing. That was the advice I got coming in the door about the capacity at which this hospital, right now, is today.
And as I spoke to the wards, those in the urology and vascular wards, they were full to overflowing, and one of the other wards that we spoke to the responsible nurses for, the same story.
This is a picture in so many parts of Australia at the moment where we don't have enough hospital beds and it is the same here as well. Therefore, that's why the Government is getting behind our National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, to deal with the fundamental reforms which are needed for the future of our health and hospital system.
If we do not act on these fundamental reforms, my great fear is this: that our health and hospital system will simply crack under the pressure. We've already been advised it's at tipping point. If we don't attend to these deep and fundamental reforms now, our fear is that it will crack.
I understand Mr Abbott's strategy when it comes to health and hospitals, and that is to be negative. I understand his broader strategy when it comes to dealing with Government legislation is to be negative, blocking and opposing. Can I just say, though, that when it comes to improving our health and hospital system it's pretty important that Mr Abbott look beyond his normal, negative, blocking, opposing strategy.
Can I just say when we look at some of the practical measures which are being blocked in the Senate at the moment, these are very practical concerns for us trying to reform the health and hospital system.
One, they are blocking the Government's legislation on private health insurance reform, which provides support at present for some of the wealthier Australians. That would unleash $2 billion worth of additional funding to provide extra hospital beds right across the country.
The second thing is this: we also have Mr Abbott blocking in the Senate our legislation which would enable practice nurses and midwives to have access to MBS and PBS, and if that doesn't unblock soon, what'll happen is that a number of our midwives, for example, will not be covered with appropriate insurance come 1 July.
These are practical matters.
Thirdly, Mr Abbott has already indicated his opposition to our proposal for a new Health and Hospitals Network. Part of that will involve legislation.
So, on key elements of health and hospital reform, we have Mr Abbott blocking, opposing and frustrating necessary reforms for the country at large.
So I'd say this - that when it comes to the future of our health and hospital system, this reform is far too important for Mr Abbott's negative, blocking strategy in the Senate to get in the road.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, now that the full horror of the insulation program has been revealed by Greg Combet now he's had a chance to look at it, isn't it time to sack Peter Garrett for serial bungling? Secondly, can I just get you to clarify, will you or won't you release the Henry Review before the election?
PM: On the question of the future of tax reform, which is the second part of your question, we will of course make sure that that is released prior to going to an election. On the precise timing of it, the Treasurer will make an appropriate statement as to when that occurs.
On the first matter that you raised, Minister Combet has been put in charge of dealing with the problems which have arisen with the implementation of the scheme. These problems are significant. The Minister made a full statement to the parliament yesterday outlining the practical measures he's taking.
I believe Mr Combet is doing the right thing, and we will reserve the right to make further statements as is necessary about other actions which might be necessary to work through some of the implementation problems on the ground.
Mr Combet is doing a first-class job in dealing with this problem on the ground, and he has my full support.
JOURNALIST: PM, under a different stimulus scheme, this country football club received 17 hot water services. They only have four shower heads. Are you shocked at the extent of this type of waste, and will you look into this scheme as well?
PM: My advice on this particular matter is that this loophole previously existed under renewable energy target legislation, and the loophole in question, I'm advised, was closed in September 2009.
Anyone fraudulently using any scheme should, of course, feel the full consequences of the law. The advice that I have is that that particular loophole was closed in September of 2009.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I say that anyone who has inappropriately made use of any such program will feel the full force of the law, and this particular loophole, as I'm advised, was closed in September last year.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about Peter Slipper falling asleep during the Indonesian President (inaudible)
PM: Look, I make no comment about Mr Slipper in particular. I wasn't watching Mr Slipper during the President of Indonesia's address, I was watching the President of Indonesia.
Knowing SBY pretty well, I'm sure he didn't take offence at someone nodding off during the parliament, but I think it's very important that when we have important addresses by visiting heads of government that they are treated with appropriate respect.
I think yesterday was a good speech by President Yudhoyono, and I believes marks a big turning point for the long-term future of our relationship.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Wayne Swan says that there might have to be budget adjustments to deal with (inaudible). What is it going to cost?
PM: On the question of how we deal with implementation problems associated with the home insulation program, we'll take those one by one. The ones that have been the subject of Minister Combet's statement yesterday will be accommodated within the existing funding envelope of the overall program.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you clear up, in terms of the people smuggling deal signed with Indonesia, is there any additional funds that will go to Indonesia to deal with (inaudible) people smuggling?
PM: One more time? Okay, right, can I just say, as far as the framework agreement on people smuggling and irregular migration is concerned, it is a confidential agreement between governments as it involves a range of security agencies and operational matters.
The second point I would say is that one of the things that it does is it provides for enhanced interception, enhanced disruption of people smuggling activities in and through the Indonesian archipelago.
On the question of funding, the agreement, as I'm advised, does not provide for that. We will, however, continue to implement our bilateral cooperation programs with the Indonesians through the Bali process and continue to support their efforts, where appropriate, to combat the common problem for us all.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Just in terms of (inaudible) the states on health reform (inaudible), have you met with Isobel Redmond (inaudible). And from a Victorian perspective, what do make of John Brumby's claims that a national (inaudible). And with your incentive payments proposed last night, why have you done that given that the Victorian experience was (inaudible) and then they found hospitals were actually (inaudible)
PM: Yeah, I think there were three in that question, if I've got it right.
The first is, and I'll ask Nicola to add on this, is that I understand the, it's about the South Australian Liberal leader, quite some days ago I said that the Australian Government was happy to provide briefings to any political party, any mainstream political party, in terms of the future of our health and hospitals reform plan.
And I think I said that in Tasmania when, obviously, the opposition party there has an interest in this as well. But that invitation was extended right across the country, and not just to those states which are currently having elections.
Nicola, do you wish to add to that? I'll come back to the other ones.
MINISTER ROXON: Yes, we did provide a briefing to Isobel Redmond yesterday. That briefing was attended by Treasury and Health officials and my chief of staff.
I do have to tell you, however, that the media alert that Ms Redmond was holding a press conference with Mr Abbott was issued at 8.30 in the morning yesterday. It was only some half an hour after that that a request was first made for that briefing, and the press conference was held at 10 past nine in the morning. So despite us actually having no notice of that, we did provide our officials, we did provide the briefing.
I do think it would be helpful if there any other oppositions or parties that would like briefings that they would perhaps consider giving us a little more notice, so that we can make sure that that is a particularly fruitful discussion.
We want everybody in the country on board for health reform, and we are happy to provide briefings to those who appropriately need them.
PM: I think the other thing to say is that the Monday I was in Tasmania I made this clear statement that we'd brief anyone who wanted a briefing. And then come Wednesday, we had this particular orchestrated activity involving the South Australian Liberal leader and the Federal Liberal leader.
The easiest thing that you can do is to run a fear campaign. The easiest thing that you can do on national health and hospitals reform is to run a fear campaign. We've seen that begun in part by New South Wales health bureaucrats. You can see it in other parts of the country as well.
I understand the South Australian Liberal leader has been also running a fear campaign about the closure of country hospitals in South Australia, as I'm advised, I haven't seen the reports myself. If that's the case, let me just say very plainly, the National Health and Hospitals Network is designed to increase funding for South Australia's public hospital system, increase funding for Australia's public hospital system, and therefore to underpin the services they provide.
What we are seeking to do is to build up the public hospital system for all Australians, including South Australians. And in terms of our activity-based funding, it will provide not one basis at all for any country hospital or rural hospital or regional hospital to be closed - at all. Now, the other bits that you were asking about -
JOURNALIST: - On incentive payments and the extra workload.
PM: On the question of incentive payments, which is the particular operation of activity-based funding in Victoria, I think that would be the example that you gave - of course, this depends entirely on how you design activity-based funding formula. And we have said quite plainly that we will make sure that this is designed in a way which fairly, properly, efficiently, effectively rewards local hospitals for delivering services on the ground.
The alternative is to continue to provide a blank cheque to various state Governments around the country, and who knows where the money is actually spent.
I'm also advised that when activity-based funding was first introduced by the previous Liberal Government in Victoria, they excluded key elements from the cost equation, one of which is the cost of nursing within the delivery of services. I was advised that this morning by representatives of the Nurses' Federation from Victoria. I've taken it at face value. I haven't tested it yet. But can I just say, it emphasises the point about why you must get the activity-based formula, the activity-based funding formula absolutely right.
JOURNALIST: Senator Fielding seemed to muscle his way on to your frontbench yesterday during the SBY speech. What do you think of his conduct, and if he wants to be the Government's friend, do you think he should start passing or assisting in the passage of some of your legislation?
PM: Oh look, my call is for all Senators - whether they belong to the Liberal party, the National party, or Greens or Independents - to take a constructive approach to getting legislation through the Parliament which working families want. Working families want -
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you prepared to negotiate with the Senate on the parental leave? Is it your way or the highway?
PM: Can I say, we have been absolutely clear-cut about our approach to parental leave, and that is, what you have from the Government is a clear policy which says that we are going to provide nearly $10,000 for parents from next year. That's clear-cut. That's our policy. It's up there in black and white.
JOURNALIST: 26 weeks?
JOURNALIST: Why is that the -
PM: Well, we've actually provided a policy which is carefully costed, carefully funded, based on Productivity Commission advice, the way in which Governments should actually develop policy.
The alternative is Mr Abbott, who wanders into the room, scratches his head and says 'I've just had an idea, I haven't bothered to ask anybody about it in terms of how it will be costed, but here you go'. And what's he done? Repudiated his statement of years ago that it would be over his dead body that anyone would ever introduce paid parental leave, or paid maternity leave, as he described it then.
Secondly, repudiated his statement of what - six weeks ago - that there be no new taxes, period.
Thirdly, brings in this massive new tax which flows through to the cost of living for working families, so much so that Mr Abbott yesterday, when asked the impact on the cost of bread, couldn't answer it -
JOURNALIST: People are allowed to change their mind, though.
PM: Well, I note that Mr Abbott said in response to that particular point that, of course, his view was that principles are there to be adjusted.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say, when it comes to something as basic as paid parental leave, and paid maternity leave, our approach is simple. We have properly costed, properly funded policy which comes into effect next year. That's our plan.
The second is this. The alternative is one which imposes a massive new tax on working families through businesses who will pass it on to the cost of groceries. That's the alternative.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) increase upwards from what you have now.
PM: We have taken advice from the experts, we've looked at the conclusions of the Productivity Commission, we've done a policy here which is properly costed, properly funded, and capable of implementation from 1 January next year. That is what we've said. That's what we intend to do.
Then out of left field, or right field, I'm not quite sure which field at the moment, you have this idea which is a massive new tax on business, which then flows through to groceries for working families, and has an impact, therefore, on the family budget.
And secondly, Mr Abbott could not even answer clearly which businesses would be liable for this tax. He couldn't answer the question whether it's $5 million worth of taxable income, or $5 million worth of tax paid. Well, pity about the two or three thousand businesses which now don't know where they stand.
JOURNALIST: Is that no to any changes from the Greens or Nick Xenophon or Senator Fielding that would win their support? I mean, if it's such a great plan, why wouldn't you consider minor compromises to get it through?
PM: We think we've got the balance right. I mean, in the business of Government, you get the advice, the Productivity Commission comes forth with their conclusions. We examine it. We work out, therefore, what the public purse can afford. We have done that as far as this is concerned. It's properly costed. It's properly funded. And it's got a proper timetable for implementation -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: - So that it therefore is able to be used by working families from next year, many of whom right now are planning on it - planning for it.
JOURNALIST: But you need the numbers.
PM: Look, the Government's been very clear about its plans. Can I say, the alternative's a massive new tax whacked on a whole bunch of businesses who had no prior warning, from an Opposition Leader who doesn't even know what the tax threshold is. And then, the impact of it flows through to the cost of living for working families.
JOURNALIST: On Scientology, why have you blocked that inquiry in the Senate? And secondly, (inaudible) the Opposition for being called obstructionist - are you then going to look very weak if you don't use the double dissolution triggers you've been given?
PM: You know something, on the Scientology question I'll need to come back to you in terms of the specific question that you ask, and I will later on through a statement through the office.
Secondly, I have said consistently that I believe Governments are elected to serve their full term. That has always been my view, unless exceptional and extraordinary circumstances arise.
Second point I'd say is this. Mr Abbott, it's time to get out of the road and stop blocking fundamental health and hospital reform. The nation wants to get on with it. Doctors want to get on with it. Nurses want to get on with it. Patients want to get on with it. It's time for Tony Abbott to get out of the road.
And having said that, I've got to get back to the House. See you folks.


KOCH: Kevin Rudd, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Kochie.
KOCH: The Reserve, this report says the banks have added an extra quarter of a percent, particularly to home loan borrowers and small business customers. Can you do anything about it?
PM: First thing is the Reserve Bank is right. The banks have been gouging. That's the bottom line here.
What are the practical things that we have been doing and we can do more about? One is that for the smaller non-bank lenders, what we've been doing throughout the financial crisis is provide them with a continuing source of credit, some $16 billion worth, to keep them afloat as competition opposed to the banks.
KOCH: Yeah.
PM: That has been very important, because we were very worried that some of those smaller lenders would, frankly, go to the wall during the crisis. So that's one thing. The second is, this year there'll come into being a whole new bunch of credit laws, tough credit laws, which will enable the regulators to crack down on gouging, across the financial sector. And this will be an important change for the year ahead.
KOCH: So not only banks, but superannuation funds, the whole lot. Could they go to the banks and say guys, no, you're not putting up your rate?
PM: Well, on the operation of the laws, you know we have independent courts and their independent processes, but the regulators will now have new powers to step in.
Of course, there's one third thing as well, which is, right now, the best thing customers can do is actually walk with their feet, and we have brought in bank switching arrangements which enable you to do that without huge walls of resistance now from the banks. As you know, they can often make it really hard by saying 'well if you exit, you've got these fees to pay, that fee to pay'- we've now made that much easier. And they have a legal obligation to make it possible for you to pull your money out of that bank.
KOCH: Excellent. Okay, we might follow that up with details of where people- of websites people can go to, to find out how to do it. Alright, let's get in to our viewer questions. Rachel Murphy is from Darwin, Rachel, you have the ear of the Prime Minister. What do you want to ask him?
PM: Hi Rachel.
MURPHY: Good morning Kochie, good morning Mr Rudd. My question to you is, why minor dental is not subsidised by Medicare?
PM: Okay, good question about dental care. Have you got kids yourself, Rachel?
MURPHY: Yeah, two.
PM: Okay, how old are they?
MURPHY: Three and five.
PM: Okay. Well, here is one thing we've done for when they get a little bit older. For the first time, we have implemented- delivering on a commitment we gave before the election- what's called a teen dental program, which means that from the ages of 13 to 18, we'll provide up to $150 a year for eligible families, usually those on under about $120,000 a year to get a teen dental check-up. That's because, as you know, kids' teeth change a lot in those years, we want to make sure that we're acting preventatively as early as possible.
But as for littlies like that, I wish I had something additional to say to you, but I don't, other than our continued support for private health insurance in these circumstances as well, and there is a rebate which is offered.
KOCH: Okay.
MURPHY: I do know that the children get it through the schooling, but, just like, adults, you know, like getting- why is it that when you go to the doctors you get a rebate from Medicare, whereas dental you don't get anything from a check-up to a clean? I know that major dental would be quite expensive for them to subsidise, but what about just a preventative measure for adults as well?
PM: Well that preventative measure we've brought in is the first one in Australia's history, and that copes with kids who are teenagers, 13 to 18. We've currently expended some hundreds of millions of dollars on that, and from memory, I think we've- in the first two years of its operation- we've provided, well, nearly one million services across Australia. You raise the point about littlies. Frankly, there's a limit to how far the budget can go on these things.
One other thing we're trying to do on dental, though, is to reintroduce a Commonwealth dental scheme for older Australians who are waiting now on public dental waiting lists, and that is currently being blocked in the Senate.
I wish I could say I could fix all these problems. We can't. One of the proposals put forward to make a system like Denticare come into existence would cost, on their estimates, some $4 billion a year- that's a lot of money. We're trying to do this step by step. When they get to 13, I can do something for you. Right now, it's private health insurance, and what you can get through the schools.
KOCH: Alright Rachel, thanks for that. Now next is Evan Kourambas from Melbourne, Evan, go ahead.
KOURAMBAS: Good morning Prime Minister. My question is about your recent announcement on your intentions to take over funding and operational control of our public hospitals. And furthermore, you announced that if you couldn't get this through Parliament, you're prepared to take it to a referendum. My question is, if state Governments are not capable of running hospitals- number one, what are they capable of running, and secondly, should the referendum question be do we actually need state Government?
PM: That's a good provocative question for this time of morning, Evan. Thank you for asking it.
KOURAMBAS: Thank you.
PM: You know something, for our proposal on health and hospitals, it is big, and it affects, frankly, mums and dads and families right across the country. What we are saying is, a national health and hospitals network, funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government taking dominant funding responsibility for the public hospital system.
Now to the core part of your question, which is why are we doing this with the States given their other responsibilities, here is the key fact. Right now, if we don't make any changes, the health budgets of the states and territories will swamp every other thing that they've got to do within the next twenty or thirty years.
In fact, here in New South Wales where I am at the moment, the Premier told me not long ago that in about 25 years time, their state budget would not have a dollar to spend beyond health and hospitals in terms of the revenues that they themselves raise. We've got to fix this system. And part of the reason we are stepping in, which goes to the other part of your question, is so that we can free up some of the funding for the states and territories to attend to things like transport, infrastructure, schools, law and order, rather than just beating a path to our door for every problem known to man.
KOCH: But Evan's saying should we get rid of the States? Why don't you give us a vote on it?
PM: The key thing is to deal with the health and hospitals system, I think that's what people are worried about most. This is a vast country. For your viewers in Western Australia today, seriously, viewers in Western Australia, viewers in Queensland, a long way from Canberra, a long way from Sydney, and Melbourne where you are Evan, they have a slightly different view about the importance of the federation and state Governments having a continuing role. My job's to make sure they've got the money to do so. And if we don't fix health and hospitals, it's really bad for mums and dads out there, and it's really bad for the future of the ability of the states to fund other services.
I'm seeing Premier Keneally today in New South Wales. We're determined to get as much cooperation from the states and territories as possible to push this reform through.
KOCH: She's got the worst hospital system.
PM: It's not flash.
KOCH: They can't run a chook raffle. Alright, you've got some homework on superannuation for stay at home mums.
PM: Sorry, you caught me in mid-swig. The- I've been doing a bit of homework on the stay at home mums. Can I give you a few points on this one?
KOCH: Yeah, sure.
PM: Firstly- and this was from Naomi I think, no, from Sonia, I got this one- superannuation splitting.
The partner of a stay at home parent can split their concessional superannuation contributions with their spouse, okay. People need to be aware of that, so that the stay at home spouse can also accumulate their own superannuation fund that way. Secondly, the partner of a stay at home parent can get an offset of up to $540 of their end of year tax if they contribute to the superannuation on behalf-
KOCH: And that's the spouse contribution scheme.
PM: That's right.
KOCH: Which is pretty attractive.
PM: The third thing is, of course, stay at home parents can have their own non-concessional superannuation arrangements. They can actually build that up over time. And finally, if the stay at home parent does some paid work during the year, he or she may receive a superannuation contribution if they also contribute to their own super. So there are three or four specific things there, and again go to the Government's super website about those particular contributions. We make it a little easier for stay at home parents to accumulate their own superannuation.
KOCH: Terrific. Thank you for that, good to see you.
PM: Appreciate the time.


PM: It's great to be back at the Royal North Shore, and I'd to thank our colleagues here, including Paul Roach, for taking us around, Maxine McKew, the local member. I've heard a lot about what's been going on here, and I think it's been a good story.
I began my consultations on the future of the national health and hospital system here at Royal North Shore Hospital about eight months ago. Since then, we have been around 103 hospitals around Australia. I've visited 21 of them, including the Royal North Shore. I've listened very carefully to what doctors, nurses, clinicians and others, and patients, have been saying about their expectations for the future of our health and hospital system.
I'll just talk briefly about what's happened here first. I understand from Paul that they began lobbying for a PET scanner here back in 1997. Is that right? That was 13 years ago. I'm very pleased that this PET scanner is now up and functioning, and I think we saw Gordon this morning and we understand how this piece of new technology will actually make things better for him - in the analysis and the diagnosis and how he is treated.
This is a good story, but you know something? Thirteen years is too long. And you know something? The undersupply of PET scanners across the country is something we need now to deal with.
How does that relate to what we're talking about with the reform of the national health and hospitals network?
We are planning to introduce a National Health and Hospitals Network which is funded nationally and which is run locally. Funded nationally, whereby for the first time the Australian Government becomes the dominant funder of the recurrent costs of our public hospital system, of their capital costs for the first time, of their equipment costs - which means PET scanners. Of course, also, the teaching, training and research costs as well.
This is a very big reform, but the time has come for this reform in Australia.
Earlier today I met with the Premier of New South Wales, Kristina Keneally, and we had a long, positive, productive discussion about future directions for this National Health and Hospital Network.
In the days ahead I'm going to be burning the shoe leather. I'll be keeping the engines running and the planes on alert as I travel from Sydney to Brisbane tomorrow to the Queensland Premier, Sunday, I understand, with the Victorian Premier, with one objective in mind - how do we land this fundamental reform for the health and hospital system for the future?
There'll be a lot of argy-bargy on the way through, but you know something? What I want as Prime Minister of Australia is to see this fundamental reform for better health and better hospitals done.
So there'll be a lot of action in the days ahead as I go to each state capital, starting with Sydney here, Brisbane, Melbourne, talking to each of the Premiers and Chief Ministers to make sure that we can land this agreement.
Of course, if the Premiers and Chief Ministers don't agree, we've also said that we'll be then seeking a further mandate from the people, but I want to make sure we land this agreement for the future.
And having said that, folks, I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how did your meeting with the Premier go? Did you manage to answer all of her questions?
PM: Well, that's a question you should put to the Premier, whether I answered them effectively. It was a good and it was a positive conversation. And we are dealing with practical matters like the future operation of local hospital networks, the future funding of the capital needs of hospitals like this one, the future funding of their equipment needs, questions such as that. It was a positive, constructive conversation. It'll be one of many, not just with the Premier of New South Wales, but with other Premiers as well.
As I said before, I intend to be wearing out the shoe leather, keeping the car engine running, the plane on high alert, running around the country talking to Premiers to get health and hospitals improved for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Premier raised some very specific questions about elements of the reforms, part of which goes to the operation of local hospital networks, part of which goes to long-term funding for the system.
As I said earlier today on radio, some Premiers around the country have said they want to know what happens in the Government's response to the independent review of taxation.
What I have said very plainly is that whatever decisions the Government takes on that in the future, there will be no net negative impact on the states and territories, so let's get back to health and hospitals reform. That's the important thing, and that's what we're focussed on here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did the Premier raise the issue of GST, and whether the New South Wales slice of the pie will increase to accommodate this system?
PM: On the question, our proposal is for a National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government for the first time becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system.
Secondly, one of the ways that will be funded is by taking approximately one third of the GST from the states and putting it into a National Hospitals Fund for the future - the Australian Government then taking on its shoulders the dominant funding burden for the future growth of the system as well.
Now, on the details of the allocation and distribution of the GST, that is currently being worked through by Treasury officials, between the Commonwealth and all the states and territories. That work will continue right through until COAG meets in April.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there are estimates that up to 20,000 health bureaucrats will lose their jobs as part of your reforms. Do you think that's a reasonable estimate? Have you got any idea about how many jobs will go?
PM: Can I say, there will be a fear campaign every other Thursday about why we shouldn't get on with the business of fundamental reforms to the health and hospital system, and you've just raised a new one.
Last week it was about closure of country hospitals. That's absolute nonsense.
As for this fear campaign, I'd simply describe it in the same sort of terms.
Wherever you go across the country, people are going to come up with one excuse after another as to why health and hospital reform should not happen.
What I'm saying, loud and clear, is that health and hospital reform will happen. We are determined that it happens. Mums and dads right across the country want to see better health and better hospital services. We've put forward a very clear cut plan for doing so. We intend to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: Beyond COAG, what's your timetable, Prime Minister, for the delivery of this new network?
PM: We would begin the implementation of this new network from 1 July next year. And then we have outlined a clear timetable for transitional arrangements to the full operationalisation of the system through 2012-2013.
But the first changes would occur from 1 July next year.
We have spent too many decades, too many decades, delaying reform of the health and hospital system; too many decades delaying how to put it on a better funding basis for the future; too many decades pushing it to one side, hoping that a band-aid would do when in fact, much more radical surgery is needed.
That is what we are proposing. We intend to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: 13 years is too long to wait. What's an acceptable period? How quickly would it be delivered under your (inaudible)?
PM: Well, in terms of the PET scanner here, 13 years is a hang of a long time to wait given, I'm told, across greater Sydney, there are only six such machines in operation.
As for the system itself, I won't go to the past and say what happened during the 12 years in office of our predecessors.
We've been in power now for two years. We said that we would put forward a properly costed, properly funded plan for the future of the national health and hospital system. We have done so.
We have now said that we are about to engage the states and territories on whether they will come in behind it or not. And further, we have said that if they don't, we're going to seek a further mandate from the people.
Also, the timetable for implementation is there for all to see. That's our plan. We think it's the right way for the country and I would urge all premiers and chief ministers to get behind it, and as I said before I will be burning the shoe leather across the country in the days and weeks ahead to try and bring that about.
JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee that no managers of hospitals like this one and the ones you'll visit in the coming days will lose their job as the result of your reform?
PM: You know what we are seeking to do through the establishment of local hospital networks is to make sure that you have a community of interest which is served by one or a number of local hospitals, large and small.
The individual management arrangements within them - we would like to see clinicians such as these gentlemen, nurses, health professionals, take a much bigger role in the delivery of these local hospital networks in the future.
Of course, you're going to need finance experts, you're going to need management experts as well, but precise organisation will be left to others. What I have said is that in establishing local hospital networks there will be no net addition to bureaucracy anywhere in the country, and we stand by that.
JOURNALIST: But you've also been to, apart from more than 20 hospitals, a lot of schools. (inaudible) bureaucratic inefficiencies are confined to the health system? And if not, why stop at health? (inaudible) heavily involved just in terms of stimulus packages with schools across the country, can you see this as a blueprint for other big bureaucracies and greater efficiencies nationwide?
PM: One of the reasons why we have decided to tackle head on the question of health and hospitals reform is because over the next couple of decades, it will chew up the lion's share and then all of the budgets of the states and territories.
Therefore, if we do not act now, the states' and territories' ability to deliver proper school services in the future, to deliver proper transport services in the future, to deliver proper law and order services in future will be undermined.
I listened carefully to what the New South Wales Premier said back in January in a speech which she gave where she said that within 20 years or so, the state budget of New South Wales would be overwhelmed by health and hospitals alone.
So, to go to your question, unless we deal with this and put the system on the right funding basis for the future, and secondly cut out the duplication, waste and overlap between the two levels of Government, then we are not serving the needs of the people of Australia or the people of New South Wales.
They want better health, better hospitals. Our plan for this National Health and Hospitals Network, one funded nationally but run locally, and for the first time in the country's history the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the system.
JOURNALIST: You talk of the mandate that you may seek, but the Premier will soon be seeking, effectively, her first mandate as well. Will it be in her political interests to accept the sort of proposal (inaudible)
PM: Premier Keneally will make her own judgments. She has engaged constructively in these discussions today. There's quite a ways to go between now and the COAG, Council of Australian Governments meeting in April, and I have a lot of discussions to undertake with a whole bunch of other Premiers.
What decisions she takes is a matter for her. I am encouraging all Premiers and all Chief Ministers to get behind this important reform.
The time for this change in our health and hospital system has come. It has well and truly come. There is no more time for delay and for excuses for delay. Let's bite the bullet, get on with it, and make sure we are actually building a system that can meet the demands that will be placed on it for the 21st Century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, an Australian has been lost at sea in Chile after the earthquake. What assistance has been given to his family or even efforts to help find him?
PM: On the details of this, I would prefer that the Foreign Minister answer your question directly. I know that our diplomatic and consular officials in Santiago de Chile have been working closely with Australian families concerned about family members. But on the details of it I would much prefer that the Foreign Minister answers your question direct, and I'm sure that will be forthcoming later today.
Thanks, folks. Better run.


MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil. Thanks for having me on the program.
MITCHELL: Well, thank you for your time. Mr Rudd, President Obama's here in a couple of weeks. Will you be recommending he becomes a Companion in the Order of Australia, as did the Indonesian President?
PM: The reason we've provided this to the Indonesian President is following on a precedent which was established by my predecessor, Mr Howard. He provided an honourary Order of Australia to the former Prime Minister of Singapore. President Yudhoyono, in his previous life, helped a lot in the response to the Bali bombings in 2002 and has done a lot, also to entrench democracy in Indonesia, so we thought this was an appropriate gesture to him.
MITCHELL: Is President Obama in line for one as well?
PM: Not so far as I'm aware, Neil.
MITCHELL: Well, it's your call, isn't it?
PM: Well, it is, but we are very mindful of what President Yudhonoyo has done over a period of nearly eight or 10 years now.
I mean, the Bali bombings went very much to the hearts and lives of many, many Australians, many, many Victorians, and his role, then as Coordinating Minister for Security, in responding to that tragedy, rounding up the terrorists and dealing with them, I believe was worthy of that recognition, together with his role in entrenching democracy in this vast, populous and important neighbour of ours, so that's the reason.
MITCHELL: President Obama's got a Nobel Prize. Maybe he doesn't need one.
PM: Are you in the queue for one, Neil?
MITCHELL: No, I'm an AO.
PM: No, I mean a Nobel Prize.
MITCHELL: Oh, I doubt that very much. The insulation disaster -
PM: - You and me together.
MITCHELL: - looks like costing upwards of $500 million. Hot water systems are being thrown at country footy clubs that don't need them, schools are getting new buildings at four or five times what the buildings should cost. Do you have any idea what this bureaucratic incompetence is going to cost the taxpayers in total?
PM: Well, let's put it in a bit of context, Neil. In responding to the global economic crisis, the Government introduced a national economic stimulus strategy. Our intention was this, and it's been realised: to keep the economy going, to prevent the economy going into recession and to protect hundreds of thousands of jobs.
MITCHELL: But that's not the argument - the argument's efficiency and waste.
PM: No, no, I'm going on -
MITCHELL: - But nobody's arguing about stimulus, they're arguing about, you know, $900,000 for a school building that should have cost $200,000, what, 17 hot water systems for a country footy club that's only got 16 players.
PM: On the implementation of various programs, of course there are going to be problems which have arisen and we have acknowledged those on the way through and we are dealing with them on the way through -
MITCHELL: - What's the total cost of the waste?
PM: The one that you just mention in relation to the heat pumps, the solar pumps, that was a program, actually, which existed, I'm advised, prior to this government taking office. The loophole which was identified in the program was closed in September of last year, and as I've said, anyone abusing programs like that will be met with the full force of the law.
On the question of the schools that you just referred to, we have a huge number of projects out there across 9,500 schools. The overwhelming majority of them are going really well. It follows logically that from time to time problems are going to arise. On the details of the school that you just referred to before -
MITCHELL: - I've got three. I've got one that's cost $931,000 for a library, another that's cost $850,000 for a two-room classroom and another that's cost $200,000 to move a sewer and stormwater drain, all outlined in The Herald-Sun today. I mean, it's just massive waste.
PM: Neil, right across Australia we have 9,500 schools currently benefitting from this program - every primary school in Victoria. And many schools, for the first time, are getting purpose-built libraries, they are getting, for the first time, improved classrooms, for the first time many secondary schools are having access to state-of-the-art language centres -
MITCHELL: - Prime Minister, that's not the argument. The argument is the waste. The argument is not that they need a library and should get one, the argument is that they're paying, you're paying, we're paying, five times as much for that library as we should. It's a waste of the stimulus.
PM: Neil, in response to any problem which arises in implementation, what the Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister, Julia, has done, is deal with each case in its circumstances to make sure that it's dealt with.
If you're going to roll out a program like this, which, for your listeners has meant a huge amount of work for tradies right across Melbourne last year when the bottom was falling out of the economy, providing jobs for sparkies, for carpenters, for bricklayers, that was the economic driver of what the Government did.
Obviously, problems will arise, from time to time, as they do with any construction project. What the Deputy Prime Minister has done or has sought to do in each case is deal with each problem as it arises.
MITCHELL: But that's my question. You put together the insulation mess, upward of $500 million, you put it together with the other waste in the schools, how much have we wasted?
PM: On the implementation of these programs, obviously in the case of the insulation program there have been real problems. That is being dealt with now by Minister Combet.
MITCHELL: How much will it cost?
PM: Well, what I'll say in response to that, Neil, is that the options we've provided for people in the case of foil insulation is to either have that insulation removed or for a switch to be installed. Now, the -
MITCHELL: - Well, that applies to foil, yeah.
PM: So the cost, therefore, that will arise from that will depend on the choices made by the individual householder. Secondly, we will also meet it within the overall funding which has been allocated for the original program. That's what I'd say in response to that.
MITCHELL: So how much is that?
PM: Well, as I said to you before, it will depend on the choice which individual households make between those two options. So, we accept responsibility for the problems with implementation, but I go back to my point -
MITCHELL: But that's only a small part of it, Prime Minister. What about the pink batts? I mean, in Sydney overnight there's another house fire linked to the insulation. We've had many in Melbourne. Are all these people going to be compensated? What is this going to cost? This is a problem unequivocally caused by your Government.
PM: Well, each of the individual circumstances has to be examined in terms of the cause of a particular problem. You know that it differs from case to case.
Of course, what the Government has said is we accept responsibility for the problems arising in the implementation of the scheme and we will deal with each of these on the way through -
MITCHELL: And do we know what it's all going to cost, all together? Do we know? Have we got a budget for it?
PM: Well, can I say in relation to the program you're talking about, what we have indicated is that we'll meet that within the framework of the budget which is already outlined. Secondly -
MITCHELL: So how much is that?
PM: Well, the program for insulation was originally announced as something in the vicinity between $3 billion and $4 billion over several years. These adjustments will be accommodated within what has already been budgeted for the program.
The other thing I'd say Neil, though, is that stepping back from the detail of each program, and you're right to be critical of any waste which occurs, I don't pretend that I'm happy with that at all, but we need to deal with each of these problems as they arise.
What I would also say, though, more broadly, to you and to your listeners, is that in dealing with these challenges we've also been dealing with the much broader challenge which was presented to our economy when every other economy, major economy, around the world went into recession and millions of people lost their jobs. We currently -
MITCHELL: Yeah but Prime Minister -
PM: We currently, Neil, have the second-lowest unemployment level of all the major advanced economies, and that's partly because government stepped in and stepped into the-
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister, we're not talking about the stimulus. We're talking about how much of the stimulus was actually wasted and could have been spent in another way, could have been spent better. Do you still consider yourself a fiscal conservative with all this?
PM: Neil, the responsible course of action in the face of a global economic crisis which is sending hundreds of thousands of people out of work is to step and to make a difference -
MITCHELL: It is not to waste money, Prime Minister, in a ridiculous way. I mean, seriously, $900,000 for a school library, which you could have built for - I could build a mansion for $900,000.
PM: Well, Neil -
MITCHELL: Well, a big house.
PM: Well, I'm not quite sure where you live Neil, so I couldn't comment on that.
On the individual circumstances concerning each school, what I know what Julia Gillard has done, the Education Minister, is intervene as each particular problem has arisen.
And can I say, if you have 10,000 schools across the country and the vast, vast, vast majority of these projects have proceeded well, can I say this is actually a great addition to the next generation of Australian's educational opportunities.
MITCHELL: At any stage will you sit down and work out how much has been wasted and tell us?
PM: Well, of course, the Auditor-General will go through all of these things appropriately with a fine tooth comb, and that is why we have a system of Government which is designed to do that.
The alternative, Neil, as recommended by our political opponents as the global economic crisis hit - do nothing, and therefore, for hundreds of thousands of your listeners to find themselves out of a job. We were not prepared to do that. We accept responsibility for any problems, however, of implementation on the way through.
MITCHELL: Well, what about, we've got a house fire overnight believed to be caused by insulation. We've got over 100 around the country. What do you say to somebody sitting in Melbourne today with insulation that's been put in their roof and they don't know whether it's dangerous or not? They don't know whether their house is going to catch fire or not? You put it there. What do you say to them?
PM: Well, in response to any concerns which any member of the public has, what Minister Combet has established is a range of services for the public which they can quickly access. Any general inquiries -
MITCHELL: Not quickly. It can take months, if not years, Prime Minister. Years. You can sit there with this stuff in your ceiling for years.
PM: Neil, can I answer your question, which you put to me, which was what can members of the public do? Firstly, they should go to a general inquiries number on 1800 808 571. If you are concerned about safety, on 131 792, and that deals with both foil and non-foil -
MITCHELL: And when will they be inspected?
PM: In terms of the schedule for doing that, the details of that are being resolved by Minister Combet -
MITCHELL: We don't know, that means, Prime Minister. That answer means we don't know, and they're sitting with, 1.1 million houses, potentially, sitting there worrying about it, and we don't know when they'll be inspected.
PM: Neil, based on the initial survey of households out there in the community, the conclusion so far reached by the officials is that 92 per cent of those houses which have had insulation installed do not have any safety-related problems -
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, why should we trust them? They're the people who put it there. These are the very people who implemented the system, and now we're supposed to trust them when they tell us it's safe.
PM: Neil, what we do is we act in response to the information that we receive based on surveys and inspections of what has occurred on the ground. We will do this step by step.
The other thing I'd say Neil, to put this into context, is that when it comes to safety-related issues for insulation in ceilings, these pre-existed the implementation of this program as well. For example -
MITCHELL: House fires have increased dramatically Prime Minister. Ceiling fires have increased dramatically.
PM: The advice that I've received -
MITCHELL: Dramatically.
PM: - is that in 2008, prior to this program being implemented, there was something in the order of 80 or 85 fire-related incidents associated with insulation. In that year, there were some 60-70,000 insulation installations occurring across the country.
What we have had since then is a very large increase in the overall insulation program nationwide. My overall point to you is there have always been a degree of -
MITCHELL: But there's also been a significant increase in ceiling fires.
PM: Well -
MITCHELL: A very significant increase. In Victoria I think it's almost tripled.
PM: Well, the information that I have related to prior to 2008 - and I go back to my overall -
MITCHELL: But that's irrelevant. These are the things that have been put in our houses since under your scheme. Are you denying that there've been ceiling fires, a massive increase in ceiling fires caused by this insulation?
PM: Neil, what I've said is that plainly in the case of the implementation of this program there have been real problems.
I'm also saying to you that prior to 2009 there were also a proportion of homes which had safety-related issues arising from insulation.
And right now, as I'm advised by officials, the rate is something like a fire-related matter is something like 1 in 10,000 homes. Well, we will deal with each of these as we should. And we'll -
MITCHELL: Do you accept that the ceiling fires have increased significantly because of the insulation mess?
PM: We are dealing with the data as it comes in Neil. And we will deal with this systematically and properly, as I'm sure you would expect -
MITCHELL: Okay.
PM: - and we will deal with it step by step, house by house. Minister Combet has put in place a program to ensure that all those who have foil insulation will have their households inspected. Secondly -
MITCHELL: We didn't even know yesterday we've had live ceilings found in Victoria. That's how much your bureaucrats are across this. Didn't even know.
PM: - Secondly Neil, that what he's indicated is that in the case of each of those households, they'll be offered the option of either having that foil removed, or a switch installed. That is the appropriate course of action.
As I've said before, the Government accepts responsibility for any problems which have arisen with the implementation of this program. That is the right thing to do. And again, I make the overall point - the Government, in seeking to implement its overall stimulus strategy, was dealing with the huge challenge represented by the global financial crisis. Obviously, problems have arisen, we accept responsibility for that as well.
MITCHELL: Do you accept, as the Treasurer said, that there may have to be spending cuts because of the amount of money wasted?
PM: In terms of the matters that you've just been raising concerning insulation, they'll be met within the already budgeted amount of money for the program. There will be no increased allocation at all.
MITCHELL: Okay, what about other things? Will there need to be spending cuts because of them?
PM: In relation to the other programs, we have no information before us which causes us to believe that we have any budget problem arising with them at all.
Remember, remember it is very easy across 10,000 school projects across the country to point to individual problems here and there. These will be dealt with on the way through.
I would simply say to you Neil, ask your local P&amp;Cs, P&amp;Fs, parent bodies right across the state of Victoria, what they think about having new classrooms, new school libraries, new multipurpose halls, new language centres, new science centres - I think you'll find there's a lot of positive response out there in the community. I know that there -
MITCHELL: I'll pursue that. I'll pursue that.
PM: Well -
MITCHELL: I'm happy to pursue that. Can you guarantee there will not be tax increases in the budget?
PM: Can I say Neil, our position prior to the election, and since the election, has always been this - we will not increase tax as a proportion of gross domestic product compared with that which we inherited from the previous Government in 2007 -
MITCHELL: Does that mean there won't be tax increases?
PM: As I said Neil -
MITCHELL: For some individuals? I mean, you might, you talk about an overall grab. What about for individuals, or companies?
PM: Neil, our position is economy-wide. We've said that time and time again. You and I have discussed this on air a thousand times before as well. My position hasn't changed. And we won't violate that. We certainly won't be the same high-taxing Government as the one which preceded us.
MITCHELL: Okay, you're saying the overall tax take won't change. But is there going to be a reshuffling of the way it's collected?
PM: Well Neil, obviously we're considering the recommendations for the independent tax review. But our overall discipline remains, we will not increase the overall tax burden on the Australian economy. That is the right way to approach it. And that is a principled approach.
I note my political opponent said on your program six weeks ago that he would not increase taxes. And six weeks later he fundamentally breached it -
MITCHELL: I agree. That was wrong.
PM: - with his great big new tax on everything -
MITCHELL: Okay, but you've had a bit of a -
PM: - I've been very clear on my position-
MITCHELL: - You've had a bit of a habit of taxing the rich, you're talking about the overall take here. Will you be changing the tax on the so-called rich?
PM: Well, I'll simply repeat our position Neil, and that is that prior to the budget and prior to our response to the independent review of taxation, we have nothing further to say on that, because we'll have to consider all the relevant options.
But the key thing is this - do not increase the overall burden of taxation on the Australian economy, and it won't be in aggregate terms any higher which our predecessors had.
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, just to - this might be helpful in the fire discussion - January to June 2009 in Melbourne, there were seven roof fires caused by insulation, the pre-insulation days, seven roof fires caused by various things. July to December 2009, 31 roof fires. This year, more than 15 already.
PM: Well, I'd go back to the figures that I referred to before. There were obviously fire-related events prior to 2009. In that year, I'm advised Neil, these are the figures I've been presented with, that some 60-70,000 insulation installations would occur in a given year. That has increased -
MITCHELL: Prime Minister, they've tripled in Victoria. Roof fires. Since you introduced this scheme, they've tripled.
PM: I was about to add to what I was just saying before Neil, is that in the period 2009-2010, the total number of installations across the country went from 70-80,000 of course to 1.1 million. Right now, the advice that I have is that you have a fire-related event for one in every 10,000. We will therefore monitor this very closely. And we will therefore deal with each individual circumstance as it arises.
MITCHELL: Meanwhile we live with it.
PM: Well, there are problems that we have had to deal with, and we will deal with the practicalities on the ground as we go through.
MITCHELL: I know you need to get away, one final question, and a quick one. About a month ago we talked about the kids out at Terang, under your new laws they're required to work three hours a day under the Award. They can only work an hour and a half because they're leaving school. They lost their jobs. More kids have lost their jobs. You had Work Fair Australia on to it. Nothing's changed. More kids have lost their jobs this week. What are you doing?
PM: Well, on that I'll take that question on notice Neil, I don't have those facts before me. But I will come back to it when we next speak on air.
MITCHELL: When will you release -
PM: - The reason I have to go now, by the way, is that I'm talking to the New South Wales Premier.
MITCHELL: I'm sorry. I'll let you go.
PM: That's fine.
MITCHELL: One question, when will the tax review be released, the Henry review, when will you release it?
PM: We'll sort that out in our own due season. I was asked yesterday whether it would be released before the next election. Yes, that of course will be the case. But we need to make sure we get it right.
I notice by the way that some of the Premiers, including the Victorian Premier, are saying that they can't provide a substantive response to their position on health and hospital reform until they have seen the Government's response to the Henry review or the Henry review being released. Can I just say this? There seems to be a different excuse every day as to why various state Premiers can't take a position on whether they're going to support national health and hospital reform.
And secondly, on your program, let me say this. In response to the independent review of taxation, no individual state will be worse off as far as that plan is concerned.
Therefore, let's put that to one side, get on with the business of health and hospital reform, which the good people of Australia want.
I'm seeing Premier Keneally in New South Wales right now. I'm seeing Premier Bligh in Queensland tomorrow. Premier Brumby wasn't able to see me in Victoria today. I understand he's free at 2pm on Sunday, I'll be flying to Victoria to see him on Sunday as well.
MITCHELL: OK, very final question, the Reserve Bank's accused the banks of gouging on interest rates, gouging extra money unfairly out of homeowners. Do you agree?
PM: The Reserve Bank is absolutely right. They are. And in response to that, watch very closely the impact of the new credit laws which the Government is bringing into force this year.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time. I didn't get to ask you how you lost weight.
PM: Sorry?
MITCHELL: Everybody tells me you've lost weight. How'd you do it?
PM: I use a, you know, gym equipment, you know, I keep, you know, watching what you eat and you use the gym and all that sort of stuff.
MITCHELL: You could sell the diet to Woman's Day.
PM: Well mate, how's yours going?
MITCHELL: Not good. Not good, but I'm trying. Thank you very much for your time.
PM: Good to be with you Neil.


PM: Good to be back in Queensland, good to be back in Brisbane, and I've just had a very good conversation with Premier Bligh about the future of our health and hospitals reform.
Australian working families want better health and better hospital services. We've put forward a plan, a national health and hospitals network which is to be funded nationally and run locally to deliver better health and hospital services for working families.
That's our proposal, and what I'm doing right now is travelling across Australia, speaking with the Premiers and chief ministers to build support for the plan which we have announced.
These discussions this morning were positive, they were substantive. We have agreed that our officials will continue to work on the detail of the plan between now and when the Council of Australian Governments meet in April. We spent a fair bit of time discussing the operation of activity-based funding, a bit of time discussing the operation of local hospital networks, fair of time about how we, on the ground, deliver better hospital services for Queenslanders.
This has been a good set of discussions and we intend to continue these meetings in the period ahead.
The Premier wants to work with us to try and resolve any outstanding questions between us and to get on with the business of improving health and hospital services for Queenslanders.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: The Premier said that one of her biggest concerns is the local networks running her hospitals and there won't be enough state-wide control. Have you been able to (inaudible)
PM: Well, I'll have the Premier, of course, speak for herself, but for local hospital networks, our plan is this: for the first time in the history of Australia for the Australian Government to become the dominant funder of the recurrent needs of our hospitals, the capital needs of our hospitals, the equipment needs of our hospitals, the teaching and the training needs of our hospitals. In the past, that's not been the case.
But, on the other hand, while funding the system nationally we want it to be run locally, and local hospital networks are really important to do that. Local hospital networks run and driven by clinicians, doctors, nurses, health experts, as well as, of course, finance and management experts as well.
I believe we'll be able to work this through with Queensland, and that's one of the areas where our officials will be working in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: Do you think you'll have any of the states on board before COAG?
PM: It's a matter for the states and territories. I take a positive view of this. I had a good meeting yesterday with Premier Keneally in New South Wales - again, positive and substantive. I've had a similar meeting here today. Tomorrow I'm catching up with Premier Brumby.
My hope is that we can forge a consensus around the plan which I have announced, and therefore we'll be working constructively and positively with the premiers to try and bring that about, but there's a long way to go yet before we get to the actual meeting of the Council of Australian Governments.
JOURNALIST: But you don't think you're particularly close to a deal with any (inaudible)
PM: I think what I've heard, both from the Premier of New South Wales and the Premier of Queensland is a positive approach. I'll allow them to speak for themselves. I don't wish to characterise their remarks.
The plan that we have put forward, remember, is for the first time the Australian Government stepping in to become the dominant funder of the public hospital system. I believe that working families across Australia are tired of the blame game, tired of cost shift, blame shift, tired of waste, duplication, overlap. They actually believe it's time to get on with it. There's been too much delay, too many excuses for delay in the past. We must get on with it now, and the discussions this morning with Premier Bligh were very good.
JOURNALIST: Should the premiers be concerned that (inaudible)
PM: Look, one of the reasons why we are driven to this reform is that if we do not change the system, the state and territory budgets will be overwhelmed entirely by health costs over the next 20 or 30 years to the point that their ability to do anything else would be removed.
I'm from Queensland. I'm a federalist. I actually believe in a system which works for all parts of the country. I've spent a lot of time working in this building on behalf of the Queensland Government at the time. Therefore, what I want to make sure is that state governments continue to have the resources to deliver the best transport services possible, the best education services possible, the best law and order services possible.
Health and hospital costs are out there, going through the roof, crushing state and territory budgets over time. The Australian Government must step in to reform the system and to fund the system dominantly for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) information from the Obama administration as to whether he is going to be (inaudible) or that it may be postponed?
PM: The advice that we have from the White House is that the President, as here in Australia, is pre-occupied with health reform in the United States and therefore there may be a delay by several days of his visit to Indonesia and to Australia. It may be shortened a bit, but I'll wait for further definitive statements from the White House.
On this question, though, can I say that the President is welcome in Australia at any time. He knows that. The Government of the United States knows that, and if this visit is delayed by several days, if it's brought about by the necessities of the health reform process in the United States, I really understand that as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The advice that we have is that he's coming several days later than originally planned and for what might be a slightly shorter visit, but we're still working that through, but he has health reform on his agenda in Washington, we have health and hospitals reform on our agenda here in Australia. He has a thing called a troublesome Senate. I have a troublesome Senate as well. There are a few similarities here.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you a fake Queenslander?
PM: I really enjoyed the Broncos last night. It was good to be out there. It was actually a pretty exciting game. Cowboys came back well in the second half. As the patron of the Broncos, I thought it was a fantastic game.
I've seen those remarks this morning. Can I say, and I'd say this to Mr Abbott, the one thing Queenslanders are concerned about is the $200 million he ripped out of Queensland's public hospitals when he was the health minister.
JOURNALIST: Did he go a bit below the belt with these personal attacks, do you think?
PM: I think the one thing Queenslanders are concerned about is health and hospital reform. The one thing Queenslanders are concerned about, therefore, when he was health minister for four or five years, ripping hundreds of millions of dollars out of Queensland's hospitals.
I notice Mr Abbott has also spoken about a proposal concerning hospital beds. Can I just say this: when he ripped a billion dollars out of the Australian health and hospital system, that's the equivalent of more than 1,000 hospital beds - 1,000 hospital beds. Let's all bear that in mind. People want us to deal with the substance of health and hospitals reform.
JOURNALIST: On the pensions increase, will pensioners be worse off (inaudible)
PM: On the question of the deeming system which has been the subject of some reporting today, that's been in existence in Australia for years and years and years under governments of both political persuasions. What's different is this - this Australian Government brought about the single biggest increase in the aged pension in the history of the aged pension over 100 years.
We are proud of that fact, the fact that we're able to increase the single aged pension by such a large amount in last year's budget. We're proud of that. We have brought that about because of a commitment we gave to senior Australians to help with the difficulties many single aged pensioners, in particular, were contemplating.
But the deeming system has been around for a long period of time under governments of both persuasions.
JOURNALIST: Some commentators have said that when you met with Kristina Keneally yesterday that you gave her a bit of a cold shoulder. Did you?
PM: I was a bit surprised by all that. We had a very good and positive meeting on health and hospitals reform. The other thing I'd say is this: on health and hospitals reform, I'm not really interested in the atmospherics. I'm interested in the substance of health and hospitals reform for the future. That's why I was in Sydney yesterday talking to the New South Wales Premier, here on Saturday in Queensland talking to Anna Bligh, and tomorrow I'll be heading down to Melbourne to talk to Premier Brumby, and over the period ahead, of course, I'll be speaking with the other premiers on the details of this plan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could I just ask you about Michael Clarke and Lara Bingle. There's been a lot of (inaudible) in the news this week (inaudible) do you think it's good for Australian cricket? Are you surprised by what's happening (inaudible)
PM: You know something? I'm going to leave that to them. I've got other priorities called the health and hospital system.
One other thing on the health and hospital system, by the way, just before I go. There's reporting today about rorting of the dental care system in Australia. This program, in which there has been apparent rorting, is one the Australian Government has been trying to close down for the last couple of years. We inherited it from the previous, Howard government.
The second point I would make is this: we have been trying to close it down because we're concerned about how it's been operating. We're trying to close it down, also, to provide the funding to establish a Commonwealth dental health care scheme for the 650,000 Australians who don't have access to public dental care.
This has been blocked by Mr Abbott and the Liberals in the Senate.
So, there are accusations today about the rorting of the scheme brought in by the Liberals, Mr Abbott's Liberals blocking its abolition in the Senate, and we want to use that money to get on with the business of proper health care, dental care, for the 650,000 Australians who rely on public dental care.
Having said all that, I've got to zip. I am due at a mobile office in my electorate.


PM: It's good to be back in Melbourne, and you've much balmier weather here today, let me tell you, than the nation's capital, so it's also been good to spend some time with John Brumby, talking about the future of the health and hospital system.
We've just had a good, positive, constructive conversation, and I'm sure we're going to be having more of those in the period ahead between now and the Council of Australian Governments meeting which will occur in April.
The Australian Government is determined to ensure that we provide for a strong economy for working families, we also deliver for the basics for working families. Those basics include an education system and our health system. That's why we believe that working families across Australia want to see improved health and hospital services, they want to see more hospital beds, they want to see more doctors and nurses.
They want to see, also, the end of waste and duplication and overlap between the Commonwealth and the state governments. That's why the Australian Government has put forward our plan for a national health and hospitals network which is funded nationally, which is run locally, in which the Australian Government, for the first time, takes on the dominant funding responsibility for the future of the public hospital system.
I've been encouraged by my meetings over the last three days with three premiers on how we're negotiating the future. I have had meetings over the last three days with three premiers on the future of our health and hospital system and I've been encouraged by the determination reflected by all those premiers so far on how we can bring about better health and better hospital services for the future.
Of course, the challenge we now have is to agree on the path, the precise path, to get there. There's going to be a lot of discussions, a lot of negotiations, between now and the Council of Australian Governments meeting in April to bring that about. So, much work still to be done, but this meeting today with John has been a good meeting, as have been the meetings in recent days with the Premier of Queensland and the Premier of New South Wales.
There is much more still to be negotiated. Our discussions focussed on areas such as the future of local hospital networks, the future funding of the system, and also the future operation of the governance of the system, as well. We'll work through those through both our treasury officials, our central agency officials, and of course the Premier and I will be meeting again in the future as well, prior to the COAG meeting.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Have you managed to persuade John Brumby of the merits of federal funding. He's been one of the more critical (inaudible)
PM: Look, I think it's fair to say that all premiers that I have spoken to so far have raised different questions about what we have put forward. We have a period of time ahead of us to sort through those one by one, but I believe working families across Australia want us all to work together to deliver this arrangement for the future which has better health and better hospitals for all Australians - and so far it's been a good set of discussions, but, you know, a lot's still to happen.
JOURNALIST: Do you think it's reasonable for the states to pass something without having seen the Henry tax review?
PM: The point that I've made in recent days elsewhere in the country is there'll be no net negative financial impact for any state or any territory as a result of the Government's decisions in response to the independent review on taxation. This, properly, therefore, is a debate about the future of the health and hospital system. That's why I've been pleased to be in Melbourne today talking with the Premier of Victoria; pleased to have been in Brisbane yesterday, talking to the Premier of Queensland; and the day before in Sydney to talk to the Premier of New South Wales and I'll be elsewhere in the federation in the period ahead.
JOURNALIST: Did John Brumby predict today that he wants to be in a situation where (inaudible)
PM: We spoke quite a lot about funding. We spoke quite a lot about governance of the system. We spoke quite a lot about how we would build a system which delivers better health and better hospital services for the good people of Victoria in the future.
On each of those elements, including funding, there'll be more discussions to be had, in particular by the heads of treasury. It would be wrong for me to say that everything with all the states has been resolved over night - of course that's not the case. This is a big change. We're proposing the biggest change to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare nearly 30 years ago.
Therefore, it's quite reasonable for states and territories to raise questions on the detail for the implementation. We are doing that. We are working our way through it.
JOURNALIST: Did you agree to the Premier's demand for $1.2 billion worth of extra funding immediately, not in four year's time, and do you still think Victoria's kidding itself about the quality of its health system?
PM: Can I just say that on the delivery of funding to the health system here under the Australian Healthcare Agreement which my friend and colleague Nicola Roxon, also from the great state of Victoria, negotiated with her state counterparts a year or so ago, right now we have flowing through to Victoria something in the vicinity of a $5.1 billion funding increase which began last year, which flows this year, goes next year and a couple of years after that.
On top of that, we're also investing here in Victoria, for the first time in a large-scale, in the capital needs of the system. Go out there past the University of Melbourne, look at the Parkville Comprehensive Cancer Care Centre which will be built soon - $426 million of Australian Government funding in direct partnership with the Victorian Government to build that centre for servicing all Victorians.
So, there is money flowing through the system now, both in terms of recurrent funding, in terms of capital funding, but we're talking about the long-term future, and the Premier of Victoria is right to work with us, ask questions, obtain answers to those questions about how this long-term reform would be done on the ground.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of Julie Bishop's comments that this is all designed to fail so that you go to the next election with the same (inaudible)
PM: Can I just say that my long-term ambition has been to fundamentally reform the health and hospital system for Australia because our view as a government is that unless we fix the long-term funding of the system and deal with the challenges of waste, duplication and overlap within it, ultimately, the system - which is now at tipping point - could ultimately break. That is why we are engaged in this debate.
The previous federal government had 12 years to fix and reform the Australian health and hospital system and didn't do a thing. Can I also say that in that period of time Mr Abbott, as health minister for four or five years, ripped $1 billion out of the public hospital system of Australia. That's the equivalent of more than 1,000 hospital beds. He put a cap on GP training places. He also was part and parcel of a government which saw the abolition of the Commonwealth dental scheme providing public dental care for hundreds of thousands of Australians.
On the question of health and hospitals, then, I certainly welcome a debate with Mr Abbott and the Liberal Party - for 12 years they did nothing other than take money out of the system.
JOURNALIST: How do you respond to claims of the Victorian Government that the reality of this scheme won't help somebody who's sitting on the waiting lists of Victorian hospitals right now, and will do nothing for them for four or five years?
PM: On the question of elective surgery waiting lists, right now we are providing, nation-wide, funding in the vicinity of $600 million or $700 million to assist in bringing down elective surgery now. So, for example, in Victoria that results in an allocation of some $70 million; for example, 5,000-6,000 elective surgery procedures have already occurred as a result of direct Federal Government funding in the last year or two.
Secondly, a lot of that funding is also going to enhancing elective surgery operating theatres in hospitals like Royal Melbourne, hospitals like the Monash Medical Centre, Sunshine Hospital, as well as hospitals at Geelong and Frankston, where extra operating theatres are being added, so in answer to your question, I think we've already got our sleeves rolled up right now, but looking to the future, there's a whole lot more to be done. That's why I welcome the discussions with the Victorian Government on that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just a separate matter, if I may - the Queensland Government has come out and said that it would be a good idea to lower the blood alcohol level to 0.02, but that all the states have to get involved. Do you think that 0.02 blood limit for driving is a good idea throughout Australia?
PM: Well, I've always been deeply concerned about the impact of alcohol on the road toll. On the details of that, though, can I say this is best deliberated on between the transport ministers of Australia, state and federal, together with the health ministers. I'd much rather this was done in a systematic way.
JOURNALIST: Can you at least describe the discussions of the day robust? Are you closer together? Are you-
PM: -Oh, look, these were good discussions, they were positive discussions. We went through a list of specific questions and provided answers where we could and agreed that officials would now work on those areas of detail which still need to be worked through. This is the proper way in which our federation should work .We've put forward a big plan for the future of health and hospitals for Australia: a national health and hospitals network funded nationally, run locally; for the first time, the Australian Government taking the dominant funding role for the future of the public hospital system.
Because it's a big change that we propose and because we think working families want the system to deliver better health and hospitals for the future it follows logically that state governments are going to have questions to ask, and our job is to work through those between now and when the Council of Australian Governments meets.
JOURNALIST: Will you need to with him again, John Brumby, again?
PM: I said before in my comments that I look forward to meeting him again before the Council of Australian Governments meets, as I've said the same to the other premiers. These are big proposed changes. It's right and it's normal and it's, frankly, the necessary thing to do, to work through outstanding areas requiring clarification and disagreement point by point.
JOURNALIST: How do you rate the Victorian Government (inaudible) in comparison to (inaudible) in other states?
PM: You know something? If you're in the business of working your way through a complex negotiation, starting to rank state and territory systems service by service, accident and emergencies, elective surgery, re-admission rates, palliative care arrangements, it differs from state to state, so I'm not in the business of providing aggregate ratings of one state against the other, including my own home state of Queensland.
JOURNALIST: Are you surprised by the push back from the Victorian Premier over the last week? Some of the comments made were very pointed to about the health care-
PM: -It's important that we work our way through each of the areas of outstanding disagreement. As I said, the Australian Government has appreciated the discussions we've had so far with Victoria and with the other states. As I've said, in three days I've met with three premiers and I'm encouraged so far by the positive attitude to delivering better health and better hospital services to working families.
Can I just conclude one other point, which goes to another debate on paid parental leave, and I neglected to mention this before.
It is very important, when we look at Mr Abbott's new great big tax on everything, that high-income earners would get $2,800 a week and low-income earners would be paying higher grocery prices and higher petrol prices. Let's be very clear about what Mr Abbott is putting forward.
The alternative, the one which we've put forward already to the Australian people, is that we would have paid parental leave in for working families at an affordable, properly costed level, starting from 1 January next year. That's the difference.
Having said that, folks, I've got to get back to the nation's capital. Parliament resumes tomorrow. Got to run.
Thank you.


The Rudd Government will invest $632 million to train a record number of doctors - to tackle doctor shortages, expand capacity and deliver better health and better hospitals.
In total, the Rudd Government's investments will deliver an additional 5,500 new or training General Practitioners, 680 medical specialists, and 5400 pre-vocational general practice program (PGPPP) training places over the next ten years.
Due to an historic lack of investment, we inherited a situation where workforce shortages are impacting on 59 per cent of all Australians.
To address this, the Rudd Government is:
     * doubling the number of places available for medical graduates to train to become a General Practitioner from 600 when the government took office to 1,200 a year by 2014;
     * more than doubling the current number of places available for medical graduates to undertake training to become specialist doctors in private, community and rural settings from 360 to 900 by 2014;
     * doubling the number of places available for junior doctors to experience a career in general practice before they become a fully fledged doctor to 975 places a year by 2013.
These major investments will meet projected shortfalls, and help reduce pressure on hospitals by improving access and availability of GP and specialist services.
Today's announcement will build on the Commonwealth's commitment to permanently fund 60 per cent of teaching and research in our public hospital systems, as part of the new funding arrangements under the National Health and Hospital Network.
Since coming into office, the Government has already committed a record $1.1 billion to train more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, including:
     * investing $496.5 million to expand undergraduate clinical training places;
     * providing 212 additional ongoing GP training places.
Alongside these investments, the government has also established Health Workforce Australia, Australia's first health workforce planning agency to better plan for our future health workforce needs.
These critical additional investments will be included and offset across the forward estimates in the 2010-11 Budget, consistent with the Government's strict fiscal strategy.
The Government has already delivered more than $55 billion worth of saves across the budget, including in the health portfolio, to make room for important national reforms.
The Government will continue to make the tough decisions necessary to deliver additional investments in a new National Health and Hospital Network, and will report on these decisions in the Budget, consistent with Budget practice.
The Government will make further announcements about investments in the Australian health workforce over the coming weeks. 


PM: It's good to be here with Mike and with Nicola today to talk about an important step forward in health and hospitals reform.
The Australian Government is committed to a strong economy, protecting the jobs of hundreds of thousands of working families, keeping Australia out of recession when most of the world, the rest of the world, has gone into recession.
We're also committed to delivering on the basics for working families. Basics in education, basics in health and hospital reform as well. And there is nothing more basic in health and hospital reform than making sure that we have enough doctors, nurses, specialists, and the allied health professionals to keep our hospital system and our health system functioning.
If you talk to working families right across the country - doesn't matter what hospital you go to or which GP practice you go to, country, city - the constant story is this; there are not enough doctors, there are not enough specialists, there are not enough nurses. We hear this right across the country.
Furthermore, in an examination undertaken by the primary healthcare taskforce, we found that six in 10 Australians live in an area where there are shortages of available doctors. Six in 10 Australians living in areas where there is a shortage of available doctors.
That's why the Government, today, will be delivering more than 6,000 new GP and medical specialists to deliver better health and hospital services for working families. We believe the time for action has come
Let me go to GPs. The Department of Health estimates that to maintain current levels of GP and primary care services alone, we will need a further 3,000 GPs out over the next decade. However, we have to do better than simply fill that gap. We have actually got to improve the level of services that we provide through GPs.
One of the reasons why Australia has one of the highest hospitalisation rates among the developed economies is because we don't have enough GPs out there. And therefore, if you've got GPs, more GPs in the community, it means that patients have more, and different places to go. If they don't, they present at accident and emergency, and often end up in acute hospital settings. Therefore, fixing the GP problem is critical.
Secondly, let me go to specialists. Estimates from the Australian Medical Workforce Advisory Committee and the medical colleges tell us that there'll be a shortage of around 1,280 specialists over the course of the decade ahead. These are big numbers. A projected shortage of 3,000 GPs over the decade ahead. A projected shortage of 1,280 medical specialists over the decade ahead. And that's just to keep things going as they are, before you talk about the growth of the system in the future.
So what are we going to do about this?
Firstly on GPs - the Government will invest $339 million to increase GP training places to 1,200 students per year, starting with increasing it to 900 per year next year. This is double the number of GP training places that existed under Mr Abbott's time as Health Minister. In total, our investments will deliver an extra 5,500 GPs working in the community over the course of the decade ahead. That is, we will fill the estimated gap of 3,000 just to keep services running at their current levels, but we will be going beyond that as well, to make sure that there are further services provided by GPs out there for working families.
Let me turn to what we propose to do on specialists. We'll be investing a further $145 million to train more specialist doctors. This will expand specialist training into private hospitals, into community settings, and into, critically, rural hospitals, and deliver an additional 680 specialists into the health system over the course of the decade. That is within those particular training settings. Of course, beyond that, the Government, through its Health and Hospitals Network plan, will be for the first time taking on the dominant responsibility in the public hospital system for the teaching and training of specialists as well.
So on the one hand, we are adding another 680 specialists across the decade ahead, through these other training settings - private hospitals, community settings, as well as regional and rural hospitals - as well as for the first time the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder for expanded specialist training within the major public hospitals as well. These are the essence of the reforms that we have planned for doctors, for GPs, for specialists. In total, this plan to deal with the shortages in our medical workforce comes to some $632 million. This plan will be fully offset and the details associated with its funding will be outlined fully in the Budget which is due in May.
This represents new money for the system. This is a new investment for the future. We begin expanding these places as of next year.
This is a necessary reform for Australia. We've proposed a new health and hospital network for Australia, funded nationally, run locally, for the first time the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding responsibility for the future of the public hospital system. The exclusive funding responsibility for the primary care system. Exclusive responsibility also for the aged care system.
Can I ask Nicola to add to my remarks, given that she has been integrally involved in this and all other elements of our health reform plan.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you Prime Minister. I just want to add a couple of extra comments, because today is a very significant announcement, appropriate that we're here with Mike Kelly, someone who deals both with the larger regional hospitals like Queanbeyan Hospital that we're at today, but also deals with the needs of GPs in smaller communities, and has been a very strong advocate for us getting this plan right, in addition to the rural incentives that of course were in last year's budget and commence on the first of July for GPs.
What we're doing today is investing in the lifeblood of our health and hospital system. We know that we cannot fix the imbalances in our system if we don't have a strong primary care system, and GPs are absolutely critical to that. So these extra training places not only will help meet the needs of the community, but will help meet the needs of our hospitals as well.
Of course, Queanbeyan Hospital is run significantly with its medical workforce as visiting medical officers, local GPs come in to the local hospital to provide services. So as well as fixing our primary care system, we're making sure that we're helping fix our hospital system as well.
We're providing more GP training places. We want young graduates, the numbers of which will be increasing over coming years, to see that General Practice is the place to be. It's where they can provide support for the community. It's where they can do a lot of the good work that they're trained for. And up until now there's been a cap on the places that has prevented some of those young students going into General Practice where they're desperately needed by the community.
We're also going to provide more support to doctors in training. For those in the health sector, the PGPPP program is a very important program. It provides young students and new graduates with experience in General Practice, rather than simply training them always in hospitals, exposure to General Practice as a vital part of our health system. And of course, importantly, training for specialists. We know that increasingly, as services are provided in private and community settings, and we want to encourage that, it helps the balance in our system, we need to provide more training in those other components of the system too.
And that's why our specialist program is targeted to rural and regional settings. It's targeted to private settings, and community settings. Of course, the public hospitals have done the lion's share of training before. But both they and our private hospitals and our general practices are calling out for the support that we are providing today to allow specialists to be trained in a better variety of settings, and we'll be working very closely with the colleges to ensure that the specialties that are in high demand and where there are shortages and the communities that are experiencing shortages are those that get the first priority for these new training places.
So I'm very excited about this announcement today, because we know we have to get the workforce right, the lifeblood of the system, if we're going to get health and hospital reform right. So I'm very pleased to be here with the Prime Minister to make this announcement, and we're of course happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: The specialist colleges have stood in the way in the past. Are they going to be on-side here? (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Look, I think we've seen a significant change in the approach that many of the colleges are taking, and the virtue of course of us funding more of these places is the conditions that can be attached, whether it's for the specialties where there are shortages like obstetrics and gynaecology or pathology, general surgery can be prioritised, but also making sure that these training places can increasingly be undertaken for example in our major regional hospitals, not just in the CBDs where a lot of training will still be done, but needs to be enhanced in those areas where there are shortages.
JOURNALIST: But the ACCC has made clear as Bonge says - was talking about - that in the past, some specialist colleges have actively sought to limit their own numbers to keep their appointment book full. Are you prepared to take them on if that happens to make this happen? And secondly, you're providing a lot of new doctors, but how do you make sure that they don't all settle within, you know, five kilometres of the GPO rather than going rural?
MINISTER ROXON: Well this is why it's such a carefully designed announcement, and why it complements the initiatives that were announced in last year's Budget in terms of the incentives for rural and regional GPs. It's why we are prepared to put money on the table for specialist training places, and with that will come conditions. And my discussions with the colleges to date have been very supportive of this.
You'll of course - I don't want to put words in their mouth - you'll need to talk to them directly, but if we see any misuse or abuse of these programs, of course we would act strongly. But I'm actually very optimistic that there is a realisation from our community of doctors that some services are not being provided in the community because of a poor distribution of specialists, and a poor distribution of GPs. We can pull our weight, that's what this announcement's doing, and we certainly will be expecting and encouraging the colleges to pull their weight.
JOURNALIST: And if they don't?
MINISTER ROXON: Well, we're making this announcement today and I'm very optimistic that they will be very positive about it.
JOURNALIST: Will you make the places bonded so that people who get (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Well, as I think any one of a number of specialists who are here or working at other hospitals will already tell you, the training period is a long period for specialties. These services can be provided while people are in training. That, in itself, makes a significant difference to the services that can be provided in rural and regional communities, and, of course, when you then balance that with, for example, in general practice incentives that are very generous now being offered, I am confident that we can make a significant difference to the shortages, both in terms of specialties and in terms of regions where there have been shortfalls.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, (inaudible) Victoria, what do you do next - do you override Victoria or do you go to the next election?
PM: All I'd say in response to that, Michelle, is one step at a time. We've had some good discussions with the premiers of NSW, Queensland and Victoria so far. We've got a few weeks to go yet between now and when the Council of Australian Governments meets, but our bottom line hasn't changed one bit.
Can I add also to Nicola's answer concerning rural and regional areas, which was raised, I think, just before?
You know, what's the big problem out there in rural and regional areas? I grew up in a small town in country Queensland. I think we had a visiting doctor once a month for half a day. This pattern across rural and regional Australia, frankly, has not been getting better. It's probably been getting worse. So what can you do about it?
The first thing is to make sure your overall supply of trained GPs increases. This is a very big step forward. We're talking about 5,500 GPs.
The second is this - the distribution of both those GP training places and the distribution of the specialist training places will be very mindful of the needs of regional and rural Australia.
Thirdly, what I find when I go to communities in the bush and elsewhere is that if a GP is trained in a local area and begins to establish roots in that local area, they tend to stay in that local area. The key thing is to make sure that you've properly distributed GP training places out there in regional and rural centres which make it possible, and similarly for specialists as well.
This is an important reform, not just in terms of the overall need for more doctors in our system, and more GPs and more specialists - it's also to deal with what is a chronic shortage of those services out in rural and regional Australia.
JOURNALIST: When will you be talking to Jon Stanhope (inaudible)
PM: Pretty soon. We've had a quick chat on the phone already, and it's less of a commute than it is to Perth, so I'll probably head to Perth before too much longer.
MINISTER ROXON: Can I just add onto that, too, because I've had several conversations with Katie Gallagher, and those of you who cover ACT politics will know that this announcement for GPs is absolutely critical - in fact, their top-order request in terms of health reform - because, surprisingly, there is actually a severe problem with GPs in the ACT, both in terms of numbers and lack of bulk billing. So I am sure that when that conversation is had that these announcements today will be very much welcomed by the ACT Government.
PM: Where the rubber hits the road with a lot of this, it's been useful talking to the health experts here in Queanbeyan this morning, and listening to Mike and his comments about this community and health care services here over a long period of time. I've just been through this hospital, which I'm advised has 32 beds, not many of which are occupied at the moment. That's just the truth. Part of that lies in the fact that we have some real workforce challenges here.
Secondly, we have an operating theatres capacity - three theatres I'm advised by one of the docs this morning, capable of doing, I think, if I can recall correctly, about 120 a procedures a month presently operating with about 20 or 30 procedures a month. Therefore, we've got a problem there.
Thirdly, as Nicola has just said and Mike has certainly been saying to me for a long time, the adequacy of GP services in the community as well, which is why, down the road here, a GP Super Clinic is being put together and I understand will be open sometime in the early part of 2011 so that you've got enough doctors, more flexible hours, operating out there in the community, but also there's enough doctors operating within hospitals like this to actually use them to their proper capacity.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know something? Hospitals like this have a huge future under the National Health and Hospitals Network of Australia, because what we're dealing with is one - how do we fund the system properly for the long term? Two - how do we make sure we have enough doctors, GPs and specialists to run the system in the future? And three - how do we also make sure that the other necessary reforms are embraced by the states and territories as well.
One footnote on that - again, the locals tell me today that here we are in Queanbeyan, which is part of a health region which is, I think, called Greater Southern Area, which starts up somewhere near Goulburn, goes to the Victorian border, east to the coast and west to somewhere.
Now, can I just say that's a fair bit of turf, OK? And in this part of the world, while I am very reluctant to engage in the business of where you should draw lines around communities of interest, surely we should start thinking about why a local hospital network in this area doesn't bring together hospitals in Canberra, in Queanbeyan, in Yass and Cooma and to make some sensible, local, community-of-interest decisions for the future.
JOURNALIST: Back to this hospital then, there's three or however many operating theatres idle at the moment. Doesn't the real problem, again, get back to the behaviour of doctors? They won't get off their tails in Sydney inner city or perhaps in Canberra, although the customer can't get a doctor there either, and come out here and work? Don't you have to compel them or do something?
PM: Two key things that we're doing here - one-
JOURNALIST: - Well, you know, I'm not joking, you're from Queensland, you can't get a doctor north of Nambour?
PM: Just listening for command and control and civil conscription. Can I just say this? Key problem, key challenge, is where do you physically fund and provide enough GP training places for the future? And what we are doing across this very large increase in the GP workforce is to make sure that they are going adequately out to rural and regional hospitals as well.
And secondly for specialists, this package concerning 680 specialists is focussed on rural settings, it's focussed on community settings, so that we can make it possible for people to become well grounded, well entrenched, well integrated with these local communities, where they want to stay, have their families, grow up, have their kids go to school. You've got to do things that way. Command and control? Well, let's see how this one works.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) provider numbers on a geographic basis?
MINISTER ROXON: Can I just add one comment to that, which I think really does go to the core of that issue?
One of the most significant shortages in specialties is for general surgery - general surgery that would actually be used in hospitals like Queanbeyan Hospital, so we have to actually deal with the pipeline as well. We have to make sure we are training people in the right specialties and encouraging them to work in the places where there are shortages. We can't just do one or the other.
If we made some rule, as you're suggesting, there would simply not be enough bodies in a number of these specialties to meet the needs across the country. So we have to enhance the training places in specialties where there are shortages and lots of them are the ones that are critically felt in rural and regional Australia.
And we have to get the mix of our other funding right, as the network plan that was released about 10 days ago seeks to do, to get our rural incentives right, so what you see is this jigsaw coming together to meet the demands of the community, the correct demands of the community to have proper services closer to home.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) suggestion you'll need to pay remote hospitals 55 per cent more than a city hospital to keep it open and regional hospitals will need up to 22 per cent more. Are they going to get that much?
PM: Well, we said very plainly the other day in response to a fear campaign being launched elsewhere that there will be not a single hospital in rural and regional Australia which will be required to close as a result of the introduction of the new National Health and Hospital Network - not one. We've been very plain about that.
Secondly, therefore, we will be designing the way in which hospitals are funded for the future to take into account the different costs of delivering services in rural and regional Australia. That's just a fact. People live out there. Therefore, you've got to make sure that they have decent access to healthcare services. You can't provide those services on the same cost structure as apply in the inner suburbs of Brisbane or the inner suburbs of Sydney. It's just different.
And when you get to Indigenous health, it gets even more of a challenge.
Sorry, you had a question as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you're sympathetic to the problems Barack Obama's facing on health reform. Given the real difficulties he's facing, do you think there is a chance he won't make it to Australia, and given that Hillary Clinton's already had to pull out, what does it say about the nature of the relationship?
PM: Oh, the relationship with the United States is in pretty good working order. I deal with the President a lot, as does Stephen with Hillary, as does Senator Faulkner with his counterpart in the United States.
Barack Obama has challenges when it comes to getting health reform through a troublesome senate. I have a lot of sympathy for Barack Obama because that's part of the democracy that we have to deal with.
JOURNALIST: Do you think he'll still make it to Australia?
PM: Look, our most recent advice is that the visit will be delayed and shortened a bit, but look, we're pretty relaxed about all this. It's a great relationship. I catch up with the President quite regularly, certainly on the phone, and we are meeting constantly at international conferences, and our officials are working together the whole time.
He's a welcome guest in Australia, whenever he can get here and for how long.
And having said all that, folks, we've got to zip and get back to Canberra. See you.


The Rudd Government will invest $339 million to increase GP training places to record levels to deliver better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
Due to historic lack of investment, we inherited a situation where workforce shortages are impacting upon 59 per cent of all Australians.
In addition, while the number of medical students graduating from our universities will double over the next five years, there has not been a sufficient increase in GP training places to enable more graduating medical students to become General Practitioners.
The Government will raise the number of places available for medical graduates to train to become a General Practitioner to 1,200 per year by 2014.
This historic investment will:
     * double the annual limit of 600 places in place when the Government took office.
     * provide a 50 per cent increase on the Government's previous commitment to increase places to 812 per year from 2011.
     * deliver around 5 million extra services by 2013, when combined with other investments undertaken since the Government took office.
To maintain current levels of GP and primary care services alone, it is estimated that an additional 3,000 GPs will be needed by 2020.
Australia also needs to reduce its high hospitalisation rates, which is currently double that of Canada and significantly higher than the United States, the UK and New Zealand.
This demands more GPs, not only to meet projected shortfalls, but to improve access and availability of GP services and help take pressure off the hospitals system.
The additional GP training places will commence from 2011 and combined with our existing investments will ensure that there are an additional 1,375 GPs practising or in training by 2013.
Over time, these investments will result in a total of 5,500 extra GPs practicing or in training by 2020.
This major investment will build on the Commonwealth's commitment to taking full funding and policy responsibility for all GP services and primary care as part of the National Health and Hospitals Network.
It will ensure that Commonwealth funded GP services have the workforce needed to properly treat Australians through less expensive primary care services rather than shunting them into expensive hospital services.
This investment is part of our major focus on primary care.
This critical investment will be included and offset across the forward estimates in the 2010-11 Budget, consistent with the Government's strict fiscal strategy.


I am pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Drew Clarke PSM as Secretary of the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism.
Mr Clarke will replace Mr John Pierce who will be resigning as Secretary to take up the position of Chair of the Australian Energy Market Commission. I express my sincere thanks to Mr Pierce for his work in the Department and wish him well in his important new role.
Mr. Clarke will take up his appointment as Secretary on 17 April for a period of 5 years.
Mr Clarke is currently Deputy Secretary in the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism. He has had a distinguished public service career with extensive experience in the development and delivery of policy and programs in the fields of science, business and energy. He holds a Bachelor of Applied Science from the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology and a Master of Science from the Ohio State University.
Mr Clarke's background and expertise equip him well to provide high level advice to government on the significant resources, energy and tourism sectors. 


The Rudd Government will invest $145 million to train more specialist doctors where the community needs them, to deliver better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
The Government inherited a situation where estimates from the Australian Medical Workforce Advisory Committee and the Medical Colleges suggest there will be a shortage of around 1,280 specialists by 2020.
The Government's investments will mean that this shortfall will be met.
These investments will:
     * more than double the current number places from 360 to 900 by 2014, when combined with existing Rudd Government investments; and
     * deliver an additional 680 specialists into the health system by 2020.
The remainder of the projected shortfall will continue to be delivered through the public hospitals system.
Traditionally, medical specialist training has been provided in public hospitals. The private sector has not provided a significant portion of the training of future health professionals. 
The overwhelming majority of specialist training is delivered in public settings, but we know that medical practice occurs in a much wider range of settings.
With a significant amount of health service delivery now occurring in the private sector, the Government will draw on the private sector to expand overall capacity for specialist training.
This major investment will be targeted at key specialisations and areas of need.
The increase in Specialty Places delivered through this investment will enhance existing specialist training which must continue.
Training targets will be developed in consultation with the medical colleges and States and Territories to ensure that the additional specialists are being trained in specialties where workforce and training capacity shortages are the greatest.
Specialties where shortages currently exist will be targeted.
These include general surgery, pathology, radiology, obstetrics and gynaecology and dermatology.
The Government will also seek the advice of Health Workforce Australia in accurately planning for future specialist workforce needs.
Priority will be given to providing training places in the communities where Australians need them, such as in rural and regional areas.
Supporting training in the private sector will build on the Government's commitment to permanently fund 60 per cent of the costs of training undertaken in public hospitals - making the Commonwealth Government the majority funder of training future doctors.
This critical investment will be included and offset across the forward estimates in the 2010-11 Budget, consistent with the Government's strict fiscal strategy.


HOST: Earlier this morning I spoke to the Prime Minister, and asked him what those places will mean for regional Queensland.
PM: Well altogether what we are doing through our national health and hospitals network is funding an extra 6000 doctors over the coming decade. That'll mean 5,500 new or training general practitioners, 680 new medical specialists, as well as about 5,500 junior doctor places as they train within our hospitals.
The second point is this: for regional Australia- and that means places like Far North Queensland, we are for the first time tackling the central problem of not enough doctors nationwide, and a large number of these GP training places and specialist training places will be going to regional areas. That's our best way of tackling the doctor shortage. It's simply been left too long with no concrete action.
HOST: So those training places - assigned to regional hospitals?
PM: For the medical specialists - there are 680 of those- the concentration there is in rural and regional areas. The concentration there is in a whole range of other areas beyond capital cities. On top of that, we of course, will continue to train medical specialists within the major teaching hospitals within capital cities. But this 680 is dedicated in particular to deal with the needs of regional and rural Australia. The second thing though, is on the GPs - and many people, many people right around the country can't get proper access to a GP.
These GP training places will be also available to regional and rural areas, because we want local doctors as they come out of medical school to be trained as GPs in situation, on the ground, in wonderful cities like Cairns and Far North Queensland, then become established in the local community, and stay there.
HOST: How are you going to attract people, though, to do that? It's one thing to allocate the training places, but is there a way to tie these training places to smaller, regional centres, particularly the very small places?
PM: Well one of the initiatives which the Government has taken already is to provide a much greater range of incentives for doctors to go to and to stay in rural and regional centres. In fact, I think we've increased the number of doctors who are eligible for those support payments up to about 2,500 across the country now, and expanded the number of areas which will be included in that as well. That's one thing.
But you know, underneath it all, what the problem is - not enough overall supply of GPs in the first place. And if we increase the supply of GPs nationwide, we will make a huge step forward to dealing with the problem. Right now the projection is that if we don't take action, just to maintain things as they are, we'll need an extra 3000 GPs in the decade ahead. However, we need to improve where we are at the moment. That's why we're aiming to deliver 5,500 new GP training places for that period, because we need to expand in particular what's available in rural and regional Australia.
HOST: Rural GPs say this isn't going to be enough, and that's what required to get GPs to the bush is a lot more money. Is that going to be available?
PM: Well, can I just go for example to the general practice rural incentives program, which the Government has introduced. And that is designed specifically to assist with location grants over a period of time. For example, $4000 in the first six months, $6000 in the first full year, $8000 in the second year, $13000 three to four years on, $18000 five years plus. Put that together, it starts to add up to a sizeable amount of money.
We are always open to further ideas about how we provide incentives in rural and regional areas. This is a program which we are proud of, which we believe will help in areas which currently have an undersupply of doctors. But I keep going back to my original point. You can provide as many incentives as you like- unless you have an overall adequate supply of GPs coming through the system, it simply won't work. And what we've done with this 5,500 additional training places for General Practitioners is extend that out much more extensively into rural and regional Australia.
We can't simply accept business as usual with the health and hospital system. Something has to change. We've put forward a plan for change, a new national health and hospital network, funded nationally, run locally, the first time the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the Australian public hospital system. But we need more doctors as well.
HOST: Mr Rudd, you've said you'll use private hospitals and general practices to help train some of these medicos. How will that work?
PM: Well, we'll simply enter into the appropriate arrangements on the ground. You know, right across rural and regional Australia, you have different mixes of private and public services. But we will simply tailor those to the circumstances on the ground. We think that's the right and the practical way to go. We are strong supporters of the public health system, the public hospital system. But where we need to engage and create a partnership with private hospitals, we'll do so as well.
HOST: Mr Rudd, I noticed one of the doctors when you were visiting Queanbeyan Hospital yesterday mentioned that you need to take a look at the Cuban health system. Have you had an opportunity to find out what's so good about the health system in Cuba?
PM: Yeah I sort of let that one go through to the keeper. I just mentioned in passing that I think there's a few problems with things like political freedom in places like Cuba. But it's a rich and diverse country we have in Australia. We're always open to ideas from everybody, but I think we might just leave that Cuban model to one side.
What we're concerned about is just not accepting the continuation of things as they are in the health and hospital system for Australia. That's why we've put together this bold new plan, funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia.
HOST: Can I just take up on that funded nationally, run locally point? Because one of the big problems in Queensland is a shortage of doctors and nurses, and employing doctors and nurses is one of the areas that you're still leaving up to the state Governments. So, surely that's not going to make any difference to the quality of healthcare?
PM: I think there are many parts to this. The first and fundamental one is how do you get rid of the game of cost-shift, blame-shift and waste and overlap and duplication between the two levels of government. Our response to that is as follows. For the first time the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system. Its recurrent needs, its capital needs, its equipment needs, its teaching and training needs. That hasn't been the case ever in Australia's history.
And secondly, to become the exclusive funder of what's called the primary healthcare system, health services delivered outside of hospitals. If you do that, then, in terms of the mindless game which occurs and has occurred over many years between the two levels of government about who's responsible for what, frankly, we take the underpinnings away from that.
Secondly, you've still got to have, however, personnel to run the system. That means more doctors, more GPs, more specialists, more nurses, and what we have made clear in our announcement today is that we're not simply restructuring, refunding the national health and hospitals network- we're actually investing new money in the provision of more than 6000 new doctors and GPs and specialists over the decade ahead. That's what makes the difference. And we, the Australian Government, are responsible for ensuring that we've got a proper supply of GPs nationwide.
HOST: Mr Rudd, The Australian newspaper is reporting that your approval rating is at its lowest since 2006. Are you concerned by that in an election year?
PM: You know something- the key things that Australian working families expect of me is to keep my sleeves rolled up and delivering on the basics. And that means health and hospitals. And that means making sure we get on with the business of reforming the system and delivering better health, better hospitals. More hospital beds, more doctors, more GPs, more nurses, more specialists.
On the question of the upcoming election, as I've said for a long, long time, when an election is held it's going to be very tightly-fought. It'll be a hard-fought election. And I expect that. But I will simply continue in the business of ensuring that we are keeping the economy strong, protecting jobs, protecting the jobs of working families in North Queensland. But you know something, it'll be a tough fight, and that's what I fully expect come election time.
HOST: Kevin Rudd, thank you.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program. 


DELANEY: The Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd. Good morning.
PM: Good morning, thank you for having me on your program.
DELANEY: How are you today?
PM: Really well, thank you.
DELANEY: Well, this is obviously a signature reform that you're hoping to take to the next election, but at the same time that's given rise to some criticism that it is nothing more than an election stunt. How serious are you about achieving meaningful reform ahead of the election?
PM: Well, the first thing I'd say is that in the two years that we've been in office so far, the Australian Government has increased its funding to the States and Territories for Australia's public hospital system by 50 per cent - five zero - up to something like $64 billion.
We've also increased the number of GP training places already by 35 per cent, and we're also investing some $3 billion-plus into the hospitals and medical research infrastructure of Australia, including a record investment of more than $1 billion in new integrated cancer care centres right across the country. So if people ask 'well, what have you been doing for the last two years', that's what we've been doing.
Now, for the future, the long-term future, what the Government did two weeks ago was launch its plan for a new National Health and Hospitals Network for the future, funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia. That wasn't the case before.
So, for the first two years we've been providing extra resources, significantly, into the system. Now, for the long-term future, we've put forward this plan because we cannot simply accept the hospital and health system as it is at present.
DELANEY: You've proposed a 60-40 funding split. How does that end the blame game? As long as the States have a financial stake in affairs they'll also demand some sort of input into decision making. Once again, there's the opportunity for finger pointing, isn't there?
PM: We think the fundamental change here is as follows: in the past, the Australian Government was only responsible for about 35 per cent of what's called the recurrent funding of our hospitals - effectively, what it costs to run them each year. For the first time, we increase that to 60 per cent and become the dominant funder for the first time in the country's history.
In the past, the Australian Government was responsible for none of the capital needs of our hospital system. That is, none of the building costs, none of the equipment costs, none of the costs, for example, you know, PET scanners and the modern, state-of-the-art equipment which we need right across the system, and now we increase that to 60 per cent to become the dominant funder.
And, finally, for the teaching and training costs of our public hospital system to train properly our nurses and to train properly our doctors within our major public hospitals, we take on that dominant funding responsibility as well. In the past, we did nothing.
So, when you put all those things together, this is a big, fundamental reform.
We become the dominant funders. But on top of that we become the exclusive funders of health care delivered outside of hospitals.
And so many of the problems in the past have arisen because of the brawls between what happens outside of hospitals, where the Federal Government has an historically strong role through Medicare, and what happens inside hospitals.
Now we become the exclusive funder of one and the dominant funder of the other. Therefore, the opportunity for cost shift, blame shift, is reduced hugely.
DELANEY: By re-directing 30 per cent of the GST from the States, aren't you robbing Peter to pay Paul?
PM: What we're doing is making sure that those funds, on average about one-third of the GST, are dedicated to a new National Hospitals Funds.
From that new National Hospitals Fund, we will provide funding and investment for the future expansion of Australia's public hospital system.
But secondly, when you look to the future, at present the health and hospitals budget of the States, on average, is growing by about 11 per cent a year. The GST is only growing by about six per cent a year. That gap is huge, and if you want to know one of the reasons why the system is under such stress at the moment, it's because of that gap.
Now, what we, the Australian Government, are doing is taking on responsibility for funding that growth gap in the future as well, something which the States and Territories would find impossible to do by themselves.
So when you talk about the future funding arrangements between the two levels of government, firstly, we're dedicating that to a new National Hospitals Fund, that one-third, on average, of the GST.
But secondly, we, the Australian Government, are taking on more than $15 billion of additional growth on the hospital system in the decade ahead because of that growth gap between the GST and current State outlays on health.
DELANEY: Are the States right to express concern about the possible interplay between this change to the GST and whatever might be contained in the Henry review of taxation?
PM: No, not at all, and the reason is I've said quite explicitly, on the record and to the Premiers who've asked me about it, that under no circumstances will they be in net terms worse off as a result of any changes to the taxation system which arise in response to the independent review of taxation. So that argument, frankly, is just not relevant, and we can't use that as a reason to delay action on our health and hospital system.
DELANEY: But as long as you're keeping the Henry report to yourself, you're asking people to take you on faith on that point, aren't you?
PM: As far as the States and Territories are concerned, the fundamental maths that I ran through before remain constant. That is, you look at how their hospital budgets are growing at present - 11 per cent per annum- you look at how much their GST is growing at present - six per cent per annum. Someone's got to shoulder that gap. We're putting up our hand to do that, and on top of that to grow the system further.
You know, if we didn't act on this, health and hospitals alone, it has been estimated, will totally swamp the State budgets of the States and Territories over the next 20 to 30 years. That is, they would be incapable of using their own source revenue for funding anything else - that is, schools, law and order, transport, the other things that State Governments are responsible for doing.
In fact, what we're doing through this reform is assisting them in freeing up some of their resources for these other priority areas while we take on the lion's share of the burden for the health and hospital system.
DELANEY: It's a big challenge, isn't it, to get all the States to sign on, to agree to all of the details of your proposal, especially when we don't even know what all of the details are as yet?
PM: Well, we have released something like a 75-page blueprint called the National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, for the first time the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the system. That was released nearly two weeks ago and there is a lot of information within it.
What I did yesterday was also make a further announcement with the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, on our new investment in the doctors we'll need as the life blood of this new system over the decade ahead.
This is a most significant announcement - that is, that we would deliver over 6,000 additional doctors over the coming decade through a $632 million investment: 5,500 new or training general practitioners, 680 medical specialists and more than 5,500 positions for junior doctors within hospitals as well.
But one of the key things is this: with these medical specialist positions, there'll be a large concentration of those in rural and regional areas. Similarly, with the GP training places, because in rural and regional Australia there are simply not enough doctors, there are not enough specialists, and we have to fundamentally change the system to make sure it's turned around.
DELANEY: But if you don't get the agreement of all the States, everything falls down, doesn't it. What's your plan B?
PM: Well, what I've said consistently is as follows: if we can't get agreement from the States and Territories on the proposal that we've put forward, then I have said we would go to the people and seek a further mandate for the Australian Government to obtain all the power necessary to bring about these reforms, including moving to 100 per cent funding responsibility over time.
That's what I've said from the beginning. That's what I said prior to the last election, that's what I've said consistently since then. So if the States and Territories do not agree with what we're putting forward, then that is what we would do, and that I believe is the most sensible course of action.
DELANEY: You've been criticised for having failed to meet the timetable, the original promise to arrive at this point by the middle of 2009. Was it more difficult than you anticipated?
PM: Well, there was something called the global financial crisis last year, and while that's not an excuse for being about seven or eight months late in producing our plan, I've got to say it did put a lot into our in-tray.
You see, our job as the Australian Government was to keep the economy strong, to protect the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians during the worst global recession since the Great Depression, and to keep Australia out of recession, which we did, when practically every other advanced economy in the world went into recession.
That was our main task last year. At the same time, we were developing our plan for long-term reform of the health and hospital system. We released that about two weeks ago. We've got a Council of Australian Governments meeting coming up in April. As I said, if we reach agreement on that, then that's our blueprint for the future. If not, then we'd be seeking a further mandate from the Australian people in order to implement that blueprint because we believe that's the right way for the future.
DELANEY: In reference to the global financial crisis and the Government's response to that, in big picture terms certainly most observers agree that that has been successful, but in the detail it's been quite an embarrassment for the Government in terms of the insulation debacle and various other allegations of wasted money and no long-term benefit to show for the money spent.
PM: Well, let me just go to the economic impact first of all. The Australian economy has been the only one of the major advanced economies to actually grow in the 08-09 period. That's just a fact.
Secondly, we've generated the second-lowest unemployment.
Thirdly, we've done so with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit, and finally, we've done so without falling into recession, which occurred practically in every other advanced economy in the world.
What's the practical consequence of that for your listeners? Hundreds of thousands of jobs for working families protected, which would otherwise have been lost through people being forced onto the unemployment queues, with huge consequences for families, for kids, and for the general economy as well.
That's what we did, and that's why we're proud of our national economic stimulus strategy.
Secondly, you talk about the impact of that strategy over time. If your listeners were to go and talk to their local schools and their local P&amp;Cs, their local P&amp;Fs, right across the country and ask the question: 'What is being built at my local school at present? Are we getting a new library, are we getting new classrooms, are we getting a new language centre, a new science centre, are we getting a new multipurpose hall for the first time in this school's history?'
Some 10,000 schools across the country are benefitting from these sorts of programs - government and non-government, rural, regional, metropolitan.
And so when we look back in a decade's time with kids now having built in their schools, for example, state-of-the-art, 21st century libraries, I believe this is a good legacy for the future.
DELANEY: Yes, but in practical terms the delivery of the home insulation program was a disaster and an embarrassment for the Government, and people are saying things like if they can't deliver insulation, how can they deliver on health reform?
PM: Well can I just answer that - that is, we have said quite upfront that there've been real problems in the implementation of the insulation program. And what we're doing now through Minister Combet is seeking to deal with each of those problems as they arise. Remember, also, in implementing a massive national economic stimulus strategy to prevent the Australian economy from falling into recession, we had to work and work very hard.
The second thing I'd say, though, is this, and you made a reference to the reforms for the health and hospital system - this health and hospital system we propose is to be funded nationally and run locally.
As I've said consistently, the big problem in the system at present is there are not enough funds dedicated to it in order to provide enough doctors, enough nurses and enough hospital beds. That's why for the first time in the country's history you've got the Australian Government stepping up to the plate.
But secondly, a system that will be run locally through local hospital networks right across the country. We don't want state bureaucrats or federal bureaucrats running local hospitals. What we want are local clinicians, local doctors, local nurses, local finance experts, local management experts through local hospital networks actually running the delivery of local hospital services.
So we believe we've got this balance right - funded nationally but run locally, and this is the reform we believe the nation needs, given that too many governments in the past, federal governments and State, have simply brushed this problem to one side because it was all too hard.
DELANEY: Prime Minister, finally, the front page of The Daily Telegraph today describes the current situation with asylum seekers as the Prime Minister's Tampa crisis - refugees moving to Darwin as more boats arrive. Are your policies to blame for attracting more asylum seekers to try their luck crossing the ocean?
PM: Can I just say that we have sought to just respond to each problem as it's arisen as far asylum seekers is concerned. These problems confronted the Howard government in the past, when you had large numbers, very large numbers, of asylum seekers seeking to come to Australia, and these figures change from year to year.
The second thing is this - that when you come to look at what causes the numbers, so much of it arises because you've got changing patterns of instability across the world. Most recently, the big factor affecting not just Australia but countries right across the world was the civil war in Sri Lanka in the middle part of last year.
These factors are being slowly stabilised within Sri Lanka. There's still a problem out there for not just us but many, many countries around the world as a number of Sri Lankans seek to leave their country. We'll simply deal with each of these practical problems as they arise, and we are doing so.
DELANEY: The editorial in the Telegraph suggests, from their point of view, that it's time for you and the Government to harden up on the refugee issue. Obviously, nothing the Australian Government does can influence the so-called push factors, but what we can do, of course, is determine how we respond to that influx, isn't it?
PM: Well, we believe we've got the response about right at present. I also note that some of the earlier changes that were made to the system in terms of the Pacific solution et cetera were then backed by the Opposition. Can I simply say that we have to deal with each practical problem as it arises. We will do so.
And can I say, this is not unique to this government. We've had boats arriving in this country for the last 30 years or so, and there have been more in some years than there have been in others. You just deal with these things in a practical way as each problem presents itself. We'll do so with these as well.
And remember, also, that on this one we're not alone. Every other country around the world is receiving large numbers of arrivals of asylum seekers - or most are, depending on their geographical location - and therefore it's a problem not just nationally, it's a problem regionally, it's a problem right across the world.
That's why we need to deal with it at countries of origin, you need to deal with it internationally through the right bodies, deal with it regionally in partnership with countries like Indonesia and Malaysia.
You know, there are so many interruptions now occurring in partnership with Indonesia and Malaysia of people-smuggling ventures, most of which never reach the newspapers for the simple reason that they are conducted quietly and done effectively on the ground, dealing with people smuggling networks.
However, these are practical problems which the Government has to deal with, and we'll continue to do so.
DELANEY: If we are to believe what we read in the papers, though, there seems to be a rising tide of opinion that our approach needs to change because our approach isn't making a difference.
PM: Well, can I say, in times past, when Mr Howard was Prime Minister, there were larger numbers of arrivals to Australia. Can I say that this in fact is being driven by so many changes in the global political situation.
Back then, you had instabilities arising from various conflicts around the world, then those conflicts tailed off, now we have new conflicts arising. The one I've mentioned most recently is Sri Lanka.
The important thing is to have a balanced approach to dealing with this and enhancing our cooperation with our regional partners to deal with the real challenge of people smuggling on the ground. As I said, many, many interruptions occurring almost on a weekly basis as our partners in Indonesia and Malaysia crack down with us on people smuggling.
However, these are practical problems which we'll continue to deal with, as are all governments around the region and the world.
DELANEY: Prime Minister, thank you for your time today.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


Eamon said a couple of weeks ago that there's no place for politics at a dinner like this.
And of course he's right.
But in my experience, packing 500 people of Irish extraction into a dining hall like this and offering to quench their thirst with a glass or seven of Guinness is the first step towards fomenting political insurrection.
Politics and the Irish go together like leprechauns and rainbows.
So in a warm spirit of non-partisan Irish hospitality, let me welcome my political opponent Tony Abbott to Queensland.
This time last year, I mentioned my namesake, St Kevin of Glendalough who lived in 6th century Ireland.
For those of you who aren't familiar with the works of this great saint, I can let you in on a little secret.
St Kevin was in fact an abbott.
He wasn't a mad abbott.
He was a run-of-the-mill abbott, given to long boring sermons and moral crusades against the lasciviously short loin cloths of the sixth century.
St Kevin in fact lived in a cave as a hermit for seven years - nothing compared to my ten long years in opposition.
His one great virtue was that he was attributed with many extravagant miracles - including steering his monastery through the global financial crisis of 578 AD.
He also held back wave after wave of unauthorised people movements of the latter 6th century, otherwise known as the Anglo-Saxons and Jutes.
St Anthony, on the other hand, was not Irish.
He was born in Portugal, lived in Italy and preached throughout Europe.
He was a seriously multicultural 13th century type.
St Anthony was trained as an Augustinian.
Be careful, Tony - Martin Luther also began life as an Augustinian.
In fact St Anthony was a man of shifting allegiances - later becoming a Franciscan.
St Anthony is now best known as the patron saint of lost things.
To be theologically correct, lost things probably doesn't extend to lost causes.
For that we must turn to St Jude.
And to be equally correct, St Anthony was canonised in record time - a mere 12 months after his passing, a testament to his virtue.
St Kevin on the other hand had to wait 1300 years.
Whether that says something about their namesakes in 21st century Australian politics, I'll leave you to judge.
But I digress.
One year ago, when I spoke to this gathering, I mentioned my Irish grandmother.
Hannah Cashin was born on the Tweed River in 1892.
She was the daughter of Irish parents who had migrated from the small parish of Ballingarry in County Tipperary.
I confessed to a few family secrets.
Like my family's links to the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848 - having come from the town where the national tricolour of green, white and orange was first unfurled.
And I owned up to my family's involvement in a long-running factional fight that raged across Tipperary in the 19th century, between the Shanavests and the Caravets.
There's even a whisper that Hannah Cashin's grandfather may have been the same William Cashin killed by the blow of a stone to his forehead in the great factional fight of 1838.
Which is probably why my forebears felt at home in the Australian Labor Party after they arrived on these shores.
But now that I've come clean about my own past - there's a matter of history that Tony needs to clear up.
No, I'm not asking Tony to discuss his views, as an ardent monarchist, on the actions of the British Crown against a nascent Irish republican movement.
I'm referring to a historic document that I have with me on the podium tonight.
It lists the names of the men and women transported to Australia on the Second Fleet in 1790.
It inscribes the name of my paternal forebear Thomas Rudd - from the thieving English side of my ancestry, as opposed to the revolutionary Irish side.
Thomas nicked a pair of shoes and got seven years in Australia.
He served his time.
He then returned to England - only to reoffend in 1799, and get transported to Australia for a second time, and for another seven years.
Getting transported to Australia twice for thieving reflected a prodigious talent.
And a worthy professional preparation for politics.
But I digress.
The question raised by this Second Fleet passenger list concerns another passenger.
On the same vessel to Australia that transported Thomas Rudd was another passenger by the name of:
William ABBOTT - from Norfolk
The question I have is, does Billy Abbott bear any ancestral relationship to Tony Abbott?
And what was his offence?
And did the forebears of Rudd and Abbott ever cross each other on the high seas - burdening future generations of Rudds and Abbotts with a score to be settled that would finally be fought out on the national stage more than two centuries later?
But as Eamon has said, a Queensland Irish Association event like tonight's is no time for politics.
Especially not in an election year.
So I won't be making any policy announcements tonight.
Although, this being an election year I asked my department to provide the Cabinet with some options for boosting St Patrick's Day celebrations.
They came up with three.
Option one - making the new national anthem It's A Long Way to Tipperary.
Option two - replacing the AFL, and rugby league and rugby union with Gaelic Football as the national football code.
Option three - my personal preference - opening up the Lodge to all Irish Australians for St Patrick's Day, with an open bar and Guinness on tap.
And so it shall be if we see the re-election of the Rudd Government.
A few comments of a more serious nature.
As we know, Ireland isn't exactly the world's largest nation.
But it's hard to think of a national day celebrated with such spirit and enthusiasm anywhere in the world.
And two million of our 22 million Australians claim Irish ancestry.
This reflects the vast reach of the Irish diaspora.
And the enduring power of Irish culture and identity.
But that's Ireland - small nation, with big hearts and a grand character.
The course of our nation's history was profoundly influenced by Irish migrants and their progeny - the Ned Kellys, James Scullins, Ben Chifleys and Paul Keatings.
Including those who, in the words of Chifley, shone their light on a hill.
As well as by less well-known Australians of Irish descent.
Those who we might say, followed the old Irish folk custom of putting a candle in a darkened window, to guide the way of strangers.
People who, one by one, helped build our national character as Australians.
The larrikin humour.
The rebellious character.
The deep suspicion of authority.
The warm hospitality.
What became for us mateship.
And the deep, deep instinct to defend the underdog.
Great Irish traits - traits that we can all celebrate.
That's why I'm delighted to announce a very special celebration.
On St Patrick's Day next year, the National Museum of Australia will open the most comprehensive exhibition ever on the Irish in Australia.
It will celebrate all aspects of the Irish contribution to Australia.
Its time span will extend from the Irish who came on the First Fleet, to the thousands of Irish backpackers who visit Australia every year.
It will be a generous and scholarly exhibition, with hundreds of exhibits from every state in Australia and from Ireland and the United States.
Many of those items have never been on display before.
The National Museum tells me that no country has ever had an exhibition on this scale, celebrating the contribution of the Irish diaspora.
The exhibition should attract interest from all across the world, and I expect it to be seen by tens of thousands of Australians before the National Museum takes the exhibition to Ireland later in 2011.
And in June this year, ahead of next year's exhibition, the National Museum of Australia will be publishing a book to celebrate the stories of Irish Australians - suitably titled Sinners, Saints and Settlers.
Friends, the first occasion when the Queensland Irish Association's St Patrick's Day celebrations were held here in Tara House was 1928.
The Catholic Archbishop of Brisbane, James Duhig, great friend of Labor Premiers T.J. Ryan and Red Ted Theodore - spoke on that occasion of his great pride as an Irish Australian.
His pride in the history, the culture and the values that came with being Australian of Irish descent.
But more than all of that, he spoke of his belief that God had given a diversity of gifts to different peoples throughout the world.
And he spoke of Australia's special opportunity.
"Never in the history of the world", Archbishop Duhig said, had any nation had such a great opportunity for combining these diverse gifts of different cultures.
He spoke of the combination of the Irish, the English, the Welsh, the French, the Germans, Italians and the Danes.
Eighty years and three generations later, Archbishop Duhig's words still ring true.
Ours is a culture today more greatly enriched by the gifts of cultures from every part of the world.
And no nation has a greater opportunity than does Australia, to bring together, in harmony, those different cultures - to build something far greater than the sum of its parts.
Australia is a young nation.
Our future offers extraordinary opportunity.
And no people have made a greater contribution to our history, character and identity than the children of St Patrick.
So on the eve of St Patrick's Day, we celebrate Ireland.
And we celebrate Ireland's contribution to the great nation that we all cherish - Australia.
So tonight I propose a toast - to Australia.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today is an historic occasion. Today we launch the National Compact: Working Together. Today marks a new era of collaboration between the Australian Government and community and not-for-profit organisations - the groups we often refer to as the Third Sector.
This compact sets the framework for all of the Government's work with Third Sector organisations as we tackle some of the greatest challenges facing Australia, an era of collaboration that will fundamentally strengthen and improve the way we work together, that will strengthen civil society and that will help the organisations which help many of the most needy and disadvantaged people in Australia.
Over the past two years, many of you here have been closely involved in bringing the National Compact to fruition, and today marks a great milestone.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues Jenny Macklin and in particular Ursula Stephens for their substantial work in making this initiative a reality. With this National Compact, we now have a framework for ongoing dialogue and consultation that will enrich policy and program development and service delivery, and today both the Government and leaders in the Third Sector will publicly sign up to it.
When we talk about the Third Sector, we are talking about 5.4 million volunteers - who tirelessly give more to society than they ever hope to receive. These not-for-profit community groups work in areas as diverse as health and social welfare, mental health, homelessness, heritage, the arts, the environment, sport, employment, volunteering and advocacy.
As the Productivity Commission noted recently, there are more than 600,000 such organisations - large and small. They contribute $43 billion a year to our economy, and provide 8 per cent of employment in our economy - almost 1 million jobs.
Of these organisations, some 440,000 are small unincorporated organisations that operate at the local community level, without Government funding or even employed staff, but with great purpose.
Volunteer sports groups, local gardening groups, seniors companion programs and thousands of other volunteer organisations - all making a huge contribution.
Together, all these organisations form the foundations that underpin our civil society, and this National Compact is long overdue recognition of that role.
The interests and responsibilities of Third Sector organisations are diverse, but they are united by a shared commitment to community wellbeing without individual commercial gain - and Government and the Sector need each other.
Government needs the deep reach of Third Sector organisations to be able to connect with people at the grassroots, and in turn, Third Sector organisations need the support that Government can provide to sustain their work.
In just over two years in office, we have acted to provide this greater support, and provide it without strings. One of our first actions, in early 2008, was to remove from Government contracts the gag clauses introduced by the Howard Government.
Those clauses banned community organisations with government contracts from speaking out on important matters of public policy. They muzzled basic freedom of speech, they undermined accountability of government policy, and they stopped community organisations from doing their job - to be a voice for the voiceless and those on the margins of our society.
We opposed those clauses in opposition. We abolished them in government and under a Government that I lead, they will never, ever return. We also acted quickly to reverse the previous Government's changes to the treatment of Fringe Benefits Tax for family tax benefit and child care benefit purposes, so that workers in the community sector did not have their benefits taken away.
We have developed a national not-for-profit Standard Chart of Accounts to reduce red tape and compliance costs for our funded agencies, for implementation from July this year. We are also working with the sector to address economic and social challenges through our Community Response Taskforce.
This Taskforce has been critical to our response to the Global Financial Crisis, including:
     * Doubling funding for emergency relief;
     * Investing $5.6 billion in new social housing; and
     * Investing $650 million directly into our communities through the Jobs Fund to create jobs and support local infrastructure projects.
We are supporting not-for-profit ventures in the child care sector by providing a $15 million loan to the consortium GoodStart to purchase 678 former ABC Learning Centres. We are providing $11 million in Temporary Financial Assistance grants to non-profit organisations to ensure the delivery of valuable community services through the economic downturn, and we are supporting volunteers across Australia through Volunteer Grants, including $21 million of grants in 2010, and through the National Volunteering Strategy we are currently developing with the States and Territories.
Our next step is The National Compact: Working Together. The name says it all.
This Compact gives community organisations, large and small, real input into Government policy and program delivery. It enables true collaboration on key social, economic and environmental challenges facing our communities and it allows the broad range of Australian not-for-profit groups to work with Government to achieve a shared vision.
I'd like to take this opportunity to thank all those who contributed to the development of the National Compact through consultations over the past two years, and always, everywhere, there has been immense and valuable contribution from the community sector.
Debate has been incisive, informed and frank. We expected a level of debate, but the overwhelming message was one of support for a Compact.
As one forum participant from Perth said, and I quote: "The moment is here, let's go for it" - and that is what we are doing.
We are all agreed that change is needed in both the Government and the Sector. Government needs to minimise the red tape and layers of reporting that can challenge even the largest and most sophisticated organisations , and there is room to improve the Sector's delivery of services, viability and development of better policy and programs.
The Australian public needs to be assured that there is transparency, accountability, efficiency and value for money in the services being delivered.
The clear message from the Sector was that it wanted a Compact that was succinct, high-level and aspirational.
The National Compact: Working Together is structured around shared principles including:
     * recognising the value of the Sector's work and the importance to national life of a strong, independent and diverse sector;
     * authentic consultation, constructive advocacy and genuine collaboration;
     * a commitment to enduring engagement with marginalised and disadvantaged Australians, especially Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people; and
     * a concerted effort to develop an innovative, appropriately resourced and sustainable Third Sector.
And, in line with these principles, we have identified eight priority areas of action.
     * First, to promote the value and contribution of the Sector.
     * Second, to protect the Sector's right to advocacy -irrespective of any funding relationship that might exist.
     * Third, to recognise the Sector's diversity when consulting and developing sector initiatives.
     * Fourth, to improve information sharing including greater access to publicly funded research and data.
     * Fifth, to reduce red tape and streamline reporting.
     * Sixth, to simplify and improve financial arrangements, not least the inconsistencies across state and federal jurisdictions.
     * Seventh, to improve paid and unpaid workforce challenges.
     * And eighth, to improve funding and procurement processes.
Our next step is to work together on action plans for community sector organisations to raise specific concerns with the Government, consistent with the National Compact.
This Compact will only be given life through the development of those action plans. We are also carefully and seriously considering the Productivity Commission Report into the Not for Profit Sector, which proposes a substantive reform agenda.
Our primary goal is to remove the barriers and obstacles to your work - to let you get on with the job in our communities.
If we are to truly succeed, we need active leadership, engagement and involvement from both the Government and the Third Sector. To do this, we have established the National Compact Sector Advisory Group, and it is good to see many members of the Advisory Group here today, and I thank them for their work.
We will also provide a range of mechanisms for Sector organisations to sign up to the Compact -  all voluntary, of course - and we plan to set up a public register of Compact signatories.
I encourage you all to pick up a copy of the Compact and visit the new National Compact website.
Challenges such as homelessness, Closing the Gap on Indigenous disadvantage, climate change and child protection are major long-term challenges. No government can solve those problems on their own.
They require strong, respectful relationships with individuals, organisations and communities, because only by working together - bringing together all of our resources, experience, skills and creativity - can we build a stronger and fairer Australia.
The Government believes that the National Compact is a commitment to change: change that will see the erosion of the disadvantage that still exists in our prosperous country; change that will create a society where everyone has the opportunity to reach their full potential, and where everyone reaps the benefits of a strong economy.
This Compact sets benchmarks for an active partnership between Government and the Third Sector - a true partnership, where those who advocate on the part of the vulnerable and the dispossessed are not silenced and gagged, but where their opinions are heard and respected and they can make an even greater contribution to building Australia's future.
This is our National Compact.
I thank you.


DOYLE: Well, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us now. Good morning to you. Is it locked in for June?
PM: Well, I'm going to be very happy any time the President chooses to visit. As I said the other day, I'm pretty relaxed about all that. I know President Obama pretty well. It would be nice to have him and Michelle and the kids. We had a conversation on the phone this morning. He'd like to have a more relaxed visit than the 24-hour, whip in, whip in out that the last one had come down to.
DOYLE: So, does he just ring you personally? How does that work? And tell you that he's -
PM: Gets on the mobile to say 'G'day, Kevin. How are you?'
DOYLE: Does it pop up? Have you got his name in and it pops up 'Barack Obama'?
PM: If that was the case I would have to shoot you.
DOYLE: Okay, fair enough. So, maybe, what, maybe bring the family, spend a bit more time here?
PM: Well, that's what he wants to do, and you see, what's going on in the United States, there's this huge health debate. It's massive. And in America there's no Medicare, the public hospital system is not really available to poor people, so as a result there are literally tens of millions of Americans who don't have any form of health care. So what he's trying to do is to get this through the American congress. He's having a huge job.
I said to him I sympathise with him in two respects - one, I've got a Senate, too, and it blocks most things I try to do, and the second is we're trying to get some new healthcare changes here in Australia as well, so we had a good conversation, but it's going to be good to see him later in the year.
DOYLE: I know you might have to shoot me, but can you give me a snippet? What do you chat about? Is he a good bloke?
PM: He's a lot of fun, actually. We talk from time to time and he's got a great sense of humour, but it would be breaching all protocols to actually go to the content of conversation. But it's a good relationship and he's doing great things for America, and for this part of the world. He's going to Indonesia as well, so it's Indonesia, us, and so he's got to schedule it with both countries.
DOYLE: He'll need it after June in Canberra. He'll want to go somewhere a tad warmer.
PM: June in Canberra, yeah. Port Douglas is sounding good - back to Queensland.
DOYLE: He'd like that. Alright, let's get onto some of our viewer questions for you this week. We've got Nicky Chadburn in Adelaide. Nicky, good morning to you. Go ahead.
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister. My question for you this morning is when will we see some definite action taken with regard to young drivers and the unnecessary deaths and injuries on our roads? I understand it's a national problem. Is there no way we can create national laws by coordination with other states and develop an action plan to minimise the road toll?
PM: Well, thanks, Nicky, for the question, and it's really important. Last time I looked at the figures I think we've got between 1,000 and 2,000 Australians who lose their lives each year on the roads, and we can do a lot better than that.
So your question, specifically, is what's the practical stuff that we can do? Number one is this - not long ago we established a new driving program, I think it's called Keys to Drive.
Keys to Drive is a program whereby, if a young person is learning how to drive, we, the Government, through your local automobile association - here in New South Wales, where I am at the moment, it's the NRMA, and the equivalents right around Australia - we provide a free driving lesson for the young person, but with their parents or their older brother, their older sister or the person who's going to take on that mentoring role.
What we don't want to see happen is bad driver training practices perpetuated through families, so it's best to use an accredited driving instructor. We, the Government, provide that one-off free driving lesson, but it's to train the trainer, as it were.
So, that's one practical thing. It's costing us about $15 million, $20 million.
The other things is this, and you also asked about can we do better in terms of right across the country - you're in Adelaide, is that right?
CALLER: Yep, that's right.
PM: So, we've established for the first time something called a National Road Safety Council, and it's now meeting, for the first time, to exchange ideas right across Australia about how we can have more uniform rules. But also there are great local innovations often brought forward by the local automobile associations about how we can just do things better, so that's another thing that's just started. It's had, I think, its first or its second meeting.
The final thing is about car design. We have brought in some new design standards for new cars in Australia and one of them have got to do with stability control systems with the cars so that if you're in wet weather or a young driver in particular loses control it becomes easier to regain control.
So there's three practical things we're doing, but, you know, it requires all of us to get out there and be part of it, particularly with younger drivers.
I've got a 16-year-old at the moment. He's out having driving lessons, and my heart goes into my mouth every time it happens, like all parents, but I think these are the sort of practical things we can do.
DOYLE: Thank you, Nicky, for your question. Are you teaching him to drive?
PM: No, Therese is. You know why?
DOYLE: Like most households.
PM: She is calmer, she is more relaxed, and she's better at it.
DOYLE: OK, good point. I like that you acknowledge that. Let's go to Jackie Perry in Wollongong. Jackie, good morning to you. What's your question for the PM?
CALLER: Good morning, Mr Rudd.
PM: Hi, Jackie.
CALLER: I'm a mother of two children - hi, sorry - I'm a mother of two children who feels strongly about the need for water safety skills. My son has been taking swimming lessons for two years now, which has cost me over $1,000 to date, and my three-month-old daughter will start swimming lessons when she's six months' old, at which point it's going to cost me $1,104 a year just to give my two children water survival skills.
So, my question to you is, with such a need for water survival skills, why is it that there isn't a Government subsidy to assist parents with such a high cost?
PM: Jackie, I wish I had the straight up answer for you, but I don't, and I'm going to have to come back to you on this one.
In terms of water safety for littlies, can I just say it's really important. I mean, we were a bit like you with our three kids. We started them off very early, usually at the ages of two or three, and take them to the local swim schools up in Queensland, and they actually were pretty expensive if you added it all up.
But in terms of what's available through either local councils, state governments or the Federal Government, can I just be honest with you? I don't know. Let me come back to you and that's my homework for next week.
But your concern about littlies and water safety is real. Up in Queensland, Laurie Lawrence, who you may know of in terms of his Olympic fame, he's just an absolute champion on the question of water safety for kids, so I'll come back to you with some concrete responses next time.
DOYLE: Thank you, Jackie. Alright, and Laurie Lawrence is amazing. I mean, the DVDs he's put out. He does so much in that area.
Can I ask you about something else this morning? Both sides of politics we've seen reject calls for a Senate inquiry into the Church of Scientology. Independent Senator Nick Xenophon who's led the charge is now saying he's going to have a third attempt at trying to get this through. I just want to show you a clip from a woman who claims the Church pressured her to have two abortions.
CLIP: It was my baby - excuse me - my body, and my choice, and all of that was taken away from me by Scientology. All we want is our chance to have our say to a Senate inquiry, and I say to Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott, please don't make us suffer in silence.
DOYLE: So, what's your view?
PM: On the Church of Scientology, what I've said before and I have the same view today, I have real, real concerns about this organisation. I've said it in the past, it's my view today as well.
So, to go to the specific question about a Senate inquiry now, as I understand it, a number of the allegations right now go to potentially criminal matters. If they are potentially criminal matters, we've got to be very careful about using parliamentary forums to air potentially criminal charges or criminal allegations, I should say, and these are often best dealt with through the law enforcement authorities.
I will, in respect to your program, look at this again, but that's the advice I've received so far.
DOYLE: Can we have an inquiry some other way? I mean, there has been a lot of controversy lately. There have been a lot of calls for it to at least be looked at, which hopefully will then sort it out one way or another. The Church of Scientology can be left alone if there's no problems. If not, they can be dealt with.
PM: Well, let me take some further advice on, let's call it the separation between general concerns about the Church of Scientology, many of which I deeply share, on the one hand, and on the other hand allegations of criminality on the other, or criminal misconduct, which are properly left with the law enforcement authorities and the criminal justice system.
So, if that's capable of some separation, maybe, but I'd rather take very careful advice on that. The lady that's just been on your program just now is obviously in huge distress, and obviously she has been through a terrible experience, and I don't diminish that one bit.
I've just got to be very careful about how you shine a light on a problem, deal with it, but at the same time don't interfere with criminal justice matters, and that's not where politicians should go.
That's my own view.
DOYLE: Thank you, alright, well, we'll get something more from you next week or so on the swimming lessons for kids, so, thanks for joining us Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


HOST: Good morning, Mr Rudd.
PM: Good morning. Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: Has the President called you yet?
PM: Yeah, I got off the phone from him about an hour or so ago, and we had a good chat. He's sad and sorry that he won't be here in Australia in the coming week or so, but he's looking forward to a more relaxed visit a little later on in the year.
HOST: So a little longer, obviously?
PM: A little longer, because he would like to be here with Michelle and the kids, and he's visiting both here and Indonesia, so there's scheduling there as well, but as it was turning out last time the visit was just going to be too tight and too short, so he's looking forward to something longer later on.
HOST: Who's got the tougher battle to get their health plan up? Him or you?
PM: I think the President and myself face some common challenges. Number one is we're both trying to get health and hospital reform done, and number two is we both face Senates who want to block everything. So, I had a chat with him about how it was all shaping up in the United States.
For your listeners, remember in America there's no Medicare. In America, frankly, the public hospital system doesn't work properly, so if you're a poorer person on lower income there's just nowhere much to go. So, he's trying to fix that, and full marks to him for doing it.
Here in Australia, we've got our own challenges, which is the proper funding, long term, of our public hospital system and health system more generally. So, we have a challenge to make sure we get the states and territories on side with that, but if we don't, as I said, we'll seek a mandate from the people to obtain the powers necessary to bring about these reforms anyway.
HOST: Because it's going to be even tougher after this weekend with Labor tipped to lose both in Tasmania and South Australia.
PM: Well, these will be tough elections for both the state governments in South Australia and in Tasmania. They've been there for some years, but this'll be a tight election campaign, it has been a tight election campaign, and the voters will decide.
But for health and hospital reform, my own view is it should go, frankly, beyond party politics. This is just crying out for change. People want more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, but they want to make sure that the system doesn't just keep up this cost-shift, blame-shift, pass-the-parcel exercise we've had for decades now. That's why we've put forward the national health and hospital network, funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funders of the system.
HOST: When we last spoke, you talked about New South Wales health bureaucrats trying to undermine this process. You might notice in the paper this morning there are stories from New South Wales Health talking about big western suburbs hospitals like Westmead which will suffer under your plan. Now, is that true, and is this continuing this battle you're having with New South Wales?
PM: I think these state health bureaucrats should stop running fear campaigns because they are frightened of fundamental changes for the future. What we want is more frontline services, more doctors, more nurses, more hospital beds. That's one of the reasons why the Health Minister and I released earlier this week a plan to invest $600 million-plus for 6,000 new, additional doctors, medical specialists, GPs, because there's a crying shortage around the country. So, I think it's time people got with the program.
HOST: Yeah, but New South Wales is the state that'll, it seems is going to be the biggest stumbling block, has to make the most changes. That meeting you had with Kristina Keneally last week, were you rude to her? Were you deliberately rude to her?
PM: We had a very good meeting, and it was substantive, it was positive, it was constructive-
HOST: -But that image of you looking away and being, you know, ignoring her.
PM: It was substantive, positive - seriously, it was a very good meeting.
HOST: But was it just, were-
PM: -I think both of us were surprised by some of the subsequent media coverage.
HOST: Was it the visual version of verballing, was it?
PM: I think we had a really good meeting. I think we're both surprised. It's Carmel as well, Carmel Tebbutt, we were both surprised by some of the media coverage later.
HOST: Do you like her? Do you like Kristina Keneally?
PM: We get on very well, as do I with the Deputy Premier and Minister for Health, Carmel. I've known both of them for quite some years. It was a really good meeting, as was the one in Queensland with Anna, as was the one in Victoria with John Brumby.
I think people are serious about getting on with the business of health and hospital reform, but you know something? I'm not really interested in atmospherics. I'm interested in substance. I'm interested in getting on with the business of changing the hospital system.
For your listeners this morning, have they got a problem with being able to find a GP on time? Have they got a problem in terms of a waiting list for elective surgery? Did they have a problem last night at accident and emergency at one of the hospitals around here? These are the problems I want to deal with, and that means cutting out waste and inefficiency from the system, because of the Commonwealth-State brawl. It means properly funding the system for the future, hence why, for the first time in Australia's history, the Australian Government would be the dominant funder of the running costs of our hospitals, the capital costs of our hospitals, the equipment for our hospitals.
Just last week I went out to Royal North Shore here, and we had funded a new PET scanner. There's only six of those in Sydney, and we've just opened the sixth, and we've paid for it.
We should have a better system than that, whereby the folk who use the Royal North Shore hospital or who depend on it for cancer services - it goes right through to the New South Wales central coast - shouldn't have to wait for a decade or so for a PET scanner to come on-stream. You need a more rational planning system than that. That's what we want to bring about.
HOST: You talk about atmospherics and how you don't like them - a lot of atmospherics in Parliament yesterday. You and Tony Abbott, it seemed to get almost personal. Do you like Tony Abbott?
PM: I've known Tony for a long, long time, so obviously he has a different set of political views to myself, and a different set of policy views. This was a big debate over health and hospital reform and all I was making a point was that Mr Abbott had four or five years as Health Minister, right up until the last election, to fix the system. He said four or five years ago, the Commonwealth should take over the system - well, he didn't.
During that period of time as Health Minister he took a billion dollars out of the public hospital system. He capped the number of GP training places. And then, hand on heart, said that he'd never, ever change the Medicare safety net, a promise he subsequently breached. So, his record on health is bad.
But you know what I'm more concerned about? What's his plans to fix up health for the future. Our plan's clear: a new national hospital and health network for the nation, funded nationally, run locally, with 6,000 new doctors, medical specialists and GPs. That's what we want to do. We don't have the alternative plan yet.
HOST: In this debate you'll have with Mr Abbott to discuss all this, will it be a freewheeling debate, or is it going to have set times that you can both speak? What will be the format?
PM: The format, I'm sure, will be sorted out in the days ahead. I'm pretty relaxed about that.
HOST: Can we have as few rules as possible, just where you can go at each other?
PM: Oh look, I'm pretty relaxed about all that. The key thing is to make sure that the people listening to the debate and who really care about the future of their local hospitals and enough beds, enough doctors, enough nurses, that my plans are clear in people's minds as to what I propose to do, but so are his.
HOST: Well hang on - because in relation to that, the suggestion is that small, local hospitals that have relied on block funding under your plan will not be able to survive under this casemix funding system that you want to introduce, and that you're going to deal with that down the track aren't you, with some of these other funding announcements? So, will you have those on the table next Tuesday so people can see what the future of that hospital will be?
PM: You mentioned before a fear campaign or the possibility of it from various state health bureaucrats. That's one of them.
Let me say very plainly on your program this morning under our proposals for this new national health and hospital network, there will be nothing in that plan at all which would cause any hospital, large or small, to close - quite the reverse. We see, for example, in western Sydney, where you've got a vastly growing population, the need to expand all those hospital services, and if you're servicing a big and growing community, our funding system would actually support that to grow those services.
At present, what happens is people are given a fixed budget once a year - that's it, goodbye. Now, that shouldn't be the case. We want a new system for the future and I think those who are arguing against it seem to be saying almost by implication that the current system is just fine and dandy, we'll defend it how it is. I don't believe that's the case, nor do I believe that's what working families want in Australia either.
HOST: Because the detail is important in this, and some of the, even in Victoria, where they've got the system operating, they've had to return to that block funding for smaller hospitals to avoid them closing, so would you do that in New South Wales, extra funding for some of those smaller, regional hospitals?
PM: To support the needs in rural and regional areas - remember, I grew up in a small country town, we had a visiting doctor once a month for half a day and the nearest hospital had about 12 beds and it was a while away, so I actually understand this from the point of view of growing up in that area-
HOST: -So would you have that extra funding?-
PM: -Therefore, going on to your point about making sure those services continue, we would absolutely make sure that those services continue and the formula that we are proposing for what's called activity-based funding is entirely tailored to the local circumstances of how far away are you, how difficult is it to deliver those services there, how more expensive it is to get a visiting specialist there, for example - on top of the particular, shall I say, concentrations of health problems in particular parts of the country as well.
So for us, and you go to the question of additional funding grants, we'll be very mindful of particular needs in the system.
HOST: So there could be block funding for some of those hospitals.
PM: We'll be very mindful of particular needs in the system because, as I've said before, there is nothing in what we are proposing which would cause any hospital anywhere to close down. That is, in essence, the fear campaign being run by the state bureaucrats who want to see no change occur.
HOST: But you understand, people criticise you for being verbose. It's a simple question. Are you going to put in block grants to deal with that, and the answer would be either yes, you will, or no, our system will deal with it. So you're saying no.
PM: What I said to you before, John, is there's nothing in our funding system which would cause any of those hospitals to close. That's your direct question, that's my direct answer, and I believe that's the assurance which I've been giving to folk as I've been asked this since the debate on this was first kicked off by state health bureaucrats putting stuff out in the papers a couple of weeks ago, and I've been pretty consistent about that.
HOST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about the school building program which has had so much debate over the past week, and Julia Gillard has been in parliament defending the program and the way it's been implemented. A simple question about the school that's almost become the focus of the program, Hasting Public School at Port Macquarie - how is it that that covered outdoor learning area that was budgeted for, I think, $400,000 or so can suddenly blow out to $900,000? It's a simple question that I don't think anyone's adequately explained yet.
PM: Well, I think from my last conversation with Julia the audit on that one hasn't been concluded yet, so let's just look at the facts once it's through. You ask me about one school. We're currently engaged in building programs for 10,000 schools across the country, 7,500 primary schools, larger scale, as well as science centres, new science centres and language centres in the secondary schools, as well, so I looked at the figures on this the other day in terms of where problems have arisen - across those 10,000 schools, complaints have been raised in terms of 0.73% of them.
Can we just put this into some context? This was done deliberately to keep the Australian economy going at a time when economies around the world were falling into recession - falling into recession. We, Australia, did not go into recession, and one of the core reasons that didn't happen is we decided to use a national infrastructure stimulus strategy, but not just that, to provide state-of-the-art libraries, state-of-the-art science centres, state-of-the-art language centres, multipurpose halls, new classrooms for kids right across Australia.
We're proud of what we've done. There's going to be problems, always, in the implementation of large scale programs. You just deal with them one by one.
So, when the audit's through in the school that you're referring to, I'm sure Julia will come to your program and go through the detail of it.
HOST: We'll remind her of that. We will, thank you.
HOST: Just, finally, Newspoll this week, I think your approval rating's gone down more than 20 percent from its high. What do you say to the more than 20 percent, a quarter of the people in the poll now don't approve of you, who used to approve of you. Why is that?
PM: Well, you know, my job is to take some hard decisions for the nation. Some of those will be popular and others will not be. One of the hardest decisions we took a year and a half ago was decisions to step into the breach with the Australian economy so it wouldn't fall into recession. Now, some of the programs that we've put in have resulted in criticism. You just referred to one of them now.
So, when it comes to election time, people will make their judgement, and my experience of the Australian people is that they are hard judges but they are fair judges, both on your record of what you've done, which is keeping this economy out of recession, protecting the jobs of hundreds of thousands of working families compare with the rest of the world, and then plans for the future - how we intend to deal with the health and hospital system.
It's going to be a huge debate about all these things. I understand that.
HOST: Mightn't it be that they just agree with you that you could have done better? You spent a week telling us that you really thought you could have done better. Do they just agree with you?
PM: Well, the point is that they will mark the Government, they'll mark me, on the basis of what we achieved and our plans for the future, and what I'm saying on that is that in terms of what we've achieved, keeping the economy strong, protecting hundreds of thousands of jobs of working families at a time when the rest of the world crashed into recession, that's not a bad achievement.
And, secondly, not just starting the reform of the health system now - we've increased our investment in the public hospitals of the country by 50 percent already, but this big plan for the future is about how do you deal with the deep surgery it needs for the long-term future? How they judge us in the end, John, that's a matter for the people - as it should be.
HOST: Do you agree that we're in a pseudo-election campaign already?
PM: You know, I presume people were in that frame of mind from the day after the last one. I don't know. My job in these limited, 3-year terms that we have here is to make use of every day to try and make a difference to working families' lives, and I am concerned - as we began this conversation today - about what's happening at the accident and emergency last night, what's happening for elective surgery today, have you got enough GPs in your area, are there enough medical specialists? And, last week, here at the Royal North Shore, to be there to see the opening of a PET scanner, I think the sixth in Sydney, which we funded directly, the Australian Government, which affects so many people-
HOST: -Didn't Tony Abbott approve that, though?
PM: Well, this is a really interesting story. What the locals have said to me is-
HOST: -He claimed to parliament he approved it.
PM: Yeah, well the Royal North Shore started making representations to them, that's the previous government, in 1997. I'm advised by the locals that Mr Abbott supported this on the eve of the last election in 2007. We actually funded it. We actually built it. We've installed it. We've opened it and it has been in operation now for one week. I think the locals are more concerned that it's there.
HOST: OK. So, you don't think you're rattled, because there are commentators lining up to say you're rattled.
HOST: Not only you, but let me say it, the party - panicked and irrational nervousness in the ranks about the next election.
PM: You know something? Political commentators will roll out there, say a whole bunch of things, and guess what? A lot of them may not like us, a lot of them may like us from time to time, a lot of them may loathe us for all the time - that's one of the great things about the democratic system which we are.
Our job is to get on with the business of governing, and on the question of having a debate health and hospitals reform, you know something? I welcome that with open arms. We have a plan for the future, it's clear cut, it's there, it's an extensive document. My opponent doesn't have a plan, and he has a record, and the record on health and hospitals is pretty damn awful.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for your time this morning.



PM: It's been good to be at this GP practice in Hornsby in Sydney to hear first-hand from the local GPs and local training GPs about their needs. I've listened very carefully to what the local GPs have had to say about their needs. Essentially, it goes down into two things, if I've got it right. One is there is simply not enough GPs at present and the second is that the biggest complaint from patients is not being able to get an appointment with your GP on time or your preferred GP on time.
That means we've got to deal with this whole question of the medical workforce, and that's why the Australian Government has been very clear-cut about what we intend to do, which is invest in an additional 6000 GP training places and specialist training places over the decade ahead. There's also another program, which we are increasing our investment in significantly. And that is called the junior doctors program, for want of a better term.
The junior doctors program currently runs at about 400 places a year. We're going to be increasing that to something close to 1000 a year. And that's to make sure that young doctors, once they've graduated from university, once they've done their term as interns within hospitals, can have experience here in real live GP practices out in regional Australia and suburban and rural Australia and regional Australia to get a taste of what GP practice is all about, and hopefully stay in GP practice as well. 
There is a huge undersupply of GPs across the country. This is an ageing medical workforce. And therefore, we need to get as much young blood in the system as possible. So the way in which we're going to do that is increase the number of training places for junior doctors, increase the number of training positions for GPs and increase of course the number of training positions for medical specialists.
I've also had the opportunity to talk to doctors here from the local hospital here at Hornsby Ku-ring-gai. And I've heard firsthand about the needs there, as well. I understand this is a significant hospital in terms of its overall beds, 200 plus. Medical staff, I think- have I got it right- of 130 odd. And the needs for hospitals like this to have a strong investment in their future. Under the Government's proposals, what we plan to do is for the first time in Australia's history, is for the Australian Government to become the dominant funders of the public hospital system in the country. The dominant funders of the recurrent needs and costs of hospitals like here at Hornsby Ku-ring-gai, the dominant funder for the first time of their capital needs, that's new buildings, plant and equipment, operating theatres and the rest. The dominant funders of also, their teaching, their training, and their research functions as well. In the past, the Australian Government provided 35 percent of the recurrent costs, zero per cent of the capital costs, zero percent of the equipment cost, and effectively zero percent of the teaching and training burden as well.
So for local hospitals like the one at Hornsby, it means that through our proposed new national health and hospitals network, we will become the dominant funding partners for hospitals like this in the future. Therefore, we believe the time for fundamental health and hospitals reform has come. With GP practices like this, so we can make sure we've got a proper GP-trained workforce into the future, but also for important local hospitals like this as well, so they are properly funded for their future as well. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Harris says that part of Hornsby hospital need to be bulldozed. Will your plan include enough money for that?
PM: Well, for the first time the Australian Government becomes the dominant funder of the capital needs of the system. I can't, for example, conduct an on-the-spot analysis about what part of the hospital, quote "needs to be bulldozed", and, quote "needs to be rebuilt". The planners will give us advice on that. But can I say this, for the first time, the Australian Government will be stepping in to the breach, and becoming the dominant funders of the capital needs of hospitals like the one at Hornsby. And of its equipment needs as well.
A lot of the public hospitals across Australia have become tired and old in terms of their plant and equipment. There are 764 public hospitals in Australia. This is one of them. And it's one of the bigger ones. Obviously, the big difference is us becoming the dominant funders, and we will look forward to providing, through that funding, better health and better hospital services for the people of this community as well.
JOURNALIST: You've spoken to a number of Premiers now about your plan. What signals are you getting that the states will agree to your plan, and what other sorts of things are they asking?
PM: We've had good discussions so far with the Premiers of New South Wales, the Premier of Queensland, the Premier of Victoria. That's just in the course of the last week. And in the middle of next week, I'll be heading over to Western Australia to see the Premier there as well. What I sense across the board with all the Premiers is a desire and a determination to move ahead with health and hospitals reform. Plainly, they have raised a number of questions where they want more information.
We have multiple official discussions underway now at the health level, at the treasury level, to work our way through those. But I would still urge and encourage each of them to come on board with fundamental national reform. Let me say one other thing. However, if we can't reach cooperative agreement with the states and the territories on our new national health and hospitals network, as I've said consistently, the Australian Government would then seek a further mandate from the Australian people in order to implement these reforms.
We believe the time has come. I don't think anybody out there is saying the system at present is good enough. People want better health and better hospital services nationwide. It's time we stopped talking about it, and getting on with it nationally.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, there's some concern that Western Sydney hospitals will suffer to (inaudible) they're so busy with emergency procedures that they don't have time to do any elective surgeries (inaudible).
PM: Can I say that there have been a number of scare campaigns launched by various state health bureaucrats in various parts of the country over the last couple of weeks. This is another one of them. Under our proposed funding model for hospitals for the future, including those in Western Sydney, where you've got big population growth, where you've got the delivery of many, many hospital services, those hospitals will benefit from the funding model that we've proposed, and be able to expand their services.
That's what we want to see. I think we've got to be very careful about separating out some fear-mongering on the one hand, from what's necessary for long-term reform of the system on the other to deliver better health, better hospital services for working families right across Australia, including in Western Sydney.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what rules would you like for your debate with the Opposition Leader over health?
PM: I'm pretty relaxed about all that. I'm sure others will sort that out. I think the good thing is this: we are going to have an opportunity to debate the future of the health and hospital system of Australia. The Government has put forward its plan, a new health and hospitals network. It'll be funded nationally, run locally through local hospital networks, and for the first time, the Australian Government taking the dominant funding responsibility for the public hospital system for the future. And we've detailed that in a 72 page plan. And since then, we've also announced a very large investment in 6000 additional medical personnel- doctors, GPs, specialists for the future. That's our plan.
Mr Abbott, of course, will have an opportunity to put forward his plan. That's why I look forward so much to the debate, because it'll be a debate about his record, our record of achievement, our plans for the future, his plans for the future when it comes to health and hospitals. This is fundamental for working families across Australia.
JOURNALIST: How does this marry with the idea of federalism and the states looking after their own affairs?
PM: I think it is important to enable the states and territories to get on with the business of providing the full range of their services. Let me give you one example. If we keep the system as it is at present, apart from delivering less GPs, less specialists, less nurses and can I say, less investment in hospitals like Hornsby in the future, there's one other disadvantage which flows as well, and that is that state budgets in the future cannot sustain the current growth in health and hospitals expenditure, let alone what will be needed in the future.
I think, various of the premiers have said to me, and have said publically, that without change, health and hospitals by itself will consume the entire state budgets of state governments around Australia over the next 20 to 30 years. In other words, not a buck left to do anything else. That is, for schools, for TAFEs, for transport systems, public transport, for road construction, or, for that matter, for law and order. So if you want the federation to work, it's really important that you, as an Australian Government, step in with the biggest single area of growth for the future, namely, health and hospitals expenditure, take on the dominant role, take on the dominant responsibility for the future growth of the system and allow the states and territories to have the financial capacity to deliver the other services for which they are responsible.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, other commentators have said that you came off second best during yesterday's Question Time stoush with Mr Abbott. What's your response to that?
PM: You know something? I value always, an opportunity to debate the future of the health and hospital system because working families across Australia not only want these matters debated, they want action on them as well.
Can I just say one other thing on the question of action? My political opponent, Mr Abbott, the Leader of the Opposition, was Health Minister of Australia for nearly five years, right up until 2007. And in that period of time he said that the Australian Government should take over the hospital system of Australia. Nothing happened.
Instead, what he did as Health Minister was rip a billion dollars out of the public hospital system. Instead what he did as Health Minister was put a cap on GP training places when he was Health Minister. He gave the Australian people a rock-solid, iron-clad guarantee that the Medicare Safety Net would not be touched. That only held up until the election because then it was fundamentally changed afterwards. And remember also, he was part of a Government which abolished the Commonwealth dental scheme, which left 650,000 people out there without any public dental care.
So on the question of compare and contrast, records of what's been done in the past, and plans for the future - I welcome future debates with Mr Abbott on the future of our health and hospital system. His record is not a flash one.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, are you confident that Australian uranium won't be used to produce weapons if we exported it to Russia?
PM: With Russia, we have of course, a country which has signed up to the relevant international instruments, legal instruments. And on top of that of course, we have our own bilateral safeguards arrangements with them as well.
Therefore, that is the system that we have applied in relation to all the other countries that we have exported uranium to for the last 20 to 30 years, and that'll apply in the case of the Russian Federation as well.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any idea what, how long Barack Obama will spend when he comes in June, and whether he can address a joint sitting of Parliament?
PM: The President and I had a good conversation this morning on the phone. He's, of course, sorry that he can't get to Australia right now. He wants to come back at a later stage with a bit more relaxed timing so he can bring Michelle and the kids. I said, 'I think Australians would like that as well'. The President of the United States is a welcome guest in Australia at any time, and that applies to President Obama as well.
But, you know something? A lot of our conversation focussed on health reform, both in Australia and in the United States. The President and I face a couple of challenges in common - the President is trying to bring about health and hospitals reform as I am in Australia and the President is facing a Senate which only seems to know one thing, which is to block reform. So, we had a bit of a conversation about those things.
JOURNALIST: And how important is the health policy for you, given the criticism you're facing over the insulation scheme and the school stimulus, especially in New South Wales?
PM: Look can I say that the Government is committed to keeping the economy strong, protecting hundreds of thousands of jobs of working families, and keeping Australia out of recession, unlike every other advanced economy, practically, in the world. And we did that through a national infrastructure stimulus plan, which provided hundreds of thousands of jobs in Australia and jobs growth in Australia, when you found, right around the rest of the world, millions of people losing their jobs.
That's the first thing. That's on the economy.
Our second commitment is this - to deliver the basics to working families: fair laws for their workplaces; investment in schools and lifting the standards of our schools through schemes like My School; and then, thirdly, delivering when it comes to improved health and hospital services for working families as well.
They are the priorities of the Government. We intend to get on with the business of doing it.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, can I just ask you - on the Senate, Telstra shares are doing really well at the moment (inaudible) plans split up Telstra. Will it pass the Senate before the election, and will you give a commitment that the Government is committed to that, and what would be your message to retail investors?
PM: First of all, I don't provide any advice to anyone of an investment nature. That is a matter for them and those who advise them. Secondly, our policy in relation to Telstra, our policy in relation to the National Broadband Network, has not changed one bit.
And, having, said that, I think I should conclude, but with one final comment about the state elections, which will be held in a couple of states around Australia tomorrow.
Can I say this: that both these state governments, both these state governments, both these state Labor governments, are good governments, but because they are long-serving Labor governments they will go into these elections as the underdogs. Can I say both these elections this weekend are likely to go down to the wire.
I think the people of Tasmania know that David Bartlett has delivered for them and that he has a plan for their future, a clear plan for their future. In South Australia, people know also that Mike Rann has delivered strongly for the South Australian economy, and in other areas as well, and he has laid out a very clear plan to keep South Australian moving ahead.
Both these governments, long-serving Labor governments, go into these elections as the underdogs, and these elections will go down to the wire.
Thanks, folks.



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Tonight is much more than the launch of the GenOne ad campaign.
Tonight is a snapshot of the changing times in our country.
We all have reason to have great belief and hope in what lies ahead for Indigenous Australians and indeed our nation as a whole.
Belief in the growing desire of all Australians to bring about overdue and crucial change.
And hope that our generation is witnessing the Closing of the Gap.
Eddie mentioned the Apology.
We know the Apology was not the end of the healing process.
It was only the beginning.
It was not about the Prime Minister of a country standing up and making a statement.
It was about the evolving cultural DNA of a nation finding its voice.
It started the building of momentum in our society - momentum which we must now maintain and even accelerate.
We must build on the growing recognition that Indigenous business is everyone's business.
Since the Apology, we have seen a renewed focus on creating opportunities for Indigenous people in this country.
Almost 12 months ago, the Australian Government officially endorsed the landmark United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Jenny Macklin said at the time that this was a step forward in "re-setting" the relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And this year we have committed our support for the establishment of the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples.
We have reason to be optimistic about where we are headed and I'll tell you why.
We are only three months into 2010 but we have already seen a number of events centered on building a new era in Indigenous engagement and opportunity.
The first was the inaugural rugby league match on the Gold Coast between the NRL All Stars team and the NRL Indigenous All Stars team in February.
Twiggy was there. And I'm sure he will join me in saying that it was a magnificent game, won by the Indigenous All Stars.
And it was a win off the field as well as on.
A couple of weeks later, we had the Indigenous Business Leaders' Forum in Parliament House.
The forum was all about how we can change attitudes and how business can get a better understanding of how to attract and, importantly, retain indigenous workers.
The response was overwhelming.
The room wasn't big enough for everyone who wanted to come.
We had to turn away 150 business leaders - such was the enthusiasm to get involved.
And that provided great encouragement for our new Government Ambassador for Business Action, Colin Carter, who will be working closely with Twiggy and others.
Colin has already visited corporate leaders across the country with the objective of bridging the gap between government and the private sector as we work towards the shared goal of growing Indigenous business.
Just a few days after the Business Leaders' Forum, I attended the opening of the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence here in Sydney.
If you haven't been over to have a look around at what I believe will be the launchpad for many great Indigenous leaders, I thoroughly recommend you go and visit Jason Glanville and his team.
The Indigenous Land Corporation has built a world-class education facility in Redfern that offers great practical help for young Indigenous Australians to reach their potential.
More importantly, it offers a place that allows them to envision new futures - like the futures that Jack and Tania have carved for themselves through hard work and the grasping of opportunities.
All these initiatives sent strong messages to our nation about what can be achieved by Indigenous Australians in the educational, sporting and business spheres.
And tonight we have GenerationOne.
A campaign which, as Twiggy has said, is all about taking responsibility, and changing hearts and minds.
The GenerationOne campaign will reach across our continent and across all sectors of our society.
It will send a strong message back to Indigenous Australians - that we want to create an Australia that values their achievements.
A nation that creates opportunities for those achievements to find purpose.
A nation that appreciates - equally - the hopes and aspirations of Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
I applaud the private sector for the GenOne initiative - in particular Andrew and Nicola Forrest, James Packer, Kerry Stokes and Lindsay Fox for their funding of the national campaign.
Of course, Twiggy was the brains behind The Australian Employment Covenant (AEC), which aims to secure 50,000 sustainable jobs for Indigenous Australians.
The AEC is about the Australian Government, employers and Indigenous people working together in partnership to provide Indigenous Australians - who are ready to turn their dreams into reality - the opportunity to do so.
But GenerationOne is taking the message a step further -- it's about getting out into the national conscience.
It is not enough to just get corporate Australia on board.
GenerationOne is about engaging all Australians to effect change.
And change will only come when we all change the way we think and act every single day of our lives.
Only then can we relegate the divide between non Indigenous and Indigenous Australians to history.
This launch is a step in the right direction.
As a Government we have always been upfront about calling for partners across the community in strengthening our work to Close the Gap.
Disadvantage is hard to reconcile in such a prosperous nation as ours.
The Australian identity is defined by the concept of the 'fair go'.
There are too many Indigenous Australians who don't get a fair go.
Too many who battle prejudice or lack of understanding and lack the basic opportunities of education and training.
The GenerationOne campaign is about rectifying that.
Just as government cannot tackle this problem alone, nor can pure philanthropic endeavour.
The bottom line is we're all Australians, and we are all in this together.
As I said at the outset, there is a cultural shift underway in Australia.
A shift in perceptions and a belief in the reality that Indigenous Australians deserve the same opportunities as non Indigenous Australians.
This campaign will help harness these changing attitudes.
Because in this campaign all Australians can participate, regardless of their political views and background. 
If you are already active you can do more.
If you have never participated in a movement, you can make a start now and play a simple role to create real change.
I applaud the captains of industry throughout our nation who are passionate about effecting change.
I wish Generation One every success in inspiring that passion in others.


School Principal: It is now my pleasure to introduce our own Member for Ballarat who is certainly a supporter of education in Ballarat, Catherine King.
Catherine King: This is the 21st Community Cabinet to be held by the Rudd Labor Government and I am absolutely delighted that they have chosen Ballarat for the 21st one. The Prime Minister and his senior Cabinet colleagues in a school hall with 500 people engaged in a community, a completely open agenda, it is just absolutely fantastic to see democracy at work.
Prime Minister: In the street this afternoon in Sturt St with Catherine King talking to local people and getting a sense of what people are talking about in this community and some of the things they think we are getting right and some of the things we might be getting wrong. Which brings me to why we are here tonight for a Community Cabinet such as this.
Community Cabinets are about one thing, and that is to ensure that the Government that you have elected in Canberra remains in touch with you as members of the community here at the local level.
Question: Thank you Prime Minister, I am John Fitzgibbon, General Manager of 3BA a local radio station. For the last 20 years we have worked with four local charities to run a Christmas appeal that provides food and food hampers and toys to local families. The last three years we have seen about a 250% increase in families seeking assistance at Christmas. I guess with increasing household costs, increasing utilities costs, food costs and so forth - what is this government planning to do to, to reduce the divide between the haves and the have-nots?
Minister Macklin: Right across the board we have got organisations contributing to making sure that those people who are doing it very very hard in our community have some support. When we saw the Global Financial Crisis really coming down the barrel at us as a country we doubled the amount of money we made available for emergency relief and of course have been getting that out through organisations like St Vincent de Paul, the Salvation Army and so on.
Question: You spoke before about best educational opportunities and that is what I want to ask you a question about. There is a large body of research on early brain development that shows very clearly that 80% of language development occurs between the ages of zero and three.
Prime Minister: So we are quite passionate about this because we have seen it. That is why we talk about building the education revolution. We say early childhood education, we say primary school education, we say secondary schools, we say trades training centres, we talk about universities, we talk about rocket science, research, innovation, R&amp;D. It's the whole spectrum.
But unless you get those first building blocks right, it is really hard.
Prime Minister: Thank you also to those of you who are community leaders here, many from local government who I have had the privilege of meeting with earlier today and to many other community organisations and for your leadership here to make a difference, things don't happen in communities by magic, someone makes them happen - that's what a community leader is.
So whether you are the folks from the Salvos up the back or the folks from local government over here, or the wonderful woman over here who is doing the work with Aboriginal kids at the breakfast group, homework group, I'm sorry. Frankly it all makes a difference and all of these are the product of leadership.
Comment 1: It is a great opportunity to engage with people and to actually hear the systemic issues as Joanne said and to actually hear that broader community perspective.
Comment 2: Well we are from the Woady Yaloak Landcare Catchment Group - one of the best in the country.
We are hoping to be able to have some influence in government attitudes towards environmental issues and landscape change in right across the board.
Comment 3: My reason for coming is because I am committed to Indigenous education. I work in the area at the University Of Ballarat and I was interested to see what the Prime Minister had to say.
They seemed to be right across their portfolios without having advisers there to tell them what to do which I thought was interesting.
I think it is a really good idea. I don't think the public get to meet their federal politicians enough.
Comment 4: I think it is a good idea.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


Prime Minister: In the future where we see these reforms going is to, as an Australian Government, fund these local hospital networks directly in order that they will have secure, long-term funding to deliver the best possible services to the people of these communities - that's why, the system again, a National Health and Hospital Network funded nationally, run locally though local hospital networks to make these decisions work on the ground.
We've also seen this morning how some of the practical measures that we've taken so far are beginning to take effect.
Outside we saw the evidence of the construction of the new teaching facility, which we are co-funders as the Australian Government. What does that mean? It means that for local hospital networks and local hospitals like this we can bring in the teaching services which are necessary here in this part of Melbourne relevant to the needs of this community. And so what you'll have there is the onsite clinical training of doctors, the onsite clinical training of nurses in much greater numbers than we've ever had before, and we're proud to be co-investors in that.
Under the new National Health and Hospitals Network the Australian Government will become the dominant funders of those sorts of facilities in the future.
Of course the other areas where we've got some runs on the board is the expansion of the operating theatres that we've seen here today as well at Sunshine.
The fact that we're able to invest already several million dollars in building a new operating theatre, enhancing the existing one to lift the overall throughput of this hospital.
We as the Australian Government would take on the dominant funding responsibility for the future expansion of operating theatres and the future expansion of hospitals themselves like the one here at Sunshine; that's why we need to get this reform done.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


The Australian Government today announced it would contribute $500,000 to the Queensland Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal Fund to assist the victims of the recent Queensland floods.
The donation will match the Queensland Government's contribution which was announced by Premier Bligh on 4 March 2010 and is in addition to assistance already being provided by the Commonwealth through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) and the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP).
The Australian Government is already providing assistance to Queensland through personal hardship and distress payments, clean up and recovery grants for small businesses and primary producers as well as through the restoration of essential public infrastructure and counter disaster operations.
Individuals requiring assistance through the NDRRA should contact the Queensland Department of Communities' Disaster Relief Assistance Scheme hotline on 1800 173 349.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) of $1,000 per adult and $400 per child has also been made available to eligible residents affected by the recent flooding in Balonne, Quilpie, Western Downs, Murweh, Maranoa, Bulloo and Paroo council areas in south-west Queensland.
Information about the AGDRP can be obtained through the Australian Government's south-west Queensland floods hotline on 180 2122.
The Australian Government will continue to work closely with Queensland authorities, local government and community organisations to ensure that affected communities have all the support they need during this period.
Individuals seeking to contribute to the Queensland Premier's Disaster Relief Appeal Fund can make donations by calling 1800 173 349.


Congratulations to the Royal Australasian College of Physicians for organising this prestigious World Congress here in Melbourne.
I want to begin by recognising the absolute importance of the medical profession to this country's future. We have one of the finest medical professions in the world, albeit a profession currently under great pressure. When we look across out nation and recognise how well we are served by our doctors, by our nurses, by our specialists, indeed this is a good country to be in, but it is a profession under great challenge.
It is also a profession where Australian families are so critically dependant. Every year, almost 87% of Australians see a doctor, with over 286 million services provided. This includes 111 million GP attendances and 22.7 million specialist attendances. This means our medical profession in busy indeed. The challenge we all face is to make sure that this profession in appropriately supported for the future.
But what I'd say, personally, to each one of you who represents a profession from both at home and abroad is how much we, in the Australian Government, appreciate your professional expertise. There's nothing more fundamental than a properly functioning health and hospital system and within it a medical profession whose standing in the community remains high and a profession in which the community places legitimate and continuing trust.
Can I also say, when it comes to physicians themselves, I also have some appreciation of the role that you play within hospitals. Yes, I've watched most of the editions of ER. I do know that surgeons play a critical of the role within hospitals. I also understand that physicians have a role to play as well, which is, some would say, equally if not more critical.
I'm a Prime Minister with extensive medical experience myself - I've worked for nine months as a wardsman at the Canterbury hospital in Sydney. You laugh - can I tell you that on those occasions I remember being told what to do much more by physicians than by surgeons and can I just tell you also I'm sure I deserved it as well.
For those of you who've come from abroad, welcome to Australia and welcome to this great and truly international city of Melbourne. You are welcome guests in this city. You are welcome guests in this country. I'm not a native of this city, so I say it with complete Australian objectivity - this is a truly wonderful city and my only caution or advice to you of those of you who have come from abroad who are choosing to drive while you're here in Melbourne: if you see a sign which says you can turn right by veering left, I suggest to you take appropriate council from one of the locals, pause briefly and pray.
As you will be aware from developments over the last several days, including in the last few hours, health debate and health reform debate is critical right across the world, most particularly, at present, in the United States. Like America, Australia is engaging in a crucially important debate on the future of our health and hospitals system.
Ours is a different debate to America's.
For almost three decades Australia has already benefited from a universal health care system. The establishment of Medicare is one of the proudest achievements of the Australian Government of the 1980s, and it has provided high-quality health care for the Australian people, but 30years later, our health and hospitals system is again under pressure and facing new pressures.
Only a few months after coming to office two years ago, the Government commissioned the most comprehensive review of our health system in 20 years. That report prepared by Dr Christine Bennett and members of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission concluded that the health and hospitals system would not be able to cope with the escalating challenges in the future. These challenges include:
     * the ageing of our population;
     * the explosion in chronic diseases;
     * the proper planning for our medical workforce;
     * the cost of medical research and its clinical and pharmaceutical application; and
     * consistent with challenges facing policy makers right across the world, how do you go about funding the system sustainably into the future?
As our health reform Commission said, in its report, the Australian system is at tipping point. For the system to be truly sustainable and to provide first -class health care for all Australians into the future it a system which must be reformed. That is why the Australian Government has committed to the most sweeping reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare.
These reforms are ambitious. These reforms are long overdue. The time for incremental change has long past.
We propose a new National Health and Hospital Network that is funded nationally and is run locally.
For the first time in the history of our country, the Australian Government will take on the dominant funding responsibility for the entire public hospital system.
For the first time the Australian Government will taken on the dominant funding role for all hospital services including their recurrent needs, their capital needs, their equipment needs, their teaching needs and their training needs.
We would take on the responsibility for the full funding and policy responsibility for GP and health care services.
We would set national standards and require transparent reporting for the health and hospital system nationally.
We would devolve responsibility for public hospital management to Local Hospital Networks - run by clinical management, as well as financial professionals and health management professionals.
We would pay Local Hospital Networks directly for the services they provide through nationally consistent activity based funding, and to fund the above, we would dedicate around one third of the Goods and Services Tax, the Australian consumption tax, to provide a sustainable funding base for the health and hospital system for the long-term future.
Reform now may be fine - ensuring that it is financially sustainable in the long-term is equally critical. As I said before, the time for incremental reform has long passed.
The Australian Government's decision to take on the dominant funding role for the entire hospital system is also designed to deal with waste and duplication and overlap between those between the two levels of government. This can be done by properly integrating the various arms of health care, from preventative care, through primary care, through hospital acute base care, to post-acute care, to aged care. This is a better outcome, therefore, in terms of coordinated care for patients but also a better use of the taxpayers' dollar as well.
We believe these reforms are necessary for the future. However, for these reforms to have effect they must also deal with the challenges that face our medical workforce.
For too long the future needs of our medical workforce have not been properly planned. The time for change has well and truly come.
Last week, I announced a $632 million investment in training additional medical specialists - more than 6,000 more doctors over the next decade ahead.
The Government inherited a situation where 6 in 10 Australians lived in an area where there were shortages of available doctors.
According to the Health Department, just to maintain current levels of services as far as GP and primary care services are concerned, it is estimated that an additional 3,000 GPs will be needed by 2020.
In addition, the Australian Health Workforce Advisory Committee and medical colleges indicate that there will be a shortage of around 1,280 specialists over the course of the next decade as well.
Rightly, there's been much focus on GPs, as we know that they are the frontline of care. The package that the Government has announced will double the number of places available for medical graduates to train to become GPs from 600 when the Government took office to 1,200, starting with an increase of 900 for the years immediately ahead.
Importantly for physicians, we are also doubling the current number of places available for medical graduates who undertake training to become specialist doctors and providing that in private, community and rural settings, increasing the number from 360 in 2010 up to an annual figure of 900.
Given the nature of a gathering such as this we're not simply talking about an addition to the number of specialist training places beyond public hospitals. I emphasise again what I said before - for the first time in the country's history, the Australian Government will be taking on the dominant funding role when it comes to the teaching and training functions of our public hospital system as well. We are, therefore, serious to get the workforce planning challenge right.
As I announced three weeks ago, we will be taking our plan to the States and Territory Governments when the Council of Australian Governments meets in April. In recent days I have been having discussions with the various State Premiers and Chief Ministers, and Nicola Roxon with the Health Ministers of Australia in the States and Territories. Our message to them has been very simple: work with us, work with the medical profession - who want reform, work with the nursing profession - who want reform, and let's get this reform done.
In partnership, we can deliver better health and better hospital services for working families right across Australia, but if the states and territories choose not to sign up, then we will seek a further mandate from the Australian people by or at the next election in order to give the Commonwealth the powers necessary to implement these reforms.
As many of you will be aware, tomorrow I will be debating the future of our health and hospital system with the Leader of the Opposition. This is an important debate.
I welcome the opportunity of putting the Government's record in its two years in office and its plans for the future on the table and to do the same with the Leader of the Opposition - his record, 12 years in office, 5 years as Health Minister and his plans for the future as well.
In fact, my opponent, Mr Abbott, was one of Australia's longest serving Health Ministers - in fact, as Health Minister for twice as long as the current Government has been in office.
I welcome giving Australians the opportunity to scrutinise not just our respective records on health and hospitals, but also our plans for the future as well.
The entry point for a debate such as this is to have a fully costed, fully funded policy for the future - a fully costed, fully funded health and hospitals policy for the future.
The Government is clear and I look forward to debating, very much, my political opponent's fully funded and fully costed policy as well.
In politics, as in any other walk of life, it is easy to criticise everything and to propose nothing and that goes for the health and hospital policy debate as well.
Given the centrality of health and hospitals for the future, this will be a dominant debate between now and the next election, and so it should be and I look forward to the opportunity, at any place, at any time, to debating the future of our health and hospital system, because this is such a central debate for our country's future.
Because of entrenched opposition, both at the federal political level and in some cases at the state bureaucratic level, the Australian Government's proposal for a National Health and Hospitals Network is likely to encounter considerable resistance.
Nonetheless, the Government will not be deterred, because Australia can no longer tolerate delay on these urgent reforms.
The Government has been encouraged by the level of support it has received from the profession and from the community.
Of course, there's a wide range of views on the details of the reforms. That will be the case with an area as complex as the health system, but the overwhelming message that we're hearing from experts, from business and from those on the front line of health care is that this is a good plan and let's just get on with it.
The President of the AMA has said that the policy is a credible response to the problems and deficiencies in the public hospital system and is evidence that there has been considerable consultation with patients and doctors. The Federal Secretary of the Australian Nursing Federation, Ged Kearney, has said much the same.
The Australian Health and Hospitals Association has described our plan, as I quote them, "a workable, well thought out plan for the health system."
The Royal Australasian College of Surgeons has said that:
"An advocate of single source funding for Australian public hospitals, the College believes such a proposal would add transparency to a system which has been too easily manipulated in the past."
These remarks and others like them from professional bodies within the health profession right across the country demonstrate a wide consensus about the need for reform, about the need to end the blame game and the need, simply, to get on with it.
It is time now that as a nation we undertook this fundamental reform.
As I said at the outset, the National Health and Hospitals Network would be funded nationally and run locally, with the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the Australian public hospital system for the first time in our history.
As many of you will be aware, the Australian Government undertook health forums in the middle of last year to engage with clinicians, patients and the wider community about the future of our health and hospitals system.
There were more than 100 public hospital forums held across the nation, in every State and every Territory. I personally attended 21 of these - at least one, and sometimes more, in each State and each Territory.
One of the clearest messages I've heard was that too many of our local clinical leaders are not adequately involved in decisions about the delivery of health and hospital services in their local communities, where they invariably know best. That is why we will be establishing Local Hospital Networks, to coordinate and plan the delivery of a comprehensive set of services within a recognised community of interest.
The Networks will comprise small groups of hospitals with a geographic or functional connection. Functional often, invariably, with a relevant tertiary hospital, but which are large enough to operate efficiently and provide a range of hospital services within the network itself.
These are not individual local hospital boards.
Alongside the need for greater involvement from local clinicians and local communities in running our hospitals, the overwhelming view of clinicians is that we must deliver health services in a coordinated way.
Where health care is tailored to the patient, there should be proper coordination across primary, across acute and across post-acute settings.
The present system sees too many patients being shunted around between self-contained systems or silos, one controlled by the State, the other by the Federal, or sometimes an ungodly-cocktail of the above. Patients themselves often fall in between the cracks.
The integration of services that will be facilitated by Local Hospital Networks is critical at a time when there is a much greater range of health services being delivered. It is also critical to dealing with the rise of chronic disease where patients have a much more and complex set of needs which they need to rely upon across hospitals, community settings and in their own homes as well.
For patients, there is a widespread sense of exhaustion, of being run around from one health service to another because of the lack of coordination and care within our system.
If we were to return to the days of individual local hospital boards, rather than integrated local hospital networks we would have a recipe for even greater fragmentation of our health and hospitals system: hospitals fighting against each other for resources; patients with more complex needs getting second-rate care and not getting the full range of services they need.
At the other extreme, there are proponents of very large health areas and health regions which are often too remote from local needs. Simply put, regional health services are not capable of tailoring services to local needs and often stifle local innovation and flexibility which is capable of improving health services on the ground in local communities.
By contrast, we argue that by establishing local hospital networks we will provide a much greater role for local clinical leadership and respond to local needs while at the same time having sufficient critical mass to deliver a range of services in a properly coordinated manner.
The second key area of the Government's plan is to pay local hospital networks directly for each service they provide rather than simply providing block funding grants to the States.
Under the Government's plan for the national health and hospitals networks, which we have clearly explained in the relevant documentation produced a couple of weeks ago, local hospital networks will be paid a price that reflects appropriate loading for their locality and the complexity of the patients they serve. The price will be determined by an independent umpire and country prices will not be set by city assumptions.
Since as early as March 2008, the Commonwealth and States both agreed to develop activity based funding. We made it clear that we would ensure the viability of small, regional and rural hospital services, and this is what we'll deliver on through the funding model that the Government will employ.
By paying hospitals directly for the services they deliver, we'll no longer be stuck with funding arrangements that are years out of date. Instead, hospital financing will have the flexibility to adjust to changing conditions, such as:
     * changes in population growth;
     * changes in demographics; and
     * changes in the health care costs due to clinical and technological innovation.
It will also enable local clinical leaders to respond with flexible local solutions which fully harness local expertise and experience, rather than mechanically applying a state-wide or even nation-wide template approach to each element of service delivery.
By paying local hospital networks directly, it will also enable local clinical leaders to respond with flexible local solutions which fully harness local expertise and efficiencies.
For the Government's reform plan to succeed, it must be properly funded.
In 1995-1996, the Commonwealth share of public hospital funding was 45 per cent of all Government funding of public hospitals. It remained around this level through to the early 2000s and then began to decline.
In 2002-03 it fell to 43 per cent. Two years later, in 2004-05, it was down to 40 per cent. Two years later, in 2006-07, it was down to 37 per cent.
The First Intergenerational Report was released by the Commonwealth Treasury in 2002. The report said, loud and clear, that to meet the needs of an ageing population health spending must rise, not fall. That is why in the Government's first two years in office, we took immediate action on that, increasing the Australian Government's allocation to the public hospitals run by the States by 50 percent to a record $64 billion dollars. That is why we took early action to increase the number of GP training places by 35 percent. That is why, for the first time, the Government has already begun to invest directly in the capital needs of the hospital system around the country, including here in Melbourne at the new facility at Parkville in which the Australian Government is contribution $426 million, some 50 percent of the capital needs for this integrated cancer care centre which will be one of the best, not just in Australia, but the world.
This is the action we've undertaken in our first two years but looking ahead to the future we must have sustainable funding for the long-term future in order to give effect to these reforms.
Under this Government's policy, the Australian Government will, for the first time, as I noted before, become the dominant funder of the entire system. This 60 percent stake equates to some $11 billion per year from next year.
We will fund 60 per cent of recurrent expenditure on research and training functions undertaken in public hospitals. We'll fund 60 per cent of the capital expenditure - both operating and planned new capital equipment - to maintain and improve public hospital infrastructure.
This commitment by the Australian Government is unprecedented. No previous Australian Government has ever attempted any responsibility for funding hospital infrastructure, let alone taking on the dominant responsibility for hospital infrastructure in the future.
Critically, the Australian Government will shoulder responsibility for the lion's share of future growth in the system as well.
This is important not only to ensure we can deliver better health and hospitals into the future, but also to underwrite the financial sustainability of our federation. We calculate that by taking on this greater funding burden, we will also be assuming $15 billion of additional funding that would otherwise be borne by the States.
Without policy change, under current trends spending on health and hospitals would consume the entire revenue raised by State Governments over the next 20 to 30 years to the exclusion of any spending on any other critical portfolio area, such as education, transport and law and order - such is the rate of increase in health and hospital expenditure that governments are currently facing.
To conclude, I believe that reform of the health and hospital system is one of the greatest long-term challenges facing our country. We must get this right, because it will have an impact on every single Australian at various stages of their lives. Every day, hundreds of thousands of Australians rely on our health and hospital system to provide quality care for themselves and for their families.
I am determined to implement the reforms we need so that Australians can be confident in the quality of the health care that they receive in the future and of the funding that underpins that health care system for the future as well.
We are under no illusions whatsoever as to the magnitude of this task, but the size of the task is no excuse to push it to one side simply because the degree of political difficulty may be great.
The Australian Government wants a working partnership - it wants to work in partnership with the Sate and Territory Governments, with health professional organisations, including the peak bodies such as the Royal Australasian College of Physicians and the wider community.
We cannot put off reform any longer.
You, as leading physicians in the Australian community, are key agents of change. Your voice must be added to this national debate as well. If it is done so, if it is done effectively in partnership with the Australian Government and all other branches of the profession which wish to see fundamental and sustainable reform of our health and hospital system for the future then we will prevail.
The Australian Government is determined to take that action.
I thank you. 


PM: I'm going to say a few things about the storms here in WA, then about Senator Minchin, then I'll go onto health and hospitals, if that's OK, and then take your questions.
I've just been talking to the Premier now about the terrible storms that have happened here in WA over the last little while. These have brought about a lot of damage, a lot of destruction, a lot of hardship, to a lot of people and behalf of the Australian Government we'd like to express our real sense of solidarity with people here in WA about what they've been going through.
Today, the Australian Government has decided to provide financial assistance to Western Australia through the West Australian Government, through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements. The following assistance is being made available to 33 disaster-declared local government areas: emergency assistance for people who have suffered personal hardship or distress, support to local governments and state agencies for the restoration or replacement of essential public infrastructure, and interest rate subsidies for small business and professional advice grants, interest rate subsidies and other measures for primary producers.
These are all available on the relevant contact numbers for the relevant government agencies and will be up on the Australian Government's website as of now, and that is, they can be had through www.fesa.wa.gov.au or the Australian Government website, as is appropriate.
The Commonwealth Government, through Emergency Management Australia, will continue to work closely with the WA authorities, local governments and community organisations to ensure that affected communities have all the support they need through this difficult period.
Again, all I could say, as someone, like Wayne, who comes from Queensland, we've been through some pretty rough storms ourselves over the years. I understand from the locals this has been very violent and caused a lot damage, a lot of hardship and a lot of distress, so our thoughts and our feelings are with the good people of WA as they've been through that, and we're here to provide this practical level of support to those disaster-affected areas.
Secondly, I've just been advised that Senator Nick Minchin from South Australia has indicated that he will not be recontesting the next federal election. Though Nick and I are on different sides of politics, could I express my recognition of his long service to the Australian Senate, his long service to the Australian Parliament, and, of course, his long service to the Liberal Party of Australia. As it happens, Nick and I went to the same university college together years and years ago; I'm also happy to say he was there a little earlier than I was, but I wish he and his family well in his decision to embark upon a new career, or a new period in his professional life.
I now go on to the question of health and hospitals.
The Treasurer, Wayne Swan, and I have just had good meetings with both the Premier of WA and of course with the Treasurer as well. With Premier Colin Barnett I've had good discussions. We've now been in meetings for the last couple of hours on the future of the health and hospital system nationally and the health and hospital system here in West Australia.
We've had a good discussion; a positive discussion; a substantive discussion; there's still a lot of work to be done. I want to work with all the premiers, Labor and Liberal, from states large and small right across Australia to get an outcome for working families wanting better health and better hospital services for the future.
Families right across Australia, pensioners and carers, are depending on political leaders to put their differences to one side and to get on with the business of bringing about better health and better hospital services for the future, and that's why I've been here in the west today. That's why earlier I've met also with the Premier of Victoria when I was in Melbourne, the Premier of New South Wales when I was in Sydney and of course with the Premier of Queensland, Anna Bligh.
The Premier of Western Australian, Colin Barnett, and I will probably meet again between now and when COAG is scheduled to convene on 19 April, and our officials and our treasurers will be also meeting in the period ahead to try and iron out remaining difficulties or disagreements between us.
We've made some progress today. It's been a good discussion, a positive discussion, and I look forward to that continuing in the weeks remaining between now and when COAG is held.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Mr Barnett says that the GST is the state's money (inaudible) the Commonwealth is funding its program out of the state's money. Where (inaudible)
PM: I think what Col and I both agree with is that the GST is the taxpayers' money, and the taxpayers of Australia and families right across Australia want us to make sure that we're delivering better health and better hospital services.
We've had a good discussion about the revenue side of this and how this policy is funded into the future. We've also had a good discussion about the structure of the system for the future as well - the operation of local hospital networks - but it's all, at the end of the day, about one thing: delivering better health and hospital services to working families here in the west and right across the nation.
As I said, it was a good, substantive conversation.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh, we've still got a number of things to iron out, I think that's fair to say. I think there are areas we achieved some clarification on how the system would operate in the future under the new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally but run locally, and that's critical. For the first time the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding responsibility for the public hospital system - its recurrent needs, its capital needs, its equipment needs, its teaching needs, its training needs - in the past, the Australian Government has not stepped up to the plate on this enough.
In fact, at the time we took office the Australian Government's total funding role for the public hospital system across Australia had shrunk right down to 37 percent, and, you know, in the past, or as of right now, the Australian Government's paying effectively 0 percent for the capital needs of the system, 0 percent for the equipment needs, 0 percent for the teaching and training needs.
We need to change that because states like WA are growth states. They've got a huge number of challenges in the future, like building enough infrastructure. Because this is such a tearaway piece of cost for the future, that is the health and hospital system, you need the Australian Government to step in and take a more dominant role - that's what we're proposing to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: He's about so tall, nice guy, he sort of-
JOURNALIST: -Which premier do you think will be the (inaudible)
PM: Look, can I say my job as Prime Minister is to work productively and positively with all the premiers; Labor, Liberal, from whichever state, in order to bring about an agreement for better health and better hospitals for working families.
Premier Barnett will logically put forward the interests of WA, as have the premiers of Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland, those I've met most recently.
We've still got a ways to go but there's still quite a number of weeks to go before we convene at COAG, but can I say we're making some progress, but there's still areas of disagreement and I've worked with Colin Barnett over many, many meetings now on many, many different challenges which he faces over here. We've been in partnership in the Ord, we're in partnership right at the new port development at Oakajee, partnership, I think, with a new construction in the middle of the city here at Northbridge, partnership also with the additional investment we've put into the Australian Healthcare Agreement already. The Midlands Hospital - we're investors there, I think, to the tune of $180 million.
JOURNALIST: The Premier has said that the hospitals are state-owned and built and operated and the states won't want to hand them over, but you're indicating hospitals will be state-operated, in a sense.
PM: Well, what I've said consistently since the release of the new National Health and Hospitals Network is that, of course, the hospital system, the ownership of the hospital system, remains within the province of the states. Nothing new in that. What we're concerned about is how do you deliver the future funding necessary to make sure that we're delivering the best possible health and hospital services to families, pensioners and carers right across Australia.
Right now, let me give you one example: the GST is growing at about 6 percent per annum, a bit less than that. Health and hospital budgets around the country run by the states and territories are growing at 11 percent per annum. The gap is getting bigger, and therefore a crunch is going to come. In fact, what we know from the Intergenerational Report is that if we don't fundamentally change the system, health budgets alone, hospital budgets alone, will effectively overwhelm state budgets completely over the next 20-30 years, making it impossible for them to fund other key priorities like in transport, like in law and order, like in infrastructure - that's why we need this fundamental change.
JOURNALIST: Have you had any update on the Stern Hu trial in China?
PM: I've had no further reports, other than to say that our consular officials in Shanghai continue to monitor the trial closely, and secondly for me to say, as I've said before, that it's not just Australia who's watching this trial very closely, but I think the eyes of the world are focussed on the way in which this trial is conducted and what happens as a result of it.
JOURNALIST: When do you expect a verdict, Prime Minister?
PM: The Chinese legal system is vastly different from the Australian legal system. As I said, we will be watching this very closely.
JOURNALIST: Are you willing to negotiate WA's share in overall GST in order to gain the support of the Premier?
PM: What we need to do is to make sure that we've got the funding necessary to deliver the best health and hospital services for families here in the west for the future - not just for next year, but for 10 years ahead, 20 years ahead, 30 years ahead. We've made our calculation in terms of the overall funding that will be necessary to do this. It's contained in the policy document we put out already.
We've also said this - that the Australian Government would take on the lion's share of the growth in the health and hospital system's funding for the future as well. Across the states, that means the Australian Government taking onto its shoulders about $15 billion worth of responsibility, which would otherwise be borne by the states. That's $15 billion which can be invested in other priorities, like transport infrastructure.
In the case of WA, that probably, over a 5-year period, equates to $1.7 billion that we the Australian Government will become responsible for funding which would otherwise have to be funded by the WA Government. Now, I want the good people of WA to get the best services they can from both levels of government, but I think this is one way we can do it.
JOURNALIST: It's obviously rare for both yourself and the Treasurer to be in WA at the same time. Why is it that Mr Swan's accompanied you on this trip?
PM: We like WA. There was a flight heading over this way. In fact, it was our flight.
Look, these are important discussions, and they affect the future of the health and hospital system for a couple of million people in this part of the world, this part of Australia, part of the Australian family. Secondly, it affects the future of public finance. You've got to get both those things right together, which is why we've had a team of officials with us specialising in health, specialising in public finance, and we've had a good couple of hours worth of discussions with out counterparts today - there's more to be done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Is it the Government's intention to process people off the island to make way for the new arrivals?
PM: Look, my advice is that we still continue to have capacity available on Christmas Island.
As I've said before, we deal with each challenge as it arises, as governments have done before us, as the Howard Government had to when, following the war in Afghanistan and following the Iraq war, you saw changes as well. In the lead up to those wars you saw outflows of refugees. Each government of Australia has to deal with the challenges they face. Most recently, we've faced an outflow from Sri Lanka.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott wants to debate you on the asylum seekers issue next week. Will you do that?
PM: Can I say that I'm focussed 100 percent on health and hospitals. That's why I'm happy to have a debate with Mr Abbott on health and hospitals. We are now focussed fully on that right through to the Council of Australian Governments meeting, and I would strongly suggest that Mr Abbott remain focussed on health and hospitals as well.
Working families, pensioners, carers, right across Australia, every state of the Commonwealth, they want better health and better hospital services, and they want politicians of all political persuasion, all levels of government, to start cooperating on getting that outcome.
I think people are getting a bit sick and tired of the finger pointing and they want instead for politicians to point the way ahead on health and hospitals.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm not familiar with those reports. I can't comment, I'm sorry. No, I haven't seen the reports at all.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, under your proposals, who will ultimately be responsible for hospitals? Will it be the state (inaudible)
PM: When it comes to the adequacy of the funding of the system, you've got, for the first time, the Australian Government becoming the dominant funders of the system.
When I said, prior to the last election, under the future of the health and hospital system of Australia the buck would stop with me, I meant it, and that means that you've got to take responsibility to ensure that our system is properly funded for the future.
Now, we've said that we want a National Health and Hospitals Network which is funded nationally but run locally - run locally through local hospital networks here in Perth, beyond Perth into the regional and rural areas of Western Australia as well, so that you've got doctors and nurses who will have a much greater role in making decisions about the delivery of health services to their local communities
What I've discovered as I've travelled around the country and spoken to, for example, the local hospital in Geraldton, I conducted a consultation there for several hours a number of months ago listening carefully to what the local specialists and doctors were saying. They were saying to me two things: one, make sure this system is funded properly; and second, make sure that those at the local level, at the coal face where the actual health services are delivered have as much say as possible in how it's done.
We think we've got the balance right with this but we've still got a ways to go between now and COAG.
JOURNALIST: Will you have Mr Barnett on board on the hospital plan by the 19th?
PM: Can I say that I look forward to many conversations with Colin between now and the 19th. As I said, we will probably end up meeting again between now and the 19th, either in the fair city of Perth or the fair city of Canberra, and we'll continue talking.
It's been a good start to these discussions. We've made some substantive progress this morning. Still some areas to work our way through, but, as I've said before, my job as Prime Minister is to spend as much time as is necessary with premiers of all political parties right across the country to get the best deal possible for working families for health and hospitals.
Having said that, folks, I'm already half an hour late to one of your local hospitals. Better go.


PM: It's good to be here with Tim Hammond, who's our candidate for the seat of Swan, and good to be here at Bentley Clinic, which is run by the Canning Division of General Practice. It's been good to see what is done on the ground here by General Practice. What we have is flexible out-of-hours services provided by GPs after five, and using these premises to provide specialist services during working hours for patients who need it from this wider community.
It's a good example of what divisions of General Practice are already doing on the ground in terms of providing good, generalised health care for the community. I've been impressed with the conversations I've had with the staff here and what they are seeking to do in preventative care and primary care and also in chronic disease management for patients.
Of course, this is part and parcel of where the Australian Government wants to take the new national health and hospital network, which is why I'm in WA at the present. The new national health and hospital network will be funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding role for the entire Australian public hospital system.
But one other arm of what we're doing is this - that is, for the Australian Government to take on total funding responsibility for primary health care. That's what GPs do in the community, and that's what allied health professionals, so many of them represented here, do in the community as well. Because, unless we get that arm of health care right, as well as the hospitals, as well as aged care, we are bringing about an incomplete reform, and we need to deal with an integrated reform of the entire system.
Therefore, we will be seeking to learn from the experiences here at this Bentley Clinic in terms of where we take primary health care reform in the future.
The other point I'd make is this: reforming primary health care, reforming the hospital system - I went to Princess Margaret's kids hospital yesterday - reforming aged care, all of this only works if you're also making sure you're delivering the lifeblood of the system, which is the future medical workforce of the country as well. GPs here are the lifeblood of the local delivery of health services to this community.
We've looked at the figures. Without any change, this country will be short of 3,000 GPs over the course of the next decade, and that's just to maintain existing health services provided by GPs, before we even start to improve them.
GPs in rural areas are complaining, in many cases entirely legitimately, of being burnt out. You find the same with GPs working excessive hours in metro areas as well.
That's why the Australian Government has put its best foot forward with its plan to provide an additional 6,000-plus medical training places, 5,500 of them GPs over the coming decade, starting with an increase next year, raising our overall number of annual training places for GPs from 600 to 900 then progressively up to 1,200 in order to fill that gap and improve the number of Australian-trained GPs in the system overall.
We need to do the same in terms of the future needs of our nursing workforce, the allied health professionals, as well. These men and women are the lifeblood of our health and hospital system, and we've seen some of the excellent work they do here at the Bentley clinic today.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: The latest Newspoll shows that support for the state government here in (inaudible) and does that give you concern federally here in the west, especially in marginal seats like Swan, here?
PM: My job as Prime Minister is to work with premiers from every state and of every political party to bring about health and hospital reform for the nation, and I will be talking with all premiers, all chief ministers, from large states, small states, Labor, Liberal, Caluthumpian, in order to bring about health and hospital reform for the long term. That means working with the WA Liberal Government as well, and I had good conversations yesterday with Colin Barnett and with Troy Buswell. We're working our way through the detail of our reform plan, but our job is simply to make this work.
People are sick and tired of the politicians of whichever party just playing the finger-pointing game at each other. Instead, what they want is for politicians to point to the way ahead, to bring about real changes to the system. That's why we'll continue to work with the Government of WA. They are elected by the West Australian people and our job is to work in partnership with them.
JOURNALIST: The Reserve Bank this morning has warned of housing bubbles and likely interest rate rises. What's your response to that?
PM: I haven't seen the text of what the RBA has put out today, but could I say this - our challenge in the last year and a half has been to protect the Australian economy from going into recession. The Australian Government has taken strong and decisive action to protect the economy, support jobs, apprenticeships and small business, and to keep our economy from falling into recession, which is what happened right across the rest of the advanced world.
This economy of ours has been the fastest growing economy, with the second-lowest unemployment and the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies, and we didn't go into recession. What's the net result of that? We've kept hundreds of thousands of people in jobs who would otherwise have lost their jobs.
Look at the unemployment rate in New Zealand, just across the Tasman. Look at the difference in terms of our unemployment rate there. If that unemployment rate was replicated here in Australia, hundreds of thousands of people would not be with jobs today, and we would be being asked questions about how you provide, frankly, an income for working families.
Now, we're into a different part of the economic challenge now, which is having successfully negotiated the global crisis, how do we build the right foundations for our long-term economic future. That's tough, but part of it means maintaining tough financial management so that we are producing a disciplined fiscal policy in the future of the type that was outlined in the last budget, which we are continuing to implement and will implement into the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a concern that Tourism Australia may have been involved in (inaudible)
PM: I'm pretty worried, Geof, about the reports that I've seen - pretty worried - and it sounds pretty off to me, but I'd like to get to the bottom of it first. I was asked about this this morning, I think, on radio here in Perth. I'm getting to the bottom of what actually happened here. I think all of us, or, sorry, let me correct myself here, many of us grew up in the days of Skippy, and you know something? If you've grown up in the days of Skippy you want to make sure that our national symbol is being properly respected in the way in which Australia projects itself abroad.
I would want to get to the bottom of it first.
JOURNALIST: If it is as it seems, though (inaudible)?
PM: Well, there's a big preface to your question, Geof - 'if' - and I really want to get to the bottom of it. I just think when you're dealing with the good name of Australia, you've got to be very careful. When you're dealing with the proper treatment of animals, you've got to be very careful, and I don't like the reports that I've seen. I really don't, but I want to get to the bottom of it.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any details about the Australian citizen that was arrested in Kenya in connection with (inaudible)?
PM: First of all, I'm aware of reports to that effect. Secondly, I have not received advice from our security intelligence authorities or law enforcement authorities on that. I would reserve comment until I have.
JOURNALIST: The AFP is heading to Dubrovnik. Are you hoping they'll get to the bottom of what happened to Brit Lapthorne?
PM: This has been a tragic case, and we need to make sure that every effort is made to make sure that the right thing is done here and if the AFP can help in that then I'm sure they will. They are a very fine, professional body of police and I'm sure they are doing everything within their powers to assist.
JOURNALIST: A large chunk of Medibank Private members face having increased premiums by up to 50 percent if they want to maintain their cover for surgeries including heart operations and hip replacements. Are you concerned by this?
PM: I think everyone should take a long, hard look at what their private health insurance funds are doing. Can I say that if people are unhappy with their private health insurance arrangements what they should be doing is going to the comparison website - www.privatehealth.gov.au - and the reason for it is this: using plain English, which everyone can understand, what you get from which fund, for how much money, and I would strongly encourage Australian consumers to do that and work out whether they are getting value for money and that would go to what's reported as having been done by Medibank Private, as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the GST is shaping as a bit of a stumbling block with your health plan over here in the West. How are you going to get past what is shaping as a bit of an impasse between you and Colin Barnett?
PM: Well, I've got to say Colin and I had a great conversation yesterday which went over a couple of hours. We went through, basically, the A-Z of health and hospital reform and the A-Z of how do you finance health and hospital reform.
And you know something? Rome's not built in a day. You've got to take it step by step. We'll be meeting again, I believe, prior to the Council of Australian Governments meeting later in April, but, obviously, there are areas of remaining disagreement, a lot of areas of agreement as well.
We take these step by step with each state. WA is important in this. People of WA, 2 million people, deserve the best health and hospital services that we can deliver, and what I'm overall concerned about is this: if I look at the future, rolling out in 10 and 20 years' time, 30 years' time, if I look at the current rate of growth of state health budgets, I look at the current rate of growth of their taxation base, the gap that is emerging is getting bigger and bigger and bigger. Someone has got to fill that gap.
We, the Australian Government, are putting our best foot forward to try and fill that gap by taking on the lion's share of the growth of the system for the long term, but we'll still work through the finance details with the premiers and chief ministers. Treasurers are meeting in the days ahead. Treasury officials are meeting on a continuing basis. There's quite a lot of detailed number crunching to be done around this, but we'll be putting every element of effort in it.
And having said that, folks, I think I'm about to zip. Thanks very much.


BEAUMONT: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is in our city at the moment and he joins me on the morning program this morning. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, Simon. Thanks for having me on your program. You've had some rough weather over here.
BEAUMONT: We have, and we're still clearing it up as best we can. Mr Rudd, can I ask you, we posed this question yesterday on our program and our listeners were asking, were wondering, why do we need 35 million people in this country by 2050?
PM: Well, what has happened with the Intergenerational Report, which is put out by the Commonwealth Treasury every several years or so, is they've just projected ahead where natural population growth would go to over the next 40 years. In fact, two of these were put out earlier by Peter Costello. And that's just based on natural fertility rates and our historical rates of migration. In fact, the population growth projected for Australia for the next 30 or 40 years is less than what we've had for the last 30 or 40 years.
So the key challenge for us, though, given that's what the projections are, is how do we as a nation prepare for that in terms of infrastructure, in terms of planning for our cities, and all those other practical things which need to be done.
BEAUMONT: In your view, is that too many? Can we manage that population growth somehow? Can we manage immigration growth somehow?
PM: Well, you know, the bulk of all this growth comes from natural fertility rates in the country and the projected migration rates for the future are basically where they have been under the previous Howard Government as well, and, as I said, going back a long period of time.
Your question is can we accommodate all that by way of infrastructure and the other services necessary. You know, what it means, Simon, is actually having proper planning for our infrastructure needs, whether it's schools, whether it's hospitals - and I'm here in the west talking about health and hospitals at the moment - but physical infrastructure like roads and the rest as well. If we don't do that then the answer to your question is no, we can't, but if we plan properly then we can make sure that we've got the facilities to accommodate a bigger population - but you know something? You've just got to be realistic about this. This population has been growing over the last 40 years at a pace of knots greater than what's projected for the next 40 years.
BEAUMONT: But we do know, and the United Nations published these figures yesterday, that there's been a spike in the number of people trying to seek asylum in Australia. You know that. We're in an election year now. It is an election issue for a lot of people. A 29 percent spike in immigration claims in Australia. The UN told us that yesterday. In the rest of the world it's stabilised. Do you see, or do you foresee, that we need to better manage immigration intake? Do we need to reduce it?
PM: Well, I think what you saw with Chris Evans on the migration intake for skills last year was a reduction from what we had before, and that was a correct move given what was happening with the global financial crisis last year. What we try and do with the migration intake each year is make sure that it's matched as best we can to the skills needs of the economy, and that differs right across the country.
Migration intake virtually doubled during the period of the Howard Government each year, and they were responding to their analysis of the skills needs at the time. Because of the circumstances last year, Chris Evans, the Minister, cut it back. For the period ahead we've got to be very mindful of where the pressures still exist in the economy for more skills.
This is always a year-by-year proposition depending on where we're at, what skills we need, and what we aren't able to generate locally, but the key thing is this - to make sure we're properly prepared for our workforce and on top of that for the other needs, like infrastructure that you mentioned before.
BEAUMONT: Do you acknowledge that border protection is an election issue for people, and will you change your Government's, the Labor Government's, border protection policy as the election nears? Will we hear an announcement where you'll make changes?
PM: Well, the first thing I'd say, Simon, in response to your question is that the Howard Government, over the years, had big challenges to deal with as well. In fact, in the period late '90s, early 2000s, you had many, many more people coming to this country by boat than is currently the case. What happens over the years is that it ebbs and flows, depending on what's happening with security around the world.
BEAUMONT: And on our government's policies. Your policy is used as a sales pitch by people smugglers.
PM: If you were to go back over the years you will find that at various times people smugglers have been reported as saying, this is during the period of the Howard Government, that there are ways in which you can get through the system as well. The bottom line is this - to make sure that you're responding to the practical challenges of the time, and when you've got, as we've had in the last six months or so, a civil war in Sri Lanka, obviously, that creates problems across the entire world.
To go back to your earlier point, which I think was based on a report in a newspaper a couple of days ago, this is what the United Nations regional representative, Richard Towle, had to say only recently. He said "I wouldn't say that what's happening in Australia bucks the trend at all. I would say it's entirely consistent..." when you are talking about what's happening more broadly internationally across the rest of the world.
The practical thing is to deal with the challenges as they arise, and that's what we intend to do, and with various people engaged in work to deal with people smugglers in Indonesia. We now have a large number of interruptions of people smuggling ventures by the Indonesians, by the Malaysians and by others.
But you know something? This has been the case for years in the past, and it is a question of how you respond to the challenges that you're presented with each day, each month, each year, such as it's been for the last 30 years, because we've had boats arrive in this country in varying numbers for the last 30 years.
BEAUMONT: On Australia's image overseas and how we are perceived immigration-wise, there's also a red-hot story around this morning, PM, about a kangaroo being used by Tourism Australia to sell Australia to L.A. as part of this annual G'Day USA marketing campaign. I'm sure you're aware of that. Have you seen the footage of the kangaroo in the cage on the L.A. street?
PM: No, I haven't, but I've read some reports of it this morning. My first reaction is it sounds pretty off to me. It sounds really off, but I'm waiting for some further details on this in terms of what's actually gone on here, but I think we in Australia have an interest in ensuring that we are properly represented around the world. As I said, based on the reports it sounds pretty off to me, but I'd like to get to the bottom of it first.
BEAUMONT: Sure. It seems it's footage from January that's been taken by someone in the street. And I guess our listeners-
PM: I just want to get to, as you understand Simon, I just want to make sure of all the facts surrounding something first. So I think it sounds pretty off to me, and I think most people would find it that way, but I'd much rather establish what has actually has gone on here.
BEAUMONT: PM, you said a couple of weeks ago on Sydney radio, I heard the comments that you hadn't had an opportunity to read the Henry review, the Ken Henry review of our taxation system as yet. You'd read an executive summary. Have you got around to reading it as yet, and will we expect an announcement around budget time or before the election, on taxation reform?
PM: The answer to your question is yes, I've been through it. But you understand that I've been pretty preoccupied with health and hospitals reform in recent months, and I think that's of big interest to your listeners as well. On the question of the independent review of taxation, as the Treasurer said the other day, we will make sure that's out there by the time of the Budget. The Budget's due in May. And because it obviously involves a whole lot of complex tax questions, we just want to make sure that we've got our response to it as well developed as possible. But my preoccupation, frankly, since the beginning of the year, is to do work on health and hospitals reform, and to deliver better health and better hospital services for working families, pensioners, carers, right across the country, including here in the West, which is why I'm here.
BEAUMONT: You met with our Premier, Colin Barnett yesterday. Do you get on alright with Colin?
PM: Yeah, yeah, no, we've had many conversations now over the last year or so that he's been in office. We've cooperated well on a whole range of areas, like the investment we're making together with the state Government in the Ord, the Ord expansion, the investment we're making with the state Government at Oakajee in terms of the port expansion here in the city of Perth at Northbridge, but also in our hospital investments as well. Already we're putting investments of $180 million into the Midland area Hospital. And also $255 million into the state rehab centre at the Fiona Stanley Hospital. But health and hospitals is certainly the big agenda for the future.
BEAUMONT: And look, you say, look I know Mr Barnett is a regular guest on our program, he acknowledges-
PM: I'd be surprised if he wasn't, Simon.
BEAUMONT: Yes, that's right. And he acknowledges that the relationship between you and he is amicable and fairly strong. But politically, we see the Newspoll released today and your Labor man here in WA, Eric Ripper not travelling too well, is he. Are you concerned about Labor's stocks in WA?
PM: Oh look, the key thing for all of us is to deliver improvements to health and hospital services for the people of Western Australia. And the people of this state and the people nationwide will make a judgment about whether you've done as well as you can or whether you need to improve. My responsibility is to look at the facts, which is that here in the West and across the nation we look- we are looking at a health and hospital system which, if it's not attended to, is at tipping point, and could break. State Governments, if you go out over the next twenty or thirty years, don't have the finance to be able to fund the future needs of the health and hospital system. That's why we're stepping up to the plate in order to provide a national health and hospital network, funded nationally, run locally, but for the first time with the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the system.
So, that's what I was talking to Colin about yesterday, and we've been working through the details of it. It's not as if we're just landing here without having done anything on health already. Remember, at the end of '08 we agreed to a 50% increase in the Australian Government's contribution to the states for public hospitals. In WA, that meant a $6.17 billion allocation, which is $2 billion more than under the previous healthcare agreement. So we've been hard at work for the last two years, but what we're now talking about is what we do for the long-term future as well, and I think your listeners, very few of them would say that the current system is working perfectly. We actually need to make improvements, and that's what Colin and I have been talking about.
BEAUMONT: Alright, just one final one if I can Prime Minister, with regards Canberra and the ACT. I know you're from Queensland but you spend a fair bit of time in the ACT.
PM: Because someone decided to put the capital there, Simon. West Australians and Queenslanders I don't think were consulted much on that one.
BEAUMONT: We know, we know where the real action is, don't we PM? The ACT authorities are going to, given we have a concern agreed about binge drinking in Australia, the ACT authorities will introduce a scheme whereby if someone buys a drink for a drunk mate in a nightclub or a pub or a licensed premises, they will be the ones who could face a fine of $550 under liquor reforms being unveiled today in the Capital Territory. What do you think of that idea?
PM: You know Simon, fools rush in where angels fear to tread. And when it comes to what individual states and territories are doing with, you know, individual parts of their liquor licensing rules, that's something which they need to be responsive to their local communities on. And I just would be reluctant to comment there. Binge drinking is a problem across the country. I'm not sure of the stats here in Perth, but certainly when I've been in my own home town of Brisbane, in Sydney, and Melbourne, this is a challenge which is you know, faced by so many families at the moment, and it requires a response both at the personal level, the family level, the policing level, and I've got all sorts of, I've got to say respect for what our friends in Police uniform have to deal with every night on our streets. But for me to comment on, you know, one by-law or another in one city or another, frankly, I think that's best left to others.
BEAUMONT: Alright, I'm going to sneak one more in PM.
PM: Off you go, Simon.
BEAUMONT: The AFL footy season starts tonight. Who do you like for the Premiership this year?
PM: Well there's only one answer to that, you know, Simon. The team called the Lions. And you know, let's just get real here. You'd be a Lions backer, wouldn't you, being from over here?
BEAUMONT: Not at all, they're playing the West Coast this week, so not at all. PM-
PM: I imagine if I was here for the game, that I may be, sort of, an isolated voice in the crowd.
BEAUMONT: I think you would be.
PM: Anyway, it's good to be on your program, and it's good to be back in the West again, and I'll be back again soon.
BEAUMONT: Thanks for talking to our listeners today.
PM: Thanks very much Simon. 


FAINE: Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Jon, how are you?
FAINE: Thank you, I'm well. Is Barnaby Joyce the equivalent in the Opposition to Peter Garrett in the Government?
PM: Look, I think when it comes to economic policy Mr Abbott has a few questions to answer. Appointing Barnaby Joyce as the alternative Finance Minister of Australia- bad judgment. Keeping him there for four months, very bad judgment. When you have someone who runs around the country and the world saying that America's about to default on its debts, the Australian state Governments are about to default on their sovereign debt, the Australian Government the same, equating this country with Greece. I mean, this is just grossly irresponsible stuff.
FAINE: But Barnaby Joyce has only uttered words. Peter Garrett's been in charge of spending money on a program that's been a disaster. Shouldn't you have sacked Peter Garrett, by your own standards?
PM: As you know from the statement I made some weeks ago Minister Garrett's responsibilities have been changed. The Government accepts full responsibility for the problems of the implementation of the home insulation program, and we're getting on the business of dealing with the practical problems which have arisen.
On the broader question of economic policy, I think it's fair to say that what Mr Abbott has put together is probably the weakest economic frontbench that we've ever seen from the Liberal party: of himself, he says he has no interest in the economy- Peter Costello said that he would not have him as his deputy because he had no interest in the economy, Joe Hockey, and then Barnaby Joyce. This is not a strong line-up. And the economic management's fundamental to everything else.
FAINE: The building program in schools is under question, in particular in New South Wales. They've had to admit that a $250,000 shade structure has been costed out at a million dollars, and this is being held up as but one example of an endemic problem in trying to spend a lot of money quickly, without proper scrutiny. Do you have to review now not just your home insulation program, but your building revolution for schools?
PM: Can I just ask you this question, Jon? How many schools do you reckon there are in Australia?
FAINE: Thousands.
PM: Nearly 10,000.
FAINE: Yep.
PM: How many projects have we got underway at the moment- about 28,000 across those schools, as I'm advised. I understand we've had complaints in relation to 0.73 per cent of those schools. Now what we set up from the very beginning was a system of audits and audit squads to go into any individual school with which there's a problem. If you were to ask your listeners to ring in about whether they are happy with what's happening in their local schools, with new state of the art libraries being built, new science centres, new language centres, new classrooms, new multipurpose halls, this is a very good program to protect jobs today, but also to build the school infrastructure we need tomorrow. Problems are always going to occur. But that's why we had audit mechanisms established. Those audit mechanisms have applied, and where problems have been identified, they were attended to.
FAINE: But there's always people out to rort any system and any program where Governments are handing out money, and you've got people trying to rort this one?
PM: Has anything changed, Jon, in the history of humankind? It's been around for a while. All I'm saying to you is that based on the figures I've got- by the way it's 24,000 projects, not 28- is that we have complaints in relation to 0.73 per cent, that's less than 1 per cent. And for a project which goes out and provides so many schools across rural Victoria, across the metro area, Catholic parochial schools which have never had a multipurpose hall in their history, new state of the art libraries. I've been to schools around the country which have never had a purpose-built library of any description.
FAINE: So you're saying it's worth having a few, a number of programs that aren't good value, in order for the overarching benefit to the economy that's being achieved?
PM: Well look, we did this deliberately, in order to protect jobs today and build the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Remember, the Australian economy, unique of the major advanced economies in the world, over the course of the global economic recession had the fastest growth, the second lowest unemployment, was the only one to stay out of recession, and with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. That's not a bad report card for the economy at large.
If we'd be generating the unemployment rates, say, in New Zealand, or in Europe, that they have there, if we had those in Australia, we'd have something like two to three hundred thousand more Australian working families who would be without a job. On the education front, and the dividend, as I said, you're always going to have problems which arise. So that's why from the very beginning, the Government established an audit mechanism with the state Governments so that if problems arose in the implementation then they could be dealt with. That's what's happened in the case of this school, too.
FAINE: Instead we've got debt. Barnaby Joyce had a chat to us earlier this morning. He had this to say, on exactly this topic.
AUDIO OF JOYCE: It is vitally important that the Australian people still remain focussed on the fact that if we spend money the way we are spending it on such things as, everybody has seen how farcical now the so called building education revolution has become, the BER. It is really the blatant education rip off and we're finding that major contractors just use it as a mechanism to (inaudible) the Australian tax payer who is going to have to pay all this money back, and schools haven't really got value for money.
FAINE: And we've got massive debt now, where you inherited no debt.
PM: Can I say, Jon, we have the lowest debt and lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies. We've acted entirely correctly with strong, early, decisive action to keep the Australian economy going. Can you imagine what discussion we'd be having on your program this morning had we taken the Liberal Party's advice, sat on our hands, and done nothing? We'd have unemployment going through the roof, hundreds of thousands of working families across the country without a job. In terms of your own listening audience, tens of thousands who are currently in a job would be without a job. We acted entirely appropriately.
But secondly, on the Education Revolution, again I'd challenge you. You speak to your local P&amp;Cs, your local parent bodies, at your Catholic, Independent, Christian schools right across Victoria and ask them whether they want to get their new library, whether they want to get their new classrooms, their new science centres, their new language centres, their new multipurpose halls. There's always going to be problems on the way through, but the overwhelming response from these 9,500 to 10,000 schools in Australia, those 24,000 projects, this is good for the economy, good for local tradies trying to earn a dollar on the way through, in terms of an economy last year which was throwing them out of work. And then, building school buildings that we need for the future.
FAINE: And the criticism comes through as you build up towards a federal election- typical Labor Government, not business experience, no real world experience, a bunch of bureaucrats and trade union officials and lawyers spending money hand over fist when they inherited no Government debt.
PM: So, you're reading from Mr Abbott's press release there it seems.
FAINE: No, it's-
PM: Can I just say, can I say in response to that-
FAINE: It's a circulating email that's come in-
PM: Sure.
FAINE: Do go on.
PM: Just in response to that question, that sort of criticism coming from the likes of Senator Barnaby Joyce, I mean, for goodness sake. If we took seriously the advice of the Liberal Party at the time, we would've sat on our hands and done nothing. What did the Australian Government do? In the midst of the greatest economic crisis the world has seen since the Great Depression, whereby growth was collapsing across the world economy, jobs being lost by the millions around the rest of the world, we did three things. We stepped in, and to stabilise the financial system, we provided for the first time an Australian Government guarantee for everyone's savings deposits. That prevented a run on the banks. I think anyone out there in the financial community recognises that fact. No such guarantee existed before. The previous Government had never provided it.
Secondly, we provided also a Government guarantee for the term funding arrangements of the banks as well-
FAINE: Yep.
PM: So that the lines of credit could still flow to small businesses, many of whom would be listening to your program this morning. And the third thing we did was, because every economy around the world was falling through the floor, we acted strongly and decisively for Government to step up to the plate, expanding the role of Government in the economy while the private sector was in retreat. Just as now, the stimulus reached its peak, frankly, at the end of the second quarter last year, and is now being withdrawn, consistent with what we laid out at the time. This is the proper approach to economic management. But also, as I said, protecting jobs now, but building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
FAINE: Okay 16 minutes past 9, Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister with me until 20 past, and then he has to move on. The Premier and Treasurers are meeting with your officials and Wayne Swan over the finetuning of a possible takeover of the states' health. Victorian Premier John Brumby has released a list of ten questions that he says need to be answered. Number one, will there be new money, generally, for health and money for new hospitals and other health infrastructure?
PM: The, I heard about John's letter this morning, I gather it's in The Age. I haven't got it yet. So I'm sure it's in the in-tray somewhere. On that one, can I just say that what we negotiated last year with the Victorian Government and the other states was a 50 per cent increase in the Australian Government's allocation to the hospitals run by Victoria and the other states. In the case of Victoria, receiving an additional $5.1 billion. That is flowing through now, next year, the year after, the year after that, and the year after that.
This is a pretty big additional investment. But the other thing is this: beyond the current healthcare agreement, we through the proposal we've now got for a new national health and hospitals network, would in fact take on nearly $4 billion worth of future growth in the Victorian hospital system on to the Commonwealth Government's books, which would otherwise be borne by the Victorian Government.
FAINE: So you're confident-
PM: The reason we're doing all this Jon, is this - you know, we've looked at all the figures. You go out, 20 or 30 years' time, state budgets cannot bear the future expansion, radical expansion, in the health and hospital costs of the country. In fact, by 20 or 30 years' time, all the state government budgets would be consumed entirely by health, and not a dollar for anything else. That's why we're acting. And I think John would surely accept that there are still problems in his hospital system. That's what every other-
FAINE: It's not perfect, but you're confident you can strike a deal, clearly. I don't want to use up all our time on health. Kevin Rudd-
PM: It's a pretty important subject, so I'm happy to talk about it, but I haven't got John's letter yet, but I'm sure it's in the mail.
FAINE: Are you going to expel an Israeli diplomat?
PM: You know something Jon? The important thing is to work through each of these matters, that is, the use and abuse of Australian passports, carefully. It's currently with the Australian Federal Police and others. We'll work our way through the detail of it and we will respond to it appropriately. Those investigations are ongoing.
FAINE: You've said nothing in answer to my question, basically.
PM: Well Jon, when you're dealing with very complex legal, police and security matters, you don't rush to judgment. You work your way through it. What I have said in the past, very plainly, is that- as has the Foreign Minister in his dealings with the Israeli Ambassador to Australia- is that we have asked some pretty basic questions about what happened here-
FAINE: Are you worried about upsetting the Jewish community, and maybe jeopardising some of their support?
PM: Jon I've said when the Israeli Ambassador was called in to see the Foreign Minister, some pretty basic questions were put, and subsequent to that, both the Foreign Minister and myself have indicated that we are not satisfied with the answers we've received. The investigations are ongoing. Once they have concluded you'll have a full and comprehensive statement from the Government. These are detailed, complex matters, and we will judge them on their merits. In terms of our relationship with Israel, and broader policy towards the Middle East, we also deal with that on its merits as well, as we did recently in a vote at the United Nations General Assembly.
FAINE: Alright. And just finally, on the stimulus, whilst you're spending money on building school halls and the like, the Tax Office is holding up billions of dollars for tens if not hundreds of thousands of Australian taxpayers, and small business in particular saying their cash flows are being ruined by the Tax Office computer glitch. If you want to stimulate the economy, just start the Tax Office refunds flowing and you'll achieve that by nothing other than getting the tax system working properly.
PM: Well, on the problems in the Tax Office, what I'd strongly suggest is that I get the Treasurer on to your program and go through the complaints which have been made, and how they'll be rectified.
FAINE: Four months, no refunds.
PM: Can I say more broadly, however, on the question of stimulus, when you look at growth collapsing around the world, and not just at the margins but fundamentally in those economies, the fact that we the Australian Government stepped up to the plate in order to keep jobs going and small businesses in business and protect apprenticeships, that's fundamental. If you want to know what the difference is between us and the rest of the world in response to what happened last year and the millions of people who are still without work throughout the rest of the world, that's because we stepped up to the plate and made a difference. Not perfect, but it was the right course of action.
FAINE: Are you going to the Grand Prix, Kevin Rudd, in Melbourne this weekend?
PM: Ah no, I'm not going to the Grand Prix in Melbourne this weekend, but I wish everyone who does all the very best.
FAINE: Don't want to go?
PM: I've been to some races over the years. But I've just got some other things on this weekend, in fact, I've got a few things on on the health and hospitals front, and I would- I'll attend to those. But I wish everyone all the best for the Grand Prix. It's been a big event for Melbourne for a long period of time.
FAINE: Thank you for your time this morning, it's been good to talk to you, and I've got lots of text messages as well which I shall now read- thank you.
PM: Thanks very much, bye.


KOCH: Good morning to you, Kevin Rudd.
PM: Good morning Kochie.
KOCH: Did Mr Abbott make a mistake in putting Barnaby Joyce into Finance?
PM: Well, I'm from Queensland, I know a little bit about things up there. Look, this was just bad judgment putting Senator Joyce in as the alternative Finance Minister of Australia. Bad judgment to keep him there for four months, until the criticism just rose and rose.
I think it also shows that on these core questions of the economy, big questions arise about whether Mr Abbott's judgment can be trusted on the economy. This is a significant role, Finance Minister of the Commonwealth, you are responsible for the entire public finance management of Australia's revenues. And this is a serious position, he should never have been there.
KOCH: Yeah, but they've got Joe as Shadow Treasurer, who's well qualified and good at his job. He's the chief bean counter, if you like, for the Opposition, isn't he?
PM: Well let me give you an example of how the Government works. When we frame a budget, and we meet on a regular basis as a budget policy committee of the Cabinet, it's myself as Prime Minister, Julia as Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, and the Finance Minister, backed by all of our officials. This is the group which determines on a weekly, monthly basis the financial settings of Australia. And what Mr Abbott did was put Barnaby Joyce in the middle of that, and Barnaby as you know is running around the world saying that the United States was about to default on its debts, Australia's about to default, the state Governments of Australia were going to default, our debt was like that of Greece - I mean, these are just irresponsible statements, that's on that position, very bad for Australia's image abroad.
KOCH: Alright, we don't want it to get in to a free kick for you. So let's go to viewer questions, the first one from Scott Spence in Perth. Scott, you've got the Prime Minister's attention.
PM: G'day Scott.
VIEWER: Thank you Kochie, G'day Prime Minister. Mr Prime Minister, my question to you is, when will you get your head out of the sand and realise your policy on illegal boat people isn't working? Under the previous Government's Pacific Solution, this stopped desperate people from getting on rickety boats and risking their lives practically overnight. Your approach to this is encouraging them to risk their lives and lining the pockets of the people smugglers. So when will you stop handballing the issue and acknowledge you've got it wrong?
PM: Scott, on the question of asylum seekers, let's just go through a few of the figures there. Boat people at various stages in Australia's history, they have been coming on and off, in various numbers, for the last 30 years. It depends very much on global security circumstances- whether wars have flared, or whether they have calmed down.
Second point is this. In the period that you referred to, Mr Howard's period in Government, at various years there were 6,000, 4,000, 5,000 people coming by boat in a given year. In the last year in Australia, 2009, I think we had just under 3,000. And this will vary from year to year. The key thing is to respond to the practical circumstances each year.
The other thing to bear in mind, Scott, is this - people legitimately focus on those who may arrive at boat, but there are also those who claim asylum from within Australia as well, and that's gone on year and year and year again, 4 or 5,000 people I think, from memory, for example who arrive here by plane claim asylum. They don't make the headlines, but they are those here each year.
But here is the final point. Forever and a day, this country has probably taken each year about 12 or 13,000 refugees each year. Back through Mr Howard's time, the same under me, and that is our overall ceiling in terms of those who are granted refugee status in this country. And so that's against a total migration intake of what, about 170, 180,000.
KOCH: Alright, I don't think anyone would argue that we shouldn't be taking asylum seeker be taking asylum seekers, refugees - that's our responsibility as a global citizen. But it is people jumping the queue, they're taking the place of others who are doing it the right way. I reckon that's what the average Australian gets narky about.
PM: And you know something, so do I get narky about it as well.
KOCH: Well why don't you do something about it? Because we've had two dozen boats this year. The UN has reportedly criticised your handling of the Oceanic Viking, they say fast-tracking the application of asylum seekers on that boat sends a bad message to the rest of the world.
PM: Let me just go to -
KOCH: What are you going to do? Pacific Solution under the Howard Government seemed to be a better policy.
PM: Well here is one fact for you Kochie. Under Mr Howard's Pacific Solution, what percentage of those folk came to Australia anyway? 70 per cent ended up here. So it was a nice piece of signposting to say they'll all be processed in Nauru, and all be processed at Manaus Island, 70 per cent of them came here anyway.
The key thing is to make sure that you've got enough cops on the beat, that is, our people in uniform, our Customs Officers, our Naval Officers doing the work on the ground. And what goes unreported each day is the huge number of interruptions and interceptions of vessels which occur. You know what? In Indonesia, for example, we've had something like 100 or so interruptions of people smuggling ventures We've got in Australia now more than 100 either before the courts or have been convicted. So this is all going on below the surface.
KOCH: So you reckon you're still tough enough?
PM: Can I just say, we'll always look at practical measures to respond to new circumstances. What's changed in the last 12 months is this - no one predicted a civil war in Sri Lanka, and the bulk of the problem has arisen because you've got this huge outflow, not just to us, but around the rest of the world.
One final point on the UN. The UN regional representative said that our circumstances in Australia were broadly consistent with other countries as well. So I think there's been some, frankly, some misreporting of what they've had to say.
KOCH: Okay, let's go back to viewers. Barry Harding from Maroochydore. Barry, good morning to you. What's your question to the Prime Minister?
VIEWER: Good morning. My question is - stop people on the dole just leaving school, getting the dole money, and living on a beach. Why can't we have conscription back? Put 'em in the forces. Give 'em an education.
PM: Okay Barry, how are you? How's the weather in Maroochydore?
VIEWER: Well at the moment it's just getting light.
PM: Okay. Alright mate. The - couple of points. Firstly on young people, we have introduced in the last 12 months something called a Compact with Young Australians. What does that mean? You must be earning or learning. That is, if you are not - if you are in the age bracket of 17 to 25, you've got to be either at school or in a full-time training course, or earning an income. Otherwise we actually do not provide people with Youth Allowance. That is a new change we have brought in.
The other thing, Barry, I'd say is this. On - you mentioned conscription, national service. In our history in Australia, we have done this very rarely, and only in times of, well, mainly in times of war, like the Second World War.
Right now, none of our service chiefs would back the introduction of conscription or national service. Neither do I. Our armed forces are made up of volunteers, they're a first-class force, and at this stage we have no problem in terms of recruiting enough volunteers for the needs of our armed forces.
KOCH: Okay. Alright, thank you for that Barry. And school buildings program - New South Wales has reportedly overturned a decision to build a shade structure for a million bucks, it'll use the money for new classrooms instead. Is this an admission that the rip-offs are just out of control in school buildings? Julia Gillard said we've got to put up with the rorts, because, basically, this saved the economy from going into recession. Is that a good enough answer?
PM: How many school projects do you reckon are underway across Australia right now?
KOCH: Tell me.
PM: 24,000. How many schools? About 9,500. You ask our viewers, whether they are from P&amp;Cs or P&amp;Fs, Catholic schools, Government schools right across Australia, are they happy with the fact that they are getting a new library, a new language centre, a new science centre, a new multipurpose hall, a new classroom?
KOCH: But it's costing the same as the Opera House, though.
PM: Hang on, Kochie, I'll come back to its economic impact in one sec. The other thing is this, is that the total number of complaints have at this stage reached 0.73 per cent, that is 0.73 of one per cent. That is less than one per cent. Now let's put all this into context. It's inevitable when you're running a massive program that you're going to have some problems. Good on the auditors for going into that project at that particular school, because that's the system we set up, so that you get a complaint that comes in, people go out and look and say hey, that's not happening right, go and fix it.
KOCH: So the rorts are less than one per cent?
PM: 0.73. But for the economy benefit, you know as well as I, we came through with the only economy -
KOCH: I know that.
PM: - Which avoided the bullet of the recession, because we put forward a whole lot of Government initiatives. This is one of them.
KOCH: And did it quick.
PM: We did it in order to protect jobs today, hundreds of thousands of them, to build the schools we need for tomorrow.
KOCH: Okay, just quickly, homework - subsidies for swimming lessons for kids?
PM: Yeah, last time it was Jacqui who asked me from Wollongong about this. Very quickly, $20 million we currently provide as a Government to support water safety organisations. In fact, an organisation called Austswim oversees a national training program for people who want to teach kids water safety techniques. But here is the critical one - a Living With Water DVD which we put together with Laurie Lawrence. If you want to get a hold of that, go to www.kidsalive.com.au, and also a Swimsafe program in her state of New South Wales, which she should contact the New South Wales Government on. But we don't provide direct subsidies to mums and dads, sorry about that Jacqui, but they are the things we're doing.
KOCH: Okay, excellent. You've got Good Friday off. Have a good Easter Break.
PM: And Saturday, and Sunday.
KOCH: What are you doing?
PM: Well, Therese and I have decided we're going to do some gardening.
KOCH: What, at The Lodge? You do your own gardening?
PM: Ah, no, we've got guys that do all of that - but, as they have for years and years and years - no, we're going to, as I said to someone recently, we're going to stick in some flowers, grow some veggies. There's a vacant lot down the back.
KOCH: A veggie patch? The Prime Ministerial veggie patch? I love it.
PM: Well, we'll get some advice on how best to do it in terms of the ground concerned.
KOCH: Okay.
PM: We're going to bring you in some produce some time later on.
KOCH: Excellent. Prime Minister, we'll be back in two weeks, so keep your questions coming ahead to the Soapbox. 


MITCHELL: The Prime Minister, Mr Rudd - good morning.
PM: Good morning, Neil. I didn't know you were a first-class rev head.
MITCHELL: Well, I enjoy it. I do enjoy it.
PM: Good on you.
MITCHELL: I think we might be about to lose it, but that's another issue.
PM: It's a big event for Victoria.
MITCHELL: Yeah, do you think we should keep it?
PM: Yeah, I do, actually. I think if you put it across the nation, big events like that and one or two of the others which are done in the other states, they're all part of the global branding for Australia.
MITCHELL: $50 million a year it's gonna, $50 million it'll cost us this year in losses.
PM: Yeah, but, I mean, it's part of global branding. You've got to be part of, look, I don't know what the local politics of it are in Melbourne and whether people like it or loathe it, but all I'm saying is from my point of view it's part of good global branding for the country when you've got things like the Formula One and you've got other major events which are part and parcel of how the world views Australia each year. But look, I'm always reluctant to step in where other people are actually footing the bill.
MITCHELL: So how much will you chip in?
PM: As I said, I'm reluctant to tell people what to do when I'm not footing the bill, so, I think it helps with the branding of our country and Melbourne. It's a great city and this is part of its international profile.
MITCHELL: I agree entirely, but the debate's on.
Now, speaking of debates, population growth figures released today: Australia has grown almost 500,000 in the year; the majority, nearly 300,000 through migration. We're well above world average, about two per cent above the world average. Is this too fast? What is the right figure for Australia?
PM: On the question of speed of population growth, one point is this - we're now growing more slowly than we did between 1970 and 2010. That was a higher rate of population growth than has been projected from 2010 to 2050. That's just the first point.
But the second thing is, look, we've just looked at the figures produced to us by the Treasury through the Intergenerational Report. They say where it's headed to by mid-century. My view is the key thing is, as Mr Abbott has said, that's what's happening. How do you prepare for it in terms of infrastructure, in terms of proper planning for our cities, in terms of schools, in terms of hospitals, and also the workforce needs of our economy.
MITCHELL: But you can change it. I mean, you can change the migration rate, for a start, and we've got, what, 300,000 migrants, net gain of migrants, in the last year. You can reduce that.
PM: Well, on migration, when the Keating Government lost office, I think we were running at about 85,000 a year. When the Howard Government lost office we were running at about 180,000 a year. This is official migration program. Right now, I think it's about the same, I think around about 180,000 -
MITCHELL: - No, 300,000 gain in migrants in the last year.
PM: Well -
MITCHELL: - 297,400.
PM: I'm talking about the official migration program. You might be talking about people who are here on temporary visas, for example, for things like study or temporary work visas or those sorts of things.
MITCHELL: Well, that's true, that's true, but some of those last years. The point is the Bureau of Stats says we've had a gain of migrants of nearly 300,000 last year. What is the right population -
PM: - I'm going through the official stats with you, which actually say that the migration load effectively had about 100,000 added to it each year over the course of the Howard Government. We're about the same in the two years that we've been in office.
But the key thing is this, Neil - to make sure that you're adjusting your migration intake each year based on the needs of the workforce. Last year, for example, the Immigration Minister took a decision to cut several thousand off it, and that was because we were in the middle of a global recession.
MITCHELL: But, okay, what is the right population figure for Australia? I mean, isn't it time, as Kelvin Thomson, one of your own backbenchers, says, we could be heading towards an environmental disaster here. Water, infrastructure, housing - what is the right figure, and how do we establish it?
PM: Well, I've been asked this many times over the last year or so, Neil. I don't have official advice before me as to what is, quote, 'an ideal population figure for Australia'. I've simply taken the information provided to me, as my predecessors have, about where it's headed. And as I've said, it's a slower growth rate for the next 40 years than it has been for the last 40. The key thing is planning - you can either your cities properly, plan your transport properly, plan your infrastructure properly, make sure you've got those things in a row, and also balance it against your long-term national security needs as well.
Kelvin is right to point to the problems about water provision. That, I think, is really important, which is why a whole lot of investments have been made by us in urban water in the last couple of years.
MITCHELL: But do we not need to sit down, as Kelvin Thomson suggests, and look at the figure we need and work towards it. You can change it by changing the migration rate, I repeat. Do we need to look at that? Do you need to look at freezing migration?
PM: Well, on the question of migration, I think we've had bipartisan consensus on this since the Second World War. And, as I said, the immigration rate went up hugely under the previous government, we've kept it about the level in which we inherited it. But I go back to my point, Neil - it's that this needs to be assessed each year on the basis of the needs of the economy. You bring it down in those years where, frankly, we don't need extra people for the workforce, and if there are, however, demands for skills which we can't meet (inaudible) Australia, then you bring it up.
That's why it's a year by year analysis, and that's as it's been over the last several decades that I'm familiar with, of governments of all persuasions. And the bulk of the growth comes from natural fertility.
MITCHELL: Well, no, it doesn't. It doesn't. According to the figures, the growth from natural fertility, the net gain was 154,000. The migration gain was 297,400. Now -
PM: - Well, we can debate those figures. On the question of the fertility impact, on the migration impact, I'm talking about here people who come here as permanent residents. But anyway, we'll come back on that.
But fertility is a big factor, migration's a big factor, but the migration factor we adjust depending on what's needed for the workforce.
MITCHELL: But Prime Minister, we're growing at double the rate of the rest of the world. Is that good?
PM: Can I say that it depends which countries you -
MITCHELL: - No, the world average is one per cent, we're growing at 2.1.
PM: Well, if you go to Japan at present, which is a country whose population has started to shrink, and many of the populations of Europe have either reached static levels or are declining. This creates some problems. One of the problems is -
MITCHELL: - But what about us?
PM: - this. Enough people in the - no, hang on - having enough people in the workforce in order to provide the income necessary to support retirement incomes, and the future of the health system. Getting that balance right is a real challenge, Neil, and that's why we try and do that on a reasoned, annual analysis of what we can sustain, what we need, and adjust it for the future.
I don't think anyone wants to have excessive migration. We don't , and as I've said, we've kept the levels about at those which we inherited from the previous government.
MITCHELL: So are you comfortable of a growth rate of over two per cent while the rest of the world is one per cent?
[PHONE LINE DROPS OUT]
Hello?
Oh no - we've lost him. The line's dropped out. Okay, we'll take a break and we'll get the Prime Minister back on the line, I hope, and come back in a moment.
[INTERVIEW BREAK]
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with me. Apologies for that, Prime Minister. The problem was at our end.
PM: I disappeared in the track somewhere, did I?
MITCHELL: Well, I don't know. It's still not all that flash. Anyway, we'll persist. Can I ask about something else? Asylum seekers - we've had a 29 -
PM: - Just to finish on the question of population, by the way, just so that we're aware of this. You asked me legitimately about where population ends up, and I said before governments of both persuasions have pursued that sort of approach. Remember, I think it was on your program, you actually asked Tony Abbott the same question about 36 million and he said something like 'I don't see anything wrong with that' -
[PHONE LINE DROPS OUT]
MITCHELL: Oh no. Hello? It's happened again. The Prime Minister is on a mobile phone, we've got other telephone problems. My apologies for that.
[INTERVIEW BREAK]
MITCHELL: We'll try once more. Prime Minister, I'm sorry about that. Now it's the mobile phones causing problems. I'm sorry, the Prime Minister's with us.
PM: I don't know whether the problems at your end or ours, mate.
MITCHELL: We'll carry it. We'll wear it.
PM: No, no, I really don't know, but there you go.
MITCHELL: Never mind - that sounds a lot better anyway. Can I move on to asylum seekers? 29 per cent increase in asylum seekers to Australia last year. The United States went down five per cent, Canada went down five per cent, the rest of the world was stable. Why are they coming here if it's not a change of government?
PM: Well, can I say that the comments made recently by the UNHCR in the region says that, in fact, I'll just quote the bloke concerned. He said that: "I wouldn't say that what's happening in Australia bucks the trend at all. I'd say it's entirely consistent."
There's been a fair bit of misreporting about this in the last period of time. The UNHCR report says Australia increased by 29 per cent, New Zealand up 36 per cent, countries like Denmark up 59 per cent, Belgium 40 per cent, Finland 47 per cent, Poland 47 per cent. It just varies around the world from year to year, and we're all dealing with the same sort of challenges, which is changing security circumstances in different countries.
MITCHELL: Okay, can we get to the insulation issue because I just want to run through a couple of things quickly. More fires, we've now got 120 house fires around Australia as a result of dodgy insulation. As we head into winter the fire brigade tell me it will get worse. They say there are ticking time bombs in ceilings all around the country. When will you inspect all of them?
PM: What we've said so far, Neil, is that we will inspect as many houses as are necessary. What Minister Combet has said is that for all foil insulation households, he'll have all of those inspected. As for non-foil insulation, he's already agreed to inspection of 150,000, and he'll keep that figure under review. Anyone concerned about it, of course, should get onto Minister Combet through the relevant government information -
MITCHELL: Doesn't work, Prime Minister. We've tried it and they say they've got no idea when they can inspect houses. We've got old ladies, and I've mentioned this to you before, living in houses frightened and you can't offer them any hope.
PM: What we'll do is work through each of these one by one, Neil, in order to make sure -
MITCHELL: - All of them? All 1.1 million?
PM: We'll work through each one of these concerns which are raised by the public one by one because it is important that we ensure that all the inspections are done properly. That means, as I said before, with foil inspections we work through all of those, 150,000 non-foil inspections. Of the sampling done so far we have some 92 per cent of homes coming back with an indication that there are no safety-related concerns, and we'll simply go through this methodically, one by one.
Now, it's going to take time. It's not perfect - I fully accept that -
MITCHELL: These people, in the mean time, are living in fear, Prime Minister.
PM: Yeah, we're going to have to work through each of them one by one. If any one of your listeners is concerned about their circumstances, please make sure that your program provides us with those numbers so we can get them directly to Minister Combet's office.
I understand this is difficult for people. I fully accept that fact, but we intend to be as systematic about this as we can.
MITCHELL: Okay, John Brumby's listed 10 questions on health today. Just one of them jumped out at me - who will negotiate nurses' wages, and how?
PM: One the, someone's told me that Premier Brumby has written me a letter and they also tell me it's on the front page of The Age, but I haven't got it yet.
MITCHELL: Number one - the Rudd plan offers no new money now, so what's in it for Victoria?
PM: Hang on, I'm just saying I haven't got it yet. Someone told me there was a letter there. Now, your first question is about industrial relations, is that right?
MITCHELL: Yep, who will negotiate the nurses' wages and how?
PM: Well, in my discussion with John the other day he asked that question and I said to him quite directly that it would be done under the existing state industrial arrangements and that would apply in every state and territory of the country.
MITCHELL: Will you sign up to Victoria's plan to train 200,000 new doctors and nurses over the next 10 years?
PM: Well, what we're doing, Neil, is because we've got such an undersupply of doctors nationwide, we, for the first time, have provided money, $632 million, to provide for an additional 6,000 GPs and specialists for across the country.
We have further announcements to make in terms of the future needs for nurses, and we are responding to that based on the submissions given to us by the AMA, the Royal College of Surgeons, the Royal College of General Practitioners, the Royal College of Physicians, and so we will work through each of these case by case, but there you go. That's 6,000 we're putting forward.
I think what people want is to deal with the undersupply of doctors and nurses right across the system, and this is one part of it.
MITCHELL: Okay, look, thank you very much for your time. Just very quickly, were you, it would have been your era - were you a fan of Hey Dad? Have you seen what's unfolding on this at the moment?
PM: No, mate, I'm not. Tell me about it.
MITCHELL: No, I thought you might have been, watched Hey Dad when you were younger, the television program. There are now allegations that one of the lead actors in fact had acted inappropriately with one of the child actors. He denies it, but that's the allegation.
PM: No, sorry, I haven't seen those reports.
MITCHELL: Okay. Dean Mighell, on this program, the secretary of the Electrical Trades Union, you said he was untrustworthy. He is threatening to sue and wanting an apology. Will he get it?
PM: I've said before, Neil, that Mr Mighell and I have a long history of disagreements, and I'm sure they'll continue into the future. He hasn't supported the Government's approach to industrial relations. He wanted a different scheme. He believed that ours was too centrist from his point of view. He wanted a more radical approach. We rejected that, and we've rejected other things which Mr Mighell has suggested over the years, and I've got to say, Neil, for the foreseeable future, we're always going to have a big difference.
MITCHELL: But that's fair enough, to have differences, but to call him untrustworthy is something else and he is threatening to sue you.
PM: Well, can I just say, Neil, as I've said, we have vast disagreements and we indicated our position in relation to Mr Mighell way back when I was Leader of the Opposition.
I think it's fair to say that I'm probably not on the top of his pin-up list, nor is Julia Gillard, nor are practically any other members of the Government which I lead - and you know something? That's because we're trying to pursue a fair and balanced industrial relations system and not yield to the most radical of the trade union leaders in the country, and that's who he is.
MITCHELL: So no apology?
PM: Can I just say I've made my position very clear, and will continue to do so.
MITCHELL: Thank you for your time. Apologies for the problems.
PM: Thanks, mate. Bye.
MITCHELL: The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd.


PM: It's good to be back in Wagga, as I've been here many times over the years, both for family visits and in other capacities as well. But it's also good to have spent some time with professionals here at Wagga Base Hospital. And I've had a good opportunity to talk to the locals here about their needs. We, the Australian Government, have been making investments in this hospital. We have provided investments for additional equipment for the operating theatres, additional equipment for the emergency department. We've also made an investment in the transitional aged care places here, I think an extra eight, just across the road I'm told, to take some of the pressure off the hospital itself.
And on top of all those things we've made investments, significant ones, in Charles Sturt University. But this is just the beginning. What we're on about is a new national health and hospitals network, which is funded nationally, but run locally. The problem which we have with state Governments around the country is that they do not have sufficient finance for the long-term future to provide the funding certainty which our health and hospitals system needs. That's why we've put forward a plan for a new national health and hospitals network which will be funded nationally, but secondly, also run locally. So that local hospital networks, where you've got a real community of interest, can get on with making local decisions for local people. Funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding role for the future of the public hospital system. One last thing, then I'll take your questions.
I welcome very much the statement by the New South Wales Opposition Leader, Barry O'Farrell, to support this plan for health and hospitals. And I would encourage Tony Abbott, the federal Opposition Leader, to do the same. Working families across Australia want us to get on with the job of building better health and better hospital services for all Australians. I congratulate Mr O'Farrell, the New South Wales Opposition Leader, giving us his support. I would call upon Mr Abbott to do the same. I think what working families across Australia, country areas, big cities, is they want to see the politics taken out of this. They want us to get on with the decisions of making sure we can deliver this necessary reform for the future.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you like to- now that you've come and seen the hospital- is it possible that you could comment on whether or not you'd like to fast-track the redevelopment of this hospital?
PM: I've had a long talk with the doctors about their redevelopment plan. They tell me that they first concluded a redevelopment plan here in 2003. That's quite a while ago. There seems to have been a, something like a seven year delay so far. You know something- what changes with what we are putting forward for the nation is for the first time, the Australian Government would take on 60% of the cost of building new hospitals, and of adding to existing hospitals, and for their equipment, like their emergency departments, and for their operating theatres.
So what I can say for the future is, once decisions are taken into redevelopment- to redevelop existing hospitals or to build new ones, under our plan, the Australian Government would be footing the dominant slice of the bill. Now, we've had discussions about the details of that, what they need in terms of extra capacity here in their emergency department. One of the problems here is the emergency department, I'm advised, can't be expanded because of the physical constraints of the hospital, that is, you can't actually make it bigger. We've got to look at practical things like that, but we, the Federal Government, for the first time, will be the dominant funders of any such expansion. In the past, the Federal Government contributed not a dollar to the capital needs of hospitals.
JOURNALIST: So ideally, when would you like to see the hospital fast-tracked?
PM: You know something, there are 764 public hospitals in Australia. There are a large number in New South Wales. What I'm saying is that once decisions are taken to expand the physical size of hospitals, or to redevelop them, or to build new ones, for the first time we become the dominant funders.
VOX: There's a reason people vote Liberal. It's to get a new hospital, so people don't lay in hospital beds for three days with broken hips.
PM: Well I think what the lady has just said there is an accurate indication of what happens when you don't have enough hospital beds. On the question of hospital beds, and to build on the comments just made, the previous Health Minister, Mr Abbott, who was Health Minister for five years, ripped a billion dollars out of the public hospital system of Australia. Now, that equates to 1025 hospital beds not being funded. What we're saying is, that has to change. And it's important to take the politics out of it, in order to make sure we get on with the positive task of making sure we've got enough hospital beds for the future.
JOURNALIST: You've got family in the region here. How would you feel if you had a family member who was laid up for a considerable time in Wagga hospital?
PM: Well, I've got to say- well, I'm about to find out I suppose, I'm going to go and have a family reunion soon, it looks like it's going to be less quiet than it was otherwise going to be- there are many hospitals in regional, rural and metro Australia which are in real need of improvement. That's just the truth of it. And people can make, you know, party political comments about this as much as they like. I think people are sick and tired of it. They just want us to get on with the job of fixing it, and to get on with it. And that's why I congratulate again Mr O'Farrell for providing bipartisan support from the Liberal party in New South Wales to get on with the job. I call upon Mr Abbott to do the same, so that we can get on with the job of providing more hospital beds, get on with the job of funding additional doctors and additional nurses which the system needs.
One last thing is this- some of our discussion now is also focused on what you need to do for extra GPs and specialists in rural and regional areas as well. That's why two weeks ago we announced a funding package of $632 million for the training of more than 6000 additional doctors, GPs and specialists, and for the specialists to be concentrated in rural and regional areas. Specialists are needed in regional Australia, like we are here in Wagga at the moment. They're needed right across the country.
Having said that folks, I'm already an hour and a half late to my family reunion, I've got to zip, got to go- thanks guys.


PM: Well it's great to be out in Broken Hill today, and great to be out here with the Royal Flying Doctor Service, and great to have had a chance to visit the Broken Hill Base Hospital. We're here to talk about the future of the health and hospital system of Australia. And the Government has put forward a new, National Health and Hospital network funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funders of the entire scheme.
I've listened today carefully to what local representatives of the RFDS and the local hospital and other health services have had to say to us. The Royal Flying Doctor Service briefing to us is of itself significant. Right now, we have something of a dog's breakfast when it comes to the funding arrangements between Canberra and the states for the Royal Flying Doctor Service. We can do a lot better on that for the future. For example, I believe the Australian Government needs to become the exclusive funder of all the primary care services delivered by the Royal Flying Doctor Service.
We also need to have a much better and predictable arrangement for the funding of aircraft like this. This Australian Government has funded 60% of the cost of the aircraft behind us. The Royal Flying Doctor Service operate 56 of these around the nation. We need to have a better and more predictable funding arrangement for them for the future, because all Australians, country and city, metropolitan, regional, rural and remote citizens, all deserve better health and better hospital services. That's what working families are saying for us everywhere.
The second point I'd make here is having spent some time with the folks from the Broken Hill Base Hospital is the importance of supporting the rural health program run by the University of Sydney and others out of this centre. And what we need to do is get behind the delivery of rural and remote health services nationwide. It doesn't matter where you live in Australia, big cities, small towns, regional centres like this. If you're in the bush, if you're in the outback, or in downtown Sydney, better health and better hospital services are needed.
One of the challenges here is to make sure that we're providing the best support possible for the doctors who come here to train, the nurses who come here to train, and the allied health professionals who come here to train. That's why I'm pleased to confirm today that the Australian Government will be investing some $2 million to make sure that we are providing an expansion of student accommodation services, and also, additional teaching facilities for the Broken Hill university department of rural health. We think this is really important for the future.
You see, health and hospital services are fundamental to the nation's future, fundamental, also, to what we do as a country long-term. Can I also say this when it comes to the future of our health and hospital services, and this is a really important point- for the future, I would really appeal to Mr Abbott to get onboard with health and hospital reform. I would really appeal to Mr Abbott to get onboard for better health and better hospital services for all Australians. I would really appeal to Mr Abbott to get onboard for delivering a better health and better hospital services here in regional, rural and outback Australia as well.
One of the things we've offered Mr Abbott is an immediate technical briefing on the implications of our reform plan for the nation. That offer has been with him for some time. I would urge him to take up that offer tomorrow. People are sick and tired of politicians pointing fingers at each other on the question of health and hospitals, and better health and better hospital services for all Australians. People have had a gutful of the finger-pointing, they want all of us to point to a direction ahead to change the system for the better, for the future.
Having said those few things, I am happy to take some questions, and then if our friend from the RFDS wants to add?
DOCTOR: No, I would support your comments (inaudible), and we look forward to the national funding model. Prime Minister, it's very reassuring to us and to people in the bush to hear your support.
PM: Okay- now folks, over to you. Any questions?
JOURNALIST: What are you going to do for the Broken Hill health (inaudible)
PM: Well, I've just mentioned that we're investing $2 million here. On the additional services- and I've spoken to some of the young doctors here this morning- what are one of the things they need? More accommodation. One of the other things they need, is they need expanded teaching facilities. This allocation here, like many others which will be announced in the days ahead right across rural, regional, remote Australia, head in that direction.
The other thing, of course, which will become relevant here, is the rural doctors incentives scheme which we have just expanded significantly, covering some 500 locations across the country, and some 2,500 I believe doctors. The third thing is this- we've offered now to invest in some 6,500 additional GP and specialist training places for the country, and a large slice of those will be heading out to rural centres like this, regional centres, outback centres like this. It's all to make a difference for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just with regards to your health reforms, could you just tell us the difference between a city hospital and Broken Hill in terms of block funding?
PM: When it comes to the future of, let me say, hospitals like the one at Broken Hill, and the smaller country hospitals around, we are very clear about this- there is nothing in the new National Health and Hospitals Network which would result in any one of these services being closed. Furthermore, let me say this- in fact, what we'll be providing is, for smaller country hospitals, block funding support to ensure they continue into the future. Let's not have any irrational fear campaigns based on this. We want better health and better hospital services for all Australians, whether they need to be brought to those services on aircraft of the Royal Flying Doctor Service, whether they need to be brought to Base Hospitals like here at Broken Hill, or be tended to on the way through in a small country hospital. It's not a time to talk about cutbacks, quite the reverse. It's a time to head in the reverse direction and invest in the future needs of the system.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, can I just clarify one thing, is Broken Hill Base Hospital a small hospital?
PM: Broken Hill Base Hospital is about 90 beds. It has a staff, I understand, of about 20 doctors- am I right? And a couple of hundred nurses. This is not a small hospital. But you know something, this hospital will be expanding under the investment plan that we will put underneath it for the future.
JOURNALIST: Why Broken Hill specifically to get the funding? Surely other places, rural, remote communities need the money, too?
PM: Well today, the announcement I've made in terms of support for student accommodation, teaching facilities, will be replicated to 20 or 30 different locations across the nation. This, however, is, let me say it, the heart of outback Australia. If you want to make it very plain to the people who live in the bush and the outback that the Government supports their needs for better health and better hospital services, it's a good place to come. Also, when you come to places like this, you learn a thing or two, as I have with our conversations this morning with the folk who actually work here.
JOURNALIST: So Prime Minister, can I just- I don't mean to go over this again- but will Broken Hill Hospital be subjected to block funding, or will they be on the casemix funding?
PM: When it comes to the future of Broken Hill's funding for its downstream services, it is categorised now as a significant regional hospital. It'll be funded accordingly. If any further services needed to be funded on a block funding basis, it will be. Let me be very clear to the people of Broken Hill and this region- there is nothing in our proposal which would result in any reduction to its services. In fact, what I see is a funding model which would lead to an expansion of its services in the future, of the type that we've announced today.
JOURNALIST: How does being in Broken Hill in terms of the Labor party heartland? How do you feel?
PM: Well, you know something, it's my first time to Broken Hill. I understand there've been a couple of Prime Ministers who've been here before. It's about a quarter of a century since the last one, and about a quarter of a century between that one and the previous one. Let's make it a more regular visit in the future.
JOURNALIST: So we're going to see you back here soon?
PM: Well, you'll see me back. I think this is a great part of Australia. Its contributed hugely to the national economy over the decades and the centuries. But what you see out here is this great dedication by health professionals who are passionate about their work. Talking to these young doctors over here in their third, fourth, fifth year of medical studies, from centres as far removed as Sydney, from Adelaide, and even from the great state of Queensland, can I say that what impresses me is their- what was funny about that?
DOCTOR: It's just that they came here to get a better education.
PM: That's right- is that they came here because they're dedicated to providing services to people who are out here in rural and regional Australia. Let me finish my remarks today by saying a few things about my political opponent. Can I say for Tony Abbott's race today, I wish him all the best in his race. If it was me, I'd probably collapse in the first leg. But can I say, he's out there in a tough field of competitors, and good on him.
JOURNALIST: Did you have a bet on him?
PM: I just wish him well. As I said, if it was me, like most blokes in Australia, I think you'd be collapsing under the pressure on the first leg. So, anyway, good luck to him.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you just comment on the asylum seekers that have been transferred to Villawood? What's happening out there at the moment, and are they going to be processed on the mainland? Why?
PM: Can I say that the Australian Government makes no apology for deciding when certain people who come here as asylum seekers are not legitimate asylum seekers. That's what's happened in this case. Our view as a Government is that when it comes to asylum seekers, if they do not pass the test of being legitimate asylum seekers, then they are sent home. That is what has happened with the decision made about this group of 90 or 100 asylum seekers, and that is why they are currently being processed for return back home. That's as it should be. A system which is fair and balanced, one which treats legitimate asylum seekers fairly, one which sends those who are not legitimate asylum seekers back home. And that's what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, obviously you're on a whirlwind-
PM: They are great glasses.
JOURNALIST: Pardon?
PM: Great sunnies.
JOURNALIST: Oh, thank you! You're on a bit of a whirlwind trip today-
PM: Where'd you get those?
JOURNALIST: Broken Hill actually, locally bought. You're- considering how close you are to-
PM: What'd they cost?
JOURNALIST: Considering how close you are to the Menindee Lakes at the moment, and how important water is both for the region and nationally, have you considered making time to go down and visit them?
PM: Can I say that I have been briefed extensively by the Minister for Water, Penny Wong, on the needs of the overall system, the particular significance of the Menindee akes. I'm also familiar with the overall challenges of the system. Remember this- for the first time in Australia's history, we will have, now, a Murray-Darling Basin Authority responsible for the entire system, the first time in the country's history. Secondly, for the first time in the country's history, we will have a cap, scientifically determined, for the use for the overall system. And thirdly, for the first time in the country's history, we are purchasing back huge amounts of water entitlements in order to take the pressure off the system.
These are three big firsts. But you know something, we're also dealing with the ravages of climate change when it comes to the water system of this nation. And that means we've got to tackle it both in the immediate sense and the long-term sense. But as for the Menindee lakes, the Climate Change Minister and others, including the Parliamentary Secretary, I'm sure will be here on a regular basis.
Okay folks, we've got to zip, because I understand you've got some customers coming in here soon as well. Thanks. 


Training for medical, nursing, dental and allied health students in Broken Hill will receive a major boost through a $1.9 million investment in student accommodation and education facilities.
The Rudd Government's investment will provide support for student accommodation units and a new wing to the University of Sydney Department of Rural Health at Broken Hill.
Currently, the Broken Hill University Department of Rural Health is operating at capacity for student accommodation.
It is further anticipated that their student load will increase by 40% in 2010 (from around 22 to 35 students on placement each week during the academic year).
By providing high quality training and accommodation facilities, the Rudd Government is helping communities attract more people to work in regional and rural Australia.
We know that doctors and health professionals who spend time training and learning in regional and rural centres often establish strong links with the local community.
These projects will help ensure that students undertaking rural training have access to top quality facilities and encourage them to consider future careers in rural health.
The Rudd Government is determined to attract more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals to regional and rural communities throughout Australia - and keep them there.
This will mean more Australians will get better access in the future to appropriate health care, regardless of their location.
This investment will build on the Government's:
- $632 million announcement to train more doctors - of which 50 per cent of new GP training places will be provided in the bush.
- $134 million Rural Health Workforce Strategy, that will deliver 500 communities and 2,400 doctors with more financial support to move and stay in rural and remote areas.


E &amp; OE proof only
Thanks very much, Michael, and thank you all for being here today and welcoming me to this marvellous building. This is the most impressive railway bridge garter I've ever been in anywhere in Australia, so for those of you who work here this is an extraordinary piece of redesign and the use of an old building for new purposes.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thanks, Michael, for the invitation to address you today on the critical challenges focusing on Australia's future. As you all know, there is no shortage of those challenges.
The critical factor, of course, in responding to each of them is to have a clear-cut strategy dealing with each element.
Standing still has never been an option for Australia. In fact, standing still is the only sure-fire option for falling behind. Policy, if it's to be real, must be dynamic, forward-looking and forward leaning.
The Government is committed to building a strong economy, protecting the jobs of working families and keeping Australia out of recession while most of the rest of the world has gone under: to change the nation for working families; to change the nation for senior Australians; to change the nation for generations of Australians to come.
In our first two years in office, we've begun this work. We've begun by:
- Bringing in fair and balanced laws for the workplace through the abolition of Work Choices; 
- Lifting our investment in and improving the state of our schools through the Education Revolution;
- Delivering better health and hospital services through the biggest reform of the system since Medicare.
On top of this, the Government has also committed to delivering a better future for all Australians: 
- By laying the foundations for long-term, sustainable growth by investing in the drivers of productivity growth in skills, infrastructure and regulatory reform;
- By properly planning and investing in our major cities and in our major regions to deal with the challenges of a growing population; and also
- By acting on the great intergenerational challenges of climate change and water.
The core to all the above is to build a strong economy for the future.
The first two years that the Government has been in office have seen wild swings in global economic conditions - from the inflationary boom of 2007, to the dramatic global bust of 2008-09, and the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression.
Through these radically changing circumstances, the Government has sought to apply consistent principles of economic management - countercyclical macroeconomic policy to maintain stability while continuing to prosecute a comprehensive program of microeconomic reform.
The Government's economic strategy has therefore been to manage the economy through fluctuating short-term economic conditions while at the same time implementing long-term economic reform. These are the two continuing arms of the Government's economic policy - both for the first two years that we have been in office and for the future.
In my address today I want to remark upon three points: 
- First, to report on how we have implemented this economic strategy through the boom and bust cycle of global economy in the last two years; 
- Second, to identify the emerging challenges associated with a return to growth following the global recession and the Government's response to those challenges;
- Third, to lay out our plans to build a platform for sustainable growth over the long term, including by building more productive, more sustainable and more liveable cities.
When this Government came to office, the Australian economy was in the full blush of an historic mining boom, fuelled by strong global economic growth: 
- Nominal GDP growth was running at 8 per cent. 
- Record commodity prices had driven up our terms of trade up more than 20 per cent since the mid-2000s, the sharpest increases since the wool boom straight after the Second World War.
- BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto were in the process of securing a record 85% increase in iron ore prices and a 200% increase in the coking coal price, delivering record corporate profitability for these mining giants;
- And these historic prices pushed mining's share of Australia's total GDP back to levels not seen since the end of the late 19th Century, when Western Australia was in the midst of a gold rush and Broken Hill was first opened up for development.
But, after 15 years of uninterrupted growth, Australia was in danger of falling into the trap of its own prosperity. The economy was suffering from capacity constraints including widespread infrastructure and skills shortages: 
- First, infrastructure bottlenecks emerged with bulk commodity ships queuing off our ports, urban congestion clogging up major cities and a broadband network that was among the slowest and most expensive in the world;
- Second, employers were suffering chronic labour and skills shortages as they struggled with the tightest labour market in 30 years;
And this combination of a booming economy and constrained economic capacity threatened to undermine Australia's macroeconomic stability. 
- Inflation rose to 16-year highs, peaking at 5 per cent in September 2008 - the highest recorded inflation rate in Australia since inflation targeting was formally introduced in 1996;
- And the Reserve Bank responded by slamming on the monetary policy brakes, delivering 12 consecutive interest rate rises, leaving Australia with the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
In my first speech on economic policy as Prime Minister of Australia, delivered in Perth in January 2008, I committed to tackling these problems, these economic challenges, through the principles of responsible, conservative economic management. In that speech I committed to: "direct all arms of economic policy ... to take the pressure off demand, reduce costs in the economy through regulatory reform, and further boost the supply side capacity of the Australian economy to alleviate inflationary pressures" - and that is what the Government went about doing.
In the following months, the Government's razor gang worked tirelessly to deliver savings of $33 billion over four years in our first budget - more savings than our predecessors delivered in the entire previous term that they were in office.
The forecast 2008-09 budget surplus of $22 billion was the largest surplus as a share of GDP in nearly a decade and achieved by delivering the lowest real increase in government spending in nearly a decade.
Of course, in the last quarter of 2008 global economic conditions changed rapidly and dramatically. On September 15, nine months after the Government came to office, the collapse of Lehman Brothers brought the global economy to the edge of a precipice.
In the months following the Lehmans' collapse, global stock markets fell by more than 50% from peak to trough - a steeper fall than had been experienced in the Great Depression. Credit markets experienced unprecedented dislocation, the global banking system recorded almost 3 trillion dollars in losses, and more than 120 banks failed or were bailed out.
Rapidly, the financial crisis also spread to the real economy:
- Major developed economies fell like dominoes into recession;
- Global trade fell by more than 40 per cent - also the sharpest fall since the Depression;
- And corporate titans, including Ford, General Motors and Citibank teetered on the brink of bankruptcy.
At the time, many commentators were seriously fearful of a return to the 1930s.
The Australian Government knew we would not be immune from these global events. It wasn't a question of whether the global economic storm would hit Australia - it was only a question of how badly we would be hit and what we could do to reduce the damage.
By early October, Australia's economy began to slump, with leading indicators including, retail trade, consumer and business confidence, and stock market indicators collapsing.
But it was not just about statistics - it was about avoiding the very real impact of recession on the lives and aspirations of working families and hard-working small businesses right across the country.
Towards the end of 2008, I received a letter from a shop owner in regional Queensland. He wrote the following:
"I write to you at my wits end ... The people who shop in the shopping centre I am in are struggling... my business has dropped 65 per cent in sales over the last 3 months. I have already had to lay off three of my seven staff... I'm scared I'm going to lose my business to bankruptcy. I'm scared my parents are going to lose their family home as it is security for my business loan."
As the global recession hit Australia, letters like these began to come in as a trickle, and then a flood.
As the economic situation changed in Australia and around the world, the Government was faced with a radically new challenge of countercyclical fiscal policy.
Being an economic conservative doesn't mean standing idly by while the Australian economy is destroyed by forces for which we had no responsibility. Being an economic conservative meant rapidly expanding the direct role of government in the economy as private sector activity collapsed.
This Australian Government, despite the clamour of opposition, decided to intervene dramatically to maintain financial market confidence and to support the real economy: 
- The Government moved quickly in October 2008 to prevent a financial panic by guaranteeing the security of all 16 million Australian deposit holders for the first time in this Government's history. 
- Second, the Government also guaranteed bank wholesale funding, giving Australian banks access to the foreign capital they needed to continue the flow of credit to Australian businesses - again, for the first time in Australia's history. 
- Third, to keep the economy afloat in the short term, we implemented an immediate stimulus of $27 billion, including cash payments, the trebling of the first home owners' boost and an increased business tax break for private investment - actions we added to in December 2008 and February 2009 as we calibrated a series of short-, medium- and long-term stimulus measures to make a difference in the real economy.
As we implemented our economic stimulus plan, we had one eye on the urgent need to support the economy rapidly, and one eye on the future needs of sustainable economic growth: 
- That is why 65 per cent of total direct investment under the nation-building for recovery strategy is investment in medium- and long-term infrastructure 
- Over the medium term, the Government launched an investment program that would involve around 50,000 construction projects in every corner of the nation, including the largest school modernisation program this country has ever seen and record investments in social housing and shovel-ready local infrastructure projects. 
- Over the longer term, the Government's committed to major infrastructure investments including major rail, road, port, education and clean-energy infrastructure projects, and a national high-speed broadband network
As the IMF concluded: "the increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls in the long term".
The Government was upfront with the Australian people about the magnitude and complexity of the challenges we faced, and of the magnitude and complexity of the economic strategy we were embarking upon to deal with the crisis, and we admitted from the outset that there would be many bumps along the way.
12 months on, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession. It is a testament to the resilience of our people, the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers, government - to pull together, and the clear direction of government economic policy from the beginning.
I am proud of the success of the Government's economic stimulus strategy.
I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates were saved by the stimulus.
I am proud that so many Australian businesses kept their doors open while so many millions of businesses closed their doors abroad.
I am proud that Australia has had the shallowest downturn of all the major advanced economies.
I am proud of the fact that Australia was the only one of the major advanced economies not to go into recession.
And I am proud of the fact that we emerged from this global recession with the lowest debt and deficit of all the major advanced economies and our AAA credit rating intact.
Australia has therefore emerged from the global recession with one of the strongest economies in the developed world.
This should be a cause for confidence. It should be no cause for complacency. Being confident but not complacent means looking over the horizon at the challenges that are now developing beyond the here and now.
It means not resting on our laurels but capitalising on our successes. It means building lasting improvements to our economy by building new foundations for sustainable growth for the future.
Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on that position as we move through the economic recovery phase and return to economic growth.
There is no doubt that Australia has rebounded from the global recession faster than most public and private sector forecasters had expected. 
- In the May 2009 budget, the Government forecast a contraction of GDP of half a percentage point for 2009-10. 
- This was revised up to positive 1.5 percent in Mid Year Economic and Financial Outlook, and the February 2010 Statement on Monetary Policy in which the RBA forecast 2 percent growth for 2009-10.
As we emerge from the global recession, I am stating unequivocally that the Australian Government's economic policy will continue to apply the principles of our economic strategy that we have implemented from the beginning:
- one, maintaining macro-economic stability through countercyclical fiscal policy;
- while two, continuing to build the foundations of long-term economic growth by continuing to invest in the drivers of productivity growth.
The Reserve Bank has already begun to adjust its policy settings to changing circumstances, gradually moving to lift interest rates from the historic lows reached at the depth of the crisis, although official rates as of today remain 3.25 percentage points lower than they were at pre-crisis levels.
Similarly, the Government's own fiscal settings have already passed the peak impact of growth because our stimulus strategy had been constructed to be targeted, timely and temporary. The impact of the stimulus peaked in the June quarter 2009 and has been phasing down ever since.
Importantly, the Government also announced in the May 2009 budget, fiscal rules that will calibrate fiscal policy for the recovery as we sought, once again, to be ahead of the curve: 
- The Government's 'expenditure rule' will cap the real growth in government expenditure to 2% once the economy returns to above trend growth - and this will apply until the budget returns to surplus. 
- Second, the Government's 'offsets rule' is already in force - requiring offsetting savings for any new expenditure. 
- Third, the Government's tax to GDP rule will ensure that the level of taxation remains lower on average than the level we inherited in 2007-08.
These fiscal rules are among the strongest and most credible in the world. As the IMF commented last year: "...the [Australian] Government's commitment to return to surpluses and achieve a positive budget balance on average over the medium term is commendable.
Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment".
These rules represent the continued embodiment of the Government's core commitment to fiscal conservatism - as the private sector rebounds, the Government's support will contract.
In summary, the Government's core economic principle of conservative countercyclical policy interventions is standing the test of the gyrations of the economic cycle. From boom to bust and recovery, the Government continues to apply constant principles to changing economic circumstances.
Thus far, I have been focussing primarily on the Government's strategy to deliver stable macroeconomic conditions across the economic cycle. However, as the Government has focussed on the various short-term economic challenges that we have confronted, we have never lost sight of our core long-term economic strategy - to reform Australia's economy for a sustainable economic future.
As I said in my first address to the Business Council of Australia after I became Leader of the Opposition back in 2007: "To stand still in a dynamic, competitive world is to go backwards. That's why I'm committed to the continuation of the reform process."
That reform process must be anchored in productivity growth, workforce participation and the development of a seamless national economy.
Let me turn first to productivity.
The long-term decline in productivity since the late 1990s is one of the most disturbing trends in Australia's economic performance. Between 1994 and 1999, Australia's productivity growth rate was second among OECD countries. However, since this surge, Australia's productivity growth has slowed. Between 1999 and 2007 we have slipped to 14th among OECD countries.
If we do not act now to lift Australia's productivity growth rate, the rate of improvement in Australia's average living standards will decline. That is why the productivity agenda lies at the heart of the Government's long-term economic strategy, and that is one of the core themes of the addresses I delivered prior to Australia Day this year around the nation in each of our nation's capital cities and states - focussed exclusively on the productivity challenge.
Without productivity growth, we do not have sustainable, long-term economic growth, and absent long-term sustainable economic growth, we do not have the enduring basis for rising living standards, let alone the investment in the social and economic infrastructure we need for the future.
Infrastructure is a critical ingredient for our future productivity growth.
According to the International Monetary Fund, in developed countries like Australia, an increase in the public infrastructure stock by 1 percentage points leads to an increase in output by around 0.2 percent. Yet despite this link, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline. A 2009 OECD report shows that Australia's investment in transport, storage and communications infrastructure as a percentage of GDP fell between the 1980s and 1990s, and fell again in the first decade of this century.
If this trend continues, Australia will fall further behind other nations on productivity and therefore in the long term on future growth and living standards.
Australia's shortfall on infrastructure investment has generated a gap between the infrastructure we've got and the infrastructure we need. We see this in our ports, in freight, in rail, on our roads and in broadband, in the clogging of our cities.
Over the past two years, our Government has been acting decisively to turn around this national infrastructure performance. We've established Infrastructure Australia to provide national leadership to setting priorities and evaluating projects. We've undertaken regulatory reforms to remove roadblocks to infrastructure investment. And we have embarked on the biggest nation building infrastructure program in this country's history:
- A $36 billion transport infrastructure plan including doubling investment in roads, quadrupling investment in rail and investing in the nation's ports for the first time.
- A $43 billion investment in a National Broadband Network - the infrastructure of the 21st century that will deliver super-fast broadband, turbo-charging businesses and transforming our classrooms and our hospitals.
This investment in transport and communications infrastructure is helping support the economy during the economic downturn, filling the gap in investment activity caused by the global financial crisis, but in the long run it helps build our future prosperity.
The Commonwealth Government also recognises the continuing important role of state governments in infrastructure provision.
I'd make the point that the Australian Government's health reform package of itself represents a significant step forward in freeing up state government balance sheets to re-focus their effort on critical state investment in infrastructure. Embarking on health reform, the Government is also therefore undertaking reform to the finances of the Federation.
Treasury estimates that without action, health and hospitals spending would consume the entire revenue raised by the states and territory governments of Australia over the next 20 to 30 years - the entire revenue.
The Government's reforms are estimated to relieve state budgets of some $15 billion of health spending over the coming decade. This will provide the states with additional capacity to invest in the roads, the public transport, the urban infrastructure necessary to support our cities and our regions in the future.
Here in Victoria, it will mean reduced funding pressure on the Victorian Government of $3.8 billion over the next decade. That is $3.8 billion that can be spent on Victorian infrastructure that in the absence would not be possible if we do not bring about our health reforms, and it is another good reason, therefore, why we should all, as a nation, pursue fundamental health reform.
Today I'm in Victoria, and tomorrow again I look forward to meeting with Premier Brumby and looking forward to further constructive discussions on the future of our health and hospital system. The time for reform is now.
Another part of the Government's productivity agenda lies in skills. The Government is building a world-class education system, skills and training that will provide and prepare our kids for jobs in both the traditional trades on the one hand and in the industries of the future on the other. We want to give Australian children the skills and tools to compete with the rest of the world for the high-skill and high-wage jobs of the future.
That is why we are right now in the process of:
1) Establishing a single national school curriculum with an emphasis on the 3 Rs: Reading, Writing and Arithmetic.
2) Providing parents with information on their children's' and schools' performance at school to help lift the standards of all schools, not just some.
3) Building state-of-the-art Trades Training Centres to service each of our nation's 2,500 secondary schools to help kids learn a trade and address future skill shortages.
4) Delivering the digital education revolution to schools so that by the end of 2011 each of our nation's Year 9-12 students will have access to computers in their school. 
5) Undertaking the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, including state-of-the-art 21st century libraries, totally digitally connected, as well as science centres, language centres and other classroom innovations.
6) Providing an additional three quarters of a million training places across the economy.
7) Investing in a further 50,000 university places across the country.
These are among the critical building blocks of an education revolution, a skills revolution, an innovation revolution - all as part of what must call in time a productivity revolution.
One of the most significant consequences of an ageing population is lower levels of workforce participation. The ageing of the population is expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2049-50, which has the potential to result in slower economic growth and slower growth in family incomes.
To express this expected fall in workforce participation in another way, consider the following:
- In 1970, there were 7.5 people in Australia of working age to pay tax and support every person over the age of 65. 
- Today, there are five. 
- By 2050, there will be just 2.7 people of working age to pay taxes for every person over the age of 65.
These are dramatic changes. To counter the effect of the ageing of the population on prosperity, we must support higher real incomes through productivity growth and encouraging the participation - the maximum participation - of those working age Australians in our workforce. Since coming to office, the Government has already implemented major long-term initiatives to this end. 
- We have established Australia's first-ever of Paid Parental Leave, coming into effect from January of next year. 
- We have increased the child care rebate from 30% to 50% to support parents return to work. 
- We have introduced a 'Compact with Young Australians' called 'Learning or Earning', which means that means that young people under the age of 21 without a Year 12 or equivalent qualification must be in education or training in order to qualify for youth allowance.
- Our national health reform agenda includes the largest-ever commitment to preventative health initiatives, and initiatives to improve management of chronic diseases, to help prevent ill health from excluding Australians from work and further impeding workforce participation.
Health has a major impact on workforce participation. Efforts to reduce chronic disease could result in as many as 175,000 extra people into the workforce in the decades ahead.
Access Economics estimates that illnesses associated with chronic pain cost Australia $11.7 billion every year in lost work days. It is estimated that there is a $16 billion annual loss in productivity due to mild to moderate mental illness in the community.
Boosting workforce participation represents another reason for backing long-term health reform. Let me be even blunter: unless we act on comprehensive health reform, we will see a radical reduction in the number of Australians of working age participating actively in the workforce, thereby undermining long-term productivity, living standards and overall economic growth.
Health reform is not just a social policy imperative. Health reform, equally, is an economic policy imperative.
If we are to lift productivity growth, foster greater workforce participation and manage the challenges of population growth, we must also plan and build better cities.
Australia's major cities contribute nearly 80 per cent of national Gross Domestic Product. 
They also provide employment for 75 per cent of the nation's workforce.
Stronger, more sustainable and more liveable Australian cities mean a stronger Australian economy and an enhanced lifestyle for our people. This is an important long-term priority for this Government, and one which cuts across many portfolios including infrastructure, transport, water, housing and the environment, and at all levels of government as well.
Unlike our predecessors, we believe that the Commonwealth Government has a significant role to play in the future of cities policy. Our first step when we came to government was to re-engage with cities policy after a decade of neglect:
- We moved quickly to establish Infrastructure Australia and alongside it we established the Major Cities Unit.
- We started a major investment program for our cities in transport, communications, housing, health, education and community infrastructure.
- And for the first time in the federation's history we have reached a landmark agreement with the states and local governments to have strategic planning in our cities that meets national criteria as a precondition - as a precondition - for further federal investment in urban infrastructure.
Earlier this month, the Government also produced the nation's first ever State of Australian Cities report. The report benchmarks Australian cities with key cities abroad and represents and presents the facts about our cities across a range of indicators - economic, environmental and social.
The State of Australian Cities report will inform Australia's national urban policy to be released later this year with a focus on three core themes - productivity, sustainability and livability:
- To have productive cities, we need cities with world-class transport and communications infrastructure that are well planned and that create hubs of innovation and high-paid jobs.
- To have sustainable cities, we need to have cities that use less energy, produce less carbon emissions, have more public transport and less reliance on cars, and sustainably use our water resources.
- To have liveable cities, we need to have affordable housing, communities that are linked to schools and hospitals and health services, and local infrastructure that creates a sense of community and promotes active lifestyles.
Already, the Australian Government is engaging in the key areas of city policy - productivity, liveability and sustainability.
First, we recognize that productive cities are critical to creating jobs and supporting high standards of living. The key elements of city productivity are infrastructure, innovation, and planning.
As I said earlier, we're investing a record $36 billion in transport infrastructure. This infrastructure will make our cities more productive, and connect our towns and regions like never before.
Here in Victoria, we are already investing the following:
- almost $1 billion to upgrade the Western Ring Road - a key freight route; and
- over $3 billion in the Regional Rail Link, the first major, new rail line for metropolitan Melbourne in 80 years. Think about that - the first major, new rail line for metropolitan Melbourne in 80 years.
- For the first time, the Australian Government has taken a decision to invest in urban rail.
- For the first time the Australian government is investing in urban water, and that is because these are fundamental underpinnings of the future efficiency of our cities.
We're also supporting innovation in our cities. When we look at the critical role being played by infrastructure, we turn also to the National Broadband Network, which will transform Melbourne and our nation's other major cities.
- NBN Co has announced that construction in Melbourne will commence in Brunswick, with a pilot program of 3,000 homes and businesses.
- The roll-out of fibre-to-the-premises technology has already commenced in Tasmania. 
- And a rollout almost 6,000 km of new fibre optic backbone links will connect over 100 regional locations along the routes to the six priority areas of Geraldton, Darwin, Emerald and Longreach, Broken Hill, Victor Harbor and South West Gippsland - parts of Australia that currently are not properly serviced by this information highway of the 21st century.
As I said, we're also supporting innovation in our cities. Here in Melbourne, we have invested in key university infrastructure that will support innovation, like:
- Latrobe Institute for Molecular Sciences
- Centre for Neural Engineering at Melbourne University
- The National Centre for Synchrotron Science; and
- The Melbourne Neuroscience Project.
Furthermore, the Government is working to improve city planning. As I noted before, in December last year the Australian Government led a landmark agreement for the first time in the country's history with states and territories for national criteria for the strategic planning of capital cities. 
- This deal will ensure that states and territories will have in place best practice capital city strategic plans by 1 January 2012. 
- Future Commonwealth funding to state governments will be contingent on this objective.
- COAG has also agreed to the COAG Reform Council driving this reform process, with the support of a small expert panel, jointly appointed by all jurisdictions, and reporting to the Council of Australian Governments.
Finally, on liveability, our investments are also designed to make our cities more liveable.
In particular, the Government is working to make housing more affordable. The Government began by establishing a Minister for Housing. Before we came to office, there was none at the federal level. This was a problem.
The previous government, apparently, did no attach priority to this. This government does.
The Government has also been active in housing policy. 
- Our National Rental Affordability Scheme is stimulating the supply of new affordable rental dwellings across the country. 
- Our $500 million Housing Affordability Fund is working to lower the cost of building new homes by removing barriers to supply. 
- First Home Saver Accounts are encouraging individuals to save for their first home over the medium-to-long term. 
- And we are investing $5.6 billion to build around 19,300 new units of social housing and repair more than 70,000 units of existing social housing the single largest investment by the Australian Government in the social housing stock of the nation.
- Furthermore, more than 200,000 Australians have benefited so far from the First Home Owners Boost.
Making housing more affordable means an increase in the housing stock in both greenfield developments and in brownfield redevelopments.
That is why today I am pleased to announce the next step in our policy to increase housing supply - a $50 million investment in housing-related infrastructure. This is part and parcel of the operation of the National Housing Affordability Fund.
This investment will deliver more than 7,000 new lots and dwellings between 6 and 14 months faster than would otherwise have been the case.
It will deliver cost savings to home purchasers that will average approximately $20,000.
This investment is part of our Housing Affordability Fund, which reduces costs incurred as a result of planning and approval delays and infrastructure costs, such as water, sewerage, transport, and open space.
Here in Victoria we are providing investment to prepare a Precinct Structure Plan for Ballarat. This will fast track land supply in the area, bringing forwarded much-needed construction by some 330 days.
These investments build infrastructure for local communities, unlock housing supply and improve housing affordability. It supports growth in built-up areas, in outer suburban areas, and in regional areas. It will be welcome news for families looking for a new home in many parts of the country - but much more remains to be done.
Too many Australians are locked out of the housing market - working families, in our view, deserve a better deal. Our Government is taking action to turn around this particular challenge, investing in infrastructure and reforming planning so we can build more houses and there are more affordable houses for working families.
The purpose of the housing affordability fund is to begin to bring about fundamental change in infrastructure costs and planning to boost housing affordability for working families. Infrastructure costs are at present keeping too many homebuyers out of the home market. This cannot be sustained for the future.
That's why housing affordability in all of its dimensions will remain a core part of the Government's future reform agenda with state and territories, both in greenfield developments, urban consolidation, and effective social and economic infrastructure planning.
Working families deserve a better deal when it comes to long-term housing affordability and infrastructure charging and in planning reform. That is why we will have more to say in the future through the future operation of our National Housing Affordability Fund.
The Government, also, is seeking to support sustainability in our cities. We are committed to ambitious emissions reduction targets and are implementing a comprehensive nationwide response to climate change.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is central to our plan to reduce Australia's greenhouse gas emissions. 
- We're also investing $4.5 billion in a Clean Energy Initiative that will support Solar Flagship projects, Carbon Capture and Storage demonstration projects, and renewable technology innovation.
- We are improving household efficiency by mandating new 6-star ratings for new homes.
- We are making commercial buildings more energy efficient through the Green Building Fund.
- And we are supporting public transport infrastructure to give families more choices about how they get around.
Together, these investments are important down payments on creating the sustainable Australian cities we need for the future.
To conclude, I remain an optimist about Australia's future.
This country is a no nonsense country, hardworking and full of hard-headed people who are not afraid of a challenge.
When the rest of the world last year sank into the global recession, our nation kept swimming and kept swimming alone. When unemployment queues around the world grew longer and longer last year, business, unions and the Australian Government joined together to save literally hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs.
When there are battles for the right causes, our nation is always there for the fight, and when our friends are in need - at home or abroad - we are always there to lend a helping hand.
We, therefore, and I, as Prime Minister, am deeply proud of the nation that I lead. That is why I am determined to continue to deliver stable economic management that keeps our economy strong while at the same time building prosperity for the long term, and that includes building long-term, sustainable, prosperous, productive Australian cities.
I thank you.


The Australian Government today announced eight housing development projects which will share in $50 million under Round Two of the Housing Affordability Fund.
The $50 million investment will save home buyers an average of $20,000 for 3214 new homes and housing lots, and will bring more than 7,000 lots forward between six and 14 months faster than would otherwise have been the case.
Forming part of the $512 million Housing Affordability Fund, the $50 million investment will provide infrastructure such water pipes, sewerage, roadwork, and community facilities in the developments.
Today's announcement will be welcome news for families across the country looking for a new home, and will help unlock housing supply and improve housing affordability.
The successful projects are:
- $2 million for Ballarat City Council to prepare a Precinct Structure Plan for the Ballarat West Growth Area, Victoria. This will fast track land supply in the area, bringing forward much needed construction by 330 days.
- $1.5 million for Salisbury City Council to develop infrastructure at Parafield Gardens and Salisbury North, South Australia. This will deliver around $12,000 in savings to more than 120 homebuyers.
- $7.5 million for the New South Wales Department of Planning to provide infrastructure for the Bungarribee Residential Estate, near Blacktown. This will deliver around $20,000 in savings for 450 homebuyers.
- $8 million for the New South Wales Land and Housing Corporation to provide infrastructure in Seven Hills. This will deliver around $67,000 in savings to Community Housing Providers who will purchase 120 properties to rent as affordable housing.
- $11.5 million for Sunshine Coast Regional Council to deliver infrastructure in Palmview, Queensland. This will deliver around $26,000 in savings to around 450 homebuyers.
- $7 million to the Western Australian Housing Authority to cover the upfront costs of sewerage, water, gas, electricity and road connections in Henley Brook. This will take around $19,625 off the cost of around 350 new homes.
- $7.5 million to the Australian Capital Territory Land Development Agency for a collector road and bus route to provide public transport services to the residents of Crace.
- $5 million to the Northern Territory Department of Lands to establish infrastructure to support the Palmerston Land Release.
Additional Round Two recipients will be announced shortly.
Thirty-seven projects shared in around $120 million under Round One of the Housing Affordability Fund and the savings generated are already being passed onto to homebuyers.


Today I have released a report which prepares the Australian Public Service to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
The report, Ahead of the Game - Blueprint for the Reform of Australian Government Administration, is the culmination of a review of Australian government administration that I announced in September 2009. It was developed by an Advisory Group chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr Terry Moran AO.
The Australian Public Service (APS) has a proud tradition of independent, professional, and efficient service. International benchmarking confirms its strong performance in these areas. Nevertheless, the APS must constantly renew itself to remain the high performing organisation which citizens expect and deserve.
Australians today want to have a say in how government meets their needs. They demand access to government information which will enable them to make the right decisions for their families. They expect public resources to be managed responsibly and accountably. They look to government for innovative and forward-looking solutions to the complex challenges Australia confronts.
The Advisory Group has put forward a comprehensive reform package to position the APS to meet these high expectations, centred on a culture of putting people first.
Nine broad reform areas are identified, supported by twenty-eight specific recommendations.
These include mechanisms to streamline and integrate service delivery, use new technology more effectively, and build strategic policy capability within APS agencies.
A culture of continuous improvement on these fronts will be embedded through reinvigorated public sector leadership, and a strengthened role for the Australian Public Service Commission.
The Government will consider the recommendations outlined in the Blueprint and respond later in the year.
I thank the Advisory Group for their work on the Blueprint.
For more information: www.dpmc.gov.au


Nine industry and non-government sector experts have today been announced as advisers to the Prime Minister's Task Group on Energy Efficiency.
Energy efficiency is a key plank of the Rudd Government's climate change agenda. Improvements in energy efficiency will help to reduce our emissions and move Australia to a low-carbon economy.
The Task Group comprises representatives from the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Treasury, and the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism.
The role of the Task Group is to:
     * report on the most economically and environmentally effective mechanisms to deliver major improvements in Australia's energy efficiency; and
     * consult with industry and community groups and seek their input on policy ideas and mechanisms to drive these changes.
The Task Group is today releasing an Issues Paper that will promote a broad discussion on how to achieve ambitious improvements in energy efficiency.
The closing date for submissions to this Issues Paper is 3 May 2010.
The Task Group - announced in November 2009 following extensive negotiations with the Opposition on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme - will provide its findings to Government in mid-2010.
Further information is available at: www.climatechange.gov.au.
Advisory Group Members:
John Connor The Climate Institute
Greg Bourne WWF
Sharan Burrow Australian Council of Trade Unions
Neil Marshman Rio Tinto
Clare Martin Australian Council of Social Service
Karen Moses Origin Energy
Rob Murray-Leach Energy Efficiency Council
Cameron O'Reilly Energy Retailers Association of Australia
Brian Spalding Australian Energy Market Commission


PM: I've just had a further meeting with Premier John Brumby of Victoria to discuss the future of the new National Health and Hospitals Network. This has been another strong, positive, substantive discussion. We worked our way through a number of the questions which arise concerning the governance of our system. We're looking forward to meeting again very soon, perhaps as early as tomorrow, to go through further of the funding aspects of the system that we have proposed.
It is important that we, the Australian Government, continue to work closely with all the states and territories, all political parties, to try and bring about better health and better hospitals for working people. That is what the people of Australia are expecting of us, and that is what we must deliver through this reform program. And again I would say very clearly to the nation at large that we want to work positively and constructively with all political leaders - Labor, Liberal, whichever party, Commonwealth and state - in order to bring about this important reform for Australians.
The Australian people have been waiting a long, long time for reform for the health and hospital system. The time for that reform has come now. We have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to get this system right for the future.
This new National Health and Hospitals Network will be the single biggest reform to our system since the introduction of Medicare. Working families know, pensioners know, carers know, that the system is under great stress and that it is at a tipping point, and it's time we all worked together to bring about this important change for the future.
Working families want more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and a system which ends the blame game between the two levels of government. It's time to get on with it.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: John Brumby said recently that he wasn't sure under your plan where the buck would stop. Did you have any discussions about that and clear that up at all?
PM: Today we worked through a whole range of questions concerning the governance of the system that we have proposed, the continued role of the states and territories, the role of local hospital networks. It was a good and substantive discussion.
Of course, on the question of ultimate funding responsibility, our proposal is this - for the first time in Australia's history, we, the Australian Government, will become the exclusive funders of the primary health care system of Australia. At present, we represent about 60 per cent of that funding, so we would go to 100 per cent funding for that.
Secondly, for the acute hospital system, for the first time in Australia's history we would become the dominant funders of the system, going from 35 per cent funding now for its recurrent costs to 60 per cent of its recurrent costs. But also, importantly, becoming for the first time, also the dominant funders for the capital needs of the system, the equipment needs of the system, as well as the teaching and training costs of the system as well, whereas at present the Australian Government provides zero per cent of those costs.
And, finally, to take on 100 per cent of the responsibility for the funding of the aged care system.
The reason why us, that is, the Australian Government, being the exclusive funders for the primary care system, the dominant funders for the acute hospital system, the exclusive funders for the aged care system, is that, ultimately, we take away any incentive in the system for patients to be shunted from one arm of it to the other. We need to have the best outcome for patients, for people presenting at emergency departments, for people attending their local GPs, et cetera, and that is the reform that we put forward and we're working through with Premier Brumby as we speak.
JOURNALIST: You've described your discussion as good and substantive, but do you feel you've narrowed the gap between both sides' positions? Have moved forward and narrowed the gap at all?
PM: I believe we are moving through the outstanding areas of disagreement one by one. I believe that we are making some progress. Of course, Premier Brumby will speak for himself, as he should. I don't underestimate the problems that we've still got to work our way through, but that's why we'll continue to keep talking, and as I said, with the objective of resuming those discussions as early as tomorrow, or at any case some stage soon.
JOURNALIST: Do you take this morning's Newspoll as an endorsement of a federal takeover of health?
PM: I believe, for me, the important thing is to focus on a positive plan to improve hospital and health services for working families. And again I just call upon all political leaders of whichever level of government to do the same. It's important everyone works together to bring about this reform for the future. I'll leave the analysis of other matters to analysts.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) criticisms of the hospital plan are about playing to his domestic audience?
PM: Look, the Premier of Victoria, as other premiers, will speak out for their local interests as they understand them. I understand and accept that. My job as Prime Minister is to take this once-in-a-generation opportunity to bring about fundamental changes to the system.
The problem we have, and the problem that's here in Victoria as well, is the system increasingly is at tipping point. That is, you have demand going through the roof for health and hospital services on the one hand, the ability of states and territories to fund the supply necessary to deal with those pressures constrained, and because you've got this gap between the demand on health and hospital services on the one hand and what state and territory governments are capable of funding on the other, the system ends up at tipping point.
That's where we are, and that's why the Australian Government's proposing to become, for the first time, the dominant funders of the health and hospital system. This would be the biggest reform since the introduction of Medicare. I believe the time has come for it.
JOURNALIST: Regarding Stern Hu, (inaudible)
PM: Stern Hu has been convicted of two charges, one of taking bribes and the other of stealing commercial secrets. Australia condemns bribery wherever it occurs.
The trial on the second charge was held in secret, with no media and no Australian officials present for it. This has left, therefore, serious unanswered questions about this conviction. In holding this part of the trial in secret, China, I believe, has missed an opportunity to demonstrate to the world at large transparency that would be consistent with its emerging global role.
The Government, of course, has made strong, high-level and frequent representations on behalf of this individual. We will continue to do so in the future.
Again, I'd reiterate: Australia condemns bribery wherever it occurs. Australia also, however, has reservations about the manner in which the second charge contained within this particular court case has been handled.
JOURNALIST: Maybe the Australian Government should have gone into bat for him earlier, harder?
PM: The Australian Government has made consistent representations on this matter from the beginning, and at the highest levels. As I said, the Australian Government condemns bribery wherever it occurs, but on the second charge here, that part of the trial was held in secret, and I believe the Chinese Government has missed an opportunity to demonstrate to the world how such trials can and should be held with complete public transparency.
JOURNALIST: How much of a strain will this put on Australia's ties with China?
PM: I believe the bilateral relationship will sustain these sorts of pressures. We've had disagreements with our friends in Beijing before. I'm sure we'll have disagreements again. As I said, when it comes to bribery, the Australian Government's position is consistent - we condemn bribery wherever it occurs.
But on the question of the full, transparent and public reporting and access for trials in the Chinese legal system, we believe that transparency is the best way to go, and we believe on this case China has missed an opportunity to demonstrate to the world at large that transparency in its judicial processes is the best way to go.
JOURNALIST: Could it be seen as a failure of diplomacy at all, the fact that (inaudible)
PM: The Chinese legal system has always been vastly different from the Australian legal system. At present in China, I'm advised, we have some tens of Australians who are currently serving various sentences for various offences committed in that country. As I said, the Chinese legal system is vastly different to Australia's.
However, differences in legal system is one thing. Again, I go back to the point about bribery. We condemn bribery wherever it has occurred, but we also believe that legal processes and trials should be held with complete public transparency. And we also reiterate that we believe that China, under these circumstances, has missed an opportunity to demonstrate to the world at large that trials of this nature should be held in public with full representation from diplomatic missions, full presence from those who are supporting those who have been accused.
JOURNALIST: Has Australia had a record-breaking month in terms of boat people arriving?
PM: Can I say that every government, going back about 30 years, I think, each year has been confronted with the challenge of asylum seekers. This government is no different.
The second point I'd make is that there are constantly ebbs and flows in the overall number of people who seek to come to this country, and that is driven, by and large, by international security circumstances. Now, that continues to be the case now, it has been the case in the past under the Howard Government, when many more people had arrived here in the period of the late 90s and the early 2000s, but our challenge as a government is to deal with each of these challenges as they arise.
I repeat what I have said on earlier occasions - if we establish that a person has no credentials as a bona fide asylum seeker, they'll be sent back home. We have sent more than a hundred people back home already and we will continue to do so into the future. That's the way in which the system should operate.
JOURNALIST: There are reports today that you're planning to completely scrap the insulation scheme. Is that the case?
PM: My advice is that we have clearly stated that we plan to bring in a replacement program for the Home Insulation Program. The guidelines for it are currently being developed by the relevant minister, Minister Combet, and by the relevant branches of the industry and the relevant safety authorities. I understand that process is still underway.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) did you discuss with John Brumby at all the opening of Maribyrnong, or using Maribyrnong detention centre again for asylum seekers?
PM: We had no such discussion on that. We spoke exclusively about health and hospitals this morning.
JOURNALIST: Is that something you'd look at, though?
PM: We have no such plans and all those sorts of questions, detailed questions of that nature, should be addressed to the Immigration Minister.
JOURNALIST: How much are closer, you met with Premier three weeks ago, how much closer are you now to being able to put pen to paper on the deal (inaudible)
PM: Oh, well, it's always a bit of a process, these things. When it comes to negotiating something as big as the biggest shake-up to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare, people are going to have a view. It takes a while.
We began, I think, with a whole series of areas of disagreement. I think we've worked our way through a number of those, but I don't diminish the fact that areas of disagreement remain. But, again, I would emphasise the fact that the Australian people expect all political leaders, at all levels of government, of all political parties, to work together on delivering better health and better hospital services for working families, for pensioners, for carers. That's what they want.
I think the public actually get it. They actually understand that the system is at tipping point. They understand that we need to bring about fundamental reform. We've got to work our way through the detail, of course, but the time for delay, I think, has well and truly passed.
Can I just conclude by some remarks on the economy? When I was here yesterday in Melbourne, I delivered an address outlining the Government's economic policy. I outlined our principles of maintaining macroeconomic stability. I outlined our principles for continued microeconomic reform by boosting productivity growth, and how we've applied those through the varying, various changes in global economic circumstance we've had to contend with - the boom conditions of 07, the bust conditions of 08-09 arising from the global financial crisis, and the slow return to growth around the world which we've seen in recent months.
I'm advised today that my political opponent, Mr Abbott, will be delivering his first address on the economy today. Can I say this - I think the Australian public will ask themselves whether they can trust Mr Abbott on the economy when it took only five weeks to break his first promise on the economy, which was not to introduce any new taxes.
On the Neil Mitchell program he said that the Liberal Party, under his leadership, would not introduce any new taxes. Five weeks later, Mr Abbott brought about his great big new tax to fund his version of a paid parental leave scheme.
That's a pretty big breach of promise within five weeks on something as fundamental as economic policy.
Thanks for your time, folks.


As part of delivering a National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government will invest $436 million to transform the way Australians with long term illness are treated.
This will begin with improving health outcomes for the nearly one million Australians living with diabetes - too many of whom end up being treated in hospitals.
For the first time, the Rudd Government will offer Australians with diabetes the option of signing up with a GP practice of their choice. This practice will:
     * become responsible for managing their care, including by developing a personalised care plan;
     * help organise access to the additional services they need, such as care from a dietician or physiotherapist, as set out in their personalised care plan;
     * be paid, in part, on the basis of their performance in keeping their patients healthy and out of hospital.
In 2007-08, around 237,000 hospital admissions were related to complications from diabetes that could have been avoided through better management.
This is 32 per cent of all avoidable hospital admissions.
With an estimated 2.2 million Australians with diabetes over the next decade, our health and hospitals system is not well placed to cope with future demand.
Patients with diabetes often need care from multiple health professionals, including GPs, specialist endocrinologists, dieticians and physiotherapists.
However, current funding arrangements are structured in a way that can lead to 'six minute medicine' and do not support coordination between services.
To rectify this, for the first time, Government funding will be able to be used by general practices flexibly to deliver the full range of services patients need.
This means a single practice will be responsible for ensuring that voluntarily enrolled patients are able to access services from a wide range of health professionals.
In addition, practices stand to be rewarded if their patients' health improves.
The Government will provide:
     * payments of around $1,200 a year on average for every enrolled patient - to cover the costs of day to day GP care and additional services.
     * payments of around $10,800 a year for the average general practice, paid in part on the basis of performance in providing better care and improving health outcomes.
The Government expects that:
     * more than 4,300 General Practices, covering around 60 per cent of all GPs, will sign-on to the program by 2012-13, its first year of operation.
     * approximately 260,000 patients with diabetes will be voluntarily enrolled in a personalised care program by 2013-14.
Providing patients with complex conditions with the option of enrolling with a single primary care service was recommended by both the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission and the draft National Primary Care Strategy.
The Government will work with patient and health consumer representatives and key primary health care groups, including GPs and allied health providers, on detailed implementation arrangements for this policy.
Long term illnesses like diabetes represent a big and growing challenge for our health system.
These reforms mark the beginning of a new way of treating Australians with long term illness.
As the majority funder of our hospitals system, the Commonwealth will have an interest in ensuring that that Australians receive high quality care in the community.
This investment builds on the Government's $632 million investment in our medical workforce that will provide more than 6,000 additional doctors over the coming decade.
As the single government funder of GP and primary care services, the Government will continue to make investments that that deliver better health outcomes and take pressure off our hospitals.


HOST: It's our pleasure this morning to welcome the Prime Minister of Australia, Kevin Rudd. Good morning, Kevin.
PM: Good morning Eddie. Good morning, guys. Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: Good to have you. Kevin, you're meeting with the Premier today, John Brumby, and you met yesterday. The issue is the health revolution that you're trying to get through. You want to change it from a state-based system to a federal-based system. Our callers have been pretty busy this morning, ringing up saying 'OK, tell us why and how this is going to make our health system better.'
PM: OK, two or three quick points. I think what all working families, pensioners and carers want is better health, better hospital services.
What are we going to do about that?
First of all, the Australian Government will become, for the first time, the dominant funder of the public hospital system. At present we pay one third of the bill. For the first time, we become the dominant funder of it. That is what we call a system which will be funded nationally, but here's the other bit - it will be run locally, through local hospital networks. There's no way in the world you'd actually run a hospital system from bureaucrats in Canberra, or for that matter, bureaucrats in Melbourne. They've got to be actually run locally.
But the big difference for the future is making sure there's enough funding in the system. If we don't change it, guess what? The states and territories, including Victoria, won't have enough money to fund this system over the next 10, 20, 30 years. In fact, the Treasuries tell us if there's no change, all the state governments' money will be consumed only on health in the next 20-30 years with not a zac to spend on anything else.
That's why we're stepping in.
HOST: So, Kevin, if this comes in, what's the first thing we'll notice? I mean, we talk about hospital waiting lists and all those types of things. We've had a lot of callers today saying what about preventative care, we've also got an ageing population. What will be the first thing, if everybody agrees to this, what's the first thing we'll notice once the Feds take over?
PM: The three things that people want to change and where we would put our investment first is more doctors, more nurses and more hospital beds, because unless you're fixing those things you're not fixing the system.
HOST: Where do we get them from? Are we going to bring them in from overseas, or are we going to get more training, because it's easy to say. Not too many kids walking around the streets walking around the streets wanting to be an apprentice doctor.
PM: Well, actually, a surprising number, actually. The problem in the past has been we haven't provided enough training places for GPs, so what we did recently, Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, and myself is look at what are the needs over the next 10 years, and frankly, just to stand still, we need an extra 3,000 GPs, and if you want to stand still and not improve the system, another 1,000 or so specialists.
But what we've done is fund a policy announced about two weeks ago which says starting next year we will increase the number of training places for doctors - that's GPs and specialists - across the decade ahead by 6,500, and that's not just pie in the sky in 10 years' time. We'll start increasing the number of GP training places from next year, and that will go up steeply each year after that. So, if you want to know a key area where you'll see change, it's the number of doctors and nurses.
We've also got to invest in more hospital beds, because wherever I am, Melbourne, elsewhere, yesterday I was at a hospital in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne - they don't have enough hospital beds. That's what they say. And if they are going to deal with, like, going into accident and emergency, they said 'well, we've got enough bays in the emergency department, maybe, but frankly, where do you put people once they've come in if they need to be admitted?' That's where the problem lies. We need to fix it.
HOST: Kevin, obviously here to talk a lot about the healthcare system. We had the Opposition Leader, Tony Abbott, on the Hot Breakfast earlier this week, the morning after he'd completed the iron man triathlon. He was pretty chirpy and feeling pretty good about himself and he didn't miss the opportunity to give you just a little whack on the way through. We thought we'd play it back to you, what Tony Abbott said earlier in the week.
HOST CLIP: Do you want to lay down the challenge now to Kevin Rudd, to say 'beat that'?
ABBOTT CLIP: Oh, look, I think that would be a bit unfair. I mean, I've always been a reasonable sportsman and Kevin never has, but look, we're all different.
HOST: Just couldn't resist, could he. What do you think of that, Kevin?
PM: I think he's right. That's what I think.
HOST: Is he trying to do everything in the polar opposite to you, Prime Minister? Is that what he's at there? The running iron man triathlons - what's he doing?
PM: Look, it's a matter for him. On the sport question, look, I'd just proudly say I was a member of the Under 14 E's rugby team at school. I made it into the C-grade team in the Yandina rural cricket competition and was then dropped. I was conscripted to be a member of the ANU weightlifting team and I lasted four days, so basically it's been a disaster all the way through, so I think Tony's right.
HOST: Nicola Roxon came out and said he should spend less time doing triathlons and more time writing policy. She's the Minister of Health, so she's saying stop exercising and get sedentary. Is that sending the right message?
PM: Well, preventative health care is really important. Look, with Tony's triathlon, as I said the other day, good on him, and I was asked about it, I said I would probably die or drown in the first leg, so good on him.
I think it's important to keep fit. As for preventative healthcare, we're going to have more things to say about that, actually, today while we're here in Victoria because fixing people in the hospital system's one thing. Having enough GPs to go to, that's another. That's basic healthcare, but preventing people from getting sick - that is really critical for-
HOST: -Can you give us a head start there, Prime Minister, on what's coming out today?
PM: We're heading off to Geelong to make some announcements about preventative healthcare, and these are going to be quite substantial nationwide. We've been doing a lot of work on this, doing a lot of work with the sort of people who are probably ringing into your program, because preventing people from getting sick in the first place, we're doing the right things not just on diet and exercise but managing the emergence of diseases like type 2 diabetes when they have onset. That's really important.
Having enough GPs to go to, making sure there are enough specialists available in the hospitals and enough hospital beds - this is the practical stuff which goes to why we need a new National Health and Hospitals Network funded nationally, run locally, because frankly the states, long-term, don't have the money to do it.
HOST: Kevin, you mentioned preventative care - one of the things that we were talking about earlier is obesity and the Australian Medical Journal actually did a 5-year study on the actual cost of obesity and as you would know it's more than, someone who's obese or, you know, overweight, the healthcare cost is roughly double that of a person who is otherwise a normal weight. When you're talking about preventative healthcare, are we talking about getting people to be more, so they have a healthier attitude towards their health and actually maybe get out there and play some sport and those sorts of things?
PM: Well, what are the two big drivers of a person's health? Well, probably three.
One is genetics, where you come from. Can't control that, that's kind of what you're given. That's what you're stitched up with when you arrive here, but the two things you can change is what you eat and how you exercise, and a lot of attention should be put on what we eat and how we exercise, but let's just say you develop one of these conditions - how do you manage it so it just doesn't get worse and get completely out of control? Bad for you as a patient, but also bad for the healthcare system as well.
So, we're going to have a fair few things to say about this today at a local level.
HOST: Prime Minister, a lot of our callers say getting to specialists, in particular in the outer regions, one having to be referred through a GP, it clogs up the whole system having to go to the GP to get a ticket if you've got one day off work, it just seems to be these archaic ways of doing business through the medical system, but the referral system has been a constant one we've had on this program, and the ability to be able to go to a specialist closer to home rather than going to the Collins Street specialist, which was the traditional way of doing it, of course, here in Melbourne, to be able to get them out in the regional areas and the suburbs.
PM: Exactly. In recent times I've been up to the Northern Hospital, I've been out at Sunshine, the hospital there, and the one I was at yesterday, Maroondah - look, the challenge from all those hospitals here in Melbourne is the same: 'we need more specialists in our turf, in our part of the world, so that everyone doesn't have to come to Collins Street.
So, how do you fix that? More doctors, more specialist training places, so part of the policy that we've talked about and announced funding for just two weeks ago is 6,500 additional doctors, including GPs and specialists, because if we don't plug this workforce gap, frankly, all the tea in China won't fix the problem. You need to fund it, which is why we are saying for the first time the Australian Government comes in and becomes the dominant funder of the public hospital system, and that is the big change we're putting forward.
HOST: Prime Minister, we're in an election year. A hardy annual is immigration, and that was another hot button for our callers this morning. Robin Williams, the comedian, the famous comedian, who has been in Australia recently, last night on David Letterman he was on and he had this to say about Australia:
CLIP: The Australians are basically English rednecks. You down there, 'how are ya? Good to see you. Hello.'
HOST: We pick up the Herald Sun today, Tony Abbott says I will shut the border, Abbott vows to stop flood of illegal boats, we pay $1,000 bribe so asylum seekers will leave. We've had Tampa, we've had all these things, we've had the White Australia Policy, you name it, it's been going for 100 years in this country, yet we've been built on immigration and there's a few people actually in this room who got off a boat to land in Australia.
Prime Minister, can we get to a stage where we forget about all the polling in issues and come out and just say 'right, here is our stance on immigration.' We're not one of the great countries of the world for having illegal immigrants coming in, by world standards, but we do need to have a population coming in because we've got West Australia that's desperate for skilled or unskilled labourers and that type of thing.
What's your position on this at the moment, Prime Minister?
PM: First of all, I think Robin Williams should go and spend a bit of time in Alabama before he frames comments about anyone being particularly redneck. That's my first response.
But to go back to your question, you know something? Since the war, immigration in this country has been a bipartisan policy and you run into people every day whose parents came out, who have come out themselves and just contributed hugely to our country's future.
When Mr Howard came to office, let me go to the official migration figures - in 1996, we were running at about 85,000 immigrants a year. When he left office it was about 180,000 a year, that's in 2007. We've kept it at about that level since then, but what we try and do is just adjust it each year based on what's the state of the workforce? What are the demands for skills? So, last year, for example, Chris Evans, the migration minister, brought it back in order to deal with the problems of the crisis, so I just think there's a bit of commonsense to be applied in all of this, and migration policy, since the war, has been bipartisan and I think it should stay that way in the future.
HOST: Kevin, big sign saying the Prime Minister's got to move on, but I just wanted to ask you a final one. Joe Biden came out when Obama got his healthcare plan through and said 'it's a big effing deal'. To me it humanised Joe Biden-
PM: -What did that mean, by the way?
HOST: Well, that's I wanted to ask you-
HOST: -Bit like when the Feds take over the state system it'll be a big effing deal.
HOST: It will be if the Prime Minister can get it through, but say, for me, when the build up to last election, when it came out about your visit to an establishment in New York it humanised you, Prime Minister. Is that-
HOST: -Why do you think he's in town?
HOST: Is that part of the battle for you, because we hear you talking healthcare and all the technical stuff, and most of the average people out there just want to say 'Kevin's a good bloke' or 'he's not a good bloke' or 'we like him' or 'we can relate to him'. Is that an issue for you, always?
PM: Look, with me, what I am is what you get. I just believe in trying to work very hard on getting these big decisions right, like on health and hospitals, or the other stuff which people want improved, schools and the rest. It takes time. You've actually got to work on it. I just think there's a limit to how many, sort of, exercises in just running around the place just trying to sell an image, rather than just doing your job.
HOST: Doing the work.
HOST: Doing your job.
PM: I'll be judged, as I should be, on whether we have more doctors, more nurses and more hospital beds, and better funding for the system. That's what I think people want, and whether they think I'm a barrel of laughs every day, well, that's a matter for them. My job is not sort of Entertainer in Chief. Eddie, that's more your problem.
HOST: Kevin, you're looking a bit tired. Are you going to have a break over Easter?
PM: Yeah, well, I think all of us need a break at this time of year, and we've been working really hard on this health and hospital stuff for some months, so, yeah, Therese and I are spending the weekend, a large part of the weekend, at the Lodge. She's started a kitchen garden down the back and she's basically conscripted me to-
HOST: -On the shovel.
HOST: Good work.
HOST: Get your hands dirty.
PM: Start digging, soil, cow dung, and whatever gets thrown in, and so-
HOST: -Can't you get a bloke to do that?
PM: Yeah, there's a guy there, but she-
HOST: -Get Tony Abbott. He's fit.
HOST: So you're not going to help the Governor General get through her wine collection?
PM: I got panned recently for having such a lousy one, but the other thing we're going to do is I've got a cousin who's got a sheep property up at Adaminaby, up in the Snowy, so we're going to go up there and go riding. He's got some horses which, we've gone there many times.
HOST: Are you a good rider?
PM: I wouldn't record it for the national archives. It's probably effective rather than being elegant, if you know what I mean.
HOST: I'm picturing you Vladimir Putin-style, tops off, on horseback, shotgun.
HOST: Bit off judo on the side of the river there.
PM: Yeah, I kind of see it as, sort of, the Kevin 'pulsating pectorals' look, but I think there are certain things the Australian public should be protected from and that's one of them.
HOST: PM, thanks for coming in. We appreciate it. You're advisers are all doing the Macarena out there, trying to drag you out of the studio. We appreciate having 20 minutes of your time. We know it's going to be a big sell. You're seeing the Premier, John Brumby, today, who'll be fighting for Victoria's interests, obviously-
PM: -Yeah, as he should, as he should. Thanks for having me on the program.


PM: Today following extensive deliberations by the Cabinet over the last month I have recommended to the Governor General the appointment of Tony Burke as Australia's first Minister for Population.
Mr Burke will also have responsibility for developing Australia's first national population strategy. Mr Burke will also be retaining his positions as Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.
The facts are that Australia is projected to have slower population growth over the next forty years than we have had over the last forty years by a factor of some fourteen percent. None the less many Australians have legitimate concerns about the sustainability of different population levels in different parts of the country. Particularly its impact on urban congestion, its impact on the adequacy of infrastructure, its impact on the adequacy of housing supply, its impact on government services, its impact also on water and agriculture and on our regions.
In developing Australia's first ever national population strategy Minister Burke will also be acutely mindful of the positive impact of population growth on future economic growth, on Australia's ability to fund the future needs of our health and hospital system, but also the future needs of our national security as well.
Therefore, the Minister will be examining how to balance the future needs of our nation, how to balance future levels of possible population growth for Australia against the impact of that growth on our infrastructure, on our planning and the different regions which make up the nation. I might just now turn to Tony to add and then I'm happy to take your questions.
MINISTER BURKE: Thanks very much Prime Minister and obviously I'm very honoured to have the opportunity to be Australia's first Minister for Population.
Population policy and developing a population strategy reaches into almost every corner of government policy whether it be urban planning, whether it be transport, provision of health services and other government services, right though to water infrastructure.
These issues have never previously been coordinated at a government level and they require a high level of cooperation with every level of government. Population pressures hit different parts of the nation differently. Whether it be the regional employer who is desperately trying to find more workers, or whether it be the person living in one of our cities who's seeing an increase in congestion from the population increases we already have. There'll be a very high degree of consultation in the coming months as we work through an area of policy which has always affected Australia, but we've never actually had a strategy to develop previously.
PM: OK folks, thank you very much Tony and over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Is today a distraction from boats (inaudible)?
PM: We've been working on this proposal over the course of the last month and it's important therefore that we get on with the job. We got on with the job of developing Australia's first ever national population strategy, as I said, there are positive impacts of population growth but there also legitimate concerns in the community about its impact on planning, on our regions, on our cities, on housing and therefore you've got to get that balance right for the future and therefore the Minister's work has to get underway. The Minister as will be reflected in the statement which will be released soon will be working on this over the course of the next twelve months. I'd also say that developing a national population strategy should be a matter of bipartisan support and whoever wins the next election, we would hope, that this important work will continue into the future.
JOURNALIST: Is Christmas Island full?
PM: The advice that I have the morning is that capacity remains on Christmas Island.
JOURNALIST: On population (inaudible) do you have a specific target for the nation's population?
PM: Well what the, let's just lay some facts on the table, the projection by the IGR is that Australia's population growth will be slower over the next forty years than it has been over the last forty years by a factor of some fourteen percent. Therefore our challenge is to make sure that we get our future population levels as right as possible and against that analysis make sure we're planning properly for the infrastructure needs, for the housing needs, for the transport needs for the regional needs and that's why we're doing what we're doing. Therefore the importance of Australia having for the first time, a Minister for Population and for the first time developing a national population strategy is to get the future balance right and that is the best answer to the debate about optimum population levels of one type or another.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) a Catholic Minister has compared this morning (inaudible) sexual abuse?
PM: I haven't seen those remarks but can I say this more broadly about the churches collectively, and I say this very advisedly, the churches collectively protestant, catholic, have a responsibility to make sure that all these matters are properly and thoroughly investigated, properly and thoroughly investigated. I think I'll just leave it at that.
JOURNALIST: Just on asylum seekers and how many people will fit on Christmas Island (inaudible) what are the numbers you have been given?
PM: Well I think the Minister has made that plain over a period of time. I'm simply responding to your question, the advice I have received this morning is that capacity remains.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned (inaudible) about the increase in arrivals?
PM: Can I say that, let's just put all this into context with some of the things we've been talking about as well. Australia's permanent migration flow each year to Australia, has been a bit like this. When the Howard Government came to office, it was about 85,000 a year.
When the Howard Government left office it was about 180,000 a year. In the last two years that we've been in office we've kept it at about that level and across all those years the number of refugees accepted into Australia has been about 13,000. The other thing I'd say is this, when you talk about individual numbers - that when it comes to the period of the Howard Government, at various times annual arrivals of people by boat out of that 13,000 got up to 5 or 6,000. In other various years 3 to 4,000, in various years 2 to 3,000.
In the year 2009, under this Government, it was something like 2,700. These figures will constantly change depending upon international and regional security circumstances. It's important that we place this in its context.
JOURNALIST: But it is a problem isn't it (inaudible)?
PM: Well what we've said is, I am just responding to you in terms of the advice received from Immigration Department.
JOURNALIST: Back to the population investigation, are you worried it will open the door to more debate on immigration numbers?
PM: The key thing is just getting the balance right for the future. Here we are in 2010, the settled history of this country is now 212 years on. This is the first time that we are appointing a Minister for Population and secondly it's the first time we are developing a national population strategy, in order to make sure we get this balance right for the future.
Natural population growth, migration growth, against the impacts across the country and different parts of the country. People in various parts of the country who will be concerned about urban congestion, others will be concerned about the means to find people to go and work in regional areas. Others will be concerned about the supply of affordable housing, others in turn will be concerned about the adequacy of agriculture for the future, and the adequacy of our water supply for the future. As Tony said before, frankly, getting the balance right across all these factors, that's what Australia needs to do for the future. That's why we are doing this and we believe we can get this balance right
JOURNALIST: What will the population strategy include (inaudible)?
PM: Well, this of course now forms part of Tony Burke's in-tray but also in consultation with a whole bunch of other Ministers as he said, quite rightly before, this impacts on every area, practically, of government policy both at the National level and I've got to say at the State level as well.
Let me give you one example. Regional policy, cities policy, how do we make sure that our cities are planned for future population growth against their infrastructure needs. For the first time the Australian Government, at the end of last year, obtained the agreement of the States and the Territories that all future federal funding for infrastructure to the States will depend on the existence of an improved, city-wide long term plan, including a long term plan for infrastructure in each of those cities.
We have taken steps in this direction already, we've taken steps in the direction of regional development, we've taken steps in terms of being the first Federal Government to invest, for the very first time, in urban rail. I draw your attention to what we've done most recently in Melbourne and on the Gold Coast so we have begun a number of investments in these areas, a number of planning decisions in these areas, but the challenge across our vast country differs from region to region. That's why we need an integrated approach and that's why we have a Minister for Population and the development of Australia's first population strategy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the hospital reform package, in particular how are negotiations proceeding with the States particularly with Victoria?
PM: We've had three rounds of discussions now between myself and Premier Brumby. We've worked through a lot of areas of potential agreement and we've worked through a number of areas of potential difficulty as well and there is still several seeks to go between now and the Council of Australian Governments.
But the mood that I pick up from the majorities of the Premiers is that they want to get on and do this thing and to get it right. I'm not diminishing the degrees of difficulty still remaining. We need to make sure we get everything right and that includes working with Premiers and Chief Ministers from all Australia's States and Territories whatever their political complexion, whether or not there is a change of Government in Tasmania for example, whether the Premier of Tasmania is Labor or Liberal, my responsibility as Prime Minister is to work with them to deliver better health and better hospital services for all Australians. This is a once in a generation opportunity to bring about the biggest reform to the system since the introduction of Medicare.
JOURNALIST: There has been some criticism considering that the media release announcing boat arrivals in December last year is basically exactly the same as the one issued last night, so do you think about (inaudible)?
PM: Well, first of all, that's a question which you should direct to the Immigration Minister. Second is, we have constantly said that it's important to respond as previous Australian governments have done to the changing security circumstances of the region and the world. That's (inaudible) affects the overall number of asylum seekers in the world. This is not a problem uniquely to Australia, it's a problem for countries across the region, it's a problem for countries across the world. Therefore, as security circumstances change so to do the policy settings in response to those circumstances as well and we will continue to apply that approach into the future as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just draw your attention, again to what I said before, under the period of the Howard Government, at various years there were 5 or 6,000 people coming in, 4-5,000 people, 2-3,000 people. In the case of 2009 I think we have 2,700 people.
It's important to place all these matters into their historical context. That is what is necessary and important for the future and secondly, to understand where these numbers fit within the overall context of Australia's annual, annual permanent migration intake. The numbers I gave you before 185,000 were coming to this country each year in Mr Howards final year in office of which 13,000 were refugees of which, in the last 12 months having kept those numbers at the same, we've had 2,700 arrive here as asylum seekers by boat. I think it's important to place all of this into its proper context.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: That's a question you'd best direct to the Immigration Minister.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: My advice is that a hospital has just issued a statement confirming that Lady McMahon has just passed away.
Could I, on behalf, of Therese and myself say to members of Lady McMahon's family that we express our sympathy to them and our support and our prayers in what is a difficult time or any family.
Lady McMahon was a distinguished representative of Australia, she was the wife of a Prime Minister of this country, and they lived in the house where we are currently standing this morning. So I believe appropriate respect should be conveyed to her family, appropriate respect to the contribution that she and her husband made to Australia and understand, at a purely human level this is a day of great sadness for any family. 


To help guide the development of policies to meet Australia's future population needs, I have recommended to the Governor General that she appoint the Hon Tony Burke MP to the new office of Minister for Population in the Treasury Portfolio.    
Minister Burke's first task will be to develop Australia's first comprehensive Population Strategy.
In his new role, Minister Burke will consider the likely trajectory of population growth and the challenges and opportunities this will create. Minister Burke will also be tasked with developing the cross government frameworks that will be required to make the most of the opportunities, and minimise the risks, associated with population growth. 
Australia's first Population Strategy will consider the social and economic infrastructure Australia will need to support a growing population, including the roads, housing and service delivery network. 
It will also consider, as an early priority, the opportunities a growing population will create for economic growth and to further develop and grow Australia's regional towns and communities.  The policy will bring a whole-of-government perspective drawing on input from all portfolios.
The strategy will also seek to address the challenges associated with population growth, including the impact on the environment, water, and urban congestion.  
It's expected that it will take 12 months to develop the strategy. There has always been a bipartisan approach on issues of population.  We would hope this work continues whoever wins the next election.
Minister Burke will address these through an open dialogue about what we want for the future of Australian society.
Mr Burke will retain his current portfolio of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.



Cairns residents will have better access to after-hours GP services following a grant of $100,000 under the General Practice After Hours Program from the Rudd Government to the Omega Medical Centre in Manoora, the Prime Minister, Minister for Health and Ageing, Nicola Roxon and Member for Leichhardt, Jim Turnour announced today.
"I am delighted that Cairns is one of 100 Australian communities to be offered Government funding for after-hours GP services," Mr Turnour said.
"The Government's General Practice After Hours Program is helping to build and strengthen after-hours care by general practitioners across Australia," he said.
General Practice After Hours grants of up to $100,000 over two years are available on a competitive basis to support after-hours services.
"The grants recognise both the long and demanding hours frequently worked by the nation's doctors and the difficulties patients have in getting access to after-hours GP care," Mr Turnour said.
"The Government's investment will ensure that as many people as possible in Cairns will have access to high-quality GP services when they need them."
"The General Practice After Hours Program will make it easier for the community to find a doctor after hours."
"Good primary care in local communities means people stay healthier, manage chronic disease and illness more effectively, and stay out of hospital."
"The program has the support of local GPs. The grants can be used to help with costs such as on-call allowances, training and running costs," Mr Turnour said.


The first radiation oncology facility for Cairns is on track for its opening in July next year - when it will start providing local services for most of the city's cancer patients who need radiation treatment.
The Australian Government is contributing $8.3 million towards the radiation oncology facility in Cairns - alongside the Queensland Government investment in the facility which is being provided as part of the State Government's major $446 million redevelopment of Cairns Base Hospital.
About 400 cancer patients a year are expected to benefit from local radiation treatment in Cairns when the facility opens.
Two radiation-proof bunkers will be constructed in the radiation oncology facility in the Cairns Base Hospital. Initially, one linear accelerator will be used to deliver local radiation oncology treatment - with a provision for a second machine when required.
At the moment, patients who need this care need to travel to Brisbane or Townsville.
This project at Cairns Base Hospital means that local radiation treatment will be provided for conditions like prostate cancer or breast cancer. Rare and complex cancer care, such as for head and neck cancers, will continue to be treated at the major tertiary hospitals - in Brisbane or Townsville.
A funding agreement was signed between the Commonwealth and the Queensland Government on 10 February 2009 for the Commonwealth's funding contribution. The Queensland Government will be providing the remaining funds required to complete the project.
Construction earthworks commenced on the site last September. The building is expected to be completed by June this year, with the cancer centre fit-out from then until February next year.
The Queensland Government will be managing the operating arrangements for the radiation oncology facility, including choosing whether to use a private operator.
In this year's federal Budget, the Government provided $3.2 billion for Health and Hospitals Fund (HHF) infrastructure projects, $1.3 billion of which was for the National Cancer Statement including $560 million to create a network of best practice regional cancer centres and associated accommodation facilities.
As well, the first Cairns patients are expected be treated locally by James Cook University dental students from January 2011 at the university's new, federally-funded school of dentistry being built in Smithfield, Cairns. Similar services will start in the Mackay campus from 2012.
The new school of dentistry in the Cairns campus of James Cook University is being built with $49.5 million of federal funding - which was necessary due to the general shortage of dentists in Australia, particularly in rural and regional areas.
The initiative means hundreds of Northern Queenslanders will benefit directly from dental services provided through JCU's Clinical Outreach Program, which received $7.2 million for this work.
The Clinical Outreach Program will provide infrastructure and resources for the clinical training of James Cook University's dentistry students in remote localities.
The dental school in Cairns enrolled 66 students last year - the first year the dental program was offered. This year, 62 students enrolled.


PM: This National Health and Hospital Network is about delivering better health and better hospital services to working families, pensioners, carers, right across Australia, a Network which is to be funded nationally but run locally through local hospital networks who know best what their local communities need - like here, in Far North Queensland.
Just over nine months ago, when I was here for a consultation with the team from Cairns Base Hospital on the future of the Australian health and hospital system, many here told us about the pressures being faced by allied health professionals.
In fact, when I was here last time the director of allied health raised with us the following: that allied health services outside of metropolitan areas were very, very stretched and we needed to do much more to support allied health professionals working in the bush and provide support to attract them to the bush, and today we return to respond to that need.
As part of our plan to deliver better health and better hospitals services to all Australians, regardless of where they live, the Government will invest funds to double the number of scholarships for allied health students to undertake a clinical placement in a rural area from 100 such scholarships a year to 200 each year, providing 1,000 additional scholarships for allied health students over the decade ahead.
We'll also establish 100 allied health locum placements each year, which will support 1,000 allied health workers over the decade ahead. That's to make it possible, for the first time, for allied health professionals working in regional and rural areas to have a break and to be replaced while they have a break. This has not existed in the past. This is new, and it is part of the consultation that we had here locally with this health community here in Far North Queensland. We listened hard to it and worked out how can we make this work better for the good people of Far North Queensland, but more broadly across the nation.
So, we're taking concrete steps towards ensuring that all Australians can get the health services they need, and where they need them, and when they need them.
I'm told this, as well - in the major cities there are something like 354 allied health professionals per 100,000 people, but in very remote areas, that can be only 64 allied health professionals per 100,000 people. We are determined to start to close this gap. We can't tackle this discrepancy over night, but these are concrete actions in this direction, and these are significant measures.


The Rudd Government will double scholarships for allied health clinical placements in rural areas and establish a locum scheme to support 1,000 allied health workers over the next decade.
These investments are part of the Rudd Government's plans to reform our health system to deliver better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
Currently, there aren't enough allied health professionals in rural and remote areas. Allied health practitioners include physiotherapists, dieticians, occupational therapists and optometrists.
In major cities there are 354 allied health professionals per 100,000 people but only 64 workers per 100,000 people in very remote areas of Australia.
To improve retention of allied health professionals in rural areas, and provide opportunities for those interested in working the bush, the Government will:
     * Double the number of scholarships available for allied health students to undertake a clinical placement in a rural area from 100 to 200 each year - providing 1,000 extra scholarships for allied health students over the next decade.
     * Provide 100 allied health locum placements per year, supporting 1,000 allied health workers over the next decade.
The Allied Health Clinical Placement Scholarship Scheme, an election commitment of the Rudd Government, has been extremely popular with allied health students seeking to undertake some of their training in the bush. 
Some 875 applications have been received for the 187 scholarships offered to date.
We know that health professionals who spend time training and learning in regional and rural centres often establish strong links with the local community.
The Government will also invest to make locum arrangements - which already exist for doctors - available to allied health professionals for the first time.
The Government will invest $11.8 million over the forward estimates to provide this additional support to allied health professionals in rural and remote Australia.
Allied health professionals working in Cairns will be eligible to apply for these schemes.
The Rudd Government is determined to attract more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals to regional and rural communities throughout Australia - and keep them there.
This will mean more Australians will get better access in the future to appropriate health care, regardless of their location.
This investment will build on the Government's:
     * $632 million announcement to train more doctors - of which 50 per cent of new GP training places will be provided in the bush.
     * $134 million Rural Health Workforce Strategy, that will deliver 500 communities and 2,400 doctors with more financial support to move and stay in rural and remote areas.


PM: Good to be back in Cairns, and good to be back here with Jim, our local member, and also Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister. Last time I was at Cairns Base Hospital I was here to thank the good folk who worked in the emergency department for looking after my wife, Therese. I say to the good people of this hospital and to the local community she's doing just fine. In fact, she had me gardening over the weekend at The Lodge in Canberra, and she's now not only fit and fighting fit but telling me what to do - at least when it comes to the gardening.
We've been doing a lot of work around the country on the National Health and Hospitals Network, which we, as a Government, announced our blueprint on a month or so ago. This National Health and Hospital Network is about delivering better health and better hospital services to working families, pensioners, carers, right across Australia, a Network which is to be funded nationally but run locally through local hospital networks who know best what their local communities need - like here, in Far North Queensland.
Since then, we've also indicated our proposed investment of more than $600 million in creating more than 6,500 new medical training places across the country, with a strong emphasis on the needs of rural and regional Australia.
We've also recently announced a further $436 million investment to ensure that GPs can provide better services for the more than 1.1 million Australians suffering from various forms of diabetes, to assist them with the full range of needs that they have in dealing with that disease and its impact on their lifestyle and their families.
Also, here in Cairns, we're here to mark the Commonwealth's actions on cancer, where we've already contributed $8.3 million to providing a radiation oncology facility here at Cairns Base Hospital, and I'd like to make it clear to the local community here that the first radiation oncology facility for Cairns is on track for its opening in July of next year, when it will start providing local services to cancer patients here in this city. I'm advised that more than 400 cancer patients a year are expected to benefit from this service - local radiation treatments here in Cairns rather than having to travel elsewhere for it.
The other thing I'm glad to announce while here I'm here in Cairns is better access to afterhours GP services for local people as well through a grant of $100,000 under the General Practice Afterhours Program to the Omega Medical Centre.
This afternoon, together with Jim and with Nicola, we'll also be visiting the new dental school at James Cook University. As you know, this is a $50 million investment from the Australian Government. I'm pleased to report that we've had some 66 students enrol last year, some 62 students have now enrolled this year. This is a huge contribution to the needs of the dental workforce in this part of Australia.
Critical, however, to dealing with a range of disease categories is the role of allied health professionals right across the country. Just over nine months ago, when I was here for a consultation with the team from Cairns Base Hospital on the future of the Australian health and hospital system, many here told us about the pressures being faced by allied health professionals.
In fact, when I was here last time the director of allied health raised with us the following: that allied health services outside of metropolitan areas were very, very stretched and we needed to do much more to support allied health professionals working in the bush and provide support to attract them to the bush, and today we return to respond to that need. We've acted when it comes to the needs of the medical workforce, generalists, general practitioners, other forms of specialisation; we've already taken some action in relation to the needs of the nursing workforce for the future; but today we're announcing particular measures that relate to the allied health workforce for the future as well.
As part of our plan to deliver better health and better hospitals services to all Australians, regardless of where they live, the Government will invest funds to double the number of scholarships for allied health students to undertake a clinical placement in a rural area from 100 such scholarships a year to 200 each year, providing 1,000 additional scholarships for allied health students over the decade ahead.
We'll also establish 100 allied health locum placements each year, which will support 1,000 allied health workers over the decade ahead. That's to make it possible, for the first time, for allied health professionals working in regional and rural areas to have a break and to be replaced while they have a break. This has not existed in the past. This is new, and it is part of the consultation that we had here locally with this health community here in Far North Queensland. We listened hard to it and worked out how can we make this work better for the good people of Far North Queensland, but more broadly across the nation.
So, we're taking concrete steps towards ensuring that all Australians can get the health services they need, and where they need them, and when they need them.
I'm told this, as well - in the major cities there are something like 354 allied health professionals per 100,000 people, but in very remote areas, that can be only 64 allied health professionals per 100,000 people. We are determined to start to close this gap. We can't tackle this discrepancy over night, but these are concrete actions in this direction, and these are significant measures.
Can I just conclude on the question of health and hospitals by making some observations about the recent debate as it affects the Leader of the Opposition and the policy of the Liberal Party, as well?
I noticed that Mr Abbott is out there saying today that he is opposed to a referendum to support health reform. Can I be very clear about this: the Government has a clear-cut policy for the future of the health and hospital system. It's called a new National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally.
That's our plan. It's out there in black and white. I haven't seen the alternative plan yet. It seems Mr Abbott hasn't been able to make up his mind whether he supports it or opposes it.
But the second thing is this - we've also said that while we want to negotiate this plan cooperatively with the states and territories at the Council of Australian Governments meeting, if we fail to do so we've also said we'd go to the people and ask them for a mandate to implement our plans. That's our approach - very simple, very clear cut, but I notice Mr Abbott is now saying that he won't necessarily support that, either.
So, in summary, Mr Abbott says he doesn't really, or does he, support our overall health and hospitals plan, the new National Health and Hospitals Network, and now it seems he doesn't support going to the people, should we need to, to ask the people for a mandate to implement this reform if we can't get there cooperatively.
I would say, very bluntly and very plainly, to Mr Abbott - time to be just plain speaking about this: will you or will you not support the Australian Government going to a referendum if we can't reach a cooperative agreement with the states and territories? It's a very simple, basic question.
Finally, folks, this morning, just off Rockhampton, I went with AMSA to inspect the Chinese vessel which is currently off the coast in the Great Barrier Reef area. Here in Far North Queensland I don't need to say how important the Barrier Reef is to the people of this part of Australia, to all Queenslanders and to all Australians. This is an extraordinary natural asset for us all. Secondly, in this part of Australia it's also a very major source of jobs and employment. Therefore, the future of the Great Barrier Reef is of fundamental importance to all Australians, not least those who live in this part of the world.
I was able to spend about an hour or so out there with the crew from AMSA. I was able to speak to some of the surveyors who either had just been onboard the Chinese vessel or who were still onboard the Chinese vessel and obtained their assessments as to the state of affairs there.
As I've said earlier today, there are four practical tasks. One is how do you deal with that oil which has already escaped from the vessel, and that's where the role of the Pacific Recorder, the Australian AMSA vessel, is so critical in terms of constructing a boom around the oil which has so far been released.
Secondly, how do you deal with the challenge of removing the remaining oil from the vessel by a bunkering operation. That, again, is where the Pacific Recorder comes into play, together with other bunkering vessels. That operation is now being planned and preparations for its implementation are well underway.
Thirdly, to establish the facts as to how this was able to occur in the first place, because the penalties which apply here obviously will be subject to the conclusion of investigations. Those investigations are underway.
Fourthly, what, if any, further measures need to be taken in relation to the legal regime governing pilotage and other such measures for the Reef in the future.
I say again what I said earlier today in Rockhampton - from my perspective, as Prime Minister of Australia, it is frankly outrageous that a vessel this size could find itself 12km off course in the middle of the Great Barrier Reef, and it's time we got to the bottom of how this could have occurred and to hold those who are responsible for this accountable.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: How do you publicly (inaudible)
PM: We have a number of elements still to go. We will work that out with the states and territories, but let's be very clear about what we've put forward so far: a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, a new role for local hospital networks - for example, one here in Far North Queensland.
Second, we've announced our plans for the future of the medical workforce. One of the key findings from consultations here and elsewhere in Australia is there are not enough doctors, and not enough specialists, and not enough GPs. We put our plans for that on the table.
For allied health professionals, we've put our plans on the table again today with the statement that we've just made.
For the treatment of certain chronic diseases, we've made our plans very plain in what we have said for the treatment of diabetes, and we'll be dealing with other major disease categories as well.
There's still some further things to clarify with the states and territories. We'll have further statements to make, but I've got to say there is a very clear blueprint for reform there, and for the first time the Australian Government taking on the exclusive funding responsibility for the primary healthcare system, the dominant funding responsibility for the acute hospital system, and the exclusive funding responsibility for the aged care system. This is a big reform, and if we can achieve it cooperatively, it will be the biggest reform to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.
JOURNALIST: The Australian this morning is reporting that 80% of your funding for the hospitals network and for the GP Superclinics is going to Labor or key marginal electorates. Is it a case of, you know, supporting-
PM: -The Health and Hospitals fund is determined, its decisions have been determined by an independent panel of experts and that has been deliberated on over a long, long period of time, and where you have major investments, for example in Melbourne, with a $476 million investment in an integrated cancer care centre, it's not just for Melbourne - for the whole of Victoria. That may lie physically within, I don't know, maybe the seat of Melbourne for all I know, but it's there to service the wider needs of the people of Victoria.
Can I also turn to what we're doing, for example, at the Chris O'Brien cancer centre in Sydney? There you have an investment by the Australian Government of some $150 million, not just to service, you know, the people of inner Sydney, but to service the people of the wider metro area of the state and the broader state as well.
The investment we've made into the Garvan Centre in Sydney - again, a significant investment, some $70 or $80 million by us, not just to service the people of inner Sydney, but the wider state as well.
So, can I just say it's very important to put such remarks into their context, and let me just talk about our commitment to rural and regional health services. We've brought about one of the single largest enhancements to incentives for rural doctors in the country's history. This $132 million additional investment from us to provide incentives for GPs and specialists to go out and locate in the bush and to stay in the bush - frankly, that goes to the whole country, and let me say a long, long way from many cities as well.
So, we are proud of our delivery of our services to the whole country, whether it's large cities, small rural towns, or even the most remote indigenous communities, and remember, the measure that we've announced recently for additional GPs and specialists, 6,500 of them, a huge concentration of those going to rural and regional areas. These allied health positions that I've just referred to today are going to rural and regional and remote areas as well.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in Australia, what population do you mean?
PM: Well, what we've said very plainly is that we have now, for the first time in Australia's history, a Minister who has this as his responsibility, and secondly, his responsibility is to develop for the first time in the country's history a population strategy for Australia. So, it lies within his in tray, his set of responsibilities, to work those levels through for the future. That's why we're doing it. We think it's the rational way to go.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Tony Abbott's outlined his-
PM: -Sorry, here, then there.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned pilotage (inaudible) on the reef. If there is evidence that this ship has been cutting corners or taking shortcuts and that it's a common practice, would you be pushing for compulsory piloting for the entire length of the reef?
PM: I believe that, first of all, we've got to establish the facts from what occurred in this case. That's why there's a proper investigation underway, and the order of priorities, of course, is to: one, deal with the oil problem now; two, deal with the salvage of the vessel now; three, then deal with the question of how did this vessel end up in its place, and that's the subject of the current investigation, then; four, as I said before, any changes which are necessary for the future.
We have a wide-open mind when it comes to any changes on the question of either pilotage or what is often referred to as the system for providing vessel guidance which currently operates in Far North Queensland and the Torres Strait. Let's see what the experts have to advise.
Can I remind you, also, that the penalties which exist under the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority Act go to a fine of some $5.5 million under current circumstances. They go to the payment of the costs of any restitution which arises from that, from any damage to the Reef, and furthermore, in the case of any Master of any vessel guilty of any negligence, sentences of up to three years imprisonment. That's what exists under the current Act.
As I said, the Government will be entirely mindful of any advice in terms of further measures which may be necessary, and any further strengthening of the Act which may be necessary, as well.
JOURNALIST: The Premier says to throw the book at them. Would that be your idea?
PM: I believe that, as I said this morning and I'll say it here again, now, it is absolutely outrageous that a vessel this size could find itself 12km off course in the middle of the Great Barrier Reef. It is absolutely outrageous. Let us see what the Maritime- the Transport Safety Bureau investigation determines, but my view is the law must be fully and absolutely applied in these circumstances. Australians take the Great Barrier Reef very, very seriously, both now and for the future.
JOURNALIST: The protestors outside about the public housing, what's your take on the concerns that (inaudible)
PM: Two things - if you look right across Australia, and the impact of the global financial crisis and the global recession, two courses of action which were available. One was to say we will do nothing about that, which is an attitude adopted by some countries, or the other is for the Government to step in while the private sector in the last 12-18 months was in retreat. That was the course of action we chose to adopt and that's why we chose to invest in the biggest school modernisation program in the country's history. That's why we chose to invest in the significant expansion in public housing, and when I look at the unemployment rates around Australia and what they would otherwise be in the absence of these direct investments by the Australian Government, they would've gone through the roof.
Up here in Far North Queensland, you've got double-digit unemployment already. If you were to pull out all the work that has gone into the construction sector, for housing and for schools, ask your local tradies, ask your local chambers of commerce what they think the impact would be on the local economy. It would be huge. Chippies, sparkies, subbies, right across the whole building spectrum, whether they are working on social housing programs or whether they're working on school modernisation programs. On the question of location, those decisions on planning are made, of course, by the state government authorities.
JOURNALIST: Would you be happy living next door to a block of public housing here?
PM: Well, I've got to say the place I live in in Brisbane I believe has social housing within a block or two and I've lived there for the last 15 years. These are decisions which are made by local authorities in conjunction with local, with the state government. That's where the planning responsibilities lie.
The question I would put to you is one which simply says the alternative, in terms of an economy which if we had done nothing and generated higher and higher levels of unemployment, the Treasury's advice to us would be that we would now have something in the order of 200,000-300,000 more Australians out of work. Think of the impact here in Far North Queensland were that the case.
I look around the world where governments have not taken this sort of action. How do you think it is that the Australian economy, unique among the major advanced economies of the world, came through the last 18 months without going into recession? Every other major advanced economy went into recession. We're one of the few economies in the advanced world to have grown positively, and that's why our unemployment rate is considerably lower, something like 5.3% or thereabouts, as against what we see - that's the figure nationally - as opposed to what we see right around the world, and frankly, the difference is Government stepping up to the plate and making a difference, and that's what we've done.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Turnbull?
PM: I've noticed the statement made today by Mr Turnbull. Can I just say this - Malcolm and I have had our differences over the years, but I believe it's very important to be very clear about a person's contribution to public life, so what I would say is that Malcolm has made a big contribution to Australian public life, particularly his work as Minister for the Environment. Secondly, I think what you see with Malcolm is someone who stood up for his principles on the question of policy on the environment and climate change rather than simply running after opinion polls.
So, I'd say to Malcolm I wish him well, I wish his family well for the future, and I'm sure he'll have a further contribution to make to Australian life.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: You know, politics is full of cut and thrust, but can I say again, with Malcolm, he's a bloke who stood up for what he believed in on the question of the environment and water and climate change and I believe he made a difference by standing up for his principles as opposed to just running after the next opinion poll. So, again I'd say I wish him well, I wish his family well, and I'm sure he'll have a continued contribution to make in Australian national life.
And having said that folks, we're already late for the James Cook University dental school. Talk to you later. Thanks. 


HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, good morning.
PM: G'day John. How are you?
HOST: This is a very good opportunity for us to have a chat about these health announcements yesterday. It's interesting, come out of the blue actually, for a lot people. Let me just quote from the Cairns Post today. It says 'the concerns of health professionals in the far north have been revealed as the driving force behind the multimillion dollar allied health package announced in Cairns yesterday'. Can you give us the bare bones of what you wanted to achieve, here?
PM: Sure. Firstly, at Cairns Base Hospital we were simply confirming that our existing 8 or $9 million investment for the upgrade of radiation oncology services at Cairns is on track, and that's on track for opening next year, and that would help about 400 cancer patients in and around Cairns at present who would otherwise have to travel elsewhere. That's one thing.
The second was this, however - allied health professionals, and these are folk like physiotherapists, dieticians, occupational therapists, optometrists. When I was last at Cairns Base Hospital for a consultation on the future of the new National Health and Hospital Network, what the locals told me is that the real problem up in the Far North is frankly, also, the undersupply of these allied health professionals, so what we've done is two things: we have doubled the number of scholarships available to allied health students to undertake clinical placement in rural and regional Australia. That's from 100 to 200 a year. That will provide an extra 1,000 scholarships over the decade to come. But, equally importantly, it's to provide allied health locums, that is, when you've got people working in these allied health areas who need to, frankly, take a holiday or they get sick, how do we support that? So, we've now, for the first time, introduced a locum placement funding arrangement which will assist in providing interim services for people who are obviously going to be out of action for four weeks a year or whatever.
HOST: 200 scholarships a year, where will they study? Where will they get their training?
PM: Well, for example, if you're looking at Far North Queensland, you'll have a number of people out there in, currently in GP-related clinics or operating, for example, out of the outreach services of Cairns Base Hospital. This is where they would obtain their placement and this is where they would be trained, but most critically, if we do this and provide this level of scholarship training in cities like Cairns, guess what? These folk are more likely to settle down there and to establish their futures there and become part and parcel of the local medical professional community as well, and I think that's great for the region.
HOST: Kevin Rudd, let me get straight to the source of concerns up here. You now have got yourself abreast of what we're trying to achieve at the hospital, for a start. Now, we've had challenges over the years, particularly trying to get specialists here. Largely, they've been overcome. We've had challenges with ramping getting into the ED, the ambulances queuing up for about, I think 11 and 12 in a row at one stage. We seem to be getting that largely under control.
However, I talked to one elderly patient yesterday. She broke her hip a few days ago. She said 'the care in our hospital is wonderful. I couldn't have wanted more, except that when I arrived in the emergency department I had to wait 10 hours for a doctor to come along and say 'this is her problem, get her to a bed' or whatever.' That is one of the really nagging problems we've got here. How will your federal Health and Hospital Network sort out those sort of problems?
PM: Well, your question is excellent and right on the money, because so many people across Australia are finding themself in that circumstance, basically being delayed in the emergency department before they get onto, frankly, the treatment they need, either within the hospital or back home if it's a minor condition.
So, what are we going to do about it? When we talk about a new National Health and Hospitals Network, we're talking about one which will be funded nationally and run locally. That means that we would, for the first time as the Australian Government, be the exclusive funder of what's called primary health care - that's GP and GP-related services, for the first time the dominant funder of the running costs and the capital costs of hospitals like Cairns Base, and also the exclusive funder of aged care.
What we mean by, however, having a system funded nationally but run locally is that Cairns Base Hospital would, therefore, as the centre of a local hospital network, have much greater autonomy in the way in which run their services as well, and we would fund them directly, as the Australian Government. Now, that means that they can make better and more local decisions about how to improve the efficiency of their emergency department, how they improve the efficiency of their elective surgery arrangements, how they deal with sub-acute beds as well.
But, on top of that, we're not just creating, as it were, a better funded system - we're also right now intervening to provide extra support for accident and emergency and for elective surgery to improve those services now, but none of it can happen, John, unless we've got enough doctors and enough nurses and enough allied health professionals, and the last thing I'd just say about that is that's why about two weeks ago the Health Minister and I announced that we'll be funding over the decade ahead an additional 6,500 doctors, GPs and specialists, a large concentration on rural and regional Australia, because unless we deal with the medical workforce shortage, we can have as many buildings and as many machines as we like, but unless we've actually got more doctors and more nurses and more allied health professionals, it won't work.
HOST: I don't want to labour this issue, but the previous government established a system where we've got more doctors going through the universities now. I would imagine they'll be coming onstream in, I don't know what, two years or something, the first of those numbers. Now you're saying 'we'll we've got to get many more hundreds or thousands of doctors out there.' Tell me why the previous arrangements aren't providing enough or aren't going to provide enough?
PM: Well, let me just go to the core if it. When Mr Abbott was Health Minister for the previous five years up until the last election, they actually froze the number of GP training places. What's that mean? It means that sure, you might have people graduating from university, albeit in not enough numbers, but there weren't funded training places for them in hospitals or in GP clinics around the country to actually make the best use of the skills that they'd acquired.
The number of, for example, when I was at Cairns Base Hospital only nine months ago, I had a couple of young fellas come up to me and say 'we're currently three or four years in but we have no guaranteed place at all, either as a hospital intern or to train as a GP. What are we going to do?' So, you ask why we have therefore increased radically the number of GP training places and specialist training places? It's to fill that gap, but also to expand the number over time, because we've also got an aging medical workforce at present, and unless we plug that, frankly, we're not going to get better health and better hospital services for critical regions like Far North Queensland.
HOST: Just quickly, you were here yesterday, you chose not to meet those protestors. I've got to tell you it's fairly rare that we have a protest in Cairns, so I would imagine they've got something fairly meaty to take up with you, but you did send your chief executive out, who gave them his ear for some time and promised to get back to them. The one issue he seemed to pick up on, according to people who were there, was the excessive spending on these various locations on the northern beaches, and also the density of the public housing developments at Earlville.
Is there an opportunity, Kevin Rudd, of you perhaps sending your Housing Minister, Tanya Plibersek, up here to meet with these people and get to the core of the excessive spending? I mean to say, the overspend, according to these people, is unbelievable. They say there's land available at Smithfield, for example, $350,000-$400,000, whereas you paid virtual waterfront land, I think the price was $1.35 million at Palm Cove, was over a million at Bluewater Harbour, where there was land that was more appropriate for this sort of development up the road for $500,000. Could she have a close look at these claims?
PM: Well, if the locals have concerns about this, and my Chief of Staff did spend time with them yesterday, then of course they should provide those concerns in writing to the Federal Housing Minister, then we'll work out where the line of responsibility lies.
Can I just back back a bit in terms of why we are investing in social housing in the first place? One, there's a shortage of affordable housing in Far North Queensland and in and around Cairns. Two, because of, frankly, the huge impact of the global recession on your economy there where you've already got unemployment in double digits, we, as the Australian Government, decided to step in and invest some $435 million in stimulus projects right across the broader Cairns region. That includes $59 million of investment in social housing, but also includes massive investment in local schools, as well, and that's to provide jobs for the construction industry which was about to fall through the floor, and frankly make unemployment in Far North Queensland that much worse. But, on the practicalities of the planning decisions that you raised, John, sure, get them to provide that, their concerns, direct to the Housing Minister.
HOST: You have to get that organised quickly. I mean to say, this work is on the verge of starting. There is a very short-term moratorium, I understand, in place, but it's pretty shaky.
The other figure, too, there's a quote here from a builder for this-
PM: -I think what we've done, John, overall, with these sorts of things, is that remember the strategic objective was to keep this economy going, and I'm very concerned about, frankly, an unemployment rate of 12 percent in Cairns, and I'd be very concerned about what it would be if we weren't investing in stimulus projects during this global impact a very tourism-exposed local economy.
HOST: Oh, very much so, but these people are concerned about the money you're spending that needn't be spent. I've got a quote here for less than $3 million for 19 units. Apparently you're spending $5.7 million.
PM: What I was about to go on to say, John, is that, therefore, in the implementation of this, when any issues arise, each of the relevant ministers has an audit mechanism available to quickly look at any problems which arrive. It is inevitable, across the country, that you're going to have implementation difficulties. What we have is an audit mechanism to look at these problems as they arise. That's why I'd encourage the locals to get that in to Minister Plibersek straight away.
HOST: Yep, and thanks for your time on the program today.
PM: Appreciate it very much, John. Good to be back in Cairns


Townsville and the Far North will benefit from a $70.1 million investment in rural and regional cancer facilities and equipment from the Commonwealth Government's Regional Cancer Centre program.
Survival rates for people suffering from cancer are lower in rural and remote communities. With some cancers, patients living in rural and remote areas across Australia are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their urban counterparts.
The funding announced today will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 18,400 new cases of cancer diagnosed in Queensland each year.
Townsville Hospital will receive $67.5 million to enhance the cancer centre to improve access to comprehensive cancer services for people in North Queensland. The funding will provide for:
     * Three radiotherapy bunkers;
     * Two new linear accelerators;
     * PET/CT scanner; and
     * 26 additional chemotherapy treatment chairs - 23 for adult patients and three for paediatric patients.
The funding will double the existing radiotherapy bunkers to six, and increase the number of linear accelerators to five.
Townsville Hospital will have increased capacity to provide additional chemotherapy treatment places for adult and paediatric cancer patients, procedures for medical oncology and haematology services, high quality diagnostic imaging services with the acquisition of a PET/CT scanner, a brachytherapy suite, and expansion of space to provide increased clinical trials capacity.
Mt Isa Hospital will receive $2.6 million for an additional building to house enhanced tele-oncology and chemotherapy treatment services and provide space for three new chemotherapy treatment chairs.
These investments in Townsville and Mt Isa will see treatment for an estimated extra 828 radiotherapy patients per year and an estimated extra 14,500 chemotherapy treatments per year.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
It is of great concern that for the 30 per cent of Australians living in rural and remote areas, outcomes are worse than for people living in the city.
The Rudd Government's $560 million investment in regional cancer centres will enable rural and regional Australians to have better access to essential cancer services closer to home.
A network of regional cancer centres that expands services and links with specialised cancer centres in metropolitan areas will better support and service all Australians and help close the gap in cancer outcomes between urban and regional Australians.
Today's announcement shows what can be achieved when the Australian community has a Federal Government who will make investments to enhance health services across the country.
It also builds on additional investment in cancer services across Queensland:
     * Funding to recruit, train and employ new breast cancer nurses in Cairns, Mackay, Mount Isa, Gympie, Hervey Bay, Gladstone, Kingaroy, Warwick, Dalby and Roma;
     * Upgrades to BreastScreen Queensland's services including:
         * $865,000 for a digital mobile van to provide screening to the South East region of Queensland. The upgraded service has been in operation since November 2009.
         * $1.2 m for the establishment and testing of a Central Picture Archiving and Communication System ahead of a state-wide introduction.
         * $838,000 to commission a fully digital four-wheeled drive mobile service to provide breast screening to women in rural and remote Far North Queensland.
Under the National Health and Hospital plan, the Rudd Government would take on 60 per cent of funding for capital upgrades for hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning.
HOST: How are you this morning Kevin?
PM: Fantastic, particularly after a walk along The Strand earlier this morning. I've got to say, you have a beautiful part of the country.
HOST: We certainly do.
PM: That sun shining on Castle Hill is just beautiful that time of day. Said hello to a lot of the locals, caught up on the gossip, including what you blokes are up to as well, so off you go.
HOST: Alright, let's have a look. First up this morning of course, a major announcement- now the PET scanner and the cancer ward at the hospital, what can you tell us about that? You're announcing that today.
PM: It's a big announcement, because we got the message loud and clear that people don't want to travel to Brisbane for all their cancer services. And therefore, this announcement's going to include the following: Funding for three radiotherapy bunkers, two new linear accelerators, the PET/CT scanner, and 26 additional chemotherapy treatment chairs, 23 for adults and 3 for paediatric patients. So, what we're trying to do is to make it possible for local people, hundreds and hundreds of them each year that have to travel to Brisbane, to get these services locally.
HOST: Alright, the current Member for Herbert, Peter Lindsay, says this is something that he put up some time ago. He wants to know why it didn't happen earlier, and also, there was an idea of a partnership with Queensland X-Ray which would've seen the machine here sooner, and would be able to perform more scans than the hospital. How do you react to that comment from Peter?
PM: You know, sometimes a few things take your breath away. The Liberals were in office for twelve years federally, with Mr Lindsay as the Member. We've been in office for two years only, and within those two years we've delivered this. In twelve years, they delivered nothing. I think it's just a very stark comparison between, frankly, people who just talk politics, as opposed to people who get on with the business of delivering. And with Tony Mooney, our candidate here for the federal seat of Herbert, we're delivering.
HOST: Alright, health is going to be a major issue. You've got the COAG summit not too far away. I've heard from sources that that's going to go on as long as it takes to get the Premiers to agree. Do you think you're in for a big fight to get this one across the line?
PM: I don't think it's going to be easy, because with the new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally to deliver better health and hospital services to working families, pensioners, carers right across the country- this would be the biggest reform to the health system since Medicare. So there's going to be a lot of blowback, a lot of pushback, but we're determined to get this done, because what we hear from working families everywhere, North Queensland, Western Australia, you name it, is that they want more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses so that people in the community can get better healthcare.
HOST: Prime Minister, boats have been causing you some problems of late. Of course, with the immigrants coming in via boats on one side, and of course now, on the Great Barrier Reef, a boat has parked itself on our Reef. What are we going to do to try and avoid this sort of thing which could potentially cause the loss of our Great Barrier Reef? If it was to lose all its oil, it could be a major problem.
PM: This is absolutely outrageous how this could've happened. Here you have this massive boat, this massive ship, 12 kilometres off course, broad daylight, in the middle of the Great Barrier Reef. So we'll be demanding some answers on this one. Key thing though right now, the practical tasks- one, how do you deal with the amount of oil which has already been released from the boat, and that is why the Government has had despatched the Pacific Recorder which arrives at the scene I believe today-
HOST: Yep.
PM: To put a float around it. Secondly, then, too, with bunkering ships, to take off the other oil which remains within the vessel. Thirdly to conclude the salvage operation itself, and then at the same time a full investigation by the relevant authorities into how the hell this happened, because there are penalties which apply for breaches, and if we need to also look at other measures for the future including a wider use of pilotage and the wider use of the vessel tracking system that applies in the northern parts of the Reef, then we will.
HOST: Alright, I had a question from a listener this morning Prime Minister. This lady lives two minutes away from the Townsville Hospital, in the suburb of Annandale, yet she has to vote for a Member who could be living in Mackay and based around Mackay. What do you say about the distribution of seats, I mean, obviously it's not directly in your control, but that seems a bit weird, doesn't it?
PM: Yeah, I'd sympathise with your listener and the person who's called in because sometimes we scratch our heads too with the decisions made by the independent Electoral Commission. But the great virtue of this country is it's beyond political interference.
HOST: Sure.
PM: The Electoral Commission makes its decision about where lines are and, look, I understand people scratching their heads if you've got a Mackay-based Member who's servicing part of the suburbs of Townsville, but frankly, these are just beyond our control. They're the rules set by an independent authority. Better we live in a country like this than one where, frankly, the electoral boundaries are corruptly drawn, as they used to be in Queensland some time ago.
HOST: Yeah, absolutely, let's not go there. Prime Minister, I also have another question. As one of probably the only people in the country who sit and watch Question Time- although I'm sure there are probably others- I watch it on a regular basis.
PM: You need to get a life.
HOST: I do need to get a life, thank you very much. Do you often get embarrassed? Because sometimes I sit there and just cringe with the behaviour of grown adults who are hopefully representing us in the best possible way, but the behaviour is sometimes atrocious. Are you embarrassed sometimes, because it's truly awful on the odd occasion?
PM: Well I think part of the problem with the Parliament is it just becomes this completely negative exchange. It's too much negativity, sometimes there's too much nastiness, frankly. I think people would much prefer the Parliament got on with the business of debating positive ideas for the future.
HOST: Is it not possible that that could happen, though?
PM: Well-
HOST: Surely we've got to be able to find a way.
PM: I'm not going to be in the business of, you know, pointing fingers at anybody in any particular political party-
HOST: No.
PM: I actually think the mood of the country more broadly is where are the positive ideas for our communities, for our cities, for our country's future? If you want to know one reason, one reason why I'm out there, frankly, it's happening right across Queensland on health and hospitals reform, is to say here is a positive plan for the future. Here are our ideas, this is how we're going to do it, how we're going to fund it, how we're going to run it, how we're going to improve it, give me the alternatives in terms of your alternative point of view, and let's get on with it.
I think we actually need to have that sort of culture in our national debate, rather than someone just, you know, picking, you know, clever one liners to score a headline the next day.
HOST: Alright, well I've just had a text from your office, it says we need the PM off now, he's got something else to do. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, thank you for your time today.
PM: Thanks for having us on the program. 


The Rudd Government will invest $560 million in new or upgraded cancer centres in regional and rural communities across Australia.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their urban counterparts.
Regional Cancer Centres will enable regional Australians to receive care closer to home and their community.
This initiative is central to the Government's $1.3 billion investment in improving cancer infrastructure announced in the 2009-10 Budget.
Cancer affects thousands of Australian families every year - 100,000 new cases of cancer are diagnosed every year, and around 40,000 people die each year from various forms of this disease.
The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, today led a series of announcements in new cancer and patient accommodation facilities for regional communities across the country.
At Townsville Hospital, the Prime Minister announced $67.5 million to enhance the Townsville Cancer Centre to improve access to comprehensive services for people in North Queensland.
The funding will provide three radiotherapy bunkers, two linear accelerators, a PET/CT scanner and 26 additional chemotherapy chairs. This will double the existing radiotherapy bunkers at Townsville Hospital to six, and increase the number of linear accelerators to five.
The Prime Minister also announced $2.6 million for Mt Isa Hospital, to provide a new building to house enhanced tele-oncology and chemotherapy treatment services and provide space for three new chemotherapy treatment chairs.
Other Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries will be making announcements at regional cancer facilities across Victoria, NSW and Western Australia:
     * The Minister for Health and Ageing, Nicola Roxon is in Victoria today to announce $42 million for the Ballarat Regional Integrated Cancer Centre, $1.5 million for patient and carer accommodation in Albury-Wodonga and $9.5 million for state-wide enhancements to existing regional cancer services in Victoria, to benefit areas including Bendigo, Traralgon, and Albury-Wodonga;
     * The Minister for Rural Health, Warren Snowdon is in Tamworth to announce $31.7 million for the New England and North West Regional Cancer Centre;
     * The Parliamentary Secretary for Disability and the Victorian Bushfire Recovery, Bill Shorten is in Gippsland to announce $23.5 million for an extension to the cancer centre and accommodation facilities; and
     * The Parliamentary Secretary for Western Australia, Gary Gray is in Bunbury to announce $23.47 million for cancer upgrades at the St John of God Hospital and $22.29 million for strengthening regional cancer services in Albany, Northam, Narrogin, Geraldton and Kalgoorlie.
Each of these projects have been assessed and approved by the independent Health and Hospitals Fund Advisory Board.
The Government will announce the remaining successful Regional Cancer Centre projects over coming weeks.
Regional Cancer Centres are major part of the Rudd Government's plan to deliver better cancer care for all Australians - irrespective of where they live.
Last year's budget included an investment of $560 million for a network of new and enhanced regional cancer centres.
This investment will fund around 20 regional cancer care projects around the country - including approximately eight new regional cancer centres, seven upgrades to existing facilities, and four patient accommodation projects.
The Government will announce the remaining successful projects in the near future.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement reinforces the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally to deliver better health for local communities. 


PM: It's great to be back in Townsville, and here with Tony Mooney, our candidate, and of course Senator Jan McLucas as well. And it's good to be back here at the Townsville Hospital, Townsville General, to talk about the future of health and hospitals right around the nation, but right here also in North Queensland. The Government is committed to a reform plan called the new National Health and Hospitals Network, which is to be funded nationally, but run locally, for the first time the Australian Government funding the exclusive needs of our primary healthcare system for the future, the dominant funder for our acute hospitals, and the exclusive funder for our aged care network.
And run locally, because we believe the decisions on the delivery of local healthcare services are better taken locally, through local hospital networks. Of course, where the rubber hits the road is what happens here in Townsville and how do we make a difference for the future. Well, one of the things that we listened long and hard to when we were here for our consultation six or nine months ago- I think in this very auditorium- was the need for regional oncology services, and how we could deal with the needs of cancer sufferers in this part of Australia.
Cancer is a disease which affects so many Australians each year. 100,000 new cases of cancer diagnosed each year. 40,000 Australians die each year from cancer. It is one of the biggest killers in Australia. For some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than those who live in urban Australia. Three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis if you're in rural Australia, as opposed to urban Australia.
Our view is that that is not good enough. It is just not good enough, and we have to make a change for the future. The Government is now investing some $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research right across the country, but the missing part in the jigsaw puzzle has been the delivery of integrated cancer care centres and integrated cancer services in rural and regional Australia. That's why I'm pleased to announce today a $438 million investment in rural and regional integrated cancer centres right across the country.
This investment will mean that Australians in rural and regional communities across Australia will be able to obtain better cancer treatment closer to home. I'm pleased to be here today in Townsville of course with Tony Mooney, our candidate and former Mayor of this great city for twenty years, who actually knows something about what it means to his local community. So many times have I been here over the years only to hear so many families say to me 'why do I have to travel to Brisbane for everything?'
Now, this is a common refrain, not just here, but in many other parts of Australia as well. Why do I have to travel to the capital city to get basic or better or integrated cancer treatment services? So today here in Townsville I'm pleased to announce that the Australian Government will be providing $67.5 million to enhance the Townsville cancer centre to improve access to comprehensive cancer care here in North Queensland. This funding will provide for a PET/CT scanner, which will be the first north of Brisbane, three additional radiotherapy bunkers, two additional linear accelerators, and 26 additional chemotherapy chairs.
This will double the existing radiotherapy bunkers at Townsville hospital to six, and increase the number of linear accelerators to five. We've listened long and hard to what people legitimately say in this part of the world. Tony was telling me before that some 4 to 500 people from this part of Queensland have to travel to Brisbane each year to get decent services. Frankly, as I said before, that's not good enough, and this is designed to change that around. This will significantly expand cancer treatment services at Townsville, as well as strengthening support for satellite cancer services in Cairns and Mackay.
Also, we are investing a further $2.5 million in Mt. Isa to enhance the teleoncology services which will be delivered there.
Today, also, it's not just me speaking here in Townsville- I have Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries right across the country making similar announcements in other parts of rural and regional Australia. The Minister for Health and Ageing, Nicola Roxon, is today in Victoria to announce $42 million for the Ballarat Regional Integrated Cancer Centre. And later today she'll be travelling to Albury-Wodonga to make an announcement there.
The Minister for Rural Health, Warren Snowdon, is in Tamworth to announce $31.7 million for the New England and Northwest Regional Cancer Centre. Parliamentary Secretary for Disability, Bill Shorten, is in Gippsland to announce $23.5 million for an extension to the cancer centre and accommodation facilities there. And the Parliamentary Secretary for Western Australia, Gary Gray, is as we speak in Bunbury to announce $23.4 million for cancer upgrades at the St. John of God Hospital.
And we will have further announcements to make about further locations over the next week to two weeks. These are important investments in rural and regional Australia, in order to make a difference to the lives of working families, pensioners, carers, and those who are afflicted by this terrible disease.
It's part of our plan to deliver a new National Health and Hospitals Network. Better health, better hospital services for all Australians, wherever they are, whatever income level they may have. Funded nationally, run locally, because what the Australian people want are more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and for critical disease categories like this, better treatment, particularly outside the capital cities.
And can I conclude by thanking Tony Mooney, who's been an extraordinarily strong voice for North Queensland on this over many years. He's worked very hard for the people of Townsville for over 20 years as Mayor. He's now standing for us as a candidate for the next federal election, and I would welcome his presence in Canberra as a further strong voice for North Queensland there. He's a person I've known for the last 20 years and for whom I have enormous respect, and I thank him for his strong advocacy and support of this announcement today.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I've been talking to those on the ground here about the project management for this. What I have seen so far in similar expansions in other parts of the world- other parts of the country- is that you may be looking at a period of a one to two year implementation period to make sure that it's all done properly. I'm just being frank with you about that. It's something you can't snap your fingers and say it'll be installed tomorrow morning. The budget is clear. The money is allocated. It is therefore there to be drawn upon. What is now needed is a project management plan within the hospital to actually bring these facilities on-stream.
For example, a week or so ago- a little longer now- I was at the Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney, opening a new PET scanner which has taken an 18 month installation period from when we allocated the money to the actual opening of that facility. By the way, in all of Sydney, you may be interested to know this, there are only 6 PET scanners. We now have one for North Queensland, through this funding, so it's going to be an important contribution to local cancer services here.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No, I think you're going to be looking at the next year or two. But I'd much rather just be upfront with you and say the money's delivered, this is what it's for, and we'll wait for a subsequent announcement from our good friends here in the hospital on their project implementation plan. The best thing, and the most important thing, is to get it absolutely right- properly plugged in, properly operating, rather than meeting some sort of arbitrarily, politically-determined deadline that it should be here by the second Thursday in March, you know, next year or whatever. I'd much rather depend on the experts to get it done right. I've spoken this morning to the folk in paediatrics and elsewhere, these are very competent people, and they will get it right. So I'm sure the hospital will make an announcement in due course about the actual physical switch-on date for each of the facilities that I just referred to.
JOURNALIST: We've been waiting for some time. Aren't you concerned that the timing of this may cause (inaudible) considering the proximity to the election?
PM: You know something? I just think it's time for everyone to be a bit positive, frankly. I heard there was some criticism about this, this morning, from the current Liberal Member here. You know something, I'd just say this to, you know, Mr Lindsay, just - be positive. You know, this is actually good news for North Queensland. Just be positive about it. You know, I could go around and say, well, what did you do for twelve years? Why didn't it happen under the previous Government? But let's just focus on the future. Let's just get it done. The money's here. It's delivered. We've heard. We've listened. Let's just get on with it. I think that's what the Australian people want, and more generally, I think that's what the people of North Queensland want as well, rather than just some political scrap.
JOURNALIST: COAG's coming up. Do you think you can get (inaudible) state Premiers onboard? And (inaudible)?
PM: I continue to meet, I continue to talk, I continue to telephone, I am contributing at present to Telstra's share price.
And I am working hard right across the country, and I was speaking to Premiers - in fact, last night here on the phone. And I'll be seeing Anna Bligh again when I get down to Brisbane, and Premier Keneally again, and the other Premiers I'm speaking to as well. You know, this month's Council of Australian Government meeting is a once in a generation opportunity to get health and hospitals reform right. Let's not pass this opportunity up. If we implement this, this will be the biggest reform to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare, nearly 30 years ago.
All Australians, whatever their politics, they just want better health, better hospital services, they want more doctors, more nurses, and they want more hospital beds. That's the baseline here.
I'd just say one other thing - I'd encourage all the premiers to get in behind this new national reform, funded nationally, run locally, and I'd say to my political opponent, Mr Abbott, get positive as well. Get in behind this. Support this change for the nation.
I saw some comments yesterday from him. I want to deliver this reform cooperatively with the states and territories if I can, but I can't get there cooperatively there's only one other way through, and that is through going to the people direct and asking them for the powers necessary to implement this through referendum. And I was pretty surprised and a bit stunned when I saw Mr Abbott opposing the Australian Government, through referendum, asking the Australian people for their support for this. I was pretty stunned by that.
I think Australians, across the country, if we can't arrive at this cooperatively as states and territories and the Australian Government, I think they'd want to be asked. I think they'd be pretty surprised and pretty disappointed if Mr Abbott was still standing in the road of that and I'd ask him to reflect on that and to change his position.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the way in which decisions are made on the regional cancer centres, of the one that we are announcing here today in Townsville, is that we have had the Health and Hospitals Fund, at arms' length from the Government, assessing all the applications which have come in from right across the country, including those from Townsville, including the one that you've just mentioned.
They have ticked off on each of the recommendations which have come to us, and the Government has decided based on that, and therefore, obviously, they have made a decision in support of this hospital and the service operating here, as opposed to the one that you've just referred to, but those are decisions which have been deliberated on by experts, and we, they having ticked them off, we have therefore looked carefully at what conclusions they've reached.
JOURNALIST: President Obama is hosting a nuclear summit in Washington in the next (inaudible). Almost every world leader is going to be going. Are you re-considering your decision to go?
PM: No, what I've said all throughout is that my first priority is health and hospitals, and I will not be attending the nuclear summit in Washington. It's important and I congratulate President Obama for his leadership in convening that summit, but my job here is to deliver health and hospital reform for all Australians. This is a once in a generation opportunity. The Council of Australian Governments meeting rapidly approaches. That nuclear summit is only, I think, four or five days before that. I need to be here. I need to be working with the premiers and the chief ministers to bring about agreement, so my priority must be to deliver health and hospital reform, and Australia will be represented by a senior minister.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh, sort of, up North Queensland, there. Oh, sorry, you meant more broadly?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, this is a very big hospital. This is over 560 beds. This is a major hospital by any national standard, not just by a state standard, and therefore when it comes to the delivery of wider health services to North Queensland, obviously this hospital has a central role. That's why we're investing some $250 million in this hospital now and its expansion, quite apart from the $70 million we're now investing into this integrated cancer centre here. So, the future of this hospital for us is critical. It becomes the hub through which you deliver integrated health services to so many people in North Queensland.
I go back to the basic principle - we need to build an Australia where people in regional and rural Australia can have confidence they can have access to the greatest possible range of health services in their major regional centres, of which Townsville is one.
JOURNALIST: We have a very busy emergency department, patients waiting 10-12 hours to get into the hospital. (inaudible)
PM: Two ways - firstly, what the Australian Government is already doing through the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, is investing with the states for the first time in a $750 million program to enhance emergency department capacity right across the country. I stand to be corrected, it may be 650, but it's in that vicinity.
And what's it designed to do? It's designed to actually increase the capacity of EDs right across the country in physical ways, like increasing the number of bays, but secondly also investing also in innovative other approaches to streamline people through emergency departments.
Take, for example, what's often called in some centres a 'fast lane' or a 'fast line' - people present at emergency departments, they haven't got the most serious of conditions, they could be dealt with effectively by GP-type services. How do you fast lane or fast line those folk immediately to an accessible GP service, which enables the ED to be freed up? That's one of the sorts of services that we're funding.
Another sort of service that we're funding is also what's called a rapid assessment unit, whereby a person having been admitted into an emergency department or seen in an emergency department is then put into a further reception unit for close observation for 24 hours or so, before they are either admitted as an inpatient or discharged.
The whole point of both those types of investments is it frees up the actual bays available within the emergency department and enables, therefore, people to be seen more quickly. These are the sorts of innovations we are beginning to fund nationally already. Under the new National Health and Hospitals Network we'll be funding more of these across the nation. That's one part.
The second is to make sure you've got enough doctors. We now are investing in another 6,500 medical training places over the decade ahead.
I remember being here in Townsville when some young doctors came up to me and said 'I'm just about to finish my university course but I can't have a guaranteed internship in the hospital because there are not enough funded training places.' Struck me as mad that that should be the case here or anywhere else, and that's why we are increasing, from next year, by a large number, the number of funded medical training places across all Australia's hospitals.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, first of all, as I said yesterday, it's still, for me, outrageous that this Chinese ship, in broad daylight, could be 12km off course in the middle of the Great Barrier Reef, and let's just call a spade a spade here, but there's a whole series of other practical things to be worked through, one of which is how did this occur? Who's responsible? And, through a proper investigatory process, what penalties should apply.
The second thing is, through a proper investigatory process, what changes need to be made for the future for the wider Great Barrier Reef, including pilotage, including the way in which we actually monitor vessel through, what's called a vessel tracking system.
Changes were made back in 2006, I'm advised, by the previous government, which took the pre-existing arrangements for pilotage, the pre-existing arrangement for vessel tracking, from the northern stretch of the Barrier Reef to include the Torres Strait. They did not, at that stage, extend that to the southern Barrier Reef, where, of course, this problem occurred with the Chinese vessel. Obviously, therefore, one of the things for us now to examine carefully is the extension of that regime more broadly across the Reef. We're going to do this in a very considered way, given the fact that the Great Barrier Reef is too important for all of us to put at risk in the future.
So, let's get the facts straight first, and then act.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Minister for Communications, Stephen Conroy, has already announced a series of regional locations in regional Australia for trialling the roll out. I believe those decisions, Jan, are underway, including for this part of the world. Help me out, please?
MCLUCAS: Gulliver, (inaudible)
MOONEY: I've got a conflict of interest. I live in Gulliver, right nearby.
PM: Well done mate, well done. I didn't know that, either.
MCLUCAS: I'm happy to assist you with that part of (inaudible)
PM: We're serious about the roll out being demonstrated early in regional Australia. That's why a number of locations have been chosen here in Townsville - thank you Senator, thank you, candidate, for your assistance - and we intend to get on with the business of the wider roll out.
So many times - and folks I'm going to have to go because I've got to actually jump on a plane - is, so many times I have been here in Townsville. I think have been here four or five, five or six times since being Prime Minister, Cairns and elsewhere, I get this question: 'what about access to proper broadband services?'
All I can say is we have a plan. We have the National Broadband Network. We have a company. It's called NBN Co.' They are in the midst of complex commercial negotiations right now, but this trial roll out is already occurring in regional centres across Australia, including Townsville. We can't have this happen fast enough in terms of the future needs of this economy.
And folks, I've got to zip. Thank you very much.



JOURNALIST: John Brumby's announced an alternative health plan. Where's that leave the (inaudible)
PM: Look, can I say that, as Prime Minister, I was elected with a mandate to deliver better health and hospital services for all Australians. That's why we're here in Rockhampton.
Secondly, working families, pensioners, carers, have all reached a conclusion that the current system doesn't work because State Governments can't afford to fund it in the future. And therefore, thirdly, that's why the Australian Government is stepping in to become the dominant funder of the public hospital system for the future.
Therefore, I would just urge John to work with the Australian Government, because State Governments cannot afford to fund this system for the future. The Australian Government must be the dominant funder for the future.
Thank you.


PM: Just let me say a few things about how pleased I am to be here in Rocky and here at the Rockhampton Base Hospital with Kirsten Livermore, who's a long-standing friend and colleague of mine who I work with closely in Canberra.
It's really important that we deliver better health and better hospital services to all Australians, and that includes people in regional Australia and major regional centres like here in Rocky, and that's why I'm pleased today to be here to announce that we are investing $67 million to establish a comprehensive cancer care centre here at Rockhampton Base Hospital.
This is a big investment. This is a lot of money, but in a practical sense what's it mean? It means that we're going to be able to ensure that we have the commissioning of two radiotherapy bunkers, the construction of a third bunker, 16 chemotherapy chairs. This will enable us to, of course, provide more comprehensive cancer care here.
The bunkers at Rockhampton will allow Queensland Health to install two linear accelerators, resulting in additional radiotherapy services for cancer patients here as well.
You see, when you look at this community and how many people use this great hospital, the basic question is this - why do I always have to travel to Brisbane for everything? We hear this message. That is why our message to the nation is we need a new National Health and Hospital Network, funded nationally by the Australian Government, delivered locally by local hospital networks.
You folk here know how to run your hospital, that's my experience, right round the country. What you need is better funding support to do it. You also need critical additional investment when it comes to cancer care.
The last thing I'd say is this - in Australia, the statistics tell us that for the one-third of our people who live outside the major cities, cancer outcomes are much, much worse than for their city cousins. That, frankly, is not good enough. We've got to change that. Too many of our fellow Australians are not getting the best access to cancer diagnosis and cancer treatment. Therefore, this is one step in that direction.
You might say 'why here in Rocky?' Well, you know, we're actually making a half billion dollar plus investment nationwide to regional centres like this right across Australia - places in West Australia, places in regional Victoria, places in regional New South Wales, here as well, and, you know something? That is a necessary step to dealing with what is one of the biggest killers in Australia today.
So, can I thank Kirsten so much for her strong lobbying effort on behalf of this hospital. I think if you put all this together, Kirsten, we must be investing about $150 million into this hospital. That is a $150 million investment long overdue. The people of this region, the good people of this region, deserve better hospital and health services. This is one practical step in that direction.
So, well done.


HOST: Prime Minister, you came to Central Queensland this week to view the Reef damage by the Chinese tanker. How does the Government propose to prevent something like this happening again?
PM: Well I'm in Queensland this week to talk about health and hospitals reform, but given the event on the Great Barrier Reef I thought it was important to go out and see what was happening with that Chinese vessel. Two or three quick things about that, by the way, the Pacific Responder I understand it has arrived on the site overnight, it begins the operations in terms of quarantining the amount of oil which has already been spilled through the laying out of booms. And secondly, it makes preparations now for the removal of remaining oil from the Chinese vessel. But your question is, how did this happen, and how can we prevent it from happening again?
There's a full Transport Safety Bureau investigation underway as to how this vessel ended up where it did. I think most Australians are feeling pretty outraged by that, as am I. On the future, we'll also be looking at any recommendations which come forward for the extension of the existing pilotage system which operates in the Northern Barrier Reef, and also what is called the vessel transit system- vessel traffic system or tracking system which applies in the Northern Reef as well. These are the two specific measures which I'm sure the authorities will look at, and whether they apply elsewhere on the Reef as well.
HOST: Should there be insurance covering the possibility of events like this in the future, as well?
PM: Well, under the provisions of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority Act, I'm advised that not only are there penalties which apply for violations of the provisions of the Act, $5.5 million fines I'm advised, as well as jail sentences for any Master of any vessel found to have violated the provisions which are laid down, of course, subject to investigation in the normal judicial processes. But also there's provision in the Act for what's called restitution costs. That is that if any vessel is found to have acted irresponsibly, then under the Act there is provisions to obtain restitution costs for damage which is caused. So let us wait until all the facts are established, but the key thing is to make sure that those responsible for this are brought to account, and any further measures for the long-term protection of the Reef are put in place.
HOST: Prime Minister, why do you think we're having this discussion now, given that so many vessels have used this path over the years?
PM: Well let's wait to see what the authorities determine on that. There are conflicting accounts in terms of the actual route which has been used here, and the extent to which it received any prior notification or not. That's why there is a proper investigation underway. I think all your listeners, and I've got to say, myself as Prime Minister, am deeply, deeply engaged with how did this happen, why did it happen, and how do we prevent anything like this from happening again.
HOST: Prime Minister, while we've got you, on a local level there's been local people coming out saying they've had visits regarding the insulation bungle that's occurred with the Federal Government, and the electricians have come through to inspect their premises, and they've been then asked to sign a document. Now, within that document is the clause that actually releases the Government from any further liability. What's your response to this?
PM: Well first of all, I think the - obviously the local circumstances here, I'm not familiar with. What I will have, however, is Minister Combet, who's the Minister responsible for dealing with the problems which have arisen with the implementation of this program get on to your program in the days ahead and go through the detailed matters which you raise.
We have to deal with each practical circumstance of each household as it arises. We intend to do that. Mr Combet's getting on with the job. But I will get him on your program very soon to answer that specifically.
HOST: While we're still on the insulation topic, the Financial Review this morning reported that the minutes of a Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet meeting in February last year show there were explicit written warnings about problems regarding installers and the accident risks with the insulation scheme. Did you see these written warnings?
PM: I simply refer you to the statements that I've made in Parliament on this matter. Secondly, can I also say that in terms of industry consultations, I'd refer you also to the initial statement by the then Minister Mr Garrett on this, where he referred to in that Parliamentary statement way back on the 11th of February this year to the fact of industry consultations occurring on the 18th of February last year.
The Department of the Environment was handed responsibility for the implementation of the program. The various Departments of Government, including the Office of the Coordinator-General were participating in the policy development process for the Home Insulation Program, and then the implementation of it lay with that Department. So the meeting that you refer to, certainly, was referenced in Minister Garrett's statement to Parliament, as I said, on the 11th of February this year.
HOST: 17 minutes away from 9 now, you're listening to ABC Tropical North with Kim Kleidon. I'm speaking with the Prime Minister, Mr Kevin Rudd. While we're on reports, the Lowy Institute poll- and this is another topic that's very much in the minds of Australians- found 72% of people surveyed agreed with a larger population, but 69% of Australians don't want the population to reach 36 million, as forecast by the federal Treasury. How will these results influence your forward planning for Australia?
PM: Well, one of the reasons we have appointed a Minister for Population, Tony Burke, is to examine future possible population levels for Australia, and secondly, how any such population levels would be sustainable against the impact on urban congestion, on the provision of infrastructure, on regional development and regional planning, on the long-term provision of government services like health and education, as well as the availability of affordable housing - these are all the factors which need to be taken into account.
Australia's never had a Population Minister before, so for the first time in history, we have done so. He is now hard at work to develop, for the first time in this country's history, a long-term population strategy, so the key thing is examining future possible levels of population against what's sustainable and he'll be doing that over the course of the year ahead.
HOST: Well, distribution is one of the words being thrown around in relation to this, and the states are talking about regionalisation, but how are we supposed to cope with infrastructure demands given we're not coping at the moment in regions with the population influx we've seen here?
PM: I think as Minister Burke, the Minister for Population, has said, different regions have different demands for growth and different capacities to sustain growth, and that varies right across the country. Also, if you look at particular regions, there's a high demand for skills and that may mean that there is a high demand, therefore, for more population to service the needs of the local economy. In other parts of the country that may be less the case.
Therefore, when the Population Minister is working his way through this to obtain a balanced population outcome for the future, obviously it will be a larger population, but one which is balanced against the future infrastructure constraints of the country and what we need to do to plan better for that infrastructure. We've got to make sure that the different circumstances of the regions are taken into account.
So, it's a vast country, vastly different needs across this country, vastly different needs within the state of Queensland, so that's why we are doing this in a systematic, considered way through this minister.
HOST: Speaking of infrastructure, you're here to announce more than $1 million in funding for training at the Mater Hospital in Mackay today. Why has it take so long to actually have the State Government, sorry, has the State Government got it wrong?
PM: Well, of the question of Mackay region's health and hospital needs, I'd see these as part of a picture which emerges right across the country. There are about 764 public hospitals in Australia, and you will probably not be surprised to know that in most of them I hear a similar story, which is not enough beds, not enough doctors, not enough nurses, and problems at emergency departments, etcetera. So, what we're doing through our new, proposed National Health and Hospitals Network is a new system which will be funded nationally by the Australian Government, but run locally through local hospital networks to make sure that more of the funding from the Australian Government gets through to those who deliver these services on the ground, and for training, the key thing is this - so many people here in Mackay tell me that one of the big challenges is getting doctors to the region, including specialists, and keeping them here.
So, what we have done and will be doing through this announcement out at the Mater Hospital today is investing in the construction fit out of a new clinical training facility capable of supporting nearly 100 additional placements for medicine, nursing, midwifery, pharmacy and physiotherapy students because if you have them trained here, locally, they're also more likely to stay here locally, as well, and that's part and parcel of making sure that you have a proper medical workforce for the future.
HOST: There's local governments calling on the abolishment of the states. Is this maybe the first step for the Federal Government to take over some of the states' responsibilities?
PM: You know something? I'm from Queensland, and I'm a federalist, which is I think it's important that we've got different voices within the federation, because this is a vast country, and there are vastly different needs across this country.
Sure, there is a much bigger role for the voice of regions. I think that is true, and when I come to regions, dynamic regions like the Mackay region, it's very important that they speak increasingly with a strong voice themselves, but that's why we've been seeking to respond to that, as well - practical projects in this region, for example, like the wastewater treatment plant for Mackay. We co-invested $45 million with the Mackay regional council in that - good project for the local area. We'll be doing more of that in the future as the Australian Government, but I think the states will be around for a while yet.
HOST: Prime Minister, just before we let you get onto your next engagement, the Federal Government announced a cancer centre for Ballarat yesterday. Why don't we get one here given we're so far away from capital cities where these are provided?
PM: Well, when it comes to the provision of integrated cancer care centres, we believe that it's important to have a much wider distribution of regional cancer care across the nation. For example, here in North Queensland, you will find that so many, many people have to travel to Brisbane for basic oncology services. What we've done most recently, in fact, only 24 hours ago in Townsville, is announce the funding for a new PET scanner. That means that people in North Queensland, rather than having to travel all the way to Brisbane, have more of an opportunity in this part of the world to be serviced by that.
In all of Sydney there are only six of these machines, for example, which provide the most comprehensive diagnostic analysis of people with various forms of cancer. Now, North Queensland is going to be one as well. We're going to expand these services in regional and rural Australia and part of the announcement I put out yesterday in Townsville has, of course, further support services for oncology treatment in this part of the world as well, in Mackay, and that was part of a half-billion dollar national announcement to establish integrated cancer care services outside of Australia's capital cities.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you and enjoy your brief stay in our beautiful region.
PM: Good to be back, and it's a beautiful part of the world. Thanks very much.


PM: First of all, it's great to be back in Mackay, and great to be here at the Mater Hospital in Mackay, and to see what great work is done here. I'm also pleased to be here with James Bidgood, the Member for Dawson, and also with Mike Brunker. Can I say in terms of James how much I appreciate his service as the local federal Member, the Member for Dawson, and his contribution to this local community. I respect the fact that James has decided for health reasons not to continue as the Labor Member for Dawson, and as the federal candidate for Dawson, and I wish him all the very best for the future.
And as for Mike, welcome onboard, and you have a large job cut out for you. Of course, this is a bloke with broad shoulders, and he's a person of formidable experience, having worked before as the Mayor of Bowen, currently the Mayor of the Whitsundays, and a person with a deep passion and commitment to this wider Mackay region. And therefore can I endorse his strength of commitment to the future of this region, and we look forward very much to working closely with him in delivering on the ground to working families, pensioners, carers in this critical part of Australia.
Let me say a few things about health and hospitals, and then I'll take your questions. We have eleven days to go until the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Canberra, on the future of our health and hospital system. I was elected with a mandate from the Australian people to deliver better health and better hospital services. We've put forward a plan to the Australian people, a new national health and hospital network to be funded nationally, and to be run locally.
For the first time in Australia's history, funded by the Australian Government as the dominant funder of the acute hospital system, run locally through local hospital networks. These will be very tough negotiations in the lead-up to the Council of Australian Governments meeting in eleven days time. I fully expect that. But I have a mandate from the Australian people to make sure that we deliver real results on the ground for better health, and better hospital services across the country.
You see right now, working families, pensioners and carers know that our current system is not working. It's just not working. We don't have enough hospital beds across Australia. We don't have enough doctors. We don't have enough nurses. And this is particularly acute in regional Australia. And what working families, pensioners and carers are saying to us is it's time for action. It's time for action. It's time to get on with it. And therefore, that is why we convene as the Council of Australian Governments in eleven days time.
We believe that if we're going to deliver a better system for the future, it is fundamental that the Australian Government become the dominant funder of the future of the Australian public hospital system, because state Governments in the future will not have the finance to do it. It's as simple as that. State Governments, if there's no change, will see their entire budgets eroded by health and hospital costs within the next 20-30 years. State budgets, if no change happens, will have no money to spend on anything else other than health and hospitals in 20-30 years.
That's why it's critical that the Australian Government steps in. It's critical, therefore, because the states and territories will not have enough money in the future to fund the system, that the Australian Government becomes the dominant funder of the system. Secondly, can I say that that therefore means that we, the Australian Government, would take on the lion's share of the future growth of the needs of the health and hospital system as well.
We'd take that on to our own shoulders, $15 billion worth of additional growth in the system, and that means, for example, in the state of New South Wales, $5 billion worth of additional growth funded by the Australian Government. $3.8 billion worth of additional growth in Victoria. Some $3.2 billion of additional growth in Queensland. South Australia, $1.1 billion, Western Australia, $1.7 billion, Tasmania, $300 million. And this absolutely makes the fundamental point. Working families know that the health and hospital system right now is not working, and it's time to fix it, and it's time, therefore, for the Australian Government to become the dominant funder of the system.
Which brings me to the needs of this region here. What we want for regional Australia is to ensure that when we talk about the local hospital networks that we have much greater say for local clinical leaders to shape the future of the health needs and the hospital needs of this region. We want a system which is funded nationally, but run locally, through local hospital networks. For example, one based here in Mackay. That means that we're able to deliver more hospital beds, it means we're able to deliver also more doctors, more nurses, more allied health professionals.
Recently, the Government made an announcement that we'd be funding an additional 6,500 medical training places across the country. A large slice of those, including the specialist training places, will go to regional Australia, including regional private hospitals as well. Because they are part and parcel of the mix of training the next generation of the Australian health workforce. And that brings us to the work here, specifically on the ground in Mackay. The Minister for Health was here only a week or so ago, and her announcement was that we'd be investing $5 million now in funding a state of the art dental training facility and affordable 20 bed student accommodation at Mackay Base Hospital.
But here in the Mater, what I am confirming today is a further $1.1 million investment for the construction, fit-out of a new clinical training facility here at the Mater. I'm advised that this will provide capacity for approximately 98 additional placements for medicine, nursing, midwifery, pharmacy and physiotherapy students. The key thing is this. If we provide more training facilities for our health professionals on the ground here at the Mater Base Hospital- sorry, here at the Mackay Base Hospital and here at the Mackay Mater Hospital we have a much greater likelihood of these health specialists, these health experts, establishing their roots in this area and staying here for the long term.
Providing them with affordable accommodation is important, providing them with proper training places here in Mackay is important, and providing them with a good professional future as part of a National Health and Hospitals Network which is properly funded for the future as well. So, here in Mackay, this is absolutely crucial to the future of the National Health and Hospitals Network which we're outlining for all of Australia's 764 public hospitals, of which Mackay Base is one. This region, one of many emerging local hospital networks, is a crucial part.
Over to you folks for any questions.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned before- if the Tasmanian election results (inaudible) what will that mean for your plan?
PM: Well I notice that there is still a decision to be made by His Excellency the Governor of Tasmania on the next Government of Tasmania. We should respect the processes, constitutional processes of Tasmania, and wait for that outcome. But let me make it very clear. I will work with any Premier, any Chief Minister, from any State, large or small, Liberal, Labor, Calithumpian, anybody, in order to bring about better health and better hospital services for all Australians, and all Tasmanians. But let's see what the Governor does. We've still got eleven days to go. We'll work through it.
JOURNALIST: So it's not likely to be delayed?
PM: Let's work through it. We've obviously been providing continued briefings to both sides of Tasmanian politics as is proper during this continuing period of resolving the outcome of the Tasmanian State Election. And we have sought to keep both sides of politics properly briefed on the details of this, as we should. But I say again, working families know that our current system isn't working. They know that right across Australia. They want us to get on with it, and do it.
JOURNALIST: Considering the Lowy Institute Poll results, how comfortable are you with current immigration levels of 300,000 people a year, and is this likely to change?
PM: Can I just make this point- the official permanent migration to Australia as of the time that the Howard Government was elected was about 80,000 a year, that's what they inherited from the Keating Government. 12 years later, when Mr Howard left office, it was about 180,000 a year, permanent migrants. Right now, under this Government, it's about 180,000 a year, after two years in office, thereabouts. Therefore, I think it's important we put these numbers into context.
The second thing is this- some of the numbers being kicked around at the moment include temporary visas, students, and working holiday visas and all those sorts of things. People come. People go. They go back home. The key figure here is permanent migration, and the permanent migration figures are the ones I've just referred to.
Now, on the second part of your question, about population, that's why we have appointed, for the first time in Australia's history, a Minister for Population, Tony Burke, and his responsibility is to develop a population strategy for Australia - the first time in the country's history - because the needs right across Australia are different, different infrastructure pressures, different parts of the country, some more able than others to cope with growth. The key thing is to get the balance right and that's what we've appointed Tony Burke to do.
JOURNALIST: Do you still support Christine Nixon?
PM: I believe that Christine has made a statement expressing regret. I fully respect the statement that she has made and I have complete confidence in her position as far as the Bushfire Authority is concerned.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let me just go to one core element of that, which is the undersupply of doctors themselves, whether they are general practitioners or specialists. The statement that we made only two weeks ago announced a $600 million-plus investment in providing an additional 6,500 medical training places over the decade ahead - that's additional.
We've also calculated that, through retirements alone, we will need to have at least an additional 3,000 medical training places simply to keep things as they are, and as you know in regional Australia and rural and remote Australia, that ratio of provision now is just not enough. That's why we're funding 6,500 places - to increase the ratio of provision so there'll be more trained doctors available either as general practitioners or as specialists across the whole country.
Then, secondly, what you do out in regional and rural and remote Australia is in major regional training centres like here and like Townsville and like Cairns and elsewhere, is to ensure that as much local training can happen here as possible, with support mechanisms like local student accommodation etcetera to make it possible for people to be trained here, then to stay here.
And, finally, the Government has expanded significantly the rural doctors incentive scheme. What we have done with the package, of I think about $132 million, is radically expand the number of doctors who are eligible for that and the number of geographical regions which are eligible for that, particularly in the most remote parts of the country. From memory, I think now 2,500 doctors are eligible for that across the country, covering several hundred locations across the country.
So, this is an attempt to deal with a problem which has grown up over a long period of time, but I go back to the core part - you can apply band-aids here and band-aids there. What this system needs is fundamental surgery, and the surgery we need is a new National Health and Hospital Network funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the system for the first time.
JOURNALIST: You've got Mike there beside you, you obviously know it's a pretty marginal seat. How confident are you that Mike can win it, and can you (inaudible)?
PM: These are very broad shoulders, OK, and he and I obviously go to the same barber, as well. That was a joke, by the way.
Can I say what impresses me about Mike is the extent of his experience in the region. You don't get to be mayor of Bowen for nothing. You don't get to be elected as mayor of the Whitsundays for nothing, and what I know about this bloke is that he's passionate about this region and he'll stand up for it.
I spent some time with him last night and I couldn't shut him up, and that's as it should be - effective local candidates and local members are in your face about the needs of their local community, and that applies to him as well.
It'll be a tough fight - fully understand that - but we've also been pretty active on the ground here. You mentioned this area, we've invested in roads $255 million on Bruce Highway work from Sarina to Cairns. This is among other things: we've invested $4 million in the Mackay Aquatic Centre and Riverside Development. We've invested money in the Burdekin Bridge upgrade. We've invested money, also, into the dental facilities that I referred to before here. We've invested $121 million in 73 schools for the biggest school modernisation program this region has seen, and also $23 million for social housing because there's been a shortage of housing, affordable housing.
So, if you put all that together, this is a Government which has been determined to deliver here on the ground in schools, in health, in medical training, in roads, in other areas, as well as an investment in that water treatment works that I opened with the mayor when I was last here.
JOURNALIST: Are you at all concerned about the ongoing CMC investigation into Mike?
PM: I have been advised that Mike's view is that these allegations are politically motivated and I've also been advised that Mike's perfectly happy to have these things dealt with by that body and furthermore, because they are with that body, I wouldn't propose to comment further.
This bloke has enormous experience locally. He's a good candidate, and it wouldn't surprise me if from time to time people are going to choose to throw a bit of mud at him because he is such a strong, local voice for this region.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm not fully familiar with the details of it. I know it's been a private hospital, I know it's gone into receivership. I'm always concerned about the impact on local hospital beds. This fine hospital here at the Mater has more than 100 beds.
At Mackay Base Hospital I saw a report today in the Mercury, I think, saying that they are running 103 percent capacity. Now, this is, look, let's just call a spade a spade - you don't have enough hospital beds in this region and we need to fix it. Let's just be blunt about that. That's what I'm trying to do nationally, and for anyone to stand up anywhere in the country and say 'look, we've got enough hospital beds, there's not a problem here, we've got enough doctors and enough nurses' - I don't find that story anywhere in the country. That's why the system doesn't need a band aid here, a band aid there. It needs some fundamental surgery.
On the details of what the administrators do, of course, that's a matter for them in the case of that particular hospital that you've mentioned.
JOURNALIST: You must be concerning for you that (inaudible)?
PM: Yeah, but there are circumstances which surround this which I am plainly not familiar with. It's a private hospital with what, I'm advised, 50-60 beds. Sorry?
JOURNALIST: 39.
PM: 39. There you go, I've inflated the number, but it's part and parcel of the local delivery of services here. Therefore, it has an impact on the rest of the system. Let's just be blunt about that.
Key thing is how do we work effectively between the private and public systems to make sure that the good people of this region are looked after? It's very hard to turn this whole system around in the matter of a day, but let me tell you our new National Health and Hospitals Network is a plan not just for the nation - it's a plan for each region of Australia as well. It's what the working families of Australia are crying out for, what pensioners and carers are crying out for - it's more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and with the Australian Government being the dominant funders of the system.
The states and territories can't afford it for the future.
JOURNALIST: Training facilities are obviously beneficial in the long term, but Mackay currently has long waiting lists for specialists and dentists. What can locals expect in the short term?
PM: Well, what we are doing through the National Health and Hospitals Network - let me explain that in two ways.
Firstly, what the Australian Government has done in terms of overall investment in public hospital services nationwide, starting from last year, is increase our investment by 50 percent, and that is a very large increased investment on our part, as well. The total allocation from us to the states and territories for hospitals now has risen from something in the vicinity of about $40 billion to something in the vicinity of about $64 billion. Queensland's slice of that, in terms of additional funding, would run in the vicinity, he says, of around about $4 billion. Now, that is over the current 5-year period starting last year.
Secondly, we're also providing upfront investments now to assist state governments in improving emergency departments, elective surgery waiting lists, and acute care services as well. Some of those are starting to flow through, but it's going to take some more time. I wish I could just, you know, take out the magic wand and say it's all fixed tomorrow, but these problems have been emerging for 20 or 30 years.
If this reform of ours is brought about, and I believe it is necessary for the nation that it is brought about, then it will be the biggest change to the health and hospital system this country had seen since the introduction of Medicare, and the time has come - the time has really come.
Having said that, folks, I've got to zip. Thank you.


The Rudd Government will invest $67 million to establish a comprehensive cancer centre at Rockhampton Hospital, as part of a Central Queensland Integrated Regional Cancer Service.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts.
This $67 million investment in Rockhampton will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 18,400 Queensland residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
The investment will fund the commissioning of two radiotherapy bunkers and construction of a third bunker, and 16 chemotherapy chairs.
The bunkers at Rockhampton will allow Queensland Health to install two linear accelerators, resulting in additional radiotherapy services for cancer patients.
Additional radiotherapy bunker space at Rockhampton will also provide for future expansion of radiotherapy services to meet growing needs in the community.
This initiative builds on the Rudd Government's investment of $76 million over two years to expand the Rockhampton Hospital.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
Member for Capricornia Kirsten Livermore said this cancer centre will mean that people in Rockhampton and the wider region can get the care that they need closer to their homes, their friends and their families.
"This is what the people in my community deserve and I am proud today that the Rudd Government is delivering it."
The integrated Rockhampton cancer centre forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish regional cancer centres so that Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


The Australian Government is planning for Mackay's future health workforce needs with an investment of $1.1 million for construction and fit-out of a new clinical training facility at Mater Misericordiae Hospital.
In Mackay, the Prime Minister announced that the funding will be provided to James Cook University and will allow for approximately 98 additional placements for medicine, nursing and midwifery, pharmacy and physiotherapy students.
The initial phase of the project will provide an immediate boost to the local economy, via more jobs and investment in the construction sector, and once complete, there will be the ongoing benefits of more students training in the region.
Students who live and learn locally are more likely to stay after graduation - and this investment will deliver more doctors, nurses, midwives, pharmacists and physiotherapists to care for Mackay's growing and ageing population.
The project aims to provide innovative clinical training placements through constructing and equipping a new teaching and study facility at Mater Misericordiae and engaging private specialist clinicians in teaching.
It builds on the Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon's announcement last week that Mackay would benefit from more than $5 million in funding for a state-of-the-art dental training facility and affordable 20-bed student accommodation at Mackay Base Hospital.
The projects are part of the Rudd Government's strategy to work with organisations involved in providing clinical training to build training capacity and enhance the long-term sustainability of the health workforce.
The Rudd Government is building a health system to meet the needs of all Australians, now and into the future.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government will fund 60 per cent of the cost of services delivered in a public hospital into the future.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better health and better hospitals for local communities.


The Australian Government is planning for Gladstone's future health workforce needs with increased local clinical training opportunities for health and nursing students.
Up to $3 million will be provided to the Queensland University of Technology to work with 3 GP clinics across Queensland, including at the Gladstone Super Clinic, to create clinical training placements for around 128 students in areas such as psychology, pharmacy, podiatry, physiotherapy, nursing and radiography.
It will also support training places at Strathpine GP Super Clinic, and Golden Beach General Practice.
In Gladstone today, the Prime Minister said the investment will help deliver new pharmacists, physiotherapists, nurses and more, to care for the city's rapidly growing population.
Member for Flynn, Chris Trevor, said students who live and learn in a community are more likely to stay after graduation.
"Gladstone is booming, and this initiative is part of the preparation to make sure we have a strong sustainable health workforce."
The projects are part of the Rudd Government's strategy to work with organisations involved in providing clinical training to build training capacity and enhance the long-term sustainability of the health workforce.
The Rudd Government is building a health system to meet the needs of all Australians, now and into the future.
Under the National Health and Hospitals plan, the Rudd Government will shoulder the majority of the funding burden - 60 per cent of all public hospital services - meaning more money is available to meet rising health costs.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better health for local communities. 


The Rudd Government will invest $9.2 million for an additional 16 chemotherapy chairs at Hervey Bay Hospital, as part of the Central Integrated Regional Cancer Service.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts. The $9.2 million investment in Hervey Bay will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 18,400 Queensland residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
The services at Hervey Bay will work together with Bundaberg Hospital where the Rudd Government is investing $8.3 million for an additional 14 chemotherapy chairs, and with Rockhampton Hospital where the Prime Minister announced a $67 million investment in additional radiotherapy bunkers and 16 chemotherapy chairs.
When operating at full capacity, the Central Integrated Regional Cancer Service will provide radiotherapy for an estimated extra 828 patients per year, and chemotherapy treatment for an estimated extra 11,500 patients per year.
It forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million investment in regional and rural cancer centres to ensure all Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
It is of great concern that for the 30 per cent of Australians living in rural and remote areas, outcomes are worse than for people living in the city.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


PM: I've never seen Chris so shy in my life.
Can I say to all of you how much I appreciate your hospitality this morning and being able to see what great work you do as health professionals here in Gladstone and across central Queensland. Great to meet all the nurses and the midwives I've seen this morning, the allied health professionals, I've seen those as well, those specialising in breast care for breast cancer which we know is a huge challenge for so many Australian women and families, to all of our doctors, including our foreign-trained doctors, and I'll just say how much we welcome your contribution to the Australian health service. It's a terrific thing.
I met, also, the dentist. Where is he? There he is. Who took 30 seconds to give me a submission. That's what I call striking while the iron's hot. Well done.
Look, the reason I'm with Chris today here in Gladstone and why I've been in Queensland all week, in Cairns, in Townsville, in Mackay, in Rockhampton, Gladstone and now I'm heading to Bundaberg as well, is simply to talk about health and hospitals, and that is why we need to fundamentally change the system for the future. What we're proposing is a system which is funded nationally but run locally - funded nationally with the Australian Government being the dominant funders of the system for the first time, but run locally so that here in regional Queensland you can make more and more local decisions about the priorities you have here, and we, the Australian Government, will be funding local hospital networks directly. That's the big change for the future.
I've listened carefully to what people have said this morning about some of the challenges with your health workforce. I've listened carefully to what a number have said about the problems in finding enough midwives in this hospital, and we have a real challenge with long-term effective workforce planning.
One of the other challenges that we're facing is the adequate supply of GPs in the community to take some of the pressure off accident and emergencies as well. One of the folk that I just met upstairs, this little girl who's in hospital with the insect bite, said, from her perspective, and she's just north of here at Calliope, I think, she said, look, for her the critical thing was being able to a GP out of hours so that we don't have to constantly traipse off to the accident and emergency, and that is one of the reasons why we are so determined to fund GP Superclinics across the country. Working in partnership with the local colleges of general practice, but the whole idea is that when things happen outside of hours that there is another place to go, other than the accident and emergency. A&amp;E is absolutely essential, but it should be there to deal with the really serious cases, and so that's why we've got to get that balance right, as well.
But on the workforce front, we also know that we've got some challenges as well. That's one of the reasons why we're funding an extra 6,500 medical training places nation-wide in the decade ahead, starting with an increase of 50 percent from next year, because we've got to make up for the shortfall which will come through doctors just retiring. So many of your local medicos are so dedicated to these communities they've been here for years and years and years, but even they one day retire. Therefore, we've got to make sure we've got an extra group, a new generation of professionals, coming through. The same with nurses - having our trained nurses across all the specialisations, that's critical as well, and the allied health professionals.
What we're here today to talk about, of course, is how do we expand the training opportunities here in local communities like this as well? And that's why we're confirming an investment of $3 million in partnership with general practice clinics including the Gladstone Superclinic to provide up to 128 student training places at that centre. That will therefore support extra pharmacists, extra physiotherapists and extra nurse training places as well, out there in general practice.
That is just one further contribution to the services that you need in communities like this. It builds on the announcements I've been making in recent days about the rapid expansion of regional cancer services as well. I think I was told before here at Gladstone Hospital you have three chemotherapy beds. Is that right? Chairs, I should say. In as far as the expansion of cancer and oncology services are concerned, right across regional Australia we're rolling out a half-billion-dollar-plus program to make sure that people have proper cancer-related services in areas outside the capital cities.
The last thing I'd say is this - we've got us an Australia for the future whereby people who live in regional Australia have proper access to health and hospital services. I looked the other day at a statistic which said that if you're diagnosed with cancer, in most forms of cancer, you have three times less the survival rates within the first five years of diagnosis if you live outside a major metropolitan centre. That should not be the case. We've got to change that, and that's why we're expanding our investment in cancer-related services across the country, as well.
So, thank you very much for having me here. We will be meeting with the other Premiers and Chief Ministers in Canberra in 10 days' time. That should be a fun meeting and looks like it's shaping up for a very interesting exchange. But, you know something? We've got to make sure that we fix the system for the future, and for the long-term future, and part of fixing it for the long-term future is making sure the building-blocks of the system, like the health and hospital community here in Gladstone, is properly funded and with proper levels of local autonomy in the future as well.
Thank you very much.
Can I just say this, before it's over - I'm heading off to Bundaberg soon, and so I'm going to be doing a press conference there on national matters, but I'm very happy to take any questions on local matter here while I'm here in Gladstone.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can you please tell me why Gladstone doesn't have an intensive care unit?
PM: Well, the answer in terms of the planning of your local services through the Gladstone Hospital and how it relates to other regional centres is something which is currently done by Queensland state health. The Australian Government does not have a direct role in that planning.
But what we do do is this for the future - under our plan, for the first time, we will become the dominant funders of the hospital system. At present we pay one third of the bill, and in the future we'd be paying for the bulk of the running costs of hospitals, the bulk of the capital costs of hospitals, the bulk of the equipment costs of hospitals, and the bulk of the teaching and training costs of hospitals, so if in the development of care plans for this region those sorts of services are delivered here locally, for the first time we actually pay - we become the dominant funders of that service.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Gladstone doesn't need a GP Superclinic. It needs an intensive care unit.
PM: Well, there's a long debate locally about the need for GP services out there in the community.
In fact, I was talking to a number of medical experts this morning who said exactly the reverse to what you have just said. And what they have said in fact, including the lady upstairs, is that what we need is to have access to out of hours GP services, to take the pressure off accident and emergency. But you know something? This should never be an either/or. We should be building up the resources and the facilities here at Gladstone Hospital, at the same time as building up the provision of GP-related services in the community as well.
JOURNALIST: Some of the nurses in Queensland aren't being paid at the moment. What's your view about that?
PM: Well if they're not being paid, that's not right- that's my view about that. Nurses are out there at the absolute front line of the delivery of care to Queenslanders and people in need. So, I don't have that report in front of me, but if that's the case, it's just not right. We need more nurses, more doctors, and more hospital beds. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: It's not just the nurses that aren't getting paid. It is all over.
PM: Okay.
JOURNALIST: There is just one big muck up. Some people for two fortnights in a row have not had any pay whatsoever.
PM: Is that right? Is that through Queensland Health, is it?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Okay, so I'm told by the health administrators here, they're introducing a new pay system. I think if nurses are not being paid, that's not right, and as far as what is being done to set that to rights, then I'll speak later today with the state Health Minister who'd be responsible for that. Over to you again.
JOURNALIST: Not just nurses. Other departments as well.
PM: Okay, okay. Picked up your point. Others as well. Where do you work, yourself?
JOURNALIST: I'm domestic.
PM: Okay, good. Thanks for telling me that, because it shouldn't be happening.
JOURNALIST: Can I get just something on the oil issue.
PM: Yeah, sure. That passes the test of being both local and national.
JOURNALIST: There's some concern that with so much development here and 3000 ships coming through Gladstone by 2007 that Gladstone might not cope, the Reef might not cope.
PM: Well, I had a good briefing last night from the Harbour Master here, and with the team which he and others have assembled to deal with the challenges out here on the Great Barrier Reef at present. I've got to say, they're a pretty professional outfit, the folk who are dealing with a problem created by a Chinese vessel which somehow seems to have found itself 12 kilometres off course in the Great Barrier Reef, and we'll come to how that happened later on.
Can I just say two things about the matter that you've raised. One is, having been to that briefing last night, I'd just like to say to the Australian people, people of Queensland, and locals, this will be a very difficult and delicate exercise in extracting the oil from this vessel, and a difficult and delicate exercise in salvaging the vessel.
Anyone who thinks that this is all over red rover, frankly, they're not getting it right. This is going to take a lot of time, a lot of technical precision, and hard work. And frankly, it is a very difficult situation still, with no absolute guarantee of success. I'd just like to make that very plain, having spoken to the experts at the Harbour Master's coordination centre last night.
The second point you raise in your question goes to the future of the Reef - the number of vessels which are exiting the port of Gladstone, but also other ports up the coast as well. One of the things that I said was that, said yesterday, and in previous days, was that in getting to the bottom of how this, frankly, outrage occurred, having a massive vessel like that 12 kilometres off course in the middle of the Great Barrier Reef, is what do we need to do for the long term future?
And the two areas that I want examined by all the Transport Safety Bureau investigators are as follows - do we need to expand the mandatory pilotage system right across the Great Barrier Reef and this was last done in 2006, it was kept to the Northern Reef and extended to the Torres Strait, but not down here. The second thing is this - do we also need to extend the reach of the vehicle tracking system, which is done for the Northern Reef and for the Torres Strait, but which is currently not applied, since 2006, to the southern parts of the Reef. These are two practical areas which need to be looked at, and I'll look very carefully at the recommendations of which they bring forward. Any other local questions?
JOURNALIST: Are there - do you think that the penalties for these shipping companies are enough to deter them from straying off course? I mean, surely with the technology we've got today, how do they get 12 kilometres off course?
PM: As I said, that's what the Transport Safety Bureau will be examining in detail, and we will look very carefully at the conclusions they reach. I think I share the views of all Australians, all Queenslanders and all locals who love the Great Barrier Reef that this is an outrage as to how it's occurred. The second point is this - you go to the question of penalties, that is also something which should be looked at for the future as well. Under the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority I'm advised that violations of the provision of that Act can result in fines of $5 and a half million, can result in terms of imprisonment of up to three years for any ship's Master who has been found comprehensively negligent. Those are the penalty regimes which currently apply, but these should be looked at for the future as well. Any last local questions?
JOURNALIST: The next thing is we've had so many industries like the LNG (inaudible) What I'm wondering is, how's the hospital going to cope with the influx of people?
PM: Exactly. And this is an important question of why we actually need the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the system nationwide. Let me put it in these terms. Nationwide at present the health and hospitals budgets are growing at about 10 or 11% per year from the State Governments of Australia. The taxation revenues going to the State and Territory Governments of Australia each year are growing at about 4 and 5%. So the gap is going like this, which is why long term, State Governments cannot afford to fund, under current circumstances, the health and hospital system of Australia. That's why we're stepping in. So you go to the immediate application of that to your region and the question that you ask about the future planning for health and hospital needs here in Gladstone. You've got to have a planning formula which takes into account future population growth, takes into account the future needs for primary care, GPs in the community out of hours, which is why we're doing what we're doing there, but also the needs of the acute hospital system and the aged care system as well, longer term.
Having the plan right for that is one thing. Having the funding right for that to make sure it happens is something else. Putting those two things together is what this new National Health and Hospitals Network of ours is all about. We can't solve these problems overnight, but let me tell you, I believe the system right now is at tipping point and if we don't undertake some fundamental surgery, nationwide, and that includes all the important parts of that network nationally, including this hospital, and this health community, I fear it will tip over. We can't afford for that to happen. The people up here today depend on all of the work of these professionals. And we intend to back them up.
Thanks for having me in Gladstone. I've got to head off now.


PM: Well first of all, it's great to be here with Belinda McNeven, our new candidate for Hinkler, and of course, Justine Elliot, the Minister for Aged Care. It's great to be back here in Bundaberg, and great to be back here in this hospital which I visited last time when I was Leader of the Opposition. And it's an important part of the overall health and hospital network, not just of this region, but of the entire nation.
In this community, the Government has taken seriously its commitment to deliver real action on the ground. That's why we're so pleased to have Belinda as our candidate here. One or two simple facts about what we've been doing on the ground in this community- in this wider region of Hinkler, we have invested some $440 million as part of the Government's national economic stimulus strategy. Let me say that again without the musical accompaniment. We have invested some $440 million as part of the Government's overall national economic infrastructure strategy.
Now that has gone into a massive investment into local schools in this area. Some $112 million spread across some 58 schools and 214 projects, so local mums and dads, and carers and grandparents seeing new state of the art libraries being built, new state of the art classrooms being built, language centres, science centres, trades training centres, all across the region to service the needs of our kids for tomorrow while creating jobs and opportunities for small business today.
We've also been investing, of course, in the needs of the local health and hospital system, some $4 million to the Bundaberg Hospital already for additional observation beds in the emergency department- this is a very musical press conference. Okay.
Also investing in health and hospitals with already a $4 million investment (inaudible) for additional observation beds in the emergency department, together with, of course, elsewhere in Bundaberg at the Mater, with the granting of Medicare eligibility to an additional MRI unit at that hospital. And on roads, the investment in local Roads to Recovery, some $6 or $7 million to three local councils to assist there.
Why do I run through these things? To simply underline one point. This Government is determined to deliver action on the ground in local communities in things that matter. In our schools, in our hospitals, in our roads, and overall economic stimulus to provide jobs, support small business and apprentices today, while building the sort of infrastructure we need for tomorrow. Of course, part of our delivery to this local area is in the area of health and hospitals. And today I want to confirm that the Australian Government will be investing $8.3 million for new and enhanced regional cancer services here in Bundaberg.
This of course is on top of the wider investment in cancer services across regional Queensland and regional Australia that we've been announcing over the last couple of days. I am constantly stunned by the statistic that with some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than are those who live in the cities. To be very clear about that, three times more likely to die within the first five years of diagnosis than those who live in urban areas.
That's not good enough for Australia, it's not good enough for Queensland, it's not good enough for this community. That's why we're determined to act. That's why, nationwide in this last few days, we've announced more than half a billion dollars worth of investment in comprehensive cancer care centres and networks right across the nation, not just in regional Queensland, but in all the states of Australia, and in regional centres across those states. Here in Bundaberg, this announcement will provide for an additional 14 chemotherapy chairs, and the cancer services provided in Bundaberg will work together with the Rocky Hospital where I announced some $67 million for additional radiotherapy bunkers and chemotherapy chairs only in the last twenty four hours or so.
Better cancer care for cancer sufferers across Australia, but in particular in regional centres like Bundaberg as well. The last thing I'd say before asking Justine, the Minister for Aged Care to comment, is this- that is, that also the Government is announcing today that we'll provide 651 new transition care places to help up to 4800 older people across Australia to enable them to leave hospitals sooner. This is part of a $293 million investment by the Government to provide an additional 2000 transition care places by 30 June 2012. I am advised that 126 of those new transition care places will be here in Queensland. I'm further advised that within these existing health regions some 34 of those places will be delivered.
This is again part and parcel of delivering real change on the ground to help working families, pensioners, carers, deal with the challenges of their health and hospital needs. If I could just ask Justine to add, then I'll take your questions.
ELLIOT: Thank you Prime Minister. It's the announcement of these allocations of the transition care places is part of our ongoing commitment to health and aged care. These 651 places, as the Prime Minister said, will assist up to 4800 people in terms of getting out of hospitals quicker, and getting into more appropriate settings to get the care that they need. This is part of our commitment leading up to the last election, to provide 2000 more transition care places. And of course, transition care can be provided for up to 12 weeks, and it can be a whole range of services, whether it be physiotherapy or personal care. And certainly, it's good to see and speak with many people who receive transition care. In fact, about 80% of people who have transition care either maintain their physical capacity, or in fact improve. So it's very important to ensure we get people out of hospital quicker and get them into more appropriate settings.
And of course, this is part of the Rudd Government's commitment to health, hospitals and aged care. When it comes to aged care, we're providing more services, 10,000 more places right across the nation with increased funding by 20%. We understand how important it is to be providing those services to older Australians right across the nation.
PM: Thanks very much Justine. And happy to take your questions, folks.
JOURNALIST: Will those transition places all (inaudible)
PM: They're the ones that I just mentioned before, the 34, which would flow to this existing state health region within which Bundaberg is located. Am I right folks? They're nodding intelligently, I think I've got that one right. Thank you.
Any other questions, folks?
JOURNALIST: Just on chemo care (inaudible)
PM: I'm advised that that funding here at Bundaberg is to provide those 16 additional chemotherapy chairs. That I understand is a significant enhancement on what is currently available here, and we believe that it's a very important way of supporting the health needs of local sufferers of cancer.
JOURNALIST: Will there be any money for radiation therapy (inaudible)
PM: I'm aware of that at this stage- we believe that our investments here represent a critical first step in extending cancer-related services across regional Australia. It starts here. You'll see our comprehensive integrated cancer care centres operating out of Rockhampton and out of Townsville. But we intend, over time, to expand these cancer-related services as well, making sure we've got chemotherapy services properly delivered here is very much an important first step.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: On the local clinical decisions, I would rather defer on that question to local hospital managers. I feel as if I'm about to become a consulting physician on these sorts of questions, and I'll leave that one to others.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's your (inaudible)
PM: Who made those claims?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: (laughs) There you go. All I can say is- can I just say, every region of Australia, for me, is important. If you were to look at where we have just in the last several days either opened or expanded the delivery of cancer services, this occurs in many parts of Australia where the party that I lead has never, ever represented those communities in Government. Let's be very clear about this. In the last couple of days or so we've had Australian Government Ministers in Bunbury in Western Australia, don't think that's ever been represented by Labor in the Federal Parliament. Tamworth in northern New South Wales, I don't think that's been represented by Labor in the Federal Parliament. Toowoomba, I don't think that's ever been represented by Labor in the Federal Parliament. You were at Toowoomba yesterday, Justine? And these are, between them, tens and tens of millions of dollars of investment.
You know what the organising principle here is? To make sure that people, wherever they live in Australia, have decent access to health and hospital services. That's what we're on about. We want to make sure it happens. And I think working families across the country, pensioners and carers, have already reached the decision that they want to see fundamental change in the system. They want to see national funding for our health and hospital system. They want to see one which is locally delivered through local hospital networks. And they want more hospital beds, they want more doctors, more nurses, but a system which also doesn't continue to encourage cost-shift and blame-shift, as the current system does.
JOURNALIST: There's been a very suspiciously timed (inaudible)
PM: Are you owning the suspicion?
JOURNALIST: Yes I am owning the suspicion.
PM: You'd prefer I didn't come?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) health debate next week -
PM: The first time I heard about Belinda's health debate next week was when I read a brief on it as I got off the plane this morning. There you go. She tells me there's no (inaudible). I just draw your attention to where I've been this week. I've been to Cairns, I've been to Townsville, I've been to Mackay, I've been to Rocky, I've been to Gladstone, I'm here and I'm heading off to Brisbane- you know why? Each of these centres is really important, and others beside, in the delivery of health and hospital services for all Australians. We intend to get on with the business.
It's time we actually put this beyond the partisan divide. I mean, I would urge all political leaders, state and federal, Labor and conservative, to get behind national health and hospital reform. People are crying out for this.
I notice my political opponent, Mr Abbott, changing position, it seems, again today on this question - one day saying that he's opposed to our health and hospital reforms, the next day saying he won't necessarily oppose them, and today saying he's going to oppose them again. We seem to have a bit of flip-flop-flap in terms of where he actually stands on this.
Can I say, too, whether it's Premier Brumby in Victoria or Mr Abbott federally, please get on board for real, fundamental, long-term health and hospitals reform. The states and territories cannot afford to fund this system for the long-term future. That is why we, the Australian Government, are stepping in, and we think it's the right direction for the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, part of your 2007 election campaign was a GP Superclinic which your Government has just announced (inaudible). Why has it taken three years for that to finally organise?
PM: Well, we've undertaken to the Australian community to establish, I think, 36 of these across the nation as part of an overall 5-year program. I understand we have nine of these centres up and running partly or fully across Australia now. We have contracts signed on a large number of additional ones, including the one, I understand, signed here yesterday with the Bundaberg Superclinic.
Look, I think everyone would like these things to happen earlier, but if you put things out to a tender process and you take all the offers, expressions of interest in, and these are considered independently, you've got to make the right decisions. Sometimes that takes longer than you would like, but I'm really pleased that this decision's been taken. I'm very pleased that the contract's been signed here in Bundaberg. I'm very pleased, more importantly, that what this will mean is, in consultation with local GPs who are apparently here at present in Bundaberg that you will have a GP Superclinic operating between 8 and 8, Monday to Friday, between 8 and 12 on Saturday and Sunday, which in my bitter experience as a father is when our kids tend to have accidents when they're out playing one form of sport or another.
Why is it that our kids refuse to only get sick between 9 and 5, Monday to Friday? It's a deep international conspiracy among children, but you know something? That's what happens.
So, what are we trying to do? Expand those services for families out there in the community, GP-related services, allied health services as well, so there is less pressure on the accident and emergency department here at Bundaberg Base Hospital. That's why, and I think that is a critical thing, good for parents, good for the hospital, good in terms of the best use of the taxpayers' dollar.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Rudd, how is the GP Superclinic supposed to address needs of the Indigenous and low-income (inaudible).
PM: Well, this GP Superclinic, I'm unfamiliar with the actual nature of the contractual arrangements with the local consortium, but the doors, when it comes to the provision of primary healthcare services, are open to all who need care.
[Door slams]
That door just shut. Let me say that again. It's a very, sort of, sound and light press conference we're having here today. Where's the music gone?
So, the doors of health care services must be open to all Australians, and the sort of Australia we want to build for the future, it doesn't matter where you come from, whether you're rich or poor, what part of the country you happen to live in, that you have access to decent, quality health care. That applies to all Australians.
JOURNALIST: Um, the clinic won't be mostly bulk billed, though, as I understand, it's only going to be for people with concession cards, so all (inaudible)
PM: On the details of that, I'll ask the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon to come and speak to you separately on that. I think it's an area where I would be reluctant to get into detailed commentary, which is the local billing arrangements of each of the 36 GP Superclinics who are operating at different locations around the country.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, say that again?
JOURNALIST: Is the clinic a compromise for (inaudible)
PM: Not that I'm aware of. Can I just say it's about time to be positive about all this? What's happening? A GP Superclinic involving a multi-million dollar investment here in Bundaberg is about to happen. It didn't exist before. It's going to exist. It's going to provide services beyond the normal hours. I would think that for working families here this would actually be a really good addition to the delivery of local healthcare services.
As I said, everyone, in a perfect world, would like everything to happen perfectly. I'm sure in all of the organisations that you represent here today and the companies that you represent, that rarely happens as well. Business of government is no different.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you mentioned John Brumby stands against your health reform previously. He's been highly critical of your plan. Why do you think you haven't been able to convince him of those reforms?
PM: Well, that, of course, is a matter of continuing discussion. I would welcome any continuing discussion with the Premiers, the Chief Ministers, from all the states, as I said, Labor and Liberal, large and small states, to bring about better health, better hospitals for working Australians. I look forward to continuing discussions with John, and I'm sure he would recognise, as well, that his hospital system has real problems, like those elsewhere in the country, but I think it comes down to this - working families want better hospitals. Working families in Victoria also want better hospitals, and I would call upon John, as I would call upon Tony Abbott, to work with the Government to deliver long-term, lasting health and hospitals reform for working families.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and that your plan would lead to more bureaucracy. What's your response to that?
PM: Well, on the question of investment in the system, could I just draw everyone's attention to this - that under the existing Australian Healthcare Agreement, which only began last year, we are providing an additional $5.1 billion in investment to Victoria, and under the new National Health and Hospitals Network we'd be providing a further $3.8 billion to Victoria. That comes to something like $9 billion worth of additional investment to the Victorian health system. I think that's a good start, of course there's more to do.
On the second question that you raised, can I say this - what we are proposing to do is in fact cut out a level of bureaucracy by funding local hospital networks direct. Many of the Premiers have said 'please, just send the money in a cheque to us. We'll look after it.' Can I say, when I go to the local health networks and hospital networks of Australia, they often have a different view, and that is they would actually much rather to be funded directly, so on the question you raise, in fact, we are funding, nationally, directly, to local hospital networks, rather than providing a blank cheque to another level of bureaucracy.
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to give more time to Premiers to sort out the nuts and bolts of your plan, or are you expecting an agreement at the next COAG meeting?
PM: I believe we've got a once in a generation opportunity at this meeting of the Council of Australian Governments to get health and hospitals reform right for working families right across Australia. I've said already, it takes more than a day we'll take the second day. It's important that we get agreement on this.
I am absolutely determined that we deliver better health and better hospital services for Australians. They want more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and you know something? We've got to do that through a system which is able to be funded long term.
Let me just conclude on this when it comes to health and hospitals - the cold fact is that the Australian Government, for the first time, will become the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia and all of its 764 hospitals, and the reason we are doing that is because the states and territories, over the next 10 to 20 to 30 years, cannot afford to support, financially, the health and hospital system.
If we do not make this change, over the next 20 to 30 years the state governments' entire budgets will be consumed by health and hospitals alone. That is why we are making this change, and that's why I think it's a once-in-a-generation opportunity to do so.
JOURNALIST: Do think it's going to - sorry - I was going to say, do you think it's going to come down to a referendum?
PM: I believe in trying to get a negotiated outcome. I'm a reasonable sort of guy on these sort of questions. Let's sit down, sort it out, find our way through, but our plan's pretty clear and we've spent a long time developing it, which is why, for example, national bodies like the AMA, the Royal College of Surgeons, the Royal College of Physicians, the Royal College of General Practitioners and other professional bodies, the Australian Health and Hospitals Association and others, have all supported the Government's plan.
Let's be very clear about this - others have expressed reservations, but you know something? We think the time is right to bring about what would be the biggest reform to the Australian health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.
Let me just conclude by making a comment in addition to statements made by a number of my ministerial colleagues in Canberra today in relation to people smuggling. The Australian Government today has announced that we are introducing an immediate suspension of the processing of new asylum applications from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. This suspension has been made as a result of the changing circumstances in those two countries. We have monitored the changing international circumstances, and we have taken action in response to those changing circumstances.
The combined effect of this suspension and the changing circumstances in these two countries will mean that more asylum seekers from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan will be refused. The Government's view is simple - if someone's claim for asylum is not legitimate, they'll be sent home. I say it again - the Government's position is absolutely clear-cut: if someone's claim for asylum is not legitimate, they will be sent home, and today's announcement in relation to this suspension underlines that fact.
Australia, like other countries, will still have to deal with global push factors when it comes to movements of asylum seekers, movements of boats, as well as the challenge which is presented by people smuggling, but today's announcement is an important announcement.
Thanks very much, folks. Got to run.



The Rudd Government will invest $8.3 million to enhance cancer care infrastructure at Bundaberg Hospital, as part of the Central Integrated Regional Cancer Service.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts. The $8.3 million investment in Bundaberg will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 18,400 Queensland residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd made the announcement at Bundaberg Hospital, and said it will allow for an additional 14 chemotherapy chairs.
This service will help give Queenslanders with cancer, the care they need as close to home and family as possible.
Cancer services provided at Bundaberg will work together with the Rockhampton Hospital, where the Prime Minister yesterday announced a $67 million investment in additional radiotherapy bunkers and 16 chemotherapy chairs.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
It is of great concern that for the 30 per cent of Australians living in rural and remote areas, outcomes are worse than for people living in the city.
The Central Integrated Regional Cancer Service forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million investment in regional cancer centres across Australia. Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


From 1 July 2010, the Australian Government will provide 651 new transition care places to help up to 4,800 older people leave hospital sooner and take pressure off the state and territory hospital systems.
The new places will be fully funded by the Australian Government as part of its $293.2 million commitment to provide an additional 2,000 transition care places by 30 June 2012.
Too many older Australians are staying in the acute hospital sector for too long after a hospital procedure. The transition care program is about helping older people get the most appropriate care and rehabilitation when and where they need it.
Transition care provides up to 12 weeks of clinical and practical support such as physiotherapy and nursing support or personal care to help older people recover and regain their independence. It can be offered in the home, in community rehabilitation centres and temporarily in residential aged care homes.
Last financial year, the transition care program helped more than 12,600 people recover from a hospital stay with 4 out of 5 either improving or maintaining their level of health and independence.
We are determined to get the hospital and aged care sectors working together so that older Australians receive the most appropriate care in the most appropriate setting.
The 651 new transition beds will extend care for older Australians beyond the hospital doors, allowing older Australians to continue to live in their own homes and their own communities.
This investment builds on the:
     * More than 10,000 new aged care places that have become operational under the Rudd Government, including 698 new transition care places;
     * Nearly 20 per cent increase in funding for aged care services; and
     * $500 million in funding to expand subacute care services.
The new places will be rolled-out from July 1, 2010 and will become operational throughout the financial year.


The Australian Government is planning for Queensland's future health workforce needs.
The Government is providing up to $22 million to support additional clinical training places for students at local universities - which will encourage more health students to study and work across Queensland.
Brisbane, Goondiwindi, Warwick, Cherbourg, and the Gold Coast are just some of the locations throughout Queensland where students will now have additional high-quality clinical training opportunities.
Students who live and learn in a community are more likely to stay after graduation, and this in turn means more Queenslanders will get better access to appropriate health care, regardless of their location.
Griffith University, University of Queensland, Bond University, Queensland University of Technology, James Cook University and the Gold Coast TAFE will share in the $22 million.
This will support approximately 1040 additional clinical training placements for students currently enrolled in medicine, nursing, psychology, physiotherapy, pharmacy, podiatry and a number of other disciplines.
The $22 million will fund opportunities ranging from placements in rural and remote GP settings to supporting new training opportunities in private hospitals. The students will be able to experience the private, public and not for profit health sectors in Queensland.
This announcement is in addition to the recent Rudd Government announcement of $632 million to train an additional 6,000 GPs and specialists.
The Rudd Government is building a health workforce to meet the needs of all Australians, now and into the future.
Under the National Health and Hospitals plan, the Rudd Government will shoulder the majority of the funding burden - 60 per cent of all public hospital services - meaning more money is available to meet rising health costs.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better health for local communities


The Rudd Government will set a new National Four Hour Target for emergency department access in public hospitals under its new National Health and Hospitals Network.
To help public hospitals reach the new Four Hour Target, the Government will invest $500 million, the equivalent of an additional 1.2 million emergency department services.
Financial incentives will be attached to these targets - where a state's public hospitals meet or beat the target, hospitals in that state will be eligible for additional health funding.
Under the new Four Hour Target, public hospitals will be expected to ensure that patients who present to an emergency department are within four hours either:
- admitted to hospital;
- referred for follow-up treatment; or 
- treated and discharged.
This new target and the funding to deliver it are contingent upon establishment of the new National Health and Hospitals Network.
The most recent figures show that currently:
- Almost one in three patients - about 600,000 people each year - wait longer than 8 hours in an emergency department before they are admitted to hospital. 
- Almost one in three patients wait longer than clinically recommended.
Hard-working doctors and nurses in our emergency departments do a great job, but they need more support to deliver working families the timely services they need.
For more than a decade, Australians have suffered as public hospital emergency departments struggled to cope with two million extra presentations and reduced funding from the former Government.
In 2007/08, our emergency departments delivered 7.1 million services to patients, but only two-thirds of patients were seen within clinically recommended times.
The Government will provide $150 million from 1 July this year in upfront payments to help states and territories with the costs of moving towards the Four Hour Target.
This investment will help provide the additional capacity, equipment and planning in hospitals needed to deliver improvements in emergency departments and lift hospitals to the new high standards required under the National Health and Hospitals Network.
A further $350 million will be available in reward funding for meeting or beating the target.
This investment will mean families can be confident that when they or a loved one need urgent care in an emergency department, they will no longer have to spend all night sitting in the waiting room or waiting for a bed.
The Four Hour Target will be phased in over 4 years, beginning in 2011 with patients in the most urgent categories of clinical need, so that Local Hospital Networks can progressively adapt to the new target.
The Government will work with clinicians to develop a nationally consistent, clinically safe and appropriate definition of the Four Hour Access Target.
Local Hospital Networks will be responsible for ensuring that hospitals within their Network deliver on the Four Hour Target.
The target will not overrule the best clinical judgement of doctors - including on decisions as to whether the best treatment is to admit a patient within four hours.
Today's announcement builds on the Rudd Government's earlier $750 million injection to improve emergency department capacity, through which 37 of our public hospitals are receiving upgrades, and the Government's record $64 billion investment in health and hospitals under the National Healthcare Agreement.
This initiative further builds on the Government's National Health and Hospitals Network reform plan, and our commitment to permanently fund 60 per cent of public hospital costs, 60 per cent of capital projects and 60 per cent of the teaching and research in our public hospitals.
It also complements our investments in GP Super Clinics and growing the GP workforce to ensure more people can get access to care closer to home, rather than having to rely on emergency departments for less serious conditions.
Today's announcement underlines the Government's commitment to lifting national standards through the establishment of the National Health and Hospitals Network, and improving access and timely care for all Australians in emergency departments and in public hospitals across Australia.


On Saturday 10 April, the Polish Government confirmed that the Polish President, Lech Kaczynski, his wife and over 90 other people including senior government members and military figures, died in a plane crash in western Russia.
Members of the Australian Polish community, along with people from around the world, will be mourning the loss of the President and so many other innocent lives.
The Australian Government expresses its deepest condolences to the Polish Government and people following this tragedy. Our thoughts and prayers are with them.


Defence Minister Senator John Faulkner will represent Australia at President Obama's Nuclear Security Summit in Washington this week.
Australia has traditionally been a strong supporter of nuclear security and non-proliferation initiatives. The summit, attended by 47 nations and the European Union, will focus on the international security of nuclear materials.
The Government recognises the potential threat of nuclear terrorism and the need for a coordinated international approach to counter this threat.
As a major supplier of uranium Australia has a particular interest in the security of nuclear materials. 
The summit is to be held on Monday April 12 and Tuesday April 13. 


PM: It's good to be here this morning at QE2, in my home town of Brisbane, and to spend some time visiting this hospital with Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, and of course Graham Perrett, the local Member, and to have met and spent some time with the members of the medical staff and the nursing staff and the wardsmen and many of the patients who are here as well. Before I begin addressing the question of health and hospital reform, I'd like to make some remarks in terms of developments overnight for our friends in Poland.
The tragic death of President Kaczynski of Poland is a great loss to the people of the Polish Republic, and of course to the Government of the Polish Republic. This has been an extraordinary tragedy involving the loss of nearly 100 people, including the President and his wife. It has also had a huge impact on so many people who had senior positions within the Polish Government. And so, on behalf of the Australian Government, we extend our condolences to the Polish people, to the Polish Government, and our thoughts and our prayers are with them all.
Secondly, on the question of health and hospital reform, let me make some remarks about what we are here to announce today. I think all of us who are mums and dads, at some stage or another, we've had the experience of waiting for a long, long time in emergency departments at night, for our kids to be attended to, or sometimes, not our kids, ourselves. I think I speak for so many parents about the times when you've been absolutely sick with worry about your little one and you come to an emergency department and you just get sick of waiting. It doesn't always happen that way, but it happens many times around the country.
It's a terrible experience to turn up to your local hospital's emergency department in the middle of the night, and then to wait eight hours for something to happen. The fact is, right now, almost one in three patients around Australia, about 600,000 people each year, wait longer than eight hours in an emergency department before being admitted to a hospital. Let me just underline that again. Around Australia right now, one in three people who present to emergency departments, that's 600,000 people each year, are waiting more than eight hours to be attended to at an emergency department and admitted to hospital. Almost one in three patients wait longer than a clinically acceptable time.
Our plan for better health and better hospitals for Australia aims to significantly reduce the currently unacceptably long waiting times in hospital emergency departments. It should be unacceptable- here we are in 2010- for people in Australia still to have to wait over eight hours in an emergency department before they are treated. We must do everything we physically can to reduce the waiting times in this nation's public hospitals. We can do better, and we must do better. And we intend now to do better.
That is why what we're announcing today is a new, four hour target for all public hospital emergency departments right across the nation, and we intend to deliver this first and foremost in the more than 165 emergency departments of our major hospitals across the country. Under the new four hour target, public hospitals will be expected to ensure that patients who present to an emergency department within four hours are either- one, admitted to hospital; two, referred to follow-up treatment; or three, treated and discharged.
To help public hospitals reach this new national four hour target, the Government intends to invest half a billion dollars, the equivalent of an additional 1.2 million emergency department services, across the country. Financial incentives will be attached to these targets. Where a state's public hospitals meet or beat that target, hospitals in that state will be eligible for additional health funding.
This new target, and the funding to deliver it, are contingent upon the states and territories agreeing with the establishment of a new National Health and Hospitals Network. For the Australian Government to step up to the plate and provide additional funding of this type means that we must have the states and territories and their public hospitals as part of an integrated national network, one in which the Australian Government will become the dominant funder for the first time of the public hospital system of Australia. This is a big change.
The Government will begin providing $150 million from 1 July of this year, 2010, in upfront payments to help states and territories with the costs of moving towards this four hour target. This investment will provide additional capacity, also equipment and planning in hospitals to deliver improvements in the performance of emergency departments, and lift hospitals to new and higher standards required under what we've defined as the new National Health and Hospitals Network. A further $350 million will be available in incentive funding for those hospitals which meet these targets for the future.
As I said before, this new plan to improve the treatment times for the emergency departments of our country will take effect and begin to take effect from 1 July of this year. It will be implemented over a four year period, and we will stage up from those categories of patients who are most clinically at risk when they present, before completing the implementation over that four year period. We will also focus initially, as I said before, on those 165 hospitals which currently run our nation's major emergency departments, and we'll work with clinicians on how to improve emergency department presentation times, and treatment plans for the smaller hospitals of Australia, as well.
To conclude before I ask the Health Minister to add to my remarks, can I just say this- I've been here this morning at QE2, and I've spoken to the folk in the emergency department here. These are really good people, a great team of people who are doing the absolute best in terms of the needs of this local community. But here's a fact- there are currently nine emergency bays in this QE2 emergency department. That's how many there were in 1981.
We're now nearly 30 years later and there are still nine. And they perform minor miracles here each day. I understand- I'm advised that those nine bays are designed to provide a throughput each day of 80 patients. Apparently they're treating, in the last 24 hours, about 110 patients. They're currently running at about 30% above what this unit was designed to do. My message to the good people here at QE2 and, frankly, to the major emergency departments of Australia, is this story is one across our nation. And therefore, we need to change the system.
That's why the Australian Government is for the first time in the country's history proposing to become the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia. And that action begins with our emergency departments. If I could ask the Health Minister to add, and then I'll say one thing about Jessica Watson, and then I'll happily take your questions.
ROXON: Thank you Prime Minister. This is another important stage, an exciting stage in our health reform plans. To be introducing a four hour target for emergency departments across the country is a big step. This is an initiative which has been agreed to and commenced implementation in Western Australia. It's something that South Australia has committed to, most recently during their last election. And we now believe that this should be implemented across the country.
It follows hot on the heels of us investing $750 million into emergency departments in the last two years that we've been in Government. That has provided funding to 37 hospitals, including here at QE2, where $19 million is going to increasing the capacity of the emergency department. And we've had a presentation today how that will provide another 11 beds for allied health treatments and others that will help speed up the process.
So I can only add to the Prime Minister's comments that we know that doctors and nurses and allied health professionals are doing their darndest across the country to see people as quickly as they can, but we are prepared to provide resources to help change the system so that the flow can work better, so that people can be treated more quickly, and most importantly so that patients don't have the anxiety of waiting for many, many hours, often to be admitted into hospital after that long wait.
I also think that here is a good example- it of course, these announcements complement our other announcements, for example in primary care. Graham Perrett has been a big advocate of the Brisbane Southside GP super clinic, a $7.5 million investment which will have a number of sites across Brisbane's south, where patients will be able to be treated more, closer to their home, and in a setting that's more appropriate for their condition, which we hope over time will help reduce the presentations that are inappropriate here at the emergency department.
Similarly, our investments last week that we announced into diabetic care, $500 million to treat diabetes patients better in the community, so that they're not repeatedly presenting with complications at emergency departments. So this is a very important part of our overall package to take pressure off our hospital system, to provide better health services for the community, and to reduce the level of worry that not only our patients feel, but the staff in our systems can feel if they can't actually redesign things to meet the modern needs of the community. I'm happy of course to answer questions as well. I think it's a very important initiative today, and I'll hand over back to the Prime Minister.
PM: Just before taking your questions, a word or two about young Jess Watson. Can I just say, all Queenslanders and all Australians are enormously proud of what she's achieved. I last spoke to her on the satellite phone when she was about to round Cape Horn. That was a while ago. And now she's back, I'm advised, in Australian waters. Here you have a young Queenslander, a young Australian who's shown great courage, great determination, and I believe is an inspiration for all Australians. Jess, it's fantastic to have you back home.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, say that again?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) part of the target?
PM: Can I say that on the staff question, one of the challenges to making emergency departments work properly is to properly invest in the number of doctors in the future. And that is why about two to three weeks ago the Australian Government announced its plans to fund an additional 6,500 medical training places over the decade ahead. 5,500 of those will be GPs. About 1000 of those will be specialists. Frankly, these reforms in emergency departments only work if we've also got flowing through an additional number of medical staff, nursing staff, the Minister has already partly acted on as well.
And the other thing I'd draw your attention to in terms of allied health professionals, those who I'm advised here will become part and parcel of a $19 million investment in increasing the throughput of the emergency department of QE2. We've also announced in the course of the last week, in fact last Tuesday in Cairns, a new package for additional training places for allied health professionals as well. Nicola, would you like to add to what I've just said? That's fine.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, why (inaudible)
PM: We are first of all determined to do this- reform the funding and structure of the new National Health and Hospitals Network, because unless we get the funding and the structure right for the future, we will continue to have waste, duplication and overlap between the Australian Government and the states. We are not prepared to have that for the future; nor is the Australian taxpayer; nor are those who use the public hospitals of Australia. Therefore, I want to be absolutely clear-cut- getting the future reform of the funding of the structure of our system is fundamental to the other growth that can occur within the system.
Secondly, we've also been plain that we need to also increase our investment in the current gaps in the system. We have done that already in terms of our proposed investment in the medical workforce. We have done that also in terms of today's announcement on additional investments in accident and emergency. Can I also say we've done so already in relation to the primary healthcare system, and the treatment of major disease categories- a very large announcement during the course of the last week or so for sufferers of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, through the primary healthcare system. And a major investment of nearly $600 million in regional integrated cancer care centres across Australia.
Each of these are separate building blocks within the system. But the overall foundation stone is the policy I announced at the National Press Club in Canberra about four or five weeks ago. That is the absolute basis which we have for moving forward.
JOURNALIST: What else are you planning on revealing this week?
PM: Can I say that- I won't use the term that you have just used- we have a series of considered policy statements which we have worked on over a long period of time. The reason they are sequenced in the way in which they are sequenced is that the foundation stone for reform, is as we've described it- agreement to a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, through local hospital networks, with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funders of the public hospital system of Australia.
Other growth elements of the system now, we have planned, we have worked through; in part we have collaborated with the states on; and they have been announced in proper sequence following the initial statement on underlying reform.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well in terms of elective surgery, I'll turn to the Minister. Can I say that on elective surgery, what we have done in the first two years in office is invest some hundreds of millions of dollars in improving the throughput of elective surgery around the country, both in terms of what's called a blitz of elective surgery procedures which we've now funded more than 60,000 such procedures around the country. And secondly, by providing investments to a large number of hospitals, more than 30 I think, Nicola?
ROXON: More than 120.
PM: There you go, more than 120. Well that is more than 30. More than 120 around the country, for enhanced surgical and theatre capacity. On further- on elective surgery, I'll turn to the Minister.
ROXON: Yes, thank you- of course, we have an elective surgery commitment with $600 million - the Prime Minister's referred to the 62,000 procedures which were undertaken under stage one - the 125 hospitals that are receiving upgrades, many of which have already opened- for example, the two theatres at Royal Brisbane. And stage three, which is being paid right now, $300 million which is being paid as states reach their targets. We have made it clear that we think more can be done in this area.
We will be making further announcements, but we've been working with the states and territories about how we continue to invest in what is an important area of access, emergency departments, elective surgery, and other access to our hospital services are obviously some of the pressure points that families feel constantly when they're trying to get access to care, and on top of the $600 million investment which is rolling out right now as we speak, there will be further announcements in due course.
PM: Okay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Our job is to work with all the Premiers and Chief Ministers, Labor and Liberal, large states and small states, between now and when there'll be a meeting of the Council of Australian Governments, tomorrow week in Canberra. I will work as constructively and positively as I can with each of them. I believe that working families, pensioners, carers, right across the country, have already reached a conclusion that the current system is not good enough. It needs to be improved.
And I would say to any Premier or Chief Minister who thinks that their system is currently good enough and doesn't need to be improved, to go and have a long, long conversation with people currently queuing for attention at the emergency departments of their hospital this morning. I think that might be, shall I say, an instructive experience for all concerned. 
Certainly, the Minister and I, between us, have visited nearly 100 hospitals across the country over the last six or eight months. And the playback that we have had in every state is that this figure that I mentioned before- 600,000 Australians each year presenting to emergency departments, having to wait more than eight hours, is not good enough for 2010. That's one in three Australians presenting in emergency departments, I'm advised, who are not being seen in clinically recommended times. 
I would say to any Premier and Chief Minister who thinks that that is good enough, I think it's time we embraced, instead, national reform. I'll continue to work with Premier Brumby and the other Premiers as positively and constructively as I can, and we still have a week of negotiations to go.
JOURNALIST: Is four hours still too long a wait? It's a long time to leave people waiting for.
PM: Well a lot of analysis has gone into this particular target. Remember, the Bennett Commission of inquiry into the health and hospital system, we had running for 18 months from when we were elected two years ago until about six months ago. And secondly, in the six months since then, the Minister and I, and others assisting us, have been round to about 100 hospitals around the country. Based n the advice that we have received, we believe that this is a credible target to work towards, with funding to head in that direction beginning from 1 July of this year.
Look, if we can make further improvements in the future, I'm sure- but if you're a mum and dad out there who's waited eight hours plus already, I think you'd be saying four sounds not a bad improvement. I go to this simple point- it is just not acceptable that in 2010 we should have a system where in accident and emergency, one in three Australians are not being treated within clinically acceptable times. That has to change, and our national health and hospital reform program is about changing that.
JOURNALIST: Just one about asylum seeker policy-
PM: Sure.
JOURNALIST: You're being accused-
PM: Sorry, you on health as well?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We'll come back. I'll take yours.
JOURNALIST: Alright. You're being accused of adopting a populist stance, taking a leaf out of Mr Howard's playbook from 2001, where he sent the SAS to the MV Tampa, and now you've used, or announced a crackdown in processing asylum seekers. One, are you- do you think the Government's in breach of any international convention or the Refugee Convention that its ratified? Are you being populist? And also, how does it work? Is it just merely a delay of three months for the Sri Lankans or the Afghans? Do you-
PM: Sorry, the answer to your question- the answer to your first question- is no. The answer to your second question is no. On the third question, which is how does it work, it is a matter of this suspension being enforced as of now. And it means it being reviewed in the case of one group at three month point, and a second group at a six month point. And the reason for that is based on information concerning the changing security circumstances in the countries of origin. Our policy is very clear-cut. Our obligations are to deal with genuine asylum seekers, and those who are not genuine asylum seekers, to send them back to their countries of origin. That is the Government's consistent position.
Over here.
JOURNALIST: Why would you expect the states to sign up to your health reform plan when they haven't had all the details to begin with?
PM: Can I say that our discussions with the states and territories have continued for a long period of time. The states and territories have a very clear idea of what is the fundamental architecture of our reform for the next 10, 20, and 30 years. We have put out a comprehensive document which outlines that, called the National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, for the first time the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the public hospital system, the exclusive funder of the primary healthcare system, the exclusive funder of the aged care system. This is a fundamental reform to deliver better- more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses.
Secondly, the growth components that we've also spoken of, have been very clear in their articulation. Therefore, I think for anyone out there to suggest that there is not enough information around, maybe those folk may be looking for an excuse not to be positive. I'm not sure. But the key thing is, I intend to be positive for the remaining week of negotiations, because I believe the Australian people want the Government to get on with the job of doing this. I was elected with a mandate to bring about a fundamental change to the health and hospital system of Australia, where we would end the age of buck-passing, of cost-shift and of blame-shift between one level of Government and the other. I intend to get on with it. I hope all the other heads of State and Territory Governments do the same.
Having said that- last one, then I'll go.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'll be seeing Anna before I leave Brissy. But I'll be in Brissy for a couple of days yet. So I'm sure we'll-
JOURNALIST: But not later today?
PM: I will be meeting Anna before I- do you want the time of the event and the coffee shop in question? I'll sort that out. There's a few other things on as well. But we will, I'm sure, catch up before we go. And having said that folks, I've got to zip, I'm due at another meeting. Thanks very much. 


HOST: Prime Minister, despite promises of millions of dollars here and there, it seems that your health plan is not that popular with all the states. Are you starting to panic?
PM: Well, you know something, if you're trying to bring about the biggest change to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare there's going to be a few people who will argue against it.
We've still got another week to go before the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments, but I think what people have concluded right across Australia, this is working families, pensioners, carers, that the current system's at tipping point. We need some fundamental surgery to fix it. That's why we're putting forward this new National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally, for the first time the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the public hospital system across the country, but also deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and to fix the system for the future, and it will take some time to negotiate. Of course, if the states don't agree, I've said that we would then seek a further mandate from the Australian people.
HOST: You've promised an extra $739 million to boost aged care services. How does that actually translate into beds and facilities?
PM: Well, this investment will support around 5,000 aged care places or beds and help to end the blame game between hospitals and aged care services. You see, it's very important that we do so in a practical way. If you don't have enough aged care beds in the regions and right across Australia what happens is that people get stuck in hospital beds, and that's bad for, shall I say, the hospital, also bad for the patient, so that's why we've put forward this package, and I'll be talking about it further today here in Brisbane.
We'll also be supporting the development of 2,500 new aged care places through zero real interest rate loans, providing an estimated $280 million to the states and territories to fund older Australians who are stuck in hospital waiting for an aged care place, so it's these range of practical measures, including expanding the capacity of what's called multi-purpose services which provide aged care and step-down services in small, rural communities by providing extra support there. It's a practical measure to deal with so many people who need, shall I say, flexible aged care services today.
HOST: There's a lot of money being thrown around right now. Is it the case that you'll just keep throwing money at it until the state governments accept it?
PM: Absolutely, well our view is simply this - and the answer to your earlier question, is that that is not our approach at all. The approach is this: many of the premiers have said 'just give us a blank cheque and we will deal with this problem.' My problem is this - so much money is now being wasted by the duplication, overlap and waste of the current health and hospital system that it is simply going to be a case of adding funding to a system which currently is not working.
Therefore, what's our approach? Fix the system now. That's why we're bringing in a new National Health and Hospitals Network to get rid of duplication, overlap and waste, and then second, fund the growth that the system needs - more doctors, more nurses, and more hospital beds.
None of the latter come for free. They all cost. They cost at Bundaberg Base Hospital, where I was the other day, but if we're going to make critical investments in Bundaberg and Hervey Bay and across the wider region, we've got make sure that the underpinning system right across the country, right across Queensland, is efficient and effective. The current one is not. That's why we need to reform it first and then fund its growth second.
HOST: New South Wales and Victoria are totally against this. How can you get it over the line from here?
PM: Well, the Victorian Premier has raised some reservations about funding, but if I look carefully at what the Victorian Premier has said, he's basically saying 'hand over an extra' $40 billion or an extra $150 billion over the decade, and it'll all be fine and dandy.' Frankly, we don't think that's financially responsible at all - not at all.
The key thing you must do is reform the system now by getting rid of duplication, overlap and waste. That's what our new National Health and Hospitals Network is about - funded nationally, run locally through local hospital networks rather than simply providing a further blank cheque to the states and then secondly funding the future growth in the system. That's what we're going to do.
There's a surprising amount of agreement from many of the states, but, obviously, there are others who are continuing to raise reservations. As I said, all this will be sorted out once we get to Canberra for the Council of Australian Governments meeting next week, but if the states don't agree, then we'd seek, of course, a further mandate from the people.
HOST: So, a referendum on whether the Commonwealth takes over hospitals will indeed go ahead if the states continue to refuse this?
PM: Well, I said this prior to the last election, I've said it since the election, I've said it since we released this policy on the NHHN, the new National Health and Hospitals Network, and I say it again today - my preference is to of cause get everyone to agree around the table, but if you can't get agreement, then of course you have to seek a mandate from the people, and the way to do that, of course, is through a referendum.
HOST: The Reserve Bank board member, Roger Corbett, has labelled your health reforms bizarre and also a formula for disaster. How to do you respond to those criticisms?
PM: I haven't seen those comments. People are always entitled to their own point of view, but can I say that if you ask anyone of your listeners in Bundaberg right now, and the wider region, whether they think there are hospital beds, whether they think there are enough doctors, enough nurses, or whether the current system is efficient or inefficient, I think they've already reached a conclusion that fundamental change is necessary.
So, there are those people out there who are going to have criticisms to make of one type or another. That's their entitlement - it's a democracy, but if you're just going to sit around and be negative and not come up with a positive plan for the reform of the system and a credible funding plan to fund the system for the future, then you're not really trying, and that's what we are seeking to do. Others will be negative about it. That's fine. We intend to get on with the job.
HOST: He believes it will lead to more public servants, a bigger bureaucracy as well. Can you rule that out?
PM: We've been absolutely clear cut about this since the day I released the new National Health and Hospitals Network, and that is that there will be no single net addition to the bureaucracy, health bureaucracy, of this country. That's the first point, but the second is this - when I talk about a new Health and Hospitals Network for regions like Bundaberg, Hervey Bay, can I say that we will fund it nationally, but we will run it locally through local hospital networks. In other words, the Australian Government will be paying money direct to frontline services rather than back-channelling it via state governments.
We have great fears that when that happens that not all the money reaches frontline delivery. That is why we are proposing the direct payment from the Australian Government to local hospital networks, to those who will be running immediate, practical local health and hospital services in important regional centres like Bundaberg and Hervey Bay. That, I think, is what the Australian people want.
HOST: So, no extra bureaucracy?
PM: That's correct. If you look at the statement that I made when I released this policy at the National Press Club a month or so ago, I was absolutely clear cut about that, but in terms of giving effect to it, I couldn't be clearer than to say we are paying money directly from Canberra to the local hospital networks.
You cannot have local hospital networks run by bureaucrats effectively, whether they are in state capitals or whether they are in the national capital. They should be run by local hospital networks, so what we are doing effectively through our payment system is making those payments direct, rather than funnelling it through state bureaucracy. That, I think, has seen too much money wasted before, and as I said before, we intend to fix the system in two ways - one, eliminating duplication, waste and overlap by creating, for the first time, a National Health and Hospitals Network, and two, then the Australian Government being the dominant funder for the future growth of the system, and every hospital I've been to, through Queensland and through most of the other states of Australia, the response has been significantly positive about the need for this to happen, because state governments, rolling the clock forward 10, 20, 30 years, finding it harder and harder and eventually impossible to fund the future growth of the system.
HOST: Just finally, Prime Minister, Hervey Bay's local state member, Ted Sorenson, is demanding a stroke unit at the local hospital. Will you help with that?
PM: Well, look, in terms of the specific needs of Bundaberg Hospital, that is of course part of their clinical plan, which they need to sort out with the local health professionals. The thing is, and I don't comment directly on what Mr Sorenson has said, is that for the future, for the first time, once the clinical priorities of that hospital are set for the 3, 5, 7 years down the track, or starting from the beginning of the implementation of these reforms, what you have is a system where the Australian Government, for the first time, will be the dominant funder. In the past, that has not been the case.
In the past, for the expansion of any hospital services at Bundaberg, at best the Australian Government would be responsible for one third of the running costs of the hospital, none of the capital costs, none of the equipment costs, none of the teaching costs, none of the training costs. What changes under our system is that we become the dominant funders for the future, and that is why this reform is relevant to whether it's the expansion of services at the hospital to deal with victims of stroke, to deal with cancer services, or to deal with the range of other services that we are funding as well.
Remember, when I was in Bundaberg last Friday, together with Belinda McNeven, our candidate for Hinkler, I announced $8.3 million for new and enhanced regional cancer services for Bundaberg as part and parcel of providing an additional 14 chemotherapy chairs. That's really important, but also expanding the delivery of regional cancer care services for important regions like Bundaberg and Hervey Bay, but more broadly across regional Queensland and regional Australia, but it all becomes more possible if the Australian Government for the future is the dominant funder of the system. That's the big change here, and we're just applying band aids if we think anything short of that is going to work.
HOST: It will be an interesting next couple of weeks. Prime Minister, thanks very much.
PM: Thanks very much, and it was great to be in Bundaberg.


PM: Our plan for better health and better hospitals for Australia aims to significantly reduce the currently unacceptably long waiting times in hospital emergency departments. It should be unacceptable- here we are in 2010- for people in Australia still to have to wait over eight hours in an emergency department before they are treated. We must do everything we physically can to reduce the waiting times in this nation's public hospitals. We can do better, and we must do better. And we intend now to do better.
That is why what we're announcing today is a new, four hour target for all public hospital emergency departments right across the nation, and we intend to deliver this first and foremost in the more than 165 emergency departments of our major hospitals across the country. Under the new four hour target, public hospitals will be expected to ensure that patients who present to an emergency department within four hours are either- one, admitted to hospital; two, referred to follow-up treatment; or three, treated and discharged.
To help public hospitals reach this new national four hour target, the Government intends to invest half a billion dollars, the equivalent of an additional 1.2 million emergency department services, across the country. Financial incentives will be attached to these targets. Where a state's public hospitals meet or beat that target, hospitals in that state will be eligible for additional health funding.
The Government will begin providing $150 million from 1 July of this year, 2010, in upfront payments to help states and territories with the costs of moving towards this four hour target. This investment will provide additional capacity, also equipment and planning in hospitals to deliver improvements in the performance of emergency departments, and lift hospitals to new and higher standards required under what we've defined as the new National Health and Hospitals Network.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


PM: Just let me say a few things about how pleased I am to be here in Rocky and here at the Rockhampton Base Hospital with Kirsten Livermore, who's a long-standing friend and colleague of mine who I work with closely in Canberra.
It's really important that we deliver better health and better hospital services to all Australians, and that includes people in regional Australia and major regional centres like here in Rocky, and that's why I'm pleased today to be here to announce that we are investing $67 million to establish a comprehensive cancer care centre here at Rockhampton Base Hospital.
This is a big investment. This is a lot of money, but in a practical sense what's it mean? It means that we're going to be able to ensure that we have the commissioning of two radiotherapy bunkers, the construction of a third bunker, 16 chemotherapy chairs. This will enable us to, of course, provide more comprehensive cancer care here.
The bunkers at Rockhampton will allow Queensland Health to install two linear accelerators, resulting in additional radiotherapy services for cancer patients here as well.
You see, when you look at this community and how many people use this great hospital, the basic question is this - why do I always have to travel to Brisbane for everything? We hear this message. That is why our message to the nation is we need a new National Health and Hospital Network, funded nationally by the Australian Government, delivered locally by local hospital networks.
You folk here know how to run your hospital, that's my experience, right round the country. What you need is better funding support to do it. You also need critical additional investment when it comes to cancer care.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


The Rudd Government will guarantee elective surgery waiting times and set a national target that 95 per cent of Australians receive elective surgery within clinically recommended times.
To help hospitals reach these goals, the Government will provide $650 million, or the equivalent of around 90,000 extra elective surgeries across Australia.
The Rudd Government will introduce:
-A National Access Guarantee for Elective Surgery under which free treatment in public or private hospitals will be rapidly provided if patients wait longer than the clinically recommended time for elective surgery.
-A national target for elective surgery, aimed at ensuring that 95 per cent of patients waiting for elective surgery are treated within the clinically recommended time by 2014, up from the current level of 84 per cent.
This new target and guarantee, and the funding to deliver them, are contingent upon establishment of the new National Health and Hospitals Network.
This is the first time any Government has delivered a guarantee that patients will receive surgery within a specific time and proposed such stringent targets to improve our elective surgery performance.
The Government's investment will provide:
-$300 million as upfront payments in 2010-11 to help clear the backlog of elective surgery patients. 
-$350 million as reward payments to states that meet or beat their target.
Too many Australians are still waiting too long for elective surgery.
In 2007-08, 16 per cent of patients, or almost 90,000 people, waited longer than the clinically recommended time for their elective surgery.
Around 3 per cent - or 17,000 people nationally - waited longer than a year before receiving their surgery.
The Rudd Government is determined to end these long waits and improve access to elective surgery for all Australians, no matter where they live.
The new National Access Guarantee will ensure that patients who have waited longer than appropriate will be fast-tracked to ensure that they do not wait significantly longer than the clinically recommended time.
The most urgent category of patients will be treated within 6 days of the clinically recommended time, moderate category patients within 15 days, and less urgent category patients within 45 days.
States will be required to identify when patients are not being treated on time, and work with patients and Local Hospital Networks to get surgery offered to these patients.
These fast-tracked surgeries could be provided in public or private hospitals, to ensure that patients get the best out of the entire hospital system.
Local Hospital Networks will be required to work with other Networks and private hospitals to ensure that these fast-tracked surgeries take place under agreed planning arrangements.
The new National Access Targets will help ensure that 95 per cent of patients waiting for elective surgery will be treated within the clinically recommended time by 2014.
The Government will work closely with clinicians and the states and territories so that appropriate clinical standards are enforced to maintain the quality of care.
This builds on the Government's earlier Elective Surgery Waiting List Plan which has delivered more than 62,000 additional elective surgeries since it began in 2008. It also provided $150 million for more than 120 hospitals to expand their elective surgery capacity. A further $300 million in performance payments are currently being rolled out.


The Rudd Government will invest $739 million in aged care to better support older Australians.
This investment will support around 5,000 aged care places or beds, and help to end the blame game that hurts hospitals and aged care services.
Through this national aged care package the Australian Government will:
     * For the first time take full responsibility for aged care, including home and community care provided to older Australians.
     * Support the development of 2,500 new aged care places through Zero Real Interest Rate Loans.
     * Provide an estimated $280 million to the states and territories to fund older Australians who are stuck in hospital waiting for an aged care place - freeing up valuable health funding and helping to end the blame game.
     * Increase incentives to GPs to provide more services in aged care homes.
     * Expand the capacity of Multi-Purpose Services - which provide aged care and step-down services in small rural communities - by 286 sub-acute beds or bed-equivalents.
The health and aged care systems face a range of challenges:
     * The aged care system is fragmented, with divided responsibilities between Commonwealth and state governments. This makes it difficult for older people and their carers to find and access the care that best suits their needs.
     * Too many older Australians spend more time than they need to in public hospital beds because of a shortage of aged care beds - in 2006, there were 2,400 patients in hospital beds waiting for an aged care place to become available.
     * Too many older Australians are unnecessarily admitted to hospital because of a lack of adequate GP and primary care in aged care homes - it is estimated that 31 per cent of transfers from aged care homes to hospitals (about 27,000 admissions per year) could be avoided through better GP care in aged care homes.
To respond to these challenges, the Rudd Government is reforming the structure of the aged care system, and making a range of investments to improve quality of aged care and expand services for older Australians.
The Government's investment in aged care will address pressure points in the system today, as well as setting out the path for further reforms.
Taking full funding and policy responsibility for aged care
For the first time, the Commonwealth will take full funding and policy responsibility for all aged care services, to end the fragmentation of aged care and to stop older Australians falling through the cracks.
This includes a transfer of resourcing for aged care services currently provided by the states under the Home and Community Care Program to the Commonwealth from July 2012. The Government will also provide an additional $34 million for the transition of the Home and Community Care Program.
This will enable the development of a nationally consistent aged care system, covering the full spectrum of services from basic home care through to high level residential care.
To help older Australians and their families more easily access information and assessment for aged care services where it suits them, the Commonwealth will also invest $32 million over the next four years in one stop shops located across the country.
More aged care places 
The Government will increase the capacity of the aged care system through:
     * Investing $143 million in providing more Zero Real Interest Rate Loans to support the development of 2,500 additional aged care places, and working with States and Territories to release more land and accelerate planning approval processes, so aged care homes can become operational more quickly.
     * Investing $120 million in capital funding to expand the capacity of Multi-Purpose Services - which provide aged care and step-down services in small rural communities - by 286 sub-acute beds or bed-equivalents.
Taking pressure off hospitals through better services in aged care homes 
The Government will expand and improve services provided in aged care settings and assist states and territories meet the cost of older patients in public hospitals by:
     * Investing $96 million over four years to improve access to GP and primary care services for people in aged care - this is expected to support around 105,000 additional GP services being provided to older Australians in aged care homes over four years.
     * Providing an estimated $280 million over the next four years to the states and territories through the allocation of up to 2,000 time-limited flexible aged care places for Long Stay Older Patients in public hospitals who have been assessed as eligible for an aged care place.
These measures will help take pressure off public hospitals.
The Government will also:
     * Provide $10 million in additional funding to improve the viability of community care providers in rural and remote areas;
     * Make 1200 Consumer Directed Care packages available, through which care recipients have a much greater say in how care services are provided to them.
Improving consumer focus and protection in aged care
The Government will invest $25 million in improving the consumer focus of aged care and reduce the complexity of current arrangements by:
     * Better equipping the Aged Care Complaints Investigation Scheme to improve complaint handling and provide access to mediation and conciliation;
     * Strengthening the regulation of aged care providers who hold accommodation bonds, with effect from 1 July 2011.
Planning for the future 
These investments will tackle pressure points and increase capacity in the aged care system now.
To set out the path for further structural reforms, the Government will also provide terms of reference to the Productivity Commission to undertake a major inquiry into the aged care system to ensure that it is equipped to meet the challenges of tomorrow.
The terms of reference will be released at COAG following consultation with the states and territories.
The Government also recognises that one of the challenges facing the aged care system is building an adequate workforce to meet increased service demands, including boosting the number of nurses - and will have more to say on this in the near future.
Australia's aged care system provides targeted, affordable and high quality care.
These measures build on the Government's existing investments in aged care which have resulted in a nearly 20 per cent increase in funding and the addition of more than 10,000 aged care places.
In building the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government is determined to get the hospital and aged care systems working together to ensure better health and better care for older Australians.


PM: It is good to be back in Brisbane, and it's good to be here at this Hospital, and as part of the research work of this University. The Government, in this one week to go before COAG convenes in Canberra, will be talking long and hard about the need for fundamental change in the health and hospital system of Australia. What are we on about? A new National Health and Hospitals Network funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time, the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the public hospital system.
And why? To deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and other health services to working families, pensioners and carers right across the country. And today, I'm announcing for the first time that the Australian Government will take over full federal control of aged care. This investment will support around 5000 aged care places or beds, and help to end the blame game that hurts hospitals, and also hurts aged care services. By ending the blame game in aged care, we'll deliver more money, more beds, and more health services for senior Australians. That's really important.
Today's announcement doesn't just deliver better care for senior Australians, it also means less pressure on our hospitals. And this means better support for aged care services for senior Australians, and at the same time, taking pressure off our hospitals for all Australians. Through this national aged care package, the Australian Government will, firstly, for the first time take full responsibility for aged care, including home and community care provided to older Australians.
Second, support the development of 2,500 new aged care places through the zero real interest rate loans scheme. Thirdly, provide an estimated $280 million to the states and territories to fund older Australians who are stuck in hospitals, waiting for an aged care place. Fourthly, increase incentives to GPs to provide more services in aged care homes. And fifthly, to expand the capacity of multi-purpose services, which provide aged care and set-down services in small rural communities by the addition of some 286 additional sub-acute beds, or bed equivalents.
Aged care is a really important part of the overall reform of our health and hospital system. Getting the reform of the acute hospital system is critical. Getting the reform of our aged care network is critical. And getting the reform of our primary healthcare system is critical. Together, this makes up a new national health and hospitals network, for better health and better hospital services for all Australians. And I, just now, might ask Justine Elliot, the Minister for Aged Care, to speak about the individual elements of the aged care program, then I'll happily take your questions.
ELLIOT: Thank you Prime Minister. This investment of $739 million is about providing more services, and access to more services, for our older Australians. We'll be delivering around 5000 aged care places as part of this package. And that's about ending the blame game, it's about ending the duplication that occurs, and the major fragmentation that we have within our aged care system.
Firstly, we'll be taking full funding and policy responsibility for aged care. Currently, the Commonwealth funds up to about 90% of aged care services, nursing home services, high-level clinical care services in the home, and we fund about 60% of home and community care services. But we're going to take over all of that in terms of aged care services, and what this means is, we'll have a nationally consistent, unified system.
So it means for those older Australians, when it comes to accessing those services, we'll be able to provide that very seamless transition, and they'll be able to access those services a lot easier through the provision of our one-stop shop, right throughout the country. Because at the moment, as I say, it's a very fragmented system, it's very hard to access those services, particularly the services you require at a particular time. So by the Commonwealth taking over full funding and policy responsibility for all of the aged care sector, and also through the provision of one-stop shops, we'll be providing much greater access for our older Australians to get those aged care services when they do need them.
Secondly, we're providing more aged care places right across the country, particularly through our zero interest loans initiative. We previously had this underway, and we've had quite a lot of providers that have applied for this in the past, and this provides them access to loans at low interest rates. And they'll be able to provide that 2,500 more beds through that. So that means greater access to capital to build more nursing homes, so there'll be more beds in place. And also through our funding of $120 million when it comes to funding multi-purpose services.
These are aged care services that exist primarily in rural and regional areas, so through this funding we'll be providing about 286 sub-acute beds or bed equivalents in those areas of rural and regional Australia in terms of accessing more aged care beds. It's very important that we're taking pressure off the hospitals through this aged care package, particularly through increasing funding to GPs to attend to nursing homes and attend to older Australians there. That way, they don't have to enter hospitals prematurely because of an illness, because we're providing greater incentives to GPs to come to nursing homes to provide those services to them.
So overall, this package today of $739 million is about providing greater access for older Australians to get the aged care services they need, when they require them. And we're going to be doing that by being the main policy and funder of all aged care services. We're providing more aged care beds right across the country, and we're also at the same time taking that pressure off our hospitals. And this is all part of our commitment to providing better health outcomes for all Australians, regardless of where they live.
PM: Okay, thanks Justine, and over to you folks for some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is this $739 million new money? Where is it coming from?
PM: Well we've made provision for this for the future, and it's an important new investment in the system. The other thing I'd say about this investment, following on from some questions I saw earlier today, is that I'd say to the states and territories it is fundamental that we get the overall reform of this new national health and hospital system right, before we then fund the expansion of the system in the future.
You've got to get these things right. If you don't deal with the reform of the system, you're consigning yourself to a future of cost-shift, blame-shift and waste, and I don't believe the Australian public will support signing a new blank cheque to the states and territories in the absence of fixing up the fundamentals of the system. That's what we're on about.
JOURNALIST: Will this be enough to get Mr Brumby onboard?
PM: That's a question, of course, for you to address to Mr Brumby, and of course to the other Premiers. Many of the Premiers, I mentioned Premier Bligh this morning, have raised with me directly the concerns they have about the long-term provision of aged care, and how it intersects with the hospital system. Also, Premier Keneally has done so, and a number of the other Premiers as well. So our response is to say here is our future proposal for a structure- local hospital networks, local primary care networks, and local aged care networks working together to best support the needs of senior Australians.
But secondly, it's built on the overall reform to the system. We've got to fix the fundamentals of the system to deal with cost-shift, blame-shift, waste, duplication and overlap- and then fund the growth in the system that so many of our senior Australians want to see.
JOURNALIST: Will you consider raising the GST to pay for rising health costs?
PM: Well, our commitment in relation to GST has been fundamental, and we believe that that setting is absolutely right. We believe that with proper planning for the future, and through new financial arrangements between the Commonwealth and the states, we can get it right for the future as well. Remember, what we're doing is saying to the states and territories, here is a proportion of your GST payments dedicated to a new national hospitals fund. And secondly, we, the Australian Government, becoming the dominant funders of the future growth of the system as well. That, I believe, is the basis of a reasonable arrangement for the states and territories.
JOURNALIST: Roger Corbett has been very critical- what would you say?
PM: Any Australian is entitled to put their point of view. But can I say this- we want a system which eliminates waste, duplication and overlap, and the excessive bureaucracy which currently exists within the system, so that we can fund the growth that the system needs for the future, for more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses.
JOURNALIST: Are you basically preparing for a referendum, a week out from COAG?
PM: Well, I believe that it's important to work as constructively as possible with all State Premiers and Chief Ministers, Labor and Liberal, big states, small states, to try and negotiate an agreement. I've also been equally clear for some years now that if we cannot negotiate an agreement by consensus, then, of course, we have said we'd seek a further mandate from the people. The Australian Government's position hasn't changed on that. And I've always said that my preference is to negotiate a new National Health and Hospitals Network by agreement with the states and territories, and I'll be putting every effort into doing so with all the Premiers in the week, in the seven days remaining between now and when COAG meets.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Victorian Government said that you'd need 10,000 aged care beds over the next decade. The funding you've announced today wouldn't be enough to cover Victoria's needs, let alone the rest of the country's.
PM: Well, can I say again with respect to the Victorian Government's ask for further funding. As I said in my remarks earlier today, the Australian Government will not be providing a blank cheque to any state Government, because we need to see the fundamental health and hospital system fixed, duplication and waste removed, before we invest in the future growth of the system.
The Australian public, also, won't stand a bar of states and territories being out there asking for a blank cheque before we fix the duplication, waste and overlap in the system. And then, the Australian public expect us to invest in the future growth of the system. That's our approach. That's why we have outlined this clear-cut plan, the National Health and Hospitals Network plan, which I released at the National Press Club six weeks ago. It is about fundamental, structural, functional funding reform for the future- and, based on that, the Australian Government's preparedness to invest in growth for the future as well.
But you know something, you can't just get a blank cheque on the basis of a system which currently does not work, and which wastes taxpayers' money.
JOURNALIST: With regard to NAPLAN testing, (inaudible) with the teachers?
PM: Well let's see of course what our friends from the Australian Education Union have to say on that. But can I say that the Australian Government is- let me say again- that the Australian Government is on the side of parents. And we're on the side of My School, because we want to lift the standards of all Australian schools. Therefore, the Government won't be intimidated by any industrial tactics by anybody, because we believe this reform is necessary for the future. Mums and Dads across the country want to see how their schools are performing, and how we lift the performance of those schools in the future.
Therefore, it's important we get on with the business of this. I think it's also very important on this debate for Mr Abbott to finally make up his mind, rather than sitting on the fence. Is he on the side of parents, who want to see this reform done? Or, is he supporting the Australian Education Union, who it seems at this stage want to undermine this reform?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, let's take this one step at a time. But you know something, the Australian Government's resolve is clear-cut. Mums and dads right across Australia, schools right across the country, want to see how their schools are performing and how we lift the quality of the performance of each school. It doesn't matter where you come from. Small towns, large cities, state schools, non-Government schools, people actually want to see the performance of their schools lifted. That's what My School is all about. That's what the NAPLAN tests are all about. That's what Julia Gillard's allocation of special investments for schools which are underperforming is all about.
I don't believe anyone should be fearful of transparency. We need to have a transparent system which is all about lifting the standards of our schools.
JOURNALIST: Does your health plan include Indigenous health?
PM: It certainly does, and on that question I might turn for some elaboration to the Health Minister, who's been speaking this morning with Indigenous leaders this morning here as well.
ROXON: Yeah, thank you very much. You probably would be aware that as part of our top priorities for the negotiations of the 2008 COAG Agreement- where we were able to deliver a 50% increase in hospital funding, which has been flowing to our hospitals from July last year- that we also prioritise two other areas, three other areas in fact. Indigenous health, workforce reform, and prevention. So $1.6 billion was committed to Indigenous health. We regarded it as one of the top priorities. That funding is being rolled out now, as we speak. And of course, some very important reforms, particularly in primary care, but across primary care, hospitals and aged care, will have a flow-on benefit to our Indigenous communities.
For example, activity-based funding for our hospitals where there are loading for rural and regional service delivery, and the particular complexity of patients, of which Indigenous patients obviously are a category where extra care is often required, shows how our plan is designed to make sure that Indigenous patients are given the care that they need, along with all other Australians. But COAG prioritised big ticket investments for November 2008, that money is already flowing, and of course we've been very careful to make sure that the design of our new National Health and Hospitals Network will deliver to all patients, but particularly to those who might have specific needs.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
ROXON: Yeah look, a lot of detailed work has already been done. Some of that money has already been spent. I can follow up with you offline if you like, the work that we've been doing with our health specialists to be able to deliver those services. That program is going to plan, and I think people have been very happy that the $58 million is allocated for what is a targeted need within the Indigenous community. But I can follow that up with you offline.
PM: Folks, can I just conclude with this, because we're due at a meeting with the Australian- the Queensland Nurses' Union, we're a bit late for it now. Six weeks ago, on behalf of the Australian Government, I released this plan on a new National Health and Hospitals Network for Australia, the NHHN. In that report, I said that in the period following its release, we would be announcing further growth plans for various parts of the health and hospitals system. And we've been doing so, over recent weeks.
What I'd also like to confirm to each and every one of you today is that later today, we'll be presenting the states with the Australian Government's final position, in documentary form, for them to consider in the lead-up to COAG. This is consistent with what I outlined at the National Press Club, consistent with the statements we have made since then, and will be documented in the final policy position that we put to the states and territories some time later today.
Thank you for your time, we'll be late for the nurses- and I don't want to make the nurses grumpy.


It is good to be back home; it's good to be back in Brisbane; good to be back in Queensland; good to be back at this great hospital; good to be back at a part of this hospital which is a part of a great university, a great Australian university, the University of Queensland, and thank you all for taking some time out this morning to be with us as we continue to expound our vision for the future of the National Health and Hospitals Network and the importance of reform, and the importance of placing this system of ours onto a sustainable basis for the long-term future.
It's been great this morning to see some of the work done here in this hospital and as part of the research work of this university. We've seen the Centre, whose world-class clinical research has a strong focus on patient-oriented care.
The work being done here testifies to what can be achieved when governments and universities work together in partnership and work together in partnership with private philanthropy, as well. I congratulate the Queensland Government, Atlantic Philanthropies and the University of Queensland for what you have achieved in just two years since the Centre was formally opened, and I wish you the very best for your ongoing work.
Can I say also to you more broadly as a medical profession, a nursing profession, those who are concerned about the wellbeing of humans, dealing with the range of physical and psychological challenges which our human family faces, how much I admire your profession. The fact that you're out there, at the coal face, assisting people in what are very dark and troubling times for many: the human consequences, the human face of physical illness and the uncertainties which that brings to so many families on a daily basis; the fact that you, as nursing professionals, allied health professionals, the fact you as medicos, general practitioners, specialists, working to improve the lot of our fellow Australians and our fellow human beings is a tribute to your profession, and for those of you at the cutting edge of medical research and science, can I say how much we hold you in admiration as well.
I'm constantly stunned when I look at the vibrance of the medical research in Australia. Given that we are a country of modest population against the other great centres of population around the world, it's still from this and this great medical research tradition that we have in this country constantly producing world leaders, world-class research, out there ahead of the field, prompting others around the world to follow in our path, collaborating with others around the world who are the best in their field
So, as I begin my remarks today, can I simply use this opportunity to salute the profession for its professionalism and its dedication to the care of the sick in our community.
Today I want to take forward the national debate on the future of Australia's health care system. I am pleased to do this in the presence of so many clinicians, researchers, academics and other health professionals because in the process of driving a long-term agenda for healthcare reform, the Australian Government has been listening intently to the voices of people like you right across the country.
Together with Nicola and with Justine we have visited more than 100 hospitals across Australia in the last six months or so - big ones and little ones, every state of the Commonwealth and in both territories. Myself, I've conducted seminars of three hours at a stretch in about 20-25 hospitals across the country, myself. I am now, I am told, being invited to become officially a member of the AMA and of the Australian Nursing Federation and now will be asked to provide minor procedures myself in various A&amp;Es across the country. That was a joke, but I feel as if I am now so part and parcel of how hospitals work on the ground and the great work which is done in them that when I turn each corner I am now greeting something which is no longer foreign to me but entirely familiar.
What we have done in developing this national reform plan is not simply pick an idea of a shelf. We commissioned Christine Bennett to undertake an 18-month long review of the entire system - the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, which went around the country, which comprised of folks from right across the professions associated with our health and hospitals system. They delivered us a report in July of last year with 123 recommendations. That was step one.
Step two was then to take those 123 recommendations, as Nicola and Justine and I have done, and road test them with health and hospital communities right across the nation, and through multiple presentations asked 'what are your views on how this would work in your hospital, in your health community?', and frankly, that's the basis of what we've put forward to the Australian People in this new National Health and Hospitals Network - not an idea plucked out of space, not an idea plucked off the shelf somewhere, not an idea just plucked abstractly out of a foreign health system, but one which has been crafted from the ground up and tested against you, the health and medical professionals of our nation.
The message we've heard from these consultations has been loud and clear, and the message is this: Australia's health and hospital system is crying out for reform. Its foundations are fractured, and its foundations must be fixed. This requires fundamental structural reform - reform that restores financial integrity to the healthcare system and makes it sustainable for the long term future, and reform that tackles the continual cost-shifting and blame-shifting which takes place between the different levels of government.
The problems of cost-shifting and blame-shifting are direct consequences of this system's current structure. The system that we currently have is fragmented. It has no clear lines of responsibility. It is a system that wastes resources. It leaves too many patients waiting at the end of longer and longer queues. It is increasingly unable to cope with the strains under which it operates, despite the best efforts - the absolute best efforts - of our dedicated frontline doctors, nurses and allied health professionals. It often leaves key decisions in the hands of bureaucrats far too remote from the communities that health professionals serve. It is built around institutions and hospitals and not around the needs of patients, and it is unprepared for the challenges of the future: the challenges represented by an ageing population; the rise in chronic disease rates; the challenge of workforce shortages; and the rising cost of medical care.
These are challenges bearing down on the Australian health and hospital system now. They are bearing down on the health and hospital systems of all advanced economies around the world.
That is why we must therefore embrace fundamental health and hospital reform. We must repair the fractured foundations of the system so that we can build better hospitals and better health services for the future.
The Health Reform Commission, the Bennett Commission, concluded last year after 18 months of work the system itself, right now, is at tipping point and existing funding and functional arrangements simply do not add up to sustainable arrangements for the medium- to long- term future. Simply increasing funding - as some have suggested - without fundamental structural reforms will just perpetuate cost-shift and blame-shift and financial waste.
The Australian Government is not prepared to simply offer the states a big, blank cheque in a system riddled with overlap, duplication and waste. That would not solve the problem. That would just add another expensive bandaid to the problem and it would be financially irresponsible to do so.
Our approach is clear cut: first, reform the system to eliminate overlap, duplication and waste with the establishment of a new National Health and Hospitals Network - one that is funded nationally and run locally.
And second, then fund the system properly for the future with the Australian Government for the first time becoming the dominant funder of the hospital system for the future, the exclusive funder of the primary care health system for the future, the exclusive funder of the aged care system for the future. These are the two elements of our reform program - fix the structure, fund the future. That's what we're on about.
But, if we can get this in place, the fundamental reforms that is are necessary to repair the system, to eliminate overlap, duplication and waste and to make the system financially robust for the future, the Australian Government can and will increase its investment in current areas of critical need in the health and hospital system today.
Today I am announcing how primary care will be better co-ordinated and fit with our commitment to Local Hospital Networks in the future. I will also be outlining the same for aged care. I will also be outlining new investments in aged care as well. These are significant additions to the package of measures that is already on the table ahead of the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Canberra one week from today.
As we announce these measures today, I reiterate this core point: we cannot deliver these new investments without the fundamental, structural reform of the National Health and Hospitals Network. If we are to allocate increased funding to our health system's future needs - like the $15 billion of growth in health care costs over the decade ahead - we must have the confidence that the foundations upon which we build are sound, are robust and are properly planned. We must be sure that our increased investments in our National Health and Hospitals Network will deliver real improvements to patient care on the ground.
This morning I want to set out why the Government's plan for the National Health and Hospitals Network - the NHHN, a network that is nationally funded and run locally - provides the strong foundations for these new investments to occur. The shift to a nationally funded health network represents a major financial reform for our Federation. Crucially, it will create a secure funding base for the health system for the future. It is a major financial reform that firstly, will help to end the blame game.
Some have been calling for additional resources without any change to the structure of the fundamental structure of the health system. Premier Brumby's health proposal seeks around $40 billion over four years or $150 billion over 10 years, but it is not a financially responsible blueprint for the future of Australia's healthcare system. It does not grapple with the need for fundamental reform of the system which at present encourages ineffective duplication and waste and it would require a massive increase in taxes.
Let me also recap what this Government has done in the two years that it has been in office:
     * Firstly, we have already made record investments, some $64 billion for the health and hospitals system starting from last year - delivering an additional $20 billion compared to the previous agreement. That is a 50 percent increase on the previous Australian Health and Hospitals Agreement;
     * Secondly, $750 million in separate investments to lift the performance of our Emergency Departments;
     * Thirdly, $500 million in investment in sub-acute care;
     * Fourthly, investments also in elective surgery, delivering some additional 62,000 procedures across the country;
     * Fifthly, $2.3 billion for cancer care, including, for the first time, $1.3 billion in cancer care infrastructure and a network of regional integrated cancer networks across our nation so that those suffering from cancer in major communities outside our capital cities can have the large part of their treatment delivered in the regions much closer to home;
     * We've also invested in some 2,000 transitional care places;
     * We've made a $275 million investment in 36 GP Super Clinics across the country to expand the network of primary care, and;
     * We've begun the largest ever investment in preventative health care;
But, ladies and gentlemen, this is just the start. This is what we have sought to do in our first two years in office. We have not been standing still, waiting for the Bennett Commission to report. We have not been standing still waiting for the deliberations that we have made as a Government in response to Bennett's 123 recommendations. This is what has been occurring on the ground over the last two years.
When I was last at the RBH I saw the practical manifestation of that through the investments that we are making to elective surgery through the enhancements to the operating theatres here in this hospital - two of them.
That sort of work is happening right across the country right now, as it's occurring in emergency departments right across the country right not - but this is just the beginning. We have much more to do.
Our blueprint for the National Health and Hospitals Network will substantially increase the Commonwealth's funding for health and hospitals into the future. The Commonwealth will fund the dominant share of services delivered in our public hospitals, and will do so permanently. The Commonwealth will also provide the dominant share for the future training, buildings, equipment and research costs for our public hospitals - permanently. In the past, Commonwealth provided zero for these functions. We now become the dominant funder for the future.
This would see the Commonwealth take on the lion's share, also, of growth in the public hospitals system and relieve state and territory budgets of around $15 billion over the decade ahead. Without this reform, the Treasury, the Commonwealth Treasury, estimates that health budgets of the states and territories will consume the entire revenues of the states and territories by the time we reach the middle of the century, progressively from 2035 on. In other words, not a single dollar left to spend on anything else other than health and hospitals. That is why this is a fundamental financial reform for the federation and its future itself.
This major financial reform will also allow us to improve the quality of patient care in Australia with tough new national standards, backed up by increased transparency across the health system.
The shift to a national funding model will repair our federation and make sure our health system does not buckle under the weight of its own pressure. Just as significantly, the shift to a locally run model of Local Hospital Networks will also repair the fundamentals of how hospitals are run. Local Hospital Networks will deliver the services most appropriate to their communities. They will reflect local clinician knowledge and expertise. These clinicians, together with local nurses and allied health professionals, will have a core and expanded role in the local governing councils of local hospital networks. We want local needs to be reflected in the decisions taken by our clinicians.
The Commonwealth is prepared to shoulder the lion's share of future hospital growth over the coming decades but only if there are greater levels of transparency of where taxpayer dollars are being spent. Paying Local Hospital Networks directly rather than through the states will achieve this for the first time.
The Commonwealth's funding will be directed to hospitals that are responsible for delivering services. Let me state that again - the Australian Government will be funding Local Hospital Networks direct, rather than simply translating that funding through the health bureaucracies of the states. That is a core part of the reform that we are proposing. This would also reward innovation and efficiency, since those Local Hospital Networks that eliminate waste will have extra resources to deliver extra services.
My conclusion, having been around so many hospitals like this great hospital around the nation is that the competence and the leadership of local clinicians, nursing professionals, allied health professionals, is that they actually know where savings are to be made in their systems and in their structures. They actually know how to better deliver health services within their communities, and they actually want some head room to be able to do that and then to re-invest what they save from that in the expansion of the services they provide. That, I believe, is a core part of this reform, as well.
Another fundamental structural reform is the Australian Government's commitment to take full responsibility for primary health care. For most Australians, GP and GP-related services are their most frequent point of interaction with the health care system.
GP care is critical to Australians of all ages. Last year, there were more than 110 million GP visits in Australia. For 22 million of us, that's a lot of visits to the doctor, yet access to GP and related services differs widely across Australia. Many Australians cannot see a GP when they need one. When they do, services - not always - often poorly coordinated, with too many patients waiting weeks for an appointment, then given the run around from GPs to specialists to allied health professionals.
The way we fund health services does nothing to support the coordination of GP and related services, nor prepare us for the challenge of managing the growing burden of chronic disease, and when our GP and related services let people down, there's one part of the system that always picks up the tab - our hospitals, and that's the most expensive part of the system. That's bad for the system, bad for the proper use of the taxpayers' dollar, but also bad for the patient.
Australia's hospitalisation rates prove that fact, with Australia recording significantly higher hospitalisation rates than comparable nations like the US and the UK, a rate higher than the average across all the advanced economies represented by the OECD.
Improving primary care, therefore, is a core priority to fixing our healthcare system. With better primary care, we would substantially reduce the estimated 441,000 potentially preventable hospitalisations that burden our health budget at an average cost of $4,230 per episode of care. Let me run those figures by you again: we could substantially reduce the estimated 441,000 potentially preventable hospitalisations that burden our health budget at present at an average cost of $4,230 per episode of care - and we can achieve better health for Australian families.
That is why under the plan for the National Health and Hospitals Network that will go to Council of Australian Governments next week, the Australian Government will assume full responsibility for primary care health services, and to that end, today I can announce a key part of the governing arrangements of the National Health and Hospitals Network: the establishment of local primary health care organisations, a new network of primary health care across Australia.
These local primary health care networks will have a key role in linking up the different parts of our health system beyond local hospitals. They will be built from the existing network of Divisions of GPs so that they don't create additional bureaucracy. They will have strong links to Local Hospital Networks, servicing common communities of interest to the Local Hospital Networks. They will also be strongly linked to local communities, health professionals and service providers, including GPs, allied health professionals and Indigenous medical services.
The responsibilities of these new networks will include:
     * Working with Local Hospital Networks and GPs to assist with patients' transition out of hospital, so that they can continue to receive all the care they need, of the type that I've seen at work here in the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital this morning;
     * Secondly, ensuring allied health care is available for people with chronic conditions, as identified in personalised care plans prepared by GPs;
     * Third, working with local health care professionals to ensure services co-operate with each other so that patients can easily and conveniently access the full range of services that they need;
     * Fourth, identifying groups in local communities that are missing out on GP and primary health care services, or services that a local area needs; and
     * Fifth, delivering also, at a local level, health promotion and preventive health care programs targeted to risk factors in communities in cooperation with the new Australian National Preventive Health Agency.
With the Australian Government taking responsibility for primary health care services we will be able to achieve better coordinated health care, greater innovation in health service and ultimately better outcomes for patients. Together with Local Hospital Networks, local primary health care networks will improve patient care and quality of health and hospital services.
For example, they will have a key role in delivering enhanced patient services for the 1.1 million Australians suffering now from diabetes, expected to rise to 2.2 million over the coming decades ahead. This is part and parcel of a particular program announced by the Health Minister during the course of the last week.
In addition, to ensure that older Australians are served as best as they can, the Government will move towards establishing aged care networks that better integrate aged care with other parts of the health system in primary and acute care. They will ensure a community of services which work with one another to provide better integrated and more efficient care across the entire health system.
In other words, if you look overall at the scheme of the system that we are seeking to build as part of this new National Health and Hospitals Network, you will have local hospital networks, you will have primary care networks, and you will have aged care networks servicing broadly common communities of interest. The longer term ambition of our reform is to further integrate the delivery of integrated health care across common communities of interest.
At present, these networks, informally, perhaps, talk to each other. In many part of Australia, regrettably, they don't talk at all. Therefore, the guiding philosophy of what we're seeking to do here is to integrate the best form of health care, integrated care, for a patient, be it in the primary system, the acute system, post-acute or in fact in the aged care network, and that is to be done through the system of structural reforms that I've outlined here today.
Furthermore, today I am announcing major new investments in aged care.
The rationale for these new investments is better patient care for Australians and better integration of aged care with other parts of the health and hospitals network. When we announced our reform plan, the Queensland Premier rightly pointed to the need for further investment and reform in aged care. She was right, absolutely right. We agree, and we value her input to these practical initiatives.
The aged care system today is fragmented, with divided responsibilities between Commonwealth and state governments. This makes it difficult for older people and their carers to find and access the care that best suits their particular needs.
Too many older Australians spend more time than they need to in public hospital beds because of a shortage of aged care beds - in 2006, there were 2,400 patients in hospital beds waiting for an aged care place despite having been classified for an aged care place, but no aged care place was in fact available.
Too many older Australians are unnecessarily admitted to hospital because of a lack of adequate GP and primary care in aged care homes. It is estimated that 31 per cent of transfers from aged care homes to hospitals, about 27,000 admissions per year, could be avoided through better GP care in aged care homes.
The Government will therefore invest $739 million in aged care to better support older Australians. This investment will support around 5,000 aged care places or beds, and help to end the blame game that hurts hospitals and aged care services at present.
These investments are possible because the Australian Government is taking full policy and funding responsibility for aged care for the future. In other words, because we're repairing the foundations of the system we are able to invest confidently in new services and expanded care.
As part of the package being announced today, we will help make navigating the aged care system easier for patients by investing $32 million in creating a network of one-stop shops across the country, providing a central point of contact for older Australians and their families needing information and access to aged care. These will form part of future Aged Care Networks which will ultimately ensure that aged care is coordinated with hospitals and GP and primary health services as I outlined before.
We will expand capacity in the system by investing $143 million to provide an additional 2,500 aged care places through the Zero Real Interest Loans Program. We will build on the successful Multi Purpose Service model in rural and regional communities by providing new capital funding of $120 million for 286 sub-acute beds or their equivalent. This investment will strengthen the provision of hospital services and aged care in our rural communities.
We will increase financial incentives to encourage GPs to provide services to patients in aged care homes - adding 105,000 extra services for aged care patients over the next four years. Improving aged care must be an ongoing priority for the Australian Government.
I want to be very clear - and absolutely clear - about today's announcement: this is not a panacea for aged care in Australia.
The truth is aged care has been poorly planned in the past. That's the absolute truth of it - including the proper planning and remuneration structure of the aged care workforce. The Australian Nurses Federation has been very clear in raising these concerns with the Australian Government and the Government intends to deal with these concerns one by one as part of the overall reform of the national health, hospital and aged care network.
This will take time, but we are determined to undertake this work.
Today I have announced the first step in that reform with an investment of some 5,000 more beds, and with, for the first time, the announcement of the Commonwealth's intention to take full funding and policy responsibility for all aged care services.
But this will not solve, as I said before, all of the challenges of aged care, particularly in the face of increasing demand. We understand that reform is needed in the future - in particular, reforms to the aged care workforce, including the nurses that are the backbone of the aged care sector.
Day and night, it is the Registered Nurses and personal carers in aged care facilities who care for our older Australians. Without supporting our hard-working nurses and personal carers, our aged care system - already under pressure - cannot be expected to cope with the demands of an ageing population.
The measures I have announced today are a very important first step. We must address the challenges facing the aged care sector to place the sector on sound footing for the future. That is why we have asked the Productivity Commission to undertake a major inquiry into the aged care system and as the Productivity Commission undertakes its work, we will continue to work with our partners in the sector to confront the challenges facing our aged care system.
I will have more to say on this in coming months, but I want to make clear our very serious commitment to reform for the aged care system is there on the record, and this includes our fundamental commitment to ensuring that frontline staff who care daily for our patients and grandparents in aged care facilities around the country are supported in their most important work.
To conclude, coming back to this hospital brings back to me many personal memories. I remember coming here as a child. My father was admitted here having suffered road trauma, and he died here, so for many Australians hospitals are not just clinical institutions. They embody within them memories, memories which are deep and memories which are personal, and it's that human dimension to health and hospital reform which we must never lose sight of. Hospitals, for so many people, represent hopes, they represent fears, they represent joy and they represent tragedy - but they are therefore an important and critical part, frankly, of the Australian fabric of life.
The Government has outlined a comprehensive plan to repair the fundamentals of our health and hospitals network and on the new stronger foundations of the National Health and Hospitals Network we can build better hospitals and better health care for the future.
As I have said from the start, we recognise the scale of the challenge that we have taken on. These are the most significant changes to the health system in three decades, since the introduction of Medicare. We recognise, too, that there is still further work to be done in other areas of the health care system - including mental health, dental health and preventative health care.
But, as I have made clear today, as a matter of basic fiscal responsibility, as a matter of basic financial responsibility, we cannot and will not make new investments into our health care system without fixing the system first. Let me repeat - we cannot and will not make fundamental new investments in the future of our health and hospitals system unless we fix first the structure of that system.
That is why we must have the support of the state and territory governments in advancing the national health reform agenda. With the further details we have set out in the past two days we are presenting an even better deal to every state and territory government and for all Australians.
I will continue to press this case forcefully with premiers and chief ministers over coming days as we continue working together in building this new National Health and Hospitals Network, not just for this generation of Australians, but for those who come after us as well.
To conclude, you as health professionals, you who have a passionate commitment to nursing, to medicine, to the various allied health professions that you represent, to those of you who are hospital administrators, to those of you who are administer various health regions across our nation, across this state, you are also part and parcel of this reform process. This is not simply to be an exercise transacted by politicians. Were that the case it would be doomed to failure.
When I say you as health professionals are absolutely fundamental to the reform process, if you believe the system needs fundamental reform, if you support the broad direct of reform I've outlined today, we need each and every one of you to get on the bus with us. This is going to be a difficult exercise in reform. There are some people that are holding out against it. I understand some of the reasons why, but can I say what I hear across the nation is a deep cry from working people, working families, from pensioners, from carers, but also those who work at the coal face themselves, the need to get on with the business of building better hospitals and a better health service for Australia's future.
I would invite you to be reformers with us in that process.
I thank you.


The Rudd Government will invest $386 million to increase the number of services in aged care to better support older Australians.
Too many older Australians spend too much time in hospital:
     * In 2006, about 2,400 patients eligible and approved for aged care and no longer requiring hospital care were waiting in hospital beds, with 63 per cent waiting in hospital for more than 35 days.
     * Too many older Australians are also unnecessarily admitted to hospital when better care in the community and in aged care homes would have kept them out of hospital: it is estimated that 31 per cent of transfers from aged care homes to hospitals (about 27,000 admissions per year) could be avoided through better GP care in aged care homes.
Improving access to GP and primary health care services in aged care
To improve older Australians' access to care and help reduce avoidable hospital admissions, the Government will invest $96 million over four years to improve GP and primary care services to aged care homes.
From 1 July 2010, through the Aged Care Access Initiative, the Government will increase financial incentives for GPs providing services to aged care homes:
     * Increase the payment for GPs who provide at least 60 attendances a year to older Australians in aged care homes from $1,000 to $1,500 annually; and
     * More than double the payment to GPs who provide at least 140 attendances a year to older Australians in aged care homes from $1,500 to $3,500 a year.
This is expected to support around 105,000 additional GP services being provided to older Australians in aged care homes over the four years to 2013-14.
From 1 July 2012, the Government will provide primary health care organisations with a flexible funding pool to target gaps in primary health care for older Australians.
This is expected to result in an additional 190,000 primary health care services over two years.
Improving the viability of community care providers
The Government will invest $10 million over four years to continue and increase the viability supplement for community aged care providers in regional, rural and remote areas, providing a real increase in the supplement for these providers for the first time.
This will provide a much needed boost to community aged care services in rural and remote areas where earnings are much lower than in major cities.
Financial assistance for Long Stay Older Patients
To assist states and territories meet the cost of older Australians who have been assessed as needing aged care but cannot be discharged to an appropriate aged care service, the Government will provide an estimated $280 million in funding over four years.
States and territories will receive funding equivalent to the average aged care subsidy for people entering residential care from hospital.
Enabling care recipients to have more say in the care they receive
To enable consumers of aged care services to have greater control over their own care and to make choices about the type of services they access and the delivery of those services, the Government will make up to 1,200 Consumer Directed Care packages available over the next two years.
Consumer Directed Care has been shown to improve care recipients' quality of life, independence and satisfaction.
From 1 July 2010, 500 community care and 200 respite care packages will be released with a further 500 community care packages released in 2011-12.
Australia's aged care system provides targeted, affordable and high quality care.
The measures build on aged care reforms that will mean the Australian Government will be responsible for full funding and policy responsibility for aged care services.
They also build on the Government's existing investments in aged care which have resulted in a nearly 20 per cent increase in funding and the addition of more than 10,000 aged care places.
In building the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government is determined to get the hospital and aged care systems working together to ensure better health and better care for older Australians.


The Rudd Government will invest $25 million to improve consumer focus and strengthen protections for residents of aged care as part of its improvements to aged care services to better support older Australians.
Recipients of aged care services are amongst the most frail and vulnerable people in our society.
These reforms mean that allegation of poor quality care or abuse will be investigated and acted upon more quickly, and protections for residents' life savings held in the form of accommodation bonds will be strengthened.
An enhanced complaints scheme
The Government will better equip the Aged Care Complaint Investigation Scheme in 2010-11 to improve complaint handling and provide access to mediation and conciliation services.
This builds on steps that the Rudd Government has taken to improve the complaints scheme and protections for residents including strengthening police check requirements, introducing reporting requirements for missing residents and investing in staff training to improve quality of care.
Consumers of aged care services and their families expect high quality care that meets the needs of older Australians in care, and the community expects a robust regulatory system that includes an effective complaints mechanism to act quickly to when poor care or abuse occurs:
     * An independent review of the Aged Care Complaints Investigation Scheme found that the Scheme needed to be strengthened
     * Consumers and providers want better opportunities to state their case and provide supporting evidence, clearer feedback and clearer advice on the outcomes of investigations and a broader scope of options for resolving complaints.
The Government will provide additional resources to the Aged Care Complaints Investigation Scheme to reduce case loads in the Scheme to improve the timeliness and thoroughness of investigations.
It will continue to work with the aged care sector, consumers and key stakeholders, including the Ageing Consultative Committee to develop and implement other improvements to the Scheme including broadening the range of options for the resolution of complaints through mediation and conciliation.
The Government has released the independent review of the Aged Care Complaints Investigation Scheme and copies of the report are available at the Department of Health and Ageing website (www.health.gov.au).
Better protection for aged care residents' life savings
The Government will invest $22 million over the next four years to better safeguard the more than $9 billion of residents' life savings held in aged care accommodation bonds.
While the overwhelming majority of aged care providers do the right thing there are currently no significant penalties or other accountability mechanisms for the misuse of bond funds.
The reforms will increase the accountability of aged care providers for the way they use the life savings of their residents.
The Government will legislate to strengthen the current prudential arrangements to:
     * clearly articulate the permitted uses of bonds;
     * improve reporting requirements;
     * introduce criminal penalties for misuse of bond funds; and
     * put in place a prudential regime consistent with proposed legislative changes, to apply to aged care providers who hold accommodation bonds.
The Government will consult with consumers and the industry and will work with relevant bodies to develop an appropriate risk based prudential regime, with a view to putting new arrangements in place from 1 July 2011.
These measures build on the Government's existing investments in aged care which have resulted in a nearly 20 per cent increase in funding and the addition of more than 10,000 aged care places.
In building the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government is determined to get the hospital and aged care systems working together to ensure better health and better care for older Australians.


Patients will receive better health care in the community after primary health care organisations (PHCOs) are established across Australia.
Getting primary care right is essential to ensuring people stay healthier and out of hospital. International evidence shows that health systems with strong GP and primary care systems achieve better health outcomes and better value for money.
Right now:
     * GP and primary health care services are not well integrated and connected to one another - health consumer groups have consistently stressed the need for better integration of these services;
     * Many patients - particularly those with chronic disease - have difficulty getting all the care that they need, for example from allied health professionals, in a coordinated and convenient way;
     * As a result, Australia has one of the highest rates of hospitalisations in the OECD.
The nationwide network of primary health care organizations will support GPs and other health professionals to improve the delivery of primary care services at the local level, as well as making it easier for patients to navigate the local health care system, by:
     * Facilitating allied health care and other support for people with chronic conditions, as identified in GP care plans;
     * Working with local health care professionals to ensure services co-operate and collaborate with each other so that patients - especially those suffering from chronic disease - can easily and conveniently access the full range of services they need;
     * Identifying groups of people missing out on GP and primary health care, or services that a local area needs, and better target services to respond to these gaps;
     * Working with Local Hospital Networks to assist with patients' transition out of hospital, and where relevant into aged care; and
     * Delivering health promotion and preventative health programs targeted to risk factors in communities.
For instance, a local primary health care organisation, in consultation with local GPs, might identify that there are a large number of diabetics in a particular area - and organise a roster of allied health professionals such as nutritionists and diabetic educators to provide sessional services to different GP clinics in that area.
The planning and management of an individual patient's care will remain the responsibility of the GP.
The establishment of regional primary health care organisations was one of the key recommendations from the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to strengthen the primary care system. Primary health care organisations will:
     * complement the services currently provided by GPs, which will be of particular benefit to patients with chronic disease;
     * work closely with Local Hospital Networks to make sure that our hospital system and GP and primary care system work together seamlessly;
     * in the future - play an increasing role in delivering services currently funded by states but which are proposed to transfer to the Commonwealth as part of the establishment of the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Primary health care organisations will be built from the existing network of Divisions of GPs so that they don't create additional bureaucracy.
The first primary health care organisations will be established by mid 2011.
Funding arrangements to support primary health care organisations will be included in the May Budget.
The Government's commitment to establishing primary health care organisations build on the Government's commitments to:
     * providing $632 million investment in building the medical workforce, including $339 million to increase the number of GP training places to 1200 per year by 2014;
     * investing $436 million to transform the way diabetes patients are managed in general practice.
By strengthening primary care at the local level, primary health care organisations will be integral to delivering a National Health and Hospitals Network which is nationally funded but locally run.


The Rudd Government will provide $263 million over four years to improve access to aged care services to better support older Australians.
Australia's aged care system provides targeted, affordable and high quality care but a number of challenges need to be addressed to ensure the needs of Australia's growing number of elderly people are met.
The supply of aged care places needs to continue to grow to meet increased demand. But in recent years there has been a downturn in construction activity in the residential sector and a lack of suitable applications from qualified aged care providers to be able to allocate all the new residential aged care places the Government has made available.
To build on other aged care initiatives and increase the capacity of the aged care system to meet growing demands, the Government will:
     * Provide a further $300 million in Zero Real Interest Loans to provide low cost finance to support investment in aged care services in areas of need;
     * Provide $120 million in capital funding for 286 sub-acute beds or bed-equivalents in Multi-Purpose Services to better support people in rural and remote areas; and
     * Work with the states and territories to commit to release more land for aged care and accelerate the planning approvals process so that aged care places can become operational more quickly.
More Zero Real Interest Loans to support investment
The Government's Zero Real Interest Loan initiative provides low cost finance to aged care providers to support the construction and investment, providing important capital assistance to the aged care sector. It has already proved successful in expanding aged care services.
In addition to extending its Zero Real Interest Loan initiative for a further two years, the Government will modify the initiative so that:
     * Areas defined as high need include areas with relatively higher numbers of older patients in hospitals waiting for discharge to aged care;
     * Aged care providers will be able to seek loans in respect of places that have been allocated but are not yet operational to assist places become operational more quickly; and
     * The repayment period is extended for new zero real interest loans from the current 12 years to 22 years.
The allocation of zero real interest loans will be made in two equal rounds of $150 million in conjunction with the 2010-11 and 2011-12 Aged Care Approvals Rounds and is expected to deliver 2,500 more aged care places.
Expanding Multi-Purpose Services to support rural and remote communities
Multi-Purpose Services provide integrated health and aged care services, generally in hospital settings, and are an important part of the health system in rural and remote areas.
The Government will provide $120 million in capital funding over four years for 286 sub-acute beds or bed-equivalents to expand these services, building on the existing 126 Multi-Purpose Services.
This will support up to 5,400 people a year when fully implemented.
The Government will also make it easier to establish new Multi-Purpose Services by allowing them to be established in larger communities, creating an additional 300 beds.
More land and fast development for residential aged care facilities
The Commonwealth Government will work with the states and territories to commit to release more land for aged care. The Commonwealth will work through COAG to accelerate planning approval processes, allowing places to become operational more quickly. This could include:
     * Identifying aged care as a priority in state planning systems;
     * Recognizing residential aged care as a class of residential development that may not require the same approval requirements as other residential developments; and
     * A process for determination of aged care development applications that are not finalised within 12 months.
Together with other elements of the Government's investment in aged care, these measures will help the aged care sector expand to meet the increasing demand driven by Australia's ageing population.
These measures build on the Government's existing investments in aged care which have resulted in a nearly 20 per cent increase in funding and the addition of more than 10,000 aged care places.
In building the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government is determined to get the hospital and aged care systems working together to ensure better health and better care for older Australians.


As part of the Rudd Government's $739 million investment in aged care to better support older Australians, for the first time the Commonwealth will take full policy and funding responsibility for aged care.
This will allow the Government to build a nationally consistent aged care system allowing people to seamlessly move from basic help at home through to residential care as their care needs change, assisted through improvements to aged care information and assessment services.
Currently, the aged care system is fragmented, with divided responsibilities between Commonwealth and state governments. This makes it difficult for older people and their carers to find and access the care that best suits their needs.
Split roles and responsibilities for aged care have resulted in:
     * Overlap between services provided for different programs run by different governments, with different cost structures and eligibility requirements.
     * Older Australians, their families and carers finding it hard to access the services they need and often do not know what services are available.
This has led to cost shifting and blame shifting.
The reforms to aged care build on the Government's commitment to take majority funding responsibility for Australia's public hospitals and help to address the care needs of Australia's growing number of elderly are met.
These reforms will help to provide:
     * Seamless transition of care for clients allowing people to move from one level of care to another as their needs change
     * Simple access to service for clients
     * Single level of government with funding and regulatory responsibility for aged care
     * Simplified accountability of governments to the community through clearer responsibility for policy and service provision
This includes a transfer of resourcing for aged care services currently provided by the states under the Home and Community Care Program to the Commonwealth, from July 2012. The Government will invest a $34 million for the transition of the Home and Community Care Program.
The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission recommended this reform would enable more simplified and integrated assessment across all forms of aged care and more integrated aged care from low level care at home through to high level nursing home care.
To ensure older Australians are served as best as they can, the Government will improve access to information and assessment for aged care services.
Over four years, the Government will invest $32 million so that older Australians and their families can:
     * More easily access information and assessment for aged care services, through establishing one-stop shops across the country.
     * Be linked to assessment services, including through the Commonwealth purchasing some more complex aged care assessment services directly from aged care assessment teams.
     * Be assisted to access services in the place that best suits them.
These changes are important if the Australian Government is to successfully meet the needs of the growing population of older Australians.
Reform is critical to ensure that over time the aged care system can respond to increasing demand for services and resources to deliver a simple integrated system on which that the community can rely.
To set out the path for further structural reforms, the Government will also provide terms of reference to the Productivity Commission to undertake a major inquiry into the aged care system to ensure that it is equipped to meet the challenges of tomorrow.
The terms of reference will be released at COAG following consultation with the states and territories.
Australia's aged care system provides targeted, affordable and high quality care.
These measures build on the Government's existing investments in aged care which have resulted in a nearly 20 per cent increase in funding and the addition of more than 10,000 aged care places.
In building the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government is determined to get the hospital and aged care systems working together to ensure better health and better care for older Australians.


PM: First of all, it's great to be back in Lismore. I was talking to Janelle Saffin, our local Member, and I think it's my fourth return to Lismore since becoming Prime Minister of Australia, if not to Lismore itself, then certainly to the electorate. And good also to have Justine Elliot, our Minister for Aged care. In the last period of time, we've been debating the future of health and hospitals reform for Australia. And our proposal is for a National Health and Hospital Network which is funded nationally, and run locally. And that's this plan that we released six weeks ago at the National Press Club in Canberra.
And since then, we have been in the middle of a big national debate about the future of health and hospitals. Our plan would be the single biggest change to the health and hospital system in Australia since the introduction of Medicare. This is therefore a once in a generation opportunity to fundamentally reform the future of our health and hospital system. And I believe working families, pensioners, carers, right across Australia, don't want us to actually pass up that chance for change.
The Commonwealth has put forward what we regard as a responsible, carefully costed, carefully crafted plan for the future. This is a product of 18 months work by a health reform commission, the product of six months or more of consultations with more than 100 hospitals right across the country, including my previous visit, as part of a local hospital consultation here in Lismore about six months or so ago.
Since then, and released in the last 24 hours, we have also indicated the additional investments we propose for the health and hospital system in the here and now, and into the future as well. New investments in terms of our medical workforce. New investments in terms of what we'll do in our hospitals, in emergency departments, in elective surgery. New investments in aged care. New investments also in the way in which we would support sufferers of diabetes, and the sufferers of cancer through integrated cancer centres across the country, particularly in regional and rural areas.
Altogether, our blueprint for reform, our investments for the future, representing a $3 billion growth in Australian Government funding for the health and hospital system starting now. That's what we want to get on and do. Now, in the six days remaining between now and the Council of Australian Governments meeting in Canberra, there's going to be a lot of claim and counter-claim. Well, that's what the political debate is all about. But I would ask all the Premiers to rise to the occasion and to grasp this opportunity to forge a national agreement, in the national interest.
I would appeal to all Premiers and Chief Ministers to now act in the national interest, and in the interests of working families. I would appeal to all Premiers and Chief Ministers to put aside local differences and support this once in a generation opportunity to deliver better health and hospital services for all working families, pensioners and carers. And I'd appeal to the Premiers and Chief Ministers to come out and confirm that they want to reach an agreement when the COAG meets in Canberra next Monday. That they want to take action on the future of health and hospital reform, to deliver better hospital and health services for all Australians.
My appeal to them is to put aside local differences, to act in the national interest, to act in the interests of working families, pensioners and carers, who are crying out for reform to our system, now. Now we will of course, in the days remaining, debate all the details, and I'm sure those discussions are going to continue. And I will continue to meet with Premiers. I was with Premier Bligh of Queensland yesterday. And I'll be of course catching up with the Premier of New South Wales again during the course of this week. And I look forward to catching up with other Premiers as well- on the phone, in the flesh, all about making all the efforts necessary to bring about this important historical agreement.
This will be a very tough negotiation. It is a really tough negotiation. When you're talking about such a fundamental long-term reform for the health and hospital system, then there's always going to be a lot of resistance, a lot of opposition, and a lot of pressure. But I would appeal to everybody to take this once in a generation opportunity to act in the national interest and deliver better health and hospital services for families, and all Australians.
Which brings me of course to what we're doing here, in Lismore. This is a good day for the people of this area, the people of this wider region. I mentioned before the impact of diabetes. It's a major disease, which affects so many Australians. And the funding that we have already announced for enhanced patient care for diabetes sufferers right across Australia. 1.1 million of them right now, rising to 2.2 million over the decade ahead. That's going to be 10% of our population. Another major disease, of course, is cancer. And I've just been speaking to some of the patients in the chemotherapy ward here at Lismore Hospital about the practical problems which patients experience in regional areas getting proper treatment.
I've spoken to a bloke before who said it's hard enough dealing with this disease, rather than having also to deal with travelling hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of kilometres, and sometimes more than that again, to get basic cancer treatment. You know, when I saw recently the figures which said that if you are diagnosed with cancer in a rural or regional part of Australia that with some of those cancers you are three times more likely to die within the first five years of diagnosis if you live in a rural area, as opposed to an urban area, I don't think that's right. I don't think that is the way in which Australians want their health system to be organised.
And we also look at the number of people diagnosed with cancer every year. Some 100,000 Australians, some 32,000 residents of this state of New South Wales. So what we, the Australian Government are doing is rolling out a series of integrated cancer care centres across the country- regional centres, so that people living in the regions who are afflicted with this disease do not have to travel as far to get basic cancer treatment. And that's why I'm announcing today that the Government will invest $9.1 million to enhance cancer services at the Lismore Base Hospital, as part of the North Coast Cancer Institute regional cancer service.
What this will do is three things. It will provide $6.5 million to commission a second linear accelerator, a second linear accelerator. Also, we are providing funding for a PET scanner at Lismore Base Hospital, and we're also providing funding of $2.6 million to be invested in a 20 unit cancer patient and carer accommodation facility which will be called Our House. We actually believe that these are important investments for this community.
If you have access to a PET scanner, as I was saying to the experts just before, frankly, it enhances your early diagnosis, the most accurate diagnosis of where a cancer has reached in a given patient's body. And that provides you with the information necessary to quickly decide what sort of treatment you need, whether it's a form of chemotherapy, whether it's a form of radiotherapy, whether in fact you need other forms of surgical intervention, or other forms of treatment. So therefore, having a PET scanner here, that's going to be pretty important. Having a second linear accelerator here will enhance the ability to provide radiation oncology services enormously across this region.
I was speaking to the experts next door, who told me with the commissioning of number one linear accelerator, we're going to be able to provide some 420 treatments in a given year. Once you've got a second linear accelerator, you multiply that by two, that's 840 such treatments in a given year. This is the practical stuff which makes a difference to working families, pensioners and carers right across this region. So I conclude where I began. These are really important investments for something as basic as the health and hospital needs of the people of this region. These are really important investments for cancer sufferers across Australia, because we are seeking to do this in major regional centres across the country.
And I'd thank Janelle very much for her strong, strong local advocacy and support of the interests of Lismore Base Hospital to make sure that these investments came here to the people of this region. Happy to take your questions, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what would your takeover of the public hospital system mean for an area like Lismore? A number of the local public would consider some of the issues (inaudible) a basket case. How will it improve things, and will that be making you take more responsibility for some of the issues at Lismore Hospital?
PM: Well let me go to a very basic fact, which is how do you fund the health and hospital system for the future. Here at Lismore Base Hospital you are servicing a vast population of people here, in this wider region. One of the critical challenges here of course is making sure you've got a sufficient funding base for this to work in the future. What we're going to do is introduce a system called activity-based funding, which means that for the services that you provide at a hospital, that you will in fact be funded for those services, not simply being given a block allocation from state office. That is a big change. That is a really big change.
The second point is this, it goes to the structure- we, the Australian Government, are going to have, for the first time, be the dominant funders of the Australian public hospital system. That is, at present, we fund one third of the running costs of hospitals like this. In the future, we'll be the dominant funders of its running costs, its capital costs, its equipment costs, its teaching costs, and its training costs. That is a huge change for the future. And finally, we will provide funding direct to local hospital networks.
That is a big change as well, because we want local governing councils made up of your local clinical leaders, your nurse leaders, your allied health professionals and other health and management and finance experts to make decisions locally about the use of those dollars. So you ask what will change? One, for the first time, we become the dominant funders of the system, and that's means for this hospital. And two, it also means that our payments will be made direct to local governing councils of a local hospital network so that they have more autonomy to make the decisions in response to local needs.
JOURNALIST: This hospital's traditionally been underfunded. Can you guarantee, under the new system, that it would get the funding that it needs?
PM: Well, what I can say is that- we are- this is one of 764 public hospitals across Australia. And my job in bringing about a national reform through a National Health and Hospitals Network is to make sure that we have a funding model which provides real funding increases for hospitals like Lismore Base Hospital which are delivering more services. That's what activity-based funding is all about. And that's quite separate to the additional investments which are outlined in this document that I released in the last 24 hours. For example, I've just been speaking with young doctors here.
One of the problems in this area is do you have enough GPs, do you have enough local specialists, do you have enough specialists nurses, do you have enough allied health professionals. In each of those areas, I've announced further investments on behalf of the Australian Government for more GP training places, more specialist training places outside of metropolitan areas, as well as of course the announcements already made by the Minister in relation to nursing.
And also, the announcements that we've made in the last week, the further investments for training places for allied health professionals, with a particular emphasis on rural and regional Australia. So you ask what changes, and whether funding will actually flow? Not only is there a funding formula for the future which guarantees that money would come to the services actually delivered, but on top of that, we've also made further investments, $3 billion worth of investments, to deal with such critical questions such as local health workforce needs.
JOURNALIST: But will it be hard for regional hospitals to compete with metropolitan hospitals if they're all sort of going to the one source?
PM: Well, one of the big challenges there on workforce is this- right now, let's just go to GPs. In order to maintain the current ratio of provision between GPs and the community over the decade ahead, we're going to need to add an additional 3000 GPs, GP training places, to the country. Because that's how many are going to exit the system through ageing, retirement and the rest. That is why the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon and I, announced recently that we'll be investing in 5,500 new GP training places nationwide, because we've got to improve the ratio of provision. Once you have done that, you have more GPs, frankly, who will be in a position to take up offers of work in regional areas as well. Right now, you have a supply and demand problem nationwide. We intend to deal with that through the measures we've outlined. And for specialists, as well.
JOURNALIST: There's also an infrastructure issue here. The next setup for the cancer unit bringing people into Lismore is-
PM: How about- it's good to have the cancer unit? Isn't it?
JOURNALIST: They're still very happy, I'm told.
PM: Is it good to have the second linear accelerator? How about the PET scanner?
JOURNALIST: I understand it's the first one in regional New South Wales.
PM: Well I think there's one in Newcastle, I'm advised, and-
SAFFIN: Regional.
PM: I'm just saying, frankly, this is a huge growth region. And let's just be realistic about it. And that's why, until recently, we haven't had a PET scanner at a major centre like Townsville in North Queensland. That's just wrong. Why are we in a situation in 2010 where this is the case? So look, block by block, change by change, region by region, we intend to make a difference. Half a billion dollars plus being invested in integrated cancer care centres in regional Australia, where frankly, people right now get a raw deal on the delivery of cancer services. Sorry, you were about to ask another question?
JOURNALIST: The next step to Lismore Base Hospital-
PM: After the three things I've just announced-
JOURNALIST: The stage three upgrade, which is getting increasingly urgent. The hospital's very old. We had a situation a little while ago where a patient dialled 000 just to get some attention because the nurse call system had failed. The cost of the stage three upgrade is around $100 million, I think, at last report. Is there any sort of prospect of the Federal Government stepping in on this?
PM: Well, can I say- to repeat what I said before- the Australian Government, if the Premiers and Chief Ministers agree to this plan, become the dominant funders of the Australian public hospital system for the first time. Secondly, that includes the capital needs of the system. That means new buildings. It means new equipment. That is new. In the past, guess how much the Australian Government provided for capital buildings and equipment in hospitals such as this- zero, absolutely zero. And occasionally, the Australian Government would step in and say actually we need this, that and the other to be done in a particular region. We actually need to put this on a systematic basis, that's what this is all about. So you asked specifically about the future expansion of this hospital? We would become 60% funders of the future growth of the system. Of course, that has to be worked out with individual service delivery plans between local hospital networks and state health systems, I understand that. But we, for the first time, become the dominant funders of the system. That is the core change here. And it affects the future of every hospital and every health service in the country.
JOURNALIST: There's another PET scanner in Queensland I believe which has been announced which is supposed to come online in 2014. When will this one come online, when will the accelerators be here?
PM: When the- I was asked this question recently, I think, in Townsville. And I'd much rather defer to the local experts who are, frankly, going to work on a very detailed installation plan, proving up plan, bringing the staff online plan, and I'm sure they, together with Janelle, will give you a detailed statement in the period ahead about when each of these elements come online. I don't wish to give a day in a month, because the experts here will frankly have a better idea on how that's going to be done in the period ahead. PET scanners take a while to get going. The advice I had in North Queensland was that they'd take probably about eighteen months from go to woe. But I'll leave it to the experts here and Janelle to make a subsequent statement about when all these come online.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just before we leave you, you've got a pilot scheme which has been operational in the Hunter region called access health- just questions, when is that looking like being rolled out further? Is there potentially going to be any more funding for that? Is it half way between your local GP and hospitals? How is that going?
PM: Well, part of the reform outlined in this document is not just the reform to the hospital system, it's the reform also that we propose to the two other major arms of the health and hospital system. One is primary care, the other is aged care, and the middle, if you like, you've got the acute hospital system. Your question goes to the future of primary care, that is what happens in terms of non-hospital care, community care, community health centres, GP-related services and allied health professionals.
What we want for the future is for better health and better hospitals to be served by enhanced primary care services and enhanced hospitals services and enhanced aged care services. On primary care, what we are looking at particularly is how do we build up local primary healthcare networks in the same sorts of geographical communities of interest as the local hospital networks.
We want to make sure that our GPs and related services are out there providing as much as they can, including with more flexible hours into the future, to take some of the burden away, frankly, from acute hospitals. So many people would present in accident and emergency, I don't know the circumstances in the Hunter, because they can't have access to out of hours GP care.
So, we are trailing a number of things around the country at the moment. 36 GP super clinics being built around the country at the moment. We have a range of other trial programs underway at the moment. But I'd like to make it very clear today that enhanced primary healthcare, better access to primary healthcare outside of hospitals, is one of the three key planks of long-term reform for the health and hospital system. And having said that, I think we'd better zip.
But let me just say one thing about the Barrier Reef, and the good work that's been done by the salvage team up there, dealing with that Chinese vessel. I'm advised that last night at 7:45pm that the first attempt to refloat the Chinese vessel was successful. Thankfully, I'm advised that no leaking oil was found, and the ship was towed overnight to sheltered waters off Barren Island. I've been up there recently, and flew over this vessel. And I've spoken with the salvage operators, and the State and Federal Government officials who've been located in Gladstone coordinating this operation.
This is- has been a very difficult task. And could I just say on behalf of the Government how much we appreciate the professional expertise of the team of officials operating out of Gladstone and elsewhere who have successfully taken this vessel from the Great Barrier Reef to this temporary place where it's moored. On top of that, could I say again, echoing the views I think of all Australians, that it is still an absolute outrage that this vessel could've landed on the Great Barrier Reef twelve kilometres off course. We will leave no stone unturned when it comes to finding out how that happened. We will leave no stone unturned through the investigatory process, which is now in the hands of the Transport Safety Bureau.
On top of that, as I said earlier, if we need changes to the regime which protects the Great Barrier Reef, either extension of the pilotage regime or the extension of the vessel tracking system on the southern parts of the reef, then we will embrace those changes in the future if that's the nature of the recommendations we receive from the investigation. The Great Barrier Reef is a great asset for all Australians. Let's keep it that way. But I congratulate the team who have done all this work on the ground.
Thanks very much folks, gotta run. 


The Rudd Government will invest $5.8 million to provide equipment for a comprehensive cancer centre at Coffs Harbour Hospital, as part of the North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Service.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts in urban areas. This $5.8 million investment in Coffs Harbour will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 32,000 NSW residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
The investment will fund the purchase of a new Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine.
It is part of a $19.7 million investment which will bring new equipment to the facility's Coffs Harbour, Lismore and Port Macquarie campuses.
This includes a second linear accelerator and a Positron Emissions Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scanner and accommodation at Lismore, and a new linear accelerator at Port Macquarie.
The additional infrastructure will also underpin planning for future expansion of radiotherapy services in this region.
This initiative builds on the Rudd Government's investment of $8.6 million to expand the Coffs Harbour Hospital. This includes $8.2 million for the emergency department and more than $400,000 to reduce the elective surgery waiting list.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
The integrated North Coast Cancer Institute forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish regional cancer centres so that Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


PM: It is good to be back in Brisbane, and it's good to be here at this Hospital, and as part of the research work of this University. The Government, in this one week to go before COAG convenes in Canberra, will be talking long and hard about the need for fundamental change in the health and hospital system of Australia. What are we on about? A new National Health and Hospitals Network funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time, the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the public hospital system.
And why? To deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and other health services to working families, pensioners and carers right across the country. And today, I'm announcing for the first time that the Australian Government will take over full federal control of aged care. This investment will support around 5000 aged care places or beds, and help to end the blame game that hurts hospitals, and also hurts aged care services. By ending the blame game in aged care, we'll deliver more money, more beds, and more health services for senior Australians. That's really important.
Today's announcement doesn't just deliver better care for senior Australians, it also means less pressure on our hospitals. And this means better support for aged care services for senior Australians, and at the same time, taking pressure off our hospitals for all Australians. Through this national aged care package, the Australian Government will, firstly, for the first time take full responsibility for aged care, including home and community care provided to older Australians.
Second, support the development of 2,500 new aged care places through the zero real interest rate loans scheme. Thirdly, provide an estimated $280 million to the states and territories to fund older Australians who are stuck in hospitals, waiting for an aged care place. Fourthly, increase incentives to GPs to provide more services in aged care homes. And fifthly, to expand the capacity of multi-purpose services, which provide aged care and set-down services in small rural communities by the addition of some 286 additional sub-acute beds, or bed equivalents.
Aged care is a really important part of the overall reform of our health and hospital system. Getting the reform of the acute hospital system is critical. Getting the reform of our aged care network is critical. And getting the reform of our primary healthcare system is critical. Together, this makes up a new national health and hospitals network, for better health and better hospital services for all Australians.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


The Rudd Government will invest $9.1 million to enhance cancer services at Lismore Base Hospital as part of a North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Service.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts in urban areas. The $9.1 million investment in Lismore will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 32,000 NSW residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
The Government will provide $6.5 million to commission a second linear accelerator and a Positron Emissions Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scanner at Lismore Base Hospital.
A further $2.6 million will be invested in a 20-unit cancer patient and carer accommodation facility, 'Our House', to be built adjacent to the new cancer care centre at the Lismore Base Hospital.
The investment means people across the North Coast will no longer have to travel to Brisbane or Sydney to receive treatment, and can get care closer to home and with the support of their family. The additional infrastructure will also underpin planning for future expansion of radiotherapy services in this region.
'Our House' will provide a home base for carers and cancer patients who need accommodation when they come to Lismore to receive their treatment.
Member for Page, Janelle Saffin said this was a wonderful announcement and will mean vastly improved cancer care for patients on the North Coast, as well as a place to stay for their carers.
"There were many local submissions for this, and I lobbied hard to see these facilities become a reality on the North Coast, and I am delighted that the cancer care services the Northern Rivers community have asked for will be delivered.
"I am very excited by this announcement and I want to thank the community and particularly Dr Chris Ingall and Dr Adam Boyce for their hard work on these cancer care initiatives," she said.
The North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Service forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million investment in regional and rural cancer centres to ensure all Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
It builds on the Rudd Government's other investment for Lismore Base Hospital:
     * $7 million to fast-track the building of the integrated cancer centre at the Lismore Base Hospital bringing the total Commonwealth contribution to $15 million. The new building is due to be completed and operational by 31 May 2010;
     * $8.3 million to expand the Emergency Department through an additional eight beds;
     * $600,000 for Elective Surgery equipment.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


The Rudd Government will invest $4.8 million to provide equipment for a comprehensive cancer centre at Port Macquarie Hospital, as part of the North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Service.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts in urban areas. The $4.8 million investment in Port Macquarie will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 32,000 NSW residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
The investment will fund the purchase of a new linear accelerator which can provide treatment for an estimated extra 414 radiotherapy patients per year.
It is part of an allocation of $17.1 million to the North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Service, which will bring new equipment and facilities to the service's Port Macquarie, Coffs Harbour and Lismore campuses.
This includes a second linear accelerator and a Positron Emissions Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scanner at Lismore, and a new Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine at Coffs Harbour.
An amount of $2.6 million will also be invested in a 20-unit cancer patient and carer accommodation facility, "Our House", to be built adjacent to the new cancer care centre at the Lismore Base Hospital.
The increase in cancer service infrastructure and capacity in this region has the potential to improve access to essential cancer services for those in highest need, including high retiree populations and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, who currently travel to Brisbane or Sydney for treatment.
The additional infrastructure will also underpin planning for future expansion of radiotherapy services in this region.
This initiative builds on the Rudd Government's investment at the Port Macquarie Hospital of almost $218,000 to reduce the elective surgery waiting list.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
The integrated North Coast Cancer Institute forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish regional cancer centres so that Australians can get cancer care closer to home and their community.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


PM: It's good to be back here in Port. I just want to say one or two things about what we're doing here today. I was here, how long ago-
OAKESHOTT: August.
PM: 6 or 9 months ago, here in Port Macquarie. Rob suggested I come to this hospital to look at its local needs. And it was very influential on us as an Australian Government in framing the sort of reforms we want to bring to the nation at large. Our new National Health and Hospitals Network has been so much shaped by the experience here in this area. Because what we want is better health and better hospital services for all Australians, wherever they live- not just the capital cities, but in regional Australia as well.
The second thing I'd say is when I was here last, I seem to recall the local medicos taking an opportunity to throw in front of my nose their recommendation for enhanced cancer services here in the area as well. I think that's what happened. I remember being given a submission. That's been through the proper assessment procedures that we have through the health and hospitals fund. And what I'm pleased to do with Rob today is to confirm that we'll be investing $4.7 million to purchase a second linear accelerator for Port Macquarie Base Hospital.
Right here- this equipment is so crucial to the survivability of so many people afflicted with cancer. One of the terrible facts in Australian life is this- if you are in a rural community, the data tells us that you are three times more likely to die within your first five years of diagnosis than if you are in a major metropolitan centre. That's not good enough for Australia in the 21st century. We've got to change that. And part of changing it means making sure we have this sort of equipment spread as far and wide as possible across regional Australia.
Whether I've been in the last week in regional Queensland where people have not had enough regional cancer services, or in regional New South Wales or elsewhere in the country, this is really important. That's why this announcement is part of more than a half billion dollars worth of investment by the Australian Government in regional integrated cancer care services right across the nation. So to the team here at Port Macquarie Hospital, can I say thanks for your professionalism, thanks for your dedication, thanks for your commitment.
The work done already with this linear accelerator, I'm advised, is about 400 plus treatments in a given year. But the problem is at present, I'm advised, that 60-100 or so people are referred each year to Sydney for other services, because this one's just used flat chat. We're going to have a second one of these, which means you're going to have 800 or so such treatments possible in a given year. We need to plan for our cancer related services so that people in regional Australia get a fair deal as well.
The last thing I'd say is this. This is all part of long term planning for the health and hospitals system. Next Monday we're meeting with the Premiers and Chief Ministers in Canberra, to forge an agreement for the future of better health and better hospital services for all Australians. I would appeal again to all the Premiers and Chief Ministers to confirm that they are committed to delivering a positive deal, a positive agreement for the future of our health and hospital system for the decades ahead. Over to you Rob, you're the local Member.
OAKESHOTT: Thanks Prime Minister. And the obvious first two words are welcome back. I said in the tea room that regardless of personalities, to have the office of the Prime Minister for the first time ever, walk through the doors of this hospital, for the first time in the history of the mid-north coast and the Lyne electorate, was a significant moment. And therefore, quite logically, to have him come back is also a significant moment. We had a conversation in the oncology rooms in August last year, I think it was August 27 last year, and a one hour meeting turned into a two hour meeting.
And hopefully, what we presented looks to have played, and the Prime Minister has confirmed this in various conversations and statements in the Parliament, that the comments we asked for through the medical staff council and those that were in the meeting about getting efficiency rewarded in the system, and getting equity of funding to regional areas such as ours, growth areas, they both look to have reappeared in the structural and financial reform package that's going to be discussed on Monday. So on the broader question of is this good for our region or not, I have previously described it as a slam dunk.
Without one extra cent going into the system, a region such as ours, a growth region, benefits substantially. We finally get access to the up to $70 million a year we've been missing out on. That's been identified through the Garling report in 2007, and finally, efficient hospitals such as ours, at Wauchope, Kempsey and Port Macquarie, and Manning, all start to get rewarded for effort. That should be supported by all, I would've thought. And I am concerned that this is being framed in a context of an election year. I would hope that we could all move beyond that. In three year federal cycles, anything can be framed really as electioneering.
This is a substantial moment in time on Monday. I would hope it's not framed in a context of Kevin Rudd versus Tony Abbott, Labor versus Liberal. Here we have a moment where we can do something good for Australian health systems, for the growth regions of Australia. The population debate has come again. This is the population debate this country needs to have through an infrastructure question. It's an area like the mid-north coast that's expected to have 90,000 new people in the next 20 years. We've got to have the infrastructure to meet it.
And for any visionaries in the room, this is even a bit of a federation debate that we're having right now. This is finishing the work of 100 years ago, and turning a federation of states potentially into the Commonwealth that we all want to have. So Monday's important Prime Minister, and certainly, if you need myself, if you need state Members like Pete, and any rugby players to come along and put people in headlocks on Monday, we're happy to be your muscle at a policy level, because it is important for us.
PM: I'll get an airline ticket for you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-
OAKESHOTT: Hang on- because I just want to talk about the cancer funding as well. Because this also is important. And we've talked about the national, I want to talk about the local. And I mentioned this to the Prime Minister before. This is fantastic, much needed funding for our area. We still have people going away, and we would all know people who've left this area to get treatment or had treatment delayed for various reasons. A second linear accelerator will substantially improve the delivery of cancer services in our area. And Government is in partnership with community on this one. I would like to think Government is the icing on the community cake.
Because if you reflect on the last five years, where we are in a building that was only built five years ago, Rotary, the combined Rotary clubs were part of the deal that saw the accommodation facilities built next door, that was their commitment as a community. We've had the Hastings cancer trust, and I think everyone in the room has been to some sort of fundraising function. If you haven't, you should go to the next one. We've now got the Jim Bruce urology and prostrate trust, also fundraising locally. This is a community effort. We've also got the relay for life coming up.
This is a community effort that has seen this cancer service in this region really start to take its place as a centre of excellence. So I hope everyone feels a bit of ownership of this today, and gives themselves a pat on the back for the $50 or the $100 that they might have donated at some function over the last five years. So thank you for recognising that, and it does matter at a federal level where we talk about the role that local networks and local ownership can play in the delivery of healthcare. Here is a great example of where a bit of the skin in the game from communities can really help in the relationship between the delivery from Government and ultimately the delivery of healthcare generally. So thanks, Prime Minister, for coming, and look forward to you coming back next time.
PM: Thank you very much. Folks, we've got to zip off, so I appreciate everyone being here. But the team of professionals, can I just say how much I appreciate their work. I spent- as Rob reminds me- I spent a couple of hours with them last time, and learned a lot. They're a very dedicated community of health professionals here, and I congratulate them not just for their work here, but frankly, the great ideas they've given the Australian Government.
Better zip, thanks folks. 


The Rudd Government and NSW Government will invest $38.6 million to enhance cancer services at Gosford and Wyong Hospitals as part of the Central Coast Regional Cancer Service.
The Rudd Government will provide $28.6 million and the NSW Government will provide a further $10 million, to provide the full spectrum of cancer services, including prevention and screening, treatment, palliative and supportive care.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts in urban areas. The $38.6 million investment in Gosford and Wyong will work towards improving the services and care for the more than 32,000 NSW residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
The new facility at Gosford will include the construction of three radiotherapy bunkers, installation of two linear accelerators, a CT scanner and an additional five chemotherapy treatment chairs.
The funding will also support the enhancement of a multidisciplinary clinic and day oncology unit at Wyong Hospital.
Once fully operational, the Central Coast Regional Cancer Service is expected to provide treatment for an additional 828 radiotherapy patients per year and 2,500 additional chemotherapy treatments per year.
The Central Coast Regional Cancer Service forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish regional cancer centres so that Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
While Australia has better overall cancer survival rates than comparable countries, there is still unacceptable variation for some people, depending on the type of cancer, a person's socioeconomic status or where they live.
It is of great concern that for the 30 per cent of Australians living in rural and remote areas, outcomes are worse than for people living in the city.
Since coming into office, the Rudd Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


HOST: Kevin Rudd, good morning, and welcome to ABC North Coast.
PM: Thank you for having me on the program. It was good to be in Lismore and on the north coast yesterday.
HOST: Your visit to our region has been described as one where you did come bearing gifts- $9.1 million injected into the local healthcare services, particularly cancer care. Is this funding dependent upon the states signing off on your health reform package? Or is this funding guaranteed regardless?
PM: Yvette, our view is that this funding needs to happen anyway, and it will. And the reason is that people are crying out for additional cancer and oncology services across rural and regional Australia. And the north coast is part of that- this $9.1 million goes toward funding a second linear accelerator, a new PET scanner at Lismore Base Hospital, an investment in a 20 unit cancer patient and carer accommodation facility. This has been needed in the region for a long, long time. Janelle Saffin, our local Member, has been very strong on this. That's why it's going ahead regardless.
HOST: How can you guarantee that it goes ahead regardless, if the states don't sign off on your new package? If they don't sign off, isn't the whole health budget going to be thrown into chaos?
PM: We want to make sure that we get a national agreement to look after the proper structure and funding of our health and hospital system for the next ten, twenty and thirty years. That's why these negotiations on the new network are important- funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funders of the public hospital system of the country. And I expect there's going to be a lot of claim and counterclaim on that in the five days remaining between now and COAG. But to go back to your earlier question, cancer services are too critical to play around with. They will happen regardless.
HOST: Kevin Rudd, Tony Abbott has said that the Federal Government should've taken over 100% of the health funding budget in this country. Why did you settle for only 60%? Why not 100%? And wouldn't that have ironed out a lot of the problems that we're now seeing with the states trying to up the ante?
PM: You know something? You mentioned before Mr Abbott- Mr Abbott, some years ago when he was Health Minister, said that the Australian Government should take over the system. He had five years to do that as Health Minister, and did not do so. Having become Leader of the Opposition, he's then backed away from that. More recently he's said he's opposed to the Government's proposed health reforms. Then he said he wouldn't necessarily oppose them. And then yesterday we had the latest position, was that- was something concerning 100%, but I'm not quite sure what.
Let's be very clear about the Government's reform plan. Three parts to it. For the first time, the Australian Government will become the exclusive funder of what's called the primary healthcare system. That is, the health services delivered outside of hospitals. Secondly, we're also for the first time becoming the dominant funder of the acute hospital system. And thirdly, we are becoming the exclusive funder of the aged care network of Australia. That is what's fundamental for this reform. And for the hospitals, for the first time we're becoming the dominant funder of their hospitals' recurrent needs, their capital needs, their equipment needs of the type that we're talking about for cancer earlier on. But also, their teaching and training needs as well.
HOST: Well, there are about five more days left before COAG, the meeting of the State Premiers, where they're going to decide on whether to back your package or not. The Victorian Premier, Mr Brumby, seems to be dead against it at this stage, and he's going to address the National Press Club today to outline his reasons why. How confident are you that you can push your agenda through?
PM: Well, obviously there's going to be a lot of claim and counterclaim for the period ahead. I understand that. But can I just say on the question of Premier Brumby, that what Mr Brumby seems to be saying is simply deliver another blank cheque to the state health bureaucracies of Australia, and it'll all be fine in the morning. We actually don't have that view. Our view is that we need to do this in two stages. One is we must ensure that the current system is reformed in order to get rid of duplication, overlap and waste, which is currently costing taxpayers billions of dollars a year. And secondly, then invest in the growth we need for the system for the future.
HOST: Mr Rudd, the architect of Medicare, John Deeble, who your party often cites as a health expert, has come out this morning and has not been very flattering about your health agenda. He says that the cost-shifting going on, the $15 billion gain that is promised to the states over ten years by the Commonwealth is in fact the extra amount the Commonwealth would have had to pay to maintain the average 8% increase in spending over the past decade, so that all we're really going to see is cost-shifting.
PM: Well perhaps I haven't seen those comments from John obviously his preferred model for the future wasn't adopted by either the independent investigatory review that we conducted for 18 months - the first 18 months that the Government was in office, or on the subsequent decisions that the Government took in response to that exhaustive inquiry into the current state of the health and hospital system, and how we need to reform it.
Secondly, on the question of growth for the system, let me just make three quick points. Right now, under the Australian Healthcare Agreement which we signed a year or so ago, within the first year or so of this Government being in office, there is already a 50% increase in the Australian Government's allocation to the states and territories for their public hospital budgets. That's happening now- 2009, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Secondly, what we're also saying is this- for this new system, for the first time the Australian Government becomes the dominant funder, but on top of that, the Australian Government also takes on to its shoulders the lion's share of the future growth of the system. This is entirely new. That means us taking $15 billion worth of investment during the course of the remainder of the decade on to our own shoulders, and taking that from the states, because the states cannot sustain the growth in funding necessary to keep the system going for the future.
HOST: And that was the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, speaking following his visit to our region yesterday. 


PM: It's great to be here in Gosford today, and it's great to be back on the Central Coast with Premier Kristina Keneally. And this is a good day for the people of the Central Coast. Here we have a growing region of some 300,000 people who have a basic ask, which is how do we get better access to cancer services in this region? And the Governments, both the Australian Government and the New South Wales Government, have listened very carefully to what locals have had to say.
And basically, what has taken my attention nationwide on this question is this- in some major categories of cancer, if you happen to live in rural and regional Australia, you are three times more likely to die within the first five years of diagnosis than you are if you live in a major metropolitan centre. That is just wrong. We have to change this for the future. And that is an important message here for the people of the Central Coast. But it's also an important message for people who live in regional Australia right across our country.
That's why together with Kristina Keneally we are today announcing a joint investment of $38.6 million to enhance cancer services here at Gosford, in order to enhance cancer services across the Central Coast. This $38.6 million is comprised of $28.6 from the Australian Government, $10 million from the Government of New South Wales. It is a good example of two Governments working together in such a critical area of health and hospital reform.
Across New South Wales each year, we have something in the order of 32,000 people who are freshly diagnosed with cancer each year. A large number of those folk live in this region. A large number of these folk across our nation, the 100,000 diagnosed each year, live in regional centres. So this is designed to enhance cancer services for them. This new facility at Gosford will include the construction of three radiotherapy bunkers, the installation of two linear accelerators, a CT scanner, an additional five chemotherapy treatment chairs. The funding will also support the enhancement of a multidisciplinary clinic and day oncology unit at Wyong Hospital.
These are important additions to cancer services in this region. Once fully operational, I'm advised that the Central Coast regional cancer service is expected to provide treatment for an additional 828 radiotherapy patients per year, and 2,500 additional chemotherapy treatments per year. These are good developments for this region. And this is just the beginning. We need to do more in the future as well.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


PM: It's great to be here in Gosford today, and it's great to be back on the Central Coast with Premier Kristina Keneally. And this is a good day for the people of the Central Coast. Here we have a growing region of some 300,000 people who have a basic ask, which is how do we get better access to cancer services in this region? And the Governments, both the Australian Government and the New South Wales Government, have listened very carefully to what locals have had to say.
And basically, what has taken my attention nationwide on this question is this- in some major categories of cancer, if you happen to live in rural and regional Australia, you are three times more likely to die within the first five years of diagnosis than you are if you live in a major metropolitan centre. That is just wrong. We have to change this for the future. And that is an important message here for the people of the Central Coast. But it's also an important message for people who live in regional Australia right across our country.
That's why together with Kristina Keneally we are today announcing a joint investment of $38.6 million to enhance cancer services here at Gosford, in order to enhance cancer services across the Central Coast. This $38.6 million is comprised of $28.6 from the Australian Government, $10 million from the Government of New South Wales. It is a good example of two Governments working together in such a critical area of health and hospital reform.
Across New South Wales each year, we have something in the order of 32,000 people who are freshly diagnosed with cancer each year. A large number of those folk live in this region. A large number of these folk across our nation, the 100,000 diagnosed each year, live in regional centres. So this is designed to enhance cancer services for them. This new facility at Gosford will include the construction of three radiotherapy bunkers, the installation of two linear accelerators, a CT scanner, an additional five chemotherapy treatment chairs. The funding will also support the enhancement of a multidisciplinary clinic and day oncology unit at Wyong Hospital.
These are important additions to cancer services in this region. Once fully operational, I'm advised that the Central Coast regional cancer service is expected to provide treatment for an additional 828 radiotherapy patients per year, and 2,500 additional chemotherapy treatments per year. These are good developments for this region. And this is just the beginning. We need to do more in the future as well. Can I also take this opportunity before I ask Kristina to comment on this service we are funding together, take the opportunity to thank all the local people who have been out here arguing for this for a long, long time.
I'd begin by acknowledging the work of Belinda, the Member for Robertson, and her long-standing advocacy of this over a long period of time. Can I also say that the local cancer groups, many of whom I have met today, too vast to mention individually. So can I say their voices have been heard loud and clear as well. To the health professionals, the oncologists, to the haematologists and those who work here at Gosford, I would thank them for their continued advocacy as well. Can I say this has been important work here in the local area, important advocacy, and it's the sort of stuff that we need to see more of into the future.
I conclude before turning to Kristina by saying this - right now, we, the Australian Government, State Governments, are engaged in a big debate on the future reform of the health and hospital system to deliver better health and better hospital services for all Australians, wherever they live. A cornerstone of all that is to make sure that we have got the best quality cancer services out there in regional and rural Australia as well. And that's why we're proud to be doing this together with Kristina's Government.
Over to you, Kristina.
KENEALLY: Thank you Kevin. It's wonderful to be joined with the Prime Minister here in the Central Coast. Prime Minister, it's terrific to have you in New South Wales as we expand in a very real way, a very tangible way, expand cancer services available to people in the Central Coast. And this is possible due to the partnership effort between the New South Wales Government and the Commonwealth Government. What we know is that in New South Wales, cancer survival rates are not just amongst the best in Australia, they're amongst the best in the world. And to be able to expand those cancer services here in the Central Coast, one of our fastest growing regions, is just terrific. And it is due to the Commonwealth's investments that that's possible.
It is a hallmark of the type of results that can be achieved through a partnership approach. And we know that this is something supported by the community, supported by clinicians here, and supported by the local Members, both state and federal, who have long campaigned for these services in the Central Coast region. It's terrific to be here today to announce and to stand with the Prime Minister and do so.
I'd like to acknowledge the Prime Minister's words about the reform process that we're undertaking. We in New South Wales recognise that for the first time in over a decade, we have a Commonwealth Government that's willing to be part of the solution when it comes to the future of our healthcare system. And we acknowledge that, we thank them, and we are determined over the coming days to work as hard as possible with the Commonwealth and our state and territory colleagues to achieve that historic agreement that will take us forward.
The people of New South Wales and the people of Australia expect us to do that. And we will. This is an opportunity to improve healthcare outcomes for the people of this state now, and to build a sustainable system into the future. To be sure, there are detailed discussions that need to occur. There are- there is analysis that needs to occur. That's happening now, between our senior officials, and back in Sydney with Government officials working around the clock so that we go to COAG best prepared, and that's able to put forward for the people of New South Wales and indeed, the for the people of Australia, the best possible solutions to the challenges that we face in our healthcare system.
So thank you Prime Minister, thank you, and I must particularly acknowledge the Members Murray Andrews, David Harrison, Grant McBride, who have worked with the local community to call for this centre and have campaigned for it. It's terrific to be here today to announce this funding of this substantial investment into healthcare on the Central Coast.
PM: Good, thank you very much Premier. And over to you folks for any questions that you've got. By the way I understand, I understand that you're going to have a stack of questions for the Premier on what I'd describe as state matters. That's terrific. Over to you Premier for that when it all happens.
KENEALLY: Thank you Kevin.
PM: So why don't we field, let's just call it health and hospital type questions and those which are relevant to what we're doing today, and then I might leave the Premier to your tender mercies for other matters. So, over to you folks. Sorry, you were about to ask.
JOURNALIST: When will the centre be operational, and what will be done for those local patients in treatment now?
PM: That's an excellent question. Kristina and I have just been talking to a number of those patients in chemotherapy chairs right now. I don't wish to mislead people that each of the items of additional equipment will be switched on overnight. They won't. The truth is that we have now budgeted for this money to occur. And that is fundamental to making sure that the extra services are added. My view, subject to what the Premier says, is that we will wait for the detailed implementation project management plans by the local hospital here, which will detail when each item of these will come on-stream.
I'd much rather we were fair dinkum with you about the delivery dates on each of those. What I am here though, today to say with the Premier is that the money for these services is delivered.
Furthermore, upstairs I confirmed to the patients that we're going to be delivering a PET scanner here as well. You will see details of that outlined in subsequent statements from the Commonwealth. It's important to provide these additional services to cancer sufferers here on the central coast.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will Australian smokers face a tax hike to pay for the hospital reform?
PM: Well, as you know, there is a comprehensive review of taxation at present. It's called the Henry Review, an independent look at the entire Commonwealth taxation system. The Treasurer has already indicated that prior to the Australian budget being delivered that that document will be released and the Australian Government's response to it, so I think we just need to wait until that is done. That is what we have said before. We intend to stick to that discipline across all ranges of tax-related matters.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if John Brumby continues to be the fly in the ointment, what chance does (inaudible) with only five days remaining?
PM: Well, there are five days remaining until COAG, and can I say that I think people right across Australia and right across the state of New South Wales and across the state of Victoria are out there wanting us to provide a new plan for the future for health and hospitals.
I understand Mr Brumby is out there today arguing for no change to the current hospital system. You know something? No reform at COAG means the same old hospital system and the same old problems as we've had in the past and no reform at COAG is bad for doctors, bad for nurses and bad for patients, bad for working families.
You know something else? People right across our country are sick and tired of excuses for delay on fundamental reform for the health and hospital system. What's our approach? One, fix the fundamentals of this system now, and two, once you are also dealing with duplication, waste and overlap, get on with the business of growing the investments which our system needs, like the cancer services that we've announced today.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one of the key architects of Medicare, John Deeble, has been quoted today calling your reforms as nothing more than spin and hype. What do you say to that?
PM: Look, everyone in one of these robust debates on the future of the health and hospital system's entitled to their point of view. That's fine. It's a democracy, and so should they express their point of view.
Can I just explain to you the process by which we've arrived at our recommendations?
One, as soon as this Australian Government was elected, within a few months we appointed Christine Bennett, formerly of Westmead in Sydney, to head the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. That Commission was made up of experts from across the medical profession and the nursing profession nationwide. They took 18 months after multiple submissions, multiple consultations right across the country to deliver to the Australian Government 123 recommendations for change. That's phase one.
Phase two is this: in the six or seven months subsequent to that, last half of last year, myself, the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, and others, we then conducted our own direct consultations with more than 100 hospitals across the nation. I did about 25 of these myself, and that is taking Bennett's 123 recommendations and saying 'how does this work for you? How does it work for your region? What's practical about this for your part of the world, and what doesn't work?' And we took all of those submissions on board.
Thirdly, we then produced our new National Health and Hospitals Network proposal over six weeks ago at the National Press Club. 48 hours ago I released volume two of that, which consolidates our proposed growth for the system, and that is now the subject of detailed collaboration and consultation between the states and territory officials.
That is a thorough process by which to reach some conclusions, and we have done this systematically, carefully, methodically to reform the system first and then to provide growth to the system as well.
Everyone's entitled to their point of view, but anyone who suggests this hasn't been developed carefully, systematically and methodically hasn't observed what the process is, and those whose recommendations may not have been taken on board by these panels of experts obviously may be a little disappointed.
Anything else, folks?
JOURNALIST: Hearing reports today the New South Wales Government's (inaudible) to reform the way the government (inaudible)?
PM: To be- I'll ask Kristina to obviously add to my answer on this, but you know something? If you look at the whole span of history, what you've had in the last decade or so is the Australian Government backing away from its financial role in the proper funding of our hospitals.
Let me put this in very simple, stark terms for you: when the Howard Government was elected in 1996, the Commonwealth was paying something around about 45 percent of the hospitals bill for country. Then, by the time the Howard Government left office it was down to about 37 percent or thereabouts. What you had was the Commonwealth Government under our predecessors stepping back from its role and basically sending the hospital pass to these good folks from the states.
Now, obviously, I won't say that any state system is perfectly run, be it Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland or anywhere else. There's always going to be problems.
So, what is fundamentally different about our reform proposal? A new National Health and Hospitals Network funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government becoming the dominant funders of the public hospital system of Australia.
We want to do that because we believe we've got to not only deal with the duplication and overlap and waste which currently exists, but provide our financial muscle to assist states running their systems in the future.
Kristina?
KENEALLY: Oh, look, and I'm happy to speak more about this in the section of the press conference, but suffice to say, though, that we in New South Wales have over the last year have brought down the debts that were owed to our creditors substantially, and I'm happy to provide those details in the next section of the press conference, but the Prime Minister points out, and rightly so, that what we have seen over the last decade is a withdrawal of support from the Commonwealth. The reason we're pursuing the opportunity that next Monday's COAG represents is that it does represent a substantial interest from the Commonwealth in being part of the solution going forward, but in the next section of the press conference we'll go into the details of that particular issue.
PM: OK, folks, if you've got nothing more I'm going to rock and roll, and-
JOURNALIST: One more question. Sorry to interrupt.
PM: OK, as long as it's a good one.
JOURNALIST: Here we go!
PM: I'm worried now.
JOURNALIST: From the Northern Territory in regards to support for the reforms and I suppose, if so, how big an impact will the Territory have in (inaudible)
PM: I've spoken at length to the Chief Minister when he was last in Canberra, and we had a good discussion about the particular needs of the Territory. The Territory has a massive challenge when it comes to Indigenous health. I think we all recognise that. New South Wales, together with ourselves only less than a year or so ago signed, for the first time, a national agreement on closing the gap with Indigenous Australians, which includes closing the gap in the delivery of health services and the support for better health outcomes for Indigenous Australians.
In the Northern Territory you see this problem writ large, so the design of our system will in no way provide a reduction in services for Indigenous health services out there in the most difficult parts of the country - in fact, quite the reverse. We'll be out there continuing to support those services in the future.
Obviously, the Chief Minister, like other premiers and heads of government, will have some technical questions to raise. That's fine. We're there to work our way through those, but I conclude where I began - we have a once in a generation opportunity to fundamentally reform the health and hospital system of Australia's. This would be the single largest reform of the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare. We have a remarkable opportunity to deal with the fundamental cost duplication and waste and overlap in our current system and to fund future growth for better hospitals, more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses and more cancer services in the future, so we've got to take this, grab this with both hands, this great historical opportunity and get on with it.
I think that's what the people of Australia, the people of New South Wales and Victoria and elsewhere in the country expect of us.
Having said that, I've got to zip and I'm sure you're going to be very nice to the Premier.


HOST: Now, of course, central Queensland's wait for the cancer unit is finally over and a lot of people are saying 'hallelujah, it's about time'. I've got to tell you, Kevin Rudd, before you came to office I'd been preaching that infrastructure in this country is absolutely, well, was, appalling, but looks like you've heeded a lot of people and you're actually putting the infrastructure back into the local communities.
PM: Well, Michael, I spent all of last week travelling around regional Queensland and if there's one big message right down the Queensland coast, including in Rocky and in the surrounding region, it's that we have to plan for growth and part of planning for growth means dealing with something as basic as health and hospitals infrastructure. That's why we've developed a plan for a new National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally, but also on critical areas of major disease like cancer, why should people have to travel to Brisbane for everything?
So, this $67 million investment at Rockhampton Hospital, as you know, will fund the commissioning of two radiotherapy bunkers, the construction of a third bunker, 16 chemotherapy chairs. This is a big enhancement to delivery of cancer services in central Queensland.
HOST: Now, will this go forward regardless of what happens in the next five or six days, with the premiers all lining up to say ye or nay to the health scheme?
PM: Can I say it would really help on this score if it was all part of a new National Health and Hospitals Network. The people of Queensland have been hanging out for this for too long and we've just got to get on with the business of making sure that these cancer services are delivered. That's the strong message I've had from Kirsten Livermore, the local member, also in Flynn from Chris Trevor.
It's just pretty basic - do you know the thing, Michael that really hit me between the eyes when I got involved in this health and hospitals debate. With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts in the city.
HOST: Well, let me tell you, when you go out to the airport on a Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, there are more passengers with grey envelopes than actual baggage, overnight. They're heading to Brisbane because of the cancer and the checkups, and, you know, it's just got to stop sooner than later.
PM: Well, yeah, it stuns me that it's taken so long to get all this done, but I've got to say I've found a similar story in Rocky, in Mackay, in Townsville, in Cairns, and of course in Gladstone and in Bundaberg. I mean, you keep getting the same story.
Cancer is one of Australia's leading killers. Secondly, we have 100,000 Australians each year freshly diagnosed with one form of cancer or another. Nearly 20,000 of those are from Queensland. A large slice of them are from rural and regional Queensland.
We've got to lift our game. That's why, when people say around the place that we can fiddle at the edges with the future of the health and hospital system, I don't believe it. I think it needs some root and branch reform. We need to reform the system, make sure it's working properly, make sure that we're eliminating waste, duplication and overlap in the system, then we must make sure we fund for growth, and that's means the need for growth in cancer services, and not just in the big cities, but in regional and rural Australia as well.
HOST: Kevin, do you have to get all the premiers to sign off, because, you know, Anna Bligh's ready to sign off, New South Wales is ready to sign off, but that Senator [sic] Brumby, he's giving you a hard time, isn't he?
PM: Well, you know, there is always a fair bit of claim and counter-claim in the lead up to a Council of Australian Governments meeting, and, obviously, you're going to have different premiers saying different things out there in the public debate, but I just say this in relation to some of the calls by Premier Brumby - you know, more money for the health system without more reform just means more business as usual and more business as usual means the same old hospital system with the same old problems.
You see, we need to do two things - change the system to get rid of duplication, overlap and waste, which is currently costing the Australian and the Queensland taxpayers billions of dollars a year, then secondly invest in the growth that we need in the system as well, and that means more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, and also critical services for those who suffer from cancer.
I really scratch my head sometimes with those who go out there and defend the status quo, who think the current situation is good enough. It's just not. It needs to change, but on top of changing the system to make sure it's - for the first time - funded nationally and run locally, with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funder of the system, we also need to make sure that we then fund the growth as well. That's the two arms of our strategy, but if we just do what people like Premier Brumby are suggesting, it means the same old hospital system with the same old problems without dealing with the core problems which exist within the system at present.
HOST: Speaking with Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia. Kevin, can I just get that right - if they don't sign up, are we still going to get the cancer, you know, equipment?
PM: Oh, absolutely. As far as Queensland is concerned, as far as the regional centres across Australia, they've been waiting too long. We've actually put forward our intention to move in this direction prior to the health reform proposal. This is an investment across the nation of about $560 million, so it will proceed.
So, for all your listeners there in central Queensland, can I just say: this will happen. It's too fundamental for frankly, people who are listening to your program this morning worried about not just having got a diagnosis for this disease, then having to worry about how they get to Brisbane, how often do they get to Brisbane, and at the same time wondering what about their jobs, what about their families, getting the kids to school. As someone said to me here in New South Wales just the other day, 'who's going to feed the pets? Who's going to look after things at home?' I mean, it's a real, real struggle for people and I think we really need to understand the human dimension of this.
HOST: Now, if by some chance when the federal election comes around and you are out, that doesn't mean that this whole thing will be cancelled, does it? I mean, these are the questions that are coming through to me, and I thought I might as well ask the man who's in the hot chair at the moment.
PM: Well, our commitment is absolutely clear cut. It is funded, it is in the budget, it is there to be delivered. Of course, in relation to all these cancer centres right around the country, these are questions which you should also put to Mr Abbott. I mean, the Australian people decide who the next government of Australia is. That's why we're in a democracy. I cannot speak for him. I'm just being very blunt about that.
HOST: OK, EST- sorry, ETS.
PM: Alright.
HOST: Sorry about that, Kevin.
PM: I was wondering where we were headed there.
HOST: A new one! We've just had Senator Joyce in. He's really harping on about, you know, the environmental tax system and how it's going to go with the environmental trading system. Is that going to affect our area much, because you are proceeding even though it looks like maybe we should be waiting a bit.
PM: You know something? The important thing is to make sure that we're acting in a serious, balanced and measured way on the global and the national challenge of climate change. Of course, there's a huge economic cost attached to neither Australia nor the world acting on climate change, and the economic impact will then be fed right back home as well to our industries and our kids' futures as well.
Secondly, however, in bringing about a balanced policy we need to make sure that of course we make adjustments for the future, but that we also support industry in the transition, and furthermore that we also are in the business of supporting households as well. That's why we've put forward a household assistance package to deal with any impact on the cost of living.
This is a very carefully considered policy. Can I say, when compared with that which Senator Joyce is offering out there, the Abbot plan on climate change, the contrast is pretty clear. Our plan does more, it costs less, and Mr Abbott's plan doesn't offer working families a single dollar in compensation even though there'll be a pass-through of costs to the consumer from his plan as well.
HOST: When do you reckon the federal election will be on, Kevin?
PM: Oh, look, do you want an exclusive on Rocky radio this morning?
HOST: Yes, please.
PM: Yeah it's likely to happen before April next year.
HOST: Oh, OK then, so before April next year?
PM: That's when the constitutional limit expires.
HOST: I figured that. Exclusive indeed! It's good to see you smiling.
PM: I've given you an edge onto that story, so, there you go, mate. You heard it first on Rocky radio.
HOST: So, we've got until April next year and it'll be very exciting to see what happens. How is Tony Abbott going? Are you finding him a good challenge compared to the previous Leader of the Opposition?
PM: Mr Abbott's the fourth Liberal leader that I have faced in my two years or so as Prime Minister or as leader of the Labor Party, and can I just say each of them is different, each of them has their own strengths, but look, you're listeners will make their judgements about what I am offering to the people of Australia in terms of what we've done, what we propose to do, and they'll make their judgement about Mr Abbott as well.
The core thing for us is this: one, we've acted in the last year and a half or so decisively to protect the Australian economy, to protect jobs and to support small businesses during the single worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression, and uniquely among the advanced economies in the world we managed to keep Australia out of recession.
The second thing we've been doing is delivering on our key commitments in terms of building our schools, building our hospitals system, as well as getting rid of an unfair industrial relations system through the abolition of Workchoices, but the other thing is to act on future challenges as well, and there in central Queensland one of the future challenges is how do we plan for growth for the future, how do we plan to make sure we've got the proper infrastructure for the future, the proper skills for the future - these are critical challenges for the future as well.
So, these are what we'll be judged on, as well as our delivery to local areas like central Queensland, and we're proud of what we have done in delivering on our pre-election commitments to the local area, not just in the seat of Capricornia, but also in the seat of Flynn, which is next door, as well. Large investments, but consistent with what we said we would do for local people prior to the last election.
HOST: How hard has Kirsten Livermore been working for Capricornia, because I've been saying that she's had three terms and she's like a little budgie - she could squeak away but nothing could happen. Finally, she's got power, she's in the corridors, how hard was she working for us on the cancer outcome?
PM: Well, Kirsten is in my ear and in my face all the time about the, for example, the health needs of the local community - as she should be. She and I went the other day to Rockhampton hospital, and you know, this is a hospital which has been crying out for federal investment for years and years and years. With this investment that we are making in cancer, with the investment that we are making over two years to expand Rockhampton Hospital, we're now investing $150 million in the future health needs of Rocky and the surrounding region itself.
This is very much because you've got local members like Kirsten who, as I said, are tireless in their advocacy for what needs to be done locally, and, I think more broadly when you've got Chris Trevor in Gladstone arguing the case for his region in the electorate of Flynn, doing the same, that's why we're seeing an expansion of health services there and more broadly Federal Government investment as well.
We believe in the growth of these regions. I'm from Queensland. I've been through Rocky and Gladstone countless times over the last 20 years in one capacity or another. I know what the potential is. I know what some of the needs are, but these local members have been very, very strong in their advocacy of what needs to be done in the local area.
HOST: Kevin, just one final question before you go because I know you're very busy this morning - debt, the debt that we've got. When do you see the light at the end of the tunnel that we may actually get out of the red, into the black. Are talking five years, ten years?
PM: We've outlined this very clearly in our budget papers. This is a very clear cut strategy on our part, and can I just remind your listeners before you have Senator Joyce running his usual fear campaign on radios right across regional Queensland, that here is the report card on Australia's response to the global recession last year and beginning the year before, one which caused every other economy in the advanced world to head into recession and has produced double-digit unemployment in North America and in Western Europe.
This is what we did in Australia: first of all, we brought about an economy which was the only one of the major advanced economies not to go into recession. Secondly, the only one to have grown positively in the '08-'09 financial year and in the period that was at the absolute core of the actual global downturn. Thirdly, we've produced the second-lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, and on top of that produced the lowest debt and the lowest deficit as a percentage of GDP of the major advanced economies. This is the Government's report card.
It's very easy to run around the place and run a fear campaign. The alternative, Mr Abbott's approach, would be to stop every school modernisation program that's currently underway in the area covered by your radio station as part of the Government's school modernisation program, so critical to keeping construction jobs going in the area, and on top of that, if we had done nothing we would have the same double-digit unemployment as you've seen throughout Europe and that you've seen in various parts of America as well - hundreds of thousands more people would have lost their jobs. So our attitude is this: when the private economy is under pressure you step in as Government to make the difference, and that's all about protecting local jobs. As the private economy recovers, that's when the role of Government is then contracted, and that is the strategy clearly outlined in our budget papers.
And, having said all that, Michael, I've got to run. I've got to be elsewhere.
HOST: OK, enjoy your jog.
PM: Well, I was in the gym last night, actually, so it's more of a stationary jog, if you know what I mean.
HOST: Good man. Thank you very much for taking out the time.
PM: All the best, Michael. Bye.


The Australian Government is planning for the future health workforce needs of New South Wales.
The Government is providing up to $13.6 million to support additional clinical training places for university students in a range of services from metropolitan rehabilitation services to rural and remote health services. 
Broken Hill, Newcastle, Shoalhaven, Ryde and Western Sydney are just some of the locations throughout New South Wales where students will now have additional high-quality clinical training opportunities.
The students will be able to experience the private, public and not for profit health sectors in New South Wales.
The University of Sydney, University of Western Sydney, The University of Newcastle, University of Wollongong and Ramsay Health Care are amongst the recipients of up to $13.6 million injection into training.
This will support approximately 1,744 additional clinical training placements for students currently enrolled in medicine, nursing, psychology, physiotherapy, pharmacy, podiatry and a number of other disciplines. 
This announcement is in addition to the Rudd Government's recent announcement of $632 million to train an additional 6,000 GPs and specialists over the next decade.
The Rudd Government is building a health workforce to meet the needs of all Australians, now and into the future.
Under the National Health and Hospitals plan, the Rudd Government will shoulder the majority of the funding burden - 60 per cent of all public hospital services - meaning more money is available to meet rising health costs. The Government will also fund 60% of teaching and research as part of this plan.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better health for local communities.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Deborah, thanks for having me on your program.
HOST: You're welcome. Kristina Keneally says she's prepared to work on a compromise. Victoria remains opposed. South Australia's in your camp. West Australia definitely not. Now Monday is looming, and you have to ask- is nuclear disarmament easier than this?
PM: You know what I find, talking to working families, pensioners, carers right across the country- is that they're just crying out for reform to the health and hospital system. And for growth in funding to the system for more doctors, more nurses, more hospital beds. We said we'd act on this prior to the last election. We said we'd have an independent commission of inquiry which ran for 18 months to come up with recommendations for the future of the system. That was delivered in July last year. We then spent six months consulting more than 100 hospitals around the country, I did about 25 of those myself.
And now we're down to the Council of Australian Governments meeting. Of course there's going to be disagreement. But I think the overwhelming message from Australians is that they know the current system's not working. They know it needs to be reformed. They're tired of the overlap, duplication and waste. They want to see more Australian Government investment in the future of hospital beds, doctors and nurses. And that's what we intend to do.
HOST: It's been interesting to watch your bedside diplomacy on this. Every night on the news there's an image of you walking into a hospital ward somewhere and saying, almost always, can I park myself here, as you sit down on the bed. Now you've obviously tried to win people's hearts on this, and you have had a bounce in the polls, apparently due to this-
PM: Do you know something? It's often easier to talk to people in a hospital bed sitting on the bed with them rather than hovering over them.
HOST: I know, but they're a captive audience, Prime Minister.
PM: No, no, listen- we make a point- just for the purpose of your listeners, we make a point of only speaking to people who are happy to have a conversation. So that is discussed with the nurses and doctors in advance, we never put people on the spot.
HOST: No, of course, and I understand this, but I wonder whether or not you think that it really will be the main election issue for you?
PM: Well look, I can't think of many more important things for working families right across the country. People look at the system, they know it's not working, they know we need more doctors, more nurses, more hospital beds. They're looking for a plan to do that. We've put forward one, a new National Health and Hospitals Network for the first time funded nationally, run locally, through local hospital networks. And for the first time, the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia. That's our plan. We've put it out there. We're arguing it.
Obviously, some of the states- or the Victorian Premier in particular- is running an argument that effectively says the current system is okay, just send us another blank cheque in the morning. I don't think that is right, because what we need to do is not have business as usual with the same old hospital system and the same old problems. What we need instead is to reform the system, to get rid of duplication, waste and overlap, and then to grow the system through the Australian Government taking on the dominant funding role for the future. That's our plan.
HOST: Can I ask you about electoral reality? The Victorian Premier is facing an election soon. Kristina Keneally's facing an election soon. You're facing an election soon. If you called a referendum on this, you might have a situation where you and Labor Premiers are fighting with each other, as all of you are headed towards an election. Now, are you really prepared to pull that off?
PM: I think my responsibility as Prime Minister of Australia is to act in the national interest. And I hear, loud and clear, from people right across this country, small rural hospitals, regional hospitals like the one I was at up at Port Macquarie just the other day, Gosford Hospital yesterday, Lismore Base Hospital the day before- they were all saying to me that they want to see action. They want to see the current system changed, and they want to see greater Australian Government investment in the system, once it's changed.
So, my job is to act in the national interest. We will do that. If the Premiers come with us cooperatively, that's great. I'd prefer to do it that way, because it's easier to get things done that way. But I've been clear, since prior to the last election, if we can't get there cooperatively I'd have to seek a further mandate from the Australian people. I've been absolutely upfront about that since I've been elected.
HOST: Then, when might an election be?
PM: Well, that's a good question to throw on Sydney ABC Radio at 8:38 in the morning. Can I just say- I'll let you in on a scoop- it'll be sometime before April next year, that's when our term expires. Look, I believe the path ahead for health and hospital reform is to try and get it right with the Premiers. I've had a lot of discussions with them. Mr Brumby, Premier Keneally, I had a good discussion with her the other night in the Central Coast. Premier Bligh I met in Brisbane only a few days ago. Premier Rann I've been talking to as well. And Premier Barnett, from Western Australia, before he flew to the United States a week or so ago.
But we're actually maintaining a high level of (inaudible) contact, political contact, trying to work this through. But I'm just being very clear about the fact that, frankly, to take for example Premier Brumby's solution, which is to say the current system's fine, just send me another blank cheque to the state health system, is not the right way to go. I don't believe the Australian people would wear that. They want the current system fixed. They want then, after we deal with the problems of duplication, waste and overlap, the Australian Government then to become the dominant funders of the system. Because, you know something, at the end of the day, state and territory budgets cannot cope with the demands of the health and hospital system for the long term future, anyway.
HOST: My guest this morning is the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. Mr Rudd, the- another issue which is looming large in people's imagination at this stage, anyway, is the idea of population growth in Australia. Now Sydney, Australia's largest city, is obviously the honey pot for enterprise and population growth. We absorb a lot of people already. You've initiated this debate. How do you think people should envisage life in a country with projected growth of, let's say, the 35 million that Treasury expects by 2050?
PM: Well let's put it all into its context. Firstly, what the Intergenerational Report produced by the Treasury said is that based on historical policy settings about natural growth and about the historical average of immigration growth, that by mid-century the country's population would increase to about 35 million. That also assumes that population growth would be slower over the next 40 years than it has been for the last 40 years. So let's just put that into its factual context.
The second point is, what do you do, therefore, in terms of making sure that you've got sustainable population levels for Australia in the future. That's why we've appointed Tony Burke as Australia's first ever Minister for Population. He's been sworn in.
[LINE DROPS OUT]
HOST: But first, we've got the Prime Minister back. Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining me again.
PM: Sorry about that Deborah. Probably my fault. But we could blame ABC funding I spose.
HOST: Well we can do something about that right now if you'd like.
PM: Sure Deborah.
HOST: But listen, after hearing the promo that we played in the meantime about Kerry O'Brien's interview with Barack Obama, you've missed an opportunity, obviously, to be at that meeting in Washington for the reasons that you've set out. But it was put to me yesterday that while Washington can completely understand why you've made that decision, you might look back in years to come on your Prime Ministerial scrapbook and say 'I wish I'd been at that meeting of international leaders, this was a meeting that might change the world'.
PM: Well look- I think the challenge here Deborah is-
[LINE DROPS OUT]
HOST: Thanks again Prime Minister.
PM: Third time lucky, and I'm sure that one was my fault. But you were talking about the United States nuclear summit. Let me just make a couple of quick points. You were- by the way, before the line dropped out, I was talking about population policy for Sydney. Look, the key thing is to develop Australia's first ever sustainable population policy. That's why we've appointed Tony Burke, who's also a Cabinet Minister here, from Sydney. Secondly, to look at future population levels, and how you would actually adjust Australia's infrastructure and service planning to meet those levels, and across different regions.
On the question of America, can I say the nuclear summit's important. But Australia's credentials on the question of nuclear disarmament are well established. And this is an area where we're going to have to do a lot of work in the future as well.
HOST: The- I think the other burning question as well is also about sustainability, just to return to that very important matter. The management of food producing land on the outskirts of Sydney, and the problems of urban sprawl are very real, and of great concern to many people who live in Sydney. Are you addressing this?
PM: Well it's not for an accident that I've appointed the Minister for Agriculture, also, as the Minister for Population, Tony Burke, who also is a Member responsible for a seat in Parliament which comes from the Sydney metro area. Here is a senior Cabinet Minister who has a wide view about sustainability and agriculture more broadly, and fisheries and forestry, as well as understanding the growth constraints of Sydney and large cities across Australia.
This is an Australian first, having an Australian Minister for Population, developing our first ever population strategy which looks at different possible population levels in the future, and how you can meet that with proper planning for infrastructure provision, for transport provision, dealing with urban congestion. At the same time, dealing also with the needs of food, of water, and the other parts which make up sustainable population policy.
HOST: Another part of that picture is energy. Now, Australia has great reserves of energy, great reserves of coal. But delivering that to people in a way that is efficient and able to be actually afforded is becoming a matter of grave concern. The absence of Government leadership since Copenhagen on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme has left lots of people trying to guess at investment planning and budgeting decisions now. Why have you gone so quiet on this issue?
PM: Let me be absolutely very clear about it. The Government's policy in terms of emissions trading is absolutely clear. Secondly, what we did with the Copenhagen conference was throw everything at obtaining a comprehensive global agreement. We didn't get everything that we, or many other nations wanted, including President Obama in the United States. But can I say, what we did was produce a Copenhagen Accord to which now, I'm advised, a very large proportion of the participating economies have now signed up to.
And one of the things they've signed up to is accepting a global target, that we cannot have global temperature increases exceed two degrees centigrade. That's one of the things that emerged through the actions of Australia and other countries at Copenhagen at the end of last year. The other thing is this, though. You talk about political leadership. What happened at the end of last year was that there was effectively a political coup within the Liberal party when Mr Turnbull said that he'd negotiated an arrangement to pass the Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the Parliament. They changed their leader by one vote, having previously voted to support the Government's scheme. And we now have a Liberal party led by Mr Abbott, who says, quote, that "climate change is absolute crap", unquote.
Now, you talk about the question of political leadership on this. I'm constrained by a political Opposition now who have control of the Senate, who have stated they think climate change is crap. Our position's clear. I think some of these questions should be directed to Mr Abbott.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for joining me this morning, and for persisting with those dropped lines.
PM: Yeah, my apologies for that, I'm sure it's because we're on the move. Thanks for having me on the program Deborah. 


PM: Well it's great to be back in this great community around Ryde, and good to be here with Maxine McKew, and with our local representatives of the medical community from Ryde Hospital, and also from Royal North Shore. And thank you, Jason, for showing us around this morning. This is an important part of the hospital network of New South Wales, an important part therefore, of the hospital network of Australia.
What the Australian Government is committed to is building a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally. Because what we need is more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. And I've seen a lot of evidence of that today, here at this important hospital. Of course, a core part of that is to make sure that our medical workforce is properly planned, and that we have enough training places for that workforce as well. And that's why we want to see an additional number of training places across the country.
Therefore, what we'll be doing is providing up to $13.6 million to support additional clinical training places for university students in a range of services from metropolitan rehab services, to rural and remote health services. These will provide some 1744 additional clinical training placements, in Broken Hill and Newcastle and Shoalhaven, in Ryde, where we are here, and in Western Sydney.
This of course is on top of what we are doing in terms of the investment in additional GP training places and medical training places with some more than 6000 of those to be funded for the upcoming decade. And those are additional places. What does it mean for this community at Ryde? An additional 36 training places across the various disciplines, from medicine, to nursing, through to the allied health professionals. I met many of those allied health professional representatives here today.
This is an important step in terms of local health workforce needs. Unless we get the health workforce right for the future, with enough doctors, enough nurses, enough allied health professionals, we won't actually fix the fundamentals of the system for the long term. Of course, the other thing we need to do is to make sure we've got a National Health and Hospital Network, which is properly reformed. No more cost-shift, blame-shift, no more waste, duplication and overlap between the Australian Government and State Governments, but also investing in the future growth needs of the system as well. And that's why this is such an important building block for long-term delivery of health and hospital services for all Australians.
I've been really impressed by the health professionals I've met here at the hospital this morning. A large medical faculty here, nursing staff, I was told of about 260. The allied health professionals are large in number. I see those who are working with diabetes over here, those who are also working with general physiotherapy services for some aged Australians. But also, a great team of people.
What I see right across Australia is a dedicated team of professionals doing their absolute best within the constraints they've currently got. What we want to do as an Australian Government is enable them to do more in the future. Better planning for their workforce. More hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. That's what the National Health and Hospitals Network is all about. Having said that, unless you want to add Maxine- I might just take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said (inaudible) you've campaigned on (inaudible) federalism. When you spoke to the staff here you said there's going to be a massive fight on Monday. What went wrong in all of this?
PM: Well, can I say that there was always going to be a disagreement between various people in various parts of Australia, representing their own interests. And can I also point to the fact that in the last two years, we have had many meetings with the Council of Australian Governments, and achieved widespread agreement on reforms to our education system, the existing Australian Healthcare Agreement- which increases the Australian Government's investment in the public hospital system by some 50 per cent - and on top of that also, the reforms that we've had in closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
All that has been agreed. But you know, sometimes disagreements arise. And you've just got to deal with them. And so far, we of course, we have Premier Brumby expressing a different view. Well, that's his right, but the Australian Government's determined to get on with the business of health and hospital reform.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about the idea of pool funding? The states seem to have their hearts set on it. What's wrong with that idea?
PM: Can I say that what the Australian Government wants to deliver is better health and better hospital services for all Australians, and we will not accept a recipe for inaction by either Premier Brumby, or for that matter Mr Abbott. If we don't reach an agreement on Monday that achieves better health and better hospitals for all Australians - as I have said consistently, then the Australian people will have their say. Our position is very clear. It's outlined in the national health and hospitals reform document I released six weeks ago at the National Press Club. That explains why we have gone for the model that we've put forward.
Two or three days ago I released volume two of that, which puts together all the growth we plan for the system. That's the Australian Government's position -
JOURNALIST: So pool funding- not on the table?
PM: That's the Australian Government's position, and I would welcome the states and territories to continue to engage constructively on that, because I think people across Australia have had an absolute gutful of squabbles about the future of the health system. They just want our political leaders to get on with the business of reform; fix up the waste and fund the future, so that these good health professionals can get on with their job.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, would you accept an in-principle agreement with the premiers on Monday, with the details to be ironed out on a later date?
PM: I think the Australian people are fed up with waiting for reform for the health and hospital system. We are proposing a formal intergovernmental agreement with the states and territories on the future of the health and hospital system. That is the Australian Government's position. And the Australian Government's position on that will not change. You see, Mr Brumby and Mr Abbott seem to have a whole list of excuses for delay, and accepting the current system as it is. I believe the Australian people want us to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: It's clearly- you're not the best of friends with John Brumby. Is there a personality clash in the middle of all this as well?
PM: Mr Brumby will always argue the interests, as he sees them, of his Government. We've been very clear about what we see the national interest as being, and what we believe to be a better funding deal for the good people of Victoria as well, for better hospital services, more hospital beds, and can I say, also, for more doctors and more nurses in Victoria as well. This is about the national interest, but it's also about making sure that hospitals across the country have the resources they need to do the job.
In a nutshell, it seems to boil down to Mr Brumby and Mr Abbott saying the current system is good enough. We're saying the current system needs to be fundamentally changed, and the Australian Government needs to fund the future growth of the system. That's, in a nutshell, what we're on about.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that you're setting a precedent, that you'll do the same thing on the GST with roads, with education? Can you give them a guarantee you won't-
PM: Can I say that we've been very clear-cut about what we are proposing on health and hospitals from prior to the last election, which is there would be no blank cheque, no sort of free ride as far as this is concerned, that it would result in adjustment of the financial relationship between the Commonwealth and the states. We've been plain about that from the very beginning.
Let us not suggest that there is anything new in that. And as far as that's concerned, our plans are absolutely clear cut on health and hospitals. We've been clear about it. The documents are out there. And I'll leave it for the others to comment on it, to criticise it, to be negative about it. We want to get on with the business of negotiating an outcome for working Australians. I think we need to be very mindful of what I'd describe as just one fear campaign after another about the changes that we propose, when in fact we're listening hard to working families, pensioners, carers everywhere who want the current system changed, and the Australian Government to become the dominant funder of it in the future.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott's pollie pedal wraps up today. Mr Rudd, should he pedal up some policy, as Richard Marles said this morning?
PM: Can I say that look, I think Mr Abbott has been in some pretty fierce weather conditions and a few steep hills. Good on him for having made it through. If it was me, probably got to day two, I would've had to have put on the training wheels, and then fall off. But good on him.
JOURNALIST: Is the funding- sorry, just one more question- is the funding you've announced today contingent on an agreement being reached on Monday, or will that come no matter what?
PM: What I've said today is consistent with an earlier announcement I've made on additional training places nationally for medical training places nationally, for allied health professional training places. These training places that I've referred to here are quite desperately needed locally. We'll get on with that business. But you know something? To make this work, to make it really work, we can't just have a bandaid here and a bandaid there. This is a system which requires some fundamental surgery.
And I go back to the core of this debate. On the one hand, you have - on the one hand you have, it seems, Mr Brumby and Mr Abbott saying that the current system is fine, and Mr Brumby's saying, just give us another blank cheque, to the State Governments of Australia. And we are saying, no, it needs fundamental reform to get rid of waste, and then the Australian Government funding the future growth of the system. That's the difference in this debate.
And having said all that folks, I think I've got to zip. I've got to be somewhere else. Thanks very much. 


STANLEY: Good morning to you, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning. Thanks for having me on the program.
ALOISI: Prime Minister, is there a possibility that John Brumby could put a kybosh on your plan?
PM: Well, Premier Brumby has expressed his views about the Victorian health system. I think at various stages he's said that they have the best health system in the country. I'm not sure that's entirely true - if you look at the figures contained in the Australian hospitals report, for example.
But, you know something? The key thing is that working families, pensioners, carers, right across Australia are crying out for reform. They know the current system's not working. They want fundamental change. We intend to deliver that, and we intend to deliver growth in the system as well - more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses as well, but what Premier Brumby is saying is 'just give us another blank cheque to the states and we'll see you in the morning.'
Well, frankly, that's the system that's operated for a long time. It hasn't worked. Our approach is quite different, which is the current system's not working. We need to fix it to get rid of duplication, waste, overlap and then put money in to grow the system - more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses.
ALOISI: He's standing firm, though. He says he's not going to budge. He is not going to support this plan. I mean, will that-
PM: -How many premiers conferences have you watched over the years?
ALOISI: Yeah, well, exactly - it'll be an interesting one this week.
PM: Look, I won't predict the outcome for next Monday, but my job as Prime Minister is to put forward a clear plan, which we call a National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funders of the public hospital system of Australia to deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. That's our plan.
Mr Brumby and some others perhaps are saying 'actually, the current system's working OK, just give the states another cheque without any reform'. We can't accept that, because it's not the right way to get rid of the waste in the system now through duplication and overlap, and not the right way to properly invest the money we need for more health services as well.
STANLEY: He's saying an absolute 'no', it seems, to your plan - publically, anyway. You've always talked about cooperative federalism. How much flexibility have you got? Is that document you've given the premiers your final offer, or have you got some wriggle room there?
PM: Well, what we've done six weeks ago at the National Press Club is put forward our plan, which is the funding, the structure, the system that we believe will work for the future: a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally and run locally.
In the last six weeks we've also put out how we would grow the funding in the system. That is, the extra funding for 6,500 doctors across the country; the extra funding for bringing about changes in accident and emergency; extra funding for dealing with challenges in elective surgery; extra funding for dealing with cancer; extra funding for dealing with diabetes - these are all consolidated in the final document we put to the states two days ago. They'll work their way through that. I'm sure there'll be a whole lot of argy-bargy in the room, but you know, we think we've got our basic position about right on this and I would appeal to all of them, all of the premiers and chief ministers, if we want better health and better hospital services for Australians, to get on board with this.
We're still working through bits and pieces of this. They're on the phone - I spoke with Premier Kristina Keneally the other night and I was speaking with others as well. We'll work through it systematically, but I'm absolutely determined that we must deliver this for Australia's future.
ALOISI: If you don't get agreement at the meeting on Monday, will you go to a referendum or do you have a timeframe? Will you allow it to lag or do you have a specific time in your mind, 'that's it, that's the deadline, the referendum will be on unless you agree to this'?
PM: I couldn't have been clearer about this, both prior to the last election and since. That is, I want to cooperatively reach a reform plan with the states and territories on the future of the health and hospital system. Plan's out six weeks ago, six weeks of negotiations, here's how we'll grow the system, and the growth that we'll take onto our shoulders, that's the Commonwealth as opposed to the states: $15 billion worth of additional expenditure from the Commonwealth over the next decade, taking that burden off the states, who need to dedicate more of their funds to things like transport infrastructure and other key needs in their various states.
But I've always said if we can't get there we'd have to seek a further mandate from the people.
ALOISI: But is there a deadline on that?
PM: Well, I've said that we would seek to do so, I said this prior to the last election, I said we'd do so by the next election. My position hasn't changed on that. It's been the same for the last two, two and half years, and that's why I would prefer to get there cooperatively, but let me be very clear - if we can't get there cooperatively, then we need to seek a further mandate from the people.
We can't just defer this to the never-never. People are crying out for reform now. In the last few days I've been in places like Gosford, like Wyong, like Port Macquarie, like Lismore. Right down the coast people are saying to me in the streets the time for change is now. Our health and hospital system's not working properly. It needs some fundamental surgery and it needs further funding for growth - hospital beds, doctors and nurses.
STANLEY: You understand history, though. If you've got John Brumby campaigning against a referendum in Victoria, if you've got the Opposition perhaps at best ambivalent, maybe actively opposing it in the context of an election campaign, how could you possibly get it up when so few referendums on often motherhood issues don't get up?
PM: This is ultimately a decision for the Australian people. I said prior to the last election 'here is my way of approaching the deep crisis in our health and hospital system. This is the way I'm going to do it - devise a cooperative plan on the basis of 18 months of work by a hospital reform commission headed by Christine Bennett, formerly of Westmead here in Sydney. They did their work. We then road tested this with six months of consultations with more than 100 hospitals across the country. I did about 25 of them myself, sitting down for three hours at a stretch with doctors and nurses road testing the recommendations.
But, you know something? It's ultimately for the Australian people to decide if we can't do this cooperatively. We've put out best foot forward. We've come up with a very thorough, well-costed, well planned document backed by so many people across the country, and people out there in regional Australia in particular know the need for change, but ultimately it's a matter for the people.
STANLEY: But what to do you say to those who say that this is really a process about getting a referendum that you can't win so you can way 'well, I've tried, so I've fulfilled my election promise and I'll move on to something else'?
PM: You know something? I am so deeply passionate about the need to fix this system. If you've been through as many hospitals as I have been through in the last year or so and spoken to as many patients as I have spoken to, and spoken to as many hard-working doctors and nurses who are keeping the current system functioning but still with a real problem in terms of the resources they've got, we've got to throw everything at it. That's what I'm doing.
But, you know something? You can't force people to agree. Australia's not that sort of country. What you can do is say 'here's the best way forward. This is what the people want. Here's a plan for the future for more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. Are you going to come with us cooperatively or not?' Then, if they don't, then you consult the people.
That is what's humanly possible, but that is the approach that we've put from the beginning.
ALOISI: On another issue, can I draw your attention to the front page of the paper today, which has probably the most-
PM: -Which paper would that be?
ALOISI: It would be the Telegraph. Probably not the most flattering photo, but are you a tough boss? Are you too hard to work for, as what the headline says? Is that the case?
PM: I reckon, one of my staff was saying this to me this morning, that in politics, as probably goes for whichever side of politics you're on, a staff working year is probably like a dog year. That is, it's probably worth about seven years in normal life, so folks stay with me for three or four years, that's probably 28 or 30 years or more in actual time.
Looks, it's a tough environment. People get the opportunity to travel to Canberra, to live there, to stay there-
ALOISI: -Be very careful. I come from Canberra.
PM: -from Sydney and Melbourne, and some of them are not entirely attracted by the Canberra lifestyle. That's a matter for them, of course, but they are separated from family, they go to Canberra, and sometimes it actually has an impact on their lives, but it's a tough job. People come in and out of political offices. You're experienced journalists, you know what happens - people come, they stay for a period, they go. My senior staff have been with me for a long time, but we also exchange staff with other offices.
STANLEY: When was the last person that left your staff? Do you remember?
PM: Oh, probably, well, actually, there was a fellow working for me in one of the media areas who, I hate to reveal this, you know, live on national radio - he went to work for the Treasurer's office, so that was actually walking around the corner, and can I also reveal to you that someone from the Treasurer's office came to work in my office some time ago. I presume they are buried in those statistics.
STANLEY: Well, I'm reading Steve Lewis. He says some nice things about you, but then says you're an uncompromising boss, rarely praise staff, and around Canberra there are all sorts of ex-Rudd staffers prepared to recount tales of woe.
PM: Well, you know something, the business of working in politics and working in national political life is a tough, tough business. People expect you to work hard. They expect you to try and do your absolute best for the country.
STANLEY: But are you tough on them? Do you turn up in foul moods at meetings with bureaucrats?
PM: I think the key thing is always to be very clear about what the country expects of you. For example, working the reform plan on health and hospitals - I make no apology whatsoever for making sure that we get that plan done, delivered, out and considered by the Australian people six weeks ago. Did we have to burn the midnight oil for weeks and months in order to do that? Yes. Do you think your listeners this morning are saying 'oh, rats, those public servants and advisers had to work until 10 o'clock at night'? No, actually they want to have their hospitals fixed. They want to have their emergency departments fixed. They want to have their elective surgery done on time.
ALOISI: I think the other criticism has been that they burn the midnight oil all the time.
PM: Well, as I said, it's tough life, being in national political life. As you know, also, in jobs in journalism you have turnover as well because you work really odd shifts as well.
STANLEY: So, you're not Jekyll and Hyde? We're not talking to-
ALOISI: -We're not talking to, which one is it? Jekyll?
PM: Well, I think it'd be a good question to ask your average, for example, News Limited bureau chief in Canberra what the turnover is in your average news bureau in Canberra. It's a tough life. People often have to relocate, there are crazy hours, it's very intense, people on the phone wanting x, y and z done within a short period of time, but I go back to the simple fact - we were elected by the Australian people to do a job. One of them, right now, is very big, on health and hospitals. That means burning the midnight oil, getting it done and sell it as hard as you can and that's the approach we take as a Government.
ALOISI: Alright, Prime Minister. Thanks for coming in this morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on your program.


The Rudd Government and NSW Government will invest $14.1 million to enhance cancer services at the Illawarra Cancer Care Centre at Wollongong.
The Rudd Government will provide $12.1 million and the NSW Government will provide a further $2 million to increase the provision of radiotherapy services at the Illawarra Regional Cancer Centre.
Upgrades will include: 
- additional infrastructure for outpatient clinics and day oncology;
- enhanced facilities for haematology and therapies;
- one additional linear accelerator;
- one additional radiotherapy bunker; 
- six additional chemotherapy chairs/beds; and
- medical diagnostic equipment.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts. The $14.1 million investment in Wollongong will work towards improving services and care for the more than 32,000 NSW residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
Once fully operational, these enhanced facilities will allow for an estimated additional 414 radiotherapy patients to access treatment each year and for an estimated additional 3,000 chemotherapy treatments a year.
The Illawarra Regional Cancer Centre forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish regional cancer centres so that Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
This initiative builds on the Rudd Government's investment of almost $403,000 in the Wollongong Hospital to reduce elective surgery waiting lists.
Since coming into office, the Rudd Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Today's announcement also shows the benefit of the Federal Government stepping up to the plate and providing funding for health services across Australia.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Rudd Government would provide 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Rudd Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities. 


PM: It's great to be back here at the Canterbury Hospital with my friend and Ministerial colleague Warren Snowdon. I used to work here as a 17-year-old, and I began my working career as a wardsman here at this hospital, and so in those days I remember very much what it was like to mop floors and to wheel patients around on trolleys and to do all the other sorts of things that wardsmen did in those days, including rapidly wheel a defibrillator from one end of the hospital to the other. Times, thankfully, have changed since then. There have been many improvements in the health and hospital system since the mid-1970s, but you know something? Coming from a family of nurses myself - my mum was a nurse, my brother was a nurse, my sister is a nurse, my sister-in-law is a nurse - and speaking to the nursing professionals here today, they are all saying loud and clear to me that some fundamental change has to happen in the system, fundamental change.
Over the last nine months or so I have visited 30 or 40 hospitals around the country. I've conducted consultations with about 21 of them, sitting down for hours on end with doctors and nurses and health professionals, hearing their ideas for the future of the health and hospital system, and that's what brings me back to Canterbury today - again, to talk to patients, doctors and nurses about what they need for the future.
What people across Australia say is this: our doctors, our nurses, our allied health professionals, are doing a fantastic job. It's just that there aren't enough of them. What they're saying is that our doctors and nurses and allied health professionals are going over and beyond the call of duty, often working in conditions where they don't have enough equipment to do their job, enough beds in hospitals to their job properly.
That's why the system needs fundamental change, and that is why the Australian Government is putting for the new National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally, with the Australian Government, for the first time, being the dominant funders of the public hospital system of Australia, all to deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses.
You know something? The blank-cheque theory of health policy has failed. The time for real, practical reform of the health and hospital system has come.
Blank cheques given out to states don't solve the problem. What deals with the problem is fundamental reform to get rid of duplication, overlap and waste - and then to grow the system. That's our approach.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Any last words for the New South Wales Premier and Cabinet this morning?
PM: Well, they'll go through their own processes. The Australian Government has been very clear about its plan. We are providing a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government taking from the shoulders of state governments the burden of the dominant growth in the system for the long-term future. It's a huge change, so that if you are a state government anywhere in Australia, that means that you should have more resources to deal with the challenges of transport infrastructure, congestion, the schools and the other responsibilities of state governments.
It's not just a reform to the health system - it's a broader reform to the future of the federation.
JOURNALIST: Does the New South Wales support, given how the other states are lining up at the moment, are they the swing state?
PM: Well, I've had many good discussions with Premier Keneally. I'm sure she and her cabinet will make their best-informed decision. Our plan is clear. We've put forward a comprehensive plan for the future. As I said, the days of writing out blank cheques for state governments for health and hospitals, I think, has passed. The Australian people want two things - fix the system to get rid of duplication, overlap and waste, and then fund the system for long-term needs; for hospital beds, doctors and nurses. That's our approach.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is in-principle support from the states enough next week?
PM: We are looking for an intergovernmental agreement. I've been very clear about that. Let's not shilly-shally around this. No ifs, no buts, no maybes - we want an intergovernmental agreement for a new National Health and Hospitals Network. I think the Australian people have grown a bit tired of more and more excuses for delay. They want their elected political leaders to get on with the business of fundamental health and hospital reform. That's our plan. We spent 18 months developing it, 6 months road testing it with hospitals across the country. We released it six weeks ago. We've announced how we would grow the system. It's all there in black and white.
The time for delay and the excuses for delay, I believe, has passed. We must get on with the job of delivering better health and better hospital services for the people of Australia.
JOURNALIST: Is there a political win for the states if it doesn't get up? They say they stood up to you, held firm to their convictions, whilst you can say 'I did all I can. They rejected my proposal and what you've got is what you're government has given you.'
PM: We've been absolutely consistent from day one. We've said we'll develop a new plan to ensure that we have better health and hospital services for all Australians. We said how we'd do it - by establishing an independent reform commission. It worked for a year and a half.
We said we'd then develop a plan in consultation with the hospital system ourselves. We've done that.
Our plan is out there in black and white, our new National Health and Hospitals Network. I would appeal to each of the premiers and chief ministers to put the national interest first, and to put the people of Australia first, in delivering better health and better hospital services for their people.
You know, it seems that Mr Abbott and Mr Brumby believe in this blank cheque theory of health policy whereby a blank cheque to the states fixes the problem without reforming the system to get rid of the waste. Well, you know something? I don't think that's acceptable, and I just don't think it's what we'll be able to deliver. I don't think that sort of approach delivers the sort of reforms that the Australian people are looking for.
You see, next Monday at COAG in Canberra we don't want just to see a blank cheque for the states. We want to see a reform plan for the state health and hospital system and a plan for funding them for the long term. That's what it's all about.
JOURNALIST: There's a suggestion today that in New South Wales that your plan may force some specialists who work both in private and public hospitals to scale back their public work and focus more on private care. Is that going to be the case, and if it is, what's your response to that?
PM: You know, between the time that we released this National Health and Hospital Network plan six weeks ago, we have had claim and counterclaim, we have had scare and fear campaign number one, number two, number three, anything you'd care to think of, and it seems that there's a whole sort of industry out there which wants to delay reform, find an excuse for not acting, can I just say we don't accept that as an approach.
The time for action is now. We have a plan for action which is clear cut, and I couldn't have been more clear cut with the premiers about the need to do two things - fix the system to get rid of duplication, waste and overlap and then have the Australian Government fund the future growth of the system to deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses.
Next Monday in Canberra we don't want simply a plan for another blank cheque for the states. We want a plan for the reform of the system and future funding growth for the system.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, John Brumby, all his public comments have been critical of the plan. Do you have any reason to believe at all that he will change his mind by Monday, and if he will come on board?
PM: Well, that's a matter, of course, for Mr Brumby. I would urge Mr Brumby and the other premiers to be positive in embracing this once-in-a-generation opportunity to fundamentally reform the health and hospital system.
Mr Brumby and Mr Abbott seem to be saying that the present system is just fine - just hand over another blank cheque to the states.
That is not our approach. We say for the future you need to reform the system to get rid of waste and then fund the future growth in the system for more hospital beds, doctors and nurses. It's clear cut.
How Mr Brumby plays this is a matter for him, as it is for the other premiers. We could not be clearer about our plan for the future. It's there in black and white, and we've been talking about it up and down the country - hospitals, town meetings, conferences like this in most of the regional centres of Australia. Warren here has been down the centre of Australia in the last week. We've had other ministers of the government across the west and in South Australia and we've had the Federal Health Minister in Victoria, and I've been down the coast of Queensland, down the coast of New South Wales - the overwhelming message right across country Australia, regional Australia, rural Australia and the big city hospitals is get on with the business of reforming the system now so that we fund our future growth properly.
JOURNALIST: New South Wales, it seems to be dependent, it might be a yes for an extra $500 million for New South Wales. Will it boil down to extra dollars here, there, to get them on board?
PM: I've said very clearly - we've put forward a comprehensive plan for the future of the health and hospital system and there will be no blank cheques to states and territories on a same old system as the past. You just can't do that, and having said that, folks-
JOURNALIST: -Oh, just quickly, your son announced today his engagement. That's something you'd be very proud of, no doubt?
PM: Well, he's a born romantic. Takes after his father - no, just joking. He's a really excited young man, and we, Therese and I, are absolutely delighted for he and for Zara, his fiancée. They haven't set any wedding dates yet that I'm aware of, but Therese is already making plans.
JOURNALIST: Did he best your proposal to Therese?
PM: Can I say, back in the early '80s things were a bit different, so we were at a quiet restaurant somewhere in Canberra. He proposed to his fiancée, Zara, on the Charles Bridge in the middle of Prague with a big rock - at dawn, I'm told. That's what I call a serious romantic. Unfortunately I'm not quite like that.
Ok, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) what were you talking about (inaudible)
PM: Just about, first of all, where she came from in China and that she'd been in Australia since '97, loves the country and was praising the local hospital services that she'd received here and the fact that people have been very kind to her. So, she's an old lady and didn't speak much English, so, I hope everyone understood what I was doing.



PM: Can I just say how delighted I am to be back here in Wollongong, and to be back again- I was here last year at the time of the economic crisis, and dealing on the challenge of local jobs. And here we're dealing with a challenge concerning the future of our health and hospital system. And a core element of that is getting our cancer services right for people who live in our major regional centres, right around Australia. And I can't think of, frankly, a more major regional centre than here in Wollongong, and here in the Illawarra.
And that's why, together with the Government of New South Wales, we're investing $14.1 million in enhancing cancer services here at the Illawarra Cancer Centre at Wollongong Hospital. What this will purchase- it will include upgrades which include additional infrastructure for outpatient clinics and day oncology, enhanced facilities for haematology and therapies, one additional linear accelerator, one additional radiation bunker, six additional chemotherapy chairs and beds, and medical diagnostic equipment as well.
The bottom line is this - there is a stunning figure in my mind which will not go away. And that is, if you are diagnosed with certain categories of cancer, and if you are treated in rural and regional areas, then the statistics tell us that you are three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than most people who live in metropolitan Australia, that is, the capital cities. Now, for Australia, that's not good enough. We actually have to lift the game, right across the country. And that means making sure we've got this sort of state of the art equipment around the country, in as many regional centres as we can.
That's why the Australian Government is now investing more than half a billion dollars in 22 regional centres right across Australia, so that when people get that piece of bad news, that they've been diagnosed with cancer, they don't also have to wrestle, at the same time, with having to travel hundreds, and sometimes thousands of kilometres to get decent treatment. This is about delivering proper cancer services to regional Australia. Wollongong's part of that. And I'd commend all of our local Members here, state and federal, for the strong advocacy they've put in behind the needs of cancer services for the people of the Illawarra. And I'd also acknowledge the contribution which Steve has also made as our local candidate, as well.
TEBBUTT: Thank you. This is great news for the Illawarra. This will allow us to provide more treatments for more people locally here in the Illawarra. We know that rates of diagnosis of cancer are increasing. We're certainly doing better in treatment outcomes, we've seen a reduction in the number of people who die from cancer. But we also know that if people can get the treatment they need locally, close to where they live, close to where their families and friends are, then their health outcomes will be better, and so will their quality of life.
So this is really important for the Illawarra. We're going from two linear accelerators to three linear accelerators- that means about an extra 414 patients will be treated each year. Extra chemotherapy services, and an opportunity to improve the quality of life of people in the Illawarra who need cancer services. So a great example of the Federal and State Governments working in partnership. We welcome the lion's share of the funding coming from the Federal Government, $2 million being put in by the State Government, and great news for the Illawarra.
PM: Okay folks, and before I zip to the airport- if you have any questions, I'll take them, then I will head off.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Ms Keneally said that she could not support the Commonwealth's take-over in its current form, with conditional support for 90 per cent - does that mean this proposal is now dead?
PM: Well let me be very clear about the Australian Government's position on health and hospitals reform. Our policy is outlined in this document, which is the new Health and Hospitals Network for Australia. Let me also be clear about its fundamentals. One, the Australian Government being the majority funder of the public hospital system in the future. Two, the Australian Government taking up 60 per cent of that responsibility. And three, only on that basis will the Australian Government provide the growth in the funding for the hospital system in the future. That's our position. It's pretty clear. And it's a matter for, of course, the Premiers and the Chief Ministers to reach their conclusions on that.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I ask you about the Young Liberal's comments yesterday- Nick Sowden- about Obama being a monkey. Your reaction to that?
PM: I think - I just think all Australians are sick and tired of various members of the Liberal arty casting slurs on President Obama. Let's leave it at that. People are sick and tired of it.
JOURNALIST: Will there be an announcement forthcoming for Shoalhaven, they've desperately wanted a linear accelerator down there.
PM: Well, we believe that the measures that we've announced here will also extend the reach of cancer-related services to the wider region. We think that this is important for people in the wider region, including the Shoalhaven. But I'd also say this - the job of providing further cancer treatment services for people does not end here, does not end with this announcement. We've actually got to work together in the future as well. Australians everywhere deserve proper access to the best quality cancer treatment services that we can provide.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why has there been so little detail available to the Premiers on your hospital reform package? And how do you expect them to make a decision?
PM: I'm really glad you asked that question- that is a document of about 74 pages. That's the new National Health and Hospitals Network. This document here is something in the order of about 100 pages. That outlines, in detail, the future funding growth of the system that we, the Australian Government, have put forward. You know something? I think the Australian people are a bit fed up with various politicians finding excuses for delay when working people, pensioners and carers right across the country are crying out for reform.
The last thing I'd say on it is this - that, you know something, on Monday, COAG has to do more than simply come up with a plan for money. It has to come up with a plan for reform, because the blank cheque theory of health and hospitals doesn't work. We've got to fix the system, and then fund the system for the future - more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. And folks, having said that, I've got to zip. 



KOCH: The PM is with us now. Congratulations.
PM: That's 'cos Therese tweeted first.
KOCH: She broke the embargo?
PM: She broke the embargo. So, she's in London on work at the moment.
KOCH: Give us the details?
PM: Well, Nick proposed to his long-standing girlfriend, Zara- he's a romantic old dog, he bought a huge rock for her here in Sydney some time ago. Popped the question while they were overseas together. So they are over the moon. And Therese is even more over the moon. I am too.
KOCH: There he is, doing Kokoda with us-
PM: He's obviously not thinking about that decision there.
KOCH: Is he a romantic like you? Where did you propose to Therese?
PM: I was at a restaurant somewhere in Canberra. Lakeside Hotel, there you go. There you go. He actually chose the Charles Bridge in Prague. So he's romantic.
KOCH: Oh okay. He's a lot more romantic than you. Alright, congratulations. Let's get down to business. Now, the papers are reporting today that you're preparing to give us new incentives to save, tax breaks if we park our money in banks for periods of at least a couple of years. Are they right?
PM: Well, you know something Kochie? We've had this thing called the Henry review on taxation. We said we're going to release it all before the budget. The budget's due next month. We'll do that, and we'll also be releasing our response to it as well. But I'm not going to go into any element of what's in the recommendations, our response to it.
KOCH: Have you got a day you're going to release it?
PM: Not yet. But before the budget. The budget's due, what, the second week of May? So-
KOCH: It is weird, though, that money in savings accounts gets treated more harshly tax-wise than capital gains, isn't it?
PM: I think we've got an interest generally in encouraging savings in the nation. I'm not trying to give an indication as to which way we're going on tax. We're still working that through as a budget committee of the Cabinet. But encouraging savings is important, because it's good for the country, good for the pool of savings, but good for people looking after their own future as well.
KOCH: Okay, let's get down to questions. Sara Nathan in Sydney, you have the Prime Minister's ear. What would you like to ask?
VIEWER: Mr Rudd, I'm a Tamil who fled Sri Lanka due to the Sri Lankan Government's systemic killing of Tamil civilians. United Nations figures indicate there's more than 88,000 Tamils civilians still kept in internment camps, even though the war finished eleven months ago.
UNHCR has not changed its guidelines on Sri Lanka since the end of the war. Given our own Australian Department of Foreign Affairs tells us not to go to Sri Lanka because of violence in that country, under these circumstances, is it a political move, or a humanitarian move, for you to suspend processing of asylum seeker applications from Sri Lanka?
PM: Sara, thank you for your question. Our policy hasn't changed. Our policy is that, when it comes to asylum seekers who are not genuine, they are not accepted, they are sent back home. For those who are genuine and in genuine fear of persecution in their countries of origin, then of course Australia will process people and provide appropriate safe haven.
That's the balance and the policy. But what's happened Kochie and Sara is that we have now changing security circumstances in large parts of Sri Lanka.
They've recently had democratic elections there. Outside of the Jaffna peninsula at the very top of the country, the rest of the country's going okay. We're therefore basing our changing processing arrangement for asylum seekers from that country based on what the reporting is from within the country.
Large parts of it are more secure. Some parts are not. Therefore, it depends where the people come from. The same with Afghanistan. So, the decision we've taken is to suspend all processing now, and we're going to see how the security situation unfolds. If it continues to improve, you'll find more and more of these applications rejected, and more sent back home.
KOCH: Okay- is that fair though, to suspend it? Because, you know, the Afghani situation is still just as volatile as previously, and that northern part of Sri Lanka, and particularly the Tamils in these camps- and the Government there is not letting any observers go and see these, what, 40-80,000 people that they've locked up. Is that fair to suspend it?
PM: It depends where people come from within the island-
KOCH: Okay.
PM: If you look, as I said, the Jaffna peninsula-
KOCH: So if they've still come from the north you'll process them?
PM: You've got to look carefully- the suspension applies right now, okay -
KOCH: Right.
PM: - because the situation is still unfolding, but in other parts of the country, it is stabilising. That's the point. You mentioned Afghanistan. Afghanistan, there are parts of that country which are also more stable than they were before. Therefore, you've got to make a decision which fairly reflects where people come from, not just from the country, but from the parts of the country as well as I said- if people are not genuine asylum seekers, then they'll be rejected and sent back home.
If they are genuine asylum seekers, then consistent with Governments in the past, we have an annual quota I think of about 13,000 across the nation. Same under Mr Howard, same before that as well. And those who seek asylum would be accommodated within that national quota for Australia.
KOCH: Okay. You're going to have an interesting weekend ahead of your meeting next week on health reforms.
PM: That's an understatement.
KOCH: Victoria's digging in. We hear that New South Wales will be seeking an extra $500 million if you want their support. Do you reckon you'll get it?
PM: Oh look, there's three or four days to go between now and Monday. I've spent a lot of time with these Premiers in the last six weeks or so. Some really want a deal. Some want an outcome for health and hospitals, others maybe less so. But you know something, I think each of your viewers wants a real outcome, because the health and hospital system's not working at present properly. So I think, I think that a whole lot of Premiers will want to act in the national interest, but I can't guarantee that all will.
KOCH: Okay. Will you pay for their support? Will you give them the half a billion if they want it?
PM: I said very carefully the other day, Kochie, that the Australian Government had put forward its final position on the question of more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, more support for emergency departments, more support for elective surgery. I think it's a reasonable position. And you know something, some say, some of the states are saying, just give us another blank cheque and it'll all be okay in the morning. I don't think, frankly, your viewers wear that either.
What they want to see is the system fixed so we get rid of the duplication, waste and overlap between the two levels of Government. That's the key part of the reform, and then for the Australian Government to become the dominant funder of the system for the future. That's our position. No blank cheques from us.
KOCH: Okay, we've got to get it right. Let's move up to Maroochydore now. Dave Hooper, what's your question?
VIEWER: Good morning Prime Minister-
PM: G'day Dave, how are you?
VIEWER: And congratulations- I'm fine, thank you- and congratulations on your son's engagement.
PM: Well thank you mate, we're getting ready for the party.
VIEWER: Prime Minister, I'm aware that you're a strong advocate for donor awareness.
PM: Kochie is too, but the way.
VIEWER: Yes, I'm aware of that as well. My question is this- in light of the fact that your advisory committee has ignored or dismissed the option of going to an opt-out country such as Spain, why has this occurred? What chance do we have of increasing our donor rates by becoming an opt-out country?
PM: It's a great question, and I've asked it right around the country. And like you, I have a big interest in this. I'm the recipient of someone having donated their aortic valve, and I received a transplant probably, you know, ten or fifteen years ago, whenever it was. So therefore, I'm deeply interested in this as well. And how, therefore, do you get it right. The problem is, we have one of the lowest donor rates in the world, that is among the developed countries, right now.
So how do we change that, that's the trick here. So what we have tried to do is to look at all the experiences around the world. We've looked at Spain, where they have this opt-out arrangement. Yes, it works to some extent. But all of our experts have looked at this very carefully and said the key thing that makes a difference in Australia would be to have a dedicated team in our major hospitals to make sure it works.
So what have we done in the last year or so? We've appointed about 157 specialist workers, in I think 70 or so hospitals across the country, whose job exclusively it is to deal with the real practical problem if a loved one has died, what do you then do in terms of that critical hour or two following their death to make sure the decision is right. You need social workers, you need counsellors, you need people with surgical skills, you need all of that dedicated within the hospitals. In the past, we haven't had that.
They are now in place, DonateLife is now working across the country. We'll have a big TV campaign starting, I think, next month, from memory.
KOCH: Yep, in May.
PM: And look, I think we just need to give this a go. It's going to take a while to change this around, but we've got to lift that donation rate. How many folk have we got in the country on lists? Is it nearly 2000?
KOCH: On the official list, in reality it's a lot more-
PM: It's nearly 2000 on the official list.
KOCH: And 25% of those will die waiting. Dave, I'm on the advisory council. Just to clear up a couple of things, Spain does not have an opt-out system. It's just presumed everyone will be an organ donor. But families still have to give consent. And the big thing is-
PM: Kochie's corrected me there. I didn't even know that.
KOCH: Yeah, not only what the Prime Minister is saying about the hospitals, but the biggest thing you can do is talk to your family. If you're a registered organ donor, we have the highest level of organ donor registrations in the world, 6 million Australians are registered. But you've got to tell your family, because they make the ultimate decision, and that's what this campaign's about. Hospitals, awareness, mate, we'll get it right. Opt-out just doesn't work in other countries.
PM: But just give me 15 seconds to round off what Kochie's said. We have this huge rate of people who say on their drivers licences, as I do, yes, take my, you know, organs, for the purposes of organ retrieval. But we have the lowest actual donation rate when someone dies. So, talk to your family. Therese and I have done this with our kids, we've signed papers, etcetera. Everyone watching the program, I'd just encourage you to do that. Remember, a couple of thousand people waiting for a donation, now.
KOCH: Exactly right. Something a bit lighter, Justin Bieber. You've got young kids. Have you heard about him? We can't believe what a phenomena it is. Joins us next- week after next. Are you a fan?
PM: A little bit, but I mainly know of him vicariously through the kids. You've got him here?
KOCH: Yeah.
PM: Really?
KOCH: Yeah, yeah. The 26th.
PM: Really.
KOCH: Yeah, so we'll save you a spot.
PM: Up the back here?
KOCH: Well, we're asking Council. So if you could put in a good word for us, it'd be much appreciated.
PM: Okay, sounds good.
KOCH: Mate, congratulations, and pass on our best to Therese as well.
PM: Nick will be over the moon. Thank you.


PM: Well it's great to be back in this great community around Ryde, and good to be here with Maxine McKew, and with our local representatives of the medical community from Ryde Hospital, and also from Royal North Shore. And thank you, Jason, for showing us around this morning. This is an important part of the hospital network of New South Wales, an important part therefore, of the hospital network of Australia.
What the Australian Government is committed to is building a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally. Because what we need is more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. And I've seen a lot of evidence of that today, here at this important hospital. Of course, a core part of that is to make sure that our medical workforce is properly planned, and that we have enough training places for that workforce as well. And that's why we want to see an additional number of training places across the country.
Therefore, what we'll be doing is providing up to $13.6 million to support additional clinical training places for university students in a range of services from metropolitan rehab services, to rural and remote health services. These will provide some 1744 additional clinical training placements, in Broken Hill and Newcastle and Shoalhaven, in Ryde, where we are here, and in Western Sydney.
This of course is on top of what we are doing in terms of the investment in additional GP training places and medical training places with some more than 6000 of those to be funded for the upcoming decade. And those are additional places. What does it mean for this community at Ryde? An additional 36 training places across the various disciplines, from medicine, to nursing, through to the allied health professionals. I met many of those allied health professional representatives here today.
This is an important step in terms of local health workforce needs. Unless we get the health workforce right for the future, with enough doctors, enough nurses, enough allied health professionals, we won't actually fix the fundamentals of the system for the long term. Of course, the other thing we need to do is to make sure we've got a National Health and Hospital Network, which is properly reformed. No more cost-shift, blame-shift, no more waste, duplication and overlap between the Australian Government and State Governments, but also investing in the future growth needs of the system as well. And that's why this is such an important building block for long-term delivery of health and hospital services for all Australians.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


PM: It's been good this morning, having been on the road now for nearly two weeks talking about health and hospitals reform and building better hospital services for all Australians to be back here in Canberra to talk about the detail of this plan with the Chief Minister.
The thing about Canberra is that it's not just a health service for the 360,000 people who live in the ACT - it's a health service for more than 600,000 people who live more widely across southern New South Wales. That's why it's such an important health service for people in rural and regional Australia, as well as those who live in this city.
Today, we've been going through the detail of this plan for a new National Health and Hospitals Network funded nationally, run locally, and the practical action being this - more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses in order to deliver better health services for working families, pensioners and carers.
The Chief Minister will speak for himself, but I'm pleased to say that we've reached agreement on the content of this plan with the Chief Minister in the lead up to what will be a very important meeting on Monday.
I'd say this about Monday's meeting - on Monday, COAG has a unique opportunity to bring about real, concrete action to improve health and hospital services for Australians. COAG can deliver better hospitals by taking real, concrete action to produce better services for working people. Our plan supports 6,500 extra doctors, 95 percent of elective surgery done on time, and caps emergency department waiting times to four hours.
Let me repeat that: our plan supports 6,500 extra doctors, it ensures 95 percent of elective surgery done on time, and caps emergency department waiting times to four hours. This is a big change on the past.
To make this happen, we've got to agree on real reform at COAG, and on that basis bring about real investment for the future, real reform and real investment for the future. I won't be signing any blank cheques on Monday, because that might be good news for state treasury bureaucrats around Australia but it would be bad news for patients depending on our hospital system.
Blank cheques may be good for state bureaucrats but they are bad for delivering better health and better hospital services for working Australians. So I thank the Chief Minister for his cooperative approach. Many of the premiers are working in exactly this direction, because I think we all know that the Australian people are looking at what happens next Monday and into the future about achieving real change on the ground for people who want better health and better hospital services.
I'll turn to Jon now and then take your questions.
STANHOPE: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
As the Prime Minister's said, the ACT has been working productively with the Commonwealth over the last four or five weeks, most particularly in relation to the detail of the Prime Minister's national health plan. We indicated early that we were very happy to work hopefully productively but certainly cooperatively with the Commonwealth to achieve a new plan for all of Australia in relation to the delivery of health care.
We accept, and I believe all Australians accept, that to do nothing was never an option, that there must be change, that change is imperative, that the Prime Minister has, through his leadership, developed a plan to take Australia forward significantly. Every state and territory will tell you, all the time, that the current arrangements for the funding of health care are simply unsustainable. That's the case for us. It's the case for every jurisdiction in Australia, so we've grasped the opportunity. We've grasped it in a positive way.
We have, of course, some local, some parochial issues, issues of significant concern to us around the detail of a national health scheme such as that proposed by the Prime Minister. We raised those in our initial meeting with the Prime Minister and sought some comfort or assurance about those special issues, most particularly issues that recognise that we only have two public hospitals here in the ACT, one of which is not owned by the ACT Government, so issues around the development of local health networks would need to be looked at in a site-specific or jurisdiction specific way so far as the ACT's concerned.
We're also unique amongst the jurisdictions that 26 percent of all occasions of service in hospitals in the ACT are provided to New South Wales residents. Indeed, 30 percent of our waiting list for elective surgery is comprised of residents of New South Wales, and we do need that unique circumstance recognised. The Prime Minister has undertaken to work productively on that very issue, and we also do have here in the Territory some inherited, some historic issues, in relation to cost structures that we would like to be assured that the independent pricing arrangements would be taken into account.
I've received today through the discussions with the Prime Minister today, continuing assurance that each of the issues of particular concern to the ACT will be dealt with, that pathways for resolving those issues have been determined and on the strength of that I'm more than happy today to commit to the national health agreement that the Prime Minister will be bringing to COAG on Monday.
The ACT will be a signatory to the agreement. It provides all Australians with certainty into the future. It brings, most importantly, the Commonwealth to the table as a significant, signed-up partner in the delivery of health care. We will have uniform, transparent systems across Australia in relation to outcomes and to cost, and the ACT's very happy to be a part of that.
As the Prime Minister said, it does need to be understood the ACT - or Canberra - is a city of 360,000, but our hospitals serve the entire southern region of New South Wales. We service through our hospitals 600,000 people. In other words, our hospitals, our health care system, provides for more people than, well for instance, the population of Tasmania. That's the significance of Canberra and the health care that we deliver. We are a major provider in Australia, providing health care not just for the 360,000 Canberrans, but for an additional, at least, 250,000 within the region, all the way from Eden to Goulburn, all the way from Gundagai to Batemans Bay.
We're very happy to sign this up. We're doing it for the people of Canberra and for this region.
PM: Thanks very much Jon, and just to emphasise that, therefore, this is an important region for not just the people in the city, but 600,000 Australians living in regional and rural areas who depend on us having a health and hospital system that can deliver for the future.
I can't say this enough, that when you have a plan on the table which offers 6,500 more doctors, 95 percent of elective surgery being done on time, and capping waiting times in accident and emergency to four hours, this is a big step forward for the future.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the agreement between these two jurisdictions will make any difference to those jurisdictions that don't support your plan?
PM: Well, that's a matter for them, and I'm sure you'll be putting those questions to them during the course of the day, but we're having great discussions with many premiers and chief ministers across the country because I think underneath it all, they all recognise the current system doesn't work. We need change. We need a new system which delivers more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. We've put out a plan, this plan, to underpin that. We intend to get on with the job.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) GST, would you be happy for states to keep the GST and just give you a commitment that they're going to put 30 percent of it, or is that a (inaudible)?
PM: We believe that for the future we must have the GST dedicated to a national hospitals fund and that is necessary so that we keep that money out of the pockets of state treasury bureaucrats.
Let me say it again: we need to have those monies dedicated to a national hospitals fund because the alternative is leaving those monies in the hands of state treasury bureaucrats who may not use it for health and hospitals. That's the old system. We're not going to be party to the old system. We have a new system, a new system which we put forward after two years of work, and this, we believe, is the right plan for the future - as I said, a plan which offers 6,500 more doctors, which offers 95 per cent of elective surgery being done on time, which offers that accident and emergency waiting times be capped at four hours. That represents real progress on a previous system which frankly no longer works.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, WA, Victoria, New South Wales, all said they will not vote for the GST issue. Has the fat lady already sung before COAG has even begun?
PM: Well, I'd encourage all premiers and chief ministers to bring a positive approach to what working people and pensioners and carers right across Australia - in WA, in Victoria, in New South Wales, Queensland and all the states - are crying out for, and it's simply this: the current system doesn't work any more. We need a new system.
Others may be happy to defend a system which no longer works. We believe we need a new system which provides for long-term funding for more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses and this plan here offers 6,500 more doctors, it offers 95 percent of elective surgery being done on time, it offers also that in accident and emergency waiting times be capped at four hours. These are the things which matter to working families.
I look at all of you here today, I'm sure all of you have presented at various times to accident and emergency departments around the country and you've had unacceptable waits. Some of you will have family members who've had to queue for elective surgery where it's gone beyond the recommended clinical time. That's got to change. Australia can do this better, and I'd ask and urge everyone to get in there and support this.
As I said before, on the GST in response to this question here, you can't just invent funding out of nothing. What you need is for these monies to be dedicated, to be allocated to a national hospitals fund so that it's kept out of the pockets of state treasuries. I don't think working people across Australia have any confidence that the state treasuries, constantly reigning in their hospital budgets is the way to go for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if talks fail on Monday, what's the next step?
PM: You know, I've been very consistent about that since way before the last election and that was we will take a reform plan for better health and better hospitals to the premiers and chief ministers and we would prefer to do this cooperatively, but if not then we would seek a further mandate from the Australian people. I have said this consistently for two to three years now and I haven't budged one bit and I don't intend to.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider further negotiations if (inaudible)?
PM: Oh, I think people are tired of delays. They're really tired of delays, and I've heard people bringing out more excuses for delay. This plan of ours was released six weeks ago, and we've released a further volume of it outlining the additional investments we would make in the system as well, and this is built on the Bennett reform proposal which was produced over 18 months and consulted right around the country over that long period of time.
The work has been done. The plan is clear. It's here, it's in black and white. We're up for decision - this Monday at the Council of Australian Governments. There are no more excuses for delay. Working families want us to get on with the business of improving their health care services now.
If you've been like me, starting in your last week, in Far North Queensland and ending up back here last night about two weeks later, a bit less, out there on the ground people are very clear about this - they've already concluded that the current system, in whichever state you're talking about, is not working properly. They want change, and the smallest country hospitals, the bigger regional hospitals, they very big metro hospitals - they want change, and it would be wrong for leaders to pass up this historical opportunity, this once-in-a-generation opportunity to bring about that change now.
Back to you, Chris.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) about something what you've just said (inaudible) you're saying having a dedicated (inaudible) Now, before I thought the idea was that you'd directly pay local hospital networks through case-mix. Are you now saying that you agree with the (inaudible)?
PM: Our position on this, Chris, has not changed. You go back to the document, we have said constantly that these monies would be dedicated or allocated to a national hospitals fund and furthermore it is absolutely critical that local hospital networks be supported. That has been clear in our position all the way through. That hasn't changed.
One of the things you also pick up in regional Australia is that they are tired, very much tired, of having state treasuries and state health bureaucrats constantly, constantly telling them what to do and telling them how much money they can't have. The virtue of us introducing activity-based funding right across the country is that these hospitals are then funded for what they actually do. That is the big difference, and when I go to hospitals like I was in the last few days at Port Macquarie, speak to the locals there, they say 'for us, here at Port Macquarie, what really works is an activity-based funding model because we are currently budgeted to deliver this many services. In reality, we are delivering this many services, and that is why our system is under so much stress.'
That's why we're bringing in this reform, and you know something? It's the product of nearly two years of work, so for those who actually go out there and call for further delay, I actually don't think they are quite listening to what the people are saying.
JOURNALIST: Christine Nixon, she now appears to have given a fourth account of events about Black Saturday (inaudible)?
PM: The Government's position hasn't changed on that. I notice that Christine Nixon has already apologised for her position on the night when the fires hit and we've said then and said since then that she continues to have the Government's support.
Having said that, folks, I've got a few things to do. I've got a team of officials in there to chunk through the rest of it. Thanks, folks.


The Rudd Government and NSW Government will invest $33.8 million to establish a new, purpose-built regional cancer centre at Shoalhaven District Memorial Hospital.
The Rudd Government will provide $23.8 million and the NSW Government will invest a further $10 million for a new regional cancer centre at Nowra that will include:
     * One linear accelerator;
     * Two radiotherapy bunkers;
     * Eight additional chemotherapy chairs;
     * Medical diagnostic equipment, including a CT Scanner; and
     * A 10-room patient and carer accommodation facility.
With some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their counterparts in urban areas.
The $33.8 million investment in Nowra will work towards improving services and care for the more than 32,000 NSW residents diagnosed with cancer each year.
Once fully operational, these new facilities will allow for an estimated additional 414 radiotherapy patients to access treatment each year, an estimated additional 4,000 chemotherapy treatments each year and additional accommodation places close to Shoalhaven Hospital.
The clinical specialties accommodated will include:
     * Medical oncology;
     * Clinical haematology;
     * Radiation oncology;
     * Palliative care;
     * Surgical oncology;
     * Cancer psychosocial services; and
     * Cancer rehabilitation services.
This investment follows the announcement on Friday of $12.1 million from the Rudd Government and an additional $2 million from the NSW Government for the Illawarra Cancer Care Centre at Wollongong.
The investment in Shoalhaven and the Illawarra forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish regional cancer centres so that Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed over $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
The NSW Government will maintain and operate the new Shoalhaven Regional Cancer Centre.
The centre will facilitate local care for cancer patients and their families at what can be a stressful time.
The networking of cancer services across Illawarra and Shoalhaven will also mean support for quality research, education and teaching for the local cancer care workforce.
NSW has some of the best outcomes for cancer patients in the world.
Figures released by the Cancer Institute NSW in December show that over the past decade cancer death rates have fallen by 13.8% in men and 7.9% in women for all ages
The new Shoalhaven Regional Cancer Centre will help maintain these excellent outcomes as we respond to an increasing and ageing population.
Congratulations to the Shoalhaven community for its efforts to raise $1 million dollars towards the new centre.


PM: It's great to be here in the Shoalhaven and it's great to be here to talk about the need to deliver better cancer services to people in rural and regional Australia, and that's what this is all about. It's about partnering with the local community, partnering with local hospitals to ensure that we deliver better cancer services and better health and hospital services to the good people of this region.
Here in the Shoalhaven local people have raised, I'm advised, something in the order of a million dollars to support the work of an integrated cancer care centre here in Nowra. I would commend them for their work. This is an extraordinary fundraising effort on their behalf.
We, the Australian Government, are confirming today an investment in total of $33.8 million for a new, purpose-built regional cancer centre here at the Shoalhaven District Memorial Hospital. We're doing so in partnership with the New South Wales Government. They're investing $10 million of that amount and I acknowledge that and thank them for it.
The purposes that this will be used for are as follows: to purchase one linear accelerator; two radiotherapy bunkers; eight additional chemotherapy chairs; medical diagnostic equipment including a CT scanner; and a 10-room patient and carer accommodation facility.
The whole point of these integrated cancer care centres at a regional level is to make sure that people suffering from cancer have the best possible range of services available to them locally. Wherever I have travelled in regional Australia in the last several weeks what I have seen is the same story: people saying 'dealing with a cancer diagnosis is bad enough. Having to travel hours and hours and hours, and in parts of regional Queensland days and days, to the capital city to get the proper range of cancer services is just too much to bear.'
That is why this is part of a total investment of more than half a billion dollars by Australian Government in integrated regional cancer centres right across Australia - 22 announcements of the type that we are making here in the Shoalhaven today.
So, this is an investment on our part in order to make a difference to these lives, of these good people in this region. I've met many of them this morning. Each has a story to tell; each of those stories is very personal, but each of those stories has profound consequences for the community as well.
So, this is a good thing to do, to support not just the fundraising efforts of local people, but to deliver decent services to those suffering from this terrible disease.
I just conclude by saying this: cancer, we have about 100,000 new diagnoses of cancer in Australia each year. We have about 32,000, 33,000 of those in New South Wales - but here is the terrible statistic: with certain major cancers, if you are in regional and rural Australia, your survival rates within the first five years of diagnosis are one-third of those who live in the major cities. That's just wrong, it shouldn't be the case and we've got to change if for the future.
That's why we also need a new National Health and Hospitals Network funded nationally, run locally with the Australian Government being the dominant funder for the health and hospital system for the future. It's part of delivering more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses and more basic services like cancer services across the country, and that's the core of the reform plan that we're putting to the nation.
Now, I must just ask, Frank - do you want to add to what I've just said?
MINISTER SARTOR: Well, only to commend the Government and the Prime Minister on this cancer centre roll out. It's absolutely fundamental, it's an important thing to do. The biggest gains in cancer are bringing best practice to regional Australia, to everybody in Australia, and that's what they're doing and we're very supportive and I thank the Prime Minister for this initiative.
PM: Good. Over to you, folks, if you have any questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you just spoke about local funding. Would an area like this, in your opinion, make an ideal model for provision of local funding, just to see how it would work on the ground?
PM: Our plan for a new National Health and Hospitals Network is to be, as it says here, funded nationally and run locally and that means - funded - the Australian Government, for the first time in history, being the dominant funder of the hospital system of Australia, and secondly run locally by local hospital networks with us making payments direct to those networks.
Now, your question goes to this particular region as a candidate for becoming such a hospital network. I'm sure that the good local folk in this part of the world will sort out what's best for them. The worst thing you can do is have someone from Canberra dictating where your lines should stop and start. What constitutes your best local community of interest, does it include this hospital, the two surrounding hospitals, does it include Wollongong as well - these are decisions best, frankly, developed locally, but once you've shaped those decisions in partnership with the state government, can I say we, the Australian Government, are in the business of providing funding to these networks directly so that local clinicians can make the best decisions locally on the use of those funds to deliver better health services, better hospital services to local people.
JOURNALIST: Does that mean that the local health service would be no longer - in this case, the South East Area Sydney health service?
PM: That's a matter for local people and local clinicians to resolve with those who will be determining the boundaries of these communities of interest in the future. I've said many times in the past - there's no news in this - I think in the state of New South Wales the health areas are too vast. They are too huge. When you talk about communities of interest, for example, up in northern New South Wales the strong feedback I had there, for example, from the people at Port Macquarie, was there are grave difficulties in making sure that their voices were properly heard within a region so vast.
I can't comment on this particular region and I don't have the region before me, but my general view is we need communities of interest served by local hospital networks which are local, where people have a sense of direct ownership and also still large enough, with enough critical mass, to provide the proper range of health and hospital services.
There's a balance in doing that, and that's the balance we need to get right for the future.
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to make more concessions to the states as you meet with the premiers today and have your meetings tomorrow in order to get your plan through?
PM: Let me just say one or two things about the meeting of COAG. You see, after 12 years of waiting, tomorrow presents the premiers and the chief ministers with a great opportunity to take a huge step forward in the delivery of better health and hospital services for all Australians, and I think that's what the Australian people are saying they want, but to deliver better health and hospital services we need first to reform the system to get rid of duplication and waste, and then secondly grow the system by greater investment in beds, doctors and nurses.
Now, some of the premiers - Mr Abbott, too - seem to be saying the current system is fine, just provide another blank cheque. I'm not prepared to do that. The Australian Government's not prepared to do that. We need more money coupled with more reform to deliver a better hospitals network for the future, not simply more blank cheques.
Let me just be very clear about that: what we need for the future is more reform and more money in order to deliver a better hospital system for the future, not simply more blank cheques. That, in its essence, is the Australian Government's position, and what does our plan provide for?
Our plan, in a nutshell, provides funding for another 6,000 or so doctors; provides funding for 95 percent of elective surgery to be done on time; provides funding for reducing waits at accident and emergency to four hours. These are very practical reforms. That's why we've put forward this plan and we intend to work with the premiers and the chief ministers through the detail of this when we gather together in Canberra tonight and tomorrow and it'll be a tough negotiation, but I am absolutely determined that we deliver better health and better hospital services for all Australians. I was elected to do that. I take that responsibility seriously. I intend to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: Can I just take it back to a local level again - the local federal electorate council for the seat of Gilmore is meeting this afternoon to possibly select its own candidate. Are you disappointed, with an election potentially so close, that the Party has left it so late to find a candidate?
PM: Well, the term, the electoral term of this Government runs through until the end of this year. Let's be very clear about that. Secondly, as far as Party preselections are concerned I'm sure all those preselection processes are well in hand and I'm confident that we're going to have a very good candidate here in Gilmore because we have a very good message for the people of the Shoalhaven and the wider region, and it's about our plan for enhancing hospital and health services, and we've detailed that on cancer services today; the fact that we're investing something close to $100 million in upgrades to local schools, primary schools getting new, state-of-the-art language centres, science centres, multipurpose halls; on top of that, libraries, resource centres, as well as the investments, of course, that we have made more broadly in other areas as well, including, I'm advised, in the whole area of rural and clinical training schools as well.
I think we've got a good message, a very, very practical message for the people of this area. Our interest is to make a difference to the lives of working families, pensioners, carers here in the Shoalhaven. I'm sure we're going to have a good candidate who will deliver that message because the record of what we have done is actually a good record.
JOURNALIST: Selected by the branches or Selected by head office or you?
PM: Preselection processes are always a deep mystery within the Australian Labor Party-
JOURNALIST: -And outside it.
PM: -so they will work their way through. I'm confident that we'll have a very good candidate who will make a very good representative for the good people of this area and be able to explain very clearly a strong record of achievement for this area on the part of the Australian Government. We have taken the interests of this region very seriously. The fact that we've got hundreds of millions of dollars of investment going in here in the biggest school modernisation program this region has ever seen, government schools, non-government schools, as well as what we've just done here at the Shoalhaven District Hospital for cancer services - this is a good record of local achievement.
JOURNALIST: Is it disappointing that you that you come here today, you make this major announcement which was certainly welcomed by the whole community, you don't have a candidate to make the most of that good feeling that's generated today?
PM: You know something? I have a very practical view of the people of Australia, including the people of the Shoalhaven. They'll make a judgement on the basis of what we have done, what our record is, including the funding that we've provided for critical services such as those for cancer. They'll make their judgement-
[TAPE BREAK - MISSING TEXT]
If someone came down here and made a thousand speeches about the need for enhanced cancer services, well, that's all political cannon fodder, that's terrific - but you know something? What's more important-
[TAPE BREAK - MISSSING TEXT]
[ENDS] 


HOST: And we're joined live now by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Prime Minister thanks for your time. When things go wrong now in our public hospital system can patients blame you?
PM: Look, when it comes to the overall funding for the public hospital systems of Australia and the health system, as I said prior to the last election, the buck stops with me. What we've brought about is big reforms today. The Australian government, for the first time, being the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia. In the past that wasn't the case. The exclusive funder of primary health care, what happens outside of hospitals like with GPs and the exclusive funder for the first time, of aged care. These are big reforms necessary for long-term funding certainty for our public hospital system.
HOST: Prime Minister you've promised an incredible amount of money, $20 billion, where's it coming from?
PM: Well let me say we're investing at two levels. Firstly, action must start this year. Our accident and emergencies need help, our elective surgery needs help as well, and this investment will go to such things as 1,300 new hospital beds, it will got to 2,500 new aged care places, it will go to more than 6,000 new medical training places for more doctors. This is the heart and soul of fundamental health reform. And also for accident and emergency and elective surgery, new targets there which are delivered by extra investment on the ground. This will take time to do. We must start now and all the detailed funding arrangements for this will be clearly outlined in the Budget. These will be fully costed and fully funded.
HOST: Alright Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time this evening.
PM: Thank you.


HOST: Prime Minister, of course you're please to have a deal but you've offered billions in extra funding to entice the States to agree to your plan. Where's that money coming from?
PM: Well, we'll detail all of that in the upcoming budget but we believe in fully costed undertakings and they will be fully costed as they have been in the past but the key is this - this is funding for 1,300 extra hospital beds. It's funding for a further 2,500 aged care places, it's funding for 6,000 additional medical training places for more doctors. These are big reforms on top of services for 20,000 more young people with mental health conditions. These are big reforms. They are expensive but we need to deliver better health and hospital services for all Australians.
HOST: Well based on that comment Prime Minister can you give us a date when the health system in New South Wales will be fixed?
PM: Well, these payments that we've outlined today, that is, which go to improved targets for accident and emergency at four hours, improved targets for elective surgery, 95% done on time. These reforms begin to be implemented from 1 July this year. I don't want to mislead people though. You can't turn around everything overnight. There's an implementation period which extends over a three year period and that is what we are committed to doing., that's why we've provided such significant investment today but we do need better health and better hospital services and in terms of reform, the Commonwealth, the Australian Government, for the first time, becomes the dominant funder of Australia's public hospital system, the exclusive funder of our primary health care system and the exclusive funder of aged care as well. It's a big day for reform.
HOST: Briefly Prime Minister, is WA the rouge state in all of this? Do you see them actually getting across the line with you on this plan?
PM: We'll work very carefully with our friends in the west. I want to make sure we get these extra services through to them as well because their hospital system is under pressure like everywhere else so we'll be talking to our friends in the WA government, working hard to get an agreement. I'm confident we'll get there.
HOST: Prime Minister we thank you for joining us on Nine News tonight.
PM: Thanks very much.


An historic agreement was reached today to deliver better health and better hospitals for Australian working families. 
This will deliver the most significant reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare. 
From July 1 this year the Australian Government will start delivering $5.3 billion in additional funding over the next four years to provide:
     * 1,300 new sub-acute hospital beds;
     * Over 6000 new doctors;
     * An additional 2500 aged care beds;
     * Emergency department waiting times capped at four hours;
     * Elective surgery delivered on time for 95 per cent of Australians;
     * An historic agreement to reshape mental health services and help 20,000 extra young people get access to mental health services;
     * More coordinated care for patients with diabetes in general practice;
     * A Commonwealth takeover of primary care; and
     * A Commonwealth takeover of aged care.
There will also be a minimum of $15.6 billion provided by the Australian Government in top-up funds to guarantee sustainable funding for public hospitals. 
This record funding will be backed by tough national standards so all Australians, regardless of where they live, know the high standards they can expect from their public hospitals. 
This new National Health and Hospitals Network also means that hard working doctors and nurses will have more say in the way their local hospital is run, through Local Hospital Networks and new primary health care organisations. 
Funding Arrangements 
The Commonwealth and seven states and territories have agreed to the Commonwealth retaining one third of the GST and becoming the dominant funder of the nation's hospital system. 
The Commonwealth will continue discussions with the Western Australian Government over the period ahead. 
One dominant funder under the National Health and Hospitals Network means that patients will no longer be shunted from one system funded by the states and territories to another funded by the Commonwealth. 
Under these reforms, the Australian Government:
     * will become the dominant funder of public hospitals;
     * fund 60 per cent of building, equipment, teaching, training and services;
     * take pressure off public hospitals by improving the health care provided in the community; and
     * fund all GP and primary care services and all aged care services.
Under the agreement, a third of state and territory GST revenue (except WA) will be retained by the Commonwealth and allocated to health and hospitals reform. 
Commonwealth and state and territory funding for hospitals (excluding block funding for small and regional hospitals, and system-wide funding, e.g. for training) will be paid into seven separate National Health and Hospitals Network funds, one in each state or territory. 
Payments for hospital services will then be made direct to Local Hospital Networks from this fund. 
Fundamental reform is needed to ensure our health system can cope with the pressures of a growing and ageing population. 
Without essential reform spiralling health costs would have consumed entire revenue raised by states and territories. 
Today's agreement delivers that reform, putting health funding onto a sustainable footing, and delivering better health and better hospitals for working families across Australia. 


PM: Well today we have reached an historic agreement to deliver better health and better hospitals for the working families of Australia.
We have agreed to the biggest reforms to the health system since the introduction of Medicare.
This is a good day for working families. It's a good day for senior Australians, for pensioners and for carers. It's a good day for mums and dads and patients, and good day for doctors and nurses working hard in our health and hospital system across the country.
This agreement is a significant agreement - but now the real work begins.
From 1 July this year the National Health and Hospitals Network will start delivering the following:
     * First - 1,300 new hospital beds;
     * Two - an historic agreement to reshape mental health services and help 20,000 extra young people get access to mental health services;
     * Three - over 6,000 new doctors;
     * Four - an additional 2,500 aged care beds;
     * Also, emergency department waiting times capped at four hours;
     * Elective surgery delivered on time for 95 per cent of Australians;
     * A Commonwealth takeover of primary care; and
     * A Commonwealth takeover of aged care.
The Commonwealth and 7 states and territories covering about 90 per cent of the nation's population have agreed to the Commonwealth retaining one third of the GST and becoming the dominant funder of the nation's hospital system.
Premier Barnett and I have agreed that we will continue to discuss hospital funding arrangements with WA over the period ahead.
For the first time, the Australian Government will become the dominant funder of the entire system. We will retain a third of GST currently provided to States and Territories and direct it to Australia's health and hospital system. We will fund 60 per cent of building equipment, teaching, and training and services delivered across our 762 public hospitals; and we will be funding all GP and primary care services and all aged care services.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is a very, very big reform of the health and hospital system of Australia.
Today's agreement places the nation's finances on a more sustainable footing for the future - for our health and hospital system and for the Federation more broadly.
The Treasury has estimated that without change, state health spending would have consumed the entire revenue raised by state governments over the next three decades. This would place enormous pressure on the other areas of state responsibility like transport, schools, and law and order.
Our actions today mean that this is no longer the case. Our actions today help ensure the future of the Federation.
In order to fund more doctors, more nurses, more beds, and better emergency departments and elective surgery, it is crucial also that the Australian Government is able to undertake reforms to deliver savings. This includes the reforms to private health insurance that we proposed in the last Budget. These changes would for us save $2 billion over 4 years - and around $100 billion over the next 40 years. This is $100 billion which would be spent on doctors, more nurses, and more beds.
Currently, the Opposition are blocking those changes.
These reforms to private health insurance, and the funding they provide, will play a crucial role in funding these significant health reforms in the future.
I'd like to conclude by thanking my colleagues here - all the premiers and chief ministers. This has been a long negotiation and it's been a very tough negotiation, as we always said it would be, but we have worked well together and I would thank each and every one of them for the contribution they have made to this critical debate for the future of our health and hospital system.
The most important thing is that we have today reached an historic agreement to deliver better health and hospital services to working families, to pensioners and carers, right across the country - people who depend on us and our work here today.
I'd also like to thank the Federal Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, for the tireless work - the absolutely tireless work - that she has put in over the past few years, months, weeks and days with her state and territory counterparts to bring this agreement about. Without her this would not have been possible.
Most of all, though, I'd like to thank the hard-working doctors and nurses and allied health professionals right across the Australian health and hospital system. These, the good folk, the professional folk who have lent me their understanding, their time, their input, their ideas over the last nine months as I've sought to frame the Australian Government's response to the future reform of our health and hospital system.
This is a terrific group of Australians. They are out there working in the field in an area which means so much to the everyday lives of millions of Australians, and they are often doing so at present under huge pressure with inadequate resources, and I'd take this opportunity - and I'm sure my colleagues would endorse it - to salute their professions. They are fundamental to the wellbeing of Australians. Our job as governments is to make their job a little easier for the future.
Also, I would like to thank the patients - the people who actually depend on the health care system of Australia for spending time with me also over the last nine months or so. I have spoken, literally to hundreds and hundreds and hundreds from the smallest hospitals in rural communities to the largest hospitals in our biggest cities and so much of what they have said has been the same; so much of them crying out for two things: please, please, please fix our system for the future; please, please, please, get rid of the duplication, the waste in our system; and please, please, please fund our system for the long-term future to deliver us more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses.
I would say to each of those folk, each of those very good folk, those suffering from cancer; those suffering from terrible diseases; those who have spent time with myself and my colleagues in recent months, that today we seek to respond to what you have been saying to us.
This is a very big reform.
I say to all those patients and their families who supported them in their time of need; those who are crying out for better hospitals - today your voices have been heard.
There is more work to be done - a whole lot more work to be done - but today, for the first time in a generation, the hard work of fundamental health and hospital reform has begun.
Now, if I could ask Kristina, the Premier of New South Wales, as chairman of CAF, to speak on behalf of the states and territories, and given the significance of today's agreement, to then turn to my colleagues each to contribute as well.
Kristina.
KENEALLY: Thank you Prime Minister.
Well, as the chair of the Council of the Australian Federation, I'd like to begin by thanking all of my state and territory counterparts. We have worked hard, we have worked well and we have worked together to achieve this historic agreement, and in doing so, Prime Minister, I'd also like to thank you, the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, and the team here at the COAG negotiations. From you we received a good and a fair hearing to our views and our concerns, and that has enabled us to achieve the historic agreement that we've reached today.
Now, it is historic, and it is important, but what is most important in what we've achieved today is better health outcomes for the people we represent: better access to elective surgery; to emergency department care; to aged care; to mental health - this is significant for the families who live in our respective states and territories, and that's why we worked so hard to achieve this agreement today.
It's also significant in terms of the funding that it delivers for each of our jurisdictions. It is significant because the Commonwealth has put its hand up for the future growth in our system, providing a sustainable way forward for our health system to continue to deliver the excellent care it does today, to improve upon that and to make it stronger into the future, and for that, Prime Minister, we do thank you.
Now, as a Council, we pushed strongly for many changes and some of those changes occurred along the way to COAG, including the inclusion of block funding, changes to local hospital networks, which I think all of us will agree have improved the outcomes that we achieved today.
But we also had our debates along the way, and those debates have been constructive. They have been respectful, and they have been able to help us achieve the right change for the Australian health system.
Now, as the chair of the CAF - and it is a role that I enjoyed greatly - but as the chair of the CAF I also enjoyed the support of this Council, and in particular to negotiate in good faith to achieve the best possible result for our national health reform here at the COAG meeting. In particular, the CAF has been identifying the desire to have state-based funds, to have guaranteed funding beyond 2014 and to see more money come into the system in the first four years. We also sought to ensure that we protected our GST from future clawback.
Can I say that it was the joint effort of the CAF that has enabled us to work so constructively with the Commonwealth. It was the Prime Minister's willingness to listen to our concerns and to respond constructively that has enabled us to reach this agreement, in particular to reach significant injection of money in the first four years.
If I can put on my hat as the Premier of New South Wales for one moment, I reflect for the State of New South Wales this represents $1.2 billion in the first four years, combined with the guarantee of funding after 2014 of $4.9 billion, a total of $6.1billion for the next 10 years for New South Wales. That is an injection of funds that simply would not have been possible for us had we not been able to reach this agreement, and I'm certain each other leader will speak to the benefits to their State.
As the chair of the CAF, my colleagues here have asked me to note this, and Prime Minister you might not be aware of this, what sealed the deal for us was your commitment this morning to an additional $800 million for additional beds. As a CAF we identified that as a crucial injection of money that was required for us and as you and I were able to seal that deal this morning, my colleagues around the table were incredibly pleased and we thank you for that. We thank you for the work that you have done with us over the last two days.
It is historic. This is real change. This will make a real difference to the people of Australia. It will take time to achieve this change, and we will all be working hard together.
For New South Wales, we came here and we got what we wanted for the people of New South Wales. We are able to say to the people of New South Wales that we met our commitment to them to deliver better health care now, to ensure that it continues into the future, and to work in partnership with the Commonwealth as we grow a sustainable health system.
Thank you, Prime Minister. Thank you to my colleagues around the table.
It has been a very fruitful few days and a very good few weeks as we negotiated the outcomes that we achieved.
PM: Thank you very much, Kristina. John, I might turn to you as Premier of Victoria.
BRUMBY: Thanks, Kevin.
Well, I think we achieved today, obviously, a great outcome, I think, for Australia. I am delighted with the outcome for Victoria. I think it's a great step forward, and there was a number of times this afternoon in the COAG meetings when the Prime Minister referred to this agreement today as one that puts patients first, and it is an agreement, I think, which puts patients first, and we all came to this meeting over the last two days with, I guess, a range of views and what had been publically a pretty vigorous debate, and I've said and I know the Prime Minister said that in relation to health this is the biggest debate we've had about health care since the establishment of Medicare in the 1970s, but I guess it's instructive to think back to that period, because if you think of the creation of Medicare, Medibank, in that period, it was a Commonwealth creation. What's been created today is a genuine partnership between the Commonwealth Government and the states, and it's a sign, I think, of the Prime Minister's commitment to the Federation, to cooperative federalism, that we've been able to reach agreement today on what is a series of landmark reforms that put patients first and provide real reform, systemic reform, to our health system.
In terms of the outcomes, I believe this is a package which guarantees real reform. So across Australia now you'll see a move to local health networks; you'll see a move to activity-based funding; and you're also going to see much more transparency across the system in terms of the information and the indicators that are available about the performance of the Victorian and Australian health systems.
Secondly, I think the big achievement of this arrangement today, this agreement today, is that there's more money now, and as Kristina has said, I think all of us, representing our own jurisdictions and through the Council of the Federation, have argued that what we needed across Australia, was more money now; not a commitment about more money in 2013, 14 or beyond but we needed more money now. And I think the commitments which the Prime Minister has given in that regard will provide significant and dramatic improvements to our health system across Victoria and across Australia, and in Victoria's case by the way over the next four years all of the initiatives which have been agreed today add something like $890 million dollars to our health budget over the next four years or to put it in percentage terms, it lifts the direct real Commonwealth contribution in our state from 41 per cent to just over 44 per cent in that three year period. And, as you know I've been campaigning hard for an increased Commonwealth commitment and a 1 per cent increase per annum is a very, very significant increase indeed.
The third thing I'd say about this agreement is that it provides a great outcome for patients. In our state we are going to see something like 332 extra beds. Beds are expensive; they are always difficult for state governments to provide. The support provided today by the Prime Minister as part of this agreement as we discussed it this afternoon will make a huge difference to the numbers of patients that we can treat across our state, and in terms of elective surgery in our state of Victoria, the reforms that we've agreed today will ensure that there are 33,900 additional elective surgery treatments over the next four years. That's 33,900 Victorians whose lives will be immeasurably improved.
Could I say the fourth thing about the arrangements today; streamlined administration. Again - many of us were concerned that these reforms might produce a new bureaucracy in Canberra. We've all been concerned to ensure that that's not the case and I think if you look at the model that's been agreed today - the administration model, the use of the health fund into which the commonwealth money and the state money is paid and then paid through with the state as a system manager through to the local health networks - this is a clean streamlined administratively simple way to provide the funds and I would certainly say, a significant improvement on where we were a few weeks ago.
And finally can I just say from Victoria's point of view we are delighted too that the communiqué today looks forward to the development of a national cancer plan which the Commonwealth and Victoria will co-lead on, on the development of that plan and this is such an important area for Victorians and Australians. We are delighted to work with the Commonwealth to develop this plan nationally.
So I think it is a great step forward; it does put patients first; it does provide real reform; it will see more patients treated; it does get more money in the system now and it does this in a way which is a genuine partnership with the states - a real partnership of the Federation which significantly improves our national health system.
PM: Thanks very much John. Anna, over to you.
BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister.
There's been a lot of hard work done in the last two days and our efforts have been directed at securing better health care now but I think even more significantly those efforts have been directed at better healthcare and better health system in ten years time and the decades beyond.
The significance of these arrangements I think cannot be underestimated.
The agreement that we will be signing up to today is a seismic shift in Commonwealth-State relations in the delivery of health care for Australians.
The Prime Minister started this process by announcing a reform package in which the Commonwealth Government, that is the level of Government that has the largest revenue raising power in the Federation, would for the first time in the history of the Federation take responsibility for growth. So this reform package for a growth state like Queensland was a no brainer. When the Commonwealth Government said they would accept responsibility for growth, we thought "these reforms are good for Queensland."
However, we wanted to see a lot more work done on the detail and there's been a lot of work done over the last six weeks to secure a set of arrangements that will work much better in a state like ours and in other parts of Australia.
I came to Canberra wanting to see more funds into the system sooner than originally proposed. For Queensland, what we will see now is a $4 billion dollar package over the next ten years that will deliver better emergency departments, faster elective surgery, more beds, new services in mental health and more aged care beds. That is a package that will make a real difference in the lives of Queenslanders and Queensland families.
I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his efforts. I'd like to particularly thank him for the very personal and hands-on approach he has taken to these reforms. I think there's no doubt that the many hours he has spent in the hospitals that are operated by the states of Australia has given him a much better sense of the real pressures on those services. The time he has spent talking to doctors and nurses and patients has given him a personal grasp of the issue that I'm not sure other senior representatives of federal governments have had in the past. So I too want to thank the doctors and nurses who made it their business to make sure the Prime Minister came to the table yesterday with a real idea of the pressures that states are under, because I think that did motivate some of his willingness to increase the package and understand the parts of the system that are under pressure.
And finally on behalf of Queensland, I'd like to thank Kristina Keneally for the work she's done as the Chair of CAF. Kristina started her premiership, I think on the third day of her premiership, she found herself chairing a Council of Australian Governments, her second COAG she's found herself leading some of the most difficult negotiations between state and commonwealth governments that we'd seen probably in a decade. She's done an outstanding job. The work she did in the very small hours of this morning to clinch the deal on extra beds was particularly outstanding, and Kristina, Queensland's very grateful - thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Anna, and Colin?
BARNETT: Well thank you Prime Minister.
Well not wishing to rain on the parade but Western Australia will not be signing the agreement as it stands.
Can I say the important part of what has been discussed - that is the health component - matters to do with elective surgery, emergency departments, extra beds and the like, I do support.
And I acknowledge - I readily acknowledge that the Commonwealth has been generous and has listened to the states over recent weeks over what is needed. So I support that part of it.
Second is the governance arrangements. While they are not ideal from a West Australian perspective, we could work within those.
The third aspect of the Commonwealth essentially taking one third of the total GST pool is not acceptable to me and it is not acceptable to Western Australia. The GST is just ten years old. When it was introduced, it was introduced as a substitute for other state taxes that had been either foregone or transferred to the Commonwealth over the years. It was, as it was presented then as the long term growth tax and solution to state finances. I am not about to compromise the integrity or the importance of the GST to my state of Western Australia.
However, as I made clear at the conclusion of the COAG meeting and on several occasions to the Prime Minister and Treasurer and the Minister for Health, Western Australia is prepared to pay an equivalent amount of money into a fund.
So in other words, the outcome would be exactly the same but we would not agree to the Commonwealth taking in a pre-empt way one third of the GST. So the outcome can be the same. And if over the coming weeks the Commonwealth agrees that Western Australia continues to receive its GST and that we will then pay an equivalent amount as agreed between our respective treasuries into the joint fund, then we will prepared to sign the agreement.
PM: Thanks very much Colin.
As I said in my remarks before, we look forward to continuing those discussions with WA in the weeks and months ahead, given that these payments that we've outlined begin to flow from 1 July.
Mike Rann, the Premier of South Australia.
RANN: Thanks very much, Prime Minister.
Well, first of all just want to say that for many years, including the eight years I've been going to COAG meetings, Premiers and Chief Ministers have been calling for a greater commitment to health funding from the Commonwealth Government, not only for now, but also funding for growth in the future, because we know, everyone here knows, that our budgets will be consumed totally by health funding unless we get a real partnership with the Commonwealth, so I want to congratulate the Prime Minister, I want to congratulate Kristina Keneally, the Chair of CAF, for the agreement that has been reached.
South Australia and most importantly Australian patients, South Australian patients are much better off in terms of the outcomes of this conference and obviously what we've got is not only a commitment for the future, but we've got extra funding now, not later; we've got a commitment to fund growth for the future; we've got extra money for emergency departments; for elective surgery; for aged care; for primary health care and very importantly, extra money now for mental health. I'm really pleased that mental health is now on the agenda nationally.
I think that Kristina's work in securing a doubling of the amount of money, $800 million, for sub-acute beds was extremely helpful to all of us in getting a breakthrough, so I want to congratulate everyone for the constructive nature in which this conference and this COAG has been conducted, but the most important thing is we're getting money now, not just later, and I think that means that we can move forward with confidence.
PM: Thanks Mike. Jon.
STANHOPE: Thanks Prime Minister.
Prime Minister, I concur in the comments of my colleagues and I most particularly extend to you too my congratulations on achieving this historic outcome today.
It is an historic agreement, it's a sea change most particularly in the form and declared level of Commonwealth commitment; a genuine partnership to the delivery of health services for people of Australia and I think that is its most significant aspect and goes to the heart of why it is quite truly and genuinely an historic agreement.
It's the first time ever that the Commonwealth has set and committed to a realistic growth factor in relation to the cost of health care and a determination to work with the states to meet the growth in demand that all health services around Australia meet and as Mike Rann has just said a growth in demand and expensive investment which really is causing each of the states and territories to groan in the context of their capacity to meet all of their other responsibilities.
I'll just say without labouring the point too far, we've made the point, acknowledged the historic nature of the agreement, how significant it is, my colleagues have given some details of the various elements and sous-elements of the significance of the fund, but for my constituents here in the ACT, this agreement represents for us an additional $81 million in the next 4 years, very significant, and over the term of the agreement by 2020 represents an annual increase in funding for the ACT of $150 million a year - a level of investment or boost or guaranteed funding for the ACT, that in the terms of just the dollars is historic in itself.
So congratulations Prime Minister for your leadership, for your sensitivity to the particular issues of all jurisdictions and each of us has issues that are peculiar to our circumstance and I'm particularly grateful for the way you've responded to those issues that are specific to us.
I thank you and each of my colleagues and Kristina Keneally for her leadership of the states and territories through the negotiations.
PM: Thanks very much Jon, and lastly Paul from our friends in the Territory.
HENDERSON: Thank you Prime Minister and again, this agreement that we've reached today really does put patients ahead of politics and certainly in the Northern Territory, I came to this COAG meeting saying. And after a number of discussions with the Prime Minister, a 'one size fits all' approach is not going to suit the Northern Territory given the unique nature of our indigenous health disadvantage in the Northern Territory.
Indigenous people make up 33 percent of our population, but 70 percent of our hospital admissions and I'm really pleased that the Prime Minister has taken into account that disadvantage through the National Pricing Authority that will be setting the efficient price for procedures in our hospitals and certainly that's a guarantee that I sought and a guarantee that the Prime Minister has been able to give.
Importantly for the Territory, another massive reform is a significant increase in the number of GP training places for the Northern Territory. We have the lowest per capita ratio of GPs in the country and this reform and commitment achieved in this agreement along with Prime Minister, your commitment for the clinical training school between Charles Darwin University and Flinders University, will see 40 GPs a year trained in the Northern Territory for the first time in our history. A very significant reform, long overdue reform and reform supported and created by the Prime Minister and his government.
350 additional Territorians a year will receive elective surgery and again, that is very much putting patients before politics. So I'm pleased with the agreement today and it really does build on the transformation of our health system in the Northern Territory and improving hospital and patient care for Territorians.
PM: Thanks very much, and ladies and gentlemen of the press, over to you, Phil.
JOURNALIST: With the unresolved issue with Western Australia, Mr Barnett you might like to respond, does Western Australia get the add-ons that were contingent on the GST component that the other states have got, and Mr Barnett said something about a guarantee about keeping his GST. Is there potential for you to appropriate that yourself and put it into the pool like you're doing with the other states? What has to be resolved?
PM: Firstly, we're pretty confident we can work something through with our friends in the West. It might take a bit of time, a bit of an arm wrestle, a few things over there in Perth. We'll see how we go. We're very committed to making sure that we can deliver better health and better hospital services in the West as well.
On the second point you raised in terms of Commonwealth powers, we've preferred to do these things on a cooperative basis and that remains my preference and that is the attitude I'd bring to bear in continued discussions with the WA government.
Matthew.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you stressed all along the importance of getting changes in the arrangements to avoid wastage that you believe is in the current bureaucracies. But in making money available now in response to the requests of the Premiers, how are you going to make sure that the money that starts flowing from July 1 doesn't go into the big black hole that you were worried about? What are the arrangements that prevent waste?
PM: Two answers to that question. The first is this - payments which will flow from the 1st of July this year through until, let's call it the transition period leading up to the commencement of the long term funding arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States, will be underpinned by agreements between us which will have clear targets for delivery. This is very clear, these have been negotiated with officials. A mention was made before, for example, of something in the vicinity of 1,300 new hospital beds - they'll be distributed by jurisdiction, they'll be measured according to their delivery. That applies to each of the specific areas of, let's call it additional investment over the coming three to four year period.
Second answer to your question is this - what is the underlying reform for the future? What we tried to do is to provide additional growth now to prepare the system for a sustainable funding base long term. The gaps in accident and emergency, the gaps in elective surgery, the gaps in acute care beds and frankly the gaps in our current workforce, doctors in particular, but also nurses, they need to be dealt with in the here and now otherwise what you're planning by way of reform starting in '14-15 will frankly just start too far behind the 8 ball.
But once those reforms kick in, and some of my colleagues have mentioned this before, the introduction of activity based funding, the use of the Independent Pricing Authority, the funding relationship with local hospital networks - these are deep structural reforms in the health care system, the hospital system of Australia, which will drive long term efficiencies.
So in summary, what are we trying to do? Frankly, enhance the capacity of the system now to deal with these huge demand pressures which people fronting up to A&amp;Es right now and not being able to get in on time and secondly, allowing enough time also to prepare for these long-term structural reforms which will drive efficiency in the long term. Andrew.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) as to the status of this agreement, my understanding was that you needed unanimity, now if Mr, the WA Premier Mr Barnett does not go with this agreement and sign up by July 1, does the agreement die and does it also mean that WA will not get any of the benefits from the agreement and can you please quantify those benefits.
PM: Well firstly I'm confident that we'll get there by one means or another because I'm dead determined that the good folk in Western Australia benefit from these investments in their health and hospital system and the reforms which will flow from then on as well.
Secondly, as far as the agreement is concerned this morning, you've heard me speak in the past about what we would do if we achieved no agreement here. Well, as of this morning we had about 33 percent of the country on board for this agreement, as of now, we've got 90 percent of the country on board for this agreement. That's not a bad agreement, and therefore we propose to get on with it.
As far as the remaining 10 percent of the country's population is concerned, which is Western Australia, we'll work our way through those challenges. And as I've said, we'll be having discussions in the month or two ahead. I was not prepared, I don't believe my colleagues were either however, to place the rest of the rollout of this into abeyance while we simply resolve the outstanding concerns of one state and I think that's the best way to go.
You talk about 1 July - I would say that our approach is one of confidence that we'll get there and under those circumstances we do not see the need for a referendum. We have 90 percent of the country on board for this, we have the largest states in the country on board for this, we have some of the smallest states in the country on board for this - it's time to get cracking. I respect the positions put forward by my friend Colin Barnett and I think we can work our way through them, it's time to get going.
Michelle.
JOURNALIST: Mr Brumby, you've been saying for weeks now, day in, day out, that the Victorian system needed another billion-plus a year. You're now happy and talking in very positive terms about $900 million over four years. Can you explain that discrepancy, and also why did you concede on the GST?
BRUMBY: Thanks, Michelle. Two things, firstly on the funding - it's correct if you look at our document, 'Putting Patients First', my objective was always to move the Commonwealth back to a position where it was an equal funding partner with the states. And in our state at the moment the Commonwealth's on about 41, we're on about 59. My objective was to get that to 50-50. The cost of doing that would be $1.2 billion in one year if you did it all at once.
What we achieved today and over the last two days, I think, was a significant shift and move in that direction, as I indicated before. You go back three weeks ago, there was basically nothing on the table in terms of significant new funding up to 2013-14. What the Prime Minister has put on the table in the last week for Victoria totals $890 million of additional funding which, as I said before, if you want to put it in percentage terms, would lift the Commonwealth's contribution, their net, real contribution, from around 41 to a bit over 44 percent. So I think that is a significant move, and if you look at the history of these things in Commonwealth contributions, it's a very sharp increase indeed.
In terms of the GST, my position on that was well known, but again I came to the meeting today determined to try and get an outcome for our state and for the people of Australia, and I think there were probably four significant concessions, if I can put it that way, that the Prime Minister has made that led me to the decision that I made.
The first is that under the new arrangements today, the state will be the system manager. That was really important to us in terms of the health system. It's a very big health system in Victoria, its $10 billion a year. You need a single manager and the state is the system manager and that's part of the agreement today.
The second is the new funding arrangements as part of the new Health and Hospitals Fund, into which there's now transparent payment from the Commonwealth, from the State and through that, the payments to the health networks are made, rather than directly as was proposed previously, to those health networks.
Thirdly as I've said, there's more money now and for I think all of the premiers that was a significant and particularly for me. And I think, finally, Michelle, there was the guarantee that the PM put on the table yesterday which was in relation to the post'13-'14, the issue of the $15.6 billion, we wanted a guarantee that that $15.6 would be on the table and paid to the states in whatever circumstances occurred, whatever health cost inflation was, whatever the GST was, in that period, and yesterday the Prime Minister provided that guarantee, which for our state is worth $3.8 billion.
So, if you put all of that together I think this was a very significant movement indeed by the Federal Government. I think we all came to this looking to get an agreement. It is true that I have moved my position a significant way, but I think it is fair to say that the Federal Government, the Prime Minister, has also shifted and I think that's the art of good leadership. Strong leadership is to be able to lead those discussions, lead those negotiations and get the right outcome for Australia. So we all gave a bit of ground and we've all got a great outcome.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've been saying all along it's been necessary to cut out the duplication, the extra bureaucracy. From what Mr Brumby is saying, it seems that the Federal Government is going to be, the money will go to the states, then to the local area boards. How is this not the same old system of state-governed bureaucracy in the health system?
PM: This actually is a fundamental change, and let me explain how. These monies from the GST which we will retain will go to a National Hospitals Fund. This is a Commonwealth entity. Then at that point, we the Commonwealth will allocate those funds to the instrumentality to be established by conjoint Commonwealth and state legislation at the state level in each state. That is a payment authority.
What is new, and I would actually commend your attention to this once the document is circulated and people have had an opportunity to read it, is in fact the states are also, for the first time, committing to deliver their funds through that same funding authority. In other words, as many reformers have been calling upon for some time, you therefore have a common fund being delivered through to the local hospital networks. This is a significant and fundamental reform. I would draw it to your attention.
These funding authorities are simply that - payment authorities, but it's important that in response to the discipline set in the system by the independent pricing authority and the operation of activity-based funding, that the money flows in that sequence. We think the structure is in fact better, Dennis, because as the Premier of Victoria just said before, it is delivered through a common fund at the end of the day through to the LHNs.
The key here is to ensure that local hospital networks are empowered and paid direct in order to ensure that they are remunerated for the physical services they deliver. That is the organising principle, if you like, of activity-based funding - but that's what's new here and I think it's a really good change.
JOURNALIST: Are you sure that you can make the changes you're describing to the GST agreement if you don't get the agreement of all of the states, including Premier Barnett?
PM: We're confident, based on our advice, that there is no particular difficulty on that score, but we'll work our way through the detail. As I said, I'm confident we'll find some landing place with our friends in the West. I go back to the overarching point - this is a big country. There are vast differences across it. We've got agreement here from seven of the eight governments of Australia, five states, two territories, representing 90 percent of the country's population. It's time to get on with it, and while being respectful of our colleagues in the West, we'll work out those challenges in the period ahead.
Over in the front.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, as the dominant funder, are now to blame if people wait longer than four hours for an emergency department or can't get on a waiting list for surgery or have an ambulance turned away from hospital?
PM: First responsibility is this, and I've been asked this many times and it's entirely the right question - my responsibility is to ensure now, as the dominant funder of the public hospital system, the exclusive funder of the primary care system, the exclusive funder of the aged care system, is the buck stops with me.
On the delivery of the health care system, that will lie in the hands, very much, of the local hospital networks. That is as it needs to be. That's why we've set up the system this way. We regard that as the right balance for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) or mismanage it as happens from time to time?
PM: Well we need to, if you look at the millions and millions and millions of services provided each year through out health and hospital system, overwhelmingly first-class services, then the overall challenge that I've been presented with as the Prime Minister is, we have a problem both of structure and of investment. What we have dealt with in these reforms is a combination of structural reform and further investment. We believe we've got that, in balance, right as well.
You've got to make sure that your structure, for example, you mentioned the example of accident and emergency before - got to make sure you've got enough primary care services in the area to take some of the pressure off accident and emergency. You've got to make sure you've got enough sub-acute beds in the system so that there's enough room for people to come into the hospital if they have to be admitted. You've got to make sure that those beds are not being clogged by people in aged care.
This is an integrated reform, structural reform, pricing reform through the independent pricing authority and comprehensive national activity-based funding for the first time in the country's history, as well as additional investment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) cost is to the Commonwealth over the forward estimates, and how will you pay for it, and are we to understand that the structure now will be a Commonwealth health bureaucracy, that there'll be a National Hospital Fund, there'll be a payment authority, there'll be a state bureaucracy and that there'll be a local hospital network - that's five layers of bureaucracy, isn't it?
PM: That's quite incorrect, and you've characterised it in your own manner. You know as well as I do what those instrumentalities are intended to do, one of which you've just already referred to already exists.
Secondly, can I say that in terms of the reconciliation of the investment and the means by which we will fund that investment you will see all that detailed, of course, in the upcoming budget, and it will be very clear. We've reached very good agreements with the states and territories today.
I go again to the fundamental point - here we have, for the first time, the Australian Government as the exclusive funder of the aged care system, the exclusive funder of the primary health care system of Australia, and for the first time in our country's history, the dominant funder of the acute hospital system. That's what drives reform here.
Remember, I first entered this debate by saying there was excessive cost shift, blame shift, between the various arms of the health care system. Who suffers from that? Long-suffering patients, as well as the Australian taxpayer, by paying too much for services being given.
That's the reform. Given life by the operation of activity based funding, given life also by the operation of Independent Pricing Authority - these are technical bodies to a technical function, the delivery line is actually first class and for the reasons I explained before, to Dennis in response to his question, and the person up the back.
JOURNALIST: Mr Barnett, are you as confident as the Prime Minister is that you can come up with an agreement despite those outstanding issues and come up with something even though today the Prime Minister hasn't budged on that GST issues.
BARNETT: I'm sure if the Prime Minister agrees with what I propose we'll reach agreement. Simple as that.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) discussion on the funding aspects of it at the COAG meeting this afternoon?
BARNETT: Well I always thought the two major issues, certainly to Western Australia were the structure of the arrangement in terms of funding and responsibility and the GST issue. Now the reality is we had very little discussion on that. I guess there had been agreement reached with the other states. The Prime Minister from the outset knew my position, I explained that to him several weeks ago, so I guess that was a point we were not going to agree on today.
JOURNALIST: Would you have preferred more discussion at the joint meeting this afternoon? How much discussion did you have?
BARNETT: I would have preferred more discussion on the way in which the administration of these monies will work, but as I said before, we believe we could work within that structure.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can you tell us how much money was put on the table?
PM: The aggregate across the forward estimates is around about $5 billion and that is to fund the services that we've just described. That aggregates all the investments by the way, that we've announced in recent weeks which go to categories of elective surgery, which go to the categories of accident and emergency, also sub-acute services, as well as a range of others which go to the states bottom line. That also includes Commonwealth (inaudible) purpose outlays which go to other arms of the health care system. I include for example, the funding that we announced, probably about three weeks ago now, for an additional six and a half thousand medical training places for the future as well.
So can I say for us, unless you are investing in the health workforce for the future, you're actually not being serious about this. How many places have I been around the country, and how many stories have I heard from my colleagues in the states and territories about health services which are there, they have equipment and they don't have staff. And particularly in rural and regional Australia, they can't find the staff, and this is a huge problem. That is why we had to make such a significant upfront investment in terms of the health workforce. Can I just call someone who's not asked a question please. Yeah, in the front.
JOURNALIST: If Mr Barnett doesn't agree by July 1 can you clarify exactly what happens then
PM: I'm confident we'll get there, we'll work our way through it. I'm confident we'll get there. Thanks very much.
JOURNALIST: Mr Barnett, could you answer the question. What happens if you don't sign on July 1?
BARNETT: Well, Western Australia currently funds 63 percent of our public hospital system. We would continue to operate it and I don't believe in any scenario that you would see the Commonwealth discriminate against sick people or elderly people in Western Australia - I don't think that's the nature of the Prime Minister or the Commonwealth.
JOURNALIST: Premier Keneally, you've got tens of thousands of health workers out there who are now waiting to be redeployed into the local hospital networks. How many will there be and when will they see this change?
KENEALLY: Well, as I've indicated, this is a change that will take some time to achieve and we will be working with the Commonwealth to do that. When it comes to local hospital networks, the states and territories will establish for themselves the boundaries and the appropriate sizes for what meets each of their jurisdictions' needs. We will do that through a process of consultation with the clinicians, with those who use our hospital system. That's how we shaped our response to the Commonwealth's proposal through consultation with those who work in our system and we would propose to do the same in establishing the LHNs.
JOURNALIST: Premier Keneally, now, how many extra beds will New South Wales get?
KENEALLY: Well, thank you - are you happy for me to interrupt? Ok - I defer to the Prime Minister in his press conference. Thank you for the question. When it comes to beds, New South Wales will be receiving a significant amount of funding and if you give me a moment I'll be able to give you the exact figure. But what I can say is this - the funding that's been provided for beds, we received an additional $266 million today, previously the Prime Minister had put on the table $268 million over the 4 year period. I won't at this point put a number on the number of beds because we have the flexibility within the agreement that was reached today to design the outcome that best suits our jurisdictions' needs so it is quite likely there will be a mixture of acute beds, sub-acute beds, possibly some mental health beds within that, possibly some beds for our medical assessment units in emergency departments.
What this represents though from the Prime Minister is a significant investment in the first four years in our health system that will make a significant difference to those patients whether they need to be seen within our emergency departments, within the new four hour target or whether they are seeking elective surgery - this is a significant investment from the Prime Minister and it's one that we in New South Wales welcome.
JOURNALIST: Isn't your understanding -
PM: Malcolm, just to add to Premier Keneally's answer, what we've funded is 1,300 additional beds which have been funded at the sub-acute bed level. These have very specific funding formulas attached to them. There is flexibility in terms of the application of those beds to different categories of beds like those for mental health and those for psychiatric services, so there may be some variation to some extent against a precise split across that 1,300 by the normal state distributional formula.
So that's the aggregate figure, that's how it's been priced. The reason we've done it on the sub-acute basis is that we the Commonwealth would like to see a huge enhancement of sub-acute beds, why? Because they are currently not sufficiently available in the hospital system, therefore acute beds are being occupied by folk who frankly don't need them, but there's nowhere for them to go, that's why these are needed. That's why we're doing that investment. Up behind there.
JOURNALIST: Premier Barnett, are you seeking a separate deal with the Prime Minister on this, and Prime Minister, if that's the case, is that really fair to the other states, specifically to Victoria which also wanted to protect its GST?
BARNETT: Well we are, I guess seeking a separate arrangement on the GST part of this overall package and as I said before, we could accept and support the rest of the package, that is one matter that we can't. And if I can just add to that, one of the reasons, not the sole reason, but one of the reasons, is that following the recent Commonwealth grants commission allocation of money, Western Australia only 68 cents back in the dollar. The big states of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland all get in excess of 90 cents. If you take away one third of the total GST pool and Western Australia's share of that, Western Australians would be getting back about 32 cents in the dollar. That would simply be unacceptable to me and to the Western Australian public.
JOURNALIST: Can you follow up there?
PM: Just on what Colin had to say about the Commonwealth Grants Commission. This operates in different ways for different states in different years. I've been around this business for about 20 years at some stages representing the great state of Queensland, other times looking at it from Canberra and it is always a complex and controversial formula. I note, I don't wish to inject any partisan reflection here at all, but Treasurer Buswell of Western Australia just prior to the CGC producing its report, said that it should be adopted lock, stock and barrel across the country.
Now obviously WA has copped a significant hit as a result of the CGC determination, some other jurisdictions have been affected as well. This is something the Treasurer continues to work through with those individual states, as you would expect.
JOURNALIST: Is it your understanding, sir, that if you don't reach agreement with the Prime Minister, is it just West Australia that stands to be isolated, or is the deal off for the rest of the states as well?
BARNETT: I would think you need every state and territory sign up to have a complete deal.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, when you unpack the GST a bit over half of it came from the- when you unpack the GST a bit over half of it came from the abolition of the wholesale sales tax, so by my back of the envelope you've got about 20 percent you might want to play with. Are you going to hypothecate that for other areas of Commonwealth priority?
PM: Nice try George. Can I say on this auspicious occasion: no. If you like at the driver of what is sending a torpedo amid ships to the budgets of the states and territories, it's health costs. If you don't touch this, you don't reform it or do anything about it, you are consigning the states to their financial death warrant over the next 20 to 30 years. It is as clear as night follows day. Absent reform, the states as far as their own revenue sources are concerned will only be able to fund health, and health alone by about 25 years' time.
That is why we are acting now, for two reasons: one to deal with the reform and the proper long-term funding of the health and hospital system which Commissioner Bennett described recently as at a tipping point. The second reason is to deal with this fundamental structural flaw in the federation, and if you don't deal with that then frankly you are kissing the states goodbye, long term. I am actually committed to the Federation, I believe in a Federation and this is part and parcel of making sure the Federation works.
But to conclude where we began, this is about long suffering patients, families, trying to get a better health and hospital system for the future. We have, as governments, worked long and hard on this. This may be regarded by some as a plan to be criticised, that's fine, it should be the subject of all sorts of debate, and that's going to happen. But you know something? This is a huge reform for the nation and we, as the governments of Australia - Commonwealth, State and Territory - have put in a huge effort to try and deliver this reform for working families, pensioners and carers, and deliver a better health and hospital service for them.
They have been waiting long and hard for this - nearly 30 years since the last fundamental reform in our health and hospital system. This one's been a long time coming. No further time for delay, it's time to get on with it.
And thanks very much for your attention.


HOST: Prime Minister, welcome to Melbourne.
PM: Good morning Steve, and congratulations on the new program.
HOST: Well, you'll be happy, we've created 30 new jobs down here on Melbourne Talk Radio, so that'll go to the bottom line on the unemployment numbers.
PM: I'm impressed. I'll be monitoring your performance, and I'll get the tax department to do it as well.
HOST: Thanks a lot. The new deal, when will we see a difference?
PM: Starting from 1 July this year, you'll start to see funding flow through to the states and territories to build 1300 new hospital beds. Also, the funding to deliver 2500 new aged care beds as well. These are fundamental changes. People have often asked also Steve about accident and emergency and about elective surgery. What we're doing with accident and emergency is that we are implementing what's called a four hour cap. That is, four hours- within four hours of presentation, patients will be treated or admitted, unless there is some clinically appropriate reason not to do so.
HOST: Aren't you setting yourself up for a fall there? I mean, you will be criticised now, not the individual states if- and you know what will happen, talkback radio will be full of people saying it oh wasn't four hours, it was six, seven, eight, ten.
PM: I think unless we establish a target here Steve it'll just get worse. We've actually got to make the system work, because long-suffering patients are sick and tired of this. It becomes- this will be implemented progressively, and I'm just being up front about that. I can't wave a magic wand overnight, because we've got to get more doctors into the system to make it work. So, what happens is, for the more urgent patients, this will commence from 1 January 2011. It will gradually roll out so that all patients will be subject to the four hour target by 1 January 2015. That's our position on the four hour cap when it comes to accident and emergency. The other one that people often ask about, Steve, is elective surgery. And on elective surgery access targets, that'll be staged so that we have a gradual improvement every year, with interim annual targets to be developed between the Commonwealth, each state, and clinicians.
But here is what we intend to do- by 2015, 95% of patients will be treated in clinically recommended times, and that will be progressively rolled out from 2012 on. So, it's important that we get these targets right, we make the system conform to them, because otherwise, it's just going to get worse and worse.
HOST: Real money, real beds, more doctors, more nurses. A real change in hospitals, and before the end of the year?
PM: We start from 1 July. As I was saying to you and to others today, Steve, I can't wave a magic wand and say it will all be fixed as of 1 July. It won't be. But unless we do these fundamental changes, guess what, it'll get worse and worse. And what the system needs is fundamental reform, so that we get rid of duplication, waste and overlap between the two levels of Government. That's what yesterday's reform plan was all about. And secondly, to invest in the new growth that the system needs. 1300 new hospital beds, 2500 new aged care places, 20,000 extra young people getting access to mental health services, 6000 new doctors.
And we've just spoken about emergency departments and elective surgery. This is a comprehensive reform plan, the biggest since the introduction of Medicare. I'm sure there'll be glitches in the implementation of this. That's just life. But unless we turn this thing around, and start to turn it around, it'll get worse and worse.
HOST: What was the deal maker that got Victoria over the line? Was it giving John Brumby continued control of his own money?
PM: Well what happens on the ground is this- and I would acknowledge John's core role in making this agreement come about yesterday.
HOST: Well he held out longer than the others, didn't he?
PM: Yeah, but John actually has had a lot of experience in running local hospital networks in Victoria, and it is no secret that we have looked very hard at what reforms Victoria has brought in, in recent years, and learned as much as possible.
HOST: So you think it's better here than elsewhere?
PM: Ah, I won't make that comparison, because it differs from category to category. Look at the recent Australian hospitals report. But I pay a lot of attention to what John has to say to these questions, because he's got a lot of experience. Second point, though, is in terms of this new system, what's it all about- the National Health and Hospitals network, funded nationally with the Australian Government for the first time being the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia.
This is a huge change from the past. In the past, we at best picked up 35% of their running costs. This is why we had to have that change in the GST, with one third of the GST now being retained directly into a national hospitals fund. But secondly, run locally, so that local hospital networks will be able to have more say in making sure they make the best decisions for the people in their area. On the funding mechanism, what we now have is a joint statutory funding authority between the Australian Government and the State Governments across Australia which brings together our funding for the system, the states' funding for the system, and through that payment authority, it is then made direct of course to the local hospital networks. This is a good reform for the future.
HOST: I talked to Nicola Roxon the other day- can you guarantee me this is not another layer of bureaucracy, not another bunch of people sitting around computers that aren't actually on a ward, fixing people up who are sick?
PM: Absolutely not. I mean, this is the nonsense I hear-
HOST: So no more bureaucrats?
PM: I said before that in terms of the overall implementation of these reforms- and I was adamant about this when I introduced this reform plan of ours at the National Press Club about six weeks ago- that there would be no net increase in bureaucracy. What we need to do is in fact dedicate more funding to frontline services. Therefore, what's happening with the introduction of activity-based funding, whereby hospitals are paid for the actual services they deliver right across the country, we are making sure that the lion's share of this funding is delivered to doctors, nurses, and those who are already under great pressure in the system.
Part of making it work also, Steve, is to make sure that we've got enough doctors coming through. That's why we've invested in 6000 new medical training places for the country. That will take some time to flow through in terms of doctors fully emerging. But that's- doctors and nurses are the engine room, the arteries, which make the whole system work.
HOST: It's complicated financially, but you're going to take a third of the GST revenue- but is there another impact elsewhere on the budget bottom line?
PM: We believe- we have costed this very carefully- I said when I launched this-
HOST: It's difficult for people to understand-
PM: No, I understand that. When I launched this new plan of ours prior to the last election, I said there'd be no blank cheque to the states. I said that if we did this, that there'd have to be a transfer of certain payments from the states to the Commonwealth. That's what the transfer of the one third of the GST is all about. And it's now dedicated directly to a national hospitals fund. The second part of it is the growth in the system over the next three to four years. And you've rightly asked about the changes which start rolling out now- and the long term growth, we will meet that within the fiscal disciplines of the Commonwealth budget. But we could not have done so unless we had that one third of the GST being brought over.
HOST: What are you doing about WA, Western Australia?
PM: Oh well, we'll-
HOST: You seem to be trying to play that down. I think you said oh, our friends over there haven't agreed.
PM: Oh well, let's just be blunt about this. We got agreement from five of the six states, both of the territories, that's seven of the eight State and Territory Governments of Australia, representing 90% of the country's population. I think your listeners want us to get on with the job of delivering comprehensive reform and better health and better hospital services now. As for the West Australians, we'll work our way through that in the period ahead. This will take a bit of time. I'm sure we will find an outcome, because I think the good people of Western Australia are waiting for better health and better hospital services.
HOST: You upset the WA Premier didn't come across?
PM: Well, of course we're all disappointed we couldn't bring about, you know, a 100% arrangement on day one. But we're not Robinson Crusoe here. We currently have several intergovernmental agreements where West Australia has not signed up. This is not the first, there have been others as well. However, my job- and for your listeners in Melbourne- is to make sure that we get on with the business of delivering better health and hospital services, whether it's at hospitals like I've visited recently in Melbourne at Maroondah, whether it's the other big hospitals, St Vincent's, look at the Austin- these places actually need help now, as well as your big regional hospitals as well.
HOST: Does this mean I can now stop playing 'the buck stops with me'?
PM: That's a matter for you, it's a free country Steve- but I'm very blunt about-
HOST: Does this deliver on that promise?
PM: That's what I said. Why do you think I've been doing this, basically non-stop for the last two years. We had to get- we didn't just pull something out of the air here. After the Government was elected and I made that comment, and prior to the last election- what we then did was set up a National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, that took 18 months. It had representatives from right across the country, clinical experts who went through the entire system, gave us 123 different recommendations.
In the last six to nine months, Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, who's done a fantastic job on this whole reform, together with myself, we've visited 104 hospitals across the country. I did 21 or 25 of them myself, road testing these recommendations with each of them. And that formed the basis of the plan we put out six weeks ago, and as I said, 90% of the country is now signed on to it. I reckon what people want is to just get on with making these changes on the ground. It won't be perfect. It won't happen overnight. That's why I've been candid about the implementation timetables for the changes in accident and emergency and elective surgery. But Steve, if we didn't do this, if we didn't start this process now, I really worry that the system would just reach tipping point, and one day, fall over.
HOST: As usual Prime Minister, thank you, and thank you for your first interview on Melbourne Talk Radio.
PM: Appreciate it very much Steve, and happy to talk on the program. 


HOST: Prime Minister, welcome. First, can I ask you a practical question- who will decide whether a hospital gets more staff, or more beds, under this reform plan?
PM: The service agreements will be determined of course between local hospital networks and individual State Governments. That was what we outlined of course when we put forward our plan six weeks ago at the National Press Club. The key change is the funding of the system. And the funding of the system has two big reforms.
The Australian Government, for the first time in this country's history, becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system. But secondly, delivered through a new funding method which is called activity-based funding. No longer are health bureaucrats saying well it might cost this much, it might cost that much. Instead, local hospitals are being actually funded for the real services they deliver. And that is the big underlying reform in this system.
HOST: But if one of these local hospital networks gets it wrong on their allocation of staff and resources, who do voters blame? Who's accountable? The Commonwealth, or the State?
PM: The system that we have devised is very plain. On the funding of the system, because I as Prime Minister have taken on the responsibility of being for the first time the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia, and the exclusive funder of primary healthcare and the exclusive funder of aged care, when it comes to the funding of the system, the buck stops with me.
On the question of the running of the system, we've said we'd have a new health and hospitals network which is funded nationally, but run locally. That is therefore run through your individual local hospital networks, and they therefore would be locally accountable. That's as it should be. We do the funding, they do delivery, that's as it must be.
HOST: You did have to concede ground though on giving the states these state-based payment authorities for the funding to be channelled through. This wasn't part of your original plan. What will they actually do?
PM: Let's be very clear about that. These are joint funding bodies established by Commonwealth and State legislation, on which we are both represented- point one. Point two, this is actually better than what we had before. That's why I'm happy to support it. Do you know why? Because not only do we have this transparent flow of funds through to local hospital networks based on activity-based funding to the people who are delivering frontline services. You now have the same transparent flow coming through this joint funding authority from the states as well.
In other words, you have a transparent pool of funding flowing through to the local hospital network. In the past, the states could be non-transparent about how they actually funded their systems. This actually makes it clear. Funding model, price determined by an independent hospitals pricing authority- secondly, local hospitals being funded by the actual services they deliver, and thirdly, a joint payment authority which makes it absolutely transparent that the money actually goes through to the service providers. That is the change which is made.
HOST: You- the Commonwealth controls the payment authority?
PM: This is a joint statutory authority between the Commonwealth and the states. But why it is better than before, it's not just our money which goes through it, it is now the states' money as well. That means that we're going to have a common pool being delivered through to the local hospital networks. That is a reform which many people have been calling for.
HOST: This wasn't in your original plan, and Christine Bennett, who chaired your hospital review process, has told Sky News this morning that this is a political reality, to give comfort to the states. Is that right?
PM: Well, as far as the State Governments were concerned, many of the State Governments had expressed various views about the Commonwealth's direct funding model through to local hospital networks. Some fully supported it, others opposed. But where I think Premier John Brumby had a contribution, a real contribution to make in the debate was let's be pretty sensible about this- if we're going to be serious about activity-based funding, transparency of money flowing through to hospital networks which is based on what they actually do on the ground based on the price for delivering those services, then let the states have their money flow through this joint statutory body as well.
Let's remember, it's just a payment authority- but it will produce transparent data about the money which comes in from our level of Government, and from the states- and what it's actually spent on in the delivery of those services on the ground.
HOST: You do have John Brumby onboard, but you don't have Colin Barnett.
PM: Well deduced.
HOST: The West Australian Premier, he's holding out on this. Now, do you acknowledge that WA is a special case? They say they're dudded on the GST carve up already. Should they get special circumstances?
PM: Well, let's just think about this dudding on the GST stuff. Look I'm all for working with our friends in the West on their longer term financial needs. I'm a Queenslander, I kind of understand some of these questions of geographical distance and separation, but also-
HOST: Does he have a point on that, though?
PM: But also the intensity of the infrastructure which underpins major resource states as well. There's a key question there to be worked through. On the Commonwealth Grants Commission, which Premier Barnett was talking about yesterday, remember, his Treasurer Troy Buswell came out and said, as we produced the Commonwealth Grants Commission report, that it should be implemented lock, stock and barrel. Whoops- he didn't give the right answer for the West on this occasion.
So I'll let them sort that debate out locally. But on this one, I just think it's pretty useful to be transparent about what's happening here. We have said- the Australian Government- that if we are being the dominant funders of the system, we need therefore one third of the GST from the states to be dedicated to a new national hospitals fund. That's why we're retaining that part of the GST. What the West Australian Government is saying is, actually, we want an accounting trick to conceal that, that is, we the Australian Government pay them the GST, they then send that cheque back to us, and pretend that that is somehow done in an accounting way which covers up the political fact and the cold hard reality that this money's going to be spent through our national hospitals fund. I just think-
HOST: You won't cop that?
PM: Well, it's a bit of an accounting trick to be quite honest. The key thing is-
HOST: But he's equally refusing to budge on this too. He's worried about this Commonwealth Government, future Commonwealth Governments tearing into the GST for other reasons down the track. Education or something else.
PM: Let me just go to that, because I think it is a really important point. When I was talking to the Premiers yesterday, and the day before, and the night before that, it's been a long meeting - it's been a long day, already.
The two reasons I gave for wanting to reform the health and hospitals system were these: one, all of the working families, pensioners and carers out there who know from their waits in accident and emergency and know from their delayed elective surgery that change has to happen and has to start happening now.
That's why we've done this reform, funded nationally, run locally, to deliver lasting reform, but here's the second reason - it's about the reform of the federation. If we don't do this the health budgets and hospital budgets of the states and territories will crush their budgets entirely within the next 25 years or so, and if that happens: no money for them to spend on education, no money at all left for them to spend on transport infrastructure, no money for law and order, so if I did a John Howard and just stood back there and said 'OK, all I'm going to do is gouge, with Tony Abbott, a billion dollars out of the health system, the hospital system, and just watch it slowly fall over', you know something? The states would fall over, the hospitals would fall over - it's bad for the federation.
So, this is a big reform in enabling the states to actually perform the rest of their functions.
HOST: Do you need WA to do the same thing that the other states have done or can you have a separate arrangement, because he's not moving on this and says he can't be bought off?
PM: Well, can I just say yesterday what Colin had to say was just plain wrong about the fact that the national agreement wouldn't proceed in his absence. I mean-
HOST: So it can? You can have a separate-
PM: Can I just be very plain about that: there are already two intergovernmental agreements which we have with the other states and territories which don't include WA, for one reason or another.
HOST: Does that mean WA doesn't get the billions of dollars you've put on the table?
PM: Can I say I am absolutely confident that we will sort something out with the West. There'll be the usual argy-bargy over the period ahead between the two governments-
HOST: Including a separate-
PM: And I get on well with Colin. Look, we've done a lot of good work together on infrastructure funding and-
HOST: But a separate deal for the West?
PM: We'll sort it out and there's a lot of time ahead and we're going to, I'm sure find an appropriate way through this.
HOST: You haven't won over Tony Abbott, either, this morning.
PM: Surprise, surprise.
HOST: He has raised concerns about the level of bureaucracy in this.
PM: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
HOST: What legislation do you actually need to get through federal parliament for this reform to get up?
PM: Well, I have noted, I think, with a fair bit of disappointment, just how consistently negative Mr Abbott is. Doesn't matter what we put forward, he is always opposed - always opposed. And I think on health and hospitals reform it's pretty sad that he just comes out with a knee-jerk political reaction and says 'no, we're going to oppose it.'
My challenge to him, my very clear challenge to him today, is to come out in black and white and say that he will not use his numbers in the Senate to block these fundamental health reforms.
HOST: What do you need his support for?
PM: Well, obviously, with changes to the intergovernmental agreement we're going to have to change the legislation which is associated with that.
HOST: And you'd have to do that before July 1?
PM: We need to get that legislation done. We need to get it done really quick for, frankly, the reform process to start - but there are other things as well.
For example, the driving engine of so many of these reforms is the introduction of activity-based funding. Activity-based funding, that is, paying hospitals on the basis of the actual services they deliver, it is made possible through an independent hospital pricing authority. That has to be set up under legislation so that we've got an efficient hospital price. There's another piece of legislation.
HOST: Can you tell me this, Prime Minister - will you tie that legislation to your means test on the private health insurance rebate, which was a broken promise, and for that reason Tony Abbott is saying he won't support that means test? Will these two things be tied, or can they be dealt with separately in the parliament?
PM: The funding which is associated with, frankly, this crazy system which Mr Abbott continues to defend whereby people like you and me and Tony Abbott who are on high incomes have our private health insurance in part rebated by working people on 50 grand a year, I reckon that stinks. We need to change that for people like us on $200,000, $300,000, $400,000 a year. That money should be going to the public hospital system, but in answer to your question-
HOST: -Will tie that to the reforms?
PM: In answer to your earlier question, they've already rejected that particular proposal. We simply want to get on with the business of delivering these other reforms, but the system has to be funded as well.
HOST: You'll separate them?
PM: Of course they'll be dealt with each on their own merits and through separate pieces of legislation.
HOST: And before the election? Will these reforms have to be put through before the election?
PM: We need to get cracking now. People have been waiting a long, long time for fundamental health and hospital reform. We intend to get on with the job. I have a heard a thousand reasons in the last six months about why we should delay, delay, delay.
Guess what? Not one of them has actually come from a real, live human being out there in the community who's sitting in an accident and emergency waiting to be treated. They have come from politicians and some state health bureaucrats and elsewhere.
It's time to get on with this. It's a big reform, the biggest since Medicare, and that's because I believe working families, pensioners and carers want better health, better hospital services - starting now. That's why our payments would start flowing for these reforms from 1 July this year.
HOST: Just finally, Prime Minister, Tony Abbott's idea for taking the dole off young Australians to encourage them to fill some of the skills gaps in mining and other industries - what do you think of that?
PM: I notice Mr Abbott has a habit of policy making on the run. Last time he did this was with his $11 billion great big new tax to pay people and families on up $150,000 a year, say $75,000 by putting in a whole big new tax on business and allowing those costs to flow through to working families for bread and milk and other things. That was the last time we had policy making on the run.
Our position is pretty clear. When it comes to any young person in Australia under 20, it's earn or learn. If you're not out there learning or earning you don't get youth allowance. It's pretty basic.
HOST: Under 30 he's talking about.
PM: We also have a broader set of arrangements for, in our Compact with Young Australians, for those under the age of 25. Can I say this is considered policy. We've worked it up, it's thorough, it's in detail. I've already started to see some changes happening out there in the community as a result of its introduction.
What we've had instead from Mr Abbott is, once again, policy making on the run. I think, you know, you do too much of that, as we've seen with his $11 billion great big new tax coming off the back of subsidising folk on higher incomes for paid parental leave, I just think it's time Mr Abbott did some hard work on these sorts of questions.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you.
PM: Pleasure.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: That was a fairly large concession, wasn't it, to allow the states to control their own pool funding? You always said the buck would stop with you. Why did you buckle to the Premiers on that?
PM: Well let's be very clear about it. First of all, we said we'd bring about a new National Health and Hospitals Network which is funded nationally, and run locally. We've delivered on the system being funded nationally, that is, for the first time the Australian Government will be the dominant funder for the system. Secondly, we've also said that local hospital networks, rather than state health bureaucrats, should deliver the system, and that those local hospital networks should have a core and greater role for local clinicians, doctors and nurses, to have their say.
On your point about the actual delivery model or the delivery agency of funding on the ground to local hospital networks, what we've agreed to with the states and territories is not a state delivery agency, what we've agreed to is a joint State-Commonwealth statutory body which becomes the payment authority. In fact, it's better than what we've planned before. Our money goes through this payment authority to the local hospital networks, and the states' money does as well. There'll be full transparency, therefore, about how the money is being delivered to each of the local hospital networks of Australia. It's actually better than what we planned for.
HOST: But those networks remain managed by the states. Under your original plan- well, it wasn't clear, was it- the original plan, they were going to be managed by the Commonwealth, weren't they?
PM: No, that's not correct. What we put forward was- in our blueprint that we released at the National Press Club about six weeks ago- was a system funded nationally, run locally, but local hospital networks, as we stated then, would negotiate their service contracts with the state health departments. What we would do is pick up the funding that was necessary to deliver those programs on the ground. There's no change there.
On the question of the actual funding authority, it's better than what we had before, because the funding authority now brings together both the Australian Government's funding and the States' Government funding through a conjointly controlled mechanism, and pays that through to the local hospital networks. That is better, because it actually produces greater transparency, on all the money reaching frontline services, as opposed to being siphoned off in the state health departments.
HOST: Okay Prime Minister, let's talk about WA, Colin Barnett refusing to sign up for the plan. Does that put the deal in doubt, or can you cut him out? Or does it scuttle the deal? Or will you need two deals? What will happen if he sticks to his guns?
PM: The bottom line is, the agreement we reached yesterday to deliver 1300 new hospital beds, to deliver some 6000 new doctors in terms of medical training places, as well as some 2500 new aged care places. This has been delivered and agreed with Governments representing 90% of Australia. Now, as far as Western Australia is concerned, look, this has happened before. We've already got a couple of intergovernmental agreements from which the Western Australians have decided not to become engaged. That's, I think, important for people to understand.
The delivery for the rest of the country flows as per the agreement yesterday. I'm confident we'll work our way through with the Premier of Western Australia. I've got to know him quite well over the years, the last year or so that he's been in the job. And we must make sure that these extra hospital beds, extra doctors, extra aged care places are delivered on the ground for the long-suffering people of Western Australia as well.
HOST: But if not, the deal with the other states will stand?
PM: The deal with the rest of the states proceeds anyway. That's just the bottom line here. Let me be absolutely clear about that. There will be a fundamental change to the way in which health and hospital services across the country are funded and delivered through this reform plan, which is the biggest change to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.
As for WA, we can find our way through. I'm sure we'll be able to sort something out. But I think it's really important for people, including in the West, not just to hide behind, sort of, accounting tricks. Let's just go to the basics here. Why did we ask for one third of the GST to be retained and directed into a national hospitals fund? We've got to make sure that this system is properly funded for the future, that's been the problem in the past.
HOST: And Prime Minister, sorry to jump in on you- but how will you fund it? That's a lot of money we're talking about.
PM: Well, I've always said to the states and territories there's no free money here. There's no blank cheque. That is why one of the most controversial aspects of this reform has been to get agreement from seven of the eight State and Territory Governments of Australia for the Australian Government to retain one third of the GST, put it into a national hospitals fund, for it to form the basis for the funding properly for the system into the future.
The second part of it is this- we can't transform this system overnight. That is, make sure that all of the changes that we need to see, in accident and emergency and elective surgery, are all delivered within the next two or three weeks. It won't happen that way. Therefore, what we have done is also provide additional investments right now to flow through for the next three or four years, to enhance accident and emergency, so that we can bring about a four hour target. Extra resources now to enhance elective surgery, so we can have 95% of patients treated within clinically accepted times, and we'll fund that within the budget.
HOST: How much is that worth? $5 billion, I think you said yesterday.
PM: Between 4.9 and 5.1.
HOST: Over what period?
PM: Between 2010- that's 1 July- through until 2014.
HOST: So you're going to have to make cuts elsewhere in the budget to accommodate that $5 billion?
PM: John, what we have done is worked long and hard over the last several months making sure that this allocation can be met-
HOST: Can be funded.
PM: Can be funded within the Commonwealth's overall budget discipline. But if we were not to do this, and to provide the extra doctors now and the training places necessary, the extra enhancements to the surgeries- in which people need to get their elective surgery done- more bays and more assessment units attached to accident and emergency, frankly, it would be a paper reform, that is, people would pretend that something was going to happen, as opposed to the substance being delivered.
So what I'm trying to do is bring about those extra doctors and nurses and hospital beds now, that is, in the period that's immediately ahead. That costs money. In order for us to deliver these improved targets for A&amp;E and for elective surgery etcetera, into the long term future and put the system on to a secure funding base.
HOST: Sorry, I'm not the Treasurer, but I can see- you've got $3 billion of BER funding that's yet to be contracted, and I think you've got the insulation program due to start from July 1. Are they areas you could look at, in terms of trying to find the money for what you've just outlined?
PM: John, we have done this through our budget process, in a highly fiscally disciplined manner. Everything that I spoke to the Premiers and Chief Ministers about yesterday we had budgeted for. It is in the budget. And it will be delivered within our budget disciplines.
HOST: So those areas, that'll all still be delivered? You're not going to scale back the stimulus money, are ya?
PM: We have- let's just deal with that question in terms of the overall impact of making sure the economy keeps performing. If you go out into regional Australia right now John, you'll find that many parts of our country have unemployment rates in excess of 10%. Far North Queensland, 12.4%, other parts of the country, high single digits. This is not an even recovery across the country. And what we have done through the national economic stimulus strategy is keep hundreds of thousands of Australians in work, that task remains ahead.
HOST: (inaudible) yeah?
PM: We'll continue to implement our national economic policy and our fiscal policy, consistent with each other. But let me tell you, getting this country out of the events of the last 18 months, when every other country- major advanced economy- went into recession has been hard work. We're not out of- fully out of the woods yet in certain regions of Australia. But we have done this health and hospitals policy in an entirely fiscally disciplined fashion.
And I'd simply contrast that with our political opponents, who despite the public revenue being awash from the proceeds of the mining boom starting in the early 2000s. What did Mr Abbott do for five years as Health Minister? He ripped, instead, $1 billion out of the public hospital system, that is wrong.
HOST: Prime Minister, speaking of Tony Abbott- I know you've got to go- but a quick question, what's your reaction to his proposal, well, he's floated the idea reasonably well in Perth of banning the dole for people under 30 to try and get them to perhaps move to WA to fill the job vacancies that occur over there.
PM: It seems that Mr Abbott does a whole lot of policy on the run. Because I noticed when that statement was made yesterday, the Liberal party quickly went out and said it wasn't Liberal party policy. So we've seen a bit of this. Also, policy on the run, like Mr Abbott's great big new tax for his proposed paid parental leave scheme which would flow through to extra costs to working families, that is, cost to businesses and costs flowing through to the price of milk and the price of bread.
But can I just say this on health and hospitals reform- Mr Abbott has already unfortunately come out and opposed the Government's reform plan and our investment plan. I would appeal to him today, to come out and make absolutely clear that he will not use his numbers in the Senate to block these fundamental reforms to our health and hospital system, to deliver the biggest change in health and hospitals in Australia we've seen- since the introduction of Medicare about 30 years ago.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program. 


HOST: Australians have been promised vastly better health and hospital services under Kevin Rudd's historic reform plan. From July 1, 2010 the National Health and Hospitals Network will start delivering 1,300 new hospital beds, another 2,500 beds in aged care and 6,000 new doctors. Waiting times in emergency will be no longer than four hours and elective surgery is to be delivered on time in 95% of cases. Funding is also aimed at mental health services for 20,000 young people. The ambitious plan is set to cost $21 billion over the next 10 years but the plan is at risk, of course, with Western Australia yet to sign up.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us now from Canberra. How are you travelling, PM?
PM: It's OK, Karl. It's been a busy few days, but I think it's been a good outcome for working families, pensioners, carers - people who want to see better health and better hospitals.
HOST: It sounds to me like you say you've cut a deal, but have you really when you haven't got all the States to sign on?
PM: Well, let's be very frank about this. We've got seven of the eight governments of Australia - that's five of the six States, both Territories - who have agreed to this and together they represent about 90% of our country's population and we can proceed with this agreement as it is and those services that you've just referred to will be delivered.
With Western Australia, I'm confident we can find a way through with our friends in the West. Working families over there, they are looking out for better health and better hospital services, too, and we intend to get on with the job.
HOST: So, what you're saying this morning is that it doesn't matter if Colin Barnett and Western Australia don't decide to go ahead with their end of the bargain, to sign on to your agreement. You will press ahead with it regardless?
PM: There's been too much delay for too long for people who are wanting to see more doctors, more nurses and more hospital beds. That's why we're getting on with it - because people are just crying out for change here. Our doctors and nurses are doing a fantastic job, they don't have the resources to it and this is the first time the Australia Government becomes the dominant funder of the public health system of Australia. For the West though, can I say we already have a number of intergovernmental agreements involving most of the other States and Territories, where Western Australia, for its own reasons, has chosen not to sign on. It doesn't mean that you simply delay everything for the rest of the nation. You get on with the business and you try and work things out separately with the West.
HOST: So, essentially, the deal is done. We are progressing. This is going ahead as it stands at twelve past seven on this Wednesday.
PM: Absolutely, because I've travelled so widely across Australia. All your viewers this morning, I've been to hospitals and local GP clinics in most of the major cities and centres of Australia and the capital cities as well. People are crying out for these changes. If we don't fix this system, I just worry that over the next decade our health and hospital system would reach a tipping point and maybe fall over. This is about providing long-term reform to get rid of duplication, waste and overlap between the two levels of government and to provide, for the first time, the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the system for the future. I think this is a big turnaround.
You mentioned before, in your introduction, what happens in accident and emergency, what happens with elective surgery. This affects thousands of people watching your program today and our job is to bring in these changes over the next one, two, and three years, getting the funding right, getting the extra doctors in place to make it work better for people who depend on our health service.
HOST: Alright. Australians voted for you in 2007 because you were going to, you promised, to fix the health system and you've only just reached a no-inclusive deal but you're going ahead with it as you've said to us this morning. Are you going to ask for them to vote for you again based on this health policy?
PM: Well, the Australian people will make up their minds about this Government's record of achievement and our plans for the future. It's a matter for them, but what I said prior to the last election is that we would undertake an independent reform investigation of the entire health system. We've done that. That took us 18 months.
We've road tested those recommendations in literally more than 100 hospitals across the country. I've visited about 25 of them myself for detailed consultations.
We've put forward our plan for the nation. It's been debated for the last six weeks and 90 percent of the nation has now come onboard with seven of the eight State and Territory governments doing so.
This is fundamental change - the biggest change to our health system since we introduced Medicare.
HOST: For those waiting - this is what we're getting emails about this morning, PM, and lots of them - for those waiting for elective surgery, for those waiting in hospital emergency departments for hours on end with their children at night, for those long-suffering patients as you call them, how long before we start to see any real and measureable improvement?
PM: Well let's go to the first part of your question which is for people, like last night, who would have gone to accident and emergency in the hundreds of hospitals across the country which offer A&amp;E services. The four hour waiting target that we have agreed to yesterday with the States and Territories is rolled out progressively from next year - that's 2011 - across the subsequent three years and that is when it will be implemented. I can't turn things around overnight-
HOST: -I understand, I understand that, PM, but also you can give them a much better indication and a much more realistic, I guess, insight into how long they are going to be waiting is it going to be, in 2012, three and a half or a four and a half hour wait? Is it going to go down from five hours? Is it going to be four hours or three hours? Is it going to go down in that regard? On a scale, can you give them some measure of improvement here because people are sick and tired of these waits.
PM: Karl, that's why we've acted on this. That's why for the first time the nation is bringing in-
HOST: -but you can't give them any tangible, realistic numbers here. They're going to want that, they're going to crave that and they deserve that.
PM: Karl, they do, if you look at the statement issued by the governments of Australia yesterday it outlines how this will be progressively rolled out between 2011 and 2014, starting with the most severe cases first and down to the next.
I cannot wave a magic wand and say here are 6,000 extra doctors to staff the system tomorrow. What I can say is here are the extra positions to actually staff these accidents and emergencies and here are the extra resources to make sure that we can implement this four hour cap. Last night you would have had people waiting 8 hours, 10 hours, 11 hours and across the nation we currently have about 35% of people in accident and emergency who are not being attended within clinically acceptable times. That's why it changes progressively from next year on, for the subsequent three years, and I can't wave a magic wand to make that better.
You also asked about elective surgery and many people are having their elective surgery delayed and delayed and delayed again. Again, what we'll progressively implement over the subsequent three-year period is bringing in a 95 percent rule - that is that 95 percent of elective surgery cases will be done within clinically accepted times. To make that happen I've got to fund the expansion of operating theatres right across the country and to make sure we have the capacity to do it. This is a detailed plan, progressively implemented, the targets are real and across that time span that I've just indicated.
HOST: Alright, I think everyone at home will be the judge of that as it unravels. Health reform is much needed in this country. We wish you all the best in implementing that with great speed.
PM, thanks for your time.
PM: Appreciate it very much, Karl.


PM: First of all it's great to be back here in Hobart, great to be at the Royal Hobart, and here at the repatriation centre and the rehabilitation unit. Because this is where the rubber hits the road when it comes to delivering better health and better hospital services to all Australians, including older Australians, including the good folk of Tasmania more broadly. It's good to be here with the Premier- I think in your first official day on the job, is that right?
BARTLETT: That's right.
PM: Good, and congratulations to you. But also here with Julie Collins, the Member for Franklin, and Jonathan Jackson, who is our new candidate for the seat of Denison. I understand you've been an accountant here in Hobart - we won't hold that against him. Born and bred here in Tassie. And also married with a couple of kids, on the steering committee of an organisation called Main Chance Farm, which helps kids at risk. So it's good to have a candidate of such high quality standing for us for the upcoming federal election due by the end of this year.
We're here to talk about health and hospitals. And together with the Premier, in Canberra over the last several days, we've forged an historic agreement for a new National Health and Hospitals Network, the NHHN - funded nationally, run locally. All for one purpose, to deliver better health and hospital services to working families, to pensioners, and to carers. And that means more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses to make the system work better.
Here in Tasmania, the key thing is to make sure that we deliver services which make a difference on the ground. And that's why I'm pleased, with the Premier, to have been party to an agreement which will deliver over the next three years $142 million in additional investment, and over the period ahead beyond that, a further $340 million. Let's just go to the immediate period ahead. We're talking about new investments into emergency departments in order to bring about, over the three years ahead, a four hour target for ED waiting times. This is important. It's important for people who go to accident and emergency, knowing they can be treated in time.
For elective surgery, we're also investing some $15 million and a further $8 million as well to bring about a target of 95 per cent of people being seen for elective surgery within clinically acceptable times. We're also investing, nationwide, in a very large expansion in hospital beds, including sub-acute beds of the type that we've been visiting here today at the rehabilitation centre.
For Tasmania, we'll see from 1 July the beginning of a rollout of 30 more of those beds across the state, including in centres like this one. This is really important, because there's a demand for these beds. It's very important for people's dignity, for their health, that they have an opportunity to rehabilitate, to get their confidence back, to get their strength back, in order to get back home. But you can't do that if you don't have enough beds. And that's why this is a very practical measure on the ground.
They advised me, coming into the centre today, that there are I think two wards of 20 each here - so across the state, we're looking at a further 30 fully staffed beds. These, for the benefits of our friends in the media, are not those physical things that you sit on called a bed. A cost of a bed is about $6-800,000 a year per bed. And that's after you've got through the set-up costs. These are very expensive investments. But they're very important to enable people to get their lives back together, to be able to become self-sufficient again, and to make sure that they can be returned home as quickly as possible.
Of course, to make all this work, we need to have for Tasmania, and for the nation at large, more doctors, more GPs, more specialists. I spoke last night here in Tasmania, in Hobart, with the head of the AMA and senior officers of the AMA about the shortage of GPs across Tasmania. The figures they gave me, Premier, were you're currently about 24 short across the state. I have no basis whatsoever to dispute those numbers. Therefore, the practical thing is what are we going to do about it to fill that gap now.
So what we're doing is adding - starting from the year ahead - a significant increase in GP training places right across Australia. And that will roll out over the decade ahead, to bring about another 6,000 places. Here in Tasmania, what we're talking about is 111 GP training places being rolled out, 20 junior doctors positions, 14 specialist doctors, 74 allied health workers. You can train people in university, that is one thing. But unless you're also funding training places within hospitals, it doesn't work. This is a radical change, therefore, to our investment in the needs of the health workforce.
So, where the rubber actually hits the road with big announcements like the one we made in Canberra the other day, what does it mean for people here, in Hobart, in Launy, and right across the state of Tasmania? It means investments which make a difference on the ground at your accident and emergency, for your elective surgery, and available hospital beds, and at a very practical level, for folk like Bertha and Tom and Noelene who we met today, folk in their 80s and 90s, it means being able to have access to a bed like this so that the acute care beds at Royal Hobart are freed up for the people who will roll into accident and emergency tonight, some of whom will need urgent surgery.
So this is all part of an integrated reform for the system.
The second thing I'd touch on before taking your questions, and asking the Premier to comment as well, is on the economy. We can invest in better health and better hospitals because the Australian Government has kept the economy strong. We've protected this economy, during the worst global economic downturn that the world has seen since the Great Depression. We have protected Australian jobs. We've protected Tasmanian jobs. Had we seen the same unemployment levels here as we've seen around the rest of the world, you would have up to half a million more Australians out of work, with huge consequences for the economy, with huge consequences for our ability to fund the expansion of services like we're doing in health and hospitals.
I'd draw your intention to the important report brought out in the last 24 hours by the IMF, the International Monetary Fund. The International Monetary Fund provides further clear international evidence that Australia leads the world in global economic performance when it comes to the advanced economies. It indicates quite clearly how Australia has succeeded in keeping this country out of recession while practically every other advanced economy in the world sank into recession.
And the numbers released by the IMF today couldn't make that any clearer. Australia's growth outlook is stronger than for any of the other advanced economies. Let's just go to one or two of the numbers so that people are very familiar with it. For 2008, we managed to keep growth in this country running at 2.4. Across the rest of the advanced economies, it contracted to 0.5. In 2009, when the global recession was biting at its worst, we managed to keep positive economic growth in the Australian economy at 1.3 per cent while the rest of the advanced economies sank into 3.2 per cent worth of recession. That is, negative 3.2.
For 2010, the IMF's projection is 3 per cent positive growth for Australia, 2.3 for the rest of the world as they slowly recover. And for 2011, the IMF's projection is 3.5 per cent growth for Australia against 2.4 per cent, the average of the other economies. This is a very clear contrast, a very clear international contrast which underpins the Australian Government's success in keeping this economy strong. And that is what we have done. And because of that, we're able to invest in the needs of our health and hospital system.
One final point on the economy. And that is the contrast in terms of our political opponent, Mr Abbott, could not be clearer. Mr Abbott today has called for the Government to immediately cancel the implementation of the remaining parts of the Australian Government's national infrastructure stimulus strategy. That's what he's called for. Mr Abbott previously has said that the model that we should've followed is New Zealand.
New Zealand went through one and a quarter years of negative economic growth. We began this period of the global economic downturn with the same unemployment rate as New Zealand. Right now if we had the same unemployment rate as New Zealand, we'd have more than 300,000 more Australians out of work.
Can I just say, this is the starkest of all possible contrasts. This policy from Mr Abbott would cause chaos, economic chaos, and would pull the rug out from under the economy. And literally thousands of businesses, small businesses, would go to the wall.
Look at the specific projects which his policy would mean either cancelling or winding back. Here in Tasmania, the Brighton Bypass on the Midland Highway - $164 million worth of investment - gone. Ipswich Motorway, the Bruce Highway, the Pacific Highway, the Hume Highway, the Western Ring Road in and around our major cities. Regional rail express in Victoria. The Hunter Expressway in New South Wales. Rail upgrades in South Australia. Mr Abbott is saying to each of these projects, 'gone'. Let's be very clear about this.
Therefore, when I look at the implications of this reckless policy announcement on the ground, huge projects affecting roads right across the country would be affected, but here in Tasmania, and right across Australia, 4,000 schools in the middle of rolling out the biggest school modernisation program that the country's ever seen would be left in complete chaos. Absolute chaos.
So my challenge to Mr Abbott is - one, name each of these projects across the country that you would cancel. Two, name which of the school modernisation projects you would cancel. Town by town, community by community, state by state. Let's have the details, or is this just a cheap political line? On the economy, Mr Abbott represents a capital R risk. And on health and hospitals, Mr Abbott, as always, is negative with a capital N.
I just conclude by one further specific investment on health and hospitals we're making here in Tasmania today. What we'll do here in Tasmania is also have $1.5 million provided to the University of Tasmania to work with a range of health providers, including Hobart Private Hospital, to create clinical training places for around 180 students. These students will be training in areas such as psychology, pharmacy, midwifery, nursing, physiotherapy and medicine. And it builds on the health workforce reforms that we've spoken of already. But these investments in our health and hospital system would not be possible unless you're able to keep our economy strong.
We've kept our economy strong. We're the only one of the major advanced economies to have stayed out of recession. The only one to have grown positively during the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression. The second lowest unemployment. The lowest debt, the lowest deficit. And Mr Abbott's response to that is 'cancel the lot'. Well I'd say, on the economy, Mr Abbott represents a capital R risk.
Now Premier, before I take any questions, do you wish to add on the health matters that we spoke about?
BARTLETT: Well can I just say, firstly, my congratulations to the Prime Minister for bringing about, having the courage, and taking us as Premiers through the most significant reforms to health and hospitals since Medicare. The reforms that we signed up to - and I proudly signed up to on behalf of Tasmania this week - will see a generation of improvement in our hospitals, a generations-worth of improvement to our elective surgery waiting lists, to our throughput in emergency departments, and to places like this in terms of the extra sub-acute beds. So my congratulations to the Prime Minister and I offer my full support in the implementation of these reforms in Tasmania.
That implementation, while these reforms will have long-term benefit over the coming decades for our nation and for our state, that full support in implementation will also have significant short-term benefits for Tasmania. With the work we've already done together since the last COAG health arrangements were put in place in late 2008, Tasmania's elective surgery waiting lists have dropped by a full 13 percentage points. That trajectory will continue with the extra investment that the Prime Minister has committed, and we will see our waiting lists in Tasmania over the coming two and three years continue to reduce by that amount or by a similar amount over those coming years.
This is a great outcome for Tasmanian patients, a great outcome for Tasmanian health and hospitals, and with the further announcement today, that investment will continue to see Tasmanians, and indeed interstate people moving to Tasmania, to find positions of training in our hospitals, which has, of course, been the missing link.
This, together with the many hundreds of millions of dollars that we committed to over the course of the election campaign that we will start implementation on right now, one of which was of course a $14 million program to attract GPs to rural and regional areas of Tasmania, will dovetail perfectly with the reforms that the Prime Minister is talking about and we'll see rural communities get better access to GP services, further taking that pressure off our emergency departments state-wide.
So, thank you for coming down, Prime Minister, and we look forward over coming months and years to working with you on getting these reforms right and delivering for all Tasmanians.
PM: Good. Thanks very much. Over to you, folks, for some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this from the IMF report (inaudible) Mr Abbott this morning said that the Howard Government could take a lot of credit for that - do you accept that?
PM: What I would say is that Mr Abbott should focus on one core fact - that is, that he and his Party opposed the Government's national economic stimulus strategy. That strategy has been validated by the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the OECD as the basis upon which this economy stayed out of recession. That is the core fact.
Secondly, not having learnt from that, Mr Abbott now says that this strategy should be cancelled. I go round regional Australia, North-West Tasmania, Far North Queensland, those parts of Australia which are still doing it tough - and I mean really tough - what Mr Abbott would say is 'I intend to pull the rug from under those regional economies'. That is not acceptable.
Can I also say, again, that on the economy, Mr Abbott increasingly is a capital R risk.
JOURNALIST: Do you now have to, to get these changes through, you now need to go to Parliament, I understand. Have you thought about the Senate and a strategy, perhaps, to get these through in that other difficult arena that might match the premiers?
PM: Well, your question is based on a core reality. The first is we can have a plan, a National Health and Hospitals Plan, to bring about better health and better hospital services for all Australians, but unless you've got the agreement of the states and territories then it wouldn't get anywhere, and if you don't get it through the Australian Parliament then you can't get it implemented on the ground.
Now, we've passed the first of those hurdles, the big one - getting seven of the eight governments of Australia, the states and territories, to support the implementation of the biggest reform to our health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare, remember, with the Australian Government for the first time becoming the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia.
That brings us to the next phase, which you point to in your question. My challenge, again, to Mr Abbott today is to provide two simple, plain-speaking guarantees.
The first is to guarantee he will not use his numbers in the Senate to block the necessary legislation to give effect to the National Health and Hospitals Network, and secondly to provide a clear-cut guarantee that if he was to win the next election that he would not overturn these reforms or change them.
That's the bottom line.
JOURNALIST: Do you have a plan B, though? Have you approached Nick Xenophon, the Greens, those sorts of people in the Senate?
PM: I've noticed already that Senator Fielding is sounding negative. The key thing here is to make sure that we have a clear statement from Mr Abbott, who prides himself, it seems, from time to time, on straight talking, to give us a straight-talking answer to this question. And the question for Mr Abbott is provide a guarantee that you won't use your numbers in the Senate to block the implementation of this health and hospitals reform package.
You know something? Mr Abbott increasingly seems to be playing to what he sees to be his short-term political advantage. I would challenge him, instead, to look to the long-term health needs of the nation. Playing short-term politics is one thing. Short-term political advantage for Mr Abbott may be one thing. Long- term health needs of the nation, frankly, is what working Australians want to see.
JOURNALIST: Would rejection in the Senate also trigger a referendum?
PM: Can I say that we believe that Mr Abbott has got a deep responsibility here to act in the national interest, not to run and hide, not to scurry away, but to be plain-speaking - plain-speaking. Our plan for a National Health and Hospitals Network has been out there for more than six weeks. It's there in two elaborate documents which detail precisely what we intend to do.
Further, there is a detailed communiqué which goes to the actual content of the agreement with the state and territories. It's there for all to see. And Mr Abbott and his Party have been following this debate for a long, long time. Mr Abbott was health minister of Australia for nearly five years just prior to this election. It's not as if he comes to this debate without any previous experience. Therefore, the challenge again to Mr Abbott, as he claims to be an exponent of plain speaking, is to say will you provide a guarantee today not to block this reform to our health and hospital system in the Senate. It's pretty plain.
JOURNALIST: Are you ignoring the crossbenchers, then? The other parties and the independents?
PM: Well, I've noted what, already, Senator Fielding has said. I'm sure discussions will occur with all senators, as it does and as would normally be the case, but let's just face some realities here about who commands the lion's share of the numbers in the Senate. It's called the Liberal and the National Party. Last time I looked their leader was Mr Abbott, and therefore the ball is very much in his court. And this question is not an academic question. It's a real question. What stand between the delivery of these reforms to our health and hospital system is Mr Abbott failing to be clear cut - does he support this in the Senate or does he oppose it?
So, rather than just running for cover, as he seems to have done in the last 24 hours on this one, I think it's time he came out and actually said what he means on this. We're coming, also, up against an Opposition which has become the most obstructionist opposition in the Senate in 30 years, if you look at the number of pieces of legislation which are being blocked by the Liberal and National parties in the Senate.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a slightly different topic - you've grappled with the Greens in the Senate on things like emissions trading and had things knocked back.
BARTLETT: I think I know where this is going.
JOURNALIST: Now that Mr Bartlett effectively needs Greens support in the lower house alone to do just about anything, how can that work? How can that possibly work?
PM: Well, first of all, the Tasmanian people have spoken. The Tasmanian people have let their hopes and desires and judgments be known through the ballot box. That's what our democracy's all about.
So, what are the alternatives? You leave a state ungovernable or you form a government, and I believe what the Premier's done is a practical course of action in response to the clearly expressed will of the people.
I've also noted carefully what the Tasmanian Greens leader has had to say. He's committed himself to a constructive course of action. I believe, at this stage in the process I see expressions of goodwill all round to make this work, and certainly my attitude as Prime Minister is I work with every democratically elected government of the country - Liberal, Labor, Calathumpian, Green, whatever you like, okay? That's what the people elect, so I think -
JOURNALIST: - Does it change the dynamics in Canberra between you as a Federal Labor and Federal Greens, at all?
PM: We've always sought to maintain a constructive dialogue with the Greens. They will whack us around the head from time to time, and say nice things occasionally. That's just the nature of the argy-bargy of politics.
Can I say, though, for the good people of Tasmania, making sure that the government is properly functioning, based on goodwill from the parties concerned, I think that's what people expect. The people of Tasmania, like Australians right across our nation, they want government to get on with the practical business of delivering better services on the ground in education, in health and hospitals and law and order and transport and infrastructure, and so I wish the new Government of Tasmania well, including its newest ministers, including Minister McKim.
JOURNALIST: Does it mean (inaudible) I mean, that would be (inaudible) for a lot of Labor ministers (inaudible). How do you think (inaudible)
PM: I think with good humour, charm, general exchange of -
BARTLETT: - Like the COAG meeting.
PM: Yeah, like a COAG meeting, which occasionally has its robust moments.
Look, it depends, ultimately, whether people want to make the system of government work or not. And, for example, COAG, the Council of Australian Governments, in the two years or so that I've been Prime Minister, it has become the workhorse of the federation. We have engineered major, major changes to the nation in terms of our intergovernmental agreements on education, on health and hospitals now, on microeconomic reform across a whole range of areas including conflicting state regulation of the economy, the agreement we reached recently in Darwin on a national agreement for the first time on closing the gap with Indigenous Australians which is the most comprehensive agreement on health and education services for the first Australians, and you know something? That's all based on ministers of different governments with different emphases and from different political parties deciding through an act of political will to make the system work.
So, the challenge and the opportunity lies to these new members of David's government to do the same. I've heard very strong expressions of goodwill and intention to do that. We're pretty relaxed about all that. At the end of the day, I think people in the community are pretty practical. They'll make a judgment based on what we do, what we deliver and how far we go.
And having said that, I'm late for a conference. You've got a conference on tourism here that I've got to address.


HOST: Kevin Rudd, good to have you with us again. Good morning.
PM: Good morning, Tim. Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: What exactly are you looking to achieve in Tasmania's hospitals, one, with a visit today, and two, in a wider sense?
PM: Well, let's be very clear about it - what we're trying to do is deliver better health and better hospital services to all Australians and all Tasmanians, and that's why we, together with the Tasmanian Premier, reached agreement in Canberra just a few days ago on a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally, and for the first time the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia.
Where's the rubber hit the road, though, for Tassie? This is an additional investment in the three years ahead of $142 million into your health system. In emergency departments, what we're moving to over that period of time is rolling out a four hour target for emergency department waiting times. For elective surgery, what we're moving out over the next three years as well is moving to a target of 95 percent of people being seen within clinically recommended times and we're also rolling out another 30 hospital beds and that roll out will begin on 1 July this year. For doctors, and I think that's where the rubber hits the road, because you do have shortages in the medical workforce here, so what we're doing is investing in another 111 GP training places over the decade ahead, 20 junior doctors, 14 specialist doctors and 74 allied health workers. I can't turn things around overnight-
HOST: Prime Minister, have I got you there? No-
PM: -to grow the medical workforce here, because unless we do that all the other undertakings we give would not come to fruition because you need doctors to run the system.
HOST: We're losing your mobile signal a little, there, Prime Minister, so we'll get through these as quickly as we can. The shortfall at the moment for GPs in Hobart and in Launceston is in excess of two dozen, and I realise the COAG program and this new health agreement is not about short-term fixes, but surely this would be a major priority for the new health minister in the state. Do you see that there is some sort of flow on, perhaps, from the agreement at COAG to this sort of prima facie and immediate problem?
PM: I was talking to the Tasmanian AMA last night about that. I don't dispute the numbers, by the way. The AMA says that their calculation is that state-wide you're about 24 GPs short. I don't wish to verbal them, but that's what they told me, so I've got no reason to doubt what they say. Therefore, the practical thing is how do we actually turn that around as quickly as possible?
We do have extra numbers coming through the various medical schools of Australia because of the increased investment put in university training places, university places for medical students. You know where the gap has been, though, Tim? We haven't had, in the past, sufficient funding for training places in hospitals. That's where this new money comes in, so I believe that with these additional new GP training places and specialist training places, 111 GP training places, 14 specialist doctors, these will be rolled out year by year but we believe that what will happen over the period ahead is that this will offset the number of people who will retire and exit the system, and once we're through it we should have a better ratio of doctors to patients.
I can't turn this around over night. Remember, my predecessor, Mr Abbott, froze GP training places nationwide when he was health minister for four or five years. We're playing catch-up football here, trying to get this turned around, but I believe we are going to make a practical difference.
HOST: As you would know, though, and obviously this could be a big ticket item in the context of the COAG meeting or a smaller ticket item, but it comes down to money, to incentives, can you create incentives for doctors who are willing to move to or remain in regional and remote places and like it or not the people of Hobart and Launceston are in regional and remote places.
PM: Well, the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, who you referred to before, has brought in, over the last 12 months, a national package, from memory, of about $130 million or $140 million, maybe a little more than that, to encourage doctors to go to regional and rural and remote areas and to stay there.
These are significant incentives - in the case of certain locations around the country, up to $60,000, $70,000, but the second thing is I don't have available to me on air right now where those lines would fall, for example, within the state of Tasmania, and if you like I'll have the Health Minister come onto your program to explain how that program works, but what we've done through two things, providing greater financial incentives for doctors to go to rural and regional Australia and to remote Australia, but secondly, most critically, Tim, adding to the overall number of GP and specialist training places, and we're doing 6,000 of these nationwide, is to increase the overall supply for the medical workforce. Unless we get that right, unless it happens, frankly, other reforms to the health and hospital system will fall away.
This is the critical engine room of it. That's why it's such a priority and why our investment in it is so significant.
HOST: The tone of the Federal Government with Colin Barnett, the WA Premier, has changed a little since COAG finished. Your tone, with respect, Prime Minister, was quite convivial with him the other day, saying I'm sure we'll be able to talk you around, whereas Nicola Roxon, of course, with that line ministers meeting in Perth today says that there'll be no extra funding for WA if it doesn't sign up to the agreement that the other states and territories have.
PM: Well, I'm sure we'll work our way through this. I've got to know Colin quite well over the last year or so, and when he's been Premier my job as Prime Minister of the country is to work productively and constructively with all premiers and chief ministers whatever their politics happens to be, because we've got to work in the national interest and we've got to work in the public interest. So I think we'll find a way through here. I'm sure there'll be the usual argy-bargy on the way through, but I'm determined, as I've said many times now in the last day or so, that the good people of Western Australia shouldn't miss out. Their hospital system is under real pressure there and we've got to make sure that better health and better hospital services are delivered there.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know we don't have very much of your time, but can you confirm for us that the Federal Government will be scrapping the replacement program for the home insulation scheme?
PM: Well, our practice, as you would know, Tim, is not to comment on continuing Cabinet deliberations, and I'm sure you'll find relevant ministers making statements on that in the period ahead, but Minister Combet is the minister responsible for that and I'm sure the minister will have things to say in the period ahead about the future.
HOST: You asked Alan Hawke to review the scheme. Will you be releasing the contents of the Hawke Review?
PM: In terms of where that particular review is up to and those arrangements, can I again suggest that we wait to see what Minister Combet has to say and I'm sure Minister Combet would have-
HOST: -Can the review, though, sorry, can the review, though, be released irrespective of Minister Combet says?
PM: As I said, in terms of the report itself and where it's up to and the deliberations on it and it's debate in the public domain, I'll wait for Minister Combet's statement on the above. As I said, it's not my practice to go into deliberations on air about the internal discussions of Cabinet. Minister Combet is the responsible minister. I'm sure he'll speak to these matters in the period ahead.
HOST: For householders around the country, though, who would be waiting to see what occurs on the 1 June when this new program of safety checks and the new rebate was to commence, those who are waiting to see what is in place, when will they know?
PM: Well, I'm sure Minister Combet will be clarifying all these matters in the period ahead. He's the responsible Minister and he's been doing an exceptionally thorough job on these questions and I'm sure you will find all the questions that you are putting to me answered by Minister Combet in due course, and again I'd have him appear on your program as well.
HOST: Alright, is safety now, though, your primary concern?
PM: Can I say it's always been the continuing concern of the Government and will remain so and Minister Combet has been re-evaluating all of those matters to make sure that these things are done properly and in the safest way possible and I have absolute confidence that he's doing a first-class job.
HOST: Mr Rudd, thanks for your time.
PM: Thanks. Appreciate you having me on the program.


HOST: This morning Kevin Rudd is in Launceston. Good morning to you, Prime Minister. Thanks for joining us this morning.
PM: Good morning. Great to be in Tassie.
HOST: Yes, I'm sure. NRL scandal, we were just chatting about with the guys. What do you think? Do you think the Storm's penalties are just too tough, or are they OK?
PM: I'm a bit like the rest of the country, Mel. Yesterday, when I heard about this down here, you actually stop and it takes your breath away. You think 'how on earth could this happen?' This is a huge, huge event for the game.
Look, I think, as others have said this morning, if you're a Melbourne fan you'd just be devastated. I mean, I looked at Molly's face just before and I've seen Molly in the Storm dressing room many times over the last couple of years. Molly's face, I think, says everything about how all Storm supporters would feel. I think they feel gutted, but you know something? I think the action taken by the NRL is right. They've gone out there, taken a very tough and hard decision. I know some Melbourne Storm fans may think it's been harsh, but you've got to defend the rules of the game.
All Australians, whatever game they play, whatever code of football they follow, they expect the teams to play by the rules and this seems to be the worst possible breach.
HOST: Yeah, exactly, no, we all know there are rules involved.
Alright, let's talk politics this morning. Yesterday afternoon you left Greg Combet to do the dirty work, basically announcing the Government's second home insulation rebate scheme would be scrapped. Can I ask why you or Peter Garrett didn't front up and face that music?
PM: What I was about to say, Mel, he is actually the minister responsible, Minister Combet, and-
HOST: -Sure, but you'll acknowledge Peter Garrett started it and you're the Prime Minister. It was a pretty big announcement.
PM: Well, we've said all along that we'd commissioned a Hawke Review into the problems arising in the implementation of this program. It had concluded and therefore it was important that the minister who I appointed responsible for dealing with these problems, Greg Combet, explained its contents and the actions which the Government was taking in response to them, and the bottom line is, for everyone who's been affected by the problems with this program, putting safety first, and that's what the Hawke Review's recommendations were about, but Greg Combet, a person of great experience who I appointed some time ago for this, is the man to answer it and I'm answering your questions about it this morning.
HOST: OK, well, pretty scathing, then, the Allan Hawke Review. He basically said it was rushed, it was inadequate. If I can quote, Grant was just chatting to the V8 boss a moment ago about the Indie and he said just as long as you do something, it takes just as long to do something badly as it does to do it right so you may as well do it right. You've got to admit this whole insulation scheme has been a massive bungle. Are you disappointed?
PM: What I've said all along, Mel, is that there has been real problems with this. Of course we're disappointed with the problems which have arisen, but we're also-
HOST: -Did you rush it? Was it just too rushed?
PM: We've also said that it's important to put safety first. That is why the Government is following the recommendations contained in the report, and that's what we intend to do.
Remember the circumstances at the time, which was that the Government, acting in response to the global financial crisis, was dealing with a real challenge of making sure that we kept the economy going, kept people in jobs, kept people in employment. That, of course, makes no excuse whatsoever with problems in implementation, and that's why we're serious about acting on the Hawke Review's recommendations. It's the right thing to do and Greg Combet's the right minister to be out there doing it.
HOST: OK, alright, can I bring a viewer question to you - Alexandra Fawly is in Sydney. Alexandra, good morning. What's your question for our Prime Minister?
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning, Alexandra.
CALLER: My grandfather is an 86-year-old veteran who served in the Northern Territory during World War Two. He drove in convoys carrying ammunition, bombs, fuel, supplies and contributed greatly to the defence of Australian borders, but because of where he served in the Territory he does not qualify for the service pension. Is your Government willing to recognise my grandfather's contribution and others like him to the World War Two campaign by making them eligible for the service pension and if not, why?
PM: Sure Alexandra, thank you for your question, and can I say you are rightly proud of everything your grandfather has done during the war, and there would be many like him who actually served onshore in Australia rather than offshore in direct theatres of war, but you know something? There have been rules around on all this since about 1920, supported by all sides of politics and by the RSL which define what they call as 'qualifying service' - that means being in a theatre of war, by and large, and under danger of direct enemy attack.
Can I just make sure, though, that your granddad's receiving all that he's entitled to, and can I really strongly suggest that you might get onto the Department of Veterans Affairs yourself to make sure that he's getting everything he's entitled to, but they are the reasons why we have that principle, it's called qualifying service, usually offshore in a theatre of war and it's been around since 1920, since the RSL actually came into being.
CALLER: Yep, the thing is, though, like, the people who served above Katherine are actually entitled to this, they have what they call qualifying service, but he contributed to the supply chain that kept Katherine going. You know, he volunteered his services for this country just the same as any other veteran has and he did not choose where to be stationed. I just don't understand why the Government doesn't deem his service worthy of Commonwealth support?
PM: Well, can I say anyone who has served their country in uniform deserves our respect and that includes your grandad. I think the other thing to say is just to be clear about the difference between, frankly, a service pension and the regular pension, it's about the same amount of money. What changes, though, with it, is that those entitled to a service pension get it, say, or become eligible for it, five years earlier at the age of 60, rather than 65, but look, on the details of your grandad's service, can I strongly suggest I'll get the Office of the Minister for Veterans Affairs onto you, Alexandra. Let's make sure he's getting everything he's entitled to, but I wish I could say I could change the rules like that, but they've been around, really, since 1920 and they are very detailed about what theatre you have to be in, what active service you have to be in, what threat of danger - usually people who are offshore in the line of fire - and I'm sorry if there's been a decision which doesn't include your grandad's service, but we should all honour his contribution for Australia and we'll be doing so again on Anzac Day.
HOST: We certainly all do. Alexandra, thank you for your question.
Prime Minister, I've got another one for you from Jason in Perth. Hey, Jason.
CALLER: Morning, Mel. How are you?
HOST: I'm really good, I'm really good, alright. The PM's got your voice. Go for it.
CALLER: Morning, Mr Rudd.
PM: G'day Jason.
CALLER: My question is where's the incentive for people that choose to work harder and have a second job, as they're penalised more tax? Why isn't it charged at the same as the first rate job or at a lower rate?
PM: Well, first of all, Jason, if you're working a couple of jobs and out there contributing to the economy, you're doing absolutely the right thing and particularly over in the West we're having an emerging skills shortage. I just say people out there, working hard - the economy depends on you.
On the question of the tax system, though, let's just go to how it's structured. What we have is what we call a tax-free threshold. I think, from memory, it's about $12,000 or $15,000. That means for that first $12,000 or $15,000 that you earn you're not taxed, but that applies to all of your income, whether it's from, not just, it depends on all of your income, irrespective of whether you're working, say, two or even three jobs. So here's the reason that the Tax Office, I think, would be making the decisions they do about what tax rate to charge you up front - if they didn't do that upfront, what you'd be hit with come the end of the financial year is a huge tax bill, and I think that would be wrong and that would be an even worse incentive for going out there to work. They try to do that calculation upfront, and it's all based on you getting that, as it were, $12,000 or $15,000 tax-free amount for all your income wherever you earn it.
HOST: Jason, thank you very much for that question. I hope that answers it.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, thank you for your time this morning and we'll check in with you next Friday.
PM: Thanks, Mel. Good to be back here in Tassie. You should come down.
HOST: I can't make it today, but we'll be there soon.


More than 400 jobs will be created under the North West and Northern Tasmania Innovation and Investment Fund, with the announcement of the 36 successful projects by the Prime Minister, Premier of Tasmania and Federal Innovation Minister.
The joint $17 million initiative of the Australia and Tasmanian Governments was launched in response to factory closures in the region and to provide families and communities with sustainable jobs and economic stability.
The announcement was made at Penguin Composites, which will receive over $1.3 million to expand workshop capacity at two sites and to fund new plant and equipment, generating 46 new jobs. The company makes fibreglass, composite and metal products for industry applications.
In total, the 36 projects will result in an additional $34 million investment in the region and will create high-wage, high-skill jobs in a diverse range of industries, including agriculture, meat processing, manufacturing, transport, construction, biotechnology and printing.
The strong response from local businesses, which had to match government funding, is a measure of the confidence in this region.
Funding ranged from $50,000 to over $2 million. Among the successful projects are:
     * Forth Farm Produce, of Forth, which received over $2 million to construct and fit-out a purpose-built broccoli and bean grading and packing facility. It is expected to generate 54 new jobs.
     * VEC Civil Engineering, of Ulverstone, awarded over $1million to develop new precast beds for the construction industry and purchasing of equipment. The project will create 30 new jobs.
     * Greenham Tasmania, of Smithton, awarded over $1.1million to expand its meat processing facilities to increase capacity and facilitate the development of a new range of value-added beef products. The project will create 25 new jobs.
By working together, governments and the business community can build a better future for North West and Northern Tasmania.
A list of grant recipients can be viewed at www.ausindustry.gov.au


PM: It's great to be here in Penguin. It's great to be here in Tassie, and great to be here to talk about the economy and jobs, and great to be here to celebrate the success of local small businesses which have become medium businesses. And what we've seen is that at work today with this great business here, in this part of regional Tasmania. We're here with the Tasmanian Government, and of course, with Sid Sidebottom, our local Member, and the Industry Minister, Kim Carr, and the local state Member, to talk about how the Australian Government can assist with local business, local jobs, making a difference for local families.
You know, the first business of Government is to keep the economy strong. That's why we acted decisively in the onset of the global financial crisis to make sure through our national economic stimulus strategy that we would keep the economy going and protect jobs when they were being lost by the millions around the world. And the result- the Australian economy, unique among the major advanced economies around the world, kept- was kept from going into recession. We kept growing positively. We've ended up with the second lowest unemployment of all the major advanced economies, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit.
That is the report card of this Government on the economy. By the way, I noticed my political opponent says we should pull the rug from under that, that we should cancel the Government's national economic infrastructure stimulus strategy. I don't think Mr Abbott realises the impact that has in pulling the rug from under the economy nationally, but critically, in regional Australia as well. Which brings me to what we're talking about here today.
The people in northern, north western Tasmania have been doing it really tough because of what's happened with the global financial crisis. It's not their fault. What's happened here, in many cases, has been a result of global factors at work. But as a result, many people in this region have lost their jobs over the last year or so. Now, you can either just turn your back on that and say not my problem. Or, if you're in the business of Government and making a difference, you say what can we do to practically be of assistance, and to help local businesses who are out there having a go, like the one we're with here this morning, Penguin Composites.
This is a great story of a local small business at work. This is a business, I'm advised, which began in the 80's, have I got it right guys? Moved in the 70s, moved in the 90s, they started with that shed down the bottom of the hill, and as things have expanded they moved up the hill. And what we see is an increasingly diversified small business, medium sized business here in regional Tasmania selling products to all parts of Australia. This is a good story, made possible by all these workers and apprentices over here who we've met as well this morning.
So the business of Government is how can we take what this firm is already doing and lend a helping hand on the way through, in particular in regions which have been doing it tough. And that's why today, with the Government of Tasmania, we are announcing 36 successful projects which have been decided upon between our Government and the Tasmanian Government as part of the overall stimulus strategy for northwest and northern Tasmania, this Innovation and Investment fund for northern Tasmania.
These 36 projects, of which this one here at Penguin Composites is one, will create about 400 local jobs. And it's based on a partnership. What we invest is also partnered with the investments by the local businesses themselves. And of course, in this project here, we're looking at an investment of $1.3 million to expand workshop capacity at two sites, to fund new plant and equipment, and generating about 46 new jobs. This company makes fibreglass, composite and metal products for industry applications, and I've had some time to look very closely at some of the innovation which is underway here. And it's really, really exciting stuff.
So we'd like to be partners in your future progress. Partners in your expansion of jobs here. Partners in the expansion of your export opportunities around the world, with sales to the Australian mainland as well. This is, however, one example of a partnership. Looking more broadly across just this immediate area as well, Forth Farm Produce of Forth will receive investment of over $2 million to construct and fit out a purpose-built broccoli and bean grading and packing facility, expected to generate 54 new jobs.
VEC Civil Engineering of Ulverstone, awarded over $1 million in investment to develop new precast beds for the construction industry and the purchasing of equipment. The project is expected to create 30 new jobs.
Greenham Tasmania, of Smithton, awarded over $1.1 million to expand its meat processing facilities to increase capacity and facilitate the development of a new range of value-added beef products, a project which we anticipate will create 25 new jobs. Now, each of these, you might say, is small. But you know something, from little things, big things grow. And you see that with businesses like this. And if we can provide a helping hand on the way through, to become co-investors in the success of these businesses, then I think we're doing some good things for this local community, for this region of Tasmania, and for regional Australia more broadly.
Sid Sidebottom, the local Member, has been in my ear and Kim Carr's ear about the absolute importance of these projects to make a difference in a part of regional Australia which has been doing it tough. So we're proud to be partners with Sid, the State Government, local businesses, 36 of them that we're announcing today, to get out there and make a difference for local jobs, supporting local families.
Of course, part and parcel of all that, as I said, is keeping the economy strong. Part and parcel of that means keeping in touch with local communities like this as well. So the second thing I'd like to announce today is that the Australian Government will be conducting its next Community Cabinet here in the northwest, here in Tasmania. This'll be in Burnie, in the month of May. Sid will be doing the catering personally. And- oh, sorry, you didn't know that - Sid will be assisting with the catering personally, and he'll be doing the community barbecue.
So we're going to bring the entire Cabinet to Burnie, and we're going to sit down for an extended period of time, not just in a formal session for a couple of hours where we take questions from the floor- but more importantly, with Ministers from right across the Government going out and speaking to local businesses, local community organisations, Local Government, and working out what we can do more to be of partnership with the good folk of this area, and the businesses who are helping make it tick over.
The last thing I'd say before inviting the Premier to speak as well is it's Sid's birthday, so be kind to him with the questions today. You can rip in to him tomorrow.
BARTLETT: Thank you Prime Minister. Well, if I might just add again my thanks for seeing the Prime Minister here on the northwest coast. Yesterday we spent some time in some of Tasmania's hospitals that will benefit significantly from the generationally significant hospital health reforms that the Prime Minister has led. And it's a great pleasure also now to be able to announce together with the Prime Minister these 36 projects across the north and northwest of Tasmania, an area as you heard has been hit by the global financial crisis, but it is an area also that has great resilience, its people have great resilience, and the other great characteristic of coasters, northwest coasters particularly, is their spirit of innovation.
I have just had myself sworn in as Tasmania's first Minister for Innovation, Science and Technology, and I will be spending a lot of my time on the northwest coast working with innovative firms like this, and many others on the list that the Prime Minister and I have announced today, in developing their innovative capacity to build productivity and to build export markets, and therefore jobs for Tasmanians. We are back on the job, and it is a great pleasure to be back on the job with the Prime Minister, and with the local Members Sid and Brenton- who I've appointed as my Parliamentary Secretary- with specific focus on the northwest economy, and northwest jobs.
That is our commitment going forward, with the Federal Government, to ensure that the northwest economy remains robust, continues to work its way through the challenges that no doubt events like McCain, like the pulp, have had the impacts- work its way through, remains robust, and continues to produce jobs and job certainty and job security for the people of this area. Thank you Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks very much Premier, and just before we take your questions, the driving force behind all this at the national level has of course been the Industry and Innovation Minister, Kim Carr. And I'd thank him, personally, and publicly, for the work he's done.
This is very detailed work. Lots of submissions from lots of firms right across this region, and I think, Kim, you've had to sift through more than 100 together with your advisers and officials, and make sure they come up to scratch. So in terms of the success of this northern Tasmania Innovation and Investment fund, the driving force has been the Industry Minister Kim Carr, I'll ask him to say a few things, and then we'll take your questions.
CARR: Well, thank you Kevin. Can I just indicate that the Department of Innovation is very, very proud of the projects that we have announced today. And I want to thank the officers that are here today that have facilitated that these processes have been undertaken so smoothly, and so thoroughly. But can I just say that the real genesis for this project, Prime Minister, if I might just correct you slightly, is Sid Sidebottom.
Sid Sidebottom came to me with a delegation of Mayors from right across the region, came across to Melbourne and said look, Kim, we've got a serious problem, a very serious problem. There was a lot of speculation about the future of the pulp and paper industry. A lot of speculation about big manufacturing plants across the north and the northwest of the state. And he said, well, you people are- you know, as a Government we've said that we are committed to standing shoulder to shoulder with working families. What does that mean for me locally? What does that mean for the people that are losing their jobs?
And what Sid has driven through to the Government nationally is us making sure we pay attention, pay attention to that fundamental commitment of standing shoulder to shoulder with working families in periods of great difficulty. And together with the State Government, we've found the willingness to actually put our money where our mouth is, to come with solid projects, and 126 projects have come forward- we were very, very surprised at the strength and the quality of the projects. We are certain that this is a model that works, which we've used in other parts of the country.
Thanks to Sid, we've had two things done as a result of those discussions. Firstly, the establishment of this innovation investment fund, and secondly the establishment of the pulp and paper industry strategy group, which has now led to the establishment of the pulp and paper innovation council as we move forward to deal with the very significant problems that we face in practical ways, in ways that ensures that blue-collar workers that know that they've got a friend in Canberra, a friend here in the Tasmanian Government and they know with our local members of parliament, a determination to ensure that everybody gets a fair cut of the action.
PM: OK, thanks very much, folks, and now over to you.
That's terrific. Well, thank you. Goodbye. I'm off.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I think after (inaudible) people are a little nervous about how this money will be spent. Are the checks and balances (inaudible)?
PM: Well, these projects have been carefully evaluated by the Industry Department. On the specific evaluation processes I'll turn to the Industry Minister for comment.
CARR: Can I just indicate that the selection process is made up of representatives from the State Government, representatives from the Department of Innovation, through AusIndustry, and local, independent business consultation. We're very, very confident about the quality of the projects, the capacity to manage these projects, because we've done it in other parts of the country.
We know it works and we know that there is the 430 jobs that we're seeing directly as a result of these jobs, we'll see new investment into the region, new opportunities for the region and we'll see, as a result of that, further investment that'll come from these things.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) where are you at with regional cancer services for Braddon?
PM: Well, because our friends in the State Government have taken a little bit of time to sort out who the government was going to be, and that's been very much in the in-tray of His Excellency, the Governor of Tasmania, but I am reliably informed resolved in the last 48 hours - otherwise I don't know what I'm doing standing here with David - we've actually both here and in South Australia delayed those announcements to make sure that the governments are sworn in in both those states. Now we'll work on the detail of those announcements. I think we are on track to do that before long.
Sid has been very strong on the fact that we need to see more oncology services across the North West. I understand that. We are, as a government, committed fundamentally to improving the delivery of cancer services to regional Australia. We are the first government in the country's history to roll out more than half a billion dollars worth of investment in radiation oncology services, in chemotherapy, in linear accelerators, in PET scanners, etcetera right across regional Australia - 22 different locations. These are in states and territories except Tassie and South Australia so far.
The commitment's there. We get it. Too many people defer their treatment for cancer if they live in regional areas because the travel just gets them down, and I think it is just wrong in Australia that people who live outside the major cities are three times more likely to die of cancer within five years of diagnosis than those who live in the major cities. It is just wrong, and one of the reasons we are turning this around is because we think everyone in the country should have a fair go. We believe that's the case when it comes to industry and jobs. We also believe it when it comes to health services.
It's one of the reasons why we're rolling out this new National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally to deliver better hospital and health services on the ground.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, home insulation employers say they've been misled. They're saying you assured them in February there would be another program. Did you mislead them?
PM: The conclusions of Minister Combet is that, consistent with what he and the Government have said previously is that safety is the first priority. We've been very mindful of the advice which has been contained in the report done by Dr Allan Hawke, a former senior official of the Australian Government and previous Australian governments, and therefore we must make sure that we continue to complete the inspection program, complete the rectification program and deal with the problems which have arisen.
I'm also advised by Minister Combet that the work associated with that program will be very substantial. He's been in very close contact with those involved in the industry. This, we think, is, based on Minister Combet's advice and the conclusions of Dr Hawke, the right course of action in these circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott is saying that your decision to roll back childcare places is (inaudible) for working families (inaudible)?
PM: I think what you need to have a look at is prior to the last election we said that we would increase the childcare tax rebate for working families from 30 percent to 50 percent. Now, this is a huge increase and the Government has delivered every bit of that when it comes to actually paying for or helping families pay for their childcare services. That's there, that's out there, it's being received.
The second point goes to the question of the availability of childcare centres. What's fundamentally changed here is, over the last four or five years, is the pace of the roll out of centres anyway through the private sector. There has been, I think, I'm advised, something like a 21 percent increase in the number of centres which have been rolled out. I think, from memory, the number of additional centres that has been rolled out over the last several years is something like a thousand. I think I'm right to say that in the period ahead we're looking at another 250 or so to be rolled out from the private sector.
Our view as a Government is that the private sector is out there doing its job and providing those extra centres, and that's what the private sector should be doing.
We have rolled out a number, particularly in areas of particular need. I've visited some, for example, which deal with the challenges, for example, of young children who are suffering from various forms of autism, various other categories of disability. These are very important things to do.
If the private sector is rolling out at a greater pace than was clear before, then it's a good thing that these centres are being rolled out. As I said, the core thing for mums and dads out there is to make sure that we do everything possible as a Government to underpin the affordability of quality childcare, and the core of that lies in us as a Government committing prior to the last election to increase the childcare rebate from 30 percent to 50 percent. We've honoured that to the letter. That's been done for some time now.
As for the physical availability of centres, the private sector is stepping up to the plate much more rapidly than I think most people would have considered possible before.
JOURNALIST: Why was Kate Ellis given the job of handing down that bad news, because you said in February you would be responsible for both the good and the bad in (inaudible)?
PM: Well, can I say very unequivocally that as the Prime Minister of the country I am accountable for what this Government does and that includes things that go according to plan and things where there are changes, and things where there are problems - I accept full responsibility for that, don't change that one bit.
We also have a system of ministerial accountability and responsibility where individual ministers take charge of particular areas of responsibility within the government, and Mr Combet in one area and Kate Ellis in the other, that's as it should be, but as far as me being accountable for things that go right and things that go wrong, that hasn't changed one bit.
JOURNALIST: When was the Government informed that the NRL was taking action on the Storm?
PM: Found out sometime yesterday afternoon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: This is, I said this earlier this morning - when I first heard about this yesterday afternoon I didn't believe it, firstly. The second thing was, having been told twice or three times what had happened, I was, like most Australians, just stunned by it - just stunned. I mean, I'm a patron of the Broncos in Brisbane and I've met a lot of these players over a long period of time now. I think all fans of the great game of rugby league will feel really let down by this, really let down. I feel really deeply for Melbourne Storm supporters. If there's any group of more loyal supporters I don't know where you'd find them and they'd be feeling absolutely gutted by this, so I think the NRL has made a tough decision but they've made the right decision in terms of the future of the game and the integrity of the game.
All these football codes have rules, and they only work and the public only have confidence in the game when the rules are being upheld, and the rules haven't been upheld here. People feel cheated, cheated badly - fans feel cheated, the other players feel cheated, I think the game itself has been cheated as well.
JOURNALIST: What's the Government's advice Australians planning to travel to Thailand?
PM: We have been following events in Thailand very closely. The Department of Foreign Affairs has recently, I'm advised, changed the travel advisory for Australian citizens and the advice now from the Department of Foreign Affairs is that people should reconsider their need to travel.
Can I say this very clearly to all Australians who are thinking about travelling to Thailand and those who are there: read carefully, very carefully, the evolving travel advice of the Australian Government. We do not write these things up there on a whim. We are following events closely in Thailand. We have many Australians in Thailand and many who regularly travel there. When we say in our travel advisory you should reconsider your need to travel, we mean that.
This is a very dangerous and explosive situation in Thailand and we need to be very, very careful that Australians don't get caught up in any trouble. We know that we've already had one Australian injured on April 22 when a bomb exploded at a train station in Bangkok. There's a lot of violence out there at the moment and I don't see it letting up any time soon.
Please, please, please, Australians travelling to Thailand - look very carefully at the Government's travel warnings. This is a dangerous situation.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried that upgrading this advisory could upset the Thai Government?
PM: My first responsibility as Prime Minister of Australia is to do whatever is possible to underpin the security and safety of the Australian travelling public. From time to time that causes frictions with other governments around the world. I think you know what I'm talking about. It's happened before and it will happen again, but the first responsibility of government is security of its citizens. Therefore, when we receive advice about the unfolding security situation in Thailand we must make that available to the travelling public, and I would urge, again, the Australian travelling public to look very closely at what we put online up there from the Department of Foreign Affairs on the current situation in Thailand.
OK folks, I think we might rock and roll. Thank you again to all who are here. Sid, and for those who are looking after his birthday celebrations, Sid told me he's, did you say you were 43?
SIDEBOTTOM: 43, yep that's right.
PM: There you go, 43 years old. I think he's putting on drinks down the pub after work so there you go. 


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Member for Braddon Sid Sidebottom today announced the 23rd Community Cabinet meeting would be held in Burnie next month.
The Prime Minister said the May meeting would be a great opportunity for members of the local community to meet directly with their government leaders.
"Community Cabinet is my commitment to ensure close consultation with the Australian people on the things that concern them at a national level and at a local level," Mr Rudd said.
"I would really like to encourage all people living in the North West and West Coasts to come along and utilise this opportunity to meet directly with the Australian Government and put forward your ideas or ask us questions.
"My Ministry and I look forward to hearing from people of the region when we visit in May."
Mr Sidebottom said this was a wonderful opportunity to talk directly with the Prime Minister and the cabinet about the issues of importance for the region.
"I'm delighted to welcome Community Cabinet to Burnie for the first time," he said.
"The evening begins with a Welcome to Country and the National Anthem, followed by a public forum, then one-one-one meetings with individuals or groups.
"I encourage all members of my local community with issues they want to raise with the Rudd Ministry to register for this event."
Mr Sidebottom also said the occasion would be an historic first.
"For the first time our region will have the ear of the whole Australian Government."
"This is the third Community Cabinet the Rudd Government has held in Tasmania and it's an honour for our area to be chosen."
"From prior experience at other Community Cabinets, the places fill up fast - so I urge people to get in quickly when registration opens up to avoid disappointment," said Mr Sidebottom.
The meeting starts with a public forum which involves a question and answer session between attendees and Rudd Government Cabinet Ministers. 
Following the forum, there is an opportunity for people to request a private meeting with a Minister.
Further details will be released in coming days about how to register to attend Community Cabinet.
Community Cabinet meetings occur every four to five weeks in metropolitan and regional Australia and are proving popular with communities who enjoy the opportunity to meet with, hear from and ask questions of their government.
To date, more than 10,000 people have attended Community Cabinet meetings around the country. From communities such as Yirrkala in the Northern Territory's East Arnhem Land to Campbelltown in Sydney's west - Community Cabinet meetings have become an integral way in which the Rudd Government communicates with communities around the nation.
Additionally, over 1,200 Australians have had an opportunity to meet with their Prime Minister or a Cabinet minister to discuss topics of their choice. The Rudd Government takes seriously its opportunity to meet with constituents.


PM: First of all it's great to be back here in Hobart, great to be at the Royal Hobart, and here at the repatriation centre and the rehabilitation unit. Because this is where the rubber hits the road when it comes to delivering better health and better hospital services to all Australians, including older Australians, including the good folk of Tasmania more broadly.
We're here to talk about health and hospitals. And together with the Premier, in Canberra over the last several days, we've forged an historic agreement for a new National Health and Hospitals Network, the NHHN - funded nationally, run locally. All for one purpose, to deliver better health and hospital services to working families, to pensioners, and to carers. And that means more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses to make the system work better.
Here in Tasmania, the key thing is to make sure that we deliver services which make a difference on the ground. And that's why I'm pleased, with the Premier, to have been party to an agreement which will deliver over the next three years $142 million in additional investment, and over the period ahead beyond that, a further $340 million. Let's just go to the immediate period ahead. We're talking about new investments into emergency departments in order to bring about, over the three years ahead, a four hour target for ED waiting times. This is important. It's important for people who go to accident and emergency, knowing they can be treated in time.
For elective surgery, we're also investing some $15 million and a further $8 million as well to bring about a target of 95 per cent of people being seen for elective surgery within clinically acceptable times. We're also investing, nationwide, in a very large expansion in hospital beds, including sub-acute beds of the type that we've been visiting here today at the rehabilitation centre.
For Tasmania, we'll see from 1 July the beginning of a rollout of 30 more of those beds across the state, including in centres like this one.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


The Prime Minister today launched the Australian Centre on China in the World at the Australian National University (ANU). The Rudd Government will provide a foundation grant of $35 million to establish the Centre and a further $18.1 million to construct a signature building to house it on the ANU campus.
In the Asia-Pacific century, with China's increasing prominence in regional and global affairs, this is an investment in Australia's future.
Through international fellowships, conferences, public events and the media, the Centre will build awareness and understanding within Australia and internationally of China's unfolding global role. It will contribute to a well-informed debate that engages the broader Australian population in a dialogue directly concerning our future.
As a hub for national and international scholars, the Centre will create an integrated, world-leading institution for Chinese studies. It will conduct groundbreaking research and mentor new generations of scholars with deep expertise on China and its global presence.
Nationally and internationally, the ANU is uniquely placed to build on its China-related expertise through a vibrant program of integrated research, education and public engagement.
The Centre will be an independent, prominently branded entity at the ANU. With its far-reaching value as a resource for more than just government and academics, it is anticipated that the business and philanthropic community will provide strong support to the Centre.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Last year I had the privilege of spending time with Alastair Morrison, not long before his death. Alastair was 93 years old, the last surviving son of Morrison of Peking, after whom this significant lecture is named. It was a singular privilege for me to have spent just a little time sharing Alastair's family memories - a unique human connection linking the tumultuous events of the late-Qing Empire to the rise of modern China.
For students of history, the world of Morrison's Peking seems exotic and remote. Whereas in truth, we are separated from that world by the span of just one lifetime - albeit, in Alastair's case, a long and well-lived life. 
Alastair in fact asked if I would deliver a Morrison Lecture. I said I it would be an honour.
And so today I am delighted to be able to present this, the 70th George E. Morrison Lecture.
George Morrison was a man surrounded by controversy. But no-one, not even his greatest detractors, could deny his deep knowledge of China and his fascination with this ancient and continuing civilisation. Morrison was one of a kind. Nonetheless, the truth is he is little known in contemporary Australia.
My view is that, 90 years after his death, it is time for that to change. 
Morrison is one of the most remarkable Australians in our early national history to enliven the world stage. And it is fitting that he is remembered by this, one of the earliest and oldest lecture series in this young country of ours.
Throughout its long history this lecture series has addressed many aspects of China's past and present. In recent years, presenters have wrestled with what has now become one of the truly great questions facing our contemporary age - the re-emergence, the rise and future global role of modern China.
C.P. FitzGerald, the noted historian of China, who established what was then the Department of Far Eastern History at the Australian National University, wrote of Morrison in the following terms:
"a man of unusual percipience and thus freer than many of his contemporaries from the prevailing dominant ideas. He, almost alone, could see beneath the dry bones of the dying Manchu Empire the stirring of fresh life, of a new, probably unintelligible and almost certainly disconcerting China, but yet a continuation of the life of that great nation into a new period of vigorous activity."
In 1935, delivering only the 5th Morrison Lecture, the noted physician Wu Lien-teh, a Malay of Chinese descent, remarked that in the person of Morrison there was a:
"blending of...qualities seldom encountered in a single individual... a physician, a journalist, a traveller, an author, a book collector and a humanist all combined."
In his travels, his sense of adventure, his curiosity for understanding and knowledge, George E. Morrison was an Australian one-off. He travelled relentlessly. Between his school and university studies, he walked from Geelong to Adelaide.
At the age of 20, he trekked from Normanton in Queensland, just south of the Gulf of Carpentaria, all the way to Melbourne - a journey of almost 3,300 km, covered without horse or camel. Besides his travels to China, Morrison ventured deep into New Guinea, studied medicine in Scotland, and travelled widely in the United States, the West Indies and Morocco. He came close to death on many occasions, and even had the rare honour of reading his own obituary in The Times, after erroneous reports of him being killed during the Boxer Uprising.
Morrison's curiosity and acute skills of observation helped make him a masterful writer. His talents were reflected in his 1895 book, An Australian in China, which so impressed readers in England that he was appointed in 1897 as the first permanent correspondent for The Times newspaper in Beijing. Over time he gained prominence in China and internationally, earning the nickname "Chinese Morrison" or "Morrison of Peking".
In many ways Morrison often placed himself in the centre of historical events, and always in the centre of danger. 
He was in southern China to report on the epoch-making rebellion of October 1911, which brought to an end two thousand years of dynastic rule. Back in the embattled imperial capital of Beijing, he landed the scoop of the millennium by reporting the abdication of the last Chinese emperor, Xuantong or, as he was more commonly known, Puyi.
He then witnessed the founding of the Republic of China, which ushered in the country's first, albeit short-lived, democratic elections, a nascent legal system and a boisterous free press.
As if his journalism did not bring him close enough to the action, Morrison then quit The Times to act as adviser to the second president of the Republic, Yuan Shikai- who notoriously in 1915 sought to re-establish the monarchy, proclaiming himself the Hongxian Emperor. For the record, reflecting perhaps an early Australian taste for republicanism, Morrison cautioned his then boss against this course of action.
Morrison's, in short, is a remarkable career.
So remarkable that the street on which he lived in central Beijing, known today as Wangfujing, was known throughout the years of the Chinese Republic as Morrison Street.
Morrison comes from a remarkable stable of Australian Sinologues, writers and public intellectuals.
Figures like:
- William Henry Donald - the journalist from Lithgow who became a political adviser to Sun Yat-Sen and later Chiang Kai-Shek;
- C.P. FitzGerald - the noted historian, academic leader and educator;
- Wang Gung-wu - historian of the Chinese diaspora, former head of this school and later Vice Chancellor of the University of Hong Kong;
- Liu Ts'un-yan - pre-eminent scholar of Confucianism, Daoism and Buddhism and former Head of the Department of Chinese;
- Ken Gardiner - lecturer in East Asian thought and history;
- Pierre Ryckmans - the much awarded art historian, novelist, and essayist;
- Stephen FitzGerald - the historian, public advocate for closer Australian engagement with Asia, and a man who became of course our first Ambassador to the People's Republic of China; 
- Ross Garnaut - economist, Prime Ministerial adviser and himself later Amabssador to China; and
- Professor Geremie Barmé - academic, film maker and writer whose particular understanding of China's past and its possible futures is recognised internationally.
What unites all of these figures is more than a deep knowledge of China. They all also bring, often from different political perspectives, a passionate, sympathetic but nonetheless clear-eyed analysis of the China of their time. In doing so, they have brought a certain "Australian objectivity" to the task.
An independence of approach.
An understanding that acknowledges the rich legacies of our western origins - but one admixed with a fascination for the ancient civilisations of our own region and their modern permutations.
This "Australian objectivity" seeks therefore to be informed, understanding and always quizzical. Tempered by what we would call common sense. Tempered also by a wry awareness of our own place in the region and the world.
And of course, our own sense of humour - although a sense of humour sometimes inexplicable to cultures other than our own.
We see this Australian tradition in the brilliant career of C.P. FitzGerald, British by birth and Australian by choice. 
FitzGerald was passionate about understanding China and communicating that knowledge to a broader public.
In his highly readable book Why China?, published in 1985 and which I recall reading as a young diplomat posted in Beijing at the time, C.P. dates his interest in China to the year 1917 when, as a young man, he read two articles in The Times by George E. Morrison. As FitzGerald recalled:
"Here was a vast world of fascinating history of which I knew nothing whatever: it did not enter into the school curriculum at all (a strong point in its favour)."
He went on to work in China and he soon set to learning Mandarin and classical Chinese. FitzGerald was deeply aware that a knowledge of contemporary China had to be grounded in an understanding of the histories, literature and philosophies of its past.
In his long career he wrote on China's dynastic past and modern revolution. On the fall of the Nationalists and the rise of the Communists. He wrote extensively on China's importance to the future of our region. Through his tireless public service as an educator and communicator he reached out to Australians at large, sharing his vast learning on China's history and the future.
After he came to Australia to work at the Australian National University, FitzGerald would develop a deep interest in both the Australian national identity and how that identity shapes our own engagement with China.
In particular, he supported this country pursuing its own interests and relationship with China, in ways free of those of the United Kingdom or the United States. Like other students of the Chinese world, C.P. FitzGerald knew how
China had for centuries loomed large in the Western mind. Hopes and fears, fantasies and nightmares were all readily projected on a land that for so long was regarded as an exotic "Far East". Whereas for us in Australia, China represented a much more immediate and practical reality to our near north.
In some respects, C.P. was pointing to the essential ingredients of a particular Australian perspective on China.
A perspective grounded in a knowledge of China's past, a practical appreciation of its present and an informed hope for the future. His view of China was neither captured by arid ideology nor a view that China was somehow simply a case study of some kind of cultural or political exotica.
For people like George E. Morrison, C.P. FitzGerald, Stephen Fitzgerald and others, China was never a canvas on which the West could simply cast its own feverish imaginings - utopian or apocalyptic.
It was always a vital, complex and powerful reality with which they became passionately involved. Theirs is a passion grounded in learning, cautious in approach yet always mitigated by empathy. China's view of its own role in the world is equally a complex mixture of hopes and concerns.
Its history  -  dynastic, Republican and contemporary  -  informs its re-emergent role.
Some say China's sense of its own history in fact emboldens its sense of future mission. Others would argue that these deep historical legacies do the reverse - that they call for measured caution on the part of China's contemporary leadership, given the litany of miscalculations littered across China's past. Either way, most would agree that China's historiography is one of abiding political and foreign policy relevance.
History is not just academic.
How China views its history very much shapes how China views its future.
For China, next year will see a seminal anniversary in the nation's most fraught modern history. 2011 marks the 100th anniversary of the end of the Chinese Empire and the beginning of the Chinese Republic.
Between now and October next year, we will see a flurry of Chinese commentaries, both official and otherwise, on the significance of the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and China's trajectory since that time.
The Xinhai Revolution was a turning point in the history of Asia. It was the first major revolution in the region - hailed by Lenin as the "awakening of Asia". It created the first democratic republic in North Asia, emboldening movements for reform and self-determination that would later sweep the region.
For China it marked a break with dynastic autocracy and colonialism, initiating what some historians call an "age of openness". It is also significant today as an event that will be celebrated, in fraternal amity, on both sides of the Taiwan Straits.
2011 is also the 150th anniversary of the first concerted efforts by a Chinese government to become active in international affairs and to reform and strengthen itself. This occurred with the Tongzhi Restoration in 1861, aimed at reversing the fortunes of a dynasty beset by aggressive Western powers during the Opium Wars on the one hand, and internal rebellion through the Taiping Rebellion on the other.
This was a period of unprecedented change.
Some historians argue that the long evolution of China's reform era should in fact be dated from this 1861 Restoration. It is then that the Chinese Empire first allowed representatives of foreign governments to reside in the capital.
The first foreign ministry was established. As was a new office of foreign trade. A formidable program of military modernisation was also begun.
These reforms, like many subsequent efforts in both the Qing and the Republic of China, were thwarted by foreign incursion and local strife.
Chinese thinkers and writers like Gong Zizhen [1792-1841] had for years hoped for a change.
Gong famously wrote the lines:
I urge the Lord of Heaven
to shake us up anew,
Grant us human talent
not bound to a single kind.
I have observed elsewhere that despite this long evolution of reform and foreign engagement, it nonetheless remains unclear how a re-emergent China will set its course as a major global power, and how its role will shape the future international order. Nor is it clear what new goals - national, social and personal - the Chinese people will set themselves as a confident and prosperous modern member of the international community.
What is without doubt is the fact that we are in a period of extraordinary change. We can now with clarity look back to the eighteenth century, to the height of China's wealth and power during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor.
We can contemplate the humiliations visited on the Manchu government during the empire's decline in the nineteenth century. We can appreciate the efforts of the Republican revolutionaries who established China's first democracy, and who created an earlier "age of openness". We are mindful, too, of the impact of cruel invasion, of internecine conflict and the economic chaos that brought this era to an end.
We can also understand better the trajectory of the sixty years of the People's Republic, its trials and tribulations, the chaos of the Cultural Revolution followed by the era of stability and reform, and the historical lessons learnt from each that have brought China to where it is today.
I have mentioned two commemorations that will be marked in 2011.
But this year of 2010 also marks a major moment in China's past that will be recalled more painfully across the Chinese commentariat.
In October 2010, both in China and abroad, people will mark the destruction in 1860 of the Garden of Perfect Brightness (Yuanming Yuan) and the garden palaces at the foot of the Western Hills outside Beijing.
The Yuanming Yuan was the most magnificent garden-palace created in imperial China. It was a seat of government as well as a museum of imperial art for over a century. An Anglo-French force destroyed it to punish the Qing government for its failure to sign a treaty at the end of the Second Opium War. The devastation of the gardens, villas and palaces represents a shameful low point in the interaction between China and the West.
Today the ruins of the Western Palaces in the Garden of Perfect Brightness stand as China's national ruin, a sombre monument to the agonies of China's past.
But those agonies were also felt by some in the West.
In far-off Paris, the destruction of 1860 was decried by Victor Hugo, who wrote:
"One day two bandits entered the Summer Palace. One plundered, the other burned. ...We Europeans are the civilized ones, and for us the Chinese are the barbarians. This is what civilization has done to barbarism."
The events of 1860 form a critical part of understanding China today. They represent one of many narratives that impact on China's political and foreign policy consciousness.
But China's stories about its past are in fact made up of numerous overlapping and contrasting narratives.
They tell of past sufferings and injustices. They speak to our broad humanity. But they also express hope and the possibility of inspiring transformation.
We understand and appreciate China has many stories to tell. Not just one. Indeed, we in the rest of the world are witnesses to, as well as interested participants in, these many stories.
In its modern nationhood, China brings together these various views of its history, its present and its future. This includes China's view of itself as a proud and ancient nation.
A nation that draws upon rich and deep traditions. A nation that traces its written history back longer than any other.
Where the Chinese of today can draw on thousands of years of written history to understand their future place in the world. Drawing on the past, some in China today would still see their country as a victim.
Others may promote it as an exemplar.
Still others again would point to the fact that for 150 years China has sought to engage the West comprehensively - only to be rebuffed, exploited and at times invaded.
The question for both China and the West, is which (or what combination) of these narratives is most likely to prevail. China is of course not the only one asking these questions of itself.
There is great interest throughout the world as to what role China sees for itself in the future.
There is a hardline view that regards China's rise as a threat to the existing global order no matter what. There is a contrary view, espoused by some particularly in the developing world and in some parts of academia, that a new "Beijing consensus" should replace the "Washington consensus" with China the model for developing countries to follow. There is the associated view of China as the economic saviour of the world, emerging from the global financial crisis.
Or alternatively, there is the view that China increasingly behaves as a mercantilist power, insensitive to its emerging global economic responsibilities. The truth is there are as many conflicting views in the West about China and its future as there are within China itself.
But within this complexity we must recognise that there are certain core unassailable facts.
The change in China since the reform and opening era began in 1978 cannot be denied.
The figures tell the story.
First, after two decades of growth of around 10 per cent per year, China has become the second largest economy in the world. It is the world's largest exporter of manufactured goods, and the third largest exporter of all goods and services. It is also now the world's second-largest car market after the United States.
This year, in the aftermath of the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression, China continues to be the principal engine of global economic recovery - a fact highlighted by the International Monetary Fund in recent days.
Only a decade ago, this would have been unimaginable.
Three decades ago, it would have been seen as sheer fantasy.
We have all been beneficiaries of China's remarkable performance. Perhaps what we do not understand so well, because we see less of it directly, is the enormous benefits this change has also brought to China.
Second, within thirty years China has transformed itself from being an impoverished, isolated and predominantly agrarian economy to become an increasingly global, wealthy, industrial and urban-centred economy. In the process, around 500 million people have been lifted out of poverty.
This is unprecedented.
Nearly half of China's population now live in urban centres, including around 150 cities that number more than 1 million people. China now has more internet users than the United States, including some 200 million bloggers. It has over 700 million mobile phone users. Over the past decade outbound Chinese tourist departures have grown five-fold to reach 47 million last year.
These figures tell of a nation in a period of great change.
Third, China's military modernisation has been rapid, as observers of the 60th anniversary parade would have noted. There have been profound changes in China's foreign policy behaviour in recent times as China's power, real and perceived, has grown.
The depth and breadth of China's transformation must be acknowledged. But so too must the fact that change is ongoing, and so too are its consequences.
China has benefitted remarkably from its policies of domestic economic reform and global economic engagement. But there is still an ongoing debate within China itself about that reform.
Will it continue to unleash the creative potential of the Chinese people?
Or are the urges to re-centralise control again coming into play - as some analysts argue, citing examples of how the state is now reasserting its role in the Chinese private economy.
China's friends also continue to have concerns about the handling of human rights in China. We want to see the development of a truly transparent and independent legal system in China. We want to see the economic system develop in a way that brings China and the Chinese people into a globalised world economy. These facts and the question of China's future matter to us because China is now an integral part of the international system.
A growing China will pursue its interests globally: that is natural.
And I believe that China recognises its own fundamental interest in working with - not against - the international system that has served China so well in recent decades.
Over the past 60 years or so, this system has entrenched the values, rules, conventions and foundations that have helped bring about the greatest prosperity that China has experienced in its history. As I have already noted, China has benefitted enormously from this international order. Increasingly China is also playing its part within this order.
We see this in China's role in the G20.
China has partnered with the other major economies in responding to the global economic crisis. China is also working with us to secure the conclusion of an ambitious WTO Doha Round - which would provide a timely impetus to global growth. China has also engaged deeply with the nations of the Asia-Pacific region. While the region is largely at peace and on a positive trajectory, we cannot take this for granted.
We need to actively shape our regional future, and lay the foundations for dealing with future challenges.
And I am pleased that China too shares this goal.
I shall continue to advocate the development of regional architecture that has the right membership and mandate to address the full spectrum of challenges confronting the region - economic, political and security. That membership must, of course, include China, just as it must include the United States, ASEAN at its core and other key nations of the region - Australia, India, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, and Russia. The inclusion of the United States and Russia in our region's emerging architecture is fundamental to the evolution of what I call an Asia-Pacific community. In fact, so much of Australia's diplomacy has been driven by this core concern - how to integrate in particular the role of the United States in the future broad architecture of our region.
In this context I welcome very much the decision of ASEAN leaders at their summit in Hanoi on 8-9 April this year to encourage the United States and Russia to deepen their engagement in evolving regional architecture.
From Australia's perspective, an enhanced regional architecture involving both China and the United States is critical to our region's future and China's future role in it. While the countries of the region will need to settle how reformed regional architecture might be constituted, the ASEAN Summit outcome offers a critical step forward to the architecture our region needs for the long-term future. China is also increasingly active in the United Nations system.
China participated too in the Copenhagen negotiations last year - and there has been much commentary on the nature of China's contribution during the critical conference on climate change. China has since associated itself with the Copenhagen Accord.
But now, as the world's largest greenhouse gas emitter, and commensurate with its global role and influence, China must take on a greater leadership role on climate change. As an emerging power, China must take more responsibility to forge the solutions to the global challenges we face. This is as necessary for China's future national interests as it is for the interests of the rest of the world.
China's contribution to the world order is undeniable.
But there is much, much more to be done.
It does not help, for example, that China associates with regimes around the world that others seek to isolate because of their assault on the integrity of international system - from the Sudan to Burma. China can - and should - do more to support wider international efforts against destabilising regimes and on global security challenges such as Afghanistan and Iran. China is going through a period of immense change, the ramifications of which are being felt around the world. The international community shares a strong interest in maintaining a stable global order that fosters growing prosperity based on cooperation between nations.
China is already a major stakeholder in the current global order.
What the world would welcome is China engaging across the board as major global stakeholder in the maintenance and enhancement of that stable, rules-based order in the future.
Good for China.
And good for the world.
But to understand what role China will, can and must play in shaping this world order, we need to understand China more deeply and engage with China at all levels. As we enter the second decade of the 21st century, China's role in the world is being reappraised. On the international stage, China has in many respects emerged stronger in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and the global recession. More engaged with the international community. More valued as a major force in the global economy. And more important as the world addresses the challenges of the future - most particularly climate change.
Australia too must also continue to assess and reassess its own understanding of China, as China's reality changes.
I believe it is time for what the Australian National University's Professor Geremie Barmé has described as a "New Sinology" (Hou Hanxue).
That is, a Sinology or study of China that is mindful of the positive traditions of exchange and learning with China, from the time of Matteo Ricci in the 16th century, through the time of George E. Morrison and C.P. Fitzgerald to the present day. A New Sinology that inherits the positive legacy of understanding and engagement that enlivened so many people who were drawn to the study of China in the past. A Sinology that engages with the Sinosphere and a vibrant and energetic contemporary China - in all its dimensions.
As Geremie Barmé has written, a New Sinology advocates:
"a robust engagement with contemporary China and indeed with the Sinophone world in all of its complexity, be it local, regional or global... "
A New Sinology is not based on old theories. It is about engaging with a re-emergent China. It says that China should not simply be viewed as a threat. Nor should this New Sinology be based on a reticence towards speaking honestly or critically about today's China, for fear of causing offence.
Instead we seek a new balance.
One that goes beyond old Cold War concepts of fan-Hua or qin-Hua - that is, of either being anti-China or pro-China - as if we are eternally locked into a binary world. This is about a more sophisticated way of understanding today's China.
A New Sinology capable of opening up new ways of understanding this great and ancient civilisation, and what it might offer again in the future. The challenge for us all is how we move forward to promote a deeper, textured understanding of the China in the 21st century. Both a China that encourages us all, as well a China that from time to time causes us to ask ourselves where China is going. In April 2008, when speaking at Peking University, I talked about Australia's evolving relationship with China and the maturing of our friendship in this new era.
As I said:
"In the modern, globalised world, we are all connected; connected not only by politics and economics, but also in the air we breathe.
A true friend is one who can be a zhengyou, that is a partner who sees beyond immediate benefit to the broader and firm basis for continuing, profound and sincere friendship.In other words, a true friendship which 'offers unflinching advice and counsels restraint' to engage in principled dialogue about matters of contention. It is the kind of friendship that I know is treasured in China's political tradition."
The bedrock of this true friendship is trust and commitment. I believe that since the Whitlam Labor government normalised relations with the People's Republic of China in 1972, Australia has established and built on just such a trust.
A long-term nation-to-nation relationship evolves on the basis of shared interests and mutual benefit. It should also grow and prosper in an atmosphere of increasing respect, deepening understanding and a recognition of values.
I have spoken of zhengyou because I feel we need to be able to speak to the government of China, its media and its peoples in a frank manner.
I believe that those engaged with the Chinese world will be respected both for what they bring materially to the relationship, but also for what they represent in their own right.
In Australia, we are an open society. The consensus by which we govern ourselves is forged through political conflict, conversation and conciliation - and resolved through the ballot box. We in politics live in the scrimmage of media exposure, and we have various tiers of democratically elected government. Like our colleagues in China, we are conditioned by our history, answerable to our environment, and constrained by our realities.
For us in Australia, our history, our values and our alliances are part of who we are. Our commitment to a positive, forward-looking and mutually beneficial relationship with the People's Republic and the Chinese world has been tested and proven over time. We believe that it is on that basis that we can progress.
I do not think that every time we express ourselves on the basis of our values and beliefs that our core friendship towards China should be called into question.
I would question a view that regards honesty and well-intentioned comment as being 'anti-China' (fan-Hua), just as I reject the careless application of the expression 'un-Australian' here at home.
I promote the concept of zhengyou so we can develop the language and the demeanour for a more sophisticated way of talking to and about each other.
We have long ago moved beyond the Cold War. I am of the view that the binary language of that era - that is, of either being anti-China or pro-China without any form of nuance, also belongs in the past. I believe this is as much an important new principle for the collective West as it is an important principle for China herself.
Otherwise, the dialogue among us all will forever be trapped in a frustrating and unproductive cycle of offence, high dudgeon and mutual recrimination.
In the past the great Chinese writer Lu Xun satirised those writers who tried to sound elevated and self-important by using fashionable foreign expressions, which simply resulted in pretentious and tortured prose. He called it "foreign eight-legged essays" (yang bagu) - referring to the formulaic essays demanded of the imperial examiners in the past, the bagu wen.
In 1942, Mao Zedong, chairman of the Chinese Communist Party, warned his colleagues against creating a new dang bagu, or "Party eight-legged essay" - a form of writing that struck a pose merely to intimidate and obfuscate. Perhaps we too often are caught up in what I would call "the eight-legged essays of international relations", waijiao bagu.
That is, stereotypical responses to complex realities.
Simplistic knee-jerk reactions to situations that require a more layered response. In the great Australian tradition, it's time that we all got over it.
Otherwise our engagement runs the risk of being formalistic and lacking the elements of a mature and genuine relationship that is necessary as we negotiate the shoals of the future. It runs the risk of concealing beneath it a range of tensions (both real and imagined) which cannot be resolved if they are not the subject of substantive discussion.
Let us remember that we are now seeing the rise of a new great power alongside the continuing single existing superpower the United States.
In this context, genuine engagement becomes critically necessary. History is not overburdened with examples of how such transitions in geopolitical and geo-economic realities have been accommodated peacefully. We need a new way forward.
And that is as important both for both the academy and policymakers themselves - as the first often as one shapes the conceptual framework of the second.
The same applies for Australia and our own engagement with China. Consider the events of the past year.
2009 brought a number of tensions to our bilateral relationship.
First, there was controversy surrounding the failed Chinalco bid for Rio Tinto in June. Then, in July, the Australian Chinese businessman Stern Hu was arrested in Shanghai. In August, Rebiya Kadeer visited the Melbourne Film Festival.
During those months, our processes, our views - be they official or popular - were frank and forthright. The boisterous environment of our democracy and the media were on display for all to see. We appreciate fully the core interests of the People's Republic of China, in particular with regard to its territorial integrity. But we too have core interests and core values that do not change over time. The interests of both our nations and our peoples must form the basis of the evolving dialogue between us.
Australia's engagement with, and serious study of, China is not a recent phenomenon. It has been a strong part of our heritage, as this lecture series amply demonstrates. But this does not mean that it is yet a strong or rich enough part of our national dialogue. As a country we need a focused training of expertise in 360-degree 'China literacy'.
Today, I am announcing how the Australian Government intends to encourage and deepen such China literacy in our principal academic institutions.
To develop a New Sinology, we must take scholars, experts and policymakers out of the silos of separate academic disciplines and departments. We need to foster a new degree of collaboration and engagement between scholars and practitioners of different backgrounds and expertise. And to do that, I believe we need to establish a new centre for study, learning and the exchange of ideas and understanding. A place where scholars, thinkers and policy specialists can engage in an across-the-board approach that brings history, culture, literature, philosophy and cultural studies perspectives into active engagement with those working on public policy, the environment, social change, economics, trade, foreign policy, defence policy and strategic analysis.
I can think of no better place than the Australian National University to further the sophisticated research and dialogue on China's engagement with Australia, our region and globally.
Nationally and internationally, the ANU is uniquely placed to build on its China-related expertise through a vibrant sustainable program of integrated research, education, training and public engagement - as well as its valuable library resources accumulated over the decades, going back to C.P. FitzGerald's time.
Therefore, it is with great pleasure that today I announce the establishment of the Australian Centre on China in the World.
Or, as we are calling it in Chinese, Zhonghua Quanqiu Yanjiu Zhongxin. The Australian Centre on China in the World will enhance the ANU's existing capabilities to create an integrated, world-leading institution for Chinese Studies.
The Centre will be a hub for national and international scholars. It will also be linked virtually with other university centres with related expertise both at home and abroad.
The Australian Government's aspiration is to make this centre the pre-eminent global institution for the integrated understanding of contemporary China in all its dimensions - and for the study of contemporary China's regional and global engagement.
In Australia, we have a deep national interest in becoming the unparalleled repository of this expertise. But there is also I believe a wider global interest in this being the case as well, given our longstanding links with European, American and Chinese scholarship in this area.
In short, the Government's intention is to build over time the global go-to place for the analysis of the continued rise of China in all of its complexity - domestic and international - employing an integrated and multidisciplinary approach. It will conduct leading-edge and innovative research on China, develop new generations of scholars with deep expertise in China and build awareness - both within Australia and internationally - of China and its role in the world. Involving outstanding thinkers and researchers in China, our region, North America and Europe is key to the new Centre's brief. Through this initiative we will help foster and support future generations of intellectual, cultural and political leadership and provide new and creative research opportunities and training. We also expect that the business and philanthropic community will see the value in this Centre and contribute to the foundation that will support it, in partnership with the Government's initial investment.
This initiative is to be far more than just a resource for government and academics.
A new building will also be designed to house the Centre, which will be both a modern academic centre and a focal point for the university.
The Australian Centre on China in the World will foster research and educational links with other Australian institutions and increase our national capacity to provide research, outreach, postgraduate and other training activities dedicated to an informed and mature consideration of China. This study of China, and the teaching about China is not only about China and the World, it relates profoundly to China in the World. It is about research and thinking about China in the larger context of history as well as in relation to our Australian world, our region - Asia and the Pacific - as well as in the context of it as a multi-faceted global presence.
It is about a China that through trade and economics, foreign policy and defence policy, history and culture, ideas and beliefs, language and literature is part of the major conversations and debates unfolding in the global environment in which we live, think and continue to hope and prosper.
It is about a China whose role is crucial whether we talk about economic growth, or climate change, regional security or international politics.
At the same time, the mentoring of people in the public sector and providing access to a broader community of outstanding scholars, practitioners and the media are crucial to the mission of the new Centre. We need not only to expand high-level dialogue about China between academics, policy-makers and senior business people. We must also seek to enhance understanding of China at all levels of Australian society.
And that is part of the mission for the new Centre. To contribute to a well-informed debate that engages the broader Australian population in a dialogue that directly concerns their future.
In establishing this new centre, we are building on a legacy of decades of Australian scholarship and broader academic, economic, cultural and political engagement with China. And that robust engagement must continue with the China of our times. Not shying away from controversy. But always seeking deeper knowledge, and where possible, common understanding.
And all in a new tradition of a New Sinology anchored in the principle of zhengyou.


The Australian Government will increase the Australian civilian effort in Afghanistan, focused on Oruzgan province.
Working alongside the Australian Defence Force, in an integrated civilian-military effort, Australia will increase its diplomatic, development assistance and police contribution to around 50 personnel.
This represents around a 50 percent increase of Australia's current contribution.
The additional diplomatic and development assistance staff will be based in Kabul, Kandahar and Tarin Kowt.
They will expand our delivery of practical development assistance projects that improve the capacity of national and local officials, and improve governance and service delivery at the local level.
The additional police personnel will be based in Tarin Kowt.
They will strengthen the work to mentor and train the Afghan National Police to allow a progressive transition to Afghan policing responsibility in the province.
Australia is committed to ensuring Afghanistan never again becomes a haven for the export of terrorism.
We are committed to supporting the United States in achieving this, and we are working closely with the Government of Afghanistan and our international partners.
The new strategy of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan is focused on twin objectives of improving security and governance.
This increased civilian effort is a prudent and considered additional contribution to support those objectives.


PM: An important day for Canberra and for the nation, and hence the remarks I have made inside.
One or two other things I would just like to say briefly about the Government's position in relation to the new foreign investment rules on residential housing. You will have seen the Government's statement today.
I want to be absolutely clear cut about this, and that is, we want to make sure that Australian working families are not being priced out of their own family homes. That is why we have acted in the way in which we have done.
We want to make sure that foreign speculators are not going to force up prices for Australians seeking to buy their own home, buy their first home and we think this is the right course of action.
Finally for the first time, what you are going to have is a penalties regime applying to people who violate this law in the future; a penalties regime which will, for the first time, include the confiscation of any capital gain by any foreign investor flouting these laws.
This is an important measure in support of working families and those who are finding it tough in the housing market right now. One question and I have got to zip.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can you give a guarantee that no individual taxpayer will be worse off under the Government's response to Henry?
PM: Can I say as I have said on many times before that the Government's response to Henry, the independent review of taxation will be delivered prior to the Budget.
I understand the Premier, the Treasurer has indicated a timeframe for that. And the Government's response to that independent review of taxation will be clear and we believe that that is the right course of action.
We think it is going to provide ample opportunity for appropriate public debate, as it should.
Future arrangements for our tax system are important for all participants


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Today is the eve of ANZAC Day, when we commemorate those who served the nation in conflict.
On ANZAC Day we remember too that national security for Australians has long meant international action.
We have known since before Federation that events around the globe can and do have a direct impact on our nation.
And in the 21st century, that is the case more than ever.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is no greater responsibility for government than that of national security.
The defence of our nation, the protection of our people, the upholding of the values which we live by and the interests which we hold dear - these are paramount.
This has been a sacred trust between all our governments and the Australian people throughout our history.
On the eve of ANZAC day, we remember this as we honour those who have served and are serving today the defence of Australia - over 3000 ADF personnel around the world. 
And we also honour our police, our diplomats and so many other dedicated officials employed in the service of our nation's security both at home and abroad.
We salute their service, and their families who stand rock-solid beside them as they stand rock-solid for Australia. We respect their commitment. We pay special tribute to those who have fallen in the defence of our land. We salute their sacrifice.
Their sacrifice reminds us afresh of our responsibility to ensure we have the capabilities to deal with the vast array of security challenges that lie ahead.
In 2008, I outlined in Parliament the ever more complex and inter-connected dimensions of our National Security environment in the first ever national security statement to the Australian Parliament by any Australian Government.
From dealing with traditional defence and diplomatic challenges, to emerging security challenges such as the persistent threat of terrorism, the evils of people smuggling, organised crime, cyber security, the perils of natural disasters, pandemics and the emerging threat of climate change.
Since then, we have been hard at work in building the right policy framework for a comprehensive approach to the increasingly dynamic and interconnected dimensions of our national security.
In 2009, we ended a decade long gap in the comprehensive review of Australia's national defence.
The Defence White Paper provides a blueprint for our defence capabilities in the context of an increasingly demanding strategic environment, where we need a force that is capable of meeting the demands of the defence of Australia, the needs of current operations, while also being able to make a contribution to a wide range of potential contingencies in our immediate region, the Asia Pacific and globally.
It represents the most powerful, integrated and sophisticated set of military capabilities that our nation has ever acquired. It will ensure that the Australian Defence Force has the reach, weight and capabilities to meet the national security challenges of the future.
It creates the pathway for the development of Force 2030 - a major step up in Australia's military preparedness, and most potent range of capabilities Australia has ever held.
We have committed to 3 per cent real growth in the Defence budget to 2017-18, and to over 2 per cent out to 2030.
Importantly, the Defence White Paper also introduces stringent financial disciplines on Defence, including a substantial savings program to maximise efficiencies and the return on the taxpayer's investment. This is the most comprehensive and coherent approach to our defence forces in a generation.
But the defence effort is only one side of the coin. How Australia manages its diplomacy, and in particular its key diplomatic relationships is also critical.
On this front, the government has also been active.
We are at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century. Our relationships with the major powers in our region, and the relationships of these powers with one another, will determine the strategic environment in which we operate.
Of these, our alliance with the United States remains Australia's single most important security relationship. The strategic stability of our region will in large part depend on the continuing strong presence of the United States.
We have intensified our cooperation with President Obama's administration and are working closely together on any number of regional and global issues: from addressing the global economic crisis to matters of global security such as Iran and DPRK's nuclear programs, climate change and regional developments.
Japan is our closest partner in East Asia with whom we have strengthened our bilateral security cooperation.
We have co-hosted with Japan the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, which is playing an influential role in the lead-up to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference later this year. This is complemented by our Trilateral Strategic Dialogue with the United States.
We are in active negotiations with Japan on a Free Trade Agreement. And in forums such as APEC, the East Asia Summit and the G20, Australia and Japan work closely together.
We continue to strengthen our relationship with China.
China is Australia's largest trading partner and Australia has been working closely with China over the past year on critical global challenges such as the global financial crisis and regional economic integration.
Australia has also begun a high level strategic dialogue with China, in addition to engagement at the highest levels between our respective security establishments and defence forces.
Australia looks forward to deepening this dialogue with Beijing in the future - and expanding new areas of security cooperation with China and our other friends and partners in the region.
At the same time, India and Australia have now designated the relationship as a strategic partnership.
This is a recognition by both countries of the growing breadth and depth of our relations and our ability to prosecute shared strategic perspectives, something this government has worked hard to achieve.
India is a major power with a widening strategic influence. Australia looks forward to the unfolding security engagement between our two countries as the Indian Ocean is increasingly a region of vital strategic interest.
Australia and Indonesia have also now designated their relationship as one of strategic partnership. President Yudhoyono's recent visit to Australia and historic address to the Australian Parliament symbolises the added strength we have brought to this vital relationship. 
The President captured it best in his address to Parliament when he said: "Australia and Indonesia have a great future together. We are not just neighbours. We are not just friends. We are strategic partners".
As with our defence, our key strategic relationships are in good order; and strengthening.
This government will continue to work these relationships to enhance regional security for us all. The government is also committed to building architecture beyond country relationships to bolster our wider security.
This is at the heart of the Government's initiative for an Asia-Pacific community. 
The shifting of global strategic and economic weight to the Asia-Pacific is changing the strategic calculus of our region. We need to anticipate and manage this challenge.
Regional dynamism and growth, coupled with Asia's history, are likely to generate new challenges and exacerbate existing tensions. While the region is largely at peace and on a positive trajectory, we cannot take this for granted.
We need to actively shape our regional future, and lay the foundations for dealing with future challenges. We need to continue to foster regional habits of cooperation.
This is why the Government has advocated the development of regional architecture that has the right membership and mandate to address the full spectrum of challenges confronting the region - economic, political and security. That architecture must have ASEAN at its core, and include other key nations of the region - the US, China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, India, New Zealand, Australia and Russia. The inclusion of the United States and Russia in our region's emerging architecture is fundamental to the evolution of what I call an Asia-Pacific community. In fact, much of Australia's diplomacy has been driven by this core concern - how to integrate in particular the role of the United States in the future broad architecture of our region.
In this context I welcome very much the decision of ASEAN leaders at their summit in Hanoi on 8-9 April this year to encourage the United States and Russia to deepen their engagement in evolving regional architecture.
While the countries of the region will need to settle how reformed regional architecture might be constituted, the ASEAN Summit outcome offers a critical step forward to the architecture that our region needs for the long-term future. It is also in pursuit of Australia's interests that the Government is seeking a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-14.
The Security Council is the key decision-making forum of the United Nations. It is the pre-eminent body dealing with international security. It deliberates on matters of war and peace. Its mission is to uphold the global, rules-based order of which we are all beneficiaries.
Australia has a big stake in the decisions of the UNSC.
It is already a quarter of a century since Australia was a member of the UNSC. Securing this seat is by no means assured given that Australia entered the field later than most others, given the previous Australian Government's decision not to contest.
Nonetheless, ours is a vigorous candidacy because we believe we have a real contribution to make.
We have long contributed to peace-building in many of the world's trouble spots, including current deployments in Afghanistan, East Timor, Solomon Islands, Sudan, and the Sinai.
Australia has unimpeachable non-proliferation credentials and is widely recognised as a leader in this field, including through our role in the Nuclear Suppliers Group and, more recently, through the initiative to establish the International Commission for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament (ICCND).
Over the years, we have been creative contributors to regional and global security - from our role in the independence of East Timor to the Cambodia peace plan; from our key role in finalising the Chemical Weapons Convention to our continuing role in the security of the Solomon Islands.
Opponents of Australia playing an active and assertive role in the councils of the world sell this country short.
Australia has a global contribution to make as recognised by successive Australian governments of all political persuasions since 1945.
Although remarkably that seems to have changed in recent years for reasons which have nothing to do with the national interest. Opponents of Australia's active role in global affairs have a "small Australia" mindset.
This mindset would never have got us a seat at what has now become the world's premier global economic decision-making body, the G20.
We were not assured a seat at this table.
But through the force of Australia's ideas and advocacy, we secured the G20 as the right global grouping, and are now working with the other 19 largest economies in the world to build a sustainable global economic recovery after the worst crisis since the Great Depression.
This is a significant achievement. The success of the G20 in stabilising the global economy has been to the benefit of all Australians. And the securing of a seat for Australia at the world's top table for economic governance will be to the lasting benefit of our national interest - whoever constitutes the future government of Australia in decades to come.
The great challenges of managing complex geo-strategic systems and relations between states will not go away. But security is no longer something that can be defended only at our borders and beyond.
As I made clear in my address to Parliament on national security in 2008, responsible governments must also face up to the reality of a new global security environment, and emerging threats.
Non-traditional national security challenges are rapidly becoming the norm, rather than the exception.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 on the United States brought starkly to attention the rise of a global violent jihadist movement that has gone on to carry out or inspire attacks elsewhere.
September 11 may now seem to some a long time ago. My message to the Australian public is simple - the terrorist threat at home and abroad is increasing, not decreasing. And the fact that to date we have not had a repeat of the carnage of the magnitude we saw on September 11 is a tribute to the skill and professionalism of all of our security agencies.
Nonetheless, the December 25 incident in the US demonstrates the fundamental importance of absolute vigilance.
Today's highly inter-connected, mobile and technology-dependent world has blurred the classical distinctions between foreign and domestic, between state and non-state security threats. It has also meant that interconnected systems and growing interdependencies, fed by ever faster and cheaper technology, is increasing our vulnerability to disruption.
Computer hackers in internet cafes can penetrate national security systems and steal commercial secrets. Virtual Imams can recruit suicide bombers off the net. And viruses can spread from a chicken farm in China to infect cities across the world with the speed of an A380.
The breadth of the challenge we face to national security has never been greater. At the top of the list, terrorism has become a persistent and permanent feature of Australia's security environment.
The threat is real and enduring. It is two-fold in nature, emerging both from the global violent jihadist movement itself, and from locally-generated but globally-inspired radicals.
The government released earlier this year the Counter-Terrorism White Paper, the first since 2004 and the first to bring together the domestic and international elements of our policy approach. This involves multiple government agencies and all levels of federal, state and local government.
Domestically we are improving our intelligence and analysis, strengthening our protective measures, and building resilience.
As part of an integrated effort we are establishing a Counter-Terrorism Control Centre to ensure a seamless flow of information for action across government.
Internationally we are working with close friends and partners, such as Indonesia, to strengthen intelligence and law enforcement collaboration and create an international environment that is hostile to terrorism. These are determined efforts to address the threat of terrorism.
But as the White Paper makes clear, the threat is serious and enduring. The government can take measures to reduce the risk of a terrorist attack, but it cannot eliminate that risk.
Another attack on Australia, our people or our interests could happen at any time. Our intelligence is good, and our intelligence, police and security professionals are doing highly professional job.
But the nature of the murky world of terrorists is that their aims and plans are hidden. Under these circumstances, there is no room for complacency.
It is this analysis that galvanises Australia's national interest in our continuing commitment in Afghanistan. Australia's interest is to prevent Afghanistan from once again becoming a haven for terrorists; to prevent Afghanistan becoming a launching pad for attacks against us.
It is fitting to consider amidst these halls of learning, freedom and tolerance that those we are up against in Afghanistan would tear the institutions down.
The operations of the international coalition in Afghanistan are at a critical point in time.
It is a time when there is a real opportunity to make real inroads against the Taliban and their Al Qaeda supporters, to make space for the government of Afghanistan to build national support, and to ready the Afghan forces for the responsibility of the security of their country.
This is why last year we made the difficult decision to increase our troop commitment by around 40 per cent to 1550 troops in support of a strategy for success. Australia strongly supports the new US-led strategy for the international coalition in Afghanistan.
This strategy is based on a sophisticated combination of military and civilian effort to ensure that the government of Afghanistan can increasingly step up to its responsibilities for security and governance.
The focus of our military effort is on training Afghan troops in Oruzgan province so that they can provide their own security.
And on this, let me be clear. We will not keep our troops in Afghanistan one day longer than that necessary to enable this transition.
The ADF in Oruzgan has mentored the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade's headquarters, a 400 man infantry kandak, and elements of the Brigade's combat and logistics support kandaks. The ADF will continue this mentoring task and plans to take on the mentoring of the remainder of the ANA 4th Brigade by the end of 2010.
Our core mission in Afghanistan is on track. But there is more to be done.
As part of our support for President Obama's strategy, late last year I foreshadowed an increase in our civilian commitment in Afghanistan.
This important civilian work is something that I have witnessed on the ground in Afghanistan. 
It is work that all Australians would be proud of. 
This increase will comprise additional diplomatic, development assistance and policing support.
This will see roughly a doubling of our diplomatic and aid effort to strengthen our capacity to understand and influence developments on the ground and to build the capacity of the government of Afghanistan.
Like our military contribution, this enhanced civilian contribution will be focussed in Oruzgan province, to complement the good work being done by the ADF in building roads and bridges and rebuilding schools.
Our increased policing effort is targeted at strengthening our ability to train the Afghan National Police so that they too can increasingly assume greater responsibility for their own law and order needs and allow us to transfer that responsibility.
Our civilian increase will amount to around 50 per cent more than our existing contribution and will be a force-multiplier for our total effort in Afghanistan.
It will enhance our capacity to prosecute our strategy with international partners and to promote our interests with the Afghan government. In this, we will continue to make it clear to the government of Afghanistan that we expect them to meet their responsibilities.
More effective civilian-military integration of all the elements of our contribution in Afghanistan will ensure that we are all pulling together and in the same direction for success.
This approach is consistent with General McChrystal's strategy for Afghanistan which is based on the time-honoured truth that military effort alone will not deliver success in conflicts like this. Unless we are using and coordinating all instruments of national power, we will be less effective.
This is serious work. It involves hard yards. It is dangerous. There have been Australian casualties in this effort. We can expect that there will be more in the future.
But it is necessary work.
And it is work that we do with our closest ally - the United States.
The strength of our alliance with the United States is founded on our bearing the burden of security together. This is fundamental. As the largest non-NATO military contribution to Afghanistan, we are fulfilling that fundamental responsibility. And Australia has never walked away from the United States in times of need. We will not now.
Australia's military commitment to Afghanistan and the conditions attached to it have been the product of detailed deliberations of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet.
This work has been led by the Defence Minister John Faulkner.
It involves detailed, delicate and diplomatic work - because the Government remains acutely aware that our decisions involve the lives of one and a half thousand of our men and women in uniform on the ground today.
This work has been carefully calibrated with our friends and allies.
That is why the Government finds the contribution to this debate on Afghanistan by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday characteristically reckless.
The Leader of the Opposition has said Australia should now lead the military operations in Oruzgan given the recent decisions by the Dutch Government.
To be clear, such a decision would probably require the further deployment of an additional thousand or more troops to Afghanistan.
To be clear, such a deployment would cost the Australia taxpayer in the order of a further 1 billion dollars per year.
Once again we have an example of erratic policy making on the run; this time on national security.
When I delivered the first National Security Statement to Parliament in December 2008, I made the point that in an increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, we needed a more integrated national security structure that enhanced national security policy coordination and implementation.
Since that time, we've made considerable strides towards a more integrated, whole-of-government approach to national security, one that moves seamlessly from domestic to international, from traditional to non-traditional, and that is agile and responsive to today's dynamic and fast-paced security environment.
We have created the position of a National Security Adviser.
This position has developed and supported whole-of-government national security policy development and crisis response.
It is building a genuine national security community. We cannot afford the stove-piping which has traditionally characterised our security agencies.
The strands of national security effort - foreign and domestic, defence and diplomacy, policy and intelligence, federal and state - are now better coordinated. But more needs to be done.
Whether it was responding to the Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria or the tsunami that struck Samoa and Tonga, the National Security Adviser has been at the centre, driving our response across government. It has also been the case in the development of the government's policy on critical strategic and foreign policy challenges such as Afghanistan and cyber security, including the Government's new cyber security strategy.
We are also working towards a coordinated budget process across the entire national security community.
This year, as part of the Budget process, the government has brought together all of the national security-related proposals from relevant agencies under one umbrella. This has allowed us to weigh options and shift resources within and between portfolios to best achieve our national security priorities.
We have also learnt through experience, in responding to disasters and conflicts in our region, that we are at our most effective when we are able to draw on all elements of our national power, military and civilian.
The Australian Defence Force, whilst indispensable and invaluable, cannot be the sum total of our effort.
So we are creating a civilian response corps to enable the rapid deployment of Australian civilians into overseas disaster or conflict zones.
An Office of the Australian Civilian Corps has been established within AusAID to implement the initiative, and create a register of Australians with valuable skill sets who can be deployed overseas at short notice to respond to crises.
It should have an interim capability by mid-2010, and be fully operational in early 2011.
In addition, we have created the Asia-Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence. 
Australia has a long and proud record of contributing to peace and stabilisation operations, and to disaster management overseas.
The Centre is designed to capitalise on our expertise and support the development of improved national civil-military capabilities to prevent and respond more effectively to conflict and disasters overseas.
We have also established a National Intelligence Coordination Committee, chaired by the National Security Adviser, to ensure our national intelligence effort is effectively integrated and aligned with our national security priorities.
Of course an important foundation for a functioning national security community is effective information sharing. We know from experience that the consequences of not sharing the right information with the right people at the right time can be catastrophic.
We needed to work together on this to improve our efforts as a national security community.
That is why the Government has supported the community's proposal for the National Security Information Environment Roadmap: 2020.
This Roadmap provides for the first time a single strategy to address the many barriers to information sharing.
It challenges some outdated notions of information 'stovepipes', and provides a clear vision of where we want to go with information sharing across the national security community over the next decade. It is aimed at ensuring that the right information can get to the right people at the right time. In all questions of national security, information and its effective dissemination is critical to all actions taken on the ground.
Today, I am pleased to formally open the National Security College.
This is an important day for Australia.
This will become a central institution in shaping the future of our national security policy, personnel and collaborative culture. It will prove to be one of the most significant and enduring foundation stones of our new, emerging national security community.
Because from it will emerge the national security practitioners, and the culture of community and collaboration, essential if Australia is to meet the security challenges of the 21st century.
The College will strengthen the ability of national security leaders to analyse Australia's strategic environment and the dynamics of change within it, and to recognise and respond to threats.
Its courses and other activities, such as the College's outreach program, will help to build trusted networks of interaction between governments at all levels, businesses, academia and community organisations.
We will include in the College participants from regional countries, building our links with national security practitioners in our neighbourhood. In this sense it is also a useful confidence and security building measure.
Its multi-disciplinary approach and whole-of-government research projects will help to identify new and emerging security threats and effective counter-measures.
It will help break down any remaining silos in our national security community.
It will promote new ways of conceiving of security threats, and new ways of addressing them.
It will build up expertise across government. And it will foster a new national security culture.
We need a national security community and culture that has a common conceptual framework, a common language, rather than the different dialects that often unnecessarily separate our defence, foreign policy, intelligence and wider security community.
I am not suggesting that core specialist, disciplinary skills should be substituted for an amorphous set of national security concepts. In fact, quite the reverse.
The specialist training of our defence force, our diplomats and intelligence community must constantly improve in order to remain among the best in the world.
I am talking about a further set of skills that should become an essential pre-requisite for the future leaders of our national security community.
To be blunt, it will be essential for all future candidates to the Senior Executive Service or equivalent positions across our national security community to graduate from an additional specialist national security course here at this College before advancing to future leadership positions.
That is why I have said this new National Security College of Australia will become central to the shape of the Australian national security community.
And that is why this is an important day for the nation.
The College will receive up to $17.3 million over four years to assist with its establishment.
In addition, a new building will also be constructed for the College here at the ANU, likely to open around the end of 2012.
I'm very pleased that Michael L'Estrange, an experienced diplomat with outstanding skills in public policy, will be leading the College.
There is no better place for the College to be placed than here at the Australian National University.
To conclude, this government stands for the strongest national security for Australia.
We stand for strong defence. We stand four-square behind the US alliance.
We stand committed to forging our key relationships in our region.
We stand for the long haul fight against terrorism both at home and abroad.
We stand for a comprehensive, coherent and well coordinated national security policy that uses all instruments of national power to meet contemporary national security challenges of Australia.
And that is why the inauguration of this new National Security College is an important day for the nation.
Thank you.


The Australian Government today has formally opened the National Security College at the Australian National University, which will become a central institution in shaping the future of the nation's security policy and personnel.
In the 21st century Australia faces a more complex national security environment than at any time in its history.
To respond to the challenges the Australian Government is working to build a new level of expertise among our national security professionals.
The National Security College will draw together policy makers and others into high-level courses to deepen national security capability.
The College will receive up to $17.3 million over four years to assist with its establishment.
Its courses will be designed to strengthen the ability of national security leaders to analyse Australia's strategic environment and the dynamics of change within it, and to recognise and respond to threats. It will foster a new national security culture.
The College will be the training ground for future generations of national security experts.
Australia depends upon having trusted networks of interaction between the government's national security professionals and those in state and local governments, business, academia and the community engaged in national security matters.
The National Security College will help improve coordination, cooperation and collaboration across government, and will be a key element of our new national security community.
A new building will be constructed for the College the ANU, likely to open around the end of 2012.
Professor Michael L'Estrange AO, former Secretary of the Department of Foreign and Trade, is the founding Executive Director of the National Security College.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
All nations are shaped by their histories, their memories and their stories.
By their triumphs, by their tragedies.
By their myths and by their legends.
Because together, these are the things that shape a nation's soul.
And how a nation remembers its past animates how that same nation sees its future.
Often in ways of which they may be barely aware.
For Australia, our identity has been etched deeply by what we call ANZAC.
For nearly a century, in fact for most of our federated history, ANZAC has occupied a sacred place not far from the nation's soul.
It shapes deeply our nation's memory. It shapes deeply how we see the world.
A hundred years later, it shapes too what we do in the world.
Neither religious nor secular, whatever our beliefs are, ANZAC is profoundly spiritual - inspiring pilgrimages still to that far-off place where our modern-day pilgrims drink deep from the well of national memory.
So what is this legend that we call ANZAC? How has it shaped our nation's life?
How does if offer quiet counsel and gentle direction as we seek to chart our future?
And how do we best nurture its flame for another century as we approach the first centenary of the ANZAC landings?
I believe each generation of Australians has a duty to pass this torch to the next.
So what is the story of ANZAC? And how do its values speak to us today?
Values of courage - courage of the type we saw in the murderous assault on Lone Pine.
Values of sacrifice - sacrifice that saw nearly 9000 Australians find their resting place today on Turkish soil.
Values of mateship - the almost biblical story of Simpson and his donkey.
Values of compassion - the decision of both the Australians and the Turks to lay down their arms for a day in order that both might bury their dead.
Values of a deeper humanity, as the Turks whom we first met in war have embraced us in peace - and the words of Ataturk (who saw no difference between our Johnnies and their Mehmets) speak to us still down the ages.
Courage, sacrifice, mateship, compassion and the bonds of our common humanity.
Good values. Important values. Values for a nation.
Yet values still of a broader and richer canvas than a narrow nationalism that simply lauds one people above another.
So how have these ANZAC values shaped our nation's life over the century?
We have become, by tradition, a nation that does not resile from a fight when fight we must.
We honour our men and women in uniform for there is no greater honour than to wear the uniform of Australia.
We stand up for our friends and for our allies and for the principles of international decency.
Yet the carnage of this war to end all wars (one in twenty-five of our entire population a casualty, one in eighty killed in action) has also made us warriors for peace.
No longer would we allow our soldiers to become mere cannon fodder for foreign generals. If fight we must, then all speed to action.
But as a nation we also strain every sinew for peace because there is no romance in the mud and the blood of war - only the cold silence of death and the sobbing of innocents.
ANZAC has taught us anew the wisdom of old - blessed are the peacemakers.
These then are good values.
Values that have become good traditions.
Values and traditions that have helped shape a good and decent people.
Values that do not allow us to remain silent when we see the underdog oppressed.
Values and traditions at work today from Afghanistan, to Timor, to the Solomons, to Sudan and the Sinai.
Values and traditions that unite millions who have served in uniform and the hundred thousand whose names lie etched in stone in this memorial.
So how then do we keep this flame alight for the century to come?
April 1915 is now beyond nearly all our living memory.
And as the ranks of those who march thin further over the years to come, how do we tend this flame with diligence and care for the generations to come?
I have the greatest confidence that it will tend itself.
But as we approach the century of the Gallipoli landings just five years from now, perhaps it is also time for a further national conversation as to how we commemorate and celebrate ANZAC in 2015.
One approach is for the government simply to announce a program of events.
As Prime Minister, I would like to do it differently.
In the year ahead, I would like to hear from the nation itself.
From the ground up. From every school. From every community. From every RSL.
Because if I've learned one thing in the time I've been Prime Minister, it is that all wisdom does not proceed from the nation's capital.
So let us instead listen to the wisdom of our people.
On how we should honour ANZAC on its centenary - a centenary which approaches faster than we may think.
To this end, the government will appoint a National Commission on the Commemoration of the ANZAC Centenary.
This Commission will be made up of former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, together with the President of the RSL - Rear Admiral Ken Doolan.
They will be supported by the representatives of the Defence Forces, the National War Memorial and by the Minister for Veterans Affairs.
The task of the Commission will be to call forth submissions from across the nation on how we most appropriately mark this important centenary for the nation.
And then at year's end, to recommend to government what we should do.
Not just for the centenary of ANZAC itself - but also for the other great centenaries that lie ahead between ANZAC Day and Armistice Day.
Some have suggested enhancing this great war memorial with a new ANZAC Gallery.
Others point what can be done with other memorials around Australia.
Some have said we should enliven further our commemorations with new monuments abroad - for example, preserving the submarine the AE2 which spectacularly breached the narrows in 1915 to threaten the Turkish fleet in a spectacular display of seamanship.
Others still have said we should even raise the AE2.
Or find her sister ship, the AE1, which remains lost without trace with all hands off Rabaul to this day.
Many have pointed to a new generation of scholarships to further the ANZAC spirit through education and excellence.
These are just some possibilities - not all of which will come to pass.
There are in fact many besides.
Let our local communities begin the national conversation from the ground up to discuss what best should be done to honour ANZAC.
I believe the diggers would want it this way.
Yesterday together with my son I visited this Memorial.
I was taken by the letters home.
Testimony to the horror, testimony to heroism, and testimony also to humour in the face of humiliation and despair.
One man wrote of the horrors of trenches:
"God it is cruel. What humans will stand is astounding...Tonight will be another long vigil gazing into death, this is truly the Valley of the Shadow."
Another, a British officer, wrote in admiration of the heroism he saw in the ANZAC assault on Helles:
"They were at home in hell-fire...They laughed at it; they sang through it. Their pluck was titanic. They were not men but gods, demons infuriated. We saw them fall by the score. But what of it? Not for one breath did the great line waver or break. On and up it went, up and on, as steady and proud as if on parade. A seasoned staff officer watching choked up with his own admiration. Our men tore off their helmets and waved them, and poured cheer after cheer after those wonderful ANZACs."
All part of what we call ANZAC.
Courage, sacrifice, mateship, compassion and our common humanity.
Values for a nation.
For our federation, they were our first generation.
But at Gallipoli, many breathed their last.
Wars always end.
But our duty to remember never will.
Lest we forget. 


I was deeply saddened to learn of the death of three Royal New Zealand Air Force personnel earlier today in a helicopter crash near Wellington, New Zealand.
I extend, on behalf of the Australian Government and people, our condolences to the families of the victims, to the service men and women of the New Zealand Defence Forces, and to the Government and people of New Zealand.
Our thoughts and prayers are with them.
As the people of our two nations come together today in Anzac Day ceremonies across our countries and around the world, to honour the memory and commemorate the sacrifice made by our service men and women, this tragedy is an especially poignant reminder of the risks that our men and women in uniform continually face on behalf of our two nations and for our freedoms.
I understand a fourth crew member is in a critical condition. We pray for his full recovery.


PM: It's good to be here with David Bradbury, our local Member- and to talk about the particular challenges facing the health and hospital needs in western Sydney, and here at the Nepean Hospital. Together with the Government of New South Wales, we're seeking to improve hospital services here. And as evidence of that, across the road you will see work commencing in about a month on what will be called East Wing, different to the West Wing I suppose, East Wing- which is a total investment on our part of nearly $100 million to add additional surgical beds, add additional mental health beds, add additional services to this hospital more broadly.
This is part and parcel of helping to build more health and hospital services here in western Sydney, which is a huge growth zone not just for greater Sydney, but for the nation. And that's why we've got to keep pace with that. Secondly, it's also evidence of the sort of work we'll now be doing together to improve health and hospital services under a new health and hospitals network for the nation. Last week in Canberra, together with Kristina Keneally, we agreed on a new NHHN for Australia-wide, a new National Health and Hospitals Network to be funded nationally, and run locally.
More autonomy for local clinicians and health experts in this part of western Sydney, and for the first time, the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the future needs of the health and hospital network, including of the public hospital system. That's a big reform. But the rubber hits the road in how we now implement this in improving the accident and emergency services here at Nepean, improving elective surgery rate here at Nepean, improving the number of services we can provide for rehabilitation beds, as well as the overall pressures on the health workforce here as well.
On the rehabilitation beds, it's probably best to describe it in these terms- we're going to have problems with accident and emergency and elective surgery, at the front end of the hospital, if you're not at the same time expanding your capacity at the back end of the hospital through rehabilitation beds. That is, where people need to go after surgery, or after particularly acute medical experiences, in order to transition them back to the community, or in some cases, to aged care.
That's why, again, in Canberra last week, we the Australian Government agreed to invest in an additional 1300 acute, sub-acute beds across the nation. Here at Nepean, I'm advised there are 18 such rehabilitation beds at this hospital. They're under pressure. We're going to need to see more investment in beds like that across western Sydney and New South Wales more broadly. That's why we've invested there. That's why we're investing specifically enhancing A&amp;E services as well. That's why we're investing, also separately, in improving elective surgery capacity, and in the overall workforce.
None of this works unless we're adding extra doctors to the system. That's why we're investing in more than 6000 additional training places across Australia, a large slice of which of course will come here to New South Wales. So, work on the ground now, the building of the East Wing here at Nepean, a $100 million investment from the Australian Government. A new national agreement which helps to underpin the future needs for accident and emergency, for elective surgery, and for rehabilitation beds at this hospital, all part of a new partnership to deliver better health and better hospital services to the good people of Sydney, and wider New South Wales.
One last point on health. To fund this, we actually need to ensure that we are getting proper resources from those programs which should be yielding savings to the budget process. And here I refer of course to our proposal over a long period of time now to bring about fundamental reforms to the private health insurance rebate. Right now, what Mr Abbott and the Liberal party are doing is refusing to allow these changes to occur. The present system provides massive taxpayer-funded subsidies for my private health insurance and for Mr Abbott's. We're both on salaries of $2-300,000 plus a year. The system's just wrong. It shouldn't be that way.
What we are doing is proposing changes in order to bring about those savings, some $2 billion over the forward estimates, to instead invest into basic hospital services for working families, pensioners and carers right across the system. So, this is a very basic bottom line thing. Because by Mr Abbott denying the reform to richer Australians getting taxpayer-funded subsidies for their private health insurance, by refusing to embrace those changes, he is denying funding flowing through to the basic needs of working people in hospitals like Nepean. To fund these reforms for the future of the health and hospital system, we need every dollar available.
And that means the $2 billion plus that is currently being held up and blocked in the Senate by Mr Abbott and the position the Liberal party has adopted. It's reckless, and it's irresponsible. It's opposition for opposition's sake. And this measure should be passed, should be allowed to pass, in order to deliver more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, for working families, pensioners and carers everywhere.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) have things started to (inaudible)
PM: The challenge of climate change hasn't gone away. Climate change requires continued domestic and international action. The Australian Government believes that a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the most effective and least expensive way of acting on climate change. And remember, the Government- together with the Opposition- remains committed to bipartisan greenhouse gas emissions targets. The Opposition decided to backflip on its historical commitment to bringing in a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and there's been slow progress in the realisation of global action on climate change. These two factors together inevitably mean that the implementation of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in Australia will be delayed.
The implementation of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in Australia will therefore be extended until after the conclusion of the current Kyoto commitment period, which finishes at the end of 2012. By the end of that period, the Governments around the world will be required to make clear their commitments for the post-2012 period. And that will provide therefore the Australian Government at that time, at the end of 2012, with a better position to assess the level of global action on climate change prior to the implementation of a CPRS in Australia.
The Government's targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions remain unchanged. The alternative, of course, is Mr Abbott's policy, which costs more, does less, has not been funded, and doesn't deliver a single dollar worth of compensation to working families. And remember, Mr Abbott at the end of the day says, quote "climate change is absolute crap", unquote. That's not our view.
JOURNALIST: A little while back you said that climate change is the greatest moral, economic and social challenge of our time. With this now being delayed, do you still believe that to be the case?
PM: Climate change remains a fundamental economic and environmental and moral challenge for all Australians, and for all peoples of the world. That just doesn't go away for the simple reason that it's not in the headlines. Therefore, the practical question is this. Our current actions delivered through until the end of the current Kyoto commitment period which finishes at the end of 2012- the critical question then is what actions postdate 2012, and the decision that we've taken as a Government is that that provides the best opportunity to judge the actions by the rest of the international community before taking our decision about the implementation of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme from that time on.
JOURNALIST: What about Australia being a world leader though? So we're now waiting for the rest of the world? What happened to the idea of us leading the way?
PM: The question of acting on climate change is a responsibility facing all Australians. The question of acting on climate change is a responsibility facing all peoples of the world. Australian action, combined with international action, is effective. That is why we've got to work together with our friends and partners in the world. The truth is, of course, that progress internationally has been slower. The truth also is that the Liberal party have executed a complete backflip on that historical position in support of an emissions trading scheme. 
And therefore, therefore the appropriate course of action is to, as I said, to extend the implementation time for the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme until the end of the current commitment period, which is 2012. And then, based on the commitments, which are then entered into by the rest of the international community, for the Australian Government to then make its assessment on the implementation of a CPRS following that time.
JOURNALIST: Isn't that a backflip on your position though? Because you were always for leading the way, and not waiting, necessarily, for the rest of the world.
PM: The Government's commitment to the targets I referred to before remain unchanged. And that is, we remain committed, together with the Opposition, to a unilateral target of 5% greenhouse gas reduction. We remain also committed to the possibility of doing more, consistent with global action. Nothing has changed there. What we are simply talking about is making a proper assessment at the end of 2012, at the end of the current commitment period, on parallel action around the rest of the world, and a judgment, therefore, based on that, on the implementation of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. The Government's commitment-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) this delay? Are you disappointed by this delay?
PM: Well, a couple of factors are real. Let's just be bottom-line about it - the Liberal Party have backflipped on their historical position in support of an emissions trading scheme. The rest of the world has been slow to act, or slower to act on appropriate action on international climate change. The real deadline facing us is the expiration of the current Kyoto commitment period, which concludes at the end of 2012.
We think this is a responsible course of action. As I said before, our commitment to the greenhouse gas reduction targets that I've outlined before remains unchanged. Secondly, our commitment to the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as the most effective and least expensive way of proceeding in action on climate change remains unchanged.
However, given that international action has been slower than was originally anticipated and given the fact that the Liberal Party has now backflipped completely on this position and therefore the legislation has not been passed, given those two factors, it's very plain that the correct course of action is to extend the implementation date and to assess the action by other states at the end of 2012, at the end of this current Kyoto commitment period.
JOURNALIST: Why not negotiate again with the Greens?
PM: Well, our doors have always remained open to negotiating with people from all sides of politics, but when you have one side of politics saying that you cannot act on climate change effectively through an emissions trading scheme, and another side of politics who would happily close the economy down tomorrow, it makes life a bit of a challenge. Therefore, we remain open to the possibility of discussions with all sides of politics. Our commitment to acting on climate change through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme remains unchanged. Our commitment to the targets that we have announced before remain unchanged. What we are doing is extending the implementation period for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, and one which is linked, therefore, to the conclusion of the current Kyoto commitment period, which ends at the end of 2012.
Our actions in place right now as a country remain consistent with our obligations through until 2012. What we need to make a judgement of is what happens post-2012 and what the rest of the world is doing, because the rest of the world and what they do is pretty important in terms of Australia's future actions as well.
JOURNALIST: Speaking of the economy, how can businesses make investment decisions if they don't know when the scheme will start or what form it will take?
PM: I think the question of business certainty is best addressed by dealing with 1) the international realities on climate change and the actions by other states, 2) making a considered assessment of the actions taken abroad and at home, and 3) ensuring that therefore the future course of action is explained clearly to business and a timetable for its implementation. I've today indicated what the extension of that timetable would be and the reasons for it.
JOURNALIST: But there's no indication of when it would it would start. They've said that they're, you know, they're playing a waiting game.
PM: What I've indicated, well, on the question of delay, I think that's a question you could appropriately put to the Leader of the Opposition. Remember, the Government actually negotiated an arrangement with the Liberal Party, which was adopted by the Liberal Party, accepted by their Party room, and then they removed their leader. That's the reason why this legislation was not introduced at the end of last year. Let's be very clear about that.
Secondly, on the question of the timetable for the extension I've just spoken of, it's very clear - that is, the conclusion of the assessment period would be at the end of 2012, which is the end of the Kyoto commitment period.
JOURNALIST: Home insulation - were jobs considered more important than safety?
PM: For the Government, the importance of safety has always been paramount. Obviously, the Government has said before there have been real problems with the implementation of this scheme and let's just call a spade a spade. That's why we commissioned the Hawke Review, that's why various other reviews are underway as well, and we will of course respond to their recommendations.
There have been a range of recommendations contained in Hawke. I'm sure various other bodies which report on this will make other recommendations as well.
Our job, now, is to deal with the problems on the ground as they exist within individual households across the country. That's what Minister Combet is doing, and to deal with that effectively through the inspection program which he's unfolding. But plainly, plainly problems were made in the implementation of this program.
JOURNALIST: But was the aims of this, in terms of the urgency given to job creation and safety, of the two, which was the more important?
PM: For the Government, safety has always been the number one priority, but I've said also there have been problems with the implementation of this and let's be very clear about that. I think everyone would accept that, and the challenge now is to deal with the practical problems on the ground. That's what the Government is seeking to do with the inspection program, and that is also why the Government will be attending to any other recommendations which come forth in terms of future action as well.
JOURNALIST: You've been called a creep for not responding to the Fullers, for not apologising, rather, to the Fullers. Do you regret that?
PM: Can I say that any family that has lost a member of its family through accidents of this nature, any human being must feel regret and sorrow for what has occurred. Certainly, when it comes to the Fuller family, I, together with other ministers of the Government, are deeply sorry for what has occurred as it affects their loved ones and nothing, no action, actually brings those loved ones back.
JOURNALIST: Did you forget who Kevin Fuller was?
PM: I beg your pardon?
JOURNALIST: Did you forget who Kevin Fuller was?
PM: The discussion that I had with the Fuller family was a good and long discussion, a very difficult discussion, a very personal discussion, and the Government and ministers, and myself, are deeply sorry for the loss of life which has occurred, and that goes to the loss in the Fuller family and in other families as well.
JOURNALIST: Did you forget who he was though, when you saw him?
PM: I'd rather not go to the detail of a very long conversation, and what I've said today is consistent with the thoughts and the feelings I sought to bring to bear in a very difficult conversation with a deeply bereaved family.
JOURNALIST: Just getting back to the beginning, you mentioned that we have 18 (inaudible) present. When will we have a specific idea about how many resources Nepean will see (inaudible) be implemented?
PM: I'd rather not give you a specific timetable on that because I think it's very important that we get the planning right and the delivery right so that people's expectations are met and not disappointed. Therefore, when it comes to this expansion of services here at the Nepean Hospital, what we have done at a national level is make sure that the investment in the number of sub-acute beds is significant. It's 1,300.
If you look at the Bennett Commission of report and their analysis of the shortfall in the investment in sub-acute beds nationwide it is described by Commissioner Bennett as the missing link in the entire system. She was previously, I believe, a CEO of Westmead. She has familiarity with what happens in Western Sydney, so, therefore, mindful of what she has said, there's a big national investment in this. Now it's a question of making sure the distribution of these is right across each state and within each state and working closely with the state planning authorities and, as they emerge, the local hospital networks to make sure that is right, but once we have an implementation schedule for that, then of course we'll make that public. I just don't want to, as it were, shoot from the hip and get it wrong. I think it's far better-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: Do you have an idea yet of how small they'll be? Is there an idea that they can be (inaudible)?
PM: Having spoken this morning with the clinical leaders here at Nepean, what they are concerned about, of course, is to make sure that they have a bigger say in the future. What they're concerned about is how local doctors and local nurses and local allied health professionals have a real say in how the health dollar is distributed in a community like this.
At present, I think it's fair to say that here in New South Wales the health areas of the states are too large. I think that's recognised also, now, by the State Government as well, so-
JOURNALIST: I just want to ask one quick question about the ETS, sorry, if you wanted to finish.
PM: Thank you. It's a pretty important question for the local communities about how these things work.
So, therefore, the key thing is to make sure that your local hospital networks are properly tied into the local communities of interest and how they are properly linked, functionally, to the big tertiary hospitals as well.
Therefore, I'm not in the business, from Canberra, of saying where a particular line should lie. For example, if there's going to be a local hospital network out here, and I assume there will be, where should it start and where should it stop. What we need is some ground-up consultation from the community to make sure we get that as right as possible.
There's one other factor which locals may be interested in as well. To make sure that those lines remain as closely allied as possible to where we have any local divisions of delivery for primary healthcare and we've got to make sure that the primary health care is better organised and better delivered and better integrated with what happens in the hospitals, and frankly what happens within aged care.
Where I'd like to move to over time is to ally the local hospital networks and their geographical footprint, the geographical footprint, also, of the primary healthcare organisations and those of the aged care networks so that we have systems which properly talk to each other so the patient actually becomes first.
I'll take yours. I better off. I'm late inside.
JOURNALIST: Just back to the ETS, who made the decision to delay?
PM: These have been deliberated upon through our Cabinet processes over a period of time, as you would expect, and the decisions that we take on the future of climate change are never taken lightly. Climate change remains a core concern of the Government. It is a core concern of the community. It is a problem which will not go away.
That is why we take these decisions carefully and deliberately and after much deliberation about action at home, action abroad, action both through emissions trading, actions when it comes to the role of renewable energy, actions when it comes to energy efficiency, actions when it comes to the application of the new and increased Renewable Energy Targets.
All these things together at home, together with action abroad, add up to a real difference for the planet. That's why we're carefully calibrating this as an integrated strategy for the future, because this, as much as others may wish, will not simply go away. It requires real action for the future.
Thanks folks.


PM: It's good to be here with David Bradbury, our local Member, and to talk about the particular challenges facing the health and hospital needs in western Sydney, and here at the Nepean Hospital. Together with the Government of New South Wales, we're seeking to improve hospital services here. And as evidence of that, across the road you will see work commencing in about a month on what will be called East Wing, different to the West Wing I suppose. East Wing, which is a total investment on our part of nearly $100 million, to add additional surgical beds, add additional mental health beds, add additional services to this hospital more broadly.
This is part and parcel of helping to build more health and hospital services here in western Sydney, which is a huge growth zone not just for greater Sydney, but for the nation. And that's why we've got to keep pace with that. Secondly, it's also evidence of the sort of work we'll now be doing together to improve health and hospital services under a new health and hospitals network for the nation. Last week in Canberra, together with Kristina Keneally, we agreed on a new NHHN for Australia-wide, a new National Health and Hospitals Network to be funded nationally, and run locally.
More autonomy for local clinicians and health experts in this part of western Sydney, and for the first time, the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the future needs of the health and hospital network, including of the public hospital system.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


View a transcript of the Prime Minister's speech at the ANZAC Day national ceremony held at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra on 25 April 2010.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


Last week's historic health and hospital reform is already delivering more services and additional beds to families in Sydney's west at Blacktown Hospital.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and NSW Premier Kristina Keneally today announced an additional 18 new hospital beds would be opened at Blacktown Hospital from early July.
Last week, the Prime Minister and Ms Keneally agreed at COAG to additional funding for NSW totalling $1.7 billion over four years to implement health and hospital reforms across the State.
The announcement of new beds was made at Blacktown Hospital's 45th Anniversary celebrations.
Blacktown Hospital has come a long way from its humble beginnings as a 44-bed hospital in 1965 to a facility with more than 350 beds.
Last year alone, 3,261 babies were born there and more than 35,000 people were treated in the Emergency Department. In addition, almost 8,000 surgical procedures were undertaken and more than 200,000 outpatient services were provided.
The 18 new beds build on the State Government's investments in Blacktown Hospital, which include:
     * Completion of a new Cardiac Catheter Laboratory that will treat more than 1500 patients and enable the people of Blacktown and its surrounding areas to receive cardiac services locally; and
     * A new CT scanner for Blacktown Hospital, which will help ensure imaging services at the hospital remain at the forefront of technology.
In addition, the Australian Government has committed $17.6 million to expand the University of Western Sydney's Clinical School. This includes $13.1 million towards research laboratories, a learning and resources centre and an auditorium, and $4.5 million to expand the clinical skills simulation centre.
Construction began on the 4 January 2010 and is expected to be completed by the end of next year.
The new scanner, the completion of the new Cardiac Catheter, and the new Clinical School ensure the people of Blacktown are getting the best quality of treatment services close to home.
The Clinical School and Research and Education Centre will soon mean young people aspiring to be doctors or other health professionals will have more opportunity to study and work in Western Sydney
The Blacktown Hospital campus provides the following services:
     * Emergency Medical Care
     * Maternity
     * Special Care for newborn babies
     * Cardiac Rehabilitation
     * Coronary Care
     * Intensive Care
     * Planned and emergency surgery
     * General Medicine
     * Renal Dialysis
     * Diabetes Education and Therapy
     * Imaging Services for inpatients and outpatients
     * Blacktown Community Health Centre
     * Dental Health
     * Mental Health.


Work on the new Mackay Stadium kicked off today with the commencement of preparatory earthworks at the site.
The Rudd Government is investing $8 million into this vital piece of community infrastructure which will support jobs today while delivering lasting benefits to the people of Mackay.
The Mackay Stadium construction is delivering on the Rudd Government's election commitment, and is expected to support over 100 jobs during construction as well as providing ongoing employment for Mackay residents.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd toured the earthworks with local candidate Mike Brunker and Member for Dawson James Bidgood.
The community and council have worked long and hard for close to a decade for this new stadium, and the Rudd Government is pleased to be partnering with them in its delivery.
When construction is complete, this first-class stadium will be the proud new home of the Mackay Cutters and be used by the ten local Junior Rugby League teams.
In addition to being a regional hub for rugby league, the local schools, sporting clubs and organisations will be able to use the stadium for sports like soccer and touch football as well as specialty events.
The new Mackay Stadium will also be a first class multi-use stadium able to host regional and interstate sporting fixtures.
Tenders for the main stadium are currently open and close on the 5th of May.


The Rudd Government today announced a comprehensive package targeting smoking and its harmful effects, including an increase in the tobacco excise of 25 per cent.
This increase in tobacco excise will provide an extra $5 billion over four years, which along with existing revenues from tobacco, will be directly invested in better health and hospitals through the National Health and Hospitals Network Fund.
The Government's anti-smoking action includes:
- The first increase in tobacco excise (above inflation) in more than a decade, an increase of 25 per cent.
- Cracking down on one of the last frontiers for tobacco advertising - in a world first, cigarettes will have to be sold in plain packaging.
- Restricting Australian internet advertising of tobacco products.
- Injecting an extra $27.8 million into hard-hitting anti-smoking campaigns.
All four measures deliver on major recommendations of the National Preventative Health Taskforce.
Cutting smoking will save lives, take pressure off our hospitals, and deliver significant economic benefits.
It is one of the best investments in prevention, and keeping people healthy and out of hospital, that we can make.
Smoking kills over 15,000 Australians every year, and is the largest preventable cause of disease and premature death in Australia. The social costs of smoking (including health costs) are estimated at $31.5 billion each year. Annually, over 750,000 hospital bed days are attributable to tobacco related diseases.
Through tough action over the past two decades, including tax increases and bans on advertising, the number of daily smokers in Australia has been reduced from 30.5 per cent of the population aged 14 and over in 1988 to 16.6 per cent in 2007.
This is important progress, but we can and must do better.
EXCISE INCREASE
The Government will increase the excise and excise-equivalent customs duty rate applying to tobacco products by 25 per cent from midnight tonight. The excise on cigarettes will increase from $0.2622 to $0.32775 per stick and loose leaf tobacco from $327.77 to $409.71 per kilogram of tobacco.
This will increase the price of a pack of 30 cigarettes by around $2.16.
This measure alone is expected to cut total tobacco consumption by around six per cent and the number of smokers by two to three per cent - around 87,000 Australians.
This measure will provide an extra $5 billion over four years that, together with existing revenues collected from tobacco, will be directly invested in better health and hospitals through the National Health and Hospitals Network Fund.
In this way, all customs and excise duty on tobacco will fund a reformed Australian health and hospital system into the future.
Cigarette price increases have been shown to be effective in cutting smoking, especially among young people, who are particularly sensitive to price.
Taxes on tobacco as a percentage of the retail price of tobacco are currently just 62% in Australia, compared to 80% in France and 77.5% in the United Kingdom.
Today's increase will bring Australia's tax treatment of tobacco closer to comparable countries.
CRACKING DOWN ON CIGARETTE ADVERTISING
In a world first, all cigarettes will be sold in plain packaging by 1 July 2012.
This will remove one of the last remaining frontiers for cigarette advertising, and was a key recommendation of the National Preventative Health Taskforce.
The legislation will restrict or prohibit:
- tobacco industry logos
- brand imagery
- colours
- promotional text other than brand and product names in a standard colour, position, font style and size.
The Government will develop and test package design that will make cigarettes less appealing, particularly to young people.
Graphic health warnings will be updated and expanded. Research shows that industry branding and packaging design reduce the effectiveness of graphic health warnings on tobacco products.
The National Preventative Health Taskforce concluded that "there can be no justification for allowing any form of promotion for this uniquely dangerous and addictive product which it is illegal to sell to children", including packaging.
The Government will also legislate to restrict Australian internet advertising of tobacco products, bringing the internet into line with restrictions already in place in other media.
ANTI-SMOKING ADVERTISING
At the same time, the Government will boost investments in hard hitting advertising campaigns by $27.8 million over four years, to a total of more than $85 million in the next four years, to encourage even more Australians to quit smoking.
This additional investment will be used for campaigns targeting people in high-need and highly disadvantaged groups such as low socio-economic communities and pregnant women and their partners.
This will extend and broaden the focus of the previous National Youth Tobacco Campaign.
The first elements of the new campaigns will be rolled out by the end of this year.
Through the Australian Taxation Office and Customs and Border Security the Government will continue its successful strong enforcement against the production and importation of illicit tobacco.
This comprehensive anti-smoking package follows this week's landmark COAG agreement delivering fundamental reform to Australia's health and hospital system, and builds upon other actions the Government has taken to improve preventative health:
- A record $872 million investment in preventative health including programs in schools, workplaces and community settings
- $103.5 million under the National Binge Drinking Strategy
- The decision to establish the Australian National Preventative Health Agency which is currently being blocked by the Opposition in the Senate.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you to ACCI for your assistance in organising this event. The Government enjoys a strong relationship with ACCI. We appreciate your robust contribution to the national economic debate and we've taken some good ideas from you - not least of which was the Investment Allowance for Business which helped support Australian businesses to grow and invest through the global recession.
Today we stand on the eve of two significant economic policy events. In three days time the Government will release the Independent Tax Review conducted by Ken Henry and his team and the Government's response to that review. In 12 days' time the Government will release its third budget, the last budget before we face the Australian people at an election.
Today, my purpose is not to pre-empt the government's tax and budget policies, but to provide some context around:
     * The economic challenges that motivate our policy agenda;
     * The economic opportunities we are reaching towards; and
     * The principles that have guided the Government as we have worked to develop our tax policy and budget package.
Over the last 18 months, Australians have faced one of the toughest global economic challenges in our lifetime. As we look back, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession. It is a testament to the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers and government - to pull together, and the strong and decisive leadership from government economic policy.
I am proud of the Government's economic stimulus strategy and the results it has produced. I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates were saved by the stimulus. In fact, had we generated the same unemployment rate as America through this global recession, another half a million Australians would be out of work.
I am proud that so many Australian businesses kept running while so many millions shut up shop overseas. I am proud that Australia had the shallowest slowdown of all the advanced economies. I am proud of the fact that Australia was one of only two of the advanced economies not to go into recession, and I am proud that we emerged from this global recession with the lowest debt and deficit of all the major advanced economies and our AAA rating intact.
Australia has emerged from the global recession with one of the strongest economies in the developed world. This should be a reason to be confident. It should not be a cause for complacency.
Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on this position as we move through the economic recovery phase and a return to economic growth.
That is the context for the Henry Review and the Budget. If we get these decisions right; take bold action to capitalise on our strong position, then I believe we can set Australia up for the next generation of prosperity.
First let me begin by describing the economic principles that have guided this Government's economic strategy over the last two and a half years. Since the government came to office, we have sought to build a strong economy, protect the jobs of working families and keep Australia out of recession. Through changing global economic conditions, the Government has applied two consistent principles of economic management:
     * Countercyclical macro-economic policy to maintain stability; and
     * Long-term microeconomic reform and investment to boost productivity and deliver sustainable growth for the future.
These are the two arms of the government's economic strategy, both for the past two years and for the future.
This Government's first two years have seen significant swings in global economic conditions from the inflationary boom of 2007, through the global slump of 2008, and towards the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression. Through these cycles, the Government has maintained a conservative countercyclical fiscal policy: restraining public expenditure growth when the private economy is strong, and stepping in to protect jobs and businesses when the private economy is weak.
This policy approach guided our response to the boom conditions this government inherited two years ago. In 2007, the Australian economy was suffering from capacity constraints, inflation was rising to 16-year highs, and the Reserve Bank had delivered 12 consecutive interest rate rises.
The Government responded with fiscal discipline including savings of $33 billion over four years in our first budget and we invested in capacity building infrastructure and skills and enhanced the independence and transparency of monetary policy.
Global economic conditions changed rapidly and dramatically towards the end of 2008. Major developed economies fell one by one into recession. Global merchandise trade fell by around 40 per cent. Again, the government applied countercyclical fiscal policy to protect Australia from the global recession.
It took strong and decisive action to guarantee the banks and provide immediate support to the economy, including cash payments to support consumption, the trebling of the first-home owners' boost and an increased business tax break for private investment. As we implemented our economic stimulus plan, we were focussed on the urgent need to support the economy rapidly, and also kept one eye on the future needs of sustainable economic growth. That is why about 65 per cent of total direct investment under the nation-building for recovery strategy is investment in infrastructure.
As the IMF concluded: "The increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls." 
Australia has the fastest growth, the second-lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and deficit when compared to the major advanced economies. As we emerge from the global recession, the government will continue to apply the same core economic principles.
Amid various short-term economic challenges, we have never lost sight of our core long-term economic strategy: to reform Australia's economy and build a platform for future growth. This strategy is based on our objective of improving Australia's long term productivity growth and participation rate. This long-term strategy is designed to address Australia's long term global and domestic economic challenges.
The recent fiscal troubles in Greece underline the ongoing legacy of the global recession. The downgrade yesterday of Greece's sovereign debt has sent shockwaves through the global financial system, reminding us once again that global financial markets are increasingly interconnected.
While Greece's fiscal position has attracted significant international attention, fiscal sustainability has become a significant risk in several advanced economies:
     * In the United States, the budget deficit in 2009 was 12.5 per cent of GDP.
     * In the United Kingdom, the budget deficit last year was nearly 11 per cent of GDP.
     * In Japan it was more than 10 per cent of GDP.
     * By contrast, MYEFO forecast Australia's deficit to peak at 4.5 per cent of GDP in 2009-10.
The IMF forecasts that as a result of persistent deficits, government debt in advanced G20 countries could rise to an average of 117 per cent of GDP in 2015. Across the IMF advanced economies the global recession has caused an increase in average debt to GDP ratios of 39 percentage points since 2007. The IMF forecasts that:
     * 10 per cent of this increase is due to the impact of the global recession on revenue and expenses from automatic stabilisers
     * 12.5 per cent is due to the impact of financial sector support, bail outs and lower revenue associated with falling asset prices and financial profits.
     * And 3.5 per cent is due to fiscal stimulus.
Unsustainable fiscal positions are a threat to global growth because they:
     * Sap confidence from financial markets.
     * Reduce fiscal flexibility and narrow the policy space for governments to support their economy through ongoing periods of weakness.
     * Push up global interest rates. The IMF forecasts that the expected 35% rise in debt could increase global interest rates by 2 percentage points and reduce advanced G20 country growth by at least 1 percentage point.
To avoid these consequences major economies must implement credible deficit reduction plans. This will not be easy. The recent IMF World Economic Outlook forecast that to bring the average debt-to-GDP of the advanced economies back to their pre-crisis levels of below 60 percent, will require average improvements in the structural balance of 8 per cent of GDP by 2020.
The scale of this adjustment will require a fundamental reshaping of government finances in many major economies. Fortunately, Australia is in a much stronger fiscal position coming out of the global recession.
Australia already has the lowest debt and deficit of any major advanced economy. In the 2009/2010 Budget, the Government implemented a series of fiscal rules that will return the budget to surplus in the coming years and reduce net debt to virtually zero by 2020.
First, the Government's 'expenditure rule' will cap the real growth in government expenditure to 2% once the economy returns to above trend growth - and this will apply until the budget returns to surplus.
Second, in order to meet the 2 per cent cap, the Government has set itself an "offset target" which requires the impact of new spending across the forward estimates to be fully offset in the budget.
Third, the Government has committed to saving the revenue improvement associated with a stronger economy, while ensuring that the level of taxation remains lower on average than the level we inherited in 2007-08.
These Australian fiscal rules are among the strongest and most credible in the world. As the IMF commented last year: "Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment" to return to surplus.
These rules represent the continued embodiment of the Government's core commitment to fiscal conservatism - as the private sector rebounds, the Government's direct support to the economy will contract. These rules have guided our fiscal policy this year and the results will be reflected in the Budget the Government brings down on 11 May.
The Australian Government is also working with our partners in the G20 to improve global fiscal sustainability. At the forthcoming Toronto meeting of G20 Leaders, we will work towards establishing robust and credible fiscal rules and targets. These rules will help us maintain confidence that government debt is being stabilised, if not reduced, over the coming decade.
Emerging markets have performed remarkably well through the global recession and are now rebounding strongly. While advanced economies are expected to grow by 2.25 percent in 2010, growth in emerging and developing economies will be double that rate at over 6.25 percent.
The resilience of developing economies is contributing to a surge in global commodity prices. Demand from China and other Asian economies contributed to a 40 percent rise in the IMF commodity index between February and December 2009, and over the medium term, commodity prices are expected to remain at high levels as demand in the emerging markets rub ups against sluggish capacity growth.
Australia has been and will continue to be a key beneficiary of the global commodity boom. Australia is already the world's biggest exporter of coal and iron ore, the second biggest exporter of uranium and soon to be one of the largest exporters of LNG.
After a dip in commodity prices last year, the RBA is now forecasting that Australia's terms of trade will rebound to 50-year highs this year. Already, spot prices for iron ore have increased by around 95%, metallurgical coal prices are up 55%, and thermal coal prices are up by around 40%.
Last month saw the biggest LNG contract signing in Australia's history. This agreement will see at least $10 billion invested in Queensland's new coal seam methane-based LNG industry. China will receive 70 million tonnes of LNG, making Australia a pioneer in LNG exports from coal seam gas.
The return of boom conditions in the mining sector can bring significant opportunities for our economy, our nation and our people, but we must also recognise the parallel challenge to ensure that our nation seizes these opportunities in full.
The first challenge is to ensure that Australia takes advantage of rising commodity prices to develop our resources to their full potential. Higher commodity prices create opportunities for some of our smaller mining operations and more marginal mining deposits. By supporting these parts of the industry the Government can help to broaden and deepen the mining sector in Australia.
The second challenge is to ensure that our mining success doesn't excessively impede other sectors of the economy. A growing resources sector will draw capital and workers to the mining states - increasing pressure on other industries and regions as they compete for employees and investment.
Third, the high demand for our resource exports is also likely to continue to support a strong Australian dollar. While this means continued downward price pressure on imports, it also means a more difficult economic environment for other exporters and import competing businesses. These businesses could find themselves stuck in the 'slow lane' of a two-speed economy.
Unless we recognise these challenges, Australia risks becoming a 'two-speed economy' as the resources sector absorbs more capital and labour, while manufacturing and other industries suffer a relative decline in competitiveness.
One of the challenges facing Government is how we can help to address the emergence of a two speed economy in a way that supports growth of all sectors and improves Australia's productivity growth over time.
Improving the productive capacity of the economy through greater investment in infrastructure is one response to the emergence of a two-speed economy. With the right infrastructure to support the resource industry and other industries, we will be in a position to take full advantage of the returns from our mining sector, and investing in major infrastructure - for example in high speed broadband - will help improve our capacity to grow the economy beyond the resources sector, ensuring that Australia continues to be an attractive place to set up a business, creating new jobs for now and the future.
Infrastructure is a critical ingredient of our future productivity growth and a critical support for the mining states as they struggle to support increased investment and production. We've been working to ensure that Australian businesses aren't held back by inadequate and poor quality infrastructure. We've established Infrastructure Australia and have embarked on the biggest nation-building infrastructure program in Australia's history, including a $36 billion transport plan to double investment in roads, quadruple investment in rail and invest in the nation's ports for the first time.
We're investing in a $43 billion national broadband network the infrastructure of the 21st century that will deliver super-fast broadband, turbo-charging businesses and transforming our classrooms and hospitals - but the challenge to provide Australia with the infrastructure we need for the coming growth phase is ongoing.
The Government will not rest on our achievements. We will continue to support nation-building infrastructure investment for Australia's future.
Another flow-on consequence of the mining boom is pressure on Australia's skilled workforce. That is why the Government has made investment in skills and education a key element of our productivity agenda.
The Government is investing in an education revolution that will prepare our kids for jobs in both the traditional trades and in industries of the future. We want to give Australian children the skills and tools to compete with the rest of the world for the high-skill and high-wage jobs of the future.
That is why we are establishing a single national school curriculum, providing parents with transparent information on school performance, delivering computer access to all year 9 to 12 students by 2011, making trades training facilities available to every secondary school, and delivering the largest school-building modernisation program in Australia's history, including state of the art libraries, science centres and language centres for many schools which have never had such basic facilities in the past.
Australia also faces a significant challenge to boost workforce participation. Boosting Australia's participation rate will assist with the challenge of the ageing of the population. It will also ensure that the growth of some sectors of the economy can bring more people into work, rather than taking resources from other sectors in a zero sum game.
To boost workforce participation, the Government has established Australia's first-ever system of paid parental leave, coming into effect from January 2011, increased the childcare rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent to support parents' return to work, and introduced a "learning or earning" compact with young Australians to make sure our kids are in either work or study.
A further consequence of the mining boom is a likely continuation of Australia's long history of current account deficits. The benign view of Australia's CAD is that it reflects a surplus of investment. The alternative is that it reflects a deficit of saving.
Certainly, growing foreign investment into the mining sector will perpetuate the debate about Australia's national savings.
The strongest element of Australia's savings is the $1 trillion pool of superannuation savings, the fourth-largest national pool in the world. Australia's superannuation system has created a tremendous source of national wealth. Australian Treasury estimates that, 25 years from now, this savings pool will have grown to $5 trillion, which will equate to 120% of Australia's forecast GDP of $4.2 trillion. This pool of savings has been a buffer for the Australian economy through difficult times and is a lasting tribute to the deep reforms engendered by the Keating Government.
In the 2009 Australian financial year, at a time when liquidity was being rapidly withdrawn from markets around the world, Australia remained an attractive place to raise capital. Australian-listed companies supported themselves through the crisis by raising $90 billion of capital - partly from Australia's domestic superannuation pool.
Improving Australia's pool of national savings remains a long term challenge for the nation.
The Government's health reforms will deliver important economic and financial benefits.
First, beginning 1 July this year, the Government will make direct investments in the health system to deal with fundamental imbalances between the supply and demand of health services across the country which can lead to poor health outcomes and reduced economic activity. This include training more than 6,000 doctors, funding 1,300 new hospital beds, and providing capital and recurrent funding to ensure reduced waiting times.
Second, the Government's reforms introduce long-term structural changes to the way that health services are delivered in Australia. These reforms will include increasing the efficiency of public hospitals through the introduction of activity-based funding. This will drive increased operational efficiency across the hospital system by explicitly linking funding to the provision of services. The National Health and Hospital Reform Commission estimated that the introduction of activity-based funding could lead to savings of between $500 million and $1.3 billion each year.
The Government will also establish an independent umpire to determine the efficient price of the full range of hospital services. The Independent Hospital Pricing Authority will determine the real cost of health services and therefore the real rate of growth in health costs. Its determinations will be the basis on which the Commonwealth pays its fixed dominant share of every hospital service that is provided.
For the first time, this means that tax-payers' contributions to public hospitals will bear a clear relationship to actual health service demand and costs. At present, hospital funding often ends up being spent on bureaucracies, and there is little transparency in how Commonwealth and State funding is actually spent.
Following last week's historic agreement, for the first time, all public moneys allocated to hospitals will flow directly to hospitals. Both Commonwealth and State funding will be warehoused in a fund at arm's length from State treasuries and health departments. From this fund, Local Hospital Networks will be paid directly for each activity they undertake, based on the fair and efficient price set by the independent umpire.
Together, these micro-economic reforms - the introduction of activity-based funding, the establishment of an independent pricing authority and the direct funding of local hospital networks - will drive efficiency across the hospital system through increased transparency and greater accountability.
Third, the Government's reforms will drive improvements in the allocation of health resources. By increasing investments in primary care and preventative health, the reforms will ensure that fewer people present at hospitals, freeing up beds for those who need them most and taking pressure of the health budget. As part of the funding reforms, the Commonwealth will not only become the dominant funder of public hospitals, it will also take full responsibility for all primary and aged care services.
The Commonwealth will have a strong incentive to ensure that patients have appropriate access to the full array of primary health care services in the community, because otherwise it will foot the bill for far more expensive acute care services delivered in public hospitals. That's why the Government is training more GPs and investing 436 million dollars to ensure people with long-term illnesses such as diabetes receive more sustained and integrated care and why the Government will continue to make important investments in preventative health, recognising that potentially avoidable conditions account for around 70 per cent of total health care expenditure.
If Australia meets these and related challenges, we will set ourselves up for a generation. If we make the right choices, we have the opportunity to deliver a period of strong prosperity which will improve the lives of not just this generation but future generations of Australians.
That is the motive we are taking into the forthcoming budget and response to Henry.
The Government has approached tax reform with the objective of ensuring Australia is well placed to meet future challenges and make the most of the global opportunities that present themselves.
Our purpose is to build a stronger, simpler and fairer tax system. A stronger tax system is one that makes Australia more productive and competitive in an increasingly globalised world. A fairer tax system ensures that builds opportunity, rewards effort and ensures no Australian is left behind. A simpler tax system means people spending less time complying with their tax obligations and reduces distortions.
Incremental reforms of the past half century have left a legacy of complexity; a system that can be unfair; and a system that unnecessarily impedes economic growth. Without reform to the tax system, an ageing population would make the structure of the existing system increasingly costly to society. Higher tax rates on workers would be borne by a decreasing proportion of society as workforce participation falls with the ageing of the population.
That is why in May 2008 the Government commissioned the most comprehensive review of Australia's tax and transfer system ever undertaken. The review was an opportunity to consider the tax and transfer system as a whole.
Over the last two years, the Government has already made significant reforms to the tax system including:
     * Lower taxes for individuals. From 1 July 2010, we will have cut tax for workers on $30,000 by $750, for workers on $50,000 by $1,750, and for workers on $80,000 by $1,550.
     * Support to working families through the 50 per cent Education Tax Rebate, which provides up to $390 per primary school child and $779 per high school child to help with the costs of education.
     * Low-tax First Home Saver Accounts - to offer a tax-effective way of saving for your first home through a combination of government contributions and concessional tax rates.
     * Reducing the withholding tax rate on distributions of income by Australian managed funds from 30 per cent to 15 per cent. A final withholding tax of 7.5 per cent will apply from 2010-11 and later income years.
     * And, of course, there was the $3.7 billion Small Business and General Business Tax Break as a key element of our stimulus plan. The temporary tax break was designed to help Australian businesses boost business investment, bolster economic activity and support Australian jobs.
In our response to the Henry Review, the Government will make the tax system stronger, fairer and simple.
A strong tax system should raise revenue in the most efficient and simplest way possible. Many of our existing taxes reduce productivity and detract from the overall efficiency of the system.
Incremental policy change has eroded the bases of even potentially efficient taxes.
Australia needs to respond to remain an attractive place to invest and do business. For that reason the Government's aspiration is to reduce the level of tax faced by the vast majority of Australian businesses.
The Government also understands the importance of a having a fair tax system. The Government has made some significant changes to the taxation and transfer systems in recent years to increase the fairness of our tax and transfer system.
By delivering permanent increases in pension payments the Government has strengthened the financial security of Australia's age, carer, disability and service pensioners. Payments have also been restructured to ensure that households relying on the pension are not disadvantaged by price increases.
The Paid Parental Leave for primary carers, to be introduced from 1 January 2011, is an important step towards ensuring our transfer system supports people when they need it most. Over time it will also increase workforce participation, particularly for women.
The Government will continue to ensure that Australia's tax system remains fair - particularly for small business and working families and seniors.
A simple tax and transfer system means people have to spend less time complying with their tax obligations and transfer entitlements. Time spent interacting with the tax and transfer system is a deadweight cost on society. In particular, time and resources wasted on tax compliance and administration could better be spent by businesses in producing goods or services that are of value to the community and most people can always find better things to do than fill out tax returns. Smaller businesses tend to bear a higher proportion of the burden of complexity and red tape.
Some complexity in the tax and transfer system is unavoidable, but the Government is committed to reducing complexity where we can to give taxpayers more time with their families and cut red tape for business.
Let me finish where I began - in the next two weeks the Government will release its tax policy and budget package. These events are an opportunity to capitalise on Australia's success through the global recession.
If we make the right decisions we will convert our strong economic position into a new generation of prosperity. These decisions are being made in the context of the significant domestic and global economic challenges facing Australia, including:
     * The challenge to return the budget to surplus following the global; recession through prudent conservative fiscal rules to govern expenditure and tax receipts;
     * The challenge to ensure all Australians benefit from the global commodities boom;
     * The challenge to boost investment in infrastructure;
     * The challenge to increase investment in skills and boost workforce participation;
     * The challenge to reform our health and hospitals system and provide sustainable finance for the future.
As Prime Minister I am deeply optimistic about Australia's future. I believe that if we capitalise on our strong position today we can create extraordinary opportunities for the future.


PM: Thank-you for your attendance this morning. The Health Minister and I wish to make some announcements concerning the future treatment of tobacco in Australia.
Everybody knows that smoking kills people. Smoking kills over 15,000 Australians every year. Every year, Australians spend some 750,000 days in hospital beds due to tobacco-related diseases. The costs of smoking, including factors like productivity and health costs, are estimated at some $31.5 billion each year. This is a massive cost for the country.
That is why, together with the Health Minister today, I'm announcing a comprehensive package aimed at cutting smoking that is aimed at saving lives and increasing funding for our health and hospital system. To achieve these two aims, the Government will take the following steps.
First, the Government will introduce the first increase in tobacco excise above inflation in more than a decade, an increase of 25 per cent, with the funding to be dedicated directly to the National Health and Hospitals Fund.
Second, cracking down on one of the last frontiers for tobacco advertising- from 1 July 2012, cigarettes will have to be sold in plain packaging, the most hardline packaging regime anywhere in the world. And when we say hardline regime in terms of packaging for the future, that is what we mean. That is what will be in broad terms on the front, and that is what you have in terms of where you'll indicate the particular brand in small print down the bottom of the actual package. This, as I've said, will be the most hardline regime for cigarette packaging anywhere in the world, for which we make no apology whatsoever.
Third, we will impose restrictions on Australian internet advertising for tobacco products.
And fourth, we'll be injecting an extra $27.8 million into hard-hitting anti-smoking campaigns.
This is a tough decision for the Government. It won't win the Government any popularity. The big tobacco companies will hate what we are doing. The Government, however, makes no apology whatsoever for what it is doing. It is the right decision. It is the right decision for two reasons. It will help people stop smoking. And second, it will raise more money to invest directly into the National Health and Hospitals Fund.
This decision, it is estimated, will raise $5 billion across the forward estimates, every cent of which will be automatically dedicated to the National Health and Hospitals Fund. Every cent of this tobacco excise increase will be spent, therefore, on better health and better hospitals for all Australians. As of today, every cent of tobacco excise will be automatically dedicated to the National Health and Hospitals Fund, both as a result of this increase as well as the revenue which already is raised from the tobacco excise.
This extra $5 billion raised by today's announcements will be invested in reducing elective surgery waiting lists. It will be invested in improving the waiting times which people have in Accident and Emergency. It will be dedicated to investment in more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses. This, therefore, is an important and major decision. We've indicated already the Government's reform plans for the future of the health and hospital system, effective action when it comes to preventative healthcare is also of fundamental importance. The proper funding for our long-term health and hospital needs is also of fundamental importance.
I'll now turn to the Health Minister to add, and then we'll happily take your questions.
ROXON: Thank you very much Prime Minister. This is an important decision that the Government is announcing today, and a key part of our health reform process, which many of you will know has been focussed on hospitals, on primary care, and on prevention. And this is the most effective action we can take to reduce the harmful effects of tobacco consumption across the entire community. We know that from the evidence that's been collected over the last 20 years, and today the steps we're taking not only will help reduce the number of smokers across the country, but also hopefully make it less attractive for young people to start in the first place.
Remember the Prime Minister's figures that 15,000 Australians die every year from tobacco-related illness. To put that in some perspective, that is 10 times the national road toll. We can take action that will make a difference. It's projected that this action alone will reduce the consumption of tobacco by about six per cent and reduce the number of smokers by two to three per cent. That means 87,000 less smokers are projected as a result of this step that's being taken today.
Now, I don't think we can underestimate as well the announcements that the Prime Minister's made about plain packaging. This is a mock-up that's been prepared by the Cancer Council, which shows that there will be very graphic warnings, there'll be no colourful branding or logos. This is the last vestige of advertising that remains in Australia for tobacco companies, and we make no apologies about trying to close it down. It will be contested, and I have to tell you one thing - the tobacco companies are already out vociferously opposing this. We know that it will have effect on their marketing, and we know that it will have an effect on consumption, and it's absolutely the reason that we are taking this action.
We, as the Prime Minister also mentioned, already have large investments in social marketing. With the announcements today we'll be spending $85 million in total on anti-smoking campaigns. And of course, we have additional campaigns that are particularly targeted at young people and Indigenous Australians, some of the members of our community who are still smoking at higher rates than others.
We make no apologies for doing this.
I have, I must say, a very personal reason for being proud of what is being done today. As a young child, my father died of cancer of the oesophagus. You don't know, given the period of time when that was, 30 years ago, whether it was smoking-related, but he was a smoker. And it is my grave fear that many others have suffered that same situation. If our action today can mean that any other child has their parents with them for a little longer, that'll be a good thing. And we don't make any apologies about taking this action.
PM: Okay, thank you very much Nicola. And over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: How strong is your legal advice, Prime Minister? The tobacco lobby, as the Minister pointed out, is already talking about testing this in the courts.
PM: Robust, and I'll turn to the Minister to add.
ROXON: Look, we're very confident that we can take this action. This action is a recommended step by the World Health Organisation as a sensible public health measure to be taken. Australia used to be the leader in tackling tobacco. And this is the last remaining step. We will again be a world leader, and I'm sure that big tobacco companies will use every bit of legal tactics they can to challenge this, but that won't scare us off from taking action which is needed, and might help save lives in the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why has it taken 10 months for the Government to release this after receiving the recommendation?
PM: Together with the Health Minister, we've been examining all the recommendations from the preventative healthcare taskforce. We've also been examining all the recommendations from the Bennett Commission of review on the future of the health and hospital system. It was important that these measures be sequenced in the way in which they have been. We've indicated our future direction for health reform. We've indicated that this needs to be funded. We've also indicated this is necessary for preventative healthcare. We intend to get on with the business of doing it.
JOURNALIST: You've brought this forward by a week. Isn't this just a distraction from the ETS?
PM: The advice we've received from the Australian Taxation Office, given media speculation in recent days about possible changes to tobacco excise was actually bringing about changes in consumption behaviour. Therefore, the strong advice we received was that it was important to act now.
ROXON: Can I just add to that this measure will be in place from midnight tonight. The Tax Office will be taking steps if there is any evidence of hoarding between the announcement being made and the time at which it commences. We obviously want to make sure that these announcements have the effect as intended, which is that from midnight tonight your average packet of 30 cigarettes will cost $2 or so extra as a result of these changes, and we hope and we encourage the community to think again about whether now is the time to quit. This will be an extra impost for smokers and it is an extra impost which is meant to lead people to take this opportunity to quit, and I might take the opportunity, Prime Minister, to remind people that the Quitline number is 131 848. Now is, there'd be no better time to decide to give up your habit, and we certainly encourage people to take that opportunity, use the money you're spending on cigarettes for something that you and your family could do together for a lot longer if you stopped smoking.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) people's choice to smoke? I mean, $2 is really nothing.
ROXON: Well, it's a large amount of money in the budget, in people's discretionary spending in a family budget, depending, of course, on your income. The Preventative Health Taskforce made recommendations about introducing these changes. Of course, you could make even larger increases. We have to get the balance right and we've taken advice on what is a sufficiently significant increase to actually encourage people to give up, but of course is not so enormous that it will be a terrible burden among some people who may not be able to give up. We are targeting those who want to give up, who need to give up, and with some support will be able to. And of course we're targeting people who have not yet started, and that's the key to this plain packaging announcement - to make sure we make it less attractive for people to experiment with tobacco in the first place.
PM: I think we had a question -
JOURNALIST: The $5 billion figure, is that calculated based on before or after an estimated 10 per cent of people give up smoking?
ROXON: So, it's not an estimated 10 per cent of people. It's an estimated two to three per cent of people who will give up smoking, which is 87,000 people, and the amount takes into effect the changed price and of course the ongoing consumption, so it takes into account those projections.
JOURNALIST: So, if you lose the, if two or three per cent of people give up smoking, you still estimate a, roughly, a $5 billion -
ROXON: That's right.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Penny Wong has been in Fairfax saying that the ETS will cost more to implement in 2013 than it would now. Do you have any projections on how more that would cost?
PM: It's quite plain what the Government's decision is here, and that is to extend the implementation date of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. In a perfect world the Liberal Party would not have torpedoed bipartisan consensus at the end of last year and circumstances would be different now. The reality is that they did. The parallel reality is that in other countries around the world global action on climate change has been slower than we would have liked.
Therefore, we've got to deal with both those realities. As I said yesterday, as I said the day before, one, the Government's commitment to greenhouse gas reduction targets remains unchanged. Two, the Government's commitment to an emissions trading scheme as the most effective and least expensive way of giving effect to those targets remains unchanged. What has changed is our pathway to get there for the reasons I've just outlined, and therefore what we'll be doing in the immediate period ahead is accelerating our implementation of the biggest renewable energy plans this country has seen. That's our course of action.
It would have been fantastic had it turned out differently at the end of last year, but guess what? The Liberal Party voted against it. Guess what? The Greens voted against it. Guess what? We've got to deal with those two realities, and we're doing so in a practical way.
JOURNALIST: There's a report in The Australian this morning saying that the Government's put the internet filtering legislation on the backburner until after the election. Is this true?
PM: I have no advice to that effect.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you respond to the tobacco companies' announcement that the introduction of plain packaging constitutes an unconstitutional infringement or expropriation, rather, of their intellectual property? And is the Government confident that you won't have to pay compensation to tobacco companies?
PM: One, the Government will not be paying any compensation to any tobacco company anywhere - first point. The second is tobacco companies are going to die in the ditch opposing this sort of packaging, this sort of plain packaging, this sort of packaging which tells you that if you smoke you're likely to have a really big health problem, and you can see it graphically - more graphically, even, than in the past. Now, the big tobacco companies are going to go out there and whinge, whine, complain, consider every form of legal action known to man. That's par for the course.
We, the Government, will not be intimidated by any big tobacco company trying to get in the road of doing the right thing for the health of working families, and the right thing also for long term funding of our health and hospital system, whatever their objections may be to this sort of baseline packaging.
JOURNALIST: Perhaps I have to put to you again, what will you say to your critics who will say this is all about timing because of the bad news in relation to the priority on the ETS?
PM: Well, can I simply refer to you, again, the advice from the Australian Taxation Office that because of media speculation about the excise in recent days that there was real concern about changes in consumer behaviour and the importance of acting now. That's the direct answer to your question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just in regards to health reforms, what were your reactions to comments by David Pennington who says he no longer supports the reforms because it won't change the way hospitals are run?
PM: Well, first of all I'd say that everyone's entitled to their point of view. It's a democracy and there are stacks of health experts across the country who have expressed support for the Government's new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally. Every individual's entitled to their point of view and to changing points of view.
Nicola?
ROXON: Yes, look, I think it's probably a little bit mis-quoting David Pennington. I don't think he's ever been a supporter of our reforms and I think he continues not to be. Unfortunately I think he is significantly underestimating the new national changes that come about from the agreement that we've reached at COAG last week. He is underestimating the importance to working families of being able to get their elective surgery provided more quickly. He is underestimating the importance of how we actually can treat people in emergency departments more quickly when you're waiting there in the middle of the night with a child hoping that you can get seen by a doctor or nurse in an appropriate period of time. He is probably underestimating the value of having national clinical standards across the board.
Now, we welcome debate about other things that you can put in to the system. In fact, I'm attending a conference later today which will be with many people who have views about what else could be part of our health reform. But we're very proud of what has been agreed. We welcome debate on how you can take this further, but I think it is underestimating the significance of delivering a national price for health services, national quality standards and better access to health care for working families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the filter again, do you think (inaudible) legislation this year?
PM: Look, can I ask you put that question to the relevant minister. I don't have any other advice to what I put to you earlier in response to your question.
Can I just add to the question that you asked me before about timing and stuff? I've referred to the ATO. It seems to be a, sort of, an assumption in your question that this is somehow a popular announcement that we've made today. It's not. There's a whole lot of smokers out there and I don't think it's going to be greeted with dancing in the streets.
Can I just say it's pretty bottom line and we've been very attentive to the advice that we've received from the ATO. This is an important measure. Therefore, it has to be done properly, consistent with the professional advice, response to the recommendations by the Preventative Health Care Taskforce on the one hand, and on the actual implementation attentive also to what the ATO has to say about distortions in consumer behaviour. That's why we've acted.
Thanks, folks. We've got to zip.


PM: First of all, it's great to be back in Hervey Bay, and it's great to be here with Belinda McNeven, our candidate for the federal seat of Hinkler. And what we're here to do today is to talk about health and hospitals - health and hospital reform nationally, but what it actually means here on the ground in Hervey Bay as well. It's a big challenge to make sure that we've got a health and hospital system which meets the nation's future needs. That's why only a week or so ago in Canberra we reached an historic agreement with the states and territories for a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally - and for the first time, the Australian Government being the dominant funder of the health and hospital system of Australia.
This is a big reform. But where the rubber hits the road, really, is what happens on the ground. More hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, more investment in accident and emergency, more investment in elective surgery - and to make sure that is happening at local hospitals like this one at Hervey Bay. In this region, the Fraser Coast, you've got important medical centres and hospital centres here at Hervey Bay, also at Maryborough, and also of course at Bundaberg, where I was just a couple of weeks ago.
And I was here at this hospital here at Hervey Bay, I think just under six months ago, listening to what the local health professionals had to say about their needs here. Number one is about what we do for the future delivery of cancer care services right across the country. It is just wrong that if you are from regional and rural Australia that the statistics tell us within the first five years of diagnosis that you are three times more likely to die of cancer in certain major cancer categories than if you lived in one of our major cities. That's wrong.
That's why we've investing more than half a billion dollars in some 22 regional cancer care centres right across Australia, so that people down the Queensland coast, in rural and regional New South Wales, in rural and regional Victoria, over in the West as well, don't have to travel to the capital city for all their basic cancer services. And that we've got a better distribution of diagnostic services as well. That's why here, at Hervey Bay, we've announced of course $9.2 million for an additional 16 chemotherapy chairs at the Hervey Bay Hospital as part of the central integrated regional cancer service.
I'm advised by the locals that'll mean taking the existing service just over here, where they've got six chemotherapy chairs, and will effectively treble the number by building this integrated centre literally just across the road from here. That's going to be a huge addition for the needs of local cancer sufferers, and we've met some of those today. We've spoken to the experts here- they say they don't have enough chairs, they don't have enough services. And this is part and parcel of making that work for this community.
It comes on top, of course, of the $8.3 million that I announced in Bundaberg a week or two ago, for an additional 14 chemotherapy chairs there, and of course, on top again, of a much larger investment in Rocky. This is all part of delivering better cancer services to rural and regional Australia.
Secondly, one of the other things I've been speaking to the locals about today is the need for more transitional care places. What are they about? It's essentially making sure that our older folk in particular, when the leave hospital, are properly cared for in the community in a transitional way before finding a proper place, back in aged care, or back in their own homes.
We've announced funding for a significant expansion of these transitional care places right across the nation, but what I want to make absolutely clear here today is that 50 older people a year in the Hervey Bay area will now benefit from the Government's expansion of transitional care places. These will provide up to 12 weeks of clinical and practical support such as physiotherapy and nursing support and personal care for older people as they recover and recuperate from surgical or other medical treatments that they've received here at this hospital.
It's one part of the overall reform of our health and hospital system.
Finally, before taking your questions let me just go back to the debate of the day, and how that fits into health and hospitals as well. There's a big national debate about the increase in the tobacco tax, and our changes to cigarette labelling. This is all part and parcel of preventative healthcare as well. Unless we are acting on critical categories of cancer in a preventative healthcare way - that means acting on cigarettes - then we're not dealing with the total problem. That's why we've brought in these big changes to the labelling of cigarette packets. That is why we've brought in these big changes to the tax imposed on cigarettes as well.
And it's very, very important that we do this. Firstly, to bring down the number of people that are smoking. Not everyone's going to stop smoking, but I ran into a bloke in the corridor today who said to me that he sat down with his wife this morning and she said she's giving up today, because it's now too expensive. I want to hear more stories like that from across the country. We estimate that 80 or 90,000 Australians will make this decision based on the increase in the cost that we have announced.
But secondly, some of the people will still keep smoking. We understand that. But smoking right now is costing Australia about $30 billion a year, if you put together the total cost. So the $5 billion that we'll earn over the next three to four years through the additional increase in the tobacco excise - every dollar of that now goes to the National Hospital Fund. And all other dollars that we pick up from the existing excise on tobacco products.
We've got to be acting on preventative healthcare, dealing with things like smoking. We've got to be enhancing our primary healthcare network, and the proper use of allied health professionals in the community. Adding resources to acute hospital care including the sort of care services delivered to cancer patients across the country as well, and also enhancing how we support aged care, through the proper provision of transitional aged care places as well. It's part and parcel of a new National Health and Hospitals Network- one which is integrated, one which deals with the whole spectrum of needs, and one which is not just funded nationally, but also run locally, through important hospitals like the one we have here at Hervey Bay.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your local candidate is still a sitting councillor. Therefore, if an election is held before mid-September, we'd be up for an estimated $400,000 by-election here on the Fraser Coast. Can you guarantee us that the Government will run the term, or that we won't be up for a by-election?
PM: Can I say this about the campaign of mudslinging being run against the local candidate about the fact that she's a councillor, is that it's precisely that - mudslinging by the National Party, and I note the National Party is also running candidates from local government in various other seats in Queensland. Can I just say it's very important that people are fair dinkum about what they're saying here.
The second point is this - I welcome the fact that we have a candidate with extensive local government experience. I welcome the fact that we have someone whose feet are on the ground, 10 years in local council, a period as deputy mayor, because guess what, a candidate like Belinda therefore knows precisely what the needs of this local community are and I think that's important. I welcome the fact that we have her candidature, and I would say to the mudslingers from the National party on this, get real about what you're doing with your other candidates around the state. I think there's just too much mud being thrown on this question.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you've announced the new chemotherapy chairs, and the funding for (inaudible) care places, but dialysis treatment, or a lack of dialysis treatment, is a key issue in this community. How confident are you under the health reform plan - will that go to alleviating and improving a lack of services?
PM: I'm certainly aware of the need of renal dialysis here. This is an important need in this community and many others across Queensland, and many others across Australia. We intend to work through each of these categories of need and come up with practical responses over the period ahead.
My challenge in the last week or so has been to get, frankly, the overall system right. That is: funded nationally, run locally, more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, better investment in accident and emergency, better investment in elective surgery, and frankly, better integrated cancer care services as well.
We can't do everything in a day, but let me tell you, I know the needs of dialysis, and we'll be working carefully with local health professionals, and with Belinda if she's elected, to make sure that we can improve the level of services there as well.
Sorry, you had a question there, I think.
JOURNALIST: Just on the Henry review, (inaudible) on your commitment to lowering income taxes for working families?
PM: I think it's very important that we have a - well, let me just say something about tax reform already. If you are going to look at the impact on income tax for working families, as of 1 July this coming year, if you're say, on about $80,000 a year, you will have received probably about $1,550 worth of tax cuts over the last three years courtesy of what we've done one year after the next. That's the first point.
The second is this - I'm not going to be in the business of speculating on the content of the Henry Review or on the Government's response to it, which will occur this Sunday, but let me tell you this: there's going to be a lot of people who will complain, there'll be a lot of people who will celebrate, and that the nature of making sure we've got the right tax system for the future in the national interest.
So, we'll let Sunday speak for itself. I stand by the remarks that I made in my address in Sydney yesterday morning in terms of the overall economic challenge we're facing and how best to meet it through tax reform over time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you spoken to local health workers today about the pay bungle and what's happening with the super? There's been locals here that haven't been paid as well (inaudible)
PM: Look, this has, I think, been a really bad situation and when I was in the region recently a number of local hospital workers raised it with me as well, from memory most recently when I was in Gladstone, and I think this has been really bad. Let's just call a spade a spade. We've spoken with the State Government in terms of trying to make sure that they fix this up as soon as possible. As I'm advised, they're still working on it, but can I just say that for the people who have suffered from it, it's been, frankly, not good enough.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, would your health reform guarantee that a similar bungle wouldn't happen again?
PM: You know something? We have a system which is funded nationally and run locally, so when I say funded nationally it means we, the Australian Government, will be funding the overall needs of the public hospital system, the primary health care system, the aged care system, as well our preventative health care investments. That's our core responsibility.
Running the system is something which must happen through local hospital networks, so when it comes to the organisation of human resources, when it comes to laying out the specific facilities needed in individual hospitals, those are the sorts of decisions which will be taken locally.
My job, as Prime Minister, is to make sure that with sufficient reform, we have an effectively operating health and hospital system nationally, and one which is properly funded. The running of the system must occur at a local level.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in Maryborough there are (inaudible)
PM: First of all, my experience of EDI is that they are a fantastic company. I've been in and out of Maryborough over many, many, many years, over the last 20 years. They have done some fantastic work in one form or another and the company has had a changing shape over time, and they have delivered well on a whole range of contracts over all those years. I'm advised at present, for example, that they are working on a $900 million contract for the Queensland Government to build and deliver 36 new trains between 2007 and 2012.
As for a further contract and future contracts, I respect the tendering processes of the Queensland Government. But my knowledge of this company and the workers who work there is that I believe that they can do just as good a job as any other company in the world. That's my experience of EDI in the past. I respect the tendering processes. They'll be worked through. I think they're a first-class company. I think it's a strong tradition of being a first-class engineering company in regional Queensland and regional Australia. They've done well in the past and I believe they are out there with the best in the world.
JOURNALIST: The Sunshine Coast Hospital (inaudible) built sooner?
PM: On the question of the Sunshine Coast's individual needs, I think what you can say right now is that hospital services in the Sunshine Coast are inadequate. Let's just call a spade a spade. It's just inadequate. I come from there, okay? I grew up there. This is a rapidly growing community. That's no reflection on the Nambour Hospital. My sister works there as a nurse. My sister-in-law works there as a nurse. My mother worked in the adjoining private hospital there for more years than any of us can remember, and I was born in that town, as well.
But, you know, this is a vastly growing population. Therefore, on the need for a future and additional hospital on the Sunshine Coast, I think there is a crying need for that. On the timetabling of it we will continue to work our way through this with the Queensland Government, but let's just be very blunt about it - the hospital needs of the Sunshine Coast are huge. The population's going through the roof. Therefore, we must act to make sure that hospital services are properly delivered. We'll still work our way through the detail of that with the Queensland Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, is it concerning that HMAS Success is again under investigation over alleged bad behaviour?
PM: I understand there are investigations underway on this. My practice in the past has been not to give comment on individual matters once they are before a relevant investigation. Let's wait for those to have their proper course. Any such allegations are of concern to, I'm sure, the entire Defence community, quite apart from the wider community as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, taking it back to the Henry Review, is the Government going to bring in a resources tax?
PM: Can I say that Sunday will speak for itself. That's when the Henry Review will be released. That's when the Government's response to the Henry Review will be released, and I think that's the appropriate course of action.
Can I say secondly and more broadly on the question of tax reform and for working families, part of the question that was raised before - three years of income tax cuts since this Government's been elected, the third year of which will be delivered on 1 July. These are big cuts of the type I described just before.
Secondly, we also brought in an education tax refund so that if you're a working family out there you can claim back up to $700 or $800 a year for secondary school expenses in defined categories.
Thirdly, we've increased the child care tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. There have been big areas of tax reform affecting working families already. On broader tax reform and the rest of the contents of Henry and our response to it, Sunday will speak for itself.
JOURNALIST: I know you said you don't want to speculate, but -
PM: That's right, that's what I said. I can say it again, if you'd like.
JOURNALIST: The WA Premier, Colin Barnett, has gone one step further and said he won't give up the state's royalties. What's your response to his comments?
PM: Well, Colin's entitled to his views. All premiers are entitled to their view. As I've said, Sunday will speak for itself, and we will make clear our response to that.
Let me just say again, on the question of tax reform, some people will celebrate. Others will complain and complain loudly. Our job is to act in the long-term, national interest of Australia, and we intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: Will you review the CPRS over the next few years (inaudible)
PM: What we have said very plainly is that one, the Government's commitment to greenhouse gas reduction targets has not changed one bit; two, that the Government believes that the most efficient and cheapest way of acting to bring about those targets is through an emissions trading scheme; three, what now changes is our pathway to reaching those ends, and that's happened for two reasons.
One is Mr Abbott and the Greens decided to vote against the Government's emissions trading scheme. That's why it hasn't been passed into law.
The second thing that's happened is that global action on climate change has been slower than was anticipated. That's why the Government will assess global action by the end of the current Kyoto commitment period. We believe that's the right and responsible course of action. And can I say on top of that that the problem of climate change hasn't gone away. It's real, and it will compound into the future.
That's why effective national action is necessary, effective international action is necessary. That's why the Government remains committed to its greenhouse gas reduction targets. They haven't changed one bit, nor has our view in terms of an ETS in delivering on those targets hasn't changed one bit. What has changed is the pathway to get there, the core reason for which is because Mr Abbott decided to torpedo the previous bipartisan support for an emissions trading scheme which Mr Howard, Mr Costello, Mr Turnbull - in fact, most of Mr Abbott's predecessors - all supported.
Having said that, folks, I'm due in Sydney. I've got to go. Thanks.


HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us this morning from Hervey Bay in Queensland. Prime Minister, good morning to you.
Look, 65 per cent of respondents say they won't be swayed, so why put up the price by 25 per cent? Is it just a tax grab?
PM: First of all, Kochie, what we've done is respond to the recommendations from our National Preventative Healthcare Taskforce, because if we want better health and better hospitals for all Australians, we've got to make sure we're dealing with one of the big causes of disease in Australia, and that's tobacco.
Secondly, we were very clear yesterday - this won't stop everyone from smoking, but it will reduce the number of Australians smoking, and as a result, because we are currently, as a nation, losing about $30 billion a year through the impacts of tobacco, any reduction in the number of smokers is going to help.
But last thing is this, and let's be very blunt about it -
HOST: - Why not just ban them?
PM: - Sorry?
HOST: Why not ban them or make them only available on prescription to long-term smokers?
PM: Look, this is the practical recommendation, Kochie, given to us by our Preventative Health Taskforce which looked at all the factors involved. Put it together with what we've done on packaging, put it together with the actual price factor, it does help bring down the number of smokers.
Now, that, as I said, helps the overall cost of delivering health care in the country. But more importantly it's really important for the health of individual Australians. So if you're watching today and you're a smoker, please use this as an opportunity to go to the QUIT helpline, use it as an opportunity to do that.
But, on the money, you're right, it raises cash, but that all goes to the National Hospitals Fund - every dollar of it - to build better health and better hospitals for the future.
HOST: Alright, let's move on. You've had a big week, a big week of backflips - emissions trading scheme, insulation program, government-funded child care centres, the internet filter. You'll need to see a physio. What are you doing? Are you cleaning out all the skeletons ahead of the next election so we can forget about them?
PM: You know something, Kochie? I've always had this view that it's important for governments to serve their full term. I've said that on your program many times before. The key thing is to make sure that we're responding the practical challenges as they arise.
You mentioned before emissions trading, for example. Of course, it's disappointing that we weren't able to get an emissions trading scheme through the Australian parliament, but Mr Abbott backflipped. I can't produce magical numbers in the Senate. That's just a reality. The Greens opposed it as well, so the practical course of action is to be clear cut about our targets to bring down greenhouse gas emissions - that hasn't changed. Clear cut about the way to do it - that's through an emissions trading scheme. But plainly, because of these realities, we now have to have a different pathway to get there and one which is matched with action around the world.
HOST: Alright, but instead of just doing the insulation program better, you've got rid of it. You had big plans for government-funded child care centres - you've slashed that as well. You know, they seem nonsensical.
PM: Let me go to the other one that you've raised, which is child care centres. We look very carefully at what the private child care market is doing right across Australia, and what you've seen, therefore, is a massive increase in private child care centres around the country. What we've done is in fact -
HOST: - They're pretty expensive, though.
PM: That's true, but that's why this Government, tax reform, we increased the child care tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. That's a huge change - up to about $8,000 a year or just under that in terms of what it means to working families.
But the key thing is to get the resources where they need to go. No government's perfect. The Government I lead is not perfect. We're trying to respond practically to the challenges as they arise and do so in a way which helps working families and pensioners and carers.
HOST: Alright, let's go to our viewer. Daniel Strand is in our Gold Coast studio. Daniel, what do you want to put to the Prime Minister?
CALLER: Good morning, Prime Minister. Good to talk to you. We should do it more often.
PM: G'day, Daniel. How are you?
CALLER: Good. Hey, we got a very special day tomorrow because we're installing solar panels and we've always tried to be very energy conscious, we try to reduce our carbon footprint and obviously a little benefit with reducing our energy bill. However, a couple of weeks back I was told that pensioners have to declare solar power as income, and, I mean, you must agree with me on this one that it is outrageous - absolutely outrageous that they have to do that, but my question -
PM: - I need to get a few facts right, first. I need to get some facts right first about your circumstances, but go on.
CALLER: But my question is, to you directly, is that what guarantees can you give me and thousands of families in Australia who are trying to do the right thing so that we will not have to declare our solar power as income?
HOST: OK, thank you for that, Daniel. Just for people who aren't up on that, Prime Minister, what you can do, to explain to everybody, is put solar panels on your roof and in New South Wales and Queensland you can sell any excess capacity back into the grid and reduce your power bill, but pensioners will have that counted as income and affect the incomes test for the pension. That does seem stupid.
PM: Well, let's go to the essence of it, and I'll go back to Daniel himself. When you put on your solar panels - and first of all, thank you for doing so, because that all helps bring down greenhouse gas emissions, you're doing the right thing. Secondly, did you draw upon the Government's rebate to do that, or did you do it off your own bat?
CALLER: No, definitely on the Government rebate.
PM: Okay, so the rebate from us would have been worth, what, about $7,000 or $8,000?
CALLER: Give or take, that's about right, and we put in probably $2,000 or $3,000.
PM: OK, so that's $7,000 or $8,000 from the taxpayer to help you put your solar panels on the roof. By the way, you're one of about, I think, 90,000 Australian families we're helping that way at the moment, and that's rolling out across the country.
Are you on the pension at the moment, and I'm sorry to just be very specific about it. Are you on the aged pension or what?
CALLER: No, no, but at some point -
PM: - Okay, but your question was about pensioners?
CALLER: Well, my question was, if pensioners are hit for this -
PM: - Sorry, I'm going to the pension question. I just, I can't see you at the moment, I'm down the barrel of a camera so I just had to ask that.
So, if you're on the aged pension right now, you need to understand that when it comes to income, every fortnight I think you can earn an additional $140, $150
[AUDIO BREAK]
If you're a married couple, I think it's more like $240, $250 a fortnight, something like that - don't quote me on the exact number.
Now, my understanding about what's called the feed-in tariff, that is, you put a solar panel on your roof and you can sell a bit of electricity back into the electricity grid, look, you know, most of those panels are designed that you perhaps feed back into the grid maybe $60, $50-$60 a fortnight. That's my last advice when I looked at this in New South Wales. It should be, therefore, doable without really affecting people's pension.
But, on the pension system as a whole, for years and years and years, governments of both persuasions, it doesn't discriminate between the source of income one way or the other, but I'd be very clear about the fact there's a big buffer above the actual aged pension rate which enables you to get extra income anyway.
HOST: But some people could be close to earning and are going to have a cutback. It just seems silly in a green sort of period we're in, we're encouraging solar panels, it seems not a big revenue earner but it means a lot of difference to an individual. It just seems a bit narky.
PM: Kochie, let's look and see if there's any finetuning possible here. I mean, the social security system that we just described, the pension system, has been around for a long time, and as you know, as a finance advisor yourself, it counts all forms of income.
There's a buffer on top of what you currently get that you can earn by way of additional income before your pension's affected. I think that should cover off what would be earned by selling electricity back into the grid. But let's have a look at the detail, and particularly the case which has just been raised by Daniel, even though he's not aged pensioner himself.
HOST: Okay, alright, Prime Minister, thank you for that. Big weekend, Henry Review on Sunday. Looking forward to that. We'll catch up next week.
PM: We've got a few things on, Kochie. All the best from Hervey Bay - wonderful part of Australia.


HOST: PM, thanks for joining us.
PM: Good to be with you.
HOST: Ken Henry made these 138 recommendations. You appear to have acted on only about four or five. Have you shied away from a major overhaul of the tax system?
PM: What we have gone for is the big reforms here. We're setting up Australia for the long-term future, protecting our economy, making sure our Government finances remain strong, but also making sure that working Australians, working families and small business get their fair share. The reforms on superannuation are key because so many people don't have enough for their retirement income.
HOST: But you are paying for much of this with this massive new tax on the miners, it is pretty hefty. Isn't there a danger you could drive away the very industry that has helped save our economy from the global down turn?
PM: Well, let's be very clear about this being a Super Profits Tax. You see, over the last decade, mining companies have earned $80 billion dollars worth of super profits but only nine billion dollars was coming back in addition to the Australian people. I think what we want is a fair return for the mining industry but we want a fair return for all Australians as well because it's the Australian people who own these assets.
We have got to build our hospitals, build our schools, build our roads, our rail, our port, and therefore we need those resources to do that for the future.
HOST: Yeah, big changes to super and as we've seen, business aren't happy. Can they afford it?
PM: Well, remember, for business we're also bringing down the company tax rate. I mean, you can't have it both ways here. What we're doing with our business community is bringing down the company tax rate which is already too high against international standards, bringing it back to the middle of the field, but also for our small businesses, we're bringing in this new change also, to make sure that when it comes to their $5,000 of expenditure on core assets in a given year, that they can write that off almost immediately. That's very important as well, so therefore we're doing that to enable them to help with the super needs of working families because our working families deserve it.
HOST: Alright, thanks for joining us. Appreciate it, thank you.
PM: Good to be with you.


The long-term tax plan we announce today will strengthen the economy and make the tax system fairer and simpler for Australian working families and businesses.
These are the first steps in a 10-year agenda that will help ensure we share prosperity fairly, maximise our opportunities, and keep Australia in the box seat as the global recovery gathers pace.
Australia faces important decisions about how we structure our tax system.
This package is carefully calibrated to make the most of the opportunities presented by commodity boom mark II, but also to address the challenges that it presents.
This is a long term plan to apply a Resource Super Profits tax to the profits earned from resources that are owned by all Australians, and use it to:
     * generate more superannuation savings for working families;
     * lower tax for all companies, especially small businesses; and
     * invest in our future infrastructure needs, particularly for mining states.
A Resource Super Profits Tax will ensure Australians get a fair share from our valuable non-renewable resources.
It will be a better way to tax resources because it only taxes profits and fully recognises the large investments made in resource projects.
It will also rebate State royalties paid by resource companies, and the Government will consult with the States on the implementation of this. The revenues will be used to deliver a stronger economy for Australian families.
Approximately one third of the package will directly assist the resources sector. A Resource State Infrastructure Fund will make infrastructure spending a permanent feature of Commonwealth and State budgets.
It will deliver $700 million in 2012-13 and more than $5.6 billion over the next decade, particularly for mining states.
Without infrastructure funding, capacity constraints will stand in the way of resource sector expansion. A Resource Exploration Rebate will help small exploration companies search for new deposits.
Roughly a third of the package will promote growth across the economy, addressing the risk of a "two-speed economy" by taking the brakes off the slower lane.
A phased cut in the company tax rate to 28 per cent will assist the competitiveness of all Australian industries. The Government will also seek to cut the company tax rate further, as revenue allows.
Small businesses will get a head start on the company tax cut, with the 28 per cent rate applying from 2012-13.
Small businesses will benefit from a new instant write-off for assets worth up to $5,000. Depreciation for other assets will be simplified, reducing complexity, cutting red tape and providing up front tax relief.
Roughly a third of the package will be used to ensure that we save rather than squander the benefits of the current boom, and translate higher economic growth and wages into long term benefits and more secure retirements.
The superannuation guarantee will be gradually increased to 12 per cent. Around 3.5 million lower paid Australians will receive a concession on their superannuation guarantee contributions, for the first time.
Over 50s with lower super balances will be given more generous contributions caps to allow them to make catch up contributions.
These superannuation measures will cost the Government $2.4 billion over the next four years.
These significant reforms will build sustainable growth with low inflation. They will attack potential capacity constraints in our economy and ensure that the proceeds from our mineral resources are dedicated to the best possible outcomes for our economy and our people.
A stronger economy benefits all Australians through more jobs and higher wages. The changes announced today are expected to increase Australian GDP by 0.7 per cent and real wages by 1.1 per cent in the long run. In current terms, this reform dividend is equivalent to an extra $450 per year in the pocket of a full-time worker on average weekly earnings.
These reforms will make our tax system fairer, by providing more Australians with a fair return for our natural resource wealth and by providing better superannuation concessions for over two million lower income earners.
The system will be simpler, especially for small businesses through simpler tax arrangements.
These changes will be consistent with our fiscal rules and will not detract from our ability to return the Budget to surplus and repay debt. This means that the package is dependent on the successful implementation of the Resource Super Profits Tax.
These reforms will not be welcomed by every business or every interest group, but they are the considered, responsible changes we need if we are to turn our success during the global recession into enduring gains for our economy, our people and our nation.
The Government's agenda for tax reform has been informed by the independent tax review, our discussions with the community and our own values and beliefs.
We will consult broadly on the changes, including with businesses, the states and the broader community.
Today we have announced that the first wave of our agenda is to reform resource, company and small business taxes and superannuation.
In the coming months we will have more to say on a number of other areas considered by the review, especially making tax time simpler for everyday Australians, improving incentives to save and improving the governance and transparency of the tax system. This would represent a full second term agenda.
Other recommendations in the review are not government policy. We have called for a mature tax debate and expect the other recommendations to be the subject of much discussion in the coming years.
We thank the five eminent members of the independent review panel; Ken Henry, Jeff Harmer, John Piggott, Heather Ridout and Greg Smith, as well as the dedicated review secretariat who supported them.
We also thank the community for their extensive contribution to the development of the report we are releasing today.
Information about the Government's future tax plan is available on the Stronger, Fairer, Simpler website at www.futuretax.gov.au. People can subscribe to the site and receive regular updates and advice, or call 1800 614 133 for further information and to obtain hard copies.


Morayfield will soon have 1,300 new homes, years sooner, thanks to a $10.5 million investment from the Rudd Government's Housing Affordability Fund.
The $10.5 million will be used by the Moreton Bay Regional Council to:
     * Construct critical infrastructure in the form of a vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian bridge; and
     * Implement the RiskSMART planning reform tool - to speed up developments assessments, reducing the costs to builders on holding land that are usually passed on to homebuyers.
The investment will save a hundred home buyers $15,000 on the purchase of a new home, 50 of which will be reserved for workers such as police, nurses and teachers.
Hundreds more families will benefit from the increase in available houses.
The Prime Minister and the Member for Longman Jon Sullivan made the announcement during a visit to Riverbank Estate with Moreton Bay Mayor Allan Sutherland and project developer PEET Caboolture Syndicate.
Mr Sullivan said Riverbank Estate is close to services, commercial and community facilities.
"I'm delighted our Government is providing funding for this project through the Housing Affordability Fund. It targets the two of the greatest needs in our local area - housing and employment.
"I am looking forward to work getting started early. The preliminary bridge work and subsequent housing construction will provide much needed employment for local workers."
The Housing Affordability Fund is reducing the costs of planning delays and infrastructure costs, such as water, sewerage and transport.
It is also increasing the number of new homes on the market in rapidly growing areas like Moreton Bay.
Moreton Bay Regional Council area is the third largest municipality in Australia with population growth occurring at double the national average.
In total the Rudd Government is investing $512 million in the Housing Affordability Fund to reduce planning and infrastructure costs in new housing developments.


CURTIS: Mr Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Good morning.
CURTIS: If this was not an election year would you have been bolder in what you picked up from the tax review?
PM: When we commissioned Ken Henry's review it was to lay out a long-term blueprint for tax reform. What we've done with this first set of measures is to do what we believe is in the national interest now. We've also said that there is further work to be done and that's the way in which we've approached his various recommendations and, of course, we've ruled out some as well, but we cannot underestimate the significance of the reforms that we're proposing for superannuation.
Not only is this good for working families who are very concerned about the adequacy of their superannuation on retirement, but it is also good for Australia's overall pool of national savings. This, I believe, is the core part of the reforms that we announced yesterday.
CURTIS: You say the Henry Review is a blueprint for longer-term reform. Why didn't you take the chance to lay out your own roadmap based on what Dr Henry has recommended that you like, to say this is what we would like to do over the coming decade?
PM: We believe we've approached this responsibly: first, to indicate these core measures that we'll undertake now and these are significant measures; secondly, those which require further examination for subsequent reform, and; thirdly, those we will never do.
That, I think, is the right way to approach this - step-by-step. Remember, we've not had a comprehensive approach to taxation reform in this country for decades and that's the reason why we commissioned Ken Henry to do this work in the first place.
But, again, I go back to the core point - our objective here is to keep Government finances strong, protect the future of the Australian economy but also ensure that working families and small businesses get their fair share from the natural resources wealth of this country, which ultimately, of course, belongs to all Australians.
CURTIS: The Treasurer has said you don't have the money for some things you'd like to do now, and other things would need the states' agreement. Isn't that all just a question of time and your abilities of persuasion?
PM: The key thing is to do what is possible now within the financial disciplines we've set for the country and remember-
CURTIS: -But will you look to putting to the states, maybe through the COAG process, these are the things we'd like to be able to do and to start the conversation?
PM: The states have, of course, a number of recommendations which came out of Henry, which are for them to consider. My job as the Prime Minister - and the Treasurer as well - is to look at these big, national reforms which are on about firstly insuring that Australians get a proper return from the enormous minerals wealth of this country and that secondly we deliver some of that to working families through increased superannuation, we deliver some of that to the business community through bringing down the company tax rate, in particular helping out small business with the, by funding a one-off, instant write-off of up to $5,000 a year, but thirdly also investing in our country's future with a new $5.6 billion-plus infrastructure fund to build roads, rail and ports for the future.
These are big reforms right now. Of course there is more to be done.
CURTIS: One of the criticisms of the Howard Government is that it spent the proceeds of the mining boom. You are putting a bit away for infrastructure as you said, but also spending the rest. Aren't you in danger of facing the same criticism?
PM: If you look carefully at what we've proposed here these are all about boosting the long-term competitiveness of the economy. First of all, about one third of what we've proposed to derive from the revenues coming from this Super Profits Tax on the biggest miners in the country, one third of that goes to making all companies in this country more competitive - that's bringing down the company tax rate.
Secondly, what we're doing also is boosting our pool of national savings through this big reform to superannuation. We've talked about it for nearly 20 years, raising the superannuation guarantee level from 9 percent to 12 percent - now we're doing it, and over the course of the decade that will boost our overall national savings by something close to $100 billion.
And thirdly, by also putting about a third of the money into the direction of investment in the long-term needs of infrastructure in this country, we believe we're getting that balance right as well.
So, this is no giveaway. This, in fact, is about investing in national savings, investing also in our future infrastructure needs but critically helping the competitiveness of businesses on the way through and helping working families have a decent retirement income.
CURTIS: But the country also at the moment faces a large deficit and an even larger debt. Will you then be prepared to bank about $2 billion that you have left over after you've spent the money you say you will?
PM: Let's put this into very clear context - what the Australian Government has done through decisive action is protect the Australian economy, keep it out of the global recession, protect hundreds of thousands of jobs and to the extent that right now the Australian economy is one of the strongest economies among the advanced economies worldwide-
CURTIS: -But there comes a day where it has to be paid for, doesn't there?
PM: -But secondly, we have done so by keeping the economy out of recession with the fastest growth among the advanced economies, but here's the core point - with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies and the second-lowest unemployment.
Mr Abbott will constantly run a fear campaign about debt and deficit. He can't answer one simple question, which is that we have achieved these things - that's keeping Australia out of recession, with the second-lowest employment of the major advanced industrial economies - while having the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of those major advanced economies.
Therefore, I think the key thing to do is to use this important reform for the taxation system to underpin the current strength of the Australian economy, bill for the future, keep our Government finances strong, protect the future of the Australian economy but also ensure that working families and small businesses get their fair share. This is the overall theme of the reform that we're putting forward today.
CURTIS: The mining industry says the new Super Profits Tax will hurt the industry. Are you absolutely sure this measure won't see jobs lost and investment go offshore?
PM: Well, I listened very carefully to what Mr Hooke had to say before. Of course there'll be threats of project closures and the rest. I also expect that the Mining Industry Council will try and put together a political campaign against the Government, they did so prior to the last election. Can I say, this though-
CURTIS: -Are you sure that their warnings won't come true?
PM: Well, let's just look at some basic figures here. Over the last decade the mining companies generated $80 billion in higher profits. At the same time governments, on behalf of the Australian people, received only an additional $9 billion over that period of time.
What we're saying is that the mining companies deserve a fair return on their investment - that's important - but we also believe the Australian people deserve a fair return on the resources which they themselves own, and remember, these companies- you mention in your introduction BHP and Rio. BHP's 40 percent foreign owned. Rio Tinto's more than 70 percent foreign owned. That means these massively increased profits, the $80 billion that I referred to before, built on Australian resources, are mostly in fact going overseas.
CURTIS: You've ruled out some options, as you say, from the Henry review. Were you surprised by some of the things that Dr Henry recommended?
PM: Well, when you commission Dr Henry, the Secretary of the Treasury and his independent panel to look right across, root and branch, at the entire tax system and they're commissioned independently, we mean that. They go out there and have an independent view and that's what they've done in putting together these recommendations.
Therefore, our response to it should be: here are the ones that we believe we can do now; here are others we can consider for later on; but also, here's a list that we will never, ever embrace - for example, the recommendation to include the family home in means testing, to introduce lands tax on the family home, to require parents to work when their youngest child turns four. These are recommendations which the independent panel has come up with but those and others of a similar type we've said that we would reject both now and into the future as well.
CURTIS: Mr Rudd, thank you very much for joining us.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's been good enough to join us. Thanks for your time, Prime Minister.
PM: G'day, Steve. how are you?
HOST: I'm well, thanks. This was a tax review, but on my reading of it we have not had one tax abolished.
PM: Well, I think the key thing here, Steve, is to look at so many of your listeners would be interested in, which is what's happening with superannuation. Many of them are confronted with retirement with not enough super. What we do is therefore close that gap by increasing the superannuation guarantee level from 9 percent to 12 percent, and for all the small business people and tradies listening to your program, this funding an instant write-off for purchase of up to $5,000 in small business, that goes right to the heart of 2.4 million small businesses. We think this is a good step forward but of course there's more to be done.
HOST: The idea for this review, I think, came out of your ideas summit didn't it, in Canberra and I think it was your idea.
PM: Well, actually it came out of the business group of the 2020 Summit. They said we hadn't had a comprehensive review of the overall structure of the tax system in 20 years or so. It was time to have one. We did that and when we commissioned it we said it would provide a long-term blueprint for a basis for reform. What we've done is taken the first step. That's what you see announced yesterday by the Treasurer and myself.
HOST: But it was supposed to be about cutting taxes, scrapping taxes and redefining the tax system. That's not what's happened here, has it?
PM: Well, let's go to the core of that. What you've got thought this package is that every worker, small business and company will be able to pay less tax, but of course they'll be able to contribute to national savings as well. This is very important reform for the future and we think, as I said before, it is an important key step in bringing about long-term tax reform.
Remember, our objectives are to keep government finances strong, protect the future of the Australian economy but also to ensure that working families and small business get their fair share from this nation's natural resources wealth which, after all, is ultimately owned by all Australians.
HOST: But have you dodged the hard recommendations from Henry because it's an election year?
PM: Can I say, Steve, when you set out to impose a Super Profits tax on some of the biggest companies in Australia, this is not an easy move. We're going to cop a lot of opposition to it and I'm sure a very well-funded campaign against us, but that's necessary to so because we need that source of revenue in order to do three things: fund, as I said, better superannuation for working Australians when they go to retirement; secondly, to provide a tax cut and a tax break for our 2.4 million small businesses, but on top of that also creating, for the first time, a new infrastructure fund of some $5.6 billion to build the road, rail and ports that we'll need for the future.
But to fund that means taking on some of the biggest mining companies. That will be difficult, particularly in the year you've just referred to.
HOST: Yeah, but the tradies you talk about and the working families that you talk about, they're unlikely to punish you during an election because you've slapped a tax on rich mining companies because most people see them as being extremely profitable anyway.
PM: Well, let's just look at the notion of superannuation adequacy, which a lot of people worry about, legitimately, in their 50s as they start thinking about, 'have I got enough money to retire on?' Right now we have a system which I don't think delivers enough by way of retirement income for many, many working families.
Now, this has been kicked around the reform debate for nearly the last 20 years, since the superannuation guarantee levy was introduced in 1992. That is, increasing the rate from 9 percent to 12 percent. What we've done is tackle this head-on. We decided that it's time to bite this bullet and get on with it because, as I said, let's just take, you know, an average worker today, say aged 30. Through this change they'll be looking at an additional $108,000 in their retirement super. We think that's an important step forward but, more broadly, to all working families and small businesses this represents real help to the bottom line.
HOST: Why wait, then, to 2013 if going from 9 to 12 is so important?
PM: We've got to make sure that this is all financially sustainable. That's why this is about giving a fair share to working Australians and small business on the one hand, given that we will need to be imposing this Super Profits Tax on some of our largest mining companies on the other.
You see, you've got to do this in a way which is financially sustainable. This new Super Profits Tax comes into operation at about that time. Therefore, on the benefits side, that's when they come into play as well, both for superannuation, small business, but also helping with the building of our long-term infrastructure.
It's been so long, Steve, since we've had any regular provision in the budgets of Australia, Commonwealth and state, for infrastructure - road, rail and ports - and frankly we've got a huge gap in our infrastructure now. We've got to use some of this revenue, about a third of it coming from this new Super Profits Tax on the miners, to fund this as well. Otherwise it comes out of the other resources provided by taxpayers and ratepayers.
HOST: Had you thought about getting to the 12 percent quicker?
PM: We went through all that, but what we're concerned about, too, is getting the balance right. Remember, when you bring in the superannuation guarantee it comes through, of course, contribution from business. They need time to work it out through their industrial relations negotiations with the various unions. Understand that that takes a bit of time, but also we want to make sure that we're also taking some of the burden off business as well. That's why we're reducing the company tax rate from 30 cents in the dollar down to 28 cents in the dollar and, depending on how things go in the future, we're open to looking at further action there as well.
So, what we're doing is on the one hand making it easier for companies to make them more competitive by reducing the company tax rate and phasing in this increase in the superannuation guarantee level over time. These are big reforms, all made possible by a decision which, as I said, won't be political popular with many in terms of this Super Profits Tax on the resources companies. These companies are often capable of fighting very well-funded campaigns against governments, particularly in election years.
HOST: These super changes have to go through the parliament and you are saying that unless the Super, the tax on the mining companies goes through, then none of this will happen. What are you saying to Tony Abbott and the Opposition in regards to their behaviour in the Senate?
PM: Well, we have, I think, at present one of the most oppositionist, blocking political parties in the Senate for 20 or 30 years if you simply count it up, the number of items of legislation that have been blocked so far, but I think it's time for Mr Abbott to stop blocking everything. He's blocked, or he's threatened to block, part of our funding for our nation health and hospitals reform-
HOST: -Well, he's used the words 'deeply hostile' today to the resources tax. That's what he's saying. He says what we've got here from the Government is a tax grab not tax reform. It's a tax fiddle not a tax cut. That wouldn't give you much hope would it?
PM: Well, it seems to me that Mr Abbott is basically deciding that it's more important to protect the super profits of large mining companies than it is to fund better retirement incomes for working Australians, a tax cut to every small business and an infrastructure fund to fund our future rail, road and ports. I think this is actually a good balance for the country's future. Remember what we're talking about is a fair return for our mining companies because it's a fantastic industry, but I think we need a fair return for all Australians - working families as well as small businesses-
HOST: -So if he blocks, it what happens?
PM: Well, that of course lies very much in Mr Abbott hands. What we saw with him last week on the tobacco tax was day one - total hostility, total opposition. Come day two he seems to have back flipped and said that he would cop it. Let's just what happens when he's actually pushed on this question about whether he would seek to block this as well. He seems to be the master of standing on the fence on these sorts of questions.
HOST: Appreciate your time, Prime Minister. Thanks a lot.
PM: Thanks, Steve.


HOST: But first up this morning the Prime Minister and the Treasurer have made their response to the Ken Henry taxation reform blueprint. The Prime Minister joins us on the program this morning. Prime Minister good morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: A tax grab on mining and resource companies, a resource rent tax, a hike of 40 per cent on Super Profits, many of those companies are West Australian. Why the tax grab?
PM: Well can I just say first of all that we've got mining companies operating in Queensland where I am today, and in the West, and South Australia and elsewhere. In fact the mining industry is a huge slab of the Queensland economy where I come from, as it is in the West, and I'm a strong supporter of the mining industry. The key thing is, are we getting enough return for the entire needs of building infrastructure in states like Queensland and West Australia in the future? We believe we can do better, and we're on about getting a fair return for local people, that's why we've brought in this Super Profits Tax for the mining industry.
HOST: How much money are we talking about over what period of time and how will it work?
PM: Well the Super Profits Tax is designed to do this: that is to impose a tax on Super Profits. If companies out there are not profitable at present then this tax is not going to be imposed on them. In fact it's a big difference that we advance, relative to a state based royalties regime which taxes the volumes of what people are mining as opposed to the profits that they make. Therefore we're only taxing profitable companies, and those which are generating Super Profits.
HOST: So how do you define a Super Profit PM?
PM: Well a Super Profit will be defined as if you've got a company which is earning, which is investing a certain amount of money, what you're then to do is to deduct their expenses, what you're then to do also is deduct further, the amount of money which would be calculated if, for example, they were investing their funds in long term bond markets. In other words, what would constitute a reasonable rate of return on investment.
HOST: But how do you define a Super Profit, what does that mean?
PM: Well it's the formula that I've just described which is - you have the total investment of the company, the total earnings of the company, you deduct their expenses, and then of course, you look at what would be a normal rate of return for that company if it was investing their money elsewhere and it's only when they go in excess of that, is a Super Profit Tax imposed.
HOST: But you know what I'm asking, and most people will be asking today, what's the difference between a profit and a Super Profit?
PM: Well let's go to the question for example of what you in the West will be very familiar with which is the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, which underpins all the investments we've seen up there in the offshore areas of the northwest over the last 20 years. That's taxed at 40 per cent. That is exactly the sort of regime, in terms of that rate, that we would seek to apply to on-shore developments as well, and the overall thing is this: those taxes are only paid when Super Profits are being earned.
Secondly, for companies starting out, small to medium sized mining companies who are not earning profits at this stage, this benefits them enormously, and they are currently hit with the heavy hand of a State based royalties regime, which frankly, taxes volumes and not profits, but on top of that again for people in the West, a billion dollars worth of tax incentives now for the exploration industry. And what does all this add up to? Providing also, frankly, an additional source of funding for West Australia for its huge infrastructure needs for the future which otherwise have to be borne by the general taxpayer.
HOST: Prime Minister, is it my imagination or are you having trouble describing to my listeners what a Super Profit is? What's the difference between a small mining company in WA that is running a profit and a BHP or Rio Tinto? I still don't understand what a Super Profit comprises?
PM: As I said the formula as I described before is exactly that. It is calculated on the basis of a company in terms of first of all, their total level of investment, secondly the revenues they earn in a given year, thirdly you remove the expenses that they generate in a given year, fourthly you then take into account what that company would otherwise earn if they were putting their money, for example, into an investment on the long-term bond market, and it's only if they are profitable using that formula, and earning Super Profits, that you would impose this Super Profits Tax. It's not foreign, for example, to all those folk who are currently operating up there on the Northwest shelf, the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax has operated for the last 20 years and on that basis huge projects, like the Gorgon project, have come into being. So it's not a foreign concept but we are seeking to apply it across Australia, and that means the big mining projects in Queensland as well.
HOST: Plenty of Australians, West Australians, have money in mining company shares and many people in their superannuation, if mining becomes less profitable because of this tax grab, this will affect ordinary Australians won't it? There is a downside to this Super Profit Tax hike?
PM: Well we've looked very carefully through independent modelling as to the impact of the Super Profits Tax on the overall size and growth of the mining industry. When you put this package together, which is a tax on Super Profits, and bear in mind also companies like BHP are 40 per cent foreign owned, companies like Rio are 70 per cent foreign owned, when you put together this Super Profits Tax on their Super Profits, add to it the fact that we are now providing effectively a better tax regime for small to medium sized mining companies, because we're taxing profits rather than volumes, and then the additional tax benefits we're providing for the first time for exploration companies, the independent analysis we have to the Australian Government has the mining industry growing by 5.5 per cent over time. Therefore, the argument that this will somehow contract the mining sector is not well placed, and if you look at the operation of a similar regime in the offshore areas of Western Australia, the Northwest Shelf, this sort of regime has been existing for 20 years and we've seen huge developments up there.
HOST: I'm going to chat to the West Australian Mines Minister Norman Moore in just a moment on the program and I'd be very interested in the local response here, we haven't heard it as yet over here Prime Minister.
PM: Well here is the rest of the package, if I could just step back from your questions about the mining industry which are entirely legitimate in terms of what actually this does fund on the other side of the equation.
First of all for all companies in Western Australia including small businesses, their company tax rate goes down from 30 cents in the dollar to 28 cents in the dollar. For small businesses, and this is a huge boon to small businesses in the West, you'll have a tax break by funding instant write-offs for purchases of up to $5,000. This is really important - less time with the accountant, more time with your customers and your family.
For individuals, however, it means a big change for superannuation. Working families need more for their long-term super, and by increasing the Superannuation Guarantee from 9 to 12 per cent, we're giving better retirement incomes to working Australians.
But finally it's this. In West Australia, and you're about to talk to the WA Mines Minister, the number of times the WA government has come to me cap in hand, wanting money to invest in infrastructure over there, we've partnered with them already in projects in the Ord, the new port development at Geraldton, also in terms of Northbridge in the inner city, as well as investments in hospitals like the Midlands hospital, can I say this? When it comes to WA huge infrastructure needs we also need a new source of revenue. That's why this money would go into an infrastructure fund for Western Australia, in order to support these necessary investments for the long term. So, the WA Government can't turn around and say look we'd like all this extra investment to happen on our infrastructure on the one hand, but secondly we oppose the revenue coming from this new Super Profits Tax on the mining companies. It doesn't add up.
HOST: If superannuation contributions will be boosted as you say from 9 to 12 per cent over the next 10 years, will that mean that some low-paid workers could be paid less as companies compensate for that contribution?
PM: Ah no. We actually believe that whereas there's always going to be bargaining, bargaining occurring between companies and employees as it has happened in times past and will happen in times future, we believe that this sort of superannuation guarantee for the future really helps working families with their long term retirement income. Can I also say, if you put that together with the tax changes to income that I just mentioned before, and the big tax cuts rolled out over the last two to three years, something like an 18 per cent cut in taxes for people on about $50,000 a year. Altogether this is a better deal for working families, but there is still, Simon, much more work to be done, I accept that.
HOST: Can you clarify for us, there are some differences in opinion in the analysis I've been looking at this morning about taxes on the family home, the retirement home. How will, as part of your response today, how will you view the assets that comprise the family home and the income that that family home may possibly generate? Can you clear that up for us today?
PM: Well as the Treasurer made clear yesterday, in our response to the Henry Review, which is a comprehensive review of the entire Australian taxation system, there are a whole range of measures that we have embraced for reform. They are the ones we've just been speaking about, Super Profits Tax and what it does for super, for small businesses and for infrastructure.
Secondly, there's a whole range of things recommended in the Henry report which we've simply ruled out. One of them of course is including the family home in the means test, or introducing lands tax on the family home, requiring parents to work when their youngest child turns four. These are recommendations which we don't believe are acceptable in Australia today. So those are clearly identified in the attachment to the Treasurer's press release put out yesterday.
HOST: And just finally PM, there is criticism already this morning, we are in an election year, that you've shied away from some of those tougher decisions because you want to get back into office. How do you respond to that criticism this morning?
PM: Well, Simon, can I say to all your listeners this morning - one of the big things that gets put to me every time I'm in the West, and I'm there every month or two, is people are really concerned about the adequacy of their retirement income. This is a big change for that. Not just for younger people in the workforce, but if you're over 50 we're also providing new tax incentives for people to top up their super as well. But you can't simply pull this out of thin air, it's got to be paid for, as do the changes for small business, and the funding for infrastructure. It's got to be paid for from somewhere, and obviously, big mining companies in the West and in Queensland and elsewhere are going to jump up and down about this. I understand that, and many of them will fund the political campaign against this Government as we head to an election at the end of this year. So for someone to suggest that this is all sort of a lay down misere and there's no problem, frankly, they don't know the mining industry as well as I do, because they're not going to be a happy bunch of campers, at least a number of them.
HOST: Thanks for your time Prime Minister, thank you for talking to my listeners this morning. We appreciate it.
PM: Thanks Simon, thanks for having me on the program.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning
PM: Morning, Sandy. Thanks for having me on the program
HOST: A pleasure. 138 recommendations, you've adopted just a handful. Why have you been so cautious?
PM: Well, let's actually go to the reforms that we've embraced. This package of reforms we've embraced means that every worker, small business and company will be able to pay less tax and contribute more to national savings. This is a major, far-reaching and significant reform that prepares Australia for a more secure and stable economic future.
You can do a mechanical count of the numbers of technical recommendations, and some of those you wouldn't touch with a bargepole, but I've got to say the core ones to do with, firstly, keeping our Government finances strong, protecting the future of the Australian economy, ensuring working families and small business get their fair share from the nation's natural resources wealth, which ultimately belongs to all Australians. I think this is a good start. Of course, there is more to do.
HOST: But it's not exactly a root-and-branch reform of the tax system, is it?
PM: Well, what we did when we commissioned the Henry Review was to undertake a comprehensive review of the tax system in order to provide a guide, long term, as to what reform should be.
What we've done is take this sizeable block of reforms now. We believe this is done correctly in the national interest and again to go to the core of it, what we are doing is creating a new tax on some of the biggest mining companies in order to help fund the superannuation guarantee, which lifts from 9 per cent to 12 percent, adding an extra $108,000 to the retirement super of an average worker aged 30 now. We are also, of course, on top of that offering generous tax breaks to older Australians with low super balances to boost their super with lump-sum payments, but also importantly for every small business out there, a tax break by funding instant write-offs of purchases up to $5,000.
These are very important changes, which go to, as I said, every worker, every small business, every company in the country.
HOST: All that will the appeal to the electorate, no doubt, so can I put this to you - is this something that has the next election in mind, as opposed to reforming the tax system which you promised to do?
PM: Well on the question about keeping the economy strong, and keeping our finances strong and ensuring working families and small businesses get their fair share, let's go to the one of the core elements of this reform, which is bringing down the company tax rate. Right now the company tax rate out there is higher, by international standards, than it has been in decades past. What we've done by reducing the company tax down from 30 to 29 to 28, is bring it back to the middle of the field.
This is a big reform for all companies, large and small, but for small business, all 2.4 million of them in Australia, a tax break by funding instant write-offs for purchases up to $5,000. They are the engine room of the economy, small business, and for all your small business listeners this morning, that is a big help as far as their bottom line is concerned and not having to go to the accountant for everything.
HOST: The Henry review wanted it down to 25 per cent. Why didn't you go all the way?
PM: What we've got to do is make sure we maintain our tax reform in an overall framework of fiscal responsibility - that is, keeping our Government finances strong. On the one hand what we've said with the big mining companies around Australia, many of whom are foreign owned in part, some in whole, is that we believe that they can deliver more when it comes to the overall needs of the Australian community. That's what we call the Super Profits Tax.
On the other hand, taking the revenue which we raise from that, we're doing these three things - bringing the company tax rate down from 30 to 28 cents in a dollar, but we've said we've got an open mind in terms of after 28 cents in the dollar whether we go further as well. But then there are the other changes for small business, the other changes for superannuation earnings for average workers and, what we haven't talked about this morning, a new, $5.6 billion-plus infrastructure fund to invest in the railroad and ports needs we have for the future.
We think this is a good, strong and balanced package.
HOST: I'll ask about that in just a moment, but last night on Channel 7 you disagreed with David Koch who gave his version, having been in there, read the review, been in the lockup, he said this was an opportunity missed. I know you get briefings on what's in the papers. Is there any commentator this morning that isn't saying this an opportunity missed? I'm looking at the headlines here: 'crucial reforms in the too hard basket', 'lack of courage under fire'. Lack of courage seems to be the theme of all the commentaries. Can you point to anyone who isn't saying that?
PM: You can debate what the third parties may say. Take, for example, the Council of Small Business Association of Australia, and they are out there representing associations which bring together 2.4 million small businesses. What they have said is that this is a welcome set of reforms because they understand from their membership that this $5,000 instant write-off for purchases is really important. That may not impress some of the commentators but if you're out there running a small business in Western Sydney today and you've got to think about 'what am I going to do when I confront the tax accountant'?, let me tell you, this reduces your burden considerably and enables you to spend more time with, instead, your customers and your families.
On the overall reform can I just say it's pretty important, John, to bring down the company tax rate. It's also fundamentally important to boost our national savings. Remember, for nearly 20 years governments have been debating whether we should bring up the superannuation guarantee from 9 percent to 12 percent. When it comes to super, many people heading towards retirement don't have enough. What we've done is actually close that gap, move to 12 percent, which no previous government has done, and that means that if you're an average worker aged 30 now, it means an extra $108,000 of retirement super. That's a big help, together with the other super changes, too.
HOST: Can I ask about that, because a lot of those small business people that you referred to earlier listening to us know over the next decade they're going to have to be going from 9 percent to 12 percent super contributions. Where would you imagine that extra 3 percent would come from? Would it come principally from the employer or would you accept them reducing the sort of pay rises that they will be giving their workers in the future so they can afford to then pay the 12 percent?
PM: There are two answers to that, and I think both are really important. The first is why we have decided to in fact levy this new tax on Super Profits by big mining companies is to provide also a tax benefit to all companies - large and small - bringing down the company rate with a special additional benefit for small businesses which we've just talked about, this $5,000 immediate write-off, and the reason we've done that is that it provides them also with the financial capacity over a much longer spread of time to bring in the increases to the superannuation guarantee, which is spread out over the decade.
But the second point is this - in any industrial relations negotiation between companies and their employees, obviously what happens with the future with the superannuation guarantee will be a factor in those negotiations. It has been in the past and of course it will be in the future as well.
HOST: You've talked about a two-tier economy in the past, both you and the Treasurer, and the mining sector, of course, is that top-tier that we hear so much about now. Do you not run the risk with your tax on the resources sector of killing the goose that laid the golden egg?
PM: Can I say when it comes to this Resource Super Profits Tax let's just have a very clear figure in mind. Resource profits were over $80 billion higher over the last decade, but the Australian people only received an additional $9 billion and when you go to some of those big companies like BHP - it's more than 40 percent foreign owned; Rio Tinto - more that 70 percent foreign owned, we believe it's time for the Australian people, and local communities, and the retirement savings of all Australians to get a fairer share of the natural wealth of this country, which ultimately is owned by all Australians.
On how this compares with rates around the world, can I just say many, many other countries are moving towards this profit-based tax that we have embraced with the Super Profits Tax. Countries like Norway have a vastly larger tax than this. They have huge natural gas resources. The Canadian provinces have moved in similar directions, and can I just say, the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax applying to off-shore developments has already had this 40 percent Super Profits Tax for the last 20 years, hasn't got in the road of major developments there. In fact it's that tax regime which applies to the $50 billion Gorgon project which has been announced recently.
HOST: Yeah, can I just ask in relation to Norway that you've just mentioned, don't they put the proceeds of their tax into some kind of future fund and pay off government debt? The reason I ask is, is there anything in what you've said, particularly in the new resource tax, to pay off the debt that we borrowed to get ourselves out of the global financial crisis.
PM: Let's go to three things. As I said before the purpose of this overall Super Profits Tax is to lift the superannuation retirement earnings for all working Australians, help small business, all 2.4 million of them, but here's the third bit - to create a new national infrastructure fund, at least $5.6 billion and growing over time, to invest in the roads, rail and ports we need for the future. That's investing in our future capital because unless that is being invested from somewhere, in terms of the source of capital, then it follows, of course, that governments will have to increasingly have to borrow to invest in those-
HOST: -Sure.
PM: -sorts of infrastructure needs-
HOST: -But isn't this the time, when the economy is growing, to be trying to pay off that debt so we're insulated again when the next downturn comes?
PM: Can I say in terms of the Government's overall policy on budget surplus and the Government's policy when it comes to Government debt, let's just bear very clearly in mind this Government has, through its actions, has not only kept the Australian economy out of the global recession, but we've done so with the second-lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies. Therefore, for scare campaigns to be run around that, frankly, is just politics from our political opponents. Any international commentator looking at our relative performance on budget deficit and debt coming out of the global recession would simply say Australia, compared with the rest of the world, frankly, is in a very, very strong position. As I said - the lowest debt, the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies.
HOST: Prime Minister, we'll leave it there, thank you.
PM: Thanks for having me on your program.


HOST: The Prime Minister is here. Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: Good morning Greg, welcome to my electorate.
HOST: [Laughs] Yes.
PM: Oh, were you welcoming me to the program? Sorry about that.
HOST: Yeah, it is your electorate, for those of you outside the city. You're going down to the Labour Day march, looking forward to that?
PM: Oh yeah, it'll be good to catch up with the folk down there, a lot of the nurses and a lot of those who work in hospitals. Spend some time talking to them about the new National Health and Hospitals Network.
HOST: OK, let's talk about the response and your thinking to the response to Mr Henry. I was just going through some of the editorials and it's mixed, some are quite favourable, others very negative, some in the middle ground. Geoff Kitney in The Australian Financial Review says this: 'Wayne Swan's baby entered this world yesterday in the typical way, its parents saw much more beauty in it than the witnesses to its birth. The long and laboured birth of the Government's response to the Henry tax review has delivered a malnourished child with its promise already limited by fears about the future trouble it might cause.' So, tell us a little bit about this baby you delivered to the nation yesterday.
PM: Well let's cut to the chase, what it is all about? On the one hand what we are doing is bringing about big changes to superannuation. That is, right now, I don't think people have enough to retire on. That's why we are changing the superannuation guarantee levy from 9 per cent to 12 per cent. For someone 30 years of age today, that means more than $100,000 more in terms of their retirement income.
HOST: That kicks in gradually?
PM: Kicks in gradually because we are very mindful of phasing that in over time with business.
The second thing is this: tax cuts for business, that is, bringing the company rate down from 30 cents to 28 cents; but also for small business bringing in an immediate arrangement for them to basically write off $5,000 in terms of their investment on assets like computers and those kinds of things in their offices, which means less time with the tax accountant, more time with your customers, more time with your families, but it helps the bottom line.
Third thing: and that is taking a new national investment fund for infrastructure to build our roads, rail and ports for the future.
But all three of the above, the super changes, the tax cuts to business and small business, and the investment fund for road, rail and port funded through a new Super Profits Tax on the mining companies of Australia, because they are currently earning, through the mining boom, Super Profits. We believe the Australian people should get a fair share.
HOST: OK, they would argue that they are going to get more than a fair share, that their contribution has been more than fair over the last five years, I think the figure was $334 billion in that time. How do you respond to their concern?
PM: Well look, you'd expect some of the mining companies to be out there and complaining about this because what we're talking about is a fair share for the Australian people and that means making sure that we've got something which provides them with a fair return, but also, a fair return for working people for their superannuation, tax cuts for small business etc.
But here is the key figure: $80 billion in Super Profits earned by the mining companies over the last decade. During that period of time, how much did the Australian people get through the existing taxes on those mining companies? An additional $9 billion.
Next point - the biggest miners: BHP, 40 per cent foreign owned, Rio Tinto, 70 per cent foreign owned. Most of these Super Profits are going overseas as well, so we're saying to the Australian people, it's time that the people got a fairer share and about a third of this amount goes to superannuation for working families, a third of it goes to tax cuts for small business and businesses in general, and another third goes to investment in our future infrastructure needs.
HOST: PM, one of the points the mining industry points at though is that they employ something like one in four Australians, probably more in Queensland and Western Australian, and particularly in regional areas, and their argument is that if they're forced to pay even more, then that could be affected long term.
PM: Let me respond to that head-on. Firstly, when it comes to a Super Profits Tax, it is imposed on Super Profits. If they're not out there earning massive amounts they don't pay the Super Profits Tax -
HOST: When does that kick in then?
PM: We make sure it's very, very clear in terms of what's calculated in terms of a normal rate of return in an investment of that order of magnitude, that this Super Profits Tax doesn't kick in until after that, and then we retain 40 per cent of those Super Profits, they get to keep 60 per cent still.
Second point is this: out there in the mining industry at the moment, we've got a situation where a lot of the miners, particularly small to medium companies, when they're kicking off, and starting out in life, they're taxed currently on a royalties regime, that's what it's called, which is based usually on volumes of what you produce, not the profits of your company. Under our new proposal, it's much better for small to medium companies starting off, who don't register big profits in their early years.
And finally, exploration, a $1 billion worth of tax incentives now, for exploration companies in order to grow our mining industry overall. Bottom line: based on our independent modelling, overall mining production with increase by 5.5 per cent as a result of these reforms, not go backwards, but we're going to have a fear campaign in the meantime, I fully predict it.
HOST: OK, but a guarantee from all the study and modelling you've done, that regional Queensland, that's where we are right now, won't be affected?
PM: Well look, let's go to regional Queensland. I was just in Mackay last week. And I presume you broadcast up there, I'm not quite sure where you land in your broadcast footprint these days. I was in Mackay, talking to locals. Mackay, you've got this huge mining activity happening out there in the Bowen Basin, but they you look at downtown Mackay, and you've got these massive trucks rumbling through the streets, and frankly, terrifying a lot of local people on their way to the port or wherever they're going.
What the people of Mackay want, and the Mayor, Mayor Col Meng of Mackay, he wants a ring road, to actually divert these trucks from the middle of town out to the port. Guess how much the ring road is likely to cost? About a quarter of a billion dollars. So are the rate payers of Mackay going to pay for that? Are the taxpayers of Queensland just going to pay for that? Or should we be asking the big mining companies, who are making these Super Profits, to make a contribution to our future infrastructure needs? So that's my practical example of how, in fact, using this money to build road, rail and ports helps.
HOST: Okay, coming back to the company tax reduction you mentioned a moment ago from 30 per cent down to 28 per cent, I think Mr Henry had recommended 25 per cent. And maybe that's an example of where many are saying you've been timid in your response to what Mr Henry suggested. I think out of 134 recommendations you've picked up around 10, some are saying less. Is it 10 you've picked up?
PM: You know the bottom line is this, we asked Ken Henry, the Secretary of the Treasury, to do an independent review of the entire tax system as a long term blueprint for reform.
What have we said in response to that? This is what we are doing now, and we've been very upfront about what we're doing, very upfront about what we're never going to do, and very about what constitutes a whole series of areas where we can do some further work in the future.
But that is how it was planned at the first step.
Secondly, what we've done is bite off what I think is a big slab of reform right now. When you talk about superannuation, so many of your listeners are worried about the adequacy of their superannuation on retirement. This is designed to deal with that long-term. And for 20 years people have been saying 'please do something about boosting the adequacy of superannuation, lift it from 9 per cent to 12 per cent'. Well we've done that.
And secondly for older Australians over 50, people like you and me mate, well no, actually, people out there who don't have sufficient in their superannuation, then we're providing an opportunity also for them to be able to have better tax incentives to top up their super as well.
HOST: OK, if part of all of this, however, Prime Minister, was to simplify, to rationalise our tax system, to what extent does it do that when the States still have, you know, there's payroll tax, there's this tax, there's that tax and I think Mr Henry wanted to do more in that area. Is that something you are committed to doing?
PM: Well, Rome wasn't built in a day, and therefore you've got to move at this step by step. There are a whole range of recommendations in there for the states and territories to look at, and they can respond to them as they see fit.
But as I said, here is a big slab of reforms which go to superannuation for working families, tax cuts for business to make them more globally competitive, and to take the pressure off small business. Don't underestimate the impact of this $5,000 immediate write-off. If you've got a small business of one or two people, frankly, that actually helps buying a computer or two, the ability to write that off rather than the current complex tax arrangements, there's a lot of simplification involved in that.
HOST: Company tax is still high, relative to other nations we're number three in the world at the moment, your changes will bring it down to about ninth, still high.
PM: We end up, as I'm advised, about the middle of the pack out of the OECD, that's the organisation of the most advanced economies. There are about 34 countries in the OECD. I think we end up now at about number 17. We were drifting higher as other countries of the world brought their tax rates down, so that's why we've acted, in other words to make sure that our major companies remain competitive globally, but at the same time not taking our eye off the fact that Super Profits are being earned by some of our biggest miners and a large slab of those super profits are going offshore. I believe firmly in people getting a fair return on their investment, but so too should the Australian people because they own the resources ultimately themselves.
HOST: Yeah ,Tony has just rung in with a question from Rocklea, wanting to know why, why not cut, and I think we've probably just covered that, why not just cut payroll tax in an effort to stimulate employment? Is that something you see being done as one of the next steps in all of this?
PM: Well, obviously when it comes to state-based taxes there's still a large slab of work to do, but the State Governments will answer these recommendations from Ken Henry in their own terms.
What I'm concerned about now is bringing about these three big changes that I've spoken about: for super, for business tax for small business and for the funding of future infrastructure by providing a better return from the biggest mining companies.
HOST: So when you opened Mr Henry's review and you looked at things like an inheritance tax on the family home, what was your response?
PM: Well, I'm glad you've raised that, because when people say you haven't gone far enough with implementing some of Ken Henry's report, and its recommendations, as you said, include the family home in the means test, introducing a lands tax on the family home, requiring parents to work when their youngest child turns four, we've ruled those out, and I imagine most of your listeners would appreciate the fact that we've ruled those out as well.
So ,when we commissioned Ken Henry, Secretary to the Treasury, an independent public servant, advised by an independent panel to provide a full set of recommendations with, you know, their Treasury hats on, that's what they've done, but our job, as the Government of the country, is to say this is what we can do now, this is what we need to do more work on for the future, and here's a whole bunch of stuff we'll never touch.
HOST: And that's one of those you'll never touch?
PM: Well spotted.
HOST: He does, however, suggest - he doesn't say it point blank, but he does suggest that for you to rationalise it and simplify it a way that you would want to do long-term, you are going to have to have a look at the GST. Is that one of those you'd never look at or one of those in that middle ground you talked about somewhere down the road?
PM: No we're very clear about this, the GST will remain at its current rate. I've said that before and we will not change our position on that.
HOST: But if you are looking at it root and branch, and we are trying to simplify things, why would you point blank rule it out? If you hypothetically raised it to 12 per cent that would get rid of a lot of these other taxes.
PM: You might be looking for a very interesting news angle this morning Greg but I'm not going to give it to you -
HOST: - No I'm just being honest with you why, if you are-
PM: -We won't be moving on the GST. Remember, as far as the GST is concerned, and it grows probably at about 6 per cent per annum, look at our, very closely recently in terms of long term funding of our hospital system, a big change we've now had is to dedicate one third of the GST across the States and Territories to a new National Hospitals Fund, the fund the future health needs of the country. So in terms of the rate: no change.
HOST: You nearly need to leave, just before you go you're going down to the Labour Day March. The union movement has been a powerful force for good in most cases, or in many cases, in our country. Where's it at now? What's your reflection on this Labour Day?
PM: You know if it wasn't for the trade unions standing up for people for the last hundred years, you wouldn't have so many basic things out there. You wouldn't have a minimum wage, you wouldn't have things like, frankly, superannuation, they campaigned hard for that back in the '80s and '90s. You wouldn't have basic things like penalty rates, overtime, you wouldn't have basic things frankly, like holiday pay.
You know, people complain a lot about what certain unions do, I have from time to time as well, people out there at the radical fringe. But if you were to take the big span of history, people who have never been a member of a union in their life but look at some of the basic things they take for granted, I just think they've been a powerful force for good in Australia, and many, many good people in them.
HOST: Their relevance seems to be declining however.
PM: I don't know. I was speaking to some of them, some of the unions recently. Depends where you are in the economy, some of their membership is growing all the time. Shop assistants union, because retail is doing well in Australia. Take the nurses for example: big union, strong membership. I've been consulting with them very closely on the development of our Health and Hospitals Reform package recently.
You know, it's a mixed picture but so too is the growth patterns right across the economy. But if you take the overall sweep of things, and this is where I think Mr Howard got it so wrong with WorkChoices, that just got the balance all wrong in Australia. I think people want to make sure that working people have a fair go, and I think unions have been part of making sure that fair go is kept alive. Super is big, and that's why these reforms on super are so important for working people.
HOST: Now just finally, Paul Keating I think wanted it brought in initially at 15 per cent didn't he? We're now up to, well it will be up to 12 per cent. Where do you see it going to beyond the 12?
PM: Well we've looked at this very carefully, we think adequacy, that's the term that they use in the superannuation literature, adequacy is we believe, based on the numbers we've got, is broadly delivered by the 12 per cent number. We're always mindful in terms of the long-term needs of working families, but you know, we've got to do things that we can afford.
So what we've done is brought together this integrated package which balances out asking the biggest mining companies, frankly, to pay Australia more. Secondly, for working families to benefit though super, for our small businesses to benefit through changes to the tax system and to use that revenue from the mining companies to pay for some of the infrastructure needs of Australia, road, rail and port, which frankly the taxpayers are already having to foot out of their own pocket.
HOST: You need to be going up to the march so enjoy that, you won't be marching anywhere near Paul Lucas will you?
PM: Not quite sure where Paul will be walking. I think I'm with one of the unions anyway, one of the unions who are relevant to the hospital sector.
HOST: Our PM, Kevin Rudd, thank you.
PM: Thanks, Greg, for having me on the program.


Thanks very much and welcome to the biggest Labour Day March anywhere in Australia, here in Brisbane.
Men and women of the Australian labour movement, you know, for a hundred years or more workers of this movement have been gathering in rallies like this throughout our history. And together we gather, standing on the shoulders of giants who have come before us. Together, men and women of the labour movement have shaped this movement for more than a century. Men and women of this movement have come together to form the great unions that you represent here today. Unions like the Missos, unions like the RTBU, unions like the AFULE, unions like the CFMEU and those I can't see in the crowd, the AWU, the Shoppies, the rest, the whole union family, forming this great Australian labour movement.
I look down in front of me and I see this, this T-shirt that says to me 'together we can make it happen'. Can I say to you, the men and women of this movement, together we are making it happen, right now.
What is it that unites our movement? One single rallying cry - 'a fair go for all'. A fair go when it comes to jobs. You know, in the last year or so, our political opponents said 'don't worry about the global recession, don't worry about the global financial crisis, just let the free markets reign'. They said 'do what they do in New Zealand instead'. Can I say, what we did as a Labor Government, was say that was not good enough. When the private sector is in retreat it's time for the government to advance. That's what we did. We protected - you and us and business together - more than 200,000 and 300,000 Australian jobs. Thank you to the labour movement.
A fair go for jobs. A fair go also, for something as basic as health and hospitals. I see our friends here from the Nurses Union. I see also our friends from the Missos - those I've worked with in the last several months on fashioning a big reform in health.
25 years ago a Labor Prime Minister called Bob Hawke delivered to Australia Medicare. 25 years later this Labor Government delivered to you a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally and, for the first time in our history, the Australian Government taking on the funding of the hospital system for the future. That's labour reform.
A fair go in health. A fair go in jobs. A fair go also in education. When I look at the reforms of Whitlam in times past, bringing in an expansion of our university places, what are we now building across Australia? The biggest school modernisation program this country has ever seen - 9,500 schools, government and non-government; 24,000 projects right across the country. New libraries, new science centres, new centres for learning, new multipurpose halls for young kids, however much money their parents have, to make sure they have a fair go at education. That's what the labour movement stands for.
A fair go for jobs, a fair go for our health and hospital networks, a fair go also for education, a fair go also for super. For superannuation for working families. 15 years ago Paul Keating stood before the nation and said working people deserve superannuation. And they said he was wrong. Paul Keating was absolutely right, we need to build superannuation for working people for the future. We moved it from three per cent to six per cent to nine per cent. This Labor Government now delivers to you 12 per cent on superannuation. A huge reform.
When I've looked at, when I've looked at what working people are supposed to retire on to give them comfort and security in their retirement years, right now it's just not enough. We need to build on that so that working people have a decent amount of money to retire on. 12 per cent is a huge step in this direction.
A fair go on super, a fair go on education. A fair go on health and a fair go on jobs.
Men and women of this labour movement, we also believe that what is fundamental for the future is to have a fair go when it came to getting rid of WorkChoices. A fair go in introducing the Fair Work Act. A fair go in getting rid of unfair dismissal. A fair go in making sure we're protecting the basic rights of working people right across Australia. And then we have Tony Abbott up there and saying this, he's going to bring back WorkChoices, he's going to bring back AWAs, he's going to bring back, bring back unfair dismissal. He stand opposed to our 12 per cent super. He stand opposed to what we want to do with the new National Health and Hospitals Network. He wants to abolish fundamentally, abolish fundamentally the school modernisation program, and he says the recipe for jobs is do what they do in New Zealand.
Can I say I couldn't see a more fundamental contrast? We, a Labor Government standing for a fair go for jobs, a fair go for health, a fair go on education, a fair go on super and a fair go when it comes to getting rid of WorkChoices. Our job is to build a future for working people everywhere.
I met before, a bloke in the Missos, in the Missos march. He said to me, his name was Bill, he's a cleaner, he says he works for Myer. Bill is worried about his job security. I said to Bill, one of the things we want to make sure that we can do to help workers like you is to make sure we never ever return to unfair dismissal. For people like Bill. For cleaners like Bill. For people who need the protection of unions like yours and the labour movement like this and the Labor Government which you represent. Our job and our solemn duty is to defend their interests and the great cause of the Australian fair go for which this entire movement stands.
I thank you.


MAYOR SUTHERLAND: Well I'd like to thank you all for coming. To be quite honest, I didn't think I'd be standing out here in the bush out here at Caboolture with the Prime Minister a couple of days ago, but nevertheless here we are and what an occasion. I'd like to take the opportunity to thank the Prime Minister very much, and the Minister for their work that they've done and Jon [Sullivan], the local member, for bringing this to fruition. This is a huge injection into our local economy.
It's going to be fantastic to have these houses brought forward, it's going to be keep them very affordable and for a council, it's the type of infrastructure that quite frankly we can't afford. We need an injection and this is just the type of injection in this hard infrastructure where the Federal Government can come onboard and help local councils.
And on behalf of Moreton Bay Regional Council, Prime Minister I thank you and your Minister and your local member Jon for your much appreciated support. Thank you very much.
PM: Thank you. Let me just say a thing or two, and I might ask Tanya then to add because this is an important national program as well. Thanks Mayor, and Jon, our local member, Tanya, the Housing Minister. It's good to be back here in Caboolture. I'm a Sunshine Coast lad and we're not far from home and when I see the Caboolture River I know that you're always about another 40 or 50 minutes away from Nambour, depending on the day.
So it is really interesting and important to see the practical difference we can make with housing affordability in this area. The Minister, Tanya Plibersek, has established a National Housing Affordability Fund. We have established it so that we can partner with local governments right around Australia to make a difference in providing affordable local housing. That's what it's all about.
Housing affordability is a huge challenge for many, many Australians, not just here in Southeast Queensland but right across the country.
The practical question is what difference can you make? One of the things that we've done is help with first home buyers with our First Home Savers Account. Another thing we've done is invest significantly in social housing nationwide as part of our National Stimulus strategy, some 20,000 additional units of social housing around the country. Third thing we've done is to establish a National Rental Affordability Scheme, and that's rolling out right across the country as well. And then, this particular fund which is also about housing affordability, and that's where we've partnered with this local council to make a difference here on the ground.
Now you can't simply wave a magic wand and hope that everything comes into being overnight. What you can do however, with a fund like this is make a big difference on opening up developments like this for affordable housing and make them cheaper than they would otherwise be. I've just been talking to the developers, we may be looking at what effectively will be housing which will be cheaper to the tune of $15,000 or even up to $30,000 a hit in this area. That actually makes a huge difference, makes a huge difference to working families. When it comes to dealing with the challenges to the cost of living pressures for working families, making sure we've got affordable housing is a key, key concern.
So with this development I'm told we'll have more that 1,000 units for development over here -
SUTHERLAND: - Over 1,400.
PM: Over 1,400. It's better to be on the underside rather than the overside in what you say. 1,400 units of development. That means 1,400 units of quality, affordable housing very closely linked to the existing central business district of Caboolture. That also makes sense and why the Minister's been involved with the planning process for this as well, because you've got civic infrastructure already in Caboolture, you've got proximity to the hospital, you've got proximity of other facilities, and it means that this community will be able to draw on what exists as the current civic centre of Caboolture as well. And as the Mayor said before, the boost to the rate base boosts also the ability to this local authority to invest in the other needs which you have in this area.
So that's what's happening here at Caboolture and I really thank Jon the local member for being such an active participant in developing this project up. But it's one of about 40 such projects that the Minister has been announcing right around the nation, helping thousands and thousands and thousands of people nationwide have greater access to affordable housing. Affordable housing is fundamental to what we're on about as an Australian Labor Government, affordable housing is a fundamental concern for working families under cost of living pressures. And we're on about making a difference on the ground in local communities like this one at Caboolture and doing it around the country.
Last thing from me before I ask Tanya to add, in terms of cost of living pressures and how we help working families more generally, there's a debate that's underway now about national tax reform. Let me say a thing or two about that as well.
You know recently we've had this thing called the Global Financial Crisis. The Australian Government took strong and decisive action to protect the Australian economy from recession, to protect hundreds of thousands of jobs, and with the result - keeping Australia out of recession in the midst of the global recession, making this economy one of the strongest economies in the advanced world right now.
Yesterday we also took decisive action on tax reform. Decisive action to keep our Government finances strong, decisive action also to protect the future of our Australian economy, but decisive action also to ensure that working families and small businesses get a fair share of the natural resource wealth of our nation, natural resources which ultimately are owned by the Australian people.
And let me recap where this goes in terms of benefits for working families. First of all we lift the superannuation guarantee from nine to 12 per cent, in order to make sure that working people when they retire have a decent retirement income. The second is this, we're offering all 2.4 million Australian small businesses a helping hand with a tax break by funding instant write offs for up to $5,000 in the assets which they purchase. And thirdly, we're also out there creating an infrastructure fund across the nation to support the roads, the rail and the ports that we need to build in the future, in particular to support our major resource states. So in overall terms what we're doing through this policy is bringing into existence a plan which makes it possible for working families, makes it possible for small businesses and all companies in Australia to enjoy the benefits of tax relief on the one hand, and secondly boosting our pool of national savings by adding to our national superannuation reforms at the same time.
And where these two things link is this - it's about working families now, the support they need to obtain access to affordable housing, and also the support they need when it comes to decent retirement incomes later on.
Tanya, can you just add on the housing project and I'll take your questions.
PLIBERSEK: Thanks very much. Look it's terrific to be here announcing another wonderful Housing Affordability Fund project today. The Prime Minister just a moment ago outlined the housing affordability measures that this Government has undertaken including the First Home Owners Boost, the First Home Saver Account, the National Rental Affordability Scheme, historic investment in social housing and very importantly the Housing Affordability Fund.
The Housing Affordability Fund is a $512 million fund and it supports projects like this right around the country. They're projects that have great new homes built, that are more affordable because of the Federal Government's investment but they also have infrastructure benefits for the whole of the local community, and often planning and development benefits for the whole of the local community as well.
Today here, we're talking about a project that will see a new bridge built - a bridge that'll carry cars and pedestrians and bicycles. But there's also a planning a development benefit with half a million dollars invested with the council into a program called Risk Smart, that means that low risk developments, your ordinary suburban homes on your ordinary block can be approved within a matter of days. That benefit will flow on to all of the people in this local government area who are planning a home of their own, which means -
[Train goes by]
PLIBERSEK: - It means that from this project we don't just get the benefit of a bridge for the local community, but also the benefit of speeded-up development assessments for people who are building in this area for decades to come.
As the Prime Minister said, this is only one project of many, many around the country. The thing that they have in common is that they deliver savings at the end of the day for new home buyers. They deliver those savings because homes that come on the market more quickly are cheaper. Developers save holding costs and they're able to pass those savings onto people who are buying homes at the end of the day.
Also, in many cases including in this project today, some home owners will be receiving a rebate. In this case, 100 home owners will receive a rebate of $15,000. There will be people like police officers, nurses, teachers, key workers who work in this local area, live in this local area, will benefit not just by having a cheaper home sooner, but also by getting a $15,000 rebate if they're one of the 100 who apply for that rebate. So thank-you very much Prime Minister for being here today and supporting this great project.
PM: Okay folks, over to you for some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your Treasurer has described your tax review as the most significant economic reform in living memory. Do you agree with that description?
PM: Well it's a significant reform, the Treasurer is absolutely right. The reason is for 20 years now the nation's been debating superannuation adequacy, and finally what we've done is take that rate from nine per cent with the SGL up to 12 per cent. That makes a huge difference for working families when they retire. Second thing we've done is to provide a massive investment when it comes to our long term infrastructure for Australia, that is the $5.6 billion at least we are putting into national infrastructure and third -
[Train passes]
PM: -Infrastructure like that, the train, and they're not cheap okay? And the third is, we are funding for the first time by the way rail projects in various parts of Australia. Australian Governments historically for a long, long time didn't invest in rail. And the third thing is providing much needed tax assistance to small business and tax simplicity to small business. But none of this is possible unless you properly tax the super profits of the major mining companies.
Put those things together, it equals a very significant tax reform but there's still more work to be done.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] some gas projects will go offshore [inaudible]
PM: Well, I've got to say what the Treasurer will be doing is working his way through the detailed implementation of the Super Profits Tax with individual project proponents. I'm confident that the Treasurer will be able to sort out the detail of each of those projects, there are many of them around the country, and he's already entered into extensive negotiations with many of them already, there's still some work to be done.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that businesses will go offshore?
PM: Can I say that you're going to have from various people in the mining sector all sorts of threats in terms of projects not proceeding et cetera. Because the objective of some will be to prevent the Australian people from getting their fair share of the resources which flow from these extraordinary deposits across Australia. I remind everybody, that the natural resource wealth of Australia is owned by the Australian people.
Secondly, I remind everybody that we actually need to see a fair return, a fair share for the Australian people in what comes from those resources, because the Australian people also have enduring needs like in infrastructure, which is very extensive.
JOURNALIST: You talk about the first home owners grant, and the boost to that grant, which pushed prices in this area up by an alarming rate in the last five years. Will your Government abolish the First Home Owners Grant?
PM: I've had many representations on that to date. Can I ask who you're representing today please?
JOURNALIST: Yes, I'm 101.5FM, which is the local community radio station.
PM: That's fine I just wanted to know, because I just noticed you had a real estate [inaudible]
JOURNALIST: I do the property show, any time you want to -
PM: - Okay, I was just checking on who we're representing. That's fine, people have different views on that. You'd be surprised to know I've just come from a Labour Day March where someone said to me will you please increase the First Home Owners Boost in terms of their area. I think we've got the balance right, we think we're doing the right thing in terms of that, the First Home Owners Savers Account and the other individual measures which the Minister ran through before.
Housing affordability is key. Absent this Australian Labor Government, this project would not happen for three years. Absent this Australian Labor Government, the actual unit cost would be much higher than they would otherwise be. 1,400 families will benefit as a result. This is the practical sort of measures we've got in mind for this community.
JOURNALIST: But if the banks don't play ball with you and lend the money, and they're not lending money in this area - they're looking for 10, 15 per cent deposit, unless the Government does something there to change the banks around I can't see personally how these projects are going to go [inaudible]
[Train]
PM: Can I say when I look at companies like PEET that are with us today, I doubt very much whether they would be investing in projects like this if they thought it wasn't going to work. Secondly, the projects that we've backed with the National Housing Affordability Fund around the country, some 30 or 40 altogether, basically they're advancing pretty well. So what I'd say to you sir, as a representative for local interests and I'm somebody who has got his fingers on the pulse, this sort of project I believe works. We make it work better through the investments that we're making. Nothing ultimately provides a single purpose solution for everything, but we've got about three or four separate programs now with one objective in mind: improving housing affordability for working Australians.
JOURNALIST: On the subject of infrastructure, Prime Minister, with another 1,400 families down here, it's going to put extra pressure on the Caboolture Hospital which is already bursting at the seams, it's going to put extra pressure on commuter trains to Brisbane. Are you going to do anything to boost those services in light of projects like this?
PM: Well can I say about the Caboolture Hospital that the reason we have brought in a National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally and run locally, is to help with the development of some of our most pressured regional hospitals. At present, the State Governments of Australia are finding it very difficult to fund the future hospital needs of the country. That's because these are so expensive, we have an increasing population, we have an ageing population as well. So what's the deal for the future?
For the future, the Australian Government for the first time will fund - become the dominant funder of the running costs of our public hospital system, for the first time will become the dominant funder of the capital costs, the equipment costs, the teaching and research costs associated with our hospitals across the country. In the past, the only thing the Federal Government did was fund 35 per cent of the running costs.
So for the future, without getting involved in the detailed planning of Caboolture Hospital, what we've got nationwide now is a new agreement with the States and Territories for us to take the dominant burden onto our shoulders for the funding of the future expansion of the public hospital system of Australia. We think that's the right reform, important reform and it dovetails with what the Mayor and the local authority, local Member and the company here are seeking to do in this community - which is to make sure that we've got affordable housing developments, integrated with appropriate planning for the area and integrated also with the necessary long term provision of key services like hospitals and schools.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've just been at the May Day Parade where the unions were voicing their anger -
PM: They call it Labour Day in this country. I think May Day they use elsewhere don't they?
JOURNALIST: Sharan Burrow called it May Day.
PM: We can each use our language. It is May -
JOURNALIST: The unions were very anti-privatisation. What's your feeling about the Queensland Government's privatisation -
PM: Well, I've been asked this many times before. The State Governments make their own calls on these sorts of questions, I'm not privy to the State Government's bottom line in terms of its balance sheet calculations. They make their own decisions, it's highly controversial, you're right to say that, but State Governments ultimately make the call there. Our job is to actually make the overall funding burden faced by State Governments easier. One of the ways in which we are doing that is by investing in the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Left alone, no reform to the health system, the health budgets of the Australian State Governments would crush their budgets entirely in the next 25 years. That is, there would not be a dollar left to spend on anything else other than health and hospitals. That's why we, the Australian Government, are taking that dominant funding burden onto our shoulders, to free up their capacity to invest in other necessary social and economic investments in the future.
One last thing -
JOURNALIST: This project here. What are the total savings going to be for buyers?
PM: I'll turn to the Housing Minister on that because I wouldn't wish to mislead you.
PLIBERSEK: Thank you. The savings come in this development in two parts. The first lot of savings are passed on to all of the homebuyers and they come because this project happens sooner, it means that the holding costs and the expected profit of the company are reduced. The companies estimates suggest that those savings could be $20,000 to $30,000 because the development comes on-line sooner.
On top of the savings that come because this development comes sooner, there will also be 100 lots that receive a rebate of $15,000. That rebate will be targeted in the first instance at key workers, so police, nurses, teachers, other people that are vital to the local community in terms of the work they do but often find it hard to afford a place to buy. So there are savings for the estate as a whole, there are savings for those key workers and there are other benefits for the whole community because the planning and development speeding-up that happens because of Risk Smart will be able to be applied to all future developments in this area. If developments happen sooner, the holding costs are reduced and those savings are passed on to in-time buyers.
JOURNALIST: Do those savings match the $10 million the bridge is going to cost?
PLIBERSEK: The rebate is not the only saving. The overall savings because of the speeding up of this development and many developments like it in what is one the fastest growing local government areas in the country is certainly terrific value for taxpayers' dollars.
PM: And just as we finish on that, Tanya has just referred to these key challenges of housing affordability again. I would note just for the record that the Housing Affordability programs we have out there for the nation have not received any bipartisan support from the other side of politics. Either the National Housing Affordability Fund, the Rental Affordability Fund, also various other initiatives that we've taken to deliver more affordable housing to working Australians.
I think people need to bear this clearly in mind. We have at present an Opposition which seems to be very keen to oppose everything and propose nothing, and to block everything that they can in the Senate. And it brings me back also to the question of the debate we are now having on tax.
The bottom line is this: Mr Abbott seems to be taking the side of the Super Profit for the biggest mining companies, and, sacrificing the interests of working families and better super and tax reform for small business. I don't think that's the right way to go.
And this local area of Caboolture, can I just say with the local member here Jon Sullivan, we're proud to be investors in the region. Our total investment in terms of national stimulus investment is something like $350 million. $195 million to upgrade the Bruce Highway for Caboolture to Caloundra. In education we've funded something like 2,300 computers in 13 schools. $1.36 million for the Morayfield Building and Construction Trades Training Centre. We're investing $104 million in 131 projects in 41 schools under the School Modernisation Program. In our hospitals, someone mentioned the Caboolture Hospital before, we've invested already ourselves some $5.2 million to expand the emergency department of that hospital and build a dedicated paediatric space. We're also investing $53.4 million in the construction of 200 units plus of social housing.
These are good investments in this local community. And your local member here, Jon Sullivan, was out there backing each of them and I thank him for his support. Thanks folks, we've got to zip.


PM: It's great to be out here at this fantastic hospital and to be co-investors with the NSW Government in making sure that we have a first class hospital here for the future. Our investment, worth some $40 or $50 million, is to build a research facility within this hospital. It's all part of delivering better health and better hospital services to working families right across Australia and right here in this part of Sydney.
I've met many workers here today, and it's been good to talk to them about what work they are doing here on this important project, but also about the importance of superannuation to their lives. I'll also say this. Every single worker here today will benefit from the better superannuation arrangements that this Government plans to introduce. Every single worker.
By increasing the superannuation guarantee, we're going to be improving the dignity and security of working families once they retire. For someone aged about 30 today, and I've met a few of them, and they're on average weekly earnings, they'd be $108,000 better off under this new change to superannuation. For someone aged 40 now, they'd be $57,000 better off. For someone who's 50 now, $22,000 better off.
These are important basic changes for working families. Superannuation provides dignity and security for retirement and this Government intends to support that with better super for working Australians.
I notice today that Mr Abbott has said he will oppose this change to super. Can I say this is not a positive approach to what working families expect right across our nation. Mr Abbott seems to have a habit of opposing nearly everything. He seems to oppose anything that moves.
On this decision, what Mr Abbott is doing, is backing the Super Profits of the biggest miners instead of getting behind the decency and security of retirement for working families. Mr Abbott is willing to sacrifice that dignity and security for working families just to make a political point of opposing everything. You know something, I don't think that's good enough. Working families right across Australia deserve a better deal, and deserve a better deal when it comes to super and that's why this Government intends to get on with the business of doing it.
Finally today when it comes to working families, let me add one further point. Many of the workers I've met today have young families. What we are doing today is also releasing our draft legislation for the Paid Parental Leave Scheme, which will come into effect from 1 January this year. This is important legislation to make it easier for young families. This is an historic piece of legislation, and will give newborn babies an opportunity to spend more time with their mums and dads during those very important early years of life.
These are the sort of basic things which make a difference for working families everywhere. Working families like those of the workers that I've met here today at this building project. Working families who want better super for their retirement, better support for when they have little ones at home. That's why this Government intends to get on with the job of supporting those working families.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, obviously the Newspoll today might not be what you were hoping for, what are your thoughts?
PM: Well listen, over the last three years, I have never commented on polls, and I don't intend to start changing that practice today.
My job as Prime Minister is to act in the Australian national interest, whether decisions that I take are popular or not. I intend to continue that practice into the future because it's the right thing to do as Prime Minister of Australia.
JOURNALIST: But it is the first time since 2006 that the Coalition has had an election winning lead.
PM: As I said, my job as Prime Minister of Australia is to act in the national interest and if that means taking decisions which may be popular or unpopular, that's part of the job. I don't intend to change that in the future for the simple reason that acting in the national interest is fundamental to our country's future. I don't intend to change.
JOURNALIST: Do you think voters are unimpressed that you shelved the ETS? [inaudible]
PM: As I said, when you're acting in the national interest and taking difficult decisions, sometimes these will be popular decisions, sometime unpopular decisions, but as Prime Minister, the key task, the key responsibility is to look at those decisions which are necessary for Australia.
Some will be popular, others will not be popular, but what I'm committed to doing as Prime Minister of Australia is getting on with the business of delivering better hospitals for working families, better super for working families, to build the strength of our Government finances, to strengthen our economy for the future. These are the tasks I intend to get on with and I will continue to do that job.
JOURNALIST: Does Mr Abbott have cause to be confident today?
PM: Well, as I said, for the last three years my practice has never been to comment on polls and I don't intend to start changing that practice today.
As I said my job as Prime Minister is to take decisions in the national interest. Some of those decisions won't be popular, but I intend to get on with the job.
And when I look at these workers here today, their concerns are about how do we deal with basic industrial conditions in the workplace, how do we deal with basic things like ensuring they have decent super to retire on, basic things like have they got decent hospitals and accident and emergency to bring their kids to in the middle of the night if they get sick. These are the things which working families are concerned about, that's what I intend to dedicate my efforts and time to, and I won't be deterred from it.
JOURNALIST: Are these the same working families who are mentioned in the poll though?
PM: As I said, when I travel across Australia and I look at working families who want support in their local hospitals, to get into accident and emergency on time. Working families who want better access to elective surgery. They want to be able to find a local GP when they need one. When they want to make sure when life gets tough and they need the services of a hospital like this, that their Government gets behind them.
And those same working families are thinking about something pretty important today, and that's their retirement. And again I say this, I think Mr Abbott today has decided to back the Super Profits of some of our biggest mining companies rather than getting in behind the security and dignity of working families for their retirement.
You know, a lot of these companies that we are talking about also have significant foreign ownership, a lot of the profits go offshore. Their investment, of course, is welcome but what we're talking about is a fair share for their investment but a fair share also for working families and for the whole country. That's what we're on about in these important reforms that we intend to get on and do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister with another interest rate rise on the cards this afternoon, what would you say to families concerned about property prices?
PM: Well, working families are under financial pressure, and it's very important therefore that Government is involved in the business of helping them with housing affordability. That's one of the reasons why through the Government we now are out there backing First Home Saver Accounts, out there backing the Rental Affordability Scheme, out there backing things like the Housing Affordability Fund so that new housing developments can be delivered to working families at less cost while we are also investing in social housing.
Housing affordability is a key concern for all Australians.
On the question of what the Reserve Bank does, of course we respect the independence of monetary policy, it'll make its decisions known in due course.
JOURNALIST: In relation to the initiative that the Government has taken to keep housing prices down, Sydney and Melbourne property prices have gone up almost 20 per cent in a year. Do you think the Government's initiatives are working?
PM: Well these measures that the Government has introduced are there to provide a helping hand and there are many, many Australians who have been assisted from it. If you look for example at the number of Australians who have benefited from the First Home Owners Boost that we introduced in the course of the global financial crisis, I think you're looking at tens of thousands of working families that have been helped by that. Obviously however, there are real problems in terms of housing affordability. They continue, and we're going to have to continue to work on this in the future.
Part of it lies in making sure we've got decent land supply and decent availability of affordable land across our major cities and major regional cities as well. Many things go into the question of housing affordability. Cost of finance is one, the availability of land is another, and also a whole lot of other factors which we seek to support through the taxation system.
Okay folks, having said that I've got to head off to another part of the country. Can I thank all the workers here for spending some time with us this morning and just to assure them that this Government is rock solid on the question of delivering better super for all working families in Australia. Thanks very much.


Thanks very much Chris, and thank you for your work on the superannuation industry and superannuation reform.
Also, Craig Dunn and other members of the Dunn cabinet who are assembled here this morning - thank you for announcing your political ambitions in such a modest and understated way this morning. Most of us choose to do these things quietly, other than in a room of 600 people, but if you're looking for the inside knowledge as to who would be members of the Dunn cabinet, let's look at this table down here, and you'd have representation from across the industry, but the political brains trust lies there in John Brogden. So, you saw it here first when you see this new force, IFSA, in fact being the emerging new political party in Australian politics. There's never a dull day in politics.
John Brogden, thank you so much for working with the Australian Government on the challenges that we face in superannuation. Peter Maher, Peter Mason and my parliamentary colleagues and Ministerial colleagues, Anthony Albanese, Tanya Plibersek, Maxine McKew, Ursula Stephens, Jason Clare and I think my state parliamentary colleague Paul McLeay. It's good to have you here today.
Thank you to IFSA for hosting this morning's breakfast. Thank you and your members also for the substantial contribution that you've made to the development of the Government's plans for the reform of superannuation, as well as our work to strengthen Australia as a financial services centre. This is an important ambition for the nation.
IFSA is a key participant in the debate on retirement incomes policy, and we welcome IFSA's contribution to that debate.
I have come today to discuss the historic reforms to superannuation that the Government announced on Sunday, and their significance both for Australian families and for the larger economy.
There you go. John warned me to push the silver button and not the blue button. Makes you wonder what the blue button would throw up. Should we try? My ministerial colleagues live in fear of PowerPoint presentations from me. I guarantee there is a small number of slides this morning.
These are the some of the most significant reforms since the Superannuation Guarantee was established in 1992.
They will give Australians significantly more financial security in their retirement.
They will strengthen Australia's economy for the future by boosting our pool of national savings and they will ensure that Australians can look to their retirement with confidence and security in a way that people in almost no other nation are able to do.
The Government is enormously proud of these reforms, and I wish to acknowledge publically the work of Treasurer Wayne Swan and in particular Chris Bowen, the Minister for Financial Services, Superannuation and Corporate Law, for their work on these reforms.
The Government is working hard, to keep the economy strong and building better hospitals and better schools and a renewable energy future.
On the economy, the Government has acted decisively to keep Australia out of the global recession, protecting jobs and small businesses by investing in nation-building infrastructure for the future and maintaining Australia's AAA credit rating.
Over the last 18 months, Australians have faced one of the toughest global economic challenges in our lifetime. As we look back, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession.
It is a testament to the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers and government - pulling together, and the strong and decisive leadership from government economic policy.
I am proud of the Government's economic stimulus strategy and the results it has produced. I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates have been saved as a result of that stimulus strategy, and the continued activity of the real economy in Australia in contrast to what we have seen around the world. I am proud that so many Australian businesses have kept their doors open while so many millions of businesses around the world have closed their doors. I am proud that Australia had the shallowest slowdown of all the advanced economies.
This should be a reason to be confident. It should be no cause however for complacency. Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on this position as we move through the economic recovery phase and a return to economic growth.
That is the context for the announcements we made on Sunday and for the upcoming Budget.
First let me begin by describing the economic principles that have guided this Government's economic strategy over the last two and a half years. Through changing global economic conditions, the government has applied two consistent principles of economic management:
     * Countercyclical macro-economic policy to maintain stability;
     * And long microeconomic reform and investment to boost productivity and deliver sustainable long-term economic growth.
This Government's first two years have seen significant swings in global economic conditions, from the inflationary boom of 2007, through the global slump of 2008, and towards the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression. Through these cycles, the government has maintained a conservative countercyclical fiscal policy: restraining public expenditure growth when the private economy is strong, and stepping in to protect jobs and businesses when the private economy is weak, and in the case of last year almost on its knees.
As we emerge from the global recession, the Government will continue to apply these same core economic principles.
Amid various short-term economic challenges, we have however never lost sight of our core long-term economic strategy: to reform Australia's economy and build a platform for future growth. This strategy is based on our objective of improving Australia's long-term productivity growth and participation rate.
Our productivity agenda includes major reform to infrastructure, skills, training and education, regulatory reform to create a seamless national economy, and the reform of the tax system.
To boost workforce participation, the Government has established Australia's first-ever paid parental leave scheme, coming into effect from January 2011. We've increased the childcare rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent to support parents' return to work, and we've also introduced a "learn or earn" compact with young Australians to make sure our kids are in either work or study.
On Sunday the Government took decisive action on a key area of microeconomic reform and one with profound macroeconomic consequences. I refer, of course, to the Government's tax reform plan.
The tax plan will;
     * Keep government finances strong;
     * Protect the future of the Australian economy; and
     * Ensure working families and small businesses get their fair share.
These reforms will allow all Australians, including working families and small business, to share in the benefits of the resource boom. By taxing the super profits of big mining companies these reforms will:
     * Offer every small business in the country a tax break by funding instant write offs for purchases of up to $5,000. That adds up to a $3,400 saving in the 1st year;
     * Also providing a $700 million a year investment in nation building infrastructure such as better roads, more rail, and bigger ports - $5.6 billion over time;
     * And, of course, boosting superannuation to help working families and to strengthen the economy.
The introduction of universal superannuation is among the proudest achievements of Australian Labor governments.
It is worth reviewing that history to understand the vision that underpins our universal super system. Superannuation began in Australia almost 150 years ago, with the Bank of New South Wales in 1862.
For more than a next century, superannuation was almost entirely the preserve of men in highly-paid, white collar jobs. Most Australians in their retirement could rely only upon the age pension and whatever savings they had put aside during their life.
That began to change in the late 1970s, because of visionary leadership in the Australian trade union movement. Bill Kelty and others became determined to transform super from being the privilege of a minority of Australians, to a becoming an entitlement for all. That is what it should be.
In 1979 they first won for workers a basic award entitlement to superannuation - initially in the leather trading and hide industry, then at retailer Woolworths, and gradually in other industries as well.
Super was put on the agenda for the Prices and Incomes Accord when the Hawke Government came to office in 1983. An historic breakthrough came with the 1986 National Wage Case decision, which gave award-based employees across all industries a 3 per cent productivity-based wage increase, allocated entirely to superannuation accounts. Unions supported this strongly, even though it involved the sacrifice of a real wage increases in the shorter term.
Superannuation coverage continued to grow, but the most historically important decision came in 1992, when the Keating Government established a universal superannuation entitlement for all workers, starting at 6 per cent of income and stepping up to 9 per cent by 2002. This was an extraordinary piece of policy innovation and entrepreneurship, and it is a great testimony to the far-sighted leadership of the union movement, in advancing the interests of working people, and the governments of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating.
Today, of course, superannuation is widely regarded as one of Australia's great economic reforms, but at the time those reforms weren't easy. Indeed, they met trenchant resistance from the Opposition.
When unions established industry funds for superannuation in the 1980s, politicians in the Liberal Party warned it was a conspiracy for Australia to become a socialist nation via the back door. When legislation for universal superannuation was introduced in 1992, the Opposition spokesman described the policy as "absolutely abhorrent", "bizarre" and a policy that he said "Australia does not need, and cannot afford at this time".
The Opposition promised to abolish it, and the legislation only got through the Senate narrowly with the support of the Australian Democrats, and when the Liberal Party later came to power under Mr Howard they scrapped government policies for the further increases in the Superannuation Guarantee.
During the 12 years in which the Liberals were in office, superannuation policy continued to undergo many changes, but overwhelmingly the benefits of those changes flowed to the higher income earners most able to take advantage of concessions for voluntary super contributions, and throughout this time, the Howard Government passed up the opportunity to use a long period of economic growth to strengthen the income security of Australians in their retirement.
Super makes a significant contribution to the financial security of Australian families and to our national economy.
First, the Superannuation Guarantee means that whenever they retire, Australians will have a higher income in retirement. Barely 20 years ago, only 46 per cent of full-time workers and 7 per cent of part-time workers had any superannuation arrangements at all. Now, 96 per cent of full-time workers and at least three-quarters of part time workers receive regular contributions to their superannuation funds.
Many workers now half way through their working lives have been accumulating superannuation since they entered the workforce.
Put simply, Australia's Superannuation system means more freedom and a greater sense of security for older Australians.
Under the 9 per cent Superannuation Guarantee as it stands today:
     * A low-income earner on half of average weekly ordinary time earnings would expect to retire and be 80 per cent reliant on the age pension.
     * For middle income earners, retirement spending will be around 70 per cent of their pre-retirement spending.
     * For those on 150 per cent of average earnings, retirement spending will be around 55 per cent of pre-retirement spending.
In other words, the system that has been in place for almost two decades has come a long way for providing adequate spending in future retirement - but there is still much, much more to be done.
Super has also strengthened Australia's economy.
First, super has built a stronger Australian economy by strengthening domestic savings. We have seen exponential growth in the pool of funds created by superannuation.
This chart shows superannuation assets, held at super funds and life insurers, now total around $1 trillion. That's around 100 per cent of GDP, well above the $41.1 billion or 13 per cent of GDP they were in 1987. Treasury estimates that, 25 years from now, this savings pool will have grown further to $5 trillion, equivalent to around 120 per cent of Australia's forecast GDP of $4.2 trillion at that time.
Chart two shows that the introduction of superannuation in 1992 has helped to turn around a three decade decline in Australia's national savings.
This chart also shows that higher level of savings has helped underpin Australia's high level of investment during recent years. Australia's gross investment rate was 27 per cent of GDP between 2004 and 2008, compared with 17 per cent in the UK, 18 per cent in Germany and 20 per cent in the US.
With commodity prices rising and the resources boom resuming, investment rates in Australia will remain high and are likely to increase even further. With a larger pool of national savings we have a stronger buffer in place, reducing the Australian economy's susceptibility to swings in foreign investor sentiment.
The gap between national investment and national savings is reflected in the current account deficit and a higher level of national savings can therefore reduce our external imbalance. You see there in the chart how this has evolved over time, and that the CAD is reflected as the difference between the two.
Second, universal super is also decreasing the long-term fiscal pressures associated with the ageing of the population. Those with higher superannuation balances are able to support themselves without relying on the provision of the age pension. Indeed, analysis by the Retirement Income Modelling Taskforce in the early 1990s estimated that the Superannuation Guarantee reforms would ultimately ease pension outlay pressures on the budget by 1 per cent of GDP.
Third, superannuation savings have built a stronger and more stable financial system and financial markets. The strongest element of Australia's savings is the over $1 trillion pool of superannuation savings. This is the fourth-largest national pool of funds under management in the world. Measured relative to the size of our economy, Australia has the third largest ratio of pension assets to GDP of all the advanced economies.
That is an impressive table, when you look at it over time, the left hand bar represents 1999, the right hand bar represents 2009, the countries of course indicated underneath. There we are in terms of our proportion of pension assets to GDP up there, in the same order of magnitude heading towards what they have in Switzerland and the Netherlands. This is an important development over time.
Australia's superannuation system has created a tremendous source of national wealth and the growth of the superannuation system has helped to diversify and internationalise Australia's financial markets. As these funds grew, funds managers needed to invest in financial assets here and abroad and this added depth to our domestic markets. Demand from funds managers has played a critical role in the development and depth of the Australian share market. About $284 billion of assets of superannuation funds and life offices were invested in Australian equities alone, as at June 2009.
The development of the superannuation system has also helped to diversify the financial system, which is the essential intermediary between saving and investment in the economy. By investing in both domestic and international markets, it has provided more choice for investors, greater competition, and broader expertise in asset and risk management.
The over $1 trillion in superannuation assets complement our $2.6 trillion domestic banking system. This means that businesses are better able to borrow directly from the market through bonds to finance their investment activities, rather than relying solely on the banking system.
The past two years have demonstrated the benefits of a diversified and balanced financial system in the tumultuous events of the global financial crisis. This pool of long-term savings was a buffer for the Australian economy during the worst financial crisis the world had seen in 75 years.
In 2009, at a time when liquidity was being rapidly withdrawn across the world from markets, Australia remained an attractive place to raise capital. The availability of funds from our pool of super savings helped make it possible for Australian-listed companies to support themselves by raising $90 billion of capital last year - despite lack of confidence in global financial markets, and those companies that raised the $90 billion employ around 1.6 million Australians, highlighting the extent to which a strong super system supports jobs and growth in the economy at large. This is an important figure.
Fourth, the growth of superannuation in Australia has built a strong financial services industry in Australia, generating the potential for Australia to become a major regional financial services hub. The finance and insurance sector has become the single largest sector of our economy, generating 10.7 per cent of gross value added. Australia's expertise in funds management, risk analysis and asset markets is the envy of other countries. Australians with this financial know-how are sought across the world, as you know in this industry, and especially in financial centres like New York, London, Singapore and Hong Kong; prospectively Shanghai.
This expertise has also created the opportunity for Australia to become a major financial services hub in the Asia-Pacific region and in global markets. The Government believes that there is tremendous potential for increasing our export of financial services, and for that reason we commissioned the Johnson Report on Australia as a Financial Services Centre, which was released in January this year. The report provides valuable guidance on building on the industry's potential, and I look forward to outlining our response to his recommendations in the future.
Nevertheless, we have not yet fulfilled the vision that drove the establishment of universal superannuation some two decades ago. In three words, that vision is adequacy, fairness, and efficiency.
The first element of unfinished business is adequacy. Provision for adequate retirement incomes is one of the greatest challenges of an ageing population, a point underscored by the 2010 Intergenerational Report. As the Report noted, between now and 2050 the number of people aged 65 to 84 years will more than double and the number of people aged 85 and over will more than quadruple. There will be only 2.7 people of working age for every person aged 65 and over, compared with 5 people today. This underscores the need to prepare Australians for their retirement with an adequate level of superannuation savings.
A recent OECD analysis highlighted the scope of the task. Australia's retirement income replacement rate - that is, the amount of income Australians will have retirement as a proportion of their working income - is below the OECD average for several income categories. This is important for all Australians to note.
In addition, there is more to be done to improve the fairness of the current system. Low and middle-income earners do not have access to anything near the incentives for higher super contributions enjoyed by those on higher income earners. Currently, workers with high incomes and high marginal tax rates benefit from a low 15% tax rate on their super contributions, but lower income workers with income of less than $37,000 and tax rates of 15%, they get, in effect, no concession and workers with a marginal tax rate below 15% pay more tax on their super than on other income.
From 1 July 2012 individuals taxable incomes of up to $37,000 will receive up to $500 in matching funds applied at a 15% rate to their contributions - effectively eliminating the tax they pay on their super. This means no tax will effectively be paid on SG contributions for those with incomes up to that amount in 2012-13. This is a real reward for saving
There is also more to do to improve the efficiency of the superannuation system. Currently, many Australians pay commissions for financial products on which they receive little real advice. Financial advisers are given sales incentives to sell customers products that are not in their best interests simply because of their direct links to particular financial institutions and the real cost of advice is often not transparent to the consumers who are paying for it. Concerns about these matters have been raised for many years, but until now governments have not acted.
In short, the work of building a fair and adequate superannuation system for Australians is still incomplete. More must be done to provide an adequate level of income in retirement. More must be done to build a fair system for lower income earners, for women and other workers in part-time employment. And more must be done to make the system simpler and more efficient.
Indeed, it's not unfair to see Australia's superannuation system as a project still under construction, and while the construction has continued, more than a decade ago the foreman effectively walked off the job.
This week, the Australian Government has announced that we are back on the job: back on the job of building a superannuation system that will provide for the needs of Australian workers in their retirement; back on the job of building fairness into Australian superannuation; and back on the job of giving Australians greater security in their retirement than is possible for people in virtually any other part of the world.
That is why, last week, the Minister for Financial Services, Chris Bowen, outlined the first stage of our super reforms, with important reforms to financial advice to improve the trust and confidence of Australian retail investors in the financial planning sector.
As a result of those reforms:
     * Australians will have better access to affordable financial advice.
     * Commissions on superannuation will be banned.
     * Financial advisers will have a new statutory fiduciary duty to act in the best interests of their clients.
     * And remuneration structures for advice on retail investment products such as managed investments, superannuation and margin loans must no longer create a conflict of interest between advisers and customers.
These reforms will help ensure that Australian investors receive advice that is in their best interests, rather than being directed to products as a result of incentives or commissions offered to financial advisers. I thank IFSA for welcoming these reforms as "a win for consumers" that "will build trust between financial advisers and the community."
Following the announcement of these reforms last week, on Sunday the Government we announced the centrepiece of our super reforms. This historic package of reforms to superannuation will improve retirement incomes for all Australians and will provide increased support to low-income earners to boost their retirement savings.
The measures we announced will:
     * First, enhance retirement outcomes, particularly for low-income earners and those older workers seeking to catch-up on their superannuation position;
     * It'll strengthen system equity; and
     * boost our national savings.
From 1 July 2013, the compulsory Superannuation Guarantee (SG) rate will be increased from 9 per cent to 12 per cent over a seven year period. The increase will be phased in from 1 July 2013 to 1 July 2019, with 0.25 percentage increases in the first two years and 0.5 percentage increases each year thereafter. This increase will provide a lasting benefit to Australian workers, including the 8.4 million working Australians currently building their superannuation. To allow businesses time to adjust and ensure adequate consideration as part of wage negotiations, a delayed start date and slow phase-in have been put in place.
Also, starting from 1 July 2012, the Government will make a contribution of up to $500 to the superannuation balances of individuals on an adjusted taxable income of up to $37,000. This also is an important reform. Taken together, the superannuation savings of 3.5 million low-income earners will be boosted by $830 million over the forward estimates, assisting those eligible to achieve higher retirement incomes.
The Government recognises that many workers want to make larger catch-up superannuation contributions as they approach retirement. This is particularly true for women who may have been out of the workforce for part of their lives and unable to build up their own super. The Government will facilitate this through extra concessions for workers with a superannuation balance under a certain threshold.
From 1 July 2012, the Government will allow workers aged 50 and over with balances below $500,000 to make up to $50,000 in concessional superannuation contributions. This doubles the cap of $25,000 which is scheduled to apply to these already workers from 1 July 2012.
To conclude, the reforms to superannuation that the Government has announced this week are the most significant reforms to superannuation since the introduction of the Superannuation Guarantee Charge in 1993. They will strengthen the financial security of Australians for decades to come.
The Government that I lead is proud this week to be building upon the most significant economic reforms of recent decades. These reforms will help working families by improving the adequacy and the fairness and the efficiency of the retirement income of millions, literally millions, of Australians and these reforms will strengthen Australia's economy for the future - adding to our national savings pool.
These reforms will also boost the financial services industry in Australia and especially in this great city of Sydney.
The Australian financial services sector is a critical domestic industry of global significance. You, as representatives of this industry, have an extraordinary opportunity before you, and that is building on the other changes to the taxation system that we have introduced in earlier budgets - I refer in particular to the polling tax - to take what is an extraordinary critical mass of talent and ability represented in this industry at home and turn it into a major export industry for Australia.
The calibre of our regulatory environment, the quality of our management, the depth of our expertise, the sheer size of pools of funds under management, means that this country and this city in particular becomes a natural take-off point to make Australia a financial services hub for wider East Asia.
You're familiar with the classical arguments: common time-zone - more or less; a great pool of languages here in this country; an extraordinary depth and breadth of the superannuation industry which is now built up over 20 years. These are great talents to draw upon, quite apart from the establishment of this country's deep global economic credentials, having come through the global economic crisis the way in which we have. These therefore are strengths to draw upon.
Your industry has these strengths to draw upon and therefore taken together provide and enormous opportunity to build this new export industry for Australia.
So, in sum, these reforms, the most significant in nearly 20 years for superannuation, are helping working families deal with the very basic task of providing for their retirement income; boosting our national savings against whatever uncertainties lie ahead for the global economy; and turning this great industry that you represent in this room today into the new export industry of Australia.
I thank you.


PM: It's great to be here with Alannah and with Gary Gray, Parliamentary Secretary for the West, to talk about affordable housing. Affordable housing is a key concern of all working families, and here in the West it's a big challenge as well. That's why we want to make sure that we're doing everything possible to assist people who are looking for a decent house on decent land getting access to that.
Here, down at Armadale, what we're doing today is announcing this part of our $22.9 million investment in WA to unlock housing supply and bring new land to market. Nine housing projects, all the way from Mandurah to Broome, will now have reduced planning and infrastructure costs.
This $22.9 million investment will save WA homebuyers an average of about $16,000 on 1,323 new homes. It'll bring about 1,890 lots forward up to two years faster than would otherwise be the case, and here at Armadale, just to be very practical about it in terms of what's on the map in front of you - 59 homes will save almost $30,000 as a direct result of our investment here of $1.75 million. The funding will be used by the City of Armadale Council to re-locate powerlines, construct roads, drains and water, power, sewer and gas services in Armadale's Newhaven development.
This is really important. It's practical stuff. We're doing about nine projects here in the West out of the National Housing Affordability Fund, and the whole purpose is to make sure that through using this National Housing Affordability Fund, we can bring forward affordable housing for literally tens of thousands of Australians and take the price off some of those developments, like we're seeing here at Armadale.
Of course, nationwide we're doing this as well. A couple of days ago I was at Caboolture in South-East Queensland - a similar concept, different practical local challenges. There we were building a bridge over a railway line to bring on-stream a whole new development close to the existing CBD of Caboolture. Here, the challenges are different, but the funding mechanism that we're using is the same one - a Housing Affordability Fund for the future.
Just before turning to your questions today, could I also emphasize an announcement also being made here in the West today by Tony Burke, the Minister for Agriculture.
We're beginning a new era in our treatment of drought support here in the West. The Government and the West Australian Government today announced a 12-month WA trail of the dramatically new drought support measures. The trial will be held in a region covering almost half of Western Australia from Karratha to Esperance, and will go from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011. The new package of measures to be trialled on the West includes farm family support, farm social support, building farm businesses, farm planning, stronger rural communities, farm exit support and also a program entitled 'Beyond Farming'. About 6,000 farmers across this region will be trialling this, and trialling it nationwide.
So, what I'd like to emphasize is that we want to be partners with the farming community here in the West and trialling this new arrangement for drought which we've developed with the peak bodies nationwide, including the National Farmers Federation, but also here to talk about how we help those who live in urban areas with better housing affordability.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: On housing, particularly interest rates, Westpac's (inaudible) $2.8 billion in six months. Is that obscene, given the struggle (inaudible)
PM: I reckon there's a very simply message for the banks, which is those in particular who over the last 6-12 months have put their rates up in excess of any official rates change frankly need to have a long, hard look at themselves, look at their level of profitability and look at how that can be better passed onto homebuyers who are struggling with mortgage rates.
JOURNALIST: Do you consider it a super tax and therefore should be taxed (inaudible)
PM: -I think one of the challenges we face-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
PM: -No, I understand your point. When it comes to the banking sector, we're always concerned about how things are passed on to the end consumer. I don't want to see anything which actually causes people who are currently paying home mortgage rates to have to pay anything more. We'll always be mindful of what the banks are up to themselves, and as I said before, those who have gone ahead of the pack over the last 6-12 months should have a long, hard look at themselves in terms of delivering the best outcome.
JOURNALIST: Why don't you tax them harder, then? Why don't you apply the 40 percent tax on-
PM: -Can I say what I'm concerned about is the actual mortgage rates being paid by, frankly, millions of Australians today and I am very concerned about any measure which would result in mortgage rates going up for working families.
You ask what the point of dissention is with something like the mining industry? The mining industry, the exports head to the rest of the world, and of course we want a successful mining industry, one which is profitable. I'm a strong supporter of the mining industry, but let me say this - all Australians, all West Australians, want a fair share of the mineral wealth of this country, mineral wealth which the Australian people own, because they want better ports, better roads, better rail, better infrastructure, better tax cuts for small business, better tax cuts for all companies. That's why we're doing it.
JOURNALIST: While you're in Perth some senior mining executives Tony Abbott's in Canberra meeting the heads of BHP and Rio. Is that a bit of a snub to you, that they're meeting (inaudible)
PM: Well, actually, I met very senior executives from BHP and Rio here last night in the West.
JOURNALIST: Not the likes of Marius Kloppers.
PM: Well, we've been talking to Marius for a long period of time, and as far as the Rio management, we'll be speaking to them as well. It's entirely normal that those sorts of discussions would occur. When I was the Leader of the Opposition we dealt with the heads of the big mining companies all the time. That's perfectly normal, and an understandable set of discussions will occur.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you been able to make some concessions to the mining industry, and secondly, if you were a bit more prudent in spending the stimulus package in schools and the insulation program, would you need to be raising taxes?
PM: Can I say that firstly in terms of the Super Profits Tax, what we want is a fair share for working families for better super, better taxes for better tax breaks for small business and better infrastructure right across West Australia - in fact, right across the nation. That's what we're doing.
Secondly, we had a good and robust exchange with the mining industry not just last night but also this morning in Perth as well. Good discussions all round. Obviously, a whole range of opinions were put, and we'll try and work though the detail of that and the individual discussions with individual companies and the Treasurer. Gary Gray was with me for those discussions this morning, as was Martin Ferguson.
On the question of the purposes to which this investment would be put, that is, the additional revenues coming from a Super Profits Tax, let me just say these are contained within themselves - that is, long term, creating a better tax environment for the 230,000 small businesses in Western Australia: up to $5,000 tax write off in a given year for their assets purchases; bringing down the company tax rate from 30 cents in the dollar to 28 cents in the dollar; but also on top of that again, making sure that we've got money for the future for a WA infrastructure fund to underpin the long-term infrastructure needs of this state. That's what we're on about, so what we've suggested is here is a revenue source, here is how it can be invested for the future. It's got nothing to do with, currently, the base of expenditure programs which already exist within the Australian budget.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) people whose super funds have taken a hit because of your announcement?
PM: Well, can I say if you look at the changes which have occurred in mining stock prices over the last 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months, they will go up, they will go down. That's what's happened with the stock market volatility over a long period of time, particularly in the commodities sector.
I think it's important to place emphasis on the independent modelling by the Treasury which says that put all these factors together, EContec, the Treasury's modeller, projects that this industry will grow by something like 6.5% over the coming 5-10 years as a result of all these measures, and that as a result what you're going to see is a broader and more dynamic mining industry in the future.
Last thing on that - 20 years ago, people predicted doom and gloom when a regime like this was put into place call the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax to govern the taxation arrangements for offshore North West Shelf and regions associated with it. 20 years later that particular set of projects is booming. The Gorgon project, one of the biggest resource projects in the world, has taken off in the midst of that particular tax regime. There is not a whole lot different between the design of that scheme and what we're now seeking to apply to onshore developments here. So, it's inevitable that mining companies are going to complain - the big miners don't want to pay more tax, I understand that, they're right to get out there, they've got their right to get out there and argue, but you know something? Our national interest dictates that we use those resources for the Australian people. The Australian people deserve a fair share from the mining resources of this country because those resources are ultimately owned by the people-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
PM: Can we just, I'll take them one at a time. Just over here and then I'll head down this way.
JOURNALIST: What about the self-funded retirees who have had tens of thousands of dollars wiped off their share portfolios and they now say it's affecting their income?
PM: If you look at the impact as I said on movements in stock prices over the last 3, 6, 12 months, there's been huge volatility. One of the reasons why the Australian market has in fact picked up over the last 12 months is because we've had strong, continued economic management in Australia. Compare the recovery and our equities markets in Australia over the last 12 months against what we've seen elsewhere in the world. Internataional markets have looked at Australia and said that here is an economy which has performed well - Combination of national stimulus strategy, combination of demand from China, combination also, of various measures taken, including in monetary policy.
Now, I think you had one here, then I'll come to you.
JOURNALIST: On the implementation of the tax, what aspects or what details (inaudible) negotiations been with the resource companies?
PM: Well, each of the companies in our discussions last night and this morning again, and Minister Ferguson and Parliamentary Secretary Gary Gray and I have spoken to many of them now, have raised different things. Some of them concern transitions; some of them concern implementation; some of them concern clarification, but each business, frankly, is a bit different because, they've got different questions to raise. So, we intend, through an extended consultation process, to work our way through it. It'll take time, but the reason we've come here, to talk to the miners direct, myself and the Minister for Resources, is to be there, be upfront, talk to them face to face and then make sure we've got a process for continuing that discussion through this implementation period.
JOURNALIST: (inadudible)
PM: On the one question which you asked me yesterday about, which is we think we've got that about right.
JOURNALIST: OK, it's not going to be just big miners that are affected. Small miners are obviously going to be affected as well. Is there scope to increase the rate of return factored into this Super Profits Tax?
PM: We think we've got the rate right, as I said in response to Geoff's question yesterday, but can I say this about small and medium miners - in the detail of what we've proposed, for small and medium miners who, frankly, maybe generating a pretty low levels of profitability early on, this package is a net winner for them. The reason being is that the current blunt instrument of the royalties regime, taxes them, often taxes the hell out of them, based on volume not their profitability, but the other thing is this-
JOURNALIST: -So, through the life of the mine though, what is, won't it-
PM: -Can I just finish my question and then take your follow-up? On the question of exploration companies, which ultimately decides how much resources we've got to develop in the future, the other thing I'd draw people's attention to is the strong emphasis that we have, now, on a $1.1 billion set of tax advantages which flow to the exploration industry for the first time. This will enormously assist various people in the exploration industry to bring on new resources for the future.
I go back to the modelling - put the Super Profits Tax together with the different treatment of companies who may not be earning profits early in their business cycle, and put that together with the exploration benefits that we have put into the package, Treasury's modelling demonstrates that over the next 5 to 10 years, in fact, we will see an overall significant increase in the level of mining activity, and I draw your attention again to the prophets of doom who were saying similar things 20 years ago when the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax was brought in, for those developments offshore.
Your follow up?
JOURNALIST: Two quick follow ups-
PM: I'll give you one then I'll go to someone else.
JOURNALIST: Analysts have said that the effective rate of tax for all mines, small, big, whatever, under this package, will go from about 42 percent currently to 55 percent or thereabouts over the full life of a mine. Given that that is an increase in tax, how can it not impact on jobs, especially in Western Australia, which produces more than 60 percent of the nation's mineral wealth?
PM: Well can I put it in these terms? Different companies will be affected differently. There are a whole bunch of employment opportunities out there at the moment with companies in the mining sector who are being penalised enourmously by the current royalties regime, which is a very blunt instrument.
What this does, in fact, is open up a further expansion in employment opportunities for them at a time in their business development when they are currently being whacked by the current tax arrangements.
Secondly, exploration companies, currently being, frankly, done in the eye by existing federal and state taxes, when it comes to their activities, now have a very significant new tax advantage for the future. They, too, will be employing more people.
And the last thing I'd say is, across the economy at large, bear this in mind as well, that here in Western Australia, and I was talking last night to the head of the WA Tourism Authority, the tourism industry and various other branches of industry here in the West are currently being whacked by the high dollar. It's really having a huge effect. One of the reasons we are using this Super Profits Tax to fund a drop in the company tax rate and a further tax break for small businesses is to make sure that those businesses maintain their competitiveness or their bottom line is helped at a time when, frankly, the dollar is affecting many of them very badly.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned then, if you were to impose a Super Profits Tax on the banks, that they'd pass those costs onto consumers?
PM: Well, I'm always concerned about people in the home mortgage market, particularly when it comes to affordable housing like we're seeing here. That's why we, as a Government, are directly investing in these sorts of projects.
Can I also say that we must be very mindful, therefore, of any impacts which could flow through to those in the home mortgage market. People put a lot of investment into their own home. We've got to make sure that investment is protected to the greatest extent possible. That's why we need to make sure that those out there who have put a lot of their blood, sweat and tears into their home mortgages are supported to the greatest extent possible.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned, though, that the backlash in WA could cost you the chance of picking up seats like Canning at the next election?
PM: Can I say that we have a fantastic candidate here in Canning who knows this area like the back of her hand in my experience, and my job as Prime Minister of the country is to make decisions which are in the national interest. Remember also, across Australia, and across West Australia- in West Australia there are 700,000 workers who will benefit from increasing their superannuation rates from 9 to 12 - 700,000 workers in WA.
Secondly, you've also got 230,000 small businesses who are going to benefit from the tax cuts that we've brought in.
And thirdly, if you look around at developments like this, I've never found a local authority anywhere who said I've got enough money for my local infrastructure - in fact, I've got too much. I've never found one. Never found one in the West, never found one in my own state of Queensland.
JOURNALIST: You don't believe-
PM: -Can I just go to it and that is you're going to hear a lot of complaints from people earning profits in the mining industry. That is understandable. No-one out there in the mining industry wants to pay more tax.
The Australian people however, the Western Australian people, deserve a fairer share of these super profits to help them with better super, to help small businesses with better tax breaks, and to help them with building infrastructure like this.
And having said that folks, I've really got to zip. Thanks very much.


PM: Now it's good to be here with Chas Hopkins today, our candidate for Cowen, and it's good to be here at a local community investment where we the Australian Government have helped put the money into this Kingsway regional sporting complex, an investment of some $2.8 million. And I've just been told by the locals here that down here you've got about 4000 netballers who come here every weekend and use these courts. A very practical thing that we had put to use by the local community is how can we make this better and if you look at all the resurfacing of these courts here, we've actually tried to make it better for local people to be able to use these facilities without, shall I say, unnecessary injury. In fact a little girl just fell over there and her mum said she didn't graze her knee this time so that's one good thing that we've done.
But these are the sorts of facilities that we're investing in right across the West, and right across Australia as well, and it's all part and parcel of the infrastructure needs of the nation.
Infrastructure is a key challenge for us all, every time I come to West Australia there is one question I'm asked at every press conference: What are you doing to fund this state's infrastructure needs for the future? And we the Australian Government so far in our two years in office have set aside some $3.4 billion worth of investment in various categories of infrastructure here but there's much more to be done.
And that's why we the Australian Government are stepping up to the plate with our plan for a Super Profits Tax on the mining industry, so that West Australia gets a fair share when it comes to investment in local infrastructure needs right across the state.
Infrastructure Australia, when it did its round of applications for infrastructure needs around the country recently, got $14.5 billion worth of applications from WA alone. $14.5 billion. Every time I meet the Premier of WA, he's got his hand out and he wants some more money for infrastructure. Well we've tried to help so far, but you know something infrastructure doesn't come for free. That's why we need a new revenue source to make it possible for the future. Therefore our super profits tax on the mining industry is about three things.
Firstly, to make sure that workers right across WA and right across the country get a fair share when it comes to their superannuation. That's the first thing, raising that superannuation guarantee from 9 per cent to 12 per cent.
The second thing is this, to give businesses and small businesses in particular a tax break, and for small businesses that ability to offset your $5000 worth of assets purchases in a given year immediately. That really helps with your cash bottom line.
The third thing is this, to also provide money for a continuing fund to support the infrastructure needs of the future. And the largest slice of that fund is likely to come to Western Australia, because this is where so much of the growth around the country is happening.
So in summary three things. One, we need a super profits tax to fund better super for working families. Two, to help small businesses with a substantial tax break and three, to fund this great state's future infrastructure needs as well.
That's what it's all about. In West Australia right now there are some 700,000 workers who would benefit from the superannuation improvement that we put forward. There are 230,000 small businesses here who benefit from the significant tax benefit that we've put forward as part of this package. But on top of that, every West Australian has a big interest in their infrastructure needs for the future: port, rail, road, other infrastructure needs.
Last thing I'd say before taking your questions is this. Is that I noticed the Premier has come out in some opposition to this tax. Can I say that you can't have it both ways. If you're the Premier of WA, you can't go to Canberra and say please give me more money for infrastructure on the one hand, and say no to a proposal to raise money to fund that infrastructure on the other. You can't have it both ways. WA has huge infrastructure needs. What we're talking about, with our super profits tax for the mining industry, is delivering a fair share back to the people of Western Australia for their super, their small businesses and their future infrastructure needs. Now there's going to be a big debate here, I understand it's on in earnest, and I'm over here to actually talk to local miners and to hear their views, and to work our way through some of the concerns which they have raised. But I believe this is an important reform for the future, for the people of Western Australia, for small businesses, for better super for working people but on top of that, for the infrastructure needs of this great state for the future.
Over to you
JOURNALIST: Speaking of the future, those kids you met a little while ago, are you worried that their parents are now going to be paying higher interest rates?
PM: The decision by the Reserve Bank today, let's just cut to the chase, makes housing affordability much harder for working families. Of course interest rates are now at still something in the order of two and a quarter per cent lower than they were when we came to office. But the bottom line is this rate rise today of one quarter of a per cent is still a slug for working families and is hard for housing affordability.
A big challenge for the future is to help with housing affordability nationwide, one of the things that we're seeking to do it to support that through programs like the Housing Affordability Fund, the Rental Affordability Scheme and other programs like that. But there's no bones about it, when you've got a quarter of a percentage point rise in interest rates it hurts the bottom line and it hurts families in their repayments on their mortgages.
JOURNALIST: You wouldn't want any more in an election year though would you?
PM: Well the Reserve Bank makes its own mind up on these things, but the bottom line is for working families, dealing with the challenge of paying off the family home, a quarter of a percentage point rise hits the family budget and there's therefore a real challenge for families in dealing with that and other cost of living pressures.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Cape Lambert Resources has announced they're cancelling all planned exploration in Australia [inaudible]. Is that the action that you wanted?
PM: Let me just say, and I indicated this the other day in Canberra when we announced our plan for tax reform, which again is this: a super profits tax on the mining industry on their super profits, and remember in the last decade we've seen those profits go up by about $80 billion, we've seen revenues come back to the Australian people of about $9 billion.
What we're talking about here is a fair share; a fair return for the mining industry but a fair return also for the people of WA, small businesses and people who want better super and better infrastructure. And I said the other day in Canberra that it would be inevitable that were would be people out there that would be threatening to suspend projects, close projects. I would think that this is going to go on for a little while to come yet because we're in the midst of a long negotiation with the mining industry about the implementation details of the super profits tax.
But I would have thought about a project like that, that the right thing to do would be to go to the Government and say here are our details, let's work through that and we're doing that already with many companies around the country.
JOURNALIST: Has it occurred to you to reconfigure the structure of it if you're not going to reconsider it altogether reconsider the structure, the Premier is saying [inaudible] per cent is too high and the super profit is too low.
PM: Well can say that the Premier of WA, I gather, is already putting up taxes on the miners himself. So it's a bit rich to start talking about those sorts of questions with me as I arrive in WA. As I said, the Premier of WA can't have it both ways. You can't say that on the one hand, you want a whole lot of more money to fund this state's infrastructure needs and the infrastructure needs are huge, and on the other hand say that we shouldn't raise a tax from the Super Profits of miners to support those infrastructure needs. We're being fair dinkum about this, infrastructure needs exist, we need some way to fund them, we're doing it through a Super Profits Tax. I think Colin's trying to walk both sides of the street here, and we're just being straight up and down about what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] billion in industry stocks and mining stocks today. Does the Government take some responsibility for that in these announcements?
PM: Well when it comes to any adjustment to taxes in the future, of course it'll take a while to filter through the system. Can I say in relation to various of those stocks that you're talking about, they've gone through a very wide trading range of the last 12 months, lower and higher than where they are at the moment, and these things will sort through over a period of time.
My basic concern as the Prime Minister of Australia is how we deliver a better balance, a fairer share, for the Super Profits being earned by our mining companies, a large slice of which goes overseas, and the needs of the people of Western Australia: what they need for their infrastructure, their roads, what they need for their basic infrastructure facilities. Small businesses, the support that they need to meet their bottom line. As well as working families who deserve a decent, and dignified retirement through better super.
We intend to get the balance right.
One thing I'd say about the mining industry on the question you raise is, we the Australian Government through the Treasury have done independent modelling about the impact of what we're proposing. If the super profits tax on the most profitable miners, to get a fair share for working families, but at the same time is a better set of tax arrangements for those small to medium companies who in a given year may not earn any profit at all. In fact, they are net beneficiaries from the proposal that we've put forward.
And the last thing is this: we've also proposed a billion dollars worth of tax concessions for the exploration industry, to make it easier for them who are currently penalised under the existing tax scheme.
What does the independent modelling of the Australian Treasury demonstrate? That in fact you'll see an increase in mining activity of about 5.5 per cent. So you're going to have a lot of threats, a lot of warnings about dire consequences. That's all part and parcel of an inevitable industry reaction and can I say this: I'm standing for a fair share for working families and for small business and for the infrastructure needs of the people of West Australia and the people right across the country when you see super profits like the ones we've seen over the last decade, mostly disappear out the back door and overseas.
JOURNALIST: You're here to talk to miners about their concerns to curb what the Premier has to say about it. Is there any room to give on this tax?
PM: Well what we've said already is that we believe we've got the overall design of the super profits tax right, but we're here of course to discuss with the mining industry implementation details. And we are, as we said in our statement from Sunday in Canberra, open to those discussions. And we are already doing that with many miners from WA; my own home state of Queensland is a huge mining state, and with miners there and right across the country.
And of course there's a difficult transition and there's a legitimate public debate about it, but I go back to the basic point: What the Australian people want is a fair share from the super profits of our biggest mining companies, a large slice of which is currently heading overseas without a fair return for people in this country.
JOURNALIST: Is the 40 per cent on the table at all or is it non-negotiable?
PM: Geoff we think we've got that about right, what we're talking about-
JOURNALIST: -so is it non-negotiable?
PM: -we thing we've got that about right-
JOURNALIST: -That would make it absolutely non-negotiable-
PM: - I think we've got it about right -
JOURNALIST: -so that's right?
PM: -and I think we've got that about right as well.-
JOURNALIST: - I'm right or you've got it right?
PM: I think we've got that about right. What we're talking to them about is the implementation details, and there's a lot of implementation details to be worked through. I'll draw your attention to the document that was released in Canberra on Sunday, which outlines the process of consultation we're going to have with the industry right across the country, here in the West, in Queensland, elsewhere, other big mining companies, to make sure that we deal with the circumstances of individual miners. And many of those miners are saying well here are our circumstances, how do we work in with this new proposed system, which after all does not come in for some years.
JOURNALIST: Haven't you given up all real chances of picking up any other seats in WA? There appears to be quite a significant backlash.
PM: Well can I say I've just been to the local shopping centre, and I had a lot of local people come up to me and say it's about time we got a fair share from the super profits from the mining companies. Can I say to folk in Queensland I was talking to the other day, big mining state, and here today, there's a whole lot of people in this great state of Western Australia who do not get direct access to the super profits of the mining companies. There's a whole lot of people who don't get a fair share. What we're talking about is those 700,000 workers who frankly should be having better superannuation for the future. 230,000 small businesses. Let me say I think these are very important members of the WA community, and we're sticking up for them.
One other thing I'd say is this. The State Premiers, privately, have said to me in the past, that it's often very difficult for them to negotiate individually with the biggest mining companies in the world. The advantage of this arrangement that we're putting forward, for a super profits tax, means that our mining companies, the biggest ones, will be dealing with the Australian Government. And in fact many of the State Governments have suggested in the past this isn't a bad way to go.
Can I say what I'm concerned about is making sure we are in a position to serve and support the infrastructure needs of this great state of Western Australia in the future. Money doesn't grow on trees, what you've got to do is make sure you've got a revenue source in order to fund the infrastructure needs of WA. Colin Barnett says to me all the time I need more money to build this that and the other. Well Colin, this is the answer, this is the way through. As I've said before, I don't think it's quite fair dinkum to walk both sides of the street on this. One the one hand, you're either saying, legitimately, that you need more funding for infrastructure in WA, but on the other hand saying that there shouldn't be more taxes on the mining industry to do that, when after all the WA Premier is doing precisely that himself.
JOURNALIST: Would you say there's a chance then of getting you to reconsider scaling back tax on the mining-
PM: We're always up for negotiation with the industry and I've spoken at length by the way about this proposal one the super profits tax with Colin before we announced it, just so you're aware of that, and our officials were over here in West Australia for most of the week in fact prior to its announcement working through the details with WA officials and with the WA Premier. But with the mining industry itself, we are open to a discussion about the details of the regime, its implementation arrangements because we want to make it as right as possible for each individual miner.
The mining industry is a fantastic industry. I'm from Queensland, it's a mining state, and I have a long, long history of dealing with our own miners. Queenslanders like Western Australians, want a fair share themselves from the resources which ultimately are owned by the people of WA, the people of Queensland, the people of Australia. And that's what we're on about here. A fair share for super, a fair share for small business and a fair share for future infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: Is your Government responsible, or your Governments proposal responsible, for Cape Lambert pulling out of planned exploration or do you believe that it's just an excuse for something that they were always going to do?
PM: Well that's why I've said before we've got many, many companies that we're dealing with at the moment, and there are thousands of mining companies across Australia, each with different circumstances. And there are hundreds, if not more here in the West, with different circumstances.
Well the important thing that we're doing with each of those is working through the details of each of their projects with them, seeing what we can do to assist with the implementation arrangements. I would have thought it would have been useful for any company, making those sorts of announcements, to check with the Australian Government first, work through the detail of how our proposal works through with the circumstances for their particular venture.
And if you're talking about an exploration company can I say this. For the first time, there is a billion dollar set of new tax incentives to help exploration. My discussions with the WA Premier in times past, you know the big missing link here is in the West and my own state of Queensland, not enough tax incentives for exploration companies. Because these folk are often suffering so many losses up front they don't actually make profits until much later.
As a result what we've done is brought in a set of new measures to help them because the future of the mining industry, in which I passionately believe, is having a strong exploration sector, with new tax incentives, helping those small to medium companies who are not making profits up front, and that's where this system of ours benefits as well, and on top of that, yielding for the whole state and the whole nation, the benefits which come from the super profits tax, when bear in mind, $80 billion more in super profits, compared with a decade ago from the mining sector, only $9 billion in extra revenue for the Australian people to meet their needs, and so much of that $80 billion heading out of the country.
I think people would like a fairer share, a fairer share for the mining industry, but a fair share for working families and having said that folks, I've got to be somewhere else.
Thank you


HOST: It's quarter to seven. It's the Prime Minister of this great nation Mr Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister good morning to you.
PM: Good morning, good to be back in Perth and thanks for having me on your program.
HOST: Yeah it's lovely to have you back here, what are you doing tomorrow? Do you want to come and co-host, are you still in town tomorrow morning?
PM: If I'm in town tomorrow morning I'll come and co-host. I could get a few brickbats from some of your leading mining executives but I'm up for that as well.
HOST: Do you feel as though you are under the pump?
PM: Well I actually had a very good discussion last night with representatives of the mining industry here in Perth, some of the biggest mining companies, and good discussion, they were very forthright in putting their views and their concerns about the Super Profits Tax that we're proposing. I was equally forthright in explaining why we believe this is necessary for the good people of Western Australia as well, because there's a big call here for greater investment in this state's infrastructure. Huge demand for road, rail, ports, new hospitals et cetera and part of our arrangement here, is to create an infrastructure fund for Western Australia, drawing in part on the revenues derived from this Super Profits Tax on our most profitable mining companies.
HOST: Prime Minister, I asked you the question do you feel as if you're a little under the pump? When you put your head on the pillow last night, did you go, you know, phew, it's been a big day?
PM: No, I slept very well actually.
HOST: Prime Minister, Monika Kos here from Channel Seven's Today Tonight program. I'm actually co-hosting this morning.
PM: G'day, how are you?
HOST: I'm very well thank you.
PM: Part of the reason you sleep well overnight here is because your day has been lengthened by several hours when you started the morning in Sydney.
HOST: Well a few red wines help you sleep well as well. Um, the general consensus, back on the mining subject, among the mining industries, is that the 40 per cent tax is too high. How much are you prepared to negotiate on that?
PM: We believe we've got those settings right but what we've said to the mining industry is that we're more than prepared to sit down and work through the detail with them, and that's what last night's discussion was all about, but also the discussions I'll be having this morning with other representatives of the mining industry as well.
I'll just go back to basic principles here: why are we doing this? So much of the profits that we've seen from the mining companies has been pretty big over the last decade. Profits, super profits, of the mining industry up about $80 billion over the last decade, however revenue back to the people of Australia, including the people of Western Australia, only $9 billion, and there's a huge demand for three things: better superannuation for working families, better tax breaks for small business, and better investment in all the road, rail and port infrastructure that this great state needs. That's why we're doing it.
HOST: Was last night's meeting a crisis meeting?
PM: No, no, no, we have rolling discussions with the mining industry all the time.
HOST: How much consultation did you have with the mining industry before you made your announcement?
PM: We had a lot of discussion between the Treasurer and representatives of key mining industries. In fact, I had a lot of discussions also with the Premier of Western Australia as well, before we announced our tax package last Sunday. Obviously it's controversial, I don't walk away from that. Part of the reason of being in Western Australia though is just to front people directly about their concerns. That's why -
HOST: You mentioned how we can benefit from it but it is very important to Western Australians given our reliance on the industry and our relationship with Asia, and our dominance of the market. I mean critics say that this could in fact put our global position at serious risk.
PM: Well, when you announce a change to the tax on mining companies, I draw people's attention to the fact that the Premier of Western Australia has said for a long period of time that the mining companies here have been under-taxed. The bottom line is there's going to be controversy. Therefore what I'm here to do is to sort through some of those details.
Also look at the rest of the package, which for mining itself, this is a new tax regime for mining companies which means that if you've got small and medium companies in particular, which aren't profitable in their early years, they in fact benefit from this package because they get their mining royalties paid back to them. The royalties regime here in the west is imposed whether or not a company is profitable or not.
And the last thing is, we've brought in a new tax benefit for the exploration industry, worth about a billion dollars, because we want to broaden the scope of the mining industry here in the future as well.
HOST: Prime Minister, there's been much controversy and also much criticism of several issues of late, particularly your handling of the ETS which is something you expressed considerable passion for. Can you see how it could be interpreted as a backdown and a contradiction?
PM: Our commitment to reducing greenhouse gases has not changed one bit. Our commitment to an emissions trading scheme as the best and most efficient and cheapest way of bringing about those greenhouse gas emission reductions has not changed -
HOST: Why is it no longer so urgent then, such a priority?
PM: - It's not changed one bit. What has changed is our pathway to getting there and for two reasons to go specifically to your question.
One is, Mr Abbott and the Greens in Canberra voted it down. It can't be got through the Parliament, that's the bottom line.
Secondly, what we've also had is slow action around the rest of the world on greenhouse gas reduction. And what we've said therefore is that if the Government is returned, what we would do, at the end of the current Kyoto commitment period at the end of 2012, is assess where the rest of the world's action is up to, and we'll make our judgment then about the timing of an emissions trading scheme. That's the course of action which comes out of Mr Abbott, who says that climate change is quote absolute crap, voting against it, and the Greens, who would have me close down the economy by lunchtime tomorrow.
HOST: We asked some of our listeners just to call in with a couple of questions for you, so let's do those -
HOST: - and there are some doozies -
HOST: There's some doozies -
HOST: There really are -
PM: That's great.
HOST: Joel rang in and he said, can we raise, this is not a bad one, can we raise the drinking age to 21 and in doing so free up some of the pressure on our hospitals right around the Australia I suppose?
PM: I think the key thing is just to teach responsible drinking to our young people. On pressures on our hospitals, you'll understand that's why we brought in a new National Health and Hospitals Network, with the Federal Government taking on the dominant funding role for the future. But no, we have no proposal to change the drinking age, that lies as you know within State jurisdictions anyway.
HOST: And Prime Minister there's been much talk over here lately of getting a new stadium. Peter, one of our listeners, would like to know how the bid is going to get the soccer World Cup to Australia?
PM: Could you tell Peter I wish I knew. But look, we believe we're in there with a reasonable show. As you know we're bidding for either 2018 or 2022. If we can pull this off for Australia, this will be a bigger event for Australia than even the Olympics. The television viewing audience globally, would be probably three times that of the Olympics, based on the figures from the last soccer World Cup. So we're going to give it a go, and I hope that if it comes off we can see a big growth in the game here in the west as well.
HOST: And hopefully Perth will have the venue for it.
HOST: Yes that would be nice.
PM: Well, we'll work through all of that with the State Governments later on but I was talking to some mums yesterday out at a sporting club where we're actually fixing up the netball courts for -
HOST: Yes, a flash photo of you in this morning's West Prime Minister -
PM: - Is there?
HOST: - You're a dab hand with a ball -
PM: Ah yeah, fortunately they didn't ask me to put it actually through a hoop. That would have been embarrassing.
HOST: You can balance it on your fingers hey?
PM: Well I can try that, I'll work on it.
HOST: Prime Minister, just a quickie from another listener who says should we secede here in WA, given everything that's happened, and we'll just take on the whole lot?
PM: This is a wonderful part of Australia. Remember I come from Queensland, where we have a very distinct personality, in terms of our Australian identity as well -
HOST: - there you go.
PM: And can I just say Queensland, you know, Queensland is as big a resources state as is WA, in terms of the depth and breadth of the mining industry there. But you know we've got to make sure that we help WA with its future needs and one of the things I'm trying to do is respond to people like the Premier of WA who says, on the one hand I desperately need more Australian Government investment in this state's infrastructure needs, but on the other hand when I turn round and raise a tax for that purpose, he says oh no we can't do that. Well I've got to say, we've got to be fair dinkum about this. That's my policy. I think Colin's in danger of walking both sides of the street on this one.
HOST: And very quickly I'll just, I just want to bring you back on that for a moment, because we've actually seen Clive Palmer, we spoke with Mr Palmer yesterday, he's threatened to pull out of Australia's mining interests. How concerned are you of this and the reaction to from the Premier as well?
PM: Well can I just- let's just call a spade a spade here. Mr Palmer is a huge financial backer of the Liberal and National Party in Queensland, a huge financial backer. I would have thought that Mr Palmer, as far as his mining interests are concerned, the responsible course of action is to first of all engage in the detailed consultations with the Treasury in Canberra -
HOST: - and that hasn't occurred?
PM: - on the implementation detail that would affect any project which he had. I'm advised that has not occurred. That invitation is extended to him, as it is to any other person who is supporting a mining industry development here, or in Queensland, or South Australia, as you work through the details with the locals.
But my bottom line is we want better super for working Australians, here in Western Australia, 700,000 of them, tax breaks for the 230,000 small businesses through that $5,000 tax break, as well as investing in the WA infrastructure needs of the future. And to do that we need this Super Profits Tax on our most profitable miners because a lot of their profits are heading overseas.
HOST: Very quickly Prime Minister, Mr Howard used to walk around Swan River every morning when he was visiting us here in Perth, what are you up to this morning?
PM: Well you know something, maybe I'm a night owl, I walked around the Swan River last night -
HOST: -oh did you?
HOST: Because we're such a beautiful safe city we can do that.
PM: Well terrific, and the Swan is such, it's one of the stunning river scenes of any Australian capital city, looks like a lake as I looked out over it this morning. You have one of the most beautiful cities in the world here in Perth and it's always a pleasure to be back here.
HOST: Prime Minister, enjoy your stay and we'll see you for the brekkie show tomorrow morning.
PM: I'll see what I can do with the schedule guys.
HOST: Thank-you.


HOST: That was Elvis Presley, this is Kevin Rudd, the Prime Minister of Australia. Mr Rudd, good morning to you.
PM: G'day, I'm glad Elvis is alive and well on Perth radio.
HOST: Yes indeed, and in the building, and one day we'll get you in the building.
PM: I look forward to it, I've been in your building many times.
HOST: Prime Minister, I'd like to just play you one of our callers this morning, a fellow name John, just have a listen.
JOHN: Ah, I've come from a rusted-on Labor family, three generations, my family, we've lost $25,000 this week from our self funded super fund, and we will never be voting Labor ever, ever again because Rudd is naive and they haven't thought this through, and they've done damage which I think is irreparable.
HOST: Prime Minister what do you say to those people, we've had others too, who've said you've been reaching into their bank accounts this week and you've taken a lot of their retirement money out.
PM: There are two things I'd say in response to your caller. The first is, that when it comes to the Super Profits Tax, what we're asking for is a fair share for all Australians, all West Australians, from the super profits being earned by our most profitable mining companies. So that there is money to do three things: boost the superannuation earnings of working Australians by increasing the superannuation guarantee from nine to 12 per cent, secondly give a tax break to the 230,000 small businesses in Western Australia, up to $5,000 tax break, and thirdly, also, providing infrastructure investment for the infrastructure needs, road, rail and ports for this State.
On the specific changes in the share market, whenever policy or tax changes occur, it follows inevitably that there will be some reaction in the share market.
HOST: Do you think this is dramatic?
PM: Well can I go to the question of for example let's go to the two mining majors that we're talking about. BHP, I'm advised, their share price yesterday was something, as of the share price as of a day or so ago, was within the range within which the share had traded over the last 12 months. Similarly with Rio shares, basically there are ups and there are downs within the share market, particularly the resources sector, over time it's a volatile sector -
HOST: Okay, so you're suggesting that these ups and downs, and they are all downs at the moment, being experienced in the commodity markets are just part of the vagaries of the market and that they don't relate to your announcement of a Super profit Tax?
PM: Of course there is a reaction in the share market in terms of a proposed change to the taxation regime on our most profitable mining companies. I don't deny that connection one bit.
What I am saying, however, is that the share prices of mining companies change significantly over time, because of a whole range of factors, up, down, and that's been the case for the last 12 months as well. The range that we have seen over a long period of time, frankly, demonstrates some of the volatility in that market.
Overall, the Government's advice from the Treasury is that, given the changes that are proposed through the Super Profits Tax, the different treatment of less profitable mining companies, those starting up in the business, and exploration companies who for the first time get a new billion dollar plus tax benefit from the Australian Government, is that the mining sector itself will grow in fact by a further 6.6 per cent over the next five to ten years through the combination of these measures -
HOST: -Prime Minister can I -
PM: -[inaudible] long-term support for the industry.
HOST: Excuse me for interrupting because there was one point that we needed to have clarified and I think people understand notions of BHP and Fortescue and Rio and the big miners, but if we're looking at a Super Profit Tax that cuts in at about six per cent, is that what we're looking at?
PM: Well let me define the terms within this debate, and there's been some discussion of this this morning -
HOST: - Okay, is six per cent there or thereabouts?
PM: Remember also, I understand the WA Premier has been on your programme this morning, he's been calling for greater taxes on the mining industry for a long time. What we're doing is basically applying the same sort of principles which you've seen with the petroleum resource rent tax, offshore developments on the Northwest Shelf for the last 20 years, and within that tax regime you've seen huge projects like the Gorgon project, $40 billion plus, go forward -
HOST: Yeah but my question Prime Minister is, and this is what people need to know, if I'm a mining company that is now enjoying some success, and that I announce a $10 million profit, which is, you know, represents six per cent or better or what, will you be seeking to tax or to take $4 million of that?
PM: Can I say, will we look through the detail of each individual company's circumstances as they are presented. Let me go to the terms which apply to the definition of a Super Profits Tax. Normal profits basically equal the revenue of the mining venture, minus their expenses. Super Profits are revenues, minus expenses, minus what we would describe as an ordinary rate of return on investment. How do we define that, an ordinary rate of return on investment? That means what you would get if you were to invest it at broadly the long term Government bond rate of about six per cent.
HOST: OK -
PM: Profits on top of that, I'll just finish the definition here, profits on top of that - Super Profits, that is - mining companies get to retain 60 per cent of those super profits. What we're talking about is that 40 per cent now going to the Australia people, the people of Western Australia, to build roads, rail, ports, and to provide tax breaks for all companies by bring down the company tax rate.
HOST: Okay, so if the criteria is right there and my mining company makes $10 million, yes indeed you will take $4 million of that to spend in a manner that you just explained.
PM: Well I won't respond in terms of the individual circumstances of individual companies, but I've given you the broad definition of the -
HOST: - yes I know but do you understand the very broad concern in Western Australia, where there are hundreds of mining companies, there was an acknowledgement that yes if you are a BHP and Rio, you have been the beneficiary of enormous profits and as you say in a move that will play out very well electorally in some quarters, that is an Australian resource that they are capitalising on.
But of those other companies, which are much, much smaller, the impression is that they will be punished too, and this morning we heard from David Flanagan, who's the managing director of Atlas Mine, a much smaller iron ore company but an iron ore company that has made real progress I think, in just four years or so. Here's what he had to say.
FLANAGAN: Almost makes it impossible for us to grow into a big company, it makes us less competitive with raising money, it makes us harder for us to recruit people. How is he going to restore consumer confidence, employee confidence, service industry confidence, and people who have got a superannuation fund, how do they know that there's going to be anything left in it when they retire?
HOST: Mr Rudd, your response?
PM: Well my response to that and your earlier question will be along these lines. There are about 700,000 workers in Western Australia right now who stand to benefit from increasing the superannuation guarantee from nine per cent to 12 per cent. You've got 230,000 small businesses in Western Australia who will benefit from the overall reduction in the company tax rate down from 30 to 28 cents and a further tax benefit of up to $5,000 in terms of their offsets. These are the things we're doing for the general economy.
Specifically for smaller mining companies though, can I just go to one point? The existing state based royalties regime is based on effectively volume; that is, it is not based on profit.
Where our system actually helps smaller to medium sized companies is this: if they are not being profitable in their early years, in fact they are net beneficiaries from this scheme that we bring in. Royalties are a very blunt instrument indeed.
And I go back to the point about exploration. We haven't had enough exploration activity in the economy - sorry, in the mining sector more generally across the country - WA, Queensland where I come from, a very proud mining state like WA. That's why we're bringing in a new package of a billion dollars plus, to underpin the overall activities of the exploration sector where, frankly, generating profits early on is very hard as well. That's why the analysis done for the Treasury by Econtech, their modelling, projects a 6.5 per cent increase in the overall activity in the mining sector. Obviously there are going to be complaints now, and I've heard some of those since I've been in Perth in the last day or so.
HOST: I am curious to know - were you able to convince the bosses of Australia's biggest mining companies last night, Don Voelte, Andrew Forrest, Sam Walsh, that you are not sabotaging their businesses?
PM: Can I say that when you are dealing with very large companies like that and others, and if you the Australian Government say that we actually believe that the entire Australian community, the Western Australian community, needs a fairer share of those profits so it goes into their super, goes into tax cuts for small business, goes into building road, rail and port in the future, they're not going to put up their hands to pay more tax. I understand that, they'll argue their case very strongly.
But our job in the national interest is to make sure there's a fair share. You know a decade ago, we were getting for every $3 in profit going to the miners, about $1 was coming to the community through tax. Now it's something like every $7, the ratio has changed in fact to one is to seven. That's a big change, all we are asking for is a fair share for the miners, but a fair share for working families right across Australia as well.
HOST: Prime Minister, it does appear in an election year that you've decided to make this some kind of us-and-them thing. Why are you so convinced that the electorate will buy the idea that those working Australians that you are again speaking of are getting ripped off by what were formerly big Australians but now you seem to refer increasingly as foreign owned multinational mining giants?
PM: I'm simply referring to the fact that I think all Australians, all West Australians, actually own these resources and we're talking about a fairer share for them, when the profits are actually going higher and higher, and a lot of those profits, and these are just a product of the numbers, are going offshore.
It costs a lot of money to build roads, rail and port. It costs a lot of money to build hospitals and schools.
And therefore what we need to do is to make sure that can be done. Mr Barnett, the WA Premier, constantly says to me "we need more funding to build infrastructure in WA". Well my response to Premier Barnett is to say "look, we the Australian Government, are prepared to build a WA infrastructure fund for the future, we're prepared to dedicate probably the lion's share of that money into WA's needs because it's such an important resource state, like Queensland". Yet at the same time the WA Premier says, "oh, look, we can't possibly have tax raised from that source, just give us the money anyway". Frankly that's walking both sides of the street. I'm being upfront about how you would fund it, because WA has got big infrastructure needs.
HOST: The reality of your conversation last night, I mean that is between you and those gentlemen, but there is some speculation, and I'd like you to confirm it or otherwise, that there is room to move on that 40 per cent figure.
PM: Well we think we've got that right actually. Last night we were talking about the details of the proposed new super tax and its implementation and the transition arrangements. And that's where we want to enter into detailed discussions with individual mining companies large and small. That's why we've outlined a large amount of time for consultation to occur between the Treasury and each mining company on their circumstances.
There was a strong and robust exchange last night, I've just come from about another hour and a half this morning with another group of miners, mainly smaller miners, talking about their concerns. I'm not trying to gild the lily here, there's a lot of concern about the impact of the tax on individual companies, they put that to myself and to Martin Ferguson direct. We'll work through those to the greatest extent we can, and it's been good to have that upfront personal exchange with these miners today in Perth.
HOST: Prime Minister, I know you've only got a moment or two left. The headline story, and I know you don't talk about polls either, but the Opposition has taken the lead in the polls for the first time in three or four years and your personal approval rating is dropping much the same way those mining shares are. Are you beginning to flail?
PM: Sorry, I couldn't quite hear that. The last bit was? I went into a dead zone.
HOST: The Opposition has taken the lead in the polls, your personal approval is dropping similarly to the way those big mining shares are. My question was are you flailing?
PM: Can I say that my job as Prime Minister is to act in the national interest. That means taking decisions sometimes which are popular and sometimes decisions which are unpopular. But the important thing is to do the job which we were elected to do, and that means delivering better hospitals for the people of Western Australia, it means delivering better super for working people here in Western Australia, it means also keeping our Government finances strong and building a long term strong economy. On the way through -
HOST: - But how do you respond Prime Minister -
PM: - On the way through -
HOST: - to growing frustration -
PM: - on the way through you're going to have times when people react negatively to some decisions that are taken, I understand that -
HOST: OK, but how do you respond to what is growing frustration among many people and many of our listeners that your Government is very skilled at producing words, millions of them that are arranged into neat phrases, about commitments you make no apology for, and will not walk away from, only to walk away from them, be it an ETS scheme that's delayed, the great moral issue of our time that's delayed, the root and branch tax reform that's ignored, and instead you just pick off a few digestible leaves and the question -
PM: - Well let me just take the things that you've raised because you've raised the emissions trading scheme and tax reform and let me answer your question directly.
Firstly on the emissions trading scheme, as you know the Australian Government sought to pass that through the Australian Parliament at the end of last year. What changed? The Liberal party changed their leadership, Mr Abbott voted against it, therefore it was voted down in the Senate. And secondly, the Greens also voted against it. Therefore it was turned down from both the right and from the left. And Mr Abbott says that climate change is absolute crap. Therefore our commitment to bringing down greenhouse gas emissions hasn't changed one bit, our commitment to our targets remains the same, our commitment to an ETS, as the best of cheapest way of doing it, hasn't changed one bit-
HOST: - you walked away from the fight Prime Minister.
PM: - our pathway to get there has changed, because the Parliament has not allowed this bill to be passed because Mr Abbott has decided to block virtually everything we've put to him. That is what's changed there.
Now the second point you raised is about tax reform. On tax reform what we said when we launched the Henry Review some years ago was that it was designed to undertake a root and branch analysis of every element of the tax system. What we then said was that it would provide a blueprint for a basis for a discussion and a debate about long term tax reform in Australia.
What the Treasurer did on Sunday was say, here is a list of things that we are going to do now, and I've run through some of them this morning; secondly, here is a group of recommendations that we will work on over time, but not during the course of the next term if the Government's re-elected; and thirdly, here's a group of recommendations we will not implement at any stage.
That's the proper rational way to go about tax reform and the measures that we've gone through today in our discussion earlier today: a Super Profits Tax; funding tax cuts for business and small business; boosting working people's super so that they've got dignity in their retirement; and also investing in this State's future infrastructure needs. These are big changes, and we believe they are right for this state's future interests.
HOST: Finally, Prime Minister, a lot of people are asking what exactly it is you believe in beyond political pragmatism?
PM: The key question that I'm elected to do is to make sure that we have an economy for Australia which is strong and robust for the future. What we did in the last 12 months, or 18 months, through decisive action was protect this Australian economy from the worst global recession that we've seen since the depression of the 30s. Had we the same unemployment rate in Europe or in America today, we'd have a half a million more Australians left out of work and we'd be having a radically different conversation this morning.
What I believe in, therefore, is making sure that Australians have their jobs now and into the future; secondly, that we've got the best education possible for the future, that's why we're building the education revolution. Large investments in schools, making sure that we've got the right investments to make sure that kids have libraries in their schools, the best learning resources, and there's proper transparency and reporting of our schools performance.
You ask what else I believe in. Making that the people listening to your program have better health and better hospitals. That's why we've spent, frankly, two years working on a blueprint for national health and hospitals reform, which in WA would see a further investment of some $1.7 billion in your health and hospitals system.
These are pretty basic things for your listeners, that's what we've been working on, as well as a renewable energy future for Australia.
HOST: Well one of our listeners is saying, and several others are sending via SMS, this rhetoric is clap trap populist policy on the run. So I guess there's a little bit of a disconnect still. Thank you for talking to us this morning.
PM: Well I just want to answer one point you raised there about health and hospitals. If you describe that as rhetoric, we've had two years of debate, we've had an agreement involving every Government in the country except WA's, on the biggest reform to the health and hospitals system since Medicare. This is pretty basic for things like accident and emergency and available hospital beds. I regard that as bread and butter, not something which you would describe in other terms.
HOST: Thank you for talking to me this morning.
PM: Thanks for having me on your program.


HOST: The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins us now on 891 mornings. Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning. Sorry for not making your program yesterday morning, guys. I was delayed with various things in Sydney.
HOST: Please don't apologise, there's a lot on your plate, you're running a country. Now, a lot of people this morning -
PM: I'm in Perth at the moment so it's bright and early.
HOST: It certainly is. Now, a lot of people this morning would be thinking, how am I going to pay the bills? Interest rates have gone up yet again. Prime Minister, do you accept any responsibility for this interest rate stress?
PM: These are decisions taken independently by the Reserve Bank.
Secondly, if you look at the Reserve Bank's recent statements about, let's call it the fiscal policy settings of the Government, they have indicated that they believe that fiscal policy settings, that's what we do though Budget policy, is about right.
What the Reserve Bank is doing is making its own decisions about the overall challenge of dealing with long term inflation in the economy.
But having said that, I understand full well why the RBA's decision to raise interest rates but that's very tough on working families paying off a mortgage and this one will result in probably an additional $50 to monthly mortgage repayments.
HOST: Prime Minister, can you explain, to the working families that you talk about a fair bit, why you're continuing to stimulate the economy while the Reserve Bank's trying to slow the economy, and they're caught in the middle, they're paying the piper.
PM: On the question of stimulus, can I just draw your attention to the fact that stimulus began to be reduced in Australia in the third quarter last year. That's how we designed it. That is, that it was peaking in the second quarter last year when the Australian economy was under great stress from the global economic recession.
Remember, this time last year, we were dealing with huge struggles to just keep the economy afloat and that's why the Government stepped up to the plate and developed a national economic stimulus strategy. And as a result, what we succeeded in doing was, among the major advanced economies , keeping the Australian economy out of recession. The only one to do so. With the second lowest unemployment, protecting hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. As I said, that stimulus peaked in the second quarter of last year.
HOST: But, isn't it also the case that you were encouraging new home owners, in the housing market, during the global financial crisis [LINE DROPS OUT] - I think we've lost the line to the Prime Minister. Please stay with us, we're going to try and reconnect with Kevin Rudd. He's talking to us this morning from Perth where he has gone, to the West, as part of the Government's sell of its adoption of part of the Henry tax review and of course the big thing that we heard on the weekend was that it's decided to hit the big mining companies who are bringing in super profits. We'll continue that discussion with him in just a moment.
HOST: Let's go back to Perth. Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. We've established the line. Prime Minister, wasn't it the case though that during the global financial crisis you were effectively encouraging new home owners into the housing markets with the first home owners scheme when interest rates were at their record lows. Now, there is some stimulus coming from Government. It remains in the economy and that's causing those people stress. So, do you accept any responsibility for the cocktail that they're having to sip?
PM: I think the key challenge for us was to ensure that we didn't have hundreds of thousands of Australians thrown onto the unemployment queues last year. If we were in Australia running the same unemployment rates as we see in America or in Europe - and in previous recessions, that's been the case, in fact our performance has usually been worse - if we were doing that, we'd have half a million more Australians out of work.
That's why we did the national economic stimulus strategy and that's why it was supported by every peak industry body in the country because it kept the economy going.
Secondly, you mentioned first home buyers. What we did then of course was to significantly increase the First Home Owners Boost but we then cut that back during the course of last year as this signs of recovery came in. You -
[LINE DROPS OUT]
HOST: Ain't going to happen is it?
HOST: Not going to happen. It's just not going to happen there. Oh, well we are attempting to talk to the Prime Minister of the country. I assume on a mobile phone line is it? Is that a mobile phone?
HOST: Yes it is. So, ah, that's the Prime Minister's mobile. It's not happening, we do apologise for that. That is frustrating for you, I know, as a listener. For us, as broadcasters, and more importantly for the Prime Minister.
HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, I think we need some telecommunications infrastructure to the West.
PM: I think we may need something. But third time lucky, let's see how we go.
HOST: I think we're moving on to jam tins on string now.
PM: [laughs] Different phones but stronger signal I think.
HOST: Thank you
PM: Sorry about that and sorry to your listeners.
HOST: Prime Minister, you met with some of the heavyweights in the mining industry in more ways than one. How did that go last night? Have you had to give any ground?
PM: I think you could describe the meeting as robust. We had a strong meeting with representatives of the mining industry. They, of course, expressed their concerns about this Super Profits Tax that we're proposing. We've said we'll work with the mining industry in Queensland and WA and South Australia also and elsewhere in the country on the details and on the implementation.
But the reason for doing this Super Profits Tax is pretty basic. Over the last decade, we've had an increase in super profits to the mining industries by about $80 billion. But when you look at the return to the Australian people, it's only been about a $9 billion increase through the existing royalties structure run by the State Governments. And a lot of those super profits are heading out of the country.
So what we are doing is three things. Using that Super Profit Tax to, one, make sure we've got better superannuation retirement for all working Australians, and that's increasing it from nine per cent to 12 per cent. Two, a cut in the company tax rate including a $5,000 tax break for all small businesses; and three, using those funds as a future source of infrastructure investment for the resource States and other parts of Australia as well, to build road, rail and ports for the future.
HOST: Did you remain locked in on your 40 per cent? Have you walked out of the meeting still committed to 40 per cent?
PM: We think we've got that right. But we are prepared to talk to the industry, as I said, about details and about implementation.
HOST: So you won't move on the 40 per cent? Or it might be 35?
PM: No, we think we've got that about right.
HOST: You think you've got it about right?
PM: Yeah, well, I think we have. We spent a lot of time on this, as well as - I notice comments that have been made by various mining industry council representatives - we've also been very mindful of where this rate stacks up with comparable rates around the world.
I think that it's very important that the Australian people begin to get a fairer share from these natural resources of Australia. Remember, the people own these resources, the companies lease them. I'm all for a fair return to the mining industry but I also want to see a fairer return for working families.
HOST: Can you clearly define a super profit?
PM: Well, a super profit is calculated in this way. If you have for example, in a mining company, a normal profit is made up of revenues minus expenses. What's a super profit? Revenues minus expenses minus what we call an ordinary return on investment. How do we define an ordinary return on investment? If you took your investment capital and, for example, invested it at the long term government bond rate, that runs at about six per cent.
So profits in excess of that are defined as super profit. Then, what we do is say that those companies running those super profits can keep 60 per cent of that but 40 per cent of it, we believe, should come back to the Australian people in investment in better super for working families. Also for the -
HOST: Yeah.
PM: - two million plus small business, tax breaks, but also investing in infrastructure which is expensive.
HOST: Alright, Westpac have just announced a record 32 per cent profit - $2.8 billion on the back of working families, who are paying interest rates, higher interest rates. Why not consider a super tax on banks? Why pick on the resources sector?
PM: Well, the resources sector are sitting on a resource which is owned by the Australian people. Let's be very clear about that. What happens with our mining -
HOST: But the banks are sitting on huge piles of cash, that are owed them, that are owned by the Australian people. 32 per cent profit, Prime Minister.
PM: I go back to my point about what the actual nature of resources is. They are owned by the Australian people, and companies actually lease them. Therefore what we are doing is making sure there is a better return for all Australians.
If you go to financial companies of the type that you've described, remember, any taxes imposed there will then flow through to the concerns about mortgages that you've just raised before. Therefore an interest rate -
HOST: What, you're saying there'll be no impact for little people from taxing big mining companies?
PM: Well, I simply draw your attention to the fact that most of their product is sold overseas, that's the first thing.
Secondly, these are Australian resources and if you've got an $80 billion increase in the super profits of our mining industry and only $9 billion increase in the return to Government around the country to spend on road, rail, ports, hospitals and schools, all I'm saying is there should be a fairer share coming back to the country. I think that's a reasonable point of view.
And I notice even some of the Premiers, including the Premier of WA, Mike Rann, who said he's opposed to a super profits tax, has said for many, many years now that the mining industry is under-taxed. All that I'm trying to do is make sure we get some resolution on this and that working families, small business and the rest of the economy through better investment in infrastructure, gets a fair share.
HOST: Will mining companies be refunded this, the State royalties they've had to pay?
PM: Under the royalties regime, of course we have an agreement whereby that is dealt within this regime. And that means that if State Governments maintain their royalties regime, which I assume that they would, then of course we're not going to double tax people. The individual companies concerned have that dealt with in the regime.
HOST: Well Kevin Foley here in South Australia has been talking about doubling royalties that this State Government has been charging people like BHP Billiton for the Olympic Dam project. So, would Kevin Foley be able to up the royalty to 7 per cent and you would impose a 40 per cent super profit tax and what would happen to that 7 per cent royalty that Kevin Foley's collecting?
PM: What we've said in terms of royalties is that we would of course use the super profits tax to deal with royalties which arise from existing contracts and those which are currently scheduled.
As for future contracts, and maybe they are the ones that you're referring to with Treasurer Foley, we intend to sit down with the State Governments and work out an arrangement for the future. But we're not in the business of being blind to the impact of State royalties regimes.
Can I just add two further points about it though. Royalties regimes are a very blunt instrument on the industry. They are imposed on volumes rather than profit. So, it doesn't matter if a mining company is profitable or not, a royalties regime gets whacked on them just by the quantity which is dug up out of the ground.
A profits tax of the type we're suggesting, of the type we've had for the North-West Shelf for the last 20 years which has supported major developments there, is based on whether a company is profitable. If they're not profitable in their early years, frankly it's to their tax advantage under new scheme and that's why we want to expand the breadth of the mining industry and our modelling says that's the effective way -
HOST: So, should Kevin Foley be banking on being able to double his royalties?
PM: As I said, it depends, and I'm unaware of the detail of what Treasurer Foley has recommended and I'd rather the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, deal with him on that. But if he's talking about a future regime, that is as opposed to current royalties imposed on existing projects or scheduled royalties regimes, then that is the area where we wish to sit down with State Governments, including that in South Australia, and I'm sure that those two Treasurers will do so.
HOST: Are you concerned about mining companies, not just selling their product overseas but taking the operations overseas? Some of them have threatened this.
PM: Whenever you propose an increase on a tax to this sector, there is often a standard response which is to say that projects will close or they'll be shifted offshore.
Part of that's a negotiating process. Part of it is because mining companies may have decided that individual projects don't stack up anyway and they may have been wanting to cancel them or postpone them for other reasons.
But on those miners with legitimate concerns about the impact of what we are saying on their particular projects, we'll be sitting down with them as we are already with, literally, dozens of mining companies around the country working out the detail of this new super profits tax and its impact on them.
As I said, if companies aren't earning super profits, they don't get taxed. This is the big change between this system and the previous system.
And if you want to build big new companies like BHP and Rio from the ground up, you've got to provide them with incentives to get past first base. Which means, when they're not earning a profit, to make sure it's advantageous for them to stay in the industry.
HOST: Carol from Ironbank has called us, we're talking to Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister, on the phone from Perth this morning, here on 891 Mornings at ten to nine. Carol, good morning.
CALLER: Good morning. Yes, I'm just wanting to know, like, I am one of the little people and in the last few days we've lost about $14,000 in our superannuation, self-funded investments from the mining stocks going down. And I just whether he's given any thought to what's to happen to those people?
HOST: Kevin Rudd, Prime Minster.
PM: Carol, thank you very much for your call. If I look, for example, to the fluctuations in the share prices for the big mining companies, my understanding is that yesterday's close, for example, for BHP was something in the vicinity of about $39. Over the last year it's fluctuated between $31 and $44. Rio, for example, closed yesterday at around $67. Over the last 12 months it's fluctuated between $46 and $81. As you know, share prices change the whole time.
What we're on about is a bigger mining industry for the future. That means broadening the base so that all Australians benefit from it, but also, working families, benefit with their superannuation as well.
So many workers listening to this programme this morning do not have enough to retire on and that's why we want to increase the superannuation guarantee level from nine to 12 and that has to be offset with some of the tax cuts we're giving to business and that has to be offset by this new super profits tax that we're imposing on the most profitable miners in the country.
HOST: And would you expect, getting on to the personal superannuation increases, that there needs to be a wage offset there as there was initially when the scheme was set up under the Accord, under the Hawke/Keating Government?
PM: What I know about our industrial relations system is that there will inevitably be argy-bargy with every enterprise bargain that goes on around the country and I'm sure this will figure in it somewhere. What we've tried to do -
HOST: But you're not going to make it a pre-condition as it was in the outset of the scheme?
PM: It will inevitably - given the way in which in which the industrial relations system works now, and it is different from the system we had in the 90s, enterprise bargaining will of course be the framework within which these discussions occur on wages. And of course, I'm sure super will feature in a number of those negotiations as well.
The key thing though is this. Right now, so many of your listeners retiring will not have enough super. We brought in this scheme, remember, effectively from 1993. Under the changes we have proposed, what will happen, if you're a 30 year old entering the workforce now, your super in current dollar terms will be something like $108,000 more because of the changes that we're bringing in. For people over 50 listening to your program this morning, also, tax changes we're bringing in to make it much easier and more tax advantageous for them to top up their super as they get close to retirement, people over the age of 50.
HOST: Prime Minister, is it possible that your efforts to clear the decks before the next election have backfired, and people no longer see you as a principled politician?
PM: Well there's been a lot of criticism, for example, on the question of emissions trading. Let me just take that one head on. I can't change the fact that Mr Abbott, at the end of last year, backflipped entirely on the question on the Liberal Party's historical support for an emissions trading scheme. They voted it down in the parliament.
The Greens, on the other end of the political spectrum, also voted it down in the Parliament.
Simply calling a spade a spade, which is to say that we can't get this emissions trading scheme through the Parliament is a difficult message to explain to the Australian people. I understand that. But I think it's far better to be upfront about it.
On the key questions underpinning it though, namely action on climate change - first and foremost, this Government's commitment to bringing down greenhouse gas emissions has not changed one bit. Our targets remain the same.
HOST: Except they've been put off until 2013?
PM: Well, just to recognising the reality that the legislation that we spent two years developing up until the end of last year and got the Liberal Party to agree to under Mr Turnbull's leadership, resulted in a leadership coup against Mr Turnbull, by Mr Abbott and Mr Abbott describes climate change as quote "absolute crap".
If you can't get it though the Parliament, it's very important simply to be frank about that fact and outline your changed timeline for getting there. Our commitment to green house gas reduction hasn't changed one bit, nor has our commitment to an emissions trading scheme as the cheapest way to get there. What it has changed is our pathway to get there. I'm just being upfront about that.
HOST: And Mr Abbott is also predicting that even if you win the next election you'll be dumped as leader within six months.
PM: Well can I say, on the question of Mr Abbott, I would strongly suggest that he begin focusing on positive policy and positive alternatives for the future. It's very easy to be negative all the time, to criticise everything and propose nothing.
What we have done, in the last several months, is put forward the biggest reform to the health and hospital system our nation has seen, signed on to by all State Governments with the exception of WA.
What we've also put forward is a very big change to the taxation system that helps working families with retirement income. These are the things we stand for. They're positive policies. The introduction of the first paid parental leave scheme in the country on 1 January next year.
Mr Abbott's habit is simply to criticise, to criticise and to criticise.
HOST: Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister, thank you for giving us your time this morning. You've been very generous.
PM: Thanks for having us on the programme.


The Rudd Government is pleased to announce that the money raised by the Australian Abruzzo Earthquake Appeal Fund will be used to fund an earthquake-proof, multi-purpose theatre in the heart of L'Aquila - Il Nuovo Teatro Stabile d'Abruzzo.
The historic town of L'Aquila was devastated by an earthquake that struck the region of Abruzzo in April 2009, prompting the Italian-Australian community to establish the Fund to raise money to assist with its reconstruction.
The Government agreed to match the community contributions to the Fund up to a level of $1.5 million. Taken together, the community's fundraising efforts and the Government's contribution have raised more than $3.7 million for L'Aquila.
The decision to fund Il Nuovo Teatro Stabile d'Abruzzo follows a recommendation by the Fund's National Committee, which consulted closely with the Italian-Australian community and the township of L'Aquila.
The theatre will play an important role in helping to restore the cultural life of L'Aquila and will stand as a lasting symbol of the Australian community's support for the people of L'Aquila.
The Prime Minister announced the theatre project as he joined with the Italian-Australian community in Melbourne for the official 50th anniversary celebrations of the Italian-language newspaper Il Globo.
Since 1959 Il Globo has informed the Italian community in Australia of significant national and global events. It has played an important community role, supporting fundraising initiatives to help recovery efforts in the wake of disasters like the Victorian bushfires and the earthquake in L'Aquila.
The Rudd Government acknowledges the hard work and commitment of the various committees that worked under the Australian Abruzzo Earthquake Appeal Fund. 


PM: It's really good to be here at the Men's Shed in Whittlesea, and to spend some time talking to Phil, and also to the other blokes who are here this morning. Ron, who's been doing some excellent woodwork over here, and also Eddie the Dutchman up there for his fine scone making skills, which I hope you as ladies and gentlemen of the press may be able to sample as well on the way through.
What we're here to talk about today is Men's Health. Blokes are basically pretty hopeless when it comes to their own health. That's my experience of it, blokes are pretty hopeless when it comes to dealing with their own health. They either think that they're invincible - that is; that they can just tough it out. They don't like talking about it usually, and frankly, the problem with all that is it makes it really hard to deal with men's health problems before they become too serious. So that's where frankly, the work that's been done here at this local level at the Men's Shed in Whittlesea is so important.
I was jsut talking to Rob Mitchell, our candidate for McEwen about this before, and the important role which Men's Sheds play in bringing blokes together to talk about anything and everything but including their health and practical things which need to be done to deal with health problems as they arise. So there's no stigma attached to wondering when and where you should get a prostate check-up; so there's no worry about frankly talking about mental health problems. So there's no concern about talking about what it is to be depressed, and how you can deal with those sorts of things when they hit you.
So that's what's really good about this group of blokes here, because they're the sorts of things they're talking about as well. Of course another part of that is just blokes coming together.
I grew up in a country town in rural Queensland, and there were always CWAs, and there were lots of organisations where the women of the community would get together and have a natter and a chat about stuff which is of concern to them, often their health as well.
I don't recall in the town I grew up in there was any such association for blokes apart from the local pub. The good thing about this is it's actually changing that around. And what I've seen here at Whittlesea this morning, I'm told from the Men's Sheds Association folk, we've got 300 or more of these now growing across Australia. That's a really good thing, because it brings blokes together in a pretty welcoming environment, do things practically together, make things, most importantly having some friendship - for isolated blokes that's really important - and talking about the things that worry them, including their health, and most importantly work out ways to deal with it.
What we're doing today is releasing Australia's first ever male health policy, first ever. It's a pretty important time that we do that, we're probably about 110 years late, but it's good that we're doing it and I'd really like to congratulate Warren Snowdon, the Minister, for his work in putting this policy together.
This is a really important document for the future. It provides us with the framework to deal with men's health associations right across the country, it provides us and State Governments with a framework within which we can help those organisations on the ground to make things better for blokes who are dealing with health challenges. It's good work. It hasn't just been plucked out of space. This is the product of extensive consultations across the community - Warren tells me some 26 public forums across Australia, involving one or two thousand people, discussing what actually makes a difference on the ground when it comes to improving the health circumstances of blokes.
On average we die five years earlier than women. Now, that's in part because we don't deal with preventable diseases. Various things like cardiovascular disease, lung cancer - their rates are much higher with blokes than they are with women.
Therefore we've got to turn that around, and where there is a preventable opportunity for doing that, we've got to grasp it with both hands and do something about it.
This policy therefore today encourages men of all ages to take action to improve their own health. It seeks to provide information, assistance and support across a number of key priority areas. It will involve an investment of some $16.7 million specifically dedicated to dealing with men's health challenges.
Now this investment includes a number of pretty important components. One of which is a $3 million investment for the Australian Men's Sheds Association, to help secure the future of Men's Sheds and to support those sheds into the future. I asked Phil before, what problems have you got here at Whittlesea, always useful to sit down and talk to the locals over a scone or two, or three, and find out what makes it work here and what could make it work better.
He said to me that Men's Sheds around Australia work on the basis of a couple of things. One, obviously, getting enough local blokes feeling comfortable about what goes on in the shed, but two, having enough finance to make it work over time.
So this investment of ours to the Men's Sheds Association is designed to do that. The other thing that we're doing is investing nearly $7 million to establish what's called Australia's first longitudinal study into the social determinants of male health, to understand all the social, economic and behavioural factors which affect the length and quality of the health of Australian men.
That's never really been done before, and that's why we need to do it. What's happening here is from the ground up, very practical things being done in sheds like this. But we also need to look at the science, and actually study what happens with men's health journeys over time, so that we can actually deal better with some of the challenges which are faced here in local communities.
One of the other things we're doing also is to assist with half a million dollars or thereabouts, to assist in the provision of regular bulletins on men's health in order to provide the most up to date information, right across the spectrum, to organisations like this, so it's on hand, on tap, and it's in a way which people can understand.
I saw up the back, by the way, a pamphlet which was headed 'What the Hell is...' and it named a particular disease condition. I didn't even know what the name of the disease condition was, but it's stuff like that which actually is very helpful for people on the ground.
So to those of you who are here at this Men's Shed here in Whittlesea, can I say to each and every one of you - you're doing a really good thing. Not just in terms of getting together and providing opportunity for you yourselves as blokes to talk about men's health challenges, but you know something, you're also giving back into the community as well, and the stuff you make here, you're contributing to the community life. And it's also good to see the local community, like the local TAFE, chipping in with the provision of some of these woodworking lathes that I see up the back here at the moment.
We have a big interest as a Government in making sure that this takes off more right around the country. Because guess what, blokes need a bit of support when it turns to dealing with men's health issues which they frankly, have been not the flashest on in the past. It's time to turn the corner on all this.
Warren did you want to add on this before we hop into questions?
SNOWDON: Just briefly Prime Minster, I think the unique nature of this men's health initiative, needs to be properly understood. It is the first, and that's why I think it needs to be applauded. But I want to also just highlight just one other main item that we're funding, which addresses Indigenous men. A $6 million program to address Indigenous men's health, and their families, to work with men so that they have more of a role in bringing up their children together, so it's very much a family orientated initiative and something that we're very pleased to announce. Prime Minister, I think you've summarised it extremely well, thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Warren, and having said that, I'm happy to take any questions you've got.
JOURNALIST: PM, [inaudible] you're launching or releasing the scoping study of the NBN today. Are you confident that that project is still viable?
PM: I'll leave those who are currently being briefed in Canberra to discuss the internals of that study on the future of the National Broadband Network. Let me be very clear, this Government is determined to build a National Broadband Network, and will not let anything get in its way. And the reason for that is that wherever I go across Australia, people are crying out for effective, high-speed, decent bandwidth broadband.
Let's go to health for example. I was recently at a community in Perth, where they described to me the absolute importance of having decent bandwidth to get health information around about individual patients. I was at a GP Super Clinic in the northern suburbs of Brisbane a few days ago, in fact on Monday, and they are fully geared up to be able to whip patient data right around the country, to specialists and experts in a particular disease category, on one condition, there's enough bandwidth to do it and right now there isn't.
So if you, for example, Phil down here has a health condition, sorry if you don't have one Phil but I'm about to tell the world that you do.
PHIL: - That's okay.
PM: Mate, most of us do. And he goes off, gets all of his diagnoses done, wherever he gets them done at the local hospital here, the local specialist. He goes to Queensland on holiday, he gets crook. We actually need to be able to get all of his patient data through as quickly as possible and that's called patient controlled electronic health records. We've got no system in the country at the moment to whip that stuff around. The result? Phil gets a worse diagnosis than he would otherwise get because the local docs up there don't have his historical health data, and secondly he has to get diagnosed again which costs the heath system thousands and thousands of extra dollars and Phil as well. You know something, that's got we've got to change.
I just give you one example therefore. So, national broadband network, this government will not be deterred from rolling out a national broadband network because it benefits the economy. It benefits business. It benefits the provision of decent health information, right around the country, benefits education and a whole lot of areas we haven't even thought of yet.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that you weren't able to get it further along the line in your first term?
PM: Ah, the National Broadband Network? We always recognised that this was a long term project, but can I explain to you what's now happening in Tasmania? In three locations in Tasmania we're already rolling out the network. So, we're already up and running. Very soon there will be further announcements to this effect as well across the country. We will not be deterred, despite the opposition from some of the largest Australian companies, from this occurring because we believe it is in the national interest for this important piece of national infrastructure to get out there. It is fundamental to this economy's needs for the 21st century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you by the situation in Greece?
PM: I saw those reports late last night just after I arrived here in Melbourne from Perth and they are disturbing. I've spoken before to the Greek Government, since the election of the current government, about the challenges it faces. It is a sober reminder of the fact that the financial crisis in Greece has a capacity to affect wider Europe, and the health of the wider European financial system has a capacity to affect what's going on more broadly across the world. I've said it before and I'll say it again - we've done well in Australia to navigate this economy through the global financial crisis. But looking globally, the global financial crisis ain't over yet and we're not out of the woods yet either. Greece is a reminder of that.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I'll just take, did you have a follow up over here and then I'll head over here.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The Department of Foreign Affairs looks at these very carefully, all the time. We have many Australians of Greek origin. Here we are in Victoria, in Melbourne, not too far down the road, there's a huge Greek community here and in other cities in Australia as well.
The Department of Foreign Affairs will be analysing the situation carefully and issuing any appropriate revisions to travel advice. The experts do this without political interference from anybody and they take advice from the relevant police and security authorities around the world.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by reports that the mining companies will use their large coffers to campaign against your super profits tax and your Government at the next election?
PM: We have taken our decision on the future of the tax system based on the national interest. And so, we've looked at one core fact which is, about a decade or so ago, for every three dollars in mining profits about a dollar went to the Australian people through taxes. Now, for every seven dollars earned in profits by the Australian mining industry, one dollar comes to the Australian people in taxes. We believe the time has come for the Australian people, for small business and for workers and their super to get a fair share of the natural resources of this country which are owned by the Australian people. So, we believe this is the right policy for the national interest.
The second thing I'd say is it's also the right policy for the future of the mining industry. The petroleum rent resource tax has operated on a similar basis on the North-West Shelf for the last 20 years and it's given rise to massive new projects like the Gorgon Development announced in the last 12 months worth nearly $50 billion. Obviously there's going to be a scare campaign by some because they fear that some of their super profits will in fact come back to the Australian community to fund better tax for small business, better super for working Australians, better infrastructure for entire nation.
I just note what Bernie Fraser, the former head of the Reserve Bank had to say on this in the last 24 hours. "Inevitably," he said, "there's going to be some crying wolf in all of this". And Mr Fraser, the former head of the Reserve Bank, has been very explicit about the fact that this is very much in the national interest.
So, I imagine that some within the mining industry will dig deep within their very deep pockets and seek to run a political campaign. We will not be deterred one bit. This is a decision in the long term national interest, good for the economy, good in the long term in broadening the base of the mining industry as well, according to the detail of the tax. But you know something? Important in terms of giving a fair share for working families and their super, a fair share for small business with big tax breaks and a fair share to fund the infrastructure that Australia needs for the future.
JOURNALIST: How seriously are you taking threats from mining companies about halting projects in light of these proposed changes?
PM: Well, I notice that a number of statements have been made by various mining companies. As I said on the day that we released our new policy on Sunday, there will inevitably be threats and warnings of project closures. That's the way in which these negotiations with mining companies usually happen. I say again, however, the Government will not be deterred. The Government believes this is the right tax for Australia's future because the Australian community deserve a fair share from the resources, the natural resources which the Australian people themselves own. That is what we're standing up for and we will not be deterred from that course of action.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a lot of, going back to today - thank you for the scone by the way.
PM: How was it by the way?
JOURNALIST: It was delicious.
PM: Did anyone have one of my scones by the way?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: What was mine like?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: No, no, the ones that I made.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Okay, alright, you go.
JOURNALIST: There's obviously lots of awareness of women's health through very high profile campaigns such as, you know, breast cancer foundations, the pink campaign. Do you think men should be doing something similar, maybe we should be doing something blue for instance, about men's health?
PM: You mean, it's like a blue singlet day? What do you think guys? We can call it Jackie Howe Day? I think there's something in that, you know. There's something about our, frankly, our gender which, we don't tend to talk about these things. That's what's got to change because if you don't talk about them, you're never going to find out that there's something wrong with you and you won't find out what you could do to stop it getting worse or stop it happening in the first place. So I'll leave it to Warren and the creative arts department to come up with a specific proposal on that, but maybe it's time we thought about something like that.
For example, I've been very much caught up with Glenn McGrath and the McGrath Foundation and the excellent work they do for breast cancer. We're now funding breast cancer nurses with the McGrath Foundation in 40 or 50 locations around Australia. Now they do a terrific day. Everyone who watches the cricket over summer knows that it's very pink on a certain day and actually causes people to think about breast cancer because it's such a scourge for women in Australia. So let's think about how we bundle together the concerns about blokes' health. What do you think, Blokes' Health Day?
SNOWDON: I reckon a blokes' day would be good.
PM: Okay, let's just think about how we up the profile.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister, the Men's Shed you're in today, it came about from support from the community, a government grant, partnershipping of the Agriculture Society and the Whittlesea Community Building Initiative. And we've got a great model here. Would your program envisage this being a model for future Men's Sheds around Australia?
PM: Let me say one or two things in general about that and then I'll turn to Warren for a more detailed answer. I actually talked to Phil before about how this one got up and running. It's a pretty good story. As I'm advised, the first meetings a couple of years ago, I think you got this shed up last September/ October. Have I got it right? The local show society pitched in because, I presume, they're used to putting up pavilions and things. That's just my assumption. Most of the equipment that you see has been donated from the local community and by local supporting business. I'm told that the revenues generated out here - I don't think I'm giving anything away as a national secret - about $4,000 a year in selling the products which are made here. I know all of you journalists will be putting your three bucks in the coffee jar out the back there before you go. I'll be watching and counting. What we're seeking to do with this $3 million investment, is to actually expand our partnership with Men's Sheds around the country.
You know what I find often works best is when you've got community organisations which actually grow things from the ground up. We then come in and partner, without ever trying to take them over. Because that's when I think you lose your local spirit and your local sense of control. That's what we want to do. So what we've got to find is a way in which we keep your local enterprise, initiative and enthusiasm alive but that additional helping hand on the way through. Warren.
SNOWDON: Just very briefly, I think the Men's Shed Association is the organisation to which we refer and defer in a sense to provide us with this advice. There are different models around the country. This is obviously a very good one and we need to work with people wherever they are because one size won't fit all, to work with people from where ever they are to help facilitate a process of getting Men's Shed's around the county.
PM: Okay folks, well having said all that I might zip.
One final thing, by the way, on the question of the super profits tax, I notice there's a debate today again on whether Mr Abbott will oppose or support this. From his current statements that he's opposed. Can I just say that if Mr Abbott blocks these reforms, he's standing in the way of and blocking better super for working Australians for their retirement, and decent tax breaks for 2.4 million Australian businesses. I would call on him to think very carefully about blocking this basic reform which delivers a fair share for working families, their retirement and a fair share for more than two million Australian small businesses. Thanks folks. 


The Rudd Government today launched Australia's first ever National Male Health Policy.
The National Male Health Policy has been developed through extensive consultations with health services, health professionals, and men themselves in 26 public forums attended by 1,300 people.
It encourages men of all ages to take action to improve their own health and recognises that this requires information, assistance and support, across 6 priority areas.
The Rudd Government is investing $16.7 million to assist in addressing male health challenges.
The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joined the Minister for Indigenous Health and Rural and Regional Health, Warren Snowdon, to make the announcement at the Whittlesea Men's Shed.
The $16.7 million commitment includes:
     * $3 million for the Australian Men's Sheds Association to help secure the future of men's sheds and support new sheds, especially in areas of high need. Men's sheds play an important role in the community by providing meeting places where men can find social support and camaraderie.
     * $6.9 million to establish the first Australian longitudinal study into the social determinants of male health to understand and address all of the determining factors - social, economic and behavioural - that affect the length and quality of life of Australian men.
     * $6 million to promote the role of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men, and encourage them to actively participate in their children's and families' lives, particularly during the antenatal period and in early childhood.
     * $400,000 for regular bulletins on male health to further build the evidence base in male health and inform health professionals, policy developers and consumers.
     * $350,000 to develop health promotion materials targeting males at key transition points in life, for distribution in men's sheds and more broadly.
     * $50,000 to support GPs to better engage and support Aboriginal and Torres Strait males through the Andrology Australia forum in June 2010.
The National Male Health Policy recognises that while the life expectancy of the Australian man at 78.7 years is among the highest in the world, this is still five years shorter than the expected life of an Australian woman at 83.7 years.
This is partly due to preventable conditions or where men experience premature deaths such as cardiovascular disease and lung cancer at higher rates than women.
Further to this, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men are particularly vulnerable, living on average 11.5 years less than non-Indigenous men.
The policy sets out six priority areas for investment:
     * Optimal health outcomes for males - Deliver initiatives and services that take into account the needs of Australian men and promote optimal health outcomes for all Australian men.
     * Health equity between population groups of males - Recognising some groups of men have worse health outcomes than others, like those living in rural and remote communities and that different initiatives and services may be needed.
     * Improved health for males at different life stages - Deliver initiatives and services that consider the health needs of Australian men in different age groups and at key transition points from youth to old age.
     * A focus on preventive health for males - Deliver preventative-health initiatives that take into account the needs of Australian men.
     * Building a strong evidence base on male health - Build the evidence base in Australian male health and use it to inform the development of policies, programs and initiatives.
     * Improved access to health care for males - Tailor health care services and initiatives to facilitate access by men, particularly for population groups of men at risk of poor health.
The National Male Health Policy is available at www.health.gov.au/malehealthpolicy


Last weekend, the Government delivered its response to the Henry Review on Taxation. Next week, the Government delivers its third budget.
Through both, the Government is delivering on the two core elements of our economic strategy: tackling the immediate macroeconomic challenges from changing global and national economic conditions, while undertaking the long-term microeconomic reforms to build a more productive and globally competitive economy.
Through fluctuating global economic circumstances over the last two years, the Government has implemented a consistent countercyclical fiscal policy to support macroeconomic stability. We have also sought to lay the foundations for long term prosperity by building the enablers of sustainable market-based growth - by investing in skills, infrastructure and a regulatory framework that boosts productivity growth, workforce participation, and brings about a seamless national economy.
These have been the two fundamental elements of the Government's continuing economic strategy since its election.
Through the Government's tax policy announcements last week we have sought to strengthen public finances, increase the global competitiveness of our economy, support small business and boost superannuation for working families.
Through the Government's budget we will continue to deliver stable conservative fiscal policy - through a 'no frills' budget that continues to consolidate on and deliver our overall economic strategy together with social policy and environmental policy.
Two years ago, when the Government was framing our first budget in 2008, I gave a speech in Perth outlining the framework that would guide our approach to that budget. I said in that speech that our first budget would be governed by the following four principles:
"Our first priority is to build a strong economy through responsible economic management - a strong economy that also delivers for working families.
Second, we are committed to honouring our commitment to help working families under financial pressure.
Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future - acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water.
Fourth, we will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs in a rapidly changing threat environment."
These were the four principles we outlined before our first budget. Looking back, these four principles have been applied in both of the last two budgets we delivered and now, two years later as we finalise our third budget, those same principles continue to guide our approach to fiscal policy for the future.
The first budget principle I laid out two years ago was responsible economic management - to maintain our economic strength.
The Australian Government's first two years have seen significant swings in global economic conditions from the inflationary boom of 2007, through the global slump of 2008, and towards the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression. Through these cycles, the government has maintained a conservative countercyclical fiscal policy: restraining public expenditure growth when the private economy is strong, and stepping in to protect jobs and businesses when the private economy is weak.
This policy approach guided our response to the boom conditions the Government inherited two years ago. In 2007, the Australian economy was suffering from capacity constraints, inflation was rising to 16-year highs, and the Reserve Bank had delivered 10 consecutive interest rate rises.
In these circumstances, the Howard Government - perversely - ran a procyclical fiscal policy. Despite the booming Australian economy from 2003-2007, real spending grew at an average of 4 per cent a year - including 5.2 per cent in the final budget year in the middle of the boom. New spending decisions in the Liberals' final Budget totalled $40 billion over the forward estimates.
Saul Eslake, former ANZ Chief Economist said last year: "The previous Government squandered much of the good fortune that came its way...We could have run much bigger surpluses..." 
Prior to coming to Government, I committed to end the era of fiscal irresponsibility under the Howard Government. From Opposition I articulated our fiscal strategy through a medium-term fiscal framework. This medium-term fiscal strategy was the most comprehensive commitment to fiscal discipline ever provided by an Australian government.
This statement provided the first commitment in Australia's history to keep the budget in surplus over the cycle. This framework guided the preparation of our first Budget - delivering responsible countercyclical fiscal policy.
The 2008-09 Budget delivered savings of $33 billion over four years. This was nearly three times the total savings delivered by the Liberals in their last three years in Government.
The Government budgeted for a surplus of $21.7 billion, or 1.8 per cent of GDP, in the 2008-09 Budget to provide a buffer for difficult economic times. Towards the end of 2008, global economic conditions changed rapidly and dramatically. Major developed economies fell one by one into recession. Global merchandise trade fell by around 40 per cent.
Again, the Government applied countercyclical fiscal policy to protect Australia from the global recession. The Government took strong and decisive action to provide immediate support to the economy including cash payments to support consumption, the trebling of the first-home owners' boost and an increased business tax break for private investment.
The Government's economic stimulus plan focussed on the urgent need to support the economy rapidly but also kept one eye on the future needs of sustainable economic growth. That is why about two-thirds of total direct investment under the nation building for recovery strategy is investment in infrastructure.
As the IMF concluded: "The increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls." 
As we emerge from the global recession, the Government will continue to apply the same core economic principles.
Last year, when Australia like all other developed economies around the world was dragged into deficit through collapsing revenues brought about by the massive contraction in global economic activity, the Government enshrined our budget principles in three core fiscal rules to guide the budget back to surplus in a post-global recession environment.
First, the Government's 'expenditure rule' caps the real growth in government expenditure to 2% once the economy returns to above trend growth, and this will apply until the budget returns to surplus.
Second, in order to meet the 2 per cent cap, the Government has set itself an offset target which requires the impact of new spending across the forward estimates to be fully offset in the budget.
Third, the Government has committed to saving the revenue improvement associated with a stronger economy, while ensuring that the level of taxation remains lower on average than the level we inherited in 2007-08.
These Australian fiscal rules are among the strongest of any in the OECD. As the IMF commented last year: "Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment" to return to surplus.
And Australia is in a better fiscal position than other countries.
Of course, much international attention is currently being focused on the fiscal crisis in Greece. This highlights the fact that the global financial crisis is not over yet and we continue to cast a weather eye on the global reverberations of developments in Europe. But beyond Greece, the challenge of restoring fiscal sustainability exists across most advanced economies.
     * In the United States, the budget deficit is expected to be 11.0 per cent of GDP this year.
     * In the United Kingdom, the budget deficit for 2010 is expected to reach 11.4 per cent of GDP.
     * In Japan, the deficit is forecast to be 9.8 per cent of GDP.
     * By contrast, MYEFO forecast Australia's deficit to fall to 3.5 per cent of GDP in the 2010-11 financial year.
Large fiscal imbalances across the industrialised world are resulting in a large accumulation of public debt. According to the IMF, the global recession has caused an increase in average debt to GDP ratios in advanced economies from about 75 per cent in 2007 to about 110 per cent in 2014. As a result, government debt in advanced G20 countries is projected to rise to an average of 117 per cent of GDP in 2015.
In contrast, again, the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook forecast that Australia's net public debt would peak at 9.6 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, and by 2015 will be in decline.
Most economies are only in the earliest stages of finding their way back towards fiscal balance. Australia is acting well ahead of the pack.
We have articulated strict and clear fiscal rules, and by complying with those rules we have an unambiguous pathway back to surplus. Australia's fiscal rules will ensure that our budget position remains the envy of the world. These rules represent the continued embodiment of the Government's core commitment to fiscal conservatism - as the private sector rebounds, the Government's direct support to the economy will contract.
These fiscal rules will ensure that this budget is not a pre-election spendathon. This will be a no-frills Budget with conservative fiscal management firmly at its core.
Despite the fact that 2010 is an election year, this Government will not be repeating the pattern of Liberal pre-election splurges. We will stick to very strict limits on spending while responsibly investing in our health and hospital system, building critical economic infrastructure, and boosting superannuation.
The fiscal policy of the Liberal party is not characterised by the same clear and disciplined framework. Since Tony Abbott became Leader of the Opposition, the Liberal Party has racked up $11.8 billion in unfunded commitments over the 5 years from 2009-10.
     * More than $2 billion through his opposition to our responsible reforms to private health insurance rebate, which Treasury estimates will still see 99.7% of people remaining in private health insurance, because he would rather have teachers and nurses subsidise the private health insurance of politicians and millionaires.
     * Almost $3 billion to reinstate welfare for millionaires, including removing the means test on the Baby Bonus and Family Tax Benefit B.
     * More than $5 billion over the next 5 years for his so-called climate change policy.
     * Over $1 billion on unfunded road commitments.
And now Mr Abbott is threatening our ability to deliver $12 billion in tax reform by not supporting a new resource super profits tax which will ensure all Australians can benefit from the commodity boom. This means we won't be able to deliver tax cuts to businesses, including small business, or improve the adequacy and equity of our superannuation system.
Instead, he would slap a huge tax bill on business - around $2.7 billion each year - to fund a Paid Parental Leave scheme that offers full replacement income for a person on $150,000 a year.
The Liberal Party has a magic pudding approach to economic policy, where they complain about debt, spend money like drunken sailors and rarely, if ever, advance budget savings. As the budget approaches, Mr Abbott has no alternative but to come clean with the Australian people and tell them what taxes he is going to increase, or what services he is going to cut to meet the cost of almost $12 billion in unfunded election promises he has already made.
The second budgeting principle I articulated in 2008 was a commitment to help working families under financial pressure. This budget will again deliver for working families through scheduled tax cuts from 1 July 2010.
Since coming into office, the Government has reduced the tax burden on working Australians three times. From July 1 this year:
     * Someone on $30,000 will pay $750 less in tax than in 2007-08 - that's 26% less tax
     * Someone on $50,000 will pay $1,750 less in tax than in 2007-08 - that's 18% less tax
     * Someone on $80,000 will pay $1,550 less in tax than in 2007-08 - that's 8% less tax
Since coming to office we have taken practical steps to ease the pressure on working families' budgets. To help pensioners week to week the Government provided an increase in payments to around 3.3 million pensioners, including people receiving the Age Pension, Disability Support Pension, Carer Payment and service pensions. From 20 September 2009, around 2.3 million full rate pensioners have received a significant increase of $35.41 a week for singles and $14.96 for couples at a cost of $12.3 billion over the forward estimates.
The Government is helping working families meet the cost of education through the education tax refund. For the first time, eligible families can claim up to $750, gaining a $375 per child refund, for each child undertaking primary school studies and $1,500, gaining a $750 per child refund for each child undertaking secondary school studies. Around 1.3 million families and 2.7 million students can benefit from the scheme.
The Government is supporting families through the Teen Dental Plan to improve the dental health of teenagers by providing a voucher to eligible teenagers which in 2010 is worth $157 to assist with the cost of a preventative dental check. The Government has committed $490.7 million over five years for the Teen Dental Plan which commenced on 1 July 2008 and has already seen more than half a million teenagers receive a check up because early dental health is critical for later life.
Last week the Government announced an historic reform to boost the retirement income of more than 8.3 million Australian workers. The Government's superannuation reforms will make Australians more secure in their retirement - taking away some of the worry many working families feel when they think about the future. Our plan includes concessions on additional Superannuation Guarantee contributions, a new government contribution for low income earners, and higher caps for over 50s. Increasing super from 9 to 12 per cent will mean:
     * Someone aged 30 now on average weekly earnings will be $108,000 better off at retirement.
     * Someone aged 40 now will be $57,000 better off at retirement.
     * Even someone who is 50 now will be $22,000 better off at retirement - and even higher if they take advantage of the new tax break for additional super contributions from older workers.
Taken together, these reforms to income tax, pensions, superannuation, health and direct family assistance for education have helped the family budget to deal with cost of living pressures.
The third budget principle I laid out in 2008 was that the Government would deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future, acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water. We have never lost sight of our core long term economic strategy - to reform Australia's economy, boost productivity and build a platform for future growth. That reform process must be anchored to productivity growth, workforce participation and the development of a seamless national economy.
Over the past two years, our Government has been acting decisively to turn around our nation's flagging productivity performance. We've been working to ensure that Australian businesses aren't held back by inadequate and poor quality infrastructure. We've established Infrastructure Australia and we have embarked on the biggest nation building infrastructure program in Australia's history, including a $36 billion transport infrastructure plan to double investment in roads, quadruple investment in rail and invest in the nation's ports for the first time.
The Government is also boosting productivity by investing in an education revolution that will prepare our kids for jobs in both the traditional trades and in industries of the future. That is why we are establishing a single national school curriculum; providing parents with transparent information on school performance; delivering computer access to all year 9 to 12 students by 2011; installing state-of-the-art trades training facilities available to every secondary school; and delivering the largest school building modernization program in Australia's history with new libraries, science centres and language centres.
The Government is also countering the effect of the ageing of the population by boosting workforce participation. We have established Australia's first-ever system of Paid Parental Leave, coming into effect from January 2011, increased the child care rebate from 30% to 50% to support parents return to work, and introduced a 'Learn or Earn' Compact with Young Australians to make sure our kids are in either work or study.
The Government is also committed to delivering long-term productivity growth by creating a seamless national economy. It makes no sense for Australian business to have to abide by up to 8 different state regulatory frameworks. That is why the Australian Government has worked through COAG to identify 27 areas of regulation which should be harmonised to create a seamless national economy across Australia, including occupational health and safety.
The Government is also committed to a superfast national broadband network to ensure our schools, hospitals and businesses have the infrastructure necessary in the 21st century. We are committed to a National Broadband Network because fast and affordable broadband is the only way we will be able to compete with economies in our region like Japan, Korea, and China. If we don't have fast broadband it will cost us lost jobs and lost business opportunities that will go to countries overseas.
The National Broadband Network is the single biggest nation building project in Australia's history; it is modernising the Australian economy for the future.
Today, the Minister for Broadband Stephen Conroy is releasing a 500-page Implementation Study. I pleased to announce that the Study confirms that our National Broadband Network vision for Australia is achievable and can be built on a financially viable basis with affordable prices for consumers.
12 months ago, the Government committed to investing in a $43 billion NBN. The Study confirms that the company will generate sufficient earnings by the end of year 7 so that the Government's recommended investment peaks at $26 billion.
The Study confirms that the NBN business model establishes that taxpayers are paid back their investment with a modest return by year 15 of the project on the basis that privatisation is completed.
The Implementation Study shows that the National Broadband Network can be done - and we are absolutely committed to it.
By contrast, I note that the Opposition spokesman declared this morning that he didn't care what the study said - he said, quote "...even if the study makes out a business case, that won't alter our view." Let me just say: this takes Opposition for opposition's sake to a new level - they are opposed to the biggest single modernising nation building project in Australia's history even before they see a plan that says it can be done.
The Opposition spokesperson went on to say, quote: "...there are alternatives that are more responsible to deliver faster and affordable broadband." Well - here's my challenge to the Opposition: let's see your broadband plan. In two and a half years of opposition they haven't offered any concrete alternative plans and in Government they had 18 failed broadband plans in 12 years that left Australia with some of the slowest and most expensive broadband in the developed world.
On Sunday the Government took decisive action on a key area of microeconomic reform and one with profound macroeconomic consequences. The tax plan will:
     * Keep government finances strong;
     * Protect the future of the Australian economy; and
     * Ensure working families and small businesses get their fair share.
These reforms will allow all Australians, including working families and small business, to share in the benefits of the resource boom. These reforms will convert Australia's economic strength into a new generation of prosperity for the future. These reforms will make our whole economy stronger:
     * Reducing company tax to keep it competitive with similar OECD nations will create new jobs, attract investment and grow the economy.
     * Cutting tax and reducing red tape will boost Australia's 2.4 million small businesses.
     * Building a $5.6 billion fund for investment in nation building infrastructure such as better roads, more rail, and bigger ports will help to support growth for the future.
     * And increasing Australia's pool of superannuation by $85 billion will strengthen our economy and lift our national savings - these measures are projected to add around $500 billion to the existing pool of superannuation savings, and contribute to further increasing national savings by around 0.4 per cent of GDP by 2035.
Finally let me make some remarks about the Resource Super Profits Tax. I want to address some of the recent commentary head on.
First, I believe it is right that the most profitable mining companies pay more during a global commodities boom. All Australians deserve a fair share of our natural wealth, but the fact is that as prices have risen in recent years the share coming back to Australians has been falling.
10 years ago royalties used to account for 1 dollar in 3 of mining profits. now they take 1 dollar in 7. Resource profits were over $80bn higher in 2008-09 than in 1999-2000, but governments only collected an additional $9bn in royalty revenue.
Second, the mining boom has brought benefits to Australia but also some costs in terms of increased demand for infrastructure. Every community in Australia - and especially those in the resource states - are crying out for infrastructure. When Infrastructure Australia opened for applications it got $14.5bn in applications from Western Australia. State premiers themselves have tried for 20 years to negotiate with the mining companies to raise royalties - partly to fund infrastructure.
It is surprising that a Premier such as the Western Australian Premier could constantly ask the Commonwealth Government for infrastructure but oppose the tax that provides the finance for that infrastructure.
The third area of debate in the community is about the impact of the RSPT on investment in the resources sector. Let me be clear that the design of the RSPT aims to broaden our mining sector and increase overall mining production.
Put simply, if companies aren't earning super profits, they don't pay the tax. In fact, the new regime can actually help more marginal mining ventures because state royalties will be refunded, meaning that emerging mining companies may actually get a cash flow gain, and for exploration companies, the Commonwealth has provided a billion-dollar exploration rebate to encourage the development of our natural resources.
For these reasons, independent modelling by ECONTECH shows that the Government's reforms will increase mining activity in Australia by around 5.5 per cent.
The mining industry is a great industry. I want to see it broadened and deepened in Australia.
I thank the mining executives I have met with over the last few days in Western Australia for their engagement with the Government. The conversations I have had were robust; but constructive. Some other commentary has been less constructive.
The Government's tax reform plan will help Australia take full advantage of the economic opportunities that lie ahead:
     * broadening and deepening our resources industry by boosting emerging mining projects and providing greater incentives for exploration;
     * funding the rail, roads and ports our resources sector needs and making investment in nation-building infrastructure a permanent structural feature of State and Commonwealth budgets for the future;
     * increasing the competitiveness of Australian business - particularly small businesses who drive employment and innovation in our economy.
Over the last 18 months, Australians have faced one of the toughest global economic challenges in our lifetime. As we look back, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession. It is a testament to the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers and government - to pull together, and the strong and decisive leadership from government economic policy.
I am proud of the Government's economic stimulus strategy and the results it has produced.
I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates were saved by the stimulus.
I am proud that so many Australian businesses kept their doors open while so many millions closed overseas.
I am proud that Australia had the shallowest slowdown of all the advanced economies.
In fact, the overall economic report card is strong. Compared with all the major advanced economies, Australia has the fastest growth, the lowest debt and deficit, and the second lowest rate of unemployment.
This should be a reason to be confident. It should not be a cause for complacency. Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on this position as we move through the economic recovery phase and a return to economic growth.
That is why the Government is taking strong action through the Henry Review and through the Budget to deliver responsible economic management.
This will be a no-frills, fiscally conservative Budget that will fund the substantial health and tax reforms we've announced in recent weeks. We will stick to very strict limits on spending while responsibly investing in our health and hospital system, building critical economic infrastructure, and boosting superannuation.
It will be a responsible Budget that makes the key investments in our future that are so critical to turning our success during the global recession into a stronger economy for working families.


HOST: Prime Minister Kevin Rudd joins me now. Good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Mel.
HOST: Gee, timing. You're five days out from releasing the budget, things seem to be going along quite swimmingly, markets were settling, now this. What effect will this have on the budget? Will you have to do a rethink?
PM: Mel, we have been very mindful of what's been going on in international financial markets over quite some months now. Our Treasury officials have been monitoring, very carefully, what's been happening in Greece. I've spoken about this in a number of recent speeches I've made on the economy.
We believe that the two big messages out of what's happening globally is this, One, coordinated global action to deal with financial problems in Greece and other European countries. We have the G20 Summit coming up next month in Canada. I imagine this will be clearly on the agenda there. But nationally, within Australia, the key thing is this, the International Monetary Fund has said we must continue to implement the remainder of stimulus strategies in Australia and other countries because we are not out of the global crisis yet. But secondly, have a clear path back to budget surplus. That is the strategy we have been embracing over a long period of time. That will be reflected on Budget night as well.
HOST: So those of us that might been expecting you to wind up the stimulus, you probably won't, could we be seeing a GFC Mark 2 and therefore the need for more stimulus payments?
PM: Well can I just say, Mel, that the International Monetary Fund only a few weeks ago was very clear on this. It said that when it came to its member states, including Australia, that the remaining elements of what we have by way of the stimulus strategy should be implemented and, in part, they are mindful of the fragility of the global economic recovery. Our own stimulus strategy peaked in the second quarter last year, nearly nine to 12 months ago and has been coming down ever since.
But the other thing is this - just to be very, very mindful of the need to, as I said yesterday in a speech to the Melbourne Press Club, mindful of charting a clear path to return to surplus. We announced our fiscal rules to do that in the last Budget. You'll see those rules implemented in this Budget as well.
HOST: Alright, as we said, a lot to take into account, five days to absorb it all. I've got a viewer question for you this morning. Bob has written into us and he asks us to play an advertisement to you which ran during the last election.
[CLIP PLAYS]
HOWARD: Who do you trust to keep interest rates low?
VOICEOVER: We've now had six rate rises since Mr Howard promised to keep them at record lows. His response?
HOWARD: Australian families have never been better off.
VOICEOVER: Authorised T Gartrell, ALP, Canberra.
HOST: So Bob asked us to play that. Now John Howard ended up with six rate rises during his last term in office, you're now up to eight. Bob, our viewer says that you're being a little hypocritical. He says did you mislead voters into thinking rates wouldn't rise so often under your leadership?
PM: Well Mel, can I just say, that's wrong on both counts. The first is in the period that Mr Howard was the Prime Minister leading up the last election there were 10 interest rate rises in a row, that's just the first point. But the second is this. I said it was completely irresponsible for Mr Howard then to make any public commitment to keeping interest rates at record lows and I would refuse to make any such commitment myself and I did not provide such a commitment prior to the last election. The key thing though is this - when you've got the sort of volatility that we've seen in global financial markets and the global economy, it's really important, absolutely important to be maintaining a prudent policy of economic management. We've had an interest rate rise this week from the Reserve Bank. But I'd draw your attention to the fact that rates now still are two and quarter per cent points lower than when Mr Howard left office and that's something like $500 less in difference in terms of an average repayment on an average mortgage.
HOST: Alright, well that was a question from Bob. Polling, gee there's been a bit of polling lately, your popularity has taken a bit of a battering. We had a marketing expert on the show yesterday who said that voters don't know your brand any more. Jane Caro was speaking and she says that they don't know what you stand for. Just have a listen to this.
[CLIP PLAYS]
CARO: Well, the first thing I would do is look really seriously at what he's going to do about climate change. I think that that's the major promise he made to the public, the major reason people lost faith with John Howard and he's got to tackle that in some way and also I think he's got to come out with some principles, what he believes in. What he stands for. And be prepared not to back away from them. He's got to prove that to us.
HOST: So, we've got a few broken promises, we've got some policy back flips. Malcolm Turnbull says a leader needs to have guts to stand up for what he believes in. How do you address perception and questions that you've become a little wobbly?
PM: On the question of pollsters Mel, every time an opinion poll has come out in the more than three years that I've been leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, I've never got into a discussion about what they mean because, frankly, my job is to act in the national interest. Sometimes decisions are going to be popular, other times, less so.
Let's go down to a couple of things though that the Government has done. We committed, prior to the last election, to bring about a fundamental reform of the health and hospital system whereby the buck would stop with me. What we've now negotiated is a reform to the health and hospital system whereby for the first time in history, we the Australian Government are the dominant funder of the hospital system of Australia, delivering better health, better hospitals, for working families. That's a fundamental commitment that we made.
You raised the topic of climate change, let me go to it. On the question of climate change, what changed in December last year, and you mentioned Mr Turnbull before, is that the bipartisan support we needed to get an emissions trading scheme through the Senate evaporated because Mr Abbott politically assassinated Mr Turnbull and turned on its complete head the support that the Liberals had provided up until that stage.
Now you could wish that you could get legislation through the Senate now but you can't because the Liberals on the one hand voted it down and the Greens on the other hand voted it down. That's why we've said what we've said about the action on climate change and in the meantime, we'll get on with implementing a very fundamental renewable energy plan for Australia.
HOST: Alright, we've kind of, I guess, covered that. I must say, the Soapbox doesn't reflex what you're saying on that one but I'll leave that one for another day. I've got another view this morning, Jesse Rob is a year eleven student in Ipswich and he's got a question for you. So Jesse, it's all yours.
JESSE: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: G'day Jesse.
JESSE: My question to you today is, during your election period in 2007 understand that you had promised, or guaranteed that all, if not most, senior students in high school would receive a federally government paid for laptop. My question is, will this promise be kept and if so, when will this promise start to be in motion?
PM: Well, thanks very much for your question. We do believe in the importance of computers in schools because it's all about the digital revolution of the future that we need. Our commitment prior to the last election was, by the end of 2011 to have a computer for every secondary school student in Australia from year 9 to year 12. So how have we gone so far? We've calculated that to meet that commitment we need something like three-quarters of a million computers in schools. So far, I think what I heard from the education department the other day, we'd rolled out 250,000 of those. We're about one-third of the way there. The Budget to deliver the rest is already in the education department and so we've got about 18 months to go to complete the implementation of that commitment. But we intend to do it, every single last computer.
HOST: Alright I'm sure that lots of viewers will hold you accountable for that one. Jesse, thank you very much for your question, that was great. A year 11 student with a long way to go. Prime Minister, we are out of time so can I get a yes/no answer on this final question. Senator Cory Bernardi, Liberal Senator, saying we should ban the burqa in Australia.
PM: Not government policy, no advice from any law enforcement agency that this is been recommended by them. I note Cory Bernardi is Mr Abbott's Parliamentary Secretary. He goes out there and says that's what he wants to do. Mr Abbott then says it's not their policy. I think they're walking both side of the street.
HOST: Thank you very much for that. Alright, good to talk to you. Thank you, we'll see you next week.
PM: Thank you.


HOST: The Prime Minister joins us now on the phone and I appreciate his time, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd good morning
PM: Good morning Neil, thanks for having me on the program, I'm on my way to Geelong at the moment.
HOST: Yeah, I appreciate you finding the time. Before we get into anything else, Wall Street, an appalling result over night, down nine per cent at one stage and closed three per cent down, are you concerned that we're, we could sort of go back to the worst of the global financial crisis?
PM: Neil I don't wish to be alarmist about any of this, but we are following these developments with considerable concern. When I get off your program I'll be speaking to the Secretary of the Treasury about developments overnight, both in the United States and in Europe. But let's just cut to the core of it. As your listeners would know there's been a problem with the Greeks and specifically Greek sovereign debt, and Europe's ability to step in on Greece's behalf. And markets have judged those arrangements to be inadequate.
And the problem that's come from that is it that it's spread a broader lack of confidence into market perceptions of a range of other economies in Europe. Europe then represesents about a third of, let's call it global financial markets, and therefore we're starting to see some volatility more broadly. Can I just say though in terms of your listening audience, in terms of an economy in the financial system which is the most robust in the world, we are the best positioned of any to withstand any subsequent shock. But we continue to follow these developments extremely closely.
HOST: This is the most concerning development these past few days is it not, since the whole thing started?
PM: I've been speaking publicly about problems in Greece for some time now, and we've been frankly having a battery of officials following these developments very closely, both here and around the world, in the last several weeks. And I'll be speaking with representatives of the International Monetary Fund myself sometime during the course of the day to plot precisely the actions now necessary in Europe and/or by the IMF, to stabilise what is a concerning set of developments in New York overnight. I believe with rational action on the part of governments in Europe, and with appropriate action supported by the IMF, we can get through this, but we are watching this very closely and through the G20, largest group of economies including Australia, we are also activating all those networks of response as well.
HOST: Could this affect the Budget, next week's budget?
PM: The key thing for the Budget, Neil, is to make sure that we do two things. The IMF, International Monetary Fund, said only about two or three weeks ago, that governments around the world need to focus on firstly, delivering the remaining dimensions of their stimulus strategy, including Australia, because the recovery globally is uncertain, and secondly, to chart a course back to returning budgets to surplus as rapidly as possible. At the last Budget we put forward our strategy for fiscal consolidation, bringing the Budget back to surplus. You'll see in the Budget next week, that the rules that we laid out 12 months ago have been rigorously applied.
HOST: A lot more money for health is being suggested, is that right? On top of what we know.
PM: Well, what we've outlined in the deal with the Premiers is a $5.6 billion investment in making sure that we've got better health and better hospitals. As for the Budget measures, I won't speculate one way or the other, Neil, in terms of what's contained within it. We will be funding, of course, through the Budget each and every one of those measures for accident and emergency, elective surgery, and more doctors' training places that we put forward to the Premiers when we had that meeting in Canberra a week or so ago, and reached the new agreement on a new National Health and Hospitals Network.
HOST: Have you kept some surprises in the Budget?
PM: Neil, won't comment one way or another on the Budget, but at the Melbourne Press Club yesterday, where I got to meet so many of your colleagues from across the great city of Melbourne, who asked a range of questions, most of them as feisty as yours, I said that the Budget will be a no-frills Budget, a no-frills fiscally conservative Budget, and the reason for that is that when the global economy is contracting, as it was during 08-09, our responsibility as the Goverment was to step up to the plate and fill the space. When the global economy is recovering, then you've got to bring the role of Government in the economy back and that's what we'll be doing.
HOST: If I may - onto the matter of the burqa, the proposition the burqa be banned. If you're out on a streetwalk, as you'll be doing in the election campaign, and a women in a burqa approached you, would you react with some automatic trepidation?
PM: Ah no, because I've met many such women, not just here but abroad over a long period of time. This is a diverse country, Neil, and people have different forms of dress, they have different forms of cultural tradition. We've been living with these sorts of differences for the last couple of hundred years. And on this debate that I see in the Melbourne papers this morning, let's just go back to a pretty basic point. We at the Australian Government level, I'm not aware of receiving any advice from any law enforcement agencies about the need to take action of the type which is being recommended by Senator Bernardi.
HOST: I guess, look I agree with you and I don't think we need to ban it, but I can see the concern if a person in a burqa walks into a bank. I can't go into a bank wearing a motorcycle helmet, or a balaclava if it's cold. Do we perhaps need to look at degrees of reaction?
PM: Look, I'm just always attentive to, Neil, the advice that we get from the law enforcement authorities. I think we've just got to make a distinction between that on the one hand and just sort of playing populist politics on the other. Look, we're a pretty sensible country in Australia, we know how to get these balances right, and I just think the diversity we've got in this country, people coming from all parts of the world, different things. The worst thing we can do is actually start ganging up on particular groups within our country, I just think that's the wrong way to go.
HOST: So you don't want to ban it?
PM: Well, the Government policy is very clear on this - which is that we've got nothing before us from any law enforcement body which says that this needs to be done, and that's our approach, we won't be doing it.
HOST: Yeah, and if they do come up with an argument you will, will you?
PM: Well, we will look at stuff on its merits. But on the question of our basic belief in the nature of Australian society, which has got a whole bunch of different people in it, who bring different cultures and traditions here and we all end up in the great Australian melting pot, and roll on a generation, you see everyone basically ending up as one big Australian family, and then the next group come, and they all end up, a generation later, as one big Australian family. Let's just look back from where we've come with waves of Greek migrants. I was with the Italian community, for example, out at Epping last night, big group here in Melbourne, talking about the contribution on the 50th anniversary of Il Globo, you know the big Italian language newspaper? And it was interesting listening to all of those folk, from 50 years ago, about the amount of prejudice they received back then, when Italians first arrived in large numbers -
HOST: That's true -
PM: Let's just put it all into a bit of context.
HOST: Prime Minister, you, I know you need to get away -just very quickly. For your super tax, $6 billion wiped off superannuation funds in three days, predictions that electricity and energy costs will go through the roof. Are you locked into it, or could you be willing to negotiate at a lower level?
PM: No, we think we've got the rate about right, Neil. That's what I said in Perth when I was asked about this the other day.
HOST: So what about the $6 billion off the superannuation funds for retirees?
PM: Well, can I say that you are always going to have share market volatility on given days, that's been the case the last three months, six months, nine months and frankly in the history of the share market. I understand that most of the mining stocks are trading within their range of the last three or six months.
Look, I think it's pretty important to have some balance in this debate. The former head of the Minerals Council of Australia, David Buckingham, was very clear in a statement he made today, he's describing the reaction from various parts of the mining industry as hysterical. He says that the reality is that the model that we're putting forward as a Government could actually underpin a growth in investment, a growth in jobs and in exploration activity, and that he goes onto say that the threat to withdraw investment, withdraw jobs, is frankly, you know, just being hysterical.
I think the bottom line is this Neil, for your listening audience - we want to make sure that by imposing a Super Tax on the resources of Australia's most profitable mining companies, that the Australian people are getting their fair share from the resources which they themselves own, in order to fund better superannuation for working families, tax cuts for all the small businesses listening to your program this morning, and tax breaks as well, and also providing funds to build the infrastructure we need for the future. Unfortunately my political opponent has decided to side with the most profitable mining companies in the country, and therefore stands in the way of blocking better super for working families and tax cuts for small business.
HOST: Ok just finally too, I've been send a letter that the Government is sending out to insulation installers. Are you aware that they're offering - these are people who got caught in the middle of the insulation mess and have been stuck with stock - they're being offered 15 cents in the dollar, not much?
PM: On the detail of that, I would prefer to get Greg Combet to speak on your program as Greg has responsibility for the implementation of this arrangement. On the content of the letter you've just referred to, no I'm not aware of that but I'll have him come onto your program and speak about it.
HOST: Fair enough, but I assume that you were aware that there was a 15 per cent compensation, 15 cents in the dollar, compensation.
PM: Again on the detail of those arrangements I'd really prefer to defer to Greg, and I will have him on your program to speak to the detail of it. I'd just rather not mislead you or your listeners, that's all.
HOST: I appreciate your time, I read you're going to stay around if you're re-elected, you're going to stay the whole term?
PM: Well-
HOST: -what about after that? You will have had enough by then I assume?
PM: The first thing Neil, is the Australian people will make their judgments about the Government's achievements and its plans for the future come the next election which is due by the end of this year.
Secondly, if the Australian people re-elect the Government of course then I would remain for that subsequent term. That's a matter for the people.
My job in the meantime is to make some critical decisions in the national interest and that's negotiating our way right now through the financial crisis bubbling away in Europe, which you began the interview with, talking about, that's frankly what is preoccupying my mind at the moment.
HOST: Okay, have you given any thought to when you would step down?
PM: You know something, Neil, I reckon it's very important to just be clear about what you put to the Australian people for your plans for the future, put to them what you've achieved so far, be frank about the fact that not everything is perfect, I've never claimed to be perfect. They'll make their judgment, they're very sensible people. As for myself, I'll continue to make a contribution so long as I believe I can make a positive contribution to the country's future. That's what I'm in the business for.
HOST: Final, final, final question, have you talked to Gordon Brown and how do you read to the election result, he looks as if he's finished, doesn't he?
PM: I haven't seen, because I've been working on these other things this morning, I haven't seen the most recent results for the last hour or so from the elections -
HOST: I know he's a mate of yours, I just wanted to know if you've spoken to him.
PM: Yeah, I know, I was about to say I spoke to him a couple of nights ago, and I've know Gordon for frankly a decade plus, he's a really good man. Whatever the British public decide in this election, can I just leave your listeners with one thought about the global financial crisis last year. The critical turning point in preventing this thing collapsing from a recession into the possibility of a depression was the G20 meeting in London in March-April of 2009 which he chaired. If he wasn't in the chair for that, I really fear for where we would have gone to in the last part of last year. The outcomes there, as the International Monetary Fund has said since then, was the turning point in the world's reaction to the implosions on Wall Street in the six months prior to that. So I think Gordon deserves an appropriate recognition for that, whatever the voters of Britain decide today.
HOST: Sounds a bit like a political obituary but fair enough. Thank-you -
PM: No, it's just a fact, he's just a good man. I sat with him for two days during that G20 meeting and frankly, I never seen such an ashen faced look from the faces of 20 heads of governments in my life, as we looked, we stared literally into the global economic abyss -
HOST: I guess the fear is we could be about to do that again?
PM: Well, these are concerning days but I believe we now have a mechanism to effectively respond to developments like we see in Greece when they arise, that's the G20. The G20 heads of government are due to meet next month again, and I'm sure the stability of financial markets will be the core of the agenda again. It was the mechanism we used last year to stabilise financial and economic collapse, we have that mechanism which is ongoing today, and on every given day my officials and advisors are working with their counterparts around the world. But these are concerning days.
HOST: Look I thank you for your time, I know the Secretary of the Treasury is waiting for your call and I'm feeling quite guilty. Enjoy Geelong.
PM: Thanks very much, appreciate it Neil.
HOST: The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. Very serious air to that discussion.


Australia's ability to tackle the public policy challenges of the future will be boosted by the Rudd Government's establishment of the Australian National Institute for Public Policy at the Australian National University (ANU).
Our development as a prosperous, dynamic and outward looking nation depends on strong, well informed, innovative and robust public policy debate.
The Commonwealth Government will invest up to $111.7 million in the Australian National Institute for Public Policy, which will have under one banner the public policy expertise available through ANU and the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZSOG).
Modelled on the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, the vibrant public policy precinct will combine a number of elements:
     * $14 million to bolster public policy expertise at ANU, through enhancing capacity in The Crawford School of Economics and Government and establishing the H. C. Coombs Policy Forum, which will inform future policy development;
     * $7 million in Sir Roland Wilson Foundation scholarships for public servants to study at ANU;
     * The recently announced $17.3 million National Security College;
     * A new $19.8 million building to jointly house the new National Security College and the enhanced presence of ANZSOG in the precinct, expected to open in 2012;
     * The recently announced $53.1 million Australian Centre on China in the World (including a building); and
     * $0.5m to scope the need and nature of additional accommodation for officials and students in Canberra for courses.
The Prime Minister also announced that the Government has accepted all of the recommendations in Ahead of the Game: Blueprint for Reform of Australian Government Administration.
The Blueprint outlines a comprehensive reform agenda to ensure the APS can meet today's challenges of unprecedented complexity and scale. Once enacted, the recommendations will strengthen strategic direction and citizen engagement across the APS; whilst equipping the staff and leaders of the APS to perform at their best.
The Government values its strategic relationship with the ANU, and has a strong commitment to public policy debate and a strong public service.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is great to be back here at our national university.
My visits are becoming so regular I'm expecting Ian Chubb will soon renew my old student card.
I'm back for a good reason.
Not just to remember where Therese and I met.
And not just because of Chubby's relentless lobbying for the ANU.
But because the ANU has a very special role in driving one of the Government's key objectives - building better links between the expertise in the academic community and the Australian Public Service.
Last August I spoke at Burgmann College about the special history of the Australian Government and the formation of the Australian National University.
I spoke about the need to reinvigorate that rich and fruitful relationship for a new century with many new challenges for policy makers and for government.
Today I want to discuss how the Australian Government plans to take the relationship of the Public Service and the ANU forward.
And how we plan to take forward the reform of the Public Service itself.
To be frank, Australia is not so flash at connecting the work of academics with the work of government.
Too often, our education and research institutions inhabit a parallel universe to that of government and the public service.
Whether it's Canberra, or Melbourne, Sydney or other major cities - our academics can occupy the same space as public servants, but it's as if they transmit on different wave lengths.
They know of each other's existence.
But they don't often tap into the relevance of each other's work.
So their connections are not strong.
And both are diminished as a result.
Academic work is less empirical and less relevant.
And policy making is less well-informed and less effective.
The Government I lead is determined to take a new direction.
And the Australian National University is at the heart of this new direction.
To build a stronger, more productive relationship between the Government and academia.
And a stronger, more skilled and more innovative Australian Public Service.
Good for the university - given its leading national role in research and education.
And good for the APS - which stands to gain much from access to the best new research on difficult challenges, and from a more highly skilled public service.
The building that we open today recalls one of Australia's greatest public servants.
Sir John Crawford was an outstanding example of strategic leadership and collaboration between academia and government.
His contribution to public service, economic policy, agriculture, academia and international relations spanned from the 1930s to the 1980s.
It is extraordinary to consider the scope of Crawford's career.
From being recruited in 1942 by the great Nugget Coombs to the Department of Postwar Reconstruction - the crucible of a generation of extraordinary public service leaders.
And right down to advising Prime Minister Bob Hawke in the 1980s, on the early steps that would later lead to the formation of the APEC forum.
Sir John's career saw outstanding service in both government and academia.
He led the departments of commerce, agriculture and trade.
He was one of the great architects of Australia's post-war growth.
He was an outstanding humanitarian, a major force behind the development of Australia's overseas aid policy, and a man with an inspired vision for Australia as a source of principle and fairness in building new institutions for a global world.
On so many matters, Crawford was way ahead of his times.
In 1960 Crawford crossed the Molonglo River as it was then - now Lake Burley Griffin - and came to the ANU.
His contribution here was as rich, productive and diverse as it had been on the other side of the river.
He became professor of economics in and director of the Research School of Pacific Studies here at the ANU.
Later he became vice-chancellor and then chancellor.
He was determined to build the links between the university and government.
He made it a condition of accepting the ANU job that he must have the freedom to take part in government inquiries and policy making.
And so he did - though governments did not always take his advice.
In 1965, for example, the Menzies Government was not persuaded of the need for a greater role for government in economic planning, despite the recommendations of Crawford and other members of the Vernon Committee.
Sir Robert Menzies dismissed the Vernon recommendations as the mere "pretensions of academic experts".
Clearly, Menzies had strong views about the difference between the two sides of Lake Burley Griffin - academics had their place, and government had its.
Crawford's leadership at the ANU saw extraordinary progress.
From re-establishing the department of international relations, to contributing to the establishment of the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, the Contemporary China Centre, the North Australia Research Unit and the Australia-Japan Research Centre.
Centres that have each upheld the goal of productive engagement with government.
As we look to renew the relationship between the ANU and the Australian Government, there is no finer example than John Crawford to inspire that vision.
Since coming to office almost two and a half years ago, the Government has been tackling many of our long-term future challenges.
From the education revolution to the national health reform agenda.
From tackling climate change to advancing a vision for an Asia Pacific community.
From dealing with entrenched problems like homelessness to building a more productive, competitive economy.
And through this time, dealing with the deepest crisis in global financial markets and the global economy in the past 75 years.
Strategic policy leadership and strategic policy advice is essential for each of these challenges.
It is difficult to provide strategic policy advice.
And while the Australian Public Service does a fine job, I believe we can always strive to do better.
Cabinet sets the Government's strategic goals.
That is a fundamental precept of our Westminster democracy.
But Cabinet will do that job much better if we have the best possible advice from our public service.
And public servants will be in a much better position to offer us the best advice if they have the best analytical skills and access to the best research from those with specialist knowledge.
And that is where the university community comes in.
Public service fosters the development of generalists, with excellent skills at solving problems and administering programs.
Universities foster the development of specialists.
Of course we need both, and they should complement each other.
But too often, public servants and academics don't talk to each other at all.
Or, when they do, they talk past each other.
You can see this in academic research that doesn't take account of real world constraints.
You can also see it in public service advice that lacks analytical clarity and ignores academic research and evidence.
Too often, public servants and academics stay in their ivory towers and concrete castles - just occasionally sticking their heads over the parapets to peer out to the world beyond.
The world, we might say, on the other side of Lake Burley Griffin.
The challenge we face is to build an ongoing dialogue.
That means public servants taking a stronger interest in research, and cooperating with academics in their field.
And it means encouraging academics to recognise their research could have greater impact when it deals with practical challenges for policy-makers.
Though to make it clear, it does not mean academics abandoning their independence, and nor does it mean that all research should have immediate relevance.
Consider the complexity of the policy challenges on which the Government is acting.
     * How do we tackle entrenched disadvantage so that children growing up in low-income areas get the literacy and numeracy skills and educational opportunities of other Australian kids?
     * In the health system, how do we build a genuinely integrated health and hospitals network, where patients experience a seamless transition between hospital and community based services?
     * How do we manage the challenges of a new resources boom and a two-speed economy to the lasting benefit of all Australians?
These are all areas where expert research is of great value as a key input for policy makers.
The Government has sought to elevate the role of academic experts in many of our policy-making processes during the past two years:
     * on the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, whose recommendations helped shape our landmark decisions on the National Health and Hospitals Network;
     * with the reform of the Australian Public Service, on which Professor Glyn Davis of Melbourne University and Professor Patrick Weller of Griffith University contributed as advisers; and
     * through the Review of Australian Higher Education, led by Emeritus Professor Denise Bradley.
Australia's think tanks also play an important role in shaping policy debates and influencing policy outcomes - through centres including:
     * the United States Studies Centre at the University of Sydney;
     * the Grattan Institute located at Melbourne University; and
     * the Cape York Institute for Policy and Leadership, a partnership with Griffith University.
But these examples are the exception, rather than the norm.
Our challenge now is to build much stronger links across the public service and across the university community in the future.
Last September I announced a review to drive the future of the Australian Public Service, under the leadership of the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran.
Their report, Ahead of the Game, was launched on 29 March.
It sets out a comprehensive blueprint for reform in four key areas:
     * the first is to forge a stronger relationship with citizens through better delivery of services, and through greater involvement of citizens in their government;
     * the second is to strengthen the capacity of the public service to provide strategic, big picture - advice that addresses the most difficult challenges of the day;
     * the third is to invest in the capability of the public service workforce -
         * through better recruitment and training; and through greater mobility within the public service;
         * through alignment of conditions across agencies;
         * and through a better approach to managing employee performance;
     * and the fourth area for reform is to improve the efficiency and quality of the public service -
         * by creating agencies that are agile, capable and effective;
         * by helping them plan;
         * and by helping them improve their performance.
The blueprint made 28 recommendations under those four themes.
I want to thank Terry Moran and the advisory group for their work on the report.
Today I am pleased to announce that the Government is accepting, in full, the recommendations of the APS reform blueprint.
We are committed to building an Australian Public Service with a culture of independence, excellence and innovation - in policy advice and service delivery.
And the recommendations in the report provide a roadmap to achieving that goal.
A key finding of the report is the need to reinvigorate the public sector's links to the outside world - with academics, research institutions and with private sector experts.
Strengthening those links is a key part of strengthening strategic leadership in the public service.
I'm pleased that responsibility for strengthening this relationship is being taken up by the new Secretaries Board - the high-level APS leadership body whose establishment was a key report recommendation.
Another key element of reform is to strengthen training and skills development within the APS.
Responsibility for this and other aspects of workforce planning and recruitment will be taken by the Australian Public Service Commission (APSC).
In line with the recommendations of the APS review, every public servant will be expected to take part in some learning and development activity every year.
Every department and agency will be required to provide, every year, for each public servant, a significant opportunity to take part in some learning and development activity, including training and education, on-the-job training, and coaching and mentoring.
Every year, the APSC will create a learning and development strategy to drive this process.
And it will design and implement a performance framework across the public service that encourages them to develop their knowledge and skills.
The Australian National University will have a key role in building a better, stronger Australian Public Service.
To that end, I am pleased today to announce a major development for the Australian National University and its relationship with the APS.
Last year, I came to the ANU and spoke about our need to strengthen the institutions behind public policy making in Australia.
I spoke of institutions like the Kennedy School of Government in the United States - an institution where the flow of experts between government and academia sharpens expertise in both.
An institution whose ethos reflects John F. Kennedy's great call to service - "Ask not what your country can do for you - ask what you can do for your country."
The Kennedy School is a collection of eminent social science research institutions, comprised of 15 institutes and research centres and over 30 executive education and degree programs.
Together, these institutions draw on the resources of the entire University to make the School a centre for training enlightened public leaders that attracts some of the best students from across the world.
I said it was time for Australia to aspire to building a uniquely local version of the Kennedy School.
Today, I am pleased to announce an historic step towards this vision, with the establishment of the Australian National Institute for Public Policy (ANIPP) here at the ANU.
As a prominently branded entity, the Institute will focus the expertise of several of the ANU's centres and schools that work in public policy and will also draw on the expertise of ANZSOG.
The Institute reflects a new partnership between the public service, ANZSOG and the ANU and will ensure Government draws on the wealth of expertise that exists across the ANU and ANZSOG networks.
The first pillar of the Institute will be an expanded Crawford School of Economics and Government.
The Crawford School is a recognised leader in public policy education, thinking and innovation across the range of policy areas.
The expanded Crawford School will maintain its focus on public policy research and research training, along with courses in public policy.
However it will include new programs to build stronger links between academia and public policy implementation and conduct research relevant to the public policy priorities of the Government.
The other foundation pillar for the Institute will be an enhanced presence for the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZSOG).
Through ANZSOG, Australia has built a unique public policy and public sector management institution.
It is a model uniquely adapted to the Australian federal system, bringing together a consortium of Governments and universities from around the country.
As a result, Australia finally has high quality public sector executive leadership training and development of a standard superior to most places in the world.
The ANZSOG presence in Canberra will be expanded, to help it achieve its goal of building executive leadership in the public service, through its courses with a vocational professional focus on public administration and public sector management, and its public sector research program, led by the Sir John Bunting Chair in Public Administration.
Last month, I announced the establishment of the Australian Centre on China in the World and the National Security College.
Both these institutions will be part of the Australian Institute of Public Policy.
The Crawford School will also host one of the most important tasks for the new Institute - the HC Coombs Policy Forum, which will draw expertise from across the ANU and ANZSOG.
The Coombs Policy Forum pays tribute to Nugget Coombs, one of the greatest Australians of all, and the man who recruited John Crawford into the Commonwealth Public Service.
The role for the Coombs Policy Forum will be to help translate high-quality public policy research into useful, innovative published analysis for use by the APS and other governments.
This is often the missing link in the relationship between government and the university community.
The Forum will conduct roundtables, conferences, seminars and public lectures, and will also host a high-level international Fellowship program.
It will also provide tailored information and advice to Parliament and the public service through briefings, policy consultancies and other forms of collaboration.
The Institute will also improve links between research and public policy by supporting PhDs for APS employees to undertake research in key areas of public and economic policy.
These PhD scholarships will be provided through the Sir Roland Wilson Foundation.
The Commonwealth will provide up to $14 million over four years to the ANU to support the establishment of the Institute.
The expansion of the Sir Roland Wilson Foundation will be supported by a $7 million one-off grant from the Government and matched by contributions from the Sir Roland Wilson estate and the ANU.
These new funds are in addition to the $35 million foundation grant for the Australian Centre on China in the World, and the funding for the establishment of the National Security College of up to $17.3 million, that I announced last month.
I believe the ANU is the ideal venue for the Institute of Public Policy - for precisely the reasons the university was established in Canberra 64 years ago.
Its proximity, its research excellence and its international reputation in public policy make the ANU the natural partner in the Australian Government's plan for strengthening the Australian Public Service.
As we look to the future of a new Institute here at the ANU, today we open this magnificent new building.
In many ways this building will be at the heart of the new Institute of Public Policy.
The designers of the JG Crawford Building have done a great job of blending the new building with the Old Canberra House, an important part of the ANU's heritage.
Old Canberra House was built in 1913 to provide accommodation for the Territory Administrator in its earliest days.
It was the first substantial house associated with the new capital.
And it is now part of the latest addition to Canberra's list of outstanding public buildings.
I also want to congratulate on the ANU on the work done to preserve the other heritage-listed cottages nearby - the constable's cottage, the gardener's cottage and the chauffeur's cottage.
The architects' vision is for the JG Crawford Building to create a courtyard heart for the public policy precinct, with the aim of fostering interaction among the community of researchers, scholars and practitioners in these surrounds.
It is the hub of the dedicated new public policy precinct here at the ANU - creating an environment for first class research, teaching and collaboration.
The Government will also be providing up to $37.9 million for two new buildings to further enhance this precinct; one for the China Centre and one for the the National Security College and ANZSOG.
All up, the Australian Government will invest up to $111.7 million in the ANU public policy precinct to create a world class facility for public policy researchers, teachers and practitioners.
Sir John Crawford was a great nation-builder.
A builder of the economic and social policy, of national institutions and of the ANU itself.
This building celebrates his legacy and calls for the development of a new generation of nation-builders.
Policy-makers and policy analysts with a vision to make a difference and build a stronger and fairer Australia for the 21st century.
It plays an important part in the Government's vision for a first class public service, with exceptional people, providing strategic leadership, doing outstanding work for the citizens of Australia.
I repeat what I said last year: that my overarching ambition for the Australian Public Service is that it should aspire to be the best in the world.
We want to make the APS a top career choice for our best and brightest - a rewarding and intellectually challenging profession, with world class training and tools, that helps create a better future.
The Australian Institute of Public Policy and the APS reform blueprint will help equip the leaders of the Australian Public Service of today and tomorrow - the policy analysts, advisers and public sector leaders.
In short, the nation-builders of Australia's future.
In that context it gives me great pleasure to declare open the home of the Crawford School for Economics and Government, the JG Crawford Building. 


PM: It's really good to be here at the Men's Shed in Whittlesea, and to spend some time talking to Phil, and also to the other blokes who are here this morning. Ron, who's been doing some excellent woodwork over here, and also Eddie the Dutchman up there for his fine scone making skills, which I hope you as ladies and gentlemen of the press may be able to sample as well on the way through.
What we're here to talk about today is Men's Health. Blokes are basically pretty hopeless when it comes to their own health. That's my experience of it, blokes are pretty hopeless when it comes to dealing with their own health. They either think that they're invincible - that is; that they can just tough it out. They don't like talking about it usually, and frankly, the problem with all that is it makes it really hard to deal with men's health problems before they become too serious. So that's where frankly, the work that's been done here at this local level at the Men's Shed in Whittlesea is so important.
I was jsut talking to Rob Mitchell, our candidate for McEwen about this before, and the important role which Men's Sheds play in bringing blokes together to talk about anything and everything but including their health and practical things which need to be done to deal with health problems as they arise. So there's no stigma attached to wondering when and where you should get a prostate check-up; so there's no worry about frankly talking about mental health problems. So there's no concern about talking about what it is to be depressed, and how you can deal with those sorts of things when they hit you.
So that's what's really good about this group of blokes here, because they're the sorts of things they're talking about as well. Of course another part of that is just blokes coming together.
I grew up in a country town in rural Queensland, and there were always CWAs, and there were lots of organisations where the women of the community would get together and have a natter and a chat about stuff which is of concern to them, often their health as well.
I don't recall in the town I grew up in there was any such association for blokes apart from the local pub. The good thing about this is it's actually changing that around. And what I've seen here at Whittlesea this morning, I'm told from the Men's Sheds Association folk, we've got 300 or more of these now growing across Australia. That's a really good thing, because it brings blokes together in a pretty welcoming environment, do things practically together, make things, most importantly having some friendship - for isolated blokes that's really important - and talking about the things that worry them, including their health, and most importantly work out ways to deal with it.
What we're doing today is releasing Australia's first ever male health policy, first ever. It's a pretty important time that we do that, we're probably about 110 years late, but it's good that we're doing it and I'd really like to congratulate Warren Snowdon, the Minister, for his work in putting this policy together.
This is a really important document for the future. It provides us with the framework to deal with men's health associations right across the country, it provides us and State Governments with a framework within which we can help those organisations on the ground to make things better for blokes who are dealing with health challenges. It's good work. It hasn't just been plucked out of space. This is the product of extensive consultations across the community - Warren tells me some 26 public forums across Australia, involving one or two thousand people, discussing what actually makes a difference on the ground when it comes to improving the health circumstances of blokes.
On average we die five years earlier than women. Now, that's in part because we don't deal with preventable diseases. Various things like cardiovascular disease, lung cancer - their rates are much higher with blokes than they are with women.
Therefore we've got to turn that around, and where there is a preventable opportunity for doing that, we've got to grasp it with both hands and do something about it.
This policy therefore today encourages men of all ages to take action to improve their own health. It seeks to provide information, assistance and support across a number of key priority areas. It will involve an investment of some $16.7 million specifically dedicated to dealing with men's health challenges.
Now this investment includes a number of pretty important components. One of which is a $3 million investment for the Australian Men's Sheds Association, to help secure the future of Men's Sheds and to support those sheds into the future. I asked Phil before, what problems have you got here at Whittlesea, always useful to sit down and talk to the locals over a scone or two, or three, and find out what makes it work here and what could make it work better.
He said to me that Men's Sheds around Australia work on the basis of a couple of things. One, obviously, getting enough local blokes feeling comfortable about what goes on in the shed, but two, having enough finance to make it work over time.
So this investment of ours to the Men's Sheds Association is designed to do that. The other thing that we're doing is investing nearly $7 million to establish what's called Australia's first longitudinal study into the social determinants of male health, to understand all the social, economic and behavioural factors which affect the length and quality of the health of Australian men.
That's never really been done before, and that's why we need to do it. What's happening here is from the ground up, very practical things being done in sheds like this. But we also need to look at the science, and actually study what happens with men's health journeys over time, so that we can actually deal better with some of the challenges which are faced here in local communities.
One of the other things we're doing also is to assist with half a million dollars or thereabouts, to assist in the provision of regular bulletins on men's health in order to provide the most up to date information, right across the spectrum, to organisations like this, so it's on hand, on tap, and it's in a way which people can understand.
I saw up the back, by the way, a pamphlet which was headed 'What the Hell is...' and it named a particular disease condition. I didn't even know what the name of the disease condition was, but it's stuff like that which actually is very helpful for people on the ground.
So to those of you who are here at this Men's Shed here in Whittlesea, can I say to each and every one of you - you're doing a really good thing. Not just in terms of getting together and providing opportunity for you yourselves as blokes to talk about men's health challenges, but you know something, you're also giving back into the community as well, and the stuff you make here, you're contributing to the community life. And it's also good to see the local community, like the local TAFE, chipping in with the provision of some of these woodworking lathes that I see up the back here at the moment.
We have a big interest as a Government in making sure that this takes off more right around the country. Because guess what, blokes need a bit of support when it turns to dealing with men's health issues which they frankly, have been not the flashest on in the past. It's time to turn the corner on all this.
Warren did you want to add on this before we hop into questions?
SNOWDON: Just briefly Prime Minster, I think the unique nature of this men's health initiative, needs to be properly understood. It is the first, and that's why I think it needs to be applauded. But I want to also just highlight just one other main item that we're funding, which addresses Indigenous men. A $6 million program to address Indigenous men's health, and their families, to work with men so that they have more of a role in bringing up their children together, so it's very much a family orientated initiative and something that we're very pleased to announce. Prime Minister, I think you've summarised it extremely well, thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Warren, and having said that, I'm happy to take any questions you've got.
JOURNALIST: PM, [inaudible] you're launching or releasing the scoping study of the NBN today. Are you confident that that project is still viable?
PM: I'll leave those who are currently being briefed in Canberra to discuss the internals of that study on the future of the National Broadband Network. Let me be very clear, this Government is determined to build a National Broadband Network, and will not let anything get in its way. And the reason for that is that wherever I go across Australia, people are crying out for effective, high-speed, decent bandwidth broadband.
Let's go to health for example. I was recently at a community in Perth, where they described to me the absolute importance of having decent bandwidth to get health information around about individual patients. I was at a GP Super Clinic in the northern suburbs of Brisbane a few days ago, in fact on Monday, and they are fully geared up to be able to whip patient data right around the country, to specialists and experts in a particular disease category, on one condition, there's enough bandwidth to do it and right now there isn't.
So if you, for example, Phil down here has a health condition, sorry if you don't have one Phil but I'm about to tell the world that you do.
PHIL: - That's okay.
PM: Mate, most of us do. And he goes off, gets all of his diagnoses done, wherever he gets them done at the local hospital here, the local specialist. He goes to Queensland on holiday, he gets crook. We actually need to be able to get all of his patient data through as quickly as possible and that's called patient controlled electronic health records. We've got no system in the country at the moment to whip that stuff around. The result? Phil gets a worse diagnosis than he would otherwise get because the local docs up there don't have his historical health data, and secondly he has to get diagnosed again which costs the heath system thousands and thousands of extra dollars and Phil as well. You know something, that's got we've got to change.
I just give you one example therefore. So, national broadband network, this government will not be deterred from rolling out a national broadband network because it benefits the economy. It benefits business. It benefits the provision of decent health information, right around the country, benefits education and a whole lot of areas we haven't even thought of yet.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that you weren't able to get it further along the line in your first term?
PM: Ah, the National Broadband Network? We always recognised that this was a long term project, but can I explain to you what's now happening in Tasmania? In three locations in Tasmania we're already rolling out the network. So, we're already up and running. Very soon there will be further announcements to this effect as well across the country. We will not be deterred, despite the opposition from some of the largest Australian companies, from this occurring because we believe it is in the national interest for this important piece of national infrastructure to get out there. It is fundamental to this economy's needs for the 21st century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you by the situation in Greece?
PM: I saw those reports late last night just after I arrived here in Melbourne from Perth and they are disturbing. I've spoken before to the Greek Government, since the election of the current government, about the challenges it faces. It is a sober reminder of the fact that the financial crisis in Greece has a capacity to affect wider Europe, and the health of the wider European financial system has a capacity to affect what's going on more broadly across the world. I've said it before and I'll say it again - we've done well in Australia to navigate this economy through the global financial crisis. But looking globally, the global financial crisis ain't over yet and we're not out of the woods yet either. Greece is a reminder of that.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I'll just take, did you have a follow up over here and then I'll head over here.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The Department of Foreign Affairs looks at these very carefully, all the time. We have many Australians of Greek origin. Here we are in Victoria, in Melbourne, not too far down the road, there's a huge Greek community here and in other cities in Australia as well.
The Department of Foreign Affairs will be analysing the situation carefully and issuing any appropriate revisions to travel advice. The experts do this without political interference from anybody and they take advice from the relevant police and security authorities around the world.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by reports that the mining companies will use their large coffers to campaign against your super profits tax and your Government at the next election?
PM: We have taken our decision on the future of the tax system based on the national interest. And so, we've looked at one core fact which is, about a decade or so ago, for every three dollars in mining profits about a dollar went to the Australian people through taxes. Now, for every seven dollars earned in profits by the Australian mining industry, one dollar comes to the Australian people in taxes. We believe the time has come for the Australian people, for small business and for workers and their super to get a fair share of the natural resources of this country which are owned by the Australian people. So, we believe this is the right policy for the national interest.
The second thing I'd say is it's also the right policy for the future of the mining industry. The petroleum rent resource tax has operated on a similar basis on the North-West Shelf for the last 20 years and it's given rise to massive new projects like the Gorgon Development announced in the last 12 months worth nearly $50 billion. Obviously there's going to be a scare campaign by some because they fear that some of their super profits will in fact come back to the Australian community to fund better tax for small business, better super for working Australians, better infrastructure for entire nation.
I just note what Bernie Fraser, the former head of the Reserve Bank had to say on this in the last 24 hours. "Inevitably," he said, "there's going to be some crying wolf in all of this". And Mr Fraser, the former head of the Reserve Bank, has been very explicit about the fact that this is very much in the national interest.
So, I imagine that some within the mining industry will dig deep within their very deep pockets and seek to run a political campaign. We will not be deterred one bit. This is a decision in the long term national interest, good for the economy, good in the long term in broadening the base of the mining industry as well, according to the detail of the tax. But you know something? Important in terms of giving a fair share for working families and their super, a fair share for small business with big tax breaks and a fair share to fund the infrastructure that Australia needs for the future.
JOURNALIST: How seriously are you taking threats from mining companies about halting projects in light of these proposed changes?
PM: Well, I notice that a number of statements have been made by various mining companies. As I said on the day that we released our new policy on Sunday, there will inevitably be threats and warnings of project closures. That's the way in which these negotiations with mining companies usually happen. I say again, however, the Government will not be deterred. The Government believes this is the right tax for Australia's future because the Australian community deserve a fair share from the resources, the natural resources which the Australian people themselves own. That is what we're standing up for and we will not be deterred from that course of action.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a lot of, going back to today - thank you for the scone by the way.
PM: How was it by the way?
JOURNALIST: It was delicious.
PM: Did anyone have one of my scones by the way?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: What was mine like?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: No, no, the ones that I made.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Okay, alright, you go.
JOURNALIST: There's obviously lots of awareness of women's health through very high profile campaigns such as, you know, breast cancer foundations, the pink campaign. Do you think men should be doing something similar, maybe we should be doing something blue for instance, about men's health?
PM: You mean, it's like a blue singlet day? What do you think guys? We can call it Jackie Howe Day? I think there's something in that, you know. There's something about our, frankly, our gender which, we don't tend to talk about these things. That's what's got to change because if you don't talk about them, you're never going to find out that there's something wrong with you and you won't find out what you could do to stop it getting worse or stop it happening in the first place. So I'll leave it to Warren and the creative arts department to come up with a specific proposal on that, but maybe it's time we thought about something like that.
For example, I've been very much caught up with Glenn McGrath and the McGrath Foundation and the excellent work they do for breast cancer. We're now funding breast cancer nurses with the McGrath Foundation in 40 or 50 locations around Australia. Now they do a terrific day. Everyone who watches the cricket over summer knows that it's very pink on a certain day and actually causes people to think about breast cancer because it's such a scourge for women in Australia. So let's think about how we bundle together the concerns about blokes' health. What do you think, Blokes' Health Day?
SNOWDON: I reckon a blokes' day would be good.
PM: Okay, let's just think about how we up the profile.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister, the Men's Shed you're in today, it came about from support from the community, a government grant, partnershipping of the Agriculture Society and the Whittlesea Community Building Initiative. And we've got a great model here. Would your program envisage this being a model for future Men's Sheds around Australia?
PM: Let me say one or two things in general about that and then I'll turn to Warren for a more detailed answer. I actually talked to Phil before about how this one got up and running. It's a pretty good story. As I'm advised, the first meetings a couple of years ago, I think you got this shed up last September/ October. Have I got it right? The local show society pitched in because, I presume, they're used to putting up pavilions and things. That's just my assumption. Most of the equipment that you see has been donated from the local community and by local supporting business. I'm told that the revenues generated out here - I don't think I'm giving anything away as a national secret - about $4,000 a year in selling the products which are made here. I know all of you journalists will be putting your three bucks in the coffee jar out the back there before you go. I'll be watching and counting. What we're seeking to do with this $3 million investment, is to actually expand our partnership with Men's Sheds around the country.
You know what I find often works best is when you've got community organisations which actually grow things from the ground up. We then come in and partner, without ever trying to take them over. Because that's when I think you lose your local spirit and your local sense of control. That's what we want to do. So what we've got to find is a way in which we keep your local enterprise, initiative and enthusiasm alive but that additional helping hand on the way through. Warren.
SNOWDON: Just very briefly, I think the Men's Shed Association is the organisation to which we refer and defer in a sense to provide us with this advice. There are different models around the country. This is obviously a very good one and we need to work with people wherever they are because one size won't fit all, to work with people from where ever they are to help facilitate a process of getting Men's Shed's around the county.
PM: Okay folks, well having said all that I might zip.
One final thing, by the way, on the question of the super profits tax, I notice there's a debate today again on whether Mr Abbott will oppose or support this. From his current statements that he's opposed. Can I just say that if Mr Abbott blocks these reforms, he's standing in the way of and blocking better super for working Australians for their retirement, and decent tax breaks for 2.4 million Australian businesses. I would call on him to think very carefully about blocking this basic reform which delivers a fair share for working families, their retirement and a fair share for more than two million Australian small businesses. Thanks folks. 


PM: It's good to be here at Geelong again and good to be here with our local Member and to talk about the needs of Geelong Hospital. This is an important part of the entire national network of hospitals which we'll be supporting through the new National Health and Hospitals Network. Funded nationally, run locally with the Australian Government, for the first time becoming the dominant funders of the public hospital system of Australia. This is going to be a very big change.
In the years ahead, that is the next two to three years ahead, the Australian Government will be investing a further one and half billion dollars or thereabouts into the Victorian public hospital system, in order to fill some of the gaps which currently exist, whether it's in accident and emergency, or elective surgery, or adequate hospital beds, or enough doctors and enough nurses. Then we fold into the long term reforms to be delivered through the National Health and Hospitals Network. But with one purpose, to deliver better health and hospital services to the Australian people and the people here in the wider Geelong region. That's what's so important, making it happen on the ground.
We've already made a start here in Geelong at this hospital. We've invested, already, $5 million, or thereabouts in expanding the elective surgery capability of this hospital, plus an investment in a couple of additional theatres as well as an additional investment in other support services for those theatres. This is important for the future, but I've got to say there's much, much more to be done and we have just begun.
Of course the Australian Government's ability to fund the National Health and Hospitals Network rests on the continuation of a strong economy. A strong economy based on strong public finance. A strong economy also based on international financial markets and their perception of this economy and also the strength of the global economy writ large. Which brings me to recent developments overnight in Greece and more widely in Europe.
Overnight, global markets have returned to the turbulence that we saw back in 2009. On the streets of Europe, and the stock exchanges right across Europe and the world, we have had a sudden reminder of the fragility of the global economy recovery.
I've said this repeatedly in recent months and I say it again - we are not out of the woods yet. We've therefore got to follow these developments with great, great care, caution and concern. I just this morning been briefed on developments in Europe overnight from the Secretary of the Treasury in Canberra
The immediate problem is that the Greek Government is struggling to cover $10 billion in its own debt payments due later this month.
The European authorities and the IMF are currently working their way through a $140 billion package of support for Greek Government. The Greek Government is working to implement its own fiscal consolidation strategy. There is therefore a framework of response for the Greek crisis. We need, however, to continue to work very closely with the international financial authorities to ensure that that framework is implemented effectively on the ground and that the confidence of financial markets is restored. 
The Australian Government continues to monitor these developments in Greece and more widely in Europe closely. We have Treasury officials, as we speak, working around the clock to ensure that these developments are not only monitored closely, but that any response that is required from us is, in fact, delivered at the right time as well. We have been doing this, not just in the last several days, we've been doing so over the last several recent weeks and months as the situation in Greece has unfolded. 
As for the implications for Australia, let me be very blunt about our circumstances. The Secretary of the Treasury again advised me this morning that Australia's national accounts, our national balance sheet, is uniquely positive compared with the other balance sheets of the other advanced economies of the world.
Our public finances are strong in Australia. We have continued growth in our economy, the only economy amongst the major advanced economies not to go into recession. Furthermore, Australia's public debt as reported in our most recent statement through the MYEFO document peaks at some 9.6 per cent of GDP in 2013-14. This contrasts with that projected for the rest of the developed economies of the world peaking at 117 per cent of GDP. In other words, that for Australia lies at less than one-tenth of what applies to the OECD on average.
This, therefore, marks Australia's strength against the rest of the world and, as the Secretary of the Treasury reminded me this morning, Australia in a uniquely positive position in terms of the strength of its national accounts, the strength of its public finances and the strength of the economy overall.
These facts are well recognised by international financial markets as they follow developments around the world and look particularly at the strength of Australian financial markets and Australia's underlying economic strength and the underlying strength of its public finances.
The Australian people, therefore, should have confidence that the Australian Government negotiated our way through the global financial crisis during the turbulent events of 08 and 09. We did so in close cooperation with our economic regulators.
The Australian Government again will negotiate our way through the current challenges and those challenges which lie ahead, drawing upon the same team of economic regulators. Therefore we should, as a nation, have confidence in this country's capacity to withstand any subsequent financial and economic shocks arising from the crisis in Greece and the crisis in Europe. We will however remain vigilant 
It's important also, to be mindful of the recent advice of the International Monetary Fund on the global economy. This contains two key recommendations for Australia and related recommendations for other countries.
The first of those recommendations from the IMF is this. Continue to implement the remaining elements of the Government's economic stimulus strategy, given the uncertainty of the global economic recovery. The second is this, to put in place a clear strategy for return to budget surplus.
These two courses of action have been implemented by the Government rigorously so far, will be reflected again in the Budget which will be released next week. This is the sober course of public finance action that is necessary under these circumstances and has been underpinned by the independent advice of the International Monetary Fund.
I remind people of the following. Of the major advanced economies, Australia was the only one of them to maintain positive economic growth, the only one of them not to fall into recession, with the second lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies.
To conclude on this, can I make one further comment. Given the nature of the IMF's advice, given also the uncertainty of the global economic recovery, now is not the time for risky snap decisions to be made on the run concerning our economy. Mr Abbott recommends that we pull the plug on economic stimulus now. Given the uncertain state of the global economic recovery, given the clear advice by the International Monetary Fund, that represents irresponsible, risky and reckless advice on the part of Mr Abbott. 
International markets are still very, very volatile. That's why we've stuck to our position of maintaining the implementation of our economic stimulus plan. The Australian economy can't afford a jolt or a shock through the sudden withdrawal of that stimulus. Let me repeat and be absolutely clear, international markets are still volatile and therefore it is imperative that we maintain the implementation of our economic stimulus strategy as recommended by the International Monetary Fund. Any sudden jolt or shock in our policy, as recommended by Mr Abbott, would be precisely the wrong thing to do in these delicate global economic conditions.
Finally, the Budget next week will stick to the same continuing strategy we've outlined in the past. It is the right course of action which has steered Australia through the economic crisis so far. It is the right course of action given where we are in terms of the global recovery. It represents the right course of action into the future as well. I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Has Treasury told you at all about how or whether the shockwaves from (inaudible) central Europe on the market, the international market overnight will have on Australia and our economy and what we have they told you we could do about that?
PM: I spoke at length to the Secretary of the Treasury this morning about these questions. These are important matters of concern, not just for Government officials but also all Australians and the entire Australian business community.
First and foremost we have to be very mindful of the impact of any problem of confidence in Europe becoming more widespread in terms of its impact on international financial markets more generally. Secondly, we are therefore working in very close collaboration indeed with our counterparts in the G20, the largest economies in the world, to ensure that our responses to these developments around the world are properly integrated and coordinated.
Furthermore, what the Secretary of the Treasury has advised is that, given the uniquely positive circumstances of the Australian economy - strong public finance on top of the fact that we have strong and positive economic growth - places us in a uniquely positive position when viewed from the perspective of international financial markets more generally.
When I finish my program in Melbourne today I'll be returning to Canberra late this afternoon, early this evening for further briefings with Treasury officials on developments in Europe over the past 24 hours.
JOURNALIST: So it's a watch and wait approach at this stage?
PM: We need to monitor closely what's occurring. We need to maintain close liaison with the economic regulators who assisted the Australian Government to steer our way through the financial crisis of 08-09. The same economic regulators are monitoring developments at home and abroad as we speak. We'll be meeting with the Secretary of the Treasury and other officials when we return to Canberra later today.
That is the prudent, normal course of action under these circumstances. As I said, we've had our Treasury officials monitoring these developments closely, not just for the last few, days, not just for the last few weeks, but for the last few months, because this is an international financial market we're talking about.
JOURNALIST: Did Cory Bernardi play the race card this morning, or last night, when he called for the burqa to be banned?
PM: You know something, it's really important just to be clear about all this. I believe Australians pride themselves in having a diverse society, one which is characterised by tolerance, one where we don't stand up and give people lectures about what they should be wearing and what they should not be wearing. I think that's a pretty basic first point.
Secondly do we really want an Australia where we start, through our language, to try and turn one group of Australians against another? I don't think so, not the sort of Australia that I want to see for the future. I haven't seen any form of advice from any law enforcement authority, anywhere in the country to us that suggests that we should do anything different. I just think it's pretty important to be responsible in our public comments on sensitive matters. I've said before, I don't think Australians would like to see one group pitted against another. I don't think that's right. I don't believe that's the sort of Australia that we want to see in the future. I think we've got to be very careful about these sort of statements. What I want to see is a diverse, tolerant Australia for the future, based on mutual respect and a common obligation to adhere to the laws of the nation.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept Tony Abbott's assurances that he, you know, doesn't agree with Cory Bernardi and that it's not Liberal Party policy.
PM: Well, that's a question for you all to put to Mr Abbott. What is shows is -
[PA Announcement]
PM: Can I say to all members of the press, if you haven't had your flu vaccinations yet, queue up over there and I'll use a syringe and personally administer it to you.
[Laughter]
PM: Back to what we were talking about. The question was about what Mr Abbott has said. You know, I think what this, at best, shows this is a Liberal Party in absolute chaos when it comes to delivering one policy. You have the Parliamentary Secretary to Mr Abbott going out with this statement, and then Mr Abbott 12 hours later saying, well, it's not our policy. What's actually going on in the Liberal Party? I mean these are sensitive and important matters which have a real effect on community life. I believe in a tolerant, diverse Australia. One where we actually embrace the diversity within our community and where we have no interest as a nation in setting one group against the other, no interest whatsoever.
Think what happens in other counties when that occurs. It's really bad. What I see across Australia is everyone, frankly, at the coal face, making it work, getting on with one another.
Let me give you one further example.
Last night I was out in Epping, which I discovered last night, is an hour and half drive from the middle of town. It was a fair old trek north. It was the Italian community celebrating the 50th anniversary of Il Globo, the Italian language newspaper. There we had representatives of the Italian community who've been at the coal face, building this nation of ours for the last half a century including the folk who started off the newspaper back in 1959 when most of you weren't born. I was just born. What they said, and I listened very carefully to what they said last night, is that when they came to Australia in the late 50s there was all sorts of prejudice and discrimination against Italians, all sorts of prejudice and discrimination against people who'd just arrived. And they are so glad of the fact we have put those years behind us, that it's actually a different Australia today. Let's keep it that way. Let's keep it that way. Let's remember some of the bad things that we've had go on in the past in this country. Learn from those lessons for the future and let's ensure that we keep this a great country that we all believe in, that I believe in. One marked by tolerance and respect and adherence to the law.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned that our markets can't afford a jolt by withdrawing the economic stimulus. Have you then introduced this mining tax, through no fault of your own, but at the wrong global time, will this also further impact the market?
PM: Well let me provide you with one part of a response to that before I respond to it more generally, and that is a couple of days ago there was a bloke who went out there, in fact it was on Tuesday, from a company called Cape Lambert, and said that the Government's decision to introduce a super profits tax for the most profitable mining companies in Australia would lead to the destruction of his project. And then we discover yesterday that the same chairman of that company, I'm advised, goes about and purchases a million shares in that company.
Now, I think the Australian public are a bit sceptical about that sort of behaviour. They like to see a bit of consistency.
And can I also draw your attention to what the former head of the Minerals Council of Australia had to say, David Buckingham, he said, and this is him, he's acted as chief executive for the mining council of Australia, he's described the response by some of our largest mining companies as quote 'hysterical'. He's said that all these threats to withdraw exploration, quite frankly, these threats were never true in the past, and they are not true now. He goes on further to say that in fact the tax reform we've planned for the mining industry, which includes new incentives for the exploration industry, better treatment of small to medium sized companies who are not generating profits upfront, will actually lead to the growth of the mining industry over time, consistent with Treasury's modelling, that the overall increase to mining activity would be something like 6.5 per cent.
So I think people will be taking with a grain of salt, some of the statements being made out there about threats of project closure.
One further remark just on that though. Our position on this is clear. What Mr Abbott has now done is take another knee-jerk decision yesterday to oppose our plan to deliver better superannuation for working families, and tax breaks for small business. Let's be very clear about it. Mr Abbott has sided with the most profitable mining companies in the world, and turned his back on better super for working families and tax cuts for small business. What we say is that when it comes to the mineral resource wealth of Australia, the Australian people own those resources, and they deserve a fairer share from those resources to fund better super, better tax cuts for small business, and better infrastructure for the future.
JOURNALIST: Seeing what's happening in the global market, is it great tax reform at the wrong time?
PM: Can I say that you have seen Australian mining shares over the last several years go up and go down, and go up and go down, that's what happens when it comes to stock markets. It's very easy for an individual mining company to take a particular slice of time on a stock market and say this, that or the other happens to be happening. I think people need to take a broader perspective on that, and if you want a broad perspective on, frankly, the recovery of the Australian share market over the last 12 to 18 months, based on the fact that this economy has done so well in the midst of the global economic crisis, frankly, that's because the Government has been out there making tough decisions on the economy, keep positive growth, prevent the economy from going into recession, preventing half a million Australians from losing their jobs. Imagine what it would have done with Mr Abbott's strategy of junking stimulus to employment here in Geelong. Just in Geelong alone, think about the consequences in this economy, this regional economy, had we done nothing, we saw the same unemployment rates as in America and Europe, it would be now 10 per cent plus, according to what's happening there. That translates into another half a million Australians out of work, and in sensitive areas such as this, you'd have thousands of Australians out of work with huge impact on local community life and small business.
JOURNALIST: Commsec has issued a strong buy recommendation for BHP Billiton and Rio shares this morning, does that give more credence to your theory that the miners are being perhaps a bit Chicken Little on the Super Profits Tax?
PM: Well I noticed a few billionaires out there in the last 24 hours saying that they are going to have a real problem with this. I'm pretty interested in what working families need for better super, to have a decent retirement with, and for the 2.4 million small businesses out there trying to have a go. I'm really concerned about that. And one other thing, if I look down here at Geelong, long term, and around the nation, funding the infrastructure these communities need. What I'd like to see is a fairer share for the infrastructure needs of growing regional communities around Australia, for the millions of Australian workers who are worried now about whether they have enough money to retire, to get them better super by raising the SGL from nine to 12, and better tax breaks for small business.
So I think, when people look at what Commsec's saying, what the former head of the Minerals Council of Australia is saying, look at the actual behaviour of certain company executives from a company like Cape Lambert, I think they may just pause and reflect and scratch their head and just wait for a bit more of this evidence to come out.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) clearly sided with the Opposition, does that pose a significant problem for you in an election year when the Leader of the Opposition now has these super rich companies behind him?
PM: Well my job as Prime Minister is to stand up for the national interest and to stand up for working families, pensioners and carers. I intend to do that.
This will be a tough fight. Prior to the last election, the same companies came out and said that if we got rid of WorkChoices, the economy would fall apart about three hours later. Well guess what - it didn't. There was a very big campaign against the party that I lead prior to the last election, saying that the mining industry would fall apart if we got rid of WorkChoices and got rid of AWAs. None of that's happened.
20 years ago, the Australian Government, the then Keating Government, introduced something called the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax. Guess what, it taxes at a rate of 40 per cent, you know where it applies, to all those offshore developments off the North West Shelf. And in the 20 years since then, we have seen massive developments including the biggest resource project Australia has seen, the Gorgon project, a $50 billion investment. Twenty years ago if you read the editorials of the financial newspapers, they said that this would be the end of the world as we knew it. In fact I re-read one of those editorials the other day, the Financial Times, 1985, I draw it to your attention for your lunchtime reading. Guess what - it didn't happen either. So a whole lot of people, defending their individual interests are going to go out there and threaten all sorts of things. My job is to act in the national interest and I intend to do so. The opposition will be stiff, Mr Abbott has decided to side with billionaire miners against the interests of working families and better super, and small business, who are crying out for some tax breaks.
Thanks folks, got to zip.
JOURNALIST: Just quickly, Geelong [inaudible] in the Budget, will it do well in the Budget?
PM: [inaudible]. That's fantastic. Well you know as I said before, Darren and Richard have been in my face and Treasurer's face about the needs of this local community for a long period of time. And it's not just some of the big investments we've made here in the hospital, the fact that we've got a Super Clinic which is due to be opened a bit later in the year, that's a big investment from the Australian Government, the fact that we already have a significant investment here in the local community in support of, dare I say it, the Cats, and the needs specifically at Kardinia Park, $15 million -
JOURNALIST: $14 million -
PM: - there you go, you got an extra million, and I understand they're probably going to hit us with some more in the future as well. Well, I'll leave that for the proper process. You know what the key thing is here? For communities like this, we have kept the economy strong. So many of the readers of your local newspaper, the Advertiser, so many listeners to your local radio stations, their number one concern is keeping their job, and what we have done through the national stimulus strategy is have unemployment at 5.3 per cent. That is the second lowest unemployment rate in all the major advanced economies. That is number one, two and three. And having a strong economy able to fund the future growth, in partnership with the Victorian Government and Geelong Hospital and local health services, these are big things for the future as well.
Now I've really got to zip.


HOST: Well, today the Government begins to sell its Budget. The Prime Minister joins me now, Mr Rudd, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning David.
HOST: Well a lot of people are saying this Budget is based on us continuing to ride the rickshaw, that China is our saviour, the huge commodities boom. Some saying, they could be a bit rubbery, that they're a bit too optimistic, what's your view on that?
PM: David, I think this is a responsible Budget, based on responsible economic management. It's something I believe in fundamentally, and therefore you've got to be very careful about all the assumptions these are based on. Part of it of course lies in our continued export performance.
But let's be very blunt about this. It also depends on the fact that we've actually generated positive economic growth in this country, kept a quarter of a million plus more people in work. They've been paying taxes rather than receiving unemployment benefits. We've kept a whole lot more businesses out there functioning, millions of them have shut down round the world, they are paying taxes as well.
And we've also brought about savings in terms of expenditure items. Put those three things together, these actually make for a responsible Budget, a responsible Budget which halves our peak debt, brings the Budget back to black three years early, in three years' time.
HOST: It's also based on the best terms of trade in 60 years. We are riding the rickshaw. Are you confident in those figures and are you confident China's not just a house of cards, that, you know, the boom can keep going? We've got a lot riding on it.
PM: The Treasury boffins analyse these things very carefully -
HOST: So you don't put the numbers together do you, Treasury does?
PM: The Treasury boffins do, and they've analysed carefully China's economic growth potential, they've looked at where commodity prices go, not just for China, always remember we're talking about Japan and Korea and other countries as well, which take huge volumes of Australian exports, and increasingly India, and they always pitch at the conservative end of that. In fact if you look at where they're pitching commodity prices for the future, it's quite low against what a number of the market analysts are saying, so we believe this is conservative, responsible economic management.
HOST: Mining has been our golden goose, will your super tax kill the golden goose? Why tax them?
PM: The bottom line is this, if you look at our long term reform for this economy, what I believe in is making sure that all companies out there remain as competitive as possible. That's why we're bringing down the company tax rate. You've got to pay for that by some means, however -
HOST: But these big miners are saying we're going to scrap projects, we're going to move offshore, we're going to take our business elsewhere.
PM: Well one of the former heads of the mining industry council said you're going to hear lots of people crying wolf about all those sorts of things. It's standard negotiation.
But can I say this, our independent Treasury modelling of the impact of this tax on the mining industry says that it will grow by something like 5.5 per cent. Why? Because we're taxing profits, not what's called volume, which means your smaller companies are out there getting taxed only on the basis of the profits they earn. Some of them can't even get a start because they get hit by an early tax based on volumes. It grows the mining industry.
HOST: Okay, Wayne Swan has capped spending increases at two per cent. Can you guarantee today, today, that you are going to keep to that two per cent cap, even during the election campaign?
PM: Absolutely -
HOST: Now remember, we've got this on tape, so whatever you say now we're going to play back to you. No more pork barrelling?
PM: Absolutely, and the reason is we said coming out of the extraordinary measures we had to take last year to keep this economy afloat - remember all those other major advanced economies went crashing into recession - we took extraordinary measures then, kept a quarter of a million Australians or so in work, all those businesses open. We had to do big things then but in order to track our way back to surplus, we had to impose these core budget rules, and one of them is to offset all new expenditure, and then the second is to keep our expenditures within a growth of two per cent and we will stick to that for the future.
HOST: Spending more on border protection than the environment, seems a bit funny, a bit crazy.
PM: Well in the case of border protection, there are basic things like the replacement life of a number of customs vessels. These are lumpy items, you've got to deal with them, make sure that all of our people out there on the front line have got the sorts of resources they need. But can I go to the question of the environment and climate change? This is a big investment, $650 million into a new renewable energy future fund.
HOST: That's Tony Abbott's scheme though, isn't it?
PM: We are building on an existing clean energy initiative of some $4.5 billion, this is on top of that, and this is to go into new projects in solar and wind and the rest to make a difference on the renewable energy front because climate change ain't going away.
HOST: Just quickly, a new Prime Minister in the UK, David Cameron, ever met him, good bloke, will he be good for us?
PM: Yeah, I've met Mr Cameron a couple of times on previous visits to the United Kingdom and we've had very good conversations at Australia House in London and elsewhere as well. I think the Australia-UK relationship goes beyond party politics. It'll be a good relationship. In fact I think I'm speaking to him not long after I get off this program. So I congratulate him on his becoming Prime Mininster of the United Kingdom, it's a high office, an important office.
But also I'd like to acknowledge the role of Gordon Brown as well, critical role last year in that London G20 summit which was so critical in coming out of the global financial crisis.
HOST: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Thanks David.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning, Steve. Thanks for having me on your program.
HOST: Pleasure. When was the last time you sat down at spoke with a real working family and do you think they would thank you for last night's Budget?
PM: I think I've spoken to a lot of working families during my recent tour of the nation's public hospitals. I got a very clear idea then that one of their priorities was making sure we had a decent health and hospital system for the future. This is one of the reasons why in the Budget last night you see such a large investment in the future of our hospital system, some $7 billion-plus of additional investment for more hospital beds, more doctors, more nurses, more GPs. I think that's a pretty basic delivery point for people listening to your program.
HOST: If you smoke and you're a working family, you whack them in the Budget. That's probably reasonable. If you've got a mortgage, though, we've had six rises. We've got food and grocery prices that keep going up. We've got the failed Grocery Watch. Petrol's back at high levels, most expensive since the global financial crunch - no Petrol Watch. You've promised to eliminate the double drop off for mums. That's been broken. You've promised GP super clinics. You've built 3, only, of the 31 that you ultimately want to build. And of course we have the great moral challenge of our time to protect future generations of Australian children from climate change - you've walked away from that. You really let the working families, down haven't you?
PM: One of the big responsibilities we've got for working families, and all Australian families, Steve, is to make sure we keep the economy strong. I believe very much in making sure that we have strong public financial management. That's why we've got in this Budget responsible management. The Government will halve peak debt and get the Budget back into the black in three years. That's three years ahead of time-
HOST: -Prime Minister what about those points I made about the environment and petrol and groceries and schools?
PM: Let's go to one of the points you just made which is also relevant to health, which is GP super clinics. At the last election we said that we would fund, I think, 35 or 36 of these. As of now, two years down the track, we have 11 in operation, we have another 17 under construction, this from memory by the way, and contracts I understand, have been settled on the others.
HOST: I won't trade memory with you, because you have a good memory. I thought it was 3 complete and 11 in the pipeline?
PM: I think we've got 11 which are operating fully or partially, we've got 17 under construction. These are my most recent numbers, and the others are with contracts either determined or almost determined. You'd understand that in each location sometimes difficulties arrive, but you're speaking from Melbourne this morning - I was down at Geelong not long ago looking at a new GP Super Clinic there which is almost up. It will be a huge addition to the health services in that area, not just with more GPs operating with flexible hours, but also on top of that, with more practice nurses, allied health professionals, so that people can better health services in the community. That's why a huge part of our investment in this Budget for mums and dads and kids right across the country is building this new National Health and Hospitals Network.
HOST: But mums wanted no double drop-off. That promise was broken. You promised the families of Australia that you would deal with climate change and you said it was the great moral challenge of our time. The ETS has been shelved. I mean, working families expected you to deliver on those promises from 2007, you promised them you would and you've walked away from them.
PM: Let me go to the question of childcare and childcare centres. One of our undertakings prior to the last election which was pretty important was to increase the childcare rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. We've delivered that. We also increased the threshold which people can be paid to $7,500, although we've now kept it at level for the future.
These are two core commitments we've made in terms of the affordability of childcare for working families.
On the question of the additional number of childcare centres, let me just go to that. With the changes which have occurred in the provision of the long day care centres across the country in the last couple of years, what the private industry has done is in fact add about 1,000 of those since then. We've also had to wrestle with, frankly, at a Government level, with the collapse of ABC Learning, and through the interventions Julia Gillard and others keep all those afloat. We therefore have seen that the occupancy rates of child care centres, long day centres, I think on average are running at about 90 per cent, so the judgement we took it would be unwise to add a large additional number to the market right now, that's the first point.
You mentioned also, on the question of climate change, Steve, I was as disappointed everybody else about our inability to get the Emissions Trading Scheme through the Australian Senate, but the Liberal Party has blocked it on three occasions - blocked it on three occasions. I can't force it through. That's why what you see in the Budget is now a whole new investment in the renewable energy future of Australia through this $650 million renewable energy future fund for more solar, more wind power and other forms of clean energy generation and that builds on the investments we've made in the past.
HOST: But you've now shelved the ETS until, you say, I think your quote was until the rest of the world does something. I mean isn't that the ultimate get out for you?
PM: What we've said is that we have delayed the implementation of the emissions trading scheme and certainly we've got to be mindful of action on the part of the rest of the world. But renewable energy is an important and critical start to our action on climate change. Climate change doesn't got away, it is real, and it's present and that's why it's addressed upfront in the Budget through the additional measures which are contained there, but as I said before, Mr Abbott on two or three occasions now, has indicated quite plainly that he is blocking this measure in the Senate.
We did the deal with Mr Turnbull. Mr Turnbull was rolled by Mr Abbott. We can't force that legislation through. That's why, realistically, I've said it will not be dealt with until a subsequent term of this Government, if we're re-elected.
HOST: You're an expert on China. This Budget is predicated on the China boom continuing. What guarantee have you got that boom will continue? What happens if China falls off a cliff?
PM: Well, in terms of the Budget underpinnings, Steve, we believe and I believe very strongly that our big responsibility is to make sure we get our country back into surplus now that we've manage to get our way through the global economic crisis.
HOST: But if China has a hiccup, you've got a big, big headache.
PM: Well, let me just go to the underpinnings of our assumptions about a surplus. It hangs on two or three factors, Steve. One is this - to make sure that of course our export industries are still doing well, but out Treasury analysts have been very conservative about their estimates about what the rest of the world, including China, will pay for our commodities over the next several years.
But the second point is this - because we've kept the economy strong during the global recession, what we've also done is keep about a quarter of a million Australians still in work and as a result of that they've been paying taxes and the Budget has not had to pay for increased unemployment benefits. That's actually held up our overall Government revenues.
And the final thing is this - we've also helped so many Australian businesses, small businesses, keep their doors open-
HOST: -that's going to make it hard for you to control inflation, though, isn't it?
PM: Well, again the Treasury has been very careful about its analysis on these questions. The inflation figure, the CPI figure, has been projected for the year ahead, that's 2010-11, at 2.5 per cent. That of course is an important inflation target for the future because through Budget discipline it's really important to keep downward pressure on inflation. Remember, the job of Government when the private economy is getting smaller and under real pressure, as it was during the global recession, that's the time for the Government to step in and make a difference. With the private economy recovering, that's the point at which Government, of course, should begin to reduce its activity in the economy so that we keep the pressure on inflation down.
HOST: Prime Minister Gordon Brown's resigned overnight. You sad to see him go?
PM: Yeah he was a good man, and he is a good man, and the reason I say that is not just because he's a friend of mine but because I remember clearly his chairmanship of the G20 meeting in London in April of last year, when, frankly, 20 world leaders, including myself as part of the G20, were sitting around the table in Downing Street staring at the global economic abyss as it seemed at the time, and Gordon chaired that meeting. We produced a first-class outcome and any analyst will tell you that that meeting and the decisions it produced basically broke the continued fall in the global economy at that time.
As for his successor, David Cameron, I've just spoken to him within the last hour on the phone, congratulated him on being elected to the high office of Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, and the thing about the Australia-UK relationship is that it's pretty much beyond party politics and I'm looking forward to working with Mr Cameron's Government as well.
HOST: Thanks for finding some time with a busy diary. I appreciate it.
PM: Thanks very much, Steve.


HOST: The Prime Minister joins me now from our Parliament House studio.
Kevin Rudd, firstly while we're talking about mining, we've just received the transcript of comments from the CEO of Rio Tinto, Tom Albanese, at a Merrill Lynch conference in Miami earlier today where he says he was shocked by your tax announcement but in particular he points out that Rio has reinvested everything it's earned in after tax profit back into Australia in the past ten years, about $38 billion in all, and he poses the question - would Rio have put that amount of money in if there had been a super tax in place? He calls it a super tax, not a tax on super profits, a super tax, and he says the answer was no. Can you afford to ignore that warning?
PM: Kerry, I think it's entirely predictable that large mining companies will complain about what the Government has put forward. What we want to ensure and what I believe in is that all Australians, because they actually own these resources, deserve a fair share back from these resources.
It reminds me, very much, of the debate which was kicked off back in the mid '80s when we brought in the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax. If you were to go to the Financial Times back in those days there's statements similar to the ones you just read out to me about the impending collapse of all future investment in offshore projects in Australia.
As we know that didn't happen. As Martin Ferguson just indicated in the earlier part of your program huge developments have since occurred within that tax framework, a 40 per cent tax, and secondly the largest resource project in Australia's history, the Gorgon project, was launched last year based on that tax. So it's fairly predictable that we're going to have complaints. We think the right thing to do is to obviously consult with the industry, we've said we're open to do that on questions of detail of implementation, of transition, but I've got to say Australians need to have a fairer share of these profits being earned from a resource which the Australian people own.
HOST: -OK-
PM: -so we can fund better super and the rest.
HOST: You've made that point but, it sounds not so much a complaint as a threat, well as a warning, if not a threat. He says the Pilbara business would not have been as big as it is, it would have been a lot smaller with this tax in place. Now are you, are you saying that's a hollow threat, it's just a process they're going through to try and soften you up?
PM: Well as I said before, Kerry, some of the large mining companies and some other companies are going to say all sorts of things as we sort out the detail of this. But again, it reminds me of a campaign which was run against the Labor Party in the lead up to the last federal election about how the abolition of Work Choices would fundamentally destroy the mining industry as well.
Well that hasn't happened nor did the introduction of the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax 25 years ago. So we've got to deal with these things on their merits.
HOST: So do you rule out categorically any significant change in the nature of your tax, whether it's the amount, the 40 per cent and you've said you're not going to, but also about the definition of what a super profits tax is?
PM: Kerry, I'll just repeat what I've said and the Treasurer has said since day one when we launched our response to Ken Henry's report and that is, we think the rates about right, we're very mindful of the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax precedent and secondly we're open for a discussion with the industry on detail, on implementation, on transition-
HOST: -What about on the-
PM: -80 companies-
HOST: What about on the definition of what a super profits tax is or what a super profit is?
PM: Well, Kerry, I don't intend to go beyond a single word that I've just said-
HOST: -OK
PM: -because that describes exactly the ambit within which the discussions are taking place with about 80 companies right now, most of the companies are in talking with the Treasurer about how to make this work but I go back to one fundamental-
HOST: Sorry, that, that does suggest to me that, that, this is still open about what that, what the final definition will be of a super profit?
PM: I just go back to what I said before, Kerry, and I haven't changed what I said from day one, there's going to be lots of sparks flying. I notice David Buckingham, who you may recall was the head of the Mining Industry Council, saying this is exactly what would happen, a whole lot of companies would come out and make all sorts of threats. As the former head of the Mining Industry Council he said that they are unfounded, that in fact this is a good tax for the future of the industry. I think we need to take all of this in our stride-
HOST: OK
PM: -remember what's at stake here is better super for working families, tax cuts for the general economy and furthermore, on top of that, funding the infrastructure which Australia needs. That is why the Government is doing this, because we believe in investing in our country's future competitiveness.
HOST: I'll get to the Budget details shortly but can you clear up a puzzle for me first.
PM: I'll try mate
HOST: -you've spent the best part of two years building up your political capital. How have you managed to damage brand Rudd so comprehensively in such a short time this year?
PM: Kerry, obviously the Government's going through a tough time at present. I've said as much to colleagues in the caucus. Governments from time to time go through difficult periods like this. Look, our job is to get on with the business of governing the country. There are lots of challenges we've handled well in the past, there's few things that we've got wrong, but when I go to the future and the proposition we've got to put to the Australian people is, who's most competent and capable of managing this economy in very difficult global times. So, some of those-
HOST: You, I, I said brand Rudd, you said the Government. I'm talking about Kevin Rudd, I'm talking about your image, your credibility, your brand. Whether some of those that appear to have been lost to you this year come back before the next election, or not, do you understand why so many people have turned against you now, Kevin Rudd, not just the Government, Kevin Rudd, and do you accept that they have judged your leadership and found you wanting?
PM: Kerry, that is a question which you should put to other folk who are political commentators and the rest. My job is to get on with the business of-
HOST: No, I'm putting it to you because you can't possibly suggest that this does not exercise your mind at all, that you are so focused, you're so focused on Government that you're not concerned about whether you're losing support going into the next election?
PM: Kerry, look I'm human like anyone else and of course you'd be inhuman if you weren't affected by developments from time to time, that's just the truth of it.
As I said before, we've been going through a tough time. Obviously a whole lot of people in the community have been disappointed by the position I announced in relation to the future of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. What's the reality that I had to confront there? Well two realities. One is that the Liberal Party backflipped and voted our legislation down, having negotiated an agreement with Mr Turnbull to get it through. That is the reality we had to confront and the second reality is this, that when we got to Copenhagen it didn't produce the sort of progress and the global agenda that we all had hoped, therefore where do we go to from here. Our commitment on climate change hasn't changed one bit, it's happening-
HOST: but-
PM: No, hang on, let me finish, you've asked me a pretty fundamental question here, which is about how the actions which I'm responsible for and the Government's responsible for are being seen. On the question of climate change our view hasn't changed one bit. The greenhouse gas reduction targets remain the same, our commitment to a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as the best way of getting there is the same, but we can't alter the fact the Liberal Party hasn't voted this down in the Senate -
HOST: OK, but-
PM: -therefore we have to-
HOST: -but there's one thing you can't escape and that is this: it is still in your hands to go to the next election on the issue as you defined as 'a great moral challenge of our time', an issue on which you accused the Opposition of political, of absolute political cowardice, it's in your hands to go to the next election, seek a double dissolution, whether you seek a double dissolution or not and make this ETS a fresh mandate for the people to decide and tell both sides of politics what they want. Now you have squibbed that decision. You have put this on the backburner until 2013, at least, and the Budget makes that clear?
PM: You know, something, Kerry, I will be delighted to fight Mr Abbott on the next election, at the next election, whenever it is held, on climate change absolutely-
HOST: On the ETS?
PM: On climate change and actions to bring it about. The bottom line is this, we believe in climate change, he says it's absolute crap.
We believe that an emissions trading scheme is the most effective and cheapest way of getting there, he has rejected that position despite the Liberal Party having formally embraced it. I now have to confront the reality that that is what he's done.
The other thing is this, and this is the second reality I referred to before which you skipped over, and that is that the progress on global action has been slower than any of us would like.
That is why we've announced a decision that we would not seek to reintroduce this legislation until the end of the Kyoto commitment period and on the basis that global action has been adequate-
HOST: -but Mr Rudd-
PM: -in the meantime what we will do-
HOST: Mr Rudd, when the Opposition tried to argue with you on holding back a vote on the ETS until after Copenhagen, that is, until after the world had made a stand, you said that was absolute political cowardice.
So why is it now not absolute political cowardice for you to show leadership on this to the rest of the world by seeking to take the Australian people with you at the next election on an ETS?
PM: You know something Kerry where I think you've got this fundamentally wrong is frankly, being absent from the negotiations in Copenhagen themselves. There was no government in the world like the Australian Government which threw its every energy at bringing about a deal, a global deal, on climate change. Penny Wong and I sat up for three days and three nights with 20 leaders from around the world to try and frame a global agreement.
Now it might be easy for you to sit in 7:30 Report land and say that was easy to do. Let me tell you mate, it wasn't.
We are fundamentally committed to climate change. We could not get the global accord that we wanted. As a consequence we need to do further work on the global front, further work on the national front, because I am absolutely passionate about acting on climate change.
We've been frustrated domestically politically, frustrated internationally by the lack of progress there, but we will not be deterred, we will progress this matter and we will achieve the best possible means of bringing down our greenhouse gas reductions, greenhouse gas levels in the future.
And the bottom line is this, the bottom line is this: there is no way you can stare in the mirror in the future and say that you have past up the core opportunity to act on climate change. I will not do that. The Government that I lead will not do that, but I cannot wish away the two realities I've just referred to.
HOST: OK, OK-
PM: -they are there.
HOST: Health is obviously going to be a big part of your re-election agenda and this Budget throws more money at it again but can I humbly suggest to you that you've buggered up the strategy by mixing up a confusing array of big spending health initiatives, with a lot of other important government announcements, good and bad, all coming within a very concentrated period, the mea culpa over the pink bats fiasco, the cutting down of Peter Garrett and ultimately the dumping of the bats all together, the backflip over the ETS that you've already referred to, the Henry Tax Review and the new resources tax, the tobacco tax, more compulsory super, all of which is there for you to sell and explain and now the Budget, this is a very crowded political picture as you get closer and closer to an election?
PM: Well, Kerry, things don't just flow as you would naturally want them to flow all the time.
What was my commitment prior to the last election on health and hospitals? That I would work with the States to bring about a national reform plan for the future of our health and hospital system where the buck stopped with me, where we ended cost shift and blame shift and failing that I would take the matter to the Australian people.
Well it took two years to do, longer than we would actually like, but you know what? We brought about the single biggest reform to the health and hospital system this country has achieved since Medicare.
Now you may make a commentary about the best political marketing of it, there's a whole lot of other factors out there which from time to time you can't control, like a global financial crisis, for example, it's sort of rocking around out there, and you've just got to deal with it as it presents itself to you. It's not everything neatly arranged in your in-tray as you would perfectly like to order your universe. It's not like that.
So what we have done is executed and implemented the commitment we gave to the Australian people prior to the last election. We've got on with the task of doing it.
The national health and hospitals network has been agreed by five States and two Territories and it delivers better health, better hospitals, more funding for doctors, nurses and you know something, the funding flows from one July and I am proud of the fact that Nicola Roxon and I could bring about this fundamental agreement.
If you think it's not been properly marketed, well that's a matter for somebody else; my job is to get the deal done. I also-
HOST: Isn't it--
PM: also have the view-
HOST: Isn't it also your job to communicate it? I mean, as the leader aren't you also supposed to be an effective communicator? Let me put this to you, all the polling you're doing is that showing that the people really understand this array of health measures that you've kept announcing one after the other after the other?
PM: Kerry, if you'd come down the Queensland coast with me and the New South Wales coast to practically all the major centres, in those regions with their local hospitals and sat with the local doctors and nurses and allied health professionals and the patients and spoken to each of their local media, perhaps not read by you in the studio where you are this evening, let me tell you-
HOST: I do occasionally step outside it, but go on-
PM: No, I'm making a serious point to you. Do you read the 'Mackay Mercury'? Do you read the 'Bundaberg News Mail'? Do you read the 'Maryborough Chronicle'? I mean these are papers which are reporting what's happening on the ground in their communities.
Myself, Nicola Roxon, we spent the last six or nine months going around to about 103 of these centres around the country. So you ask are people aware of what we're doing on a health and hospitals front?
HOST: Um, no, I-
PM: Probably more so, probably more so than you may think.
HOST: I was asking, I was asking how much they've absorbed of this complex array of announcements that you've been making in the last six weeks or so with all the other stuff.
PM: Well I've gone to the core one which you've raised which is about the health and hospitals reform.
HOST: OK.-
PM: The Budget of course contains a huge new investment in it. It is linked very much-
HOST: Before you go on Mr Rudd, I'm sorry but we're out of time and I've got serious constraints to meet the schedule. But this is a conversation I guess we're going to have to continue and obviously we'll be looking at the health thing in toto as things move along, but thanks very much for joining us tonight.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program Kerry.


HOST: You have broken a lot of promises lately, why should voters believe that you will actually now get the budget back into surplus?
PM: Well firstly the Government's proud of its record in delivering on the big reforms to the health and hospital system, the education revolution, and so many of the key elements of responsible economic management. On the question of economic management, can I just say this: we did the right thing during the global economic crisis. We kept the Australian economy out of recession, almost uniquely amongst the major advanced economies. But now we have a new task which is to build a platform for future growth. And what I believe in passionately is that when the circumstances present themselves you bring the budget back to surplus, and that is why we are, through this Budget, managed to bring about a set of numbers which has our net peak debt halved, which also has our Budget back in surplus three years ahead of time and in just three years time. These are pretty solid achievements when measured across the rest of the world.
HOST: But that economic growth and that return to surplus, is built on the assumption that our terms of trade will reach 60 years high, that the mining boom will continue to grow, and yet you're putting this new tax on the mining industry that could hurt that very growth.
PM: Well let's go to the underpinnings of the Budget itself. The reason we are able to bring the Budget back into black in just three years' time, is because one: the performance of our export industries, that is true. Two, because of our actions in the economy, we've actually kept nearly a quarter of a million people out there in work, who would otherwise be unemployed. They continue to pay tax -
HOST: You've wasted a lot of money too, on insulation programs -
PM: But hang on David. Let's just get this absolutely right. They continue to pay taxes, otherwise we'd be paying them unemployment benefits, and also, Lindsay Tanner and the team having bought about some savings, key savings. Put those things together, we're confident therefore, of the surplus that the Budget papers project for three years' time.
HOST: But as I say, money's been wasted in this process as well, can you seriously say that every dollar spent has been spent wisely?
PM: David in the process of public administration, things go wrong, I'm not going to say to your viewers that everything's been done perfectly, it hasn't been. But on the core question of conservative economic management, keeping the economy out of recession, number one. Number two, now that we are through the global economic crisis, bringing our Budget back to surplus three years ahead of time, these are the core things which matter for families, for pensioners, for carers.
Because by bringing the Budget back to surplus, in which I believe our current circumstances absolutely necessitate, it underpins our ability to do all these other things like building also the investments for the future.
HOST: But the new mining tax, according to the industry, it is going to undermine that resources boom, undermine the ability to continue that growth.
PM: Well let me just respond to that in its own terms. Firstly the mining industry council recommended that we head in the direction of a profits-based tax for the future, let's be very clear about that.
HOST: Not a retrospective one.
PM: They recommended a profits-based tax, that is the actual system. The second one is this, the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, which has been operating now for 25 years, amidst predictions of doom and gloom for the future of any offshore investment in Australia way back then. And since then we've had the biggest resource projects this country has ever seen, that's the second point. But the other thing is this, the Treasury's independent modelling through Econtech, says that if we put together the various measures that we have for mining, including a billion dollar plus package of incentives for the exploration industry, that the mining industry will actually grow in its activity by 5.5 per cent.
We've got to separate out, a fear campaign about projects closing, to getting on with the business of tax reform so that all Australians get their fair share from the resource which they ultimately own.
HOST: You are negotiating some details on this with the industry, I am just wondering what is up for negotiation, obviously the 40 per cent rate stays, you're still going to get the same revenue, $9 billion a year, but are you negotiating on where it kicks in, what profit level will you start to tax?
PM: Look we've been very clear about this. We think the rate is about right. On the other elements of the negotiation with individual companies, we're looking at detail, implementation and transition.
HOST: So what profit level it kicks in, is that up for negotiation?
PM: I will leave that to the negotiators.
HOST: But you're the Prime Minister.
PM: I'll leave that to the professional team of negotiators and you know why? Because each individual firm's circumstances are somewhat different.
HOST: But are you seriously saying you're happy for the negotiators to decide what profit level this tax should kick in at?
PM: Can I say I intend to leave the process of the negotiation with the team which has been appointed to do that. It'll then come back to the Treasurer, and it'll then come back to the Cabinet.
HOST: So it is ultimately your decision?
PM: It will then come back to the Cabinet. And therefore it's the right way to do these things. Any fundamental tax reform like this one, which is aimed at producing a fairer share for all Australians in tax cuts, in company tax cuts, in more super as well as tax breaks on your bank account savings, you've got to get this right, and therefore it will take time and we'll work through those matters with the 80 or so companies who are already in negotiation with the Treasury
HOST: You've cut spending in this Budget in a number of areas, just a couple of them, child care subsidies have been cut by almost $300 a year, why?
PM: Well the key question that we had to wrestle with was, first of all, maintaining our pre-election commitment to increase the child care rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent, we have done that, at considerable cost to the budget, and that helps with the affordability of childcare for families right across the country. Secondly, we committed also to taking that up to threshold of $7,500.
What we've done is actually keep it at that threshold, it went up to $7,800 at one point, it is back at $7,500. We understand that will affect probably something like three or four per cent of families, 97 per cent of families we are advised, won't be affected by that. But you know, if you're going to bring a budget back to surplus, in all these challenges, you've got to make disciplined and hard decisions in certain areas and this has been one of them.
HOST: Climate change is another area, we knew you've shelved the emissions trading scheme until 2013 at the earliest and last night announced a new renewable energy future fund. Can you tell me how is this any different to Tony Abbott's direct action climate fund?
PM: Renewable energy is based in the first instance on this Government having passed a renewable energy target of 20 per cent. That didn't exist before, the previous Government did not act on that. The second point is this: we have already out there, a $4.5 billion clean energy initiative which comprises support for renewables, also support for clean coal, and support for various arms of energy efficiency.
The purpose of this new fund, this renewable energy future fund, is to provide an opportunity for investment at commercial levels with companies out there in the solar area, in the wind area, in the tidal area, in all those other areas -
HOST: It's picking winners, isn't it, in the private sector, which is what you've criticised about Tony Abbott's approach?
PM: Well the key thing though is to be actually realistic about what can be produced by renewable energy at the end of the day. We believe it can make a big contribution, but our commitment to greenhouse gas reductions has not changed one bit. Our commitment to an emissions trading scheme as the most efficient and the cheapest way of getting there has not changed one bit.
HOST: So why didn't you have a double dissolution to force that through.
PM: What's changed is that you've got, of course, Mr Abbott who has decided for politically opportunistic to block this not just once, but multiple times.
HOST: Which means you can hold, under the constitution, a double dissolution election. Why not?
PM: The key things as I have said year in, year out, is that my overall view is that it's important for Governments to serve their full term.
HOST: But you can do that and still have a double dissolution election.
PM: My view has long been that Government should serve their full term. Let's be very clear about this on the question of action on climate change. We accept it's real. Mr Abbott says, to use his own term, it's absolute crap. We say that the science is fair 'dinkum. He says it's not. We say that the most effective way of producing long term significant greenhouse gas reductions is by and emissions trading scheme, he says not.
HOST: Yes but you could still go to a full term or there abouts and have a double dissolution election to put this scheme in place, to deal with the great moral challenge of our time, are you squibbing it?
PM: On the key question of action on climate change, the fundamental thing is to keep working on the renewable energy front which we are doing now. Secondly, to deal also with the challenge of getting the necessary consensus around an emissions trading scheme to get it through the Parliament in the first place.
HOST: But are you scared of a double dissolution?
PM: Can I just say this, when you have a combination of the Greens on the one hand, voting against the scheme that we put forward, and the conservatives on the other hand, voting against it in the other direction, it makes the passage through the Parliament a very, very difficult prospect.
That is why we will continue to advance the whole question of dealing with renewable energy. Our commitment to an emissions trading scheme has been deferred until action by 2013, as you indicated before. But we believe that this problem has not gone away, therefore it is important to get started now.
Around the world, various Governments have difficulties getting cap and trade schemes or whatever through their various legislatures; it doesn't mean you stop action, in means you get on with that action in the here and now.
HOST: The Treasurer last night made it clear that there's not much room for more spending given the state of the Budget, to get back into surplus in three years time. Given that you have been spending a lot in the last couple of years, are you seriously saying you will now tighten the belt, you won't, in the lead up to the election, be making big spending promises.
PM: We have said since the last Budget that the trajectory back to surplus would be by applying a two per cent cap on expenditure. We've done that in the period since then, we've done that through this particular Budget, and we intend to adhere to that in the future.
HOST: A pretty frugal campaign coming up?
PM: Well we said before that this would be a no frills budget, we believe that steering Australia through the global economic crisis required the Government to expand its activity in the economy. It also says that when the private sector rebounds, that you've got to also make sure that Government pulls back because producing a surplus like that is absolutely critical in order to do the things that you need for working families, keeping pressure off interest rates, making sure that your investments are carefully targeted on health and hospitals and the things that count right across the country.
That's what I believe and I believe conservative economic management is all about that.
HOST: Just finally Prime Minister, Gordon Brown has stepped down as Prime Minister in Britain. You worked with him very closely through the G20 process and I know you've praised him a lot, particularly for the work in Pittsburgh at the G20 there. You've spoken to David Cameron I understand this morning, are you sad to see Gordon Brown go?
PM: Gordon Brown is a very good man. His contribution, particularly at the London Summit last year of the G20, which he chaired, was fundamental in breaking the fall in the global economy which was occurring at the time. That, the economic historians will point back to in decades to come, was how we managed to prevent this global recession becoming something much worse.
I've spoken this morning to David Cameron. I've wished him very well, congratulated him on his win, told him to take an hour off with his wife Samantha and enjoy the moment. I said, the real job will start in an hours' time. And I'm confident that this relationship, which I really do think is above party politics, is one which is going to go from strength to strength.
HOST: Prime Minister thanks for joining us.
PM: A pleasure.


HOST: Mr Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: After a frenetic year you've had with thrills but plenty of spills, many in the last couple of weeks, was a dull and competent budget what you needed to help gain lost ground?
PM: The key thing that I believe in is responsible economic management. Responsible economic management during the global downturn and responsible economic management now that we're on a path to recovery, and that's why, what we the Government, have done is halve peak debt, get the Budget back in the black in three years and that's three years ahead of time. I believe that it's really necessary to do that in these circumstances of uncertainty around the world.
HOST: Did you really though have no choice but to produce this sort of budget? Because you couldn't go on spending the way you were during the financial crisis?
PM: Well the core element of conservative economic management in which I believe, is expanding the role of government in the economy when the private sector is in retreat. That was certainly the case during the global financial crisis and had we not done that we would have had a quarter of a million more Australians out of work, many small businesses collapsing.
Now that the economy, globally, is on a pathway to recovery, although it's still uncertain, with the private sector expanding it's time for the role of government to retreat. That's what conservative economic management is all about. That's what's what I believe in. Getting the country back to surplus three years ahead of time making sure, however, also giving a fair share to, for all Australians in this country's national wealth and also preparing for Australia's future. That's what we're on about in this Budget.
HOST: Does putting on your fiscal conservative cloak again meaning you also have to hold spending down in the election campaign? You can't go promising big bribes?
PM: Well again the first responsibility that I have as Prime Minister, and what I deeply believe to be the right course of action, is to steer the economy through a highly fluid set of circumstances around the world.
Right now, if you look carefully at the debt crisis in Europe where you've got net debt rates ranging from 70 to 80 to 90 to 100 per cent plus of GDP, and our own net debt peaking at something like 6.1, the right thing to do is to make sure that we are bringing about a very conservative bottom line. These are uncertain times globally; therefore when it comes to an election year, this is not a pre-election spend-a-thon. Mr Howard used to do that in the year leading up to an election every year. This is a responsible budget keeping to its 2 per cent cap on expenditure and we will adhere to that.
HOST: Will you be disappointed if you don't get a political bounce after this Budget?
PM: The key thing with the Budget is to act in the national interest because if you go around the world at the moment, people look at Australia and say, how did this country manage to come through the recession globally in such good shape? We have a responsibility as a Government, and I have got a responsibility as a Prime Minister, to make sure we keep it that way. Build on the strength that we've had coming out of the global recession and lay the foundations for long-term future sustainable growth. How people judge that and assess that politically will be a matter for them. We've got to make sure we're doing the right thing by the country, this is a responsible Budget for that reason.
HOST: You say you're getting the Budget back in the black in three years' time, but it's a wafer thin surplus and the Opposition is going to block some of what you propose. Can you deliver it?
PM: Well on the question of the surplus, we have worked through this very, very carefully. I noticed some of the commentary about this and I noticed some of the commentary, for example by Mr Hockey, the Shadow Treasurer, who said in fact that last year the Treasury's projections for growth were vastly too optimistic. Now he says the Treasury's projections last year were vastly too pessimistic. I think we need to take with a grain of salt what the Opposition is saying about the numbers here.
We've taken very conservative estimates from the Treasury, bearing in mind all sorts of factors. One is our performance in exports, the second is the fact that we've kept nearly a quarter of a million Australians in jobs, which means they are paying tax and they're not taking unemployment benefits. That helps the bottom line, as well as hundreds of thousands of businesses with their doors kept open rather than them closing down as their counterparts did overseas. We've also produced savings.
HOST: But if you can't get the mining tax through the Senate that leaves a lot of your spending promises unfunded doesn't it?
PM: Well let's be very clear about that. We have said very carefully that the Resources Super Tax is about producing a fair share for all Australians. Now a fair share for all Australians meaning bringing the company tax rate down for all Australian companies, by the way including the mining companies, down to 28 per cent, a big tax break for small business. Also boosting superannuation for working families up from 9 per cent to 12 per cent, and investing with a new fund into the infrastructure needs particularly of our resource states.
Now these things, one is tied to the other and therefore it's absolutely important that we get this Resources Super Profits Tax through. On the question of the surplus it of course is contained within other measures within the Budget.
HOST: Can you make the mining tax more palatable to the mining industry, or are you in a position where you simply can't afford to back down on any more promises?
PM: Well we've been very clear about the fact that we think we've got the rate for the Resources Super Profits Tax about right. We've also been very clear about the fact that we will consult with industry, with the mining industry on detail, on implementation and transition and right now the Treasury and others are engaged in consultations with nearly 100 separate countries on those questions. We'll work through the detail. It will take quite a long period of time, but remember the mining industry itself prior to the Henry review, in its own submission, recommended a resources rent tax for the future and we've had one for the petroleum sector operating for the last 25 years.
HOST: You're predicting growth at 4 per cent but inflation at just two and a half, do you really believe that's achievable?
PM: Well the key thing is to ensure that we, in our fiscal policy, are doing the right thing. When it comes to the inflation number, as I said, this is a modest budget, a no frills budget and we've kept within the expenditure cap of 2 per cent and we've offset new expenditure with saves. That is an important discipline for this Budget.
Obviously it's going to be a responsibility for the entire economy in registering continued, strong economic growth. But our Treasury, remember, is made up of conservative economic analysts who have been at this task for a long period of time, and I believe that these projections they have put forward, with these forecasts they have put forward are based on the best analytical information available.
HOST: Much of what you are promising happens in two or three years' time, including the delivery of that first surplus, yet the trust people had in you is shakier than it used to be. Can you expect people to take you on trust on these promises?
PM: Well, on the question of the Government's economic projections, these are based, as I said, on the conservative analysis of the Australian Treasury-
HOST: So you can deliver these?
PM: -It is the Treasury together with the Budget and Strategic Policy Committee of the Cabinet, which puts together this Budget over a long period of time. As I said, the fact that we are able to produce such a strong budget performance, the fact that we're able to provide Australians with a fairer share, for example fairer super and tax cuts for working families, the fact that we are able to invest in our future, for example in health and hospitals and schools and a new Renewable Energy Future Fund.
This is all because we've provided strong economic management for a long period of time, but the numbers upon which these are based come out of the expert analysis of the Treasury itself.
HOST: Finally Prime Minister you worked closely with your now former British counterpart Gordon Brown in the lead up to the G20 meeting a little over a year ago. Are you sad to see him go?
PM: Well Gordon Brown should be congratulated for his core achievement at the London G20 Summit in April of last year. Any analyst who looks back at what happened in that summit will know that that action, which he chaired as head of the G20 at the time, broke the fall in the global economic collapse which was occurring at that time. It was a critical meeting.
I've just now got off the telephone from David Cameron however, his successor. I've congratulated Mr Cameron on being elected to the high office of Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. We've had a good conversation just now, he's looking forward to a further upgrade in the Australia/UK relationship. We even talked about the possibility of him coming out to Australia at some stage, perhaps coinciding with a few games of cricket. So it will be a good relationship. The Australia/UK relationship is above party politics.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for have me on the program.


HOST: Prime Minister, good morning.
PM: Good morning Neil. Thanks for having me on your program.
HOST: Well thanks for your time. Just before the Budget, have you spoken to the new Prime Minister in the UK yet?
PM: Ah, yes, just within the last hour I spoke with David Cameron, and I certainly congratulated him on being elected to the high office. I also suggested that he and his wife just take a moment of quiet time to enjoy it all because in about an hour's time it all starts. I've met him twice before in London, Neil. The thing about the Australia/UK relationship over many years is that it's always risen above party politics, goes back to the days, I suppose, of Curtin and Churchill. So I think this will be a good relationship between us for the future, a lot of work to do on the global economy. Big meeting, the G20, up in Canada at the end of next month, given that global financial markets are still jittery.
HOST: And have you commiserated with Gordon Brown?
PM: I haven't got through to Gordon yet but I will. I spoke with him just before the election. Gordon is a good man, and has made an extraordinary contribution to the global economy. That work, I may have mentioned this on your program at an earlier stage, that he did chairing a very critical meeting of the G20 last year, which frankly was so fundamental to preventing a global recession from heading into something much, much worse, so he should be honoured for that.
HOST: Prime Minister, the Budget - I'd like to say this is original, it isn't, it comes from David Koch - we're riding the rickshaw aren't we? What happens if the boom busts in China? What happens to Australia?
PM: Well, the Treasury's estimates of our commodity prices, Neil, is pretty conservative. See, what I believe in is making sure that we're running conservative economic management here and therefore that means getting this country back into surplus as quickly as possible and we're going to do that three years ahead of time. And of course that means ensuring that we are keeping a whole range of basic financial disciplines in place. Now on the commodity prices thing, with China, the Treasury's estimates against most market analysts are pretty, pretty conservative. The second thing though -
HOST: But if it does burst, we're still relying on a hell of a lot of extra money to come in in tax?
PM: Well can I say that it's not just China, we're talking about of course our huge markets in Japan, in the Republic of Korea and increasingly India as well.
HOST: Do you deny we're riding the rickshaw?
PM: I think the Chinese, well China is obviously our largest trading partner at present, but Japan is also huge, and so is India, increasingly so, Republic of Korea as well. But the other point I was going to make is this, Neil - the other part of why we are confident about being able to being able to bring back this Budget to surplus three years ahead of time, and in just three years' time, is because of our interventions in the economy last year. We've kept, you know, getting close to a quarter of a million people in jobs, that means they're still paying taxes. If that wasn't the case, and they were unemployed, which if you look at the unemployment rates around the world is what would have happened, then they would be also not just only not paying taxes, but we'd be paying them unemployment benefits. So these things together add up to our ability to bring the budget back to surplus.
HOST: The other element there, what if you don't get the super tax through the Senate? What happens?
PM: Well there are probably three consequences which flow from that, and maybe four. The first is -
HOST: - Is the surplus gone?
PM: No, the surplus is entirely funded within the Budget itself. The Resource Super Profits Tax is used to fund three or four other measures. One of them, of course, is bringing down the company tax rate, down to 28 cents, as well as particularly important changes for tax treatment of small business, a new tax break for small business.
HOST: So if it doesn't get through, you don't do what you said you would out of the Henry review?
PM: That's right -
HOST: - It doesn't affect the Budget?
PM: No, no, that's right. The two things are directly linked. The Resource Super Profits Tax on the one hand to give a fair share to all Australians, bring down the company tax rate, helping small business, boosting super for workers and also investing in infrastructure. These things are directly linked. On top of one other measure though, that's what I was getting to before, which was announced by the Treasurer last night, and that is that 50 per cent tax cut on people's bank savings interest, up to $1,000, that also is part of this package.
HOST: What's that worth to a person, a couple of hundred dollars is it?
PM: Look I don't overestimate it, Neil, but at present there's not a whole lot of tax incentive for people to have money in a bank account. Therefore we're trying to actually make it more advantageous for people, often older people who prefer to keep their money in bank accounts. It all contributes to national savings.
HOST: Obviously you're selling this around financial responsibility and return to surplus, will you therefore guarantee no big spending offers before the election?
PM: Absolutely.
HOST: What would you restrict yourself to?
PM: Well we've restricted ourselves to a two per cent spending cap, and we've adhered to that for this Budget . Remember the job of Government when the private economy is under stress is to expand the role of Government so that we keep people in jobs. But now that we've signs of recovery, despite what's happening around the world at the moment, it's time for the Government to pull back. That's why we are able to bring back the Budget into surplus, halve the peak debt, get the Budget back in the black in three years.
HOST: So how much is two per cent?
PM: Well two per cent is that -
HOST: You're limiting yourself to that, how much in dollars?
PM: Oh well, I don't have those specific figures in front of me, it would range, because we normally budget in four year cycles, it changes obviously one year to the next, but two per cent is a real limit, we've adhered to that, and these were the disciplines we outlined 12 months ago. And that's why we are confident we can bring back this surplus three years ahead of time, in a time when frankly, most other governments around the world will be swimming in deficit for many, many, many years to come.
HOST: Why have you dudded Victoria here on roads? $260 million Victoria gets, New South Wales $717 million, why is Victoria dudded?
PM: I don't have the breakdown on the roads figures around the country, but I will ask Anthony Albanese to come on your program to answer that specific question.
HOST: But the principle, why did Victoria get significantly less?
PM: Well let me also just add from my broader knowledge about the investments we've made in Victoria during the course of the last Budget -
HOST: Yeah but what about New South Wales as well -
PM: No, no, no I'm just about to go to that. In the last Budget you'll recall that our investment in Victorian transport infrastructure was huge, including from memory a $3.1 billion investment in the Regional Rail Express, first time frankly the Australian Government's invested anywhere in the country in urban rail. So Victoria did very, very well out of the Budget investments last year. On the Budget allocations this year, I'd rather have the Transport Minister answer your specific questions.
HOST: Fair enough. I'll ask you about the batts, you know I've been a critic of the insulation system, the batts. You've put aside $339 million to check 150,000 homes. That's $2,260 each house, how does that happen, to go and check them? $2,260 each.
PM: In terms of the spread of that over the number of houses, again I'll have Minister Combet come on that, but remember we are looking at not just inspections for that group that you're speaking of but also those with foil insulation.
HOST: No, this is the batts, it's reported as $339 million for 150,000 homes with batts to be checked, not replaced, $2,260 each.
PM: Well in terms of those figures I'm sure they are based on the best analysis of what it takes to do this job properly. As I've said multiple times on your program before Neil, there have obviously been real problems with the implementation of this. Our responsibility as a Government is to get it right, these are the figures which have been presented by Minister Combet.
HOST: The, ah, $1 billion on asylum seekers, do you accept that if we could get a policy right that they didn't come here, we could save a lot of money?
PM: Well you know one of the key things on border protection, Neil, is to keep investing in our forces, and that means also replacing our Customs vessels when it becomes time to replace them. These are expensive items, they have to be done when it becomes due. Therefore that's part of the expenditure we're talking about there.
Generally, on border protection, our view is that we must make sure that we've got the best assets deployed out there, protecting Australia's waters. But as far as overall flows in people movements are concerned, for the last 10 to 15 years, it have always been driven by peaks and troughs in global and regional security conditions. With the war in Sri Lanka last year, civil war, you have lots of people leaving for Canada, here and elsewhere.
HOST: But you know how much it irritates people, the private jets, the four star hotels, are we stuck with that?
PM: Well the challenge that we have is to deal with all the practical problems that present themselves. That means, initial processing of course on Christmas Island, it means also using other facilities as determined by the immigration authorities. Remember the use of private hotels is not something which is unique to this Government. It was used extensively by the previous Government as well, depending on the circumstances and whether people are exiting a country, on their way to an airport, all those sorts of things.
HOST: Professor McGorry, the Australian of the Year, I was just talking to him a moment ago, he says that you've as good as ignored mental health and it will cost lives. Now why is mental health, well he says people with mental illness will wake up today and say why has the Government forgotten us?
PM: Well let me go specifically to that criticism. Professor McGorry, I recall, runs a very important service called Head Space around the country. At present the Australian Government, I think for the first time, has funded I think 30 of those around Australia -
HOST: - Yep, $78.8 million -
PM: - Yeah, and my recollection is we're now increasing the number that we are funding as well.
HOST: A drop in the ocean he said. He said well you've got six per cent of your spending, health spending, on mental health, New Zealand has 12 per cent.
PM: I was about to come to that as well. There's a second part which I'd draw to your listeners' attention as well. Remember we are investing hugely in the health and hospital system in this budget. Part of is an increase in the number of hospital beds, some 1,300. Part of those beds can also be made available in hospitals for psychiatric patients. But let me go to the broader criticism of Professor McGorry. I accept fully that when it comes to mental health there is much, much more work to be done, as there is in aged care. I said this at the time that we produced the agreement with the States and Territories on the Health and Hospitals Network - these are two areas that still require a whole lot of work, I don't even pretend that that work has been done.
HOST: Meanwhile he says preventable deaths aren't prevented, people die.
PM: Right across the health system, whether I'm talking about chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular et cetera, each set of medical experts will present often the same graphic point of view. I can't dispute any of them. What I can do is try and produce a system-wide reform and what you've got in this Budget is a $7.2 billion investment which produces 1,300 more hospital beds, 6,000 plus more doctors, more nurses as well as more GP services in the community. There's more to be done.
HOST: I know you need to, he doesn't dispute that either, but I know you need to get away. Just one thing, are you aware you're spending $30 million advertising, on propaganda to convince us on climate change? $30 million over two years.
PM: My understanding is that the public advertising campaign concerned, Neil, also deals specifically about how households get engaged in their own emissions reduction tasks. I don't have the detail in front of me, but things like household rebates et cetera. More broadly, it's important that the community is aware of the sorts of programs which they can access or get behind and support. On the detail of the actual ad itself, I've not seen it.
HOST: Thank you for your time, will interest rates stay down because of this?
PM: Well we've taken the cue that we've really got to make sure we stick to budget discipline here, and I've said bringing this Budget back to surplus helps keep pressure off rates. But it's going to be still a tough year ahead and as you know the Reserve Bank makes up its own decision.
HOST: Thank you very much for your time, the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, sorry I kept you a little bit too long.


PM: First of all, it's good to be back home. It's full of fog and chills in Canberra. It's great to be back here in sunny Queensland.
This week the Government has brought down a budget, a budget which is about building a strong economy but also delivering a fairer Australia, an Australia which invests in our future challenges. What we've done is bring down a budget based on strong economic management - strong economic management which halves our debt, which brings the budget back to surplus three years ahead of time and in just three years from now.
On top of that, we've invested in tax cuts for working families; tax cuts for small business; better super for Australian workers; as well as investing in our long-term infrastructure needs and in more doctors, more nurses and more hospital beds. This is all about the fairness in which we believe - that is, a strong economy which keeps it strong for the future but is delivering a fairer outcome for all Australians.
Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Are the battlelines drawn for the next election?
PM: I think it's pretty basic. We stand for a fair go for all Australians and that means getting rid of WorkChoices. The Liberal Party stands for bringing back WorkChoices. We stand for job security. Mr Abbott stands for job insecurity.
I'll just add one other thing as well - all this, at the end of the day, is about responsible economic management. This is a responsible, cautious, conservative budget. I notice today that even Mr Abbott's own colleagues voted him down in the shadow cabinet because they don't trust him on core economic management.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott says you (inaudible) great big new tax (inaudible) public purse (inaudible)
PM: Well, what I'd say, having listened to Mr Abbott's speech last night, it was all negative with not a single positive plan for the future, and again I'd say the reports we have today is that even Mr Abbott's shadow cabinet colleagues didn't trust him on economic management to support one of his proposals.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think the overall size of the Australian public sector is about right. I think what Mr Abbott has indicated is that he stands for job insecurity, job insecurity primarily because he's promising to get rid of the unfair dismissal laws. This is a big change.
I've just been speaking to a whole lot of working people inside. It's pretty basic, whether you've got job security or not, and I think Mr Abbott has said he wants to take away basic protections which underpin people's job security. We won't agree to that. That's why we got rid of WorkChoices. He says he's going to bring it back. Remember, we protected hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs during the worst recession Australia has seen in three quarters of a century
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Strong economic management is absolutely basic to what this Government is on about and that which I believe in. Therefore, we will be having a debate, a big debate, on who's stronger at economic management and the reform of the tax system is part of that.
Let's go to that at one further level of detail. Why are we reforming the tax system? We want to make sure that Australians get a fairer share of the resources that they all own but also that we're able to bring down the tax on companies across the country; to bring down the tax on small business; to boost the super retirements for working families; and to invest in our long-term infrastructure needs.
What's the alternative on tax? Remember, Mr Abbott opposes what we have done in bringing down the company tax rate, so what you have is this government bringing down company taxes, Mr Abbott sticking them up. That's a pretty basic, basic difference right across the economy at large.
Why are we doing this? Because we believe in building a strong, broad-based economy for the future, one which can weather future storms.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry, I can't quite hear.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, (inaudible) has created a lot of uncertainty in Central Queensland. Are you concerned about something (inaudible) all those marginals that-
PM: You know, when I've been around regional Queensland in recent times, I remember, particularly, a conversation in the main street of Mackay where locals said to me the mining boom is fantastic - what we want is a fairer share of the proceeds for our city. That's what they said. They want a fairer share of the proceeds for their city, and what does that mean in practical terms?
Go to Central Mackay and have a look at what's happening with trucks rumbling through the middle of town through to the ports. A lot of people, frankly, find it now too scary to even cross the road. That's what the locals told me.
So, what's the answer? Building a ring road from the main drag into town out to the port of Mackay. Guess how much that costs? Several hundred million dollars. So, who's going to pay for that? The rate payers of Mackay? The tax payers of Queensland? Australian taxpayers? This is where it is very, very practical. We want a fairer share of the super profits earned by our most profitable mining companies to come back and be invested in the infrastructure which is necessary to support those regional communities and that's what we believe in.
JOURNALIST: It's going to hurt your election chances (inaudible)
PM: I think if you spoke on the ground to what people are saying in those communities about what they need locally and how it should be funded, every one of those communities I've been to, whether it's in Rocky, or whether it's in Mackay or Gladstone - each one of the local authorities has asked me this question: how do we plan for and fund for growth? How do we do that?
Now, we can't just invent that from somewhere, that's got to come from somewhere, and that's why we believe that there should be a fair share and a fair return for miners, that's true. There should be a fair share and a fair return for the entire Australian community and that means the regional communities which support our mining industry as well.
JOURNALIST: Are the details of that tax negotiable?
PM: As I've said before, ever since we released it, we believe we've got the rate about right. On the question of detail, on the question of implementation, on the question of transition, that's all part of the consultation process which is already underway with hundreds of mining companies around the country.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a teacher in Adelaide has admitted to changing answers on NAPLAN tests. What do you think of this?
PM: Cheating shouldn't happen anywhere. What we're on about with these tests across the country is to give an honest picture of schools where we've got some problems, where we need to provide more resources, so we're actually on about finding out the truth, so that if there is a challenge in a particular area we need to know where we need to enhance the literacy and the numeracy and all those sorts of resources to make it better, so we need to get honest results, so I'm pretty disappointed by that. I'm sure the state education authorities have it in hand.
JOURNALIST: So, do you think that the results aren't credible, that it's a waste of money and time?
PM: No, everywhere I've gone in Australia people are saying it's really good that through the MySchool website we have our first window on how my school's performing. You know, you have a bit of an idea about this teacher or that teacher, depending on where your kid's been through that school, but it's far better that you've got a sense of comparing the school as a whole against similar schools around the state or around the country. That's what MySchool is all about, so on your question, it's very important that we've got the data to do that and that it's properly administered and properly tested, because that enables us to make those judgements about where extra resources and investments are needed.
JOURNALIST: Back to the Budget quickly, are you worried Mr Abbott will succeed in quashing the mining super tax like he did your ETS?
PM: Look, I go back to what I said before - I listened to Mr Abbott last night. In a half hour address to the Australian nation it was all negative with nothing really positive; no positive plan. So, it's easy to oppose everything and propose nothing, but I think with this an election year people are going to start to ask some pretty basic questions, and one of them is whether your budget adds up. You can't just, sort of, push that off to the never-never, and say 'oh well, someone do all the adding up later on.' You can't do that.
I remember when I was Leader of the Opposition some years ago, by the time we got to the stage of delivering a budget reply we already had a large number of savings out there from which we could draw upon to make specific numbers out of. I see none of that hard work's been done. It's very easy to be negative in politics. The real challenge is to be positive.
JOURNALIST: Tell me why, then, is the Queensland Resources Council, they want the consultation period for the RSPT shortened. They say it's going to add to uncertainty the longer this goes on. What's your response to that?
PM: Look, the Treasurer has that consultation process well in hand. I know he is also liaising closely and carefully with various state governments around Australia. This process, we're working with, I said, with, I think, more than 100 companies already. We will work our way through it, but as I close, can I just say this - the reason we are fundamentally reforming the tax system is because we need to build a strong platform for broad economic growth for the future. That means bringing down the company tax rate for companies right across Australia; giving small business a helping hand through a big tax break for them; investing in our national pool of savings by tens of billions of additional dollars in super. This is the right reform.
There's going to be all sorts of things said on the way through but we intend to get on and do it.
One last thing as I go: I was reminded as I came here again today that it's the anniversary of the sinking of the Centaur. It's the 67th anniversary. I was at St John's Cathedral earlier this year for that extraordinary memorial service once the ship had been found.
Two or three hundred Australians lost their lives on that ship. It means a lot to those of us in particular who come from Queensland, so let's spare a though today for those who perished on the Hospital Ship Centaur as they were out there in the line of fire in Australia's name.
Thanks, folks. Got to run.


PM: Kristina Keneally, Jessie's parents Julie and Roger, her brother Tom, her sisters Hannah and Emily, grandparents Gordon and Margaret, and most importantly, Australia's newest hero, Jessica Watson.
Jess, welcome back to dry land. Welcome back home to Australia. You know something- you may feel a little wobbly on your feet just now. But in the eyes of all Australians, you now stand tall, as our newest Australian hero. You know, at 16 years old, you are a hero for all young Australians. You are also a hero for all young Australian women. You do our nation proud.
We've spoken a lot in recent months over the satellite phone- some times more clearly than others. These conversations have been terrific. When we spoke on Australia Day, I asked you what was your message for all Australians; what did you want me to tell the nation on your behalf? And what you said was three simple words, live your dream. Jessica, today you have done just that. You have lived your dream.
Later that day, I think you were about five thousand miles west of Cape Town, in the middle of nowhere. Think of your geography books. There's not much out there, just the blue stuff, and the grey stuff, and the white stuff. No land. Out there, in the middle of nowhere, she then blogs to the rest of the world that we had this conversation. But to prove that she was Australian, she said what was the most important thing to happen to her on Australia Day- not talking to me as the Prime Minister- but that she finally fixed the dunny on the boat. That proves she's a young Australian. I understand there've been problems still, ever since.
You know something, this is a great day for our country. You do all of our hearts proud. When we spoke again on the phone, I asked you this question- what is it that you wanted to do most when you got back on dry land in Australia? And here speaks a young adventurer, who has sailed singlehandedly around the world. What did she want to do most when she got back to Australia? She said this- I need to learn to drive. I need to learn to drive.
Well, on behalf of the Australian Government, your Keys2Drive kit. This provides you with one free lesson courtesy of the Australian taxpayer for you and your mum and your dad. And your mum and dad in particular. Channel Ten, I understand, are providing an extra ten driving lessons. Well, thank you Channel Ten. But the motto of this Keys2Drive campaign is "find your way". You know something, you have no problems on that score. You will pass your driving test with flying colours, as you passed the navigation test of the world.
Jess, all Australians are proud of you today. Your family is proud of you. We're proud of you. All of Sydney is proud of you. All of our home state of Queensland is proud of you. All Australians are proud of you. In three years- in three days time, you celebrate your 17th Birthday. Happy Birthday Jess.
Ladies and gentlemen, all of you have come out today, and if you're watching from at home now, three cheers for our newest Australian hero- our Jess Watson. 


Thank you Alan, and thank you, Crystal, for that extraordinary performance.
When I first met Alan Jones, probably about three or four years ago, I was Leader of the Opposition and I remember him saying to me in that funny studio of his out there at 2GB, off air he said this: 'You know something? There's an epidemic of cancer out there. Everybody I know has been touched by this. Everybody I know is having someone in their family or their immediate circle of friends who has been stricken.'
That was before, of course, Alan himself faced his own challenge, and it says something about how widespread this challenge is for all Australians and for young people that that is our national story.
If I looked around this room of leaders tonight - whether they are captains of sport, captains of industry, captains of politics - I doubt that any person could put up their hand now and say they know of nobody in their immediate circle of friends or family who is not now affected.
In that conversation Alan said to me 'Have you heard of a bloke called Chris O'Brien?', and as a loyal son of Queensland and someone who never watched RPA I said I didn't have a clue who Chris O'Brien was. He said, 'You should track him down about what needs to be done on cancer.' So I did.
Chris O'Brien, for those of you who did not know him or have the honour of knowing him, was an extraordinary Australian - not just a television star on that program RPA as it was, but also a brain surgeon and someone who specialised in neurological cancers, and the ultimate, ultimate irony - the cruel and saddest irony - was that he himself became stricken with brain cancer. Our foremost surgeon, our foremost neurological surgeon in this city and probably across the nation, and certainly the public face, himself struck down.
So at Alan Jones' suggestion I actually went and tracked this bloke down when I was Leader of the Opposition. Didn't know him from a bar of soap, just sat down, and he took me through the journey of someone who has sat on one side of the bed, and someone who now lay on the other side of the bed.
I just sat there for a couple of hours and listened to this bloke as he unfolded the story, and it was an extraordinary story. In the time that I've been Prime Minister I've only authorised one state funeral in this country, and that was for him. He died a year or so ago, he fought an extraordinary fight - an extraordinary fight - and his single message was this to me: for words to become deeds, we need to invest in this killer disease.
100,0000 members of our fellow Australian family are stricken with this disease each year - 100,000. That is a truckload of people; it's a huge number of people. 1,600 of them are very young people, very young people of the type of whom we've been speaking tonight.
I was talking to Andrew from your Foundation earlier this evening and it seems that we have a friend in common, or we had one. You may have seen me on television recently visiting practically every public hospital in Australia. By the end of that tour of Australia I was ready to conduct minor surgery myself I'd received such a rolling instruction from the clinical specialists of our country.
But with one of the young faces up there, we think, I sat down with her on her bed as she slowly began to slip away. She was a very young person - one of that 1,600 - one of those very human faces.
And so when Chris O'Brien says if you want to make a difference, invest: invest in the women and men of science who are at the forefront of this; invest in those who provide the clinical treatment up front, close and personal, doing everything within their power to wrest this person back from the abyss; and do everything you can in terms of what the clinicians describe as palliative care - what we would describe as basic human love and compassion.
So, Governments can't do everything, but they can do a bit. In fact, if they are minded they can do a lot. It's one of the reasons, and I attribute this to Chris O'Brien, that I became personally and passionately engaged in this cause - cancer at large.
We've now invested $2.3 billion in cancer initiatives across the country. There are the big ones which get the headlines. That's fine. Here at RPA the Chris O'Brien Centre as it will be, a radical expansion of the Garvan in the city as it should be, a fine institute. In Melbourne the centre at Parkville - $300 million-plus. It will be a world centre of excellence as well.
But it's also the smaller things. Here's one figure which should command all of our attention, and it's this: if you live outside one of our capital cities and outside one of our major regional centres, you are three times more likely to die within the first five years of diagnosis than if you live in one of those cities - three times more likely. You see, what happens is people just shrug. They say it's too hard, why should I bother? If I'm in Townsville, where we think the young person we have in common may have been, why, why, why should I put myself through the trauma of travelling to Brisbane, 1,000km away, for the basis diagnosis, the subsequent diagnoses, the basic treatments - isn't it better just to spend what time you have left with those who are near and dear to you rather than completely uproot your family life and the life of those who are near and dear to you.
And so making sure these centres are available to people who live outside grand cities such as Sydney, the most beautiful city in Australia, but also available in Bunbury, available in Tamworth, available in Ballarat, available in Townsville - that's really important. A huge number of our fellow Australians live out there, and they deserve a fair go as well.
You know, young people in that age bracket we're talking about - they don't get dealt a fair go. As Australians we passionately believe in this thing called a fair go, but if you're a young person in the prime of their lives, 16, 17, and then the diagnosis comes in, the truth of it is you haven't been given a fair go. That's where we can make a difference - to give them a fair go, and it's not just through making sure that the clinical services are available, but we're out there at the forefront of global and national research to find a breakthrough to make a difference.
So that's what we're on about together - Government playing its role, you as captains of industry with a heart of compassion I believe doing what you can as well. That's what makes a difference.
So for young people, you can ride on. It's great, you should do it. We're in there with $15 million. I understand the state governments of Australia are collectively throwing in 20, and you, the community, are being asked to raise a further 15. That's good.
I'm confident we're going to get there - drag out your mobile phones, the old ones, all those loitering in your top drawer at the office. I opened my top drawer the other day and I was astounded at what I saw. That was before I got to the mobile phones.
It makes a difference. I understand from the campaign so far some 50,000 have been surrendered in the first month alone - each of those is worth a buck or two. Hop into it, it's worthwhile.
But I finish by saying this, and I think back again to the young girl nearing the end of her life in a hospital bed in rural Queensland - I think her voice, like those who survive, like one of the names on your website, Jess, a 15-year-old, which I read on my way in from the airport here this evening. She survived. She said, though, in her blog that at the age of 15 I began to plan my funeral. There's something very visceral about that - sort of hits you in the solar plexus. It gets you.
But the great mark of a great country is that we care and together, you in business, we in Government, together with the whole community, can make this difference - so let's do it.


Burnie will receive $4.78 million to establish a new cancer care centre at the North West Regional Hospital.
The centre will include a patient support centre and a new chemotherapy treatment service, with 12 chemotherapy treatment chairs. A million dollars will also go towards a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) unit.
When fully operational this new facility at Burnie will provide an estimated extra 6,000 chemotherapy treatments per year.
The Rudd Government funding announced today is part of a $47.67 million state-wide partnership with the Tasmanian Government and private contributors to enable a balanced and coordinated project across Tasmania. The Tasmanian Government will provide almost $24 million towards this project, with $3.95 million in other contributions.
The Burnie regional cancer centre will be networked to enhanced cancer services across Hobart and Launceston and will enable all Tasmanians to have better access to essential cancer services closer to home.
The state-wide Tasmanian Cancer Care project will include:
     * improved radiation and medical oncology infrastructure and associated services
     * state-of-the-art multidisciplinary team facilities with video conferencing
     * patient support centres at all three sites
     * enhanced and expanded allied health and palliative care services
     * enhanced education and research facilities and linkages
     * a state-wide shared clinical patient record system.
Member for Braddon, Sid Sidebottom said Tasmanians have the second-highest incidence of cancer in Australia, and survival rates for people suffering from cancer are lower in rural and remote communities.
"This investment will mean people in the North West suffering cancer will have their loved ones and important support networks close to hand to help them cope with cancer treatment.
"This important partnership will make a real difference to the lives of Tasmanians," Mr Sidebottom said.
Since coming into office, the Government has committed more than $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government provides 60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals.
The Australian Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally through local hospital networks to deliver better outcomes for local communities.


HOST: Good morning, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning. Great to be back in Tassie today.
HOST: Now, the latest EMRS poll in Tasmania shows that the state Labor Party is at 23 per cent and the Premier's rating isn't that much better, and, of course, as you know, this is after a 12 per cent swing against Labor in the March state election, so given that the Labor faithful seem disenchanted, what does federal Labor have to do to retain Tasmania in federal parliament?
PM: The key thing for the Australian Government is to keep the economy strong and also to provide a fair go for all Australians and all Tasmanians. What does that mean specifically in Tasmania? Well, keeping the economy strong means building our infrastructure for the future. That's why we're putting out a National Broadband Network. Mr Abbott said he'd scrap that. This is already under build, currently, in Tasmania.
Secondly, it means basic stuff like better health and better hospitals, and that's why we've agreed on a national health and hospitals plan, funded nationally, run locally, in order to deliver better services for people on the ground across regional, rural and metropolitan Tasmania. These are the things we've committed to. This is what we're going to get on and do.
HOST: One thing about helping out ordinary Australians here in Tasmania, a topic taking over the headlines, is forestry, and there's about to be a full-scale review of the industry and I understand that the Premier is speaking to the federal Forestry Minister, Tony Burke, today. But what confidence can you give the hundreds of families that are doing it tough that are part of the forest industry here in Tasmania? What confidence can you give them today that your Government can be relied upon for support?
PM: Well, let's go to, let's cut to the chase about jobs. First thing I'd say is that every worker deserves maximum security when it comes to their jobs. That's why the Australian Government intervened in the global financial crisis with a massive investment in stimulus to keep the wheels of the economy turning.
For example, I'm in north-western Tasmania today. We've invested, in the last 18 months or so, some $280 million in order to keep the wheels of the economy going. That's all about protecting jobs.
But the other thing is this - also in north-western Tasmania, I was there recently with Sid Sidebottom announcing a further package of investments in local support for business. I was recently, for example, at a local business which is manufacturing various forms of industrial material. Those sorts of investments are exactly what we need to get on doing.
And, finally, when it comes to the forestry industry, we've always believed in getting the balance right, and I know Tony Burke has worked very closely with the forestry industry in Tasmania to make sure we continue to get that balance right, as well.
HOST: Do you think the workers at the paper mills on the north-west coast, where they're closing down and many people have lost their jobs, do you think that they might be feeling the balance is right?
PM: Well, this is a difficult time for many, many industrial plants across not just Tasmania but elsewhere in the country. That's one of the reasons why we're seeking to reform the economy nationally, through our changes to the taxation system to bring down company tax lower.
On the individual circumstances in those companies I cannot comment, but I what can say is that we're out there, for example, job-generating in Tasmania at present through not just stimulus but also laying out the National Broadband Network, which is involving a lot of people and a lot of work on the ground, individual infrastructure projects with local authorities right across Tasmania, and on top of that creating jobs, too, through our support for particular businesses to help them expand, and I've seen so many good examples across the north recently.
HOST: Well, I'm sure people won't knock spending on infrastructure. In the forestry industry, for example, there's a lot of infrastructure already here, there are a lot of families that have outlaid a lot of their own money for the equipment that they've got on the ground, which is laying idle at the moment, so how can your Government support them?
PM: Well a key challenge is to make sure at the level of national Government, as I said, that we're keeping the economy strong, that we are protecting jobs by investing in infrastructure, and by making sure that we continue to roll out our stimulus payments. You ask particularly about circumstances on the ground, and right now in Tasmania we're making a very big investment in local schools. In fact right across, say, north-western Tasmania, we're investing nearly $100 million in nearly 139 different projects at 63 schools. That's all about providing jobs for construction, jobs also for tradies, jobs also for those in the support industries. Example, food and local restaurants et cetera, to keep the wheels of the economy turning off the basis of that big investment in schools.
So whether it's schools, whether it's infrastructure like broadband, or whether it's also the infrastructure we're doing with so many local regional councils, that's how we're seeking to make a difference, to create new jobs, to support businesses building new jobs, and also supporting those workers who are displaced out of existing jobs.
HOST: Prime Minister you're on your way to Burnie today for a Community Cabinet, what topics do you think will be the major focus today?
PM: I believe that every time I've been down to Tasmania in recent times, and this will be my third or fourth visit to the north west since I've been Prime Minister, the key question there is always the economy and jobs, that's number one, and we've been talking a lot about that in this interview. But the other is about delivering on our local health and hospital services, and what I'll be doing with Sid Sidebottom in Burnie is turning the sod on the Burnie GP Super Clinic, that's all about providing flexible health services out of hours for local people.
Also we've got a Community Cabinet at the Parklands High School tonight, and we're looking forward to getting on with the business of talking to the local community about their further needs as well. It's part of keeping in touch with the people of the north west as we go through difficult and challenging economic times.
HOST: Prime Minister thank you very much for your time, I hope you enjoy your trip to Tasmania.
PM: Always good to be back in Tassie.


The Rudd Government and Tasmanian Government will invest $47.67 million to improve cancer care across the island.
Tasmanians have the second-highest incidence of cancer in Australia and with some cancers, patients from rural areas are up to three times more likely to die within five years of diagnosis than their urban counterparts. 
The Rudd Government will provide $18.7 million and link the Southern Area Health Service (Hobart), the Northern Area Health Service (Launceston), the North Western Area Health Service (Burnie), the Menzies Research Institute, the Cancer Council Tasmania and other stakeholders.
The Tasmanian Government will provide almost $24 million towards this project, with $3.95 million in other contributions.
Investments in regional cancer centres such as this, networked to the enhanced cancer services across Hobart, Launceston and Burnie will enable all Tasmanians to have better access to essential cancer services closer to home and to cope better with cancer treatment.
This delivers on the State Government's election commitment of $10 million for North West cancer services.
The Commonwealth funding will include almost $10.4 million for Hobart, including:
     * $4 million for the construction of a third radiation oncology bunker at Royal Hobart Hospital to underpin future infrastructure and equipment needs
     * $5.5 million for the relocation of the Dwyer Rehabilitation Ward to the repatriation facility site to enable the redevelopment of the Outpatient Cancer Care Centre
     * $0.5 million for the development of the patient support services centre
     * $0.33 million for tissue bank infrastructure at the Menzies Research Institute.
As part of the project, $3.53 million will be invested by the Commonwealth in cancer infrastructure enhancements at Launceston General Hospital, including:
     * $1.0 million for the expansion of the medical oncology unit
     * $1.55 million for a patient support centre
     * $0.73 million for an education and research centre
     * $0.25 million for palliative care upgrade.
The Commonwealth funding also includes $4.78 million towards a new cancer care centre at the North West Regional Hospital in Burnie and a contribution of $1 million towards a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine.
The funding for the Tasmanian Cancer Care project will provide an additional 18 chemotherapy treatment chairs  -  12 chairs at Burnie and six at Launceston. Once fully operational, these new facilities will provide an estimated extra 9,000 chemotherapy treatments per year.
The expanded radiotherapy and medical oncology infrastructure and associated services and care will be supported by improved state-wide information and communications technology and clinical cancer patient record systems.
Enhanced education and research facilities will facilitate better collaboration between health services and link with the University of Tasmania and the Clifford Craig Medical Research Trust. This will help ensure that advances in treatment approaches can be quickly adopted in clinical settings and incorporated into medical and health student training.
Cancer affects thousands of Australian families  -  about 100,000 new cases of cancer are diagnosed annually with about 40,000 people dying each year from various forms of this disease. 
The Tasmania Regional Cancer Centre forms part of the Rudd Government's $560 million commitment to establish centres so that Australians can get care closer to home and their community.
The Rudd Government has committed more than $2.3 billion in cancer infrastructure, medicines, screening and research.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, the Government will provide 
60 per cent of the funding for capital upgrades for public hospitals. 
The Australian Government's plan will see health services funded nationally and run locally to deliver better health for local communities.


The Burnie community today celebrated the opening of the new West Park Sports Facility by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.
Mr Rudd joined the local families, Minister for Infrastructure and Local Government Anthony Albanese and Federal Member for Braddon Sid Sidebottom to mark to official opening.
"We are pleased to have provided almost $2.3 million to the Burnie City Council for this project from our Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program (RLCIP)," Mr Rudd said.
"The Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program is delivering local jobs in communities across Australia by building the facilities we all need for the long term.
"Here in Burnie that has meant more than 70 jobs during construction, providing a valuable boost to the local economy."
The West Park Sports Facility includes an indoor training area, new offices for sporting organisations, a function centre and corporate boxes overlooking the West Park ovals.
"The new facilities have already created great excitement in the community and will increase local involvement in sports, especially in football, cricket, athletics and cycling which are all held in West Park," Mr Sidebottom said.
"The facility encourages healthy, active lifestyles and will be enjoyed for many years to come."
"In partnership with every council in the country the Rudd Labor Government is delivering more than 5,000 small and larger scale building projects like these, including new and refurbished public libraries, sporting facilities, parks and playgrounds, and child care centres," Mr Albanese said.
"In fact, we are making the single largest federal investment in community infrastructure in the nation's history through the $1 billion RLCIP."
Mr Rudd, Mr Albanese and Mr Sidebottom congratulated the Burnie City Council and the local community for helping deliver this important project, and helping to build a stronger region for the future.


Australia condemns North Korea for the sinking of the South Korean Navy corvette Cheonan on 26 March with the loss of 46 lives.
The South Korean Ministry of National Defense today issued a statement setting out the results of the investigation of the Joint Civilian-Military Investigation Group (JIG) into the causes of the sinking of the Cheonan.
The key findings of the investigation are deeply disturbing. The JIG gathered conclusive evidence that the Cheonan was sunk by a torpedo manufactured in North Korea, fragments of which were found on the sea floor at the site of the incident.
This hostile and unprovoked act represents a flagrant violation by North Korea of the United Nations (UN) Charter and the 1953 Korean Armistice Agreement.
The international community cannot let this act pass without an appropriate response. The Australian Government is working closely with South Korea and other partners on how to respond, including action in the UN Security Council.
I spoke by phone with the President of the Republic of Korea, H.E. Lee Myung-bak, today to reiterate my sincere condolences at this tragic incident, underline Australia's solidarity with South Korea, emphasise Australia's condemnation of North Korea's deplorable act and confer on appropriate responses.
The Australian Government was pleased to contribute five specialist and intelligence personnel from the Royal Australian Navy to support the Korean-led investigation, at the request of the South Korean Government. The United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden and Canada also contributed to the investigation.


The Prime Minister is a strong advocate of APEC, and fully supports its leaders meetings.
The leaders meeting has been essential to delivering APEC's goals, and continues to be a key annual event in the region.
APEC has an enviable and long standing record of forging prosperity and security through its focus on free and open trade and investment.
It continues to play a pivotal role in the Asia-Pacific region, including supporting the region's recovery from the global economic crisis.
The Australian Government warmly welcomes proposals by ASEAN to more deeply engage the United States and Russia; but those proposals have no implications for the future or structure of APEC.


PM: Well good morning animal lovers one and all- from Abby the dog, and all the pooches out there. They tell me last year that we had 3500 canines doing the RSPCA Million Paws Walk. And they're all- I think there are 3600 here this morning, from what I can see. This is a great day for the RSPCA. It's a great day for Canberra. And it's a great day for all creatures great and small.
This little one of ours, Abby, a Golden Retriever, she makes up so much of our family life at home. As I look down at the faces of all the little kids here today and of family pets who are loved and are part of their families, they make such a huge difference to us as human beings. The big thing is this- animals love us without question. The big question for us is how do we care for animals without question. And what the RSPCA is on about is looking after animals, making sure we exercise our duty of care and responsibility to animals, because they have no choice.
So folks, thank you for being out here in such wonderful numbers today. I was told last year we had 9000 people walking, 3500 dogs, five Ferrets, and one Alpaca. Hands up, the Aplaca this morning. Can't see the Aplaca this morning. Anyone bring a Ferrett? No one's brought a Ferrett. Jasper, our cat, has decided wisely to stay at home.
Folks, have a wonderful day, and may this RSPCA Million Paws Walk remind the whole country, Australia, of our duty of care to animals.
I thank you.


The Prime Minister of Australia Kevin Rudd and Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma, today announced that the next Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) will be held in Perth, Western Australia from 28 to 30 October 2011.
CHOGM is held every two years and is the highest consultative and policy making mechanism of the Commonwealth.
The Prime Minister said that as a committed and active member of the Commonwealth, Australia is delighted to be hosting CHOGM for a third time - Melbourne in 1981, Coolum in 2002 and Perth in 2011.
Commonwealth members share a strong commitment to the fundamental principles of democracy and development, good governance, the rule of law, and the protection of human rights. CHOGM is a unique opportunity for Commonwealth leaders to work together to address significant global challenges.
The Prime Minister noted that "Australia and in particular Western Australia, looks forward to welcoming Commonwealth leaders and delegates to Perth for what I am confident will be a successful summit."
The principal venue for the meeting will be the Perth Convention and Exhibition Centre.
Mr Sharma observed that CHOGM brings together leaders representing around one quarter of the world's countries, and one third of the world's population.
"It is the opportunity for Commonwealth leaders to discuss the national and global challenges of our times, to exchange views and best practice, to find paths to peace and prosperity for all, and to deliberate on how this exceptional organisation can serve the world better", the Secretary-General said.
"The Commonwealth community is delighted and grateful to be hosted once again by the people and government of Australia. The Commonwealth is all about governments and people who share the same values and principles, and the will to support each other. CHOGM therefore brings together our political leaders but also civil society, young people, the business community, and many others who share the vision of this global summit in Perth being a Commonwealth meeting for a Commonwealth of its times," he added.
The agenda for the meeting will be set nearer the time. Leaders will focus on a wide array of issues of collective interest to the 54 member nations of the Commonwealth.


PM: It's great to be back at Geelong, great to be back at Deakin University. And this has been a great day for this local community, who have Darren and Richard as the local Members- because we're making an investment in the future of the Geelong economy, an investment in the future of Australia's economy.
The work done here with carbon fibre is terrific. A carbon fibre pen, one of the many things where you see the application of carbon fibre and other advanced materials being developed here at this great facility here in Geelong. And we're proud of the fact that we're investing in the future of this facility. This is a large investment, $37 million, makes a big difference for the future, and this is going to be a world class facility, and in fact one of the world's leading centres when it comes to new materials research.
For people who don't understand what new materials are about, it's really important to underline what we're talking about here. You need basic substances to build things with, and in days gone by we had timber, we had cement, we've had steel, we've had all sorts of building materials. Now we're looking at a whole new generation of these building materials in part based on fibre research. And that is the centre of excellence which we are celebrating here today. That's what we're investing in, because it's all part of building a strong economy for Geelong for the future, and a strong economy for Australia for the future. It makes a real difference.
As I said in my remarks before, when I became Leader of the Opposition years ago, I said I never wanted to be Prime Minister of Australia if the country didn't make things anymore. That remains my position. And when we look at this new generation of building materials, not just designed here, not just applied here, but potentially manufactured here for use right across the world, this is a good day for the local area, a good day for this region, and a good day for the country.
One thing else I'd say before I take your questions. I note the statements made recently by our political opponents about where they would take the economic management of Australia and its regions. In the midst of the chaos and confusion that we've seen in Mr Abbott's Budget reply, he has announced some pretty extreme policy when it comes to local economies like this.
Extreme policies like cutting future investment in trades training centres. Extreme policies like cutting into health, e-health, and other GP-related services like GP super clinics. Cuts like that mean a big difference for the future, cuts to the abolition of broadband, that is so important for the future as well. Cuts when it comes to clean and renewable energy for the future. These are quite extreme policies, and where the rubber hits the road is in communities like this.
If you're going to cut trades training centres, cut- savagely- the green car fund, cut also into high-speed broadband, cut also into health and hospitals, and into GP super clinics, and cut investment in clean green energy for the future, you're actually sending a torpedo into the heart of the Geelong economy, you're sending a torpedo into the heart of regional economies right across Australia.
So in the midst of all the chaos and confusion of the last few days, you pour it all back, and you see some pretty extreme policies which will make a fundamental difference on the ground across regional Australia, if they were to be implemented. We stand for growth, we stand for jobs, we stand for investing in the future. It seems we see more and more evidence that they stand for torpedoing growth, job cuts, job insecurity and undermining the big investments in the future.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It's a great place. Cats are playing tonight, against Collingwood. Who's backing Collingwood? She's backing the Cats-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: It's because we've got a big investment here in Deakin. This is a very large investment for us, $37 million. Cabinet only took this decision a short time ago, and we wanted to get out down here and get the work going. This application was made by the University some time ago into the Education Investment Fund, we've been through it, we've approved it, it's time to get cracking and to announce it.
As for our local Members here, they're doing a fantastic job. Their record of local achievement is strong, and it is good, and this, frankly, just builds on it.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) ALP (inaudible) branch stacking allegations that were raised mid-week, do you think there's a need for an independent inquiry, or are you happy with the ALP investigating that matter?
PM: These are matters for the state organisation of the ALP.
JOURNALIST: The Aussie dollar is on the decline at the moment, are you concerned traders are abandoning our dollar at the moment?
PM: I've seen a few reckless remarks by the Liberal party on this question. Everybody around the world knows that there is a genuine crisis of confidence in Europe, in particular in Greece, and concerning sovereign debt and, as a consequence, there are significant changes in currency markets and equities markets right across the world. The second point I'd make is this- if you look at the adjustments which have occurred in the last 24 hours to the Australian equities index in general, in fact, the adjustment in the minerals index is less than occurred to the overall stock market index. I think it's important to bear that in mind.
JOURNALIST: So you don't agree with those calling the Aussie dollar less (inaudible)
PM: I go to the answer that I just gave you. And both of the points I just raised.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the comments of the mining industry and given the comments of Garnaut as well, what's your view now about the state of play of the resources tax, is it time to compromise or back down?
PM: We are strong supporters of a resources super profits tax because it provides better super for working families, tax cuts for all Australian businesses, bigger tax cuts for small business, and enables us to invest in the infrastructure of tomorrow. As I've said before, we believe we've got this policy basically right. We've always said we'll consult with the industry on detail, on implementation, and on transition. And that's what's happening with the Treasury consultation panel right now, with companies right across the country.
JOURNALIST: Are you worried about legal action in relation to (inaudible) WA?
PM: I think it's pretty important to focus on the need to bring about a reform for the Nation which makes a difference to the competitiveness of all businesses in the nation. Let's go to the core elements. Businesses right around the country need to have a better company rate because, currently, they are becoming less competitive against the company tax rate that's applied around the world.
So we're using this change, for the mining industry, to bring down the company tax rate by two percentage points nationwide. Secondly, to make small businesses more competitive by giving them an extra helping hand with a tax break for a $5000 write-off against their asset purchases in a given year. Thirdly, better super for working families. Fourthly, funding infrastructure developments around the country. We think we've got that balance about right, but we'll continue to consult with industry on detail and implementation and on transition.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Victorian ALP?
PM: I can say that any such accusations should be dealt with by the state executive of the Australian Labor Party, and I'm sure that investigation is underway.
JOURNALIST: Ross Garnaut (inaudible) an ally of the Government, an architect of the ETS, and has now said you should compromise with miners on this tax.
PM: Look, the consultation process that I've just referred to goes to detail, goes to implementation and goes to transition. We've said that from day one. You know something-can I say that we're going to have a lot of people out there from various mining industries proclaiming doom, gloom and despair in the midst of a consultation process.
Guess what, a lot of those mining companies don't want to pay any more tax. Guess what, they expect, therefore, the rest of the taxpayers to somehow subsidise better super for everybody else, tax cuts for the rest of business, and on top of that, the funding of infrastructure.
Let me give you an example about how expensive infrastructure is. We, the Australian Government, partnered with the Victorian Government in massive investments in roads in this region alone. The ring road around Geelong, the highway as well, these are multi-hundred million dollar investment. We're doing this right around the country.
You know something? You've got to find future revenue sources to build the infrastructure for the future, as well. That's why we believe that mining companies can pay a fairer share. That's why we believe the Australian people also deserve a fairer share from the resource which they themselves ultimately own.
JOURNALIST: What's Tony Abbott (inaudible) talking about consultation (inaudible) BHP met with the Treasury yesterday, Rio meet with the Treasury today (inaudible)
PM: Well, the- these consultations will continue for some time yet. The Treasurer leads the consultations. I'm sure if you put that question to him as the responsible Minister he'd have a response to you- for you, but I can just say that this will take some time. When you're looking at companies in vastly difference circumstances right across the country, obviously the issues they raise are all going to be different, from the BHPs and the Rios of this world down to the others, but we think we've got a good consultation panel lined up to do this work, and I think about 100 companies are currently with the panel, working their way through the detail of this.
JOURNALIST: The mining tax (inaudible) your health reform (inaudible)
PM: The bottom line is we've achieved, with the cooperation with the states and territories, the biggest reform to the health and hospitals system since Medicare. You've got five states and two territories signed up. Biggest change that we've seen for decades. We think we've got a good reform for the future. I'm sure there'll continue to be technical discussions with the WA Government. Those will continue, but for the rest of the country, we intend to get on with the business of rolling out these reforms. They are big and they and they are important.
The last time I was here I was at Geelong Hospital. They can't wait for these reforms to start from 1 July, because it means a greater flow-through of funds for the additional work that they need for accident and emergency, for elective surgery, for sub-acute beds. These are the practical things that people want. That's what we have done through this, as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've been cancelling a few media appearances. What's the explanation for that?
PM: Well, I think that question should be directed to my media office. I'm not aware of that at all.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) has coming out to say 'look, to get rid of this mining super tax you need to get rid of the Government'.
PM: Well, Twiggy is entitled to his own view and I'm sure he'll have many more colourful views to express in the period ahead. It's a democracy. He can say what he wishes. I think what the Australian people are saying is that they believe that when this resource is owned by the Australian people, a fair share should go to the mining industry and a fair share should go to the Australian people in terms of better super for retirement for working families, a fair go in terms of tax cuts to businesses and small business, in terms of better investment in infrastructure.
So, it's going to be an interesting debate, but this is an important reform for the future. One last thing before I head back the airport is on the application of the cuts that I mentioned before from Mr Abbott- let's be very clear about what happens in communities like this.
The Corio trades training centre, a combined investment, from memory, of $10 million or $11 million by the Australian Government, bringing together some eight or nine local secondary schools, a state-of-the-art trades training centre, now, under Mr Abbott, to be slashed. That is, cut, abolished, no longer existing.
Can I say this is a very basic matter of concern for local communities like this? Communities like this, as Darren was saying to me before, you've parts of this region which don't have access to decent broadband. We've got a plan to fix that. It's called the National Broadband Network. We're rolling it out in Tasmania as we speak. So, under Mr Abbott, no more broadband, gone. Corio trades training centre, gone. Investment in local health services, Barwon e-health initiative- gone, because we're providing future funding for that as well.
On the ground here the cuts mean real changes, so let's be very blunt about this. It's not just the chaos and confusion we've seen in recent days. The extreme policies which, frankly, torpedo local economies like this and torpedo the health reforms we've agreed on with the Victorian Government.
Having said that, folks, I've got to zip.


The Australian Government will invest $37 million to develop a world first Australian Future Fibres Research and Innovation Centre (AFFRIC) at Deakin University.
The project will support:
     * More than doubling of laboratory space from 1500m2 to 4000m2;
     * 3 additional research groups;
     * 220-270 additional researchers;
     * 50 additional Australian and international research collaborations;
     * The co-location of 86 CSIRO researchers; and
     * 120 onsite jobs during the construction period.
The new centre will draw together Australia's world-class expertise in fibre science and materials technologies, and position Australia as an international hub for new materials industries.
Carbon fibre is a defining material for 21st century manufacturing with applications for the textile, automotive and aviation industries. It is used in products like cars, planes, wind energy machinery, offshore oil and gas facilities, pressure vessels and protective apparel.
There are currently 950 firms manufacturing carbon fibre composites in Australia. The value of domestic production is estimated to be $3 billion per annum.
The centre will involve four research platforms: Carbon Fibre Manufacture and Materials Technology; Nano-Fibre Discovery - Characterization and Application; Green Natural Fibres; and Smart and Functional Fibrous Materials. 
The project planning is in progress, with construction scheduled to commence in December 2010 and be completed by September 2012.
The $102 million AFFRIC is also receiving funding support from Deakin University, CSIRO and the Victorian Centre for Advanced Material Manufacturing. It will also have collaborative arrangements with regional and industry development organisations such as the City of Greater Geelong and the Technical Textiles and Nonwoven Association (TTNA). 
The investment is part of Round 3 of the Education Investment Fund (EIF). The Australian Government is investing $4 billion through the EIF in Australia's tertiary education and research infrastructure.


The Australian Government will invest $37 million to develop a world first Australian Future Fibres Research and Innovation Centre (AFFRIC) at Deakin University.
The project will support:
     * More than doubling of laboratory space from 1500m2 to 4000m2;
     * 3 additional research groups;
     * 220-270 additional researchers;
     * 50 additional Australian and international research collaborations;
     * The co-location of 86 CSIRO researchers; and
     * 120 onsite jobs during the construction period.
The new centre will draw together Australia's world-class expertise in fibre science and materials technologies, and position Australia as an international hub for new materials industries.
Carbon fibre is a defining material for 21st century manufacturing with applications for the textile, automotive and aviation industries. It is used in products like cars, planes, wind energy machinery, offshore oil and gas facilities, pressure vessels and protective apparel.
There are currently 950 firms manufacturing carbon fibre composites in Australia. The value of domestic production is estimated to be $3 billion per annum.
The centre will involve four research platforms: Carbon Fibre Manufacture and Materials Technology; Nano-Fibre Discovery - Characterization and Application; Green Natural Fibres; and Smart and Functional Fibrous Materials. 
The project planning is in progress, with construction scheduled to commence in December 2010 and be completed by September 2012.
The $102 million AFFRIC is also receiving funding support from Deakin University, CSIRO and the Victorian Centre for Advanced Material Manufacturing. It will also have collaborative arrangements with regional and industry development organisations such as the City of Greater Geelong and the Technical Textiles and Nonwoven Association (TTNA). 
The investment is part of Round 3 of the Education Investment Fund (EIF). The Australian Government is investing $4 billion through the EIF in Australia's tertiary education and research infrastructure.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
It's great to be here with you today as we take the next step at the launch of the national advertising campaign "DonateLife, Discuss it today. OK".
This is something that I am passionate about.
As a donor recipient myself, I am absolutely committed to increasing the rate of organ and tissue donation in Australia. As is everyone in this room.
We all know that there is a high level of public support for organ and tissue donation.
But while transplant success rates in Australia are among the best in the world, organ and tissue donation rates remain comparatively low.
At any given time, approximately 1,700 Australians are waiting to get the call for a life-saving or life-transforming transplant - this includes some 1,200 Australians waiting for a kidney transplant.
One of those people waiting by the phone for that call was Dean Jobson.
I had the privilege of meeting Dean back in February, at the launch of Organ Donor Awareness Week.
Dean is your average knockabout bloke, a young bloke from Goulburn.
Except that at that stage, Dean had been waiting 19 months for a heart transplant.
He couldn't work, he was dependent on a mechanical heart to keep him alive, and his dad had been forced to give up work to be his carer.
But Dean had a great attitude, which impressed everyone who saw him in the Theatrette in Parliament House that day.
He didn't feel sorry for himself.
Instead, his attitude was:
"I'd prefer to be alive and on a transplant waiting list than the alternative. I've still got the chance."
And ladies and gentlemen, I'm very pleased to be able to say today that Dean got his chance.
Recently, Dean got that long-awaited phone call.
There was a donor.
Dean got his transplant.
And he's doing well.
He's now an outpatient at St Vincent's Hospital in Sydney.
And he's hoping to be home for good sometime in the next fortnight.
His transplant has made a huge difference to him because he no longer needs his ventricular assist device - his mechanical heart.
He's now an ordinary bloke, with an extraordinary heart. He's happy, and his parents are over the moon.
Dean's cardiomyopathy affected everyone in his family - his life, of course, but also his parents' lives as they needed to care for him at a time when they might have thought about taking things easy.
This beautiful gift from a selfless donor and donor family has given Dean and his family their lives back.
Dean's story is a very real example of why the Australian Government is committed to increasing the rate of organ and tissue donation in Australia.
That's why in July 2008, the Australian Government announced the $150 million World's Best Practice Approach to Organ and Tissue Donation for Transplantation plan.
This is a national reform plan built on international best practice and experience, with three core elements:
     * A coordinated, national approach to organ donation and transplantation;
     * Expert, dedicated staff on the ground in all our major hospitals to enable organ and tissue donation to proceed; and
     * Increased community awareness about the importance of organ and tissue donation and the difference it can make.
We've made significant progress in laying the foundations for change in public hospitals.
We've improved hospital systems.
We've established a national clinical network of staff - over 150 doctors and nurses in 76 major hospitals around the country dedicated to improving organ and tissue donation.
Across the country, the new hospital medical directors and nursing staff are spearheading change within hospitals, enabling donations that might not otherwise have gone ahead, including from smaller regional hospitals for the first time.
And these donations are happening.
I am advised that recently, a hospital that had never previously been involved in organ donation was able to help a family to carry out the wishes of their loved one.
And by doing so, three Australians received a life-changing transplant. And two of these people had been on the waiting list for more than seven years.
Donor Family Support Coordinators are being rolled out for the states and territories.
These dedicated, compassionate experts support families through the traumatic, confusing and highly emotional process of making a decision about their loved one becoming a donor. And they support those families, whatever decision they make.
In addition, new clinical triggers to help identify potential donors and additional funding to hospitals to make sure costs are not a barrier to organ donation are making a difference.
The early signs are encouraging - and the Government believes that Australia can do much better as the reforms transform the approach to organ and tissue donation across the country.
But while hospitals have a pivotal role to play, equally important in our quest to boost donation rates is what takes place outside the hospital walls.
Community awareness is absolutely vital.
And that awareness can be raised around the kitchen table.
On the couch in the ad break. In the car on the way to the shops. Over coffee or a meal or a drink at the bar.
We need to talk to the people we love about what we want to happen when we're gone.
And we need to know what their wishes are regarding organ donation.
Because families that know each other's donation wishes are more likely to uphold them.
And families will always be asked to give the final OK before donation can proceed.
That's why it is vital to discuss organ donation with your family.
This is the third element of our reform plan.
Research tells us that the vast majority - around 80 per cent - of Australians support organ donation and think it is important to discuss it with their family.
However, only 17 per cent of Australians have actually discussed their donation wishes in detail with their family and loved ones. And 37 per cent have never had that discussion.
We have to change those statistics. We have to make sure that all Australians have the facts they need to make an informed decision.
And that they understand that they need to share their decision with the people close to them. Too many Australians do not talk about organ donation.
40 per cent of Australians do not know whether their loved one would want to be a donor or not. Many family members do not confidently know each other's wishes.
Many people have not discussed their donation decision with family members for more than a year.
Many can't remember whether they have had the discussion at all.
We know that the most important thing people want to know in order to make a decision about consenting to organ donation is - is this what they wanted?
The simple fact is that even if a person is registered as a donor - and I encourage you all to register as a sign of your commitment - their family will always be asked to give consent for donation to take place.
The family is always asked to give the final OK and that is why it is important for the people close to you to know your decision about organ donation.
There are many non-government organisations who are working tirelessly at the local level to raise awareness of organ and tissue donation within the community.
This campaign will supplement their endeavours.
Working together we can make a difference.
When I look at South Australia's long history of strong performance in this area, with its rate of donations above 20 donors per million population - double the national average of around 10 donors per million population for the last decade - I know that we can do better across the country.
We need to do better to help the many Australians who need an organ or tissue donation to survive. It's as simple as that.
There are many people passionately committed to increasing awareness of organ and tissue donation and working tirelessly towards building a world class system.
And I commend their contribution, and thank them for it.
Today we are launching a call to action to all Australians. It is time for all Australians to:
     * discover the facts about organ and tissue donation;
     * decide about becoming an organ and tissue donor, and
     * discuss their decision with their family and friends.
It is time for all those dedicated health professionals in the sector to work together to ensure that families are given the opportunity to have their loved one's intention to donate carried out.
It is by doing this that we will help save the lives of many Australians who are waiting for a new chance at life.
From tomorrow night, Australians across the nation will begin to see this television advertisement.
And I hope it will encourage all Australians to begin talking about organ and tissue donation.


PM: Often changing things around takes time, and this has taken some time as well, making sure we get it right.
As you sit back in your lounge rooms in Australia tonight and in the days and weeks ahead and look at the community advertisement that we are about to see, and which I haven't seen. The whole idea is to provoke a conversation at home, that's all its about. You know Australians are often a bit uncomfortable about talking about these very basic life and death issues at home. Often are a bit uncomfortable. Um, it is not our favourite topic of conversation. We talk about the football, we talk about politics, we talk about politics, we talk about politics, we talk about football and but we are here to talk life and the ending of it and the beginning of it.
And that is what this is about as well. Remember those figures, we have nearly got 2000 people around the country right now, on lists, on lists, waiting to become recipients. Many of them are known to us in this room here.
And we now have the capacity in place in the hospitals to make a difference. Now the next, and final step, is to get each mum and dad, each young person, each old person, to start having that conversation at home.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, the first peoples of this land to trade and engage with the region we now call Asia.
I am honoured to address this gathering of eminent Australians committed to enhancing our country's engagement with Asia.
A gathering that is sponsored by two great institutions.
The Asia Society has a long history in the United States and has established itself as a strong presence here in Australia over the past 13 years.
It has joined Asialink in carving out for itself a key role in promoting Australia's relations with Asia.
This year, we mark the 20th anniversary of Asialink's founding.
In 1990, Australia's first Ambassador to the People's Republic of China, Professor Stephen Fitzgerald, joined with the Myer Foundation to create a new institution dedicated to building bridges of learning and understanding between Australia and Asia.
And so Asialink was born.
In Asialink's 20th anniversary year, I pay tribute to Stephen Fitzgerald and Sid Myer, and thank them - on behalf of the nation - for their vision and persistence.
I also thank emeritus Vice Chancellor, Professor David Pennington, who had the foresight to offer Melbourne University as the home for Asialink.
Asialink's anniversary represents 20 years of tireless work to promote public understanding of the countries of Asia and of Australia's role in the region.
Twenty years in which Asialink has grown from two people operating from a Carlton terrace house to a team of 45 staff in world-class headquarters in the Sidney Myer Asia Centre at the University of Melbourne, where Heads of State and international conferences can be hosted.
Twenty years, also, in which Australia's engagement with and attitudes toward Asia have been transformed.
In 20 years, Asialink has grown in influence and reputation.
In partnership with Education Services Australia, and with core government funding, it has established the Asia Education Foundation to inform curriculum development and educate teachers.
It conducts study tours that make Asia literacy a reality for hundreds of Australians.
It undertakes business engagement and leadership programs that shape the relationships of the future.
And the PricewaterhouseCoopers Melbourne Institute Asialink Index is a vital new tool for assessing how well our aspirations for Asia engagement translate into reality.
The Asialink Index has brought together for the first time a diverse array of data ranging from trade and investment to tourism, migration and humanitarian assistance.
The index shows that Australia's engagement with Asia has grown by a factor of more than four since 1990 - significantly outstripping our engagement with the rest of the world.
In other words, our level of economic and cultural engagement with Asia is now more than four times what it was 20 years ago - reflecting a transformation in Australia's place in the global economy.
In the same period our ties with the countries of South East Asia have also grown by a factor of four.
And our relations with China have grown by a factor of 15.
As the global balance of economic and strategic power shifts to our region, Asia matters to Australia as never before.
The Asia Pacific accounts for 60 per cent of the world's population and 70 per cent of the world's carbon emissions.
This year the region, with China at its core, will be responsible for 75 per cent of global economic growth.
Asia-watchers also know that our region can be subject to instability and strategic competition - as recent events in Thailand and the waters surrounding Korea have reminded us.
It is home to the six largest standing armies in the world.
Rapid economic growth is fuelling defence spending.
And we know from history that major shifts in the geostrategic balance have rarely occurred without upheaval.
Against this backdrop, this government's approach has been one of active engagement and creative middle power diplomacy.
I am proud of what we have achieved with Asia.
We have added new depth to our key bilateral relationships.
We have pushed forward the debate about the future of our regional institutions.
On the defence and security side we have increased ties with key partners in the region, including Japan and South Korea.
With Japan we established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
This independent Commission's report has formed the basis of joint work by the two governments that we have taken to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference currently underway in New York.
This is a clear illustration of the shared values and interests we have with Japan.
With South Korea we now have for the first time a framework for our security cooperation.
We have broadened our relations with India having forged a new strategic partnership - reflecting a commitment by both governments to move beyond the fitful engagement of the past and into a long-term partnership.
Our relations with China had some bumps in the road last year, but are very strong.
We have had a series of senior visits in both directions that underline the commitment of both countries to the relationship.
And our pavilion at the Shanghai Expo is a demonstration of our commitment to a good relationship with China.
I am told - by the Vice Chairman of China's Central Military Commission, General Guo Boxiong who visited Australia last week - that our pavilion at the Shanghai World Expo is one of the best!
Our relations with Indonesia are at an all time high.
Earlier this year we hosted President Yudhoyono of Indonesia.
He became the first Indonesian President to address the Australian Parliament.
And we both agreed that the relationship between Australia and Indonesia had never been stronger.
We have worked hard with the new Government of Prime Minister Najib in Malaysia to build on our strong historical links to bring our relationship into the next phase - a phase where we work together not just bilaterally, but also regionally and globally.
We have hosted senior visitors from Vietnam - Prime Minister Dung and General Secretary Manh of the Communist Party.
These visits resulted in us agreeing to establish a Comprehensive Partnership - a road map for taking forward the relationship across a wide range of fields.
Our bilateral political, security and defence ties with key partners are growing.
So too are our commercial ties.
Last year, Australia's trade with Asia outstripped our commerce with the rest of the world by 50 per cent.
But we are not content to leave matters there.
We are negotiating free trade agreements with China, Japan, South Korea and Malaysia, and we hope soon to commence talks with India and Indonesia.
We are working to advance Australia's standing as a regional hub for financial services.
On the regional political front, we are an active member of the major forums of the region, including the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum and APEC.
This year, we joined the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit as an observer.
In October, for the first time, we will participate in the Asia Europe Meeting.
We will have a seat at the table when the leaders of world's most economically dynamic region meet with the leaders of the world's largest single market - the European Union.
We are working closely with regional partners such as South Korea, Japan, China and Indonesia to reform global economic governance through the G20.
And we have instigated the debate on how best to shape regional architecture to form a community capable of addressing the full range of shared challenges facing the Asia Pacific.
This question is critical for our future.
We need a stable and prosperous region.
We need to shape regional dynamics so that cooperation and dialogue are the norm.
We cannot simply sit by and watch relationships in this dynamic region unfold.
I welcome very much the decision of ASEAN leaders at their summit in Hanoi on 8-9 April this year to encourage the United States and Russia to deepen their engagement in evolving regional architecture.
I note also that President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and Prime Minister Lee of Singapore said after they met recently that inviting the US and Russia to meet with ASEAN and the six other members of the East Asia Summit - China, South Korea, Japan, India, Australia and New Zealand - would be one way to achieve this deeper engagement.
It is clear that a range of partners in Asia agree with Australia that reform of our regional architecture - including, vitally, deeper engagement with the United States - is needed.
This is what we are seeking - engagement in a cooperative institution of all of the key players in the region.
In sum, our diplomatic relations with Asia have never been stronger.
But, as you at this forum are well aware, that is not the whole story.
True engagement means building bridges at all levels - not just between governments.
As you know, my vision is for Australia to be the most Asia-literate nation in the collective West.
My vision is that Australians should be able to communicate with our neighbours with understanding and ease.
If we can achieve that goal, we will be better placed to make a contribution to the region and make the most of the opportunities with which its development will present us.
As I have said at this Forum in the past, unless we have the capacity to create an Asia-literate Australia - one which is knowledgeable in the languages of the region and familiar with the principal cultures of the region - the task we face will be very difficult.
Today - as the Prime Minister of this Commonwealth - I reiterate these sentiments.
But the truth is that we, as a nation, are not yet fully equipped to take advantage of the transformation taking place on our doorstep.
On assuming office, my government was faced with the challenge of overcoming years of Asia-literacy neglect under our predecessors.
The Keating Government in the early 1990s implemented the National Asian Languages and Studies in Australian Schools Strategy (NALSAS), to advance the teaching of Asian languages and studies of Asia in Australian schools.
I'm proud to have worked extensively on the establishment of that program.
But I regret that in 2002, the former coalition government axed this program.
A mistake, incidentally, that Tony Abbott has today told you he apparently recognizes he must fix - although he was, of course, a member of the government that cut the program in the first place.
I have always found that 2002 decision inexplicable.
Under NALSAS, the Commonwealth had worked effectively with the States and Territories to almost double Asian language studies enrolments in schools across Australia in the space of six years.
Predictably enough, cancelling this program caused enrolments to crash.
Today I am releasing three new reports commissioned by the Australian Government on the teaching of Asian languages in Australian schools, which complement an earlier University of Melbourne report on Chinese language education.
These reports, prepared by academic experts in conjunction with the Asia Education Foundation, provide the most current data and insight into the state of Japanese, Chinese, Indonesian and Korean language education in Australia.
They clearly demonstrate the scope of the challenge ahead.
They indicate an alarming 22 per cent drop between 2000 and 2008 in the number of Australian students studying one of these four Asian languages from kindergarten to Year 12.
At a time when our Asian literacy should have been growing stronger, it grew weaker.
At a time when more students should have been studying Asian languages, fewer undertook those studies.
This is a trend we must reverse.
And the Australian Government has acted to do so.
In the 2008 Melbourne Declaration on Education Goals for Young Australians, all Australian Education Ministers agreed on the importance of producing young citizens capable of relating to - and communicating across - the cultures and countries of Asia.
The Council of Australian Governments has set an ambitious target:
- that, by 2020, we will increase to at least 12 per cent the number of students leaving Year 12 fluent enough in Chinese, Indonesian, Japanese or Korean to engage in trade and commerce in Asia or university study.
And the Australian Government quickly implemented plans to meet this objective.
In 2008, we committed $62.4 million over four years to a new program aimed at increasing the number of students who take up one of the four key Asian languages.
Implementation of the National Asian Languages and Studies in Schools Program (NALSSP) is progressing well.
There has been strong interest across the education community since the program commenced on 1 January 2009, and states and territories have developed innovative plans to meet the 2020 target.
These include online distance education materials, extended curriculums for advanced students, in-country study tours, student incentives and scholarships, and linking secondary students with young people who are using an Asian language in the workforce.
One of seven projects funded under the NALSSP has enabled Deakin University to open a new Centre for Teaching Asian Languages and Cultures last November.
Recently, a Year 11 student from Queensland wrote to me about his experience of studying in Japan.
His school had received an Asia literacy grant under the NALSSP.
This young student, who had not studied a foreign language until last year, wrote that:
"breaking the language barrier is a difficult thing to do .... I can see this language and others taking a prominent place in my future, as well as many return trips to Japan." 
For this student, among many others including myself, learning an Asian language has not just been about career advancement.
His words demonstrate the discovery of an inner passion for languages that opens doors to understanding.
Clearly, the Government's efforts are having an impact on the lives of young Australians.
But we are committed to doing more.
The new national curriculum recognises the need for young Australians to have the skills, knowledge and understandings to engage with Asia.
I thank the Asia Education Foundation for its continued support for the development of this curriculum.
Of course, Asia literacy is not just about what kids learn in the classroom.
It also means building closer and enduring personal ties between Australia and the region.
This was the motivation behind my announcement last year of the Australia Awards - a new initiative to build the international reputation of our scholarship programs and maximise their benefit to Australia.
This announcement, which I was pleased to make at the National University of Singapore - one of Asia's top ranked universities - was backed by 170 additional Australian scholarships for the region.
In addition, further new scholarships will now be delivered to Asia over coming years as a result of the 2010-11 Budget.
The Australia Awards were inspired by the Colombo Plan, which benefited more than 40,000 people across Asia over 30 years and exported goodwill through an alumni network that endures to this day.
They will build on more than half a million international students who are studying in Australia today.
Last month I was proud to launch a new Australian Centre on China in the World at the ANU - an integrated, world-leading institution for Chinese studies that will serve as a hub for Australian and international scholars.
Mentoring people in the public sector and providing access to a broad community of outstanding scholars, practitioners and the media are crucial to the mission of the new Centre.
We need not only to expand high-level dialogue about China between academics, policy-makers and senior business people.
We must also seek to enhance understanding of China at all levels of Australian society.
Of course, the same principle applies to the other major countries and cultures of our region.
With India, we have built a broad knowledge partnership ranging from collaborative education projects from primary to tertiary level, to joint scientific and technical research - such as a joint solar cooling and mini-grids project between India's Energy and Resources Institute and the CSIRO.
Our joint strategic research fund with India is our largest with any country.
I have said before that Australia needs to do a lot better on Indonesian studies.
In 2008, through AusAID we joined with the Myer Foundation and the Australia-Indonesia Institute to launch a new program to build school-to-school partnerships between Australia and Indonesia.
The BRIDGE program has already brought together 93 schools, 187 teachers and 120,000 students through student exchanges, study tours and online social media such as Facebook, MySpace and Wikispaces.
2008 was a big year for progress on the huge task of strengthening Australia's Asia literacy.
That July, my Malaysian counterpart and I also announced a sister schools program beginning with 12 schools in Malaysia and Victoria.
The program has generated so much interest that it has already doubled in size within two years.
We are also considering the thoughtful recommendations, made in February this year, of a joint Australia-Japan working group on promoting Japanese language education and people-to-people exchanges.
And finally, through institutions such as APEC and the East Asia Summit, we are working to build a regional education community where students and education providers can move between countries with ease.
This Government is committed to deepening our engagement with Asia on all levels - political, economic, defence and people-to-people links.
I am proud of what we have achieved so far.
But I am also the first to acknowledge that overcoming the legacy of Asia-literacy neglect prior to 2007 will take time and resources.
It is, however, something we must invest in - because Asia literacy is an investment in our future.
It is a low-risk, high-yield investment that the Government is pursuing through a diverse portfolio of activities.
I know Sid Myer and Professor Tim Lindsey will say that our investment needs to be far greater.
The work of committed individuals such as Sid and Tim demonstrates that Asia literacy is not a job for government alone.
The diversity of delegates at this conference is testimony to our common stake in building an Australia equipped to meet the opportunities and challenges presented by this new Asian century.
We have representatives from banks and universities.
We have diplomats, health professionals, development experts and artists.
It reveals the true meaning of Asia Pacific community for Australia as a nation.
I wish you success for the remainder of your conference and I look forward to reading your conclusions and recommendations. 


The Government today released four new reports on the teaching of Asian languages in Australian schools that make plain the decline in Asian language learning that happened under the previous government.
The Government is committed to fixing this decline. The Government has committed $62.4 million over four years to 2012 to increase the number of students learning the languages and cultures of China, Japan, Indonesia and Korea under the National Asian Languages and Studies in Schools Program (NALSSP).
The reports provide the most current data and insight into the state of Japanese, Indonesian and Korean language education in Australian schools. An overarching report also covers Chinese language education.
Academic experts in each of the languages were commissioned to write the reports in conjunction with the Asia Education Foundation, funded through the Australian Government's School Languages Program.
The three language reports on Japanese, Indonesian and Korean complement an earlier report on Chinese language education and complete coverage of the suite of four languages which are the focus of the NALSSP.
They provide valuable baseline data and evidence, which will be used to inform future policy and national initiatives aimed at increasing the number of students studying Asian languages.
The reports indicate a decline in the number of students studying an Asian language in Australian schools, particularly at the secondary level.
In 2008, the proportion of Australian students studying one of the four Asian languages from Kindergarten to Year 12 was 18.6 per cent, down from 24 per cent in 2000.
All Australian governments have agreed to a target of at least 12 per cent of students exiting Year 12 by 2020 with a fluency in one of the four Asian languages sufficient for engaging in trade and commerce in Asia and/or university study.
The Australian Government considers learning languages other than English, in particular Asian languages, very important to Australia's future security and prosperity in an increasingly globalised world.
The reports, which include a summary report, The Current State of Chinese, Indonesian, Japanese and Korean Language Education in Australian Schools, are available at www.deewr.gov.au/Schooling/NALSSP/Pages/Resources.aspx


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I am pleased to be here today, speaking to a joint audience - the opening conference of the National Security College, and the second meeting of the National Security Senior Leadership Forum.
I spoke to the first National Security Leadership Forum in September last year, and I opened the National Security College just last month. Both are initiatives I thoroughly support. Both are essential to building a cooperative and cohesive national security community and culture in Australia.
In December 2008, I delivered the first ever National Security Statement by an Australian Prime Minister to the Australian Parliament.In that statement, I outlined the increasingly complex, fast moving, and inter-connected nature of our national security environment.And I outlined the need for a new, more agile and better integrated and coordinated approach to national security, to face up to the reality of a new global security environment and emerging threats.
Looking back over the past decade, some of the most serious threats to nation states, and to the functioning and integrity of the international system at large, have been from what practitioners would call 'non-traditional' threats.
- The global financial crisis, which posed the most significant threat to the world economy and the institutions that underpin it since the Great Depression. 
- The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, on the United States and the global violent jihadist movement that went on to carry out or inspire attacks elsewhere, including on Australians. 
Furthermore, there are emerging 'non-traditional' threats to our national security which are not yet fully understood.
- Climate change, which has the real potential to exacerbate, or perhaps in time cause, security challenges.
- Serious organised crime, where the enormous costs to society and economic impacts are becoming more apparent.
The common thread linking all these threats is the challenge they pose to traditional boundaries - between foreign and domestic, between policy and operational and between government and the private sector. The conclusion we have to draw is that any sort of meaningful response must be multi-faceted and highly coordinated. It simply cannot be the preserve of a sole government department or agency.
Today's highly inter-connected, mobile and technology-dependent world has blurred the sorts of classical distinctions that used to exist. It has also increased our vulnerability to disruption because the modern world is made up of many highly complex systems within systems. Each of these systems must operate smoothly to guarantee the life we expect. This has broadened the definition of potential national security threats.
I don't believe for a moment that the traditional challenges of statecraft - managing relations between states, shaping complex geo-strategic systems, or issues of war and peace - will go away. These are enduring features of our national security.
Indeed, the management of Australia's relationships with the major powers, the prosecution of our global interests, our active shaping of the unfolding strategic environment in the Asia-Pacific, and the readiness and capabilities of our defence force are more important to our national security and national prosperity than ever.
But these new, non-traditional challenges have taught us that we cannot afford to sit still when it comes to protecting Australia and Australian interests.
So I am particularly supportive of the theme of today's conference. Amidst these changes and uncertainties, some things must endure. Foremost of these are our national strategic interests:
- our continued territorial integrity and border security;
- our political sovereignty;
- our cohesion and prosperity;
- the interests of Australians at home and abroad; and
- regional stability and a rules-based global order.
Since the first National Security Statement, we've made progress towards achieving a more integrated, whole-of-government approach to national security. An approach that moves seamlessly from domestic to international perspectives, from traditional to non-traditional threats, and that is agile and responsive to today's dynamic and fast-moving security environment. We have created the position of a National Security Adviser - Duncan Lewis - supported by a dedicated Group within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
This position has developed and supported whole-of-government national security policy development and crisis response. It is helping to break down silos and stovepipes between departments and agencies and build a genuinely integrated national security community. In addition to bringing together different threads of the federal government, Duncan's job is also to work with state counterparts and the private sector.
So, as I reminded you all last year, if he calls it will be important and you need to be ready to respond in support. 
For the first time ever this year, as part of the 2010-11 Budget, we brought together all of the national security-related proposals from relevant agencies under a single umbrella - the Coordinated National Security Budget.
The Budget commits us to an investment of $4.3 billion to strengthen our national security, including measures on border security, aviation security, counter-terrorism, identity security, and military stabilisation operations. A coordinated approach to national security funding allows us to weigh options and shift resources across portfolios to best achieve our national security priorities. And it provides a more accurate picture of our overall national security effort in the context of government spending.
Perhaps most importantly, it forces agencies to see their own work in the broader national security context.
This is helping to drive a change in the culture in agencies towards true whole-of-government thinking - because nothing drives cultural change in government like budgets!
We have also taken a number of steps to build the national security community.
Here at ANU we have established the National Security College, which will quickly become a central institution in our emerging approach towards national security policy. The College will equip the next generation of leaders with the knowledge and skills needed to navigate our more complex national security environment. Over time it will build up expertise across government, foster collaborative leadership, and replace any remaining silos with trusted networks of interaction within the national security community.
We have established a National Intelligence Coordination Committee, chaired by the National Security Adviser, to ensure our national intelligence effort is effectively integrated and aligned with our national security priorities.
We have taken steps to improve information sharing within the community.
The National Security Information Environment Roadmap: 2020 has now been publicly released. The Roadmap provides - for the first time - a single strategy to address the barriers to information sharing, articulates a clear end-point, and dismantles some outdated notions of information 'stovepipes' and 'need to know'.
Last year, we released the first National Security Science and Innovation Strategy. The strategy embraces the full breadth of national security threats arising from rapid changes to the technological capabilities of potential adversaries, and sets out ways to improve the application of science and innovation to strengthen our national security.
We released the Counter-Terrorism White Paper which, for the first time, brought together the international and domestic elements of our counter-terrorism policy into one document.
We are building the AFP's overseas network and using the AFP's expertise more in stabilisation operations throughout the region.
We are creating a civilian response corps to enable the rapid deployment of Australian civilians into overseas disaster or conflict zones.
We have created the Asia-Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence to improve our civil-military capabilities and our ability to respond effectively to overseas conflicts and disasters.
Finally, we are doing more to actively consult and engage stakeholders outside the traditional Federal Government national security community, such as state and territory governments, business, industry and academia.
I would like to speak today about how these changes impact on you - the practitioners of national security.
Today, this audience is broader than the one at the National Security Executive Leadership course last year. This year we have all the key commonwealth agencies here - Defence, Attorney-Generals, DFAT, the AFP, and others. Like last year, we have representatives from state government agencies. But this year there are also leaders of the business community, academics and commentators present. This is an important evolution.
As domestic and international events, impacts and influences become increasingly blurred in the complex modern world, we need to look beyond the confines of government when considering national security and how we respond to national security challenges.
Perhaps this is most clearly seen in the need to protect critical infrastructure from terrorism, and ensure the continuity of essential services in the face of all hazards. For our economic and social well-being in the modern world, we rely on key infrastructure. Telecommunications networks. The electricity grid. Financial systems. Traffic systems - in the air, on the ground and at sea.
A disruption to any one of these systems would have a devastating impact on our lives and livelihoods. Just look at the effect of one volcano in Iceland. The cost of air travel being grounded by that cloud of volcanic ash over Europe is estimated to be a loss of 1.5 billion Euros for the airline industry and a further 1 billion Euros for the tourism sector in Europe. The follow-on impacts would have been even greater.
Over the past year, there have been some significant shifts in our thinking around critical infrastructure. 
For a number of years, the focus of governments around the country has been very much on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attack.
But as I said in the National Security Statement, national security is much broader than that. It is about protecting Australia and Australians from all hazards, be they man-made or natural. In line with this change in thinking, we are broadening the way we secure Australia's critical infrastructure. If we are to bolster our infrastructure against a hazard or disaster of any kind, we can no longer write policies or promote risk assessments aimed at protecting it against a specific hazard. Instead, we must enhance the 'resilience' of our critical infrastructure - that is, the capacity for it to withstand and recover from all emergencies and disasters. This resilience must involve all sectors of society - including all levels of government, business, the non-government sector and individuals.
As you would know, all of the systems in Australia - all of our infrastructure - cross a number of boundaries. They may cross international boundaries and call up questions of sovereignty. They almost certainly cross state boundaries in Australia and raise questions of jurisdiction. But they also cross boundaries between the public and the private. Ownership and operation of the assets that lie at the base of these systems is neither wholly private nor wholly government. The continued operation of infrastructure may rely partly on government control, and partly on industry-led standards. But it is also dependent on an effective business-government partnership.
Because of our reliance on critical infrastructure, its preservation, protection and resilience to all hazards becomes a matter of national security.The questions for all of us here today therefore are:
- how do we provide security for our infrastructure;
- what is our role in providing security; and 
- how do we work together - with all stakeholders - to achieve that security?
Answers to these questions are complex. But let me give you some concrete examples of what I am talking about.
There are a couple of organisations that most of you in Canberra would know of, but some in the business community might not know much about.
They are the Cyber Security Operations Centre in the Defence Signals Directorate, and the Computer Emergency Response Team Australia, or CERT Australia as it is known, in the Attorney General's Department.
Both of these organisations are full of computer boffins. And one of their key tasks is to assist in the protection of Australia's computer networks.
Earlier this year we opened the Cyber Security Operations Centre in DSD, which was the first time we let the media into DSD. The Centre brings together representatives from the relevant government agencies, including ASIO, the AFP, Attorney-General's and, of course, Defence, to sit in one location and monitor and support our government networks to keep them safe, secure and operating. When fully operational, the Centre will maintain a 24/7 watch on cyber activities that might threaten Australia's national security. It will provide the Australian Government with a better understanding of the cyber threat. It will coordinate responses to cyber security events of national importance.
But Government networks do not operate in a purely government environment. They all work closely with commercial telecommunications systems. So an important part of the Centre's job is to engage with the telecommunications providers and open lines of communication about the challenges we collectively face. In the event of a threat or sophisticated attack against the non-government sector, the Centre collaborates with industry through CERT Australia.
CERT Australia provides cyber security information and advice for the Australian public and business community. Particularly, owners and operators of systems of national importance and critical infrastructure. To date, CERT Australia and its predecessor GovCERT have briefed around 500 companies on sophisticated cyber threats. This reflects the fact that protecting national security means getting out there to industry and having frank conversations about the cyber threats we face. It means talking to telecommunications companies and finance companies about data and how it is protected. It means working out where the shared vulnerabilities are and how we can work to overcome them.
Cyber-security illustrates the point that government and industry need to work with each other to provide the security and stability we need for our infrastructure.You are all stakeholders in that security. You are all critical to providing it. There are, however, some areas of national security where the government will always be the main player.
National defence is the responsibility of the Federal Government.We published the first Defence White Paper in nearly a decade last year. It was the result of a rigorous process of assessing the military threats we might we face, and how we would have to deal with them.
The result was a plan - Force 2030 - to build by 2030 a defence force with more capabilities to meet the changing environment in our region. And it entailed a commitment to stable and predictable funding for the Department of Defence for the next 20 years. We are committed to ensuring that Australia has the ability to defend its territory. Of course, preparing defence forces is only part of the equation for securing the nation. The other side is to shape the regional and global environment so that it develops in ways favourable to us and our interests.
It is for that reason that this government has been unashamedly active in global and international affairs. Making sure that our voice is heard as the world's major economies shape the response to the global financial crisis is as much a matter of national security as is buying the right tanks. Being active in the G20 over the past two years has helped to protect our core national economic interests.
For a nation like Australia that lies at the Western edge of the Pacific and the South Eastern edge of Asia, the decades ahead will bring a lot of change. China is rising. India is emerging. The United States continues to predominate. Other major powers in the region are seeking to secure their futures.
In this environment, the government's view is that, in addition to strong relationships with key partners, we also need to help develop the right institutions that will help us manage any friction as power relativities change. That is why I have spoken about an Asia Pacific community.
This is a straightforward concept of ensuring that the leaders of all of the key nations in the region can get together periodically with a mandate to discuss all the challenges our nations face - political, economic, environmental, or strategic. We have no such body at the moment. Our view is that having one would be in our national interest. And we welcome recent statements from around the region that reflect a recognition of the need for our regional institutions to embrace the wider mandate and membership that our regional institutions need to meet further challenges.
Just as we need at home to build new partnerships to help us manage the complexities of the modern security environment, we need to do the same things in the evolving, complex international security space as well.
Taking stock almost a year and a half on from the National Security Statement, I think we have gone some significant way towards creating a single and unified national security community. We are on the way to building a national security community that is better equipped, coordinated and integrated, and that is able to respond more effectively to the full spectrum of national security threats. But there is much more to be done.
If there is one lesson to take from today, it is the need for continual evaluation and improvement in the way we approach national security. We not only need to be mindful of emerging security threats, but also mindful of new ways to respond to them. And in particular, we need to be mindful that significant assets exist outside government which can make an important contribution to our national security.
Businesses own or operate a significant portion of our critical infrastructure, and have a great deal of knowledge and expertise of the domestic and international environment. Academics and think tanks can offer valuable insights and perspectives, from outside the bubble of government, that can inform better policy. Opinion and community leaders can do much to build social resilience and cohesion, important national assets. It is important that, as leaders of the national security community, you all work together to secure the nation. And I congratulate you all on your participation in these courses as building the national security community.
I thank you.


The Prime Minister and the Assistant Treasurer, Senator Nick Sherry, have today announced tax deductible donation status for One Laptop per Child Australia Ltd.
One Laptop per Child Australia was founded in 2008 and aims to improve the lives of Indigenous children living in disadvantaged communities in rural and remote Australia.
It is working to achieve this goal by giving remote Indigenous school children laptops. The laptops are designed to be durable, energy efficient and child appropriate.
Since 2008, the organisation has delivered over 1,500 laptops to 20 disadvantaged schools in the Northern Territory, Western Australia and Queensland. Before 2012, it hopes to provide up to 20,000 laptops.
The Australian Government is pleased to be able to extend deductible gift recipient status to One Laptop per Child. Through this listing, the organisation will be in a significantly better position to attract private and corporate donors to raise critical funds to meet its 20,000 laptop objective.
The decision will be effective from today and run until 30 June 2012. All donations of $2 or more will be fully tax deductible during that period and all taxpayers who make a donation should ensure they receive a receipt.
The listing of One Laptop per Child is expected to cost $2.4 million.
The work of One Laptop per Child closely complements the Government's six year $2.2 billion investment in the Digital Education Revolution (DER) which will universally improve access to a digital environment for all secondary students in years 9 to 12, regardless of location.
The Commonwealth is also already investing $7 million over four-years from 2009-10 in improving internet access in indigenous communities through the National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Public Internet Access.
The Government is strongly committed to encouraging an active and dynamic philanthropic sector in Australia. Major reforms to boost the level and transparency of private giving were legislated in 2009 and reforms to public ancillary funds were announced in the 2010-11 Budget.
Legislation to amend the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 to give effect to this announcement will be introduced as soon as practicable.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I thank everyone for being here tonight as we celebrate the work of a really great initiative.
Since January 2008, One Laptop Per Child Australia has rolled out more than 1,500 laptops to kids in remote and disadvantaged communities across Australia.
To kids at Jigalong Remote Community School in Western Australia.
At Tullawong School in Queensland.
At Yirrkala School in the Northern Territory, which I had the pleasure to visit a couple of years ago.
And with the aspiration of providing up to 20,000 laptops by 2012, so that all kids have the chance of reaching their full potential, no matter where they live or what school they go to.
This is a really good initiative.
It is what building a stronger, fairer Australia is all about.
Giving children the opportunity to experience a world beyond the boundaries of where they live.
Giving them access to education.
And that's what they can do with these tough little laptops.
The XO is dustproof.
It's waterproof.
It's got a state-of-the-art screen that can be used in the sun.
It's low on energy use.
And it can handle being thrown around or dropped.
Most importantly, it is loaded with educational programs to inspire children to engage with education and connect with digital technology.
Earlier this year, I delivered the progress report on Closing the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
And that report made clear that while literacy and numeracy scores varied across grades, Indigenous children are consistently not meeting a minimum standard.
In Year 5 reading, just 63.4 per cent of Indigenous children were at or above the national minimum standard, compared with 92.6 per cent of non-Indigenous children.
In Year 3 numeracy, 96 per cent of non-Indigenous students met or exceeded the standard, but only 78.6 per cent of Indigenous students did.
And the more remote the student, the bigger the gap.
In 2009, the percentage of Indigenous students living in very remote areas who met national minimum standards was as low as 26.4 per cent for Year 5 reading and 21.4 per cent for Year 9 writing.
We can do better.
We must do better.
And we are committed to doing better.
The Australian Government is passionately committed to giving all kids access to the best education possible.
That's why we are investing $2.2 billion to give school students in Years 9 to 12 access to digital technologies, through the Digital Education Revolution initiative.
It's why we are investing $2.5 billion through National Partnership arrangements with states and territories to improve literacy and numeracy, to support sustained teacher quality and to target disadvantaged communities.
It is why we have invested in the biggest school modernisation program the nation has ever seen.
And it is why I am delighted that OLPC Australia is complementing our work through this initiative.
This is practical work, on the ground, where it is vitally needed.
It builds on work that One Laptop Per Child is doing around the globe with disadvantaged children.
It has been made possible by the generous support of corporate partners - the Commonwealth Bank, Telstra and News Ltd - and by donations from ordinary Australians, digging deep into their pockets.
And tonight I can announce that the Government will support OLPC Australia in its fundraising activities.
With the Assistant Treasurer, I am delighted to announce that the Government will amend the income tax law to make donations of $2 or more to OLPC Australia tax deductible.
The decision will be effective from today, subject to public fund requirements.
This is a practical way to support the important work that OLPC Australia is doing to give children the chance to reach their potential.
Kids in Umbakumba.
In Robinson River.
In Nhulunbhuy.
In the words of John Hartigan, "...kids [who] are punished because of their isolation being given an opportunity to get an eye on the world".
OLPC Australia is all about opportunity.
And I thank you for your work.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today we gather to make a down payment on one of the nation's most fundamental obligations - to protect the health of its citizens.
And in the field of medicine, no killer is more challenging or more destructive than cancer.
Cancer will touch one in three of us.
I've been touched by cancer.
My mum died of lung cancer.
And brain cancer killed my good friend, the late Professor Chris O'Brien - one of the most gifted Australians of our time.
Each year, more than 100,000 Australians sit down with their doctor and hear the devastating verdict that they have cancer.
And 600 of those are children.
Each year, 40,000 Australians lose their fight against cancer.
That's 26 times the number who die on our roads every year.
To transform cancer care, we need better coordination and more investment.
We have to break down silos and translate research into practice.
We have to mobilise the resources and commitment of governments.
Our National Plan for Better Cancer Care is about better services today, and developing the research base for the future - backed with over $2.3 billion in funding since the Government took office.
One of the things that most struck me is that Australians living in our rural and regional areas are three times more likely to die from some cancers than their counterparts in major cities.
That's why we're investing in 20 regional cancer care projects around the country - including eight new regional cancer care centres, upgrades to seven existing facilities, and four patient accommodation projects.
It's why we will ensure that these regional cancer centres will have links and referral pathways to the two integrated cancer centres - Lifehouse at RPA and the Parkville Comprehensive Cancer Centre in Melbourne - to set the gold standard for our nation.
This is a core part of the biggest reforms to our health and hospitals since the introduction of Medicare.
Reforms to deliver a health and hospitals system that is nationally funded and locally run.
But no matter how much we improve services, our current treatments - surgery, chemo and radiotherapy - have their limitations.
To take us further we need research.
And that is where the Lowy Centre will come into its own.
This Centre rests on two foundations.
The first is the generosity of a great Australian, Frank Lowy and
his family.
And the second is a dedicated partnership between:
- the University of New South Wales;
- the Children's Cancer Institute Australia;
- the Australian Cancer Research Foundation;
- the NSW and Australian Governments; and 
- a group of selfless Capital Appeal Donors.
The Australian Government made a significant contribution to this Centre - $13.3 million.
And the Commonwealth, through the National Health and Medical Research Council, has provided the University of NSW with $45 million in cancer research funding over the past five years - $11.9 million in 2010 alone.
This will support our cancer researchers - who are opening new frontiers every day.
Look at the work of Ian Frazer and his colleagues in developing Gardasil.
Not only have they have they saved generations of women from the misery of cervical cancer.
They have given renewed hope to the research community that one day we can master cancer - just like our forebears defeated TB, polio and smallpox.
The very same hope inspires and animates this centre.
Like the work of Dr Kerrie McDonald and her team tackling the growing incidence of brain tumours.
Or Professor Philip Hogg's work on proteins that has led to two new anti-cancer drugs which are currently being trialled.
That is the quality we have here at the Lowy Centre - 400 of the nation's brightest.
It is especially fitting that we honour the Lowy family's generosity the week, marking - as it does - the 50th anniversary of Westfield.
History will not only record Frank Lowy as an astute businessman but also a generous one.
Think of his contribution to international affairs through the Lowy Institute.
His support for the 'beautiful game' and our FIFA World Cup bid.
His dedication to the Jewish community and to Israel.
And his backing for innovation and education:
- the Lowy Packer building at the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute,
- and the new Lowy Library at the Australian Graduate School of Management, to name but two of Frank's recent contributions.
Today we add another project to that proud list.
A place that is one of the largest dedicated cancer research centres in the Southern Hemisphere - and also one of the best.
A place that will be at forefront of our fight to unravel - and in time defeat - this cruel and savage disease.
With those thoughts in mind, I honour the Lowy family and our other partners for their vision and generosity.
I thank the Centre's staff for their dedication and care.
I thank the architects, contractors and workers who brought this building to fruition during tough economic times.
And with pride and confidence, I declare the Lowy Cancer Research Centre officially open.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you for the invitation to join you this morning. This year is an historic year for health reform. Right now, the Government is involved in a significant national economic debate: a debate about economic management and economic responsibility; how we build a stronger Australian economy into the future; how we ensure all Australians share in the benefits of our natural resource wealth.
This debate is ongoing and the Australian Government will be out there, making the case for significant tax reform, between now and the election. 
Amidst that national debate, we are continuing the fundamentally important work of national health reform. This work cannot wait. Our health and hospitals system is at a tipping point, as the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission said last year. The pressures of rising demand, an ageing population and the increased costs of medical technology in coming years will push it beyond that tipping point if we do not.
That is why the Australian Government has taken on the great challenge of building a 21st century national health and hospitals network. Last month we concluded an historic agreement on health reform at COAG. As I said at the end of that meeting - our work has only just begun.
In this historic year, I want to acknowledge the contribution that the Australian Medical Association has made to the health policy debate - and the contribution the AMA has made to the Government's national health reform agenda; reforms that are long overdue; reforms that health professionals have told the Australian Government are needed - so that Australia has a strong, modern and sustainable health care system for the 21st century.
Today I will make remarks on three matters.
First, I will discuss how the Government is addressing the priorities for health care reform identified by the AMA.
Second, I will make an important announcement on strengthening the role of doctors in providing clinical leadership in our hospitals.
Third, I will address the importance of general practices in the Government's plans for the National Health and Hospitals Network.
On 16 September last year, Andrew Pesce presented the Government with the AMA's Priority Investment Plan at our consultation with the AMA and the medical colleges. This was the first of many discussions that Nicola Roxon and I have had with Andrew in addressing these priorities as part of our national health reform agenda.
The key change the doctors have been calling for is an end to the blame game between the Commonwealth and States over the funding of our public hospitals. The Australian Government has acted on that call with our blueprint for the National Health and Hospitals Network that is nationally funded and locally run.
Under our reform plan, the Commonwealth becomes the majority funder of public hospitals and will pay a fixed majority share - that is, 60 per cent of the efficient price of every hospital service, set by an independent umpire, to take the politics out of health funding.
This will end the five-yearly cycle of Commonwealth and State governments finger-pointing at each other over hospital funding. It will ensure that the Commonwealth contribution to public hospitals is permanently linked to health service demand and increases in cost.
In addition, as the majority funder the Commonwealth will no longer have an incentive to cost-shift into the hospital system. The Commonwealth will ensure that patients have appropriate access to high quality GP services in the community, because it will otherwise foot the bill for more expensive hospital care.
Doctors also called for more investment. The Australian Government is investing an additional $7.3 billion in the health system over five years. We are addressing problems in the health system that have been of longstanding concern to the AMA:
- $750 million to support the staged introduction of a four-hour National Access Target to reduce emergency department waiting times. 
- $800 million to support a National Access Target for 95 per cent of Australians to receive elective surgery in clinically recommended times.
- $1.6 billion to fund more than 1,300 new sub-acute care beds - and, to address concerns raised by the AMA that this increased funding could just be lost in bureaucracies, the COAG Agreement will specifically require States and Territories to actually increase bed numbers. 
- $120 million for capital investments for around 286 additional places in multi-purpose services.
The way hospitals will be funded aligns directly with what the AMA called for in its priority investment plan. Hospitals will be funded through a single source - a National Health and Hospitals Network Funding Authority, which in each state will combine Commonwealth and State funding.
There has been a lot of conjecture about the significance of the COAG agreement and arrangements for how hospitals are funded. The COAG agreement goes further than our original reform blueprint by requiring that full transparency will apply not only to Commonwealth funding of hospital services, but State and Territory funding as well.
I welcome this as a change for the better. For the first time Australians will be able to see transparently how their hospitals are funded from both levels of Government - and how funds dedicated to health are spent.
The AMA also called for national targets and performance monitoring - and in each of these key areas - the National Health and Hospitals Network has delivered.
The AMA also called for greater clinical input into our hospital system. This is the second matter I wish to address today.
During the past year I have had hundreds of conversations with doctors, nurses and other health professionals in hospitals across the nation. One of the most common messages I heard was that doctors feel locked out from decision making on the ground in hospitals where they work.
A key reform in the new National Health and Hospitals Network is the establishment of Local Hospital Networks, which put clinicians and local communities back at the centre of delivering hospital services. Local Hospital Networks will be responsible for running hospitals - instead of State Health Departments, Area Health Services and the other centralised models in place today.
Clinical leadership will be an integral part of Local Hospital Networks. Today I want to make an important announcement about how we will achieve this goal.
The COAG agreement we have secured will put in place the structure that clinicians have sought - a locally run system, with decisions located closer to local doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, and today I am pleased to announce that we will reinforce this new structure with a financial commitment.
The Government will invest $58 million to establish Lead Clinicians Groups in Local Hospital Networks and at a national level.
This is an investment in better leadership for better hospitals and better healthcare.
Locally, Lead Clinicians Groups will guide Local Hospital Networks on:
- how national best practice is best delivered locally. 
- how we can best improve quality and safety; 
- service planning and the most efficient allocation of clinical services within the Network, and
- developing innovative solutions that best address the needs of local communities.
These Groups will be made up of local health professionals - doctors, nurses and allied health professionals drawn from within each Network. Some States have already moved in this direction and we will work with them and professionals on making sure this commitment is complementary.
This Government is committed to ensuring that Local Hospital Networks turn to the expertise of their Lead Clinicians in determining how they can best deliver on the tough national standards we will be seeking. I have already made clear that clinicians will be represented on Local Hospital Network Governing Councils.
We want to ensure that clinicians have confidence in the Governing Council, and that clinical representatives are the best people for the job. This Government believes that local clinicians will often be the best people for the job - and Local Lead Clinician Groups will also be approached to nominate clinicians to sit on the Governing Council of their Local Hospital Network.
In addition to the local groups, the Government will also establish National Lead Clinicians Groups to develop and encourage the use of evidence based clinical guidelines. They will help set national standards - which local Lead Clinicians Groups can translate into best practice in communities' right across the country.
As a result of these measures, at both a National and Local level - doctors, nurses and allied health professionals will have a permanent and influential voice in our health and hospitals system. This is an important reform of the governance of our health system and I believe it will deliver safer, higher quality health care, to the benefit of patients and their families.
We look forward to working with the AMA on the development and implementation of Lead Clinicians Groups, as we work to ensure that medical professionals play the fullest possible role in shaping the healthcare system of the future.
Together with the changed funding arrangements outlined above, local clinical engagement represents a key reform in delivering a nationally funded and locally run healthcare system for the future.
The third matter I want to address today is how we provide for better General Practice and primary health care.
As the majority funder of the entire health system, the Commonwealth now has a direct financial incentive - one that it has never had before - to help Australians stay healthy and out of hospitals. That can be achieved through improving GP and primary care, better prevention and investing in electronic health records.
Less than a month after reforms were agreed with the States, the Commonwealth rounded out its health reform agenda with a $1.2 billion investment in GP and primary care. This investment is a reflection of a new era in healthcare in Australia - where the Commonwealth has the incentive to improve primary care, based on international evidence that better primary care delivers better health outcomes.
This all starts with having high-quality, well-trained medical staff, and if we're to build the health workforce we need for the future, we need to make the right long-term investments, as the AMA has long argued.
The Australian Government has announced a $1.2 billion investment to train more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals.
- This includes 1,375 more general practitioners practising or in training by 2013, and 5,500 new GPs or GPs undergoing training over the next decade. 
- It will provide for 680 more specialist doctors over the next decade. 
- And it will deliver 975 places each year for junior doctors to experience a career in general practice during their postgraduate training period.
This package is the single largest expansion of Australia's health workforce in Australian history. The AMA has played a key role in the design of the health workforce plan, and we appreciate that work.
The Government recognises that GPs are at the heart of primary care services in Australia and we want to provide you with the extra support you need deliver the best possible care for your patients. We will support GPs expand their practice and deliver additional services by investing $355 million to upgrade 425 existing general practices and primary care facilities across the country, and to provide a further 23 GP Super Clinics.
Over the coming weeks, the Government will be opening the first round of applications and I remain hopeful that the Opposition will decide to support this policy.
We will also provide $390 million to expand support for around 4,600 full time equivalent nurses working in general practice in a major boost to primary care. For this first time, GPs in urban areas will be eligible for funding to help employ practice nurses. This will mean general practices are provided with annual incentive payments of $25,000 per full time GP for a registered nurse and $12,500 per full time GP per enrolled nurse.
The Government will also invest $449 million to improve care for people with diabetes. This will mean that where patients diagnosed with diabetes and their doctors choose - they will have the option of enrolling at a GP practice to help them access a range of additional services.
Practices will be able to use this funding flexibly to support general practices in helping tailor care around the needs of individual patients. We will ensure that patients will continue to be able to see any GP of their choice - for example, if they are on holiday in a different city.
This model represents a significant change in how patient care for diabetes is funded, and we will continue to discuss the detail of this policy with the AMA.
The Government will complement its investment in empowering local clinicians to have more of a say in running local hospitals by establishing a network of locally-run Medicare Locals. Medicare Locals will support GPs and primary care organisations in improving access to health services in the community, and driving integration with Local Hospital Networks and aged care services.
For instance, a Medicare Local, in consultation with GPs, might identify that there is a substantial need for mental health services in an area - and organise a roster of allied health professionals such as psychologists to provide sessional services across a number of GP clinics.
Planning and management of individual patient's care will remain the responsibility of their GP and Medicare Locals will help complement services provided by GPs. For example, Medicare Locals will play a key role in improving access to GP services after hours.
Each of these investments will directly improve services today, but to keep Australians healthy into the future, we need to counter the high and increasing rates of chronic disease, much of which is avoidable. That's why the Australian Government is making the largest ever investment in preventative health.
In 2008 we delivered an $872 million investment. We are also tackling the lifestyle risks that contribute to rising rates of chronic disease - smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and obesity.
Last month the Government increased the tobacco excise by 25 per cent. The increased revenues from tobacco excise, along with existing revenues, will be directly invested in increased health funding. We will also require plain packaging for cigarettes from 2012 - the world's toughest tobacco packaging regime.
We have also taken action to curb excessive alcohol consumption. In our first Budget, we raised the excise on ready-mixed drinks, the so-called alcopops that have been particularly associated with youth binge drinking.
When we announced this policy, there was fierce resistance from a big industry. They ran ads. They ran misleading scare campaigns. They campaigned for our political opponents. They said the policy wouldn't work. But we pressed ahead and yesterday the Bureau of Statistics confirmed the success of this policy.
The statistics for 2008-09 show that after four years when alcohol consumption in Australia was increasing year after year - in 2009 we saw a small decline. The main reason for that decline was a 30 per cent decrease in ready to drink or pre-mixed beverages. Per capita consumption of pure alcohol by persons aged 15 years and over also decreased from 10.32 litres to 10.08 litres.
The Bureau of Statistics noted that this was chiefly a result of:
"a fall in the apparent consumption of alcohol of ready to drink (pre-mixed) beverages which more than accounts for the increases in beer, wine and spirits".
This conclusion shows that the Liberal Party were led astray on opposing good tax reform by the alcopop industry and today we see them making the same mistake with sections of the mining industry.
Another critical step in preparing our entire health system for the demands of the future is to improve the accuracy and accessibility of patient health records. The AMA rightly identified e-health as an investment priority last year, and the Government has committed $467 million to establish an electronic health record system. This will provide all Australians with the option of a personally controlled electronic health record.
As doctors you know that electronic health records will help you deliver better health care. Patient information will be more accurate. You won't need to order unnecessary extra tests, chase information from other health providers or require patients to recall their medical history.
It will mean better access to hospital discharge summaries, test results and details of prescribed medications, and reduced adverse drug events and medication errors. It will also enable better and safer care, and smoother transitions between hospital care and care in the community.
This is a critical component of long-term health reform and the Government urges the Opposition to reconsider its plan to scrap investment in e-health records.
I welcome the AMA's ongoing and crucial role in rolling out the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Securing agreement for the National Health and Hospitals Network was a major challenge. It meant putting major health reform on the national agenda; it meant bringing the States and Territories to the table; and it required an unprecedented process of consultation with patients, health professionals and experts across Australia.
The medical professions played a critical role in the consultation process, and they played a critical role in the shape of our reforms which will deliver more beds, funding for public hospitals from a single source and greater clinical leadership.
But it is the next stage where the rubber hits the road - in the implementation of these reforms. I look forward to working with the AMA to get the most out of our investments in health and hospitals and the most out of these reforms to the benefit of all Australians. 


KOCH: Prime Minister, thanks for joining us.
PM: Good morning, Kochie.
KOCH: If you knew last October, and some of the letters are dated back in August, as well, that there was, quote, aan unacceptably high occupational health and safety risk', why didn't you act then?
PM: Well, what happened, Kochie, was that each time Minister Garrett wrote to me and informed other ministers that there was a problem with the implementation of this scheme either on safety or compliance actions were taken to improve the safety. This happened on at least three, four or five occasions in the second half of last year.
The scheme came in on 1 July. It went to Cabinet beforehand. It went through an exhaustive analysis. It was implemented from that time, and then, on a number of occasions, through that correspondence, the Minister, responding to industry, responding to concerns out there in the community, said 'here is a problem. We need to do x, y and z about it'. And what Cabinet and I did through correspondence was say 'OK, fine, do that', and that's what happened.
But the bottom line is, the measures, at the end of the day, were not sufficient, and let's just be frank about that.
KOCH: OK, was there a suggestion in any of those recommendations, though, to say we should stop it, should take a breather, let's reconsider this?
PM: I'm under no- I have no awareness or knowledge of any document sent to me which said that the scheme should be stopped until, at the end of the day, the advice came to stop it. What we received all the way though was one series of recommendations from the Minister, and the letters that have just been referred to, saying x, y, z needs to be done because a, b and c is going wrong or needs to be improved, and that's what was ticked off each way through. But the bottom line is this - mistakes were made. These measures were not sufficient, and of course there has been a review of these matters conducted by Mr Hawke. But this has not been a program which has been well implemented. Let's just accept that as a fact.
KOCH: OK, alright, let's go on to questions now from viewers. We have an email from Sam. Sam was too nervous to come and put it, so we'll put it to you. This is very topical at the moment. Given the current logic being expressed as to why mining companies should have their taxes increased on super profits, why don't you apply the same logic on the super profits of banks? Now, does Sam have a point? Why pick on the miners? I mean, you know, the banks are making massive profits as well.
PM: I think, David, everyone out there understands that the non-renewable resources of Australia are owned by the Australian people. What happens with the mining companies is that they rent the use of that resource. That's what's different about mining.
These resources are owned by the Australian people, and therefore, throughout our history, have been taxed separately on top of the normal company rate. For example, in the past what you've had is state governments applying what's called royalties to get a tax stream coming from those resources, but our view is if you look over the last 10 years, for every three dollars in profit earned by the mining companies, one dollar was being paid to the taxpayer through royalties. Roll it on 10 years, it's for every seven dollars in profit, one is being paid to the taxpayer through royalties.
So, what we're saying is we just need a fairer share for the Australian people in order to fund better super; in order to fund tax cuts for small business; and to fund the future needs of infrastructure.
KOCH: But you're being accused at the moment of undermining the confidence of the Australian dollar, sort of sparking a share market rout in mining company share prices which is flowing through to our super funds, so we're getting poor performance because mining companies are saying 'this is going to hurt us. We're not going to go ahead with a lot of mines. We're going to pull out of Australia and go somewhere else.'
PM: David, you're a financial journalist. You know that both those first propositions are just wrong. On the question of the dollar, any market analyst will tell you that what's happening with the Australian dollar in the last week you've seen on currency markets across the world because of reactions to what's happening with global financial market instability, and, also, even in our part of the world with events on the Korean peninsula.
And on share markets, let's be very blunt about this - what's happened with share markets is, again, a response to instability in global financial markets and our resource stocks in Australia have performed better than the banking stocks or the financial stocks, and our overall stock exchange has performed better than most other stock exchanges around the world.
So let's just be clear about this. Obviously, mining companies will complain if they're asked to pay more tax, but we believe they need to be paying a fairer share to help with better super for all working people, upping that rate from 9 per cent to 12 per cent, bringing in company tax cuts for all companies, 30 down to 28, special tax cuts for small business or tax breaks for small business, and, of course, better infrastructure investment.
KOCH: Alright, let's go back to our viewers. Shane Holdam is in Melbourne. Shane, you've got the Prime Minister's ear. Fire away.
VIEWER: Yeah, Mr Rudd, good morning.
PM: G'day Shane.
VIEWER: I get drug tested at work. Why can't we drug test people that are unemployed, receiving a benefit all the time? A lot of other industries now get drug tested as well, so why can't - if they want to receive the benefit, the dole or unemployment - why can't we drug test them?
PM: Well, when we're looking at unemployment benefits and trying to get people into work, there's a whole series of practical things we've got to do and I'll come to your specific question just in one sec. If you're under 21, we have a policy called Earn or Learn, which means that in order to have access to what's called Youth Allowance they've got to be either in full-time education, they've either got to be in full-time training, or on top of that, they've got to be in full-time work. If you're in part time training, you've got to be out there looking for work, earning or learning, so those folk don't actually fall through the cracks.
If you're over 21, then of course we have what's called a series of interviews, initially fortnightly and growing over time, which we've only just brought in, to make sure that people are out there in a fair dinkum way looking for work or for identifying their training needs to get them into work, then to plug them into the right training provider.
You asked specifically about whether, in fact, people should be drug tested. Look, on the question of those sorts of things, it would strike me as something which would probably involve all sorts of problems in terms of civil liberties, but let me just come back to the program whether in fact there are any other health checks which apply to people on the receipt of New Start or Youth Allowance. On that one, though, I don't think we have any plans in mind.
KOCH: OK, thank you for that, Shane. Opposition bringing back the Pacific Solution as a policy to stop boat people coming in - will you look at changing your policy more towards the Pacific Solution, because it seemed to work better than yours?
PM: Well, let's just nail it in one. The so-called Pacific Solution was in fact a stopover in Nauru for 6 or 12 months, costing the taxpayer $300 million or $400 million, and 70% of those people were then resettled in Australia or elsewhere. In fact, a very large number ended up back in Australia. So, let's just call a spade a spade here - it might look good in the headlines, very expensive and a huge number ended up coming back to Australia.
The problem with the asylum seekers challenge is that it rises and falls with what's happening with global security circumstances, whether it's in Sri Lanka, whether it's in Afghanistan, or whether it's in Iraq, and in the past, the previous government dealt with this when they had hundreds of boats, 15,000 people come, then it tailed off for a while, then it began, of course, in recent years to rise again because of events in Sri Lanka and elsewhere.
We will maintain a balanced policy on this, a hardline policy tough on people smugglers, and anyone who's not a genuine refugee gets sent back home.
KOCH: Alright. Run out of time, but can we give you some homework for next week-
PM: -By all means.
KOCH: -Give the details of the family of John Parsons. John, from Bendigo, died in Hawaii while trekking in 2008. The family says the investigation into his death there has dragged on for so long they still can't bring the body home. Can you make some inquiries on their behalf and see if they can speed things up?
PM: These deaths of loved ones abroad are always really hard, so let's get to the details and come back to you.
KOCH: Terrific. Thank you. Good to see you.
PM: Likewise.


The Rudd Government will invest $58 million to establish Lead Clinicians Groups in Local Hospital Networks and at a national level.
Lead Clinicians Groups will provide local health professionals - doctors, nurses and allied health professionals - with a permanent and influential voice in the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Lead Clinicians Groups are a critical plank in the Government's National Health and Hospitals Network which will deliver a nationally funded and locally run health and hospitals system.
The Groups will give medical professionals the resources to develop innovative clinical solutions to improve the running of their hospitals.
A key finding from the Government's health reform consultation process was that clinicians feel locked out of and disengaged from the operation of public hospitals.
This damages staff morale, increases turnover and disrupts patient care.
By establishing Lead Clinicians Groups in Local Hospital Networks, the Government will ensure that local health professionals have a say on:
- improving quality and safety in hospitals; 
- planning the most efficient allocation of services within a Local Hospital Network; 
- developing innovative solutions that best address the needs of local communities; and
- translating national best practice into local delivery of services.
Lead Clinicians Groups in local communities will be supported by specialist National Lead Clinicians Groups, who will develop and disseminate evidence based clinical guidelines.
This will drive safe and high quality hospitals services for Australians.
The Government will work with States and Territories who have already moved in this direction on making sure this commitment is complementary.
Provision for this announcement has been made in the 2010-11 Budget and it is fully offset along with the Government's investments to build a National Health and Hospitals Network.
The Government's historic National Health and Hospitals Network will deliver:
- the Australian Government as the majority funder of hospitals and the dominant funder of primary care and aged care;
- strong national standards for emergency department and elective surgery waiting times; and
- a record $7.3 billion in new investments across hospitals, GP and primary care, aged care, mental health and eHealth.
This will deliver better health and better hospitals for all Australians and ensure that our health system reflects the excellence of the professionals who serve the needs of patients every day.


PM: Well this is good day for health and hospitals in Australia, health and hospitals in Victoria. This is an historic agreement between the Australian Government and the State Governments and Territory Governments of Australia, between the Australian Government and the Government of Victoria. It's about one core principle with is putting patients first, one core principle which is better health and better hospitals for all Australians and all Victorians.
I'd like to thank the Victorian Premier for being such a constructive participant in what has been a difficult debate for the nation, bringing about fundamental reform for the health and hospital system. This is the biggest reform for the health and hospital system that Australia has seen since the introduction of Medicare. Its core elements are these: firstly that we are, as the Australian Government, becoming the dominant funder for the public hospital system of Australia for the first time. Its capital costs, its recurrent costs as well as its teaching costs, training costs and research costs. And the Australian Government is becoming the exclusive funder of the primary health care, the exclusive funder for the aged care network as well. These are big and fundamental reforms.
Secondly, for states like Victoria, what it now means is that over the next three to four years we'll investing something like an additional $1.5 billion to enhance the number of hospital beds, enhance the elective surgery performance within Victoria, enhance also accident and emergency services in Victoria, as well as increase the supply of doctors and nurses in Victoria as well.
This is where the rubber hits the road in a very practical way. I'm advised that for example that $1.5 billion will result in some 300 plus sub-acute additional hospital beds across the state of Victoria. For elective surgery, making sure that we bring about over time our four hour target by investing something like an additional $180 million in Victoria, that's for accident and emergency. For elective surgery, to make sure that we have 95% of our elective surgery procedures completed within clinically acceptable times, investing in Victoria something like a further $180-$190 million, and also a further large investment to enhance the size of the local health and hospital workforce; more doctors, more nurses. For the longer term it also means an additional investment of the Australian Government helping with Victoria with at least a further investment of some $3.5-$3.8 billion for the outer years.
So this overall, is a good reform for Australia, it's a good reform for Victoria, it is a good injection from the Commonwealth into the needs of the public hospital system here in Victoria. And I conclude where I began, this is an historic agreement, an historic reform, it is all about putting patients first, better health and better hospitals for all Victorians, for all Australians, and I thank the Victorian Government and Premier John Brumby for his agreement to this important national reform. Over to you you John.
BRUMBY: Terrific. Thank you very much to the Prime Minister, and to Tony Lupton and the Andrew Way and can I welcome the Prime Minster here at the Alfred today. We are very, very proud of the Alfred Hospital and the great work here that's performed by the doctors and nurses and support staff, but we've been particularly pleased this morning to show the Prime Minister our elective surgery centre, and when we were having the discussions at COAG which led to this historic agreement, one of the things that I talked about there was the extraordinary difference that investment in centres like this can make.
And what we've seen here at this centre, which cost something like $90 million for stage one opened in 2007, is much, much higher rates of throughput, better patient outcomes and cancellation rates which have dropped from eight to ten per cent down to one to two per cent. And all of that reinforces what the Prime Minister has talked about today, and that is that all of the things that we're doing in health, and the reform agreement that we're signing today, is all about putting patients first. And as the Prime Minister said, when we went up to COAG to the COAG agreement, there was a pretty vigorous debate across the community about health care, and there should've been a vigorous debate because we spend more money on health in our budget than any other single item of spending. And as the Prime Minister has said the changes that we've agreed on have been the biggest changes to our health system since Medibank as it was then in the 1970s.
And so we needed to have that debate with the community and between Governments to make sure we've got the policies right, and we're signing this document today, it is an historic document. It means significant reform to our health system, it means better outcomes for patients, it means more elective surgery, it means quicker treatment times in emergency departments. And as the Prime Minister has said it also means, for Victoria, 332 additional sub-acute beds.
So when we went through that debate, we've ended up with and agreement which I think is a great agreement for our state. As the Prime Minister said over the next four years there will be, in round terms, about $1.5 billion extra coming to our state. $900 million of that will flow directly through our hospital system. And it will mean 150,000 EDs treated quicker, it will mean an extra 34,000 elective surgery treatments and as I've said, it will mean 332 additional sub-acute beds. And of course as part of that too there's something like $700 million for primary care, for aged care, for preventative care, all of the things that support our hospital system, and make our health system truly comprehensive- offering the best possible care.
In terms of the post 2013-14 arrangements, as you know these are a matter of debate too between Governments, again we've achieved I think an excellent outcome for Australia and for Victoria. And in our case we now have secured, locked-in and guaranteed something like $3.8 billion of additional funding between 2013-14 and 2019-20. So this is an historic agreement. This is a great agreement. This is the biggest single step forward in healthcare that our state has ever seen. And we recently produced our State Budget as you know, and many people described it as two health budgets in one, and it was two health budgets in one, because it contained all of the additional spending that we're providing as a State Government, plus of course the significant increases in spending that the Prime Minister has provided.
And so in total, with the Prime Minister's funding and our own purpose funding, we've been able to commit $4 billion extra of funding in Victoria to put patients first over the next four years and that's by far the biggest single additional injection that we've ever seen in health. So it will make a difference to patients, whether they're here at the Alfred, whether they're at the Austin, whether they're in Bendigo or whether they're in Ballarat, and we couldn't have done all of this and committed all of these funds, without the significant, the very significant, additional support that we got from the Prime Minister. And for that, Prime Minister, we thank you.
PM: Just before taking your questions, where the rubber hits the road here is from 1 July. That's when our additional funding for Victoria starts. So we reached an agreement back in April, and here we are looking at 1 July for additional funds to flow, additional funds for those additional sub-acute beds, additional funds for accident and emergency, additional funds also for elective surgery and in other areas of investment in the healthcare system. So the bottom line is, making the changes happen on the ground, and that's where this partnership is so important. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister twelve months down the track, what will, what material changes or differences will patients see in treatment and their waiting times?
PM: I think one of the great things about being here at the Alfred today is to look precisely at what's been achieved in this great institution in terms of the throughput of elective surgery cases. Here, through the investments already made by the Victorian Government, you can see that their throughput has increased by some 60 per cent, it means less cancellations for elective surgery procedures.
So what does this mean in practical terms? That additional investment, from memory about $180 million ourselves with the Victorian Government on enhancing elective surgery procedures across Victoria, means that you will see those elective surgery waiting times comes down. That's what it's all about. That's very practical. So the very practical bits are less cancellations for elective surgery, more predictability for elective surgery, meaning that you can get it done quicker and get through and get out and get home. The second thing is, accident and emergency, additional investments there to increase the throughput of the A and E departments of the Victorian and Australian hospital system, so that your presentation time and wait will be reduced over time as well.
These are big changes together with the addition to sub-acute hospital beds.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a report in the paper today that, ah, funding (inaudible) mining campaigns. You once said that such campaigns were a cancer on democracy, can you tell us what the difference is here is?
PM: Well what I've said before is that all such public information campaigns should go through the relevant approval processes, that's the first point. And the second is this, I mean the Government from time to time, over the last two years or so, has engaged in various forms of public advertising on matters of public, the public interest and the national interest. Also, in the Budget papers, we were very explicit on what would be expended on individual campaigns, and these also go to national interest or public interest matters. Specifically on this one, let me just underline one point. We're on about a very big change to the Australian taxation system. When you've got, therefore, multinational companies, many big ones, lining up to fund a very big scare campaign against big tax reforms- which could damage the economy, damage economic confidence, and therefore hurt working families, the Government has a responsibility to put the facts on the table. That's what we're doing.
JOURNALIST: You described such advertising campaigns back in 2007 as a 'thick cancer', and something which you would like to diminish. Has your position changed?
PM: Can I say that if you were to put together the quantum of Howard Government advertising in any period of time against what this Government has identified publicly in the Budget papers several weeks ago as its intention to advertise in this area and a couple of other areas, this is chalk and cheese. Furthermore, when it comes to our responsibilities for the economy, economic confidence, the economy at large, and protecting it from damage- and to make sure that working families are not hurt through scare campaigns funded by very large-scale contributions from various multinational companies, we've got a responsibility to act. A responsibility to look after working families. We've got a responsibility to look after the overall interests of the economy. We have a responsibility to make sure the facts are out there, and not simply subjected to a scare campaign funded by some very, very big vested interests.
JOURNALIST: Have you seen the Opposition's latest campaign (inaudible)
PM: No, I haven't. And the bottom line is this. When this Government faces the Australian people, we will be saying there is a very clear choice on keeping our Australian economy strong, and secondly, making sure that we're delivering fundamental reforms to the health and hospital system of Australia. We alone are committed to the actions necessary to keep our economy strong. Mr Abbott has said he'd happily pull the rug over stimulus- the rug from under stimulus in the economy. On these national health and hospital reforms, we stand committed to their implementation from 1 July, Mr Abbott stands opposed. The other thing I'd say is that on health and hospitals, we have a massive investment in expanding the public hospitals of Australia. Mr Abbott when he was Health Minister ripped $1 billion out of the system, and now has said he'd rip almost another $1 billion out of the system. That's the basic contrast.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the mining tax, are you concerned you're losing ground in WA over that?
PM: This will be a tough debate, because we're prosecuting it in the national economic interest. The tax reforms that we are committed to as a Government is to deliver big changes to the company tax rate right across Australia. Tax cuts for small business. Better super for working families. On top of funding infrastructure for our economy's long term needs. Here in Victoria, the Premier and I have often discussed the infrastructure needs of this great state. These are huge needs. Therefore, the question we've got to face as an Australian Government is how do we fund the infrastructure needs of the nation long term. That's our reform plan. It's going to be a tough fight. It's going to be a difficult debate. But we intend to bring about fundamental tax reform.
It is of no surprise whatsoever when you have those who have made huge profits in recent times that they will complain about paying more tax. I'll leave one figure with you. Ten years ago, for every three dollars in profits to the mining companies, one dollar was returned to the taxpayer through royalties. Ten years later, seven dollars in profit to the mining companies, still returning only one dollar to the taxpayers through royalties. The Australian people actually want a fairer share of the resources which they themselves ultimately own.
JOURNALIST: What do you make of assertions that the whaling issue has been brought up as a diversion?
PM: The action that we have taken on that matter is consistent entirely with our pre-election commitment. We said that we would- one, use diplomatic action to try and bring about a cessation. That action, that diplomatic work has not succeeded, although diplomatic negotiations continue. Secondly, we've always said that in the event that that wasn't going to produce the results, we would therefore undertake international legal action. This is honouring our pre-election commitment. Furthermore, we're very mindful of the fact that we have significant conferences of the International Whaling Commission coming up. It's very important for Australia's position to be crystal clear, and those conferences are only a matter of a week or two away. That's why we've done it, and we've done it based on a decision of the Australian Cabinet.
JOURNALIST: Premier, can I direct a question to you regarding a story in The Age this morning linking the Facebook of this young girl who's been involved with St Kilda players. Apparently that has ended up on some computers within Government departments, including the TAC.
BRUMBY: I'm not aware of that. I obviously saw the article this morning, and I think any transmission, circulation of that I think would be inappropriate. And the TAC or any other agency should take steps to ensure that that doesn't occur. I would make a more general point I think about Facebook, and I think it's- there's other story in the media today for example about cyber bullying, and the steps that we're taking there in schools. Facebook can be a wonderful tool, a wonderful window to the world. But individuals, and particularly young people, do need to be careful and think about the images that are presented there, because they can be circulated, they can be circulated to the world. And we're seeing in schools, too, the steps we've announced with cyber bullying.
These are new steps to put in place new arrangements and new rules within schools to try and protect children. We're doing work, too, with the Alannah and Madeline Foundation- I believe the Federal Government also- we're jointly funding a project there to try and eradicate cyber bullying in schools. But look, the action in terms of circulating that, inappropriate, and Departments need to stop that. But I think there's a broader issue there about Facebook, and that is that we all need to be sort of mindful about the way in which it's used and mindful of what some of the consequences can be.
JOURNALIST: The email that is circulating has former AFL footballers has (inaudible) if not the wider AFL community?
BRUMBY: Again, I haven't seen it. I don't know if you can say that. But I think it's unfortunate that it's been circulated, and I think I've made my comments clear in relation to any Government agencies that have circulated that.
JOURNALIST: Just on the resources advertising again, do you concede that you've broken your own (inaudible)
PM: We've been absolutely consistent. Well, first of all, the Government has funded a number of public information campaigns over a long period of time. That's the first thing. Secondly, we have guidelines which governed that, and those guidelines also contain within them provisions for advertising in compelling circumstances. Thirdly, what are the compelling circumstances here- if you face the prospect of a large-scale scare campaign from well funded, multinational companies about tax reform, we as a Government have a responsibility to act in defence of the economy, economic confidence, and to protect working families' interests from being hurt. Can I add one further thing as I go. And that is, just to echo what the Premier just said about cyber bullying.
He's absolutely right. This is an increasing scourge on our modern Australia. We have real problems here. You speak to mums and dads- and the Premier and I do, regularly- this is a major problem which we have to wrestle with. It's not making the headlines a whole lot, but frankly, below the radar, it's something that mums and dads are becoming increasingly concerned about, right across the country. Little kids being affected. Older kids being affected. Kids that we all know being affected. And this is going to require some fresh approaches from us all. Together we are backing the foundation the Premier referred to before, the Alannah and Madeline Foundation. We've both been in Melbourne here supporting its operation. But there is much more work for us all to do, because this is a concern for all families.
Folks, I've got to zip, because I've got to be elsewhere. 


The Prime Minister and Victorian Premier today signed a historic agreement to deliver a National Health and Hospitals Network.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will improve health outcomes for the people of Victoria and the sustainability of the Victorian health and hospitals system.
This agreement delivers the most significant reform to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will deliver a dominant funder, so that patients in Victoria are no longer shunted from one system funded by the State Government to another funded by the Australian Government.
Under this reform, the Australian Government will:
- become the dominant funder of public hospitals, funding 60 per cent of the nationally efficient price of every public hospital service provided to public patients 
- fund 60 per cent of building, equipment, teaching, training and services; 
- fund all GP and primary care services and all aged care services. 
This new National Health and Hospitals Network also means that hard working doctors and nurses will have more say in the way their local hospital is run, through Local Hospital Networks and new primary health care organisations.
From July 1 this year, the Australian Government will start delivering $1.5 billion in additional funding for Victoria over the next four years, this will provide:
- $402 million for 326 new sub-acute hospital beds
- A four hour target on emergency department waiting times, backed by a $181 million investment in additional capital and recurrent funding
- A target of 95 per cent of people receiving elective surgery within clinically recommended times, backed by a $194 million investment in additional capital and recurrent funding.
- $112 million to provide coordinated care for around 65,000 patients with diabetes 
- $128 million to support more aged care places and improved access to GP and primary health care services in aged care
- $278 million to train more doctors and allied health professionals and to support the nursing workforce in Victoria.
- $37 million for youth friendly mental health services and more mental health nurses
The Australian Government will also deliver around $3.8 billion in top-up funds between 2014-15 and 2019-20, to guarantee sustainable funding for Victoria's health and hospital system.
Today's agreement delivers fundamental reform to ensure that the Victorian health and hospitals system can cope with the pressures of a growing and ageing population.
It will deliver a nationally funded and locally controlled health system that will ensure that future generations of Australians enjoy access to universally accessible health care. 


PM: We lose 40,000 members of our Australian family every year through cancer. That's a lot of people. 100,000 Australians each year receive a diagnosis of one form of cancer or another. That is a very large number of people. And I doubt as I look out to this audience today that there is anyone among you who not among their family and friends has been directly affected by this terrible, terrible disease.
Having just been taken through this marvellous centre behind where we gather today, and listened to the briefings from the medical researchers on the work they are doing, in their laboratories, with their test tubes and their pipettes and every conceivable 21st century device to replace each and every one of the above. It is a wonder and a marvel to behold. However, none of this is made possible unless we make the facilities possible for that to occur. That is why together with the Government of New South Wales and together with the University, we in the Australian Government are proud investors in this great institute.
The cost of the equipment that I have just been shown through is formidable but you know the need which it meets is even more formidable so it is a good thing that we are doing this together.
Now we have been galvanised as a Government about this great challenge to put a line through cancer. Put a line through cancer. This affects too many of us in this country and that must be our ambition. The Government is now investing some 2.3 billion dollars in a whole range of cancer related research and treatment areas right across the country.
It is with great pride and great confidence therefore that I declare the Lowy Cancer Research Centre officially open.
(The video related to this transcript is available from the Multimedia section of this website.)


PM: Thanks for coming. I wanted to make some remarks about the RSPT, the Resource Super Profits Tax. After I've made some remarks I'll then hand over to the Treasurer and to Martin Ferguson to add to them.
The Government has received, now its interim, first consultation report from the first consultation panel which has been dealing with the contents of the tax proposal and the individual representations being made by individual mining companies. The Government will not be releasing this report or those which follow it because it's, of course, is a series of confidential consultations between the Government and industry.
However, the reason for calling you together today is to simply underline the fact that based on an initial round of consultations, first, consultations are going well, second, we do not expect to land any agreement with the mining industry any time soon. Anyone out there expecting that there'll be some magic deal at midnight tomorrow night is wrong. That's not how it's going to be. Furthermore, this is going to be quite a long and protracted negotiation over quite a long period of time. And there I speak of weeks, at least, if not beyond.
The Government of course, is sitting down with companies from right across the mining industry and will continue to do so because we believe it is right that we understand fully the implications of the Government's proposed tax on the individual circumstances of each company.
Furthermore, I wish to emphasise that the Government remains fully committed to a Resource Super Profits Tax consistent with the framework that we announced on 2 May. That of course, includes a 40 percent rate, that, of course, includes making sure that we can also bring about other elements of tax reform as well.
These reforms from the Government's perspective, are fundamental to building economic growth for Australia in the future because they make possible bringing down the company rate, they make possible changes to the taxation arrangements for small business, they also make possible the delivery of increased superannuation entitlements to working families.
For us therefore, this is important reform. We remain fundamentally committed to it. We intend to get on with the job, but this is going to take quite some time yet.
Treasurer, like to add to that?
TREASURER: Thanks, Prime Minister. I just wanted to make a couple of points and I think I made them quite strongly on the 2 May when we released the response to the Independent Tax Inquiry, and that is, fundamental reform is absolutely necessary to strengthen our economy for the long-term. And this reform of resource taxation is absolutely fundamental to boost investment, to strengthen the economy over time, but most importantly to deal with the challenges we face as we go forward, to build our national savings, to invest in infrastructure, to make our economy much more competitive by lower corporate rates across the board and in particular, tax incentives for small business.
Now, I think there are many here who are aware that over the years, particularly the last 25 years, it has been the hard, fundamental reforms that have built the strength of the Australian economy which has assisted us so much in recent years. This is fundamental, hard reform.
The Government is not surprised that it is meeting fierce resistance from some of the biggest companies in the country, and indeed, some of the biggest resource companies in the world. That is just a fact of life, and it is naïve for anybody to expect that it would be different because they will have to pay a bit more tax.
There is compelling evidence in the Henry Report that they've not been paying their fair share, but the Australian people deserve their fair share, and compelling evidence in that report as to what we must do for economic reform as we go forward to build our national savings, to make our economy more competitive through lower corporate rates and to invest in infrastructure. Thanks.
MINISTER FERGUSON: Might I remind you that this is a tax on profits. Contrary to what the Leader of the Opposition is saying, this is not a tax on extraction. We should also not forget that the industry itself has argued for tax reform. It has actually argued in support of a profit-based tax system.
What we are about putting in place is a modern tax system to actually take forward the resources and energy sector in the 21st century. We took on a debate 25 years ago akin to this with respect to the petroleum industry, and we've come a long way in that 25 years. Last year we landed the biggest ever single investment for a project in Australia.
What we're about is bedding down the detail and putting in place certainty, which ensures that we get a fair return for the Australian community for their resources during the good times but I also remind you that during the bad times there is also some relief for the mining industry. And in the past when we had a total focus at a state level on an extraction tax, time and time again this, the very mining industry that was approaching treasurers and resource ministers to actually get some relief from the royalty payments, and we should never lose sight of that because this is about a fair approach to how we develop the resources sector in the future, akin to how we put in place, 25 years ago, a Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, and the only person and organisation that is now opposed to the resources sector actually paying a fairer return to the Australian community during the good times is actually the Leader of the Opposition and the Coalition.
PM: Just before I take your questions, the Government therefore remains fundamentally committed to delivering this tax reform, important for the nation, important for the industry. Secondly the Government is entirely prepared for the sorts of scare campaigns that we've seen in times past. We saw it with the introduction of the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, we saw it over Mabo, we've seen it in relation to industrial relations, each of which created a furore at the time with the mining industry at various stages saying that would end in the collapse of the industry, none of those scare campaigns proved to be accurate nor does this one have that potential either.
JOURNALIST: Whatever changes you make will be made before the election?
PM: We will take this process of negotiation seriously Michelle, however long it takes. We don't intend to be railroaded by any particular timetable, we intend to get it right and we will take those negotiations seriously. Our commitment to the reform hasn't changed one bit.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd why not offer the taxpayers a break here and offer a deal to the mining sector and say we'll back of our ads if you back off your ads while this consultation period proceeds?
PM: Well it's quite plain that, and I've seen some reports of advertising campaigns for the mining industry up to $100 million - Clive Palmer's probably kicking in I don't know - but the bottom line is we've got a responsibility to rollback against the misinformation, and there's a fair bit of misinformation out there. And it's in the public interest that that occur and we don't resile from that one bit. This is an important tax reform for the nation, any significant tax reform results in a public information campaign of one description of another. This is a major one. We therefore have a responsibility to make sure it is a debate based on facts, on facts, rather than misinformation.
JOURNALIST: The miners are going to be in town tomorrow, is this press conference, is this statement to them in advance you're not going to be pushed around?
PM: Well look I am sure when the miners are in town, Martin will have some time with them, he's always a cheery chap. Wayne I think you're going overseas aren't you?
SWAN: But we have been spending a lot of time together.
PM: And what I seem to remember last time that we had what is I think called a "minerals week" is that I had all those folk from the mining industry round for a drink beforehand, I am sure I'll do so again, unfortunately I can't attend the dinner itself -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm speaking at a Chifley Research foundation. I really haven't thought that through Phil but I'll let you know.
JOURNALIST: Was your decision to go with mining ads on the part of the Government a mistake in terms of what it's done to your credibility?
PM: Well first of all, we don't back away one bit from our responsibility to make sure we have a public information campaign on a major area of tax reform based on facts. Secondly the mining industry has very deep pockets. As I said, reports out there circulating of a campaign up to $100 million, that's a lot of advertising. We therefore have a responsibility to make sure that this is a debate based on the facts.
Furthermore, you go to the question of guidelines and the probity of decision making processes, can I make it very plain that the Government has adhered to the guidelines which it announced earlier in 2010 and we've adhered to those guidelines. Those guidelines make specific provisions for certain compelling circumstances, those compelling circumstances arose. We don't back away from that decision one bit.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, hello, we're doing a profile on Julia Gillard for Australian Story -
PM: Oh good.
JOURNALIST: Which has been sort of very interesting in the last couple of days, what we'd like to know from you is do you think she'll be the next Prime Minister?
PM: You know what I've said many times in the past when asked this subject, she's a fantastic Deputy Prime Minister and she's going to make a fantastic Prime Minister as well one day.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of the advertisements, you spoke of your system that you put in place, but in fact back in 2007 you in fact said that the Auditor-General would have it. You didn't say anything about giving yourself a get out clause of giving the Minister the right to give you an exemption. Why, given that you offered a 100 per cent guarantee that you wouldn't do what the previous government did, should I believe anything that you say about anything?
PM: First of all can I say that in the debate in 2007 it was about whether or not we would first of all bring down the quantum of public advertising, we have done that. Secondly, would we therefore introduce as well a set of guidelines anchored in the Auditor-General, yes we said that as well. Thirdly, very soon after the Government was elected, the Auditor-General in fact wrote to me and indicated that he regarding this as potentially in conflict with his position. Nonetheless we proceeded, and we proceeded on the basis they we'd review how those arrangements went for a period leading up to 2010; it was then subject to review. Subsequent to that review, the revised guidelines which introduced the Independent Communications Committee, that decision was taken and revised guidelines were issued I think in March of 2010.
Those guidelines contained the provision we referred to before, because exceptional circumstances do from time to time arise and that is the set of provisions that we drew upon in the case of this particular campaign.
On the question of the quantum, we've honoured our commitment. We implemented a set of arrangements with the Auditor-General for the first two years. There were considerable complaints about that initially from the Auditor-General, subsequently also from the Opposition, I think in the Public Accounts Committee level, the Opposition welcomed the change in the guidelines including the content of them, that is the full content of those guidelines.
JOURNALIST: What can you tell us about the Government's decision to move asylum seeker families to the West Australian goldfields and is there concern in the Government about this issue damaging the Government in the polls?
PM: Can I just be very plain on the question of asylum seekers, we're not going to be party to some fear campaign run by the Liberal Party in the community about asylum seekers. We believe that we should have a proper process to deal with genuine asylum seekers, we should have a proper process to return those who don't pass the criteria for being accepted as a refugee to return those to their country of origin. That's the right thing to do.
So we're not going to engage in some sort of race to the bottom as, which seems to be being embarked upon by the Leader of the Opposition. What we have out there is a fear campaign based on a whole series of myths, a whole series of myths. Let's go to one of them. Every year in this country, going back to Mr Howard's time, we have about 13,000 refugees come to this country. What varies from year to year is whether they come by boat, whether they actually arrive by plane or whether they are processed out of various refugee camps around the world, but the overall number's about the same.
That's the reality here. Now the fear campaign being mounted by our opponents is of a different type all together, based on a series of myths. Let's have some truth in this debate, some absolute truth in this debate. We have a fair and balanced and reasonable and humane asylum seekers policy, we believe it is the right policy for the future. And I think it's time that this scare campaign and fear campaign being mounted by our political opponents was confronted for what it is, which is essentially based on a series of untruths.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where will you begin, when will you begin then processing Afghans and Sri Lankans again and will you do that before the next election? Will you give us some sort of timetable as to when those people who are in detention will know when that will come to an end?
PM: Firstly, the policy as it relates to both Afghanistan and Sri Lanka is entirely consistent with the one that we've had since the Government has been in. Secondly the operation of that policy is entirely contingent on changing security circumstances in countries of origin. Various parts of Sri Lanka, various parts of Afghanistan, that's why the decision to suspend processing was taken. As to what happens at the conclusion of that suspension period, that'll also be determined by the circumstances in those countries.
I go back to the general principle however, we have a fair, balanced, humane, tough border control immigration policy. We think it's the right one for Australia, and when it comes to the fear campaign being run by our opponents based on a series of myths out there about numbers and about push factors and about this that and the other and social security entitlements, let's just you know, unmask each of those for what it is: a rolled gold bucket of fear and invariably, in fact almost exclusively based on myth.
JOURNALIST: Given that you asked us or invited us a few years ago to keep you accountable on Government advertising, how is it that you're spending $7.6 million in the next, in the weeks to June 30, advertising your broadband scheme which similar to the RSPT, does not have the backing of legislation and you're still going through consultation. And following up from Mark Simkin's question, you said to your party room today that you wouldn't be outflanked by the right, so are you actually being outflanked by the left in terms of Colin Barnett who says that housing people in Leonora is not humanitarian.
PM: First of all on the question of the operations of the Independent Communications Committee of the Government and as it relates to other normal public information campaigns can I suggest you direct those questions to the Special Minister of State. Secondly, on the question of Colin Barnett and what he may have said or not said on a particular day, I don't know. But what I can say to you is this, we have a fair, balanced, reasonable policy for dealing with the challenge of asylum seekers, and I think, including in the great state of Western Australia, it's important to start rolling back in some of the myths and some of the untruths which have been put out there. Let's just bring this down to tin tacks in terms of numbers of folk in any given year, push factors around the world, processing arrangements, refusal rates. Let's just put this into some context and we should also put into a bit of context the role which people who come here and have done so in the past as refugees have played in subsequent Australian life.
I was, the other night at a do in Sydney to honour Frank Lowy's 50th anniversary of the establishment of Westfield. Now Frank's circumstances may be known to some of you, a lot of people have come to this country as refugees and made huge contributions. Now, right now in this debate around the country, there's a lot of fear out there, a lot of people in the community are feeling fear, and that fear is also being also whipped up by some folk as well. What we need to get down to is nailing each one of these facts and dismantling some of the myths being put around by our political opponents. We are not going to engage in some sort of race to the bottom with these guys on the question of asylum seekers. It seems to be fear is the common denominator for every public utterance by the Leader of the Opposition on any element of Government policy. (Inaudible)
JOURNALIST: Thank you. Prime Minister if you can break your word to someone like a Labor mate like Morris Iemma, why should we and voters trust you anymore?
PM: Well firstly Mr Iemma at the time asked me to publically support his position on the privatisation of the electricity industry of New South Wales. I did that, I supported the Government's policy. Secondly on the question of organisational matters within the Australian Labor Party, Mr Iemma's recollection of events is not accurate.
JOURNALIST: In 2007, you said that individuals and groups had a perfect right to use their own money to advertise their views. Why has that changed?
PM: Your reference is in particular -
JOURNALIST: You gave a news conference; it was the same news conference on the 13th of June 2007 in which you also said that taxpayer funded politicised advertising was a cancer on our democracy and your prelude to that was saying that individuals and groups had a perfect right to use their own money to advertise their views, but that using Government money for politicised advertising was a cancer on our democracy, I'm asking you why that changed.
PM: Well the first thing I'd say to you in response to that Karen is your assumption that the public advertising campaign as related to the RSPT does not deal with the matter in a factual manner. Let's call a spade a spade here. You have the Opposition and the mining industry saying that the Government's proposed changes to taxes represent a knife to the throat of the industry, what a load of balderdash, what a load of absolute bunkum. I mean let's just get straight a bit. I mean in terms of your reading, have a look at this bit in yesterday's Financial Times in London, I commend the editorial to you: 'miners like oilmen - this is editorial in the Financial Times yesterday - are a tough lot, they are fighting tooth and nail to derail the Australian Government's plan for a super profits tax, but just as oil and gas companies survive when a similar tax is imposed on them, the mining industry has broad enough shoulders to bear this new burden as well,' and it goes on and it goes and on and on.
This is the considered analysis of the Financial Times in London. Can I just say when you therefore have a stream of misinformation from a bunch of mining companies who just don't want to pay more tax, guess what? It gets pretty willing out there.
So, you either stand back and say well, we the Australian Government have no responsibility to explain the facts of our tax position or we do have that responsibility. We chose the latter. We make no apology whatsoever for engaging in this public debate and we intend to prosecute this debate. It is the right tax reform for Australia.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) just broadly of promises, just listening to your answer to Matthew's question, it sounded like one of those pharmaceutical ads where the promise it'll stop you from heart attack and then there's the list of side effects that go on for about 30 minutes later. Will you be a bit more circumspect in the next election campaign when you're making promises so you don't give up 100 percent guarantees and then get mugged by political reality later on and not be able to deliver? Will you be a bit more upfront and realistic with the Australian people?
PM: Well Mark, on the question of did I believe that the mass of public advertising being used by the then Conservative government in 2007 was a cancer on democracy, I did and I do. If you look at the numbers, from memory it's about $250 million, I think, in that particular year. I stand to be corrected. Look at the volume that went out on WorkChoices in that particular year, and if you look at my interview at the time - part of it, not all of it, part of it dealt with the sheer quantum of this stuff being rolled out.
Therefore, if you look at that compared with what we the Government, have done, I'd ask to fairly compare. In our first - just one second - in our first year in office we, I think expended about one third of that amount, our second year in office about one half of that amount. We actually took seriously this whole injunction about being very, very mindful about the sheer quantum of this material out there.
Secondly, there'll be debate, which Matthew's legitimately engaged in just now, about the guidelines. We sought to implement a series of guidelines around the Auditor General. As I said, the Auditor General, just after the election in 2007, wrote to me and said 'why not set up an independent consultative committee?', because there was some concern about conflict of interest. That is, he approves ads and then to be expected subsequently to audit them? We then changed the guidelines. We made that public in March of this year. The Opposition supported them.
On your overall question about our language and my language in particular, look, I try to be as absolutely as, you know, passionate as I can about what I believe to be a real cancer on the show, which was just the sheer volume of that stuff at the time. I'll be held accountable for what I've done subsequently. I accept that responsibility.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the super tax, you've said there may be weeks or months of consultations and negotiations with the mining industry. What could the mining industry expect as a compromise? Not obviously details of the deal, but how much are you prepared to shift from the deal was announced on May the 2?
PM: What we've said consistently, Dennis, and I think the Treasurer has said the same and the Minister has the same, is that we believe this 40 per cent rate is right and we've said we will consult with the industry on detail and on implementation and on transition. In fact, I think the Treasurer's gone further than that and talked about generous transition.
That's the framework in which we're having these consultations and negotiations, but what I do know about consultations with very big - very big - mining companies who sometimes hunt in packs is that it's far better that these negotiations are conducted direct rather than through the media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've mentioned the 40 per cent rate and the other tax reforms that are funded by the revenue. Is the uplift factor and the concept of carrying forward credits for previous years' losses and for un-deducted capital expenditure, is that part of the framework that's not negotiable?
PM: Consistent with the answer to Mr Shanahan from The Australian newspaper, I repeat my earlier formulation and do not change one jot from it.
JOURNALIST: PM on advertising, are you saying that you did not break a 2007 election promise because of the process, and if not would you apologise for breaking the promise?
PM: What I said was that there was a huge cancer on Australia from the sheer volume of government advertising at the time. I undertook to change that. Guess what? We did. We reduced it and have reduced it hugely. The Finance Minister will give you the details of that.
Secondly- hang on, hang on - ou asked me a question, I'm answering it. The second part concerned the guidelines which we said would be framed around the Auditor General. We implemented those in July of 2008. We said we'd review those in 2010. We did so.
We obtained as I said, initial reservations from the Auditor General. Both Petro Georgiou and I think Bronwyn Bishop on the public accounts committee also expressed their view that this represented a deep conflict of interest. We therefore changed the guidelines. They were put out in March of this year and as a result of that the Opposition at the time fully supported the change, but they are -
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) watered down on the old ones and he says that they don't provide as much protection as the ones that you replaced.
PM: (inaudible) speak for himself, but I'm saying that is the process that we've gone through. That is what we've applied. That is what we have implemented.
JOURNALIST: In relation to the mining tax campaign, the advice suggests that the committee saw an initial draft of the mining tax advertisements. Did the Gov- in relation to your mining tax campaign, advice suggests that the committee, the independent committee of officials, saw an initial draft of those advertisements. My question is did the Government decide to step around the committee because it got an impression that the ads wouldn't be cleared expeditiously enough, or did you make that decision in advance of showing them the material?
PM: That's a question you should put to the Special Minister of State, that's the first point.
The second is, as I said in the Parliament yesterday, the Government from the beginning of this year, is my recollection, fully planned to bring about a public advertising campaign to explain the detail of the RSPT. The reason for using the particular provisions concerning pressing or compelling circumstances is because we confronted the reality of a mining industry about to dig deep into its pockets - in fact, had begun to do so, I think, very early in May - to run a campaign which we would describe as misinformation.
Therefore, it was necessary to expedite. That is why we did what we did.
Furthermore, can I say to each of you, and without apology, we have a fundamental reform at stake here. That is the future of the RSPT and the associated set of tax reforms which it funds. We take our responsibility seriously. The contrast between what we offer and the Opposition offers is clear: we stand for better super for working families; they want to take it away. We stand for tax cuts for all Australian companies; they want to increase the company tax for all Australian companies, virtually. We stand for reducing the tax burden on small business; they stand for increasing that burden. We stand for investing in infrastructure; they stand for taking it away.
The contrast here is pretty clear. It's a big debate. That is why we will join that debate using this form of public advertising. We can have this debate about the manner in which decisions were taken to launch into a public advertising campaign. It's proper entirely, to be the subject of that level of scrutiny.
On the question, however, on the question however, of joining this debate and dealing with the sheer volume of misinformation out there from a bunch of mining companies who don't want the Australian people to get their fair share of the resources which they themselves own, well frankly, we're not just going to declare the field vacant. We're going to join the battle. That's what we're doing.
Part of my purpose here today is to reflect to you all that the Government's intention to prosecute this tax reform remains unchanged.
You had a question on Israel?
JOURNALIST: Is there any justification for the lethal use of force on a civilian convoy in international waters?
PM: I am still to receive a full briefing on the facts relating to this. However, as I have seen them, let me say this very clearly, the Australian Government condemns any use of violence under the sorts of circumstances that we have seen.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the loss of life which has occurred.
Thirdly, it is imperative that the Government of Israel conduct its own immediate, independent inquiry as to what happened.
Fourthly, that should be immediately provided to the United Nations Security Council.
If the Israeli authorities and the Israeli Government do not do that, then consideration should be given to what other form of inquiry occurs.
The last point I'd make is this, because it is time for Question Time, and that is that also, when it comes to a blockade against Gaza, preventing the supply of humanitarian aid, such a blockade should be removed. We believe that the people of Gaza, letting aside the whole questions of the long-standing dispute and a long-standing war, the people of Gaza should be provided with humanitarian assistance.
Thank you, folks. Got to go.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The story of the Australian Labor Party is a story of hope triumphing over fear. 
It is also our nation's story. Our nation's past, and our nation's future. 
A continuing narrative throughout Australia's history that says it is better to build up than to tear down. That it is better to build the nation, than to wait for someone else to build the nation for us. That it is better to create opportunity for all, rather than tolerate opportunity for the few. That it is better to face the future, than to fear the future. 
The story of Labor is a story of the triumph of hope over fear. A story that says afresh to each generation that we can build a better Australia. 
A stronger Australia. A fairer Australia. An Australia in which all our families can aspire to a better future. And an Australia that proudly raises its independent voice in the councils of the world in the belief that together, we can also build a better world. 
Friends, this is the continuing mission of Labor. 
These are the continuing values of Labor. This is the continuing purpose of Labor. 
Hope triumphing over fear. 
Friends, the work of the Australian Labor Party is never complete. Each age, and each generation, brings new challenges and new opportunities.
As we prepare for those challenges, we do well to learn from the achievements of past Labor governments:
- Nation-building endeavours to build a stronger Australia.
- Social reforms to build a fairer Australia.
- Tackling the hard, long-term challenges in our economy, in health care, in education and in national security - so that we pass on to the next generation more than we inherited from the last.
Labor is the party of reform.
The party that has driven economic reform for a century and more. The party that has delivered social progress for a century and more. And if we sometimes fall short of what we aspire to be, our party is defined by a set of values that always brings us back to Labor's core purpose. The enduring spirit that runs through successive Labor governments, from generation to generation. 
Chifley called it the light on the hill.
The betterment of all Australians. 
Andrew Fisher half a century earlier had spoken of the vision to give "the typical labourer... the fairest condition of life; the fullest opportunity to rise in life" 
And this is what Labor has always stood for. 
Removing the barriers that hold people back; creating the opportunities that take people forward; giving every Australian the freedom to fulfil their potential; and working ceaselessly for the common good of all. 
Tonight we remember the historic election of the Fisher Labor Government on 13 April 1910. 
An election where Labor won 42 seats to the Opposition's 31 seats - as well as every one of the 18 vacant Senate seats. 
A path-breaking election that brought the first majority Labor Government into office in history. 
An election that proved Labor could govern - govern responsibly, and govern successfully .
The man who made that possible was Andrew Fisher.
By any objective standard, Fisher stands tall in the pantheon of great Labor leaders. In every sense he stands as a Labor great alongside Curtin and Chifley. Fisher made Labor an effective national political force.
He built foundations for ongoing political success - and without the split over conscription, Labor might well have dominated politics in the decades that followed. Indeed, had he stayed in office the party split over conscription would never have occurred. 
Andrew Fisher was of course a proud son of Scotland and devotee of the poetry of Robbie Burns. 
But his is a profoundly Australian story.
The story of a modest man who started his working life at the age of nine in the coal pits of Ayrshire in Scotland - but rose to lead his party into government with an historic parliamentary majority.
He endured many hardships throughout his life. His years as a miner left lasting damage to his health. For representing workers as a union leader, he was blacklisted by mine owners from the coalfields of Ayrshire to the goldfields of Gympie. His highest qualification was an engine driver's certificate. But he was never intimidated by his lack of formal education.
Fisher was taught to read from the Bible.
He had none of the pedigree or the opportunity of his conservative contemporaries - men like Barton, a former student of Sydney Grammar and Sydney University; Reid, from Sydney High and Sydney University; and Deakin, from Melbourne Grammar and Melbourne University.
Fisher was not an ideologue.
But he was animated by a profound sense of justice, a deep religious faith, a powerful sense of public service, a prodigious work ethic - and an extraordinary tenacity.
He travelled more than any other politician of his generation. According to his biographer:
"In one 28 day trip around Queensland, he covered nearly 5,600 kilometres and visited 36 towns, using train, coach, buggy, horseback and even a railway tricycle. He received over 60 deputations, attended 51 meetings, and on one day alone, spoke some 14 times."
When he lost his seat in the Queensland Parliament in 1896, largely due to a vicious newspaper campaign against him, he went out and started up his own workers' newspaper, the Gympie Truth. 
His determination was unequalled. 
Fisher embodied the heart and soul of the new Australian Labor Party. 
In Scotland, he had worked alongside Keir Hardie, founder of the British Labour Party and its first leader. 
In Queensland, he saw the dawn of the Australian Labor Party in 1891. He was among the first group of Labor candidates elected to the Queensland parliament in 1893. He served in the world's first Labor government, in Queensland in 1899. He sat in the first Australian parliament, as the member for Wide Bay from 1901. And he wrote his own page in history by leading Labor to victory in 1910 - the first majority Labor government in the world, and later becoming our first wartime Prime Minister. 
Andrew Fisher was above all a nation-builder. 
He took on a colossal program of work, and he left the legacy of a strong, effective national government. 
He knew that nationhood required national leadership, national infrastructure, national institutions, uniform standards and a sense of collective national identity and shared progress. 
He recognised what his times required. 
Fisher understood the importance of prudence and fiscal responsibility - so he worked hard to sustain a strong budget position, and avoided debt until it was made inevitable by war. 
He believed Australia should not rely on using the British currency - so he established a national currency and a publicly owned Commonwealth Bank. 
He believed a national economy required national infrastructure that linked the entire continent - so he built the east-west railway and established uniform postal rates. 
He believed Australia had outgrown the time when its defence forces should simply be divisions of the British armed forces - so he strengthened national defences, established the Royal Australian Navy and Duntroon military training college, and in later years he was tireless in promoting the Anzac legacy. 
He knew a decision needed to be made on choosing a national capital so he selected Canberra for the Australian Capital Territory.
He believed a decent society must support those unable to work, so he led the efforts to establish the age and invalid pensions. 
He knew the dangers of unsafe workplaces from seeing many friends and loved ones lose life or limb at work - so he fought passionately for workers' compensation schemes both in Queensland and Federal Parliaments.
He'd seen how many women were so poor they couldn't even afford to have a doctor present when they were giving birth - so he established the first maternity allowance - the 'baby bonus'. 
He believed the new nation needed to develop its own sense of cultural identity, so he supported Australian artists, and laid foundations for key cultural institutions like the national library and national art collections, as well as establishing a new national coat of arms that remains in place today. 
And he fought persistently for social progress - 
- for women's suffrage;
- for voting reforms that empowered working people - he is, for example, the reason we hold our elections on Saturdays - so working people are not hindered in exercising their democratic rights; and
- for land reforms to discourage speculators and to make housing more affordable. 
Fisher's record of achievement is breathtaking. 
It may have been even greater had it not been for the outbreak of war, and the truculence of a very conservative High Court. 
But even so, Fisher - and the Labor leaders who followed him - were crucial to Australia's greatest achievement. 
The creation of this exceptional nation.
A nation built from a motley collectivity of souls, drawn from all corners of the earth; a nation that became a stable and successful democracy, that carved its living from an inhospitable earth to build one of the most prosperous nations on earth - rich in innovation, rich in enterprise; a nation that has so often led the world in social progress that it became one of the most open, most progressive, least class-based societies in the world.
A nation that believes in everyone having a go, and a nation that also believes in everyone getting a fair go. 
A nation that celebrates success, hard work and individual achievement; a nation that rewards achievements both in the workplace and the market place.
A generous country and community, confident of its place in the region and in the world - straddling uniquely the challenges and complexities of our Indigenous antiquity, our European history and our Asian geography.
Each and every generation of Australians is confronted by the challenge of whether they take forward the project of building this stronger, fairer, better Australia, or whether they retreat to a more divided, insular, less generous Australia - one stuck in the past, fearing the future, and railing against the uncertainties of a changing world. 
Andrew Fisher answered that challenge for his generation.
He took Australia forward. 
He laid the foundations of nationhood for our modern economy, our defences and our great social institutions, foundations on which we are still building today.
As heirs to the great legacy of Andrew Fisher and those who have followed him this last one hundred years, the challenge for us today is to answer history's call for our generation.
To build Australia's future, upon the strong foundations of the past. 
Just as Fisher helped build Australia's future for the 20th century, so we must shape Australia for the 21st century. 
As a government, we came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better - better opportunities, better health and hospitals, better schools and a better workplace. 
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, we acted decisively to support Australian families. 
I was determined to shield Australians from an economic cyclone that would have seen hundreds of thousands of Australians lose their jobs, their homes and their businesses.
We took decisive action, and Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy.
Throughout that crisis, we were determined to sustain Australians' essential confidence in our future as confidence collapsed around the world.
This is the point of everything we are doing.
Because without confidence in our future, the nation turns in on itself. 
In Government, I have strived to remove the obstacles and expand opportunities, so that no Australian is held back from fulfilling their potential. I have sought to support the daily efforts of individuals, families and communities around the country as they work hard, raise kids, build businesses, create communities - and through both success and adversity, sustain hope in their future. 
That's why we acted to end Work Choices.
That's why we supported families with:
- three years of tax cuts;
- with extra help for the costs of child care;
- with extra help for the costs of school; 
- a better health and hospitals system for the future; 
- driving our education revolution to deliver the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world. 
In Government we have always aimed to deliver a big reform agenda, and there are times when we have run into difficulties, when we haven't achieved everything we set out to do, and when we are working hard to deal with those areas where we have fallen short. 
Our task - and Labor's historic task - is to give people the security they need to achieve their ambitions and realise their dreams.
Now as we look beyond 2010, we're determined to continue the job we began for Australian families. 
Delivering not just on the big picture, but on the things that count for families and communities as well.
We're getting the budget back to surplus in three years time - three years ahead of time - to keep the economy strong. Through strong economic management, we're halving net peak debt. 
We're already funding 1,000 new nurse training places every year. We'll have an additional 1,300 GPs qualified or in training by 2013.
We're currently delivering Trade Training Centres for 732 schools and over the next three years we'll ensure another 520 schools have access to one.
And despite setbacks delivered by an obstructionist Senate, we're tackling climate change by boosting the renewable energy target and supporting record renewable energy investment, and by building one of the world's largest solar power plants, right here in Australia.
Andrew Fisher faced daunting challenges in 1910.
We face daunting challenges today. 
To secure our nation's future, we must continue to adapt and change. 
We must keep our markets open because open markets maximise competition which in turn maximise growth. 
We must modernise Australia's industries and institutions to generate the jobs of tomorrow rather than believing we can somehow snap-freeze the past. 
To stand still is to go backwards. 
Open markets by contrast are dynamic. 
We must invest in roads, railways, ports and broadband.
Fisher began a trans-Australia railway to build a truly national economy. We will build a National Broadband Network to underpin the national economy of the future. 
Above all, we must invest in our people - in their education, their health and in the strength of their community.
This isn't just about our national economy, the skills of our workforce, or the competitiveness of our industries.
It is about lifting our nation's ambitions for the future, and calling forth the best from all Australians. 
Not just for ourselves individually, not just for our families, but also for the common good, the 'commonwealth' of all Australians.
That's why Labor has always been the party of reform.
Building a stronger Australia.
Building a fairer Australia.
And making the tough decisions for the future.
As we prepare for the 2010 election, echoes from 1910 reverberate down through the generations.
Labor, with a vision to build our nation up. The conservative parties, with the aim only to tear things down.
Labor, building Australia up with a nation-building agenda. The Liberal Party, just wanting to tear things down. 
Tear down the most basic protection from unfair dismissal; tear down the modernisation of our schools; tear down the historic reform of the national health and hospital network; rip up a national broadband network. 
We stand for a strong economy - they have said instead they would have sent us into recession. 
We stand for delivering a surplus three years early - they have no plan to return the Budget to surplus. 
We stand for a decent safety net - they would bring back WorkChoices and AWAs. 
We stand for better health and better hospitals - they stand for ripping billions out of the public hospital system. 
We stand for the mining industry paying its fair share for the people's resources - they say the mining industry pays too much tax. 
We stand for building something that lasts out of the soaring commodity prices and the second round of the mining boom - they stand for squandering it, just like they did last time round. 
We stand for better super for working families - they stand for ripping away that extra super. 
We stand for tax cuts for Australian business - they stand for tax increases for Australian business. 
We stand for the biggest increase in the pension in its one hundred year history - they stand for increasing the aged pension age to 70. 
These are just some of the differences between us. 
In 2010, the Liberal and National Party just want to slither into office on a string of fear campaigns because they know that fear is a potent force in politics. 
That is why they use it. 
It also helps mask their real policy agenda because it is not a pretty agenda. 
And what would they have us fear?
- They'd have us fear debt and deficits - though we have less debt by a country mile than any of the major advanced economies.
- They'd have us fear a tax that requires mining companies to pay their fair share - though these companies now enjoy record profitability. 
- They'd have us fear an emissions trading scheme when we all know that a price on carbon is inevitable - necessary for business, necessary for the environment. 
- And they'd have us fear genuine refugees - although this country has for decades taken the same overall number of refugees each year. 
Every time, they tell us, the sky's about to fall in. 
And then the sky doesn't fall in. 
It didn't fall in after native title. It didn't fall in over the abolition of Work Choices. And it's not going to fall in now. 
Each of these claims will be contested by the facts, and each will be found wanting. 
Because the fears they promote are built on sand. 
Our task, as ever, is to recognise the concerns of the Australian community, not to deny them, and instead to put the facts. 
The Liberals and Nationals oppose everything.
They propose nothing. 
Except, of course, fear. 
That's what seems to define Mr Abbott's Liberal and National Party - the most extreme Liberal leader in history. 
Opposition to reform; stagnation against progress; fear against hope.
A party that looks not to the common good, but only what's in it for me. 
Friends, we in the Australian Labor Party can trace our lineage all the way back to the government of Andrew Fisher a century ago.
Indeed, all the way back to the founding of the Labor Party in 1891 on the fields of Barcaldine and the wharves of Balmain. 
And if Andrew Fisher was with us tonight, I believe he'd still feel at home. 
I think he'd be proud of the achievements today of the party he helped to found and lead into office. 
- The Fair Work Act, that reflects the same values that shaped his reforms to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. 
- Australia's first-ever Paid Parental Leave scheme, shaped by the same values that inspired Australia's first-ever maternity allowance, under Fisher. 
- The expansion of universal superannuation, shaped by the same values that underpinned Fisher's commitment to the age pension.
- The National Broadband Network, shaped by the same nation-building values that inspired the national railway line Fisher built across the Australian continent.
- And when we told him that Australia emerged in better shape than any of the major advanced economies, after the worst global recession since the 1930s, I reckon he'd be proud, and maybe not all that surprised.
Friends, Andrew Fisher was neither a soaring intellect, nor a powerful orator. 
But he had character, determination and the deepest sense of Labor values. 
And Fisher's achievements in office make him soar above contemporaries who enjoyed far greater education, privilege and prowess. 
As we cast our eyes back over the past century, we can see how the election of 1910 pointed with hope to Australia's future. 
The nation where a Scottish miner's son could rise to national leadership is a nation where hope can triumph over fear; a nation that would provide a home for the refugees from war and destruction in Europe a generation later; a nation that would make a home for people from every corner of the world since; a nation that would finally come together to formally recognise its grave mistreatment of Indigenous Australians, and to offer these first Australians a formal apology. 
Friends, Australia in 2010 is very different to what it was in 1910. 
In so many ways, a better nation. 
A land of greater diversity, opportunity and possibility, and a much better nation for the life of Andrew Fisher and the work of successive generations of the Australian Labor Party. 
I'm proud to lead a Government that stands in the great tradition of Andrew Fisher.
I'm proud to lead a reforming Labor Government. 
And I'm proud to lead a nation-building Government grounded in enduring Labor values - of hope triumphing over fear. 
A government with a vision for a stronger, fairer Australia in the 21st century. 
And a government that is getting on with the job of building that future today. 


PM: It's great to be here with my good friend President Nasheed of the Maldives. President Nasheed and I have become good friends during our period of collaboration on a whole range of challenges in recent times. He's a strong leader for his nation. He's a champion of human rights, a champion of democracy and a champion, globally, on the great challenge of climate change. I wish to pay tribute to President Nasheed's leadership, most particularly at the Copenhagen conference on climate change, and that conference and his continued advocacy underlines the fundamental importance of continued global and national action on climate change.
This is the first state visit to Australia by a democratically elected President of the Maldives. It reflects the closeness of the relationship between our two countries. We are both members of the Commonwealth. We are both democracies. We are both countries of the Indian Ocean, and therefore deeply committed to a range of regional and global challenges together.
We also have strong bilateral cooperation. We have today confirmed further assistance to the Maldives to assist in dealing with the practical impacts of climate change on the ground. Our cooperation with the Maldives goes beyond this, however, and President Nasheed has been keen during his visit to Australia to promote the further economic development of his country as well.
Australia has a long history of supporting scholarships for people in the Maldives, going back to the days of the Colombo plan, and today Australia will also be providing a further 25 such scholarships - Australia Awards - to the good people of the Maldives. These scholarships will provide opportunities for people to come to Australia to study in areas of priority to the Maldives, including education, the environment, science, health, governance and public administration. We will also continue to provide assistance to Australian volunteers to health with teacher training in the Maldives.
This is about helping the Maldives build a better future for itself. Although a small country, 300,000 people, they are a part of the family of democracies around the world, and we stand shoulder to shoulder with them as a fellow democracy.
The third area where we've increased our cooperation is in the security field. The Maldives has not been immune from the spread of terrorist propaganda and terrorist activity, which has afflicted many parts of south Asia. International terrorism is a threat to us all. Australia will work with the Maldives, as it does with other countries of the region, to build capacity to deal with these challenges. In particular, the Maldives will be participating in a number of training programs with the Australian police and the Australian police, through the WA police in particular, are assisting with programs on the ground in the Maldives.
We are also working with the Maldives to build a legislative framework for addressing transnational crime. President Nasheed has shown great leadership in his country, nationally and internationally, and I value his friendship and his cooperation around the world.
Can I just say, as I turn to the President for his own opening remarks before taking questions from yourselves, that he has been a strong friend of Australia, a strong collaborator with Australia in the lead up to Copenhagen and at Copenhagen on practical global action on climate change, and I would salute his leadership on that.
Also, he has championed the consolidation of democracy within his country. Democracy has not always been the prevailing political condition within the Maldives. He has shown courageous leadership in ensuring that democracy remains entrenched within his country, and we work with him in continuing to consolidate the democratic project there.
So, President Nasheed, you come to Australia as a friend; you come to Australia, indeed, as a partner as we tackle the common challenges of our region and the world.
I turn to you for your opening remarks.
PRESIDENT NASHEED: Well, thank you very much and good morning.
As the Prime Minister pointed out, Maldives and Australia, our relations go back many, many years. We became an independent country in the 1960s but Australian assistance to the Maldives goes way back to the 1950s. Maldives has been fortunate to become graduated from a least-developed country to a developing country now, very much because of a lot of Australian capacity-building assistance to the Maldives all throughout the years, so, therefore, we value our friendship and our closeness with Australia.
I met the Prime Minister first in the Commonwealth summit and since then we've worked in three international summits together. I have seen the Prime Minister working and I believe Kevin Rudd has one the most important voices and is one of the most intelligent people working in this field, and if not I would say for a lot of very good work done by the Prime Minister in Copenhagen, we would have come out from Copenhagen without anything. We are fortunate that we have an Accord, and I know, we all know, that it's not the best. We could have got much more and we wished more from it, but what was available was got because, in a lot, in very many ways, because of the Prime Minister's engagement and how he was able to lobby and get a number of states along, to come out with an agreement or some form of an understanding in Copenhagen.
So, I thank the Prime Minister for that, because for the Maldives climate change is not an issue in the future. It is something that is happening right now, and for us it is very important that we find an agreement, we find an understanding on how we may deal with this issue. Even in the future, and even now, we will only be able to go along with this agenda, go along with climate change issues, when we have Prime Minister along with us, going along with us, and when the Prime Minister is able to go along with us.
It is, in my mind, very unfortunate that the Prime Minister had to go to Copenhagen empty handed, in a sense. The Australian parliament was unable to come up with the necessary legislations prior to Copenhagen summit, but even with that handicap the Prime Minister was able to fashion things together and come out working very hard.
I value Prime Minister's leadership and I also thank him for bringing me out into the international arena and to the climate change issues. Although we do not share a similar political platform, we share a conservative platforms, but the Prime Minister is of Labor Party - he is the leader of the Labor Party - so in my mind climate change and many issues such as this are not really political, and they should not be political. The fact that we share similar ideologies in this issue means that it doesn't really cut across political divides as much as other issues might.
Australia is an Indian Ocean country. Australia is an island country as well, so we share a lot of similarities and we would like to work closer and I'm sure that relationship can benefit both our countries and the globe at large.
We would like to, I wouldn't want to go on and on and on, but would welcome your questions.
PM: Normal convention here Mr President is we'll take four questions, usually one to you, one to me, one to you and one to me, so is there a question first for the President of the Maldives?
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that the Prime Minister has delayed the ETS and do you think, Mr President, that it reflects a loss of resolve from Mr Rudd who you say played a key role in Copenhagen?
PRESIDENT NASHEED: It's difficult for me to believe, I do not believe that Mr Rudd has less resolve in climate change now. I do not also believe that the Prime Minister has back tracked on his promises or on his legislations that he wants to get through the Parliament. It's very difficult for me to understand why the Prime Minister should be blamed on this. It's not, as I understand it, and I'm finding it very difficult to understand why the Prime Minister here is trying to defend himself for this. I really don't see the issue at all.
It's very, very difficult for me to understand, when all the legislations that the Prime Minister wanted to pass through the Parliament were not passed, not because of the Prime Minister but because of the Opposition. So I would like to understand why the Prime Minister should be blamed for this.
I'm not saying these things just simply because I am standing next to the Prime Minister, but I'm saying this, I'm not a person, I've spent half my adult life in gaol, and I'm not a person to say things that I do not believe in. And it's very difficult in this moment for me to actually, just simply because I'm more of a conservative thinker, to go along with that line of thinking. No, I'm not disappointed with the Prime Minister, I hope the Prime Minister remains as he is, and I hope that he's able to deliver the legislations that he's thinking it through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can we get your reaction to Xstrata's announcement that it's now postponing about $600 million worth of investment around Mt Isa, and also do you think the coal and other minerals companies are making true statements about their intentions, and if not will you have them investigated under the Corporations Act?
PM: First point I'd make, this is a question for me.
PRESIDENT NASHEED: This is supposed to be our press conference-
PM: Nasheed, this is called an Australian press conference
PRESIDENT NASHEED: This is supposed to be our press conference.
PM: It'll rock and roll in many different directions.
PRESIDENT NASHEED: I'm sure there should be enough respect on (inaudible) as well, this is supposed to be our press conference.
PM: It's ok, I'll handle this question, and then we'll throw one back to you. I'm always respectful of President Nasheed given his personal tribulations in life, he's a courageous man, and very attentive to his advice.
Now on the question of Xstrata. I said at the very beginning of this debate on the future of the Resource Super Profits Tax, there'd be claims by mining companies, statements by mining companies, there'd be threats of project closures, there would be projects also threatened to be frozen or frozen. This is part and parcel of what will be the normal argy bargy of a very tense debate between parts of the mining industry and the Australian Government.
Secondly, no mining company I've met so far has whacked up their hand and said they'd like to pay more tax, I wait for that response from them. Therefore, mining companies are going to be fighting tooth and nail not to pay more tax; that's just the truth of it.
On the last part of your statement, or your question I should say Mark, I would much rather look at the text of what is released by the company later today in the question of any matter of probity. I am, however, of the view that we are just going to have a lot of sharp exchanges between the Government and mining companies about the impact as they would see it of the RSPT on them.
One final thing on the RSPT is this.
When people look at statements like this from Xstrata, also cast your mind back to history and the events of the mid 80s when we brought in the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax and everyone predicting gloom, doom and despair at that time.
The second point is this, under the proposed RSPT, marginal projects are in fact advantaged under that tax scheme because it is a profits tax, it is not a production tax, that is its key advantage, it actually assists in bringing projects on in their early states rather than the reverse where they are hit with a very flat production based tax in the early stages.
But Mark, there's going to be claim and counterclaim, there'll be a lot of heat and there'll be a lot of acrimony in this public debate, the Government's determined to prosecute tax reform.
Now another question for the President of the Maldives.
JOURNALIST: Mr President, notwithstanding your last answer, Australia says it will only attempt to legislate an ETS in the future if there is significant international progress. Do you believe that's the correct approach or do countries need to do what they can regardless of the international environment?
PRESIDENT NASHEED: Because we live in an interconnected world, it's always difficult for countries to come up with, especially in an issue such as climate change and the environment, countries unilaterally to come up with legislation, it's always difficult and in many ways it doesn't really quite make sense either. Australia is having to delay its legislation not because the Prime Minister or the Government wants it to delay, wants to delay these legislations, but because the Parliament has decided that they're not going to work along with these lines and therefore this is the only thing that is possible. That you have to wait a long, when you live in democracies (inaudible) you have to listen to these people, you have to listen to the people and you have to get the people to come out backing these legislations.
I hope that this election could bring more progress of ideas in climate change to the light, to the limelight, and therefore I hope that soon after the election you will be able to come up with proper legislations.
PM: Another question.
JOURNALIST: Back on the RSPT if you will, Rod Eddington, has made some interesting comments, I mean he's effectively calling on you to start the consultation again. Can you rule that out or are we just going to be dealing with the model that you've taken out of the Henry Tax Review?
PM: Well as I said I think yesterday, I think I was here with you yesterday or was it the day before? I can't remember. Our approach to this hasn't changed, I said the day before yesterday as I've said since the beginning of this debate on the RSPT, that we're looking for fundamental tax reform consistent with the framework that the Treasurer announced on the 2nd of May.
Secondly we also announced a consultation process associated with that, which as I indicated a couple of days ago has a long, long, long way to go yet, and I certainly welcome Rod's remarks in terms of the underlying importance of consultation. He's a good man, known him for a long time, and these consultations will be of fundamental importance between the Government and the industry, but there's a long way to go yet.
Just as we conclude can I just come back again on the question of climate change, which you posed to two questions to President Nasheed on. The bottom line is this: global action on climate change is absolutely necessary, national action on climate change is absolutely necessary, this Government remains committed to an emissions trading scheme, we need to make sure that the Senate becomes, shall I say, positioned in a manner which is able to deliver that change to Australia's domestic laws.
The other point I'd underline is this. It'd be very good if we started to see a little bit more pressure from Mr Turnbull within the ranks of the Liberal Party on this question. As I understand, Mr Turnbull is increasingly active on many fronts.
Thank you very much.


The President of the Republic of Maldives, HE Mohamed Nasheed, is a welcome guest in Australia.
He is the first democratically-elected President of the Maldives to visit Australia.
Talks today focused on shared interests in tackling climate change, combating terrorism and violent extremism, and economic and education assistance for the Maldives.
Australia and the Maldives share a commitment to achieving an effective global response to climate change. President Nasheed was a strong advocate for international action at the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference.
Australia and the Maldives continue to work closely together on climate change, particularly through the Cartagena group and in support of the efforts of the Association of Small Island States (AOSIS). We will continue to work together in the lead up to the Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Cancun, Mexico.
Australia recognises the particular challenges faced by the Maldives in the face of climate change. Australia will provide $500,000 to help the Maldives adapt to and mitigate the impact of climate change.
The Maldives has made significant progress in social and economic development. Australia is committed to assisting President Nasheed and his nation to meet the challenges they face.
We have a shared interested in countering terrorism and violent extremism. Australia is co-sponsoring workshops in South Asia for senior police and prosecutors aimed at fostering intra-regional law enforcement cooperation. Australia will fund the participation of senior police and prosecutors from the Maldives at these workshops, including at the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation.
Australia is also supporting the Maldives Government's commitment to encourage the formation of civil society organisations. Australia will provide $300,000 to support Civil Society Development in the Maldives in partnership with UN Development Program. This support will help build the capacities of civil society organisations active in public debate and advocacy for human rights, gender equality and youth development.
Australia is also working closely to support the Maldives to strengthen human resource capacity in priority sectors - education, environment and science, health, governance and public administration. As the Maldives does not have any degree conferring institutions, Australia has been a long-standing provider of technical and managerial training, enhancing people-to-people links between our two countries.
For the 2011 intake, Australia will offer up to 25 Australia Awards to the Maldives, an increase of 7 over the 2010 intake. This includes up to 21 Development Awards for undergraduate and postgraduate studies and up to four Leadership Awards for postgraduate studies in Australian institutions. Further to this support, Australia will provide an additional six volunteers to assist with teacher training and funding of $230,000 to support the Maldives National Qualifications Framework.


More than 600 jobs and apprenticeships will be on offer at today's Keep Australia Working Jobs Expo at the Lake Kawana Community Centre.
The Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is on the Sunshine Coast for the Jobs Expo along with Parliamentary Secretary for Employment Jason Clare and Member for Longman, Jon Sullivan.
Mr Sullivan said the region has been hit hard by the global recession - unemployment on the Sunshine Coast is 6.6 per cent.
"That's well above the national average and that's why we're holding today's Jobs Expo," Mr Sullivan said.
"It's pretty simple. We are putting local employers with jobs and local people looking for work in the one place."
Around 70 exhibitors will take part in the Expo - including major local employers and training companies like:
- Energex - 50 jobs;
- Hyatt Regency Coolum - 31 jobs;
- Mission Australia - 23 jobs;
- Australian Country Music Association - 5 jobs; and
- Steps Disability QLD - 5 jobs.
Some of the jobs on offer included farmers, accountants, retails assistants aged carers, nurses, bar managers, bakers and apprenticeships in plumbing and hospitality.
"It's a jobs supermarket," Mr Sullivan said.
"It is a practical example of the action the Rudd Government is taking to get local people back to work."
The action the Government took last year has kept the economy strong, but there are still regions which are doing it tough. Today's event is one of at least 20 Keep Australia Working Jobs Expos that will be held in regions hardest hit by the global recession.
The 18 Jobs Expos held so far have created up to 6,700 jobs.


HOST: Prime Minister good morning and welcome home.
PM: Good to be back in Queensland Madonna and good morning to your listeners.
HOST: And just before we get to the mining issue you may have heard some of the interviews we've just done. A fairly unusual case, a woman who shot and killed her husband freed in a terrible domestic violence case, and we talk about mining taxes, we talk about these big things, but domestic violence, what can politicians or the community do about that?
PM: The answer is very basic on that one Madonna and that's lead. Because this is a scourge on our society. I'm very much involved and have been for a long time in the White Ribbon campaign and the White Ribbon campaign has men sign up right across Australia, to sign a pledge, never ever, under any circumstances to commit an act of violence against any woman.
HOST: But the wrong men are probably signing up.
PM: That's true but what I'm saying is men have got to speak to other men about this, there needs to be something in the culture which has somehow, in some parts of Australia, condone this. The figures are awful, around one in three women experience physical violence at some time in their life, and one in five experience sexual violence sometime during their life time. Our attitude as a Government is zero tolerance and that's why we are developing, with the States and Territories, a national plan to reduce violence against women and their kids.
HOST: Yeah because you wonder if children actually see that in the home, what hope do they have?
PM: It's crushing, I mean I've spoken to so many families both here in Brisbane as a local member, but since being in this position right across the country. This is a real disease, it's just wrong, and frankly blokes have got to talk to other blokes about this, there can't be any nod and a wink that under any circumstances this is acceptable. It turns my stomach.
HOST: Alright lots of things to get through this morning, just upfront this debate over whether US President Barack Obama has cancelled, or is in the process of cancelling his trip to Australia, can you fill us in there?
PM: Madonna I hope to be talking to the President in the next day or so. As I've said many, many times before, the President of the United States is welcome in Australia at any time. I note that he's going through some real challenges at the moment with that massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and frankly this is a big challenge for him. But I'll be talking to him in the next day or so, we will make whatever information is available following that, but as I said he's welcome in Oz any old time.
HOST: Alright he's not the only political leader facing challenges, this morning the first time there seems to be evidence of direct job losses through uncertainty over this resource rent tax. How many jobs will we see go before this is all nutted out?
PM: Well the first thing I'd say Madonna is that we believe this tax reform with the mining companies is really important because overall, it results in increased economic activity and jobs in Australia. That's the independent modelling done by the Australian Treasury.
HOST: But the 60 contractors who have reportedly been given pink slips, are they going to listen to that, are they going to understand that?
PM: Well let me just go to that, and some of the claims being made by Xstrata.
I'd draw your attention to an article in this morning's Sydney Morning Herald by journalist Elizabeth Knight who's a business writer for the Herald. And she's not a supporter of our tax proposal, but she has directly challenged the accuracy of Xstrata's claims on employment. I think the other thing to bear in mind about Xstrata is this, remember prior to the election of this Government, they actively campaigned against the Government getting rid of Workchoices and AWAs. I just think there's going to be a lot of sound and fury in this debate. You're going to have mining companies making claim after claim because none of them want to pay more tax.
HOST: But do you concede, do you concede-
PM: Our view in simple Madonna and that is we believe they should be paying a fairer share to the Australian people
HOST: We know that
PM: Of course which all Australians own.
HOST: We know that is your view, and held very strongly, but the uncertainty in no determination, do you concede that is perhaps hurting us economically?
PM: I think we can work our way through this Madonna, it's going to be a tough negotiation, we have a very firm position as a Government, but I'd just draw off on the lessons of economic history. The mining industry did a similar campaign against the Labor Government in the 80s when we brought in a similar tax regime for offshore mining called the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax, also at 40 per cent. They said that would be the end of the world as we knew it for offshore mining, that didn't happen, that sector has flourished since then, we're going to go through the same now.
HOST: But Anna Bligh says she wants to see you today, that this is costing jobs, it's devastating families, she wants you to put down the baseball bat and actually negotiate. How do you respond to your ALP State colleague?
PM: Anna is entitled to her views and she should put them, we talk all the time. My job is in the national economic interest and the very basic point is this, to bring about long term tax reform which makes sure that these companies are paying a fairer share so that we can do this: one, boost super for all working Australians from nine per cent to twelve per cent. Second, to make sure we can bring down the company tax rate for all Australian companies by two percentage points, bigger tax breaks for small business and critically, and this is a debate we had in Parliament yesterday, using some of the extra funds we get from a super profits tax on the big mining companies to put back into the infrastructure Queensland and the rest of the country needs. That's why we're doing this.
HOST: Your Resources Minister Martin Ferguson I understand told a meeting of the Minerals Council of Australia in Canberra yesterday that there was room for adjustment of the parameters. Will you negotiate on anything other than the transitional arrangements?
PM: You know something Madonna, the place where you don't have a negotiation is through the Australian media. Our position has been constant from day one when we released our tax plan and that is we believe we've got the rate right, we've said also however we'd consult with industry on detail, on implementation and transition.
HOST: But don't you think the public have a right to know how moveable, how flexible you are on this, it's certainly splitting the public, it seems almost 50/50 down the centre and people want to understand it, they want to know what's going to happen.
PM: I think what the Australian public really want to know is the impact of the Resource Super Profits Tax on the economy at large, secondly on jobs in the economy and thirdly, how it's used to fund other much needed areas in Queensland and around the country, like better super for all working families.
On the detail of negotiations, they are at the end of the day commercial because each company's circumstances are different and that goes to the transition arrangements that we've spoken of.
But I go back to the Xstrata point, the head of Xstrata by the way said yesterday his company pays too much tax. I mean give us a break.
HOST: Alright that's Xstrata, Merrill Lynch this morning is saying it might cause price rises for bricks and plasterboard, you quoted from the Sydney Morning Herald, let me do the same, BHP Billiton in the SMH this morning says that the tax jeopardized its multi-billion dollar expansion of Olympic Dam in South Australia. This is a very fairly big hill you need to climb.
PM: Well tax reform is always hard. You've got very, very big mining companies with well lined pockets able to fund very big campaigns against any Government which says we'd like to get a fairer share back to the Australian people, that's what's happening.
HOST: But at what point do you consider yes, you say the miners are wrong and a big proportion of the population agree with you, the other proportion support the miners, but do you agree the uncertainty surrounding this, the lack of decision irrespective of who's right and wrong, is actually doing damage?
PM: You know something Madonna, any form of tax reform is hard, it's not a neat, quick, clinical process because each company's circumstances are different. We're working through this in good faith with the mining companies; we believe the miners deserve a proper return for their investments but so too do the Australian people, but I've got to say when you have leading mining executives saying they're paying too much tax, I think that's wrong.
Can I just go also to this particular case of what's been described as a marginal coalmine in Queensland?
HOST: Yes.
PM: If that's the case the whole design of the Resource Super Profits Tax is this, and it's very important for your listeners to understand that, upfront when a mining project is not generating profits, this Resource Super Profits Tax benefits them because it taxes them less, it's only when later in their life these projects earn very big profits does this tax kick in, as opposed to State royalties which are applied on production volumes from day one. That is why this reform is good for marginal mines.
HOST: Just a final question before you go, I'm running an election sweep, is there a particular Saturday between now and March next year you'd like to put your name next to?
PM: That's a good one Madonna. I like that.
HOST: You could win $300 worth of ABC prizes.
PM: I think you'd be had for insider trading, if I did that, so I'm very mindful of the laws of the Commonwealth.
HOST: Prime Minister thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Madonna.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's good to be back home in Queensland.
It's good to be here at the Queensland Media Club.
And it's good to be given the opportunity to talk both about the nation's future and Queensland's future.
During the past decade, Queensland has been driving Australia's growth - with State final demand growing by an average annual rate of 4.7 per cent, compared to national average GDP growth of 3.0 per cent.
It's therefore a state where governments also have to manage the challenges of growth.
Our purpose as a government is to keep the economy strong and provide a secure future for Australian families.
As a government, we came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better - better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools.
We've made progress.
We've cut income taxes three years in a row so that someone on $50,000 will now pay 18 per cent less tax than 3 years ago.
We've ended Work Choices so that basic conditions like penalty rates have been restored.
We've increased hospital funding by 50 per cent in just two years.
And much much more.
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, as a government we did what we had to do.
We acted decisively to support Australian families.
As the National Accounts showed this week, if we had not taken decisive action, the Australian economy have gone into recession like almost all other advanced economies.
But because we acted together, Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy.
Together, we've actually created almost 55,000 jobs in the economy here in Queensland, and 225,000 jobs nationally - since the global recession began in 2008, while jobs have been slashed around the world.
Nonetheless, the truth is that many working families and small businesses in Queensland and across the nation are still doing it tough, because the path to economic recovery is uneven.
For the future, we're absolutely determined to continue the job we began for working families.
That starts with maintaining a strong economy.
We're getting the budget back to surplus in three years' time - three years ahead of time - to keep the economy strong.
Our debt levels are low - peaking at less than one-tenth the average of the major advanced economies, and less than half the level projected a year ago.
And through these core financial disciplines, we are keeping spending under control.
But the purpose of keeping the economy strong is to make sure all Queenslanders, and all Australians, are getting a fair go - as well as getting a fair share of our nation's prosperity.
That's why we're implementing the most far-reaching reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare almost three decades ago.
We're already funding 1,000 new nurse training places every year.
We'll have an additional 1,300 GPs qualified or in training by 2013.
And we're putting the funding of our national health and hospitals network on a sustainable long term footing, where the Australian Government for the first time in history will be the dominant funder of our public hospital system of Australia.
We're building better primary schools for our kids.
We're currently delivering Trades Training Centres for 732 secondary schools and in the next three years, for another 520.
We're delivering our commitment to provide computers for every year 9 to 12 student across the nation - the Deputy Prime Minister delivered the 300,000th computer today in western Sydney.
And despite setbacks, both in Copenhagen and in the Australian Senate, which three times blocked the Government's emissions trading scheme, we will continue to act on climate change, with major investments in renewables like solar power.
We have now passed laws to ensure that by 2020, we'll be generating enough renewable energy to meet the needs of all Australian households.
Australia's working families do deserve better, and we are determined to continue the work that we have begun.
Because much work remains to be done.
Making nation-building investments for our future, to tackle the large infrastructure backlog.
Investing in roads, railways, ports and a high-speed National Broadband Network.
But above all, investing in our people - in their education, 
their health and in the strength of their communities.
So that we can build a stronger Australia.
And build an Australia with a fair go for all - and with a fair share for all.
We have focused a major share of our national investment in Queensland.
Our record of achievement is significant.
Just as our plans for Queensland's future are substantial.
We've been there to support Queensland during the global economic recession.
We supported Queensland's financial institutions during the Global Financial Crisis - guaranteeing bank deposits and wholesale term funding for banks, because we were determined that Queensland financial institutions survived the crisis when many said at the time they would not.
Queensland's economy has been supported by the Government's Nation-Building Economic Stimulus package to the tune of $10.8 billion - through payments to support working families and investment in medium and longer-term infrastructure.
The Government is also making major productivity investments to build a stronger Queensland.
In our first two years in government, we increased our investment in transport infrastructure for Queensland by 125 per cent compared to the last two years of the previous government.
That includes:
- An additional $884 million for the Ipswich Motorway.
- $488 million on the Bruce Highway. 
- $365 million towards development of the Gold Coast Light Rail system, and
- $98 million for 66 rail crossing safety projects and 207 black spot projects.
We have increased our national education investment in Queensland by 138 per cent in our first four years compared to the last four years of the previous government.
This includes:
- $3.1 billion for 5,898 projects at 1725 schools under the school modernisation program;
All these projects have kept builders and tradies in work during a difficult time in the economy - supporting local economies across the state.
The Government is also making major investments in health, housing and pensions so that all Australians get a fair go and have their fair share.
We have increased the investment in Queensland's health and hospitals system by 55 per cent compared to the previous health care agreement.
And building on this, under the recent COAG agreement on health reform, the Australian Government will provide an additional $1.05 billion in health funding for Queensland over the next four years.
By 2013-14, this will be funding an extra 4,400 elective surgery procedures and an additional 162,000 emergency department presentations - as well as new funding for 265 new sub-acute beds, training for doctors and health professionals, and new primary care and aged care services.
We are investing in social housing for Queenslanders families who most need it - with $1.1 billion for the construction of around 4,050 new houses, and more than 23,000 more undergoing repairs and maintenance.
Some 569,000 pensioners and carers in Queensland have received substantial pension increases of up to $100 per fortnight - the single biggest increase in the history of the pension, helping make a big difference for those struggling with cost of living pressures.
The Australian Government has therefore radically increased its investment in Queensland's future.
All this investment in the future strength of our economy and delivering a fair go and a fair share for working families depends on the continuing reform of our economy.
To boost productivity growth.
To create a seamless national economy.
And ensure that Australian companies remain competitive with the rest of the world.
And that includes tax reform.
The Government received the Henry Review at the start of this year.
The economic opportunity we confronted was to convert Australia's strong performance through the global recession into a lasting economic advantage.
By boosting the competiveness of our economy, lifting national savings, and boosting infrastructure investment.
I was under no illusion as to the size of the political challenge we would be taking on in this reform.
I knew that those affected by the tax would fight and fight hard.
And so they have.
But so will we.
We decided to take on this challenge which should have been taken on a decade ago as commodity prices began their record surge.
We are determined to prosecute our case that mining companies should pay a fairer share for the resources that the Australian people own.
And in doing so, we will not be intimidated by the statements or actions of any large mining company - foreign or domestic - and that includes Xstrata.
The Government believes in the importance of tax reform:
- To boost Australia's global competitiveness, by cutting the tax rate for corporate and small businesses.
- To boost Australia's saving, by lifting Australia's pool of superannuation savings by $85 billion over 10 years 
- To boost retirement incomes - that is, better super for working families, adding an extra $108,000 to the retirement super of an average worker aged 30 now.
- And to boost investment in infrastructure, funding the rail, roads and ports our resources sector needs
To fund these important reforms, the Government announced plans for a Resources Super Profits Tax.
The Government took on the challenge to reform Australia's system of resource taxation with our eyes wide open as to the complexity and scale of the task.
We saw the same scare campaign the last time a 40 percent profits-based tax was introduced for offshore mining in the 1980s - although that industry went on to flourish.
The mining industry said the industry would collapse after the introduction of native title.
They were wrong.
The mining industry said the industry would go backwards if we abolished Work Choices and AWAs.
They were wrong.
The fears campaigns have been many.
But we have chosen to take on this battle for reform.
I believe the Government will prevail in the resource super profits tax debate - because it comes down to two simple arguments:
First, we should be taxing the profits not the production of our resources.
Even the mining companies accept that profits taxes are better than the current state production taxes.
Second, the mining companies can and should pay a fairer share now that they are earning huge boom-time profits from minerals - minerals owned by the Australian people.
All we are asking is for the profitable mining companies to pay a share of tax similar to the share they paid in the past.
On the first point, I believe we have got the fundamental principles of resource tax reform right.
It is right that we move towards a system of resource taxation which taxes profits not production.
The existing system of state royalties is inefficient.
Royalties tax production - unfairly disadvantaging mines with higher investment requirements and higher extraction costs.
The current system of royalties means that companies are paying tax on every tonne of ore they extract - even before they have made a profit.
The super profits tax will remove royalties - meaning that mining companies won't pay tax until they are profitable - indeed until they have earned a return on their investment.
The RSPT in fact shares risk between companies and the Government.
The Government contributes 40 per cent of the cost of the investment through tax credits.
The Government later takes 40 per cent of the supernormal profits of companies if and when they became profitable.
And critically - the Government fully refunds to companies the existing state production-based royalties.
What will this system deliver?
First, it means that less profitable mining companies will actually pay less tax - Treasury modelling indicates that for a typical project - a company earning less than 10 per cent returns will pay less tax.
Second, this system will introduce minimal distortions to the production and investment decisions of the companies developing the resource.
Third, this system will promote the development of Australian resources.
Modelling by Econtech suggests that under an RSPT scheme, mining investment will rise by 4.5 per cent, mining production by 5.5 per cent in the long run and jobs by 7 per cent.
Even the Minerals Council CEO Mitch Hooke has confirmed that they prefer a profits-based system:
"We agree with the concept .... We, in fact, put it on the table through the course of the Henry review and that was let's move from the inefficient and complex set of royalties that exist across the states .... to a profits-based system where the risk and reward is shared between the state, who owns the minerals, and the companies that develop them."
The second principle of our tax reform is that mining companies should pay a fair share for the resources they rent from the Australian people.
This means that we need a tax that is flexible enough to adapt to changing global commodity prices.
Royalties are based on volumes not profits - and they have not kept pace with the mining boom.
By taxing Super Profits, the RPST will adapt to changing commodity prices.
The tax take will rise through commodity booms; and fall as prices moderate.
By contrast, the Leader of the Opposition has said that mining companies are paying too much tax.
Others disagree - including, by the way, the Premier of Western Australia who wants to raise the royalty rate and indicated earlier this year that mining companies were getting away with murder. 
I believe many Queenslanders and many Australians feel the same way.
And I believe they are right.
These are the two core principles of resources tax reform:
First, moving to a system based on profits rather than 
production.
Second, ensuring that Australians get a fair share.
I also want to deal with a number of myths that have been given circulation in recent weeks in a debate characterised by a lot of heat and considerably less light.
Myth number one:
Andrew Forrest said on Wednesday that the Government was:
"trading the sovereign status of the country for a chance at improving an election process or plugging a hole in the budget".
With the greatest of respect to Mr Forrest, this claim is without foundation and he knows it.
Contrary to this myth, the Government's tax package has nothing to do with returning the budget to surplus, as any examination of the budget papers would reveal.
The revenues it raises will fund cuts to the company tax rate, tax breaks and tax simplification for small business, better super for working families, and a national infrastructure fund.
The Government is forecasting the Budget to go back to surplus in 2012-13.
In that year and every year preceding it, the Government's tax reform package in fact has a negative net impact on the budget bottom line.
So this claim by Mr Forrest is simply untrue and if he consulted the Budget papers, he would know that to be the case.
The second myth emerges from claims that the stock market is falling due to the RSPT.
Mr Abbott said recently:
"our share market is under pressure, at least in part, because the government has totally mismanaged its proposal for a great big new tax on mining". (25 May 2010)
The facts prove otherwise.
Australian shares have fallen by less than in other countries.
In the month after the mining tax was announced, Australian shares fell by less than in other countries.
- The Australian stock market fell by 7.4 per cent
- The London market fell by even more: 7.7 per cent. 
- The US Dow Jones index fell by even more, 9.2 per cent, having recorded its worst May performance in 70 years (1940).
- The Japanese stock market fell by 10.6 per cent.
Further, Australian mining shares have fallen by less than the average of all shares.
In the month of May, Australian mining shares fell by less than the average of all shares: 
- Australian mining shares fell by 6 per cent. 
- But all Australian shares fell by more than that - 7.8 per cent 
- The banks and financials fell by 10.4 per cent. 
- In May, Australian mining shares have outperformed the market by almost 2 per cent.
Again, however, we must be mindful of misinformation in the market-place and hence the need to put the facts before the Australian people.
A third myth in the current debate is that the RSPT will increase the cost of living.
When asked about their position on the mining tax, Mr Abbott said: "it could involve very real costs for consumers.....it's a tax on consumers" (25 May 2010)
The truth is the vast majority of the minerals subject to this tax - like iron ore in the Pilbara - are shipped overseas at prices set on world markets.
Econtech modelling shows that the Government's tax reform package - including the RSPT and our cuts to company tax - will actually reduce the price of food and housing over time by making our economy more competitive.
The independent Econtech report says: "Tax reform means that the cost of living .... is lower than would otherwise be the case." (Page 27)
But I will tell you what does affect consumer prices - and that is a tax on all business with more than a $5 million turnover that Mr Abbott says he will introduce to fund $75,000 a year paid maternity leave for millionaires.
That tax on companies like Coles and Woolies will flow straight through to consumers with higher prices for bread, milk and eggs.
So much for the myth on the cost of living. 
The fourth myth is the regular claim from mining companies that this tax will reduce investment.
The simple truth of the RSPT is that very profitable projects will pay more tax.
And less profitable or marginal projects will pay less tax.
So projects that would have gone ahead anyway will pay more; and projects that were in the balance will pay less tax.
Some of the numbers and claims being bandied about by some mining bosses like Clive Palmer are so ridiculous they do not bear scrutiny.
Mr Palmer claimed to be shutting down a project in South Australia.
We're still trying to locate that project.
But Mr Palmer is not alone.
On the 4th May (two days after the tax was announced) West Australian iron ore explorer Cape Lambert Resources announced it would halt its search for minerals in Australia due to the new Government super tax.
On that day, Tony Sage, who is the Executive Chairman of Cape Lambert said he would now shift the company's exploration activities to its projects outside of Australia.
On the 6th May, Mr Sage notified the ASX that he would acquire a further 1 million shares in Cape Lambert.
Facts can be troublesome things in a debate such as this.
That brings me to the current case of Xstrata.
In the last few days Xstrata has announced the suspension of two projects.
Xstrata claimed that the suspensions were directly related to the Resources Super Profits Tax.
First, I find it perplexing that any company is making a decision about the future of major projects at this point:
The new proposed system was announced just 1 month ago.
We are 12 months away from the draft legislation.
We are 24 months away from the start of the new system.
The second point to make about the suspended projects is that they were always challenging for Xstrata.
It is instructive to reflect on what analysts have said about the Ernst Henry mine's future in recent years.
Here is what RBC Capital said about the Ernest Henry mine back in 2007:
"we believe that production at the Ernest Henry mine will reduce significantly from 2011 onwards as the operation switches from an open pit to underground operation."
Let me also quote from ABARE's publication "Australian Commodities", Volume 14, March 2007:
"Xstrata's Ernest Henry mine is scheduled to cease mining in January 2010, but stockpiled ore will continue to be processed, which will enable the production of copper concentrates (at a lower rate) until 2012."
Various industry analysts have expressed the view that the Ernest Henry copper mine is a mature mine with rising costs and declining ore quality.
The third point to note in relation to yesterday's announcement is that Xstrata's tactics are not new.
Xstrata was one of a number of companies that directly lobbied the government and ran a well coordinated media campaign claiming that getting rid of Work Choices and Work Choices style AWA's would destroy their business.
The fourth point to make about the Xstrata announcement is that commentators today are questioning the accuracy of Xstrata's claims on employment.
Elizabeth Knight wrote in the Sydney Morning Herald today wrote on the employment impact claims of the company:
"It was a stupid idea by Xstrata to exaggerate and gloss over the detail in order to push its point. It detracts from the merits of its debate."
I should note that Elizabeth Knight is an opponent of the RSPT.
Fifth, the fact is that the RSPT scheme will reduce the tax burden on marginal mines.
David Buckingham - ex CEO of the Minerals Council has said:
"...what that's going to do is lighten the tax burden on the less profitable projects. It will actually spread the base around which effective investment can take place. This is actually an incentive to the sector, not a detriment.
The final point to make is that while Xstrata has made some interesting points very recently about the possible impact of the RSPT.
On May 26, the Queensland Coal Industry Rail Group (which comprises 13 companies including Xstrata) bid $4.85 billion to buy the QR Central Queensland coal track network.
The media statement from the consortium said: "QCIRG assumes that the proposed tax, if implemented, would not apply to infrastructure or the operations of QCIRG and that a sensible outcome can be achieved with the Commonwealth Government on any tax on resources such that the industry's growth ambitions can still be realised." (QCIRG - Media Statement - 26 May 2010).
A year is a long time in politics.
It seems to be an eternity when it comes to commerce.
Last week - confident that in fact a sensible landing point could be achieved in relation to the RSPT.
One week later - not the case at all.
But we know that Xstrata doesn't want an RSPT that would mean they pay more tax on their most profitable operations.
Indeed Xstrata says it should pay less tax.
I would simply say this to Xstrata:
Many companies are negotiating with the Government in good faith.
They are engaged with the Treasury Panel and I thank them for their constructive cooperation.
Other mining companies are less constructive.
And I would repeat what I said yesterday in Parliament:
This Government will not be intimidated by the statements or actions of any mining company - foreign or domestic.
This Government will not be stood over by any mining company - foreign or domestic.
This Government will stand up for the national interest - and that means getting a fairer share for the resource that is owned by all Australians.
For better super for all Australians.
For tax cuts for all Australian small businesses.
For tax cuts for all Australian big businesses.
For better infrastructure for Australia's regions and the resource states that support them.
The Government has delivered strong and responsible economic management through the Global Recession. 
And we will continue to deliver strong and responsible economic management into the future. 
Tax reform is a challenge this government took on because we believe it is critical for Australia's future prosperity - not because it would be popular, and not because it would fill a hole in the budget.
We took on the challenge because we believe it is essential to strong economic management. 
Responsible economic management is not an abstract concept. 
It is the vehicle through which the Government can deliver on the aspirations of the Australian people. 
It is because of our economic strength through the global recession that:
- We have been able to deliver historic reforms to our health and hospital system.
- We have been able to deliver three consecutive tax cuts for working Australians.
- We were able to deliver on pension reform.
- We have been able to significantly boost investment in infrastructure.
- We have been able to invest in skills. 
These are the dividends of strong economic management. 
I am determined to get on with delivering for Australian families. 
Delivering tax reform that gives all Queenslanders, and all Australians, their fair share.
Delivering better schools, better health and better hospitals. 
Delivering a strong economy, with a secure future for Australian families.


PM: It's good to be back here on Sunshine Coast. Let me open my remarks by just talking briefly about the tornado victims at Lennox Head in New South Wales. This has been a devastating tornado for local residents. The New South Wales Government has acted.
I wish to announce now that the Australian Government will also be providing emergency assistance to those who have suffered damage at Lennox Head.
This will take the form of personal hardship and distress grants. It will take the form of concessional loans of up to $130,000 for affected small businesses. It will also involve concessional loans of up to $25,000 for voluntary and non-profit organisations and road and rail freight subsidies of up to $15,000 to affect any primary producers.
These are practical forms of assistance, but the bottom line is this, the Australian Government stands behind the people of Lennox Head who have suffered this considerable damage to their local community and will in there supporting them as they seek to rebuild.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister when did (inaudible)
PM: Just, I'll take questions in a minute more broadly.
It's good to be here today with Wallace and with Tabitha - where's Tabitha? There she is. And Jason and Jon, here on the Sunshine Coast to talk about the economy and jobs and apprenticeships. This is a cornerstone of what we seek to do as an Australian Government.
The global economy and the Australian economy took a battering during the crisis, and what that's done is affected jobs and apprenticeships right around Australia. We've helped support jobs by our national economic stimulus strategy. In fact, we've had the growth of some 225,000 jobs since the crisis hit when jobs have been shed right across the rest of the world.
The important other thing is this - to make sure that we're also providing support necessary to keep businesses taking on apprentices, and that's what the Apprenticeship Kickstart program is all about. Kickstart apprentices, the program has so far, I'm told by Jason, the Parliamentary Secretary, has supported some 24,000 young people right across Australia. That's a big number.
Here on the Sunshine Coast I'm told that the program between December and February has added some 456 new apprentices. To put that in perspective, that's about double the number that were put on in the previous period, over the previous December-February period. And we see these results right across the country as we see local employers taking up the Kickstart program because it's all supporting young people in apprenticeships in order to get those young people into jobs and not to become victims or permanent victims, of a global recession.
The other thing is this, the really good thing is in communities like this around the county we're also hosting these local jobs expos. I understand this is probably number 18 we've run around the country. I've been to a couple before, or at least one up in Far North Queensland and this is a great opportunity to see people connected with local job opportunities, and you see in the crowds here today at Kawana. This is a large group of people who have come in response to what we've organised here with local employers, local traineeship providers and other local non-profit organisations as well. It's a really good thing.
Nationwide, we've connected about 6,600 people to jobs as a result of jobs expos, and that's pretty good in the midst of a real problem in terms of employment around the country affected by the global economic recession. Here today on the Sunshine Coast there are some 600 jobs up on that board there and this is a really good thing. It actually helps people connect into the labour market and to real job opportunities.
So, my message to you today is very simple - this Australian Government is on about keeping the economy strong, protecting Australian jobs and building the apprenticeships we need for the future, because where the rubber hits the road is in the lives of people like Wallace who's training in the building industry and people like Tabitha who's training to be a chef and one a day a master chef so that these young people carve out there futures, and we want to support them on the way through.
Before I take your questions, Jason, who's the Parliamentary Secretary for Employment, will add some remarks.
CLARE: Well thanks Prime Minister, and thank you so much for your support for the jobs expo program and for Apprentice Kickstart. This is really a jobs supermarket. You can see on the board where we've got 600 jobs on offer today. The idea is really simple - we put local employers that have got jobs and local people that are looking for work in the one place, and it works. As the Prime Minister has said, we've run 18 job expos around the country already and created 6,600 jobs, and we're going to create hundreds more jobs here today on the Sunshine Coast.
It's all part of the Government's plan to keep the economy strong and making sure that we recruit more apprentices. Apprentice Kickstart has been incredibly successful. We're now recruiting more apprentices in traditional trades than we were before the global recession, and to put that in perspective, in the 1990s, when Australia went into recession, the number of apprentices in traditional trades fell through the floor. The number of apprentices being recruited in traditional trades dropped by over 30 percent and it took 13 years before we recruited the same number of apprentices again.
We have done that in one and you see two of those young apprentices here today, Wallace and Tabitha, and they're two of 24,000 young apprentices that we've put on. But we need more apprentices: we need more carpenters; more chefs; more plumbers; more electricians, and that's why we've extended the Kickstart program from now until November - to recruit even more apprentices to build the skills that we need for the future.
PM: Thanks, Jason. Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) tally of workers sacked because of your super profits tax?
PM: Well, can I go to the question of Xstrata and Xstrata's claims in recent days. I'd draw everyone's attention to a report in today's Sydney Morning Herald which fundamentally challenges the accuracy of what Xstrata had to say yesterday - point one.
Point two - the head of Xstrata has said in the last 24 hours, he believes his company should be paying less tax. Well, I don't think Australians agree with that.
Thirdly, the Government's Resources Super Profits tax is designed to do one core thing - support the growth and development of marginal mining projects in their early, difficult years when they are not generating profits, and then taxing them later when they become much more profitable. The net result, according to independent modelling by the Australian Treasury: that the mining industry would grow in its investment by some 4.5 to 5.5 percent, and employment would grow across the mining industry by 7 percent.
So, I say again, when it comes to Xstrata and the boss of a company who says they are already paying too much tax, I think it's time that people like that got real and secondly, I will say again what I said in the Australian parliament yesterday: this Government will not be intimidated by the statements or actions of any Australian mining company or any foreign mining company because our job is to act in the national interest.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) possible future negotiations then you might try and work out some sort of deal?
PM: We've said consistently, from the beginning, that we've got a strong, good consultation process with many, many mining companies right across Australia, and most mining companies are actually cooperating fully in that process. It's a good process.
Now, from time to time you're going to have a bunch of companies go out there and they're going to try and generate a scare campaign and a fear campaign. I say to them this Government will not be intimidated by any scare campaign, any actions, any statements, by any mining company foreign or domestic. Our job is to govern in the national interest. We intend to do so.
JOURNALIST: What about the Queensland Government? They're urging you to put the baseball bat away and to negotiate with the miners.
PM: Well my job is to act in the Australian national interest and I think when you're dealing with some of the very big mining companies around the world, like Xstrata, it doesn't pay to behave like a pussycat. I think it's pretty important to be pretty firm about the national interest. That's what we intend to do.
I say again - we're not about to be intimidated by Xstrata or by anybody else. Tax reform is tough. When was the last time any of you saw a mining company put their hand up and say they were prepared and happy to pay more tax? General silence around the room. Can I say, therefore, that when you're engaged in a reform like this, it's going to be tough. This debate is a tough debate. What's the bottom line, however? The Australian people deserve a fair share of the resources which they, the Australian people own and as a result of that enjoy better super, lower taxes for small business, lower taxes for all Australian companies, as well as investment in the infrastructure needs of our resource regions.
JOURNALIST: The Sunshine Coast is an area that's been, obviously, incredibly hard hit by the GFC. 600 jobs is a drop in the ocean for this part of the world. What is the Federal Government doing to help us, I suppose, get through these troubling times?
PM: Well, let me go to that in some little detail. Number one, the total investment in stimulus in the Sunshine Coast would go into the hundreds of millions of dollars. While I do not have the figure before me at present, on the law of averages you would find that this is a multi-hundred million dollar investment.
Secondly, specifically for the building industry, like Wallace is involved in it at the moment. We now are engaged in the biggest school modernisation program this country has ever seen. Some people chose to criticise it. That's fair enough, they can do that.
The overall impact on the building trade, people who are out there as subbies, people who are out there as electricians, people who are out there as carpenters, people who are there as bricklayers - there's a huge impact on overall employment levels.
Mr Abbott says, pull the rug from under all of that because you don't need it. There is a very stark alternative. If we pull the rug from under economic stimulus now, as Mr Abbott says we should do, you would see employment and confidence and activity in the building industry collapse nationwide, including here on the Sunshine Coast.
So, you ask what we're doing? It's called economic stimulus and one of the big forms of that stimulus is the school modernisation program. The alternative, of Mr Abbott, is to pull the rug from that and send Australia into recession. That is his script.
JOURNALIST: We need money for the airports, we need money for the university hospital, can the Federal Government promise us any of that infrastructure and (inaudible)?
PM: Well on the Cooroy to Curra stretch of the Bruce Highway that you mentioned the Australian Government has stepped up the plate and provided that investment. I noticed that the previous National Party Member for Wide Bay and the current National Party Member for Wide Bay, the Leader of the National Party, has sat there representing this region and done nothing to fund what is a horror stretch on the Bruce Highway. We've stepped in and decided to fund that and it's an investment of some hundreds of millions of dollars.
Secondly you refer to hospitals. Let me be very plain about that, the Australian Government in the health reforms that we agreed at COAG at the end of April agreed that for the first time the Australian Government will become the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia: its capital costs, its recurrent costs, its teaching costs, its training costs, its research cost. So if there are new hospitals developed guess what, for the first time in the country's history, the Australian Government becomes the dominant funder of those hospitals. That's the big change here.
So you ask what we're doing in terms of local infrastructure, the road we're investing in.
Secondly, the hospital system, we for the first time take on the dominant funding role. And I'd commend your attention, through the local authority here, the Sunshine Coast Regional Council, that we are investing with them in many, many other smaller scale infrastructure projects right across the region.
JOURNALIST: There's speculation that President Obama won't, may not be coming to Australia, have you spoken to him and do you understand if he doesn't make it out?
PM: As I've said always with President Obama, who I regard as a good friend of Australia and a good personal friend, he is welcome in this country at any time. Obviously at present he has a few things on his hands when it comes to the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, this is a significant problem for him to handle, but I hope to be speaking to him on the phone in the next day or so and we'll advise you further.
JOURNALIST: Will you be visiting Lennox Head?
PM: At this stage I have not been advised as to whether that would be useful or productive. What I will do however, is keep closely in contact with the State Government in terms of any further practical assistance which can be delivered and whether any specific Ministerial presence is useful and necessary. If so, that will be provided.
JOURNALIST: On the Sunshine Coats we've been for a long time very concerned about the growth rates here, (inaudible) Queensland being under pressure. You've obviously in the past backed a big Australia, do you continue to back a big Australia or is that something that you've changed your mind on as the pressure heats up in areas like here?
PM: You know one of the reasons we've appointed a Minister for Population for the first time in Australia's history, is to make sure we get this balance right for the future. So where you've got strong economic and population growth, that you're also planning for the infrastructure needs and the housing needs of those communities in the future. One such growth region of course is the Sunshine Coast. I know it well, I grew up here, I went to school here, I've seen the roads, and I've seen what's happened in terms of the number of cars, each time I come back.
So therefore the challenge for us as a national Government is to get the balance right across all the regions of Australia because each of those regions is different.
But on the key question of infrastructure here's the difference.
The previous Australian Government said infrastructure is the responsibility of the States. We, this Australian Government have said no, it's a partnership between the Australian Government and the State Governments. A partnership when it comes to roads, a partnership when it comes to rail, a partnership when it comes to ports, a partnership when it comes to affordable housing, and a partnership when it comes to general infrastructure.
It's getting that balance right, that's why we've got a Minister for Population, so that we get the balance right, matching the population pressures and or demands across Australia with what needs to be done to support local communities with the infrastructure they need.
Folks I've actually got to get to Brissy because I've got to address the Queensland Media Club, and I don't want to disparage your colleagues but I really do have to zip it.
Thanks very much.


HOST: Mr Rudd, welcome to AM.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: You've now had two opinion polls showing Labor's primary vote falling to the mid-30s. Today's poll shows you'd be swept from office if an election was held now. How much is that the fault of decisions you've taken?
PM: Well, Lyndal, the truth is if these polls were reflected on election day, Mr Abbott will become the Prime Minister. So the challenge for me and for the Government is to work harder into the future. I've got a huge amount of work to do to explain my plans as opposed to Mr Abbott's plans.
Remember what an election is - an election is about alternatives, and our plan's clear on the economy, on health, on hospitals. Mr Abbott's is reasonably clear now in terms of Work Choices, bringing back Work Choices and cuts to education and cuts to health. An election is all about alternatives, but I have a huge amount of work to do and I intend to get on with the job.
HOST: But haven't you let voters down? You've put your emissions trading scheme on hold, you've ditched election promises on childcare and insulation, you've proposed a new tax with no consultation and sidelined your own advertising guidelines. As I said, haven't you let voters down?
PM: Lyndal, I believe that the key challenge for the Government is to explain very plainly what our plans are for the future. We can-
HOST: -Have you not been doing that well enough?
PM: We can rake over the coals of the past. My challenge and my responsibility as Prime Minister - is to lay out plainly our challenges for the future. We were elected with a very ambitious program for government and we've made some progress. We've made some real progress. We've got rid of Work Choices. We've kept the economy strong. We've also increased our health expenditure by some 50 percent. We've increased the training of nurses by 1,000 places, 5,500 new GPs coming online over the decade ahead.
These are important changes, but you know something? We've also had to deal with real challenges which have hit us amid ships as well. When the global financial crisis hit, we had to do what was necessary to save the Australian economy.
HOST: But on other things you have broken promises and ditched commitments which you previously said you were very passionate about.
PM: Lyndal, the Australian people will hold me to account for the record of what we have achieved, that which we have fallen short of, and our plans for the future. I'm determined to get on with our plans for the future, and part of those plans for the future also lie in keeping the economy strong, bringing the budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time in very uncertain global economic circumstances, as well. And remember many families across Australia are doing it tough as we speak, but our job is to get on with the task of government. It's a difficult task, it's a hard task, challenging global economic circumstances, but our plans are clear. But I think the plans of our opponents are clear as well - bringing back Work Choices, which I think fundamentally affects working families and their take home pay and their working conditions, big cuts to health, big cuts to education. It's about alternatives. That's-
HOST: -But one of the plans you have, which is the mining tax, which is leading to some of your fall in support in the polls, that that plan is far from clear. When are you going to finalise the details of this tax. Can you afford to wait the weeks you said last week it would take?
PM: I think the bottom line is this: this proposal for a resource super profits tax is good for the Australian economy. I believe it is an important reform for the Australian economy.
HOST: But that message clearly isn't getting out, is it?
PM: Well, let's go to the heart of it - it's about making all of our companies in the Australian economy more competitive globally. You see, we've kept the economy strong by keeping it out of recession. The key thing is to build on that for the future. How do you do that? It's by making sure that our companies are globally competitive by bringing down the company tax rate, giving small business a tax boost, but also the other big national economic reform is boosting our level of national savings. Let me just focus on that for one second.
Right now, when people look at Greece and they look at Europe and they see huge levels of sovereign indebtedness. In Australia, one of the ways in which we've been able to keep the economy strong is by having this large pool of national savings. Now, that will be added to by the increase in superannuation for working families that we plan. It boosts our national savings by something up to $100 billion, which puts us in a very strong position, globally, for the future - on top of bringing our budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time. We intend to get on with this.
HOST: But you can't do any of the things you want to do with the proceeds from the mining tax until you have the details finalised. Are you going to sit down personally and talk to mining industry leaders and negotiate with them in the next few weeks?
PM: Well, Lyndal, I began talking directly to mining company leaders, I think a day or two after the Government announced its plans, back on the 2nd of May. I sat down at dinner with a whole group of them in Perth-
HOST: -But that's different to negotiating with each company individually about what they want.
PM: Secondly, I also sat down with a group of them last week in Canberra and will continue to do so as is necessary, but the reason for this reform, the reason for this big reform, is to keep our economy strong and globally competitive for the future. That is why we are doing it.
The other reason, of course, is to ensure that all Australians get a fair share from the resources which they, the Australian people, ultimately own.
HOST: Are you prepared to move on the tax? Are you prepared to move on the 40 percent rate in order to strike a deal?
PM: What I've said repeatedly, Lyndal, is that we believe we've got the overall design of this tax right. We've said we've got the rate right. We've said we'd consult with industry on the question of detail, on implementation and generous transition arrangements.
The easy thing to do is simply to assume that our economy in the future will just continue to grow without continuing reform. That's not our view. Part of the reform we need for the future of our economy is to make sure it remains globally competitive, and part of that means getting extra revenue from the mining companies on the one hand and using that to bring down everyone else's taxation rates on the other, so that those companies which are affected by a higher Australian dollar remain globally competitive and boost our national savings.
HOST: The reality also is that you're a Prime Minister, you're facing an election in a few months' time. Can you afford to drag this-
PM: -You can name the date for me.
HOST: I'd love to. Can you afford to drag this fight out through the election?
PM: Because these economic reforms are deeply in the national interest, it's important that we get our consultations with the industry right. Obviously, these are difficult, hard-fought negotiations-
HOST: -But should you have started earlier? Should you have prepared the ground better?
PM: Well, it's a bit like saying 'could you have altered the timing of the global financial crisis?' Not entirely. There are certain things which affect you at different times. Last year, 2009, we were wrestling with the biggest economic crisis the world had seen since the great depression. Therefore, we could just have put the entire program of economic reform and tax reform on the backburner. We could have done the same on the base of health and hospitals reform, but we haven't done that, either. We've got on with the business of health and hospitals reform, the biggest reform since the introduction of Medicare, and those changes start from 1 July.
We have also got a responsibility in the national interest to continue economic reform, because if I look to the future we have a job to deliver here, which is to keep the economy strong and to deliver a fair share for working families for the future. We've made progress so far. There's some important reforms we've achieved so far, but there's still much more to be done. I'm determined to do it.
HOST: Both opinion polls, the Newspoll last week and the Neilsen poll today, show a quarter of voters, nearly a quarter of voters, would prefer anyone other than the major parties. What does that tell you about disillusionment in the electorate?
PM: What it points to very much, Lyndal, is that I have a huge amount of work to do. I don't underestimate that. This is a very difficult task ahead, but I'm absolutely determined to execute that task. You see, keeping our economy strong is not easy. It's not just like clicking your fingers. There's a huge amount of work each day in doing that.
Similarly, getting on with the business of implementing health and hospitals reform. This is a massive reform involving every hospital in the country, starting from 1 July this year, ensuring we've got better hospitals, better health services, more doctors, more nurses, better performance at accident and emergency, better performance in our elective surgery, better performance in terms of patient-controlled electronic health records.
These are very difficult tasks, but you know something? We'll be judged on what we've done and our plans for the future and I go back to the question of what are polls about. What's an election about? It's about an alternative: my plans versus Mr Abbott's plans. Mr Abbott's plans, we would argue, are extreme - cuts to hospitals, cuts to health, bringing back Work Choices. Our plans are very clear, by contrast, and we believe better for Australia's future.
HOST: The journalist David Marr has written an essay about you where he's argued you're driven by anger. Do you have an angry heart?
PM: I'll leave all the commentators to sort that one out. I mean, I think there have been about 1,000 pieces written on me in recent times. People can make their own judgement. At the end of the day, Lyndal, what I'll be judged on is what we've been able to achieve for Australia: have we been able to keep the economy strong; have we been able to deliver for families seeking a fairer share for their future; and the alternative, which is Mr Abbott's, and I believe those alternatives are pretty clear, but I go back to where we began our discussion this morning. These polls, if they are reflected on election day, Mr Abbott would be the next prime minister. I have a huge amount of work to do ahead of me.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time.
PM: Thanks for having me on the program.


PM: The Government's plan for introducing reforms through the National Health and Hospitals Network is of fundamental importance to delivering better health and better hospital services to all Australians. This is the single largest reform that the Government has brought about in the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare. What's it mean on the ground? Better health and better hospital services. Big reforms for accident and emergency. Big reforms also for elective surgery.
Big reforms in terms of the number of hospital beds, some 1200 plus additional hospital beds across the country. It means also more nurses, an additional 1000 nurses being trained each year. More GPs, an additional 1000 or a total of 1200 GPs being trained each year, double that which existed at the time when Mr Abbott put a cap on that when he was Health Minister. So these are fundamental reforms.
But the rubber hits the road in terms of the services which are actually delivered to working families, their kids, their mums and dads and grandparents on the ground. And what I've sought to do today is explain very carefully how that affects individual lives. How it affects you if you get a sick kid on a Saturday morning who develops an infection and has got no GP to present at. How does it affect you if you've got a grandad who needs hip replacement surgery, against the guarantees that we're now providing for elective surgery, and his ability to get that service elsewhere, either at another hospital or at a private hospital.
Or how does it affect you if you're one of the 2.2 million Australians who are suffering from type 2 diabetes or projected to across the course of the decade, and what does that mean in terms of your better personalised care plan, and the better spread of regional cancer care services. These are big reforms. We have planned it, we have funded it in the Budget, we've agreed it with the states and territories. It's to be rolled out starting from 1 July this year. The alternative's pretty clear as well.
Mr Abbott as Health Minister gouged $1 billion out of the public hospital system of Australia, and now has committed himself to nearly $1 billion of further cuts to health services in the future. This alternative is absolutely stark, absolutely clear-cut. Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what does it say that Peter Garrett didn't know about the suspension of the ETS, that he read it in a newspaper? What does it say about the Government?
PM: Well, on the question of the deliberations on the emissions trading scheme, that of course was conducted through the relevant Cabinet committee. Secondly, of course, then the entire Cabinet approved the entire Budget, which included within it the proposed funding arrangements for climate change measures, including that one. Furthermore, I wouldn't comment further on internal Cabinet arrangements. Of course, the full and smooth flowing of these arrangements is sometimes interrupted when in a free and fast-flowing democracy such as ours, various bits and pieces are leaked out to you as members of the fourth estate.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, it was a pretty friendly reception in there this morning for you, you must be pretty happy with that- although today's polls look as though you wouldn't be getting that reception, you know, elsewhere in the country, in fact you'd probably not be in Government anymore. How does that make you feel?
PM: I think it's very clear-cut that if what we see in the polls today is reflected on election day, Mr Abbott would be the next Prime Minister of Australia. Let's just be upfront about that. I think that it's also very important to say that elections are about alternatives. Let's be very, very clear about this. The alternative on offer is either a Government led by myself, or a Government led by Mr Abbott. The alternative is my plans for Australia's plans future, versus Mr Abbott's plans for Australia's future.
The alternative is, in our case, keeping the economy strong, keeping the economy out of recession, three years of tax cuts for working families, better health and hospitals. What's Mr Abbott's plan? Bring back WorkChoices, cuts to education, cuts to health. We have a huge job ahead of us in the months ahead to make that alternative crystal clear in the Australian public's mind. But let's be very blunt. If those numbers today are reflected on election day, Mr Abbott would be the next Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Are you resorting to a fear campaign though, Prime Minister, by referring to Mr Abbott as now the alternative leader?
PM: I think it's just called calling a spade a spade. The polls, as reflected today, if they were repeated on election day, would have Mr Abbott as the next Prime Minister. Therefore, let's be very clear about it. Elections are about alternatives. Either voting for myself and my plans for the country's future, or Mr Abbott and his plans for the country's future. It's pretty basic. Either you're voting to keep WorkChoices out, or you're voting to bring WorkChoices back. You're voting for either increased investments to the health and hospitals system, or cuts to the health and hospitals system. Increased investments in our schools and universities, or cuts to our schools and our universities. It's pretty basic. It's about alternatives. But I'm simply calling a spade a spade.
JOURNALIST: Your popularity and the Government's popularity have plunged pretty dramatically. I'm just wondering, which decision do you regret the most?
PM: The key thing is to work absolutely tirelessly to deal with the challenges which lie ahead for Australia's future. I have a huge amount of work which lies ahead of me. The Government has a huge amount of work which lies ahead of us. There's little point in raking over the coals. Commentators can do that. Our job is to get on with the business of outlining our record of achievement, our plans for the future, and to contrast that with Mr Abbott's record of achievement as Health Minister for five years, and what he said he believes in, and his plans for the future. And nothing's more basic than that, than health and hospitals.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said that you're calling a spade a spade. Is David Marr calling a spade a spade? He's written a fairly colourful piece about his time with you, mentioned some rather obscure language as well. Is this on the record, is this correct?
PM: Can I say something- commentators can write whatever they like, and they have been for years about yours truly. My job's to get on with the business of working hard to bring the economy into the future, implement tax reform, make sure that we keep the economy strong, make sure we bring the Budget back to surplus- three years time, three years ahead of time. And deliver our reforms for health and education. What commentators write about, you know, me, is just a matter for them really.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd can I ask a broader question?
PM: What if I said no?
JOURNALIST: What's gone wrong?
PM: The key challenge for us is to get on with the big tasks which lie ahead for the Government. You've just heard me speak about health and hospitals reform, this is a massive reform agenda, it's hard, it's tough, it's difficult, there's been a fair bit of opposition to it from some of the State's and some of the Territories, getting on with the business of tax reform, the hard and tough business but it's necessary in order to keep the economy strong, necessary for example, to continue this economies global competitiveness, to boost that competitiveness in the future, boost our national savings for the future, and on top of that, to make sure that we're also building our nation's road, rail and port for the future, that's what we're focussed on.
As I've said there's little point in raking over the coals from the past, commentators will do that, my job's to get on with explaining my plan for the future, and to contrast that with Mr Abbott's plan for the future and I intend to do that.
JOURNALIST: But there's something personal about this, it seems directed against you at the moment.
PM: Well my challenge is to get on with the business of working harder in the future, there's a huge amount of work for me to do and for the Government to do, I intend to get on with it, and we're pretty determined about getting these reforms of ours done.
The health and hospitals system been waiting for these reforms for 30 years, tax reform's been sitting out there waiting to happen for the last 20 years, education reform' has been waiting for the last ten or 20 years; we're going to do that, we're going to keep at it, we're determined to do it and obviously it's going to be a rocky old road, and if there was an election, based on these numbers, then Mr Abbott would be the Prime Minister, that's calling a spade a spade.
JOURNALIST: So are you angry at the core, as David Marr's put it?
PM: The question of what folk happen to say about me and all the rest of it is a matter for them. Commentators, analysts, writers they will draw their own conclusions, I'm a determined person who is determined to deliver on the reforms that we set out to in health, in hospitals, in education, the Education Revolution, in keeping the economy strong and I'm determined to work hard to make sure that that set of plans is a very clear set of alternatives to Mr Abbott's plans which are all about bringing back Workchoices, cuts to education, cuts to health, and on top of that, I've got to say with no plan whatsoever to bring the Budget back to surplus, that's what separates us.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you blame yourself for poor polling?
PM: The key challenge for us is to just roll up our sleeves for the future, I'm the Prime Minister, I'm responsible for the leadership of the Government and I have said consistently through good times and through bad times, through difficult times, through less difficult times, that the buck stops with me, that's very clear. But the challenge for the future is to get on with the task of delivering our core reforms, and we intend to get on with the business of doing that.
Elections, again I say, are about alternatives. If these polls are reflected on election day Mr Abbott is the Prime Minister. Secondly, elections are about the alternatives, what do I stand for, what does he stand for, what is his record, what is my record, secondly, or thirdly, what are his plans for the future and what are mine?
Having just spoken to a whole bunch of working people, and ask them this pretty basic question about Workchoices, it's pretty interesting when all that comes to the surface, how deeply, deeply anxious people are about Mr Abbott's plans to bring back Workchoices. It affects everyone in the workforce. He's already announced his plans to get rid of protections from unfair dismissal, he said that Workchoices will be back, whatever name they've given it. Elections are all about alternatives and this one will be no different, it will be tough, it will be hard, it will be hard fought, but we're determined to get on with the job that we have to do.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd (inaudible) we had a decade of the Howard Government, that Prime Minister then lost his seat. You know you had that incredible public support for the apology and signing Kyoto, you had record personal satisfaction. Just as Kevin can you tell us how disappointing this feels?
PM: The key thing is just to get on with the job, I'm a determined person and it's a task of getting on with the job of delivering the reforms we'd said we'd do. I can't begin to explain to you how hard, for example, health reform is. Getting that done, getting it agreed, getting it implemented, it's detailed and complex work.
Education reform, hard detailed complex work, getting it done, and at the end of the day keeping the economy strong.
You know when we all went around the world into a recession - the work that the Government was required to do to keep Australia out of recession was tough work, we did what we had to do, we therefore were the only major advanced economy not to go into a recession. These are tough things; the business of Government, it's a tough business, but we intend to get on with it, we will remain determined to implement our reform program which goes right across health, education, as well as keeping the economy strong and equally determined that everyone is clear cut about the alternative which they have before them, and that alternative is Mr Abbott and Mr Abbott's plans for education cuts, hospital cuts, as well as his determination to bring back Workchoices for all working Australians.
Having said that folks, I've got to zip.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Women and men of the Health Services Union Australia, it's great to join you this morning, because you are the backbone of our hospitals, our aged care and our health services. You know how important your work is and how much the health system depends on you.
I've got a bit of insight into your work as well, both from working as a wardsman at Canterbury Hospital in my late teens, when I learnt that job is much, much more than just pushing a trolley around a ward, and from visiting dozens of hospitals all across the country during the past 12 months as the Government has embarked on the work of national health reform.
One thing I've heard loud and clear as the Health Minister Nicola Roxon and I have talked to patients, to health experts, to staff, and to health unions is this: there's a lot we can do to deliver better health and better hospitals, and it doesn't matter who talks to me - nurses, surgeons, orderlies, ambos, clerical staff, or the people behind the counter in the café - everyone knows we need change. And everyone knows we want change, and that's what we are delivering - The most fundamental change in Australia's health system since the introduction of Medicare, a National Health and Hospitals Network that is nationally funded and locally run.
This morning I want to talk to you about how our plan will deliver better healthcare for all Australians, but first I will discuss how healthcare fits into the Government's larger vision for Australia's future.
Two and a half years ago, the Government that I lead was sworn into office. Since our first day in office, our purpose has been to build a stronger economy that delivers a fairer share for working families.
We came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better: better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools.
We've made progress.
We've cut income taxes three years in a row so that someone on $50,000 will now pay $1,750 less in income tax. That means almost one in every five dollars they were paying in tax three years ago, is now back in their own pockets, helping them pay for the weekly groceries, get on top of the pile of unpaid bills sitting on the kitchen counter, or put a few dollars aside each week for the kids' Christmas presents.
We've also delivered an education tax refund to help get the kids through school, paying for things like textbooks, a laptop, a printer, broadband at home and trade tools for kids in school trade courses. This year, that refund will put up to $779 back in your pocket for each child in secondary school, and $390 for each child in primary school.
We've ended Work Choices. That means Australians can no longer be forced onto AWA individual contracts that cut their pay and conditions. We've built a modern safety net of decent pay and conditions. Employers can't rip away penalty rates, overtime and leave loading with no compensation, as happened with WorkChoices, and for the first time, employees have the right to come together and bargain with their employer for a better deal.
We're investing in nation-building for Australia's future after years of governments failing to invest enough to keep our roads, railways, ports and broadband up to world class standards and much, much more.
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, as a government we did what we had to do. We acted decisively to support Australian families.
Almost every other advanced economy went into recession. Australia didn't, and the reason we didn't was because as a nation, we all came together, governments, business, unions and local communities.
The Government took decisive action. As a result, Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy.
In the rest of the world, millions of jobs have been lost - as much as 16 million in advanced economies, but in Australia, since the global recession began in 2008 we've been creating jobs. There's almost 225,000 more jobs today than there were then. All of us should be proud of that, because every one of those jobs matters.
Even so, the last couple of years have still been tough for many families, because the path to economic recovery is uneven.
We've got much, much more to do to keep the economy strong and deliver a fairer share for Australian families. It all starts with maintaining a strong economy.
We're getting the budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time, to keep the economy strong. Our debt levels are low, peaking at less than one-tenth the average of the major advanced economies, and less than half the level projected a year ago.
We're undertaking the big challenge of tax reform, so that we can boost superannuation for all Australians, and cut taxes to make Australian companies and small businesses more competitive, and we're investing in the things that will make our economy stronger and more productive in the future.
We're investing in an education revolution, building better primary schools for our kids. We're currently delivering Trades Training Centres for 732 secondary schools and in the next three years, for another 520. We're delivering our commitment to provide computers for every year 9 to 12 student across the nation. Last Friday the Deputy Prime Minister delivered the 300,000th computer to a school in Cranebrook in Sydney's west.
And despite setbacks, we will continue to act on climate change, with major investments in renewables like solar power. We have now passed laws to ensure that by 2020, we'll be generating enough renewable energy to meet the needs of all Australian households.
And most importantly, I want to discuss today how we're tackling health reform.
Fixing our hospitals and healthcare is important for everyone in this room because it matters to you every day you turn up at work, but it's also important to you and to all Australians because all of us depend on our healthcare system, whether it's for an ageing mum or dad, our young kids, a sudden emergency or managing an ongoing condition.
Better hospitals and better healthcare matter for all Australians. That's why the Government has taken on this challenge, because we know from the major review of the health system that we commissioned when we came to office that our health system is at a tipping point. It's under enormous pressures, and those pressures are going to keep on growing.
We can't just sit idly by and do nothing, and we certainly can't afford a government that rips billions out of our public hospitals as Tony Abbott did as Health Minister, and as he'd do again if he becomes Prime Minister.
Our hospitals and healthcare system needs reform. That's why we're implementing the most far-reaching reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare almost three decades ago.
We will make the Australian Government the dominant funder of our public hospital system for the first time in history. That's important, because in the long run the States simply can't afford to meet the growing cost of healthcare. It will literally send them broke. By stepping up to the plate, the Australian Government will ensure that our hospitals and healthcare system have the funding they need for the future.
On top of this, we are delivering more resources right now. We are investing in 1,300 new beds for our hospitals, expanding capacity in emergency departments and elective surgery, and supporting 2,500 new aged care places.
We're making major new investments in primary health care with GP Super Clinics that can provide care when you need it after hours, and that can help avoid the run-around between GPs, specialists, pathology and other health services.
We're already funding 1,000 new nurse training places a year. We are raising the number of GPs being trained to 1,200 a year - more than double the cap imposed by Mr Abbott. We are doubling the number of scholarships and locum places for our allied health professionals every year.
Each of these investments will help improve the health services in which you work, but let's be specific about what a National Health and Hospitals Network means for Australian families.
Consider how much healthcare has changed from our parent's generation, the days when visiting your GP meant visiting an office with one doctor and a pile of cardboard records; when a cancer diagnosis was less likely to provide hope of survival; and when chronic diseases like heart disease and diabetes were more likely to be treated in hospital, often when they had severe and fatal effects.
Now consider our vision for better hospitals and better health care through the Government's plan for the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Imagine a family with young kids. It's Saturday morning, and their seven year old daughter, Emily, has suddenly come up with a severe skin reaction. Her mum, Anthea, doesn't know what it is or how she should treat it. She picks up the phone to the family's local medical practice, to find that it is closed, but her call is automatically put through to the National After Hours GP and primary care service, in which the Government is investing $126 million over four years.
Anthea is able to get immediate advice from a registered nurse who can ask the right questions and make an initial assessment of whether she needs to get immediate assistance. If required, she will be put through to a GP, who can tell her whether she needs to call an ambulance, go to a hospital, or arrange for Emily to be seen by a GP in their community.
That advice line is an important first step because it gives Anthea the opportunity to speak directly to a qualified professional for advice.
Let's imagine the advice is to go to the GP. The National After Hours service helps arrange for Emily to be seen at a clinic that is only 15 minutes away. Emily is taken straight to this clinic to see a GP, and her mum is spared precious time ringing through a pile of numbers in the Yellow Pages.
It might also mean that Anthea and Emily avoid a long wait in a hospital emergency department when she could have been helped by a local health service, something that happens to 2 million Australians every year, because of the introduction of personally-controlled electronic health records, with Anthea's permission, the GP is immediately able to see Emily's medical history: her history, for example, of asthma; her previous allergies; and the current medication that she is receiving. This helps to quickly identify possible causes of a skin reaction and helps avoid prescribing medicine that might have an adverse effect.
Let's imagine that the doctor advises a further consultation with a specialist dermatologist. Because of the Government's $355 million investment, the clinic that Emily has visited is one of 425 across the country that has been upgraded so that it can deliver more services in a single location. This means that more specialist doctors will be co-located and this will be made possible because the Australian Government is investing $144 million over four years to train more specialist doctors - 680 more over the next decade. In fact, a dermatologist might be on duty that morning, enabling the GP to walk Emily across directly and perhaps have a direction conversation about Emily's skin reaction.
This kind of interaction has been rare in the past. As many of us have experienced first-hand as parents, carers or friends, or for our own healthcare, getting to see a specialist often involves long waiting lists, battling through traffic jams and juggling time off work.
Now let's imagine that the patient is not the daughter, but the mum. Anthea has a history of diabetes in her family, and she has recently been diagnosed with diabetes herself. Her doctor is participating in the Government's $449 million plan to provide more coordinated care for diabetes sufferers. That means she can benefit from a major innovation in primary health care.
She can be confident that instead of having to initiate regular doctor appointments and feel responsible for organising every aspect of her care, she is now going to benefit from ongoing care supported by single general practice where she is enrolled.
Anthea's GP will prepare a care plan which identifies the services she will need over the next 12 months. That includes regular visits to a dietitian who is co-located with the local Clinic. It also includes visits to an endocrinologist who will help to identify any emerging health problems associated with the diabetes and develop preventative strategies to avoid a deterioration. She'll see a podiatrist, and a diabetes educator.
This contrasts to the experience of healthcare that many diabetes patients have right now, which often involves them having to navigate their way around the health system alone and without any guidance. In fact, all too often Australians living with diabetes end up in hospital. Indeed, one out of every three avoidable hospital admissions is related to diabetes.
That's why the Government is acting to provide better health care for the estimated 2.2 million Australians with diabetes over the next decade. This is not just in the best interest of Australians, but for the first time it is in the financial interests of the Australian Government. There will no longer be an incentive to shunt patients from Commonwealth-funded GP and primary care services into the state funded hospital system.
As the dominant funder of public hospitals, the Australian Government will ensure that patients have access to high quality health care closer to home, because we will otherwise foot the bill for more expensive hospital care.
Now let's turn to Anthea's elderly father, Angelo. Angelo has been experiencing chronic hip pain. His specialist doctor has put him on the waiting list for a hip replacement, but there's a high demand in his area because of the older age profile of the population.
We know people are waiting too long for elective surgery and our reforms will change that. The Government's $800 million investment will ensure 95 per cent of all patients waiting for surgery will be treated within clinically recommended times, and from July 2012, anyone who has been on the waiting list for longer than clinically recommended will have their surgery fast-tracked. That means that Angelo may have his hip replacement operation in a hospital in another area, or in a private hospital.
Now let's imagine one other person: Walter, a 53-year-old farmer in northern New South Wales.
A regular checkup with his GP has discovered a suspect mole on his back. The mole turns out to be cancer, and a nasty one. It's a diagnosis which turns his life upside down, but instead of having to go to Brisbane or Sydney for treatment, he is referred to Lismore - to the North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Centre at Lismore Base Hospital.
He'll be able to stay at Our House, the new 20-unit cancer patient and carer accommodation facility. Because the diagnosis has been made early, and he hasn't had to wait months before he can arrange getting to a major city, he now has a better chance of beating cancer, because one of the awful things about cancer - an awful disease - is that Australians living in rural and regional areas are three times more likely to die from some cancers than their counterparts in major cities. That's why we are investing in 20 regional cancer care projects around the country.
If complexities emerge, Walter is able to access a world class cancer institute in Sydney, the Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre, where treatment and research come together under the same roof. It is part of our National Plan for Better Cancer Care, backed by more than $2.3 billion in funding since the Labor Government came to office in 2007.
It's at all these times - when your child has a serious rash, when you are battling with a long-term illness, when you need surgery to restore your mobility and when you suspect you might have a very serious disease - that Australians turn to their health and hospitals system. That's when better hospitals and better healthcare really make a difference and that's when the Government's health reforms will really make a difference in the lives of Australian families and these changes will support the critical role of the health workforce in our health and hospitals system.
While the Local Hospital Networks will assume responsibility for the day to day operations of their services, it is not the Government's intention to change existing employment arrangements, including the Crown employment arrangement in NSW. States will continue to have responsibility for overall industrial relations policy, including the conduct of enterprise bargaining and the setting of broad IR policies such as union consultation. It is the Government's clear intention that existing wages and conditions will be maintained in the introduction of Local Hospital Networks and any future changes would only occur through the usual negotiating processes applying in each state.
Friends, I said earlier today that the Australian Government came to office with an ambitious agenda. We came to office with an ambitious agenda, because we're ambitious for Australian families and Australia's future.
Government is hard work, and we're involved in some very important national debates right now - on health reform, on tax reform, on industrial relations and on economic responsibility and how we ensure Australian families have their fair share of our nation's prosperity.
Within the next six months there will be an election. Australians will have the choice between a reforming Government that is building a stronger economy with a fair share for working families - and the risk of Tony Abbott as Prime Minister.
Mr Abbott is a risk to Australian families. His record of pushing extreme policies like WorkChoices, ripping a billion dollars out of our public hospitals, and his erratic decision making speaks for itself.
I don't believe Australian families are prepared to risk their future with Tony Abbott. I believe they want a government that is committed to delivering better opportunities, better schools, and better health and hospitals. That's what the Government is delivering.
Australian families deserve better, and we are determined to continue that work. 


ALOISI: Mr Rudd good morning.
PM: Good morning, thanks for having me on your program.
ALOISI: Another disastrous poll result for the Government yesterday, your personal approval ratings are through the floor and the Government facing a possible annihilation at the next election. You've lost 1.1 million voters in three months, what's gone wrong?
PM: Well we have a huge challenge ahead of us, which is to explain very carefully what our record is, and it's a good record of achievement across the economy and across health and across education, what our plans are for the future, but you know you're right Sandy, and that is those polls produced yesterday would see Mr Abbott as Prime Minister, but let's be very clear about this, an election is about alternatives and it puts into very stark contrast what we stand for in terms of keeping the economy strong, delivering tax cuts to working families, getting rid of WorkChoices, boosting hospital funding by 50 per cent, big reforms in education, a new national curriculum, against Mr Abbott who says he'd bring back WorkChoices, slash health funding, and slash education funding.
By the way you mentioned polls, there's been a bunch of polls out recently, some have had us ahead, some behind, but what I know having been in this business for a long, long time, is that they do change over time.
ALOISI: They do change although lately there has been a bit of a trend, do you think you've lost the trust of the Australian electorate?
PM: It's a hard job in terms of explaining all that the Government is doing and the reasons for it, I fully accept that. As the Prime Minister of the country and the leader of my Party I take full responsibility for that as well. But the key thing is to explain, as I said before, these alternatives, and based on the Sydney Morning Herald poll yesterday, Mr Abbott would be Prime Minister, but the challenge that I face is to be absolutely clear about the differences between us.
I noticed just coming in here you were talking about superannuation. Well there's a very basic difference. We're proposing a big package of tax reform, one of the things which comes from that is increasing all working Australian's superannuation guarantee from 9 per cent to 12 per cent; Mr Abbott opposes that. But what does that mean for someone listening to the program this morning? If you're on $50,000 a year it means that you retire, if you're a young person starting out in the workplace now, with an additional $108,000. Other big super changes as well for older workers able to top-up with tax benefits and lower paid people able to get more from their super as well.
So I go back to my point, it's about alternatives, it's about what our record of achievement is in key things on the economy and keeping us out of recession, and Mr Abbott and what he stands for.
STANLEY: Well David Marr we spoke to earlier, you've no doubt heard David Marr's commentary on your personality-
PM: Well actually I haven't.
STANLEY: Haven't you, well it is deeply personal and he's talked about an anger that you have at your core and he's talked about it going back to your childhood, the boarding school you went to, the Catholic school, and that must, to be stripped open in that very public way must be difficult.
PM: You know John, when I stuck my hand up first of all to go into Australian public life and then secondly stuck my hand up to become leader of the Labor Party, you basically have to accept that fact, that's just the truth of it in contemporary Australian politics.
As for any analysis of me and all that sort of stuff, I think I'll leave that to the commentators, what your listeners are concerned about is what's my plan for the countries future, what's our record of achievement in keeping the economy strong and giving a fairer share to working families, I'll leave all that analysis to others.
STANLEY: And yet the issue that seems to have turned the polls quite dramatically against you is decisions you made on climate change and asylum seekers, and again we spoke with David Marr in the last half hour. His view is that you genuinely believe that there's a problem with climate change, it is urgent, and that you've been quite surprised by the backlash in putting the decision off into the future.
PM: Well let me just-
STANLEY: Were you surprised, are you surprised by that?
PM: Let's just go to the core of the climate change alternative. I believe that climate change is happening, going back to what I was being asked before by Sandy, what's Mr Abbott's position, he says that climate change is quote, his own words, absolute crap unquote.
STANLEY: Well he has changed that though hasn't he, hasn't he, he has now said he believes man contributes and action is needed.
PM: It depends which day of the week you happen to ask Mr Abbott that question. He's on one side of it and the other. Just before Christmas he said that the country need to pass an emissions trading scheme, that's before he decided it was a very useful thing for him to use to remove Mr Turnbull.
Let's go back to the core question though that you ask about climate change. It is clear to me, and always has been, for years and years and years that climate change is happening. Secondly, therefore, that's why I ratified Kyoto, the Liberals opposed ratifying Kyoto, that's why we brought in a renewable energy target from increasing it to 20 per cent, so that by 2020, the electricity needs of all of our households, the equivalent of that will be generated from renewable energy sources. We've also got the biggest investment program in renewable energy projects right across Australia, including what we believe will be the biggest solar plant anywhere in the world.
On the emissions trading question, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, here is the fact. Three times the Liberal Party blocked it in the Australian Parliament, I can't force it through, therefore realistically what I've said, it has to be delayed until a new Parliament.
ALOISI: But if you believe so passionately in it, why did you not go to a double dissolution?
PM: Whenever the election is held, and whatever form the election takes, let me be very clear with you that climate change and emissions trading will be absolutely central to that because the core of it is this, we accept the science, Mr Abbott rejects it, we have concrete measures to deal with it from renewable energy, energy efficiency and a commitment to bring in an emissions trading scheme, Mr Abbott rejects emissions trading, and has a series of other measures which everyone out there simply doesn't add up.
But what I'm just saying to do in response to your question before, the core reality you face is that we, as the President of the Maldives, the guy who comes from that country in the Indian Ocean which is most vulnerable to climate change, the bloke who conducted a Cabinet meeting underwater in scuba gear a couple of years ago because he was trying to make a point to the world community what was happening, I had him in Canberra a few days ago. He and I worked together passionately for three days together with 20 other leaders in Copenhagen to try and get a global agreement, ran into a brick wall there, got an outcome about five or six out of ten, in the Australian Parliament ran into a brick wall there because three times the Liberals voted it down.
So you go ahead in these other areas, solar, renewables, energy efficiency, and necessarily that means a delay, a delay, in bringing in an emissions trading scheme.
ALOISI: Another reasons given for the dip in the polls for you and the Government has been that you have not been able to sell the mining tax to the Australian electorate properly, if I look at the papers today, I'm holding up a full page ad put in there by the mining industry, have they done a better job of convincing us that the mining tax is not a good thing, as opposed to the Government letting us believe it should come into implementation.
PM: Well, let's go back to core principles here, again. What do we want through tax reform? We want to make sure we keep the economy strong in the future by bringing down the company tax rates of all the companies in Australia, and funding that from the revenue which we'd impose on our most profitable miners.
Secondly, bringing down the tax rate and giving extra tax breaks to small businesses, 2.4 million of them across Australia, because they are the engine room of the Australian economy.
And third, to boost our level of national savings by nearly $100 billion by increasing superannuation for all those working people listening to your program this morning by increasing the superannuation guarantee level from 9 percent to 12 percent.
That's what we are doing.
Now, the Opposition, obviously, to this, is ferocious. You've got a whole bunch of people out there with the Liberal and National Party acting in cahoots with various elements of the mining industry, but in terms of a bit of a fact check, what do we see last night? We saw Mr Clive Palmer saying that he had, effectively, exaggerated his claims about the impact of the resources super profits tax on him. There's also an interesting statement from one of the other mining companies which was out there the other day proclaiming job losses, indicating that they had exaggerated as well.
I think the Australian people, over time, will be sober judges of this, about whether this proposal of ours for tax reform strengthens our economy for the long term - we believe it does; whether it delivers a fairer share for all Australian families through better super and tax cuts for small business - we believe it does, against the scare the campaign which even the mining companies themselves in the last 24 hours have admitted, in effect, that they have exaggerated their claims.
STANLEY: Where are you drawing the line on compromise, because you say the 40 percent, that's non-negotiable. Is that right?
PM: Sorry, just sipping a cup of tea.
STANLEY: That's alright. The 40 percent - non-negotiable?
PM: What we've said from day one is that we believe we have the rate right and we've said we'd also sit down and consult and negotiate with all those individual mining companies on detail, on implementation, and transition.
STANLEY: But that uplift rate of 6 percent, that's where everyone focuses on as the potential compromise.
PM: And what the Treasurer has said, also, is generous transition arrangements. Beyond that, we don't actually go to detail of discussions with individual mining companies in the public media, and the reason is each of the companies' circumstances are different.
Go to the core principle, again - if you are a smaller company starting out or you're generating a return as a mining company of less than, say, 10 percent, you're going to end up paying, Treasury advises, less tax through our proposal. It's only when you start to get above a 10 percent return rate, on average, that you start to pay a bit more. If you're earning super profits of 40 or 50 or 60 percent, you're going to be paying a fair bit more. That's what we are doing because our analysis is this strengthens the mining industry overall by encouraging the smaller players and those who are suffering losses in the earlier years of their project. It's good for the mining industry, grows the mining industry by 5.5 percent over time, grows the economy by nearly an additional percentage point, strong for the reform of the economy long term in keeping it strong, but giving a fairer share on the way through.
ALOISI: With the mining industry fighting you tooth and nail, and it seems they've won over the Australian electorate, you're going to WA today. Will you be sitting down with them, mining industry executives?
PM: Well, I, since day one - in fact, I think we launched our tax reform plan in early May. I think within a day or two I flew to Perth, into the lion's den, and sat down at dinner, actually, with the WA heads, anyway of BHP, of Rio, with Twiggy-
ALOISI: -Are you going to do it again?
PM: -Fortescue Metals, and who else was there? Others, anyway, from the mining industry, and we've sat down, or I've sat down, with a number of them since then, and in the West I'm sure there'll be further opportunity to hop into it, but you know something? The business of leadership on keeping our economy strong for the long term, it's a hard business. A lot of people out there who are earning super profits in the mining industry don't want to pay more tax. I think the Australian community believe they can, but the more important thing is to make sure we're taking the strength in our economy now, having kept this economy out of recession, building on that through our budget discipline of bringing the budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time, by reforming it for the long term to keep it strong into the long-term future.
STANLEY: Back to, politically, you've got to come up with a compromise with the miners. Every political analysis says you need a compromise with the miners. Is it possible that before the election you'll be able to come up with a regime which will be acceptable to them and that this will be called off, that you can neutralise this campaign?
PM: Well, John, as I said the other day, I think I was asked this in Canberra, we'll take as long as is necessary to work through the detail with each of these companies and I don't think it's right to actually put a timeframe around it. There are lots of complexities in this. Each mining company's circumstances are different. I just gave you the overall example-
STANLEY: -Yeah, I know.
PM: -If you're earning less than 10 percent return you're better off, and some of those folk are quite pleasantly surprised by the detail when they get on top of it, and others, when they see that if they are super profitable, they are a bit more concerned, but on the timeframe question, to go straight to your point, we'll take as long as is necessary, because getting the detail right is imperative.
STANLEY: OK, but do you think you can get a compromise?
PM: We'll, we believe, as I said, we've got our-
STANLEY: -So you can't utter the word compromise? You can't even say compromise?
PM: Well, what I've said consistently is that we've got our framework right and we're going to consult and negotiate with industry. I don't think you can be clearer than that. We said we'd do that on the questions of detail of implementation and transition arrangements, and when you talk about those things you're talking about dealing with each of those circumstances which industry come up with, given their individual company circumstances when they talk to our folk in the Australian Treasury, but the key thing is to make sure we are reforming the economy for the long term.
You can't sit still. You've got to get on with the business of reform. We intend to do that.
STANLEY: I'm sorry, but in your head, aren't you seeing this headline: 'Rudd talks compromise'? You can't even entertain the thought that you'll compromise with them?
PM: You know something, John, when I talk about consult, negotiate, detail, implementation, transition, that's the serious stuff of working your way through any challenge, but our core principles here are right and we've said that from the beginning and this will be a tough debate, but I think your listeners need to take, also, a bit of a grain of salt of some of the fear campaigns being run out there, because what I believe in is keeping the economy strong and getting a fairer return, also, for all those families listening to the program this morning. It's a tough business.
ALOISI: Prime Minister, it is a tough business, so can you be 100 percent convinced that you'll lead your Party to the next election?
PM: Oh, absolutely. You know, if you look back on your predecessors in this position, and one of the advantages of spending a bit of time sitting in the Lodge in Canberra is that most of your predecessors have been through challenges. In fact, I think all of them have, of one type or another. Anyone who thinks that this is some sort of smooth ride is just deluding yourself, particularly if you're in the business about making changes. You know, we got, remember this, we got bagged mercilessly for bringing in a stimulus strategy in 2008/09, in the midst of a debt and deficit scare campaign. What's the result? We kept the economy out of recession and as a result we've got the lowest debt and lowest deficit of any major advanced economy in the world, so we copped a lot of flak then. We've copped a lot of flak since then on a whole range of other things, and this Government hasn't been perfect. We've made mistakes. I've said that many times.
The key thing is to focus on the challenge of keeping the economy strong for the future, and for families, making a difference in their hospitals and in their schools. That story I saw, I think on the front page of the Herald this morning about people waiting for cancer treatment. This is basic for people, getting that right. That's why I spent so much of the last month or so announcing our investment, about a quarter of a billion dollars throughout New South Wales, for enhanced cancer diagnosis and treatment services right across the state. That's what people are also talking about at their kitchen tables this morning.
ALOISI: Alright, Prime Minister, enjoy your trip to Western Australia. Maybe you'll come back with a new bag of tricks for us to talk about.
PM: It'll be exciting.


PM: A short time ago the Acting Chief of Defence Force and the Acting Defence Minister confirmed that we had lost two Australian soldiers killed in Afghanistan on active duty. Today the nation mourns the loss of two brave soldiers of Australia. This is an enormous loss for their families and their loved ones. On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia I extend to them our deepest condolences, our deepest sympathy. Our prayers and our thoughts are with them on a day of incredible personal loss. 4
Our soldiers' remains are being returned to Tarin Kowt, they have been returned to Tarin Kowt before they are returned to Australia.
Also, in this attack an explosive detection dog was also killed. These are incredible dogs who also do an incredible job out there in the field and form an extraordinary bond with the soldiers who work with them.
This is a sober reminder to us all about the difficult and dangerous work that our soldiers are doing each day in Afghanistan, whether it's in the news or whether it's not. It's a sobering reminder that we are up against a determined and dangerous enemy. It's a sober reminder also that, for Australia, our mission is important to ensure that Afghanistan does not return to become an operating base for terrorists around the world. Terrorists who in the last decade have killed more than a hundred Australians.
Last night I spoke to our commanders in the field in Afghanistan and the commanding General, General Cantwell as well. I asked them, as our leaders in the field, to convey to all the troops in Afghanistan the support and the solidarity of all Australians with them at a time when they have lost one of their comrades in arms, two of their comrades in arms.
I also asked our commanders in the field to convey to the troops in the field, the fact that all Australians feel tremendously proud of the work they do each day in the name of Australia and that our thoughts and our prayers are with each and every one of them and their families at this very difficult time.
This is an extraordinarily hard and wrenching time for families, for friends, for fellow soldiers. Let us all bear each of them in our thoughts today.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd does this incident show that Australia should have more troops in Afghanistan?
PM: The Government believes that overall troop deployment to Afghanistan is about right, given the mission that we have set for ourselves. We have never extended a blank cheque when it comes to our troop commitment, what we have said is that the mission is clear, and that is in Oruzgan Province, to raise the Fourth Afghan Army National Brigade so that that Brigade can assume security responsibilities for the province. That is our mission, that is what we're working towards, we believe our current troop commitment is right for that purpose.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd what sort of support is being offered to the families of these soldiers?
PM: The Australian Defence Force are a family, the Australian Army is a family, therefore when tragedy strikes they behave like a family. They have their own protocols and procedures in place to provide support and immediate care for loved ones. I've seen this before, they are extraordinarily good at providing the physical, practical and emotional support which families and loved ones go through at times like this. They are a very good organisation, they are a family.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd just on the mining tax-
PM: Can I just ask for any other questions on Afghanistan first please.
JOURNALIST: In the past year (inaudible) and you've talked about the troop levels, is it the time that the Taliban is resurgent, are we winning the war (inaudible)?
PM: I would draw your attention to comments recently by the Chief of Defence Force in Canberra, who indicated that we are making progress in our part of Afghanistan and more broadly, but let us make no bones about it, this is a very tough, difficult, continuing military campaign and we are up against a determined and dangerous enemy. However, under no circumstances can Australians afford to allow Afghanistan to become a free, operating, training base for terrorist organisations in the future. That is what happened in times past, and as a result many, many Australians, innocent Australians abroad lie dead. Therefore, our resolve must be firm and we must complete the mission which we have set for ourselves in that particular province of Afghanistan, in partnership with our friends and allies from around the world.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The security situation in Afghanistan is constantly changing and in different parts of the country. I think it's very important to bear that in mind, in different parts of the country. For example, the number of claims in this country go to the Hazara lands within Afghanistan, and circumstances in those parts of the country change from time to time. In Oruzgan we are dealing with parts of the country which are predominantly Pashtu, and have usually a different set of security circumstances. Therefore what the Government has done on the question you raise is act responsibly and flexibly in response to changing circumstances of security over time and changing circumstances also in different regions of Afghanistan. And that of course is consistent with our obligations under the convention.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I think first thing to say is this, the Defence Minister John Faulkner has been assiduous in undertaking a rolling review of the security circumstances in Afghanistan, in Oruzgan, and our preparedness to deal with each of those challenges as they arise. This is not a static situation, it is a dynamic situation and the Defence Minister together with the Chief of the Defence Force have been fundamentally engaged in our evolving security needs in that part of the country.
As for other forces, I cannot comment directly on their circumstances, but you're right to say this has been a hard day, a difficult day for so many of our people in uniform and those in uniform from other lands as well. There are families grieving today all around the world. The mission, the mission, is an important mission for all civilised countries in the world.
Are there any more questions on Afghanistan? I'll take a few others on other subjects and then go.
Just here, here and then you.
JOURNALIST: Minister Conroy has accused Google of hoovering up banking details which a Google person says is wrong (inaudible). Is the Minister prejudicing an AFP investigation of this continuing claim (inaudible)?
PM: The Minister's statements speak for themselves, I'm sure they'll be a continued robust exchange between himself and the various companies concerned, I'm sure they'll both argue their positions, I stand by what the Minister has said.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister just on the mining tax, will you be using your trip to Western Australia to meet with mining executives and will you be meeting with Colin Barnett as well and do you think a compromise at this stage on the mining tax is possible, do you expect to reach a compromise?
PM: I think the first thing to say about tax reform is this, tax reform is important for all Australians, including all West Australians because it's about building a strong economy for the future as well as ensuring that all Australians and all West Australians get a fairer share for the future as well. Over there in the West there have been mining booms in the past, but not all West Australians believe, well frankly not all West Australians have benefitted from those booms in the past.
So we're on about building strength for the future, we're on about a fairer share for the future. Building strength for the future through making sure that we're bringing down the company tax rates for some 50,000 West Australian companies to make sure that they are globally competitive in future. Providing tax breaks to some 160,000 WA small businesses to make sure that that helps their bottom line with an ability to instantly write off something like $5000 worth of asset investments in a year. Making the economy strong by investing in WA's future infrastructure needs, its roads, its rail and its ports, because it's such a dynamic economy, and having the funds possible to do that, and also to boost our overall level of national savings through the superannuation reforms, $85 billion worth of national savings, an important buffer for the future.
On the fairer front, it's making sure that all those WA families get a fairer share too, by making better super available for them in the future as well, and that means hundreds of thousands of families having their superannuation guarantee level increased from 9 to 12 per cent, so that their superannuation nest egg is better for the future.
Now on the tax reform debate itself on the ground, when I was last in WA, which was I think barely a month ago, I sat down with a bunch of leaders from various mining companies, I saw another group recently in Canberra. We'll continue to talk as is necessary, I'm sure I'm going to run into a few over there as well.
The other thing you mentioned is the WA Premier, the WA Premier said earlier this year that his view was that mining companies were getting away with murder, his comments not mine, and that therefore they should pay more. Well I think it's important to be consistent in this debate and I think it's very important that in our overall tax reform we use therefore, the Resources Super Profits Tax as part of an overall tax reform which benefits the Australian economy and the WA economy in the future as well.
JOURNALIST: Is the election campaign going to consist of what the Liberals are saying a vicious smear campaign against Tony Abbott?
PM: I haven't seen comments from the Liberals this morning. I think the bottom line is this - an election, whenever it's held, is about alternatives. It's about Mr Abbott and his position on bringing back WorkChoices; his position on further cuts to health and hospitals, like the billion he cut when he was last Health Minister; and further cuts to education; and cuts to renewable energy projects.
That's what he's said so far, and our alternative is pretty clear: we've got rid of WorkChoices. It won't be coming back under us, because we want to protect people's penalty rates. We've increased our investment in the hospital system by 50 percent already and on top that we're investing hugely in the education system - a new, national curriculum, for example. These are big alternatives. One other one which was partly touched upon, maybe, before is in the area of Senator Conroy's portfolio, a national broadband network. We are building it. We need to make sure the entire economy is prepared for the 21st century. Mr Abbott has effectively said he'd rip it up.
Now, when you ask, therefore, about an election, an election is about alternatives, and my responsibility is to make those alternatives absolutely crystal clear in people's minds as we travel through the rest of this year.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) resource-rich country (inaudible)?
PM: It's a matter for foreign governments to do what they would do. I have noted that a profits-based taxation system has been contemplated by a range of governments around the world.
Your question goes to the fundamental point about why moving to a profits-based tax regime for the mining industry is actually better for the mining industry in the long term, and that is because for start-up companies in the beginning of their operations and when they're not profitable they're actually given, effectively, a big tax break and they pay less tax under this system. It's only when they become significantly profitable or super profitable that they'd end up paying more tax. Therefore, anyone who has been intelligently participating in this debate supports a profits-based way of taxing the industry in the future, rather than a volume-based way of taxing the industry in the future.
That's why, in summary, on the future of tax reform, number one - it's about making sure we've got a strong economy in the future by making sure we're helping with company tax rates, bringing them down right across the board; small business tax breaks; providing funds for building infrastructure; boosting national savings, a very important buffer at times of global economic uncertainty; and, on top of that, for the mining industry itself, broadening the base of the industry through a profits-based system.
I go back to where I began this set of questions this morning, and that is, it is also really important that apart from building a stronger Australian economy for the future we're also delivering a fairer share for all Australian families and the bottom line there is what we do for people's super when they retire. A lot of people are worried about how much super they'll have to retire on in 10, 20, 30 years' time. If you're 30 years old today, under the proposals that we're putting forward and if you're on $50,000 a year, you know, you end up being about $108,000 better off under this proposal. That's why it's a very important reform for working families.
Thank you, folks, and I better zip.


PRICE: Morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Steve, thanks for having me on the program.
PRICE: I couldn't escape the ad break there. We were either going to finish it with a Minerals Council ad or one from your own Government, they're everywhere.
PM: There's a debate on at the moment, I take it?
PRICE: There is a little bit of a debate on. Rio Tinto's Australian Managing Director, David Peever, said last night that he'd said there'd been much talk from the Government about wanting to sit down, but there'd been little substance to back that up, and he's asked you to sit down with him when you visit WA this week. Will you?
PM: Oh look, with Mr Peever, I don't conduct those sort of consultations across the media. I think the thing to say Steve is that all of these companies have been involved with the Australian Treasury in Canberra, going through the details of their individual company circumstances. And secondly, there's been quite a lot of engagement at a Ministerial level through the Resources Minister Martin Ferguson, through the Treasurer Wayne Swan and also, when a whole bunch of these folk were in Canberra last week, including a representative of Rio, I sat down with them myself.
So I think that's a bit wide of the mark. Certainly when I'm in Perth, where I'll be going later today, I'm sure I'll catch up with various folk from the mining industry as well.
PRICE: So the time for negotiation is over? Or there is still an open window for you to make serious changes to the way this tax is going to be implemented?
PM: Steve, if you go to the core of what we're on about, we've said that we believe this tax reform plan of ours has got the rate right. We think we also have said from the very beginning that we'll be talking to the mining industry about details, about implementation, and about generous transition arrangements. And all those consultations and negotiations continue to be underway. There's a big campaign by the mining industry. You know it as well as I do. What I note, interestingly overnight though Steve is that folks live Clive Palmer and even Xstrata, the big coal company - a lot of assets in Queensland - have been forced to admit in effect they've been exaggerating their claims in recent times.
There's going to be a lot of exaggerated claims and threats, because let's face it, some of the very biggest mining companies don't want to pay more tax, whereas we're on about tax reform to keep our economy strong for the long term, by using the revenue that comes from this new arrangement with these most profitable mining companies to fund, first of all, reduced company tax rates for all Australian companies. Secondly, to make sure that all the small businesses listening to your program this morning get a tax break and a tax cut as well. And thirdly, to boost our national savings by making sure that every worker gets an increase in their superannuation payments from 9 percent to 12 percent, which if you're 30 years old, and you're on about 50 grand at present, means that you'll be retiring with an extra $108,000. I mean, this is a significant reform.
PRICE: Do you concede that this is now hurting the Government? And do you concede that some of your own backbenchers are getting very nervous? We had Gary Gray, the former ALP National Secretary, asked about your plunge in polling, said quote: "It's very, very difficult to get back from these situations. Howard lived in a dream that he could. Keating lived in a dream that he could." But he says it's very hard to get back, and he lays this firmly at the feet of the mistakes you've made in not implementing policies you've promised, plus this mining tax.
PM: Well, the business of leadership for our country is very, very difficult and always has been.
PRICE: But this is also about political survival for you as a person, isn't it?
PM: Well let's see, but the key responsibility I've been handed by the Australian people is to keep the economy strong, and to make sure that families also get a fairer share.
PRICE: But you don't want to go down in history as a one term Prime Minister, surely?
PM: But in keeping- but let me just go back to the core point here- keeping the economy strong means taking some difficult decisions. Remember, we got bagged mercilessly a year or two ago by saying that we needed to use economic stimulus to keep the Australian economy afloat. We were bagged and attacked because of debt and deficit. What's the result of that? Together with the work of the community and the business sector, we kept the Australian economy from going into recession.
Furthermore, what we've done is done so by making sure also that we've got the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies, but the business of economic reform doesn't stop there. You've got to build for the future, and make sure that you're able to make sure our companies remain globally competitive, which is why we're bringing down the company tax rate.
PRICE: Are you happy to lose office on a point of principle?
PM: Well the key thing is to be out there doing the right thing for the country in the long term. The Government of course, like any Government -
PRICE: But is doing the right thing for the country losing office on a point of principle?
PM: Well as I said, no Government is perfect. I've never claimed that in relation to the one that I lead, either. But getting it right in the economy long term is important, and I'm pretty confident at the end of the day, Steve, that people will make their judgment.
PRICE: You said yesterday you had to work harder, how could you possibly work harder? I mean you apparently, if what we read is correct- you lose staff hand over fist because you work too hard.
PM: The, I think when you're elected to political office, people expect that you're going to work hard, and I certainly do. And the people around me do too, and they're a fantastic team.
PRICE: But harder, how could you work harder?
PM: As do my Ministers. What I was going to go back to just before though, Steve, because you raised the question of elections - what are elections all about? It's about an alternative. On the polls that were published yesterday, if they are repeated on election day, you're right to say that Mr Abbott would be the Prime Minister. That brings into very sharp focus the alternatives between us, and between Mr Abbott. And for your listeners this morning, what's that mean?
Pretty basic, really. For the economy, we've kept it strong, Mr Abbott has no plan to return the Budget to surplus. Secondly, we got rid of WorkChoices, he wants to bring it back. We've increased spending on hospitals by 50 percent, Mr Abbott's already cut a billion dollars when he was Health Minister, and plans to do the same again. We're building education, and we're investing more in education and a new national curriculum. Mr Abbott says he's going to cut funding to education as well. These are pretty basic alternatives. So, an election's about that.
PRICE: But to bring this back, Prime Minister, a personal issue - you talk about working harder. It's reported that in Copenhagen you worked four days straight with one hour of sleep. That's just not smart, is it?
PM: Well first of all, I don't think that's accurate.
PRICE: That's not true?
PM: No, no, that's not true. We -
PRICE: I mean, this has all become very personal about you, hasn't it?
PM: But let me just go to the point you just made. We did work for a long time. We did work round the clock for an extended period of time. But you know something? So did Heads of Government from right around the world, because it was an important conference, we were trying to get it right. And at the end of that conference, it could've fallen apart completely with no agreement. What we did get was a Copenhagen Accord, which is probably about a 6 out of 10 result (inaudible)
PRICE: But does it then embarrass you when you have people like David Marr reporting that you were using the F word to describe Chinese delegates to Copenhagen?
PM: You know something, what I've learnt in politics over the years is you never talk publicly about private conversations. And, and-
PRICE: Do you feel let down when others do?
PM: No, no, that's a matter for them. You know, you're a grown up when you decide to enter into politics. Put your hand up and say that you're open to, you know, complete public scrutiny. And sometimes that's, as you know Steve, pretty searching. Sometimes it can be fair. Others may judge, from time to time, it's less so. But look, the key thing is this- your listeners, I think, are much less concerned about all of that, which commentators will write about day in day out.
What they're on about is, are we going to keep the economy strong for the future, what are we going to do to fix their hospital system, when do the new hospital beds start arriving, what am I doing for their accident and emergency and their elective surgery waiting times, what are we doing with the supply of doctors and nurses, when's the new national curriculum come in, and guess what - we have a strong record of achievement in each of those areas. The day's political debate, whatever it is, will often focus on other things. That's fine.
PRICE: But when you go home to Therese at night and the kids, and you sit there around dinner and you're talking, it must get difficult when they read and hear that people are describing their father as having anger management issues and that he uses bad language.
PM: Oh well look, you know everyone in this business is human. And I'm blessed Steve, with a marvellously supportive wife and life partner Therese. We've been married for nearly 30 years. And kids who are marvellously supportive, given that kids often cop flak, and this doesn't just apply to me, it applies to anyone in political leadership, including Mr Howard when he was Prime Minister. Kids often cop flak as well as a result of being in political life. But that's part of the price that you pay. But I'm very blessed by having such a supportive family. But the key thing is, all the families really listening to your program this morning because many of them, right now, are doing it tough, notwithstanding the fact that we've managed to steer the economy through this global crisis without going into recession.
PRICE: I know you've got to go, and I don't like to do this to you off the top, but the ABC is apparently reporting that two Australian soldiers could be among a number of NATO soldiers killed in Afghanistan, up to ten troops may have lost their lives. Are you aware of that incident?
PM: Steve, for all reports coming out of Afghanistan, there are very important and sensitive protocols to adhere to. That would apply to any developments at any time. There are often reports through from Afghanistan about the wellbeing of our soldiers. I adhere to those protocols religiously. And that would apply today as any day.
PRICE: Okay, appreciate your time as usual, thanks.
PM: Thanks Steve.
PRICE: Good on you, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. 


The Australian Government today announced that it will establish a new $6 billion Regional Infrastructure Fund.
The Regional Infrastructure Fund will invest in projects with potential partner funding from States, private investors and/or local governments.
The Fund comprises $5.6bn of revenue from the Resources Super Profits Tax commencing in 2012-13, as previously announced, and an additional $400 million for the fund between 2010-11 and 2013-14. These additional funds have already been provided for in the Budget.
Today's announcement means investment can start now, to address our urgent infrastructure needs, rather than waiting for revenue proceeds of the Resources Super Profits Tax to flow.
The Government believes it is time to put something back into the mining communities, and those communities which support them, that give so much to Australia and make our national economy strong.
At a speech to the Perth Press Club, the Prime Minister outlined his intention that the lion's share of the infrastructure fund generated by the Resources Super Profit Tax should go to the major resource states of WA and Queensland - consistent with each state's share of total mining production.
Today it was also announced that Western Australia should expect more than $2 billion in additional infrastructure investment from this fund.
That means more rail, roads, ports, and other crucial infrastructure to support the workforce in critical mining regions and in communities that support mining regions.
Infrastructure Australia will be consulted on projects.
Projects will be selected based on the following criteria:
- Promote development and job creation in mining communities, and communities which support the mining sector;
- Provide a clear benefit to Australia's economic development, and to investment in Australia's resource or export capacity;
- Address potential capacity constraints arising from export production and resource projects.
It is high time that the regions in Western Australia that generate so much of our national wealth got their fair share of the proceeds of the mining boom - and that is what our tax reform plans will deliver.
This builds on the record investment the Rudd Government is making in the nation's economic infrastructure - more than doubling the roads budget and increasing fivefold the investment in our interstate rail network


PM: It's good to be back in Perth and good to be back at this important centre which is so critical to Australia's future ability to win the Square Kilometre Array project. If we were to win that project it would be an enormous benefit for Western Australia and an enormous benefit for the nation. That's why together with New Zealand we're collaborating globally on winning this $2.5 billion project for our countries. The competition will be stiff, but we believe you've got to be in it to win it. That's why the Australian Government has put in such significant investments in support of the SKA Project and we'll continue to support this project right through to conclusion.
The other thing I'd say is this. The investments we're making here in terms of renewable energy are really important as well. Climate change continues as a major challenge for all countries around the world, all economies around the world, this challenge has not gone away. Therefore, making significant investments in renewable energy, significant investments in energy efficiency and the case here in geo-thermal energy is an important part of any nation's long term response to the challenge of climate change.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how would you describe the nature of your talks yesterday with Marius Kloppers about the super profits tax?
PM: Well, as I've said many times before I respect the views of the mining industry. I grew up in the great state of Queensland where we've had a few mining enterprises over the years, quite a few, and so I'm always keen to listen to what the mining industry has to say. We had a cordial and frank discussion, and I'm sure we'll continue to do that in the future.
While I'm here in the West I imagine I'll catch up with other mining executives as well as I did during my last visit.
JOURNALIST: Did you compromise part of your language during that discussion?
PM: I said privately what I've always said publicly, and that is that we believe that we've got the rate for this proposed reform about right. I've said also that we are consulting with industry on implementation, on detail and on generous transitional arrangements. And that's precisely what the Treasury consultation panel is doing with companies right across Australia, and what the Treasurer and myself have been doing with corporate executives from the resources sector as well.
JOURNALIST: Are you the obstacle in these negotiations as Peter Walsh has said?
PM: Well look I'll just let Peter speak for himself, I thought Gary had some interesting things to say about Peter earlier today, sounds like family feud on the road but -
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -
PM: - Hang on, hang on, let me answer the question and then I'll turn to the question that you have.
The key thing in a tough negotiation, a hard negotiation, is to make sure that you're listening attentively to what the industry is saying, carefully reviewing the facts, being equally careful about not simply swallowing hook line and sinker what any particular industry association or individual company may say as well. We've seen some evidence of that in recent days, in terms of statements made by various others. So we're going to continue with this consultation process.
Here is a very significant development though, today here in Perth. The Premier Mr Barnett I'm advised, today on Perth radio, has indicated that's it's time we had a debate here in Australia about whether mining companies are paying enough tax. Remember earlier this year Mr Barnett stood up and said that mining companies were getting away with murder, that's what Mr Barnett said. Today when challenged on that on Perth radio, he said we need a debate on whether mining companies are paying enough tax.
Well that's the debate we're engaged in. That's the discussion we're engaged in. It's about tax reform. And this tax reform is also about building a strong economy for the long term by providing support for company taxes coming down, small business tax breaks as well as making sure we're building up our ability to fund WA's future infrastructure needs, and at the same time, getting a fairer share to families through better super for those families.
Sorry, I cut across you before.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, do you expect people like Tim Hammond to win marginal seats in WA on the back of this tax?
PM: When you've got first class candidates like Tim, we're going to be right there, upfront, very competitive, very sharp in the field. This will be a tough election, but an election is about alternatives, an election is about what you're putting forward. And what I know for a fact is that we're out there saying we're going to invest more in hospitals, Mr Abbott says he's going to cut hospital funding and health funding. We're out there saying we're going to invest more in schools and universities, he said he's going to bring about cuts in investment in education. On top of that, we've got rid of Workchoices, Mr Abbott says he's going to bring back Workchoices.
When you've got candidates in the field like Tim, he'll be going round to each and every school in the electorate and asking this question: which of your school modernisation projects will have the rug pulled from under it if our opponents are elected, and there are so many current projects involving libraries, language centres, science centres across the what, 40 or 50 schools I think spread across the electorate who'll be asking themselves this very basic question.
So it's a debate about national alternatives and local alternatives and with a first class candidate like Tim we're going to be highly competitive.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you talk about consultation but the Premier says he hasn't spoken to you in five weeks, are you avoiding him?
PM: I have had more discussions with Colin over the last two and a half years that I have been Prime Minister I think than probably any other Premier in the country.
SWAN: That applies to me as well.
PM: And that applies to the Treasurer as well. And if you look at the vast array of co-investment projects we have with WA, these have been huge consultations between us. The big investments in the Ord, the the big investments in Oakajee, the big investments here in Perth in Northbridge, the large investments in the Fiona Stanley Hospital here as well as the Midland Hospital, as well as in the cancer treatment centres in regional WA. This is a long, deep pattern with consultation between us and I'm sure it's going to continue in the future.
JOURNALIST: What about on the tax though, has there been any discussions?
PM: We had many, many, many discussions, the Treasurer and myself, with Colin over a long period of time on this question. As I've said, on the public record Colin's said that mining companies, in his words, not mine, his words, are getting away with murder. He says today there should be a debate about them paying more tax. I'm in that debate, I'm being upfront about it, I think it would be good if everyone was as well.
JOURNALIST: What's your message to the Gina Rinehart and Andrew Forrest (inaudible) protests next to where you'll address the Press Club today, there's more than a thousand people there, will you budge on the six per cent rate?
PM: Well you know something, I respect, fully, everyone's right to express their point of view. This is a democracy, and if there are objections and concerns to aspects of the Government's tax reform proposal it's good that people have the opportunity to put that, put it sharply, and to register their views.
As for Twiggy, I'm sure I'll be sitting down with Twiggy again in the future as well, Twiggy's pretty unavoidable wherever you go to, and I'm sure he'll be out there larger than life today as I'm sure other folk will be as well. But you know something folks, I've actually got to make my way there and so if you'll just excuse me, and I'm sure you're going to have an entire second innings once I get to the press club.
Can I just, I've actually got to zip, see you folks.


BEAUMONT: Mr Rudd, thank you for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks Simon, thanks for having me on your program.
BEAUMONT: Mr Rudd, in Western Australia today, this is a chance for you, isn't it - either on this program or while you're here in the next couple of days - to back off on the mining tax. If you do it today, if you do it now on this program, it could save you your job. Will you do that? The floor is yours.
PM: Nice try Simon. I'm here to explain to the people of Western Australia why tax reform's important, and if it wasn't important and positive for the WA economy and for families in Western Australia, we wouldn't be doing it. If you go to the core of what we're on about, this tax reform is all about strengthening the WA economy long term, by cutting company tax for all West Australian companies, including 50,000 small companies trading across this state, making a tax break available to all of West Australia's 160,000 small businesses, as well as providing a source of revenue to boost our investment in WA infrastructure. That's in terms of strengthening the economy long term.
But in the meantime, it's also about providing extra superannuation for 700,000 workers in WA who will get higher super savings, and that helps take a bit of pressure off the weekly budget in the long term. So if you're 30 years old, you'd be around $108,000 better off by retirement as a result of these changes. So this is what we're doing.
BEAUMONT: But the superannuation contribution is also made up by employers, so that's not totally true, that's not all coming from a taxation base. Whatever way you look at it -
PM: That comes from - in relation to that question Simon - it comes from two sources. One of course is the cost to tax revenue through the Australian Government providing better tax treatment for people making savings through super, that's one thing. But the second obviously involves businesses. And for businesses, we're also making it easier for them to make those payments through extra super over time by bringing down their tax rates. So that's why -
BEAUMONT: So who are you trying - while you're here - who are you trying to explain this to? Are you trying to explain it to the people who will put you back into office, or are you trying to explain it to the miners? Because it seems to me, looking at the opinion polls, this, you're not explaining this very well to anybody.
PM: Well Simon, you're, I'm on your program, I'm talking to your listeners this morning about what we're seeking to do for tax reform for the economy for Western Australia, and for families in Western Australia. And what we're on about as a Government is building a stronger Australian economy long term, but also making it easier for families. And that's why these super reforms are so important.
In terms of the mining industry, I entirely respect the mining industry's point of view. We are engaged in a continuing consultation with them. And that will continue into the days and weeks ahead. We think these consultations have been productive. We're learning various things from various companies about their individual circumstances. But this will be a very difficult negotiation, I fully accept it.
BEAUMONT: But you, you're saying to me today and to our listeners, you're not going to back off, you're going to forge ahead? You're not going to drop the thresholds or change this taxation. You're going to go ahead. You and Mr Swan are going to forge ahead?
PM: Well Simon, as we said last time, I think, on this program, we believe that we've got the rate of this tax right. And we also said, I think I said this on your program too last time I was in Perth only a few days after announcing the Government's tax plan, or tax reform plans, that we would consult with the industry on detail, on implementation, and on generous transitional arrangements. And all those consultations with big mining companies are happening as we speak, and have been happening over the course of the last month.
BEAUMONT: Whichever way you look at it, whichever way you look at the thresholds, or what you're saying, or what the miners are saying, you're going to take $9 to $10 billion out of the mining industry. You must concede that does make it a less attractive investment option?
PM: I think it's very important to look at what this does for long term economic reform and the strength of the economy. I look recently, for example, at considered analyses published in the Financial Times in London, these are the folk who actually examine carefully the details behind or beyond all the rhetoric and underneath all the rhetoric that's mounted by one side of the debate against the other. And what do we actually find underneath it all? That this sort of reform is seen by analysts such as that, reflected in the editorial of the Financial Times, as good for the mining industry long term.
Remember what this is about, in part. It's about also encouraging smaller, less profitable mining operators in their early years in particular to get going, to get established. That's because the Government is of course allowing them to establish a tax credit of some 40 per cent of their upfront investment when they get into the field. It's about deepening and broadening the industry.
And remember what the analysis also points to in terms of the overall impact on growth in the mining industry. The independent analysis of the Treasury says that with all these reforms taken together, bringing down the company tax rate, also bringing down the tax rate faced by small business, and the other changes which are brought in, including the advantage for small miners here, mining investment according to the independent modelling of the Australian Treasury over time goes up by some four or five per cent. And employment in the mining industry also goes up by something like seven per cent over time.
So, I know that people in the mining industry will have a different point of view, Simon, and they will say that loud and clear, and that's their right. We live in a democracy. Good on 'em. But I've got to look carefully and calmly at the figures that we're presented independently of all the noise and clamour.
BEAUMONT: Independent analysis from Treasury and independent analysis from experts in London doesn't hold much sway here in WA, when you've got sober, upright citizens who are well respected over here, like Sam Wash, like Albanese, and to an extent Twiggy Forrest, when they rail against this tax and say it'll mean less investment, we in WA are more inclined to listen to them, than some pointy head in Treasury or in London. You must concede that -
PM: Well Simon -
BEAUMONT: - You've been trying to demonise the miners in all of this from day one. When you and I first spoke, you talked about this super profit, it's put you offside with the miners, and it's put you offside with a lot of people in WA.
PM: Simon, when was the last time that somebody actually proposed a tax reform which involved a sector of the economy paying more tax, when those who are being asked to pay more tax are going to pop the champagne corks and say it's a great thing? What we're on about for West Australian families is a fairer share for all those families. So many small businesses out there not linked to the mining industry or only indirectly linked to the mining industry I think would be pretty happy about the prospect of a $5,000 ability to write off assets they've purchased as a result of the tax changes which in part we fund through the resource super profits tax.
And also, all those working families listening to the program this morning who are thinking about their retirement in 10, 20, even 30 years' time, wondering about whether they've got enough superannuation. Now, those families want to know whether they're going to have enough to have a decent and dignified retirement. That's why increasing the superannuation guarantee from nine per cent to 12 per cent is so important for them. As I said, if you're a younger person, you end up with an extra $108,000 in your nest egg later on. These are important reforms for all families. That's why we talk about this being a fairer share for families, here in the West as well, but also strong in terms of its addition to the WA economy in the long term by bringing down the tax rate for all WA companies.
BEAUMONT: But you will, you will also - you talked about this being a national imperative. This is a national tax, this is a federal tax. Do you think people in these working families in suburban Victoria and New South Wales, do they have a right to some sort of ownership of the iron ore in Western Australia? Because constitutionally they don't.
PM: Well let's go to the core of that. That's one thing we haven't discussed so far. I'll be talking a little more about this at the Perth Press Club today as well. And that is, one of the additional things that we're seeking to fund through the proceeds from the resource super profits tax is a specific investment fund for WA's infrastructure. This state's road, its rail, and its ports. Every time I've been to the West, Simon, over the last two and a half years as Prime Minister - and that has been on average every two months, I come here quite a lot - I haven't been here on one occasion where someone from either state government or from a local authority has come to me and said we desperately need the following piece of infrastructure - road, rail, port and for that matter, even high-speed broadband - in order to equip ourselves for the future.
Now, you talk about the proceeds therefore of a resource super profits tax, part of those proceeds - the lion's share of those proceeds - will come back to WA and to the other big resource state, Queensland, in order to fund infrastructure projects in these states. That's what we believe is necessary to help the resource generating centres of the west and of Queensland and elsewhere.
Those people deserve better investment in their communities, better infrastructure for their communities. And also here in Perth, so many people also support the activities of the mining parts of the state as well. So infrastructure funds - the lion's share - comes back to the states which generate these, this resource wealth in the first place.
BEAUMONT: But again, this goes back to consultation and this goes back to the way you've sold this. At no time in the last two and a half years have you said to the West Australian Government we'll fund Northbridge Link, and Oakajee and Ord River, but the money's going to come out of a mining tax. At no stage have you said that. You only started saying that from May 2nd. Those negotiations on those infrastructure projects may well have been very different if that was brought up at the time, surely?
PM: But Simon, what you've just said is actually just untrue. All those projects you've just mentioned, frankly, are funded through the pre-existing Building Australia Fund which we put together as soon as the Government was elected. And those projects proceed in any case. That's why I did announce the co-investment, the first time by an Australian Government in a long, long time with a WA Government, to expand the Ord. A huge investment in Oakajee, to make sure that the port will have sufficient capacity for the future for a new minerals province. And here in the city of Perth, the fact that one part of town is not properly linked to the other because of Northbridge and the way it's currently laid out, the Premier made a strong case to me for that to be fixed, and we came up to the plate and made that investment. Together with I think, two, three, four five hundred million dollars worth of investments in various hospital and health facilities here in Perth as well, Fiona Stanley, the Midland Hospital and others like that.
What I'm talking about Simon is something quite different, it's how we actually create a pool of funds for the long-term future for the West, WA infrastructure -
BEAUMONT: But for NSW and Victoria as well?
PM: But what I'm saying is the funds that we are talking about through our national investment fund would be entirely reflective of how much each of those States contributes to the resources wealth of the nation. In the case of the West, that's probably something in the vicinity of 35, 40 per cent, similarly to the State that I come from, Queensland. When I travel round regional Queensland, people ask the same question. In Mackay recently they said we've got huge mining developments in the Bowen Basin, but we desperately need a new road to the Port of Mackay because people can't get through the centre of Mackay these days without being mown down by trucks. The cost of that road is $240 million, and the question I'd raise then is do the rate payers of Mackay pay for that? Do the State taxpayers of Queensland pay for that? Or should we be using some of the enormous wealth of some of those super profits earned by the biggest mining companies to funnel back directly into infrastructure investments within the States that they've come from? And WA and Queensland would get the lion's share of this proposed new infrastructure fund.
BEAUMONT: So in the past when Federal Governments have been funding national infrastructure projects, or projects of this type that you say are in the national interest, this tax on the miners hasn't been there. How have we been able to fund them in the past? Lots of West Australians listening today will say, Mr Rudd we pay plenty of taxes, we pay plenty of income tax, companies we work for pay plenty of company tax and payroll tax and State taxes as well, why can't you fund these infrastructure projects with the existing pool of money?
PM: Well here is the bottom line. Anyone who's analysed the infrastructure needs of WA, and Queensland for that matter, will tell you that there is not enough infrastructure now; the roads, rail and ports already under serious stress. What we as an Australian Government have done is made record investments, as an Australian Government, in the infrastructure needs here in the West. From memory, something like three, three and a half billion dollars worth of investments in one form or another over the last several years that the Government has been in, vastly in excess of what our predecessors invested here.
But for the future Simon, this is a really critical point, the infrastructure needs of this State are vast and on the existing tax base cannot be funded. So what's the alternative?
Either the infrastructure is not built for the future, or secondly, you ask the State Government here to fund it and to run significant and sustained budget deficits and ring up a whole lot of State debt, or you ask the Federal Government to run up a whole lot of federal debt, or finally, you ask mums and dads out there to increase their taxes, either income tax or the taxes on small business.
We say that the sector of the economy most able to share a greater part of the burden for funding our infrastructure needs for the future is in fact our most profitable mining companies. Asking them to put a bit back in to the community in terms of the road, rail, ports and other infrastructure the community needs.
BEAUMONT: Well they would probably argue they do that already to a large extent through the taxes they do pay and the royalties they pay.
PM: Well you talk to them though in the communities up in the north west of this State, Simon, the story I get on the ground from a lot of folk is that once upon a time mining companies, well, tended to take on total responsibility for funding the infrastructure of towns, cities, regional developments. But the criticism I hear in various parts of the country over the last decade or so is that they've withdrawn that level of support, putting more pressure back onto local governments and onto State Governments.
And therefore what I'm doing is putting that out there in very stark and sharp relief. That is, we need to get on with the business of building our infrastructure for the future and to make sure that we are in fact getting those road, rail and ports built, prepared to boost the productivity of the mining sector and the overall wealth of our WA economy in the long term, that's what this is in large part about as well.
BEAUMONT: You say mining - point taken about fly in fly out, I agree with you there - you say that mining is the profitable sector, and many callers to this station say what about banks, what about pharmaceutical companies, what about the growth industry of internet sales companies, why not tax them as well to this level?
PM: Well I think when I was coming onto your program this morning I heard some bloke replayed from, was it Atlas Resources?
BEAUMONT: Yes, David Flanagan.
PM: Is that the bloke who said that iron ore is a infinite resource?
BEAUMONT: Yep.
PM: Well go to back to Geology 101, it's not, and the whole point of having a separate tax regime on minerals and resources, going back for more than a hundred years or more, is that these are non-renewable resources. They exist for a period of time.
The key challenge is how do you use them when they exist to build up wealth for tomorrow, build up wealth for the long-term future. That's why we're proposing to take some of those funds and put it into a WA infrastructure fund to build the State's infrastructure for the long-term. But also, boost the whole level of savings by making it possible for WA families to save more through the super changes I mentioned before; good for them, but also good for the pool of national savings, but also strengthening the whole broad base of this economy.
Many of the companies I've spoken to in the West have been punished pretty badly over the last 12 months or so because of the high Australian dollar losing competitiveness; the international student service providers for example, international tourism industry here in the West, what they are looking for is a bit of help elsewhere. How can you help them when the dollar is punishing them, a dollar pushed higher also by among other factors, the strength of our mining sector, how you can help those other companies is by bringing down their company tax, causing them to pay less tax and therefore helping them remain more competitive over time. That's why we're seeking to do this, it's a non-renewable resource and that's where the guy from Atlas, whatever his name is, Mr Flanagan, frankly is just not telling the truth.
BEAUMONT: Alright, so Prime Minister just to go briefly to where we started, and I did want to get a comment on our involvement in Afghanistan before you leave us this morning, to go back to where we started, you're over here to explain, not to reconcile or to back down?
PM: Simon, I very much respect the mining industry. Coming from Queensland the big mining State, I've known some of the leaders of our mining industry for not just the last two years I've been in office, I've known them for 10, 20 years, including the people that you mentioned just before, I've met them many, many times before. I have great respect for them and their achievements.
However, we're in the business of a tough consultation and negotiation with them. Obviously, as I've said, if you ask the big mining companies to pay more in tax, in order to fund better super and better infrastructure for the whole community, those mining companies will object. But I'm here to consult, to listen, listen respectfully to the views that are put, but we believe tax reform is really important for the country.
We're also here for a Community Cabinet meeting, to listen to what people in the local area have to say about their other needs which the Australian Government can support and that goes to basic things, like health, like education and all the sorts of things that mums and dads talk about round the dining room or the kitchen table.
BEAUMONT: Alright, yesterday we woke up to the terribly sad news that Darren Smith and Jacob Moerland, two young Aussie boys were killed in Afghanistan by an IED. In simple terms PM, what needs to happen for you to pull our troops out of Afghanistan?
PM: Well firstly Simon, given that we're having this discussion on radio with your listeners here in the West, again I would reiterate what I said yesterday - our condolences and our sympathies to the families of these two brave Australian soldiers, who are from are from the Brisbane based 2nd Combat Engineer Regiment. Your question goes to the future of our mission in Afghanistan. What we have said very clearly, is that our mission is very specific, and that is to raise the 4th Afghan Army Brigade so that it can take on security responsibilities for the province of Oruzgan, and having done that, our mission would then be complete, having secured that province for the future controlled by the local people.
We're in the process of doing that now, we're training up battalions which belong to that Brigade, but it's a very difficult and dangerous part of Afghanistan and all of your listeners I'm sure, would just spare a thought today for our brave women and men in uniform over there given the daily dangerous environment in which they operate.
BEAUMONT: So it's about this push, this surge into the southern provinces and if that is deemed successful by what, the Coalition forces, we may see a date of withdrawal announced?
PM: Well I go back to our mission, which is you can't just walk out of the place without locals being equipped to take care of the responsibility for the part of Afghanistan which we've been a responsibility for, and that means getting it right, it means training them the right way, that takes time. We've made really good progress on that so far and our troops are doing a fantastic job. It's also important to bear in mind though, Simon, that we can't allow under any circumstances Afghanistan just to become this sort of free-range training ground for organisations like Al-Qaeda and other global terrorist organisations in the future.
Remember already, these organisations have been responsible for the murder, through terrorist attacks, of about a hundred Australians already. Therefore we've got a national interest involved in making sure Afghanistan doesn't return to being their operating base for the future.
BEAUMONT: Prime Minister thank you for talking to us this morning, we appreciate your time.
PM: Thanks Simon for having me on the program.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be back in Western Australia for this, my 16th visit as Prime Minister.
On average, I've been in the West every two months since the last election.
And the reason is simple - WA is a driving force of the Australian economy for the 21st century.
WA is a major Australian gateway to the world.
This great international city of Perth.
Its great public universities.
Great centres of innovation.
Outstanding tourist areas like the Margaret River, which now rivals the vineyards of France.
WA's mighty mineral and energy fields which make such an important contribution to our nation's exports and our national economy.
Western Australia has always been characterised by the spirit of enterprise.
Always by a willingness to have a go.
And all Australians share a sense of pride in this State's nation-building achievements.
WA has had to overcome the tyranny of distance from the major population centres of the East.
And it has done so in spades.
WA has become Australia's gateway to India.
To China.
To Indonesia, and the rest of South East Asia.
This is a State with unlimited potential.
Today, I want to talk to you in a very concrete way about what we have done together so far.
And what we can do together for the future.
Always, my overriding goal is to build a stronger economy that delivers a fairer share for working families.
We came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better: better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools.
And the Government has made progress.
We've ended Work Choices.
And that means a fairer share for West Australian workers.
Let me give you as an example what that has meant locally.
More than a thousand employees work with the Activ Foundation in over one hundred facilities across Perth and regional towns like Albany, Busselton, Kalgoorlie and Manjimup.
These workers have challenging jobs providing respite care, home care and full accommodation services for people living with disabilities.
WorkChoices delivered them individual contract AWAs that gave them little or no access to penalty rates, permanency or personal leave.
Home care assistants were on as little at $15.53 per hour.
But now, under the Fair Work Act, the union and their employer have negotiated an enterprise agreement delivering them better pay, penalty rates, long service leave and access to permanency.
And relations between management and staff have improved.
The Government has also cut income taxes three years in a row.
Again, that has made a difference for around one million West Australian taxpayers who are battling cost of living pressures.
That means someone on $50,000 will now pay $1,750 less in income tax.
In other words, an 18 per cent tax cut - or almost one in every five dollars being paid in tax three years ago, is now back in their own pockets.
Nationally, we've boosted our investment in the health and hospitals system by 50 per cent compared with the previous government.
Here in the West, we've increased hospital funding for Western Australia by 55 per cent.
We're funding an additional 1,000 new nurse training places every year nationally.
We are raising the number of GPs being trained to 1,200 a year - more than double the cap imposed by Mr Abbott as Health Minister.
And we've investing to help the WA Government build new hospitals and health facilities, including:
- the new rehabilitation unit at Fiona Stanley Hospital; and
- a new general hospital to replace the existing Swan Districts Hospital.
- new GP Super Clinics in Cockburn, Midland and Wanneroo.
And we are improving the access and support for cancer patients in rural and remote parts of the state with two Regional Cancer Centre projects at Bunbury and outside the South-West, with a multi-site network of rural cancer centres to improve services in Albany, Northam, Narrogin, Geraldton and Kalgoorlie.
As a government, we're also delivering for West Australian families.
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, the Government did what we had to do to support jobs and keep our economy strong.
We acted decisively to support families here in Western Australia and across the nation - with an economic stimulus that injected $5.3 billion into the West Australian economy.
Almost every other advanced economy went into recession.
Australia didn't, and the reason we didn't was because as a 
nation, we all came together, governments, business, unions and local communities.
The Government took decisive action.
As a result, Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy in the world.
Although let's be clear - many families and small businesses are still doing it tough because recovery has been so uneven.
In the rest of the world, millions of jobs have been lost - as much as 16 million in the OECD.
But in Australia, since the global recession began in 2008 we've been creating jobs.
There's almost 225,000 more jobs today than there were then.
West Australian families were hit hard by the global recession - with the unemployment rate almost doubling in the 12 months after September 2008.
But since then, 25,000 West Australians are back in jobs and unemployment is now below the nation's average, at 4.7 per cent.
As a government, we know we haven't been able to do everything that we planned - and some things didn't go according to plan.
But we are determined to get on with the job.
We've got much, much more to do to keep the economy strong and deliver a fairer share for Australian families.
It all starts with maintaining a strong economy.
This is critical given the storm clouds gathering over Europe and the uncertainties of global financial markets arising from concerns over some European sovereign debt and public discussions of the risks of default.
Here in Australia, we're getting the budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time - to keep the economy strong.
Australia already has the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies.
Australia's budget will return to surplus ahead of all the major advanced economies.
Australia's debt levels are lower when compared with the debt levels of all the major advance economies - peaking at less than one-tenth the average of the major advanced economies.
In fact, because our economy didn't go into recession, our net debt will peak at less than half of what was projected 12 months ago.
By keeping the economy strong, tax revenues have held up better.
By keeping people in jobs, we've spent less on unemployment benefits.
That's all helped bring the budget back to black in three years - three years ahead of time.
We're also investing in schools, in training, and in universities, so our kids have the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
We're currently delivering Trades Training Centres for 102 West Australian secondary schools.
We're building better primary schools for our kids - with 2,985 projects across 1,067 West Australian schools.
New libraries, new science centres, new language centres.
We are investing in major building and infrastructure works at West Australian universities, including an Engineering Pavilion at Curtin University of Technology.
We're also investing in nation-building infrastructure for Australia's future after years of governments failing to invest enough in our roads, railways and ports.
The Nation Building Program has increased the national investment in West Australian roads and railways by more than two thirds.
This investment includes projects like the Great Eastern Highway upgrade.
We have committed to new Australian Rail Track Corporation infrastructure in the goldfields region.
We've committed to the development of Oakajee Port, to service mines in the Mid West.
Another example is the Fitzgerald River National Park project.
In early 2009, Premier Barnett came to me and expressed his concern about BHP Billiton's decision to close the Ravensthorpe nickel mine during the worst phase of the global financial crisis.
We resolved to work together to upgrade the roads and facilities within the Park - and support the local community.
The Australian and WA Governments are working together to rebuild and seal 80 kilometres of road, and develop a coastal walking trail from Bremer Bay to Hopetoun.
The project will support more than 80 local jobs.
And it means this outstanding natural asset will become an even more attractive destination for both domestic and international tourists.
And we are committed to making housing more affordable.
We have introduced the Housing Affordability Fund (HAF), to lower the cost of building new homes.
So far, the Government has funded 59 projects across Australia.
A quarter of these - 15 projects- are in Western Australia.
Last month, I visited the Newhaven Development at Armadale, where we are enabling the City of Armadale Council to relocate powerlines, build roads and drains, and install water, power, sewer and gas services.
In this one location, this will allow 59 home buyers on low and moderate incomes to buy homes for under $300,000, with a saving of almost $30,000 per home.
And as I said, this is one of fifteen housing affordability projects we are rolling out across WA.
We are also building around 2,000 social houses in WA, and carrying out repairs and maintenance on around 10,000 existing homes.
This is critical to tackling the shortage of public housing in this state.
And despite setbacks, we will continue to act on climate change.
We are expanding renewable energy so that by 2020, renewables will generate enough power to meet the electricity needs of all Australian households.
And with major investments in renewables like solar energy - building one of the world's largest solar power plants here in Australia.
This morning, I announced a significant investment here in Perth to support the renewable energy component of Australia's bid for the $2.5 billion Square Kilometre Array radio telescope.
As you know, this is a global, competitive project and we're up against South Africa.
Part of the bid criteria is to require the use of sustainable energy in the project.
So the Australian Government's $47.3 million investment announcement today is to build the nation's single largest geo-thermal facility to power the Pawsey High Performance Computing Centre in Kensington - as well as a full scale solar/storage/diesel energy generations system at the Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory.
This is one of dozens of renewable energy projects the Government is supporting across the nation - all part of the Government's continued response to climate change.
Each one of these investments matters because each plays a part in building a stronger economy that delivers a fairer share to working families.
I know that families in this State face cost of living pressures and there are times they are anxious about the future.
Today, I want to talk to you about that future and about the Government's proposal for a Resources Super Profit Tax.
But before I do, let's learn a lesson from history.
The first Premier of Western Australia, the great explorer and geographer Sir John Forrest, was determined to ensure that the great mining boom of the 1890s built enduring foundations for Western Australia's future.
That boom almost quadrupled the West Australian population in the decade from 1894.
Forrest supported mining but was often opposed by goldminers for his commitment to using the proceeds of the gold rush to leave a lasting endowment for the whole of Western Australia.
Forrest was determined to make lasting investments in 
public works such as railways, bridges, jetties, telegraph lines, pipelines, hospitals and lighthouses.
As his biographer Frank Crowley notes:
"Forrest wanted to make the prosperity of the present pay for the hoped-for success of the future... This did not endear him to goldminers."
But in the long run, those investments helped build this great State.
These are things to learn from the debate of a hundred years ago.
I understand that in this State there is community concern about the Resources Super Profits Tax proposal.
And I also understand that in certain quarters there is outright opposition to it.
And I am here today to listen to those concerns, and to respond to them.
This great State, this great nation has been big enough to work our way through these big debates before.
And I believe we will do so again.
Stripped of all the harsh words and loud noise this debate couldn't be simpler.
The fact is we have now entered a second phase of the mining boom that began nearly a decade ago.
The last mining boom delivered very large profits both in Queensland and in Western Australia.
But not all the working families of Queensland and Western Australia benefited from the boom.
People like Richard Dow, a 57 year old employee of the Activ Foundation - helping people with disabilities in a group home in High Wycombe in Perth, and getting by on an income of just $35,000 per year.
For hundreds of thousands of West Australians like him, the mining boom meant higher rents, bigger mortgage debts, and increased costs of living.
So it's important as a nation that in this boom we do better than in the last boom.
And particularly, we do better in making sure all West Australians get a fair share.
There's a core principle here - the people of Western Australia actually own these resources.
Furthermore, they are finite resources - you can only take them out and ship them off once.
That means acting now to get a fair share of the proceeds for Australian families.
It means acting now to get a fair share for Australian businesses so they can employ more workers.
And it means acting now to see truly first class infrastructure in the resource states.
There is a lot of sound but often not a lot of light in the public debate so far.
I believe that responsible sections of the resources sector now accept that the sector can pay more tax than at present.
I believe that there is also acceptance that a tax based on profit rather than a tax based on volume of ore extracted is a more efficient tax.
These are important foundations stones on which to build.
And in building on this foundation, the Government is determined to implement tax reform which is designed to build a stronger and more enduring foundation for long term economic growth.
The Government's vision for tax reform is to deliver tax benefits right across the WA economy.
Tax reform that will mean we can cut taxes to make Australian companies and small businesses more competitive - to help with their bottom line.
We will cut the company tax rate from 30 to 28 per cent.
Here in the West, at least 50,000 companies stand to benefit from such a tax cut.
Furthermore, we are cutting taxes for small business - all 2.4 million Australia-wide and more than 160,000 here in WA.
For those 160,000 small businesses and tradies here in WA, that means increasing their ability to instantly write-off the purchase of business assets from $1000 to $5000. This really helps, straightaway, with the bottom line for a small restaurateur buying an oven, fridge or a new computer.
These small businesses are an important driver of the Australian economy.
And cutting taxes for small businesses will increase their profits and give them more resources to invest in growth.
Reducing the company tax rate will make Australian businesses more competitive with others they compete with around the world.
The second key element of our reform package is to lift the Superannuation Guarantee for all Australian workers, from 9 per cent to 12 per cent over the next decade.
That means better super for 700,000 WA workers - a better and more secure retirement. 
This will boost our national superannuation savings pool by $85 billion over 10 years.
For a 30 year old on a wage of $50,000 today, that will mean an extra $108,000 in their super nest egg for retirement.
Good for the economy.
Good for working families.
Third, because of tax reform, we will fund investment in essential infrastructure that will help build a stronger and more productive economy.
These are the three key endowments that will come from the Resources Super Profits Tax.
They are benefits that will reach every Australian home and every Australian business.
And - more importantly - they will reach into the future, conferring advantage upon our nation through this generation and beyond.
Including here in Western Australia.
My vision for tax reform includes building a fund to invest in new infrastructure that is essential for West Australian families, WA communities and for this State's future.
To use some of the proceeds from the mining boom to build the road, rail, ports, and the infrastructure for the workforce that supports the mining industry, and which supports WA's future growth.
The Australian Government is determined to ensure that mining communities benefit from the resources boom.
It is not right that the regions and towns producing so much of Australia's wealth, should suffer from a poverty of investment.
I believe it is time to put something back into the mining communities, and those communities which support them, that give so much to Australia and make our national economy strong.
It is my intention that the lion share of the infrastructure fund generated by the Resources Super Profit Tax should go to the major resource states of WA and Queensland - consistent with each state's share of total mining production.
That is why the Government can announce today that we will be directing a bigger share of the proceeds of a resurgent resources boom back into resource states through critical infrastructure to boost our export capacity across the wider economy.
The Government will therefore establish a new $6 billion Regional Infrastructure Fund.
The Regional Infrastructure Fund will invest in projects with potential partner funding from States, private investors and/or local governments.
The Fund comprises $5.6bn of revenue from the Resources Super Profits Tax commencing in 2012-13, as previously announced.
Today I am pleased to announce an additional $400 million for the fund between 2010-11 and 2013-14.
These are funds that have already been provided for in the Budget.
This takes the total fund to be worth a massive $6 billion.
And it means investment can start now, to address our urgent infrastructure needs, rather than waiting for revenue proceeds of the Resources Super Profits Tax to flow.
Today I also can announce that Western Australia should expect more than $2 billion in additional infrastructure investment from this fund.
That means more rail, roads, ports, and other crucial infrastructure to support the workforce in critical mining regions and in communities that support mining regions.
Infrastructure Australia will be consulted on projects.
Projects will be selected based on the following criteria:
- Promote development and job creation in mining communities, and communities which support the mining sector;
- Provide a clear benefit to Australia's economic development, and to investment in Australia's resource or export capacity;
- Address potential capacity constraints arising from export production and resource projects.
For example, I know that Premier Barnett has identified the need to upgrade infrastructure for the Pilbara Cities of Karratha and Port Hedland - including airport upgrades, water and communications infrastructure, and land servicing.
Another demand is upgrades to road links to the expanded Perth Airport, which is also a critical part of WA's infrastructure to support the mining sector.
It is high time that the regions in this State that generate so much of our national wealth got their fair share of the proceeds of the mining boom - and that is what our tax reform plans will deliver.
Reforming the taxation of resources also constitutes a significant national economic reform.
The existing system of inconsistent state royalty taxes is inefficient and unfair.
It disadvantages mines with higher investment requirements and higher extraction costs.
And it imposes a tax before they've even made a dollar of profit.
The Resources Super Profits Tax will tax profits, not production.
And it won't impose one dollar of tax until companies have made a normal return on investment.
Typical resources projects earning less than 10 per cent returns will therefore pay less tax under this reform - as Treasury's analysis has shown.
Distortions in investment decisions will be reduced, and West Australian resource development will be promoted.
Long-term reforms are rarely popular - but as economists have confirmed, the long-term impact of this reform will be a stronger economy and a stronger mining sector.
It will mean a more secure and comfortable retirement for Australian working families.
In addition, the RSPT will ensure that mining companies pay their fair share for the resources they rent from the Australian people, including the people of WA.
So that when global commodity prices rise and profits boom - as they did earlier this decade, and are doing again now - Australians will get a fair share for our resources.
But if prices moderate and profits fall, as occurred last year, mining companies will also be paying less.
This reform is about efficiency, it's about economic reform, it's about a stronger economy and it's about West Australian families getting their fair share.
The Australian Government is determined to continue the job of building a strong economic future for Western Australia and ensuring West Australian families get a fairer share.
We're continuing with the job of getting the budget back to surplus and delivering better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools for West Australian families.
And we will ensure this great State of Western Australia and its mining communities benefit from the resources boom you are working so hard to deliver.
I come to this State keen to talk with miners, workers and members of the community about my plans for the future and the details of our Resources Super Profit Tax.
And I've come to this State keen to listen.
But I am sure that through our conversation it will become clear that we believe in and are driven by the same goals.
A resources boom that support all WA companies by lowering company tax.
A resources boom that benefits working families in Western Australia by boosting super.
A resources boom that delivers a $2 billion plus Regional Infrastructure Fund that re-invests that money in WA's future infrastructure needs.
A fair share too for mining companies that take on so much risk and have to strive to be the best in a competitive world.
A fair share for those who work in mining.
A fair share for mining communities that see the benefits but also feel the burdens of rapid economic growth.
A fair share for Western Australia.
And a fair share for the owners of the mineral wealth in the ground - and that's each of us and all of us.


The Rudd Government will invest $47.3 million in Western Australian to ensure solar energy and the nation's largest direct heat geothermal facility power Australia's bid to host the world's strongest radio telescope.
Two key pieces of infrastructure being built to support the Square Kilometre Array (SKA) bid will now have full-scale, clean energy generation systems because of the investment.
     * The Pawsey High-Performance Computing Centre in Kensington, will now use hot sedimentary aquifers to provide cooling and ventilation in the largest direct heat geothermal demonstrator in Australia at 10 MWth; and
     * The Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory will now use a full scale solar/storage/diesel energy generation system.
This investment has the potential to cut energy costs by $5 million per year, and reduce Australia's carbon emissions by 12,000 tonnes per year - the equivalent of taking 6,000 cars off the road.
The projects will also help the CSIRO, which owns or leases 1,000 buildings across 55 locations, achieve its goal to be carbon neutral by 2015.
The announcement will strengthen Australia and New Zealand's bid to host the mega-science $2.5 billion SKA radio telescope by ensuring it meets the international community's aspiration that sustainable energy be used for the project.
The Australian Government has demonstrated a strong commitment to the SKA bid with other important investments: $100 million for the SKA Pathfinder, $80 million for High Performance Computing for the SKA, and $25 million for an optical fibre backbone broadband link from Perth to Geraldton.
The SKA involves 20 countries and will have the potential for discovery ten thousand times greater than existing radio telescopes. It will explore a number of fundamental scientific questions such as the origin of the universe, the nature of dark matter and the existence of life in the universe.
Hosting the SKA will generate significant economic and scientific benefits, particularly to WA, including spin-offs in areas such as supercomputing, data transmission, renewable energy, construction and manufacturing.
The decision on the location of the SKA between Australia-New Zealand and Southern Africa is expected around 2012.
Construction on the energy generation projects is scheduled to commence in November 2010, be completed in August 2013, and support 62 construction jobs.
The $47.3 million Rudd Government investment is part of the Sustainability Round of the Education Investment Fund, which is seeing a $4 billion investment in world-leading, strategic tertiary education and research infrastructure.
To learn more about Australia and New Zealand's SKA bid - including access to images, animations and factsheets - visit www.ska.gov.au 


PM: It's good to be down here in Mandurah and good to be here with Alannah and good to be here with Wayne and a number of local workers. We've been talking about the needs of this community, the needs of infrastructure across WA and how do we fund that infrastructure for the future.
The Government is establishing a regional infrastructure fund. The Government is establishing a WA regional infrastructure fund of at least $2 billion, and that's to make a big difference with funding the roads, rail and ports that communities like this and WA overall need for the future. Because we believe that's the best way to make sure that WA gets a fair share of the profits which come from a mining boom, back into the infrastructure needs of WA - road, rail and ports - back into the infrastructure needs of local communities and also to help workers with better super.
I notice in the debate in the last 24 hours, that our political opponents are saying that mining companies provide all that infrastructure, that's what Mr Abbott I understand has said in effect on 6PR. I just think that shows how out of touch our political opponents are with reality. My experience of this State and my own state of Queensland is, in fact, mining companies have stepped back over the last ten to twenty years from providing all the infrastructure needs associated with their developments, let alone communities like this which support the mining industry in other parts of the State.
There's a pretty clear choice here. We, the Government, are saying WA deserves a WA infrastructure fund to support the road, rail and ports this great State needs for the future and the local communities of the future, and our political opponents are saying, nope, no one needs to fund that because the mining companies will look after it themselves.
I think the choice is very stark and it's very clear.
Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: The fund's $6 billion figure Prime Minister, how much money will you throw at this to buy your way out of your problem with the mining companies?
PM: Well Geof you may recall that at the time when the Government's tax reform proposal was launched in early May, we indicated then the size of this national fund. That was back in early May. What we've simply indicated today is where the distribution would go in broad terms for WA. So nothing has changed on that front. But what we have said very clearly is that if a State like WA is generating the wealth, then WA should get back its fair share in building its road, rail and ports for the future.
JOURNALIST: I know that you've said that you've got the mix about right and you've been consistent that but can you categorically state now some weeks into this debate that there will be no movement (inaudible) at the moment?
PM: Can I say Geof, as I said when you asked me this question four times in a row last time I was over here, that we think we've got the rate about right, that we're engaged in consultation now with the industry, on detail, on implementation and on transition arrangements. Our position on that hasn't changed one bit.
Wayne was talking I think to some mining leaders yesterday, I'll be talking to some today as I have been in the last week or so. Those consultations continue and we welcome the input of the mining companies.
JOURNALIST: Andrew Forrest has described this as a charade-
PM: Sorry I've just.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, Mr Forrest has described the Treasury process as a charade, he says there hasn't been any negotiation, he said that was made clear on day one with Treasury officials, that they said this tax, if you don't like it you'll have to change the Government.
PM: Mr Forrest can speak for himself and we're seriously engaged in a consultation process at multiple levels-
JOURNALIST: Is that what (inaudible)?
PM: At multiple levels, we're engaged in a consultation process at multiple levels with mining companies and that will continue.
JOURNALIST: The WA Government is considering launching a Constitutional challenge (inaudible) are you confident that you could (inaudible)?
PM: Well I think we're pretty well fortified in our position, but can I just say to Mr Barnett, who I think from the middle of the year, as I understand it, will be whacking WA families with an increase in electricity prices, a 20 per cent increase in electricity prices and Mr Barnett who says that he doesn't need any additional funding source to fund this State's infrastructure needs, I'd actually like to hear what Mr Barnett's views are on those questions.
Who is going to fund this State's future infrastructure needs? I've got a proposal on the table, it's called a regional infrastructure fund, I've said very clearly where the source of revenue would come from, that's our plan. What I hear from Mr Barnett is simply a series of complaints, I do not hear an alternative proposal.
Let's be very clear about it, what's Mr Barnett's plan for funding the future infrastructure needs of WA? I said last night, I think at the Community Cabinet at Como Secondary College, that the total number of infrastructure asks we had from across WA, through Infrastructure Australia, was $14.5 billion. Now that comes from communities right across this State - solid, hard economic infrastructure projects. So my challenge back to Colin is, how will you fund that? Where do you get the money from? How do you propose to do it? We've got a plan on the table about how we'd tackle it, what's his? I'd really to drill down into what is the alternative.
At the Press Club yesterday I threw that challenge down to folk from the Chamber of Commerce and elsewhere. Ok, you say we need extra infrastructure so what are the alternative sources? You want the State Government to go into debt? That's fine let Colin own that and he can raise whatever level of debt he wants. You want the Federal Government to go into debt to fund infrastructure? Do you want taxpayers like Peter, I was talking to before where's Peter gone, you want taxpayers like Peter to fund it through the extra tax he pays on income through working overtime? Or do you think mining companies, when they go through periods of super profitability when commodity prices are up, that they should pay some more?
That's the challenge I lay squarely at Mr Abbott's feet and Mr Barnett's feet, what's their answer to funding this State's, WA's future road, rail and port needs and I haven't heard that answer yet.
JOURNALIST: So is that a yes then?
PM: I've laid out a very clear challenge, and I'm very serious about that challenge, I haven't heard the answer yet, I'd be very interested to hear what the answer is.
Mr Abbott's answer this morning is, don't worry, no one needs to fund the infrastructure needs for the future, because the mining companies will do it. Well, I think I saw a bunch of pigs fly over at that moment, in fact they are still flying past.
I'd like to hear from Mr Barnett, let's be fair dinkum about this.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Let me be fair dinkum about this, let him be fair dinkum about this, how are you going to fund, Colin, your State's future road, rail and port needs? Mr Abbott, how are you going to fund WA's future road, rail and port needs? We have a plan for doing that, I don't hear the alternative.
JOURNALIST: Will you speak to Mr Barnett before you leave (inaudible)?
PM: Well can I say last time I checked there'd been no request in from Mr Barnett's office to catch up with me.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: So can I just go back to that point, if someone wants to have a yak they usually pick up the phone and say ok, let's have a yak. All I'm saying is that right now I'm engaged with mining companies and with working people about the impact of our tax reform proposal on them, and it's a good, continuing consultation; it's hard and it's tough, if Colin wants to have a yak, jump on the phone and we'll sort out a time, I'm pretty reasonable about all that. But I think you need to go back and ask the question, if he's serious about that, then where's the request, I haven't seen it.
JOURNALIST: Why do those negotiations happen through the media and not (inaudible) met him?
PM: Sorry, can I, I just want to take this question.
JOURNALIST: Don't you want to talk to him about things like the healthcare plan that he hasn't signed up to?
PM: As I've said, I said yesterday that I've probably talked to Colin more about this plan, prior to its announcement, than any other Premier in the country, I've spoken to Colin about other areas of Commonwealth/State cooperation probably more than most other Premiers in the country, and I'm always open to having continued conversations with him, I simply make the point, last time I checked, there'd been no request in for a further discussion.
WOMAN: Keep it up Kev (inaudible).
PM: The other thing I'd say is this, the key question here is, the key question here is one of working it through with the mining companies themselves. They are the people who are engaged in this, I know your question is and it draws on your loud intervention to my left, is the principal parties here are the Federal Government and the individual mining companies.
The principal question I'd like the WA Government to answer is how will the WA Government fund what they say are the huge infrastructure needs of this State in the future, how will they fund it? And I have not heard an answer to that from anybody. Geof?
JOURNALIST: On the boat people, there are 119 boat smugglers in WA gaols, they're Commonwealth prisoners, the State Government here wants you to (inaudible) and they want them to ship them out of our prisons and (inaudible)?
PM: You know something Geof the protocols governing these arrangements have been in place for a long, long time, well prior to the election of this Government, so I think it's important just to put all that into its proper context.
JOURNALIST: The Government, though, is going to be stopped paying for them from July 1 (inaudible)?
PM: Well as I've said these protocols have been in place for a long period of time and as I understand it were applied consistently in the period that Mr Howard was in office, and the then State Labor Government was in office as well.
JOURNALIST: So we're stuck with them?
PM: I think, I'm sure officials work their ways through these things as they've always done before, I simply make the point that the rules haven't changed and if the previous State Labor Government had those arrangements in place with the then Federal Howard Government, then I assume those protocols are reasonable for the future as well, but I'm sure officials will sort their way through it.
Folks I've got to get back to Perth, thanks for being out here this morning.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) back from Afghanistan?
PM: In the last 24 hours I've spoken with the families of both our soldiers who have lost their lives in Afghanistan. The first thing I'd say is that everyone, and I'm sure this happens anyway, but everyone needs to respect the grieving which these families are going through right now, it's intense and it's personal and everyone should give these families as much space as possible. The normal protocol is that, and we've applied this consistently in the past, is that the ramp ceremonies are attended by the Chief of Defence Force and the Defence Minister, we will apply those protocols in this case as well.
As to appropriate attendance at funerals, that's very much a question of what the families request and are comfortable with, but let's all bear these families in our thoughts and prayers today as the initial ramp ceremonies in Afghanistan and Al-Minhad are being conducted.
I spoke to John Faulkner the Defence Minister about this yesterday, I understand that the Defence Minister and the Chief of Defence Force are on hand to be at the ramp ceremony I think at Al-Minhad.
JOURNALIST: Will you attend the service if the family wants you to?
PM: Yeah as I've always done Geof, as I've always done, it's a question of being sensitive to what families want and where that's been the case in the past then I have been there and we would be respectful and responsive to those requests again.
Thank you very much.


HUTCHISON: Mr Rudd, good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Geoff, thanks for having me on your program.
HUTCHISON: On Lateline last night, Andrew Forrest said the consultation process over the super profits tax is a charade. And you talk of useful discussions behind closed doors, but where is the evidence of something really constructive here?
PM: Well, discussions are occurring with the mining industry, Geoff, at several levels. One is of course through the panel run by the Treasury in Canberra where we have I think probably around 100 mining companies, we speak directly with them about their individual circumstances. And on top of that, with some of the major mining companies who have also had very direct and fruitful consultations as well. That's ongoing, and as you mentioned before, Twiggy Forrest's comments, I'll be catching up with Twiggy again this morning, as I've spoken to him in the past as well.
HUTCHISON: Are you going to come out of that meeting smiling? Will both of you be shaking hands and saying 'there's the resolution we wanted'?
PM: Geoff, these are always tough negotiations. They're hard. And what's at stake here is a pretty important set of tax reforms for the future of WA and for the country at large. So, as I've said before, and I think you were at the Perth Press Club yesterday, when I spoke there. It's important that we spend the time that is necessary to work through the details, the implementation, transition arrangements, and take the time that is necessary. And I'd regard my discussion with Twiggy this morning as part of that process.
HUTCHISON: Mr Rudd, you gave the impression at that press club lunch- in the face of some audience cynicism, of course- that you are open to consultation. That things, these are my words not yours, that things appear to be moving swimmingly. Now, my question to you is why have we not heard one miner come out and say the same thing?
PM: They were your words Geoff, I'm glad you note that, and I certainly did not say that.
HUTCHISON: No, but you were very positive, and very effusive, and very encouraging. But everyone in the audience was, was thinking, well, where's the one mining executive to come out and say 'yes, it actually is happening this way'?
PM: Well, you've characterised my remarks in your own way. What I did say yesterday was that these consultations are continuing, they are substantive, and they are with a whole bunch of companies, and not all of them here in the west of course, of course there are others in various other parts of the country, a number of international firms as well. But the whole business of a consultation Geoff is not to go through the media and go to the detail of each of those negotiations that are underway, it's not the way in which you deal with these things. Step back from it all for a bit, I mean, these are important matters for the mining industry, very important matters. But also important matters for WA.
For example, what I did say yesterday in an announcement at the Perth Press Club, was that we'd be using part of the proceeds from this resources super profits tax to establish a WA Regional Infrastructure Fund of at least $2 billion. That's all about how we use some of the profits which come from the most profitable mining companies to funnel back into the state of Western Australia which has generated the wealth in the first place.
HUTCHISON: Can I ask, Mr Rudd-
PM: That's what we're on about here, and that's what's at stake in this.
HUTCHISON: And I think there was some surprise and some enthusiasm at the news of a $2 billion infrastructure spend for Western Australia. How long has that been part of this policy, though? Because for those who are sceptical, for those who say he'll do anything, say anything, that this is policy on the run, how long has that been part of the plan?
PM: Well Geoff, you'll recall that at the time that the tax reform plan of the Government was announced back in the early part of May, that we then announced that there would be a National Infrastructure Fund of around about $6 billion or thereabouts. What I simply confirmed yesterday was that the nature of the distribution of that fund would overwhelmingly benefit the major resource states of WA and Queensland. So in terms of consistency of policy, that's been our approach all around.
The question I'd though raise, and I did at a press conference down at Mandurah this morning, where I've been talking to local workers about the impact of what we're proposing for better super for working families, as well as better funding for infrastructure needs for the future, road, rail and ports is - there's always a big debate here in the west about how we fund this great state's future road, rail, port infrastructure needs. We put forward a plan by which how we fund that, and which is to funnel back into WA a huge slice of the wealth which comes out of the tax paid by our mining companies directly into the future infrastructure needs of WA.
Now, Mr Barnett, the Premier, is very critical of the tax reform plan that we have made. My challenge to him is, what is his alternative plan? Mr Abbott said yesterday that he believes the mining companies are paying all these infrastructure costs across the state. I think that's absolute nonsense. What's his alternative plan? Ours is on the table. Because this state needs to have investment back into the roads, rail, ports and other economic infrastructure to support the state's future development. Our plan's clear. I'd like to know what their alternative ideas are.
HUTCHISON: Prime Minister, is the risk of losing one or even two of the four seats you have in Western Australia a political price that you are prepared to pay to push this through?
PM: You know something Geoff? I believe that here in the west we are going to be highly competitive come the time of the federal election, whenever that is held. And that is because, first of all, we have a strong record of achievement here in the west.
Secondly, because the plan that we have put forward through tax reform also means that you're going to have a WA infrastructure fund to deal with the communities like I've just talked about before at Mandurah, where I've been this morning.
We've got great candidates in the field. I spent some time yesterday with Tim Hammond, our candidate in Swan. This morning with Alannah MacTiernan, our candidate-
HUTCHISON: -Sure, but will people care about how good your candidates are or will they listen to, you know, yesterday, and we were posing the question about whether that Langley Park protest was a broad-based community protest or whether the boss of a mining company said 'hey, all of you go town to the Terrace and hold this placard and wave it', but what troubles people is that, use this as an example: Stephen Moir, who's the head of the Motor Trades Association, spoke out saying 'we don't like the tax, we believe it would impact on every facet of the motor industry, whether it involves selling tyres, servicing the mining industry or renting cars.'
The community anxiety about this tax is that it's consequences will be felt way beyond the mining sector, particularly in Western Australia. That's what they need reassuring about.
PM: Well, let me just go to two basic points about the economy. The first is the Australian Government was criticised strong and loud, including here in the West, I've got to say, by the measures that we took to keep Australia out of recession through the global economic crisis, the global economic recession. Australia succeeded in that and the Australian Government did what it had to do in the face of huge criticism.
Just this morning, secondly, we've just had the unemployment figures released. Unemployment in Australia has gone down to 5.2 percent. What that means, compared with every other advanced economy in the world, almost, we are out-performing them, keeping the economy strong.
HUTCHISON: That is great news, but also, at the same time we're getting figures out about retail spending confidence, and that that's going through the floor.
PM: Well, can I go to the question of your overall point before, was the question of confidence in the direction of the economy. I'm going to two very basic measures, Geoff, in response to your question.
One is the strength of our performance as the only major advanced economy in the world not to go into recession, and that's because this Australian Government did what it had to do in the face of massive criticism of debt and deficit, etcetera.
Secondly, on unemployment, we now have about half the unemployment level of the United States, about half the unemployment level of many countries in Europe, and for your listeners this morning the difference there lies in, frankly, if we were generating the unemployment levels of so many other countries around the world you'd have another half a million Australians out of work, so on the basic direction of economic policy, this Government has a strong record of achievement.
Now, thirdly, how do you keep the economy strong for the long term? How do you build economic growth for the long term? So much of that lies in making sure you're building the infrastructure, the road, rail and ports we need for the future. We've got a plan for doing that, the regional infrastructure fund that I announced yesterday - for the West, $2 billion-plus.
HUTCHISON: But your argument is, isn't it, your argument here is that where else is the money going to come from if not from a tax like this?
PM: That's a core question on which I haven't heard an answer from either Mr Barnett, who constantly asks me for funding and then blames us if that funding is not forthcoming; then I say to Mr Abbott the same question and Mr Abbott says, and he's the alternative Prime Minister, he says 'oh, don't worry, this infrastructure will be funded by the mining companies.' I think that's just nonsense. We've got a clear plan.
HUTCHISON: Last question, Prime Minister. The Attorney-General of Western Australia, Christian Porter, is considering a High Court challenge arguing that there are constitutional measures that will prevent the imposition of this tax and that the WA Government is going to pursue it. Does that concern you?
PM: That's, as I said, I think, yesterday in response to a question at the Perth Press Club, the Commonwealth is advised that we're well fortified in our constitutional position on that. On the broader question of the WA Government, I just think it's time they were fair dinkum. They keep saying they need more infrastructure. We've put forward a way of funding it. Mr Barnett said earlier this year that mining companies were getting away with blue murder. He's no longer saying that. I think it's just time people were a bit straight up and down about this and they'd like to know how we are going to fund all the stuff that this great state needs for the future. We've got a plan for doing it.
HUTCHISON: Kevin Rudd will be meeting with Andrew Forrest a bit later this morning. Please come out of that meeting with both of you shaking hands, because I think the public need to see that, Mr Rudd. I think they, I know this has become a very media debate, that big statements have been made on both sides. You're spending $38 million of our money trying to prosecute your argument in what you call the national interest. The mining sector is spending millions of dollars in a public debate and most of us are scratching our heads and wondering of someone is lying to us or if someone is gilding the lilly, so I just wonder, perhaps you could convince Mr Forrest to come out and you could both shake hands and-
PM: -Well, Geoff, if that's the benchmark you're establishing for success or failure with this morning's discussion with Twiggy, then that's just an unrealistic benchmark. We are going to work our way through this systematically, in a calm and measured way over a period of time and I'll leave the histrionics to others to engage in.
The key question is to make sure we're getting the right outcome for WA, better super for WA families, better infrastructure for WA for the future, and to make sure that the mining companies are paying their fair share of the resources owned by the people of WA.
HUTCHISON: Prime Minister, thank you for talking with me.
PM: Thanks, Geoff. Bye.


Today, the Rudd Government announced a further $2.5 million to deliver a state-of-the-art stadium for Mackay.
Work on the stadium is now underway, and the new investment will ensure NRL-standard stadium lighting, seating on three sides of the stadium, a sealed car park, upgraded hospitality facilities, and a community room.
The community and council have been tireless in their efforts to get Mackay a first-class stadium and the Rudd Government is pleased to provide additional funds to ensure the stadium will be a source of pride to the people of Mackay.
The $2.5 million is in addition to $8.8 million committed by the Rudd Government during the 2007 election.
The investment stands in stark contrast to the Liberal-National Party's decade of silence on the stadium, and eventual $6.5 million promise during the last election.
When complete, the Mackay community will enjoy a 12,000-seat capacity stadium, improved parking and drop-off facilities including for disability access, and better security and walkway lighting.
The Rudd Government welcomes Stadium Mackay's intention to work with local skills and training organisations to provide extra opportunities for the youth employment in the Mackay region in the construction of these upgrades.
This package of works will be ready to commence in coming weeks, subject to a formal risk assessment of the proposal by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, and Local Government.
This project is a wonderful example of the Rudd Government partnering with local communities, to create jobs and build community infrastructure for the future.


The Australian Government today announced that Queensland should expect more than $2 billion in additional infrastructure investment from the new $6 billion Regional Infrastructure Fund.
This investment will reflect the importance of the major resource state of Queensland's contribution to total mining production in Australia.
The Regional Infrastructure Fund will invest in projects with potential partner funding from States, private investors and/or local governments.
For the first time, key regional Queensland mining towns like Mackay, Gladstone, Rockhampton and Townsville will be able to compete for a dedicated stream of funding for infrastructure.
More infrastructure money - just for mining towns and communities.
The recent announcement of an additional $400 million for the fund between 2010-11 and 2013-14 means that investment can start now, to address our urgent infrastructure needs, rather than waiting for revenue proceeds of the Resources Super Profits Tax to flow.
The Government believes it is time to put something back into the mining communities, and those communities which support them, that give so much to Australia and make our national economy strong.
That means more rail, roads, ports, and other crucial infrastructure to support the workforce in critical mining regions and in communities that support mining regions.
Infrastructure Australia will be consulted on projects and projects will be selected based on transparent criteria.
This builds on the record investment the Rudd Government is making in Queensland infrastructure, which is $8.6 billion for transport infrastructure over the Nation Building Program to 2013-14.


KOCH: Good morning to you Prime Minister. Look, what really-
PM: Good morning Kochie.
KOCH: Gets my goat up with this sort of thing is that, during the financial crisis, we all came to the help of the banks, the Government- which is us- let them trade on our AAA credit rating so they could raise capital cheaply. The Government, which is us, guaranteed deposits. And this is what they do to us.
PM: Well you're right Kochie. There's been far too much gouging in the past on bank fees and charges. That's absolutely right. And if you look at that most recent data, by the way, no consolation to your viewers, the level of gouging has slowed a bit, would you believe, from where it was in the past. But here's the good news.
From the first of July, we have new, tough national credit laws covering all financial institutions, which enable you out there as a member of the public to actually take action with a bank on the basis of unfair or exploitative fees and charges. Up until now there's been no legal basis for doing it. As of 1 July this year there is.
KOCH: Alright. Because, you know, the super tax on mining profits has got everyone's attention at the moment. Have you ever thought of sticking one on the banks if they gouge us too much?
PM: Well what worries me of course with sticking external charges on banks is the immediate flow-through to consumers, and the cost of your mortgage, the cost of your car loan and those sorts of things. On the question of the resources super profits tax, that in fact is about super profits being earned on the basis of what our mining companies, the most profitable of them, sell to the rest of the world. In other words, the flow-through impact on prices here is negligible. And the key thing there is getting a fairer share back for all working families through better super.
But on the bank fees and charges, you're right. And people are right to be angry about that. That's why this Government has changed the law. And I would really urge your listeners- sorry, your viewers- to get a hold of the information on the Government website about 1 July, about your new rights to tackle your bank on exploitative fees and charges. And secondly, for the first time, the Australian Government from 1 July is also taking over total regulatory responsibility-
KOCH: Okay.
PM: For the entire credit union and rest of those institutions, rather than being fragmented across the country.
KOCH: Alright, we might do a segment over the next couple of days next week on what your new rights are going to be and how you can take on the banks. Speaking of the super profits tax on miners, though, you've had some pretty narky responses from the miners themselves. Today, business commentator Terry McCrann reckons you're going to announce major changes to the proposed super profits tax, either today or tomorrow. Are you going to do that?
PM: I think Terry's pretty wide of the mark on that. Can I just say, I've seen in some of the newspapers this morning, it says we were on the verge of a deal. The other newspapers are saying there'll never be a deal. You know, the reality probably lies somewhere in between all that Kochie. I think we've got weeks and probably months of consultation yet with the major mining companies.
We'll work our way through the detail. I've had some good discussions with heads of mining companies, both BHP and Twiggy Forrest and others. That continues with our Resources Minister, Martin Ferguson. The key thing is to make sure we get a fair return for the mining companies, and a fair return on the resources owned by all Australians, in the form of better super.
KOCH: Okay, you just said that opinion today is from one end to the other, and the truth will lie in the middle. So that tends to indicate you are prepared to compromise, and you will compromise?
PM: Yeah but Kochie, what I have said from day one is that we think we've got the rate of this tax about right. And we've also said we'd consult with industry on detail, on implementation, and generous transition arrangements. And as I've just said, with all of the mining companies we've met- come and tell us where your projects are up to, how can we help in terms of those transitional arrangements-
KOCH: They're certainly telling you.
PM: Yeah, but the bottom line is, have you ever met a mining company, Kochie, who says he wants to pay more tax? Well, our view is, it's time that the most profitable companies, who gain super profits when commodity prices go through the roof, it's time some of those super profits came back to help with bringing down the company tax rate, helping small business with big tax breaks, and better super for working families, and investing in infrastructure.
KOCH: Okay, alright. As long as we don't lose jobs, as long as we don't lose exports. Let's take a question from a viewer now-
PM: Well, look at the unemployment figures yesterday.
KOCH: Yeah, I know, they're pretty impressive. Vicky runs a prawn trawler on Queensland's Sunshine Coast. She has a question for you. Vicky, you've got the Prime Minister's ear.
PM: Sure.
VIEWER: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Hi Vicky, how are you?
VIEWER: I just wanted to- good. Our family owns and operates a fishing vessel out of Mooloolaba here on the Sunshine Coast, and we'd just like to know, these further fishing grounds that you want to close, why do we need these new Commonwealth marine reserves? It's not only going to impact on our commercial fishermen and our industry, but the land-based operations that rely and supply the commercial fishing industry, their survival.
Also, the consumer, they're the ones that are really going to miss out. You and your family, Kochie and his family, they're- there's not going to be the local seafood available. With these closures, the fresh seafood's going to be gone. You're not going to be able to enjoy your fresh seafood every week.
KOCH: Alright, let's go back to the Prime Minister.
PM: Is it Vicky, or Lisa? Vicky. I know where you are, Mooloolaba. I learnt to swim down at the beach at Mooloolaba, and I certainly know where the trawlers operate from down at the Mooloolaba boat harbour. Now, the fishing industry's vital for Australia's future. Recreational fishing is also really important for families right across the country. The key question is to get the balance right. You see, as you know, as someone engaged in the industry, there is a whole concern out there about maintaining the overall health of our fish stocks right around Australia.
And you will see, for example, there's been debates recently about the supply of bluefin tuna and lobsters in various parts of the country. The key thing is to get this balance right. There will be a process which is gone through with all of the commercial fishers and recreational fishers around the country to make sure we get that balance right. Let me tell you, we are huge supporters of the continuation of the commercial fishing industry. I'd really encourage you to get engaged, through your organisation, with the Federal Government and the state Government on how we get that balance right, because your interest lies in making sure we've got enough fish stocks for the future as well, for you, and for all those people who like to dip their line in on the weekend, purely recreationally.
KOCH: Alright Vicky, thank you for that. Watch out for the Prime Minister the next time he takes a dip in your area, hopefully not in budgie smugglers. Now before we let you go Prime Minister, Harry Kewell's groin has been a concern for the entire nation ahead of the World Cup. A South African witch doctor- now, listen to this, this is important- a South African witch doctor says Kewell needs a get well message from Australia's Prime Minister so he can be healed in time to play for the Socceroos. This is not the BER, this is not the ETS, this is not the GFC, this is way more important. It's the KGC, a Kewell groin crisis. So, can you send Harry a message?
PM: You know Kochie, sometimes there's things that sort of catch you on the back foot in politics. And being provided advice by a South African witch doctor to fix Harry Kewell's groin is just, kind of, right out there.
KOCH: Yep, yep.
PM: Can I just say, I reckon Harry Kewell wouldn't want me anywhere near the fixing of his groin. I think there's a whole lot of professional people who can do that. But let me just say this. Forget the witch doctor, let's get on with the game. And I think Harry's fantastic, and I wish him the absolute best- and I'll be out there watching on Monday for the first game.
KOCH: Okay, alright, I think that was a get well message. I think that'll do it. You can talk to the witch doctor about putting a spell on some, a spell on some mining gurus or something like that. We'll leave that up to you. Alright, you have a good weekend, thank you for that.
PM: By the way, someone said here this morning- someone said here this morning- I was supposed to fix his groin, not just send a message. So, I'm just sending him a cheerio.
KOCH: Right.
PM: I think it's the safest thing to do. It's a family program.
KOCH: Okay, yeah. We wouldn't want to give you the tube of dencorub. Alright, thank you very much for that.
PM: No way, no way. 


PM: This is about something really important, it's about paid parental leave. This is a reform which we as Government and as a nation have been waiting for, for a long, long time. And it's now down to crunch time in the Australian Parliament. It's now down to crunch time in the Australian Senate and we can't delay any longer. We must see this legislation through. Because this is a big reform for families, mums and dads right across the country.
It's something which makes it a bit easier to juggle having kids and getting back to work if that's your choice. So can I just thank the folk who are here with us today with Sharon- Ilana and Sharon as well, for pulling together what I understand is 25,000 signatures, that's a lot of signatures, and these are from mums and dads right across the country who want to see this change. So we have a very simple message for the Senate, which is get out of the road guys, just get on with it. This is really important, this is really important, it is so key to making life easier for working families.
As a Government we'll be doing a few other things on that front as well. It took us a long time to do, but frankly, putting a nail in the coffin of WorkChoices was so important because on the key question of the money you bring home in the pay packet, making sure you've still got penalty rates and basic conditions is so important. That's basic. The other thing is that as of 1 July we're bringing in for the third year, three years in a row, of tax cuts for working families as well for someone on $50,000 a year. It's important to just bear a moment thinking about the impact of these tax cuts on someone on that level of income. Over the three years it adds up to about an 18% cut in tax, something in the order I think of about $1750 less in tax.
So what are we trying to do through all these measures? Getting rid of WorkChoices on the one hand and protecting penalty rates, cutting taxes for working families, nearly a 20% cut in those taxes, bringing in paid parental leave, delivering on the childcare tax rebate which we increased from 30 to 50, delivering also on basic things like the Education Tax Refund. What links all of these things? What links them is making it easier for working families to chart their future and to manage their day to day, their week to week, the month to month challenge of balancing the family budget.
So as a Labor Government, as an Australian Government, we are very proud of this achievement, very proud that we pulled together a paid parental leave scheme which is affordable, which is funded across the country in the proper way and which goes to those people who need it.
So can I say to all those who've been out there very busily collecting petitions, thank you, and may the burden of these petitions weigh heavily on the shoulders of every Senator in the two weeks that lies ahead. Thanks very much.
MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. If I could just say a very, very warm thank you to Sharon Burrow and everyone who's been involved in collecting these 25,000 signatures on this petition which we will present to the House of Representatives this afternoon. This really is a roll call of those Australians who want to see paid parental leave introduced into our country. We have waited decades for the introduction of paid parental leave, and this petition is a demonstration of all the people who want to see paid parental leave exist for mums and dads so that they can spend more time with their newborn babies.
Whether you're a retail worker, whether you're a rail or a bus driver, whatever sort of job that you have we want to make sure that you're able to spend those critical early months with your newborn baby. I do also want to say to all of the Senators, now's the time, now's the time to vote for this legislation to make sure that it will be available for parents from the first of January next year. For the first time, Australia will catch up with the rest of the world. For the first time we'll have a paid parental leave scheme in this country. Eighteen weeks paid at the federal minimum wage, paid for by the Government, paid for and budgeted for, we know that this is something that parents have waited a very, very long time for.
I do also want to say that this would not have happened unless we'd had support from this Prime Minister. We've had twelve years of a previous Government, including Tony Abbott, who said that it would not have happened over his dead body. By contrast we have a Prime Minister who has made sure that we are in the position we're in today, on the brink of introducing the first paid parental leave scheme into this country and I thank him for that.
BURROW: Well this is an historic week. I know working women right across Australia know, families know, that finally justice for mums and dads at that point where they are most vulnerable, they're excited to have a child but they're fearful of paying the bills. Finally, thanks to Kevin Rudd, to Jenny Macklin, to Tanya Plibersek, we actually have within our grasp four and a half months of income. Two thirds of Australian women who have a baby today have zip, zero, nothing, not one dollar in their pay packets. We know that the stories like Ilana Crawford will tell you of her partner losing his job during the global financial crisis, of her having to go back when Sam was just a few weeks old and the trauma and the difficulty of that first twelve months. That is writ large across Australia.
And of course, if the Senate does not pass this Bill, it will continue to be an injustice. So we say to all of the Senators, don't you dare, don't you dare deny working Australians, the parents of Australia, four and a half months of income and the security that Kevin Rudd was prepared to back. This is a day when we know that this week we can make history. Thirty years of campaign by Australian women. It's long overdue. And frankly I'm excited about it, people right across Australia are excited about it, we've got 25,000 petitions gathered in just the last few weeks where people say to all the Senators, to the Liberals, the Greens, the independent Senators, pass the Bill. That's our message. Pass the Bill, stop playing politics, give women four and a half months of income security so they can enjoy the birth of their child and along with them, their partners and families.
I've got two wonderful women here with me today, Ilana Crawford, I'll tell you her story in a minute, but Sharon Manser, Sharon has step children- she doesn't have children of her own- but she has five step children, that's pretty amazing. But she was so incensed that women didn't get equity in this matter, that some women got paid maternity leave and others didn't, that she personally went out and got 1000 petitions signed. So Sharon, this is Sharon, she's just done an amazing job and we are very grateful. Ilana on the other hand, I'm going to ask, if you can manage to both give her petitions to the Prime Minister and have the baby, and in fact tell us her story. So, come on forward.
CRAWFORD: Basically when I was, I changed jobs and I fell pregnant shortly after starting a new job. I therefore was unemployed for about eleven months before I had Samuel. I was not entitled to a single cent from anyone or anything, I was not even entitled to get my job back if I so chose. My employer basically said to me that he would allow me to come back after three months in order to maintain my product knowledge, but I would have to make myself available within three months of Sam being born to go back to work.
Consequently, my husband lost his job, and I was in a position where I had to go back to work full time to support the family, to stop us from losing our house, and I just don't think we can afford to wait any longer for a paid parental leave scheme. It made a huge difference for the women in my situation and a lot of women on lower income. We can't afford not to have it, we are in a position where, as Australia, we can catch up to the rest of the world with this situation, and put ourselves in line with all the other countries and we just can't afford to wait any longer for it.
BURROW: And Jenny, Sharon has some petitions for you as well. Do you mind if we share them around? And we've got a few left over to deliver to Tony Abbott and other people round the House. So this is indeed a terrific day, Prime Minister, Jenny, women are very, very grateful, even women like us Jenny whose kids are now grown up, we know we campaigned for a long time with a lot of other women, and it's long overdue, so thank you Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) being offered by Tony Abbott, wouldn't you like more?
BURROW: Oh look, this is a hoax frankly. If Tony Abbott denies working women and their families four and a half months of income because he wants to play politics, when the business community frankly will never pay- but secondly, in this case I'm on their side, don't deserve to pay. They've already bargained with union members and their unions for paid maternity leave. This scheme will add to that. So they will be very well off those women who are union women, we know that, we don't expect a business to double-dip. Tony Abbott knows they won't. I think he's actually secretly assuring them that he won't, and it's a hoax. So four and a half months within our grasp, the time is now.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, despite the Coalition's misgivings, they've already said they're going to wave this through the Senate, why the feisty words to the Senate?
PM: Well, we've actually learnt to be a bit distrustful of how these things are handled in the Senate. We had assurances before on things like an emissions trading scheme and they fell apart, and there's been other negotiations which frankly have not been honoured in the Senate before. Speak to Minister Albanese about that. who actually handles House business and speak to those who handle Senate business, in terms of the number of undertakings which have not been honoured. That's why we are very plain about this, the community wants this reform. It must be delivered. Rather than people engaging in, shall I say, a bit of doublespeak on it.
To answer also the question that was raised before about the differences between the two proposals. This- as Sharon's just said- is funded by the entire Australian community through the taxpayer. It is done at a reasonable and modest level. It actually targets those people who need it. We're not in the business of actually putting a tax on business in order for them to fund $75,000 payments to millionaires. We're just not in that business. We don't think it's right, we think it's wrong. On the question of tax, we actually are standing more broadly for bringing down the company tax rate by two percentage points. Our opponents are for bringing the company tax rate up two percentage points for those above five mil. It's a pretty clear contrast.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, why is your leadership in crisis?
PM: Well that's a point of language which you have used and used which is dramatically consistent with the dress which you have chosen today. It's a great tie, it's a nice hat, I like it a lot. Can I just say this on the question which you've just pointed to- you know, reform is a tough business. Reform is a hard business. It's a controversial business, and the key thing in the reform process is for Governments to maintain their nerve and for Governments to maintain their unity. This Government is doing both, and we'll get on with it.
We intend to apply to this the same discipline that we'd apply as we negotiated our way through financial crisis, when many, many, many- including all of those opposite- attacked us daily over the measures that we took. We saw the country though that. We've seen the country though other challenges. And we'll work our way through this challenge as well. Thanks folks.


Prime Minister Rudd will make an overseas visit from 25 to 29 June, attending the G20 Leaders Summit in Toronto, and making a bilateral visit to New Zealand.
In Canada, the Prime Minster will attend the Toronto G20 summit, meet bilaterally with a number of G20 leaders, and engage with senior Canadian and Australian business representatives.
The G20 has proved to be a vital mechanism to manage global economic challenges. At the Toronto summit, G20 Leaders will be focused on an agenda designed to pave the way towards stronger, more sustainable and balanced global growth. Leaders will also focus on the current challenges to fiscal sustainability in some parts of the world.
The Prime Minister will visit New Zealand on 29 June. During the visit, the Prime Minister will hold talks with Prime Minister Key, Cabinet Ministers and senior business representatives. Prime Minister Rudd will also address the New Zealand Parliament. He will be the first foreign leader to be accorded this honour. 


PM: The Government is committed to a program of reform. The Government is committed to the continued reform of our economy, that's why we're engaged in a big debate on tax reform right now and we'll continue to prosecute that debate. We're also involved in the reform of our education system, quality reforms within the school system, the national school curriculum as well as our quantitative investments in the system as well.
We're also engaged in the business of health and hospitals reform and if the planets align the Parliament will agree to another reform today, in terms of paid parental leave. This would be a significant reform for the nation and parents, mothers, have been waiting for this reform for a long, long time and we look forward to the conclusion of the Senate's deliberations and hope that those deliberations will end positively.
What we're here to talk to you about now is another item of reform which will be before the Parliament this week, this sitting fortnight and here I speak about welfare reform. The Senate will shortly debate the Government's welfare reform Bill. This legislation is about making welfare work. By encouraging individual responsibility and fighting passive welfare. By helping people move from welfare dependence in into work, into education and into training and making sure that welfare payments are spent in meeting the needs of kids.
This is an important reform, not just for the nation at large but also for the most disadvantaged Australians who depend on our safety net. Welfare should not be allowed to become a way of life in Australia. Encouraging welfare dependency helps nobody, least of all the families concerned. Also taxpayers have a right to expect that welfare payments are also part and parcel of how we keep our economy strong as well and that means investing, wherever possible, into the skills and training needs of our workforce, particularly for our young people.
Therefore this is about rights and responsibilities, that's proper welfare reform. We intend to fight passive welfare and link income support more strongly to school attendance, to study and work and to the proper care of children. There's no escaping from the fact that at present, when you've got a history of welfare dependence within families, we lack strong incentives to get those folk out of the cycle of welfare dependency. These incentives are not in place right now.
But from 1 July this year, depending on the deliberations of the Senate, these welfare reforms will commence in the Northern Territory and across the entire community within the Northern Territory. They will extend the benefits of income management to indigenous and to non-indigenous people in need of financial structure and protection. They will ensure more welfare is spent also on life's essentials like food, like clothing and rent and less goes to alcohol and to drugs. And they will support and encourage families to make positive decisions about the critical things in life including a child's education, their health and their nutrition.
The critical thing about these reforms is that they are not restricted to indigenous communities in the Northern Territory. What will happen with the passage of this Bill is that they will extend to entire community within the Northern Territory and that is why this is an important reform for the future of the nation.
Therefore the challenge is pretty simple. We're either going to be fair dinkum about welfare reform in this country, which means the Senate passing this legislation this fortnight so it can come into effect as of the first of July. No delays, no stuffing around, get on with it. This is an important reform for the future for the nation, an important welfare reform for those who need additional incentives to break welfare dependency.
Before I take your questions I'd like to ask Jenny to add to the detail and then I'm happy to take your questions.
MACKLIN: Thanks Prime Minister. It is now in the final stages of passage through the Parliament. The Paid Parental Leave legislation has been partly debated this morning and we hope it will be finally resolved in the Senate this afternoon. If it is finally agreed to in the Senate this afternoon this will be a very significant reform for Australian families.
Families, mums and dads, have waited decades for Paid Parental Leave, for Australia to finally catch up with the rest of the world. The rest of the developed world knows that Paid Parental Leave is good for families, good for mums and dads, good for babies and also good for business. So finally Australia looks like catching up with the rest of the developed world.
If the legislation goes through the Senate, this legislation will mean that Paid Parental Leave will start in Australia on the 1st of January next year. Parents will be able to get access to 18 weeks of Paid Parental Leave paid at the national minimum wage. This is a very, very significant reform.
The second area of reform is in the area of welfare responsibility. We know that there is no dignity, no dignity in a life on welfare. And what we want to do is make sure that we work with welfare recipients to make sure that their welfare payments are spent in the interests of children, are spent to encourage young people to go out and get the training and jobs that will mean that they will have a better life.
This welfare reform legislation is also very significant. For the first time we will see the roll out of income management across an entire Territory. It will introduce a non-discriminatory approach to income management, it will apply to people who have been long term beneficiaries of Parenting Payment, or Newstart, to make sure that welfare is spent responsibly. To make sure that parents spend their welfare in the interests of their children, to make sure that children go to school. These are very, very significant changes and we look forward to the Senate support.
PM: Over to you folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister because no one is starting I will. I wanted to ask you about health very quickly. Do you remember making a promise to a doctor in Hornsby by the name of Richard Harris when you visited earlier this year? You told him you would go back and tour the hospital with him. He's contacted you on seven different occasions directly and he's had no response.
PM: Well first of all when it comes to the implementation of our health and hospital reform program, that takes effect from 1 July. You're right I made a commitment to go back to the hospital at Hornsby and I'm aware of the communications and I'll be doing so, post 1 July when our reforms begin to take effect.
Secondly if anyone seriously suggests that the Government has not been serious about consulting local hospitals around this country on the implementation of health and hospitals, frankly, they're just wrong. We had about 107 hospitals visited I think around the country by myself and health minister and her Parliamentary Secretaries and the Minister Assisting. I visited some 20 to 30 of those myself around the country and I look forward to getting back to Hornsby.
JOURNALIST: You said you had an open door policy when you became Prime Minister, he's contacted you on seven different occasions, he's a respected surgeon, it's a local hospital, why haven't you gone back?
PM: There are 756 hospitals in Australia. I imagine I've got a fair bit of correspondence from each of them. I look forward to getting to the Hornsby Hospital soon. I'm unaware of the seven items of correspondence that you speak to.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Minister I'm just asking this is obviously for the Northern Territory, are there plans to roll it out to the rest of Australia after you see how it goes in the Northern Territory?
MACKLIN: What we've had made clear is at the end of 2011, after the end of 2011, we will do a very extensive evaluation of the impact of the introduction of income management across the Northern Territory before we extend it to other parts of Australia.
But certainly from the evidence we have so far in the Northern Territory, income management is a very useful tool for making sure that food is put on the table, making sure that welfare money is spent in the interests of children and not on alcohol and drugs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister do you concede that the RSPT as it's currently designed in dead in the water but once you've modified it, done a couple of carve outs here, there and everywhere it will be barely unrecognisable to what's been presented?
PM: Thank you for that very loaded question. The bottom line is this, we're in the business of tax reform, it's a tough debate with the mining industry. We've outlined our framework on the second of May, we're in the business of a tough and hard set of negotiations, and just make a broader point, who is on the side of tax reform here? The Government, the MCA, Mitch Hooke, my best mate, together with a whole bunch of other people out there, Marius Kloppers, Twiggy Forrest, I could go through the list of those who say we need reform in way in which the resources industry is taxed.
There are two people who are opposed to reform that I have seen around the nation and they tend to walk in lock step these days; Tony Abbott and Clive Palmer. They are the two that I see out there opposed to a reform which is based on profits. Can I say, we are in the business of reform, the industry is calling for it, we are determined to get our negotiations with the industry right. We also want to see the product of that reform which is; better super for working families, tax cuts for Australians businesses, and on top of that, better investment in our infrastructure. And the debate and the negotiation continues. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Pension groups are concerned pensioners will be caught up in your new welfare reform system. Can you guarantee that pensioners will not be subjected to quarantining of their income?
MACKLIN: I think their concerns are driven by a scare campaign that's being run by the Greens, so I thank you for the question so I can make it very clear. We will not be applying income management automatically to aged pensioners, or disability support pensioners except in two instances; where the child protection authorities recommend that it would be in the interests of the child for a person's pension to be income managed, so the person would have to be caring for the child and there would need to be evidence of neglect of the child.
And the second instance would be where there is evidence of considerable vulnerability by of the pensioner. So it may be where the pensioner is being abused by a relative, harassed for money, humbugged for money. They're the instances where it would apply to a pensioner. I think it is very important that we get this cleared because the vast majority of pensioners do do the right thing. Of course, are able to manage their money. Pensioners may choose to participate in income management and if the experience in Western Australia is anything to go by, I think we will see pensioners putting their hand up to be voluntarily income managed because it will help them look after their money.
JOURNALIST: In some cases pensioners will be forced?
MACKLIN: Only where there are instances of child protection needing to step in or where the pensioner is particularly vulnerable to harassment or humbugging.
JOURNALIST: The generous transitions arrangements, do they include consideration of the taxing point and also treating different industries, different sectors and different minerals differently, is that part of what the transition involves?
PM: Well let me restate very plainly what the Government has said from the beginning. We think we've got the rate of this tax about right. We are consulting and negotiating with the industry about detail, about implementation and about generous transition arrangements. One the different qualities and different circumstances of, let's call it, sections of the industry, it's quite plain that we will be considering with different parts of the industry their respective requests for transitions arrangements which may be particular to their industries. Whether we respond positively to that is a separate matter, but that's currently the consultation negotiation which Martin Ferguson is directly engaged in.
This one here, then it's over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you've made much of the need for working families to have better superannuation entitlements but in the Senate an hour or so ago the Government Senators voted against adding superannuation to your paid parental leave scheme. Is it your goal in the longer to have superannuation attached to that paid parental leave scheme?
MACKLIN: We've made it clear that we will have a proper review of the Paid Parental Leave scheme within a couple of years and that's going to be the result of an amendment that we're moving in the Senate that will be part of the legislation that this review will be undertaken, and the issue of superannuation will be part of that review.
PM: I am in complete concord with the Minister. Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister could I just clarify as far as the RSPT is concerned, could I just clarify, what you're talking about here in terms of the negotiations with the industry are that you've got your overall design parameters, 40 per cent, uplift factors and so forth in place, what you're prepared to negotiate on is things like taxing points and particular transitional arrangements like that, so that you are not at this stage conceding any of the fundamental design principles of the tax?
PM: Laura I do not intend, through the media, to engage in any public debate about elements of detailed implementation and generous transition arrangements. If you were the Government engaged in negotiations with industries as large, big, muscley, and from time to time as ugly as parts of the mining industry, you'd actually manage those negotiations privately, confidentially and with them individually, that's what's going on at the moment. The media is not the means by which you go through each of those points. We're serious about generous transition arrangements, we're serious about the individual circumstances of firms and of projects. And by virtue of what's gone on with both the Treasury consultation panel and the subsequent negotiations involving myself and Martin and Wayne is that we're getting to grips with each element of that. But we will not be engaged with a detailed blow by blow account of elements of generous transition arrangements through the media.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister your best mate Mitch Hooke today said that as far as his companies are concerned the negotiations aren't within a bulls roar of what they want, he's looking for revenue neutral reform and of course what's on offer from Tony Abbott is complete revenue neutrality as far as they're concerned. Are you resigned to go into the election with at least the MCA members resolutely opposed to what's on offer from you?
PM: Well this Government's on about the hard business of reform, the hard business of tax reform, this is a tough debate we're engaged in. Secondly, of course Mitch Hooke would go out and say I don't want to pay more tax. The only person who agrees with him but goes further than that is Tony Abbott who says that Mitch and his mates are already paying too much tax. We don't have that view. I don't think anyone else really across the country has that view either. We intend to prosecute this reform, we intend to get it right, that's why we're engaged in detailed consultations with individual firms. I presume one of the things which upsets Mr Hooke is the fact that we are engaged in individual consultations and negotiations with the firms that count, the firms that are out there making money, the firms that are out there employing people, that are doing real projects rather than going to an individual who seeks to represent them.
JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to go to the election Prime Minister with such opposition from the companies that you're talking about?
PM: We're prepared to do what is right in the national interest, and that means getting tax reform right. These debates have always been hard in the past, they will be in future, so we intend to prosecute this reform debate. Remember there's two clear polarities here: us on the one hand saying tax reform for the mining industry is the right thing to do, a volumetric, a production based tax for the mining industry is not efficient, a profits based tax is efficient, we believe that, Mitch Hooke believes that, Twiggy Forrest believes that, Marius Kloppers believes that, a whole bunch of other people in the mining industry believe that. The only person opposed to that is Mr Abbott and Clive Palmer who has a particular relationship with the Liberal National Party, which you're all familiar with.
JOURNALIST: Other than the meeting yesterday with BG, what evidence is there that things have moved from consultation to negotiation? Are you holding any other talks with chief executives that proves that point?
PM: Well I don't intend either to go into a day by day, blow by blow account as to who I, Martin, Wayne are consulting with or negotiating with and where each of those is in fact up to at a given stage, nor will I go into a day by day rendition in the public debate about what might constitute at the end of the day generous transition arrangements. These are tough and hard negotiations that we're engaged in, but we'll prosecute them because this reform is right for the future of the country.
You know something, reform in this place has never been easy. I also draw people's attention to the fact when the big reforms have been proposed in the past, people have said the mining industry would fall apart. We had that fear campaign at the time of Workchoices, we had it sometime before that with the introduction of native title legislation, we had it sometime before that for the offshore sector when the introduction of the PRRT occurred. And folks it's four minutes to two and I'm due in a certain place in four minutes. Thank you very much.


O'BRIEN: The Prime Minister joins me now from Canberra.
Kevin Rudd, when you singled out the mining industry table at the Mid Winter Ball in your speech last night, and said to them, in relation to the current dispute over the resources tax, "We've got a long memory", what exactly did you mean?
PM: Well, I think it's pretty interesting, Kerry. First of all, it's good to be back in 7:30 Report land. It's great to be back with you.
The Ball last night is just a fun and frivolous occasion. Last time I heard it was supposed to be, sort of, off the record. It was just a throwaway line, that's all, and I think anyone observing that would know that. The truth is that-
O'BRIEN: -There are throwaway lines and throwaway lines, of course. If you say you're negotiating in good faith with the mining industry, but you tell me how you'd react if you're locked in a bitter argument with somebody and they say to you 'I've got a long memory, mate', how would you take that?
PM: Well, you know something, Kerry? We're engaged in a very hard fight with various parts of the mining industry. It's all about tax reform, and why are we putting this tax reform forward? Because we believe that within the mining industry we need to move to a system which taxes profits rather than production. It's the best thing to expand the industry long term.
Secondly, the extra revenue we'd get from that we'd use to fund better super for working families, bring down tax for corporates and for small business and to fund the road, rail and ports that so many of our mining communities and communities that support them need.
Now, mining companies, many of them, are obviously unhappy about that because they don't want to pay more tax. Well, there's nothing particularly unique in that, so it's a very hard and hard-fought debate.
O'BRIEN: You have said all this. You've been explaining this for weeks now, which has certainly had no positive impact for you in the polls, but what I'm asking you is whether if somebody said to you, when you're in the middle, locked in a very bitter argument with them and they say to you 'Mate, I've got a long memory', wouldn't they take that as something of a threat, a warning?
PM: Kerry, I just think it's pretty important to put a few light-hearted remarks at a Mid Winter Ball with a bunch of journos in the room into its context. I mean, if you were going to repeat everything else I had to say last night on this program in terms of, you know, various comments about how I or the Government have performed, I mean, are they to be taken in the same sort of serious light? It's just a throwaway line.
O'BRIEN: Well, it was reported this afternoon, it's already been reported in the media, yes, I know it was Chatham House rules, but as I say, it's now been reported. I've spoken to several people and they all took the same reaction from it, that you were sending the mining industry a message.
PM: Kerry, it was just a throwaway line.
This is a tough negotiation with the mining industry. It's very tough and you say that, obviously, we're having no impact in communicating the Government's position on that. Bear in mind we're also up against a forensic campaign being launched by a very profitable industry in this country which doesn't want to see change: the same industry who said that when we changed WorkChoices that the mining industry would fall over - that didn't happen; the same industry that said that when we brought in Native Title legislation that the industry would fall over - and that didn't happen; and 10 years before that, when we brought in the petroleum resource rent tax, that that would kill the offshore industry - and that didn't happen.
These debates are always tough and that's why the Government is going through a tough time. This is a really hard-fought debate.
O'BRIEN: So, do you want to just clear the air now for anybody who's taken your comments wrongly by telling the mining industry that there will be no attempt at payback after the next election if you win it?
PM: You know something, Kerry? I have a very short memory as well, so-
O'BRIEN: -I'm not quite sure what that means but we'll move on. So what exactly-
PM: -It's just a joke, Kerry. It's just a joke.
O'BRIEN: I'll work it out later.
PM: For goodness sake. You have a look at the text of the rest of the things I said at the Mid Winter Ball, the bunch of journos are out there having fun all done up in their glad rags. I mean, it's just a bit of fun, a bit of a joke.
O'BRIEN: So what exactly is the current status of negotiations, because it's become very confusing. Have you now taken personal charge of the negotiations? Are you negotiating company by company? Are you embarked on a strategy where you gradually whittle away opposition from various elements within the industry, leaving the big guys like BHP, Rio and Xstrata exposed?
PM: Kerry, we've gone about this in two, well, in fact, three stages.
Firstly, in terms of consultation prior to 2 May when we released the Henry review and our response to it, the Treasury and the team under Ken Henry had been engaged in about 18 months worth of consultations with industry, including the mining industry, including the prospect of a profits-based tax, including many of the elements of what subsequently emerged in it as well, so let's not pretend that this simply emerged from the blue on 2 May.
Second thing is, since then, the last month or so, we've had a consultation process through a Treasury panel which has been out there bringing forward all the numbers and information from individual companies about the details of the proposed tax reform and its effect on them.
Now thirdly, we are now engaged in a process of negotiation and we are negotiating with individual companies around the country, many of whose circumstances are quite different depending on where they are, what mineral they're mining and what the nature of their production process is.
O'BRIEN: And are you now staying in daily contact with that? Are you in effect now heading the negotiations?
PM: The team of negotiators at the political level is of course myself, the minister responsible for the resources sector, Martin Ferguson, and the Treasurer, Wayne Swan, as you would expect.
O'BRIEN: OK.
PM: And secondly, supported by a team of Treasury officials who do the number crunching. This is how it would normally work. They're complex, hard, commercial negotiations with some companies which don't take the Government's proposals all that well.
O'BRIEN: Blind Freddy can tell that your back's to the wall politically - polls haemorrhaging, an election keeping closer, in a mess over the mining tax. The industry heavy weights can read the polls too, so what's the incentive for them to settle this now when they can see the prospect of a Liberal Government that would actually dump the tax idea?
PM: Well, the first thing I'd say to you, Kerry, is that we need to be pretty mindful of some political history here. You've mentioned polls just now. Governments before have been up and been down. My predecessor went through that on multiple occasions, as did his and as did Bob Hawke before him. You know that as well as I do.
O'BRIEN: Have you ever seen the Labor Party record a poll where its primary vote was running at 33 per cent?
PM: Kerry, if you were to go back through the history of the Party in the last several decades you'll find that we've been up and down at various times.
O'BRIEN: Have you seen one this low? 33 per cent primary? Incredible.
PM: Kerry, I'm just saying governments are up and down depending on the circumstances at the time and the toughness of the fight in which you are engaged. This is a tough fight.
O'BRIEN: But there are people in your own Party who are musing that this didn't have to be quite this tough in quite this way. When you say that the mining industry was engaged from 18 months ago through the process of Henry, it's one thing to be consulted and have an opportunity to present your case to a review process, a committee or a task force, but then once the policy, once the Government puts its policy in place that's a different matter all together.
Why couldn't you have consulted directly with the mining industry about the prospect of this mining tax before you hit them with a finely detailed, crafted policy and then said, here it is, now let's talk about it?
PM: Well, my answer to your question, Kerry, is in two parts.
Firstly, look carefully at the nature of the discussion papers, etcetera, which the Treasury put out prior to 2 May. They actually went straight to the question of a profits-based regime. Ken Henry made multiple speeches on this subject, invited submissions from the industry. The Mining Council of Australia said they wished to move to a profits-based regime themselves. That's prior to 2 May, going back 6 and 12 months. Secondly-
O'BRIEN: -But Ken Henry, sorry, with respect, Ken Henry is a public servant. He's not the Government. He's not actually making the policy. He was doing the review. You're the ones who have put the policy together and you've done that in secret, behind closed doors, and then gone to the mining industry and said here it is.
PM: Kerry, the review which Ken headed was actually conducted by a wide panel and in the consultation process, prior to 2 May, there was extensive discussion across the board in terms of moving to a profits-based tax. That's the first thing.
The second thing is since 2 May, when the policy was released, what we have said consistently is that we believe that the framework we've put forward on 2 May is right, the tax reform to deliver those changes that I referred to before, but on questions of detail, of transition and of implementation, including generous transition arrangements, that we would then engage in detailed consultation and negotiation with the industry, which is what we are doing now.
Now are you seriously suggesting, Kerry, are you seriously suggesting Kerry, that if we had gone through this process with companies before and said, 'hey guys, we'd like to bang this tax on you, I'm just going to consult with you for about three months about that', they would have said, 'That's terrific, thank you for consulting, we'll now pay more tax.'
It was always going to be hard, so I think it's quite frankly just wrong to assume that it was going to be more easily landed as a consequence of having done it some other way.
O'BRIEN: But why didn't you handle the tax pretty much in the way the Hawke Government did successfully in '84 with its resource rent tax on the petroleum industry - signal your intent on having the tax, release the parameters as the Government, based in your instance on Henry's findings, for genuine negotiation, then announce your policy?
What you did instead was to sit on the Henry report for months while you determined the policy, then you sprang it on the industry and the public, enshrined it in the Budget and then invited them in for consultation about the transition costs. That's not a policy negotiation, is it?
PM: Well, Kerry, you slid over, at the very end of your question, the whole point of transitional arrangements. What do transitional arrangements mean? It goes to the existing state of projects which mining companies are operating. They're vastly different and when we have said consistently they're in the marketplace for generous transitional arrangements, we mean that. So, in terms of, if you like, flexibility about those transitional arrangements, we've always been upfront about that since 2 May.
What you seem to be assuming is that if you were to say all that beforehand that mining companies would be out there dancing in the street and saying, 'Yep, we really want to pay more tax, we'll just have a discussion with you on the design features'. Let's get real about this. They wouldn't want to do that and what we as a reforming government have been on about is to use this tax reform, one, to actually boost the long-term growth of the industry by making it an efficient profits-based tax, as opposed to a blunt instrument called a production tax which throttles so many early companies in the early stages of their development, and beyond that to use the revenue which comes from that tax reform to fund better super for working families, 7.5 million of them; better tax breaks for small businesses, 2.4 million of them; a 2 per cent cut in the corporate rate for the 770,000 Australian businesses who are incorporated; and beyond that investing in road, rail and port in the regions of Australia as well.
That's why it's a tough debate, because whenever I ask the question of the mining industry, 'Hey guys, where am I actually going to find this extra money from to invest in the road, rail and ports right around regional Queensland, regional WA, various parts of Queensland where I was even today?'. the question comes 'We need to get this investment to support our local mining industries, who's going to pay for it?' Well that's the question I'm now putting back to the industry. That's why we're proposing a regional infrastructure fund, in part, to do it.
O'BRIEN: There's been a lot of criticism of the way you have centralised power within the Government, that since the global financial crisis Cabinet has become not much more than a rubber stamp, the big issues decided by the so called gang of four - yourself, Julia Gillard, Wayne Swan and Lindsay Tanner. For instance, on the resources tax your Resources Minister, Martin Ferguson, a skilled negotiator who knew all ins and outs of the industry, was very much on the periphery as this policy was put together. Have you now re-embraced a wider Cabinet consultation process?
PM: Well, you know something, Kerry, I just think the proposition is wrong. Let's just go to what the Government has been doing in recent times and over the last year or two. Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, fantastic minister, National Health and Hospitals Network, a major health reform.
Go to what Julia has been doing in terms of the national curriculum. She's been doing that and bringing it ultimately to the Cabinet for conclusion.
Look at various other reforms by other ministers, Penny Wong and the renewable energy target. Look at the other reforms which we've brought in through various other ministers. Tony Burke, the new reform in national drought policy which is currently being trialled in Western Australia. Chris Bowen, in terms of what's now been done with uniform national credit laws. This is all done by individual ministers and this is done-
O'BRIEN: -And when you, and did Penny Wong bring a submission to Cabinet to alter the timing and schedule and walk away in the next two years from the emissions trading scheme or was that decided by you, Julia Gillard, Lindsay Tanner and Wayne Swan?
PM: On the question of the internal deliberations of the Cabinet, these are always done through Cabinet or the Cabinet committee structures, including on the matter that you just referred to.
O'BRIEN: Was that decided within that committee group of four?
PM: I won't go to the internal Cabinet decision making processes and individual decisions. You know that as well as I do. Cabinet committees are-
O'BRIEN: -I'm not asking you to reveal secrets about what you talked about. I'm asking you to tell me whether that decision was taken by yourself and three other ministers and then presented to the Cabinet as a fait accompli. How much discussion was there in cabinet?
PM: On the budget question you've just referred to, to go back to your point before about the budget consequences of the emissions trading scheme, of course Penny was consulted on that. I consulted her as did other ministers on many, many occasions.
The key question though, and I go back to your broad point, about what ministers are doing in this Cabinet of the Australian Government, if you lined up our Cabinet members, our Cabinet Ministers, one by one, and compared them with their opposite numbers, this is an exceptionally strong Cabinet team and if you go down the list of what I've just gone through and I didn't even get to Jenny Macklin on paid parental leave, a stunning reform through the Australian Parliament today so that for the first time from 1 January next year you're going to have a paid parental leave scheme for 148,000 parents across the country, $570 a week-
O'BRIEN: -And missing a lot of space in the media because it's taken up with all these negative issues, some of which even your own colleagues believe you've brought on yourself.
PM: Well, Kerry, tonight I notice that you haven't asked a question about paid parental leave, 148,000 parents out there about to have their lives changed. You're asking me about communications tactics, you're asking me about political management.
I'm seeking to talk to you about policy. There's a policy which affects 148,000 people, a large slice of whom will be watching your program tonight, and it means being able to spend more time with a little bub when it comes home, a bit more support financially when that time comes in your life and this is something the country's been waiting for for years and years, and to go right back on the core question you asked, Jenny Macklin has had responsibility for this, discharged it, concluded it, brought it to Cabinet and decided. I could give you a list of a 100, a 100 of these things which have been done in the last two years and I think it's pretty easy to become, you know, fixated on one thing or another, but this list of reforms is impressive, those ministers are impressive ministers, as are their colleagues, and they've taken charge of these things themselves in a proper process of Cabinet government.
O'BRIEN: OK, and to some degree I imagine the media will be fixated over the next 24 hours with what the Auditor-General said to a Parliamentary committee today, that your advertising, government advertising guidelines had been softened and this was in the context of the campaign that is running now on the mining industry, and I'm told that this is an issue that's resonating in Labor electorates, in marginal electorates, that the people are taking a view, that you have departed from your own pledge on this, that you set new ground rules for government advertising to prevent abuse and that you've now changed those ground rules which the Auditor-General says have been softened?
PM: Well, Kerry, I made two commitments prior to the last election on this. One was I said the quantity and the volume of government advertising under the Howard Government was obscene.
Let me just go to some facts. In the first year that this Government was elected, we spent, I think, about one third of what the Howard Government had spent on government advertising in the previous year. In the second year of this government we spent about one half of what the Howard Government spent on advertising the previous year, and in 2007 I think they spent about a quarter of a billion dollars on Government advertising. In the last 12 months, I'm advised, we've spent probably $50 or $60 million on advertising.
When it comes to introducing the goods and services tax, the Howard Government tax spent $450 million on that, I'm advised. On this particular campaign concerning a very deep question of tax reform, we are spending $37 million. Let's put this into some quantitative context.
The second part of your question is this, the guidelines. We said before the election that we would involve the Auditor-General in an approvals process. On 1 July, 2008 we brought in that because we thought it was the right way to go. At that stage I'd already received a letter from the Auditor-General to me personally, not long after becoming Prime Minister, saying that he thought this was not the right way to go and it should instead be an independent committee.
We said we'd review this after two years. We did so in 2010 by an independent committee. It then established or recommended an independent communications committee. That's been functioning since the beginning of this year.
That is what we have done and I think it's important to put it into its context, so on the commitments I've made, I believe they're consistent with what I've said to you and to others prior to the election.
O'BRIEN: And very briefly, coming back to those polls. If the trend in those polls is not reversed in coming weeks, or at least arrested, will you consider putting your Party ahead of your own personal ambitions and resign?
PM: Can I just say to you, Kerry, this business of reform is a tough business. It's a hard business. It's never some sort of even and smooth trajectory. I expect that we're going to continue to take a whacking in the polls for some little time to come yet
O'BRIEN: But you've got an election looming, you've got an election coming.
PM: Yeah, well we have an election due by whatever it is, March or April next year and we only have 3-year terms. You've got to use the time effectively. You can't just dodge hard questions like tax reform. You've got to engage in it and that's what the business of being an effective government of the country is like together with the other stuff that we have done-
O'BRIEN: -OK, I won't ask you to go through the list again, but we're out of time.
PM: -keeping the economy strong, unemployment at 5.2 per cent. That's as important as the other matters we're engaged in right now in the debate.
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: I appreciate it.


The Prime Minister tonight announced the membership of the Expert Panel for the review of capital city strategic planning systems, at the Australian Council of Local Government (ACLG) dinner held in Parliament House.
Key challenges face Australia's cities including managing population and economic growth, addressing climate change, improving housing affordability and tackling urban congestion.
The Panel's role will be to support the COAG Reform Council, which will review planning systems to ensure they meet the agreed national criteria to make Australia's cities more productive, sustainable and liveable.
The Panel will be Chaired by the Hon Brian Howe, a pioneer of urban development who, through the Building Better Cities program, brought the Commonwealth back into city policy two decades ago.
The Deputy Chair will be Ms Lucy Turnbull who brings real-world local government experience as a former Lord Mayor of Sydney.
Members of the Panel are: Mr Rod Pearse OAM, Ms Jude Munro, Mr John Denton, Ms Sue Holliday, Professor Duncan Maclennan CBE FRSE AcSS, and Ms Meredith Sussex AM. Dr Geoff Gallop, Deputy Chair of the COAG Reform Council, will also take a particular responsibility on behalf of the COAG Reform Council for this initiative. A short biographical note on each member is attached.
The Panel provides a blend of experience, drawing its membership from people with backgrounds from the Commonwealth, state government, local government, academia, the private sector, design and planning.
This Panel has a critical role to play in the implementation of the landmark reform agreed at the December 2009 meeting of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) that will see high quality capital city strategic planning systems by 2012.
High quality city planning systems will also ensure that infrastructure investments - including investments by the Commonwealth in nationally significant infrastructure in our cities - deliver the best possible returns.
The Commonwealth must have confidence in the integrity of a capital city's strategic planning system if it is to continue to invest in that city.
In undertaking its review of strategic capital city strategic planning systems, the COAG Reform Council will consult Local Government.
Local Government are key partners in the governance of our capital cities and this partnership will be extended.
Local Government will have vital roles in the planning of our cities and in ensuring that those plans meet the needs of local communities.
ATTACHMENT A
Chair: Brian Howe
Brian Howe is Professorial Associate at the Centre for Public Policy, University of Melbourne, and former Deputy Prime Minister (1991-95). As a Cabinet Minister in the Hawke and Keating Governments (1984-96), he held responsibility for a range of portfolios including housing, social security, health and defence.
Deputy Chair: Lucy Turnbull
Lucy Turnbull served as the 81st Lord Mayor of Sydney from 2003-4, and prior to this as deputy Lord Mayor from 1999-2003. She was also a former commercial lawyer and investment banker.
Members
Duncan MacLennan
Professor Duncan McLennan, an internationally renowned expert in the areas of cities, neighbourhood renewal and housing economics, is the Director of the Centre for Housing Research at the University of St Andrews, Scotland. He has held senior government and academic positions in Australia and Canada and advised governments on housing policy in UK, Poland, France, Sweden, Ireland, New Zealand, Canada and Australia.
Meredith Sussex AM
Meredith Sussex AM is an administrator of Brimbank City Council (Vic) and has extensive experience in land use and planning issues at senior levels in the Victorian Government and in local government. From 2002 to 2006 Ms Sussex led the Office of Commonwealth Games Coordination.
Rod Pearse OAM
Rod Pearse retired in 2009 after ten years as the managing director and CEO of Boral. He was also the Chair of the Business Council of Australia's Sustainable Growth Taskforce which delivered its report on Australia's infrastructure challenges in October 2009.
Jude Munro
Jude Munro is the outgoing CEO of Brisbane City Council (she is leaving the position on 18 June 2010), a position she has held since 2000. She has extensive experience in local government, having previously served as the CEO of the City of Adelaide, the interim CEO of the City of Moreland (Vic), and CEO of the City of St Kilda (Vic).
John Denton
John Denton is a leading architect and urban designer renowned for his work on major landmark buildings and urban projects, both in Australia and internationally. He formerly served in an advisory role to the Victorian Government as State Government Architect.
Sue Holliday
Sue Holliday is a private consultant in the area of urban change and has extensive experience in academic and public sector roles in urban planning and development. She is the immediate past president of the Planning Institute of Australia and was the Director-General of NSW Planning from 1997 to 2003.


The Australian Government today announced an additional investment of $100 million into community infrastructure, including libraries, community centres and sports grounds and facilities, as part of our partnership with local government.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd made the announcement today at the third meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government, the nation's largest gathering of mayors and shire presidents, at Parliament House in Canberra.
This third round of the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program (RLCIP) brings the Rudd Government's investment through the program to more than $1.1 billion since November 2008.
The funding will be shared between all of the nation's councils and shires to provide better infrastructure for local and regional communities.
So far, nearly 5,000 small- and larger-scale community infrastructure projects have been funded under the RLCIP including swimming pools, bicycle paths, sports grounds and facilities and environmental and disability-access infrastructure.
The majority of these projects have either been completed or are currently underway.
These projects have supported jobs in local communities during the global financial crisis while building infrastructure to support communities for generations to come.
The next round of the program is aimed at strengthening our communities during the economic recovery.
Local government is the level of government that is closest to the community, and the nation's councils and shires are well-placed to identify and deliver local infrastructure priorities.
That's why the Rudd Government has forged a new partnership with local government to invest in our communities.
Through this program, the Rudd Government is helping to improve the lives of everyday Australians, proving that cooperation between governments creates better communities.
Each local government will be allocated the same amount of funding as the last round of the RLCIP with shares determined by a robust, transparent and accountable process based on data collected by the State and Territory Local Government Grants Commissions. They will then be asked to nominate projects against that funding that are local community priorities.
Applications for the third round of the RLCIP will open shortly with further information at: www.infrastructure.gov.au 


DOYLE: Good morning to you.
PM: Good morning Mel.
DOYLE: This is good news for you, as well as parents.
PM: Oh no, it's good news for parents. There's about 148,000 parents across Australia we think will benefit from this scheme. It's been a long time in the planning. People have been waiting for it for a long, long time, and we got it through the Senate last night. So it just helps with some of those real cost of living pressures which parents have when a newborn comes. But critically, it gives, gives parents more of a time to spend time with the newborn in those critical few months after the baby arrives home.
DOYLE: Yeah. Just a quick comment then, too- I mean, not everyone's sold on the idea-
PM: Yeah.
DOYLE: I've got an email, 16 year old Rachael Fisk says she doesn't know, she doesn't think, sorry, that it's fair that stay at home mums get paid close to what is now on offer to working parents taking leave. Rachael thinks it's a couple's choice to have kids, so they should look after them for free. Obviously this is a point that comes up a lot in this discussion. What are your thoughts?
PM: Well look, what we're trying to do is also get the balance right here for stay at home mums on the one hand, who do a fantastic job, and those who choose to go back to the workplace. Because every parent's circumstances are different. The baby bonus still applies to mums who stay at home. And also, what's called Family Tax Benefit A, and Family Tax Benefit B. And you put these things together, depending on your family's circumstances, there's still a fair bit of support there if you're a stay at home mum whose job is absolutely critical.
Therese, in our life, has sort of, you know, done both with the bub early on, our first one. She was stay at home for a while. Later on she was back into the workforce. So, really, circumstances change, and we're trying to make sure that this support is there at a practical and flexible level for mums out there and parents, a lot of them. And this is good news for those families.
DOYLE: Alright. I've got another viewer question for you now, Gabby. Gabby, good morning to you- what's your question for the Prime Minister?
VIEWER: Good morning Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Gabby.
VIEWER: My question is, currently the Australian Government allows certain children's sport- educational expenses like internet use and computer purchases which is great, and very important. But I wonder whether the Australian Government could consider thinking long term, because of the extremely high childhood obesity rates, whether they could consider making certain sporting expenses a tax deduction to encourage and assist struggling families like myself. I mean, I have two gorgeous sons, but rugby union fees, swimming lessons, things like that, I wonder if they could become tax deductions. I'd hate to think that the rich get fit and the poor get fat.
PM: Alright. Gabby, thanks very much for your question, and thank you also for supporting those two boys of yours out there playing rugby and swimming. And the cost of rugby boots, I know, is for example very high. Then you've got the membership fees and everything else. Look, I wish I could just, you know, promise to fix everything along these lines. But I can't. And no previous Australian Government has provided tax deductions for sporting gear or memberships of the type that you describe.
What we have done, and you referred to this in the beginning of your question, is we've brought in this thing called an education tax refund, for both secondary school students, and primary school students. So for the first time, you have an opportunity for tax deductions for things like books, computers as you mentioned before, but also if your kids are doing trades at school, for certain critical tools as well, internet use as you said. And that's designed to take some pressure off the family budget overall, so that there is a bit more space to help fund those extras that you're talking about, which is really critical to keep our kids active and in community sport. But I'm sorry, I can't just fix this one.
DOYLE: Yeah, but no, it's wonderful that Gabby's boys are so active, and there's a lot of families in the same boat there. Can I talk about health?
PM: Yeah.
DOYLE: It's been a major focus of your Government.
PM: Yeah.
DOYLE: I was at a function the other night, and, and, got chatting to the lovely Australian of the Year, Patrick McGorry. We were talking about mental illness, mental health. And he was saying that those with mental illness are three times less likely to access care than those with physical health issues. So, my question to you this morning is when will you give mental health sector the same focus that you've given, for example, public hospitals.
PM: Sure. Well, Patrick does some fantastic work. And he's had a lot to say about the further needs in this mental health sector. On mental health, one of the, I think, the organisations which he's got started I think is called Headspace, from memory.
DOYLE: Yes.
PM: And it's really targeted on adolescents. I've been to one of his places I think down in Melbourne, in Sunrise- in Sunshine, I should say- you're Sunrise, Sunshine's down there. And they do terrific work with early interventions with young people, and provide a whole range of services for young people.
DOYLE: But I think they need more.
PM: Yeah, yeah.
DOYLE: I understand that they do fund many places, but there's about another three quarters of a million young Australians with unmet mental illness needs.
PM: You're absolutely right. And what we've done in the Budget is double the number of Headspace operations around the country. Just off the top of my head Mel, I can't give you the exact number.
DOYLE: You just expanded to an extra 20,000.
PM: That's true. And this, I am fully prepared to concede on your program, is the beginning of a whole lot more work that's needed to be done in the whole sphere of mental health. We're also funding additional mental health nurses.
DOYLE: Great.
PM: So you know what the two big areas of future health reform are, Mel? Getting mental health reform right, and getting aged care absolutely right for long term reform as well. We've tackled the public hospital system. We've tackled primary healthcare. But these are the two big areas still to be done, and we're determined to get on with it.
DOYLE: And as we know, those two areas, when they're addressed, will ease up the pressure obviously on hospitals, which is facing in the middle.
PM: Yeah.
DOYLE: Prime Minister, thanks very much for your time, good to talk to you this Friday.
PM: Thanks Mel, appreciate being on the program.


PM: Today we can announce a major new agreement to build a stronger Australian economy, but also to provide cheaper, better broadband services to Australian families, to Australian small businesses, right across our nation.
Today, Telstra and the National Broadband Network have signed a Financial Heads of Agreement which provides the way for that cheaper, faster, universal broadband service for all Australians.
After 20 years, it also achieves fundamental structural reform in the telecommunications sector, separating out wholesalers from retailers, and therefore represents a major reform for the nation.
The Government committed to building a superfast broadband service for all Australians back in 2007, when the Government was then in Opposition.
In 2009, the Government committed to building a National Broadband Network.
Last month the Government released the National Broadband Network implementation study, and today we announce the conclusion of what has been a very tough negotiating process between NBN Co on the one hand and Telstra on the other which has gone on for the better part of a year. This has been a very difficult, tough, hard negotiation, but it's also been an honest set of negotiations and it demonstrates what can be yielded through a process of negotiation where the end point is to deliver better services for all Australians and a better outcome for our nation's economy.
So, I'd like to thank very much both the representatives of Telstra and of course the leadership if NBN Co for their participation in what has been a hard negotiation over a long period of time.
This also, of course, makes Telstra a participant in the NBN roll-out. It also makes Telstra the largest customer of the National Broadband Network and we, through the National Broadband Network, look forward to partnering with Telstra, and of course other companies, in the future in delivering this important new set of services, as I said, right across our nation.
It also provides certainty for Telstra's future. It also provides certainty for Telstra's 1.4 million shareholders, as well.
We regard this as a good outcome for the nation; a good outcome for our economy; a good outcome for the National Broadband Network; a good outcome for Telstra, and most critically, a good outcome for all Australians - individuals, families, small businesses - who stand to benefit from this fundamentally new technology able to turbocharge out nation's future.
So - good for a stronger economy; good for families; good for the nation.
I'm now going to ask the Minister, Stephen Conroy, to comment. Before he does so, can I say publically how much I have valued his strong support, engagement and shepherding of this process through what has been a very, very tough negotiation of a long period of time, and it is a tribute to the Minister, as well as to others, that we have reached this significant outcome today.
Over to you, Stephen.
MINISTER CONROY: Well, thank you, Prime Minister.
Well, today is a truly exciting day in the history of Australian telecommunications sector.
I would like to start by thanking Catherine and David and the entire team at Telstra, as well as Mike Quigley and his team at NBN Co.
These negotiations have been tough, they have been complex, and at times they have been colourful, but most importantly, I believe that they have been conducted in good faith with a firm focus on getting the best outcome for everyone.
The Government has always maintained that it was possible to have a win-win: a win for Telstra shareholders and a win for the Australian public as a whole.
This Agreement provides us with a clear pathway to take Australia from the copper age to the fibre future. We also have a clear way forward for reforming the telecommunications sector, to introduce the right market structure, to unleash genuine competition at the retail level for the first time.
Once the NBN rollout is complete and Telstra has completed the migration of its customers to the NBN, Australia will be served by a national wholesale-only network not controlled by any retail company. In other words, structural separation - so long argued for by many stakeholders in this sector - this will have been achieved.
Today's announcement involves: the progressive migration of customers from Telstra's copper and HFC networks to the new wholesale-only fibre network to be built and operated by NBN Co; the re-use of suitable Telstra infrastructure - including pits, ducts and backhaul fibre - by NBN Co as it starts to rollout its new network, avoiding unnecessary duplication.
Combined with the Rudd Government's public policy reforms, Telstra estimates the agreement will deliver them a post-tax net present value of approximately $11 billion.
As part of the public policy reforms, the Government will establish a new entity, USO Co - with Commonwealth funding of $50 million in 2012-13 and 2013-14, increasing to $100 million per annum thereafter. It will provide $100 million to Telstra to assist in the retraining and redeployment of Telstra staff that will be affected by this change to the structure of the telecommunications sector. And it will require NBN Co to be the wholesale supplier of last resort for fibre connections in greenfield developments from 1 January 2011.
Further information regarding the reforms I've just mentioned will be available on the Department's website.
The Agreement means that NBN can be rolled out quicker, cheaper, more efficiently and with faster take-up rates.
Today's agreement is significant, but there is still more work to do across a number of very complex issues, including the move to Definitive Agreements and shareholder approval.
To improve competition and consumer protection in the transition to the NBN, last year we introduced a Bill to reform the structure of the telecommunications sector. The Government remains committed to implementing the reforms set out in the Bill, which is currently before the Senate. The Government will be making a number of amendments to the Bill to provide Telstra with the legislative certainty that it needs to proceed with structural separation while still protecting the long-term interests of end-users.
These amendments will improve the current equivalency and transparency measures while the NBN is rolled out. They will also permit Telstra to set out how it will migrate customers to the NBN and for this to be subject to industry consultation and consideration by the ACCC.
As the Prime Minister has said, today's agreement between Telstra and NBN is significant. It will be remembered as the moment the Australian Government and the industry joined together to revolutionise the telecommunications sector in this country.
Of course, fast broadband will deliver more than just high-speed telecommunications. It is about better access to health services for Australian families; better educational opportunities for Australian kids; creating new business opportunities and stimulating Australia's economy, and it is about creating and keeping jobs in Australia.
In just a few short weeks the first customers in Tasmania, in one of the worst broadband markets in the country, will begin receiving services under the NBN.
Today's milestone brings the rest of Australia a step closer to receiving these services that will lift us to be a world leader in broadband access and telecommunications innovation.
Thank you very much.
PM: Good. Just before we take questions, if I could ask Catherine Livingstone from Telstra to make some remarks to you, followed by Mike Quigley from the NBN Co.
LIVINGSTONE: Thank you, Prime Minister. I think, just to add to those words, today's agreement is an encouraging milestone in the process and the result, as the Prime Minister and Minister have said, are the result of a very complex series of negotiations over quite some time between Telstra, the Government and NBN Co.
The agreement certainly takes us a step closer to achieving that mutually beneficial outcome which, as you know, has always been Telstra's objective, and that outcome will be in the best interest of the Telstra shareholders.
Now, we're very encouraged by the Heads of Agreement, but there is a great deal of work to do to achieve the definitive agreements. The Heads of Agreement gives us a very firm base from which to proceed down that path and Telstra will very diligently and with resources seek to conclude those definitive agreements as quickly as possible.
Thank you.
PM: Good. Thanks very much, Catherine. Now, Mike Quigley from NBN Co.
QUIGLEY: Thank you, Prime Minister.
This is a very important step forward for NBN Co and I'd like to acknowledge and thank all those people within Telstra and NBN Co who have put in literally thousands of hours of work in reaching this point.
The board and management of NBN Co believe this $9 million investment, which is the NBN Co component of the deal, represents a very sound outcome for NBN Co. It's a sound outcome because, first of all, it maximises the use of existing infrastructure. It avoids infrastructure duplication. It accelerates the roll out of the NBN and, I think most importantly, Telstra is likely to become NBN Co's biggest customer, as we've said.
In a previous life, I had Telstra as a customer, and I very much look forward again to having the same opportunity as we move forward.
Thank you.
PM: Good. OK folks, over to you.
JOURNALIST: There's no guarantees this deal will be done, is there?
PM: Can I say, when you have a Financial Heads of Agreement, which goes to the level of detail in which we have just concluded between the two sides, this is absolutely basic to this rollout occurring. Both Telstra, in my discussions with them, and NBN Co, in my discussions with them, and discussions with them together, are confident this will occur. It could not occur in the absence of this Financial Heads of Agreement, as the Minister outlined in his statement just before.
JOURNALIST: What is the legislative timetable now, given that the parliamentary weeks are rapidly running out?
CONROY: Well, look we obviously have been in discussions with Telstra about a range of amendments that deliver that certainty that I described earlier. We are in a position where we can bring some of those forward. Whether or not the Opposition choose to be constructive, I mean, they're now in a situation where this agreement has widespread support across the whole sector.
We would be able to, certainly, put forward a raft of them this week. Whether or not they will be passed by the Senate- as I said, all round Australia: the telco sector; the local government community, if you were here this week and talked with any of the local government communities; and in Western Australia, the Barnett Government; the Tasmanian Liberal Opposition, they are behind and supportive of this agreement.
If we're re-elected, we will continue to implement the NBN. So, people should understand that if Tony Abbott is elected he will shutdown the National Broadband Network, and it's now time for Tony Abbott to make a decision.
The Australian public have a clear choice and we will be progressing this forward this week, if we can get cooperation. We have, obviously, a raft of other legislation equally as important to the Government that we need to progress. The Opposition, for many months now, have refused to support extra days, extra hours, to allow bills to be debated in the Senate. This level of obstructionism has been unheard of in the last 20 years, and we will continue to press ahead with our reform package, our legislation and our amendments.
JOURNALIST: Minister, will you be retaining for the average internet user - or the average Australian, in fact - and how much cheaper will they get their broadband as a result of this deal and when exactly will it be delivered? Will it be delivered-
CONROY: -Well, as I said, in Tasmania, in a couple of weeks, the first customers will actually get National Broadband Network services, and already we've seen the three ISPs, or RSPs as we now call them, who've gone in to the marketplace in Tasmania, put out their pricing structures.
Internode have probably been the most aggressive, and I do want to stress these are introductory prices for Tasmania. They're not the final prices that will be across the whole of Australia, but you've seen, as an example, Internode are offering 25 meg for $29.99 and you've seen-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
CONROY: -Absolutely. This will be delivering cheaper and faster services for all Australians ultimately, and Internode is offering 100 meg for $60. I mean, this is a real price in the marketplace right now.
JOURNALIST: When do you anticipate Telstra completing the migration of its customers to NBN Co and-
CONROY: -I'm not sure. Mike, did you want to hazard a guess, or-
JOURNALIST: -and therefore achieving structural separation?
CONROY: I mean the build is across the eight years we've talked about, but I might pass to the engineers to give us a-
QUIGLEY: -This is, as we know, it's a very large engineering project. There's quite a bit of complexity, as you would understand, in migrating customers. There's lots of different scenarios to be looked at. It is an 8-year rollout that has been scheduled, so I imagine the last of the customers would come across at the end of that rollout period.
JOURNALIST: Mr Quigley, how much money have you saved by not having to duplicate the infrastructure you're getting from Telstra?
QUIGLEY: This is a, it's a significant saving, and obviously that's why NBN Co board and management-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
QUIGLEY: No, I'm not prepared to give a figure on that, obviously, but it's obviously a good outcome in that regard.
JOURNALIST: Is it more or less $11 billion?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) between Telstra and the Government were pretty much poison only a year or so ago. How did things change to the point where you can get an agreement like this?
PM: Sweetness and light and Stephen Conroy are the three answers to that question.
This is a- if you're having a negotiation on something as hard as this, and it is hard - Just roll the clock back a bit, 20 years ago when we began this long process of telecommunications reform, and it's not been a glorious history over that 20 years, from governments of both political persuasions, getting this fundamental reform, this structural reform right, and that is separating out wholesaler from retailers.
That's been tough, and of course the commercial detail of this particular negotiation's been tough as well, but I think in the last 12 months, what you've seen behind the scenes is a strong determination on both parties to get this done, and again I commend the role of Stephen Conroy in shepherding this thing through.
I think it's fair to say that over the last month or so the two sides have come closer, and I think there is a genuine commitment, as I see it, on the part of Telstra to go forward with its business future. It's a strong company with a strong history in Australia, a robust financial position and therefore carving out its future on the basis of this new certainty, as well as our national obligation to put forward this major new piece of infrastructure for the 21st century.
Stephen mentioned before, I think, what excites people about this is what it's potentially going to do for something as basic as delivery of health services across Australia. In the health and hospitals reform in which I've been engaged for much of the last six months, the future of a patient-controlled electronic health record is so fundamental - shooting health data around the country from a doctor to a specialist, to a surgeon, for someone who gets sick on holiday at one end of the continent to the other.
Revolutionising the way in which we deliver education - you don't have an advanced maths teacher in central west Queensland? Well, suddenly you can get one, you know, online with available bandwidth, band speed, cheaply, efficiently.
The applications are huge, so what I sense in my conversations with all these good folk this morning - and we've been having quite a long conversation this morning about the where to from here - is a commitment to, I think, this important national purpose.
You see, when we land this and it's out there on the ground, Australia will be out there as a global leader in providing this-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible)
CONROY: -If I could just add-
PM: -providing this - just one sec - and providing this infrastructure relative to what we see in other countries of similar geographical size, or even population concentrations worldwide.
So, you asked your question, how'd it all come together? Hardline commercial negotiations, honesty in the negotiations, but I think a unifying purpose about a huge future for the company, Telstra, but getting on with this important public purpose.
Over to you.
CONROY: Sorry, if I could just add to that - probably, to take your point, the single most important change that took place was when the Telstra board elected Catherine and David as the chair and CEO, and brought John Stanhope, who's quietly standing over in the corner and no-one's mentioned his name yet, on to the board as part of the team. So, I think the single most important step forward was the decision by the board of Telstra to elect the new leadership which has taken an absolute change in the approach from Telstra. It's been evident for the last- these have been very tough negotiations, yet you have not been reading about them from us. There's been much speculation and at times comical speculation, but it has not been put in place by Telstra or ourselves or NBN Co, and I think that that good faith and that trust that has been built up over the last- demonstrates absolutely that the war is over.
JOURNALIST: Question for Telstra.
PM: There's a question here from, Phil.
JOURNALIST: On another topic, Prime Minister, could I-
PM: -We'll roll with this one for a bit and then come-
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: David over here, and then you, mate.
JOURNALIST: Just a question about the $11 billion. Has it come out of the $43 billion? Does it mean that the network in the end will cost less than $43 billion? And a related question for Ms Livingstone - if the independent experts say that $11 billion is not a fair value, is the deal off?
CONROY: Certainly, I think Mike has indicated that there is now a cheaper national build for the total project. I think he's rightfully saying there's some commercially sensitive issues there in revealing exactly what that figure would be, but no question, it is again cheaper and delivering a better, more reliable, and faster services that we've currently got now.
And in terms of the Telstra question, Catherine?
LIVINGSTONE: Yes, thank you, Stephen.
Clearly, Telstra has negotiated very hard over the last 12 months and we're very well informed about our business and also the interests of our shareholders. We will, of course, take the final proposal if it's negotiated through the definitive agreements, through an independent experts review and then put that to shareholders, subject to regulatory approvals.
PM: There's a question here in the front - Ari.
JOURNALIST: Telstra, how confident are you that you've achieved a good deal for shareholders, given that there were estimates that went up to $25 billion for the value of the assets that are being sold?
LIVINGSTONE: Look, I think it's- how many times can I say it? We have been through very tough negotiations. We are very well informed about our business. We regard this Financial Heads of Agreement as a significant milestone and we look forward to negotiating the definitive agreements.
PM: OK, there's another one at the front here.
JOURNALIST: A question for Telstra - you mentioned that there are still some issues outstanding, amongst them taxation and issues around the migration. Can you explain just what the tax issues are and explain a little of just what remains still to be done?
LIVINGSTONE: Look, I don't want to comment on all of those details because that's part of the negotiation of the definitive agreement, so, we've tried to be clear about the fact that there's a great deal of work yet to do but we'll just work through the issues.
JOURNALIST: But what is the tax? I'm just particularly interested in what the tax issue might be?
LIVINGSTONE: It's just to do with the way the arrangements are structured financially. It's a mechanical exercise, but it's something that has to be resolved as part of the negotiating of the agreements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you must be hoping for a similar circuit breaker on the mining tax. Can you tell us, do you support Wayne Swan's claims that-
PM: -Hang on. Are there any other questions on the Telstra stuff, and I'll come back to you.
JOURNALIST: How much equity does this deal give Telstra in the NBN Co? Is that a, or is there a value of that $9 million or-
CONROY: No, we're buying access to their ducts, the bits of their infrastructure. There's no Telstra ownership of NBN shares or anything like that. It's a commercial transaction which is what was signed this morning which commits NBN to pay certain prices for certain access to Telstra assets, so, there's no equity involved. The Government remains as the McKinsey- McKinsey's recommended the Government should retain 100 per cent ownership during the course of the build and that remains consistent after today's announcement.
JOURNALIST: Minister, just to clear up those numbers, though - $43 billion has been well canvassed publicly and yet we're being told today that the savings below that can't be for commercial-in-confidence reasons. This is a taxpayer-owned company in the first instance. When and how will we get that indication?
CONROY: We - Lindsay, did you?
TANNER: I think there's some confusion between capital and recurrent here, because effectively what's happening is that the payments that we're talking about here are recurrent payments that are into the future.
NBN Co is not fronting up with a giant pile of money tomorrow to Telstra. These are contractual arrangements where NBN Co is effectively saying we will pay you a payment for access to your infrastructure, whereas the figure of $43 billion relates to the capital build, so the two are not comparable.
JOURNALIST: So then you will own the infrastructure, that the deal's been done-
TANNER: -No. NBN Co is proposing to pay Telstra for the use of its infrastructure. It is not buying the infrastructure.
JOURNALIST: So is it leasing it, in effect?
TANNER: That's a matter for detailed negotiations-
JOURNALIST: Can you indicate over what period of time will they take place?
TANNER: Look, that's something that obviously is still to be negotiated between parties.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can we just have a bit of order here, thanks? Over here then you.
JOURNALIST: Sorry, Prime Minister. Does this mean Telstra will no longer be building infrastructure for broadband? Will that be now taken over by NBN Co, and Telstra will just become its biggest customer? Is that how it works from now on?
PM: Stephen
CONROY: I think, that's essentially. I mean, they'll still be providing wireless services, so they've still got a very strong interest in broadband through the wireless spectrum and obviously the release of spectrum in to the future, and Telstra, I'm sure, will have an interest in that to ensure that they can introduce - and they're already testing I believe - their 4G products. So, they'll still be providing infrastructure on the ground to support that wireless structure and they've still got existing infrastructure in the ground and they'll be servicing it and upgrading it as they see fit in terms of back-haul.
But in terms of the copper network, part of the agreement is that the copper network is obviously being phased out, so that as we connect fibre - in each street, in each suburb and each town - Telstra transfers its customers across and the decommissioning of the copper network.
I mean, that's how it's structured. Well, we said it's an 8-year build.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
CONROY: Oh, sorry, look, I think, to be fair we'd like to try and finalise that document before the annual general meeting. I think that would be in time for it. I should let Telstra speak for what their timing is of presenting of the vote. That's a different issue to completing this, but I think it would be very fair, if we're wanting to try and complete, so Telstra shareholders at the AGM could ask questions about and it could be described and discussed, but I should really pass to Catherine to comment on that any further if she'd like to.
LIVINGSTONE: Well, I think, as I said, we're aiming to work with NBN Co and to see the completion of the definitive agreements and that final negotiation as rapidly as possible. I think that's our mutual intention.
PM: I just add one point - the bottom line is this is a better deal for the Australian taxpayer because we've struck a negotiated outcome with Telstra. It made sense for the taxpayer to be able to use Telstra's ducts in order to put this through and we think that is the sensible, prudent, proper way to conduct these negotiations.
Second thing is, get the infrastructure out there. Third thing, make it available to all families and small businesses.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you a Sydney-centric question, Prime Minister?
PM: A what?
JOURNALIST: A Sydney-centric (inaudible)
PM: All right, OK.
JOURNALIST: The Penrith by-election - did you heed any message out of what happened in Penrith on the weekend, and what is your message, the Federal Government's message, to the people of Western Sydney?
PM: Well, as far as Sydney by-elections are concerned, I think both Kristina and I think the leader of the State Opposition have made it pretty clear, that these have been fought on state issues, and secondly, I think it's our long experience in the political process that the Australian people vote differently on state and federal political matters and they have done for quite some time.
As for the people of Western Sydney, can I just say this, and communities like those in Western Sydney right across the nation: there are still big cost of living pressures out there and these are real. When we look at the fact that our economy as a whole has held up really well through the global financial crisis, that's true relative to the rest of the world, but the cost of living pressures out there and the challenges faced by small business on the ground are real, and they are hard and they are difficult, and as I've moved around the nation last month, I just picked this up time and time again.
As a nation, relative to what's going on in Europe, what's going in North America, this is a good performance for us as Australia, but let me tell you, it is still very hard out there. So, our challenge as a Government is, for example, to deliver things like what we have got coming forward on 1 July, which is the third round of tax cuts. If you're on $50,000 a year, it means that after three years, you effectively got about $1,750 less tax than you were paying three years ago. It's nearly a 20 per cent tax cut. It's those basic cost of living questions, which I think are really important for people out there.
Sam, I said before, and then over to you, mate.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. What evidence do you have of strong arm tactics by big mining companies in relation to this mining tax debate? Is it anecdotal? Have there been any direct concerns raised with your government?
And in relation to the issue of Western Sydney, are you picking up at all that the boat people issue is a concern there among your Labor MPs or your constituents?
PM: Sure. On the first point, I think what the Treasurer was doing this morning is simply calling a spade a spade.
Answer to your second question, yes.
And thirdly, as far as the concerns about the vote in Western Sydney, as I've said, I think in response to Phil's question before, our overwhelming sense of that, and having spoken with state political colleagues, is that this is a vote on local state political issues.
JOURNALIST: So companies have gone to the Prime Minister's office and said they're being strong-armed? Is that what you're answering yes to?
PM: I said, in the sequence of the questions you asked, yes to the second.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the tenor of today's-
PM: -To the Government. I didn't say to the PMO.
JOURNALIST: Given the tenor of today's agreement, and I'm sure that you'd like Telstra to be digging iron ore as well-
PM: -Well, business diversification's always possible. It's a diverse, flexible company and it's-
JOURNALIST: It's quite evident, isn't it, Prime Minister, that you're not going to be able to get the big miners across? Are you then hopeful that the small miners or the smaller miners will be happier with concessions on faster recovery of capital and the taxing point at which certain minerals are taxed?
PM: I think the bottom line is, building out of the negotiations with Telstra, is that if you engage in those negotiations in a constructive, positive, frank, honest, upfront sort of way, they'll be tough and they'll be long, but you get there in the end and you produce something which is good.
We'd- actually, in a similar process with a whole bunch of mining companies right now - very constructive, positive, full of detail, getting there, wrestling it down. I can't say that for all, though.
I go back to what I've always said through this process, though. Reform is tough. It's very tough, and I saw some commentary the other day about this, but you know, the Government's belted around in the opinion polls at present. The Government will continue to be belted around the opinion polls at present, but this is not a Government of opinion polls. It's a Government which believes in the national interest and the national interest demands that we do tax reform. That tax reform is hard, but we intend to prosecute the debate.
We've always said that we would be open to consultation and negotiation on detail and implementation and generous transition arrangements for mining companies across the country. That remains the case, and we are through that process with so many mining companies right now.
Folks, I'm about to freeze. Socceroos.
JOURNALIST: How do you feel about Harry Kewell's (inaudible)
PM: We are a)-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible) with Senator Conroy, do you agree that this just sounds like a bunch of whinging Poms?
PM: I'll let him answer the latter part of your question. I actually, look I am not fully versed on every rule of the round ball game, OK? I'm just being upfront with you here. But I think the red card was a bit rough. I would say questionable, but you know something? let's get behind the Socceroos. They've got a game coming up against Serbia and it's a tough competition over there.
You can answer the question about your country of origin.
CONROY: Well, look I don't think, I think they've got a lot to complain about given how they played against Algeria, frankly, but look, the Socceroos put in a great performance.
PM: I think that will be in the British (inaudible)
CONROY: The Socceroos put in a great performance last night. I mean, clearly a penalty, but the sending off was probably a bit harsh and the way they responded to the sending off was fabulous. I mean, Chipperfield had the chance to score with the keeper and we were just dead unlucky. So, it was a fabulous performance last night and if they can produce a performance like that, then there's still a chance to go through and we should get right behind them and congratulate them on how they've bounced back from, you know, a very tough game against Germany.
But it was a great performance last night, particularly given they were down to 10 men, and Harry's one of the, you know, the stars of the team and to lose Harry was a real blow, 'cause he was causing havoc in that early stage before he got caught.
PM: And now that NBN Co and Telstra matters have been concluded with this Financial Heads of Agreement, Conroy will now be heading to South Africa to assist with general advisory responsibilities.
That was a joke. It was not true.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Got to go, folks. We're heading off. Thanks very much.


The Australian Government today welcomed the announcement by Telstra and NBN Co that they had entered into a Financial Heads of Agreement.
This agreement paves the way for a faster, cheaper, more efficient rollout of the National Broadband Network, with faster take-up.
This is an important step in the delivery of the single largest nation building infrastructure project in Australian history, which will increase national productivity and help build a stronger economy.
The Agreement between NBN Co and Telstra, worth an expected value of $9 billion, provides for:
     * The reuse of suitable Telstra infrastructure, including pits, ducts and backhaul fibre, by NBN Co as it starts to rollout its new network - avoiding unnecessary infrastructure duplication; and
     * The progressive migration of customers from Telstra's copper and pay-TV cable networks to the new wholesale-only fibre network to be built and operated by NBN Co.
The Agreement means that:
     * Taxpayers benefit because it reduces the overall cost of building the network and will result in higher take-up rates and revenue for NBN Co.
     * A greater proportion of the NBN rollout will be underground, with less overhead cabling.
     * Australia's largest telecommunications company, Telstra, will become a participant in the rollout of the NBN, and is likely to become NBN Co's largest customer.
Combined with Australian Government public policy reforms, Telstra estimates that the agreement announced today will deliver Telstra a post-tax net present value of approximately $11 billion. The payments by NBN Co to Telstra would be made over a number of years as the rollout progresses.
Through the migration of Telstra customers to the NBN, Australia will benefit significantly from a national wholesale-only broadband network, delivering structural separation of Telstra.
This historic microeconomic reform will ensure Australia finally has a genuinely competitive telecommunications industry which works for all Australian households and businesses, and helps to drive long-term productivity growth in our economy.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission will review the competition aspects of this agreement as envisaged in the Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Safeguards Bill, which the Government still hopes to pass to provide greater certainty to industry.
In support of the Agreement, the Australian Government will progress public policy reforms to support the transition to NBN to which Telstra attributes a value of approximately $2 billion. It will:
     * Establish a new entity, USO Co - with Commonwealth funding of $50 million in 2012-13 and 2013-14, increasing to $100 million per annum thereafter. The remaining funding that USO Co requires will be contributed by industry, as it is now with final arrangements subject to industry and stakeholder consultation;
     * Provide $100 million to Telstra to assist in the retraining and redeployment of Telstra staff that will be affected by this very significant reform to the structure of the telecommunications industry; and
     * Require NBN Co to be the wholesale supplier of last resort for fibre connections in greenfield developments from 1 January 2011.
These important contributions were provided for in the 2010-11 Budget.
USO Co will assume responsibility for most of Telstra's Universal Service Obligations for the delivery of standard telephone services, payphones and emergency call handling from 1 July 2012. This will ensure that essential communications services are protected and assist the structural reform of the industry.
Telstra, NBN Co and the Commonwealth agencies will now move to negotiate detailed Definitive Agreements, which is expected to take some months.
When these negotiations are concluded the Definitive Agreements will be put to Telstra's shareholders and the Government, for final approval.
While today's announcement is a significant step in the rollout of the NBN, as confirmed by the NBN Implementation Study, this project would still be financially viable even without the participation of Telstra.
The NBN is critical to securing Australia's international competitiveness. It is central to Australia's economic future because it will deliver universal superfast broadband to all Australian households and businesses no matter where they live or do business. 


Well, good morning to you all.
I understand you were locked out in the cold this morning. This was a pre-determined plan to test your level of Christian commitment to social justice. It was not an accident. Sorry about that. I'm sure you'll recover with something warm to drink and to eat fairly soon.
Micah Challenge has asked for something pretty basic but deeply profound - to do justice, to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.
This is often a challenging environment in which to walk humbly with your God. That's the parliament building.
To do justice, to love mercy, these are big and fundamental challenges for all people of conscience.
Mention was made just before of Wilberforce and many of us have seen the film; some of us have read his biography; some of us have read more about his life. What strikes me about people like Wilberforce and those who at that time and before him, campaigned for social justice was that they were all told at the time it was impossible; that it couldn't be done; that if you change these things it would so fundamentally wreck the economy and the existing social order that it wasn't worth trying; and even if you were sympathetic to the cause, somehow, somehow, it was just so far off into the future that you could never get there.
Well, people like Shaftesbury said no, we can make a difference. People like Wilberforce said no, we can make a difference. People who said one day that women should have the vote, they also made a difference. People who said that vote should be extended to all human beings, whatever their property class, they, too, believed they could make a difference. And in each of their cases, whether it was the repeal of the Child Factory Act, whether it was the introduction of laws to prevent the sending of children down into mines, whether it was laws to ensure that mines could be worked in with safety, and factories, laws which repealed slavery, laws which enabled all people to participate in the democratic society of nations, all these were made possible because men and women decided to make a difference. That's what impresses me about you good folk here today in making poverty history and the underpinnings of it through the Micah Challenge.
Some sometimes argue that the question of social justice and the alleviation and the elimination of extreme poverty are just too hard and too far off. You know something? I think that's wrong.
I think each and every one of you here are demonstrations of the fact that you believe that's wrong. I think each and every one of you here sees yourself as a change-maker in the world today.
Those of you who have signed up for the Micah Challenge, and if my memory serves me well more than 100,000 of you across the country, are out there as individual ambassadors for change in each of your local communities: in the face of local politicians; in the face of your local community leaders; in the face of your local newspapers, causing them to conclude that this isn't just something which hangs of the edge or at the extremes of what's possible or normal in our national and local political life, but it actually is fundamental.
So, I thank you for the work that you've done: for the meetings you've held; the engagements you've had; and the fact that you're here in Canberra today to be in the face of our nation's politicians as well, because it's important that you do so. This place is full of competing priorities. What's important? How do we spend our nation's resources? What should we give our time to? You are constantly out there as this nagging, prophetic voice.
If you read the history of folk like Micah and the Old Testament prophets, they could be real nags. Jeremiah, Isaiah, Micah, Amos - these were in your face types. They didn't have a lot of popularity at the time, by the way, either, in your face types. So, can I say to each and every one of you, it's good, the work that you're doing.
The Millennium Development Goals are the practical mechanism through which we engage as countries of the world to make that difference. There's no point going out there and re-inventing the wheel. The MDGs are there. They are the product of the crafting of agreement between governments going back to the Millennium Summit, and we're now 10 years into the Millennium.
These are basic goals, eight of them, and they go to very basic measures about whether we are making a difference to extreme poverty. That is why we have embraced them as an Australian Government. That's why they've formed the structure through which we explain what we are doing in terms of our international development assistance effort.
There's no point re-inventing the wheel. They should be our framework. That's why we've now incorporated that framework of the MDGs into what we're doing with each and every one of the Island countries of the Pacific. We've done that over the last two years.
How do we measure whether we're making progress or not? Well, the MDGs actually provide a mechanism for doing that. You're either improving the figures on infant mortality, for maternal death, or you're not. It's very measurable.
Of course, having a way in which you measure these things and a way in which you organise your efforts, that's one thing. The second one is whether you're making an effort as well.
Prior to the last election I said we'd commit to 0.5 by 2015-16. That is a commitment from which I believe none of us can move. I thank the Leader of the Opposition and those who have preceded him in his position for committing them to that goal as well. It's really important, and so in the last two years our overseas development assistance contribution has gone from, I think, $3.1 billion to $4.3 billion as a result. The most recent budget - more than half a billion dollars more. We're on track to realise that 0.5 goal, and if you know where we started from, it's been a long distance to travel.
Every Finance Minister and every Treasurer of the country will rail against this. I don't think it's right to do that, and that's why we're on track to reach that. We know there is more to do.
To do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God. A year or so ago Tim Costello gave me this version of the Bible, a Poverty and Justice Bible. You'll be familiar with it.
Sometimes people think this is just one of those marginal things, also, even in the teaching of the Christian scriptures. It's not. There are 2,000 verses in this Bible which are all about the injunction for each of us to do justice and to love mercy and to make a difference for the poor.
So, thank you, each and every one of you, for making a difference for the poor. Your advocacy on the ground is effective. You've made the nation's political leadership listen, so when you go back to your communities and the schools from which you come, just tell them this one thing - you have made a difference, you are making a difference, and together we will make a difference in eliminating extreme poverty across the world.
That is our nation's ambition and the ambition of all people of conscience, everywhere.


Thank you very much.
To Vice President Xi Jinping, members of your delegation, fellow Members of Parliament, friends of Australia, friends of China, ladies and gentlemen.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the 2010 Australia-China Trade and Economic Cooperation Forum.
I hope Australia's welcome to our friends from China has been warm enough to protect you from Canberra's cold weather.
The overwhelming enthusiasm of today's forum and with so many people here present, and the scale of the Chinese delegation that is here today, is a reflection of Australia and China's shared commitment to our trade and economic ties.
As you saw recently during the worst economic downturn in 75 years, if we are going to face the global economic challenges of our time, then we must do so together. At a time when international trade was suffering, total trade between Australia and China grew by 15.1 per cent to $85 billion in 2009.
Merchandising (inaudible) from China grew even as Australia's total imports fell and our resource exports to China boomed taking Australia's merchandise exports up by over 30 per cent to more than $42 billion.
I could go on citing figures but the long and short of it is that these gains came about through the hard work and commitment of all of you here in this room. People who understand the promise of not just strong economic relations but of also building the people-to-people ties which underpin them.
For this and for the service you have done for the Australian and Chinese people, by expanding bilateral cooperation on trade and economic matters I thank you.
As I watched the opening ceremony at the Beijing Olympics in 2008 I saw China emerging on to the world stage. The remarkable transformations that we've seen in China were on display for all to see, these changes are of world significance. Our relationship stretches back a long time but we have a strong future ahead of us as well, and I'd encourage each person here to participate in this dialogue which is so important to our trade and economic relationships.


It is with profound sadness that I inform the House that a helicopter carrying Coalition forces went down in Khandahar province in Afghanistan today.
There were ten Australian servicemen on board.
It's my sad responsibility to inform the House that three Australian Commandos from the Special Operations Task Group have been killed.
Seven other Australian servicemen are wounded, two of them very seriously.
This is a tragic day for Australia and for the Australian Defence Force.
It is a day of the deepest sorrow for the friends and families of those who have lost their loved ones in this tragedy.
I express to all of them the deepest condolences of the Australian Government and the Australian people.
Our thoughts are also with those who have been wounded.
I want them and their families to know that they will receive the best possible medical care.
This tragedy brings to sixteen those Australians who have lost their lives serving our country in Afghanistan.
This is a very heavy price to pay, particularly for the families of those brave Australians who have lost their lives.
We know our mission in Afghanistan is hard, but this mission is critical for our common security.
We work alongside our allies from the United States and from other NATO countries to avoid Afghanistan once again becoming a breeding ground for terrorists who can then strike at innocent Australians both at home and abroad.
It is our nation's highest calling to wear the uniform of Australia.
Those who wear it do outstanding work for Australia and they do that outstanding work in this most difficult, demanding and dangerous of environments.
Today we recall their service as we mourn the loss of some of Australia's finest.
The commitment, the dedication and sacrifice of those soldiers will not be forgotten.
It will never be forgotten.
All Australians owe them a debt of gratitude for their service and for their sacrifice.
Our thoughts and our prayers are with the families and friends of those who have fallen.
We mourn them, we pay tribute to them, we pay tribute to them having paid the ultimate sacrifice for our nation. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Let me first congratulate Lenore Taylor and David Uren for this book.
This is an important contribution to contemporary political history.
Just as Laura Tingle wrote a defining account of Australia's recession of the early '90s in Chasing The Future - so Lenore and David have written a defining account of Australia's response to the global recession of the late 2000s.
Of course there is a great difference in those two episodes of recent economic history.
In the early '90s, Australia struggled with a recession that was more severe than many other economies.
In the more recent global recession, compared to others Australia has of course done far better.
And this is the story why.
Some elements of the story will be familiar, though already they seem a long time ago.
The weeks of September 2008 when the crisis broke and Lehmann failed.
The sequence of emergency measures, first in the United States and then across the world.
And the emergency responses here in Australia and in other nations.
Lenore and David bring all those events together into a fast-paced narrative.
But their research has also dug up quite a bit that most of us hadn't heard before.
We learn that as the tidal wave of the global recession headed to Australian shores, with Treasurer Wayne Swan in the United States meeting with other Finance Ministers, he took part in the critical cabinet meetings deciding on the stimulus on a phone hookup.
But not a phone hookup in a wood-panelled embassy room in Washington DC - but from a teenage boy's bedroom in Maryland, surrounded by posters of rock legends, because that was the only place the embassy could provide the Treasurer with a secure line.
We also read that one of Australia's leading financial economists, Professor Ian Harper, spent a weekend doing interviews in October 2008 assuring people about the safety of Australia's financial system - and then he promptly raced down the street to the closest ATM to take out as much cash as he could in case of a financial collapse.
We also find that it seems whenever financial markets were collapsing, invariably those events seemed disrupt exotic holidays that bank executives were enjoying in the most remote corners of the world.
These are the discoveries you make with the kind of substantive research that Lenore and David have undertaken.
The early chapters remind us that when the Government was elected in November 2007, we came to office with an ambitious agenda.
We did not imagine that within nine months we would face a full-blown financial crisis.
Lenore and David fully capture the drama and crisis of those weeks in late 2008.
And I can tell you, from someone at the centre of Australia's response to that crisis - the drama was more than anyone could ever wish for - it was a white-knuckle ride.
As world leaders who were speaking to each other every day throughout that period, we contemplated the collapse of the global financial system and the global economy.
As a global economy, we screeched to the edge of the cliff, and we leaned over.
Only narrowly did we pull back from the edge.
Let's remember the scale of the crisis.
- In the first 12 months of this recession, global stock markets fell by more than 40 per cent off their peak - nearly twice their fall during the first 12 months of the Great Depression.
- Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent from the peak in April 2008 - as bad as in the first 12 months of the Great Depression.
- And global trade fell by 17 per cent this time - almost double the 10 per cent fall in the first 12 months of the Great Depression.
More recently, some have sought to downplay the extent to which this crisis threatened Australian families.
And of course downplaying that threat suits the political interests of some.
But as Lenore and David say, it was:
"arguably the greatest threat the country had faced since World War II...
"it was the worst crisis financial markets had ever seen...The complete collapse of the world financial system appeared a real prospect, with incalculable consequences."
Those incalculable consequences included the risk of a "death spiral" among Australian financial institutions.
Had that happened, it would have wreaked havoc for small businesses, depositors, home owners and the wider Australian economy.
And that's why we were determined to act, and act decisively.
Lenore and David say that the Government's response showed "extraordinarily early planning compared with other governments around the world".
I just call it doing what we had to do.
With everything within our powers, we were determined to leave nothing to chance.
Because we had lived through the recessions of the early '80s and again the early '90s.
- We'd seen the effects on 50-something blokes in factories who one day got a pink slip and never worked another day in their lives.
- We'd seen a generation of kids frozen out of jobs and apprenticeships as unemployment climbed beyond 10 per cent.
- And we'd known families who struggled to stay together through the terrible difficulties of selling up the family home, pulling kids out of schools and seeing a lifetime of dreams turn to dust.
We knew we couldn't insulate Australia completely from the global recession.
But if we acted decisively, we could cushion the impacts on working families.
We could apply the lessons from past downturns.
And that's what we did.
As Lenore and David say repeatedly - if the Government hadn't acted decisively, Australia would have gone into recession.
Just as North America did.
Just as Europe did.
Just as south-east Asian economies did.
And just as New Zealand did.
And just as Australia would have done if the Liberals had been in office.
That is the blunt reality.
The Liberals opposed the stimulus.
They underestimated the risks for Australian families.
They got their analysis of the global financial crisis fundamentally wrong.
And had they been in office, hundreds of thousands more Australians would still be out of work today, and thousands of small business would have gone to the wall.
Lenore and David make the point that perhaps the Government has suffered politically because we acted so quickly that many Australians today aren't even aware of the threat we faced:
"Australia bore the recession very lightly... The reality is that people only factor in what they know. Those whose jobs were saved don't know who they are and, even if they did, would be hard pressed in most cases to draw the link between retaining their employment and the Government's actions."
That's a judgment for others.
But for Wayne and me, and for this Government, working to protect Australian families from threats like the global financial crisis are why we're in public life.
It's why we're Labor.
We belong to a political tradition that grew out of the suffering of working people in the Depression of the 1890s.
That has stood up for working families through the booms and busts of the economic cycle.
And that believes in the power of governments to protect people when markets fail.
As a Labor government, that's in our DNA and it's why we did what we had to do.
So where does this leave us today, nearly two years after the crisis unfolded?
Let's imagine for a moment if the Australian Government had not acted as we did.
Imagine where we would be today.
We'd be just where the governments of many other advanced nations are.
- Facing years of hard, grinding efforts to get hundreds of thousands of people out of long-term unemployment and back into the workforce.
- Experiencing the erosion of our capital base and our skills base when investment dries up and people lose their jobs.
- Dealing with a much larger budget challenge because of the high costs of unemployment, lower tax receipts and a less productive economy.
But that's not where we are today.
Australia has come through the global recession stronger than almost any other advanced economy.
That's why I don't accept the passing remark in the book that "there is depressingly little to show" for our stimulus, in terms of its contribution to productive capacity.
I don't think the facts support that contention.
Of course if we'd had more infrastructure projects sitting on the shelf and ready to go, then we'd have gone ahead with those.
But when we came into office, that work simply hadn't been done - the previous Government had neglected its responsibility for national infrastructure for 12 years.
It's simply not true to say the stimulus investments won't contribute to a more productive economy.
Investments in rail track and new rail lines; in roads; in super-fast broadband; in our schools and universities - these are real investments - essential investments - that will build a more productive economy.
And investments in social housing and community infrastructure deliver lasting benefits to working families across the nation.
Tens of thousands of those homes were in shocking disrepair and we've fixed them - and the whole purpose of building a strong economy is that you can take action and make life better for Australians who are doing it tough.
Because of our stimulus plan, Australia has higher skills base, contributing to higher long term productivity.
More children have grown up in homes with a parent who holds down a job.
The stimulus was never just about savings jobs now.
It was also about saving human capital for a generation, and strengthening our enduring social fabric.
So that we continue to build a stronger economy and deliver fairness for working families into the future.
We acted rapidly to keep the economy going - to stop it going over the cliff.
So mistakes were made along the way. 
It's important to learn from those mistakes - and that's what we're doing. 
But today, our national debate in Australia is not the debate that's going on in other countries.
It's not a debate about suburbs full of streets of empty homes that have gone through foreclosure.
It's not about how we restore the livelihoods of working Australians who lost their jobs and are still unemployed today.
And it's not about how we deal with hundreds of thousands of kids who have never had a day's work in their lives.
Instead, it's about the big challenges of the future - and how an ambitious government gets on with the job of delivering better health, better hospitals, better schools and a fair share of the proceeds of the mining booms for Australian families.
How we build a national health and hospitals network that can meet the needs of an ageing population in the decades ahead.
How we reform our tax system, so that we have better superannuation and more secure retirement for Australians; competitive company tax rates; and taxation of our resources sector that ensures Australians get their fair shares of the proceeds of the next phase of the mining boom.
These debates aren't easy debates - reform is never easy - but they are crucial to our future.
And we're able to get on with these debates, because we're not facing years of recovery from recession.
So with those initial reflections, let me again congratulate Louise Adler and the team at MUP for another great book.
Across the country, bookshelves are weighed down with the weight of MUP's publishing scoops of the last few years.
Well done again.
And congratulations to Lenore and David.
This is an important contribution to Australian political history and Australian political economy.
I'm delighted to launch Shitstorm.


Let me just say a few things and then I understand we're going to have an open set of questions about things near and dear to your hearts.
Firstly, about the role of the churches in Australia in shaping the country that we have become.
I have said throughout my public life that I am proud of the role played by the Christian churches in shaping this country Australia.
Right back to its earliest days and the arrival of the first Christian chaplain in the colony in the First Fleet, Richard Johnson, through to the arrival of the first Catholic priests not long after, and the arrival of various other Christian traditions in this country, the way in which so many of the social institutions of this country have been shaped by the Christian church.
The earliest efforts in bringing about universal education rested on the back of the efforts of the Christian churches. The beginnings of our public hospitals began on the back of the efforts of the Christian churches. The beginnings of basic social institutions such as orphanages, and such as care for the poor, began off the back of the Christian churches.
And the key values which underpin the Judeo-Christian ethic which has been alive in this country for the last two centuries have been shaped so much by the traditions which you represent in this room.
It is often only in the absence of those traditions that you begin to feel what it would be like had Australia been placed differently. That is not to say that those in the Christian traditions have always got it right. You and we have, mistakes have been made by each of the traditions represented in this room. But that should not cause us to conclude that the glass have been overwhelming full rather than empty.
So many people in this country have benefitted from the great tradition of Christian charity and church intervention in society and in people's lives when they have been so singularly distressed. This would be quite a different - and I believe poorer - country were it not for that contribution.
So that is me. It does not mean in this country Australia we are therefore hostile to other religious traditions, we are not.
We are the country which resolved in the 1890s that we would not have an established religion. That reflected the great wisdom of our founding fathers that there should be none and that in fact we should be open to all.
I read some years ago the great debates in the United States at the time following the Revolutionary War as to whether they should have an established religion there, and as soon as the Episcopalians worked out that the Presbyterians were trying to beat them to the jump, they decided they wouldn't have an established religion either. I think there was great wisdom in those deliberations of the 1890s.
And as a consequence in the absence of an established religion, we therefore do welcome, with open arms people of other religious traditions, be they Muslims, be they people of the Jewish tradition, or people of Buddhist faith or other faiths. That is the right and proper thing in a country which respects freedom of religious expression.
And of course in our great Australian family there are those of no faith. And that does not mean that people of no faith therefore have nothing to contribute to debates about morals, to debates about ethics and to debates about values; they do. The great thing about our country Australia is that it tolerates people of faith, of many faiths and those with no faith, and that is the proper workings of a country such as ours rooted in the principles of democracy and respect for the law.
In terms of our engagement with matters I think of real relevance to the churches represented here and those listening to and watching the broadcast, I think one of our first priorities as a Government has been to engage with churches in what you're doing in schools, in the education system of Australia.
We've been out there investing in probably the biggest school modernisation program that this country has ever seen, in fact it is. And we have been completely blind to the question of whether a school is a State school or a non-State school, a Government school or a non-Government school, a Catholic school or a Christian school, an independent Christian school, an Anglican school or whatever school.
The key thing is as I travel around the country is how so many schools, run by churches, which have frankly been struggling to make sure that they've got the most up to date facilities. Basic things like libraries, basic things like learning centres, basic things like science centres, state of the art language centres. And I would like to simply emphasise one core point - that as we have done this as part of our national economic stimulus strategy, we have done so to make sure that all Australians, wherever they go to school, wherever they choose to send their children to school, have been benefitted from this program.
I was in Melbourne not long ago opening a school, a Catholic parish school called St Luke the Evangelist - hi to anyone who happens to be watching from St Luke the Evangelist this evening. But what gave me a particular delight in opening their new learning centre was the fact that as the parish priest, a delightful Irish-Australian said, 'we've been a little bit down of heel at late, we haven't had a new building for 40 years'. And that gives my heart genuine joy when I see those changes occurring on the ground.
Also in the state school system of Australia, you know that the Government has supported the continuation of the school chaplaincy program. It's been a matter of some controversy in various parts of the country. The reason we've decided to support its continuation is because we actually think it's the right thing to do.
In my experience of chaplaincies on the ground they perform a very, very good role. Some schools may choose, through their parent communities, not to have one, that's their choice. If they wish to use that funding to support a school counsellor of no particular religious tradition that's their choice,.
But I am pretty pleased by the extent to which this has been taken up right across the country. We'll go through our own evaluation as to whether it works everywhere well. I'm told by every school community I go to it's working fantastically well, but we need to measure that because it involves the expenditure of Government funds.
But I'm pretty confident this program is going to continue because I see from so many of our school principals, and some of the most hardened and difficult high schools in our country, and some of the primary schools who are dealing with real challenges in various parts of Australia, how much they value the role of a school chaplain who has formed something of the social glue, the spiritual glue, of a school community.
So I hope through those specific actions - what we've done on chaplaincies, what we've done more broadly on school building programs - and our broader continued investment in the non-Government education system, that you'll be clear that our bona fides are real.
Another great contribution of course by the churches has been what you do in the area of health, hospitals and broader support for those with disabilities.
We've taken this challenge to heart as a Government. I said prior to the last election that I feared that our health and hospital system may not survive unless we fundamentally reformed it. I know some will see this as a political debate. To me it's a debate about human decency - that anyone who is sick, irrespective of where they come from, should be able to have access to first class health care.
So our reforms to bring in a new National Health and Hospitals Network is part and parcel of that. For the first time the Australian Government will be the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia - first time. In the past State Governments have provided one third, on average, of the running costs. We now will be the 60 per cent funder of the capital costs, the running costs, the teaching costs, the research costs, the training costs of hospitals.
We're also going to become the exclusive funder of the primary healthcare system - that is, the system outside of hospitals, and, for the first time, the exclusive funder of the aged care network of Australia.
These are big reforms, and I am concerned that in the absence of having done these reforms that the system would have simply reached tipping point as state governments are increasingly incapable, frankly, of funding the future needs of the public hospital system.
Which brings me to another challenge which I believe we share in common, and that is how do we deal with the problem of homelessness and affordable housing.
For us as a government this is pretty basic. We've set ourselves a target of halving homelessness. The Census statistic says that as of a couple of years ago that we had something like 100,000 Australians out there homeless; some 10,000 Australians each night sleeping rough.
That strikes me as off. It shouldn't be the case. We're a wealthy country. We should be able to do better than that.
You know, as representatives of the Christian churches, there are some folk who are sometimes very hard to help and I understand that too. But you know, when I go round to the homeless centres of Australia, and I've been to a lot in the last two and a half years I've been in this position, and I ask them 'have they got enough room at the inn?', they usually don't. They are turning people away. Often, for one person accepted, nine are turned away. That should not be the case. We need to change that.
One of the things that we are changing is we're now investing in 20,000 new units of social housing right across Australia as part of the Government's economic stimulus strategy. We're also fixing up tens of thousands of others which have actually fallen into disrepair and were no longer properly habitable.
We're also working with the non-government sector in projects like Common Ground. Common Ground, in our large cities, is in a process now of building a number of free-standing, hotel-like accommodation at the lowest level for people who need, literally, somewhere to stay the night. It's modelled on what's happened in New York and other cities in the United States.
My wife, Therese, who is heavily involved in this, will be opening the first of those facilities, I think, in the next month or two in Melbourne, I think, and that is happening around the rest of the country as well.
Also, investing in homelessness programs because, as you know, homelessness itself is usually a final manifestation of a whole bunch of other problems, whether it's mental illness, whether it's family breakdown, or whether it's problems with criminality, and all these things tend to connected. And so, there is also a large investment from the Government through the outreach of church, charitable and community organisations to do something about the causes of homelessness. How do you actually prevent people from falling into homelessness through better debt management just before the house is literally returned to the bank? How do you actually help people train and become trained to enter the workforce in order to become more resilient and self-reliant?
This is a very big investment by the Australian Government and something about which I feel passionately, because no Australian should have to sleep rough at night. We shouldn't be a country like that. We should be able to do better. And so partnering with you in the church and charitable sector for us is pretty important on that front as well.
We're also pretty, shall I say, hardline on the question of welfare as well. We don't believe that simply extending a welfare cheque is the end of the Government's responsibility. The welfare reforms that we're about to introduce in the Northern Territory are profound. These impose a whole series of new conditionalities, not just for Indigenous Australians, but now for non-indigenous Australians as well on a non-discriminatory basis in the Northern Territory, and prospectively, depending on how that goes, for the country at large, that people who are on welfare long-term actually have to meet a whole series of new conditions with the objective of bringing them off welfare.
This welfare reform is tough, it's hard. It's also compassionate. It's trying to get the balance right. But we believe that intergenerational welfare dependency is just wrong. It's actually bad for people.
And therefore I would draw your attention carefully to what we have just outlined in the parliament in the last week or so about our program for welfare reform, starting with the entire community in the Territory, but moving progressively to the rest of the country, depending on the success of those particular reforms.
In the workplace, you probably know which tradition we come from on that score. We actually believe fairness and the great Australian fair go belief is based on and anchored in a fair go for all in the workplace; that you should have an opportunity to bargain for the conditions that you've got at work.
We had real concerns with the previous set of laws, called WorkChoices. We didn't think that was right and fair.
We became very concerned when people's right at work were being traded away down to nothing, and that the most defenceless people, those in the lowest-paid occupations, were not getting a fair go - losing their penalty rates, losing their shift allowances, losing their overtime.
So, for us that's pretty basic as well. That's why we said, prior to the last election, we'd get rid of Work Choices, and that's why we have done that. It's a pretty basic difference between us.
And, speaking of work, the availability of jobs itself is for us a pretty fundamental belief. People think that this global financial crisis that the world has gone through in the last 18 months or so has somehow just passed Australia by, almost by accident or by miracle. It didn't. We actually chose to step into the economy and make a difference.
I've already spoken about this school building program - that's $15 billion worth of investment, partly to provide jobs for tradies, for small businesses, right across the country when the building sector was actually collapsing; partly also to make sure that your schools would have a lasting and positive legacy from this investment. But our fundamental driving factor was not to see mass unemployment.
Right round the world today, if you're a pastor in a church somewhere in the American mid-west, to the south, you'd be staring at double-digit unemployment and above. Right across the UK and Europe at present, you're seeing manifestations of unemployment between 8 and 18 and 19 per cent.
Here, we chose to make a difference, and through the measures that we took to stimulate the economy, amidst huge controversy, we actually kept the economy out of recession. But most importantly we kept hundreds of thousands of Australians in work. The thought of creating a generation of people thrown out of work with a decade to come back and to recover, and perhaps never recover, was something we didn't want to see.
The dignity of having a job is, for us, a fundamental human dignity, and that is why we acted in the way we did, and the result is pretty plain. Australia has 5.2 per cent unemployment. It's the second-lowest unemployment level of all the major advanced economies.
Had we generated in Australia the unemployment rate we now see in the United States - it's just under 10 - half a million Australians more would be out of work. Our total workforce is about 10 or 11 million. That's a lot of people.
Imagine what would be happening in each of your parishes, in each of your church communities, if such a large slice of people, frankly, weren't able to work and properly cater for their families and their basic needs.
So, protecting jobs, particularly through this extraordinary, abnormal global economic event has been a fundamental value of this Government at work.
Also, our action on climate change. There's been much debate about this. Our view is very simple - climate change is real, it's happening, and we cannot simply put our heads into the sand and pretend that it's not.
In terms of action on climate change, we've put forward three or four concrete measures. One, an emissions trading scheme as a good way to actually bring down, the most effective and cheapest way of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. We put our proposed legislation to the parliament three times, and three times it was voted down by our political opponents, and of course it therefore requires a new parliament to deal with it.
The other way you act on climate change is to radically invest in renewable energy - solar, wind, geothermal - and we we're doing that, the biggest renewable energy investment the country has ever seen.
Thirdly, energy efficiency, so we actually consume less and we are proper custodians of a sustainable planet.
And, beyond that, to work globally, because what we do here nationally represents 1.5 per cent of global emissions, so, with the Chinese, with the Indians, with the Americans and others to make sure that the planet is pulling together.
Copenhagen was a hard conference, but it was a necessary conference, because if we take, I believe, carefully the requirement on this generation to be proper stewards of God's creation it means that we should act responsibly in the care of this planet and this creation as well.
So we will continue to work on those agendas as well.
As I know I've been given the bell, and I think it's probably about time to wind up, I just finish on one point. These are some of the actions we've undertaken at home, here within this wider community called Australia. Wesley, the father and Methodist, said, when asked what his parish was and where his parish was, said quite correctly that the world was his parish, and so too it is in terms of our wider responsibilities.
We are proudly, in this country and under this Government, increasing our level of overseas development cooperation to 0.5 per cent of gross national income. What's that mean in practical terms? We've increased was we gift to the rest of the world from $3.2 billion when the Government was elected to now about $4.4-$4.5 billion. This has been a big change.
We are now engaged in aid programs in Africa. In the past, there were very few. We have now used the Millennium Development Goals and through the Micah Challenge and others supporting that to make a difference to extreme poverty around the world and within our own region. In partnership with the rest of the world, I think we can make a difference.
Therefore, what we do at home should also be reflected in that which we seek to do abroad.
There are many other things I'm sure that you'll wish to ask about, whether it's about asylum seekers or whether it's about questions of broader morality or other concerns which you as churches would have, and I'm pleased to seek to answer each of those questions.
I thank you very much.


Today the Rudd Government announced $30 million to market Australia to the dynamic Chinese travel market, and a forum on Chinese tourism to be held in Cairns in the near future.
China has 46 million outbound travellers each year. It is a market worth $2.8 billion to Australia's tourism industry and is forecast to increase at an average annual a rate of 10.2 per cent to $5.5 billion in 2017.
The recent announcement of a new service by China Southern from Guangzhou to Brisbane and increased frequency from both Sydney and Melbourne to Guangzhou are good examples of the expansion in air services needed to harness the strong Chinese growth. To build on this, the two sides agreed today that Australia will host a high level forum in Cairns on two way tourism between Australia and China in the near future. They agreed that the high level forum would serve to promote Chinese tourism to Australia and in particular to north Queensland.
In efforts to capitalise on the fast growing Chinese market, the Australian Government's tourism investment in China will include:
- Working with major airline partners including China Eastern, Air China, Qantas and China Southern Airlines to build frequency, capacity and dispersal of direct air services throughout Australia. The recent strategic partnership announced by Tourism Australia and China Southern is an example of the kind of relationship which will deliver both marketing and capacity benefits for Australia. 
- The launch of Tourism Australia There's Nothing Like Australia campaign in China in early August. This will include print and broadcast advertising in major national and regional media in addition to a digital campaign inviting potential Chinese travellers to vote online for the best Aussie experiences suggested by 3,500 Australian entries. 
- Strengthening partnerships with the travel agents who sell Australian holidays in China through Tourism Australia's Aussie Specialist travel agent program, which currently has nearly 3000 members in China.
- Streamlining and enhancing the China Approved Destination Status (ADS) Scheme Code of Business Standards and Ethics to monitor the ADS-approved operators and the quality of services provided to Chinese tourists visiting Australia under the scheme.
The $30 million investment also includes the $4.1 million announced by the Australian Government in April for consolidating bilateral relations for international tourism between China and Australia under the Approved Destination Status (ADS) scheme plus Tourism Australia's investment in China to market Australia as a tourist destination.
Australia has enjoyed a great head start as the first Western destination to gain approval from the Chinese Government to host group leisure tourists from three provinces of Shanghai, Beijing and Guangzhou in China since 1999.
During that time the number of Chinese visitors has grown from 93,000 visitors in 1999 to more than 366,000 in 2009 to become the fourth largest market for tourism to Australia.
China is expected to emerge as Australia's number one source market for international visitors in the next few years.
To help make this promise a reality the Government's focus will be on strengthening our investment beyond the three core regions of Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou into Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces and generating the demand which will drive air capacity and further investment.


The Prime Minister and the Vice President of the People's Republic of China HE Mr Xi Jinping today witnessed the signing of ten agreements that will add further depth and momentum to the Australia-China relationship.
The significance and variety of the agreements concluded today reflects the strong and growing cooperation between Australia and China. The agreements cover projects worth more than $10 billion in total.
Seven of the ten agreements relate to resources and energy. This demonstrates the dynamic relations between the two countries in this sector, and the strong complementarity of the two economies.
The agreements will also see upgrades to infrastructure and will deliver jobs and regional development. For example, the agreement between Karara Mining Ltd, China Development Bank Corporation and the Bank of China will underpin the development of proposed port and rail infrastructure at Oakajee in Western Australia. The project is expected to generate several thousand new jobs in the region.
The inter-governmental agreement between the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism and the National Energy Administration of China on enhancing cooperation in the field of energy underscores the Governments' shared commitment to addressing the twin challenges of climate change and energy security.
The two governments also concluded an export protocol to provide Tasmanian apple-growers and exporters with improved quarantine conditions to commence the export of apples to China.
Together, these agreements demonstrate the dynamism of bilateral economic cooperation, and the benefit that brings to both countries.
More information on the agreements is attached.
21 JUNE SIGNING CEREMONY FACT SHEET
Prime Minister Rudd and Vice President Xi Jinping today witnessed the signing of the following agreements to further expand the strong cooperation between Australia and China in education, trade, infrastructure, communications, energy and resources.
1. Facility Agreement for USD 1.2 billion between Karara Mining Ltd and China Development Bank Corporation (CDB)
Signatories: Mr Garret Dixon, CEO, Gindalbie Ltd and Board Member, Karara Mining Ltd; Mr Chen Yuan, Chairman, China Development Bank
This joint venture is a critical component underpinning the development of proposed port and rail infrastructure at Oakajee in Western Australia. This infrastructure, together with Karara's project at its mine site, is expected to generate several thousand new jobs in the region.
2. Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Cooperation on Project Development between the Government of South Australia and CDB
Signatories: Hon Tom Koutsantonis MP, Minister for Industry and Trade, Government of South Australia; Mr Chen Yuan, Chairman, China Development Bank
To build capacity for the development of major long-term energy infrastructure in South Australia by promoting greater cooperation in the areas of resources, infrastructure, clean energy, minerals processing and agriculture.
3. MoU on Cooperation on Project Development between Aquila Resources Ltd and CDB
Signatories: Mr Tony Poli, CEO, Aquila Resources Ltd; Mr Chen Yuan, Chairman, China Development Bank
The MoU will support the development and expansion of Aquila's coal and iron ore mining projects in the Pilbara in Western Australia.
4. MoU between the Party School of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and The Australian National University
Signatories: Professor Lawrence Cram, Deputy Vice-Chancellor, The Australian National University; Professor Huang Xianqi, Director, Advanced Training Department, Central Party School
The MoU covers agreement on training, joint research and exchanges of personnel, with a focus on promoting better understanding of governance in both countries and establishing durable academic linkages.
5. Arckaringa Unincorporated Evaluation Joint Venture Agreement between China National Offshore Oil Corporation and Arckaringa Energy Pty Ltd
Signatories: Mr Christopher Lambert, Chairman, Altona Energy; Mr Fu Chengyu, President, China National Offshore Oil Corporation
This Agreement will further opportunities for Chinese investment and market development in South Australia by promoting cooperation in resources, infrastructure, clean energy, minerals processing and agriculture. Projects may include conversion of coal in the Arckaringa Basin into high value clean energy products such as liquid fuels, chemical feed-stocks and power.
6. Strategic Partnership Agreement between Telstra and ZTE
Signatories: Mr Tarek Robbiati, Group Managing Director, Telstra International; Mr Kevin Cui, Senior Vice President, ZTE Corporation
To extend this strategic partnership, Telstra will become a preferred telecommunications supplier to ZTE worldwide and ZTE will continue to supply Telstra's telecommunications equipment to support the construction of the LTE network in Hong Kong and also with ZTE handsets in Australia.
7. Engineering and Procurement Contract Cooperation Agreement for China Gezhouba Group Company Ltd to provide procurement, engineering and design services to Fortescue Metals Group Ltd 
Signatories: Mr Andrew Forrest, CEO, Fortescue Metals Group; Mr Nie Kai, Deputy General Manager, China Gezhouba Group Company Ltd
To fast-track the expansion of Fortescue's iron ore project in the Pilbara to a production capability of 95 million tonnes of output a year. At current estimates, the expansion will add more than AUD 5 billion of annual export revenue to Australia.
8. Cooperation Agreement of China First Coal Development between Resourcehouse Ltd, Export-Import Bank of China, Metallurgical Corporation of China and China Power Holdings
Signatories: Mr Domenic Martino, Director, Resourcehouse Ltd; Mr Philip McNamara , Executive Director, China First Pty Ltd; Mr Yuan Xingyong, Assistant to the President, Export-Import Bank of China; Madam Li Xiaolin, Executive Chairwoman and President, China Power Holding Ltd; Mr Shen Heting, President, Metallurgical Corporation of China Ltd; Mr Zhenyi Hu, Vice President, China Rail Construction Corporation Ltd.
To establish a USD 8 billion China First Coal Project involving the construction of a mine, a 476km railway to the port of Abbott Point near Bowen and the construction of a coal loading terminal. The project is expected to result in approximately AUD 4 billion in exports every year for 25 years.
9. MoU between the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism of Australia and the National Energy Administration of the People's Republic of China on enhancing cooperation in the field of energy
Signatories: Mr Drew Clarke, Secretary, Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism or Mr Brendan Morling, Head of Energy and Environment Division; Mr Qian Zhimin, Deputy Administrator, National Energy Administration of China.
To enhance and extend long-standing cooperation between the Australian and Chinese Governments on energy, notably in oil and gas, coal and coal seam gas, low emissions technologies, renewable energy and uranium. This will better position both nations to address the twin challenges of climate change and energy security.
10. Protocol of Phytosanitary Requirements for the Export of Apples from the State of Tasmania, Australia to China
Signatories: Ms Rona Mellor, Deputy Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry; Mr Wei Chuanzhong, Deputy Administrator, General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of China
The protocol provides Tasmanian growers and exporters with improved quarantine conditions to commence trade in apples to China; this follows the Australian Government's long-standing request for removal of certain requirements to improve access. 


Thanks very much Grant for those words of very warm welcome and known in Queensland as irony. First of all can I acknowledge all of you who are captains of industry here with whom we have had a long and productive relationship over a long period of time. I notice many of the representatives of the banking industry are here this evening for example, with whom I have just spent the better part of the last hour discussing what I believe is fundamental to every business in this room, and that is the future cost of capital in this country.
We have just been through a global financial crisis. The global financial crisis required extraordinary interventions by Government in order to underpin the continued stability of our financial system and the businesses which depend on it. That required a range of measures. It required us uniquely as a Government to intervene in the economy, for the first time to provide a sovereign guarantee for every single Australian's bank deposit to underpin confidence in the system.
Secondly, for the banks here represented, to also provide a guarantee for their wholesale funding requirements of global credit markets (inaudible.) And thirdly on top of that, given the damage to the real economy, to then intervene to prevent an entire collapse of private demand in the economy in order to prevent the economy from tail-spinning into recession, which occurred in 32 of the other 33 OECD economies. These were extraordinary interventions by Government.
The result and the report card I think, as those of you in this room have acknowledged, has been reasonable. We've emerged as one of the only OECD economies not to go into recession. We have kept growth positive. We have the second lowest unemployment rate of all the major advanced economies and the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. In terms of a report card of basic economic credibility I don't think that's too bad; there is always room for improvement, but it is however measured against the performances of other economies confronted with similar challenges.
The key one which for us has been fundamental is actually keeping people in jobs. Mention has just been made of the mining industry, let me talk to you about the employment performance of the mining industry in the last twelve months. The mining industry contracted its employment load by about 19 per cent last year in the face of what was occurring in the general economy, or more like 15 to 16 per cent. But if it was replicated more broadly across the economy, the total unemployment level in this country would have been something in the order of 15 to 20 per cent. Mining represents employment directly of about 100,000 Australians, 15,000 of them actually lost their jobs last year.
What we did was step into the breach and make sure that private demand kept up and through public investment that overall employment kept up. For those of your companies which depend therefore on the vibrancy of the private economy and the overall performance of our economy in difficult global circumstances, this I think has been a reasonable achievement.
There's a second part though which arises from that, it's a consequence. What Governments are required to do globally in part cause extreme increases in the levels of sovereign debt around the world. Such that we now have a global debate about the sustainability of levels of sovereign debt in Europe and elsewhere. We all know the story of Greece, which is not one relevant to the immediate financial crisis, but what Greece has unfolded is a level of nervousness in markets and bond markets in particular about the sustainability of public debt levels around the world.
That of course brings us back to what will be an important set of discussions which I'll be attending on Australia's behalf this weekend in Toronto, the G20. The G20 will be deliberating on a series of financial reforms which will go down to the cost of capital for each business represented in this room. The proposals which have been forward by Europeans and others, who've had a much less happy experience of the global recession that we have, are intense, they are regulatory and they are prescriptive and of the type and order of magnitude that unless we stand firmly in the Australian national economic interest, will have a profound impact on the cost of capital in this country over time. We intend to discharge our responsibilities in the national economic interest.
Our country has emerged well from this crisis, through good regulators, through a good regulatory system and also through a Government which worked very closely with the regulators at a time of crisis. Therefore looking forward my first responsibility in this country and that of the Government is not just to maintain the stability of the financial system, but in order also to protect it from excessive global regulatory intervention which will drive the cost of capital up. And that in turn would impede global economic activity.
There are four specific items of the Toronto agenda which will flow through to the G20 agenda in Korea at the end of the year. Each of these goes directly to the cost of capital. As various economies around the world, most particularly in Europe and North America seek to insure themselves against future systemic risk against future crisis, the problem is, for economies like ours, and financial systems like ours which have emerged so well, it is that were those burdens to be applied on us, then the impact in fact would be simply of a type which would cause the cost of loans both for business and other purposes to go through the roof, if left unattended to.
So our first responsibility in the last year and a half was actually to keep this economy going, to keep our financial system afloat and to deal with the consequences of those actions through what has happened in the rising levels of global sovereign debt and the consequential actions now by regulators across the world and G20 leaders, not all of them, who seek to regulate private capital in a manner which could have unintended consequences elsewhere.
So that's our first responsibility, maintain macroeconomic stability, maintain integrity in the financial system.
A second responsibility we have beyond all of that is to ensure that we are building in this economy long term productivity growth. Saving the economy from recession is one thing, building for future growth is another thing. That is very much the agenda upon which we were elected, and that agenda is about how do you build sustainable productivity growth for the future of the Australian economy. What are the levers available to us?
When it comes to productivity the equation is actually pretty basic. How do you make labour more productive by instilling in it greater skills, greater education, greater training? How do you also make sure that the infrastructure available to labour is there so that the labour input into a given productive enterprise is used and deployed maximally in the greatest efficiency? And the infrastructure deficit of this country is known and known well.
The third thing you can do is get out of the hair of business to greatest extent possible by removing the regulatory burden. What we have done against all those three measures in the two and a half years that we've been in Government I believe has been substantial.
On the first measure, education, skills and training, the Deputy Prime Minister is here. We've increased our investment in schools alone by 50 per cent in our first couple of years in office. This is a substantial increase because what we do through early childhood education, what we do through schools, what we do through education, training, universities, TAFE and the rest is of fundamental importance in the quality of the labour force which emerges for you to use later on. And there's a great danger that we were simply falling behind. This has been a big quantitative investment.
The qualitative reforms have also been significant. Again the Deputy Prime Minister has been engaged in what I could describe as visible and occasionally audible fisticuffs with various teachers unions around the country to make sure that we in fact had consistent, mandatory national testing of students across the country and mandatory transparent public reporting of the performance of schools. Unless you get that right, dealing just with the basics of literacy and numeracy, quite apart from the other ranges of skills which are needed for the future, we're always going to be held back in terms of our productivity. This is a big reform. It's been undergone, often below the radar, occasionally above the radar.
Then on infrastructure. You've seen the calculations of infrastructure deficit in this country, they are huge. For the first time the Australian Government has appointed a Minister for Infrastructure. For the first time we've established a outfit call Infrastructure Australia, for the first time a rational analysis of the current infrastructure deficit across all of its elements: road, rail, ports and the rest, has been undertaken. For the first time we have a national priority list of infrastructure projects which need to be attended to. This is pretty fundamental to making sure that we have maximum productivity in the future, and the biggest and best piece of infrastructure that we are about to deliver will come through the National Broadband Network.
I see David Thodey here this evening from Telstra. We've been in an arm wrestle with Telstra for how long? A long time and he looks much happier than he did this time last week. But can I say this has been a good negotiation, the product of what actually good negotiations can produce if there is good will all round. And this has actually produced that, and it's produced a real result, good for the Telstra shareholders but good for the country and good for the economy.
We're going to have a National Broadband Network, it's going to be an open access network. We've finally after 20 years resolved the question of structural separation from wholesale networks to retail providers. This is a fundamental microeconomic reform, and Stephen Conroy is here with us this evening, he should be personally congratulated for his efforts. It's been a strong, hard effort put in by him and supported by our friends in Telstra in bringing about the conclusion which we saw announced on Sunday.
I cannot think of an Australia of the 21st century absent a state of the art broadband network. When we were elected in 2007, we had the third most expensive broadband of the OECD, the third most expensive. We also had a speed of the network which was about 35 times slower than that which was available to the fastest broadband providers in the OECD. That was the baseline that we inherited in 2007.
We set to work, we announced a plan, we said we were going to have a National Broadband Network, we said we'd invest up to $43 billion, we actually believe this is the infrastructure of the 21st century, just as railways, roads and the rest, telegraph, were in the 19th century and in the 20th century.
This is an important investment for the future, from which each of the businesses represented in this room will benefit enormously, in ways which the economy at large hasn't by and large thought through yet. New ways of doing business, new ways in which you can actually sell products across the tyranny of distance which has so far haunted so much of our small business community, or those which are geographically isolated from major markets both here and abroad. This is a fantastic innovation. Also for the way in which Government does business in delivering basic and efficient services and saving public finance, for example in simply the ability to transfer electronically and at speed, patient controlled electronic health records.
This is a turbo-charging piece of infrastructure which this Government has brought about and is important because unless we have infrastructure at global standards, unless we have skills at global standards, we will not have productivity growth at global standards.
Which brings me to my third point, on what we've been doing the last two and a half years. I often scratch my head about what our predecessors did for their twelve years in office on the question of regulatory reform, I really do. When we came to office we embarked upon a program which largely the BCA have been supporting, which is to identify those areas of regulatory disharmony across the Federation, six states, two territories and everything from occupational health and safety down to product specifications and job classifications and occupation classifications. And we said 'this is nuts, this is crazy, how do we fix it'. And we set up, and I see Craig Emerson is up the back here, he's been a driving force in this together with the Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner, in making sure that we made this happen. 27 hair-pulling-out working groups of the Council of Australia Governments, pushing each one of these reforms through. How many have we landed so far Craig, out of the 27? One third will be landed by 1 July this year.
If you know anything of the complexity of these negotiations, let me tell you they are enough to cause grown men and women to cry, but we have prevailed, we have been persistent and occasionally we've used intelligently, effectively, affectionately and diplomatically, the fiscal leverage of the Commonwealth.
The important is delivering the outcome, and I look as something as basic as occupational health and safety, about which so many of your businesses have complained for years and years and years, and this Government has actually delivered that, minus the WA Government.
Regulatory reform is something we've been on about because our objective and our mission statement of Government is very clear, a seamless national economy, a seamless national economy with covering off the infrastructure deficit, creating infrastructure of the 21st century, as well as producing the best skilled, best trained and best educated workforce in the world. That's our mission statement for productivity growth.
Let me go on to a third point, which is what else do you do given the current structure of our economy to maximise its global competitiveness. One of those things you do is look at the impact of a two speed economy. You look at the impact of high levels of an Australian dollar and their impact on the export competitiveness of so many companies which are not in the resources sector.
One of those impacts we've already seen, and that is the impact for example of the international tourism market in Australia in the last 12 months. If you go to far north Queensland in Cairns, the unemployment rate in Cairns at the moment is 12.4 per cent. You go to any State Government in the country and ask for their tourism data, the international tourism numbers are down to billy-o. That's what's happening.
Ask those in the universities how their international student markets are going, it's not just the Indian students problem in Melbourne, because that's been largely geographically contained. What's actually happening is the dollar is punishing those providers hugely, and what is a substantial export earner for Australia, the international tourism market and the international student market has been punished by the dollar.
There are some in this room who still represent the art of manufacturing. I actually believe in manufacturing, we've actually come through with an auto industry virtually intact, not a bad achievement when you actually think what's happened elsewhere in the world through the crisis which has recently concluded. But you know something, our great, fantastic world beating manufacturers are also being punished by a high Australian dollar. It is affecting the aggregate competitiveness of the Australian economy.
So you ask therefore what therefore is the rationale of the tax reform. The company tax rate at present exists in the upper third of the OECD. Our challenge is to bring it down at least to the middle and to optimally take it lower. The Government's target is to bring it to 25, but you know something, money doesn't grow on trees, you've actually got to fund the company tax cut from somewhere. So how do you do that if you want your Australian firms outside the resources sector to remain globally competitive. You've got to fund it from somewhere.
We could fund it by jacking up a whole lot of taxes on consumers, on individual PAYE earners, you could do it that way. Or you could also look at those companies which benefit most from resources with are ultimately owned by the Australian people who from time to time, in the global commodity cycle, will enjoy great levels of profitability as a result of the resources which they sell to the rest of the world.
I fully get it and understand it having known the mining industry for the last 20 years coming from Queensland, how much risk and enterprise is involved in setting up a mine, and how much risk and enterprise (inaudible) lies in actually taking up a project such as that in offshore north west Australia in making it work. These are big things, I've been up there, I've seen how much capital is involved, how much risk is involved, it is large. But I'm also mindful of the fact that when you've got a global commodity boom, driven by the demand from economies like China, that it's time also to look at what the proceeds of that boom could do for broader tax reform in the Australian economy.
So what's our core proposal? One: that the resources sector onshore should have a profit based tax regime just as the offshore sector has had since Craig Emerson and others worked on the PRRT more than 20 years ago. Secondly, we've argued that a profit based regime is better than a production based regime because it goes up and down much more closely with fluctuations in the global commodities cycle, we think that's actually rational, in fact that was the submission to us also of the Mining Council of Australia.
Third, we've also said that as far as the proceeds of this are concerned, we would use it not to go into the budget bottom line at all, but we would use it to fund the company tax reform which your organisation has been calling out for, for a long period of time. We've said we'd bring company tax down to 28, our ambition lies to bring it down to 25. We've said also we'd bring about tax breaks for small business because those 2.4 million small businesses we believe should be given every encouragement to become the big business of the future.
The other thing we've said is that by virtue of those adjustments to company tax rates and tax breaks for small business, we'd make it more possible, aided by enterprise bargaining, to bring about the increase in the superannuation guarantee from 9 per cent to 12 per cent over time, progressively across the decade ahead.
Not only is that good for working families, who also need to have a decent nest egg to retire, decent superannuation adequacy, all 7.5 million of them, it boosts our national savings.
I'm always mindful of the great reform that Paul Keating brought in the 90s with compulsory superannuation in this country. The rest of the world stands in awe at the quantity of superannuation savings we have in this country, north of $1 trillion. What we do through these reforms is add something in the vicinity of at least another $100 billion to that, of taking the rate from 9 to 12.
I also note from our friends in the corporate community, that when credit markets froze during the course of 2008-09, the existence of onshore savings off the back of super were fundamental in a number of domestic capital raisings which occurred to the tune of some $70, $85, or even $95 billion. Creating a bigger buffer of national savings for the future in my argument is actually a very good thing to do. Lower company tax, tax breaks for small business and creating a greater pool of national savings. I regard that as pretty fundamental tax reform.
The argument which has just been put forward by others, that somehow the Government's approach to tax reform is incomplete, I believe is inconsistent with what we said when we commissioned the Henry review in the first place. What we said when we commissioned the Henry review was that we would have a possible blueprint from long term debate, discussion and a foundation for long term, comprehensive tax reform.
When the Treasurer released the Henry review on the 2nd May, he indicated the following: there was a range of proposals and recommendations in Henry which we would not contemplate in a month of Sundays. There was another range, from memory Wayne, 60 or 70 or maybe 70 or 80 which are on the table for future discussion in a future term of this Government - and then there was a range that we would actually act on in the immediate term. That's our approach. We actually think it's systematic, because there had been no systematic review of the totality of the tax system for at least 25 years or more.
That's the approach that we said we'd take, that's the approach we did take, and we've made clear the basis for the reform which we are now taking forth.
Now on the question of consultation which has just been raised concerning tax, and concerning the RSPT. As the Treasurer said on the day, on the 2nd of May, what we're up for is this. We want a tax on profits, we want for that tax to be 40 per cent, that's what applies currently in the PRRT, we wanted a tax which also applies to existing projects. We've also said that that tax should generate revenue to fund the type of policy reforms I've just mentioned.
We've also said that on the question of detail, implementation and generous transition arrangements, we would consult and negotiate with industry. With many, many companies in this country, we are doing precisely that and have been doing it for the last month or so. Many resulting in quite good conclusions.
A number of companies have chosen not to embrace that, for reasons best know to them. That of course is their right, it's a free country, so when it comes to us being prepared to consult and negotiate within the framework I've just referred to, I believe it's a very open invitation. You can have a door open for a while, it does however require a decision for others to walk through that door as well.
Tax reform we think is really important. Our proposal on an RSPT is there and the areas where we are prepared to negotiate against the framework of 2 May is there for all to see. As I said, through Martin, through Wayne and through others, those negotiations and consultations continue.
So that in a nutshell is our rationale for tax reform. That in a nutshell is the way in which we are seeking to undertake consultations with those in the corporate community and the mining community, who wish to undertake them. And that process is underway.
On the question of the public sound and light show, that of course is a matter for various parties to attend to. I will not seek to apportion publically, responsibility for that.
My interest as Prime Minister of the country is to get a good outcome for the nation. I have spent a fair bit of time over the years with the resources industry, I've spent a lot of time with the corporate community. I used to work with these guys KPMG, though they will now probably publically disown me given the reports they released in recent days. It's ok, hang in there (inaudible) It's a joke, alright?
And therefore the best outcome for the country is if we can negotiate our way through this, and find a good landing point. That's what we're up for. We're actually a Government that believes in that. But if there is some misty eyed view that if you went through a process of six months consultation before putting out the sort of framework I just referred to before, that our largest mining companies would whack their hand up and say yes, I really want to pay more tax, then I don't necessarily hold that view.
We're open to questions of negotiation, consultation on design. That's detail. On transition, on generous transition arrangements, that's what we mean, that's what we've said, that's what we're doing with many companies across the country.
A last word on the G20. Can I just say to all of you that we the Government still have some concerns about how the global economy is unfolding. We all follow the public debate, the public newspapers, but we're also examining what's happening in terms of threats on the supply of credit internationally and where that goes to in the future. We are in uncertain times. It's very important that I end this presentation to you on the question that I began with, which is it is fundamental for us all to maintain the stability of our financial system.
Absent the flow of credit and the availability of credit, then frankly, our economy is in deep trouble. Therefore we as a Government maintain a very clear weather eye on what will be necessary for the future in ensuring the continued stability of our system which underpins everything which we do.
Toronto will be engaged in that, a lot of it behind the scenes as we look carefully at bond market reactions to the recent developments in sovereign debt. There's a lot of jitteriness out there on the question of sovereign debt and we're going to have to work our way through that soberly, calmly, in a considered fashion as we did through the first phase of this global financial crisis, which I still hope was the last phase of this global financial crisis.
I thank you.


Yesterday afternoon I advised the House of the accident involving a coalition helicopter in southern Afghanistan in the early hours of Monday morning. I informed the House that, tragically, three Australian commandos from the Special Operations Task Group were killed in that crash. Seven were wounded. The United States has confirmed one of their personnel was killed and three other soldiers were wounded. In addition, a civilian interpreter who was travelling with the Australian element was wounded.
All seven injured soldiers are in the Kandahar military facility. The Australian Defence Force continues to ensure that they receive the best possible medical attention. I am advised that the most recent assessment of the seven wounded soldiers is that two are in a very serious condition. One of those soldiers has sustained a very serious head injury. Both these soldiers are in intensive care. The five other soldiers are now listed as being in a satisfactory condition. Six of the seven soldiers have undergone surgery. The medical authorities have not yet made any decision as to when any of the injured soldiers will be moved to the NATO medical facility in Germany. Any move will only be taken when the condition of the soldiers allows.
The names of the fallen soldiers have not yet been released. As the House would be aware, there are protocols in the Department of Defence which apply in these circumstances. The department will only release the names of the soldiers when they have approval from all the families involved. This is a terrible time for them and we need to respect their privacy. With regard to the wounded soldiers, they are Special Forces and, as a result, they have protected identity status. This means their names cannot be released.
The cause of the incident is yet to be determined. It would be inappropriate to speculate until the investigation into the incident has been completed. I am advised that this incident was not caused by insurgent action. I am also advised that casualties occurred when the aircraft crashed heavily to the ground.
Defence is making arrangements for the repatriation of the three fallen soldiers later this week.
Today, let me reiterate that the thoughts and the prayers of all Australians are with the families, friends and colleagues of those involved in this incident.
These are hard days - very hard days - but I wish to reaffirm to the House the government's commitment that we will complete this mission in Afghanistan. Fundamental national interests are at stake, national interests which go to the security of us all and the security of our friends and allies. We therefore will stay the course and complete the mission which we have embarked upon in Afghanistan.



PM: Good morning or good afternoon. Thank you for your attendance. Yesterday as you know was a busy day.
We had the swearing in at Government House of myself, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer.
Of course, we also had Parliament.
Last night, I met extensively with my colleagues, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, the Deputy Leader in the Senate, as well as the Treasurer Chris Bowen.
We've been discussing at some length the composition of the ministry of this government and those discussions of course have continued this morning.
The new executive will be sworn in next Monday here in Canberra subject of course to Her Excellency's availability.
This morning I've also spent a lot of time with the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet being briefed on current budget priorities, economic priorities, other policy priorities, and national security matters.
This afternoon there will be a full briefing by the range of government officials beyond PM&amp;C here in the Cabinet room, together with a briefing on national security by the full range of officials as well.
So we've had a few things on as you would understand.
Today what I would like to do is share with you the discussion I had with my caucus colleagues about 36 hours ago about why I have elected to return to the Prime Ministership of Australia.
I believe that this is important and it's important that the nation is fully aware of why this change has occurred.
Secondly, I also want to today share with you my overall approach to policy decision-making by the government. Finally I want to talk about the future of the national school improvement plan – better schools, better futures for our kids.
On the first matter, there are three reasons I sought to return to the leadership of this party.
It is rare a person is given a second opportunity to lead one of the major political parties of Australia.
Mr Howard was extended that opportunity.
I've been extended that opportunity.
I regard it as a singular honour for that to have happened.
First reason for my decision was that the government was on track for a catastrophic defeat at the upcoming election.
Not just a massive majority from Mr Abbott in the Lower House but also a massive majority in the Senate as well or at least a significant one.
Were that to occur then we would effectively have seen torn down so many of the reforms that this government, both under my Prime Ministership and Julia Gillard's Prime Ministership, we would have seen them simply disappear.
Whether we're talking about the National Broadband Network; whether we're talking about trade training centres; whether we are talking about Medicare locals; whether we're talking about proper investment in our schools; whether we're talking about investment in basic things like urban rail projects.
All these would simply be torn down were we to suffer such a catastrophic defeat.
Had we lost in the Senate as well, who knows what would happen and what would've happened in terms of the future of the Fair Work Act, which affects penalty rates and working conditions and overtime for so many of Australians.
Some of these reforms, good reforms, have been Julia's and I pay appropriate tribute to her work on the national school improvement program and her work on the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Some of these reforms of course date back to the period when I was Prime Minister after 2007.
Some of these reforms were the joint work of both of us.
My attitude was simply this: I could not stand idly by and allow all these good changes which have benefitted millions of Australians to simply be thrown away in the event that we suffered such a catastrophic defeat at the election.
Hence it was time to put up my hand.
The second reason is the mood I picked up across the Australian people over a long period of time is whatever their politics, they want this election to at least provide them with the opportunity for a real choice.
Many were saying to me and to my colleagues that they didn't feel as if they had a real choice.
That they were being forced to choose Mr Abbott when they didn't really want to.
I believe that my return to the leadership of the Australian Labor Party and as Prime Minister of Australia provides the Australian people with that choice.
A real policy choice for the next election and for Australia's future.
The third reason is that I want to make some policy changes.
Those policy changes will be considered in due course by the Cabinet once it's sworn in and over a period of time, these will be of course made public to you, the Australian media, and through you to the Australian people.
These have been hard times in any political party.
At various times in history, all parties have gone through such times.
Then those parties come through.
We intend to come through as well.
What I have said privately is what I have said publicly – any member of the ministry under Prime Minister Gillard who wishes to continue to work under my Prime Ministership will be welcome to do so.
I'm pleased and gratified that so many have chosen to do so.
My business is to harvest all the talents that are available for the good of the Australian people and for the good governance of Australia.
I also said I'd talk briefly about my approach to government decision making.
The Cabinet as I said will be sworn in next Monday.
Those of you good ladies and gentlemen of the press which expect an avalanche of policy decisions between now and next Monday, just chill for a while.
In fact, chill for quite a bit.
Because this will be done through the proper orderly processes of Cabinet decision making.
Everyone knows the budgetary environment which the governments faces and the nation faces.
Each of these decisions therefore will be properly considered through the normal machinery of government.
If I have learnt one thing from my previous period as Prime Minister and I've learned quite a lot from my previous period as Prime Minister, one of the things I have learnt is the absolute importance of proper orderly consultation with Cabinet colleagues on any major decision of the government.
We can all say it's too busy, there's a global financial crisis going on, sorry colleagues, don't have time, we've got to save the banks from falling.
These all seem pretty good justifications at the time but frankly decision making is always much better when it can be done collegiately.
I'd also like to mention before I take questions from you the government's approach to the national school improvement plan.
I've spent a lot of time with my colleagues the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Senator Penny Wong and Senator Jacinta Collins on a discussion last night and this morning on future of the national school improvement plan.
This up until now has gone by the name of Gonski.
I know David Gonski.
In fact, full disclosure, he's Chairman of my wife's board of her company.
So before any of you start writing the exposes, there you have it from the horse's mouth.
Mind you when this was first put forward when I was still Minister for Foreign Affairs in the previous Cabinet I did declare that conflict of interest.
The bottom line is I don't think David wants his reforms referred to as the Gonski reform.
I think when I last spoke with him, he finds that a bit too confusing.
I ran into someone recently in my electorate in Brisbane who said they're all for the Gonski reforms because their kids have been educated in a Steiner school and Gonski was kind of like Steiner and there you go.
I said well not quite.
So I think we have a slightly different challenge which is to take the absolute with substance of a plan for national school improvement and to describe what it actually does for Australian teachers, for Australian students, for Australian kids and for their schools physically as well.
This national school improvement program is about better schools and better futures for our kids.
It is a program which looks specifically at what we do to lift teacher standards, by bringing about a new standard for teacher education before they qualify as teachers in the first place.
That's important.
It's also about improving the quality of what is taught in schools.
For example, under this plan, science will be introduced as a testable item under the existing national testing program which at present applies to only literacy and numeracy.
That will be introduced under this national school improvement program.
In other areas, we go to the importance of greater autonomy for school principals, so that there is a much greater power to hire and fire and to use the resources available to the school with discretion, by the principal as they see fit.
On top of that, you also have greater transparency.
Every school under this will be required to develop a school improvement plan, which is to take your school from here to here in terms of the quality of its education outcomes for the kids, and also for how the resources of the school will be developed over time as well; and for that to be transparent to the parent community as well as to the wider public.
Finally, this is a reform which seeks to also provide reliable long term funding on the basis of needs-based funding for future.
Whether those schools are government schools or non-government schools, state schools or Catholic schools.
So therefore, for these reasons, in consultation with my colleagues this morning, but also given that there are certain time lines which are bearing down on us from various of the states and territories; the decision that I am announcing today is that under my Prime Ministership and under this government, we will support the national improvement plan for Australian schools, better schools, better futures for our kids.
Secondly in relation to the consultation deadline, which currently expires with the jurisdictions on this, expires I think on 30 June, we'll extend that by two weeks.
I look forward to the opportunity of sitting down myself with premiers and chief ministers from states which have not signed on.
I look forward to my discussion when I return to the people's republic of Queensland to speak with the premier thereof.
I'm sure I'll get a warm reception.
All we Queenslanders bond closely particularly after a State of Origin win.
On top of that I look forward to seeing Premier Napthine.
I look further discussions also with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and also the premier of Tasmania.
What is really important here as well is the Catholic scheme where much progress has been made in negotiations, not yet quite concluded and the independent schools where frankly, there is still a gap between their position and those held by the government.
This is an important item of reform.
It's a major item of reform.
I pay tribute to my predecessor for the work she and Minister Garrett have done on it and because of the urgency of decisions, and timing surrounding decisions, that is why I have made it clear today that under my Prime Ministership, this policy direction will continue.
I am concerned about making sure we have proper certainty for future funding.
That we have also the parallel guarantee of the improvement of the education outcomes of Australian schools and for their kids.
Finally, the government’s about bringing the country together, not dividing it.
I know my political opponent is pretty good at that sort of thing.
I think it's time we all came together.
I look forward to spending some time with the business community pretty soon.
I look forward to spending some time with the leader of the trade union movement pretty soon.
I look forward to actually having a civilised policy discussion, even if in private with the Leader of the Opposition on some of the big challenges facing the country's future.
I look forward very much to an open public debate with Mr Abbott at the National Press Club, in the next week or so, on the question, to start off with, of debt and deficit.
I've heard a million questions in there.
Let's have it fully and out in the open at the National Press Club.
You folks at the National Press Club, you set out the rules. I'm relaxed.
Sometime next week, sometime the following week but let's actually have a debate about the facts.
Over to you for questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are you going to unite your party after such bitter in-fighting over the past few months and how do you clearly differentiate yourself in policy from the former Prime Minister?
PM: Well the first point is that as I said before, governments go through and political parties go through periods of internal debates.
It’s not unique to the Labor Party, it's happened before with the conservatives, it's happened before with us and then people bind together.
Secondly, it's important to heal the wounds by making a very simple statement, that those, whatever their views of me in the past, who wish to serve in the ministry in the future will be welcome to do so.
I've had many, many constructive conversations, positive conversations with a whole bunch of ministers who wish to continue.
As for the question of future policy directions I go back to my earlier comments about the orderly nature of Cabinet decision-making.
I will say this, however, it's really important that we bring the country together.
I really do not support the politics of division, whether it's on the basis of class or anything else.
I actually believe we are much better as a nation working together.
Therefore, I'm saying that under my leadership, there is a hand outstretched firmly to business, to work with us, as it is also with the unions and I intend to have those meetings very soon.
JOURNALIST: One of the policy issues you've had trouble with last time and I don't think you mentioned so far today is asylum seekers and boats.
Will you be going to Indonesia to see the Indonesian President to discuss it?
And what philosophical position will you have in dealing with the boats?
Will you be trying to for example, will you be saying you're going to stop the boats or will you be trying to manage them or encourage people to come in a more orderly way under regional processing?
PM: The great thing about this country is we have long believed in a system of orderly migration.
The problem with the current situation is that I really fear that we begin to see some fragmentation for the overall national support for a system of orderly migration in Australia.
That has stood us so well since the days of Arthur Calwell way back in the post-war period.
We actually have to be very attentive to a basic national interest, which is to sustain broad public support for a system of orderly migration.
Secondly, on the question of Indonesia, I will be briefed this afternoon by colleagues who've been working on the proposed visit to Indonesia and following that briefing, of course, I will announce a decision about going to Jakarta.
I will be speaking with President Yudhoyono sometime after I finish with you good folk here this afternoon in Canberra.
I would also if I went to went to Indonesia be speaking frankly on the much broader questions of our common national security interests.
On top of that, a really big one, which is I am concerned about Mr Abbott's policy where he says that he can turn the boats back to Indonesia as he states, and when he states now more recently, only when safe; and when the Indonesian Government says they will not accept such a policy.
I'm very concerned about whether if Mr Abbott were to become Prime Minister and continues that rhetoric and that posture and actually tries to translate it into reality, I really wonder whether he's trying to risk some sort of conflict with Indonesia.
It's not a good thing.
It's a really bad thing.
Let me tell you, if you are a student of the Australia/Indonesia relationship which I have been since the days of the late forties until now, there've been some pretty tough times in the relationship.
I never want to see that happen again.
A quarter of a billion people live to the north of us.
We have a huge national interest in having a working relationship with them.
On the question of the attitude I bring to bear on asylum seekers, it will be in the national interest, mindful of the need to sustain popular support for the overall integrity of the migration program.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept Wayne Swan's budget parameters as they exist now, as in the 2013-14 budget, or is everything on the table and my second question is: have you had any thoughts about one of the controversial policies which is moving single mums onto the lesser Newstart payment?
PM: I've had a lot of thoughts about many things. That's one of them.
But these are deliberations for the Cabinet.
As I said, that will occur next week.
Secondly on the question of budget parameters, there will be a discussion about that this afternoon.
I'd rather not, frankly, make any broad sweeping statement about budget parameters, prior to receiving proper briefings by PM&amp;C and Treasury as to where things stand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I go to what commitment you might have to party reform because it is a matter of interest for a number of your senior supporters.
There's going to be preselections now in Rankin, Perth, Kingsford Smith, all the plum Labor seats.
Will you be insisting on local plebiscites?
Will you be opposing the parachuting in by the party organisation?
PM: I thank you for raising the question.
Party reform as you've studied a few of my previous statements on this is near and dear to my heart for a range of reasons.
One of which is also near and dear to my heart and that is how we conduct ourselves in an orderly fashion in the future on questions of the leadership of our parliamentary party.
I will speak to that at some length later on.
On the broader question of party reform, can I say this: I am revolted by what I have seen unfold in New South Wales.
I am revolted by what I have seen unfold through the ICAC inquiry.
I am revolted that this could've been seen to have been acceptable practice.
I will therefore be having a very deep discussion with cabinet colleagues of an entirely political nature about the new direction for New South Wales and more broadly, where we go on the overall remit of party reform nationwide.
You asked, Malcolm, specifically about local preselections.
The overwhelming preference is there will to be local democratic ballots.
The only exception I see to that is if you have a genuine crisis of time.
In the seats you've just mentioned I'm not sure that such a crisis exists. I really am not.
By the way I'm pleased you've referred to the seat of Rankin as a plum seat.
I don't think Craig would regard it as that nor any of us from the Queensland branch just right now.
JOURNALIST: The third for taking back the leadership was changes you want to make.
It was widely telegraphed when you challenged last year that you wanted to move the carbon price quickly [inaudible] floating price. Bearing in mind what you said about processes needing to respected, is that something that you’re going to be looking at [inaudible]?
PM: That's a great question. It's all about the carbon price.
I will be speaking with my Cabinet colleagues on that.
Yes, I didn't telegraph it before in times past.
I actually said it and I own that.
Don't walk away from anything I've said.
It's a silly thing to try to do for anyone in public life.
I'm also very mindful of due process.
I want to discuss this fully with the Cabinet including the budget implications which flow from any such decision and the timing of any such decision.
That I think is the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: Just following up on [inaudible] you indicated one of the reasons for your return is some policy changes without giving us the detail on what they are.
Can you tell us the areas broadly that you do want to see policy changes and carbon being one of them and the timing here, this could take some time.
Will you cover off all the policy changes before going into campaign mode?
PM: Look, I can't on the one hand say we believe in orderly Cabinet-based decision making and then 12 minutes later say ‘okay mate, let's make an exception, I’ll just tell you what I’m about to do tomorrow.’
It’s not like that.
Business of government is not like that and there is sufficient time for us to work through some of the big policy challenges we face in an orderly fashion.
I intend to do that.
As for your other question about what happens during our period of government as opposed to when we go into caretaker mode, look I would hope to get major policy settings right before we enter caretaker mode.
But as you always know electoral contests are often about a few new ideas as well.
So I would emphasise the importance of sticking to orderly decision-making processes.
JOURNALIST: Back on border protection for a tick.
PM: I'm surprised by that Andrew!
JOURNALIST: I know, sorry about that. But Bob Carr in recent days has been talking about how the area has been controlled by people smugglers and been talking about economic migrants. Is this the sort of rhetoric that you embrace?
And secondly do you rule out recalling parliament to get some potential changes to legislation through?
PM: On the question of the parliamentary schedule, that of course has not been discussed with Cabinet colleagues, least of all with the Deputy Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese, and Leader of the Government in the House.
So whoa behold anyone who makes such an announcement in the absence of talking to Albo.
So let’s just put all of that to one side.
You’ve referred I think to Bob Carr’s recent language and his specific reference to economic migrants?
Look, let’s just face some facts here. A whole budge of people who seek to come to this country are economic migrants who are seeking to comport themselves as refugees.
That's why we have seek a decision-making process, and some are genuine refugees.
And the Wisdom of Solomon lies with those in our national immigration service and our Refugee Review Tribunal to sort out one from the other. It's a hard business.
But you would have to be deluding yourself if you thought that there weren't a l bunch of people seeking to come to this country for purely economic reasons.
Our challenge is to minimise that number and to ensure that we still maintain our commitments under the refugee convention.
JOURNALIST: You spoke, I think on Wednesday night – it’s a bit of a blur – about not leaving the bush behind, about regionalism. Can you give us any ideas about why you mentioned that? What you’re looking at there?
You also spoke about manufacturing in similar terms as when you first took the leadership. Do you think there needs to be any policy shift, or changes more generally?
PM: Look, I’m just kind of telling it like it is. I’m a kid who grew up in the country and I’ve never left that behind me.
So when I talk about nation building, I think of rural areas. I think of farms, I think of animals, I think of horses, I think of little communities of 200 people, I think of larger towns of 10,000 like the big smoke I went to secondary school in in Nambour.
I will come back in a minute by the way to give you an example of under the better schools plan what Nambour State High School – I’m advised – would receive by way of an additional allocation under the proposed national schooling improvement plan.
The advice I had was that over six years, Nambour State High School would be something like $10.8 million dollars better off.
Now having been through that school – and I don't think Nambour ever having been a seat ever owned by the Australian Labor Party, maybe back in Andrew Fisher's day I'm not quite sure – I feel pretty passionately about those kids having needs-based funding and the best opportunities for the future of any other kid in the country.
That's where I come from.
You spoke about manufacturing. Well we didn't do a lot of manufacturing in Nambour. There was a welding works but I think it shut sometime in the 60s.
It is absolutely critical for our economic future that there is a viable manufacturing industry in this country. It is not an old industry. It is a new industry.
It is being reformed because of the innovations and materials research, new materials research and the innovations which are now occurring in the forms of new copying technologies.
This therefore creates us with a whole bunch of new opportunities to regenerate cities for example like Geelong and elsewhere.
And can I say one further point on the broader question of the economy?
When I look at the challenges of rest of this year, and certainly for the upcoming three-year term, the huge outstanding economic challenge for us is the end of the China resources boom.
This will have a dramatic effect on our terms of trade, a dramatic effect on living standards in the country, a dramatic effect also potentially on unemployment unless we have an effective counter-strategy.
What Government has been seeking to do is of course to boost national productivity, and there are encouraging figures in terms of labour productivity, but across the board we have to do a whole lot more as well.
And with the benefit of a lower dollar, assist and work with industry in diversifying the Australian economy.
Remember I got ridiculed so much in time’s past by Peter Costello and others when I used to stand up and say ‘what are you going to do Mr Costello, Mr Howard, once the mining boom is over?’
I had abuse hurled at me because this was an unpatriotic statement back in 2007.
I’ve got to say it's happened, and the whole reason for the productivity reforms that we've brought in through infrastructure, through education, et cetera has been to gear the whole economy to deal with these new challenges of the future.
And a lower dollar begins to put our agricultural industries, our manufacturing industries, and our service exports into a better space to create the new jobs which may come off in our resources sector.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I just take you back to some of the language about what would happen if Tony Abbott turned back the boats to Indonesia. You used the term ‘risking conflict with Indonesia’, and asked us to consider the history. Are you talking about the possibility that that policy would raise armed conflict with Indonesia? Or do you want us to think about [inaudible]?
PM: No, no, I'm talking about diplomatic conflict. But I'm always wary about where diplomatic conflicts go.
Confrontation with Indonesia evolved over a set of words, and turned into something else.
Let's call it for what it is.
If the Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia in Australia says that the policy of the Government of Indonesia is not one which would faintly support the policy put forward by Mr Abbott, and secondly if Mr Abbott as Prime Minister then seeks to do that, you end up with a pretty robust diplomatic conflict and I become a little uncertain as to where that heads.
And I have had enough experience in international relations, as a serving diplomat, as Foreign Minister, and as Prime Minister to know one thing: you really need to have some pretty cool hands on the tiller when you're dealing with the Indonesia relationship.
JOURNALIST: Is there an armed conflict risk between Australia and Indonesia troops.
PM: I just said there is a risk of diplomatic conflict and if you're mindful of the history, you have got to be mindful of where conflict leads you.
I for one, as Prime Minister of Australia, will do everything within my power to continue to improve the relationship with Indonesia, rather than to put it at risk.
I'm not suggesting that Mr Abbott would intentionally head in that direction at all.
But I'm saying very clearly that you have a policy collision here between what he says and what the Government of Indonesia says.
Mr Abbott has said he has already started writing his victory speech as Prime Minister. This is not a hypothetical thing.
He's been well ahead in opinion polls for a very long period of time. Therefore, we've got to ask this question. What happens on Day 1 when field marshal Tony puts out the order to the captain of the Australian naval frigate X to turn back a bunch of boats?
And you've got naval frigate from the Indonesian navy on the other side of the equation.
I think that there's sufficient maturity in this country and I hope certainly on the part of our friends and colleagues in Indonesia to avoid such a contingency.
I'm simply putting a spotlight on a direct policy conflict. Mr Abbott seeks to take personal political capital out of his three-word slogan.
It has huge foreign policy consequences. All I’m saying is, that's a diplomatic conflict, if it goes anywhere else – I certainly hope it doesn’t – I don’t believe it would. I hope it wouldn’t.
But I just think it's time to be honest about all this.
JOURNALIST: To call it what it is in your terms, isn't the solution to stop the boats leaving Indonesia in the first place?
And don’t you need to have a robust discussion with them about that?
That wasn't going to be my question, but anyway.
All of your predecessors as Prime Minister, including rather bizarrely yourself, have had press conferences like this in which they promise to have an open-door policy, to consult widely, to release policy in an orderly fashion and then have shut the door, talked to themselves and thrown things out like sausages.
Not being unkind that was a criticism of your prime ministership in the end.
What undertakings specifically have you given to your team that you won't be like the original Kevin?
PM: Well what I’ve said to the Cabinet colleagues that I've been just referring to this morning; Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, and the leader of the Government in the Senate, Deputy Leader in the Senate and to some other colleagues, is that anything major goes through the Cabinet.
There are from time to time genuine national security crises. Some of us do get telephone calls in the middle of the night.
I remember having to on the spur of the moment ring President George Bush and ask specifically, from an Australian national interest point of view, would he take actions necessary to support and to save a very large insurance company in the United States because it had huge re-insurance implications across the Australian insurance industry.
Did I sit down and have a Cabinet meeting about that? Nope. So I'm just saying that's the caveat. Stuff happens and you've sometimes got to act on it quickly. You've got to use your judgment.
But on anything major, which is a major structural policy shift, a major policy shift which affects large constituencies in the country, I believe it's really important to put it through the cabinet and that's what I will be doing.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of education, you’ve changed, you’ve announced name change and a deadline change.
Are we expecting to see more money offered?
And on the issue of party reform and being revolted, are you reopening the pre-selection in the Northern Territory for the Senate given your good friendship with Trish Crossin?
PM: The first point is about – let me just answer the question on party reform.
On party reform, it's near and dear to my heart.
I've said on the public record the principles which I apply to it.
I've been pretty upfront about it.
I’ve got some other thoughts on it as well and I think the challenge we have in New South Wales is here, present and immediate.
That stuff you see before ICAC doesn't seem to just fall out of nowhere and therefore you've got to act on it.
On the question of party preselections, I will take advice from colleagues as the best way forward. I have not turned my mind to any specific preselection anywhere for the simple reason, as I outlined at the beginning of this, there has been a fair bit on. Lane…
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just go to Lane please?
JOURNALIST: You said Mr Rudd this morning (inaudible) and have you asked any of those who've indicated that they want to stay on?
PM: On the question of the swearing in, it will be either announced on the day or before.
It depends a bit when frankly it's all ready and done.
A little practical thing is this: get your administrative arrangements right.
Orderly decision making means that when you are assigning ministers to portfolios that the precise administrative arrangements are dealt with.
That takes a fair bit of time.
For my sins I was once a Cabinet Secretary in the Queensland Government.
I'm sure I got it wrong a few times. In fact you were up there at the time, Lane.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just to take you back to preselections, obviously under your predecessor there's been a lot of talk about gender politics, including gender politics within the ALP.
What is your attitude to getting women into some of the now quite a few seats that are coming up, and have you given any thought to Batman?
I take your point about not giving thought to preselection individually and in general but that's been very high profile.
Do you have an opinion on that?
PM: A strong high profile role for women in Australia's national political life is absolutely essential.
You heard me say that when I was first elected as Prime Minister.
You've seen me do that when I went to that election in 2007 with Australia's first woman as Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.
I think you saw that also when I recommended to the Queen the appointment of the first woman as Australia's Governor-General.
And I believe that we have had a strong, very strong team of women ministers in the Australian Government and there will still be a very strong team of women ministers in the next Cabinet as well.
On top of that, in terms of getting more and more women into the Australian Parliament, that is my aspiration as well.
I want women to have every, every opportunity.
I support their full participation in our national political life and consistent with the local preselection processes.
I would be urging people to take consideration of women who may stick their hand up.
I notice some recently had their hand up then pulled it down, in the case of Jed Carney.
But frankly, I think our national political life is much better served by the fact that what I have discovered in my own family with a fairly strong wife, a fairly strong daughter and a very robust lunged granddaughter, is that we actually see things through slightly different eyes these two genders of ours and it's important that we have all that round the Cabinet table and in our parliamentary debate as well.
JOURNALIST: Congratulations on your big increase in your Chinese followers.
PM: Sorry, I have no idea where you're from. I’m just running across the line.
JOURNALIST: Julia Gillard mentioned just in this room about her (inaudible) about her visit to China in April (inaudible) Are you satisfied with the current relations between the two countries and are we going to see some policy changes in this respect?
PM: I think the relationship with China is in very good working order.
Everyone knows that we have massive economic interests which we have in common.
We also know that on many, many foreign policy questions we have an identical or common view and from time to time we have the odd difference on questions such as human rights.
Kind of as it's been for a long period of time.
The state of the relationship is good.
What I'd really like to see and this has been a tough, tough process and I would say to our friends in Beijing, let us conclude the free trade agreement between China and Australia.
This thing has been moving across the Sahara at the pace of a slightly lame camel.
It really needs to be brought to conclusion.
That's no criticism of any Trade Minister who's held a portfolio but it's been very difficult.
If I could say this to our friends in China who are often concerned about the impact of Australian agriculture on their own domestic agricultural industry.
If Australia exported all of its agricultural exports to China it may cater for the extra food demands of Guangdong province, maybe, on a good day.
We will not by simply the size of the agricultural output that we have, create so much as a minor disruption in the Chinese agricultural industry and I think in terms of Chinese consumers' demands, for an increasing range of food products, and of our appropriate environmental accreditation, that there is a huge opportunity for us as Australians to huge opportunity Australians to do much better in Australians in the Chinese agricultural Australians and I'm sure in the Chinese market.
I'm sure the Chinese will have some further requests of us as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you're extending the deadline on the school funding reforms but are you offering any flexibility on the structure those reforms.
Would you offer any flexibility on how much the States contribute or how much Canberra contributes to that deal?
PM: Well David, I'm just a reasonable guy.
So you walk in the door, you shake someone's hand and say OK this for the nation's good, what can we do about it.
I also would pay tribute to Barry O'Farrell who's copped it neck from his Liberal parliamentary colleagues here in Canberra for actually taking a decision based on the future needs of the kids in New South Wales and I’d actually appeal to all the Premiers and Chief Ministers to kind of just look above the parapets here and look to how it will unfold for the next decade.
So on the question of the fundamentals of the Commonwealth position, it will not change.
But I'm a reasonable guy.
I will have a chat and if there's an argument I will either shoot it down in flames or say well let's have a think about this.
But can I say, the parameters for variation are very, very narrow, very, very narrow.
Not least because the good folk of NSW and a few other States have already signed up.
JOURNALIST: Some of you colleagues believe that leaked against, stalked and tore down Australia's first female Prime Minister. Can I ask you to respond to those concerns? Secondly, will you be acting on your new-found opinion on gay marriage?
PM: On the first question, the answer is that those accusations are completely untrue.
On the second, as you know, through some would describe as my tortuous essay on my change in position on marriage equality, I didn't arrive at that position lightly.
It was a journey. I arrived at that position and I actually would stay to Mr Abbott right here and now.
Whoever wins the next election, please let's just have the civility to open this to a conscience vote for all.
I've indicated publicly where I will go on this.
If he doesn't, then I think we then have to look at other mechanisms, including the possibility of recourses to plebiscite or referendum, including the possibility.
But I would much prefer to have this thing just resolved.
My position is out there. The position of so many other members and senior ministers is out there.
I think I'm now the first Prime Minister of Australia who is a full signed-up supporter of marriage equality.
I don't think anyone else was. I would like to see this and the reason I want to see it done is, frankly, because it causes so many people such unnecessary angst out in Australia, in the gay and lesbian community.
It just shouldn't be the case.
JOURNALIST: You have policy decisions to make that have budgetary implications.
What would you, without getting into the detail of any of those, what will be the attitude you bring to that?
Will you bring the fiscal conservative?
Will you bring the fiscal stimulator?
What is your attitude towards the budget and if I may your predecessor when she came in said she would not move into The Lodge until she'd been confirmed at an election.
What is your attitude towards moving into The Lodge?
PM: On the question of the economy and the approach I bring to bear, if I was to sum it up in two simple terms, it is economic responsibility.
By which I mean this look carefully right now in 2013 at what has happened to the British economy, because the British conservative government, it's entitled to do this, decided to implement a full blown austerity package in the midst of very troubled global economic circumstances and even worse in Europe.
They plunged the British economy back into recession and have come within a hair's breadth of a triple dip recession.
If Mr Abbott adopts that approach, as he has said and his economic spokesmen have said they will, let me say this very bluntly: he will tip Australia into recession and bring about significant unemployment.
What I know from economic history in this country is that once you've done that, it takes so long to get people back into employment and sometimes you end up with a lost generation or a lost half generation.
So my attitude is this: if everything was normal right in the global economic cycle right now, then of course, you would bring the budget back to surplus immediately.
But guess what it’s not. I have consistently said throughout my public policy career, that we will balance the budget consistent with the economic cycle, is to cater for contingencies such as we have at present.
So therefore, I bring to bear an attitude of economic responsibility.
It is economically irresponsible to undertake a massive austerity drive based on slash and burn which would tip the economy into recession and practically every mainstream economist in Australia agrees with that.
I'm looking at Fiona, the Director of Communications.
Hang on, hey folks, I will come back to that.
If I keep on talking here, half of you will right that he just went on and on and on and I could go now and the other half would say he didn't answer my question.
So what do you want me to do?
OK, I will stay for about another five minutes or so and let's go to this question.
On the question of The Lodge I really haven't turned my mind to that at all but at the appropriate time and certainly when Julia has vacated the premises, then when I'm in Canberra I will use The Lodge.
That's what the Prime Minister of Australia does.
But I will be spending a fair bit of time in Brisbane.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you plan to repair the mining tax before the election?
PM: What I'd like to be briefed on when we get to a budget briefing soon is the revenue projections from the mining tax.
And again I won't go into the business of policy speculation.
But I just want to be briefed on what are the revenue projections at present?
And how the tax is being implemented.
I think that’s the responsible course of action.
I don't foreshadow anything dramatic.
JOURNALIST: Two questions, on your question about your economic responsibility and being a fiscal conservative, would you basically look - if you are making any policy changes to make sure that they are revenue neutral and offset in savings.
Second the government announced in the budget that it would be reviewing the whole question of refugee humanitarian status.
Have you been briefed yet on where that review is up to and would you anticipate you will have an answer that you could take to Indonesia if you go?
PM: On the first question about offsets that's generally been my conservative approach.
I await however the briefing.
Which is about to occur so I simply add the caveat I have not yet been briefed by Treasury officials but that's been my general approach in terms of offsetting new expenditure initiatives.
On the second point I've been briefed this morning on the progress of the review.
G'day Bill, how are you? Senator Bill Heffernan, good to have you here.
On the other question, could I say this: the secretary PM&amp;C has briefed me on where that's up to.
There's still a lot of work to be done and the precise conclusion of it I just don't know.
JOURNALIST: Business has been scathing about the previous government's Fair Work legislation which went through the Senate last night and the 457 legislation which will go through we think at about 3pm today.
Will you commit to further consultation with the business community around these two pieces of key legislation as part of your promise to work more closely with business.
PM: Well it seems to be your question which is suggesting the conditionality’s of what constitutes a good working relationship with business.
If I was to define a good working relationship with business with ticking the box of everything that business community asks for, let me tell you the Commonwealth would've been bankrupt about 10 years ago.
Secondly, I have had an initial look at the provisions of the legislation you just referred to.
Particularly the local testing for employment purposes by firms who then seek to make recourse to 457s.
As far as those local testing are arrangements are concerned, on the face of it, they seem to be fine to me. Once this legislation is passed, I will be very attentive to any real cases put to me by the business community as to whether that's created a real operational problem as opposed to something which is rhetorical.
Remember this: we run one of the most open labour markets in the world.
We have a system of very large migration to this country, including people on all sorts of skills classes, as well as the use of 457s which you know has grown very considerably in recent times under us.
There is no government which has stronger credentials in saying it's a global labour market and therefore - my wife is Chairman of a global company and she understands these things.
She's dealing with different labour market jurisdictions all the time and how you move people from one jurisdiction to the other.
But I don't think it's too much of an ask to simply say if you want to employ somebody, can you stick an ad in the paper and then have a look to see whether the local talent pool can be sufficient to it?
JOURNALIST: I want to ask you about your rallying cry for young Australians to get involved so you can cook with gas?
Are you looking at policies particularly for young people or do you think the personality of Kevin is enough to engage young people?
PM: No, the personality of Kevin would turn a whole bunch of people off, quite frankly. (laughter) Don't laugh so quickly!
The bottom line is this: a lot of young people including my own daughter, Jess, have spoken to me long and hard for example on marriage equality and wherever I go in Australia it just hits you in the face what young people think about this which is that our current arrangements are just wrong.
So frankly my position on that is clear.
Mr Abbott's position on that is clear.
I've announced the reasons for the change in my position.
But can I just add one other thing?
In terms of cooking with gas, which Jessica told me last night was one of the daggiest things she had ever heard me say - none of you are daggy dads? Anyway.
The use of broadband with decent bandwidth by younger Australians is taken for granted.
I've spoken to a whole bunch of foreign student who is come to Brisbane to study, from China for example, and they say what is it with your local broadband speeds?
These things are just not up to world standards.
Frankly, the digital generation know this. Older folks tend not to.
So I’ve got to say marriage equality, decent world-class broadband, these are two big selling points to young Australians all of whom are fully wired for sound.
Now folks I have really got to … one for Karen then I will go.
JOURNALIST: Three years ago when this job was taken from you, your successor said that a good government had lost its way.
I’m wondering what was it about her government that led them to the catastrophic state you have described?
How much was it the matter of her elevation and how much of it was something else? What was it?
PM: Karen, I don't think there's anything to be served by going into any of those things in the public domain.
I've said this to my colleagues and very mindful of personal experience back in 2010, is that I will not tolerate anyone going out there and trashing Julia's reputation.
Let me tell you, I have a bit of experience of that, it's not pleasant and it's not right.
Frankly, I don't think the Australian people like it either.
So history will be the judge of all these things.
I'm pretty relaxed where people will reach their judgments over time as to the decisions that have been taken.
But in terms of just dealing with a human being and having been in this situation myself, I believe Julia Gillard should be treated with appropriate respect and dignity as a former Prime Minister of Australia. Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


Canberra
The Prime Minister will visit Jakarta and Bogor Indonesia, from 4 to 5 July at the invitation of President Yudhoyono to attend the annual Indonesia-Australia Leaders’ Meeting.
Indonesia is a close friend and neighbour and one of Australia’s most important bilateral partners. Our countries enjoy a close and dynamic relationship based on mutual respect, shared democratic values, and a common interest in building a stable and prosperous region.
Our bilateral relationship is one of Australia’s most broad-based, spanning business, education, defence, security and people-to-people links. 
Indonesia is an important commercial partner for Australia, with two-way trade valued at $14.6 billion and Australian investment in Indonesia valued at $6.8 billion in 2012. 
Our countries work together regionally and globally, including as fellow members of APEC, which Indonesia is chairing this year, and the G20, which Australia will chair in 2014.  We also cooperate closely in the East Asia Summit.


Subject(s): Macquarie candidate Susan Templeman; Government investment in Blue Mountains; Trades training centres; Election date; Asylum seekers; Relations with Indonesia 
PM: It’s great to be back in the Blue Mountains with our terrific local candidate Susan Templeman.
Susan Templeman is a first-class local candidate, and I've been up here with her before – how long ago was that?
TEMPLEMAN: October last year.
PM: October last year, and neither of us has aged a bit since then.
TEMPLEMAN: Not at all!
PM: But she is extraordinary, 22 years a local, dedicated to this community, and it’s a community to which the Australian Labor government has delivered a lot.
I've just been through some of the things that we've done here. In the schools of this area, 35 primary schools I think in the federal electorate of Macquarie, and we have injected more than $55 million into new libraries, new multipurpose facilities, new classrooms and the rest.
Then when you look at TAFE and trades, and I saw a guy before, he’s an electrician, they're always looking for people coming through. We have built in this area four new trades training centres.
And this is terrific, servicing – the Penrith Valley trades training, McCarthy College trade training, and when I was up here last time, I went up to St Columba’s School and met some of the kids who are using some of those facilities.
But on top of that there’s a whole bunch of folk up here who are now making use of more university places.
Did you know this? Since we were elected five or six years ago, there are now 190,000 more Australian kids at universities than there were before.
Because we took a policy decision which said if you are able, on merit to get into university, Australia should give you a place to be in university.
And as a result of that, 190,000 more young Australians are now at university who weren’t there only five or six years ago. I think that’s a great Labor achievement.
So whether it’s schools, or whether it’s trades training centres, or whether it’s universities, we’re out there making a difference for peoples’ lives, and that’s why we’ve got to continue the work we’ve set out to do.
And one of the areas we’re going to continue to set out that work is through our new national Better Schools Plan.
And that is for better futures for our kids. And this is a very large investment into the future of our schools. It’s needs-based funding, it lifts the standards of our teachers.
It also ensures that we’re offering quality curriculum to our kids because we want every kid to make the most of their lives and then give back as much as they can to Australia.
One final thing about our local candidate here. She has a whole lot of guts and determination.
She is out there in the community working hard, and what I’d say to all you good local people is when you get to the next election, I want Susan Templeman as the next Member for Macquarie.
TEMPLEMAN: This is a fabulous community and we’re really honoured that the Prime Minister has come here on his first weekend as PM in this term.
So we welcome him, a big cheer to welcome Kevin! And we look forward to having you back many more times.
PM: I will be. Now does anyone else have a question for me.
JOURNALIST: Do we have an election date yet?
PM: Consistent with Australia’s Constitution, we will determine that based on all the necessary criteria and we’ll act according to the Constitution.
In the meantime, the government of Australia continues and I'm the Prime Minister of that government, and we’ve got more things to do.
JOURNALIST: Will you raise the prospect of Tony Abbott starting a war with Indonesia when you meet with President Yudhoyono?
PM: What I said, very simply, was this. Mr Abbott has to answer two questions. He says that he will send the boats back to Indonesia.
Number one question, what will he do when a boat sinks? Number two, what will he do if he pushes a boat back, and the Indonesian naval forces push it back in our direction, because their policy is they will not take boats back?
These are two questions for Mr Abbott to answer, and I just say if he doesn’t answer those two questions, he’s not fair dinkum about his policy.
Remember, this bloke is saying that – he’s already written his victory speech, he’s said to everyone that – he says he’s going to be Prime Minister in several months’ time.
Well on top of that he’s got a very basic question to ask about this policy.
Number one, what happens if a boat sinks, and number two, what happens if the Indonesians push the boat back?
He hasn’t answered either of those things, so either it’s a fair dinkum policy, or it’s simply codswallop to try and win some votes.
Next question.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret those comments?
PM: I stand by everything I said, including the fact that my responsibility as Prime Minister is to ensure we have a first-class relationship with 250 million people in Indonesia, a country which constitutes our most important neighbour.
Any others before I go?
JOURNALIST: How buoyed are you by the poll?
PM: Well I think we’re doing okay but we’ve got a long, long way to go, and having said that folks, we’ve got to zip because I've got to head back into Sydney.
Thanks folks.
[ENDS]


Today I announce changes to the Cabinet and Ministry that I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General.
The team I am announcing today are a strong, smart and experienced group of people who will continue to deliver the great work that this Government is doing.
This is a strong team to build our economy for the future.
Cabinet changes
The Deputy Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese, will take on the Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy portfolio in addition to Infrastructure and Transport.
The Treasurer, Chris Bowen’s responsibilities will include Financial Services and Superannuation.
Jacinta Collins, Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate, joins the Cabinet as Minister for Mental Health and Ageing.
Bill Shorten will serve as Education and Workplace Relations Minister.
Tony Burke will be the new Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship, as well as retaining the Arts portfolio.
Brendan O’Connor will serve as the Minister for Employment, and for Skills and Training.
Kim Carr will join the Cabinet as the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research and Minister for Higher Education.
Julie Collins will also join the Cabinet as the Minister responsible for Housing and Homelessness, Community Services, Status of Women, and Indigenous Employment and Economic Development.
Mark Butler will take on the portfolios of Climate Change, Environment, Heritage and Water.
Catherine King will now serve in Cabinet as the Minister for Regional Australia, Local Government and Territories.
Joel Fitzgibbon joins the Cabinet as Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
As does Richard Marles as the Minister for Trade.
Tanya Plibersek will add Medical Research to her responsibilities as Minister for Health.
Ministry changes
Kate Ellis will add the Youth portfolio to her current responsibilities.
In addition to his current portfolio, David Bradbury will assist the Treasurer in the Financial Services and Superannuation portfolio.
Kate Lundy will be the Minister for Multicultural Affairs, as well as the Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation and for the Digital Economy.
Don Farrell will be the new Minister for Sport and continue to assist the Minister for Tourism.
Sharon Bird will join the ministry in the Regional Development, Regional Communications and Road Safety portfolios.
Melissa Parke will also join the ministry as the first Minister for International Development.
I am also announcing a number of changes to Parliamentary Secretary responsibilities.
Parliamentary Secretary changes
Kelvin Thomson will be the Parliamentary Secretary for Schools.
Amanda Rishworth will take on the new responsibility for Environment and Urban Water in addition to her current responsibilities for Disabilities and Carers.
Alan Griffin will be the Cabinet Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister.
Ed Husic will also be the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. He will also be the Parliamentary Secretary for Broadband.
Matt Thistlethwaite will add Infrastructure and Transport to his existing responsibilities.
Doug Cameron will be the new Parliamentary Secretary for Housing and Homelessness.
I want to thank all Ministers who have served the Government so well in their current portfolios.
I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that the new Ministry be sworn in on Monday 1 July 2013.
The full list can be viewed at http://www.dpmc.gov.au/parliamentary/index.cfm


Subject(s): New Ministry and Cabinet; Simon Crean; Carbon pricing; Women in the Ministry; Federal Election
PM: Thank you for joining us in Newcastle, one of Australia's truly great regional cities.
We are in Newcastle today to launch the first day of operations of DisabilityCare Australia, Australia's first comprehensive national disability insurance scheme.
And here in Newcastle it is also my great pleasure to announce the members of my Cabinet. There will be a full list circulated of the members of the Outer Ministry and of course of the Parliamentary Secretaries as well.
The core task of this Australian Government is to keep the economy strong, given the threats we face from the global economy, the end of the China resources boom, also the beginnings of a credit squeeze in China itself.
And given the size of the China economic relationship and its impact on the Australian economy at large, our jobs, our standards of living, our growth as well as the overall wellbeing of our economy, we have got to make sure we get our responses, our economic policy responses, right to this new set of challenges.
I believe as Prime Minister of Australia the right response is twofold.
Number one, we must continue to diversify our economy, not to have all our eggs in one basket.
That means ensuring that we are doing whatever we can to boost our manufacturing, to boost our services industries, to boost our agribusinesses, to generate new jobs in these sectors rather than simply relying upon just one.
And second, to do this by making full use of the falling exchange rate which in fact boosts our global productivity.
Secondly, to enhance our productivity through our investments in skills, in education, in training, in infrastructure – but on top of that again, to bring about a much more productive relationship between business and Labor and to end the days of so-called class warfare.
We are interested as a Government in pulling Australian businesses and the Labor movement together to work in the Australian national interest.
That's why proven economic leadership, given the enormous challenges that we face, is so important.
Proven leadership that frankly I had to learn on the job as Prime Minister during the global financial crisis.
That's why I have assembled today a strong economic team, one with vastly more experience and vastly more competence than those we face opposite.
This team will be led by Chris Bowen as Treasurer of the Commonwealth.
Chris has served as Assistant Treasurer. He has served as Minister for Financial Services. He is respected by the Australian business community. He is a good bloke.
He is not only safe hands; he's also a bloke capable of taking the very hard decisions. Highly intelligent, a man of courage, not a populist.
Penny Wong continues as the Minister for Finance.
Every Cabinet economic team needs a Dr No. Someone prepared to say to their ministerial colleagues ‘great idea colleague, but we can't afford it’.
Penny will continue to perform that function. She is a highly intelligent person. I have known her for a long, long time and she has a prodigious work ethic.
I said just before that productivity was central to our economic task. Better skills, better infrastructure, but also the end of unnecessary divisiveness between business and unions.
Deputy Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has responsibility for infrastructure, now broadband as well, transport and communications.
This is a large set of responsibilities for a man with a prodigious work ethic and a heart for all Australia. He will do the job well. He will help keep the nation's arteries going.
Without properly functioning national infrastructure, the roads, rails and ports which have served us well in the past and which we must continue to invest in the future. The new infrastructure; our National Broadband Network, NBN.
On top of that, we of course have the skills agenda.
Bill Shorten will become the new Minister for School Education with responsibility for the national school improvement program or what we call our Better Schools Plan for our kids' future.
He will retain the portfolio of industrial relations.
Within Government, Bill will also have a new responsibility for driving the productivity agenda with business and unions.
Kim Carr will be the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science, as well as Higher Education.
Higher education is critical for our future. Kim has a passion for this sector and I am sure he will develop a strong, productive, reform-oriented agenda with the sector.
Kim will be joined by Brendan O'Connor, the new Minister for Employment, Skills and Training.
Gary Gray will continue as Minister for Resources and Energy, Minister for Tourism and Minister for Small Business. He’ll also bring to the Cabinet table the strong economic voice of Western Australia.
On top of this, Richard Marles will join the Cabinet as the Minister for Trade. Richard will have his job cut out; we have major free trade agreements to conclude, not least of which is with China.
If you look at our economic team, they are drawn from across the breadth of our nation.
We have senior economic ministers from Queensland – myself – New South Wales, of course you’ve got the likes of Albo and of course Chris Bowen.
In Victoria you’re going to have Bill Shorten; in South Australia, Penny Wong.
Also in the West, you’ll have Gary Gray as well as the other ministers I have just mentioned.
The voice of all Australian mainland states is going to be at the Cabinet table on the economy.
And of course when it comes to Tasmania, we are going to have our first Cabinet minister for a long, long time as well.
Labor governments have a head, but let me tell you we also have a heart, and make no apology for it. That's what makes us different.
I am delighted that Jenny Macklin will continue today as Minister for Family Services and Minister also responsible for Disability Reform and also Minister for Indigenous Affairs. She is a person of great experience and a great work ethic.
Tanya Plibersek will continue in Health and her portfolio will also now include medical research. She will be the Minister for Health and Medical Research.
Jacinta Collins joins the Cabinet as the new Minister for Mental Health and Ageing.
Julie Collins joins the Cabinet as well and this is to ensure that we have a proper voice at the Cabinet table for housing and homelessness, two enduring passions of mine since the day I first became Leader of the Opposition some time ago. She will also be Minister for the Status of Women.
Catherine King also joins the Cabinet. Catherine is from Ballarat, one of Australia's great regional cities. She will be Minister for Regional Australia, Local Government and Territories to ensure that Australia's regions get a fair go.
That's what's important. It is not just the capital cities, and it’s not just Sydney and Melbourne let me tell you.
This is a high priority for us all, to make sure that all Australians get a decent share of the national cake.
In terms of the regions, but also the economy more broadly, we have of course the important portfolio of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
Joel Fitzgibbon who represents a rural and regional seat of Hunter will join us as the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. He will be responsible for finding new future business opportunities in agribusiness and food production.
He will bring a strong voice for the regions, a strong voice for agriculture, a strong voice of course for our forestry workers, and a strong voice also for our fisheries.
I have spoken about our economic team, I have spoken about the team which is committed to social justice, a team which is committed to the regions and a team committed to agriculture.
Our national security team is strong. We have Bob Carr who will continue as Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith who will continue as Defence Minister. Mark Dreyfus will continue as Attorney-General and Minister for Emergency Management.
Tony Burke will be the new Minister for Immigration, Multiculturalism and also for Citizenship. He has had great experience as a Shadow Minister for Immigration in the past.
He has a fine policy mind, he is very tough minded. He also has a heart and I'm sure he will do well in this portfolio.
Jason Clare will continue as Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Justice in the outer ministry.
On the environment, this is important for all of us; climate change, our natural ecosystems, our river systems and of course our marine parks.
Mark Butler from South Australia will be Minister for Climate Change and Minister for the Environment, Water and Heritage. And I welcome Mark to this new portfolio area of responsibilities.
As for the Outer Ministry, the team continues, there is one addition to it and that is Melissa Parke from Western Australia.
She will become Australia's first Minister for International Development. Again the hallmark of this Australian Government is that we take seriously our mission to those in Australia who don't have much and those around the world who have nothing at all.
Our job in the international community is to help those who frankly run a risk of dying tomorrow in the absence of proper vaccinations or emergency food assistance. And Melissa has a passion for this area.
As for the Parliamentary Secretaries, they will continue broadly as in the past. There will be three new additions.
One is of course Ed Husic who will be Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. He will also be Parliamentary Secretary for Broadband.
Alan Griffin, Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister also, and Cabinet Secretary for this Government.
And Doug Cameron will be the Parliamentary Secretary for Housing and Homelessness.
Colleagues, this is a strong team. I am proud to lead this team.
This team has been selected on the basis of merit.
I am delighted that in this Cabinet of ours, we will have the largest number of women of any Cabinet in Australia's history. This is a very strong team.
Penny Wong at the head of it and so many others with her as well.
I have mentioned before of course Jenny. I have mentioned also before of course Tanya; joined by three new women ministers as well.
This will be a great contribution to the cause of women, as well as the cause of good government in Australia.
I'd also like to make mention of Simon Crean. Simon will be making a statement on his own future later today as I'm advised by him.
I would also like to acknowledge here publicly as Prime Minister of Australia how much I value his work over the years. He has been an extraordinary leader in our movement for a long period of time.
He has worked in previous Australian Labor governments. He has worked prior to that as head of the Australian trade union movement.
He played an extraordinary role in fashioning the Accord and bringing our industrial relations system kicking and screaming into the 21st century. I acknowledge his contributions.
In the period I was Prime Minister also a fantastic Minister for Trade, and certainly under Prime Minister Gillard he has performed well in Regional Australia where in the regions they love him, they really do, because he has got a heart for regional Australia.
But I will leave his own statement on his own future for him and I understand he will be standing up later today based on a conversation I had with him yesterday.
The Cabinet will be sworn in at Government House in Canberra by Her Excellency the Governor-General at two o'clock this afternoon.
Following that, the full ministry will meet at 4PM. We'll get down to business in Parliament House in the Cabinet room and the business of government will continue.
To conclude, before I take your questions, ours is a great country, but you know something, we can even make it better.
We have enormous potential. Our job in the future is to harvest that potential and make an even better Australia.
A stronger Australia, a fairer Australia. The hallmarks of what we as Australian Labor governments seek to do.
And on the way through our job is, while keeping the economy strong, never, ever, ever to allow the fair go to be thrown out the back door.
I'm happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Simon Crean on the radio this morning said he was offered a portfolio to woo him to stay. Can you tell us what that was?
PM: I will leave those private conversations for Mr Crean and his subsequent statement today.
JOURNALIST: This is quite a promotion for Mr Shorten. Is this a reward for his supporting you in your leadership ballot?
PM: When it comes to the education portfolio and our plan for better schools, better schools for our kids' future, it is important that we have got everyone of talent and ability out there advocating the cause.
Bill has a strong mind. He also has a strong ability to communicate.
Therefore, when we have got a first class plan to improve long term funding and reform of our school system, I want our best players on the field, and Bill fits that category.
Also I emphasise this: while retaining the position of industrial relations, he also has responsibility for driving the productivity agenda.
Bill is not there as some spokesman for the Australian trade union movement. I wouldn't cop that and he wouldn't either.
He is there to drive a productivity agenda which brings us together.
That is, business who generate the jobs and unions who represent employees in order to get the best and most productive and fair outcome from the businesses who create the bulk of Australia's wealth.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said after the leadership spill there would be no recriminations for any ministers yet Tony Burke and Brendan O'Connor have been moved on.
PM: I think you will find that both these ministers are in the Cabinet.
JOURNALIST: They’ve been moved from their positions.
PM: Well I think no reasonable person would say, and I certainly haven't said from day one, that any minister who was going to continue in the Cabinet or the ministry or as a parliamentary secretary would by definition keep their portfolio.
And all the ministers have understood that from day one.
JOURNALIST: Immigration though is pretty poisoned chalice though, isn't it?
PM: Tony Burke is a highly competent minister. It is a tough challenge. And to rise to a tough challenge you appoint a tough minister.
Tony is one of those. He has got experience in the field. He is tough-minded but he has a heart.
And I think he has got the right balance to actually execute the difficult challenges which lie ahead.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to people who are worried their costs will go up today because the carbon price is going up?
PM: I think the first thing to say is that the Treasury's projections are that the impact on cost of living will be modest and these are being compensated for by adjustments to the family payment system.
The second thing is this; often these questions about the price on carbon are taken in isolation.
The alternative Prime Minister, Mr Abbott, through his so-called direct action plan means putting a huge swag of new costs on to Australian business and guess what, you have two choices then.
Australian businesses are going to say we are a bunch of philanthropists, we will not pass any of those costs on to consumers or we're going to pass them straight on to consumers.
Businesses will pass on Mr Abbott's cost directly to consumers.
I think it is important to consider this in balance. After all, the Australian people will face an election.
They are going to make a choice between us being upfront and transparent about the cost of the price of carbon and, secondly, how it is best compensated – and we have done that – as opposed to Mr Abbott's magic pudding whereby somehow you whack a whole lot of new charges onto business to fund his direct action plan and then mysteriously assume none of that is going to flow its way through to extra costs for consumers.
Give us a break. That's just not true.
JOURNALIST: Are you discussing possible changes with your new Cabinet – how quickly could you envisage your change to carbon pricing and how quickly would it take to implement those changes?
PM: Cabinet processes will be conducted in an entirely orderly and predictable fashion.
We will go through the Government's current policies, work out where any challenges exist.
I have some fresh policy ideas of my own but I don't intend to canvass those here before taking it through the proper deliberations of the Australian Cabinet.
So we will wait and see how Cabinet resolves itself on these questions.
JOURNALIST: There is a number of women in the Ministry; a peace offering to the female voters of the country?
PM: I am basically a guy who believes in meritocracy. And when you find people of merit, whether they are women or men, they should be promoted.
And none of you could stand here and say that strong, capable, competent women like Julie Collins from Tasmania, like Catherine King from Ballarat, like Jacinta Collins from Melbourne, would not be there on their merits.
They are there on their merits. These people are folk that command the respect of not just their parliamentary colleagues, but also the sectors of the community which they have been dealing with so far.
So I am pretty relaxed about the fact – remember you are looking at the guy who went to an election with Australia's first woman as Deputy Prime Minister, Julia.
Secondly who promoted, or recommended I should say, the first woman as Governor-General of Australia.
I appointed Australia's first Ambassador for Women and Girls.
And I come from a family of pretty strong women. I actually don't see things through the prism of gender. I never have and I never will.
JOURNALIST: Do you think these women have gone unrewarded in the Labor Party so far?
PM: You know something? The Labor Party can be a bit of a tough beast on these questions, and if you roll the clock back 10 or 20 years, on both sides of politics frankly, it has been hard going.
I actually pay a lot of tribute to those trailblazers in the past who opened the door, made it more possible and then made it entirely normal so that hopefully by the time we get to whoever the next Cabinet of Australia is, following the subsequent election, whether Mr Abbott wins or whether I win, that we need an Australia where these questions of gender are no longer asked.
And in some of the most mature democracies in the world they aren't because women have assumed a full and complete role in the government of their countries.
I look forward to that day.
JOURNALIST: Brendan O'Connor would be one of the shortest serving immigration ministers in Australian history. Is this an admission that he has botched the campaign on 457s?
PM: Brendan O'Connor, who I have known for a long, long time, and when I was Prime Minister first put him into the ministry, is a person with a passion for employment, a passion for skills, a passion for training.
When I spoke to Brendan about this, he was delighted, and I think it is the best mix.
As I referred to Burkey before, and his skills in the immigration field, he is going to do a great job there.
None of these jobs are easy. None of them.
If any of you in this room have worked for a minister, let alone senior ministers or prime ministers, let me tell you it is free and fast-flowing.
Most of you as journalists wait for the product to pop out the end in a useable press release for a newspaper the next day or for the radio news bulletin that afternoon.
That represents about one-hundredth of the process which precedes it, which goes to what problem are we trying to fix, how we going to fix it, what will work, what won’t work, what's it cost and what's the orderly way of making those decisions?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you thought any more about an election date?
PM: Look, I’ve said before that my approach will be identical with Prime Minister Howard, identical with Prime Minister Keating, identical with Prime Minister Hawke and all their predecessors, which is to act entirely according to the Australian Constitution.
So those announcements will be made at the right time.
JOURNALIST: Joel Fitzgibbon resigned after several controversies in 2009. Is this giving him a second chance, and why?
PM: Joel is a very competent local member in this part of the world as you know. I have known him for a long time.
And I think four years in Coventry, which effectively is what Joel has done, has given him plenty of time to reflect and I believe everybody gets a reasonable opportunity for a second chance.
And Joel has a passion for the regions and therefore a passion for agriculture.
If you go through the electorate of Hunter, which you good folk in Newcastle probably have from time to time, what I see is a dynamic region which is obviously full of mining, but it is full of agriculture as well and regional towns.
And I think he is a very good fit for the portfolio.
So I just say to people give Joel a go. He has been four years on the sidelines. I think everyone deserves to get a second chance.
[ENDS]


Australians with significant and permanent disability will for the first time have the power to choose the support they need and how that support is provided, with today's historic launch of DisabilityCare Australia.
DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, today opens for business in four launch sites across the country; the Hunter area in New South Wales, Geelong and the Barwon area in Victoria, in South Australia for children and in Tasmania for young people.
This is a momentous achievement for Australia, finally giving people with disability, their families and carers the certainty they deserve.
DisabilityCare Australia will give Australians the peace of mind that if they, their child or a loved one has a significant and permanent disability, they will get the support they need, when they need it, over their lifetime.
More than 26,000 people with disability, their families and carers will benefit from the first stage of DisabilityCare Australia, which will be gradually implemented to ensure we establish a sustainable national scheme and that people can transition into the scheme smoothly.
DisabilityCare Australia has staff and offices in each of the launch sites, and from today, people in launch sites who are accessing specialist disability services will start moving into the scheme.
DisabilityCare Australia has started getting in contact with these people through their current providers and has already made appointments with many of the people who are due to move into the scheme during July.
People with significant and permanent disability in launch sites who are not accessing specialist disability supports can contact the scheme at any time.
The online My Access Checker tool is available to help determine whether they can access DisabilityCare, and staff members at the local shopfronts are ready to assist people through the process.
DisabilityCare Australia will enable people with disability to choose supports that best meet their individual needs and preferences.
DisabilityCare Australia’s Local Area Coordinators will work one-on-one with people with disability to link them into their communities, and DisabilityCare will provide a comprehensive information and referral service to help people with disability access mainstream, disability and community supports.
When the full scheme is rolled out nationally by July 2019, about 460,000 Australians with disability will get the support they deserve.
The 2013-14 Federal Budget provided $14.3 billion over seven years to 2018-19 to roll out DisabilityCare Australia nationally, on top of existing Commonwealth disability funding.
DisabilityCare Australia has long-term funding certainty through an increase to the Medicare Levy of 0.5 percentage points—every cent of which will go towards funding DisabilityCare.
DisabilityCare Australia will launch across the Australian Capital Territory and the Barkly region in the Northern Territory in 2014.
For more information about DisabilityCare Australia, call 1800 800 110 or go to www.disabilitycareaustralia.gov.au
High resolution images, and video and audio grabs from each launch site are available at: www.disabilitycareaustralia.gov.au/news


Prime Minister, Minister for Education
Canberra
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Education yesterday met with representatives from the National Catholic Education Commission (NCEC) who welcomed the progress made in negotiating a new approach to school funding.
This means that the Catholic systemic schools are one step closer to guaranteed extra funding of around $3 billion over six years.
On this basis, the NCEC agreed to take forward to State and Territory Catholic Education Commissions the final school funding settings that will deliver extra benefits and funding for Catholic school students across the country.
The new funding arrangements are now enshrined in the Australian Education Act 2013 which passed the Federal Parliament on 26 June 2013.
Further discussions will continue with the NCEC and other schooling authorities and sectors to finalise the Regulations for the Australian Education Act 2013.
The full amount of extra funding will flow to every Catholic systemic school in Australia if all states and territories sign up to the Australian Government’s Plan for Better Schools and contribute their share.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Education stressed the importance of this milestone in achieving better schools and a better future for Australian kids.
He welcomed the commitment shown by the NCEC to a funding system that would improve outcomes for students in Catholic systemic schools.
The Prime Minister said the extra funding included $1.6 billion from the Australian Government’s commitment to grow current investment in schools by 4.7 per cent a year.
The other $1.4 billion formed part of the more than $15 billion additional investment for schools under the National Plan for School Improvement, of which the Commonwealth’s contribution would be around $10 billion over 2014 to 2019.
The Prime Minister said these fairer funding arrangements would benefit approximately 700,000 school children across almost 1,650 Catholic systemic schools around Australia.
It will mean more resources for these schools to deliver improvements to the quality of teaching, help implement a national curriculum, include science as part of annual testing, and provide additional support to students who need it the most.”
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Education acknowledged the invaluable work of the NCEC in working towards this important milestone.
The NCEC will now brief all State and Territory Catholic Education Commissions on the final funding arrangements for Catholic systemic schools to be transitioned from 2014.
As a result, each of these Commissions are now working to develop and agree a Memorandum of Understanding with the Australian Government setting out the education reforms to be implemented over the six year transition period.


Subject(s): Annual Australia-Indonesia Leaders’ Meeting; Home insulation scheme; Border security; Business investment in Indonesia
PM: Well I’m delighted to be back in Indonesia for the annual Indonesia-Australia Leader’s Meeting.
This is of course my first time abroad since being sworn in.
Indonesia was in fact the first country I visited having been sworn in as Prime Minister back in 2007. And I have been back to this country about ten times since then as Prime Minister or as Foreign Minister. And it’s a delight to be back in Jakarta.
Indonesia is one of our closest friends and neighbours and it’s one of our most important trading partners across the spectrum.
We share a truly comprehensive strategic partnership based on mutual respect, shared democratic values and a common interest in building a stable and prosperous region. I’m pleased to be here for this important meeting. 
Indonesia is a great and dynamic success story unfolding. I pay tribute publicly to President Yudhoyono for his leadership in engineering this chapter in Indonesia’s transformation; transformasi as it’s called here.
Transforming Indonesia into a stable and continuing democracy and transforming the Indonesian economy into one which has grown at about six per cent each year during the period of his presidency.
I’ve already had a good conversation with the President on the telephone. And I look forward to catching up with him this evening over dinner with my wife Therese and of course with Ibu Ani.
I’ll be thanking him personally for his strong and active support for the Australia-Indonesia relationship over the years, a relationship that will be critical for Australia’s success in the 21st Century.
Of course the relationship covers all areas including our economic engagement, our defence engagement, education, border security, tourism, economic development and people-to-people links.
This is a very good relationship for both of us, and an important one.
Indonesia has a young, fast growing economy with a quarter of a billion people. It’s projected to be the world’s tenth largest economy by 2025. 
I’m particularly keen to discuss with President Yudhoyono the ways in which we can build our economic relationship into the future.
I believe it’s still underdone at present. We’ve got a long, long way to go in building a much stronger trade and investment relationship between Australia and Indonesia.
We’ll also of course be discussing how we can work more closely to make the most of the opportunities that will come with the profound shift in global economic weight to our own region.
It’s a big year ahead for both Indonesia and Australia.
Indonesia hosts APEC later this year. We of course host the G20 next year. This therefore brings these major global institutions right into the heart of these two countries of ours – Australia and Indonesia.
And I’ll also be congratulating President Yudhoyono for his first class work as the co-chair of the UN Secretary General’s High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the post-2015 development agenda, and reiterate to him Australia’s intention to continue cooperating with Indonesia while we are on the UN Security Council as a non-permanent member.
Again, let me say how delighted I am to be back in Indonesia. Saya senang berada di Jakarta. Terima kasih and I look forward to your questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the parents of Matthew Fuller asked that you apologise for their son’s death. Will you do that?
PM: This is an unspeakable tragedy affecting a young boy, a young man and young men.
I cannot, as a parent, begin to understand the grief which parents would be feeling under these circumstances.
As the Prime Minister of the country I am deeply sorry for what is occurred and of course I apologise for these deaths given that it was a government program.
The Queensland Coroner has issued a report on the subject and I’ve looked carefully at what the Acting Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has said today.
I agree with the Acting Prime Minister. We accept the Coroner’s conclusions.
The Coroner’s report of course goes to a range of subjects. But let’s not beat around the bush, this was a government program.
Secondly, I also note what the Coroner had to say about the culpability of individual firms as well.
A number have been prosecuted by the relevant Queensland authority already. And I understand one further has been recommended for further prosecution by the DPP.
But on the question which is purely personal, purely about the death of young men, and this young man in particular whose parent have spoken out on, I simply say on behalf of the Australian Government, how deeply sorry I am, and of course we apologise without reservation.
JOURNALIST: Was there too much haste in the assembling of this program Mr Rudd, and are there any lessons that you’ve learned as a result of what’s happened?
PM: Up until now there’s been an independent review of this program I think by Allan Hawke.
I think there has also been an Auditor-General’s report into this program.
Of course we accept their recommendations as we do those of the Coroner who’s deliberated on these professionally.
The other thing I’d say is that the Australian Government has co-operated fully with the Queensland Coroner and that is at it should be.
So those conclusions and those recommendations of course we fully accept.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what can be expected, I know you spoke before you left about talks on border security. What should we expect from tomorrow’s summit?
PM: Well I think it’s quite wrong to have huge expectations that there’s going to be some headline result out of what is a regular meeting between the Prime Minister of Australia and the President of Indonesia, which covers the full breadth of our relationship.
Of course border security will be part of the discussions I have with President Yudhoyono; that’s right, and it’s logical and it’s natural.
But I’m in the business of working with our Indonesian friends and partners on what actually works in dealing with the challenge of border security rather than using three-word slogans which sound good, but in practice don’t work.
So this is going to be a serious discussion about the economy, about trade and investment links, about how much more we can do on that front, our defence ties, border security and the rest our engagement with the region.
JOURNALIST: You said that you were implementing an election promise when you dismantled the Howard Government approach to border protection. Do you concede that it was a mistake though, that that promise that you implemented – elements of it – have proven to be flawed?
PM: As I said recently in interviews the truth of it is that immigration policy is constantly subject to change, as it should be because our global and regional circumstances change as well.
So on our immigration policy we’ve necessarily seen adjustments over time, whether it’s under Mr Howard or it’s been under us, and again under us more recently.
And I’ve made comments about the speed of adjustment which should have occurred to our policy in the 09-10 period following other developments in our region.
The reason I say all that is that Australia’s immigration policy is not etched in stone.
You’ve got to continue to adjust it to changing and emerging circumstances.
We’ll do that, but here is the criteria: one, it’s got to work, number two, it’s got to honour our international obligations, and three, I am not faintly interested in people producing three word sound bites to win a few votes, as opposed to doing the real hard work on what actually works for a challenge faced by countries right around the world.
JOURNALIST: Part of your mission here is furthering Australian business investment in Indonesia, giving Australian businesses direct advice as to the options. How important is an FTA to facilitating that type of investment?
PM: I think it’s really important, and the fact that we’ve got this close economic partnership agreement negotiation underway is fundamental.
A lot of Australian businesses have a perception problem when it comes to Indonesia. They think it’s just too hard to get into as a market.
Well, frankly, if you took that attitude to what it was like dealing in China ten, 20, 30 years ago, or frankly in Japan 40, 50, 60 years ago, we would’ve got nowhere.
All I’m saying is, there’s a quarter of a billion people next door to Australia, it’s barely an hour’s flight from Darwin depending on where you are.
And therefore, when you see hundreds of millions of people emerging here, as the Indonesian middle class, wanting to purchase things that we in Australia buy, and frankly the Australian business community needs to lift its horizons and see that there’s a whole new world of opportunity here.
And folks, I’ve really got to see the Indonesian President tonight over dinner, I don’t want to keep him waiting, thank you very much.


PM: Good morning, thank you for joining us.
This has been a busy first week for the government.
We have sworn in a new ministry, I've been working with the Ministers to set up Cabinet processes for the orderly consideration of a range of policy challenges which lie ahead of us.
Yesterday I spent the time on the telephone to each of the Premiers and Chief Ministers and I have spoken to all of them.
Premier Campbell Newman I understand is away on holiday at the moment so I will catch up with him I assume when he gets back.
I have also, as you know, had meetings with the heads of the ACTU and the heads of the Business Council of Australia on the need to bring the various parties to our national economic debate together to deal with some of the challenges we face for the future.
I will be meeting further with them in the period ahead.
On top of that, as you know, we have extended the deadline for the states and territories to sign up to the better schools plan by a couple of weeks.
I've been touching on those negotiations in my initial discussions with premiers and chief ministers.
We have also of course launched DisabilityCare Australia on Monday.
This is a great reform for Australia.
We have also been preparing for the visit to Indonesia.
I will leave you soon from this press conference and head to the airport and I will be in Jakarta later this afternoon early evening Australian time.
Indonesia is a crucial economic partner of Australia.
I want to re-emphasise and emphasise a thousand times to the Australian business community that this is a very large emerging market for Australia and it's time we actually rose to the challenge and the opportunity.
Of course I will also be discussing with the Indonesian Government our security relationship and associated questions of border security.
So this is the business of the nation in which we have engaged during our first week in office.
This will remain my number one priority as PM.
Today, I want to focus on business of the Australian Labor Party.
Today I want to focus on the future reform of the Australian Labor Party.
The Labor Party I intend to lead will be a modern Labor Party.
I want a more Democratic Labor Party.
I want one which is more representative of the face of modern Australia and I want a Labor Party which is free from the taint of some of the things we have seen emerge in ICAC in NSW.
That is why today I’m announcing federal intervention into the NSW branch of the Australian Labor Party and I have corresponded with the General Secretary of the NSW branch to that affect and copied that correspondence to members of the National Executive of the Australian Labor Party.
This is not a decision that's been taken lightly, it's been taken in full consultation with other senior ministers of the government, the Treasurer as well as the Leader and Deputy Leader in the senate and also the subject of conversation, discussion and dialogue with the full Cabinet early this week.
The last such intervention into the NSW branch was conducted more than 40 years ago but this is not a usual occurrence.
Like all Australians, I have been appalled by the allegations arising out of the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption.
These allegations have also appalled the tens and thousands of genuine hard working Labor Party members right across NSW and right across Australia.
I have met so many of these folks in the time I have been elected office, good, salt of the earth people out there labouring year in, year out to get Labor Governments and Labor members elected.
It's those folks who feel this as badly as any of us in terms of what's been put before the nation through the lens of ICAC.
While these specific matters before ICAC have been dealt with through the appropriate legal channels I feel as the national leader of the party to ensure that the party is reformed.
As a party we must stamp out a culture which has allowed this type of behaviour to take hold and that is why I have written to the General Secretary today.
These reforms include, number one – zero tolerance of corruption; calling on the NSW branch to impose new rules so that any person with the finding of corruption is immediately expelled from the party and that anyone being investigated for improper conduct can be removed from the party.
At present the rules do not explicitly permit this and this has been a problem for the NSW branch in recent times.
Number two – there will be a ban on property developers as candidates; instructing the NSW branch to impose a ban on property developers from standing as Labor Party candidates in the future.
Number three – establishing independent judicial oversight to restore confidence in the dispute mechanism processes of the NSW branch; and so I've asked the NSW branch to dissolve the disputes and credentials committee which has been too controlled by factions and establish a new NSW internal appeals tribunal.
This tribunal will be chaired by a retired judicial officer or senior legal professional and comprised of individuals of utmost integrity who must not be actively seeking elected public office.
Furthermore, I have written requesting the establishment of a Labor Ombudsman so that rank and file members of the Australian Labor Party can have their complaints heard and properly investigated in timely fashion by an independent and trusted person and authority.
Finally, I have written to ask that we have an assurance in the future of at least 50 per cent of the administrative committee of the NSW branch, the major decision making body of the NSW branch being made up of rank and file members as well as containing three independent directors with board experience.
Also, the establishment of a charter of rights and responsibilities making a clear statement that the rules are binding on all members.
I regard this as a necessary set of reforms.
I also reserve to myself the right to make a further request in the future should further reforms be necessary in the light of any subsequent findings by ICAC.
I would like to acknowledge the role so far of John Robertson and what he has put forward in terms of early reforms to the rules which govern the parliamentary party in NSW.
I would also acknowledge the initial reforms undertaken also by the General Secretary Sam Dastyari.
This is the beginning of the reform program and I will have asked the national executive through George Wright, the National Secretary, to report back within 30 days on the implementation of this federal intervention.
As I said before, I also reserved myself the right to request further reform measures should they prove to be necessary.
The time has come to modernise the Australian Labor Party.
We need to open the windows and the doors of the great Australian Labor Party to the Australian community.
We need to give people full voice, fair opportunity; we want of course continued full participation from members of our great Australian trade unions.
We must also recognise there is a broader church in Australia who must be represented within the Australian Labor movement as well.
Of course, therefore, another task of wider reform of the Australian Labor Party beyond NSW lies ahead of us and I will have more to say on that in the future.
Before concluding and throwing it open to questions, could I make a few remarks about my upcoming visit to Indonesia.
On Friday morning in Indonesia, I will be addressing members of the Australian Indonesian business community.
I will then travel to Bogor to meet with President Yudhoyono for the third annual Australian-Indonesia leaders meeting.
This will be followed by an official lunch hosted by the President of Indonesia.
On top of that, I would like to emphasise again that the economy and trade will be high on our agenda.
This is critical, I believe, for both our economies for the future.
Indonesia is a close friend and neighbour and one of Australia's most important bilateral partners.
We will of course be discussing regional security questions as well.
The bilateral relationship is in excellent working order and we will of course also be discussing the questions of border security.
This will be my fifth visit to Indonesia as Prime Minister.
I also travelled to Indonesia five times as Foreign Minister.
I regard SBY as a good friend.
I've known him for a long time and I believe it’s a relationship that will continue to develop in the future.
I will also be accompanied by Therese, by the way.
So she is looking forward to catching up with Ibu Ani, SBY's wife when we are in Jakarta.
Finally last night and in previous days I have had something to say about the need for a debate with Mr Abbott.
The bottom line is this - the Australian people face a choice.
Big choices on the economy, big choices on the economy, big choices on social policy, big choices on environmental policy, big choices on jobs and I cannot understand why Mr Abbott does not seem to have the ticker to want to come forward and participate in a national debate.
So in consultation with the National Press Club, we have set aside next Thursday for a debate at the National Press Club and between now and next Thursday I will be hounding Mr Abbott up hill and down dale to make sure he gets there.
If he doesn't want to come he should bring Mr Howard as an assistant.
He was with Mr Howard the other day. I'm fine. He can bring whoever he likes.
As I’ve said, the topic is debt and deficit.
Have one after that, we can have it on immigration policy.
One after that we can have on carbon pricing.
I'm happy to debate him on the terms which he has set forward are so important for this election.
So Mr Abbott, could I just say this - it's time to fess up to the Australian people about what you really stand for and what your real policies are for the future or are they all just sound bites and slogans. 
Before taking your questions, I’m going to ask the Deputy Prime Minister to speak on the NSW intervention and then take the questions that you have.
DPM: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
Can I say that from the perspective of a member of the NSW branch and a former official of the NSW Australian Labor Party, it has been very clear for some time that there is a problem with the culture and structures of the NSW branch.
The structures have allowed a situation to develop whereby a small group have been able to have, who are a majority within a sub-faction, then go and become a majority within a faction and then impose their will on the party.
Those structures must be reformed.
The days of fact factional dominance in NSW must also be reformed because they have clearly led to an abuse of power.
These reforms advanced by the Prime Minister today will do just that.
What they do is will ensure that decisions are taken on merit.
The situation whereby you could know the outcome of a meeting of the ALP Credentials Committee, or the ALP Disputes Committee, or the ALP Review Tribunal before the meeting was held has to end.
These structural reforms will end that and hence end the power of those who are in a position to know the outcomes before the meetings are held.
That's why meetings this is the most significant reform into the NSW branch in 40 years; 40 years ago when the reform established the review tribunal of the NSW branch, that was meant to do the job.
Unfortunately, over a period of time, what happened was that the culture that had dominated the culture that had dominated the lower echelons of the branch went further up and the same pattern of behaviour emerged with consequences for the actions of Labor members of government.
We are seeing that played out in NSW at the moment.
What these structures are necessary also through the national executive because the NSW branch isn't in a position to change its own rules.
The national executive must impose these rules in order for them to be done in a timely manner.
As a citizen of the great state of NSW, I believe that the electorate want these reforms to happen and they want to see and actually see the response and the reality of a change in the way that the NSW Labor Party operates.
So this reform imposed from the national executive, the ALP Administrative Committee will remain in place to oversee these changes but they will be imposed at the national level in order to ensure that it gets done.
We need to have the rights and responsibilities of every member of the Labor Party respected.
Overwhelmingly there has been such great disappointment, great disappointment, from ALP rank and file members, the people who staff the polling booths, the people who put things in letter boxes, the people who go out there and advocate at their local pub or their local footy team or the local P&amp;C for the cause of Labor have been let down.
What we are saying through these reforms is that your rights will be respected.
Your work for the cause of Labor will be respected.
We'll put in place structures that ensure that the circumstances that we have seen recently in NSW can never happen again.
PM: Thanks very much Deputy Prime Minister. Happy to take your questions.
JOURNALIST: You have copied this letter to state secretaries in all branches, is that because even though they might not have the problems identified by ICAC, they are still something other branches should consider in terms of reforms to greater transparency?
The second question is, the last couple of years we have seen problems with the union culture like the HSU, do you have any concerns about that?
Is that something that needs action as well?
PM: The first point I'd make is the reason for copying this letter to the NSW General Secretary and to other state and territory secretaries is explicitly to ask them to review their own rules and practice to make sure it is up to standard.
My initial priority of course is NSW for the obvious reasons which Anthony Albanese has just referred to.
On the question of unions, of course we have seen problems in recent times highlighted within the HSU and let us be very clear about that.
These are very, very difficult questions.
I'll have more to say about those matters in due course but we also have institutions available to us through state industrial registrars as well as federal authorities looking at these things as we speak, but I am attend attentive to the needs in this area as well.
JOURNALIST: Are there any property developers who are seeking preselection in the Labor Party and why single out this one profession?
Shouldn't any business person whose business might benefit from government decisions divest themselves before seeking public office?
PM: On the question of people's businesses, I am actually in the businesses of attracting people who have commercial experience into the ranks of the Australian Labor Party because we need those voices around the table.
We are at our best a broad church, we want people from small business, we want people from big business, we want people from the trade unions, we want from the community sector.
As a general principle we deal with those questions through the normal provisions of pecuniary interests.
That is, you give the government, a full statement of declaration of pecuniary interests is made to the Prime Minister at the time and secondly the normal declarations by all members occurs in this place as well.
Let's just be frank.
There is a particular problem when it comes to the property development industry.
This applies particularly to the local government level and applies particularly to the state government level across the state of NSW and I hazard to say potentially more broadly.
The reason is you have such enormous discretionary powers available.
I'm just calling it for what it is, rather than trying to be too pure about it all.
This is a problem. It's not just a problem for the Labor Party either.
I think the other mob should have a look at themselves as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if the NSW Labor Party is so sick that it needs federal intervention and if the federal Labor Party is so sick that it needs to change its Prime Minister, why should anyone vote for the Labor Party at the next election?
PM: Well, can I say that the values of the Labor Party are longstanding and enduring for 120 years or more and we have provided great government of this country in the past and we will continue to do so in the future.
The values are constant.
The policies which have been put into practice over the years including under this government have, by and large, been strong, good policies for the future as well.
What I'm addressing is a problem of the institution.
Therefore, and it is part of the institution that we are addressing as far as the need for reform is concerned.
Therefore any party worth its salt from time to time has a look at itself and says ‘this needs to be fixed, that needs to be fixed,’ or you just brush it under the carpet.
I'm not into brushing things under the carpet.
As I said, I'm about the face of modern Labor with the doors and windows of our party thrown wide open, increasingly democratised and for the sorts of things that we have seen emerge from ICAC in NSW to become things of the past and never to be things of the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the allegations against Craig Thomson have been in the public domain since 2009. I'm aware that's completely separate, obviously, to the ICAC process in NSW. Why has it taken the federal arm of the Labor Party so long to intervene given it has been profoundly obvious there have been cultural interests in NSW?
PM: On the individual case, I will not comment. Secondly, I am not about to rake over decisions which were taken or not taken in the past. I have been Prime Minister of this country for a week.
This is something I have been determined to address, had I the opportunity to do so, for a long, long time.
I have spoken more broadly on the need for party reform for a long period as well. Our challenge is to turn us into the party of the future.
The party which is a modern Australian Labor Party, which embraces diversity, which has internal and transparent democratic processes and which frankly can take the fantastic values for which we have stood for 100 years - values of freedom, values of a fair go, values of opportunity, values of enterprise, values of compassion - and to make sure the institution matches those values.
That's what I'm on about, and it requires some surgery. I am not going to walk away from it and say it's all too hard. We’re going to get on with it.
JOURNALIST: If these changes are so urgently required shouldn't federal Labor have acted earlier and shouldn't Julia Gillard have acted earlier?
PM: I have not the slightest intention of criticising my predecessor on these matters.
What I face as the reality as leader now, now the Prime Minister of Australia, with a particular responsibility to act.
Authorising the first intervention in the NSW branch of the Australian Labor Party since the 1970s, when Gough Whitlam was then the Leader of the Opposition, is not an ordinary step. We have got to make this intervention work.
As I said, we'll get a report back within a month on implementation. I expect these proposed rule changes to occur. As I said also I don't resile from requesting further rule changes if anything else emerges.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just briefly on your Indonesia trip, there is an expectation that seems to be around that there will be something emerging from this on the issue of border protection and asylum seekers. Can you guide us as to what would be the reasonable expectation? Are you expecting anything to emerge from your conversations that might develop asylum seeker policy in any direction?
PM: First of all, as I said last night on national television, it's important to always be in the business of being open to adjustments to policy, as circumstances change. That's a fact.
People have been adjusting immigration policy since the modern form of it was introduced by Arthur Calwell in the 1940s. It is not etched in stone, it is not in the 10 Commandments, “we shall never change our immigration policies.” That’s nonsense.
I also said last night in changing immigration policy in recent times with action by Mr Howard in 2001, further changes in 2004 and 2007, changes under us following the mandate we got from the Australian people in 2008 and changes in circumstances in terms of regional security from 2009-2010 on.
Secondly, on the specific visit to Indonesia, it would be completely wrong, and I think disrespectful to the Indonesian President, to create any expectation of any immediate change at all.
I am there to have a dialogue with him on this question but I also would emphasise this – that this is part of a regular leaders' meeting. This is the third in a sequence which has been established by my predecessor.
It is therefore to look at the overall temperature and content of the Australia-Indonesia relationship.
That means our big common economic interests, our big common security interests, in particular challenges in wider east and south-east Asia, and of course the bilateral matters including a free trade agreement and border security.
So don't hold your breath for some bright and breezy announcement out of Jakarta this time tomorrow afternoon that everything is all fixed and back to normal.
Mr Abbott, if you are going to have an immigration policy which is more than a three-word slogan "stop the boats" or as I suggested last night given - he likes short pithy sentences - "how to stop the boats" - I think we're all ears.
I am not in the business of going to Jakarta and promising any of you or the Australian people that there will be an immediate change in policy, by the Indonesians or by us. What I’ve said very loud and clear last night, immigration policy is constantly evolving.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given policies are evolving, would you go as far as your Immigration Minister did last night and acknowledge a mistake in opposing offshore processing and, on a totally unrelated matter-
PM: This is a double bunger, Mark.
JOURNALIST: Sorry. Are we seeing a coup in Egypt?
PM: Let me go to the first one. As I said last night on your network, the ABC, I think we should have adjusted our policy earlier once regional circumstances changed in 2009-2010. I’m fully up-front in acknowledging that.
No one gets every policy call perfectly and I certainly haven't, and never pretended to do so.
I have been watching events in Egypt very closely. This has been an extraordinary set of developments. As you know, the Government strongly supported the Arab Spring.
As Foreign Minister then at the time I was in Egypt not long after the events in Tahrir Square. I'm aware of all the controversy surrounding the administration of President Morsi and I am certainly aware of what has happened overnight.
I would simply say on behalf of all Australians, we want the return, we want to see the return to full democratic government in Egypt as rapidly as possible. I believe that's the expectation of the international community.
Secondly, could I say this in terms of interests of travelling Australians, and this is an important matter for us all. On 2 July we increased the overall level of our travel advice for Egypt to ‘reconsider your need to travel’ - level three of four - due to ongoing civil unrest and the threat of terrorist attack.
Australians currently in Egypt who are concerned about their safety should consider leaving now.
We continue to urge Australians to avoid all demonstrations and protests as they may turn violent and closely monitor media for information on events and developments that may affect their security and safety.
There are no reports so far of Australians being among those killed or injured. The Australian Embassy in Cairo remains open. Commercial flights continue to operate normally out of Egypt.
And we will continue to make any adjustments to the travel advisory as is appropriate and as is our responsibility.
JOURNALIST: On the Labor Party reforms, at what point would an MP be expelled or suspended? Would it be a newspaper report of corruption, would it be a tribunal like Fair Work Australia launching an investigation? Would it be a finding in a report from a tribunal? Would it be a contravention being LAID in the civil court or criminal charge? At what point?
PM: That sounds like you are appearing in a legal matter yourself with that range of possibilities.
What I'm doing is recognising the current deficiencies of the NSW rules which do not permit a person charged or convicted of corruption to be expelled as an automatic consequence, nor do they provide the administration of the NSW branch of the party the ability to remove someone from the party temporarily or permanently on the basis of an ongoing investigation.
On the latter, of course, judgment will need to be made in terms of the full spectrum of investigations which may be under way.
JOURNALIST: That doesn't clarify at what point.
PM: I think giving the NSW branch those powers is an enormous step forward. At present they do not have such powers, to the great frustration of the current Secretary General and to John Robertson, the leader.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back on property developers, how does that change the culture of the NSW Labor Party and particularly do you also need to do something about donations from property developers and how will it have affected the events that unfolded in ICAC for example? And also, who did you actually talk to, what range of people did you talk to in coming up with these recommendations and do they reflect some of the findings of Carr, Faulkner and Bracks review?
PM: Can I turn to the Deputy Prime Minister first to answer the first part.
DPM: There have been changes already made under NSW legislation which is why the letter from the Prime Minister to the NSW branch refers to the definition in the NSW legislation.
What this does, though, is particularly to go down into local government as well as state government where you have had – and it is across the spectrum, it must be said, not just in the Labor Party, but certainly in the Liberal Party and the independents have sought to gain, particularly local government office, but some in terms of state office.
That will be ruled out in terms of the NSW rules to be adjusted by these changes.
PM: In answer to the second part of your question Laura, I don't intend to go through the detail of a whole range of internal conversations but can I say this has been the result of discussion in the cabinet, full consultation with senior ministers - not just those from NSW like the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer - and a range of other folks as well.
As I said before, you don't take these decisions lightly.
JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, had intervention been discussed at the very least at any stage within the branch, and if it was proposed who resisted?
DPM: I long ago stopped being an activist in the NSW branch administrative committee, or indeed it is a long time since I attended a factional meeting.
I have distanced myself from those processes some time ago but it was pretty clear - I think certainly can I say, at the branch member level.
At the branch member level, your average branch member of Marrickville Central Branch will welcome this change, because at the branch level they have been quite rightly embarrassed by the behaviour of a few bad eggs.
They're overwhelmingly Labor Party members who work so hard for the election of Labor Governments and are so proud of their Labor Party membership, want to see this reform.
This reform provides an opportunity as well to further democratise the NSW ALP. You might be aware, Malcolm, of having discussions between ourselves 20, 25 years ago about these sorts of issues.
This reform is absolutely vital and I think it's important that it be got right and that's why the national executive intervention, rather than simply saying to NSW “go away and do your best”.
Even though it must be said that under Sam Dastyari and Michael Lee as State President and John Graham as the assistant secretary, there have been a range of reforms which have been introduced already.
What this does is ensure that that occurs and occurs in a way that has the authority of the National Executive, we’ll ensure we get it right.
PM: The bottom line Malcolm, is there is too much resistance to the sorts of directions of the individuals who the Deputy Prime Minister just mentioned.
And there is only one way through. That is for those powers to be given to the federal executive to bring about those rule changes.
That's why we are doing it. That's why we are doing it over the course of the next 30 days. I want to report back within 30 days on these changes. I believe it can be done. Two last questions because we do have to do a few things.
JOURNALIST: Change of tone I guess, Mr Albanese you’re going to be Acting Prime Minister in a couple of hours for a day and a half. I was wondering what that meant to you and what the public can expect from you and what you might be announcing as Acting Prime Minister while he is away?
DPM: Firstly, can I say it is an extraordinary honour. Not one I was expecting. So, therefore, I haven't had a great deal of time to consider my plans.
My son did suggest, along with the AFP people currently, there is a lot of activity in a suburban street in Marrickville providing protection that has been set up in the last 24 hours.
PM: You weren't supposed to tell them that, by the way.
DPM: Let me tell you, it's not subtle!
I did suggest to the Prime Minister the easiest thing did might be, particularly given it is school holidays for a sleepover at Kirribilli, but we won't be doing that.
I will be going, I think quite appropriately after this press conference, to Coffs Harbour to switch on more residents in Coffs Harbour and Sawtell to the National Broadband Network and to also launch an important initiative for aged care and how aged care can be delivered in the home through the National Broadband Network as a great example of something that the Opposition don't seem to understand.
The NBN is about uploads, not downloads. It's about what you can do in terms of service delivery, and I think it is entirely appropriate that I do that as my first act.
Then I will be in Marrickville this afternoon. From the feeling yesterday in Marrickville, I think local residents are really proud because we are representatives and they are proud their local member's a Deputy Prime Minister and I think they will be proud that I have an opportunity for a short period of time to be Acting Prime Minister.
And then tomorrow I'm in your great state of Victoria, in Bendigo, meeting with business leaders again, meeting with the 'iBendigo’ group, a group of businesses benefitting regional Australia through the NBN.
So it will be a busy time while the Prime Minister is away but I'm not envisaging making big decisions apart from doing my job.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what will you raise with the Indonesian President on the live export trade? And with the benefit of hindsight, would you have handled the halt to that trade any differently? 
PM: Look, when I was last in Indonesia in an official capacity as Foreign Minister, I had long conversations with the Indonesian President about these matters. 
Indonesia legitimately expects long-term domestic food security, and their protein needs are met by the importation of beef. 
They have a policy towards long-term self-sufficiency in beef. 
Our job is to work with them to deal with their long-term development of their own herd as well as to ensure that all of our beef producers in North Queensland and northern Australia more generally, Northern Territory and the Kimberley and elsewhere, get the best access that's possible to the Indonesian beef market given what's happened in the past.
I'm also mindful very much of the animal welfare challenges that we have seen and I'm also mindful of what we are now doing through the Australian aid program to assist with animal welfare challenges in Indonesia, doing it cooperatively. 
So I am sure this will be part and parcel of our discussion. We have obviously interests, the Indonesians have interests, I am sure we will work our way through it and get the right balance. 
As I said, the this is a big economic relationship with Indonesia. If I have one final appeal to the Australian business community, let's make it bigger. 
This is a huge emerging economy. It will become one of the top ten economies in the world. In the next decade, it will pass Australia in terms of the overall size of the Indonesian economy.
It's next door to us. A quarter of a billion people and with a rising middle class, and with that, per capita beef consumption will go from 2 kilograms per year to 17 or 18 kilograms per year over time. 
Frankly, this is a very big opportunity. We have got to manage the problems and reopen the doors to the future.
Thanks very much folks.


Prime Minister, Minister for Higher Education
Bogor, Indonesia
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announced today that the Australian Government will increase people to people links with Indonesia by funding study experiences for Australian students, new specialised research on the bilateral relationship, and a festival showcasing Australia to our largest neighbour.
The Australian Government will provide $47 million over four years for the AsiaBound with $10.6 million for the program’s first year of operation.
The first group of AsiaBound student grants will allow 3700 Australian students to study in Asia, including more than 400 in Indonesia.
Supporting this study is an important investment in Australia’s future. A study experience in Asia is an invaluable way for Australians to broaden and deepen their understanding of the region’s cultures and languages. AsiaBound will enhance essential people-to-people links in the region and build workforce capabilities.
The Australian Government is also providing $10 million to the Lowy Institute for specialised research, dialogues and partnerships to strengthen the institute’s focus on Asia and increase its presence in the region.
The institute’s Engaging Asia Project will have an early focus on Indonesia, which is one of Australia’s most important neighbours, and will raise Indonesia’s public profile in Australia.
The Australian Government will be seeking the institute’s expert input through new research on the Australia-Indonesia relationship, the Indonesian economy and Indonesia as an emerging foreign policy participant in the region.
OzFest Indonesia, a 3-month long festival of Australian culture, art, science and technology and sport will take place in major centres across Indonesia from January to April 2014. The festival will showcase a dynamic and contemporary Australia to Indonesia, and further build people-to-people links between our two countries.


Prime Minister, Minister for Agriculture
Bogor, Indonesia
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono have announced during the annual Australia-Indonesia Leaders’ Meeting in Bogor the establishment of an Indonesia-Australia Red Meat and Cattle Forum. 
The Prime Minister also announced today a $60 million funding package, to be provided over 10 years, for increasing agricultural cooperation and boosting investment in the red meat agribusiness sector in Indonesia.
The Forum will comprise a broad range of representatives from the beef and cattle industry, including well recognised and established industry figures and senior government officials. 
The Forum will enhance engagement between the Australian and Indonesian beef industries and the governments of both countries. It will also improve prospects for long-term trade and investment in beef in Indonesia.
To capitalise on the opportunities for agricultural cooperation and investment, the Forum will recommend activities to build the meat supply chain and encourage greater Australian investment in Indonesia. The $60 million package will be available to kick start these activities, which would benefit both Australian and Indonesian consumers and producers.



Terima kasih Bapak President.  Selamat siang, memang bagus sekali kembali ke Indonesia.  Maaf bahasa saya kurang lancar.
[Thank you Mr President. Good afternoon, it is indeed good to return to Indonesia. I apologise that my Bahasa is not fluent]
Indonesia is a great country and Bapak President thank you for your kind invitation to be back here again. I am pleased to be here for the third Australia-Indonesia Leaders’ Meeting.
Indonesia is critical to Australia’s interests. I believe Australia is critical to Indonesia’s interests.  Indonesia is also emerging as an economic powerhouse of South East Asia. GDP of one trillion US dollars. 
It is the fifteenth largest economy in the world; by 2030 it is estimated to be the seventh largest economy in the world; and by 2050 the fourth largest economy in the world behind China, the US and India. Something big is happening in Indonesia and everyone in Australia and the world should pay attention. 
This is a population of 250 million people. Massive social transformation is underway and for Australia this means that across our nation, whether it is those engaged in politics, whether it is those engaged in business, whether it's those engaged in education, or whether it’s those engaged in the community sector, we need to bring these two great economies together and forge a great future. And that is what I am personally dedicated to doing.
Since 2007 we have had almost 130 two way high level visits between Australia and Indonesia. We’re been busy. I’ve been here about ten times myself and SBY has been to Australia as well, and I’ve been pleased to receive him there. 
Indonesia is also the only ASEAN member of the G20, a meeting which of course we will host at summit level in Australia in my own home city of Brisbane next year. 
Our defence relationship is strong. It’s our most important in the region.
We’re signed defence cooperation agreements and we’ve held our inaugural defence ministers meeting only last year. Indonesia is one of our most important terrorism partners and SBY I congratulate Indonesia and our good friends in the TNI and the Indonesian police and in the other Indonesian government agencies for the work we do together to combat our common enemy of terrorism. 
We talk about the future. I believe a core message from this meeting is we need to expand our economic horizons – do much more in terms of the economic relationship between us.  Indonesia is our twelfth largest trading partner, but trade is still only worth around fifteen billion between us. We can do with imagination and hard work a lot more than that. 
SBY and I confirmed our commitment to the Indonesia Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, the first round of negotiations occurred in March this year. There is a lot of work to be done, but I’m sure Bapak President and myself will be encouraging the negotiators to reach agreement as soon as possible.
Food security is also critical to the quarter of a billion people who live in this vast archipelago. Today we discussed how to advance this in terms of our cooperation in the beef industry. 
I was pleased to announce the establishment of the Indonesia Australia red meat and cattle forum. A sixty million dollar ten year initiative to boost investment in the red meat agri-business sector in Indonesia. Good for Australian beef industry.  Good for Indonesian investors and good also for Indonesian consumers. 
The President and I also discussed extensively cattle exports to Indonesia, and I thank Indonesia for its cooperation given recent challenges. And of course we’ve also discussed the continuing challenges of animal welfare.
Indonesia will host APEC in October this year in Bali. Bapak President has indicated the theme for APEC is economic resilience. I support him in that. 
It is an important message for all of us given the challenges of the global economy. Maintaining economic resilience in Asia, because now the global economy depends on the health of our region like never before. 
As I said before, we have the G20 in Brisbane next year and I look forward very much to coordinating with the President of Indonesia how we build on his theme of economic resilience into the agenda of the G20 as well.
The President has also mentioned our cooperation in the area of people smuggling and I acknowledge the strong work that he and his officials have done in this area. I congratulate the President on his new initiative, that is, to convene a regional ministerial meeting of key origin, transit and destination countries.
A conference to explore concrete operational policy responses, including new regional responses and actions to enhance border security in addressing the problem of irregular movements of persons.
As the President of Indonesia just said, this problem of people smuggling is a problem for our entire region. Therefore the President’s initiative is for all of us to work now together, and I salute you, Mr President, on your bold initiative in hosting, in the immediate period, ahead a ministerial conference to bring about concrete actions to reduce this problem for all of us.
Furthermore, could I also congratulate the President more broadly for his work as an international statesman. President Yudhoyono is now known throughout the world. Not just because he is the leader of the world’s largest Muslim country. Not just because there are a quarter of a billion people who live here. Not just because you have successfully transformed this country into a modern democracy and a growing economy. But also for the President’s personal contribution in these areas as well. 
President Yudhoyono has in his period as President consolidated the transformation of Indonesia into a strong robust democracy, and I publicly thank you for that SBY.
 You have also presided over the growing strength of this economy. Six per cent average annual growth over the period of your presidency, making this into the big economy it is today. On the wider world stage also, the work you have done with the United Nations as the co-chair of the UN Secretary General’s high level panel of eminent persons; on the post 2015 development agenda; the future of the Millennium Development Goals. 
SBY is representing the Republic of Indonesia, is having a crucial voice in the councils of the world in shaping the future global campaign to reduce poverty, and eliminate extreme poverty, for all the peoples of the world.
Finally, SBY referred to the important challenge which he faces and the region also confronts in terms of security.  He also referred in particular to the challenges which still exist within Papua.
I would like to publicly reaffirm here what successive Australian Prime Ministers have done in the past which is that Australia recognises now, has recognised in the past, and will recognise into the future the territorial integrity of the Republic of Indonesia. That includes Papua. 
Secondly, I would also congratulate the President’s strong leadership in what he’s described as his autonomy plus package for the future of Papua.  I encourage him in this direction and I’ve said as the Prime Minister of Australia I will do everything I can to support him in this important direction as well.
The President of Indonesia, President Yudhoyono, has achieved already huge success in Aceh. To the extent that the entire international community has looked with great appreciation at what he’s achieved there.  Australia, Bapak President, wants to work with you in a way which you would best suggest we can be helpful in making sure that we bring about a long term, stable, peaceful, prosperous and secure Papua as part of the Republic of Indonesia.
Bapak President, thank you so much for your hospitality. 
Thank you also to Ibu Ani, who is here somewhere perhaps, who has been kindly hosting my wife Therese.  Therese has brought to Ibu Ani a yellow rose for planting in the Presidential Palace in Jakarta which was taken out of the Rose Garden at Parliament House in Canberra.  Something that they visited together when Ibu Ani and Bapak President were there in March of 2010. 
I hope the yellow rose blooms well in your garden and as it does, remember not just our wives, Ibu Ani and Thérèse, but also our friendship and also remember the friendship between the peoples of Australia and Indonesia. 
Thank you Bapak President.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
In 2007 – less than a month after I became Prime Minister – Indonesia was the destination of my first overseas visit.
Today, in 2013, I am pleased to return here once again in my capacity as Prime Minister and to meet again with my counterpart, and good friend, President Yudhoyono.
In these five-and-a-half years, I have been to Indonesia ten times.
This is a beautiful country.
Thérèse and I love this country and its people.
And it is good to be back again.
During this period, I have seen Australia’s bilateral relationship with Indonesia become a keystone of our foreign policy.
Today, Australia and Indonesia are much more than near neighbours. 
We are close partners.
We are strategic partners.
We are strong, proud democracies.
We sit at the same diplomatic tables around the world – the G20, APEC, the East Asia Summit.
Both our countries are living through a time of truly historic change.
200 years ago, China and India were the world’s largest economies.
But in the two centuries since, the defining feature of the world economy has been the gap between the industrialised West and the developing East.
A gap that has meant a vast difference in opportunity and prosperity.
Samuel Huntington called the separation of these two economic hemispheres ‘the Great Divergence’.
Today, we are living through the ‘Great Convergence’.
The mature economies of the United States, Europe and Japan continue to grapple with the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.
Meanwhile the Asia Pacific region, our region, is undergoing an economic transformation of a scale and speed that dwarf those witnessed during the Industrial Revolution.
When I first became Prime Minister in 2007, the previous six years had seen a million people in Asia lifted out of poverty every week.
Across our Asian hemisphere, income per person doubled within a decade.
After the Industrial Revolution, it  took the United Kingdom  50 years to achieve that doubling. 
Urbanisation is transforming Asia.
By 2050 the world population is expected to grow by 2.3 billion.
That entire increase will be absorbed by cities.
Asian cities alone will house an extra 1.4 billion people.
The pace and power of these changes can be clearly seen here in Indonesia.
Today, as the global economic centre of gravity shifts to Asia, Indonesia is poised to take its place as one of the world’s largest economies.
A trillion dollar economy in the next few years.
 Number seven in the world by 2030, number four by 2050.
A rise as rapid as it is impressive.
Australian businesses in particular should take note of this.
Everywhere we turn, there are remarkable statistics.
Today Indonesia has more billionaires than Japan – and more per capita than India or China.
In Jakarta, the minimum wage rose by 44 per cent this year alone.
This economic change is driving a massive social transformation.
Not just freeing people from poverty.
But giving them a standard of living that would have been unimaginable a generation ago.
Today Indonesia is home to a young population looking to engage with the world.
50 per cent of the Indonesian population is under 30.
Indonesia is the world’s third largest market for Facebook and Jakarta is the most active Twitter City in the world.
I’m hoping to add a few friends and pick up a few followers while I’m here.
The potential ‘demographic dividend’ of this generation of young, tech-savvy, global citizens is truly stunning.
Already, Indonesia’s ‘consuming class’ is larger than Australia’s population. 
By 2030,  the Indonesian middle class will be 135 million strong.
Their purchasing power will drive an unprecedented expansion in demand for goods and services. 
Indonesia should become a vast marketplace for Australian goods, services and industry.
A marketplace where a surging middle class will create a demand for new goods and services to suit their changing tastes, lifestyle and household income.
In this time of change and opportunity, you will be the ones who will make the Australia-Indonesia business relationship flourish.
Beef cattle is just one area where we can build a genuine business partnership.
By 2015 Indonesian beef consumption of 530 000 tonnes will exceed domestic production.
Together, we can do more than simply satisfy rising domestic demand and ensure a steady supply of beef for Indonesia, we can build a value chain to satisfy the markets of the world.
Consider our complementary strengths.
Indonesia is already a world leader in fattening and finishing cattle, with some of the very best intensive feedlots.
And Australia’s extensive grazing lands and tradition of pastoral excellence, allow us to breed high-quality beef cattle at a competitive price. 
Realising our collective potential will require shared vision and concerted effort.
It begins with a relaxation of supply constraints for the Indonesian beef market.
This alone could provide the necessary kickstart for further investment and cooperation.
In the services sector there are exciting new markets to be developed.
The financial services sector is an important sub-set.
The opportunities that exist in financial services are ones that can deliver greater financial security to those millions of Indonesians who currently live outside the formal financial system.
An estimated 58 per cent of adult Indonesians do not have a bank account.
A very much smaller percentage are insured – some estimates suggest as low as 14 per cent.
How, in such a scenario, can individuals or households save, borrow, build up a credit history, invest, or even properly manage risk?
This is an expanding area of demand for Australian expertise, that also delivers a beneficial outcome for Indonesia.
In education, there are already 100,000 Indonesians with degrees from Australian Universities.
And today, around a quarter of Indonesian international students choose to study in Australia.
As you have experienced, often the connections made in an educational exchange provide the foundation for a future business relationship.
Just as the growing number of research partnerships between Australia’s CSIRO and Indonesia’s BPPT (Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology) provide a pathway to future innovation and cooperation.
But for all the success, there is still a world of untapped potential that awaits.
You know the figures.
In 2011-2012, all the two-way trade between our countries only added up to $14.9 billion dollars.
In two-way investment, Indonesia remains outside of Australia’s top ten partners.
We do not need to look far to find opportunities to do better.
Infrastructure is just one example of a mutually beneficial area for investment.
With global growth forecast at 3¼ per cent, still below the pre-GFC trend of around 5 per cent, the G20’s key priority is to rebuild consumer confidence and re-energise private spending.
Some of this can be achieved through infrastructure projects.
For example, Indonesia has positioned infrastructure as a central topic for APEC this year.
The G20 is also working on infrastructure to bolster global economic growth and Australia will be giving this issue high priority.
In the next two years of the G20, I am confident we can work together to strengthen the focus and outcomes on infrastructure.
Infrastructure investment is a case study that reveals just how much stronger our trade and investment relationship can be – provided we have the right plan and process. 
With this in mind, it is my pleasure to launch Towards 2025 – Australia’s Indonesia Country Strategy.
A document that outlines the broad pathway to the stronger trade and investment relationship we can have.
This country strategy advances the objective from the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper to build stronger and more comprehensive relationships with countries across the region.
It outlines a vision of where our relationship with Indonesia should be in 2025 and how we intend to get there.
Governments in both countries must commit to securing market access, lowering trade and investment barriers, and establishing regulatory certainty.
Just as importantly, business groups like you need to form a common view about opportunities in Indonesia and Australia – and work together to spread the good word.
 Delegation visits and high-level investor-matching and support all add to the experience of a business transaction and greatly increase the likelihood of return custom.
That’s why I commit that, if re-elected as Prime Minister of Australia in federal elections this year, I will lead a high level business delegation from Australia’s top businesses to Indonesia by the end of 2013.
This will be the next big step in bringing our Country Strategy to reality.
I want Australia’s best and brightest business minds engaging directly with their counterparts and making sure we fully unlock the potential of what is on offer.
Above all, to succeed we must do more than remove impediments – we must create partnerships. 
Formal agreements like the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement now under negotiation and advocacy organisations like the Indonesia-Australia Business Partnership Group have an important role to play. 
But also partnerships created through everyday business.
Like the joint venture between Australia’s single largest exporter of wheat to Indonesia, Western Australia’s CBH Group, and the PT Eastern Pearl Flour Mill in Makassar.
The fourth largest single-site flour mill in the world, with a processing capacity of 840,000 tonnes of flour a year.
This is a partnership that’s helping to meet Indonesia’s food needs and creating local jobs and investment, while helping Australian wheat growers supply a crucial value chain.
For a nation like Indonesia, with its youthful profile, and with the ASEAN single market just around the corner, the challenge is to quickly deepen the pool of highly skilled workers.
Australia is already lending a hand with this human capital development, through our educational partnerships, our scholarship programs and the focus of our development work.
On cattle stations across northern Australia, Indonesian animal husbandry students are getting intensive industry training in a program developed by the world’s best – the Northern Territory Cattlemen’s Association. 
The Australian Vocational Education Training Program, where directors from up to 20 Indonesian polytechnic institutes travel to Australian TAFE colleges, is another great example of a growing trend in the intercultural exchange of skills. 
The Australian government is dedicated to enhancing these educational connections.
This year we will provide financial support to more than 400 Australians to study in Indonesia under our AsiaBound program.
Today I am also pleased to announce that the Government will provide $10 million to fund Australia’s Lowy Institute’s Engaging Asia Project. 
This program will support new research, dialogues and partnerships in the region and strengthen the Institute’s focus on Asia – particularly Indonesia.
And I acknowledge the Honourable James Spigelman AC,  Chair of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who is present here today from the Lowy Board of Directors.
In the same spirit, our Embassy here in Jakarta will be hosting OzFest Indonesia from January to April 2014.
A program of events that will showcase the best of Australian performing and visual arts, our great national passion for sport, and our world-class science, education and innovation sectors.
This is all part of the larger project of bridging the perception gap between us: as communities we should know each other better.
A much bigger event on our immediate horizon is the APEC summit that Indonesia will host in October this year in Bali.
Indonesia and Australia were both present at the creation of APEC in 1989.
Our business communities are both active in the work program of the APEC Business Advisory Council.
We are also both key players in the G20, which Australia is looking forward to hosting next year in Brisbane.
These forums are critical to global economic prosperity, and we need to build strategic continuity between the APEC and G20 agendas.
As a member of the G20 troika, Australia is also talking with ASEAN member nations on these goals, in particular with Indonesia, as the largest economy of ASEAN, and a G20 member.
Next year marks the 40th year of ASEAN-Australian relations, and today I announce that the Australian Government has nominated Simon Merrifield as Australia’s first resident ambassador to ASEAN.
Australia has long been a believer in the constructive and cooperative power of multilateral forums. 
I propose greater engagement still in the lead-up to Australia’s hosting of the G20.
One thing I would like to see is greater engagement with communities of interest that sit outside the formal G20 structure: civil society, business, think tanks, labour, young people.
There’s already a considerable volume of good work occurring outside the formal G20 structures, through associated fora such as Business 20, Think 20, the Y20 and Civil 20.
But if you take Business 20 as an example, it is still dominated by business groups from the advanced economies.
And while those voices need to be heard and have great value to add, so too for the voices of those from the emerging economies, particularly the emerging economies of Asia.
I know that the Australian B20 leadership team preparing for our host year in 2014, led by Wesfarmers CEO Richard Goyder, shares my belief and will be encouraging those new voices.
As close as Australia and Indonesia are diplomatically– the real barometer of our relationship will always be people-to-people links.
No-one understands this better than you, the people who have done so much for Indonesian and Australian business connections.
You are the first wave of our mature and modern trade relationship.
And part of your role as stewards of this relationship is to help shape the next wave.
It is great that so many crucial players can be here today.
Leaders from groups like Kadin and the Indonesian-Australian Business Council which have led the way in strengthening the trade and commercial ties between our countries.
And all of you who have been generous with your ideas as we  continue to develop the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
Your passion and vision for the Indonesia-Australia relationship goes back a long way.
With an audience like this, I do not need to spruik the importance of engagement between Australia and the rest of Asia.
You live and breathe these things.
But I do want to assure you that I share your passion.
I leave you today with an Indonesian saying, ‘tak kenal maka tak sayang’.
If we do not know each other, we would not care for each other.
Today, Australia and Indonesia know and care for each other better than at any time in our history.
And I look forward to working with you to build a new era in this relationship.


Subject(s): Australia-Indonesia Annual Leaders’ Meeting
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Kevin Rudd met at the third annual Indonesia-Australia Leaders’ Meeting in Bogor on 5 July 2013.
President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Rudd were encouraged by the many positive developments in the bilateral relationship between Australia and Indonesia since the second Annual Leaders’ Meeting in Darwin in 2012, particularly within the framework of comprehensive partnership between the two countries. The two Leaders shared their mutual commitments for progress, prosperity and security of both countries. 
The Leaders reaffirmed the two countries continued adherence to the principles of respecting each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity as mandated in the Lombok Treaty.
Both Leaders were of the view that the two countries need to continue cooperation at the bilateral, regional as well as global levels in maintaining durable peace and stability in the region and the world at large. The two Leaders acknowledged that Australia and Indonesia need to harness the many real opportunities of the Asian Century.  The two Leaders underlined the importance of the Annual 2+2 Dialogue between Foreign and Defence Ministers in addressing challenges and seizing opportunities the two countries have.
The Leaders encouraged the further promotion of bilateral trade and investment cooperation between Indonesia and Australia. They welcomed the conclusion of the first round of Indonesia Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) negotiations in March 2013.  Noting that the two countries have shared interest in the area of food security, both Leaders agreed to further explore trade and investment cooperation in the agriculture sector, including in the beef and cattle industry.
The two Leaders also agreed to continue advancing trilateral cooperation with Timor-Leste to promote greater economic links between eastern Indonesia, northern Australia and Timor-Leste.
President Yudhoyono welcomed Australia’s increased development program to support Indonesia’s development priorities such as social protection, education and infrastructure. The two Leaders committed to pursue initiatives to develop the skills needed, across their communities, to engage with each other. They reiterated their commitment to deepening people-to-people links, including by enhancing the mobility of people between Indonesia and Australia and promoting connectivity, scientific, educational and cultural links. Both leaders welcomed the convening of the second Indonesia-Australia Dialogue, held in Sydney in March 2013.
The Leaders recognised the importance of the two countries’ wide-ranging cooperation in tackling regional and global challenges, particularly transnational crimes such as terrorism, cyber-crime and drugs, corruption and money-laundering.  The Leaders affirmed the value of an inaugural annual Law and Justice Ministers’ meeting before the end of 2014.
As co-chairs of the Bali Process, the two Leaders reaffirmed their commitment to continue to develop a regional solution, involving countries of origin, transit and destination which covers elements of prevention, early detection and protection, to combating trafficking in persons and people smuggling and other related transnational crimes. They stressed the importance of avoiding unilateral actions which might jeopardise such a comprehensive regional approach and which might cause operational or other difficulties to any party. The Prime Minister of Australia welcomed Indonesia’s initiative to invite key origin, transit, and destination countries to a conference to explore concrete operational and policy responses, including regional approaches and efforts to enhance border security, in addressing irregular movement of persons. 
Both Leaders reiterated their commitment to strengthening defence and security cooperation, including through the signing of the Defence Cooperation Arrangement by Defence Ministers in September 2012.  Both leaders welcomed expanding cooperation, including in strategic policy and planning, and capability building. The two Leaders looked forward to the continued cooperation across the region to respond to natural disasters.
Both Leaders reiterated their commitment to working closely together to address bilateral consular matters to protect their nationals overseas.  They acknowledged the progress made on consular issues, namely the establishment of annual consular consultations and crisis response cooperation, and agreed to explore further opportunities for strengthening cooperation and information sharing in this area.
The two Leaders attached importance to the role and continued development of ASEAN-centred forums, particularly the East Asia Summit. The Leaders looked forward to an ASEAN-Australia Leaders’ Summit in 2014 to celebrate 40 years of ASEAN-Australia relations. Australia and Indonesia also committed to strengthening cooperation in the Indian Ocean. 
Both countries reaffirmed the importance of peace, stability and maritime security in the region and of disputes being resolved in accordance with international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, without resorting to the threat or use of force, or other forms of coercion, while exercising self-restraint in the conduct of activities.  Both countries called for the early conclusion of a code of conduct in the South China Sea. 
The Leaders underlined the benefits of close collaboration globally and welcomed the opportunity to pursue complementary policy agendas across Indonesia’s hosting of APEC in 2013 and Australia’s hosting of the G20 in 2014.  They looked forward to Australia and Indonesia co-hosting a symposium in Jakarta in the coming year to strengthen our cooperation in the G20, and deepen our engagement with regional partners on the G20 agenda. Australia commended President Yudhoyono’s leadership as a co-chair of the High Level Panel on the post-2015 Development Agenda and looked forward to working together in advancing this development agenda.  The two countries welcomed the opportunities from Australia’s 2013-14 membership of the United Nations Security Council to highlight an Asia-Pacific perspective on global challenges.


Prime Minister Kevin Rudd today launched the Australia in the Asian Century Indonesia Country Strategy.
The strategy outlines how Australians can harness and develop the skills needed to deepen and strengthen our engagement with our important northern neighbour. 
Indonesia, as a rising regional power with a rapidly growing economy and a consuming class more than double Australia’s population, presents significant opportunities for Australia and Australian businesses.
The strategy identifies a range of specific pathways to 2025, including updating public perceptions about Indonesia, encouraging Indonesian language and cultural studies, enhancing the mobility of people in both directions, building awareness amongst the business community, and strengthening people-to-people engagement within and between our governments.
The Prime Minister thanked the Australian community for its contribution to the development of the strategy.  Consultations were held across Australia throughout April and May 2013 with business, academia, local government, youth groups, and community organisations participating in roundtables and ‘town hall’ style public forums in each State and Territory capital. 
In all, five country strategies will be released, covering Australia’s five major relationships in Asia.  The remaining four, covering China, India, Japan and South Korea, will be released in the coming months.
The Indonesia Country Strategy and information on the public consultations and submissions can be found at http://www.dfat.gov.au/issues/asian-century/.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED 
A warm welcome, Your Excellency, and a warm welcome also to you, First Lady of Timor-Leste, Ms Isabel Ferreira.
Your Excellency, I know that you are no stranger to Australia.
Your previous visits as Chief of the Defence Force have a lasting legacy in the enduring links you forged with Australia’s military leadership.
However, this is your first visit as President, and it is a privilege to welcome an old friend in a new and distinguished capacity.
 Mr President, I have also been a frequent visitor to your beautiful country over the years.
Timor-Leste was one of the first countries I visited as Prime Minister, reflecting the importance I personally place on our relationship.
I last visited Timor-Leste as Foreign Minister in July 2011. 
I visited Timor-Leste’s National Police Academy – supported by the AFP’s Timor-Leste Police Development Program. 
I travelled to Maliana in Timor-Leste’s west to visit a farming community benefitting from the AusAID and ACIAR-supported Seeds of Life program.
The friendship between our people goes back far beyond independence in 2002.
It was forged in the jungles of World War II, when brave and selfless Timorese locals gave shelter, food and assistance to the Australian soldiers of Sparrow Force.
These ties were strengthened from the mid-1970s onwards, when Timorese communities established themselves in Melbourne, Sydney and Darwin.
Our friendship deepened again when Australia led the multilateral INTERFET force after the independence ballot.
And again when we participated in the UN International Stabilisation Force.
Many Timorese who made a safe home here in Australia during those difficult years of conflict have now returned to Timor-Leste.
Lending their energies and talents to the building of a proud new nation.
Now, a decade on from independence, our relationship is that of close neighbours, good friends and partners.
History tells us it can take a nation a generation, or more, to build resilience and confidence after conflict.
Timor-Leste has turned its face to the future with resolve and energy.
And in one short decade it has laid the foundations of a modern state.
It has been a transition to a more stable and self-determined future.
But a future in which friends are still within hearing, still there with a hand outstretched.
So, while domestic and military security is now in the hands of Timor-Leste’s own, home-grown forces, Australia is still there, helping to build local capacity through our bilateral defence and policing programs.
And Australians are working side by side with locals to help achieve the Timor-Leste Government’s ambitious development goals.
Delivering health and education projects.
Ensuring that women get the health services they need during pregnancy.
Delivering water and sanitation infrastructure.
Pursuing rural development goals.
Re-building the rural roads so essential to economic supply chains.
Repairing destroyed schools, so that children can get the education they deserve.
The students enrolled in primary education rose from 190,000 in 2000, to almost 239,000 in 2010, a significant achievement.
Today almost half of the students who complete primary school are girls.
We’ll continue to work together – and in partnership with others in the region.
Last week in Indonesia I met President Yudhoyono and I note – Mr President – that you also visited Indonesia on a state visit last month. 
The inaugural trilateral leaders meeting between our three countries  was held November 2012 and we look forward to further discussions.
I am heartened to see that we both have such strong relationships with our near neighbour.
And all three nations are committed to exploring the possibilities of working more closely together.
The Seasonal Worker Program is another example of a new area where we are working together for mutual benefit.
People, and the connections between them, have historically been at the heart of the relationship between Timor-Leste and Australia.
That won’t change.
Whatever our shared path over the coming years, we will tread it together.
Your Excellency – obrigardo wain.
I thank you for honouring us with your visit.
You are among friends.


PM: Today on behalf of the leadership team of the Australian Government, we would like to announce a proposal for a major change in the rules for the election of the leader of the parliamentary Labor Party for the future. 
I said last week it’s time to throw open the windows of the Labor Party structure to the wider community through our membership.
Today, as never before, Australians demand to be included in the Labor Party’s decision making, and proposals for reform that I will outline to you now are represent an important change to this effect. 
Following extensive discussion with the leadership team and extensive discussion with the full ministry team today, the changes to the structure of the Labor Party I will take to a special meeting of the caucus of the Labor Party recognise that the Labor Party must change to reflect our changing nation. 
Today more than ever, Australians demand to know that the Prime Minister they elect is the Prime Minister they get. 
The Australian public requires that certainty, these changes will give them that certainty. 
The reforms I announce today will give more power to the everyday members of the Labor Party.
They will ensure that power will never again rest in the hands of a factional few. 
Today I can announce that following a meeting today of the full ministry, I’ve written a letter to the chair of the federal parliamentary Labor Party asking him to convene a special meeting of the caucus for Monday 22 July 2013 to discuss the 2013 election campaign, but in addition our forward policy agenda and our change to these rules.
These rules changes are as follows, if caucus embraces them, they include the following.
The federal parliamentary leader of the Labor Party will be elected jointly by the party membership across the nation and the members of the federal parliamentary Labor Party on the following proportional basis.
Votes by the party membership across the entire nation being weighted at 50 per cent and votes by the federal parliamentary Labor Party weighted at 50 per cent.
Make no mistake, this is the most significant reform for the Australian Labor Party in recent history.
It is one that should be welcomed by all members of the Australian Labor Party across the nation, whether you’re a long serving member of parliament, a loyal hard working volunteer, a union activist active in our local branches, or a student who has just joined Young Labor, or someone who is thinking about it as they watch the news this evening. 
I believe this change is essential to grow a vibrant, modern Australian Labor Party for a modern and diverse Australia of the future. 
I believe it will encourage people to reengage in the political process and to bring back those supports, supporters who have become disillusioned. 
It will ensure that all those who for so long have given their time and energy to the fight, for what we believe in, that those people will now have a direct voice in the election of the national leader of our party.
In fact, they will now have a vote, one that matters and one that our branch members from across the nation deserve.   
The changes it passed will mean the following.
An election for leaders shall automatically occur following an election where the Australian Labor Party does not form government. 
Further, an election for leader can be called by the caucus secretary after any of the following events: upon the resignation of a leader; at the request of the leader; or at least 75 per cent of the members of the federal parliamentary Labor Party sign a petition requesting the election for a new leader be held on the grounds that the current leader has brought the party into disrepute.
Candidates for election to the position of leader must be nominated by a minimum of 20 per cent of the membership of the federal parliamentary Labor Party. 
If there is more than one candidate, a ballot shall be held amongst all party members within the mandate for the election of a leader. 
Eligibility to vote and the manner of voting shall be the same as that for the national president of the Australian Labor Party. 
The ballot for the leader shall take no longer than 30 days. 
To all those Labor voters I say this, Labor values do not belong to one person or any select group, neither should the decision of who leads the federal Labor Party.
So this rule change is clear. 
If the leader of the Australian Labor Party takes the Party to the election and they are returned to form the government of the nation, that person remains the as leader of the party in the government for the duration of that term.
Secondly, if the party is unsuccessful in an election, the rules process that I have just outlined is the one that then applies. 
This is one of a number of important reforms which the Labor Party will need to consider and embrace in the future.
Of course in this matter, I lie entirely in the hands of my caucus colleagues when we convene under the rules on 22 July to consider this fundamental change.
I appreciate the support of the leadership group. I appreciate the contribution of all members of the ministry who deliberated on this today.
Of course if we are not successful in this the only recourse left available to me is then to convene a special rules conference of the party.
I therefore entrust this important reform into the hands of my federal parliamentary colleagues and I’m confident that we’ll have a good result for the future but I’m mindful that this is a democratic process within the party and it is in their hands entirely how it is resolved.
Two weeks’ notice is necessary because that’s what the rules say. 
To conclude, these reforms are about building a modern Australian Labor Party for the future of Australia. 
Parallel reforms, reforms like this have taken place in many other western political parties in countries right around the world in recent decades. 
We’re not Robinson Crusoe on this, in fact, we’re a bit late. 
I suggest the Liberals might have a look at their rules as well. 
We are looking therefore through this to increase the membership of our party nationwide, we’re sending out a very clear message across the entire nation that you, as a valued member of our party, one of the tens of thousands of people across the entire Australian family, you get a say in who becomes the national leader of our party by direct vote. 
Also as part of this package, I’ve also indicated that the rules of the caucus, if they are embraced, would then return the powers to the caucus for the election of the rest of the executive of the Labor Party. 
This is an important reform for all of us. 
Important for the Australian Labor Party. Important for the confidence that the Australian people put into the Labor Party and its leadership as we face them to go to an election. 
I would say this to all people out there who are considering supporting the values for which we stand – and they are very good values – and want to become active in the movement whether you are a trade unionist, whether you are a small business operator, whether you are a student, whether you are a professional, or even an unbiased journalist sitting in the press gallery but you’d like to get involved consistent with your professional ethics. 
That there this a place for you in the wider broad church of our movement, we want to hear your voice in the membership, have a say not just in our rules, not just a say in our policies, not just a say in our procedures but have a say directly and the power to vote in the leader of our party. 
I believe the Australian people demand that certainty, I also believe the members of our party deserve that certainty as well. 
This is a major reform. 
Once this is out and discussed in two weeks’ time, can I say to the rest of you, we are onto the business of the government of the country and other necessary reforms that we’ve got in the policy space in the days ahead. 
Can I just turn to the Deputy Prime Minister for a few comments and then we’ll take your questions. 
DPM: Just briefly, the Australian Labor Party is of course Australia’s oldest political party. 
It’s also been responsible for major reform for more than 120 years since 1891. 
Today what we do is how that we are also a modern political party and today we launch a massive recruitment campaign. 
We want people to be a part of Labor. 
If you support Labor, if you want to be engaged with Labor, we are saying to you that we want your participation as a member and in return for that you will get a say in who is the leader of the federal parliamentary Labor Party. 
This is an opportunity to reengage in Australian politics for all those who are Labor true believers but have up to this point questioned the value of party membership.
Today along with the direct vote for the national presidency and other reforms that will be pursued at some point in the future we’re saying we value the party membership. 
It’s not just about the members of the caucus. It’s about those people who trod the streets, who put things in letterboxes who hand out how-to-votes. 
We value you. 
We respect you and today we are demonstrating that with the most significant empowerment of Labor Party members in our history. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two questions, how would the selection of the candidates work? Would the candidates still be put forward by the caucus for the people to then to vote on and would all four leadership positions be decided? 
PM: Let me answer those two in sequence. 
The requirement for nomination is a minimum nomination of 20 per cent of the caucus, so you could have one candidate, two candidates, three candidates, and of course the system of voting which operates within this particular arrangement would be those which operate more generally which is optional preferential voting. 
I think that’s the right way to go. And as for the application of the rule, it is for the leader only. 
The parliamentary party will select all other members of the executive, including these three leadership positions around me. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, who did you consult with on this move- 
PM: Heaps of people.
JOURNALIST: Could you be a little bit more specific than that? 
PM: More than heaps of people. 
JOURNALIST: Maybe with names? And also does the caucus have, really have a choice in two weeks given that the alternative would be to roll you and your clear preference in this rule change just before an election? 
PM: The first thing I would say is that many, many people within our movement have spoken out on the need for this reform in recent times. Chris Bowen’s been one of them, but there have been others as well. 
Secondly, I have been discussing this particular proposal and variations of it with the Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Government in the Senate and the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate for quite some time, and we have met and dealt with this extensively in recent days again. 
And thirdly, we've just had a meeting of the entire ministry of 30 members of the parliamentary party and they’ve agreed that this is the process that we should put forward. 
As I said we’re in the hands of the parliamentary caucus. It has to be one of the most significant decisions they make on the future structure of our party, and I'm pretty relaxed about putting our future and the future of the Government in their hands. 
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does this now mean that the events that happened in 2010 where Julia Gillard came to you in your office and challenged you, and in 2006 when you went to Kim Beazley and challenged him, that that can now not happen anymore? 
And what would happen if a Labor Party MP went to a Labor Party leader and said I want to challenge you? 
PM: This applies in its principal focus to the Labor Party forming government. The issues which arose in terms of the events of 2010 was the Australian people saying to us uphill, down dale around the country, we voted for this guy and then suddenly it all changed. That’s the first point. 
But it’s a broader principle than that. Much broader than an individual and myself in that case.
It’s about providing the Australian public with the certainty that the person that they vote for as Prime Minister serves that term as Prime Minister. That’s a legitimate ask. 
As for the party in opposition for example, we go to an election, we don’t win it, the party in opposition, the rules that I've just outlined apply. 
Furthermore in terms of the possibility of changes to the Labor leadership in opposition, then of course the variations which are discussed in the rules will be the subject of our deliberations over caucus.
But the principal matter here is if you go to an election, the Labor Party has a duly elected leader, and you look down the barrel of the camera to the Australian people and say vote for the party and vote for the government that I lead, that that is the person that is returned to them as Prime Minister for the duration of that term.
And as I said, the mechanisms outlined in the proposed rule change prevent anyone from just wandering just one day or one night and saying ‘okay sunshine, it’s over.’
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I take it from that that whereas a couple of weeks ago a petition had to be a third of the caucus, now it needs to be three quarters of the caucus before that same process. 
PM: And for a specific purpose, that the individual concerned who as leader is bringing the party into broader disrepute. 
That’s simply a means by which the parliamentary party could form a judgment that  the leader – the parliamentary leader – was a person who at that stage was causing the party reputational damage of a significant order of magnitude and therefore you need to have what is called a recall mechanism. 
Secondly, if that is exercised, what then happens is that you go back with a process of a normal election of the party.
If the person who was leader felt aggrieved, then you go through the election process which is outlined. It’s a double safety valve. 
JOURNALIST: Just a technical matter. Does this have to be ratified later by a formal party conference once it’s been through the caucus, and secondly could you outline your thinking why you changed your mind on the desirability of the leader selecting the frontbench? 
PM: Let me take those almost in reverse.
On the question that you raised about the rule concerning the leader of the party selecting the frontbench, that has been in full operation now for about six years and was brought into operation through a change to the caucus rules which I initiated in 2007-8. I can’t remember the exact date.
Therefore in terms of the legal underpinnings of how we’ve operated as a parliamentary party for the last six years, that has been adequate for the purpose – and that would be a change to the caucus rules – would be adequate for this purpose as well. 
On the other point, which is why have I changed my view on this, at the end of the day it’s really important to have a proper balance. 
You want to be able to say to the Australian people that you vote for this guy, you vote for this woman, they end up being elected, they end up staying on as Prime Minister for the duration of that term. 
There’s another reason for it by the way, for that particular reform. 
Too often, political leaders are going to become timid and intimidated by the usual avalanche of opinion polls when difficult decisions are taken, and the whole quality of government and governance starts to decline as political leaders have to look constantly behind, over their shoulders, when hard things are being decided upon. 
This actually provides some certainty for that process for the good governance of Australia. I think where the balance comes in, Michelle, is this.
It’s really important also for the parliamentary party to be able to exercise their voice in selecting the other members of the executive to ensure that they have adequate representation in the decision-making processes of the Government as well. 
It’s a balance, and I think it’s the right balance. 
More fundamentally it gives as assurance to the Australian people that the person who is elected at an election as Prime Minister serves as Prime Minister for that term. 
JOURNALIST: On the issue of increasing membership, how is this going to attract people to Labor rather than the alternative which is most likely the Greens?
PM: Well in the case of the Australian Labor Party, Albo mentioned a minor historical detail. 
We've been around 120 years as a mass political party. We intend to remain as a mass political party. 
Secondly, the reason for periodically changing our rules is to make sure we are continuing to open the doors to changes in Australian society. 
There’s a whole bunch of folks out there who’d like to become active in our movement.
They'd like to become supporters of our movement, they want to have a voice in our movement, and now they have a direct voice. 
It’s one of a series of reforms which need to be embraced over time to democratise the party.
DPM: Can I make on point, Prime Minister, which is that this increases the transparency and openness of the Australian Labor Party. 
The Greens political party still don’t let any of you to look at their conferences.
PM: When we have a conference, as you well know, you get to see the whole lot.
DPM: In all its glory. 
PM: In all its glory, general entertainment for some, despair for others.
JOURNALIST: If these conditions were in place two weeks ago, would you have beaten Julia Gillard in the leadership ballot? 
PM: The important thing about this reform is it’s designed to deal with long term stability of the party’s leadership. It’s very simple and plain about that.
It’s about a principle that goes way beyond my individual circumstances, Julia’s individual circumstances, it’s a structural reform for the party. 
And the core thing is this. If you go to the people and you’re elected, and you become Prime Minister of the country, the people expect that you’ll remain in that position.
And the prudent provisions contained for extraordinary circumstances are outlined there as well.
JOURNALIST: Why now, Prime Minister, and how much of this has been driven by revenge for the events of 2010? 
PM: Absolutely zero about all of that.
And why now? Frankly the Australian people are asking a legitimate question. Let’s just be frank about it. And it’s been in the public debate in recent times. 
Okay, this person is leader of the Australian Labor Party now, he’s the Prime Minister. He goes to election. Will you provide a guarantee that this person will serve a term subsequent to that as Prime Minister? This provides the rules-based response to that question. 
It is the logical response to a real question being raised by the Australian people.
No ifs, no buts, no maybes about it, and if you didn’t address it in this way prior to an election later this year, then frankly you wouldn’t be fair dinkum with the Australian people.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, under these new rules, if Labor is not successful at the election and the leadership is thrown open, will you recontest it? And separately on a separate issue if I may- 
PM: Can I just say this. To respond to that, straight up and down, it’s number one, I'm in this election when it’s held later this year, for one purpose alone and that is to secure the return of the Government, because there are so many good things that we've done for the country. 
Good things such as the National Broadband Network, good things such as the health and hospitals reforms, good things such as the investment program in Australian schools, and I don’t want to see those thrown out the back door if Mr Abbott becomes Prime Minister. 
Secondly, as I've said before, unfortunately with Mr Abbott we have a very negative politician who seems to be more interested in how you divide the country rather than unite it. 
And I’d much rather get on with the business of uniting the country, and having said that folks, we need to zip. 
Thank you very much.


Subject(s): Visit to NT; Election campaign; Better Schools Plan
PM: As a Queenslander, I feel like this is my second home. Luke here I've known for a long, long time.
Luke is a professional soldier by training, 13 years if I'm right, or thereabouts, and so don’t mess with him  basically, he knows what he’s doing.
His wonderful wife Kate is a great friend of mine. She worked with me when I was Foreign Minister; she’s now working for me as Prime Minister.
So she’s a really talented person and I enjoy working with her and have done for years. Now you have a new baby daughter who I met for the first time this morning.
LUKE GOSLING, ALP CANDIDATE FOR SOLOMON: Sally.
PM: Baby Sally was crawling round the floor of the Prime Minister’s Office this morning and basically creating mayhem, but it was good mayhem.
Now I think you all know Luke’s background, professional soldier, lived in the Territory now for how many years, mate?
GOSLING: On and off since 2002.
PM: On and off since 2002, served in Timor just across the water there, and is committed to this local community.
He’s committed to the wellbeing of our servicemen and women, because he’s a professional soldier himself.
He knows what it means to put on the uniform of Australia; he knows therefore what it means to look after our Diggers once they leave the services as well.
When it comes to this part of the world, I have had one mission as Prime Minister of Australia over the years again now. And that is to make sure that people in the Territory get a fair go.
That means that we have an improvement to the health services up here.
I'm so pleased that when I was here last as Prime Minister, we opened the Alan Walker cancer centre at Royal Darwin Hospital. I remember it clearly.
Prior to that, people in Darwin had to travel to Adelaide in order to get the most routine cancer procedures.
Now it is available here in Royal Darwin Hospital for local people. That is a huge change for locals here in the Territory.
But you know with health and hospitals, it’s one step at a time, and the next step is to provide proper hospital services to the people of Palmerston.
That’s why the Government is committed to building a new hospital at Palmerston.
We have put forward $70 million and I would call upon the Country Liberal Party government of the Northern Territory to stump up the $40 million we need to make this work.
That’s a fair partnership, we’re providing $70 million, we’re asking them for $40 million.
It’s time we got real about it because I know across the community; I spoke with a bloke called Pete this morning on morning radio – Hi Pete wherever you are – and I know he and others have been campaigning for this for a long time.
There’s a big population out there, it’s a young community, they need a local hospital.
Can I say also that the future of the Territory will rest on the shoulders of candidates in the House of Representatives like Luke Gosling.
And like also of course Warren Snowdon, our Member for Lingiari who’s already a minister of the government.
I would encourage all Territorians to get behind Luke and to make sure that we turn Solomon into a win for the Government and more importantly a win for delivering better services for health, for hospitals, for schools and for the community here in the Northern Territory.
Thank you folks, I'm happy to take some questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, where is the Gonski deal at?
PM: The question today about the Better Schools Plan for Australia.
I'm pleased to announce that today Bill Shorten, the Education Minister, reached an agreement with the Government of Tasmania so the state of Tasmania is signed on to the Better Schools Plan.
So we have New South Wales, we have South Australia, we have Tasmania, we have the Australian Capital Territory, and our negotiations with various others are going not badly.
So can I just say this is a Better Schools Plan for the nation. What’s it about? It’s about lifting the standards of each school, and if you’ve got a kid in grade 3 who is falling behind in reading and writing, in numeracy and literacy, Gonski – the Better Schools Plan – is about providing the money to get in a specialist tutor to bring that kid back up to scratch.
It’s very practical, so I'm really pleased Tasmania has joined and I would say directly to Mr Abbott, the Leader of the Opposition, get behind a positive plan for Australia’s future. Get behind a positive Better Schools Plan for Australia’s future.
Australian schools want it, Australian schoolkids want it. Classroom teachers want it. And I’d just say stop being so negative Mr Abbott and support the Government’s positive initiative for Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you reconsidering Nova Peris’ preselection?
PM: I said this morning from Canberra my attitude to this is that we have in Trish Crossin a person who has been an excellent senator for the Northern Territory, and we have also in Nova a fantastic candidate for the Australian Labor Party as well.
I have spoken at some length with Trish and I've been consulting locally with members of the Northern Territory branch of the Labor Party.
Since I've been here I've been speaking with the President and the Secretary of the Northern Territory branch.
And I said this morning I wanted to consult with them, to see what their views were.
And they have told me on behalf of the leadership of the Labor Party here in the Northern Territory that despite all the difficulties that have happened with the national intervention in the preselection, that they want here in the Territory, the Australian Labor Party members want us to get behind Nova as the Australian Labor Party candidate for the senate.
I support their local recommendation.
This is of course a very difficult thing for Trish. Trish Crossin has been a friend of mine for 15 years. Trish Crossin has been a wonderful representative for the Territory.
I spoke to her again this morning and I've spoken to her in recent days. This is very tough for her, and frankly it’s very tough for all of us.
But I've got to say we’ve got to look to the future and we’ve got to get behind Nova in what is going to be a tight senate race here in the Northern Territory and a tight race for us all.
So the bottom line is this. I don’t like the way in which it was handled, that’s the truth, six months ago.
We have an election due in several months’ time, and therefore we’ve got to get on with the business of uniting behind our Labor candidates Luke Gosling here in the seat of Solomon and of course Nova in the senate.
JOURNALIST: What’s your reaction to the polls out today?
PM: You may find this strange, but I have not read them. I've been bedding down the whole process of party reform.
Yesterday in Australia I put to the Australian parliamentary Labor Party caucus a plan for the future, a plan which says that if the Australian people vote for a Labor leader at an election time, they can be guaranteed that that person will remain as Prime Minister through until the next election.
That’s what the Australian people want. They have a right to have that certainty. On top of that, we have now new rules for the election of Labor leaders.
That is, 50 per cent for the parliamentary Labor Party and 50 per cent for the members of the Labor Party right across Australia.
So you can have tens of thousands of people being able to put up their hand and vote for a future leader of the Labor Party, and on top of that the parliamentary party retaining 50 per cent for itself.
This is the most democratic reform that the Labor Party has had in 120 years.
JOURNALIST: Will you release the sealed part of the Bracks Review?
PM: That I will leave to the executive of the Australian Labor Party. I am aware of the history of that and I’ll leave it to others.
JOURNALIST: Just to go back to education, what do you have to say to the Territory Government about them not signing onto the reforms yet?
PM: Well I'm going to be speaking with the Chief Minister I think late this afternoon early this evening. I've met him once before and I look forward to a further discussion.
I would say to the Chief Minister, put party politics to one side, it’s time to be positive about the future. Any mug can play negative politics; it’s frankly the easiest game to play in politics.
The hard thing to do is to put forward positive plans for the future which works. This plan works, and for the nation it delivers an extra $16 billion of funding to the schoolkids of Australia.
It’s about better schools, better opportunities for our kids, so I’d day to the Chief Minister here get behind the plan.
Don’t play Territory politics; it’s the easiest game in the world to play. State politics, Territory politics, local politics.
Look to the future and look in the eyes of each of the young kids in the Territory and say do I want more funding for each of those kids at school?
If this little possum here has a problem with reading and writing at some stage, do I want her to get the intervention that she needs? Of course I do.
If this one is doing really well at maths and she needs some extra coaching to jump a year, do I want the extra coaching to come for her? Of course I do.
And I think he should as well.
JOURNALIST: Are you willing to alter the model that’s previously been offered to the Territory?
PM: The model that we've put is a pretty good one, and if it’s good enough for the good people of New South Wales – I'm not from New South Wales, you’re not from New South Wales, I'm told it’s a pretty big state, in fact it’s the largest state in the country.
So if the good people of New South Wales through their Liberal-National government can accept this as a reasonable model, the people of South Australia through their government, the people of Tasmania through their government, I think it’s a pretty good model for the NT to get behind as well.
I want better schools and I want better opportunities for kids like these here in the Territory.


Subject(s): Election campaign; Reforms to ALP; Newspoll; Asylum seekers; NPC debate; Visit to NT
HOST: Kevin Rudd, Good morning.
PM: Good morning Pete, thanks for having me on the program.
HOST: A delight to have you and congratulations on getting your old job back Kev.
PM: Thank you for that, I'm looking forward to getting to Darwin today actually and I’ll be in the Territory for a couple of days. After Queensland the NT’s the best place in the world to be.
HOST: You’ve announced today that grassroots Labor members could help elect the leader, taking power from the factional and faceless men.
You will be congratulated by many for that move, but when we transpose that to the local scene and the issue with Nova Peris being parachuted into Trish Crossin’s senate seat, there is a classic example where the rank and file weren’t even consulted and the former Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, exercised the captain’s pick.
PM: On the first point you raise Pete, which is the need for national reform of the Australian Labor Party, this has been 100 years in coming.
And what we’re doing for the benefit of your listeners is making sure that in the future when there is a vote for the leader of the Australian Labor Party, 50 per cent of that vote will go to the members of the parliamentary party and 50 per cent will go to members of the Australian Labor Party across the entire nation.
That’s to give local members of our party a voice in our future national direction.
The other thing about this reform Pete is that when the Australian people therefore go to an election and if they vote for a person to become their Prime Minister, under these reforms that person stays as their Prime Minister for the parliamentary term.
That’s what all this is about.
On the local stuff that you’ve raised, I intend to have a chat with the locals about that when I get up there.
I know enough about Darwin and the Territory to know that people from the south and from elsewhere need to actually get up there and see how the locals feel.
I’ll be talking to the local branch about this question when I get up there, and I’ll be talking to locals as well.
So I know all of the controversy surrounding this, but I actually want to hear what the locals have got to say.
HOST: Yeah, there is a bit of a bitter taste in a lot of people’s mouths because like when you were first elected Prime Minister of this country, then you were dumped by your own party, you were elected by the people.
Trish Crossin was elected by the people, and it really should be up to either Trish Crossin or the people to decide when it’s time.
PM: Well Trish Crossin’s made a huge contribution to the Territory as a senator. And she’s a good friend of mine and has been for a long, long time.
Of course when it comes to Nova Peris, she also has made a contribution to life in the Territory and her work in terms of encouraging young indigenous kids to get into education, to stay in education in particular with Aboriginal girls, is first class.
But I go back, Pete, to what I said before. The last thing you want is for some bloke on a phone from Canberra saying that I've got all the received wisdom on this.
I really look forward to getting to Darwin to talk to the locals about this, including the Northern Territory branch of the Labor Party.
HOST: Okay. The bump in the opinion polls. Quite extraordinary Kevin, less than a fortnight and all of a sudden you're up there with Tony Abbott and it looks as if we will go to an election with a neck-and-neck contest.
The election date – would you like to announce it live here on 360?
PM: You want an NT exclusive on the election date?
HOST: I would be delighted Kev.
PM: Pete, I love you dearly and I love the Territory even more, but there’s a thing called a Constitution.
It sets the parameters for when an election date should be and despite Mr Abbott jumping up and down on all of this, and guess what, he doesn’t get to decide, the Constitution outlines when elections are held.
So like all my predecessors, Mr Howard, Mr Keating, Mr Hawke and going back to Bob Menzies. They operated under the Constitution. I’ll do the same.
HOST: Okay, alright, we’ll move on from the election issue. I'm obviously not going to get a scoop there. Tony Abbott’s mantra with ‘stop the boats’.
You had discussions with the Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Did he look you in the eye and say we won’t cop boats being turned back?
PM: Well, I've known SBY, the President of Indonesia, for a long, long time, in fact well before he was President of Indonesia and I've met him on many times. He’s a good friend, and he’s a good friend of Australia.
I think you’d understand Pete when it comes to private diplomatic conversations, the thing you don’t do is go and broadcast to the world the precise content of those discussions.
What happens when you have a meeting like that is that the participating governments – in his case the Indonesian Government – puts his case down on paper in a joint statement, and that’s what we did yesterday and you’ll see his views clearly reflected there in terms of unilateral action.
The bottom line is this Pete. When it comes to asylum seekers, first of all it’s a problem across the world. We’re not Robinson Crusoe.
If you're in Europe or sailing across the Mediterranean all the time, same with North America and people coming from Latin America and elsewhere, this is a problem for many, many countries including within our region.
A lot of folk come from outside the region, from Iraq, from Afghanistan, from Iran and then find their way to Indonesia or Malaysia or elsewhere in the region including Thailand.
So the right response is a regional response and that’s why the Indonesian President has decided to pull together – at his initiative – a meeting of regional ministers to work out practical actions for all of us now to take.
And the really interesting thing, important thing about what President Yudhoyono had to say is that he said this is our problem together. And that’s why he wants a cooperative approach to reducing this problem over time.
I’d say this, unfortunately Mr Abbott seems to be very taken with political slogans and flash sounding phrases like ‘stop the boats’.
I think what the Australian people want to know is how will you stop the boats, Mr Abbott? And that’s a pretty valid question given that he’s spent the last four years saying that he will, how will he?
Because as you said before, this is going to be an open and competitive race for the Australian election and he’s got to fess up to what his policies are.
That’s why I've asked him to a debate at the National Press Club this week on Thursday.
HOST: We can lend you a chair.
PM: Well we might need that, but for your listeners who were listening to Mr Abbott over the last few years, it’s all about debt and deficit, it’s all about stop the boats and it’s all about carbon pricing.
So what I've said to Mr Abbott, okay, let’s have the first one on debt and deficit, that’s your chosen topic.
We’ll have the second one on ‘stop the boats’ and then the third one on carbon pricing.
Let’s actually hear what you would do about each of these things rather than just chant a slogan like you’re at a football game.
HOST: Just finally before I let you go Prime Minister-
PM: I've got to jump on the plane to come and see you.
HOST: I know.
PM: I'm up there to campaign for Luke Gosling, who’s a great bloke, he’s our candidate for the seat of Solomon, in fact his partner Kate works for me so I should put all that on the record.
He’s a good guy, and as you know he’s a career soldier and we’ll be up there talking about the Palmerston Hospital which Pete, I understand you’ve had a bit to do with as well.
HOST: Yes very much so and very disappointed we were-
PM: I want to see that project go ahead.
HOST: It has to go ahead, it’s an essential piece of infrastructure. But quickly before you go, as the Australian Prime Minister and if you are re-elected, whenever the election might be, will you support the Northern Territory becoming the seventh state?
PM: I love this question.
HOST: So do I.
PM: You know something, I am such a huge fan of the Territory, and as a Queenslander I just feel automatically at home when I'm up there.
On the question of statehood, it’s such a complex constitutional question, I just want the Territory to develop and to become a stronger regional economy, more jobs, more economic development, more opportunities for all Australians, and I’ll have a lot to say about that during the election campaign.
So Pete I'm sorry on that and the election date, I can’t give you a scoop.
HOST: Prime Minister, great to talk to you and I don’t doubt we will chat again.
PM: See you soon, bye.


Today the Australian and Tasmanian Governments have reached an historic agreement that will deliver long term improvements for every one of the 81,000 school students in Tasmania. 
This is not just an investment in schools, this is a down payment on the long-term strength of the Australian economy, and will underwrite higher productivity for decades to come. 
Tasmania becomes the fourth jurisdiction to agree to the National Education Reform Agreement, with its students now supported by three key measures:
&gt;an ambitious goal for Australia to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025, and rated as high quality and high equity.
&gt;continued reform under the Better Schools in the areas we know drive better student outcomes including: quality teaching; quality learning; empowered school leadership; meeting student need; and transparency and accountability; and
&gt;funding arrangements that are based on the needs of individual students and individual schools.
For the first time, all funding will be linked to education reforms with this investment supporting the long term future of Australia. 
Funding will be targeted on lifting school performance and giving each and every student in Tasmania a world-class education, no matter where they live, the school they attend or their family background. 
The Heads of Agreement that provides the detail of this reform for Tasmania which will see annual funding allocations for Tasmanian schools rise to $1.4 billion in 2019. 
Over the six years of the new agreement, the Australian and Tasmanian Governments will invest more than $380 million in extra funding between 2014 and 2019. 
Put simply, these indexation arrangements mean all schools in Tasmania – Government, Independent and Catholic – will see fair funding growth each year.
To achieve this, the Australian Government has committed to grow its school education spending by 4.7 per cent per year from 2014 into 2015 and throughout the agreement. 
In return, consistent with its 2013/14 Budget, Tasmania has agreed to grow its 2015 base funding by 3 per cent to 2016 and will continue to do so every year thereafter. 
The Tasmanian government will also introduce a new school funding model for Government schools, the Fairer Funding Model (FFM), to ensure resources are targeted to where they are needed most. 
The agreement made today will benefit principals and teachers, who will see improved workforce flexibility and productivity, more training and support, and greater autonomy in decision making in schools. Parents and community organisations will see more transparency around school performance and funding so they can be more informed and involved in the education of their children. 
With Tasmania now joining New South Wales, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory in signing up to the reforms, and with the passing of the Australian Education Act 2013, 63 per cent of Australian school students will receive increased funding from the 2014 school year.


Subject(s): National Broadband Network; Constitutional recognition for indigenous Australians; Carbon pricing; Better Schools Plan
PM: It's great to be out here again with Luke, our candidate for Solomon. This is a really important part of what we are doing in Solomon and across Australia.
What are we trying to do? Build an economy for the twenty-first century, build an economy which deals with the challenge of the end of the China resources boom, building the infrastructure of a new economy to take us beyond the resources boom.
This infrastructure is like building a railway network in the nineteenth century or a freeway network in the twentieth century. This is the freeway of the twenty-first century.
Here we are in Darwin, one of the most remote centres in Australia. And remote from the rest of Australia but the gateway to Asia.
This technology is going to revolutionise Darwin's future and the Territory's future with bandwidth and band speed which is going to make sure that any business, any school, any hospital, anyone engaged in practical daily life can link immediately with their counterparts across Asia and across the rest of Australia.
It's going to transform the way in which we do business.
The bottom line is this. With the NBN, we are finally overcoming the tyranny of distance for Australia, overcoming the tyranny of distance for the Territory and for the smallest communities across Australia.
One of the great things about this reform is that we have decided that there shall be no digital divide in Australia between the people who live in downtown Sydney and Melbourne, and Brisbane, and those who live out in the regions.
Everybody should have access at affordable prices to the NBN, so that they can make sure that their businesses or their organisations are going to function effectively in the twenty-first century.
So what does it mean here in this neck of the woods, in this part of Darwin? This Friday, we're going to have switched on 2600 homes across Darwin for access to the NBN.
This is the beginning of a huge project for Darwin and the Territory. Of course right across the Territory we're going to see this happen as well.
Fibre construction on Darwin's NBN has already commenced with more than 25,000 homes and businesses.
And we've seen the rollout activity in areas like Bayview, Casuarina, Darwin City, East Point, Eaton, Fannie Bay, The Gardens, Larrakeyah, Ludmilla, The Narrows, Parap, Stuart Park, Alawa, Anula, Leanyer, Lyons, Malak, Marrara, Moil, Tiwi, Wagaman, Wanguri and Woolner, and I am sorry if I mispronounced any of those.
But the bottom line is it's coming to a suburb and a community near you in Darwin and through our use of wireless and satellite technologies right across the Territory as well.
The whole point is this is the future. Copper is the past.
Mr Abbott, and surprisingly Mr Turnbull, represent the technologies of the past.
Mr Turnbull knows better. He is just doing what Mr Abbott is telling him to do.
For the future, it is fibre optic, every modern economy around the world is laying out fibre optic.
In ten years’ time we will look back on this day and say why didn't we do it ten years earlier? That is what we will say.
If in ten years’ time the other mob get in and they decide to go back to good old nineteenth early twentieth century copper, everyone will shake their heads in wonder as to how this pack of mugs in Australia, the alternative government of Australia, could think that this was a solution for the future.
This is about the economy, it's about health, it's about education, it's about the future. And I'm proud to be part of it.
Final word – when I first put my name to the Australian people to become their Prime Minister in 2007, I said we would build a National Broadband Network.
We're the party of nation builders. We're out across every city and centre in the nation, either building it now, laying it out now, or planning for the layout over the next couple of years.
This is the largest engineering project in Australia's history.
I am proud to be the Prime Minister who took to it the people first up and I'm proud to see the product of our work here in the suburbs of Darwin today.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: A question pertinent to events later today. There seems to be some disquiet in East Arnhem Land about your timetable to amend the Constitution to recognise the indigenous population. What is your timetable?
PM: My view is that we should be in the business of bringing about constitutional recognition for the First Australians as soon as possible.
Remember, I committed prior to 2007 that an early act of the then Australian Government was to have a national apology to Aboriginal Australians and the Forgotten Generations. We did that.
We are now committed to rolling out the constitutional recognition for the First Australians and we want to get that work done.
There's just one thing we need to make sure that is done on the way through: to get bipartisan support from Mr Abbott's party.
The history of Australian referendums is that if you don't get bipartisan support, they will go down.
So what I want to make sure happens is that we get bipartisan support and then get to it the people as soon as possible.
I want this done in the next term of the Australian parliament. That is what I really want to see. And I really want to achieve that bipartisan consensus as rapidly as possible.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott says the he was Prime Minister he would release a draft amendment within the first 12 months of office. Can you match that?
PM: Constitutional recognition of indigenous people has been our policy from the beginning.
I find it always surprising when someone like Mr Abbott, who permanently engages in negative politics, begins to provide public lectures to the Australian Government on the question of indigenous policy.
I would say to Mr Abbott, in the parliamentary committee which is now seeking to resolve the question to put the Australian people, get your act together, tell us what you actually want, in detail, black and white, and let's get it done.
The Australian people are waiting for this. The Aboriginal people are waiting for this.
But frankly the ball lies in his court. It really does.
JOURNALIST: One other question on the referendum. Are you committed to the local government referendum proposal?
PM: I am really disappointed at what has happened with the apparent withdrawal of Coalition support for that referendum. I am deeply disappointed.
I have spoken to local governments across Australia who want to see this happen.
So the internal politics of division within the Coalition on this must be frankly just out of control.
You have Nats versus Nats, Libs versus Libs, Libs versus Nats. Frankly the nation deserves better and Australian local government deserves better.
I look forward frankly to having a frank conversation with Mr Abbott.
Of course I could have had it tomorrow if he bothered to show up for the debate in Canberra, about what his actual position is on this.
We have always been committed to making sure that we get this referendum done and dusted.
But it makes it really hard when you've got a withdrawal, an apparent withdrawal of bipartisan support.
JOURNALIST: The NT’s Attorney-General yesterday called for a 50 year exemption to the carbon tax for the Territory because he fears it’s going to jeopardise the future of the Territory and future growth.
PM: On carbon pricing, I just wish the Liberal and National Party would catch up with the twenty-first century.
In China they're introducing carbon pricing. Carbon pricing has been introduced into Europe a long time ago.
It makes for pretty cute, short-term negative politics to constantly bang on about this.
The hard thing in government is to work out what you do about a real problem called climate change.
That is what we are on about. That's what responsible members of the international community are talking about as well.
Can I say to the Northern Territory Government there is a very immediate challenge for the NT Government: are you fair dinkum about signing up to the Better Schools Plan?
I represent the Australian Government. I am here offering to invest, together with my team, $300 million extra into the schools of the Northern Territory over the next six years.
Every school will see increased funding. Every school will see increased funding and I still have stonewalling from the Northern Territory Government, whether they think this is a good idea.
I don't know what is going on up here, but in previous times, if the Prime Minister of Australia came to Darwin and said 'I want to invest $300 million in your schools’ it would take about 45 seconds to get an immediate and positive response.
They may have some real policy concerns about the nature of the plan.
Education Minister Bill Shorten will work with them on that, but the bottom line is this: I want to invest in the best schools possible for the Territory.
$300 million is on the table.
I can't understand why the NT Government want to walk away from that.
They're constantly saying they're cash-strapped up here. There’s $300 million to build better schools, to get better outcomes for our kids.
JOURNALIST: Will there be any give and take on that?
PM: Bill Shorten has been a good Minister. He’s been bringing the Tasmanians on side. That’s been good.
The Tasmanian Government has signed up. The South Australian Government has signed up. The ACT Government has signed up.
And the Government of New South Wales, which when I last looked was a pretty big state in Australia, they’ve signed up.
I think it's time we all put politics to one side, came together, united for the benefit of our kids for the next generation.
So Bill Shorten, I am sure, will be talking to the Chief Minister and his Ministers about this.
But we need to get cracking and get it done. Time is running out.
Thanks folks, all the best.


Canberra
The Prime Minister wants to broker closer co-operation between business, unions and government as part of a new national competitiveness agenda designed to smooth the nation’s economic transition out of the resources boom.
The Prime Minister has also rejected myths created by Tony Abbott about the Australian economy, saying the Opposition Leader is attempting to scare Australians over their economic well-being rather than producing serious alternative policy.
In a speech to the National Press Club today, the Prime Minister also called on the business sector to use the existing Fair Work Act to drive productivity gains and to sharpen its engagement with Asia, particularly Indonesia.
In an assessment of the economic challenges facing Australia, the Prime Minister said the nation must adjust its policies to recognise the end of the China resources boom and an anaemic global economic recovery in the wake of the global financial crisis.
While resource and commodity exports are up, the prices we receive for them have now fallen almost 25 per cent since their peak and are likely to fall further.
Economic policy must now focus on a transition from an investment-intensive phase in our minerals and energy sector toward a focus on new investment in other sectors of the economy including the trade sector that will now be advantaged by a lower dollar.
Managing this economic transition is now a core task of Australian economic policy. The nation can manage this transition by our domestic industries and our exporters taking advantage of a new, lower Australian dollar, boosting supply, and exporting a greater range of goods and services to a greater range of markets throughout the world.
Since becoming Prime Minister a fortnight ago, Mr Rudd has met four times with the ACTU and the Business Council of Australia to enlist their support for closer co-operation.
Over coming days senior ministers will continue the consultations to hammer out a work program on the ways forward to boost productivity.
Agenda items include rising energy prices, unintended rigidities in the labour market, business productivity, red tape, education, skills and training, infrastructure and small business.
The core of this new national competitiveness agenda must be a common agreement to lift the rate of annual productivity growth from its existing level of 1.6 per cent to 2 per cent or better.
The Prime Minister had challenged Mr Abbott to join him at today’s NPC function for a debate about Labor’s record, its policies for the future and the Coalition’s competing policy vision.
Mr Abbott failed to attend.
Mr Abbott’s ongoing attacks on the Government’s record are not based in fact and he has failed to produce any new policy beyond a daily diatribe of negative politics designed to make Australians feel the nation is on the verge of falling apart.
The objective facts do not support his claims. 


Prime Minister, Minister for Education
Today the Australian Government and Independent Schools Council of Australia (ISCA) reached an historic agreement that will deliver real benefits to 562,000 students in independent schools across Australia.
The agreement will see more than $1 billion additional funding flow to Australian independent schools over the next six years – if every state and territory signs up.
The Better Schools Plan is a plan to give every student in every Australian school the opportunity to reach their full potential and compete with the rest of the world.
The Australian Government respects every parent’s right to choose where they send their kids to school.
Over a long period of time, the Australian Government has supported the growth of the Independent school sector and values the role it plays in educating young Australians.
Today’s historic agreement will ensure every Australian kid, irrespective of where they live, which school they attend or their family background, will get the best start in life.
This is not just an investment in schools, this is a down payment on the long-term strength of the Australian economy, and will underwrite higher productivity for decades to come.
The Australian Government has set an ambitious target for Australia to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025 and this can only be achieved by working together with our independent schools.
The Better Schools Plan delivers reform in the areas we know drive better student outcomes including quality teaching, quality learning, empowered school leadership, more individual attention for students, and transparency and accountability.
The Australian Government and the Independent Schools Council of Australia have worked cooperatively, respectfully and intensively to ensure this is a good deal for independent schools.
As a result of the agreements reached with New South Wales, South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania, 45 per cent of independent schools will also see additional state government funding.
It is now time for Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory to join with other states, the ACT and the Independent sector in embracing the Better Schools Plan.


Prime Minister, Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Minister for Indigenous Health and Member for Lingiari
Yirrkala 
The Rudd Government today marked the 50th anniversary of the Yirrkala bark petitions, documents which helped drive the recognition of land rights and the process of reconciliation in our country.
In July 1963, the Yolngu people from the Gove Peninsula in the Northern Territory sent two bark petitions to the Australian Parliament.
These petitions sought recognition of their rights to their traditional lands and voiced opposition to mining exploration in the area.
Although not successful in halting mining operations, the Yirrkala bark petitions were significant as the first traditional documents to be tabled in the Australian Parliament, and today they are rightly counted among the founding documents of our nation.
To support Aboriginal people in East Arnhem Land to live and drive economic development on their homelands, the Rudd Government is today announcing a $4.3 million investment in the Laynhapuy and Marngarr homelands.
This investment will provide for works to make housing safer, help residents to reduce their energy consumption and improve the safety and reliability of the local water supply.
Importantly, the sustainable living project will help drive local employment and business enterprises, through partnerships with local Aboriginal organisations to deliver the works.
The project will be managed by the Centre for Appropriate Technology, with the help of a local steering committee.
The Government funding will also help to employ a local coordinator to ensure that the interests of the Laynhapuy and Marngarr homelands are better represented.
The coordinator will play an important role in negotiating and implementing a plan with the Government to address key areas of disadvantage.
The Government is also investing more than $20.5 million to build or upgrade more than 110 houses in the communities of Yirrkala and Gunyangara in East Arnhem Land.
Through the Government’s Stronger Futures in the Northern Territory package, 62 existing houses in Yirrkala will be upgraded. Additionally, up to 30 new houses will be built through the National Partnership Agreement on Remote Indigenous Housing (NPARIH). 
In Gunyangara, 21 existing houses will be upgraded and six houses will be replaced with new houses.
 This investment in housing infrastructure is also providing local employment opportunities for Aboriginal people in Yirrkala and Gunyangara. The National Partnership Agreement has a 20 per cent target for Indigenous employment in the delivery of new housing construction, which it has exceeded in every state and the Northern Territory.
The Laynhapuy and Marngarr homelands project builds on the Rudd Government’s continued support for making outstations and homelands across the Northern Territory safe, including:
• $206.4 million for the provision of municipal and essential services in the Northern Territory over 10 years as part of the Stronger Futures package.
• $4.3 million for the Utopia homelands sustainable living project as part of the Stronger Futures package.     
The Rudd Government is also committed to land rights in the Northern Territory. Since 2007, the Government has handed back 42,225 square kilometres of land under the Land Rights Act, more than 12 times the area of land handed back between 2002 and 2007.


Prime Minister, Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy 
The Prime Minister has today helped roll out the National Broadband Network in Darwin, ahead of the network being officially switched on for 2,600 homes and businesses later this week.
This is great news for the people of Darwin, with the NBN scheduled to be fully rolled out in the Northern Territory by the end of 2015.
Labor’s National Broadband Network is a world class communications network that meets Australia’s broadband needs today and into the future.
Fibre construction on the NBN has already commenced to more than 25,000 homes and businesses in Darwin.
This includes in Bayview, Casuarina, Darwin City, East Point, Eaton, Fannie Bay, The Gardens, Larrakeyah, Ludmilla, The Narrows, Parap, Stuart Park, Alawa, Anula, Leanyer, Lyons, Malak, Marrara, Moil, Tiwi, Wagaman, Wanguri and Woolner.
When it comes to broadband, the future is fibre.
That is what Labor is delivering in Darwin and right across the country.
The Coalition wants to keep the copper, using last century’s technology to hold Australia back.
The Government believes everyone deserves access to fast, reliable, affordable broadband – that’s why we’re connecting everyone to the NBN at no connection cost.
Australians deserve the world’s best communications network, which only Labor’s National Broadband Network provides.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED 
I would like to acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, the Gumatj and Rirratjingu clans of the Yolngu people, and pay my respects to their elders, past and present.
Fifty years ago, in this small community, in this remote part of paradise, two of Australia’s most important founding documents were drawn up.
Four thousand kilometres from a Canberra winter, and the bricks and mortar that represent our system of parliamentary democracy.
Far from the Houses of Parliament and from the formal courtrooms where our grievances are settled.
The Yirrkala Bark Petitions were drawn up using the ochre of the land. The bark of the trees.
The Yolngu used art in those founding documents, because that is the language of their law.
Exquisitely drawn images,
That tell the story of their relationship to the land.
And through that relationship, proclaiming their title to that land.
Their right to have a say over what happens to the land they have cared for, for thousands of years.
Then, to be doubly secure, the signatories translated that proclamation into language for people 4000km away to understand.
The language of ‘honourables’ and ‘excisions’, ‘humble petitioners’ and requests for committees of enquiry.
Two languages, but one message - of inalienable title.
The Yirrkala Bark Petitions were a documentary bridge between two noble legal traditions.
They became the first traditional documents to be recognised by an Australian Parliament.
Fifty years on, they stand among the founding documents of our nation.
Friends, we know that the hopes the signatories had of the Yirrkala Bark Petitions were not realised.
The excision of land was upheld. The bauxite mine went ahead.
A subsequent court challenge to secure land rights failed.
The bridge between our two cultures, our two laws, and our understanding of this ancient land was not yet strong enough.
Justice Blackburn himself, in refusing to recognise Aboriginal title in this place in his 1971 judgement:
“The question is not one of fact, but of law”.
One law. But not Yolngu law.
The Bark Petitions may not have effected their immediate aims.
But these crucial documents triggered a chain of historic events.
The beginnings of an understanding that there was another, older, law in place on this land.
Perhaps the most significant part of Justice Blackburn’s judgment was his statement that:
"If ever there was government by law rather than government by man then this is it."
Because it was this understanding that was the catalyst that led first to the Woodward Royal Commission.
Then, in 1976, to the passage of the Northern Territory Aboriginal Land Rights Act.
A process that culminated - three decades later - in Mabo, and the overturning of the doctrine of terra nullius.
Important changes to our nation’s laws.
But perhaps more importantly, changes to our national story.
It has been these changes that, piece by piece and over time, propelled us, compelled us, to deliver the national apology. 
On that day, it was my privilege to say sorry.
And with that word, so long needed, and once heard, to continue to strengthen the bridge between our cultures.
That bridge, which provides the foundation for our work to Close the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Today, it is the same path to change that is helping us to build support for Constitutional Recognition of Australia’s first peoples.
Another campaign, incidentally, that is deeply rooted here on the Gove Peninsula, with another bark petition.
As Prime Minister, I was proud to accept that petition from Galarrwuy Yunupingu in 2008.
From that petition, the movement for recognition has grown.
So that now, thanks to the hard work of the Expert Panel the Government appointed, we have clear recommendations for what recognition could look like.
The Parliament has passed an Act of Recognition, and established a parliamentary committee to continue work towards a referendum.
Because constitutional change must be a part of a journey that makes all Australians proud.
We must tread that path to change, together.
As I speak to you today, Australians are also gathering in Alice Springs, as the latest stop in the ‘journey to recognition’.
This long walk began in Melbourne and will culminate here in Arnhem Land at the Garma festival.
Along the way, people across Australia have become part of the movement for change.
People like Haydon, a property owner in Murray Bridge in South Australia.
As he saw the journey pass past his gate, Haydon asked what it was all about.
And when Haydon was asked whether he would vote yes, he simply said:
“Oh hell yeah.”
Fifty years on, that is the footprint of the original Yirrkala Bark Petitions.
The legacy of a group of courageous elders who spoke up for their people and against injustice.
Who asserted title to their own lands. And set out their claim in images of great power and symbolism.
Fifty years on, some of those elders are here today.
Wali Wunungmurra, Dhunggala Mununggurr, and Manunu Wunungmurra, all signatories  to the Yirrkala Bark Petitions.
And Dr Gawirrin Gumana, one of the artists who recorded the elders’ eloquent claim for land title on panels in the Yirrkala Methodist Mission Church.
Respected leaders of their people. Welcoming us onto their lands today.
Secure in the knowledge that the rights they asserted all those years ago are now recognised in the law of their country and the laws of this nation.
And their rights translating now into concrete outcomes for their people.
Since the signing of the Gove Mining Agreement with Rio Tinto in 2011 the traditional owners have a stake and a say in the bauxite mine on their land.
Importantly, local businesses and enterprises are leveraging the presence of the mine to deliver jobs and prosperity.
Today, I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government will also be supporting these efforts by traditional owners to drive local economic development, with our own $4.3 million investment in the Laynhapuy and Mangarr homelands, to make housing safer, and improve infrastructure.
An investment that will draw on the skill and energy of locals to deliver these works, to build stronger communities and a stronger local economy.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great privilege to be here today to mark the fiftieth anniversary of two remarkable and precious pieces of our nation’s documentary heritage.
Documents that proved to us all that no bridge between traditions is too hard to build.
No translation is too difficult to attempt.
And that courage and conviction can prevail.


The Prime Minister will visit Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, from 14 to 15 July 2013.
Papua New Guinea is Australia’s nearest neighbour and one of our most important bilateral partners.  
Our unique relationship is based on shared history, extensive business links, the deep friendship between our two peoples and close government ties. 
The bilateral trade and investment relationship is vibrant and growing. Two-way trade today stands at more than $7 billion, growing by 2.2 per cent in 2012. 
The level of Australian investment in PNG, including through participation in the landmark PNG LNG project, has grown five-fold in five years and today stands at $19 billion. 
In Port Moresby, the Prime Minister will meet Prime Minister Peter O’Neill to discuss priority bilateral interests, including joint work in policing and health.
With PNG and Australia playing important leadership roles in the Pacific, the Prime Ministers will also discuss cooperation on shared regional challenges.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED
I am, without apology, an optimist about our nation’s future.
Our national strengths are formidable.
Our weaknesses, compared with the rest of the world, are few.
And, if our policy settings are right, the challenges we face for the future are entirely manageable.
My optimism therefore is not based on some sort of feel-good factor.
Instead it is based on a cold, hard analysis of the facts – including our ability to manage change when change is necessary.
And the core fact is this: Australia is seen around the world as one of the strongest economies, one of the most stable societies, as well as a nation underpinned by a robust national security.
For these reasons, it is just plain wrong for anybody in our national political debate to be talking Australia down.
Of course there are things we need to reform.
The process of reform is never-ending.
But that is different to a daily diatribe of negative politics whose single objective is to cause the Australian people to feel that our national economy and our national security is on the verge of falling apart – if not now, then certainly by next Thursday afternoon.
Mr Abbott is a formidable politician.
He is the most conservative politician to become leader of the Liberal Party in its history.
He is particularly formidable in the art of negative politics.
 But a 100 per cent diet of negative politics is bad for our nation.
It is bad for national confidence.
And the truth is that it is a lazy substitute for the hard work that is needed to develop, argue and implement real policies that will change Australia for the better.
That is why Mr Abbott has so far publicly stated that he does not want to face the public scrutiny of an economic policy debate here at the National Press Club of Australia.
Today’s debate was to be about the economy.
My core argument to you today is that given the new economic challenges that Australia is now facing, what the Australian people now want to see is a debate about a clear, positive economic policy direction for their future.
Given the significant and recent decline in our terms of trade, a critical influence on jobs and on the living standards of our people, substantive economic policy debate is no longer just an option for our nation.
It has now become a necessity.
Because if we make the wrong decisions now – we will be living with those decisions for the decade ahead.
So how do we best define this core new economic challenge for the nation?
And how do we best define the most appropriate policy response to this challenge?
When I was first elected Leader of the Opposition, I argued long and hard that Australia had to prepare for the day when the resources boom was over.
You will remember I was ridiculed by then Treasurer Peter Costello for even asking the question – as if it reflected a lack of economic patriotism.
The truth is in 2013 – the China resources boom is over.
While the export of resource and commodity volumes are up, the prices we receive for them have now fallen almost 25 per cent since their peak and may well fall further.
This is reflected in our declining terms of trade from the historic highs we achieved only a year or so ago.
At their peak, our terms of trade were more than 60 per cent higher than their average across the 20th century.
Over the course of the boom beginning in 2002-03, these record terms of trade have delivered Australia around a 15 per cent boost in our national income.
Our producers have responded fantastically to these international price signals and have brought about arguably the single greatest investment phase in our history.
But now that investment phase is slowing.
Right now, we find ourselves at a cross-over point for our national economy.
A transition from an investment-intensive phase in our minerals and energy sector which has understandably pulled resources away from other sectors of the economy.
And a transition to a new phase of investment in other sectors of the economy, including the traded sector, that will now also be advantaged by a lower dollar.
Managing this economic transition is now a core task of Australian economic policy.
Critical for jobs. Critical for infrastructure.
When I was elected Prime Minister in 2007 I said the best policy response to any future change in our economic circumstances was to lift our national productivity.
I have never changed my view.
We then took action by radically increasing investment in human capital (early childhood education, school standards, school infrastructure and school funding and uncapping university places); a radical new investment in economic infrastructure (road, rail, ports and for the first time urban transport and the NBN) and a third program of regulatory harmonisation between the Commonwealth and the states.
Nine months into office, while implementing these productivity based reforms, we, together with the rest of the world, were hit by the GFC.
This was no small thing.
This was the largest financial and economic crisis faced by the international economy since the Great Depression three quarters of a century before.
We continued to implement our productivity reform agenda.
But our core economic priority, understandably, became national economic survival as we watched bank collapses around the world, depositors lose their savings and economies crash into recession with massive job losses.
As you know, here in Australia, we deployed a national economic stimulus strategy, timely targeted and temporary, which helped keep Australia out of recession, kept the economy growing, and kept unemployment with a five in front of it – one of the lowest levels in the world.
And we did so with lower levels of debt and deficit than practically all the major advanced economies in the world.
These were our core preoccupations from 2008 to 2010.
In early 2010 with the economy stabilising, as Prime Minister I returned to the theme of national productivity growth.
In January 2010, drawing on the third intergenerational report “Australia to 2050: Future Challenges”; I outlined Australia’s triple dilemma of an aging population; static to declining workforce participation rates; and slowing multi-factor productivity growth.
Just to recap: in 2010 one in seven Australians were over the age of 65, whereas by 2050 that ratio will fall to one in four.
This aging of the population is also expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent to around 60 per cent by mid-century.
And third, average labour productivity growth, which had risen to 2.1 per cent per annum during the 1990s, had fallen to 1.4 per cent in the decade just past, although it has risen to 1.6 per cent over the year to March.
Three years later, the three Ps (population, workforce participation and productivity) continue as the core economic agenda for the future.
However in prosecuting this agenda, we now face the new global and national economic circumstances which I outlined earlier, demanding that we implement a new national competitiveness agenda with a new sense of national urgency.
These global factors frame the new economic challenge that Australia faces today: how to protect our jobs and living standards given that global growth is sluggish and now the Chinese resources is slowing.
I am optimistic that we can rise to this new challenge with a clear-cut policy direction that puts productivity first, driven by a new sense of partnership between government, business and unions.
My confidence in rising to this challenge is underpinned by our economic fundamentals which we have kept strong, despite the pressures of the Global Financial Crisis.
If anyone seriously doubts this, they should ask why we were one of the few countries in the world to have a triple-A credit rating with a stable outlook from all the ratings agencies that analyse minutely Australia’s and every other country’s debt and deficit profile.
But strong macroeconomic fundamentals are not sufficient themselves to meet the urgency of the new challenge that now confronts us.
The Government will maintain a prudent approach to fiscal policy, returning the budget to surplus across the economic cycle – and as the Treasurer has recently confirmed. We will continue with our plan to return the budget to balance in the medium term.
But other economic reforms (what the economists call microeconomic reform) must also be prosecuted with a new urgency.
Because the China resources boom is coming off, Australia’s core economic strategy for the future must be one which diversifies our economy, by creating more jobs in manufacturing, food production, infrastructure, construction, and our many other services industries, rather than having all our eggs in just one basket – the resources and energy sector.
Relying on the lower dollar alone to boost competitiveness is insufficient for the great economic task that lies ahead.
That is why Australia must embrace today a new national competitiveness agenda.
If we fail to do so, in the years ahead there is a danger that Australia will begin to price itself out of international business.
The core of this new national competitiveness agenda must be a common agreement among us all that we must lift our annual productivity growth rate to 2 per cent or better for the future.
Our population should continue to be supported by a strong migration policy designed to mitigate the effects of our ageing population.
Our workforce participation policy must continue to embrace positive reforms in paid parental leave, flexible forms of childcare, as well as increased female participation in the workforce in order to keep our participation rate as high as possible.
But of the three P’s, our most critical task remains lifting our national productivity growth rate on the back of a new national competitiveness agenda.
Over the last two weeks I have met now on four occasions with the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
I have done so because I have never believed in class warfare.
I have done so because I have always believed that Australia at its best is both a nation of equity and opportunity – a nation that values enterprise, because it is enterprise that creates the jobs, as well as being a nation that values a fair go for all.
The truth is if we are to drive a new national competitiveness agenda we need to have government, business and unions working as much as possible together – pushing in the same strategic policy direction for the overall wellbeing of our national economy.
I do not have a pie in the sky attitude to all this.
There will always be disagreements.
That is normal in a market economy.
And we all have a huge interest in growing the size of the national economic pie together.
The discussions I have had in the last couple of weeks with both business and the unions have been useful in elaborating the possible content of a new national competitiveness agenda for Australia.
Thus far we have agreed on seven broad areas of necessary policy work together.
Number one: Domestic electricity price regulation in Australia, and the impact of the current carbon price as well as the future availability of competitively priced domestic gas supplies are high on the agenda.
Australian electricity prices are too high by global standards.
This affects the competitiveness of all firms large and small. Of course it also affects individual consumers.
But before you all start reaching for your revolver on the carbon price, let’s be rational about this: the carbon price at present contributes less than 10 per cent to national electricity prices.
The primary reason for the hike in electricity prices appears to be the current system of national electricity regulation which has allowed excessive rates of return for publicly-owned transmission and distribution utilities which have become cash cows for various state and territory governments.
Furthermore, reforms are needed for the supply of competitively priced gas for Australian businesses and households.
Number two: We must continue to examine any unintended rigidities arising in the labour market.
And before anyone gets too excited here, let me record as a fact that under the Fair Work Act, labour productivity in the market sector is running at nearly 2 per cent per annum – one and a half times the pace during the WorkChoices era.
Wage growth has been moderate —the Wage Price Index has grown 3.2 per cent through the year.
Industrial disputes are low – under Fair Work the rate of industrial disputes is around one third the rate in terms of days lost compared to under the Howard Government.
The Government believes the Fair Work Act represents a reasonable balance for the future.
The Government nonetheless believes some businesses are not making the most effective use of the Act to drive the productivity outcomes that they need for the future of their businesses.
What I have discussed with the BCA, the ACTU and Minister Shorten is how we can harness a greater spirit and practice of industrial cooperation to produce better outcomes for us all. Nobody has an interest in a business going bust.
A good place to start could be in respect of large greenfields projects where large numbers of Australians are employed and which represent significant levels of investment.
These projects reflect to the world the broader industrial, regulatory, and investment circumstances existing in this country – we need to make them work, and work well.
Number three: Business productivity.
The BCA itself has recently reported on problems in Australian business productivity, competent project management as well as the most effective use of capital by management.
The future of the productivity agenda therefore does not in any way lie exclusively with the labour market.
In fact some bad industrial outcomes for some major projects can be the result of bad management decisions rather than union hostility.
Business might say this is exclusively a problem for business.
I would argue, as does the BCA, that this is also a problem for the nation.
I am also concerned that if you went through our business elites, you would not find a whole lot of the top 25 executives in each of our top 100 firms who have spent any of their career time serving in Asia – the engine driver of the global economy through until mid-century.
Remember, this is the Asian Century.
The truth is Australia is much under-done in Asia beyond the resource and energy sector.
Indonesia is a classic example – an economy which by 2050 is on track to become the fourth largest economy in the world after China, India and the United States.
But at present, Indonesia does not fall within our top 10 trading partners or our top 20 investment destinations.
This is a problem of Australian enterprise. Not a problem created by Australian unions.
Number four: We need a new approach to the regulatory impost on business from all levels of government.
This particularly applies to multiple and conflicting environmental assessment requirements for state and federal governments.
Surely it lies within our wit and wisdom to begin by integrating the assessment procedures and reports at present separately mandated by the Commonwealth and the states.
Surely we should aim at having one single integrated assessment system, even if we continue to have two different decision points.
An integrated assessment system removes so much of the regulatory burden faced by businesses when trying to get a project off the ground.
I have already discussed this with Premier O’Farrell in particular and I want to take this discussion further. 
Number five: Education, skills and training.
Our national objective must be to build the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world.
Progress has been made.
We now have universal pre-school education supervised by teachers for a minimum of 15 hours a week emphasising pre literacy, pre-numeracy skills.
We now have NAPLAN to make publicly transparent the literacy and numeracy performance of all schools.
The Government’s Better Schools policy plans to invest a further $10 billion over the next six years to lift school standards and education outcomes through transparent school performance plans.
We have uncapped university places for Australian students so that we now have 190,000 more kids at university than five years ago.
We do, however, need to do more with vocational education and training, particularly given the recent withdrawal of effort by many of the states.
Number six: Infrastructure.
Infrastructure Australia is doing great work.
For the first time in the nation’s history, a national infrastructure priority list has been developed on the basis of a rigorous cost-benefit analysis.
Major projects are underway across road, rail and ports and urban transport.
More projects should be underway such as the Cross-River Rail project in Brisbane.
The NBN is being rolled out – the new infrastructure of the 21st century which of itself becomes a massive productivity driver for firms.
We do however need to embrace new forms of infrastructure financing and this forms part of an important agenda of work.
Number seven: We must improve the operating environment for small business in this country.
And we want to work with the Council of Small Business of Australia to achieve this.
This involves access to capital.
It also involves other productivity drivers such as the effective take up of the NBN.
As Prime Minister I am passionate about the future of small business.
During the course of next week, key cabinet ministers will sit down again with the BCA and business groups, and with the ACTU to hammer out agendas of work in these areas (COSBOA in the case of small business) to work out where to go next with each of these agendas.
I say again - as Prime Minister I want to bring the nation together in this new national competitiveness agenda.
It is the only way it will work.
Mr Abbott’s alternative economic agenda
 I have outlined the Government’s definition of Australia’s core economic challenge; to manage the economic transition that lies ahead by maintaining macroeconomic stability and at the same time implementing a new national competitiveness agenda.
You might well ask, at least in his absence, what Mr Abbott’s alternative economic diagnosis is.
And based on that diagnosis, what his alternative policy prescription for the national economy is.
Mr Abbott says that Australia’s core economic problem is that we are suffering from a debt and deficit crisis.
He said: ‘… there is now a budget emergency.’ (Budget Reply speech, 16 May 2013).
Mr Abbott, is a formidable politician – he is the nation’s most formidable exponent of negative politics, and negative politics above all designed to induce feelings of worry, anxiety and fear in the community.
He and the Liberal Party have concluded that fear is a far better political bet than engaging on a debate on the facts.
Which is why once again Mr Abbott refused to debate the economic facts here today.
Fact one: Despite Mr Abbott saying every day the economy is in crisis, since we have been in office the Australian economy has in fact grown by 14 per cent.
Whereas over the same period of time the economies of the United Kingdom, France and Japan have actually shrunk in size.
And those of Germany and the United States have only grown about one fifth the rate of the Australian economy.
While Canada has grown by around half our rate.
Fact two: Australia has one of the lowest levels of government debt as a percentage of our economy in the OECD.
Fact three: Australian government debt per capita is one of the lowest in the OECD.
 Fact four: Australia’s budget deficit as a proportion of the size of our economy is also one of the lowest in the OECD.
Fact five: Australia’s unemployment rate is lower than almost every major advanced economy.
So this is the factual economic report card for Australia that Mr Abbott does not want to debate today.
Let’s go to debt and deficit levels in particular – because this is what Mr Abbott has banged on about for three years now, and it will dominate Mr Abbott’s negative message for the election campaign.
Our debt level is scheduled to peak at 11.4 per cent of the size of our economy.
Of course we should always be concerned if we have a debt.
And we should always repay our debts responsibly.
But Australia has one of the lowest debt levels in the world.
Because Mr Abbott’s exaggerated claims on debt and deficit are based on a falsehood the whole house of cards he has constructed against the Government’s economic credentials, resting on the flimsy foundation of his debt and deficit attack, comes tumbling down.
Mr Abbott’s economic policy for the future is even worse.
His prescription is to implement a slash and burn austerity drive across the nation.
Well we have seen how that works in Queensland under Campbell Newman where business and consumer confidence has been shaken by the sacking of thousands of people, and the shrinking of critical government services.
We have also seen the impact of austerity drives by conservative governments in the United Kingdom which nearly produced a double dip recession, and has continued to plague growth.
Just this year, the United Kingdom recorded the largest quarterly decline in household living standards in a generation.
And please note this core fact: the British economy today is smaller than it was back in 2008.
In summary, Mr Abbott just doesn’t understand economics.
Don’t take my word for it. That is what former Treasurer Peter Costello said about Mr Abbott.
Today, I wanted to debate the future of our economy.
Mr Abbott’s absence has made such a debate impossible.
Therefore, whenever you hear Mr Abbott, Mr Hockey, Mr Robb or anyone else try and run the lines on an Australian debt and deficit crisis, remember this was the day for Mr Abbott to defend his case.
Instead, Mr Abbott decided to cut and run.
Run away from the facts.
But keep pumping out the fear.
In Mr Abbott’s absence, what I have done today is outline our framework for tackling Australia’s future economic challenges.
Australia is now an economy in transition.
A transition from the previous decade of the China resources boom.
To the decade ahead where we must now diversify our economy so that we don’t have all our eggs in one basket.
The challenge for the Australian Government is to accelerate a new national competitiveness agenda that boosts our long term productivity growth.
We need to aim for a productivity number with a “2” in front of it.
And to get there we need to bring the nation together, not pull it apart.
Australian Labor Governments know how to manage the great transitions in our economy.
We did it with the Hawke and Keating governments when they transitioned Australia from the old, closed, post-war economy to the new internationalised economy that sets us up for the future – producing 22 years of sustained economic growth and an underlying inflation rate of 2.5 per cent – a world record.
We did it again under this government when we transitioned Australia through what Paul Keating recently and eloquently described to me as the “valley of death” of the 2008-09 Great Global Recession.
And I believe we can transition Australia again, capturing the gains of the Asian Century while diversifying the Australian economy so that in the future we have all sectors, all our cities and our regional centres lifting their economic performance.
Australian Labor Governments manage transitions.
We sketch the future.
We harness the energy and ambition of our people.
And as the people’s government, we put policy to work to put the changes in place that best secures our future.
Graphs
Graph 1 - Cumulative Economic Growth under the Labor Government - growth since December quarter 2007
 Graph 1  [PDF 638kB]
Graph showing cumulative economic growth since December quarter 2007
Graph 2 - Government Net Debt of Selected OECD Countries - as a percentage of the size of the economy, as at 2012
 Graph 2  [PDF 661kB]
Graph showing Government Net Debt of selected OECD Countries
Graph 3 - Government Net Debt Per Capita
 Graph 3  [PDF 605kB]
Graph showing Government Net Debt Per Capita
Graph 4 - Comparison of Budget Balances for Selected Economies - calendar years 2012-18
 Graph 4  [PDF 646kB]
Graph of Comparison of Budget Balances for Selected Economies - calendar years 2012-18
Graph 5 - Unemployment Rates for Selected Economies
 Graph 5  [PDF 645kB]
Graph of Unemployment Rates for selected Economies
[ENDS] 
Graphs are available National Library Pandora Archive:
http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/79983/20130830-1433/www.pm.gov.au/press-o…


JOURNALIST: Your speech today took some of us of a certain age back to 1983, with talk of productivity pacts and bringing the nation together.
Bob Hawke of course famously talked about reconciliation, recovery and reconstruction, and made the accord the centrepiece of his bid for government and his subsequent governance.
How formal should this relationship be between the government, business and the unions? Do you’ll be in a position to clearly articulate where those agendas are before the election campaign? And does it provide a way of making unions a positive for Labor rather than a negative?
PM: Thanks Laura. The bottom line is, back in the 1980s, of course the then accord between the government and the trade union movement and business was based at a time of central wage fixation. We're not at that time now.
We have a much more diversified labour market and a more complex array of industrial arrangements as we should in a flexible labour market to meet the demands of the 21st century economy.
However, one of the great, shall I say, psychological products of the period of the then accord, was that it caused business and the unions to actually come together to agree what was important to grow the national economic cake.
What I've seen in recent times is too much, shall I say, just blind adversarialism and I don't point a finger in one direction or the other. It's just been too adversarial. Therefore, I'm not foreshadowing a new accord in the 1980s sense.
What I am foreshadowing – is what I said quite specifically – is a new national competitiveness agenda and with areas of work, some of which our friends in the union movement will be happy with and other agendas of work which those in the BCA will be more happy with.
But the bottom line is: we've actually got to get around a table and start talking more effectively.
You asked further what would be the likelihood of specific agenda items of work made explicit between now and whenever we face the people.
I just intend to preside over this gathering of our key ministers, BCA's key representatives and the ACTU's key representatives to work out what is now the next doable list of micro-economic reforms. Against one objective which is to lift productivity growth.
I think it's a better way to go than just, frankly, throwing bricks at each other and I think some of the politics of class warfare, however exaggerated or not exaggerated, have not served us well in the past.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Farr from News.com.au, Prime Minister. Could I go to the taxpayer-funded trip of Senator Crossin to Europe with her husband and it might seem a minor matter but I believe it joins an accumulation of instances that have damaged public faith in politics and political institutions, including journalism.
Can Senator Crossin's trip be justified as anything more than a farewell tour on the taxpayer tab? And more broadly, what would you do to strengthen faith in politics and political institutions?
PM: The truth is, Malcolm, I'm not familiar with detail of Senator Crossin's visit. In fact, the first time I discovered that Trish was in London was when I was talking to her the other day about developments in the Northern Territory. So I will let Senator Crossin speak for herself on this and I'm not across the detail.
One of the things that we sought to introduce during the Government's first term was a clear public declaration by Members of Parliament and Senators, when they travelled abroad, as to why they were travelling and to make it clear to the public the purposes of their travel and what they achieve as a result of their travel.
If that needs to be sharpened up, I'm all for sharpening it up further. I think the Australian public are just completely intolerant of people having a holiday at the taxpayers' expense. And they should be. This is serious business of the nation.
Our parliamentarians from time to time do need to travel. And let me give you one case in point through a parliamentary committee that I've recently been on. And it's the intelligence committee of the Parliament.
Dealing with complex questions of how you regulate the environment concerning freedom of information on the one hand with the necessary requirements of our intelligence agencies on the other, in the ongoing challenge of terrorism.
In dealing as they have done with both the British and Canadian Select Committees of the Parliaments on those questions, those are the sorts of engagements which are really important and shape legislation for the future. That's entirely justifiable.
But I think we need to move more in that direction than people going off for a jolly wherever that might happen.
JOURNALIST: Chris Uhlmann from the ABC. You've said in the past that you have an overwhelming preference that there be local democratic election for preselection ballots. There are five under way at the moment. It looks like the National Executive might step in.
But would you personally endorse a candidate who has never lived in the community in which they quantity to represent, has never had any connection with it until today has never expressed any interest in it and until last month wasn't a member of Labor Party?
PM: I thought it was a pretty interesting interview. And look, I don't know the person concerned. I've not met her before that I'm aware of.
Look, I think when you are going to vote for a person locally, one of the things they do look for is connection with the community.
They also look for a range of other things, the skills that you bring, and how you can actually take the cause of their community, their city or their State further in the national Parliament, they could be ministers one day or whatever.
I don't rule out people coming to a seat where they've not had a previous connection with. But I thought it was a pretty curious interview and I was a little surprised by it.
On the broader question of how we select candidates, I am out for the best possible people we can get into the Parliament of Australia.
It means therefore - I think I said this just after becoming Prime Minister - that wherever it is possible, local ballots should be held and people subjected to, frankly, the scrutiny of local party members who get to assess their relative merits or not.
If there's a time problem then you go to another mechanism.
More broadly across the Parliament, we really need to lift the standards of the Parliament in terms of the calibre of the people we get in in the future as well.
This is not a problem of any particular political party, it's systemic. I see this in many other democracies around the world. We need to encourage the brightest and best.
And frankly given the brutality of some of the preselection processes, both for the Liberals and ourselves, some of the brightest and the best don't necessarily have the hardened body armour to get through that in order to find themselves into the national Parliament.
So let's see how this lot turn out. My overwhelming preference remains local ballots.
JOURNALIST: Mark Riley from the Seven Network, Mr Rudd. You observed that electricity prices are too high. It's a pretty easy observation to make, but doing something about it has proved very difficult.
Is it your promise to Australian voters that you will reduce electricity prices and how will you go about doing that?
PM: Mark, I don't intend to make any rash promise here that I have no guarantee of delivering. That's quite wrong. Don't intend to do it.
What I have, however, been briefed on, by people who follow the electricity industry and its regulatory system, is that we have a problem with the way in which it's now being regulated.
How big or small any flow-through would be through a change in the regulatory arrangements, I do not know but I am flagging this as a key area of reform.
When I look at the fact that electricity prices in recent years have gone up, if you put the years together, by 80 or 90%.
And I think frankly when I go around, you know, small businesses in my own community, one of the things, all of them - doesn't matter what they're doing - raise with me is the cost of utilities.
And frankly as I said in my formal speech, the carbon price component of that is relatively small.
On this regulatory stuff and what States and Territories are doing for a bit of a gouge on the way through, I think that's where we have to have a very close look.
To be fair to them, if there is a problem in the regulatory system, which is nationally controlled, that's where the changes must occur.
That's why I put this at the top of the seven items of the agenda I ran through before. But I'm not going to make false promises. It's just wrong.
But I think there is a problem at mill on this. And I think we need to get to the bottom of it and bring about some changes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Phillip Hudson from the Herald Sun. In your speech, you talked about the response to the global financial crisis.
And at the time you said that we would be having a temporary deficit which I think it's now looking like 8 or 9 years before, on the current forecasts, the budget gets back to surplus.
Was Labor wrong to put so much focus on returning to surplus and having that as the core economic message at the expense of promoting the other economic positives as you've tried to do today?
And I must ask, yesterday you sent out a picture of yourself with a Norman Gunston-style shaving cut. We're not used to seeing our Prime Ministers do such things and show such intimate pictures of themselves.
PM: Unless you take them yourselves, you mean.
JOURNALIST: It received quite mixed messages on social media. I guess I'm not Robinson Crusoe, to borrow one of your phrases, to ask him why did do you it?
PM: I think we all just need to loosen up a bit and have a joke from time to time. Ever cut yourself when you’ve been shaving? Good, okay. Well I'm a human, I shave, and from time to time it bleeds.
I was also about to walk out the door and do a press conference. So you either have a spontaneous combustion on camera, which is a real possibility, or fess up to what had just happen. I decided to fess up.
But listen, I don't intend to change my ways for any sense of political correctness out there.
That's just me. People will like it, people might loathe it but frankly that's just me. I don't intend to get into the restructuring of personality business. That's not my style.
I've been dealing with people on social media for a long, long time. I get lots of positive response, I get lots of negative response. That's nature of social media.
But I'd much rather be engaging people and not just on the high policy debates that we're having today but the normal stuff which happens in a person's life.
Guess what? Prime Ministers are human and occasionally they cut themselves shaving.
On the question of debt and deficit which you raised also, look, to be absolutely fair to those who have preceded me, I think it was very difficult to foreshadow after the events of 2008-09 that the global economic recovery would be so absolutely patchy, so slow and frankly then have a compounding factor of the Chinese economy coming off as well.
Now, when facts change, it's important that you adjust accordingly. That is the core lesson I think of public policy and certainly economic policy in particular.
Remember the great exchange with Maynard Keynes in the 1930s, I think just after the general period, when people asked ‘Why, Mr Keynes, have you changed your opinion?’ To which his immortal response was ‘My dear chap, when facts change, I change. My dear chap, what do you do when facts change?’ There's something in that. It's a basic wisdom.
And so when you're dealing with such a volatile set of global economic circumstances, as all Treasurers around the world have faced over the last five years or so since the global financial crisis, and new complicating factors in our region, because of what's going on in China, then I have full sympathy for Treasurers and central agencies in governments right around world trying to read the entrails of a very unusual set of economic circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Shane Wright from the West Australian. Since the Budget, global interest rates have gone up and quite sharply on Australian Treasury yields and it's actually pushed up the interest bill for Australia by about a billion dollars over the forward estimates.
At the moment we're paying about 13 billion a year in interest, which is the equivalent of FBT and superannuation tax collections, to pay off the interest that's been garnered through the reaction to the global financial crisis.
Is it fair to future taxpayers to be saying ‘you're going to be paying another 13 billion next year and the year after and the year after in interest’, which is money that could've been better spent on infrastructure and services?
PM: Well, with respect, you haven't asked yourself the counter-factual and had the Government not intervened, with a temporary, targeted and timely national stimulus strategy as we did, what would've happened?
The economy would've gone into recession as those around the world did.
You would've also seen unemployment go through the roof as it did around the world and what are the consequences of that?
You would've had a decline in Government receipts; you would have a massive growth in Government outlays as we paid for things like the unemployment benefits bill for the nation, particularly if you went into double digit employment, which is entirely conceivable where we've been in previous recessions around the world.
In other words, had you taken the advice given to us by others, which is not to engage in a targeted stimulus strategy, then what no-one has ever answered is what would then have been the aggregate impact on overall government budget and our public debt levels?
No-one has ever actually analysed that. That's the counter-factual.
Then of course there's the second thing, which folk don't answer is, what would be the enduring social tragedy of having double digit unemployment?
I am old enough to remember when we did have double digit unemployment in the past. And we went through the recessions of the past.
This is a very unpleasant experience for families. People have been thrown out of work, often losing their homes. And as a result of that, kids growing up in households which produce the possibility of intergenerational unemployment.
I wasn't about - as Prime Minister at the time - to stand idly by and allow that to happen. I think we took exactly the right call.
And the IMF and other international institutions have concluded this was the most effective fiscal policy intervention in response not global financial crisis anywhere in the world. That's my answer to your question.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Kieran Gilbert from Sky News. If the Business Council of Australia says to you, we need to change the workplace laws, are you open to that? If you win the election, to change them or is this new cooperation within the framework of the Fair Work Act, is that set in stone?
PM: What I said quite clearly in my remarks before, is the Fair Work Act in the Government's view represents about the right balance given where we'd been before with WorkChoices.
What I went on to say further, and this has come out in some of the pretty interesting discussions with both BCA leaders and union leaders, that within the Fair Work Act, frankly, many of the mechanisms are not being best used to get the best productivity outcomes for a given firm or a given new project. That's what we want to work on.
I think the balance is about right. That's what I said before. So my response to the BCA, and I'm not saying to you anything publicly that I haven't said to them privately, is what can we do further within the Act? And let's look particularly at the future of greenfields projects and greenfields agreements to see if we can do better.
JOURNALIST: Lenore Taylor from Guardian Australia. On the carbon tax you said fairly clearly you're not going to shoot it but are you going to change it in some way, possibly by bringing forward the floating price?
And just in terms of your remarks on the surplus and returning to surplus, will you return to surplus along the, on the same time frame as outlined in the Budget and would it matter if that shifted a little bit to achieve what you're trying to achieve?
PM: On the surplus question, the Treasurer and I have both made statements about that and we're committed to returning the Budget to balance in 2015-16.
And on your first question, can I say, there is a thing called a Cabinet process and Cabinet continues to work through a range of policy matters. I'm sure part of that agenda deals with the future of the carbon price as well.
As you know, these are complex questions and people shouldn't be shooting from the hip. I don't intend to.
JOURNALIST: Mark Kenny, Mr Rudd, from The Age and Sydney Morning Herald. I might get into a bit of programmatic specificity if I can with you. On parental leave, Tony Abbott has a more generous scheme than the government currently has legislated.
I’m wondering, would you consider changes to that scheme, particularly to address the gap in superannuation payments that women would suffer under your scheme as compared to his?
PM: Well of course Mr Abbott's scheme is a huge slug on business. This comes from the so-called pro-business party: the Liberal Party.
And my private conversations with a number of large firms indicate they’re not looking forward to this Bill coming forward.
Second point I’d make is, guess what? My knowledge of Australian business is that they’re not a bunch of philanthropists.
They’ll say ‘oh this is a really good thing to do, we'll absorb all of that and you the consumers won't actually pick up any of the bill on the way through’. Well pigs might fly.
We know what’s going to happen, which is when this impost hits business, it will flow through to consumers. In other words, it's a hidden tax and it will therefore be a hidden increase in consumer prices. That's just the truth of it.
We spent a lot of time working through paid parental leave and as Prime Minister in 2010, we launched this. It was the right thing.
Look, it's not most generous scheme in the world. I know that. But against where we were before, where we had nothing, this represents a serious helping hand to parents when they are confronted with the initial challenges of having a new munchkin running around the living room.
So I think that given our budgetary circumstances, I think it's about right. We'd all wish to be Santa Claus and write out cheques. I'm not in that business because we have to maintain our fiscal discipline as well as attend to the core economic agenda that I outlined before.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'd like to ask a question about the asylum seeker debate. I've seen some projections where if current rates are continued, we'll have about 100,000 asylum seekers in the next term of the Government.
Do you believe that the boats can be stopped? If so, what is your policy to stop the boats? Also, could you update us on when the conference announced by SBY is actually going to be held?
And could you enlighten us as to what you might say to Iran, Afghanistan or Myanmar, some of the origin countries that might prevent some of these people leaving those jurisdictions?
PM: Thank you, Sid. This is an important question for Australia. And it's an important question which doesn't deserve glib answers from anybody, either our side of politics or Mr Abbott's side of politics.
I think the one step forward that we've got from the Indonesians is the recent statement which you pointed to, Sid. President Yudhoyono off his own bat said he will host a regional conference of ministers.
On the timing of that, I would expect it would happen within months. And possibly even shorter than that. But I leave that to the host country, because it's a matter for them to sort through.
It also depends on the availability of ministers from a range of other countries, source countries and transit countries.
But the importance of SBY's statement the other day was him saying very loudly and very clearly that he accepts that this is a problem for us all, not just a problem for Australia. That's an important step forward.
Second point I'd make is: I think one of the advantages to be achieved through such a conference is where a regional ministerial meeting could go, for example, with regional visa regimes. That is, visas and regimes which allow too easy access to various countries in the region.
I know there's work going on that but it's complex given the relationships which exist between some source countries and transit countries.
Also, of course, we have a review under way, as is publicly known, concerning the assessment procedures for asylum seekers in Australia itself as currently enforced by the Department of Immigration and the individual decision makers for individual cases.
The truth is Australia's acceptance rate for bona fide asylum seekers is very high by global standards. That’s the truth of it.
And the reason why the Government is having a close look at this is: is that because we have a unique set of asylum seekers coming here or is it because our assessment procedures need to be tightened up?
There are three practical areas of work that we're working on but I'm not about to respond to your question, Sid, with my own three-word slogan. I think the Australian people are too intelligent to tolerate that sort of thing from us or anybody else.
It's a real problem. It's a growing problem. I accept that. I recognise it. And we are required therefore to adjust our policy against these new facts. I've been signalling that quite plainly in recent times.
JOURNALIST: Paul Bongiorno, Ten News, Prime Minister. Tony Abbott has described your reforms on the way in which the parliamentary leader of the Labor Party would be elected as sham reforms. And if you do look a little closer at it, while caucus may overwhelmingly endorse your reforms, you do need the Labor Party to implement them, especially if you want the 40,000 members to vote.
We know at the 2010 national conference the unions wouldn't have a bar of it and it didn't get off the ground at all. How confident are you that this reform, dear to your heart, will in fact survive the election?
PM: Well, the first thing I would say to Mr Abbott is he should try it out. Open up the Liberal Party to a bit of democracy. There are not just a few closed darkened rooms in the Labor Party when it comes to preselection decisions or dare I say it so-called factional decisions. You talk to the Liberals at Parliament house, they're always talking about the left, the right, the right and the left, the left right out and the rest.
So I think it is good for all modern political parties to throw the doors open and democratise their procedures. There's nothing to be feared from anyone who aspires to the leadership, of my party or Mr Abbott's party, to put themselves before a much wider audience which comes from the broad community as well.
My second point is that, as I said the other day, Paul, this will matter will go to a certainly meeting of the Parliamentary Labor Party on 22nd of July.
I've put forward my arguments for it. I'm sure there’s going to be a robust discussion, as there was a robust discussion the other day in the meeting of the full ministry, which went on for, from memory, about three hours.
So the Labor Party takes these rule changes seriously but I’ve got to say this is the pathway to the future. This is what we’ve got to do. The pathway for Labor in the future is to represent a much broader based political party than perhaps we have in the past.
As Prime Minister, I see part of my responsibilities as being a Prime Minister for those, for example, who cannot work through disability. A Prime Minister for those who can't get a job and they want to, the unemployed.
I see myself as a Prime Minister for knows who are in employment and standing up for fair pay and conditions. I also see myself as a Prime Minister for those who choose to leave paid employment and invest in their own businesses and grow their own businesses to provide employment for others.
This is therefore a broad church and I'm saying the Australian Labor Party should be as comfortable for people who've decided to go out there and grow their own business as for people who've been traditionally members of the Australian trade union movement. That's the signal I'm sending across the country and to the members of the party in particular.
JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan from the Conversation. Mr Rudd, just to take a little further your reform package, some have suggested that your 75 per cent trigger point for the leadership to be reviewed is too high for the party in opposition.
Are you willing to be at all flexible on the package you have put forward and do you think there is an argument for a different level, say 50 per cent, in opposition? That is a distinction, on this question, between a Prime Minister and an Opposition Leader.
PM: I think the core reason for this reform, the core reason for this reform, is so that the Australian people, when they vote for a Prime Minister, they get that Prime Minister. And they know that Prime Minister is going to be there for that term of the Parliament.
Secondly, in terms of another reason why this reform is necessary, as I said before, it's time for the Australian Labor Party to throw the windows of the show open and let a bit of fresh air in. I think that is not going to do anyone any harm in terms of new people, new members from a vast array of different backgrounds.
Thirdly, in terms of the dynamics of opposition, Michelle, as I said in my introductory press conference the other night, in opposition that is a separate conversation, I think, for Caucus colleagues. I'm more concerned, frankly, about what happens in Government and I'm pretty relaxed about that but at the same time, we've got to make sure that we have leadership predictability.
The core thing for this reform is to make sure that we have a clear answer to the Australian public when they say ‘if we vote for this person, will they be our Prime Minister after the election if he or she is elected as Prime Minister?’ That's what's necessary. We've had a difficult period in recent years on this. That's the answer which needs to be given.
As I said in the press conference the other day, on the question of if we are in a period of opposition, I'm open to a discussion with the colleagues about that. That is for me is a secondary concern.
JOURNALIST: Paul Osborne from Australian Associated Press. I just have a double-barrelled question. One is: the jobless rate obviously went up today to 5.7 per cent. In Tasmania it's 8.9. Do you have any specific plans to address the very low level of unemployment assistance, which is about $35 a day for a single unemployed person?
And secondly, on a completely separate matter, we hear from our PNG correspondent that you're going to PNG next week. What's your agenda for that trip?
PM: We are putting out a statement later on this afternoon. I’m going to PNG. I will be in Cairns just before then, I'm talking about Sunday. I've been speaking to Prime Minister O'Neill. It is important that I use this period to speak with our regional political leaders.
I've met with the President of East Timor just a few days ago. About a week or so ago, I met with the President of Indonesia. I think it's important I spend some time with Prime Minister O'Neill.
There are two big questions on the agenda with PNG at a bilateral level. Number one is the future of their massive new gas project. As you know, there is significant Australian equity in that project.
Number two, the Prime Minister has also raised with me, on the telephone, concerns that he has about the law and order challenge in a number of PNG's major cities, and so I want to deal with that.
So if we can reach an arrangement whereby we can cooperate better with PNG to lift the levels of security on the streets of the bigger cities, then I think that going to help Australian investors, the Australian business community, as well as the good people of PNG.
The third thing he raised with me, by the way, is about the state of PNG's hospitals. Through the aid program, I remember, in my previous incarnation, working on a plan to get basic pharmaceuticals and medical supplies out to district health clinics right across remote PNG.
That is being rolled out and has been a very effective program. In the so-called referral hospitals within PNG, and there is about six or seven of them, frankly we have a real problem.
Moresby's hospital is on the improve, however if we look at places like, I think, Lae and Madang, there is a lot of work to be done.
So what we’re going to try and look at is how we, through the aid program, work at hospital management teams which can be drawn from Australian experience and expertise, to harness the sort of nursing staff and sort of medical staff and equipment into properly a functioning major referral hospitals.
And your earlier question I have now lost track of.
JOURNALIST: The earlier question was about unemployment support.
PM: On unemployment, and, yes, I'm conscious of the fact that we have a very large level of unemployment in Tasmania and I look forward to spending some time with the Premier soon on what we can do further in that State.
I've mentioned before also the increase in unemployment, I think, worryingly in my own State of Queensland.
I feel that on the ground as I walk around my own community, in my electorate, talking to people who are concerned about their job security, and it is affecting business confidence and frankly it's flowing through in terms of the ability of small businesses to keep their doors open in some sectors.
On the question of unemployment benefits, can I say, that question along with others that have been floated with me, including supporting parents payments will be the subject of further discussion by the Cabinet.
I don't want to make false promises and create expectations which can't be realised, but obviously we as a government are concerned about these genuine social challenges, and we will be doing what we can in these areas. Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


I don’t know about the rest of you, and I know I have no official capacity to this, but I think all Australians would like today to be declared Ashton Agar Day.
This is a young man who’s just given such absolute delight to every Australian overnight, whether you're a cricket fan or not.
The look of enthusiasm on this young man’s face was enough to put a spring in the step of everyone this morning right across the country.
So Ashton, well done mate, the country’s proud of you and there’s no pressure, but we expect this to be repeated every test match!
Thank you to the folk at Mary Ryan’s for hosting today’s launch.
It’s an old truism that a town isn’t a real town without a bookstore.
Certainly in my local community on Brisbane’s Southside, as a family we have spent a lot of time over a lot of years sipping coffees at our local bookstore Riverbend – in fact I’ll be there this evening.
I believe in books.
I believe in the power of ideas.
I believe in the importance of debating ideas.
The American novelist and essayist William Styron once said that “a good book should leave you ... slightly exhausted at the end”.
By that measure, Nick Cater’s The Lucky Culture is a very good book indeed.
Good enough, apparently, to warrant a launch in every capital city and quite a few regional population centres.
In fact, this launch is the literary equivalent of Dame Nellie Melba’s farewells – they never seem to stop.
I’m not sure what the statute of limitations on launches is.
Everyone will eventually have read his book because everyone - eventually - will have launched it somewhere.
But Nick, I don’t quite know how the locals will take to your description of the “parched nature strips of twenty-first century suburban Brisbane”, reflecting the “arid intellectual climate in which mankind [is] no longer master of its destiny”.
Sounds a little bit like southern intellectual snobbery to me Nick.
But then, Nick himself, in the prologue to The Lucky Culture, has encouraged robust feedback on his writing.
There’s even a blogspot for the purpose.
So here is my humble contribution to the blog.
There’s no denying that The Lucky Culture is an entertaining read.
By turns both amusing and provoking.
There is the occasional jolt of recognition.
A barb that wounds. A caught reflection that reveals one’s less photogenic side – Norman Gunston eat your heart out.
The Labor Party certainly does not escape criticism.
Nor should it.
But there are also many moments in the reading of The Lucky Culture when the author’s aggrieved tone and generalisations sit oddly with the facts.
It’s the kind of book that seems imbued with a sense of disappointment.
As if written by someone rudely woken from a dream.
Nick Cater arrived in Australia in 1989 to a land he perceived as free from class distinctions.
An egalitarian land free from bombast, where pretentions were sorted out quick-smart.
A place where you might be better off than someone else, without ever feeling you were therefore somehow better than someone else.
It’s an egalitarianism that the author glimpsed from his taxi window, driving from the airport to the city on his first day as a new chum.
An egalitarianism he traces back to the very foundations of the nation.
Or at least its colonial foundations, because in the book, Indigenous Australia seems curiously invisible, its influence on our national character almost negligible.
So much so that he announces in his prologue that when he uses the term “settled” Australia, it should be regarded as a “value-neutral” reference to the country post 1788.
Nick, much of the troubled part of our history since 1788 has been because we refused to come to terms with the fact that form most of our settled history, we have treated our Aboriginal brothers and sisters with contempt.
And through a painful national process of reconciliation, we are finally seeking to put wrongs to rights in this most elemental exercise of egalitarianism.
Nick Cater’s central grievance is that this sturdy, no-bulldust egalitarianism has given way, over recent years, to a new social class, a new elite.
A class of university-over-educated men and women who, for the first time in our history, don’t just feel better off than their fellows, but better full-stop.
And who think they are entitled to look down on those who do not share their world view.
For the first time, Nick asserts, snobbery has become part of our national character.
But I wonder if perhaps the Australia which Nick Cater glimpsed on that first taxi ride from the airport, back in 1989, a view obviously formed by his reading of D H Lawrence was in fact a realistic glimpse.
Yes, by world standards we have indeed always been a classless society.
More classless certainly than the England from which Nick Cater fled.
And the England from which my forebear was much less ceremoniously exported in 1790.
And unlike Nick, without having to pay his fare.
But this book’s rather romantic view of convicts working in harmony with their jailors and jolly migrants making their unimpeded way from fruit-picker to millionaire, must surely be tempered just a little by social and economic reality.
And by political movements such as our own which have sought to reform that reality for the betterment of those brought up on the wrong side of the tracks.
Ponder for a moment the following list.
Port Arthur.
Sarah Island.
Moreton Bay.
The Parramatta Female Factory.
Myall Creek.
Lambing Flat.
The Eureka Stockade.
Brisbane’s Bread and Blood riots.
The 1890 Maritime Strike.
The 1891 Shearer’s Strike.
The 1917 food riots.
The New Guard.
Wave Hill.
Chapters in the history of our egalitarian society that are surely worth at least a footnote on what Geoffrey Blainey, has called our national ‘balance sheet’.
Curiously, the author Nick Cater does invoke to support his thesis of a classless past is Henry Handel Richardson.
But surely if The Getting of Wisdom shows anything it is that snobbery was alive and well, and rolling its eyes in derision, in 1910 Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, as a library-card-carrying member of the club Nick Cater despises in this book, I crave a moment for self-defence.
I’m a positive person. An optimist.
I believe this nation’s best days lie ahead not behind.
The reforms Nick excoriates in The Lucky Culture are ones that I believe have made us a more egalitarian place.
Certainly they have transformed my life and my prospects.
Foremost among these reforms, a fine education – first at a great government school.
Followed by a quality tertiary education at a great public university.
Both the beneficiaries of Labor Government reforms by the man Nick Cater seems to criticise the most – E.G Whitlam.
At high school our first proper library for my final year.
At university, free access and a living allowance for kids like me whose mothers had scrimped and saved with the remote hope that her youngest kid might one day benefit from a university education.
Nick, these were deeply egalitarian reforms.
And they replaced a system infinitely less accessible to rural working class kids like me.
Education reform.
Law reform.
Cultural reform.
By the time I left school it was barely a decade since the lifting of the marriage bar that required women public servants to resign their jobs if they married.
My school-leaving coincided with the passage of the Racial Discrimination Act.
With Gough Whitlam trickling a handful of sand into the palm of Vincent Lingiari.
Acts and moments that have strengthened our sense of egalitarianism, not weakened them.
I speak of our real, our lived, our flesh and blood, egalitarianism.
And Nick, one that gave this young Australian an example of equality of opportunity and its capacity to transform lives.
One that has a little less of Nick Cater’s beloved Mick Dundee about it, perhaps.
But one that may be truer to who we are as a people.
Whether we live in the bush or the city.
Whether we are a plumber or a paediatrician or a prime minister.
As for our national capacity to prick the balloon of self-importance of our political elites, we don’t need to look much further than the television series The Hollowmen.
I’ve wanted to go to Antarctica for ages.
But ever since the The Hollowmen episode that made a Prime Ministerial trip to Antarctica as a perfect media diversion, I’ve been too petrified to even think of it.
This is a remorseless satire on the very elites Nick Cater insists are taking over our nation, shutting down our debates and stifling our opinions.
Thankfully, we can apparently still openly mock these elites on prime-time television.
And write freely about them, in books like this one.
It’s a freedom I am glad of.
Whatever Nick Cater may suggest, none of us wants to have our world view indulged and endorsed by everything we read.
We need polemics like The Lucky Culture to prick us, to goad us.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a brave author who includes the word “Lucky” in his title.
The word instantly evokes, as I am sure it intends to, Donald Horne’s mid-60s clarion call, The Lucky Country.
A call to shake off the self-satisfied reverie Horne believed had held back Australia’s intellectual and artistic development.
A call to harness our great qualities, and make of these a great nation.
I’ve always been of the view that in this country we must make our own luck.
This in fact was the cultural point of my address to the National Press Club yesterday.
We once thought we were lucky to ride on the sheep’s back.
Then we thought we were lucky to be able to dig anything out of the ground that mother nature had fortunately put there.
The truth is this all took hard work.
As does out next challenge.
To manage the transition from our current economy and the end of the China resources boom, to our future economy which diversifies our economic base to build the new industries of tomorrow.
Implementing a new national competitiveness agenda for Australia is not about luck.
It is about hard work.
Hard work to tap new domestic gas fields to lower our energy prices.
Hard work to get the best productivity outcomes under the Fair Work Act.
Hard work to get the best entrepreneurial leadership to create the new businesses of the future, and the new global markets they will serve.
Hard work to protect the environment, but also, to streamline assessment processes so that we get the best outcomes for both the economy and the environment.
Hard work to create the best educated workforce in the world.
That’s why I'm catching up with Campbell Newman today.
I mean to ask Campbell Newman to sign on to the Better Schools Plan for Australia, to invest another $3.8 billion into the schools of Queensland and to Queensland schoolkids.
Hard work to build world-class infrastructure that reduces our tyranny of distance.
Again that’s why I'm meeting Premier Campbell Newman today.
Again I’ll be asking Premier Campbell Newman to sign onto, to honour his original agreement to co-fund and co-invest in the Brisbane Cross-River Rail infrastructure for the future.
And let me tell you, there is nothing more egalitarian than hard work.
It is not the stuff of elites.
It is the stuff that offers opportunity and reward for all.
We’ve come through economic challenges that have brought older, less agile nations to their knees.
We are engaging in our region as never before.
As one of the top dozen economies in the world and an active contributor to global affairs, we are seated at the important tables, for the big conversations.
Next year, this fair city hosts G20 – the world’s foremost economic collaboration forum.
Donald Horne wouldn’t recognise the Australia I see when I’m out and about every day.
My concern is that maybe Nick doesn’t either.
Maybe we just see and experience different realities within the same country which we both love.
So let’s keep the dialogue open, fresh and robust.
Nick has certainly done that in his book.
I’ve wanted to accord him the respect of doing the same today.
So thank you to Nick and to HarperCollins for the opportunity to be a part of what is turning into more of a festival of book launches rather than a single event.
But let us above all celebrate the power of ideas, and the debate of ideas in shaping our nation’s future.
[ENDS] 


Subject(s): Asylum seeker vessel in distress
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the situation with this latest boat that seems to have foundered off the coast, is it becoming critical that something just has to be done to break this nexus because more and more people are dying every week?
PM: Let me just say this about the announcement made by Minister Jason Clare this morning: firstly, I am deeply saddened and disturbed by, obviously, the news that a young child has lost its life in this incident.
I’m advised that the vessel in question had some 90-odd people on board. I’m further advised that 88 people, so far, have been recovered.
And I am advised that there is also a search and rescue operation underway.
I would, obviously, want to thank our Naval personnel and all of those who, themselves, put their lives at risk in undertaking these very complex operations at sea.
The loss of any child’s life, or of any person’s life, at sea, in these sorts of circumstances, is a genuine human tragedy.
This tragedy underlines the absolute importance for Australia to continue to adjust its policies to meet changing circumstances in the region and in the world when it comes to border security.
That is why our response in terms of elevating the work we do cooperatively with the Indonesians and others is now urgent.
That is why other measures in terms of the continued adjustment of our border protection policy are also critical.
We will continue to adjust our policies as appropriate – that’s the right thing to do.
And, regrettably, this tragic human event, this human tragedy, reinforces the absolute need to continue to adjust our policies.
JOURNALIST: Don’t you need something bigger than adjustments, though, to deal with what seems to be happening on a more and more regular basis?
PM: Right across our region there are events occurring which affect the flow of people and the actions of human smugglers, and, of people smugglers, and this is one part of that. And it’s a tragic part of it.
What we’re seeking to do is to work at multiple levels: working with the source countries; working with our police and intelligence agencies; working with transit countries; working on the high seas; working on visa arrangements; working on, also, the criteria which are used by decision makers in Australia on whether a person has bona fide refugee status or not.
This is an absolute priority for me, an absolute priority for the Government, to continue to adjust our policy to changing circumstances.
And I will have more to say about this. Thanks.


PM: I'm here obviously to do some work with the Cairns City Council, an important project, to upgrade the Cairns CBD.
This is an important centre of Australian tourism. The Cairns City Council have asked us for a federal injection of $4.6 million.
I'm here today with our candidate Billy Gordon to announce that's exactly what we are doing, investing $4.6 million here into Cairns.
The reason we are doing that is because this city has got to look spick and span for the future - that's what the mayor's told me - in order to continue to attract tourists not just from Japan, not just from China, but right across the world.
This is our one investment on the beautification of the Cairns CBD.
As someone told me, Mr Abbott was here recently and said it was beautiful enough and didn't need further injection.
I simply listened to the local government, and that's what they've asked for and that's what we are going to support.
A word or two about Billy Gordon, our candidate. This fellow has been born and bred in Far North Queensland.
On top of that, he's been an army reservist; on top of that he’s been a bloke with a passion for this local community and how we can turn Far North Queensland to an even better place for the locals to live and for a stronger local economy, as well.
We were talking just before about his opponent Warren Entsch, and let me just say a word or two about Warren Entsch.
Warren Entsch talks a big game in Canberra, he talks a big game here in Far North Queensland.
But when it comes to the vote, he votes for Tony Abbott to disconnect people's local broadband, to vote against the funding for the Bruce Highway and to vote against, or not support, the funding for this project here.
So you can talk a big game up here in Cairns about what a strong local member you are, but if in Canberra you don't go and argue the case and deliver real investment for your community, well frankly, it's all pretty hollow.
Let me just say one or two things about what this Government of ours has been doing in Cairns and Far North Queensland.
I do this particularly for the benefit of our friends in the local media and the local community, because it's worthwhile putting the record squarely on the wall.
Here in Far North Queensland we have invested $133 million in funding 66 new school libraries, 23 multipurpose halls, 7 science and language centres and some 49 new classrooms.
I think that's a big investment in education.
In our local secondary schools we have installed more than 7000 new computers to make sure there is no digital divide between the kids up here in the Far North part of the Queensland and kids elsewhere in Australia.
Trades training centres - we have built seven trades training centres right across Far North Queensland, a total budget of just under $20 million.
Then I look at the university, James Cook University. We have put a massive amount in funding in there.
The dental school, which we funded some $52.5 million and on top of that the Cairns Institute, itself worth now some $20 million and I understand it will be open very soon.
These are big investments in a very important institution for the Far North Queensland local economy.
On top of that, let me just say one more thing about education.
I was talking to Premier Campbell Newman on Friday in Brisbane about getting behind the Better Schools Plan for Australia's future.
Under the Better Schools plan - this is a really important figure - if Campbell Newman was to agree with us, it would mean $3.8 billion invested more in our schools across Queensland over the next six years.
That's a lot of money. Let me give you an example.
In Cairns State High School it would result in an additional $12.6 million over six years. An additional $2 million - in fact, a little bit more - each year.
So I'd say to Premier Campbell Newman, get with this project to build better schools for Cairns and for Far North Queensland. The money is so important.
Then I go to health and hospital services. Out here at Cairns Base Hospital we have invested just under $10 million to establish a regional cancer care centre.
It's one of about 20 we have done around the country so that people who don't live in the capital cities get first class cancer care here in regional Australia.
On top of that, we have invested some $12 million into the planned procedure centre, $14 million into a 16 bed rehabilitation unit, as well as, as I said before, the investment we've made into the dental school out here at the university.
We have funded $5 million for the Cairns GP super clinic; we've established Medicare Local here in Cairns as well. These are important local initiatives.
DisabilityCare, which we have just launched nationwide; when it's up and running we'll have some 2800 people here in Far North Queensland supported by DisabilityCare Australia.
That's a really important Australian Labor Government initiative.
If I go through the rest, paid parental leave, an important reform for our country, here in Far North Queensland we've already got 2100 local families drawing upon paid parental leave.
And roads, roads, roads. Here in Cairns, $150 million to do the upgrade of the Bruce Highway in Cairns southern suburbs, part of a $5.7 billion dollar investment right across Queensland to upgrade the Bruce Highway.
Let me just put that into context.
We've been in office for just under six years. We've invested and are committed to $5.7 billion worth of investment, and we have been in office for just under six years.
Mr Howard, in his period in office which was about 12 years, spent about $1.3 billion on the Bruce Highway.
So let me just put it into context. On the Bruce Highway, this Australian Government has invested more than four times the amount of what Mr Howard's Government invested, and in less than half the time.
So if I hear any hypocrisy from the Liberal National Party on who is investing what in the Bruce Highway, you need to know these facts and figures.
Can I say overall this has been a good opportunity to spend time with Billy today and catch up with local supporters and members, and also members of the public.
This election campaign is going to be a marathon, and it's going to be very tough to pick who is going to win come election day, whenever election day is held.
But we have got to have good runners in the race. This bloke is a good runner in the race, I'm backing him all the way. Billy, say a few things, and off we go.
BILLY GORDON, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR LEICHHARDT: I wanted to first of all say thanks very much for the Prime Minister’s visit here today and I want to thank all the supporters who have come out today.
I want to touch on something the Prime Minister talked about.
He talked about real investment for Far North Queensland.
We need to start thinking about what the roads, what our infrastructure, what our spending has been here in the southern corridor.
I live across the road from the Southern Access Bypass, I see firsthand exactly what a real investment looks like. I see it on a daily basis when I'm travelling here to work.
What we need is more than chocolate roses here in Far North Queensland, what we need here is more than crocodile skin boots; we need real people to stand up for the real people of Far North Queensland. Thank you.
PM: It's great also to be here, of course, with your local Senator Jan McLucas, who’s a Minister in our Government, and also Catherine King, who is in our Cabinet and she’s the Minister for Regional Australia, and that's why she's here, to support Far North Queensland.
Any questions, folks?
JOURNALIST: In regards to the ETS, there were plans for that underway with Julia Gillard. What’s different with your plan?
PM: The Cabinet is working towards a floating price for carbon rather than a fixed price.
The Government is moving in this direction because a floating price takes cost of living pressures off Australian families, and still protects the environment and acts on climate change.
We have still got fair bit of budget work to do because this has to be a budget neutral undertaking. But that work’s under way with the Cabinet committees.
JOURNALIST: So where are the several billion dollars’ worth of cuts going to be made?
PM: The Treasurer and others are working on this proposal. It necessarily has to be budget neutral.
The key thing though is that with this change, it would mean that Australian families have less cost of living pressures and it would also mean strong action still on the environment and climate change.
I just add on that, on climate change, this is the Government that ratified Kyoto, this is the Government that brought in the 20 per cent mandatory Renewable Energy Target, this is the Government which has also brought in a carbon price.
What I've spoken about today is the move to a floating price.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect Prime Minister O'Neill to raise a pretty scathing report, the second one by the UNHCR, on Manus Island when you talk with him?
PM: The reason I'm going to Papua New Guinea, is based on a conversation I had with Premier O’Neill in Brisbane not long ago.
The number one reason is that here in Far North Queensland, there is huge economic engagement with Papua New Guinea.
We want to make that closer and better and mutually profitable for both business communities. I've spoken to the head of your local Chamber of Commerce about that today.
The second reason is that in Papua New Guinea, the Prime Minister has told me they have real law and order problems in some of their major cities.
That concerns me. I'm going to be talking to him about what we can do to enhance our cooperation there.
Also, there are genuine issues with their hospital system where some of the major referral hospitals are not functioning properly.
Obviously, I'll be accompanied by the Trade Minister, Richard Marles and I’ll be accompanied by the immigration Minister Tony Burke and we’ll be dealing with any other issues which are raised on the PNG by side.
JOURNALIST: Do you expect that to be raised? It was a pretty scathing second report on the conditions at that-
PM: The thing about a Government visit to our nearest neighbour, Papua New Guinea, is that the Papua New Guinea Prime Minister will inevitably raise what's on his mind.
I have a very open mind to dealing with his set of challenges and ours and obviously the ongoing implementation with existing immigration arrangements with Australia.
JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott wants to abolish the ETS. Why don’t you do the same?
PM: Mr Abbott has said that he thinks climate change is crap - that's what he said - word for word. That's not what I have said that he said, that's what he said.
So he would just like to wish climate change away, pretend it's not going to happen.
As for his so-called direct action model, it won't work and it will cause a huge, huge financial impost on Australian business.
Around the world, people are moving towards a floating price on carbon. It's the case in Europe. It's also being experimented with in one form or another in China and in other economies as well.
You can't just stick your head in the sand and pretend that climate change is not happening. It is.
Therefore, the responsible answer to the climate change challenge is what are we going to do about it.
We have three sets of actions. We've ratified Kyoto, we've brought in a Renewable Energy Target of 20 per cent of total electricity generation by 2020, and thirdly, we have a price on carbon.
And also, if this new direction is taken and supported through our Cabinet budget review committee process, then of course we would have a floating price.
See you later.
[ENDS] 


Prime Minister, Minister for Regional Australia
The Rudd Labor Government will deliver up to $4.8 million to help to transform the Cairns central business district ahead of next year’s G20 meeting.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and the Minister for Regional Australia, Catherine King, today announced the funding in Cairns as part of the Government’s continued commitment to the economic development of northern Queensland.
Improvements to the CBD will make public transport more efficient, and remodel the city centre to link the esplanade, convention centre, cruise liner terminal and city port.
This overhaul for the city centre of Cairns is well overdue.
The project will drive increased spending in the city centre, stimulating small business activity and local and tourist spending.
This in turn will generate new employment opportunities, with more than 120 jobs expected to be created in the construction phase, and ongoing employment opportunities in the revitalised retail and services sector.
Cairns will be in the global spotlight next year as it hosts the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting, and the funding will also allow for the creation of more green space through the city centre, as well as improving access for vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
The Government had been working with the northern Queensland Regional Development Australia committees and stakeholders to identify priorities to support growth.
Infrastructure, tropical knowledge, agriculture, mining and tourism have been identified as priority areas.
The northern Queensland region generates approximately $60 billion in gross regional product annually from mining, agriculture, energy, education and tourism.
The area has an exciting future and Labor is committed to unlocking the region’s future growth through investment and support. 


Port Moresby, PNG
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announced today that the Australian Government will increase support for health and hospitals in Papua New Guinea to help save lives.
Support for improved health in Papua New Guinea is a key agreed priority under the Australia-Papua New Guinea Partnership for Development.
The Australian Government will provide just over $160 million over four years to 2016.
This additional funding will ensure continued availability of quality assured medical supplies for 2,700 health facilities across Papua New Guinea. It will build on Australia’s existing support for pharmaceuticals procurement and distribution.
Australian funding will also support the rehabilitation of rural and remote health facilities in Western Highlands, Eastern Highlands, Milne Bay, Western Province and Bougainville, which have some of the poorest health indicators in the country.
Funding will also be directed toward refurbishing and expanding training schools and colleges for nurses, midwives and other health workers.
The quality and amount of health infrastructure throughout Papua New Guinea is inadequate for Papua New Guinea’s fast-growing population. The additional funding will help improve the quality of primary health services.
Australia’s support would also improve the retention of health workers which is currently a significant problem. 


Prime Minister, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Rockhampton
The Prime Minister and Agriculture Minister today announced $2.5 million in funding for the next Beef Australia expo in Rockhampton to showcase Australia’s cattle industry, to support jobs and to secure new markets.
The expo is the largest and most significant cattle industry event in the country and will benefit many of the 184,000 Australians employed in agriculture and meat processing by promoting our cattle and industry technology on the international stage.
The Rudd Government is committed to securing jobs in the cattle industry and recently announced a $60 million funding package to build the meat supply chain and improve long-term trade and investment opportunities between Australia and Indonesia.
Australia is the world’s second largest exporter of beef and showcasing our first-class industry to international markets will help promote trade and ensure jobs into the future.
Beef Australia 2012 attracted 85,000 people including delegates from more than 35 countries.
With the value of production of Australia’s cattle industry estimated to be worth $7.4 billion in 2012-13 and beef and live cattle exports estimated to be worth $5.2 billion in 2012–13, events like Beef Australia are integral for the future of our economy.
Beef Australia 2015 will be held in Rockhampton, Queensland from 4–9 May 2015. 


The Rudd Government will deliver up to $5.3 million to upgrade Townsville’s Tony Ireland Stadium to help secure the future of cricket and football in north Queensland.
The Prime Minister and Minister for Regional Australia today announced the funding in Townsville as part of the Government’s economic development plan for northern Queensland.
This funding will be matched by the Townsville City Council to deliver the $10.6 million project.
The 10,000-seat Tony Ireland Stadium is the only professional grade AFL and cricket facility in northern Queensland but its lighting prevents the staging and televising of most national and international matches.
That will change once the lighting and stadium upgrade has been completed.
This is good news for tourism and the economy, and it is good news for the north Queensland community.
Local families, schools and teams of all abilities and ages will be able to use a top-class facilities right in the backyard.
And it will allow Townsville to bring national international standard events to the Tony Ireland Stadium.
This upgrade will improve lighting from 200 lux to 1200 lux intensity, reinforce existing light poles, involve significant electrical works.
It is part of our positive plan for regional development in northern Queensland for the future.
The Government has been working with the northern Queensland Regional Development Australia (RDA) committees and stakeholders to identify priorities to support growth.
The region generates approximately $60 billion in gross regional product annually from mining, agriculture, energy, education and tourism.
North Queensland has an exciting future and the Rudd Government is committed to working with the community to support jobs and unlock future growth. 


Prime Minister, Treasurer , Minister for Climate Change, Environment, Heritage and Water
PM: Thanks very much for coming. It is great to be back in Townsville. I have been to this great city in Queensland’s north many, many times over the years.
As I travel around North Queensland and the rest of the nation it's clear to me that many Australians are feeling cost of living pressures.
This is real, not just in Queensland's north, but around the nation.
It is equally clear that most Australians want to see their nation doing its bit, playing its part to protect the environment from the effects of climate change.
The Government has decided to terminate the carbon tax, to help cost of living pressures for families and to reduce costs for small business.
From 1 July next year Australia will move to an emissions trading scheme, one that is used around the world including in countries like Britain, like Germany and soon in China itself.
The modelling from Treasury shows that in the financial year 2014-15 an average family will receive a cost of living relief to the value of $380 per year.
This is modest relief, but it's real. This contrasts with Mr Abbott's plan and its impact is also real.
We calculate it will cost the same average family $1200 per year more when fully implemented.
We expect the change that we are bringing in will see the price on carbon fall from an expected $25.40 a tonne by next July to around $6 a tonne.
This is a big change.
Treasury modelling tells us this will reduce pressures on consumers and on businesses.
Every Australian should be clear about the Government's new ETS and that it will leave average families $380 per year better off while Mr Abbott's scheme, once fully implemented at least $1200 a year worse off.
I want to emphasise that very clearly. This is a big difference when it comes to the future.
Under this scheme that we are bringing in, this will mean average families $380 a year better off, under Mr Abbott's scheme when fully implemented $1200 a year worse off.
When I was elected back in 2007 as Prime Minister I was elected to bring in an emissions trading scheme and a floating price.
In fact, in the same election, Mr Abbott campaigned with Mr Howard also to bring in an emissions trading scheme.
I remind you what Mr Abbott had to say back in 2009 when he said, ‘you can't have a climate change policy without an emissions trading scheme.’
Mr Abbott's words, not mine.
Mr Abbott said, “You can't have a climate change policy without an emissions trading scheme.”
Or as Mr Hockey, the alternative treasurer, said in the same year 2009: “The Liberals,” he said, “were the initiators of the emissions trading scheme.”
The Liberals went to the 2007 election promising to introduce an emissions trading scheme.
Well, my attitude to all that is pretty basic. I agree with them. Let's give credit where credit's due.
I have also made it plain in recent days that any change to our policy must be budget neutral.
This change, to reduce the cost of living pressures for families, will cost $3.8 billion over the forward estimates period for the budget.
We'll make up for the lost revenue with savings in other government programs. This is the fiscally responsible thing to do.
The nation's 370 biggest polluters will continue to pay for their carbon pollution but the cost will be reduced, meaning less pressure on consumers.
We will also be maintaining our special assistance payments given to families and low income earners to take account of the effect of carbon pricing.
In other words, our Household Assistance Package, family payments and for pensioners will continue.
I believe overall this is a good package. It's a balanced package. It's good for families. It's good for pensioners. It's good for small business.
It's also good for the environment and when I visit a wonderful place like Townsville, when I'm up in North Queensland and when we are here right on the door step of the Great Barrier Reef, I'm certain we're taking the correct action.
We want our kids and our grandkids, and I've got one now, to be able to enjoy one of Australia's greatest natural assets.
We don't want them to be able to just read about the Great Barrier Reef in some history book in the future.
We want them to experience the Great Barrier Reef in the future.
As well as being a natural wonder of world, the Great Barrier Reef has also bought $6.2 billion to the tourism economy here alone in North Queensland.
So action on climate change, international action as well as national action on climate change, also means for us in Australia jobs and real jobs into the future.
Tens of thousands of jobs into the future.
On the question of the budget impact I'll now turn to Treasurer Chris Bowen and then to Mark Butler on the impact of our action on the important task of continued work on climate change.
TREASURER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
Today is of course an important step in our positive economic plan to deal with the post mining boom world, to assist Australia in the transition and to spur more investment in manufacturing services across our economy and also to provide real cost of living relief to families.
The bringing forward of the emissions trading scheme to 2014 does come at a cost to the budget of $3.8 billion over the forward estimates.
This has been more than fully funded by the Government.
We've done so in such a way that there is no impact on the Household Assistance Package, that is protected.
We've also protected investments in the renewable energy sector with no change to funding to ARENA and no change the RET or to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
We've also done so in a way which has no reduction in funding to the Jobs and Competitiveness Program which supports trade-exposed emissions intensive industries.
The Government has decided to make $3.9 billion worth of savings decisions over the forward estimates meaning we are actually making a contribution to the budget bottom line of $177 million over the next 4 years.
I'm going to outline these savings to you now. It will take me a couple of minutes obviously to run through them all for you.
Firstly in relation to the Energy Security Fund we will be saving $770 million over the forward estimates by bringing forward the 2015-16 free permits to 2014-15 and discontinuing the program after that.
This saving recognises the significant benefit for generators of the decision that is being announced today and there has been broad consultation with the industry about this.
We are also changing the funding in the Clean Technology Investment Program and the Carbon Capture and Storage flagship program which will be the subject of savings and some re-profiling saving $586 million over the forward estimates.
We're also making a saving in the Coal Sector Jobs Package, saving $186 million in 2014-15 ensuring the value of the assistance adjusts to the new carbon price.
We're also making a budget saving in the Biodiversity Fund returning unallocated funds to the budget saving $213 million over the forward estimates.
This fund does overlap with the Caring For Our Country allocation and was funded through the carbon tax.
We're also reducing our funding to the Carbon Farming Futures Program saving $144 million over the forward estimates.
We're also making some general savings decisions and announcing those today making a contribution to paying for the decision that we're announcing.
We're abolishing the statutory formula in relation to fringe benefits tax on cars and I'll just spend a couple of minutes on this because this is a significant savings decision.
This will save $1.8 billion over the forward estimates.
Now the current statutory formula allows people who are claiming fringe benefits tax relief to just nominate a figure of 20 per cent and not justify that claim.
The world has moved on from when this system was introduced in 1986.
We now have much better technology, so that people can use phone apps and other devices which are much easier than keeping a log book.
The rules stipulate that it's necessary to keep a log book for up to 12 weeks over a 5 year period but this can now be done through mobile phone technology and applications which are easily downloadable on the web.
This means that people can claim this if they are entitled to it very easily and there is no longer any justification for the statutory percentage method of claiming fringe benefits tax use on cars.
It's important to note that many tradespeople and others who already use log books are not affected by this change.
In fact it does not affect the 3.6 million Australians who directly claim the fringe benefits tax relief through their tax returns.
It does affect potentially around 320,000 people who are expected no longer to be able to justify that percentage claim.
This will be effective for all contracts entered into from this time forward but there will be a transition in place until April 2014 to ensure people have time to make the transition and to factor that into their calculations.
It does not affect people who are already have a contract in place, it is only contracts entered into from this time forward.
We're also announcing some public service efficiency measures today, recognising the good work that's been done in the Department of Finance in better procurement of software and also recognising that we are in a position to make some modest changes to the executive level and senior executive services of the Australian public service with a 1 per cent reduction in the number of staff at those levels across the board.
Again, this has been worked through by the Department of Finance very methodically and carefully.
This as I say means that this decision means that we have a positive impact on the budget bottom line.
These savings measures will not be universally popular with everybody.
They are not easy to make; savings decisions never are. But they are the right decisions to make in a fiscally make responsible way.
This announcement today means we embrace the market mechanism in a way that should be done.
This contrasts the approach by others. I saw Mr Abbott yesterday saying a so-called market in the non-delivery of an invisible substance to no-one.
This increasingly shrill commentary from the Opposition combined with the shrill commentary from Mr Hunt on the weekend shows the Liberal Party really doesn't understand that the rest of the world is moving to a market mechanism in a way which is environmentally responsive and responsible and that's what this Government is announcing today.
I will hand over to Minister Butler.
MINISTER BUTLER: Thank you, Prime Minister. Thank you, Treasurer.
As both the Prime Minister and the Treasurer have indicated, this is a very important measure that delivers cost of living relief to households and to Australian businesses.
But I also want to say to the millions of Australians who care deeply about their environment and who are committed to the fight against climate change; that this decision also preserves the integrity of our commitment to reduce carbon pollution and to fight that climate change that we know is happening today.
The environmental integrity of this program is recognised across the world.
Across the world people recognise the most efficient and the most effective way to drive down carbon pollution is through an emissions trading scheme.
As the Treasurer and Prime Minister indicated this is a scheme that already operates in many, many advanced economies like Great Britain, Germany, France, California and many other states of the US and Canada.
We have an emissions trading scheme ready to start the year after next in South Korea and China only this month has started their emissions trading schemes in Shenzhen and will start soon in many other cities covering a population of more than 200 million people with the aim to have a national emissions trading scheme operate in 2015.
The thing about an emissions trading scheme from the environment's perspective is that it sets a legal limit on the amount of carbon pollution that can be dumped into the atmosphere every year, a limit that reduces every year so that we actually can turn this climate emergency around.
Now this is a feature that is completely lacking from Tony Abbott's so-called direct action plan, a plan as the Prime Minister indicates, that would have an impact on the average household by the time it's fully implemented of around $1200 a year but does nothing to provide a legal limit on the amount of carbon pollution being dumped into the atmosphere.
The other thing from the environmental integrity perspective, I just want to draw attention to, was alluded to by the Treasurer.
This has been a very difficult exercise to find savings to ensure the revenue gap of $3.8 billion is covered.
But in addition to protecting households from that exercise completely, we've also been able to protect all of our renewable energy programs so that we can continue to build clean energy sources for Australia like wind power and solar power.
Now these resources increased their market share of the national electricity market last year by more than 25 per cent alone.
They already deliver 24,000 jobs in Australia and as the Prime Minister indicated we know that they will deliver tens and tens of thousands more jobs into the future.
This has been a central feature of our program to combat climate change.
When Prime Minister Rudd was elected in 2007 there were about 7000 households that had roof top solar electricity; now there are more than 1 million.
Only recently we announced the opening of the largest wind farm in the Southern Hemisphere supported by the Government's Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
This is utterly central to the program to combat climate change.
Again it's an element of environmental policy that only last week we saw Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party start to walk away from but I'm very proud that in this quite challenging exercise we've been able to ensure that our commitment to renewable energy is absolutely untouched.
PM: So, in summary, this is a good day for Australia.
It's an important day for Australia.
It's an important day for bringing about cost of living pressures relief to families and relief also to small businesses who are battling hard.
It's modest relief but its real relief.
It's also a good day for the environment as we continue our efforts nationally, in partnership with the international community to bring about a sustainable reduction in greenhouse gas emissions so that we can have a liveable planet for the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're in regional Queensland on a kind of short tour, what can Queenslanders expect from you?
PM: Well I would say that Queenslanders have a pretty big interest in the carbon price.
I think Queenslanders have a pretty big interest in cost of living pressures and that Queenslanders have an interest in how much their household budgets will be affected by this measure or, if they were to elect Mr Abbott as Prime Minister, what it would cost them then.
So I'd say to all Queenslanders and all Australians, under our plan average families will be $380 a year better off as opposed to Mr Abbott's so-called plan which would leave them $1200 a year worse off when fully implemented.
That is a bottom line figure for all Queenslanders and all Australians.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've said it's a good day for the environment as well but a lower carbon price, less incentive to reduce emissions.
You've also got money out of programs such as the Clean Technology Fund. How is it going to help reduce emissions? How is it a good day for the environment?
PM: Well let me answer that in two specific ways and then I will ask the Minister for the Environment and Climate Change to supplement my answer.
Number one, you're looking at the Government which ratified the Kyoto Protocol.
Number two, you're looking at the Government which also brought in a mandatory renewable energy target of 20 per cent by 2020 and that one, together with other mechanisms which the Government has in place, is frankly supporting a boom in the renewable energy sector in this country.
Therefore we see massive transformations occurring around power generation countrywide.
I'll turn to the Minister to supplement my answer.
MINISTER BUTLER: Thank you, Prime Minister.
The important thing about an emissions trading scheme, as I said earlier, is that there is a legal limit on the amount of carbon pollution that can be put into the atmosphere.
That is what the environment cares about.
The environment doesn't care what price is being paid for every tonne of carbon pollution, the environment just cares about the amount of carbon pollution.
Now, we alone have a legal commitment to reducing carbon pollution through this type of scheme.
Tony Abbott's direct action plan says nothing about the amount of carbon pollution legally that will be able to be dumped into the atmosphere over the next 10 years.
We've set up a climate change authority that's chaired by Bernie Fraser, the former Reserve Bank governor, to provide the Government with advice on what that limit should be between now and 2020, and we're involved in an international process to ensure that there is international discussion which the United States, China and dozens of other countries have signed up to for a period beyond 2020.
So the price is not the important thing from the environment's point of view.
From the environment's point of view it just wants to know that there is less carbon pollution being spewed into the atmosphere and ours is the only scheme that has that legal limit.
Can I also just support the Prime Minister's comments about renewable energy sources.
Last year alone in the 2012-13 financial year, we actually saw carbon pollution from the national electricity market reduce by more than 7 per cent because of the very big increase in the share of electricity generation by renewables.
As I said, a share that increased by more than 25 per cent last year alone.
So in addition to us having legal limits on carbon pollution emissions each year between now and 2020, committed to an international process for a system beyond 2020, we're also doing what the Opposition will not do, which is provide certainty to the renewable energy sector so we can continue to build solar power capacity and wind power capacity to start to take share away from more carbon polluting sources like coal power.
JOURNALIST: In regards to the public service cuts, how many people is that and how much is it going to save? Do you have a figure yet?
PM: I will just draw your attention to a couple of points and then the Treasurer will add to my answer.
We're here in Townsville. 220 people have been axed by Campbell Newman here at Townsville Hospital alone. Stacks of nurses and stacks and other health professionals.
In fact, we see that by Campbell Newman's Liberal National Party Government across Queensland. Fourteen thousand people have lost their jobs.
This has had a huge effect on job security and confidence on the part of small business.
This Australian Government is investing in Queensland, it is investing across Australia.
The number of jobs that have been added here in North Queensland through the National Broadband Network project is significant.
The jobs that we’ve added so far through the building of school libraries and multipurpose facilities in recent years has been huge.
Here in Townsville the continued work on our $420 million worth of investment in the roads system around here means more local jobs. So we have been investing a lot.
And what the Minister was referring to before was reforms to our public procurement system.
TREASURER: Thanks Prime Minister. The efficiency steps that the Department of Finance has been working on will save $248 million over four years.
These changes will be exclusively in the executive and senior executive ranks of the public service.
There are approximately 44,500 currently, positions in those ranks and that will reduce over time by about 800 positions.
Now, in context, these positions have grown by about 29 per cent over a period where the general public service has grown by about 6 per cent.
So all the calculations and all the indications would indicate that this will be an appropriately measured and balanced step over time.
JOURNALIST: Are most of those jobs based in Canberra?
TREASURER: You would expect them to be, yes.
JOURNALIST: Will these be redundancies?
TREASURER: Obviously the preference is always through natural attrition over time.
JOURNALIST: Minister you said the price doesn't matter in terms of the environment. But obviously it’s a market mechanism so the price is set by the number of permits and so on. In Europe, which we’re tying to, there has been a collapse in the price there and there has been criticism the level is too high.
So how are we going to make sure that our level is not going to be too high in terms of how many permits are issued like there clearly has been in Europe?
MINISTER BUTLER: That is right. So that’s why we have established the Climate Change Authority, an independent body with very substantial experienced people as members of that Authority.
As I said, chaired by Bernie Fraser, the former Reserve Bank Governor, and he will be providing – or the Authority will be providing – draft advice as early as October I think, and final advice by the end of February, on what those caps should look like out to 2020. So that is-
JOURNALIST: And will there be a cap linked from Europe then?
MINISTER BUTLER: The caps are a different question to the price. We have an arrangement to link with European Union in terms of being able to trade permits across between Australia and Europe, but the caps that are put in place here and the caps put in place by the European Commission will be done independently.
And at the end of the day, that is the important thing from the environment point of view. What are the number of tons of carbon pollution going into the atmosphere, both between now and 2020, but obviously in terms of our international negotiations beyond then?
The other part of the picture other than just the price and say the competitive balance between renewable energy and coal fire power stations, for example, is our commitment to the renewable energy target to ensure that the electricity market has at least 20 per cent renewables as a base by 2020.
We are very confident, given the investments and the support we have given that sector, that we will make that 20 per cent relatively comfortably.
Unfortunately though, Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party have started to step away from their commitment to the renewable energy target as well.
We’ve seen in South Australia, with good support, only last year renewable energy constituted 30 per cent of the South Australian electricity market.
We know with the sorts of supports that we are giving that sector, the certainty on their investment through a renewable energy target out to 2020, that renewables can continue to grow and continue to carve into the carbon pollution that we provide into the atmosphere.
JOURNALIST: Can we take this as an admission that the price that was originally negotiated with the Greens was too high?
MINISTER BUTLER: If I can say a couple of things about that. I think at the time the carbon tax was introduced, there was a view that it would take some years for the system to settle into place.
I think what we’ve seen over the first 12 months is that the 370 businesses that are liable to pay the carbon price have settled into a system with the Clean Energy Regulator relatively smoothly – with one exception, Clive Palmer, who has refused to pay his liability – but otherwise very smoothly.
And the advice we have got is that we don't need this three-year period to transition to an emissions trading scheme which is why we have taken the decision today, or announced the decision today, to terminate the carbon tax and make an earlier move to an emissions trading scheme; the type of scheme that is operated in so many parts of the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the savings, in terms of-
PM: Just let me add to that and I will take your question.
Let's be very clear about this. We have had extensive Cabinet consultation on this for some weeks and deliberations and these are tough decisions.
They’ve got to be fiscally responsible, and they’ve got to be environmentally responsible, and they have to serve the interests of families who are under financial pressure.
But today, we have taken a decision to terminate the carbon tax.
Today we are announcing a decision to move to a floating price.
Mr Abbott often has said in the past, ‘Well the problem with pricing carbon is that countries like China are not on board’.
Well, I think Mr Abbott needs to look at what is happening in China.
China, for its own reasons has decided it must act on climate change by bringing in a carbon price and its 2015 target of moving to that, in terms of most provinces in the country, is a very important step globally.
China, now, is the world's largest emitter. They need to do this for themselves and for the planet. Our job is to play our part.
The other point I’d make is this. When people look to questions of national leadership on climate change or on the economy, they actually want to know that those decisions are properly considered.
And when I see statements like the one that Mr Abbott made the other day, when he described carbon pollution as invisible – and therefore I presume is not real – it is a bit like saying that because air is invisible, it is not real. I mean, it just doesn’t make sense.
People around the country just scratch their head when they wonder about such a person's qualifications for being Prime Minister of the country.
So for us, this is carefully considered, well thought out. We worked on this for a long period of time.
And we believe we have got the balance right, both for the country, the families, for small businesses and for the environment, including this wonderful Barrier Reef.
JOURNALIST: Just on the costs: so that figure of $380, are there projections further on, I would assume that would fall with the projection of the carbon price going up?
And on Mr Abbott's plan how is that going to cost $1200 if he too will keep that compensation and make cuts in a similar fashion you have done today?
TREASURER: That $380 figure is in relation to the coming financial year and that is the cost based on Treasury modelling.
JOURNALIST: Does that drop?
TREASURER: It is a one year figure based on the Treasury's view of the carbon price.
In relation to Mr Abbott's plan, Mr Abbott's plan is to subsidise polluters. Is to subsidise polluters on their application.
Now any significant steps to reduce pollution come at great cost. Come at great cost and must be paid for.
So it’s up to Mr Abbott to refute that this would be the cost of his plan.
His plan subsidises polluters directly. He calls it Direct Action. It is a direct subsidy plan to polluters, to say come to the Government and we will pay you. We will pay you.
And that comes at an enormous cost to the Budget, as has been calculated through the normal processes.
PM: Let's be very plain. Treasury modelling is that under our plan, following the abolition of the carbon tax, average families will be $380 a year better off as opposed to Mr Abbott's plan, when fully implemented, which will leave them $1200 a year worse off.
And if we're talking about cost of living pressures for families across Australia, that’s important.
Let me add one other thing. On electricity prices and gas prices, a number of people around the country have been calling upon us to take this action.
Well, we’ve acted.
The biggest contributor to energy prices around Australia, in fact, has come from state governments in the main and in the case of a number of them, gouging consumers and gouging small businesses to reap a big profit dividend to the state government budgets.
We have done our bit, so it’s time the Liberal National Party Governments in Queensland and elsewhere in the country – state governments generally where this is happening – to start acting as well because they represent the biggest hit on overall energy prices in the country.
JOURNALIST: We have heard that assistance will continue for families but what about the 370 businesses liable to pay?
MINISTER BUTLER: We made a promise that the Household Assistance Package would remain untouched and we make no apology for standing by that promise.
In terms of the 370 businesses that are liable to pay this, they’ll see a 75 per cent reduction in their carbon price liability based on where we think the price, or where Treasury advises us the price, will be. A 75 per cent reduction.
As the Treasurer said, we’ve also decided to keep in place entirely the assistance to those industries which are emissions intensive – so produce a lot of carbon pollution – but are also trade exposed, for the reason we don't want to see them simply close down and move to some other countries.
So those free permits, the assistance that we give, up to 92 per cent of free permits, will also remain untouched.
So they will have the 92 per cent of free permits, plus a carbon price that is reduced by 75 per cent.
So if anything, those industries are significantly better off as a result of our decision to terminate the carbon tax.
JOURNALIST: Minister you mentioned the re-profiling of the Carbon Capture Scheme, what does that mean?
MINISTER BUTLER: Carbon capture and storage is a technology that has a lot of potential to contribute to our plan and our commitment to reduce carbon pollution.
But we have taken advice that the projects that are currently going through a feasibility process are unlikely to be ready for the funding that’s currently profiled in the years in which it is profiled.
So our advice has been the best thing to do is to defer that funding for years beyond the forward estimates which is likely to be when the projects will be ready for the sort of investment we're talking about.
PM: I am a big supporter of the coal industry here in Queensland.
I am a Queenslander. It’s got potential, it’s got a future, it’s got a real future. But if you're supporting the coal industry, you also have to be investing in clean coal technologies.
And there are a number of available technologies and Mark is absolutely right, these are coming slower to fruition than many of us would have liked, not just here but around the world. They are complex technologies.
So carbon sequestration storage, this is important work, but we have got to be sensible about how long it is going to take to bring them on stream.
On the question more broadly of the carbon price and the debate which has erupted in recent days on this, Mr Abbott has walked away from his commitment at the 2007 election when he said we must have an emissions trading scheme.
Mr Hockey is walking away from his statement that the Liberal Party is the inventor of the emissions trading scheme.
We have put forward our plan pretty plainly. How we are going to pay for it from the budget, how it’s going to affect households, and the action we will still take on the environment.
So, Mr Abbott, you did not want to debate me on debt and deficit at the National Press Club, even though that forms a large part of your political ads on television at the moment.
Here’s the challenge: you pick the day next week at the National Press Club to debate the carbon price.
The Emissions Trading Scheme under this Government versus your scheme.
And let the people decide, through that debate, whether we have the facts supporting our case or yours. Any day next week.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I just get clarification on the cost? You have said a couple of times it is $380 a year.
Just confirming that is the first year only, and also in terms of the carbon price at forward estimates, is it still predicted to go up to $38 as per previous modelling?
TREASURER: The $380 figure relates to the floating price coming forward by one year.
So very clearly, in 2015, we would have been moving to a floating price anyway. We have taken the decision the right thing to do is to bring it forward by 12 months, and that is the impact over that 12 month period.
As the Prime Minister said, it’s modest but real. And that is one of the reasons we have taken this decision.
In relation to the carbon price estimates in the Budget and by Treasury, they are based on a rolling average over a period, I think, of three months in relation to the carbon price around the world; with a very clear recognition of the European price being the main determinant of the carbon price around the world.
JOURNALIST: How can you assure us that the figures you are stating are correct?
TREASURER: Let me draw you to the attention of the Treasury modelling about the carbon price all the way through.
Despite the scare campaign, despite the rhetoric we have seen, the Treasury modelling has been spot on all the way through.
So somebody would need to show me evidence that that won't be the case on this occasion.
JOURNALIST: One quick question on asylum seeker policy: the Coalition has welcomed Indonesia's Minister saying that their Government would talk about turning back the boats policy. That has since been clarified, what is your response to that?
PM: Well it’s pretty interesting what has been said on this subject just in recent days.
I notice that the position taken by Mr Abbott is that he still believes he can turn back the boats.
I note what the Indonesian Foreign Minister had to say about this last night, “The unilateral level comes forth when certain national measures taken without due consideration or communication, at least when some other affected countries are involved. this is where it can be troublesome.”
Can I then go on to paraphrase what he says, and that is that he sees there are real difficulties with this sort of unilateral action.
I draw your attention carefully to what the Indonesian Foreign Minister has said last night.
On the question, which is a real question for all of Australia on asylum seekers, as we seek to adjust and change our policy in response to the new challenges which are emerging: you either have a real policy which deals with the problem and reduces it over time, or you have a simplistic, negative three-word slogan which frankly is just a bit lazy because it doesn't actually produce the results.
So I would draw everyone's attention to what the Indonesian Foreign Minister had to say this morning.
Thanks very much folks.
[ENDS]


PM: It’s great to be here with the Mayor of Mackay and also our candidate for this terrific seat of Dawson, Bronwyn Taha.
And Bronwyn, I know, lives in Proserpine with her husband Darren and you’ve got two kids, so you’re pretty well connected to this local community. I’m told, according to my notes here, you’re a member of the Midge Point Branch of the SES?
BRONWYN TAHA, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR DAWSON: Yes, I am a proud member.
PM: There you go. So, serious SES work over here. If you get in strife ring your local Labor candidate. No, dial the right number actually.
This is my fourteenth visit to Mackay as Prime Minister. That’s quite a lot. So I said to the coppers coming in, I think I’ve been to Mackay more than any other regional centre in Queensland.
It’s a terrific place. I remember, when I’ve come here before, that beautiful spot to stay near the Marina, and the fantastic walk you’ve got there as well.
But it’s a dynamic regional economy. Of course, you’ve got the huge mining developments in the hinterland, but it’s a great city and regional services centre as well.
What we’re here to talk about today is an investment in, of course, local sporting infrastructure.
I would’ve loved to be up here for the opening of this and I just wasn’t able, physically, to make it. But thank you to those who tried to invite me.
But why I’m so passionate about this sort of investment in regional Australian centres and cities is because it develops team sports.
It develops our regional sporting culture. It develops and trains the football players of the future.
And these young kids we’ve seen running out here today, you’ve probably seen one or two of them will be playing State of Origin in the future.
And because they’re going to get all that encouragement of playing on a good field, with a great stadium, that attracts the best players from around the region and around the state.
Of course it’s not just this investment – which is $11.3 million – to the Mackay regional economy; just over this way we’ve got the Indoor Basketball Stadium, and that is an investment of a further $6 or $7 million.
And that’s going to be home to the Mackay Meteors and the Meteorettes. There you go.
And what I love about Queensland centres, having grown up in one myself, is the way they encourage local people to get involved in team sport, and provide a great atmosphere and environment for kids to reach their best and excel and to go on to high levels of competition.
If you look at our State of Origin teams and our big teams in the NRL, so many of them come from regional centres around Australia, particularly in Queensland.
And I think it’s a tribute to communities and clubs like this one, and the Mackay Cutters, that you’ve produced such great players in the past.
But the other thing I’d say is this: in our commitment to this region, centred in Mackay, we don’t just come here and talk about things. We do things. And I’m proud of that fact.
I was looking at the list as I came in just now. We’ve invested about $130 million in local schools; we’ve built 53 new school libraries in this region.
That’s a lot of libraries, and that’s to make sure our kids have the best opportunities for the future.
We have built five new science and language centres. We’ve built four new Trades Training Centres in this region, benefitting nine secondary schools across the electorate of Dawson.
We’ve put nearly 6000 computers into the high schools in this community, so there’s no digital divide between kids growing up in Mackay and kids growing up in any other part of Australia.
And here’s my one point about education in the future.
Right now we’re trying to roll out a Better Schools Plan for Australia.
We’ve got New South Wales to sign on, we’ve got South Australia to sign on, we’ve got Tasmania to sign on; we’ve got the Independent Schools Association of Australia to sign on.
Now I saw the Premier of Queensland last week in the hope we’d get Queensland to sign on as well. And I hope he does.
Because here’s the benefit: if we get agreement on this, it’s a further $3.8 billion investment into Queensland schools over the next six years.
And so that’s $3.8 billion extra. That’s huge.
Let me give you an example. Mackay State High, under this plan, would receive $9.8 million in public funding – additional – over the next six years.
That’s an increase of 54 per cent. These are massive increases.
Why are we doing it? We’re doing it because we want the kids who grow up in these schools and are educated in these schools to have great opportunities.
If they are falling behind – either in primary school or high school – then we want to have resources in the school so that a kid can be taken out of a class and get specialist attention to bring them back into the mainstream.
Most of us have had kids at some stage or another who we think are ahead of the class or a bit behind, actually.
And the best thing to make a parent feel better about it is to make sure that when that happens, there is enough resources for a tutor to come in, take the kid off a couple of hours a day, three or four days a week, bring them back on literacy and numeracy and that sort of thing.
That’s what these resources are for. It’s designed to produce better schools and better education outcomes for our kids and to make sure that all of our schools lift their performance.
That’s why we’re requiring schools to develop their own performance plans which then become public, and transparent, and available to the community.
So that you know where the school was before and how it’s improving against each of these defined measures.
On health, we’ve invested also some $15 million to James Cook University, including funding for the University’s Clinical School, and I understand that’s been a successful investment as well.
Townsville and Mackay Medicare Local has been invested in as well, to provide flexible referral services for people, often out of hours.
If I could also refer to the National Broadband Network, where we have some 10,700 homes and businesses in and around Mackay, in this region, where the fibre network is under construction or complete.
And by mid-2016, we’ve have approximately 35,600 either under construction or completed.
Now, people often ask me what does the NBN mean. For regional cities like Mackay, it’s a huge difference.
It means it helps us overcome the tyranny of distance, which is really important, because if you’re here and you’ve got to go everywhere else in order to business, what the NBN does is you can have live, immediate video conferencing, there and then, with anybody in Australia.
And if you’re designing this stadium you could be sitting here in Mackay, talking to the architect – whoever they are, the designer in Whoop-Whoop, talking about the plan online, with all of the technology, every single detail, pumped down the tube.
And you can say we want this change to that, this change to that, and do it in 15 minutes, as opposed to teams of people flying backwards and forwards. That’s what it’s about.
Or if it’s in the case of medicine, and a Mackay-based hospital, you might need a specialist cardiologist who deals with one particular heart condition.
There might only be five in Australia, but you’ve got someone who is suffering from that condition here.
Through the NBN, by linking the hospitals around the country, you’re going to be able to have immediate diagnostics undertaken down the line, with a specialist cardiologist in Melbourne who says, ‘I know that condition, this is the symptomatology, this is what you need to do in terms of a surgical procedure, and by the way, don’t prescribe these drugs’.
And similarly with education – let’s take Mackay State High School.
The language they teach there – I’m sure they teach a foreign language – they’ll be able to have real-time communication with a school in France, Germany, Japan, China, wherever they’re learning that language. Like, right on screen, in time.
And so they can exchange language classes with each other.
It’s about bringing the world together, and therefore overcoming the tyranny of distance.
And so, as a kid who grew up in a regional town – Nambour, much closer to Brisbane than you folks – I know how important it is to be able to be connected.
And this is designed to break down the walls of geographical separation.
People can live here for the wonderful quality of life that you’ve got, but then they can also communicate directly and do business around the world.
Good for business, good for families, good for schools, good for hospitals, good for healthcare.
Finally, this is going to be an interesting old election.
We in the Government, in order to have the best voice possible for Mackay and this region, we are looking forward very much to having Bronwyn join us in Canberra.
Now, whatever your politics here at a gathering like this, I would like her very much to be on our team and so that her voice in the future can bring arguments, such as the one I had before for a stadium like this, so that we can get behind and partner with the Mackay Regional Council.
JOURNALIST: Are you coming here to announce funding for the ongoing operations of the stadium?
I’m not sure whether you’re aware but it has hit financial trouble and is a project that you funded in the 2007 campaign. Will you fund its ongoing operation?
PM: What I’ve just run through is probably something in the order of about $300 or $400 million investment in recent times.
The reason I’m also here, on what is a flying visit, is to actually sit down with the council in a minute because I want to hear what they’ve got to say about their priorities for future investment in this region.
What I do, whenever I go to a regional centre – whether it’s Cairns, Townsville, Mackay, whether it’s Rocky or Gladstone or anywhere else – is to sit down with the council, sit down with the mayor, listen to them carefully about their priorities, usually talk to the local chamber of commerce, have a chat to the local newspaper editor, to see what the hell’s going on and what where we can productively assist.
So no, I’m not here with a specific flagship announcement on anything. I’m here to celebrate what we’ve done, I think you’d appreciate it’s a good thing.
JOURNALIST: But if it goes broke it’s no good to anyone really.
PM: Oh so you don’t like it?
JOURNALIST: No, I’m not saying that.
PM: Okay that’s good; this one actually likes it, that’s good to hear that. I’m here to listen to what the council says. And that’s the right thing to do.
I believe in actually being consultative about these things.
And to hear that’s a priority – and when I’ve been here before they wanted this thing – that’s good. They said they wanted that down there. It’s being built.
When I look at all the schools in this area I see we’ve actually built libraries. Have you found a local P&amp;C or P&amp;F at one of your local schools who doesn’t like their new school library? Didn’t think so.
That’s $131 million worth of investment. So I listen to what the locals have to say through the council.
JOURNALIST: But if the council does feel that they need financial assistance, is that something that you’ll – that the Federal Government – may be able to do?
PM: Well, as you can see from the list of stuff we’ve done, we have a pretty good cooperative relationship with the council here.
We’ve done so in the past, I don’t see why we wouldn’t do so in the future.
But I’m all about priorities. Each one here around this community would have a list of 20 different priorities about what is needed in this area.
I bet your Local Government – and I’ve had uncles who have been mayors themselves over the years, usually National Party mayors by the way in my case – is they actually have a feel for what the real distillation of priorities is.
That’s why I take it seriously.
All that I’m saying is, I’m here for a brief time – a very brief time – but I want to listen. But also celebrate some of the stuff that we’ve done.
JOURNALIST: Talking about priorities, obviously Tony Abbott was in town this morning talking about his plan for the Bruce Highway. What’s your response for his plan for it being bigger and better?
PM: Well I think, what I know about the good people of Mackay and of Queensland is that they prefer to see a record of action rather than a pile of rhetoric.
So what’s our record of action?
We have invested $5.8 billion in the Bruce Highway. Four times more than occurred under the Howard Government, of which he was a Minister. Four times more.
So I saw Mr Abbott say earlier somewhere that yes, this Government had invested a little bit more.
But when I went to school in Eumundi, four times more was 400 per cent more. And 400 per cent is not a little bit; it’s actually quite a big bit.
So that’s the record. Anyone doubt the record? Anyone challenging it? Because when he was asked this question today he said yes after the third question: this Government had funded more in the Bruce.
And as for the future, our plans are costed, they are consulted with the local regional councils, and in this neck of the woods we’ve also been working on the upgrade of the Bruce southern approach to Mackay, with federal funding of $50 million.
So $50 million there.
I’ve just been in Gladstone, a project of about $150 million which is the Calliope Crossroads.
I’ve just been, also, up in Cairns, a very large project in the Bruce and its southern approaches to Cairns.
We’ve invested something like $400 million in recent times constructing a massive series of road works around Townsville.
You know what we’re doing with the Bruce? We have a strategic plan whereby each of the major regional centres – we start with the centre and we move out to make sure where most of the traffic accidents occur, which is on the approaches to towns, cities either side – we tackle those first.
The long term plan, as I said elsewhere this week, is that I want to see a dual carriageway from Melbourne to Cairns.
I want to see – I’ve seen on the Hume what’s now been built on the Pacific – and I now want to see on the Bruce.
But it’s got to be funded, and it’s got to be real. And if Mr Abbott suddenly discovered the Bruce Highway, where was he for 12 years?
And by the way, there’s a bloke just down the road there called Warren Truss. He was the Transport Minister in the Howard Government.
He had plenty of time to work on the Bruce. He’s a local fella. But they managed to spend only 25 per cent of what we’ve committed. I’ll let locals work out the mathematics of that.
JOURNALIST: Will you be reviewing how much is actually on the table from the Federal Government for the Bruce?
PM: As long as there’s some appropriate recognition from good folk in the local community about what has happened, then as I’ve said before we will always keep open our future policy considerations on road infrastructure across the nation, consistent with budget discipline.
This council works to a budget discipline, we work to a budget discipline, and I’ve been very disciplined in the past about what we’re going to invest in here.
All of these things have been budgeted for, including the Bruce Highway upgrade which is occurring to the southern approaches of Mackay here.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott committed to construction Stage One of the Ring Road this morning. Will you commit to the same thing?
PM: I believe in taking these things methodically, step by step. And that’s why I’m here to talk to the council.
It’s all very good to pull one thing out of the sky after another and say we might do it, and all the commitments that we’ve made in the 12 years they had to act before – but nothing happened.
The thing is, I’ll listen to the council, I’ve talked to Minister Albanese, who has undertaken the single biggest investment in the Bruce Highway of any Australian Government ever.
And we, therefore, are strong partners in the future of the Bruce.
Our record and the runs are on the board, and we look forward to being partners in the future.
Any other local questions before I have a chat to the council?
JOUNRLAIST: (Inaudible)
PM: I’d say that number one, if you look to what we’ve done with the new carbon price, through the emissions trading scheme, the carbon price has just been reduced from $26 a tonne to $6 a tonne.
Secondly, for families up here in Mackay, what does that mean?
It means that under this scheme, that you will end up having average families $380 a year better off. Under Mr Abbott’s scheme, you’ll have people $1200 a year worse off.
If you’re concerned about cost of living pressures up here in Mackay and this part of Queensland, I think people will focus on that.
And as for industry, of course we’ll continue to support industry in their adjustments.
The other thing I’d draw your attention to is: you’ve just spoken about the mines over there. If we go in the other direction we have the reef.
And the Great Barrier Reef is pretty important to us. And because of that, we’re acting on climate change.
We don’t hold a view that climate change is crap.
That’s what Mr Abbott has said his view of climate change is. Quote, unquote. His words, not mine.
Because if you don’t work on climate change nationally and internationally, the reef won’t be here for our kids or our grandkids.
That’s the problem.
And so we’re acting on this is a responsible way. We brought in a renewable energy target of 20 per cent, we have an emissions trading scheme, and on top of that we’ve ratified the Kyoto Protocol.
And so we believe you can do that and still be sensitive to cost of living pressures, support industry in their adjustment, and do the right thing by the reef for the future in a balanced way.
Looking after the reef, supporting our industries. That’s our approach for the future.
[ENDS] 



PM: It’s great to be back here in the Gladstone region.
I'm here with Chris Trevor, who’s our candidate for Flynn and formerly the Member for Flynn and a good friend of mine, a good friend over many, many years.
And I'm also here with Leanne Donaldson who is our candidate for Hinkler down the road there and she is going to put up a huge fight in order to secure Hinkler for the Australian Labor Party at the next election.
Let me talk a bit about what we're doing here today. When we look to Australia's future, what Australians want is a positive plan for the nation's future.
What they want is a government which knows how to handle the big economic challenges.
We've had some success with that in recent years. We've, together as a nation and the Government, come through the global financial crisis.
We managed together to avoid the global recession and we managed to avoid mass unemployment and we've managed to do so while keeping our triple-A credit rating with low levels of debt and low deficit.
But you know something, none of us can rest on our laurels because we now face new major challenges for Australia's future. And the new challenge is a bit like this.
Right now around the world you see a very slow global economic recovery and you also see the China resources boom coming off. And in regions like this it has big consequences.
Therefore you can either just stand still and wait for stuff to happen or you can get on the front foot and make sure that you are prepared as possible and so what the Australian Government's response to this new economic challenge is, how do we best diversify our economy in the future, grow new jobs and keep our living standards through new sectors of the economy, whether it's in manufacturing, whether it's in agribusiness, whether it's in construction services, financial services, or areas like education services as well.
That's where we're going to see new growth as well. That's where we're going to see new jobs. It's so that we ensure that we don't have all our eggs in one basket.
Now, the Government's policy response has been to launch a new national competitiveness agenda.
I spoke about this at about this at the National Press Club just recently. And it's got a number of pillars.
Number one is about energy prices.
Number two is about getting as much flexibility out of the Fair Work Act as we can.
Number three, business productivity.
Number four, the approval processes for big projects like this one.
Number five is about what we do to make sure we've got the best possible skills levels in our economy.
Number six, about our infrastructure.
Number seven, of course, is small business formation.
On the first one, on energy prices, just recently, in fact just yesterday, I announced the termination of the carbon tax and I announced that Australia would now be moving towards a floating carbon price reducing the carbon price from $26 a tonne down to $6 a tonne.
And what that means for an average Australian family is making sure that that family will be about $380 better off each year in contrast to Mr Abbott's plan which would have those average families $1200 a year worse off when fully implemented. That's a big difference.
Now, it's about making sure that our families are able to have some support in dealing with cost of living pressures but it's also about providing more competitiveness for our businesses by taking some of the pressure off their electricity prices as well.
And, the challenge now for state governments like the Queensland Government is to stop gouging state government profits out of its state power utilities.
Generators, distributors as well as the transmission companies as well, because they are pushing huge price pressures onto consumers and onto business.
That's what responsible action on carbon means.
Today's a pretty special day when we talk about carbon because it's a bit like this.
Six years ago today, then Prime Minister John Howard announced that the Liberal National Party would be implementing an emissions trading scheme.
He made that commitment at the National Press Club in Canberra.
Let me quote what he had to say six years ago today: "This emissions trading scheme will be world class in its coverage and governance. And in the years to come it will provide a model for other nations to follow. Being among the first movers on carbon trading in this region will bring new opportunities and we intend to grasp them."
That's what John Howard said on behalf of the Liberal National Party six years ago today, backed by Mr Abbott, backed by Mr Hockey who are senior members of his ministerial team of the day.
Except, of course, he's walked away backwards from it.
I've got to say this, it's about time Mr Abbott levelled with the Australian people as to why he has walked away from the commitment he gave with John Howard six years ago and instead wants to put in a new carbon plan which lands average Australian families with an extra $1200 bill each year.
It just doesn't make sense.
The other thing about a competitive Australia under our new competitiveness agenda is not just competitive energy prices but competitive infrastructure.
And competitive infrastructure means having a good road system around Australia as well.
That's why we've embarked upon a plan of massive road infrastructure investment by the Australian Government, record investment against any period in Australian economic history and that's why, for example, we're investing in roads like this.
This is the Bruce Highway behind me, and it's being intersected here by the Dawson Highway.
And what we've done as part of practical action on infrastructure is invest $150 million here to bring about this work here to add the Calliope Crossroads.
This is a very necessary piece of road building in order to reduce accidents but as well as to speed up the economic efficiency of the Bruce Highway itself.
There's been a bit of talk about the Bruce Highway today I understand and I understand Mr Abbott has had something to say about it as well. Well here is a basic factual challenge for Mr Abbott.
PM: Well here is a basic factual challenge for Mr Abbott.
 The Federal Government's investment in the Bruce Highway under this Government currently stands at an unprecedented $5.7 billion, more than four times that which occurred under the Howard Government. Four times that which occurred under the Howard Government.
And so, Mr Abbott was asked about this today and he said, "Well, the current Government…" – meaning this Government, ours – “…has spent a little bit more than its predecessor."
 Well, let me just contrast the figures: $5.7 billion versus $1.3 billion. $5.7 billion versus $1.3 billion.
That strikes me as about 400 per cent more. I don't think it's a little bit more, I think it's 400 per cent more.
And it's about time we had some facts in this debate.
The truth is this Australian Government is investing fundamentally in the road infrastructure needs of Australia and fundamentally, of course, in the future of the Bruce Highway.
 And we're proud of what we're doing in this road here.
And so the other thing I'd say to Mr Abbott, who puts himself forward as the alternative Prime Minister of Australia, is this: this is real action on the Bruce Highway behind me.
It's 400 per cent more action than occurred when the other mob had 12 years to fix up the Bruce.
We've put our shoulder to the wheel with a record $5.7 billion investment.
Queenslanders are not mugs, Mr Abbott, they believe what they see with their eyes not just pleasant sounding speeches from politicians promising future investment in the never, never.
 Finally, let me just turn to our candidates here. These are two great candidates for the Australian Labor Party in this part of the world.
I've mentioned CT before, he's a very good man. He, in fact, was a part of the team that was elected to the Australian Parliament, as the Member for Flynn, back in 2007.
He's a terrific bloke, always been loyal to me. Also committed, and doing real stuff.
He walked from Gladstone to Brisbane to raise money for leukaemia in 2005. Well done, mate. Walked from Mackay to Gladstone raising money for prostate cancer. This is a bloke who believes in raising money for charity.
He's also been part of a team up here which got folks like us to deliver for the local regional economy.
I've mentioned the $150 million investment here for the Calliope Cross Roads, also a big investment in the Kirkwood Road, other investments including the upgrade to Gladstone Airport Terminal – nearly $5 million.
And for people at Emerald $2.5 million for the Performing Arts Centre revitalisation, $6 million for the Emerald Opal Street Sports Precinct construction.
Finally on schools in this area, I want to make this point.
I have not seen a bigger investment in schools anywhere in Australia than I've seen here.
Over $150 million invested in 92 new classrooms, 113 new school libraries, 28 multipurpose facilities, 8 new science and language centres, 3 new Trades Training Centres, 5,000 more computers into the high schools.
And under our Better Schools Plan, let me make this very plain.
And I’d call upon Mr Newman, the Premier of Queensland, to do this: stop playing politics on the Better Schools Plan and reach an agreement with the Australian Government.
We have a proposed investment of some $3.8 billion into Queensland schools if only Mr Newman would sign up.
What's that mean for a local school here? Gladstone State High School under our plan would receive an additional $12.1 million in public funding over the next 6 years, that's an increase in 56 per cent.
If you're at Emerald High School, that would mean an extra $2.9 million out over the next 6 years – an increase of 51 per cent.
These are big changes for local schools.
So, Mr Abbott's up there standing with Mr Newman, talking about roads today and talking about Queensland's future.
What I've seen from Premier Newman is slash and burn, sacking health workers, sacking hospital workers, sacking public servants, reducing services.
What you get with Campbell Newman is the entree, what you get with Mr Abbott is the main course.
Finally, for Hinkler, it’s really good to have our candidate here and I look forward to getting down to Bundy and other centres in Hinkler not too far from now. Leanne is a good local candidate and we’re going to have good messages for the local community here.
The last thing I'd say before turning it to your questions is this: both these candidates have been speaking to me about the needs of the Bundaberg Port, which has been knocked around a fair bit as a result of recent really bad weather.
We need to do some work down there and I'm going to take that message to Anthony Albanese in terms of what we can do to help the Port get back into normal business.
 Over to you, folks.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you match Tony Abbott's funding commitment on the Bruce Highway?
PM: I will match Tony Abbott with action.
We have delivered $5.7 billion worth of action.
What we've got from Mr Abbott is a whole pile of rhetoric.
If it was real about the Bruce then for 12 years in office we would have seen more than $1.3 billion.
We are proud of our report, we have a plan for the future for the upgrade of the Bruce and I think it's time Mr Abbott levelled with the Australian people and the Queensland people about his record so far.
Remember, the Transport Spokesman they're standing up with today, Warren Truss, who comes from down the road here, was Transport Minister under Mr Howard when they delivered basically zip - $1.3 billion under their term in Government.
We've got a strong plan and we have a record of delivery and you see it every stretch of the road from up there in Cairns down to the Cooroy to Curra at the other end.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott said he's more of a Queenslander than you because of the money he's put forward for the Bruce. Surely that's not the case?
PM: Well if Mr Abbott says he's more of a Queenslander than myself then why did he only invest $1.3 billion when they had 12 years to make a difference? You answer that yourselves.
JOURNALIST: What about the Sunshine Coast in terms of the Bruce Highway? They feel they've been forgotten a bit.
PM: Well I would say the Cooroy to Curra stretch – which I know very well because I grew up on the Sunshine Coast, in Eumundi, and we drove to Cooroy a lot – and it’s been frankly one of the worst fatality zones in the Bruce Highway and of any highway stretch anywhere in Australia.
We have now invested hundreds of millions of dollars into Stage One of the Cooroy to Curra, and with another stage still to come.
Guess what? That's in Warren Truss's electorate. He's the former Transport Minister of the Liberal National Party Government.
We don't really have much of a political prospect of ever winning that seat, but you know what we've done?
We've invested in the upgrade of the Bruce Highway there because we want to see a real change to the Bruce.
It's very easy to use extravagant language; it's very hard to do real things. This is a real project here and we've seen them up and down the Bruce, funded by us, $5.8 billion worth.
JOURNALIST: There appears to have been some branch stacking in Kingsford Smith, you’ve said before that you want to crack down on that sort of thing. Are you going to take any action there?
PM: Well, I am the bloke who is behind national party reform.
Biggest reform the Australian Labor Party has seen in a century is a new system for electing the leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party.
And I would draw your attention to it again for the first time in our party's history, 50 per cent of the vote will come from members of the parliamentary party, 50% will come from the tens of thousands of rank and file members of the party right across the nation.
What's that about? It's about dealing with the power of the factions.
No-one's done this before. It's the right thing to do. If there are any irregularities on the ground, the national secretary will take appropriate action.
JOURNALIST: On the emissions trading scheme, your point about the Opposition (inaudible) changing is well made. But your own side itself has also changed a fair bit. Why should you be believed this time around?
PM: My commitment to the people in 2007 was to introduce an emissions trading scheme.
Number two, the Liberals, together with the Greens, voted against it twice and voted it down in the Australian Parliament.
Number three, this emissions trading scheme is the commitment I gave to the Australian people back in 2007: consistency on environmental action.
And I'm proud that we're doing so in a manner which still delivers cost of living pressure relief for Australian families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what are you going to change to stop the flow of asylum seeker boats and deaths?
PM: Well as I've said before, we have a responsibility to adjust and change our policies on asylum seekers in response to new circumstances.
And we will continue to work methodically through the real possibilities for change, which will have a real effect.
I would say, again, to those who think this is very easy to do, like Mr Abbott, that responding to the challenge that we have is not helped by just coming up with glib, three-word slogans: stop the boats.
The Australian people want to know what the further answer is to this question. How Mr Abbott, would you stop the boats? That's the real question.
On our policies we are looking at this right now globally, in terms of the effectiveness of the Refugee Convention.
We're looking at it regionally in terms of our cooperation with regional States in south-east Asia and the south-west Pacific, hence my visit to Indonesia, discussions I've had recently in Papua New Guinea and elsewhere in order to strengthen our regional cooperation as folk move their way through this region.
Thirdly, we need to also act on the challenge that we face in the refugee determination processes for our country and you will see some statements which have been made today, I believe by the minister responsible, concerning the assessment processes domestically for refugees.
The bottom line is this: Australia so far has had a reasonably generous approach to the assessment of asylum seekers from around the world.
What's happened now under Foreign Minister Bob Carr and others is those criteria are being looked at afresh and we'll have more to say about that in due course.
Action at the global level, the regional level, the national level, that's the correct response to a problem which is not uniquely Australia's.
It is a problem right around the world and I'd much rather have a real response to this problem, rather than pretend to the Australian people that you can fix it like that, because when Mr Abbott says that, frankly he's deluding folks.
JOURNALIST: There was a boy last week in Cairns that was bullied quite badly, had his leg broken. What's your response to bullying?
PM: Bullying, wherever it occurs and in schools, should have zero tolerance by any teacher, by any principal and frankly by the kids themselves.
This can be living hell for a small kid at a school and I would think Australia in 2013, we don't just accept that as normal behaviour by kids. We just don't, it's wrong, it terrifies kids and impedes their ability to make the most of their schooling.
So I'd just say to the Australian community, to all teachers, all principals and kids themselves, if you see some kid being bullied in school and you know when it's happening: the strong and courageous thing to do is to step forward and to stop it or to help stop it and put your arm around the kid and say "I'm with you."
That's what I'd say in response to what you've just said.
[ENDS]


E &amp; O E – PROOF ONLY
My fellow Australians.
Tonight I want to speak to you about a matter of great importance to all of us.
Earlier today I met the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea and struck a new regional arrangement on asylum seekers.
From this point forward, asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat will be sent to Papua New Guinea for processing and resettlement.
Australia will continue to have cooperative arrangements in asylum seekers with Nauru.
People who come by boat now have no prospect of being resettled in Australia.
The rules have changed. If you come by boat you will never permanently live in Australia.
This has not been an easy decision for me or my colleagues.
The sight of asylum seekers being exploited by people smugglers is appalling.
And the problem is likely to get worse in the future as it is for so many countries around the world.
We also have to do everything possible to protect our orderly migration system and the integrity of our borders.
The bottom line is that we have to protect lives by dealing robustly with people smugglers.
Australians have had enough of seeing asylum seekers dying in the waters to our north and our northwest.
They’ve had enough of people smugglers profiting from death.
Like me, they worry about the safety of our brave servicemen and women involved in rescue operations when boats get into distress.
As Prime Minister, I must address changing circumstances, balancing our humanitarian obligations under international law with the reality on the ground. 
Australian Governments have never had a policy on asylum seekers that is set in stone.
We must always adjust to changing circumstances while remaining true to our values and vigilant concerning our legal obligations.
Asylum seeker policy is complex. It is very complex indeed.
It is hard. It involves detailed cooperation with other countries.
With this announcement there will inevitably be many hurdles along the road.
It won’t be smooth and nobody should expect the boats to stop tomorrow.
In fact, people smugglers will now try and test our resolve.
Our job is to deal with each new hurdle as it appears.
Under our new policy, Australia will continue to take genuine refugees from around the world under the normal processes of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Refugees who have often been languishing in camps for a decade.
But my message to asylum seekers around the world is simple.
Under the arrangement with Papua New Guinea, if you come here by boat, you will be sent to Papua New Guinea.
I also have a message for the people smugglers of our region and the world.
Your business model is over.
The decision we have announced today is one part of the Government’s multilayered approach in responding to the scourge of people smuggling.
The Government will continue to adjust our policy and approach in the future as necessary.
I thank you for your attention.


Prime Minister, Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Minister for Immigration, Attorney-General
PM RUDD: First of all, Prime Minister, thank you so much for travelling to Brisbane from Moresby. Brisbane we see as the northern capital of Australia and it's good to have you here.
To your ministerial colleagues, including of course the Foreign Minister of Papua New Guinea and the Attorney-General of Papua New Guinea, and my parliamentary and ministerial colleagues as well and I believe we have a member from West Britain, good to see you as well.
Today the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea and I are announcing a major initiative to combat the scourge of people smuggling.
Today we're announcing a new resettlement arrangement between Australia and Papua New Guinea.
From now on, any asylum seeker who arrives in Australia by boat will have no chance of being settled in Australia as refugees.
Asylum seekers taken to Christmas Island will be sent to Manus and elsewhere in Papua New Guinea for assessment of their refugee status.
If they are found to be genuine refugees they will be resettled in Papua New Guinea, an emerging economy with a strong future; a robust democracy which is also a signatory to the United Nations Refugees Convention.
If they found not to be genuine refugees they may be repatriated to their country of origin or be sent to a safe third country other than Australia.
These arrangements are contained within the Regional Resettlement Arrangement signed by myself and the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea just now.
Under this RRA, the arrangement between Australia and PNG will apply for the next 12 month period and be subject to annual review by the joint Australia Papua New Guinea Ministerial Forum.
Critically, this RRA does not specify an absolute limit to the number of asylum seekers who can be transferred or genuine refugees who can be resettled.
Our expectation and the expectation of our officials is as this Regional Resettlement Arrangement is implemented and the message is sent loud and clear back up the pipeline that the number of boats will decline over time as asylum seekers then make recourse to other more normal UNHCR processes to have their claims assessed.
In the period ahead our Governments intend to make sure that the message is delivered loud and clear to people smuggling networks around the world, and those criminal elements within Australia who may be supporting them that the hopes that they offer their customers for the future are nothing but false hopes.
Australia will continue its cooperative arrangements on people smuggling with the Republic of Nauru and looks forward to furthering those arrangements in the future.
I understand that this is a very hard-line decision.
I understand that different groups in Australia and around the world will see this decision in different ways.
But our responsibility as a government is to ensure that we have a robust system of border security and orderly migration on the one hand as well as fulfilling our legal and compassionate obligations under the Refugee Convention on the other.
Therefore, it's important for me to make clear to all concerned how the Government, after lengthy internal deliberation with all relevant ministers and agencies and with our PNG counterparts, have sought to get in balance right.
Number one, this decision today is part of the Government's framework for a multilayered approach to dealing with the scourge of people smuggling, and doing so within, not outside, the legal framework of the Convention.
Critically, the Convention requires us not to send genuine refugees back to the countries they have fled from, and in this arrange minute we honour that undertaking.
The Convention requires us to provide proper humane treatment of people; under this arrangement we will do so.
And also under this arrangement, asylum seekers who are determined to be genuine refugees will have therefore a country of settlement, namely Papua New Guinea.
Number two, at a global level, this morning I also spoke with the United Nations Secretary-General.
I indicated that Australia will be convening an international conference of relevant transit countries and destination countries within the framework of the Refugee Convention to deliberate on how to improve current global international arrangements in two respects.
Firstly, the adequacy of processing systems and centres around the world, and as well as that, how do we best have a better arrangement for Australia, Canada, the US and other countries to deal with the resettlement burden around the world.
Number three, Australia sees this as a Regional Resettlement Arrangement between Australia and Papua New Guinea, and therefore is part of our broader approach on regional cooperative arrangements in South East Asia, and the South Pacific, on people smuggling.
In this regard, we will seek to develop further regional arrangements within this framework over time through the mechanism already agreed between Australia Indonesia for a ministerial conference of Immigration Ministers and Foreign Ministers to be held next month in Indonesia.
Number four, as also discussed in Indonesia, we will also be working with regional partners on visa arrangements for certain countries around the world that have become source countries for the outflow of irregular people movements.
In this area, I have noted reports from Jakarta today on forthcoming arrangements from the Indonesian Government on visa arrangements for Iranians.
Number five, Australia's also reviewing its own national assessment procedures for dealing with refugee determination arrangements within Australia; whether those are appropriately benchmarked with other national jurisdictions around the world, and whether these need to be changed.
Australians are people with hard heads but also with a kind and compassionate heart.
I wish to emphasise that Australia will continue to take large numbers of genuine refugees through our existing global humanitarian program.
Recently the Government increased our intake from 13,000 to 20,000 per annum.
These refugees are people who have languished in UN camps around the world for years and in some cases for more than a decade.
These refugees Australia will continue to help as part of our humanitarian responsibilities to the international community.
Should the international I referred to earlier in the week on global resettlement practices be successful, and if we also see the successful implementation of the RRA announced today, Australia stands ready to consider progressively increasing the number of places in the humanitarian program as recommended by the Houston Panel.
Many Australians will also be concerned about the proper and humane treatment of both asylum seekers and genuine refugees under the RRA.
The Government is fully mindful of its obligations under international and domestic law; this is no trivial matter.
The Minister for Immigration will be releasing a subsequent statement on the proper treatment of asylum seekers and refugees under this arrangement, in particular the proper protection of unaccompanied minors and families with children.
The Government is fully mindful of the UNHCR report on Manus, and as I said earlier this week in Moresby, as the Manus facility is developed further over time we intend to ensure that all proper requirements are met and this will take time.
Furthermore on the question of the settlement of genuine refugees with their status having been determined in Papua New Guinea, the Australian Government, in support of the PNG Government, will provide comprehensive settlement services to ensure that these refugees can live safely and with security and in time, prosperity, within PNG.
I want to be clear with everyone both within in Australia and Papua New Guinea that Prime Minister Peter O’Neill has decided to help Australia with a problem we face, the problem of people smuggling, and Peter I thank you for that.
I thank you as a friend; I thank you as a fellow Prime Minister and as a neighbour.
I also thank the Prime Minister for having raised his willingness to do more in cooperation on people smuggling when we met in Brisbane only a couple of weeks ago, and our conversations since then have been based on that initial encounter.
I want to be equally clear with people in Australia and PNG that our Government is also helping Papua New Guinea deal with the problems that they face.
That's what friends are for and that's what friends do for each other, and we make no apology for that.
Australia has been PNG's strongest development partner for decades.
Earlier this week in Moresby I agreed with the Prime Minister that we would help PNG in a number of important areas.
The Prime Minister and I have also discussed the important work we can do in the area of health and hospitals.
We've agreed that Australia will now help with the redevelopment of the major referral hospital in Lae and its long term management needs.
We've agreed to fund 50:50 the reform of the Papua New Guinea university sector including next year by implementing the recommendations of the Australia-PNG education review.
We've also agreed to help PNG with the support they have sought in professional management teams in the health, education and law and order portfolios.
And Australia, Prime Minister, stands ready to assist PNG further with other development needs in the future.
The RRA that Papua New Guinea and Australia are announcing today represents one part of a comprehensive response to the challenge of people smuggling.
Some will say it's too hard-line; others will say it's inadequate and we should simply jettison the Refugee Convention. There will be criticism both from the left and from the right.
What the Government has sought to do is provide a robust, balanced response to a problem for all of us.
I want to be frank with everyone around the nation that the implementation of this Regional Resettlement Arrangement will not be smooth. We are bound to run into many unanticipated problems. We will tackle them one by one.
I also want to be frank with everybody by saying the implementation of this arrangement will not be inexpensive; acting on such a sustained challenge to border security does cost.
There will be those both in PNG and Australia who will seek to attack this arrangement through the courts, which is why we have been as careful as we can in constructing an arrangement which is mindful of the earlier deliberations of the courts.
And above all, I want to level with the nation by saying that the boats are not going to stop coming tomorrow, in fact it is more probable that the people smugglers will try and test our resolve for the period ahead.
It's important, however, to look how measures such as this work over the months and years ahead.
We are prepared to do more. I want to be absolutely clear with the Australian people as to why we're doing this. Finally, it's for three reasons.
The first is that our intelligence agencies indicate the numbers of people seeking to come to Australia by boat will continue to increase in the future as the people smuggling industry becomes more professional and entrenched around the world.
Other countries are finding it the same.
Second, with each vessel that comes, there is a continued risk of drownings, and we've seen too much of this already.
There is also a third reason. People smugglers try to drum up business when there is human tragedy around the world.
We know this from Afghanistan, Iraq and Iran, but the international community now faces a massive new outflow from Syria.
That is why the international community needs to deal with each of these new challenges in a sustainable fashion.
That is why we need a comprehensive network of processing centres around the world, and better and more equitable resettlement obligations around the world rather than every country simply playing pass-the parcel.
Therefore the decision announced today represents one practical step forward, among many that will need to be taken for future.
This is not a three-word slogan. This is a piece of hard public policy which we are working through cooperatively within our region and which must now be implemented.
And we must do so calmly, rationally and with resolve. Today represents one major step forward. Many other steps lie ahead, and I thank the Prime Minister for his cooperation.
PM O’NEILL: Thank you, Prime Minister Rudd. And I thank you once again for inviting myself and my colleague Ministers from Papua New Guinea to join you on this very important regional announcement.
This is a regional initiative that we think that the region continues to face as Pacific communities, like Papua New Guinea, and the other small island states continue to have challenges maintaining their borders.
And as a result of that, we continue to have illegal immigrants ourselves, into those nations and countries.
Papua New Guinea was asked, by the then government in 2006, to establish a processing centre in Manus.
In 2011 of course, the then government, the Gillard Government, asked us to reopen that facility.
We have insisted since we came into government that we wanted to establish a permanent regional processing centre.
Today's regional resettlement program is one that we believe will resolve many of those issues we have brought forward to the Australian Government.
That is why I want to thank the Prime Minister of Australia Kevin Rudd and of course the government for their initiative to try to accommodate our wishes to establish a regional processing centre and a regional resettlement scheme that has now been announced today.
Papua New Guinea as a country, it might not be widely reported, but we also have our own refugee issues. For many years, over tens of thousands of refugees in our country.
I believe that the processing centre and the resettlement arrangement, that we're now forging, will enable us to have an orderly process in those people who are seeking genuine citizenship of other countries in the region.
And that is why we agreed to a resettlement program where we believe strongly that genuine refugees can be resettled in our country and within the region in the years to come.
I also want to say this: an annual review will take place in these arrangements.
So as Prime Minister Rudd has stated earlier, it is not going to be easy.
But of course Papua New Guinea is blessed with lots of land mass and a very small population.
There is enough assistance that we can give to the Australian Government in handling this issue of the refugees that the Australian Government is facing.
So once again, thank you very much for asking us to join you in this major announcement.
We look forward to working with the Australian government in the Australian government in the near future and making sure this resettlement program works for our community in the Pacific region.
MINISTER BURKE: Thank you, Prime Minister and Prime Minister O’Neill and Ministers.
We've had one vessel that has been intercepted, at least one immediately before this announcement.
It will be vessels from now on intercepted or on reaching Australia that will have the new rules applied to them.
To send people to Manus Island, the health checks themselves take up to two weeks.
So there will be a delay from the first boats arriving before people begin to be transferred to Manus Island.
In the last couple of weeks, I've removed children and a number of family groups from Manus Island because the facilities, as they are right now, are not appropriate for some of those different groups.
The intention here though, is that we will now bring the quality of those places back up to standard for the processing centre.
So that, where at the moment, we will not be transferring women and children immediately across to Manus Island, the intention is that as the temporary facility moves to a permanent facility, anybody who arrives from now on will be subject to the new rules.
People who are currently within the detention network, within Australia on Manus or on Nauru do not have these rules applied to them.
But from now on, vessels that are intercepted will have the new rules apply to them.
And it will be a couple of weeks because of the health checks circumstance before the first transfers take place.
AG: Thank you Prime Minister. Just to reiterate that, although the Prime Minister has already said these things, this arrangement will be in entirely in accordance with Australia's international and domestic law obligations.
Papua New Guinea is of course a signatory to the Refugees Convention and, as has been indicated by both Prime Ministers, Papua New Guinea is going to withdraw the reservations that it had to the Refugees Convention in respect of people who are to be transferred from Australia.
What that means is that all people transferred to Papua New Guinea will have the full benefit of the rights that come to them under the Refugees Convention.
Papua New Guinea will be conducting the processing and, of course, as is appropriate under the Refugees Convention, it will carry with it for all those who are assessed as being genuine refugees, the right to potentially resettlement in Papua New Guinea.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the obvious question is how much is this going to cost? And secondly, is the government confident it will withstand the obvious legal challenges that are going to come?
PM RUDD: A full statement of costs will be put forward by the Finance Minister in due course.
We've gone through that quite extensively.
Of course, some of the matters that I've referred to in terms of development cooperation would occur within the framework of the development assistance budget.
Others will, of course, need to be dealt with in a different way.
On the question of the overall impact on the budget of asylum seekers in general, at present, because the numbers are going up and up and up, this is a huge burden to budget.
What we're on about here is a new arrangement which actually will send a very clear message to people smugglers with the objective of reducing the number over time and therefore, with less call on the budget.
So for us, those budgetary arrangements are important.
On the second question you raised, I would simply refer to the statements by the Attorney and myself earlier on.
And that is, we are operating here within the legal framework of UN convention and Australian domestic law.
We’ve been entirely mindful of early determinations by the Australian High Court.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said you’ll review this within twelve months, how will you measure whether it's been successful? How much of the boats need to stop or how many boats need to stop before you can decide?
PM RUDD: I think the real evaluation here lies in what the intelligence and security agencies inform us about the likely impact of these arrangements over time in bringing numbers down over time.
It would be wrong and misleading for me to even begin to suggest a number to you today. I don’t intend to do that. I believe in being straight with the people of Australia.
And therefore, what we're seeking to do through these arrangements is send a clear and undiluted message to every people smuggler in the world that your business model is basically undermined.
Your business model, which says if you jump on a boat, you're going to end up in Australia, that doesn't apply any more.
We'll see how long it takes to have an effect.
But we want to be upfront about the fact that will not be overnight.
As I said, people smugglers may well seek to test the resolve early on.
It will be bumpy and rocky for a while but this is a clear change in strategic direction and dealing with the core element of the business case of people smugglers, which says that if you jump on a boat, you've got a free ticket to Australia and there to stay.
JOURNALIST: Has this been approved by Cabinet?
PM RUDD: Yes, we've had extensive discussions through full Cabinet and the National Security Committee of the Cabinet over the last several weeks.
As I said, this conversation about this arose because my good friend Peter O'Neill, when he was last in Brisbane a few weeks ago, over a bite to lunch on the verandah at Norman Park, said ‘what can we do more to cooperate with people smuggling’ so we've worked from there and all our agencies have been engaged since that time.
JOURNALIST: Why won't you tell us what the cost is now and how you will pay for it?
PM RUDD: Can I say we will undertake this with an absolute application to discipline, that this will be budget neutral.
That is the commitment the Australian people want me to give to them.
That's the commitment I am giving to them.
In terms of the finalisation of those arrangements which fall currently within or outside the aid budget, then we'll make a full statement in due course and the Finance Minister will do so.
JOURNALIST: One more question. In the next 12 months, how many asylum seekers is PNG willing to take?
PM O’NEILL: The details are in the agreement there. We will take as much as we can on the capacities that we have on the ground.
And as you know, we are building more capacity to take more refugees and asylum seekers.
JOURNALIST: Can you give us an indication of the number? You must have a number in your mind, surely?
PM O’NEILL: You can't just simply estimate a number.
You don't know how many people are seeking such a refugee status in the boats that arrive.
So we hope that the boat will stop and there will be nobody coming to Manus and that is the objective of these arrangements.
PM RUDD: The other point to add to what the Prime Minister has just said is that every people smuggler in the world would want us to give you a number.
We're not for obvious national interest reasons.
That is why in agreement is framed in the way it's framing so we don't allow people smugglers to gain the system.
That's just completely wrong. I said before our international convention for visits is four.
I appreciate the lateness of the day and I'm sorry for those who have been inconvenienced by that but the PM has just arrived from PNG. Thank you for your time.
[ENDS] 


Brisbane
As of today asylum seekers who come here by boat without a visa will never be settled in Australia.
Under the new arrangement signed with Papua New Guinea today – the Regional Settlement Arrangement - unauthorised arrivals will be sent to Papua New Guinea for assessment and if found to be a refugee will be settled there.
Arriving in Australia by boat will no longer mean settlement in Australia.
Australians have had enough of seeing people drowning in the waters to our north.
Our country has had enough of people smugglers exploiting asylum seekers and seeing them drown on the high seas.
We are sick of watching our servicemen and women risking their lives in rescues in dangerous conditions on the high seas.
Regional processing arrangements in Papua New Guinea will be significantly expanded and people will be sent to Manus Island as soon as health checks are complete and appropriate accommodation is identified.
PNG officials will assess their claims on Manus Island.
Our governments will expand existing facilities on Manus Island, as well as establishing further facilities in Papua New Guinea.
There is no cap on the number of people who can be transferred to Papua New Guinea.
The Australian Government, in partnership with the PNG Government, will support settlement services for those with refugee status, as safe and appropriate accommodation and services are identified.
We are a compassionate nation and we will continue to deliver a strong humanitarian program.
If the measure announced today and the international meeting on the Convention that has been flagged lead to a significant change in the number of people arriving by boat, then the Government stands ready to consider progressively increasing our humanitarian intake towards 27,000 as recommended by the Houston Panel.
There is nothing compassionate about criminal operations which see children and families drowning at sea.
Access to our humanitarian program must be through the international organisations which resettle people around the world, not through criminal operators who have pushed people onto unseaworthy vessels with tragic consequences.
The new arrangements will allow Australia to help more people who are genuinely in need and help prevent people smugglers from abusing our system.
The people smugglers themselves are constantly changing the way they operate and we need to be flexible enough to anticipate and match their actions to avoid the terrible consequences of this trade.
No doubt there will be some people smugglers who now encourage asylum seekers to test our resolve.
Be in no doubt. If people are paying thousands and thousands of dollars to a people smuggler they are buying a ticket to a country other than Australia. 


Subject(s): Labor Party reforms; Asylum seekers
PM: The Australian parliamentary Labor Party has today met here at the Balmain Town Hall.
Today, the Australian parliamentary Labor Party has made more history in Balmain.
Today, the Australian parliamentary Labor Party has decided to democratise the party for the future.
The party has decided also to make sure that the PM who the people elect in the future will be the Prime Minister the people get in the future.
The Australian Labor Party has been meeting in this hall for the last 120 years, in fact the Australian Labor Party has been meeting in halls like this around Australia for the last 120 years.
Today, the ALP has passed one of its most significant reforms to the party in recent history.
This reform brings us into line with the sorts of models which have been embraced in the United Kingdom, Canada and the United States.
These are reforms which will be welcomed by our 44,000 rank and file members across the nation.
Each of our members now gets to have a say, a real say in the future leadership of our party.
Decisions can no longer simply be made by a factional few.
But these reforms also extend beyond party lines, they go to the Australian public itself.
The Australian public now have certainty. Australians demand to know that the Prime Minister they elect is the Prime Minister they get and that is underlined by these reforms.
The changes that we have passed will see the federal parliamentary Labor Party leader elected jointly by the party membership and the members of the FPLP on the following proportional basis: votes by the party membership is weighted at 50 per cent and votes by the federal parliamentary Labor Party weighted also at 50 per cent.
An election for leader shall automatically occur following an election where the ALP does not form government.
An election for leader can be called by the Caucus Secretary after any of the following events: upon the resignation of the leader, at the request of the leader, or at least 75 per cent of the members of the federal parliamentary Labor Party sign a petition requesting that an election for a new leader be held on the grounds that the current leader has brought the party into disrepute.
These changes were also if we were to continue to be the party of ideas, reform and change, as well as the party of fearless debate.
We have also, in our meeting today, accepted three sets of amendments moved by myself and seconded by Anthony Albanese, the Deputy Prime Minister.
And that is that the rule, in terms of the Leader of the Opposition, if the party doesn't form government, under those circumstances, the leader would be open to a future ballot if there was a petition of 60 per cent of the members of the federal parliamentary party rather than 75 per cent as is the case for the party when we are in government and the leader is Prime Minister.
The second procedural motion that was put forward by myself and the deputy leader relates to the closing of the day of nominations for the election of a leader and the third is that in the interim period between an election and such an election being held for the party leadership, the deputy leader or the highest ranked House of Representatives member shall act as leader for the interim.
I welcome the fact that the parliamentary Labor Party has chosen to support these procedural amendments moved by myself and the Deputy Prime Minister.
Friends, for the future, this is an important set of reforms for our party.
Across Australia, the great thing about the Australian Labor movement is that we are a party of the grass roots.
We are at our best when we are listening to people right across the country.
And we are at our best when we know that the rank and file of our membership, all 44,000 of them, know that they have an active say in the future direction of our party.
This therefore is a good story to sell for us across the country.
I believe it is the right message for the party, it is the right message also to the country at large, who have raised concerns about these matters in recent times.
I repeat, under this reform, we have implemented the single greatest reform in the parliamentary Labor Party, the Labor Party more generally in recent times.
Not only democratising the party but also ensuring that the Prime Minister the Australian people vote for is the Prime Minister that the Australian people then get.
Of course, this is a matter for us primarily but also of relevance to the country at large.
As well as this, in recent times, we have embraced another series of important policy directions.
Last Friday, we made clear through the announcement with Prime Minister Peter O'Neill from Papua New Guinea, our new approach to the question of asylum seekers.
The rules have changed and that is now legitimately the subject of attention around the world, which is precisely as we want it to be.
A clear cut message to people smugglers around the world.
This month, we have also launched our landmark national disability reforms, DisabilityCare Australia.
On track to benefit tens of thousands, then hundreds of thousands and then millions of Australians over time, though ultimately peaking at this stage, based on our projections, at 460,000.
We have also extended our Better Schools negotiations under the Better Schools Plan.
We have received, of course, the support of the Government of Tasmania, the Independent Schools Association and we are also into the conclusion of our negotiations with other sectors of the Australian education community as well.
We have also acted to scrap the carbon tax, bringing forward the introduction of the emissions trading scheme, which will ease cost of living pressures for Australian families.
Friends, what I would say overall to all Australians who have been engaged with what we have been doing in the last three weeks, is we have been getting our own house in order.
With this major reform to the parliamentary party, I believe we have one of the most modern party structures in Australia, going into the future. That is as it should be.
We have also been putting our best foot forward on key areas of policy, on the future challenges to our economy and our response to it through a national competitiveness agenda, through to what we have done most recently also in relation to asylum seekers and of course the price on carbon.
More work is to be done.
We will continue to do our best for the Australian people but I believe this is a positive day for democracy in Australia, an historic day for the Australian Labor Party and a great day for Australian Labor Party members across our nation.
JOURNALIST: With the Caucus rule on the leadership, are you worried at all that the trade unions may try and change that post-election at national conference or are you confident that fifty-fifty model will now stick?
PM: The Caucus is the master of its own destiny.
The Caucus has spoken and after a significant protracted, vigorous debate involving no uniformity of views, but reaching a resolution that this was the best way forward, the Caucus has spoken.
Therefore, this will be the model we take into the future.
I know there will be some resistance from a few folk around the show.
That is normal given the composition of our great and glorious movement.
But let me tell you, this has been a vigorous debate today.
It has been a lot of consultation over the last two weeks and frankly this is reform that has been coming for a long, long time.
The Australian Labor Party needs to throw open the doors and the windows to let a bit of fresh air in for the future. In fact, a lot of fresh air.
Open to new ideas, new people to make sure we're out there representing the Australia of tomorrow, not the Australia of 40 years ago.
JOURNALIST: In recent weeks there has been allegations of branch stacking, for example in the seat of Kingsford Smith. With these reforms, how long are they going to take to filter through if there is allegations of branch stacking in recent days?
PM: Party reform is a long process.
This single reform in terms of the election of the parliamentary leader is, I think, the biggest reform in recent party history, by a long shot.
In terms of probity across NSW, you will understand that not long ago, I requested the national executive to undertake intervention in the state of NSW.
That process is underway.
Any irregularities in any voting process, of course, would go through the national executive.
Party reform overall is going to take a while yet. There are future things to do as well.
I want to see the party democratised more and more and more.
That is the pathway to the future and no one in our show should have anything to fear from the voice of the people.
JOURNALIST: Were asylum seeker issues discussed, Mr Rudd, and what was the response from your colleagues on that – on your plan?
PM: Obviously I provided a report to the Caucus on what I have been doing as leader with my Cabinet colleagues over recent weeks.
And, of course, I reported to them on the reasons we had taken the decision we announced last Friday with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea.
Obviously, there are Caucus members who are concerned about this and they expressed their concerns directly.
My response and that of Tony Burke – the Minister – and other colleagues, was that our challenge here is to deal a fatal blow to the people smuggling industry long term.
And you can't do that unless you go to the core reason this industry exists, which is them offering people around Australia – around the world I should say – the prospect of coming here to live full-time.
Rather than us taking - rather than us continuing to take refugees from other centres around the world which is what we’ve done in recent times.
So this – from our perspective and the Government's perspective and my response to questions from the Caucus – is the right response and it is the right ethical response to the drownings we see at sea, the proliferation of this industry, and the fact that people languishing in camps for 10 and 20 years aren't getting a fair go, in terms of coming here as a bona fide refugee.
JOURNALIST: You once argued there was a biblical requirement for us to look after the stranger in our midst, has that argument gone, what has happened to that argument?
PM: Well, without going to the absolute accuracy of your quote, let me say this: we have an ethical responsibility to look after people wherever we can.
And that means that when people come to our shores, we look after them humanely and we look after them humanely consistent with what we're required to do, as well, through international law and under the refugee's convention.
And through this approach, the regional resettlement arrangement, we are doing precisely that.
We have been mindful of first of all, the importance of people being treated in a humane fashion.
We have been mindful of the requirement that people are assessed according to proper standards.
We are mindful, also, that under the current provisions of the convention, no-one is actually ultimately required to provide a final state of residence for a person determined to be a refugee.
There is a requirement for best efforts under the current convention but no requirement to actually say here is where you can live once your status is determined. We have done that.
And on top of that, it is the requirement, we feel, both under international law, and in our response to this practical challenge, to use the humanitarian quota of 20,000 places to benefit those who are languishing, in some cases rotting in camps, around the world.
These are our ethical requirements as well and I will not be Prime Minister of Australia and see the entire orderly immigration system itself threatened by not sending a message such as this to the people smuggling industry around the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how quickly can you scale up Manus Island to the 3,000 that you mentioned, and also if your efforts are frustrated in legislation after the election, would you be prepared to call a double dissolution on it?
PM: I won't go into hypotheticals at all.
What we have done is put forward a clear cut policy.
We have negotiated and agreed it with the Government of Papua New Guinea.
We have had Cabinet National Security Committee and its advisors and the full Cabinet working on this for some weeks.
We believe we have a thorough approach which is eminently defensible in the international community and with the prospect of being effective.
Now, on the question of the implementation of this, which goes to your first part of your question, as I said, and Minister Burke said, in our press conferences last Friday: this is going to take quite a while to roll out.
It is a big operational undertaking and I have said from the outset, there will be bumps in the road, there’ll be challenges on the way, we understand that.
People will engage in the politics of this big time, as well as the prospect of legal challenges here and Papua New Guinea.
This is what happens when you seek to act decisively on something as fundamental as this.
But we make no apology for the decision we have taken.
We have reflected on it long and hard, and we believe it is the right response given the incoming problem that we now face.
JOURNALIST: The British Labour Party is having a discussion at the moment about restricting union members who are members of the Labour Party only to those who have a ticket in the British Labour Party, so you don't have the automatic union affiliation. Is this something you think the Australian Labor Party should look at?
PM: Well I was talking to Ed Miliband, the British Labour Party leader, about this in the last couple of weeks. Ed’s a good friend of mine – I’ve known him for the last decade or so.
So I won't comment on the British internal debate, a matter for the Poms, and they seem to be doing well in a few areas of late recently as well unfortunately.
But, could I say this: what we are seeking to do here with this reform is say to all of our friends and supporters in the trade union movement, we want you active in the branches of the Australian Labor Party. That is what we're saying.
So when you’ve got a have a whole lot of people out there who are members of trade unions, we want you to be active in your local branch – the Balmain branch, the Bulimba branch in Brisbane where I come from.
So that you're part and parcel of local community life.
That is where we want to see the activism of our trade union friends and that is what this reform is designed to encourage.
JOURNALIST: Does the no advantage principle apply to asylum seekers sent to Papua New Guinea: meaning that do they still languish for years unspecified to have their claims processed or will claims be processed immediately?
PM: On that, I direct that question to the Immigration Minister. I don't wish to say anything inaccurate.
As you know, we indicated that this new arrangement would apply from the date of announcement last Friday. But I would suggest you put that question to him. I do not want to say anything which is misleading.
JOURNALIST: You say you won't apologise for the toughness of this policy, but will you apologise for dismantling the Pacific solutions?
PM: In many times in the recent debate on the question of asylum seekers policy, what I’ve said I this – and I think you’re aware of it.
Number one: we took our policies to the 2007 election with that explicitly made clear to the Australian people and we were voted in on that basis. And we did so under the circumstances at the time.
What I have said most recently in interviews on this subject is that circumstances then internationally changed, particularly in the period of 2009-10.
I have also said we should have adjusted our policy earlier.
What I am saying now is given the information about the numbers of people coming; secondly it overwhelming our humanitarian quota of 20,000 a year, who normally we ask people around the world through the UNHCR to fill.
This required an adjustment in policy.
That is what I have said and that is what underpins the new policy approach we have adopted for the future.
Remember, Australia remains the third most-generous country in the world in the resettlement of refugees.
After the United States and Canada, we take the largest number. Under this Government we have increased it from 12,000 to 20,000 a year.
I have foreshadowed with the successful implementation of this regional resettlement arrangement, that we also leave open the possibility of increasing that number from 20,000 to 27,000.
I have also said very clearly here are the range of other protections we are building in under the obligations of the UN Convention. But I am also saying to people smugglers and their business model around the world that, frankly, your model is busted.
And you better get used to that fact because this Government is going to take a hard line on this.
These folk are merchants in death and their business model needs to be dismantled. Part of this policy response is to do just that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you made a final decision on the election date yet and if you have, do you care to share it with us?
PM: Let me just say, you know something, in this period of government, we have been focused on the outstanding policy challenges that we face.
And there are still a number to address.
We have been dealing with this problem of asylum seekers policy.
We have been dealing with the challenges of cost of living pressures and therefore the decision we have taken to scrap the carbon tax.
We have also been dealing with the matters that gathered here today to attend to in Balmain which is fundamental party reform.
I have also been seized as, to the Government, of the new economic challenges which lie ahead of us given the end of the China resources boom and the need for us to diversify the economy, create new industries, so we don't have all of our eggs in one basket.
These are big challenges for government. We still have other challenges to deal with.
People have mentioned here today, this broader debate as I understand that you would on asylum seekers.
I have also seen statements from Mr Abbott on this. I want to make something plain here in my response to what he has said today.
It is quite plain to us that Mr Abbott is out there deliberately undermining the Government's clear message to people smugglers.
This is not in the national interest. It might be in Mr Abbott's personal political interest but frankly, if you do that sort of stuff, you raise the question about your ultimate fitness to hold the high office of Prime Minister.


PM: Women and men of Balmain, this is Unity Hall. You tell me this is where the Labor Party began. I say it began in Unity Hall and Barcaldine.
But let us not revisit the State of Origin, even for the Australian Labor Party.
The thing is we are here where the movement began, and today we have sought to give the movement its future.
What I see here are so many people who have been hardworking members of our party for years, for decades, and in some cases with our life members, more than half a century.
You are our heart and soul. You are the sinew in our bodies which makes it possible for us to function as a political party and movement.
Your values, your passion; without that we are nothing. We are absolutely nothing. With it we are everything and with those values, with that passion we can prevail.
When I look at you as hardworking members of our party, I have this simple view in my very basic Queensland heart which says this: you as members of the Australian Labor Party, our rank and file, you should have a say in the future election of the leader of the Australian Labor Party.
Our party should have nothing to fear to throw its doors open, throw its windows open, to our great rank and file, into our local communities, because we represent you therefore we should trust you to elect the best people possible to lead our movement in the future.
So I am perfectly relaxed in surrendering our future to you.
The new rule is pretty basic really. You get 50 per cent of the say, the federal parliamentary Labor Party gets 50 per cent of the say; I reckon that equals 100 per cent excellence for the future.
And before we get to the inevitable carping from the person who seeks to be Prime Minister of Australia, I would just say to him one thing. Mr Abbott, why don’t you try it yourself in your own party?
A little democracy in the Liberal Party mightn’t go astray.
I know they are normally a perfectly united mob, and I know Malcolm has his own views on that in recent days, but can I just say throwing the doors open of our major political parties is about rejuvenating the lifeblood of democracy itself.
And we are leading the way, as we have always done in the past.
Friends, the challenge which lies ahead of us is big. I make no pretence that this election, whenever it is held, is going to be easy. It will not. Hard work lies ahead of us.
They think, and they’ve thought, that they’ve had this thing in the bag. Remember Tony Abbott said he’s been busy writing his victory speech?
I think the Australian people always look askance at political arrogance when they see it.
Then we had the federal director – what’s his name – Loughnane, addressing a gathering of the Liberal party faithful in Canberra only two months ago saying we the Liberal Party have won this election.
Again I say the Australian people are very harsh judges of political arrogance when they see it.
Instead what I know is securing each and every voter’s support, for us obtaining victory at the next election will be fought suburb by suburb, town by town, city by city, state by state, branch by branch, polling booth by polling booth, and I am confident we can win.
Friends I conclude with this: the mission of Labor is to build up the house. We build things. We build the schools. We go out there and we build the universities. We build hospitals. We build things called the National Broadband Network.
We build things that matter, which create a house in which our people and the people of our nation can live and have their being and have a sense of prosperity and security for the future.
We are the nation builders. We build the house. The other mob, they have a much easier script. They tear the house down. That’s the difference.
‘National Broadband Network? No, no, not for you Sonny Jim, we’ll remove that. A Better Schools Plan for your school? No you can’t have that money over there, we’ll rip that money away from kids and from teachers.’
‘Oh, new libraries in your schools, new multipurpose facilities, new classrooms, new electronic whiteboards, no we’ll take all those away as well.’
And by the way, the National Broadband Network we’ll just rip out of the ground or disconnect it.
We build the house up, they tear it down. We’re the nation builders, the other mob would frankly just sit back and wait for the magic of the marketplace for just make it all better in the never-never.
That’s not who we are; we are Labor.
We believe in building the nation; we believe in fairness for all; we believe in a fair go for all.
We believe in building the nation through each community, each suburb, each city, right around this vast country of ours and making sure that all of us, whether we are newly arrived on these shores, have been here for generations or have been here since eternity with the First Australians, that we are one Australian family together.
That is our vision and our purpose. We build the house up, they tear it down. We unite the nation, they seek to divide it.
We have a positive plan for the future. All they’ve got is a box and barrel of negativity like you’ve never seen before.
That’s the difference folks, that’s who we are, that’s who they are.
That’s why we will fight to ensure the future remains with this Australian Labor Government.
I thank you.


Prime Minister, Minister for Education
Melbourne
Subject(s): Better Schools Plan; Asylum seekers; Foreign aid; Birth of the Royal Prince
PM: Well it’s great to be here this afternoon with Bill Shorten, the Education Minister, here at Aquinas College here in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne. I’m also here with the local member Michael Symon.
I’m also here with a neighbouring member, Laura Smyth. I’m also here with Rupert Evans, our candidate for Aston. And then I’ve got Kelvin Thompson, the Parliamentary Secretary for Education.
The thing about Australians is they want us, as national leaders, to have a positive plan for the future. They don’t want wall-to-wall negativity.
They want leaders who actually bring the country together on the things that matter for our future.
They want that to happen because they want to see us put in the building blocks for a strong Australian economy for the future as well.
The truth is we’ve got big economic challenges ahead of us.
Partly because of the end of the China resources boom, partly because of sluggish recovery in the global economy. And therefore, there’s a big transition ahead of us.
Because of all that, we’ve got to be realistic about the fact that our future not assured.
We need to be smart about our response to the new economic challenges and ensure that we diversify our economy in the future.
That is make sure we are growing new jobs and new businesses in the new industries of the future, not just putting all of our eggs in one basket, which is the energy and resources sector.
So that, basically, is what the government’s strategy is. And to do that we have to be as competitive as possible as an economy in the world.
We need therefore to invest in the future, invest in jobs, invest in infrastructure, invest in skills. And that brings us to the Better Schools Plan, which Bill Shorten has been working on, together with his Parliamentary Secretary Kelvin Thompson, for quite a while now to bring this to some successful conclusions.
And today, because of the work that’s been done, we now have almost two thirds of the kids in Australia benefitting under the Better Schools Plan, which will deliver extra funding and extra resources to government schools, Catholic schools and independent schools in most of the states of Australia.
But we’ve still got some who we’ve got to get across the line.
Today in particular and the reason we’re at Aquinas is that Minister Shorten has concluded successfully this negotiation with the Catholic education system.
And I’d draw your attention to their statement today.
The National Catholic Education Commission, the NCEC, and the Australian Government have agreed to sign up to the Better Schools Plan.
This is a significant milestone in itself and follows on the decision in recent weeks by the Independent Schools Council of Australia giving the Better Schools Plan their tick of approval for the future as well.
The Catholic school system across Australia represents about three quarters of a million kids across 1,700 schools – this is a big slice of Australia’s education. One fifth of the kids in school are at Australian Catholic schools. And that’s why this agreement with the Catholic school system has been so important to roll out the Better Schools Plan across the nation.
This therefore will result in a significant funding boost for our Catholic schools.
Under the agreement reached today, Catholic systemic schools will benefit from $1.6 billion in extra funding over the next six years if all governments sign up to the better schools plan.
We’ve also delivered classroom benefits: individual attention for every student, so that if your kid at school is falling behind a bit, they get the extra support in the classroom they need to catch up.
If your kid needs a bit of extra help to excel even further  at what they are doing, then that extra help can be there as well.
That is why we are providing this extra support.
Here at Aquinas College, a large Catholic college here in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne, we are looking at a $6 million plus addition to the allocation to this school over the next six years. That is a large addition shot in the arm compared with what the school budget is provided for now.
And that is to provide the extra resources to do that individual attention that we spoke of just before.
It will also enable other reforms to take place in the schools, including what we do to lift standards of all of our schools across the country and also provide more resources to our first class principals and headmasters and headmistresses across the country as well.
So to Bill Shorten, the Education Minister, I congratulate him on his success in concluding this negotiation.
To the Catholic school system of Australia, thank you for coming on board with this.
We think it’s a great investment for the future of the nation and great investment for the future of the Catholic school system as well because our objective is clear.
We want our kids to be the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce anywhere in the world. And to do that we’ve got to make sure that every school gets the resources it needs.
Minister Shorten: It’s great to be here at Aquinas College in Ringwood and I thank Principal Tony O’Byrne for organising such a warm welcome from the students.
Like most Australians, I’ve never worked in a school but like every Australian we’re all partly a product of our school years. This federal Labor government is committed to making sure that every school – government or non-government, independent or Catholic – receives the support so that their child can get the best start in life.
This Labor government has got unreservedly good news for parents of children, parents who choose to send their children to Catholic systemic schools.
Today, the National Catholic Education Commission, on behalf of all its state and territory Catholic education commissions, has welcomed the commitment to make sure that there are billions of dollars extra heading towards the parents and children of Catholic schools.
This news means specifically for parents of children who attend Catholic schools that they will see extra resources flowing to their classrooms, so every individual child who either is perhaps doing well, they can be pushed to go further, or perhaps is not doing so well, can receive the support they need.
It means parents of children with disabilities will see extra support going to their children so they can choose between the government and the non-government sector.
It means if you come from a non-English speaking background, with low levels of English at home, you can get extra resources.
This is good news for a successful school like Aquinas College in Ringwood.
What it also means is that of the three-and-a-half million children in Australia going to school, about two-and-a-half million are now in educational jurisdictions who support and signed up to the principles and the funding base needs model of the Better Schools program.
What it also means is that children in state governments who have not signed up, are not getting in their schools the same resources which are available in New South Wales, Tasmania, South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory, children who go independent schools, and children who go to Catholic schools.
We now believe it is time that all educational jurisdiction take advantage of the federal government’s commitment to education funding to make sure that all children get an equal and good start in life and they are set up for their adult years.
PM: The bottom line is this, we're off to see Premier Napthine this afternoon and our call is pretty basic: come on board Premier, this is a great plan for Australia.
If the Liberal Government in New South Wales can sign on and see the benefits for them, then I think there's something in this for Victoria.
If I'm right, Bill, I think the additional investment which would go to the Victorian Government system would be in the order of $4 billion.
Now, I'm not sure that any mum and dad or person in charge of a local parent community in a school in the state system in Victoria would want to say goodbye to that.
Because we want to lift all boats, we want to lift all schools, Government, independent, Catholic. That's what we're about.
So whether it's Premier Napthine here in Victoria, Premier Newman up in my home state of Queensland or Premier Barnett in the West, basically we want people to come on board with this because it's good for our kids.
When we are all long gone from the political stage, in decades to come, the fact that we were now putting in genuine needs based funding into our schools to provide those extra resources, to empower our principals with more resources to distribute as they need within schools, we'll look back and say, "This was the sort of reform we should have actually had in place a lot earlier”.
Journalist: There's now extra implementation money for both Catholic schools and independent schools, does that raise a fairly strong argument for the states to get additional money for implementation?
Minister Shorten: With the Catholic schools, we're asking them to implement our national reforms and our priorities.
We've accepted the proposition that they're not as large as state governments and they certainly don't have all the administrative systems of state governments, so we're accepted the proposition, and have all along, that we should assist them in terms of the reporting and the data collection for our national standards.
We want Australian children to be finishing in the top five nations by 2025.
We also understand that if we're asking, we respect the autonomy of non-government systems.
Catholics have been educating people in Australia since the first fleet. We respect the autonomy of the Catholic education system, we respect the choices that parents make if they choose to send their children to a Catholic system, but we also want a line of sight for Commonwealth taxpayer dollars to make sure that we're accomplishing greater and better educational outcomes for every child in Australia.
That's why we're assists them in terms of the implementation fund to make sure we can get the best national outcomes and the best reporting for national outcomes, which I think Commonwealth taxpayers deserve.
Journalist: How close are you to striking a deal with the Victorian Government?
Minister Shorten: The seriousness with which we take it is the Prime Minister will be meeting with Premier Napthine this afternoon.
The talks have been constructive in the last couple of weeks. The data is flowing, obviously when you get two parties together or two groups in negotiation together, you’ve got to make sure you're working off the same set of facts.
The Commonwealth Government's proposition is a good proposition. We want to ensure that of course the Victorian Government, with the issues that they've got, that we can talk it through with them.
But one thing is for sure, we don't want Victorian children in the government system to miss out on what children in the non-government system are getting and children in other states are getting.
And I believe so long as the Victorian Government and the national government focus on the children, they're the future, then I think we can come to a mutually agreeable outcome in the best interests of Victorian school children.
Journalist: Are you likely to strike this deal this weekend or in the next few days then?
Minister Shorten: It takes two to tango and we are most keen, we come with our proverbial sleeves rolled up, with a spirit of good will and it's always in the detail isn't it?
PM: No, but it's in Victoria's interest to do this. The Commonwealth is coming to the table with a large new investment.
All of us in this country are under budgetary pressure, everyone knows that.
But this is one set of budgetary pressures which we can't actually turn our back on, which is the needs of our kids for the future.
Investing in our kids' future, frankly, is great for the nation and great for the unlocked potential of every child who is at this Aquinas College and colleges like it right across Australia.
Journalist: With a deadline approaching though, will a deal be reached by the deadline?
PM: Bill's analogy was one of Latin American dancing. And even my limited skills at the tango would suggest that indeed you do need two to tango.
We're down here not just to take in the scenery and the fine weather that Victoria offers today. Can you clean up the weather a bit?
Minister Shorten: That’s after this one.
PM: I'm here for a purpose. And it's a matter for the Premier as to whether he wants to join us in that, I think, important national purpose, which would benefit every single kid at every single school here in the great State of Victoria.
Journalist: Can I ask you a couple of questions that Tony Abbott has raised about the Papua New Guinea resettlement claim?
PM: Can't ask those questions at all.
Journalist: The first is whether or not, with the increased autonomy that PNG now has over how Australian foreign aid is spent there, whether that increases the risk that money could be poorly spent or wasted or even perhaps misspent?
PM: I have two clear messages for Mr Abbott today on this question.
Number one, when we announced the Regional Resettlement Arrangement, he came out and welcomed it, then he said it wouldn't work, then he said it was unravelling, then Mr Turnbull said it would work.
What I've concluded from all of this and Mr Abbott's case is this: Mr Abbott is doing everything here he can possibly to send a mixed message to people smugglers around the world.
And by sending that mixed message to people smugglers around the world, it seems to me that the result would be to try and muddy the waters and therefore maybe it's in his political interest, not to see this agreement work.
It's in the national interest that this new Regional Resettlement Arrangement works. That's why we're doing it.
Australians want their national political leaders to cooperate on matters like this, which are deeply in the national interest.
We've put forward a proposal, it's now been reflected in a bilateral arrangement signed between ourselves and a sovereign government, it's there in black and white for everyone to see.
And we see Mr Abbott, it seems, by his daily statements sending out a very, very mixed message to people smugglers as to whether this arrangement could stick or work. That is not in the national interest.
It might be in his personal political interests but it’s certainly not in the national interests.
I would appeal to him to actually support our nation's long-term interests, irrespective of who is PM of this country after the next election.
Second point that you've raised, now, I say this so Mr Abbott as well.
Mr Abbott today has simply not told the truth, just not told the truth.
He said and I quote him “that this is a free gift as a simple cash grant with no accountability”. That is untrue, that is 100 per cent, rock solid untrue.
And Mr Abbott needs to be called to account for it. And the reason it's untrue is because every single investment we make with our development partners in the world is subject to the most detailed agreements about where investments are made and how they are accounted for.
Previously as Foreign Minister of Australia, I oversaw an independent review of Australia's aid effectiveness. We had the lowest fraud rate of any aid program almost in the world because we take this seriously.
Project by project, country by country and often in the most difficult places in the world.
This is absolutely untrue and Mr Abbott needs to be held to account for his failure to tell the truth on this.
Journalist: Haven't you weakened the oversight of that half a billion dollars?
PM: Mr Abbott has done nothing other than speak untruths on this. The truth is this: Papua New Guinea has been our development partner for decades and decades and decades.
Secondly, I draw your attention to the fact that what we have done with all of our partner governments around the world is align the priorities of the Australian development program with the stated national priorities of each partner government, whether it's Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, countries in South Asia, whether it’s countries elsewhere in the South Pacific or in Africa.
That makes sense because you're all pushing in the same direction.
His assertion is radically difference to that. Mr Abbott has said that this is a free gift as a simple cash grant. That is 100 per cent untrue and he needs to be held account for it.
One final point on that, I'd draw your attention to a documentary which was only puts out a couple of years ago, which is about the attitude of the previous Liberal government and it involved an interview with Mr Reith who did a lot of work with Mr Howard way back when on these questions.
In that there is an exchange involving Mr Reith where it was Mr Reith says: "I said to John, Mr Howard, before he left, well I think we should give them basically whatever they want. I mean, even though people will say, ‘Oh well you were sort of buying favours from them’. I mean here's a group of people a bit down on their luck, my attitude was why don't we what we can do with them. And if they help us, that's good."
Then it's said by Mike Scrafton, the adviser to the Defence Minister says to the program, "yeah I was standing next to him. He rang up and said $20 million? Okay. That was it, $20 million of taxpayers' money.”
That is what the Howard Government did. That is what I call, to use Mr Abbott's term, effectively a handover of cash.
That's not what we do. That's not how we conduct our development policy. I would draw people's attention to these documentary statements by members of Mr Howard's Government in stark and total contrast to this Government's probity based approach to the delivery of international development assistance.
Journalist: Are there any plans afoot to reach a resettlement deal with the Solomon Islands?
PM: We have said repeatedly that the Australian Government's Regional Resettlement Arrangement is open for discussion with any other government wishing to participate.
As far as the Sols are concerned, I think they have their own priorities at the moment.
RAMSI has just coming to a close, it’s been a successful process.
But this is a matter for sovereign governments, what’s our concern as far as Australian is concerned? Overwhelmingly our preference is to deal with Governments who are ratification states of the UN Refugees Convention.
Journalist: arrivals since this agreement was struck would be transferred?
PM: Minister Burke answered that on the first day.
PM: Is there a factional realignment under way in Victoria at the moment and will that cut you and your people out?
Minister Shorten: I think you probably referring to the preselections that are being held.
I don't comment about the internal workings of the Labor party but I can report that the preselections for Hotham and Lalor will be concluded tonight and we will have good candidates, campaigning for the re-election of the Rudd Labor Government tomorrow.
And those candidates know, just as every member of parliament or candidate here knows, the politics is about choices, you choose to prioritise expenditure on education or you don't.
The Opposition now need to move from negativity to positive. They need to explain to the Catholic education commission, and every school principal and every school council and every parent, what will they do if they were elected to power and will they dismantle the new money, which we are allocating to schools.
And importantly about today's announcement there is now certainty for 1700 schools to start planning their budgets for next year.
It is now time for the Opposition to make the same choice that the federal Labor government has made.
The journey of improving better schools started under Prime Minister Gillard, it has been concluded under Prime Minister Rudd.
The Opposition now have a choice after three years of negativity on education, do they think it is important to provide extra funding to Catholic schools for every school child in a Catholic school over the next six years? And that's the sort of choice which I know every Labor candidate and Labor member of parliament, including those who from are preselected tonight, we've made that choice.
It's now time for the Liberal Party, the Coalition to decide, are they negative on education, will they play politics with the school children's future or will they decide that the education of our children and better schools should be a matter of above politics?
REPORTER: You mentioned the royal baby before, have you got at gift prepared for the Prince?
PM: A gift for the little prince, the royal bub? Ahh well Therese and I and Jessica have been talking a bit about this, as well as with various colleagues in the government and so - any of you got kids here? Okay. Have you read the little book Ten little fingers, ten little toes by Mem Fox? Anyone read that one to their kids? Put your hand up please. Okay. Well we have. It’s a great little book. And so we’ll be providing a copy of that wonderful Australian children’s book to the mum and dad to read to the bub.
On top of that, we've also been thinking about what works a bit more over time.
Now, the Prince, well his family, have had a strong commitment to conservation and the environment. I have spoken to Prince Charles much about this over the years, and I know the Duke of Edinburgh, who I’ve met a number of times in the past, has a similar passion.
So we've been thinking about how you bring all these things together. And so one great Australian marsupial which is in a bit of strife at present is the bilby. There's a research project underway, I'm advised, at Taronga Park Zoo in Sydney to save and preserve the bilby. What we've decided to do as a Government is to provide a $10,000 grant to the research program at Taronga Park Zoo for the bilby and this will be in honour of the new baby Prince.
Furthermore, we'll name the enclosure for the bilby after the Prince, subject to the agreement of the Taronga Park Zoo authority and I'm sure Barry O'Farrell the Premier might come along with that.
Thirdly, I don't know if the Royal Family would need this but we'll probably give them a free pass to Taronga Park Zoo as well but that's just in addition.
But in terms of cute and cuddly toys, it will be a cute and cuddly bilby that we'll be sending off to London soon with a copy of Mem Fox’s book.
And we'll think a little bit further about if other gifts are appropriate for the nation at large.


The Prime Minister today congratulated the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge on the birth of their first child, a son.
On behalf of all Australians, Therese and I extend our warmest regards to the new parents, Prince William, Duke of Cambridge and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge.
Prince William holds a special place in the hearts of many Australians. Some of us remember his first visit to this country as a 9 month old baby more than 30 years ago with his mother Diana and father Charles.
In more recent times, Prince William demonstrated deep compassion when he met with families in Victoria who had lost everything during the Black Saturday bushfires of February 2009.
We share in the joy of the Royal Family, particularly Prince Charles on the birth of his grandson and Queen Elizabeth II on the birth of her great grandchild.
This is a happy day for our close friends in Britain and the Commonwealth.


Prime Minister, Minister for Education
Melbourne
Catholic systemic schools across Australia will benefit from extra funding and more resources after the National Catholic Education Commission (NCEC) and the Australian Government today reached an historic agreement on the Better Schools Plan.
The agreement will see approximately $1.6 billion in additional funding flow through to the nation’s 1650 Catholic systemic schools over six years, benefiting almost 700,000 students.
The Rudd Government has the utmost respect for the integrity and autonomy of the Catholic education system, which for over 150 years has served some of the most disadvantaged communities in Australia.
It is an educational system with a proven track record - from educating some of our best and brightest, to taking on some of the most disadvantaged students.
We know that teachers and principals of our Catholic schools want to ensure that every child gets the opportunity they deserve, and the Better Schools Plan will do just that.
The Australian Government and the NCEC have worked constructively and respectfully over many months to secure the best possible outcome for students in Catholic systemic schools.
The Better Schools Plan will ensure that every Australian child, irrespective of where they live, which school they attend or their family background, will get the best start in life.
This is not just an investment in schools, this is a down payment on the long-term strength of the Australian economy, and will underwrite higher productivity for decades to come.
The Australian Government has set an ambitious target for Australia to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025 and this can only be achieved by working together with Catholic schools.
This additional funding will enable Catholic systemic schools to implement the signature reforms of the Better Schools Plan including initiatives around quality teaching, quality learning, meeting student need, empowered school leadership and better data collection and research to drive improvements within schools.
The agreement reached today and the additional funding that will flow to Catholic education provides enough funding for each Catholic systemic school to receive a three per cent increase per student per year, based on 2013 funding levels. This has been acknowledged by the Catholic education sector during our recent constructive discussions.
In addition, the Australian Government has locked in indexation at 4.7 per cent from 2014, providing certainty for schools through to 2019. 
The new funding arrangements and the Better Schools’ reforms are guaranteed through the Australian Education Act 2013 which passed the Parliament on 26 June, 2013.
Today’s announcement brings the Catholic systemic schools in line with the rest of the non-government schools sector in Australia, following the recent agreement between the Australian Government and the Independent Schools Council of Australia (ISCA). 
It is now time for Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory to join with New South Wales, Tasmania, South Australia, the ACT and the Catholic and Independent sectors in embracing the Better Schools Plan.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
In my first National Security Statement to the Parliament five years ago, I said that the first priority of government was the nation’s security.
Much has changed since then in the national security landscape.
What has not changed is the resolve of our government in responding to the national security challenges we face.
The work of national security is hard work.
It is demanding work.
It is necessary work.
And for the professionals who do the work, it is rewarding work.
We must ensure our intelligence community has what it needs to protect us from the threats of today.
And to anticipate the threats of tomorrow.
We must always be vigilant on national security.
And the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation has for two thirds of a century been a cornerstone of our national security.
I was struck by a remark your Director-General made in a speech not so long ago: ASIO’s successes are mostly unheralded or, if they have been made public, soon forgotten. We remember the bomb that went off, not that one that was defused.
This was a simple acknowledgement of the great paradox that all intelligence agencies face.
 You deal in counterfactuals.
You succeed by making sure that things don’t happen.
The better you are at your work, the less we hear of you. The less we know about you.
The men and women who work in our national security family don’t take on this task for fame or fortune.
Nor for personal glory.
They do it to make this country safe.
National security is hard work.
There are certain qualities that this work requires.
Qualities of Courage. Sacrifice. Dedication. Professionalism.
In that respect, as a nation, we have been well served by our national security community.
The defence of our national security has always been tied fundamentally to our sense of nationhood, and throughout our nation’s history.
It was thus under Deakin and Fisher.
Under Curtin, Chifley and Menzies.
And down to the present day.
In 1949, it was the Chifley Government that wrote the charter for ASIO.
The Cold War was upon us.
And ASIO’s creation reflected the fact that Australia was taking responsibility for this important part of your national security.
In the directive he provided to the first Director-General of Security, Mr Justice Reed, Prime Minister Chifley said that ASIO would be tasked with defending Australia from: external and internal dangers arising from attempts at espionage and sabotage, and from the actions of persons and organisations.
I should add, David, that Chifley also went on to say that: Members of the organisation should not be unduly prominent at cocktail parties, but should devote themselves to the tasks allotted to them.
For all the years that now separate us from Ben Chifley’s Australia and ours, his vision for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation has survived the passage of time.
The end of the Cold War did not end the threat of espionage and terrorism.
We depend on ASIO to protect our democratic freedoms.
To deal with terrorism.
And to combat espionage. 
This is the hard work of national security.
On a day such as today, we should pause for a moment to reflect on the work others are doing in this the hard work of national security in Australia’s name.
• Think of the diggers at Tarin Kot, backed by intelligence agencies that work to define the threats they encounter.
• Think of the pilots of the Hercules touching down in Kabul as they provide support to the International Security Assistance Force.
• Think of our police and military serving as members in the Solomon Islands mission as their mission draws to a close.
• Think of the more than 3000 Australian Defence personnel deployed on operations around the world as we meet here in Canberra today.
• Think for a moment of our Australian Defence personnel currently serving in UN and multilateral peace and security operations in such countries as Afghanistan, Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, South Sudan and Syria.
• Think of our cyber specialists.
• Of our intelligence analysts.
• Think of the Australian Federal Police and our customs and border protection personnel.
• Think also of our diplomats and our aid workers often working in dangerous environments around the world.
 In a world of change, new threats are constantly emerging or evolving – cyber threats, terrorism at home and abroad and people smuggling.
The technology-dependent world we now live in also presents more challenges and threats.
 Australia now operates in a world of complex systems, all vulnerable to malicious cyber activity, whether originating from states, criminal organisations or misguided individuals.
 For this reason, the Australian Government’s determination is to continue to lift our cyber capabilities including our network defences.
 In opening today’s building, we are also opening the new Australian Cyber Security Centre – dedicated to analysing cyber threats, coordinating the government response and developing preventative strategies.
 This Centre, located in this new building, will bring together the existing cyber capabilities from across Defence, the Attorney-General’s Department, ASIO, the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Crime Commission.
 These capabilities will include ASIO’s cyber espionage specialists, experts from the Australian Signals Directorate’s Cyber Security Operations Centre and the Computer Emergency Response Team Australia.
 This is delivering on the government’s commitment outlined in my first National Security Statement to bind “the detailed and diverse work of the national security community into a coherent, coordinated whole”.
National security requires looking beyond the horizon.
 National security requires the best people and equipment.
 It also requires financial resources.
 Tough decisions have to be made in accordance with priorities.
 Since 2008, government investment in national security has increased from $28.6 billion in our first budget in 2008-09 to $32.3 billion in 2013 14.
 The government’s most recent budget provided more than $100 billion to Defence over the Budget and Forward Estimates and around $220 billion as guidance for the following six years.
 The Government is also focused on increasing our cyber security capabilities, with our investment growing from $233 million in 2011-12 to $368 million in 2013-14.
 These reflect important commitments for our future national security needs.
 The government will also continue to invest the resources necessary for the purposes of our border security and take the hard decisions that are necessary in the national interest, whether they are popular or not.
 This is what the nation expects of its national political leaders on the things that matter for our national security.
 Today, nearly two-thirds of a century after its creation, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation continues to adapt and evolve to counter emerging threats and protect Australians from those who wish us harm.
 It helps provide the Australian Government the intelligence it needs to weigh up the complex questions of national security.
 And the dedicated men and women of ASIO carry out their work with a self-effacing, no-nonsense excellence that its founder Ben Chifley would recognise and endorse.
 It is only fitting that your new headquarters should take this the name of the Prime Minister who brought this institution into being.
 It is now my great pleasure to declare the Ben Chifley Building officially open.
 [ENDS]


Melbourne
Subject(s): Better Schools Plan; Investment in La Trobe; Asylum seekers; Economy; Development assistance; Debate with Opposition Leader
PM: It’s great to be here at Brentwood Park Primary School. I'm here with Laura Smyth and she's our local member. And this is a great Australian state school.
We're here to talk about the Better Schools Plan and our investment in schools right across Australia, including here at Brentwood Park.
I've just had a look at some of the investments we've made at this school in the past, including this fantastic multipurpose facility.
And what we're talking about now is how we invest further in the future.
This is an important plan for the country. The Better Schools Plan is about lifting the standards for all Australian schools, lifting the standards for all Australian school kids, so that there is enough funds to provide for that special one-on-one attention when you need it: if one of the kids is falling behind a bit or needs a bit extra for them to surge forward.
Now, I've been talking to the kids and the teachers here who are learning Chinese, this is a great thing.
It's important that they're doing so because it reminds us that our schools are part of the world. And there's a bit of a competition going on around the world as to which kids are going to emerge with the best skills in the future.
Here in our part of the world in Asia, four of the top five school systems in the world are just next door. Really. Hong Kong, Korea, and Shanghai in China and in Singapore.
And so under the better schools plan we want Australian school kids to be able to match their competitors, match the other kids from these schools into the future.
Just to underline that one more time. What we want is for Australian school kids to be able to compete properly against kids graduating from schools in Korea, in China, and in other parts of the world like Singapore.
Why? Because we want our kids to get the best jobs possible and for their living standards in the future to be high as well.
Across Australia we're putting out this Better Schools Plan. This represents, if we get agreement across the whole country, a further $15 billion investment into Australian schools.
This is a huge investment. It will apply to Government schools, to Catholic and independent schools.
Yesterday, Bill Shorten and I announced the agreement of the Australian Catholic school system to support the Better Schools Plan. The Catholic school system has 1700 schools across Australia, they educate 20 per cent of the kids in this country so I welcome them coming on board.
The independent schools have done the same. State Governments in New South Wales, and South Australia and Tasmania have done the same.
And yesterday, I sat down with Premier Napthine to see if Victoria could come on board as well. Victoria is a big state, it’s the second biggest one in the country.
You’ve got more than half a million kids in school in Victoria and I want them to benefit from the Better Schools Plan and we want them therefore to have the best resources for the future.
In Victoria, if Premier Napthine signs up, you will see a $4 billion additional investment in Victorian schools.
That is a lot of funding in order to make schools like Brentwood Park be the best they possibly can, and providing those extra resources to help kids, who might be falling behind a bit or if you really want to turbo charge a few kids who are doing particularly well, a bit of one-on-one to make sure they become the state's best.
Let me give you a practical example. If Premier Napthine signs up to the Better Schools Plan, this school here at Brentwood Park would be $2.8 million better off over six years.
That represents a 48 per cent increase per student in terms of the overall school budget. This is not just a small amount, it's actually a large amount.
It's designed to make the job of our teachers and our principals easier than it is, raise the standards, extra resources and produce better outcomes for our kids.
So my challenge though is not just to Premier Napthine, with whom I had a good conversation yesterday. My challenge is also to Mr Abbott who puts himself forward as the alternative Prime Minister of Australia.
Mr Abbott has decided to be 100 per cent negative about this plan to invest $15 billion extra into the Australian school system. I think Mr Abbott needs to be asked why.
I don't know a single mum and dad in the country who could understand why you would not want to invest more in our schools. It’s so important for our kids’ future.
I think Australians are sick and tired of such wall-to-wall negativity on things such as that.
The last thing, before taking your questions, is just to reflect also on what Laura has been doing here in the local community more broadly.
I mentioned this multipurpose facility, which has been built here at Brentwood Park. In fact, in the electorate which she represents, we've made similar investments in around 61 schools and we've had a total of $110 million investment through the school improvement program.
And that includes 15 multipurpose facilities like the one at the back here, it includes building 28 new school libraries across this region, and 20 new classrooms.
At the secondary school level, we've also provided the funding for more than 7,000 new computers to go into the region's secondary schools.
Also, a few kids when they've gone through primary school want to pursue not an academic but a career in the trades. We've actually also invested in building three new trades training centres so that they get the best opportunities possible as well.
The Better Schools Plan I have just mentioned.
One final point about the record here in La Trobe, in the electorate which Laura proudly represents, is that it's not just in schools that we've made this investment, but in health as well.
For example, the Berwick GP Super Clinic, $2.5 billion investment from us. Before it didn't exist, now it does. It’s a very practical thing for us to do for this community.
Also in local infrastructure, roads are important here in Melbourne. We've invested just under $70 million for the Monash Freeway in the Warrigal Road to Clyde Road section.
And also, I remember myself committing to a $30 million investment for the Clyde Road upgrade, which I understand is getting closer to completion. That's our funding as well.
NBN, we will have an investment in this part of Victoria by mid-2016, we should have something in the order of 22,600 homes either under construction with the National Broadband Network connection or already connected in the biggest engineering projects in the country's history.
So whether it's infrastructure and roads, whether it's the new infrastructure, the National Broadband Network, whether it's very practical things like local health services and the Berwick GP Super Clinic or, frankly, the huge investments in schools like Brentwood Park, our mission is to make a difference and to try and make these communities better.
And that's why we are pleased to be able to represent this community through Laura in the Parliament and the Government of the country.
Journalist: What's the latest on the boat that's sunk off Indonesia?
PM: I've just received some advice on that and I think it's far wiser that we leave it to the relevant Minister, Minister Jason Clare to provide a rolling update on the facts.
But I would say that all of our agencies are actively following this and ensuring that everything that can be done is being done.
This underlines the need for policy changes in Australia on asylum seekers policy which sends a very clear message to people smugglers to stop sending people by boat to Australia.
We are seeing too many drownings, too many sinkings, too many innocent people being lost at sea.
Journalist: There is news this morning that there are up to 100 people unaccounted for from a boat that has sunk off Indonesia.
This will take the total of people who have boarded boats since you announced your policy on Friday to more than 400. Is this an indication that your policy is already [inaudible]
PM: Can I just make a very clear statement about this. Number one: the asylum seekers policy we've adopted is about sending a very clear message to people smugglers that if you try to come to Australia by boat you'll not be settled in Australia. Very clear message.
In fact, if you are proven to be bona fide refugees you'll be settled in another country, Papua New Guinea.
That is all about destroying the people smugglers' business model. That's why we're doing it.
Secondly, as I said and others said on the day we launched this – just Friday last week – that the boats would not stop coming straight away. We also said this would take some time. Very clear about that.
We also said that the people smugglers would in fact try to test our resolve to see whether we’re actually able to implement this policy.
I say there is a huge national interest involved in making sure this policy works.
And so you're going to have naysayers, like yourself, saying that – that underpins your question – that there are problems.
I'm saying this is one of the most difficult areas of public policy in Australia. And we have taken a considered decision on what we regard to be the best response to a challenge for Australia.
And it's not been one taken lightly. It also will take time to implement.
Let me add one other thing, though. That's our policy, it’s clear cut. But you've raised the question of asylum seeker policy, let me put to you what the alternative is.
We have said very clearly that we intend to break the business model for asylum seekers by saying to them that if you send people by boat to Australia, you will not settle in the country. It's very simple; it’s a very clear message.
And it's going to be tough in the implementation phase. I’ve said that right from the beginning. People will challenge it and do all sorts of things.
This is a strategic direction for the long term, and there will be bumps on the road – conceded that.
The alternative – because Mr Abbott wants to become Prime Minister and he should be held to account for what he puts forward – Mr Abbott initially welcomed this policy, then on the second day he attacked it and said it wouldn't work.
Well, I would simply say to Mr Abbott: the previous policy adopted during the days of the Howard Government, it didn't work either, you know why? Because their Pacific solution simply became a way-station on the way to Australia – 75% of people who went off to various re-settlement centres ended up in Australia a few years later.
It didn't send any signal at all over time to people smugglers.
And then we come to Mr Abbott's new alternative policy, his three-word slogan: stop the boats.
The Australian people want, however, a six-word slogan, which is: how will you stop the boats? That's a legitimate question.
I want to finish on one point and then I'll come back to you. I’ve said I won't be adding to the detail of it because the relevant Minister, Jason Clare, is in contact with the maritime authorities and he'll give you the most relevant update.
The question is about the alternative policy on asylum seekers. And that is what the Australian people are out there considering and what they'll ultimately make up their mind on.
So what I'm saying very simply is this: it is in the national interest that this policy of ours works. Because we need to make sure that the business model of people smugglers is destroyed.
But while it's in the national interest for the regional resettlement agreement to work, it seems to me increasingly that Mr Abbott has judged that it's not in his political interest for it to work.
And so, what I see now is him just changing his language. Nationally welcoming it the first day, the second day attacking it and saying it wouldn't work.
The effect of what he is saying is to muddy the message to people smugglers around the world, because each of them listen carefully to everything that is said in the national debate - including by those who put themselves forward as the alternative Prime Minister.
So therefore the effect of Mr Abbott's statements is to muddy the message to people smugglers, because I think Mr Abbott has reached a political conclusion that he'd much rather see this policy not be effective.
And I say again, very bluntly: that if you put yourself forward as to be the Prime Minister of Australia, the national interest should come first. And partisan politics aimed to, frankly, derail the regional resettlement agreement is just an appalling approach to the responsibilities of the highest office of this land, and frankly causes many people to question whether he is in fact fit to hold that office.
Journalist: [Inaudible]
PM: It’s a responsible thing to ask, to respond to your question about an incident which is ongoing, it’s a responsible thing to say in response to an unfolding incident  that – as I am here in Melbourne – the responsible Minister is Jason Clare and he will be in touch with the relevant authorities now.
We take every incident in the sea involving the possible loss of life deeply seriously.
All of the resources of the State are dedicated to do whatever we can, and therefore that is underway at the moment. But if you’re asking me about an incident that is unfolding, then I will not respond for the simple reason that the Minister is in touch with the authorities.
Journalist: Moving on then, has the Government, is the Government looking for an extra $6 billion to make up saving measures for possible revenue shortfalls?
PM: All Governments around the world are facing pressure on their budgets.
The expenditure review committee of our Cabinet wouldn't be doing its job if it wasn't continually looking at the overall shape of the Budget. In terms of its detail work, that's a Cabinet-in-confidence matter.
But we take our fiscal responsibilities seriously. What are they? Number one, keep the economy strong, number two, return the Budget to balance, number three, deal with any challenges on the revenue side and to deal with any way in which we can continue to tighten expenditure.
That's the responsible course of action. And given that we are in the business of alternatives, Mr Abbott's alternative Treasurer said that they have a $70 billion black hole for the Opposition to account for in their Budget numbers.
And by virtue of their position on the fringe benefits tax it's just gone up to $72 billion.
So I'd wait for them to answer the questions about where they'd fund that black hole from.
Journalist: SBS last night, a show described the situation in Manus Island and sexual assaults and abuse amongst detainees. I wondered what your response is.
PM: We take any such reports seriously and they should all be investigated. And I understand that the Immigration Minister is investigating this.
I think he's sought some evidence from the journalist in question when this was first raised a week or so ago. Where that has got to the in represent days, I'm unsure.
But any allegation of this nature should be properly investigated thoroughly and I imagine that will occur.
I go back to the general question of asylum seekers policy. What I’d say is that we have a clear policy direction, which is saying to the people smugglers "if you send people to Australia by boat they will not be settled in Australia".
I'm still waiting to hear what the alternative policy is in detail.
This morning, here in Melbourne, I was interviewed by Neil Mitchell on this subject. And what did Neil Mitchell say? He said “well, if you want to have a debate on asylum seekers, will you do it on my program, 3 AW”. I said "fine, I'll do it tomorrow morning”.
Myself, Mr Abbott explaining our different policies on how to deal with challenge of asylum seekers. People have to right to know.
Our policy is out there, we're seeking to implement it. What’s the alternative apart from a three-world slogan, we don’t know.
Once again on Mr Abbott's chosen grounds for debate, he's refused to show up.
A couple of weeks ago, I said “well, you want to fight the election on debt and deficit, come and debate me at the National Press Club”. He didn't show up.
A week or so ago, I announced that we'd be scrapping the carbon tax and moving to a floating price. He said he wants to campaign on this in the election, I said “come to the National Press Club and debate that, your chosen subject”. Didn’t do that.
This morning on asylum seekers, we're in the midst of the debate which you are legitimately asking questions about. That’s what your job is.
And so what I've said is "put your money where your mouth is, on to a debate offered by Neil Mitchell on 3 AW”. I said I'd be there tomorrow morning and he's declined because he's too busy. Why add this to Mr Abbott?
If you’re too busy tomorrow morning, Mr Abbott, to have a debate on asylum seekers policy on 3AW, you pick the day, any day within the next week, and I’ll come to Melbourne and join that debate.
Hour-long debate, straight Neil Mitchell, myself and Mr Abbott. And Mr Mitchell can be the person in the middle, always gives me a hard time, I'm sure he gives Mr Abbott a hard time as well, good on him, that's his job.
But I go back to the point whether we're talking about the economy, whether we're talking about asylum seekers, if you're serious about being the next Prime Minister of Australia, you’ve got to step forward and engage and say this is what we'd do differently and why.
Journalist: [Inaudible]
PM: Our undertaking through the joint arrangement with the Government of Papua New Guinea is that we will work with their authorities to ensure the safety and security of those who are assessed in Papua New Guinea.
And furthermore, those if they're determined to be bona fide refugees, those who would be settled in Papua New Guinea.
We take those Convention responsibilities seriously. And for those reasons we spent several weeks discussing this with the UNHCR.
Journalist: Does the same debate invitation apply to Jon Faine at the ABC?
PM: Well I'll just take the one I was presented with this morning. There's a pretty clear invitation out there, so let's see if Mr Abbott's response to today is "I'm too busy tomorrow to come to Melbourne to debate the Prime Minister of Australia".
Well, fine, I'm sure he's got a lot of stuff on. I've got a few things on as well. I'm trying to negotiate a new schools agreement with the Government of Victoria worth $4 billion.
But let's just say he's really busy. The challenge is, within one week, name the day, I’ll come back to beautiful Melbourne. Just organise better weather then. And I’ll be up for that debate.
In terms of other programs, we'll take all those in sequence.
Journalist: How much extra will this new AusAID program to PNG cost?
PM: I said earlier that a number of the measures that we've adopted to support our friends in Papua New Guinea will come through reallocations within the development assistance budget. A number may be funded elsewhere.
We've also said that this will be fully accounted for when the government delivers its economic and fiscal statement.
Journalist: Can you give us a round-about figure?
PM: That’s why we have an economic and fiscal statement so it's not round-about.
But I’m saying we already have something in the vicinity of a $5 billion development assistance budget globally.
Secondly, our one with Papua New Guinea is about half a billion dollars.
Thirdly, it will be fully accounted for.
Now that you ask that question, let me flip this into reverse one more time.
Mr Abbott told the Australian people a lie yesterday. He told them a lie. What he said was that the Australian Government was providing unaccountable cash grants to the Government of Papua New Guinea.
That is a bald-faced lie and I would ask those of you in the media to hold him to account for that.
Where is his evidence? Every single dollar that we provide any country in the world through development assistance cooperation is done on the basis of that bilateral agreement, which we monitor the implementation of, to ensure that it is spent on the right purposes: hospitals, schools and the rest.
In fact, as Foreign Minister, I oversaw an independent review of aid effectiveness in 2011, with an independent panel, which concluded that the Australian aid budget was the most efficient and effective budget for development assistance anywhere in the world, with one of the lowest levels of fraud in the world.
So if Mr Abbott is seeking to be truthful with the Australian people today, maybe the national broadcaster could ask him this question: Where's his evidence? Where’s the evidence?
I think it's time we had some truth in the national debate. I've told you what we stand for in asylum seekers policy and there are challenges and difficulties and I've acknowledged all of those.
What's the alternative policy? He's said we're providing cash grants to Papua New Guinea. Where’s your evidence? Where’s the truth? Where are the facts? Or is it a wild political assertion in order to obtain political office.
Thanks for your time.


Subject(s): PNG asylum seeker deal; debate with Opposition Leader
HOST: Good morning to you, Prime Minister.
PM: Good morning Lisa, from a very chilly Tasmania.
HOST: Well hopefully this will warm you up, Prime Minister.
Can I just ask: are you really comfortable sending vulnerable people who are fleeing persecution into an environment like I’ve just described?
PM: Well, the first thing you’ve got to ask yourself is whether all people leaving to come by boat with people smugglers to Australia are bona fide refugees. That’s the first question you’ve got to ask.
HOST: Are you saying the majority aren’t?
PM: Well let me answer your question Lisa: that’s the first question you put to me about assuming that all people coming to this country by boat are, therefore, by definition, fleeing persecution.
That’s always been a complex question.
The second is this: I make no apology for the fact that we have to make very hard decisions in the international interest.
What we are therefore sending out is a very clear cut message to people smugglers that if you bring people by boat to Australia, they will not be settled in Australia.
It’s a very clear cut message.
Thirdly, on the question of Manus: we will seek to improve the conditions in Manus over time, and that is the responsibility we’ve jointly undertaken with the Government of Papua New Guinea.
These are difficult and hard decisions but we don’t shirk from them.
HOST: How long will those improvements take, Prime Minister?
PM: Well, this is in the hands of a taskforce now.
Under the Government we are obviously undertaking our obligations relevant to the Refugees Convention.
That means making sure that we have appropriate accommodation; that we have, also, necessary security; and that we have, therefore, with settlement, the Australian Government working with the Government of Papua New Guinea to make sure that people are settled in Papua New Guinea over time in safety and security.
Now, what I said the other day when I announced the Regional Resettlement Arrangement is that there’ll be lots of bumps in the road, lots of difficulties, lots of challenges, and these will be nutted out one by one.
You don’t just click your fingers and say - as Mr Abbott does – a three-word slogan will fix everything. This is hard and difficult policy and we are determined to get on with the job.
HOST: When your leadership was challenged by Julia Gillard back in 2010 you promised not to lurch to the right on this issue. Many are saying you’re now further to the right than John Howard.
PM: The challenge we all face right now is that if numbers coming to Australia because of the operations globally of people smugglers continues to grow and grow and grow, two things will happen.
One: you will not see hundreds of people drown offshore from Australia.
You will see thousands drown offshore from Australia.
That’s just what would happen if the numbers continue to go up and up.
And the second reason for acting in this manner is this: there are currently about 12 million recognised refugees who are languishing in United Nations High Commission for Refugees camps right around the world.
And Australians have historically been very generous.
We have now, in recent times, been seeking to settle 20,000 of these folks each year in Australia as part of our global responsibilities.
Those arriving by boat are now overwhelming that number, so that we do not settle any of those people who had been languishing in camps for years and I’m not about to simply sit back and allow that to happen.
Those are two very strong reasons, and these are two very principal reasons, for acting in the way that we have.
The challenge that I put out to anyone who asks that we should consider a different approach is this: what would you do to stop thousands of people, including children, drowning offshore, other than undertake a policy direction like this? What is the alternative answer?
HOST: Prime Minister, you were the one that changed the policy by dumping the Pacific Solution. Do you now accept that that was that a mistake?
PM: What I’ve already said Lisa is that it’s been necessary – and always necessary – for a Government to adjust their policies as circumstances change over time. I have been very upfront about that, and we’ve needed to.
In 2007, we took a series of policies to the election; the Australian people voted for them; we implemented them.
What happened then later in 2009-10 plus is our international circumstances began to change. We had a civil war in Sri Lanka.
We had other disturbances around the world, just like the unfolding…
HOST: Prime Minister, you did not move. At that time, you did not move. You saw this unfolding and over two years you made no change to how the country was dealing with it.
PM: …just like the unfolding circumstances in Syria today.
And Lisa, what I said at the National Press Club recently – I think you would know this – is that of course, with the benefit of 20-20 hindsight, you would have begun to adjust our policies in 09-10.
But when you have changing circumstances in the world unfolding underneath your feet, it takes a while to adjust.
What I’m saying now is the fresh humanitarian crisis in Syria – which all countries in the world are focused on – with the outflow of 1.8 million people potentially from that country, we must adjust our circumstances.
Australia’s immigration policy and our asylum seekers policy is not chipped in stone so that you never change it if the external circumstances change.
That’s the right and responsible thing to do.
HOST: Well you proved that when you dropped the Pacific Solution, Prime Minister.
How much is it costing the Government to get Papua New Guinea to sign on to this deal?
PM: Well Lisa I will answer the question you just put, Lisa, which is we adjusted our policy accordingly. And then secondly, the policy I would…
HOST: And then the boats started coming again.
PM: No. I am talking about the announcement that we made last Friday.
HOST: Well since you made that announcement Last Friday…
PM: Prior to that, Lisa, on the previous time in 2007, we took that policy to the Australian people and we implemented it.
Circumstances change, we’ve adjusted since then, and I keep going back to this: our policy is clear.
If a smuggler brings someone to Australia by boat, you will not be settled in Australia. That’s ours.
Mr Abbott’s alternative policy is a three-word slogan: stop the boats.
I’d like to know how he would stop the boats. He’s never answered that. In fact he refused any debate on that, which Neil Mitchell offered yesterday morning in Melbourne.
HOST: Prime Minister, since you announced this solution there have been five new asylum seeker boat arrivals, three separate sinkings, and just yesterday another six people – including a young child – died, and 44 other people are missing.
Is this policy not working already?
PM: Lisa, in the statement I delivered last Friday with the Attorney General and the Immigration Minister and the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, what I said was very clear that this policy announcement would not result in an immediate reduction in boats coming to Australia. It would need to be implemented over time.
I also said – last Friday when we announced this policy – that as soon as it became clear to people smugglers around the world that this is the new change in direction on the part of the Australian Government in response to changing circumstances, that people smugglers would then seek to test our resolve by pushing even more for a while, at us.
So, therefore, we don’t intend to flinch. This is the right policy. It is the right message.
I think you heard a people smuggler interviewed by a media outlet the other day say that this was a fundamental assault on their business model.
Well, that’s a pretty gruesome way for him to put that, but the bottom line is this, I challenge anyone else looking at this policy challenge for Australia to deliver a credible alternative policy.
Mr Abbott gives us three-word slogans.
HOST: Ok, Prime Minister. Unfortunately we’ve got to zip. Thanks very much for your time this morning.
PM: Thanks very much Lisa.


Subject(s): Flagstaff Hill Primary School; Better Schools Plan; Local investment in health; Meeting with Premier Weatherill; Holden; Asylum seekers
PM: It is great to be here with Senator Don Farrell, Senator for South Australia and the Federal Minister for Sport and for those reasons Don is passionately committed to what we do with in school programs to boost our sporting capabilities, our physical fitness and all the sort of games you’ve been playing here today. And of course Annabel Digance who is our candidate for this Federal Seat of Boothby.
It’s great to be here with all the good folks at Flagstaff Hill Primary School. It’s a good school to be at this afternoon.
You have introduced me to how to play sharks and dead ants, is that right?
These are two traditional South Australian games which I’ve never heard of in my life but thank you for the cultural introduction.
One of the reasons we’re here is just to look at the sort of investments we’ve been able to make in wonderful Australian schools like the one here at Flagstaff Hill.
I have just been talking to the principal or told we’ve invested around $4 million in this school.
You can see what it does for the school community.
Number one: I was just told by the principal that in the 30-35 years that the school has been in existence they’ve never ever been able to have a whole of school assembly.
That means putting all the kids together, 400 or so, with mums and dads and grandparents in a single place and it’s really good for community life and school community life.
The other thing which is the big advantage and I see you’ve done it well here with your basketball courts and the rest is that when the weather is crook you can come inside and play and I know it’s always fine and sunny here in South Australia.
I’m told you had a bit of rain recently, it looks very green flying in, but that’s the other reason.
But the third is for out of school hours care.
The, what you call down here I think oshc, is that right?
In Queensland we call it OSHC but yours is easier, oshc.
The thing about this program is it’s literally hundreds of thousands of folks around Australia use out of school hours care programs.
It’s really good, provides flexibility for mums and dads and carers and grandparents before school and after school.
I think I was told here before that it’s available from about 7:30 in the morning, 7:15 until when school starts at 8:45 and then the afternoon from 3:15 until 6:15.
That gives mums and dads lots of flexibility but on top of that you’ve got all these great folks who are here for the active sports program which is funded by the Australian government in whole.
But we cooperate with states to make sure it works well within their various systems.
The whole idea is to make sure you have fun and enjoy physical fitness when you are here after school.
We’re very proud of the achievements that we’ve been able to deliver for the education system more broadly.
I was talking before to the principal about our Better Schools Plan and we’ve now agreed on this plan with the South Australian State Government, we’ve agreed on it with the Catholic education system and the independent schools.
What that means is that altogether we are now going to be investing some additional $660 million in extra funding over the next six years.
$430 million from the Australian Government, $230 million from the South Australian Government.
This makes a huge difference to the quality of our schools.
What’s it about? Better schools, better teaching and better education for you guys so that you have all the skills that you need for the future, for the jobs of the future, once you finish high school and go off and go and do different things afterwards, that’s what it’s about.
Now what does it mean for your school here at Flagstaff Hill?
Well according to our numbers it’s about $1.5 million extra for this school over the next six years which is an increase of about 28 per cent per student.
So this is genuinely a Better Schools Plan for Australia.
Now right across the nation it’s about $15 billion extra investment in schools because we believe in education being the foundation stone for Australia’s future.
You kids are going to be a huge part of it.
Here in this particular community here in Boothby we’ve also been investing more broadly.
About $108 million altogether in 30 new classrooms across this community.
21 new school libraries, 20 new multipurpose facilities like this.
Two new science and language centres in the secondary schools and on top of that more than 7,000 computers have been installed in the secondary schools.
I’ve just visited a school in Devonport in Tasmania, Devonport State High at around lunchtime today and those kids – all 600 of them at that high school – for the first time they’ve all got laptops in their school.
This is really designed to make sure that every Australian kid gets a fair chance to participate in what we call the digital education revolution.
On top of that, in this area, we’ve also been investing in five new Trade Training Centres and what they are is when you get to high school and you decide you want to become a carpenter, become a bricklayer, become a mechanic or work on design and fashion and those sorts of things, Trade Training Centres are designed to help those kids; and we built five brand new ones benefiting six local high schools which is a good thing as well.
One or two other things I’d like to talk about in terms of our achievements here.
At the university we’ve also invested $6.5 million in capital funding Flinders University to build a lecture theatre complex.
On top of that we have a share of a $28 million investment in the Flinders Medical Centre for the establishment of new emergency department models of care and $40 million investment in a Repatriation General Hospital for the establishment of 20 new sub-acute beds.
So across education, across health and across a number of other areas, we have been very active in this community.
So the reason I’ve gone through those things is to say we believe in making a difference and so that you can look at befores and afters and before, none of the things that I’ve just talked about were here five or six years ago, they are now.
It’s all about making it better for you guys.
Whether it’s here at primary schools, where it’s here at out of school hours care with the Active Sports Program, whether it’s Trade Training Centres, universities or other key services as well.
So together with Annabel and Don we’re here to make a difference for this local community and for the good people of South Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be meeting with the Premier and…
PM: Sure, I’ll talk to Jay a bit later today.
I think the staff are all sorting out times so we’ll have a chat and as far as the future of Holden is concerned, for me this is a question of the national interest.
It is why the Australian government has already, I think in December last year made a co-investment agreement with GMH in excess of $200 million and we are in continued discussions through Industry Minister Kim Carr on how we ensure that Australia has a viable long term motor industry including GMH, including here in South Australia.
Because it’s part of Australia’s history and its future.
JOURNALIST: Will you be accepting any of his recommendations in terms of altering the FBT?
PM: I think the key thing for the future of GMH is to have a long term investment.
Remember, we’re the Government that put together the $5.4 million new car plan which was to support and be partners with GMH and also with Toyota.
On top of that, we have these other agreements that we’ve signed as well.
What we’ve got to look to is not the next year or two. You’ve actually got to look out to the next 5, 10, 15 years.
As I’ve said before, I don’t want to be Prime Minister of a country that doesn’t make things anymore. And that means making sure we’ve got a viable, long term auto industry.
So we’ll chat all those things through with Jay later in the day, but I’m determined to see this auto industry survive into the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you’ve said with the PNG solution that you expect there to be bumps in the road. How long do you expect those bumps to last?
PM: I actually talked about that a lot this morning when I was in Tasmania.
I repeat the fact that if you’re bringing in a major new policy which is important in dealing with the long term challenge of people smugglers, which is to say to them: if you expect to bring people to Australia by boat, people smugglers, then they will not be settled in Australia – implementing that policy is hard, tough business.
We intend to get on with the business and we are resolute in our course of action.
JOURNALIST: Do you have an aspirational time frame of when you’d like to see those bumps ironed out?
PM: What I said when we launched the policy – and I’m sure you read it last Friday – was that this is a policy for the months and years ahead.
It’s key that we establish a clear cut policy direction for the future, and to implement it.
There’s a difference between that on the one hand and three-word slogans on the other.
I get really worried, really worried, when I see certain people out there talking about Papua New Guinea, and talking about the Chief of the Defence Force in the way in which they’ve done in the last 24 to 48 hours.
We’ve seen some responses to that as well.
The point I make is this: if you’re going to deal with big challenges, like people smugglers, it means having a well thought through policy which will be implemented, recognising that there are going to be challenges on the way.
As opposed to simply pulling stuff out of the air and cobbling it together with a few three-word slogans.
On top of that, our policy’s been framed in partnership with our regional friends and partners in Asia and the Pacific.
We work very closely with them.
I draw your attention to statements which have been made by various regional governments about various alternate proposals in recent days – not to mention the statements today about the Opposition’s most recent three-word slogan.
JOURNALIST: On the Opposition’s plan for border protection, how is that different to what’s in place now and do you think theirs is a simpler version with their chain of command?
PM: Well I’m pretty interested in the reaction of various Defence professionals today and I think we should be very attentive about what they’ve had to say about this proposal.
What I’m concerned about is the big questions for Australia’s future, including border security, including making sure these kids have the best schools in the world, and to make sure we keep the economy – including its manufacturing sector – strong so that there are jobs for the future.


Prime Minister, Minister for Regional Australia
Launceston
The Rudd Labor Government is delivering $100 million under the Tasmanian Jobs and Growth Plan to set the state up for a secure economic future.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and the Minister for Regional Australia, Catherine King, today announced projects to be funded under the multi-million dollar package over the next four years to support new, emerging and growing industries.
Tasmania continues to face a range of economic challenges including the high Australian dollar, fluctuating global markets and period of rapid change in the forestry industry, which have affected some of the State’s traditional industries.
The Plan represents a long-term vision for Tasmania with priority given to projects that unlock business potential, build on the State’s advantages and encourage sustainable communities.
The projects reach across a range of industries and capitalise on Tasmania’s unique strengths, including the food and beverage industry, timber processing, tourism, natural gas, advanced manufacturing and the arts.
In addition to funding for 31 individual projects, the State Government will receive $10 million to establish an Industry and Innovation Fund, and $4.5 million for a Tourism Fund to support further projects identified over the next four years.
The Plan balances economic wellbeing and environmental outcomes and builds on the Federal Government’s previous $24 million investment to help diversify Tasmania’s economic base.
Since the additional funding was announced in May 2013, the Government has conducted extensive consultation including with the Economic Diversification Taskforce Tasmania, Regional Reference Groups and the Tasmanian State Government.
The State Government, local councils and community groups are to be commended for their input in identifying projects that will contribute to the long-term economic security of the state.
Funding from the Jobs and Growth Plan is dependent on value for money assessments for each element following announcements and formal legislative protection of the new reserves, as specified in the TFIGA.
A list of projects is attached and further information on the Tasmanian Jobs and Growth Plan can be found at www.regional.gov.au


Subject(s): Tasmanian Jobs and Growth Plan; Tasmanian Tourism Fund; Better Schools Plan; NBN; Asylum seekers; Foreign aid
PM: It’s great to be back in Tasmania here with the Premier and here with Catherine King, the Minister for Regional Australia and obviously Geoff Lyons, our local member, as well as all of our Tasmanian Federal Labor team. Welcome also the Deputy Premier.
This is an important day for Tasmania because we regard Tasmania as a core part of the Australian family. On top of all that, I really like the place.
I come down here a lot. I've been over there climbing Cradle Mountain. I've been to Launceston so many times over the years, to the north west and to Hobart, over to Freycinet.
This is the beautiful part of Australia.
What we're here today to talk about is jobs and growth. Now if we don't have a strong economy across Australia, frankly, everything else falls away.
Unless we have strong economic growth and strong jobs growth, everything else falls away.
I believe that we have a fundamental national responsibility to sustain the long-term strength of the Tasmanian economy.
This is part of the Australian national family.
There are challenges here, always the product of a degree of isolation from the mainland economy, I understand that, but therefore we've got to make an extra effort to make sure that the economy and jobs remain strong in this part of Australia.
That's why I am delighted to be here in Tassie today to be with the Premier in delivering our $100 million Tasmanian Jobs and Growth Plan.
This is a key initiative for Tasmania.
It will go to support a whole range of projects across the State.
In particular I would draw attention to the fact that we are, right across Tasmania, out there supporting some 31 separate projects.
Also, state wide, we are investing in a $10 million Industry and Innovation Fund and beyond that again $4.5 million for a Tasmanian Tourism Fund.
These are really important initiatives.
And as I look out here across the river to the north bank, great part of Launceston. When I was last here only a few months ago, I remember sitting down I think with the mayor and other locals saying this is one of the developments we want to see going.
So if I could just illustrate one of the projects that we are investing with the Launceston City Council, a North Bank precinct development of $3 million.
That's the practical stuff we're doing right across the state of Tasmania.
Tassie is part of Australia's economic future.
Therefore, our job is to keep this economy strong and to grow the jobs of the future.
Our record in Tasmania overall is also a strong one.
I was looking at some of the figures this morning and what we are doing right across the state is strong and good work.
When I look at the investments that we have made in the education system here, it’s extraordinary.
We have as an Australian Government invested in some 59 new school libraries, 120 multipurpose facilities, 30 science and language centres, some 19 or 20,000 computers in schools, 13 Trades Training Centres benefiting 36 schools and then the Better Schools Plan.
The Better Schools Plan will be a huge shot in the arm for Tasmanian schools in the future.
I'm pleased that Tasmania, New South Wales, South Australia, the independent school system, the Catholic school system have all signed on.
But what does it mean here on the ground for Tassie?
It means that with this agreement there will be an additional $382 million invested into the schools of Tasmania, in the state system.
That is a huge investment.
Therefore it's going to enable us to make sure that we have better schools, better teaching, and on top of that, better education outcomes for our kids.
I would say to any Tassie mum and dad this: if you are a bit worried about your one at school, in primary school, falling behind at bit in maths or science and you want to make sure they are going to get some extra special time with teachers or tutors to bring them back up to up to scratch, that's what this plan is for.
If you've got a kid who is doing really well and might be being held back a bit by the others in the class, this is to provide extra resources to make sure that that kid can go to the height of their potential.
It’s all about better schools, better teaching, better education outcomes.
Of course we have spoken down here a lot about our investments in health and hospitals in the past and they are strong.
Also in infrastructure, the National Broadband Network is literally rewriting the future of the Tasmanian economy by overcoming the tyranny of distance.
That's what it’s about for the future.
Now that's what we're doing for Tasmania.
It is a very strong plan.
Building schools, building health and hospital services, building the infrastructure which this state needs, including the National Broadband Network.
We are in the building game.
Unfortunately Mr Abbott is in the tearing down game. That's what he seems to be best at.
I would simply say this, and I understand Mr Abbott is in Tasmania today, to Mr Abbott, with his proposal to change the allocation of GST across the states, he will effectively crash the Tasmanian economy and destroy jobs.
I cannot be clearer than that.
When he goes over to the west and says to Colin Barnett ‘we're going to re-do your GST plan to give more money to Western Australia,’ what he's not being upfront with people here in Tasmania in saying is that means crashing the amount of money which Tasmania gets from the GST.
The calculation is this: if you took Mr Abbott's plan at face value it would mean a $600 million cut to grants to Tasmania.
This is huge in a state this size.
Therefore, what have we got?
A strong plan for Tasmanian growth and jobs, we are investing in 31 projects across Tasmania, all about creating local jobs and local business opportunities.
We are building state's infrastructure in schools and in hospitals and in health, and in the infrastructure of tomorrow in the National Broadband Network.
We are building the state up but what we have from the alternative Prime Minister of Australia, is frankly an admission that he would crash the Tasmanian economy.
Not good for Tasmania, not good for families, not good for growth, and certainly not good for jobs.
PREMIER GIDDINGS: Thank you Prime Minister and a warm welcome to Tasmania. We're very pleased to have you here.
As you can see, the Australian Government has been working very closely with the Tasmanian Government on some critical reforms for this state.
I enjoyed working with you, as Health Minister, on delivering the national health reforms that we see now delivering results here in Tasmania.
But we also, as you've said, talked about the Better Schools Plan and we're very pleased to support the Australian Government in what they're trying to achieve in helping us to improve the outcomes for students no matter where they go to school here in this state.
And we're very pleased with the support we've had from the Australian Government in helping us to restructure our forest industry.
A restructure which has naturally been very painful for many people within the community but a restructure we couldn't avoid, one that we had to work through, and one that we are trying to assist local communities to be able to grow new jobs and have hope.
What you're delivering here today with the $100 million economic and jobs plan is absolutely critical to this state.
There are a number of projects that will help regional Tasmania in the north west, in the south and here in the north of the state as well.
Important projects that help to grow new jobs in industries that we know have a strong future, the dairy industry, the aquaculture industry, tourism, which has been the heart of the Tasmanian economy for many, many decades.
We are very proud of what we've been able to achieve with you and we thank you and your Minister Catherine King as well for the work that you’ve done with us in being able to help Tasmania restructure.
I would also agree with you very strongly that we are quite concerned about what a Tony Abbott led government could deliver for this state.
He has made it very clear that he does not support the Better Schools Plan.
He has made it very clear he does not support the NBN roll-out as is being delivered right here and now in this state.
And he's also made it very clear that he would not support the work that we're doing in this area of forestry and most importantly the biggest risk of all, is that he would pull out of the GST Grants Commission process we have, which would risk in excess of $600 million to our state.
And with a budget of $5 billion, you're quite right, that would devastate the state of Tasmania.
We are yet to get any reassurances from Mr Abbott that he will not actually go down this pathway as we have yet to get any assurances from Malcolm Turnbull in relation to the NBN either.
We welcome you, we wish you all the best and thank you very much for what you've been able to work with us and deliver for Tasmania.
PM: Thanks very much Premier. I would like to ask the Minister Catherine King. Catherine is from a regional city in Australia. She's from Ballarat.
The reason she's Minister for Regional Development is that she understands intrinsically what it is like not being in one of the major capital cities of mainland Australia and therefore, she has a passion for the regions and that's why I've got her in this job.
MINISTER KING: Thanks very much Prime Minister.
First, in terms of the Tasmanian Jobs and Growth Plan, I want to thank the Tasmanian Government and my federal parliamentary colleagues, fantastic members who represent this beautiful part of the world.
The Jobs and Growth Plan is based on the Tasmanian Government's economic development plan and each of the regional councils’ economic development plans and we've had extensive consultation over the past two years.
I think this is the 15th or 16th time since August 2011 a Regional Australia Minister from the Australian Government has been here to talk and now finally deliver the $100 million Jobs and Growth Plan.
It is a very good plan that spread across each of the areas, supporting business, building on Tasmania's advantages and sustaining and supporting local communities.
The plan also makes sure that there are projects delivered across the north, the south and the north west.
Again, I want to thank very much the economic diversification taskforce who has been working very closely with the state government and the Tasmanian Government on delivering this package.
PM: I reinforce my thanks to this fantastic Tasmanian team.
We've got, of course, Geoff here is the local member, behind me I have a great array of Tassie talent. And I’d particularly like to in Tasmania, congratulate you Julie as our Tasmanian Cabinet Minister and I'm very proud to have her in our Federal Cabinet team.
So if you've got complaints about what the Federal Government has to do, she's the one.
MINISTER COLLINS: Thank you, Kevin.
PM: In terms of the delivery to Tasmania, she's also the one. She's raising the voice of Tasmania around the Cabinet table.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, this $100 million, is this new money or already existing money that's just been re-branded?
PM: What we've worked on very carefully, and I'll ask Catherine to add to this, is making clear which additional projects across the state we are funding by name.
This has been an exhaustive process which we've gone through with our team, the Tasmanian Government and through the Minister's department.
And so we have been very careful and very cautious about not making this announcement about the allocation until we have had all that nutted out.
For example in Geoff's case, I know very much from my previous briefing here, how important this North Bank development here is in Launceston but we wanted to make sure we had all the t’s crossed and the i’s dotted and we’re here today to deliver.
MINISTER KING: This is money that was contingent on intergovernmental agreement on forestries.
So yes, it is new money and new projects announced today.
JOURNALIST: You talked about education being good for Tasmania.
One of our major problems is students and young people leaving the state as soon as they finish school.
What will your government do to ensure those people, once they've got an education, stay in the state?
PM: The first thing we have got to make sure with our schools is that our schools maintain world-class standards.
Our schools are not just in a national competition, they're in a global competition.
And if I look at our major economies across our own Asia-Pacific region, Singapore, Korea, those in major cities in China like Shanghai, these kids are powering ahead in terms of maths, science, as well as literacy.
And so what we're on about first and foremost is to raise the standards of all of our schools.
You can't do that by just whistling into the air and hoping that something will happen.
It requires bricks and mortar and requires investing in our teachers.
So that's the first thing.
You've got to have the skills to qualify for good jobs and that's provided through the school system, university system, but also the training system.
I'm very proud of the fact that we have, in fact, built across Tasmania 13 Trade Training Centres across Tasmanian schools.
These are world-class facilities to make sure kids pursuing their trades are also getting the best.
So having kids' skills ready is one thing, having them jobs ready is another thing and making sure there are jobs is the third.
So what we will be working with the Tasmanian Government on is on projects like this to make sure that when Tasmania kids leave the school system, with the best skills possible, that we can help them find a job or make them job ready.
I'm on about jobs. I'm on about growth. This package is about jobs and about growth.
I’d just make one clear point again.
If Mr Abbott is Prime Minister, you'll have three huge torpedos aimed at Tasmania: number one, ripping $600 million out of your GST; number two, pulling the plug on the National Broadband Network for Tasmania; and number three, refusing to back a $380 million investment in your school system.
Three big torpedoes aimed at Tasmania with ‘T Abbott’ written on the side of each.
JOURNALIST: How many jobs do you expect this plan to create?
MINISTER KING: Each of the different projects have different aspects of job creation to them.
So there's some in the building and construction phase, then there are jobs right the way across each of the different sectors that we have concentrated on in the package.
For example, we were very mindful that in terms of displaced workers from the forestry industry, that we made sure that there was funding for a range of different programs to look at immediate and short-term jobs for those workers.
But what this package really is about is both providing support and transition for those workers but also increasing the opportunities and the new jobs into the future.
There's work in there in advanced manufacturing, there are projects in there in terms of viticulture and aquaculture, as well as other agricultural areas as well.
So the jobs growth, each individual project has got estimates of jobs that will be associated with them but we've been very mindful that this is about short, medium and very much the long-term future of jobs in Tasmania.
PM: If we look at Australia's current economic challenge, we have big changes occurring.
We had the end of the China resources boom, we have something of a credit crunch within the Chinese economy and a very sluggish global economic recovery.
That's the challenge we face.
Therefore the real question for all of us as members of the Australian family is what's our strategy in response?
Our strategy is we must now diversify the Australian economy, not have all our eggs in one basket – the mining sector, the minerals sector, the resources sector, the energy sector – and grow new jobs in new industries.
Including in new forms of manufacturing, new services industries, agribusiness, the construction services industry, the health services industry, as well as the education services industry, the financial services industries.
We do that building the competitiveness of our economy by global standards, which is why our skills and our schools have to be world-class, our infrastructure like the high-speed broadband network have to be world-class and also that our energy prices are competitive across the world as well.
So you put all that together, that's the big picture we're operating within.
What we've got to make sure is every part of the big story of Australia, including the Tasmanian chapter, is firing as well.
That is why we are making these investments.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, headlines this morning have written off your solution on asylum seekers saying it’s in tatters, it’s sinking.
It is over before it began?
PM: The first thing I would say is that the government's strategy 100 per cent clear.
That is that any people smuggling trying to bring to someone to Australia by boat will not be allowed to settle in Australia.
That's our policy, that's our strategy.
Secondly, Mr Abbott's alternative strategy is this: a three-word slogan. Stop the boats. Everyone would like to add three words for Mr Abbott. How will you stop the boats? Make it a six word slogan.
Then he's got a new three word slogan today, I think it's called operation something or other. Operation sovereign border or something.
So we've now got two three-word slogans: stop the boats, operation sovereign something or other.
You know the business of national security is a hard and tough business for any government of Australia.
The business of border security is a hard and tough business for any government of Australia.
What I notice is this: number one, Mr Abbott doesn't have an alternative, he has a three-word slogan.
Number two, he does not want the government's Regional Resettlement Arrangement to work so he's deliberately sending out a message to muddy the communications with people smugglers around the world because for political reasons he’d much rather the government's strategy did not work.
Because it is not in his personal political interests.
But here's number three, really important: I look very carefully at the statement issued by the High Commissioner of Papua New Guinea yesterday in Canberra.
Mr Abbott demonstrates that he is not capable of working with our regional partners, whether it is in South-East Asia or in the Pacific, to produce a regional agreement to deal with what is a regional and global problem called people smuggling.
Therefore, I think it is pretty clear, you’ve got three words slogans, a bloke who actually doesn't want the Regional Resettlement Arrangement to work and he's sending out mixed messages to people smugglers around the world because he doesn't want this strategy to succeed because that's not in his political interests.
On top of that, he can't work with our neighbours and that is very clear from the statements which have been made in recent days.
This is tough business.
I last said last Friday this was going to be a challenge for the long-haul, said very clearly that there would be bumps in the road, there will be, but I challenge anybody to come up with an effective alternative strategy given how big the challenge is for us and for all countries in the world.
JOURNALIST: How much extra foreign aid will PNG get next year?
PM: We'll make that very clear in terms of the economic and financial statement that will be made in due course by the Treasurer.
We are already significant development assistance partners with Papua New Guinea, strong programs.
Again I return to Abbott's false statement only two day ago where he said falsely, I would say as a deliberate lie, that we are providing unaccounted for cash payments to Papua New Guinea.
That's just wrong.
He knows it’s wrong.
He knows it’s untrue.
He's simply making that statement in order to curry political votes in this country, when in fact each of our programs with PNG is the subject of a detailed intergovernmental agreement to deliver the right outcome.
Our policy is clear: if you are a people smuggler and you are bringing a person by boat to Australia, that person will not be settled in Australia.
Clear, hard-line policy, there’s going to be challenges with the implementation but that's our clear-cut message.
JOURNALIST: What about Malcolm Fraser's call for a Royal Commission into allegations of torture and possible rape on Manus Island, doesn't that demonstrate that maybe your policy is in tatters?
PM: What I would challenge anyone to answer the question is how do you reduce the number of people drowning at sea? How do you do that?
If the numbers coming by boat because of changes in our international circumstances are going to go up and up and up, it follows that the numbers drowning at sea will go up and up as well.
From hundreds each year, into the thousands each year.
So my challenge to anybody is what is the alternative strategy other than to send a clear-cut message to people smugglers that if you seek to bring someone to Australia by boat, they will not be settled in Australia?
Hardline message, necessary message, that's our policy as opposed to a three line slogan from Mr Abbott and no-one else being able to answer the question about how do you reduce drownings at sea.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible] how will you ensure those sort of concerns don’t happen in PNG?
PM: Well the bottom line is this, that this is a hard area of government policy.
If it was easy then frankly we would all walk away and it would all sort itself out by tomorrow lunchtime.
It’s not like that.
It’s hard work, it’s difficult work and as I said last Friday with other ministers and the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea when announcing this you this strategic direction.
There are going to be difficulties along the way, bumps in the road, we know that.
But I would much rather level with the Australian people about all those challenges, while sending a clear-cut message to the nation and to people smugglers around the world that if you think you can bring people by boat to Australia, then those people will not be settled in Australia.
That's our hardline message and we're going to have lots of challenges on the way through but this is the only way in which we get to a position over time of reducing those coming to Australia so we see a reduction in the number of those drowning.
The other humanitarian question is this, so that once again Australia can begin settling refugees in this country through our expanded quota of 20,000 places a year, from some of the world's worst hell holes, around the country.
Last point I’d make before we close up – because I've got to see the mayor and have a chat with the Premier about one or two other things here – is that I'm passionately committed to Tasmania's economic future.
I believe that this state can have a first class future.
One of the drivers of it will be the investment fund for innovation we've set up, turbocharged by the National Broadband Network.
What's that going to mean in practice?
You can enjoy this fantastic lifestyle of living in Tasmania, be linked to the rest of the world with world-class broadband and being able to grow the businesses of tomorrow from living here in Launceston, from living over in Devonport, from living down in Hobart,  from living in any of the great regional centres of Tasmania.
And the second one is this, I'm a passionate believer in the future of the Tasmania tourism industry.
It is a beautiful state and frankly with broadband necessary for travellers from around the world, so they can be linked into their developments back home with their own businesses, if we don't have that on hand, people aren't going to come.
It is part of the future of the Tasmanian tourism industry and that's what we're doing as well through this new addition of the Tasmania Tourism Fund.
Building the new industries of the future, creating a strong economy for the future, building jobs off the back of those new innovations, as well as tourism, and other innovations in areas like manufacturing and agriculture and agribusiness, we can power this economy ahead.
Jobs and growth are our motto. That's what we're sticking to. Thanks for your time.


Subject(s): Better Schools Plan; DisabilityCare Australia; Health investments; Infrastructure investments; NBN; Regional Resettlement Arrangement; Economy
PM: Well it’s great to be here with John Bissett who is our candidate for Swan, and here we are at St Norbet’s College.
John has a great background: he’s worked as a motor mechanic apprentice way back when. He furthered his studies at TAFE and John Curtin University, spent time in the Army Reserve’s 16th Battalion. You served as a Councillor for 23 years mate – that’s a serious effort – and apparently Deputy Mayor of the town of Victoria Park.
So here you’ve got a candidate for the Australian Labor Party in this part of Perth who has very strong credentials in the practical business of Government, and there’s nothing more practical than working in Local Government.
Here at this College, but here in this wider community, the Government has a strong record of achievement.
Here in the community, represented in the Federal division of Swan, we’ve been investing more than $106 million in 31 new classrooms, 14 new libraries, 11 new multi-purpose facilities, a new language centre – I think this is the one we’re in at the moment here at St Norbet’s.
On top of that we’ve been investing in 5,000 new computers just in the schools – the secondary schools – in this community. And the Principal told me before that all the computers – the lap tops – that are used here at St Norbet’s are a product of the investment by the Australian Government in this school.
We’ve also – across the electorate of Swan – invested nearly $20 million in six new trade training centres; I think one is here at this College as well. And these support some nine schools – secondary schools – in this area.
We’ve also been active in our investments in local health and hospitals.
We’ve got a share of a $52 million investment in the Bentley Hospital, with 18 rehabilitation beds.
And we’ve been investing in the local Medicare Local, the Bentley Armidale Medicare Local, which has been a strong investment, part of a nationwide set of investments by us to improve local primary health care in the community.
On DisabilityCare I think it’s important to note that once DisabilityCare Australia is fully up and running we’re going to have about 2,700 people, we estimate, in this community of Swan, who would be supported by that when it’s fully up and running.
School Kids Bonus – very important for cost of living – we’ve got about 6,000 families receiving the School Kid’s Bonus in this community.
Paid Parental Leave: 2,200 local parents who are benefitting from this Government’s initiative.
And also, we’ve been actively involved in the investment in local infrastructure.
In the roads, we have a $224 million investment in the Great Eastern Highway upgrade which I’m told is a done project. Then we have a massive investment also in the Gateway WA Perth Airport and Freight Access Road which is underway. So these are big investments.
The last investment I’d like to refer to is what we’re doing with the National Broadband Network.
NBN fibre services have been switched on for over 1,600 homes and businesses in Victoria Park. And then, across that – in addition to that – by November of this year we will have commenced construction on another 7,000 homes and businesses in the suburbs of Beckenham, Bentley, Cannington, Ferndale, Langford, Lynnwood, Queens Park, St James, Welshpool and Wilson. Have I mispronounced any of those? Well done. Always good to ask.
Finally, here at St Norbet’s let me just say a thing or two about the Better Schools Plan.
I mentioned how we’ve invested in the needs of local schools: language centres, computers, and new school libraries.
What I am really here in Perth to do is sit down with Premier Colin Barnett to talk about the future of the Better Schools plan. And whether we can get WA, also, to sign on to the DisabilityCare Australia agreement as well.
For the Better Schools Plan, the bottom line is this: with WA’s 1,100 schools, if we reach an agreement they would stand to benefit from around $920 million extra funding over 6 years - $590 million would come from us, the Australian Government, $330 million from the WA Government.
And that would mean an increase per school over WA of just under $1 million each over 6 years.
Here at St Norbet’s you would see a funding increase of almost $7 million over the next 6 years: an increase of about 31.6 per cent per student.
That’s all about enabling schools to have the extra resources necessary for their Principals to work out which kid actually needs a bit of one-on-one attention if they’re falling behind; which kid actually needs some one-on-one attention if they’re doing super well and actually need to be challenged further; as well as having school improvement plans for the entire school community.
Which are then subject to public measurement through NAPLAN and an expanded NAPLAN-type assessment so that everyone knows that the school is seeking to improve in the following areas and have confidence that this extra investment is producing a better education outcomes for everybody.
And that would mean a whole lot here in this community as well.
My final point is simply this: I would appeal to Premier Colin Barnett to hop on board with the rest of the country because we have no interest at all in running WA schools. These things are always best done at the local level.
What we do have an interest in, however, is securing an agreement which would result in a further injection of nearly $600 million of Federal funding over the next 6 years into WA schools, whether they are Catholic, whether they are independent, or whether they are State.
And that’s what I think is really important for the future.
JOURNALIST: An agreement on Better Schools funding seems far, far away.
The Premier’s comments this morning was he sees no value in having State Public schools having to report to Canberra. He also made the claim that States that are currently signed up were pressured into doing so, and in the situation of Victoria who may or may not sign up later today, they would have been bullied into it if they signed up.
Now is that the case? And from those comments it seems you have little chance of getting WA on board.
PM: I think it’s really important for Colin to separate out political rhetoric from the bottom line here, which is that we stand ready to invest nearly another $600 million in WA schools. That’s what’s really important.
On his substantive point about reporting to Canberra, that’s just nonsense. That’s just nonsense. Schools are run locally.
What we simply have done with the other states is agree on a line of sight for the extra money we put into schools so that school improvement plans can be developed and then measured over time so that you get better education outcomes for each kid. It’s actually a co-investment.
So I’d say to Colin: it’s really important for him to have another think about whether WA schools will benefit from $600 million which you would otherwise be saying goodbye to.
On his final point about the Vic’s and the other states, food goodness sake, you know. You sit down, you talk with Premiers, you say are you interested in this or are you not.
Bill Shorten the Education Minister has been debating this quite a lot with his State counterparts. And remember, through the process of discussion, he’s reached agreement with the Catholic system nation-wide, he’s reached agreement with the Independent School system nation-wide, the State of New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania.
I think they believe they’re actually getting a good outcome for them and this would be a great outcome for the West as well.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in relation to asylum seekers, there has been some reports that Sir Michael Somare says he’s not happy with the PNG plan, and also there are some reports that Indonesia is not very happy about the PNG plan as well because they were not consulted. Is that incorrect?
PM: Well the first thing I would say is that we make no apology for our position on asylum seekers, which is that we are saying very clearly, to any people smuggler, that if you try and bring someone to Australia by boat they will not be settled in this country.
Second point I would make is: that is the only credible response to the people smugglers if you want to maintain Australia’s border security and if you want to stop not hundreds but thousands of people drowning in the future.
As for our negotiations with other Governments, we have worked very closely with the Government of Papua New Guinea over a month now in working these details through, both during my meetings with Prime Minister O’Neill in Australia, in Port Moresby, subsequently in Australia again, and with multiple Ministers.
And as for Indonesia, we have worked very closely with the Indonesian Government on the work that will result in the regional conference on people smuggling which will be held in Indonesia I think on the 20th of August.
I’ll just make one other point: that’s our policy. It’s clear cut. There will always be bumps in the road, but that’s the direction we’re taking the country. It’s the right approach.
The contrast is this: what we have now is Mr Abbott showing he cannot work with either Indonesia or Papua New Guinea. And you’ve seen the most extraordinary statements recently by the High Commissioner of Papua New Guinea about all of that.
And on top of that, we have Mr Abbott’s most recent ‘Operation Whatever’, ‘Operation Whatevs’, you know, which the Defence experts across Australia have said is just a three-word slogan which doesn’t work. And in fact it’s worse than that.
So there’s our policy direction, that’s his alternative, and it’ll be a matter for the Australian people to sort out what works. And as for our collaborative relationship with PNG and Indonesia, they’re very close.
I spoke to the President of Indonesia just yesterday about all these matters and will continue to collaborate on a regional framework to make this work for the nation. It’s not easy, it’s hard.
JOURNALIST: What about the UNHCR’s criticism? I mean, they say that they’re troubled by the PNG Solution?
PM: Yeah, I think I said in Port Moresby the other day after they had done an earlier report on Manus, that we had received the report, we’d noted on it, and together with PNG we would seek to take all the appropriate steps to lift the standards that are currently applying in Manus.
I think that’s the right thing to do. This takes a bit of time, and we’re going to take our time to do it, and make sure we do it thoroughly.
And, similarly, I think Minister Burke has responded to the most recent statement by the UNHCR.
I draw your attention his comments – because of where I’ve been I haven’t actually seen the statement from the UNHCR – but I’m sure Minister Burke has answered that this morning.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, how long until the education deal is off the table for WA?
PM: We’ve said all along – I spoke to Premier Barnett about this on the phone not long after becoming Prime Minister, so that was several weeks ago now, and I spoke to all Premiers about the need to discuss this through – I know our officials have been talking and certainly I want to continue that conversation with him when we meet later today.
But as both Bill Shorten and I said a couple of weeks ago, we’ve extended this a couple of times already and I think time’s kind of running out.
And I’d just say to Colin, who I know very well and I’ve done a lot of cooperative deals with over the years – that big inner city rail cover project in the middle of town, whether it’s investments there, the road systems that I’ve talked about, our huge funding into the Ord Stage II, we’ve got a big record of working with the WA Government – I would actually urge him to reconsider his position on the Better Schools Plan and the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I think that’s going to be really good for the people of Western Australia and I don’t think we should let politics get in the road.
JOURNALIST: Did you or your Government provide Jakarta with details of the PNG asylum plan before it was announced on Friday?
PM: You know, we have multiple diplomatic channels with all of our friends and partners in the region and I’m sure our Embassy and our Foreign Minister, who’s in semi-daily contact with Marty Natalegawa, would have attended to all the necessary communications with regional Governments.
I just go back to what I said before: we are developing regional cooperative arrangements to deal with the real problem of people smuggling.
We have a clear cut policy which says that if you’re a people smuggler and you’re going to try and get a person to Australia by boat, that your business model is over because that person will never settle in Australia.
The alternative is a cocktail of three-word slogans, as I said ‘Operation Whatever’, plus extraordinary statements by Government spokesmen from Papua New Guinea and elsewhere which really cause us to question whether Mr Abbott – cause us to question – whether Mr Abbott is fit to handle complex questions of national security, let alone complex questions on the national economy.
And I’ll just conclude on this: on the economy we’ve also had Mr Abbott’s Finance Spokesman say yesterday that the global credit ratings agencies don’t matter, his Treasury Spokesman saying today that they don’t intend to adhere to the same standards I had to adhere to in 2007, laid out by Mr Howard and Mr Costello back then, about proper scrutiny of their $70 billion black hole – that’s what they’ve said themselves.
So on these big questions of national security, big questions of national economic and Budget management, I think people are beginning to scratch their heads as to whether, in fact, Mr Abbott’s up to the job.


Afghanistan
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has visited Australian military and civilian personnel in Afghanistan.   
The Minister for Defence Materiel Mike Kelly, the Chief of the Defence Force General David Hurley and Australia’s Ambassador to Afghanistan Jon Philp accompanied the Prime Minister. Mr Rudd was also joined by his wife Therese Rein.
Mr Rudd met members of the Australian Defence Force and the Australian-led Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) at Multi National Base-Tarin Kowt (MNB-TK).  He was briefed by Australian and coalition commanders on progress in the military campaign and met the Governor of Uruzgan Province, Amir Mohammed Akhundzada.
Mr Rudd thanked Australia’s men and women in uniform for the vital work they are doing in preventing Afghanistan from again becoming a safe haven for international terrorists by building the capacity of the Afghan security forces.  He paid tribute to the 40 Australian service men who have lost their lives in Afghanistan.
Mr Rudd said, “the Australian people are immensely proud of what our military and civilian personnel have achieved over the past seven years in Uruzgan in difficult and dangerous circumstances”.
Australian Defence personnel have trained and mentored the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) so they can provide security for their people.  This year’s fighting season is the first time in over a decade that the ANSF are fighting the insurgency almost entirely alone. 
There are now 38 girls’ schools and more than 200 schools in total, a sixfold increase since 2006.  Up to 80 per cent of pregnant women now receive pre-natal health care and midwives and nurses have been trained to provide further support. 
With other donors, we have upgraded more than 200 kilometres of roads and bridges, generating employment opportunities for thousands in the province.  
The Prime Minister’s visit comes as Australia prepares to hand over full security responsibility for Uruzgan province to the ANSF by the end of the year. 
In line with the phased draw down of international forces agreed with the Afghan government and Australia’s coalition partners, MNB-TK and the PRT will close and around 1,000 of Australia’s men and women in uniform will return.
Mr Rudd said, “It was an important time to honour the work of Australian personnel in Uruzgan as Australia’s contribution in the province draws to a close.  Australia military and civilian personnel have made real and tangible improvements to people’s lives in the province.”
The Prime Minister reiterated Australia’s commitment to supporting Afghanistan’s future beyond nationwide transition at the end of 2014, including through ongoing training and financial support for Afghan security forces and an aid program.
“The end of our mission in Uruzgan marks a change but not an end to Australia’s engagement with Afghanistan,” Mr Rudd said.  “It is time for the Afghan people to build on the progress they have achieved with the international community’s help and take control of their future”. 
Mr Rudd and Ms Rein laid wreaths at a memorial for fallen servicemen at Tarin Kowt.


Subject(s): Asylum seekers; PNG asylum seeker policy; Carbon tax; Climate change; Budget surplus
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you for coming on the show.
PM: Thanks for having me, Andrew.
HOST: Prime Minister, in 2008 you scrapped our tough border laws.
Now, an Australian Federal Police report compiled around September in that same year warned that people smugglers, and I'm quoting, “will market recent changes to Australia's immigration policy to entice potential illegal immigrants.”
Now, that report was sent to your department in March. Why did you not follow that advice and heed that warning?
PM: Well, the first thing, Andrew, and you would accept this as a conservative, is that there is a thing called a democracy.
We went to the 2007 election with a set of policies, including the abolition of the then Pacific Solution. We obtained a majority. People knew exactly what we were proposing to do, and we did it.
Secondly, having formed the Government, we received in the subsequent years multitudes of advice from all sorts of different government agencies.
I'm not familiar with the one you just referred to, nor would you logically expect me to be familiar with, if it went to my department. But the bottom line is we observed a change in circumstances over the subsequent years.
As I’ve said elsewhere, probably around the 2009-10 point is where we should have adjusted policy earlier.
HOST: I'm saying though that that warning was sent to your department in March of 2009, only months later.
Again in 2008, the year you did this, the International Organisation of Migration in Indonesia warned, “people smugglers have clearly noted there has been a change in policy and they're testing the envelope.”
Wasn't scrapping the border laws your most catastrophic mistake?
PM: As I just said before, we operated on the base of the mandate we received from the Australian people in the 2007 election. And had we not done so, you and others would have criticised us for not honouring our word to the Australian people.
Secondly, circumstances then changed.
HOST: Well, they did change.
PM: And I quite readily admitted that we should have adjusted probably in the period of 2009-10, or begun to adjust, and I've gotta say 20-20 hindsight is easy.
And whatever the reports…
HOST: That's not hindsight. These are warnings.
PM: One of the reports that you referred to, or both of them, in fact, would have been part of a multitude of reports coming to the Government with differing analyses of what was transpiring at the time.
And you know as well as I do if you run a Government, you head a Government, you don't see all the reports which come in. They are assessed by your agencies, and there would have been many of them.
HOST: Well you're saying that you were doing merely what the voters had asked you to do in 2007.
PM: It's called the democratic mandate.
HOST: Well, before the 2007 election, you said, “Labor's policy is that if people are intercepted on the high seas, then these vessels should be turned around.”
Maybe the voters expected you to honour that promise?
PM: Well, what we discovered subsequent to the election period, and after long consultation with officials, is - and this is the reality which Mr Abbott faces today - is the instruction given to people smugglers out there on the high seas is that if you are about to be turned around by an Australian vessel, go out and sink the boat.
That's precisely the modus operandi which many of them have adopted, and therefore it proves to be an impractical policy.
HOST: Can I talk to you about your PNG deal? Now you promise that you will send every boat person to Papua New Guinea.
Now, since you have made that threat, boat people have kept arriving at more than 100 a day. There's been no drop.
Doesn't that suggest to you your plan has failed already?
PM: Well, Andrew, as you know from the statement I made only a little over a week ago, at the time of announcing the regional resettlement arrangement I said very openly on day one, number one, don't expect an immediate reduction of boats.
Number two…
HOST: When can we expect- reduction?
PM: Number two - number two is what I said - people smugglers will then seek to test the Government's resolve.
HOST: They’re testing it. So when will we see this work?
PM: Will then test the people’s - will then seek to test the Government's resolve. And we are not for turning.
Our policy is very clear. If you're a people smuggler and you seek to bring people to Australia by boat to Christmas Island, then know this - you will not be settled in Australia.
That is the core response to the business model which people smugglers have used around the world for quite a long time in dealing with Australia.
HOST: When will we see your policy start to work? Before the election? Will we see fewer boats?
PM: What I said when I launched the policy with the other Ministers, the Attorney-General and the Immigration Minister, Tony Burke, a week or so ago, was that we would need to see the implementation of this policy over a period of time and its effect over many months.
HOST: So, what you're saying, then, is that this may not work before the election? Trust you, it will after?
PM: Well, last time I looked, Andrew, I have been Prime Minister of this country for the last four weeks.
What I have sought to do is address this within the first couple of weeks.
HOST: I’m just after a performance mandate.
People will - you're asking people, taking trust that you will do what you say. Your plan will work. I'm asking you - will we see it work before the election?
PM: And what I'm saying to you in response is the appropriate decision by the Government is to go to the heart of the business model of people smugglers, which is for them to say to their customers, “If you bring folk to - if you come to Australia with us, then you'll end up being settled in Australia.” And what I'm saying in response is that's not going to happen.
And you know as well as I do, it is the implementation of that policy direction over time, resolutely, which will yield results. In the interim, people smugglers will test resolve.
HOST: I just asked you a fairly simple question, which is…
PM: And I have given you a very direct answer.
HOST: No, you haven’t.
PM: An absolutely direct and a responsible answer.
HOST: Will we see fewer boats before the election?
PM: I have given you a responsible answer. I don’t intend to…
HOST: You don't know?
PM: I am giving you a responsible answer, which says the clarity of the Government's decision, going to the heart of the people smuggling model, is the right response.
Number two, it is the product of the implementation of that over time.
HOST: Prime Minister, you promised to terminate the carbon tax, switching it a year earlier from the price set in Europe's emissions trading system.
Now, you say this will cut power bills, because Europe’s price today is $6. But Labor's last budget, and that's two months ago only, projects that Europe's price will actually rise over the next six years to $38. Not $6 - $38.
Can you guarantee that we will never pay a carbon price higher than what we pay today?
PM: If you have a floating price, Andrew, and you will understand that, the price changes over time. That’s why you have it - it’s called a market solution.
HOST: So you can’t guarantee that we won’t one day be paying $38 instead of, today, $24.
PM: Andrew, as a good market person yourself, being the strong conservative that you are, markets function according to supply and demand.
And therefore, what will happen with a floating price for carbon is that we will adjust accordingly over time.
HOST: About climate change - well, let’s go into it. What I want to know is…
PM: I accept the science. It’s happening. Therefore we’re going to do something about it.
HOST: I am going to quote the science, and see whether you accept the science.
An IPCC author, Professor Roger Jones - we’re talking science - says your carbon policies will at best cut the world’s temperature by 4 thousandths of 1 degree, by the end of the century - 4 thousandths.
Do you seriously think it’s worth us spending all this money, these taxes, these programs, to do essentially nothing about the temperature?
PM: The International Panel of Climate Change scientists that you just referred to contains within it 4,000 scientists. You’ve just chosen to quote one.
Number two is this…
HOST: That is the best - that is the most generous figure…
PM: That is…
HOST: Will you dispute?
PM: That is - that is one.
HOST: Will you tell me how much your programs will cut the temperatures?
PM: I am just putting into context, there are 4,000 scientists on that panel, you’ve just chosen to quote one.
HOST: No, that is the science. That is the science.
PM: Here is the second point - no, no, that’s your…
HOST: Are you denying that figure?
PM: Ah, Andrew, you’ve chosen to select the quote which suits your argument. That’s the first point.
HOST: Well you tell me your figure, then. Alright?
If my figure is wrong, you tell me your figure.
PM: My second point - no. You’ve said, here is one selection from a panel of 4,000 scientists.
Of course it happens to accord with the Andrew Bolt view of the world.
HOST: No. No, this is…
PM: It’s true. It’s absolutely true. The second point…
HOST: Prime Minister. You are misinformed. That is what your programs will do.
If you think your programs will drop the temperature by more than 4 thousandths of a degree, tell me now.
PM: Um, when you…
HOST: Tell me now.
PM: When you pronounce that the science says this, you’re saying Andrew Bolt’s selection of the science says that.
HOST: Well, tell me what Kevin Rudd’s selection...
PM: The second point is this…
HOST: Tell me Kevin Rudd’s…
PM: I’m about to answer, if you’d allow me the opportunity.
HOST: Alright, let’s hear the figure then.
PM: The opportunity that I would take is simply this - when you implement an action on carbon pricing as a nation, like Australia, then you represent less than 2% of global emissions, and you make an undertaking to reduce your carbon emissions over time, the way in which it works globally is to work in partnership with countries and economies around the world.
HOST: Another IPCC scientist, Hans von Storch - I’m sure you’ve heard of him, very prominent - has said that there’s been no - essentially no warming for 15 years.
In another five years, if there is no more warming, he will have to reconsider the global warming theory.
Will you reconsider your adherence to the global warming theory if there is no more warming for another five years?
PM: There are two sources of authority that we should listen to, because we pay them for their best and considered advice.
One is the International Panel of Climate Change scientists - not just…
HOST: I’ve just quoted one.
PM: Yeah, you’ve just quoted one of 4,000…
HOST: A very prominent one.
PM: A very selected quote.
HOST: I’m asking you, do you accept…
PM: And the second point is this. The second source of authority…
HOST: What will make you change your mind?
PM: The second source of authority, as the Prime Minister of Australia, is the CSIRO.
And the CSIRO, which is a body which has existed in this country since the 1930s, analyses climate change science.
Their conclusion is that not only does it exist, but the consequences for Australia, of us and the world not acting, is that you will see an increase in extreme weather events, and you will see an increase in drought events across south-eastern and south-western Australia.
HOST: They’re snowing you, Prime Minister.
To finish off, in 2007, Labor under you promised to turn back the boats. It promised to stop reckless spending.
In 2010 Julia Gillard promised no carbon tax, and a budget surplus. This year all of those promises and a lot more were broken.
What are you going to do to make people trust your promises now?
PM: The first thing I would say is that climate change, building on where we’ve just been in this discussion, is real. It requires action, putting a price on carbon.
What I put forward was a floating price way back when - rejected by an ungodly cabal of the Liberals and the Greens. And subsequently, Julia Gillard at the beginning of the last parliamentary term - or this parliamentary term…
HOST: No, I'm not asking you to justify…
PM: No, no.
HOST: So I'm asking you about how you go about rebuilding trust?
PM: Because, if you are engaged in a discussion about trust, understanding is important, in terms of where - how we arrived at where we’ve arrived at.
Number two, on the question of asylum seekers that you raised, we have had to adjust our policy over time. And I make absolutely no apology whatsoever for our current policy settings, because the world around us has changed.
And number three, you spoke about expenditure disciplines.
I would simply go back to the point, Andrew, that within nine months of having been elected, the global financial crisis erupts, the largest economic crisis the world has seen since the Great Depression, from which many economies in the world have yet to recover.
We actually invested, we borrowed to do that, and the result was not only do we have new modern facilities in schools around Australia, that we didn't go into recession, we don't have mass unemployment.
And we have among the lowest debt and deficit levels in the world, with an AAA credit rating. Despite what Mr Abbott may say on your program.
HOST: Prime Minister, thank you so much for joining me. I hope you didn’t regret it.
PM: No, no. I'm happy to come back.


Prime Minister, Minister for Sport
Melbourne
The Prime Minister today officially launched the International Cricket Council Cricket World Cup 2015 with New Zealand Prime Minister John Key and Federal Minister for Sport Don Farrell.
This Cricket World Cup is one of the world’s largest sporting events and will demonstrate Australia’s expertise in delivering outstanding major sporting events.
It is expected to bring more than 50,000 international tourists to Australia, generating about $360 million in direct expenditure across Australia and New Zealand.
The World Cup will also reach a global audience of over 900 million people, putting Australia in the international spotlight as a preferred tourism, trade, and investment destination.
A total of 49 one day matches will be played at venues in Australia and New Zealand.
The Australian Government has made significant investments to upgrade many of the venues hosting matches – including the Sydney Cricket Ground, Adelaide, Bellerive and Manuka Ovals.
For our cricket-loving nation, hosting the Cricket World Cup with New Zealand takes on greater meaning as 2015 also marks the ANZAC centenary.
The Cricket World Cup 2015 is the 11th edition of the tournament and was previously hosted by Australia and New Zealand in 1992.
The Australian Government will work in partnership with the New Zealand Government, Local Organising Committee, the International Cricket Council, States and Territories to deliver a world class event.
The Cricket World Cup is an exciting global sporting event and we are committed to maximising opportunities for Australian businesses and spectators.


Prime Minister, Minister for Health, Minister for Medical Research
Sydney
The Rudd Government has announced an additional $19.5 million in Government funding to the Chris O’Brien Lifehouse project at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital (RPA) in Camperdown.
The extra funding will allow the fit-out of inpatient facilities, operating suites and procedure rooms to be built faster, allowing cancer patients to be treated sooner on site.
The purpose built centre is part of the Government’s commitment to provide world leading cancer care in Australia. Lifehouse at RPA will ensure better outcomes for people living with cancer.
As an integrated cancer centre, Lifehouse at RPA will deliver a range of vital services in the one location including clinical care, surgery, medical and radiation oncology, research, integrative medicine, and support services for patients, their families and carers.
The new facilities will include 96 inpatient beds, eight operating suites and procedure rooms, and 18 intensive care and high dependency beds.
Since coming to power in 2007, the Government has invested more than $4 billion into cancer care, improving detection and treatment.
Cancer survival rates in Australia are among the best in the world due to our advances in research, development of early detection, improvements in treatment and follow up care.
The additional $19.5 million funding brings the total Commonwealth contribution to Lifehouse at RPA to $169.5 million.
In 2008-09, $50 million was allocated to Lifehouse at RPA through the Health and Hospitals Reform, followed by $100 million in 2009-10 through Round One of the Government’s Health and Hospitals Fund.
The inpatient services unit is now due to open in late 2014 – approximately two years earlier than the original expected date – thanks to the additional Federal funding and matching funds contributed by Lifehouse at RPA.
In the years before his passing, Chris O’Brien worked to transform the Sydney Cancer Centre into a world-class integrated cancer treatment centre.
The Government is honoured to help realise Chris’ vision sooner, and Lifehouse at RPA will be a place where his compassion and skill will live on.


Prime Minister, Minister for Health, Minister for Medical Research
Sydney
Subject(s): Chris O’Brien Lifehouse; Health funding; ICAC; Asylum seekers
MINISTER PLIBERSEK: Thank you everyone for gathering this morning. I want to start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land that we’re meeting on today, the Cadigal people of the Eora nation, and I pay my respects to their elders past and present.
It’s wonderful of course to have the Prime Minister here today. With Gail O’Brien who has played such an integral role in the establishment of this beautiful facility. Tim Dugan, the CEO of the Chris O’Brien Lifehouse at RPA, Ian Breedon, the Chairman, Professor Michael Boyer, the Chief Clinical Officer, Dr Mary Foley, the Director General of New South Wales Health and Teresa Anderson, the Chief Executive of the Sydney Local Health District.
It’s delightful to be here to see the progress of the Chris O’Brien Lifehouse cancer centre at RPA.
Of course this is going to make a huge difference to the people of New South Wales, not just the people of Sydney but New South Wales and I think many Australians because of not just the clinical work that will happen here but also the research and the innovation that will happen here.
Cancer has been a focus for this government since 2007 with a number of cancer packages.
In fact, we’ve invested more than $4 billion in cancer because cancer being the number two killer in Australia is a number one priority for the Australian Government.
We’ve listed more than 36 new medicines on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Schedule and indeed, on the first of August tomorrow, we’ll see two very important new medicines listed, again for cancer.
We’ve invested not just in magnificent facilities like this but also in Sydney the King Horn Cancer Centre that I know works very cooperatively with Chris O’Brien Lifehouse, and in Melbourne, the Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre, a half billion dollar comprehensive cancer centre there.
Of course, we know it’s not just people in cities who get sick and need these facilities, so we’ve also invested in 26 regional cancer centres, many of them open already, some of them in final stages of completion just like this.
I’m delighted to be here today because this centre really does represent Chris O’Brien’s philosophy on the treatment of cancer but also our government’s treatment on cancer.
We need to do better in prevention and that’s why we expanded our breast cancer screening programs and our bowel cancer screening programs.
We need to better with treatment and that’s why listed new medicines and opened new facilities.
We need to better with prevention so we’ve taken very important steps with plain packaging of tobacco to reduce our smoking rates, just as one example.
But we also need to remember to treat the whole person and I think Gail will talk to us a little bit, in a moment, about Chris O’Brien’s vision because of course we need to offer the finest detection, prevention and cure.
But cancer treatment is not fun. It’s never fun and making sure that we offer psychological supports and social supports to cancer sufferers and their families is very much part of a vision of this state of the art facility.
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has been a supporter of this beautiful facility but more importantly Chris O’Brien vision for better cancer treatment since first meeting him many years ago and has been here, I think, I’m not sure how many times he’s been to this site now but since before it was even a hole in the ground.
I remember the first time we visited together was looking at the linear accelerators next door.
PM: Well thank you Tanya and Gail. Lovely to have you here.
This vision is Chris O’Brien’s and Gail O’Brien’s vision. This bloke has had a bit to do with it as well.
Every now and then in national political life, there are great days where it makes it all worthwhile and this is one of those days because we are making things better for people who suffer from cancer.
I got to know Chris O'Brien way back when, when I was Leader of the Opposition, and he had already been diagnosed and it was one of those terrible, terrible tragedies for a guy who was doing so much for people suffering from cancer, himself he was afflicted by the same condition which ultimately took his life.
Chris O'Brien saved lives and he changed lives.
This marvellous Lifehouse centre is about making sure that his contribution while he was alive continues well into the future.
These are living stones and therefore his vision and his work will continue with every person and every room in this place once we welcome the first ambulatory patients later this year.
To all those who have been associated with this project, to the construction, the Multiplex mob, well done.
Those who are still doing their work, guys up there, well done. Keep at it. Five minutes off, then hop back into it.
To the entire team from RPA and more broadly let's call it the cancer research, cancer treatment community, well done because you've all had your say in how this facility should look and how it should function in the future.
To all our colleagues from both Federal Health and State Health of New South Wales, thank you for working so closely with us as well.
Of course the important fundraising team, which has been behind this from the corporate sector, the Chairman and others who are associated with making sure this is a world-class facility.
To Gail, her vision and her input, a very personal touch into how you change the lives of people afflicted with a very challenging disease.
Let me just say one or two things about why we are doing this and why we are acting resolutely on cancer across Australia.
As the Health Minister said before, cancer is Australia's number two killer and therefore it is a number one priority for the Australian Government.
You can't just push this to one side. It's mainstream. None of us here today are free of either family connections or friends who at one stage or another have suffered from cancer.
I'm the son of a woman who never smoked in her life and she died of lung cancer, we assume through passive smoking.
All of us are touched in one way or another by this. So for the Government, this is a number one priority.
If you look at the figures which Tanya touched on before, they are very challenging.
In 2013, 125,000 Australians will be diagnosed with cancer. 125,000. Next time you're watching a game at the MCG on the television, think of the MCG and think of it full and plus another 25,000 on top.
That's what we're talking about.
That’s a huge number of Australians each year.
Let's just put that into our sights, into our focus.
Within that, we have tobacco as the number one preventable cause of cancer.
Around 30 per cent of cancer is caused by tobacco consumption and it's estimated that this will kill 15,000 Australians each year. 15,000 Australians this year.
So this day somewhere in Australia on average, 40 to 50 Australians will die as a result of smoking-induced cancers.
That is far too many.
It's a tragedy for those who are afflicted and it's also really expensive for the country to deal with, particularly when it's preventable.
Smoking is the major cause of lung cancer responsible for 90 per cent of all lung cancers in males, 65 per cent in females.
We looked at some of the figures in terms of how this occupies the public hospital system of Australia each year.
Over 750,000 hospital bed days per year are attributable to tobacco related diseases. 750,000 hospital bed days each year are attributable to tobacco related disease.
It represents just under 10 per cent of the total burden of disease in Australia being attributable to smoking.
I mean we need to get serious on this major driver of cancer in Australia and around the world.
So the legitimate question is, what are we doing about it? That's the nature of the challenge. 125,000 Australians being afflicted with cancer each year, 30 per cent of them afflicted through smoking-related cancers and on top of that you have the extraordinary cost to our public hospital system.
The cost to economy by the way is estimated to be $31.5 billion a year. $31.5 billion a year. We're a $1.5 trillion economy, $35 billion a year up in smoke, literally.
What are we doing about it?
As the Health Minister indicated before, we are now investing $4.1 billion as an Australian Government to improve the prevention, detection and treatment of cancer as well as cancer related research.
Australia, I’m advised, now has the best overall cancer survival rates in the world.
That's because we are putting such a huge investment into this killer disease.
Now what it means across the country, of our $4.1 billion nearly $2 billion has been invested in new and amended cancer medicines and the Minister indicated a couple of those have just literally come on the market throughout the PBS. Tomorrow.
These are genuinely critical drugs and they are really expensive as we know through our Budget processes but we believe it's absolutely necessary to do.
On top of that, we're also investing $1.5 billion on cancer-related research, including the translational research of integrated cancer care that we see here at Lifehouse as it will unfold and at centres like it around Australia, including the $426 million investment in the Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre.
Also, the Minister indicated the number of specific cancer types that we're investing in the research of. I won't go through the list but they are formidable.
Around Australia though and this is quite critical, we are also investing $672 million in 26 regional cancer centres across Australia.
This is as important as what is happening here in the middle of Sydney or in the middle of Melbourne or the middle of Brisbane where I come from.
What happens out there in regional Australia is critical. You know why?
The survival rates out there in the regions and rural areas are much, much lower than the cities.
Why? People just give up. They give up because it's too much hassle to fly to Brisbane, fly to Sydney, fly to Melbourne, disrupt your life. They just give up and they shouldn't because there's a whole lot of life still lying ahead of them.
So that's part of the vision which I've been prosecuting since I first became Prime Minister back in 2007 and the result – 26 regional cancer care centres.
Places like New England, the Central Coast, the North Coast of NSW – Shoalhaven, Illawarra, Lismore, in Queensland, in Central Queensland, Townsville, on the Sunshine Coast, Whyalla in South Australia, Ballarat and Gippsland in Victoria, Bunbury in Western Australia, Darwin.
These are just some of the investments that we've made right around the country.
And so I conclude with these remarks.
This is a major investment here in Sydney at this Lifehouse centre, part of a much wider national investment of $4 billion-plus in dealing with the number two killer in Australia today.
You can either just say it's all too hard and someone else should fix it or you step up to the plate and you're part of it solution.
We believe in being part of the solution.
That's what a compassionate Australia is all about, turning it into bricks and mortar and things that make a difference for people.
But I'd say this in conclusion, when we are looking at 15,000 Australians dying each year as a result of smoking-related diseases, we are looking at the cost to the hospital system and the health system of that.
Frankly, this costs a lot of money for the Australian tax payer and we’ll need to continue to take necessary action to make sure that we can fund this great work into the future and ultimately secure the cure for cancer as well.
GAIL O’BRIEN: Thank you very much Prime Minister.
I have to say this wouldn’t even be happening if it weren’t for you and the relationship that you and Chris had and how you actually listened to him and his grand idea.
Just as I’ve been standing here, I’ve been think how he would feel walking in that door if were sick. He’d feel safe, he’d feel, the fear dissolve, he’d feel he’s in a place where there are people to look after him, have a smile on their face and people who understand.
Chris did say this isn’t just about an iconic building, because it obviously is, but it’s about what goes in here and I absolutely know we have, in Professor Boyer we have the best clinicians and his team to follow on in here.
So I just thank you so much and Tanya for coming here today.
I know that we’ll be able to do something great for the people New South Wales.
TIM DUGAN: I don’t know if there’s much more I can add other than what the Prime Minister and the Minister and Gail have already said other than to say great ideas don’t happen easily.
There’s been a lot of people in this room and across the country who put their hard work to making this facility a reality.
It won’t be a functioning cancer centre until the end of the year, so there’s a bit more work to be done.
But I’m absolutely sure, given the levels of effort and hard work and intellect that’s gone into getting us to where we are today, from all sectors of the community, the support of the Commonwealth Government has been amazing, the New South Wales Government, Sydney University, corporate sector and each and every one of the people who have made contributions to this organisation.
You’ve built an amazing piece of national infrastructure and I think it’s something that everybody should be proud of for many, many years to come.
So I’d just add to Gail, our collective thanks.
PM: It gives me great pleasure on behalf of the Australian Government to announce a further support to this cancer research here, care and patient support services by providing an additional $19.5 million to the Chris O’Brien Lifehouse project.
This funding will be matched by Lifehouse and will enable the project to be completed in mid-2014 instead of the original completion date of 2016.
Imagine that, a government project finishing early, and under budget, and you doubt the existence of God.
It will be used for fit-out of inpatient facilities, operating suites and procedure rooms.
This $19.5 million means that since 2007 the Australian Government has committed $169.5 million towards this project. Every cent of it, well spent, well invested in order to save lives and improve lives.
Overall, this is $169 million from the Australian Government, including a further $19.5 million today and I congratulate all concerned for bringing this great project in Chris O’Brien’s memory to conclusion.
JOURNALIST: Today will probably be the worst day for New South Wales Labor in living memory.
PM: That’s not a question on cancer research.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
MINISTER PLIBERSEK: The Northern Territory Government have been given many months to explain why a facility that was built to care for patients attending the Royal Darwin Hospital for critical surgery isn’t being used for that purpose.
The funding that funded this Chris O’Brien Lifehouse cancer centre came from the Health and Hospitals Fund as did the $18.5 million for the patient accommodation attached to the Royal Darwin Hospital.
The Northern Territory Government have decided to use that instead for locking up alcoholics.
What I’ve asked them to do is explain to me and to the Health and Hospitals Fund how they will meet their responsibility to treat patients at the Royal Darwin Hospital and how they will keep the patients and staff of the Royal Darwin Hospital safe given that there are people basically jailed on the grounds of the Royal Darwin Hospital.
The Northern Territory Government have refused to do that.
What I’ve said is that they should return that money to the Health and Hospitals Fund so that it may be used for health priorities in Darwin. They have a great deal of health needs up there, they haven’t explained how they’ll meet the need for patient accommodation at Royal Darwin Hospital.
I think that there’s been a tremendous failure of leadership in the Northern Territory on this issue.
PM: Can I just emphasise what the Minister has just said.
Our health dollars have to be spent the right way. There is a limit to the number of taxpayer dollars available for health.
What I like about this place and this project is you see value for money. You see the purposes for which the funds have been dedicated realised in what’s being done.
I say again, when it comes, in particular, to cancer, treating cancer and smoking-related cancers cost the Australian taxpayer hundreds of millions of dollars each year.
Frankly, these are funds we have to continue to raise from the taxpayer.
It’s important therefore that taxpayer dollars are spent the right way across the range of the health portfolio mission.
JOURNALIST: So NSW Labor, obviously ICAC will release their recommendations today. What do you [inaudible]
PM: I’ve been absolutely disgusted by what I’ve seen in the ICAC hearings so far and my view is very simple. Anyone who is responsible for corruption or illegal behaviour should face the full force of the law. That’s what I want to see happen.
JOURNALIST: Will your reforms outlast you if you don’t win at this election?
PM: I say again, I’ve been disgusted by what I’ve seen in the ICAC public hearings so far. I welcome this report, anyone who is responsible for illegal or corrupt behaviour should face the full force of the law.
Further I would say it was for no idle reason that I took a virtually unprecedented step of directing federal intervention in the NSW branch of the Labor Party.
This set of reforms are anchored in one core principal: zero tolerance for corruption, zero tolerance for corruption and I expect that to be fully reflected in the intervention we’ve undertaken and I go back to my comments on the ICAC report. The Australian Government welcomes the ICAC report.
We’ve been disgusted, I’ve been disgusted by what I’ve seen before ICAC and anyone responsible for corrupt behaviour should face the full force of the law.
JOURNALIST: Could you tell us a bit more about your campaign team needing three people that worked with Obama has been [inaudible]?
PM: Well we’re a very broad church. We sort of take advice from wherever we will.
These are matters for the national organisation.
I’ve always been a strong supporter of President Obama, both in his leadership in the world, also his message to the American people and we’ll draw up the best brains in the world.
But these are questions for the national organisation of the Australian Labor Party.
They’re very welcome. We’re a very welcoming bunch here in the national campaign team of the Australian Labor Party.
JOURNALIST:  When’s the economic statement due to be released?
PM: That’s a matter entirely for the Treasurer and the Finance Minister.
The last time I saw them, they were beavering away in a cave somewhere underneath the Treasury building and that’s what they’re supposed to do.
The business of economic management is a tough business.
We believe in tough disciplines, they are adhering to those disciplines and that’s why when we decide to allocate $19.5 million to this project, it is fully budgeted for.
I’d contrast that with what I’ve heard in recent days, which is Mr Abbott junking completely the finance disciplines established by John Howard and Peter Costello back in 1996.
He said, through Mr Hockey, they won’t be adhering to those disciplines.
In other words, they expect to be able to just have a blank cheque.
We’re adhering to those budget disciplines, they’ll be transparent to the Australian public.
That’s what Finance Minister and Treasurer are working on. It’ll be released in due course. It’s very important that Mr Abbott be held to identical account.
JOURNALIST:  [Inaudible] consider a deal with the Nauruan Government to expand the number of asylum seekers that can be sent to Nauru?
PM: The Minister, Tony Burke, has been in constant contact with all regional governments, including the government of Papua New Guinea and the government of Nauru and will continue to do so.
This occurs within our framework of a Regional Resettlement Arrangement and occurs within a wider framework of a regional approach to the assessment of asylum seekers across South East Asia and the south west Pacific.
Our policy is clear. Our policy is if you are a people smuggler and you put a person onto a boat to come to Australia, that person will not be allowed to settle in Australia. That’s our message.
The contrasting message I’ve seen from Mr Abbott is this. Mr Abbott’s most recent three-word slogan after Operation Whatever is as follows: Mr Abbott now says we’re going to have some arrangement with Nauru which has a numerical limit on it, which people smugglers will be able to work out and after that, they can in large measure come on to Australia a little while later.
That isn’t a policy, that’s a piece of sloganeering for the purposes of getting a cheap headline.
We’ve got a real policy, we’re implementing it, it’s tough, it’s hard but it had a core message, which is that if you are going to get on to a boat with a people smuggler to come to Australia, you will not be settled in Australia.
That’s the simple message, it’s a hard line message, we thought it through carefully.
Frankly, the alternatives being put on offer by Mr Abbott are either three-word slogans or frankly, it’s just designed to grab a quick headline.
Frankly, when you see the reports in today’s press about how this recent episode has been apparently financed, I think there are a lot of questions to answer for Mr Abbott about that one.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM: I’ve just seen the reports in the newspaper, I think it’s time for Mr Abbott to fully account for what has occurred.
Was Mr Abbott aware of all of this? What actually transpired? Was it funded? I’d just like to hear the answers to all these questions.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I’m responsible for formulating policy and implementing policy that maintains the Australia’s national security interests.
I’ve said what our policy is, if you come on a boat aided by a people smuggler to Australia, you will not be settled in Australia and therefore, that’s what we’re implementing.
There’s going to be all sorts of opposition to it, not terribly politically popular in various parts of the country, I understand that.
Lots of implementation hurdles, we’ll cross each one of those as we come to it.
I’m sure there’ll be legal hurdles as well, we’ll cross each of those hurdles as we come to it.
But that’s our core policy.
The alternative is not much better than a three-word slogan and when Mr Abbott utters his immortal phrase ‘stop the boats’, the Australian people want to hear the six-word phrase ‘how will you stop the boats?’ That’s what we need to hear the answer on.


Prime Minister
Sydney
I am pleased to announce that I will be recommending to the Governor-General, Her Excellency the Honourable Quentin Bryce AC CVO, that she reappoint Mr Roger Wilkins AO as the Secretary of the Attorney-General’s Department.
Mr Wilkins has led the Attorney-General’s Department with distinction and I thank him for his ongoing contribution to the Australian Public Service.
The Governor-General will consider the appointment under recent amendments to the Public Service Act 1999 which took effect on 1 July 2013. 
Mr Wilkins’ current appointment is due to end on 31 August 2013 and his proposed reappointment will be until 31 August 2014. 


Subject(s): Regional Resettlement Arrangement with Nauru; Election date; G20
PM: Mr President, you're a very welcome guest in Brisbane, a very welcome guest in Australia, and it's good to see you here representing our good friends in the Republic of Nauru.
I'd also like in particular to thank you for travelling to Brisbane to finalise this agreement.
And also to our ministerial colleagues, Minister Tony Burke, the Minister for Immigration and of course the Minister for Finance and Sustainable Development and Justice, Mr David Adeang from the Republic of Nauru. I extend to you also, Minister, our warmest welcome.
Today the President of Nauru and I are proud to announce an important initiative to tackle people smuggling in our wider region.
As the Australian people know our Government's approach to people smuggling is one which maximises regional cooperation.
This is a regional problem, it's a global problem, it requires therefore regional cooperation, it requires therefore global cooperation.
Today we are pleased to announce that we've reached a new Regional Resettlement Arrangement, one that supersedes the Memorandum of Understanding we signed last year.
This is very much parallel to the arrangement we have signed with Papua New Guinea.
Our Governments have agreed that the Republic of Nauru will not only maintain and extend its regional processing capacity, but it will also provide a settlement opportunity to persons it determines are in need of international protection.
This means that those seeking safe haven will have the opportunity to settle and reside in Nauru, to settle and reside in Nauru.
The numbers that could be settled over time will of course be the decision of the Government of Nauru and we're very much mindful of the fact that Nauru is a small country.
The Government of Nauru first raised this prospect of settlement arrangements with our Government on 9 July and as I noted before this arrangement is similar to that agreed to Papua New Guinea a fortnight ago.
Unauthorised maritime arrivals to Australia will now be sent to Papua New Guinea or Nauru for assessment of their refugee claims.
If they are found to be genuine refugees under these arrangements they will be settled, they will be able to settle and reside in Papua New Guinea or they may settle or reside in Nauru; both countries being signatories to the UN refugee convention.
If they're not found to be genuine refugees they may be repatriated to their country of origin or be sent to a third country other than Australia.
No matter where people smugglers try to land asylum seekers by boat in Australia, they will not be settled in Australia. This is our core principle.
This is our core unshakeable position: that if people smugglers try and bring asylum seekers to Australia by boat those people will not be settled in Australia.
The agreement with Nauru today means that they could be subject to transfer to Nauru or Papua New Guinea and resettlement in one of those countries.
The expansion of our regional arrangement sends a clear message that coming to Australia by boat is not the way to gain Australian residency.
If you are seeking to take the dangerous passage by boat my message as Prime Minister of Australia is simply this: don't.
Don't believe the lies that people smugglers are peddling, don't get on the next boat.
You won't be settled in Australia, you will be sent to Nauru or Papua New Guinea for reprocessing and resettlement.
Australia will work closely with Nauru to rebuild the regional processing centre capacity to accommodate unauthorised maritime arrivals pending the outcome of the refugee claims.
Nauru, as I've noted already, is a signatory to the Refugees Convention and will settle those it determines are in need of international protection in accordance with its own convention obligations.
We'll be working together on the details of this arrangement, but Australia will be supporting Nauru to provide settlement services including access to health and education to those who are settled in Nauru.
The Government of Australia will bear all costs incurred under and incidental to this Memorandum of Understanding.
Australia expects to provide $29.9 million in aid to Nauru in 2013 -14.
In addition, $17 million also for the rebuilding of the prison in Nauru.
Also funds will be made available and have been made available through the contingency reserve which will be allocated consistent with the take up of the resettlement arrangements within Nauru.
These are fully accounted for in the economic statement yesterday.
We will continue to engage our regional partners tackle irregular migration and people smuggling.
This arrangement is another step forward to stop the evil trade that has resulted in a tragic death at sea for so many.
As I stated when I recently announced the regional resettlement arrangement with Papua New Guinea, the approach we're now taking to unauthorised maritime travel is a tough, very tough approach.
It's a hard-line approach. It's a necessary approach. It is also the most humane approach.
But as Prime Minister I am committed to maintaining the integrity of our borders through a robust system of border security and orderly migration.
Our first responsibility as the Government of Australia is to maintain our national security and to maintain the integrity of our borders.
It is important to note that the Government considers these arrangements are consistent with our obligations as signatory to the Refugees Convention and other international conventions to which we are party.
The Memorandum of Understanding signed today ensures the unauthorised maritime arrivals transferred to Nauru will receive proper and humane treatment.
Asylum seekers who are determined to be genuine refugees will have a country of settlement, namely Nauru or Papua New Guinea.
Australia continues to fulfil its international responsibility to care for those in need of international protection or humanitarian need.
Australia increased its humanitarian program to 20,000 places in 2012-13, up from 12 or 13,000 places and has maintained that program level into this year.
This increase allows Australia to concentrate on refugees who have spent many years in UN camps, around the world, some for many decades.
I'll reiterate what the Minister and I said here only two weeks ago: that contingent on the successful implementation of our regional resettlement approach the Government stands ready to increase our overall humanitarian intake consistent with the recommendations of the Houston Panel of review some time ago.
Australia will continue to assist the resettlement of refugees.
We will continue to work with our regional partners and other traditional and emerging refugee receiving countries to identify further settlement opportunities.
Again I'd like to thank very much his Excellency, the President of Nauru, and for the Government and the people of Nauru, for their generous offer to settle those determined to be in need of international protection.
The MOU with Nauru and the Regional Resettlement Arrangement with Papua New Guinea are part of our Government's continuing work to tackle the scourge of people smuggling in a practical and in a new way.
These arrangements compliment actions occurring across the region.
I've previously welcomed reports that Indonesia is amending its visa on arrival regulations concerning those coming from Iran and also welcome reports that Malaysia is considering adopting similar steps.
Australia is working with its neighbours in South East Asia and in the South Pacific as part of a broader approach on regional cooperative arrangements.
The conference hosted by Indonesia later in August will provide an opportunity to develop further regional arrangements.
International conferences will convene relevant transit and destination countries and will build also on previous arrangements that we've agreed across the region, and also most particularly on how to improve global arrangements within the framework of the Refugee Convention.
Ladies and gentlemen, the question of asylum seekers and people smugglers is not an easy one. It's very hard. It's hard for any government. But we believe that these represent practical steps forward in dealing with a problem for Australia now, for the region and for the world.
These are hard and complex measures, these represent practical action, they do not represent a three-word slogan.
They represent the resolve of our Government to work with our neighbours calmly and resolutely to address the challenge which we face together.
If I could now ask my colleague and friend the President of Nauru to address you, he will begin by making some remarks in the Nauruan language for his own folks back home.
This is a good thing. If I spoke Nauruan I would join him but I don't so I won't.
Then he will make some remarks in English, and then consistent with international practice which we've adopted here with Prime Minister O'Neill, we normally take two questions a side, four altogether.
On such international occasions we're happy to take those questions and then we'll leave Minister Burke to follow up any further questions of detail concerning the agreement we've signed with Nauru today.
Over to you, Mr President.
PRESIDENT WAQA: Thank you, Prime Minister Rudd.
[Addresses audience in Nauruan language]
Thank you, Kevin Rudd. Let me say from the outset that we're so happy to be here and to be part of this historical occasion of signing this MOU together with you, the Australian Government and the Government of Nauru.
We see ourselves as – let me maybe make it clear that we will be active participants in this solution to try and assist with Australia's determination of solving this problem of irregular immigration into Australia.
So as President of the Republic of Nauru I'm happy to say on behalf of our people that we will stand by Australia, making sure that this works.
And not only that, that all the refugees or asylum seekers that come through our camp will be treated humanely and with their human rights upheld.
Those are a few words for me to say at this time and I will be happy to take some questions after this.
PM: Thank you very much, Mr President.
I think what I'd say in conclusion is that as I said a couple of weeks ago in relation to Papua New Guinea, implementing these sorts of arrangements with people as ugly as people smugglers around the world is always hard. It's never easy.
As I've said before, there will continue to be bumps in the road. There will be implementation difficulties, always the possibility of legal challenges one way or another.
But the bottom line is this: unless you are dealing with the core business model of people smugglers, which is to say to them if you are out there putting people on boats for their money and telling them that if they come by boat to Australia they will be settled here, you are lying to them because they will not be settled here.
That's what this arrangement with Nauru is about, that's what our existing arrangement with Papua New Guinea is about, these form the basis of a regional response to a problem which is affecting us all. Over to you folks for questions.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, will you be calling a September 7 election?
PM: Well as you may have noted we have been busy in the business of Government.
Minister Burke, myself, and others have been engaged in the negotiations of this important arrangement with Nauru, as we have been previously with Papua New Guinea.
The other point I'd make is this: we have also been – including through today and into the period ahead – in negotiations with the Government of Victoria to conclude the Better Schools agreement with them.
We thought we had an agreement in recent days, now they seem to be playing politics with Tony Abbott and not willing to agree.
At least I don't know what the precise outcome of that is going to be.
I'm also in negotiation with the Government of Western Australia, seeking to reach a landing point with them on the possible inclusion of WA for the first time in DisabilityCare Australia.
On top of that we've been in negotiations with the Government of New South Wales on a better approach to environmental assessment procedures.
Now, these three negotiations haven't reached conclusion yet, so we have a few things to attend to yet and so therefore on your question, I've made no determination whatsoever in terms of the date of an election.
JOURNALIST: Mr President, why have you signed up to this agreement? Isn't asylum seekers Australia's problem?
PRESIDENT WAQA: I think the problem of asylum seekers is not just Australia’s.
You know, discussed in so many forums that it is a regional solution for us as well.
And we have happily engaged ourselves right from the start from the original Pacific Solution, and again, nothing has changed.
We’re happy to be part of, and continue our friendship, with Australia.
And whatever we can offer, we’re happy to do it.
PM: And we also emphasise the fact, as I said in my remarks before, that Nauru is a small country and therefore the numbers that would be settled to reside in Nauru will be entirely at the discretion of the Government of Nauru.
But this agreement today is an agreement that for the future, this is legally possible between us and therefore its implementation, case by case, number by number, will be a matter for our friends in Nauru and we will work closely together on that.
It's all part of sending a very clear message back to the people smugglers and we're banging that message through loud and clear.
JOURNALIST: What happens when Nauru can no longer take any more asylum seekers?
What sort of impact do you think the numbers that they can take will actually have on the trade?
PM: I think the important thing, Jason, is to make sure that we have a clear and resolute message to asylum seekers and to people smugglers.
Already Minister Burke through active negotiations with Papua New Guinea and the engagement with his own officers, we have seen two plane loads of people go from Christmas Island to Manus.
This is the first concrete steps in the direction of the new policy, this has been noted across the people smuggling world.
This agreement is part of adding further regional pillars to this new policy of ours which is a very simple message: if you're a people smuggler sending someone on a boat to come to Australia, those folks are not going to be allowed to settle in Australia.
That's the core message, this is just one extra pillar.
I fully concede and agree, as I've said explicitly up front, that Nauru is a small country.
But this agreement enables some to be settled there and it adds to the agreement already with Papua New Guinea.
JOURNALIST: Will you be heading to the G20 in Russia?
PM: The G20 is a critical institution.
In fact, I have just come from a conversation with the Prime Minister of India on the telephone about the agenda for the G20.
It's my intention to be in St Petersburg but I'm very mindful also of the other challenges which lie ahead of us as well.
To reiterate what I said to an earlier question, the dates concerning a particular election, which are outlined full well in our Constitution as to when they could and couldn't be, such a determination has not been reached.
G20 agenda, the G20 agenda is full and important for all of us. It's about jobs and growth.
We in Australia have been strong participants in its agenda since I attended the first G20 summit as Prime Minister back in 2008.
It stabilised the Global Financial Crisis, put in set a whole new set of arrangements for stabilising financial markets for the future.
We are hosting the next G20 in this city of Brisbane next year.
I place enormous priority to the G20 and its agenda.
At the same time I'll always balance that against other considerations before us as well.
As I said, no decisions concerning election dates have been made.
Now folks, I said we'll take four questions, we have.
Minister Burke will remain to answer any more questions and I would invite Mr President to come and share a cup of tea.
BURKE: Thank you very much.
Well that counts as an opening statement so I will just go straight to questions if there are further questions.
JOURNALIST: Minister, will the asylum seekers have a choice between Nauru and Papua New Guinea or how will that be decided?
MINISTER BURKE: The decision when people have a clean process is whether or not they are found to be a refugee.
The country offering settlement offers settlement.
If somebody decides they don't want settlement then they're welcome as they always have been to go either back home or to another country where they have a right of residence.
JOURNALIST: If they are found to be a refugee though, is it a matter of deciding whether they want to settle in Nauru or Papua New Guinea or will the Australian Government or either of those government's make that decision?
MINISTER BURKE: If you were processed in Nauru then the presumption would be if Nauru offered a settlement opportunity there then that would be the offer.
What Nauru have put on the table, the Government of Nauru have put on the table in the Memorandum of Understanding signed today meets all the criteria that are required under the convention.
JOURNALIST: Minister, first PNG, now Nauru, are there any other governments you're in negotiations with for similar settlement procedures?
MINISTER BURKE: As you'd be aware from the Prime Minister explaining the dates of when this was first raised with me, it was well before July 9, well before the Papua New Guinea arrangement had been signed off in this room.
There are a number of nations throughout the region who have indicated an interest in wanting to deal with this but as you would know by now our way of dealing with the region is vastly different to our political opponents.
They will rush off to the media statement; we will work constructively to see whether or not an agreement is possible.
JOURNALIST: Can we expect more announcements like this in the next few months?
MINISTER BURKE: That will depend on decisions made by other countries.
I'm prepared to say there are other countries that have raised this with us as well.
We have made a decision that we're not going out there selling the idea or trying to talk people into agreeing.
But there are a number of countries within the region who have signed the convention and who have a genuine commitment to wanting to take a regional approach.
If we're able to reach agreement with them then we will but it's very much their call.
JOURNALIST: What is the total cost now for the PNG and Nauru solution?
MINISTER BURKE: Look, I prefer not to use the word solution given it has a particular historical context which causes to have a convention in the first place.
The total budget figures on those were all provided in the update that was given by the update that was given by the Treasurer yesterday.
The important thing to remember with all of this though is if this does have an impact that people believe it might, and that is that it actually makes a difference to the number of people smuggling operations coming across the Indian Ocean.
Over time the difference to the Budget is a significant saving.
Now there are better reasons than that for going down this path but the impact on the bottom line over time here is actually positive for the Budget, not negative.
JOURNALIST: Minister, when do you think the boats will stop?
We've had 3 weeks now since the Papua New Guinean solution has been instituted, when will the boats stop?
Do you foresee a date, do you foresee a time frame?
MINISTER BURKE: That's in the decision of some criminal networks.
I'm not in charge of criminal networks who make these decisions to put people's lives at risk on the high seas.
They will continue to test our resolve and for however many people believe the claims that people smugglers make, that will determine how many boats, that will determine how many people are affected by the new arrangements.
But no-one, while people will test our resolve, no-one should doubt our resolve.
Anyone who arrives by boat without a visa should know they will not be settled in Australia.
There is no longer a reason to pay a people smuggler and get on a boat.
The product that they have been selling to people has been the chance to live and work in Australia, that product has been taken from them.
JOURNALIST: Minister, there's been unrest on Nauru in detention centres now that the agreement's being expanded, are you going to beef up security or how will you keep behaviour under control?
MINISTER BURKE: Well, the behaviour that you refer to involved action which amounts to criminal offences in every country of the world.
There is no country in the world where those sorts of actions don't have criminal consequences.
The Nauruan Government is currently going through the process of collecting statements and affidavits of being able to go through the process of laying charges.
Australia support the right of the Government of Nauru to enforce its own criminal law and we are helping them to make sure that they have sufficient prison capacity.
Now we don't prejudge how will be found guilty, how many will not but it is important to them, and to us, that they are able to have sufficient prison capacity in the wake of those events.
Might I say when I've gone through Nauru, yes, there's an anger from the people of Nauru about the events of that day.
There is also a very high level of anger from other people who were there for processing.
They have seen a minority of their number torch the buildings that they were about to have as their place to sleep.
They know that there are people who were about to have claims finalised and some of whom would have then been offered settlement probably in Australia because they were before these arrangements had been put in place.
Now there are hold ups in the processing itself and we also have to balance whether or not individuals themselves who might have been found to be refugees are now either going to be facing criminal charges or are going to be required to be witnesses in criminal cases.
So the cost, yes, there's a financial cost, yes, there's a cost in frustration for the people of Nauru, but I've got to say the ones who have borne the cost very, very personally include other people who are there for processing.
JOURNALIST: If arrivals continue at the same rate that they are now, how long realistically can we expect Nauru to continue resettling people before that’s just not an option?
MINISTER BURKE: Nauru has a small population and it is a small country and it will be at the discretion of the Government of Nauru how many people they want to take on this.
JOURNALIST: Must have made some estimation as to how long [inaudible]?
MINISTER BURKE: Well, I think I've answered this as comprehensively as anyone can with the response I gave earlier, that the people smuggling operators are criminal networks and no Government is in charge of whether or not people break the law but we are in charge of how we respond to it.
And nobody should be in any doubt about the way we will respond and there are two plane loads of people who have now arrived in Manus Island who, if they had questioned whether or not we were serious a week ago, they're not questioning it now.
JOURNALIST: Mr Burke, when will the first group of new asylum seekers be sent to Nauru and do you have an idea of the split between PNG and Nauru?
MINISTER BURKE: The Nauruan numbers will be small and the Nauruan numbers, the priority there will be groups involving children, whether it's unaccompanied minors or family groups.
There are a number of cases that have been put to me over recent weeks where people have tried to isolate a description of the group that might not be able to be sent to Papua New Guinea and because this hadn't yet been concluded I hadn't flagged what would be able to happen in those instances.
But certainly now through any of the examples that people were trying to conjure up to find a hole in the system, it's quite clear that Manus Island is not the only option in case loads.
It's quite reasonable for the Government of Nauru, given what they've seen in recent, with the incident more than a week ago, that they are more comfortable taking groups that involve children than they are taking single adult males.
I think that that makes sense and certainly from our perspective it resolves some of the issues that people have been challenging me within recent days that I haven't been able to point directly to until now.
JOURNALIST: Is Papua New Guinea aware at the time of signing the agreement that you were making this deal with Nauru, was it discussed?
MINISTER BURKE: I'm not going to go in detail in discussions country by country but if I can answer in general terms.
The Government of Papua New Guinea specifically knew that we were in conversations with other countries of the region and if you read the original arrangement that was signed with the Government of Papua New Guinea you will see that it specifically contemplated that other countries within the region might join.
Before today's announcement though, certainly Papua New Guinea were told that Nauru was about to do this and we were made fully aware of today's announcement.
JOURNALIST: When will the first people arrive in Nauru under this new arrangement?
MINISTER BURKE: We need to, we've isolated the site and determined the site which will be appropriate for family groups, where as you would imagine we're not going to house family groups beside or on the same location as where we have single adult males.
So a site has been chosen, community consultation with some of the local people has already been initiated by the Government of Nauru and it's a matter now of us, as quickly as we can, getting some accommodation available there.
It's also the case though that there is an immediate priority when we talk about construction on Nauru that is more urgent.
The prison capacity in Nauru, their prison is not built to house the number of people who are currently there and I have an immediate priority to make sure that we're able to do some things to unlock their prison capacity first.
JOURNALIST: In the same way we saw different deals with different states in relation to Gonski and there was some arguing about that.
Do you think there could be some potential conflict between PNG and Nauru in them getting slightly different deals?
Do you think anyone will feel worse off?
MINISTER BURKE: They're very different countries with different populations.
Both nations are aware of what's been negotiated with the other and each nation is in support of the entire project.
JOURNALIST: If we can clarify your statements from earlier – single males will not be sent to Nauru, is that right?
MINISTER BURKE: Single males will not be settled in Nauru.
Now, the logistics of processing are complicated in Nauru at the moment in terms of processing because we have an entire population who are either on charges or maybe witnesses.
So we have a population at Nauru that even though before the Papua New Guinea announcement, because I knew that this was in train and may well come together, I had planned to start taking a number of people off Nauru to make way for family groups.
We're not in a position to do that at the moment.
So therefore the new site will be the location for family groups.
That does mean it will be a little bit longer than it would otherwise be but it's specifically contemplated, it's the reason for today's Memorandum of Understanding and effectively, as far as settlements concerned, a door that had been closed up until now has been opened.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned a new site, what can you tell us about it as far as what will be built there and how big it will be and just the conditions there?
MINISTER BURKE: Look, the hope is that we can maximise for family groups what you would describe as an open centre.
That's how we want to be able to construct it.
That's the best environment for children and you need to make sure that you've got appropriate services located there as well.
But the consultation with the locals on the site has only been undertaken quite recently with the Government of Nauru and so in terms of the specifics for that site, as to how we will configure the family accommodation, is something that we've got a bit of time given that my first priority is to deal with their jail capacity.
JOURNALIST: You say Manus Island is not up to scratch, are you saying Nauru is over capacity?
Where's the humanity in terms of, are you worried about that aspect of it?
MINISTER BURKE: Well sorry, what you've just characterised with respect to Nauru is not true.
I didn't say that it was over capacity. I said at the, that the number of people we have, certainly at the moment we don't have the accommodation we want because a whole lot of the transferees burnt it.
Now, in the context of that we will be doing two things, or three things.
We need to do something on Nauru about prison capacity.
We need to work and reconfigure how the processing centre, the main processing centre will look and we need specifically to be establishing the family accommodation.
Now the site that’s been chosen to get family accommodation up for a small number of families relatively quickly I don't think will be hard.
I'm not going to give you deadlines on it.
I will say upfront my first priority is the prison capacity because there we do have a prison population at the moment involving a very significant number, not a majority, but a very significant number of people who had been sent there for processing who are in a circumstance now where by any definition the prison population is overcrowded.
Now in terms of Manus Island not being up to scratch, can I say when I was on Manus last and I will be making a number of visits there in coming weeks and months, I met with the people from Toll who were there on the ground.
I met with the people from the military and the combination of clearing sites, of doing drainage and earthworks, of getting accommodation up, of putting up new marquees, of taking the old marquee sites and shifting them into permanent accommodation.
We've had since then plane load after plane load go through.
The Manus Island operation and the accommodation there is going to keep very well ahead of the plane loads.
I know there have been attempts from some to try to run an argument that somehow capacity won't keep up.
I'm keeping a very close personal eye on this and I will tell you clearly I have no doubt whatsoever that however many people, people smugglers decide to bring across the Indian Ocean, we will have more than ample capacity.
JOURNALIST: Minister, you said earlier that we're not actively trying to sell this particular idea throughout the region, why is that?
If it’s something that we think could work quite well why are we not actively trying to convince other nations to get on board?
MINISTER BURKE: For the first two and for the, there's other references that I've made but I'm not going to name any nation.
But the truth has been Prime Minister O'Neill approached Prime Minister Rudd.
Minister Adeang, the Minister for Justice from Nauru approached me.
The reality has been the approaches have been made directly to us.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that maybe the recent riots on Nauru played on the Government's mind when they were making this decision?
Do you think it had any impact on the negotiations?
MINISTER BURKE: I've seen no evidence that it did.
That realistically will probably have to be a question to them given that they've never raised it with me in those terms.
Thank you very much.


Prime Minister, Minister for Disability Reform
DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, will become a truly national scheme with the historic agreement today between the Commonwealth and Western Australian Governments to a two year launch, commencing from July 2014.
The Commonwealth and WA Government will jointly fund a DisabilityCare Australia launch site in the Perth Hills area, with around 4,300 participants. 
This will be delivered by the DisabilityCare Australia Agency under national governance arrangements set out in the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) Act 2013. 
Our two Governments will also jointly fund two sites that will operate under  Western Australian My Way model, in the Lower South West and Cockburn-Kwinana, with around 4,080 participants. 
These sites will be delivered by the Western Australia Disability Services Commission under State legislation.
Around 8400 West Australians with disability, their families and carers will benefit from the DisabilityCare Australia and MyWay sites in WA.
The launch of DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, in Western Australia will offer people with disability and their families and carers in the launch sites the reassurance they will get the support they need over their lifetimes.
An independent evaluation of the services and outcomes in both sites will be undertaken throughout the launch period so the lessons learnt can be shared and taken into account in the future delivery of services in Western Australia and full roll-out of DisabilityCare across Australia.
Under the agreement reached today, the Western Australian and Australian Governments will share the costs of the launch of DisabilityCare on the same basis as the agreements reached with other jurisdictions.
Today’s agreement is another important step forward in the implementation of DisabilityCare Australia.


Prime Minister, Premier of Victoria, Minister for Education
Today the Australian and Victorian Governments reached an historic agreement to deliver long term improvements under the Better Schools Plan for each and every one of the 870,000 students in Victoria.
The Prime Minister and Premier of Victoria have made a down payment on the long term strength of the Australian and Victorian economies that will underwrite higher productivity for decades to come.
The Prime Minister acknowledges the hard work and commitment of Education Minister Bill Shorten and all the relevant education officials that have brought this deal to fruition today.
This agreement builds on the important reforms currently being implemented in Victoria as set out in New Directions for School Leadership and the Teaching Profession, Towards Victoria as a Learning Community position paper, and the Victorian Government’s Vision for Languages Education.
As part of these arrangements, recognising the role of the Victorian Government in managing its own schools, the Australian and Victorian governments will work together towards:
An ambitious goal for Australia to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025, and rated as high quality and high equity.
Continued reform under the National Education Reform Agreement on the prime factors we know drive better student outcomes including: quality teaching; quality learning; empowered school leadership; meeting student need; and transparency and accountability; and
Continuing and refining funding arrangements in Victoria through the Student Resource Package and Financial Assistance Model which are based on the needs of individual students and individual schools.
The agreement signed today provides the detail of this reform for Victoria which will see funding allocations for Victorian schools total $63.7 billion over the six years from 2014 to 2019.
Over the six years of the new agreement, the Commonwealth and Victorian Governments will invest more than $12.2 billion in extra funding above 2013 levels. This equates to $6.8 billion from the Commonwealth Government and $5.4 billion from the Victorian Government.
Both Governments have provided funding certainty for Victorian schools for the next six years by agreeing a year-by-year transition that will see Victorian schools – Government, Independent and Catholic – receive fair funding growth each year.
This agreement puts Victoria on an agreed funding trajectory that would see Victorian schools reach 95% of the national Schooling Resource Standard (SRS) by 2022, consistent with the ambitions of the Commonwealth for the implementation of a national schools funding system founded on the need-based funding principles that underpin the Better Schools Plan.
The agreement signed today will benefit principals and teachers, who will see improved workforce flexibility and productivity, more training and support and greater autonomy in decision making in schools.
Parents and community organisations will see more transparency around school performance and funding so they can be more informed and involved in the education of pupils.
This agreement enshrines Victoria’s role as the manager of schools systems in the State and demonstrates that it is not Commonwealth intention to take over the running of Victorian schools.
Importantly, the agreement supports accountability for the use of public funds within Victorian schools through a focus on performance and transparency. 
The Commonwealth and Victoria consider that the arrangements embedded in this agreement strike the right balance between local autonomy and management and accountability.
Victoria now joins New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory in signing up to the Better Schools Plan.
This brings the total of Australian school students supported by the increased funding from the 2014 school year to 78 per cent.


PM: In long negotiations over the weekend we’ve concluded an agreement with Western Australia and I spoke to Premier Barnett last night and WA is now going to participate in the DisabilityCare Australia scheme.
We’re going to have two pilot projects in the west and I thank the WA Premier for getting on board with our national approach.
There are some unique features to the WA scheme but I think it’s going to be good for everybody, particularly for those suffering from disabilities.
The other thing I’d like to report to you is I spoke this morning to Premier Napthine in Victoria.
There have been negotiations underway between the Commonwealth and Victoria now over the last week.
And as of this morning we have reached agreement and Victoria will now sign up to the Better Schools Plan for Australia and that is a really good outcome for the school kids of Australia and the school kids of Victoria.
So these are the sort of things we’ve been working on in recent days.


Prime Minister, Treasurer
The Australian Government is very pleased to announce today that ACTU President Gerardine (Ged) Kearney will be the Australian leader of the ‘L20’ process of engagement between organised labour and the G20. Australia assumes the presidency of the G20 on 1 December this year.
Ms Kearney has a distinguished record as an advocate for Australian workers, and is the ideal person to develop a comprehensive and effective process of consultation between Australian workers and their international counterparts.
The Australian Government believes it is important that all sectors of society have the opportunity to contribute views to the G20 process. At a time when almost 200 million people are unemployed worldwide, policies to promote jobs and growth are necessarily at the core of the G20’s work, and the views of labour will be particularly relevant.
It has never been more important that all players in the economy work with governments to build a global economy in which nobody is left behind.
Ms Kearney will lead the Australian L20 Steering Group, a group of Australian labour leaders which will work closely with the International Trade Union Confederation and the Trade Union Advisory Committee of the OECD, as well as with international counterparts. Together they will develop a process for effective and productive engagement between organised labour and G20 leaders in 2014.
We are pleased to announce the following Australians as members of the L20 Steering Group who have been selected for their ability to engage across organised labour, both internationally and within Australia:..


Grant Belchamber, Australian Council of Trade Unions
Michael Borowick, Australian Council of Trade Unions
Leon Carter, Finance Sector Union
Paddy Crumlin, Maritime Union of Australia
Joe De Bruyn, Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association
Andrew Dettmer, Australian Manufacturing Workers Union
Charlie Donnelly, National Union of Workers
Nadine Flood, Community and Public Sector Union
Susan Hopgood, Australian Education Union
Paul Howes, Australian Workers Union
Mark Lennon, Unions New South Wales
Tim Lyons, Australian Council of Trade Unions
Grahame McCulloch, National Tertiary Education Union
Ron Monaghan, Queensland Council of Unions
Bob Nanva, Rail, Tram and Bus Union
Michael O'Connor, Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union – National
Dave Oliver, Australian Council of Trade Unions
Michele O'Neil, Textile Clothing and Footwear Union of Australia
Tony Sheldon, Transport Workers Union
David Smith, Australian Services Union
Louise Tarrant, United Voice
Lee Thomas, Australian Nursing Federation
Andrew Vickers, Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union – Mining and Energy Division
Chris Warren, Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance


Additionally, the L20 will engage actively on G20 issues with the business (B20), think-tank (Think 20) and civil society (C20) groups the government has already established, and with representatives of youth from G20 member countries.
Original transcript


The Australian Government today announced that Australia will host a Youth 20 (Y20) summit next year as part of its G20 presidency. The Y20 will give young people a voice in the G20 discussions.
The Y20 will gather young leaders from the world’s twenty largest economies for an exciting exchange of ideas. It will help build skills and networks, and identify the most pressing economic challenges and opportunities facing young people today.
 The involvement of youth in the official G20 program will help strengthen G20 discussions and outcomes by harnessing the energy and innovative thinking of young people.
 The Government has established a Y20 Planning Group of seven young Australians to plan and manage the Australian Y20 in 2014. They will reach out to youth across Australia and the globe, and develop a Y20 process that will ensure meaningful engagement between young people and the G20 in 2014.
 Members of the Planning Group were selected based on their expertise and impressive leadership skills in one or more of the following areas: youth policy, energy, development, international relations, entrepreneurship, climate change and economics.
 Mr Benson Saulo, Director of the National Indigenous Youth Leadership Academy, will chair the Group, whose members are:  
• Ms Samah Hadid (NSW)
• Ms Yassmin Abdel-Magid (QLD)
• Mr Scott Limbrick (VIC)
• Mr Ehon Chan (QLD)
• Ms Amanda McKenzie (ACT)
• Ms Holly Ransom (WA).
 An impressive program of events is available for Australia’s young people in the lead up to the Y20, including the announcements of National Youth Award recipients in August and the Young Australian of the Year Award in January, and National Youth Week running from 4 to 13 April 2014.  
 The Group of Twenty (G20) is the premier forum for its members economic and financial cooperation. It brings together the world's major advanced and emerging economies, representing around 85 per cent of global GDP. Russia is hosting the G20 in 2013, and Australia will host in 2014, with the leaders summit to be held in Brisbane in November 2014.
 G20 youth events have been held since the 2010 Toronto summit. Mexico formalised the Youth 20 (Y20) as part of the official G20 program in 2012, recognising the effect G20 decisions have on young people across the globe. Russia held an Y20 Summit in June this year, and Australia will continue the Y20 in 2014.
 The Y20 is the main platform for young people across the G20 to make their voices heard on the most pressing global economic challenges. Y20 summits involve substantive policy discussions between youth from across the globe and also include social events, cultural exchange and the opportunity for delegates to make lasting connections in G20 countries.
 The Russian Y20 summit was held 18-21 June in St Petersburg, in the margins of the St Petersburg International Economic Forum. The delegates produced a policy communique for the consideration of leaders, which covered areas such as education, climate change, energy and financial regulation.
 The Australian Y20 will be organised by the Planning Group with support from the Office for Youth in the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.


